Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


«      '


PRINTED  BY  WILLIAM  CLOWBS  AND  80NS|  LIMITSO,
LONDON  AND  MECCLBS.


iTht  rig^kts  of  translation  and  o/rt^roduciion  are  reserved.)


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


BOITSO  BT  THE


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,


DEAN  OF  OLOI70E8TEB;


AND  BT  THB


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


I.    THESSALOI^A^S.


(Sxposftton  anil  l^omfletfcs
By  rev.  p.  J.  GLOAG,  D.D.


I^omflies  bg  Farious  authors.

REV.  PROP.  T.  CROSKEBY,  D.D.  BEV.  W.  P.  ADENEY.  MA.

BEV.  B.  C.  CAFFIN,  M.A.  BEV.  B.  FINLAYSON,  B.A.


IL  0  n  ti  0  n  :
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


/Ol  k  ^^°  r-


4


J^^-al^r^ ": .


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF

PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


INTRODUCTION.


§  1.  The  Authorship  op  the  Epistlb.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  author  of  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians
is  the  Apostle  Paul.      This  is  one  of  those  scriptural  writings  the  genuine-
ness of  which  has  been  almost  universally  acknowledged.  *  It  has  been
called  in  question   only  by  theologians  of  the  most  extreme  school  of
criticism/  and  has  even  been  admitted  by  some  belonging  to  that  school.*
The  external  evidence  in  its  favour  is  strong.     It  is  indirectly  alluded  to
by  the  apostolic  Fathers ;  it  is  directly  referred  to  by  such  early  Fathers  as
Irenaeus,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  Tertullian ;   it  is  contained  in  the
Muratorian  Canon,  and  in  the  early  Syriac  and  Latin  versions  belonging
to  the  second  century ;  and  its  genuineness  has  never  been  challenged  until
recent  times.     To  quote  only  one  of  thdse  Fathers ;  Irenseus  (a.d.  179)  thus
writes :  **  And  on  account  of  this  the  apostle,  explaining  himself,  has  set
forth  the  perfect  man  of  salvation,  saying  thus  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Thessalonians :  *  And  may  the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly,  and  may
your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  without  complaint  until
the  advent  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ   "  ('Adv.  HaBres.,'  v.  6,  1).      Nor  is
the  internal  evidence  less  strong  than  the  external.     The  character  of  Paul
is  distinctly  impressed  upon  this  Epistle ;  his  intense  love  for  his  converts,
his  anxiety  about  their  spiritual  welfare,  his  joy  when  he  receives  a  favc^ur-
able  account  of  their  faith  and  charity,  his  zeal  for  the  cause  of  the  Lord
for  which  he  is  ready  to  sacrifice  everything,  his  noble  independence  of
spirit, — all  these  characteristics  of  the  apostle  are  seen  in  this  Epistle.     So
also  the  style  and  mode  of  expression   are  Paul's.     We  have  the  same
employment  of  emphatic  terms,  the  same  rich  use  of  synonyms,  the  same

»  See  anthor'B  *  Pauline  Epistles/  pp.  79—106.

*  Baar  and  the  Tubingen  school ;  Hilgenfeld,  however,  asserts  its  genuineness.

a  3


ii  INTRODUCTION  TO


acoumulation  of  ideas,  the  Bame  digressions  suggested  by  a  word,  the
same  preference  for  participial  constructions  as  are  elsewhere  found  in
Paul's  other  Epistles.  In  short,  as  Professor  Jowett  observes,  "  It  has  been
objected  against  the  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  that  it  contains  only  a
single  statement  of  doctrine.  But  liveliness,  personality,  similar  traits  of
disposition,  are  more  difficult  to  invent  than  statements  of  doctrine.  A
later  age  might  have  supplied  these,  but  it  could  hardly  have  caught  the
very  likeness  and  portrait  of  the  apostle.  •  •  •  Such  intricate  similarities  of
language,  such  lively  traits  of  character,  it  is  not  within  the  power  of  any
forger  to  invent,  and,  least  of  all,  a  forger  of  the  second  century."^  Nor
is  there  anything  in  the  contents  of  the  Epistle  at  variance  with  the  opinion
that  it  was  written  by  Paul.  It  has,  indeed,  been  asserted  that  it  is  devoid
of  individuality  and  doctrinal  statements.  Its  perusal  will  show  that  it
is  at  once  lively  and  specially  adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  Thessalonians.
And  that  it  is  devoid  of  doctrinal  statements  is  an  assertion  which  may
also  well  be  disputed ;  but  even  admitting  that  there  is  a  partial  truth  in
the  remark,  yet  this  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  circumstances  under
which  the  Epistle  was  written.

The  coincidences  between  the  Epistle  and  the  incidents  in  the  life  of
Paul,  as  recorded  in  the  Acts,  is  another  striking  proof  of  its  authenticity.'
In  the  Acts  we  read  of  the  persecution  to  which  Paul  and  Silas  were
subjected  at  Philippi,  when,  in  violation  of  their  rights  as  Koman
citizens,  they  were  publicly  scourged  and  cast  into  prison.  In  the  Epistle,
written  in  the  name  of  Paul  and  Silas,  there  is  reference  to  this  shameful
treatment:  "Even  after  we  had  suffered  before  and  were  shamefully
entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto
you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  contention  "  (ch.  ii.  2).  In  the  Acts  we
are  informed  that  Paul  and  Silas  encountered  a  similar  persecution  at
Thessalonica.  •*  The  Jews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  envy,  took
unto  them  certain  fellows  of  the  baser  sort,  and  gathered  a  company,  and
set  all  the  city  on  an  uproar,  and  assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought
to  bring  them  out  to  the  people"  (Acts  xvii.  5).  In  the  Epistle  Paul
appeals  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Thessalonians  concerning  this  treatment :
*•  For  verily,  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  before  that  we  should
suffer  tribulation ;  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  know  "  (ch.  iii.  4).  In
the  Acts  we  are  informed  that  Paul  parted  from  his  companions,  Silas  and
Timothy,  at  Beroea,  and  was  rejoined  by  them  at  Corinth :  **  And  when
Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  Macedonia  (to  Corinth),  Paul  was
pressed  in  the  spirit,  and  testified  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  Christ'*
(Acts  xviii.  6).  And  the  Epistle,  written,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  from
Corinth,  is  in  the  joint  names  of  Paul  and  Silvanus  and  Timotheus.  Not
only  are  there  these  coincidences,  but  also  additional  statements  in  the
Epistle  supplementing  the  history,  thus  proving  that  the  one  record  could

»  Jowett'B  '  St  Paul's  Epistles.*  vol.  L  pp.  24—26  Ist  edit,  pp.  28,  29  2nd  edit
*  Paley*8  *  Horn  PaulinaB :  *  on  1  Thessalonians.


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  ill


not  have  been  copied  from  the  othp*r.  Thus  in  the  Acts  we  are  informed
that  Silas  and  Timothy  did  not  join  Paul  until  after  his  arrival  at  Corinth
(Acts  xviii.  5) ;  whereas  in  the  Epistle  there  is  a  statement  which  has  led
many  ^  to  afiSrm  that  Timothy  joined  Paul  at  Athens,  and  was  sent  by  him
from  that  city  to  Thessalonica :  **  Wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer
forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone ;  and  sent  Timotheus,
our  brother,  and  minister  of  God,  and  our  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  of
Christ,  to  estabHsh  you,  and  to  oomfort  you  concerning  your  faith  "  (ch.  iii.
1,  2).  In  the  Acts  we  are  informed  that  Paul  preached  in  the  synagogue
for  three  sabbaths,  reasoning  with  the  Jews  (Acts  xvii.  2) ;  whereas  there
are  references  in  the  Epistle  which  have  induced  some  to  think  that  his
residence  in  Thessalonica  was  more  protracted.  In  the  Acts  we  are  only
informed  that  Paul  preached  in  the  synagogue  to  the  Jews  and  devout
Greeks,  that  is,  the  religious  proselytes;  whereas  it  is  evident  from  the
whole  character  of  the  Epistle  that  the  Church  was  composed  of  Gentile
converts.  These  differences  are  not  contradictions,  and  may  easily  be
adjusted ;  but  they  are  apparent  enough  to  demonstrate  the  independence
both  of  the  history  and  the  Epistle.

§  2.  The  Church  of  Thessalonica.

Thessalonica  was  a  large  seaport  of  Macedonia,  situated  in  the  form  of
an  amphitheatre  on  the  slope  of  a  hill  at  the  north-east  end  of  the  Thermaic
Gnlf,  now  called  the  Gulf  of  Salonica.  It  had  in  antiquity  various  names.
Thus  it  was  called  Emathia  and  Halia.  In  ancient  histoiy  it  appears
under  the  name  Therma,  so  called  from  the  hot  springs  in  the  neighbour-
hood. Under  this  name  it  is  mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  invasion  of
Xerxes,  and  in  the  history  of  the  Peloponnesian  War.  We  are  informed
that  Cassander,  the  son  of  Antipater,  King  of  Macedonia,  rebuilt  Therma,
and  called  it  Thessalonica,  after  the  name  of  his  wife,  the  half-sister  of
Alexander  the  Great  (Strabo,  vii.  Frag.  24).  According  to  another  account,
less  trustworthy,  it  was  so  called  by  Philip,  the  father  of  Alexander,
to  commemorate  his  victory  over  the  Thessaloniaus.  In  the  Middle  Ages
it  appears  under  the  contracted  form  Salneck ;  and  is  now  known  under
the  name  Salonica.  Under  the  Bomans  Thessalonica  became  a  city  of
great  importance.  During  the  temporary  division  of  Macedonia  into  four
districts,  it  was  the  capital  of  the  second  district ;  and  afterwards,  when
the  Boman  province  of  Macedonia  was  formed,  it  became  the  metropolis  of
the  country,  and  the  residence  of  the  Boman  governor.  In  the  civil  wars
it  sided  with  Augustus  and  Antony,  and  was  rewarded  by  receiving  the
privileges  of  a  free  city.  Strabo,  who  lived  shortly  before  the  Christian
era,  observes  that  **  it  has  at  present  the  largest  population  of  any  town  in
the  district "  (Strabo  vii.  7,  4).  In  the  time  of  Paul,  then,  Thessalonica  was
a  populoas  and  flourishing  town ;  it  was  chiefly  inhabited  by  Greeks,  with

*  So  Paley,  Bleek,  Neander,  Jowett,  and  Ellicott


%       '


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY   THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,

DEAN  or  GL0V0I8TEB;


AND  BT  THE


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


WITH


]  N  T  R  O  D  U  C  T 1 0  N  S

BY  THB

TEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.

RIGHT  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S.E.

VERY    REV.  PRINCIPAL   J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.

REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.

REV.  A.  PLUMMER.  M.A..  D.D.


-M-


KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE,

1887.


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO


S  3.  The  Occasion  op  the  Epistle.

Paul,  driven  from  Tbessalonica,  had  repaired  to  Beroea,  but  from  this  also
he  had  been  compelled  to  depart  by  the  machinations  of  the  Jews  of
Thcssalonica  (Acts  xvii.  13,  14).  He  had  learned  that  the  persecution
which  had  arisen  dnring  his  presence  was  continued  in  his  absence  (oh.  ii.
14).  And  hence  he  was  filled  with  anxiety  about  his  Thessalonian
converts.  He  knew  that  by  reason  of  the  shortness  of  his  residence  they
were  only  partially  instructed  in  Christianity,  and  he  naturally  feared
that  they  might  fall  from  the  faith.  Twice  he  had  planned  to  visit  them ;
but  circumstances  had  prevented  him  (ch.  ii.  18).  Accordingly,  no  longer
able  to  master  his  anxiety,  he  sent  his  fellow-labourer  Timothy,  either  from
Beroea  or  Athens,  to  ascertain  their  state  (ch.  iii.  1,  2).  Paul,  meanwhile,
had  repaired  from  Beroea  to  Athens,  and  thence  to  Corinth;  and  there
Timothy  joined  him,  and  the  information  which  he  brought  was  the  occasion
of  this  Epistle.  That  information  was  upon  the  whole  consolatory  and
satisfactory.  Timothy  brought  good  tidings  of  the  faith  and  charity  of
the  Thessalonians,  of  their  affectionate  regard  for  the  apostle,  and  of  their
earnest  desire  to  see  him.  The  Thessalonians,  in  spite  of  the  persecution
which  they  endured,  continued  steadfast  to  the  faith ;  they  were  examples
to  all  that  believed  in  Thcssalonica  and  Achaia  (ch.  i.  7  ;  iii.  6,  7).  But,
however  favourable  this  report  of  Timothy,  there  were  still  many  defects
to  supply,  many  errors  to  correct,  and  many  evil  practices  to  reform.  The
religious  knowledge  of  the  Thessalonians  was  defective ;  their  religion  had
partially  degenerated  into  fanaticism ;  and  especially  they  were  filled
with  excitement  under  the  persuasion  of  the  immediate  coming  of  Christ.
Some  of  them  had  neglected  their  worldly  duties  and  had  sunk  into  an
indolent  inactivity  (ch.  iv.  11,  12).  It  would  appear  that  some  of  the
converts  had  died,  and  their  friends  were  distressed  on  their  acoount,  lest
they  should  forfeit  the  blessings  to  be  bestowed  at  the  advent  of  Christ
(ch.  iv.  13).  Nor  had  the  Thessalonians  entirely  detached  themselves  from
the  vices  of  their  former  heathen  state.  The  apostle  had  to  warn  them
against  sensuality,  that  vice  so  prevalent  among  the  Gentiles ;  and  he  had
to  rebuke  the  covetousness  of  some  as  well  as  the  indolence  of  others  (ch.
iv.  1—7).

With  regard  to  its  contents,  the  Epistle  is  divided  into  two  parts :  the
first,  comprehending  the  first  three  chapters,  may  be  termed  historical ;
the  second,  including  the  two  last  chapters,  is  practical.  The  apostle,
after  saluting  the  Thessalonians,  renders  thanks  to  God  for  the  entrance
of  the  gospel  among  them,  for  the  mighty  efficacy  with  which  it  was
accompanied,  and  for  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  (ch.  i.).  He  alludes
to  his  demeanour  when  in  Thcssalonica ;  how,  notwithstanding  his  shameful
treatment  at  Philippi,  he  had  preached  the  gospel  among  them  amid  much
contention ;  how  he  had  sought  neither  their  money  nor  their  applause,  but.


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO


at  the  end  of  the  Epistle,  there  is  appended  the  note  :  **  The  First  Epistle
to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  from  Athens."  Though  such  a  note  is
found  in  the  most  anoient  manuscripts,  it  is  evidently  a  mistake.  The
Epistle  could  not  have  been  written  from  Athens,  for  Silas  and  Timothy
were  not  both  there  with  the  apostle ;  and  it  was  not  written  until  the
return  of  Timothy  from  Thessalonica,  which  occurred  at  Corinth ;  nor  is
there  any  ground  for  the  supposition  that  Paul  and  his  companions,  during
his  residence  at  Corinth,  made  a  short  excursion  to  Athens.  The  mistake
appears  to  have  arisen  from  a  careless  inference  drawn  from  the  words,
•*  We  thought  it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone'*  (ch.  iii.  1);  whereas
the  reference  there  is  evidently  to  a  past  event,  and  indirectly  implies
that  the  apostle  was  not  at  Athens  when  he  wrote  these  words.  These
subscriptions  at  the  end  of  the  Epistles  have  no  authority ;  and  although,
in  general  correct,  yet  occasionally,  as  in  the  present  instance,  they  are
erroneous.


§  5.  The  Peculiarities  of  the  Epistle.

The  special  peculiarity  of  this  Epistle  is  that  it  is  undoubtedly  the  first
of  Paul's  extant  Epistles.  Whether  it  is  the  first  Epistle  that  Paul  ever
wrote  is  an  entirely  different  question ;  but  it  is  the  first  that  has  come
down  to  us.  This  is  a  point  on  which  almost  all  commentators  are  agreed.
In  all  probability  it  is  the  earliest  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,
with  the  possible  exception  of  the  Epistle  of  James.

It  is  erroneous  to  affirm  that  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  is
devoid  of  doctrinal  statements.  The  supreme  dignity  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  the  spiritual  kingdom  which  he  has  established  in  this  world,  the
deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come  effected  by  him,  the  necessity  of  holi-
ness for  salvation,  the  reign  of  Christ  in  heaven,  the  resurrection  of  the
just,  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  the  blessedness  of  a  future  state  to  the
righteous  and  the  wi*ath  which  awaits  the  wicked,  are  all  clearly  deduced
from  this  Epistle.  The  great  plan  of  redemption  through  the  sufferings
of  Christ  was  clear  to  the  apostle  from  the  beginning.  We  can  hardly
even  affirm  that  there  was  a  development  in  the  views  of  the  apostle —
a  progress  made  in  spiritual  knowledge  and  insight  into  the  ways  of  Grod.
No  doubt  different  doctrines  are  insisted  on  in  the  different  Epistles ;  but
this  arose  from  the  circumstances  of  the  Churches  to  whom  the  apostle
wrote.  Thus  in  this  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  there  is  no  mention  of
the  great  Pauline  doctrine  of  justification,  because  in  that  Church  there
was  no  controversy  with  the  Judaistic  Christians,  and  therefore  no  necessity
of  defending  the  doctrine  of  justification  against  erroneous  notions ;  whereas
the  errors  of  the  Galatian  Church  caused  the  apostle  to  dwell  specially  on
that  doctrine.  So  also  at  a  still  later  period  the  incipient  Gnostic  errors
were  the  occasion  which  induced  the  apostle  to  insist  more  fully  on  the
nature  of  Christ's  Person  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Ephesians


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THKSSALONTANS.  ii

than  in  bis  earlier  Epistles.  BisHop  Lightfoot,  in  bis  able  article  on  tbe
**  Epistles  to  tbe  Tbessalonians,"  in  Smitb's  '  Biblical  Dictionary/  notices
tbree  points  of  difference  between  tbese  and  Paul's  later  Epistles.  First,
in  tbe  general  style  of  tbese  earlier  letters  tbere  is  greater  simplicity  and
less  exuberance  of  language.  Secondly,  tbe  antagonism  is  different  Here
tbe  opposition  comes  from  tbe  unconverted  Jews ;  afterwards  Paul's  oppo-
nents are  Judaizing  Cbristians.  Tbirdly,  tbe  doctrinal  teacbing  of  tbe
apostle  does  not  bear  quite  tbe  same  aspect  as  in  tbe  later  Epistles.  Many
of  tbe  distinctive  doctrines  of  Cbristianity  wbicb  are  inseparably  connected
witb  Paul's  name  were  not  evolved  and  distinctly  enunciated  until  tbe
needs  of  tbe  Cburcb  drew  tbem  out  into  prominence  at  a  later  date.  So
hx^  tben,  it  may  be  true  tbat  tbis  First  Epistle  to  tbe  Tbessalonians  is  not
80  doctrinal  as  tbe  Epistles  to  tbe  Bomans,  Galatians,  and  Epbesians.
Tbe  drcnmstances  of  tbe  Cburcb  determined  tbe  contents  of  tbe  Epistle.
Tbe  doctrine  most  insisted  on  and  explained  is  tbe  second  advent,  because
erroneous  views  prevailed  concerning  it  among  tbe  Tbessalonians,  giving
rise  to  many  disorders.

Paul,  in  writing  to  tbe  Tbessalonians,  lays  bare  bis  beart ;  be  speaks  of
bis  gentleness  among  tbem,  even  as  a  nursing  motber  cberisbetb  ber
cbildren,  and  of  bis  readiness  to  impart  unto  tbem,  not  tbe  gospel  of  God
only,  but  bis  own  soul  by  reason  of  tbe  affection  wbicb  be  bore  to  tbem.
Tbe  Epistle  wbicb  it  most  closely  resembles  is  tbat  to  tbe  Pbilippians.
Tbe  Macedonian  Gburcbes  were  peculiarly  attacbed  to  tbe  apostle,  and  be
to  tbem ;  be  writes  to  tbem  in  tbe  fulness  of  bis  affection ;  and  exborts
tbem,  not  so  mucb  witb  tbe  autbority  of  a  spiritual  teacber,  as  witb  tbe
love  and  tenderness  of  parental  affection,  even  as  a  fatber  dotb  bis  cbildren.

§  6.    Literature.

List  of  works  consulted  in  tbe  following  Exposition  :-*

Alexander,  Bishop  of  Deny,  **  Epistles  to  Tbessalonians,"  in  '  Speaker's  Commentary/
1881 ;  Alford,  H.,  '  The  Greek  Testament,'  voL  iii.,  3rd.  edit,  1866 ;  Auberlen,  C.  A.,
"1  Thessalonians  i.,  ii.,"  in  Lange's  •  Bibelwerk,'  1869  ;  Bleek,  J.  F.,  •  Introduction  to
the  New  Testament,'  translation  1870;  'Lectures  on  the  Apocalypse,'  translation
1875 :  Calvin,  J.,  '  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians,'  translation  1851 ;  Conybeare
and  Ho%^ son,  *  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,'  2nd  edit,  1862;  Davidson,  S.,  'Intro-
duction to  the  New  Testament,'  1st  edit,  3  vols.,  1851 ;  '  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
the  New  Testament,'  2  vols.,  1868;  De  Wette,  W.  M.  L.,  •  Kxegetisches  Handbuch:
Thcssalonicher,'  1864 ;  Diedricb,  J., « Die  Briefe  St  Pauli,'  Leipzig,  1858 ;  Doddridge,
P^  *  Family  Expositor ; '  Diisterdieck,  F.,  *  Ofifenbarung  Johannis : '  dritte  Auflage,
1877 ;  Eadie,  John, '  Commentary  on  Tbessalonians,'  1877;  Ellicott,  Bishop,  •  St.  Paul's
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  drd  edit.,  1866 ;  Elliott,  E.  B.,  '  Horaa  Apocalypticas,'
5th  edit,  1862  ;  Farrar,  F.  W.,  •Articles  in  the  Expositor^'  vols.  i.  and  ii.,  2nd  series;
Gloftg,  P.  J.,  *  Pauline  Epistles,'  1874 ;  Hofmann,  J.  C.  K.,  *  Die  heilige  Schrift  N.  T. :
Th.  L,  Thestalonicher,'  1869 ;  *  Schriftbeweis,'  1854 ;  Hurd,  Bishop, '  On  tbe  Prophecies,'
ToL  ii.,  4th  edit.,  1776;  Jowett,  B.,  •St  Paul's  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  etc.,  Ist
edit,  1865 ;  2nd  edit,  1869 ;  Kirchbofer,  J.,  *  Quellensammlung,'  1842 ;  Koch,  A.,
'  Commentar  tiber  d.  1  Thessalonicher,'  1856 ;  Lardner,  N.,  *  Credibility  of  the  Gospel
History,'  1815 ;  Lee,  W.,  ••  Revelations,"  in  *  Speaker's  Commentary,'  1881 ;  Lightfoot.


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  THESSALONIANS.

Bishop,  article  "  Thessalonians,"  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary ;  *  Lillie,  J.,  *  Lectures  on  the
Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,'  1863 ;  LUnemnian,  G.,  "  Briefe  an  d.  Thess.,"  in  Meyer  s
'  Kommentar/  dritte  Anflage,  1867 ;  Translation  of  the  same,  1880 ;  Maclcnight,  J.,
'Translation  of  the  Epistles;'  Meyrick,  F.,  article  on  ''Antichrist/'  in  Smith's
'Dictionary;'  Newton,  Bishop,  'Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies;'  Olshausen,  BL,
'  On  the  Thessalonians/  translation  1851 ;  Paley,  W., '  Hone  Pauliuse ; '  Paterson,  A.,
'  Commentary  on  1  Thessalonians/  1857 ;  Renan,  £., '  L' Antichrist,  3rd  edit.^  1873 ;
Reuss,  E.,  '(reschichte  d.  heiligen  Schriften/  yierte  Aufla^e,  1864;  Riggenbach,  C.  J.,
"  Commentary  on  Thess.,"  in  Lanure's  '  Bibelwerk/  1869 ;  Yaughau,  C.  J., '  First  Epistle
to  the  Thessalonians/  1864;  Whitby,  D.,  'Commentary  on  the  New  Testament;'
Wieseler,  Karl, '  Chronologic  d.  Apost.  Zeitalters,'  1848 ;  WordbWorth,  Bishop, '  Gret^k
Testament/  6th  edit.,  18U1.


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   OF


PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


EXPOSITION.


CHAFFER  I.


OxTEBTS. — ^Paul,  after  the  address  and
salutation,  testifies  that  he  renders  constant
thanks  to  God  for  the  Thessalonians,  calling
to  remembrance  their  faith,  loTe,  and  hope,
being  assured  of  their  election.  He  ex-
presses his  joy  in  their  cordial  reception  of
the  gospel  and  tho  Ohristian  character
which  they  exhibited,  being  examples  to  all
belieyers  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia.  Ho
mentions  tho  favourable  report  which  he
had  of  their  conversion  to  God  from  idols,
and  of  their  waiting  for  the  advent  of
Christ.

Ver.  1. — FanL  He  does  not  call  himself
**  an  apostle,"  not  because  the  Thessalonians
were  newly  converted  (Chrysostom),  or  from
tenderness  to  Silvanus  who  was  not  an
apostle  (Estius),  or  because  his  apostolic
authority  was  not  yet  recognized  (Jowett),
or  because  he  had  merely  conmienced  his
apostolic  labours  (Wordsworth) ;  but  be(»u8e
his  aposlleship  had  never  been  called  in
question  by  the  Thessalonians.  For  the
same  reason  he  omits  this  title  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Philippians ;  whereas  he  strongly  in-
sists upon  it  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Corin-
thians and  Galatians,  because  among  them
there  were  many  opposed  to  his  authority.
And  tilTums.  The  same  as  the  Silas  of  the
Acts.  He  is  mentioned  as  a  chief  man
among  the  brethren,  and  a  prophet  or
inspired  teacher  (Acts  xv.  22,  32).  His
Latin  name  renders  it  probable  that  he  was
a  Hellenistic  Jew,  and,  like  Paul,  ho  was  a
Boman  citizen  (Acts  xvi.  37).  He  was  sent
with  Judas  Barsabas  from  Jerusalem,  to
convey  the  apostolic  decrees  to  Antioch;
and  be  accompanied  Paul  instead  of  Bar-
Btbu  on  his  second   missionary  journey

L  THX88AL05LAK8.


(Acts  XV.  40).  He  suffered  imprbonment
witii  Paul  at  Philippi;  and  was  engaged
with  him  in  preaching  IJie  gospel  in  Thes-
salonica,  Beroea,  and  Corinth.  His  ministry
at  Corinth  is  honourably  mentioned  by  Paul
in  his  Second  Epistle  to  tho  Ck)rinthiaD8
(2  Cor.  i.  9).  After  this  there  is  no  moro
mention  of  Silvanus  in  the  Acts,  and  it  is
doubtful  whether  he  was  the  Silvanus  by
whom  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter  was  con-
veyed to  the  Churches  of  Asia  (1  Pet.  v.  12).»
Ancient  tradition,  erroneously  supposing
that  Silas  and  Silvanus  were  different
persons,  makes  Silas  the  Bishop  of  Corinth,
and  Silvanus  tho  Bishop  of  Thcssalonicii.
And  Timotheus.  The  well-known  disciple  of
Paul.  He  was  a  native  of  Lystra,  having  a
Greek  father  and  a  Jewish  mother  (Acts
xvi.  1).  He  joined  Paul  and  Silas  on  their
second  missionary  journey  at  Lystra,  and
was  with  them  in  Philippi,  Thessalonica,
and  Corinth.  He  was  with  Paul  on  his
third,  missionary  journey,  and  was  sent  by
him  on  a  mission  to  Mac^onia  and  Corinth
(Acts  xix.  22 ;  1  (^r.  xvi.  10),  and  accom-

Sanied  him  into  Asia  on  his  lost  journey  to
erusalem  (Acts  xx.  4).  Ho  was  also  with
Paul  during  his  first  Roman  imprisonment,
when  he  wrote  the  Epistles  to  the  Philippians
and  Colossians  (Phil.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1).  After-
wards he  resided  at  Ephesus  (I  Tim.  i.  3) ;
from  which  he  was  recalled  to  Bomo  by
Paul  shortly  before  his  martyrdom  (2  Tim.
iv.  21).  The  last  mention  of  Timothy  is  in
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews :  ^  Know  yo
that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  liberty ;
with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I  will  seo
you  •*  (Heb.  xiii.  23).  According  to  eccle-
siastical tradition,  ho  became  Bishop  of
Ephesus,    and   there  suffered  martyrdom.

*  Some,  on  insuflScient  reasons,  identify
Silas  with  Tertius  (Rom.  xvi.  22),  and
others  with  Luke.


^r


THE  FmST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALOXIANS.    [ch.  l  1— Id.


Silvanus  and  Timothens  arc  associated  with
Paul  in  his  address  to  the  Thcssalonians,
not  to  give  weight  and  authority  to  his
Epistle,  hut  hecause  they  assisted  him  in
the  planting  of  the  Church  at  Thessalonica,
and  were  now  with  him  at  Corinth,  when
he  was  writing  this  Epistle.  Silvanus  is
placed  first,  because  he  was  the  older  and
Lad  been  longer  with  the  apostle,  and,  as  is
evident  from  the  Acts,  was  at  this  time  the
more  important  of  the  two  (Acts  xvi.  19;
xvii.  4).  By  being  included  in  the  addresj,
thcv  are  represented  as  joint  authors  of  the
Epistle  with  Paul,  although  they  were  only
80  in  name.  It  is  possible  that  Paul  em-
ployed one  of  them  as  his  amanuensis  in
writing  the  Epistle.  Unto  the  Chnroh.  The
word  "  Church  "  denotes  a  select  assembly  ;
here.  Christians  selected  from  the  world.  It
does  not  denote  in  the  New  Testament,  as
with  us,  a  building,  but  the  congregation.
In  Paul's  later  Epistles,  those  addressed  are
called,  not  the  Cliurch,  but  saints.  Of  the
TheiealonianB.  In  other  Epistles  the  address
is  to  the  city,  as  Rome,  Philippi,  Colosse ;
here  it  is  to  the  inhabitants.  The  Church
of  the  Thcssalonians  was  chiefly  composed  of
converted  Gentiles,  with  a  small  number  of
converted  Jews  (see  Introduction).  Which
i$;  to  be  omitted,  as  not  being  in  the  original.
In  God  the  Father  and  in  the  Lord  Jesns
Chriit.  The  characteristic  peculiarity  of  the
Church :  they  are  in  God  and  Christ,  that
is,  in  fellowship  with  them,  united  to  thcni.
"  In  God  the  Father  "  characterizes  them  as
not  being  heathens ;  "  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ'*  characterizes  them  as  not  being
Jews.  Oraoe  be  onto  yon,  and  peace.  The
usual  apostolic  benediction.  •*  Grace  **  is
the  Greek  and  "  peace  "  is  the  Jewish  form  of
salutation.  The  Greeks  commenced  their
epistles  with  wishing  grace  for  those  to
whom  they  wrote;  and  the  usual  form  of
salutation  among  the  Jews  was  SlicUom  or
*'  peace ; "  the  apostle  combines  them,  thus
intimating  that  ooth  Greeks  and  Jews  are
one  in  Christ  Jesus.  In  the  Pastoral  Epistles
and  in  the  Second  Epistle  of  John  the  form
is  **  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  "  (2  John  3),
and  in  the  Epistle  of  Jude  it  is  **  Mercy,
peace,  and  love"  (Jude  2).  From  Ood  the
Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ.
These  words  are  wanting  in  some  impair-
tant  manuscripts,  and  are  omitted  in  the
R.V.  The  preponderance,  however,  of  ex-
ternal authority  is  in  their  favour.

Ver.  2. — ^We.  Many  expositors  (Coiiy-
beare,  Koch,  Jowett)  suppose  that  the  plural
18  here  userl  for  the  singular ;  as  Paul  else-
where does  in  other  parts  of  this  Epistle.
Thus:  "Wherefore  wo  would  come  unto
you,  even  I  Paul,  once  and  again  "  (ch.
ii.  18);  "Wherefore  when  we  could  no
longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be  left


at  Athens  alone"  (ch.  iii.  1).  In  these
verses  the  pronoun  *'  we "  is  evidently  re-
stricted to  Panl.  Still,  however,  Silvanus
and  Timotheus  being  mentioned  directly
before,  it  is  most  natural  to  include  tiiem
here.  Give  thanks  to  God  alwayi  for  yon  aU.
All  Paul's  Epistles,  with  the  solitary  excep-
tion of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  com-
mence with  an  expression  of  thanksgiving.
Making  mention  of  yon  in  onr  prayen;
whilst  we  are  engaged  in  prayer  for  you.
Paul's  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  took  the
form  of  thanksgiving.

Ver.  3. — Bemembering  without  eeuing.
Some  attach  the  words,  "  without  ceasing,"
or  "unceasingly,"  to  the  previous  clause;
"making  mention  of  yon  unceasingly  in
our  prayers"  (so  Alford).  Tonr  work  of
faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patienee  of
hope.  These  expressions  are  not  to  be
weakened,  as  if  they  were  a  mere  Hebrsian
for  activo  fnith,  laborious  love,  and  patient
hope.  We  have  here  the  three  cardinal
virtues— faith,  love,  and  hope  (1  Cor.  xiiL
13).  Elsewhere  these  graces  are  com-
bined. Thus  a^ain  in  this  Epistle:
"  Putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and
love ;  and  for  an  helmet,  the  hope  of  sal-
vation "  (ch.  V.  8) ;  and  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Colossians :  "  Since  we  heard  of  your  faith
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  the  love  which  ye
have  to  all  saints,  for  the  hope  which  is
laid  up  for  you  in  heaven "  (C6L  i.  4,  5\
By  the  "  work  of  faith"  is  not  meant  faith
itself  as  the  work  of  God  (John  vi.  29),  but
that  faith  which  is  energetic,  which  is  actiTe
and  living,  productive  of  good  works.  By
the  "  labour,  or  toil,  of  love "  is  not  meant
that  love  which  is  devoted  to  God,  but  that
love  which  manifests  itself  in  acts  of  kind-
ness toward  our  fellow-Christians  and  toward
the  human  race.  And  by  the  '*  patience  of
hope "  is  meant  that  constancy  which  re-
mains unconqucred  by  trials  and  persecu-
tions. There  is  a  climax  here  ;#faitli  manifests
itself  by  its  works— its  active  exertion ;  love
by  its  toils — its  works  of  self-denial ;  and
hope  by  its  patience — ^its  endurance  amid
trials  and  discouragements.  "  Rememberingi
the  apostle  would  say,  your  faith,  hope,
and  love:  a  faith  that  had  its  ontwftfd
effect  on  your  lives  ;  a  love  that  spent  itself
in  the  service  of  others;  and  a  hope  that
was  no  mere  transient  feeling,  but  was  con-
tent to  wait  for  the  things  unseen,  when
Christ  should  be  revealed"  (Jowett).  In
onr  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  These  words  do  not
refer  to  all  three  virtues  (Hofmann),  but
only  to  the  last,  specifying  its  object,
namely,  that  it  is  hoi>e  in  the  advent  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  hope's  highest
expectation,  because  at  the  advent  the
kingdom  of  Christ  will  oome  in  its  glory.
In  the  sight  of  (or  rather,  before)  Goa  and


c&.  1. 1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  filPlSTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


our  Father.  These  words  are  to  be  conjoined
with  "remembering:"  ''remembering  un-
ceasingly before  Graid  and  our  Father  your
work  of  faith,"  etc.  According  to  the
English  idiom,  the  conjunction  *'and"  is
dropped — **  God  our  Father."

\er.  4.— Knowing ;  that  is,  not  the  Thes-
salonians  themselves,  but  we,  Paul  and  Sil-
vanus  and  Timotheus ;  knowing,  being  well
assured  of.  Brethren  beloved,  your  election
of  God ;  or  rather,  as  it  is  in  tho  margin
and  in  the  R.V.,  Knowing  brethren,  be-
loved of  God,  your  election.  By  election
is  meant  that  act  of  free  grace  by  which
God  destines  individuals  to  become  believers
in  Christ  Thus  the  Thessalonian  converts
were  chosen  or  elected  by  God  from  among
their  heathen  countrymen  to  become  Chris-
tians. The  ultimate  reason  of  their  Chris-
tianity was  their  election  of  God.

Ver.  5. — ^For ;  or  rather,  how  thai  (B.V.) ;
or,  becatue ;  assigning  the  reasons  for  Paul's
c<mfidence  in  their  election ;  and  these  rea-
sons were  two :  first,  the  powerful  entrance
which  the  gospel  had  among  them;  and
secondly,  the  joyful  reception  which  was
given  to  it  by  the  Theesalonians.  Our  gospel ;
that  is,  the  gospel  which  was  preached  by
us.  Came  not  unto  yon  in  word  only.  The
gospel  came  in  word,  for  this  was  a  necessary
pre-requisite,  but  "  not  in  word  only,"  that
is,  it  was  not  a  bare  publication  or  commu-
nication in  human  words.  Bnt  in  power.
Some  restrict  the  epithets  which  here  follow
to  the  teachers,  as  denoting  the  mode  in
which  they  preached  the  gospel ;  but  it  is
better  to  refer  them  both  to  the  teachers
and  the  taught  By  **  power  "  is  not  meant
miracles,  but,  in  contrast  to  "word,"  the
power  with  which  Paul  and  his  companions
preached,  and  the  impression  whid^  the
gospel  made  on  the  hearers.  And  in  the
Hoqr  Ohost  Here  also  the  reference  is,  not
to  miraculous  g^fts,  but  to  the  influences  of
the  8pirit  accompanying  the  preaching  of
the  gospel ;  such  was  the  efficacy  of  Paul's
pvsaehing  that  it  proved  itself  to  be  accom-
panied by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost
m  the  conrersion  of  his  hearers.  There  is
here  an  ascent :  the  gospel  came  in  power,
and,  what  is  more,  it  came  in  the  Holy
Ghoat  And  in  mnoh  asinranoe.  By  '^as-
•ozance  "  here  is  meant  the  confidence  with
which  Paul  and  his  fellow-workers  preached
the  gospel  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  the
fulness  of  conviction  with  which  tho  Thes-
salonians received  it  As  ye  know.  An
ai^)eal  to  their  knowledge  that  what  he  now
states  is  tme.  What  manner  of  men  we
were  among  yon.  Alluding  to  the  blame-
Ussncss  of  their  behaviour  when  in  Thessa-
kmiea»  For  yonr  sake;  namely,  that  we
songht  not  our  own  profit  or  advantage,
but  your  spiritnal  good.


Ver.  6.— Now  follows  the  second  reason
assigned  by  Paul  for  his  confidence  in  their
election.  And  ye  became  followers  (or,  tmt-
tatoTtt)  of  ns,  and  of  the  Lord;  of  Christ.
By  becoming  imitators  of  the  apostle,  they
became  imitators  of  Christ.  **Be  yo  fol-
lowers of  me,"  writes  St  Paul  to  the  Corin-
thians, *^even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ"  (1
Cor.  xi.  1).  The  point  of  imitation  did  not
consist  in  their  cordial  reception  of  the  gos-
pel, for  that  could  not  apply  to  Christ ;  bnt  in
their  joyful  endurance  of  suffering.  Having
received  the  word  in  mnoh  aflUction.  We
learn  from  the  Acts  that  the  unbelieving  Jews
stirred  up  the  heathen  rabble,  and  nosed  a
persecution  against  Paul  and  his  associates,
in  consequence  of  which  they  had  to  depart
from  Thessalonica  (Acts  xvii.  4 — 10).  It
would  appear  that,  after  the  apostle  had  left
the  city,  the  penecution,  far  from  abating,
rather  increased,  and  the  Gentile  inhabit-
ants united  with  ^e  unbelieving  Jews
against  the  Christians;  the  Thessalonian
converts  suffered  from  their  own  country-
men  as  well  as  from  the  Jews  (ch.  ii.  14).
With  joy  of  the  Holy  Ohost;  that  is,  not
merely  spiritual  joy,  or  joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  but  joy  which  proceeds  from  the
Holy  Ghost-— joy  which  is  produced  by  him,
of  which  he  is  the  Author.

Ver.  7. — So  that  ye  were  eniamples.  The
word  here  rendered  '^ensamples"  litorally
signifies  '*  types.'*  It  is  used  to  denote  a
form  or  figure  (Acts  vii.  43),  a  model  or
likeness  (Acts  vii.  44),  a  mark  or  impression
(John  XX.  25).  Hence,  in  a  metaphorical
sense,  it  came  to  signify  an  example,  a
pattern  for  imitation.  **)^ow  these  things
are  our  examples"  (1  Cor.  x.  6).  To  Ssi
that  believe— to  all  believera— in  Macedonia
and  Achaia.  These  are  the  two  provinces
into  which  ancient  Greece  was  divided  by
the  Romans,  each  of  which  was  governed  by
a  proconsul.  Macedonia  was  the  northern
portion,  including  Macedonia  proper,  Epirus
and  Blyricum ;  at  first  it  was  divided  into
four  districts,  but  afterwards  united  into
one  province,  of  which  Thessalonica  was
constituted  the  capital.  Achaia  was  the
southern  portion  of  ancient  Greece,  includ-
ing the  Peloponnesus,  Attica,  Boeotia,  etc.,
and,  until  recently,  was  nearly  of  the  same
dimensions  with  the  modem  kingdom  of
Greece;  its  capitol  was  Corinth.

Ver.  8. — For ;  or,  because  the  proof  of  this
praise  conferred  on  the  Thessalonians.  From
yon  sounded  out.  Resounded  like  the  sound
of  a  trumpet  Comp.  Bom.  x.  18,  **  Their
soxmd  went  into  all  the  earth,  and  their
words  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  The
word  of  the  Lord.  This  does  not  intimate
that  the  Thessalonians  by  their  missionary
activity  disseminated  the  gospel,  but  that
from  them  locally  the  gospel  had  spread.


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONUNS.    [en.  1. 1—10.


Not  only  in  Maoedonia  and  Aeliaia,  bnt  also
in  every  place  yonr  &ith  to  Ood-ward  ii
•pread  abroad.  There  ia  a  slight  difficulty
in  tiie  construction.  The  sentence  is  com-
plete without  tlie  addition,  '*your  faith  to
God- ward  is  spread  abroad/'  and,  therefore,
we  must  consider  these  words  as  equivalent
to  *'  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the
Lord."  When  the  apostle  says  that  "the
faith  of  the  Thessalonians  is  spread  abroad
in  every  place,"  the  moaning  is  that  the
report  of  their  joyful  reception  of  the  gospel
had  excited  universal  attention.  There  is
here  a  certain  use  of  the  figure  hyperbole.
The  words,  **  in  every  place,"  are  not  to  be
taken  in  their  full  literal  sense,  but  are
merely  a  strong  expression  for  the  wide
diffusion  of  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians.
Paul  uses  similar  hyperboles  in  other  places,
as  when  he  speaks  of  the  faith  of  the  Romans
being  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world
(Rom.  i.  8),  and  of  the  gospel  having  come
into  all  the  world  (Col.  i.  6).  Tliis  wide
diffusion  of  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians,
notwithstanding  the  recent  date  of  their
conversion,  may  be  accounted  for  when  wo
consider  that  Thessalonica  and  Corinth
were  two  great  commercial  cities,  from  and
to  which  there  was  a  constant  coming  and
going,  so  that  reports  might  easily  be  trans-
mitted by  merchants  and  strangers.  It  has
also  been  suggested  that  Aquila  and  Pris-
oilla,  who  had  lately  come  from  Rome  (Acts
xviii.  2),  must  in  their  journey  have  passed
through  Thessalonica,  and  would  bring  with
them  to  Corinth  such  a  report  of  the  faith
of  tlie  Thessalonians  (VVieseler).  So  that  we
need  not  to  speak  anything ;  that  is,  of  your
faith,  as  this  is  alr^y  so  well  known  and
applauded.

Yer  9. — ^For  they  themselvef ;  that  is,  the
reporters,  those  in  Macedonia,  Achaia,  and
every  other  place.  Show  of  ns ;  or,  report
concerning  us  (R.V.)  in  regard  to  our
preaching  or  entrance  among  you.  Instead  of
questions  being  asked  of  us  by  them,  as  would
naturally  be  expected,  they  of  their  own
accord  give  information.  What  manner  of
OBtering  in  we  had  among  yon.  *'  Entering"
here  evidently  refers,  not  merely  to  the  out-
ward entrance,  the  mere  preaching  of  the
gospel  among  the  Thessalonians;  but  to
the  access,  the  internal  entrance,  which  the
gospel  found  into  their  hearts ;  that  is,  with


what  power  and  fulness  of  the  Holy  Qhost
we  preached  the  gospel  unto  yon,  and  with
what  joy  and  confidence  and  contempt  of
danger  ye  received  it.  And  how  ye  turned
to  Ood  from  idols.  This,  as  already  remarked,
is  one  of  the  proofs  that  the  Church  of  Thes-
salonica was  chiefly  composed  of  Qentile
converts,  though,  of  course,  not  to  the  exclu-
sion of  the  Jewish  element  (Acts  xvii.  4).
To  serve  the  living  and  true  Ood.  Two  epi-
thets employed  in  contrast  to  the  idols  of
the  heathen :  **  living,"  in  opposition  to  dead
idols,  which  were  nothing  in  the  world;
**  true,"  not  in  the  sense  of  veracious,  but
of  real  in  opposition  to  the  imaginary  gods
of  the  heathen.

Ver.  10.— And  to  wait.  The  faith  of  the
Thessalonians  took  the  form  of  hope  or  ex-
pectation for  the  coming  of  the  Lord;  an
element  of  Christian  feeling,  perhaps,  not  so
prominent  in  the  present  day.  For  his  Son
from  heaven ;  referring  to  the  second  advent.
Christ  on  his  departure  from  this  world
went  to  heaven,  where  he  resides,  making
intercession  for  us,  but  from  thence  he  will
come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  In
the  primitive  Church  the  advent  of  Christ
was  not  regarded  as  at  a  distance,  but  as
an  event  which  might  at  any  moment  occur.
Whom  he  raised  from  the  dead;  with  em-
phasis placed  before  ''Jesus,"  because  his
resurrection  from  the  dead  was  the  open  de-
claration, the  public  inauguration,  of  his  Di-
vine sonship  (Rom.  i.  4).  Even  Jesns  which
delivered  ns.    The  participle  is  present ;  not

Sast,  '*who  delivered  us,"  namely,  by  his
eath ;  nor  future,  "  who  shall  deliver  us,"
at  the  judgment ;  but  present,  **  who  delivers
us ; "  the  deliverance  is  going  on — it  com-
menced with  his  death,  but  will  not  be  com-
pleted until  his  advent.  Or  the  word  may
be  used  as  a  substantive,  *^  Jesus,  our  De-
liverer." From  the  wrath ;  or  righteous  in-
dignation of  God ;  here  punishment  as  the
effect  of  wrath.  "  The  wrath  of  God  is,  in
its  deepest  ground,  love ;  love  itself  becomes
a  consuming  fire  to  whatever  is  opposed  to
the  nature  of  goodness  "  (Koch).  To  oome ;
literally,  which  is  coming,  the  coming  tcrath^
denoting  its  absolute  certainty.  This  coming
wrath  will  take  place  at  the  advent  of  Christ,
when  he  appears,  not  only  for  the  salva-
tion of  his  people,  but  for  the  destrnctiou
of  his  enemies.


HOMILETICS.


Vers.  1,  2,— -The  character  of  Christians.  1.  ITiey  are  converted;  they  turn  to  Crod
from  idols.  As  the  heathen  turned  from  material  idols,  so  do  believers  from  spiritual  idols.
A  change  is  effected  in  their  disposition ;  their  chief  affection  is  now  fixed  on  God  and
Christ ;  they  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  2.  They  wait  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;
they  expect  salvation  from  him,  and  look  forward  to  his  second  coming.  3.  They  live
a  holy  life ;  they  possess  the  three  cardinal  virtues,  and  prove  that  they  do  so  by  their
outward  manifestations.


6  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  1. 1—10.


he  was  of  older  standing  and  greater  weight  in  the  Church  than  Timothy,  a  compara-
tiyely  young  evangelist.

II.  The  Chttbch  to  which  the  salutation  was  addressed.  "  To  the  Church  of
the  Thessalonians  in  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  Its  situation,
Thessalonica  was  the  capital  of  all  Macedonia,  and  is  still  the  second  city  of  European
Turkey.  Important  then  as  now  hy  its  commerce ;  important  by  its  place  on  the  great
road  which  connected  Bome  with  its  Asiatic  dependencies ;  but  more  important  in  the
eye  of  the  apostle  as  a  grand  centre  of  missionary  operations  both  by  land  and  sea,  and
with  a  mingled  population  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.  2.  Its  tru6  character  as  a  Church,  It
was  "  the  Churcn  of  the  Thessalonians  " — a  regularly  organized  community  of  Chris-
tians, mostly  Gentiles,  having  the  root  and  ground  of  its  spiritual  existence  in  union
with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  They  were  "  in  the  fellowship  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,"  because  they  were  "  dwelling  in  GK)d,  and  God  in  them,"  and  "  they  were  in  him
that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  The  one  fellowship  implies  the  other ;  for
Jesus  said,  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me ; "  yet  it  is  also  true  that  it  is
"  God  who  calls  us  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Son  "  (1  Cor.  i.  9).    This  double  fellow-


There  is  no  fellowship  but  in  the  truth.  To  be  in  darkness  is  to  bo  out  of  fellow-
ship (1  John  i.  6).  (2)  Their  unity.  "  Even  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us  "  (John  xvii.  21).  (3)  Their  love  to  one  another.
"  If  we  love  one  another  God  abideth  in  us  "  (1  John  iv.  12).  (4)  Their  boldness  in
the  day  of  judgment  (1  John  ii.  28).  (5)  Their  ultimate  perfection.  "  I  in  them,  and
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one ''  (John  xvii.  21— -23).  Behold  thus
the  high  dignity  and  blessed  privilege  of  the  Church  at  Thessalonica.

III.  The  salutation.  "  Grace  and  peace  be  unto  you."  (Sec  homiletical  hints  on
Gal.  i.  5  ;  Col.  i.  2.)— T.  C.

Vers.  2,  3. — Heartfelt  thanksgiving  for  spiritual  prosperity.  The  apostle  begins  by
a  full  and  earnest  expression  of  thanksgiving  such  as  is  characteristic  of  all  his  Epistles
except  that  to  the  Galatians.

I.  The  ground  of  thanksgiving.  "Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work  of
faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  We  consider
here:  1.  The  graces  of  the  Christian  life.  We  have  here,  in  the  first  Epistle  ever
written  by  the  apostle,  his  favourite  trilogy  of  Christian  principles.  (1)  The  three
graces  are  fundamental.  As  the  three  principal  colours  of  the  rainbow — red,  yellow,  and
blue,  representing  respectively  heat,  light,  and  purifying  power — supply  in  their  combi-
nation all  the  other  colours,  so,  by  a  sort  of  moral  analysis,  it  can  be  shown  that  faith,
hope,  and  love  lie  at  the  foundation,  or  enter  into  the  composition,  of  all  other  Chris-
tian graces  whatever.  (2)  They  are  three  inseparable  graces.  Faith  always  works  by
love,  and  love  is  inseparable  from  hope,  for  "  hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  the
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Rom.  v.  5),  Faith  is  the
necessary  root,  as  hope  and  love  are  its  unfailing  fruits.  As  faith  works  by  love,  it  is
also  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for.  (3)  They  are  at  once  the  defence  and  the  adorn-
ment of  Christian  life.  "  Let  us,  who  are  of  the  day,  be  sober,  putting  on  the  breast-
plate of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  a  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation  "  ('ch.  v.  8).  (4)  They
are  the  abiding  principles  of  Christian  life :  "  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  love,  these
three  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13).  They  do  not  die  with  death ;  for  in  eternity  the  Church  will
be  made  perfect  in  love,  as  it  will  ever  continue  to  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  hope  for  new
developments  of  truth  and  new  disclosures  of  blessedness.  2.  The  practical  aspect  of
these  graces  as  forces  in  the  life  of  the  Church,  There  is  a  climax  in  the  exhibition  of
the  three  graces.  The  apostle  does  not  say,  "  the  work  of  faith,  the  work  of  love,  the
work  of  hope,"  but  ascends  from  work  to  labour,  and  from  labour  to  endurance.  There
is  a  work  that  is  a  refreshing  exercise  of  our  energies,  but  it  involves  no  exhaustion
or  fatigue ;  but  when  work  has  deepened  into  labour  we  become  conscious  of  the
limitation  of  our  strength,  and  then  we  have  to  call  in  the  new  principle  of  endurance,  or
**  patience,"  if  we  are  to  carry  it  to  a  triumphant  result.  (1)  The  work  of  faith  points
to  a  work  springing  out  of  faith ;  for  faith  is  the  most  active  of  all  the  principles  which


CH.I.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


influence  human  coDduct.  Their  faith  was,  therefore,  a  fruitful  faith.  (2)  The  labour
of  love  suggests  the  sacrifices  which  we  are  ready  to  make  for  the  objects  of  our  love.
It  was  not  "  love  in  word  or  in  tongue,"  but  "  in  deed  and  in  truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18).
(3)  The  patience  of  hope  suggests  the  severity  of  present  afflictions,  which  are  borne
with  constancy  and  perseverance  because  the  sufferers  are  cheered  by  hope.  But  it  is
"hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  '*  that  is,  hope  of  his  second  advent;  for  the  Tbessa-
lonians  had  a  constant  and  overwhelming  sense  of  the  nearness  of  his  coming,  which  in
iiome  cases  broke  in  upon  the  continuity  of  their  daily  duties.

II.  The  occasion,  circumstanoes,  and  frequency  op  the  apostle's  thanksgiving.
**  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all,  making  mention  of  you  in  our  prayers.**
1.  It  teas  in  his  prayers  for  them  that  he  expressed  his  thanksgiving,  "  Even  in  the
sight  of  God  and  our  Father."  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  was  upon  him  daily  (2  Cor.
xi.  28),  and  under  such  a  burden  he  "  bowed  his  knees  to  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."  It  is  happy  for  Christians  to  be  remembered  in  the  prayers  of  saints,  to  be
borne  upon  their  hearts,  to  be  borne  up  before  God  in  intercessory  prayer  (Rom.  i.  9 ;
Eph.  i.  16).  His  thanksgivings  were  as  constant  as  his  prayers.  2.  The  thanksgivings
vjtre  addressed  to  Ood  because  the  spiritual  prosperity  at  Tbessalonica  was  due  neither
to  the  converts  themselves  nor  to  the  preachers  of  the  gospel.  We  must  ever  speak  of
the  grace  of  God,  and  exalt  it  in  our  praises.  3.  The  thanksgiving  was  all  the  more
hearty  and  full  because  it  had  regard  to  the  prosperity  of  the  entire  community,  **  All
of  you,"  because  they  were  an  eminent  seal  of  his  apostleship,  a  blessed  effect  of  his
ministry  among  them. — T.  C.

Vers.  4 — 6. — Their  election  and  its  fruits  another  ground  of  thanksgiving.  The
apostle,  Jew  as  he  was,  addresses  these  Gentiles  as  his  brethren,  and  represents  them
as  the  objects  of  Divine  love.    "  Knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  God,  your  election."

I.  There  is  an  election  according  to  grace.  1.  The  election  referred  to  here  was
not  an  election  to  exteimal  privilege  or  ecclesiastical  relationship;  for  that  might  have  had
a  very  uncertain  issue,  and  would  not  have  been  the  subject  of  such  abounding  thankful-
ness as  he  expresses  in  this  passage.  2.  It  vxis  not  even  the  call  to  obtain  glory ^  which  they
had  received  through  his  gospel  (2  Thess.  ii.  13, 14) ;  for  the  election  only  realized  itself  in
that  call.  Scripture  always  distinguishing  the  order  of  election  and  calling.  "  Whom  ho
did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called  "  (liom.  viii.  30).  3.  Much  less  is  the  election  to  be
identified  with  regeneration,  conversion,  or  faith.  These  were  its  effects.  4.  It  was  an
election  to  eternal  life,  involving  all  the  various  processes  of  his  grace,  (Rom.  xi.  5.)  (1)
It  is  an  election  in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  4).  (2)  It  is  irrespective  of  merit  (Rom.  ix.  11).
(3)  It  is  through  faith  and  tne  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  (2  Tbess,  ii.  13).  (4)  It  is  to
eternal  glory  (Rom.  ix.  23).

IL  The  knowledge  of  this  election  is  a  possible  and  an  actual  experience.
The  apostle's  knowledge  was  not  derived  from  special  revelation,  neither  was  it  the
mere  credulity  of  a  kindly  charity,  '*  hoping  all  things  *'  in  the  absence  of  evidence.  It
had  a  double  grounds-one  subjective  and  the  other  objective;  one  based  upon  the
apostle's  conscious  experience  in  preaching  the  gospel,  the  other  upon  their  practical
and  hearty  reception  of  the  truth.  1.  The  suhjective  evidence.  *'  For  our  gospel  came
not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much
assurance."  (1)  It  did  come  in  word,  for  it  was  conveyed  to  the  Thessalonians  in
human  speech,  albeit  not "  in  the  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,"  but  it  passed
beyond  the  word.  It  did  not  merely  sound  in  the  ear  nor  touch  the  understanding.
(2)  But  it  came  in  power — on  the  part  of  the  preachers  with  an  overwhelming  force
and  persuasiveness,  so  that  **  the  faith  of  the  people  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of
man,  but  in  the  power  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  5).  There  was  a  conscious  abounding  energy
which  carried  them  beyond  themselves,  with  an  overmastering  conviction  that  they
would  prevail.  (3)  It  came  also  **  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  or,  as  the  apostle  elsewhere
phrases  it,  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  4).  The  Word
would  otherwise  have  been  a  dead  letter  and  a  killing  letter,  but  the  Spirit  gave  it  life.
The  power  of  the  gospel,  therefore,  was  due  to  the  efficient  operation  of  the  Spirit.  (4)
It  came  also  "in  much  assurance,"  not  on  the  part  of  the  Thessalonians,  but  on  the  part
of  the  preachers  of  the  gospel,  who  were  fully  convinced  of  its  truth,  and  had  thorough
confidence  in  its  power.    (6)  This  subjective  evidence  was  confirmed  by  their  own


8  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  1. 1—10.

recollection  of  the  three  preachers  of  the  gospel — **  As  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we
were  among  you  for  your  sake."  The  Thessalonians  would  have  a  very  yivid  recoUeo*
tion  both  of  the  preaching  and  the  preachers.  The  three  brethren  were  conspicuous  by
their  holiness,  their  zeal,  and  their  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians.  This
was  no  self-flattery,  for  it  was  confirmed  by  the  knowledge  of  their  converts.  2.  ITie
objective  evidence  of  their  election,  "And  ye  became  imitators  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord,
haying  received  the  Word  in  much  afliiction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Their  ready
imitation  of  the  apostle  and  his  colleagues — which  was,  in  truth,  an  imitation  of  Christ,
so  far  as  they  were  connected  with  him  in  his  life  and  truth — was  a  practical  proof  of
the  sincerity  of  their  conversion.  The  imitation  was  manifest  in  the  spirit  and  circum-
stances of  their  reception  of  the  truth.  (1)  The  truth  was  received  '*  in  much  afflic-
tion." The  history  of  their  conversion  confirms  this  statement  (Acts  xvii.  5,  9).  But
the  persecution  continued  after  the  departure  of  the  apostle.  The  gospel  had  its  draw-
baclu,  but  the  Thessalonians  were  steadfast  in  their  allegiance  to  the  truth.  (2)  Tet
it  was  received  •*  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  that  is,  the  joy  that  springs  from  his
presence  in  the  soul.  They  were  thus  imitating  that  apostle  who  "  took  pleasure  in
infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  in  persecutions,  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake  "
(2  Cor.  xiL  9, 10).  The  joy  in  question  is  (a)  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22) ;  (6)  it
is  essentially  connected  with  the  kingdom  of  God  as  part  of  its  blessedness  (Rom.  xiv.
17) ;  (c)  it  is  capable  of  increase  through  the  very  presence  of  affliction  (Acts  v.  41) ;
(d)  it  is  the  strength  of  the  believer — "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  your  strength  "
(Neh.  viii.  10) ;  (e)  its  advent  marks  a  distinct  change  in  the  world's  history ;  (/)  it
ought  to  be  constant  (Phil.  iv.  4);  (jgi)  it  is  maintained  through  abiding  in  Christ
(John  XV.  10, 11).— T.  C.

Vers.  7,  8. — I7ie  profound  impression  made  hy  the  conversion  of  the  ThesscUonians,
Having  become  imitators  of  the  apostles  and  of  our  Lord,  they  soon  became  examples
for  the  imitation  of  other  Churches.  Their  conversion  lifted  them  up  into  a  sudden  and
distinct  visibility  in  two  directions.

I.  The  gospel  was  thus  carried  through  Northern  and  Southern  Greece  like
THE  ringing  bound  OP  A  TRUMPET.  "  For  from  you  hath  sounded  out  the  Word  of
the  Lord  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia."  These  two  divisions  of  Greece,  included  in
the  Homan  empire,  received  the  report  of  the  gospel,  which  went  forth  like  a  joyful
sound,  proclaiming  with  no  uncertainty  liberty  to  the  captives.  1.  A  work  of  grace  in
one  place  quickly  leads  to  a  work  qf  grace  in  other  places.  The  tale  of  wonder  is
repeated  with  solemn  surprise,  gratitude,  and  expectation.  2.  Churches  already  in
existence  were  stirred  and  stimulated  by  the  visible  work  of  grace  at  Thessalonica.

II.  The  REPORT  OP  their  faith  received  a  wide  publicity  everywhere,  eves
OUTSIDE  THE  LIMITS  OP  GREECE.  This  was  not  wonderful,  for  the  city  was,  as  Cicero
says,  in  the  very  bosom  of  the  Roman  empire,  a  centre  of  business  and  influence  which
touched  its  furthest  limits.  Their  faith  must  have  had  the  solid  stamp  of  reality  to
px)duce  such  a  widespread  sensation.  It  must  have  been  practical  and  self-manifes*
tative,  for  they  did  not  hide  it  in  their  own  breasts,  but  declared  it  by  words  and  deeds.
There  was,  therefore,  no  necessity  for  the  apostle  speaking  about  it — "  so  that  we  need
not  to  speak  anything." — T.  C.

Vers.  9, 10. — The  nature  of  the  impression  made  upon  the  world  by  the  spectacle  of
Thessdlonian  piety.  It  was  a  truly  providential  foresight  that  led  tho  apostles  at  the
beginning  of  the  gospel  to  plant  it  first  in  the  great  cities  of  the  world.  Thus  it  first
appeared  at  Jerusalem,  Antioch,  Ephesus,  Thessalonica,  Home,  and  Corinth.

I.  The  world  was  first  impressed  by  the  rapid  and  immediate  success  of  the
APOSTLES.  "  For  they  themselves  show  of  us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto
you."  The  world  seemed  to  appreciate  the  boldness,  the  sincerity,  the  uprightness  of
the  preachers,  as  elements  of  their  success ;  for  there  was  no  dexterous  flattery,  there
was  no  spirit  of  self-seeking,  there  was  no  guileful  strategy,  in  the  proclamation  of  the
gosi)el.

II.  The  world  was  btill  more  deeply  impressed  by  the  blessed  effects  op  the
apostles'  pREAOHiNa.  "  And  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and
true  God.''    1.  It  was  a  conversion  from  idolatry.     Immediately  and  at  once  they


\


CH.  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


received  converting  grace,  under  the  influence  of  which  they  turned  to  the  Lord  from
their  dead  and  fictitious  deities.  (1)  Idolatry  is  apostasy  from  God.  These  Thessa*
lonians  **  had  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptihle  God  for  the  likeness  of  an  image  of
corruptible  man,  and  of  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things  "  (Rom.  i.  23).
They  had  been  "joined  to  their  idols  "  for  ages  (Hos.  iv.  17).  They  had  been  hitherto
walking  just  like  other  Gentiles,  in  all  moral  blindness  and  carnality  of  heart  (Eph.  iv.
17, 18).  (2)  Their  conversion  was  a  repudiation  of  idolatry.  It  was  not  mere  prosely-
tism.  It  was  the  bursting  asunder  of  ties  which  had  an  immense  social  as  well  as
religions  weight  in  pagan  life.  (3)  It  was  a  thorough  consecration  to  the  service  of
the  living  and  true  God.  As  their  God  was  true  God  and  living  Grod,  having  life  in
himself  and  a  true  and  faithful  relation  to  his  worshippers,  they  could  give  him  the
living  service  of  faith,  obedience,  and  dependence.  2.  Another  effect  of  the  apostles*
preaching  was  their  expectation  of  our  Lord's  coming.  The  doctrine  of  the  advent
occupies  the  foreground  in  the  thoughts  of  the  Thessalonians,  as  in  the  two  Epistles
addressed  to  them.  As  faith  underlies  the  service  of  the  true  God,  so  hope  underlies
the  expectation  of  the  Lord's  coming.  '*  And  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he
raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  who  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  (1)
This  implies  the  belief  that  Jesus  is  in  heaven,  to  reign,  to  plead,  to  prepare  a  place  for
lis.  (2)  It  implies  the  belief  that  he  will  return  from  heaven*  The  Thessalonians  may
have  believed  that  he  would  return  in  that  age,  but  all  Christians  live  in  the  **  blessed
hope  "  of  his  second  coming.  (3)  This  waiting  attitude  implied  the  recognition  of  a
certain  connection  between  Christ's  resurrection  and  our  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to
come.  They  were  not  waiting  for  a  dead  man  lying  in  a  Jewish  grave,  but  for  One
raised  from  the  dead,  and  living  in  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  His  resurrection  implied
the  completion  of  his  atoning  work,  as  the  work  of  atonement  supplies  the  grounci  for
our  continuous  deliverance  irom  the  wrath  that  is  coming.  There  is  a  wrath  coming
upon  disobedient  sinners,  but  there  is  a  way  of  deliverance  provided  in  the  Word  of
Jesus  Christ  ratified  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead. — T.  C.

Ver.  1. — The  address,  I.  The  writer.  1,  He  uses  no  title.  He  does  not  style
himself  apostle.  He  asserted  his  apostolic  authority  when  it  was  necessary  to  do  so ;
for  the  sake  of  others,  as  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  and  G^tians.  Now  it
was  not  necessary ;  the  Macedonian  Churches  regarded  him  with  affection  and  reverence.
He  simply  gives  his  name,  his  new  name — Paul.  He  had  laid  aside  his  old  name  with
all  its  associations.  It  recalled  the  memory  of  the  famous  king,  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,
of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  It  recalled  to  the  apostle  the  memories  of  his  own  old  uncon-
vert^  life,  his  self-satisfied  Pharisaism,  his  persecution  of  the  Church,  especially  that
one  saddest  day  of  his  life,  when  he  consented  to  the  death  of  the  first  martyr  of  the
Lord,  the  holy  Stephen.  He  had  laid  aside  his  old  name,  and  with  it  his  old  modes  of
thought,  his  old  life.  Paul  was,  we  may  say,  his  Christian  name ;  we  do  not  read  of  it
before  the  beginning  of  his  first  missionary  journey ;  it  was  consecrated  now  by  con-
stant, untiring,  self-sacrificing  labour.  It  was  known  wherever  Christ  was  preached  as
the  name  of  the  great  missionary,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  the  first  of  the  noble
band  of  Christian  missionaries,  who  had  left  his  home  and  all  that  once  he  loved  to
devote  himself,  heart  and  soul,  to  the  mission  work  with  all  its  hardships,  all  its
dangers.  Many  holy  men  have  trodden  in  his  steps ;  but  it  was  Paul  who  first  set  the
high  example,  who  kindled  the  sacred  enthusiasm  which  has  led  so  many  saints  in
every  age  to  fulfil  the  Lord's  command,  to  go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel
to  every  creature  Paul  is  a  Latin  name ;  it  means  *'  little."  St.  Augustine  in  one  place
suggests  that  St.  Paul  may  have  chosen  it  to  mark  himself  as  "  the  least  of  the  apostles."
There  are  other  possible  reasons  for  the  change,  and  it  may  be  thought  that  St.  Paul
would  have  shrunk  from  what  might  seem  almost  like  a  parade  of  humility.  But  at
least  we  may  find  a  lesson  here.  God  exalteth  the  humble.  Paid  is  a  famous  name.
Others  have  borne  it — some  distinguished  Romans ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the  apostle
to  make  the  name  honoured  and  beloved  throughout  the  civilized  world.  The  Paulus
who  conquered  Macedonia  for  Rome  is  far  less  famous  now  than  the  Paul  who  won  the
Macedonian  Churches  for  Christ.  2.  He  associates  others  with  himself.  Paul  is  the
spiritual  father  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians ;  ho  is  the  writer  of  the  Epistle,  not
Silvanus  or  Timothens  (see  2  Thess.  iii.  17).    But  they  had  laboiured  with  him  in


10  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cii.  i,  1— la


Tbessalonica ;  Silvanns  certainly,  Timotheus  la  all  probability ;  they  had  shared  hia
dangers  there ;  they  were  well  known  to  the  Thessalonians.  So  he  joins  their  names
with  his  own,  recognizing  their  brotherly  fellowship,  their  faithful  co-operation,  and
shrinking,  it  may  be,  from  putting  himself  into  unnecessary  prominence.  Ho  seeks  not
honour  for  himself;  he  has  no  literary  ambition ;  his  one  aim  is  the  salvation  of  his
converts,  the  glory  of  Crod.  (1)  Silvanus,  or,  in  the  shortened  form  of  the  name,  Silas.
He,  like  St.  Paul,  was  a  Roman  citizen,  and  bore  a  Latin  name.  It  was,  in  the  Latin
mythology,  the  name  of  the  sylvan  god,  who  was  supposed  to  protect  the  sheep,  and
save  them  from  wolves.  When  he  became  a  Christian,  that  name  might  perhaps  serve
to  remind  him  of  the  great  duty  of  tending  the  flock  for  which  the  good  Shepherd  died.
He  had  been  a  l«ider  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  ^he  was  a  prophet  (Acts  xv.  32),  that
is,  he  had  the  gift  of  spiritual,  inspired  eloquence ;  he  used  it  to  exhort  and  confirm  the
brethren.  He  accompanied  St.  Paul  in  his  first  missionary  journey ;  he  worked  wiUi
him,  he  suffered  with  him.  In  the  dungeon  at  Philippi,  his  feet  made  fast  in  the
stocks,  he  prayed  and  sang  praises  unto  God.  His  presence  and  8>'mpathy  had  cheered
St.  Paul  in  his  dangers.  Companionship  in  affliction  had  bound  them  very  close  to  one
another.  When  workiug  together  at  Thessalonica  they  must  have  still  felt  the  efifects  of
the  many  stripes  which  they  had  received  at  Philippi.  It  was  natural  that  St.  Paul
should  mention  Silas  in  writing  to  the  Thessalonians.  We  may  notice  here  that  he
furnishes  one  of  the  links  which  couple  together  the  two  apostles  whose  differences
(Ghil.  ii.  II — 21)  have  been  so  much  magnified  by  heretics  of  old,  by  unbelievers  now.
St.  Paul  loved  Silvanus ;  St  Peter  counted  him  a  faithful  brother  (1  Pet  v.  12).  (2)
Timotheus,  St  Paul's  dearest  companion,  his  own  son  in  the  faith,  bound  to  him  with
the  closest  ties  of  tender,  personal  afiection.  He  stands  first  among  the  noble  company
of  holy,  loving  fellow-workers  whom  St  Paul  had  drawn  around  himself.  He  was
known  to  the  Thessalonians ;  his  name,  indeed,  does  not  appear  in  the  record  of  St.
Paul's  visit  to  Thessalonica  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  But  we  know  that  he  was  sent
there  afterwards  to  establish  and  to  comfort  the  Thessalonian  Christians  concerning
their  faith  (ch.  iii.  2).  Doubtless  he  was  chosen  for  that  work  because  of  the  Christian
zeal,  the  loving,  gentle  sympathy  which  marked  his  beautiful  character.  He  fulfilled
his  mission,  and  brought.back  to  the  apostle  good  tidings  of  the  faith  and  charity  of  the
Thessalonians.    He  greets  them  now.

IL  The  Chubch.  1.  The  foundation  of  the  Thessalonian  Church,  St.  Paul  had
been  shamefully  treated  at  Philippi ;  he  had  not  lost  courage.  He  came  to  Thessalonica ;
ho  went,  as  he  was  wont,  to  the  synagogue.  There  he  preached  for  three  sabbath  days ;
he  **  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures.'*  He  showed  (as  our  Lord  himself  had
shown  to  the  two  disciples  on  the  way  to  Emmaus)  that  it  was  necessary  that  the
Messiah  should  suffer,  and  should  rise  again  from  the  dead ;  he  showed  that  Jesus  was
the  Messiah,  the  Christ.  All  true  preaching  must  be  full  of  Scripture ;  all  true  preaching
must  be  full  of  Christ  St.  Paul's  words  w^ere  greatly  blessed.  Some  Jews  believed,  a
great  multitude  of  Greek  proselytes,  many  ladies  of  rank.  Those  three  sabbaths
had  been  wonderfully  fruitful ;  a  Church  was  formed  at  Thessalonica.  2.  The  ifford
"  Church,"  This  is  the  earliest  of  St  Paul's  extant  Epistles ;  it  may  be  (possibly  the
Epistle  of  St.  James  was  written  earlier)  the  earliest  of  all  the  writings  of  the  New
Testament.  Then,  if  we  were  to  read  the  New  Testament  in  chronological  order,  we
should  meet  here  with  the  word  **  Church  "  for  the  first  time.  St  James  (ii.  2)  uses  the
word  "  synagogue,"  not  "  Church."  Our  Lord,  of  course,  used  it  earlier.  He  founded  the
Church.  Ho  had  said,  *'  On  this  rock  will  I  build  my  Church ; "  and  again,  "  Tell  it  to
tlie  Church."  But  the  date  of  St  Matthew's  Gospel  is  probably  later  than  that  of  this
Epistle.  The  Greek  word  means  simply  an  assembly,  a  congregation,  as  the  word
**  synagogue  "  means  a  meeting.  It  is  derived  from  a  verb  which  means  to  call  out  or
summon,  and  is  regularly  used  in  classical  Greek  of  the  assemblies  of  citizens  summoned
by  the  magistrate  in  the  Greek  commonwealths  for  legislative  or  other  political  pur-
poses (comp.  Acts  xix.  89) ;  sometimes  of  other  assemblies,  as  of  the  crowd  of  artisans
collected  by  Demetrius  (Acts  xix.  32,  41).  It  ,is  used  of  the  congregation  of  Israel
in  Acts  vii.  38 ;  Heb.  ii.  12 ;  and  sometimes  in  the  Septuagint  The  New  Testament
has  taken  the  word  and  filled  it  with  a  new  and  holy  meaning.  It  is  the  assembly
which  Christ  hath  chosen  to  himself  out  of  the  world — the  flock  of  Christ  The  visible
Church  of  Christ  is  **  a  congregation  of  faithful  men,  in  which  the  pure  Word  of  GKjd  is


CH.  L  1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,  11


preached,  and  the  sacraments  be  duly  ministered  according  to  Christ's  ordinance  in  all
those  things  that  of  necessity  are  requisite  to  the  same."  The  great  day  of  Pentecost
was  the  true  birthday  of  the  Church ;  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  then  sent  down  from
heaven  knit  together  the  disciples  into  one  body,  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  St.  Luke
gives  us,  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  a  description  of  the  Church  at
that  time.  "  Then  they  that  gladly  received  the  Word  were  baptized : .  .  .  and  they
continued  steadfastly  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,
and  in  prayers."  Thus  the  notes  of  the  Church,  according  to  Holy  Scripture,  are  baptism,
fellowship  with  the  apostles,  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  the  holy  communion,  public
worship.  The  Church  is  also  one,  for  it  is  one  boay  in  Christ,  united  into  one  fellow*
ship  hy  the  indwelling  of  the  one  Spirit.  It  is  holy,  because  it  is  being  sanctified  by  the
Holy  Ghost ;  all  its  members  are  dedicated  to  God  in  holy  baptism ;  they  are  all  pledged
by  that  dedication  to  follow  after  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  It  is  catholic,  because  ic
is  not  confined  to  one  nation,  like  the  synagogue,  but  univci*sal,  world-wide,  open  to  all
who  receive  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  apostolic,  because  it  is  built  upon  the  foundation
of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  Comer-stone ;  and
because  it  continues  in  the  doctrine  and  fellowship  of  the  apostles.  It  is  the  bride  of
Christ.  "  Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it ;  that  h»  might  sanctify  and
cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  that  he  might  present  it  unto
himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."  3.  The  Church  of  the  ThesscUonians,  Now
there  was  a  branch  of  the  one  Church  at  Thessalonica.  (1)  It  was  the  second  Church
founded  in  Europe.  The  first  was  at  Philippi,  a  small  place,  though  a  Roman  colony.
Thessalonica  was  a  populous  city,  the  metropolis  of  Mac^onia.  G^  plants  his  Church
everywhere.  It  embraces  all  who  will  accept  the  gospel — ^poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and
\emjed ;  it  meets  the  deepest  needs  of  all  places  alike — the  quiet  country  and  the
stirring  city.  (2)  It  was  already  organized.  It  had  its  ministers  (ch.  v.  12, 13),  and
its  assemblies  for  public  worship  (ch.  v.  27).  Short  as  St.  Paul's  visit  was,  he  had,  it
seems,  ordained  elders  there,  as  he  was  wont  to  do  in  every  Church  (Acts  xiv.  23),  and
had  provided  for  the  regular  meetings  of  the  brethren.  (3)  It  was  m  God  the  Father
and  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  was  its  essential  characteristic.  As  Chrysostom
nys,  **  There  were  many  UKkrifficu,  many  assemblies  both  Jewish  and  Greek.  St.  Paul
writes  to  that  assembly,  that  congregation,  which  was  in  God.  It  is  a  high  exaltation,
above  all  other  possible  dignities,  to  be  in  Grod.^'  Thessalonica  formerly  lay  in  wicked-
ness, in  the  evil  one  (1  John  v.  19),  in  the  sphere  of  his  activity.  Now,  the  Church  there
was  in  God.  The  presence  of  Gk>d  was  the  very  atmosphere  in  which  the  Church  lived
and  moved.  It  lay  in  the  everlasting  arms,  encircled  with  his  embrace,  guarded  by
luB  love.  The  words  imply  a  close  intimate  union,  an  exceeding  great  depth  of  love  and
tenderness,  a  very  great  and  profound  truth,  which  does  not  admit  of  formal  definition,
and  cannot  be  adequately  expressed  in  language ;  but  it  is  realized,  in  a  greater  or  less
degree,  in  the  inner  life  of  those  true  members  of  the  Church  who  abide  in  that  invisible,
but  most  holy  and  most  blessed,  union  with  the  Lord.  God  had  breathed  into  the
Church  of  the  Thessalonians  the  breath  of  life — that  new  life,  that  eternal  life,  which
consists  in  the  personal  knowledge  of  God.  That  life  is  in  his  Son.  Christ  is  the  Life.
"  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  The  Thessalonian  Church  was  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  as  it  was  in  God.  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,"  says  St.  John,  "  even  in  his
Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."  The  Church  is  in  Christ,
then  surely  Christ  is  God.  The  Church  cannot  be  said  to  be  in  any  creature;  in
St  Paul,  for  instance,  or  in  any  other  of  the  holiest  saints  of  God.  Such  an  assertion
would  be  unmeaning,  blasphemous.  Then  in  the  first  verse  of  the  first  of  St.  Paul's
Epistles  (the  least  dogmatic,  some  say,  of  all  his  Epistles,  possibly  the  earliest  of  the  New
Testament  writings),  he  distinctly  teaches  the  great  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  our  Lord
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  "  In  Christ,"  **  in  the  Lord,"  is  a  constant  formula  of  St.  Paul*8 ;
be  is  never  weary  of  repeating  it,  never  weary  of  enforcing  the  great  truth  that  the
Cbristian  lives  in  Christ.  Here  he  asserts  the  same  thing  of  the  Church  as  a  whole.
It  is  in  Christ,  living  in  his  life,  holy  in  his  holiness,  strong  in  his  strength,  gbrious
(John  xrii.  22)  in  his  glory;  the  glory  of  his  presence  now,  the  glory  of  eternal  life
with  him  henceforth  in  heaven.  The  Church  is  "  in  Christ ; "  its  members  must  strive
to  realize  the  blessedness  of  that  holy  fellowship  in  their  own  individual  souls.


12  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.i.1— 10.

Outward  membership  will  not  avail  for  our  salvation,  unless  we  abide  in  living
spiritual  communion  with  the  Lord.

III.  The  salutation.  1.  Orace.  It  is  one  of  those  words  which  the  Holy  Spirit
has  taken  from  common  use  and  filled  with  a  sweet  and  sacred  meaning.  (1)  It  is  the
gracious  favour  of  God  which  rests  upon  all  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
That  favour  is  essentially  free,  spontaneous,  flowing  out  of  that  eternal  love  which  is
intimately  one  with  the  very  being  of  Grod.  *^  God  is  love."  It  is  given  in  and  through
the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  is  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (2)  It  is  the  gratitude,
the  spirit  of  joyful  thankfulness,  which  should  be  the  happy  temper  of  those  who
believe  in  the  grace  of  God.  (3^  It  sometimes  (as  in  Col.  iv.  6)  expresses  the
sweetness,  the  winning  beauty,  the  dignified  gracefulness  of  the  true  Christian  character.
The  grace  of  God  produces  thankfulness,  and  gives  grace  and  beauty  to  the  life.  2.
Peace,  It  was  the  first  greeting  of  the  risen  Lord  to  his  apostles,  **  Peace  be  unto  you.'*
It  became  the  apostolic  greeting.  The  Macedonian  Churches  had  little  outward  peace ;
they  were  early  called  to  suffer.  They  needed  that  blessed  peace  which  God  alone  can
give.    (See  homiletics  on  Phil.  i.  2  and  iv.  7.)

Lessons.  1.  Imitate  St.  Paul  in  his  humility.  Notice  every  feature,  every  mani-
festation of  that  great  grace ;  it  is  hard  to  learn.  2.  The  Church,  as  a  whole,  is  in  God ;
in  his  guardianship,  in  his  encircling  love.  We  must  strive  and  pray  to  realize  that
loving  presence  individually,  to  be  in  God  ourselves.  3.  Pray  that  grace  and  peace  may
rest  on  all  who  bear  the  Name  of  Christ.-*B.  C.  C.

Vers.  2-^. — The  apostle^s  thanksgiving,  I.  Its  character.  1.  It  is  shared  with  his
companions.  '*  We  give  thanks."  The  three  friends  prayed  and  gave  thanks  together.
It  is  true  that  the  plural  number  is  characteristic  of  these  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians ;
the  singular  is  avoided,  it  seems,  from  motives  of  modesty.  But  here,  immediately
after  the  mention  of  the  three  names,  it  is  natural  to  regard  the  thanksgiving  as  pro-
ceeding from  all.  It  is  a  true  Christian  feeling  that  draws  friends  together  for  religious
exercises.  The  faith,  the  love,  of  the  one  kindles,  strengthens,  the  like  graces  in  the
other.  The  tide  of  prayer  and  praise  from  many  hearts  flows  in  deeper,  fuller  volume
towards  the  throne.  And  we  know  that  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in
his  Name,  there  is  he  in  the  midst  of  them.  2.  It  is  constant.  "  We  give  thanks  to
Grod  always.'*  Thanksgiving  is  the  joy  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven ;  it  is  the  outpouring
of  the  Christian  heart  upon  earth.  The  nearer  we  can  approach  to  perpetual  thanks*
giving,  the  nearer  we  draw  to  heaven.  **  Sursum  corda ! " — "  Lift  up  your  hearts !  *'  is  an
exhortation  which  we  daily  need.  May  God  give  us  grace  to  answer  daily,  hourly,
"  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord.**  3.  It  is  for  all.  The  true  shepherd  knows  his
sheep ;  he  loves  them  all,  he  prays  for  all.  He  does  not  divide  them  into  parties.  The
closer  his  own  walk  with  Grod,  the  more  he  is  enabled  to  keep  himself  apart  from  and
above  party  divisions.  But  the  infant  Thessalonian  Church  seems  to  have  enjoyed  the
blessing  of  unity.  It  was  not,  like  Corinth,  distracted  by  strife  and  party  feeling.
4.  It  accompanied  prayer.  Thanksgiving  and  prayer  ever  go  together.  The  man  who
prays  earnestly  must  give  thanks,  for  prayer  brings  him  into  the  sense  of  God's  most
gracious  presence ;  and  with  that  presence  cometh  joy — joy  in  the  Lord.  True  prayer
must  involve  intercession,  for  in  answer  to  prayer  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given ;  and  the
first,  the  chief  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  is  love.  St.  Paul  is  a  remarkable  example  of
perseverance  in  intercessory  prayer.

II.  Its  grounds.  1.  His  remembrance  of  their  spintucd  state.  He  was  working
hard  at  Corinth  ;  in  the  midst  of  his  labour,  with  all  its  new  interests,  he  remembered
without  ceasing  the  Christians  of  Thessalonica.  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  was
already  beginning  to  press  upon  him.  He  was  unwearied  in  his  labours,  in  his
supplications,  in  his  constant  thoughtfulness  for  all  the  Churches  which  he  had
founded,  for  all  the  converts  whom  he  had  brought  to  Christ.  Mark  the  extent,
the  comprehensiveness  of  his  love  for  souls.  2.  His  description  of  that  state.  The
Thessalonian  Christians  already  exhibited  the  three  chief  Christian  graces.  (1)  Faith,
and  that  not  a  dead  faith,  but  a  faith  that  was  ever  working  through  love.  St.
Paul  remembered  their  work  of  faith.  Faith  is  itself  a  work,  the  work  of  Grod.
"  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent."  It  is  itself  a
work,  and  it  must  work  in  the  soul,  for  it  is  an  active  principle.    It  cannot  exist  with-


CH.  1. 1—10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,  13

out  working.    Its  working  may  not  always  express  itself  in  outward  action ;  it  will  do
80  when  possible ;  but  it  will  be  always  working  in  the  inner  sphere  of  the  heart,

E reducing  self-purification,  self-consecration,  spiritual  self-sacrifice.  Each  step  towards
oliness  is  a  work  of  &ith,  hidden,  it  may  be,  from  the  eyes  of  men,  but  seen  by  him
who  searcheth  the  heart.  The  Thessalonians  had  shown  their  faith  by  their  works.
(2)  Love,  the  greatest  of  the  three,  manifests  itself  in  labour.  The  word  is  a  strong
one ;  '*  toil,"  perhaps,  is  a  better  rendering.  Toil  is  not  painful  when  it  is  prompted  by
love.  True  Christian  love  must  lead  the  believer  to  toil  for  the  gospel's  sake,  for  the
souls  and  bodies  of  those  whom  Jesus  loved.  The  abundance  of  the  Christian's  labours
is  the  measure  of  his  love.  "  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all "  (says  St.  Paul,
1  Cor.  XV.  10) :  **  yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."  (3)  Hope.
The  object  of  the  Christian's  hope  is  the  Saviour—- our  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  our
Hope."  We  hope  for  him — for  his  gracious  presence  revealed  in  fuller  measure  now,  for
the  blissful  vision  of  his  glorious  beauty  hereafter.  That  hope  is  patient.  The  husband*
man  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth ;  the  Christian  waits  patiently  for
Christ.  It  works  patience  in  the  soul.  He  can  endure  the  troubles  of  life  who  is
blessed  with  the  lively  hope  of  the  inheritance  reserved  in  heaven.  The  Thessalonians
showed  in  their  lives  the  presence  of  this  lively  hope.  AU  this  the  apostle  remembered
without  ceasing  before  Gk)d  in  his  prayers  and  meditations.  3.  Hia  confidence  in  Ood's
election.  Himself  "  a  vessel  of  election "  (Acts  iz.  15),  he  felt  sure  that  the  same
gracious  choice  had  rested  on  the  Thessalonian  Christians.  God  had  "  chosen  them  to
salvation,"  he  tells  them  in  the  Second  Epistle.  St.  Paul  loves  to  dwell  on  the  great
truth  of  God's  election.  4.  T?ie  evidence  of  that  election,  St.  Paul  finds  it :  (1)  In  the
lives  of  the  Thessalonians,  Archbishop  Leighton  beautifully  says,  "  If  men  can  read
the  characters  of  God's  image  in  their  own  souls,  these  are  the  counterpart  of  the  golden
characters  of  his  love  in  which  their  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life.  He  that
loves  God  may  be  sure  that  he  was  first  loved  of  Gt)d ;  and  he  that  chooses  God  for  his
delight  and  portion  may  conclude  confidently  that  Cfod  hath  chosen  him  to  be  one  of
those  that  shall  enjoy  him  and  be  happy  in  him  for  ever ;  for  that  our  love  of  him  is
bat  the  return  and  repercussion  of  the  beams  of  his  love  shining  upon  us."  The
Thessalonians  received  the  Word ;  they  showed  the  martyr  spirit;  they  were  content  to
sufifer  as  Christians  for  the  gospel's  sake.  They  had  joy  amid  tears — that  holy  joy
which  the  presence  of  the  ble^ed  Spirit  can  give  even  in  the  midst  of  afflictions.  They
were  learning  in  their  own  experience  the  meaning  of  that  seeming  contradiction,'
"  Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing."  They  imitated  the  holy  life  of  St.  Paul,  the  holiest
life  of  the  Iiord  Jesus  Christ.  By  this  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  they  were
making  their  calling  and  election  sure.  (2)  In  the  energy  and  success  of  his  own
preaching  among  thvm.  He  had  brought  them  the  gospel,  the  glad  tidings  of  great
joy.  He  had  delivered  his  message  with  power,  with  the  strength  of  deep  conviction.
The  Holy  Ghost  was  with  him,  teaching  nim  what  to  speak,  filling  him  with  a  Divine
fervour  and  enthusiasm.  His  words  were  more  than  mere  sounds ;  they  were  a  message
full  of  intense  meaning — a  message  from  God.  The  Thessalonians  had  felt  the  power  of
bis  preaching ;  they  were  his  witnesses.  This  energy  was  not  his  own ;  it  came  from
God ;  it  proved  that  God  was  with  him  f  it  was  a  sure  evidence  that  God  was  blessing
the  apostle's  work ;  it  was  given  for  the  sake  of  the  Thessalonians ;  it  surely  meant
that  God  had  chosen  them  to  be  his  own.

Learn :  1.  To  take  delight  in  the  spiritual  progress,  in  the  faith,  hope,  love  of  our
fellow-Christians.  2.  To  thank  God  for  it.  3.  To  refer  all  that  seems  good  in  us  to  God's
electing  grace.    4.  To  look  for  the  evidence  of  that  election  in  holiness  of  life.— B.  C.  C*

Vers.  7—10. — The  happy  results  of  the  conversion  of  the  Thessalonians,  I.  Thet
BKCAME  AN  EXAMPLE  TO  OTHEBS.  1.  T^Tue  piety  tends  U)  propagate  itself.  The  Thessa-
lonians had  not  long  embraced  Christianity.  But  they  had  learned  much ;  they  had
given  their  hearts  to  God.  The  Macedonian  Churches  gave  St.  Paul,  from  the  first,
deep  and  nnmingled  satisfaction.  Thessalonica  was  the  metropolis  of  Macedonia,  the
leat  of  government,  a  centre  of  trade.  It  became  a  centre  of  spiritual  life.  AU
believers  throughout  Macedonia  and  Achaia  looked  to  the  Thessalonians.  St.  Paul  was
now  at  Corinth,  the  chief  city  of  Achaia.  The  Lord  had  much  people  in  that  city ;  but
there  were  grave  evils  at  Corinth,  many  causes  for  anxiety  and  distress.    St.  Paul  must


14  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  l  1— Id.

have  told  the  Corinthians  often  of  the  simple  faith  and  ohedience  of  the  Macedonians.
So  the  Thessalonians  became  an  example  to  the  converts  whose  lot  was  cast  among
the  sensual  temptations  and  the  intellectual  restlessness  of  the  famous  Peloponnesian
town.  The  lives  of  good  men  are  very  precious ;  they  are  a  living  proof  of  the  power
of  God's  grace ;  they  are  facts  which  can  be  seen  and  tested ;  facts  from  which  the
reality  of  the  forces  which  are  working  in  the  unseen  sphere  of  God's  spiritual  agency
can  be  inferred  with  as  much  certainty  as  the  laws  of  nature  from  the  facts  of  observa-
tion and  experiment.  2.  The  Word  of  Ood  is  living  and  powerful.  The  Thessalonians
had  received  it ;  it  was  in  their  hearts  and  on  their  lips.  As  the  starry  heavens  with
their  silent  witness  declare  the  glory  of  Grod,  so  it  is  with  the  stars  that  are  in  the
right  hand  of  the  Saa  of  God  (Rev.  i.  20) ;  their  sound  goeth  forth  into  all  the  earth.
That  heavenly  melody  was  issuing  now  from  Thessalonica.  **  It  hath  sounded  forth,"
St.  Paul  says,  like  a  clear,  thrilling  trumpet-strain.  It  hath  sounded,  and  still  it
sounds,  reaching  far  and  wide  with  its  penetrating  tones.  The  conversion  of  the
Thessalonians  was  known  not  only  in  the  neighbouring  regions  of  Greece.  The  glad
news  had  brought  joy  wherever  the  gospel  had  reached.  It  was  not  necessary  for  the
apostle  to  praise  the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians ;  men  knew  it,  talked  of  it  among  them-
selves, reported  it  to  the  great  missionary  himself.

II.  The  testimony  that  was  borne  to  the  fatth  op  the  Thessalonians.
Christians  talked :  1.  Of  the  wonderful  success  of  St  FauVs  preaching.  Those  three
weeks  (he  may  have  remained  there  somewhat  longer)  had  been  a  time  of  marvellous
fruitfulness.  It  was  but  an  entrance,  the  time  was  so  short ;  but  what  an  entrance  I — so
full  of  power,  so  manifestly  under  the  Divine  guidance.  The  three  men — Silas,  of
whom  we  know  so  little ;  Timotheus,  shy  and  timid ;  Paul,  of  whom  it  was  said  in
Corinth  that  his  bodily  presence  was  weak,  and  his  speech  contemptible,—  they  had
done  wonders  in  Thessalonica.  God  was  with  them  plainly ;  there  could  be  no  other
explanation  of  such  strange  unexampled  energy.  2.  Of  the  change  wrought  in  the
Thessalonians,  They  turned  from  idol- worship.  The  Thessalonian  Church  was  mainly
Grentile ;  there  were  a  few  Jews  among  them,  but  the  Jews  as  a  body  bitterly  perse-
cuted the  infant  Church.  The  gospel  was  glad  tidings  indeed  to  thoughtful  Gentiles.
The  Jews  had  great  and  precious  truths,  though  their  teachers  had  well-nigh^hidden
them  under  a  mass  of  traditions  and  idle  forms.  But  what  was  there  in  the  heathenism
of  the  day  on  which  a  thinking  man  could  rest  his  soul  ?  There  were  temples  every-
where, but  what  man  who  felt  the  yearnings  of  the  human  soul  for  righteousness  and
God  could  in  his  heart  reverence  the  deities  who  were  worshipped  there  ?  So  the
Thessalonians  turned  from  their  idols :  (1)  To  servo  the  living  and  true  God.  The
Grentiles  did  not  serve  their  gods.  It  could  not  be.  They  admired  the  temples  and
the  statues  as  works  of  art ;  they  regarded  their  religion  as  of  some  political  impor-
tance, a  part  of  statecraft.  But  now  the  converts  were  ready  to  serve  God,  for  they
began  to  know  him.  Their  idols  were  dead  things ;  the  God  whom  Paul  preached  was
living,  loving,  and  powerful ;  they  felt  his  power  in  their  hearts,  nay,  he  was  the  Life ;
all  life  (they  knew  now)  came  from  him,  and  was  his  gift.  Their  idols  were  false
gods,  there  was  no  truth  in  them  ;  they  were  images  of  that  which  was  not ;  for  an
idol,  as  St.  Paul  taught  them,  was  "  nothing  in  the  world."  The  Thessalonians  could
see  the  snowy  top  of  Olympus ;  the  stories  of  the  gods  who  dwelt  there  were  but  idle
tales.  St.  Paul  had  taught  them  of  the  great  Creator  who  is  very  God,  living  and
true ;  nay,  the  one  only  Source  of  real  life  and  being.  He  is  the  very  God,  the  self-
existing  One,  I  AM  that  i  am.  There  is  none  other.  (2)  To  wait  for  his  Son  from
heaven.  Hope  is  the  key-note  of  this  Epistle,  as  joy  and  faith  are  of  the  Epistles  to
the  Philippians  and  the  Romans.  St.  Paul  had  taught  his  converts  not  only  to  believe
in  God  the  Father  who  made  us,  but  also  in  G^  the  Son  who  redeemed  us.  Ho
taught  them  the  great  truths  of  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension,  the  blessed  .doctrine  of
the  atonement.  Some  of  the  Thessalonians,  perhaps,  had  tried  to  grapple  with  the
dark  mysteries  of  life,  sin  and  misery.  St.  Paul  pointed  them  to  Jesus.  *'  Behold  the
Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  There  is  wrath  coming  in  its
awfulness ;  but  there  is  a  Deliverer — One  who  is  delivering  us  now,  who  is  daily  deliver-
ing us  from  the  power  of  sin,  as  we  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  him ;  who  will  deliver
us  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  if  by  the  gracious  help  of  the  blessed  Spirit  we  abide  in
him.    And  tnis  Deliverer  is  Jesus."


cn.i.  1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  15

Lessons.  1.  The  holy  lires  of  Christian  people  help  the  blessed  work  of  saving  souls ;
holy  lives  are  more  persuasive  than  holy  words.  Let  each  Christian  strive  to  do  his
part.  2.  We  are  not  in  heathen  darkness;  God  has  given  us  the  light  of  his  gospel.
Let  us  be  thankful,  and  show  our  thankfulness  in  our  lives.  3.  Wait  for  the  coming
of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  all  our  hopes  are  in  him. — B.  0.  C.

Ver.  1 . — Introduction,  This  Epistle  has  the  distinction  of  beiug  the  first  in  time
of  all  Paul's  Epistles.  The  leading  thought,  to  which  there  is  reference  toward
the  close  of  each  of  the  five  chapters  into  which  the  Epistle  has  been  divided,  is  the
second  coming  of  our  Lord,  The  first  three  chapters  are  personal,  setting  forth  the
apostle's  connection  with  the  Thessalonians,  and  interest  in  them  as  a  Church.  In
the  remaining  two  chapters  he  addresses  them  in  view  of  their  condition  as  a  Church,
and  especially  in  view  of  anxiety  connected  with  the  second  coming.  Pleased  with  the
progress  they  were  making,  he  writes  to  them  in  a  quiet,  practical,  prevailingly
consolatory  strain.

L  The  wbitebs.  "  Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timothy."  Paul  comes  first,  as  pre-
eminently the  writer.  It  can  be  made  out  that  the  matter  and  style  are  characteris-
tically Pauline.  It  speaks  to  his  humility  that  he  does  not  claim  it  as  his  own,  that  he
does  not  put  forward  his  official  position,  but  associates  two  brethren  with  him  as  joint-
writers.  These,  Silvanus  (to  be  identified  with  Silas)  and  Timothy  (less  prominent  at
the  time),  assisted  at  the  founding  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  Timothy  had  just
returned  from  a  visit  of  inquiry  to  Thessalonica.  He  therefore  claims  them  as  adding
the  weight  of  their  influence  with  the  Thessalonians  to  his  own.  And  their  place  as
joint-writers  is  accorded  to  them  throughout.  Only  in  three  places,  for  a  special  reason
in  each  case,  docs  he  make  use  of  the  singular  number.

n.  Community  addressed.  "Unto  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  in  God  the  Father
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  Thessalonica — so  named  by  Cassander  in  honour  of  his
wife,  who  was  a  sister  of  Alexander  the  Great — was  well  situated  for  commerce  "  on  the
inner  bend  of  the  Thcrmaic  gulf— half-way  between  the  Adriatic  and  the  Hellespont—
on  the  sea-margin  of  a  vast  plain  watered  by  several  rivers,"  the  chief  of  these  beinz
the  Axius  and  Haliacmon.  Under  the  Romans  it  became  a  large,  wealthy,  and
populous  city ;  and  was  chosen  as  the  Macedonian  capital.  Its  importance  has  been
well  kept,  up  to  the  present  day.  Saloniki  (slightly  altered  from  Thessalonica)  ranks
next  to  Constantinople  in  European  Turkey,  with  a  population  of  seventy  thousand.
Paul  visited  Thessalonica  in  his  second  missionary  tour,  after  the  rough  handliog  he
had  received  in  the  other  Macedonian  city  of  Philippi.  The  Jews,  being  more  numerous
here  than  at  Philippi,  had  a  synagogue ;  and  in  this,  Paul,  for  three  sabbath  days,
reasoned  with  them  from  the  Scriptures,  opening  and  alleging  that  it  behoved  the  Christ
to  suffer  and  to  rise  again  from  the  dead,  and  that  this  tfesus  is  the  Christ.  The  result
was  so  far  favourable.  Some  Jews  were  persuaded,  and  consorted  with  Paul  and  Silas ;
of  the  Gentile  proselytes  attached  to  the  Jewish  synagogue,  a  great  multitude,  and,
among  these,  not  a  few  chief  women.  But  there  was  also  what  was  unfavourable.
The  Jews  as  a  body,  being  moved  with  jealousy,  took  unto  them  certain  vile  fellows  of
the  rabble,  and  raised  a  tumult  against  the  Christian  preachers,  which  ended  in  their
departing  by  night  for  Beroea.  Paul  and  his  assistants  had  a  very  short  time  in  which
to  found  a  Church  in  ITiessalonica.  For  three  sabbath  days  Paul  reasoned  in  tho
Jewish  synagogue.  We  may  allow  a  little  longer  time  for  the  ripening  of  Jewish
opposition.  Short  as  the  time  was,  they  had  settled  down  to  supporting  themselves  by
labouring  with  their  own  hands.  Short  as  the  time  was,  the  Philippian  Christians,  in
their  eagerness,  had  managed  once  and  again  to  send  unto  Paul's  necessity.  What
would  render  the  formation  of  a  Christian  Church  at  Thessalonica  easier  was  the  number
of  Gentile  proselytes  who  embraced  Christianity.  These  had  received  training  in
monotheistic  ideas,  and  had  already  the  elements  of  a  godly  character.  But,  beyond
this,  many  Gentile  idolaters  must  have  been  brought  in ;  for  the  entering  in  of  Paul
and  his  companions  was  signalized  as  a  turning  of  the  majority  of  them  from  idols  unto
the  living  and  the  true  G^wi.  Under  the  conditions  of  time  and  manual  labour  and
Jewish  fanaticism,  the  founding  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  a  most  marvellous
work.  So  short  time  with  them,  Paul  wrote  to  them  when  he  got  to  Corinth,  after
tiiiting  Beroea  and  Athens,  about  the  close  of  the  year  52.    The  Thessalonians  are


IG  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  i.  1-10.

addressed  as  a  Churcb,  %,e,  in  their  corporate  capacity,  with  corporate  responsibilities  and
privileges,  not  as  saints,  i,e.  in  respect  of  the  consecration  of  tne  members  individually.
They  are  addressed  as  a  Church  in  God  the  Father,  t.e,  as  having  all  the  position  of  sons.
They  are  also  addressed  as  a  Church  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  t.e.  as  a  Christian  family
where  the  sons  are  all  saved  men  placed  under  the  superintendence  of  him  who  has  the
position  of  Lord,  and  distributes  to  their  need.

III.  Gbketino.  "Grace  to  you  and  peace."  This  did  not  necessarily  exclude
favour  and  peace  from  men,  from  these  persecuting  Jews.  But  whether  it  had  that
sweep  or  not,  it  certainly  meant  the  Divine  treatment  of  them,  not  according  to  merit,
but  according  to  infinite  mercifulness,  and  the  consequent  freeing  of  them  from  all
disturbing  influences.    It  is  what  we  should  invoke  for  all  our  friends. — B.  F«

Vers.  2 — 10. — Manifestation  of  interest,  I.  How  they  thanked  Gk)D  for  the
Thessaloniaks.  "  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all,  making  mention  of  you
in  our  prayers."  The  three  Christian  preachers  away  at  Corinth,  and  in  the  midst  of
their  engagements  there,  were  interested  in  their  Thessalonian  converts.  They  were  so
interested  as  to  act  as  priests  for  them.  This  they  did  at  the  throne  of  grace,  praying
for  them  by  name,  in  view  of  their  special  needs  as  a  Church.  This  they  would  also  do
unit^ly,  praying  to  all  the  more  purpose  that  they  united  their  prayers ;  for  a  threefold
cord  is  not  easily  broken.  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  in  a  land  may  not  counteract  all
wickedness ;  but  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy,  agreeing  as  touching  what  they  asked  for
a  progressing  Church  like  Thessalonica,  would  certainly  mean  valuable  help  to  them
from  heaven.  Praying,  they  gave  thanks  always.  This  designation  of  time  is  not  to
be  understood  with  the  utmost  strictness.  It  is  prescribed  in  Exodus  that  Aaron
should  bear  the  judgment  of  the  children  of  Israel  (the  Urim  and  Thummim)  upon  his
heart  before  the  Lord  continually,  i,e,  whenever  he  went  into  the  holy  place  to
discharge  the  pontifical  functions.  So  the  meaning  here  is  that,  whenever  these  men
of  God  went  into  the  presence  of  God  to  discharge  the  priestly  function  of  prayer  for
the  Thessalonians,  their  hearts  were  filled  with  gratitude  for  them,  which  they  poured
forth  in  thanksgiving.  They  gave  thanks  to  God,  who  had  made  the  Thessalonians  a
Church,  who  had  blessed  them  hitherto,  and  upon  whom  they  depended  for  future
blessing.  They  gave  thanks  to  God  for  them  all.  They  did  not  know  of  any  (and
their  information  was  recent)  who  were  bringing  dishonour  on  the  Thessalonian
society.    They  were  all  with  one  heart  helping  forward  the  common  Christian  good.

11.  Upon  what  they  proceeded  in  thanking  God  for  the  Thessalonians.
*'  Bemembering  without  ceasing."  They  proceeded  in  their  thanksgivings  upon  what
they  remembered  of  the  Thessalonians.  The  impression  produced  at  the  time  had  not
been  effaced  by  fresh  scenes,  new  engagements,  the  lapse  of  time.  By  thinking  of
them  and  hearing  from  them  their  impression  of  them  had  not  ceased  to  be  lively.
This  impression  concerned  the  three  Christian  graces— /at^A,  love,  hope.  In  1  Cor.  xiii.
love  is  placed  last,  the  object  being  to  exalt  it,  in  its  permanent  value,  over  the  other
two  Here,  as  also  in  the  fifth  chapter  and  in  Col.  i.,  and  virtually  in  Titus  ii.,
the  natural  order  is  followed,  faith  manifesting  itself  in  love  (Gal.  v.  6),  and  hope  rising
out  of  love  (Rom.  v.  6).  Hope  is  also  properly  held  to  come  last,  as  the  link  between
the  present  and  the  future.  What  the  Christian  pioneers  remembered  was  the  practical
outcome  of  each  grace.  1.  **  Your  work  of  faith, ^^  In  the  eleventh  of  the  Hebrews  we
read  of  special  works  which  were  produced  by  faith.  But  the  work,  in  its  totality ,  which
each  man  produces,  is  the  life  which  he  lives  before  the  world.  And  he  who  believes
that  there  is  the  eye  of  the  holy,  heart-searching  God  upon  him ;  that  he  is  here  to  carry
out  the  Divine  behests ;  that  according  as  he  does  or  does  not  carry  out  these  behests
does  he  lie  under  the  Divine  approval  or  disapproval ;  that  there  is  a  judgment  coming
which  shall  prove  each  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is ; — such  a  man  will  surely  produce
a  work  very  different  from  him  who  habitually  looks  only  to  the  seen  and  the  temporal.
The  adoption  of  faith  as  the  principle  of  their  lives  meant  to  the  Thessalonians  the
abandonment  of  many  vices,  and  the  cultivation  of  sincerity,  humility,  purity,
temperance,  and  other  Christian  excellences.  2.  **  And  labour  of  loveJ*  The  word
translated  "  labour  "  approaches  the  meaning  of  painful  effort.  We  are  not  merely  to  wish
well  to  others  and  to  rejoice  in  their  good ; — that  implies  no  lahoriousness  of  love.  But
we  are  to  burden  ourselves  with  the  wants  of  others,  and  to  undertake  labours  on  behalf


CH.I.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  17

of  the  sick,  on  behalf  of  the  poor,  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed,  on  behalf  of  the  ignorant,
on  behalf  of  the  erring.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  full  of  these  labours ;  their
Church  life  had  become  one  labour  of  love,  a  putting  forth  of  painful  effort  for  each
other,  without  thought  of  reward,  with  only  the  desire  to  please  the  Master.  It  was
a  labour  of  purest,  freest  love,  that  the  Master  himself  undertook  on  behalf  of  those
whom  he  was  not  ashamed  to  call  his  brethren.  3.  "  And  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.**  Hope  was  the  characteristic  grace  of  the  Thessalonians.  It  was  hope
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  more  exactly  defined  in  the  Epistle  as  hope  with
regard  to  his  coming.  It  was  a  hope  which  burned  in  them  with  extraordinary  intensity.
So  eager  were  they  as  to  the  time  of  its  realization  that  there  was  a  likelihood  of
impatience  being  engendered  by  delay.  When  the  Thessalonians  are  remembered  here
for  the  patience  of  their  hope,  we  are  to  understand  the  brave  way  in  which  they
maintained  the  conflict  with  sin  within,  and  especially  with  persecution  without.  It  is
the  hope  of  victory  that  sustains  the  soldier  under  all  the  hardships  of  the  march  and
the  dangers  of  the  battle-field.  So  it  was  the  hope  of  the  infinite  compensation  that
there  would  be  at  the  coming  of  Christ  that  sustained  them  under  the  disadvantages  of
their  position.  What  to  them  were  all  that  their  enemies  might  inflict  on  them,  when
any  day  Christ  might  come  amon^  them  for  their  deliverance  ?  They  could  say  with
their  teacher, "  For  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be
com|-ared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  to  us- ward."  Additional  circumstance,
"  Before  our  God  and  Father."  This  points  to  the  solemnity  and  also  the  joy  of  the
remembrance.  It  was  in  prayer  that  it  took  place.  It  was  there  before  the  God  of
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy,  the  Heart-searching  One,  who  could  testify  that  it  was  no
foimal  remembrance,  but  was  marked  by  sincerity.  It  was  also  belbre  their  Father,  who,
as  Infinite  Benevolence,  regarded  it  with  pleasure.

in.  There  is  noted  the  fact  op  the  election  op  the  Thessalonians.
"Knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  Gkxl,  your  election."  Paul,  for  himself  and  his  helpers,
addresses  them  as  brethren.  What  they  had  in  common  was  that  they  were  beloved
of  God.  What  marked  them  as  objects  of  Divine  love  was  their  election.  This  is  a
word  of  deep  and  gracious  import,  which  is  more  opened  up  in  other  places  in  Scripture.
What  marked  ancient  Israel  was  that  they  were  the  election.  In  succession  to  ancient
Israel,  Christians  were  the  election.  Among  others  these  Thessalonian  Christians  had
most  of  them  been  elected  out  of  heathenism,  elected  to  all  the  piivileges  of  the  new
covenant.  They  owed  this  their  position  not  to  their  own  merits.  It  was  no  doings  of
their  own  that  brought  Christ  into  the  world.  It  was  by  circumstances  over  which
they  had  no  control  that  the  gospel  was  preached  to  them  in  Thessalonica.  It  was
not  in  their  own  strength  that  they  believea.  It  was  Divine  love,  then,  that  gave  them
their  {losition  among  the  election,  and  to  Divine  love  was  to  be  all  the  praise.

IV.  Paul  and  his  helpers  came  to  the  knowledge  op  their  election  bt
consideration  op  Divine  assistance  vouchsafed  in  preaching  to  them.  "  How
that  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance ;  even  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  showed
ourselves  toward  you  for  your  sake."  The  gospel  is  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  all
men.  It  could  only  be  called  their  gospel  inasmuch  as  they  used  it  instrumentally  in
the  conversion  of  souls.  It  was  Cl^st  who  was  the  great  Subject  of  it.  "  Neither  is
there  salvation  in  any  other."  These  three  agreed  as  to  the  purport  of  the  gospel.  It
was  not  different  from  the  gospel  as  preached  by  Peter  or  any  other  Christian  teacher.
In  dealing  with  the  Jews  in  Thessalonica,  as  we  learn  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
the  gospel  proper  was  accompanied  with  the  producing  of  proof  from  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures  that  the  Messiah  was  to  suffer  and  to  rise  from  the  dead ;  and  the  fitting  into
it  of  other  proof  that  the  historical  Jesus,  who  had  lately  been  on  the  earth,  met  all
the  requirements  of  their  Scriptures.  But  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike  it  was  the  freo
offer  of  salvation,  based  on  the  great  facts  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  God's  Son  in
our  nature.  This  gospel  had  come  to  them  in  Thessalonica ;  it  had  ])rovidentially  been
directed  their  way.  it  had  come  to  them  in  word,  in  the  Word  preached,  and  that  was
1  great  point  gained.  "For  how  shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not
heard?"  But  it  had  not  come  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power.  They  felt  power
descending  on  them  in  the  delivery  of  their  message.  This  was  nothing  else  than  the
aasistaooe  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    And  it  was  accomiianied  with  the  deep  assurance  thnt

L  THE8«AI/)NIAN9.  0


W  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE8SAL0NIANS.    [ch.  1. 1— 10.


their  message  was  taking  effect.  The  Thessalonians  themselves  had  the  proof  of  their
being  men  who  were  divinely  assisted  toward  them.  And,  as  this  Divine  assistance
was  granted  in  their  interest,  it  pointed  to  their  being  in  the  number  of  the  elect.

V.  Paul  and  his  helpers  came  to  the  knowledob  op  the  election  of  thb
Thessalonians  by  consideration  or  their  power  of  imitation.  "  And  ye  became
imitators  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord,  having  received  the  Word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  is  a  point  of  difference.  They  preached  the  Word,  or  rather
—for  a  new  aspect  is  brought  up — ^the  Lord  in  them.  It  was  the  Lord's  message  they
delivered ;  they  were  the  instruments  of  the  Lord  in  its  delivery.  It  was,  therefore,  the
Lord  as  well  as  they,  and  more  than  they,  in  the  preaching.  On  the  other  hand,  the
Thessalonians  received  the  Word.  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  what  is  said  in  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles  in  connection  with  Beroea :  "  Now  these  were  more  noble  than  those  in
ThcRsalonica,  in  that  they  received  the  Word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  examining  the
Scriptures  daily,  whether  these  things  were  so."  For  the  meaning  there  is  that  the
Bercpan  Jews  were  a  nobler  class  than  the  Thessalonian  Jews,  which  is  no  reflection  on
the  Thessalonian  Christians,  who,  with  few  exceptions,  were  Gentiles.  The  testimony
of  this  Epistle  is  that  they  were  a  Church  peculiarly  receptive  of  the  Word.  Allowing
for  this  difference  which  the  sense  requires,  the  imitation  is  to  be  restricted  to  the
associated  circumstances  and  spirit.  "  In  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."
It  was  the  Word  that  gave  rise  to  much  affliction.  And  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at
that,  when  the  light  comes  into  conflict  with  darkness,  this  should  be  the  result  to
those  who  are  associated  with  the  light.  In  much  affliction  the  three  subordinates  and
the  great  Superintendent  in  them  drew  joy  from  the  Word  preached.  "  Sorrowful,  yet
always  rejoicing,"  said  the  greatest  of  the  thRc.  In  the  same  affliction  the  Thessa-
lonians were  imitators,  in  drawing  joy  from  the  Word  received.  They  were  not
crushed  under  the  affliction,  but,  imbibing  the  comfort  of  the  Word,  they  rose
triumphant  over  it.  In  both  cases  the  joy,  which  was  not  to  be  thought  of  as  earthly,
proceeded  from  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  within.  This  was  the  second  thing  that
pointed  to  their  election.

YI.  The  Thessalonians  webe  bo  good  ihitatobs  as  to  become  an  ensample
TO  others.  "  So  that  yc  became  an  ensample  to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and  in
Achaia."  These  were  the  two  Roman  divisions  of  Greece.  It  is  implied  that  the
circumstances  of  the  Grecian  Churches  were  similar.  To  believe  was,  more  or  less,  to
be  opposed,  to  be  afflicted.  The  Thessalonians  were  an  encouragement  to  the  other
Churches.  Philippians,  Beroeans,  Athenians,  Corinthians,  might  all  take  heart  from
the  manner  in  which  the  Thessalonians  triumphed  over  their  affliction.

VII.  There  was  a  widespread  report  reoardinq  Thessalonica  which  was
very  serviceable.  "  For  from  you  hath  sounded  forth  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  not
only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  but  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God-ward  is  gone  forth ;
so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  anything."  This  shows  how  the  Thessalonians  could  be
an  ensample  to  so  many.  There  was  the  condition  of  'publicity.  In  the  language  which
is  used,  prominence  is  given  to  the  Word,  and  it  is  characterized,  not  now  as  **  our
gospel,"  but  as  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  From  them  at  Thessalonica  the  Word  of  the
Lord  had  sounded  forth.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  sounds  forth,  not  merely  when  we
preach  it,  but  also  when,  as  these  Thessalonians  did,  we  receive  it  and  allow  it  to  have
influence  upon  our  lives.  From  them  at  Thessalonica  there  had  been  a  notable
sounding  forth.  The  image  employed  is  that  of  a  trumpet,  filling  with  its  clear
sound  all  the  surrounding  places.  Hill  and  valley,  hamlet  and  homestead,  are
waked  with  it.  So  the  gospel-trumpet  had  been  sounded  at  Thessalonica,  and
the  result  is  represented  as  the  filling  of  all  Greece  with  the  clear  sound  of  the
gospel.  Its  wakeful  sound  had  reached  the  important  places,  not  only  in  Macedonia,
but  in  Achaia.  There  is  suggested  by  this  what  the  Church  has  to  do  for
the  world;  it  has  to  sound  the  gospel-trumpet,  so  that,  without  any  hyperbole,  the
whole  world  shall  be  filled  with  the  clear  sound  of  the  gospel.  The  sounding  forth
from  Thessalonica  had  reached  even  to  places  beyond  Greece.  And,  in  giving
expression  to  this,  Paul,  as  he  sometimes  does,  gives  a  different  turn  to  the  sentence.
We  should  have  expected  it  to  run  so  as  to  be  complete  :  "  Not  only  in  Macedonia  and
Achaia,  but  in  places  beyond."  He,  however,  lays  hold  on  what  the  Word  had  notably
done  for  the  Thessalonians,  viz.  made  them  monotheists,  given  them  faith  to  God-ward,


CH.I.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  19

and  the  sentence  is  made  to  run :  "But  In  every  place  your  faith  to  God- ward  is  gone
forth."  "  The  currency  of  the  reports  was  probably  much  promoted  by  the  commercial
intercourse  between  Thessalonica  and  other  cities,  both  in  Greece  and  elsewhere.  Wicseler
suggests  that  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  who  had  lately  come  from  Rome  to  Corinth  (Acts
xviii.  2),  might  have  mentioned  to  the  apostle  the  prevalence  of  the  report  even  in  that
more  distant  city.  If  this  be  so,  the  justice  and  truth  of  the  apostle's  hyperbole  is  still
more  apparent ;  to  be  known  in  Rome  was  to  be  known  everywhere."  This  may  be
true,  but  still  it  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  sounding  forth  to  distant  places  is
rather  ascribed  to  the  vigour  with  which  the  gospel-trumpet  had  been  sounded  at
Thessalonica.  By  the  going  forth  of  their  faith  there  was  great  service  done.  In
preaching  the  gospel  in  new  places,  it  was  Paul's  custom  to  hold  up  what  it  had  done
for  other  places.  With  regard  to  Thessalonica,  he  was  placed  in  an  exceptional  position.
In  Beroea,  in  Athens,  in  Corinth,  wherever  he  went,  he  needed  not  to  labour  in  language
to  create  an  impression  of  what  the  gospel  had  done  for  Thessalonica.  He  needed  not
to  say  anything,  the  work  bjing  already  done  for  him.

VIII.  The  two  points  to  which  the  report  referred.  1.  The  entering  in  of
Paul  and  his  helpers,  **  For  they  themselves  report  concerning  us  what  manner  of
entering  in  we  had  unto  you."  This  has  already  been  particularized.  It  was  their
gospel  coming  unto  the  Thessalonians,  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance.  It  was  that  attested  by  the  Thessalonians.  It
was  the  Lord  in  them  preaching  the  Word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  Now  it  is  generalized — **  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you."  They
did  not  need  to  enter  upon  that ;  the  people  themselves  in  the  various  places  came
forward  with  their  acknowledgments.  This  was  important  to  the  three  ministers ;
it  was  a  seal  to  their  ministry,  it  was  added  influence  in  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.
A  minister  may  well  aspire  to  have  such  a  record.  2.  The  response  of  the  Thesia-
Jonians,  "And  how  ye  turned  unto  God  from  idols,  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God,  and
to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead."  This  is  an  expansion
of  the  previous  words, "  your  faith  to  God-ward."  They  bad  been  idolaters.  This  is  to
be  understood  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  as  a  whole,  which  points  to  its  composition.
They  turned  unto  God  from  idols.  There  is  marked  their  conversion  to  monotheism.
They  turned  from  idols  **  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God."  The  old  translation  is  better
here :  **  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God."  Idols  are  dead ;  their  living  touch  upon  the
soul  can  never  be  felt.  They  turned  from  dead  idols  to  the  living  God,  the  God
in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  who  giveth  to  all  life  and  breath
and  all  things.  Idols  are  false  and  vain,  they  can  do  no  good  to  their  votaries.  They
turned  from  false  and  vain  idols  to  the  true  God,  who  cannot  deceive  his  worship-
pers, who  comforts  and  cheers  them,  who  is  the  Rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek
him.  Turning  from  idols,  they  maide  their  life  a  service  of  this  living  and  true  God —
not  a  dead,  make-believe  service,  but  characterized,  from  its  object,  by  life  and  truth,
a  waiting  on  him  to  carry  out  his  behests.  There  is  marked  their  conversion  to  Chris-
tianity. They  turned  from  idols  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from
the  dead.  They  laid  bold  on  the  great  Christian  fact,  that  God  gave  up  his  Son  to  die
for  man.  They  also  laid  hold  on  the  other  great  Christian  fact,  that  God  raised
him  from  the  dead  and  raised  him  to  heaven.  They  further  believed,  on  Divine
authority,  that  God's  Son  was  to  come  from  heaven.  Round  this  their  life  as  a  Church
very  much  revolved ;  they  were  fascinated  by  its  influence.  They  waited  for  his  Son
from  heaven;  they  lived  in  daily  expectation  of  his  coming.  While  we  are  not  curious
about  the  time  of  Christ's  coming,  let  us  not  lose  the  influence  of  the  fact  of  Christ's
coming.  Let  us  consider  whether  we  are  prepared  for  his  coming.  Let  us  be  dead  to
the  charms  of  the  world,  dead  also  to  its  opposition.  Let  us  take  comfort,  under
present  troubles,  from  this  coming  (John  xiv.  1 — 3).  Let  us  joyfully  anticipate  the
coining  (I  Pet.  i.  8).  We  may  well  learn  from  the  Thessalonians  to  give  this  subject
greater  prevalence  in  our  thoughts.  Let  us,  like  them,  be  found  in  the  attitude  of
expectancy.  Christ's  last  message  to  man  is  this:  ''Yea,  I  come  quickly."  And  the
reply  which  we  are  expected  to  make  is  this:  "Amen :  come.  Lord  Jesus."  "Even  Jesus,
which  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  This  is  the  first  of  the  three  references
to  the  wrath  of  God  in  this  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  It  is  an  element  that  is
mora  krgely  prevalent  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.    It  was  natural  tliat.


20  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  i.  1—10.

writing  so  much  to  the  Tbcssaloninus  about  the  second  coming,  he  should  introduce  the
future  wrath.  The  full  expression  in  this  place,  "  the  wrath  to  come,"  had  already  been
used  by  one  who  could  preach  the  terrors  of  the  Law.  When  the  Baptist  saw  many  of
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  coming  to  his  baptism,  he  said  unto  them,  *'  Ye  offspring  of
vipers,  who  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come?**  Paul,  standing  after  the  great
Messianic  manifestation,  could  say  more  definitely  and  mildly,  "  Even  Jesus,  which
delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."  (1)  The  reality  of  the  turath.  By  the  wrath  of
God  we  are  to  understand  the  disposition  which  leads  him  to  inflict  punishment  for  sin.
It  cannot  be  said  of  God  that  he  is  wrathful,  or  that  wrath  is  the  predominant  feature
in  his  character.  For  "he  delighteth  in  mercy;"  but  "judojment  is  his  strange  work."
When  men  put  themselves  in  opposition  to  God,  while  he  is  displeased,  he  is  also
grieved.  We  read  of  the  grieving  of  the  Spirit ;  of  Christ,  while  looking  round  on  his
audience  with  anger,  being  grieved  at  the  hardening  of  their  hearts.  Even  when  GKxi,
from  necessities  of  government,  may  have  to  remove  the  reprobate  from  his  presence,
there  is  not  wanting  the  tone  of  indignant  rebuke, "  Cast  ye  out  the  unprofitable  servant
into  the  outer  darkness :  there  shall  be  the  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  But  with
this  righteous  indignation  there  is  no  mingling  of  malice,  but  only  a  feeling  of  infinite
reluctance  to  resort  to  such  a  measure  with  any  of  bis  creatures.  It  is  supposed  to  be
derogatory  to  the  Divine  character  that  there  should  b^  wrath  in  the  heart  of  Grod  at  alL
But  how  is  he  to  regard  sin  ?  Is  sin  to  be  committed  under  his  government,  and  no  notice
to  be  taken  of  it,  especially  when  it  is  of  the  very  nature  of  sin  to  strike  at  the  Divine
government?  Such  an  idea  would  certainly  be  repudiated  in  connection  with  human
government.  Or  are  we  to  suppose  that  he  can  become  accustomed  to  the  si^ht  of  sin,
so  as  not  to  heed  this  sin  or  that  sin  in  the  great  multitude  that  are  committed  every
day  upon  this  earth  ?  But  God  can  never  see  sin  to  be  other  than  it  really  is.  It  stands
out  before  him  in  all  its  details  and  in  all  its  vileness,ns  that  which  interferes  with  his
government,  thwarts  his  holy  ends  among  men.  And  as  he  has  taught  us  to  flash  out
in  anger  against  wrong-doing,  so  we  must  believe  that  his  own  soul  flashes  out  in  anger
against  wrong  done  to  his  government.  But  we  must  exclude  from  the  Divine  out-
flashing  such  inequality  as  attaches  to  human  outflashing.  The  Thrice-holy  One  never
knows  the  perturbing  influence  of  passion ;  sin  is  not  felt  more  keenly  at  the  first,
and  less  keenly  when  time  has  exerted  its  sway — it  is  ever  unchanged  before  his  mind.
He  continues  unsatisfied,  and  the  fire  burns  within  him  against  it,  until  it  is  removed
out  of  his  sight.  So  far  from  wrath  being  derogatory  to  God,  it  must  enter  into  a
right  conception  of  the  Divine  character.  It  is  necessary  to  the  consistency  of  the
Divine  character.  To  favour  the  following  of  a  certain  course,  and  yet  to  view  with
indifi*erence  the  following  of  an  opposite  course,  is  simply  characterlessness.  According
to  the  ardour  with  which  we  regard  one  course  must  wo  burn  ag'iinst  its  opposite.  We
must  think  of  God  as  infinitely  favouring  righteousness;  and  he  would  not  be  true  to
himself  if  his  feelings  did  not  infinitely  burn  against  iniquity.  According  as  he  is
attracted  to  the  pole  of  holiness,  so  powerfully  must  he  be  repelled  from  the  opposite
pole  of  sin.  Even  under  the  New  Testament  economy  it  is  said  that  *'  our  God  is  a
consuming  fire."  More  prominence  is  given  to  this  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  a
necessary  conception  of  God,  that,  as  he  is  consumed  with  zeal  for  the  cause  of  truth
and  love,  so  he  is  a  consuming  fire  to  all  that  is  opposed  to  it.  There  is  a  certain
course  which  he  favours — which  he  puts  forward  as  obligatory.  He  gives  us  every
encouragement  to  follow  this  course ;  it  is  the  consuming  desire  of  his  heart  to  see  it
followed  by  us.  This  may  be  said  to  be  the  course  of  humble  dependence  upon  him.
If  we  follow  this  course,  he  is  pleased,  and  he  marks  his  pleasure,  by  making  our
humility  return  in  liberty  and  happiness  upon  ourselves.  But  if  we  wilfully  assert
our  independence  and  follow  our  own  course,  then  God  will  make  our  wilfulness  recoil
in  bondage  and  misery  upon  our  own  souls.  Wrath  is  even  necessary  to  our  rising  to
a  proper  conception  of  the  Divine  compassion.  We  miss  what  the  Divine  compassion
is,  unless  we  first  apprehend  ourselves  as  objects  of  the  Divine  wrath.  "  That  heathen
antiquity  had  no  idea  of  God's  love  is  attributable  to  the  fact  that  it  had  no  living
conviction  of  the  world  being  under  God*s  wrath.  Plato  and  Aristotle  rise  only  to  the
bare  representation  of  God  as  being  a  jealous  God ;  and  men  who  in  our  day  speak  of
dispassionate  love  rise  no  higher  than  they."  (2)  The  time  to  which  the  vrrath  is
referred.    The  wrath  to  come  is  the  disposition  of  wrath  in  its  future  manifestation.


CH.  I.  1-10.3    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  21


It  is  in  the  next  world  that  it  is  to  come  to  its  full  manifestation.  Even  now  God
manifests  his  displeasure  against  sin.  The  Flood  was  an  early  and  signal  instance
of  God's  wrath  burning  against  a  wicked  world.  And  the  destruction  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  was  another  signal  instance  of  God*s  wrath  burning  against  wicked
communities.  But  under  the  present  order  of  things  God  does  not  ordinarily  deal
with  man  in  unmixed  wrath.  He  has  ends  of  redemption  in  view.  And,  though  he
does  give  experience  of  judgment  that  men  may  not  be  forgetful  of  him,  still  he
mingles  mercy  with  judgment.  And  usually  he  gives  us  to  experience  far  more
mercy  than  judgment,  that  thereby  he  may  commend  redemption  to  us.  He  exercises
wonderful  forbSiranco  toward  us,  that  thereby  he  may  win  us  over  to  himself.
Thus  it  is  that  meantime  there  is  no  adequate  impression  given  of  the  punitive
justice  of  Grod.  We  do  not  see  punishment  following  always  upon  sin.  We  do  not
see  punishment  proportioned  to  sin.  The  more  hardened  in  sin  men  are,  the  more
may  they  escape  present  punishment.  It  does  not  yet  appear  what  God*s  displeasure
against  sinners  is,  any  more  than  it  yet  appears  what  bis  love  to  his  people  is.  There
are  hindrances  which  prevent  a  full  manifestation  in  both  cases.  In  the  next  world
thefSe  hindrances  will  be  removed,  and  then  it  will  be  seen  clearly  how  God  views
every  one  who  through  a  period  of  grace  continues  to  oppose  himself  to  Divine  love.
The  sins  of  this  life,  unforgiveu,  will  cry  unto  Grod ;  and  his  wrath,  no  longer  restrained,
will  go  forth.  There  are  things  for  which,  it  is  said  in  the  Ejnstle  to  the  Ephesians,
the  wrath  of  God  coroeth  upon  the  children  of  disobedience.  There  is  a  certain  open
defiance  and  forgetfulness  of  God  (encouraging  to  ungodliness)  which  in  a  special
manner  attracts  the  Divine  judgment.  But  it  is  true  of  a  sinful  life  as  a  whole,
that  what  there  is  in  it  of  resistance  to  Gk>d  draws  down  on  it,  when  the  time  comes,
the  Divine  wrath.  This  is  to  be  at  the  day  of  judgment,  which  is  called  "  the  day
of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Then  there  will  be
a  righteous  summing-up  of  the  life  lived  on  earth  as  a  whole ;  and  the  wrath  that
descends  will  exactly  indicate  what  God's  estimate  of  the  life  is.  That  there  will
be  retribution,  and  retribution  exactly  proportioned  to  each  life,  some  being  punished
with  few  stripes  and  others  with  many  stripes,  is  most  certain.  We  cannot  define
with  exactness  the  manner  and  contents  of  the  retribution.  The  language  employed
in  Scripture  is  sufficiently  fitted  to  create  alarm :  '*  But  unto  them  that  are  factious
and  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness,  shall  be  wrath  and  indignation,
tribulation  and  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  worketh  evil."  What  is  at
first  the  assertion  of  independence  toward  God,  will  become,  retributively,  hindrance
and  bondage  in  complete  subjugation  and  environment  by  Gk)d.  What  is,  in  its
working,  excitement  and  self-gratification,  will  become,  retributively,  in  the  distrac-
tion of  the  mind,  in  the  upbraidings  of  conscience,  a  feeling  of  anguish.  There  is  thus
before  the  life  of  sin  a  dark  future.  *'  There  remaineth  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of
judgment,  and  a  fierceness  of  fire  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries.*'  And  the  life  of
sin  is  not  to  be  judged  by  what  it  is  at  present  in  its  licence  and  excitements  and
restraint  of  judgment,  but  is  to  be  judged  by  what  it  is  to  come  to.  It  is  in  the  next
world  that  the  nothingness  and  wretchedness  of  a  life  of  sin  will  be  fully  evidenced.  And
what  a  powerful  deterrent  is  this  to  continuing  our  resistance  to  Divine  grace  1  (3)  The
Deliverer  from  the  wrcUh  to  come.  This  is  the  gracious  side  which  is  now  presented
in  the  gospel.  We  must  think  of  the  wrath  to  come,  in  order  that  we  may  properly
conceive  of  the  Deliverer.  He  is  appropriately  called  Jesus.  **  Thou  shalt  call  his
name  Jesus,  for  it  is  he  that  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  Here  it  is  saving
from  the  wrath  of  God  on  account  of  their  sins.  We  read  of  heroes  of  antiquity
who  were  renowned  for  delivering  countries  from  the  monsters  with  which  they  were
infested.  The  New  Testament  tells  of  One  who  delivers  from  the  evil  most  to  be  feared
of  man — the  wrath  to  come.  It  is  not  to  be  understood  that  Jesus  did  deliver  (on
the  cross)  or  mri/l  deliver  (at  the  last  day),  but  rather  that  it  is  his  office  to  deliver.
This  is  the  great  part  which  he  performs  for  men ;  it  belongs  to  Jesus  to  deliver
fit)m  the  wrath  to  come.  This  office  entailed  on  the  Holder  of  it  infinite  self-abnega-
tion. "  ITie  Son  of  Gkxi, , . .  even  Jesus."  And,  as  the  Son  of  God,  he  had  to  begin  by
laying  aside  his  Divine  glory,  not  counting  it  a  prize  to  be  clutched  at  by  him.  And
lie  came  down  into  our  nature,  that  he  might  receive  into  himself  the  wrath  due  to  our
sin.    He  became  the  great  vessel  of  wrath.    What  should  have  been  poured  into  us


22  THE  nRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  1. 1— 10,


was  poured  into  him.  Thus  tho  Deliverer  is  the  greatest  of  all  sufiTerers.  He  is  one
who  has  marks  of  myftterious  sorrow  and  anguish  upon  his  nature.  And  tliat  shows
how  far  it  is  from  being  accdniino;  to  the  heart  of  Gk)d  to  make  men  miserable,  to  send
wrath  upon  them.  Ho  intori)oscs  between  the  sinner  and  the  results  of  his  sin  in  this
great  Deliverer  sent  forth  from  his  own  bosom.  He  says, "  Save  from  going  down  to  tho
pit,  for  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Bather  docs  he  inflict  wrath  upon  his  Son  than  inflict
it  on  us.  So  far  as  his  doing  is  concerned,  he  has  removed  the  wrath  to  come — ^he  has
made  it  non-existent.  Is  Umt  not  proof,  the  most  conclusive,  that  wrath  is  most
abhorrent  to  him,  that  in  his  heart  of  hearts  he  wishes  us  to  escape  from  wrath,  wishes
to  make  us  all  happy  ?  (4)  Our  relation  to  the  Deliverer,  It  is  said  here,  "  which
delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come.*'  And  the  context  shows  that  the  refei-ence  is  to
believers.  All  are  welcome  to  come  into  a  saving  relation  to  Christ ;  but,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  all  do  not  come.  In  Tliessalonica  there  were  many  to  whom  the  gospel
of  deliverance  came,  who,  in  their  idolatrous  life,  thou<;ht  it  an  idle  tale.  I'here  were
some  who,  tired  of  their  idolatrous  life,  welcomed  the  thought  of  deliverance,  and
gave  a  ready  ear  to  the  apostle  when  he  told  them  of  Jesus  "  which  delivereth
from  the  wrath  to  come."  And  there  are  many  still  in  our  more  enlightened  times
who  treat  wrath  and  deliverance  from  it  as  an  intrusion.  The  great  work  which
Jesus  accomplished  has  no  interest  to  them.  They  like  to  go  on  in  their  own  self-
pleasing  way,  heedless  of  the  issues.  There  are  others,  and  these  are  the  believers,
who  are  unsatisfied  in  a  life  merely  in  tho  present.  They  are  anxious  to  know  how  they
are  to  meet  the  eternal  issues.  And  feeling  unable  to  do  this  themselves,  as  guilty
before  God,  they  shelter  themselves  in  Jesus,  *'  which  delivereth  from  the  wrath  to
come.*'  Taking  him  as  their  Representative,  entering  into  the  full  benefit  of  his  deliver-
ance, tho  future  is  relieved  to  them,  and,  for  the  first  time,  they  breathe  freely  as  in  tho
atmosphere  of  heaven.  Out  of  Christ  the  wrath  to  come  is  still  a  reality,  and  a  reality
which  has  been  made  more  dreadful  to  those  who  refuse  to  escape  from  it.  In  Christ
let  us  take  the  comfort  of  our  ix)sition,  let  us  dismiss  our  fear  of  future  wrath  ;  and  let
us  remember  him  to  whom  we  owe  our  escape,  and  let  us  prove  our  gratitude  by  a  life
of  loyalty  to  our  Deliverer. — R.  F.

Ver.  3. —  Works  of  grace.  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians  St.  Paul  singles  out  three
Christian  graces  for  supreme  honour — faith,  hope,  and  love.  Here  ho  selects  the  same
three  graces,  but  not  simply  to  praise  them  for  their  own  inherent  merits.  They  are
now  regarded  in  their  energetic  operation,  as  powers  and  influences ;  and  the  fruits  of
their  activity  are  the  subjects  of  the  apostle's  thankful  recognition.  He  makes  mention
in  prayer  of  the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  and  patience  of  hope.

I.  Christian  graces  are  active  powers.  They  aro  beautiful  in  themselves,  but
they  are  not  to  exist  solely  for  their  o'wn  beauty.  Flowers  aro  lovely,  but  the  object
of  the  existence  of  flowers  is  not  that  they  may  dream  through  the  summer  hours  in
their  loveliness,  and  then  fade  and  wither  and  die.  They  serve  an  important  end
in  the  economy  of  plants  by  preparing  fruit  and  seeds.  1.  The  active  operation  of
Christian  grace  glorifies  Ood,  While  dwelling  only  in  the  depths  of  the  soul,  quiescent
and  secret,  they  do  not  show  forth  the  glory  of  God.  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,
that  ye  bear  much  fruit"  (John  xv.  8).  2.  The  active  operation  of  the  Christian
graces  is  a  means  of  benefiting  our  fellow-men.  Faith,  love,  and  hope  are  not  given  to
us  for  our  own  enjoyment  only.  They  are  aids  for  our  mission  in  life — the  mission
of  serving  God  by  serving  mankind.  We  must  let  them  have  their  perfect  work,
that  this  mission  may  be  fulfilled.  3.  The  active  operation  of  the  Christian  graces
is  a  proof  of  their  vital  health.  "  Faith  apart  from  works  is  barren  "  (Jas.  ii.  20).  By
the  fruits  they  bear  wo  know  how  far  we  nave  the  graces  within  us.

II.  Christian  graces  have  their  separate  spheres  of  energy.  1.  Faith  has  tis
u'ork.  When  we  both  believe  and  actively  trust  in  the  helps  of  the  Unseen,  we  are
encouraged  to  use  them,  and  when  we  yield  ourselves  in  faith  to  tho  will  and  law  of  the
Unseen,  we  learn  to  obey  the  authority  above  us.  Hence  the  work  of  faith.  This  is
characterized  by  decision — it  is  no  wavering,  hesitating,  intermittent  activity — by
calmness  and  by  enci^y.  2.  Love  has  its  labour.  Labour  is  harder  than  work.  It  implies
great  eflbrt,  toil,  and  trouble.  Love  goes  beyond  faith  and  undertakes  greater  tasks.
But  with  love  "  all  toil  is  sweet."    An  enthusiasm  amounting  to  passion  characterizes


CH.I.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa  23

this  activity  and  distinguishes  it  from  the  sober  work  of  faith.  Love  to  God  and  love
to  man  are  necessary  for  the  hardest  work.  It  was  not  mere  faith,  it  was  love,  that
inspired  the  awful  toils  and  sacrifices  of  Christ.  3.  Hope  has  its  patience.  This  is  the
passive  fruit  of  Divine  grace.  It  is  not  therefore  the  less  important,  nor  does  it  there-
fore show  the  less  energy.  We  need  strength  for  endurance  as  much  as  strength  for
action.  Christian  hope  manifests  its  energy  by  unflinching  perseverance  in  spite  of
present  crosses  and  distresses.

IIL  Chbistian  graces  must  co-operatb  fob  the  bifekiko  op  the  full  Christian
LIFE.  St.  Paul  rejoices  that  all  three  of  the  primary  graces  were  in  active  operation
in  the  Thessalonian  Church.  Characters  are  too  often  one-sided.  Faith  is  hard  if  love
is  wanting.  Love  is  weak  and  wild  if  it  is  not  supported  and  guided  by  faith.  Hope
is  an  idle  dream  without  these  two  graces,  and  they  are  sad  and  gloomy  if  they  are  not
cheered  by  hope.  As  the  cord  is  far  stronger  than  the  separate  strands,  fiiith,  hope,  and
love  united  produce  energies  many  times  greater  than  the  results  of  their  individual
efficacy.  The  perfect  Christian  character  is  the  character  that  is  developed  into  rich
fruitfulness  on  all  sides.  All  the  colours  in  the  bow  must  blend  to  produce  the  pure
white  of  saintlinesB. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  6. — The  dynamic  gospel.  If  we  may  illustrate  spiritual  truths  by  describing
them  in  the  terminology  of  physical  science,  wo  may  say  that  the  great  mistake  which  the
Church,  as  well  as  the  world,  has  been  making  over  and  over  again  is  that  of  treating
the  gospel  statically  instead  of  dynamically — as  a  settled  creed  to  be  embraced  in  its
rigid  form  rather  than  as  a  power  to  be  submitted  to  in  its  progressive  influence.  But
it  is  evident  that  the  apostles  cared  not  one  straw  for  their  preachin;^  except  in  so  far  as
It  was  the  vehicle  of  Divine  energy.  They  tau»;ht  the  truth,  not  as  professors  of
metaphysics  in  a  college,  but  as  workmen  who  were  bringing  a  new  force  to  bear  on  the
reconstruction  of  society.

I.  It  is  vain  to  receive  the  gospel  in  word  only.  1.  It  may  be  published,  A
heathen  country  may  open  its  ports  to  missionaries.  Bible  societies  may  circulate  the
Scriptures  through  every  country  and  hamlet.  Preachers  may  never  cease  to  expound
it.  And  all  this  will  be  as  nothing  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  people  who  will  not  hear,
understand,  believe,  and  submit  to  the  truth.  2.  It  may  bo  heard.  Crowds  may  flock
to  the  churches.  Attentive  conjicregations  may  hang  upon  the  lips  of  popular  preachers.
And  still  no  good  may  be  done  while  the  truth  is  not  understood,  believed,  and  obeyed.
3.  It  may  be  understood.  The  meaning  of  the  lani^uage  used  may  be  intelligible  enough.
People  may  give  themselves  the  trouble  of  thinking  out  the  subjects  presented  to  them
by  tl>c  ])reacher8.  Still  all  is  vain  if  the  gospel  is  not  believed  and  submitted  to.  4.  It
may  be  believed.  The  truth  may  not  be  doubted.  We  may  have  a  certain  conviction
of  it,  and  yet  even  this  may  count  for  nothing  without  the  faith  that  accepts  the  inflnences
and  ftillows  the  directions  of  the  gospel.  There  is  a  world  of  differt^nce  between  believing
the  gospel  and  believing  in  Christ ;  at  least,  in  the  only  way  in  which  this  is  of  practical
im|»ortance,  viz.  as  a  trustful  acceptance  of  his  grace  and  a  loyal  devotion  to  his  will.
So  lung  as  wc  come  short  of  this  we  may  have  the  gospel,  but  it  will  be  "  words,  words,
words  " — the  letter  that  killeth,  not  the  spirit  that  quickeneth.

If.  The  gospel  may  be  beceived  in  power.  This  very  statement  seems  to  strike
some  pet)ple  who  have  long  been  familiar  with  the  words  of  the  gospel  as  a  new  revela-
tion, as  itself  a  fresh  gospel.  But  we  have  to  learn  the  power  as  well  as  the  truth  of
the  gospel  if  it  is  to  be  of  any  real  good  to  us.  1.  The  operation  of  the  power  of  the
gospel  consists  in  changing  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  The  gospel  does  not  simply
promise  future  salvation.  It  effects  present  regeneration.  The  new  birth  is  the  essential
Deginning  of  redemption.  Nothing  but  a  power,  vast,  overwhelming,  penetrating,  and
omnipotent,  can  make  new  creatures  of  old,  stubborn  profligates  and  hypocrites,  men  of
the  world,  and  self-righteous  Pharisees.  2.  The  secret  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  is  in
the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  The  new  man  is  "born  of  the  Spirit"  (John  iii.  5).
Christ  is  **the  Power  of  God,"  because  he  baptizes  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Matt.  iii.
11).  Christ  expressly  connected  the  power  of  apostolic  preaching  with  the  gift  of  tne
Hdy  Spirit :  "  Ye  shall  receive  power,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you  "  (Acta
I  8).  rreachers  need  this  to  eive  force  to  their  words,  and  hearers  to  receive  the  truth
effectually.     8.  The  sign  of  uie  power  of  tho  gospel  will  be  much  assurance.    The


24  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  l  1— 10.

faith  which  grows  out  of  experiencing  this  power  will  be  much  stronger,  more  vivid,
and  more  joyous  than  that  of  first  believing  the  truth  of  the  gospel. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  6. — Affliction  with  joy.  The  Christians  of  Thessalonica  had  no  sooner  accepted
the  gospel  than  they  were  attacked  with  swift,  sharp  persecution;  and  it  is  to  be
remarked  that,  while  in  other  places  the  apostles  were  often  assailed  and  the  converts
spared,  here  the  full  force  of  the  assault  fell  on  the  infant  Church  (Acts  xvii.  5 — ^10).
8t.  Paul  frequently  refers  to  the  sufferings  that  so  quickly  tested  the  faith  of  this  brave
Christian  community  at  the  very  commencement  of  its  new  life  (ch.  ii.  14 ;  iii.  2-  5).
But  in  spite  of  persecution  a  peculiar  joy  seems  to  have  possessed  the  Church  at
Thessalonica.  The  Epistles  to  the  Tliessalonians  are  to  be  distinguished  for  hearty
congratulations  and  a  spirit  of  gladness.  Here  is  an  apparent  paradox,  which,  however,
when  regarded  from  a  higher  standpoint,  resolves  itself  mto  a  spiritual  harmony.

I.  An  earthly  pabadox.  St.  Paul  was  much  inclined  to  the  use  of  startling  para-
doxes. His  vigorous  mind  seemed  to  delight  in  facing  them.  Thus  his  style  is  rugged
with  great  contrasting  ideas.  1.  The  gospel  does  not  prevent  affliction.  To  the  Thes-
E^alonians  it  was  the  means  of  bringing  suffering.  ChristiaDs  often  suffer  more  of
earthly  trouble,  rather  than  less,  than  others  (Heb.  xii.  8).  Though  the  gospel  is  good
news,  and  though  it  brings  gladness  to  the  soul,  it  may  be  ushered  in  with  storms  and
sufferings  in  the  outer  life.  This  might  be  expected,  seeing  that  it  is  in  conflict  with
the  prince  of  this  world.  2.  Affliction  does  not  prevent  the  experience  of  the  joy  of  the
gospel.  In  spite  of  much  affliction,  the  Thessalonians  had  joy.  The  world  sees  only
the  outside.  Hence  its  common  verdict  that  religion  must  be  melancholy.  It  can  see
the  flaming  fagots ;  it  cannot  see  the  exultant  heart  of  the  martyr.  It  is  a  great  truth
to  know  that,  when  God  does  not  remove  trouble,  he  may  give  us  such  gladness  of
heart  as  shall  entirely  counteract  it.  Surely  it  is  better  to  rejoice  in  tribulation  than
to  be  sad  in  prosperity.

II.  The  spiritual  harmony.  1.  The  affliction  is  external^  while  the  joy  is  internal
The  two  belong  to  different  spheres.  It  would  be  impossible  for  one  and  the  same
person  to  be  in  temporal  prosperity  and  adversity  at  the  same  moment,  or  to  be  at  once
in  spiritual  sunshine  and  under  spiritual  clouds.  But  it  may  well  be  that,  while  the
earthly  sun  is  shrouded  ir<  gloom,  the  heavenly  sun  is  shining  in  full  splendour.  2.  The
affliction  comes  from  earthly  causes,  the  joy  from  heavenly.  Men  persecute,  the  Holy
Spirit  inspires  joy.  Here  are  different  sources  of  experience,  and  accordingly  the
experiences  differ.  3.  The  affliction  rather  helps  the  spirittuil  joy  than  otherwise.  It
prevents  men  from  looking  to  external  things  for  comfort.  It  enables  them  to  see  that
true  joy  must  be  inward  and  spiritual.

In  conclusion,  observe  that  affliction  is  no  reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  gospel,  since
this  is  not  therefore  the  less  true,  and  it  claims  to  bo  received  on  its  truth,  not  on  our
pleasure,  and  also  because  the  joy  it  brings  will  not  be  lessened  by  any  external
lrouble.—\V.  F.  A.

Ver.  8. — How  the  Word  is  sounded  forth,  I.  The  need  of  sounding  forth  the
GOSPEL.  This  is  a  fine  expression,  "  sounded  forth ; "  not  merely  whispered  in  the  ear,
but  proclaimed  far  and  wide,  with  a  fulness,  a  richness,  and  a  power  that  command
attention.     Such  is  the  proclamation  that  the  royal  message  of  the  gospel  deserves.

1.  The  gospel  comes  from  God,  It  is  not  like  the  composition  of  an  obscure  man.  If
God  opens  his  mouth,  surely  his  words  must  be  worthy  of  publishing  in  trumpet-notes.

2.  The  gospel  is /or  all  men.  It  is  not  a  secret  doctrine  for  the  cultured  few.  All  the
world  needs  it,  all  the  world  has  a  right  to  have  it.  Therefore  it  should  spread  over
wide  territories  and  penetrate  to  remote  districts.  The  alarm-bell  must  be  resonant,
the  bugle-call  must  be  clear  and  piercing,  the  shepherd's  voice  must  be  high  and  full
that  the  wandering  sheep  may  hear  it  and  return  to  the  fold.  3.  The  gospel  is  conjlicttd
by  other  voices.  Men  are  preoccupied.  The  din  of  the  world  renders  them  deaf  to  the
message  from  heaven.  The  world  will  not  lie  in  solemn  stillness  to  hear  the  angels
sing.  The  sound  of  the  gospel  must  go  forth  so  that  deaf  ears  shall  be  unstop^ied,  and
walls  of  prejudice  fall  flat  like  those  of  old  Jericho  at  the  trumpet-notes  of  Israel's  priests.

II.  The  methob  of  bounding  forth  the  gospel.  1.  It  must  be  sounded  by  living
men,    A  written  gospel  is  not  enough.    Soul  must  stir  soul.    2.  It  must  be  sounded


CH.I.1— 10.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  25

in  the  conduct  of  Christians,  It  would  seem  that  St.  Paul  wa^  thinking  rather  of  the
iofluence  of  the  heroic  endurance  of  the  Thessalonians  and  of  their  spiritual  prosperity
than  of  the  missionary  labours  of  evangelists  sent  out  by  them,  for  he  writes  of  how
they  became  an  ensample  to  all  that  believe  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia,  and  how  in
every  place  their  faith  to  Grod-ward  was  gone  forth.  The  loudest,  clearest,  most  eloquent,
most  unanswerable  procUimation  of  the  gospel  is  the  unconscious  testimony  of  Christian
living.  3.  It  may  be  sounded  forth  with  redoubled  energy  from  the  midst  of  affliction.
The  troubles  endured  by  the  Thessalonians  tested  and  revealed  their  faith,  and  so
led  to  the  fuller  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of
the  Church."  Men  never  preach  Christ  so  perfectly  as  when  they  die  for  him.  The
torch  that  kindled  Latimer's  fagots  at  Oxford  kindled  a  glorious  fire  of  reformation
throughout  England.  4.  It  can  be  sounded  forth  with  greatest  effect  from  central
positions,  Thessalonica  was  the  capital  of  Macedonia.  What  happened  there  was
not  done  in  a  corner.  Christian  testimony  witnessed  at  this  great  centre  would  spread
far  and  wide.  It  is  our  duty  to  establish  Christian  influences  in  prominent  places.
While  not  boasting  of  our  own  doings,  and  not  letting  our  left  hand  know  what  our
right  hand  doeth,  we  should  still  not  hide  our  candle  under  a  bushel,  but  so  let  our
light  shine  before  men  that  we  may  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  and  remem-
ber that,  if  a  city  which  is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid,  it  is  most  important  that  the
light  of  the  gospel  should  shine  from  such  a  place. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  9, 10. — ITie  great  change.  The  Thessalonians  were  converted  heathens.  To
them  the  blessedness  of  the  gospel  would  be  largely  measured  by  its  contrast  with  the
darkness  of  paganism.  In  Christendom  the  language  descriptive  of  the  acceptance  of
the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  gospel  would,  of  course,  be  different.  But  little  else  than
the  language;  and  with  the  essential,  spiritual  signification  of  it,  oven  this  would
scarcely  need  altering.  St.  Paul  regards  the  great  change  in  two  aspects,  present  and
future.

I.  The  present  aspect  of  the  great  change.  "Ye  turned  unto  God  from  idolrf,
to  serve  a  living  and  true  Grod.'*  1.  It  is  emancipation  from  an  evil  service  and  enlist-
mtnt  in  a  good  service.  In  the  old  condition  a  man  is  a  servant,  of  idols,  of  sin,  of
passion,  of  the  world,  of  Satan.  He  thinks  himself  free,  but  he  is  really  a  miserable
slave.  In  the  changed  condition  the  Christian  is  freed  from  this  thraldom.  But  ho  is
not  the  less  a  servant.  He  no  longer  serves  in  hard  bondage.  Love  is  his  chain,  and
free  devotion  his  service.  StiU  he  serves.  2.  It  is  the  giving  up  of  death  and  falsehood
and  the  acceptance  of  truth  and  life,  (1)  The  idol  is  lifeless.  All  worldly,  sinful
living  is  a  devotion  to  lifeless  gods,  to  mere  material  things  that  perish  in  the  using.
The  Christian  serves  a  living  God,  who  can  give  vital  grace,  accept  loving  devotion,
and  commune  with  his  people.  (2)  The  idol  is  false.  Idolatry  is  a  lie.  All  earthly
things  when  exalted  into  gods  become  unreal  and  only  mock  thoir  devotees.  God  is  real,
and  he  only  can  be  rightly  served  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  We  come  to  reality,  to  fact,  to
truth,  when  we  come  to  God.

II.  The  future  aspect  of  the  great  change.  1.  It  consists  in  a  turning  from
wrath.  Whether  we  anticipate  it  with  fear,  or  delude  ourselves  in  the  dream  of
evading  it,  or  simply  ignore  it  with  stolid  indifference,  the  fact  remains  that  for  all  of
us,  while  in  our  sins,  there  is  a  certain  looking  for  of  judgment.  If  we  are  children
of  sin  we  must  be  children  of  wrath.  It  is  no  small  blessing  to  be  able  to  face  the
future  and  to  see  that  reasonably  and  righteously  all  the  horror  of  Divine  wrath  is  gone
in  the  free  pardon  of  sin.  It  is  like  turning  one's  face  from  the  lowering  thunder-
cloud to  the  silver  light  of  sunrise.  2.  It  leads  on  to  an  anticipation  of  the  coming
glory  of  Christ,  All  the  early  Christians  were  much  occupied  with  this  anticipation,
but  none  more  so  than  the  Thessalonians.  The  hope  of  the  Parousia  is  an  ever-
recurrent  theme  in  the  two  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  this  Church.  His  own  mind  must
also  have  been  very  full  of  it  when  he  wrote  these  letters.  In  their  immediate  expecta-
tiwi — at  least,  as  far  as  a  visible  appearance  and  triumph  of  Christ  was  concerned — the
first  Christians  were  disappointed.  But  the  great  promises  still  cheer  us  as  we  wait  for
the  glory  that  is  reserved  in  the  future.  The  Christian  conversion  thus  not  merely
results  in  a  deliverance  from  wrath;  it  inspires  a  grand  hope  and  promises  a  rich  glor^
in  the  days  to  cooic.— W.  F.  A.


26


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cH.  n.  1— 2a


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


CJontents. — Paul  turns  from  the  reports
of  others  to  tho  experience  of  the  readers.
They  themselves  knew  that  his  entrance
VfOB  not  powerless ;  although  maltreated  in
Philippi,  he  was  emboldened  to  preach  the
gospel  at  Thcssalonica.  His  preaching  did
not  proceed  cither  from  delusion  on  his  part
or  from  a  desire  to  delude  others.  He  felt
approved  by  God,  and  was  actuated  by  no
improper  motives :  he  sought  neither  their
praiso  nor  their  money ;  so  far  from  insisting
on  his  apostolic  rights,  ho  was  gentle  among
them,  nnd  conducted  himself  with  the
tenderness  of  anniaing  mother  toward  her
children ;  and  so  far  from  his  ministry  being
a  pretext  for  covetousness,  ho  had  laboured
for  his  own  support;  and  thus  he  could
confidently  appeal  to  tho  Thessalonians  as
witnesses  of  the  blamelessness  of  his  con-
duct And  as  his  entrance  among  them  was
not  powerless,  so  he  thanked  God  that  it
resulted  in  their  reception  of  the  gospel;
they  had  embraced  it  as  tho  word  of  God,
and  had  not  shunned  persecution  for  its
sake;  they  had  in  this  become  the  imitators
of  the  Churches  in  Judtea.  The  apostle  then
alludes  to  his  earnest  desires  to  see  them;
twice  ho  had  attempted  to  como  to  Thcssa-
lonica, and  twice  he  had  been  prevented  by
the  machinations  of  Satan.  They  were  very
dear  to  him — the  objects  of  his  tender  affec-
tions, and  the  source  of  his  rejoicing  before
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming.

Ver.  1. — For  yourselves,  brethren;  in  con-
trast to  other  persons.  Not  only  do  strangers
report  the  power  and  eflBcacy  of  our  prcjich-
ing  among  you,  but  you  yourselves  are  ex-
perimentally acquainted  with  it.  Know  our
entrance  in  unto  yon ;  referring,  not  merely
to  the  mere  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  tho
Thessalonians,  but  to  tho  enlranco  which
tho  gospel  found  into  their  hearts— to  its
coming,  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power
(ch  i.  5).  That  it  was  not  in  vain;  not
empty,  useless,  to  no  purpose, — descriptive
of  the  character  of  the  apostolic  entrance
among  them.  Our  entrance  among  you
was  not  powerless,  unreal ;  on  the  contrary,
it  was  mighty,  energetic,  powerful.  The
reference  is  cliiefly  to  the  manner  or  mode
in  which  Paul  and  his  companions  preached


the  gospel,  though  not  entirely  excluding
the  success  of  tho  gospel  among  the  Thes-
salonians (comp.  I  Cor.  xv.  14,  '*  And  if  Christ
bo  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and
your  faith  is  also  vain  '*).

Ver.  2. — But  even  after  we  had  tnffered
before,  and  were  Bhamefolly  entreated.  As
the  word  here  rendered  **  suffered  before "
does  not  in  itself  imply  that  the  sufferings
wore  unjust,  the  apostle  adds,  *'  and  were
shamefully  entreated."  As  ye  knoWt  At
FhilippL  Wo  are  informed,  in  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  that  Paul  and  Silas  were
publicly  scourged  and  cast  into  prison ;  and
scourging  with  rods  was  regarded  as  an
ignominious  punishment,  and  therefore
was  forbidden  to  be  inflicted  on  Roman  citi-
zens, such  as  Paul  and  Silas  were.  "  They
havo  beaten  us  openly  uncondemned,  being
Romans,  and  have  cast  us  into  prison"
(Acts  xvi.  37).  We  were  bold  in  our  Ood  to
speak  unto  jou.  Tho  word  here  rendere<l
*•  bold "  denotes  boldness  or  freedom  of
speech ;  and  hence  some  render  the  clause,
*'  Wo  were  bold  of  speech  in  our  God,  so  as
to  speak  unto  you"  (Ellicott).  Perhaps,
however,  as  the  verb  "to  speak"  follows,
it  is  better  to  render  the  clause,  **  We  were
confident  in  our  God  to  speak ; "  or  "  em-
boldened to  speak"  (R.V.,  "we  waxed  bold").
This  boldness  or  confidence  was  in  our  God,
that  is,  on  account  of  our  fellowship  or  union
with  him.  The  gospel  of  God.  The  genitive
of  orijjin,  denoting,  not  merely  that  God  was
tho  Object,  but  that  ho  was  the  Author  of  the
gospel.  With  much  contention ;  or,  in  tnudi
conflict  (R.V.),  alluding  to  the  peril  and
danger  with  which  Paul  preached  the  gospel
in  Thessalonica.

Ver.  3. — For  our  exhortation.  This  word
has  a  twofold  signification,  denoting  both
"  exhortation  "  and  "  consolation  ;  "  when  it
refers  to  the  moral  conduct  it  denotes  ex-
hortation, but  when  it  is  an  address  to  a
sufferer  it  denotes  consolation.  In  the  gospel
these  two  meanings  are  blended  toj^cthcr.
Was  not  of  deceit.  Not  in  tho  sense  of  guile,
which  would  bo  tautological,  but  simply
"  error,"  without  any  direct  evil  intent ;  our
gospel  was  not  a  delusion — we  wore  not  our-
selves deceived.  Hor  of  uncleanness;  a
word  usually  employed  to  denote  sensuality,
and  in  this  sense  the  meaning  is — We  did
not,  like  the  heathen  in  their  worship,  give
occxision  to  unclean  practices  :  "  We  havo
corrupted  no  man"  (2  Cor.  vii.  2).  Tho
word,  however,  may  be  taken  in  a  more
general  sense,  as  denoting  impurity  of  dis-
position, impure  motives:  such  as  the
impure  desire  of  applause  or  of   gain,  to


0H.1I.  1— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.


27


which  the  apostle  afterwards  alludes.  Or  of
guHe.  As  we  were  not  ourselves  deceived,
so  neither  did  we  attempt  to  deceive  others.
The  apostle  did  not  adapt  his  religion  as
Muhomet,  to  suit  the  prejudices  or  passions
of  men ;  he  did  not  employ  any  seductive  or
temporizing  arts ;  but  he  boldly  went  in  the
fiice  of  the  prevailing  religions  of  the  age,
both  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Gentiles.

Yer.  4. — But;  in  contrast  As;  according
as.  We  were  allowed.  The  old  English
for  "approved.**  Of  God.  The  word  ren-
dered ** allowed"  signifies  tried,  tested  as
gold  is  tested  in  the  fire,  and  hence  also  the
result  of  that  trial,  **  approved ."  As  wo  were
esteemed  wortliy  to  be  put  in  trust  with
the  goepel ;  entrusted  with  its  publication.
Xren  lo ;  in  this  condition  of  approval  and
trust.  We  speak,  not  as  pleasing  men,  but
God,  that  tiieth.  The  same  verb  that  is
rendered  '*  allowed  "  in  the  first  part  of  the
verse;  hence  "proveth,"  or  ** approveth."
Our  hearts.  Not  a  general  statement,
"God  who  is  the  Discemer  of  the  heart ; "
but  "  our  hearts,"  namely,  of  us,  the  pub-
lishers of  the  gospel — Paul  and  Silas  and
Timothy;  thus  appealing  to  God,  as  the
infallible  Judge  of  their  sincerity.

Vtr.  5. — For;  confirming  the  statement
that  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  did  not  seek
to  please  men,  but  God.  Neither  at  any
time  used  we  flattering  words;  endeavouring
to  gain  you  by  flattery  and  praise ;  we  did
not  pander  to  your  feelings;  we  did  not
soften  the  demands  of  the  gospel.  As  je
Imow,  nor  a  cloak — or  pretext — of  covetous-
ness.  We  did  not  use  the  gospel  as  a  pretext
to  mask  our  real  motive,  which  was  cove-
touBuess,  pretending  to  seek  your  spiritual
good,  whereas  in  reality  we  sought  our  own
advantage.  Paul  could  with  perfect  con-
fidence appeal  to  Lis  converts,  and  say,  **  I
have  coveted  no  man*s  silver,  or  gold,  or
apparel  **  (Acts  xx.  33).  Ho  was  free  from
all  sinister  motives.  **  He  did  not  use  words
such  as  flattery  uses,  or  pretexts  such  as
covetousncss "  (Jowett).  God  is  witness.
Paul  appeals  to  the  Thessalonians  them-
selves that  he  had  not  used  flattering  words ;
80  now  he  appeals  to  God  that  the  motive
of  bis  conduct  was  not  covetousness.  Men
can  judge  the  external  conduct,  they  can
hear  the  flattering  words;  but  God  only
can  know  the  motive  of  action — he  only  can
discern  the  covetousness.

Ver.  6. — Hot  of  (or,  from)  men  sought  we
glorj,  neither  of  you,  nor  yet  of  others,  when
we  Blight  have  been  burdensome.  These
words  admit  of  two  meanings.  The  apostlo
may  refer  to  his  refusal  to  seek  mainten-
ance from  the  Thessalonians,  and  in  this
tense  become  a  burden  to  them.  But  such
a  meaning  does  not  suit  the  context ;  and
besides,  tl^  refusal  of  maintenance  is  after-


wards alluded  to  by  the  apostle.  The
reference  here  is  not  to  maintenance,  but  to
glory :  we  did  not  seek  glory  from  you,
when  wo  might  have  been  burdensome,
when  wo  might  have  done  so.  Hence  the
word  is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  honour,
importance;  when  we  might  have  claimed
honour.  As — in  virtue  of  our  character  as —
the  apostles  of  Christ.  Paul  does  not  speak
of  himself  alone,  but  he  includes  Silas  and
Timotljy,  and  therefore  the  word  "  apostles  "
is  to  bo  taken,  not  in  its  restrictea,  but  in
its  wider  meaning.

Ver.  7. — But.  The  apostle  now  describes
his  conduct  positively.  We  were  gentle ;
a  word  used  of  the  amiable  conduct  of  a
superior  toward  an  inferior,  as  of  a  master
toward  a  servant,  a  prince  toward  his
subjects,  or  a  father  toward  his  children.
**  The  servant  of  God  must  not  strive,  but
be  gentlo  toward  all  men  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  24).
Some  manuscripts  read,  **  We  were  babes
among  you" — the  difierence  being  only
the  addition  of  another  letter.  Among
you;  in  our  intercourse  with  you.  Even
as  a  nurse;  or  rather,  a  nursing  mother,
for  the  children  are  her  own.  Cherisheth ;
the  word  employed  for  birds  wanning  and
cherishing  their  young.  Her  children.  A
stronger  expression  of  tenderness  and  lovo
could  hardly  be  made.  Even  as  a  nursing
mother  dedicates  her  life  for  her  infant ;  so,
says  Paul,  we  are  willing  to  dedicate  our-
selves for  you.  Some  imjwrtant  manuscripts
read  the  verge  thus:  "But  wo  were  bubes
among  you,  even  ns  a  nurse  cherisheth  her
children ; "  but  this  arises  from  an  obvious
error  of  the  transcriber.

Yer.  8. — So  being  affectionately  desirous
of  you ;  a  strong  expression  in  the  original :
"being  filled  with  earnest  love  for  you."
We  were  willing.  The  word  denotes  a  pre-
determination of  the  will:  "we  esteemed  it
good."  To  have  imparted  unto  you,  not  the
gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls.
An  evident  climax  :  not  only  were  we  willing
to  preach  the  gospel  of  God  to  you,  but
more  than  this,  to  sacrifice  our  own  lives  for
your  advantage.  The  word  here  rendered
"souls"  denotes  lives;  and  the  meaning  is
that  the  apostle  was  willing  to  submit  to
death  for  the  sake  of  the  Thessalonians.
The  plural  "  wo "  still  implies  Paul  and
Silns  and  Timothy.  The  thought  is — As  a
nursing  mother  not  only  nourishes  her
children,  but  is  also  ready  to  sacrifice  her
life  for  them;  so  the  apostle  not  only
nourished  his  spiritual  children  with  the
pure  milk  of  the  gospel,  but  was  ready  to
sacrifice  his  own  life  for  their  spiritual  main-
tenance; thus  expressing  in  the  strongest
manner  the  womanly  tenderness  of  the
apostle  toward  his  converts.  Because  ye
were  dear  unto  us.


23


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.    [ch,  il  1— 20.


Ver.  9. — For ;  u  proof  or  coDfirmation  of  '
this  dearness  of  the  TlicfisaloDiaiiB  to  the
apostlo.    Te  lemember,  brethren ;  recalling
to  their  recolloction  his  conduct  when  he
was  with  them.     Our  labour  and  travalL
These  two  terms  frequently  occur  together
(2  Cor.  xi.  27;    2  Thesa.  iii.  8),   and  can
hardly  be  distinguisheil ;  "  labour,"  or  "  toil,"
is  active,  denoting  exertion ;   **  travail "  is
■  passive,  denoting  weariness  or  fatigue,  the
effect  of  the  exertion.   For  labouring ;  in  its
btrict  meaning  chiefly  used  of  manual  labour.
Paul  here  refers  to  his  working  for  his  own
support  as  a  tent-maker.    Night  and  day.
Night  precedes   according   to  the  Jewish
mode  of  reckoning.    It  does  not  denote  that
the  apostle  made  up  by  labour  at  night  the
loss  of  time  during  the  day  which  his  higher
duties,  as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  oce^i-
sioned ;  that  he   wrought  at  his  trade  at
night,  and  preached  during  the  day ;  but  the
phrase,  "  night  and    day,"   denotes  inces-
santly, continually.    Because  we  would  not
be  chargeable  to  any  of  you.   Not  a  proof  of
the  poverty  of  the  Church  of  Thessalonica ;
but  the  reason  of  this  unselfish  conduct  of  the
apostle  was  that  no  hindrance  should  arise
on  his  part  to  the  spread  of  the   gospel ;
that  no  imputation  of  fcclBshncss  or  cove-
lousncss  should  be  laid  to  his  charge.    As
he  had  done  at  Thessalonica  so  the  apostle
acted  in  other  places.     Thus  at  the  time
he  was  writing  this  Epistle  he  was  working
for  his  supjx)rt  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  iv.  12;
2  Cor.  xi  d).  And  such  was  also  liis  practice
at  Ephesus ;  for  in  his  farewell  address  to
the  Ephesian  elders    ho  could  appeal   to
them:  *' Yea,  ye  yourselves  know,  that  these
hands  have  ministered  unto  my  necessities,
and  to  them  that  were  with  mo  "  (Acts  xx.
34).    We  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of
God.    Thus  freely,  without  charge.

V<ir.  10. — ^Ye  are  witnesses,  and  God  also ;
ye  of  the  outward  conduct,  and  God  of  the
motives  which  actuated  us.  Howholily  and
justly  and  unblamably ;  *' holily  ''denoting  the
apostle's  conduct  to  God,  "justly  "  his  con-
duct to  man,  and  "  unblamably  "  the  negative
side  of  both  particulars.  We  behaved  our-
selves among  you  that  believe.  The  apostle
here  refers  to  his  own  personal  demeanour
and  to  that  of  Silas  and  Timothy  among
them,  in  order  that  the  Thessalonians  might
realize  the  purity  of  their  conduct,  and  so
might  continue  steadfast  in  their  attachment
tf)  the  gospel  which  they  taught,  lie  mon-
tiung  specially  *'  them  that  believe,"  not  that
he  acted  otherwise  among  those  that  did  not
believe,  but  because  believers  were  cognizant
of  his  conduct.

Ver.  11. — As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted
and  comforted  and  charged  every  one  of  you,
as  a  father  doth  his  children.  The  transla-
tiou  of  this  verso  is  somewhat  faulty;  it


ought  to  be,  as  in  the  R.Y.,  as  ye  know  how
we  dealt  with  each  one  of  you,  as  a  fcUher  with
his  own  children,  exhorting  you,  and  eneourag'
ing  you,  and  testifying.  Paul  here  changes
the  image  from  that  of  a  nursing  mother
to  that  of  a  father;  because  then  he  was
speaking  of  his  tender  care  for  bis  conv<>rts,
whereas  here  be  speaks  of  the  instructions
and  admonitions  which  he  gave  them ;  as  a
mother  he  nourished  their  spiritual  life,  and
as  a  father  he  superintended  their  spiritual
education.  **  Exhorting  and  comforting  and
charging;"  representing  three  modes  of
the  apostle's  instructions :  ^  exhorting  "  de-
notes also  encouraging  and  consoling ;  **  com-
forting" denotes  supporting  and  sustaining
("  Comfort  the  feeble  minded,"  ch.  v.  14) ;  and
"  charging  "  denotes  testifying  or  protesting
— ^a  solemn  pressing  home  of  the  exhortation
to  the  hearers.

Ver.  12. — ^That  (or,  to  the  end  that)  ye  would
walk  worthy  of  God ;  so  as  to  adorn  the  gospel
of  God.  So  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians:
**  That  ye  would  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord
unto  all  pleasing "  (Col.  i.  10).  Who  hath
called  you ;  or,  as  the  best  attested  manu-
scripts read,  who  calleth  you.  To  his  kingdom
and  glory.  Not  to  be  weakened  as  if  it  were
a  Hebraism  for  **  his  glorious  kingdom,"  or
"  the  kingdom  of  his  glory ; "  but  the  kingdom
and  glory  are  to  be  viewed  as  two  different
objects.  **  God  called  you  to  his  kingdom,"
namely,  the  Messianic  kingdom  which  he
has  established  on  earth ;  and  which  will
be  completely  realized  at  the  advent.  And
"  God  called  you  to  his  glory,"  namely,  the
glory  which  is  in  reserve  for  all  the  members
of  his  kingdom.

Ver.  13. — For  this  cause.  Not  because
God  has  called  you  to  his  kiugdom  and
glory,  but,  referring  to  what  follows,  because
of  your  reception  or  the  gospel.  We  thank
God.  Although  the  reception  of  the  gospel
was  in  one  sense  the  free  and  voluntary  act
on  the  part  of  the  Thessalouians ;  yet  in
another  sense  it  was  the  act  of  God  who
ordained  them  to  accept  the  gospel ;  their
belief  was  an  operation  of  (jrod  in  them.
Without  ceasing,  because,  when  ye  received
the  Word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us;
literally,  because  wlien  ye  received  from  us  ilte
Word  of  hearing,  which  is  of  God.  The  gospel
is  called  "  the  Word  of  hearing,"  because  it
came  by  hearing ;  hence  **  the  Word  heard,"
or  *'  the  Word  of  the  message  "  (R.  V.).  It  is
further  designated  "of  God"— the  Word
whose  Author  is  God.  Te  received  it  not  as
the  word  of  men — as  if  it  were  of  human
origin — but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  of
God— of  Divine  origin — which  effectually
wCrketh.  The  pronoun  may  refer  to  God,  **who
effectually  worketh,"  or  better  to  the  Word
of  God,  OS  the  principal  subject  of  the  sen-
tence.  Also  InyQU  that  believe.    The  gospel


CH.n.1— 20.]    THE  FIRST     EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


29


waR  powerful  as  respects  the  preachers,  and
iffcctual  as  respects  the  hearers.

Ver.  14. — For  ye,  brethren,  beoame  fol-
lowers ;  or  rather,  imitators^  namely,  in  the
endarance  of  suffering  for  the  sake  of  the
gospel,  not  in  intention  only,  but  in  reality.
Of  Uie  Chnrohes  Of  Ood  which  in  Jndsea  are
in  Christ  Jesni.  These  Churches  are  men-
tioned as  being  at  this  early  period  the
mo»t  prominent.  The  special  mention  of
persecution  by  the  Jews  has  its  origin  in  the
fact  that  it  was  by  the  unbelieving  Jews
that  Paul  was  persecuted  at  Thessalonica.
For  ye  also  have  suffered  like  things  of  your
own  countrymen.  One  of  the  proofs  that
the  Church  of  Thessalonica  was  Gentile  in
its  ori;5in;  as  these  countrymen  were  evidently
Gentiles,  being  here  distinguished  from  the
Jews.  From  this  it  would  seem  that,  after
Paul  and  his  companions  had  left  Thessalo-
nica, the  persecution  which  arose  against
the  Christians  continued,  and  the  Gentiles
combined  with  tiie  Jews  in  opposing  the
gospel.  Even  ai  they— the  Churches  of  God
in  J  udsea —  have  of  the  Jews.  We  learn  from
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  the  Jewish
Christians  in  Judsea  were  exposed  to  severe
pir«»cution  from  their  unbelieving  country-
men :  Stephen  was  put  to  death,  and  Paul
himself,  in  his  unconverted  state,  was  a  chief
among  the  persecutors.

Ver.  15.— Who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesna ;
emphatic,  to  point  out  the  greatness  of  their
wickedness.  And  their  own  prophets;  or,
tu  fcome  manuscripts  read,  and  the  prophets.
This  crime  was  often  laid  to  the  charge  of
the  Jews  :  thus,  by  our  Lord,  "  Ye  are  wit-
nesses unto  yourselves,  that  ye  are  the
children  of  them  which  killed  the  prophets  "
(Matt  xxiii.  31) ;  and  by  the  protomartyr
Stephen,  '*  Whidi  of  the  prophets  have  not
your  fathers  persecuted?"  (Acts  vii.  25.)
And  have  perseented  ns;  literally,  driven
H»  out,  as  Paul  and  Silus  were  expelled  from
The£»s:ilonica.  And  they  please  not  Ood,  hut
are  oontrary  to  all  men.  The  hatred  and  con •
tempt  which  the  Jews  bore  to  other  nations
is  noticed  by  Tacitus,  Juvenal,  and  other
heathf-n  writers.  Thus  Tacitus  writes  of
them  :  **  They  are  faithful  to  obstinacy,  and
merciful  toward  themselves,  but  toward  all
others  ore  actuated  l»y  the  most  irreconcil-
able hatred  (odium  humani  gerieris)"  And
Juvenal  says,  "They  will  not  show  the
road  to  one  who  was  not  of  their  religion,
nor  lead  the  thirsty  person  if  uncireum-
cised  to  the  common  spring."  Perhaps,
huwcver,  the  apostle  refers  here,  not  to  the
enmity  of  the  Jews  to  the  human  race  in
general,  though  perfectly  cognizant  of  their
bigotry  and  intolerance;  as  this  enmity
was  a  perversion  of  their  peculiar  distinction
ta  the  people  of  God ;  but  rather  to  their
opposition  to  his  preaching  the  gospel  to


the  Gentiles— to  their  extreme  reluctance
that  the  Gentiles  along  with  themselves
should  be  admitted  into  the  kingdom  of
God.

Ver.  16. — Forbidding  ns — by  contradict-
ing, blaspheming,  slandering,  laying  snares
— to  speak  to  the  Oentiles  Uiat  they  might
be  saved.  Not  that  the  Jews  were  averse
to  the  proscl^tism  of  the  Gentiles,  provided
they  were  circumcised  and  kept  the  Law
of  Moses;  on  the  contrary,  Judaism  at
this  period  was  a  proselytizing  religion;
but  their  great  objection  to  the  preaching
of  the  gospel  was  that  the  preaciiers  did
not  insist  on  the  Gentiles  becoming  Jews
before  they  became  Christians.  And,  ac-
cordingly, we  learn  from  tho  Acts  of  the
Apostles  that  the  unbelieving  Jews  were
the  most  violent  and  implacable  enemies  of
the  gospel.  Of  the  numerous  persecutions
mentioned  in  tho  Acts,  there  were  only  two,
namely,  those  at  Philippi  and  Ephesus,
which  were  not  occasioned  by  the  Jews.
To  fill  np  their  Bins  alway;  so  that  the
measure  of  their  iniquity  became  full  to
overflowing.  Their  forbidding  tho  apostles
to  preach  to  the  Gentiles  was  tho  last  drop
which  caused  tho  cup  of  their  iniquity  to
overflow  (comp.  Gen.  xv.  16,  "The  iniquity
of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full").  Tho
remark  of  Professor  Jowett  is  well  worthy
of  notice:  "In  tho  beginning  of  sin  and
evil  it  seems  as  if  men  wore  free  agents,
and  had  the  power  of  going  on  or  of  re-
treating. But  as  the  crisis  of  their  fate
approaches,  they  are  bound  under  a  curse .
and  the  form  in  which  their  destiny  presents
itself  to  our  minds  is  as  though  it  wero
certain,  and  only  a  question  of  time  how
soon  it  is  to  be  fulfilled."  For  the  wrath  ;
that  wrath  which  was  predicted  and  is
merited  by  them.  "Wrath"  is  here  used
for  punisliraent,  which  is  the  effect  of
wrath.  Is  oome  upon  them  to  the  utter-
most; literally,  to  the  end.  Tho  apostlo
here  refers  to  the  judgments  of  (Jod,  which
were  impending  cm  Jerusalem  and  the
Jewish  people ;  judgments  which  wore  fear-
fully executed  in  tho  awful  sufferings  they
endured  in  the  Jewish  war,  and  in  tho
destruction  of  their  city  by  the  Romans.

Ver.  17. — Hero  a  new  chapter  ought  to
have  commenced,  passing  on  to  another
subject,  tho  apostle's  desire  to  visit  tho
Thessalonians.  But  we,  brethren,  being
taken  from  yon;  literally,  being  bereaved  of
you  (R.V.).  For  a  short  time;  literally,
for  the  space  of  an  hour.  And  yet  it  was
several  years  before  the  apostlo  revisited
Thessalonica;  but  he  hero  speaks  of  the
short  period — ^a  space  of  six  months — which
had  already  separated  them ;  not,  as  some
suppose,  that  his  mind  was  so  full  of  the
ideas  of  eternity    that  he  overlooked  all


80


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  il  1— 2a


diviBioDs  of  time.  In  pretenoe,  not  in  heart.
Similar  expressions  are  common  in  Paul's
Epistles,  denoiin;^  kid  love  for  his  converts ;
thus :  "Thought  bo  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet
I  am  with  you  in  the  spirit"  (CJol.  ii.  5).
Endeavoured  the  more  abundantly  to  see
your  face  with  great  desire;  because  our
separation  has  been  so  short.  As  lias  been
well  observed,  •*  Universal  exix^rience
testiiios  that  the  pain  of  separation  from
friends  and  the  desire  to  return  to  them  are
more  vivid,  the  more  freshly  the  remem-
brance of  the  departure  is  on  the  mind  "
(LUuemann).

Yer.  18. — Wherefore  we  wonld  have  come
unto  yon,  even  I  Paul.  Paul  distinguishes
himself,  l)ecau8e  in  all  probability  his  com-
panions, Silas  and  Timothy,  had  been  at
rhessalonioa  after  he  had  left  it.  Once  and
again.  Not  used  indefinitely,  but  referring
to  two  separate  attempts  which  Paul  made
to  revisit  the  Thessalonians.  Bat  Satan
hindered  as ;  denoting,  not  the  enemies  of
Christianity,  but  the  devil,  the  author  of
(ill  the  hindrances  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
I*aul  hero  recognizes  the  personality  of
Satan,  as  the  author  of  all  evil,  the  great
opponent  of  God  and  Christ.  We  are  not
infonued  by  what  instrumentality  this  hin-
drance of  Satan  ti)ok  place.  It  may  refer
to  tiie  various  persecutions  against  Paul,
which  prevented  liini  returning  to  Thessa-
lonica,  and  especially  to  that  persecution
raised  against  him  in  lierooa  by  the  Jews
of  TIscsialonica  (Acts    xvii.    l[\).     In  one


sense,  indeed,  the  hindrances  arose  in  the
way  of  God*8  providence,  for  under  its
direction  all  the  journeys  of  Paul  were
placed,  and  Satan  could  not  have  hindered
him  from  preaching  the  gospel  in  any  quar-
ter, unless  by  the  Divine  permission  (comp.
Acts  xvi.  7 ;  Rom.  i.  13).

Ver.  19. — For  what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,
or  crown  of  rejoicing  t  or,  glorying.  The
apostle  calls  the  Thessalonians  his  **  hope,*'
not  because  he  anticipates  any  reward
from  their  conversion,  or  because  their  con*
version  would  counterbalance  his  former  per-
secution of  the  Christians,  but  because  he
hoped  to  meet  them  in  glory  ;  he  calls  them
his  "joy,"  because  he  would  rejoice  with
them  in  their  iinal  salvation ;  and  he  calls
them  his  "  crown  of  rejoicing,"  because  he
regards  them  as  trophie3  of  the  >'ictory  of
the  gospel  which  ho  preached.  Similarly
he  calls  the  Philippians  *Miis  joy  and
crown"  (Phil.  iv.  1).  Are  not  even  ye;
or  r.ither,  are  not  ye  alsoi — ye  as  well  as
other  Cliristians?  In  the  presence  of —
before — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming ;
at  the  restoration  of  his  Messianic  kingdom.

Ver.  20. — For  ye  are  our  glory  and  joy.
Some  refer  this  verse  to  the  present,  and
the  former  verse  to  the  future ;  not  merely
at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but
even  now  yo  are  our  glory  and  joy.  But
there  is  no  reason  for  this  distinction ;  the
words  are  merely  confirmatory,  and  added
from  the  fulness  of  the  apostle's  emotions.


IIOMILETICS.

Vers.  5,  6. — Motives  of  action,  Man  judges  us  by  our  outward  conduct;  God  by
our  internal  disposition.  The  apostle  appeals  to  God  as  a  witness  of  the  purity  of  his
motives.  He  asserts  that  he  was  free  from  all  desire  of  personal  fame  or  interest.  Can
wo  make  the  same  appeal  and  the  same  assertion?  1.  Are  we  influenced  by  unworthy
motives  ?  Is  covetousness,  the  desire  of  fame,  or  the  love  of  power,  the  mainspring  of
our  life?  2.  Or  are  we  influenced  by  worthy  motives?  Do  we  seek  to  please,  not
man,  but  God  ?  Is  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  tho  chief  end  of  our  life  and
actions?

Vers.  7, 11,  19. — The  true  pastorate,  1.  Its  qualities,  Paul  compares  himself  to  a
nursing  mother  and  a  father.  A  minister  should  resemble  the  one  in  his  tenderness  and
loving  sympathy,  and  the  other  in  his  wisdom  and  firmness.  2.  Its  mode :  exhorting,
comforting,  and  charging.  3.  Its  reward :  (1)  conversion  of  the  hearers ;  (2)  a  joyful
meeting  with  them  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.


Ver.  12. — Our  high  and  holy  calling.  We  ought  to  walk  worthy  of  God,  so  as  :  1.
To  obey  God*s  laws.  2.  To  imitate  God's  moral  perfections.  3.  To  enjoy  God's  fellow-
ship. 4.  To  adorn  God's  gospel.  5.  To  promote  God's  cause.  6.  To'  live  to  God's
glory.


Ver.  13. — The  gospel  a  Divine  revelation,  1.  Negatively,  The  gospel  is  not  the
word  of  man ;  not  tho  result  of  man's  wisdom ;  does  not  spring  from  a  development
of  human  thought;  its  doctrines  are  not  within  the  sphere  of  the  human  intellect.    2,


can.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  81

Positively.    The  gospel  ia  the  Word  of  God.    This  seen  from  its  origin,  its  contents,
and  its  efficacy.

Vcr.  16. — Beware  of  opposing  the  gospel.  The  Jews  did  so.  They  endeavoured  to
prevent  the  apostle  preaching  to  the  Gentiles,  and  wrath  came  upon  them  to  the  utter-
most ;  and  so  will  all  opposition  made  to  the  gospel  terminate  (Ps.  ii.  6,  9).  If  we
ourselves  will  not  emhrace  the  gospel,  let  us  beware  of  throwing  obstacles  in  the  way  of
those  who  would.  Especially  let  parents  beware  how  they  act  toward  their  children
when  under  religious  impressions.

Ver.  18. — The  opposition  of  Satan  to  the  gospel,    "  Satan  hindered  us."

L  The  personality  op  Satan.  Christ  and  Satan,  the  heads  of  two  opposite  empires
•—the  one  the  kingdom  of  light,  and  the  other  the  kingdom  of  darkness ;  the  one  the
source  of  all  that  is  good,  and  the  other  the  source  of  all  that  is  evil.

IL  The  aqency  op  Satan.  He  hindercth  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  Ho  workcth  in
the  children  of  disobedience.    Mode  of  his  operation  ;  the  instruments  which  he  employs.

III.  The  PINAL  VICTORY  OP  Christ  over  Satan,  Though  Satan  hindereth  the
{^pel,  yet  it  is  only  for  a  season.  **  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet
ihortly  "  (Rom.  xvi.  20).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

•

Vers.  1 — 4. — Effectiveness  of  the  gospel.  Entrance  into  Thessalonica,  It  was  not  neces-
sary, however,  to  depend  upon  foreign  testimony  for  the  facts  of  the  case,  for  the  Thes-
salonians  themselves  were  the  best  witnesses.  "  For  yourselves,  brethren,  know  our
entrance  in  unto  you,  that  it  was  not  in  vain,''  but  an  effective  living  reality,  a  great  and
gracious  success.     The  proof  of  the  fact  is  contained  in  two  circumstances.

I.  The  boldness  op  the  three  preachers.  **  But  even  after  that  wo  had  suffered
before,  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi,  we  were  bold  incur  God
to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  conflict."  The  insulting  treatment
the  apostle  had  received  at  Philippi  had  not  the  effect  of  scaring  him  away,  or  of
leading  him  to  withdraw  into  Asia,  leaving  Europe  to  its  fate.  Such  treatment  would
have  deterred  men  of  a  different  stamp.  His  boldness  was  not  mere  stoical  courage,  but
based  on  faith,  for  he  was  *'  bold  in  our  God,"  and  was  equal  to  present  perils  as  well  as
to  past  persecutions ;  for  he  spoke  the  gospel  of  God  ''  in  much  conflict,"  caused,  as  wo
know,  by  the  league  of  violence  which  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  formed  with  "lewd
fellows  of  the  baser  sort "  against  the  gospel.

II.  The  spirit  and  method  op  their  ministry.    "  For  our  exhortation  was  not  of
deceit,  nor  of  uncleanness,  nor  in  guile.*'    The  matter  is  exhibited  first  negatively,  and
then  positively.     1.  Negatively.    His  persuasive  exhibition  of  the  truth  was  not  (I)
**  of  deceit."    He  was  not  deceived  himself — he  had  not  "  followed  cunningly  devised
fables  " — neither  did  he  design  to  deceive  others,  for  he  preached  the  truth  as  it  is
in  Jesus.     Therefore  there  was  all  the  greater  force  and  fervour  and  directness  in  his
teaching.     (2)  "  Nor  of  uncleanness."    There  were  no  impure  or  sinister  ends  in  his
teaching,  implying  love  of  gain;  nor  any  disposition  to  tolerate  those  subtle  forms  of
temptation  which  sometimes  manifest  themselves  even  under  the  guise  of  piety.     (3)
"  Nor  in  guile,"  for  he  was  straightforward  and  sincere  in  his  methods,  with  "  no  cunning
craftiness,"  no  mancouvres,  no  strategy ;  for  they  had  *'  renounced  the  hidden  things  of
dishonesty,  not  walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully  "
(2  Cor.  iv.  2).     2.  Positively.     The  method  of  his  preaching  met  with  the  Divine
approval.     **  But  as  we  were  approved  of  God  to  be  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel,  even  so
we  speak  ;  not  as  pleasing  men,  but  God,  who  trieth  our  hearts."     (1)  The  gospel  is  a
soleum  trust,  a  rich  treasure.    There  are  many  human  trusts  which  men  would  rather
ihirk,  but  the  apostle  is  not  unwilling  to  accept  this  trust  for  the  good  of  the  world.
(2)  He  claims  no  independent  worthiness  for  so  sacred  a  trust.    God  gave  him  any
worthiness  or  sufficiency  he  possessed.     **  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God,  who  also  hath
made  us  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament*'  (2  Cor.  iii.  5, 6).    (3)  He  discharged  his
trust  (a)  with  a  perfect  disregard  for  men's  opinions  about  him  (1  Cor.  iv.  3) ;  (6)  and
with  no  desire  to  catch  the  favour  of  men.    "Not  as  pleasing  men ; "  for  "  as  of  sincerity.


32  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1— 20.

as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God,  speak  we  in  Christ "  (2  Cor.  ii.  17).  Not  sacrificing  truth
to  the  fancies  or  prejudices  of  men  in  order  to  secure  their  favour.  If  "  he  pleased  men,
he  should  not  be  the  servant  of  God  "  (Gal.  i.  10).  (4)  He  had  supreme  and  final  regard
to  the  all-seeing  God,  "  who  trieth  the  hearts,"  who  knows  the  springs  of  all  actions,
discovers  all  artifices,  and  brings  all  hidden  things  to  light.  Men  look  on  the  outward
appearance.  God  "spares  all  beings  but  himself  that  awful  sight — a  naked  human
heart.^  Ho  "seeth  not  as  man  seeth.*'  It  is  vain,  therefore,  to  appear  other  than
we  are. — T.  C.

Vers.  5—8. — The  spirit  and  method  of  apoitoltc  labour.  The  apostle  seta  it  forth
ander  two  aspects.

J.  Negativkly.  "  For  neither  at  any  time  were  we  found  using  words  of  flattery,  as
ye  know,  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  God  is  witness ;  nor  seeking  glory  of  men."  li
The  apostle  and  his  colleagues  did  not  attempt  to  win  their  way  by  flattery,  either  by
setting  forth  high  views  of  human  nature,  or  by  holding  men's  persons  in  admiration
for  the  sake  of  advantage ;  for  their  gospel  tended  rather  to  humble  man  and  subdue  his
pride.  Flattery  is  a  gross  dishonour  both  to  God  and  man,  for  it  implies  untruthful-
ness, and  may  become  fatal  in  its  results  to  easily  deluded  sinners.  The  apostle
appealed  to  the  Thessalonians  in  confirmation  of  his  statement.  2.  They  did  not  use
their  position  as  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  as  God  could  testify,  who  knows  the  heart.
The  ajxjstle  might  say  now,  as  he  afterwards  said  to  the  elders  of  Ephesns,  "  I  coveted
no  man*s  silver,  nor  gold,  nor  apparel."  The  false  teachers  were  chargeable  with  cove-
tousness, for  "  through  covetousness  shall  they  with  feigned  words  make  merchandise
ol  you  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  1,  3).  How  emphatically  the  apostle  insists  upon  ministers  of  the
gospel  being  free  from  this  vice!  "Not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre."  3.  They  were  not  fond
of  vain-glory.  "  Nor  seeking  glory  of  men,  neither  from  you,  nor  from  others,  when  wo
might  have  been  burdensome  as  apostles  of  Christ,"  or  might  have  stood  on  their  dignity
as  apostles  of  Christ.  There  is  no  allusion  here  to  his  claim  to  ministerial  support,  but
rather  to  the  position  of  magisterial  dignity  he  might  have  assumed,  with  all  its  pomp
and  peremptoriness  and  sternness.  His  spirit  at  Thes&Uonica  was  not  that  of  lordship
over  God's  heritage.

II.  Positively.  "  But  we  were  gentle  in  the  midst  of  you,  as  when  a  nurse  cherisheth
her  own  children."  1.  They  u>ere  gentle  in  their  intercourse  with  their  converts ;  unas-
suming and  mild,  with  no  haughty  or  imperious  airs,  challenging  honour  and  homage.
They  acted  in  the  very  spirit  of  the  good  Shepherd.  Long  afterwards  the  apostle  could
remind  one  of  his  present  colleagues  that  "  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but
be  gentle  to  all  men,  apt  to  teach,  patient,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that  oppose
themselves"  (2  Tim.  ii.  24 — 26).  This  gentleness,  which  is  at  once  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit
(Gal.  V.  22)  and  a  characteristic  of  the  "  wisdom  from  above"  (Jas.  iii.  17),  becomes  all
the  more  impressive  when  it  is  linked  with  the  highest  strength  of  character.  2.  TJiey
were  most  affectionate  in  their  intercourse  with  their  converts,  **  Even  so,  being  affec-
tionately dtsirous  of  you,  we  were  well  pleased  to  impart  to  you,  not  the  gospel  of
God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  become  very  dear  to  us."  (1)  Their
yearning  love  was  manifest :  (a)  In  their  imparting  the  gospel  to  them.  As  their  spiritual
|xirents  they  travailed  in  birth  till  Christ  was  formed  in  them,  and  then  they  fed  them
thereafter  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  (b)  In  their  readiness  to  risk  their  lives
for  the  sake  of  their  children  in  the  faith.  They  verily  carried  their  lives  in  their  hands.
(2)  This  apostolic  solicitude  on  their  behalf  sprung  out  of  their  deep  love  for  the
Thessalonians,  as  being  at  once  the  trophies  of  their  ministry,  and  as  being  pre-eminently
docile  in  their  attitude  toward  the  gospel  and  its  preachers.  There  is  hardly  any
stronger  tie  in  this  world  than  that  which  links  together  a  spiritual  father  and  his
converts. — T.  C.

"Ver.  9. — A  retrospect  of  his  disinterested  and  self-sacrificing  labours.  He  next  recalls
the  circumstances  of  his  ardent  and  laborious  ministry  amongst  them.  ♦'  For  ye
remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night  and  day,  that  we  might
not  burden  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you  the  gosjKjl  of  God."

I.  The  ministry  of  the  apostle  was  always  laborious.  He  could  say  to  the
Corinthians  that  **  he  had  approved  himself  as  the  minister  of  God  in  labours ; "  that  '*  in


cfl.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,  33


labours  he  was  more  abundant  **  (2  Cor.  vi.  4^  6 ;  xi.  23} ;  exhausting  his  strength  daily
in  his  eager  anxiety  to  reach  the  people  with  the  gospel  of  God.  If  ever  man  went  to
tiie  edge  of  his  possibility,  it  was  the  Apostle  Paul.  The  labour  might  be  exhausting  in
itself,  or  on  account  of  the  obstacles  thrown  in  his  way,  but  it  became  the  habit  of  his
daily  life.

IL  It  was  doubly  laborious  at  THESSALOiaCA  ON  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  NECESSITY  HE

IMF06ED  UPON  HIMSELF  OF  woRKiNO  FOR  HIS  LIVING.  Occupied  in  preaching  or  teaching
through  the  day,  he  devoted  his  nights  to  his  craft  as  a  tent-maker.  1.  JTie  necessity  in
question  was  not  imposed  by  either  the  Mosaic  or  the  Christian  Law,  He  showed  to  the
Corinthians  that  alike  natural  justice,  the  Mosaic  ordinance,  and  positive  law,  as
announced  by  our  Lord  himself,  required  them  to  support  the  ministers  of  the  gospel
(1  Cor.  ix.).  "  They  who  preach  the  gospel  shall  also  live  of  the  gospel."  2.  It  was  a
necessity  based  upon  a  high  Christian  expediency.  At  Corinth  he  thought  good  **  not  to
use  his  power  in  the  gospel,"  and  therefore  preached  the  gospel  there  "  without  charge."
The  malignity  of  Jewish  enemies  led  him  to  avoid  even  the  appearance  of  covetous-
ness,  or  of  attempting  to  *'  make  a  gain  "  of  the  Corinthians.  We  do  not  know  under
what  circumstances  he  was  led  to  pursue  a  similar  course  at  Thessalonica.  It  may  have
been  from  similar  accusations,  or  from  a  tendency  he  had  observed  among  certain  saints
in  the  city  to  forswear  work  and  go  about  as  "  busybodies."  But  his  policy  was  excep-
tional, and  affords  no  rule  in  modem  times  unless  the  circumstances  should  again  become
exceptional.  3.  It  was  a  necessity  cheerfully  accepted  for  the  good  of  the  Thessalonians.
He  had  but  two  means  of  support  in  the  city.  (1)  He  was  not  supported  by  super-
natural means,  like  Elijah  in  the  desert.  (2)  He  was  occasionally  helped  by  the
thoughtful  kindness  of  the  Philippians.  ''I  robbed  other  Churches,"  be  tells  the  Corin-
thians, •*  taking  wages  of  them  to  do  you  service."  He  tells  the  Philippians,  "  For  even
in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  necessities"  (Phil.  iv.  15—17).  (3)  He
had  to  supplement  these  occasional  gifts  by  "  working  with  his  own  hands."  Every
Jew  had  to  learn  a  trade.    The  apostle  thus  dignifies  common  industry. — T.  C.

Vers.  10 — 12.'^Appeal  alike  to  man  and  to  God  respecting  his  personal  and  his  official
work  at  Thessalonica,    This  double  appeal  attests  his  profound  sincerity.

I.  Consider  his  personal  deportment.  "  Ye  are  witnesses,  and  Grod,  how  holily,
and  justly,  and  unblamably  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  believe."  He  touches
on  the  twofold  relationship  of  the  Christian  life  toward  OtodL  and  toward  man,  for  he
had  always  exercised  himself  "  to  have  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  man  and
God,"  and  strove  "  to  give  no  offence  in  anything,  that  the  ministry  be  not  blamed  "
(Acts  xxvi.  16 ;  2  Cor.  vL  3).  He  had  striven  to  walk  circumspectly  in  a  world  prone
to  suspect  sinister  ends  even  in  the  best  of  men.  The  apostle's  walk  was  on  high,  even
as  his  calling  was  high.

II.  Consider  hib  official  deportment.  It  was  manifest  in  his  method  of  dealing
with  his  converts,  and  in  the  end  which  he  kept  steadily  in  view  in  all  his  ministry.
1.  His  method  of  dealing  with  his  converts.  **  As  ye  know  how  we  exhorted  and  com-
forted, and  testified  to  each  one  of  you  as  a  father  doth  his  children."  (1)  Mark
the  yarieties  in  ^his  mode  of  dealing  with  his  converts,  (a)  He  exhorted  them,  for
their  position  of  persecution  and  temptation  demanded  that  he  *^  should  give  them  much
exhortation  "  (Acts  xx.  2).  (6)  He  comforted  them,  in  the  presence  of  many  disquieting
circumstances  in  their  condition,  (c)  He  testified  to  them,  exhibiting  gospel  truth  with
all  urgency.  (2)  Mark  the  i^ectionate  spirit  of  his  dealing  with  them:  "As  a
father  doth  his  children ;"  for  he  combined  a  father's  unwearying  love  with  his  power
of  direction  and  autliority.  (3)  Mark  the  individualizing  interest  in  their  welfare :
••  Each  one  of  you."  Whether  they  were  rich  or  poor,  few  or  many,  he  passed  by  none
of  them.  They  all  had  a  place  in  his  heart.  2.  The  aim  of  aU  his  affectionate  and
individualizing  interest  in  their  welfare,  **  That  you  would  walk  worthy  of  Grod,  who
calleth  you  into  his  kingdom  and  glory."  The  duty  here  enjoined,  "  Walk  worthy  of
God."  This  implies  (1)  conformity  to  his  revealed  will ;  (2)  adornment  of  the  gospel
by  a  holy  walk ;  (3)  supreme  regard  to  the  obligations  involved  in  the  high  calling  of
God— these  being  necessitated  by  (a)  the  nature  of  the  call,  which  is  not  external,  but
spiritual ;  (6)  by  the  consideration  of  him  who  calls  us ;  (c)  by  the  holy  ends  of  the
call ;  (d)  by  the  conrnderation  of  their  high  destiny :  for  they  are  called  to  "  his  own

L  THB88AI/)NIAH8,  J>


34  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1— 20.


kingdom  and  glory."  This  kingdom  is  that  which  is  estahlished  in  the  mediation  of
Christ,  iDto  which  we  enter  by  the  gate  of  regeneration,  and  which  reaches  its  full  and
fioal  development  in  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  The  glory  is  that  which  be  impresses
upon  his  people  here,  and  which  receives  its  full  manifestation  hereafter, — ^T,  G,

Ver,  13. — The  Thessalonian  reception  of  the  truth.  The  apostle  had  spoken  of  his
own  part  in  the  work  of  grace ;  he  now  speaks  of  the  manner  in  which  liis  converts
accepted  the  truth.  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses ;  now  I  am  yours."  His  immediate  ground
of  thankfulness  was  that  they  had  received,  not  man's  word,  but  God's,  and  that  the
Word  was  so  thoroughly  efficacious.  ''For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without
ceasing,  because  when  ye  received  the  Word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,  ye  received
not  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  Word  of  Gbd."

I.  They  appreciated  the  difference  between  the  word  of  men  and  the  Word
OF  God.  1.  They  first  heard  it  no  doubt  with  interest  and  docility  of  spirit,  '*  Faith
cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God."  The  Word  was  not  read  but
heard  in  the  preaching  of  the  apostles ;  it  was  no  discovery  of  their  own  mind.  2.
ITiey  received  it  as  an  external  fact  made  known  to  them  by  man,  3.  They  welcomed
it  with  the  inner  acceptance  of  faith.  It  was  "mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard  if*
(Heb.  iv.  2).  It  was  "  the  joy  and  the  rejoicing  of  their  heart "  (Jer.  xv.  16).  4.  Their
glad  acceptance  of  it  was  conditioned  upon  its  Divine  origin.  It  was  not  man's  word,
representing  a  new  speculation  in  philosophy  or  ethics ;  it  was  "  the  Word  of  God "
(Rom.  X.  14).  It  was  therefore  (1)  an  infallible  Word ;  (2)  bearing  the  impress  of
Divine  authority ;  (3)  and  therefore  to  be  received  with  reverence  and  love,

II.  They  manifested  the  power  of  the  truth  in  their  lives.  "  Which  efifectu*
ally  worketh  also  in  you  that  believe."  1.  This  effectual  operation  is  conditioned  upon
their  faith,  "The  Word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  fuith  in
them  that  heard  it "  (Heb.  iv.  2).  The  gospel  is  only  to  the  believer  "  the  power  of  God
to  salvation"  (Rom.  i.  16).  2.  Its  power  was  manifest  in  quickening,  enlightening,
sanctifying,  and  comforting  under  all  afflictions  and  persecutions. — T.  C.

Vers.  14 — 16. — l^e  evidence  of  the  effectual  working  of  the  Divine  Word.  They  were
able  to  imitate  the  patience  and  constancy  of  the  Judasan  Churches  under  great  persecu-
tions. These  Churches  were  referred  to  probably  because  they  were  the  oldest  Churches,
and  the  most  severely  persecuted.

I.  It  is  A  high  honour  as  well  as  privilege  for  Churches  to  be  selected  as
PATTERNS  OF  PATIENCE  TO  OTHER  Churches.  "  For  yc,  brethren,  became  followers  of
the  Churches  of  God  which  in  Judsea  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  We  are  first  to  be  imitators
of  Christ,  then  of  all  who  follow  in  his  steps,  who  keep  on  "  looking  to  Jesus  "  (Heb.  xiL
2).  There  were  many  Churches  in  Judsea,  for  Christianity  was  founded  by  Jews  ;  its
first  converts  were  Jews ;  its  first  martyrs  were  Jews ;  and  the  Churches  among  t.hem
rejoiced  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ,  as  the  Source  of  their  life  and  comfort.

II.  The  path  of  the  Thessalonians  was  one  of  severe  iiual  and  continuous
persecution.  "  For  ye  also  have  suffered  like  thinp;s  from  your  own  countrymen,  even
as  they  from  the  Jews."  1.  They  had  received  the  Word  "  in  much  affliction,^  (Ch.  i,  6.)
The  first  outbreak  of  violence  against  them  occurred  after  their  conversion  (Acts  xvii.  5).
They  belonged  to  one  of  those  Churches  of  Macedonia  of  which  the  apostle  long  after-
wasds  wrote  to  the  Corinthians  as  "  enduring  a  great  trial  of  affliction."  It  came  from
their  heathen  countrymen.  2.  Their  trials  attested  the  genuineness  of  their  conversion,
U'he  heathen  would  have  had  no  quarrel  with  a  dead  faith.  The  Thessalonians  did  not
"  sleep  as  did  others."  They  discovered  by  sharp  experience  that  *'  all  that  will  live
godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  3.  Their  trials  involved
the  precious  experience  of  a  *^  fellowship  in  Christ's  sufferings.^^  (Phil.  iii.  10.)  4,  Their
trials  manifested  at  once  the  strength  of  their  faith  and  their  Christian  constancy,

III.  It  was  some  comfort  to  the  Thessalonians  to  know  that  they  were
not  the  only  sufferers  from  the  fury  of  persecutors.  "Even  as  they  have
of  the  Jews :  who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  their  own  prophets,  and  drave  us
out."  This  terrible  invective  against  the  Jews  illustrates  the  saying  that  the  apostle
often  "goes  off  at  a  word."  It  recalls  the  langiu^e  of  Stephen  before  his  murderers
(Acts  vii.  62).    The  malignity  of  the  Jews  against  their  believing  countrymen  was


cH.n.l— 20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  35


extreme.  1.  The  Jews  were  murderers  of  Jesus  and  the  prophets.  Though  the  Saviour
was  executed  by  the  Romans,  the  responsibility  of  the  terrible  deed  rests  on  the  Jews^
who  "  for  envy  "  delivered  him  up,  and  "  killed  the  Prince  of  life."  They  likewise  killed
their  own  prophets,  whose  very  sepulchres  they  afterwards  built  and  garnished.  What
wonder,  then,  that  the  Thessalonian  converts  should  escape  I  2.  The  Jews,  though
zealous  for  Ood,  did  not  please  him,  "  They  pleased  not  God,"  but  rather  provoked
him  to  anger  by  their  unbelief  and  their  wickedness.  3.  They  were  at  cross -purposes
with  all  mankind.  They  were  "  contrary  to  all  men."  They  were  anti-social,  exclusive,
and  bitter,  so  that  the  heathen  Tacitus  could  describe  them  as  "  holding  an  attitude
of  hostility  and  hatred  to  the  human  race."  But  it  was  specially  manifest  in  their
resistance  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles — "  forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that
they  may  be  saved.**  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  supply  abundant  evidence  of  this  fact.
4.  The  end  to  which  aU  this  wickedness  toward  Qod  and  man  was  tending,  "  To  fill  up
their  sins  at  all  times."  (1)  God  often  allows  nations  to  complete  the  sum  of  their
wickedness  before  bringing  upon  them  final  retribution.  '*The  iniquity  of  the
Amorites  was  not  yet  full "  (Gen.  xv.  16).  (2)  The  judgment  upon  the  Jews  was  at
band — ^  but  the  wrath  is  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."  "  There  is  now  nothing
between  it  and  them."  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  still  future,  but  '*  the  da3's
of  vengeance  were  already  come."  The  fire  was  already  burning,  which  would  never
be  quenched  till  the  vengeance  was  complete,  llie  apostle  seems  to  regard  the  moment
of  the  rejection  of  the  Messif^  as  marking  the  outpouring  of  the  Divine  wrath.  The
history  of  the  Jews  from  that  moment  is  a  significant  commentary  on  the  passage.
— T.  C.

Vers.  17, 18. — The  apostle's  anxiety  to  visit  the  Thessalonians.  His  departure  had
been  very  sudden,  but  he  had  never  ceased  to  regret  his  separation  from  them.

I.  His  gbief  at  the  severance  of  personal  intercourse  with  them.  ''But
we,  brethren,  being  bereaved  of  you  for  a  short  season  in  presence,  not  in  heart."  The
term  is  expressive  of  the  orphan-feeling  felt  by  children  deprived  of  their  parents,  or
of  parents  bereaved  of  their  children.  He  seems  to  say  like  Jacob,  "  If  I  am  bereaved
of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved."  1.  llis  grief  was  a  proof  of  his  deep  affection  for  them,
Grace  intensifies  all  right  human  affections.  2.  Absence,  instead  of  weakening,  ratJier
UrengViened  his  desire  to  see  them  again  face  to  face,  Neither  time  nor  distance  could
diminish  his  interest  in  them.

IL  The  separation  was  immediately  followed  by  several  attempts  to
REViBiT  them.  '*  We  endeavoured  the  more  exceedingly  to  see  your  face  with  great
desire."  The  difficulties  were  great,  but  he  tried  once  and  again  to  get  back  to
Thessalonica,  probably  in  the  period  when  Silas  and  Timothy  were  temporarily  gone
from  him.

III.  The  obstacles  to  his  return.  "But  Satan  hindered  us."  1.  Tlie  apostle
believed  in  the  existence  of  a  personal  evil  spirit  as  well  as  in  his  steadfast  resistance  to
the  kingdom  of  God  in  all  its  interests.  He  was  "  not  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices."
2,  The  obstacles  may  have  arisen  through  Satan  inciting  evil  men  to  raise  conflicts  and
tribulations  round  the  apostle,  so  as  to  allow  of  no  leisure  for  the  projected  visit.

rV,  The  ground  of  his  anxiety  to  revisit  them.  "  For  what  is  our  hope,  or
joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are  not  even  ye  before  our  Lord  Jesus  at  his  coming?"
He  did  not  desire  to  have  his  labour  in  vain.  1.  They  were  closely  identified  with  his
oum  future  hcmour  and  happiness,  by  the  hope  that  they  would  not  be  '*  ashamed  at
Christ's  coming,"  but  would  be  "  his  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing."  He  would  then
"  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ  that  he  had  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain  "
(Phil.  ii.  16, 16).  Therefore  he  longed  to  be  near  to  them  that  "  he  might  impart  to
them  some  spiritual  gift,"  and  watch  over  the  walk  of  his  spiritual  children.  2.  His
wish  implies  (1)  that  there  will  be  degrees  of  glory  in  heaven  according  to  the  measures
of  a  minister's  usefulness ;  (2)  that  he  will  be  able  to  identify  his  converts  in  heaven.
— T.C.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Thecharaderistiesof  St,  Pau^^s  preaching  at  Thessalonica.  I.  Appeal
TO  THE  becollkction  OF  THE  Thessalonians.  1.  His  first  appearance  among  them
had  not  been  in  vain.    Others  had  borne  witness  to  its  results.    That  testimony  was  true ;


36  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1— 2a


the  Thessalonians  knew  it  themselves.  The  apostle  appeals  to  them  in  all  the
confidence  of  Christian  simplicity.  Perfectly  sincere  and  single-hearted  himself,  he
knew  that  as  a  body  they  had  appreciated  the  purity  of  his  motives.  They  could  bear
testimony  (he  knew  that  they  would  gladly  do  so)  that  his  preaching  from  the
beginning  had  not  been  empty  talk,  but  full  of  energy  and  life  and  fire.  It  is  a  blessed
thing,  this  mutual  confidence  between  a  pastor  and  his  flock.  2.  His  previous  suffer-
ings had  not  ahated  his  zeal.  He  had  been  cruelly  treated  at  Philippi ;  he  bore  the
marks  of  the  lictors'  rods  when  he  entered  Thessalonica.  It  did  not  damp  his  ardour.
His  Lord  had  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before
him.  For  the  same  joy,  the  great  joy  of  saving  souls,  St.  Paul  was  content  to  suffer,
and,  if  need  be,  to  die.  Troubles  soon  came  upon  him  in  Thessalonica.  He  preached
amid  much  conflict,  but  he  was  full  of  courage.  3.  His  courage  was  of  God.  We
were  bold  in  our  God.  It  was  he  who  gave  them  boldness,  he  who  taught  them  what
to  speak ;  they  felt  that  it  was  not  they,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  who  spoke  in  them.
They  abode  in  him,  in  his  encompassing,  irradiating  presence,  within  the  sphere  of  his
gracious  influence ;  hence  came  their  utterance,  their  boldness  of  speech.  4.  For  their
gospel  (our  gospel,  he  calls  it  in  ch.  i.  5)  was  the  gospel  of  God,  They  were  the
messengers,  but  he  had  given  the  message.  It  was  his  glad  tidings ;  it  came  from  him,
and  it  brought  tidings  of  him,  of  his  will,  of  his  justice,  of  his  love ;  it  told  men  of  a
Creator,  a  Saviour,  a  Sanctifier.  It  was  a  high  mission  to  preach  that  blessed  gospel ;
the  sense  of  its  unspeakable  preciousness  inspired  their  burning  words.

II.  What  their  preaching  was  kot.  The  Jews  had  tried  to  poison  the  minds
of  the  Thessalonians  against  the  apostle ;  they  imputed  low,  earthly  motives  to  him.
St.  Paul  repudiates  their  insinuations.  1.  There  was  no  mixture  of  selfish  motive.
Their  preaching  was  not  of  error  or  of  deceit.  They  were  not  deceived  themselves,
they  did  not  deceive  others.  They  did  not  belong  to  the  crowd  of  wandering  impostors
like  Simon  Magus,  or  Elymas  the  sorcerer.  They  knew  certainly  the  truth  of  their
mission.  St.  Paul  had  seen  the  Lord ;  what  he  delivered  to  the  Thessalonians  he  had  first
received  of  the  Lord.  He  knew  this  from  the  sure  evidence  of  experience.  His  own
truthfulness  was  manifest ;  the  mighty  change  that  had  come  over  his  life,  the  great-
ness of  his  sacrifices  proved  it.  'i'here  was  no  uncleanness  (as,  perhaps,  some  of  his
enemies  maliciously  suggested),  no  impurity  of  any  kind,  attaching  to  his  exhortation
or  his  conduct.  None  who  knew  him  could  charge  him  with  such  things.  But  a  life
of  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  souls  was  unexampled.  He  was  the  first  missionary  who
had  traversed  Asia  Minor,  and  now  came  to  Europe  for  that  lofty  purpose.  The  mass
of  men,  whether  Jews  or  heathens,  could  not  understand  his  noble  character ;  it  was
high  above  them.  They  judged  hira  by  themselves.  They  were  incapable  of  such
self-denial  for  the  sake  of  others ;  they  could  not  believe  in  it ;  they  had  no  faith  in
love,  in  purity,  in  high  religious  motive.  Such  a  life,  too,  if  real,  if  genuine,  was  a
rebuke  to  them.  It  angered  them.  They  could  not  bear  to  think  of  its  contrast  with
their  own  life ;  it  was  like  light  and  darkness.  And  so  they  believed,  or  forced  them-
selves to  believe,  that  it  was  not  genuine.  A  true  life  like  St.  Paul's  seemed  to  them
above  human  nature — impossible,  inexplicable.  And  they  said  that  it  was  not  true ;
they  attributed  his  actions  to  vulgar  motives,  to  low  selfish  designs.  2.  There  was  no
covetousness.  His  life  was  not  one  of  pretences,  fair  words  serving  to  conceal  the  covetoos-
ncss  which  (so  said  his  enemies)  was  his  real  motive.  But  his  treasure  was  in  heaven.
He  had  sufi'ered  the  loss  of  all  things  for  Christ  He  had  in  him  a  hidden  treasure,
a  pearl  of  great  price,  for  which  he  was  content  to  count  all  else  as  loss.  He  could  not
covet  earthly  gold  who  had  the  true  riches.  But  he  had  to  endure  this  among  other
slanders.  It  was  said  of  him  at  Corinth  (2  Cor.  xii.  17 ;  vii.  2).  He  was  obliged  to
take  with  him  delegates  of  the  Churches  to  assist  him  in  the  administration  of  alms,
that  he  might  avoid  blame  (2  Cor.  viii.  20,  21).  What  a  sad  proof  of  the  meanness  of
human  nature  that  such  a  motive  should  be  attributed  to  such  a  man !  3,  ITiere  was
no  desire  of  glory.  They  did  not  seek  to  please  men,  but  God,  They  knew  that  God
tried  the  hearts,  and,  knowing  that,  they  sought  only  to  approve  their  inner  and  outer
life  to  him.  We  labour,  said  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  v.  9),  it  is  our  ambition  to  be  well
pleasing  unto  him.  God  had  proved  them ;  he  had  entrusted  them  with  the  gospel
It  was  a  high  privilege.  St.  Paul  counted  it  so;  he  magnified  his  office.  He  sought
for  nothing  else.    The  great  work  of  winning  souls  was,  he  well  knew,  of  all  worf^s  the


cfl.li.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  37


highest  and  the  nohlest.  Gkxl  was  proving  their  hearts  now.  He,  the  Searcher  of
hearts,  knew  their  work  through  and  through.  He  knew  the  inner  life  of  thought  and
motive,  as  well  as  the  outer  life  of  word  and  action.  They  fully  recognized  this  great
truth.  They  knew  that  their  motives  were  pure  and  unselfish.  God  knew  it  too.
It  was  all  they  wanted.  They  sought  not  praise  of  men.  They  had  no  pleasure  in
flattery ;  they  did  not  flatter  others.  That  the  Thessalonians  knew.  God  knew  the
purity  of  their  motives.  "  God  is  witness,"  they  could  say.  How  blessed  that  life
must  be  which  could  thus  appeal  to  his  all-seeing  eye !  They  were  apostles  of  Christ ;
St.  Paul  in  the  highest  sense,  Silvanus  and  Timotheus  in  the  more  extended  meaning
of  the  word.  St.  Paul  may,  indeed,  be  using  the  plural  number  of  himself  only ;  more
probably  in  this  place  he  includes  his  companions.  They  might  have  claimed  honour
for  themselves ;  they  might  have  made  men  feel  the  weight  of  their  apostolic  dignity.
But  they  sought  not  glory  from  men.  They  had  overcome  that  temptation  which  is
so  strong  in  most  men,  the  '*  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds,"  the  desire  of  earthly  glory.
in.  What  theib  freachino  was.  1.  They  were  gentle.  There  is  very  strong  manu-
script evidence  for  i^irtoi,  babes.  If  that  is  the  true  reading,  St.  Paul  means  that  their
character  was  one  of  childlike  simplicity,  free  from  selfish  motives ;  they  were  babes  in
malice,  but  men  in  understanding  (1  Cor.  ziv.  20).  But  "gentle"  suits  the  context
better.  '^^The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men."  St.
Paul  adduces  the  most  touching  type  of  human  tenderness — the  nursing  mother  cherish-
ing her  own  children,  warming  them  in  her  bosom.  Such  had  been  his  gentleness
among  bis  children  after  the  faith.  He  had  sought  to  win  them  by  gentle  words.  He
had  told  them  of  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  He  had  set  before  them  the  attractive
picture  of  the  Saviour's  tender  love.  Gentleness  wins  more  hearts  than  sternness.  The
apostle  knew  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  He  could  remind  his  converts  of  the  awful  things
beyond  the  grave.  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  But  he
knew  that  love  is  a  more  powerful  motive  than  fear.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."
The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  draweth  all  men  to  the  Saviour,  because  it  is  the  manifesta-
tion of  that  love  that  passeth  knowledge — the  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  They  were
actuated  by  the  strong  love  of  souls.  The  Thessalonians  had  become  very  dear  to  them.
They  had  not  known  them  long,  but  they  recognized  them  as  sheep  of  that  little  flock
which  the  Lord  Jesus  bids  those  who  love  him  to  feed  for  his  love's  sake.  Thus  loving
them,  they  were  affectionately  desirous  of  their  salvation.  They  were  ready  to  give  them
not  only  the  blessed  gospel,  but  their  own  selves,  their  own  lives,  in  humble  imitation
of  the  good  Shepherd  who  laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep.  They  had  exposed  them-
selves to  the  greatest  dangers  for  the  work's  sake;  for  that  work  they  were  ready,  if  need
be,  to  die.  The  love  of  souls  is  the  essential  requisite  for  real  success  in  the  sacred  work
of  the  ministry.  Other  qualifications  may  win  the  praise  of  men ;  but  the  true  work  of
winning  souls  can  be  wrought  only  by  those  who  have  learned  from  the  blessed  Saviour
something  of  that  holy  love  which  burned  in  the  sacred  heart  of  Jesus.  3.  They  were
absduUiy  disinterested.  They  would  not  be  burdensome  to  their  new  converts.  The
Philippian  Church  had  twice  s6nt  help  to  the  apostle  during  his  residence  at  Thessa-
bnica  (PhiL  iv.  16).  That  help  he  had  accept^ ;  it  was  unasked,  freely  given.  Ho
welcomed  it  for  the  sake  of  the  givers,  as  an  evidence  of  their  love.  But  the  gifts,
though  very  precious  as  a  proof  of  Christian  charity,  were  probably  small  in  themselves;
the  I^hilippian  Church  was  very  poor.  It  seems  also  to  have  been  a  season  of  scarcity ;
times  were  bad.  The  missionaries  had  to  labour  for  their  livelihood.  St.  PauPs  craft,
weaving  tent-cloth  of  goats'  hair,  was  hard,  wearisome,  ill-paid  work.  He  had  to  labour
night  and  day.  Tet  he  achieved  those  great  results.  He  had  but  the  sabbath  to  him-
seu.  Three  sabbath  days  he  spent  in  reasoning  with  the  Jews,  and  preaching  Jesus  in
the  synagogue  at  Thessalonica ;  other  days  he  had  to  work,  to  work  hard  and  long,  for
his  daily  bread.  The  Greeks  despised  manual  labour ;  they  called  it  vulgar ;  they  left
such  work  to  slaves.  The  apostle  teaches  by  his  own  example  the  dignity  of  honest
labour,  the  diznity  of  true  Christian  independence.  Probably  the  Thessalonians  could
have  helped  him.  "Not  a  few  of  the  chief  women"  had  become  Christians.  They
must,  one  thinks,  have  been  willing.  St.  Paul  must  have  had  reasons  for  declining
their  aid,  as  he  afterwards  declined  the  aid  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  xi.  9, 10).  How
these  thoughts  increase  our  admiration  of  the  great  apostle!  Amid  all  these  difficulties,
all  these  cares^  all  this  engrossing  labour,  he  preached  with  power,  with  perseverance^


33  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  ii.  1—20.

with  success  such  as  only  an  ardent  love  of  souls,  only  the  presence  of  Gk>d  the  Holy
Ghost,  could  give,  4.  They  set  a  high  example.  The  Thessalonians  saw  their  outward
life ;  God  could  read  the  secrets  of  their  hearts.  That  life  was  pure  and  holy  towards
God,  just  and  righteous  in  its  relations  to  men.  The  Christians  of  Thessalonica  knew
that  they  were  blameless.  Others  might,  perhaps,  be  busy  with  their  insinuations ;
unbelievers  might  suggest  this  or  that  unworthy  motive.  The  Christians  had  learned
to  know  St.  Paul  and  his  companions.  They  knew  the  sincerity,  the  purity  of  their
lives.  Nay,  St.  Paul  could  fearlessly  appeal  to  a  higher  Witness— to  the  all-seeing  God.
Example  is  a  mighty  aid  in  preaching  the  gospel.  Deeds  are  more  persuasive  than
words.  A  holy  life  is  an  evidence  of  the  reality  of  those  spiritual  ficts  which  the
preacher  describes  in  words.  5.  lliey  taught  their  converts  individtkdlly.  They  were
not  contented  with  preaching  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day ;  they  taught  from
house  to  house.  The  converts  were  many,  we  read  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Chry-
sostom  wonders  at  their  zeal  in  omitting  no  one  in  so  great  a  miiltitude.  They' sought
out  each,  caring  for  each  separate  soul,  sharing  the  angels'  joy  over  one  sinner  that
repenteth.  They  tried  all  means  of  winning  souls.  They  exhorted,  stirring  the  souls  of
men  with  burning  words,  suggesting  nobler  views  of  human  life  and  destiny ;  they
comforted,  encouraging  the  afflicted,  the  despondent,  the  penitent,  by  the  glad  tidings  of
pardon,  peace,  and  hope ;  they  testified,  urging  their  converts  by  every  constraining
motive  to  persevere  in  the  Christian  life.  And  all  this  they  did  with  such  earnestness,
with  such  affectionate  interest,  with  such  love  as  a  father  shows  towards  his  own
children.  A  bright  example  of  the  pastor's  work.  6.  The  purport  of  their  exhortation,
God  was  calling  them ;  they  must  walk  worthily  of  that  high  calling.  He  was  calling
them  into  his  kingdom  now,  into  the  kingdom  which  Christ  had  come  to  found — his
Church.  They  had  become  children  of  the  kingdom.  He  was  calling  them  higher  yet,
to  his  glory,  to  the  beatific  vision,  that  the  Saviour's  prayer  might  be  fulfilled,  **I  will
that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am,  that  they  may  behold  my
glory  which  thou  hast  given  me."  Their  walk  in  life  must  show  the  reality  of  their
hope.  Walk  implies  movement,  change  of  place  and  scene.  As  they  move  hither  and
thither  in  the  course  of  their  daily  lives,  in  their  business,  in  their  amusements,  they
must  ever  think  of  that  high  calling,  and  live  according  to  their  hopes.  Their  religion
was  not  to  be  confined  to  the  sabl^th,  to  the  synagogue,  to  the  hours  spent  on  th<;ir
knees  in  private  prayer;  they  must  carry  it  everywhere  with  them;  it  must  guide,
stimulate,  comfort,  encourage  in  all  the  varying  circumstances  of  daily  life.  Their  life
must  be  worthy  of  their  calling.  They  must  show  its  influence ;  they  must  adorn  the
doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour  in  all  things.

Lessons.  1.  Study  the  lives  of  St.  Paul  and  other  holy  men.  2.  Let  not  that
study  end  in  admiration  ;  act  upon  it.  3.  In  such  lives  is  seen  the  manifest  workings
of  the  grace  of  God.  4.  The  sight  of  such  lives  confirms  the  faith  of  the  wavering,
kindles  the  desire  of  the  lukewarm.  5.  True  Christians  are  the  light  of  the  world ;
they  must  let  their  light  shine  before  men.  6.  But  not  for  their  own  glory;  they
must  seek  only  the  glory  of  God. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  effects  of  the  gospel.  I.  Its  beception  by  the  Thessalonians.
1.  They  believed  that  it  came  from  Ood,  Paul  and  Silas  and  Tiraotheus  brought  tiie
message;  the  Thessalonians  recognized  it  as  the  message  of  God.  They  felt  that  it
came  from  him.  (1)  Their  words  were  such  as  never  man  untaught  of  God  could
speak.  The  gospel  was  utterly  unlike  anything  that  had  been  heard  or  read  before.  It
stood  alone,  unique,  separate  from  all  other  histories.  No  human  imagination  could
have  pictured  it ;  no  human  genius  could  have  thought  it  out.  It  must  be  of  God ;  it
could  have  no  other  source.  It  bore  within  itself  the  evidence  of  its  inspiration,  of  its
Divine  origin.  And  (2)  they  felt  its  energy  within  their  hearts.  It  did  not  lie  dormant
there ;  it  was  living  and  powerful.  It  wrought  within  them  with  a  mighty  working,
drawing  them  by  a  strange  constraining  power  away  from  their  old  self-pleasing  lives
into  the  new  life  of  faith  and  love  and  self-denial.  That  living  force  showed  that  it
was  the  Word  of  God.  No  mere  human  words  could  so  stir  the  heart.  The  preaching
of  the  cross  might  be  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews,  it  might  seem  foolishness  to  the
Greeks ;  but  to  those  who  had  the  precious  gift  of  faith,  it  was  "  the  power  of  God  and
the  wisdom  of  God."    2.  They  showed  their  faith  by  their  works.    The  infant  European


CH.  n.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  39

Churches  imitated  the  oldest  Churches,  those  of  Judasa.  All  alike  belonged  to  Qod ;  all
were  io  Christ  Jesus,  living  branches  in  the  true  Vine.  The  new  converts  sought  to  live
like  the  first  Christians.  **  Then  had  the  Churches  rest  throughout  all  Judssa  and
Cralilee  and  Samaria,  and  were  edified ;  and  walking  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  the
comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  multiplied."  They  imitated  them  in  active  holiness,
and  they  imitated  them  in  patient  endurance.

II.  The  opposition  op  the  world.  1.  The  Oentile  opposition.  It  first  appeared  in'
Macedonia.  In  Philippi  the  evangelists  were  for  the  first  time  brought  before  Gentile
magistrates.  The  politarchs  of  Thessalonica  had  more  sense  of  justice  than  the
Bo-^Ued  praetors  of  Philippi.  They  contented  themselves  with  taking  security  from  the
Christians  who  were  brought  before  them.  But  the  converts  were  exposal  to  great
persecution  in  both  places  from  the  first.  In  his  letters  to  both  Churches,  St.  Paul
i^un  and  again  mentions  their  sufferings.  In  writing  to  the  Corinthians  he  speaks  of
the  **  great  trial  of  affliction  **  which  l^set  the  Mac^onian  Christians.  The  Thessa-
lonians  had  to  suffer  much  at  the  hands  of  their  own  countrymen.  But  they  had  been
taught  that  those  who  would  live  a  godly  life  must  suffer  persecution,  and  so  they
thought  it  not  strange.  It  had  been  so  from  the  beginning  of  Christianity.  They
looked  to  the  example  of  the  earliest  Churches.  2.  The  Jewish  opposition.  The  Jews
had  slain  the  prophets ;  they  had  slain  the  Lord  Jesus ;  they  had  chased  the  apostle
from  city  to  city.  They  were  St.  Paul's  own  countrymen.  He  loved  them  dearly.  He
could  find  no  words  strong  enough  to  express  his  intense  longing  for  their  salvation  (see
Kom.  ix.  1 — 3).  But  they  were  constantly  thwarting  his  work — ^that  work  of  saving
soola  on  which  his  whole  heart  was  set.  They  were  doing  so  now  at  Coriuth,  opposing
themselves  and  blaspheming  (Acts  xviii.  6).  St.  Paul  could  not  restrain  bis  feelings  of
holy  indignation.  They  call  themselves  (he  says)  the  peculiar  people  of  God ;  but  they
please  him  not.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  and  they  are  contrary  to  all
men.  In  that  hatred  of  the  human  race  which  heathen  writers  attribute  to  them,  they
tried  to  hinder  the  apostle  from  preaching  to  the  Gentiles.  Nothing  angered  them
more  than  the  proclamation  of  a  free  salvation  offered  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  (see
Acts  xxiL  21,  22).  This  wicked  jealousy  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  sins.  Their
sin  was  its  own  punishment.  That  hardened  heart  was  the  beginning  of  the  judgment
that  was  coming.

Leam :  1.  To  reverence  the  Gospel  as  the  Word  of  God.  2.  To  look  for  its  inner
working  in  the  heart.    3.  To  imitate  the  saints  of  God  in  patient  endurance. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  17 — ^20. — 8t,  PauTa  love  for  his  converts,  I.  His  lonqinq  desikb  to  see
THEM.  L  Eis  efforts  to  return  to  Thessdlonicct.  He  had  not  been  long  away.  He  was
at  Corinth  now.  Perhaps  the  jealousies,  the  dissensions,  the  sin  which  encompassed
him  there  made  him  long  all  the  more  for  the  simple  faith  and  love  of  his  Macedonian
friends.  He  was  with  them  even  now  in  heart,  thinking  of  them  in  the  hour  of  prayer,
remembering  them  in  his  thankgivings.  But  there  was  a  feeling  of  bereavement,  almost
of  desolation,  when  he  thought  of  their  absence.  So  very  dear  they  had  become  to  him
during  the  short  time  which  he  spent  at  Thessalonica.  We  feel,  as  we  read  these  words,
the  depth  of  St.  Paul's  affection;  we  feel  the  power  of  Christian  love.  2.  IVhat  hindered
him  from  coming.  It  was  Satan,  Satan  the  adversary — that  awful  being  whose  presence
in  Qrod's  world  is  so  great  a  mystery,  but  whose  personality  is  so  clearly  taught  in  Holy
Scripture,  whose  power  and  malice  we  have  all  so  often  felt.  Twice  the  apostle  pur-
posed to  revisit  Thessalonica ;  twice  the  hindrance  came.  The  visit  would  nave  given
him  great  comfort.  Satan  envied  him  that  comfort,  that  sweet  communion  with  his
Christian  friends.  Satan  hinders  us,  we  may  be  sure.  He  tries  to  rob  us  of  the  conso-
lations of  religion,  of  the  sweetness  of  Christian  sympathy.  His  agency  is  more  wide-
spread than  we  think.  He  is  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  their  adversary  in  the  religious
life.  But  God  sitteth  on  high.  He  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are
able.  He  will  make  all  things,  even  the  temptations  of  the  evil  one,  work  together  for
our  good  if  we  abide  in  his  love.

n.  HiB  EXPRESSIONS  OP  AFFECTION.  1.  They  are  his  glory  and  his  joy.  They  are  so
now.  He  had  few  joys  in  this  world,  few  earthly  comforts.  His  life  was  spent  in  hard
labour  amid  dangers  and  privations.  It  was  relieved  by  very  few  pleasures.  The
natural  beauty,  the  hi8tori<»l  associations  of  the  places  which  he  visited  in  his  travels.


40  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch,  n.  1—20.

seem  to  have  given  bim  no  enjoyment  His  one  joy  was  to  save  souls ;  his  one  pleasure
was  the  loving  sympathy  of  his  converts.  He  sought  no  earthly  glory ;  fame  was
nothing  to  him.  The  souls  won  to  Christ  by  his  preaching  were  his  glory.  2.  They
would  he  his  crown  at  the  last.  Not  they  only,  others  saved  by  his  preaching  at
Damascus,  at  Antioch,  in  Cyprus,  in  Asia  Minor,  were  his  hope  and  ioy ;  but  none  were
more  tenderly  loved  than  the  Christians  of  Macedonia,  none  are  addressed  with  more
endearing  words.  He  ever  looked  forward  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus
Christ ;  the  great  day  was  always  in  his  thoughts.  What  joy  would  it  be  to  present
these  happy  souls  to  Christ,  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  the  heavenly  bridegroom !  This  was
his  hope;  this  would  be  his  crown — the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away,  which  the
chief  Shepherd  shall  give  in  that  day  to  those  &ithful  presbyters  who  have  fed  the
flock  of  God  willingly  and  of  a  ready  mind,  being  themselves  ensamples  to  the  flock.

Lessons.  1.  True  Christians  will  delight  in  the  society  of  those  like-minded  with
themselves.  2.  We  must  remember  the  restless  energy  of  Satan.  We  must  trust  in
Ood.  He  is  stronger  than  the  strong  man  armed.  3.  We  must  pray  for  grace  to  love
the  saints  of  God  as  St.  Paul  loved  them. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  manner  of  the  preachers;  or,  self-portraiture,  I.  What  the
Thessalonians  had  found  their  FEEACHiNa  TO  BE.  1.  Not  void  of  power,  "  For  your-
selves, brethren,  know  our  entering  in  unto  you,  that  it  hath  not  been  found  vain."  **  For  "
goes  back  to  the  first  of  the  two  divisions  given  at  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter.
This  is  indicated  by  the  recurrence  of  the  leading  Greek  word  translated  "  entering  ia."
It  was  said,  "  For  they  themselves  report  concerning  us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we
had  unto  you.*'  There  is  an  advance  to  a  fiui,her  point.  Not  only  did  the  people  in  the
various  places  report,  but  they  themselves  had  the  evidences  in  their  possession.  The
evidences  are  regarded  as  extending  down  to  the  time  of  the  Thessalonian  letter  being
received.  Taken  hold  of  at  that  moment,  and  addressed  as  brethren,  they  are  asked
this  question,  "  What  has  the  entering  in  of  us  preachers  been  found  to  be  ?  **  And,
having  had  ample  time  to  estimate  the  entering  in,  they  are  confidently  expected  to
give  this  testimony,  "  It  hath  not  been  found  vain."  The  epithet  "  vain  "  might  mean
empty  of  result ;  but  that  thought  falls  imder  the  second  division,  which  is  taken  up  at
ver.  13.  It  must,  therefore,  mean  empty  of  all  that  it  ought  causally  to  contain — empty
of  purpose,  and  earnestness,  in  a  word,  of  evangelical  power.  2.  Characterized  hy
fortitude,  **  But  having  suffered  before,  and  been  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know,  at
Philippi,  we  waxed  bold  in  our  God  to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  in  much  con-
flict." This  is  so  far  confirmed  by  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  where  the  narrative  of  the
entering  in  to  Thessalonica  is  immediately  preceded  by  the  narrative  of  the  rough  treat-
ment received  at  Philippi.  The  feature  of  the  suffering  before  referred  to  here  is  there
presented  as  imprisonment.  It  was  imprisonment  with  aggravated  circumstances,
raul  and  Silas  were  dragged  into  the  market-place  before  the  magistrates,  by  whose
orders  they  were  beaten  with  rods.  After  many  stripes  had  been  laid  on  them  they
were  cast  into  the  inner  prison,  and  their  feet  made  fast  in  the  stocks.  This  was
shameful  treatment,  not  because  they  were  there  in  Philippi  on  an  errand  of  mercy,
which  heathen  magistrates  could  not  appreciate,  but  because  their  rights  were  not
respected.  It  was  an  irregularity  to  lay  stripes  on  them  at  all  as  Roman  citizens.  It
was  a  further  irregularity  to  punish  so  hastily  in  obedience  to  clamour,  and  without  an
opportunity  of  defence  being  granted.  All  this  was  known  to  the  Thessalonians.  So
far  the  statement  here  supplements  the  narrative  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  We  read,
further,  that  Timothy  accompanied  Paul  from  Lystra,  and  again  that  he  was  left  behind
at  Beroea,  but  there  is  nothing  said  of  him  in  the  interval.  We  learn  from  this  noUco
that  he  was  co-operating  with  Paul  and  Silas  both  in  Philippi  and  in  Thessalonica,
although,  we  may  understand,  not  so  prominent  an  object  of  attack  as  the  others,  who
were  his  seniors  both  in  age  and  in  service.  The  three  were  not  intimidated  by  this
treatment  in  Philippi.  On  the  contrary,  proceeding  to  Thessalonica,  they  waxed  bold
in  their  God  to  speak  unto  the  Thessalonians  the  gospel  of  Grod.  It  was  the  gospel  of
God,  inasmuch  as  it  came  as  a  glad  message  from  God.  They  looked  to  God  as  their
God,  who  had  commissioned  them  to  deliver  his  message.  As  conmiissioned  by  GJod  to
deliver  his  message,  they  did  not  flee,  like  Jonah,  through  fear,  but  they  emboldened
themselves  in  their  God,  that  he  would  give  them  his  protection  and  support.    It  did


can.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa  41

not  fkre  with  them  in  Thessalonica  differently  from  what  it  did  in  Philippi.  Their
message  brought  them  into  conflict  with  the  powers  of  unbelief.  It  was  a  conflict  of
a  formidable  nature.  Bat  the  fact  that  they  were  able  to  stand  forth  and  speak  the
goepel  of  God  in  the  face  of  strong  opposition  was  evidence  of  the  very  highest  value
that  their  entering  in  to  Thessalonica  was  not  vain.

U.  Theib  oekebal  habit  as  pbeachebs.  1.  They  tuere  not  like  the  idolatrous
priests.  (1)  They  did  not  preach  out  of  error,  "  For  our  exhortation  is  not  of  error."
'lliere  was  not  much  of  what  is  here  ccdled  exhortation  in  the  ministrations  of  the
idolatrous  priests.  They  did  not  lay  themselves  out  to  influence  men  by  suasion  to
what  was  considered  to  be  the  right  belief  and  the  right  life.  The  old  translation  in  this
place,  ••  deceit,"  was  objectionable.  Such  men  were  not  impostors  to  begin  with.  They
believed  in  their  system.  It  was  what  they  had  received  by  tradition  from  their
fieitheni.  Nevertheless  it  was  a  system  of  error,  literally,  "  wandering."  Heathenism
was  a  wandering  from  God,  whether  objects  of  worship  were  sought  in  the  stony  world,
in  the  silence  of  vegetable  life,  behind  the  hieroglyphics  of  the  brute  creation,  or  behind
the  human  form.  Out  of  such  error  they  ministered  to  man.  Paul  and  his  com-
panions, on  the  other  hand,  ministered  out  of.  truth.  They  had  the  true  conception  of
God  and  of  human  life.  Their  exhortation  had  its  inspiring  cause  in  Christianity.  As
moved  themselves  by  its  soul-cheering  truth,  they  sought  to  move  others.  (2)  They
did  not  preach  out  of  undeanness,  "  Nor  of  uncleanness."  This  was  the  general  cha-
racter of  heathen  ministrations,  but,  as  denied  here,  it  would  seem,  from  the  context,
to  refer  more  particularly  to  the  impure  love  of  gain.  Those  who  ministered  in  heathen
temples  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  gifts  from  the  worshippers.  And  there  was  the
danger,  and,  in  the  absence  of  better  influences,  the  likelihood  of  gain  becoming  the
end,  in  which  their  ministrations  had  motive  power.  This  was  not  the  end  in  which
the  apostle  and  his  companions  found  motive  for  their  way  of  exhortation.  (3)  They
did  not  resort  to  unworthy  methods  in  preaching.  "  Nor  in  guile."  Heathen  priests
could  not  but  be  conscious  of  much  imposture.  Conscious  of  no  inflatus,  of  no  extra-
ordinary knowledge  possessed  by  them,  they  yet  professed  to  tell  the  future  from  the
position  of  the  stars,  from  the  flight  of  birds,  from  the  entrails  of  animals.  They  had
to  do  with  unrealities  in  many  forms,  in  order  to  keep  up  their  influence  with  the  wor-
shippers. The  apostle  and  his  companions,  as  their  end  was  the  salvation  of  souls,  so
they  only  sought  it  by  the  use  of  means  which  their  conscience  could  approve.  2.
They  realized  their  responsibility.  '*  But  even  as  we  have  been  approved  of  God  to  be
entrusted  with  the  gospel,  so  we  speak ;  not  as  pleasing  men,  but  Grod  which  proveth
our  hearts."  There  are  two  ideas  in  a  trust.  The  first  is  acting  for  another.  He  who
makes  over  the  trust  does  not  act  himself  by  reason  of  death,  or  by  reason  of  infirmity,
or  by  reason  of  absence  (as  in  the  analogy  that  is  made  use  of  in  Luke  xix.  12).  The
trustee — he  to  whom  the  trust  is  made  over— acts  in  his  name  and  for  his  interest.
The  second  idea  is  acting  apart  by  on^s  sdf.  The  trustee  may  have  directions  to  guide
him,  and  ample  resources  to  draw  upon  in  the  management  of  the  trust.  But  other-
wise he  acts  independently.  He  is  left  there  alone  with  the  trust ;  in  responsibility  it
is  his  and  not  another's  if  it  is  managed  well ;  it  is  his  and  not  another's  if  it  is  mis-
managed. (1)  What  their  trust  was.  '*Sowe  speak."  A  minister  must  not  be  devoid
of  thoughts,  and  must  also  bo  able  to  give  clear  expression  to  them.  He  has  also  to
stand  up  before  his  fellow-men,  and  to  speak  to  them  face  to  face  with  a  practical  aim.
That>  with  the  speaking  of  which  he  is  intrusted,  is  the  gospel.  ''  The  gospel  of  the
glory  of  the  blessed  God,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust.^'  The  gospel  is  properly
the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  all  people.  It  begins  with  the  message  of  pardon  to  the
guilty,  of  adoption  into  the  family  of  Grod  of  the  disowned  and  disinherited.  It  is,  in
its  gladaome  breadth,  the  promise  of  the  communication  of  the  Divine  life  and  happi-
ness to  our  being.  It  is  this  which  the  minister  has  to  speak  with  a  view  to  its  accept-
ance. It  is  not  meant  that  he  is  only  to  speak  this.  For  he  has  the  whole  Bible  to
open  up  as  he  can.  He  has  other  important  truth  to  present,  even  the  terrors  of  the
Law  in  its  bearing  on  the  gospel.  Neither  is  he  to  confine  himself  in  his  illustrations
to  the  Bible.  For  as  all  roads  led  to  Home,  so  all  things  can  legitimately  and  usefully
be  made  to  lead  to  the  gospel.  Only  nothing  is  to  be  dilated  upon  or  brought  in
which  has  not  the  effect' of  making  prominent  the  gospel  proper,  or  the  glad  message
from  God  to  man.     (2)  Their  being  chosen  for  the  trust.    **As  we  have  been  approved


42  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cu.  n.  1—20.

of  QodP  "  It  was  requisite,"  it  has  been  said  of  the  Athenian  priesthoods,  "  that  all
priests  should  1x3  of  legitimate  birth,  without  bodily  defect,  and  of  unblamable  life  and
conversation.  These  particulars  were  ascertained  by  a  dokimasia,"  It  cannot  be  said
of  all  who  are  in  the  oflBce  of  the  ministry  that  they  have  received  the  Divine  approval.
There  must  be  a  certain  aptitude  in  natural  gifts  for  preaching  the  gospel.  There  must
especially  be  aptitude  in  the  moral  state  of  the  preacher.  God  has  seen  fit,  by  saveil
men,  to  save  men.  He  employs,  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  those  who  have
sympathy  with  the  goepel.  In  this  light  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy  were  no  pre-
tenders, but  had  received  the  Divine  stamp— had  been  pronounced  fit,  from  their  gifts
and  experiences,  to  be  employed  in  the  saving  of  souls.  (3)  Tht  spirit  in  which  they
fulfilled  their  trust  Danger  they  avoided.  This  was  man-pleading.  There  is  a  certain
pleasing  of  men  which  is  not  to  be  avoided  by  the  preacher  of  the  gospel.  He  is  to
seek  to  interest  men  by  all  legitimate  methods.  But  this  pleasing  cannot  be  exalted
into  a  law  universal.  We  are  not  to  please  men  as  though  we  were  responsible  to
them.  We  are  not  to  please  men  as  though  we  had  to  consult  their  false  tastes,  their
natural  dislike  to  the  gospel.  On  the  contrary,  all  man-pleasing  is  to  be  repudiated
where  it  interferes  with  the  main  design  of  the  gospel,  which  is  to  effect  a  change  upon
the  heart.  Excellence  they  cultivated.  This  was  Ocd-pleasing.  This  is  a  safe  rule  to
follow  in  every  case.  For  he  is  infinite  excellence,  and  he  who  seeks  to  please  him
follows  no  low  or  variable  standard.  It  is  the  fit  thing  to  do  in  the  position  in  which
we  are  placed.  He  has  entrusted  us  preachers  with  the  gospel ;  it  is  therefore  simply
our  duty  to  please  him  who  has  given  us  so  solemn  a  trust.  If  we  have  been  approved
of  God  to  bo  entrusted  with  the  gospel,  that  is  so  far  well.  But  there  is  an  approval
that  we  have  to  look  forward  to  at  the  end  of  our  labours.  And  shall  it  then  be  seen
that  we  have  stood  the  test  ?  Shall  we  then  receive  the  word  of  approval,  "  Well  done,
good  and  faithful  servant "  ?  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy  claimed  that,  in  accordance
with  the  fact  of  their  having  been  approved,  they  spake  pleasing  God.  And  this  is
heightened  by  the  consideration  that  God  is  regarded  as  proving  their  hearts.  They
preached  as  under  the  eye  of  the  heart-trying  God.  They  preached  as  if  asking  God
to  remove  from  their  hearts  all  thai  unfitted  them  for  dealing  with  the  p;ospel.  They
preached  with  some  consciousness  in  the  depth  of  their  being  that  their  single  aim  was
to  find  acceptance  for  the  good  message.

III.  Theib  habit  toward  the  Thebsalonians.  1.  Denial  of  selfishness,  (1)  In
the  form  of  flattery,  "  For  neither  at  any  time  were  we  found  using  words  of  flattery,
as  ye  know.**  In  proof  of  what  was  their  general  habit,  an  appeal  is  made  to  what  their
habit  was  particularly  toward  the  Thessalonians.  At  no  time  were  they  found  using
speech  whose  contents  were  flattery.  Having  denied  generally  the  method  of  deceit,
they  now  deny,  toward  the  Thessalonians,  the  method  of  flattery.  It  is  a  method
commonly  resorted  to  by  deceivers.  It  may  seem  removed  from  selfishness,  inasmuch
as  it  is  a  way  of  pleasing  men.  In  that  respect  it  is  not  so  odious  as  a  habit  of  detrac-
tion. But  the  flatterer  is  essentially  selfish.  He  professes  affection  he  does  not  feel ;
he  bestows  praises  beyond  what  he  considers  to  be  deserved.  He  thus  goes  against  the
person  he  seeks  to  flatter,  who  has  a  right  to  have  presented  to  him  what  a  man  really
is,  and  not  what  he  assumes  to  be — a  true  face,  and  not  a  mask.  And  he  further  goes
against  him,  inasmuch  as  he  would  have  him  think  of  himself  as  different  from  what
he  really  is.  Paul  and  his  companions  were  not  slow  to  let  the  real  affection  of  their
heart  be  known,  and  to  bestow  praises  where  they  were  deserved.  But  they  disclaimed
flattery,  appealing,  in  support  of  their  truthfulness  in  doing  so,  to  the  experience  of  the
Thessalonians.  (2)  In  the  form  of  covetousness.  "  Nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  God  is
witness.**  The  idea  of  deceit  is  carried  forward  in  the  word  "cloak."  It  is  something
worn  under  which,  or,  to  keep  nearer  to  the  Greek  word,  "  woven  before  "  ("  pretext "),
behind  which  the  real  design  is  concealed.  Covetousness  is  doubly  degrading  in  connec-
tion with  sacred  service.  It  is  laid  down  as  one  of  the  qualifications  of  a  minister  that
he  is  not  to  be  greedy  of  filthy  lucre.  Paul  and  his  companions  did  not  use  great  pro-
fession of  godliness,  or  of  affection  and  esteem  for  the  Thessalonians,  as  a  pretext  for
getting  their  money.  They  were  conscious  to  their  own  minds  of  purity  in  this  matter,
and,  feeling  the  vast  importance  of  being  thoroughly  cleared  from  such  an  imputation,
they  solemnly  call  God  to  witness  that  they  were  stating  the  truth.  This  form  of
vconfirmation — "  Qtod  is  witness  " — approaching  to  the  oath,  is  only  to  be  used  in  a  matter


en.  II.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  43


to  covetousneas.    Following  the  method  of  deceit,  they  might  have  been  seeking,  not
money,  but  glory.    Christ  says,  "  I  receive  not  glory  from  men."    And  he  declares  this
to  be  an  obstacle  to  believing.   *'  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  glory  one  of  another,
and  the  glory  that  cometh  from  tbe  only  God  ye  seek  not  ?  "    Paul  and  his  companions
had  not  sought  glory  which  had  its  origin  in  men,  neither  more  immediately  from  them
nor  from  others.    They  had  not  done  this  when,  as  the  meaning  would  seem  to  be,
they  might  have  claimed  honour  as  the  apostles  of  Christ.    The  idea  of  "  burdensomc-
ness  "  seems  out  of  keeping  with  the  immediate  context,  the  preceding  thought  being
**  glory,"  and  the  succeeding  thought  being  "  gentleness."  It  seems  better,  then,  to  adopt
the  other  meaning  which  the  words  equally  well  bear :  "  When  we  might  have  claimed
dignity,  assumed  consequenoe."    They  had  an  honourable  status  as  apostles  of  Christ,
that  designation  being  taken  widely.    The  honour  connected  with  it  came,  not  from
men,  but  from  Christ,    It  was  a  great  honour  to  hold  a  commission  from  Christ.    But
they  did  not  put  forward  their  official  position ;  they  did  not  exact  a  recognition  of  it
from  men.    2.  On  the  positive  side  their  motherly  unselfishness.    **  But  we  were  gentle
in  the  midst  of  you,  as  when  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  own  children :  even  so,  being
afiectionately  desirous  of  you,  we  were  well  pleased  to  impart  unto  you,  not  the  gospel
of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  sould,  because  ye  were  become  very  dear  to  us."    JSo  far
from  being  mere  officials  taken  up  with  their  dignity,  they  were  gentle  in  the  midst  of
them.    T^eir  whole  bearing  in  the  midst  of  the  Thcssalonians  was  like  that  of  a  |)arent
in  the  midst  of  his  children.    Nay,  that  does  not  suffice  to  bring  out  the  nature  of  the
gentleness.     It  is  not  the  father  who  is  taken ;  but,  as  expressing  greater  tenderness,
the  mother.    In  another  place  (Gal.  iv.  19)  Paul  also  makes  use  of  the  motherly :  "  My
little  children,  of  whom  I  am  again  in  travail  until  Christ  be  formed  in  you."    Hero
he  not  only  takes  the  mother,  but  the  mother  at  the  time  when  she  is  nursing.    As
when  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  own  children.    It  is  then  that  the  motherly  feeling  is
most  active  in  her.    It  is  then  that  she  uses  the  sweetest  expressions,  holds  her  child
with  the  greatest  fondness  and  solicitude.    But  the  nursing  mother  is  not  only  the
picture  of  gentleness  ;  she  is  also  the  picture  of  unselfishness.    She  does  not  think  of
receivinp;  from  her  child ;  she  thinks  only  of  giving.     She  gives  from  herself,  and,  it*
that  child's  life  were  in  danger,  she  would  not  hesitate  to  give  her  own  life.     So  tho
motherly  was  very  active  in  them  at  Thessalonica.    They  were  affectionately  desirous
of  tbe  Thessalonians.    Desire  has  a  certain  contrary  nature  to  affection.    Desire  draws
in ;  affection  gives  out.    It  is  giving  out  that  is  referred  to  here.    It  would  seem,  there-
fore, better  to  translate,  "  Having  a  fond  afifection  for  you."    In  the  working  of  this
affection  they  gave  to  the  Thessalonians  the  milk  of  the  Word — ^here  called  the  gospel
of  God — ^what  was  given  them  by  the  great  and  tender  Giver  to  give  to  the  new-born.
And  such  was  the  unselfishness  of  their  affection  that  they  had  the  willingness,  if  it
had  been  necessary,  to  give  their  very  lives  for  the  Thessalonians,  because,  in  their
craving  for  the  Word,  they  were  felt  to  be  very  dear.    3.  Striking  exemplification  of
unselfishness.    "  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night  and
day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you,  we  preached  unto  you  tho  gospel  of  God."
The  apostle  and  his  companions  "  practically  gave  up  their  existence  "  to  the  Thessa-
lonians.    Those  addressed  as  brethren  are  called  upon  to  call  to  mind  the  labour  and
travail  undergone  for  them.    The  second  word  serves  the  purpose  of  intensification.
lliere  was  giving  out  of  strength  in  "  heralding  "  the  gospel  of  God.    A  herald  does
not  spare  himself;  as  gospel  heralds  they  did  not  spare  themselves  in  soul  or  body.
This  work  of  heralding  was  by  itself  labour  and  travail ;  but  it  was  added  to  by  the
circnmstances  under  which  they  heralded.    They  felt  themselves  under  the  necessity
of  working — Paul,  no  doubt,  at  the  work  of  tent-making.    That  also  was  labour  and
travail ;  for  it  was  night  and  day — as  we  would  say,  day  and  night ;  not  completed  with
claylight,  but  extending  into  the  night.    There  was  no  reason  for  his  not  receiving  from
the  Philippians  as  he  <5d  at  Thessalonica.    There  was  reason  for  his  not  receiving  from
th«  Thessalonians.    The  reason  given  is,  the  desire  not  to  burden  any  of  them.     His
liot  feeling  free  to  burden  any  of  them,  whatever  determined  it,  raised  him  now  above
tbe  sospicion  of  being  covetous  among  them.    Ho  had  only  been  a  giver,  like  a  nursing


44  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—20.

mother.  4.  What  their  behaviour  generally  was  toioard  the  Thessalonians,  "  Ye  are
witnesses,  and  Grod  also,  how  holily  and  righteously  and  unblamably  we  behaved  our-
selves  toward  you  that  believe.''  Their  behaviour  is  defined  as  being  toward  the  Thes-
salonians as  believers.  We  may  think  of  Paul  as  speaking  for  himself  and  his
companions.  How  did  he  bear  nimself  toward  these  believers?  (1)  Holily^  i.e.  with
love  and  reverence  toward  God  in  them.  (2)  Bighteously,  i.e.  with  due  consideration
for  their  position.  This  must  be  taken  to  include  their  position  as  believers.  There
was  what  was  suitable  for  them,  as  adopted  into  the  family  of  God  through  faith.
(3)  Unblamably,  a  strong  word  which  is  used  not  infrequently  by  the  apostle.  It  is
the  negative  side  of  the  two  positions  that  have  been  given.  Here  there  is  a  concen-
tration of  the  self-praise,  as  it  may  seem,  that  pervades  the  paragraph.  How  could
he  act  so  holily  and  righteously  toward  the  Thessalonians  as  to  incur  no  blame  from
them  or  from  God  ?  But  that  is  not  all :  he  makes  an  appeal  to  them  as  witnesses,
and,  the  second  time  in  the  paragraph,  he  makes  a  solemn  appeal  to  GK)d  as  Witness  even
of  his  inward  disposition.  It  cannot  be  understood  that  he  lays  claim  to  perfection  ;  for
it  is  he  who  says  in  another  place,  *'  Not  that  I  have  already  obtained,  or  am  already
made  perfect"  But  it  must  be  understood  that  ho  claimed  to  be  sincere,  and  sincere  in
no  ordinary  degree,  in  seeking  the  good  of  the  Thessalonians.  In  claiming  this  he  was
not  really  praising  himself ;  but  he  was  making  clear  what  was  fitted  to  influence
powerfully  the  Thessalonians  in  their  fidelity  to  the  gospel.  He  points  to  them  as
believers,  because,  it  may  be,  they  were  fitted  to  appreciate  the  spirituality  of  his
bearing.  He  points  to  them  as  believers,  chiefly  as  showing  that  they  worthily
responded  to  what  his  bearing  was.  5.  Their  fatherly  dealing.  There  are  frequent
allusions  to  fatherhood  in  God  in  Scripture.  One  of  the  allusions  to  motherhood  in
God  is  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  13,  *'  As  one  whom  bis  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort  you."
Both  meet  in  God,  forming  a  complete  conception.

**  No  earthly  father  loves  like  thee,
No  mother  e*er  so  mild."

So  they  must  meet  in  the  servant  of  God.  Paul  has  already  in  this  paragraph  referred
to  himself  as  acting  the  motherly  part ;  he  now  supplements  it  by  referring  to  himself
as  acting  the  fatherly  part.  (1)  Individual  dealing,  **As  ye  know  how  we  dealt
with  each  one  of  you,  as  a  father  dealeth  with  his  own  children."  It  is  the  part  of
a  father  to  have  his  children  under  his  eye.  He  is  acquainted  with  their  little  histories
and  peculiar  dispositions.  And  he  does  not  deal  with  all  alike,  but  studies  their  various
ways,  and  deals  with  them  accordingly.  So  it  is  the  part  of  a  minister  not  only  to
make  a  general  declaration  of  the  gospel,  but  also,  father-like,  to  deal  with  his  people
individually,  according  to  what  he  knows  of  their  circumstances  and  needs.  (2)  Three
words  descriptive  of  the  nature  of  fatherly  dealing,  **  Exhorting  you."  It  is  the  part
of  a  father  not  merely  to  tell  his  children  their  duty,  but  also  to  exhort  them,  to  ui^o
them  warmly  to  duty,  especially  from  his  own  experiences  of  life.  So  it  is  the  part  of
a  minister  not  only  to  hold  up  Scripture  precept  for  instruction,  but  also,  father-like,
warmly  to  recommend  its  observance,  especially  from  his  own  spiritual  experiences
*'  And  encouraging  you."  It  is  the  part  of  a  father  to  hold  out  encouragement  to  the
performance  of  duty.  Nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  the  young  than  a  discouraging
tone.  So  it  is  the  part  of  a  minister  not  to  be  harsh,  censorious,  despondent,  but,
father-like,  to  catch  a  geniality  and  hopefulness  from  his  message  which  may  be  said
to  have  come  from  the  fatherhood  of  God.  '*  And  testifying."  The  word  can  bear  a
stronger  meaning — charging,  conjuring.  There  are  times  when  a  father  addresses  his
children  as  with  his  dying  breath,  conjures  them  by  all  that  he  counts  dear  and  sacred,  by
a  consideration  of  their  best  interests,  not  to  give  way  to  temptation,  but  to  follow  in
the  path  of  duty.  So  there  are  times  when  it  is  becoming  for  a  minister  to  concentrate
his  earnestness  and  to  address  his  people  as  with  his  dying  breath,  conjuring  them  by
the  authority  of  God,  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  the  dreadfid
issues  at  stake,  by  the  solemnity  of  judgment,  not  to  allow  themselves  to  be  cheated
out  of  happiness,  but  to  make  sure  of  Christ  as  their  everlasting  Portion.  (3)  To  what
the  fatherly  dealing  is  to  be  directed,  "  To  the  end  that  ye  should  walk  worthily  of
God,  who  calleth  you  into  his  own  kingdom  and  glory."  It  is  the  part  of  a  father  to
endeavour  to  hold  the  children  to  what  is  noble.    For  this  purpose  he  loves  to  tell  them


can.  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  46


of  the  good  name  their  family  has  borne,  of  the  call  which  that  addresses  to  them  to
follow  out  a  good  career.  And  so  he  exhorts,  encourages,  conjures  them.  Let  them
not  stain  that  noble  name,  let  them  not  stop  short  of  that  noble  career.  So  it  is  the
part  of  a  minister,  father-like,  to  tell  his  people  of  their  high  dignity  and  destiny,  of
their  being  called  by  God  into  his  own  kingdom,  of  their  being  called  in  that  kingdom
to  share  with  God  in  his  glory.  And  so  he  exhorts,  encourages,  conjures  them.  Let
them  proTB  worthy  of  having  place  and  honour  in  Gtxl's  kingdom.  Let  the  royal
$tamp  be  on  all  their  conduct. — R.  F.

Vera,  13 — 16. — Besponse  of  the  Thessahnians  to  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  by
Paul  and  his  companions,  I.  Theib  acceptance  of  the  Word.  *'  And  for  this  cause
we  also  thank  Grod  without  ceasing,  that  when  ye  received  from  us  the  word  of  the
message,  even  the  Word  of  God,  ye  accepted  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but,  as  it  is  in
truth,  the  Word  of  God,  which  also  worketh  in  you  that  beUeve."  With  this  com-
mences the  second  of  the  divisions  indicated  at  the  close  of  the  first  chapter.  Our
attention  is  turned  away  from  the  preachers  to  the  hearers.  It  is  confusing  to  join
"  also  "  to  "  we,"  and  to  suppose  the  meaning  to  be,  with  Liinemann,  "  We  as  well  as
every  true  Christian  who  hears  of  your  conduct,"  or,  with  EUicott,  •'  We  as  well  as  you
who  have  so  much  to  be  thankful  for."  It  makes  an  easier  transition  to  join  "  also  "
to  "  thank,"  making  the  subject  of  thanksgiving  something  additional  to  the  earnest-
ness of  the  preachers.  We  may  translate  freely,  "  Having  this  as  an  antecedent,  we
have  this  in  addition  as  a  consequent  for  which  to  thank  God."  Here,  then,  is  a  falling
back  into  the  thankful  strain  with  which  the  Epistle  commenced.  The  very  word
translated  '*  without  ceasing  "  is  caught  up.  Having  given  out  their  strength  in  preach-
ing, they  had  imceasing  cause  of  thanksgiving  to  God  in  the  result  In  setting  forth
the  result,  the  word  is  described  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Thessalonians  in  relation
to  the  preachers.  The  nearest  translation  is  ''the  from-us-heard-word."  This  they
received  in  the  outward  ordinance  of  preaching.  Having  thus  received  it,  they  next
accepted  it  or  received  it  into  their  inmost  being.  They  gave  this  inner  reception  to  it,
as  being,  in  their  estimation,  not  the  word  of  man.  It  was  indeed  delivered  by  men.
It  was  a  word  of  human  salvation.  In  its  very  humanness  it  was  fitted  to  reach  men.
Dut  their  estimation  of  the  word  rose  above  it  as  a  mere  human  word  to  what  it  really
was  (as  attested  here),  the  Word  of  God.  It  was  a  Word  given  under  Divine  direction.
It  was  a  Word  that  came  from  the  heart  of  God.  It  was  a  Word  of  the  overflowing  of
Divine  love.  It  was  a  Word,  moreover,  that  was  accompanied  with  the  Divine  efficacy.
In  harmony  with  its  being  the  Divine  Word,  it  is  described  as  working  in  them  that
believe.  Faith  is  the  organ  for  our  reception  of  the  Word.  We  may  receive  the  Divine
Word  in  the  outward  ordinance  of  preaching,  but  if  there  is  not  this  organ  of  inner
reception  it  must  remain  inoperative.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  faith,  and  in
proportion  as  there  is  faith,  does  the  mighty  power  of  the  word  pass  into  us,  even  up  to
the  full  extent  of  our  capacity  and  need.  It  is,  therefore,  our  duty  to  see  that  we  pre-
sent no  obstacle  of  unbelief  to  the  efficacy  of  the  Word  in  us.  "  That  the  Word  may
become  effectual  to  salvation  we  must  attend  thereunto  with  diligence,  preparation,  and
prayer ;  receive  it  with  faith  and  love,  lay  it  up  in  our  hearts,  and  practise  it  in  our  lives."

II.  The  accepted  Woed  weouqht  in  them  to  give  them  Christian  heroism.
**  For  ye,  brethren,  became  imitators  of  the  Churches  of  God  which  are  in  Judaaa  in
Christ  Jesus :  for  je  also  suffered  the  same  things  of  your  own  countrymen,  even  as  they
did  of  the  Jews."  There  were,  to  appearance,  other  Churches  of  Gtxi  in  Judaea.  It
was,  therefore,  necessary  to  distinguish  Christian  Churches  in  Judaea.  It  is  not  to  be
understood  that  the  Thessalonian  Christians  were  designedly  imitators  of  the  Judaean
Churches.  In  result  they  were  imitators.  In  similar  circumstinces  they  exhibited  a
similar  spirit.  Judssa  was  notably  the  quarter  where  Christian  heroism  was  most
required,  llie  Jews  there  were  filled  with  deepest  rancour  against  Christ.  By
their  numbers  they  were  more  to  be  considered  by  the  Koman  power,  and  were  able  to
go  to  greater  lengths  against  the  Christians.  It  could  be  said  of  the  Thessalonian
Christians  that  they  were  not  behind  the  Judaean  Churches  in  Christian  heroism.  They
suffered  the  same  things  of  their  own  countrymen.  We  are,  therefore,  to  understand
that  they  were  subjected  to  severe  persecution  in  Thessalonica.  We  know  that  the
Jews  had  to  do  with  the  persecution  as  instigators,  but,  as  they  had  Little  in  their


46  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa    [oh.  il  1—20.

power  without  the  action  of  the  Gentile  anthorities,  their  own  countrymen  are  referreil
to  as  those  at  whose  bands  the  Thessalonians  suffered.  A  position  was  held  for  Christ
at  Tbessalonica  as  in  Judcea.  And,  in  recording  this  to  the  praise  of  the  Thessalonians,
thoy  warm  toward  them  and  address  them  as  brethren.

III.  Fob  theib  encouragement  in  heroism  the  Jews  are  presented  in  their
TRUE  character.  1.  Their  past  conduct,  (1)  Worst  manifestation,  "Who  both
killed  the  Lord  Jesus."  In  the  Greek  the  mind  is  first  made  to  rest  on  the  word
"  Lord."  Then  there  is  bronj^ht  into  neighbourhood  and  sharp  contrast  with  it  the
word  "  killed."  The  "  Lord  "  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  to  whom  Divine  attri-
butes are  ascribed — whom  David  owned  as  his  Lord — they  did  not  own  or  submit  to ;
but,  going  in  the  opposite  direction  as  far  as  they  could  go,  him  they  murdered.  They
did  this  not  only  to  him  who  was  the  Impersonation  of  authority,  but  was  also  the
Accoraplisher  of  the  loving,  saving  purpose  of  God.  For  "  Jesus  "  is  added  as  a  third
word.  This  the  Jews  did  as  a  nation.  They  said  in  effect,  through  their  constituted
authorities,  '*  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him.''  In  thus  charging  guilt  home
upon  the  Jews,  Paul  was  charging  it  home  upon  himself.  For  wherever  he  was  at  the
time  of  the  crucifixion,  in  his  then  state  of  mind  he  was  in  full  sympathy  with  the
action  of  the  rulers.  And  it  is  right  that  we  should  see  here  not  only  the  blackness  of
the  Jewish  heart,  but  the  blackness  of  the  human  heart.  This  was  what  we  did  to  our
Lord  when  he  came  on  an  errand  of  mercy  to  our  earth.  We  laid  hands  on  him  and
put  him  to  death.  For  this  let  us  be  deeply  humbled  before  God.  Let  us  say  with
Job,  in  ncnrer  contact  with  God,  "  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  (2)
Manifestations  leading  up  to  the  worst,  "And  the  prophets."  What  the  Jews  did  to
their  Messiah  was  not  an  isolated  act.  It  was  only  of  a  piece  with  what  their  previous
conduct  had  been.  "  Which  of  the  prophets,"  said  Stephen,  "  did  not  your  fathers  per-
secute? and  they  killed  them  which  ehowed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  Righteous
One ;  of  whom  ye  have  now  become  betrayers  and  murderers."  The  treatment  they
gave  to  God's  messengers,  whose  work  it  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  Messiah  by
rebuke  and  prediction,  led  up  to  the  treatment  they  gave  their  Messiah.  In  his  pre-
Christian  state  Paul  was  well  entitled  to  be  called  **  son  of  them  that  slew  the  prophets ; "
and  60  are  all  who  abuse  and  thwart,  or  stand  aloof  from,  those  who  are  seeking  to
advance  the  cause  of  God  in  the  world.  (3)  Manifestation  subsequent  to  the  worst,
"  And  drave  out  us."  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  driving  of  the  apostles  out  of
Judfiea.  Q  his  was  overruled  by  God  for  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  beyond  Judaea ;
but  none  the  less  was  it  culj)ablc.  It  showed  that  the  spirit  of  penitence  had  not
passed  over  them  for  the  heinous  crime  of  which  they  had  been  guilty.  They  were
still  holding  to  the  words,  "  His  blood  be  upon  us,  and  uix)n  our  children.**  2,  C7on-
demnation  of  their  conduct,  (1)  It  was  against  Qod,  *'  And  please  not  God."  The
Jews  thought  they  were  pleasing  God  in  what  they  did  to  Christ  and  also  to  the  pro-
phets and  apostles.  This  is  denied  of  them.  They  were  really,  in  their  anti-Christian
position,  setting  themselves  against  the  Divine  ends.  They  were  setting  themselves
ag^nst  the  whole  meaning  of  their  existence  as  a  nation,  against  the  teaching  of  their
oracles,  against  the  design  of  their  rites.  They  were  setting  themselves  against  the
evidence  of  miracles,  and  against  the  stronger  evidence  of  a  goodriess  which  should
have  carried  conviction  to  every  honest  heart.  If  they  could  1^  so  far  mistaken,  have
not  we  reason  to  be  on  our  guard?  We  may  think  that  we  are  pleasing  God  when  we
have  never  learned  the  alphabet  of  the  Divine  teaching,  have  never  subjected  ourselves
to  the  Divine  control.  (2)  It  was  against  man,  "  And  are  contrary  to  all  men ;  for-
bidding us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  may  be  saved.**  Their  condemnation
manward  is  as  strong  as  their  condemnation  Godward.  They  were  contrary  to  all  men,
is  the  language  used;  and  the  proof  which  is  given  is  conclusive.  The  gospel  is  the
offer  of  salvation  to  all  men.  But  the  universality,  which  is  its  glory,  was  to  them  its
defect.  They  had  the  idea  of  keeping  salvation  to  themselves.  They  had  the  idea  that
they  were  blessed  the  more,  the  fewer  they  were  that  were  blessed.  And  when  the
apostles  spoke  to  the  Gentiles,  and  thus  preached  the  larger  salvation,  as  if  tJie  blessing
were  being  taken  away  from  them,  they  forbade  them  in  such  manner  as  they  could,
by  contradiction,  calumnies,  laying  snares  for  their  life.  If  this  was  their  ftdl,  let  ui
beware  lest  it  should  be  ours.  The  first  saved  (for  as  Christians  we  stand  where  the
Jews  stood)  must  understand  it  to  bo  their  duty,  not  to  draw  the  lino  at  themselveSi


cH.n.1— 20.]    THE  FIBST   EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  47


but  to  reach  forth  in  blessing  to  all  the  unsaved.  3.  Final  result  of  their  conduct.  (1)
Jn  guUt.  "To  fill  up  their  sins  alway."  Inhere  is  here  a  reflection  of  our  Lord's
words,  **  Fill  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fathers."  The  Jews  were  on  their  trial  as
a  nation.  In  this  trial  they  should  have  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  good  actions,  of
service  to  the  world.  That  would  have  been  their  vindication  before  Gk)d.  Instead  of
that^  they  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  sins.  There  is  significant  language  used  in
Gen.  ZY.  16,  "  But  in  the  fourth  generation  they  shall  come  hither  again ;  for  the
ioiquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full.'*  It  is  a  sad  thing  that  it  could  be  said  of
the  Jews  with  Divine  helps,  as  of  the  Amorites  without  Divine  helps,  that  they  were
filling  up  their  sins.  They  were  filling  up  their  sins  alway.  It  was  a  course  which
they  did  not  alter  by  a  genuine  deep  conformed  repentance  as  a  nation.  The  general
tendency  of  their  conduct,  both  before  Christ,  at  the  time  of  Christ,  and  after  Christ,
was  to  fill  up  their  sins.  They  obstinately  put  away  God  from  them,  disregarded  the
Divine  calls  and  warnings.  And  the  ultimate  result  of  such  conduct,  in  the  working
out  of  the  eternal  purpose,  could  only  be  as  here  set  down,  the  bringing  of  the  measure
of  their  sins  up  to  the  full.  (2)  In  punishment.  "  But  the  wrath  is  come  upon  them
to  the  uttermost."  This  is  in  contrast  with  the  filling  up  of  their  sins,  in  their  oppo-
sition to  God  and  man.  The  wrath  of  God,  which  is  here  mentioned  for  the  second
time  in  the  Epistle,  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the  predestined  or  the  merited  wrath.  It  is
a  wrath  which  descends  upon  nations  as  well  as  upon  individuals.  As  the  measure  of
their  sins  is  thought  of  as  being  brought  up  to  the  full,  so  the  wrath  is  thought  of  as
reaching  its  utmost  limit,  when  it  must  discharge  itself — when,  instead  of  probationary
dealing,  there  must  be  inflictive  judgment.  The  inspired  writers  here  had  words  of
our  Lord  on  which  to  proceed.  "  That  upon  you  may  come  all  the  righteous  blood
shed  on  the  earth,  from  the  blood  of  Abel  the  righteous  imto  the  blood  of  Zacbarias
son  of  Barachiah,  whom  ye  slew  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  altar.  Verily  I  say
unto  you,  All  these  things  shall  come  upon  this  generation."  The  apostolic  words  were
written  within  fifteen  years  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  Jews  were  finally
rejected  as  a  nation.  There  is  hope  of  their  conversion  at  some  future  period ;  but  it
cannot  be  said  that  to  this  day  the  wrath  of  God,  for  their  long  course  of  disobedience,
has  been  removed. — R.  F.

Vers.  17 — 20. — Great  desire  to  see  the  Thesscdonians,  With  this  another  chapter
might  fitly  have  commenced.

1.  ThEIB  DE8IBE  WAS  ALL  THE  GBEATEE  THAT  THEY  WEBE  ORPHANED  OF  THE  ThES-

SALONiANS.  "  But  we,  brethren,  being  bereaved  of  you  for  a  short  season,  in  presence,
not  in  heart,  endeavoured  the  more  exceedingly  to  see  your  face  with  great  desire."
Very  different  were  Paul  and  his  associates  from  the  Jewish  persecutors.  They  had
the  most  tender  feelings  toward  the  Thessalonians,  whom  they  acknowledge  as
brethren,  llie  principal  statement  is  that  they  were  orphaned.  It  is  a  word  which  is
usually  applied  to  children  who  are  bereaved  of  their  parents.  It  is  here  adopted  as  a
strong  wora  to  express  the  great  pain  which  those  apostolic  men  felt  in  being  separated
from  their  loved  converts.  They  have  already  called  themselves  father  and  mother  to
the  Thessalonians.  Now  it  is  rather  the  Thessalonians  who  are  father  and  mother  to
them,  of  whom  they  have  been  bereaved,  by  whom  they  have  been  left  desolate.
Two  mitigating  circumstances  are  added.  It  was  separation  for  a  short  season,  literally,
•*  the  season  of  an  hour."  It  is  the  language  of  emotion.  It  was  but  the  season  of  an
hour,  compared  with  the  time  they  would  be  together  in  the  better  world.  Then  it
was  separation  in  vteaence,  not  in  heart.  Still,  with  these  mitigating  circumstances,
they  were  in  an  orphaned  state.  All  the  more  exceedingly,  then,  were  they  zealous  to
see  their  face  with  great  desire.  This  reference  to  the  effect  of  absence  is  a  touch  of
nature  which  the  Thessalonians  could  well  appreciate.

n.  Paul  was  hindbbed  in  havinq  his  desibe  to  see  them  qbatified.  "  Because
we  would  fain  have  come  unto  you,  I  Paul  once  and  again ;  and  Satan  hindered  us.**
They  would  fain  have  come  unto  them.  Having  said  this,  Paul  (correctively  so  far)
refers  to  two  definite  occasions  on  which  his  plans  were  to  proceed  to  Thcssalonica.
The  statement  did  not  pertain  to  Silas  and  Timothy,  as  they  were  probably  not  with
him.  By  necessity  of  fact  he  therefore  detaches  himself  from  the  others:  ''I  Paul
once  and  again."    And  once  and  twice  Satan  hindered  him.    There  is  distinct  test!-


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  n.  1—20.


mony  here  to  Paul's  belief  in  a  personal  tempter.  Satan  appears  here  in  his  real  cha-
racter as  adversary  of  God's  people.  Repeatedly  he  actually  succeeded  in  hindering
Paul  in  his  good  intentions.  Though  only  a  secondary  agent,  he  has  a  wide  range  in
the  use  of  means.  We  are  to  think  of  the  means  here  not  as  sickness  (which  was
allowed  in  the  case  of  Job),  nor  as  other  work  needing  to  bo  done  elsewhere,  but  as
difficulties  caused  by  the  working  of  evil  in  the  minds  of  [persecuting  enemies  or
unfaithful  friends.  The  language  ts,  "  Satan  hindered  us ; "  for  there  was  not  only  a
hindering  of  Paul,  but  of  Silas  and  Timothy  as  well,  who  were  interested  in  the
advancement  of  the  cause  in  Thessalonica.

III.  Esteem  was  the  beason  fob  desibinq  to  bee  the  Thessaloniaks.  "For
what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  glorying  ?  Are  not  even  ye,  before  our  Lord  Jesus
at  his  coming  ?  For  ye  are  our  glory  and  our  joy."  The  use  of  the  plural,  which
begins  with  the  preceding  word,  illustrates  the  humility  and  generosity  of  the  apostle.
As  in  the  next  statement  of  fact  he  has  to  slide  again  into  the  singular,  he  might
naturally  have  preserved  the  singular  in  this  intermediate  burst  of  feeling.  But  he
will  not  exclude  Silas  and  Timothy  when  it  is  possible  to  include  them.  These
apostolic  men  had  their  hope.  Without  hope  it  is  not  possible  to  endure  existence.
And  if  the  future  is  not  really  bright,  it  is  made  to  appear  bright  with  false  colours.
Tliey  had  not  only  their  hope,  but  their  joy ;  i.e.  they  were  joyful  in  view  of  what  they
hoped  for,  which  again  was  a  crown  of  glorying.  As  Christian  athletes  they  looked
forward  to  their  wreath  of  victory.  This  is  thought  of  as  the  Thessalonian  converts,
they  among  others.  These  conquerors  were  not  to  appear  alone  before  our  Lord  Jesus
at  his  coming.  But  their  converts  in  the  various  places  were  to  be  as  a  wreath  of
victory  around  their  heads.  It  is  faith  that  brings  us  into  a  fundamentally  right
relation  to  Cbri»t ;  but  within  that  relation  there  is  room  for  greater  or  less  activity.
The  teaching  here  is  that  we  are  to  aim  at  not  appearing  before  Christ  alone  at  lus
coming.  Christian  parents  and  Christian  ministers  ought  to  be  in  a  position  to  say
then,  "  Behold  T,  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me."  There  is  inci-
dentally a  comforting  thought  in  the  language  used.  It  is  implied  that  Paul  would
know  his  converts  at  Christ's  coming.  We  may,  therefore,  feel  certain  that  Christian
friends  will  know  each  other  in  the  future  state.  And  what  a  stimulus  is  this  to  be
unremitting  in  our  prayers  and  labours,  so  that  all  who  are  dear  to  us  shall  appear  in
that  happy  company  at  last,  not  one  wanting !  It  is  added,  '*  For  ye  are  our  gtorj  and
our  joy."  As  woman  is  said  to  be  the  glory  of  the  man,  so  converts  are  here  said  to  be
the  glory  of  ministers.  The  Thessalonian  converts  were  a  halo  around  the  heads  of
their  teachers.  They  were  also  their  joy,  a  source  of  deep  satisfaction,  as  their  wreath
of  victory  at  the  lookcd-for  coming. — B.  F.

Ver.  2. — Boldness  in  declaring  the  gospel.  I.  Thebe  abe  cibcumstances  that
MAKE  the  declabation  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AN  ACT  OF  BOLDNESS.  St.  Paul  had  been
"  shamefully  entreated  ^  at  Philippi.  Danger  threatened  also  at  Thessalonica.  But  the
apostle  was  nothing  daunted,  not  even  holding  his  life  dear  in  the  prosecution  of  his
great  mission.  Similar  dangers  beset  the  missionary  now,  and  no  one  has  a  right  to
undertake  mission  work  who  is  not  prepared  to  endure  hardship  as  a  good  soldier  of
Jesus  Christ.  Moral  courage  is  not  less  requisite  in  outwardly  peaceful  circumstances.
The  discouragement  of  indifference,  the  chilling  influence  of  ridicule,  and  even  the
hindrance  of  direct  opposition,  will  meet  us  if  we  are  faithful  to  our  duty  of  declaring
the  gospel  where  it  is  most  needed.

II.  It  is  THE  BUT?  OF  THOSE  WHO  ABE  ENTBU8TED  WITH  THE  GOSPEL  NOT  TO  8HBINK

fbom  declabing  it  in  SPITE  OF  ADVEB8E  CIBCUMSTANCES.  It  Is  a  trust,  and  the  trust
must  be  discharged  even  if  the  steward  die  at  his  post  The  world  needs  the  gospel
most  when  it  is  most  opposed  to  it.  For  the  sake  of  the  very  men  who  mock  or  resist
us  we  must  faithfully  discharge  our  message.  Others  also  need  it  who  must  not  be
kept  out  of  their  lawful  privileges  by  our  weak  fears.  Moreover,  the  glory  of  God  must
be  sought  above  all  considerations  of  personal  safety.  How  strangely  that  passion  of
devotion  to  Christ  which  inspired  the  apostles  to  preach  him  at  the  peril  of  their  lives
contrasts  with  the  selfish,  comfort-loving  habits  of  many  who  have  undertaken  to
•discharge  the  duties  of  the  same  stewardship  in  our  own  day  I

III.  A   BOLD,  DECIDED  DECLABATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  IS  ALWAYS  KECE8SABT.      Chrfs-


CH.  II.  1—20.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  ^9

tianity  is  do  religion  for  cowards.  It  is  a  gross  error  to  suppose  that  it  unmans  its
followers.  The  greatest  heroes  of  the  first  century  were  the  Christians.  A  manly
courage  is  much  needed  in  the  present  day.  The  gospel  should  always  be  declared
clearly,  positively,  and  confidently  by  those  who  have  a  sure  faith  in  it  themselves.  It
is  a  great  mistake  to  think  that  a  timid,  apologetic  tone  will  he  more  conciliatory.  We
have  no  need  to  be  thus  timidly  apologetic  for  the  gospel,  if  it  is  true ;  but  if  it  is  not
true,  we  have  no  right  to  defend  it  at  all.  In  either  case  a  weak,  half-hearted  advocacy  is
culpable.  Eumity  is  best  overcome  and  ridicule  shamed  by  courage.  It  is  most  foolish
for  the  Christian  advocate  to  be  afraid  of  boldly  stating  his  beliefs  before  his  sceptical
opponent.  Let  us,  however,  distinguish  true  boldness  from  heedless  provocativeness  on
the  one  hand,  and  from  mere  insolence  on  the  other.  Christians  are  to  be  wise  as
serpents,  to  be  courteous,  and  as  far  as  in  them  lies  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men.

lY.  The  soubce  of  Christian  boldness  is  in  God.  This  boldness  is  a  very  different
thing  from  mere  brute  daring.  It  is  spiritual,  sober,  thoughtful.  It  has  to  face
spiritual  as  well  as  carnal  foes.  It  comes,  like  other  Christian  graces,  as  an  inspiration
from  the  Spirit  of  Grod.  They  who  are  most  deeply  in  communion  with  Ghxl  when  by
themselves  will  be  most  thoroughly  brave  when  in  the  world.  Thus  Joshua  was  made
courageous  by  his  vision  of  the  '*  captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord "  (Josh.  v.  14).
—W.  F.  A.

Yer.  4. — Entrusted  with  the  gospel,  I.  The  gospel  is  a  tbust.  1.  The  gospel  is  of
great  vaiut.  If  property  is  put  in  trust  it  is  presumably  valuable.  We  carefully
gu^  what  we  prize  nighly.  God's  message  of  reconciliation  is  a  charter  of  liberty,
a  covenant  of  grace,  a  promissory  note  of  future  blessings.  2.  The  gospel  needs  to  be
guarded  and  administered.  It  is  in  danger  of  being  lost,  forgotten,  perverted,  and
corrupted.  Trustees  are  required  in  order  to  preserve  it  in  its  integrity  and  to  give  it
forth  to  those  who  need  it.  3.  The  gospel  is  entrusted  to  men.  There  are  those  who
are  put  in  trust  with  the  gospeL  Men  are  to  trust  God ;  God  also  trusts  men.  lie
confides  in  the  honour  and  devotion  of  his  people.  As  the  steward  is  entrusted  with
his  master's  estate,  the  servant  of  GK)d  receives  a  trust  of  the  rich  treasures  of  the
gospeL  The  treasure  is  committed  to  earthen  vessels.  Thus  does  God  honour  his
children  and  use  them  for  his  good  purposes.

II.  The  tbustees  of  the  gospel  abe  chosen  and  approved  of  God.  God  called
the  prophets,  and  Christ  called  the  apostles.  Every  true  Christian  minister  is  called  of
God.  The  Church  is  God's  chosen  company  of  trustees  of  the  gospel.  Christian
nations  are  providentially  appointed  for  its  custodianship.  Certain  qualifications  are
required  in  the  trustees,  in  order  that  they  may  be  approved  of  Gk>d.  1.  They  must
hud  ike  truth  tliemselves,  **  Not  of  error  "  (ver.  3).  The  first  requisites  are  an  under-
standing of  and  a  belief  in  the  gospel.  2.  They  must  live  in  accordance  with  the
truth.  "Nor  of  nncleanness."  The  trustee  of  the  holy  gospel  must  be  a  regenerate
man.  Otherwise  his  conduct  will  damage  the  gospel  which  he  holds.  3.  They  must
be  honest  in  the  discharge  of  the  trust.  "  Nor  in  guile."  No  self-seeking,  double-
dealing,  or  men-pleasing  can  be  permitted  in  the  trustees  of  the  gospel.  They  must
be  sincerely  devoted  to  the  truth  that  is  entrusted  to  them.

IIL  The  teusteeship  of  the  gospel  imposes  important  duties.  1.  The  gospel
must  be  preserved  in  its  integrity.  The  trustees  are  not  permitted  to  tamper  with  the
tmst  We  have  no  right  to  add  to  or  to  detract  from  the  gospel  as  it  is  given  to  us  in
Uie  New  Testament.  It  is  a  matter  of  honour  that  one  who  holds  office  in  a  Christian
Church  should  not  avail  himself  of  the  advantages  of  his  position  to  advance  private
views  which  in  any  way  militate  against  what  is  containeii  in  the  gospel  charter  on
which  the  Church  is  founded.  The  New  Testament  is  a  trust-deed,  and  its  provisions
most  be  studiously  observed,  or  the  trusteeship  implied  by  any  active  work  in  the
Church  must  be  resigned.  Any  other  course  is  dishonest.  2.  The  trust  of  the  gospel
most  be  discharged  for  the  benefit  of  those  fi/r  whom  it  is  designed.  The  trustees
must  study  the  interests  of  the  beneficiaries.  Trustees  of  the  gospel  are  teachers  of  the
go0peL  This  truth  of  God  is  not  to  be  wrapped  up  in  a  napkin,  but  made  use  of  for
the  good  of  mankind.  The  Jews  were  entrust^  with  the  oracles  of  Gud  that  ultimately
the  Gentiles  might  receive  those  oracles  from  their  hands.  The  Church  is  intrusted
with  the  gospel  that  she  may  convey  it  to  the  world.  The  trust  of  the  gospel  carries
I.  thesbalohiahb.  b


50  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1— 20.


with  it  the  obligation  of  undertaking  missionary  enterprises.  3.  The  trust  of  the
gospel  must  he  discharged  to  the  approval  of  Qod,  It  is  his  trust.  He  will  call  the
stewards  to  account.  Their  aim,  therefore,  must  he,  not  to  please  men^  hut  "Qod
which  proveth  our  hearts." — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  7,  8. — The  um  of  affectionateness  in  commending  the  gospd.  It  is  very
interesting  to  observe  what  a  wealth  of  affection  St.  Paul  poured  out  upon  the  Churches
which  came  under  his  care.  He  was  not  satisfied  with  declaring  the  facts  of  the  gospel
and  demonstrating  the  truth  of  them  to  the  conviction  of  his  hearers.  He  was  very
different  from  a  cold  philosopher  who  simply  aims  at  establishing  a  certain  thesis.
Deep  feeling  entered  into  his  work.  A  touching  gentleness  and  affectionateness  may
ht)  felt  as  the  pervading  tone  of  his  treatment  of  his  converts.  He  does  not  behave  as  a
master  who  is  ambitious  to  lord  it  over  the  heritage  of  Christ.  He  is  like  a  nurse  with  her
children.   The  example  of  the  great  apostle  is  worthy  of  the  study  of  all  Christian  teachers.

I.     ThB     gospel    IB    BEST   COMMENDED     BY    AFFECTIONATENESS     IN    THE    CHRISTIAN

FBEACHEB.  The  gospcl  bases  its  first  claims  on  its  own  truth  and  reasonableness,  and
it  is  necessary  that  men  should  be  convinced  on  these  points  if  due  respect  for  the
rights  of  the  human  intellect  is  to  be  observed.  Nevertheless  the  most  persuasive
power  is  not  to  be  found  in  hard  reason;  nor  does  it  reside  in  the  splendours  of
eloquence.  It  is  much  more  effective  when  it  comes  from  simple,  natural  affectionate-
ness. Men  are  more  vulnerable  in  the  heart  than  in  the  head.  The  Christian  teacher
must  attack  both  strongholds  ;  he  will  be  foolish  indeed  if  he  neglect  the  more  accessible
one.  It  is  often  seen  in  experience  that  affectionateness  conquers  where  convincing
logic  falls  dead,  and  where  glowing  rhetoric  only  dazzles  the  hearers.  1.  ITie  influence
of  the  preacher  depends  chiefly  on  his  affectionateness.  His  relations  with  his  hearers
are  personal.  He  is  more  than  the  herald.  He  is  the  shepherd  of  the  flock,  the
father  or  brother  of  the  family,  the  nurse  of  the  babes  in  Christ.  Thus  ties  of  love
between  pastor  and  people  not  only  make  the  association  in  Church  life  happy ;  they
also  afford  the  greatest  aids  to  the  work  of  the  ministry.  2.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  is
best  reveaied  through  affectionateness.  The  gospel  is  no  dreamy  dogma,  no  hard  law,
no  pom]x>us  manifesto.  It  is  a  message  from  a  father  to  his  children,  and  a  story  of
love  in  death.  The  Bible  is  a  most  human  book,  homely,  brotherly,  pathetic  in  its
affectionate  character.  But  this  character  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  gospel  is  marred  and
almost  lost  to  view  when  harsh  lano^uase  and  cold  feelings  accompany  the  preaching  of
it.    The  gospel  of  love  should  be  offered  in  a  kindred  spirit  of  love.

n.  A  RIGHT  FEELING  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE  GOSPEL  WILL  LEAD  TO  AFFECTIONATENESS

IN  THE  Christian  preacher.  It  is  most  important  that  the  desired  affectionateness
should  be  genuine.  The  pretence  of  it  is  mere  hypocrisy.  Affectionate  language
which  does  not  spring  from  a  heart  of  love  is  a  mockery.  It  is  better  to  have  an  honest
hardness  than  this  assumed  unctuousness.  It  is  important,  also,  that  the  affectionate-
ness should  be  healthy  and  manly,  and  should  not  degenerate  into  effeminate  senti-
mentality. The  gospel  itself  should  inspire  the  right  affectionateness.  1.  The  spirit
of  the  gospel  being  love,  if  we  truly  receive  the  gospel  it  will  inspire  love.  The  greatest
change  which  it  produces  in  men  is  to  cast  out  selfishness,  and  to  give  a  heart  of  love
to  God  and  man.  2.  We  best  show  our  love  to  Christ  hy  loving  our  brethren.  We
love  Christ  in  them.  He  who  loves  Christ  warmly  will  have  the  spirit  which  St.
Paul  manifested  to  the  Churches  under  his  care. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  12. — Worthy  of  God,  I.  To  be  worthy  op  God  is  the  highest  aim  of
SPIRITUAL  aspiration.  It  is  so  high  an  aim  that  it  seems  to  be  hopelessly  out  of  our
reach.  Are  we  not  in  everything  unworthy  of  Gk)d  ?  Our  sinfulness  is  direct  ill-desert,
our  unbelief,  weakness,  and  imperfection  dishonouring  to  Divine  grace,  our  very  virtues
and  good  deeds  of  no  absolute  worth,  because  at  best  we  are  unprofitable  servants,  who
have  but  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty  to  do.  Nevertheless  :  1.  We  should  aim  at
the  highest  attainment,  though  as  yet  we  may  be  far  from  reaching  it  2.  We  may
become  increasingly  less  unworthy  of  God.  3.  We  may  truly  honour  Ood  by  our
character  and  deeds.  4.  We  may  hope  at  last  to  be  worthy  of  God  in  the  sense  that
we  shall  be  fit  to  dwell  with  him ;  no  disgrace  to  his  Name  when  we  bear  it,  and  able  to
take  our  position  as  members  of  his  family.


ch.il  1—20.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61


n.  To  BB   WOBTHT   OP  GOD  IS  TO   BB  LIVINQ  IN  A  BIGHT   C0UB8S  OP   DAILY   LIPE.

This  is  expressed  by  the  word  '*  walk."  1.  It  must  he  a  continuous  course.  To  have
passing  phases  of  very  pure  spiritual  thought  is  not  to  be  so  worthy  of  God  as  to  walk
continuously  in  obedience  to  his  will  though  on  a  much  lower  plain.  2.  It  is  to  be
Btriven  after  in  daily  life.  We  do  not  want  angels' wings  wherewith  to  soar  into
unearthly  altitudes.  We  can  walk  on  the  lowly  earth  and  yet  be  worthy  of  God.
The  worthiness  depends  on  the  spirit  of  our  conduct,  not  on  the  sphere  in  which  we
live.  With  coarse  surroundings,  in  toilsome  drudgery,  by  humble  tasks,  the  soul  can
so  live  as  to  be  worthy  of  God.

III.  It  18  THE  DUTY  OP  ALL  Chbistians  TO  BB  woBTHY  OP  GoD.  The  requirement
does  not  belong  to  a  counsel  of  perfection  which  a  few  rare  souls  may  adopt  at  their
will.  It  is  laid  upon  all  Christians  as  a  duty.  The  special  ground  of  the  obligation  is
in  what  God  has  done  for  his  people.  He  has  called  them  '*into  his  own  kingdom  and
glory."  1.  Gratitude  requires  us  to  walk  worthy  of  God.  His  gifts  and  his  promises
reveal  love  and  sacrifice  on  his  part  which  naturally  call  for  love  and  devotion  on  ours.
2.  The  future  destiny  of  Christians  also  demands  this  conduct  The  heir  should  behave  as
befits  bis  future  position.  "  Prince  Hal ''  was  an  unworthy  prince  in  his  youth,  especially
because  he  disgraced  himself  in  view  of  an  exalted  future.  Christians  are  heirs  of  Gtxi^
kin^om.    Therefore  they  should  walk  worthily  of  him  who  has  called  them  into  it.

I V.  It  is  the  object  op  ChBISTIAN  PBEACHING  to  lead  men  to  BE  THUS  WOBTHY

OP  GoD.  If  the  aim  of  the  spiritual  life  must  be  high,  so  also  must  be  that  of  its  guide
and  teacher.  The  preacher  s  work  is  not  done  when  a  soul  is  first  turned  from  the
slavery  of  sin  to  the  service  of  Christ.  Then  follows  all  the  education  and  training  of
the  new  life  up  to  the  perfect  worthiness.  Hence  the  need  of  affectionate  influence  and
all  graces  of  persuasion. — W.  F.  A.

Vcr.  13. — TJie  Word  of  God.  I.  St.  Paul  claimed  to  be  a  teacheb  op  the
WoBD  OF  God.  1.  He  did  not  admit  that  his  teachings  were  merely  human  specula^
tions  on  religious  subjects.  His  position  was  entirely  different  from  that  of  the  most
gifted  philosopher,  more  exalted  since  he  stood  forth  as  the  apostle  of  superhuman
truth,  and  abo  more  humble  since  he  subordinated  his  own  private  ideas  to  the  message
of  which  he  was  but  the  bearer.  2.  St.  Paul  did  not  profess  to  be  simply  a  witness  of
the  facts  of  the  gospel.  That  was  the  position  of  the  first  Christian  teachers.  St.  Peter
and  his  companions  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  presented  themselves  as  witnesses  of  the
great  transactions  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  chiefly  of  his  resurrection.  They  narrated
what  they  had  seen  and  beard  (Acts  ii.  32 ;  1  John  i.  1).  St.  Paul  had  not  been  a
companion  of  our  Lord.  But  he  had  something  higher  than  the  knowledge  of  experience
and  observation.  He  did  not  learn  his  gospel  of  men ;  it  was  revealed  to  him  in  the
solitudes  of  Arabia.  3.  St.  Paul  claimed  to  be  inspired  with  a  Divine  revelation.
It  waa  not  his  thought,  nor  even  his  testimony  of  Divine  facts,  but  the  Word  of  God
that  he  proclaimed.  It  is  plain  that  the  apostle  used  his  own  language,  and  spoke  in
a  characteristic  and  individual  style.  He  also  reasoned  with  his  own  intellect ;  for
in8]Hration  does  not  simply  breathe  through  a  man  as  through  a  mechanical  instrument.
But  his  language  and  thought  and  whole  being  were  illumined  and  elevated  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  so  that  he  saw  the  truth  of  GKxi  and  was  able  to  speak  the  Word  of  God.

IL  The  Thessaloniaks  accepted  St.  Paul's  message  as  the  Wobd  op  God.  1,
They  admitted  the  fact.  They  did  so,  no  doubt,  firat  because  the  power  and  personal
influence  of  the  apostle  impressed  them ;  then  because  they  were  convinced  by  his
arguments ;  then  because  they  must  have  felt  the  inherent  beauty  and  greatness  of
what  he  taught ;  and  lastly  because  they  saw  the  good  effects  of  his  gospel.  By  these
four  gradations  we  are  led  on  to  a  more  and  more  consistent  belief  in  the  Divine  authority
of  the  gospel ;  viz.  by  authority,  by  argument,  by  the  excellency  of  the  gospel  itself,
and  by  its  fruits.  2.  The  Thessalonians  received  the  message  as  befitted  its  Divine
(rrigin,  (1)  They  believed  in  its  truth.  God  only  speaks  what  is  true.  To  establish
a  message  as  the  Word  of  God  is  to  prove  its  truth.  (2)  They  submitted  to  its
authority.  There  may  be  many  things  in  the  gospel  which  we  cannot  account  for.
Our  faith  in  God  should  be  implicit  ^3)  They  yielded  to  its  influence.  Thus  they  let
it  work  in  them.  The  Word  of  God  is  a  word  of  grace  and  a  word  of  command.  To
•eoepi  it  aright  we  must  avul  ourselves  of  the  grace  and  obey  the  command.    To


62  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—20.

receive  a  word  of  pardon  as  from  a  king  is  to  leave  the  prison  wlien  the  door  is  open.
To  receive  a  message  as  from  a  master  is  to  carry  out  the  order.

III.  St.  Paul's  teaching  proved  itself  to  bb  the  Word  of  God  by  its  effects.
It  was  found  to  be  working  in  the  Church  at  Thessalonica.  The  Word  of  Grod  is
powerful  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Christ's  words  were  spirit  and  life  (John  vL  63).  This  Divine
Word  is  no  barren  revelation  of  far-ofif  celestial  curiosities.  It  is  a  message  concerning
human  and  earthly  as  well  as  heavenly  affairs.  Like  the  first  creative  word,  when
GKxl  spake  and  it  was  done,  the  message  of  the  new  creation  is  a  word  that  effects.
God's  words  are  deeds.  But  that  they  may  be  deeds  in  us  it  is  necessary  for  us  to
receive  them  in  faith.  And  in  proportion  to  our  faith  will  the  energy  of  God's  Word
work  in  us. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  16. — Fulness  of  sins.  **  To  fill  up  their  sins  alway."  This  is  a  terrible  and
mystorious  expression.  Some  light  may  be  gained  by  considering  it  in  relation  to  the
history  of  the  Jews,  as  it  is  of  these  people  that  it  is  here  written.  They  bad
accumulated  sin  upon  sin  in  slaying  Christ  and  the  prophets,  in  expelling  the  apostles
from  their  communion,  and  finally  in  hindering  the  Gentiles  from  receiving  that  gospel
which  they  bad  rejected  for  themselves.  But  there  was  to  come  an  end  to  this  tale  of
wickedness.  The  time  was  drawing  near  when  the  Jews  would  no  longer  have  power
to  hurt  the  cause  of  Christianity,  and  when  swift  punishment  for  their  accumulated
iniquities  would  descend  in  the  destruction  of  their  city  and  nation.  They  were
hastening  to  fill  up  the  sins  which  must  issue  in  this  fearful  doom.

I.  The  greatest  sin  is  that  of  sinnikq  without  restraint.  It  is  a  mistake  to
speak  of  every  sin  as  of  infinite  guilt,  or  of  all  sins  as  equally  guilty.  Such  an  assertion
is  not  only  false,  it  tends  either  to  despair  or  to  reckless  excess  in  sinning.  However
far  one  has  gone  in  sin,  it  is  better  to  stop  than  to  go  oh  to  greater  enormities.  To  be
adding  sin  to  sin,  and  to  be  sinning  "  alway,"  are  signs  of  reckless,  abandoned  depravity.

II.  There  is  a  fulness  of  sins  which  brings  its  own  penalty.  When  sin  reaches
this  point  the  penalty  can  no  longer  be  stayed.  The  cup  once  full  flows  over  in  wrath
and  ruin.  It  is  as  though  forbearance  and  guilt  were  in  the  scales.  When  guilt  is  full
the  balance  dips.  There  is  an  end  to  all  possible  long-suffering.  The  more  men  go  on
in  excesses  of  sin,  the  faster  do  they  approach  the  inevitable  day  of  reckoning.  The
sooner  the  sin  is  filled  up  to  the  measure  which  passes  endurance,  the  sooner  must  the
stroke  of  doom  fall.

IIL  Fulness  of  sins  must  lead  to  fulness  of  punishment.  They  who  fill  up
their  sins  always  will  have  the  wrath  "  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."  The
worst  debtor  must  be  made  to  pay  the  last  farthing.  The  swifter  the  rush  downhill,
the  greater  the  crash  at  the  bottom.  The  more  tares  that  are  sown  in  spring,  the
more  bundles  to  bum  in  harvest.  He  who  fills  the  present  life  with  sins  will  have  the
next  life  filled  with  wrath.

IV.  There  seems  to  be  a  limit  to  sins.  There  is  a  fulness  of  sins.  There  is  no
fulness  of  virtues ;  these  can  be  developed  indefinitely.  The  good  man  is  growing  up
to  a  perfection.  The  bad  man  is  being  corrupted,  not  to  a  perfection,  but  to  a  fulness.
Evil  has  limits ;  goodness  has  none.  Satan  is  let  loose  for  a  time.  God  restrains  the
wrath  of  the  wicked.  Sin,  through  rebellion  against  God,  cannot  break  away  from  all
Divine  control.   Sins  are  limited  by  several  means :   1.  Capacity.    We  have  a  limited

Sower  of  sinning.  2.  Tirne.  Qod  sometimes  cuts  the  sinner  off  in  the  midst  of  his
ays,  and  brings  the  guilty  nation  to  destruction.  3.  Providential  control.  The
fulness  of  sins  is  not  the  amoimt  which  God  predestines  to  be  committed,  for  God  is
not  the  author  of  sin,  nor  does  he  will  or  permit  it.  This  fulness  is  the  measure
beyond  which  God  stays  the  evil  from  proceeding.  When  the  tide  of  iniquity,  driven
onwards  by  rebellious  powers,  reaches  this  fulness,  God  says,  "  Here  shall  thy  proud
waves  be  stayed,"  and  the  storm  beats  itself  out  in  impotent  fury. — ^W.  F.  A.

Ver.  IS.^Eindered  by  Satan.  St.  Paul  tells  his  friends  at  Thessalonica  that  he
was  anxious  to  revisit  them,  and  that  he  made  the  attempt  to  do  so  more  than  once,
but  that  he  was  hindered  by  Satan.  The  direct  impediment  may  have  been  the
opposition  of  his  enemies  (Acts  xvii.  13, 14)  ;  or  it  may  have  been  bodily  sickness — **  a
thorn  in  the  flesh,  a  messenger  of  Satan."    Whatever  this  immediate  and  visible  bin-


cu.  iiLl— 13J    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


53


dianoe  was,  the  point  of  interest  to  us  is  that  St.  Paul  attributed  it  to  Satan.  Let  us
consider  the  hindrance  thrown  in  the  way  of  good  work  by  Satan.

L  Satan  hindebs  the  wobk  of  the  gospel.  1.  The  hindrance  is  to  he  seen  in  all
times.  Doors  are  shut ;  enemies  are  raised  up ;  misunderstandings  throw  mission  work
into  confusion.  2.  The  source  of  the  hindrance  may  be  discovered  by  its  character.
'*  By  their  fruits  they  shall  know  them."  The  excuse  may  be  the  preservation  of
order,  the  restraint  of  excesses,  or  conservative  respect  for  old  ways.  That  the  real
source  of  opposition  is  Satanic  may  be  known  when  (1)  bad  men  are  the  agents,  (2)  a
good  moral  reformation  is  frustrated.  3.  This  hindrance  converts  mission  work  into  a
war/are.  The  Church  becomes  an  army.  The  forces  of  light  and  darkness  are  drawn
up  in  battle  array.  New  territory  cannot  simply  be  claimed  by  planting  the  standard
of  the  cross  upon  it.    It  must  be  fought  for  and  won  in  conquest.

IL  Satan's  hindrance  is  independent  of  the  chabacteb  of  the  Christian
LABOUBEBa  Of  coursc,  if  these  men  receive  Satan  into  their  hearts,  so  much  the  more
effectually  will  their  mission  be  frustrated.  They  become  traitors  who  destroy  their
own  cause  by  opening  the  gates  of  the  citadel  to  the  foe.  Sin  indulged  by  the  servant
of  Christ  is  treason.  This  is  a  certain  and  fearful  hindrance  to  success.  But  the
Christian  labourer  may  be  faithful  and  may  still  be  hindered  by  Satan.  In  the  old
tradition  Satan  dared  to  oppose  the  archangel  Michael.  Shall  we  be  surprised  that  he
opposes  a  man  ?  Satan  resisted  and  tempted  Christ.  He  hindered  St.  Paul.  There-
fore do  not  let  us  think  that  all  difficulties  will  vanish  if  only  we  are  true  and  faithful.
Satan  may  hinder  us,  though  we  are  innocent,  through  the  wickedness  of  other  men.

IIL  Satan's  hindrance  is  ovebbuled  by  God's  pbovidenoe.  Here  St.  Paul  writes
of  Satan  hindering  him.  In  the  Acts  St.  Luke  tells  us  how,  when  the  apostle  and  his
friends  ''assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia, .  .  .  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  suffered  them  not"  (Acts
xtI.  7).  Li  it  not  possible  that  sometimes  the  two  influences  may  have  concurred  in
effecting  the  same  results  though  originating  in  the  very  opposite  sources  and  prompted
by  contradictory  motives  ?  Thus  the  messenger  of  Satan  that  was  sent  to  buffet  St.
Paul  was  the  means  of  applying  a  wholesome  discipline  and  of  saving  him  from  imdue
self-exaltation.  Thus,  too,  though  Satan  troubled  Job,  with  the  object  of  showing  him
to  be  a  hypocrite ;  the  great  trial  proved  to  be  for  the  glory  of  God  as  well  as  for  the
honour  of  nis  servant.  Satan  tempted  Christ,  and  so  made  him  the  better  High  Priest
for  us.  Satan  compassed  the  death  of  Christ,  and  thereby  led  to  the  redemption  of
the  world.    Satan's  Hindrance  to  our  work  may  be  overruled  for  its  more  full  accom-

})lisbment  in  the  end,  just  as  the  east  winds  of  early  spring  help  to  secure  a  good  fruit
uurvest  by  checking  the  too-early  development  of  bud  and  blossom.  Moreover,  all  this
hindrance  is  but  temporary.  Satan's  reign  is  for  a  season  only.  And  when  the  hin-
drance is  removed  the  final  result  will  not  have  suffered  for  the  delay.  Perhaps  it  will
even  come  the  quicker  for  the  temporary  hindrance,  as,  when  once  it  bursts  its  bounds,
the  stream  rushes  out  with  the  more  vehemence  for  having  been  dammed  up.  Let  us
not  be  impatient.    Bemember  that  Gk>d  has  all  eternity  to  work  with. — ^W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  ra.


Cos  TENTS. — The  apostle,  no  longer  able
to  repress  his  longing  and  anxiety  for  the
Thessalonians,  resolved  to  be  left  alone  at
Athena,  and  sent  Timothy  for  the  purpose
of  exhorting  them  to  endurance  amid  their
persecntioDS,  and  to  bring  him  information
conceniDg  their  condition.  Timothy  had
just  rejoined  him  at  Corinth,  and  the
apostle  expresses  the  extreme  satisfaction
which  he  felt  at  the  welcome  tidings  which
bis  messenger  had  brought  of  their  faith


and  love;  it  put  new  life  into  him,  and
comforted  him  in  all  his  affliction  and
distress.  He  prays  God  that  he  may  be
permitted  to  revisit  the  Thessalonians,  and
to  supply  what  was  still  defective  in  their
faith;  and  he  makes  it  the  object  of  his
earnest  supplication  that  the  Lord  Jesus
would  make  them  so  to  increase  in  love  and
establish  them  in  holiness  that  they  may
be  blameless  at  his  appearance  with  all  his
holy  ones.

Ver.  1. — This  verse  is  closely  connected
with    tho   concluding   verses   of   the   last


54  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  hi,  1—13.


chapter,  from  whioh  it  should  not  be
Beparated.  Wherefore;  on  account  of  my
a£&ction  toward  you  and  my  repeated  vain
attempts  to  see  you.  When  we.  Some  refer
the  plural  to  Paul,  Silas,  and  Timothy  (ch.
1.  1) ;  others  to  Paul  and  Silas,  as  Timothy
had  been  sent  to  Thessalonioa ;  but  it  is  to
be  restricted  to  Paul,  as  is  evident  from
ch.  ii.  38  and  iii.  5,  and  inasmuch  as  Paul
was  left  alone  at  Athens ;  the  plural  being
here  used  for  the  singular.  Could  no  longer
forbear ;  could  no  longer  restrain  our  long-
ing and  anxiety  to  know  your  condition.
We  thought  it  gfood ;  a  happy  translation  of
the  original,  expressing  ooth  **we  were
pleased  and  resolved."  To  be  left  at  Athens
alone ;  an  expression  of  solitude.  Alone  in
Athens,  in  the  very  metropolis  of  idolatry.
Compare  with  this  the  common  saying,
"Alone  in  London."  In  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  we  are  informed  that  Paul  came
to  Athens  alone,  and  that  there  he  waited
for  Silas  and  Timothy  (Acts  xvii.  14,  15),
and  that  these  fellow-workers  rejoined  him
at  Oorinth  (Actsxviii.  5).  Many  expositors,
liowever,  firom  this  and  the  next  verse,  infer
that  Timothy  at  least  joined  Paul  at  Athens,
but  was  sent  back  by  him  to  Thessalonioa,
to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  hiB  converts
in  that  city.  Such  is  the  opinion  of
OUhausen,  Neander,  De  Wette,  LUnemann,
Hofmann,  Koch,  and  Schott;  and,  among
£nfi;lish  expositors,  of  Macknight,  Paley,
Eaaie,  Jowett,  EUicott,  and  Wordsworth.
There  is  no  contradiction  between  this  view
and  the  narrative  of  the  Acts.  Luke  merely
omits  to  mention  Timothy's  short  visit  to
Athens  and  departure  from  it,  and  relates
only  the  final  reunion  of  these  three  fellow-
workers  at  Corinth.  Indeed,  Paley  gives
this  coming  of  Timothy  to  Athens  as  one  of
the  undesigned  coincidences  between  this
Epistle  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.^
Still,  however,  we  are  not  necessitated  to
suppose  that  Timothy  joined  the  apostle  at
Attiens.  The  words  admit  of  the  opinion
that  ho  was  sent  by  Paul  direct  from  Beroea,
and  not  from  Athens;  and  that  he  and
Silas  did  not  join  Paul  until  they  came
from  Macedonia  to  Corinth.  Such  is  the
opinion  of  Hug,  Wieselcr,  Koppe,  Alford,
and  Vaughan.

Yer.  2.— And  sent  Timothens.  This  was
a  great  act  of  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of
Paul;  because  to  be  without  an  assistant
and  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  in  such  a
city  as  Athens,  the  very  centre  and  strong
hold  of  heathenism,  full  of  temples  and
idols,  must  necessarily  have  brought  upon
him  many  discomforts ;  and  yet  liis  anxiety
for  the  Thessalonians  overcame  all  motives


»   Pale/s  *Hor»  Paulinie,'  1  Thessalo-
nians, No.  iiL


of  personal  oonvenienoe.  Our  brother,  and
minister  of  Ood,  and  onr  fellow-labonrer.
The  reading  of  manuscripts  here  varies.
Some  important  manuscripts  read,  "our
brother  and  fellow-worker  with  God'* — a
phrase  whioh  is  elsewhere  employed  by  the
apostle:  ^for  we  are  labourers  together
with  Qod"  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).  Retaining,
however,  the  reading  of  the  text,  Paul  here
calls  Timothy  his  orother,  expressing  his
esteem  and  fraternal  affection  for  him ;  "  a
minister  of  Qod"  expressing  Timothy's
official  position  and  the  honour  conferred
on  him  by  Christ;  and  his  **  fellow-labourer,"
expressing  his  laborious  work  in  preaching
the  gospel,  and  reminding  the  Thessalonians
of  his  labours  among  them.  Different
reasons  have  been  assigned  for  this  eulogy
pronounced  by  Paul  on  Timothy.  Some
suppose  that  it  was  to  show  how  eagerly  he
consulted  the  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians,
by  sending  to  them  a  person  of  such  im-
portance and  of  such  use  to  himself  as
Timothy  (Calvin) ;  others  think  that  it  was
to  recommend  Timothy  to  the  favourable
regard  of  the  Thessalonians  in  the  absence
of  himself  (Chrysostom) ;  but  it  appears  to
bo  the  natural  outburst  of  affection  for  his
favourite  disciple.  In  the  gospel  of  Christ
Timothy  had  laboured  with  Paul  smd  Silas
in  the  publication  of  the  gospel  at  Thessa-
lonioa, and  was  consequently  well  known  to
the  Thessalonians,  and  favourably  regarded
by  them.  To  establish  yon,  and  to  comfort
yon ;  or  rather,  to  exhort  you,  as  the  matter  of
exhortation  follows.  Ooneeming  yonr  &ith ;
in  order  to  the  continuance  and  furtherance
of  your  faith.  The  purpose  of  the  mission
of  Timothy ;  namely,  to  confirm  the  Thessa-
lonians in  the  faith,  to  exhort  them  to
perseverance  in  Christianity,  notwithstand-
ing ihe  persecutions  to  which  they  were
exposed.

Ver.  3. — ^This  verse  contains  the  object  of
the  exhortation ;  the  clause  is  an  accusative
to  the  verb.  That  no  man  should  be  moved
(or,  shaken)  by;  or  rather,  tn;  expressing
the  position  in  which  they  were  placed.
These  afflictions.  The  same  word  as  **  tribula-
tion "  in  the  next  verse.  For  yonrselvee  know.
How  they  knew  is  explained,  partly  from
the  forewamings  of  the  apostle,  and  partly
frem  their  own  experienoe.  That  we ;  not  to
be  referred  to  Paul  only,  nor  to  Paul  and
his  companions,  Silas  and  Timothy,  nor  to
Paul  and  the  Thessalonians,  but  to  all
Christians  in  general ;  that  we  Cluristians.
Are  appointed  thereunto ;  namely,  by  God.
Our  afflictions  do  not  result  from  chance,
but  are  the  necessary  consequence  of  our
Christianity;  they  arise  frem  the  appoint-
ment and  ordinance  of  Gk)d.  Tribulation  is
the  Christian's  portion.  Whatever  truth
there  may  be  in  the  raying  that  prosperity


CH.IIL1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


65


ifl  the  pzoxnue  'of  the  Old  Testament,
affliction  is  certainly  the  promise  of  the
New.  We  must  be  conformed  to  Christ  in
his  sufferings.  **In  the  world,"  says  our
Lord,  '^ye  shall  have  tribulation"  (John
xvL  S3).  When  our  Lord  called  Paul  to
his  apoBtleship,  he  showed  him  how
great  things  he  must  suffer  for  his  Kame's
sake  (Acts  ix.  16).  All  the  apostles
suffer^  from  persecution,  and  concerning
Christians  in  general  Paul  asserts  that  it  is
only  through  tribulation  that  they  can
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Qod  (Acts  zi?.
22 ;  see  Rev.  vii.  14).

Yer.  4.— For;  assigning  the  reason  why
they  should  not  be  mov^  by  these  afflic-
tions. yexily,whfliiwe  were  with  you,  we  told
jon  iMfinre  that  we ;  here  also  Christians  in

general.  Should  suffer.  Not  a  simple  future,
ut  denoting  that  it  was  thus  appointed  in
the  counsels  of  God — that  their  tribulation
was  the  result  of  the  Diviue  purpose.
Trilralatuni  (affliction) ;  evexi  as  it  oame  to
pan,  and  ye  know ;  thnt  is,  from  your  own
experience.  The  affliction,  then,  was  not
some  strange  thing  which  had  befallen
tfaem«

Yer.  5.— Tor  thii  oauae,  when  I  could  no
longer  forbear ;  no  longerrepress  my  anxiety,
and  endure  my  want  of  information  con-
cerning you.  I  Mat  to  know  your  ikith ;  to
receive  mlbrmation  concerning  your  spiritual
condition.  Lest  by  some  means  the  tempter ;
a  designation  of  Satan,  used  also  by  Matthew
(i?.  3).  Have  tempted  you,  and  our  labour
be  in  ¥ain;  that  is,  useless,  without  result
(see  on  ch.  IL  1 ;  comp.  also  Gal.  iv.  11,  **  I
am  afraid,  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you
labour  in  vain").  The  temptation  to
which  the  Thessalonians  were  exposed  was
that  of  apostasy  from  Christianity,  through
the  fear  or  endurance  of  persecution.  That
the  tempter  had  temptea  them  is  probable
— it  was  almost  unavoidable;  that  he  had
succeeded  in  his  temptation,  and  hod  thus
rendered  the  apostlo*s  labours  among  them
lueless,  was  uncertain — a  contingency  which
mifriit  possibly  have  taken  place.

Yer.  6.—- But  now  when  Timothens  eame
from  you  unto  ui.  Timothy,  as  we  learn
from  the  Acts,  in  company  with  Silos,
joined  Paul  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  15),  and
brouj^ht  him  information  concerning  the
state  of  ttie  Thesaalonian  Church.  And
brtms^  Uf  good  tidings;  the  same  word
which  is  elsewhere  employed  for  preaching
the  gospel  The  information  which  Timothy
brought  to  the  apostlo  was  as  it  wore  a
euspel  to  him  (oomn.  Luke  ii.  10,  **  Behold
I  bring  you  gooa  tidings").  Of  your
fsith  and  eharity.  The  go^  tidings  which
Timothy  brought  referr^  to  the  sjpiritual
oonditioD  of  the  Thessalonians — their  feiith
bad  not  been  shaken  and  their  love  had  not


waxed  cold  under  the  persecutions  to  which
they  were  exposed;  and  along  with  their
faith  and  love  was  the  affection  which  they
bore  to  the  apostle,  and  their  earnest  desire
to  see  him.  And  that  ye  have  constant
remembrance  of  us  always,  desiring  greatly
to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you.  The  affec-
tion between  the  Thessalonians  and  Uie
apostle  was  mutuaL

Yer.  7. — ^Therefore,  brethren,  we  were  com-
forted over  you — with  reference  to  you — ^in
all  our  affliotlon  and  distress.  Some  refer
'*  affliction  "  to  outward  troubles,  and  *'  dis-
tress" to  internal  evils — referring  the  one
to  the  persecutions  arising  from  his  Corin-
thian opponents,  and  the  other  to  his  bodily
infirmity  (Koch).  Such  a  distinction  is,
however,  precarious.  The  words  do  not
refer  to  the  apostle's  anxiety  on  account  of
the  Thessalonians,  for  that  was  removed  by
the  coming  of  Timothy.  Clearly  some  ex-
ternal trouble  is  denoted.  Paul,  when  he
E reached  the  gospel  at  Corinth,  and  before
e  obtained  the  protection  of  Gallic,  was
exposed  to  much  persecution  and  danger.
The  Jews  had  expelled  him  from  their
synagogue  (Acts  xviii  6),  and  attempts  had
been  made  against  him  which  at  length
broke  out  into  an  insurrection  against  him,
when  he  was  dragged  before  the  Roman
tribunal  (Acts  xviii.  12).  His  condition  at
Corinth  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle  was
dark  and  gloomy.  By  your  faith ;  by  the
steadfastness  of  your  faith.  The  good  ne\«s
which  Timothy  brought  of  the  faith  and
love  of  the  Thessalonians  comforted  the
apostlo  amid  all  the  trials  and  difficulties
and  disappointments  of  his  ministry  (comp.
with  this  passage  2  Cor.  vii.  4 — 7).

Yer.  8. — For  now  we  live.  Not  to  be  referred
to  the  eternal  and  future  life  (Clirysostom) ;
or  to  be  weakened  as  if  it  merely  signified,
"  We  relish  and  enjoy  life  notwithstanding
our  affliction  and  distress  "  (Pelt)  ;  but  the
meaning  is  the  good  tidings  which  Timothy
has  brought  have  imparted  new  life  unto
us ;  "we  are  in  the  full  strength  and  fresh-
ness of  life,  we  do  not  feel  the  sorrows  and
tribulations  which  the  outer  world  prepares
for  us"  (Liiiicmann).  The  apostle  con-
siders his  condition  of  affliction  and  distress
as  a  kind  of  death  ;  so,  elsewhere  he  says,
•*I  die  daily"  (1  Cor.  xv.  31);  and  from
which  death  he  was  now  again  raised  to
life.  If;  provided — a  hypothetical  assump-
tion. Te  stand  fast;  continue  firm  in  the
faith  of  tho  gospel.  In  the  Lord;  the
element  of  true  life.

Yer.  9. — ^For ;  assigning  the  reason  of  the
declaration,  **  now  we  live."  What  thanks
can  we  render  to  Ood  again  for  you.  As
their  steadfastness  in  the  fiiith  was  owing
to  God's  grace,  thanks  was  to  be  rendered  to
Qod  on  their  behalf.    For  all  the  joy ;  joy


■■


^■P


56


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—13.


in  all  its  fulness  (comp.  Jos.  1.  2,  "  Connt  it
all  joy  ").  Wherewitli  we  joy  for  your  lakes
before  our  Ood.  Giving  prominence  to  the
purity  of  their  joy.

Ver.  10. — Night  and  day  (comp.  ch.  ii.  9)
praying  exceedingly.  Denoting  the  intense
earnestness  and  anxiety  of  the  apostle  for
the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  Thessalonians,
that  n)uiid  vent  to  itself  in  incessant  prayer
for  them.  Now  follows  the  subject-matter
of  his  prayer :  That  we  might  see  your  face,
and  might  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in
yonr  laith.  The  faith  of  the  Thessalonians
was  not  perfect ;  it  was  **  lacking  "  in  several
respects.  It  was  defective  in  extent ;  they
were  ignorant  of  many  of  the  doctrines  of
the  gospel,  and  had  formed  erroneous  views
of  other  doctrines,  such  as  the  second
advent  It  was  defective  in  application ;
'they  had  not  yet  renounced  all  the  corrupt
practices  of  their  former  heathen  life,  nor
had  they  embodied  all  the  precepts  of  the
gospel  into  their  actual  life.  The  Thessa-
lonians were  as  yet  but  novices.  So  also
the  reason  which  impelled  Paul  to  wish  to
come  to  Rome  was  to  supply  that  which  was
lacking  in  the  faith  of  the  Roman  converts
(Rom.  i.  11).  Confirmation  was  a  work  it:
which  the  apostle  delighted,  being  both
important  and  desirable.  In  general,  faith
at  first  is  weak  and  defective ;  it  is  only
developed  by  degrees.  Especially  is  it  in-
creased by  every  increase  of  spiritual  know-
ledge. **  Add  to  your  faith  knowledge  "  (2
Pet  i  5,  6).  The  remark  of  Calvin  is
worthy  of  attention :  *'  Paul  is  desirous  of
having  the  opportunity  given  him  of  sup-

5 lying  what  is  wanting  in  the  faith  of  the
'hessalonians,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
completing  in  all  its  parts  their  faith  which
was  as  yet  imperfect.  Yet  this  is  the  faith
which  he  had  previously  extolled  mar-
vellously. From  this  we  infer  that  those
who  far  surpass  others  are  still  far  distant
fh>m  the  gckL  Hence,  whatever  progress
we  may  have  made,  let  us  keep  in  view  our
deficiencies,  that  we  may  not  be  reluctant
to  aim  at  something  further."

Ver.  11. — How  Ood  himself  and  onr
Father;  or,  as  we  would  express  it  according
to  the  English  idiom,  Ood  himself,  our  Father,
omitting  thecoxgnnotion.  And  our  Lord  Jesns


Christ.  Some  suppose  that  the  three  Divine
Persons  of  the  sacred  Trinity  are  here  ex-
pressly named :  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
the  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but
the  words  in  the  original  will  not  bear  this
sense :  **  God  himself  and  our  Father  *'■  is
the  same  Divine  Person.  Direct.  It  is  to
be  observed  that  the  verb  ** direct"  is  in
the  Greek  in  the  singular,  thus  denoting  a
unity  between  Gkxl  our  Father  and  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  At  all  events,  we  have
an  express  prayer  directed  to  Christ,  thus
necessarily  implying  his  Divine  nature.  Onr
way  nnto  yon.

Ver.  12. — ^And  the  Lord.  By  some  re-
ferred to  the  First  Person  of  the  blessed
Trinity,  God  our  Father  (Alford);  by
others  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Father  and
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  afterwards  both
mentioned  in  the  prayer ;  but  it  is  to  be  re-
ferred, according  to  the  prevailing  usage  in
Paul's  Epistle,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Hake  yon ;  literally,  you  may  the  Lord  make,
putting  the  emphasis  on  **  you."  To  increase
and  abonnd  in  love  one  toward  another;
toward  your  fellow-Christians.  And  toward
all  men ;  toward  the  human  race  in  general.
'*This  is  the  character  of  Divine  love  to
comprehend  all ;  whereas  human  love  hath
respect  to  one  man  and  not  to  another "
(Theophylact).  Xyen  as  we  do  toward  yon ;
that  is,  as  we  abound  in  love  toward  yon.

Ver.  13.— To  the  end  (in  order  that)  he
may  establish  yonr  hearts  unblamable  in
holiness  before  Ood.  In  the  sight  of  God,  in
his  judgment  who  searcheth  the  hearts.
The  woi^s,  "before  God,"  are  to  be  con-
joined neither  with  "holiness"  nor  with
"  unblamable,"  but  with  the  whole  phrase,
"  unblamable  in  holiness."  Even  onr  Father,
at  the  coming  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  at
the  second  advent  With  all  his  saints.
By  "saints"  or  "holy  ones"  are  by  some
understood  the  angels  who  shall  accompany
Christ  to  judgment ;  but  although  the  term
"  saints "  is  used  of  the  angels  in  the  Old
Testament,  it  is  never  so  employed  in  the
Kew.  The  word  seems  to  denote  those  holy
men  who  have  died  in  the  Lord  and  who
shall  be  raised  at  the  advent,  and  accom-
pany Christ  to  the  judgment


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  3,  4,— 'Connection  between  affliction  and  religion.  True  religioDy  instead  of
delivering  those  who  possess  it  from  suflfering,  rather  entails  suffering  upon  them.
Believers  are  appointed  by  God  to  suffer  tribulation.  This  was  peculiarly  true  of  the
early  Christians,  but  it  is  true  generally.  We  are  appointed  to  afflictions  (1)  in  order
that  by  them  our  fitness  for  heaven  and  our  relish  for  our  everlasting  rest  may  be
increased ;  (2)  in  order  that  we  may  thus  learn  the  blessed  graces  of  patience  and
resignation — graces  which  we  could  not  leam  in  health  and  prosperity,  and  which  will
be  useful  to  us  in  a  world  of  glory  (1  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).


cam.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN8.  67


Yen.  3,  8. — Stetxd/astness  in  faith  and  affliction.  "  That  no  man  should  be  moved
by  these  afflictions."  We, are  certainly  not  now  exposed  to  persecutions,  but  still  there
are  afflictions  peculiar  to  the  Christian  life.  We  are  forewarned  of  them,  and  therefore
are  not  to  regard  them  as  strange  or  unexpected  calamities.  1.  This  steadfastness  is
the  work  of  Ood,  God  is  able  to  make  ns  stand,  and  will  cause  us  to  be  more  than
conquerors.  He  can  even,  while  we  continue  in  this  state  of  warfare,  establish  our
hearts  unblamable  in  holiness.  2.  This  steadfastness  is  the  work  of  man.  We  must
co-operate  with  Ckxi  We  must  beware  of  beiug  either  terrified  by  threats  or  allured
by  blandishments.  We  must  exercise  prayer,  watchfulness,  and  the  active  performance
of  Christian  duties.

Vera,  6 — 8.— 1%«  duties  of  minister  and  people.  In  the  reciprocal  feelings  of  the
apostle  and  his  Thessalonian  converts,  we  gain  instruction  regarding  the  mutual
conduct  of  minister  and  people.  1.  Duties  of  the  minister.  The  affection  and  anxiety
which  he  should  have  for  his  people ;  the  earnestness  with  which  he  should  pray  for
them ;  the  gratitude  with  which  he  should  thank  Grod  for  their  spiritual  welfare ;  the
joy  which  he  experiences  in  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  and  the  warmth  of  their
charity ;  the  care  and  diligence  with  which  he  should  supply  what  is  lacking  in  their
faith.  2.  Duties  of  the  people.  The  reciprocal  afifection  which  they  should  have  for
their  minister;  the  good  remembrance  which  they  should  entertain  of  him;  the
obedience  which  they  should  render  unto  him  in  spiritual  matters;  the  constant
prayers  which  they  should  ofifer  up  for  him.

Ver.  9. — Joy  in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  others.  We  rejoice  in  the  temporal  prosperity
of  our  friends ;  much  more  ought  we  to  rejoice  in  their  spiritual  prosperity.  ^'  Now  we
live,"  says  the  apostle,  "  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  And  similarly  the  Apostle
John  says,  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth."
We  must  imitate  the  angels  in  heaven,  who  rejoice  at  the  repentance  of  a  sinner.  We
must  imbibe  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  who  is  represented  as  rejoicing  when
he  had  found  the  sheep  that  was  lost.  We  should  rejoice  (1)  because  souls  are
rescued  from  hell  and  Satan  ;  (2)  because  Christ  is  glorified  in  the  salvation  of  men ;
(3)  because  new  members  are  born  into  the  family  of  Qod ;  (4)  because  boundless
nappiness  is  secured.

Vcr.  10. — Dtfective  faith.  Our  faith  may  be  defective  in  various  ways.  1.  In  its
qualittf.  It  may  be  mingled  with  unbelief  or  with  doubts ;  we  may  only  partially
believe.  If  ao,  let  our  prayer  be,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  2.  In  its
ctfoctB,  It  may  not  embrace  all  the  revealed  truths  of  religion  ;  we  may  be  ignorant
of  some  of  them,  or  have  adopted  erroneous  notions  concerning  others.  If  so,  we  must
**  add  to  our  Caith  knowledge."  3.  In  its  efficacy.  It  may  be  too  much  of  a  dead
faith ;  it  may  not  exercise  itself  outwardly ;  it  may  not  sufficiently  influence  our
practice.  If  so,  we  must  remember  that  "  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead."  4.  In
iU  tieadfastneu.  Our  faith  may  be  wavering,  unstable,  liable  to  fail;  it  may  be
variable ;  sometimes  we  may  be  strong  in  the  feiith,  and  at  other  times  weak.  If  so,
let  our  prayer  be^  "  Lord,  increase  our  fiuth."

Vcr.  12. — Prayer  addressed  to  Christ.  We  have  here  an  instance  of  prayer  addressed
to  Christ.  The  apostle  prays  that  Christ  may  direct  his  way  to  the  Thessalonians,  and
make  them  abound  in  love.  The  martyr  Stephen  breathed  out  his  spirit  in  a  prayer
to  Christ.  And  Christians  in  general  are  represented  as  those  who  in  every  place  call
on  the  Lord  Jesus.  ''  There  is  no  foundation,"  as  Bishop  Alexander  remarks,  *'  for
any  such  statement  as  that  'truly  primitive  and  apostolic  prayer  is  invariably  to
God  through  Christ.'"  Christ  himself  is  often  in  Scripture  the  direct  Object  of  wor-
ship. Now,  if  Christ  be  not  God,  the  apostle  and  early  Christians  were  idolaters.
The  divinity  of  Christ  is  Ithe  only  ground  on  which  the  worship  of  Christ  can  be
defended.

Vera.  12, 13. — Religious  progress.    1.  TTie  nature  of  rdigious  progress.    It  is  ani
mcrease  in  love  to  our  fellow-ChristiaDS  and  to  all  men*     2.  The  ultimate  end  of.


68  THE  FIRST  EHSTLB  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  m.  1—13.

religious  progreu.  The  establish  men  t  of  our  hearts  in  holiness,  and  our  being  presented
blameless  before  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming.

Ver.  13. — The  ultimate  end  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  establishment  of
believers  in  holiness  before  God  at  the  advent  of  Christ  is  the  ultimate  desi^jn  of
Christianity.  Or,  as  Paul  elsewhere  expresses  the  same  truth,  "Christ  loved  the
Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it ;  that  ho  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing
of  water  by  the  word,  that  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish"

iEph.  V.  26,  27).  And  again,  "  That  ye  may  be  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord
esus  Christ"  (1  Cor.  i.  8).  What  a  glorious  consummation !  What  a  perfection  of
holiness  I  When  faith  and  love  will  both  be  perfect ;  when  all  that  is  lacking  in  our
faith  will  be  supplied ;  and  all  that  is  defective  in  our  love  will  be  remedied ;  and
when  the  whole  Church  will  be  presented  faultless  and  blameless  before  God ;  when
sin  and  moral  imperfection  will  be  for  ever  excluded  I

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 5.— I%tf  design  of  Timothy'a  mission  to  Thessalonica.  When  the  apostle
could  no  longer  control  his  longing  to  see  his  converts,  he  sent  them  Timothy  by  way
of  relieving  his  solicitude  in  their  behalf.  His  love  for  them  was  manifest  in  all  the
circumstances  of  this  mission.

I.   He  8ACBIFICES  HIS  OWN  lUMEDIATE  COMFORT  TO  THEIB  BENEFIT.      **  We  thought

it  good  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone."  1.  Though  Timothy  was  most  necessary  to  him  in
the  ministry,  he  parted  with  him  for  their  good,  2.  Athens,  as  a  seat  of  boundless
idolatry,  exercised  such  a  depressing  influence  upon  him  that  he  needed  the  stimulus
of  Timothy's  society.    Yet  he  denied  himself  this  comfort  that  he  might  serve  them.

IL  He  despatches  to  them  the  most  highly  esteemed  of  his  fellow-
LABOUBEBS.  '*  Our  brother,  and  minister  of  God,  and  fellow-labourer  in  the  gospel  of
Christ."  He  selects  one  best  fitted  to  serve  them  by  his  gifts,  his  experience,  and  his
knowledge  of  the  apostle's  views  and  wishes.  The  various  titles  here  given  to  Timothy
help  to  honour  him  before  the  Churches,  and  to  challenge  the  abiding  confidence  of  the
Thessalonians.

III.  The  design  of  Timothy's  mission.  It  was  twofold :  "  To  establish  you,  and
to  comfort  you  concerning  your  faith,"  and  "to  know  your  faith."  1.  The  necessity
for  his  mission.  The  afflictions  which  they  were  enduring  for  the  gospel.  (1)  These
afflictions  had  a  most  disturbing  tendency.  *'  That  no  one  be  disquieted  by  these
afflictions."  The  converts  had  newly  emerged  from  heathenism,  and  therefore  the
apostle  was  more  concerned  on  their  behalf.  Yet,  as  we  know  from  the  Second  Epistle,
they  remained  firm.  "  We  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God  for  your
patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure  "  (2  Thess.
i.  4).  (2)  These  afflictions  were  of  Divine  appointment.  "  For  yourselves  know  that
we  are  appointed  thereunto."  They  were,  therefore,  "  no  strange  thing."  They  come
by  the  will  of  God,  who  has  determined  their  nature,  severity,  and  duration.  "  Behold,
I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  The  afflictions  were  not  accidental.
(3)  They  were  clearly  foreseen  by  the  apostle.  "  When  we  were  with  you  we  told  you
beforehand  that  we  are  to  sufier  affliction."  (a)  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  forewarn
their  converts  of  coming  affliction,  lest  they  should  be  ofiended  thereby,  (b)  Converts,
when  forewarned,  ought  to  be  forearmed,  so  that  they  may  not  sink  under  them,  much
less  forsake  the  gospel  on  account  of  them.  "  For  the  light  afflictions  are  but  for
a  moment,  and  work  out  an  exceeding  weight  of  glory."  (4)  Satan  is  the  main  source
of  danger  in  these  afflictions.  "  Lest  by  any  means  the  tempter  had  tempted  you."
The  apostle  was  "  not  ignorant  of  his  devices,"  and  was  apprehensive  lest  Satan  should
get  an  advantage  of  his  converts  by  moving  them  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  and
causing  them  to  relinquish  their  profession  of  it.  (5)  The  only  security  against  Satan's
temptations — faith ;  for  this  "  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world  " — this  is  the
shield  **  wherewith  they  could  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."  2.  The  manner
in  which  Timothy's  mission  was  to  be  discharged,    "  To  establish  you  and  to  comfort


CH.m.1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  69

you  concerniDS  your  faith.**  (1)  In  relation  to  the  Thessalonians.  Timothy  would
(a)  establish  tnem  by  giving  them  a  fresh  exhibition  of  the  truth  with  its  manifold
evidences.  The  strongest  faith  needs  confirmation.  The  apostles  were  in  the  habit  of
confinning  the  souls  of  the  disciples  (Acts  xiv.  22).  (b)  He  would  comfort  them  con-
cerning their  fedth  by  exhibiting  the  example  of  Christ,  the  glory  that  must  accrue  to
God  from  their  steadfastness,  and  the  hope  of  the  coming  ^Dgdom.  (2)  In  relation
to  the  apostle  himself.  "  To  know  your  faith."  One  object  of  his  sending  Timothy
was  to  put  an  end  to  his  own  anxieties  and  doubts  on  their  behalf,  for  he  might  fear
that  **  his  labour  would  be  in  vain.**  He  might  hope  the  best  but  fear  the  worst,  for
he  was  most  deeply  concerned  in  their  welfare. — T.  C.

Vers.  6—8. — The  happy  isstie  of  Timothy's  visit  to  Thessalonica,  This  Epistle  was
written  immediately  after  Timothy's  return  as  expressive  of  the  apostle's  ht^arty  relief
at  his  tidings.

I.  Thb  good  tidinob.  "Your  faith  and  charity,  and  that  ye  have  remembrance
of  us  always,  desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you.**  1.  Their  faith.  He
was  gratified  to  hear  of  the  steadfastness  and  soundness  of  their  faith.  They  aboimded
in  the  (I)  grace  of  faith,  which  was  unfeigned,  growing,  and  lively ;  (2)  in  the  doctrine
of  faith,  wMch  had  much  light  in  it ;  (3)  in  the  profession  of  faith,  which  they  held  fast
without  wavering,  out  of  a  pure  conscience.  2.  Their  love.  This,  which  was  the
fruit  of  their  faith,  had  not  waxed  cold  on  account  of  abounding  iniquity.  Their  faith
worked  by  love.  The  two  graces  are  always  found  together.  Christian  love  must  be
without  dissimulation,  in  deed  and  in  truth,  fervent  and  constant.  3.  Their  constant
and  kindly  remembrance  of  the  apostle,  "  Ye  have  a  good  remembrance  of  us  always.*'
They  thought  much  of  their  spiritual  teachers,  bore  their  persons  in  memory,  thought
of  them  with  gratitude  and  respect,  and,  no  doubt,  remembered  them  in  their  prayers.
i.  Their  desire  to  see  the  apostle,  lliey  desired  to  have  their  memories  refreshed  by
a  personal  visit  from  him.  If  they  had  begun  to  fall  away,  they  would  not  have  been
so  anxious  to  see  him.  There  was  a  tender  attachment  on  both  sides,  for  there  was
a  longing  on  both  sides  for  further  fellowship.

II.  The  effects  of  these  good  tidings  ok  the  apostle.  "Therefore  we  were
comforted  over  you  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress  by  your  faith."  1.  They  enabled
him,  if  not  to  forget,  at  least  to  bear  up,  under  a  weighty  burden  of  trial.  He  was  now
at  Corinth,  in  peril  and  persecution  from  the  Jews,  who  '*  opposed  themselves  and
blasphemed "  (Acts  xviii.  5 — 17 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  3).  He  was  disconsolate  and  dispirited,
almost  like  a  dead  man,  carrying  about  with  him  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  but  now
the  news  of  Timothy  revived  him,  like  life  from  the  dead,  infusing  into  him  new  life
and  vigour.  It  was  their  faith  especially  which  comforted  him.  There  is  no  comfort
to  a  minister  comparable  to  that  which  springs  from  the  stability  and  perseverance  of
his  people.  2.  The  very  continuance  of  his  Itfe  seemed  to  be  dependent  upon  their
sieaa/astness.  **  For  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.'^  The  language  is
^most  painfully  strong.  It  suggested  to  them :  (1)  The  necessity  of  continued  watchful-
ness and  faith.  (2)  The  true  secret  of  steadfastness — ^being  "  in  the  Lord."  Thus  only
would  •*  they  build  themselves  up  in  their  most  holy  faith,**  ''  continuing  steadfastly
in  the  Church's  prayers  and  instructions.**  (3)  How  much  they  could  affect,  not  the
comfort  only,  but  the  life  of  their  teachers,  by  their  vigilance  and  perseverance  I — T.  C.

Yflis.  9, 10. — The  apostle's  gratitude  to  Ood  and  his  further  solicitude  for  his  converts,
L  His  gbatttude  fob  the  joy  impabted  by  Timothy's  tidings.  "  For  what  thanks
can  we  render  to  Qod  again  for  you,  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes
before  our  CK)d?  "  1.  He  has  no  words  to  express  his  gratitude  to  Ood  for  their  constancy,
2.  The  jay  he  experienced  was  not  in  the  greed  of  any  u)orldly  advantage  he  Imd  gained,
but  was  the  h^irty  and  sincere  joy  of  one  profoundly  interested  in  their  spiritual
welfare.  3^  It  was  joy  **  btfore  God,*'  who  sees  and  knows  all  inward  thoughts  and
feelings,  and  therefore  kaows  its  reality  and  power.

IL  His  fbayebful  anxiety  to  see  the  Thessalonians  fob  theib  fubtheb
bekzfit.  ^  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that  we  might  see  your  face,  and
might  perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in  your  faith.**  His  prayers  had  an  extraordinary
fervency.    Ministers  ought  to  be  much  in  prayer  for  their  flocks.    1«  The  deficiencies


60  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ui.  1—13.

in  iheir  faith.  They  had  already  received  the  grace  of  faith  and  the  doctrine  of  faith,
and  exhibited  in  its  fulness  the  "  work  of  faith."  But  there  were  de6ciencies  still  to  be
supplied.  (1)  Their  faith  wanted  still  greater  power,  for  they  had  hardly  yet  escaped
all  danger  of  relapse  into  heathen  impurities.  (2)  It  wanted  to  be  more  widely
diffused  through  all  the  duties  of  life,  for  they  needed  to  mind  honest  industry  and
forswear  idleness.  (3)  They  needed  fuller  light  upon  the  second  advent.  2.  The
design  of  the  ministry  is  to  supply  these  deficiencies  of  faith.  The  apostle  longed  to  be
at  Thessalonica  once  more,  not  only  to  impart  to  them  *'  some  spiritual  gift,  to  the  end
they  might  bo  established"  (Rom.  i.  10, 11),  but  to  give  them  fuller  teaching  upon  the
various  points  where  their  faith  needed  enlargement  It  is  God's  work  to  increase  faith,
but  ministers  can  jiromote  it  as  instruments,  for  they  are  *'  for  the  perfecting  of  the
saints  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God." — ^T.  0.

Ver.  11. — Further  prayer  for  his  personal  return  to  Thessalonica,  The  apostle  had
hitherto  been  hindered  by  Satan  from  carrying  out  his  intention.  '*  But  may  God  him-
self and  our  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  direct  our  way  unto  you."

I.  The  apostle  beoognized  a  Divine  hand  in  all  that  oongebned  his  pebsonal
LIFE.  His  way  to  Thessalonica  seemed  hitherto  blocked  up,  but  he  felt  that  it
depended,  not  upon  Satan,  nor  upon  his  wicked  instruments,  but  upon  the  will  of  God
himself,  whether  he  should  ever  take  that  way.  This  implies :  1.  Our  journeys  are
not  in  our  otvn  power,  Man  may  plan  his  own  ways,  but  God  directs  his  goings ;  for
*'  a  good  man's  steps  are  ordered  by  the  Lord."  2.  Our  journeys  are  not  to  he  under^
taken  fvithout  God's  will,  (Jas.  iv.  13, 14 ;  Rom.  1. 10.)  It  is  for  him  to  order  us  where
and  when  to  go.     3.  It  is  in  his  power  only  to  remove  the  obstacles  to  our  journeys,

II.  The  apostle  beoognized  this  pbovidential  guidance  as  equally  exebcised
BY  THE  Fatheb  AND  THE  SoN.  1.  He  prays  here  to  both  Father  and  Son,  The  same
prayer  is  addressed  to  both  without  distinction,  for  the  verb  is  in  the  singular  number.
Must  not  Jesus,  therefore,  be  a  Divine  Person  ?  2.  Father  and  Son  are  here  regarded
as  possessing  one  indivisible  will,  as  exercising  a  joint  agency  in  the  guidance  of  men,
and  as  possessing  an  equality  of  power  to  this  end.  Athanasius  saw  this  fact  clearly  in
the  grammatical  peculiarity  of  the  passage.  3.  THm  apostle  exercises  an  appropriating
faith  in  both  Father  and  Son,  for  he  speaks  of  "  our  God  and  Father,"  and  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  He  was,  therefore,  all  the  more  disposed  to  trust  submissively  to  the
directing  hand  of  (Jod, — T.  C.

Vers.  12, 13. — The  apostle's  prayer  for  the  progressive  sanct^fication  of  the  Thessalonians
and  their  jfinal  perfection  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  He  has  just  prayed  for  himself,  but
whether  he  is  to  come  to  them  or  not,  he  has  a  prayer  for  their  spiritual  benefit.

I.  CONSIDEB   THE    PeBSON  TO  WHOM  THE  PBATEB  IS  ADDBES8ED.      "  But    yoU   maV

the  Lord  enlarge."  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  *'  as  the  Purchaser  of  the  Church  with
his  own  blood,"  has  received  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  the  benefit  of  his  people.
It  was  to  the  Lord  the  apostles  addressed  the  unanimous  prayer,  "  Increase  our  faith."

II.  The  blessing  pbayed  fob.  ''But  you  may  the  Lord  enlarge  and  make  to
abound  in  love  toward  one  another,  and  toward  all."  1.  The  existence  of  their  love
is  frankly  admitted.  He  had  spoken  of  *'  their  labour  of  love."  He  prays  now  for
its  increase.  2.  Their  love  was  to  be  an  abounding  love,  (1)  There  were  defects  in
their  love,  as  there  were  defects  in  their  faith,  to  be  supplied  from  the  inexhaustible
Source  of  all  love.  (2)  The  objects  of  their  love  were  (a)  *'  one  another,"  those  of
the  household  of  faith,  who  were  to  have  the  first  place  in  their  affections ;  (6)  but
"all  men"  likewise,  as  children  of  a  common  Father,  for  as  we  have  opportunity  we
must  do  good  unto  all  men  (Gal.  vi.  10),  the  world  itself  being  the  field  of  our
missionary  labours.  The  Apostle  Peter  adds  '*  love "  to  "  brotherly  kindness "  in  the
chain  of  Christian  graces,  as  if  to  imply  that  brotherly  kindness  might  become  a  narrow,
sectarian  thing,  and  therefore  the  love  of  man  as  man  is  enjoined.

in.  The  design  and  tendency  op  this  pbogbessivb  incjbeabb.  "To  the  end  that
he  may  stablish  your  hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before  our  God  and  Father  at
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints."  1.  This  implies  that  estahUsh"
ment  in  holiness  is  necessarily  involved  in  the  enlargement  of  both  faith  and  love.  2.  It
implies  that  stability  in  Tidiness  is  the  great  end  of  Christian  life  in  a  world  which


CH.  m.  1— 13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61


•hakes  believers  by  fears  and  temptations  and  delusions.  3.  It  implies  that  without
wrfeet  holiness  we^eannot  appear  without  hiame  before  Ood,  4.  It  implies  that  perfect
hdineM  is  reserved  for  the  second  coming.  (H  It  is  not  attainable  in  this  life.  We
are  not  here  **  without  spot  or  wrinkle.**  (2)  It  is  connected  with  the  redemption
of  the  body.  (3)  It  is  connected  with  the  final  glorification  of  the  redeemed ;  for  all
the  saints  are  to  be  associated  with  the  Judge  as  assessors  in  the  final  judgment  (Luko
xxiL  30 ;  John  v.  28 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  3).  Therefore  let  us  pray  for  the  increase  of  faith
and  loye,  and  live  in  the  blessed  hope  of  the  "day  of  Christ" — ^T.  C.

Yots.  1—6. — Proof  of  the  apostle's  love  for  the  Thessalonians.  I.  Thb  mission  op
TiMOTHT.  1.  He  could  no  longer  forbear,  Mark  the  intensity  of  his  afiection.  He
repeats  the  words  twice,  ver.  1  and  ver.  5,  first  in  the  plural,  then  in  the  singular
nomber,  implying,  perhaps,  that  while  all  the  missionaries  longed  to  know  how  it  fared
with  the  Tbessalonians,  his  lon^ng  was  the  most  overmastering.  He  must  hear  of
his  converts,  cost  him  what  it  might.  The  suspense  was  agonizing ;  he  could  endure
it  no  longer ;  so  deep,  so  burning,  was  his  interest  in  their  spiritual  state.  What  an
examine  to  ChriAian  pastors  now  1  2.  He  would  submit  to  any  sacrifice  ;  he  would  be  left
alone  at  Athens,  ''Alone  in  London"  has  almost  passed  into  a  proverb.  Loneliness  is
nowhere  felt  so  much  as  in  a  great  city — a

"  Crowded  wilderness,
Where  ever-moving  myriads  seem  to  say,
*  Go  I  thou  art  nought  to  us,  nor  we  to  thee — away  I  *^

St.  Paul  felt  like  this  at  Athens.  To  the  student  of  history,  to  the  lover  of  classical
antiquities,  Athens  is  one  of  the  most  attractive  of  cities.  To  St.  Paul  it  was  almost  a
desert.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  found  delight  in  natural  beauty  or  in  historic
associations ;  the  one  object  of  his  life  was  to  extend  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  to  win
iouls  to  Christ.  The  Athenians  of  his  day  had  much  curiosity,  much  versatility,  but
no  depth  of  character,  no  real  longing  after  truth.  They  did  not  persecute ;  they  had
not  earnestness  enou^  for  that.  But  mockery  and  indifiercnce  were  more  painful  to
St  Paul  than  danger  and  sufiering.  He  could  not  feel  at  home  in  Athens.  And  he
was  one  of  those  men  to  whom  sympathy  is  almost  a  necessity;  his  one  earthly
comfort  was  the  society  of  Christian  friends.  This  Epistle  shows  the  intensity  of  bis
afiiections;  he  can  scarcely  find  words  strong  enough  to  express  his  love  for  the
Thessalonians,  his  yearning  desire  to  see  them  again.  Yet  he  had  spent  only  three
weeks,  or  perhaps  a  short  time  longer,  at  Thesssdonica.  How,  then,  must  he  have
prized  the  society  of  Timotheus,  the  dearest  of  all  his  friends !  He  was  his  brother,  his
fellow-labourer ;  he  could  ill  spore  him,  especially  while  labouring  in  vain,  as  it  seemed,
in  that  most  uncongenial  place.  But  he  would  send  him ;  he  would  endure  that
isolation  which  was  so  oppressive  to  him.  Even  for  himself  it  was  better  than  the  cruel
uncertainty  which  he  could  bear  no  longer ;  and  the  visit  of  Timotheus  would  be  very
useful  to  the  infant  Church  at  Thessalonica.  So  he  thought  it  good ;  it  pleased  him,
there  was  a  pleasure  mingled  with  the  pain,  to  be  left  at  Athens  alone.  There  is  a
pleasure  in  self-sacrifice,  severe  but  real ;  there  is  a  peace  in  the  conscious  submission
of  the  human  will  to  the  blessed  will  of  God — a  peace  not  granted  to  all,  for  not  all
take  up  the  cross,  but  very  precious,  very  high  and  holy.  3.  So  he  sent  his  closest  friend
and  companion.  His  words  show  how  he  felt  the  separation.  He  describes  him  as  his
hrother ;  elsewhere  he  calls  him  his  son  in  the  faith,  his  dearly  beloved  son.  His
msence,  his  loving  care,  his  afifectionate  sympathy,  were  very  dear  to  St.  Paul.
His  help,  too,  was  very  needful ;  he  was  the  minister  of  God,  St.  Paul's  fellow-labourer
in  the  gospel  (the  r^ings  are  somewhat  confused,  but  the  meaning  is  plain) ;  ho
could  assist  him  in  his  difiicult  and  almost  heartless  labour  at  Athens.  Like  St.  Paul,
he  delight^  to  serve  GKxl,  to  do  GKxl's  work,  to  preach  the  glad  tidings  of  the  atone-
ment, the  resurrection  of  Christ,  the  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the
Lord  Jtf  us.  There  was  work,  hard  work,  enough  and  more  than  enough,  for  both  of
them  at  Athens ;  but  St.  Paul,  in  his  intense  anxiety  for  the  Thessalonians,  sent  to
them  his  dearest  companion  and  his  best  helper.  Old  work  must  not  be  neglected  for
new  -  it  is  a  common  temptation.  The  care  of  all  the  Churches  pressed  upon  St.  PauL
The  minister  of  God  must  care  for  all  the  souls  entrusted  to  his  charge.


62  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN8.    [oh.  in,  1—13.


II.  The  purpose  of  Timothy's  mission.  1.  To  stahlish  them.  They  were  but
neophytes — Christians  of  a  few  moDths.  The  first  work  of  drawing  men  to  take  an
interest  in  religion  is  often  easier  than  the  work  which  follows  of  stablishing  and
building  them  up  in  the  faith.  It  is  hard  to  persevere ;  we  know  it  from  our  own
experience.  It  may  be  that  by  God's  grace  we  have  drawn  nigh  to  the  crucified  One ;
we  have  felt  something  of  the  sweetness  of  his  precious  love ;  our  hearts  have  burned
within  us  as  we  listened  to  his  voice,  *'  Come  unto  me."  In  such  moments  we  have
felt,  perhaps,  that  our  work  was  well-nigh  done,  and  our  souls  saved  for  ever ;  we
thought  that  we  could  never  fall  from  him  whom  we  had  learned  to  love  so  dearly.
But  a  little  while,  and  we  found  ourselves  miserably  disappointed.  The  time  of  tempta-
tion came ;  or  perhaps,  without  any  definite  temptation,  the  freshness  of  those  glowing
feelings  passed  away ;  we  lost  our  first  love,  and  sunk  back  into  that  cold  indifference
which  we  hoped  we  had  shaken  off  for  ever.  We  lost  all  that  we  seemed  to  have
gained ;  we  had  to  begin  our  work  again.  Alas  1  many  are  thus  always  beginning ;
their  spiritual  history  is  a  series  of  oscillations  between  permitted  carelessness  and
feeble  repentance.  They  make  no  real  progress  towards  that  holiness  without  which
we  cannot  see  God.  They  need  a  Timotheus  to  stablish  them.  It  is  one  of  the  most
important,  one  of  the  most  difficult,  duties  of  the  ministers  of  Gtxi  to  persevere  them-
selves, to  lead  others  to  persevere.  2.  To  comfort  them,  or  rather,  perhaps,  to  exhort
them.  They  needed  both,  comfort  and  exhortation.  The  cross  was  coming.  They
were  but  babes  in  Christ ;  they  shrunk  from  its  sharpness.  But  "  we  must  through
much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  grace  of  perseverance  is  best
acquired  in  the  bracing  air  of  affliction.  "  The  trying  of  our  faith  worketh  patience."
Self-denial,  the  mortification  of  the  flesh,  are,  alas  1  to  many  of  us  but  empty  sounds.
They  must  become  realities  in  our  daily  lives  if  we  are  to  be  Christians  indeed.  The
sentimental  religion  of  mere  poetry  and  feeling  is  a  weak  and  sickly  exotic ;  it  will
never  bear  the  cold  blasts  of  temptation,  it  will  not  stand  in  the  evil  day.  Timotheus
was  to  comfort  the  Thessalonians  in  their  troubles,  to  exhort  them  to  patient  endurance,
that  their  faith  might  not  fail  them,  that  it  might  rather  grow  and  increase.  3.  To
prepare  them/or  tribulation,  (1)  Afflictions  mutt  come.  It  is  a  law  of  Christ's  king-
dom. "Whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth."  The  Saviour  endured  the  cross,
despising  the  shame ;  the  Christian  roust  consider  him,  always  "  looking  unto  Jesus."
**  We  are  appointed  thereunto,"  St.  Paul  says ;  not  himself  only,  but  all  Christians.  It  is
God's  ordinance ;  it  is  *'  the  trial  of  faith,  much  more  precious  than  of  gold."  The  gold
l^erisheth,  the  faith  abideth ;  it  will  issue  in  pr^se  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing
of  Jesus  Christ.  But  "  we  are  appointed  thereunto."  We  must  recognize  this,  and
accept  it  cheerfully  as  the  law  of  our  Christian  race.  The  cross  is  the  very  badge  and
emblem  of  our  religion ;  the  cross  is  a  sacred  object  in  the  Christian's  eyes ;  but  it  will
not  profit  us  unless  we  bear  the  inner  cross,  the  spiritual  cross  of  self-sacrifice  wrought
into  our  souls  by  the  power  of  Gt)d  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Lord  Jesus  bore  the  cross
first ;  his  death  upon  the  cross  gave  a  deep  and  awful  and  blessed  meaning  to  the  word ;
it  invested  the  cross  with  glory  and  solemn  beauty  and  attractive  sweetness.  His  saints
have  followed  him.  One  after  another  they  have  taken  up  the  cross ;  they  came  out
of  great  tribulation.  From  the  quiet  rest  of  paradise  their  voices  seem  to  fioat  around
us  yet,  telling  us  of  the  power  of  the  Saviour  s  cross  and  the  high  rewards  of  suffering
for  his  sake.  "  We  are  appointed  thereunto,"  St.  Paul  said  to  the  Thessalonians ;  he
does  not  attempt  to  hide  it  from  them.  They  were  very  young  Christians,  but,  young
as  they  were,  they  must  experience  the  law  of  suffering.  "  Ye  knew  it,"  St.  Paul  says ;
for  they  knew  the  blessed  story  of  the  cross,  and  they  knew  the  meaning  of  the  cross.
The  Churches  of  Macedonia  had  a  great  trial  of  affliction.  We  are  not  called  to  suffer
in  the  same  way,  but  the  cross  has  the  same  meaning  still.  "In  the  world  ye  shall
have  tribulation."  "We  are  appointed  thereunto."  We  are  not  in  danger  of  the
martyr's  death,  but  the  martyr's  spirit  is  as  necessary  as  ever  it  was ;  its  essence  lies  in
the  prayer  which  we  daily  use,  "  1  hy  will  be  done."  We  must  not  be  moved  by  these
afflictions ;  they  must  not  be  allowed  to  disquiet  us,  to  disturb  the  steadfastness  of  our
faith.  Affliction  is  the  ordinary  atmosphere  of  the  Christian  hfe.  (2)  St,  Paul  had
told  them  this.  When  he  was  with  them,  short  as  the  time  was — three  weeks  or  a
little  more — he  warned  them  of  the  coming  trials.  It  was  a  great  help  when  the  time
came.    As  Chrysostom  says,  if  the  physician  warns  his  patient  of  the  probable  symp-


aB.iiLl— la]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  63

toms  of  his  disease,  he  is  not  so  terrified  when  they  come.  Thus  the  Thessalonians
were  prepared  to  see  the  sufferings  of  St.  Paul  and  his  companions — prepared  themselves
to  follow  them  as  they  followed  Christ.  The  preacher  must  not  dwell  exclusively  on
the  bright  side  of  religion,  its  beauty  and  its  joys ;  he  must  point  to  the  cross ;  he  must
prepare  himself  and  his  people  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.
(3)  B%it  tftcugh  he  hcut  warned  them,  he  was  stiU  anxiotis.  The  affliction  had  come,  as
he  had  said.  He  knew  that  they  were  suffering;  he  felt  for  them  in  their  trials.
Especially  he  was  anxious  to  know  how  that  newly  formed  faith  of  theirs  would
enoare  tne  first  shock  of  persecution.  The  tempter  had  tempted  them — that  was
certain.  These  trials  were  his  work.  It  was  permitted;  it  was  overruled  for  good,  as
the  erent  showed.  But  it  came  from  the  same  evil  one  who  had  tempted  Joh  to  curse
God,  and  was  foiled  then  by  the  patience  of  that  holy  man,  and  now,  by  the  grace  of
God,  Youchsafed  to  the  Thessalonians.  But  St.  Paul  did  not  know  the  issue.  He  had
hemid  of  the  temptation,  and  with  the  tender,  trembling  solicitude  of  a  loving  parent  he
feared — he  could  not  help  fearing — lest  his  labour  should  prove  in  vain.  Mark,  again,
his  firm  belief  in  the  personality  of  Satan.  He  knew  his  malice ;  he  was  not  ignorant
of  his  devices,  and  he  feared  for  his  children  in  the  faith.

Lksokb.  1.  Pray  for  the  love  of  souls ;  seek  to  love  souls  with  a  groat  love,  as
St  Paul  yearned  for  the  salvation  of  his  converts.  2.  Be  content,  like  him,  to  suffer
privations  for  the  souls  of  others.  8.  Pray  for  the  grace  of  persevenanco  ;  be  distrustful
of  self;  trust  only  Christ;  watch  always.  4.  Expect  afflictions,  chastisements ;  they
must  come ;  they  form  a  necessary  part  of  Christian  experience ;  be  prepared  for  them.
— B.  C.  C.

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  return  of  Timotheus.  I.  The  good  news.  I.  The  faith  and
charity  of  the  Thessalonians,  This  was  good  tidings  to  St.  Paul.  The  gospel  was  good
tidings  to  all  who  felt  the  misery  of  sin,  to  all  who  had  been  distressed  by  the  strange,
perplexing  mysteries  of  life.  Tidings  of  a  Deliverer,  of  an  atonement,  of  the  gracious
nelp  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  of  eternal  life  to  come,  were  full  of  joy  and  gladness  to
the  Thessalonians.  Out  of  that  first  great  joy  sprang  other  gifts  of  joy.  The  apostles
bad  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  their  children  were  walking  in  the  truth.  They
bad  so  entered  into  the  full  meaning  of  that  short  prayer,  *'  Thy  will  be  done,  in  earth
as  it  is  in  heaven,"  that  they  had  learned  to  share  the  holy  joy  wherewith  the  blessed
inhabitants  of  heaven  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  Gtxxl  news  to  them  did
not  mean  this  or  that  earthly  success,  but  the  growth  in  grace  of  Christian  souls.  Are
we  thus  affected  when  we  hear  of  the  victories  of  the  gospel,  of  missionary  triumphs
abroad,  of  converted  sinners,  of  holy  deaths  at  home?  It  is  a  sure  index  of  our
spiritual  state.  If  we  know  ourselves  the  deep  blessedness  of  communion  witii  God,  we
shall  count  it  good  news  indeed  when  we  hear  of  other  souls  being  drawn  into  that  holy
fellowship.  The  glory  of  God  is  the  one  highest  object  to  which  all  true  Christians
look,  and  each  redeemed  soul  brings  new  glory  and  honour  to  the  great  Redeemer.  The
deeper,  the  purer  our  joy  in  the  growth  of  holiness  around  us,  the  nearer  our  approach,
while  we  are  yet  on  earth,  to  the  holy  joy  of  heaven.  Timotheus  brought  news  that
the  faith  of  the  Thessalonians  had  not  wavered  in  the  fiery  trial,  that  their  charity  was
living  and  fervent.  It  was  glad  news  indeed  to  St.  Paul.  2.  Their  remembrance  of  the
apoitie,  St.  Paul  had  a  tender  human  heart ;  he  writes  these  words,  as  Bengel  says,
with  a  fresh  joy,  with  the  tenderest  love.  The  steadfastness  of  their  faith  was  the  chief
part  of  the  good  news ;  but  also  their  personal  love  for  the  apostle  was  very  precious  to
bim.  To  hear  that  they  loved  him  still,  that  they  desired  greatly  to  see  him,  that
they  remembered  his  presence,  his  words,  his  affection,  was  very  sweet  to  him.

IL  8t.  Paul's  delight.  1.  He  wcu  comforted.  He  had  need  of  comfort  and
encouragement.  Since  he  left  Thessalonica  he  had  met  with  great  perplexities  and
dinppointments  at  Athens;  and  now  at  Corinth  he  was  working  amid  many  difflcul-
tie«,  much  harassed  by  the  persecutions  of  the  Jews,  toiling  hard  for  his  daily  bread.
He  tells  them  of  his  necessities,  of  his  affliction.  But  now  he  was  comforted  ;  and  it
was  their  faith  that  brought  him  comfort,  that  encouraged  him  in  his  work.  How
these  words  must  have  pleased  the  Thessalonians,  who  so  loved  the  apostle !  To  hear
of  tlurir  fidth  was  good  tidings  to  him ;  to  be  told  that  that  faith  had  given  him  such
deep  comfort  in  his  troubles  must  have  been  good  news  to  them.    2.  Their  perseverance


64  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  in.  1—13.

gave  him  new  life.  He  knew  what  it  was  to  die  daily,  to  bear  about  always  in  the  body
the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  if  death,  as  he  says,  was  working  in  him,  there  was
a  new  life  that  more  than  balanced  it ;  a  new  life,  full  of  warm,  glowing  feelings,  full
of  high  hopes  and  eager  aspirations.  And  that  life  was  nourished  and  sustained  by  the
continued  progress  of  the  gospel.  The  tidings  of  their  faith  gave  him  a  sense  of  life,  a
spiritual  energy,  a  joy  analogous  to  that  joy  in  the  mere  sense  of  living  which  we
experience  sometimes  Id  the  bloom  of  youth  and  health.  But  his  joy  was  wholly
spiritual ;  the  Hfe  of  Christ  in  other  souls  seemed  to  stimulate  the  cuergies  of  the  same
Divine  life  in  himself ;  he  felt  the  water  of  life  within  him  springing  up  with  renewed
freshness,  as  he  listened  to  the  glad  words  of  Timotheus  telling  him  how  the  Thes-
salonians  were  standing  fast  in  the  Lord.  They  were  in  the  Lord,  as  he  was — in  the
sphere  of  his  gracious  presence,  of  his  Divine  working ;  and  to  be  in  the  Lord  is  life,  for
he  is  the  Life.  Spiritual  life  consists  in  union  with  him,  without  whom  we  can  do
nothing.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  in  him ;  so  was  St.  PauL  Their  life  and
his  life  came  from  the  same  Source.  The  knowledge  of  their  faith  and  love,  their
spiritual  life,  quickened  the  Divine  life  that  lived  in  him.

III.  His  THANKBGiviNa.  1.  He  tJianka  God/ar  them.  He  regards  thanksgiving  as  a
return  due  to  Almighty  God  for  his  mercies.  So  the  psalmist,  "  What  shall  I  render
unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  towards  me  ? "  He  fulfils  his  own  precept^  *'  In
everything  give  thanks."  Thanksgiving  is  the  outflow  of  a  loving  heart.  The  love  of
God  is  the  very  essence  of  religion ;  and  the  more  we  love  him,  the  more  fervent  will
be  our  thanksgivings.  St.  Paul  thanks  God  for  the  Thessalonians,  for  their  faith  and
love :  for  faith  and  love  come  from  God,  who  is  the  Object  of  faith,  who  alone  can
increase  our  faith ;  who  is  Love,  from  whom,  the  highest  Love,  cometh  all  ])ure  and
holy  love.  2.  Jle  thanks  Qodfor  his  own  joy.  Holy  joy  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  the
gift  of  the  Spirit,  the  foretaste  of  the  joy  of  heaven ;  it  must  issue  in  thanksgiving.
St.  Paul's  joy  was  full  and  complete.  He  thanks  God  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  he  was
joying.  There  were  no  shadows  to  darken  its  brightness ;  he  had  heard  of  no  back-
slidings  among  the  Thessalonians.  And  it  was  pure ;  it  could  bear  the  all-seeing  eye  of
God.  "  We  joy  before  our  God,"  he  says.  There  was  no  element  of  selfishness,  no
earthly  pride,  no  lower  motive,  to  defile  it.  Such  joy  in  the  salvation  of  souls  is  indeed
heavenly ;  it  is  like  the  ineffable  joy  wherewith  the  blessed  rejoice  before  the  throne.
3.  He  cuida  prayer  to  his  thanksgiving.  Prayer  and  thanksgiving  ever  go  together ;
they  act  and  react  upon  one  another.  Prayer  leads  to  thanksgiving ;  thanksgiving
lends  increasing  energy  to  prayer.  (1)  Ho  prayed  night  and  day.  The  quiet  of  the
night  is  a  time  for  holy  thoughts.  The  psalmist  thought  of  the  Name  of  God  in  the
night  season,  and  received  comfort.  The  Christian  prays ;  he  watches  with  Christ  as  he
lies  yet  awake  on  his  bed.  He  prayed  night  and  day.  While  working  at  his  daily
labour,  the  hard  work  of  weaving  the  goats'  hair,  he  ever  prayed«  So  it  is  with
Christians  now.    They

"  Ply  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet.
Because  their  secret  souls  some  holy  strain  repeat."

(2)  He  prayed  exceedingly.  ''Above  measure,"  the  words  mean  literally.  The  more  we
pray,  the  more  we  love  prayer.  The  prayers  of  the  Christian  increase  in  fervour,  in
earnestness,  and  in  delight,  the  nearer  he  draws  to  God.  Prayer  occupies  more  and
more  of  his  time ;  it  tends  to  assume  more  and  more  its  proper  place  as  the  great  work
of  life,  the  most  important  part  of  each  day's  business.  St.  Paul's  love  for  the  Thes-
salonians deepened  the  importunity  of  his  intercession.  (3)  He  prayed  that  he  might
see  their  face.  To  see  a  good  man's  face,  to  hear  his  voice,  to  touch  his  hand,  is  a
source  of  true  pleasure.  St.  John  trusted  to  speak  &oe  to  face  with  his  Christian
friends,  "  that  our  joy,"  he  says,  "  may  be  full."  So  was  it  with  St.  Paul.  (4)  That
he  might  be  enabled  to  do  them  good.  He  had  been  but  a  very  short  time  with  them.
He  wished  to  give  them  further  instruction,  to  fill  up  what  was  lacking  in  their  know-
ledge. Christians  may  be  living  near  to  Qod,  but  there  is  always  room  for  fiirther
advance  in  knowledge  and  in  holiness.  A  saint  of  God  like  St.  Paul  can  always  do  us
good.

Learn :  1.  To  rejoice  in  the  spiritual  progress  of  others.  2.  To  thank  Qod  for  it
3.  To  take  delight  in  intercourse  with  holy  men. — B.  C.  C.


CB.  m.  1—13.]    THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  G5

Vers.  11^13. — St.  PauVs  prayer  for  his  converts,  I.  God  himself  is  the  okly
GiYEB  OF  ALL  GOOD  THINGS.  1.  He  can  gtvc  the  apostle  and  his  converts  the  great  joy
of  another  meeting.  The  Thessalonians  might  be  zealous  in  their  religious  duties ;
St.  Paul  might  pmy  exceedingly,  above  measure ;  but  it  is  God  himself,  not  any  creature,
from  whom  all  goodness  flows.  The  word  ouT<Jy  ("  himself")  is  emphatic.  He  only  can
save ;  he  only  is  the  Giver  of  joy.  He  is  our  G^,  therefore  he  is  able ;  he  is  our
Father,  therefore  he  is  willing  to  help  us.  His  is  the  kingdom  and  the  power  and  the
glory,  and  he  loves  us  with  a  Father's  love.  The  apostle  adds  the  Saviour's  Name :
**  God  our  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  addresses  Christ  in  the  language  of
direct  prayer.  He  uses,  too^  a  verb  in  the  singular  number.  There  can  be  no  satis-
iactory  explanation  of  this,  save  that  furnished  by  our  Lord's  own  words,  "  I  and  my
Father  are  one."  From  him  only,  the  Triune  God,  cometh  every  blessing.  He  can
bring  St.  Paul  again  to  the  Thessalonians.  He  will,  if  it  is  good  for  him  and  for  them.
2.  He  can  increase  in  them  the  great  grace  of  charity.  Love  is  the  chiefest  of  all
graces ;  it  expels  all  manner  of  sin  little  by  little  from  the  heart  which  it  fills ;  it
consumes  selfishness  little  by  little  with  its  heavenly  fire.  It  must  abound  in  the
Christian's  heart,  for  it  is  the  best  of  all  treasures ;  it  must  be  fervent,  intense,  for  luke-
warmness  is  hateful  to  the  Lord.  It  must  be  wide  in  its  range ;  for  that  love  which
rests  on  some  men  because  they  are  agreeable,  and  excludes  others  because  they  do  not
please,  is  merely  human ;  not  of  God — mere  natural  affection  ;  not  the  precious  grace  of
holy  love.  Grod  loved  the  world ;  the  measure  of  his  love  is  the  gift  of  his  Son.  His
saints  in  their  poor  way  must  imitate  him.  He  only  can  make  them  abound  in  love  ;
for  love  is  of  God,  and  every  one  that  loveth  is  bom  of  GK)d  and  knoweth  God.  Love  is
the  best  gift  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God.  We  must  covet  earnestly  that  great  grace,  and
seek  it  from  him  of  whose  only  gift  it  cometh.

II.  God  can  fulfil  the  good  work  which  he  began.  1.  Holiness  comes  from  him.
Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord ;  and  it  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost  who
sanctifieth  the  elect  people  of  GKxl.  He  can  cleanse  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  by  his
Divine  inspiration.  He  can  make  the  soul  that  was  unclean  pure  and  blameless.  We
must  listen  to  his  voice  speaking  in  our  hearts.  He  checks  us  when  we  are  tempted  to
sin ;  he  calls  us  ever  onwards  to  holiness,  to  self-consecration,  to  closer  union  with
Christ.  It  is  our  part  to  recognize  his  awful  presence,  to  shrink  with  godly  fear  from
grieving  the  indwelling  Spirit,  to  make  silence  in  our  hearts  to  listen  to  his  voice,  to
pray  with  ever-deepening  earnestness,  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  hearcth."  2.  He
can  enable  us  to  persevere.  The  psalmist  says,  "  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed,  my  heart  is
fixed."  Thai  fixedness,  that  establishment  of  the  heart  in  holiness,  cometh  from  God ;
it  is  his  gift.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee,
because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  We  need  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,  to  be
strengthened  with  all  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  Then  we  shall  persevere
unto  the  end ;  then  we  shall  be  found  unblamable  in  holiness  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  with  all  his  saints.  St.  Paul  ever  looked  forward  to  that  second  coming ;
it  filled  the  whole  range  of  his  hopes.  So  ought  Christians  now  to  live,  "  looking  for
and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God."

Lessons.  1.  St.  Paul  prays  that  God  would  direct  his  way  to  Thessalonica.  We
may  pray  for  the  great  blessing  of  intercourse  with  those  whom  we  love ;  but  it  must
be  **  in  the  Lord,"  in  humble  submission  to  his  will.  2.  But  above  all  things  we  should
pray  for  their  continued  growth  in  grace  and  holiness,  in  preparation  for  the  coming  of
the  Lord.— B.  0.  C.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  subject  is  still  great  desire  to  see  the  Thessalonians,  I.  Paul  alon^
AT  Athens.  **  Wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to  be
left  behind  at  Athens  alone."  There  is  continued  the  use  of  the  plural ;  but  it  is  to  be
regarded  as  corrected  by  the  use  of  the  singular  in  the  fifth  verse.  The  correction
relates  to  the  mission  of  Timothy,  which  is  to  be  understood  as  covering  Paul's  being
left  behind  at  Athens.  For  want  of  full  materials  it  is  difficult  to  understand  the
bearing  of  what  is  said  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  on  what  is  said  here.  But  the  most
probaUe  account  of  matters  seems  to  be  the  following.  Silas  and  Timothy  were  left
behind  at  Bensa.  They  that  conducted  Paul  from  Beroea  brought  him  as  far  as
Athens;   and  immediately  returned  with  a  commandment  unto  Silas  and  Timothy

L  THESSALONIANS.  F


66  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAXS.    [en.  iii.  1— 13.


that  they  should  come  to  him  with  all  speed.  Here  comes  in  the  link  which  is  given
hero:  Wherefore  (t,e.  on  account  of  his  endeavour  to  see  the  Thessalonians  havins
twice  proved  abortive)  when  he  could  no  longer  forbear  (t.6.  when  he  was  necessitated
to  give  some  relief  to  his  feeling  of  being  orphaned),  he  thought  it  good  to  be  left  behind
at  Athens  alone.  This  was  a  change  of  plan,  but  arising  out  of  the  very  best  feeling.
He  sent  on  to  Bercea  a  second  commandment,  that  Timothy  should  proceed  to  Thessa-
lonica  before  joining  him,  Silas  meantime  remaining  at  Beroea.  In  that  case  Paul  was
really  left  behind  at  Athens,  though  not  with  the  greatest  literalism.  He  was  left
behind  from  the  point  of  view  of  Timothy  going  on  to  Thessalonica,  and  also  of  his
intention  to  have  had  Silas  and  Timothy  with  him  at  Athens.  It  was  the  being  alone
at  Athens  that  made  him  think  of  sending  for  Silas  and  Timothy,  while  his  conductors
firom  Bercea  had  not  yet  left.  He  felt  the  atmosphere  to  be  so  oppressive  beyond  his
expectations  that  he  longed  for  their  fellowship.  And  while  he  was  waiting  for  them,
as  we  learn  firom  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  feeling  did  not  abate.  He  went  forth
into  this  beautiful  city  which  was  associated  with  the  greatest  intellectual  refinement.
And,  though  a  man  of  gigantic  intellect,  he  was  not  attracted  to  the  study  of  its  works
of  art  or  philosophies.  No,  it  was  the  gospel  sandals  with  which  his  feet  were  shod.
It  was  in  the  lignt  of  Christ  that  he  contemplated  the  city.  Its  principal  works  of  art
were  temples.  There  on  the  Areopagus  was  a  temple  of  Mars,  with  the  subterranean
sanctuary  of  the  Furies.  On  the  prominent  Acropolis  was  the  Parthenon,  or  temple  of
Athene,  the  protectress  of  the  city,  and,  next  to  it  in  magnificence,  the  Erectheum  with
its  presiding  deities.  A  third  rock  was  associated  with  Jove.  There  was  an  altar  of
Prometheus  within  the  groves  of  the  Academy ;  the  Lyceum  was  dedicated  to  Apollo.
At  every  turn  wore  structures  connected  with  idolatrous  worship,  and,  among  tho  many,
the  eye  of  the  apostle  detected  an  altar  with  this  inscription,  "  To  the  Unknown  God,*'
from  which  he  afterwards  took  occasion  to  preach  to  the  Athenians  some  of  the  elemen-
tary truths  of  religion.  It  was  while  alone  in  this  city/till  of  idols,  oppressed  by  its
false  forms  of  religion,  that  he  longed  for  Silas  and  Timothy  to  come  on  to  him.  But,
strong  as  his  desire  for  their  fellowship  was,  it  was  soon  overmastered  by  another,  viz.
desire  toward  the  Thessalonians,  for  the  gratification  of  which  he  was  willing  to  make
sacrifice  by  remaining  alone  at  Athens.

11.  Mission  of  Timothy  with  reference  to  the  Thessalonians.  "And  sent
Timothy,  our  brother  and  God's  minister  in  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Timothy  is  some-
times called  Paul's  son ;  he  is  here  called  his  brother.  He  was  a  son  who  had  already
grown  up  to  be  a  companion  and  associate  in  work.  He  was  one  to  whom  Paul  gave
commandment,  yet  it  was  properly  to  God  that  he  stood  or  fell.  The  sphere  in  which
he  ministered  to  GK)d  was  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  was  his  duty  generally  to  bring  tho
gospel  of  Christ  to  the  wants  of  men.  But  let  us  think  of  it  as  his  duty  specially  to  bring
the  gospel  of  Christ  to  the  wants  of  the  Thessalonians.  1.  Timothy  was  to  seek  to  influence
them  against  their  being  moved  by  the  pressing  afflictions,  "To  establish  you,  and  to
comfort  you  concerning  your  faith ;  that  no  man  be  moved  by  these  afflictions."  The
afflictions,  not  confined  to  the  Thessalonians,  but  having  the  first  reference  to  them,
are  regarded  as  present  It  was  Thessalonian  afflictions  that  forced  Paul  to  leave
Thessalonica  much  sooner  than  he  had  intended.  It  was  in  a  manner  Thessalonian
afflictions  that  followed  him  to  Beroea.  At  the  time  of  sending  Timothy  he  may  have
had  late  information  of  the  things  suffered  by  the  Thessalonians  of  their  own  country-
men. By  indications,  then,  ho  could  only  think  of  the  afflictions  as  what  might  any
moment  be  experienced  by  them.  In  consequence  of  these  afflictions  Timothy  was
sent  to  establish  them.  It  was  work  which  might  expose  him  to  the  attacks  of  the
virulent  Jews  of  Thessalonica ;  and  this  establishing  work  is  usually  committed  to  older
men.  But  that  by  which  he  was  himself  established  was  his  message.  And  it  was  to
this  that  he  was  to  look  for  establishing  the  Thessalonians.  He  was  to  exhort  them
(not  comfort  them)  concerning  their  faith,  that  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these
afflictions.  He  was  to  hold  up  persuasively  before  them  the  gospel  of  Christ,  that  their
faith  thereby  being  strengthened,  they  might  be  kept  from  apostatizing.  2.  There
was  reason  for  their  not  being  moved  by  the  afflictions,  *'  For  yourselves  know  that
hereunto  we  are  appointed.  For  verily,  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  before-
hand that  we  are  to  suffer  affliction;  even  as  it  come  to  pass,  and  ye  know."  The
Thessalonians,  and  Paul  as  well,  and  not  they  alone,  were  appointed  to  sufifer  afflictipn.


cH.ni.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  67

It  was  the  sovereign,  all-wise  decree  of  God  that,  through  the  affliction  of  his  people,
the  gospel  was  to  be  spread  abroad,  and  transmitted  to  future  generations.  And  tnat
was  a  reason  why  they  were  not  to  be  moved  in  affliction.  They  were  not  being  made
the  sport  of  chance,  or  simply  left  to  the  will  of  their  enemies ;  but  they  were  sub-
mitting to  the  reasonable  necessary  appointment  of  their  heavenly  Father,  and  that
along  with  others.  The  Thessalonians  were  well  acquainted  with  this  doctrine.  It  had
been  taught  them  by  Paul,  when  he  was  with  them.  And  in  this  he  was  simply
following  the  great  Teacher.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  hold  out  false  expectations.
He  told  them  whom  he  asked  to  enter  into  his  service  that  they  were  to  count  the
cost ;  they  might  be  called  even  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  his  sake.  And  at  the  last
he  recurs  to  this  in  speaking  to  his  disciples.  "  If  the  world  hateth  you,  ye  know  that
it  hath  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.  .  .  .  Eemember  the  word  that  I  said  unto  you,  A
servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute
you ;  if  they  kept  my  word,  they  will  keep  yours  also. . .  .  These  things  have  I  spoken
unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be  made  to  stumble.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  the
synagogues :  yea,  the  hour  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  you  shall  think  that  ho
offereth  service  unto  God.  And  these  things  will  they  do,  because  they  have  not  known
the  Father,  nor  me.  But  these  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  when  their  hour
is  come,  ye  may  remember  them,  how  that  I  told  you."  As  Paul,  after  the  Master,
taught,  so  it  came  to  pass,  and  so  they  had  experience.  Being  thus  prepared  beforc-
bfuid,  their  affliction,  instead  of  shaking  them,  was  fitted  to  have  a  confirming  effect
upon  them.

IlL  Mission  op  Timothy  with  reference  to  Paul.  "  For  this  cause  I  also,  when  I
could  no  longer  forbear,  sent  that  I  might  know  your  faith,  lest  by  any  means  the  tempter
had  tempted  you,  and  our  labour  should  be  in  vain.''  It  seems  best  to  connect  **  also  "
with  "  sent,"  as  is  grammatically  allowable.  He  sent  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  the
Thessalonians,  but  also  for  his  own  sake.  The  affliction  was  a  special  reason  why  he,
Paul  (the  singular  beiug  introduced),  could  no  longer  forbear.  He  wanted  information
regarding  their  faith.  Connected  with  this  was  anxiety.  As  a  fact,  the  tempter  had
tempted  them.  God  tempteth  no  man ;  he  seeks  only  through  affliction  to  make  his
people  conquerors.  Through  affliction  Satan,  according  to  his  nature,  had  sought  to
seduce  the  Thessalonians  to  apostasy.  And  it  might  be  that  by  some  means  (for  he
is  fertile  in  means)  he  had  succeeded  in  his  nefarious  object.  In  that  case  his  labour
among  the  Thessalonians,  and  laborious  praying  for  them,  in  all  of  which  he  had  a
natural  interest  before  God,  would  be  vain.  It  would  be  as  if  his  lot  had  never  been
cast  among  them.  Wishing,  then,  to  have  his  mind  relieved  from  this  state  of  anxiety,
he  had  sent  on  Timothy.

rV.  Good  kbws  from  Thessalonica.  *'But  when  Timothy  came  even  now  unto
ns  from  you,  and  brought  us  glad  tidings."  Paul  had  meantime  gone  on  from  Athens
to  Corinth,  where,  according  to  Acts  xviii.  5,  he  was  joined  by  Silas  and  Timothy.  He
lost  no  time  in  writing  to  Thessalonica  after  their  arrival.  Timothy,  who  seems  not
to  have  delayed  by  the  way,  was  the  bringer  of  good  news,  of  a  kind  of  gospel — being.
indeed,  tidings  of  the  fruit  of  the  gospel.  He  announced  what  the  gospel  had  wrought
for  the  Thessalonians  in  three  particulars.  1.  "Of  your  faith."  lime  thy  was  able  to
tell  his  master,  by  whom  he  had  been  sent,  that  they  had  such  a  hold  upon  the  Divine
help,  that  they  were  able  to  stand  against  the  assaults  of  their  enemies.  2.  *'  And
love."  He  hsd  also  this  good  news  to  tell  Paul,  that,  in  the  face  of  opposition,  they
were  not  weakened  by  division,  but  were  only  drawn  the  closer  together  in  the  bonds
of  Christian  love.  3.  "  And  that  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always,  longing  to
see  us,  even  as  we  also  to  see  you."  He  had  the  further  tidings  to  convey,  that  they
bad  a  lively  impression  of  all  he  had  been  to  them — to  whom,  under  God,  more  than  to
any  otho",  they  owed  their  existence  as  a  Church.  His  name  was  a  savour  of  a  sweet
smell  among  them.  At  aU  times  they  thought  of  him  with  pleasure.  And  as  it  had
been  told  tnem  that  he  had  a  longing  to  see  them,  so  they  wished  it  to  be  told  him
that  they  had  a  longing  to  see  again  the  face,  and  not  less  to  hear  again  the  voice,  of
their  teacher.

V.  CoMFOBT  imparted  BY  THE  GOOD  NEWS.  "For  this  cause,  brethren,  we  were
OGanforted  over  you  in  all  our  distress  and  affliction  through  your  faith :  for  now  we
live»  if  je  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."     "  As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news


68  THE  HRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iil  l—lS



from  a  far  country."  When  Jacob  knew  that  Joseph  was  alive,  his  spirit  revived.
Paul  had  not  a  little  of  distress  and  affliction,  of  trouble  from  without,  that  was
straitening  and  oppressive,  at  Corinth  as  elsewhere ;  but,  when  the  good  news  came
regarding  his  Thessalonian  converts,  he  forgot  his  distress  and  affliction.  He  was  com-
forted over  them,  in  his  brooding  love.  What  in  them  specially  communicated  comfort
to  him  was  their  faith,  i.e.  the  faith  which  enabled  them  to  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.
So  dependent  was  he  on  them  for  happiness,  that  he  only  truly  lived,  had  life  in  its
vigour  and  elasticity,  if  he  could  think  of  them  as  standing  fast  in  the  Lord.  While
he  thus  acknowledges  their  steadfastness  in  the  past,  he  gently  appeals  to  them  to
remain  steadfast  in  the  future.  Let  them  not  take  away  the  condition  of  his  happiness.
A  Christian  parent  is  dependent  for  his  happiness  on  the  conduct  of  his  children.  If  he
hears  of  them,  when  on  going  out  into  the  world  they  come  to  their  trial,  as  departing
from  the  Lord,  then  his  spirit  is  crushed.  But  if  ho  hears  a  good  report  of  them  as
standing  fast  in  the  Lord  (in  his  strength  and  purpose),  then  his  bones  are  made  fat
And  so  is  it  with  a  Christian  minister  and  his  people.

VI.  Thanksgivino  on  account  op  the  good  news.  "  For  what  thanksgiving  can
we  render  again  unto  God  for  you,  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  for  your  sakes
before  our  God?"  The  good  news,  the  glad  tidings,  filled  the  apostle's  heart  with  joy.
There  is  an  unhallowed  joy  which  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  joy.  Not  connected
with  a  recognition  of  God,  not  in  accordance  with  God's  laws,  it  cannot  bear  the  Divine
inspection.  The  joy  of  the  apostle  for  his  Thessalonian  converts  was  not  of  this  nature.
It  extended  over  a  wide  range,  but  over  all  the  range  he  joyed  for  them  before  God.  It
was  not  joy  away  from  God,  but  joy  to  which  he  could  ask  Gt>d  to  be  privy,  as  being
jov  in  their  Christian  state,  especially  in  their  Christian  steadfastness.  This  pure  joy,
which  was  his  life,  the  apostle  poured  forth  in  thanksgiving.  It  was  God  alone  who
had  made  their  mountain  to  stand  strong ;  to  him,  therefore,  was  due  all  the  praise.
Thanksgiving  is  a  return  which  God  desires  from  us  for  his  mercies.  And  we  must
often  feel,  with  the  apostle,  that  we  cannot  make  a  sufficient  return  in  this  form  for
mercies  bestowed  upon  ourselves  and  upon  others.

'*  Through  all  eternity  to  thee
A  joyful  song  PU  raise ;
For,  oh  I  eternity's  too  short
To  utter  all  thy  praise."

VII.  Prater  with  which  the  thanksgivino  is  blended.  "  Night  and  day  praying
exceedingly."  He  gave  thanks  when  he  prayed,  and  that  was  night  and  day.  He
borrowed  from  both,  which  is  suggestive  of  morning  and  evening  as  fitting  seasons  for
the  duty  of  prayer.  How  fitting  that  in  the  morning  we  should  turn  to  God  and
consecrate  to  him  the  powers  he  has  renewed  1  How  fitting  that  before  returning  to
the  world,  to  meet  its  temptations,  to  be  entrusted  with  opportunities  of  usefulness,  to
meet  what  Providence  has  awaiting  us, — how  fitting  that  before  we  take  the  first  step  we
should  implore  the  favour  of  him  on  whom  the  lot  of  every  day  depends  I  How  fitting,
too,  that  in  the  evening  we  should  thank  God  for  the  benefits  of  the  day,  that  we
should  seek  to  be  relieved  of  the  burden  of  its  transgressions,  and  that  we  should
commit  ourselves  through  the  night  to  the  keeping  of  him  who  neither  slumbers  nor
sleeps!  We  can  understand  that  the  apostle  would  borrow  largely  from  the  night;
for,  apart  from  his  labours  night  and  day,  his  prayers  here  are  described  as  beyond
measure.  What  a  rebuke  to  those  who,  instead  of  breaking  beyond  bounds  In  the
impetuosity  of  devotion,  narrow  their  prayers  within  small  compass,  or  omit  them
altogether  I  Here  we  discover  the  secret  of  his  power ;  and  let  us,  in  this  undevout
age,  go  back  to  his  style  of  praying,  without  any  loss  of  intensity,  beyond  bounds.
Two  subjects  of  'prayer,  1.  "  That  we  may  see  your  face."  It  has  been  said  of  Paul
by  James  Martineau,  that  "  his  ardent  and  generous  soul  had  fastened  itself  on  no  one
living  object,  but  on  an  abstraction,  a  thing  of  his  own  mind,  the  truth ; "  "  that  he  rested
nowhere  long  enough  to  feel  his  nature  silently  yet  irrevocably  depositing  itself  there,
but  was  at  all  times  ready  to  gather  up  his  feelings  and  pass  on ; "  that  he  loved  his
disciples  less  in  their  individual  persons  and  for  their  own  sakes  than  as  depositaries  of
the  truth — as  links  of  a  living  chain  of  minds  by  which  that  truth  would  complete  its
circuit,  and  find  a  passage  for  its  renovating  power.    But  it  is  difficult  to  know  what


CH.  III.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  69


personal  attachment  is,  if  there  are  not  the  marks  of  it  in  Paul.  Did  he  merely  gather
up  his  feelings  and  pass  on,  when  he  was  driven  by  persecution  from  Thessalonica?
Ko ;  the  Thessalonians,  in  the  short  time,  had  obtaineid  a  place  in  his  heart,  which  was
not  transient,  which  they  have  to  this  day  in  heaven.  And  night  and  day,  when  he
was  away,  they  came  up  before  him  in  his  audience  with  God ;  and  what,  going  beyond
bounds,  he  asked  was  partly  this — that  he  might  see  their  face.  He  wished  to  have
fellowship  with  them,  soul  with  soul,  such  as  is  best  promoted  by  direct  personal  inter-
course. That  he  embraced  so  many  in  his  affection,  that  he  could  not  give  them  more
time  individually,  did  not  make  his  attachment  less  truly  personal.  2.  '*And  may
perfect  that  which  is  lacking  in  your  faith.''  It  is  true  that  Paul  had  an  object  beyond
seeing  their  face,  and  that  was  that  he  might  the  better  impart  to  them  spiritual  benefit.
But  is  that  attaching  importance  to  the  person  only  as  a  home  for  the  truth  ?  If  so,
then  it  is  what  should  be  true  of  all  affection.  The  more  ardently  we  love  persons,  the
more  should  we  love  them  not  as  mere  earthly  beings,  but  rather  as  having  a  heavenly
constitution,  as  those  in  whom  it  is  fitting  that  the  truth  should  have  a  resting-place
and  home.  The  more  we  love  to  see  their  face,  the  more  we  should  seek  to  perfect  that
which  is  lacking  in  their  faith.  Paul  meant  no  reflection  on  the  Thessalonians,  who
were  little  more  than  beginners  as  believers.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  they  had
come  up  to  the  full  measure  of  faith.  They  had  stood  the  tests  to  which  they  had
been  put»  but  there  might  be  stronger  tests  coming.  Neither  they  nor  he  had  come
up  to  the  full-measured  faith  of  the  Master,  who  had  stood  even  the  forsaking  of  the
Father.  Privileged  to  come  among  them,  he  could  only  hope  to  be  helpful  in  making  up
the  deficiencies  of  their  faith  by  a  fuller  and  more  earnest  exhibition  of  gospel  truth.

VIII.  Pbateb  thbown  into  fobm  to  be  ovebheabd  by  God.  2'tvo  petitions
corresponding  to  the  two  subjects  of  prayer,  1.  "  Now  may  our  Gk)d  and  Father  him^
self,  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  direct  our  way  unto  you."  Paul  prayed  to  have  his  way
directed  unto  the  Thessalonians.  In  the  same  way  the  servant  of  Abraham  prayed  to
have  his  way  prospered  in  the  obtaining  of  a  wife  for  Isaac.  We  may  learn  that  we
are  to  make  even  external  arrangements  subjects  of  prayer.  "  Our  Gk>d  and  Father  him-
self .  •  .  direct  our  way  unto  you."  Satan,  with  his  misanthropic  qualities,  twice  suc-
ceeded in  hindering  him  in  his  endeavours  to  proceed  to  Thessalonica.  He  looks  above
his  own  feeble  endeavours  and  the  hinderings  of  Satan,  to  God,  in  his  almightiness  and
fatherliness,  himself  to  direct  his  way  unto  the  Thessalonians.  "  The  Lord  Jesus  direct
our  way  unto  you."  We  may  learn  that  it  is  right  to  pray  to  Christ,  though  it  is  mora
usual  to  pray  to  the  Father  through  Christ.  The  way  of  his  servants,  even  the
external  way,  is  in  his  sovereign  hands.  We  must  not  forget  that  he  controls  all  things
in  heaven  and  in  earth.  In  this  verse  there  is  a  most  remarkable  enallage  of  number —
two  nominatives  followed,  not  by  a  pluml,  but  by  a  singular  verb.  It  is  one  of  the
most  striking  proofs  in  Scripture,  all  the  more  that  it  comes  in  incidentally,  of  the
absolute  unity  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  It  was  made  effective  use  of  by  Athanasius,
in  his  case  against  Arius.  2.  (1)  More  immediately,  "  And  the  Lord  make  you  to
increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another,  and  to  all  men,  even  as  we  also  do
toward  you."  If  there  is  any  distinction  between  the  two  main  verbs  here,  it  is  that
the  first  refers  more  to  range,  the  second  to  degree.  It  is  implied  that  the  Thessalonians
already  increased  and  abounded  in  love;  still  there  was  room  for  higher  things.
••  Whether  I  come  or  no,  the  Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  abound  in  love."  They
were  to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another  (within  the  Christian  circle  at
Thessalonica),  and  toward  all  men  (the  wider  Christian  circle,  and,  beyond  it,  the  world
lying  in  wickedness).  This  is  in  conformity  with  what  Peter  says,  that  to  brotherly
tindnesa  we  are  to  add  charity.  There  is  a  concentration  of  our  affections  in  our  home.
But  we  are  not  selfishly  to  confine  them  there ;  rather  are  we  to  get  there  refreshment
for  a  wider  circle.  So  there  is  a  concentration  of  our  affections  in  the  Church  or
enlarged  home.  But  we  are  not  to  make  it  a  close  guild ;  rather,  in  its  refreshing  fellow-
ship, are  we  to  be  fitted  for  embracing  in  our  affection  the  whole  world.  The  apostle
supports  his  petition  by  his  own  example.  It  is  literally, "  even  as  we  also  toward  you."
And  it  is  better  to  leave  it  thus  indefinite,  that  Paul's  example  may  extend  over  past
and  present.  He  was  not  one  who  had  confined  his  affections  to  any  narrow  circle ;
bat  they  had  gone  out  toward  them  in  Thessalonica,  and  were  still  going  out.  It  is
true  that,  when  the  truth  finds  a  home  in  a  person,  there  is  a  look  beyond  him  to  ita


70  THE  FIRST  EPISIXE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  in.  1—13.


finding  a  home  by  him  in  others.  And  the  more  truly  and  deeply  we  are  attached  to
men  as  persons,  the  more  shall  we  with  Paul  feel  prompted  to  view  them  as  appointed
for  the  transmission  of  the  truth.  (2)  Ultimately,  "  To  the  end  he  may  stablish  your
hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before  our  God  and  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord
Jesus  with  all  his  saints."  By  the  stablishing  of  our  hearts  we  are  to  understand  our
being  made  proof  in  our  inmost  being  against  temptation,  our  being  placed  above  the
reach  of  a  fall.  This  is  to  be  brought  about  by  love  proceeding  from  faith.  As  love  is
said  to  be  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law,  and  the  bond  of  perfection,  so  it  is  here  viewed  as
consummating  our  establishment.  We  are  to  be  established,  so  as  to  be  in  the  sphere
of  holiness,  sanctity  without  blame,  and  that  under  the  searching  yet  loving  eye  of
God.  Such  a  consummation  seems  far  beyond  us  at  present ;  but  it  will  be  realized
for  us  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints.  His  power  over  the  evil  of
our  hearts,  through  His  blood  and  Spirit,  will  then  be  fully  manifested.  With
imperfect  holiness  now,  then  we  shall  be  saints  indeed.  And  as  Christ's  saints,  the
trophies  of  his  power,  we  diall  attend  on  him  at  his  coming,  and  swell  the  majesty  of
his  train.  Let  us,  then,  give  love  the  sweep  of  our  being,  to  the  dislodging  of  sin,  to  the
incoming  of  saintlincss,  that  in  Christ's  day  of  triumph  we  may  be,  with  the  saints,  in
his  train.— R.  F.

Ver.  6.— JTou;  the  work  of  the  gospel  may  he  frustrated  hy  temptation,  St.  Paul  has
just  referred  to  the  external  hindrance  to  his  journeying  that  Satan  was  able  to  throw
across  his  path  (oh.  ii.  18).  He  now  writes  of  a  much  more  serious  Satanic  opposition
in  the  temptation  of  his  converts  to  unfaithfulness.  Ho  is  anxious  lest  during  his
absence  the  fierce  enmity  of  the  Jews,  either  by  some  more  violent  attack  on  the
Church  or  by  the  harassing  of  incessant  petty  persecution,  may  at  length  have  broken
down  the  fidelity  of  the  Christians  at  Thcssalonica.  And  ho  shows  his  anxiety  by
sending  to  inquire  of  the  state  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  The  danger  in  which  these
Greek  Christians  lay  besets  the  people 'of  Grod  in  all  ages,  though  the  form  in  which  it
presents  itself  varies  considerably.

L  The  tbmptbb  baises  up  temptatioks  in  ordeu  to  frustrate  the  work  of  the
GOSPEL.  1.  The  tempter  furnishes  temptations,  A  temptation  implies  two  things:
(1)  a  latent  appetite  or  desire  in  the  mind  of  the  tempted,  which  appetite  or  desire  may
be  natural  or  acquired,  innocent  or  corrupt,  such  as  tne  innate  instinct  of  self-preserva-
tion or  the  artificial  craving  for  strong  drink ;  and  (2)  external  circumstances  tnat  tend
to  rouse  the  internal  longing.  Now,  the  tempter  may  work  through  either  of  these  two
elements  of  temptation.  He  may  sway  the  mmd  towards  certain  thoughts  and  impulses,
or  he  may  present  to  the  mind  occasions  of  sin  by  bringing  about  an  arrangement  of
circumstances  which  shall  appeal  to  the  internal  desire  in  such  a  way  that  indulgence
would  be  unlawful.  Thus  dangers  appeal  to  the  instinct  of  self-preservations  and  for-
bidden delights  to  the  love  of  pleasure.  2.  These  temptations  tend  to  frustrate  the  work
of  the  gospel.  All  is  undone  if  the  Church  proves  unfaithful.  High  knowledge  may
be  acquired,  elaborate  organization  may  be  perfected,  busy  work  may  be  accomplished,
and  yet,  if  the  purity  of  the  spiritual  life  is  invaded,  or  the  faithfulness  that  should  mark
the  soldier  of  Christ  corrupted,  the  labour  that  led  to  the  happiest  results  is  all  in  vain.

IL  The  tempter  can  only  frustrate  the  work  of  the  gospel  when  the
TEMPTED  YIELD  TO  TEMPTATION.  1.  The  power  of  the  tempter  is  limited  to  temptation.
He  can  i)er8uade ;  he  cannot  compel.  He  may  use  threats,  or  he  may  use  cajolery.
But  he  cannot  use  force.  For  the  violence  that  is  done  to  the  body  of  the  martyr  is
no  violence  to  his  soul,  but  only  a  powerful  persuasive  influence.  Satan  goes  about  like
a  roaring  lion.  He  has  a  deep  throat,  but  blunt  fangs.  2.  We  are  free  to  resist
temptation.  Temptation  cannot  destroy  free-will.  The  tempter  simply  tries  to  induce
us  to  choose  the  evil.  If  we  do  not  choose  it,  he  is  powerless.  And  the  decision  lies
entirely  with  ourselves.  3.  The  grace  of  Qod  will  help  us  to  resist  temptation  effectually.
We  are  not  left  alone  to  battle  with  the  tempter.  If  Satan  is  against  us,  God  is  for  us.
Stronger  and  greater  influences  for  good  are  provided  for  counteracting  the  evil  influences.
But  these  are  equally  outside  our  liberty  of  choice — ^good  persuasion  as  against  bad  per-
suasion. It  is  for  us  to  lend  ourselves  to  the  helpful  grace  of  God  in  Christ  if  we
are  to  be  strong  to  resist  temptation  and  to  prevent  the  work  of  the  gospel  from  being
frustrated  in  us. — W.  F.  A.


CH.  m.  1—13.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TUB  THESSALONIANS.  71


Vcr.  8. — St,  PauTs  devotion  to  his  converts,  I.  A  pictuee  of  Christian  love.  St
Paul  is  intensely  devoted  to  his  converts.  Their  prosperity  is  his  life,  their  unfaith-
fulness his  death.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the  early  Christian
character — ^more  conspicuous  than,  alas!  it  is  in  the  modem  Church.  An  apostle
felt  more  than  a  brotherly  love  for  the  Churches  he  had  planted.  His  affection  was
that  of  a  father  for  his  children.  1.  Christianity  promotes  care  for  others*  It  is
directly  opposed  to  a  self-seeking  exclusiveness  as  much  in  spiritual  as  in  worldly
affairs.  As  it  bids  a  man  not  simply  care  for  the  enriching  of  himself  with  material
wealth,  80  it  equally  forbids  him  to  seek  only  for  the  saving  of  his  own  soul.  The
Church  of  Christ  is  always  required  to  have  in  view  the  object  which  Ignatius  Loyola
propounded  as  the  great  end  of  the  society  of  the  Jesuits  when  he  wrote,  '*  The  end  of
this  society  is  not  only,  with  the  grace  of  God,  to  devote  ourselves  to  the  salvation  and
perfection  of  our  own  souls,  but  also,  with  the  same  Divine  grace,  to  labour  most
earnestly  for  the  salvation  and  perfection  of  our  neighbour.'^  2.  Christianity  hinds
Christians  together  in  close  bonds  of  affection.  This  is  its  aim,  and  this  is  what  it  does
when  unhindered  by  culpable  selfishness  and  coldness.  The  gospel  introduces  a  new
experience  into  the  world.  Christian  love  is  quite  unlike  jyagan  friendship,  being  (1)
broader ;  (2)  deeper,  founded  on  spiritual  union ;  and  (3)  warmer.

11.  Ajt  induoehent  1*0  Christian  fidelity.  1.  The  inducement  is  first  direct  and
personaL  St.  Paul  urges  the  Thessalonians  to  be  steadfast  because  he  feels  his  own
life  to  be  wrapped  up  in  their  fidelity.  For  his  sake,  if  not  for  their  own,  he  desires
them  to  resist  the  temptations  that  are  trying  them.  No  doubt  so  devoted  and  affec-
tionate a  man  as  St.  Paul  would  be  able  to  bring  great  weight  of  persuasion  to  bear  on  his
converts  by  this  appeal  to  their  consideration  for  their  spiritual  father.  A  similar
influence  may  be  helpful  now.  If  we  know  one  who  has  laboured,  prayed,  and  watched
fur  our  soul,  surely  the  desire  not  to  grieve  him  at  the  last  by  proving  all  his  toil  to
have  been  in  vain  should  be  a  motive  for  profitiag  by  it.  The  scholar  should  feel  thus
towards  his  teacher,  the  child  towards  his  Christian  mother ;  above  all,  every  one  of  us
towards  Christ,  that  his  work  may  not  be  in  vain — that,  after  all  he  has  suffered  for  us,
he  should  not  be  made  to  suffer  by  us.  2.  Further,  the  inducement  is  general  and
inferential.  If  the  steadfastness  of  the  Thessalonians  was  a  matter  of  such  profound
concern  to  St.  Paul,  it  must  have  been  of  great  importance  in  itself.  Here  is  a  strong
reason  for  not  thinking  lightly  of  Christian  fidelity.  An  apostle  feels  that  he  lives  in
the  faithfulness  of  his  converts.  How  supremely  necessary  must  that  faithfulness  be
fur  them !  how  supremely  necessary  must  it  ever  be  for  the  Church  1

lil.  An  example  fob  Christian  work.  The  Church  at  Thessalonioa  was  faithful.
St.  Paul  was  not  disappointed  in  his  friends.  The  secret  of  this  steadfastness  may  be
seen  in  the  spirit  of  the  apostle.  He  was  no  perfunctory  preacher.  Not  onlv  was  his
heart  in  his  work ;  his  heart  was  with  the  people  to  wnom  he  minbtered.  Their
faithfulness  and  failure  were  questions  of  life  and  death  to  him.  The  servant  of  Christ
has  here  an  example  of  supreme  interest.  Learning,  eloquence,  holiness,  zeal,  all  fail
without  love.  The  preachef  who  identifies  himself  with  his  people  is  the  most  success-
fiU  in  winning  them  for  Christ.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  12. — The  increase  of  love,  I.  The  increase  of  love  is  the  first  essential  of
Chbistian  pbogbsss.  St.  Paul  sets  it  first  and  by  itself  as  the  root  and  secret  of  the
blameless  holiness  before  God  which  he  regards  as  the  great  consummation  of  perfection.
The  Chnrch  has  too  often  disregarded  this  primary  note  of  progress,  preferring  growth
in  knowledge,  enlarged  activity,  and  more  extended  influence  in  the  world.  But  it
needs  to  be  seen  that  the  one  measure  of  spiritual  prosperity  is  the  degree  in  which  love
abounds.  The  reasons  for  this  honouring  of  Christian  love  are  apparent.  1.  Love  is  the
most  like  Ood  of  all  human  experiences.  We  are  nearest  to  uod  when  we  love  one
another  most.  2.  Love  is  the  most  fruitful  grace.  It  does  most  good  to  the  world  and
inspires  the  best  service  of  Goil.  3.  Love  is  the  foundation  of  all  other  graces.  It
opens  the  eyes  of  knowledge,  and  kindles  the  ardour  of  zeal,  and  inspires  the  life  of  faith,
and  breathes  holiness  into  the  soul.

IL  This  incbeasb  of  love  must  be  in  extent  as  well  as  in  intensity.  It  is  not
enoogh  that  we  have  a  very  warm,  passionate  devotion  if  this  is  confined  to  a  narrow
circle.  One  of  the  most  important  features  of  Christian  love,  in  contradistinction  to  the


72  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  hi.  1—13.

natural  kindness  of  persons  of  an  affectionate  disposition,  is  its  breadth.  It  is  not  led
by  fancy  and  confined  to  the  arbitrary  selection  of  a  merely  humaa  love.  1.  It  begins
with  Christ,  Though  St.  Paul  does  not  here  express  this  truth,  he  implies  it.  For  he
is  writing  to  a  Cliristian  Church,  not  to  a  mixed  crowd  of  men  of  the  world.  He
assumes  devotion  to  Christ,  and  seeks  for  the  fruits  of  it.  Now,  it  is  part  of  the  glory
of  Christianity  that  it  reveals  man  in  his  most  attractive  character  when  it  shows
Christ  to  us.  Thus  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity  is  possible,  because,  first  seeing  man
in  Christ,  we  afterwards  learn  to  see  Christ  in  every  man.  2.  It  expands  into  love/or
all  Christians,  The  special  characteristic  of  the  brotherly  love,  so  much  enforced  in
the  New  Testament,  is  that  it  flows  out  to  Christians  as  such,  irrespective  of  personal
attractiveness  or  the  reverse.  Of  course  we  must  have  our  natural  affinities  and  special
friendships.  Christ  had  as  much.  But  we  must  not  confine  Christian  love  to  such
cases.  Indeed,  the  specially  Christian  character  of  love  is  not  seen  until  this  love  is
bestowed  upon  those  who  would  not  have  received  it  had  they  not  been  united  to  us
through  Christ.  3.  It  must  extend  to  all  men.  Christian  love  is  not  confined  to  the
Christian  community.  The  disciple  of  Christ  is  the  true  philanthropist.  It  is  not
dimply  that  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  universalism  we  are  to  endeavour  to  draw  all  men
within  the  fold  of  Clirist ;  we  are  also  to  love  them  while  they  remain  outside  it.  We
are  to  love  them  as  men.  From  this  wo  may  infer  that  religious  exclusiveness  is  a  sin,
that  Christian  people  should  take  interest  in  all  things  human — in  the  science,  art,
business,  politics,  and  social  and  domestic  affairs  of  the  world.  The  progress  of  our
Christian  life  may  be  measured  by  the  cheerful  sympathy,  breadth,  and  generosity  of
our  humanity.

III.  The  incbease  op  love  is  a  fruit  op  Divine  gbac^.  St.  Paul  prays  that  the
Lord  may  make  the  Thessalonians  increase  and  abound  in  love.  1.  Love  is  only
possible  where  the  hard  heart  of  selfishness  has  been  softened.  It  is  the  work  of  God*8
Spirit  within  \\a  to  make  this  change.  God  also  casts  out  the  impurities  which  deaden
genuine  love  and  the  aversions  which  limit  it.  2.  Love  springs  up  in  us  by  contact
toith  the  Divine  love.  That  love  must  be  revealed  and  "  sued  abroad  in  our  hearts  "
in  order  that  our  love  may  be  stimulated.  3.  Nevertheless  human  influences  help  the
development  of  Christian  love.  The  apostle  referred  to  his  own  example :  "  Even  as  we
do  towards  you."  Christian  love  is  contagious.  The  study  of  the  lives  of  men  of
large-hearted  charity  is  helpful  in  the  overthrowing  of  our  narrow  prejudices  and  the
arousing  of  a  broad,  strong  spirit  of  loving-kindness. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  13.— -2>mn€  culture,  God  is  carrying  on  a  process  of  culture  with  his  people,
training,  educating,  and  forming  them  according  to  his  own  ideal  of  humanity.  To
ignore  this  process  while  admitting  the  merciful  kindness  of  God  in  other  respects  is  to
take  a  low  view  both  of  providence  and  of  Christianity.  To  recognize  it  is  to  do  much
towards  lightening  the  burdens  and  the  mystery  of  all  this  unintelligible  life.  For
pain,  temptation,  and  disappointment  can  be  better  borne  when  wo  know  that  the  end
of  God's  dealings  with  us  is  not  our  enjoyment  of  present  ease,  but  our  education  in
character.

I.  The  subject  of  Divine  culture.  **  Your  hearts."  The  education  that  secures
good  habits  is  a  shallow  training  if  it  leaves  the  source  and  spring  of  conduct  untouched.
It  may  drill ;  it  cannot  discipline.  Neither  is  the  mere  infusion  of  knowledge,  nor  even
this  with  the  addition  of  the  cultivation  of  taste  and  the  development  of  mental  energy,
the  great  requisite  in  God*s  culture.  He  aims  at  renewing  and  purifying  the  heart.
He  is  not  satisfied  with  decorous  conduct  as  a  mask  for  a  corrupt  heart.  But,  having
secured  purity  of  heart,  he  knows  that  right  conduct  will  follow.  Moreover,  if  the
external  act  may  appear  to  men  questionable,  God,  reading  the  heart,  accounts  his
people  blameless  when  the  motive  is  good.

II.  The  character  moulded  under  Divine  culture.  "  Unblamable  in  holiness."
1.  It  is  holiness,  God  does  not  satisfy  himself  with  the  forgiveness  of  the  past ;  we
should  not  be  satisfied  with  that.  He  aims  at  the  real  and  positive  holiness  of  his
people.  Holiness  is  more  than  dutifulness,  more  than  virtue.  It  includes  these  human
types  of  goodness,  but  it  goes  beyond  them.  It  goes  down  to  thought,  aflection,  and
conduct,  seeking  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.  It  rises  to  the  character  of  God  him-
self.    Holiness  is  godlike  goodness,  as  virtue  is  human  goodness.    2,  This  holiness  is


CH.IV.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


73


to  be  unhlamahle.  It  is  to  be  perfect.  It  is  to  stand  the  test  of  a  searching  scrutiny.
Tet  it  Is  not  a  barren  negative  purity.  For  we  may  be  blamed  for  sins  of  omission  as
much  as  for  sins  of  transgression.  It  is  the  unprofitable  servant  who  is  cast  into  the
outer  darkness.    To  be  unblamable  we  must  faithfully  discharge  our  trust.

lU.  Thb  8TAKDABD  AIMED  AT  IN  DiviNE  CULTURE.  The  hoUncss  is  to  be  Unblam-
able before  our  God  and  Father  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  saints.
1.  God  is  satisfied  with  no  less  holiness  than  such  as  is  pure  in  his  oum  sight.  Our
standard  is  low  because  our  conscience  is  corrupt.  The  height  of  God's  aim  is  only  tc
be  measured  by  the  loftiness  of  his  own  character.  Nevertheless,  bo  it  remembered^
God  will  expect  no  more  of  us  than  is  humanly  possible.  The  gardener  aims  at  pro^
dudng  a  perfect  flower  up  to  his  own  ideal^  but  still  only  up  to  his  own  ideal  of  what
a  flower  snould  be ;  he  does  not  seek  in  it  the  properties  of  animal  or  man.  2.  The
test  ia  to  be  applied  at  the  coming  of  Christ  with  his  saints.  They  come  to  judge  the
world.

IV.  The  btabujty  secured  by  Divine  culture.  "  Stdblish  your  hearts."  High
culture  often  produces  a  result  which  is  brief  in  proportion  to  its  excellence.  The
forced  hot-house  flower  soon  fades.  Knowledge  acquired  simply  to  meet  an  examina-
tion is  quickly  forgotten.  This  is  not  education.  God  aims  at  more  than  the  momentary
elevation  of  rare  seasons  of  grace.  He  will  have  a  firm  and  lasting  character^a  spiritual
life  which  is  also  an  eternal  life.

y.  The  means  employed  fob  Diyins  culture.  Ycr.  12  describes  this.  It  is  an
increasing  and  abounding  love.  Holiness  springs  from  love.  They  greatly  err  who
seek  it  in  the  lonely  and  chill  altitudes  of  an  inhuman  saintliness.  By  mutual  Christian
love,  and  by  a  broad,  practical  love  of  mankind,  wc  are  trained  in  the  purity  which  may
be  at  last  quite  blameless,  even  in  the  sight  of  Grod. — W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Coxtents. — ^With  this  chapter  the  second
portion  of  the  Epistle — its  practical  appli-
cation^oommenoes.  The  apostle  exhorts
and  entreats  the  Tbessalonians  to  make  pro-
gress in  the  Christian  life,  and  to  practise
thiOae  commandments  which,  when  he  was
with  them,  he  gave  them  by  the  authority
of  JetuB  Christ.  God  had  called  them  to
holiness  and  to  the  renunciation  of  their
heathen  practices.  They  must  especially  be
on  their  guard  against  impurity,  to  which
aa  Gentiles  they  were  formerly  so  prone.
He  who  rejected  his  injunctions  rejected,  not
man,  but  God,  whose  conmiands  they  were.
As  they  were  already  taught  of  Qod  in  the
active  practice  of  Christian  love,  so  they
mutt  abound  therein.  They  must  not  allow
tbemselvet  to  be  led  away  by  excitement,  as
if  the  day  of  Christ  were  at  hand,  but  with
qnietoess  and  honesty  perform  the  duties
of  their  earthly  calling,  and  so  commend  tho
goepel  to  unbelievers.  And  with  regard  to
their  anxiety  oonoeming  tho  fate  of  their
deceaaed  friends,  they  were  to  be  comforted
by  tho  thought  that  the  dead  in  Christ
would  be  no  loaen  at  the  advent,  but  would


rise  first,  and,  along  with  the  living,  would

bo  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  at    his

coming,  and  so  they  shall  all  be  united  in

ono  holy  fellowship  with  him.

Ycr.  1. — Forthermore ;  litemlly,  finally ;
for  the  rest — introducing  the  closing  or  prac-
tical part  of  the  Epistle.  The  apostle  uses
the  same  word  elsewhere  at  the  close  of  his
Epistles  (comp.  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 ;  Eph.  vi.  10;
Phil.  iv.  8;  2  Thess.  iii.  1).  Then;  or
rather,  therefore ;  connecting  this  exhortation
with  the  closing  verses  of  the  last  chapter :
In  order  that  you  may  be  established  un-
blamably  in  holiness  at  the  coming  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  must  do  your  part,
you  must  earnestly  strive  after  holiness.
We ;  to  be  restricted  to  Paul.  Beseeoh  you,
brethren,  and  exhort  you  by  the  Lord  Jeens ;
or  rather,  in  the  Lord  Jesus;  that  is,  in
fellowship  with  him — the  sphere  or  element
within  which  the  apostle  besought  and  ex-
horted tlie  Tbessalonians.  Ho  wrote  as  the
organ  or  instrument  of  the  Lord  Jesus.
That  as  ye  have  received  of  us.  Paul  hero
appeals  to  the  exhortations  which  he  gave
them  during  his  residence  among  them  at
Thessalonica.  How  ye  ought  to  walk  and
to  please  Ood;  how  you  ought  to  conduct
yourselves  so  as  to  please  God.  The  walk-
ing was  tho  means  of  pleosing.  The  R.V.,
after  these  words,  on  the  authority  of  manu-
scripts, adds,  **  even  as  ye  do  walk."    So  ye


74


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cu.  iv.  1-18.


would  abound  more  and  more.  The  apostle
acknowledges  their  Christian  walking;
they  had  already  entered  upon  the  road;
their  conduct  was  sanctified ;  but  he  exhorts
them  to  abound  therein  with  still  greater
care  and  fidelity.

Ver.  2. — ^For  ye  know;  appealing  to  their
memory  in  confirmation  of  what  he  had
sakL  What  commandments  we  gave  you  by
the  Lord  Jesus ;  or,  through  the  Lord  Jesus ;
that  is,  not  merely  by  his  authority,  but  by
means  of  him,  so  that  these  commandments
did  not  proceed  from  Paul,  but  from  the
Lord  Jesus  himself.  We  have  here,  and
indeed  in  this  chapter  throughout,  an  asser-
tion of  the  inspiration  of  the  apostle :  the
commandments  which  ho  gave  to  the  Thes-
salonians  were  the  commandments  of  tho
Lord  Jesus.

Vor.  3.— For  this  is  the  wiU  of  Ck)d.  The
phrase,  "the  will  of  God,"  has  two  signifi-
cations in  Scripture :  tlio  one  is  the  de-
termination of  God— his  decree ;  the  other
is  his  desire,  that  in  which  he  delights — a
will,  however,  which  may  be  frustrated  by
the  perversity  of  his  creatures.  It  is  in
til  is  latter  sense  tliat  the  word  is  hero  em-
ployed.  Even  your  sanctiflcation ;  complete
consecration;  holiness  taken  in  its  most
general  sense.  Our  holiness  is  the  great
design  of  Ciirist's  deatli,  and  is  the  revealed
will  of  God.  Some  (Olshausen,  LUnemann)
restrict  the  term  to  moral  purity,  and  con-
sider  tho  next  clauso  as  its  explanation
(com p.  Uom.  xii.  1).  That  ye  should  abstain
from  fornication ;  a  vice  fearfully  prevalent
among  the  heathen,  and  which,  indeed,
they  hardly  regarded  as  wrong.  Especially
it  was  the  great  sin  of  Corintn,  from  which
the  apostle  wrote,  the  patron  goddess  of
which  city  was  Venus.

Yer.  4.— That  every  one  of  you  should
know  how  to  possess.  Tho  word  here  ren-
dered " possess ''  rather  signifies  "acquire.''
The  B.V.  renders  the  clause,  "that  each
one  of  you  know  how  to  possess  himself  of ; "
hence  it  admits  of  the  translation,  "to  ob-
tain tho  mastery  over."  His  vessel.  This
word  has  given  nse  to  a  diversity  of  interpre-
tation. Especially  two  meanings  have  been
given  to  it.  By  some  it  is  supposed  to  be  a
figurative  expression  for  "  wife,"  in  which
sense  the  word  is  used,  though  rarely,  by
Hebrew  writers.  Peter  speaks  of  the  wife
"  as  the  weaker  vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  This
is  the  meaning  adopted  by  Augustine,  Schott,
De  Wette,  Koch,  Hofmann,  LUnemann,
Biggenbach;  and,  among  English  ex-
positors, by  Alford,  Jowett,  EUicott,  and
Eadie.  Tin's  meaning  is,  however,  to  be
rejected  as  unusual  and  strange,  and  unsuit-
able to  what  follows  in  the  next  verse.  The
other  meaning — "  one's  own  body  " — is  more
appropriate.    Thus  Paul  pays,  "We  havo


this  treasure,"  namely,  the  gospel,  "in
earthen  vessels"  (2  Oor.  iv.  7;  comp.  also
1  Sam.  xxi.  5).  The  body  may  well  be
compared  to  a  vessel,  as  it  contains  the
soul.  This  meaning  is  adopted  by  Chry-
sostom,  Calvin,  Grotius,  Bengel,  Olshausen,
Meyer ;  and,  among  English  expositors,  by
Macknight,  Conybeare,  Bishop  Alexander,
Wordsworth,  and  Yaughan.  In  sanctiflca-
tion and  honour.  What  the  apostle  hero
requires  is  that  every  ono  should  obtain
the  mastery  over  his  own  body,  and  that
whereas,  as  Gentiles,  they  had  yielded  their
members  servants  to  uncleanness  and  to
iniquity  unto  iniauity,  they  should  now,
as  Christians,  yield  their  members  servants
to  righteousness  unto  holiness  (Bom.  vi.  19).

Yer.  5. — Not  in  the  lust  of  ooncupisoence
— not  in  the  passion  of  lust  (B.Y.) — even  as
the  Gentiles  which  know  not  Ood;  and
therefore  from  whom  nothing  better  was
to  be  expected.  The  moral  sense  of '  the
heathen  was  so  perverted,  and  their  natures
so  corrupt,  that  they  looked  upon  fornica-
tion as  a  thing  indifferent

Yer.  6. — ^That  no  man  go  beyond;  or,
transgress.  And  defraud ;  or,  as  it  is  in  tho
margin  of  our  Bibles,  oppresSj  or,  overreach ;
vsrong  (B.Y.).  His  brother.  Not  an  ex-
hortation against  dishonesty,  or  prohibition
against  all  attempts  to  overreach  in  usual
mutual  intoreourse,  as  the  words  would  at
first  sight  seem  to  imply,  and  as  some  con-
sider it  (Uormann,  Liinemann,  Biggenbach) ;
but,  as  is  evident  from  the  context,  a  con-
tinuation of  the  former  exhortation,  a  prohi-
bition against  impurity.  In  any  matter;  or,
more  properly,  in  the  matter^  namely,  that
about  which  I  have  been  discoursing.  "  An
example  of  the  modest  reserve  and  refined
delicacy  which  characterize  the  holy  apostle's
language  in  speaking  of  things  which  the
Gentiles  did  without  shame,  and  thus,  by  a
chaste  bashfulness  of  words,  conmiending
tho  duty  of  unblemished  purity  in  deeds "
(Wordsworth).*  Because  the  iiord  is  the
Avenger  of  all  such;  cither  of  all  suoh  as
are  thus  defrauded  or  of  all  such  sinful
practices.  As  we  also  have  forewarned  you
and  testified.

Yer.  7. — For  Gh>d  hath  not  called  us  unto ;
or,  for  the  purpose  of.  Uncleanness ;  moral
uncleanness  in  general  (comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  15).
But  unto ;  or,  in ;  in  a  state  of.  Holiness ;  or
sanctification ;  the  same  word  as  in  the  third
verso ;  so  that  holiness  is  the  whole  sphere
of  our  Christian  life.

Yer.  8.— He  therefore  that  despiseth ;  or,
as  it  is  in  the  margin,  rejecteth(K.Y.).  What
is  rejected  is  either  the  above  commands  to
moral  purity,  or  the  Christian  calling  to
holiness,  or,  better  still,  Paul  himself,  as  tho

*  ISee  also  Jowett,  in  loco.


CH.IV.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


75


organ  of  God.  Deepiseth;  or,' rejecieth.  Hot
Bftn ;  that  ia,  not  me,  as  if  the  commands
were  given  from  myself—were  of  mere
human  origin.  But  Ood ;  the  Giver  of  these
commands.  8o  also  Peter  said  unto
Ananias,  ''Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  man,
but  unto  God  "  (Acts  v.  4) ;  and  our  Lord
says,  " He  that  rejecteth  you  rejeoteth  me"
(Luke  X.  16).  Who  hath  also  given  unto  us
hli  Holy  Spirit.  If  this  is  the  correct
reading,  then  the  apostle  here  again  asserts
bis  own  inspimtion,  and  that  in  the  strongest
and  plainest  terms.  The  best  manuscripts,
however,  read,  **  who  giveth  his  Holy  Spirit
unto  you  "  (R.V.) — a  strong"  enforcement  of
holiness,  inasmuch  as  the  Holy  Spirit  was

fiven  them  for  the  express  purpose  of  pro-
ocing  holiness  within  them.
^  Ver.  9. — ^The  apostlo  now  proceeds  to  a
new  exhortation.  Bnt  as  tonoMng  brotherly
loT*.  Brotherly  love  is  the  love  of  Chris-
tians to  Christians,  that  special  affection
which  believers  bear  to  each  other;  a  virtue
which  was  carried  to  such  perfection  in  the
primitive  Church  as  to  call  forth  the  ad-
miration of  their  heathen  adversaries.  This
virtue  is  often  inculcated  in  Scripture  (Hob.
xiii.  1 ;  1  John  iii.  14),  and  is  distinguished
from  love  in  general  (2  Pet.  i.  7).  Ye  need
not  that  I  write  nnto  yon ;  a  delicate  and
gentle  reproof.  For  ye  yonrselves  are  taught
of  God.  We  are  not  here  to  think  of  the
new  commandment  of  brotherly  love  given
by  the  Saviour,  nor  on  the  Divine  compassion
exciting  us  to  love ;  but  '^  taught  of  God"
by  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  on  their  hearts
and  consciences  to  love  one  another.

Ver.  10.— And  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all
the  brethren  which  are  in  all  Macedonia.
Not  only  to  those  in  Thessalouica,  but  to  all
believers  in  your  country  and  neighbour-
hood. But  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  that
yo  ineresM  more  and  more;  that  yo  make
progress  in  brotherly  love — that  it  increase
mjpurity,  in  warmth,  and  in  extent.

Yer.  11. — ^And  that  ye  study;  literally,
that  ye  he  ambitioui.  To  be  quiet ;  to  avoid
unrest,  to  live  in  peace.  Worldly  ambition
excludes  quietness  and  prompts  to  restless-
ness ;  so  that  the  apostle  s  admonition  really
is,  **  that  ye  be  ambitious  not  to  be  ambi-
tious.** The  unrest  which  disturbed  the
peace  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  not
political,  but  religious;  it  arose  from  the
excitement  naturally  occasioned  by  the
entrance  of  the  new  feeling  of  Christianity
among  them.  It  would  also  appear  that
they  were  excited  by  the  idea  of  Christ's
immediate  advent.  This  had  occasioned
disorders,  and  had  caused  several  to  neglect
their  ordinary  business  and  to  ^ve  them-
selves over  to  an  indolent  inactivity,  so  that
Christian  prudence  was  overborne  (comp.  2
These,  iii  6—12).    Perhaps,  aUo,  the  libe-


rality of  the  richer  members  of  the  Church
was  abused  and  perverted,  so  as  to  promote
indolence.  And  to  do  your  own  buainess ;  to
attend  to  the  duties  of  your  worldly  calling,
to  avoid  idleness.  And  to  work  with  your
own  hands.  From  this  it  would  appear  that
the  members  of  the  Thessalonian  Church
were  chiefly  composed  of  the  labouring
classes.  As  we  oommanded  you.  A  precisely
similar  exhortation  is  given  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Ephesians :  '*  Let  him  that  stole  steal
no  more :  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working
with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good"
(Eph.  iv.  28).

Ver.  12.— That  ye  walk  honestly;  that  is,
honourably ;  seemly.  Toward  them  that  are
without ;  without  the  pale  of  the  Christian
Church,  toward  those  who  are  not  Chris-
tians, whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  the  unbe-
lieving world.  So  also,  in  another  Epistle,
the  apostlo  says,  '^  Walk  in  wisdom  toward
them  that  are  without'*  (Col.  iv.  5).  That
ye  may  have  lack  of  nothing;  either  neuter,
of  no  thing ;  or  perhaps  rather  masculine,  of
no  man ;  that  ye  be  under  no  nocessity  of
asking  assistance  either  from  heathens  or
from  ^llow-Christians ;  inasmuch  as  working
with  your  hands  will  put  you  in  possession
of  what  is  necessary  for  li/e ;  whereas  idle-
ness necessarily  involves  poverty  and  depen-
dence on  others.

Ver.  13. — With  this  verse  the  apostle
proceeds  to  another  subject^  namely,  to
comfort  those  who  were  mourning  the  death
of  their  friends.  It  would  appear  that  the
Thcssalonians  were  in  perplexity  and  dis-
tress concerning  the  fate  of  their  deceased
friends,  fearing  that  these  would  miss  those
blessings  which  they  expected  Christ  to
confer  at  his  advent.  Their  views  of  the
time  and  nature  of  the  advent  and  of  the
future  state  in  general  were  confused.  They
expected  that  Christ  would  come  imme-
diately and  establish  his  kingdom  on  earth ;
and  consequently  they  feared  that  those  who
had  died  would  be  excluded  from  it.  But  I
would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren ;
a  phrase  often  used  by  the  apostle,  when  he
makes  a  transition  to  new  and  important
matters  (comp.  Rom.  i.  13 ;  xi.  25 ;  1  Cor.
X.  1 :  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  i.  8).  Conoeming  them
which  are  asleep;  or,  are  fallen  asleep.
The  death  of  believers  in  tho  New  Testa-
ment is  frequently  called  "sleep."  "Our
friend  Lazarus  sleepeth  "  (John  xi.  11).  Of
Steplien  it  is  said  that  **he  fell  asleep"
(Acts  vii.  60).  "  Many  are  weak  and  sickly
among  you,  and  man^  sleep  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  SO).
*'  Then  they  also  which  are  fallen  asleep  in
Christ  are  perished  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  18).  "  We
shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be
changed  "  ( I  Cor.  xv.  51).  "  He  fell  asleep  "
is  a  common  epitaph  on  early  Christian
tombstones.    It  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is


76


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cu.  iv.  1— 18.


not  of  the  dead  generally  that  the  apostle
Bpeaks,  bat  of  the  dead  in  Christ,  and  espe-
cially of  those  members  of  the  Thessalonian
Church  who  had  died.  That  ye  sorrow  not.
Some  suppose  that  sorrow  for  our  deeeased
friends  is  here  utterly  prohibited ;  inasmuch
OS  if  we  had  a  firm  belief  in  their  blessed-
ness we  would  rejoice  and  not  moura.  But
the  sorrow  here  prohibited  is  a  despairing
and  an  unbelieving  sorrow ;  we  are  forbidden
to  Borrow  as  those  who  have  no  hope,  no
belief  in  a  blessed  resurrection.  The  tears
of  Jesus  at  the  tomb  of  Lazarus  have
authorized  and  sanctified  Christian  sorrow.
"Paul,"  observes  Calvin,  ** lifts  up  tho
minds  of  believers  to  a  consideration  of  the
resurrection,  lest  they  should  indulge  exces-
sive grief  on  occasion  of  the  death  of  their
relatives,  for  it  were  imseemly  that  there
should  be  no  difference  between  them  and
unbelievers,  who  put  no  end  or  measure  to
their  grief,  for  this  reason,  that  In  death  they
recognize  notliing  but  destruction.  Those
that  abuse  this  testimony  so  as  to  establish
among  Christians  stoical  indifference,  that
is,  an  iron  hardness,  will  find  nothing  of  this
nature  in  Paul's  words."  Even  as  others ;
literally,  cu  the  rest ;  namely,  the  heathen.
Which  haye  no  hope ;  no  hope  of  immortality
beyond  death,  or  no  hope  of  the  resurrection.
The  heathen,  with  very  few  exceptions,  had
no-  hope  of  a  future  life,  and  hence  they
mourned  over  the  death  of  their  friends  as
an  irreparable  loss.  This  disconsolate  feeling
is  apparent  in  their  writings  (for  examples,
see  Liinemann,  Alford,  and  Jowett,  in  loco).

Yer.  14.— For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died
and  rose  again.  Tho  apostle's  argument
proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  Christ  and
believers  are  one  body,  of  wliich  Christ  is
the  Head  and  believers  are  tho  members;
and  that  consequently  wliat  happens  to  the
Head  must  happen  to  tlie  members.  Our
knowledge  and  belief  of  a  future  state,  and
especially  of  the  resurrection,  is  founded  on
tho  resurrection  of  Christ  (comp.  1  Cor.  xv.
12—20).  Sven  so  them  also  which  sleep  in
Jesns ;  or  more  literally,  (ftrough  Jestis.  Will
Ood  bring  with  him;  namely,  with  Jesus.
Tiiese  words  are  differently  construed.  Some
read  them  thus :  '*  Even  so  them  also  which
sleep  will  God  through  Jesus  bring  with
him"  (Do  Wette,  Lunemann);  but  this
appears  to  be  an  awkward  construction  ;  as
wo  must  then  render  the  clause,  *'  will  God
through  Jesus  bring  with  Jesus."  It  is,
therefore,  better  to  refer  tho  words,  "  through
Jesus,"  to  tho  first  clause.  It  is  through
Jesus  that  believers  fall  asleep;  it  is  he
who  changes  the  nature  of  death,  for  all  his
people,  from  being  the  king  of  terrors  into  a
quiet  and  gentle  sleep,  from  which  they  will
awaken  to  eternal  life.

Yer.  15.>-Fcr  this  we  say  unto  yon  by  the


word  of  the  Lord ;  or  rather,  by  a  word  oj
the  Lord,  The  apostle  does  not  refer  to
those  portions  of  the  gospel  which  record
our  Lord's  discourses  concerning  the  last
things ;  nor  to  some  sayings  of  Ghrii$t  pre-
served by  tradition ;  but  to  a  direct  revelation
made  unto  liimself  by  the  Lord.  We  know
from  Scripture  that  Paul  had  many  such
revelations  imparted  to  him  (comp.  1  Cor.
xi.  23 ;  Gal.  i.  11, 12).  That  we  which  are
alive  and  remain  nnto  the  coming  of  the
Lord.  These  words  are  the  occasion  of  an
important  discussion.  It  has  been  affirmed
that  the  apostle  here  asserts  that  he  himself
expected  to  be  alive,  with  the  majority  of
those  to  whom  he  was  writing,  at  the  Lord's
advent ;  that,  according  to  his  expectation,
Christ's  second  coming  was  close  at  hand.
**  Those  who  are  alive  and  remain  "  are  dis-
tinguished from  "those  who  are  asleep,"
and  in  the  former  class  the  apostle  includes
himself  and  his  readers.  And  a  similar
declaration  is  contained  in  the  First  Epistle
to  tho  Corinthians :  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep,
but  we  shall  all  be  changed "  (1  Cor.  xv.
51).  Such  is  the  view  adopted  by  Grotius,
Olshausen,  Koch,  Neander,  Lechler,  Baur,
Winer,  Reuss,  Liinemann,  Biggenbach ;  and,
among  English  divines,  by  Alford,  Jowett,
Stanley,  and  Conybeare.  Some  of  them
suppose  that  Paul  changed  his  opinion  on
this  point — that  whilst  in  his  earlier
Epistles  he  taught  the  immediateness  of  the
advent,  in  his  later  Epistles  he  renounced
this  hope  and  looked  forward  to  his  own
departure.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any
ground  for  this  opinion.  On  the  contrary,  it
would  appear  from  the  Second  Epistle  to
the  Thesittdonians,  written  only  a  few  weeks
after  this  Epistle,  that  Paul  did  not  expect
the  advent  immediately, but  mentions  a  series
of  events  which  would  intervene  before  its
occurrence  (2  Thess.  ii.  1 — 3).  And  in  this
Epistle  he  represses  the  curiosity  of  the
Thessalonians  about  the  precise  time  of  the
advent  by  telling  them  that  it  was  beyond
the  sphere  of  his  teaching  (cb.  v.  1,  2).  We
consider,  then,  that  the  apostle  speaks  hero
as  a  member  of  the  Christian  body,  and  uses
a  very  common  form  of  expression — that  we
Christians  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto
the  coming  of  the  Lord ;  but  not  at  all  in-
tending to  express  his  confidence  that  ho
himself  and  his  converts  would  be  actually
olive  at  the  advent.  "  He  spake,"  says  St.
Chrysostom,  "  not  of  himself,  but  of  Chris-
tians who  would  be  alive  at  the  day  of
judgment."  Such  is  the  view  adopted  by
Chrysostom,  Calvin,  Bcngel,  Hofmann,
Lange,  Macknight,  Ellicott,  Bishop  Alex-
ander, Wordsworth,  and  Yaughan.  At  the
same  time,  it  must  be  remembered  tliat
the  time  of  the  advent  was  expressly  con-
cealed (^latt.  xxiv,  36 ;  Acts  i.  7),  and  that


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


n


it  might  occur  at  any  period ;  and,  by  reason
of  their  proximity  to  the  first  advent,  the
primitiye  Christians  would  be  deeply  im-

fresaed  with  the  possibility  or  even  proba-
ility  of  its  occurrence  in  their  days.
Chriatiaiis  were  to  be  living  always  in
leadiness  for  this  great  event,  and  thus  it
became  a  matter  of  expectation.  **  Strictly
making,  the  expectation  of  the  day  of  the
Lord  was  not  a  belief,  but  a  necessity  in
the  early  Church  ;  clinging  as  it  did  to  the
thought  of  Christ,  it  could  not  bear  to  be
separated  from  him ;  it  was  his  absence,  not
his  presence,  that  the  first  believers  found
it  hard  to  realize  "  ( Jowett).  Hence  Paul
might  not  regard  the  advent  as  far  removed
into  the  distant  future,  as  wholly  impossible
to  happen  in  his  days,  but  as  an  occurrence
which  might  at  any  time  take  place ;  but  he
did  not  teach  anything  definite  or  certain  on
the  subject'  Shall  not  prevent ;  go  before
or  anticipate,  obtain  the  preference  over,  get
before,  so  that  those  that  are  asleep  might
be  left  behind  and  fail  of  the  prize.  Them
tbMt  are  asleep;  those  who  are  dead,  so  that
they,  tho  living,  should  be  glorified  before
them,  or  perhaps  hinder  their  glorification.
Yer.  16. — For ;  assigning  a  reason  for  the
above  assertion,  **  because."  The  Lord  himself;
not  merely  the  Lord  as  the  chief  Person  and
Actor  on  that  day,  in  contrast  to  his  saints,
but  emphatic,  **  tho  Lord  himself,"  the  Lord
in  his  own  proper  Person.  Shall  descend  from
hsavflii ;  where  the  crucified  and  risen  Jesus
is  now  enthroned,  seated  at  the  right  hand
of  God.  With  a  shout ;  a  word  denoting  a
commanding  shout  as  that  of  a  leader  to  his
host  when  he  leads  them  into  tho  battle,  or
of  ihe  army  when  it  rushes  to  the  fight.
Some  refer  this  shout  to  what  follows — tho
voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of
God  ;  but  there  are  three  particulars  hero
mentioned.  Others  attribute  it  to  Christ
himself.  With  the  voioe  of  the  archangel ;
or  rather,  of  an  archangel.  There  is  only
one  archangel  mentionea  in  Scripture  (Jude
9) ;  tho  word  denotes,  not  "  chief  angel,"  but
**  chief  or  ruler  of  the  angels.*'  Accordingly,
some  suppose  that  Christ  himself  is  here
meant,  as  to  him  alone,  it  is  asserted,  does
this  title  belong;  but  the  Lord  and  the
archangel  are  here  evidently  distinguished.
Others  strangely  imagine  that  the  Holy
Ghost  is  here  meant.  Others  fix  on  the
archangel  Michael  (Jude  9).  Christ  is
represented  as  accompanied  by  angels  to

*  See  dissertation  on  "Paul's  Views  of
the  Advent "  in  the  author  s  *  Introduction
to  the  Panlinn  Epistles/  pp.  94—106.


the  judgment;  and  it  is  futilo  to  inquire
who  this  leader  of  the  angels  is.  And  the
trump  of  Gk>d ;  even  as  Lho  trumpet  sounded
at  tho  giving  of  the  Law  from  Sinai.  Also
tho  advent  of  Christ  to  judgment  is  repre-
sented as  heralded  by  the  sound  of  a
trumpet  (Matt.  xxiv.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52).
"  Wo  are  to  recognize  three  particulars,  fol-
lowing each  other  in  rapid  succession  — the
commanding  shout  of  the  King  himself,  the
voice  of  the  archangel  summoning  tho  othor
angels,  and  the  trump  of  God  which  awakens
the  dead  and  collects  believers"  (Riggen-
bach).  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise
first.  Some  suppose  that  tho  reference  hero
is  to  the  first  resurrection;  that  the  righteous,
"  the  dead  in  Christ,"  shall  rise  before  the
wicked,  **  the  dead  not  in  Christ ; "  and  that
a  thousand  years,  or  tho  millennium,  will
intervene  between  the  firet  and  second
resurrections  (Rev.  xx.  4,  5).  But  this  is
an  entirely  erroneous  supposition.  All  that
is  here  asserted  is  that  the  dead  in  Christ
shall  rise  beforo  tho  living  in  (Christ  shall
be  changed;  there  is  no  contrast  between
tho  dead  in  Christ  and  the  dead  not  in
Christ,  nor  any  allusion  to  the  resiwrection
of  tho  wicked.

Ver.  17. — ^Then  we  which  are  alive  and
remain ;  or,  are  left ;  that  is,  tho  saints  who
shall  then  be  found  alive  on  the  earth.  The
apostle  classes  himself  among  tho  living,
because  ho  was  then  alive.  Shall  be  caught
up.  The  expression  describes  the  irresistible
power  with  which  tho  saints  shall  be  caught
up,  perhaps  by  the  ministry  of  angels.  To-
gether with  them ;  with  the  dead  in  Christ
who  are  raised.  In  the  clouds.  Our  Lord  is
described  as  coming  to  judgment  in  tho
clouds  of  heaven  (Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  Rev.  i.  T).
According  to  the  Old  Testament  represen-
tation, God  is  described  as  making  the
clouds  his  chariot  (Ps.  civ.  3).  To  meet
the  Lord;  in  his  descent  from  heaven  to
earth.  In  the  air.  Not  that  he  shall  fix  his
throne  in  tho  air,  but  that  he  passes  tlirough
the  air  in  his  descent  to  tho  earth.  And  so
shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord ;  shall  share
a  blessed  eternity  in  the  vision  and  partici-
pation of  his  glory.  The  apostlo  does  not
nere  describe  tho  solemnities  of  the  judg-
ment ;  but  stops  at  the  meeting  of  Christ
and  his  risen  saints,  because  his  obiect  was
to  comfort  the  Thessalonians  under  bereave-
ment

Yer.  18.— Wherefore  comfort  one  another
with  these  words ;  on  the  ground  of  that
Divine  revelation  which  I  have  made  unto
you.


78  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1— 18.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  3,  7. — Holiness  the  design  of  revelation.  Holiness  is  tlio  end  aimed  at  in  all
tbe  dispensations  of  Grod.  (1)  Gt)d  has  chosen  us  hefore  the  foundation  of  the  world  that
we  should  be  holy  (Eph.  i.  4) ;  (2)  Christ  gave  himself  for  us  to  redeem  us  from  all
iniquity  (Titus  ii.  14) ;  (3)  the  Holy  Spirit  is  conferred  to  sanctify  us  (Titus  iii.  5 ;
2  Thess.  ii.  13) ;  (4)  the  Word  is  the  instrument  of  sanctification  (John  xvii.  17) ;  and
(6)  God  chastens  us  in  order  that  we  might  bo  made  partakers  of  his  holiness  (Heb.
xii.  10).    In  short,  holiness  is  salvation— our  restoration  to  the  moral  image  of  Qtod,

Vor.  9. — Brotherly  love,  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  a  lovo  to  all  believers  as  believers,  as
being  the  children  of  the  same  Father,  the  brethren  of  the  same  Saviour,  the  members
of  the  same  family,  the  sharers  of  the  same  grace,  and  the  expectants  of  the  same
glorious  immortality.  To  aU  men  we  are  related  by  a  common  humanity,  but  to
Christians  we  are  still  more  closely  related  by  a  common  Christianity.  2.  Its  manifest
tcUions,  It  will  show  itself  in  acts  of  kindness  done  to  believers,  in  preferring  their
company  to  that  of  worldly  men,  and  in  conversing  with  them  on  religious  subjects.
3.  The  evidence  arising  from  brotherly  love.  It  is  a  proof  that  we  are  not  of  the  world,
that  we  love  God  and  that  we  are  Christ's  friends  and  disciples.

Vcr.  11. — Quietness  and  faithfulness  in  worldly  duties,  1.  Quietness,  A  true
Christian  is  of  a  quiet  and  retiring  disposition  ;  he  shrinks  from  worldly  bustle ;  he  is
free  from  worldly  ambition ;  like  the  lily  of  the  valley,  he  loves  the  shade ;  he  knows
that  tills  is  not  his  home,  and  he  looks  for  a  better  country,  even  a  heavenly.  2.
Fait?{fulnes8,  A  true  Christian  faithfully  performs  his  worldly  duties,  because  he
believes  them  to  be  assigned  him  by  the  Lord ;  and  ho  labours  assiduously  at  his  calling,
bec»iuse  he  recognizes  it  ••  the  law  of  Providence  that  if  any  man  do  not  work
neither  shall  he  cat.

Vcr.  12. — Honesty,  1.  Its  nature.  We  must  guard  against  commercial  dishonesty ;
all  attempts  to  go  beyond  and  defraud  our  brother ;  all  overestimating  what  we  sell,
and  imderestimating  what  we  buy ;  all  shrinking  from  the  payment  of  debts ;  all  mean
practices  to  gain  customers.  2.  Its  importance.  Temptations  to  dishonesty  in  this
commercial  age.  Dishonesty  combined  with  religious  profession  gives  occasion  to  the
enemies  of  Grod  to  blaspheme.  We  must  walk  honestly  toward  them  that  are  without.
The  independence  and  loftiness  of  character  which  honesty  imparts.

Ver.  13. — The  death  of  friends,  1.  TJie  Christian's  sorrow  for  the  death  of  friends.
All  sorrow  not  here  forbidden ;  only  commanded  not  to  sorrow  as  those  who  have  no
hope.  The  Christian  sorrow  is  a  submissive  sorrow,  which  discerns  the  hand  of  God ;
a  noly  sorrow,  which  improves  the  affliction ;  a  disinterested  sorrow,  which,  whilst  it
mourns  over  the  loss,  is  comforted  at  the  thoughts  of  the  happiness  of  the  departed ;  an
enlightened  sorrow,  which  looks  forward  to  the  future,  and  regards  our  separation  from
our  departed  friends  as  being  neither  final  nor  complete.  2.  The  Christian's  improve'
ment  of  the  death  of  friends.  It  teaches  us  the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  power  of
religion,  and  the  necessity  of  preparation  for  our  own  death.

Ver.  14. — Resurrection  of  hdievers.  The  ground  of  their  resurrection  rests  on  their
union  to  Christ  and  on  his  resurrection.  Not  only  are  their  souls  immortal,  but  their
bodies  shall  be  redeemed  from  the  grave.  The  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of
God  will  call  them  from  their  graves,  and,  endowed  with  spiritual  bodies,  they  shall  be
caught  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  The  I'esurrection  is  purely  a
doctrine  of  revelation ;  it  formed  no  part  of  the  religion  of  nature ;  the  natural  analogies
which  are  adduced  are  defective  in  essential  points.


cii.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  79


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  importance  of  living  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  The  prac-
tical part  of  the  Epistle  begins  at  this  point.

I.  Mark  thb  affectionate  manner  of  the  apostle's  address.  "Wo  bescecli
you  and  exhort  by  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  does  not  speak  in  the  language  of  command,
much  less  assume  the  air  of  a  lord  over  God's  heritage,  but  meekly  and  affectionately
in  the  way  of  entreaty.  But  there  was  all  the  force  of  authority  in  the  very  entreaty
because  it  was  grounded  in  the  Lord  Jesus  as  its  source  and  element.

11-  The  important  nature  of  his  request.  "  That  according  as  ye  received  from
us  bow  yo  ought  to  walk  and  please  God,  ye  would  abound  yet  more."  1.  It  is  the
duty  of  a  minister  to  enforce  moral  duties  as  well  as  gospel  doctrines.  Scripture  knows
notning  of  antinomianism  except  to  condemn  it.  It  is  necessary  for  ministers  to  expound
duty  as  well  as  doctrine.  2.  it  is  possible  to  please  Ood  in  holy  walking.  This  does
not  imply  that  the  saints'  acceptance  depends  upon  themselves,  but  that  God  is  pleased
with  what  a  believer  docs  in  faith  from  a  principle  of  love,  in  the  grace  of  Christ,  for  the
Divine  glory.  "  The  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  people."  Even  when  our  hearts  con-
demn us,  **  he  upbraidcth  not "  ( Jas.  i.  5).  3.  It  is  necessary  to  increase  in  godliness.
"So  ye  would  abound  yet  more."  (1)  The  apostle  recognizes  their  begun  sanctifi-
cation.  The  best  texts  add  the  words,  "  even  as  also  ye  walk."  (2)  He  enforces  the
necessity  of  making  further  increase  in  holy  walking.  There  must  be  an  "  exercising
of  themselves  unto  godliness,"  a  resolute  *'  going  on  unto  perfection  "  in  the  exercise  of
every  grace,  in  the  discharge  of  every  duty,  "  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  "
(2  Cor.  vii.  1).

III.  Entorcemest  of  the  exhortation.  "  For  ye  know  what  commandments  we
gave  you  by  the  Lord  Jesus."  1.  The  apostlt*s  position  was  purely  ministerial^  for  he
merely  delivered  what  he  had  received  from  the  Lord.  2.  The  moral  duties  he  enjoins
are  hosed  in  the  gospel  of  Christy  which  supplies  the  motives  to  a  full-hearted  obedience.
— T.C.

Ver.  3. — Sanctification  a  Divine  arrangement.  "  For  this  is  God's  will,  your  sancti-
ficatioD."    The  first  duty  expressed  is  personal  holiness.

L  The  nature  of  sanctification.  1.  It  implies  the  consecration  of  all  our
faculties  and  powers,  both  of  body  and  mind^  to  GocTs  service.  2.  It  implies  personal
purity  in  heart  and  life.  We  are  to  '*  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and
and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).

II.  The  ground  op  the  exhortation.  1.  It  is  Ood's  will.  That  ought  to  stimulate
to  exertion  and  encourage  to  prayer.  "  Teach  mo  to  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God."
2.  It  was  the  design  of  Christ's  death ;  for  he  "  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good
works  "  (Titus  ii.  14).

UL  The  means  of  sanctification.  1.  It  is  by  the  truth.  "  Sanctify  them  by  thy
truth  :  thy  Word  is  truth."  2.  It  is  by  his  ordinances.  3.  It  is  by  his  providences.
(Ps.  cxix.  71 ;  Heb.  xii.  10 ;  Rom.  ii.  4.)  4.  It  is,  above  all,  by  the  Spirit  of  holiness,
as  its  tele  Author, — T.  C.

Ver.  S.'^Warning  against  sins  of  impurity.  The  apostle  comes  at  once  to  par-
ticulars. *'  That  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication."  Though  adultery  and  incest  were
crimes  among  the  heathen,  fornication  was  not  accounted  a  sin  at  all.  Therefore  we
can  understand  the  emphatic  place  which  is  assigned  to  this  sin  in  the  synodal  letters
to  the  Gentile  Churches  (Acts  xv.  20—29).  The  Gentiles  "walked  after  the  flesh  in
the  lust  of  uncleanness."

L  Consider  the  heinousness  of  this  bin.  1.  It  is  a  sin  against  God.  So  Joseph
re^uded  it  (Gen.  xxxix.  9).  The  law  to  restrain  from  this  sin  is  grounded  in  the
reason,  "  For  I  the  Lord  am  holy  "  (Lev.  xix.  2).  The  Divine  nature  which  believers
share  through  grace  is  quite  inconsistent  with  *'  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world
through  lust "  (2  Pet  i.  4).  This  sin  is  likewise  inconsistent  with  the  design  of  the
gospel  of  Christ  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Eph.  iv.  29, 30).    2.  It


80  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1—18.


ts  a  iin  against  our  neighhour.  This  is  implied  in  the  scventb  commandment.  3.  li
is  a  sin  against  our  own  bodies.  (1  Cor.  vi.  18.)  Sinners  dishonour  their  own  bodies
?Rom.  i.  2i\  i.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  soxd,  "  Whoredom  takes  away  the  heart "
(Hos.  iv.  11).

II.  Consider  the  fatal  consequences  of  this  sin.  1.  It  wastes  the  body,  (Job
XX.  ll.J  2.  It  wars  against  the  soul,  (1  Pet,  ii.  11.)  3.  It  causes  shame.  (Prov.  vi.
83 ;  Epn.  v.  12.)  4.  It  entails  poverty,  (Prov.  vi.  2G.)  5.  It  excludes  from  the  kingdom
of  Qod.    (1  Cor.  vi.  9, 10.)— T.  C.

Vers.  4 — 8. — How  personal  purity  is  to  be  maintained.  The 'sanctification  which  is
God's  will  requires  that  *'  every  one  of  you  know  how  to  possess  himself  of  his  own
vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour,  not  in  passion  of  lust"  The  vessel  is  not  a  wife,
but  a  man's  own  body.  If  it  meant  a  wife,  it  might  be  said  that  every  man  would  be
bound  to  marry.  The  wife  is  no  doubt  called  the  "  weaker  vessel,"  the  evident  meaning
of  the  term  of  compiarison  being  that^the  husband  is  also  "  a  vessel."

I.  How  the  body  is  to  be  used.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  It  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  outside
the  pale  of  moral  obligation,  as  antinomian  perverters  say,  basing  their  error  on  the
words  of  the  apostle,  ''It  is  not  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me ; "  **  In  me,  that
is,  in  my  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing."  (2)  It  is  not  to  be  injured  or  mutilated
by  asceticism,  after  Romish  example.  The  apostle  condemns  '*  the  neglecting  of  the
body  "  and  "  the  not  sparing  of  the  body  "  (Col.  ii.  23).  (3)  It  is  not  to  be  made  "  an
instrument  of  unrighteousness  "  through  sensuality — *'  not  in  passion  of  lust."  Sensu-
ality is  quite  inconsistent  with  the  very  idea  of  sanctification.  2.  Positively.  (1)  The
body  is  to  be  kept  under  control ;  the  Christian  "  must  know  how  to  possess  himself  of
his  own  vessel."  He  "  must  keep  under  the  body ; "  he  must  make  it  servant  and  not
master,  and  not  allow  its  natural  liberty  to  run  into  licentiousness.  (2)  He  must
treat  it  with  all  due  honour — *'  in  sanctification  and  honour ; "  (a)  because  it  is  God's
workmanship,  for  '*  we  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made ; "  (b)  because  it  is  "  the
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19) ;  (c)  because  it  is  an  heir  of  the  resurrection ;
(d)  Dccausc  it  is,  and  ought  to  be,  like  the  believer  himself,  *'  a  vessel  unto  honour,
sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master*s  use,"  for  the  body  has  much  to  do  in  the  economy
of  grace.

II.  DiBSUASiYES  against  FER80NAL  IMPURITT.  1.  The  knowledge  of  Qod  received
by  the  Christian  ought  to  guard  us  against  it.  The  apostle  here  attributes  Gentile
impurity  to  ignorance  of  God.  "  Even  as  the  Gentiles  who  know  not  God."  The
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  was  alienated  from  the  life  of  Grod,  and  thus  sunk  into
moral  disorder.  The  apostle  shows  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans  how  God,  as  a
righteous  retribution,  gave  over  the  idolatrous  Gentiles  to  all  sorts  of  moral  dishonour.
2.  Another  dissuasive  is  the  regard  we  ought  to  have  for  a  brother's  family  honour.
"  That  no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud  his  brother  in  this  matter."  A  breach  upon
family  honour  is  a  far  worse  offence  than  any  breach  upon  property.  The  stain  is
indelibly  deeper.  3.  Another  dissuasive  is  the  Divine  vengeance.  For  "  the  Lord  is
the  Avenger  concerning  all  these  things."  If  the  vengeance  does  not  reach  men  in
this  world,  it  will  in  the  next,  where  they  will  have  their  portion  in  the  lake  that
bumeth  with  fire  and  brimstone.  They  shall  "not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God"
(1  Cor.  vi.  9).  4.  The  naiure  of  the  Divine  caU  is  another  dissuasive.  For  "  God  did
not  call  you  for  uncleanness,  but  in  sanctification."  They  had  received  "a  holy
calling,"  a  **  high  calling ; "  and  though  "  called  \mto  liberty,"  they  were  "  created  unto
good  works."  They  were  "  called  to  be  saints ; "  for  God  says,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am
holy."  6.  Another  dissuasive  is  that  the  sin  involves  a  despisal  of  Ocd,  who  has  given
us  his  Holy  Spirit  that  we  may  attain  to  sanctification.  "  He  therefore  that  despise th,
despiseth  not  man  but  God,  who  hath  also  given  unto  us  his  Holy  Spirit"  (Jod  has  ordered
all  our  family  relations,  and  any  dishonour  done  to  them  involves  a  contempt  of  his
authority.  We  have  in  this  passage  God— Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit— interested  in
man's  salvation  and  holiness.— T.  C.

Vers.  9, 10. — Inculcation  of  brotherly  love.    The  apostle  next  reminds  the  Thessa-
lonians  of  the  duty  of  abounding  in  brotherly  love.
L  The  nature  of  this  love.     1.  It  is  the  affection  of  those  who  are  children  qf  the


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  81


tame  Father,    ((hi.  iv.  26.)    Members  of  the  same  **  household  of  faith  "  (Gal.  yi.  10).
**  Every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him  "

il  John  V.  1).  2.  It  is  a  practical  love,  "  Not  in  word  only,  bat  in  deed  and  in  truth  *'
1  John  iii.  18).  It  showed  itself  in  "  labours  of  love,"  and  especially  through  the
whole  of  Macedonia.  3.  It  tuas  a  duty  thoroughly  understood  by  believers,  because
they  were  "  taught  of  Gtod  to  love  one  another  "  in  both  Testaments.  4.  It  vxm  the
ieU  of  regeneration.  (1  John  iii.  14.)  5.  It  urns  a  token  of  disdpleship.  (John  xiii.
350    6'  ^*  ^'^^  essential  to  the  growth  of  the  Church.    (Eph.  iv.  16.)

n.  The  motives  to  this  love.  1.  The  command  of  Christ.  (John  xiii.  34.)  2.
The  example  of  Christ.  (Eph.  v.  2.)  3.  The  glory  of  Christ  in  the  world  is  promoted
Jy  iL  (John  xiii.  35.)  4.  It  will  be  a  powerful  means  ioioards  the  world*s  conversion
(John  vii.  21.)

IIL  The  manifestation  op  this  love.  1.  In  bearing  one  another's  burdens  (Gal.
li.  2).  The  Thessalonians  several  years  afterwards  showed  this  spirit,  as  we  see  by
2  Cor.  viii.  1,  2,  toward  the  Churches  of  Macedonia.  2.  "  In  honour  preferring  one
another*'  (Rom.  xii.  10).  3.  "Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another"
(Col.  iii.  13).    4.  •*  Not  suffering  sin  upon  a  brother  "  (Lev.  xix.  17). — T.  C.

Vers.  11, 12. — Inculcation  of  the  duty  of  quiet  and  honest  industry.  "And  that  ye
study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business,  and  to  work  with  your  own  hands,  as
we  commanded  you.''

L  A  warning  against  three  inconsistent  and  unprofitable  modes  op  life.
1.  Theu  were  to  guard  against  a  spirit  of  restlessness.  "  That  ye  study  to  be  quiet."
There  had,  perhaps,  arisen  an  unsettlcment  of  mind  on  account  of  their  belief  in  the
nearness  of  Christ's  advent,  as  well  as  some  uneasiness  on  account  of  the  fate  of  their
deceased  brethren.  It  led  to  a  desultoriness  of  life  little  effective  for  any  good  end.
The  apostle,  therefore,  coimsels  sedateness  and  calmness.  We  ought  to  live  **  a  quiet
and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  2).  2.  They  were  to  guard
against  a  meddling  and pragrfiatical  spirit.  "  Do  your  own  business."  Love  naturally
iodines  us  to  "  look  not  on  our  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others "  (Phil.
iu  4),  but  it  must  not  prompt  either  to  the  neglect  of  our  own  business  or  to  undue
interference  with  that  of  others.  We  must  not  be  "busybodies  in  other  men's  matters."
3.  They  were  to  guard  against  idleness,  "  Work  with  your  own  hands."  The  converts
probably  belonged  mostly  to  the  artisan  class.  The  belief  in  the  nearness  of  the  advent
had  unhinged  their  minds,  and  led  them  to  neglect  the  duties  of  their  secular  calling.
Industry  is  a  commanded  duty.  "  Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein
he  was  called  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  20).  The  Thessalonians  needed  to  be  reminded  of  it,  for  he
had  occasion  to  speak  of  it  in  his  first  visit.     Idleness  has  peculiar  temptations.

IL  Motives  to  the  discharge  of  these  duties.  *'  That  yo  may  walk  honestly
tovBrd  them  that  are  without,  and  that  ye  may  have  need  of  nothing."  1.  We  are  to
have  consideration  to  the  opinion  of  those  without.  They  may  misjudge  us,  yet  their
judgments  may  be  often  true.  We  must  not  repel  them  by  our  inconsistencies  of
oooduct.  We  must  give  "  none  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully " ,
(1  Tim.  V.  14).  2.  We  are  to  provide  a  supply  for  our  own  wants,  (1)  so  as  to  support
corselves  respectably,  (2)  and  to  enable  us  to  supply  the  need  of  others.  Christianity
it  above  all  tnings  a  self-respecting  religion,  and  has  the  promise  even  '*  of  the  life  that
now  is."    Mendicancy  is  essentially  degrading. — ^T.  C.

Vcr.  13. — Sorrow  for  the  dead.  The  apostle  next  refers  to  the  share  of  the  Christian
dead  in  the  coming  of  Christ,  respecting  which  some  misapprehensions  seem  to  have
existed  at  Thessslonica.

I.  Thk  death  of  friends  is  a  cause  of  deep  sorrow  to  survivors.  Such  sorrow
is  instinctive,  and  is  not  forbidden  by  the  gospel :  for  **  Jesus  wept "  at  the  grave  of
Lazani8,and  the  friends  of  Stephen  ''  made  great  lamentation  over  him."  True  religion
does  not  destroy,  but  restrains,  natural  affections.

IL  There  is  a  difference  between  Christian  and  heathen  sorrow.  That
of  the  heathen  is  extravagant,  because  there  is  *'  no  hope "  in  the  death  of  their
natives.  It  is  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world,"  which  is  utterly  uncheered  by  hope.  The
sorrow  of  the  Christian  is  sober,  and  chastened  by  the  hope  of  the  gospel.

I.  thessalonians.  q


I


82  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1— 18.

nL  The  caubb  of  Thbssalonian  bobbow.  1.  li  was  not  that  there  vxis  a  denial
or  doubt  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  such  as  existed  at  Corinth.  2.  Nor  %uas  it
tliat  the  resurrection  was  regarded  as  past  already,  according  to  the  heresy  of  Hymenasus
and  Fhiletus.  3.  Bui  it  was  that  it  was  feared  the  Christian  dead  would  not  le
raised  to  share  with  the  living  in  the  coming  glories  of  the  advent,

IV.   T^  BESUBBEOnON    HAS     OHANGBD    DEATH  INTO  A  BLEEP.       '<  ThoSO    that    are

asleep."  1.  There  is  nothing  in  the  word  to  justify  the  idea  of  the  souTs  unconsciousness
in  the  period  between  death  and  resurrection.  2.  Sleep  implies  an  awaking.  This  will
occur  at  the  resurrection.    Thus  the  hope  of  the  Church  is  the  hope  of  the  resurrectiuii.

y.  I^  IMPOBTANOE  OF  EXACT  KNOWLEDaS    BESPSCTING   THE    FUTUBE   DESTINY  OF

THE  SAINTS.  ''I  would  Dot  havo  you  ignorant.**  Ignorance  of  the  truth  mars  our
spiritual  comfort. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  14,  16. — Realms  against  sorrow  for  the  dead.  The  apostle  gives  several
reasons  why  the  Thessalonians  ought  not  to  sorrow  for  their  dead.

I.  The  fundamental  beason  is  the  death  and  besubbection  of  Cubist.
''If  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again."  These  are  the  primary  facts  of
Christianity.  They  are  inseparably  linked  together,  for  the  resurrection  was  the  crown
of  the  redeeming  sacrifice ;  for  if  he  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  he  was  raised  again
for  our  justification.    Deny  either  or  both,  we  "  are  yet  in  our  sins."

II.  The  second  beason  is,  when  Chbist  comes  again  fuom  the  Fatheb's  bight

HAND,  HE  will  BEING  WITH  HIM  THE  SLEEPING  SAINTS.      '*  Even    80   them    also    who

sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him."  L  The  dead  saints  sleep  in  Jesus,  They
are  associated  with  him  both  in  life  and  in  death.  They  "  die  in  the  Lord ; "  *'  they  are
present  with  the  Lord.''  2.  TJiey  will  accompany  Jesus  at  his  second  coming.  This
includes  (1)  their  resurrection  from  the  dead, — for  *'  he  who  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus
shall  raise  up  us  also  by  Jesus  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  14) ;  (2)  their  joining  the  retinue  of  Jesus
to  share  his  triumph.  As  risen  from  the  dead,  he  becomes  "  the  Firstfhiits  of  them
that  slept."

III.  The  thibd  beason  is  that  the  living  saints  will  not  pbecede  the
DEAD  SAINTS  AT  THE  COMING  OF  Chbibt.  *'  For  this  we  Say  unto  you  by  the  word
of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall
not  precede  them  which  are  asleep."  This  fact  would  efiectively  dissipate  their  sorrow
for  their  departed  friends.  1.  ft  is  a  fact  made  knoum  by  special  revelation.  Such
revelations  were  frequently  made  to  the  apostle,  as  in  the  case  of  his  special  mission
field  (Acts  xxii.  18 — 21),  the  position  of  Gentile  saints  (Eph.  iii.  8),  the  Lord's  Supper
(1  Cor.  xi.  23),  and  the  reality  and  proofis  of  Christ's  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  3).  2.  It
is  a  fact  that  does  not  imply  either  the  nearness  of  the  second  advent,  or  the  apostle*s  oum
share  as  a  living  man  in  its  glories.  He  says,  *'  We  which  are  alive  and  remain  to  the
coming  of  Christ ; "  he  merely  identifies  the  living  believers  of  the  last  age  with  him-
self, as  if  he  said,  '*  Those  of  us  Christians  who  may  be  alive  at  the  advent."  He  could
not  have  believed  that  he  would  not  die  before  the  advent,  for  (1)  that  would  imply
that  "  the  word  of  the  Lord "  had  misled  him ;  (2)  he  actuaUy  preferred  to  be  absent
from  the  body,  and  toward  the  end  of  his  life  spoke  of  death  as  "  gain,"  and  of  his
desiring  '*  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,"  words  quite  inconsistent  with  this  theory ;
(3)  he  virtually  declares  in  the  Second  Epistle  that  the  advent  could  not  happen  in
his  lifetime  (2  Thess.  ii^ ;  (4)  he  knew  that  no  man,  not  even  the  Son  of  man,  knew
the  time  of  the  advent  (Mark  xiii.  42).  3.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  living  saints  will  not
get  the  start  of  th/e  dead  saints  in  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  This  is  his  express  revelation
I'rom  the  Lord.  "  The  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,"  or  before  the  living  are  changed
(1  Cor.  XV.).  The  Thessalonians  need  not,  therefore,  sorrow  for  their  departed  friends,
neither  be  afraid  themselves  to  die. — T.  0.

Vers.  16—18. — ITie  order  of  events  at  the  second  advent.  The  apostle  justifies
his  statement  by  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  truth.     He  sets  forth  the  order  of  events.

I.  The  descent  of  the  Lobd  fbom  heaven.  "For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of
God."  1.  It  unit  be  a  descent  of  our  personal  Lord.  "  No  phantom,  no  providentiiU
substitute,  no  vicarious  spirit ; "  the  same  Person  that  ascended  is  he  that  will  descend


CE.  IV.  1— la]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  83


2.  A  will  he  a  descent  with  awe-inspiring  cuxompaniments,  (1)  ''With  a  signal
shout"  by  the  Lord  himself,  which  will  be  ta^en  up  and  prolonged  oy  (2)  "  the  voice  of
the  arohaugel;  "  for  he  is  to  come,  "  bringing  with  him  all  the  holy  angels"  (Matt.  zxv.
31) ;  and  (3)  "  the  trump  of  God,"  for  •'  the  trumpet  shall  sound  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  62),
and  "  be  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet "  (Matt.  xxiv.  31).  It  is
God's  trumpet  because  employed  in  his  heavenly  service.  It  will  be  the  sound  of  a
literal  trumpet,  like  that  which  was  heard  upon  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16,  19).  These
various  sounds  are  to  herald  the  descent  of  the  Lord,  and  to  gather  the  elect  together
liom  the  four  winds  of  heaven.

IL  Tbe  BESuaBEOTioN  OF  THE  DEAD  SAINTS.  ''  And  tho  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise
first."  There  is  no  allusion  to  the  resurrection  of  tho  wicked.  The  apostle  is  con-
cerned at  present  with  the  destinies  and  glories  of  a  single  class.  So  far  from  the
sainted  dead  being  overlooked,  the  priority  of  resurrection  is  to  belong  to  them.

m.  Ths  change  of  the  livinq  saints.  This  wonderful  transformation  is  here
rather  implied  than  asserted.  "  For  we  shall  not  all  die,  but  we  shall  be  changed "
(1  Cor.  XV.  51).

IV.  The  simultaneous  assumption  of  both  classes  of  saints.  "Then  we
which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  to  meet  the  Lord
in  the  air."  1.  Am  one  united  hand,  the  saints,  in  spirititalized  bodies,  wUl  he  caught
up  in  clouds — those  "  clouds  which  are  his  chariot " — ^iust  as  he  himself  ascended  *'  in  a
doud,"  and  "  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight  (Acts  i.  9).  The  new  bodies  of
believers  will  be  able  to  pass  with  ease  through  the  air.  2.  The  saints  will  then  "  meet
ike  Lord  in  the  air*' — not  in  heaven  as  he  leaves  it,  nor  in  earth  as  he  approaches  it,
but  between  heaven  and  earth.  Tho  apostle  does  not  say  whether  they  will  at  once
deKend  to  earth  and  return  with  him  to  heaven.  He  is  silent  upon  the  question  of
thejudgment  or  the  entry  into  final  glory.

V.  T^  perpetual  residence  of  the  saints  with  the  Lord.  "And  so  shall
W8  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  1.  Jt  will  be  a  meeting  vnthout  a  parting.  The  inter-
course begun  will  have  an  endless  duration.  Believers  shall  *'  go  no  more  out."  2.  It
implies  an  intimate  fellowship  with  the  Lord,  3.  It  wUl  he  the  fulfilment  of  our  Lord*s
prayer :  "  That  they  also  whom  thou  hast  given  me  bo  with  me  where  I  am,  that
they  may  behold  my  glory  "  (John  xvii.  24).

VL  The  consolatory  influence  of  all  these  truths.  "Wherefore  comfort
ooe  another  with  these  words."  Chase  away  your  sorrow;  the  dead  are  not  lost  or
Ibrgptten ;  they  shall  share  in  the  glories  of  the  advent.  There  was  surely  deep  and
listing  oonsolation  in  such  truths. — T.  C.

Ters.  1, 2. — Exhortation,  St.  Paul's  affectionate  importunity.  1.  He  beseeches.
He  has  finished  the  personal  part  of  his  letter ;  he  has  told  them  of  his  love,  his  constant
remembrance  of  them,  his  prayers  for  them,  his  thanksgiving ;  he  has  reminded  them
of  the  close  spiritual  ties  wluch  bound  them  to  him.  Now  he  beseeches  them  to
pcTMrrere.  He  knows  the  exceeding  difQculty  of  maintaining  a  Christian  life  in  this
sinful  w<N'ld ;  he  knows  the  momentous  issues  that  depend  on  perseverance ;  he  loves
his  converts  with  an  intense  love ;  therefore  he  beseeches  (comp.  2  Cor.  v.  20).  He
iiset  all  means  of  persuasion  in  turns.  Now  he  commands,  now  he  beseeches.  Some-
times entreaty  is  more  prevailing  than  commandment,  gentleness  than  authority.
Ko  qualities  are  more  important  in  tho  work  of  the  ministry  than  a  genuine  love  for
souls,  a  T&d  and  evident  anxiety  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  our  people.  St.  Paul
beseeches ;  it  is  an  example  to  all  Christian  ministers.  2.  He  exhorts  them  in  the  Lord
Jesui.  Christian  people  need  all  manner  of  encouragement,  comfort,  exhortation.
That  exhortation  prevails  which  is  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  presence,  his  grace,  himself,
is  the  sphere  of  the  Christian's  spiritual  activity.  Ho  who  lives  habitually  in  **  that
leUowship  which  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"  is  best  able  to  lead
others  to  God  and  heaven.  For  he  who  hath  the  Son  hath  life.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  tho
Life ;  and  he  who  hath  that  life  himself,  hath  from  the  life  that  abideth  in  him  the
warmth,  the  fervour,  the  holy  enthusiasm,  without  which  religious  exhortation  has
no  power,  no  reality.  *'  In  the  Lord  Jesus."  Mark  how  frequently  those  words, ''  in
Chnst^"  **  in  the  Lora,"  are  on  the  lips  of  St.  PauL  It  is  a  constant  formula  with  him«
But  it  is  a  formula  full  of  life,  full  of  holy  meaning.     *'  Not  I,  Christ  liveth  in  me."


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  iv.  1—18.


3.  He  reminds  them  of  his  former  teaching.  He  had  given  them  a  charge,  and  that
through  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  had  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  he  delivered  unto
them.    The  commandments  were  not  his;  they  were  the  commandments  of  Christ.

'  He  had  received  them  from  Christ ;  and  through  Christ's  appointment,  guidance,
presence,  he  delivered  them  to  the  Thessalonians.  He  appeals  to  their  recollection.
They  knew  them  ;  they  had  the  knowledge ;  that  knowledge  involves  a  deep  and  solemn
responsibility.  The  Lord  tells  us  in  the  Gospel  of  the  condemnation  that  hangs  over
the  careless  servant  who  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did
according  to  his  will.  Hence  the  force  of  the  apostle's  words,  "  Ye  know."  Much  had
been  given  to  them,  much  would  be  required.  It  is  a  warning  to  be  always  remembered,
to  bo  urged  constantly  upon  ourselves,  upon  those  who  are  brought  in  any  way  under
our  influence.  "  Ye  know."  Knowledge,  if  it  issue  in  obedience,  is  exceeding  precious ;
knowledge  without  obedience  involves  an  awful  danger.  "  Ye  know ; "  therefore  we
must  use  that  knowledge,  that  precious  talent  entrusted  to  our  keeping.  The
tremendous  alternative  lies  before  us — the  blessed  words,  "Well  done!"  or  the  sentence
that  fills  the  heart  with  shuddering  awe,  "  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant !  "    4.  Ee

'  vrges  them  to  continual  progress.  He  had  taught  them  how  to  walk  and  to  please  God.
The  subject  of  his  practical  teaching  was  how  to  walk,  not  how  to  talk.  They  must
walk  in  the  Spirit,  he  had  told  them ;  their  daily  life  in  all  its  details  and  circum-
stances must  be  guided  by  the  promptings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy
servant  heareth,"  is  the  key-note  oi  the  true  Christian  life.  lHhuB  living  they  would
please  God.  To  please  God  is  the  highest  Christian  ambition;  the  consciousness  of
pleasing  him  is  the  highest  Christian  joy.  But  walking  implies  progress.  Standing  still
is  dangerous ;  it  must  issue  in  backsliding.  They  must  go  on  from  strength  to  strength  ;
they  must  forget  those  things  that  are  behind,  and  press  on  to  those  that  are  before.
The  grace  of  GK)d  abounds ;  it  is  without  limit.  He  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and
vpbraideth  not.  So  must  the  Christian  abound  more  and  more  in  the  exercise  of  the
graces  communicated  to  him  by  God ;  he  must  work  the  works  of  righteousness  with
ever-increasing  energy,  as  the  grace  of  God  more  and  more  fills  his  heart.

Lessons.  1.  Do  all  things  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  learn  by  experience  the
meaning  of  those  deep  words,  **  in  the  Lord."  2.  Remember  that  knowledge  implies
responsibility.  3.  Strive  to  maintain  continual  progress  in  all  Christian  graces,  in
faith,  hope,  love,  humility,  patience. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  3 — 8. — The  law  of  purity,  I.  Purity  op  heart.  1.  The  will  of  Ood  the  rule
of  the  Christian  life.  To  please  God  is  the  strongest  desire  of  the  true  Christian ;  and
we  please  him  by  obedience.  The  Lord  delighteth  not  in  outward  observances  as  he
doth  in  "obeying  the  voice  of  the  Lord."  The  Christian's  prayer  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done."
The  standard  of  that  obedience  is  the  obedience  of  the  angels  in  heaven.  It  is  above
our  reach ;  but  it  is  what  we  are  bidden  to  aim  at,  what  we  are  told  to  pray  for  in  our
daily  prayers.  It  should  be  the  efifort  of  our  lives  to  lift  ourselves  up,  by  the  grace  of
God  assisting  us,  nearer  and  nearer  to  that  heavenly  rule.  Without  that  grace  we  are
helpless;  but  "I  can  do  all  things,"  says  St.  Paul,  "through  him  that  strengtheneth  me."
2.  TJie  tvUl  of  Ood  is  our  sanctification.  He  willeth  mat  all  men  should  be  saved ;
but  salvation  is  possible  only  through  sanctification;  for  without  holiness  no  man  shall
see  the  Lord.  Sanctification  is  the  separation  from  all  that  is  evil,  the  entire  consecra-
tion of  the  whole  man  to  the  service  of  God,  the  gradual  conforming  of  the  human  will
to  the  blessed  will  of  God.  Christ  is  our  Sanctification.  "  He  of  God  is  made  unto  us
Wisdom,  and  Righteousness,  and  Sanctification."  Faith  brings  us  near  to  him,  and  he
becomes  our  Righteousness ;  then  the  work  of  sanctification  logins.  It  is  a  progressive
work,  slow  and  gradual.  The  more  the  believer  grows  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  the  more  does  that  blessed  knowledge  exert  its  hallowing  power.  The
beauty  of  holiness,  the  sweetness  of  fellowship  with  God,  the  glories  of  his  coming  king-
dom, are  more  and  more  deeply  felt.  Then,  when  the  affections  are  set  upon  things  above,
and  the  heart's  love  is  centred  upon  God,  the  soul  reacheth  forth  after  Christ,  longing
above  all  things  to  be  like  him,  yearning  after  holiness  with  a  strong,  intense  desire,
eagerly  striving  to  purge  itself  from  the  defilement  of  sin,  and  to  advance  ever  onwards
in  the  work  of  sanctification ;  and  that  because  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  dwelleth  there
himself,  and  the  pulses  of  his  love  beat  in  the  converted  heart.  He  is  our  Sanctification.


CH.nr.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  85


He  abldeth  in  his  people's  heart  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  All  holy  desires,
all  good  counsels,  all  just  works,  come  from  him — from  his  inspiring,  elevatiug  presence.
This  is  the  will  of  God ;  this  is  what  God  would  have  us  to  be.  It  is  a  very  nigh  and
heavenly  state ;  yet  in  its  various  degrees  it  must  be  by  the  grace  of  God  within  our
reach.  For  he  is  the  Qtod  of  truth;  his  promises  are  not  deceitful;  his  commandments
do  not  mock  us  with  a  standard  impossible  of  attainment.

U.  PuRTTT  OF  LIFE.    1.  ChosHty.    The  apostle  is  writing  to  converts  who  but  a
flhoit  time  before  had  been  heathens.    It  was  necessary  to  speak  very  plainly  and
flolemnly  on  this  subject ;  for  the  heathen  commonly  regarded  that  impurity,  which  is
80  great  a  sin  Id  the  sight  of  God,  almost  as  a  thing  indifferent.    But  the  will  of  G^  is
our  sanciification,  and  sanctification  involves  purity.    Without  sanctification  we  cannot
see  the  Lord ;  but  the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  him.    God  is  light ;  in  him  is  no  dark-
ness at  all.  There  is  something  awful  in  the  stainless  purity  of  the  starry  heavens.    As
we  gaze  into  them,  we  feel  ourselves  oppressed  with  an  overwhelming  sense  of  our  own
tmckanness.    It  is  a  parable  of  the  ineffable  purity  of  God.    In  his  sight  the  heavens
aie  not  clean.    He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil ;  therefore  only  the  pure  in  heart
can  see  his  face.    That  inner  purity  covers  the  whole  spiritual  life.    It  implies  freedom
from  all  lower  motives—all  that  is  selfish,  earthly,  false,  hypocritical ;  it  is  that  trans-
parency of  character  which  flows  from  the  consciousness  of  the  perpetual  presence  of
Qod.    But  that  inner  purity,  which  is  so  large  an  element  in  sanctification,  involves
the  perfect  purity  of  the  outward  life.    Religion  is  not  morality,  but  it  cannot  exist
without  morality.    It  transcends  morality,  but  it  implies  it.   This  was  not  the  teaching
of  the  religion  which  the  Thessalonians  had  abandoned.    That  admitted  immorality.
Their  very  gods  were  immoral.  They  were  served,  not  by  purity  of  life,  but  by  sacrifices
and  ontward  rites  often  leading  to  impurity.  Hence  the  urgency  of  the  apostle's  appeal.
Amid  the  evil  surroundings  of  a  heathen  town,  living  in  an  atmosphere  of  depraved
pnblio  opinion,  new  converts  were  exposed  to  constant  and  great  dangers.    St.  Paul
reminds  them  that  holiness,  without  which  there  is  no  salvation,  is  impossible  without
chastity.    Fornication  is  not,  what  they  once  deemed  it,  a  thing  indifferent.    It  is  an
awful  sin  against  God.    Christianity  has  taught  us  this.    We  know  it  welL    We
wonder  at  the  light  way  in  which  heathen  writers  speak  of  abominations  which  now  we
shrink  from  naniing.   But  the  sin  exists  still  in  terrible  strength.   It  hides  itself,  indeed ;
it  walketh  in  the  darkness ;  Christianity  has  driven  it  there.    But  still,  alas  1  it  slays
it*  thousands  and  its  ten  thousands.    It  cuts  a  soul  away  from  God  with  a  fearful
npidity.    It  fills  the  man  \vith  impure  images,  unholy  desires.    It  drives  out  of  tho
heut  the  thought  of  God.    The  soul  that  is  tainted  with  this  foul  leprosy  cannot  pray.
It  cannot  endure  the  thought  of  the  presence  of  God  in  his  heart-searching  nearness,  in
his  awful  purity.    Impurity  destroys  the  possibility  of  the  slightest  approach  to  that
sanctification  without  which  we  cannot  see  God.    Hence  the  necessity  of  the  apostle's
eamett  words,  "  The  will  of  God  is  your  sanctification ;  and  there  can  be  no  sanctifica-
tioQ  if  ye  live  in  uncleanness."   2.  Honour.   The  unclean  life  of  the  heathen  cities  was
full  oi  sin  and  shame.    The  Christian  life  is  truly  honourable.    The  Christian's  body  is
a  holy  thing.    It  has  been  dedicated  to  God.    It  is  "  for  the  Lord  "  H.  Cor.  vi.  13).
The  Christian  must  acquire  a  mastery  over  it  in  honour.   Ho  must  yield  nis  '*  members
at  inatmments  of  righteousness  unto  God."    The  Christian  husband  must  give  honour
to  his  wife.    Christian  marriage  must  be  honourable,  for  it  is  a  parable  of  the  mystical
■nioQ  that  is  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church.    The  life  of  holiness  and  purity  is  a  thing
to  be  honoured.   Those  who  honour  holiness  honour  Gk>d,  who  is  the  most  holy  One,  the
one  Fountain  of  holiness.   3.  T?ie  knowledge  of  Qod,   The  heathens  knew  not  God.   They
might  have  known  him.    He  had  manifested  in  the  works  of  creation  his  eternal  power
and  Godhead.    But  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge.    They  changed
tlie  glory  of  the  incorruptible  Gtni  into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man.    Their
filie  gods  resembled  men,  not  only  in  their  form,  but  also  in  their  sins  and  uncleanness.
Men  had  framed  a  conception  of  Deity  from  their  own  corrupt  nature,  and  that  concep-
tioii  reacted  powerfully  upon  their  character.    Their  gods  were  like  them,  and  they
woe  like  their  ^ods.    The  Thessalonian  Christians  had  learned  a  holier  knowledge.
They  must  not  live  like  the  heathen,  who  knew  not  the  true  and  living  God.    Their
knowledge  must  act  upon  their  life.    They  mitst  be  pure.    4.  Impurity  is  a  sin  against
wmL     "  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light."    impure  desires  assume


86  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1—18.

the  form  of  love ;  tmcleanness  usurps  and  degrades  the  sacred  name  of  love.  The
sensual  man  ruins  in  body  and  in  soul  those  whom  he  professes  to  love.  He  uses  words
of  tenderness.  He  is  the  most  cruel,  the  deadliest  enemy  in  his  wicked  selfishness.
Ho  cares  not  for  the  nearest  and  holiest  ties.  He  sins  against  the  sanctity  of  matri-
mony. He  brings  misery  upon  families.  Seeking  only  the  gratification  of  his  own
wicked  lust,  ho  transgresses  and  wrongs  his  brethren.  But  his  sin  will  bring  swiffc
punishment  upon  him.  The  Lord  is  the  Avenger  in  all  such  things.  He  called  us
not  for  uncleanncss,  but  in  sanctification.  Sanctification  is  the  very  sphere  in  which
the  new  life  moves  and  energizes.  Uncleanness  is  utterly  alien  to  it.  The  Lord  who
called  us  in  sanctification  will  pimish  with  that  awful  vengeance  which  belongeth  to
him  all  who  for  their  wicked  pleasure  sin  against  their  brethren.  5.  It  is  a  Bin
against  Ood,  Gk)d  hath  given  us  his  Holy  Spirit.  He  hath  given  that  great  gift
"  unto  you,"  the  apostle  says — to  you  Thessalonians.  He  gave  it  once,  he  Is  giving
it  still.  It  is  this  great  fact  which  makes  uncleanness  in  Christians  a  sin  of  such
exceeding  awfulness.  Their  bodies  are  the  temples  of  Ood  the  Holy  Ghost.  To
bring  impure  thought  into  that  most  sacred  presence,  to  defile  that  body  which
he  has  taken  to  be  his  Church  and  shrine,  is  an  outrage,  an  insult  to  that  Divine
Majesty.  Such  a  man  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace.  Of  what  punishment
shall  he  be  thou^t  worthy  ?  The  Spirit  of  pnrity  cannot  abide  in  an  impure  heart.
He  will  depart,  as  he  once  departed  from  Saul.  There  are  awful  things  in  Holy  Scrip-
ture said  of  those  who  resist  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  will  not  listen  to  his  still  small  voice
speaking  in  the  heart,  but  continue  to  vex  him  by  wilful  and  persistent  disobedience,
till  at  last  his  voice  is  heard  no  more,  and  his  gracious  influences  are  quenched.  It  is
enough  to  fill  the  thoughtful  Christian  with  shuddering  awe  when  he  reflects  on  that
sanctification  which  the  Word  of  Gbd  requires,  and  contrasts  it  with  the  fearful  preva-
lence of  sins  of  impurity.

Lessons.  1.  Long  after  holiness,  pray  for  it,  struggle  for  it  with  the  deepest  yearn-
ings of  the  heart,  the  most  earnest  enorts  of  the  life.  2.  Flee  from  the  slightest  touch
of  impurity — the  thought,  the  look,  the  word.  It  is  a  deadly  poison,  a  loathsome
serpent;  it  stingeth  unto  death.  3.  Remember  Qt)d  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the
Christian's  heart.     Keep  thyself  pure. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  9 — 12. — 2%e  law  of  love.  I.  On  its  positive  side,  h  II  is  taught  by  Ood.
God  is  love,  and  love  is  of  God.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  school  of  love.  God  him-
self is  the  great  Teacher.  He  teaches  us  by  his  own  example.  *'  So  God  loved  the
world,  he  gave  his  only  Son ; "  "  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."
The  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  reveals  to  us  the  blessed  love  of  God.  God  the
Holy  Ghost  teaches  his  people  to  comprehend  with  all  saints  what  is  the  length,  and
breadth,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge.
He  shows  us  something  of  his  own  blessed  love,  and  bids  us  learn  of  him.  "  This  is  my
commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you."  We  are  his  disciples,
his  pupils ;  we  learn  of  him.  What  should  we  learn,  if  we  learn  not  to  love  ?  It  is
the  great  task  of  life.  Our  lives  are  wasted  if  we  have  not  learned  that  holiest  lesson
before  we  die ;  for  heaven  is  the  home  of  love.  TTiere  is  no  place  there  for  the  soul  that
hath  not  learned  to  love.  God  is  the  Teacher.  He  had  taught  the  Thessalonians.
They  did  love  the  brethren.  They  needed  not,  the  apostle  says  in  his  tenderness,  a
human  teacher.  2.  Yet  8t,  Paul  exhorts  them.  For  love  is  a  debt  which  is  never
fully  paid.  The  great  lesson  of  love  is  never  fully  learned.  We  are  dull  scholars.  Our
natural  selfishness  keeps  us  back.  We  need  every  incentive,  every  help.  There  must
be  a  continual  growth.  To  stand  still  is  to  lose  ground.  We  must  urge  ourselves,  we
must  urge  others,  to  abound  more  and  more.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  our  Example.  "  As  I
have  loved  you,**  he  says.  The  depth,  the  purity  of  that  holiest  love  is  altogether
above  us,  out  of  our  reach ;  we  cannot  attain  unto  it.  We  see  its  effects  in  the  lives
of  his  saints.  We  know  how  the  love  of  Christ  constrained  the  holy  apostle  St.  Paul
to  live  no  longer  to  himself,  but  to  him  who  died  for  him  and  rose  again.  We  despair
of  ever  reaching  that  high  degree  of  holy  love ;  but  it  must  be  the  strongest  yearning
of  our  hearts  to  advance  continually,  to  abound  more  and  more.

IL  On  its  negative  side.  1.  Christian  ambition.  Ambition  (4>t\orifita)  is  a  com-
mon word  in  Greek  ethics  and  history,  a  prominent  characteristic  of  Greek  political  life.


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  87

There  Is  a  Ohristian  ambition ;  its  object  is  not  to  be  first  in  the  arena  of  political  strife,
but  to  {ureach  the  gospel^  to  please  Gtod,  to  live  a  quiet,  holy  life  (compare  in  the  Greek,
Rom.  XV.  20 ;  2  Cor.  v.  9).  Political  ^tAori/tfo,  Bengel  says,  blushes  to  be  quiet.  The
Qreeks  were  eager,  bustling,  restless,  each  longing  to  be  first.  The  apostle  seeks  to
turn  the  ambition  of  the  Thessalonians  into  another  channel  Their  ambition  should
be  to  be  quiet — to  keep  themselves  free,  as  far  as  might  be,  from  political  excitement
and  social  rivalry,  that  they  might  cultivate  the  inner  life  of  love  and  peace  and  com-
mxinion  with  Qod,  Love  would  lead  them  to  abstain  from  meddling  with  other  men's
matters — ^to  do  their  own  duty  in  the  station  where  GK>d  had  called  them.  Love  would
keep  them  free  from  envy  and  party  spirit,  and  help  them  to  maintain  a  current  of
quiet,  peaceful  thought  within  their  souls.  2.  Christian  dignity.  Love  would  keep
tnem  from  everything  that  might  bring  the  gospel  into  discredit.  The  Christian  has
duties  towards  those  who  are  without  His  light  must  shine  before  men,  that  they
may  be  led  to  glorify  him  from  whom  the  light  cometh.  The  life  of  the  Thessalonian
Christians  must  be  honest,  becoming.  The  apostle  insists  on  the  dignity  of  honest
labour.  It  was  little  regarded.  Educated  Greeks  and  Romans  spoke  of  it  as  coarse
and  vulgar.  The  Lord  Jesus  worked  with  his  hands,  so  did  St.  Paul.  Christianity  has
invested  the  life  of  industry  with  a  grace  of  its  own.  St.  Paul  here  uses  the  same  word
in  connection  with  honest  labour  which  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  employed  to
d^ignate  the  ladies  of  rank  at  Beroea,  the  "  honourable  women  ^  who  believed.  The
Christian  must  be  careful  to  use  words  in  their  true  sense.  It  is  not  wealth  or  rank
that  is  truly  respectable,  but  virtue  and  holiness.  Thus  living,  thus  labouring,  they
would  have  need  of  nothing ;  rather,  perhaps,  of  no  man.  They  would  attain  that
honourable  independence  which  enables  one  to  "  look  the  whole  world  in  the  face,  for
he  owes  not  any  man."

Lessons.  1.  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts;  pray  for  growth  in  charity.  2.  Let
your  ambition  be  a  Christian  ambition;  try  to  be  first  in  humility,  first  in  self-
sacrifice,  first  in  the  quiet  discharge  of  daily  duties.  3.  Never  despise  labour ;  it  was
the  lot  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  has  its  own  moral  beauty  and  dignity. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  13 — ^18. — The  resurrection,  I.  Comfort  fob  thb  sorrowdjo.  1.  ITie  dead
in  Christ  sleep.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished  death ;  he  has  changed  it  into
sleep.  "  She  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth,"  he  said  of  the  little  daughter  of  Jairus.  The
sting  of  death  is  sin,  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  The  Lord
died  and  rose  again.  He  died ;  he  encountered  the  king  of  terrors  in  all  his  awful  power;
but  by  his  death  he  hath  abolished  death  to  his  saints.  Stephen  fell  asleep  under  the
crushing  shower  of  stones.  So  is  it  with  believers  now ;  they  are  laid  to  sleep  through
Jesus.  Through  his  atonement,  through  his  loving  care,  through  his  gracious  presence,
death  is  but  sleep  to  them.  They  die  in  the  Lord ;  they  rest  from  their  labours.  They
are  not  unconscious ;  they  do  not  "  sleep  idly,"  for  they  are  blessed ;  they  are  "  with  the
Lord,  which  is  far  better."  Tet  that  quiet  rest  of  the  holy  dead  in  Paradise  is  as
a  peaceful  slumber  compared  with  the  entrancing  joy  of  the  glorious  resurrection.  Tes,
they  sleep ;  they  have  not  yet  attained  unto  that  perfect  consummation  and  bliss  both
in  body  and  soul  which  shall  be  theirs  in  God's  everlasting  glory.  There  the  redeemed
of  the  Lord,  perfected  in  strength  and  gladness,  entranced  in  the  contemplation  of  the
beauty  of  the  Lord,  the  beati6c  vision,  need  rest  no  longer.  "  They  rest  not  day  and
night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to
come."  But  now  they  rest.  They  are  in  peace ;  they  are  happy,  for  they  are  with  Christ
2.  Therefore  the  Christianas  sorrow  is  full  of  hope.  We  must  sorrow  when  our  loved
ones  fall  from  our  side.  The  Lord  wept  over  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  Not  to  sorrow
would  be  the  hard  stem  temper  of  stoicism.  The  Christian  sorrows  over  the  grave,
but  it  is  a  sorrow  chastened  by  faith,  cheered  by  hope.  The  heathen  might  envy  the
very  flowers  of  the  field.  "  They  die,  indeed,  but  it  is  to  spring  up  again  with  renewed
life  and  beauty ;  while  man,  when  he  dieth,  sleepeth  on  for  ever — a  still,  silent  sleep ;
he  waketh  nevermore."  Such  was  the  wailing  of  the  heathen  poet.  It  is  not  so  with
the  Christian.  He  finds  comfort  himself,  he  comforts  others,  with  the  blessed  words
of  Holy  Scripture.  His  sorrow  is  not  boneless,  like  that  of  the  heathen :  he  looks  for
a  happy  meeting  in  that  blessed  place  wnere  there  is  "  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,
nor  crying."    8.  That  hope  springs  out  of  faith.     We  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18.


again.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  earnest  of  our  resurrection.  He  is  the  First-
fruits,  the  First-begotten  from  the  dead ;  they  that  are  his  shall  follow  him.  The
resurrection  of  Christ  was  one  principal  topic  of  the  apostolic  preaching ;  it  is  now  one
of  the  most  precious  articles  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  very  centre  of  our  most  cherished
hopes.  He  was  seen  by  many,  by  Mary  Magdalene,  by  the  other  holy  women,  by  the
apostles,  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at  once.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have
not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."

n.  The  oomino  of  the  Lord.  1.  Its  solemn  accompaniments.  He  shall  come,
the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  with  his  holy  angels.  He  shall  descend  from  heaven  with
a  shout.  His  voice  will  pierce  through  the  universe ;  all  they  that  are  in  the  graves
shall  hear  it.  The  trumpet  shall  sound.  The  voice  of  the  trumpet,  exceeding  loud,
filled  the  people  of  Israel  with  trembling  at  Mount  Sinai.  More  awful  by  far  will  be
the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God  that  wakes  the  dead.  What  that
trumpet  may  be  we  cannot  tell ;  but  sound  it  will,  "  for  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the
word  of  the  Lord."  2.  Its  end  and  purpose.  The  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first.  They
shall  hear  his  voice,  though  they  have  lain  in  their  graves,  some  of  them,  almost  from
the  beginning.  They  shall  come  forth,  and  that  first.  Then  follows  the  assumption  of
the  living.  Those  who  are  found  alive,  who  have  not  entered  into  the  deep,  quiet  rest
of  Paradise,  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  We  shall  meet  one
another ;  we  shall  meet  him ;  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  him.  "  Wherefore  comfort  one
another  with  these  words."

Lessons.  1.  Let  sorrow  in  bereavement  be  Christian  sorrow,  softened  by  faith  and  hope.
2.  The  holy  dead  are  at  rest.  Do  not  call  them  "  poor ; "  they  are  blessed.  3.  Let  us
strive  to  walk  with  God  now,  that  we  may  be  ever  with  the  Lord. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Sanctification,  With  this  chapter  commences  the  hortatory  part  of
the  Epistle.

I.   EXHOBTATION  TO  ADVANCE  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  WHAT  HAD  BEEN  DELIVERED  TO

THEM  OF  THE  DiviNE  WILL.  "  Finally  then,  brethren,  we  beseech  and  exhort  you  in  the
Lord  Jesus,  that,  as  ye  received  of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  please  Grod,  even  as
ye  do  walk, — that  ye  abound  more  and  more."  The  announcement  which  is  made
by  *'  finally"  of  the  close  of  the  Epistle  is  to  be  taken  as  meaning  that  the  remaining
part  is  to  be  taken  up  with  that  which  is  now  introduced.  There  is  a  natural  transi-
tion from  the  prospect  of  being  unblamable  in  holiness,  with  which  the  personal  part
of  the  Epistle  ends,  to  this  hortatory  part.  The  exhortation  is  very  affectionate  in  tone.
The  Thessalonians  are  addressed  as  brethren.  And  there  is  not  the  simple  form,  "  We
exhort  you,"  but  it  is  preceded  by  a  less  frequent  form  (only  once  used  by  Paul  beyond
these  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians), "  We  beseech  you,"  which  is  the  language  in  which
friend  earnestly  presses  home  a  request  on  friend.  "We  exhort  you"  is  more  the
language  in  which  a  teacher  earnestly  presses  home  duty  on  his  hearers.  "  We  exhort
you  "  is,  moreover,  defined  and  heightened  by  the  addition  of  the  words  "  in  the  Lord
Jesus."  The  three  Christian  teachers  found  the  element  of  their  exhortation,  not  in
themselves,  but  in  him  who,  as  Saviour,  has  a  right  to  rule  all  lives.  It  is  implied  that
the  tone  of  Christ  toward  us  is  that  of  earnest  exhortation,  in  which  he  perfectly
reflects  God ;  for  it  is  said,  in  2  Cor.  v.  20,  that  God  exhorts,  which  should  have  been
the  translation  there.  There  had  been  delivered  by  the  teachers  to  the  Thessalonians
the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and,  as  they  had  formerly  sought  to  please  their  false
deities,  so,  when  they  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  it  became  their  duty  to
please  him.  There  had  also  been  delivered  to  them  how  they  ought  to  walk  and
to  please  Grod,  i.e.  to  say,  this  had  been  presented  to  them  in  considerable  detail,  so  that
they  coiild  readily  follow  the  course  of  life  that  was  pleasing  to  Gt)d.  To  their
credit  it  could  be  said  that  they  were  following  in  their  God-pleasing  course,  and
what  is  pressed  home  on  them  is,  that  they  should  abound  more  and  more  in  it.
*'  The  Lord  make  you  to  abound,"  is  language  which  has  already  been  used ;  and  this
exhortation  to  abound  more  and  more,  which  recurs  in  the  tenth  verse,  may  be  said  to
be  the  watchword  given  to  the  Thessalonians.  However  much  we  have  walked  and
pleased  Gk>d,  we  have  not  done  it  enough.  Let  us  abound  more  and  more  in  the  course
that  is  pointed  out  to  us  in  the  Bible  as  pleasing  to  GK)d.
11.  Appeal  to  their  memory  in  connection  with  what  had  been  delivered


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONUNS.  89


TO  THBM  OF  THB  DiviNB  WILL.  "  For  ye  know  what  charge  we  gave  you  through  the
Lord  Jesua."  There  is  not  a  happy  change  made  from  "  commandments  **  in  the  old
tranalation  to  "  charge"  in  the  revised  translation  here.  There  is  an  ohacuring  of  the
idea,  which  is  that  the  Divine  will  has  been  delivered  in  the  form  of  commandments.
There  were  the  ten  commandments  of  the  moral  Law.  These,  possessed  by  the  Israel-
ites, placed  them  far  in  advance  of  the  heathen  around  them.  ComiDg  out  of  heathen-
ism, it  would  be  a^reat  boon  to  the  Thessalonians  to  have  these  fixed  in  their  memory.
Presented  along  with  Christian  considerations,  they  would  become  Christian  com-
mandments. There  were  other  Christian  commandments,  of  which  wo  have  examples
toward  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  which  would  be  reiterated  and  reinforced  until  they
also  were  fixed  in  the  memory.  In  these  commandments  Paul  and  Silas  and  llmothy.
were  only  the  medium  of  delivery.  Given  by  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  they
were  to  be  regarded  as  his  commandments.  These  being  now  to  bo  referred  to,  they
are  indirectly  asked  to  call  them  to  mind.

EL  Purport  op  the  Divine  will.  1.  QeneraXly,  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,
even  yotir  sanctification."  It  was  affirmed  by  William  of  Ockham  that  "  if  God  had
commanded  his  creatures  to  hate  himself,  the  hatred  of  God  would  ever  be  the  duty  of
man."  It  was  a  violent  supposition  to  make  of  him,  whose  will  is  absolutely  wedded  to
holiness,  and  who  can  only  command  his  creatures  to  be  holy.  The  will  of  God  is  here
said  to  be  our  sanctification.  This  is  a  word  which  is  very  often  used  in  a  passive  sense.
**  Sanctification  is  the  work  of  God's  free  grace,  whereby  we  are  renewed  in  the  whole
man  after  the  image  of  God,  and  are  enabled  more  and  more  to  die  unto  sin  and  live
unto  righteousness."  The  Greek  word  here  has,  however,  the  active  sense.  The  way  in
which  we  are  actively  to  advance  the  work  of  our  saoctification,  is  by  yielding  up  our
will  to  the  will  of  G^  in  all  that  he  requires  of  us  from  moment  to  moment.  By
abounding  more  and  more  in  the  course  thieit  is  pleasing  to  God,  we  shall  more  and  more
die  unto  sin  and  live  unto  rir;hteousness,  more  and  more  be  made  according  to  the
Divine  idea,  from  our  inmost  life  to  its  most  outward  manifestation.  2.  Particularly.
(1)  Fornication,  "  That  ye  abstain  from  fornication ;  that  each  one  of  you  know  how
to  possess  himself  of  his  own  vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour,  not  in  the  passion  of
lust,  even  as  the  Gentiles  which  know  not  Gtxl."  This  is  one  of  the  commandments
in  which  the  Divine  will  finds  expression.  In  1  Cor.  vii.  2  marriage  is  put  forward  as
the  remedial  course  against  fornication.  The  form  here  is,  that  there  can  be  the
ponenion  of  a  wife  in  consistency  with  sanctification  and  honour.  This  is  put  in
favourable  contrast  with  another  possession  belonging  to  Gentilism,  possession  in  the
passion  of  lust,  «>.  in  which  the  morbid  sensual  de^iire  acquires  the  force  of  a  passion.
'ilie  fact  of  fornication  being  so  rife  in  the  Gentilism  with  which  they  were  sur-
rounded, and  out  of  which  tbey  had  lately  come,  is  the  reason  why  the  Thessalonians
are  specially  guarded  against  it.  What  was  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  Gentiles  by
their  ignorance  of  GK)d,  was  not  to  be  excused  in  them  who  had  been  blessed  with  the
knowledge  of  Ck)d.  (2)  Adultery,  "  That  no  man  transgress,  and  wrong  his  brother  in
Uie  matter."  This  sin  is  not  named,  but  only  that  mentioned  in  which  it  differs  from
the  preceding.  Being  an  overreaching  and  wronging,  not  a  neighbour,  but  a  Christian
brotner,  in  the  matter  involved,  it  is  **  doubly  flagitious."

IV.  Warnikg.  *'  Because  the  Lord  is  an  Avenger  in  all  these  things,  as  also  we
forewarned  you  and  testified."  In  Epbesians  the  warning  is,  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you
with  empty  words :  for  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the
sons  of  disobedience."  In  Colossians  it  is  similar :  "  For  which  things'  sake  cometh  the
wrath  of  God  upon  the  sons  of  disobedience."  The  idea  here  is  that  the  Lord  is
Avenger  in  all  the  things  that  have  been  referred  to.  **  For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,
but  hath  committed  all  judi^ent  unto  the  Son."  As  Judge,  he  is  to  be  thought  of  as
Righter  between  man  and  God.  When  men  give  themselves  up  to  sensuality,  God  has
a  controversy  with  them.  And,  by  appeal  from  GK>d  against  men,  Christ  comes  in  as
Righter  in  the  controversy,  to  vindicate  the  holy  character  of  his  Father's  laws,  to  pimish
for  the  unholy  use  of  his  Father's  gifts.  From  the  immediate  context  we  are  also
led  to  think  of  Christ  as  Righter  between  man  and  man.  He  is  the  Righter  of  the
■lave  who  is  trampled  upon  without  pity  by  his  unlawful  owner.  He  is  the  Righter
of  the  man  who  has  the  purity  and  peace  of  his  house  invaded  by  the  adulterer.  When
with  the  Thessalonians,  the  teachers  had  made  this  their  teaching  clear.    In  view  of


90  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  iv.  1— 18.

judgment  they  had  warned  them,  and  solemnly  testified  to  them,  that  these  things
would  not  go  unpunished.

V.  The  holy  object  of  theib  calling.  "  For  Q-od  called  us  not  for  uncleanness,
but  in  sanctification."  The  thought  is  similar  to  w4>at  is  expressed  in  the  third  verse.
There  is  this  difference,  that  the  will  of  God  there  is  here  connected  with  a  historical
point  Let  them  remember  the  great  turning-point  from  heathenism  to  Christianity.
Then  God  graciously  called  them  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son.  And  to  what  did  he  c^
them  ?  It  was  not  to  a  life  of  uncleanness,  but,  in  keeping  with  the  holy  life  of  Christ,
in  keeping  with  the  holiness  of  God  vindicated  on  the  cross,  it  was  to  find  the  sphere
of  their  calling  in  the  pursuit  of  holiness.

VI.  The  rejecter.  "  Therefore  he  that  rejecteth,  rejecteth  not  man,  but  God,  who
giveth  his  Holy  Spirit  unto  you."  This  is  drawn  as  a  conclusion  from  the  object  of
their  Christian  calling.  There  is  not  singled  out  an  actual  rejecter  among  the  Thessa-
lonians.  But,  should  such  a  rejecter  arise  among  them,  let  it  be  known  that  he  is  not
a  rejecter  of  man  in  his  interests  and  rights,  but  a  rejecter  of  God,  who  has  laid
down  laws  and  limits  for  his  creatures.  He  is  especially  a  rejecter  of  God,  who  gives,
to  those  whom  he  has  called  in  Christ,  his  Holy  Spirit.  Sanctification  is  pre-eminently
the  Holy  Spirit's  work.  And  for  any  of  them  to  indulge  in  the  sins  referred  to,
would  have  this  as  its  gravest  condemnation,  that  it  was  a  thwarting  and  grieving  of
the  Spirit  in  his  holy  strivings. — R.  F.

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  Christian  circle  and  (accounting  by  them  that  are  without,  I.
Brotherly  love.  1.  The  disposition.  "  But  concerning  love  of  the  brethren  ye  have  no
need  that  one  write  unto  you :  for  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  Qod  to  love  one  another."
There  is  a  rhetorical  touch  here  which  is  called  "  passing  over" — not  saying  what  might
be  said  with  a  view  to  gaining  over.  For  while  it  is  said,  "  Ye  have  no  need,"  the  design
IS  more  efiFectually  to  impress  on  the  Thessalonians  the  necessity  of  brotherly  love.  While
they  are  graciously  commended,  they  are  at  the  same  time  shown  how  proper  it  is  for
them  to  love  the  brethren  as  being  taught  of  God.  Their  education  in  this  important
department  was  a  reality.  To  be  taught  of  God  does  not  exclude  human  help,  the  help
of  others,  or,  as  contrasted  with  that,  self-help.  Only  human  help  does  not  avail,  unless
it  is  taken  up  and  made  eficctual  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Teachings  and  experiences  must  be
*  inwardly  interpreted,  and  made  luminous  to  us.  We  must  therefore  stand  in  an  imme-
diate relation  to  Gt)d  as  his  disciples  who  are  taught  of  him ;  who,  according  to  another
representation,  have  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One  to  know  all  things.  It  is  fitting
that  he  who  has  made  our  minds,  and  retains  sovereign  power  over  them,  should  teach
us.  It  is  also  fitting  that  he  should  teach  according  to  his  own  nature.  As  Love,  he
has  created  us,  sustains  us  in  being,  earnestly  desires  our  well-being,  places  us  under
numberless  obligations  to  him.  Shall  he  not  then  school  us  to  love  ?  As  under  the
Divine  teaching  we  form  a  brotherhood  of  Christian  disciples.  And  this  is  the  only
fellowship  of  minds  that  is  right  to  the  core,  that  will  stand  all  the  tests,  that  will
stand  out  in  eternal  permanence.  In  the  brethren  there  is  something  of  Christian
excellence  on  which  to  rest  our  love,  and  we  are  to  recognize  and  value  and  delight  in
that,  even  under  an  uninviting  exterior,  and,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  to  desire  its  increase
and  perfectness.  2.  Its  manifestation,  "  For  indeed  ye  do  it  toward  all  the  brethren
which  are  in  all  Macedonia."  An  argument  has  been  founded  on  this  statement  against
the  early  date  of  the  Epistle ;  but  it  tells  the  other  way.  For  the  love  is  not  said  to  be
manifested  toward  all  tne  brethren,  but "  toward  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all  Mace-
donia;" i.e,  to  say,  its  manifestation  was  yet  limited  to  the  Christian  circle  nearest  to
the  Thessalonians.  We  are  to  think  of  Philippi,  a  hundred  miles  distant  on  the  one
side,  and  Beroea,  twenty  miles  on  the  other.  To  the  Christians  in  these  places  they  had
found  opportunities  of  showing  their  Christian  love.  It  was  just  such  an  outgoing
as  might  commendably  be  connected  with  the  short  period  of  a  few  months.  The
word  "do"  is  emphatic  after  "taught."  The  lesson  is  that  Divine  teaching  is  to
be  followed  by  suitable  practice.  Love  must  be  allowed  free  outlet.  "  Love,**  says
Barrow,  *'  is  a  busy  and  active,  a  vigorous  and  sprightful,  a  courageous  and  industrious
disposition  of  sou)  ^hich  will  prompt  a  man,  and  push  him  forwM^  to  undertake  or
undergo  anything — to  endure  pains,  to  encounter  dangers,  to  surmount  difficulties  for
the  good  of  its  object    Such  is  true  charity ;  it  will  diEpose  us  to  love,  as  St.  John


OH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  91

■  t  —^1^—  ^»1^— ^-^^— ^M.

prescribeth,  in  \f ork  and  in  truth ;  not  only  in  mental  desire,  but  in  effectual  perform-
ance ;  not  only  in  verbal  pretence,  but  in  real  effect.**  3.  Its  increase,  "  But  we  exhort
you,  brethren,  that  ye  abound  more  and  more."  What  Paul  had  prayed  for  (ch.  iii.
12)  is  now  made  subject  of  affectionate  exhortation.  The  watchword  formerly  applied
to  the  whole  of  a  God-pleasing  course  is  now  specially  applied  to  brotherly  love.
Let  them  abound  more  and  more.  Let  them  seek  opportunities  of  manifesting  their
interest  in  Christ's  people  beyond  Macedonia.  And  let  them  look  to  the  purifying  and
intensifying  of  their  love  to  the  brethren.  And,  with  a  longer  Christian  history  than
they  had,  have  we  not  need  of  the  same  watchword  ?  If  we  have  abounded,  let  us
abound  more  and  more.  Let  us  embrace,  in  intelligent  practical  interest,  a  wider  and
wider  extent  of  the  Christian  world.  The  great  obstacle  to  love  is  selfishness,  or  exor-
bitant fondness  for  our  own  interests,  for  which  we  have  all  reason  to  humble  ourselves
before  God.  When  shall  we  be  taught  to  abandon  this  ?  When  shall  we  be  taught  as
in  the  great  school  of  Christ,  by  the  great  lesson  of  the  cross,  to  give  love  the  unlimited
sway  of  our  being,  so  that  we  shall  ungrudgingly  delight  in  our  Christian  brethren,  seek
their  advancement  in  Christian  excellence,  and  help  them  in  all  ways  that  we  can?

n.  AOOOUNTINO  BY  THEM  THAT  ARE  WITHOUT  THE  CHRISTIAN  CIROLB.     1.    QuietneSS

and  doing  our  own  business,  "  And  that  ye  study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own
business."  "  Be  ambitious "  is  the  marginal  reading  for  "  study,"  and  the  idea  of
honour  which  is  in  the  Greek  word  is  to  bB  regarded  as  thrown  into  prominence  by  the
association.  "  Be  ambitious  to  be  quiet.**  This  is  a  paradox ;  for  whereas  restlessness
belongs  to  ambition,  wo  are  to  make  it  the  object  of  our  ambition  to  bo  quiet.
"  Political  ambition,"  says  Bengel,  "  blushes  to  be  quiet ;  '*  and,  it  may  be  added,
Christian  ambition  rejoices  to  be  quiet.  What  is  it  that  is  here  commanded  to  us  ?
It  is  not  a  mere  negation.  To  be  quiet  is  not  necessarily  to  be  without  strong  force  in
our  nature ;  but  it  is  to  have  those  forces  so  placed  under  Divine  restraints,  so  mode-
rated by  reason,  justice  and  charity,  modesty  and  sobriety,  as  that  we  can  do  our  own
business,  can  confine  ourselves  to  the  sphere  of  our  own  proper  duties.  We  may  indeed
interpose,  when  the  honour  and  interest  of  God  is  much  concerned,  when  the  public
weal  and  safety  are  much  endangered.  We  may  interpose  for  the  succour  of  right  against
palpable  wrong,  for  our  own  just  and  necessary  defence.  We  may  interpose  when  our
neighbour  is  plainly  going  to  ruin,  "  snatching  him,"  as  Jude  says,  "  out  of  the  fire."
We  may  also  interpose  when  we  can  do  our  neighbour  considerable  good.  For  all  that  is
really  doing  our  own  business.  But  we  are  not  to  be  impelled  by  ambition,  or  covetous
desire,  or  self-conceit,  or  any  other  disturbing  influence,  beyond  our  own  proper  bounds.
We  are  not  to  attempt,  unasked,  to  manage  for  another,  to  overbear  his  will,  to  impose  on
him  our  opinions,  to  make  free  in  conversation  with  his  character,  to  pry  into  his  affairs.
We  are  not  to  thrust  upon  him  our  advice,  to  reprove  him  unbecomingly,  or  rashly,  or
unreasonably,  or  harshly.  We  are  not  to  interpose  in  the  contentions  of  others  so  as  to
make  ourselves  parties,  or  so  as  to  raise  or  foment  dissensions.  For  all  that,  against  what
is  here  commended,  is  turbulent  meddling  with  what  God  has  not  made  our  business.
**  We  may  consider,**  says  Barrow,  "  that  every  man  hath  business  of  his  own  sufficient
to  employ  him ;  to  exercise  his  mind,  to  exhaust  his  care  and  pains,  to  take  up  all  his
time  and  leisure.  To  study  his  own  near  concernments,  to  provide  for  the  necessities  and
conveniences  of  his  life,  to  look  to  the  interests  of  his  soul,  to  be  diligent  in  his  calling,
to  discharge  carefully  and  faithfully  all  his  duties  relating  to  God  and  man,  will  abun-
dantly employ  a  man ;  well  it  is  if  some  of  them  do  not  encumber  and  distract  him.
Seeing,  then,  every  man  hath  burden  enough  on  his  shoulders,  Imposed  by  God  and
nature,  it  is  vain  to  take  on  him  more  load,  by  engaging  himself  in  the  affairs  of  others ;
he  will  thence  be  forced,  either  to  shake  off  his  own  business,  or  to  become  overburdened
and  oppressed  with  more  than  he  can  bear.  It  is  indeed  hence  observable,  and  it  needs
must  happen,  that  those  who  meddle  with  the  business  of  others  are  wont  to  neglect
their  own ;  they  that  are  much  abroad  can  seldom  be  at  home ;  they  that  know  otnera
most  are  least  acquainted  with  themselves.  Philosophers  therefore  generally  have
advised  men  to  shun  needless  occupations  as  the  certain  impediments  of  a  good  and
happy  life ;  they  bid  us  endeavour  to  simplify  ourselves,  or  to  get  into  a  condition
requiring  of  us  the  least  that  can  be  to  do.'*  2.  Working  with  our  oum  hands,  "  And
to  work  with  your  hands,  even  as  we  charged  you."  This  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  parti-
cular injunction  under  the  foregoing.    In  the  Second  Epistle  the  language  is,  **  that  they


92  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18.

quietly  work."  The  language  here  seems  to  point  to  this,  that  many  of  the  members  of
the  Thessalonian  Church  were  handicraftsmen.  From  this  injunction,  and  the  way  in
which  the  second  coming  is  introduced  in  the  next  paragraph,  it  would  seem  that  the
disturbing  influence  in  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  was  religious  excitement,  called  forth
by  the  new  world  of  thought  into  which  Christianity  had  brought  them.  They  were  espe-
cially excited  by  the  prospects  connected  with  the  second  coming.  Paul,  for  one,  saw  the
danger  of  their  being  carried  awav  by  the  excitement — not  so  as  to  be  meddlesome,  but
so  as  to  be  negligent  of  their  earthly  calling.  Therefore  he  charged  them  well  to  work
with  their  own  hands,  which  also  he  enforced  by  his  eziample.  In  this  he  showed  his
sense  of  the  importance  of  quiet  industry.  However  much  we  may  be  under  the  influ-
ence of  the  great  truths  and  prospects  of  our  religion,  let  us  not  be  without  the  steadying
condition  of  onr  earthly  calling.  3.  We  are  to  he  quietly  industrious  so  as  not  to  produce
a  bad  impression  on  them  that  are  without.  "  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  toward  them
that  are  without,  and  may  have  need  of  nothing."  What  there  is  of  connection  between
the  two  parts  of  the  paragraph  seems  to  be  this.  We  are  to  exhibit  love  within  the
Christian  circle ;  we  are  also,  within  the  Christian  circle,  to  be  quietly  industrious,  so
as  not  to  give  occasion  of  ofifence  to  them  that  are  without.  We  are  to  remember  that
the  eye  of  the  world  is  upon  us,  and  that  we  are  subjected  to  its  judgment.  And
there  are  certain  external  features  of  the  Christian  circle  upon  which  the  world  is  quite
fitted  to  pronounce  judgment.  Upon  none  is  it  more  ready  to  fix  than  upon  anything
like  the  neglect  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  Therefore  it  is  recommended  that  we
quietly  work  with  our  own  hands,  with  this  specially  in  view,  that  we  may  walk
becomingly  (t.c.  honestly)  toward  them  that  are  without,  and  have  all  that  is  necessary
for  onr  wants.  By  industry  and  honesty  we  shall  commend  our  religion  to  them  that
are  without ;  for  these  are  things  which  they  can  appreciate  and  by  which  they  are
likely  to  be  attracted.  Whereas,  by  idleness  and  indisposition  to  pay  our  debts,  we  shall
bring  a  reproach  upon  our  religion  which  does  not  belong  to  it,  and  repel  from  us  them
that  are  without.  In  early  times  the  heathen  called  healthy  beggars  traders  on  Christ,
in  allusion  to  what  is  here  guarded  against.  Let  us  not  by  meddlesomeness,  or  by  any
want  of  industry,  or  honesty,  or  prudence,  or  straightforwardness,  present  Christ  in  an
unlovely  aspect  to  them  that  are  without. — R.  F.

Vers.  13 — 18. — Anxiety  about  the  state  of  the  Christian  dead.  I.  State  of  the
Christian  dead  no  cause  fob  sorrow.  "But  we  would  not  have  you  ignorant,
brethren,  concerning  them  that  fall  asleep ;  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  the  rest,  which
have  no  hope."  Paul  (the  principal  writer)  sets  himself  here  to  administer  consolation
to  the  Thessalonians.  In  doing  so  he  practises  the  duty  he  lays  down  in  the  concluding
words  of  the  paragraph.  Himself  in  possession  of  comfort  about  the  state  of  the  Chris-
tian dead,  he  could  not  leave  them  in  ignorance  of  it.  As  his  Christian  brethren,  they
must  be  sharers  with  him.  Timothy  had  probably  communicated  to  him  the  occasion
of  their  anxiety.  It  was  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  as  in  other  Churches — there  were
those  who,  from  time  to  time,  were  falling  asleep.  The  change  in  the  translation
extends  the  scope  of  the  language  beyond  the  actually  dead.  How  did  it  fare  with
their  dead,  and  how  also  would  it  fare  with  those  whom  death  would  yet  overtake  ?
Christians  are  distinguished  from  the  rest  of  mankind.  It  is  said  of  the  latter  as  a
class,  that  they  sorrow  having  no  hope.  What  did  the  men  of  the  old  heathen  world
think  with  regard  to  their  dead  ?  Theocritus  says,  "  The  living  have  hopes,  but  the
dead  are  without  hope."  -^schylus  says,  "  Of  the  once  dead  there  is  no  resurrection."
Lucretius  says,  "  Nor  does  any  one  stand  forth  awaked,  whom  once  the  cold  pause  of
life  has  found."  Catullus  says,  "  Suns  may  set  and  return  ;  when  once  our  brief  day
has  set  we  must  sleep  one  everlasting  night."  It  is  a  sad  thought  that  some  modern
thinkers  have  given  expression  to  the  same  blank  hopelessness.  Strauss  has  said,  "  A
life  beyond  the  grave  is  the  last  enemy  which  speculative  criticism  has  to  oppose  and,
if  possible,  to  conquer."  The  whole  hope  of  John  Stuart  Mill  was  an  earthly  future,  not
for  the  individual,  but  for  the  race,  created  by  science  "  when  all  the  greater  evils  of
life  shall  have  been  removed."  If  such  were  our  creed,  or  want  of  creed,  we  might  well
sorrow  when  our  friends  have  been  taken  away.  Our  only  feeling  could  be  that  we
had  seen  the  last  of  them.  Their  memory  might  remain  (John  Stuart  Mill,  writing
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  said,  '*  Her  memory  is  to  roe  a  religion  ") ;  but  that  cannot


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  93

lift  the  gloom  from  the  extinction  of  personal  existence.  Let  oo  rude  hand  rob  us  of
the  comfort  which  our  Christianity  brings.  It  tells  us  here  that  we  are  not  to  sorrow
for  the  state  of  our  Christian  dead.  We  may  indeed  sorrow  for  our  being  deprived  of
their  earthly  society.  The  Master  himself  gave  relief  to  his  nature  in  weeping,  even  in
view  of  a  speedy  resurrection.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  removal  of  his  friend  Epaphroditus
would  have  been  to  him  sorrow  upon  sorrow.  But,  as  for  the  state  of  our  Christian
dead,  we  are  here  told  that  they  &re  fallen  asleep.  The  description  is  in  respect  of  the
body,  and  contains  three  ideas.  1.  Continued  existence.  A  man  continues  to  exist,
though  he  is  in  a  state  of  sleep.  The  body  is  still,  but  the  mind  may  be  active  in
dreams.  And  so,  when  the  bodies  of  our  Christian  dead  are  in  the  stillness  of  the  grave,
there  is  no  cessation  of  their  existence.  All  doubt  on  this  subject  must  be  put  to  rest
by  the  words  of  our  Saviour  on  the  cross  to  the  dying  penitent  at  his  side, "  To-day
thou  shalt  be  with  me  in  Paradise.**  The  souls  of  the  departed  are  not  in  a  state  of
sleep ;  but  they  are  wakened  up  to  a  higher  life.  2.  Repose,  In  sleep  we  lose  our  hold
upon  the  world;  we  forget  its  cares  and  pleasures ;  we  are  being  calmed  and  soothed  in
our  feelings.  And  so  we  are  to  think  of  our  Christian  dead  as  for  ever  released  from
the  work  and  toil,  the  pain  and  sorrow,  of  this  life,  and  as  now  calmed  and  soothed
in  the  presence  of  God.  "  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  Write,  Blessed
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth :  yea,  saith  the  Spirit^  that  they
may  rest  from  their  labours,  for  their  works  follow  with  them."  3.  Wakening,  Wo
think  of  sleep  as  followed  by  a  waking.  And  po  we  are  to  think  of  a  wakening
for  our  Christian  dead,  though  it  may  be  after  long  years.  They  are  awake  now  in
respect  of  their  souls ;  our  fuller  comfort  is  that  they  shall  yet  be  awake  in  respect  of
those  bodies  which  we  have  sorrowfully  laid  in  the  grave.  "  I  will  ransom  them  from
the  power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death  :  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues ;
O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction."

IL  Reason  fob  the  Chbistiah  dead  being  associated  with  theib  Lobd  at  his
COMING.  "  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  that  are
fallen  asleep  in  Jesus  will  GKxl  bring  with  him."  The  apostle  goes  back  to  the  cardinal
facts  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrection.  These  are  facts  for  which  those  who  reject
our  continued  existence  after  death  have  little  respect ;  but  they  are  dear  to  the  Chris-
tian heart,  and  the  more  finnly  our  faith  lays  hold  upon  them,  the  more  animated  is
our  hope  for  our  Christian  dead.  We  believe  that  Jesus  died ;  thus  briefly  does  the
apostle  state  the  fundamental  article  of  our  Christian  faith.  '*  Such  is  the  historial
and  supernatural  basis  of  Christianity—its  very  definition,  its  breath  of  life,  the  source
from  wnence  springs  all  its  greatness,  strength,  and  uniqueness."  The  apostle  states
the  fact  plainly,  "  Jesus  diedy**  which  is  all  the  more  observable  that  it  is  followed  by  a
statement  not  plain  but  consolatory— our  Christian  dead  are  fallen  asleep.  We  believe
in  a  God  who,  in  infinite  love,  became  man,  that  he  might  verily  (not  in  semblance)
die,  and  who  was  not  less  truly  God  than  man  when  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  We
believe  in  a  God-Man  who  came  under  the  broken  Law,  and  endured  death  as  the  curse
due  for  sin.  And  our  faith  follows  him  beyond  his  death.  We  believe  that  Jesus  rose
again.  That  is  the  second  great  article  of  our  Christian  faith.  Having  in  his  death
made  full  atonement  for  sin,  he  could  not  be  holden  of  death.  He  rose  victoriously  out
of  the  state  of  insensibility  and  lifelessness  in  which  his  body  lay  in  the  tomb.  He
rose  with  the  same  body,  but  changed  to  a  nobler  quality.  We  further  believe  that
he  died  and  rose  again,  not  for  himself,  but  for  those  whom  he  represented.  He  experi-
enced death  and  conquest  as  Jesus— Saviour,  Leader  of  his  people.  United  to  him,  his
people  are  not  to  be  separated  from  him  in  destiny.  He  is  here  associated  with  their
death.  They  are  laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus,  as  the  preposition  should  be.  There  is  called
up  the  image  of  Jesus  himself  caring  for  his  own  when  the  life  departs — laying  them
to  rest  in  the  grave,  and  watching  over  them  there  with  his  omnipotent  love.  And,
as  he  is  associated  with  their  death,  so  they  are  to  be  associated  with  his  coming.
Them  that  are  laid  to  sleep  by  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Jesus.  We  are  brought  in  view
here  of  what  distressed  the  Thessalonians.  It  was  not  a  question  simply  of  the  resur-
rection ;  in  that  case  the  language  would  have  been,  "  them  will  God  raise  tip."  But  we
are  carried  a  point  beyond  that,  to  their  beins  brought  as  raised  with  Jesus,  We  may,
therefore,  understand  that  what  distressed  the  Thessalonians  was  the  bearing  of  the
cominj;  of  Christ  on  them  who  did  not  live  to  see  that  event.    Would  they  not  stand


94  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [oh.  iv.  1—18.


at  a  great  disadyantase  ?  Would  they  have  any  share  at  all  in  his  coming  ?  Were
they  not  to  be  sorrowed  over  as  those  who  had  missed  the  great  object^ of  their  hope?
For  the  relief  of  the  Thessalonians  Paul  tells  them  this,  to  begin  with,  that  the  Christian
dead  are  to  be  brought  with  Jesus.  We  are  not  to  think  of  them  as  brought  from
heaven,  for  they  are  viewed  in  respect  of  their  being  in  their  graves.  But  we  may  think
of  them  as  joining  their  descending  Lord,  and  brought  with  him  to  earth.

IIL   REVELi^TION  MA.DB  TO  PaUL  THAT  THB  CHRISTIAN  LIVINO  ABB  NOT  TO  HAVE  THE

PBSOEDBNOB  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  DEAD  AT  Chbist's  COMING.  **  For  this  we  Say  unto  you
by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left  unto  the  coming  of  the
Lord,  shall  in  no  wise  precede  them  that  are  fallen  asleep."  It  is  true  that  in  all  he
says  in  this  Epistle  he  is  under  the  direction  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  In  what  he  is
now  to  say  he  proceeds  on  a  word  of  the  Lord  such  as  there  is  in  the  Epistles  to  the
seven  Churches.  He  was  privileged  to  announce  directly  from  the  heavenly  Christ
what  had  hitherto  been  concealed.  The  heavenly  Christ  was  so  interested  in  the  Thes-
salonians that  he  had  given  his  servant  this  revelation  for  them.  The  apostle  divides
Christians  into  two  classes — ^*  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,**
and  **  they  that  are  fallen  asleep."  He  includes  himself  in  the  former  class,  and  from
this  it  has  been  very  confidently  inferred  that  he  had  a  definite  expectation  of  living
unto  the  coming  of  Christ.  But  he  includes,  not  only  himself  and  Silas  and  Timothy,
but  also  the  Thessalonians,  about  whom  he  has  said  that  there  were  those  among  them
who  from  time  to  time  were  falling  asleep.  Did  he,  then,  having  a  definite  expectation
for  aU,  believe  in  all  being  saved  from  death  by  an  immediate  coming  of  Christ  ?  Is  it
not  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  thought  of  the  living  and  left  as  in  a  continual
flux  ?  This  is  borne  out  by  the  use  of  the  present  instead  of  the  future — "  we  who  are
for  the  present  the  living  and  left,  who  have  no  certainty  that  we  will  not  remain  unto
the  coming  of  Christ,  but  have  also  no  certainty  that  another  moment  will  not  transfer
us  to  the  class  of  them  that  are  fallen  asleep."  The  revelation  made  to  Paul  related  to
a  Question  of  priority  of  time.  It  is  strongly  denied  of  the  Christian  living  that  they
will  come  into  the  presence  of  the  Lord  at  his  coming  before  the  Christian  dead.  This
was  further  relief  to  the  distressed  Thessalonians.  Their  departed  Christian  friends
would  not  only  be  brought  with  Jesus ;  it  was  also  true  that  this  bringing  would  not
be  deferred  until  after  the  Christian  living  had  taken  their  places  in  nearer  relation  to
their  Lord.

IV.  Great  drama  of  the  future.  Here  we  are  supplied  more  particularly  with
the  contents  of  "  the  word  of  the  Lord."  1.  Prelude  :  I%e  Lord  descending  in  majesty,
**  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven,  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the
archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God."  The  central  Figure  is  the  Lord  himself.  He
now  sits  enthroned  in  heaven.  Lord  over  all.  But  he  shall  yet  descend  from  heaven.
There  is  thus  confirmation  of  the  announcement  made  by  the  heavenly  visitants  to  the
disciples  gazing  after  their  vanished  Lord :  "  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from
you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven."  We
are  left  to  think  of  the  majesty  of  our  descending  Lord  chiefly  from  the  accompani-
ments of  the  descent.  He  shall  descend  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,
and  with  the  trump.  The  shout  is  such  a  shout  of  command  as  is  given  by  a  leader  to
his  host.  There  are  some  who  think  of  the  shout  of  command  as  given  by  Christ.
This  is  the  view  which  is  adopted  by  Milton  in  his  conception  of  another  scene.

"  The  Son  gave  signal  high
To  the  bright  minister  that  watched :  he  blew
His  trumpet,  heard  in  Oreb  since  perhaps
When  God  descended ;  and  perhaps  once  more
To  sound  at  general  doom."

There  is  this  consideration  which  tells  against  that  interpretation,  that  God  has  been
introduced  as  bringing  them  that  are  asleep  with  Jesus.  We  are  thus  led  to  think  of
God  as  the  Actor  behind  the  scene,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  expression  following —
"  the  trump  of  God."  This  makes  it  more  natural  to  think  of  the  accompaniments
of  the  scene  as  arranged  by  God.  Are  we,  then,  to  think  of  God  as  giving  the  shout
of  command?  The  objection  to  that  view  is,  that  the  shout  is  represented  not
as  preceding  (as  befitting  God)  but  as  accompanying  the  descent    It  seems  better,


OH-iv.  1— 18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  95


then,  to  think  of  the  shout  as  given  by  the  archangel  in  the  Name  of  God,  and  as  com-
prehending the  two  things  which  follow.     First,  Uie  moment  that  the  Lord  descends
from  his  heavenly  throne,  the  archangel,  apprised  of  what  is  to  happen,  marshals  his
innumerable  host.    The  shout  of  command  he  gives  in  this  case  with  the  living  voice —
the  voice  of  the  archangel.    The  angels  are  an  orderly  multitude.    "  He  doeth  according
to  his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  "  (with  whom
the  idea  of  orderliness  is  not  associated).    We  read  of  *'  twelve  legions  of  angels."
The  angels  are  led  by  an  archangel.    We  read  in  Scripture  of  the  angel  Gabriel,  and  also
of  the  seven  anrrels  that  stand  before  Gtxi,  but  only  in  another  place  of  an  archangel  who
is  there  named  Idichael.    Our  Lord  prepared  us  himself  for  this  glorious  accompaniment
of  his  coming :  '*  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  angels  with
him ; "  •*  When  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  the  holy  angels ;  "  "  When
he  cometh  in  his  own  glory,  and  tbe  glory  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  holy  angels."    An
army  associated  with  royalty  gives  an  impression  of  power  and  grandeur.    So  how
mighty  and  glorious  a  Personage  must  he  be,  in  whose  honour  all  the  legions  of  angels
are  marshalled  I     They  are  mighty  angels,  and  holy  angels,  and  especially  are  they  in
sympathy  with  the  work  of  honouring  Christ.    As  they  sang  over  his  birth  on  earth,
so  do  they  accompany  him  in  his  triumphal  descent  to  earth,  having  this  to  rejoice
their  hearts,  that  they  also  are  to  share  in  the  glorious  consummation.     The  archangel,
having  marshalled  his  host  to  move  in  harmony  with  the  descending  Lord,  at  a  subse-
quent stage  is  to  give  another  shout  of  command,  this  time  n9t  with  the  living  voice,
but  with  the  trmnpet  put  into  his  hand  by  God.    Milton  thinks  of  the  trumpet  that
was  used  "  when  God  descended  "  in  Horeb,  calling  the  congregation  of  Israel,  as  being
the  same  trump  of  God.    Very  vividly  in  1  Cor.  xv.  is  it  associated  with  the  resurrec-
tion :  **  At  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound."   2.  First  act :  Resurrection  of
the  Christian  dead,    **  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  fii'st.*'    ''  The  trumpet  shall
sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible."    The  trumpet  is  simply  the  instru-
ment ;  it  is  the  power  of  God,  communicated  through  the  trumpet,  that  raises  the  dead.
A  trumpet  supposes  a  faculty  of  hearing  ;  but  this  trump  of  God  has  miraculously  to
supply  the  faculty  of  hearing.    The  remains  of  our  Christian  friends  which  we  lay  in
the  grave  soon  mingle  with  the  dust.    They  hear  not  any  sound  of  earth  that  passes
over  them.    But  there  is  a  trumpet-call,  with  Divine,  all-penetrating  power  in  it,  that
one  day  they  shall  hear  in  their  graves,  and  hearing  they  shall  start  up  as  once  they
were,  and  yet  how  changed  I    It  was  beside  the  purpose  of  the  revelation  to  bring  into
view  the  resurrection  of  others  than  Christians,  or  the  nature  of  the  resurrection-body.
The  Thessalonians  were  so  taken  up  with  the  coming,  that  the  resurrection  was  thrown
out  of  view.    It  did  not  enter,  or  did  but  little  enter,  into  their  understanding  of  tbe  last
things.    Therefore  their  attention  is  concentrated  upon  the  simple  fruitful  fact  of  the
resurrection.    It  meant  the  presence  of  their  departed  Christian  friends  in  the  body  on
the  earth  ready  to  meet  Christ.    And  that  all  fear  of  their  being  anticipated  might  be
removed,  it  is  stated  not  only  that  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise,  but  that  they  shall  rise
first,  i.e.  to  say,  they  shall  rise  before  the  assimiption  of  the  Christian  living.    The
Christian  dead  now  in  the  resurrection-body,  and  the  Christian  living,  will  be  on  the
earth  at  the  same  time,  equally  ready  for  the  approach  of  Christ.     3.  Second  ad:
Assumption  of  the  Christian  living,    **  Then  we  that  are  alive,  that  are  left,  shall
together  with  them  be  caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air."    The
Christian  living  are  to  be  swiftly,  irreaistibly  caught  up.     This  implies  their  transforma-
tion in  their  bodies.    They  are  to  be  caught  up  at  tno  same  time  with  the  Christian
dead  who  have  been  raised.    The  two  classes  will  form  one  great  blessed  company,
between  whom  what  distinguished  them  has  passed  away.    How  tliey  will  be  marshalled
does  not  appear.    We  do  read  of  leading  places  being  assigned  to  the  twelve  apostles.
That  they  will  be  as  orderly  in  their  multitudinousness  as  the  innumerable  company  of
the  angels,  we  do  not  doubt.    Caught  up  in  the  enveloping  upbearing  clouds  in  one  body,
they  are  to  meet  their  descending  Lord  with  the  marshalled  army  of  angels  in  the  air.
As  persons  of  distinction  go  forth  to  meet  their  prince,  so  they  now,  all  of  them  glorified
persons,  are  caught  up  to  meet  their  Lord  in  his  triumphal  descent.    4.  Finale :  Perpetual
enjoyment  of  the  society  of  Christ.    "  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."    There  is  a
blazik  here,  which  it  did  not  lie  within  the  purpose  of  the  revelation  to  have  filled  up.
That  the  Lord  actually  descended  to  earth  may  be  regarded  as  certain.     The  air  was


96  I'HE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [ch.  iv.  1—18.


his  pathway  to  earth.  When  it  is  said  that  the  fallen  asleep  God  will  hring  with  Jesus*
the  meaning  plainly  is  (taken  in  connection  with  the  language  which  has  just  been
used)  that,  joining  our  Lord  in  the  air,  they  will  be  brought  with  him  to  earth.  We
may  think  of  the  earth  as  transformed,  in  preparation  for  the  Lord's  coming.  Some
would  interpose  here  a  lengthened  personal  reign  of  Christ  on  earth  with  his  saints.  We
are  only  on  sure  ground  when  we  think  of  Christ  as  coming  for  judgment.  "  But  when
the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  augels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  on
the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  the  nations  :  and  he  shall
separate  them  one  from  another,  as  the  shepherd  separateth  the  sheep  from  the  goats."
All  that  is  here  passed  over,  and  we  are  presented  simply  with  the  final  state  of  the  two
classes  that  have  been  united.  *'  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  The  meeting
referred  to  shall  be  followed  by  no  parting.  It  is  Christ's  wish  and  promise  that  we
should  be  with  him.  "  And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and
receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also."  Christ  has  prayed  to
the  Father  that  we  should  be  with  him.  *'  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou
hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I  am."  And  when  we  have  been  brought  into  his
presence,  in  spite  of  death  and  all  opposing  powers,  separation  will  be  impossible.  As
members,  we  must  be  with  our  Head ;  as  loving,  we  must  be  with  the  great  Object  of
our  love.  To  be  with  the  Lord  is  to  be  in  the  most  favoured  position  for  the  enjoyment
of  his  love,  for  the  comprehension  of  his  mind,  for  the  reception  of  his  Spirit,  for  the
accomplishment  of  his  plans.  To  be  with  the  Lord  is  also  to  be  with  that  great  and
blessed  company  who  shall  bo  gathered  round  him,  comprehending  the  elder  sons  of
creation,  the  great  and  good  of  all  ages,  and  those  Christian  friends  we  have  "  loved  ere
since  and  lost  awhile."  What  is  the  position  we  shall  be  carried  forward  to  through  the
course  of  eternal  ages  is  more  than  tongue  can  tell,  more  than  heart  can  conceive.

V.  Mutual  comfortino.  '  *'  Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these  words."  We
might  read  "  exhort  one  another."  But  in  view  of  the  sorrow  of  the  Thessalonians
we  rightly  read  **  comfort  one  another."  We  might  even  read  "  cheer  one  another ; "
for  the  words  are  not  only  of  a  comforting,  but  of  an  inspiriting  nature.  It  is  not
Christian  teachers,  but  Christians  generally,  who  are  addressed.  Knowing  what  comfort
is,  let  us  not  selfishly  allow  our  Christian  brethren  to  be  ignorant  of  it.  Even  in  our
ordinary  partings  in  the  world  there  is  an  element  of  sadness  that  calls  for  comfort.
As  Shakespeare  has  it —

**  So  part  we  sadly  in  this  troublous  world
To  meet  with  joy  in  sweet  Jerusalem."

Uow  thankful  ought  we  to  be  that  we  are  not  in  the  position  of  those  who  have  no  hope  ;
that  we  can  tell  those  who  have  lost  Christian  friends  of  the  sweet  and  cheering  truth
of  Christ's  coming  I  It  is  sad  to  think  of  them  sleeping  in  the  dust  of  the  earth ;  but,
laid  to  sleep  by  Christ,  then  they  ehall  awake.  They  shall  rest  and  stand  in  their  lot
at  the  end  of  the  days.  They  shall  hear  the  resurrection-call,  and  stand  in  the  body
as  once  they  stood  upon  this  earth.  They  shall  be  present  as  witnesses  and  actors  at
the  most  glorious  event  the  universe  shall  ever  have  seen.  They,  and  we  too,  shall
be  borne  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet  and  welcome  our  descending  Lord.  And  from  that
first  united  meeting  of  him  in  our  embodied,  completed  state,  we  shall  be  for  ever  with
the  Lord.— R.  F.

Ver.  1. — Christian  progress.  This  verse  introduces  a  series  of  practical  exhortations
by  an  urgent  entreaty  to  general  Christian  progress.  The  details  of  conduct  must  be
considered.  But  the  spirit  and  character  of  the  whole  life  are  of  primary  importance.
First  see  to  the  health  of  the  whole  tree ;  then  prune  and  train  the  several  branches.

I.  The  great  obligation  of  Christian  progress.  1.  Jt  requires  afull,round  develop-
ment of  spiritual  graces.  It  is  not  satisfied  with  a  shrunken,  shrivelled  life  of  the  soul.
The  meagre  Christianity  of  those  who  are  only  concerned  with  the  minimum  require-
ments of  religion  is  foreign  to  the  very  nature  of  a  true  spiritual  life.  This  should
abound ;  it  should  overflow ;  it  should  be  developed  in  all  directions.  A  one-sided  life  is
maimed  and  marred,  however  advanced  it  may  be  in  a  particular  direction.  We  shoiild
aim  at  completing  the  circle  of  graces.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  being  '*  perfect."  2.
It  proceeds  by  gradual  growth.    We  are  to  abound  "  more  and  more."    Th«  attainment


CH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  97

which  is  respectable  to-day  will  become  despicable  if  it  is  not  exceeded  to-morrow.
The  growth  is  double— a  greater  achievement  according  to  our  present  capacities  and
an  enlargement  of  those  capacities.  The  precious  wine  rises  higher  in  the  vessel ;  and
the  vessel  itself  expands.

II.  The  distinctive  chabacteribtics  op  Christian  progress.  1.  B  consists  in  con-
duct.  We  are  required  to  grow  in  knowledge.  But  this  is  not  the  most  important  form
of  spiritual  progress.  It  has  come  about,  unfortunately,  that  the  phrase  '*  advanced
Christianity  "  stands  for  a  certain  doctrinal  movement.  It  should  be  chiefly  used  for
moral  and  spiritual  progress.  The  great  advance  is  to  be  in  the  walk  and  conversation
of  life — ^the  daily,  normal  conduct.  2.  It  is  guided  hy  knowledge,  St.  Paul  exhorts  his
readers  to  abound  more  and  more  in  the  conduct  which  follows  his  directions,  "  As  ye
have  received  of  us."  This  progress  is  not  to  be  according  to  our  own  fancied  ideal  of
perfection.  It  is  in  pursuit  of  clear  duty,  and  that  duty  is  declared  in  Christian
teaching.  3.  It  is  grounded  on  previous  experience.  In  the  Revised  Version  we  read
the  adcStion,  *'  even  as  ye  do  walk."  Future  progress  depends  on  our  present  position.
We  must  not  be  always  laying  a  new  foundation.  The  Christian  life  is  not  a  series  of
revolutions.  Because  more  is  required  of  the  Christian,  the  good  already  attained  is  not
ignored.  4.  It  aims  at  pleasing  God.  Thus  it  is  characterized  by  a  regard  for  the  will
of  God,  It  is  not  satisfied  with  reaching  any  human  standard.  It  is  required  to  be
purey  true,  and  spiritual.

III.  The  btrokq  inducements  towards  Christian  progress.  1.  They  are  urged  with
personal  appeals.  St.  Paul  beseeches  and  exhorts.  He  appeals  to  the  brotherhood  of
Christians  and  its  tie  of  mutual  affection  between  himself  and  his  readers.  2.  They  are
centred  in  regard  for  Christ,  "  By  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  a  sort  of  adjuration.
The  close  relation  of  the  Christian  to  Christ  is  his  grand  motive  for  striving  after  true
progress.  The*grace  of  Christ  supplies  the  power ;  the  love  of  Christ  brings  the  obliga-
tion. By  all  that  he  is  to  us  we  are  urged  to  be  worthy  of  him  in  an  even  richer  and
fuller  Christian  life.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  9. — Love  of  the  brethren.  Christianity  introduced  a  new  word  into  the  speech  of
mankind — "Philadelphia"  '*  love  of  the  brethren."  This  word  distinguishes  a  remark-
able characteristic  of  the  early  Church.  It  describes  how  the  first  Christians  regarded
themselves  as  the  members  of  one  family.  It  was  no  visionary  socialism,  no  commu-
nistic scheme,  that  led  them  to  have  all  things  common.  They  felt  like  the  members
of  one  household,  like  the  nearest  kindred  in  one  home,  and  in  the  spirit  of  home  life
they  shared  their  possessions.  This  was  only  possible  so  long  as  the  family  spirit  per-
vaded the  Church.  Circumstances  altered  the  habits  of  the  Church  as  it  grew  in
numbers  and  spread  over  a  wider  area.  But  all  through  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  the
same  family  affection  of  Christians  is  apparent.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  leading
feature  of  Christianity.

I.  Its  scope  and  area.  1.  It  is  specially  confined  to  fellow-Christians,  It  is  to  be
distinguished  from  philanthropy.  We  should  love  all  men.  Our  neighbour,  be  he
of  the  house  of  Israel,  a  Samaritan  or  a  heathen,  has  claims  upon  us.  But  love  of
the  brethren  is  to  be  distinguished  from  this  general  love  of  one's  kind.  It  is  the
Christian's  love  of  the  Christian.  2.  It  is  due  to  all  Christians.  It  should  not  bo
given  to  a  particular  chosen  circle  of  intimates  only,  nor  simply  to  the  members  of  one
sect,  nor  to  those  only  who  excite  our  admiration.  All  Christians,  of  all  ranks  and
orders,  rich  and  poor,  cultured  and  ignorant,  saintly  and  imperfect,  orthodox  and
heterodox,  in  every  branch  of  the  Catholic  Church  of  Christ,  have  claims  upon  our  love.

II.  Its  origin.  1.  A  common  fatherhood.  We  all  have  the  same  Father  in  heaven.
In  proportion  as  we  realize  the  broad  fatherhood  of  GK>d  shall  wo  enter  into  the
brotherly  love  of  his  family.  He  is  the  Father  of  whom  "  every  family  in  earth  and
heaven  is  named."  2.  A  common  brotherly  relation  to  Christ,  Every  Christian  can
claim  Christ  as  his  Brother.  The  great  elder  Brother  binds  all  the  members  of  the
family  together  by  attracting  them  all  to  himself.  We  learn  to  love  our  fellow-
Christian  by  seeing  the  Christ  in  him.  3.  Common  interests.  We  share  the  same
blessings,  enjoy  the  same  redemption,  walk  in  the  same  pilgrimage,  and  are  travelling
towards  the  same  home.

III.  Its  influence.    True  love  of  the  brethren  cannot  be  without  effect.     Only  the

I.   THESSALONIANS.  H


98  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  iv.  1—18,

lack  of  it  could  have  permitted  the  fearful  quarrels  and  enmities  that  have  divided
Christendom.  Begard  ^  man  as  your  brother,  and  you  will  be  loth  to  hound  him  to
death.  Were  this  love  stronger  many  blessings  would  result.  1.  Mutual  forbearance.
We  permit  our  brother  to  hold  his  own  opinion  and  follow  his  own  conscience.  2,
Mutual  helpfulness.  Selfish  Christianity  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  To  bear  one
another's  burdens  is  just  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  3.  Power  to  influence  the  world.
Civil  war  in  the  Church  means  paralysis  of  the  army  that  should  conquer  the  world  for
Christ.  When  Christians  again  learn  the  almost  lost  art  of  loving  one  another,  they
will  attract  converts  from  the  world  outside  by  better  means  than  reasoning  and  preach-
ing.—W.  F.  A.

Ver.  11. — The  industrial  life.  Christianity  has  something  to  say  on  the  industrial
life.  It  has  been  charged  with  discrediting  industry.  No  calumny  could  be  more
^Ise.  It  certainly  discourages  engrossing  worldly  cares,  and  bids  men  remember
their  heavenly  citizenship.  But  it  only  inculcates  a  more  faithful  discharge  of  earthly
duty  by  insisting  on  lofty  views  of  life  and  the  pure  principles  which  should  inspire  it.
Three  duties  in  regard  to  the  industrial  life  are  here  urged  by  St.  Paul.

I.  An  ambition  to  be  quiet.  The  word  "  study  "  means  literally,  "  be  ambitious."
This  is  a  remarkable  collocation  of  ideas— ambition  and  quiet.  It  is  as  though  the
apostle  said,  "  You  have  been  ambitious  to  make  a  noise  in  the  world ;  reverse  your
fum :  be  ambitious  of  quiet.''  This  striking  piece  of  advice  is  urged  in  close  con-
nection with  directions  regarding  the  industrial  life.  Probably  the  Church  at  Thcssa-
lonica  was  largely  composed  of  working-men.      There  was  a  danger  lest  the  new

Sr^vileges  of  Christianity  should  make  some  of  these  men  foolishly  anxious  to  make
lemselves  conspicuous.  1.  We  shoxdd  aim  at  doing  much  good  without  attracting
attention  to  ourselves.  The  Christian  should  not  clamour  for  recognition.  He  should
be  content  that  his  work  prospers,  though  he  remains  obscure.  2.  We  should  he  too
husy  with  work  to  have  much  time  for  talk,  Busybodies  are  generally  drones.  How
silent  is  the  work  of  God  in  nature  !  Silently  the  forest  grows.  So  let  our  work  bo
done.  3.  We  should  work  peaceably.  The  noisy  man  is  too  often  the  quarrelsome
man.  In  the  ambition  to  soimd  a  name  abroad,  bitter  envy  and  jealousy  are  excited.
4.  Ignorant  people  should  not  suppose  Uiat  the  privileges  of  Christian  brotherhood  qualify
them  to  teach  otners.    "  Be  not  many  teachers  "  (Jas.  iii.  1).

IT.  A  DoiNQ  one's  own  business.  1.  The  claims  of  th^  Church  are  no  excuse  for  the
neglect  of  a  man*s  secular  business.  It  is  wrong  to  become  so  much  the  slave  of
business  as  to  have  no  time  or  energy  for  mission  work,  Sunday  school  teaching,  etc.
But  it  is  also  most  certainly  wrong  to  fail  in  our  duty  in  the  secular  sphere.  The
Christian  should  bo  the  most  punctual,  prompt,  and  energetic  man  of  business.  Ho
should  serve  Christ  in  it.  If  he  is  responsible  to  others,  his  religion  should  strengthen
his  fidelity  not  to  give  eye-service  as  a  man-pleaser.  2.  Religion  does  not  remove  a  man
from  the  station  in  which  he  is  placed  by  Providence,  It  may  so  improve  his  habits  of
work  and  may  bring  such  blessings  upon  him  as  may  enable  him  gradually  to  rise  iu
the  social  scale.  But  it  may  permit  no  such  external  change ;  it  should  not  be  expected
to  do  so  in  every  case.  And  however  that  may  be,  religion  can  make  no  sudden
change  in  a  man's  circumstances.  The  Christian  slave  was  in  outward  circumstances
a  slave  still.  The  artisan  remained  an  artisan.  3.  Christianity  forbids  us  to  be
envious  of  the  more  prosperous  condition  of  other  people.  It  is  not  for  us  to  snatch  at
their  privileges  to  the  neglect  of  our  own  duty.  Every  man  has  his  Divine  vocation.
It  is  the  Christian's  duty  to  find  his  special  vocation  and  to  follow  it,  whether  it  lead
him  up  the  Beulah  heights  or  down  through  the  valley  of  humiliation.  In  the
Church  let  each  man  find  his  own  place  and  do  his  own  work.  There  is  a  diversity  of
gifts.  One  has  a  gift  of  speech,  another  a  gift  of  deft  handiwork.  Let  neither  be
ambitious  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  other.  4.  Christians  should  be  too  busy  ivith  their
own  work  to  have  time  to  judge  their  neighbours.  We  are  workmen,  not  judges.  To
his  own  Master  each  man  stands  or  falls.

III.  An  honest  dilwence  in  manual  labour.  This  duty  is  clearly  brought  out
in  the  Revised  Version,  which  omits  the  word  "  own  "  before  "  hands,"  so  that  we  read
the  clause,  "  Work  with  your  hands."  Thus  we  have  a  direct  recommendation  of
manual  labour.     1.  Manual  labour  is  necessary.    There  is  hard,  rough  work  of  this


GH.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONUNS.  99

kind  that  mast  be  done.  It  is  cowardly  to  shirk  it  Galtivated  people  do  not  object  to
bard  work  for  amusement,  e.^  rowing,  Alpine  climbing.  Why  should  it  be  shunned
wben  it  is  useful  ?  2.  Manual  lahour  is  honourable.  Any  work  done  with  a  good
purpose  is  honourable.  The  work  of  the  carpenter  is  often  more  honourable  than  that
of  the  financier.  The  dirtiest  work  is  not  always  done  by  the  roughest  hands.  The
crowding  of  the  sons  of  working  men  into  the  ranks  of  clerks  is  not  a  healthy  sign
if  it  betokens  a  shame  of  honest  toil.  3.  Manual  lahour  is  wholesome.  The  punish-
ment of  Adam  is  no  curse.  It  is  a  blessing  that  man  has  to  '^  eat  his  bread  in  the
sweat  of  his  face.''  While  the  early  monks  were  busy,  building,  digging,  weaving,
monasticism  presented  a  picture  of  pure  Christian  living.  Riches  brought  superiority
to  physical  industry,  and  corruption  speedily  followed.  The  best  of  Christ's  apostles
were  working  men. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  12. — Christians  be/ore  the  world.  In  the  previous  verse  St.  Paul  has  been
urging  upon  his  readers  the  duty  of  quiet  industry.  He  now  gives  two  reasons  for
this  advice — first,  that  they  may  walk  honestly  before  the  world ;  and  secondly,  that
they  may  have  need  of  nothing.  The  apostle  turns  to  the  same  subject  in  his  Second
Epistle.  ''  If  any  mau  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat,"  he  says  (2  Thess.  iii.  10).
Qod  only  provides  for  us  when  we  cannot  provide  for  ourselves ;  or,  rather,  he  provides
for  us  by  helping  us  to  provide  for  ourselves.  He  feeds  the  ravens  by  giving  them
strong  wings  and  claws  and  beaks,  and  by  providing  them  prey.  But  the  birds  must
catch  their  quarry.  We  need  not  be  anxious  about  the  morrow  if  we  are  diligent  in
doing  our  own  business.  So  much  for  the  second  reason  for  diligence.  The  first  demands
more  extended  inquiry,  and  may  bo  taken  by  itself  as  a  fertile  subject  for  meditation.
We  are  to  be  diligent  in  our  secular  business  in  order  that  we  may  "  walk  honestly
towards  them  that  are  without."

I.  Christiaks  owe  duties  to  the  world.  Christians  have  no  right  to  treat
"  them  that  are  without ''  as  outlaws.  If  we  should  pray  for  those  who  despitefully  use
us,  much  more  should  we  treat  them  honestly.  And  if  wo  are  to  be  kind  to  pur
enemies,  certainly  we  arc  required  to  be  just  to  those  who  are  not  inimical  to  us.  The
Christian  must  pay  his  debts  to  an  infidel.  The  temperate  man  must  fulfil  his  obli-
gations to  the  drunkard.  The  spiritually  minded  man  must  be  just  to  the  worldly
minded  man.    Christians  should  respect  the  rights  of  the  heathen  in  foreign  countries.

II.  The  world  judges  Christians  according  to  their  discharge  of  these
DUTIES.  These  it  can  appreciate.  It  knows  nothing  of  the  behaviour  of  Christians
in  the  Church.  It  cares  nothing  for  orthodox  creeds  or  devout  psalm-singing.  But  it
can  estimate  the  value  of  a  thorough  piece  of  work,  and  it  can  see  the  merit  of  a
prompt  payment.  If  we  are  wanting  in  these  things,  the  world  will  only  regard  us  as
nypocrites  when  we  make  much  of  our  religion  in  spiritual  matters — and  rightly^  for  if
we  are  not  honest  men  we  cannot  be  saints.

III.  The  world  judges  of  Christianity  according  to  the  external  conduct
OF  Christians  in  this  respect.  Here  is  a  graver  consideration.  The  honour  of
Christ  is  concerned.  The  defaulting  Christian  gives  a  shock  to  Christian  evidences.
One  glaring  instance  of  misconduct  in  secular  affairs  does  more  to  hinder  the  progress  of
true  religion  than  volumes  of  sermons  can  do  to  advance  it.  Even  the  negligent  and
idle  Christian  brings  discredit  on  his  Master.  The  Christian  artisan  should  be  known
from  the  secularist  by  the  greater  diligence  and  thoroughness  of  his  work.

IV.  Christians  have  no  right  to  expect  good  treatment  from  the  world
unless  they  behave  honestly  towards  it.  The  Church  at  Thessalonica  lived  in
constant  danger  of  an  assault  from  the  hostile  heathen  population  of  the  city.  It  was
most  desirable  that  no  shadow  of  an  excuse  should  be  given  for  an  attack.  Idleness^
noisy  restlessness,  interference  with  other  people,  would  provoke  opposition.  Quiet
industry  was  most  safe.  When  a  master  found  that  the  Christians  were  his  best  hands
he  would  not  be  inclined  to  molest  them.  We  shall  best  conciliate  opponents  and
silence  enmity  and  at  last  win  respect  by  a  quiet,  unassuming,  diligent  discharge  of
our  daily  duty.— W.  P.  A.

Vers.  13, 14. — Sorrow  for  the  dead  transfigured  hy  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  In
the  neighbourhood  of  Thessalonica — Salonica  it  is  now  called — ^there  maybe  seen  at  the


loo  THE  FIRST  EPlSTLt  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cs.iv.l— 18.


present  day  ancient  tombs  on  which  are  to  be  read  inscriptions  expressing  hopeless
regret  for  the  dead.  The  Church  addressed  by  St.  Paul  was  a  little  community  which
had  learnt  to  enjoy  a  strange,  new  view  of  the  state  and  prospects  of  the  departed,
planted  in  the  midst  of  a  great  pagan  populace  that  held  the  melancholy  sentiments  of
these  epitaphs.  Contrasting  the  Christians  with  "  the  rest "  of  the  people,  the  apostle
reminds  them  that  they  should  not  give  way  to  the  despairing  sorrow  that  was  natural
to  men  who  had  no  hope.

I.  OuTSiDB  Christianity  sorrow  fob  the  dead  is  hopeless.  1.  Bistory  and
experience  establish  this  fact.  Pagan  tombs  everywhere  express  themselves  with
various  degrees  of  despair,  but  never  with  cheerful  hope.  Nations  like  tbo  Egyptians
that  had  a  firm  faith  in  a  future  life  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  enjoyed  any  hopes
respecting  that  life.  A  general  dream  of  immortality  pervades  our  race ;  but  it  is
everywhere  dim  and  cheerless.  Many  men  at  all  times  have  broken  away  from  it
altogether,  and  have  said  with  Catullus,  "When  once  our  brief  day  has  set  we  must
sleep  one  everlasting  night."  2.  JReasoning  cannot  conquer  the  common  hopelessness
of  sorrow  for  the  dead.  The  arguments  outside  Christianity  may  bo  divided  into  two
classes :  (1)  Naturalistic ;  e.g.  from  the  nature  of  consciousness,  from  the  indestructi-
bility of  all  known  existences,  from  the  general  instinct  of  immortality,  from  analogies
of  sleep,  transformations  of  insects,  succession  of  winter,  spring,  etc.  Less  and  less
weight  is  being  ascribed  to  all  such  reasoning.  It  will  not  bear  the  strain  of  anxious
doubt.  The  mourner  turns  his  eyes  in  vain  to  nature  for  comfort.  (2)  Theistic,  (o)
In  the  wisdom  of  God.  Man's  life  being  but  imperfectly  developed  here,  the  Divine
idea  of  humanity  would  be  vain  and  futile  without  a  larger  world  for  realizing  it.  (b)
In  the  justice  of  God — the  necessity  of  a  future  judgment,  (c)  In  the  goodness  of
God.  A  father  would  not  mock  his  child  by  creating  him  so  that  he  has  a  great
hunger  for  a  future  which  is  unattainable.  Nevertheless  even  these  arguments  do  not
satisfy,  for  who  can  venture  to  speak  with  assurance  of  the  high  counsels  of  the
Almighty  ?  and,  moreover,  they  presuppose  a  knowledge  of  the  character  of  God  which
only  Christianity  clearly  furnishes.

II.  Christianity  draws  the  sting  of  hopelessness  from  sorrow  for  the  dead.
1.  It  does  not  destroy  that  sorrow.  To  do  so  would  be  impossible.  We  must  grieve  at
parting  from  those  who  are  dear  to  us.  Indeed  it  would  be  unhealthy  for  us  entirely  to
conquer  natural  sorrow.  We  should  have  to  conquer  natural  love  first.  A  softening,
subduing,  purifying  mission  comes  with  this  grief,  and  is  one  of  the  best  means  of
helping  us  to  receive  Christian  truth.  2.  But  Christianity  removes  the  sting  from  this
sorrow  by  depriving  it  of  hopelessness.  The  hope  which  St.  Paul  refers  to  is  plainly
the  hope  of  receiving  back  those  who  have  been  taken  from  us  by  death.  They  are
gone,  but  not  gone  for  ever.  Every  weary  year  as  it  passes  brings  us  nearer  to  the
happy  reunion.  The  words  of  St.  Paul  plainly  show  that  he  believed  in  the  mutual
recognition  of  friends  in  the  future  life.

III.  The  death  and  resurrection  op  Christ  are  the  secret  of  this  Chris-
tun  transfiguration  of  sorrow  for  the  dead.  1.  The  strongest  argument  to
convince  men  generally  of  a  future  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  taken
in  connection  with  his  life  and  teaching.  He  spoke  of  judgment  and  of  eternal  life.  He
confirmed  his  words  by  rising  from  the  dead.  The  confirmation  is  twofold.  (1)  The
resurrection  is  a  Divine  authentication  of  the  claims  and  mission  of  Christ.  (2)  It  is
an  instance,  a  crucial  test,  a  proof  that  a  future  life  is  possible.  2.  For  Christians  the
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  are  grounds  for  enjoying  the  hope  of  a  reunion  of  all
the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord,  (1)  The  triumph  of  Christ  is  here  shown.  Now,  the
object  of  his  death  and  resurrection  was  to  redeem  the  world.  But  this  redemption
would  be  vain  if  there  were  no-  resurrection.  "If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hoped  in
Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  pitiable."  The  resurrection  of  Christ  proves  that  the
object  of  his  death  was  obtained.  It  must  therefore  be  followed  by  the  resurrection  of
his  people  in  order  that  the  redemption  thus  accomplished  may  be  fully  realized  in
them.  (2)  The  union  of  Christians  with  Christ  secures  their  resurrection.  His
experience  becomes  the  experience  of  his  people,  because  he  lives  in  them  and  they  live
in  him  (1  Cor.  xv.  22).— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  15, 16. — The  order  of  the  second  advent.    The  subjects  here  brought  before  us


en.  IV.  1—18.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN8.  101


are  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  speculation.  "We  have  no  data  whatever  to  go  upon
beyond  the  authoritative  declarations  of  the  Word  of  God.  St.  Paul  himself  was  not
prepared  to  reason  about  them.  He  could  simply  declare  what  was  revealed  to  him.
But  this  he  did  declare  with  marvellous,  unhesitating  positiveness.  He  prefaces  his
declaration  by  distinctly  claiming  the  authority  of  inspiration  for  it.  **  For  this  we
say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord."  So  remarkable  a  revelation  as  that  of  the
following  verses  needed  some  such  assurance  of  its  origin  to  commend  it  to  us.  We
must  take  it  in  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  written,  or  wo  must  leave  it  alone.  It  is
useless  to  begin  rationalizing  with  it.  It  is  foolish  to  attempt  to  go  one  step  beyond
what  is  writteu.  A  sermon  on  such  subjects  must  be  as  purely  expository  of  the
words  of  Scripture  as  possible.  We  note  here  three  events  in  time,  and  their  external
consequence.  The  order  of  these  three  events  is  what  St.  Paul  is  most  immediately
concerned  with.  The  occasion  of  his  writing  on  them  appears  to  have  been  the  trouble
felt  by  his  readers  as  to  the  condition  of  those  Christians  who  died  before  the  second
advent  of  Christ  which  they  were  expecting  shortly  to  happen.  Would  these  departed
brethren  miss  the  joy  of  welcoming  their  glorified  Saviour?  The  order  of  events
described  by  the  apostle  removes  this  difficulty.

I.  The  first  event  is  the  advent  of  Christ.  1.  Ee  is  to  come  in  Person,  He
does  not  forget  the  world  for  which  he  died.  He  will  return  to  his  weary,  waiting
Church.  2.  Ee  is  to  come  in  glory.  His  first  advent  was  humble  and  obscure.  Few
knew  the  Babe  in  the  manger.  Lowly  and  self-sacrificing  was  the  whole  life  that
followed.  But  every  one  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.  The  humble  Jesus
IS  to  come  again  as  the  exalted  Lord.  3.  Ee  is  to  come  conspicuously.  The  shout,  the
full  voice  of  an  archangel,  the  blast  of  a  trumpet — these  awful  sounds  surely  betoken
no  obscure  mystical  advent  which  can  be  questioned  after  it  has  occurred.  When
Christ  comes  a  second  time  no  one  will  say,  '*  Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  no  ?  "  All  will
hear  the  great  shout  and  the  pealing  angel-notes.

n.  The  second  event  is  the  return  of  the  departed.  Instead  of  missing
the  joy  of  that  great  advent,  as  their  friends  sadly  feared,  those  Christians  who  had
fallen  asleep  will  be  the  first  to  share  it.  The  trumpet  will  awake  the  dead  before  it
arouses  the  living.  There  will  be  no  advantage  in  being  among  the  living  at  the  time
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Some,  even  in  our  own  day,  have  fondly  hoped  for
some  such  privilege.  But  St.  Paul  distinctly  tells  us  that  the  privilege  is  the  other
way.  The  departed  will  be  the  most  privileged.  This  is  fair ;  for  if  they  have  endured
the  pangs  of  death  to  reach  Christ,  it  is  right  that  they  should  see  him  first.

III.  THE    THIRD    EVENT     IS    THE    ASSOCIATION    OF    LIVING    CHRISTIANS  WITH    THE

SECOND  ADVENT  OF  Christ.  They  take  the  second  place  in  honour,  not  having
wrestled  with  death  and  conquered  the  dread  foe,  as  their  departed  brethren  have  done.
But  they  also  join  in  the  glad  triumph  of  their  Lord.  Of  the  physical  process
described  as  being  "caught  up  into  the  clouds"  we  know  nothing,  and  therefore
cannot  tell  how  it  will  be  realized  till  it  is  accomplished.  The  attempt  to  explain  it
has  only  made  the  subject  ridiculous.  But  the  two  spiritual  facts  accompanying  it  are
clear.  A  joyous  meeting  with  Christ  and  the  departed,  and  a  change  of  state  and
sphere ;  the  earthly  life  and  its  limitations  giving  place  to  the  heavenly  life  and  its  more
exalted  powers.

IV.  The  eternal  consequence  is  the  permanent  dwelling  of  Christians
with  Christ.  The  second  advent  here  described  is  not  a  passing  event  which  ends.
It  is  not  a  mere.visit  of  Christ.  It  is  not  like  the  first  advent,  which,  after  a  few  years,
was  followed  by  the  death  and,  after  his  resurrection,  the  ascension  of  Christ.  Christ
will  never  leave  his  people  again.  1.  It  secures  joy.  The  joy  of  love  is  to  be  with
those  we  love.  The  highest  Christian  happiness  is  to  be  "  for  ever  with  the  Lord.'*
This  is  heaven.  2.  It  protects  from  trouble,  God  wipes  away  tears  from  all  eyes.
Associated  with  Christ  for  ever,  his  people  can  never  weep  again.  8.  It  guards  from  sin.
Where  the  triumphant  Christ  always  is,  the  defeated  tempter  can  never  come.  4.  It
ciccomplishes  the  reunion  of  friends.  All  being  with  Christ,  all  are  also  together.  The
home  is  perfected  by  the  gathering  of  the  blessed  dead  with  the  glorified  living  around
the  abiding  Christ.— W.  F.  A.


102


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THBSSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.l— 28.


EXPOSmON.


CHAPTER  'V.


Contents. — Willi  regard  to  the  time
of  that  glorious  advent  when  believers,
whether  dead  or  living,  will  be  gathered
together  to  Christ,  the  Thessalonians  had
Already  been  fully  instructed.  They  knew
well  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  would  come
suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  and  surprise
an  ungodly  world.  But  they  were  not  in
dai'ktiess  bo  as  to  bo  taken  by  surprise.
Still,  however,  they  must  exercise  constant
watchfulness  and  sobriety,  and  be  armed
with  the  Christian  graces  of  faith,  love,  and
hope,  being  coinforted  with  the  assurance
that  Qod  had  not  appointed  them  to  wrath,
but  to  the  acquisition  of  salvation  through
Jesus  Christ)  who  died  for  their  benefit,  in
order  that,  whether  living  or  dead,  they
might  share  in  the  blessings  of  his  advents

Now  follows  a  series  of  short  admonitions.
The  Thessalonians  were  to  love  and  honour
their  ministers,  to  live  in  peace  among
themselves,  to  admonish  the  disorderly,  to
oiicourage  the  faint-hearted,  to  support  the
weak,  and  to  exercise  forbearance  toward
all  men.  They  were  to  be  on  their  guard
against  revenge,  to  preserve  Christian  joy-
fulness,  to  be  constant  in  prayer,  and  to
maintain  a  thankful  disposition.  They
were  not  to  quench  the  Spirit,  nor  despise
prophesyings,  but  were  to  test  all  things,
retaining  the  good  and  rejecting  the  evil.
And  it  was  his  earnest  prayer  for  them  that
God  would  so  completely  sanctify  them  that
they  might  be  blameless  at  the  advent  of
the  Lord  Jesus.  After  requesting  an
interest  in  their  prayers,  and  solemnly
charging  them  to  read  this  Epistle  to  the
assembled  Church,  the  apostle  concludes
with  his  apostolic  benediction.

Ver.  1. — This  verse  is  connected  with
what  precedes.  The  apostle  was  comforting
the  Thessalonians  under  the  loss  of  their
deeeased  friends  by  the  assurance  that  both
the  living  and  the  dead  would  be  gathered
together  at  the  advent.  The  question
would  naturally  arise,  **  When  shall  these
things  be?"  (Luke  xxi.  7);  and  it*  would
appear  that  the  Thessalonians  expected  an
immediate  advent.  The  apostle  represses
their  curiosity  on  this  point  by  reminding
them  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the


Lord's  coming.  But  of  thtt  times  and  the  sen-
sons,  brethren;  that  is,  of  the  time  and  the  pre-
cise petiod  of  tho  Lord's  advent.  "  Times  "
and  ^* seasons"  are  elsewhere  united  together
(Eccles.  iii. ;  Dan.  ii.  21 ;  Acts  i.  7).  The
word  translated  *' times"  denotes  time
absolutely  without  regard  to  circumstances ;
and  the  word  rendered  ** seasons"  denotes
a  definite  point  of  time ;  not  merely  the
day,  but  the  hour  (Mark  xiii.  82).  Te  have
ho  need  that  I  write  unto  you;  literally^
thai  ought  he  written  unto  you  (R.V.) ;  comn.
ch.  iv.  9.  The  reason  why  it  was  not  neea-
ful  for  the  apostle  to  write  unto  them  was,
not  because  he  regarded  tho  information
unprofitable  or  superfluous,  or  because  ho
knew  it  to  be  impossible,  but  because  he
had  already  informed  them  when  at  Thcs-
salonica  that  the  time  of  the  advent  was
beyond  the  sphere  of  his  teaching.  Tho
apostle  mentioi^s  this  to  repress  that  vain
curiosity  which  iA  ilatutal  to  man,  and  which
was  the  occasion  of  so  much  disorder  among
the  Thessalonians.  Our  duty  is,  not  to  pry
into  tho  times  and  seasons  which  the  Father
hath  put  in  his  own  power  (Acts  i.  7),  but
to  exercise  constant  watchfulness.

Ver.  2.— For  yourselves  know  perfectly ;
namely,  not  from  Scripture,  nor  from  oral
tradition,  but  from  the  teaching  of  the
apostle  when  in  Thessalonica.  That  the  day
of  the  Lord.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  "  is  a
common  Old  Testameht  expression,  denot-
ing tho  coming  of  the  Divine  iudgments
(Joel  i.  15;  ii.  1);  and  by  the  phrase  here
is  meant,  not  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
nor  the  day  of  one's  death,  but  tho  day  of
the  Lord's  advent,  when  Christ  shall  descend
from  heaven  in  glor^  for  the  resurrection  of
the  dead  and  the  judgment  of  the  world.
The  idea  of  judgment  is  contained  in  the
term  **dav."  So  oometh  as  a  thief  in  the
night.  The  same  comparison  is  used  by  our
Lord  himself  (Matt.  xxiv.  43;  Luke  xii.
89),  and  tho  very  words  are  employed  by
Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.  10).  Tho  point  of  resem-
blance is  evidently  the  unexpectedness  and
suddenness  of  the  coming.  Tlie  thief  comes
upon  people  in  the  night  season,  when  they
are  asleep  and  unprepared ;  so,  in  a  similar
manner,  when  Christ  comes,  he  will  find
the  world  unprepared  and  not  expectiug
his  advent.  The  ancient  Fathers  iuferretl
from  this  passage  that  Christ  would  come  to
judgment  in  the  night  season,  and  henco
they  instituted  vigils,  or  night  watches.
Some,  still  more  precisely,  fixed  the  coming
on  Eastei  night,  from  the  analogy  of  tho
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from  Egypt  on
the  paschal  evening.

Ver.  3, — Por;  tho  best  manuscripts  omit


CH.V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


103


this  conjunction;  tho  description  is  con-
tinuons.  When  they  shall  say ;  namely,  the
unbelieving  world.  Peaee  and  safety ;  peace
denoting  internal  rest,  and  safety  external
secnrity.  Sudden  destruotion  cometh  upon
them.  When  they  thought  themselves  most
secure,  they  were  then  in  the  greatest
danger;  when  they  were  most  off  their
guard,  then  the  crisis  came.  As  travail  upon
a  woman  with  child.  Tho  primary  point  of
Tcsemblance  is  certainly  the  suddenness  and
unexpectedness  of  the  event;  as  labour
comes  upon  a  woman  suddenly,  so  sudden
destruction  cometh  upon  tho  ungodly  world.
Still,  however,  the  unavoidableness  of  the
judgment  may  also  be  here  intimated ;  there
IS  no  possibility  of  escape :  this  is  implied
in  the  last  clause,  and  they  shall  not  escape.

Ver.  i. — Bat  ye,  brethren ;  ye  believers,
in  opposition  to  the  unbelieving  world.  Are
not  in  darkness;  referring  back  to  the  night
(ver.  2),  when  the  thief  comes.  By  darkness
is  hero  meant,  not  merely  ignorance,  bat
moral  depravity — tho  darkness  of  sin.  Ye
are  not  in  the  ignorant  and  sinful  condition
of  the  unredeemed  world,  so  as  to  bo  sur-
prised by  the  dav  of  the  Lord.  With  you
it  is  not  night,  but  day ;  the  light  of  the
gospel  is  shining  around  you ;  nnd  there-
fore the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  will  not
surprise  you  in  an  unprepared  stato.  That ;
a  statement,  not  of  result,  but  of  purpose —
•*  in  order  that."  That  day;  the  day;  namely,
the  day  of  the  Lord.  Should  overtake  you—
surprise  you — as  a  thief.

Ycr.  5.— Te  are  all  the  children  of  the
light,  and  tiie  children  of  the  day.  Hebra-
istic expressions  denoting.  Ye  all  belong  to
the  light  and  to  the  day.  An  affirmation,
strengthening  tho  previous  declaration.
The  light  and  tho  day  are  B3rnonymous
expressions — the  day  being  the  period  of
lignt,  as  opposed  to  the  night  and  darkness.
We  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness ;
rendering  the  positive  assertion  moro  em-
phatic.

Ver.  6. — Therefore ;  because  wo  arc  the
children  of  the  light  and  of  tho  day,
because  wo  have  been  enlightened  and
purified,  wo  ought  to  be  watchful  and  sober,
so  tliat  we  may  not  be  unprepared  for  tho
day  of  the  Lord.  Privileges  will  avail  us
nothing,  unless  we  use  them  and  walk  up
to  them.  Let  tu  not  sleep.  Sleep  is  hero
evidently  used  metaphorically  to  denote
religious  carolessness.  As  do  others ;  the
unbelieving  and  ungodly.  But  let  us  watch
and  be  sober;  evidently  to  bo  understood
metaphorically  of  spiritual  vigilance  and
sobriety :  watchfulness  denoting  wakeful-
ness from  sleep,  and  sobriety  freedom  from
intoxication.  Both  must  bo  combined :  wo
must  be  watchful,  on  our  guard,  and  wo
must  be  sober,  armed  and  prepared ;  ^'  for


even  by  day,"  observes  St.  Ohrysostora,  f*  If
one  watches,  but  is  not  sober,  he  will  fhtl
into  numberless  dangers."  The  same  exhor-
tation is  given  by  Peter,  but  in  tho  reverse
order :  "  Be  sober,  be  vigilant "  (1  Pet  r.  8).

Ver.  7. — For ;  the  reason  of  this  exhortd-
tion.  They  that  sleep  sleep  ih  tiie  id^t ;
and  theytiiat  are  dxiinken  are  druiikbn  in
the  night.  Here  not  to  be  t^en  in  a  metd-
phorical  sense,  but  a  simple  statement  bf
fact — what  occurs  in  ordinanr  experience.
The  night  is  the  season  in  which  sleep  and
drunkenness  usually  occur;  whereas  the
day  is  the  season  of  watchfulness,  sobriety,
and  work.  Both  heathen  and  Jews  con-
sidered it  as  eminently  disgraceful  for  a
man  to  be  seen  drunken  in  the  day-time.
Hence,  when  the  Jews  accused  tho  believers
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  with  being  fllied
with  new  wine,  Peter  answered,  "We  dtfe
not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose,  seeing  it  is  but
the  third  hour  of  the  day"  (Acts  ii.  15).

Ver.  8. — iut;  contrast  to  tho  conduct  of
those  who  are  of  the  night :  let  us  not  onl v
be  watchful,  but  armed.  Tho  apostle  ndw
adopts  a  favourite  figure,  that  of  spiritdal
armour.  The  arms  wnich  he  here  mentions
are  only  two— the  breastplate  to  protect  the
heart,  and  the  helmet  to  guard  the  heaa ;
they  are  both  defensive  weapons,  because
tho  reference  here  is  not  so  much  to  the
believer's  conflict  with  evil,  as  to  hiB
defence  against  surprise.  And  by  these
spiritual  weapons  aro  denoted  the  three
cardinal  graces — faith,  love,  and  hope  (ch.  i.
8).  Let  us  who  are  of  the  day,  be  uowt,
putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  aiid  love.
By  »'  faith  "  is  here  meant  faith  in  Christ ;
and  by  "  love,"  not  so  much  love  to  God  as
love  to  man.  These  preserve  tho  heart  of  a
Christian  against  the  assaults  and  influ-
ences of  evil,  as  the  breastplate  guards  the
heart  of  the  earthly  warrior.  And  for  a
helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation.  Salvation  in
its  most  comprehensive  sense.  The  hope  of
salvation  sustains  our  courago  amid  all  the
trials  of  life  by  holding  out  to  us  the
prospect  of  eternal  bless^ness.  Vigilance
IS  of  no  avail  unless  armed  by  faith,  hope,
and  love.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians
there  is  a  still  fuller  enumeration  of  the
Christian  armour  (Eph.  vi.  14— 18^;  and
there  is  a  slight  difference  in  the  descrip-
tion of  the  weapons.  Here  the  apostle
speaks  of  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love ;
there  of  the  breastplate  of  righteousness
and  of  the  shield  of  faith.  Here  the  helmet
is  called  tho  hope  of  salvation ;  ther^  the
apostle  speaks  of  tlie  helmet  of  salvation.
And  besides  these  defensive  weapons,  other
weapons  of  defence  and  tiie  Bwora,  a  weapon
of  offence,  are  mentioned.

Ver.  9. — Tot,  Not  a  new  reason  fbr  waioh-
fuluess  and  sobriety,  bat  rcferrhig  to  *'  tho


104  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALOJSIANS.    [ch.  v.  1— 28.


hope  of  salvation,"  why  we  may  with  con-
fidenco  put  on  such  a  hope  ae  a  helmet.
God  hath  not  appointed  ni  to  wrath,  hnt  to
ohtein — or,  to  the  acquisition  of — salvation  hy
--or,  through — our  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  Not
through  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  nor  even
through  faith  in  Christ,  bat  through  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  through  what  he
has  done  for  us,  and  especially  through  his
atoning  death.  The  appointment  of  God's
grace  is  here  mentioned  as  the  efficient
cause  of  our  salvation ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  as  the  Mediator  through  whom
salvation  is  bestowed.

Yer.  10. — ^Who  died.  His  death  being  the
meritorious  cause  of  our  salvation.  For  ns ;
that  is  here,  not  "  instead  of  us,"  but  "  for
our  benefit,"  or  "on  our  account."  That,
whether  we  wake  or  sleep.  Hero  not  to  be
taken  in  an  ethical  sense — whether  we  are
spiritually  awake  or  asleep,  for  those  who
are  spiritually  asleep  will  be  surprised  by
the  coming  of  the  Lord )  nor  in  a  natural
sense — whether  he  come  in  the  night  and
find  us  taking  our  natural  sleep,  or  in  the
day,  when  we  are  awake — which  would  be  a
mere  trifling  observation;  but  in  a  meta-
phorical sense — whether  we  are  alive  or
dead.  The  apostle  has  just  been  speaking
of  those  who  are  dead  under  the  designa-
tion of  those  "  who  are  asleep  "  (ch.  iv.  18),
and  therefore  it  is  natural  to  interpret  the
clause,  "  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,"  of  the
condition  of  believers  at  the  coming  of  the
Lord.  There  is  here  certainly  a  change  of
metaphor :  "sleep"  in  ver.  6  denotes  religious
carelessness ;  in  ver.  7,  natural  sleep ;  and
here,  death.  We  shall  live  together— or,  in
one  com^Hiny— with  him.  The  apostle  is  still
continuing  his  consolatory  address  to  those
who  were  mourning  over  their  deceased
friends;  and  he  tells  them  that  at  the
advent  there  will  be  no  difference  between
those  who  are  then  alive  and  those  who
sleep— both  will  live  together  with  the  Lord
(comp.  Bom.  xiv.  8,  9).

Ver.  11. — ^Wherefore;  because,  whether
alive  or  dead,  you  will  equally  share  in  the
blessings  of  the  advent  Comfort  yourselves
together.  The  words  refer  back  to  the  last
verse  of  the  preceding  chapter  (ch.  iv.  18),
and  with  them  the  apostle  concludes  his
consolatory  address  to  those  who  were
mourning  over  the  loss  of  their  friends.
And  ediiy  one  another;  or,  huUd  up.  It
was  a  favourite  figure  of  the  apostle  to
compare  the  Chrirtian  Church  and  each
individual  believer  to  a  building.

Ver.  12. — ^With  this  verse  commences  a
new  paragraph.  The  apostle  adds  in  con-
clusion a  few  brief  and  somewhat  miscel-
laneous exhortations.  And  we  beseech  yon,
brethren;  an  expression  of  earnestness  and
affection.    To  know ;  that  is,  to  value,  appre-


ciate, and  esteem.  Them  which  labour
among  yon.  It  was  Paul's  custom  to  or-
ganize the  Churches  which  he  had  founded,
and  to  appoint  presbyters  among  them.
Although  tne  Church  of  Thessalonica  had
been  so  recenUy  founded,  yet  it  had  its
presbyters.  And  are  over  yon.  The  pres-
byters, in  virtue  of  their  office,  presided  over
the  Christian  assemblies.  In  tiie  Lord ;  the
sphere  in  wiiich  they  were  set  over  the
Church ;  they  were  ordained  to  minister  in
sacred  things.  And  admonish  you.  There
are '  not  three  classes  or  orders  of  office-
bearers here  mentioned — those  who  laboured
among  them,  those  who  presided  over  them,
and  those  who  admonished  them  (Mac-
knight);  but  all  these  duties  belonged  to
one  class,  namely,  the  presbyters.

Ver.  13. — ^And  to  esteem  tiiem  very  highly
in  love  for  their  work's  sake ;  that  is,  both
on  account  of  their  labours,  and  especially
on  account  of  the  dignity  of  their  office,  for
their  work  is  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Both
love  for  their  persons  and  respect  for  their
authority  are  here  enjoined.  And;  to  be
omitted,  as  not  in  the  original.  Be  at  peace
among  yourselves.  A  new  exhortation,  en-
tirely independent  of  the  preceding;  it  is
not  addressed  to  the  presbyters,  but  to  the
members  of  the  Church  in  general.

Ver.  14. — How  we  exhort  yon,  brethren ;
an  exhortation  also  addressed  to  all.  Warn
them  that  are  unruly ;  or,  as  in  the  margin,
disorderly  (B.V.).  Different  modes  of
treatment  have  to  be  adapted  to  different
classes;  the  unruly  have  to  be  warned.
The  word  hero  rendered  "  unruly  "  or  "  dis-
orderly" was  originally  a  military  term
expressing  the  character  of  those  soldiers
who  would  not  keep  their  ranks — out  of  the
ranks.  It  would  seem  from  this  and  other
intimations  that  disorders  existed  among
the  Thessalonians ;  and  that,  especially
being  impressed  by  a  belief  in  the  near
approach  of  the  advent,  several  of  them
neglected  the  common  duties  of  life,  and
abstained  from  workin  g.  Comfort  the  feeble  -
minded.  By  **  the  feeble-minded  "  are  meant
the  desponding  or  faint-hearted ;  those  who
were  agitated  aoout  the  fate  of  their  deceased
friends,  or  those  who  despaired  of  the  grace
of  God  by  reason  of  their  sins.  These  were
not  to  be  reprimanded,  but  comforted  and
exhorted.  Support  the  weak.  By  ^Uhe
weak  "  are  not  meant  those  who  are  phy-
sically weak — the  sick ;  but  those  who  are
spiritually  weak,  whose  faith  was  feeble —
those  who  were  afraid  of  persecution,  or  were
troubled  with  vain  scruples.  These  were  to
be  supported — confirmed  in  the  faith.  Be
patient  toward  all  men ;  all  men  in  general,
whether  believers  or  unbelievers;  toward
them  patience  and  forbearance  were  to  be
exercised.


CH.V.1— 28.]    THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


105


Ver.  15.— See  that  none  render  evil  for
evil  nnto  any.  The  prohibition  of  reveuge
is  peculiarly  Christian,  neither  corresponding
to  the  spirit  of  heathenism,  nor  yet  clearly
revealed  in  Judaism.  A  precisely  similar
prohibition  is  given  in  Rom.  xii.  17,  "Re-
compense to  no  man  evil  for  evil."  But  ever
follow;  pursue  after.  That  whioh  ia  good;
the  good,  the  beneficial.  Both  among  your-
selves ;  your  fellow -Christians.  And  to  all
men.  The  human  race  in  general ;  the  one
being  brotherly  kindness  and  the  other
charity  (2  Pet.  i.  7).

Ver.  IG. — ^Sejoice  evermore;  or,  rejoice
always  (R.V.).  Joy  is  that  feeling  of  delight
which  arises  from  the  possession  of  present
good,  or  from  the  anticipation  of  future
happiness ;  and  in  both  respects  the  believer
has  abundant  reason  for  constant  joy.  He
possesses  the  blessedness  of  forgiveness  and
the  sure  prospect  of  eternal  life,  and  he  has
the  consciousness  that  all  things  work  to-
gether  for  good  to  them  that  love  God  (Rom.
viii.  28).  God  wishes  his  people  to  be
happy,  and  does  not  suffer  them  to  be  indif-
ferent to  their  own  peace.  He  commands
them  to  rejoice,  yea,  to  rejoice  evermore.
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and  again  I
say,  Rejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4).

Ver.  17. — Piay  without  ceasing.  The
means  of  promoting  religious  joy  is  prayer.
This  prayer  is  to  be  "  without  ceasing,"  im-
plying constancy  (Col.  iv.  2)  and  persever-
ance (Rom.  xii.  12 ;  Eph.  vi.  18 ;  Luke  xviii.
1).  This  is  not  a  mere  precept  "capable  of
fulfilment  in  idea,  rather  tlian  in  fact"
(Jowett) ;  but  it  is  an  exhortation  to  live  in
a  devotional  frame  of  mind.  It  is  iuipos-
Bible  to  be  always  on  our  bended  knees,  but
we  may  bo  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  when
engaged  in  the  duties  of  our  earthly  calling.
Prayer  may  be  without  ceasing  in  the  heart
which  is  full  of  the  presence  of  God,  and
evermore  communing  with  him.

Ver.  ]8.->In  everything  give  thanks.  In
every  circumstance — in  joy  and  in  sorrow;  for
everything — for  prosperity  and  for  adversity ;
in  every  place — in  the  house  of  God  and
on  the  bed  of  sickness ;  Christians  should
not  only  bo  engaged  in  constant  prayer,  but
in  constant  thanksgiving;  indeed,  their
prayers  should  partake  largely  of  the  nature
of  thanksgiving.  For  this ;  this  thankful
apirit.  Is  the  will  of  God ;  his  desire.  In
Christ  Jesus ;  the  sphere  in  which  this  will
of  Gk)d  is  displayed.  Concerning  yon.  God
by  the  pit  of  his  Son  has  laid  us  under  the
obligation  of  perpetual  thanksgiving.  Our
whole  lives  ought  to  be  one  continued  thank-
offering  for  all  the  blessings  of  redemption.

Ver.  19.— Quench  not  the  Spirit.  The
Spirit  is  here  considered  as  a  flame  which
may  be  extinguished  (Matt.  iii.  11).  The
descent  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  was  in


the  form  of  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire
(Acts  ii.  3).  By  the  Spirit  hero  is  usually
understood  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the
Spirit — speaking  with  tongues  or  prophesy-
ings;  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  apostlo
hero  forbids  the  exercise  of  these  gifts
being  hindered  or  checked.  In  tiie  next
verse  the  gift  of  prophesying  is  mentioned.
But  there  is  no  reason  to  exclude  the  ordi-
nary and  still  more  valuable  gifts  of  the
Spirit,  such  as  pure  thoughts,  holy  actions,
devout  affections,  which  may  be  effectually
quenched  by  a  careless  or  immoral  life.
"  Quench  not  the  Spirit."  Do  not  those
things  which  are  opposed  to  his  influences.
Be  on  your  guard  a^rainst  sin,  as  opposed  to
the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  In  this
sense  the  admonition  is  similar  to  that  given
by  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians :
*»  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God"  (Eph.
iv.  30).

Ver.  20.— Despise  not  prophesyings.  This
refers  to  the  miraculous  gift  of  prophecy
possessed  by  the  primitive  Church.  And
by  prophesyings  here  we  are  to  understand,
not  the  prediction  of  the  future,  but  in-
spired discourse,  conducive  to  the  instruc*
tion  and  edification  of  the  Church.  **  By  the
term  'prophesying,'"  observes  Calvin,  "I
do  not  understand  the  gift  of  foretelling  the
future,  but  the  science  of  interpreting  &rip«
ture,  so  that  a  prophet  is  an  interpreter  of
I  the  will  of  God."  This  useful  gift,  it  would
seem,  was  apt  to  be  despised,  and  the  infe-
rior miraculous  gift  of  tongues  to  be  preferred
before  it  (1  Cor.  xiv.  1 — 3).

Ver.  21.— Prove  all  things.  This  exhor-
tation is  closely  connected  with  the  preced-
ing. **  Prove  all  things,"  namely,  whatever
was  advanced  by  the  prophets  in  their  in-
spired discourses  (comp.  1  John  iv.  1,
"  Believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits
whether  they  are  of  God  ").  "  Prove  "  here
means  to  test,  as  metals  are  tested  in  the  fire ;
and  hence  the  word  frequently  denotes  the
favourable  result  of  the  testing,  or  approval.
There  was  a  special  gift  of  discerning
spirits  in  the  primitive  Church  (1  Cor.  xiL.10;
xiv.  29).  But  although  the  words  primarily
refer  to  the  testing  of  prophetic  utterances,
yet  they  have  a  general  application.  We
should  not  rest  our  faith  on  the  authority
of  others.  The  right  of  private  judgment
is  the  characteristic  and  privilege  of  Pro-
testantism. We  ought  thoroughly  to  ex-
amine all  doctrines  by  the  test  of  Scripture,
and  then,  discerning  their  reasons,  we  shall
be  able  to  take  a  firmer  hold  of  them.  At
the  same  time,  the  fundamental  principle  of
rationalism,  that  reason  as  such  is  the  judge
of  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  is  not  con-
tained in  these  words,  and  cannot  be  inferred
from  them.  Hold  fast ;  retain.  That  wbidh
is  good ;  the  good,  the  beautiful,  the  honour-


108


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THE8SAL0NIANS.    [cii.  v.  1—28.


able ;  a  dififcrent  word  from  that  rendered
**  good  "  in  vcr.  15.  We  are  to  retain  what-
ever is  good  in  those  "  all  things  "  which  we
are  to  prove  or  test,  namely,  in  the  pro-
phesyings.

Ver.  22.— Abstain  from  all  appearance  of
evil  This  verse  is  connected  with  the  last,
and  states  negatively  what  is  there  stated
positively.  Test  the  declarations  of  the
prophets ;  retain  the  good,  and  reject  the
evil.  The  word  translated  "appearance"
has  been  differently  rendered;  it  denotes
fbtm,  figure,  species,  kind :  so  that  tho
clduSe  is  to  be  rendered,  "  Abstain  from  all
fbrm  of  cvU  "  (R.V.),  or,  *'  of  tho  evil,"  tho
word  being  an  abstract  substantive.  The
whole  exhortation  is  similar  to  that  given  in
Koin.  xii.  9,  only  there  the  negative  state-
ment ia  put  first:  "Abhor  that  which  is
evil ;  cleave  to  that  which  is  good."  Some
suppose  that  the  metaphor  employed  is  from
the  practice  df  money-changers  who  tested
the  money  offered  to  them,  rejecting  what
wafl  base  and  retaining  what  was  genuine.
Aindng  the  Fathers  we  meet  with  the  phrase,
**  Be  ye  experienced  money-changers,"  as  a
tradiiionary  sayiug  of  our  Lord ;  and  some
8npi>o8e  that  tho  apostle  refers  to  this  saying,
and  give  the  following  paraphrase:  "The
good  money  keep ;  with  every  sort  of  bad
money  have  nothing  to  do ;  act  as  expcri-
ehced  money-changers :  all  the  money  pre-
Eented  to  von  as  good,  test."  Such  a
supposition  is  fanciful  and  far-fetched.

V  er.  23.— And  the  very  Ood  of  peace ;  tho
God  who  communicates  peace ;  an  expres-
fclon  frequently  employed  by  Paul  at  the
plose  of  his  Epistles  (Rom.  xv.  83 ;  xvi.  20  ;
Phii.  iv.  9;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  2  Thess. iii.  16).
Sanoiify  yon  wholly;  that  is,  perfectly,
without  anything  wanting,  referring  to  the
entireness  of  the  sanctincation,  which  is
presently  expressed  in  detail.  And  I  pray
God  your  whole  spirit  and  sonl  and  body ;
the  adjcctivo  "  whole "  applies  to  all  tho
three  substantives.  The  apostle  hero
divides  human  nature  into  three  parts —
spirit,  soul,  and  body;  and  this  threefold
division  is  not  a  mere  rhetorical  statement :
•*  The  apostle  pouring  forth  from  the  fulness
of  his  heart  a  prayer  for  his  converts"
(Jowett) ;  but  a  distinct  statement  of  tho
throe  component  parts  of  human  nature.
The  "spirit"  is  the  highest  part  of  man,
that  which  assimilates  him  to  God  ;  renders
him  capable  of  religion,  and  susceptible  of
being  acted  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The
"soul"  is  the  inferior  part  of  his  mental
nature,  the  seat  of  the  passions  and  desires,
ef  the  natural  propensities.  The  •'  body  "
Is  the  Corporeal  frame.  Such  a  threefold
distinction  of  hi;man  nature  was  not  lih-
known  among  the  Stoics  and   I^latonists.


There  are  also  traces  of  it  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, the  spirit,  or  breath  of  God,  being
distinguished  from  tho  soul.  Be  preserved
blameleis.  **  The  spirit  is  preserved  blame-
less at  the  advent  when  the  voice  of  truth
rules  it,  the  soul  when  it  strives  against  all
the  charms  of  the  senses,  and  the  body  when
it  is  not  abused  as  the  instrument  of  shame-
ful actions  "  (Liinemann).  Unto  the  coming
of  our  Lord  Jesns  Christ.

Ver.  24.— Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  yon.
Paul  knows  that  he  does  not  beseech  God
in  vain.  He  who  calls  you  to  the  Christian
faith  is  faithful  to  fulfil  his  promises.  God's
calling  is  the  commencement  of  a  series
which  terminates  in  glorification  (Rom.  viil.
80).  A  similar  appeal  to  the  faithfulness  of
God  [is  elsewhere  made  by  the  apostle  (1
Cor.  i.  9 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  3).  Who  also  will  do
it;  namely,  will  preserve  you  blameless
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Ver.  25.— Brethren,  pray  for  ns ;  namel v,
that  our  dpostolic  work  may  be  successful ;
that  **  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free
course  and  be  glorified "  (2  Thess.  iii.  1).
The  apostle,  in  almost  all  his  Epistles,
requests  from  his  converts  an  interest  in
their  prayers  (Rom.  xv.  80;  2  Cor.  i.  11 ;
Eph.  vi.  19 :  Col.  iv.  8 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1 ;
comp.  Heb.  xiii.  18).  Ministers  and  peoplo
need  each  other's  prayers,  and  prayer  is  a
duty  which  they  owe  to  each  other.

Ver.  2G. — Greet  all  the  brethren  with  a
holy  kiss.  That  certain  persons  were  en-
joined to  salute  the  other  members  of  tho
Church  is  a  proof  that  tho  Epistle  was
given  into  the  hands  of  the  presbyters.  Tho
rofcrenco  is  to  the  mode  of  salutation  in  tho
East.  The  kiss  is  called  **  holy  "  because  it
was  the  symbol  of  Christian  affection.  TJic
same  exhortation  is  made  in  other  Epistles
(Rom.  xvi.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  20 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12).

Ver.  27.— I  charge  yon;  namely,  tho
presbyters.  By  the  lord;  namely,  Christ,  an
indirect  proof  of  his  Divinity,  the  adjuration
being  in  his  Name.  Tho  reason  of  this
solemn  charge  was,  not  on  account  of  any
remissness  on  the  part  of  the  presbyters,  but
was  occasioned  by  the  earnestness  of  the
apostle  and  by  his  consciousness  that  what
he  wrote  was  most  important  to  tho  Thessa-
lonians,  and  was  the  command  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Clirist.  That  this  Epistle  be  read  unto
all  the  holy  brethren ;  unto  tho  Church  of
Thessalonica.

Ver.  28.— The  grace  of  onr  Lord  Jesus
Christ  bo  with  yon.  A  similar  salutation
is  TO  be  found  at  the  close  of  all  Paul's
Epistles ;  indeed,  in  tlie  Second  Epistle  to
the  Thessalonians,  ho  states  that  this  salu-
tation was  the  token  which  he  afl^xed  to  his
Epistles  (2  Thess.  iii.  17, 18;).  Amen.  To
be  rejected,  as  not  in  the  ori^nal.


CH.V.1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  107


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  6. — Watchfulness  and  sobriety.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  uncertain  as  regards  its
time.  The  early  Christians  were  mistaken  in  regarding  that  time  as  at  hand^  and  we
perhaps  may  be  equally  mistaken  in  regarding  it  as  distant.  But  there  is  an  event
wiiich  to  each  of  us  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  same  as  "  the  day  of  the  Lord/'
which  is  both  near  and  imcertain — the  day  of  our  death.  Let  us  be  watchful,  so  that
that  day  may  not  overtake  us  in  an  unprepared  state ;  and  let  us  be  sol^r,  never
indulging  ourselves  in  any  course  of  action  in  which  we  would  not  wish  death  to
surprise  us»

Ver.  8. — Spiritual  armour.  We  must  not  only  be  watchful,  but  be  armed  sentinels.
To  guard  against  surprise  we  must  especially  provide  ourselves  with  two  defensive
weapons.  1.  The  breastplate  of  faith  and  love.  By  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  man
we  shall  effectually  preserve  our  hearts  against  evil  influences.  Faith  imparts  courage,
and  love  preserves  us  from  selfishness,  the  great  inlet  to  evil.  The  stronger  and  the  more
living  our  faith,  and  the  purer  and  the  more  active  our  love,  the  more  completely  shall
we  be  guarded  against  evil.  2.  The  helmet  of  the  hope  of  salvation.  By  "  the  hope  of
salvation  "  we  shall  preserve  our  head  from  being  filled  with  the  idle  dreams  of  worldly
happiness,  whether  of  power  or  fame.  Hope  will  defend  us  from  being  seduced  by  the
world's  pleasures  or  allured  by  the  world's  honours.

Ver.  15. — Christian  forgiveness,  1.  Its  peculiarity.  Forgiveness  of  our  enemies  is
pre-eminently  a  Christian  virtue.  It  had  no  place  in  the  morality  of  the  heathbn.
The  utmost  they  could  attain  to  was,  *'  Thou  shalt  love  all  men  except  those  who  havo
wronged  thee."  It  was  very  obscurely  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  ancient
saints  did  not  distinguish  between  sinuers  and  their  sins ;  hence  David's  bitter  curses
against  his  and  the  Lord's  enemies.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  first  to  lay  special  stress  on
forgiveness.  2.  Its  properties.  Forgiveness  must  be  free,  full,  and  universal;  no
feelings  of  enmity  or  ill  will  to  any  of  our  fellow-men  ought  to  lodge  in  our  hearts.
We  must  imitate  the  example  of  our  Saviour,  who  on  the  cross  prayed  for  the
forgiveness  of  his  murderers.

Ver.  lQ,-^Beligiotts  joy,  1.  Its  sources.  Religious  joy  springs  from  four  sources :
from  the  relation  in  which  believers  stand  to  God,  and  tlien  it  is  the  joy  of  love ;  from
the  interest  which  they  have  in  Christ,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  faith ;  from  the
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  holiness ;  and  from  the  hopes
which  they  have  of  heaven,  and  then  it  is  the  joy  of  hope.  2.  Its  properties.  Religious
joy  is  ordinarily  calm ;  it  is  serious ;  it  may  bo  often  interrupted ;  it  is  purifying ;  it  is
generally  greater  at  peculiar  seasons ;  and  it  is  often  sensibly  felt  at  the  hour  of  death.
3.  Means  of  obtaining  it.  We  must  live  by  faith  in  Christ,  guard  against  seeking  our
chief  happiness  in  any  creature-good,  and  be  diligent  in  the  performance  of  our  religious
duties.

Ver.  17. — Unceasing  prayer.  We  ought  not  only  to  havo  stated  hours  of  prayer,  but
to  be  continually  raising  up  ejaculatory  prayers,  carrying  on  a  constant  mtercourse
between  God  and  our  souls;  our  prayers  should  be  like  the  angels  which  Jacob  saw
continually  ascending  the  mystic  ladder  to  the  throne  of  God.  Unceasing  prayer
implies:  1.  A  devotional  spirit:  walking  with  God.  2.  Ejactdatory  prayer:  our
thoughts  rising  in  prayer  amid  our  daily  occupations.  3.  Perseverance  in  prayer :  not
leaving  ofif  until  our  prayers  are  answered.  4.  Regularity  in  prayer :  caremlly  keeping
the  appointed  seasons  for  prayer.  5.  Conjunction  of  thanksgiving  with  our  prayets :
realiEing  God's  mercies  and  grace.

Ver.  l^.^Quenching  the  Spirit.  1.  How  xve  may  quench  the  Spirit,  We  qiiencli  the
Si'irit  by  the  commission  of  grievous  sins,  by  the  indulgence  of  sensuality,  covetous-
uess,  pride,  and  the  irascible  passions,  and  by  formality  and  lukewarmness  in  our
religion.    2,  How  xve  may  cherish  the  Spirit,    We  cherish  the  Spirit  by  earnest  desires


108  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v,  1—28.


for  his  influences,  by  a  diligent  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  by  a  spirit  of  tiust  and
dependence,  and  by  compliance  with  his  secret  impressions.

Vers.  21,  22. — U&e  of  reckon  in  religion,  1.  The  office  of  reason  in  religion.  Reason
is  of  use  to  examine  the  evidences  of  revelation,  to  ascertain  the  contents  of  revelation,
and  to  judge  that  there  is  no  contradiction  to  reason  and  morality  in  those  doctrines
which  we  suppose  are  deducible  from  Scripture.  2.  The  limitation  of  reason  in  religion.
Distinction  between  what  is  above  reason  and  what  is  contraiy  to  reason.  When  once
we  prove  that  Scripture  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  such  and  such  doctrines  are  con-
tained in  it,  then  it  is  the  province  of  reason  to  submit  to  faith,  because  the  truth  of
these  doctrines  rests  on  their  being  part  of  a  Divine  revelation ;  the  doctrines  of  reve*
lation  are  above,  but  they  can  never  be  proved  to  be  contrary  to,  reason.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Certainty  of  the  time  of  the  second  advent.  There  is  a  natural  curiosity
to  know  "the  times  and  the  seasons"  connected  with  an  event  so  transcendently
important  to  the  human  race.  "  But  of  the  times  and  the  seasons  ye  have  no  need  that
I  write  unto  you."

I.  GK)D  HAS  TIMES  AND  SEASONS  IN  HIS  OWN  POWER.  It  is  Solemnly  true  that "  to
everything  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  the  sun  "  (Eccles.  iii.  1).
God  has  "  determined  the  times  before  appointed  "  (Acts  xvii.  26).  His  Son  came  "  in
the  fulness  of  time  "  (Gal.  iv.  4).  There  is  often  a  curious  periodicity  in  the  great  time-
intervals  marked  in  sacred  history.

U.  God  has  hid  from  man  the  precise  date  of  the  second  coming.  "Of
that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,
neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  "  (Mark  xiii.  32) ;  "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times
and  the  seasons  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power  ^  (Acts  i.  7).

III.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  be  perfectly  unexpected.  "The  day  of  the
Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  1.  It  is  the  day  of  the  Lord,  as  it  is  "  the  day
of  the  So7i  of  man,^*  "  The  day  of  God ; "  "  the  day  of  redemption,"  involving  that  of
the  body  as  well  as  the  soul ;  "  the  last  day,"  the  day  which  winds  up  the  destinies
of  the  universe.  2.  It  will  he  sudden  and  unexpected.  It  will  be  "  as  a  thief  in  the
night,"  who  comes  without  previous  warning  at  such  an  hour  as  we  are  not  looking  for
him.  This  is  true,  even  though  there  may  be  signs  in  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars,  and
distress  of  nations,  and  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear  (Luke  xxi.).  These  will  be  the
first  signs  to  break  up  the  calm,  but  the  wicked  will  not  see  them  in  their  true  light.
There  is  nothing  in  the  simile  of  the  thief  to  justify  the  opinion  that  Jesus  will  come
in  the  night.

IV.  The  security  of  the  wicked.  "  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety ;
then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child  ;  and
they  shall  not  escape."  1.  Their  condition  is  one  of  ^^  peace  *^  inner  quiet^  and  "  safety"
external  tranquillity,  2.  ITieir  fate,  "  They  shall  not  escape."  It  will  be  with  them
as  with  the  men  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot  (Matt.  xxiv.  36 — 39).  The  catastrophe
will  be  as  inevitable  and  as  full  of  fear  as  in  the  case  of  a  "  woman  in  travail."

V.  The  preparedness  of  the  righteous.  This  lies  in  their  character.  "  But  ye,
brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  1.  They
were  "  not  in  darkness,"  They  were  "  sons  of  light,  sons  of  the  day."  Darkness
is  the  characteristic  of  the  wicked.  (1)  There  is  darkness  in  their  understanding.
(2)  There  is  darkness  in  their  hearts.  "  Their  foolish  hearts  are  darkened."  (3)  They
walk  in  darkness,  and  therefore  stumble  and  go  astray.  (4)  They  live  in  darkness
(Ps.  cvii.  10),  they  belong  to  "the  kingdom  of  darkness"  (Col.  i.  13);  they  are
under  "the  world-rulers  of  this  darkness"  (Eph.  vi.  12).  (5)  But  the  darkness
does  not  hide  them  from  God's  vengeance.  2.  Believers  are  "  S07i8  of  light,"  "  Sons
of  the  day."  (1)  They  walk  in  the  light  (1  John  i.  7);  for  "he  that  followeth
me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life"  (John  viii.  12).
'2)  They  are  in' fellowship  with  God,  for  they  cannot  have  it  and  walk  in  darkness

1  John  1.  6,  7).    (3)  They  "  have  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  put  on  the


f


ctt.v.l— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  109

armonr  of  light "  (Rom.  xiii.  12).    (4)  They  are  In  fellowship  with  all  believers ;  for
"  he  that  walketh  in  darkness  hateth  his  brother  "  (1  John  ii,  9). — ^T.  C.

Vers.  5—8. — A  warning  against  waichlessness.  The  apostle  says  that,  as  children  of
light  and  of  the  day,  believers  ought  to  exercise  vigilance  and  sobriety  in  view  of  the
solemn  prospects  before  them.

I.  Thb  bin  and  danger  of  spiritual  sleep.  "  Let  ns  not  sleep,  as  do  others."
There  are  three  kinds  of  sleep  spoken  of  in  Scripture— the  sleep  of  nature,  which
restores  the  wasted  energies  of  the  body ;  the  sleep  of  death ;  and  the  sleep  of  the  text,
which  is  always  fraught  with  peril,  its  prevailing  idea  being  insensibility.   The  sleeper  is :

1.  Not  aware  of  his  danger.    2.  Forgetful  of  his  duty,    3.  Unconscious  of  the  real  world
around  him.    4.  Immovable  to  all  appeals.    5.  May  not  even  know  that  he  is  asleep.

II.  The  duty  op  watchfulness  and  sobriety.  "  But  let  us  watch  and  be  sober,'*
so  as  to  be  always  prepared  for  the  Lord's  coming.  We  are  not  to  be  overcharged  with
surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  so  that  that  day  should  overtake  us  unawares.  Let  us  watch
that  we  may  be  sober.  1.  The  reason  is  that  sleep  and  di-unkenness  are  works  of
darkness  done  in  the  night,  "  They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  they  that  be
drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night."  Those  spiritually  asleep  **  sleep  through  all  life's
agitations,  beneath  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  the  pleadings  of  mercy  from  the  cross."
Like  drunken  men,  they  are  intoxicated  with  life's  delights,  "  minding  earthly  things,"
occupied  supremely  with  "  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness."  Believers  are  not  so,  into
whose  heart  "  God  has  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  to  give  the  light
of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus  "  (J  Cor.  iv.  6).

2.  Another  reason  for  watchful  sobriety  is  that  our  life  is  a  spiritual  warfare.  The
believer  is  to  be  a  sentinel  always  on  guard,  or  a  soldier  on  the  battle-field — "  having  on
the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  an  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation."  As  a  good
soldier,  bound  to  endure  hardness,  he  goes  forth  into  the  conflict  of  life,  equipp^  in
Divine  armour,  not  for  aggression  but  for  defence.  The  pieces  of  armour  here
enumerated  are  for  the  protection  of  vital  parts,  the  heart  and  the  head.  (1)  Faith
is  the  principal  part  of  this  spiritual  armour.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh
the  world,  even  our  faith "  (1  John  v.  4,  5).  It  is  by  faith  they  resist  the  devil
(1  Pet.  V.  9).  It  is  by  it  all  difficulties  are  overcome  (Matt.  xvii.  20).  If  it  is  by
the  "sword  of  the  Spirit,  the  Word  of  God,"  we  are  to  conquer,  faith  is  the
arm  that  wields  the  sword.  The  eleventh  chapter  of  Hebrews  illustrates  the  power
of  faith  as  a  principle  of  action  and  as  a  principle  of  endurance.  (2)  Love  is  joined
with  faith  to  form  the  breastplate,  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love "  (Gal.  v.  6).  Love
preserves  from  apostasy,  and  knits  the  saints  together,  because  it  is  the  bond  of
perfection,  and  thus  enables  us  to  bear  all  trial  through  love  to  the  Redeemer.  (3)  The
hope  of  salvation  is  the  helmet.  In  the  corresponding  passage  in  Ephesians,  the
helmet  is  salvation  itself;  but  the  difference  is  not  material,  the  salvation  in  the  one
case  being  partially  enjoyed,  in  the  other  an  object  of  future  hope.  Hope  is  a  protection
to  the  believer,  as  it  nerves  him  to  meet  danger,  and  enables  him  to  brave  difficulties,
by  looking  to  the  glorious  objects  in  view.  Therefore  it  is  "  the  patience  of  hope."
Thus  the  three  Christian  graces  make  the  soul  watchful  and  ready  for  the  Lord's
coming. — T.  C.

Vers.  9 — 11. — TJie  source^  channel,  and  end  of  the  salvation  hoped  for.  The  apostle
is  now  led  to  illustrate  the  hope  of  salvation.

I.  Its  source.  "For  God  did  not  appoint  us  to  wrath,  but  to  the  obtaining  of
salvation."  1.  The  calling  is  according  to  the  purpose,  "  Whom  he  predestinates,
them  he  also  calls."  The  security  of  the  believer  depends,  not  upon  himself,  but  upon
God's  unchangeable  and  loving  purpose.  2.  The  purpose  is  not  to  wrath,  but  to
salvation.  Though  believers  were  once  "'children  of  wrath,"  they  are  now  reconciled
to  God,  and  saved  from  ^vrath  to  come.  3.  God*s  purpose  of  mercy  toward  us  does  not
free  us  from  the  necessity  of  being  watchful  concerning  the  means  of  salvation,

II.  The  channel  of  salvation.  "By  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  The  covenant
was  "  ordained  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator,^  (Gal.  iii.  19.)  2.  His  death,  not  his
doctrine  or  example  merely,  was  necessary  to  our  salvation.  "  Who  died  for  us."  3.  Bis
death  uhis  substitutionary*    It  was  "  for  us."


110  THE  FIRST  EPISTLH  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1-^28.

III.  Thb  snd  ov  this  saltation.  "  Who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake  or
sleep,  we  should  live  with  him  together."  This  was  "  the  joy  set  before  him "  for
which  "  he  endured  the  cross  **  (Hob.  xii.  2)  that  we  might  live  to  him  in  order  to
our  living  with  him.  1.  It  is  life  with  Christ  Not  merely  life  in  him,  but  life  with
him  in  glory.  "  I  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better  "  (Phil.  i.  23).
It  is  the  greatest  joy  and  glory  of  heaven  (Rom.  xiv.  8,  9 ;  1  Cor.  v.  9).  2.  It  is  life
ivith  all  believers.  They  are  to  live  with  him,  unsevered  from  one  another ;  for  whether
they  "are  alive  and  remain,'*  or  whether  they  are  of  those  who  ''have  fallen  asleep,"
they  will  be  together,  in  Christ's  society.  Thus  the  great  salvation  is  the  ''  common
salvation."

rV.  The  00N80LAT0BT  ASPECT  OF  THB8K  TRUTHS.  "Wherefore  comfort  yourselves
together,  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do."  These  truths  afforded  a  grand
basis  for  mutual  comfort  and  edification.  The  Thessalonians  ought,  therefore,  to
dismiss  their  despondency  and  alarm,  and  encourage  each  other  with  the  blessed  hopes
of  the  gospel. — ^T.  0.

Vers.  12, 13. — The  due  recognition  of  Christian  pastors.  The  apostle  next  touches
upon  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  its  teachers.

I.  The  APPOINTMENT  ov  PASTORS  IN  THE  Church.  1.  This  was  hy  Divine  appoint*
tneni*  "He  gave  pastors  and  teachers"  (£ph.  iv.  11).  There  is  no  hint  given  in
Scripture  of  a  time  when  pastors  would  cease  to  be  necessary,  and  when  the  Church
would  be  served  by  an  "  any-man  ministry."  2.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  aposUes  to
"  appoint  elders  in  every  city"  for  they  understood  the  advantages  of  a  full  ecclesiastical
or^nization.

II.  The  official  position  and  duties  of  pastors.  1.  They  are  lahourers  in  the
Church,  "We  beseech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you."
(1)  This  work  is  no  sinecure,  but  a  hard  exhausting  service,  with  heavy  responsibilities
and  many  cares,  (a)  It  is  labour  in  preaching.  For  they  "  labour  in  the  Word  and
doctrine  "  (1  Tim.  i.  5),  "  rightly  dividing  the  Word  of  truth  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  15),  giving
each  of  the  household  of  faith  "  a  portion  of  meat  in  due  season  "  (Luke  xii.  42).
(h)  It  is  labour  in  earnestly  contending  for  the  faith  as  well  as  in  dispensing  the
ordinances  of  religion.  (2)  It  is  labour  in  a  Divine  partnership.  For  pastors  are
'•labourers  together  with"  God  in  the  work  of  perfecting  the  Church  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).
2.  They  are  presidents  in  the  Churches,  "  Those  which  are  over  you  in  the  Lord."  This
refers  to  the  elders  or  presbyters,  who  are  also  called  pastors,  or  shepherds,  or  bishops
(Acts  XX.  17,  28).  (1)  The  appointment  of  rulers  is  essential  to  order  and  harmony  m
the  Church.  (2)  Yet  they  are  not  a  sacerdotal  caste,  nor  "  lords  over  God's  heritage"
(1  Pet.  V.  3).  (3)  Their  ofi&cial  superiority  is  "in  the  Lord,"  because  from  him
aeriving  its  warrant,  motive,  and  blessing.  3.  They  are  spiritual  guides,  "And
admonish  you."  They  have  "  to  watch  for  your  souls  as  they  that  must  give  account "
(Heb.  xiii.  17J.  Therefore  they  must  "  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort  with  all  long-suffering
lind  doctrine  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  They  have  to  "  warn  every  man,  and  teach  every  man  in
all  wisdom,  that  they  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Col.  i.  28).
They  have  to  warn  against  sins  committed,  and  urge  to  duties  neglected.

III.  The  obligations  of  Christian  people  to  their  pastors.  1.  They  mvst
give  them  du^  recognition  as  pastors.  They  must  "  know  them."  They  must  make
themselves  acquainted  with  them,  that  pastors  may  be  the  better  able  to  know  the
state  of  their  souls,  and  they  must  acknowledge  their  position  as  "  stewards  of  the
mysteries  of  God,"  and  submit  to  their  ministry.  2.  They  must  "  esteem  them  very
highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake."  (1)  The  bond  is  not  to  be  one  of  mere  official
relationship,  but  of  affection.  (2)  A  due  respect  for  the  ministry  is  an  important
element  in  its  efficiency  and  success.  Therefore  we  are  to  "  hold  such  in  reputation/'
and  to  count  them  "  worthy  of  double  honour."  3.  The  ground  of  this  claim  is  ^^fur
their  work's  sake."  Not  for  the  mere  office,  which  may  be  often  filled  unworthily,
though  it  is  still  entitled  to  consideration,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  "  labours  of  love  "
involved  in  its  faithful  discharge.  Ministers  who  "  make  full  proof  of  their  ministry  "
challenge  the  abiding  respect  of  their  flockt.-rT.  C.

Ver.  13. — Inculcation  of  mutual  peace,     "  And  be  at  peace  among  yourselves."


en.  V.  1-28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  Ill

This  is  connected  with  the  previous  verse,  for  a  faithful  pastorate  tends  to  unity  and
peace.

I.  This  peace  depends  upon  oub  Divikb  calling.  For  it  is  the  <*  peace  unto
Avhich  we  are  called"  (Col.  iii.  15).

II.  It  is  essential  to  growth  and  blessing.  (Eph.  iv.  3;  Ps.  cxxxiii.  1;
Jas.  iii.  18.)

III.  It  is  one  of  the  blessings  always  to  be  prayed  for.    (Ps.  cxxii.  6 — 8.)

IV.  It  is  one  of  the  beatitudbs  with  a  promise.   (Matt.  v.  9.)

V.  It  is  one  of  the  fairest  growths  of  the  Spirit.    (Gal.  v.  22.) — T.  0.

Ver.  14. — Mutual  duties  of  Church  memhers.  The  Church  must  act  as  well  ns  its
pastors.

I.  Admonition  to  the  disorderly.  "  Warn  them  that  are  unruly."  1.  The
unruly  are,  literally,  those  who  break  rank,  taking  exceptional  courses,  to  the  injury
of  the  peace  or  unity  of  the  Church.  Prohably  the  apostle  refers  to  the  unhinging
effect  of  the  error  concerning  the  near  approach  of  the  advent,  leading  individuals  to
abandon  work  and  loiter  about  in  a  sort  of  meddlesome  idleness.  2.  Stuih  persons  need
to  he  warned,  even  with  sharpness  of  reproof,  yet  in  love ;  for  "  God  is  not  the  author
of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  in  all  the  Churches  of  the  saints  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  Warn  them
to  "  do  their  own  business,  and  work  with  their  own  hands."

II.  Comfort  for  the  feeble-minded.  "Comfort  the  feeble-minded."  1.  These
persons  were  overburdened  with  sorrow  on  account  of  the  dead,  under  the  influence  of
error  respecting  their  safety.  They  were  not  intellectually  feeble,  but  had  become
dispirited  and  desponding  through  their  failure  to  realize  the  hope  of  the  resurrection
at  the  advent.  2.  They  were  to  be  comforted ;  not  rebuked  or  admonished  for  their  sins,
but  exhorted  lovingly  in  the  truth.  It  is  the  Lord's  way  '^  to  raise  them  that  are
bowed  down,"  and  "  to  comfort  them  which  be  in  any  trouble  "  (2  Cor.  i.  4).  There  is
"  consolation  in  Christ."

III.  Support  for  the  weak.  "  Support  the  weak."  1.  The  weak  in  faith,  or  other
Christian  graces,  who  may  still  feel  the  lingering  influence  of  Jewish  prejudice  and
pagan  delusions.  "NVe  are  to  "  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak."  2.  They  must  he
sustained^  not  despised  for  their  weakness,  "  Be  eyes  to  the  blind ;  be  feet  to  the
lame."  Thus  "  we  fulfil  the  Law  of  Christ."  We  must  "  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang
down,  and  the  feeble  knees  "  (Heb.  xii.  12, 13).

IV.  Patience  toward  all  men.  "Be  patient  toward  all  men."  1.  Fatience  or
long-suffering,  in  view  of  the  perverseness,  or  defects,  or  follies,  or  sins  of  men.  It  points
to  a  temper  not  easily  moved  or  ofiended,  to  a  disposition  to  bear  and  forbear  after  the
example  of  that  Father  who  "  is  long-suffering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that  any  should
perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).  This  disposition  greatly
promotes  the  comfort  and  usefulness  of  life.  2.  It  is  to  be  exercised  toward  aU  men.
Even  to  those  outside  the  household  of  faith  who  may  gainsay  or  persecute  the  truth.
— 'i\  C.

Vcr.  15. — Ahsiinence  from  revenge,  and  the  steadfast  pursuit  of  good.  To  a  people
freshly  emerged  out  of  paganism  this  counsel  was  still  most  appropriate,  for  the  Greeks
were  remarkable  for  their  undying  feuds.

I.  Warning  against  retaliation.  "  See  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  to  any  man."
1.  Retaliation  is  condemned  both  by  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  (Lev.  xix.  18;
Horn.  xii.  19.)  2.  It  is  condemned  by  Christ's  beautiful  example  of  forbearance,  (1  Pet.
ii.  23.)  "Who,  when  ho  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  when  he  suffered,  threatened
not."  3,  It  is  expressly  rebuked  by  Christ  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  James  and  John,
(Luke  ix.  54,55.)  4.  It  springs  from  a  spiteful  heart.  (Ezek.  xxv.  15.)  6.  It  indicates
a  want  of  trust  in  Qod,    (Prov.  xx.  22.)

II.  Inculcation  of  the  pursuit  of  good.  "  But  ever  follow  that  which  is  goodt
both  among  yourselves  and  to  all  men."  Believers  are  not  to  resist  evil,  but  to  return
good  for  evil — to  overcome  evil  with  good.  1.  The  good  to  be  done  is  after  the  example
of  Christ,  who  "  went  about  every  day  doing  good."  2.  It  is  done  in  virtue  of  union
with  Christ,  (John  xv.  4,  5;  Phil.  i.  11.)  3.  It  is  the  preordmned  pathway  of  God's
children,   (Eph.  ii.  10.)    4.  Christians  ougJU  to  provoke  each  other  to  good,   (lieb.  x.  24.)


112  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  v.  1—28.

5.  It  is  a  grand  argument  for  the  gospel,  (Matt.  v.  IG.)  6.  It  is  to  he  catholic  in  its
spirit ;  for  it  is  to  be  done,  not  to  believers  only,  but  "  to  all  men."  The  believer  is  to
have  "  brotherly  kindness "  as  well  as  "  love  '*  (2  Pet.  i.  7).  7.  It  is  to  he  earnestly
pursued.  "  Follow  after  that  which  is  good."  (1)  Because  it  glorifies  God  (Matt  v.  16).
2)  Because  God  remembers  it  (Heb.  vi.  9, 10).  (3)  Because  it  is  an  evidence  of  faith
J  as.  ii.  14 — 20).    (4)  Because  it  shall  be  brought  into  judgment  (2  Cor.  v.  10). — T.  C.


t


Ver.  16. — The  duty  and  the  privilege  of  constant  Joy,  "  Rejoice  evermore."  (Sec
homiletical  hints  on  Phil.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  4.) — T.  C.

Ver.  17. — The  duty  of  constant  prayei\  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  There  is  a  mutual
affinity  between  joy,  prayer,  and  thanksgiving,  as  wo  see  by  other  passages  of  Scripture
(Phil.  iii.  4—6 ;  Col.  iv.  2).

I.  Prayer  the  duty,  the  privilege,  the  interest,  op  all  believers.  1.  It  is  a
commanded  duty,  (Matt.  vii.  7.)  2.  It  is  a  sign  of  conversion.  (Acts  ix.  11.)  3.  Saints
delight  in  it.  (Ps.  xlii.  4 ;  cxxii.  1.)  4.  It  is  recommended:  (1)  By  the  example  of  Christ
(Luke  xxii.  32).  (2)  By  the  experience  of  past  mercies  (Ps.  iv.  1).  (3)  By  the  faith-
fulness of  God  (Ps.  cxliii.  1).  (4)  By  the  fulness  of  the  promises  (Ps,  cxix.  49;
1  John  V.  15).

II.  The  necessity  of  constant  supplication.  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  1.  TJiere
is  nothing  in  the  words  to  justify  the  neglect  of  other  duties.  The  apostle  travelled  and
preached  and  laboured  with  his  hands  as  well  as  prayed ;  but  he  cultivated  a  constant
spirit  of  supplication.    It  is  not  true,  therefore,  that  it  can  be  fulfilled  only  in  idea.

2.  It  is  a  command  not  to  he  fulfilled  by  set  hours  of  prayer,  much  less  by  adherence  to
a  monastic  rigour  of  devotion.  Yet  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  set  hours.  The  psalmist
prayed  at  evening,  morning,  and  noon  (Ps.  Iv.  17).  Yea,  "  seven  times  a  day  do  I
praise  thee  "  (Ps.  cxix.  164).  Daniel  prayed  three  times  a  day  (Dan.  vi.  10).  3.  The
apostle  enjoins  a  constant  spirit  of  pi'ayer  in  view  of  our  constant  dependence  on  the
Lord.  Prayer  should  interspace  all  our  works.  The  heart  may  rise  to  a  throne  of
grace  in  inward  prayer  when  the  bands  are  busy  with  the  duties  of  life. — T.  C.

Ver.  18. — The  duty  of  thanksgiving.  It  is  the  natural  fruit  of  joy  as  it  is  the  natural
accompaniment  of  prayer.  "  In  everything  give  thanks ;  for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in
Christ  Jesus  concerning  you."

I.  Thanksgivino  is  the  exercise  of  a  joyful  and  prayino  heart.  1.  It  is  a
mark  of  the  wicked  that  they  have  no  thankfulness.  They  who  glorified  not  God  *'  neither
were  thankful "  (Rom.  i.  21).  It  is  a  sign  of  the  antichristian  apostasy  that  men
"shall  be  untbankful"  (2  Tim.  iii.  2).  Since  "every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift"
comes  from  the  Father  of  Lights,  the  guilt  of  such  ingratitude  is  great.  2.  It  is  the
mark  of  the  saints  in  heaven  mat  they  are  full  of  thanksgivings.  (Rev.  xix.  6, 7 ;  vii.  12.)

3.  It  is  likewise  a  mark  of  the  saints  on  earth,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  dwell  in  thy
house :  they  will  be  still  praising  thee  "  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  4).  They  abound  in  faith  with
thanksgiving  (Col.  ii.  7).  They  offer  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  (Ps.  cxvi.  17).  They
habitually  offer  thanksgiving  (Dan.  vi.  10).

II.  Thanksgivino  must  be  universal  in  its  sphere.  "In  everything  give  thanks."
1.  For  the  supply  of  our  bodily  wants.  (1  Tim.  iv.  3, 4.)  2.  For  the  gift  of  Christ.  (2  Cor.
ix.  15.)  3.  For  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  the  Lord.  (Ps.  cvi.  1.)  4.  In  all
circumstances  of  prosperity  and  adversity ^  joy  and  sorrow^  health  and  sickness.  Job
could  say  in  the  depth  of  his  affliction,  "  Blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (Job  i.
8,  20,  21).

III.  The  ground  and  reason  of  this  duty.  "  For  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ
Jesus  concerning  you."  The  Scripture  as  well  as  the  light  of  nature  directs  to  it,  as  it
sets  forth  that  "good  and  perfect  and  acceptable  will  of  God,"  "  Whoso  ofiereth  praise
glorifieth  me."  In  Jesus  Christ  is  this  will  revealed  and  made  effectual ;  for  all  God's
mercies  reach  us  through  the  channel  of  his  mediation.  Therefore  we  "are  to  give
thanks  unto  God  and  the  Father  by  him "  (Col.  iii.  17) ;  therefore  "  by  him  let  us
offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually  "  (Heb.  xiii.  15).— T.  C.

Vers.  19^21. — Exhortations  regarding  spiritual  gifts.    These  three  verses  refer  to


cii.  V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  113

one  subject,  the  cxtraordiuary  manifestations  of  the  Spirit  so  frequent  in  the  Church  at
this  period,  but  apply  likewise  to  his  ordinary  influence  in  believers.

I.  The  sin  and  danger  of  quenching  the  Spirit.  "Quench  not  the  Spirit."
Perhaps  there  was  a  tendency  to  repress  spiritual  utterances,  either  because  they  had
become  fanatical,  or  from  an  undue  love  of  order.  It  is  possible  to  resist  the  Spirit.
God  strives  with  man,  who  may  yet  resist  all  his  importunities  (Acts  vii.  51),  "  insult-
ing the  Spirit  of  grace"  (Heb.  x.  29).  Even  in  the  case  of  believers,  "  the  flesh  lusteth
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh"  ((Jal.  v.  17).  It  is  both  sinful  and
dangerous  for  believers  to  "  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  they  are  sealed  to
the  day  of  redemption  "  (Eph.  iv.  30).    The  text  suggests  the  idea  of  quenching  a  fire.

1.  The  Spirit  acts  upon  the  'believer's  nature  like  a  fire,  warming,  purifying,  refining.

2.  The  fire  may  he  quenched  hy  neglecting  it  quite  as  much  as  by  casting  water  upon  it.
This  is  the  tendency  of  neglect.  3.  Sin  has  a  tendency  to  quench  (he  Spirit,  as  water
quenches  fire.  We  ought  to  stir  up  our  gifts  and  graces  that  they  may  shine  the
brighter,  and  give  both  light  and  heat  around  us.  Yet  provision  is  made  in  the  cove-
nant of  grace  that  the  fire  once  kindled  will  never  be  quenched.

II.  There  must  be  no  undervaluation  of  prophesyinqs.  *'  Despise  not  prophe-
syings."  1.  These  were  spiritual  utterances,  sometimes  in  psalms  and  hymns,  "  for  the
edification  and  exhortation  and  comfort"  of  believers,  though  they  had  the  effect
sometimes  of  laying  bare  the  hearts  of  unbelievers  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25).  They  were  more
important  than  other  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  more  to  be  coveted  (I  Cor.  xii.  31).
2.  They  tuere,  therefore,  not  to  he  despised,  (1)  Perhaps  there  had  been  **  false  pro-
phets "  at  Thessalonica  who  had  tried  to  pervert  the  truth,  or  weak  members  who  nad
abused  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  tendency,  therefore,  to  underrate  the  gift  was  natural,
but  not  proper.  (2)  Perhaps  the  exercise  of  this  gift  created  less  wonder  or  made  less
visible  impression  than  other  gifts,  like  those  of  tongues  and  healing.  Therefore  it  came
to  be  rather  despised.

III.  The  necessity  of  testing  spiritual  gifts.  '*  Prove  all  things ;  hold  fast  that
which  is  good."  Instead  of  rejecting  prophesyings,  they  were  to  test  them  by  a  due
spiritual  discernment.  1.  They  were  to  he  tested:  (1)  By  a  comparison  with  the  original
tradition  given  to  them  (2  Thess.  ii.  2).  (2)  By  a  comparison  with  the  prophesyings  of
others  who  sat  as  judges  (1  Cor.  xiv.  29).  There  was,  besides,  a  supernatural  gift  of
•*  discerning  of  spirits  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  10,  14,  29).  (3)  By  marking  the  practical  fruits
of  these  prophesyings.  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good.*'  Our  Lord  said,  "  Beware  of
false  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening
wolves.  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits"  (Matt.  v.  15,  16).  True  doctrine  is
"according  to  godliness  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  3).  Thus  Christians  are  to  examine  the  grounds
of  their  faith,  to  hold  fast  nothing  that  has  not  first  been  tried,  and  to  retain  only
*'  that  which  is  good."  2.  Believers  have  the  capacity  as  well  as  the  right  to  test  ail
things.  They  are  "to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God"  (1  John  iv.  1\  (1)
They  are  the  spiritual ;  "they  judge  all  things,  yet  they  themselves  are  judged  of  no
man  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  15).  They  have  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  they  know  all
things"  (1  John  ii.  20).  (2)  A  right  state  of  heart  is  necessary  to  this  power  of  insight.
"  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God  "
(John  vii.  17).  "  Walk  as  children  of  light  .  .  .  proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  God  "
(Eph.  V.  8— 10).— T.  C.

Ver.  22. — Warning  against  every  form  of  evil,  "  Abstain  from  every  form  of  evil,"
whether  practical  or  doctrinal.

I.  We  need  to  be  warned  against  evil.  1.  Because  we  naturally  tend  to  do  evil,
2.  Because  evil  is  so  injurious  to  our  spirits,  in  repressing  Joy,  prayer,  and  thanks^
giving,  3.  Because  it  gives  offence  to  others.  Therefore  we  ought  to  abhor  that  which
is  evil,  to  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.

II.  The  forms  of  evil  are  very  various,  and  therefore  not  easily  detected.
Truth  is  one;  error  is  manifold.  Satan  can  disguise  error  under  forms  difficult  of
detection.  It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  decide  what  is  evil.  But  "  a  sound  heart  is  the
best  casuist."— T.  C.

Vers.  23,  24. — Prayer  for   the  sand ification  and  preservation  of   Th^ss'jlonian

J.  TnKSSAT/>NTANS.  1


lU  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  v.  1-28.

believers,  I.  It  T8  a  prayer  for  perfect  banctifioatton.  "  And  the  very  Qtod  of
peace  sanctify  you  wholly."  1.  It  is  the  design  of  the  Qod  of  jyeace  to  do  this.  Our
Lord  came  to  "save  his  people  from  their  sins,'*  to  "redeem  them  from  all  iniguity."  2.
This  sancdfication  is  to  extend  to  hody^  soul,  and  spirit,  (1)  The  body  is  to  to  sancti-
fied, for  it  is  to  become  an  "instrument  of  righteousness,"  a  "temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"
and  eventually  will  receive  its  "redemption "  in  the  resurrection  (Rom.  viii.  23).  (2)
The  soul  is  to  be  sanctified.  It  is  the  principle  of  animal  life.  It  is  the  self.  The
individual  life  of  man  is  to  be  fully  sanctified.  (3)  The  spirit  points  to  the  inner  life
as  coming  firom  God,  as  the  soul  is  life  as  constituted  in  man.  The  spirit  is  the  higher
aspect  of  self,  the  spiritual  man  being  man  as  grace  has  reconstructed  him.  Yet  the
two  words  are  parallel,  though  not  equivalent ;  signifying  not  two  separate  natures  in
man,  but  two  separate  functions  of  the  same  nature.  Provision  is  made  for  the  sanctlfi-
cation  of  the  whole  man.  3.  It  is  not  perfect  in  the  present  life.  The  very  prayer  that
Qod  might  sanctify  them  wholly  implies  that  it  was  an  attainment  yet  to  be  reached.

II.  It  is  a  prater  for  the  preservation  of  saints  till  the  coming  of  Christ.
"May  your  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blameless."  1.  It  is  Qod  only  who
can  keep  us.  He  "  keeps  us  from  falling,**  that  "  he  may  present  us  faultless  before
the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy"  (Jude  24).  He  "keeps  us  from
evil*'  (John  xvii.  15).  Saints  are  "kept  by  his  power"  through  faith  unto  salvation
(1  Pet.  i.  5).  2.  The  preservation  is  to  extend  till  the  second  advent.  Not  till  death,
but  till  his  coming,  implying  that  body  and  soul  are  alike  to  share  in  the  final
redemption.  "  He  that  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it  till  the  day  of
Jesus  Christ  **  (Phil.  i.  6).

III.  The  ground  of  his  oonfidence  in  GtoD's  purpose  of  sanctification  and
preservation.  "  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will  do  it."  1.  Ood^sfaith-
fiUness  is  the  guarantee.  He  "  also  will  do  it."  He  will  be  faithful  to  his  oath,  to  his
promises,  to  his  covenant ;  for  he  has  promised  to  cleanse  his  people  from  all  their  sins,
and  preserve  them  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.  Gk)d  is  faithful  **by  whom  ye  were
callea  into  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  "  (2  Cor.  i.  8,  9).  2.  Effectual  calling  is  anotJier
guarantee.  For  whom  he  calls  he  justifies  and  glorifies.  If  he  gives  grace,  he  gives
glory.    The  calling  implies  perfection,  as  it  is  the  first  step  to  it.— T.  0.

Vers.  26 — 27. — Three  closing  injunctions,  I.  The  apostle  asks  an  interest  in  tiii:
PRAYERS  OF  THE  Thessalonians.  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us.**  1.  He  did  not  fed  himself
independent,  in  spite  of  cdl  his  high  graces  and  gifts,  of  the  intercessions  of  the  humblest
disciples.  His  request  is  a  proof  of  his  deep  humility.  2.  His  position,  with  the  care  of
aU  the  Churches  upon  his  heart,  entitled  him  to  their  prayers.  He  said  to  the  Roman
Christians,  "  Strive  together  with  mo  in  your  prayers  to  God  for  mo.*'  (1)  He  wanted
a  door  of  utterance  as  well  as  a  door  of  entrance.  (2)  He  wanted  to  be  delivered  from
unreasonable  and  wicked  men.  (3)  He  wanted  to  see  the  gospel  flourishing  in  all  the
Churches.

II.  Exhortation  for  Christians  to  salute  each  other.  "  Greet  all  the  brethren
with  a  holy  kiss.**  Eastern  customs  differ  from  Western ;  but  the  salutation  ought  still
to  prevail  in  all  our  Churches,  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the  spirit.  It  ought  to  express
the  feeling  of  oneness,  of  affection,  of  equality  among  the  disciples  of  the  same  Lord.
Christianity  purifies  and  elevates  worldly  courtesy.

in.  Solemn  adjuration  to  have  the  Epistle  read  to  all  the  brethrkn.  "  I
charge  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  Epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  holy  brethren.**  Conjec-
tures have  been  freely  expressed  that  the  elders  at  Thessalonica  may  have  been  disin-
clined to  read  the  letter  to  the  Church.  There  is  not  much  ground  for  the  opinion.  1.
This  Epistle  was  the  first  ever  written  by  the  apostle  to  any  Church;  and  as  the  disci  pUs
may  not  have  known  how  to  use  it,  he  gives  specific  directions  on  the  subject.  2.  lie
recognizes  the  right  of  aU  the  brethren  to  read  it,  Rome  denies  to  the  laity  this  right.
— T.C.

Vers.  1 — 11. — "  The  day  of  the  Lord,''*  I.  The  time  of  its  coming.  1.  There  u^s
no  real  need  to  write  to  them  about  this,  St.  Paul  had  spoken  of  it ;  it  had  been  a
principal  subject  of  his  teaching.  They  knew  all  that  could  be  known,  all  that  they
needed  to  know  for  their  souls  health.    But  there  was  a  restless  curiosity,  an  eager


CH.V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  115

Ion  gin?: "  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own
power."  Such  knowledge  was  not  for  the  apostles ;  it  is  not  for  the  Church.  "  Of  that
day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man."  But,  in  spite  of  these  words  of  Christ,  human
thought  has  ever  busied  itself,  it  busies  itself  still,  to  pry  into  this  awful  secret.  St.
Paul  had  told  the  Thessalonians  all  he  knew ;  there  was  no  need  to  write  it  again.
But  he  deals  gently  with  them.  He  tries  to  quiet  their  restless  anxiety.  2.  They  knexo
that  it  could  not  he  known.  It  cometh  suddenly,  when  men  are  least  expecting  it;
when  they  say,  "Peace  and  safety."  It  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  They  knew  the
Lord's  illustration.  St.  Paul  had  told  them.  It  was  enough  for  them  to  know.
Suddenly,  as  the  lightning  that  cometh  out  of  the  east  and  shincth  even  to  the  west,
the  Son  of  man  shall  come.  That  we  know;  nothing  more  can  be  known.  It  is  a
thought  full  of  awfulness,  full  of  deep  lessons  and  solemn  warnings.

IL  Readiness  fob  its  coming.  1.  Christians  are  not  in  the  darkness.  Darkness  is
the  element,  the  sphere  of  the  unconverted  life.  Darkness  is  ignorance  of  God,  igno-
rance of  the  atoning  work  of  Christ,  ignorance  of  the  blessed  influences  of  God  the
Holy  Ghost.  Such  darkness  is  either  intellectual,  darkness  of  the  understanding;  or
spiritual,  darkness  of  the  heart  and  will.  The  two  act  and  react  upon  one  another.
Darkness  of  the  understanding  produces  in  some  cases  and  in  some  measure  darkness
of  the  heart.  Darkness  of  the  heart  often  results  in  darkness  of  the  understanding.
There  are  cases  of  darkness  which  seem  to  us  the  most  perplexing  of  problems ;  men
and  women  who  have  from  the  very  beginning  of  life  been  enveloped  in  an  atmosphere
of  ignorance,  brutality,  and  sin,  from  which  there  seems  to  be  no  escape — who  seem  to
us,  as  people  say,  to  "  have  no  chance,"  no  possibility,  humanly  speaking,  of  attaining
to  enlightenment  and  the  knowledge  of  God.  What  can  be  done  in  such  cases?  Wo
must,  each  one  of  us,  do  all  that  lies  in  our  power  to  help  the  helpless  and  to  teach
the  ignorant ;  and  then,  when  we  have  "  done  what  we  could,"  wo  can  only  leave
them,  in  the  trustfulness  of  faith,  to  his  mercy  who,  we  know,  will  require  little  of  those
to  whom  little  has  been  given.  But  the  darkness  which  we  have  to  face  in  our  daily
walk  is,  more  commonly,  not  like  this,  but  wilful  darkness.  '*  He  that  hateth  his
brother  "  (St.  John  says)  "  is  in  darkness  even  until  now."  Any  wilful  sin  deliberately
indulged  darkens  the  heart.  **  If  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of
darkness."  The  soul  that  cherishes  a  secret  sin  cannot  believe,  cannot  see  Gbd,  cannot
be  in  readiness  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  If  such  are  not  awakened  to  a  sense  of
guilt  and  danger,  the  great  day  must  overtake  them  as  a  thief,  coming  upon  them  in
all  its  sudden  awfulness.  2.  they  are  sons  of  light.  **  God  hath  shined  in  their  hearts,
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."
The  true  light  now  shincth.  We  are  in  the  light,  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God,
the  light  of  the  presence  of  God.  We  belong  to  the  light ;  it  is  all  around  us ;  it  is  in
us.  Indeed,  the  true  light  "  lighteth  every  man."  The  Lord  is  loving  unto  every  man.
"  The  Lamb  of  God  taketh  away  [beareth]  the  sin  of  the  world."  We  must  believe,  in
spite  of  sad  and  dark  appearances,  that  there  is  no  child  of  man  on  whom  the  heavenly
Father  hath  not  shined ;  none  who  are  left  to  perish  without  a  hope  of  salvation.  The
light  shineth  upon  all ;  but  they  are  sons  of  light  whose  souls  within  are  lighted  with
that  heavenly  glow,  who  come  to  the  light  and  rejoice  in  the  light,  and  in  the  bright-
ness of  that  light  see  what  others  cannot  see  because  their  eyes  are  holden — the  fair
beauty  of  the  Lord,  the  exceeding  loveliness  of  the  blessed  Saviour's  life,  the  aureole
of  golden  light  that  bathes  the  cross  ^of  Christ  in  a  glory  of  unearthly  radiance.
3.  There/ore  they  must  walk  in  the  light.  They  must  live  in  the  consciousness  of  that
light,  feeling  its  warmth  and  glory ;  as  they  move  hither  and  thither  in  their  daily  life,
they  must  walk  in  the  sense  of  that  light  which  is  all  around  them.  It  shows  things
in  their  true  colours.  Sin  is  hateful,  loathsome ;  you  see  its  utter  hideousness  when
the  light  shines  upon  it.  Holiness  is  fair  and  bright ;  you  see  its  attractive  beauty
when  the  heavenly  light  shines  on  it  in  its  glory.  The  light  shines  into  our  hearts ;
it  shows  us  our  guilt,  our  misery,  our  danger.  But,  blessed  be  God,  it  does  more  than
that.  It  hath  a  purifying  power ;  it  cleanses  what  was  unclean ;  it  brightens  what  was
dark.  '*  If  we  walk  in  the  light  .  .  .  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all
sin."  4.  They  are  sons  of  day,  there/ore  they  must  watch.  The  light  shows  the  danger
of  sloth ;  it  rests  upon  those  awful  words,  **  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant,"  and
brings  them  out  into  full  distinctness.    They  must  not  sleep,  as  do  others.    IndifTer-


llG  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cu.  v.  1-28.


ence  and  apathy  are  deadly  enemies  of  the  soul.  The  unbelieving  multitude  sleep ;
they  are  thoughtless  about  their  souls,  careless  of  the  awful  destinies  which  lie  before
us.  The  believer  will  watch ;  for  he  will  remember  the  reiterated  commandment  of  his
Lord,  "  Watch,  therefore.  .  .  .  What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  Watch."  Watch  •
fulness  is  though tfulness ;  it  is  a  vivid  interest  in  everything  that  belongs  to  the
spiritual  life,  an  earnest  desire  to  quicken  it  into  ever  new  energies,  a  freshness  of
spirit,  an  active  vigilance  in  guaraing  against  all  the  dangers  and  temptations  that
surround  us.  "  They  that  sleep,  sleep  in  the  night,"  but  we  are  sons  of  day.  We  must
watch  as  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord.  We  know  not  when  he  cometh ;  we  must  bo
watchful  always  lest  that  day  overtake  us  as  a  thief.  It  cometh  as  a  thief.  This  warning
of  our  Lord  is  not  only  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  but  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  St.  John,  re-echo
the  solemn  words.  It  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  early  Christians;  witness
the  name  Gregory  ("  watchful")  so  common  in  the  ancient  Church.  Would  that  that
impression  remained,  that  we  too  might  be  stirred  to  ever-deepening  watchfulness.  "  The
Lord  is  at  hand."  5.  They  must  he  sober.  "  They  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the
night."  The  Christian  must  be  sober.  Intoxication  causes  drowsiness ;  it  is  inconsistent
with  watchfulness.  The  intemperate  cannot  watch.  The  Christian  must  be  temperate
in  all  things ;  strictly  temperate  as  regards  food  and  drink,  for  temperance  is  the  fruit
of  the  Spirit,  and  drunkenness  is  one  of  those  works  of  the  flesh  of  which  it  is  written
that  "  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  must  be
temprate  in  all  his  enjoyments;  for  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life, — all  these  things  intoxicate  their  votaries,
and  make  them  slothful  and  drowsy  in  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  But  we  must  be
sober,  for  we  are  of  the  day ;  we  walk  in  the  light  of  day  and  are  looking  for  the
coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  6.  They  must  be  prepared  for  the  assaults  of  temptation.
They  must  be  clothed  with  tlie  armour  of  light.  (1)  The  breastplate  of  faith  and  love.
The  hosts  of  darkness  will  gather  round  the  Christian  warrior  as  he  stands  watchful
at  his  post.  They  cannot  harm  him  if  he  continue  faithful ;  the  flery  darts  of  the
wicked  one  cannot  pierce  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love.  Faith  is  trustfulness.  1  he
soul  that  trusts  in  Christ  is  fixed  and  steadfast.  Trust  not  in  earthly  things ;  they  will
fail  you  at  the  last.  But  trust  in  Christ;  ho  abideth  faithful ;  he  is  able  to  save  even  to
the  uttermost ;  his  love  is  stronger  than  death.  Faith  protects  the  Christia!i*s  heart.
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Faith  overcomes  the
world.  Love  springs  out  of  faith,  and  quickens  faith.  Believe  in  Christ,  and  love  him
you  nmst,  for  faith  realizes  his  presence  in  all  his  grace  and  tenderness.  *'  We  havo
known  and  believed  the  love  that  Gt)d  hath  to  us ; "  "  We  love  him,  because  ho  first
loved  us.**  Love  reacts  on  faith ;  for  God,  who  is  Love,  can  bo  known  only  of  those
who  have  learned  of  him  the  great  lesson  of  love.  **  Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of
God,  and  knoweth  God."  Like  is  known  by  like.  He  who  knows  not  in  his  own  heart
what  it  is  to  love,  cannot  know  God,  who  is  the  eternal  Love.  Love  grows  out  of  faith,
and  love  fills  faith  with  life  and  joy  and  holy  enthusiasm.  Love  and  faith  protect  the
Christian  as  he  watches ;  they  sustain  his  energies.  Faith  presen- es  him  from  anxious
doubts ;  the  holy  love  of  God  keeps  out  all  carnal  loves.  (2)  The  helmet  of  the
Christian  warrior.  The  hope  of  salvation  guards  his  head.  Other  hopes  may  fall  in
shattered  ruins  on  him  ;  they  will  not  crush  him ;  they  may  vex  and  bruise,  but  they
will  not  reach  a  mortal  part ;  they  may  strike  him  as  he  stands  erect  and  fearless ;  they
will  glance  off  from  the  polished  surface  of  the  helmet  of  salvation.  The  blessed  hope
of  life  eternal  living  in  the  heart  supports  the  Christian  in  toil,  in  sorrow,  in  sickness,
and  in  death.  "Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these  three."  He  will  watch  who
hath  these  blessed  graces ;  he  will  i^ersevere,  faithful  unto  death,  looking  always  for  the
coming  of  the  great  and  awful  day.  7.  Ood  is  their  Strength,  Without  him  they  can
do  nothing.  He  did  not  appoint  us  to  wrath.  He  is  our  Father ;  he  is  not  willing  that
any  should  perish.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved.  Salvation,  great  and
blessed  word,  is  what  God  willeth  fcr  us  all.  8.  The  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Our
salvation  is  his  work.  He  died  for  us,  on  our  behalf  and  in  our  stead ;  his  precious  death
is  the  high  example  of  entire  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  others ;  it  is  the  atonement
for  our  sins.  "  For  t«."  Those  great  words  stimulate  us  to  love  and  serve  him ;  they
should  be  constantly  in  our  thoughts ;  they  should  fill  us  with  wonder,  awe,  and  ador-
ing love.    *'  For  us,"  though  we  were  sinners ;  "  for  us,"  though  he  is  God  ;  "  for  us" — wo


ou.v.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  11'


can  never  reach  the  depths  of  mysterious,  blessed  meaning  which  lie  hid  in  those  two
simple  words.     He  died  that  we,  whether  we  watch  or  sleep,  while  we  remain  among
the  living,  watching  for  his  coming,  and  while  we  sleep  with  those  who  are  laid  to  sleep
through  Jesus,  should  ever  live  together  with  him.    His  death  is  our  life ;  by  his  death
he  took  away  the  power  of  sin,  which  is  the  death  of  the  soul.    He  died  that  we  might
live  in  that  holy  life  which  is  in  fellowship  with  him.    That  life  begins  now.   "Ye
have  eternal  life,"  St.  John  says.    Christ's  saints  live  with  him  and  in  him,  for  ho  is
their  Life.    They  live  with  him  during  their  earthly  pilgrimage ;  they  live  with  him  in
Paradise,  where  the  holy  departed  are  with  Christ;  they  shall  live  with  him  in  that
glory  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  car  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of
man.    9.  Practical  conclusion,     (1)  They  must  comfort  one   another.      The  word,
wavers  in  its  meaning  between  comfort  and  exhortation.     The  two  ideas,  indeed,  run
very  near  together,  as  the  etymology  of  the  English  word  "  comfort "  suggests.    To
comfort,  according  to  its  derivatioD,  is  to  strengthen.    Comfort,  consolation,  is  a  source
of  strength.    The  despondent,  those  who  brood  over  their  sufferings  and  fret  them-
selves in  their  troubles,  are  timid,  devoid  of  energy  and  strength.    Comfort  helps  them
to  "  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  the  feeble  knees,"  and  stimulates  them  to
look  forward  to  the  future  with  hope  and  courage.    The  Thessalonian  Christians  needed
both  comfort  and  exhortation.    They  had  a  great  trial  of  affliction ;  they  suffered  much
persecution  from  the  beginning.    No  earthly  comfort  is  so  great  as  the  sympathy  of
loving  Christian  friends.     And  those  who  sympathize  with  us  stir  us  up  by  their
example,  by  their  loving  words;    their  sympathy  implies  exhortation;  it  issues  in
exhortation,  it  makes  exhortation  real  and  effective.    (2)  They  must  edify  one  another.
To  edify  is  to  build  up.   The  wise  builder  builds  his  house  on  the  rock,  which  is  Christ.
He  is  the  Foundation  ;  Christians  are  "  built  up  in  him."    In  the  deepest  sense  he  is  the
Builder.    "  On  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church."    But,  St.  Paul  says, "  we  are  labourers '
together  with  God."    Such  grace  ho  gives  to  his  servants  that  they  are  privileged  to
help  on  the  great  work,  to  build  upon  the  one  Foundation.    There  is  no  higher,  holier
work  than  this,  to  prepare  the  living  stones,  to  build  them  up  into  the  one  holy
temple,  the  Church  of  the  living  God.    The  Thessalonians  were  doing  it.    St.  Paul
recognizes  their  loving  labours,  and  urges  them  to  persevere.     Be  it  ours  to  follow
them.

Lessons.  1.  It  is  not  for  us  to  know  the  times  and  seasons ;  be  not  too  curious ;
but :  2.  Prepare  in  quiet  faith :  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  3.  Live  as  sons  of  light ;  pray
for  grace  to  realize  the  presence  of  God,  to  see  the  cross  by  faith,  to  watch  in  hope  and
love.  4.  Each  Christian,  however  humble,  has  his  place  in  building  up  the  Church  of
Christ ;  let  each  do  his  part. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  12 — 22. — Closing  exhortations.  I.  The  ministers  of  the  Church.  1.  l^ieir
duties,  (1)  They  labour.  The  work  of  the  Christian  ministry  involves  much  labour-
unseen  labour  in  prayer  and  study,  outward  labour  in  preaching,  in  visiting  the  sick
and  aged,  in  feeding  the  Church  of  God  which  he  purchased  with  his  own  blood.
They  are  unworthy  of  their  high  calling  who  do  not  labour.  (2)  They  preside  over
the  flock,  but  it  is  "in  the  Lord;"  by  his  appointment,  in  his  strength,  in  accordance
with  his  will,  with  a  view  to  his  glory,  not  their  own.  They  must  not  seek  to  be
"  lords  over  God's  heritage,"  but  rather  be  ensamples  to  the  flock,  first  in  humility,
first  in  self-denial,  first  in  Christian  love.  (3)  They  admonish — a  difficult,  a  painful
duty,  but  often  the  duty  of  a  minister ;  not  to  be  neglected  by  those  who  watch  for
souls  as  they  that  must  give  account,  but  to  be  performed  in  humility  and  gentleness,
with  many  prayers  for  guidance  and  for  wisdom.  2.  The  respect  due  to  their  office,
St.  Paul  beseeches  the  Thessalonians  (mark  his  earnestness)  to  recognize  the  labours  of
their  presbyters ;  perhaps  there  had  been  some  neglect  of  them.  It  is  good  for  Chris-
tians themselves  to  know  the  ministers  who  work  among  them,  to  take  a  lively  interest
in  their  work,  their  difficulties,  their  necessities:  so  they  may  share  in  that  holy  work
themselves.  Such  an  interest  will  lead  them  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for  their
work's  sake,  for  its  dignity  and  importance,  but  also  for  the  faithfulness  with  which
it  is  performed.  The  indolent  and  careless  will  not  win  this  esteem.  Reverence
towards  those  set  over  us  and  due  subordination,  tend  to  promote  the  peace  of  the
Church.  That  peace  is  of  the  utmost  moment.  Our  unhappy  divisions  give  occasion  to


118  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  v.  1-28,

the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully,  and  draw  Christians  away  from  the  quiet  pursuit
of  holiness  into  the  unhealthy  atmosphere  of  controversy.

II,  The  duties  of  the  brethren  generally.  1.  Admonition  and  encouragement.
All  Christians  must  take  their  part  in  the  great  work  of  saving  souls ;  all  are  respon-
sible, in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  for  the  welfare  of  the  souls  that  come  within  their
influence.  All  true  Christians  must  admonish  when  admonition  is  needed ;  all  must
comfort  those  who  stand  in  need  of  comfort.  All  must  support  the  weak,  and  all  must
practise  patience  towards  all  men,  unbelievers  as  well  as  believers.  For  these  duties
are  so  many  dififerent  phases  of  Christian  love^  and  Christian  love  is  the  highest  of  all
graces.  The  love  of  the  brethren  is  the  proof  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto
Sfe.  Then  the  Christian  who  is  living  in  that  life  which  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God
must  take  a  deep  and  holy  interest  in  the  souls  around  him.  The  nearer  he  lives  to
God  the  better  he  will  be  able  to  admonish,  to  comfort,  to  support ;  the  more  willing
he  will  be  to  labour  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  2.  They  must  teach  the  unlawfulness  of
revenge.  The  heathen  almost  universally  applauded  it.  To  return  evil  for  evil,  they
thought,  was  as  commendable  as  to  requite  good  with  good.  The  Christian  must  learn
of  Christ,  the  blessed  Master,  to  pray,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  He  must  crush  out  of
his  heart  all  revengeful  feelings ;  he  must  learn  to  love  his  enemies,  to  pray  for  those
who  use  him  despitefully.  It  is  a  hard  lesson  sometimes.  We  shall  learn  it  if  we  are
living  by  faith  in  the  presence  of  the  cross.  He  died  for  the  Thessalonians  when  they
were  enemies ;  they  must  learn  of  him  to  be  kind  to  all  men,  even  to  the  unthankful  and
to  the  eviL  3.  Cnriatian  Joy,  It  is  a  duty,  not  merely  a  privilege.  A  sullen,  joyless
temper  implies  a  want  of  faith,  the  absence  of  hoi^e  and  love.  "  The  kingdom  of  God
is  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Joy  is  one  of  the  fruits  of
the  Spirit.  He  dwelleth  in  the  Christian  heart,  and  his  presence  bringeth  joy.  There
must  be  joy  where  Gt)d  is;  the  joy  of  heaven  lieth  in  this,  "Ho  that  sitteth  on  the
throne  shall  dwell  among  them."  And  the  joy  of  the  faithful  on  earth  is  joy  in  the
Lord,  joy  in  his  presence,  in  his  love.  Not  to  rejoice  is  want  of  trustfulness  in  him
whose  love  should  gladden  the  Christian  heart.  Barrow  begins  his  great  sermon  on
this  text  with  the  words,  "  0  good  apostle,  how  acceptable  rules  dost  thou  prescribe  I
O  gracious  God,  how  gracious  laws  dost  thou  inspire  1 "  but "  res  severa  verum  gaudium."
Many  rejoice  at  times,  in  seasons  of  excitement;  but  to  rejoice  evermore,  in  sickness,
and  pain,  and  disappointments,  and  bereavements — this  is  difficult  indeed ;  this  implies
a  high  degree  of  self-mastery,  a  living  faith  in  God.  We  must  learn  to  regard  joy  as
our  bounden  duty,  a  duty  which  flows  out  of  the  great  debt  of  love  which  we  owe  to
God,  Joy  is  the  expression  of  our  gratitude ;  it  ought  to  be  the  free-will  offering  of  a
thankful  heart.  "Rejoice  evermore"  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  Ho  who
commands  gives  also  power  to  obey.  He  giveth  to  all  men  largely.  Ho  gives  his  Holy
Spirit  to  all  who  ask  in  faith,  and  with  the  Spirit  comes  the  gift  of  joy.  4.  Fersever^
ance  in  prayer.  The  whole  of  the  Christian  life  should  be  consecrated  to  God^very
action,  word,  thought.  This  involves  a  constant  reference  of  all  the  little  details  of  our
daily  lives  to  the  will  of  God,  We  should  refer  them  all  to  him,  as  Hezckiah  spread
the  letter  of  Sennacherib  before  the  Lord.  No  emergency  is  so  great  as  to  keep  the
faithful  Christian  from  his  God,  none  of  our  little  difficulties  is  so  small  as  to  make  it
needless  or  unseemly  to  consult  the  Lord  in  prayer.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  in
deed,  do  all  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Thus  the  whole  life  must  be  sanctified
by  habitual  communion  with  God,  while  in  the  stated  hours  of  prayer  the  believer  will
constantly  entreat  the  Giver  of  all  good  with  unceasing  and  ever  more  urgent  impor-
tunity for  more  abundant  grace,  for  larger  spiritual  gifts,  for  strength  from  on  high  to
offer  daily  a  more  acceptable  service.  Thus  prayer  will  be  without  ceasing.  The  heart
prays  when  the  lips  are  silent.  5.  Thankfulness,  Thanksgiving  must  always  accom-
pany prayer.  It  springs  out  of  faithful  prayer ;  for  faithful  i3rayer  brings  us  into  the
presence  of  God,  and  in  that  presence  we  must  give  thanks.  Thanksgiving,  like
prayer,  should  be  without  ceasing,  in  everything.  We  thank  God  for  his  unspeakable
gift,  the  gift  of  Christ ;  we  thank  him  for  our  access  to  him  in  prayer  and  praise  and
holy  sacrament ;  wo  thank  him  for  our  creation,  preservation,  and  all  the  blcsyings  of
this  life.  We  must  learn  to  thank  him,  not  only  in  our  joys,  but  in  our  sorrows  too.
We  must  thank  him  for  his  chastisements,  for  they  are  sent  in  love.  "  Hast  thou
suffered  any  evil,"  says  Chrysostom:  "if  thou  wilt,  it  is  no  evil;  give  thanks  to  Goil,


CH.  V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  119

aud  the  evil  is  turned  to  good."  He  practised  what  he  taught ;  in  the  midst  of  cruel
afflictions  he  died  with  the  words,  "  Glory  be  to  God  for  all  things,"  oa  his  lips.  This
is  the  will  of  God — God  would  have  the  Christian's  life  to  be  a  life  of  joy,  a  life  of
unceasing  prayer,  of  perpetual  thanksgiving.  This  is  his  will  in  Christ  Jesus,  revealed
in  the  words  of  Christ,  exemplified  in  the  life  of  Christ,  rendered  possible  by  the  grace
of  Christ  to  those  who  abide  in  him.  6.  Spiritual  gifts.  The  Divine  fire  was  kindled
at  the  great  day  of  Pentecost  in  the  baptism  of  fire ;  the  like  holy  flame  burns  in  all
true  Christian  hearts.  It  is  of  all  gifts  the  most  precious.  It  involves  an  awful
responsibility.  (1)  It  is  our  part  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  us ;  to  watch  very
carefully  lest,  through  sin  or  carelessness  or  indifference,  the  holy  fire  lose  its  brightnesa
and  its  power.  The  foolish  virgins  were  suddenly  aroused  to  the  consciousness  that
their  lamps  were  going  out.  The  Lord  was  come;  they  had  no  oil,  they  were  not
ready.  It  was  too  late.  Arise  and  trim  your  lamps ;  take  warning  in  time ;  quench  not
the  Spirit.  An  unclean  life,  says  Chrysostom,  quenches  that  holy  fire ;  so  does  apathy,
indifference  in  religion.  Sin  is  like  water  poured  upon  the  flame.  There  is  no  fellow-
ship between  light  and  darkness ;  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelleth  not  in  the  impure  heart.
Indifference  gradually  quenches  the  fire.  The  lamp  will  not  burn  without  the  oil ;  the
daily  renewal  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  necessary  for  the  support  of  the  spiritual  life  within
us.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  from  Saul ;  he  may  depart  from  us  if  we  live,  like
Saul,  in  wilfulness  and  disobedience.  It  is  a  fearful  thought  that  we  have  the  awful
power  of  quenching  that  Spirit  which  is  the  very  life  of  our  souls.  It  should  stimulate
us  to  constxiut,  anxious  watchfulness.  (2)  Quench  not  the  Spirit  in  others ;  despise  not
prophcsyings,  but  prove  all  things.  There  is  a  holy  enthusiasm  which  comes  from
God ;  there  is  a  fanaticism,  a  mere  fervour  of  excitement,  which  is  not  of  God.  Wo
must  not  believe  every  spirit,  lest  we  be  carried  about  with  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine.
We  are  bidden  to  "  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God."  There  were  prophesy inga
in  the  apostolic  times,  flowing  from  the  direct  inspiration  and  impulse  of  the  Holy
Spirit ;  there  are  such  utterances  now.  There  were  then,  and  there  are  now,  counterfeit
likenesses  of  these  spiritual  gifts.  There  is  need  of  care.  God  giveth  to  his  chosen  a
power  of  spiritual  discernment.  *^  He  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  things ;"  he  will  hold
fast  that  which  is  good.  7.  All  evil  must  be  avoided.  Every  form  of  evil ;  little  sins,
as  they  are  called,  as  well  as  great  sins.  Little  sins  are  the  first  symptoms  of  the
deadly  disease.  It  may  be  checked  at  its  outbreak ;  if  neglected,  it  may  slay  the  soul.
The  danger  is  great ;  the  enemy  is  awful  in  his  power  aud  malignity.  Halo  all  that
comes  from  him. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  23,  24. — The  result  of  oledience  to  these  commandments — sanctijication.  I.  It
13  TUE  GIFT  OF  GoD.  1.  Feoce.  Peace  is  the  blessed  fruit  of  obedience.  Be  careful
for  nothing ;  live  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  and  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all
understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  thoughts.  But  it  comes  from  God.  He  la
the  God  of  peace.  It  is  his ;  "  My  peace,"  the  Lord  Jesus  says.  It  is  God  who  maketh
jKjace,  who  reconciles  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  imto  them.
2.  Holiness,  Holiness  is  the  sum  of  all  Christian  graces.  All  the  precepts  contained
in  the  previous  verses  are  here  taken  together;  they  meet  and  are  summed  up  in
holiness.  But  no  human  effort  can  sanctify  the  heart  without  the  grace  of  God.
Therefore  the  apostle  is  not  content  with  exhorting  the  Thessalonians ;  he  prays  that
God  may  sanctify  them.  May  he  himself  (he  says  emphatically),  "  the  GKxl  of  peace,
sanctify  you  wholly."     He  goes  on  to  expand  the  last  word.

II.  It  must  pervade  the  whole  being.  1.  The  spirit.  This  is  the  highest  part  of
our  iraraaterial  nature,  the  breath  of  life,  inbreathed  by  Almighty  God.  It  is  the  part
receptive  of  Divine  communications,  which,  in  the  regenerate,  holds  converse  with
God ;  which  is  the  sphere  of  the  oixjrations  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  man  is
spiritual  in  whom  the  spirit  rules ;  he  is  natural  (i|/vx**<^0  ^^  whom  the  soul  (^vx^)  has
usurped  the  place  of  the  spirit.  The  evil  spirit  seeks  to  enslave  the  spirit  of  man ;  he
Rtrives  to  enter  in  and  dwell  in  the  spirit  which  should  be  God's.  The  peace  of  God  is
the  tme  garrison ;  it  guards  the  heart  and  thoughts  of  the  faithful,  leaving  no  ingress
fur  the  wicked  one.  2.  The  souL  Each  of  the  two  words  is  sometimes  used  for  our
whole  invisible  nature ;  but,  when  distinguished  from  the  spirit,  the  soul  is  the  lower
I  art  of  our  immaterial  being,  which  belongs  in  common  to  the  whole  animal  creation  ;


120  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO   THE  THESSALOi^IAKS.    [en.  v.  1—28.

the  seat  of  the  appetites,  desires,  afTections.  Those  men  in  whom  the  animal  soul  pre-
dominates are  called  by  St.  Jude  "sensual,  not  having  the  spirit"  (i^vx*fo^  ityevfia  fiij
$XoyT(s).  The  soul  is  sanctified  when  it  submits  itself  to  the  divinely  enlightened
spirit,  when  all  its  appetites,  feelings,  longings,  are  controlled  and  regulated  by  the
sanctified  spirit.  3.  The  body.  The  Christian  body  is  a  holy  thing.  It  should  be  the
temple  of  tne  Holy  Ghost;  it  should  be  presented  unto  God  a  living  sacrifice.  It  is
sanctified  when  it  is  ruled  by  the  spirit,  when  it  is  kept  pure  from  the  defilements  of
sensual  sin,  when  its  members  arc  made  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God.  The
apostle  prays  that  the  whole  man,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  may  be  preserved  in  the  whole
sphere  of  its  existence,  so  as  to  be  without  blame  in  the  great  day.  4.  How  is  this
possible  f    God  is  faithful;  he  will  do  it.     He  calleth  us.     His  calling  is  not  vain,  his

Eromises  are  not  delusive ;  they  are  true,  for  he  is  the  Truth.  He  will  do  it — all  that  he
as  promised,  all  that  we  pray  for,  more  than  we  pray  for,  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or
think ;  for  his  power  worketh  in  us.  He  will  do  it.  He  will  give  us  his  Holy  Spirit ;
he  will  sanctify  us  wholly  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  his  purifying  influences ;  he  will  pre-
serve our  entire  being  blameless  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  if  only  we  persevere — if
we  abide  in  him.    This  little  verse  has  been  well  called  "  the  sum  of  all  consolation."

Lessons.  1.  Work,  but  pray.  Be  obedient,  but  always  look  to  God,  and  trust  only
in  his  grace ;  it  is  he  that  giveth  holiness.  2.  Pray  for  entire  sanctification.  Body,  soul,
and  spirit — all  are  God's ;  glorify  him  in  all.  3.  Obey  his  calling ;  he  will  fulfil  his
promises. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  26 — 28. — Conclusion,  I.  He  asks  for  their  prayers.  He,  the  great  apostle,
begs  for  the  prayers  of  these  neophytes,  these  babes  in  Christ.  It  shows :  1.  His
humility,  2.  The  value  of  prayer,  A  good  man  has  said,  "  Prayer  is  possession.
Faithful  i)rayer  is  the  sure  possession  of  all  that  the  redeemed  will  of  man  can  desire.
The  man  who  is  full  of  prayer  is  full  of  power.  I  would  rather  have  the  gift  of  a
brother's  faithful  prayers  than  of  his  plentiful  substance.  And  I  feel  that  when  I  have
given  to  a  brother  my  faithful  prayers  I  have  given  him  my  best  and  greatest  gift."
3.  The  duty  of  praying  for  the  clergy.  They  have  a  great  charge,  an  awful  responsi-
bility. They  might  well  shrink  from  the  burden,  conscious  as  they  are  of  sin  and
weakness.  But  they  work,  if  they  are  faithful,  in  the  strength  of  God  and  in  the
strength  of  prayer — their  own  prayers  and  the  prayers  of  the  Church.  The  prayers  of
the  Church  are  their  due,  for  it  is  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  When  they  fail  in
energy,  in  self-denial,  in  holy  example,  it  may  be  in  part  the  fault  of  those  who  do  not
pray,  as  the/ are  bidden,  for  the  ministers  of  God.

II.  The  kiss  of  peace.  St.  Paul  four  times,  St.  Peter  once,  bid  Christians  to  salute
one  another  with  a  holy  kiss.  The  practice  was  universal  in  ancient  times;  it  was
associated  with  the  Holy  Communion.  Now  it  exists  only  in  the  Coptic  Church  of
Egypt.  The  outward  form  has  passed  away ;  ancient  customs  may  bo  disused  when
changes  in  habits  and  feeling  render  them  no  longer  suitable.  The  sacred  duty  of
brotherly  love  remains  unchanged  for  ever.  "  By  this  shall  men  know  that  ye  are  my
disciples,  when  ye  have  love  one  towards  another."

III.  The  Epistle  to  be  read  in  the  Church.  Mark  his  earnestness :  ho  adjures
them  by  the  Lord.  It  was  his  first  Epistle.  This  solenm  injunction  was  more  needed
now  than  afterwards.  Then  the  Epistle  was  to  stand  on  a  level  with  the  ancient
Scriptures ;  it  was  to  be  read  publicly,  as  Moses  and  the  prophets  were  read  in  the
synagogues.  It  was  to  bo  read  to  all.  The  open  Bible  must  be  given  to  all.  All  need
its  holy  lessons ;  all  have  a  right,  by  the  gracious  gift  of  God,  to  the  blessings  which
it  offers.

IV.  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  begins  his  Epistle  with  grace ;  he
ends  it  with  grace.  The  grace  of  God  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  our  salvation.
"By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am;"  "By  grace  are  ye  saved."  All  our  truest
happiness  here,  all  our  hopes  for  blessedness  hereafter,  come  from  the  grace  of  God.

Lessons.  1.  Try  to  realize  the  great  value  of  prayer;  desire  the  prayers  of  the
saints.  2.  Pray  for  the  clergy ;  it  is  a  sacred  duty.  3.  Love  the  brethren.  4.  The
Bible  is  a  precious  book ;  see  that  you  prize  it. — B.  C.  0.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Exhortation  in  view  of  the  Lord^s  coming,     I.  How  the  pay  of  the


cir.  V.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  121

Lord  is  sudden  and  unexpected  in  its  coming.  "  But  concerning  the  tim^s  and  the
seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  aught  be  written  unto  you.  For  yourselves
know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  conieth  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  By  the
same  method  which  is  followed  in  ch.  iv.  9,  the  apostle  seeks  to  impress  on  the  Thessa-
lonians  a  certain  point  relating  to  the  times  and  the  seasons  which  make  up  the  period
of  the  Lord's  dealing  with  men.  This  related  more  particularly  to  the  day  of  the
Lord,  the  day  when  the  Lord  is  to  descend  to  earth,  which  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the
completing  point  of  the  times  and  the  seasons.  It  is  practically  to  each  of  us  the  day
of  our  death.  When  with  them  he  had  taken  care  that  they  should  accurately  under-
stand the  sudden  and  unexpected  nature  of  the  advent.  There  were  decisive  words  of
the  Lord  on  which  to  proceed.  "  But  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  one,  not  even
the  angels  of  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Father  only ;  '*  "  It  is  not  for  you  to
know  the  times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power."  There
was  even  the  same  image  employed  by  our  Lord  which  is  employed  here.  "  But  know
this,  that  if  the  master  of  the  house  had  known  in  what  hour  the  thief  was  coming,  he
would  have  watched,  and  not  have  left  his  house  to  be  broken  through."  As  a  thief,
without  notice  given  and  under  cover  of  the  night,  approaches  the  dwelling  which  its
occupant  thinks  secure,  so  stealthily  approaches  the  day  of  the  Lord.  To  all  alike  the
uncertainty  exists,  and  will  exist.  All  fixings  of  the  time,  such  as  are  sometimes
attempted,  are  wholly  unwarranted.  God  does  not  mean  that  either  the  Church  or  the
world  should  know  the  time,  any  more  than  ho  means  that  any  of  us  should  know  the
time  of  our  death.

IL  How  TO  THE  CARNALLY  SECURE  THE  DAY  OF  THE  LORD  IS  TO  COME  AS  A  TERRIBLE

SURPRISE.  "  When  they  are  saying,  Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh
upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child ;  and  they  shall  in  no  wise  escape."
The  image  is  carried  forward,  and  we  are  to  think  of  those  who  confine  their  interest
to  the  earthly  sphere,  and  do  not  dream  of  their  possession  as  ever  to  be  disturbed.
But,  having  sown  carnal  security,  they  are  to  reap  destruction,  and  not  only  in  their
earthly  but  also  in  their  higher  interest.  It  is  a  strong  word  which  is  employed,  and
corresponds  to  "  wrath,"  which  is  afterwards  employed.  This  feeling  of  carnal  security
grows  upon  men.  At  first  they  chide  themselves  that  they  neglect  Christ  and  their
everlasting  salvation.  But,  carried  forward  by  the  desire  of  earthly  gratification  and
in  confidence  in  their  own  strength,  they  find  excuses  for  the  course  which  they  are
following.  A  state  of  moral  darkness  is  produced  in  them.  They  become  blinded  to
the  character  of  God,  and  the  opposition  which  is  ever  widening  between  their  life  and
the  will  of  God.  The  result  is,  that  qualms  of  conscience  leave  them,  and  they  say,
"  I  have  a  feeling  of  peace  within,  and  there  is  no  trouble  from  without."  But  just  when
they  come  to  this  height  of  carnal  security,  then  sudden  destruction  comes  upon  them,
from  which  there  shall  be  no  escape.  Thus,  it  would  seem,  will  it  be  at  last.  All
men  will  not  be  ready  for  the  descending  Lord.  "  As  were  the  days  of  Noah,  so  shall
be  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man.  For  as  in  those  days  which  were  before  the  flood
they  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  given  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that
Moah  entered  into  the  ark,  and  they  knew  not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all
away ;  so  shall  be  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man."  So  it  would  seem  is  it,  anticipatively,
now.  Men  go  on  in  their  sinful  courses,  until  they  are  suddenly  overtaken  by  death
and  destruction.

III.  How  TO  SONS  OF  LIGHT  AND  SONS  OF  THE  DAY  THE  DAY  OF  THE  LORD  SHOULD

NOT  BE  A  SURPRISE.  "  But  yc,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  over-
take you  as  a  thief :  for  ye  are  all  sons  of  light,  and  sons  of  the  day :  we  are  not  of  the
night,  nor  of  darkness."  The  Thessalonian  brethren  are  excluded  from  the  darkness
which  is  implied  in  the  state  of  carnal  security;  it  was  not,  therefore,  designed  that
that  day  should  overtake  them  as  a  thief.  The  class  to  which  they,  as  Christians,
properly  belonged,  was  that  of  sons  of  light  and  sons  of  the  day.  They  are  those  to
whom  the  Lord  has  been  revealed,  especially  to  whom  it  has  been  revealed  that  he  will
come,  and  who  thus  have  light  in  them.  They  are  those  upon  whom  the  Sun  of
righteousness  has  risen,  making  day  around  them.  Welcoming  the  lijiht,  even  in  its
reproving  power,  they  come  to  be  made  of  light  and  enveloped  with  lijjht,  so  that  they
are  suns  of  light  (which  is  the  Divine  nature)  and  sons  of  the  day  (which  is  the  Divine
?ncompa6sment).    When  it  is  always  light,  the  thief  has  not  opportunity  of  approach-


122  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cii.  v.  1— 28.


iug  without  being  seen.  So  those  who  have  abundance  of  light  in  them  and  around
them  should  not  be  surprised  by  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  class  from  which  toe  as
Christians  are  excluded  is  that  of  those  who  are  of  the  night  and  of  darkness.  They
are  those  who  have  moral  night  drawn  around  them.  Thoy  are  those  into  whoso
nature  the  light  of  God*s  mercy  and  truth  has  not  penetrated.  Loving  the  darkness
rather  than  the  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil,  they  come  to  have  darkness  as  their
surrounding  and  their  nature,  so  that  they  are  of  the  night  and  of  darkness.  It  was
open  to  the  apostle,  from  the  use  of  similar  expressions  by  our  Lord  ("  sons  of  this  world,"
"  sons  of  the  devil "),  to  have  said  sons  of  the  night  and  sons  of  darkness.  He  seems  to
have  chosen  his  language  purposely  to  avoid  the  idea  of  freedom,  to  bring  out  the  idea
of  servitude.  Thoy  are  not  like  the  free  sons  of  light  and  free  sons  of  the  day.  They
are  rather  those  who  are  hemmed  in  by  the  night,  who  are  enslaved  to  darkness.  When
there  is  darkness  in  and  around  a  dwelling  there  may  be  said  to  be  an  invitation  to  the
thief  to  approach.  So  those  who  have  darkness  in  and  around  their  being  may  be  said
to  invite  a  surprise  from  the  day  of  the  Lord.

IV.  How   WE   ARE   BOUND,  AS  ENLIGHTENED   ChBISTIANS,  TO   WATCH   AND   BE  SOBER.

"  So  then  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  the  rest,  but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober.  For  they  that
sleep  sleep  in  the  nif;ht ;  and  they  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  nighf  There
is  put  forward  what  we  are  not  to  do.  Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  the  rest  of  mankind.
Sleeping  implies  obliviousness  and  inactivity.  The  rest  of  mankind  are  in  an  oblivious,
inactive  state,  especially  with  regard  to  the  solemn  issues  of  life.  Let  us  who  have
light  not  be  like  them.  What  we  arc  to  do  is  to  watch.  We  are  to  have  the  wakeful
activity  of  the  sentinel  at  his  post.  Ho  knows  not  from  what  side  or  what  hour  the
enemy  may  approach,  so  he  has  altogether  and  always  to  be  vigilant.  In  like  manner,
let  us  take  full  account  of  the  fact  that  death  is  coming.  And,  seeing  we  know  not
how  or  what  hour  it  may  come,  let  our  vigilance  all  round  never  sleep.  What  we  are
to  do  is  also  to  he  sober,  A  subject  should  he  in  a,  Jit  state  when  ushered  into  the
presence  of  his  sovereign.  It  will  be  a  solemn  thing  for  us  to  be  ushered  into  tho
presence  of  the  Lord  at  death ;  and  we  should  be  in  a  fit  state  for  the  occasion.  We
should  especially  have  our  appetitei  in  proper  restraint.  We  should  have  the  full
command  of  our  powers.  We  should  be  so  employed  from  moment  to  moment  that,
when  the  last  moment  comes,  we  can  fitly  leave  our  employments  and  pass  into  tho
presence  of  our  Judge.  Not  to  be  doing  this,  is  to  be  conforming  to  unenlightened
practices.  "  They  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  they  that  be  drunken  arc  drunken
in  the  night."  The  literal  fact  is  stated  as  the  basis  for  thought.  Night  is  the  con-
genial time  for  sleep.  So  those  who  are  in  the  night  of  sin  are  in  a  drowsy,  unalarmed
state  with  regard  to  their  spiritual  concerns.  They  do  not  take  into  account  that  they
have  to  meet  death,  and  yet,  however  deep  their  sleep,  they  have  to  meet  it  and  the
realities  to  which  they  will  be  wakened  up  after  death.  Night  is  also  the  congenial
time  for  drunkenness.  How  much  of  the  drinking  that  is  to  be  deplored  goes  on  after
darkness  has  set  in  1  So  those  who  are  in  the  night  of  sin  are  in  a  state  of  spiritual
intoxication.  And  that  is  the  worst  thing  that  can  be  said  of  the  literal  drunkard.
His  spiritual  nature  is  in  a  bad  state.  In  not  restraining  his  appetites  he  is  rebelling
against  God.  In  continuing  in  sin  he  is  hardening  his  heart.  And  he  is  not  fit  for
passing  into  the  presence  of  his  Judge.  And  so  is  it,  too,  with  those  who  are  drunken
with  the  world's  engagements  and  cares.  They  become  incapacitated  for  spiritual
exercise,  and  for  the  enjoyment  of  tho  Lord's  presence.  "  But  take  heed  to  yourselves,
lest  haply  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this
life,  and  that  day  come  on  you  suddenly  as  a  snare."

V.  How  WE  ARE  TO  GIVE  PROOF  THAT  WE  ARE  SOBER  BY  BEINQ  ARMED  WITH  FAITH,

LOVE,  AND  HOPE.     "  But  let  us,  since  we  are  of  the  day,  be  sober,  putting  on  the  breast-

Slate  of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  a  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation."  Having  tho  light  of
ay,  and  knowing  what  is  coming,  let  us,  as  sober  men,  take  all  due  precautions.  For
us  to  be  forewarned  should  be  to  be  forearmed.  It  is  only  defensive  armour  that  is
thought  of  here  as  brought  into  requisition.  The  idea  seems  to  be,  that  we  are  to  bo
armed  against  all  that  would  imfit  us  for  our  Lord's  coming.  1.  The  breastplate.  This
is  a  double  piece  of  armour.  It  is  faith  and  love  combined.  Faith  apprehends  the
Lord's  coming,  in  opposition  to  blind  unbelief  which  says, "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his
coming  ?  for  since  tbc  fathers  fell  a'rleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were."    Faith  defends


OH.  V.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPIlSTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIA^JS.  123

by  encircling  us  with  tho  Divine  strength,  which  is  as  though  every  part  of  our
defenceless  hearts  were  covered  with  armour.  But  faith  only  rightly  defends  when,
at  the  same  time,  love  gives  Christ  the  possession  of  our  hearts.  It  is  the  world  that
tempts  us  to  forget  the  Lord's  coming,  to  make  no  preparation  for  death.  When  our
hearts  are  filled  with  love  to  the  Saviour,  we  are  enabled  to  keep  out  the  world.  The
breastplate  of  our  defence  being  completed  by  love,  brings  it  into  agreement  with  what,
in  Epb.  vi.  14,  and  also  in  Isa.  lix.  17,  is  called  "  the  breastplate  of  righteousness."  2.
The  helmet.  This  is  a  single  piece  of  armour.  In  Eph.  vi.  17,  and  also  in  Isa.  lix.  17,
it  is  simply  called  "  the  helmet  of  salvation."  But  what  is  meant  is  what  is  here  called
"  the  hope  of  salvation.'*  We  have  a  certain  experience  of  salvation  already  in  the  work-
ini^  of  faith  and  love.  Hope  reaches  beyond  this  experience  forward  to  tho  salvation
which  is  to  be  completed  at  the  Lord's  coming.  This  hope  is  a  defence  to  us,  as  the
helmet  used  to  bo  to  tho  warrior.  Wearing  this  provided  armour,  wo  can  hold  our
head  high  and  scatbless  above  present  troubles.  Let  us,  then,  as  sober  men,  not  unclasp
our  breastplate,  not  lay  aside  our  helmet.

VI.  How  THE  SALVATION   HOPED  FOR   HAS   BEEN  MADE  A  DiVlNE  CERTAINTY  TO  US.

**  For  God  appointed  us  not  unto  wrath,  but  unto  the  obtaining  of  salvation  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  For  those  who  are  sunk  in  spiritual  slumber  and  intoxication
there  is  an  appointment  unto  wrath.  The  Divine  displeasure  must  be  manifested
against  the  rebellious  course  which  they  have  been  following.  But  for  us  who  are
acting  as  sober  men  there  is  an  appointment  unto  the  obtaining  of  salvation  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  t.e.  at  his  coming.  And  what  God  has  appointed  will  be  carried
out.  A  soldier  endures  in  the  hope  of  victory.  But  the  victory  is  to  him  an  uncertainty ;
it  may  not  be  realized,  or  he  may  not  live  to  share  in  it.  But  the  Christian  soldier  has
a  Divine  appointment  on  which  to  proceed.  If  even  now  we  take  Christ  as  our  Saviour,
and  from  this  point  wait  for  his  coming,  then  God  intends  that  we  shall  conquer.  Let
us  seize  the  advantage  of  our  position.  While  we  have  our  faith  and  love  in  vigorous
ex(  rcise,  let  us  know  also  the  sustaining  power  of  a  lively  hope.

VII.  How  THE  OBTAIKINQ  OF  SALVATION  HAS  BECOME  ASSURED  TO  US.      "  Who  died

for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  him."  1.  Our  li/s
has  its  source  in  ChrisVs  death,  Christ  died  for  our  benefit,  and,  by  implication,  in
our  stead.  Ho  died  in  the  way  of  making  satisfaction  for  our  sin.  In  him,  as  our
Hepreseutative  or  Head,  we  obtain  the  benefits  of  his  work.  It  is  as  though  we  had
died,  as  though  we  had  made  satisfaction  for  sin.  Thus  in  condescending  love,  in
accordance  with  eternal  principles,  are  we  introduced  into  salvation.  2.  The  final  end
ff  Christ^s  death  is  that  we  should  live  together  with  him.  Christ  died  with  this  view,
that  we  should  ultimately  live  along  with  him,  and  have  fellowship  with  him ;  wo
sntering  into  his  thoughts  and  delighting  in  his  love,  while  he  enters  into  our  thoughts
and  delights  in  our  love.  3.  This  end  is  independent  of  our  waking  or  sleeping  at
Christ's  coming.  Our  waking  or  sleeping  is  accidental ;  the  essential  thing  is  that  wo
shall  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  fellowship,  as  it  then  shall  be,  im  the  body.
Both  classes,  those  who  wake  and  those  who  sleep,  have  the  same  reason  for  assuring
themselves  that  they  shall  live  together  with  him,  viz.  in  the  fact  that  he  has  died  to
merit  it  for  them,  as  he  lives  to  secure  it  for  them.  Those  who  wake  shall  be  changed
without  the  union  between  soul  and  body  being  broken;  and,  changed,  they  shall  live
together  with  him.  Those  who  sleep  have  the  union  between  the  soul  and  body  broken,
without  any  break  in  the  union  between  the  soul  and  Christ  and  in  fellowship  with
him ;  and,  raised  from  their  graves,  they  shall  live  together  with  him.  Thus  the  ultimate
state  of  both  classes  is  to  bo  the  same,  the  apostle  returning  here  to  the  conclusion
reached  in  ch.  iv.  17,  where  it  is  said  of  the  same  two  classes  united  that  they  shall
be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.

VIII.  How    IN    THE    CIRCUMSTANCES     THEY    ARE    TO    ACT    TOWARD     EACH    OTHER.

**  Wherefore  exhort  one  another,  and  build  each  other  up,  even  as  also  ye  do."  There
is  an  unhappy  change  from  "  comfort "  to  "  exhort "  in  the  translation.  It  ought  to
bo  "comfort,"  as  in  tho  parallel  verse  at  the  close  of  the  previous  paragraph.  They
were  to  comfort  one  another  with  what  was  blessed  in  the  Lord's  coming.  They  were
also  to  edify  each  other,  in  preparation  for  the  Lord's  coming — communicating  know-
ledge to  each  other,  praying  for  each  other,  pressing  duty  on  each  other,  stimulating
each  other  by  example.     This  they  were  doing,  and  in  that  way  were  admirably


124  THE   FIRST  EPISTLE   TO   THE  THESSALONIANS.     [cii.  v.  1— 2^

answering  the  ends  of  their  being  in  a  Christian  society.  But  let  them  go  on,  and  not,
while  only  a  little  away  from  the  starting-point,  suppose  that  they  have  reached  finality.
Let  us,  too,  make  the  end  of  our  being  in  a  Christian  society  comfort  and,  especially,
edification  to  all  the  members. — R.  F.

Vers.  12 — ^22. — Exhortations,  I.  Duty  toward  the  presidents.  "  But  we  beseech
you,  brethren,  to  know  them  that  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and
admonish  you ;  and  to  esteem  them  exceeding  highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake."
The  Greek  bears  that  those  who  labour,  preside,  and  admonish  are  all  one  class.  From
other  places  in  the  New  Testament  we  must  imderstand  that  the  reference  is  to  the
class  of  the  elders.  "  And  when  they  had  appointed  for  them  elders  in  every  Church,
and  had  prayed  with  fasting,  they  commended  them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  had
believed."  "  For  this  cause,"  Paul  says  to  Titus,  "  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou
shouldest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting,  and  appoint  elders  in  every  city,  as
I  gave  thee  charge.*'  From  1  Tim.  v.  17  it  appears  that  there  were  ciders  who  simply
ruled,  and  others  who  both  ruled  and  taught.  The  language  employed  in  the  descrip-
tion of  the  elders  here  does  not  require  a  restriction  in  the  application  to  teaching;
elders.  It  can  only  be  said  that  the  greater  extent  of  their  duties  warrants  a  si)ecial
application  to  them.  There  is  put  forward  the  idea  of  their  being  workers.  In  any
omce  the  first  thing  to  be  looked  to  is  the  amount  of  real  honest  work  that  is  done  in  it.
Certainly  it  is  not  meant  that  any  ecclesiastical  office  should  be  a  sinecure.  There  was
spiritual  work  to  be  done  among  the  Thessalonians,  and  there  were  those  who  were
appointed  for  the  doing  of  it.  These  did  their  work  even  to  weariness^  Next  to  their
being  workers,  they  were  presidents.  In  1  Tim.  v.  17  the  elders  are  described  as  thus
ruling  or  presiding.  In  this  presidency  there  is  implied  the  possession  of  ecclesiastical
ix)wer ;  but  it  is  with  limitations.  Believers  stand  in  an  immediate  personal  relation
to  the  Lord.  But  there  is  also  the  relation  in  which  believers  stand  collectively  to  the
Lord.  In  this  relation  Christ  is  not  only  President ;  but  there  are  those  who  in  each
Christian  society  preside  in  the  Lord,  i.e,  they  preside  in  his  Name,  they  represent  his
authority  in  the  relation.  To  them  belongs  the  power  of  the  keys,  or  of  admitting  and
excluding.  To  them  it  belongs  to  preside  at  the  ordinance  of  the  supper.  To  them  it
belongs  to  sit  in  judgment  in  matters  connected  with  the  eflBcient  working  of  the
society.  As  presidents,  they  are  also  monitors,  not  restrictively  teachers.  It  belongs  to
them  as  characterized  by  piety  and  practical  wisdom,  and  as  foremost  in  every  good
work  themselves,  in  a  special  manner,  in  virtue  of  their  ofiice,  to  press  duty  on  those  over
whom  they  have  been  placed,  to  stir  up  the  negligent,  to  administer  rebuke  to  the
erring.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  members  of  a  Christian  society  toward  their  laborious
presidents  and  monitors  to  know  them.  It  is  usual  to  take  this  knowing  as  equivalent
to  knowing  ivith  appreciation,  which  is  afterward  defined  as  esteeming  in  love.  It
seems  better  not  to  bring  forward  the  ideas  of  esteem  and  love,  but  to  think  only  of
that  on  which  the  esteem  and  love  are  founded,  viz.  such  a  marking  of  the  presidents
as  leads  to  their  being  esteemed  and  loved.  The  esteem  is  to  be  founded  on  the  work
belonging  to  their  office.  They  .are  engaged  in  the  Lord's  work,  in  seeking  the
spiritual  good  of  those  over  whom  they  have  been  placed.  And  as  that  is  the  most
important  of  all  kinds  of  work,  they  are  not  only  to  be  esteemed,  but  esteemed  exceed-
ing  highly  for  their  work's  sake.  While  they  are  to  be  esteemed,  they  are  also  to  be
loved.  Love  is  to  be  the  element  in  which  the  esteem  is  to  have  its  subsistence  and
nourishment.  They  are  not  to  be  judged  harshly,  but,  in  love,  a  kindly  view  is  to  be
taken  of  them,  and  their  defects  overlooked.

n.  Duty  of  regarding  the  peace  op  the  Christian  circle.  "Be  at  peace
among  yourselves."  Our  Lord  exhorts  the  twelve  in  almost  the  same  terms  :  "  Be  at
peace  one  with  another."  The  exhortation  means  that  we  are  to  cultivate  toward  the
members  of  the  Christian  circle  such  good  feeling  as  will  dispose  us  not  only  to  refrain
from  strife,  but  also  to  be  on  good  terms  with  them.  And  if  we  are  to  be  peaceably  dis-
posed, as  we  are  elsewhere  exhorted,  toward  all  men,  much  more  are  we  to  be  peace-
ably disposed,  as  we  are  here  exhorted,  to  those  to  whom  we  stand  in  nearer  alliance
and  engagement,  who  are  subjects  with  us  of  the  same  Prince  of  peace.  The  most
fruitful  cause  of  congregational  or  more  widely  ecclesiastical  dispeace  h  fondness  for
power  or  honour.     It  was  when  the  twelve  had  disputed  one  with  another  who  was


en.  V.  1— 2S.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  125

the  greatest  (Mark  ix.  34),  and  had  turned  against  one  who  used  Christ's  Name  yet
followed  not  them  (Mark  ix.  38),  that  they  were  exhorted  to  be  at  peace  one  with
another  (Mark  ix.  50).  John  refers  to  a  certain  Diotrephcs,  in  a  Church  to  which  he
wrote,  who  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence  among  them.  There  are  those  who  are  more
concerned  to  advance  themselves,  or  their  family  connection,  or  their  party,  than  the
common  ends  for  which  the  society  exists.  A  co-operating  cause  is  prejudice.  There
are  those  who  are  more  attached  to  opinions  hastily  formed,  or  traditionally  received,
or  to  which  they  are  constitutionally  inclined  as  more  liberal  or  more  conservative,
than  to  the  truth  honestly  inquired  into.  When,  with  this,  there  conspires  worldly
motive,  leading  to  worldly  policy,  the  result,  on  occasion  or,  it  may  be,  on  little
occasion,  is  dispeace.  One  cure  for  dispeace  is  respect  for  the  properly  constituted
authorities,  or  good  feeling  toward  the  presidents.  This  will  oft'-n  carry  a  society
through  a  difficult  trial.  A  more  effective  cure  is  abundance  of  Christian  work.  It
was  when  the  twelve  were  in  the  way  (unemployed  so  far)  that  they  disputed  who  was
the  greatest.  When  afterward  they  were  in  the  midst  of  their  work,  the  question
would  not  be  who  was  the  greatest,  but  who  could  do  the  most  work  for  Christ.  For
a  Church  to  be  actively  engaged  in  real  work  for  the  Master  is  to  be  in  the  best
position  for  its  own  peace.  Pray,  then,  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,  and  for  its  order
liness  and  holy  activity,  as  conducive  to  peace.

III.  Doty  toward  three  classes  within  the  Christian  circle.  1.  The  dis-
orderly, "And  we  exhort  you,  brethren,  admonish  the  disorderly."  This  class  is
described  by  a  word  which  is  used  of  soldiers  who  do  not  keep  their  rank.  There  were
those  in  the  Thessalouian  Church  who  were  out  of  rank,  in  the  way  of  being  negligent
of  their  business,  under  the  influence  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  In  Christian  Churches
still  there  are  those  who  are  out  of  rank,  in  the  way  of  being  careless  in  attendance  on
ordinances,  in  the  way  of  being  dissipated,  in  the  way  of  being  chargeable  with  dis-
honourable actions.  If  it  is  a  grave  fault  to  be  disorderly  in  a  military  sense,  it  is  no
less  grave  a  fault  to  be  disorderly  in  a  Christian  sense.  Must  it  not  be  offensive  to  him
who  is  pre-eminently  charged  with  the  order  of  the  Church,  the  Captain  of  our  sal-
vation ?  And  his  command,  laid  not  merely  on  the  presidents  but  on  all,  is  that  such
should  be  admonished.  They  all  need  to  be  admonished  to  the  performance  of  the
duty  with  regard  to  which  they  are  at  fault ;  and  some  of  them  need  to  be  admonished
to  take  the  tirst  step  in  the  Christian  life.  2.  The  faint-hearted,  "  Encourage  the
faint-hearted."  In  our  Churches  there  are  those  who  are  faint-hearted  on  account  of  the
loss  of  friends,  as  the  Thessalonians  were  faint-hearted  on  account  of  the  supposed  fate
of  Christian  friends  taken  away  before  the  coming.  There  are  those  who  are  depressed
by  the  state  of  their  temporal  affairs,  as  the  Thessalonians  would  have  a  depressing
influence  in  the  way  in  which  maintenance  and  home  and  even  life  were  affected  by
persecution.  There  are  always  those  who  are  apt  to  be  faint-hearted  on  account  of  their
spiritual  state.  Have  they  a  real  interest  in  Christ  ?  Are  they  making  progress  in  the
Christian  life?  Are  they  doing  any  good?  Are  they  having  an  influence  for  gowl
upon  those  over  whom  they  are  immediately  placed?  The  command  of  Christ,  laid  on
all,  is  that  such  are  to  be  encouraged.  Let  them  be  encouraged  by  the  thought  of  the
kind  Providence  that  is  exercised  over  them.  Let  them  be  encouraged  to  the  exercise
of  faith.  "0  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?"  "  Why  art  thou  cast
down,  0  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  in  me  ?  hope  thou  in  God :  for  1  shall
yet  praise  him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God."  3.  The  toeak,
"Support  the  weak."  There  would  be  those  among  the  Thessalonians  who  felt  the
weakening  influence  of  the  heathenism  out  of  which  they  had  come.  Heathen  habits
could  not  be  laid  aside  in  a  day.  So  there  are  those  in  our  Churches  who  are  anxious
to  do  well,  but  are  apt  to  stumble  from  the  strength  of  evil  habit.  The  command  of
Christ,  laid  on  all,  is  that  such  are  not  to  be  left  to  stand  or  fall  by  themselves;  but
they  are  to  be  supported  by  sympathy  and  counsel  and  example  until  they  attain  to
greater  moral  strength — as  infants,  or  those  weakened  by  disease,  need  to  be  supported,
until  they  can  go  about  freely.

IV.  The  one  duty  toward  all  within  the  Christian  circle.  "  Be  long-
suffering  toward  all."  It  seems  better  to  confine  the  reference  to  the  Christian  circle,
and  to  consider  the  reference  as  widened  in  the  following  verse.  This  is  the  condition
of  mind  that  will  fit  us  for  dealing  with  all.    It  was  not  unfitting  that  the  duty  should


12G  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  v.  1—28.


bo  laid  upon  a  young  Church  like  that  of  Thessalonica.  Young  Christians  are  of  a
sanguine  disposition.  In  their  own  enthusiasm  they  look  for  others  being  enthusiastic.
They  need,  in  their  experience  of  the  difficulty  of  evil  being  cast  out  of  their  own
hearts,  of  keeping  up  their  own  enthusiasm,  to  be  taught  the  lesson  of  patience.  Let
them  not  be  less  earnest,  but  lot  them  bear  long,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  those  who  are
lukewarm  and  faulty  brought  Into  a  better  state.

V.  Duty  especially  toward  those  who  injure  us.  "  See  that  none  render  unto
any  one  evil  for  evil ;  but  alway  follow  after  that  which  is  good,  one  toward  another,  and
toward  all.'*  The  heathenish  idea  is  to  return  evil  for  evil.  Even  Aristotle  regarded
it  not  less  reasonable  to  return  evil  for  evil,  than  to  return  good  for  good ;  **for  other-
wise," he  says, "  if  a  man  must  not  retaliate,  his  condition  appears  to  be  as  bad  as  slavery  "
('Ethics,*  bk.  v.  ch.  5).  This  heathenish  disposition  to  take  revenge  on  those  who
injure  us  needs  to  be  conquered  by  us.  Hence  there  is  enjoined  on  us  care  :  "  Take
heed  that  none  render  unto  any  one  evil  for  evil."  There  is  danger,  if  we  are  not  careful,
of  our  giving  way  to  revengeful  feelings.  The  Christian  idea  is  that  we  are  to  resist
not  evil :  **  Whosoever  smiteth  thee  on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also."
The  meaning  here  is  that,  instead  of  returning  evil  for  evil,  we  are  to  do  kind  offices  to
those  who  injure  us.  This  is  the  best  way  of  gaining  our  offending  brethren.  It  is
also  the  best  way  of  gaining  over  them  that  are  outside.  There  is  no  more  powerful
argument  in  favour  of  Christianity  than  its  conquest  of  rcvengefulness,  its  disposing  us
to  return  good  for  evil.

VI.  Duty  op  rejoicinq.  "  Rejoice  alway."  The  happy  God  designs  us  to  be  happy
like  himself,  and  not  merely  in  heaven.  We  cannot,  indeed,  have  a  light  heart  when
we  think  of  the  evil  in  us  and  around  us.  But  while  sorrowful,  we  can  always  rejoice
In  the  thought  of  our  Christian  advantages.  "  He  that  hath  the  inexhaustible  Spring
of  good  for  nis  portion,  that  hath  his  welfare  entrusted  in  God*8  most  faithful  hand,
that  hath  the  infinite  Beauty  and  Excellency  for  the  perpetual  object  of  his  contem-
plation, that  enjoyeth  the  serenity  of  a  sound  mind,  of  a  pure  heart,  of  a  quiet
conscience,  of  a  sure  hope,  what  can  he  want  to  refresh  or  comfort  him  ?  If  we  scan
all  the  doctrines,  all  the  institutions,  all  the  precepts,  all  the  promises  of  Christianity,
will  not  each  appear  pregnant  with  matter  of  joy,  will  not  each  yield  great  reason  and
strong  obligation  to  this  duty  of  rejoicing  evermore  ?  "    (Barrow).

VII.  Duty  of  prayer.  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  This  cannot  mean  that  prayer
is  to  occupy  our  whole  time.  For  prayer  is  only  one  duty,  and  wo  have  to  propor-
tion our  time  between  our  various  duties.  But  it  means  that  we  are  to  make  prayer
part  of  the  great  business  of  our  life,  and  not  a  by-business.  It  means  that  we  are  to
connect  prayer  with  the  principal  occasions  of  our  life.  It  means  that  in  particular
matters  we  are  to  pray  on,  until  we  succeed  in  the  object  of  our  requests.  It  means
that  we  are  to  have  stated  times  for  prayer,  especially  the  natural  seasons  of  morning
and  evening.  It  means  that  in  the  intensity  of  our  earnestness  we  arc  to  overleap
these  stated  times.  "  Devotion  is  the  best  food  of  our  souls,  which  preserveth  their
life  and  health,  which  repaireth  their  strength  and  vigour :  if  we,  therefore,  long  abstain
from  it,  we  shall  starve  or  pine  away ;  we  shall  be  faint  and  feeble  in  all  religious  per-
formances ;  we  shall  have  none  at  all,  or  a  very  languid  and  meagre  piety  "  (Barrow).

VIII.  Duty  op  thanksoivino.  "In  everything  give  thanks,  for  this  is  the  will  of
God  in  Christ  Jesns  to  you-ward."  To  give  thanks  means  that,  sincerely,  duly  sensible
of  our  benefits,  we  are  to  make  cheerful  acknowledgment  of  them  to  God.  To  give
thanks  in  everything  means  that  we  are  to  thank  God,  not  only  in  great  things,  but
also  in  small  things;  not  only  in  rare  things,  but  also  in  common  things.  It  means
that  we  are  to  thank  God,  not  only  in  present  things,  but  for  past  mercies  as  well,  ami
even  for  what  is  laid  up  for  future  enjoyment.  It  means  that  we  are  to  thank  God,
not  merely  in  things  affecting  ourselves,  but  also  in  things  affecting  others.  It  means
that  we  are  to  thank  Qod,  not  merely  in  prosperous  things,  but  also  in  adverse  things,
recognizing  the  merciful  moderating  of  them,  the  merciful  design  in  them,  the  support-
ing grace  under  them,  and  the  benefit  resulting  from  them.  It  means  that  we  are  to
thank  God,  not  merely  in  things  affecting  our  bodies,  but  also  in  things  affecting  our
souls.  The  duty  of  thanksgiving  is  here  enforced  by  the  consideration  that  this  is  the
will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  us-ward.  In  Christ  Jesus  he  is  infinite  kindness,
always  overflowing  in  blessing  on  us.     How  fitting,  then,  that  we  should,  through


cif.v.1-28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  127

Christ  Jesus,  "  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  "  I
This  has  the  distinction  of  being  the  most  delightful  of  all  duties.  ''  For  praise  and
thanksgiving  are  the  most  delectable  business  of  heaven  ;  and  God  grant  they  may  bo
our  greatest  delight,  our  frequent  employment  upon  earth  "  (Barrow).

IX.  Duty  toward  the  Spirit.  "Quench  not  the  Spirit."  The  Spirit  is  com-
pared here,  as  in  other  places  in  Scripture,  to  fire.  There  is  the  beginning  of  spiritual
life  in  every  man.  There  is  the  depraved  nature,  but  there  is  also  the  Spirit  with  his
vital  energy  to  be  cherished  or  quenched.  It  is  especially  in  connection  with  the
gospel  that  the  Spirit  is  given  to  men.  In  the  gospel  there  is  presented  a  Divine  call
to  accept  of  Divine  mercy,  and  there  is,  in  connection  with  it,  a  Divine  warning  against
refusing  Divine  mercy.  "  Ho  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  eternal  life;  but  he  that
obeyeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  The
Spirit,  in  the  Word  read  or  preached,  brings  the  gospel  call  to  bear  upon  the  conscience
and  heart.  The  feeling  that  we  ought  to  accept  of  salvation  and  not  throw  away  our
existence,  the  desire  to  give  Christ  our  confidence  and  not  spurn  his  love,  is  the  working
of  the  Spirit.  And,  in  providence  after  providence,  does  the  Spirit  more  gently  whisper
to  us,  or  more  loudly  rouse  us  up  to  the  importance  of  the  Divine  call  and  warning.
It  is  suggested  by  the  context,  that  what  those  who  have  felt  the  power  of  the  Spirit
have  to  fear  is  the  repression  of  enthusiasm.  Let  them  give  free  outlet  to  the  working
of  the  Spirit,  and  not  be  deterred  by  the  conventionalities  even  of  religious  society.  If
they  feel  prompted  to  pray,  let  them  not  restrain  prayer.  If  they  feel  prompted  to
study  God's  Word,  let  tnem  sit  down  and  pore  over  it.  If  they  feel  prompted  to  throw
themselves  into  Christian  work,  let  them  not  hold  back.  It  was  by  a  strange  perversity
of  will  on  the  part  of  Saul  that  he  was  deserted  by  the  Spirit.  David  feared  that  his
outbreak  of  sin  would  drive  away  the  Holy  Spirit  from  him.  What  prevents  men
feeling  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is  especially  an  irregular  life.  They  turn  away  from
good,  and  give  the  reins  to  their  passions,  and  another  spirit  than  God*s  takes  possession
of  them.  But  there  is  not  needed  outward  irregularity  to  quench  the  Spirit.  The
essential  thing  is  the  withdrawing  of  the  mind  from  the  range  of  the  Divine  revelation,
the  paying  no  heed  to  the  Divine  voice,  the  smothering  good  feeling  even  under  the
ordinary  engagements  of  life,  the  neglecting  to  follow  up  good  impressions  by  a  decisive
step  for  Christ.  The  result  in  the  following  out  of  trial  is  a  state  of  mind  in  which
there  is  an  insensibility  to  the  importance  of  the  Divine  call  and  warning.  Conviction
of  sin  or  uneasiness  about  it  ceases  ;  interest  in  what  is  good  dies  out.  The  Spirit  of
God  takes  his  departure,  and  an  evil  spirit  takes  full  possession.  There  is  this
encouraging  thought  to  those  who  have  been  resisting  and  grieving  the  Spirit,  that
while  there  is  the  slightest  thought  of  good  remaining  in  their  hearts,  it  may  be  fanned
into  a  flame.  The  Spirit,  long  slighted,  at  last  cherished,  will  come,  and  with  his  vital
energy  fill  their  whole  being.

X.  Duty  with  regard  to  prophesyikos.  "Despise  not  prophesyings."  These
were  special  manifestations  of  the  Spirit.  As  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  and  also  in  the
Galatian  Churches,  so  in  the  Church  of  Thessalonica,  there  was  the  presence  of  miracles.
There  was  the  gift  of  healing ;  there  was  also  the  gift  of  tongues.  As  striking  mani-
festations the  use  they  served  was  especially  in  impressing  and  drawing  the  attention
of  them  that  were  outside.  Prophesyings  were  intelligent  and,  probably,  impassioned
utterances  of  Divine  truth  under  the  inflatus  of  the  Spirit.  As  such  the  use  they
served  was  especially  in  promoting  the  edification  of  the  Church.  Let  none,  then,  run
the  risk  of  quenching  the  Spirit  by  placing  a  low  value  on  his  less  striking  but  far
more  important  manifestations.

XL  Duty  of  proving  all  things.  *'  Prove  all  things."  The  language  is  taken
from  the  art  of  the  assayer.  He  has  special  skill  in  applying  tests,  with  the  view  of
discovering  what  is  real  and  what  is  counterfeit  in  metals,  what  is  good  coin  and  what
is  bad  coin.  So  the  Christian  assayer  is  to  be  specially  skilled  in  testing  the  real
nature  of  thini^s.  There  is  nothing  in  the  language  to  restrict  the  reference  to  the
prophesyings  wliich  have  been  mentioned.  It  is  not  said  "  all  prophesyings,"  or  "all  these
things."  And  if  there  is  an  antithesis,  as  some  authorities  have  it,  in  the  assertion  of
"hut,"  yet  is  it  preserved  by  regarding  prophesyings  as  included  among  all  things.
The  wideness  of  the  reference  is  confirmed  by  the  consideration  that  things  as  proved
are  divided  into  things  to  bo  chosen  and  things  to  be  rejected.     In  prophesyings,  as


128  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [cii.  v.  1—28.

inspired,  there  was  no  element  to  be  rejected.  Proviuj;  them  could  only  mean  learning
to  put  due  value  upon  them,  partly  in  comparison  with  other  Divine  gifts.  Ordinary
teachings  have  not  all  the  true  ring  or  composition,  "  0  holy  simplicity  1 "  exclaimed
Huss,  when  he  saw  an  aged  devout  woman  throwing  a  fagot  on  to  his  burning  pile.
But  our  safeguard  is  not  a  holy  simplicity,  believing  all  that  we  have  been  told  by  good
men;  it  is  rather,  in  dependence  on  the  direction  of  God,  the  exercise  of  an  independent
judgment.  That  is  the  sheet-anchor  of  our  Protestantism.  We  reject  the  claim  of  the
Koman  Catholic  that  we  are  to  accept  of  things  because  they  are  taught  by  the  Church,
because  they  have  been  ordained  by  councils,  because  they  have  even  the  support  of
the  apostolic  Fathers.  The  thing  to  be  deplored  is  that  much  of  our  Protestantism  is
traditional,  an  unreasoning  acceptance  of  belief.  With  regard  to  opinions  which  pass
current  in  society,  we  are  not  to  accept  of  them  because  they  are  popular,  because  they
are  well -sounding,  because  they  arc  associated  with  particular  names  or  parties ;  but
we  are  to  have  a  Divine  insight  into  them  as  true  or  false.  With  regard  to  what  is
presented  for  the  regulation  of  our  conduct,  there  is  evil  as  well  as  good  presented  for
our  acceptance.  •  And  evil  is  not  presented  to  us  as  evil ;  it  takes  specious  forms — even
Satan  puts  on  the  garb  of  an  angel  of  light.  We  have  need,  therefore,  to  be  on  our
guard ;  we  have  need  to  have  our  senses  exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil.  Let  us
inquire,  regarding  an  action  or  course  of  action,  whether  it  is  fitted  to  yield  not  simply
a  present  but  a  solid  and  lasting  satisfaction,  without  regrets  in  the  future  ;  whether  it
is  according  to  right  principle  and  conducive  to  strength  of  character,  and  fitted  also
to  be  beneficial  to  others.  "  If  we  discerned  ourselves,"  says  the  apostle,  '*  we  should
not  be  judged."  Let  us  be  just  with  ourselves,  that  we  may  escape  the  consequences
of  a  false  judgment.  Let  us  impartially  apply  the  tests  now,  as  those  to  whom  they  are
to  be  impartially  and  convincingly  appliea  at  the  day  of  judgment,

XII.  Duty  in  view  of  thk  result  of  provixo  all  things.  1.  On  the  one
hand  to  hold  fast  the  good,  "  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  It  is  implied  that  we
are  not  to  be  always  proving.  As  a  result  of  our  proving,  we  find  out  that  which  is
sood.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  that  which  is  good  to  hold  it  fast,  and  not  to  let  it  go.
If  we  have  found  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  let  us  hold  it  fast.  Let  us  take
it  as  nutriment  to  our  souls.  Let  it  be  the  test  by  which  we  try  things.  "  To  the
Law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there
is  no  light  in  them."  If  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  as  to  the  claims  of  Christ  as  our
Divine  teacher,  let  us  hold  him  fast;  let  us  take  his  teachings  into  our  being,  and  let
the  confessing  of  Christ  be  that  by  which  we  try  the  spirits,  not  persons,  but  rather  the
spirit  by  which  individuals,  communities,  institutes,  systems,  are  animated.  If  we  have
satisfied  ourselves  that  Christ  has  made  full  atonement  for  our  sin,  let  us  hold  that  truth
fast  as  central,  let  us  take  all  the  comfort  there  is  in  it,  and  let  it  be  the  test  of  loyalty
to  Christ.  If  we  have  found  out  what  a  good  life  is  as  commended  and  exemplified  by
Christ,  and  as  put  to  the  proof  by  ourselves,  let  us  hold  it  fast  as  what  has  held  us  up
in  the  past,  as  what  has  held  up  the  good  in  all  the  generations,  as  what  will  hold  us
up  until  we  obtain  an  immutable  standing  in  heaven.  And  let  us  not,  with  a  false
toleration,  think  that  any  life  can  be  good  which  wants  the  great  theistic,  and  esj)ecially
the  great  Christian,  elements.  2.  On  the  other  hand  to  abstain  from  evil.  "  Abstain
from  every  form  of  evil."  The  old  translation  is  indefensible  here.  The  words  should
not  have  formed  a  verse  by  themselves ;  they  should  have  been  added  on  to  the  former
words.  In  view  of  the  good  and  evil  that  are  separated  in  the  proving  of  things,  we  arc
on  the  one  hand  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  abstain  from
every  form  of  evil.  If  anything  is  yet  undetermined  to  our  mind,  our  duty  as  already
laid  down  is  to  find  out  its  true  nature.  If,  after  examination,  it  is  of  a  doubtful  nature,
or  seems  to  be  bordering  on  evil,  our  duty  certainly  is  to  abstain  from  it.  But  the  duty
laid  down  here  is  different  from  that.  It  is  our  duty  with  regard  to  what  we  have
found  out  to  be  one  of  the  many  forms  of  evil.  Having  found  it  out  to  be  evil  in
reality,  let  us  not  hesitate  about  our  course,  let  us  abstain  from  it,  let  us  refuse  to  taste
it  even  as  we  would  not  take  poison,  let  us  turn  away  from  it  as  from  that  which  is
alien  from  our  being  and  fitted  only  to  work  our  destruction. — R.  F.

Vers.  23 — 28. — Prayer,  T.  Prayer  for  the  sanctification  of  the  Thessa-
LONiANR.     "And  the   God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you  wholly;    and  may  your


CH.V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  129

spirit  and  soul  aod  body  be  preserved  entire,  without  blame  at  the  coming  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  From  the  object  of  the  prayer  Grod  is  here  named  the  Gk)d  of
peace.  The  peace  which  takes  away  the  discord  of  our  nature  and  restores  its  harmony
is  his  will  and  gift.  But  he  is  only  the  God  of  peace  to  us  in  our  sanctification.  The
apostle  had  been  exhorting  to  various  forms  of  holiness.  Feeling,  however,  how  feeble
his  part  was  in  their  sanctification,  he  makes  his  appeal  to  the  first  Cause  of  Sanctifi-
cation. "  The  God  of  peace  himself  sanctify  you.*'  In  sanctification  there  is  the  idea
of  being  set  apart  to  the  service  of  God.  In  the  prayer  the  stress  is  laid  on  the  wholeness
of  the  sanctification.  In  the  word  translated  "  wholly  "  there  is  the  idea  of  wholeness
in  the  way  of  the  end  being  reached.  The  materials  of  the  temple-building  and  vessels
were  originally  in  a  rough  state.  But,  put  into  the  hands  of  cunning  workmen,  they
were  brought  up  into  apt  and  consistent  and  beautiful  forms.  And  not  without
iprinkling  of  blood  were  they  dedicated  to  God.  So  the  stufif  of  which  we  are  made
is  originally  in  an  unpolished,  defiled  condition ;  but,  in  the  hands  of  the  great  Artificer,
through  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  are  we  bein^  brought  up  into  a  state  in
which,  in  our  whole  being,  we  shall  be  fit  for  being  employed  in  the  service  of  God.
In  the  second  part  of  the  prayer  there  is  brought  in  another  aspect  of  the  wholeness  of
sanctification.  And  the  word  which  indicates  it  is  brought  forward  in  the  original  out
of  its  natural  position,  so  as  to  be  separated  from  the  similar  word  translated  "  wholly  "
only  by  "  and.'*  It  conveys  the  idea  of  being  whole  in  the  way  of  being  entire  in  its  parts.
'*  It  means  what  represents  the  whole  un^vided  possession,  what  is  not  weakened  by
division,  and  thus  subsists  in  perfect  integrity  "  (Delitzsch).  The  integrity  refers  to  the
three  parts  into  which  our  nature  is  here  regarded  as  divided — ^spirit  and  soul  and
body.  In  some  places  Scripture  language  turns  upon  the  distinction  between  the
material  and  immaterial  nature  of  man.  Here  the  immaterial  nature  is  divided  into
spirit  and  soul.  And  this  is  in  keeping  with  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit  in
Heb.  iv.  12,  and  also  with  the  contrast  between  the  present  psychical  body  and  the
future  spiritual  body  in  1  Cor.  xv.  "  Whilst  the  soul,"  says  Olshausen,  who  has  made
a  special  study  of  this  subject,  **  denotes  the  lower  region  of  the  inner  man — comprises,
therefore,  the  powers  to  which  analogous  ones  are  found  in  animal  life  also,  as  under-
standing, appetitive  faculty,  memory,  fancy — the  spirit  includes  those  natural  dis-
positions which  constitute  the  true  human  life ;  viz.  reason,  as  the  faculty  of  perceiving
the  Divine ;  conscience,  as  the  faculty  of  distinguishing  moral  good  and  evil ;  free-will,
as  the  faculty  of  moral  choice,  by  which  the  ability  to  form  a  history  is  purchased.'*
The  spirit,  we  may  say,  is  that  by  which  we  have  the  power  of  knowing  and  serving
God,  and  of  making  character,  and  in  which,  in  its  whole  range,  we  are  separated  from
the  brutes.  The  soul  is  the  lower  part  of  the  inner  man,  in  which,  in  its  judgments,
and  longings,  and  recollections,  and  imaginings,  the  spirit  is  designed  to  bear  rule.  The
body,  or  outer  man,  which  is  quickened  by  the  soul,  and  has  the  power  of  exciting  the
soul,  is  another  sphere  in  which,  in  its  appetites  and  powers,  the  spirit  is  designed  to
bear  rule  through  the  soul.  The  spirit  is  wholly  sanctified  in  the  sense  intended  when,
through  the  possession  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  reason  and  conscience  faithfully  represent
the  Divine  voice,  and  the  will  is  faithfully  responsive  ;  when,  as  a  whole,  it  is  the  ruling
centre  with  reference  to  the  rest  of  the  nature.  The  soul  is  wholly  sanctified  when  the
understanding  is  used  as  a  help  to  the  keeping  of  Divine  precepts ;  when  the  desires
and  aflections  are  divinely  regulated  and  purified  and  tempered ;  when  there  is  a  ready
memory  for  the  Word  of  God,  and  a  readiness  from  past  associations  in  calling  up
good  thoughts ;  when  the  imagination  is  filled  with  Christ  and  the  Christian  ideal  and
the  Christian  prospect;  when,  as  a  whole,  this  part  of  our  nature  does  not  assert
its  independence  of  the  spirit  above,  and  can  resist  the  charms  of  the  senses  below.
The  body  is  wholly  sanctified  when  its  various  members  are  used  as  instruments  of
righteousness ;  when,  as  a  whole,  it  does  not  aspire  to  rule  in  the  soul ;  when  it  takes
its  law  from  pure  judgments,  and  desires,  and  recollections,  and  imaginings.  Such
is  the  wholeness  of  sanctification  in  the  integrity  of  the  nature.  And  what,  on  the
positive  side,  is  represented  as  integrity  of  nature,  on  the  negative  side  is  represented
as  being  without  blame.  Here  there  is  a  glance  forward,  as  there  frequently  is  in  this
Epistle,  to  the  coming  of  Christ.  It  is  then  that  the  integrity  of  our  nature  is  to  be
fully  realized,  and  to  be  placed  in  inviolable  keeping.  Beyond  that  point,  the  integrity
of  our  nature  perfectly  attained,  no  power  in  the  universe  can  ever  break.

I.  THE88AL0NIANS.  K


130  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1^28.

11.  The  pbatbb  gbounded  in  the  faithfulness  of  God.  "Faithful  is  he  that
calleth  you,  who  will  also  do  it."  There  is  a  distinct  covenanting  on  the  part  of  Crod
to  bring  about  our  sanctification.  "  For  this  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  the
house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,
and  on  their  heart  also  will  I  write  them :  and  I  will  be  to  them  a  Grod,  and  they  shall
be  to  me  a  people."  God,  in  calling,  actually  begins  the  covenant  work  of  our  sanctifi-
cation, and  an  appeal  can  be  made  to  him  as  the  faithful  God,  by  ourselves  or  others,
to  carry  out  what  he  has  begun.  Let  us  not  be  backward  to  remind  him  of  his
promise,  or  to  look  for  it  being  followed  by  performance.

Conclusion.  1.  Bequest  for  prayer,  **  Brethren,  pray  for  us."  This  request  for  prayer
comes  from  the  three  Christian  workers.  They  were  thrown  upon  those  for  whom  they
laboured,  in  being  themselves  also  compassed  with  infirmity.  They  felt  that,  if  the
Divine  blessing  was  to  rest  upon  their  work  in  the  highest  measure,  then  the  Thessa-
Ionian  Church  must  join  with  the  other  Churches  in  giving  them  the  assistance  of  their
prayers.  2.  The  holy  kiss,  **  Salute  all  the  brethren  with  a  holy  kiss."  This  was  the
common  Eastern  form  of  salutation,  associated  with  religion.  Apparently  the  elders
were  thus  to  salute  the  members  of  the  Thessalonian  Church,  one  by  one,  in  the  name
of  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  Propriety  does  not  allow  with  us  the  use  of  this  form
of  salutation  between  the  various  members  of  the  Christian  circle.  But  there  is  no
reason  why  there  should  not  be  all  the  good  feeling  and  fellowship  with  Christ  of
which  the  holy  kiss  is  symbolic.  At  the  same  time,  if  love  is  to  be  sustained,  it  must
be  allowed  all  suitable  forms  of  manifestation.  3.  Direction  as  to  the  public  reading  of
the  EpisUe,  **  1  adjure  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  Epistle  be  read  unto  all  the  brethren."
The  direction  is  given  in  the  most  solenm  manner.  Paul  writes  in  his  own  name,  and
adjures  by  the  Lord.  The  adjuration  was  apparently  founded  on  the  importance  of  the
Epistle,  not  merely  to  the  elders  to  whom  it  was  handed,  but  to  the  whole  community.
Let  it  be  brought  directly  to  bear  upon  all,  that  they  may  each  for  themselves  have
their  impression  of  its  contents.  Such  an  adjuration  in  the  first  of  Paul's  Epistles
significantly  points  to  the  right  of  every  Christian  member  to  have  direct  access  to  the
Word  of  God.  "  What  Paul,"  says  Bengel, "  commands  with  an  adjuration,  Rome  pro-
hibits with  an  anathema."  4.  Btnediction,  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be
with  you."  He  ends  his  Epistle  as  he  began,  by  imploring  ^ace.  It  is  to  the  ever-
living  Divine  Head  of  the  Church  that  we  must  look  for  the  bestowal  of  the  blessing,
and  not  according  to  the  merit  of  any  for  whom  we  implore  it,  but  only  according  to  the
abundance  of  the  merit  that  he  has  obtained  for  them. — R.  F.

Vers.  2 — 4^. — A  thief  in  the  night.  The  one  idea  to  be  impressed  upon  us  by  this
fitriking  image  is  that  of  unexpectedness.  The  thief  succeeds  in  making  his  entrance
when  he  is  least  expected.  So  will  it  be  on  **  the  day  of  the  Lord."  The  idea  is  derived
from  the  teaching  of  Christ,  in  which  it  is  more  fully  expanded  (see  Matt  xxiv.
43,  44).  The  "day  of  the  Lord"  which  is  to  come  thus  suddenly  is  often  referred  to
in  the  Old  Testament.  There  it  is  a  dreadful  occasion  of  Divine  manifestation  for
judgment,  to  be  hailed  with  gladness  when  the  judgment  falls  on  the  enemies  of  Israel
and  brings  the  chosen  people  deliverance,  but  to  be  regarded  with  terror  by  sinful
Israelites  (Amos  v.  18).  St.  Paul  regards  it  as  the  day  of  Christ's  second  advent.  But
the  general  use  of  the  expression  in  the  Old  Testament  justifies  us  in  applying  the
warning  concerning  it  to  various  forms  of  the  parotisia,

I.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon  the  benighted  ab  a  thief.  1.  The  day
is  unexpected.  What  did  the  heathen  fellow-citizens  of  the  Thessalonians  know,  or
think,  or  care  about  the  glorious  advent  of  Christ,  with  its  angel-summons  and  its  trumpet-
blast  for  which  the  Christians  were  watching  so  eagerly  ?  The  Jews  did  not  expect  the
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  world  does  not  think
of  the  great  judgment-day.  Worldly  people  do  not  contemplate  death.  2.  No  signs
are  given  to  the  world  of  the  dawning  of  this  dread  day.  No  lurid  twilight  betokens  the
tempestuous  morning.  It  bursts  suddenly  upon  a  world  slumbering  in  darkness.
Science,  philosophy,  ordinary  signs  of  the  times,  give  no  hint  of  it  to  the  unspiritual.
The  biblical  arithmetic  of  our  modem  prophets  is  always  proving  itself  at  faiut.  Ko
bare  intellectual  calculation  will  ever  discover  the  "day  of  the  Lord."  3.  It  is  best  for
the  world  that  no  natural  signs  should  herald  this  day,     (1)  Christian  people  are  better


CH.  V.  1—28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  131

without  the  common  signs  which  could  be  discerned  by  ordinary  observation.  To
possess  them  would  be  to  walk  by  sight.  They  are  not  given  in  order  that  faith  may
be  exercised.  (2)  The  world  at  large  is  better  without  these  signs.  Th^y  would  dis"
arrange  all  the  necessary  pursuits  of  life.  Some  would  cry  abjectly  for  mercy  without
really  repenting  at  heart.  Some,  as  when  plagues  raged  in  cities,  would  fling  off  all
restraints  and  plunge  into  a  reckless  course  of  debauchery.  Some  would  coldly  calculate
the  time  allowed  for  sinning  before  they  would  need  to  bethink  them  of  preparing  for
the  end.

II.  The  DAT  OP  THE  Lord  will  not  come  upon  the  enlightened  as  a  thief.  St.
Paul  makes  an  important  distinction  here — one  that  is  not  always  recognized :  *'  But
ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief."  1«
No  men  are  enlightened  catothe  date  of  the  second  advent.  Even  Christ  did  not  know
it.  This  he  distinctly  says  (Mark  xiii.  32).  2.  Christians  are  enlightened  as  to  the
fact  and  the  character  of  the  second  advent.  (1)  They  know  that  Christ  will  come  again,
which  is  more  than  the  unbelieving  world  knows.  They  have  Christ's  own  promise  to
rely  upon  (Matt.  xxiv.  30).  (2)  They  know  that  Christ  will  come  unexpectedly.  At
least,  they  ought  to  know  this  if  they  read  the  teachings  of  Scripture  on  the  subject.

3.  The  enlightenment  of  Christians  wUl  prevent  the  second  advent  from  coming  upon
them  like  a  thief.  When  we  are  prepared  for  a  surprise,  it  is  no  longer  a  surprise.  If
we  know  a  thing  may  happen  at  any  time,  its  occurrence  will  not  give  us  the  shock  of
an  unexpected  event.  Christ,  longed  for,  eagerly  desired,  fondly  expected,  will  come
at  an  hour  when  his  people  know  not,  but  not  when  his  true  disciples  are  unprepared
to  welcome  him. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  6—8. — Night  and  day.  St.  Paul  writes  of  two  classes  of  people  whose  con-
ditions correspond  respectively  to  night  and  day.  Many  associations  of  gloom  and  evil
and  ignorance  gather  round  the  image  of  night,  while  their  opposites — brightness,
goodness,  knowledge,  etc. — are  suggested  by  the  idea  of  day.  One  advantage  of  the
metaphorical  language  of  Scripture  is  that  it  gives  to  us  richer  and  more  suggestive
ideas  than  could  be  conveyed  by  bare  abstract  phrases.  Subsidiary  notions,  like  chro-
matic chords  in  music,  give  tone  and  richness  to  the  main  idea  impressed  upon  us  by
a  manifold  and  significant  image.  This  is  apparent  with  the  use  of  the  images  light
and  darkness  by  St.  John.  St.  Paul  would  have  us  think  that  the  unspi ritual  and
godless  world  is  in  general  like  a  people  of  the  night,  while  the  Church  is  like  a  city  of
light.  But  probably  the  enlightenment*  of  revelation,  the  daylight  of  spiritual  know-
ledge, is  the  prominent  thought  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle.  For  we  find  that  in
previous  verses  he  has  been  referring  to  the  shock  of  surprise  to  the  world  which  will
not  be  shared  by  enlightened  Christians.  On  the  fact  of  their  greater  enlightenment  he
now  founds  an  exhortation  to  conduct  worthy  of  it.  The  fuller  light  demands  the
holier  life.    Sons  of  the  day  have  not  the  excuses  of  children  of  night.

I.  The  children  of  the  night.  1.  These  are  in  darkness.  The  darkness  is  not
confined  to  the  illiterate.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  the  inhabitants  of  heathen  lands.
People  in  Christian  countries,  who  are  familiar  with  the  language  of  the  New  Testament,
may  be  totally  ignorant  of  its  spiritual  thought.  Such  people,  though  they  sit  in
imiversity  chairs  as  professors  of  divinity,  are  blinded  with  midnight  blackness.  Was
not  Faust  in  the  night?  2.  Some  of  the  children  of  the  night  sleep.  These  are  the
thoughtless  and  careless.  They  may  be  awake  to  secular  business.  But  they  slumber
over  moral  and  spiritual  subjects.  If  they  think  of  them  at  all  it  is  with  dreamy
unconcern.  3.  Others  of  the  children  of  the  night  are  avxike  only  to  evil.  They  spend
the  night  in  drunkenness.    They  hide  shameful  practices  under  the  cloak  of  darkness.

4.  The  guilt  of  the  children  of  the  night  is  mitigated  just  in  proportion  as  their
benighting  is  not  wilful.  If  it  arises  from  their  unhappy  circumstances,  these  unfortu-
nate people  cannot  be  condemned  to  the  same  doom  as  that  of  men  who  sin  with  their
eyes  open,  or  as  that  of  those  who  wilfully  put  out  their  eyes  because  they  love  darkness.

IL  The  sons  of  the  day.  1.  These  are  enlightened.  They  may  not  be  brilliantly
intellectual  nor  highly  educated.  They  may  be  illiterate  in  human  lore.  But  the
•'eyes  of  their  hearts**  (Eph.  i.  18)  are  opened.  By  faith  and  love  and  obedience  they
have  come  to  know  what  Grod  has  revealed  through  his  Spirit.  2.  Sons  of  the  day  are
expected  to  be  wakeful.    It  is  natural  to  sleep  in  the  night.    Sleep  in  the  day  betokens


133  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.    [ch.  v.  1— 28.

sinful  indolence.  The  indifference  of  spiritoally  ignorant  people  is  natural.  That  of
Christians  on  whom  has  risen  **  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  **  is  monstrous.  3.  Sons
of  the  day  are  expected  to  be  sober.  It  is  bad  enough  to  be  drunken  in  the  night,  but
a  debauch  which  is  not  shamed  by  the  light  of  day  proves  itself  to  be  scandalously
depraved.  There  are  excesses  of  passion,  of  self-will,  and  of  worldly  excitement  which
Christian  people  who  have  escaped  the  coarser  sins  fall  into.  These  are  not  excusable
in  ike  children  of  the  night,  but  they  are  much  less  excusable  in  the  sons  of  the  day.
Sobriety  becomes  the  enlightened  Christian.  This  sobriety  need  not  consist  in  Puritan
rigour;  much  less  should  it  partake  of  sourness,  gloom,  or  prim  formality.  The  sober
Christian  should  remember  that  the  typical  citizen  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  little
child.  Sobriety  is  just  the  opposite  to  unrestrained  passionatcness  of  pleasure  or  anger.
4.  Sons  of  the  day  are  provided  with  armour.  The  three  graces — faith,  hope,  and  love
— constitute  the  armour  of  the  Christian.  They  protect  the  two  most  vital  parts —
breast  and  head.  Faith  and  love  come  together,  for  they  interact.  Faith  working  by
love  protects  the  heart.  Hope,  the  hope  of  final  deliverance  from  trial  and  temptation,
is  the  helmet,  because  it  protects  the  head  by  keeping  the  thoughts  clear  and  calm.
— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  9,  10. — The  Divine  appointment  of  Christians.  To  some  it  may  seem  super-
fluous that  a  Christian  apostle,  writing  to  the  members  of  a  Christian  Church,  should
say,  **  God  appointed  us  not  unto  wrath."  But  the  import  of  this  declaration  is  made
apparent  by  what  precedes.  St.  Paul  has  been  contrasting  the  condition  of  the  sons  of
light  with  that  of  the  children  of  darkness.  Among  the  latter  are  to  be  found  all
degrees  of  that  conduct  which  hides  under  the  cloak  of  night — from  the  carelessness  that
sleeps,  down  to  the  debauchery  that  is  awake  only  to  cause  its  own  shame.  Such  things
must  bring  wrath  in  **  the  day  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  2).  But  Christians  are  called  to  quite
another  life.  They  are  not  destined  to  wrath.  Let  them,  therefore,  not  behave  as  the
sons  of  the  night,  but  in  a  way  that  is  worthy  of  their  call  to  salvation,  with  sobriety
and  confidence,  strong  in  faith  and  love,  and  rejoicing  in  hope  (ver.  8).

I.  The  Divine  appointment  to  salvation.  1.  It  springs  from  an  august  Source,
God  appoints  to  salvation.  He  has  a  hand  in  our  destinies.  We  are  not  left  to  dis-
cover a  way  of  escape  from  ruin  for  ourselves.  God  has  interfered  for  our  deliverance.
2.  It  is  determined  by  a  firm  ordinance,  God  "appointed."  This  word  signifies  pre-
vision, arrangement,  definite  order.  Redemption  is  not  an  irregular  makeshift  brought
about  by  a  hasty  after-thought.  It  enters  into  the  calm,  eternal  thoughts  of  Gt)d,  and
takes  its  place  in  the  orderly  disposition  of  the  Divine  government.  3.  It  aims  at
securing  a  large  result.  When  Gtod  makes  bare  his  arm  and  settles  a  solemn  appoint-
ment, this  must  be  for  some  adequate  result.  The  object  must  be  lar^e  to  justify  so
large  an  action.  Here  it  is  nothing  less  than  perfect  deliverance  from  the  ruin  of  sin.
Salvation  is  not  a  technical  phrase.  It  is  too  big  a  word  to  be  defined  by  a  theological
sentence.  It  is  deliverance  all  round — from  root  and  fruit  of  evil,  from  wrath  of  justice,
from  penalty  of  law,  from  tyranny  of  Satan,  from  vice  of  heart,  from  judgment  without,
from  corruption  within.  4.  It  is  to  be  personally  accepted.  We  are  appointed  to
**  the  obtaining  of  salvation  ; "  for  (1)  though  ordained  by  God,  it  is  not  enjoyed  by  us
until  we  have  personal  experience  of  it ;  (2)  this  personal  acceptance  depends  on  our
own  will  and  act ;  (3)  the  full  consequences  of  the  Divine  ordinance  of  salvation  are
still  future.

II.  The  method  op  accomplishing  this  Divine  appointment.  1.  It  is  secured  hy
the  mediation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Thus  it  is  to  bo  obtained  "  through  "  him,
which  means  (1)  that  the  salvation  itself  is  brought  about  by  the  action  of  Christ ;  and
(2)  that  it  becomes  ours  when  we  are  united  to  Christ.  Now  each  of  these  points  has
its  own  distinct  position  in  the  great  work.  Too  often  they  are  confused  together.  It
is  not  necessary  for  us  to  comprehend  all  that  Christ  does.  Our  part  is  to  see  that  we
are  united  to  him.  He  will  do  his  part  whether  we  understand  it  or  not.  2.  It
involved  the  death  of  Christ  for  us.  So  much  we  know  as  a  fact,  whatever  theory  wo
may  have  as  to  the  bearings  of  the  crucifixion  upon  the  process  of  redemption.  And  it
is  the  great  fact  which  is  of  supreme  importance  to  us.  It  is  unfortunate  that  abstract
propositions  concerning  the  theological  aspects  of  it  should  confuse  our  vision  of  tlio
simple,  touching  statement,  "  He  died  for  us.*'


cii.  V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  188

III.  The  end  for  which  this  Divine  appointment  is  made.  1.  Tliis  is  that  we
may  live  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  Strictly  speaking,  the  fellowship  with  Christ  is  given
as  the  object  of  the  suffering  of  death  by  Christ.  But  the  earlier  lArt  of  the  passage
shows  us  the  Divine  appointment  of  salvation  as  secured  through  Christ  Putting  the
two  together,  we  see  that  salvation  is  worthless  without  the  life  in  Christ,  as  well  as
that  salvation  is  only  possible  to  those  who  are  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  Salvation  is
in  itself  a  ne$;ative  term.  Bare  deliverance  is  of  little  use  unless  some  good  is  to  be
made  of  the  liberty  and  immunity.  While  a  fellow-creature  is  being  saved  from  death
by  drowning  we  follow  the  process  with  intense  interest ;  but  after  his  deliverance  we
may  not  feel  much  concern  with  his  future  career.  It  may  be  that  he  will  make  but  a
poor  use  of  his  restored  life.  If  we  finished  the  story  we  might  find  the  issue  to  be  a
pitiable  anti-climax.  God  is  guarding  his  great  appointment  from  a  similar  catastrophe.
They  who  are  saved  live  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  Such  a  life  is  worth  securing  at
the  greatest  cost.  2.  This  fellowship  with  Christ  is  independent  of  the  greatest  outward
rhanges.    It  remains  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  i,e,  whether  we  live  or  die.^W.  F,  A.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Three  universal  exhortations.  The  striking  feature  of  these  three
exhortations  is  their  universality.  It  is  natural  that  we  should  sometimes  pray  and
rejoice  and  give  thanks.  But  certainly  it  does  not  come  naturally  to  us  to  be  always
doing  these  three  things.  Nearly  all  men  experience  them  at  some  time  in  their  lives.
Universality  and  continuance  are  to  be  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  Christians
in  regard  to  them.  It  is,  says  St.  Paul,  "  the  will  of  GKxi  in  Christ  Jesus  to  you-ward  "
that  these  remarkable  signs  of  ?race  should  be  seen  in  Christian  people.

I.  Perpetual  bejoicino.  Christians  are,  of  course,  subject  to  natural  fluctuations
of  mood  and  feeling.  They  are  also  liable  to  the  changes  of  fortune ;  and  they  are  not
callous  to  the  perception  of  them.  None  of  us  can  escape  sorrow.  Some  good  people
have  the  greatest  troubles.  The  only  perfect  Man  who  ever  lived  was  '*  a  Man  of
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  How,  then,  can  we  rejoice  always  ?  St.  Paul  was
too  real  and  too  sympathetic  to  mock  the  sorrowing  with  the  glib  words  of  cheer  that
shallow  comforters  administer.  If  he  exhorted,  he  knew  that  the  exhortation  was
practicable.  1.  Christian  rejoicing  is  a  deep,  calm  joy.  The  surface  may  be  ruffled
while  the  depths  are  still;  cross-curreuts  may  vary  while  the  undercurrent  runs  steadily
on.  Surface  pain  may  conceal  sacred  joys  which  it  cannot  destroy.  2.  The  secret  of
Christian  joy  is  inwardness.  These  Christians  do  not  depend  on  external  circumstances
for  their  happiness.  The  spiritual  sources  of  rejoicing  in  the  love  and  presence  of  God
are  not  disturbed  by  earthly  calamities.  Often  they  give  forth  sweetest  blessedness
under  the  blows  of  affliction,  as  the  waters  flowed  out  when  Moses  struck  the  rock.  If
we  want  to  rejoice  always  we  must  live  always  near  to  God.  The  first  exhortation  is
closely  connected  with  the  second.  3.  Christians  are  also  helped  to  rejoice  always  by
living  in  the  future  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).

II.  Ceaseless  praying.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to
be  always  on  our  knees.  That  is  not  possible ;  nor  would  it  be  right,  for  the  work  of
life  must  be  done.  We  arc  not  only  worshippers;  we  are  servants.  1.  Ceaseless  praying
is  a  continuous  direction  of  the  heart  towards  Ood,  The  essence  of  prayer  is  not  the
uttering  of  devout  phrases.  God  does  not  hear  us  for  our  much  speaking.  Christ  con-
demned long  prayers,  not  because  we  could  pray  too  much,  but  because  they  became
superstitious  as  though  a  worth  lay  in  their  length,  and  also  because  they  became
formal  when  the  spirit  flagged.  Prayer  is  essentially  spiritual  communion  with
God.  This  must  be  supported,  however,  and  inspired  by  definite  seasons  wholly
given  to  devotion.  People  often  abuse  the  motto,  Lahorare  est  orare.  It  is  only  true
of  the  prayerful  man.  2.  Ceaseless  praying  is  attainable  through  the  enjoyment  of
unbroken  unum  with  Ood,  Our  thought  may  not  be  always  occupied  with  God  because
the  duties  of  life  demand  our  attention,  and  its  recreations  are  requisite  for  our  health.
But  if  we  live  near  to  God  we  shall  have  an  abiding  sense  of  God's  nearness,  a  quick
uplifting  of  the  heart  to  him  in  quiet  moments,  and  many  a  secret  talk  with  him  even
in  our  busiest  hours.

IIL  Universal  thanksgiving.  The  difficulty  is  to  make  this  honest  For  it  is  an
insult  to  God  to  utter  words  of  thanksgiving  while  the  heart  is  ungratefuL  How  can
wc  thank  God  for  pain,  for  loss,  for  things  the  good  of  which  we  cannot  discover?    1.


134  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cii.  v.  1^2^.

UniverscU  thanksgiving  is  possible  through  the  perception  that  under  all  circumstances
blessings  outnumber  and  outweigh  troubles.  We  fix  our  thoughts  on  our  trouble  to  the
neglect  of  a  thousand  blessings.  A  fairer,  wider  consideration  would  call  up  more
grateful  thoughts.  2*  UniverscU  thanksgiving  is  possible  Ity  means  of  faith  that  holds
troubles  sent  by  God  to  be  blessings  in  disguise,  A  mere  consideration  of  the  facts  of
life  will  not  create  it  But  when  we  have  come  to  believe  that  '*  the  mercy  of  the  Lord
endureth  for  ever/*  we  have  learnt  the  secret  of  universal  thankfulness. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  19. — Quenching  the  Spirit,  This  verse  is  often  misread.  The  context  shows
that  it  does  not  refer  to  the  resistance  Of  the  sinner  to  the  striving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in
his  heart.  For  the  words  immediately  following,  *'  despise  not  prophesyings/'  indicate
its  reference  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  inspiring  utterances  in  the  Church.  Some
prosaic,  cautious  people  were  inclined  to  check  these  enthusiastic  utterances.  Perhaps
there  were  foolish  would-bo  prophets  who  were  making  themselves  and  the  Church
ridiculous  by  their  predictions  about  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  a  subject  in  which  the
Church  at  Thessalonica  was  then  deeply  interested.  St.  Paul  does  not  wish  his  readers
to  accept  all  that  is  offered  to  them,  for  he  says,  '*  Prove  all  things.''  But  he  fears  lest,
in  the  rejection  of  imposture,  pretence,  illusion,  and  misguided  flEmaticism,  genuino
teachings  of  the  Divine  Spirit  should  be  discarded.  Therefore  he  warns  his  readers
against  the  danger  of  quenching  the  Spirit.

I.  There  is  a  fire  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  fire  that  is  not  to  be  quenched.  In  Old
Testament  times  a  prophet  was  fitted  for  his  mission  by  having  a  live  coal  from  off  the
altar  laid  upon  his  lips  (Isa.  vi.  6).  Christ,  who  came  to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
came  also  to  baptize  with  fire.  The  Spirit  descended  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  under  the
form  of  tongues  of  flame.  Gbd's  Spirit  deepens  feeling,  kindles  enthusiasm,  rouses
sacred  passion,  sets  the  soul  aflame  with  love.  He  who  has  not  felt  the  fire  knows  not
some  of  the  strongest  working  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  psalmist  knew  it  when  he  said,
**  While  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  3).

II.  There  is  a  danqeb  lest  we  should  quench  the  Spirit.  1.  In  our  own  hearts.
If  we  check  our  more  generous  emotions,  and  harden  ourselves  with  maxims  of  the
world,  and  so  immerse  ourselves  in  grinding  business  cares  that  wo  have  no  thought  or
heart  left  for  spiritual  feelings,  we  shall  quench  the  Spirit  in  ourselves.  For  us  there
will  be  no  revelation.  To  us  heaven  will  be  black  as  midnight,  silent  as  the  crave.
No  warmth  of  devotion  nor  flash  of  spiritual  perception  will  brighten  up  the  dull  and
dreary  chambers  of  our  souls.  2.  In  others.  Beware  of  checking  young  enthusiasm.
It  may  err ;  but  it  had  better  err  than  die.  Middle-aged  common  sense  may  not  under-
stand it.  But  this  may  not  be  the  fault  of  young  enthusiasm.  It  may  result  from  the
deadened  perceptions  of  an  unsympathizing  mind.  If  we  cannot  follow,  at  least  let  us
not  check  an  inspiration  which  may  be  too  high  for  our  low  sunken  lives.  3.  In
Scripture.  Absolutely,  of  course,  we  cannot  quench  the  Spirit  in  Scripture.  The  Book
remains,  whatever  we  may  think  of  it.  But  to  ourselves  we  may  quench  the  Spirit.  A
dry,  hard  critical  examination  of  the  Bible,  ignoring  all  devotional,  practical,  and
spiritual  uses  of  it,  will  rob  it  of  all  inspiration  for  the  reader.  With  some  the  fires  are
burnt  out;  they  only  grope  among  the  ashos,  and  cannot  find  a  lingering  spark.  To
such  people  the  Bible  is  the  most  dreary  book  in  the  world.  In  order  that  the  fire  of
inspiration  should  touch  us,  the  fire  of  love  and  faith  must  be  kept  alive  on  the  altar  of
our  hearts. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  21. — Private  judgment.  This  verse  should  be  read  in  connection  with  the  pre-
ceding passage.  There  we  find  a  caution  against  quenching  the  Spirit  and  despising
]prophesyings  by  a  narrow,  cold,  or  prejudiced  refusal  to  listen  to  the  utterances  of  our
tellow-Christians.  Here  we  have  a  warning  in  the  other  direction,  that  we  may  guard
against  accepting  every  saying  which  professes  to  be  the  outcome  of  spiritual  influences.
We  must  try  the  spirits  and  accept  each  only  as  its  claim  is  proven.  But  the  universal
character  of  the  verse  before  us  gives  it  a  more  general  application  to  all  teaching.

I.  St.  Paul  recognizes  the  right  and  duty  of  private  judgment.  This  funda-
mental principle  of  Protestantism  is  Pauline.  The  apostle  is  not  writing  to  doctors  of
divinity  or  authorized  teachers ;  ho  is  addressing  the  whole  Church  (see  ch.  i.  1).  To
the  general  congregation  of  Christians  he  says,  '*  Prove  all  things.*'    The  advice  was  in


€«.  V.  1— 28.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  136

accordance  with  bis  own  practice.  He  speaks  of  himself  and  his  colleagues — '*  by  the
manifestation  of  the  truth  commending  ourselves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  tbe
sight  of  God"  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).  Contrast  the  Koran  with  the  New  Testament.  Moham^
med  dogmatizes;  St.  Paul  reasons.  We  caimot  shelter  ourselves  in  error  under  the
jBgis  of  high  authority.  St.  Paul  abandoned  with  contempt  the  errors  which  he  culti-
vated while  he  sat  at  the  feet  of  Ghunaliel.  It  is  our  duty  as  well  as  our  right  to  have
independent  personal  convictions.

II.  The  bequirement  of  inquiet  is  untveesal.  *'A11  things."  We  most  take
nothing  for  granted.  Some  of  the  surest  convictions  of  one  age  ore  absolutely  repudiated
by  another  age.  This  statement  becomes  softened  in  practice  by  the  ease  and  uncon-
sciousness with  which  many  things  may  be  proved  to  us.  We  have  not  to  carry  on
elaborate,  original  inquiries  to  establish  every  point  of  our  belief.  There  are  beliefs
which  are  best  proved  without  any  such  inquiry.  But  all  must  be  proved.  The  reason
is  twofold.  1.  Many  specious  delusions  threaten  to  deceive  us.  There  have  been  false
prophets  flattering  tbe  people  with  smooth  words  since  the  days  of  Jeremiah's  oppo-
nents. Truth  and  error  are  mixed.  Forged  coins  closely  resemble  good  sovereigns.
Care  must  be  taken  to  sift  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  2.  Truth  is  most  valuable  to  us
when  we  have  tested  and  proved  it  for  ourselves.  Then  we  understand  it  most  clearly,
believe  it  most  heartily,  and  value  it  most  highly.  The  few  islands  of  truth  for  which
a  man  has  laboured  and  fought  through  seas  of  difficulty  are  more  precious  to  him  than
vast  continents  of  truth  which  he  inherits  at  second  hand.

III.  The  method  of  inquiry  must  be  experimental.  This  is  implied  by  the
word  *'  prove/*  which  means  test,  and  is  used  of  the  assaying  of  precious  metals.  High
a  priori  argument  is  a  dangerous  guide.  The  more  t^ious  and  less  pretentious
methods  of  observation  and  experiment  are  safer.  To  this  method  Christ  referred  when,
speaking  of  the  various  teachers  who  should  arise,  he  said,  **  By  their  fruits  ye  shall
know  them."  This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  taste  the  fruits,  i,e,  to  adopt  every
system  in  order  to  discover  its  merits.  We  can  observe  its  working  in  others.  There-
fore the  first  requisite  in  regard  to  any  new  teaching  is  patience.  Give  it  time  to  reveal
itself  by  its  fruits,  and  do  not  pass  a  hasty  judgment  upon  it.  If  you  do  not  wait
for  the  harvest,  you  may  oot  out  wheat  with  tares.  Next,  careful  inquiry  is  to  be
made ;  ideas  and  their  fruits  are  to  be  tested.  But  two  cautions  should  be  borne  in
mind.  1.  The  experience  and  testimony  of  other  people  is  evidence.  We  may  not
accept  what  any  say  simply  on  the  authority  of  their  official  position.  We  who  do
not  believe  in  the  Pope  ot  Kome  would  be  very  foolish  if  we  adopted  a  little  private
pope  of  our  own  creation.  But  the  authority  of  knowledge,  experience,  and  ability  is
weight  in  evidence.  2.  We  must  not  assume  that  nothing  is  true  but  what  we  can  prove.
To  do  this  is  to  dethrone  the  pope  only  to  set  up  our  own  infallibility.

IV.  The  end  of  inquiry  is  to  discover  and  to  hold  to  what  is  good.  It  is
not  reasonable,  nor  happy,  nor  healthy  to  live  in  a  permanent  condition  of  unsettled  i
conviction.  It  is  useless  to  inquire  at  all  if  our  inquiry  is  not  to  lead  us  to  some
decisive  issue.  When  we  have  arrived  at  a  truth,  we  need  not  repeat  the  process  of
seeking  for  it  over  and  over  again.  Having  proved  certain  things  to  be  good,  we  may
rest  satisfied  with  the  result — always  preserving  an  open  mind  for  new  light,  for  it  is
a  great  mistake  to  confound  an  open  mind  with  an  empty  mind.  1.  The  result  of
inquiry  should  be  to  discover  what  is  good.  The  good  is  more  important  than  the
beautiful,  the  pleasant,  the  convenient,  the  striking,  and  the  noveL  2.  When  the  good
is  discovered  it  should  be  held  firmly.  Then  the  seeker  after  light  is  to  become  the
guardian  and  champion  of  truth. — W.  F.  A.

Yer.  23. — Complete  sandification.  In  concluding  his  Epistle,  and  finishing  his  list
of  practical  exhortations,  St.  Paul  sums  up  his  desires  for  the  welfare  of  his  i^ulers  by
one  comprehensive  prayer  for  their  complete  sanctification.

I.  Consider  the  nature  of  sanctification.  The  sanctification  of  a  man  makes
a  sanctuary  of  him.  It  consecrates  him  to  the  service  and  for  the  presence  of  GKxl.
It  includes  two  things,  the  second  of  which  is  essential  to  the  first.  I.  Dedication.
The  sanctified  man  is  dedicated  to  God.  He  yields  himself  up  to  the  will  of  Gh)d.
Ho  is  ready  for  any  use  to  which  God  may  put  him.  He  lives  to  glorify  God.
2.  Purification,    We  have  come  to  regard  this  as  essentially  the  same  as  sanctification.


136  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  v.  1—28.

It  Ss  not  80,  for  Christ  was  sanctified  (John  xvii.  19),  and  he  never  needed  to  be
purified.  But  the  great  hindrance  to  our  consecration  of  ourselves  to  Gk)d  or  to  any
special  Divine  purpose,  is  sin.  Therefore  for  us  the  one  great  preliminary  is  purifi-
cation.

II.  Obsebve  the  scope  of  SANCTiFiOATioir.  It  IS  to  be  complete:  1.  In  range.
It  affects  spirit,  soul,  and  body — St.  Paul's  human  trinity.  (1)  Spirit  Our  highest
thoughts,  aspirations,  and  efforts  are  to  be  sound,  pure,  and  devoted  to  God.  (2)  Soul,
Our  h>wer  capacities  of  feeling  and  acting  in  our  natural  human  life  are  to  be  equally
sanctified.  We  cannot  have  a  devout  spirituality  side  by  side  with  a  carnal  natural
imagination.  Moreover,  our  natural  humanity,  in  its  lower  perceptions  and  energies,
should  be  used  for  the  service  of  God.  (3)  Body.  This  is  not  only  not  to  be  degraded
by  vicious  appetite,  but  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  for  God's  service.  It  is  un-
christian to  mutilate  or  weaken  the  body.  This  should  be  kept  sound  and  healthy
and  vigorous  for  our  Master's  use.  2.  In  intensity.  The  sanctification  is  to  be
11iorou|2^.  Each  part  of  our  nature  is  to  be  *' wholly"  sanctified.  We  must  not
dedicate  ourselves  to  God  half-heartedly.  He  requires  the  whole  surrender  of  our
whole  nature.

UL  Note  the  soubcb  of  sanctification.  It  is  in  GKxl.  St.  Paul  turns  from
exhortation  to  prayer.  Here  and  there  little  duties  are  directed  by  our  own  will  and
energy.  But  the  grand  work  of  complete  purification  and  consecration  must  be  God's.
1.  By  means  of  his  spiritual  influence.  He  sanctifies  by  breathing  into  us  his  Holy
Spirit.  Contact  with  God  burns  out  sin,  and  lifts  the  soul  into  an  atmosphere  of
holiness.  2.  By  means  of  his  providential  care.  St.  Paul  prays  that  God  will  keep
his  readers  *'  entire  " — as  we  read  in  the  Kevised  Version.  He  guards  from  too  great
temptation.

IV.  Look  at  the  end  of  sanctification.  This  is  to  be  ''  blameless  at  the  coming
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1,  Preparation  for  the  second  advent.  We  are  required
to  be  ready  to  meet  Christ.  The  glad  expectation  should  encourage  every  effort  to
prepare,  lest  we  should  be  like  the  foolish  virgins.  2.  Blamelessness.  Christ  comes
as  Judge.  How  sad,  after  longins  to  see  him,  to  meet,  instead  of  a  welcome  from  our
Lord,  only  stem  words  of  rebuke  1 — W.  F,  A.

Ver.  24. — Ood*s  faithfulness.  Between  the  Divine  call  to  salvation  and  the  full
accomplishment  of  salvation,  the  Christian  needs  faith  to  watch  and  wait,  to  work  and
walk  through  the  darkness.  The  rock  on  which  he  must  build  this  faith  is  God's
faithfulness.

I.  Chabactebistics  of  God's  faithfulness.  1.  Ood  performs  what  he  promises,
God  promises  in  his  Word.  He  promises  most  solemnly,  aud  as  it  were  by  oath,  in  his
covenants,  e.g.  with  Noah,  with  Abraham,  with  Moses  and  Israel,  and  the  new  covenant
sealed  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  God  also  promises  by  his  actions.  Natural  instincts,
such  as  the  innate  thirst  for  light,  the  yearning  for  immortality,  etc.,  are  the  Creator's
promises  written  on  the  very  being  of  his  creatures.  God's  faithfulness  means  that  ho
will  not  belie  these  promises.  2.  Ood  is  true  to  himself.  His  consistency  and  immu-
tability are  the  grounds  of  his  faithfulness.  Because  he  is  true  to  himself  he  will  be
true  to  us:  "The  mercy  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever."  If  we  are  left  to  "the
uncovenanted  mercies"  of  Grod,  these  are  large  and  sure  enough  to  dispel  all  fear.  3.
Qod  justifies  the  confidence  of  his  children.  Faithfulness  implies  trustworthiness.  If
we  commit  our  souls  to  God  as  to  a  faithful  Creator,  he  accepts  our  trust,  and  thereby
pledges  his  honour  not  to  desert  us.

II.  Grounds  for  believing  in  God's  faithfulness.  1.  Our  knowledge  of  tJie  nature
of  Ood,  If  wo  believe  in  God  at  all,  we  must  believe  in  him  as  moral,  good,  nay,
perfect.  A  weak  and  limited  being  may  change  and  fail.  God  is  too  great  to  be  faitli-
less.  2.  The  testimony  of  those  who  can  best  speak  for  Ood,  We  judge  of  a  person's
character  largely  on  the  evidence  of  those  who  have  the  most  intimate  acquaintance.
Now  we  find  prophets  and  saints  who  are  nearest  to  God  in  thought  an(l  life  most
positive  in  asserting  his  faithfulness.  Only  they  who  dwell  in  the  outer  courts  of  his
temple,  or  altogether  away  from  his  presence,  venture  to  deny  it.  3.  The  evidence  afforded
by  the  life  of  Christ,  Christ  was  the  great  Revealer  of  the  character  of  God ;  and  Christ
was  faithful  even  to  death.     4.  The  witness  of  history  to  the  past  faithfulness  of  Ood ;


CH.  V.  1—23.]    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  137

e,g,  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  the  return  from  the  captivity,  the  advent  of  Christ,
the  presence  of  Christ  in  his  Church  to  guide  and  strengthen  and  bless.  5.  The  confir-
mation of  personal  experience.  Many  have  proved  God's  faithfulness  in  their  own
lives.  They  can  say,  '*  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  saved  him
out  of  all  his  troubles."

III.  Temptations  to  doubt  God's  faithfulness.  1.  The  weary  time  of  waiting.
God  does  not  fulfil  his  promises  as  soon  as  he  makes  them.  Long  intervals  try  our
faith.  So  was  it  with  the  Jewish  expectation  of  the  Messiah ;  so  is  it  with  the  Christian
expectation  of  the  second  advent.  The  heart  is  sickened  with  hope  deferred*  But
this  doubt  is  as  foolish  as  that  of  one  who,  seeing  the  morning  to  be  long  in  coming,
begins  to  distrust  the  promise  of  sunrise.  2.  Appearances  of  unfaithfulness.  Nothing
tries  love  so  painfully  as  the  necessity  of  so  acting  as  to  provoke  doubts  of  its  own
constancy.  Yet  the  truest  love  will  not  shrink  from  this  necessity  when  it  arises.  God
seems  to  desert  us,  or  he  visits  us  in  chastisement.  It  is  his  greater  faithfulness  that
leads  him  so  to  act  as  to  cloud  our  vision  of  his  love.  3.  The  unexpected  fulfilment  of
Divine  promises.  God  does  not  always  fulfil  his  promises  in  the  way  expected  by  us.
Then  we  are  disappointed.  But  the  error  was  in  our  previous  delusion,  not  in  any
change  on  God's  part.  Moreover,  the  true  Divine  fulfilment,  though  at  first  less
pleasing  to  us  than  our  expectation  of  it,  always  proves  in  the  long  run  to  be  far  better.

IV.  The  response   which   God's  faithfulness  should  call  forth  from  us.

1.  Adoration,     The  faithfulness  of  God  is  one  of  the  most  worthy  themes  of  worship.

2.  Trust.    Faithfulness  merits  confidence,  and  it  encourages  it.    3.  Fidelity.     If  Gc«d
is  faithful  to  us,  he  has  a  right  to  bid  us  be  faithful. — W.  F.  A,


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OP


ST.  PAUL  TO  THE   THESSALONIANS,


••  •


•••


•••


CHAPTER  I.

TITEMB

The  Character  of  Christians
The  Three  Cardinal  Virtues
The  Entrance  of  the  Gospel
The  Imitation  of  Christ      . . .
The  Union  of  Affliction  with  Joy
The  Example  of  Christians
The  Expectation  of  the  Advent
Addresses  and  Salutation    . . .
Heartfelt  Thanksgiving  for  Spiritual

Prosperity
Their  Election  and  its  Fruits  another

Ground  of  Thanksgiving
The  Profound    Impression    made  by

the    Conversion    of    the    Thessalo-

nians  ...
The  Nature  of  the  Impression  made

upon  the  "World  by  the  Spectacle  of

Thessaloni an  Piety
The  Address

The  Apostle's  Tlianksgiving
The  Happy  Results  of  the  Conversion

of  the  Thessalonians
Introduction

Manifestation  of  Interest    ...
Works  of  Grace    ...
The  Dynamic  Gospel
Affliction  with  Joy
How  the  Word  is  sounded  forth
The  Great  Change


..  •


PAGE
4
5

5
5
5
5
5
5

6

7

8


8

9

12

13
15
16
22
23
24
24
25


CHAPTER  H

THKinB

Motives  of  Action ...

The  True  Pastorate

Our  High  and  Holy  Calllog

The  Gospel  a  Divine  Revelation

Beware  of  Opi)osing  the  Gospel

The  Opposition  of  Satan  to  the  Gospel

Effectiveness  of  the  Gospel...  31, 38

The  Spirit  and  Method  of  Apostolic
I^abour  ...  ...  ...

A  Retrospect  of  his  Disinterested  and
Self-sacrificing  Labours  ...

Appeal  alike  io  Man  and  to  God  re-
specting his  Personal  and  his  Official
Work  at  Thessalonica

The  Thessalonian  Reception  of  the
Xrutu ...  ...  ...  •••

The  Evidence  of  the  Effectual  Work-
ing of  the  Divine  Word  ...

The  Apostle's  Anxiety  to  visit  the
Thessalonians    ...

The  Characteristics  of  St.  Paul's
Preaching  at  Thessalonica

St.  Paul's  Love  for  his  Converts

The  Manner  of  the  Preachers ;  or,  Self-
Portraiture        ...  ...  ...

Response  of  the  Thessalonians  to  the
P^lamation  of  the  Gospel  by  Paul
and  his  Companions        ...  ...      45

Great  Desire  to  see  the  Thessalonians       47


PACK

30
30
30
30
31
31


32


32


33

34

84

85

85
89

40


ii


INDEX.


•••


BoldDoss  in  declaring^  the  Gospel

EntniBted  with  tho  Gospel ...

The  Use  of  Affeotionateneas  in  com

mending  tho  Gospel
Worthy  of  God     ...
The  Word  of  God...
Folnesa  of  Sins     ..•
Hindered  by  Satan


•••


•••


•••


•••


CHAPTER  ra.

Connection  between  Affliction  and
Beligion  ...  ...  •,.

Steadfastness  in  Faith  and  Affliction

The  Duties  of  Minister  and  People  ...

Joy  in  the  Spiritual  Welfare  of  Others

Defective  Faith    ...

Prayer  addressed  to  Christ ...

Beligious  Progress

The  Ultimate  End  of  the  Christian
Dispcbsation     ...

The  Design  of  Timothy's  Mission  to
Thessalonica     •••

The  Happy  Issue  of  Timothy's  Visit
to  Thessalonica ...

The  Apostle's  Gratitude  to  God  and
his  Further  Solicitude  for  his  Con-
verts    •••  ...  ...  ,,,

Further  Prayer  for  his  Personal  Return
to  Thessalonica...

The  Apostle's  Prayer  for  the  Pro-
gressive Sandiflcation  of  the  Thes-
salonians  and  their  Final  Perfeclion
at  the  Coming  of  Christ  ...

Proof  of  the  Apostle's  Love  for  tho
Theisalonians   ...  ...

The  Return  of  Time theus  ...

St.  Paul's  Prayer  for  his  Converts    ...

Great  Desire^to  see  the  Thessalonians

How  the  Work  of  the  Gospel  may  be
frustrated  by  Temptation

St.  Paul's  Devotion  to  his  Converts  ...

The  Increase  of  Love

Divine  Culture     ...


•••


CHAPTER  IV.

Holiness  the  Design  of  Revelation    ...

Brotherly  Love     ...

Quietness  and  Faithfulness  in  Worldly

Duties...
Honesty...
The  Death  of  Friends        •••


FAOB

48
49

50
50
51
52
52


5G
57
57
57
57
57
57

58

58

59

59
60


60

61
63
65
65

70
71
71
72


78
78

78
78
78


Resurrection  of  Beliovcrs    ...  ...

The  Importance  of  Living  in  Harmony

with  the  Divine  WiU

Sanctification  a  Divine  Airangement
Warning  against  Sins  of  Impurity    ...
How  Personal  Purity  is  to  be  main-

uuneci  •«.  ...  ...  ...

Inculcation  of  Brotherly  Love
Inculcation  of  the  Duty  of  Quiet  and

Honest  Industry
Sorrow  for  the  D^
Reasons  against  Sorrow  for  the  Dead
The  Order  of  Events  at  the  Second

Advent  ...  ...  •••

Exhortation         ...  ...  ...

The  Law  of  Purity

The  Law  of  Love ...  ...  ...

The  Resurrection

Sanctification

The  Christian  Circle  and  Accounting

by  them  that  arc  without
Anxiety  about  the  State  of  the  Chris-
tian Dead         ...
Christian  Progress  ..«

Love  of  the  Brethren
The  Industrial  Life
Christians  before  the  World
Sorrow  for  the  Dead  transfigured  by

the  Resurrection  of  Christ
The  Order  of  the  Second  Advent


FAOK

78

79
79

79

80

80

81
81
82

82
83
84
86
87
88

90

92
96
97
98
99

99
100


CHAPTER  V.

Watchfulness  and  Sobriety...            ...  107

Spiritual  Armour ...            ...            ...  107

Christian  Forgiveness         ...           ...  107

Religious  Joy       ...           ...            ...  107

Unceasing  Prayer               ...            ...  107

Quenching  tho  Spirit  ...  107, 13^

Use  of  Reason  in  Religion  ...            ...  108

Certainty  of  the  Time  of  the  Second

Advent              ...            ...            ...  108

A  Warning  against  Watchlessness  ...  109
Tlic  Source,  Channel,  and  End  of  the

Salvation  hoped  for         ...            ...  109

The   Due   Recognition  of   Christian

Pastors              ...            ...            ...  110

Inculcation  of  Mutual  Peace             •••  110

Mutual  Duties  of  Church  Members  ...  Ill
Abstinence    from    Rovouge,  and  the

Steadfast  Pursuit  of  Good  ...  Ill
nio  Duty  and  the  Privilege  of  Constant

Joy      ...            ...            ..•            •••  112


INDEX.


iU


The  Duty  of  GoDstant  Prayer
The  Duty  of  ThanksgiTing^
Exhortations  regarding  Spiritual  Gifts
Warning  against  Every  Form  of  Evil. .
Prayer  for  the  Sanctification  and  Pre

serration  of  Thessalonian  Believers
Three  Closing  Injunctions  ...
-  The  Day  of  the  Lord  "     ...
Closing  Exhortations
The  Besultof  Obedience  to  these  Com

mandments — Sanotiflcation
Conclusion


•••


•••


PAGE
112

112
112
113

113
114
114
117

119
120


PAGE


THEME

Exhortation  in  View  of   the  Ix)rd's

Coming
Exhortations
Prayer    •••  ...

A  Thief  in  the  Night
Night  and  Day     ...
The  Divine  Appointment  of  Christians    132
Three  Universal  Exhortations  ...    I3il

Private  Judgment  ...  ...    131

Complete  Sanctification      ...  ...    135

God*s  Faithfulness  136


120
124
128
130
131


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,


DEAN  or  OLOU0E8TKB;


AND   BY  THE


UEV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


J  J .  11IESSAL0]STIAXS

<Sxpos(tton  axib  ^omflettcs
By  rev.  p.  J.  GLOAG,  D.D.


f^omfltes  bg  Fattous  ^utbors.

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D,  REV.  W.  P.  ADENEY,  M.A.

REV.  B.  C.  CAFFIN,  M.A.  REV.  R.  FINLAY80N,  B.A.


ii  u  II  0  0  n  ;

KEGAN  PAUL,  TEENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF

PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


-•o*-


INTRODUCTION.


■•o^


§  1.  The  Authorship  of  the  Epistlk.

The  external  evidence  in  favour  of  the  authenticity  of  the  Second  Epistle  to
the  Thessalonians  is  even  stronger  than  that  in  favour  of  the  First  Epistle*
In  consequence  of  the  prediction  of  the  '*  man  of  sin,"  contained  in  the  second
chapter,  which  prediction  made  a  great  impression  on  the  early  Ghuioh,
it  is  more  frequently  referred  to  and  quoted  by  the  Christian  Fathers.
The  testimonies  of  Justin  Martyr,  Irenaeus,  Clemens  of  Alexandria,  and
Tertullian  may  all  be  appealed  to.  Justin  Martyr  (a.d.  140)  unquestionably
alludes  to  this  Epistle  when  he  says,  '^  When  also  the  man  of  apostasy*
who  speaketh  great  things  against  the  Most  High,  shall  dare  to  commit
unlawful  deeds  against  us  Christians "  (*  Dial,  cum  Tryph.,'  c.  110);  And
the  following  direct  quotations  are  found  in  the  writings  of  Ireneeus
(a.d.  178) :  *'  And  again  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  speaking
of  antichrist,  Paul  says,  '  And  then  shall  that  wicked  one  be  revealed  whom
the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  spirit  of  his  mouth,  and  destroy  with
the  presence  of  his  coming '  (ch.  ii.  8)  *'  (*  Adv.  Haeres.,'  iii.  7,  2).  And
again :  '*  Concerning  whom  the  apostle  in  the  Epistle  which  is  the  Second
to  the  ThoHsalonians  thus  speaks :  *  Except  a  falling  away  come  first,  and
the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition :  who  opposeth  and  exalteth
himself  above  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped '  (ch.  ii.  3,  4)  "
(*  Adv.  Hrores.,'  v.  25.  1).

Nor  is  the  internal  evidence  by  any  means  deficient.  The  character  of
Paul  is  impressed  upon  this  Epistle ;  his  lively  sympathy  with  his  oonvertB,
his  gratitude  to  God  for  the  increase  of  their  faith  and  love,  his  joy  in  their
spiritual  welfare,  his  tenderness  when  censuring  them,  his  assertion  of  his
apostolic  authority,  his  reference  to  his  former  instructions,  his  request  for
an  interest  in  their  prayers, — all  these  characteristics  of  the  apostle  are

IL  TllSSSALONIANS.  b


u


INTRODUCTION  TO


fonnd  in  this  Epistle.  The  style  is  undoubtedly  Pauline.  We  have  the
same  form  of  salutation  at  the  beginning  and  of  benediction  at  the  close,
the  same  parallelisms,  the  same  digressions  and  expansions,  the  same
expressions  and  peculiarities  of  diction,  which  are  elsewhere  found  in
Paul's  other  Epistles.^  The  prophetic  portion  in  the  second  chapter  has
indeed  been  adduced  as  an  evidence  of  spuriousness.  But  this  objection  is
partly  founded  on  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  the  prediction ;  and  although
it  is  admitted  that  there  is  here  a  striking  peculiarity,  yet  this  peculiarity
relates  only  to  the  matter,  not  to  the  phraseology,  which  is  undoubtedly
Pauline.  **  The  passage  in  question,"  observes  Dean  Alford,  "  will  be  found
on  oomparison  to  bear,  in  style  and  flow  of  sentences,  a  close  resemblance  to
the  denunciatory  and  prophetic  portions  of  the  other  Epistles.  Compare,
for  instance,  ver.  3  with  Col.  ii.  8,  16;  vers.  8,  9  with  1  Cor.  xv.  24 — 28 ;
ver.  10  with  Hom.  i.  18,  1  Cor.  i.  18,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  15;  ver.  11  with  Rom  i.
24,  26 ;  ver.  12  with  Rom.  ii.  5,  9  and  Rom.  i.  22." «  And  although  this
passage  has  been  much  objected  to  by  modern  critics,  yet  hardly  any
scriptural  passage  has  been  more  frequently  referred  to  by  the  early  Fathers,
and  that  without  any  doubt  that  it  formed  a  part  of  a  genuine  Epistle
of  Paul.

The  undesigned  coincidences  noticed  in  this  Epistle  are  few  and  unim-
portant. The  obscurity  of  the  prediction  concerning  antichrist  has  been
adverted  to  as  a  proof  of  genuineness.  No  author,  it  has  been  remarked,
writes  unintelligibly  on  purpose;  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that  what  is
almost  unintelligible  to  us  was  not  unintelligible  to  the  Thessalonians.
They  had  a  key  to  the  interpretation  of  the  passage  in  the  oral  instructions
of  the  apostle  given  when  he  was  at  Thessalonioa :  **  Remember  ye  not,  that,
when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  of  these  things?  And  now  ye  know  what
withholdeth  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time  "  (ch.  ii.  5,  6).*  In  the
Epistle  Paul  observes :  **  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  nought ;
but  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night  and  day,  that  wo  might  not  bo
chargeable  unto  any  of  you "  (ch.  iii.  8).  The  apostle  here  asserts  that
he  received  nothing  in  the  way  of  maintenance  from  the  Thessalonians ;
and  this  fact  is  confirmed  by  a  statement  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians*
wherein  it  is  said  that  his  wants  in  Thessalonica  were  at  least  partially
supplied  by  the  Philippians :  **  Now  ye  Philippians  know  also  that  in  the
beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  Church
communicated  with  me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only.
For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  necessity  "  (Phil.  iv.
15,  16).  And  the  motive  which  induced  the  apostle  to  decline  support
from  the  Thessalonians,  namely,  to  give  them  an  example  of  honest  labour
and  diligence  in  work  (ch.  iii.  9),  was  the  same  which  actuated  him  to

*  Soo  author's  *  Pauline  EpistlcB,'  p.  108  ;  and  also  Jowett's  *  Epistles  of  Paul,*  vol.  i.  ppi
140—142,  Ist  edit.

*  Alford*8  •  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  55.

*  Paley'8  '  Hora)  Paulinra : '  2  Thessalonians,  No.  i.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  iu.


pursne  the  same  course  of  conduct  at  Epbesus  (Acts  zx.  34,  35).  There
appears  also  to  be  in  this  Epistle  a  reference  to  the  First  Epistle,  where  the
apostle  says,  *' Therefore,  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions
which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  in  our  Epistle  "  (oh.  ii.  15).

§  2.  The  Occasion  of  the  Epistle.

The  persons  to  whom  this  Epistle  was  written  were  **  the  Church  of  the
Tbessalonians  "  (ch.  i.  1),  or  the  Christian  converts  in  the  city  of  Thessa-
lonica.  We  have  already  fully  discussed  this  point  in  the  introductory
remarks  to  the  First  Epistle.

In  order  to  understand  this  Second  Epistle,  we  must  endeavour  to  ascer-
tain t]ie  condition  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  when  the  apostle  wrote
to  them.    Paul  had  been  compelled  to  leave  the  Tbessalonians  only  partially
instructed  in  Christianity ;  they  were  defective  both  in  the  knowledge  of
its  doctrines  and  in  the  practice  of  its  precepts.     He  had  written  them  an
Epistle  to  coirect  abuses  and  to  supply  what  was  lacking  in  their  faith
(1  Thess.  iii.  10).     The  intelligence  brought  back  to  the  apostle  by  the
bearer  of  the  First  Epistle,  or  through  some  other  channel,  was  the  occasion
of  this  Epistle.     The  apostle  received  a  good  report  of  the  Tbessalonians,
and  is  enabled  to  express  his  joy  and  thankfulness  to  God  that  their  faith
grew  exceedingly,  and  the  love  of  every  one  toward  each  other  abounded
(ch.  i.  3).     But  still  the  erroneous  views  concerning  the  advent,  and  the
consequent  disorders  to  which  he  had  adverted  in  the  First  Epistle,  had
rather  increased  than  diminished.     The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  left  the
world  only  twenty  years  before.     He  had  promised  to  return  at  an  uncertain
date,  and  therefore  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  the  Church  in
general  should  have  expected  his  immediate  return.     Various  circumstances,
both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world,  heightened  this  expectation.     Such
a  view  of  an  immediate  advent  had  taken  possession  of  the  minds  of  the
Thessalonian   converts.      Their  anxiety   for  the   loss  of   their  deceased
relatives,  who,  Ihey  thought,  would  lose  all  the  benefits  occurring  at  the
advent,  had  indeed  been  assuaged  by  the  former  Epistle,  but  the  expecta-
tion of  the  immediate  advent  itself  had  grown  in  strength.     The  Tbessa-
lonians, it  would  seem,  from  misapprehending  some  passages  of  the  First
Epistle,  considered  that  the  day  of  Christ  was  at  hand  (ch.  ii.  2).     Mistaken
and  enthusiastic  men  had  also  nourished  this  deception  by  appealing  to
visions  and  to  the  traditionary  sa}'ings  of  the  apostle ;  and  it  would  even
appear  that  an  Epistle  had  been  forged  in  the  name  of  the  apostle.     The
Church  was  tiirown  into  a  state  of  wild  excitement;  an  impatient  and
fanatical  longing  for  the  instant  when  Christ  would  come  seized  upon  one
portion,  whilst  fear  and  consternation  at  the  awfulness  of  the  event  over-
whelmed another.    The  consequence  was  that  many  of  the  Thesscdonians
were  neglecting  their  secular  business  and  living  idle  and  useless  lives,
conceiving  that  there  was  no  use  of  working  in  a  world  which  was  so  soon


iT  INTRODUCTION  TO


to  be  destroyed,  or  of  performing  the  duties  belonging  to  a  state  of  things
which  was  so  soon  to  terminate.  Their  only  duty  they  felt  was  to  be  in
readiness  for  the  immediate  coming  of  their  Lord.

Accordingly  the  design  of  the  apostle,  in  writing  this  Epistle,  was  to
correct  the  error  which  the  Thessalonians  entertained  concerning  the
immediate  advent,  and  to  rectify  those  abuses  to  which  that  error  had
given  rise.  The  main  object  of  the  apostle  was  to  warn  the  Thessalonians
against  thinking  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  imminent.  The  apostle
reminds  them  of  his  former  instructions  on  this  point,  and  tells  them  that
a  series  of  events — the  manifestation  and  destruction  of  the  man  of  sin —
would  intervene.  "Now  we  beseech  you  concerning  the  advent  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  gathering  together  unto  him,  that  ye  be  not
soon  shaken  from  your  mind,  or  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,
nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  present"  (ch.  ii.  I,  2).
And,  along  with  this  correction  of  error,  was  the  correction  of  the  disorders
occasioned  by  it.  There  were  among  the  Thessalonians  some  who  walked
disorderly,  working  not  at  all ;  them  he  enjoined  to  return  to  their  employ-
ments, to  do  their  work  with  quietness,  and  to  eat  the  bread  of  honest
labour  (ch.  iii.  10 — 12).

With  regard  to  its  contents,  the  Epistle  is  divided  into  three  parts,  nearly
corresponding  to  the  three  chapters  in  our  version;  the  first  part  is
eucharistic,  the  second  apocalyptic,  and  the  third  practical.  The  apostle,
affcer  saluting  the  Thessalonians,  renders  thanks  to  God  for  tlio  good  report
which  he  had  received  of  them,  for  the  increase  of  their  faith  and  love,  and
for  their  great  patience  under  prolonged  persecution ;  he  comforts  them
under  their  sufiferings  by  the  prospect  of  rest  and  recompense  at  the  advent
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  prays  for  their  continuance  in  the  faith,  and  for  the
glory  of  Christ's  name  through  their  steadfastness  and  holiness  (ch.  i.).
He  then  proceeds  to  the  principal  object  which  ho  had  in  view — the  correc-
tion of  their  error  in  supposing  that  the  day  of  Christ  was  imminent.  He
admonishes  them  not  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  led  away  by  excitement  as
if  Christ  would  immediately  appear,  he  reminds  them  of  his  former  con-
versations with  them  on  this  subject,  and  he  describes  the  coming  of  the
man  of  sin  which  must  precede  the  coming  of  Christ  (ch.  ii.  1 — 12).  He
then  exhorts  them  to  attend  to  the  admonitions  he  had  given  them,  whether
by  word  or  by  his  Epistle;  he  prays  that  the  Lord  might  direct  their
minds  to  a  patient  waiting  for  the  advent  of  Christ ;  ho  especially  warns
them  against  that  unsteadiness  and  idleness  which  prevailed  among  them ;
he  enjoins  them  to  discountenance  and  admonish  all  those  who  would  not
be  persuaded  by  his  injunctions ;  and  he  concludes  his  Epistle  by  appending
with  his  own  hand  his  apostolic  benediction,  as  a  tokcQ  of  its  genuineness
(ch.  iL  13 — iii.).


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


§  3.  The  Date  of  the  Epistle.

This  Epistle  was  evidently  written  shortly  after  the  First.  Silas  and
Timothy,  as  in  the  First  Epistle,  are  conjoined  with  Paul  in  the  salutation,
and  were  consequently  still  in  his  company  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle.
But  when  Paul  left  Corinth,  we  are  not  informed  that  these  two  fellow-
workers  accompanied  him  (Acts  xvii.  8);  nor,  from  what  appears,  were
they  ever  afterwards  both  together  with  him.  Timothy,  we  are  informed,
rejoined  Paul  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  22) ;  but  there  is  no  further  mention
of  Silas  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Besides,  the  relations  and  wants  of
the  Church  are  similar  to  those  which  are  presupposed  in  the  First  Epistle ;
similar  commendations,  warnings,  instructions,  and  prayers  are  contained
in  both  Epistles ;  the  only  difiference  being  what  the  lapse  of  a  few  months
might  effect  in  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Thessalonian  Church.  A
closer  indication  of  time  is  supposed  to  be  contained  in  oh.  iii.  2,  where  the
apostle  entreats  the  Thessalonians  to  pray  for  him  that  he  might  be
delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men — evidently  from  his  unbeliev-
ing Jewish  opponents — from  which  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  outbreak
of  Jewish  hatred  and  fanaticism,  when  the  apostle  was  dragged  before
Gallic,  was  about  to  take  place.  At  all  events,  time  must  be  allowed  for
further  information  concerning  the  Church  of  Thessalonica  to  have  reached
the  apostle,  for  the  progress  which  the  Thessalonians  made  in  faith  and
love,  and  for  the  further  development  of  the  error  concerning  the  advent
We  cannot  be  wrong  in  fixing  the  time  of  the  composition  of  this  Epistle
to  the  later  part  of  Paul's  residence  in  Corinth,  or  to  the  close  of  A.D.  53.
Calvin  is  undoubtedly  mistaken  when  he  supposes  that  this  Epistle  was
written  dunng  the  last  journey  of  Paul  to  Jerusalem,  supposing  that  the
"unreasonable  and  wicked  men"  were  the  Judaizing  Christians  who
dogged  his  steps.

Some — Grotius,  Ewald,  Laurent,  Baur,  Davidson  (2nd  edit.) — ^reverse  the
order  of  the  Epistles,  and  suppose  that  this  Second  Epistle  was  in  reality
the  First.  But  the  reasons  which  they  give  for  this  opinion  are  without
weight.  The  mark  of  genuineness,  at  the  close  of  the  Epistle,  was  given
in  consequence  of  the  existence  of  a  spurious  Epistle  (ch.  ii.  2),  and  not
because  it  was  the  first  Epistle  which  the  apostle  wrota  The  Second
Epistle  presupposes  the  First.  The  First  Epistle  describes  how  the  Thes-
salonians received  the  Word  of  God,  whilst  the  Second  Epistle  mentions
their  progress  in  faith,  love,  and  patience.  The  First  Epistle  treats  of  the
uncertainty  of  the  advent ;  the  Second  Epistle  corrects  the  misapprehension
of  the  Thessalonians  concerning  that  uncertainty.  The  First  Epistle  adverts
to  the  spirit  of  disorder,  the  germs  of  which  the  apoHtle  saw  in  the  Thes-
salonian Church ;  the  Second  Epistle  rebukes  this  spirit  still  more  sharply,
as  these  germs  had  developed  and  borne  pernicious  fruit.  The  First  Epistle
had   given  the  Thessalonians  commandments  to  be  obeyed;  and,  in  the


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SECOND  THESSALONIANS.


Second  Epistle,  the  apostle  exhorts  them  to  hold  the  traditions  which  he
had  delivered  to  them,  whether  by  word  or  his  Epistle.

The  place  of  writing  was  Corinth.  The  note  at  the  end  of  the  Epistle,
"The  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  from  Athens,"
although  found  in  very  ancient  manuscripts,  is  undoubtedly  erroneous ;  so
also  are  other  statements  which  refer  the  composition  of  this  Epistle  to
Bercea,  Laodicea,  or  Bome.  This,  then,  is  the  second  of  Paul's  extant
Epistles.

S  4.  The  PEcuLUBrriES  of  the  Epistle.


The  great  peculiarity  of  this  Epistle — that  which  distinguishes  it  from
all  Paul's  other  Epistles,  and  imparts  to  it  a  peculiar  importance,  and  at
the  same  time  renders  its  exposition  a  matter  of  great  difficulty — is  the
prediction  of  the  man  of  sin,  contained  in  the  second  chapter  (vers.  1 — 12).
This  section  is  distinguished  from  all  the  other  writings  of  Paul,  and  is
closely  allied  to  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  and  the  apocalyptic  visions  of
John.  Here  the  apostle  glances  into  the  future,  and  predicts  what  is  to
happen  in  the  latter  days.  There  are  other  portions  of  his  Epistles  in
which  he  refers  to  what  will  occur  in  the  last  days,  and  at  the  period  of
the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  Gk)d  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 5 ;  Rom.  viii.  19 — 24),
and  he  also  foretells  the  full  conversion  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  the
faith  of  Jesus  (Bom.  xi.  25) ;  but  this  is  the  only  passage  in  all  his  Epistles
where  a  detailed  prophecy  is  given.  This  prediction  of  the  man  of  sin,  as
already  observed,  had  peculiar  attractions  to  the  early  Church  suflfering
from  persecution ;  and  it  has  been  the  subject  of  numerous  dissertations  in
modern  times ;  its  very  obscurity  being  one  cause  of  the  interest  attached
to  it,  and  of  the  amount  of  ingenious  labour  expended  on  its  elucidation.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF


PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  I.

CosTEJfTS. — ^Paul,  after  the  address  and
salutation,  commences  this  Epistle  by  render-
ing thanks  to  God  for  the  welcome  intelli-
gence he  had  received  of  the  increase  of  the
foitli  and  love  of  his  Thossnlonian  converts,
80  tliat  he  was  enabled  to  boast  of  them
throughout  all  the  Churches  'of  Achaia,  on
account  of  their  steadfastness  in  the  en-
durance  of  continued  persecution.  Their
present  sufforing  was  an  evidence  of  a  future
state  of  retribution,  when  the  justice  of  God
would  bo  vindicated,  and  affliction  would  bo
rendered  to  their  persecutors  and  rest  to
them  the  persecuted,  on  that  great  day  when
the^IiOrd  Jesus  would  appear  in  glory  for
the  destruction  of  his  enemies  and  the  glorifi-
cation of  Iiis  people.  The  apostle  expresses
liis  constant  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians
that  God  would  enable  them  to  walk  worthy
of  their  high  vocation,  so  as  to  be  made
partakers  of  that  glory  which  would  be
conferred  on  believers  at  the  advent.

Vers.  1,  2. — Paul,  and  Silvanus,  and  Timo-
theus.  This  Epistle,  like  the  former,  is
written  in  their  conjoint  names,  as  all  three
wert«  eng:igcd  in  the  planting  of  the  Church
in  TlK'Ssiilonica.  Unto  the  Choroh  of  the
Thessalonians  in  God  our  Father  and  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ:  gprace  nnto  yon,  and
peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  (For  the  exposition  of  these
two  verses,  boo  remarks  on  1  Thess.  i.  1,
whoro  the  udilress  and  salutation  are  almost
entirely  tho  same.)

Ver.  [\. — We.  Not  to  be  restricted  to  Paul,
the  plural  being  used  for  tho  singular,  as  is
eleewln  re  the  case  (1  Thess.  ii.  8;  iii.  1);
but  inclusive  of  Silas  and  Timothy,  inas-

II.  Tm>SAI.OXIANS.


much  as  they  are  mentioned  directly  before
(see  note  to  1  Thess.  i.  2).  Are  bound ;  feel
ourselves  morally  constrained.  To  thank
God  always  for  you,  brethren  (oomp.  1  Thess.
i.  2).  The  apostlu  first  praises  his  converts
for  what  good  was  in  tliem,  before  he  censures
them  for  their  faults,  and  in  this  manner  he
secures  their  attention.  As  it  is  meet ;  as  it
is  right  and  proper  in  tho  circumstances  of
the  case.  The  words  are  not  to  be  considered
as  a  parenthetic  cLiuse,  far  less  as  a  tautolo-
gical expression  ( Jowett) ;  but  they  state  that
tho  reason  of  the  apostle's  thanksgiving
arose  from  the  spiritual  condition  of  the
Thessalonians ;  **  with  tho  acknowledgment
of  personal  obligation,  Paul  joins  a  recog-
nition of  tho  circumstances  of  the  case"
(Hofmann).  Because  that  yonrfkitibgroweth
exceedingly— 6uperabounds—«nd  the  eharity
of  every  one  of  yon  alL  The  subject  of  the
apostle's  thanksgiving  was  the  increase  of
the  faith  and  love  of  tho  Thessalonians:
fiiith  here  being  faith  in  Christ,  and  love
being  love  to  man.  Faith  and  love  contain
in  themselves  the  whole  of  tho  Christian
life ;  faith  is  its  commencement,  its  source ;
love  is  not  only  its  outcome,  its  spiritual
action,  but  its  completion;  the  climax  of  the
Christian  life  is  to  be  made  perfect  in  love.
Here,  however,  love  is  restricted  by  tlio
context  to  love  to  believers,  or  brotherly
love.  Toward  each  other ;  that  is,  toward
your  felluw-Christiuns  in  Thessalonica.
Love  is  not  a  mere  general  oficction,  but
is  to  be  specially  manifested  —  ^  toward
oacli  believer."  Abonndeth;  increaseth  in
intensity.

Ver.  4.— Bo  that  we  ourselves.  ••We"—
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy,  tho  founders
of  tho  Church  of  Thessalonica.  **  We  our-
eelves."  not  merely  we  of  our  own  accord
(Hofmann),  but  we  as  well  as  our  informants,
wlio  brought  us  this  intelligence  of  tlio
increase  of  your  faith  and  love.    Glory  in

B


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cji.  i.  1—12.


joa  in  the  ChnroheB  of  Ood ;  that  is,  in  those
Churches  witli  which  wo  com©  in  contact ;
namely,  the  Church  at  Corinth  and  the
Churches  in  Achaia.  It  would  appear  from
this  that  several  Churches  had  been  founded
in  Achaia,  as,  for  example,  the  Church  of
Cenchrca  (Rom.  xvi.  1).  For  your  patience
and  faith ;  not  to  bo  weakened  as  a  Hebraism
for  "  your  patient  faith,"  or  "  for  the  patience
of  your  faith ;  *'  nor  is  faith  to  be  taken  in  the
sense  of  faitlifulness  or  fidelity  (Liincmann) ;
but,  as  in  the  previous  verse,  it  denotes
"fjBdth  in  Christ."  Patience  is  steadfast
endurance,  which,  in  order  to  be  of  any  value
in  the  sight  of  God,  must  bo  combined  with
fSEuth ;  stoical  endurance  is  not  hero  nor  any-
where elso  inculcated  in  Scripture.  In  all
your  perseontionB  and  tribulations — afflic-
tions—that ye  endore ;  or,  are  enduring ;  the
persecution  which  arose  when  Paul  was  at
Thessalonica  being  continued.  The  patience
and  faiUi  of  the  Thcssalonians  shono  the
more  brilliantly  amid  persecution  and  afflic-
tion, even  as  the  stars  shine  brightest  in
the  dark  night.  To  bo  a  true  Christian  in
tho  time  of  peaoo  is  a  great  matter ;  but  to
bo  a  true  Christian  in  the  season  of  persecu-
tion is  a  greater ;  faith  is  then  tested  in  the
furnace.

Vcr.  5. — ^Whioh  is  a  manifest  token.    A
sentence  in  apposition,  so  that  the  words,
**  which  is,"  printed  in  italics,  ought  to  be
omitted.    By  •'  token  "  is  here  meant  pledge
or  proof.    The  reference  is  not  simply  to  the
Thcssalonians,  but  to  tho  whole  clause — to
the  fact  of  tho  Thcssalonians  steadfastly  en-
during persecutions  and  affliction ;  in  other
words,  to  their  sufferings  for  the  asiko  of  tho
gospel.    Of  the  righteone— just— judgment
of  God.    Not  to  bo  referred  to  tho  present
state,  and  particularly  to  sufferings  perfect-
ing the  Thcssalonians  and  preparing  them
for  tho  kingdom  of  God  (Olshausen) ;  but  to
the  future  judgment.    These  words  imply
that  the  sufierings  of  ihe  righteoos  and  the
prosperity  of  their  wicked  persecutors  was
a  clear  proof  that  there  shall  be  a  future
state  of  retribution,  when  the  inequalities  of
tho  present  state  of  things  will  be  adjusted,
when  tho  apparent  violations  of  justice  will
be  rectified,  and  when  matters  will  be  com-
pletely reversed — when  the  persecutors  will
be  punished  and  the  persecuted  rewarded
(comp.  Phil.  i.  28,  "  And  in  nothing  terrified
by  your  adversaries ;  which  is  to  them  an
evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of
salvation  and  that  of  God").    That;  in  order
that,  indicating  the  purpose  of  God's  dis-
pensation.    Te   may  be   counted   worthy.
Paul  hero  finds,  in  the  faith  and  patience  of
the  Thcssalonians  amid  persecution,  an  evi-
dence of  a  state  of  reward,  as  well  as  in  the
cmelties  of  their  persecutors  an  evidence  of
a  state  of  punishment    The  idea  that  man


can  merit  salvation  as  a  reward  from  God  is
not  contained  in  tliis  passage.  As  all  men
are  sinners,  salvation  can  only  be  obtained
through  tho  merits  and  mediation  of  Christ.
But  with  this  grace  of  God,  justice  is  not
abolished ;  the  ri;5]itoous  will  bo  rewarded
for  their  faith  and  patience  (comp.  Ileb.  vi.
10;  also  Heb.  xi.  6;  Luke  vi.  35;  1  Cor.
iii.  8  ;  2  John  8).  Of  the  kingdom  of  God ;
namely,  tho  Messianic  kingdom  which  Christ
will  establish  at  tho  advent :  here  tho
heavenly  state.  For  which ;  for  tlio  sake  of
which.  Ye  also  suffer ;  or  rather,  are  suffer-
ing ;  the  sufferings  being  continued  down  to
tho  time  when  the  apostlo  wrote  this  Epistle.

Ver.  6. — Seeing  it  is ;  or  rather,  if  indeed
it  is ;  if  so  he  that  it  is  (E.V.).  A  hypotheti-
cal sentence,  not,  however,  introducing  an
uncertain  or  conditional  fact,  but  an  em-
phatic assertion — what  is  felt  by  all  to  be
true.  A  righteous  thing  with  God.  Not
only  will  tho  justice  of  God  be  displayed  in
tho  rewards  of  tho  righteous,  in  counting
them  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  for
which  they  suffer,  but  it  will  also  bo  dis-
played in  the  punishments  to  bo  inflicted  on
their  persecutors.  To  recompense  tribula-
tion to  them  that  trouble  you.  We  have
here  an  example  of  one  of  the  most  common
defects  of  our  English  Version  in  rendering
cognato  words  by  different  terms,  and  thus
creating  needless  perplexities  and  giving  rise
to  erroneous  interpretations;  the  words
"tribulation"  and  "trouble"  are  cognate,
and  hence  tho  verse  ought  to  be  rendered  as
in  tlic  R.y.,  "  If  so  bo  that  it  is  a  righteous
thing  witli  God  to  recompense  affliction  to
them  that  afflict  you."

Vcr.  7. — ^And  to  you  who  are  troubled —
afflicted — ^rest.  The  word  "  rest "  here  is  a
noun  in  tho  accusative,  not  a  verb,  ns  Eng-
lish readers  might  at  tho  first  glance  sup-
pose. It  literally  denotes  relaxation,  ease.
Tho  meaning  of  the  pass^go  is  that  it  is  a
righteous  thing  with  God  to  rocompenso
rest  to  you  who  aro  afflicted.  The  recom-
pense of  the  persecutors — ^those  who  afflict,  is
affliction ;  tho  recompense  of  tho  persecuted
— the  afflicted,  is  rest  (comp.  Matt.  xi.  28, 2U).
The  rest  or  relaxation  here  mentioned  is
that  which  awaits  believers,  not  in  this
world,  but  in  tho  next,  "  where  tho  wicked
cease  from  ti'oubling,  and  tho  weary  aro  at
rest"  (Job  iii.  17).  "There  remaineth  a
rest  for  tho  people  of  God"  (Heb.  iv.  9).
The  happiness  of  heaven  on  its  negative
side,  as  freedom  from  earthly  affliction  and
persecution,  is  here  stated.  It  is  rest  to  tho
weary,  freedom  to  the  enslaved,  release  from
sorrow,  suffering,  and  pain,  relaxation  from
toil,  ease  irom  noise  and  turmoil,  the  quiet
haven  of  peace  after  being  tossed  about  in
the  tempestuous  ocean.  With  us ;  that  is,  not
with  lis  believers  in  general,  or  with  us  tho


CH.  L  1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


apostles,  the  champions  of  the  faith,  and
Etill  less  with  us  Jews,  the  saints  of  Ismcl ;
but  witli  us,  the  writers  of  this  Epistle,
namely,  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  When
the  Lord  Jesus  ihall  be  revealed ;  or,  more
literally,  at  the  revelation  or  apocalypse  of
Hie  Lord  Jesus.  The  advent  of  Christ  is
generally  expressed  by  another  word,  par-
otMia,  denoting  ** presence;"  here  tho  word
is  apocalypse^  bringing  before  us  in  a  more
yivid  manner  tho  yisible  manifestation
of  Christ.  The  advent  of  Christ  is  the
period  when  he  who  has  hitherto  been  con-
cealed will  be  manifested  as  the  supreme
Buler  and  Judge  of  the  world.  From  heaven ;
where  now  he  is  concealed  from  human
view,  seated  at  the  riglit  hand  of  God.  With
hii  mighty  angels;  not  with  his  host  of
angels,  but,  as  it  is  in  the  margin  of  our
Bibles, ."  with  the  angels  of  his  power  "—
serving  his  power  and  proclaiming  his  might.
It  is  the  uniform  declaration  of  Scripture
that  Christ  will  come  to  judgment  attended
by  his  holy  angels  (ISIatt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxiv.  31 ;
Judo  14).  And  these  angels  are  *'  the  angels
of  his  power,"  sent  forth  to  execute  his  com-
mands. By  their  instrumentality  the  dead
shall  bo  called  irom  their  graves,  and  tho
wicked  separated  from  among  the  just  (1
Thess.  iv.  16 ;  Matt.  xiii.  49).

Ver.  8. — ^In  flaming  fire ;  not  the  instru-
ment of  punishment — '*in  flaming  fire  taking
vengeance ;  *'  but  a  further  description  of  the
glory  of  Christ's  appearance — "  revealed  in
flaming  fire."    In  the  Old  Testament  God
is  represented  as  appearing  in  flaming  fire,
as  when  ho  manifested  himself  to  Moses  in
the  burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.  2 ;  Acts  vii.  30) ;
and  especially  his  coming  to  judgment  is
represented  as  coming  in  fire  (Ps.  xcvii.  3).
What  is  theie  asserted  of  God  is  here  re-
ferred to  Christ  (oomp.  Rev.  xix.  22).   There
is  also  a  probable  reference  to  the  Shcchinah
or  cloud  of  glory  in  which  Christ  will  appear
for  judgment  (Key.  i.  7).    Some  also  suppose
a  reference  to  tho  fire  of  the  universal  con-
flagration which  shall  usher  in  tho  List  day
(2  Pet.  iii.  10),  and  others  to  tho  firo  which
shall  consume  the  ungodly,  but  it  is  best  to
restrict  the  expression  to  the  glory  of  Christ's
manifestation.    Taking  vengeance ;  literally,
giving ;  that  is,  awarding  or  allotting  ven-
geance, representing  the  oct,  not  of  a  con-
queror or  of  an  avenger,  but  of  a  righteoos
Judge.    On  them  that  know  not  God — the
unbelieving  Gentiles— and  that;  or  rather,
on  ihem  thai;  a  second  chiss  being  here
denoted.    Obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Chxist ;  namely,  tho  unbelieving  Jews.
The  ignorance  of  the  one  and  the  disobedi-
ence of  the  other  were  the  causes  of  their
punishment.

Ver.  9. — ^Who ;  namely,  the  unbelieving
Gentiles  and   Jews.     Shall   be  pimiBhed;


literally,  */2a7Z  pay  the  penalty;  shall  suffer
punishment  (K.V.).     With  everlasting  de-
struction ;  or  rather,  even  everlasting  destrue-
tion  ;  tho  words  being  in  apposition.    •*  De-
struction" here  denotes    ruin,  death;  the
word  is  only  used  in  Paul's  Epistles  (1  Cor.
V.  8;  1  Thess.  v.  3;  1  Tim.  vi.  9).    The
Greek  word  translated  **  everlasting,"  firom
dogmatic  reasons,  has  given  rise  to  much
controversy.     Here   it   appears   to  denote
eternal — eternity  to  come.    The  eternal  pun-
ishment of  tlie  wicked  seems  here  asserted;
a  terrible  declaration,  which  the  mind  shud-
ders to  contemplate.    The  observation  of
Olshausen  is  worthy  of  attention :   "  This  is
tho  only  passage  in  Paul's  Epistles  in  which
everlasting  damnation  is  oi)enly  declared,
whereas  not  a  few  occur  in  which  a  biinging
back  of  all  tho  lost  ones  is  apparently  as-
simied  as  possible ; "  but  he  adds,  **  For  the
supposition  that   Paul  did  indeed  in  the
earliest  of  his  Epistles  still  teach  everlasting
damnation,  but  gave  it  up  in  later  times,  there
exists  no  sufficient  foundation,  because  the
bringing  back  again  is  nowh^  fireely  and
openly  declared."  *    From  the  presence  (or,
face)  of  the  Lord.    This  clause  has  received
a  threefold  interpretation.  Some  (De  Wette,
Hofmann)  take  the  preposition  •*  from  "  in  a
causal  sense,  denoting  the  efficient  cause  of
tho  punishment  of  the  wicked— that  they  will
be  as  it  were  blasted  by  the  face  of  the  Lord.
Others  (Chiysostom,  Theophylact)  take  it
in  a  temporal  sense,  denoting  tho  swiftness
of  tho  punishment  of  the  wicked — that  their
punishment  will  rise  directly  on  the  appear-
ance of  Christ  (Liinemann,  Alford).    And
others  take  it  in  a  local  sense,  denoting
banishment  or  separation — that  the  wicked
will  bo  expelled  from  that  jov  and  glory
which  reign  in  the  presence  of  Christ ;  they
shall  be  banished  away  from  the  presence  of
tho  Lord.    This  last  interpretation  seems  to
be  tho  correct  meaning ;  it  gives  to  the  pre-
position its  full  force.   And  from  the  glory  of
his  power ;  not  a  Hebraism  for  "  his  mighty
glory  "  (Jowett),  but  from  that  glorv  which
has  its  origin  in  his  power — the  wicked  will
be  banished  from  the  manifestation  of  his
power  in  the  glorification  of  his  saints.    Tlie
punishment  of  the  wicked  on  its  negative
side  is  here  stated.    As  the  presence  of  tho
glorified  Jesus  will  constitutu  the  happiness
of  heaven,  so  banishment  from  his  presence
will  constitute  tho  misery  of  hell,  because  tho
soul  is  then  cut  off  from  the  source  of  all
good  and  of  all  holiness.

Ver.  10. — When ;  defining  the  period  when
this  judgment  of  tho  wicked  will  occar.  He ;
namely,  the  Lord  Jesus.  Shall  eome  to  be
glorified ;  the  purpose  of  hi.s  coming.  In ;
'•"+  "through,    or  "among,"  but  **in,'*  "°


not


as


Olshoiifleii  on  Thessalonions,  in  loco.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  i.  1—12.


the  sphere  or  element  of  hia  glory.  Eii
aainti;  not  the  holy  angola  who  will  ac-
oompony  him  to  judgment,  but  holy  men
whom  he  lias  redeemed  with  his  blood.
Christ  will  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  inas-
much as  their  glory  was  the  result  of  his
Bufferings  and  oeath,  and  their  holiness  is
the  rcficction  of  his  holiness ;  ^  They  will
reflect  as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord."
And  to  be  admired;  wondered  at,  praised.
In  all  them  that  belieye ;  or,  (eZteved  The
work  of  faith  is  past;  the  result  of  faitli,
the  state  of  sight  and  glory,  has  commenced.
The  glorifictilion  of  belieyers  will  thus
become  the  glorification  of  Christ.  The
glor^  of  Christ  does  not  arise  from  the
pumbhment  of  the  wicked,  but  from  the
glorification  of  belieyers.  Christ  will  indeed
be  glorified  in  the  pimishmentof  the  wicked.
His  justice  will  be  manifested  and  yindi-
cated ;  but  his  glory  will  be  especially  seen
in  the  manifestation  of  his  mercy  toward
belieyers.  Because  cor  testimony ;  namely,
the  testimony  of  Paul  and  Iiis  associates,  Silas
and  Timothy.  Among  yon ;  or  rather,  unto
you.  Was  belieyed ;  to  be  considered  as  a
parenthesis.  Jn  that  day;  namely,  the  day
of  the  Lord's  adyent,  to  be  connected  with
the  commencement  of  the  yerse,  '*In  that
day  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in
his  saints."  Some,  overlooking  the  paren-
thesis, render  the  words  cither,  ''because
our  testimony  concerning  that  day  was
belieyed  among  you ;  **  or,  **  because  our
testimony  among  you  shall  be  belieyed  on
that  day " — assented  to  by  the  whole
nniyerso;  but  the  first  rendering  gives  a
false  meaning  to  the  preposition,  and  the
second  a  false  construction  to  the  verb,  as  if
it  were  future.

Ver.  11. — ^Wherefore;  with  a  view  to  this
consummation,  in  order  that  Christ  may  be
glorified  in  you.    We  pray  always  for  yon


that  oar  God  would  ooimt  yov  worthy  of
this  calling ;  or  rather,  of  your  calling  (B.y.).
Tlie  calling  was,  properly  speaking,  only  the
commencement  of  the  Christian  life,  but  as
it  was  the  first  link  in  a  chain  that  termi-
nated in  glory,  it  is  used  to  denote  the
whole  Christian  life  — your  vocation  as
Cliristians.  And  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasnre
of  his  goodness.  The  pronoun  **  his  "  is  not
in  the  original.  The  words  have  been
differently  rendered :  some  render  them  **aU
God's  pleasure  in  our  goodness ; "  others
restrict  both  words  to  mean  '*  every  desire  of
goodness  **  (R.V.).  And  the  work  ot  faith ;
that  faith  which  is  active,  living,  produc-
tive of  good  works  (see  exposition  on  1
Thess.  i.  3).  With  power ;  or,  in  power;  to  be
taken  adverbially,  and  to  be  connected  with
the  verb  "fulfil:"  "That  God  would
mightily  fulfil  in  you  all  moral  goodness,
and  a  faith  which  is  energetic"

Ver.  12.— That  the  name  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ ;  or  simply,  of  our  Lord  Jesus^
•* Christ"  not  being  in  the  original.  The
"name  of  our  Lord  Jesus"  is  not  a  mere
periphrasis  for  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,
out  the  name  denotes  his  nature  and
character.  The  second  petition  of  our  Lord's
prayer  is  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name,"  and
this  the  npostle  applies  to  Christ ;  he  prays
that  his  Name  may  be  hallowed  among  tho
Thessalonians — an  incidental  proof  of  his
divinity.  Kay  he  glorified  in  yon,  and  yon
in  him;  a  twofold  glorification:  Christ  is
glorified  in  believers,  when  by  their  holiness
they  promote  his  cause  and  rcfiect  his
glory ;  and  believers  are  glorified  in  Christ,
when  they  receive  out  of  his  infinite  fulness.
According  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Some  suppose  that  the
epithet  '*  God  "  also  belongs  to  Jesus  Christ,
but  the  [construction  hardly  bears  this
meaning.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  4. — Christian  patience,  1.  Its  nature.  It  denotes  steadfast  endurance.  Nega-
tiyely,  not  stoical  endurance  or  apathetic  fatalism.  Positively,  a  spirit  of  calm  sub-
mission to  the  providence  of  God  and  resignation  to  his  will.  2.  Its  source.  It  has
its  root  in  faith ;  it  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  and  it  is  combined  with  hope.  3.
Means  of  acquiring  it.  Pray  to  God  as  the  Giver  of  patience ;  look  to  Christ  as  the
Example  of  jmtience ;  submit  to  affliction  as  the  cause  of  patience ;  cultivate  faith  as
the  support  of  patience ;  and  meditate  on  heaven  as  the  goal  of  patience.

Yers.  6,  7. — A  future  state  cf  retribution.  Rewards  and  punishments  in  this  world
are  unequally  distributed.  The  righteous  are  often  persecuted  and  afflicted,  whereas  tho
wicked  are  often  happy  and  prosperous.  Herod  sits  upon  the  tlirone,  and  Christ  expires
on  the  cross.  But  this  state  of  things  shall  be  rectified.  Christ  shall  recompense  to
the  wicked  tribulation — they  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction  from  the
presence  of  the  Lord ;  and  he  shall  recompense  to  the  righteous  rest — they  shall  be
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  for  which  they  sufier.


on.  1. 1—12.]    TUE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


Vers.  7,  8. — The  manner  of  ChrisVs  second  coming.  1.  He  shall  come  in  person.  Not
merely  in  spirit  or  in  power,  but  in  a  visible  form ;  he  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven ;
every  eye  shall  see  him.  2.  ffe  shall  come  in  power.  He  shall  be  accompanied  by  the
angels  of  his  might,  who  shall  execute  his  commands,  call  the  dead  from  their  graves,
assemble  together  the  elect,  separate  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  and
consign  the  wicked  to  the  abodes  of  woe.  3.  Ee  shall  come  in  glory.  *'  In  flaming
fire " — in  the  Shechinah,  the  cloud  of  glory.  4.  Ee  shall  come  in  justice ;  punishing
the  ungodly  and  rewarding  his  faithful  servants.

Vers.  9,  10. — Tlte  coming  of  Christ  for  judgment.  1.  Its  reality.  The  difference
between  his  first  and  second  coming.  Then  he  came  to  save  the  world,  now  he  shall
come  to  judge  the  world.  Then  he  came  as  Son  of  man,  now  he  shall  come  as  Son  of
God.  2.  Its  purpose.  He  shall  come  to  award  punishment  to  his  enemies ;  they  shall
be  for  ever  banished  from  his  presence,  the  Source  of  all  happiness,  the  Author  of  all
holiness.  He  shall  come  for  the  salvation  of  his  people — to  conquer  all  their  enemies,
to  rescue  their  bodies  from  the  grave,  to  acknowledge  them  as  his  before  an  assembled
universe,  and  to  receive  them  into  the  abodes  of  eternal  happiness.

Vers.  10,  12. — Christ  glorified  in  his  saints.  1.  By  their  holy  conduct  they
display  his  character.  His  image  is  impressed  upon  them ;  they  mirror  forth  the  glory
of  the  Lord.  2.  By  their  active  exertion  in  well-doing  they  advance  his  glory.
3.  Their  future  glorification  is  the  glory  of  Christ.  The  glory  of  his  work,  in  that  no
saved  them ;  the  glory  of  his  grace,  in  that  ho  redeemed  them ;  the  glory  of  his  power,
in '  that  he  has  rescued  them  from  all  their  enemies.  Throughout  eternity  believers
will  be  jewels  in  the  Saviour's  crown.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  S.-^Thanl'sgiving  for  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  Thessalonians.  Timothy
had  brought  the  apostle  tidings  of  their  faith,  their  love,  their  sufferings,  and  their
patience.

I.  The  grounds  of  his  thanksoivino.  **  Because  that  your  faith  groweth  exceed-
ingly, and  the  love  of  each  one  of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth."  1.  The
marked  growth  of  their  faith.  At  his  last  writing  to  them  he  had  hinted  at  deficiencies
in  their  faith  (1  Thess.  iii.  10),  but  he  had  now  learned  that  it  had  grown  exceedingly.
(1)  Growth  is  a  sign  of  a  living  faith.  (2)  It  is  right  to  pray  for  the  increase  of  foith
(Luke  xvii.  5).  (3)  Faith  grows  (a)  in  its  strength  (b)  and  in  its  range.  The  Thessa-
lonians had  been  able  to  receive  new  truths,  and  to  bear  the  shock  of  persecution  with
calmness.  Their  faith  worked  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6),  and  the  trial  of  their  faith  worked
patience  (Jas.  i.  3).  2.  The  marked  growth  of  their  love  to  one  anotlier.  He  had
prayed  for  an  increase  of  love  among  them,  and  he  was  thankful  that  his  prayer  had
been  heard.  (I)  Their  love  had  grown  in  fervour,  (a)  Their  persecutions  had  endeared
them  the  more  to  each  other.  (6)  They  "  looked  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,
but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others"  (Phil.  ii.  4).  They  "bore  one  another's
burdens  "  (Gal.  vi.  2).  They  were  "  kindly  affectioned  to  one  another  with  brotherly
love  "  (Rom.  xii.  10).  (2)  Their  love  had  grown  in  its  range.  They  bad  an  indivi-
dualizing solicitude  m  each  other's  welfare,  no  saint  being  outside  the  pale  of  their
kindly  regards.

II.  The  obligation  and  appropriateness  op  his  thanksoivino.  "  We  are  bound
to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  as  it  is  meet."  1.  The  apostle  regards  it  as  a
positive  dtbt  which  it  would  he  injustice  not  to  discharge^  for  he  feels  that  (Jod  is  the
true  Author  of  all  the  blessings  they  had  received.  2.  Ee  regards  it  as  demanded  hy
the  very  proprieties  of  the  case,  **  As  it  is  meet " — that  this  recognition  should  be
made.— T\  C.

Ver.  4. —  ITie  apostle's  interest  in  the  Thessdlonian  Church  as  manifested  hy  his
praises  of  it  to  other  Churches.  Ho  had  formerly  listened  to  their  praises  from  the  lipi
of  other  Churches ;  he  could  now  sound  their  praises  at  Corinth  and  elsewhere,  ascribing
all  the  while  due  praise  to  God.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  1. 1—12.


I.  The  ground  of  his  fraibes.  "  For  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  per-
secutions and  tribulations  that  ye  endure."  1.  Afflictions,  whether  in  the  form  of  sharp
persecution  or  of  more  general  trouble,  are  the  lot  of  Qod^s  faithful  ddldren.  They  are
**  appointed  thereunto  "  (1  Thess.  ii.  3).  2.  It  is  the  glory  of  a  Christian  to  hear  such
afflictions  with  patienee  and  faith.  The  Thessalonians  hsul  not  been  **  moved  by  these
iraictions  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  3).  (1)  Their  patience  was  the  result  of  their  faith.  "  The
trial  of  your  faith  worketh  patience "  (Jas.  i.  3).  Their  trials  did  not  uproot  their
faith.  They  had  "the  patience  of  hope,"  The  faith  and  the  patience  are  always
closely  allied.  "  I  know  thy  faith  and  thy  patience  "  CRev,  ii.  19).  (2)  It  is  for  the  plory
of  Qod  and  for  the  good  of  believers  that "  patience  should  have  its  perfect  work"  (Jas.

1.  4 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  20).    (3)  It  is  necessary  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises  (Heb.  vi.
12 ;  X.  36).

IL  It  is  not  unlawful,  but  expedient,  that  a  minister  should  gloiiy  in  his
PEOPLE.  Not  in  their  social  rank,  or  riches,  or  numbers,  but  in  the  jiraces  of  the
Spirit  manifested  in  their  life.  The  apostle  elsewhere  advises  us  not  to  glory  in  men,
but  in  the  Lord.    But  in  this  case  the  glory  is  given  to  God,  not  to  man.

IIL  It  promotes  the  spiritual  welfare  of  Churches  to  hear  of  the  success  op
the  gospel  in  other  Churches.  The  example  of  faith,  love,  and  patience  at  Thcssa-
louica  would  stimulate  the  saints  in  all  Greece. — T.  C.

Ver.  5. — The  significance  of  these  sufferings  in  relation  to  Divine  judgment.     He
.  comforts  them  with  the  thought  of  the  certainty  of  the  future  judgment.

1.  There  will  be  a  righteous  judgment  of  men.  "  Verily  there  is  a  God  that
jndgeth  in  the  earth  "  (Ps.  Iviii.  11).  The  afflictions  of  the  righteous  and  the  prosperity
of  the  wicked  in  the  present  world  are  not  inconsistent  with  this  righteous  judgment.
The  problem  is  an  old  one,  how  to  imderstand  the  mystery  of  Divine  providence.  The
Book  of  Job  sets  forth  its  conditions  and  its  mysteries.  The  disturbing  effect  of  sin  is
not  sufficiently  considered  in  estimating  the  character  of  the  Divine  administration.  It
is  the  inequalities  in  Divine  providence  that  lead  us  to  expect  a  future  rectiUcatioH  of
wrongs ;  for  God's  judgment  is  righteous.

n.  The  patient  heroism  op  the  saints  is  itself  a  sign  of  God's  righteous

.  JUDGMENT.    "  Which  is  a  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  ye  may  be

counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer."     1.  It  is  not  that

believers  suffer, receiving  here  their  evil  things,  while  the  wicked  receive  their  good  things.

2.  It  is  not  because  Ood  is  just  and  there  must  be  a  future  judgment.  3.  It  is  not  that
the  persecution  wa^  an  indication  how  the  judgment  would  go  at  the  last  day.  4.  It  is
that  the  patience  of  the  saints  accredited  them,  by  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  as  meet
heirs  of  his  kingdom,  while  it  was  a  presage  of  the  cominj:  judgment,  when  the  future
would  bring  its  double  compensation  for  the  present.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  in  the
Philippian  Epistle :  "  And  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries :  which  is  to  them
an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God  "  (Phil.  i.  28).
It  follows,  therefore,  (1)  that  God  is  not  forgetful  or  indifferent  to  the  sufTorings  of  his
saints ;  (2)  that  patience  is  a  special  qualification  for  the  enjoyment  of  G^d's  kingdom ;
(3)  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the
future  happiness  of  the  saints,  who  will  have  an  eternal  weight  of  glory. — T.  C.

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  future  judgment  as  to  its  righteousness,  time,  circumstances,  and
results  to  the  two  classes  concern^  in  it.  The  apostle  proceeds  to  set  forth  the  certainty
of  the  Divine  judgment  as  affecting  the  saints  and  their  persecutors.

I.  The  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  THIS  JUDGMENT.  "Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with
God  to  recompense  affliction  to  them  that  afflict  you ;  and  to  you  who  arc  afflicted  rest
with  us."  1.  An  appeal  is  made  to  man*s  innate  sense  of  justice.  A  want  of  this
element  of  justice  in  human  character  is  regarded  as  a  defect.  A  right-minded  man  is
indignant  at  wrong,  and  delights  in  the  retribution  that  falls  uix)n  wron;;-doers.  This
sentiment  of  justice  is  but  a  reflection  of  Divine  character,  for  we  are  made  in  the  image
of  that  God  who  hates  sm  with  **  a  perfect  hatred  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  22).  2.  Ood  is  "  not
unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance  "  (Rom.  iii.  5),  for  he  has  established  in  his  govern-
ment of  the  world  an  iuseparable  connection  between  sin  and  misery.  Therefore  we
may  expect  to  see  a  Divine  retaliation  upon  transgressors — "  affliction  to  them  that


cu.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  7

afflict  you  " — the  penalty  partaking  of  the  very  clmracter  of  the  sin.  On  the  other  hand,
God  is  not  "  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  lahour  of  love/*  The  aiO^cted
shall  be  recompensed  with  "  rest,"  as  well  as  reward  for  all  their  patience.

II.  The  time  of  the  judgment.  "  When  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from
heaven."  1.  There  is  a  day  appointed  for  the  judgment  of  the  wo7'ld ;  for  Gt)d  "  hath
appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  Man  whom
he  hath  ordained*'  (Acts  xvii.  30,  31).  2.  The  day  is  that  which  is  to  he  the  inanifeUc^
tion  of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  He  is  now  in  heaven,  "  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of
God "  (Acts  vii.  56) ;  but  he  shall  then  come  forth  in  glory  to  those  who  "  wait  for
him,"  to  the  judgment  of  the  world.  3.  Tlie  time  of  the  judgment  is  unknown  to  man.
The  day  of  the  Lord  "  shall  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night.*'

II L  The  subordinate  chicumstances  of  the  judgment.  1.  Tlie  angelic  retinue,
"The  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  his  power."
(1)  They  manifest  his  power  and  enhance  his  glory.  They  will  be  with  him  when  he
**  shall  come  in  glory,  and  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory  "  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  (2)  They
execute  his  purposes,  whether  of  wrath  or  mercy,  (a)  They  "  gather  together  his  elect
from  the  four  wiods**  (Mark  xiii.  27).  (b)  They  "shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all
things  that  offend,  and  them  that  do  iniquity,  and  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire"
(Matt.  xiii.  41, 42).  2.  The  jiaming  glory  of  his  manifestation.  It  shall  be  "  in  flaming
lire ;  '*  not  as  the  instrument  of  vengeance,  but  as  enhancing  the  glory  of  the  Divine
] presence.  "Our  God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silence:  a  fire  shall  devour  before
liim,  and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about  him.  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens
from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people**  (Ps.  1.  3,  4).

IV.  The  results  of  the  judgment  to  the  two  classes.  1.  The  dass  of  perse"
cutors,  "  Those  which  afilict  you.*'  (1)  Wicked  men  cannot  endure  the  saints.  It  is
with  them  as  with  Cain,  who  slew  his  brother.  Wherefore?  "  Because  his  own  worku
were  evil,  and  his  brother's  rif^jhteous  **  (1  John  iii.  12).  (2)  The  cry  of  the  saints  rises
to  heaven  against  them.  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and
avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ?  **  (Rev.  vi.  10).  (3)  The  persecutors
are  of  two  classes.  "  Them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (a)  The  first  class  refers  to  Gentile  persecutors.  "  They  know
not  God.'*  Ignorance  is  their  great  sin.  They  had  resisted  the  light  of  nature,  (a)  It
was  wilful  ignorance,  for  they  had  the  truth  brought  to  their  doors  in  Thessalonica ;
(/3)  their  ignorance  made  confidence  in  God  impossible,  (7)  as  well  as  an  intelligent
worship  of  God.  (h)  The  second  class  refers  to  Jewish  persecutors — "  that  obey  not
the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chi'ist.**  As  ij^norance  was  the  sin  of  the  Gentiles,  dis-
obedience was  the  sin  of  the  Jews.  They  knew  God,  but  rejected  the  gospel  of  Christ.
They  were  fiercer  persecutors  of  the  saints  even  than  the  Gentiles,  (o)  Christ  is  the
Author  of  the  gosjjel  as  well  as  its  theme.  (3)  The  gospel  is  to  be  obeyed  as  well  as
received,  and  is  therefore  called  "the  obedience  of  faith;'*  for  faith  without  obedience
is  dead,  as  obedience  without  faith  has  no  value.  (4)  The  judgment  upon  the  persecu-
tors. It  is  described  first  generally  and  then  more  definitely.  The  Lord  Jesus  shall
take  vengeance  upon  them.  They  "  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."  This  represents  "  the
wrath  of  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  vi.  IG,  17).  (a)  The  judgment  is  everlasting  destruction.
This  does  not  imply  aniiiiiilation — an  idea  equally  opposed  to  Scripture  and  to  the  facts
of  natural  science.  The  term  "  everlasting  "  associated  with  it  neutralizes  the  idea  of
anniliilation,  which  implies  a  point  of  time  in  which  the  wicked  cease  to  exist.  The
duration  of  the  punishment  will  be  as  the  duration  of  the  blessedness  (Rev.  xvi.  26 ;
Heb.  ix.  14;  Matt.  xxv.  4G).  (i)  It  involves  separation  from  "the  face  of  the  Lord,
and  the  glory  of  his  strength."  It  is  heaven  to  "see  Christ  as  he  is,"  to  be  "  with  him
where  he  is,  that  they  may  behold  his  glory."  The  sum  of  all  woe  is,  "  Depart  from
me."  A  great  gulf  is  fixed  between  tlie  saved  and  the  lost  (Luke  xvi.  26).  The
wicked  are  to  be  outside  the  apocalyptic  city  of  God.  "  Outside  are  dogs  "  f  Rev.  xvi.  14,
15).  2.  The  class  of  saints.  The  results  of  the  judgment  as  affecting  them  are  thus
described.  (1)  They  are  to  bo  accounted  "worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  (a)  They
are  heirs  of  it,  as  children  of  God.  (b)  They  are  calleil  into  it.  (c)  The  kingdom
"shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High"  (Dan.  vii.  27).  "The
saints  shall  judge  the  world"  (I  Cor.  vi.  2,  3).    They  shall  "inherit  the  kingdom**


S  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cir.  1. 1— 12.

(Katt  XXV.  34).  This  is  '*  the  grace  that  is  to  bo  brought  to  them  at  the  revelation  of
Jesus  Christ "  (1  Pet.  i.  13).  (2)  They  shall  receive  rest — **  rest  with  us,"  as  the  Lord's
recompense  for  all  their  sufferings.  It  points  to  their  release  from  persecutions,
(a)  There  is  a  rest — a  sabbatism — '*  for  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9).  They  "  shall
rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them  "  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  (b)  It  is  rest
in  the  fellowship  of  all  saints — "  rest  with  us."  (3)  The  effect  of  the  Lord's  second
advent — *'  that  ne  may  bo  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  be  admired  in  all  them  that
believe."  (a)  The  Church  is  to  be  **  the  glory  of  Christ."  Jesus  said,  "  The  glory
which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them  "  (John  xvii.  10,  22).  "  The  beauty  of  the
Lord  God  shall  be  upon  her,"  and  **  his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  her  "  (Ps.  xc.  17) ;
Isa.  Ix.  2).  The  Church  is  addressed  thus :  ^  There  shall  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  3).
(5)  Christ  shall  be  an  Object  of  wonder  to  believers  in  that  day.  '*  To  be  admired  in  all
them  that  believe."  The  wonder  will  spring  out  of  the  extraordinary  manifestations
of  his  glory  and  power. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  11, 12. — Prayer  for  the  ThessaJonians  tn  prospect  of  their  glorification.  His
wish  was  that  they  would  undergo  the  necessary  preparatory  work  in  anticipation  of
their  future  glorification.    It  was  a  double  prayer.

I.  A  PRAYEB  THAT  HIS  CONVERTS  MIGHT  APPROVE  THE  REALITY  OF  THEIB  CALLING

BY  THEIR  FAITH  AND  LIFE.  *' Whercunto  WO  pray  always  for  you,  brethren,  that
God  would  count  you  worthy  of  his  calling."  1.  The  nature  and  intent  of  the  calling,
(1)  It  is  the  effectual  call  of  the  Spirit  in  conversion  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  (2)  It  is  according
to  the  Divine  purpose  (Rom.  viii.  28).  (3)  It  is  (a)  high  (Phil.  iii.  14);  (b)  holy
(2  Tim.  i.  9);  (c)  heavenly  (Heb.  iii.  1).  (4)  It  is  a  call  (a)  to  fellowship  with  Christ
(1  Cor.  i.  9);  (6)  to  holiness  (1  Thess.  iv.  7);  (c)  to  liberty  (Gal.  v.  13);  (d)  to  peace
(Col.  iii.  15);  (e)  to  glory  and  virtue  (2  Pet.  i.  3);  (/)  to  eternal  life  (1  Tim.  vi.  12).
2.  A  waik  worthy  if  such  a  calling,  "  That  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this
calling."  How  can  any  sinful  man  be  accounted  worthy  of  it?  He  is  already  called,
and  God's  counting  him  worthy  proceeds  on  the  supposition  of  that  pre-existing  fact.
It  supposes :  (1)  That  their  life  would  be  found  at  the  last  day  in  harmony  with  the
call  (1  Thess.  v.  24).  (2)  That  they  would  meanwhile  **  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation
wherewith  they  were  called  "  (Eph.  iv.  1),  and  "  make  their  calling  and  election  sure  "
(2  Pet.  i.  10).     (3)  That  they  would  have  occasion  to  praise  God  for  the  call  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).

II.  A  PRAYER  THAT  HIS  CONVERTS  MIGHT  FULLY  REALIZE  THE  BLESSED  PROCESS
THROUGH   WHICH  THE   APOSTLE's  OBJECT   MIGHT  BE  SECURED.      The  prOCesS  is  twofold.

1.  That  Ood  would  work  in  them  every  delight  in  moral  goodness.  **  Fulfil  every  good
pleasure  of  goodness."  (1)  Good  men  delight  in  goodness  and  in  doing  good.  (2)  It
is  God  who  implants  this  delight  in  them ;  for  they  arc  "  his  workmanship,  created  in
Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works"  (Eph.  ii.  10).  They  are,  therefore,  to  be  "zealous  of
good  works"  (Titus  ii.  14),  and  to  provoke  one  another  to  "good  works"  (Heb.  x.  24).
This  goodness  is  one  of  the  Spirit's  fruits  (Gal.  v.  22).  2.  That  Ood  would  fulfil
the  work  of  faith  with  power.  (1)  Faith  is  an  operative  grace ;  it  "  worketh  by  love ; "
it  justifies  itself  by  good  works.  (2)  It  is  a  Divine  work.  Therefore,  as  something
may  have  been  lacking  therein,  the  apostle  prays  that  he  who  is  the  Author  of  their
faith  would  be  the  Finisher  of  it  (Heb.  xii.  2).  (3)  It  is  a  work  done  with  power.  At
their  conversion,  the  Thessalonians  felt  the  **  greatness  of  his  power  to  us-ward  who
believe"  (Eph.  i.  19),  and  the  same  power  is  needed  to  make  it  triumphant  as  a  principle
of  action  and  as  a  principle  of  endurance.  "  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God ; "  we  are  "  kept  by
the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation'*  (1  Pet.  i.  5).

HI.  The  ultimate  object  of  the  apostle's  prayers  for  the  Thessalonians.
*•  That  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him."
1.  The  very  Name  of  Christ  is  to  he  glorified  in  the  saints,  (1)  Because  it  is  "  a  Name
that  is  above  every  name,  at  which  every  knee  should  bow  "  (Phil.  ii.  10).  (2)  Because
it  is  the  Name  for  the  sake  of  which  the  saints  are  now  "hated  of  all  nations"  (Matt.
xxiv.  9).  (3)  Because  it  is  the  Name  by  which  the  saints  are  called  (Jas.  ii.  7).
(4)  It  is  glorified  in  the  saints  (a)  in  their  holiness  of  life ;  (b)  in  their  victory  ovei
the  world  and  sin ;  (c)  in  their  steadfast  loyalty  to  him ;  (d)  in  their  final  exaltation  to
•*  his  kingdom  and  glory."    2.  Tiie  saints  will  be  glorified  in  Christ.    (1)  In  his  wear-


cii.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  9

ing  their  nature  on  the  throne ;  for  "  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren  "  (Heb.  ii.
11).  (2)  In  their  being  clothed  with  his  righteousness — "  comely  with  the  comeliness
he  has  put  upon  them."  (3)  In  their  "reigning  with  him,"  and  "being  glorified
together"  (2  Tim.  ii.  12;  Rom.  viii.  17).  They  shall  be  "partakers  of  bis  glory."
3.  ITie  spring  or  source  of  all  the  blessings  of  the  saints.  "  According  to  the  grace  of  our
God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  The  whole  work  of  salvation  till  it  ends  in  glory
illustrates  "  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace."  (a)  The  pui-pose  of  the  Father  is  of
grace;  (b)  the  mediation  of  the  Son  is  of  grace;  (c)  the  blessings  of  the  new
covenant  are  all  of  grace.  (2)  This  grace  has  a  unity  of  source — **  in  our  God  and
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;"  implying  oneness  of  essence  and  the  coequal  Godhead  of
Father  and  Son.— T.  C.

Vers.  1 — 4r. — I7ie  introduction,  I.  The  address.  1.  The  description,  St.  Paul
repeats  the  opening  words  of  the  First  Epistle.  He  addresses  the  same  Church ;  he
describes  it  in  the  same  sacred  words.  It  is  ''  in  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ."  He  could  say  of  it  nothing  higher,  nothing  holier.  To  be  in  God,  in  Christ,
is  of  all  positions  the  loftiest,  of  all  blessings  the  most  precious.  None  are  so  highly
exalted  as  those  who  are  nearest  to  Christ;  none  have  such  ricb  store  of  heavenly
treasure  as  those  who  abide  in  him,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.
There  is  but  one  slight  variation.  In  the  First  Epistle  he  said,  **  the  Father ; "  here  it  is
**  our  Father."  The  pronoun  implies  a  close,  endearing,  affectionate  relationship.  The
Church  is  in  God  our  Father,  in  the  embrace  of  his  fatherly  love,  chosen  by  his  electing
grace ;  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  saved  by  his  precious  death,  living  in  that  life  which
Hows  from  Christ,  which  is  Christ.  2.  The  salutation.  Ho  uses  the  same  words  as  in
the  First  Epistle ;  he  could  find  no  more  suitable  terms  to  express  his  good  wishes  for
his  converts.  He  could  desire  nothing  better  for  them  than  grace,  and  peace ;  grace,  the
origin,  the  source,  of  every  highest  blessing ;  peace,  the  sweet  and  holy  end,  the  very
crown,  of  the  Christian  life.  It  is  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that
these  and  all  other  blessings  flow.  St.  Paul  joins  together  the  two  Divine  Persons ;  they
could  not  be  thus  associated  as  the  one  ultimate  source  of  grace  and  peace,  were  they. not
both  alike  Divine.  Peace  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  with  the  Holy  Spirit  whom  the  Lord
Jesus  sends  unto  us  from  the  Father  comes  the  sacred  gift  of  peace.  Grace  and  peace
come  from  God  the  Father  by  the  incarnation,  atonement,  intercession  of  God  the  Son,
through  the  indwelling  presence  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  and  the  love  of  God  flow  into  the  Christian  heart  through  the  fellowship  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  All  that  the  Christian  can  desire  for  himself,  for  his  friends,  for  the  whole
Church,  comes  from  God ;  he  seeks  it  of  God  in  prayer ;  he  knows  that  God  will  hear.
"  This  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  r.sk  anything  according  to  his
will,  he  hcareth  us."

II.  The  thanksgiving.  1.  The  duty.  Thanksgiving  is  a  debt  which  we  owe  to
God,  a  debt  which  we  must  always  acknowledge,  which  we  can  never  fully  discharge.
It  is  very  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty,  that  we  should  at  all  times  and  in  all
places  give  thanks  for  all  things  unto  God.  We  must  thank  him  for  his  grace  given  to
ourselves ;  and  if  that  grace  abides  in  us,  we  shall  feel  ourselves  bound  to  thank  him
for  the  working  of  the  same  grace  in  others.  We  shall  regard  every  true  conversion,
every  increase  of  grace  in  others,  as  a  blessing  granted  to  the  whole  Church  and  to  our-
selves. We  shall  feci  a  keen,  living  interest  in  each  soul  that  is  gathered  into  Christ's
flock,  and  so  share  the  angels'  joy  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  For  the  welfare  of
each  member  affects  the  whole  Church;  when  "one  member  is  honoured,  all  the
members  rejoice  with  it."  Such  was  the  feeling  of  St.  Paul.  "  We  are  bound,"  he  says—
we  owe  it  as  a  debt — "  to  thank  God  always  for  you."  He  fulfils  his  own  precept ;  he
gives  tbanks  always.  The  thanksgiving  of  the  faithful  Christian  must  be  continuoiw,
never-ending.  2.  'The  ground  of  St,  FauVa  thanksgiving.  (1)  1'he  faith  of  the  Thes-
salonians.  He  had  gladly  recognized  their  faith  and  love  in  his  First  Epistle ;  he  had
again  and  again  exhorted  them  to  abound  more  and  more.  Now,  writing  a  second
time  after  a  short  interval,  he  thanks  God  for  the  growth  of  their  faith.  It  had  increased
"  exceedingly ; "  he  uses  one  of  those  strong  words  which  his  ardent  feelings  so  often
suggested.  **  Lord,  increase  our  faith,"  is  a  prayer  which  we  cannot  make  too  often.
Faith  must  grow  if  it  is  true  and  living ;  for  it  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen ;  it


10  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAXS.    [ch.  i.  1—12.


brings  the  cross  of  Christ,  the  presence  of  God,  within  the  range  of  our  mental  view.
That  holy  vision  will  draw  ns  nearer  ever  by  its  constraining  power,  quickening  and
deepening  in  our  hearts  the  faith  which  first  brought  us  by  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  to
the  Saviour.  The  faith  of  the  Thessalonians  was  growing  exceedingly ;  so  it  will  be
with  ns,  in  spite  of  the  unbelief  and  indifference  which  so  fill  the  air,  if  we  persevere
in  prayer,  and  try,  in  humble  dependence  on  the  grace  of  GoO-  to  fashion  our  lives
according  to  our  prayers.  (2)  Their  love  was  abounding  also.  Love  is  the  fairest
ornament  of  a  Christian  Church.  Faith  is  the  root,  love  is  the  fruit.  The  tree  that
grows  downwards  will  grow  upwards  also ;  the  fair  growth  of  foliage,  flower,  and  fruit
will  bear  some  proportion  to  the  unseen  depth  and  strength  of  the  root  below.  The
Thessalonian  Church  was  rich  in  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  And  their  love  was  not  only
increasing  in  fervour,  but  in  range  also.  It  was  not  partial,  not  limited  to  this  man
or  that  man  according  to  natural  tastes  and  similarities  of  disposition.  It  extended
throughout  the  Church ;  the  love  of  each  one  of  them  all  was  abounding  toward  one
another.  It  is  a  bright  picture.  Indeed,  the  Thessalonians  were  not  without  their
faults,  as  we  find  in  ch.  ii.  and  iii. ;  but  the  apostle,  in  his  love  and  thankfulness,
gladly  dwells  on  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  Church  before  he  proceeds  to  notice  the
shortcomings  of  individual  members.  It  shows  his  love  and  his  wisdom.  The
encouragement  of  the  opening  verses  would  dispose  the  Thessalonians  to  receive  in
a  good  spirit  the  few  reproofs  that  follow.  3.  The  expression  of  his  thankfulness,  Uo
not  only  gives  thanks  to  God ;  he  glories  before  men.  "  We  ourselves,'*  he  says — "  we
glory."  Though  his  deep  humility  might  have  withheld  him  from  glorying  over
a  result  which  was  due,  under  God,  to  his  own  zealous  labours,  the  rapid  growth  of
their  faith  and  love  so  filled  him  with  exuberant  gladness  that  he  could  not  refrain  his
lips.  "  God  forbid,"  he  says  elsewhere,  **  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  But  he  is  really  gloiying  in  the  cross  now ;  he  glories,  not  in  his
own  achievements,  but  in  the  trium])hs  of  the  cross.  It  was  the  work  of  God  in  real
truth,  not  his  work;  he  knew  it  well.  Indeed,  he  had  laboured  abundantly — that  he
knew,  he  could  not  help  knowing  it;  but  he  gladly  ex])lains  the  abundance  of  his
labours  by  the  abundance  of  grace  that  was  vouchsafed  unto  him.  "  Yet  not  I,"  he  says,
*'but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me."  The  faith,  hope,  and  love  of  the  Thessa-
lonians proved,  as  he  said  in  the  First  Epistle,  their  election.  God  had  chosen  them  to
be  his  own;  his  grace  worked  mightily  in  them.  And  now  St.  Paul  was  glorying  in
the  faith  and  patience  of  his  converts.  They  were  in  great  affliction;  he  sympathized
with  them,  he  comforted  them ;  but  yet  he  rejoiced  over  them.  'J'heir  affliction  by  the
grace  of  God  was  turned  to  a  blessing ;  it  proved  the  steadfastness  of  their  faith  and
Qieir  patience,  and  it  strengthened  them.

Lessons.  1.  Thankfulness  is  the  Christian's  duty;  thank  God  always.  2.  Especially
thank  him  for  his  grace  working  in  his  people.  3.  Glory  in  the  victories  of  grace,  not
in  worldly  successes.     4.  Pray  for  continual  progress  in  faith,  love,  patience. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  persecutions  of  the  Thessalonians,  1,  The  meaning  of  affliction.
1.  It  do€^  not  mean  that  God  is  angry  with  us.  Job's  friends  thon;:;ht  so.  So  did  Asaph
once ;  but  when  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  Grod  his  eyes  were  enlightened ;  he
understood  then  that  Gt)d  himself  is  the  Portion  of  his  people ;  that  there  is  nothing
upon  earth  to  be  desired  in  comparison  with  him ;  that  though  heart  and  flesh  may
fail,  God  is  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  for  his  chosen  in  tliis  world,  and  in  the
world  to  come  will  receive  them  to  glory.  God's  dealings  with  men  are  often  misinter-
preted ;  people  use  the  word  "  judgment "  carelessly  and  without  knowledge.  Affliction
would  be  almost  intolerable,  if  it  were  indeed  always  a  proof  of  the  Divine  wrath.  But,
God  be  thanked,  he  himself  has  told  us  it  comes  in  love.  2.  It  is  a  trial  of  our  faith.
Satan  said,  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?  "  The  world  often  says  so  now ;  it  imputes
lower  motives;  it  refuses  to  believe  in  unselfish  goodness.  The  man  who  can  say  in
the  midst  of  troubles,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the
Name  of  the  Lord,"  is  a  living  proof  of  the  reality,  of  the  sustaining  power,  of  the
presence  of  God;  one  of  those  miracles  of  grace  which,  thank  God,  are  still  daily
wrought  around  us  in  the  world.  These  things  are  among  the  facts  registered  by  the
observer  of  spiritual  truths — facts  as  real  as  the  facts  of  external  nature,  and  of  far
deeper  and  more  abiding  moment.     3.  It  worketh  patience.    The  trial  of  God's  saints


OH.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  11

is  more  precious  than  that  of  gold  which  perisheth.  Gold  is  tried  by  fire ;  Gtod's  people
are  tried  in  the  furnace  of  afiliction.  Affliction,  meekly  borne,  hath  a  re6ning  power;
it  eluvates  and  refines  the  whole  character ;  **  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous-
ness to  them  that  are  exercised  thereby."  Faith  is  strengthened  by  trials ;  patience  is
acquired  by  the  habit  of  enduring  affliction.  Without  endurance,  without  suffering,  there
is  no  opportunity  of  developing  the  grace  of  patience.

II.  The  ultimate  issue  of  persecution.  1.  To  the  persecuted.  Rest — ^rest  with
all  saints ;  with  St.  Paul  who  had  been  the  means  of  their  conversion,  who  was  then
writing  to  comfort  them.  The  weary  and  heavy  laden  who  come  to  Christ,  as  he  bids
them,  find  in  him  rest  for  their  souls  even  in  this  present  life.  There  is  an  inner
rest  of  the  spirit,  amid  outward  unrest  and  trouble,  which  is  the  plclged  possession
of  the  soul  that  hath  found  Christ  and  resteth  in  faith  on  him.  ''  Thou  shalt  keep
him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee :  because  he  trusteth  in  thee.
Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever:  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength;"  or
rather,  as  in  the  margin,  "  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  Rock  of  ages."  The  only  rest  for
the  penitent,  for  the  sorrowful,  is  on  the  breast  of  Jesus.  We  find  rest  there  now ;
but  the  truest,  deepest  rest  is  yet  to  come  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  "  Requiescat  in
pace,"  we  say  of  the  departed.  They  are  found  worthy  of  that  rest  in  the  kingdom
of  God  who  have  endured  affliction  in  faith  and  patience.  God  is  pleased,  in  his
gracious  condescension,  to  call  them  worthy.  "  They  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for
they  arc  worthy."  That  worthiness  is  of  God ;  it  is  his  gift ;  he  makes  them  worthy
by  his  grace.  He  called  them  not  because  they  were  worthy,  says  St.  Augustine ;
rather  by  liis  choice  he  makes  them  worthy.  It  is  not  their  merit  but  his  election,
not  their  goodness  but  his  grace,  that  makes  them  what  they  are.  They  have  not
chosen  him,  but  he  hath  chosen  them  that  they  should  bring  forth  much  fruit.  They
are  not  wise,  or  strong,  or  holy ;  but  Clirist  their  Lord  is  all.  He  is  present  with  them,
abiding  in  them  by  his  Spirit,  purging  away  their  sins,  communicating  to  them
more  and  more  of  his  own  holiness  and  love.  As  he  is,  so  are  they  in  this  world;
and  they  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  they  shall  be  like  him,  for  they  shall  see
him  as  he  is.  For  his  sake  they  are  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  in
the  hope  of  that  kingdom  they  are  willing  now  to  suffer.  But  these  present  sufferings
are  not  worthy  to  bo  compared  with  the  coming  glory.  They  know  it,  and  they
suffer  patiently,  for  they  recognize  that  great  truth  that  only  by  the  way  of  the  cross
can  we  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  To  the  persecutors.  God  will  recompense
affliction  to  those  who  afflict  his  saints.  They  who  persecute  the  Lord's  disciples
persecute  the  Lord  himself.  It  pertains  to  his  justice  that  such  must  receive  the  due
reward  of  their  deeds.  It  is  right ;  and  because  it  is  right,  it  must  be  so.  Christians
must  pray  for  their  jxjrsccutors ;  they  must  do  what  lieth  in  them  to  soften  their
hearts,  to  save  their  souls,  to  avert  the  coming  judgment.  But  when  the  judgment
comes  tliey  can  but  stand  by,  and  recognize  in  solemn  awe  the  justice  of  the  most
holy  God.

Lessons.  1.  Chastisements  are  sent  in  mercy  ;  be  patient,  be  thankful.  2.  Chastise-
ment is  only  grievous  if  we  do  not  understand  its  meaninj]^ ;  accept  it  as  sent  from
God ;  take  it  as  a  cross ;  be  careful  not  to  lose  its  blessed  fruits.  3.  Think  of  the
great  joy  of  those  who  are  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  let  that  high
hope  be  your  comfort  in  trouble.  4.  Envy  not  the  oppressor,  and  choose  none  of  his
ways. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  7 — 10. — T?ie  great  day,  I.  The  judomext  of  the  wicked.  1.  77ie  revelation
of  the  Judf/e.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  once  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  he
is  ordained  of  God  to  bo  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  He  shall  come  as  God  once
came  down  on  Mount  Sinai,  in  the  like  awful  plory.  (1)  With  the  angels.  They  shall
gather  the  wicked  from  among  the  just,  and  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire.
The  angels  will  be  the  ministers  of  his  justice — the  blessed  angels  who  are  now  the
messengers  of  his  love  and  grace.  Now  they  rejoice  over  each  sinner  that  repentoth;
then  they  will  cast  the  impenitent  into  the  everlasting  fire.  We  think  of  the  angels
as  gentle,  loving,  holy,  as  our  friends  and  guardians;  they  are  so,  so  far  as  we  are
Christ's.  They  desire  to  look  into  the  mysteries  of  redemption ;  they  annotmced  the
Saviour's  birth ;  they  rainistereti  to  him  in  his  temptation,  his  agony;  they  celebrated


12  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cil  i.  1—12.

Ills  resurrection  and  ascension.  Kow  they  are  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  that
shall  be  heirs  of  salvation ;  they  encamp  round  about  those  who  fear  the  Lord,  and
deliver  them.  They  help  in  carrying  on  his  blessed  work  of  love.  But  they  are  holy ;
they  hate  evil ;  they  must  turn  away  from  those  who  have  yielded  themselves  to  the
dominion  of  the  evil  one ;  they  must  execute  at  the  last  the  awful  judgment  of  God.
Fearful  thought,  that  the  blessed  angels,  loving  and  holy  as  they  are,  must  one  day
cast  the  hardened  sinner  into  hell,  as  once  they  cast  Satan  out  of  heaven.  (2)  In
flaming  fire.  The  Lord  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  flre,  in  that  glory  which  he  had
before  the  world  was.  His  throne  is  fiery  flame  (Dan.  vii.  9).  He  himself  is  a  con-
suming flre.  The  sight  will  be  appalling  to  the  lost,  full  of  unutterable  terror ;  *'  they
shall  say  to  the  rocks.  Fall  on  us ;  and  to  the  hills.  Cover  us."  '*  By  thine  agony  and
bloody  sweat,  by  thy  cross  and  passion,  good  Lord,  deliver  us."  2.  ITie  lost.  Two
classes  are  mentioned  here.  (1)  Those  who  know  not  God — the  heathen.  They  might
have  known  him.  Some  of  them  did  know  him.  They  had  not  the  Law,  the  outward
Law,  but  it  was  written  in  their  hearts ;  Gh>d  spoke  to  them  in  the  voice  of  conscience.
They  listened ;  they  did  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  Law.  Such  men,  we  are
sure,  God  in  his  great  mercy  will  accept  and  save.  But,  alas !  the  fearful  picture  drawn
by  St.  Paul  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  represents  with  only  too
much  truth  the  general  state  of  the  heathen  world  in  the  apostolic  times.  Their
blindness  was  criminal ;  it  was  the  result  of  wilful  and  habitual  sin ;  their  ignorance
was  without  excuse.  (2)  Those  who  obeyed  not  the  gospel.  All,  whether  Jews  or
Gentiles,  who  had  heard  the  preaching  of  Christ.  They  had  heard,  as  we  have,  all
that  the  Lord  Jesus  had  done  and  suffered  for  us;  they  had  had  the  opportunity  of
hearing  his  holy  precepts.  **  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the
world,  and  men,  loved  darkness  rather  than  light."  To  know  the  gospel  and  not  to
obey  it,  to  have  the  light  around  us  and  not  to  admit  it  into  our  hearts,  not  to  walk
as  children  of  light — this  must  bring  the  judgment  of  God  upon  the  disobedient.
The  greater  the  lip;ht,  the  heavier  the  responsibility  of  those  who  sin  against  light  and
kDowIedge.  3.  The  punishment  The  Lord  Jesus  will  award  vengeance.  "  Vengeance
18  mine ;  I  will  recompense,  saith  the  Lord."  Terrible  thought,  that  vengeance  must
come  from  him,  the  most  loving  Saviour,  who  loved  the  souls  of  men  with  a  love  so
burning,  so  intense  in  its  Divine  tenderness !  But  it  must  be  so.  The  exceeding  guilt
of  sin  is  manifest  in  this ;  it  turns  the  chiefest  of  blessings  into  an  increase  of  con-
demnation ;  the  cross  is  utter  death  to  the  impenitent  and  the  ungodly.  And  that
ven^reance  takes  effect  in  destruction.  The  destruction  is  eternal ;  then  it  is  not
annihilation.  It  is  the  destruction  of  all  gladness,  hope,  all  that  makes  life  worth
living ;  it  is  the  exclusion  from  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power.
Only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God.  The  lost  souls  cannot  see  his  face.  The  exclusion
is  eternal;  is  it  endless?  It  continues  through  the  ages;  will  those  ages  of  misery
ever  end  in  restoration  ?  Can  a  soul,  once  so  hardened  in  guilt  that  it  must  be  shut
out  of  the  presence  of  God,  ever  repent  in  that  exclusion  ?  It  sinned  obstinately
against  light  during  its  time  of  probation ;  can  it  recover  itself  now  that  the  light
is  withdrawn?  It  is  hardened  through  the  dcceitfulness  of  sin  and  the  power  of  evil
habits ;  can  it  break  those  chains  of  darkness  now  ?  These  are  dark,  awful  questions.
We  may  ask,  on  the  other  hand,  how  can  "  Gk)d  be  all  in  all,"  if  sin  is  to  exist  for  ever?
how  can  it  be  that  "  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive,"  while  there  is  still  a  hell  in
the  universe  of  God?  The  subject  is  beset  with  difficulties  and  perplexities;  it  excites
bewildering,  harrowing  thoughts.  We  must  leave  it  where  Holy  Scripture  leaves  it.
We  would  gladly  believe,  if  it  were  possible,  that  there  is  hope  beyond  the  grave  for
those  who  die  unblest ;  but  such  an  expectation  has  no  scriptural  authority  beyond
a  few  slight  and  doubtful  hints.  Who  would  dare  to  trast  to  a  hope  so  exceeding
slender?  No;  if  we  shrink  in  terror  from  the  thought  of  being  one  day  shut  out  of
God's  presence  into  the  great  outer  darkness,  let  us  try  to  live  in  that  gracious
presence  now.

II.  The  glory  of  the  bighteous.  1.  lis  time :  when  he  shall  come.  They  suffer
now;  sometimes  they  arc  persecuted,  their  name  is  cast  out  as  evil.  But  they  have
their  consolation ;  they  see  indeed  through  a  glass  darkly,  but^'  yet  they  do  see  by
faith  the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  they  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory
as  by  the  Lord  the  Spirit.    They  have  a  glory  now;  but  it  is  an  inner  spiritual


CH.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  13

glory  derived  from  the  indwelling  of  the  blessed  Spirit  whom  the  world  seeth  not,
neither  knowcth.  Now  they  are  the  sons  of  God  ;  when  he  shall  appear,  they  shall
be  like  him,  for  they  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  2.  Its  nature :  the  unveiled  presence  of
Christ,  He  shall  be  glorified  in  his  saints.  "  I  am  glorified  in  them,"  he  said,  when
about  to  leave  them.  When  he  comes  again,  that  glory  shall  shine  forth  in  all  its
radiant  splendour.  He  shall  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe.  The  glory  of  his
presence  abiding  in  them  shall  arouse  the  wondering  admiration  of  all.  The  lost  spirits
will  wonder;  they  will  be  amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  the  salvation  of  the  blessed.
*'  This  is  he  "  (Wisd.  v.  3,  6)  "  whom  we  sometimes  had  in  derision  .  .  .  how  is  he  num-
bered among  the  children  of  God,  and  his  lot  is  among  the  saints  ?  "  The  very  angels
will  wonder  at  the  exceeding  glory  of  the  Lord  shining  in  his  saints.  For  he  will
change  the  body  of  their  humiliation,  and  make  it  like  the  body  of  his  glory.

Lessons.  1.  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  let  us  keep
that  awful  day  in  our  thoughts.  2.  Think  on  the  fearful  misery  of  eternal  separation
from  God ;  live  in  his  presence  now.  3.  We  hope  to  bo  like  him  in  his  glory  ;  let  us
take  up  the  cross. — B.  C.  C.

Yers.  11,  12.— 5^  PauVs  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians.  I.  Its  purpobt.  1.  He
prays  that  God's  favour  may  rest  upon  them.  TTiat  he  may  count  them  worthy.  We
feel  that  we  are  all  unworthy — unworthy  of  his  grace  and  presence.  We  are  not  worthy
that  he,  the  blessed  One,  should  enter  under  our  roof,  into  our  heart.  But  whom  he
loves,  those  he  makes  worthy  of  his  love.  He  counts  them  worthy,  though  they  are  in
themselves  unworthy ;  his  grace  makes  them  worthy  in  Christ.  He  calls  them ;  they
through  grace  obey  the  calling.  He  calls  them  ever  higher,  nearer  to  himself,  till  they
reach  at  length  the  prize  of  the  high  calling.  2.  Jliat  Ood  who  "began  the  good  work
in  them  would  complete  it.  He  prays  (1)  that  God  would  fulfil  in  them  every  desire
of  goodness.  He  had  used  the  same  word  of  himself  (Hom.  x.  1)  :  "My  heart's  desire
and  prayer  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be  saved."  His  heart's  desire  (cifSoiefa)  was  a
good  desire ;  it  issued  from  goodness — goodness  given  by  God,  inwrought  into  his  heart
by  the  working  of  the  good  Spirit  of  God.  All  holy  desires  come  from  God ;  he  prompts
them ;  they  issue  out  of  the  goodness  which  comes  from  him,  from  his  grace.  He  will
fulfil  such  desires,  for  he  has  promised,  "  Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst
after  righteousness :  for  they  shall  be  filled."  The  holy  desire  will  issue,  if  we  persevere
in  prayer,  in  the  good  counsel,  in  the  just  work.  He  prays  (2)  that  God  would  fulfil
the  work  of  faith.  In  his  First  Epistle  he  spoke  of  his  affectionate  remembrance  of
their  work  of  faith  ;  now  he  prays  that  God  miciht  fulfil  that  work  in  power.  Faith
is  itself  a  work,  **  the  work  of  God  " — a  work  which  issues  from  God,  from  his  grace ;
a  work  which  is  pleasing  to  God,  for  it  is  his  will ;  a  work  which  ends  in  God,  in  the
contemplation  of  God,  in  the  glory  of  God.  And  faith  works;  it  is  a  living  principle,
an  active  energy.  It  will  lead  on  to  ever  more  earnest  prayer,  to  a  closer  walk  with
God.  And  that  prayer,  that  communion  with  God,  will  contmually  deepen  and  strengthen
faith ;  for  in  answer  to  faithful  prayer  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  and  the  Spirit  is  power
— ^power  from  on  high.

II.  Its  final  end — the  glory  of  Gk)D.  1.  That  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  might
he  glorified  in  the  Thessalonians,  That  men  might  see  their  good  works,  and  glorify
the  Lord  that  bought  them,  the  Father  that  called  them.  We  say  in  our  daily  prayers,
**  Hallowed  be  thy  Name.*'  We  have  been  baptized  into  that  great  Name ;  that  holy
Name  is  upon  us.  Very  weak  and  sinful  as  we  are,  that  great  Name  may  be  hallowed,
glorified  in  us,  if  we  do  all  things,  great  or  small,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  if  we
always  give  thanks  to  the  Father  by  him ;  if  we  show  in  our  daily  walk  before  men
the  power  of  his  grace.  It  is  the  great  end  of  the  Christian  life. :"  Whatsoever  ye  do,
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  2.  That  they  might  he  glorified  in  him.  His  saints  share
his  glory.  "  The  glory  which  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them."  He  dwelleth  in
them,  and  they  in  him.  His  glory  is  theirs,  for  they  are  his.  "  Ye  are  Christ's."
And  he  is  theirs.  The  Father  gave  the  Son,  the  Son  of  God  gave  himself  for  us,  to  us.
Hence  it  is  that  his  true  peoi^le,  beholding  (though  now  in  a  glass  darkly)  his  glory,  are
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory.  And  that  according  to  the  grace  of
our  God  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  All  our  blessings  come  from  his  grace;  he  is  our
God,  therefore  we  can  trust  in  him.    He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  for  he  is


14  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  1. 1—12.

Almighty.    He  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  therefore  we  may  cast  all  our  care  upon  hixD,
for  he  wUl  save  us ;  he  loveth  us  even  to  the  end.

Lessons.  1.  Our  salvation  is  of  Gk)d ;  its  heginning,  course,  end — all  is  of  grace.
2.  Every  good  desire  comes  from  him ;  ask  him  to  strengthen  the  desire,  to  develop
it  into  action.  3.  Seek  power  from  him — ^power  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  win
the  victory  at  last  4.  Let  the  glory  of  the  Lord  «fesus  Christ  l^  the  one  great  aim
above  all  other  motives. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  1 — ^12. — Maniftstation  of  solemn  interest.  Address  and  salutation,  "  Paul,
and  Silvanns,  and  Timothy,  unto  the  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  in  God  our  Father
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  Ghrace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.*'  The  address  is  the  same  as  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,
with  the  exception  of  the  substitution  of  **  our  Father  "  for  **  the  Father."  The  saluta-
tion is  also  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  the  twofold  source  from  which  grace  and
peace  are  invoked,  which  is  the  same  as  in  many  of  Paul's  Epistles,  with  the  exception
of  the  substitution  of  *'  the  Father  "  for  "  our  Father."

L  Recognition  op  the  satisfactoby  condition  of  the  Thessalonian  Chuech.
1.  Brfore  Ood,  "  We  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway  for  you,  brethren,  even
as  it  is  meet,  for  that  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  love  of  each  one  of  you
all  toward  one  another  aboundeth."  We  are  to  understand  that  information  had
reached  Paul  and  his  companions  from  Thessalonica  since  the  despatch  of  their  first
letter  to  that  place.  It  was  information  of  faith  and  love  on  the  part  of  the  Thessa-
lonian converts,  of  such  a  nature  as  to  make  Paul  (taking  him  as  representative)  feel
inwardly  bound  to  thank  God  alway  for  them.  This  inward  feeling  answered  to  an
outward  fitness  of  circumstances.  In  the  previous  letter  he  had  shown  a  deep  interest
in  the  perfecting  of  the  lacking  elements  in  their  faith.  Wc  may  think  of  a  tree  that
has  not  come  to  its  full  proportions.  It  could  now  be  said  of  them,  after  an  interval
of  less  than  a  year,  that  their  faith  was  growing  exceedingly.  It  was  exhibiting  such
increase  as  a  healthy  faith  always  exhibits,  and  this  in  a  marked  dcgrcr^.  For  such
largo  realization  of  his  wishes  in  the  time  it  was  only  meet  that  he  should  thank  God.
Ho  had  also  expressly  prayed  that  the  Lord  would  make  them  to  abound  in  love  one
toward  another.  It  could  now  be  said  that  this  was  in  the  way  of  fulfilment.  Their
love  was  in  process  of  enlargement  as  all  love  should  be,  and  in  a  marked  degree  as  the
word  would  seem  to  imply.  Their  love  was  markedly  individual.  There  was  love
toward  the  circle  as  a  whole  which  was  real  and  commendatory,  but  there  was  also
personal  attachment  between  the  various  members  of  the  circle,  individual  toward  indi-
vidual Their  love  was  also  markedly  universal  within  the  circle.  The  abounding
was  in  the  love  of  each  one  of  them  all  toward  one  another.  That  testified  to  a  har-
monious circle.  *'  When  we  love  in  part,"  says  Theophylact,  "  this  is  not  love,  but
division.  For  if  it  is  for  Gt)d's  sake  thou  lovest,  see  that  thou  love  all."  There  is  a
symmetry  in  love  which  requires  that,  loving  our  heavenly  Father,  we  should  love  all
Ids  children ;  that,  loving  Christ,  we  should  love  the  whole  Christian  circle.  In  the
Thessalonian  circle  no  exception  is  made  of  the  busybodies  afterwards  referred  to  as
loved  or  loving.  In  being  busybodies  they  were  not  doing  their  duty  by  the  other
members  of  the  circle ;  but  the  obstacle  thus  presented  to  their  brethren  loving  them
was  commendably  surmounted.  As  for  the  love  of  the  busybodies  themselves,  it  was
not  suflBciently  characterized  by  wisdom,  and  did,  therefore,  contain  something  to  bo
subtracted.  Still,  his  prayer  had  been  in  so  large  a  degree  answered  that  it  was  only
meet  that  he  should  give  thanks  to  God  for  them.  What  obstacles  there  are  to  our
loving  in  the  Christian  circle  let  us  try  to  surmount,  and  let  us  not  ourselves  present
any  obstacles.  And  let  us  be  thankful  before  God  for  what  harmony  is  enjoyed.  2.
Before  the  Churches.  "  So  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God
for  your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  in  the  afflictions  which  ye
endure."  Formerly  there  was  no  need  to  say  anything  of  their  faith  to  God-ward.
Their  conversion  to  Christianity,  with  joyfulness  in  attendant  persecution,  was  widely
known.  It  was  not  now  that  others  were  behindhand ;  for  they  had  warm  friends,
and  these  not  a  few,  who  gloried  in  them.  But  Paul  and  his  companions  were  so  over-
joyed that  they  were  moved  to  join  with  others  in  glorying  in  them.  The  sphere  of
glorying  was  the  Churches  of  Gtid,  i.e,  Corinth,  from  which  this  letter  was  \NTitten,  and


CH.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  15

other  Churches  with  which  they  had  correspoiideTioe.  What  they  especially  p^loried  in
was  the  patience  of  the  Thessalonians.  Persecution  had  come  upon  them  after  perse-
cution ;  they  were  then  enduring  afflictions.  But  they  had  nobly  stood  their  ground.
Their  patience  was  sustained  by  faith — faith  in  a  kind  and  wise  Providence  that  was
watching  over  them,  that  made  use  of  their  afflictions  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel,  that
would  not  leave  them  in  the  end  unrewarded.  This  patience  sustained  by  faith,  Paul
and  his  companions  held  up  before  the  Churches  for  their  encouragement  in  like  cir-
cumstances. This  being  their  motive, .  there  was  no  breach  of  modesty  in  the
instructors  of  the  Thessalonians  themselves  plorying  in  them.

U.  Righteous  judoment  of  God.  1.  With  reference  to  the  Thessalonians,  "  Which
is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God;  to  the  end  that  ye  maybe
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  yo  also  suffer."  The  patience  sus-
tained by  faith,  which  was  held  uj)  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Churches,  is  now  used
for  the  encouragement  of  the  Thessalonians  themselves.  Let  them  think  of  the  judg-
ment of  Gt)d  that  was  coming.  That  judgment  would  be  righteous  in  dealing  with  men
according  to  character.  'J'he  character  they  possessed  left  no  doubt  as  to  what  the
righteous  judgment  of  God  would  be.  It  looked  forward  to  their  being  in  the  end
counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  For  that  kingdom  they  were  suffering ;  but
let  them  know  that  they  who  thus  suffered  would  also  reign.  2.  With  reference  to
their  persecutors,  "If  so  be  that  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with  Qt)d  to  recompense
affliction  to  them  that  afflict  you,  and  to  you  that  are  afflicted  rest  with  us."  The
persecutors  had  no  source  of  encouragement  in  their  character.  They  also  had  to  pass
under  the  judgment  of  God;  but  what  could  righteous  judgment  mean  to  them?
Their  character  was  that  of  cruelly  afflicting  Qt>d's  people.  Could  it  be  a  righteous
thing  with  God  to  place  them  alongside  of  patient  sufferers  as  worthy  of  the  kingdom  ?
That  would  be  to  have  no  regard  to  distinction  in  character,  to  make  God  the  friend  of
cruelty  as  much  as  of  patience,  and  in  that  way  to  contradict  the  very  idea  of  righteous
judgment.  The  incontestably  righteous  thing  could  only  be  that  with  what  measure
they  meted  it  should  be  measured  unto  them ;  that,  giving'affliction,  there  should  be
given  back  to  them  affliction;  while,  to  the  afflicted  Thessalonians,  the  righteous
opposite  would  bo  release  from  the  strain  of  affliction— release  in  company  with  Paul
and  Silas  and  Timothy  in  like  manner  afflicted.

III.  Judicial  procedure  under  which  dealujo  with  the  Thessaloniakb  ahd
THEIR  PERSECUTORS  FALLS.  1.  Toward  the  ungodly,  (1)  Judge  and  time  of  judgment,
**At  the  revelation  of^the  Lord  Jesus."  The  righteous  judgment  of  God  is  now
associated,  as  in  other  Scriptures,  with  the  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead.  It  is  as
Jesus,  or  Saviour,  that  he  is  to  fill  the  lordly  office,  and  to  exercise  the  lordly  preroga-
tives of  Judge.  He  is  now  concealed  from  human  view,  upon  which  the  ungodly
presume.  But  one  day  he  shall  appear  upon  this  earthly  scene,  and  not  in  the  lowly
form  in  which  he  before  appeared,  but  in  a  form  that  shall  mark  his  Divine  sovereignty.
(2)  Place  from  which  revealed,  '*  From  heaven."  When  before  ho  appeared  there  was
no  impression  of  his  coming  from  heaven.  He  was  bom  upon  this  earth ;  he  wore
the  earthly  form  ^of  our  humanity  until,  having  made  atonement  for  our  sin,  he
ascended  into  heaven  and  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  The
heaven  which  then  opened  to  receive  him  will  again  open,  that  he  may  reveal  himself
on  earth  for  judgment.  It  will  be  observed  that  this  revelation  from  heaven  is  identical
with  the  descent  from  heaven!  described  in  1  Thessalonians.  (3)  Manner  of  revela-
tion. First  circumstance,  "  With  the  angels  of  [his  power."  In  the  former  description
the  Lord  appeared,  attended  by  the  archangel  and  (by  implication)  his  angelic  host.
The  old  translation  here  is  "  mighty  angels.'  Their  attendance,  as  of  an  army  upon  an
earthly  sovereign,  is  intended  to  give  an  impression  of  his  power.  This  they  give  by
their  numbers ;  they  may  also  give  it  by  the  personal  might,  more  than  human,  vnia
which  they  are  endowed.  Second  circumstance,  "In  flaming  fire."  In  the  former
description  it  is  the  clouds  that  are  mentioned.  Here  the  Lord  appears  encircled  with
a  flame  of  fire.  The  clouds  conceal  and  moderate  for  the  saints  that  have  been  acknow-
ledged. The  uncreated  splendour  displayed  before  men  in  view  of  judgment  is  as  fire.
In  1  Cor.  iii.  13  fire  is  associated  with  judgment :  "  Each  man's  work  shall  be  made
manifest :  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  is  revealed  by  fire ;  and  the  fire  itself
shall  prove  each  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is."    As  separating  from  it  all  impurity.


16  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cm.  i.  1—12.

tUts  judicial  fire  mnst  haye  a  fearrol  aspect  to  the  ungodly.    The  description  here  bears
a  close  resemblance  to  what  is  found  in  Dan.  vii.  9,  10:  'M  beheld  till  the  thrones
were  cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  whose  garment  was  white  as  snow,
and  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  pure  wool :  his  throne  was  like  the  fiery  fiame,  and
his  wheels  as  burning  fire.    A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  before  him :
thousand  thousands  ministered  unto  him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood
before  him  :  the  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  opened."     The  description  is
here  transferred  from  the  Ancient  of  days  to  him  who  is  there  styled  the  Son  of  man.
(ji)Jtidtcidl  action  toward  two  classes  of  the  ungodly.    "  Rendering  vengeance."    Judg-
ment is  the  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God.    When  men  are  convicted  before  a
human  tribunal  they  have  to  give  an  equivalent  for  the  wrong  they  have  done  to
others.    Society  in  that  way  not  only  protects  itself,  but  expresses  its  indignation
against  their  crimes.    The  Lord  is  to  take  his  seat  as  Judge,  first  convicting  and  then
pronouncing  sentence.    In  this  there  is  implied  no  revengeful  feeling ;  but  there  is
implied  holy  indignation,  in  the  name  of  the  highest  Authority  in  the  universe,  against
all  the  ungodly  for  all  their  works  of  ungodliness  which  they  have  ungodly  wrought.
First  class  of  the  vngodly,    "To  them  Uiat  know  not  God."    This  is  a  description  of
the  heathen.    And  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  vengeance  is  to  be  rendered  not  merely  to  the
wicked  world>rulers  (Pharaohs  and  Neros),  to  those  who  have  traded  in  their  fellow-men,
to  those  who  have  been  covenant-breakers,  to  those  who  have  taken  away  the  life  of  the
innocent,  but  to  the  heathen  as  a  whole.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that
they  are  not  regarded  historically,  but  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  writers  as  those
who  have  had  to  do  with  their  not  knowing  God.    In  so  far,  therefore,  as  it  can  be
iustly  said  that,  from  their  bad  environments,  they  have  not  had  to  do  with  this  not
knowing  God,  vengeance  shall  not  be  rendered  to  them.    But,  in  so  far  as  they  have
not  followed  their  light,  there  shall  not  any  of  them  escape.     Second  doss  of  the  ungodly,
'*  And  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus."    Our  Lord  Jesus  is  iden-
tified with  gospel  as  well  as  with  Law,  with  mercy  as  well  as  with  judgment.    What
is  the  gospel  but  the  good  news  of  the  Son  of  God  coming  into  our  nature,  and  suffering
vengeance,  just  indignation  and  death,  in  room  of  the  transgressors?    And  when  he
comes  forward  now  in  the  ministration  of  the  gospel,  and  commands  men  everywhere
to  repent  of  their  sins  and  to  accept  of  mercy,  has  he  not  a  right  to  be  obeyed  ?  And
will  the  most  humanitarian  maintain  that  he  who  obeys  not  should  go  unpunished?
(5)  Their  punishment  in  its  contents.     "  Who  shall  suffer  punishment,  [even  eternal
destruction  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  his  might.''     Such  being
their  character  (as  "  who "  implies),  they  shall  suffer  punishment.    The  suffering  of
punishment  by  them  corresponds  to  the  rendering  of  vengeance  by  the  Ix)rd.    The
punishment  is  declared  to  be  destructive.    This  may  mean,  and  in  some  of  its  applica-
tions does  mean,  annihilation.    But  there  is  not  good  reason  for  supposing  that  it  means
annihilation  in  its  application  to  the  punishment  of  the  ungodly.     It  seems  to  involve
a  low  conception  of  the  nature  of  man  and  of  the  moral  government  of  God,  to  suppose
that  human  beings  are  to  be  placed  under  trial,  and  to  work  out  a  moral  history,  and
that  after  their  failure  they  are  in  multitudes  to  be  quenched  in  the  darkness  of  non-
existence.   It  seems  more  reasonable  to  take  the  meaning  to  be  that  they  shall  be
destroyed,  in  being  consigned  to  a  state  of  misery   for  which  in  their  creation  they
were  not  intended.     Their  nature  (unlike  that  of  Christ's  people,  1  Thcss.  iv.  23)
being  disintegrated  by  sin,  their  peace  shall  be  completely  broken.     The  epithet
"eternal"  which  is  applied  to  destruction  is  of  terrible  import.    It  points  to  the  pun-
ishment as  stretching  away  into  the  eternal  world.    It  may  be  doubted  whether  by
itself  it  is  decisive  for  the  absolute  eternity  of  future  punishment.     It  is  not  so  decisive
as  if  the  form  had  been  endless.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  decisive  'against  the
endlessness  of  future  punishment  that  the  word  means  age-long.      It  needs  to  be
considered  in  connection  with  the  subjects  to  which  it  is  applied.    Eternal  sin,  as  the
right  reading  now  is  in  Mark  iii.  29,  apparently  means  sin  for  which  there  is  no
escape  from  punishment.     Eternal  punishment  does  not  mean  that  judgment  is  eternally
proceeding,  but  that  its  issues  reach  into  eternity.    The  similar  word  which  in  the  Old
Testament  is  applied  to  the  mountains  from  the  nature  of  the  case  imi)ort3  a  limited
eternity.    The  eternal  times  through  which  [the  mystery  was  hidden  can  only  mean
limited  times  into  which  the  past  eternity  was  regarded  as  divided.    Applied  to  God,


en.  L  1f-12.]    the  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  17


as  the  word  is  in  the  same  sentence  at  the  close  of  Romans,  it  indicates  the  absolute
eternity  of  God.    Applied  to  life,  as  it  very  frequently  is,  from  the  nature  of  life  and
from  the  Divine  guarantee,  it  means  life  that  is  endless  and,  as  it  is  expressed  in  one
placo,  indissoluble.    It  still  remains  a  question  whether,  from  the  nature  of  spiritual
death  and  from  the  character  of  God  along  with  other  teachings,  destruction  is  to  be
regarded  as  eternal  in  the  sense  of  being  endless.    It  certainly  is  a  word  which  is  fitted
to  strike  terror  into  the  ungodly.    The  destruction  is  further  represented  as  the  greatest
of  all  deprivations.     It  is  to  be  away  from  the  face  of  the  Lord.    The  supreme  pleasure
of  Christ's  people  is  to  be  their  beholding  his  face  of  infinite  benignity  turned  toward
them.    "As  for  me,"  says  the  psalmist,  "I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness."
"  And  they  shall  see  his  face,"  it  is  said  in  the  last  chapter  of  Revelation.     So  the
bitterest  element  in  the  case  of  the  ungodly  will  be  that  no  look  of  love,  no  look  of  the
infinite  benignity  of  the  Saviour,  will  be  turned  toward  them.     As  the  earth  without
sunshine,  so  must  it  be  to  be  away  from  the  face  of  Christ.    It  is  also  to  be  away  from
his  glory.     Three  disciples  were  taken  up  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  to  see  his
glory.     He  also  encouraged  the  eleven  at  the  last  by  the  prospect  of  their  seeing  his
glory.     "  That  where  I  am  they  also  may  be  with  me,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory
which  thou  hast  given  me."    It  is  particularly  here  the  glory  of  his  might.     He  who
has  the  look  of  infinite  benignity  gives  also  in  his  appearance  the  impression  of  infinite
might.     How  glorious  a  Being  to  be  privileged,  without  fear,  yet  with  solemn  awe,  to
look  upon  1    To  be  eternally  destroyed,  then,  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  from  the
glory  of  his  might,  such  will  be  the  terrible  punishment  awarded  to  them  that  know
not  God,  and  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus.    2.  Toxvard  the
saints.    "  When  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  be  marvelled  at  in  all
them  that  believed  (because  our  testimony  unto  you  was  believed)  in  that  day."
Contemporaneous  with  his  judicial  action  toward  the  ungodly,  is  to  be*  his  judicial
action  toward  his  own.     They  are  hero  called  his  saints,  answering  perfectly  to  that
description  then  as  they  only  imperfectly  do  now.    As  his  saints,  they  shall  be  acknow-
ledged on  the  day  of  judgment ;   and  their  reward  shall  be  to  have  their  outward
condition  brought  into  perfect  correspondence  with  their  inward  character.    This  is
called  their  glorification.    The  Lord,  having  given  grace,  will  also  give  glory.     Wo
may  think  of  the  glory  as  the  blossoming  forth  of  the  grace.     As  the  flower  comes  to
beauty  of  form,  so  they  shall  be  made  beautiful  to  look  upon  in  their  higher  order  of
being.    Their  glorification  is  here  presented  under  the  special  aspect  of  the  glorification  of
Christ  in  them.    As  Judge,  he  is  to  carry  out  his  own  word.    *'  And  the  glory  which  thou
hast  given  me  I  have  given  unto  them."  As  he  is  in  them  as  the  source  of  their  holiness,  so
is  his  beauty  to  shine  forth  in  their  outward  form.    From  heaven  we  "  wait  for  a  Saviour,
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall  fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may
be  conformed  to  the  body  of  his  glory,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even
to  subject  all  things  unto  himself."     This  glorification  of  Christ  in  the  saints  shall  call
forth  the  wonder  of  the  assembled  universe.    They  shall  marvel  at  the  infinite  benignity
and  power  of  him  who  out  of  darkness  has  made  light,  who  upon  rebels  against  his
Father's  authority  has  stamped  his  own   glorious  image.      In  connection  with   the
marvelling,  is  brought  in  the  condition  of  our  future  glorification.    With  a  look  back
from  judgment  it  is  said,    "  in  all  them  that  believed."    And  believing  is  taken  up
and  connected  particularly  with  the  Thessalonians — "  because  our  testimony  unto  you
was  believed."    In  keeping  with  this  language,  Aiithis  defined  by  Bishop  Pearson**  as
an  assent  unto  truths  credible  upon  the  testimony  of  God  delivered  unto  us  by  the
apostles  and  prophets."    Let  us  give  cordial  assent  to  the  facts  and  truths  of  the  gospel,
which  we  have  upon  the  best  of  testimony,  that  we  may  not  come  short  of  the  glorifica-
tion which  shall  be  the  marvel  of  the  universe.     There  was  not  needed  further  predica-
tion of  time,  but  it  is  emphasized  by  the  addition  of  the  words,  **  in  that  day."    The
day  when  the  Lord  is  to  render  vengeance  to  the  ungodly,  that  is  to  be  the  day  when  he
is  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  marvelled  at  in  all  them  that  believed.

IV.  Prayeb  in  coxxection  with  the  glorification  of  the  Thessalonians.  "To
which  end  we  also  pray  always  for  you,  that  our  God  may  count  you  worthy  of  your
calling,  and  fulfil  every  desire  of  goodness  and  every  work  of  faith,  with  power;  that
the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him,  according  to  the
grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    Toward  their  glorification  the  wishes,

II.  THESSALONIANS.  0


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  1. 1—12.

and  not  only  tbo  wishes  but  the  prayers  also,  of  Paul  and  his  companions  were  directed,
and  always  directed.  As  bclieying,  Gh>d  was  calling  them  to  glory.  Our  God,  say  the
petitioners,  grant  to  the  Thessalonians  at  the  last  to  be  counted  worthy  of  their  calling.
For  this  end  let  power  sufficient  be  granted  to  bring  to  completion  every  inward  desire
and  the  outward  work  appointed  them.  They  had  aspirations  after  goodness ;  let  these
receive  fulfilment.  They  had  a  life  to  live  before  the  world  according  to  the  faith  by
which  they  were  actuated ;  let  it  be  as  a  finished  piece  of  work.  Thus,  having  real
excellence,  would  they  be  adjudged  worthy  of  glory.  The  final  end  of  their  glorification
is  emphasized  by  repetition,  with  some  modification  of  form.  There  is  brought  in  "  the
Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus,"  i.e.  as  he  is  revealed  to  men  as  Saviour,  exalted  to  sovereignty.
And,  as  they  are  to  be  the  element  in  which  his  Name  is  to  be  glorified,  so  reciprocally
is  he  to  be  the  element  in  which  they  are  to  find  their  glorification.  Thus  is  identifica-
tion with  Christ  in  glory  made  clear  as  clear  can  be.  This  final  end  of  glorification  is
looked  for  in  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  Thessalonians,  not  according  to  their  deservings,
but,  say  the  iietitioners,  according  to  the  grace  (undeserved  and  rich)  of  our  God  and
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (in  his  superabundant  merits). — K.  F.

Yer.  2. — Orcice  and  peace.  St.  Paul  opens  his  Second  Epistle  with  the  expression  of
the  same  good  wishes  which  he  expressed  in  his  earlier  Epistle.  There  is  no  need  of  a
spiritual  parsimony  for  reserving  highest  benedictions.  The  best  can  be  breatheii  freely,
because  there  is  no  end  to  the  resources  of  God.  But  we  need  not  fear  to  repeat  them,
inasmuch  as  they  are  always  suitable  to  Christian  needs.  Though  we  may  tiro  of  the
words, "  grace  and  peace,'*  and  shall  do  so  if  we  do  not  enter  into  the  spirit  of  them,  we
can  never  tire  of  the  things  themselves,  for  they  are  large  as  the  universe  and  fresh  as
-eternity.  Grace  and  peace  represent  the  origin  and  the  perfection,  the  foundation  and
the  pinnacle,  the  root  and  the  fruit,  of  Christian  prosperity.  It  begins  in  grace  and
rests  on  grace  and  draws  its  supplies  from  grace ;  it  grows  into  round,  ripe  fulness  in
.peace.

I.  Gbace  is  the  soubce  of  Christian  prospebity.  1.  Christian  grace  is  essentially
GocTs  free  favour.  This  is  the  first  characteristic  of  the  new  covenant.  It  starts
with  mercy  to  the  sinner;  it  continues  with  grace  to  the  saint.  It  is  beyond  nature
which  leaves  us  to  our  own  devices,  and  law  which  directs  but  docs  not  aid,  and  justice
which  rewards  according  to  our  works,  because  it  offers  its  blessings  to  the  undeserving
"  without  money  and  without  price."  Grace  is  the  key-note  of  the  anthem  of  the
Bethlehem  angels.  2.  Christian  grace  is  an  active  enei^gy  of  Ood.  It  is  not  the  bare
negative  mercy  that  lets  off"  penalties,  that  withholds  the  hand  of  justice  from  striking
the  blow  of  doom.  Nor  is  it  only  a  kindly  disposition.  It  is  tbo  highest  Divine  energy
and  the  most  vigorous  fruitful  activity.  God  works  upon  us  in  grace.  3.  Christian
grace  works  through  the  whole  of  the  Christian  life.  We  do  not  simply  depend  upon
God's  grace  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  the  renewal  of  our  hearts  at  the  commence-
ment of  our  better  life.  We  continue  to  live  upon  grace.  It  begins  by  delivering  us
from  our  Egyptian  bondage;  it  continues  by  supplying  our  daily  bread.  Christians
would  as  surely  perish  without  these  supplies  of  grace,  even  after  the  first  forgiving  act
of  salvation,  as  the  Israelites  would  have  perished  without  the  manna  even  after  they
had  crossed  the  lied  Sea.

II.  Peace  is  the  crown  of  Christian  prosperity.  1.  Pecux  is  the  first  interest  of
a  nation,  a  Church,  a  soul.  We  cannot  enjoy  wealth,  pleasure,  or  comfort  if  we  have
not  peace.  For  peace  we  pine  and  yearn.  2.  Fea^ce  is  the  most  perfect  of  blessings.
When  this  is  rich  and  full  we  want  little  else.  We  can  afford  to  suffer  if  we  bear  our
lot  with  interior  peace.  It  may  be  said  of  peace,  as  it  is  said  of  love,  it  "  suffereth
long."  3.  Peace  is  the  greatest  outcome  of  grace.  It  cannot  be  had  without  grace.
Grace  restores  us  to  peaceable  relations  with  God,  gives  us  peaceable  dispositions  to
bear  and  forebear  one  with  another,  and  breathes  into  us  a  spirit  of  content,  submission,
and  holy  calm.  We  may  advance  far  in  activity,  etc.,  before  we  gain  this  precious  gem
of  grace.  Inward  serenity  in  all  weathers  of  outward  circumstance  is  the  last  product
of  spiritual  culture.

III.  Grace  and  peace  are  enjoyed  through  our  union  with  God  and  Christ.
The  twofold  benediction  has  a  twofold  reference.  1.  Grace  originates  in  the  Father.
The  first  thought  of  redeeming  the  world  arose  in  the  bosom  of  God.    The  secret  of


en.  L  1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  19


these  wonderful  blessings  is  a  Father's  love.  2.  Feace  is  found  in  union  with  God.
We  enjoy  the  peace  that  is  never  absent  from  the  Spirit  of  God  when  we  approach  his
holy,  serene  presence.  3.  Both  are  received  by  us  through  Christ.  He  is  the  incarna-
tion of  God's  grace.  He  makes  a  way  by  his  sacrifice  for  us  to  enjoy  it.  He  is  also
"our  peace."  "When  we  learn  the  "secret  of  Jesus"  we  shall  have  the  peace  of  God
which  passe th  all  understanding. — ^^V.  F.  A.

Ver.  3. — Oromivg  faith.  In  his  former  Epistle  St.  Paul  congratulated  the  Thessa-
lonians  on  the  fruits  of  faith,  love,  and  hope  which  he  saw  among  them  (1  Thess.  i.  8),
and  he  prayed  for  the  increase  of  their  love  (1  Thess.  iii.  12).  Now  he  is  thankful  that
their  faith  continues  to  grow,  and  that  their  mutual  affection  is  full  and  overflowing.
Let  us  consider  the  first  of  these  two  signs  of  progress.  (For  the  **  increase  of  love,"
see  on  1  Thess.  iii.  12.)

I.  Thk  signs  of  growing  faith.  Faith  is  an  invisible  spiritual  grace.  How,  then,
did  St.  Paul  know  that  it  was  increasing  in  the  distant  Church  of  the  Thessalonians  ?
We  need  not  suppose  that  he  possessed  any  supernatural  insight  for  reading  the  hearts
of  men.  If  faith  grows  the  fruits  of  faith  grow.  A  feeble  faith  makes  a  feeble  life.
When  the  whole  heart  is  faint  the  whole  head  is  sick  (Isa.  i.  5).  Faith  is  always  known
by  its  works,  and  the  health  and  vigour  and  stature  of  faith  by  the  character  and
measure  of  Christian  activity.  Note  some  of  the  signs  of  growing  faith.  1.  Brighter
cheerfulness.  We  are  less  distressed  with  doubt,  have  little  torment  of  fear,  bear
present  ills  patiently,  when  wo  trust  the  goodness  of  God  more  fully.  2.  Deeper
devotion.  Slight  faith  means  cold  prayer.  We  are  near  to  God  just  in  proportion  as
we  have  faith  in  him.  3.  Fuller  activity.  We  work  half-hcartUy  when  we  believe
half-heartedly.  A  strong  trust  in  the  grace  of  God  gives  a  strong  energy  for  doing  the
work  of  God.  4.  Warmer  love.  Faith  worketh  by  love  (Gal.  v.  6).  When  we  trust
Christ  more  truly  we  feel  the  force  of  his  love  more  deeply  and  love  him  more  warmly
in  return,  and  then  our  love  to  Christ  shows  itself  in  love  of  the  brethren.

II.  The  skcret  of  growing  faith.  Faith  flows  from  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  a  gift
of  God  (Eph.  ii.  8).  Nevertheless,  God  is  always  willing  to  bestow  this  gift,  and  our
reception  of  it  depends  on  what  we  do.  Faith  will  not  grow  without  cultivation.  Two
most  important  truths,  too  often  ignored,  help  us  to  the  secret.  1.  Faith  grows  by
means  of  what  it  feeds  on.  This  is  in  harmony  with  a  law  of  all  growth.  Nothing  can
come  from  nothing.  If  a  child  is  not  fed  it  will  die,  certainly  it  will  not  grow.  Grow-
ing plants  take  nourishment  from  air  and  soil.  Faith  will  not  grow  by  our  wishing  it
to  grow,  nor  by  any  manipulation  with  it.  Yet  people,  so  to  speak,  take  out  their  faith
and  try  to  do  something  with  it  in  order  to  improve  it.  The  great  mistake  is  to  think
of  increasing  our  faith  by  any  consideration  of  the  faith  itself.  We  must  forget  our
faith  and  look  at  Christ,  and  then  our  faith  will  grow  unconsciously.  We  have  too
much  introspection.  An  intelligent  consideration  of  the  grounds  of  faith,  especially  a
study  of  Christ,  reading  of  Scripture,  prayer,  "  means  of  grace,"  etc.,  help  faith  to  grow.
2.  Faith  grows  by  exercise.  This  is  also  natural.  Children  need  exercise  that  their
bodies  may  grow.  Unused  limbs  shrink  and  shrivel  up.  The  arm  of  the  blacksmith  is
strong  witli  work.  The  intellect  grows  by  being  employed.  The  torpid  intellect
becomes  st'ipid.  So  faith  must  be  used  in  order  that  it  may  grow.  Instead  of  deploring
our  little  faith,  let  us  use  it  and  it  will  grow  larger.  This  is  Christ's  own  advice;  for
when  his  disciples  said,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith,"  instead  of  doing  as  they  wished
by  a  miracle,  he  almost  rebuked  them  by  saying  that  if  they  had  faith  as  small  as  a
grain  of  musUird  seed,  even  that  when  fully  exercised  would  be  enough  to  remove  a
mountain  ;  and,  like  the  seed  which  is  a  living  thing,  it  would  grow  when  planted.  It
is  as  loolish  not  to  use  our  faith  because  it  is  small  as  it  would  be  not  to  plant  the  seed
for  a  similar  reason.  Thus  wc  keep  faith  small.  It  must  be  employed  if  it  is  to  grow.
— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  5. — A  token  of  righteous  judgment.  St.  Paul  regards  the  patient  endnrance  of
persecution  by  the  Thessaloniau  Christians  as  "a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous
judgment  of  God."  Here  is  one  of  those  paradoxes  of  triumphant  faith  in  which  the
apostle  delighted.  To  the  superficial  observer  the  aspect  of  affairs  told  the  very  opposite
Btory  to  that  which  St.  Paul  read  in  it.    Good  men  were  persecatedy  and  they  boro


20  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.     [cii.  i.  1—12.

their  persecution  patiently ;  yet  nothing  was  done  for  their  redress.  Was  not  this  a
break-down  of  justice  ?  The  case  is  like  that  of  the  psalmist,  who  was  jxirplexed  at  the
prosperity  of  the  wicked  till  he  went  into  the  sanctuary,  and  then,  by  faith  and  the
knowledge  of  unseen  Divine  law,  understood  their  end  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  17).  His  faith  in
the  supremacy  and  justice  of  God  leads  the  apostle  to  put  the  contrary  construction  on
passing  events  to  that  which  would  be  laid  \i\yon  them  by  unbelief.

I,  The  patient  endurance  op  persecution  is  a  token  of  God's  coming  judgment
OF  reward.  The  judgment  has  two  sides.  There  are  sheep  as  well  as  goats.  To
those  who  groan  under  the  yoke  of  present  injustice  the  coming  of  a  future  judgment
must  be  hailed  with  joy.  Then  the  cruelty  will  cease,  the  calumny  will  be  repudiated,
the  wrong  will  be  righted.  But  how  is  the  patient  endurance  of  persecution  a  token
of  the  coming  judgment?  1.  It  shows  the  necessity  of  it.  Of  course,  this  argument  is
only  addressed  to  faith.  If  we  believe  in  God  and  his  righteousness  we  cannot  suppose
that  he  will  permit  wrongs  to  remain  unredressed.  If  justice  were  done  on  earth  wo
need  expect  no  further  rectification.  But  the  postponement  of  justice  makes  the  future
coming  of  it  certain.  Here  is  a  reason  for  looking  forward  to  a  future  life.  If  this  life
were  rounded  into  perfection  we  should  not  have  so  much  occasion  for  expecting  another
life.  But  now  that  it  is  broken  and  not  justly  completed  there  must  be  a  future.  If
the  wages  of  God's  labourers  are  not  paid  to-day  there  must  be  a  morrow  when  they
will  be  paid.  2.  It  permits  the  persecuted  to  look  forward  to  a  happy  issue  from  it.
They  will  not  be  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  simply  because  they  endure
persecution.  Suffering  is  not  merit.  Heaven  is  not  bare  compensation.  But  the
patient  endurance  is  a  sign  of  character,  and  it  reveals  a  fitness  for  the  future  award  of
blessings.  The  untried  may  be  uncertain  of  their  fate.  The  tried  and  faithful  have
reason  for  more  confidence.

II.  TiJE  unavenged  infliction  of  persecution  is  a  token  op  God's  coming  judg-
ment OF  punishment.  The  blood  of  Abel  cries  to  God  from  the  ground.  The  meek,
patient  endurance  of  the  martyr  demands  future  retribution  more  powerfully  than  the
loudest  cry  for  vengeance.  The  better  the  character  of  the  persecuted  is,  the  less  they
deserve  their  ill  treatment  and  the  more  patiently  they  bear  it,  the  greater  will  the  guilt
of  the  persecutors  appear.  Thus  this  condition  of  affairs  is  a  token  of  a  coming  judg-
ment of  wrath.  1.  It  shows  the  necessity  of  it.  If  justice  were  already  done,  guilty  men
might  have  some  excuse  for  denying  the  probability  of  a  future  judgment.  But  now
they  cannot  speak  of  it  as  an  idle  threat  of  the  Church.  Justice  demands  it.  2,  It
ivarns  the  wicked  to  expect  a  dreadful  doom.  It  reveals  the  guilt  of  their  sin ;  and  it
makes  so  glaringly  apparent  the  contrast  between  their  conduct  and  that  of  their
victims  that  a  difl'erence  of  destiny  of  corresponding  magnitude  may  be  expected. —
W.  F.  A.

Vers.  6 — 10.— 7%e  judgment-day.  This  vivid  description  of  the  judgment-day
begins  with  an  appeal  to  the  justice  of  its  awful  events  :  "  If  so  be  that  it  is  a  righteous
thing,"  etc.  The  details  of  the  great  day  can  only  be  revealed  by  Divine  inspiration.
But  the  great  outlines  of  its  proceedings  may  be  predicted  by  our  own  consciences.

I.  The  separation  op  destinies.  Destinies  are  now  apparently  mixed  and  dis-
arranged without  any  evident  regard  to  justice.  They  will  not  bo  so  then.  There
will  be  a  clear  division  between  the  sheep  and  the  goats.  1.  Suffering  to  the  per-
secutors. They  who  give  affliction  shall  suffer  affliction.  There  is  a  law  of  nature
as  well  as  a  principle  of  fairness  in  the  lex  talionis  when  it  is  rightly  applied.  A  bad
man's  doom  is  to  be  the  recoil  of  his  evil  deeds  upon  his  own  head.  2.  liest  to  the
persecuted.  The  specially  coveted  reward  of  the  afflicted  is  rest.  To  the  weary
sufferer  that  alone  is  an  immeasurable  blessing.  There  is  some  compensation  in  the
fact  that  rest,  which  to  the  idle  and  comfortable  is  itself  a  weariness,  becomes  the
most  happy  solace  to  the  suffering.  Note :  (1)  This  rest  is  the  more  enjoyable  because
it  is  shared  with  beloved  friends  (Paul,  Silas,  etc).  (2)  It  is  not  given  to  all  the
afflicted,  but  to  afflicted  Christians,

II.  The  time  of  the  judgment.  It  is  here  synchronized  with  the  second  advent
of  Christ.  He  is  King  and  Judge  as  well  as  Friend  and  Saviour.  His  repudiation  of
the  office  of  Judge  during  his  earthly  humiliation  (Luke  xii.  14)  should  only  make  us
feel  how  surely  the  exercise  of  his  rightful  judicial  functions  must  be  reserved  for  some


CH.  1. 1—12.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  21

fature  occasion.  Jesus  Christ  cannot  endure  eternal  injustice.  He  is  strong  to  execute
as  well  as  righteous  to  desire  judgment.

HI.  The  persons  condemned.  Two  classes  are  named.  1.  Those  who  are  ignorant
of  Qod.  The  heathen  world  seems  to  be  here  referred  to.  Why  should  these  benighted
l^eople  be  punished  for  their  ignorance?  Because  they  might  have  known  God  (Rom.
i.  18—20).  But  they  can  only  be  punished  in  so  far  as  their  ignorance  was  wilful
and  came  from  moral  causes,  t.c.  in  so  far  as  they  "held  down  the  truth  in  unrighteous-
ness.'* Doubtless  there  have  been  good  heathen  men  who  have  not  committed  that
offence.  2.  Those  who  obey  not  the  gospel.  People  of  Christendom  are  now  referred  to.
It  is  of  no  use  to  live  in  a  Christian  nation,  nor  to  belong  to  a  Christian  Church,  nor
to  believe  in  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  if  we  do  not  obey  the  gospel.  Obedience  is  the
one  test.  Heathen  are  only  condemned  for  wilful  neglect  of  God,  Christian  nations
for  disobedience  to  the  Clirislian  gospel.

IV.  The  doom  of  the  guilty.  1.  They  are  to  suffer  punishment.  Their  doom
will  not  be  purely  privative,  nor  will  merely  natural  consequences  follow  their  evil
conduct.  Distinct  penalties  will  be  imposed.  2.  The  punishment  will  chiefly  consist
in  **  eternal  destruction.^  This  dreadful  phrase  certainly  cannot  be  taken  as  an
equivalent  for  everlasting  torment.  Is  not  sin  everywhere  destructive  ?  The  wages
of  sin  is  not  pain— though  pain  does  follow  it — but  death.  This  destroying  process,
left  to  itself,  will  go  on  for  ever.  All  hope  of  a  far-off  end  to  it  must  be  in  some
interference  with  its  action  by  the  Divine  mercy,  which  is  also  eternal.  3.  The  punish-
ment will  be  increased  by  the  mecLSure  qf  the  glory  that  is  missed.  The  eternal  destruc-
tion involves  separation  "  from  the  face  of  the  Lord."  In  his  presence  there  is  fulness
of  joy.  Spiritual  destruction  includes  the  killing  out  of  the  spiritual  eye  that  beholds
the  beatific  vision. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  11. —  Worthy  of  the  Christian  calling.  Here  is  a  prayer  with  two  aspects.  It
looks  to  heaven  and  to  earth.  It  is  concerned  with  God's  estimate  of  his  people  and
with  their  own  spiritual  successes.

I.  The  heavenwabd  aspect  op  the  prayeb.  St.  Paul  has  just  been  describing  the
great  and  terrible  judgment-day  in  language  of  fire  and  thunder.  Now  he  expresses
his  anxiety  that  all  may  be  well  with  his  readers  on  that  day,  when  they  will  be
called  to  account  to  ascertain  how  far  they  have  walked  worthily  in  respect  of  their
vocation.  1.  Christians  have  a  calling.  We  are  called  to  bo  Christians,  and  beinp
Christians,  to  enter  the  pilgrimage  of  the  heavenly  lile.  The  object  of  this  general
calling  is  to  follow  Christ.  But  we  are  also  each  of  us  called  to  some  specific  indivi-
dual vocation.  2.  The  Christian  calling  involves  high  obligations.  It  is  no  light  matter
to  be  found  worthy  of  it.  When  a  great  trust  is  put  upon  a  man  a  heavy  responsibility
accompanies  his  discharge  thereof.  So  is  it  with  every  Christian.  3.  Qod  watches  us
in  the  pursuit  of  our  calling.  Wo  are  observed  of  God,  neither  escaping  his  eye  in
our  most  secret  hours,  nor  disregarded  by  him  in  our  least  important  actions.  4.  Ood
will  bring  us  to  account  for  our  fulfilment  of  our  calling.  It  is  most  iiuportant  that
he  should  reckon  us  to  have  worthily  discharged  our  vocation  because  "his  favour  is
life."  But  he  who  calls  us  to  the  Christian  life  can  give  us  grace  to  discharge  its
obligations.    We  can  pray  that  we  may  be  accounted  worthy.

II.  The  earthward  aspect  of  the  prayer.  1.  It  seeks  the  fulfilment  of  every
desire  of  goodness.  These  are  the  desires  which  spring  out  of  the  good  disposition  of
a  Christian  heart.  (1)  It  is  not  every  desire  of  a  good  man  that  is  to  be  fulfilled.
Good  i;eoplo  may  have  foolish  wishes.  The  desires  to  be  prayed  about  are  those  which
spring  directly  out  of  goodness.  (2)  Good  desires  may  be  unsatisfied.  We  may  wish
well  and  not  have  opportunity  or  power  for  executing  our  wishes.  The  spirit  may  be
willing  while  the  flesh  is  weak,  or  the  spirit  may  be  weak  in  energy  while  it  is  good
in  intention.  2.  It  seeks  the  fulfilment  of  every  work  of  faith.  St.  Paul  agrees  with
St.  James  that  faith  shows  itself  by  works.  But  he  sees  deeper  into  the  difficulties
of  weak  human  nature.  Though  our  trust  and  fidelity  prompt  us  to  obedient  service,
innumerabhi  hindrances  intervene  and  frustrate  our  energies.  We  need  that  God
should  establish  the  work  of  our  hands.  Even  when  wo  sow  and  water  well  he  must
give  the  iiicnase.  3.  The  accomplishment  of  these  ends  depends  on  a  gift  of  power.
Goodness  without  strength  is  futile.    But  the  strong  God  infuses  strength  (Ps.  Izxiii.


22


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cii.  u.  1—17.


26).    The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  Spirit  of  power.    The  Chxirch  should  pray  more  earnestly
for  the  grace  of  energy. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  12. — Ghrifi&h  I.  The  great  end  op  the  Christian  vocation  is  to  glorify
THE  Name  of  Christ,  llie  blessings  for  which  St.  Paul  has  been  praying  are  to  lead
up  to  this  great  result.  1.  The  Christian  lives  for  Christ.  Christ  is  the  cl»ief  Corner-
stone of  the  finished  temple  as  well  as  the  Foundation  with  which  the  building  is
begun.  Ho  is  the  Omega  as  well  as  the  Alpha.  We  begin  with  him;  in  him,  too,
we  end.  Receiving  all  our  grace  from  Christ,  we  are  to  devote  our  lives  to  him.  2.
The  Christian  lives  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  We  cannot  minister  to  his  wants  directly
as  did  those  women  who  ^ave  of  their  substance  during  his  earthly  humiliation —
though  we  can  do  so  virtually  when  we  give  to  his  brethren.  But  we  can  minister  to
his  glory  as  directly  as  did  those  disciples  who  cast  their  garments  in  his  path  and
hailed  his  entrance  into  Jerusalem  with  shouts  of  praise.  3.  The  Christian  honours
Ohri^  by  glorifying  Jiis  Name,  The  Name  is  not  merely  the  distinctive  appellation,
but  the  descrii)tive  characteristic.  To  Jesus  there  is  givun  "  the  Name  which  is  above
every  name  "  (Phil.  ii.  9).  His  Name  is  what  is  known  of  him  and  praised  in  him,
i,e.  Ids  fame.  So  we  speak  of  one  making  a  name.  We  cannot  add  to  the  greatness
and  gloriousncss  of  our  Lord.  But  we  can  make  his  fame  to  be  more  widely  spread
and  more  highly  exalted  amons;  men.

IL  When  the  Name  of  Cuukt  is  glorified  his  people  share  the  glory.  1.
There  is  a  prospect  of  glorification  for  Christians.  The  doleful  plaint  of  the  despised
sufferer  is  not  to  be  the  only  song  of  the  Church.  Not  only  will  joy  follow  sorrow,
but  exaltation  will  succeed  humiliation.  The  Thessalonian  Christians  were  a  despised
and  persecuted  community  living  among  cruel,  scornful  neighbours.  This  trying
condition  was  not  to  bo  permanent.  For  their  shame  they  would  have  double  glory
in  the  end.  2.  Christian  glorification  follows  the  glorification  of  Christ.  The  first
point  is  the  glorifying  of  our  God*s  Name ;  that  of  his  people  comes  second.  The  order
is  significant.  (1)  We  must  not  seek  our  own  glory,  but  in  seeking  Christ's  ours  will
follow  unsought.  (2)  Until  the  master  is  glorified  the  servants  must  remain  in
obscurity.  'J'he  great  glory  of  the  second  advent  will  be  followed  by  the  exaltation
of  the  Church.  3.  Christian  glorification  depends  on  union  with  Clirist.  We  are  to
be  glorified  in  him.  (1)  All  that  makes  the  Christian  glorious  comes  from  Christ.
Without  him  we  are  shamed  and  dark  and  dead.  (2)  Glory  comes  to  us  through  our
sharing  Christ's  glory,  as  the  clouds  are  cjlorified  in  the  light  of  the  rising  sun.

III.  The  glorification  of  Christ  and  his  people  arises  from  a  worthy  ful-
filment OF  the  Christian  calling  according  to  Divine  grace.  1.  It  arises  from  a
worthy  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  calling.  St.  Paul  prayed  that  God  would  count  his
people  worthy  of  their  calling  for  this  express  purpose,  that  they  might  glorify  Christ,
etc.  (ver.  11).  We  glorify  Christ  by  our  lives.  Songs  of  praise  go  for  little  if  our  con-
duct dishonours  our  Lord.  The  richest  anthem  of  praise  risis  from  the  silent  living  of
a  pure  and  useful  Christian  life.  Our  own  glory  is  also  only  possible  when  our  life  in
Christ  has  been  fruitful.  2.  It  depends  on  Divine  grace.  It  is  **  according  to  the
grace,"  etc.,  i.e.  the  glory  corresponds  to  the  grace.  The  more  ijrace  we  have  the  greater
will  be  the  glory.    Fulness  of  grace  brings  fulness  of  glory. — W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  II.


Contents. — The  apostle  now  proceeds  to
the  principal  olject  which  ho  had  in  view
in  writing  this  Epibtlo.  The  Thcssalonians
had  adfiptcd  erroneous  notions  concerning
the  advent ;  they  supposed  that  the  day  of
the  Lord  was  imminent,  and,  in  consequence
of  this  belief,  they  were  thrown  into  a  state


of  excitement  and  alarm.  The  apostio
reminds  them  of  hia  former  inslructiunB  on
this  subject;  how  ho  liad  told  them  that
before  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord
there  should  bo  a  great  apostasy,  and  the  man
of  sin,  whoso  nature  and  cl)aractcri:>tics  ho
had  described  to  them,  should  be  revealed ;
but  that  at  present  tlierc  was  a  restraining
influence  which  prevented  his  appearance.


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAXa


23


When  that  restraining  infliicnco  was  removed,
the  man  of  sin  would  be  rcvcalod.accompanied
with  powers  and  signs  and  wonders  of  false-
hood, and  would  succeed  in  deceiving  those
who  were  destitute  of  the  love  of  the  truth.
Then  would  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  come  and
destroy  him  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth  and
the  appearance  of  his  presence.  The  apostle
thanks  God  that  the  Thessalonians,  on  the
contrary,  were  chosen  to  salvation  and  to  a
participation  of  the  glory  of  tho  Lord;  he
exhorts  them  to  stand  fast  in  tho  instruc-
tions which  he  had  delivered  them ;  and  he
concludes  with  a  prayer  for  their  consolation
and  confirmation.

This  chapter  is  involved  in  difficulties ;  it
is  the  obscurest  passage  in  the  writings  of
Paul ;  it  is  pre-eminently  one  of  those  things
in  his  Epistles  which  are  hard  to  bo  under-
stood (2  Pet.  iii.  IG).  But  it  is  to  be  ob-
served tliat  tho  description  of  tho  man  of
sin,  though  obsciuB  to  us,  was  not  necessarily
obscure  to  the  Thessalonians.  They  had
information  on  this  point  which  we  do  not
ixwsess.  The  apostle,  when  at  Tlicssiilonica,
had  instructcil  them  in  this  subject,  and
to  these  instructions  he  refers  in  the  de-
scription which  ho  here  gives  (vers.  5,  G).
Nor  was  the  information  which  ho  imparted
to  them  indefinite  and  general,  but  definite
and  precise.  Ho  had  described  the  nature
of  the  apostasy,  the  characteristics  of  the
man  of  bin,  and  tho  influonoes  which  retarded
his  manifestation  (vers.  3,  4) ;  and  if  these
ix)ints  wcro  known  to  us,  as  they  were  to
the  Thessalonians,  most  of  the  obscurity
which  rests  on  tliis  prediction  would  dis-
appear. At  present  we  give  tho  exposition
of  the  passage,  reserving  the  discussion  of
the  various  theories  concerning  its  interpre-
tation to  an  excursus  at  the  end  of  the
chapter.

Ver.  1. — How ;  literally,  huf;  a  particle  of
transition.  We  beseech  you.  Pflseing  from
what  he  besought  God  for  them  to  wliat  he
beseeches  them.  Brethren,  by.  Considered
by  8ome,'a8  in  the  A.V.,  as  a  form  of  a^ljura-
tion.  Thus  Calvin  :  "  He  adjures  believers
by  tho  coming  of  Christ ;  for  it  is  eustomary
to  adjuro  by  those  things  which  are  re-
garded by  us  with  reverence."  But  buch  a
construction  is  unknown  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  is  besides  unnatural.  Others
render  the  preposition  **  in  behalf  of"  or**  in
the  interest  of,"  **  as  tliough  he  were  pleading,
in  honour  of  that  day,  that  the  expectation


of  it  might  not  be  a  source  of  disorder  in  tho
Church  "  ( Jowett) ;  but  such  a  sense  is  too
artificial.  It  is  best  to  render  it  **  concern-
ing "  or,  as  in  the  R.V.,  "  touching."  The
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Some
(Whitby,  Hammond)  suppose  that  by"  tho
coming  of  tho  Lord  Jesus  was  here  meant
his  coming  in  spirit  at  the  destruction  of
Jerusalem,  and  that  the  apostasy  was  tho
revolt  of  the  Jews  from  tho  Romans ;  the  re-
straining power  being  differently  interpreted.
But,this  is  a  forced  and  extravagant  interpre-
tation, and  is  completely  overthro\vn  by  what
the  apostle  says  in  tho  next  verso,  for  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  imminent.
Besides,  the  Thessalonians,  who  were  chiefly
Gentile  converts,  were  too  distant  from  Jeru-
salem to  bo  much  troubled  by  tho  destruc-
tion of  that  city.  By  the  coming  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then,  is  here  meant,  as
is  tho  uniform  meaning  of  the  phrase  in
the  writings  of  Paul,  the  second  advent.
And  by  (or,  concerning)  our  gathering  to-
gether onto  him.  The  word  translated
"  gathering  together  "  occurs  only  once  again
in  the  New  Testament,  where  it  is  need  with
reference  to  the  assembling  of  Christians  for
worship  (Heb.  x.  35).  Here  it  is  used  with
reference  to  the  assembling  of  believers  to
Christ,  when  he  shall  be  revealed  from
heaven ;  it  refers,  not  to  the  raising  of  the
dead,  but  to  the  gathering  together  of  those
who  are  then  alive  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  17).

Ver.  2. — That;  to  the  end  that,  the  purpose
for  which  the  apostle  besought  the  Thessa-
lonians. Ye  he  not  soon  ;  quickly.  This  has
been  variously  interpreted,  **  so  soon  after  my
exhortation,"  or  **  so  soon  after  my  departure
from  Thessalonica,"  or  *•  so  soon  after  your  re-
ception of  the  gospel,"  or  "  so  soon  after  this
opmion  of  tho  imminence  of  Christ's  coming
was  promulgated."  Others  refer  it  to  man-
ner rather  tlian  to  time — "soon  and  with
small  reason"  (Alford).  Shaken;  agitated
like  the  waves  by  a  storm,  as  tho  word  signi-
fies. In  mind;  or  rather, /rom  your  mind;
from  your  sober  reason.  Or  he  troubled;
a  still  stronger  expression;  "terrified."
Neither  by  spirit;  not  any  falsely  under-
stood prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  nor
any  mistaken  revelations,  whether  by  visions
or  dreams ;  but  prophetical  discourses  deli-
vered by  members  of  tho  Church  in  a  state  of
excitement,  announcing  tho  imme<liato  com-
ing of  Christ,  and  which  were  mistaken  for
Divine  communications.  There  does  not
appear  to  havo  been  any  intention  to  deceive;
the  Thessalonians  erred  in  neglecting  **to
try  tho  spirits "  and  to  **  prove  the  pro-
phecies." Nor  by  word ;  not  any  traditional
word  of  Christ,  nor  any  misinterpretation
of  his  prophecy  concerning  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem,  nor  a  calm  discourse  in  distinc-
tion from  proplielic  uttciances;   but  tho


24  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—17.


report  of  some  of  the  ap68tle*8  wonls,  cither
erroneous  or  misunderstood.  Her  by  letter.
Not  the  apostle's  former  Einstlo  to  the  Tbes-
aalonians,  tlie  passages  in  which  concerning
the  advent  had  been  misinterpreted  (Paloy) ;
for,  if  this  were  the  case,  the  apostle  \vould
have  expressed  himself  more  plainly  and
would  not  have  repudiated  it;  but  some
letter,  either  forged  in  the  apostle's  name  or
pretending  to  inculcate  his  views.  As  firom
HI.  These  words  apply  to  the  last  two  pnr-
ticulars :  '*  Let  no  pretended  saying  or  pre-
tended letter  of  mine  disturb  you  in  this
matter."  As  that — to  the  effect  that— the
day  of  Christ;  or,  as  tbo  best  manuscripts
read,  of  the  Lord.  Is  at  hand ;  literally,  U
ftresent,  so  R.Y.  Tlie  verb  is  so  translated
in  tiie  other  passages  where  it  occurs  (Rom.
viii.  38 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22 ;  Giil.  i.  4 ;  Heb.  ix.  9),
except  in  2  Tim.  iii  1,  where  it  ought  also
to  have  been  so  rendered.  It  is,  however,
difficult  to  conceive  how  the  Thessaloniuns
could  think  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was
actually  present.  We  cannot  imagine  tliat
they  thought  that  Christ  had  already  come
for  judgment.  To  escape  the  difficulty,
some  conceive  that  **tho  day  of  the  Lord"  is
not  identical  with  **  the  coming  of  the  Lord,"
but  that,  besides  the  actual  advent,  it  in-
cludes the  events  whicii  are  its  antecedents
and  concomitants  (Endie).  It  appears,  how-
ever, best  to  suppose  that  the  word  is  a
strong  expression  for  the  imminence  of  tliat
day ;  that  the  hour  of  tho  advent  was  about
to  strike.  The  Thessalonians  ought  always
to  bo  living  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  the
day  of  the  Lord,  as  that  day  would  come
suddenly  and  unexpectedly ;  but  they  were
not  to  be  so  impressed  witli  a  sense  of  its
immediatencss  us  to  bo  deprived  of  their
sober  reason.

Ycr.  8. — Let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any
means ;  in  any  way,  not  onl^  in  any  of  the
foregoing  metiiods,  "by  spirit,  or  word,  or
letter,"  but  in  any  way  whatever.  For  {that
day  shall  not  come).  The  bracketed  words
are  not  in  the  original,  but  are  correctly
supplied  for  the  completion  of  the  sense.
Except  there  come  a  falling  away;  or,  the
apostasy ;  namely,  that  apostasy  about  which
the  apostle,  when  in  Thessalonica,  had  in-
structed his  readers.  Tlie  falling  away  here
alluded  to  is  evidently  religious,  not  political.
Hence  it  cannot  be  the  revolt  of  the  Jews
from  the  Romans,  or  any  of  those  revolts
and  disturbances  which  then  occurred  in
the  political  world.  Nor  must  we  conceive
that  the  man  of  sin  himself  is  here  meant ;
for  this  apostasy  precedes  his  coming
— prepares  the  way  for  his  advent;  it  is
not  the  result,  but  the  cause,  of  his  ai)ixiar-
ance.  The  word,  then,  is  to  be  taken  gene-
rally to  denote  that  rera.irkable  *'fallin'^
away"  from  Christianity  conceruing  whicli


Paul  had  instructed  tho  Thessalonians  (comp.
1  Tim.  iv.  1 — 3).  First ;  namely,  before  the
coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  And  that
man  of  sin;  in  whom  sin  is,  as  it  were,
personified,  as  righteousness  is  in  Christ
Be  revealed.  Tho  apostle  considers  the  man
of  sin  as  tho  counterpart  of  Christ;  as
Christ  was  revealed,  so  shall  the  man  of  sin
be  revealed.  The  son  of  perdition;  whose
sin  necessarily  conducts  to  perdition;  not
here  the  perdition  of  his  followers,  but  his
own  perdition.  The  same  name  which  was
applied  by  our  Lord  to  Judas  Iscariot
(John  xvii.  12).

Ver.  4. — ^Who  opposeth;  or,  the  opposer,
taken  substantively.  The  object  of  oppo-
sition is  not  so  much  believers,  as  Christ;
he  is  antichrist,  tho  opponent  of  Christ.
And  yet  antichrist  is  not  Satan,  the  great
adversary  (1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Rev.  xii.  10),  for  he
id  expressly  distinguished  from  him  (ch.  ii.
9),  but  the  instrument  of  Satan.  As  Satan
entered  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Ihcariot,  the
son  of  perdition,  so  does  he  take  possession
of  the  man  of  sin.  And  exalteth  himself
above ;  or  rather,  against^  in  a  hostile  man-
ner. All  that  is  called  Ood ;  not  only  against
all  the  false  gods  of  the  heathen,  but  also
against  tlio  true  God  (comp.  Dan.  vii.  25;
xi.  3G).  Or  that  is  worshipped ;  that  is  an
object  of  worship.  The  same  word  that  is
used  in  Acts  xvii.  23,  **  As  I  passed  by  and
beheld  your  devotions  " — the  objects  of  your
worship.  So  that  he  as  Ood.  The  words
"  as  God  "  are  to  be  omitted,  as  not  found  in
the  best  manuscripts.  Sitteth  in  the  temple
of  God.  According  to  some,  the  temple  of
Jerusalem  (Do  Wctte,  liiiuemann,  Eadie),
either  as  it  then  existed  or  as  restored  ac-
cording to  tho  prophecy  of  Ezekiel.  But  it
appears  more  correct  to  reefer  the  expression
metaphorically  to  tho  Christian  Church.  It
is  a  favourite  metaphor  of  Paul  to  compare
believers  in  particular,  or  the  Church  in
general,  to  tho  temple  of  God  (comp.  1  Cor.
ui.  17;  vi.  19;  Eph.  ii.  20—22).  Showing-
exhibiting — ^himself  that  he  is  God.  His
bitting  in  the  temple  of  God  was  an  asser-
tion of  his  divinity ;  he  claimed  to  be
regarded  and  worshipped  as  God.  This
was  the  crowning  act  of  his  impiety;  nctt
only,  like  the  Roman  empcrf»rs,  he  dcmande<l
to  be  worshipped  as  one  of  many  gods,  but
he  claimed  to  himself  the  prerogative  t»t'
tho  Godhead,  not  only  to  the  exclusion  of  tlie
false  gods  of  heathenism,  but  even  of  tlie
true  God.

Yer.  5. — ^Remember  ye  not,  that,  when  I
was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  tlungs  1
These  words  contain  a  repr(>ach.  Had  tho
Tlicssaloniuns  remembered  tho  instructions
of  tho  ajTostle,  they  would  not  have  been
so  soon  shaken  from  their  sober  reason  or
troublcil.      The   ajiostle,   when   he  was   in


en.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


25


Thessalonica,  had  told  them  of  these  thingrs;
he  had  instructed  them  concerning  the
nature  of  the  apostasy  and  the  coming  of
the  man  of  sin  ;  so  that,  as  already  observed,
this  description,  so  obscure  to  us,  was  not
obscure  to  the  Thessalonians, — they  pos-
sessed the  key  to  its  interpretation.

Vor.  6. — And  now.  The  particle  **  now  "
has  been  variously  interpreted.  Some  con-
nect it  with  the  restraining  influence:
**And  ye  know  what  now  withholdeth ; "
but  if  so,  there  would  have  been  a  different
arrangement  of  the  words  in  the  original.
Others  consider  it  as  a  mere  particle  of
transition :  "  Now,  to  pass  over  to  another
subject;"  but  there  is  no  transition,  the
apostle  continues  his  description  of  the  man
of  sin.  It  is  rather  to  be  considered  as  a
particle  of  time;  "Now  ye  know,  because
you  have  been  instructed  on  this  point."
Ye  know;  Paul  having  told  them  when  he
was  at  Thessalonica.  What  withholdeth ;
hindereth.  The  hindrance  does  not  refer
to  the  prevention  of  the  apostle  from  speak-
ing freely  on  this  subject,  lest  ho  should
involve  himself  in  political  difficulties ;  nor
to  any  delay  in  the  coming  of  Christ;  but
to  a  restraint  upon  the  appearance  of  the
man  of  sin :  "  Ye  know  what  prevents  his
open  manifestation."  That  he ;  namely,  the
man  of  sin.  Might  he  revealed  in  his  time;
literally,  in  his  season;  in  his  proper  time,
the  time  appointed  by  God.  Events  were
not  yet  ripe  for  his  appearance.  Just  as
there  was  a  '*  fulness  of  time  "  when  Christ
fihould  appear  (Gal.  iv.  4),  so  there  was  a
"fulness  of  time"  when  the  man  of  sin
should  bo  revealed;  there  was  a  series  of
events  going  on  which  would  culminate  in
his  revelation.  The  nature  of  this  restrain-
ing or  withholding  influence  will  after-
wards be  considered;  whatever  it  was,  the
Thessalonians  were  formerly  explicitly  in-
formed.

Ver.  7. — For  the  mystery.  "Mystery"
here  denotes  something  which  was  unknown
or  secret  before  it  was  revealed  (comp.
Eph.  iii.  3 — 5).  So  also  one  of  the  names
of  Babylon,  the  scat  of  the  antichristian
power,  is  Mystery  (Itev.  xvii,  3).  Of  ini-
quity; rather,  of  lawlesmess ;  namely,  this
aiK)bta8y  which  shall  precede  the  coming  of
the  man  of  sin.  The  genitive  here  is  that
of  apposition — "  that  mysteiy  which  is  law-
lessness," whose  essence  and  sphere  of
operation  is  lawlessness.  Doth  already
work ;  or,  is  already  icorkhig.  The  mystery
of  iniquity  even  now  works  in  secret;  but
the  man  of  sin  himself  will  not  appear
until  the  restraining  power  be  removed.
Even  at  the  time  tho  apostle  wrote  the
seeds  of  apostasy  were  already  sown;  the
leaven  of  lawlessness  was  fermenting  inside
Christianity ;  the  foundations  of  a  false  Chris-


tianity were  being  laid.  Thus  the  apostle
warned  tlie  Ephesians  that  false  teachers
would  arise  from  among  themselves;  to
Timothy  he  writes  of  those  perilous  times
which  were  then  present ;  and,  in  hiB
Epistles,  mention  is  made  of  false  practices
and  doctrines,  such  as  the  worship  of  angels,
abstinence  from  meats,  bodily  mortifications^
and  the  honour  conferred  on  celibacy.  So
also  John,  in  his  First  Epistle,  refers  to  this
working  of  this  antichristian  power  when
he  says,  "  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time :
and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall
come,  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists. . . .
Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  Giod :
and  this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist,  whereof
ye  have  heard  that  it  should  come;  and
even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world  "  (1  John
ii.  18 ;  iv.  3).  "  Antichrist  does  not  step  on
the  scene  suddenly  without  any  prepara-
tions; on  the  contrary,  a  stream  of  anti-
christian sentiment  and  conduct  pervades
the  whole  hibtory  of  the  world  "  (Oluiausen).
Only  he  that  now  letteth;  or,  restraineth,
tho  old  meaning  of  the  word  "let."  WiU
let.  These  words  are  not  in  the  original,
and  ought  to  be  omitted.  Until  he  he  taken
out  of  the  way.  The  whole  clause  ought  to
be  rendered,  "The  mystery  of  lawlessness
is  already  working,  only  until  he  who  re-
struineth  is  removed ;  when  that  takes
place,  when  the  restraining  influence  is
removed,  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  will  no
longer  work  secretly,  but  will  be  openly
manifested.

Ver.  8. — And  then;  namely,  so  soon  as
he  that  restraineth  is  taken  out  of  the  way.
Shall  that  Wicked ;  or,  that  lawless  one,  in
whom  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  is  realized ;
not  diflerent  from,  but  the  same  with,  the
"man  of  sin,  tho  son  of  perdition."  Be
revealed ;  appear  unveiled  in  all  his  naked
deformity.  No  longer  working  secretly,  but
openly,  and  in  an  undisguised  form;  no
longer  the  mystery,  but  tho  revelation  of
lawlessness.  The  apostle  now  interrupts
his  description  of  tho  man  of  sin  by  an-
nouncing his  doom.  Whom  the  Lord;  or,
ns  the  be&t-att<;sted  manuscripts  read,  vshom
the  Lord  Jesus.  Shall  consume;  or  rather,
shall  slay  (R.  V.).  With  the  spirit  (or,  breath)
of  his  month.  Various  interpretations  have
been  given  to  this  clause.  Some  refer  it  to
the  Word  of  God,  and  others  to  tho  Holy
Spirit,  and  suppose  that  the  conversion  of
the  world  is  here  predicted;  but  this  is
evidently  an  erroneous  interpretation,  as
the  doom  of  antichrist  is  here  announced.
Others  refer  the  term  to  a  cry  or  word,  and
think  that  the  sentence  of  condemnation
pronounced  by  tho  Lord  Jesus  on  the  wicked
IS  intended.  But  the  words  are  to  be  taken
litenilly  as  a  description  of  tho  power  and


28


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ou.  ii.  1—17.


inndBtible  might  of  Chnst  at  his  coming —
that  the  mere  breath  of  his  mouth  is  sufiS-
oisnt  to  oonsmne  the  wicked  (comp.  Isa.  xi.
4^  **  He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod
of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his
lipt  shall  he  slay  tho  wicked  ").  And  shall
diitcoy  (or,  annihilate)  with  tha  brightness
(pg,  appearance)  of  his  coming.  The  two
words,  epiphany  and  parousia^  which  are
elsewhere  usoti  separately  to  denote  the
coming  of  Christ,  are  here  employed.  There
is  no  gpx)und  for  the  assertion  that  the  first
is  the  subjective  and  the  second  the  objeo-
tive  OKpect  of  Christ's  coming  (Olshausen).
The  brightness  of  Christ's  coming  is  not
hen  expressed;  bdt  tlie  meaning  is  that  the
men  appearance  of  Christ's  presence  will
aimilulate  tho  wicked.

Yer.  9.— The  apostle  resumes  his  descrip-
tion of  tho  man  of  sin.  Even  him ;  not  m
the  original,  but  necessary  for  the  sense.
Whose  ooming.  Tho  use  of  the  same  term,
parouna^  employed  to  denote  the  coming  of
Christ  exhibits  the  counterpart  of  tho  man
of  sin.  Is  after  the  working— according  to
tho  cnor^ — of  Satan.  Sntan  is  the  agent
who  works  in  the  man  of  sin ;  ho  being  tho
organ  or  instrument  of  Satan.  With  all
power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders.  Tho
adjectivo  **  lying  "  ought  to  be  rendered  as
a  substantive,  and  applied  to  all  throe:
**  With  all  powers  and  signs  and  wonders  of
falsehood ; "  whoso  origin,  nature,  and  pur-
pose is  falsehood.  Here,  also,  the  counter-
part to  Christ  is  manifest ;  for  the  same  terms
— *•  powers,"  **  signs,"  and  **  wonders,"  aroem-
ploTed  to  denote  his  miracles  (Acts  ii.  22 ;
Heb.  ii.  4).  The  miracles  of  Christ  were
miracles  of  truth ;  tho  miracles  of  the  man
of  sin  would  be  miracles  of  falsehood.  There
does  not  seem  to  bo  any  essential  diflerence
between  powers,  signs,  and  wonders ;  but
the  words  are  employed  as  a  mere  rhetorical
enumeration.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that
the  man  of  sin  will  be  enabled  to  porform
real  miracles :  they  nro  the  wonders  of
falsehood;  but  still  by  them  his  followers
will  bo  deceived  (comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  24).

Yer.  10. — And  with  all  deeeivahlenets  of
nnxighteonsness ;  or  rather,  tcith  all  deceit
of  unrighteousness  (R.Y.);  either  with  all
deceit  leading  to  unrighteousness  or  with
all  deceit  which  is  unrighteousness.  The
man  of  sin  works  by  deceit  and  falsehood ;
and  by  means  of  imposture  and  wonders  and
high  pretensions  ho  will  succeed  in  imposing
on  the  world.  The  energetic  power  of  the
man  of  sin  is,  however,  by  no  means  irresis-
tible; only  they  who  perish  will  succumb
to  it.  In  them.  In  the  best  manuscripts
the  preposition  **  in  "  is  wanting ;  therefore
the  words  aro  to  be  translated  for  them  or  to
them.  That  perish  (comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  15);
beeans*  they  received  not  the  love  of  the


tmth.  Not  only  did  they  not  receive  the
truth  when  it  was  oflforod  thom,  but,  what
was  worse,  they  were  destitute  even  of  a  love
of  the  truth.  By  the  truth  hero  is  meant,
not  Christ  himself,  as  some  expositors  think,
but  primarily  the  Christian  truth,  and
secondarily  the  truth  generally.  There
was  in  them  a  want  of  susceptibility  for  tho
tmth,  and  thus  not  only  were  they  prevented
embracing  tho  gospel,  but  they  were  led
astray  by  numerous  errors  and  delusions.
That  they  might  be  saved.  The  result
which  naturally  would  arise  from  the  recep-
tion of  tho  truth.

Yer.  11. — ^For  this  cause;  on  account  of
their  being  destitute  of  a  love  of  the  truth.
God  shall  send  them ;  or  rather,  6^  aencU
them ;  the  present  being  chosen  because  the
apostasy  had  already  commenced,  the
mystery  of  lawlessness  was  already  working.
Strong  delusion;  or,  a  tcorhing  of  error
(B.  Y.).  Theso  words  are  not  to  be  weakened,
as  if  they  meant  merely  that  in  righteous
iudgment  God  permitted  strong  delusion  to
00  sent  them;  tho  words  aro  not  a  mere
assertion  of  judicial  permission,  but  of  actual
retribution.  It  is  tho  ordinance  of  God  that
the  wicked  by  their  wicked  actions  fall  into
greater  wickedness,  and  that  thus  sin  is
punished  by  sin ;  and  what  is  an  ordinance
of  God  is  appointed  by  God  himself.  That
they  should  believe  a  lie ;  or  rather,  (he  lie^
namely  the  falsehood  which  the  man  of  sin
disseminates  bv  his  deceit  of  unrighteous-
ness. Being  destitute  of  the  love  of  the
truth,  they  are  necessarily  led  to  believe  a
lie — their  minds  are  open  to  all  manner  of
falsehood  and  delusion.

Yer.  12.— That ;  in  order  thai.  The  state-
ment of  purpose  depending,  not  upon  "  that
they  should  believe  a  lie,"  but  upon  "God
sends  them  a  strong  d(3lusion  " — denoting  a
still  more  remote  purpose  of  God.  God,  as
tho  moral  Kuler  of  the  universe,  will  pro-
nounce sentence  of  condemnation  against
them,  this  sentence  being  the  necessary
result  of  their  receivin,'^  not  tho  love  of  tho
truth.  Its  reception  would  have  been  tlie
cause  of  their  salvation ;  its  rejection  results
in  their  condemnation.  They  all  might  be
damned;  or  rather,  judged  (R.V.).  Tho
verb  employed  does  not  hero,  or  else-
where, express  the  idea  of  condemnation,
though  this  is  implied  ])y  the  context.  Who
believed  not  the  truth ;  namely,  the  Chris-
tian truth ;  their  unbelief  of  it  was  the  con-
sequenco  of  their  want  of  love  of  the  truth,
ana  was  the  cause  of  their  being  judged.
But  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness.  Their
delight  in  unrighteousness  was  wholly  in-
compatible witli  their  belief  in  tho  truth;
their  want  of  faith  arose,  not  from  any  defect
in  their  understanding,  but  from  the  perver-
sion of  their  moral  nature.


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.


27


Hero  the  description  of  the  man  of  sin
concludes,  and  hence  the  second  division  of
the  Epistle  closes.  The  succeeding  verses
should  have  been  attached  to  a  new  para-
gmph,  being  the  commencement  of  the  third
or  hortatory  portion  of  the  Epistle.

Ver.  13. — But;  this  may  be  considered  as  a
simple  particle  of  transition,  or  as  containing
a  contrast  to  those  alluded  to  in  the  previous
verses.  I  thank  God  tlmt  you  are  not  ex-
posed to  the  delusions  of  the  man  of  sin  and
to  the  destruction  of  his  followers.  We.
By  some  restricted  to  Paul,  and  by  others
as  including  Silas  and  Timotheus  (ch.  i.  1).
Are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  Ood.
Notwithstanding^  the  disorders  which  had
arisen  in  the  Cliurch  of  Tliessalonica,  Paul
had  abundant  reason  to  thank  God  for  his
great  grace  vouchsafed  to  the  Thessalonians,
in  retaining  them  in  the  gospel,  and  in
enabling  tliera  to  abound  in  faith  and  love.
For  you,  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord;
tbat  is,  of  Christ.  In  the  former  Ej)istle  he
calls  them  **  beloved  of  God "  (1  Thcss.  i.
4),  here  "of  Christ;"  one  of  tlj^^  numerous
indirect  proofs  in  these  Epistles  of  the
Divinity  of  Christ.  Beoaose  God  hath  from
the  beginning.  Some  valuable  manuscripts
read,  "  because  God  hath  chosen  you  as  iirst-
fruits,"  and  this  rendering  has  been  adopted
by  several  eminent  expositors  (Jowett,
Hofmann,  Riprgcnbach) ;  but  the  prepon-
derance of  authorities  is  in  favour  of  the
reading  in  our  A.V.  The  phrase,  **fn)m
the  beginning,"  doo  not  denote  "from  the
beginnins:  of  the  gospel,"  but  "  from  eter-
nity." The  apostle  refers  the  salvation  of
tho  Thessalonians  to  the  eternal  election  of
God.  Ghoeen  yon  to  salvation — the  final
purpose  of  God's  election.  Through;  or
rather,  tn,  denoting  the  elements  in  which
tho  salvation  consibted,  or,  which  is  tho
bame  thing,  tho  state  into  which  they
were  chobcu.  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit
— the  Divine  side — and  belief  of  the  truth —
tho  human  fcido  of  llu*  element  in  which  tho
salvation  was  realized.

Ver.   14.— Whereunto ;    to   which.     The


reference  being  to  the  "Whole  elansei,  being
"chosen  to  salvation  in  sanctification  of  the
Spirit  and  belief  of  tho  truth."  He  oalled
yon.  Whom  God  elects  from  eternity,  he
calls  in  time.  By  onr  goipel;  the  gospel
preached  by  u&  To  tibe  obtaining  (or»
acquisition)  of  the  glory  of  onr  Lord  Jetns
Christ.  Different  meanings  have  been
attached  to  these  words  ;  some  render  them
"  for  the  purpose  of  an  acquisition  of  glory
to  Jesus  Christ;"  others,  "for  a  glorious
possession  of  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  others,  **  to
bo  possessors  or  sharers  in  the  glory  of
Jesus  Christ."  The  last  meaning  is  the
correct  one.  Believers  are  constituted
"  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heira  with  JesoB
Christ."

Yer.  15.— Therefore,  brethren,  stand  flurti
and  hold  the  traditionB.  Traditions  gene-
rally denote  statements  orally  deliverea  and
reported ;  here  tho  word  denotes  the  apostle's
instructions  in  Christianity,  whetiier  these
are  given  by  word  of  mouth  or  by  letter.
Whiohye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word ;
referring  to  the  apostle*s  preaching  when  iu
Thessalonica.  Or  onr  Epistle;  referring  to
the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalouians.

Yer.  16.— Kow  onr  Lord  Jesns  Chxisk,  and
God,  even  onr  Father,  who  hath  loved  ns.
These  last  words,  "  who  hath  loved  us,"  are
to  be  restricted  to  God  our  Father,  whose
love  was  manifested  in  sending  his  Son  to
rescue  sinners  from  destruction.  And  hath
given  us  everlasting  consolation ;  or,  comfort ;
everlasting  as  contrasted  with  the  temporary
and  deceitful  comfort  which  the  world  gives.
And  good  hope  through  graoe ;  or,  in  grace,
"  In  grace  "  belongs  to  the  verb  **hath  given,"
and  denotes  the  mode  of  the  gift— of  his
own  free  grace,  in  contrast  to  personal
merit.

Yer.  17. — Comfort  yonr  hearts,  and  stab-
lish  yon ;  or,  according  to  tho  best  manu-
scripts, stahlish  them  J  namely,  your  hearts.
These  verbs  are  in  the  singular,  but  their
nominative  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and
Goil  our  Father,  thus  implying  the  unity
between  these  Divine  Persons.  In  every
good  word  and  work.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Hie  second  advent.  1.  The  time  of  the  advent.  The  erroneous  notions
of  the  Tlies-^alonians  concernin;;  the  advent.  Our  Lord's  references  and  the  references
iu  the  Epistles  to  the  advent.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  assertion  that  the  apostles
believed  in  or  taught  tho  immediate  coming  of  Christ.  They  announced  the  certainty
of  the  advent,  but  the  precise  time  was  not  within  the  sphere  of  their  inspiration.
2.  TJie  practical  iujlnence  which  the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent  shotdd  have  upon  ««.
Negatively,  it  should  not  deprive  us  of  our  sober  reason  or  fill  us  with  alarm.  Posi-
tively, its  certainty  should  inspire  us  with  hope  and  fill  us  with  joy ;  its  uncertainty
should  stir  us  up  to  watchfulness  and  preserve  us  in  patience.  We  must  not  measure
by  our  impatience  the  purposes  of  him  with  whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and
a  thousand  years  as  one  day."


28  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

Ver.  8.— Jwiportanoe  of  religious  knowledge.  We  are  surrounded  by  many  influences
tending  either  to  lead  us  into  error  and  delusion,  or  into  scepticism  and  infidelity.  We
must  add  to  our  faith  knowledge,  and  seek  to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  faith.
The  truth  ought  to  be  the  great  subject  of  inquiry.  Let  us  cultivate  the  love  of  the
truth ;  let  us  pursue  the  truth  wherever  it  leads,  lest  we  should  render  ourselves  liable
to  the  condemnation  of  those  who  believe  not  the  truth,  but  have  pleasure  in  un-
righteousness ;  and  lest  we  should  be  led  from  error  to  error,  and  be  lost  in  a  perfect
maze  of  falsehood.

Vers.  3—9. — The  doctrine  of  antichrist.  Antichrist  is  the  caricature  or  counterpart
of  Christ.  1.  He  is  the  man  of  sin,  the  personification  of  iniquity;  whereas  Christ
is  the  righteous  One,  the  personification  of  righteousness.  2.  lie  is  the  mystery  of
iniquity;  whereas  Christ  is  the  mystery  of  godliness.  3.  His  advent  is  announced
by  the  same  word  as  the  advent  of  Christ.  4.  His  coming  occurred  in  its  proper  season ;
so  also  Christ  came  in  the  fulness  of  time.  5.  His  coming  is  after  the  working  of
Satan ;  whereas  Christ's  coming  is  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  6.  He  performs
miracles  of  falsehood,  a  countirpart  of  the  real  miracles  which  Christ  performed.  7.
He  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  thus  occupying  the  proper  scat  of  Christ.  8.  He
phows  or  exhibits  himself  as  God,  whereas  Christ  is  the  true  manifestation  of  the  God-
head. In  short,  the  kingdom  of  light  which  Christ  has  established  has  its  counterpart
in  the  kingdom  of  darkness.

Ver.  13. — Sanctification,  1.  Its  nature.  It  denotes  separation  and  consecration.
It  consists  in  the  mortification  of  sin  and  the  production  of  holiness.  2.  Its  properties.
Universal,  adapted  to  our  peculiar  characters,  discernible,  progressive,  in  this  life  always
imperfect,  constant,  and  eternal.  3.  Its  Author,  The  Holy  Spirit  the  immediate
Author;  it  is  his  peculiar  ofiice  to  produce  holiness  in  the  soul.  He  not  only  purifies
our  affections,  but  takes  up  his  abode  in  our  hearts.  4.  Its  instrument.  The  belief  of
the  truth.  The  instrument  with  which  the  Spirit  works  is  the  Word  of  God.  We
must  not  disjoin  these  two ;  the  a<;ency  of  the  Spirit  and  the  instrumentality  of  the
Word  arc  both  equally  essential  and  equally  important,

Ver.  15. — Betcntion  of  Scripture.  Whilst  we  reject  the  false  and  wrong,  we  mus
hold  fast  to  the  true  and  right.  This  is  an  age  of  testing.  1.  We  must  examine  the
evidences  of  the  Word  of  God.  2.  We  must  endeavour  to  find  out  its  meaning  by
careful  study,  and  by  prayer  for  the  guidance  and  teaching  of  God's  Spirit.  3.  We
must  bring  all  doctrines  and  opinions  to  the  test  of  Scripture,  and  draw  our  belief  from
the  Word  of  God,  and  not  from  the  opinions  and  traditions  of  men.  4.  We  must  ever
walk  up  to  the  light  which  we  have.  The  Spirit  is  promised  to  guide  us  into  all  truth,
and  if  we  depend  upon  him  and  follow  bis  guidance,  we  shall  not  be  suficred  to
go  astray.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1, 2.— -4  misapprehension  respecting  the  time  of  the  second  advent.  The  apostle's
main  design  in  this  Epistle  is  to  correct  a  most  disquieting  error  that  had  arisen  upon
this  point

I.  The  panic  in  the  Thessalonian  Church.  1.  It  was  concerning  the  date  of  the
second  coming  of  Christ.  "  Touching  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our
gathering  together  unto  him."  The  facts  of  this  auj^ust  event  had  been  prophetically
described  in  the  First  Epistle.  (1)  It  was  the  personal  coming  of  Christ  in  **the  day
of  the  Lord  "  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  (2)  It  was  an  event  involving  their
"  gathering  topjether  unto  him  "  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  a  happy  meeting,  a
marvellously  glorious  sight.  2.  The  misapprehension  caused  a  sort  of  panic,  "That
ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled  " — like  a  ship  tossed  uix)n  a  stormy  sea.
It  was  this  deep  agitation  of  mind,  this  consternation  and  surj)rise,  which  led  to  the
unsettled  spirit  that  manifested  itself  in  the  Thessalonian  Church.  Errors  in  the
region  of  dispensational  truth  often  have  this  tendency.  3.  The  panic  was  due  to  one
or  other  of  three  sources.    "  Neither  by  spmt,  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us."


CH.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  29

(1)  It  may  have  had  its  origin  in  somo  pretended  revelation  or  spiritual  utterance  in
the  Thessalonian  Church.  Our  Lord  had  predicted  false  alarms  ot*  this  sort.  *'  Then
if  any  man  shall  say  unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or  there ;  believe  him  not "  (Matt.
xxiv.  23).  (2)  Or  it  may  have  come  **  through  word,"  that  is,  word  of  mouth,  sup-
posed to  bo  spoken  by  the  apostle  during  his  visit  to  Thessalonica.  (3)  Or  "  through
letter  as  from  us,"  apparently  forged  letters  such  as  had  already  become  rife  in  the
early  Church.

II.  The  ground  op  the  panic.  "  As  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present.''
This  is  the  correct  translation ;  not  "  it  is  at  hand."  1.  It  could  inspire  no  terror  for
the  Thessctlonians  to  know  that  the  day  was  at  hand,  for  this  had  always  been  the
apostle's  teaching,  as  well  as  that  of  ail  Scripture  (Matt.  xxiv. ;  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  Phil,
iv.  5 ;  Heb.  x.  25,  37 ;  Jas.  v.  8 ;  1  Pet,  iv.  7).  They  had  been  already  familiar  with
the  doctrine,  which  ought  rather  to  have  filled  their  hearts  with  transcendent  gladness.
2.  Their  disquietude  and  distress  arose  from  the  belief  that  the  Lord  had  already  come
without  their  sharing  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom.  Their  relatives  were  still  lying  in
their  graves  without  any  sign  of  resurrection,  and  they  themselves  saw  no  sign  of  that
transformation  of  body  in  themselves  that  was  to  be  the  prelude  to  their  meeting  the
Lord  in  the  air.  The  apostle  tells  them  distinctly  that  the  day  has  not  come,  and
that  the  signs  of  its  approach  had  not  yet  been  exhibited. — T.  0.

Vers.  3 — 8. — The  rise  of  the  apostasy  and  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin  must
precede  the  second  advent.  This  fact  would  assure  them  that  a  period  of  time  of  at
least  indefinite  extent  would  intervene  before  the  day  of  the  Lord.  "  Let  no  man
deceive  you  by  any  means."

L  The  coming  of  the  apostasy.  "  Because  the  day  will  not  set  in  unless  there
come  the  apostasy  first."  1.  The  apostasy  is  so  described  because  it  was  already  familiar
to  their  minds  through  his  oral  teaching,  "  Remember  ye  not,  that,  when  I  was  with
you,  I  was  telling  you  of  these  things  ?  "  2.  It  points  to  a  signal  defection  from  the
Christian  faith  We  imagine  that  the  primitive  Churches  were  signally  free  from
error  or  fault  of  any  sort.  Tiie  apostle  himself  notes  the  signs  of  beginning  apostasy
even  in  his  own  day.  (1)  "  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work."  (2)
There  were  for  himself  "perils  from  false  brethren."  (3)  There  were  in  the  Church
itself  "  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  (4)  Later  still  "  many  deceivers  had  entered
into  the  world."  (5)  The  apostle  foresaw  that  the  evil  '*  would  increase  unto  more
ungodliness."  (6)  This  apostasy  was  to  precede  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin,  not
to  be  regarded  as  identical  with  it.  Yet  the  two  movements  were  not  to  be  regarded
as  independent  of  each  other,  except  in  the  order  or  time  of  their  development.
(7)  The  signs  of  the  apostasy  in  Christendom  are  to  be  seen  principally  in  the
Papacy,  but  likewise  in  the  kindred  errors  and  corruptions  of  the  Greek  Church  as
well  as  in  the  delusions  of  Mohammedanism.  The  elements  of  the  apostasy  were,
however,  to  be  gathered  up  and  concentrated  at  last  in  a  single  person  as  their  final
embodiment.

II.  The  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  *' And  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the
son  of  perdition ;  who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above  every  one  called  God,  or
an  object  of  worship.'*  llis  characteristics  are  here  distinctly  described.  1.  He  does
not  represent  a  system  of  error y  like  Romanism,  or  the  papal  hierardiy,  or  a  succession
of  popes,  but  a  single  person.  The  man  of  sin  has  not  yet  appeared.  Yet  Romanism,
or  the  papacy,  comprehends  much  that  is  involved  in  the  idea  of  this  terrible  person,
who,  however,  goes  beyond  it  in  the  appalling  extent  of  his  wickedness.  The  passage
is  not  symbolic,  but  literal.  It  is  a  literal  person  who  is  described.  2.  He  is  **  the
son  of  perdition"  (1)  Not  because  he  brings  ruin  to  others,  but  (2)  because  he  is
himself  doomed  to  ruin — going  literally  to  "  his  own  place,"  like  Judas,  who  may  be
regarded  as  a  type  of  him.  3.  His  boundless  and  blasphemous  assumptions.  (1)  His
opposition  to  every  God,  true  and  false.  (2)  His  self-elevation  above  every  God,
true  and  false.  His  action  recalls  the  prophecy  of  Daniel:  "The  king  shall  do
according  to  his  will ;  and  he  shall  exalt  himself  above  every  god,  and  shall  speak
marvellous  things  against  the  God  of  gods"  (Dan.  xi.  36).  This  prophecy  refers  to
a  polytheistic  king.  The  apostle  refers  to  the  man  of  sin  as  repudiating  all  worship,
as  if  he  represent  a  higher  divinity  than  anything  worshipped  on  earth,    (a)  The


80  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

deBcription  does  not  apply  to  the  pope  or  the  mpacy :  (a)  Because  the  pope,  though  the
head  of  a  system  of  idolatry,  does  not  oppose  Goii  or  exalt  himself  al)ovc  him^  but  rather
owns  himself  "  a  servant  of  servants  of  the  most  high  Gk)d/'  and  blesses  the  people,
not  in  his  own  name,  but  in  the  Name  of  the  Triune  God.  (/9)  Because,  instead  of
exalting  himself  above  God  or  objects  of  worship,  he  multiplies  the  objects  of  worship
by  the  canonization  of  new  saints,  and  submits,  like  the  humblest  of  bis  followers,  to
the  worship  of  the  very  saints  he  has  made,  (y)  Because  the  pope,  though  guilty  of
arrogating  almost  Divine  powers  to  himself,  does  not  supersede  God  so  as  to  make
himself  God.  The  man  of  sin  **  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he
is  God."  Though  votaries  of  the  papacy  have  often  given  Divine  titles  to  the  popes,
the  Po[ies  have  never  assumed  to  bo  God,  but  only  vicars  of  Jesus  Christ  on  earth.
They  have  claimed  to  be  viceroys  of  God.  The  temple  of  God  cannot  be  the  Vatican ;
nor  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  an  ideal  building ;  nor  can  Home  be  regarded  as  the
centre  of  the  Christian  Church.  (8)  Because  this  prophetic  sketch  contains  no  allusion
to  strictly  papal  peculiarities,  such  as  idolatry,  either  as  to  the  yir<pn  Mary,  saints,
angds,  or  relics,  the  invention  of  purgatory,  priestly  absolution,  bloody  fanaticism,
debased  casuistry,  lordship  over  the  world  of  spirits,  (h)  The  description  applies  to
the  man  of  sin — the  lawless  one— for  whom  the  Papacy  prepares  the  way  by  a  long
course  of  apostasy  from  the  truth,  (a)  This  terrible  person  is  to  oppose  Gkxi  and  all
worship  of  every  sort,  and  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  an  impersonation  of  infidel
wickedness.  (i3)  He  is  to  sit  down  in  the  vacated  "  temple  of  God ''  and  claim  all  the
attributes  of  divinit}'.  He  sits  down  in  God*s  place — for  the  temple  is  God's  dwelling —
in  some  actual  temple,  and  appropriates  it  to  his  own  use.  Wherever  the  scene  of  this
marvellous  usurpation  may  be,  it  signifies  the  obliteration  of  all  Christian  interests  and
the  triumph  of  atheistic  malignity.  When  the  Lord  comes,  "  shall  he  find  faith  in  the
earth?"  We  see  how  Positivism  in  our  own  day  has  forsaken  the  worship  of  a
personal  God  and  betaken  itself  to  the  worship  of  concrete  humanity.  The  man  of
sin  will  use  the  papacy  as  Augaste  Comto  travestied  it  in  constructing  forms  of  Posi-
tivist  devotion,  by  turning  it  into  some  darker  shape  and  making  it  the  tremendous
instnmaent  of  the  world's  final  ruin.

III.  The  check  to  the  full  development  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  And  now  what
restraineth  ye  know,  in  order  that  he  may  be  revealed  in  his  own  time.  For  the
mystery  of  iniquity  is  already  working  only  till  he  who  now  restraineth  be  taken  out
of  the  way."  These  words  imply :  1.  That  the  apostasy  was  already  in  hchy ;  for  "  the
mystery  of  lawlessness  is  already  working."  The  two,  if  not  identical,  are  closely
connected  top:ether.  (1)  It  antagonizes  Clirist,  who  is  *'  the  mystery  of  godliness  "
(1  Tim.  iii.  16).  The  mystery  is  a  process,  not  a  j^erson,  yet  it  works  against  the
person  of  Christ.  (2)  Many  of  the  elements  of  the  "  apostasy  "  were  in  existence  in
the  days  of  the  apostles,  at  least  in  the  germ-state.  The  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  and
the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  point  to  an  early  development  of  Gnostic  error  which
found  its  place  in  due  time  in  the  papal  system  (Col.  ii. ;  2  Tim.  iii.).  The  self-deifying
tendency  was  manifested  in  the  conduct  of  several  of  the  Ccesars.  2.  The  words  imply
that  the  working  of  the  apostasy  was  still  undefined  and  as  yet  ungucssed  at.  It  was
still  "a  mystery,"  to  be  revealed  in  due  time.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the
gradual  growth  of  error  in  the  patristic  age.  False  opinions  held  by  pious  Fathers  in
one  age  were  held  by  errorists  in  the  next  age  to  the  exclusion  ol  tlie  truth.  3.  The
words  imply  that,  as  the  apostasy  would  last  through  ages,  the  check  would  likewise
exercise  a  continuous  effect.  The  common  opinion  is  that  the  Roman  empire  was  the
restraining  power  upon  the  development  of  the  man  of  sin.  It  was  certainly  such  upon
the  course  of  the  apostasy,  which  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  man  of  sin.  It  held  the
Papacy  in  check  till  it  was  itself  swept  away  by  barbarian  violence.  Because  it  has
passed  away,  it  docs  not  follow  that  the  man  of  sin  must  have  been  revealed  at  once ;
for  other  checks  have  been  supplied,  and  are  being  still  continuously  supplied,  in  the
polity  of  nations  and  in  the  face  of  Divine  truth,  to  restrain  the  last  terrible  manifesta-
tion of  his  power.

IV.  The  doom  of  the  man  of  sin.  "  Whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  consume  with
the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  with  the  appearance  of  his  coming."  1.  This
does  n&t  refer  to  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  Christ  tvorking  in  the  minds  of  men  for  the
devlmtiion  of  antichrisHan  error  and  antitheistic  wickedness,   hut  to  the   actual


€H.  iL  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  31

versonal  advent  of  Jesus  Christ,  2.  The  language  implies  the  suddenness  and  the
completeness  of  the  overthrow  of  the  man  of  sin,  who  thereby  becomes  "  the  son  of  perdi'
tion^  3.  The  picture  presented  may  be  identical  with  the  Gog  and  Magog  conspiracy
which  is  to  follow  the  millennium.  (Rev.  xx.  7,  8.)  The  Lord  puts  the  question,
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  in  tiie  earth  ?  "  (Luke  xviii.  8).
Thus  the  apostle  assures  the  Thessalonians  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  cannot  have
come,  becanse  all  the  events  here  pictured  must  happen  before  that  great  and  terrible
day.— T.  C.

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  methods  of  the  man  of  sin  and  the  retribution  that  overtakes  his
victims.  The  apostle,  after  telling  the  doom  of  the  man  of  sin  by  anticipation,  goes
back  upon  his  description  so  as  to  bring  out  the  contrast  between  the  coming  of  Christ
and  the  coming  of  his  arch-enemy.

I.  The  methodb  of  the  man  of  sin.  ''Whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan
in  all  powers  and  signs  and  prodigies  of  lying.*'  1.  The  source  of  all  this  wonder-
working activity — Satan,  There  is  more  than  human  depravity  at  work  in  this
tremendous  revelation  of  evil  power.  As  Satan  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  lies,  he  will
stamp  falsehood  upon  the  whole  system,  which  he  will  elaborate  with  superhuman
craft  for  the  misj::uidance  of  men.  2.  The  charactei'  of  this  activity.  It  is  external
and  internal.  (1)  It  is  external — "  in  powers  and  signs  and  prodigies  of  lying."  (a)  These
are  to  be  a  mimicry  of  Christ's  miracles,  for  the  three  words  here  used  are  twice  applied
to  our  Lord's  miracles  (Heb.  ii.  4 ;  Acts  ii.  22).  (b)  They  were  not  real  miracles,  as
if  they  had  been  done  by  Divine  power,  but  jugglers'  tricks  or  such-like  startling
wonders  as  might  delude  "  the  perishing "  into  the  belief  that  they  were  done  by
Divine  power.  The  signs  were  to  bo  as  false  as  their  author,  (c)  Their  design  was  to
attest  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  of  the  man  of  sin.  (2)  It  is  internal — "  in  all  deceit  of
nn righteousness  " — so  as  to  pass  sooner  for  truth.  Guile  marks  his  whole  career,  and
unrighteousness  is  the  aim  and  result.  He  "  speaks  lies  in  hypocrisy ; "  "  by  good
words  and  fair  speeches  he  deceives  the  hearts  of  the  simple"  (1  Tim.  iv.  2;
Hom.  xvi.  18).  The  ministers  of  Satan  can  as  easily  transform  themselves  into  minis-
ters of  righteousness  as  Satan  himself  become  an  "  angel  of  light "  (2  Cor.  xi.  14,  16).
3.  The  effects  of  this  wonder-working  activity.  They  are  confined  "  to  those  that  are
perishing."  It  is  not  possible  "  to  deceive  the  elect "  (Mark  xiii.  22).  Those  who  are
blinded  to  the  glory  of  the  gospel  are  in  the  way  of  easy  deception  (2  Cor.  iv.  3).
It  is  those  on  the  way  to  perdition  who  are  so  easily  deceived.

II.  The  retribution  that  overtakes  the  victims  of  the  man  of  sin.  '*  Because
they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved."  The  causes  of  the
success  of  the  man  of  sin  are  first  described  on  the  side  of  man  and  then  on  the  side  of
God.  The  whole  case  is  one  of  just  retribution.  1.  The  sin  of  the  perishing,  (1)  The
truth  was  that  which  brought  salvation  near,  disclosing  at  once  their  need  of  a  Saviour
and  the  readiness  of  Christ  to  save  them.  (2)  They  did  not  receive  it,  though  it  was
oflfered  them,  but  rejected  and  despised  it  (3)  They  rejected  it  because  they  had
"  not  the  love  of  the  truth."  Without  this  love,  the  truth  will  do  us  no  good ;  it  must
be  received  into  the  heart  as  well  as  the  head.  Augustine  prayed,  *'  Lord,  make  me
taste  that  by  love  which  I  taste  by  knowledge."  2,  The  Divine  retribution  for  the  sin
of  the  perishing.  *'  And  for  this  cause  God  is  sending  them  an  inworking  error,  that
they  should  believe  the  lie  "  of  the  man  of  sin.  They  rejected  the  truth  of  God ;  God
will,  as  a  judicial,  punitive  infliction,  send  them  blindness  so  that  the  error  of  the
man  of  sin  will  be  received  as  truth.  "  A  terrible  combination  when  both  God  and
Satan  are  agreed  to  deceive  a  man ! "  There  is  a  double  punishment  here.  (1)  They
will  actually  believe  the  lie  of  the  man  of  sin.  Sin  often  in  the  moral  government  of
God  is  punished  by  deeper  sin.  Those  who  care  nothing  for  the  truth  are  easily
seduced  into  the  worst  errors.  Men  will  at  last  become  so  perverse  as  to  call  *'  evil
pood,  and  good  evil."  (2)  They  will  be  finally  judged  for  the  pleasure  they  have  taken
in  unrighteousness.  **That  all  may  be  judged  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had
pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  It  follows :  (a)  That  error  is  not  an  innocent  thing.  It
has  practical  issues  of  the  most  momentous  character,  (b)  That  it  is  a  fearful  perversion
of  the  human  soul  to  take  pleasure  in  what  God  hates,  (c)  That  God  allows  the  sin
and  madness  of  men  to  develop  themselves  to  their  fullest  extent,  (d)  That  Ck)d  in  this


32  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

way  will  be  finally  justified  in  their  judgment ;  he  "  will  be  justified  in  his  speaking,
and  shall  be  clear  in  his  judging  "  (Ps.  li.  4). — T.  C.

Vers.  13, 14. — Apostolic  thanksgiving  for  the  election  and  the  calling  of  the  ITiessa-
lonians,     I.  The  I)ivinb  election.     *'  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you."

1.  There  is  an  "  election  according  to  grace  "  (Rom.  xi.  5).  It  is  not  to  be  confounded
with  the  calling,  which  is  an  effect  of  it.  "  Whom  he  predestinated,  them  he  also  called  "
(Kom.  viii.  30).  Our  salvation  is  always  traced  to  "his  own  purpose  and  grace  which
was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."  2.  The  date  of  the  election,
"  From  the  beginning.**  It  is  "  from  the  foundation  of  the  world "  (Eph.  i.  4),  and
therefore  does  not  rest  upon  the  personal  claims  of  individuals.  3.  The  means  of  the
election,  "  In  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth."  The  election  is  to
the  means  as  well  as  the  end;  it  cannot  take  effect  without  the  means.  There  is  an
objective  as  well  as  a  subjective  side  in  the  sphere  of  the  election.  (1)  The  sanctifica-
tion of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  objective  side,  (a)  It  implies  a  spiritual  change  of
nature.  The  Spirit  applies  the  salvation,  and  regeneration  is  his  first  work,  (h)  Sancti-
fication is  the  evidence  as  well  as  the  fruit  of  election.  (2)  "  The  belief  of  the  truth."
This  is  the  subjective  side.  Man  is  not  passive  in  his  salvation,  (a)  As  the  Spirit  is  the
agent,  the  truth  is  the  instrument  of  salvation,  (h)  The  truth  must  be  believed  in
order  to  salvation.  As  men  are  chosen  to  be  saints,  they  are  chosen  also  to  be  believers.
(3)  The  necessary  connection  between  the  sanctification  and  the  belief.  It  might
appear  as  if  the  belief  of  the  truth  ought  to  precede  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit.
But  there  cannot  be  faith  without  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  while,  on  the  other  hand,
the  sanctification  is  "through  the  truth."  The  two  are  inseparably  joined  together.
4.  The  end  of  the  election,  "  God  hath  chosen  you  to  salvation."  (1)  It  is  not  an
election  to  Church  privileges.  (2)  Nor  to  national  privileges.  (3)  But  to  salvation
itself,  (a)  This  is  salvation  from  sin  and  sorrow,  death  and  hell.'  (h)  It  is  "  the  end
of  our  faith  "  (1  Pet.  i.  9).

II.  The  Divine  calling.  "  Whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining
of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  election  issues  in  the  call.  1.  The  Author
of  the  call.  God.  "There  is  one  Lawgiver  who  is  able  to  save  and  to  destroy."  He
has  the  right  to  call  and  the  power  to  call.  Nothing  but  Divine  power  can  save  the
soul.  2.  The  means  of  the  call,  "  Our  gospel."  The  ministry  of  the  Word  was  the
^eat  instrument  in  the  Spirit's  hand  of  their  conversion.  3.  The  end  of  the  call,
(1)  It  was  to  obtain  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  was  to  be  obtained,  not  purchased  or
wrought  out  by  their  personal  righteousness.  (2)  Believers  are  to  share  in  the  very
glory  of  their  Redeemer. — T.  C.

Yer.  15. — Exhortation  to  a  steadfast  maintenance  of  apostolic  traditions,  "  There-
fore stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether  by  word,  or
our  Epistle."

I.  The  ground  of  this  exhortation.  It  was  their  election  and  calling.  There  is
a  perfect  consistency  between  the  Divine  election  and  the  obligations  of  Christian  duty.

II.  The  necessity  of  Christian  stability.  It  was  specially  needful  at  Thessalo-
nica,  in  the  midst  of  the  agitations  and  shakings  and  restlessness  that  prevailed  on  the
subject  of  the  second  advent.  Believers  were  not  "  to  be  carried  about  by  every  wind
of  doctrine,"  lest  "  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  they  should  fall  from
their  own  steadfastness."  They  were  to  "  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  their  confidence,"
and  not "  be  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel."     1.  Th-jre  is  safety  in  stability.

2.  There  is  comfort  in  it.  3.  It  gives  glory  to  God,  4.  It  gives  strength  and  en-
couragement to  the  weak  and  vacillating,

III.  The  manifestation  of  this  stability.  "  Hold  fast  the  traditions."  1.  Tliey
were  of  two  kinds,  oral  and  written,  "  Whether  by  word,  or  our  Epistle."  (1)  They
included  apostolic  doctrines — "  the  form  of  doctrine  delivered  to  them."  (2)  Apostolic
ordinances,  such  as  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  they  had  received  from  the
apostles,  as  the  apostles  from  the  Lord.  (3)  Apostolic  rules  and  usages  for  the  govern-
ment of  the  Church.  2.  The  traditions  in  question  afford  no  warrant  for  the  Roman
Catholic  doctrine  of  traditions  handed  down  through  ages.  Because :  (1)  The  word  is
here  applied  to  both  oral  and  written  teaching.    (2)  The  traditions  were  not  handed


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  33

down  from  some  one  anterior  to  the  apostle,  and  from  the  apostle  handed  down
to  the  Thessalonians ;  nor  were  they  committed  to  the  Thessalonians  to  be  handed
down  to  future  ages.  They  were  handed  over  directly  by  the  apostle  to  the  Thessa-
lonians. (3)  The  doctrine  of  tradition  dishonours  the  Scriptures,  because  the  traditions
are  said  to  be  necessitated  by  the  defectiveness  and  obscurity  of  Scripture. — T.  0.

Vers.  16, 17. — Prayer  after  exhortation.  The  comprehensive  prayer  for  blessing  with
which  he  concludes  is  strictly  after  the  apostle's  manner.

I.  The  authors  of  the  blessings  prayed  for.  "Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
himself,  and  (Jod,  even  our  Father."  The  order  of  mention  is  unusual,  though  the
name  of  Jesus  occurs  first  in  the  apostolic  benediction  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  1.  Ood  the
Father  is  the  ultimate  Source  of  blessing^  as  it  is  through  Jesus  Christ  the  blessing  comes
to  us.  2.  There  is  an  entire  equality  between  them,  seeing  the  blessing  is  attributed  to
both.  3.  There  is  oneness  of  essence,  as  is  indicated  by  the  singular  verb  used  in
the  passage.

IL  The  ground  of  expecttatign  that  the  blessings  asked  will  be  given.
"  Who  loved  us,  and  gave  us  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace."
1.  The  Divine  love  is  the  true  ground  of  all  our  hopes  of  blessing,  for  it  is  everlasting,
unchangeable,  practical  in  its  ends.  2.  The  two  elements  in  the  Divine  gift.  (1)  "  Ever-
lasting consolation."  (a)  A  source  of  unfailing  comfort  in  the  midst  of  the  trials  of
life,  springing  out  of  everlasting  sources  and  sufficing  to  all  eternity ;  for  God  is  a  "  Gbd
of  all  comfort,"  and  "  if  there  be  any  consolation,"  it  is  in  Christ.  (&)  This  comfort  is
a  gift— a  mark  of  Divine  favour,  not  of  human  merit.  (2)  '*  A  good  hope  through  grace."
(a)  This  is  "  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised  before  the
world  began  "  (Titus  i.  2).  (b)  It  is  a  good  hope  (a)  because  of  its  Author ;  (0)  because
of  its  foundation,  "  through  grace ; "  (7)  because  of  its  purifying  efifects  (I  John  iii.  4).

in.  The  blessings  prayed  for.  1.  Heart-comfort,  "  Comfort  your  hearts."  They
needed  to  be  comforted  on  account  of  their  troubles  respecting  the  second  advent.
None  but  God  can  give  true  and  lasting  comfort.  *'  Thou  hast  put  gladness  into  my
heart."  2.  Establishment  and  perseverance,  "  And  stablish  you  in  every  good  wokI
and  work."  (1)  This  blessing  is  to  be  sought  especially  in  restless  and  unsettled  times.
(2)  Stability  is  to  be  sought  in  "  every  good  word,"  so  that  believers  may  not  be  carried
away  by  "  winds  of  doctrine ; "  and  in  "  every  good  work,"  so  that  they  may  not  be
shaken  by  doubt  and  thus  become  restless  and  disorderly  in  conduct.  Instability  is
weakness,  as  stability  is  strength. — ^T.  C.

Yers.  1,  2. — The  day  of  Christ  not  immediate.  I.  The  mistake  of  the  Thessalo-
nians. 1.  In  itself.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  present ;  it  is  already  dawning ;  it  is
close  upon  us.  This  thought  bad  taken  possession  of  their  souls ;  it  filled  their  hearts ;
it  left  no  room  for  ordinary  commonplace  duties.  They  were  neglecting  these  in  their
strong  excitement,  in  their  eager  anticipation  of  the  approach  of  the  great  day.  What
was  the  use  of  attention  to  business,  of  daily  labour,  of  the  quiet  performance  of  their
accustomed  tasks,  when  the  Lord  was  to  be  expected  at  once,  when  they  were  to  be
caught  up,  away  from  earth  and  its  employments,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  *'  We
which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up,"  St.  Paul  had  said  in  his  First  Epistle.
They  misunderstood  his  words ;  they  supposed  that  it  must  be  during  their  own  life-
time ;  that  it  might  be,  that  it  would  be,  immediate.  2.  Its  origin*  Spirit,  word,  or
letter.  "Believe  not  every  spirit"  (St.  John  said);  "try  the  spirits  whether  they  are
of  God."  There  were  utterances  which  claimed  to  be  inspired  and  were  not  so.  The
discerning  of  spirits  was  one  of  the  manifold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  was  their
duty  not  to  despise  prophesying,  but  yet  to  prove  all  things.  There  were  also  words
quoted  as  if  sjwken  by  St.  Paul ;  letters,  too,  purporting  to  come  from  him.  Men
misrepresented  him  ;  they  attributed  the  sayings  of  others,  their  own,  perhaps,  to  the
holy  apostle ;  even  letters,  it  seems,  were  current,  said  to  be  the  apostle's,  but  not
really  his.  People  are  perplexed  often  nowadays  by  the  many  difierences  of  opinion
which  exist  among  Christians.  The  fact  of  this  diversity  is  to  some  an  excuse  for
unbelief  or  for  sloth  in  spiritual  things ;  to  others,  a  real  temptation,  a  great  trial  of
faith.  But  we  see  it  has  been  so  from  the  beginning.  There  were  errors  of  belief  in
this  infant  Church  of  Thessalonica  while  the  apostle,  who  had  founded  it,  was  still
XL  thessalonians.  d


84  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.


near  at  hand — at  Corinth.  Even  in  theM  early  days  Uiings  which  he  had  said  were
misunderBtood ;  his  authority  was  claimed  for  words  which  he  had  never  spoken  ;  and,
strangest  of  all,  there  were  written  letters  bearing  his  name  which  were  falsely  ascribed
to  him.  We  have  our  trials  now.  We  are  troubled,  some  of  us,  by  the  difficulttes
which  arise  from  various  readings  or  interpretations,  by  the  doubts  thrown  by  modem
writers  on  this  or  that  book  of  Holy  Scripture,  by  the  conflict  of  opinions  in  the  Church.
It  is  some  comfort  to  think  that  we  of  this  age  are  not  alone  in  our  temptations ;  our
position  is  not  one  of  such  singular  perplexity  as  some  of  us  are  apt  to  think.  If  we
perserere  in  prayer,  if  we  try  to  live  by  faith  looking  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the
doubts  which  rex  us  will  soon  be  cleared  away.

IL  St.  Paul's  way  of  deauko  with  that  mistake.  1.  He  beseeches  them.  He
is  very  gentle  with  his  converts,  very  earnest  too,  and  affectionate ;  full  of  deep  anxiety
for  their  spirituid  welfare.  And  it  was  a  matter  of  great  importance.  St  Paul  had
dwelt  much  upon  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  The  Parousia  was  a  subject  of  much  excited
talk,  much  stirring  of  heart  among  the  Thessalonians.  St.  Paul  had  spoken  in  his  First
Epistle  of  "  our  gathering  together  unto  him ; "  how  *'  we  that  are  alive  and  remain  shall
be  caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.**  It  was  a  prospect  very
blessed,  very  awful  too;  it  had  been  opened  out  in  strong,  startling  words.  They
inferred  from  his  way  of  expressing  himself  that  it  was  very  close  at  hand,  to  be  looked
for  immediately ;  their  excitement  was  intense.  He  beseeches  them  to  listen.  2.  They
must  be  calm.  Religion  lies  in  a  calm,  quiet  walk  with  God.  It  has  its  emotions,  they
are  at  times  deep  and  strong ;  it  has  its  enthusiasm,  but  it  is  ordered  and  grave.  They
must  not  allow  themselves  to  be  shaken  from  their  settled  judgment ;  they  must  not  give
way  to  this  trembling,  uneasy  excitement.  They  must  return  to  the  quiet,  st^y
discharge  of  the  common  duties  of  life ;  their  best  strength  was  in  quietness  and  confi-
dence. This  was  the  best  preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  That  coming  was  not
immediate ;  much  was  to  happen  first.

Lessokb.  1.  Learn  to  be  sober,  thoughtful,  to  distrust  excitement,  to  live  in  patient
continuance  of  wellnioing.  2.  There  will  be  difficulties,  perplexities ;  they  are  trials  of
Uith ;  they  must  be  endured  in  patience  and  overcome  by  faith.  3.  Prepare  for  the
coming  of  Christ.  The  best  preparation  is  to  perform  each  duty  as  it  comes  in  Cedth
and  prayer  as  unto  the  Lord. — B.  C.  C.

Verg.  3 — 12. — The  man  of  sin.  I.  He  must  oome  before  the  day  of  the  Lord.
1.  His  reveUitian,  He  is  antichrist — the  evil  counterpart  of  the  most  holy  Saviour;
he  has  his  revelation,  his  apocalypse.  There  must  be  an  apostasy  before  the  coming  of
the  Lord — a  great,  notable  apostasy.  The  apostle  had  warned  the  1  hessalonians  of  it ;
we  need  these  warnings  now.  We  must  not  be  discouraged  when  we  see  scepticism,
unbelief,  rampant  around  ua.  These  things  must  be ;  Holy  Scripture  has  forewarned  us.
We  must  be  prepared ;  we  must  be  calm  and  steadfast,  looking  for  the  coming  of  the
Lord.  Such  apostasies  there  have  been ;  there  have  been  precursors  of  the  man  of  sin,
such  as  Caligula  shortly  before  the  date  of  this  Epistle,  or  Nero  shortly  after.  There
have  been  evil  men  among  the  popes  of  Rome  who  have  exhibited  in  their  lives  some  of
the  characteristic  features  of  the  antichrist.  But  the  apostasy  is  yet  to  come ;  the  man
of  sin  is  yet  in  the  future ;  the  mystery  of  iniquity  is  working  even  now ;  it  is  working
below  the  surface,  in  secret ;  hereafter,  we  know  not  when,  it  will  burst  forth  into  open
day  in  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  We  must  not  look  forward  to  a  continual,
unopposed  progress  of  the  gospel ;  we  must  not  expect  that  religion  will  go  on  in  ever-
extended  triumphs,  with  no  checks,  no  defeats,  overspreading  the  earlh  more  and  more
with  its  blessed  influences.  Such  an  expectation  is  not  warranted  either  by  Scripture
or  bv  the  signs  of  the  times.  Scripture  tells  us  of  the  coming  apostasy,  of  the  revelation
of  tno  man  of  sin.  And  in  the  world  the  forces  of  unbelief  and  evil  are  evidently
gathering  themselves  for  a  mighty  conflict.  In  our  own  country,  it  is  true,  there  has
been  a  great  revival  of  religious  zeal,  great  love  for  Christ,  much  earnest,  self-denying
work  for  his  sake.  But  alongside  of  this  there  has  been  a  great  outburst  of  infldelity,
a  widespread  scepticism,  a  hatred  of  revelation,  manifesting  itself  iu  the  life  and  works
of  men  of  learning  and  culture ;  while  elsewhere  the  revolt  against  all  forms  of  authority,
Divine  and  human,  has  been  more  outspoken  and  far  more  widely  spread.  The  armies
of  GM  and  Satan,  the  powers  of  good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  faith  and  unbeUef,


CH.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  36


seem  to  be  already  marshalled  in  preparation  for  an  awful  straggle.  It  must  come,
Holy  Scripture  warns  us ;  it  will  culminate  in  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  He
will  be  revealed — out  of  previous  obscurity ;  the  apparition  will  be  unveiled  out  of  dark-
ness. 2.  His  character.  He  is  a  person,  a  man  of  mighty  intellect  and  giant  strength
of  will,  who  will  take  advantage  of  a  general  development  of  unbelief  and  lawlessness,
and  gain  for  a  time  a  widespread  sovereignty.  Sin  fills  his  being;  it  becomes,  as  it
were,  incarnate  in  him ;  it  dominates  his  entire  personality.  He  is  *'  a  son  of  perdition  **
like  Judas  ^compare  the  common  Hebraism,  ''a  son  of  death"),  destined  himself  to  eternal
death,  involving  in  utter  death  all  who  follow  him.  He  is  an  adversary,  a  human
Satan,  filled  with  all  the  awful  energy,  the  concentrated  malice  of  the  evil  one.  He  is
the  antichrist,  the  avowed  and  bitter  enemy  of  the  holy  Saviour,  bringing  with  his
intense  wickedness  the  horrible  cry  of  "  ficrasez  Tinfame  1 "  into  awful  prominence.  He
exalts  himself  against  every  one  that  is  called  Gk>d ;  he  sits  in  the  temple  of  God,
reviving  the  madness  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  impious  attempt  of  Caligula.  Such
a  man  the  world  has  not  yet  seen.  There  have  been  many  outbursts  of  wickedness,
many  evil  men  in  the  long  course  of  history  have  risen  to  sovereign  power ;  but  no  one
yet  has  combined  in  himself  all  the  characteristics  ascribed  to  the  man  of  sin  in  this
Epistle.  It  is  a  fearful  spectacle  which  is  yet  to  come.  St.  Paul  warned  the  Thes-
salonians  that  such  things  there  would  be,  uprisings  of  malice  and  persecution,  anticipa-
tions of  the  man  of  sin.  He  warns  the  whole  Church  throughout  all  time  that  such
things  are  to  be  looked  for ;  that  sooner  or  later,  before  the  end  cometh,  the  man  of  sin
himself  shall  be  revealed  in  all  the  awful  energy  of  unmingled  wickedness,  relieved  by
no  one  trace  of  goodness.

n.  The  obstacle.  1.  The  Thessdlonians  knew  what  it  was,  St.  Paul  had  told
them  of  this  during  his  short  residence  in  Thessalonica.  For  some  reason  he  had  dwelt
much  on  this  awful  subject;  it  must  have  been  necessary  for  the  Thessalonians  in
their  special  circumstances,  though  we  know  not  why.  They  had  knowledge  which  we
have  not ;  they  knew  precisely  what  we  cannot  find  out  for  certain  with  all  our  search-
ing. We  may  be  satisfied  that  this  knowledge,  then  good  for  them,  is  not  now  necessary
for  \is,  or  it  would  have  been  more  clearly  revealed.  **  Te  have  an  unction  from  the
Holy  One,"  St  John  says  of  believers,  "  and  ye  know  all  things  " — all  that  we  need  to
know  for  life  and  godliness.  2.  What  was  itf  The  Boman  empire,  the  power  of
Boman  law,  the  emperor  as  embodying  that  power.  This  was  the  answer  of  most
ancient  writers ;  it  seems  to  be  the  most  common  answer  now.  Then  the  power  of
Home  checked  the  outburst  of  anarchy  and  lawlessness.  It  is  still  the  majesty  of  law,
the  authority  of  well-ordered  governments,  that  fulfils  the  same  office.  The  mystery
of  lawlessness  is  working  now ;  it  has  not  reached  its  height,  it  has  not  embodied  itself
in  the  fearfdl  personality  of  the  man  of  sin.  But  it  is  working;  and  it  is  a  mystery,
the  terrible  counterpart  of  the  mystery  of  godliness.  There  is  a  mystery  in  evil,  a
strange,  fearful  mystery,  dark  secrets  not  yet  revealed ;  a  mystery  which  suggests  awful,
heart-rending  questionings — questionings  which  can  be  quieted  only  in  his  presence  who
giveth  rest  to  the  troubled,  anxious  soul.  This  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  working
even  then  in  the  world  which  the  God  of  love  created ;  it  is  working  now ;  but  it  is
held  down  by  the  restraining  power ;  it  cannot  give  birth  to  the  man  of  sin  till  his  time
shall  come,  the  time  foreordained  in  the  counsel  of  God.  Then  the  restraining  power
will  be  taken  out  of  the  way ;  lawlessness  will  prevail,  and  its  creature  and  embodiment,
the  lawless  one,  will  come.

in.  His  AcnviTY.  1.  It  is  hut  for  a  short  time.  The  Lord  Jesus  shall  destroy  him,
and  that  in  an  instant,  when  ho  cometh.  He  needs  only  to  speak  the  word  of  power ;
the  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  sweep  the  adversary  into  that  perdition  to  which  he  was
appointed.  The  manifestation  of  his  coming,  the  very  sight  of  the  awful  Judge,  shall
slay  the  wicked  one.  This  must  be  our  consolation  when  the  dark  problems  of  life
distress  our  souls — ^'the  Lord  cometh."  Then  shall  come  the  assured  triumph -of
righteousness,  the  crowning  victory  over  all  the  powers  of  evil.  2.  But  it  is  tremendous.
As  God  is  revealed  in  Christ,  so  is  Satan  revealed  in  the  man  of  sin,  the  antichrist
The  "miracles  and  wonders  and  signs"  (Acts  ii.  22)  which  God  did  by  Christ  are
parodied  by  the  power  and  signs  and  wonders  which  Satan  will  work  through  the  agency
of  the  man  of  sin.  As  Christ's  coming  is  with  power,  with  his  mighty  angels  in  flaming
fire,  so  is  the  coming  of  the  lawless  one  with  aU  power  according  to  the  working  of


BO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

BataiL  As  God  worketh  in  his  saints  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure,  so
Satan  workoth  in  this  his  renresentative  with  all  the  awful  energy  of  diabolical  wicked-
ness. Ilio  antichrist,  says  Bengel,  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Satan  as  Christ  to
Qod.  Tlie  antichrist  will  work  miracles,  but  they  are  by  the  energy  of  Satan,  wonders
of  falsehood.  They  are  not  mere  deceptions,  they  are  real  miracles ;  but  they  are  the
works  of  him  who  is  the  father  of  lies ;  and  they  are  lies,  inasmuch  as  they  are  intended
to  mislead  men  into  worshipping  him  as  God  who  is  the  personation  of  Satan,  the  liar
fVom  the  beginning.  Lies,  too,  they  are,  because  they  are  the  signs  of  a  power  which  is
only  a  miserable  imposture,  which  must  soon  end  in  death  and  ruin.  Our  Lord  has
warned  us  (Matt.  xxiv.  24)  of  false  Ghrists  and  false  prophets  whose  signs  and  wonders
should  be  so  startling  as  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect.  The  false
nrophet,  the  second  beast,  of  the  Bevelation  doeth  great  wonders,  so  that  he  maketh
nro  to  come  down  from  heaven,  and  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by  the
moans  of  those  miracles  which  he  hath  power  to  do.  Then  there  may  be,  there  will  be,
false  miracles,  lying  wonders.  Miracles  alone  do  not  always  prove  the  agency  of  God,
but  miracles  with  holiness,  works  of  faith  issuing  out  of  a  life  filled  with  the  presence
of  God.  The  blessed  life  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  is  a  mightier  miracle  than  the
|)hysical  wonders  which  he  wrought.  A  life  of  perfect  purity  and  transcendent  holiness
m  the  weakness  of  human  flesh,  amid  all  the  temptations  of  this  wicked  world,  is  to  us
a  more  convincing  proof  of  the  Divine  mission  of  Christ  than  the  signs  from  heaven
would  have  been  wliioh  the  Jews  so  often  asked  for.  The  Church  must  expect  the
coming  of  lying  wonders;  she  must  stand  unshaken  amid  all  the  developments  of
Satanic  energy.  The  elect  will  not  be  deceived,  for  thev  will  recognize  the  notes  of
autichrist,  "  all  the  deccivableness  of  unrighteousness ; "  they  will  remember  the  warn-
ings of  Holy  Scripture :  "  Whosoever  doeth  not  righteousness  is  not  of  (Jod,"  *'  He  that
oommittoth  sin  is  of  the  devil ;  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning."

IV,  Its  uksult.  1,  lit  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth;  not  the  elect — the
■ouls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the  hand  of  God ;  but  those  who  have  not  been  sealed  wiUi
that  Holv  Spirit  of  promise  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance,  the  pledge  of  that
seal  of  the  living  Qod  which  hb  angel  shall  one  day  set  uxx)n  the  foreheads  of  his
chosen.  But  there  arc,  alas  1  those  that  are  perishing,  who  have  not  passed  from  death
unto  life  through  faith  in  the  Son  of  Qod,  but  still  abide  in  death.  Such  men  the  man
of  tin,  the  lawlt^s  one,  deceives  and  engulfs  in  his  OAvn  utter  destruction.  2.  Their
<>i<*i4  wilfulness  is  the  cttuse  of  their  ruin,  "  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish."
The  true  lij;ht  li^htoth  every  man.  It  came  to  them,  but  they  received  it  not.  They
receivoil  not  Christ.  He  is  tlie  IVuth,  and  he  is  Love.  He  came  into  the  world  that  the
world  through  hiui  might  bo  saved.  But  they  received  not  him  who  is  the  Way,  the
Truth,  and  the  Life.  They  had  no  love  for  the  truth,  no  desire  for  it.  They  were  quite
indiifonuU  to  the  truth,  though  their  conscience  told  them  that  it  was  the  truth;  they
Wi>ri»  wi^nw  thai\  indift'oront,  thov  n^jtxrtod  it.  They  might  have  been  saved ;  the  truth
winild  have  made  them  fnn?.  'Ihey  might  have  been  sanctified  through  the  truth;  for
the  truth  of  Q\^,  rvceivtnl  into  the  heart,  hath  jwwer  to  cleanse,  to  purify,  to  save  Uie
•oul.  But  they  lovtni  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil.  3.  It
ends  IH  jWtWd/  hiindHess.  QtxVs  Sj^rit  will  not  always  strive  with  man.  In  his  awful
Justice  he  givv«  over  to  a  wpivbate  mind  those  who  jiersevoro  in  disobedience.  He
iwndetli  them  a  stn^ng  delusion,  a  working  of  em>r.  As  virtue  is  its  own  reward,  so
sin  is  it*  own  punishment.  Eternal  sin  (see  Mark  iii.  29  in  the  be^t-supported  reading
is  the  fearful  end  of  the  ol^stinate  sinner.  That  hardening  of  the  heart,  in  which
habitual  sin  must  at  last  wsult,  is  asorilx^  in  Holy  Scripture  sometimes  to  God,  some-
times to  the  sinner  himself,  s^nuetimes  to  the  dcceiifalnoss  of  sin.  They  are  different
m\xlo3  of  oxprv^ssdn^  the  same  law  of  Qod*s  government.  He  has  so  ordered  our  moral
luitUTts  that  sin,  wlieu  it  is  full  gr^^wn.  brinceth  forth  death.  He  lots  the  rebel  have
his  own  will ;  he  leavw  him  to  be  **  lor\l  of  himsolfi  that  heritage  of  wvv."  The  Sj^irit
is  withdrawn  at  last  fh>m  those  who  vex,  grieve,  it^ist,  his  gracious  intiuences.  But
thwv  is  f^Muethini!  mow  awful  still.  Kvn  only  did  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  dej^rt  from
SauU  but  •^  an  evil  si\irit  fn>m  the  Lot\!  trxHiKev!  him."  Gvxl  hia^ ivlf  sends  at  the  last,
in  his  most  awful  justice,  the  strvnig  delusiv>n.  the  in  working  of  errvr.  It  is  the  last
st»ti^«  wvvra*  than  the  fini^t ;  after  which  c».^m«  that  drvadful  svnicr.ct\  "  I:  is  impossible
to  ivncw  them  a^pua  unto  rvix^nMOhv**"    This  thought  give$  a  most  terrible


•  •  •


cii.  II.  1-17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN3.  87

significance  to  every  act  of  wilful,  nnrepented  sin ;  every  such  act  brings  a  man  nearer
(how  near  he  cannot  tell)  to  that  most  awful  state  whence  there  is  no  repentance.
Then  comes  judicial  blindness;  the  light  that  was  within  them  becomes  darkness.
They  would  not  believe  the  truth  of  God,  now  they  believe  the  lie  of  the  man  of  ran.
It  is  the  judgment  of  God.  We  see  indications  of  it  from  time  to  time  in  the  credulity
of  unbelief.  Men  who  reject  the  Bible  are  sometimes  ready  to  believe  anything  except
the  Bible;  they  will  greedily  accept  any  legend,  any  scientific  hypothesis,  though
evidently  not  more  than  a  provisional  hypothesis,  which  seems  to  contradict  the  Bible ;
they  will  deify  humanity,  they  will  worship  the  idol  which  is  the  creature  of  their  own
thoughts  rather  than  the  living  Gt>d.  This  unbelief  sprang  out  of  sin ;  they  *'  had
pleasure  in  imrighteonsness."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  nonest  doubt ;  such  were  the
doubts  of  Asanh,  of  Thomas.  But  unbelief  in  a  very  large  measure  comes  from  moral
causes.  Sin  darkens  the  heart  and  the  mind ;  sin  always  leads  to  practical,  often  to
intellectual,  unbelief.  **  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light ;  ^  he  walketh  in
darkness ;  he  seeth  not  the  coming  judgment.

Lessons.  1.  Be  prepared  for  times  of  darkness — they  must  come ;  be  strong  in  faith.
2.  If  unbelief  becomes  dominai^t,  still  believe ;  God  has  forewarn^  us.  3.  Anarchy,
confusion,  leads  to  the  predominance  of  sin.  ''  Give  peace  in  our  time,  0  Lord."  4.  Even
miracles  may  deceive.  Christ  remaineth  faithful ;  trust  always  in  him.  5.  Hate  sin
with  utter  hatred ;  it  ends  in  hardness  of  heart. — B.  C.  0,

Vers.  13 — 17. — St  PauVs  hopes  for  the  ThesscUonians,  1.  He  thanks  God  toe  his
PAST  MERCIES  SHOWN  TO  THEM.  1.  FoT  their  dection.  He  turns  from  prophecies  of
coming  terrors  to  thoughts  of  hope  and  consolation.  He  repeats  the  words  of  ch.  L  3,
'*  Wcare  bouud  to  give  thanks."  He  felt  the  greatnessof  God's  mercies  to  the  Thessalonians.
Mercies  shown  to  them  were  shown  to  him ;  he  so  dearly  loved  them.  It  was  his  bounden
duty  to  thank  God  for  them ;  how  much  more  was  it  their  duty  to  be  thankful  for  the
grace  granted  to  them  I  Goil  had  set  his  love  upon  them ;  God  had  chosen  them  from
the  beginning.  This  was  the  source  of  their  blessedness ;  not  any  merits,  any  good
deeds,  of  theirs.  All  our  hopes  rest  on  the  electing  grace  of  God.  That  thought  is  full
of  sweet,  pleasant,  and  unspeakable  comfort  to  godly  persons.  It  was  so  to  the  Thessa-
lonian  Christians,  especially  at  this  time,  when  awful  anticipations  of  the  coming  end  were
casting  a  dark  shadow  over  them.  That  election  manifests  itself  in  holiness  of  life.  The
seal  of  the  Spirit  is  the  earnest,  the  pledge,  of  the  heavenly  inheritance.  God's  elect  must
feel  within  themselves  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  mortifying  the  works  of  the
flesh,  and  their  earthly  members,  and  drawing  up  their  minds  to  high  and  heavenly
things.  The  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  the  sphere  in  which  the  life  of  election  moves
and  energizes.  And  with  the  growth  of  holiness  in  the  heart  faith  is  ever  deepened
and  strengthened.  The  working  of  the  Spirit  greatly  confirms  the  faith  of  eternal  sal-
vation to  be  enjoyed  through  Christ ;  it  convinces  the  Christian  soul  with  a  mightj
power,  with  the  certainty  of  intuition,  of  the  reality  of  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel,  so
that  the  Christian  walks  in  ever-increasing  faith,  in  the  power  of  that  victory  which
overcometh  the  world.  2.  For  the  hope  of  glory.  God  had  predestinated  the  Thessa-
lonians  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son ;  by  the  preaching  of  St.  Paul  he  had
called  them  to  that  state  of  salvation.  They  were  living  in  a  present  salvation ;  they  were
looking  forwards  to  a  future  glory ;  their  high  hope  was  the  obtaining  of  the  glorv  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  glory  will  be  the  glory  of  his  stunts,  for  he  has  given  it  them
(John  xvii.  22).  They  are  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ.  All  that  Christ
has  is  theirs  in  hope ;  for  Christ  himself  is  theirs,  and  they  are  Christ's.  The  Christian
who  cherishes  this  high  and  blessed  hope  must  live  in  continual  thankfulness.

IL  He  URGES  THEM  TO  STEADFASTNESS.  1.  In  the  life  of  faith.  Stand  fast,  he  save ;
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith.  You  must  do  your  part.  Gfod  has  chosen  you ;  he  has
given  you  his  Spirit ;  he  has  called  you  to  salvation.  Yet  you  must  work  out  that  salva-
tion. We  need  not  perplex  ourselves  with  the  deep  mysteries  which  thought  cannot
fathom ;  in  practice,  the  duty  of  perseverance  follows  from  the  electing  grace  of  God,
He  has  chosen  you ;  persevere,  for  he  gives  you  the  power ;  be  steadfast,  for  you  owe  a
great  debt  of  gratitude  to  him  who  has  so  greatly  loved  you.  2.  In  doctrine^  Hold  the
traditions.  St.  Paul  had  taught  the  Thessalonians  by  word  of  mouth.  We  must
remember  that  in  all  probability  not  one  of  our  four  (jK)6pels  was  yet  written.    The


38  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

Thessalonians  knew  the  history  of  our  Lord's  life  and  death,  and  the  doctrines  of  the
Christian  faith,  only  through  the  oral  teaching  of  St.  PauL  The  First.Epistle  was  the  only
part  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  known  to  them ;  probably  the  only  part  as  yet  in
existence.  St  Paul  had  taught  orally  for  several  years  before  he  began  to  write.  Oral
teoclung  was  often  misunderstood,  often  forgotten,  as  this  Epistle  shows.  But  the  teach-
ing of  an  apostle,  whether  by  word  or  by  writing,  was  a  precious  deposit,  for  that
which  he  deliver^  to  his  converts  he  had  himself  received  of  the  Lord.  Bo  it  ours  to
continue  steadfast  in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship.

TTT.  He  sums  uf  hib  hopes  in  a  benediction.  1.  He  points  them  to  God,  The
cknse  begins  in  the  Greek  with  the  emphatic  alnSsf  himself.  We  must  stand  fast,  we
must  persevere ;  but  it  is  he  who  establishes  the  hearts  of  his  chosen ;  he  only  is  our
everlasting  Strength,  the  Hock  of  ages.  The  apostle  in  this  place,  as  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  14,
puts  the  ^viour's  name  first,  because  it  is  by  Christ  that  we  have  access  to  the  Father.
We  feel  that  this  order  would  have  been  incongruous,  impossible,  unless  Christ  were
indeed  Grod ;  we  feel  that  the  singular  verb  could  not  be  used,  as  it  is  twice,  in  ver.  17,
unless  he  and  the  Father  were  one  (comp.  1  Thcss.  iiL  11).  God  the  Father  is  our
Falser,  St.  Paul  says  emphatically.  He  loved  us ;  on  his  fatherly  love  rests  our  election,
our  hope  of  glory.  Ho  has  given  already  to  his  saints  eternal  comfort,  a  comfort
independent  of  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  earthly  Ufe — a  comfort  eternal,  for  it
rests  on  him  who  is  eternal;  and  with  that  comfort  which  is  present,  though  not  temporal,
not  confined  within  the  limits  of  time,  he  has  given  also  a  good  hope  of  future  glory,
the  blessed  hope  of  everlasting  life  with  Gtxl  in  heaven.  And  this  he  has  given  in  grace,
in  the  encompassing  atmosphere  of  his  favour,  without  merit  or  works  of  ours.  2.  He
prays  that  OocPs  blessing  may  siUl  rest  upon  them.  He  who  loved  them,  and  gave  them
eternal  comfort  and  good  hope,  will  surely  comfort  and  establish  them.  His  first  gifts
are  a  pledge  of  their  continuance.  He  will  not  leave  his  work  unfinished.  His  love
is  like  himself,  etcmaL  He  can  shed  that  blessed  comfort  into  the  heart,  the  inmost
seat  of  joy  and  sorrow.  When  there  is  hidden  comfort  there,  outward  troubles  may
cause  sorrow,  but  cannot  take  away  the  fulness  of  joy.  He  can  establish  our  heart ;
he  can  give  us  that  established  heart,  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxiL  7,  8),
which  the  world,  the  flesh,  the  devil,  cannot  shake.  Then  we  shall  speak  only  words
of  truth  and  love,  and  do  only  works  of  righteousness  and  faith  through  that  inner
comfort  and  strength  which  comes  from  God  alone.

Lessons.  1.  In  the  midst  of  dangers  there  is  comfort  for  the  saints  ;  they  are  in  the
hands  of  God ;  God  hath  chosen  them.  2.  Look  for  the  evidence  of  Gkxi's  election  in
holiness  of  life ;  without  holiness  we  cannot  see  him.  3.  Be  steadfast ;  make  your  calling
and  election  sure ;  take  heed  lest  ye  fall.  4.  Only  God  can  give  "  eternal  comlbrt.*'
Seek  that  precious  gift  of  him ;  it  is  given  to  those  whom  he  stablishcs  in  every  good
word  and  work. — B,  C.  C.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Antichrist.  L  Error  regarding  the  coming  of  Chbist.  **  Now
we  beseech  you,  brethren,  touching  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our
gathering  together  unto  him ;  to  the  end  that  yo  be  not  quickly  shaken  from  your
mind,  nor  yet  bo  troubled,  either  by  spirit,  or  by  word,  or  by  Epistle  as  from  us,  as  that
the  day  of  the  Lord  is  now  present ;  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  any  wise."  The  apostle
beseeches  the  Thessalonians  as  brethren,  in  the  interest  of  correct  views  of  the  coming
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  his  principal  topic  in  both  Epistles.  ^The  com-
forting side  of  the  coming  is  the  gathering  together  of  all  believers  unto  him,  never  to
be  followed  by  a  separation,  as  set  forth  in  1  Thess.  iv.  17,  "  Then  we  that  are  alive,
that  arc  left,  shall  together  with  them  "  (the  dead  in  Christ  who  have  been  raised)  **  be
caught  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the
Lord."  ty  the  way  in  which  ho  introduces  this  gathering  together,  it  can  be  seen  that
it  was  very  attractive  to  him.  It  was  that  in  the  coming  which  he  especially  wished
to  be  conserved.  In  the  beginning  of  1  Thess.  v.  the  apostle  had  distinctly  taught  the
imoertainty  of  the  time  of  the  coming.  But  representations  had  been  made  to  the
Thessalonians  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  actually  beginning.  Three  forms  which
these  representations  might  take,  or,  more  probably,  did  take,  are  specificxi.  There  were
representations  founded  upon  pretended  prophecy.  There  were  also  representations
fomided  upon  an  alleged  oral  communication  of  the  apostle.    There  were  further  repre-


cu.  IL  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  3S

sentatioDs  founded  upon  an  alleged  Epistle  of  the  apostle.  The  existence  and  circula-
tion of  a  fabricated  Epistle  seem  to  be  hinted  at  in  the  words  at  the  close  of  this  Epistle :
"  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle :
so  I  write."  If  the  Thessalonians  accepted  of  these  representations,  there  was  danger  of
their  being  precipitately  shaken  from  their  composure  of  mind  and  even  thrown  into
a  terrified  state,  as  at  sea  men  are  discomposed  and  even  horrified  by  the  biu'sting  of
a  storm  upon  them.  The  apostle,  therefore,  considered  it  necessary  to  write  this  Epistle,
to  put  them  on  their  guard  against  their  being  led  away  by  these  representations.  Let
no  man  beguile  them  in  these  ways,  or,  making  it  wider,  in  any  other  way.

n.  The  antichristian  manifestation.  1.  The  coming  of  Christ  to  he  preceded  hy
apostasy.  "  For  it  will  not  be,  except  the  falling  away  come  first."  "  Apostasy  "  (after  the
Greek)  is  the  more  technical  word — the  apostasy  of  which  the  Thessalonians  had  been  told.
There  is,  particularly,  meant  falling  away  from  the  faith  of  Christ.  It  is  a  movement
begun  by  those  who  have  been  within  the  Christian  circle,  and  who,  after  having  been
advantaged  by  Christianity  in  outward  enlightenment  and  quickening,  have  ungratefully
turned  away.  Or  the  movement  away  from  Christ  may  dishonourably  be  encouraged  by
those  who  still  remain  within  the  Christian  circle,  but  have  lost  faith  in  the  distinctive
teachings  of  Christianity.  The  name  of  "  apostate  "  has  been  given  to  the  Emperor  Julian
for  his  signal  renunciation  of  Christianity,  but  it  is  a  name  which  belongs  to  every  one
who  in  the  struggle  of  life  parts  with  his  early  Christian  convictions,  his  good  tradi-
tions. Let  us  see  that  we  are  not,  in  the  smallest  degree,  contributing  to  the  move-
ment away  from  Christ.  2.  The  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin,  "  And  the  man  of  sin
be  revealed."  It  is  now  an  exploded  idea  that  the  man  of  sin  means  popery.  The
principal  interpreters — Olshausen,  Ellicott,  Alford,  Eadie — hold  to  the  idea  of  the  man
of  sin  being  a  person.  He  is  supposed  to  be  the  last  and  worst  product  of  the  apostasy.
He  is  a  caricature  of  Christ,  having  a  mystery,  and  revelation,  and  miracles,  and  claim
of  divinity,  a  coming  and  preparation,  even  as  Christ  has.  He  is  as  inclusive  of  all
the  bad  forms  of  humanity,  as  Christ  is  of  all  its  good  forms.  It  cannot  be  said  of  this
most  unlovely  conception  that  it  has  the  similitude  of  truth.  It  cannot  be  dogmatically
laid  down  as  a  matter  of  interpretation  that  the  man  of  sin  is  a  person,  any  more  than
the  restrainer  is  a  person.  The  designation  '*  man  of  sin  "  points,  in  the  first  place,  to
sin  as  the  essence  of  the  ajwstasy.  The  moving  away  from  Christ  is  an  opposing
of  the  Divine  authority.  The  designation  "  man  of  sin  "  points,  in  the  second  place,
to  sin  as  working  under  human  (not  angelic)  conditions,  and,  taken  along  with  apostasy,
points  especially  to  the  development  of  sin  in  human  history.  The  designation  "  man  of
sin"  points,  in  the  third  place,  to  this  historical  development,  not  as  actual,  but  as  idealized.
As  the  language,  "  0  man  of  God,"  is  a  call  to  consider  the  true  ideal  of  manhood,  so  the
man  of  sin  may  be  viewed  as  the  ideal  of  the  development  of  sin  among  men.  In  so
far  as  popery  is  after  this  ideal  may  it  be  said  to  be  the  man  of  sin.  In  so  far  as  any  of
us  take  after  the  bad  ideal  of  manhood  may  it  be  said  to  us,"  0  man  of  sin!"  calling  us
to  consider  what  we  are  following  after.  Let  us  see  that  we  do  not  in  the  least  merit
the  designation.  By  the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin  is  to  be  understood  the  bringing
out  of  the  real  nature  of  sin.  It  may  put  on  specious  forms,  but  it  is  essential  vile-
ness ;  it  is  up:lier  than  the  ugliest  of  creatures,  it  is  more  venomous  than  the  serpent,  it  is
more  grovelling  than  the  earth-worm,  it  is  blacker  than  darkness.  And  in  the  working
of  Providence  in  human  history,  it  is  intended  that  this  should  be,  with  accumulating
evidence  and  unmistakably,  brought  out.  And  we  are  here  taught  that  there  cannot
be  the  revelation  of  Christ  at  his  coming  until  all  that  is  evil  in  sin  has  been  brought
out.  3.  The  son  of  perdition,  "  The  son  of  perdition."  The  common  Hebrew  form  is
followed.  Sprung  from  perdition,  he  has  perdition  as  his  destiny.  The  designation
marks  the  result  of  the  movement  away  from  Christ.  Every  such  movement  must
prove  in  the  end  abortive.  How  many  of  those  movements  that  once  had  vitality  in
them  have  already  ended  in  perdition  I  The  designation  was  given  by  our  Lord  to  Judas
Iscariot :  *'  And  none  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition."  And  it  is  certainly  not
to  be  wondered  at  that  he  whose  apostasy  was  aggravated  by  the  proximity  in  which
he  stood  to  Christ  should  strikingly  be  shown  in  his  suicidal  end  to  be  the  son  of
perdition.  In  so  far  as  any  of  us  are  moving  away  from  Christ  we  are  placing  our
pateriiity  in  perdition,  and  are  working  out  perdition  as  our  destiny.  Let  us,  then,  be
vramcd  by  what  will  yet  be  seen  to  come  out  of  sin.   4.  The  oppostr  of  Christ,  "  He  that


40  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  ii,  1—17.

opposetb."  It  is  not  said, "  He  that  opposeth  Christ,"  but,  from  the  way  in  which  Christian
thought  is  interwoven  with  the  whole  paragraph,  we  may  understand  that  to  be  the
meaning.  We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  movement  as  described  by  the  designation
"  antichrist "  with  which  John  supplies  us.  As  it  is  in  its  origin  a  movement  away
from  Christ,  so  it  comes  to  have  the  character  of  being  directed  against  Christ.  It  is
a  movement  in  which  advantages  gained  from  Christ  are  unworthily  used  against  him.
As  it  is  the  object  of  God  in  the  Church  to  put  forward  Christ  for  the  acceptance  of
men,  so  it  is  the  object  of  antichrist  to  draw  away  men  from  Christ.  Popery  is  anti-
christ in  so  far  as  it  does  not  give  Christ  and  his  words  and  his  death  their  proper
place  in  Christian  belief  and  life.  It  may  be  said  of  us  that  we  are  antichrist  in  so  far
as  we  do  not  yield  ourselves  up  to  Christ,  and  do  not  to  our  utmost  ability  help  forward
Hie  cause  of  Christ.  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  and  he  that  gathereth  not
with  me  scattereth  abroad."  6.  The  deifier  of  self,  "  And  exalteth  himself  against  all
that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped;  so  that  he  sittcth  in  the  temple  of  God,
setting  himself  forth  as  God."  There  is  strong  confirmation  here  of  the  doctrine  of
Hiiller^  that  all  sin  is  of  the  nature  of  selfishness.  Antichrist  is  selfishness  rising  to  the
impious  height  of  self-deification.  He  raises  himself  above  and  against  him  who  is
truly  called  God,  without  thereby  falling  into  idolatry ;  for  he  also  raises  himself  above
and  against  those  that  have  only  the  name  of  gods,  and,  it  is  added  (going  beyond  the
actually  named),  above  and  against  all  that  can  be  turned  into  an  object  of  worship.
He  does  not,  therefore,  shut  out  the  sacred  sphere ;  rather  docs  he  fill  it  with  himself.
He  is  the  centre  of  all  wisdom,  power,  and  glory  for  which  worship  is  due.  The  startling
language  is  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  setting  himself  forth  as  God.  There
is  supposed  to  be  meant  a  session  in  the  actual  temple  in  Jerusalem  by  those  who,
laying  undue  stress  upon  the  language  here,  regard  the  paragraph  as  having  already
received  its  fulfilment  But  there  is  reference  to  the  actual  temple  only  by  way  of  illustra-
tion. As  God  was  represented  as  sitting  between  the  cherubim,  requiring  the  adoration
of  all  Israelites  (as  he  was  the  object  of  adoration  to  the  highest  intelligences),  so  anti-
christ entertains  the  thought  of  divinity  and  strictly  requires  adoration.  While  in
Christ*s  consciousness  of  divinity  there  was  the  element  of  infinite  self-sacrifice,  in
antichrist's  presumptuous  thought  of  divinity  there  is  only  the  element  of  utter
selfishness.  We  are  not  to  think  here  merely  of  him  who  sits  in  the  Church  and
arrogantly  wields  spiritual  power.  Kather  are  we  to  see  the  tendency  of  the  whole
movement  away  from  Christ.  This  is  how  it  aims  at  expressing  itself.  This  is  the
dreadful  interpretation  of  what  it  would  be  at.  And  it  is  true  of  us  all,  in  so  far  as  we
are  selfish,  that  we  are  aiming  at  making  a  temple  for  ourselves  in  which  to  sit  down
and  to  require  adoration.  As  we  in  our  present  state  of  fueling  can  only  recoil  from  such
self-deification,  let  us  beware  of  that  selfishness  which  is  at  the  heart  of  sin.  6.  The
ITiessalonians  reminded  of  former  teachings  on  the  above  points.  "  Remember  ye  not,  that,
when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things  ?  "  In  his  teachings  on  the  coming
he  was  not  corrected  or  supplemented  by  recent  revelation.  He  bad  occupied  the  same
position  from  the  beginning ;  such  is  undoubtedly  his  own  contention,  and  is  against
the  contention  of  some  who  attribute  to  him  that  he  believed  that  he  would  Uve  to  see
the  coming.  He  reminds  the  Thessalonians  here,  not  without  some  measure  of  blame,
that  when  he  was  with  them  (and  he  singles  out  himself  in  making  this  statement)  he
told  them  some  things  which  he  was  now  putting  down  in  his  letter.

III.  The  restraining  power.  1.  What  restrains  tlie  antichristian  manifestation.
"  And  now  ye  know  that  which  restraineth,  to  the  end  that  he  may  be  revealed  in  his
own  season."  This  was  another  point  on  which  he  had  given  them  information.  It  is
left  indefinite  what  the  restraining  power  is.  The  prevailing  opinion,  as  expressed  by
EUicott,  is  "  well-ordered  human  rule,  the  principles  of  legality  as  opposed  to  those  of
lawlessness — of  which  the  Roman  empire  was  the  then  embodiment  and  manifestation."
It  is  true  that  civil  rule  keeps  back  many  of  the  manifestations  of  evil.  The  civil  ruler
is  a  terror  to  evil-doers.  If  men  were  allowed  to  give  vent  to  their  evil  passions  with-
out dread  of  punishment,  this  world  would  be  a  pandemonium.  But,  at  the  same  time,
it  is  true  that  the  worst  manifestations  of  evil,  of  proud  defiance  of  God,  of  bitter
rancour  against  Christ  (which  are  chiefly  to  be  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  anti-
christian  movement),  are  those  with  which  the  civil  magistrate  has  little  to  do.  The
condition  upon  which  these  manifestations  depend  is  rather  the  increased  setting  forth


cu.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  -d

of  Christ.  There  is  a  manifestation  of  good  going  forward,  as  well  as  a  manifestation  of
evil.  It  must  yet  be  showni  in  human  history  that  there  is  an  essential  loveliness
belonging  to  the  Christian  life.  Many  Scriptures  promise  a  period  of  conquest  for  the
Church.  When  the  Church  extends  its  conquests  there  will  be  a  solidarity  of  influence
on  the  side  of  Christ  of  which  no  adequate  conception  can  now  be  formed.  The  result
of  that  will  be,  among  those  who  participate  in  the  antichristian  movement,  deepened
hatred  against  Christ.  As  when  he  conquered  on  the  cross  there  was  a  calling  forth
against  him  of  the  worst  elements  especially  of  superhuman  evil,  so  when  he  advances
to  conquest  in  human  history  there  will  be  a  similar  calling  forth  of  the  worst  elements
especially  of  human  evil.  The  time  when  evil  is  thus  powerfully  to  be  revealed  has
been  fixed  by  God.  It  may  bo  said  that  the  apostle  should,  according  to  the  inter-
pretation, have  regarded  the  Christian  manifestation  as  coming  to  a  head.  But  it  was
open  to  him  to  regard  it  under  a  special  aspect  as  that  which  in  its  yet  partial
character  held  back  the  full  manifestation  of  antichrist.  2.  The  present  working  of
the  mystery  of  lawlessness,  **  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work."
'*  liawlessness,"  which  corresponds  to  "sin,"  formerly  used,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  favouring
the  view  that  the  restraining  power  is  human  rule.  It  points  to  the  antichristian
movement  as  characterized  by  a  disposition  to  cast  ofif  all  authority,  especially  the
highest  authority.  The  stress  is  to  be  laid  on  "  mystery."  Evil  was  then  working,  and
in  working  was  revealing  itself,  but  its  true  nature  as  opposition  to  Christ  was  largely
concealed,  was  only  very  partially  revealed.  A  lurid  lignt  was  thrown  upon  it  by  the
ten  great  persecutions  which,  under  the  Roman  emperors,  were  directed  against
Christianity.  Light  is  thrown  upon  it  by  the  attacks  which  in  the  present  day  are
made  upon  Christianity.  But  it  would  seem  that  we  have  not  seen  all  that  is  in  it  of
opposition  to  Christ.  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  still  works.  3.  The  removal  of  the
restrainer,  "  Only  there  is  one  that  restraineth  now,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.
And  then  shall  be  revealed  the  lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  bring  to  nought  by  the  manifestation  of  his  coming."
Ellicott  regards  the  use  of  the  masculine  gender  as  a  realistic  touch,  by  which  what
was  previously  expressed  by  the  more  abstract  "restraining  power"  is  now  represented
as  concrete  and  personified.  It  is  strange  how  this  should  not  be  regarded  as  applying
also  to  the  "  lawless  one  "  to  whom  the  restrainer  is  here  opposed.  If  the  restrainer  is
human  rule,  then  his  removal  must  mean  the  upturning  (apparently  general)  of  human
rule.  And  that  is  what  is  contemplated  by  some  as  the  conclusion  to  human  history.
But  the  restrainer  being  "  Christianity  not  come  to  the  season  of  its  full  manifestation,"
his  removal  must  mean  the  arrival  of  that  season.  When  Christianity,  working  among
the  multitudes  of  men,  brings  its  full  influence  to  bear  on  the  antichristian  movement,
in  what  it  calls  forth  of  opposition,  that  movement  will  come  to  the  completeness  of  its
exposure.  And  antichrist,  thus  morally  defeated,  eternally  disproved,  will  have  taken
away  from  it  its  sphere  of  operation.  It  will  bo  slain  with  the  breath  of  Christ's  mouth,
and  brought  to  nought  by  the  manifestation  of  his  coming.

IV.  The  lyiko  characteb  of  the  antichristian  movement.  1.  Lies  of  Satan,
"  Even  he,  whose  coming  is  according  to  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  power  and  signs
and  lying  wonders."  As  Satan  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  lies,  so  the  antichristian
movement  which  he  inspires  is  characterized  by  lying.  As  Christ  has  power  and
signs  and  wonders  of  truth,  so  the  antichristian  movement  has  power  and  signs  and
wonders  of  lying.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Church  of  Rome  puts  forward  a  claim  of
miracle-working,  which  helps  it  to  preserve  its  influence  over  minds,  but  which  it
cannot  establish.  The  power  and  signs  and  wonders  by  which  men  are  apt  to  bs  deluded
now  are  more  of  an  intellectual  nature.  It  is  objected  to  Christianity  that  the  miracles
with  which  it  is  bound  up  are  shown  by  science  to  be  impossible.  It  is  objected  that
it  presents  too  severe  a  view  of  our  human  condition,  in  representing  us  as  standing  in
need  of  salvation.  It  is  objected  that  it  presents  too  severe  a  view  of  the  character  of
God,  in  representing  him  as  punishing  sin  in  Christ.  It  is  objected  that  it  presents  too
severe  a  view  of  human  duty,  in  calling  upon  us  to  forsake  all  and  follow  Christ.
When  these  objections  are  powerfully  presented,  and  so  as  to  have  the  appearance  of
saving  the  character  of  God  from  aspersions,  there  may  be  the  efl'cct,  which  false
miracles  have  often  had,  of  men  being  deluded.  2.  Lies  of  Satan  leading  to  unrighteous*
ness»    "W^ith  all  deceit  of  unrighteousness."     When  men  entertain  fiBklse  views,


42  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  u.  1—17.

especially  of  the  character  of  God,  there  is  an  easy  transition  to  unrighteousness.  There
aie  many  ways  in  which  they  can  persuade  themselves,  that  they  may  exercise  liberty
in  their  manner  of  living.  They  do  not  need  to  pray  to  God ;  they  do  not  need  to  read
Ck)d'8  Book ;  they  do  not  need  to  keep  QodCs  day ;  they  do  not  need  to  be  strictly
honourable  in  their  transactions ;  they  ao  not  need  to  make  sacrifices  for  others.  It  is
enough  that  they  keep  up  an  appearance  of  probity  and  purity,  and,  it  may  be,  of
leligiony  before  men.  They  can  leave  all  their  failings  to  the  general  mercy  of  Gt)d.
d.  Unrighteouinesa  leading  to  destruction.  ''For  them  that  are  perishing.*'  From
unrighteousness  there  is  a  necessary,  though,  it  may  not  be,  an  immediate,  transition  to
destruction.  When  men  do  not  observe  the  rules  which  are  laid  down  for  them  l^
God,  they  are  contending  with  God,  and,  contending  with  Otod,  they  cannot  in  the  end
succeed ;  for  Gkxl  is  stronger  than  they.  There  were  those  who  were  perishing  in  their
unrighteousness  in  Paul's  day.  And  there  are  still  those  who  seem  to  be  perishing
in  their  unrighteousness.  4.  The  just  deeding  of  God,  (1)  What  those  who  are  in
the  antiehristian  movement  rtjed,  "  Because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,
thai  they  might  be  saved."  The  apostle  holds  that  it  was  their  own  fault  if  they
were  perishing.  And,  in  doing  so,  he  brings  forward  very  precious  truth.  GK)d  has
in  view  our  salvation.  He  wiileth  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  and  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  truth.  For  this  end  he  makes  us  the  offer,  not  of  the  truth,  but
of  the  disposition  which  is  necessary  for  finding  it — the  love  of  the  truth.  Of  all
dispomtions  it  is  that  which  is  most  needed  to  begin  with.  It  is  that  which  is
needed  against  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart.  It  is  that  which  is  needed  against
the  delusive  lies  of  Satan.  If  we  accept  of  the  love  of  the  truth,  if  we  have  the  dis-
position to  know  the  truth  about  ourselves,  and  to  follow  the  Divine  leading — and
God  promises  us  this  disposition — then  we  shall  certainly  be  led  on  to  salvation.  But  if
we  do  not  accept  of  the  love  of  the  truth,  if  we  have  the  disposition  to  flatter  ourselves,
and  to  follow  some  ignis fatuus  of  our  own  imagination — and  that  is  only  too  natural  to
us — we  shall  as  certainly  be  led  on  to  destruction.  (2)  Wliat  they  induce,  "  And  for
this  cause  God  sendeth  them  a  working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie :  that  they
all  might  be  judged  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  righteousness."
Beceiving  not  the  truth,  it  was  not  with  them  as  though  the  offer  had  not  been  made
to  them.  There  was  induced  a  state  of  judicial  blindness.  As  it  was  induced  in  con-
nection with  the  Divine  offer  which  was  refused,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Divine
laws  in  their  nature,  it  could  be  attributed  to  God.  It  could  be  said  that  God
sent  them  a  working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie.  Christianity  is  the
most  reasonable,  most  beautiful  thing  in  existence.  But  when  men  are  in  a  state  of
judicial  blindness,  they  do  not  see  its  reasonableness  and  beauty ;  they  believe  men
who  lie  about  it,  and  treat  it  with  indifference,  or  disdain,  or  hatred.  This  can  only
lead  on  to  their  being  judged  and  condemned,  the  ground  of  their  condemnation
being  their  not  believing  the  truth  especially  about  Christ,  but  taking  pleasure  in
unrighteousness.  Let  us  see,  then,  that  we  accept  the  great  offer  from  God  of  veracity,
of  love  for  the  truth.  Let  us  be  willing  to  take  a  truthful  view  of  things ;  not  taking
darkness  for  light,  and  evil  for  good.  Let  us  be  willing  to  follow  the  Divine  leading.
Let  us  especially  be  open  toward  Christ — toward  the  eflicacy  of  his  blood,  toward
the  convincing  power  of  his  teachings,  toward  the  enjoyment  of  his  fellowship.
And,  if  the  antiehristian  manifestation  goes  forward  around  us,  let  us  be  all  the  more
decided  on  the  side  of  Christ. — B.  F.

Vers.  13 — 17. — Exhortation  to  steadfastness,  I.  How  grounded.  1.  The  election
of  the  Thessalonians.  "  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway  for  you,  brethren
beloved  of  the  Lord,  for  that  God  chose  you  from  the  beginning  unto  salvation."  This
is  another  overflowing  of  gratitude  for  the  Thessalonians,  who  are  described  not,  as  in
1  Thess.  i.  4,  as  "  brethren  beloved  of  GKkI,''  but  as  **  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,"  i.e,
sharing  with  Paul  and  his  colleagues  in  the  special  love  and  care  of  him  who  presides
over  the  brotherhood.  There  is  the  same  inward  binding  that  there  was  before  (ch.  L  3)
to  give  thanks  to  Gk)d,  and  to  give  thanks  to  God  alway.  What  gave  perpetual  matter
of  thanksgiving,  as  in  1  Thess.  i.  4,  was  the  election  of  the  Thessalonians.  There  is  not
brought  in  here,  as  there  is  there,  their  being  chosen  out  of  a  condition  of  sin,  but  it  is
implied  in  their  being  chosen  imto  a  condition  of  salvation.    They  had  been  chosen  from


CH.  IT.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  43

the  beginning,  ».c.  from  eternity.  When  God  contemplated  the  creation  of  a  race  of
men,  and  contemplated  at  the  same  time  the  incursion  of  evil  into  hnman  nature  and
human  history,  he  also  contemplated  human  salvation.  It  was  also  within  the  Divine
plan  (going  out  into  all  particulars)  that  the  Thessalonians  among  others  should  be
saved.  2.  Means  of  the  realization  of  their  election.  (1)  Inward  means,  (a)  From  the
Spirit.  "  In  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  Precedence  is  naturally  given  to  the  work
of  the  Spirit.  For  we  must  feel  that,  if  God  had  not  approached  us  first,  we  never
should  have  approached  him.  The  work  of  the  Spirit,  from  beginning  to  end,  is  a
work  of  sanctification.  It  is  a  saving  work,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  reclamation  of  our
nature  from  unholy  uses.  On  the  positive  side  it  is  the  fitting  our  nature  for  Divine
uses.  As  the  Spirit  is  the  Agent  of  our  sanctification,  his  all-sufficient  help  must  be
entirely  depended  upon.  (6)  From  themselves,  "  And  belief  of  the  truth."  In  election
we  are  responsible  for  our  state  of  mind.  The  Spirit  works  on  our  mind  through  the
truth.  We  may  think  of  the  truth  that  Gk)d  has  provided  salvation  for  us.  We
may  also  think  of  the  truth  that  God  (according  to  ver.  10)  has  made  us  the  offer
of  the  love  of  the  truth.  We  may  further  think  of  the  Divine  ideal  to  which  our  life
is  to  bo  brought  up.  The  Spirit  has  sovereign  power  in  the  presentation  of  truth  to
the  mind;  and  what  we  have  to  do  is  to  be  receptive,  to  offer  no  obstacle  to  his
presentation  of  the  truth.  And  we  are  sanctified  only  in  so  far  as  we  have  received
the  truth  into  us.  ,  (2)  Outward  means.  "  Whereunto  he  called  you  through  our
gospel."  The  gospel  is  especially  the  offer  of  salvation  on  the  ground  of  Christ's
death.  It  was  their  gospel,  as  that  in  connection  with  which  they  served  God.  There
was  Divine  sovereignty,  in  the  Thessalonians  being  favoiured  with  the  gosijel.  It  was
by  circumstances  over  which  they  had  no  control  that  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy
were  sent  to  Thessalonica.  These  servants  of  Christ  stood  forward  and  preached  the
gospel  to  them,  and  it  was  when  they  received  it  as  a  message  from  God  that  they
were  called  to  salvation.  From  that  point  their  calling  dated.  There  is  added  the
outward  aspect  of  the  salvation  to  which  they  were  called.  "  To  the  obtuning  of  the
glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  characteristic  of  the  Epistle.  The  glory  to
which  we  are  called  is  the  glory  'which  is  possessed  by  Christ,  ana  which  he,  as  sove-
reign Dispenser,  is  to  make  our  possession.  We  are  to  be  glorified  with  nothing  less
than  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  will  be  seen  that  God,  in  electing,  has  in  contemphition
all  the  means  of  the  election  being  realized.  We  may  assure  ourselves  of  belonging
to  the  number  of  the  elect,  in  so  far  as  we  have  evidence  of  our  election  in  our
sanctification.

U.  How  PUT.  "  So  then,  brethren,  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which  ye
were  taught,  whether  by  word,  or  Epistle  of  ours."  Election  contemplating  the  means
of  its  realization  in  faith,  it  is  not  improper  to  found  upon  election  an  exportation  to
steadfastness.  They  had  taken  up  their  Christian  position.  Attempts  would  be  made
in  the  way  of  persecution  to  move  them  away  from  their  position.  The  ill-grounded
expectation  of  the  immediate  coming  was  fraught  with  perils  to  them.  It  was  already
having  a  bad  effect  upon  some  in  making  them  idle.  It  would  be  trying,  to  think  that
it  was  well  grounded  and  not  to  have  it  realized.  It  would  even  be  trying,  to  know
that  it  was  ill  grounded  and  to  have  to  give  it  up.  There  would  be  danger  of  religioaB
excitement  being  followed  by  reaction.  Let  them  beware,  then,  of  apostatizing ;  let
them  stand  fast.  The  way  in  which  they  were  to  stand  fast  was  by  holding  fast  the
traditions.  By  the  "  traditions  "  wo  are  to  understand  the  truths  handed  to  men.  For
instance,  there  was  the  revelation  which  was  necessary  for  the  stablishing  of  the
Thessalonians,  that  there  was  to  be  an  apostasy  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  In  the
traditions  they  had  been  instructed  both  oraily  and  by  writing.  We  are  limited  to
the  latter  mode  of  instniction.  What  are  known  as  ecclesiastical  traditions  have
not  independent  authority,  but  have  to  be  test^  by  the  written  Word.  All  our  oral
instruction  has  to  be  founded  upon  the  written  Word.  By  being  in  writing,  the  truths
handed  to  us  are  preserved  from  corruption.  We  know  that  we  have  them  in  the
form  in  which  God  wishes  us  to  have  them.  It  is  difficult  to  escape  the  infiuenoe  of
traditional  interpretation.  Yet  there  is  always  the  opportunity  of  a  true  interpretation,
while  we  have  the  text  as  it  was  left  by  inspired  men.  The  written  Word  is  one
of  the  great  boons  conferred  on  men.  It  is  a  great  advantage  to  a  child  that  he  has
not  everything  to  learn  for  himself,  but  has  the  benefit  of  the  experience  of  his  parenta.


44  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ii.  1—17.


So  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  us,  that  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  childish  and  foolish
thoughts,  but  that  we  have  the  written  instructions  of  our  heavenly  Father.  It  is  by
holding  to  these  written  instructions,  as  an  unchanging  element  in  the  midst  of  all
the  tests  to  which  we  are  subjected,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  temptations  to  which  we
are  exposed,  that  we  shall  be  enabled  valiantly  to  maintain  our  Cnristian  position.

III.  How  FOLLOWED  UP.  Invocation  of  the  Divine  blessing.  1.  How  God  is  invoked,
(1)  In  the  Second  Person.  *'  Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself."  From  evangelical
activity  there  is  a  rise  first  to  the  Mediator  and  lordly  Dispenser  of  blessings  in  the
Church.  After  the  preachers  have  done  their  best  for  the  Thessalonians,  they  have
the  painful  consciousness  left  that  they  are  impotent  in  themselves.  At  Corinth  Paul
planted,  Apollos  watered,  but  God  gave  the  increase.  So  Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy,
feeling  that  they,  in  speaking  and  writing  to  the  Thessalonians,  were  only  held  by  him
who  holds  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand,  implore  his  help  to  make  their  activity
successful.  '*  Our  Lord  Jesus  Chnst  himself  accomplish  what  we  are  aiming  at  for
them.  Let  his  almighty  efiBcacy  be  communicated  through  our  feeble  instrumentality."
If  we  would  do  any  good  to  any  in  whom  we  are  interested,  Christ  must  do  it  for  us.
His  high  priestly  service  must  be  recognized  by  us.  Therefore  let  us  ever  rise  above
our  mere  wishing  and  striving  for  others  to  him  who  can  make  our  wishing  and
striving  effectual.  (2)  In  the  First  Person,  (a)  Ilis  fatherhood.  "  And  Gcd  our
Father."  From  evangelical  activity  there  is  a  rise,  through  the  Mediator,  to  him  who
is  the  Final  Reason  and  Contriver  of  redemption.  We  have  some  iufluencc  with  Gk)d
when  we  can  call  him  our  Father.  We  naturally  expect  to  have  more  influence  with
a  friend  than  with  a  stranger.  We  can  appeal  to  him  as  a  friend.  We  can,  if  need
be,  intercede  on  the  score  of  friendship  and  long  acquaintance.  So  we  can  appeal
to  God  as  our  Father,  to  bless  not  only  ourselves  but  others.  And,  should  every  other
appeal  fail,  surely  this  shall  not  fail.  When  the  cry  comes  up  on  behalf  of  his  needy
children,  **  Our  Father,  wilt  thou  not  bless  ?"  surely  he  will  not  turn  away  his  ear,  (6)
Wherein  it  was  manifested.  *'  Which  loved  us."  This  is  timed  in  the  past,  and  calls
up  the  great  act  of  love — the  gift  of  the  Son.  Our  Father,  who  gave  his  Son  for  U8«
We  can  behold  in  this  how  God  can  love.  Some  would  represent  it  as  very  un-
iiitherly.  But,  apart  from  the  Son's  unforced  consent,  there  is  this  consideration,  that,
where  there  is  true  fatherly  feeling,  it  is  not  more  easy  to  sacrifico  a  son  than  to
sacrifice  one's  self.  David  felt  this  when  he  uttered  his  lamentation  over  Absalom:
"  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  I "  We  must  hold  that,
loving  the  Son  infinitely,  the  Father  could  as  well  have  sacrificed  himself  as  his
Son.  The  marvel  and  mystery  is,  that,  loving  his  Son  infinitely,  he  could  be  moved
to  sacrifice  him  for  us  his  undeserving  creatures.  But  surely  by  this  act  of  devotion
the  love  of  God  for  us  is  placed  for  ever  beyond  all  doubt.  In  presence  of  the  cross,
to  doubt,  or  to  act  as  though  we  doubted,  that  G^d  loves  us,  is  doing  him  the  most
glaring  injustice,  (c)  What  it  ohlained  for  its.  "And  gave  us  eternal  comfort**
There  is  no  hiding  it,  that  it  is  comfort  that  we  all  need.  There  is  an  evil  heart,  to
keep  us  from  being  happy.  It  gives  rise  to  slavish  fear  of  God  and  forebodings  of
judgment.  There  is  also  an  evil  world,  which  alone  is  suflScient  to  keep  us  from  being
perfectly  happy.  It  is  an  evil  world,  whore  there  is  exposure  to  poverty,  to  sickness,
to  bereavement,  to  death.  It  is  an  evil  world,  where,  with  sensitive  spirits,  we  have  to
look  forth  on  so  much  sin  and  wretchedness.  Where,  then,  is  the  comfort  ?  There
is  no  real  comfort  for  a  guilty  conscience  in  ignorance  or  distraction.  It  is  unsub-
stantial comfort,  to  know  that  our  sufifering  is  common.  There  is  some  substantial
comfort  in  the  sympathy  of  our  fellow-men,  but  it  is  variable.  Wo  may  not  find
friends  all  that  wo  would  desire  them  to  be  to  us.  Those  by  whom  we  are  most
comforted  may  be  taken  away,  and  wo  have  to  bo  comforted  for  their  loss.  But  there
is  comfort  provided  by  eternal  love,  and  comfort  that  is  eternal  in  its  nature.  There
is  comfort  in  knowing  that  our  great  Substitute  has  made  full  satisfaction  for  our
sin.  There  is  comfort  in  knowing  that  wo  are  clasped  to  the  heart  of  tho  everlasting
Father.  That  is  comfort  which  is  neither  deceitful  nor  fleeting.  It  is  sufficient  for
us  amid  all  the  cares  of  life.  It  is  independent  of  all  contingencies.  "And  good
hope.**  Comfort  refers  to  time  present ;  hope  refers  to  time  future.  Beyond  all  that
we  have  of  good  and  of  comfort  under  evil,  there  is  hope.  And  what  is  this  hope  ?
It  is  the  hope  of  our  real  joys  being  perfected,  of  our  being  delivered  from  tho  plague


CH.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  46


of  an  evil  heart  and  the  burden  of  an  evil  world,  of  our  being  placed  where  there
wiU  be  no  more  need  of  comfort — in  the  presence  of  the  eternal  Love.    It  is  also  a  good
hope,  in  its  being  well  founded — not  founded  on  our  own  thoughts,  but  founded  on
the  character  and  work  and  promise  of  God.    It  is  a  hope  which  is  even  now  good
in  its  cheering  influence  upon  our  hearts,    (d)  Obtained  without  deserving  of  ours.
"  Through  grace."    The  comfort  is  not  self-created  ;  we  have  had  nothing  to  do  wiUi
the  procuring  of  it    But,  seeing  it  has  been  graciously  provided  for  us  by  eternal
Love,  we  have  good  reason  for  taking  it  in  the  whole  benefit  into  our  hearts.    The
hope  is  one  which  we  could  not  have  dared  to  cherish  of  ourselves.    It  is  far  beyond
anything  that  we  could  have  thought  of.    But  we  cannot  limit  the  grace  of  God.
If  it  is  his  good  pleasure  to  give  us  this  hope,  we  have  good  reason  for  cherishing  it.
2.  For  what  end  Ood  is  invoked.     (1)    To  bless  the  Thessalonians  with  comfort,
"  Comfort  your  hearts."    There  is  another  incidental  proof  here  of  the  Divinity  of
our  Lord  in  the  use  of  a  singular  verb,  while  both  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  God  our
Father  are  the  subject.    The  hearts  of  the  Thessalonians  were  full  of  hopes  and  fears  in
view  of  the  coming  which  was  thought  to  be  imminent ;  comfort  is,  therefore,  invoked
for  their  hearts.    It  cannot  but  be  congenial  to  God  to  comfort  the  Church.    *'  Comfort
ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.    Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and
cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned :  for  she
hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."    Having  provided  the  comfort
in  Christ,  he  must  best  know  how,  through  Christ,  to  apply  it  to  our  need.     (2)
To  bless  them  also  with  stability.    "  And  stablish  them."    Comfort  is  invoked  partly
with  a  view  to  stability.    When  we  are  uncomforted  we  are  unstable  as  water.    Our
energies  are  relaxed,  and  we  are  imfitted  for  our  work.     Sorrow  is  weakness,  but
comfort  is  strength.    Double  sphere  in  which  stability  is  invoked  for  them,    (a)  Work,
"  In  every  good  work."    It  was  not  unnecessary  that  they  should  be  reminded  that
they  were  called  to  work,  even  to  work  with  their  hands.    God  grant  them  all  the
good  elements  which  belong  to  work.    Let  the  simplest  work  be  done  honestly.    Let
not  their  works  "  with  self  be  soiled."    Let  them  be  done  imto  the  glory  of  Qod,
In  these,  and  in  all  the  elements  of  good  work,  let  them  be  confirmed,    (b)  Wwd,
'*  And  woi-d."    Good  speaking  is  even  more  difficult  than  good  acting.    "  If  any  man
ofifend  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man."    Gt>d  grant  them  all  the  good  elements
which  belong  to  speaking.    Let  every  word  be  characterized  by  truthfulness.    Let  it
also  have  fitness;   for  "a  word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  pictures  of
silver."    Let  it  also  have  wholesomeness,  and  not  be  like  bad  fruit.    Let  it  breathe
kindliness.    Let  it  breathe  loyalty  to  Christ.    In  these,  and  in  all  the  elements  of  good
speaking,  let  them  be  confirmed. — R.  F.

Vers.  1,  2. — A  great  delusion.  One  object,  perhaps  the  principal  object,  of  this
Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  following  as  it  does  so  closely  upon  the  First
Epistle,  is  to  correct  a  disturbing  error  that  was  obtaining  some  considerable  footing
among  the  Macedonian  Christians.

I.  THE  GREAT  DELUSION.  The  First  Epistle  contains  repeated  references  to  an
expectation  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ  which  was  evidently  very  strong  in  the
Thessalonian  Church.  The  wish  is  father  to  the  thought.  From  expecting  "  the  day
of  the  Lord  "  to  arrive  at  any  moment,  some  had  been  led,  on  most  insufficient  evidence,
to  ask  whether  it  had  not  already  come.  The  great  delusion  was  that  *'  the  day  of  the
Lord  is  now  presents*  It  is  not  likely  that  any  supposed  Christ  to  have  come,  though
in  an  invisible  way,  and  in  a  different  manner  from  which  it  was  expected,  or  that  they
thought  he  might  have  come  to  another  place,  unseen  and  unknown  to  the  Churches  of
northern  Greece.  What  they  were  inclined  to  think  seems  to  have  been  that  the  new
era  in  which  Christ  was  to  appear  had  already  dawned,  though  he  himself  had  not  yet
come.  Similar  is  the  delusion  of  any  who  suppose  that  the  day  of  grace  is  over  and
the  time  of  judgment  come,  or  that  of  those  who  think  they  have  got  into  a  new  dis-
pensation  beyond  the  dispensation  of  the  New  Testament.

II.  The  sources  op  the  delusion.  1.  Latter-day  prophecy.  The  expression
*'  either  by  spirit "  seems  to  refer  to  the  supposed  inspiration  of  Christian  prophets.
St.  Paul  had  previously  warned  his  friends  to  prove  all  things,  while  not  quenching  tho
Spirit  by  despising  prophesyings  (1  Thcss.  v.  19 — 21).    We  must  beware  of  self-


46        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [cH.  IL  1—17.

deluded  fiEmatics  as  well  as  of  deliberate  deceivers.  2.  Fahe  apostolical  tradUicn,
"  By  word  '*  probably  means  by  reported  word  of  St.  Paul,  which  word,  however,  never
leally  came  from  him.  Thus  early  were  false  traditions  afloat.  See  the  mistaken
tradition  about  St.  John  (John  xzi.  23).  If  these  erroneous  traditions  were  current
during  the  lifetime  of  the  apostles,  how  can  we  accept  so-called  "apostolic  tradition*
as  an  authority  7  3,  A  forged  Epistle,  The  mistake  could  scarcely  have  arisen  from
our  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  since  that  Epistle  referred  to  the  great  day  as
future,  while  the  error  made  it  present  It  is  important  to  ascertain  the  authenticity
of  the  books  of  Scripture.

ni.  The  danoeb  of  the  dxlttbiok.  Si»  Pbul  warns  against  it  as  something  to  be
carefully  avoided.  Many  evils  attached  to  it.  1.  Erroneous  views.  These  are  bad
in  themselves,  as  true  views  are  desirable  on  their  own  account.  The  soul  suffers  for
want  of  truth  as  the  body  for  want  of  light.  2.  Dishonouring  conceptions  of  the  second
advent.  If  the  day  were  already  come,  where  was  the  glory,  the  judgment,  the  rectifi-
cation of  all  things?  False  doctrines  dishonour  Christ  even  when  they  are  meant  to
glorify  him.  3.  Confusion  of  conduct.  Such  a  delusion  as  that  which  was  creeping
mto  the  Thessalonian  Church  would  disarrange  all  practical  life.  Delusions  about  the
second  advent  distract  attention  from  sober  Christian  work.

rV.  The  WARNiNa  against  the  delusion.  1.  Form  no  hasty  opinion,  *'  Be  not
quickly  shaken,"  etc.  Specious  arguments  should  be  examined  at  leisure  before  they
are  adopted.  2.  Do  not  permit  novel  teaching  to  give  distress.  If  the  heart  is  well
settled  in  Christian  truth,  though  the  mind  should  be  open  to  receive  new  light,  no
distress  or  disturbance  need  be  felt.  3.  Beware  of  deception,  "  Let  no  man  beguile
you."  Christians  should  be  watchful  and  ''wise  as  serpents,"  each  having  his  own
independent  convictions. — W.  F.  A.

Yer.  8. — TTie  man  of  sin.  The  man  of  sin  and  his  awful  character  and  career,  here
described  by  St.  Paul,  are  subjects  of  such  deep  and  dreadful  mystery,  that  we  may
well  take  warning  from  the  intricate  confusion  of  the  interpretations  put  forth  by  those
peo|de  who  profess  to  expound  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  and  content  ourselves  with
accepting  the  prediction  as  it  stands  without  attempting  to  identify  it  with  particular
historical  events.  Though  some  of  its  terms  apply  well  to  certain  explanations,  and
others  to  difierent  explanations,  no  explanation  has  yet  been  furnished  which  fairly  and
without  any  straining  of  words  covers  the  whole  of  them.  From  Nero  to  the  pope,  from
the  days  of  the  siego  of  Jerusalem  to  those  of  the  yet  future  millennium,  certain  odious
persons  and  systems  have  been  selected  for  a  realization  of  the  prophecy.  Leaving
these  dubious  identifications,  let  us  look  at  the  main  outlines  of  the  picture.

L  Theee  IB  A  MAN  OF  BIK.  Whether  be  lived  in  the  past  or  has  yet  to  appear,  a
man  to  whom  this  awful  name  belongs  is  described  in  inspired  Scripture.  The  Bible
does  not  ignore  the  awful  depths  of  numan  wickedness.  It  is  dreadfully  significant
that  this  evil  being  is  a  man,  not  a  devil.  Humanity,  which  was  created  in  the  image
of  Gk)d  and  intended  to  be  a  temple  of  God,  may  be  degraded  into  the  image  of  Satan
and  become  a  haunt  of  iniquity.  As  good  works  through  human  sympathies,  so  does
evil.  A  bad  man  is  more  dangerous  than  a  fallen  angel,  because  he  is  nearer  to  his
fellow-men.

n.  The  MAN  OP  BIN  FOLLOWS  AN  APOSTASY.  1.  Spiritual  apostasy  leads  a  man  to
moral  corruption.  The  man  who  has  forsaken  Christ  is  tempted  to  fall  into  gross  sin.
Faith  is  the  great  preservative  of  morals.  2.  Apostasy  lays  the  Church  open  to  attacks
from  her  enemies.  The  **  man  of  sin  "  could  not  arise  before  the  Church  had  fallen,  nor
if  he  had  appeared  could  he  have  had  any  power  against  a  faithful  Church.

III.  The  man  op  bin  fbecedes  the  second  advent  op  Christ.  It  was  a  mistake
on  the  part  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  to  suppose  that  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  had
arrived,  because  the  dreadful  appearance  of  the  man  of  sin  which  was  to  precede  that
day  had  not  yet  been  seen.  St.  Paul  warns  us  that  apostasy  and  the  frightful  life  of
this  wicked  man — whoever  ho  may  be — must  come  before  Christ  returns.  He  does
not  encourage  us  to  look  for  a  gradual,  unbroken  progress  of  Christianity.  The  growth
of  the  harvest  fruit  is  arrested  and  delayed  by  frost  and  storm.  Christ  even  wondered
whether  he  should  find  any  faith  left  on  the  earth  at  his  return  (Luke  xviii.  8).  The
glorious  consummation  of  all  things  to  which  the  Christian  looks  forward  is  not  to  be


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         47

expected  as  the  result  of  quiet  improvement  without  relapse.  Between  the  present  and
that  "great  Divine  event ^  dark  chasms  of  iniquity  yawn.  Every  age  has  thought  it
could  detect  signs  of  this  evil  in  its  midst  So  the  unbelief  and  corruptions  of  our
own  day  are  taken  by  some  to  be  "  signs."  Unhappily  the  language  of  the  apostle
warns  us  to  expect  more  terribly  demonstrative  signs  than  any  yet  seen.

IV.  The  appeabanck  of  the  man  op  sm  is  a  sign  of  the  APPBOACHiKa  advent  op
Chbist.  Here  is  some  encouragement  for  the  Church  to  endure  the  trials  of  the  darkest
times.  These  times  are  to  usher  in  the  great  and  glorious  day  of  the  Lord.  Evil,  when
most  triumphant,  is  nearest  defeat.  Dreadful  as  may  be  its  transient  success,  it  will
soon  be  swept  away.  When  the  horror  of  sin  is  blackest,  the  judgment  which  is  to
sweep  it  away  is  nearest  at  hand.  Christ  will  come  again  when  he  will  be  most  needed.
— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  7, 8. — The  mystery  of  lawlessneas.  The  exact,  objective  application  of  this
prediction,  like  that  of  the  preceding  description,  is  not  easy  to  discover.  But  principles
are  involved  which  are  susceptible  of  general  application.

I.  These  is  a  mystery  of  lawlessness.  By  this  expression  the  apostle  probably
means  a  mystery  the  character  of  which  is  lawless.  1.  We  may  expect  to  meet  with
new  mysteries.  While  time  and  inquiry  resolve  some  mysteries,  they  bring  upon  us
fresh  ones.  We  are  not  to  expect  to  be  able  to  imderstand  all  the  forces  and  influences
with  which  we  are  surrounded.  It  is  enough  that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  God  who
knows  all,  and  trusting  in  Christ  who  can  lead  us  safely  through  the  darkness.  2.
New  mysteries  may  he  characterized  hy  new  lawlessness.  The  answer  to  our  inquiries
may  be  very  unsatisfactory  in  revealing  only  evil.  There  are  strange  novelties  which
are  obscure  in  all  points  but  their  moral  character,  and  that  is  plainly  evil.  If  so,  we  may
hope  for  no  good  from  them,  and  need  not  further  interest  ourselves  in  them.  3.  AU
lawlessness  is  mysterious.  How  did  it  originate?  How  is  its  existence  possible?
Why  does  not  God  sweep  it  away  ?  These  questions  have  perplexed  men  in  aU  ages.
We  bow  before  them  in  helpless,  pained  wonder.

n.  Thebe  is  a  bestbaint  on  the  mysteby  of  lawlessness.  1.  Its  full  power  is
not  yet  revealed.  There  are  those  who  treat  all  sin  with  imbecoming  levity,  because
they  do  not  yet  see  its  terrible  fruits.  They  are  playing  with  a  torpid  adder,  that  may
awake  at  any  moment  and  inflict  a  fatal  wound.  No  one  knows  what  hidden  possi-
bilities of  harm  lurk  in  the  deep  caverns  of  undeveloped  sin.  There  are  volcanoes  in
the  hearts  of  some  quiet  men  which  may  burst  into  destructive  fires.  2.  Human
means  may  he  used  to  restrain  the  mystery  of  lawlessness.  Government,  law,  society,
healthy  habits  of  the  majority,  keep  it  down  for  a  time.  3.  Qod  holds  the  mystery  of
lawleuness  in  cheek.  He  is  supreme  over  its  wildest  ra^g.  '*  He  that  sitteth  in  the
heavens  shall  laugh."    GK)d  restrains  the  superabundant  wrath  of  man  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).

nL  The  hidden  mtstebt  of  lawlessness  wiMi  be  bevealsd.  The  volcano  must
break  into  eruption  some  day.  Evil  cannot  slumber  for  ever.  Hypocrisy  will  tire  of
its  meek,  innocent  demeanour.  The  harvest  of  sin  will  have  to  be  reaped.  Let  not
any  man  put  his  confidence  in  the  secretness  or  slowness  of  the  processes  of  evil.
The  more  they  are  hidden  now,  the  worse  will  be  the  appalling  outburst  of  them  when
the  restraint  under  which  they  groan  at  present  is  released.  The  longer  the  wild
horses  are  held  in  by  the  leash,  the  fiercer  will  be  their  mad  gallop  when  they  break
loose.

IV.  Chbist  will  conqueb  the  mysteby  of  lawlessness.  Evil  will  not  long  be
rampant.  One  fearful  rebellion  and  then  a  tremendous  defeat.  1.  Christ  is  to  he  the
Conqueror  of  it.  Ho  came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  We  could  not  effect  this
sreatwork.  He,  our  Saviour,  does  it  for  us.  2.  Christ  is  to  come  again  for  this  ohfect.
When  the  mystery  is  revealed,  Christ's  '*  manifestation  "  follows.  3.  Christ  conquers
with  a  breath.  His  first  work  was  difficult,  involving  his  death.  His  last  work  will  be .
divinely  simple,  and  yet  sublimely  successful. — ^W.  F.  A.

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  love  of  the  truth.  The  reason  for  the  doom  of  those  who  are  to
be  destroyed  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ  here  given,  is  that  they  do  not  receive  thei
love  of  the  truth.

L  Qod  expects  us  to  beceive  the  love  of  the  tbuth.    1.  Truth  is  good  in


48  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  u.  1—17.


itself.  Truth  is  to  the  soul  what  light  is  to  the  body.  It  is  natural  for  men  to  love  the
day,  unnatural  for  them  to  shun  it.  In  a  right  and  healthy  state  we  should  lo^e  truth
simply  as  truth,  whatever  else  it  be.  2.  Christian  truth  is  peculiarly  attractive.
Scientific  truth  is  beautiful,  philosophic  truth  is  valuable ;  but  the  truth  of  the  gospel
has  far  deeper  attractions,  because  it  contains  revelation  of  the  love  and  fatherhood  of
Ood,  of  the  grace  and  goodness  of  Christ,  of  the  redemption  of  the  world,  of  the  way  of
salvation,  of  the  heavenly  rest,  etc.  8.  Truth  should  be  welcomed  with  love.  We  cannot
accept  it  to  any  advantage  until  we  love  it ;  for  (1)  love  opens  our  eyes  to  a  synnn-
thetic  understanding  of  it,  and  ^2)  love  saves  us  from  a  cold,  barren  acceptance  of  it,
and  helps  us  to  receive  it  profitably.

IL  It  IS  AN  EVIL  HEART  THAT  PBEVEKT8  HEN  FROM  BEOEIVINa  THE  LOVE  OF  THE

TRUTH.  St  Paul  traces  back  the  bad  condition  of  those  who  reject  the  love  of  the
truth  to  the  fact  that  they  "  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness."  The  pleasures  of  sin
cannot  exist  side  by  side  with  the  love  of  the  truth.  Evil  hates  the  light  (John  iii.
19).  Moral  corruption  has  no  sympathy  for  the  lofty  thirst  for  truth  of  a  pure  souL
Hence  it  may  be  concluded  that  indifierence  to  truth  is  a  sign  of  moral  eviL  The
corrupt  life  is  a  false  life,  and  its  departure  from  truth  reveals  the  baseness  of  the
character  beneath.  This  is  why  the  rejection  of  the  truth  is  culpable.  Intellectual
doubt  is  of  quite  a  different  character.  Indeed,  it  often  arises  from  genuine  love  of
truth,  while  self-satisfied  orthodoxy  is  often  quite  indifferent  to  verifiable  facts,
preferring  respectable  error  to  painful  truth.

III.  The    PENALTY    OF    REJECTING    THE    LOVE    OF    THE    TRUTH   18   INCAPACITT   TO

KNOW  TRUTH  FROM  ERROR.  God  puulshcs  men  in  this  condition  by  sending  "  them  a
working  of  error,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie."  This  is  an  awful  fate.  Ttuth  is  too
precious  a  pearl  to  be  cast  before  swine.  They  who  do  not  love  it  shall  not  have  it.
Liars  become  incapable  of  knowing  truth.  The  habit  of  indifference  to  truth  so  grows
upon  some  people  that  the  whole  idea  of  truth  becomes  obscure  and  meaningless  to  them,
and  they  ask  with  Pilate,  half  bewildered,  half  scornful,  "  What  is  truth  ? "  Is  not
this  a  veritable  destruction — the  spiritual  eye  blinded  and  burnt  out  by  the  fires  of
falsehood  and  unrighteousness ;  the  highest  intellectual  faculty,  that  of  grasping  truth,
killed  by  corruption  and  falsehood?  €rod  save  us  all  from  this  hideous  doom! —
W.  F.  A.

Vers.  13, 14. — The  Divine  work  of  salvation.  We  are  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  the
happy  spiritual  prospects  of  our  fellow-Christians,  because  they  all  spring  from  his  good
purpose  and  work.  The  most  striking  characteristic  of  the  description  before  us  is  its
attributing  the  whole  process  from  beginning  to  end  to  the  will  and  action  of  Orod,

h  The  BEGiNNiNa.  1.  An  initiaZ  Divine  choice.  This  dates  back  to  the  dim  ages
of  an  awful  antiquity.  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  In
the  beginning  was  the  Word.  In  the  beginning  Gtxi  chose  his  people  for  himself.
Salvation  is  no  after-thought  coming  in  to  redeem  the  failure  of  creation.  It  was  all
planned  from  the  first.  When  God  made  man  he  foresaw  sin  and  determined  on
redemption.  Each  one  of  us  is  thought  of  by  God  from  the  first.  We  come  into  the
world  to  fulfil  vocations  which  God  designed  for  us  when  he  first  planned  the  universe.
2.  A  present  Divine  call.  The  choice  would  be  of  no  use  if  it  were  not  made  known  to
us.  But  when  the  time  for  executing  God's  great  design  has  arrived,  he  makes  it
suflBciently  known  for  us  to  be  able  to  follow  it.  He  calls  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.
The  gospel,  then,  is  an  invitation.  It  is  good  news,  but  only  for  those  who  will  accept
the  invitation.  This  new  gospel  came  to  bid  men  fulfil  an  ancient  destiny.  The  latest
work  accomplishes  the  oldest  thought  of  God.

II.  The  process.  1.  Sanctification  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the  Divine  ade  of  the
process.  Prior  to  it  is  the  great  atoning  work  of  Christ.  But  that  work  is  done  for  us
that  we  may  receive  the  Spirit  of  God  as  its  fruit.  Now  we  are  looking  at  the  work
of  God  in  us.  Gt)d  purifies  and  consecrates  his  people  by  an  inspiration  of  his  own
Spirit.  No  safety  is  possible  to  the  guilty,  no  glory  to  the  unholy.  The  cleansing
process  must  come  before  the  great  end  can  be  reached.  2.  Belief  of  the  truth.  This
is  our  side  of  the  process.  It  is  useless  for  us  to  wait  for  our  sanctification  and  for  the
baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  to  produce  it.  It  will  not  come  without  our  active
reception  of  it.    There  is  no  magic  about  the  process  of  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         49

It  comes  on  certain  conditions  being  fulfilled  by  us.  (1)  Truth  is  the  vehicle  that
C3nveys  it  into  our  hearts.  (2)  Faith  is  the  door  in  our  hearts  that  opens  to
receive  it.

III.  The  knd.  1.  Salvation.  Take  this  word  in  the  largest,  roundest  sense,  as
deliverance  from  all  evil.  It  is  painfully  true  that  in  our  greatest  joy  and  thankful-
ness we  have  to  recollect  that  at  best  we  are  plucked  as  brands  from  the  burning.  No
blessing  can  be  enjoyed  till  the  awful  ruin  into  which  our  souls  were  all  of  them
sinking  through  our  great  and  dreadful  sin  has  been  stayed.  2.  Olory,  Salvation  is
the  beginning  of  God's  work  in  us ;  glory  is  the  completion  of  it.  We  can  have  no
jilory  while  we  are  in  the  mire  of  sin  and  wretchedness.  But  when  we  are  delivered,
Grod  will  not  leave  us  like  drowning  men  on  a  barren  rock,  saved  from  present  destruc-
tion indeed,  but  with  dreary  future  prospects.  He  will  not  have  ended  bis  work  with
us  till  he  has  exalted  us  into  the  region  of  his  own  glory. — ^W.  F.  A.

Vers.  16,  17. — A  benediction,  I.  The  sources  op  the  benediction.  A  true
benediction  is  more  than  an  expression  of  good  wishes.  It  is  a  prayer  by  one  who  has
especial  weight  in  intercession,  although  it  is  expressed  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is
offered.  The  benediction  of  so  great  and  good  a  man  as  St.  Paul  is  of  great  value,
because  the  "effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  But  the
blessings  desired  by  the  apostle  are  not  given  by  him  any  more  than  the  blessings  of
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  to  their  children  were  given  by  the  patriarchs.  The  sources
of  the  blessings  of  a  benediction  are  not  human  nor  earthly  at  all.  Here  they  are
declared.  1.  The  personal  influence  of  Jesus  Christ,  This  is  strikingly  expressed  by
the  reference  to  "  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself  J*  His  brotherhood  and  his  love  lead
him  to  bless  us.  His  Divinity,  his  goodness,  and  his  sacrifice  give  him  authority  in
heaven.  In  his  own  right  he  blesses.  And  he  does  not  delegate  the  blessing.  He
confers  it  himself.  2.  The  fatherhood  of  Ood,  Because  God  is  "  our  Father  "  we  may
expect  blessings  from  him.  Fears  and  doubts  arise  from  partial  views  of  G^d,  and
views  which  leave  out  of  account  his  great  fatherly  nature.  He  does  not  bless  as  a
Master  paying  wages,  but  as  a  Father  dealing  affectionately  with  his  children.

II.  The  assurances  op  the  benediction.  Grounds  for  believing  that  God  will
give  the  blessing  are  given  for  the  encouragement  of  faith.  1.  Love  in  the  past.  He
has  revealed  his  character  by  his  providence,  and  he  has  proved  in  this  way  that  ho
loves  his  children.  But  a  parent's  love  is  distinguished  from  all  other  kinds  of  love  by
its  permanence.  If  God  ever  did  love,  he  still  loves.  2.  Eternal  comfort.  This  we
have  now  in  the  peace  of  forgiveness  and  the  rest  of  faith.  The  peace  is  such  that  the
world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  The  rest  is  beneath  the  snadow  of  a  great  rock
that  outlasts  even  the  seemingly  everlasting  hills.  3.  Hope  for  the  future.  Gk)d  has
uttered  promises  and  encouraged  hopes.  We  cannot  beueve  that  ne  will  mock  the
expectations  which  he  has  raised.

III.  The  objects  of  the  benediction.  1.  Heart-comfort,  We  have  eternal  com-
fort ;  nevertheless  we  need  more  comfort.  No  soul  is  yet  perfectly  at  rest.  Sorrow
distresses  the  most  trustful.  (1)  Observe  the  "breadth  of  the  Divine  comfort.  We  may
have  it  in  some  departments  of  life  and  yet  miss  it  in  others.  The  Greek  word
paraklesis  has  a  wider,  fuller  meaning  than  our  word  "comfort."  It  stands  for  all
nelp,  and  help  in  every  direction  is  what  our  souls  need.  (2)  Note  the  home  of  the
Divine  comfort.  It  is  to  be  in  our  hearts.  Comfort  anywhere  else  is  vain.  Com-
fortable houses,  clothes,  etc.,  leave  the  deepest  trouble  untouched.  The  heart  may  be
on  a  rack  when  the  body  is  on  a  downy  couch.  (Jod's  comfort  reaches  the  heart.
2.  Stability  in  work  and  word.  We  must  not  stop  at  comfort.  We  are  consoled  in
distress  that  we  may  be  free  and  strong  and  glad  for  service.  (1)  The  service  must
come  from  the  heart.  **The  heart**  is  to  be  stablished  for  service.  (2)  It  must  be
various  and  complete — ^^ every  good  work."  (3)  It  must  extend  to  speech — "and
word."  The  Scriptures  lay  great  stress  on  a  right  use  of  speech.  (4)  It  must  be
steadfast.  This  is  the  end  of  the  benediction.  Eternal  comfort  must  be  balanced  by
steadfast  faithfulness. — W.  F.  A.


n.  THS8SAL0NIAN8.


CO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  ii.  1—17.


EXCURSUS  ON  THE  MAN  OF  SIN;


This  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  prophecies  in  the  New  Testament.  It  oocun  in
the  writings  of  St  Paul,  whose  practical  mind  constituted  him  rather  the  preacher  of
the  present  Uian  the  prophet  of  the  future.  There  is  an  obscurity  in  the  language
which,  as  already  observed,  could  not  have  been  so  great  to  those  to  whom  the  apostle
wrote,  for  he  had  previously  instructed  his  readers  in  the  nature  of  the  occurrence
(ch.  ii.  5,  6) ;  but  our  iguorance  of  these  instructions  renders  the  passage  to  us
enigmatical  and  difficult  to  understand ;  and  perhaps^  also,  this  obscurity  is  increased
by  reason  of  our  distance  from  the  time  when  the  apostle  wrote.  There  are  in  this
jffediction  several  points  requiring  consideration :  the  apostasy  or  falling  away  which
was  secretly  working  even  in  the  apostle's  days ;  a  withholding  or  restraining  influence
which  prevented  its  open  manifestation  and  full  development ;  the  advent  of  the  man
of  sin,  his  characteristics  and  final  doom.  We  shall,  first,  give  a  history  of  the  various
opinions  concerning  this  subject  in  past  ages,  and  then  consider  those  views  which  are
most  prevalent  in  our  days.

The  folloviring  is  a  literal  translation  of  the  passage,  in  accordance  with  the  exposi-
tion given  in  the  foregoing  pages:  "But  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  concerning  the
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  assembling  together  unto  him,  that  you  be
not  soon  shaken  from  your  sober  mind,  nor  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word,
nor  by  epistle  as  from  us,  to  the  effect  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  imminent'  Let  no
man  deceive  you  by  any  means,  because  that  day  shall  not  come,  except  there  come
the  apostasy  first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth
and  exalteth  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God,  or  is  an  object  of  worship ;  so  that
he  sits  in  the  temple  of  Grod,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God.  Remember  you  not  that
when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things?  And  now  you  know  what  restraineth,
that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  is  already
working,  yet  only  until  he  that  restraineth  is  removed ; '  and  then  shall  the  lawless
one  be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and
annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming;  even  him  whose  coming  is  after  the
working  of  Satan,  in  all  power  and  signs  and  wonders  of  falsehood,  and  in  all  deceit
of  unri^teousness  for  them  that  perish,  because  they  receive  not  the  love  of  the  truth,
that  they  might  be  saved.  And  for  this  cause  God  sends  to  them  the  working  of
€rror,  that  they  might  believe  the  lie ;  that  they  might  be  judged  who  believed  not  the
truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness."

According  to  these  words,  this  much  is  evident — that  the  apostle  expected  a  fiEdling
away  from  the  purity  of  Christianity.  Nor  is  this  the  only  passage  where  St.  Paul
alludes  to  such  a  declension  from  primitive  faith  and  holiness ;  there  are  allusions  to
it  in  his  other  Epistles,  but  especially  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  where  he  describes  the
apostasy  of  the  latter  days :  '*  Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the  latter

*  This  excursus  is  chiefly  an  expansion  and  revision  of  a  dissertation  on  **  The  Man  of
Sin  **  in  the  author's  work  entitled  *  Introduction  to  the  Pauline  t^pistles.'  For  dissertations
on  the  Man  of  Sin,  the  reader  is  referred  to  AKord's  *  Greek  Testament,*  vol.  iiL,  Prolegomena,
pp.  55—08,  3rd  edit;  Eadio's  *  Commentary  on  the  Thcssalonians/  pp.  329—367;  Elliott's
*Horio  Apocalypticfl9,'  vol.  iii  pp.  91,  etc.,  5th  edit;  Hurd,  *0n  Prophecy/  voL  ii.  pp.  1,
etc.,  4th  edit;  Jowett  on  the  *  Thcssalonians,*  vol.  i.  pp.  108 — 182,  1st  edit.,  pp.  178—194,
2nd  edit;  Lilnemann'a  *Briefe  an  die  Thessalonicher,*  pp.  214—229,  and  the  translation  of
the  same,  pp.  222,  etc. ;  an  article  on  "  Antichrist "  by  Sicyrick,  in  the  appendix  to  Smith's

*  Dictionary  of  the  Bible ;  *  Bishop  Newton's  *  Dissertation  on  St.  Paul's  Prophecy  of  the
Man  of  Sin ; '  Biggonbach's  dissertation  in  the  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians  in  Lange'a

*  Conunentary ; '  and  "Wordsworth's  •  Greek  Testament,'  in  loco.

*  Or  "  is  present"    (See  Exposition.)

*  Revised  Version,  "  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  already  work :  only  there  is  one
that  restraineth  now,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way"  (see  footnote  in  the  Revised
Edition).


CH.  !!•  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61

times  somo  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of
devils ;  speakinc;  lies  in  hypocrisy ;  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron ;
forbidding  to  many,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created
to  be  received  with  thanksgiving  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth  "  (1  Tim.
iv.  1 — 3).  So  also,  in  his  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy,  he  alludes  to  the  impending
nature  of  this  period  of  apostasy — the  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  already  working :
**  This  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come,"  or  rather,  "  are
present "  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 5).  And  St.  Peter  affirms  that  there  shall  arise  in  the  Church
false  teachers,  who  shall  privily  "  bring  in  damnable  heresies,  even  denying  the  Lord
that  bought  them,  and  shall  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction  '*  (2  Pet.  ii.  1) ;
and  that  *'in  the  last  days  there  shall  be  scoffers,  walking  after  their  lusts"  (2  Pet.
iii.  2).  And  a  similar  declaration  is  made  by  St.  Jude :  "  Kemember  ye  the  words
which  were  spoken  before  of  the  s^ostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  how  that  they  told
you  there  should  be  mockers  in  the  last  time,  who  should  walk  after  their  own
ungodly  lusts'*  (Jude  17, 18).  And  our  Lord  himself,  in  Lis  eschatological  discourse,
warned  his  disciples  that  there  should  arise  false  Christs  and  false  prophets  (Matt,
xxiv.  24)— a  declaration  which  probably  lies  at  the  root  of  all  similar  apocalyptic
assertions.^  In  these  passages,  however,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  a  plurality  of  false
teachers  is  asserted ;  whereas,  in  our  passage,  they  are  concentrated  in  an  individual —
the  Man  of  Sin.

Especially  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  John — there  is  express  mention  of  Antichrist  of  a
person  (or  jyersons)  who  is  the  opponent  of  Christ.  It  is  only  in  these  Epistles  that
the  word  occurs,  and  it  does  so  four  times  :  '*  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time :  and  as
ye  have  heard  that  [the]  Antichrist  shall  come,  even  now  there  are  many  Antichrists.'*
**  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ?  He  is  Antichrist,  that
denieth  the  Father  and  the  Son."  "  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ
is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God :  and  this  is  that  spirit  of  Antichrist,  whereof  ye
have  heard  that  it  should  come ;  and  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world."  "  For  many
deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the
flesh.  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  Antichrist"  (1  John  ii.  18,  22;  iv.  3;  2  John  7).
Now,  the  Man  of  Sin  of  St.  Paul  has  been  identified  with  the  Antichrist  of  St.  John.
They  agree  in  several  points :  in  both  he  is  described  as  an  individual,  whose  coming
will  be  foreshadowed  by  many  forerunners ;  ^  in  both  his  advent  is  future,  but  the  evil
principle,  the  apostasy  or  spirit  of  Antichrist,  is  already  at  work ;  and  in  both  there  is
open  opposition  to  God  and  Christ.  It  is,  however,  to  be  observed  that  in  St.  John
the  Antichristian  error  is  more  positively  stated  as  consisting  in  the  denial  that  Jesus
Christ  came  in  the  flesh, — accordingly,  as  Gnosticism,  which  we  know  was  already
secretly  corrupting  the  Church ;  and  hence  the  reason  why  some  have  connected  the
Man  of  Sin  with  the  errors  of  the  Gnostics,  whereas  it  does  not  appear  from  St.  Paul's
words  that  the  characteristics  of  the  Gnostics  correspond  with  the  characteristics  of
the  Man  of  Sin;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  denial  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  is
common  to  both.

It  would  far  exceed  the  limits  of  this  excursus  to  compare  the  Man  of  Sin  with  the
declarations  concerning  the  manifestations  of  evil  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John.  In
that  mysterious  book  there  appears  to  be  two  centres  or  impersonations  of  evil :  the
one  described  as  the  beast  coming  out  of  the  sea,  to  whom  the  dragon  gave  his  power
and  seat  and  great  authority  (Rev.  xiii.  1,2);  and  the  other,  as  another  beast  coming
out  of  the  earth,  who  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  spake  like  a  dragon  (Rev.  xiii.
11),  and  who  has  been  identified  with  the  false  prophet  (Rev.  xvi.  13 ;  xix.  20 ;  xx.  10).'
Whether  there  is  a  resemblance  between  the  Man  of  Sin  and  either  or  both  of  these
beasts,  we  do  not  inquire ;  in  both  a  manifestation  or  revelation  of  evil,  and  the  con-
centration of  it  in  an  individual  or  individuals,  is  predicted.

*  On  the  connection  between  Paul's  prediction  and  our  Lord's  prophecy,  see  De  Wette's
•  Thessalonicher,*  p.  188.

*  "The  mystery  of  iniquity  working,"  in  St.  Paul's  prophecy;  the  "many  Antichrists"  of
St  John.

*  Archdeacon  Farrar  entertains  the  strange  idea  that  the  first  beast  coming  out  of  the  sea
is  Nero ;  and  the  second  beast  coming  out  of  the  earth,  or  the  false  prophet,  is  Vespasian
(see  articles  in  the  ExpotttoTt  May  and  September,  1881).


62  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSAL0NIAN8.    [ch.  il  1—17.

Tho  prediction  of  St.  Paul  bears  a  still  more  striking  resemblance  to  the  vision  of
l>aiiiel  concerning  the  wicked  and  persecuting  king  (Dan.  xi.)  than  to  either  tho  Anti-
christ of  St.  John  or  the  beasts  of  the  Apocalypse.  That  prophecy  of  Daniel  received
its  primary  accomplishment  in  Antiochus  Epipnanes,  the  great  persecutor  of  the  Jews,
but  the  concluding  portion  is  applicable  to  a  future  opponent  of  God  and  his  people^
and  finds  its  full  accomplishment  in  him.^  Now,  the  imagery  employed  by  the  pro^met
and  the  apostle  is  the  same.  Paul  predicts  a  falling  away ;  and  Daniel  tells  us  that  the
kins  shall  **  have  intelligence  with  them  that  forsake  the  holy  covenant "  (Dan.  xi.  30).
Paul  tolls  us  that  the  I^n  of  Sin  shall  sit  in  the  temple  of  God,  displaying  himself  as
God ;  and  Daniel,  in  tho  passage  quoted  by  our  Lord,  speaks  of  the  abomination  of
desolation  being  set  up  in  the  holy  place  (Dan.  xi.  31).  Paul  foretells  that  the  Man
of  Sin  shall  oppose  and  exalt  himself  against  all  that  is  called  God  or  is  an  object  of
worship ;  and  Daniel  tells  us  that  the  king  shall  exalt  and  magnify  himself  above
every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  the  God  of  gods,  and  shall  prosper
till  the  indignation  be  accomplished  (Dan.  xi.  36).    This  resemblance  between  the

Jtcrsecuting  king  of  Daniel  and  the  Man  of  Sin  is  repeatedly  noticed  by  the  early
leathers.  Thus  Origcn  observes,  "  What  is  stated  by  Paul  in  the  words  quoted  by  him
when  he  says,  *  so  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  GKkI,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God,'
is  in  Daniel  referred  to  in  the  following  manner :  '  And  on  the  temple  shall  be  the
abomination  of  desolation,  and  at  the  end  of  time  an  end  shall  bo  put  to  the  deso-
lation *  **  (Origen,  *  Contra.  Cels.,*  vi.  46).*  There  can  hardly,  then,  be  a  reasonable
doubt  that  Paul  in  his  prediction  had  this  proi)hecy  of  Daniel  in  view.'

The  pre<liction  of  St.  Paul  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin  made  a  deep  impression  upon
tho  early  Fathers,  and  the  references  to  it  in  their  writings  are  numerous.  There  is
also  a  comparative  unanimity  in  their  sentiments.  In  general,  they  considered  that
the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  was  future ;  that  the  Man  of  Sin  was  Antichrist,  and  an
individual ;  and  that  the  restraining  influence  was  the  Roman  empire.  Justin  Martyr
sneaks  of  the  Man  of  Sin  as  the  man  of  apostasy,  who  speaks  strange  things  against  the
Most  High,  and  shall  venture  to  do  imlawful  deeds  on  earth  against  Christians  ('  DiaL
cum  lYyph.,*  c.  110).  Ircnscus  observes  '*  that  he,  being  an  apostate  and  a  robber,  is
anxious  to  be  adored  by  God ;  and  that,  although  a  mere  slave,  he  wishes  himself  to  be
proclaimed  as  a  king.  For  he,  being  endued  with  the  power  of  the  devil,  shall  come,  not
as  a  rijzhteous  king  in  subjection  to  G(.xi,  but  as  the  lawless  one ;  concentrating  in
himself  all  Satanic  apostasy,  and,  settin«;  aside  all  idols,  he  shall  persuade  men  that  he
himself  is  God  **  (*  Adv.  Uair.,'  v.  25.  1).  TertuUian  alludes  to  the  Roman  empire  as
the  restraining  power :  "  What  ol>stacle  is  there  but  the  Roman  state,  the  fallins;  away
of  which  shall  introduce  Antichrist,  for  then  shall  be  revealed  the  lawless  one ? "  ('Do
Resurr.,'  o.  24).  And  again,  **  We  Christians  are  under  peculiar  necessity  of  praying
for  the  emperors  and  for  tho  cinnpKto  stability  of  the  empire,  because  we  know  that
dreadful  power  which  hangs  over  the  world  and  the  conclusion  of  the  age,  which
threatens  tho  most  horrible  evils,  is  only  retanleil  by  the  continued  existence  of  the
Roman  empire.  This  is  what  we  would  not  exi>crience.  And,  while  we  pray  that  it
may  Iw  deferred,  we  hereby  show  our  gtxxl  will  to  tho  perpetuity  of  the  Roman  state  **
(*  A|x^l.,*  c.  32).  Hippolytus  supp^^ses  that  Antichrist  will  be  a  Jew,  belonging  to  the
tribe  of  Dan:*  "As  Christ  springs  fnnn  the  tribe  ot'  Judah,  so  Antichrist  is  to  spring
fnc^m  the  tribe  of  l^an"  (*1\»  Antichristo,'  c  14).  Cyprian  regards  Antiochus
Epiphancs  as  the  ty^x^  of  Antichrist  (' Exhort,  ad  Martyr.,*  c  11).    And  Jerome

*  Tho  Jews  considonxl  Antiochus  Epiphanci*  as  Uio  typo  of  Anticlmst,  to  whom  they  gave
tho  namo  of  Annilluiit.  Thus  tho  Tanrum  translutos  isa.  xi.  4,  **  By  the  breath  of  his
moxiUi  ho  shall  slay  Amiillus,  tho  wioki^  one."  Atw^nling  to  tlvo  Jewish  notions.  Annillus
»huU  apfxxir  in  the'  last  days;  ho  shall  bo  bom  of  a  marble  statue  in  one  of  the  churches  of
Komo:  tho  Romans  shall  aoknowUx!}^'  him  as  thoir  Mt^^iah.  and  accept  him  as  their  king;
))o  Kl\aU  make  war  with  TsraoU  and  in  tho  hittlo  that  will  ensue  Mos.<iah  K^n  Joseph  will  bo
alain :  but  Mossiah  Km  I\ivid  shall  ap{var,  and  utterly  dcsti>c«T  Annillus  and  hii  followeis.

•  tHV  alft>  Iren^UJk  *  Adr.  Hspr..'  r.  2.\  a

•  For  tho  i>N«cmblanot^  K'twotm  this  pnxliotion  of  Paul  and  tho  pi^c^phoev  of  Daniel»
iw»  Jowott  *\n  ^St  l^kuVs  Epistlocs*  tx>L  i.  p.  174,  etc^  Ist  t\lit, ;  Hofmann's  '  Schriftbeweis,'

*  Tho  Mine  ojankA  it  entotained  by  Irencus,  'Adv.  UxrV  t.  30.  2.


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECON-D  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  53

observes,  "  As  the  Saviour  had  Solomon  and  other  saints  as  types  of  his  coming,  so  we
may  rightly  believe  that  Antichrist  had,  as  a  type  of  himself,  that  most  wicked  king
Antiochus,  who  persecuted  the  saints  and  profaned  the  temple "  (on  Dan.  xi.  35).
There  was  a  diversity  of  opinion  among  them  regarding  the  meaning  of  the  temple  of
God,  in  which  the  Man  of  Sin  was  to  seat  himself.  Some  of  the  Fathers  (Chry-
Bostom,  Theodoret,  Aujiustine,  Jerome)  interpreted  the  expression  figuratively  as  de-
noting the  Christian  Church ;  whilst  others  (Irenasus,  Cyril)  took  it  literally,-  and
referred  it  to  the  temple  of  Jerusalem^  supposing  that  the  Man  of  Sin  would  rebuild
the  temple.

It  was  an  opinion  in  the  early  Church,  continuing  even  to  the  date  of  the  fourth
century,  that  Nero  was  Antichrist.  Uf  course,  such  an  opinion  cannot  refer  to  the  Man
of  Sin,  as  this  would  involve  an  anachronism ;  but  can  only  be  applied  to  Antichrist
as  described  in  the  Apocalypse.  Too  much  has  been  made  of  this  Nero  myth,  as  it  is
seldom  alluded  to  by  the  early  Fathers  until  the  close  of  the  third  century.  Nero  was
the  first  emperor  who  persecuted  the  Christians,  and  was  therefore  peculiarly  obnoxious
to  them.  After  his  death,  there  was  a  general  impression  throughout  the  Koman  world
that  he  was  not  really  dead,  but  was  living  in  concealment  in  Parthia,  and  would
return  to  regain  his  empire.  "  About  this  time,"  observes  Tacitus, "  a  report  that  Nero
was  still  alive,  and  on  his  way  to  the  East,  excited  a  false  alarm  throughout  Achaia  and
Asia"  ('  Hist.,'  ii.  8).  And  Suetonius  mentions  that  it  was  thought  that  Nero  was  still
alive,  and  would  shortly  return  to  Home,  and  take  vengeance  on  all  his  enemies  (*  Nero,'
57).  Mention  is  made  in  history  of  three  impostors  who  personated  Nero :  one  in  Achaia
and  Proconsular  Asia,  in  the  reign  of  Otho  ;  a  second,  also  in  Proconsular  Asia,  in  the
reign  of  Titus;  and  a  third,  protected  by  the  Parthians,  in  the  reign  of  Domitian.
From  this  notion  appears  to  have  arisen  the  Christian  idea  that  Nero  would  be  again
raised  up  as  Antichrist.^  The  earliest  notice  of  this  opinion  appears  in  the  fourth  of
the  Sybilline  books  (a.d.  80),  which,  however,  is  considered  by  critics  to  be  not  of
Christian,  but  of  Jewish  origin.  In  the  fifth  Sybilline  book,  supposed  to  be  of  the
time  of  Hadrian  (a.d.  130),  according  to  some  by  a  Jewish  Christian,  and  according
to  others  by  an  Egyptian  Jew,  the  Antichrist  Beliar  is  identified  with  Nero.*  Not
until  the  close  of  the  third  century  (a.d.  290)  does  Victorinus,  Bishop  of  Pettau,  in  his
exposition  of  the  Apocalypse,  identify  the  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea  with  Nero :  "  Now
that  one  of  the  heads  was,  as  it  were,  slain  to  death,  in  this  he  speaks  of  Nero  ;*'  and
Chrysostom  regarded  Nero  as  the  type  of  Antichrist.^  The  great  reason,  however,  on
which  certain  writers  ground  their  opinion  that  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse  considered
Nero  to  be  Antichrist,  was  the  declaration  contained  in  Kev.  xvii.  10, 11,  "  And  there
are  seven  kings :  five  are  fallen,  and  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come ;  and  when
he  Cometh,  he  must  continue  a  short  space.  And  the  beast  which  was,  and  is  not,  even
he  is  the  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth  into  perdition  '* — a  passage  referred  to  by
Victorinus.*  By  the  five  kings  they  understand  the  five  emperors  who  had  already
reigned — Augustus,  Tiberius,  Caius,  Claudius,  and  Nero ;  by  the  sixth,  Galba  (or,  accord-
incj  to  others,  Vespasian :  Galba,  Otho,  and  Vitellius  being  omitted,  as  their  reigns  were
short)  ;  by  the  seventh,  Otho  (or,  according  to  others,  Titus);  and  by  the  eighth,  who
was  also  one  of  the  seven.  Antichrist  or  Nero  restored  to  life.  This  passage  is  still
appealed  to  by  recent  writers  who  adopt  the  Nero  hypothesis.^    Lactantius  (a.d.  306),

*  See  Merivalo's  *  History  of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire,'  cabinet  edit.,  vol.  vil.
pp.  50,  etc.,  348,  etc.

'  See,  on  the  Sybilline  orncles  and  tlieir  probable  n go,  Dnimmond's  *  Jewish  Messiah,'
pp.  10 — 16.   According  to  Friedlicb,  both  the  fourth  and  the  fifth  books  are  of  Jewish  origin.

*  Lnrdncr*8  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  04.

*  Victorinus  supposes  the  five  kings  who  hnd  fallen  to  bo  G.ilbe,  Otho,  Vitellius,
Vespasian,  and  Titus ;  the  sixth,  Domitian ;  the  seventh,  Ncrva ;  and  the  eighth,  Antichrist
or  >iero.

*  As  Liicke,Ewal(l,  Blcek,  Dc  Wette.  Rcnan,  Immer,  DUsterdieck,  and  Archdeacon  Farrar.
Diistertlieok  and  Archdeacon  Farrar  (who,  however,  upi>ears  undecided)  suppose  that  the
eighth  king  in  Domitian,  who  came  as  Nero  in  spirit,  and  wiio  was  also  called  Nero.  Most
of  these  writers  suppose  that  Augustus  was  the  first  emperor,  though  no  sufficient  reason
can  be  assigned  for  the  exclusion  of  Julius  Ctesar.  Renau  commences  with  Julius  Cssar,
and,  according  to  him.  Nero  was  the  sixth  emperor,  whom  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse


54  THE  SETOXD  EPISTLE  T^  THE  THESSALOXIAXS.    [ca.  n.  1-«17.


OD  tbe  other  bai<c,  rcfocUttf  Uiis  farpothfib  a«  cxtTmrszsnt:  **Sr«xie  pg»m»  of
extraTa::%2t  ic^a^ioatK'D,''  Le  obMrrei^  **Eap;i:«e  t&a:  Xctxx  b«vin«r  been  oonvcjed  to
a  dlstizi:  n^ju,  u  still  all  re;  axkd  to  him  tx.eT  affCj  tbe  Svl^IIiDe  renes  oonoeniiikg
'  t:.e  f attire  wLo  iitv  his  am  wofhet^  bc&g  u^  ciixie  frcm  tbe  nttenoost  boondanes
of  the  earth ;  *  as  if  he  -rho  vu  the  first,  shall  alscr  be  the  list  penccutor,  aod  that  prove
the  (oreran&er  of  Antichrist.     Bat  we  Ouzht  Dot  to  btlkre  thoce  vhOp  affirming  that


appear
the  cartu  and  c^erthrov  mankiTid." '

The  oijfonents  of  bifrrarch^cal  pover  in  tbe  Middle  Ares  regirded  tbe  pope  as  Anti-
christ, and  or^ii^ifiered  the  pa&»a^  in  question  as  a  predjctian  of  the  origin  and  growth
of  the  papal  autboritj.  llins  as  early  as  tbe  close  of  the  tenth  oentury  (a.d.  991),
Amalph,  I^hop  of  Oricans,  declared  at  tbe  CoancU  of  Kheims  that  if  tbe  Boman
pontiff  was  destitute  of  cliaritr,  and  puffed  up  with  knowledse,  he  was  Antichrist.
This  Tiew  was  entertained  br  Kobert  Grost^te  the  celebrated  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  hj
Baronarola,  bj  the  AlbigeuKC,  the  Waidenses^  Wickliffe  and  the  Wickliffites,  the
Hufldtes,  and  all  those  sees  who  were  in  oppo^ition  to  the  Roman  bierarchT.  Even
Ht  Bernard  tises  this  bold  lanznage :  "  The  ministers  of  Christ  are  become  the  servants
of  Antichrist,  and  the  beast  of  the  Apocalypse  has  seated  himself  in  the  chair  of
St  Peter."  «

The  Reformers  in  general  tCio\'U-d  this  opainn.  Such  was  the  view  of  Luther,  Calvin,
Zuinglius,  Melancthou,  Beza,  and  Bucer ;  and,  among  English  Reformers,  Cranmer,
Ri<!ley,  Latimer,  Ho^^per,  and  Jewell.  Acco^ng  to  them,  tlic  apostasy  is  the  faUing  away
from  evangfilical  doctrine  to  tbe  traditions  of  men  and  tbe  corruptions  of  popoy ;  the
Man  of  Sin,  or  Antichrist,  is  not,  as  tbe  Fathers  conceived,  an  individual,  but  the  succes-
sion of  J0J',  es — serM  et  tuecetsio  hominum  ;  and  the  restraining  power  is  tbe  Roman  empire,
out  of  whose  ruins  the  pspacy  arose.  The  Lutheran  Church  inserted  this  opinion  as
an  article  in  their  creed  (Articl.  Smalc,  iL  4).  In  tbe  dedication  of  tbe  translat<»v  of
the  Authorized  Version  to  King  James,  it  is  assumed  that  tbe  pope  is  the  Man  of  Sin  ;
and  that  mo:<arch  is  complimente*!  for  writing  in  tbe  defence  of  the  truth,  which  gave
**  such  a  blow  unto  that  Man  of  Sin  as  will  not  be  healed.''  And  the  assertion  that  tbe
fope  is  Antichrist  and  the  Man  of  Sin  forms  one  of  the  articles  of  the  Westminster
Confesj'ion :  **  There  is  no  other  head  of  the  Church  but  the  Lord  JesiLs  Cijrist ;  nor  can
the  Pop*  of  Rome  in  any  sense  be  head  thereof,  hut  is  that  Antichrist,  that  Man  of  Sin
and  son  of  yif-niition,  that  exaltcth  himself  in  the  Church  against  Christ  and  all  that  is
called  God  "  (cb.  xxv.  6).

The  Romanists,  on  the  other  hand,  were  natcrally  led  by  opposition  to  consider  the
passage  as  a  prediction  of  the  rise  and  growth  of  Protestantism.  The  apostasy  was
the  falling  away  from  the  Romish  Church  by  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  The
Man  of  Sin  denoted  heretics  in  peneral,  but  especially  Luther,  the  chief  of  the  Reformers.
The  restraining  influence  was  the  German  empire,  considert'd  as  a  continuation  of  the
Roman  empire.  This,  however,  was  not  the  general  opinion  of  the  Church  of  Rome;
most  of  their  theologians  sup{>osed  that  Antichrist,  or  the  Man  of  Sin,  was  an  individual
whose  coming;  is  yet  future.

'  The  Greek  Church  was  naturally  led  to  regard  tbe  prophecy  as  a  prediction  of
Mohammedanism;  the  apostasy  was  the  falling  away  of  many  Greek  and  Oriental
(/burches  to  Mohammedanism;  the  man  of  sin  was  Mohamraeil ;  and  the  restraining
influence  the  i»ower  of  the  lloman  empire.'  Some  of  the  Reformers  (Melancthon,  Bucer,
MuHcuius)  considered  that  there  were  two  Antichrists — one  belonging  to  the  Eastern
ChMrch  and  the  other  to  the  Western  ;  the  Eastern  Antichrist  was  Mohammed,  and  the

erroneously  supposwl  to  be  alivo.  (Sec  a  most  interesting:  note  on  this  Nero  fable  by  Arch-
dcfOfon  I^f.',  in  the  *  SjK^aker'B  Commentary,'  New  Testament,  vol.  iv.  ]>.  759,  etc.  See  also
Ble<rk*g  *  Lecturi's  on  the  Apocalypse,*  p.  86,  etc. ;  Dusterdieck*8  *  Ull'cnbarun;r  Johauuis,*
p.  f)21.et<f.;  o  -,

•  LiKrtantiug,  •  De  Mortibus  Perpccutonim,'  c.  ii.

•  QiMted  by  Riiboii  Hunl,  *  On  Prophecy,*  vol.  ii.  pp.  28,  29.

•  iiirii>cfnt  IIL  endeavoured  to  stir  up  a  crusade  by  the  declaration  that  Mohammed  was
the  Man  of  Kiu.


en.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  55


Western  was  the  pope.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance  that  all  three — the  Greeks,  the
Romans,  and  the  Protestants — were  at  one  as  regards  the  restraininoc  influence ;  this  they
regarded  as  the  imperial  power — the  Koman  empire,  either  in  itself  or  continued  in  the
Greek  and  Grerman  empires.

The  modem  views  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin  are  chiefly  four :  the  Rationalists,  who
consider  that  there  is  no  prophecy ;  the  Praeterists,  who  consider  the  prophecy  as  already
falfiUed;  the  Progressionists,  who  rejijard  it  as  being  fulfilled  or  in  the  course  of  fulfil-
ment ;  and  the  Futurists,  who  regard  the  fulfilment  as  still  future.

1.  The  first  class  of  expositors  are  those  who  regard  all  the  usual  interpretations  as
proceeding  from  a  false  assumption  as  if  there  were  a  prophecy,  whereas  there  is  in
reality  no  prediction  at  all.  This  opinion  is  adopted  by  Koppe,  Pelt,  De  Wette,  Liine-
mann,  Jowett,  and  Davidson.  Koppe  appears  to  have  been  the  earliest  who  took  this  view
of  the  passage.  He  idealizes  the  prediction,  and  supposes  that  the  apostle  is  only  stating
his  impressions  of  what  might  be  the  future  state  of  the  Church  from  a  consideration  ci
the  times  in  which  he  lived.  The  apostle  was  profoundly  impressed  with  the  prophecies
of  Daniel,  and  from  them  he  dreaded  an  outburst  of  evil  after  his  death,  and  he  expressed
his  forebodings  in  language  coloured  from  Daniel.  Pelt  supposes  that  the  mystery  of
iniquity  was  the  inward  principle  of  evil  which  the  apostle  foresaw  would  afterwards
break  forth  in  a  more  open  and  violent  form ;  that  the  restraining  power  was  the  will
of  God  holding  back  the  kingdom  of  Satan ;  and  that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  the
final  victory  ot  good  over  evil.  So  also  De  Wette  observes,  "  He  goes  altogether  wrong
who  finds  here  any  more  than  the  apostle's  subjective  anticipation,  from  his  own
historical  x)osition,  of  the  future  of  the  Christian  CImrch.  Instead  of  rising  to  the
example  of  Christ,  acknowledging  the  limitation  which  there  is  to  a  definite  foreknowledge
of  the  future,  the  apostle  pays  a  tribute  to  human  weakness,  since  ho  wanted  to  know
too  much  beforehand.*'  *  Liineraann  considers  that  Paul  was  so  entirely  engrossed  by  his
ideas  of  the  proximity  of  the  advent  that,  carried  away  by  his  individuality,  he  "  wished
to  settle  more  exactly  concerning  its  circumstances  and  conditions  the  historical  relations
of  the  coming  of  Christ  than  is  allotted  to  man  in  general  to  know,  even  although  he
should  be  the  apostle,  the  most  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God."  *  "  Such  passages  [Col.  ii.
8, 16 ;  Eph.  vi.  12],"  observes  Professor  Jowett,  "  are  a  much  safer  guide  to  the  interpre-
tation of  the  one  we  are  considering  than  the  meaning  of  similar  passages  in  the  Old
Testament.  For  they  indicate  to  us  the  habitual  thought  of  the  apostle's  mind ;  *  a
falling  away  first,'  suggested,  probably,  by  the  wavering  which  he  saw  among  his  own
converts,  the  grievous  wolves  entering  into  the  Church  of  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  29),  the
turning  away  of  all  them  of  Asia  (2  Tim.  i.  15).  When  we  consider  that  his  own
converts  and  Jewish  opponents  or  half-converts  were  all  the  world  to  him ;  that  through
them,  as  it  were  in  a  glass,  he  appeared  to  see  the  workings  of  human  nature  generally,
we  understand  how  this  double  image  of  good  and  evil  should  have  presented  itself  to
liim,  and  the  kind  of  necessity  that  he  felt  that  Christ  and  Antichrist  should  alternate
with  each  other.  It  was  not  that  he  foresaw  some  great  conflict,  decisive  of  the  destinies
of  mankind.  What  he  anticipated  for  man  nearly  resembled  the  spiritual  combat  in
the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Romans."  ^  And  Dr.  Davidson  remarks,  "  The  passage  does
not  contain  a  prophecy,  but  rather  the  writer's  notion  on  a  subject  which  did  not  concern
the  proper  faith  and  duty  of  mankind.  Those  notions  were  shaped  by  the  floating
belief  of  his  day,  and  have  nothing  beyond  an  historical  interest.  They  belong  to  the
past  of  Christianity — to  its  infantine  state,  when  it  was  emerging  out  of  Judaism,  and
assuming  that  independent  position  to  which  no  man  contributed  so  much  as  the  apostle
uf  the  Gentiles.*

JSuch  a  view  is  at  variance  with  the  idea  of  inspiration — in  other  words,  with  the
supposition  that  the  apostle  was  guided  in  writing  by  a  higher  Spirit  than  his  own.
The  supernatural  is  entirely  overlooked  ;  the  apostle  writes  according  to  his  own  fancies;

>  De  Wette,  however,  expresses  himself  very  differently,  in  the  preface  to  his  exposition
of  the  Apocalypse ;  there  he  recognizes  the  symptoms  of  Antichrist  in  the  God-denying
egoism  of  our  day,  with  its  rejection  of  all  restraints.

-  Liinemann,  'Briefe  an  die  Thessalouicher,'  pp.  229,  230,  translation  of  the  same^
p.  237.

»  Jowett*8  *  St.  Paul's  Epistles,*  vol.  i.  p.  177,  1st  edit.

*  Davidson's  *  Introdiictiuu  to  the  Xcw  Testament,'  vol.  i.  p.  14  (new  edit.).


66  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

he  is  led  astray  by  bis  erroneous  opinions.  How  such  a  view  is  "  entirely  consistent
with  the  apostle*s  inspiration  *'  is  difficult  to  understand,  even  althou};h  we  employ  the
term  ''inspiration  "  in  a  very  broad  sense.  The  power  of  foretelling  the  future  is  denied
to  the  sacred  writers.  "  We  take  them/*  observes  Dr.  Davidson, "  as  guides  to  &ith  and
practice  generally  without  adopting  all  that  they  propounded,  or  believing  that  they  could
foretell  events."  ^  It  is  evident  the  apostle  is  here  giving  a  prediction  of  what  shall  take
place ;  and  therefore,  if  there  were  no  real  prediction,  he  was  on  this  point  mistaken  and
in  error,  and  conseaucntly  uninspired.  If  we  admit  inspiration,  we  must  receive  the
truths  declared  as  the  revelation  of  God :  the  Scripture  contains  truths  to  be  received,
and  not  the  mere  opinions  of  fallen  men  to  be  canvassed.

2.  The  second  class  of  interpreters  are  those  who,  recognizing  a  prediction,  regard  it
as  already  fulfilled.  To  this  class  belong  Grotius,  Wetstein,  Hammona,  Le  Clerc,  Whitby,
Schottgen,  Wieseler,  Kern,  Dollinger,  and  Baumgarten.  These  generally  agree  in  consider-
ing that  the  prophecy  received  its  accomplishment  in  Christ's  coming  in  spirit  to  destroy
Jerusalem,  although  they  differ  widely  in  details.  Grotius  supposes  that  the  Man  of  Sin
was  Caligula,  who  demanded  supreme  and  universal  worship  as  god,  and  ordered  his  statue
to  be  placed  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem ;  he  who  restrained  was  Vitcllius,  the  Proconsul
of  Syria,  who,  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  refused  to  obey  the  order  of  Caligula ;  and  the
lawless  one  was  Simon  Magus.  It  seemed  to  Paul  that  the  delineation  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes  in  Daniel  was  to  be  realized  in  Caligula.'  But  the  distinction  between  the
Man  of  Sin  and  the  lawless  one  is  incorrect,  and  besides,  the  interpretation  involves  an
anachronism,  as  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  was  written  after  the  death  of
Caligula.  Wetstein  adopts  the  extravagant  opinion  that  the  Man  of  Sin  was  Titus,  '*  the
delight  of  the  human  race,"  whose  army  brought  their  idolatrous  ensigns  into  the
captured  temple  and  offered  sacrifices  there ;  and  that  the  restraining  influence  was
Nero,  that  monster  of  iniquity,  whose  death  was  necessary  for  the  rule  of  Titus.
Hammond  imagined  that,  by  the  Man  of  Sin,  Simon  Magus,  together  with  his  followers
the  Gnostics,  was  meant ;  the  apostasy  was  the  falling  away  of  the  Christians  into
Gnosticbm ;  and  the  restraining  influence  was  the  apostles,  who,  by  still  preaching  to  the
Jews,  preserved  the  union  still  subsisting  between  Jews  and  Christians.'  Le  Clerc
supposes  that  the  apostasy  was  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Romans ;  the  Man  of
Sin  was  the  rebellious  Jews,  and  especially  their  leader  Simon  the  son  of  Giora ;  and  the
restrwning  power  was  the  chief  of  the  Jewish  nation,  who  were  against  the  revolt.  Whitby
also  considers  the  apostasy  was  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Roman  empire  or  from
the  faith ;  the  Man  of  Sin  was  the  Jewish  nation,  with  their  high  priest  and  Sanhedrim ;
and  the  restraining  power  was  Claudius,  during  whose  reign  the  Jews  would  not  rebel,  as
they  were  under  great  obligations  to  him.*  Schottgen  also  agrees  with  Whitby  in  con-
sidering that  by  the  Man  of  Sin  is  meant  the  Pharisees,  the  rabhis,  and  the  doctors  of
the  Law ;  but  he  differs  from  him  in  considering  that  the  restraining  power  was  the
prayers  of  the  Christians,  which  warded  off  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  until  they  had
left  the  city  and  retired  to  Pella.  Much  more  ingenious  is  the  opinion  of  Wieseler.  He
also  considers  the  prophecy  as  a  prediction  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  *'  He  that
restraineth  "  must  be  some  good  influence  which  delayed  the  catastrophe^  and  this  he
considers  to  be  the  pious  Jews  then  living,  particularly  the  Christians ;  and  if  the
singidar  number  requires  an  individual,  then  the  rcstrainer  is  James  the  Just,  the  Lord*b
brother.  Not  until  James  was  murdered  and  the  Christians  had  removed  from  Jem-
salem'was  the  city  taken.^  Kern  considers  that  the  Man  of  Sin  is  Nero ;  he  that  restraineth
is  Vespasian  and  his  son  Titus ;  and  the  apostasy  is  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  or  the
departure  of  the  Christians.*  Dollinger,  like  Kem,  supposes  Antichrist  to  be  Nero.
Nero  was  already  adopted  by  Claudius,  and  was  re;]:arded  by  many  as  the  future  Csesar.
''He    that  restraineth"  was  Claudius.     The   coming  of  Christ  was  his  coming  to

*  Davidson's  *  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament,"  vol.  i.  p.  15  (new  edit).
'  Grotius,  *•  Annotationes  in  II.  Epistolam  ad  Thessal.'

'  Hammond  on  the  New  Testament,  in  loco,

*  Whitby's  *  Commentary,'  pp.  813—818.    London  :  Thomas  Tegg,  1842.

•  Wieseler's  *  Chronologio  des  apostolischen  Zietaltera,'  pp.  268—277.

•  Kem,  on  this  account,  considers  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  to  be  spurious.
The  same  view  is  maintained  by  Baur,  Hilgenfeld,  and  others  belonging  to  the  Tubingen
BohooL


CH.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  57

execute  judgment  on  Jerusalem ;  and  although  Nero  did  not  personally  undertake
anything  against  the  Jews,  yet  he  did  so  by  his  lieutenant  Vespasian.  The  apostasy
was  the  departure  of  the  Christians  into  the  errors  of  the  Gnostics.  Diillinger,  however,
considers  that  there  may  be  a  more  complete  fulfilment  in  the  last  days,^  Baumgarten
thinks  that  the  prophecy  reflects  the  experience  of  the  apostle :  the  Man  of  Sin  was  the
Jews  who  everywhere  opposed  his  preaching  the  gospel ;  the  apostasy  was  the  renuncia-
tion of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah ;  and  the  restraining  influence  was  the  imperial  authority
which  hitherto  had  protected  the  apostle  and  kept  the  Jews  in  check.  This  opinion
appears  to  be  partially  adopted  by  Bishop  Lightfoot :  ,**  It  seems,  upon  the  whole,  pro-
bable," he  observes,  "  that  the  Antichrist  is  represented  especially  by  Judaism.  With  a
prophetic  insight,  the  apostle  foresaw,  as  he  contemplated  the  moral  and  political  condi-
tion of  the  race,  the  approach  of  a  great  and  overwhelming  catastrophe.  ...  It  was  to
Boman  justice  and  Roman  magistrates  that  the  apostle  had  recourse  at  this  time  to
shield  him  from  the  enmity  of  the  Jews  and  to  check  their  violence."  ^  At  the  same
time,  he  thinks  that  the  prophecy  has  not  yet  received  its  most  striking  and  complete
fulfilment.

It  would  be  a  mere  waste  of  time  to  examine  these  views  seriatim.  So  far  as  they
consider  the  prophecy  as  having  received  its  full  accomplishment,  they  do  not  satisfy
its  conditions,  and  have  only  a  general  and  fancied  resemblance.  Especially  it  is  fatal
to  the  views  of  this  class  of  interpreters  that  the  coming  of  Christ  alluded  to  is  evidently
not  his  coming  in  spirit  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  but,  as  the  context  shows,  and  as  is  the
uniform  meaning;  of  the  phrase  in  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  his  coming  in  person  to  establish
his  spiritual  kingdom.

3.  The  third  class  of  exponents  are  those  who  regard  the  prophecy  as  being  fulfilled,
or  as  in  the  course  of  fulfilment ;  that  is,  as  already  partially  fulfilled,  but  awaiting  its
complete  accomplishment :  we  allude  to  those  who  find  in  the  passage  a  prediction  of
popery.  Besides  the  early  Reformers,  this  opinion  is  advocated  by  Hooker,  Hurd,
Newton,  Turretin,  Benson,  Bengel,  Doddridge,  Macknight,  Michaelis,  Elliott,  and
Bishop  Wordsworth.

This  opinion  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that  the  restraining  influence  is  the  Roman
empire.  In  the  prediction,  that  influence  is  both  masculine  and  neuter ;  by  the  mascu-
line the  emperor  is  meant,  and  by  the  neuter  the  empire.  This  opinion  is  that  of  the
early  Fathers,  and  was  generally  adopted  with  various  modifications  by  Greeks,  Roman-
ists, and  Protestants.'  It  is  in  itself  highly  probable,  and  may  have  been  handed  down
by  tradition  from  the  Church  of  Thessalonica,  who  had  been  instructed  concerning  its
nature  (ch.  ii.  6).  If  the  restrainer  was  the  Roman  emperor,  we  may  understand
the  reason  of  the  reserve  of  the  apostle.  If  he  had  stated  this  in  so  many  words,  he
would  have  been  regarded  as  an  enemy  to  the  Roman  government,  because  he  would
then  teach  the  destruction  of  the  empire,  and  would  have  involved  Christians  in  perse-
cution. Prudence  required  a  discreet  silence  on  this  point.  This  reason  for  reserve
was  recognized  by  the  early  Fathers.  **  If  St.  Paul,"  observes  Chrysostom,  "  had  said
that  the  Roman  empire  will  soon  be  dissolved,  the  heathen  world  would  have  destroyed
him  as  a  rebel  and  all  the  faithful  with  him,  as  persons  who  took  up  arms  against  the
state.  But  St.  Paul  means  the  Roman  empire ;  and  when  that  shall  have  been  taken
away,  then  the  Man  of  Sin  will  come.  For  as  the  power  of  Babylon  was  dissolved  by
the  Persian  dynasty,  and  the  Persian  was  supplanted  by  the  Greek,  and  the  Greek  by
the  Roman,  so  the  Roman  will  be  dissolved  by  Antichrist,  and  Antichrist  by  Christ"
(m  loco).  Now,  in  the  view  of  those  who  regard  the  pope  as  the  Man  of  Sin,  this  pre-
diction was  fully  verified.  No  sooner  was  the  restrainer  removed  than  the  Man  of  Sin
was  revealed.  As  long  as  the  Roman  emperor  continued  heathen  and  resident  at
Rome,  no  ecclesiastical  power  was  permitted  to  exalt  itself;  but  no  sooner  did  the

*  For  DoUinger's  views,  see  Liinemann,  *  On  the  Thessalonians,*  p.  232 ;  and  Biggenbach
in  Lange*8  *  Commentary.*

*  Smith's  *  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  article  *'  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians."

*  To  this  general  opinion  tlie  view  of  Calvin  is  a  notable  exception.  He  supposes  that
the  restraining  influence  was  the  limited  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  and  that  the  Man  of  Sin
was  not  to  be  manifested  until  the  gospel  was  preached  to  tiie  whole  world.  **  This,  there-
fore, was  the  delay  until  the  career  of  the  gospel  should  be  completed,  because  a  graciouB
invitation  to  salvation  was  first  in  order  "  (Calvin,  in  loco).


68  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  n.  1—17.

ttUiperor  Temove  from  Rome  to  Ckmstantinople,  than  the  papacy  arose— -the  restraint
on  the  Bishop  of  Rome  was  removed  ;  and  after  the  Roman  empire  in  the  West  came
to  an  end  by  the  dethronement  of  Augustnlus,  the  power  of  the  pope  mightily  in-
creased.

Bat  the  great  point  of  inquiry  is — ^Is  there  a  siifiicient  resemblance  between  this
prophecy  and  Romanism,  so  that  we  may  conclude  that  they  are  related  to  each  other
as  prediction  and  ful61ment?  Are  the  characteristics  of  the  Man  of  Sin  found  in
popery  ?  Those  who  belong  to  this  class  of  interpreters  assert  that  the  resemblance  U
strikinc;  and  obvious.  An  apostasy  is  predicted,  and  there  is  in  Romanism  a  falling
away  fh)m  the  pure  gospel  to  the  traditions  of  men ;  the  doctrines  of  purgatory,  tran-
substantiation,  the  sacri6oe  of  the  Mass,  the  adoration  of  the  Virgin  and  the  saints,  are
adduced  as  examples.  The  Man  of  Sin  is  represented  as  opposing  and  exalting  himself
against  idl  that  is  called  Ood  or  is  an  object  of  worship ;  and  this  is  considered  as
receiving  its  fulfilment  in  the  pope  exalting  himself  above  all  human  and  Divine
authoritv,  claiming  the  title  '*  king  of  kings,  and  lord  of  lords,"  applying  to  himself
the  words  of  the  psalmist,  "  All  kings  shall  bow  down  before  thee,  styling  himself
universal  bishop,^  and  asserting  his  power  to  dispose  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.
The  Man  of  Sin  is  said  to  seat  himself  in  the  temple  of  Gkxi,  showing  himself  as  God.
The  temple  of  God  is  here  understood  to  be  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  pope  places
himself  in  it  as  its  supreme  head,  the  vicar  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  shows  himself  as  Gk)d
by  claiming  Divine  attributes,  as  holiness  and  infallibility ;  assuming  Divine  preroga-
tives, as  the  power  of  pardoning  sins  and  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven ;  and  using  such  Divine  titles  as  *'  Our  Lord  God  the  pope,**  "  Another  God  on
earth."  ^  Every  pope,  on  his  election,  is  placed  on  the  high  altar  of  St.  Peter*s,  and  rec^ves
the  adoration  of  the  cardinals.  The  coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin  is  after  the  working  of
Satan,  with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  wonders  of  falsehood.  And  this  is  considered  as
receiving  its  fulfilment  in  the  false  miracles  of  popery ;  in  the  impositions  of  indulgences
and  purgatory ;  in  the  wonders  done  by  sacred  images  moving,  speaking,  bleeding ;  in
the  prodigies  effected  by  sacred  relics;  in  the  supernatural  visitations  of  the  Virgin;
and  in  the  pretended  power  of  working  miracles  which  the  Church  of  Rome  still  claims;
as  Bellarmine  reckons  the  glory  of  miracles  as  the  eleventh  mark  of  the  Catholic  Church.
God  is  represented  as  punishiog  sin  by  sin,  "sending  to  them  the  working  of  error  that
they  mi(;ht  believe  the  lie."  The  popish  legends,  which  have  gained  such  credit  as  to
be  admitted  among  their  ceremonies,  and  especially  the  monstrous  doctrine  of  transub-
stantiation,  are  regarded  as  the  fulfilment  of  this  part  of  the  prophecy.^  And,  besides,
in  the  other  passage  where  Paul  predicts  the  falling  away  of  the  tatter  times,  the  marks
which  he  gives  find  their  counterpart  in  the  corruption  of  popery :  "  Giving  heed  to
seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils ;  speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy ;  having  their  con-
science seared  with  a  hot  iron ;  forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from
meats  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  1—3).

Paul  represents  the  system  as  working  even  in  his  days:  "For  the  mystery  of
lawlessness  is  already  working "  (ch.  ii.  7).  It  works  inwardly ;  it  is  a  mystery,
something  concealed  and  unknown  until  it  is  revealed ;  the  germs  of  the  Anticbristian
system  were  already  in  the  Church ;  the  leaven  of  corruption  was  at  work.  Paul  knew
this  because  he  was  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  can  see  what  man
cannot  see  (Wordsworth).  But,  in  truth,  the  germs  of  the  Anticbristian  system  are
discernible  in  the  false  doctrines  and  superstitious  practices  alluded  to  in  Paul's  Epistles ;
and  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  a  striking  resemblance  between  tbem  and  the  doctrines
and  practices  of  Romanism ;  as,  for  example,  the  worship  of  angels  (CoL  ii.  8),  the

*  In  the  remarkable  words  of  Gregory  tl»o  Great,  in  opposition  to  the  Patriarch  of  Con-
stantinople, •'  Whoever  calls  himself  universal  biahop  is  the  precursor  of  Antichrist."

*  ThcBO  and  sucb-liko  titles  are  cited  in  Jewell's  *  Apology;*  Poole's  *  Annotations ;  *
Nowton,  *0n  the  Prophecies.*  See  also  Barrow*8  *  Treatise  on  the  Pope's  Supremacy ;  *
SlillinRfleet,  *  On  Popery,'  ch.  xviii. ;  and  Luthardt's  •  Saving  Truths  of  Christianity,*
pp.  305,  3UG.

*  "  The  annals  of  the  world,"  observes  Dr.  Macknight,  "  cannot  produce  persons  and
events  to  which  tho  things  written  in  this  passage  can  ho  applied  with  so  much  fitness  as
to  the  bi«li()i»8  of  liomo.  Why,  then,  should  we  be  in  any  doubt  concerning  the  interpreta-
tion and  application  of  this  famous  prophecy  ?"


CH.  II.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  59

abstinence  from  certain  foods  (1  Cor.  viii.  8),  bodily  mortification  (Col.  iL  23),  the
traditions  and  doctrines  and  commandments  of  men  (Col.  ii.  8,  22) ;  so  that,  as  Bishop
Newton  observes,  "  the  foundations  of  popery  were  laid,  indeed,  in  the  apostles*  days,
but  the  superstructure  was  raised  by  degrees,  and  several  ages  passed  before  the  build-
ing was  completed,  and  the  Man  of  Sin  was  revealed  in  full  perfection."  *

Of  course,  according  to  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  complete  fulfilment  of  the
prophecy  is  still  future.  The  destruction  of  the  Man  of  Sin — that  is,  according  to  this
view,  Romanism — is  also  predicted :  "  Whom  the  Lord  Jesus  will  slay  with  the  breath
of  his  mouth,  and  annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming  "  (ch.  ii.  8).  We  have
shown,  in  the  Exposition,  that  by  this  cannot  be  meant  the  preaching  of  the  pure
gospel,  or  the  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God  at  the  Reformation ;  the  language  is  denun-
ciatory. As,  however,  this  portion  of  the  prophecy  is  unfulfilled,  it  is  not  required
to  offt-r  any  explanations.  The  interpretation  of  unfulfilled  prophecy  is  probably
beyond  the  powers  of  the  human  mind ;  the  fulfilment  is  the  only  key  to  the  inter-
pretation.

To  this  view  of  the  subject  numerous  objections  have  been  raised :  there  are  three
which  merit  consideration.  (1)  It  is  aflSrmed  that  the  Man  of  Sin  is  distinctly  asserted
to  be  an  individual ;  he  is  called  "  the  lawless  one,"  "  the  son  of  perdition ; "  whereas,
according  to  the  above  view,  he  is  an  ecclesiastical  system,  or  a  succession  of  indivi-
duals. But,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  observes,  "  in  all  figurative  passages  it  is  arbitrary
to  assume  that  a  person  is  denoted  when  we  find  a  personification.  Thus  the  Man  of
Sin  here  need  not  be  an  individual  man ;  it  may  be  a  body  of  men,  or  a  power,  or  a
spiritual  influence."  ^  The  restraining  influence,  which  is  put  at  one  time  in  the  neuter
and  at  another  time  in  the  masculine,  is  almost  universally  acknowledged  to  be,  not  a
person,  but  an  influence  or  series  of  persons.  So,  in  like  manner,  the  Man  of  Sin  may
be  a  succession  of  individuals;  at  least,  there  is  no  absolute  necessity  arising  from  the
terms  of  the  prophecy  to  regard  him  as  a  person.^  (2)  It  is  afl&rmed  that,  even  admitting
all  the  striking  coincidences,  yet  the  idea  of  popery  does  not  and  never  did  fulfil  the
prophecy  in  ver.  4.  So  far  from  the  pope  opposing  and  exalting  himself  against  all
that  is  called  God  or  is  an  object  of  worship,  his  "  abject  adoration  and  submission  to
them  has  ever  been  one  of  his  most  notable  peculiarities "  *  (Alford).  But  to  this  it
has  been  replied  that  the  arrogance  of  the  pope,  his  assertion  that  he  is  the  vicar  of
Christ,  his  claim  of  infallibility,  which  has  lately  been  conceded  to  him,  are  a  distinct
fulfilment  of  this  prediction.  (3)  It  is  said  that  "  if  the  papacy  be  Antichrist,  then  has
the  manifestation  been  made  and  endured  now  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years,  and  yet  the
day  of  the  Lord  has  not  come,  which,  by  the  terms  of  our  prophecy,  such  manifestation
is  immediately  to  precede  "  (Alford).  But  to  this  it  has  been  answered  that  it  is  not
asserted  that  the  coming  of  Christ  follows  directly  on  the  coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  but
merely  that  the  Man  of  Sin  will  precede ;  the  interval  between  the  two  comings  is
nowhere  defined.  Besides,  it  may  be  that  there  is  a  development  of  Antichrist,  and
that  his  final  destruction  by  the  coming  of  the  Lord  will  not  occur  until  his  full  develop-
ment. Thus,  for  example,  the  spiritual  power  of  popery  may  be  unfolding  itself;  the
mystery  of  lawlessness  may  be  still  working,  as  was  lately  seen  in  the  introduction  of
two  new  dogmas  into  the  Romish  Church — ^the  immaculate  conception  of  the  Virgin,
and  the  x>ersonal  infallibility  of  the  pope.  The  career  of  the  Man  of  Sin  has  not
yet  run.

Upon  the  whole,  on  an  impartial  review  of  the  subject,  we  cannot  avoid  the
impression  that  the  points  of  resemblance  between  the  prophecy  and  Romanism  are
numerous,  varied,  and  striking.  Our  forefathers  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  application  of
the  prediction,  and  perhaps  they  were  nearer  the  truth  than  we  in  modern  times  who
hesitate.  Such  an  opinion  may  bo  considered  as  uncharitable  and  unjust,  and  is
certainly  not  in  accordance  with  the  more  liberal  spirit  of  our  age,  where  popery  ig
viewed  as  it  presently  exists,  divested  of  its  power  to  persecute,  and  as  seen  in  the
culture,  refinement,  and  piety  of  many  of  its  adherents.     But  when  wo  reflect  upon

*  BiBhop  Newton's  '  Dissertation  on  the  Man  of  Sin.*

*  Smitli's  '  Dictionary  of  tiio  Hible,'  article  '*  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians."

•  Sec  Elliott's  *  Iior;o  Apocalyptica?,*  vol.  iii.  p.  956,  5th  edit.;  Newton,  *  On  tho  Pro-
phccics.*

♦  Alford's  *  Greek  Tcstamout,*  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  CG.


60  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  il  1-17.

the  abominable  persecutions  of  the  Inquisition,  the  monstrous  wickedness  of  the  popes
prior  to  the  Reformation,^  the  atrocities  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  religion,*  the  crimes
committed  by  the  priests,'  and  the  general  corruption  of  the  whole  system ;  and  when
we  think  that  it  is  only  the  restraining  influence  of  Protestantism  which  prevents  a
repetition  of  such  actions,  we  may  see  reason,  if  not  to  affirm  positively,  yet  to  suspect
that  such  an  opinion  may  be  founded  on  truth,  and,  if  so,  be  neither  uncharitable
nor  unjust.

4.  Ihe  fourth  class  of  interpreters  consider  the  fulfilment  as  future,  and  that  we  are
not  to  look  for  any  past  occurrences  as  answering  all  its  requirements.  This  opinion
is  the  one  which  is  chiefly  favoured  in  our  days.  It  has  been  adopted  by  Hofmann,
Ewald,  Olshausen,  Riggenbach,  Lange,  Alford,  Ellicott,  Lillie,  Eadie,  Meyrick,  and
Bishop  Alexander,  although  there  is  a  considerable  difference  in  their  views.

It  is  maintained  that  it  is  unwarrantable  to  consider  the  pope  as  Antichrist,  and  the
papacy  as  an  Antichristian  system.  The  essential  doctrines  of  Christianity  are  main-
tained and  defended  by  the  Romanists.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  exalted,  and  his  suffer-
ings are  declared  to  be  an  atonement  for  sin.  The  great  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  not
only  maintained,  but  prominently  brought  forward.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  are
recognized  and  depended  on.  And  the  pope,  instead  of  opposing  himself  to  Grod,  owns
himself  to  be  the  servant  and  worshipper  of  God.^  Hence  it  is  considered  that  in  the
future  there  may  be  a  fuller  completion  than  has  ever  yet  taken  place  in  the  past
Prophecy  has  many  partial  fulfilments,  until  it  reaches  its  climax  in  a  complete  accom-
plishment. Thus  the  Messianic  prophecies  of  our  Lord  were  partially  fulfilled  in
David,  in  Solomon,  in  the  Jewish  nation.  So  it  may  bo  with  this  prediction ;  its  final
application  may  be  reserved  for  the  last  days  of  this  world's  probation.  The  anti-
christian elements,  which  are  now  found  dispersed,  may  be  collected  and  exhibited  in
an  individual  who  will  bo  the  realization  of  the  Man  of  Sin.

According  to  Hofmann,  the  whole  passage  refers  to  the  visions  of  Daniel.  Paul
applies  the  prophecy  therein  contained  to  the  latter  days.  The  power  that  restraineth
the  outburst  of  evil  is  a  good  principle ;  just  as  Michael,  the  guardian  angel  of  the
Jews,  withstood  the  Prince  of  Persia  (Dan.  x.  20).  When  the  good  principle  which
was  preserving  the  world  in  agreement  with  God  is  removed,  then  Antichrist  will
appear  in  the  form  of  some  mighty  lawless  conqueror.  Hofmann  appears  actually  to
expect  the  revivification  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.*  Ewald,  again,  applies  to  the  prophecy
the  prediction  of  Malachi  concerning  the  coming  of  Elijah.  Ue  supposes  that  by  that
which  hinders  the  appearance  of  Antichrist  the  coming  of  Elijah  is  meant,  and  that
Antichrist  will  not  be  revealed  in  all  his  atrocious  wickedness  until  Elijah  be  taken
out  of  the  way  and  again  translated  to  heaven.^

Omitting  these  interpretations,  which  must  appear  to  our  English  minds  fanciful
and  extravagant,  based  on  mere  conjecture,  and  wholly  arbitrary  in  their  nature,  wo
come  to  the  more  rational  statements  of  other  divines.  In  general,  according  to  them,
the  Man  of  Sin  is  an  individual  of  gigantic  mental  power,  enormous  daring,  and  extreme
wickedness,  who  shall  appear  on  the  earth  in  the  latter  days;  and  the  restraining
influence  which  prevents  the  appearance  of  such  an  individual  is  moral  order  or  govern-
ment. Thus,  according  to  Olshausen,  the  Man  of  Sin  is  an  individual.  All  the  manifesta-
tions of  evil,  the  revolt  of  the  Jews  from  the  Romans,  Nero,  Mohammed,  the  development
of  the  papacy  in  the  Middle  Ages,  the  French  Revolution  of  1789,  with  the  abolition
of  Christianity,  and  the  setting  up  of  a  prostitute  as  the  goddess  of  Reason  in  the
cathedral  church  of  Paris,  and  the  present  diffusion  of  infidelity  and  atheism,  are  the
precursors  of  Antichrist ;  but  they  contain  only  some  of  his  characteristics,  not  all.'
Similarly  Dean  Alford  observes,  "  Though  eighteen  hundred  years  later,  we  stand,  with
regard  to  this  prophecy,  where  the  apostle  stood ;  the  day  of  the  Lord  not  present,
and  not  to  arrive  until  the  Man  of  Sin  be  manifested ;  the  mystery  of  iniquity  still

'  As,  for  example,  Sixtus  IV ,  Innocent  VIII.,  Alexander  VH.

•  The  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew.

•  See  Froude's  *The  English  in  Ireland.*  bk.  iii.  ch.  i.  sect.  2.

•  Sec  Eadie,  » On  the  Thessalonians,*  p.  353.

•  Hofmann's  *  Thessalonicher,*  p.  333.

•  Ewald's  *  Sendschreiber  dor  Apostel  Paulus,*  p.  27.

^  Olshausen,  *  On  the  Thcssaloniaod,'  pp.  488,  480,  Clark's  translation.


CH.  n.  1—17.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  61

working,  and  much  advanced  in  its  working ;  the  restrainer  still  hindering.  And  let  us
ask  ourselves — What  does  this  represent  to  us  ?  Is  it  not  indicative  of  a  state  in  which
the  lawlessness  is  working  on,  so  to  speak,  underground,  under  the  surface  of  things,
gaining  throughout  these  many  ages  more  expansive  force,  more  accumulated  power,
but  still  hidden  and  unconcentrated  ?  And  might  we  not  look,  in  the  progress  of  such
a  state  of  things,  for  repeated  minor  embodiments  of  this  lawlessness;  the  many  Anti-
christs (1  John  il  18)  springing  up  here  and  there  in  different  countries,  the  apostasy
going  onward  and  jirowing,  just  as  there  were  of  Christ  himself  frequent  types  and
minor  embodiments  before  he  came  in  the  flesh  ?  Thus  in  the  papacy,  where  so  many
of  the  prophetic  features  are  combined,  we  see,  as  it  were,  a  standing  embodiment  and
type  of  the  final  Antichrist — ^in  the  remarkable  words  of  Gregory  the  Great,  the
proecursor  Antichristi ;  and  iu  Nero,  and  in  every  persecutor  as  he  arose,  and  Mahomet,
and  Napoleon,  and  many  other  forms  and  agencies  of  evil,  other  and  more  transient
types  and  examples  of  him."^  And  Bishop  Ellicott  remarks,  *'The  adversary  is
Antichrist,  no  mere  set  of  principles  or  succession  of  opponents,  but  one  single  person,
being  as  truly  man  as  he  whom  he  impiously  opposes."  And  he  observes,  "  The
restraining  principle  is  the  power  of  well-ordered  human  rule,  the  principles  of  legality
as  opposed  to  those  of  lawlessness,  of  which  the  Roman  emperor  was  the  then  embodi-
ment and  manifestation.*'  ^  Similar  views  are  adopted  by  Bishop  Alexander,^  Dr.  Eadie,
Lillie,^  and  Riggcnbach.  Moyrick,  in  his  interesting  and  exhaustive  article  on  "  Anti-
christ," in  the  appendix  to  Smith's  *  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  thus  expresses  his  view
of  the  sum  of  Scripture  teaching  with  regard  to  Antichrist :  *'  It  would  appear  that
there  is  to  be  evolved  from  the  womb  of  the  corrupt  Church  an  individual  Antichrist,
who,  being  himself  a  scoffer  and  contemner  of  all  religion,  will  yet  act  as  the  patron
and  defender  of  the  corrupt  Church,  and  compel  men  to  submit  to  her  sway  by  the  force
of  the  secular  arm  and  by  means  of  bloody  persecutions.  He  will  unite  the  old  foes,
superstition  and  unbelief,  in  a  combined  attack  on  liberty  and  religion.  He  will  have
the  power  of  performing  lying  miracles  and  beguiling  souls,  being  the  embodiment  of
Satanic  as  distinct  from  brutal  wickedness.'*  Or,  as  Lange  puts  it,  "  Antichrist'may
proceed  from  a  coalition  between  completed  absolutism  and  completed  radicalism."

Of  course,  according  to  this  view,  the  fulfilment  being  yet  future,  we  cannot  apply
to  its  truth  or  falsehood  the  characteristics  given  us  in  the  prophecy  itself!  It  appears
to  bo  the  uniform  doctrine  of  Scripture,  as  seen  both  in  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment and  of  the  New,  that  before  the  consummation  of  all  things  there  will  be  a  final
and  desperate  struggle  between  the  principles  of  good  and  evil.  The  revolt  against  all
rule  and  authority,  the  spread  of  Nihilism,  the  increase  of  infidelity  and  agnosticism,
the  unblushing  proclamation  of  atheism  and  the  support  given  to  it  in  the  scientific
and  political  world,  the  deification  of  materialism,  are  all  the  precursors  of  Antichrist.
It  may  only  require  a  dissolution  of  order  and  a  corruption  of  morals,  greater  and  more
universal  than  that  which  occurred  in  the  great  French  Revolution,  to  usher  in  the
coming  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  who,  amid  the  confusion,  will  seize  upon  the  sceptre  of
dominion.  We  may  figure  him  as  an  individual,  a  man  of  more  commanding  abilities
and  far  greater  wickedness  than  the  first  Napoleon ;  one  who  will  subdue  the  world,
and  in  the  height  of  his  impiety  and  ambition  proclaim  his  atheism,  and  that  man
himself  is  God.  We  cannot  penetrate  into  the  future,  but  we  may  rest  confident  that,
if  such  a  state  of  things  should  happen,  the  final  victory  of  the  good  over  the  evil
cannot  be  doubted ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord  is  suflBcient  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of
Antichrist,  and  to  bafile  all  his  pretensions.  "  Whom  the  Lord  shall  slay  with  the
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  annihilate  by  the  appearance  of  his  coming."

*  Al ford's  *  Greek  Testament,'  vol.  iii.,  Prolegomena,  p.  67.

*  Ellicott,  *  St  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.'  p.  109.

*  Commentary  on  the  Thessalonians  in  the  *  Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iii.  p.  742.

*  Lillie's  *  Lectures  on  the  Thessalonians,'  p.  537,  etc.


C2        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [en.  m.  1— la


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  HL


CovTEsm. — Tlie  npoetle  now  oomes  to  the
eonclosion  of  his  EpisUe.  He  beseechcB  the
ThesBaloniani  for  an  interest  in  their  prayers,
that  the  gospel  may  be  rapidly  diffused  and
gloriflcMl  hy  nnmerons  oonversions,  and  that
he  and  his  fellow-workers  may  be  enabled
to  preach  it  unhindered  by  the  opposition  of
their  enemies.  He  expresses  his  confidence
that  the  Lord  will  prosorye  them  from  evil
and  render  them  obedient  to  his  instruc-
tions, it  being  his  earnest  prayer  for  them
that  they  mi^t  be  directed  into  the  love  of
God  and  the  patience  of  Jesns  Christ  The
apostle  then  proceeds  to  admonish  them  on
account  of  Uie  disorderly  conduct  which
many  of  them  exhibited.  Ho  had  heard
that  there  were  some  among  them  who
walked  disorderly,  and  who,  either  from
dread  or  from  excitement  on  account  of
their  belief  in  the  immediate  coming  of  the
Lord,  had  desisted  tram,  their  worldly  em-
ployments. He  commands  such  to  return  to
their  duties,  giving  himself  as  an  example,
inusmuoh  as,  when  at  Thessalonica,  he  had
laboured  with  his  own  hands  for  support.
If,  however,  such  disorderly  persons  were
not  to  bo  p<»r8uaded,  then  he  enjoins  the
members  of  the  Church  to  withdraw  from
them  and  exclude  them  from  their  society,
in  order  that  they  might  be  ashamed  and
brought  to  repentance  and  amendment  of
life.  He  invokes  peace  upon  them  from  the
Lord  of  peace ;  he  authenticates  his  Epistle
to  g^iard  against  imposition ;  and  concludes
with  his  apostolic  benediction.

Ver.  1. — Finally;  furthermorf. ;  for  the
rtU;  introducing  the  concluding  part  of
the  Epistle  (see  1  Thcss.  iv.  1).  Brethren,
pray  for  ut  (see  a  similar  request  in  1  Thess.
V.  25),  Observe  the  imsclfiahness  of  the
ui)08tli''s  request.  He  does  not  ask  the
Thetisalonians  to  pray  specially  for  himself,
but  for  the  imim)>Cilcd  diffusion  and  success
of  the  gt^i«iH'l,  and  for  himself  only  in  so  far
as  that  ho  might  be  frecii  from  all  hindrances
in  preaching  the  gospt^ — that  God  would  be
]»la\stHi  to  crv)Nvn  his  hibours  with  success.
That;  intnxiuoing  the  subject-matter  of
pmyer;  what  ho  riH|ue8ted  the  Thessii-
ituiians  to  pn\y  for.  The  word  of  the  Lord —
naniolv,  the  g\»spt^l — may  have  free  eourse ;
literullY,  ffiuy  run ;  that  all  ol>stacles  to  its


progress  may  be  removed ;  that  its  diffosioii
may  be  firee  and  unimpeded ;  that,  like  the
sun,  it  may  rejoice  as  a  stronc:  man  to  run
his  race  (rs.  xix.  5 ;  corap.  Ps.  cxlviL  15,
"He  sendeth  forth  his  commandment  upon
earth:  his  word  runneth  very  swiftly*^
And  be  glorified;  namely,  in  theconvendon
of  souls  (comp.  Acts  xiii.*  48).  The  allusion
may  be  to  the  applause  given  to  the  viotots
in  the  foot-races  which  constituted  bo  oon-
siderable  a  part  of  the  Grecian  gameSb  This
personification  of  the  Word  of  the  Loid  is
a  favourite  figure  with  the  i^>ostle.  **Ih
St  Paul's  language  there  is  but  a  thin  film
between  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Divine  per-
sonal Spirit,  and  the  spirit  in  the  believei^s
inmost  being.  And  so  in  St  Paul's  concep-
tion there  is  but  a  thin  film  betweoi  tae
Word  preached  and  the  living  Word  of  God
who  is  God  '*  (Bishop  Alexander).  Ewn  as
it  is  with  you ;  a  recognition  of  the  eager-
ness with  which  the  Thessalonians  had
received  the  gospel.

Yer.  2. — ^And  that;  a  further  addition
to  the  prayer.  We ;  either  I  Paul,  or  else
Paul  and  Silas  and  Timothy.  Kay  be
delivered;  not  may  **come  off  victorious
whether  by  life  or  death"  (Oilvin),  but
may  be  rescued  from  our  enemies.  «iowett
observes  that  we  have  here  the  shrinking
of  ^e  fiesh  firom  the  dangers  which  awaited
the  apostle.  But  there  is  no  trace  of
cowardice  in  those  words;  the  apostle  de-
sires deliverance,  not  for  his  own  soke,  but
for  the  sake  of  the  free  diffusion  of  the
gospeL  From  unreasonable ;  a  word  whose
original  meaning  is  *^  out  of  place ; "  then
used  in  an  ethical  sense,  "wicked,"  "absurd,"
"unreasonable;"  perhaps  here  applied  to
persons  who  will  not  listen  to  arg^uments.
And  wicked  men.  By  these  unreasonable
and  wicked  men  are  not  to  be  understood
the  Jews  of  Thessalonica,  from  whom  FbjjI
formerly  suffered,  for  their  influence  would
hardly  extend  to  Corinth;  nor  Christians
who  were  only  so  in  name  (Calvin),  and
specially  the  Judaizing  Christians,  for  there
is  no  alluhion  as  yet  to  their  attacks  upon
the  apostle ;  but  the  ftmatical  and  unbeliev-
ing Jews  at  Corinth  (see  Acts  xviii.  12).
For  all  men  have  not  faith ;  or,  the  faith ;
the  faith  is  not  the  possession  of  alL  Faith
hero  is  the  Christian  faith:  all  men  have
not  received  it— obviously  alluding  to  the
unbelieving  Jews.  The  words  cannot  mean,
all  men  have  not  tho  true  faith — referring
to  pnneiuUxi  Cliri!>tiaus — false  brethren,  but
stH.'n.t  enemies  (Calvin).  Nor  is  it  to  be
rendered  "  all  men  have  not  the  capacity  of
faith.*'  Others  understand  by  faith  that
upright  and  candid  disposition  which  would


en.  III.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


63


engairo  men  to  receiTe  the  testimony  of  the
apostle ;  (md  others  fidelity,  as  if  the  apostle
meant,  ^  There  are  few  men  whom  we  can
trust."

Ver.  3. — Bnt;  in  contrast  with  the  men
just  mentioned.  The  Lord  is  faithful ;  as  if
the  apostle  had  said, "  Man  may  be  faithless,
but  the  Lord  is  faithful "  (see  Bom.  iii.  4).
**  In  contrast  to  the  infidelity  of  man,  he
praises  the  fidelity  of  Gkxl"  (Bengel).  By
the  Lord,  Christ  is  meant.  In  the  former
Epistle,  faithfulness  is  attributed  to  God
(1  Thess.  V.  24),  here  to  Christ.  This  faith-
fulness  of  Christ  consisted  in  watching  over
his  Church,  and  in  effecting  its  diifusion  in
spite  of  all  the  opposition  of  these  unreason-
able and  wicked  men.  Who  ihall  stablish
yon,  and  keep  you  from  evil ;  or,  the  evil.
The  word  "  evil "  may  be  either  masculine
or  neuter:  if  masculine,  then  it  denotes
"the  evil  one;"  if  neuter,  then  "evil"
in  general.  There  is  nothing  in  the  word
itself  to  determine  its  meaning;  this  must
be  learned  from  the  context  Most  com-
mentators (Calvin,  Bengel,  Olshausen,  Hof-
mann,  Macknight,  EUicott,  Eadie,  and
Bishop  Alexander)  suppose  that  the  evil
one  is  meant ;  and  it  is  so  rendered  in  the
K.  V. :  "  Guard  you  from  the  evil  one."  But
it  is  better  to  take  the  word  abstractly —
"  evil "  in  general,  whether  evil  persons  or
evil  things ;  as  a  contrast  to  "  every  good
word  and  work"  (ch.  ii.  17).  So  Alford,
Liinemann,  De  Wette,  Jowett,  Lillie.  There
is  the  same  difierence  of  opinion  with  regard
to  the  words  in  the  Lord's  Prayer :  "  Deliver
us  from  evil ; "  or  "  from  the  evil  one "
(B.y.).  Here,  also,  notwithstanding  the
high  authorities  on  the  opposite  side,  we
consider  that  our  Lord's  words  are  not
limited  to  the  evil  one,  but  are  to  be  taken
generally — "  evil "  in  the  widest  sense,  as
being  much  more  forcible.

Ver.  4. — And  we  have  oonfldenee  in  the
Lord.  The  apostle  confidently  expects  the
obedience  of  the  Thessalonians,  but  his
oonfidcnco  is  not  fixed  on  them^n  their
own  efforts,  endeavours,  and  resolutions —
but  on  the  Lord,  namely,  Christ;  on  his
grace  and  strength  communicated  to  and
perfected  in  weakness.  The  obedience  of
the  Thessalonians  flowed  from  the  grace
of  Christ;  it  was  in  consequence  of  the
communication  of  the  influences  of  his
Spirit  that  they  were  enabled  to  make  pro-
gress and  to  persevere  in  the  Christian  life.
•*  Here,"  observes  Professor  Jowett,  "  as
elsewhere,  the  apostle  speaks  of  believing,
hoping,  doing  nil  things  in  Christ.  We
lead  an  ordinary  life  as  well  as  a  religious
one ;  but,  with  the  apostle,  his  ordinary  life
is  his  religious  one,  and  hence  he  uses
religious  expressions  in  reference  to  all  that
he  says  and  does."    The  apostle  lives  in


the  sphere  of  Christ.  Tonohing  yon ;  with
reference  to  you — the  direction  of  his  con-
fidence. That  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the
things  which  we  command  yon.  There  is
here  the  same  union  of  Divine  assistance
and  human  effort,  of  Gkni's  working  and
man's  working,  which  pervades  the  whole
scheme  of  the  gospel  salvation  (see  Phil.  ii.
12, 13).

Ver.  5. — ^And  the  Lord ;  namely,  Christ,
for  so  the  word  "  Lord  "  is  to  be  rendered  in
St  PauPs  Epistles.  Bishop  Wordsworth
supposes  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here
invoked,  as  both  God  and  Christ  are  after-
wards  mentioned  in  the  petition;  but  the
term  "  Lord  "  is  not  applied  by  the  apostle
to  the  Holy  Ghost;  2  Cor.  iii.  17  is  the
only  apparent  exception.  Direct  yonr  hearts ;
as  the  heart  is  the  fountain  of  Christian
life — ^the  centre  of  the  will.  Into  the  love
of  God.  Here  not  Gk>d*s  love  to  us,  specially
"the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God  in
Christ  and  his  work  of  redemption"  (Ols-
hausen) ;  nor  the  love  of  God  to  man,  which
is  to  be  the  pattern  of  our  love  to  Gk>d  ;  but,
objectively,  our  love  to  Gtod.  This  love  of
God  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  Law ;  and  hence
the  apostle  prays  that  the  Thessalonians
may  be  directed  into  it  as  the  source  and
essence  of  all  acceptable  obedience.  And
into  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ.  The
words,  "patient  waiting,"  are  but  one
word  in  the  original,  generally  translated
"patience"  or  "endurance."  The  clause
has  been  differently  interpreted.  Some
(Calvin,  Hofmann,  Jowett)  render  it,  as  in
the  A. v.,  "patient  waiting  for  Christ."
And  this  is  conformable  to  the  context,  as
the  object  of  Paul  wsis  to  repress  all  impatient
longing  for  the  advent.  But  such  a  mean-
ing is  not  linguistically  justifiable.  Others
render  it,  "patience  for  Christ,"  that  is,
steadfast  endurance  for  his  sake  (De  Wette);
but  there  is  no  preposition  in  the  original.
The  words  simply  mean  "  Christ's  patience,"
or  "the  patience  of  Christ"  (R.V.),  the
patience  which  he  exhibited  under  his
unparalleled  sufferings.  The  Thessalonians
were  exposed  to  persecutions,  and  therefore
the  apostle  prays  that  they  might  be  directed
into  the  patience  of  Christ,  as  this  would
enable  them  to  bear  all  their  sufferings  with
oomix>sure.  Love  and  patience  comprehend
the  active  and  passive  virtues  of  Christianity.

Now  follows  a  warning  against  the  dis-
orderly life  and  conduct  which  the  expec-
tation of  the  immediate  advent  of  Christ
had  produced.  On  account  of  the  supposed
nearness  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  great
disorders  had  arisen  in  the  Thessalonian
Church.  Work  had  been  given  up  by
many,  who    walked    about    in    fanftti'mi


C4        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ul  1—18.


idleness.  The  apostle  hod  censiurcd  this
oondact  in  his  former  Epistle  (1  Thcss.  iv.
11,  12),  but  the  evil  had  rather  increased
than  diminished;  and,  accordingly,  he  se-
Yciely  rcbokcs  this  spirit,  and  sets  himself
to  correct  the  disorders  occasioned  by  it.

Yer.  6. — ^How  we  oommand  yon,  brethren.
An  injunction,  not  specially  directed  to  the
elders  or  office-bearers,  but  to  the  members,  of
the  Church  in  general  («ee  1  Thess.  v.  14).  In
the  Hame  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Chriit.  Strength-
ening the  command,  as  being  given  in  the
Name  and  authority  of  the  great  Head  of  the
Church ;  not  we,  but  Christ  himself  commands
you.  That  ye  withdraw  yonnelYes.  A
nautical  expression,  denoting  to  **  shorten
the  sails ; "  hence  metaphorically  to  keep  out
of  the  way,  to  withdraw ;  that  ye  avoid  in-
tercourse and  fellowship  with ;  no  allusion
as  yet  to  excommunication.  Trom  every
brotiier — fellow-Christian — that  walketh  dis-
orderly; literally,  out  of  the  rank»  (see  1
Thess.  y.  14).  And  not  after  the  tradition ;
or,  the  instructions ;  not  the  example  of  the
apostle,  which  is  i^terwards  mentioned,  but
the  inbtructions  which  he  orally  delivered
when  at  Thessalonica,  and  subsequently
confirmed  by  the  Epistle  which  he  had
written  to  them  (see  oh.  iL  15).  Whioh  he
receiyed  of  uf.  Here  the  readings  of  manu-
scripts differ.  Some  read  **  which  you  re-
ceived of  us,"  and  others  "  which  they,"
namely,  those  represented  by  the  brother
that  walketh  disorderly,  "  receive  of  us "
(so  B.V.).

Ver.  7. — For  yonnelYes  know ;  without  it
being  necessary  for  me  to  say  anything  about
the  matter;  ye  yourselves  are  witnesses.
How  ye  ought  to  follow  (or,  imitate)  us;
better,  perhaps,  to  be  restricted  to  Paul  than
used  as  inclusive  of  Silas  and  Timothy.  For
we  behayed  not  onrselyes  disorderly  among
you ;  referring  to  the  apostle's  residence  in
Thessalonica.

Yer.  8. — Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's
bread;  a  Hebraism  for  ** neither  did  we
get  our  sustenance,"  as  bread  was  the  staff
of  life.  For  nought;  gratis,  free  of  expense.
But  wrought  with  labour  and  travail  night
and  day,  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable
unto  any  of  you.  The  apostle  makes  the
same  declaration  in  his  First  Epistle,  ex-
pressed in  almost  similar  terms :  **■  For  ye
remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail ;
for  labouring  night  and  day,  because  we
would  not  be  chargeable  unto  any  of  you,
we  preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  "  (1
Thess.  ii.  9).

Yer.  9.— Not  because  we  have  not  power ;
that  is,  to  demand  support.  Paul,  as  an
apostle,  had  the  right  of  maintenance  from  the
Cnurches  among  whom  he  laboured.  This
right  of  support  he  insists  upon  in  the  First


Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  ix.  1 — 18).
But  for  the  sake  of  his  converts,  to  give
them  an  example  of  diligent  working,  and
to  remove  every  impediment  to  the  progress
of  the  gospel,  he  often  waived  his  rights.
Thus  he  did  at  Thessalonica  (1  Thess.  u.  6,
9),  at  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  3  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  9),
and  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  34) ;  in  all  these
places  he  laboured  for  his  maintenance  as  a
tent-maker.  But — we  acted  so— to  make  onr-
selyes an  enfample  unto  yon  to  follow —
imitate — ^oi.

Yer.  10.— For  even  when  we  were  with
yon ;  during  our  residence  in  Thessalonica.
This  we  commanded,  that  if  any  man  would
not  work,  neither  should  he  eat  This  or
similar  expressions  have  been  shown  to  be
a  proverb  m  frequent  use  among  the  Jews.
Thus :  **  Whoever  doth  not  work  doth  not
eat"  CBereshith  Babba');  *'Let  not  him
who  would  not  labour  before  the  sabbath
eat  on  the  sabbath  "  (*  In  Lib.  Zenon.').  It
is  a  law  of  nature,  and  the  apostle  here  sanc-
tions it  as  a  law  of  Christianity.  There  is
here  a  reference  to  the  sentence  pronounced
on  man  in  Poradise  in  consequence  of  dis-
obedience :  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt
thou  eat  bread  *'  (Gen.  iii.  19).  Labour,  in-
deed, may  in  one  point  of  view  be  considered
as  part  of  the  curse,  but  it  is  also  a  blessing
adapted  to  man's  fallen  nature.  Labour  is
the  law  of  Grod;  idleness  is  the  parent  of
many  crimes  and  is  productive  of  misery.
He  who  has  no  business  allotted  to  him
ought  to  choose  some  useful  occupation  for
himself.

Yer.  11. — ^For;  the  reason  for  the  allusion
to  this  proverb.  We  hear.  The  apostle  had
either  heard  from  Timothy  who  hsui  rejoined
him  from  Thessalonica,  or  from  the  report
of  the  bearers  of  the  First  Epiatle.  That
there  are  some  which  walk  among  yon  dis-
orderly, working  not  at  all,  but  are  In^y-
bodies.  There  is  here  a  paranomasia  or
play  upon  words,  the  words  **  working  "  and
'*  busy  bodies  "  being  cognate.  It  is  difficult
to  preserve  the  resemblance  in  a  translation.
"Busy  only  with  what  is  not  their  own
business  "  ( Jowett) ;  **  Working  at  no  busi-
ness, but  being  busybodies'*  (Ellicott) ;  **  Not
busy,  but  busybodies  "  (Wordsworth).  The
word  *^  busybodies  "  denotes  busy  in  useless
and  superfluous  things,  about  which  one
need  not  trouble  himself — occupied  about
trifles.  Tlie  apostle  refers  to  the  fanatical
excitement  in  the  Church  on  account  of
which  the  Thessalonians,  instead  of  occupy-
ing themselves  with  the  fulfilment  of  the
duties  of  their  earthly  calling,  busied  them-
selves about  matters  which  were  unprofitable
and  vain.

Yer.  12. — How  them  that  are  snoh  we
command  and  nhort  by  (or,  as  the  best
manuscripts    reeui,    in)    our    Lord    Jesna


CH.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        65


Chrift ;  in  him,  as  the  souroe  of  authority ;
**  In  his  Name."  That  with  qnietnen.  In
contrast  to  being  busybodies,  with  cahnness
of  spirit,  freedom  from  excitement.  They
work,  and  eat  their  own  bread;  not  the
bread  of  others,  but  their  own,  for  which
they  have  laboured  and  which  they  have
earned.  They  would  thus  be  independent
of  the  liberality  and  generosity  of  others.
(For  similar  exliortations,  see  1  Thess.  iy.
11 ;  Eph.  iv.  1'8.)

Ver.  13. — But  ye,  brethren;  contrasted
with  those  who  walk  disorderly,  ye  who  have
not  neglected  your  worldly  employments.
Be  not  weary  in  well-doing ;  or,  as  it  is  in
the  margin,  faint  not  in  well'doing ;  **  lose  not
heart  in  well-doing  *'  (EUicott).  The  phrase
has  been  differently  interpreted.  Thus
Ghiysostom  explains  it  that  indolent  persons,
however  justly  they  may  be  condemned,  must
not  be  suffered  to  perish  from  want — a  mean-
ing opposed  to  the  context.  Calvin  renders
it  that,  although  there  are  many  that  are
undeserving  and  abuse  our  liberality,  we
must  not  on  this  account  leave  off  helping
those  who  need  our  aid :  let  not  the  sloth  of
those  disorderly  persons  hinder  or  damp
your  charity — a  most  needful  admonition,
but  it  does  not  exhaust  all  that  is  meant  by
the  precept.  Others  restrict  it  to  diligence
in  our  earthly  duties :  though  othera  be
idle,  working  not  at  all,  let  not  their  example
lead  you  astray ;  bo  not  ye  weary  in  doing
what  is  right  and  proper  (Liinemann).  But
the  phrase  is  to  be  understood  in  its  general
sense,  denoting  holy  and  upright  conduct
(see  Gal.  vi.  9,  where  the  same  exhortation
is  given).

ver.  14.— And  if  any  man  obey  not  onr
word  by  this  Epistle,  note  that  man.  Some
attach  the  words,  **  by  this  Epistle,"  to  '*  note
that  man,"  and  render  the  clause,  **  Note  that
man  by  an  epistle  to  me.**  Thus  Calvin :
**  He  desires  that  they  may  be  reported  to
him,  that  ho  may  reprove  them  by  his
authority."  So  also  in  the  margin  of  our
A. v.:  "Signify  that  man  by  an  epistle.**
But  the  presence  of  the  article  denoting  a
definite  EpUtle,  ''  this  Epistle,*'  and  the
order  of  the  words  in  the  Greek,  are  against
this  interpretation.  Others  render  the  clause,
**  Note  that  man  by  this  Epistle ;  **  point  out
to  him  the  injunctions  and  the  warnings
which  are  contained  in  it  against  such  a  line  of
conduct ;  but  such  a  meaning  is  too  artificial.
It  is  better,  therefore,  to  attach  the  words,
••by  this  Epistle,'*  to  "  our  word,**  as  in  the
A.V. :  *•  If  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by
this  Epistle.**  **  Note  that  man ;  **  thiit  is,  set
a  mark  upon  him,  note  hiiu  for  the  sake  of
avoidance,  excommunicate  him  from  your
aociety.  And  have  no  company  with  him.
Exclude  him  from  your  fellowship  meetings,
your  love-feasts.    That  he  may  be  ashamed;

U.  THESSALONIANS.


the  design  or  object  of  thus  noting  him.
As  if  tho  apostle  had  said,  "Bring  the
force  of  Cliristian  opinion  to  bear  upon  him.
Show  your  moral  indignation  by  excluding
him  from  the  Christian  community."  The
noting  or  excommunicating  was  more  of
the  nature  of  a  correction  than  of  a  punish-
ment, and  its  design  was  the  reclaiming  of
the  offender.

Ver.  15. — ^Yet;  or  as  it  is  in  the  original,
and;  a  purely  connective  particle.  Count
him  not  as  an  enemy;  an  entire  outcast.
But  admonish  him  as  a  brother;  a  Chris-
tian brother.  No  hostile  feeling  was  to  be
united  with  this  avoidance  of  intercourse
with  the  erring,  but  rather  loving  admo-
nition, inasmuch  as  he  was  still  a  (Christian
brother.

Yer.  16. — ^How  the  Lord  of  peace  himself.
In  1  Thess.  v.  23  it  is  "  the  God  of  peace  *'
who  is  invoked :  •*  And  the  very  God  of
peace  sanctify  you  wholly.**  Hero  it  is
Christ  who  is  named  as  **  the  Lord  of  peace."
He  is  the  Lord  of  peace,  as  the  Author,  tiie
Procurer,  the  Mediator  of  peace.  Peace  is
here  to  be  taken  in  its  widest  sense — peace
with  God,  complete  salvation.  Give  yon
peace  always  by  all  means.  Some  manu-
scripts read  "  in  every  place,"  but  the  read-
ing in  our  version  is  best  attested—**  always
by  all  means ; "  **  at  all  times  and  in  every
way ;  **  whether  it  be  outward  or  inward,  for
time  or  for  eternity.  The  apostle  could
desire  no  higher  blessing  for  his  converts.
The  Lord  be  with  yon  all.

Yer.  17.— The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine
own  hand.  The  apostle  usually  dictated
his  Epistles  to  an  amanuensis,  but  wrote
the  concluding  words  with  his  own  hand.
Thus  Tertius  was  his  amanuensis  when  he
wrote  the  Epistle  to  tho  Romans  (Rom.  xvi.
22).  Probably  the  Epistle  to  the  Gkilatians
is  an  exception  (Gal.  vi.  11),  and  also  the
Epistle  to  Philemon  (Philem.  19).  The  same
authentication  expressed  in  the  same  words
is  found  in  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corin-
thians (1  Cor.  xvi.  21),  and  in  the  Epistle  to
the  Colossians  (Col.  iv.  18).  Whidh ;  refer-
ring, not  to  the  salutation,  but  ta  tho  whole
clause ;  which  circumstanoe.  Is  the  token ;
the  mark  of  authentication.  Of  eyexy  Epistle.
Such  authentication  was  especially  necessary
in  the  case  of  the  Thessalonians,  as  it  would
seem  that  a  forged  epistle  had  been  circu-
lated among  them  (ch.  ii.  2).  Some  restrict
tho  words  to  the  Epistles  which  the  apostle
would  afterwards  write  to  the  Thessalonians
(Lunemann);  but  they  are  rather  to  be  under-
stood of  a  caution  which  the  apoetle  prac-
tised, or  was  to  practise,  in  all  his  Epistles.
Some  refer  the  t^iken  to  the  words,  "The
salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,"
and  although  these  words  are  only  found  in
two  other  Epistles,  yet  it  is  asserted  that  the

r


66       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.    [oa.ni.  1—18.


other  Epistles  were  otherwise  soiBoiently
authenticated.  Bat  it  appears  better  to  un-
deratand  by  the  salutation  the  benediction
which  follows ;  and  a  similar  salutation  or


benediction  is  found  at  the  close  of  all  Fsul's
Epistles  (see  1  These,  y.  28).

Ver.  18.— The  graes  ol  ovr  Lord  Jsms
Christ  be  with  yon  aU.


HOMILETICa

Yer.  1. — Intercessory  prayer.  1.  Its  duty.  We  must  not  be  selfish  or  confined  in
our  prayers,  but  bear  each  other's  burdens  before  a  throne  of  grace.  Christian  love
finds  its  outlet  in  intercession.  A  desire  for  the  salvation  of  others  must  manifest
itself  in  prayer  for  tbeir  conversion.  Ood  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  and  will  answer  our
prayers  for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves.  The  command  of  God  to  make  intercesdon
for  all  men  should  constrain  us,  and  the  example  of  holy  men  should  encourao^  us.
2.  Its  objects.  Sinners,  that  they  may  be  saved ;  believers,  that  they  may  be  confirmed
in  the  faith  and  kept  from  evil ;  ministers,  that  their  ministry  may  be  blessed ;  the
gospel,  that  it  may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified.

Yer.  3. — Perseverance  of  the  saints.  1.  Its  nature.  By  the  perseverance  of  the
saints  is  meant  that  all  true  believers,  those  who  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith  sjid
sanctified  by  his  Spirit,  can  never  fall  from  the  faith ;  that  they  shall  always  abide  in
a  state  of  grace  or  favour  with  God ;  and  that  they  shall  continue  in  holiness  unto  the
end.  2.  Its  ground.  The  perseverance  of  the  saints  is  founded  on  the  faithfulness
of  Christ.  *'  The  Lord  is  faithful."  He  who  has  begun  the  good  work  will  carry  it  on ;
he  who  intercedes  for  us  in  heaven  will  obtain  his  requests ;  ho  who  has  bestowed  upon
us  his  Spirit  will  not  withdraw  his  grace.  3.  Its  uses.  The  perseverance  of  the  saints
is  full  of  comfort  to  confirmed  believers ;  it  is  that  which  imparts  security  to  all  their
other  blessings,  transforms  their  hopes  into  assurance,  and  fills  them  with  joy  unspeak-
able. On  the  other  hand,  it  affords  no  encouragement  to  licentiousness,  for  it  is  a  per-
severance in  holiness ;  it  is  not  that  believers  \^l  be  saved  whatever  their  conduct  may
be,  but  that  they  will  persevere  in  holiness  unto  the  end.

Yer.  6. — The  patience  of  Christ.  1.  Its  perfection.  As  seen  in  his  conduct  toward
God  and  man  during  his  sufferings,  and  in  contrast  to  the  conduct  of  the  most  patient
men,  as  for  example  Job,  Moses,  and  Paul.  2.  Its  example.  We  have  need  of  patience
in  this  world  of  toil  and  suffering;.  A  contemplation  of  the  patience  with  which  Christ
endured  his  unparalleled  sufferings  is  the  best  antidote  against  impatience  under  any
sufferings  which  we  may  bo  called  upon  to  endure.

Yer.  6. — Avoidance  of  evil  company.  The  apostle  commands  us  to  withdraw  ourselves
from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  to  have  no  fellowship  with  those  who
obey  not  his  instructions.  We  must  avoid  making  wicked  men  our  companions,  other-
wise we  shall  soon  be  led  astray  and  contaminated  by  their  evil  principles.  The  happi-
ness or  misery  of  the  young  for  time  and  for  eternity  is,  humanly  speaking,  dependent
upon  those  whom  they  now  choose  as  their  intimate  companions.

Yer.  10. — The  sanctity  of  labour.  True  religion  hallows  earthly  labour.  Christianity
is  not  designed  to  draw  a  man  out  of  the  world,  to  cause  him  to  neglect  his  earthly
duties,  or  to  make  him  idle;  but  to  consecrate  and  sanctify  his  worldly  employments;
to  cause  him  to  perform  them  in  a  religious  spirit,  and  to  look  up  to  God  as  his  chief
Master.  Paul  himself  wrought  at  the  occupation  of  a  tent-roaker ;  and  a  far  greater
than  Paul,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  was  for  the  greater  part  of  his  life  engaged
in  the  occupation  of  a  carpenter.  "Earthly  things,"  observes  Dr.  Arnold,  "are
precious  when  we  use  them  as  the  materials  with  which  we  may  build  for  ourselves
a  heavenly  habitation  ;  and  the  humblest  and  most  ordinary  trade  or  employment  may
be  carried  on  with  such  a  temper  end  such  a  spirit  that  it  may  advance  us  daily  on  our
way  to  heaven ;  and  the  angels  themselves  may  behold  us  engaged  in  it  with  respect
and  love."


Yer.  Ih^Evil  of  being  busybodies.    Busybodies  are  idle,  yet  busy ;  idle  as  r^ards


cH.ra.1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAKS.       67

their  own  work,  but  busy  with  the  business  of  others ;  ever  meddling  with  what
belongs  not  to  them ;  always  counselling  others  and  interfering  with  their  concerns,
whilst  neglecting  their  own ; — a  character  at  once  mean  and  degrading,  the  cause  of
much  annoyance  to  themselves  and  of  mischief  to  others.

Ver.  13. — Weariness  in  weU-doing,  1.  The  specification  of  some  different  forms  of
wdl-doing.  The  advancement  of  men's  temporal  interests,  the  promotion  of  religion,
the  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  working  with  and  for  Christ.  We  must  remember  that  we
ourselves  must  first  he  good  before  we  can  do  good ;  there  must  first  be  well-being
before  there  can  be  well-doing.  Good  works  can  only  proceed  from  good  men.  2.  The
causes  of  weariness  in  well-doing,  A  love  of  ease  and  a  wish  not  to  put  ourselves  to
trouble ;  a  want  of  self-denial ;  the  monotony  of  the  work ;  a  want  of  co-operatiun
and  sympathy ;  a  want  of  apparent  success ;  a  want  of  realization  of  Christ's  claims
on  our  lives  and  services.  3.  Considerations  why  we  should  not  he  weary  in  well-doing.
Our  duty  as  Christians  ;  the  bright  example  of  Christ;  the  reward  which  awaits
the  rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1, 2. — The  prayers  of  the  Thessalonians  asked  hy  the  aposUe,  He  had  prayed
for  them ;  he  now  asks  them  to  pray  for  him.

I.  Ministers  need  the  prayers  of  their  people.  "Finally,  brethren,  pray  for
ns."  1.  Because  their  work  is  a  great  work,  2.  Because  it  is  weighted  down  tvith
opposition  and  hindrance.  3.  Because  ministers  feel  their  need,  not  only  of  human
sympathy,  hut  of  Divine  grace,  wisdom,  and  strength,  4.  Because  such  prayers  knit
the  hearts  of  pastor  and  people  more  closely  together,

II.  The  double  purport  of  the  prayer  for  the  apostle.  It  was  for  no  mere  per-
sonal or  seltish  object,  but  had  exclusive  reference  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.  To
pray  for  ministers  is  to  pray  for  the  gospel.  1.  It  was  a  prayer  for  the  rapid  spread  of
the  gospel,  *'  That  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run  and  be  glorified^  even  as  it  is  also
with  you."  (1)  There  were  grave  hindrances  in  its  way  presented  by  Jewish  prejudice.
Gentile  fanaticism,  and  the  jealousy  of  the  Roman  power.  He  is  anxious  that  the
gospel  should  not  go  halting  and  picking  its  steps,  but  ''like  a  strong  man  rejoicing
to  run  a  race,"  overleaping  all  barriers  of  space  and  prejudice  and  hatred.  Ministers
have  their  **  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace."  It  is  Gbd  only
who  can  remove  all  impediments  and  make  the  mountains  a  plain  before  Zerubbabel.
(2)  The  apostle  was  anxious  that  the  gospel  should  be  glorified — as  "  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation" — by  the  conversion  of  large  numbers  of  people,  by  their  cheerful
obedience  to  the  truth,  and  by  their  orderly  walk  in  the  gospel.  He  quotes  the  example
of  the  Thessalonians  themselves — "even  as  it  is  with  you" — ^as  worthy  of  imitation
in  spite  of  some  exceptional  defects.  The  courteous  reference  would  lead  his  converts
to  pray  for  him  with  deeper  interest  and  fervour.  2.  It  was  a  prayer  for  deliverance
from  obstructive  enemies,  "And  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and.
wicked  men."  The  impediments  to  the  free  progress  of  the  gospel  were  evil  men.
They  were  his  Jewish  enemies  at  Corinth  who  rose  against  the  apostle  and  brought
him  to  the  judgment-seat  of  Gallic  (Acts  xviii.  12).  (1)  It  was  a  prayer  that  his
career  mi^ht  not  be  cut  short  by  their  malignity.  The  apostle^s  life  was,  perhaps,  the
most  valuable  in  all  the  world  in  that  generation,  but  it  seemed  to  be  at  the  mercy
of  men  without  scruple  or  mercy.  He  was,  indeed,  "in  deaths  oft."  His  enemies
either  lay  in  wait  for  him  to  destroy  him,  or  roused  the  fanaticism  of  mobs  against  him.
(2)  It  was  an  enmity  directed  by  men  without  any  check  from  reason  or  principle.
His  most  persevering  enemies  through  life  were  the  Jews.  No  reason  or  argument
could  satisfy  them  or  mollify  their  hatred.  Their  conduct  was  easily  explained  by  the
fact  that  "  all  men  have  not  faith."  As  if  nothing  better  could  be  expected  from
godless  and  blaspheming  Jews. — T.  C.

Vers.  3,  i. — The  apoetU^s  c^ieerful  asauranet  and  confidence  on  behalf  of  ike  Thetmi^


G8         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [CH.  in.  1—18.

lonians.    He  dismisses  all  thoughts  about  himself,  and  returns  to  the  thought  of
comforting  his  converts.

L  Thb  double  blessing  IK  STORE  FOB  THEM.  "  Who  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep
you  from  eviL"  1.  An  essential  factor  in  their  Christian  comfort  wcu  establishment
(1)  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  which  were  threatened  by  godless  or  fickle  specu-
lators ;  (2)  in  the  grace  of  faith,  which  may  be  weakened  by  persecution  or  by  miscon-
ceptions of  truth ;  (3)  in  the  profession  of  faith,  which  true  believers  will  be  able  to
hold  fast  to  the  end.  2,  An  equally  essential  factor  was  their  preservation  from  evU^
either  (1)  in  the  form  of  sin,  that  it  should  not  have  dominion  over  them  or  reign  unto
death ;  (2)  or  in  the  form  of  Satanic  temptation ;  (3)  or  in  the  form  of  opposition
from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men.

II.  The  abodment  to  assure  them  of  this  double  blessing.  ''The  Lord  is
faithful."  He  will  be  true  to  his  promises,  and  not  sufiiBr  one  of  them  to  fail.  The
Lord  Jesus  is  at  once  the  Author  and  the  Finisher  of  our  faith.  ''  We  are  complete  in
him ; "  we  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might."  '*  If  we  believe
not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself  (2  Tim.  ii.  13).  "  I  can  do  all
thin^  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me  "  (Phil.  iv.  13).

III.  The  confidence  of  the  apostle  based  on  this  assubance.  *'  But  we  have
confidence  in  the  Lord  touching  you,  that  you  are  both  doing  and  will  do  the  things
which  we  command  you."  1.  The  ultimate  ground  of  his  cor^idence  touching  them  was
in  Vie  grace  and  strength  of  the  Lord,  not  in  themselves,  or  their  wisdom,  or  strength.
2.  The  matter  of  his  confidence — their  present  and  future  obedience  to  his  commands.
There  must  be  a  patient  continuance  in  well-nioiDg;  a  ready,  universal,  perpetual
obedience  to  the  commands  he  had  already  given  them  by  the  authority  of  Christ,  and
to  those  which  he  was  now  about  to  give  to  them. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  6. — The  apostle*  s  further  prayer  for  his  converts.  They  needed  grace  to  enable
them  to  discharge  all  these  duties.

I.  The  Loed  Jesus  is  the  true  Dibectob  of  the  heabt.  ''The  Lord  direct
your  hearts  into  the  love  of  Ood,  and  the  patience  of  Christ."  1.  The  heart  needs
direction.  It  is  the  fountain  of  life  and  feeling  and  action.  But  it  is  often  wayward
in  its  impulses.  2.  The  heart  that  is  self-led  is  misled.  We  cannot  direct  our  own
hearts,  neither  can  apostles  do  it  for  us ;  the  Lord  only  can  do  it.  He  directs  us  by
his  Spirit,  not  only  into  all  truth,  but  into  all  right  feeling  and  all  acceptable  obedience.
He  only  can  change  us  into  his  own  likeness.

II.  The  bight  direction  of  the  Christian  heart.  "  Into  the  love  of  (Jod,  and
the  patience  of  Christ."  1.  The  love  of  Ood  is  the  spring  of  cdl  evangelical  obedience^
and  the  motive-force  of  all  spiritual  power.  The  Thessalonians  had  love  already,  but
the  apostle  prays  for  fuller  measures  of  it,  that  they  may  be  prepared  for  yet  more
exact  and  thorough  and  unquestioning  obedience.  2.  The  patience  of  Christy  which
so  characterized  him,  is  to  be  copied  in  the  lives  of  his  followers  exposed  to  similar  per-
secutions. His  sufferings  are  their  sufferings ;  and  they  need  his  patience  to  enable
them  to  endure  them,  as  well  as  to  sustain  that  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing"
in  the  midst  of  evil  which  will  keep  them  free  from  restlessness  and  disorderly  walking.
— T.C.

Ver.  6. — The  apostle* s  method  of  dealing  with  the  idle  husyhodies  of  the  Thessalonian
Church,    This  is  one  of  the  leading  objects  of  this  Epistle.

I.  The  nature  of  the  offence  rebuked  by  the  apostle.  "Withdraw  your-
selves from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  tradition  they
received  from  us."  1.  It  was  a  hahit  of  idleness  caused  by  the  unsettling  tendency  of
the  belief  that  the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  was  near  at  hand  to  wind  up  all  human
affairs.  They  were,  therefore, "  working  not  at  all,"  allowing  themselves  to  be  ignobly
dependent  either  upon  richer  brethren  or  upon  ecclesiasiical  funds.  2.  Linked  vnth
this  idle  habit  was  the  disposition  to  be  "Imsybodies** — concerning  themselves  with
matters  that  did  not  belong  to  them.  "  Bishops  in  other  men's  dioceses,"  as  the  figure
of  the  apostle  elsewhere  describes  the  same  class  (1  Pet.  iv.  15) ;  like  the  yoimger  widows
who  "  were  wandering  about  from  house  to  house,  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also
and  busy  bodies"  (1  Tim.  v.  13).    This  unworthy  habit  of  life  was  a  serious  annoyance


CH.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         69

and  interruption  to  neighbours,  as  well  as  an  unwarranted  tax  upon  the  generosity  oi
their  rich  patrons.  3.  Jt  was  an  aggravation  of  the  offence  that  the  offenders  were  not
only  '*  hrethren!^  hut  were  living  in  deliberate  disregard  of  the  apostle^s  oral  instructions
during  his  first  yisit  to  Thessalonica.  **  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we
commanded  you,  that  if  any  would  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat.**  Thus  they  showed
a  reckless  defiance  of  apostolic  counsel.  This  vras  surely  to  **  break  rank,**  as  the  word
**  disorder  "  suggests.

II.  TuE  apostle's  oommand  to  the  Church  BESPECTiNa  these  offenders.  1.
The  time  was  past  for  mere  requests  or  exhortations.  He  had  addressed  them  in  this
milder  tone  in  the  First  Epistle  :  '*  We  beseech  you  that  ye  study  to  be  quiet,  and  do
your  own  business  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  11).  But  his  request  had  been  disregarded.  2.  The
<:ommand  he  now  addresses  to  them  was  hacked  hy  Divine  authority,  **  We  command
you  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  Because  he  is  the  Source  of  all  autho-
rity in  the  Church;  ^2)  because  the  conduct  of  the  Thessalonian  busybodies  was
a  dishonour  to  the  Lord  who  bought  them;  (3)  because  k  was  a  command  to  which
obedience  could  be  secured  so  long  as  the  Christians  '*  directed  their  hearts  into  the
love  of  God,  and  the  patience  of  Christ."  3.  It  was  a  command  to  the  body  of  tJ^e
Church  to  "  withdraw  themselves  "  from  the  disorderly  brethren,  (1)  It  was  no  command
to  excommunicate  them.  It  was  no  case  of  expulsion  or  exclusion  from  Church
fellowship,  but  (2)  what  may  be  called  social  excommunication.  The  brethren  were  to
avoid  all  unnecessary  intercourse  with  them,  perhaps  the  richer  members  to  encourage
them  no  longer  in  their  indolent  and  restless  fanaticism  by  their  ill-placed  generosity,
and  thus  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  shame  and  repentance  for  their  laziness  and  tale-
bearing.— T.  0.

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  example  of  the  apostle  himse{f  as  a  support  to  his  command,  1,
The  apostle's  example.  '*  For  we  were  not  disorderly  among  you,  nor  did  we  eat
bread  for  nought  from  any  one,  but  in  toil  and  weariness,  working  night  and  day.*'
Though  there  were  rich  people  in  the  Church,  he  accepted  no  gift  from  them,  but
laboured  at  his  craft  assiduously  to  earn  a  living  for  himself.  1.  His  refusal  of  support
from  his  converts  did  not  invalidate  his  right  to  it,  ''Not  because  we  have  not
authority  " — an  authority  which  he  fully  expounds  in  1  Cor.  ix. — for  "  the  labourer  is
worthy  of  his  hire,"  and  has  he  not  "a  right  to  forbear  working"?  2.  It  was  based
upon  a  supreme  regard  to  Thessalonian  interests,  (1)  "That  we  might  not  be  a  burden
to  any  one  of  you,"  (2)  and  '*  that  we  might  give  ourselves  for  a  pattern  unto  you  to
imitate  us."  The  apostle  had  evidently  in  view  the  extravagances  of  conduct  that  were
beginning  at  an  early  period  to  spring  from  misunderstaDdiogs  respecting  the  time  of
the  Lord^  coming.  He  was  not  ashamed  of  his  handicraft.  iTo  Christian  man  ought
•ever  to  be  ashamed  of  honest  labour.

II.  The  apostle's  injunction  to  the  disorderly.  "  For  even  when  we  were  with
you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that  if  any  one  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eat"  1.
This  does  not  apply  to  those  who  cannot  work,  but  to  those  who  will  not.  The  command
does  not  touch  cases  of  charity.  2.  It  is  a  command  based  on  the  original  law  of  Eden,
**  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread  "  (Gen.  iii.  19).  Work  is  a  Divine  order,
not  repealed  by  Christianity  but  lifted  up  to  higher  blessing  and  dignity.  The  idle
man  ought,  therefore,  to  be  allowed  to  suffer  the  effects  of  his  idleness.  3.  It  is  a  com-
mand which,  when  obeyed^  will  introduce  tranquillity  into  life,  and  at  the  same  time
conduce  to  an  honest  self-respect,  "  That  working  with  quietness  they  eat  their  own
bread."  (1)  They  would  thus  be  eating  their  own  bread,  not  the  bread  earned  by
others'  toil,  nor  that  reserved  by  the  same  toil  for  the  use  of  the  really  destitute  and
poor.  (2)  They  would  thus  carry  more  quietness  into  their  own  lives  as  well  as  those
of  their  neighbours,  for  there  would  be  no  time  for  intermeddling  with  other  people's
concerns.  We  should  live  '*  quiet  and  peaceable  lives  in  all  gcndliness  and  honesty  "
<1  Tim.  ii.  2).— T.  C.

Ver.  13. — Exhortation  to  weU-doing,    "  Brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well-doing."
I.  This  implies  that  they  had  been  hitherto  engaged  ik  well-doing.    '*  Walk-
inghonestly  to  them  that  were  without "  (1  Thess. iv.  12).

II.  It  IS  AN  INJX7NCTI0N  NEEDED  BT  THE   VERT  CONDITION  OF  THE  ThESSALONIAK


70       THB  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa    [oh.  m.  1— 1&

Ghubcb.  Their  charity  misht  hare  been  abased  by  the  idle,  but  they  were  not  to  be
discouraged  by  these  exampTes  of  fanatical  restlessness  from  the  practice  of  beneficence.
nL  &  IS  AK  iNJxnircnoN  fowebfullt  BBoomcEimBu  all  through  thh  oosnu
1.  It  VKu  putting  into  practice  the  patience  of  Christy  for  which  the  apostle  praved  in
thdr  interest  2.  Ood  is  glorified  hy  wdl-doing,  (John  xv.  8.)  3.  God  renCemien  iL
(Heb.  tL  9, 10.)  4.  A  blessing  attends  ii.  (Jas.  L  25.)  5.  It  foUows  m  uUo  amr
final  rest.    (Rev.  xiv.  13.)— T.  C.

Yers.  14,  15. — The  true  spirit  of  faiihful  dealing  with  an  erring  hroihm'.  The
apostle  returns  to  this  subject  again.

I.  His  bbitsratbd  gomhakd.  "  If  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  Epistle^  note
that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him.'*  Let  him  be  a  marked  man,  like  a  leper  in
your  midst,  standing  wholly  isolated  in  a  heathen  city.  This  would  be  a  social  eactn»-
sion  deeply  felt  by  a  "  brother"  who  would  be  cut  off  from  the  cordial  greetings  of  the
Ohurch.

IL  Thb  DE8IGH  OF  THIS  SOCIAL  EXooHMUNiCATioH.  '*  That  he  may  be  aabamed.*
It  is  not  **  for  destruction,"  but  for  edification ;  it  is  to  bring  the  offender  to  a  due  aenn
of  his  sin,  and  to  a  resolution  for  its  abandonment.

III.   ThB  SPIBIT  in  WHICH  THB  GOMHAKD  18  TO  BB  OARBIED  OUT.      ^  Yet  OOUnt  him

not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  1.  It  is  an  it^function  not  to  regard
him  €LS  your  enemy ^  or  as  an  enemy  of  Christy  as  if  he  had  denied  the  futh,  or  sunk  into
profligacy,  or  relapsed  into  heathenism.  There  must  be  neither  hostility  nor  careless-
ness on  your  side,  but  rather  **  the  love  that  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind."  2.  It  is  am
injunction  to  affectionate  admonition.  ''  But  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  How  this
would  be  consistent  with  the  withdrawal  of  all  intercourse  it  is  unnecessary  to  speculate.
There  was  to  be  a  faithful  dealin<;  with  him  that  he  might  be  won  back,  ana  **  Satan
have  no  advantage  "  over  him. — T.  0.

Ver.  16. — A  prayer  for  peace,  "  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  yon  peace
always  in  every  way."

I.  The  Author  of  this  blessing.  "The  Lord  of  peace  himself" — Jesus  Christ.
1.  He  is  our  abiding  Peace.  (£ph.  ii.  14.)  2.  He  gives  it  as  his  legacy  to  the  Church.
(John  xiv.  27.)  3.  Ee  guides  into  the  way  of  peace.  (Luke  i.  79.)  4.  He  is  the  Prince
of  peace,    (Isa.  ix.  6.)    5.  Peace  is  preached  by  him.    (Eph.  ii.  17 ;  Acts  x.  36.)

II.  The  peace  in  question  includes  :  1.  Reconciliation  with  Ood.  2.  Peace  vnih
one  another.  3.  Peace  in  aU  the  relations  of  life.  4.  Pecuie  in  the  midst  of  speculative
disturbances.    5.  Peace  in  the  midst  of  persecutions.    6.  Peace  in  the  prospect  of  deaih,

III.  It  was  a  prater  for  a  continuous  peace.  "Always."  It  was  to  be  as
uninterrupted  as  a  river  (Isa.  xlviii.  18),  with  no  breaks  made  in  it  by  the  world,  the
flesh,  or  the  devil.    None  but  the  Lord  of  peace  could  sustain  such  a  peace  in  power.

rv.  It  18  PEACE  to  bb  acquired  in  bvebt  way — ^BY  praying,  by  preaching,  bt
conybbsation.

V.  The  pendant  to  this  happy  prayer.  "  The  Lord  be  with  you  all."  A  com-
prehensive benediction  upon  the  disorderly  as  well  as  the  orderly  brethren  of  Thessa-
lonica.  "  Be  with  you  all " — **  by  his  presence  to  comfort  and  refresh ;  by  his  power  to
keep  and  preserve ;  by  his  grace  to  assist ;  and  by  his  Spirit  to  counsel,  advise,  and
direct."— T.  C.

Vers.  17, 18. — The  closing  salutation  with  its  autographic  significance.  "The  salu-
tation of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle :  so  I
write."  He  takes  the  pen  out  of  the  hand  of  his  amanuensis  and  writ<es  the  cksiiig
words  himself.

L  It  was  important  to  authenticate  the  Epistle.  There  were  letters  fidsdy
attributed  to  him  (1  Thess.  ii.  2).  It  is  essential  for  Christians  to  ktiow  the  distinction
between  the  human  and  the  Divine.  The  Thcssalonians  would  be  able  to  identify  his
laijje,  bold  handwriting  (Gal.  vi.  11).

II.  The  salutation  was  not  a  mere  symbol  of  friendship,  but  a  pbayeb  fob  his
bbix)ved  converts.  •*  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all."  1.  Eis
Epistles  began  with  prayer ;   they  end  with  prayer — ^**  fencing  round  that  whidi  he


CH.  m.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS,         71

said  with  mighty  walls  on  either  side."  2.  All  the  good  he  desires  for  his  converts  is
included  in  the  grace  of  the  God-Man,  The  prayer  implies  the  Divinity  of  Christ.
His  name  alone  appears  in  his  parting  supplication.  3.  It  is  a  ^parting  request  for  M
the  brethren  without  exception^  including  even  those  who  received  his  rebukes. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  1,  2. — Prayer  for  missions.  I.  The  importance  op  it.  Prayer  is  a  mighty
power ;  we  must  use  it.  We  must  not  stand  by  indifTerent  and  uninterested,  and  leave
the  progress  of  the  gospel  to  missionaries  abroad,  to  Qt)d'8  ministers  at  home.  We
must  all  take  our  part  in  the  work.  Success  in  that  work  depends  in  large  measure  on
the  prayers  of  the  faithful.  All  who  pray  earnestly  for  the  work  of  missions  are  really
helpers,  as  really,  though  not  in  the  same  degree,  as  the  most  hardworking  missionaries.
Faithful  prayer  is  as  necessary  as  faithful  preaching.  The  united  prayers  of  the  Church,
the  mighty  volume  of  supplication  that  ascends  in  behalf  of  missions,  is  the  strength  of
those  who  labour  in  loneliness  and  self-denial  among  heathen  and  savages.  Each  one
of  us,  however  humble,  may  contribute  his  share  to  the  great  result.  All  who  do  so
are  co-workers  in  the  blessed  work  of  saving  souls.  It  is  a  high  privi^ge ;  the  Lord
has  committed  the  progress  of  Christianity  to  the  prayers  of  his  people.  We  may  well
ask  ourselves  if  we  have  been  as  energetic  as  we  ought  in  that  great  spiritual  work.

II.  Thb  duty  of  prayeb.  1.  For  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  St.  Paul  urges  it  con-
stantly upon  his  converts.  He  had  been  praying  for  the  Thessalonlans ;  now  he  asks
for  their  prayers  in  return.  It  is  a  commandment.  He  bids  us  pray  that  the  Word  of
the  Lord  may  run,  that  it  may  meet  with  no  check  in  its  onward  course,  but  spread
ever  further  and  wider,'  from  city  to  city,  from  country  to  country,  till  "  the  earth  shall
be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  This  is  the  only
limit.  The  Church  must  not  be  stationary ;  it  must  be  always  in  movement.  The
water  of  life  is  living  water,  ever  welling  up  fresh  and  clear;  it  is  a  running  stream.
Stagnation  means  corruption.  The  gospel  must  keep  moving  onward,  winning  fresh
hearts,  exerting  an  ever-growing  influence  over  those  who  have  long  felt  its  power.  To
stand  still  is  to  go  back,  to  win  no  new  victories  is  to  lose  its  ancient  triumphs.  It  is
our  bounden  duty  to  help  on  this  progress  by  our  earnest  prayers.  We  are  met  by  an
inert  mass  of  apathy ;  we  must  strive  to  kindle  it  into  life  by  our  fervent  supplications.
**  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have."  The  apathy  of  which,  it  may  be,  we  complain  so  bitterly,
may  be  due  in  large  measure  to  our  own  spiritual  sloth,  to  the  sluggishness  of  our
prayers.  Where  the  Word  of  the  Lord  runs,  it  will  be  glorified;  it  is  living  and
powerful ;  it  will  manifest  its  energy  in  the  blessed  lives,  the  holy  deaths,  of  converted
men ;  it  will  show  forth  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  that  glory  of  holiness  which,  springing
from  his  indwelling  presence,  will  transform  the  souls  in  whom  that  presence  abides.
2.  For  the  missionaries  themselves.  They  are  exposed  to  many  dangers ;  it  was  so  with
St.  Paul.  He  was  now  at  Corinth,  a  city  where  there  was  a  great  work  to  do,  for  the
Lord  had  much  people  there.  But  he  met  with  much  opposition,  at  first  from  fanatical
Jews,  afterwards  from  ^'  false  brethren  "  and  "  false  apostles."  He  bids  the  Thessa-
lonlans pray  that  he  might  be  delivered  from  these  men,  not  for  his  own  sake — ^ho
counted  not  his  life  dear  unto  himself — ^but  that  he  might  finish  his  course  with  joy,
and  be  blessed  in  saving  many  souls.  So  we  should  pray  now  for  faithful  missionaries,
that  they  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men.

Lessons.  1.  Pray  constantly  for  the  success  of  the  gospel  in  all  the  world.  Christ
bids  you ;  his  apostles  bid  you.  2.  Do  not  think  yourself  too  weak  and  sinful  to  do  so ;
such  humility  is  false  humility ;  it  defrauds  God's  ministers  of  the  assistance  which
you  are  bound  to  give  them.  3.  Believe  in  the  power  of  prayer;  it  is  an  important
element  in  a  living  faith. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  3 — 5. — St.  PauTs  confidence.  I.  Ha  trusts  in  the  Lord.  1.  H^  Lord  is
faithful.  All  men  have  not  the  faith ;  the  faith  is  not  the  possession  of  all.  These
unreasonable  and  wicked  men  seem  to  be  beyond  its  saving  influences.  But  the  Lord  is
faithful.  He  is  the  Truth  ;  his  promises  are  sure.  Amid  the  tumult  of  opposition,  the
rude  fanaticism  of  the  Jews,  the  sneers  of  the  philosophic  Greeks,  St.  Paul  still  trusted
in  the  Lord.  *'  The  Lord  is  faithfuL"  It  is  a  great  word ;  we  may  well  pray  that  it
may  be  engraven  in  our  hearts,  as  the  centre  of  our  hopes,  the  strength  of  our  souls.
2.  Ee  wiU  strengthen  the  Thessalonians,    It  is  what  St.  Paul  prayed  for  in  the  lail^


72         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  ra.  1-ia

chapter.  He  knows  that  his  prayer  is  heard.  CM  will  stablish  the  Thessaloniana.  He
has  built  his  Church  upon  a  rock ;  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  The
rain  may  descend,  the  flood  may  come,  the  stream  of  adversity  may  b«it  vehemently
against  the  Church  of  (rod ;  it  cannot  fall,  for  it  is  founded  upon  the  rock.  God  is
faithfuL  He  will  keep  them  from  the  evil — from  the  evil  which  surrounds  them  in  the
world,  from  the  power  of  the  evil  one.  The  words  sound  like  a  reminiscence  of  the
Lord's  prayer.  Compare  also  2  Tim.  iv.  18,  '*The  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every
evil  work^  and  will  preserve  me  unto  his  heavenly  kingdom."  St.  Paul,  it  seems,  was
accustomed  to  use  the  same  holy  words  which  we  say  in  our  daily  prayers.  How  many
generations  of  Christians  that  prayer  has  helped  in  their  heavenward  journey !  They
are  safe  now  with  Christ.  We  are  marching  onwards  to  that  rest  which  they  have
reached.  We  have  the  same  helps  which  they  had.  Let  us  seek  that  holy  confidence
which  St.  Paul  had.  The  Lord  is  faithful ;  he  will  stablish  you ;  he  will  keep  you
from  the  evil.

II.  He  has  confidence  in  the  Thvssalonians.  Or  rather  in  the  Lord  touching
them.  It  is  in  the  Lord  always  that  he  trusts ;  but  that  confidence  in  the  Lord  reaches
to  the  Thessalonians;  he  believes  that  they  are  doing  now,  and  will  continue  to  do  the
things  which  he  commands  them,  because  he  is  sure  that  the  Lord  will  stablish  them,
and  keep  them  from  the  evil.  It  is  an  exhortation  delicately  expressed  in  the  language
of  confidence.  He  trusts  them ;  the  consciousness  of  being  trusted  is  a  strong  xnotive
for  obedience ;  there  is  a  sense  of  shame  in  disobeying  a  master,  a  teacher^  who  reposes
implicit  confidence  in  his  pupils.    Mark  the  delicate  tact  of  the  apostle.

III.  He  doubts  them  not,  tet  he  fbats  fob  them.  1.  For  groxoih  in  love.  In
1  Thess.  iii.  II  he  had  prayed  that  God  would  direct  his  way  to  the  Thessalonians;
here  he  prays  that  God  would  direct  their  hearts  into  the  way  of  love.  The  way  of
love  is  the  way  that  leads  to  God,  who  is  love.  We  need  to  be  directed  thither.  Our
attention  is  often  distracted  by  the  various  paths  which  lead  this  way  and  that  in  the
journey  of  life.  God  can  direct  us  by  his  Spirit  into  the  one  path  which  leads  to  God.
That  path  is  love,  self-denying,  self-forgetting  love — the  love  which  comes  from  God
and  ends  in  God.  For  love  is  of  Gt)d,  it  is  his  gift ;  it  comes  from  him  who  is  the  only
Fountain  of  pure  and  holy  love.  And  it  ends  in  him ;  for  Grod  only  is  the  true  Object  of
our  highest  love ;  only  in  him  can  the  deep  yeamines  of  our  souls  find  their  proper
satisfaction.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart."  It  is  his  com-
mandment, the  first  of  all  the  commaudtnents.  He  does  not  mock  us  with  commands
which  we  cannot  obey ;  he  giveth  his  Spirit ;  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  the  gift  of
power.  He  can  direct ;  he  will,  if  we  seek  it  in  persevering  prayer,  direct  our  hearts
into  the  love  of  God.  2.  For  growth  in  patience.  The  Church  of  Thessalonica  needed
patience ;  it  was  much  afBicted  from  the  first.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  great
Example  of  patience.  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame.  If  we  would  run
with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  we  must  consider  him,  always  looking  unto
Jesus.  In  our  sufferings  we  must  meditate  on  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,
and  pray  for  grace  to  follow  his  example.  We  need  his  patience,  such  patience  as  he
had.     We  must  pray  for  it.    The  Lord  will  direct  us  to  it.

Lessons.  I.  The  Lord  is  faithful ;  trust  in  him.  He  is  true ;  he  will  establish  the
hearts  of  his  chosen.  2.  We  must  be  stern  with  ourselves,  but  gentle  with  others;
gentle  words  of  confidence  win  those  whom  harshness  would  only  repeL  3.  Pray  for
love ;  pray  for  patience. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  6—16. — The  importance  of  the  common  duties  of  daily  life  shown.  I.  By  St.
Paul*8  earnest  ArPEALS.  1.  lie  commands,  and  that  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  There  were  some  among  the  Thcssalonian  Christians  who  walked  disorderly,
whose  lives  were  not  ordered  according  to  the  teaching;  which  they  had  received  from
St.  Paul.  The  Church  generally  was  sound,  as  the  Epistle  shows,  but  there  was  a
section  that  needed  counsel  and  firm  treatment.  Probably  the  prevalent  restlessness
about  the  approach  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  filled  their  minds  that  it  seemed  hard  to
attend  to  less  exciting  matters.  In  view  of  an  event  so  awful,  the  little  details  of  daily
occupation  seemed  trivial  and  insignificant  The  whole  course  of  life,  with  all  its
complex  interests,  might  any  moment  be  abruptly  checked  by  the  sudden  coming  of
the  Lord.    It  was  hard  to  descend  from  the  contemplation  of  a  topic  so  absorbing  to  the


CH.  III.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         73


little  duties  of  work  and  everyday  life.  But  the  apostle  commands^  and  that  with
the  greatest  earnestness.  It  is  just  in  those  little  duties  that  our  responsibility  chiefly
lies.  It  is  in  the  small  matters  of  daily  life  that  the  battle  between  good  and  evil  is
fought  out  for  each  individual  soul.  *'  The  daily  round,  the  common  task,"  is  tlie  field  in
which  we  are  trained  for  heaven ;  or,  if  not  for  heaven,  it  must  be  for  helL  Ordinary
lives  are  commonplace ;  they  do  not  present  opportunities  for  showy  action ;  there  are
few  emergencies,  little  excitement  in  them.  The  lives  of  most  of  us  are,  by  Qod's
appointment,  ordinary  and  commonplace ;  it  is  the  discipline  for  eternity  which  he  has
provided  for  us.  The  quiet,  faithful  performance  of  those  common  duties  is  the  best
preparation  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  He  cannot  find  us  better  employed  than  in
the  work,  whatever  it  may  be,  which  his  providence  has  given  us  to  do.  And,  in  truth,
those  commonplace  lives  afibrd  ample  opportunities  for  self-denial,  if  only  we  will  use
them ;  a  road  for  drawing  daily  nearer  to  God,  if  only  we  will  take  the  path  pointed
out  by  his  providence,  not  some  self-chosen  way  of  our  own.  A  commonplace  life
may  be  in  the  eyes  of  the  holy  angels  full  of  beauty  and  heroism.  To  do  each  little
duty,  as  it  comes,  faithfully  and  thoroughly ;  to  keep  the  thought  of  God's  presence
constantly  before  us,  and  to  try  in  all  things,  great  and  small  alike,  to  please  him ;  to
persevere  all  the  day,  and  every  day,  in  the  quiet  life  of  duty ; — ^this  involves  a  sustained
efibrt,  a  lofty  faith,  a  holy  love,  which  are  in  the  sight  of  Grod  of  great  price.  The  life
of  duty,  however  humble  and  quiet  that  duty  may  be,  is  the  life  of  holiness.  Beligious
fervour,  religious  excitement,  if  it  ends  in  excitement  and  does  not  issue  in  obedience,
is  but  a  counterfeit  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  it  will  not  abide  the  day  of  his  coming.  In
the  First  Epistle  St.  Paul  had  bidden  the  Thessalonians  to  study  to  be  quiet,  to  do  their
own  business,  to  work  with  their  own  hands.  He  speaks  more  strongly  now.  Probably
the  excitement  had  increased ;  it  had  led  to  the  disorder  which  he  condemns.  He  com'
mands  them  now,  and  that  in  virtue  of  his  apostolic  authority,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  whose  ambassador  he  was.  Sometimes  Gtxi's  ministers  must  speak  with
authority.  They  must  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season ;  they  must  reprove,  rebuke,
exhort ;  but  such  rebukes  will  avail  little,  unless  they  are  administered  with  much  long-
sufiering,  with  humility  and  godly  fear,  and  enforced  by  that  authority  of  character
which  only  holiness  of  life  can  give.  To  possess  such  authority,  a  man  must  have  that
reality  the  absence  of  which  is  so  soon  detected ;  he  must  have  that  ready  sympathy
which  is  such  a  source  of  power  and  success  in  ministerial  work.  2.  They  must  with'
draw  themselves  from  every  brother  that  wcUketh  disorderly,  St.  Paul  is  not  issuing  a
sentence  of  excommunication,  as  in  1  Cor.  v.  and  1  Tim.  i.  20.  The  conduct  of  these
Thessalonians  was  not  so  utterly  wicked  as  that  of  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth ;
their  errors  were  not  so  dangerous  as  those  of  Hymenseus  and  Alexander.  But  they
were  neglecting  the  duties  of  their  station ;  they  were  living  in  disobedience.  It  was
not  right  for  Christians  to  recognize  such  men  as  brethren ;  their  lives  were  a  scandal ;
they  were  bringing  discredit  upon  the  Christian  name.  True  Christians  must  be  jealous
for  their  Master's  honour ;  they  must  sometimes  show  openly  their  disapprobation  of
inconsistency.  It  is  a  difficult  and  paiuful  duty.  It  is  necessary,  in  performing  it,  to
keep  a  very  careful  watch  over  our  own  motives ;  to  speak  and  act  in  deep  humility  and
real  charity ;  to  cast  first  the  beam  out  of  our  own  eye ;  to  remember  the  Saviour's  rule,
*'  Judge  not."  But  though  a  difficult  duty,  it  is  sometimes  a  duty.  A  true  Christian
must  not  live  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  men  who  disgrace  their  Christian  profession.
He  will  not  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,  nor  stand  in  the  way  of  sinners.  All
his  delight  will  be  in  the  saints  who  are  on  the  earth.  Especially  he  must  avoid  the
companionship  of  those  who  make  a  great  show  of  religion  and  live  ungodly  lives.
No  sin  is  more  dangerous  than  hypocrisy;  none  is  more  strongly  condemned  by
our  Lord.

II.  By  his  example.  1.  lie  did  not  behave  himself  disorderly.  He  illustrated  in  his
life  the  power  of  true  religion.  He  was  a  man  of  warm  affections,  of  enthusiastic
character,  full  of  high  hopes ;  but  he  never  allowed  any  excitement  of  feeling  to  interfere
with  the  quiet  performance  of  daily  duties.  His  life  and  preaching  supplemented  one
another.  His  preaching  disclosed  the  motives  which  prompted  his  actions  and  regulated
his  life ;  his  life  was  his  preaching  translated  into  action — ^it  showed  the  reality,  the
living  force,  of  the  truths  which  he  preached.  2.  He  worked  with  his  own  hands.  He
always  asserted  the  right  of  the  apostles  and  their  companions  to  maintenance  from  the


74         THE  SEOOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIAXa    [cs.  m.  1—18.

Churches.  The  Lord  hath  ordained,  he  said,  that  they  which  praach  the  gospel  aboold
live  of  the  (coepel.  But  he  did  not  cl^m  this  right  for  himaelt  It  was  not  pride  that
prompted  his  conduct;  he  accepted  the  gifts  (?  the  Philippians.  But  he  anew  the
value  of  an  example  of  self-denying  and  absolutely  disinterested  labour.  The  Gentile
world  had  never  seen  such  a  life.  It  was  a  power  in  itself;  it  constrained  the
admiration  and  won  the  hearts  of  men ;  it  forced  them  to  admit  the  reality  of  a  religioQ
which  sustained  him  in  such  unparalleled  self-sacrifices.  So  he  would  not  eat  any
man's  bread  for  nousht.  For  nought,  he  says  in  his  humility ;  though  he  knew  wm
that  his  converts  in  Thessalonica  owed  to  him,  like  Philemon,  even  their  own  selves.
He  wrought  with  his  own  hands,  and  that  night  and  day.  It  was  hard,  uninteresting,
ill-paid  labour.  It  required  the  close  application  of  many  hours  to  earn  even  the  simple
livelihood  which  contented  him.  But  he  worked  on  in  patience,  knowing  the  power
of  example.

IIL  UE  DffSIBTB  OK  TUB  DX7TT  OF  HONEST  LABOUB.      1.  J9e  Juid  dOM  90  during  hu  SftMf

at  ^HieiBalonica.  He  had  given  his  opinion  in  the  words  of  a  short,  stem  proverb^  **  H
any  will  not  work,  neither  let  him  eaf  I^ibour  is  the  ordinance  of  Qoi ;  a  punish-
ment at  first  (Qen.  iii.  19),  but  it  is  turned  into  a  blessing  TPs.  cxxviiL  2)  to  those
who  accept  it  as  the  will  of  God,  and  use  it  as  a  discipline  of  obedience  and  self-deniid.
Work,  in  some  form  or  other,  is  a  necessity  for  us ;  without  work,  life  soon  becomes
dreary,  full  of  restlessness  and  dissatisfaction.  To  have  nothing  to  do  is  far  from
enviable ;  it  is  full  of  ennui  and  weariness.  Time  is  a  priceless  tcdent,  given  us  that
wo  might  work  out  our  own  salvation ;  to  waste  it  day  after  day,  to  **  kill  time,"  as  the
saying  is,  is  a  miserable  misuse  of  the  good  gifts  of  Gk)d«  We  must  all  work,  if  we
would  be  happy  here,  if  we  would  be  ready  to  meet  the  Lord  when  he  cometh.
Mental  labour  is  the  lot  of  some,  manual  labour  of  others.  Ghxi  has  ordered  our  lot
and  appointed  our  work.  Work  of  some  sort  we  must  have.  None  have  a  right  to
eat  their  bread  without  labour,  neither  the  rich  nor  the  poor.  (1)  If  God  has  given
us  worldly  means,  still  we  have  no  right  to  eat  the  bread  of  idleness.  We  must  find
work  to  do,  the  work  which  the  Master  has  set  us.  If  we  need  not  work  for  our-
selves,  wo  must  work  for  others.  There  is  work  enough  for  all  in  the  vineyard  of  the
Lord ;  only  in  work  can  we  find  peace  and  satisfaction.  Without  work,  we  are  eating
the  bread  which  we  have  not  earned ;  without  work,  we  must  in  the  end  be  restless
and  unhappy ;  without  work,  bow  can  we  bear  to  read  those  awful  words,  '*  Thou
wicked  and  slothful  servant  *'  ?  ^2)  And  the  apostle  forbids  indiscriminate  alm^ving.
When  the  Lord  said,  "  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,"  he  did  not  mean  to  the  idM
and  the  worthless.  Give  freely,  but  give  to  the  old,  the  sick,  the  helpless.  It  is  a
difficult  thing  to  give  rightly ;  it  needs  study,  thought,  prayer.  We  must  not  encoursge
idleness,  but  neither  must  we  allow  our  heart  to  be  hardened  by  the  imposture  whidi
we  meet  so  often.  Be  generous,  full  of  sympathy  to  the  afflicted,  but  let  the  idle  be
corrected  by  the  stem  discipline  of  hunger.  To  give  to  such  is  doubly  wrong ;  it
enoourafles  the  slothful  in  their  sinful  idleness,  and  it  robs  the  really  poor.  C  Ee
repeaii  his  exhortation  now.  There  were  busybodies  at  Thessalonica,  who  neglected
their  own  business,  and  busied  themselves  with  matters  which  did  not  concern  them,
or  with  curious  questions  which  were  beyond  their  reach.  It  is  always  so  with  the
idle ;  the  restless  thoughts  must  find  occupation,  and  commonly  find  it  in  mischi«t
8L  IViul  exhorts  them  again.  He  does  not  sternly  leave  them  to  themselves ;  he  longs
for  their  spiritual  welfare.  He  exhorts  them,  aud  that  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  to  work  with  quietness ;  not  to  let  excited  feelings  interfere  with  the  quiet,
well-ordoreil  life  of  Christian  duty ;  but  to  eat  their  own  bread,  the  bread  earned  by
honest  labour ;  not  to  live  on  the  alms  of  others,  when  they  might  preserve  a  manly,
Christian  indo|>endeuco.

IV.  Uk  asks  tuk  drkthrek  to  8mH>RT  HIS  EXHORTATIONS.  I.  They  must  not  he
%peary  in  f(W?-<f(MMy.  There  is  much  to  make  Christians  weary ;  their  own  helplessness
aud  aiu fulness;  the  disapix^inlnients,  misunderstandings,  ingratitude,  which  they  meet
with  in  ihvir  work.  But  thoy  must  persevere  in  the  quiet  walk  of  duty ;  they  must
do  gixxi,  seokiu};  no  reward  save  that  which  comes  from  our  Fath»  who  seeth  in  secret.
WiNariness  is  hAixl  to  K^ar ;  it  will  (wss  heavily  upon  us  at  times.  We  must  run  with
pati<'iice  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  looking  always  unto  Jesus.  2.  The^f  must  cany
onl  hie  cenemre*.    His  Epistle  was  an  authoritative  document ;  it  came  fh>m  the  Loid's


CH.  ni.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.         75

apoetle,  armed  with  the  Lord's  authority.  It  must  be  obeyed ;  it  was  the  duty  of  the
Church  to  enforce  obedience.  The  brethren  must  show  their  concurrence  with  St.  Paul
by  not  keeping  company  with  any  professing  Christians  who  may  still  persist  in
disorderly  conduct.  But  they  must  be  careful  not  to  sin  against  the  law  of  love.  The
offender  is  a  brother  still ;  they  must  admonish  him  for  his  soul's  sake ;  they  must
show  by  their  conduct  their  sorrow,  their  disapproval  of  his  disobedience,  that  the
disapprobation  of  Christians  known  and  respected  may  bring  him  to  a  sense  of  shame,
and,  by  God's  grace,  to  amendment  of  life.

Lbssons.  1.  Duty  seems  sometimes  dull  and  prosaic,  but  it  is  our  appointed  path ;
do  each  little  duty  as  in  the  sight  of  Gk>d.  2.  There  is  a  true  dignity  in  honest  labour ;
never  despise  it  in  others ;  work  yourself  in  the  station  to  which  God  has  called  you.
3.  Bo  careful  in  your  choice  of  companions ;  avoid  the  disorderly ;  seek  the  society  of
the  pious  and  obedient. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  16—18. — Conclusion,  I.  The  closing  prater  fob  pbagb.  1.  Only  ihe  Lord
can  give  ii.  Again  we  have  the  solemn  iLdr6sy  himself.  He  is  the  Lord  of  peace ;  it
is  his  :  '^  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  He  only  can  grant  that  chiefest  blessing.  The
Thessalonians  might  have  their  difficulties,  their  dangers ;  they  might  be  weary.  But
it  is  the  weary  and  the  heavy  laden  whom  the  Lord  calls  to  himself.  "  Come  unto  me,"
he  says,  ''and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Only  we  must  take  up  his  yoke,  the  yoke  of  obedience;
only  we  must  bear  his  burden,  the  burden  of  the  cross ;  and  we  shall  find  peace,  rest
for  our  souls.  For  his  yoke  is  easy.  It  seems  not  so  at  first ;  we  are  tempted  often  to
be  disorderly,  to  forsake  the  quiet  path  of  duty ;  it  is  hard  to  resist  temptation.  But  if
we  come  to  Christ  and  learn  of  him,  the  blessed  Master,  he  will  teach  us  the  grace  and
blessedness  of  obedience,  and  we  shall  gradually  learn  something  of  his  own  lesson — to
do  our  Father's  will  as  it  is  done  in  heaven,  gladly  and  with  cheerful  submission.  His
burden  is  light.  It  seems  not  so  at  first ;  the  cross  is  sharp.  But  he  bore  the  cross  once
for  us;  he  bears  it  with  us  now.  When  be  strengthens  us  we  can  do  all  things ;  the
heavy  burden  becomes  light  when  we  rest  on  his  strength.  He  is  the  Lord  of  peace.
Peace  is  his  to  give ;  he  will  give  it  to  the  chosen.  2.  He  can  give  it  alvxtya.  At  all
times  and  in  all  ways  we  need  the  peace  of  God.  We  want  it  in  the  Church,  in  the
commonwealth,  in  the  family ;  we  want  it  all  the  day  and  every  day.  We  shall  have
it  if  he  is  with  us,  for  with  his  presence  comes  the  gift  of  peace.  "  The  Lord  be  with
you."  It  is  a  precious  benediction.  We  listen,  we  accept  it  in  humble  thankfulness.
We  must  strive  ourselves  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  to  realize  the  deep  truth
of  his  presence,  to  draw  daily  nearer  and  nearer  to  him.

n.  St.  Paul's  own  salutation.  1.  His  autograph.  He  writes  the  concluding  words
with  his  own  hand.  His  Epistles  were  sacred  writings;  they  were  the  work  of  an
inspired  apostle;  they  had  the  stamp  of  Divine  authority.  St.  Paul  marks  their
importance  by  his  closing  words.  He  did  not,  perhaps  he  could  not,  write  the  whole ;
he  writes  his  signature  at  the  last.  In  his  own  handwriting,  perhaps,  as  some  have
thou^t,  large  and  clumsy  (comp.  QsX,  vi.  11  in  the  Greek),  but  known  and  loved  by
his  converts,  he  sends  his  last  word  of  love ;  he  salutes,  he  greets  them  with  the  embrace
of  Christian  charity.  2.  His  last  benediction.  As  always,  be  ends  with  the  grace  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  had  prayed  in  his  first  Epistle  that  it  misht  rest  upon  them.
Now  he  adds  the  signidcaut  word  "  all."  He  had  been  obliged  to  blame  some  of  them,
to  blame  them  severely ;  but  he  will  not  end  his  Epistle  with  words  of  censure.  He
prays  that  grace  may  be  with  them  ail.  He  loves  them  all ;  he  longs  for  the  restoration
of  those  who  were  living  disorderly,  for  the  continual  progress  and  sanctification  of  the
whole  Church.  And  so  he  prays  for  grace.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can
convert  the  erring ;  that  same  grace  can  comfort  and  confirm  the  faithful.  St.  Paul
ok)ee8  all  his  Epistles  with  a  prayer  for  grace.  The  grace  of  God  should  be  alw»ys  in
our  thoughts,  in  our  hearts,  in  our  prayers  for  ourselves  and  others.

Lessons.  1.  Only  (jod  can  give  true  and  lasting  peace ;  seek  it  of  him ;  he  giveth
to  all  men  liberally.  2.  We  need  it  always,  everywhere ;  then  pray  always,  every-
where. 8.  By  grace  ye  are  saved ;  refer  everything  to  the  grace  of  God ;  trust  only  in
that  grace,  not  in  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done. — B.  C.  C.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Intimation  of  ihe  dose  of  the  Epistle,    *'  Finally,  brethren."


7C        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THBSSALONIANS.    [oh.  m.  1—18.

I.  Bequest  for  prayeb  on  behalf  of  the  feeachers.  1.  For  the  diffunan  and
glorification  of  the  Word  of  tJie  Lord  through  their  instrumentality.  Diffusion,  **  Pny
for  us,  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  The  Word  of  the  Lord  is  the  Word  as
given  by  the  Lord  to  be  diffused.  It  is  especially  the  offer  of  salvation  to  perishiog
men  on  the  ground  of  Christ's  work.  The  Thessalonians  are  asked  to  pray  Uiat  the
Word  of  the  Lord,  by  their  preaching,  mav  run,  i.e.  have  free  and  rapid  course.  In  the
same  way  we  are  to  prav  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  be  everywhere  preached.
This  is  a  motto  for  a  Bible  Society :  "  Pray  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  By
boUi  means  may  it  accomplish  its  course.  Let  no  country  be  shut  to  the  preaching  of
the  gospel,  to  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures,  Let  the  earth  be  filled  with  knowleqze.
Olorification,  "  And  be  elorified."  For  this,  too,  prayer  needs  to  be  made.  May  the
Divine  Spirit  accompany  the  Word  in  its  course  throujzh  the  world.  And,  wherever  it
comes,  let  it  be  glorified.  Let  it  be  shown  to  be  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  by  its  powerful
saving  effects  upon  the  hearts  of  all  who  hear  it  or  read  it  Commendaiortf  staiemaU
with  reference  to  the  Thessalonians,  "  As  also  it  is  with  you."  In  its  course  through
the  world  in  those  days,  the  Word  came  to  Thessalonica.  And  they  presented  no
obstacle  in  their  hearts  to  its  reception.  They  received  it,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  bat
as  it  is  in  truth  the  Word  of  Gk)d.  And  it  was  signally  glorified  in  its  being  ihe  means
of  their  beine  turned  from  idols  to  the  living  and  true  God.  Let  the  Word  of  the  Lord
idso  be  glorified  in  our  conversion,  in  the  transformation  of  our  characters.  Let  ns  be
willing  trophies  of  the  power  of  the  Word  to  change  us  to  the  Divine  form.  2.  For  ihe
presence  of  a  condition  without  which  they  could  not  he  instrumental  in  diffusing  and
glorifying  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  "  And  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  unreasonable
and  evil  men."  In  most  places  thepreachers  had  to  encounter  unreasonable  and  evil
men.  If  these  had  their  way,  the  Word  of  the  Lord  would  be  impeded,  by  there  not
being  freedom  for  preaching  it.  The  Thessalonians,  then,  are  askea  to  pray,  on  behslf
of  the  preachers,  for  their  deliverance  from  these  unreasonable  and  evil  men.  They
are  not  forbidden  to  pray  for  their  personal  salvation,  but  they  are  enjoined  to  pray
against  them  as  impeders  of  the  Word.  Let  Divine  restraint  be  laid  upon  their  un-
reasonableness and  malice,  but  let  Divine  speed  be  granted  to  the  Word.  Reason  for
expecting  the  existence  of  unreasonable  and  evil  men,  **  For  all  have  not  faith."  The
meaning  is  not  that  all  have  not  aptitude  for  faith.  It  is  one  of  the  devil's  lies  that
religion  is  only  a  matter  for  some  people.  The  meaning  is,  that  all  are  not,  in  the  way
of  faith,  receptive  of  the  Word.  We  need  not,  therefore,  wonder  if,  in  the  case  of  some,
their  want  of  sympathy  with  the  Word  shows  itself  in  forms  of  unreasonableness  and
malice.  They  are  only  working  out  their  position  more  vigorously  than  some  others,
even  as  Paul  did  in  his  pre-Christian  state.

n.  They  had  confidence  that  the  Lobd  would  assist  the  Thessalonians.
"  But  the  Lord  is  faithful,  who  shall  stablish  you,  and  guard  you  from  the  evil  one."
They  at  once  turn  away  from  their  own  case  to  the  case  of  the  Thessalonians.  There
were  unreasonable  and  evil  men  at  Thessalonica  too.  But  the  Lord  was  to  be  trusted
in  as  Protector  of  his  Church  in  every  place,  and  stronger  than  the  unreasonable  and
evil  men.  And  their  Lord  Protector,  the  preachers  were  persuaded,  would  make  them
immovable  against  the  assaults  of  their  enemies,  and  would  deliver  them  from  the  evil
one,  the  inspirer  of  their  unreasonableness  and  malice.

IIL  Theib  confidence  in  the  Lord  extended  to  the  co-opebation  of  the  Thes-
salonians WITH  the  Lord  assisting  them.  "  And  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord
touching  you,  that  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the  things  which  we  command."  In  the
language,  "  And  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord,"  there  is  a  carrying  forward  of  the
thought.  Their  confidence  in  the  Lord  extended  to  the  Thessalonians  doing  their
part.  They  had  no  doubt  that  in  the  present  they  were  doing  what  they  were  com-
manded. They  had  no  doubt  also  in  their  resolution  for  the  future.  This  expression
of  confidence  has  the  force  of  hopeful  exhortation.

IV.  Pbayeb  that  the  Lord  would  assist  the  Thessalonians.  "  And  the  Lord
direct  your  hearts."  Though  the  Lord  promises  to  assist  us,  and  to  assist  us  in  con-
nection with  our  good  resolution,  yet  we  need  to  pray  for  his  assistance.  The  prayer
is  for  the  directing — not  mere  directing,  but  the  powerful  directing — of  our  hearts.  Of
ourselves  our  hearts  are  misdirected.  But,  in  virtue  of  his  triumph  on  Calvary,  the
Lord  has  power  over  bur  hearts  to  direct  them  aright.     There  is  a  twofold  direction


CH.  m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        77

mentioned,  1.  The  central  diaposition,  ^Tnto  the  love  of  God."  Our  hearts  are
rightly  directed,  when  they  are  directed  in  love  toward  him  who  is  the  Centre  of  our
being.  As  being  should  tend  toward  its  source,  so  should  we  tend  toward  Gk>d.  As  it
is  natural  for  a  child  to  love  his  parents,  so  surely  it  is  natural  for  us  to  love  him  by
whom  we  have  been  made,  and  for  whom  we  have  been  made.  It  was  the  object  of
the  Lordy  in  his  personal  ministry  on  earth,  to  hold  up  before  men  the  immeasurable
goodness  of  God.  So  it  is  his  object  in  our  hearts,  by  his  Spirit,  to  hold  up  Divine
excellence,  so  that  we  may  be  powerfully  attracted  toward  God.  And  in  this  love,  as
it  is  real  and  active,  is  there  motive  power  for  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of
God  handed  to  us  by  inspired  men.  The  Lord,  then,  give  us  this  love  for  ourselves  and
our  friends.  May  Gtxi  he  so  presented  to  us  that  all  misdirection  of  our  hearts  shall  be
powerfully  overcome.  2.  The  special  disposition  in  their  situation,  "  And  into  the
patience  of  Christ."  By  the  patience  of  Christ  we  aro  to  understand  the  patience
exhibited  by  Christ  which  is  held  up  before  us  as  our  ideal.  '*  For  consider  him  that
endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself."  In  the  midst,  then,  of  unreason-
able and  evil  men — not  more  unreasonable  and  evil  than  those  which  assailed  Christ —
let  them  in  the  same  spirit  endure. — B.  F.

Vers.  6 — 16. — Duty  of  withdrawing  from  a  disorderly  brother,  L  Duty  stated.
^  Now  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye
withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the
tradition  which  they  received  of  us."  The  commandment,  being  in  the  Name  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  was  as  authoritative  as  though  it  had  been  given  directly  by  him
who  has  the  absolute  right  to  command  in  the  Church.  It  was  a  commandment
relating  to  a  brother  walking  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  received  tradition.  It
is  implied  that  a  definite  order  had  been  appointed  by  the  Lord  for  the  conduct  of
members  of  the  Church.  This  order,  handed  to  the  preachers,  had  been  handed  by  them
to  the  Thessalonians.  But  how  was  a  brother  to  be  dealt  with  who  did  not  observe
this  order  ?  Our  Lord  had  laid  down  the  rule  with  regard  to  one  who  ofifended  directly
against  a  brother.  *'  And  if  thy  brother  sin  against  thee,  go,  show  him  his  fault  between '
thee  and  him  alone :  if  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he  hear
thee  not,  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  that  at  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses  or  three
every  word  may  be  established.  And  if  he  refuse  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church :
and  if  he  refuse  to  hear  the  Church  also,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  the  Gentile  and  the
publican."  What  we  have  here  differs  from  that  in  being  the  case  of  one  who  by  his
conduct  offended  against  the  general  order  and  reputation  of  the  Church  to  which  he
belonged.  In  1  Cor.  v.  there  is  the  ordaining  of  discipline  in  a  case  of  very  great
scandal  in  the  Corinthian  Church.  "  For  I  verily,  being  absent  iu  body,  but  present  in
spirit,  have  already,  as  though  I  were  present,  judged  him  that  hath  so  wrought  this
tnins,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, ...  to  deliver  such  a  one  unto  Satan  for
the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."
The  disorderliness  in  the  Thessalonian  Church  was  not  of  the  gravest  nature.  Nor  was
it  disorderliness  with  the  greatest  amount  of  deliberation ;  but  was  rather  the  conse-
quence of  a  false  inipresion  with  regard  to  the  coming.  Nor  was  it  the  most  confirmed
disorderliness,  being  after  clear  enunciation  of  duty  as  shown  in  1  Thess.  iv.  11, 12,
and,  we  may  suppose,  after  warning  as  directed  in  1  Thess.  v.  14 ;  but  disorderliness  to
which  discipline  had  not  yet  been  applied.    There  is  allowed,  then,  to  the  disorderly

g;rson  the  position  of  brother,  and  apparently  the  right  to  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table,
ut  the  right-minded  members  of  the  Thessalonian  community  are  directed  to  with-
draw from  him.  Let  him,  in  the  way  of  discipline,  be  shunned  in  private  intercourse.
Let  him  be  made  clearly  to  understand  that  no  countenance  is  given  to  him  in  his
disorderly  course.

n.  Duty  enforced  by  the  example  of  the  preachers.  "  For  yourselves  know
how  ye  ought  to  imitate  us :  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you ;  neither
did  we  eat  bread  for  nought  at  any  man's  hand,  but  in  labour  and  travail,  working  night
and  day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you."  An  appeal  is  made  to  what  was  within
their  own  knowledge  and  observation.  They  were  aware,  without  their  requiring  to
be  told,  that  there  had  been  nothing  disorderly  in  the  behaviour  of  the  preachers  among
them.    They  had  practised  what  they  had  taught.    They  had  been  an  example  in  all


78         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  m.  1—18.

perticnlare  of  the  order  of  which  they  had  been  the  medium  of  deliyery.  Special  ZBfier-
ence  is  made  to  their  being  an  example  of  independence  acquired  by  manual  labour.
It  could  not  be  said  of  them  that  they  had  eaten  bread  for  nouzht  at  any  man*s  hand.
They  had  eaten  bread  in  labour  and  travail,  working  night  and  day,  to  be  raised  above
the  point  of  being  burdensome  to  any  of  them.  Very  similar  language  is  used  in  the
First  Epistle.  "  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labour  and  travail :  working  night
and  day,  that  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you."  The  thought  there  is  that,  by  their
having  adopted  this  course,  they  were  placed  above  all  suspicion  of  selfishness.  They
were  only  givers  to  the  Thessalonians,  as  mothers  to  their  infant  children.  We  are
here  told  what  led  to  their  supporting  themselves  by  the  labour  of  their  own  hands.
It  was  the  consideration  of  example.  In  the  excitement  into  which  the  Thessalonian
Church  had  been  thrown  by  the  announcement  of  the  coming,  there  had  been  early
observed  a  tendency  to  neglect  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling,  which  could  only
result  in  their  making  themselves  a  burden.  To  counteract  this  tendency,  they  had
thrown  the  influence  of  their  example  into  the  scale  of  industry.  As  they  were  not
burdensome  to  the  Thessalonians,  let  none  of  them  be  burdensome  to  any.  JSesenntion
of  right,  "  Not  because  we  have  not  the  right,  but  to  make  ourselves  an  example  unto
you,  that  ye  should  imitate  us."  As  preachers  they  had  the  right  to  be  maintained  by
those  to  whom  they  ministered.  In  preaching  they  were  as  much  labouring — giving
out  their  strength,  even  the  strength  of  their  bodies— as  when  they  were  tent-making;
or  engaged  in  other  manual  labour.  And,  according  to  the  principle  which  is  brou]^
in  elsewhere,  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  In  certain  circumstances  they  felt
free  to  accept  of  maintenance  from  those  among  whom  they  laboured,  and  thus  to
give  their  whole  strength  to  spiritual  work.  Even  at  Thessalonica  they  felt  free  to
accept  of  a  gift  from  the  Philippian  Church.  They  did  not  feel  free  to  accept  of
maintenance  from  the  Thessalonian  Church,  simply  because  it  was  necessary,  by  their
example,  to  encourage  among  them  a  spirit  of  independence  in  connection  with  A\\\gtkxi^
in  performing  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling.

IIL  Duty  enfobced  by  the  plain  manner  in  which  the  fbeachebs  had  tauort.
**  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  If  any  will  not  wo^,
neither  let  him  eat."  In  the  First  Epistle  it  had  been  said,  '*  And  that  ye  study  to
be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business,  and  to  work  with  your  hands,  even  as  we
charged  you."  The  Thessalonians  are  now  referred  back,  beyond  that  point^  to  the  time
when  the  preachers  were  with  them.  In  prescribing  starvation  as  the  remedy  for  the
shirking  of  labour,  Christianity  has  a  certain  aspect  of  severity.  And  yet,  in  this
respect,  Christianity  is  only  sanctified  common  sense.  There  may  be  doubt  in  par-
ticular cases  whether  a  man  has  the  ability  to  work  or  the  opportunity  to  work.
But  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  this,  that  if  he  has  the  ability  to  work  and  the  oppor-
tunity and  will  not  work,  then  he  should  be  allowed  to  starve.  That  is  to  say,  let  the
struggle  go  on  in  him  between  hunger  and  indolence.  There  is  no  call  for  our  inter-
posing in  the  name  of  Christian  charity,  which  needs  to  be  salted  with  salt,  if  it  would
not  lose  its  flavour.  We  may  expect  that  the  struggle  will  end  in  hunger  gaining  the
mastery  over  his  indolence.  And  there  will  be  an  ex|)erience  gained  which  may  make  him
a  profltable  member  of  society  for  the  time  to  come.  It  is  well  that  the  Christian  rule
is  so  plainly  laid  down.  For  there  is  a  false  spiritualism  that  looks  askance  at  labour.
It  has  even  been  attempted  to  throw  a  Christian  halo  around  idleness  in  the  order  of
the  mendicant  monks.  But  there  is  a  sensible  practical  tone  about  Christianity  which
must  commend  it  even  to  those  who  are  not  in  sympathy  with  its  central  teaching.  We
do  not  need  to  engage  in  our  worldly  business  with  a  grudge,  as  though  all  the  time
gained  to  the  body  were  lost  to  the  soul.  We  may  feel  free,  with  Paul  and  Silas  and
Timothy,  in  labour  and  travail,  to  work  night  and  day,  that  we  may  not  be  burden-
some to  any.  There  is  indeed  danger,  and  very  great  danger,  of  our  goino:  over  to  the
other  side,  and  neglecting  our  spiritual  duties,  becoming  worldly  in  our  business.  But
that  is  to  go  beyond  the  intention  of  Christ,  He  means  that,  by  attention  to  our
spiritual  duties,  we  should  be  fitted  for  our  worldly  duties.  He  means  that  we  should
be  mindful  of  him,  and  loyal  to  his  laws  in  our  worldly  duties.  He  means  that,  through
the  right  performance  of  om*  worldly  duties,  our  highest  spirituality  should  be  pro-
moted.    And  blessed  is  he  who  can  work  out  this  problem  aright  in  his  life.

IV.  Occasion  for  laying  down  the  duty.  "  For  we  hear  of  some  that  walk  among


OH.  in.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        79

you  disorderly,  that  work  not  at  all,  but  are  basybodies."  There  were  some,  the  few
among  them,  who  did  not  observe  the  order  given  by  the  Lord.  Specially,  they  did
not  observe  the  Lord's  appointment  of  labour.  They  are  described  as  working  not  at
alL  They  were  not  idlers  pure  and  simple,  to  begin  with.  They  did  not  work,  because
they  thought  the  coming  was  already  commenced.  They  were  really  in  a  high  state
of  tension.  And,  as  their  energies  were  not  allowed  scope  at  all  within  their  proper
work,  they  had  to  find  scope  in  work  beyond.  This  is  brought  out  in  the  Greek  as  it
cannot  so  well  be  brought  out  in  the  English  translation.  It  is  literally,  and  in  a
paradoxical  way,  "working  nothing,  but  working  beyond.*  They  did  not  busy  them-
selves with  work  that  belonged  to  them ;  they  even  energetically  busied  themselyes
in  a  meddlesome  way  with  work  that  did  not  belong  to  them.

Y.  The  disobderly  brethren  addressed.  ^  Now  them  that  are  such  we  command
and  exhort  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and  eat  their  own
bread."  The  Lord's  authority  and  suasion  is  brought  to  b^r  on  them  as  a  class.  It
was  not  sufficient  excuse  for  them  that  they  took  the  Lord's  coming  to  be  imminent.
Even  though  their  impression  had  been  well  foimded,  they  were  not  therefore  justified
in  freeing  themselves  from  the  Divine  ordinance.  If  we  knew  when  definitely  we  were
to  die,  it  would  still  be  our  duty,  our  strength  being  continued  to  us,  to  work  up  to
the  very  last  moment.  That  would  be  in  the  way  of  preparing  for  our  change.  So  tney
should  rather  have  thought  of  being  called  away  from  their  ordinary  work  1^  Christ  at
his  coming.  They  would  thereby  have  saved  themselves  from  much  sinful  and  dis-
quieting speculation  and  intrusion  into  what  did  not  concern  them.  When  we  work,
and  work  with  all  the  might  of  our  nature,  within  our  own  proper  sphere,  we  can  have
the  accompaniment  of  quiet.  We  can  have  restlessness  banished  from  our  mind ;  and
we  can  avoid  the  annoyance  that  comes  from  meddling  with  the  affairs  of  others.
When  we  work,  too,  with  a  diligent  hand,  we  are  put  in  a  position  of  honourable  inde-
pendence. We  do  not  need  to  be  a  burden  upon  others.  We  can  eat  our  own  bread,
eat  what  we  have  earned  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow.  To  orderliness,  then,  in  the  form
of  attention  to  the  duties  of  their  worldly  calling,  with  all  the  weight  of  the  Lord's
authority,  with  all  the  charm  of  the  Lord's  suasion,  the  preachers  sought  to  bring  back
the  few  among  the  Thessalonians  who  bad  been  disorderly.

VI.  The  Church  addressed  as  right-minded.  "  But  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary  in
well-doing."  From  the  way  in  which  the  Church  is  addressed,  it  can  be  seen  that  the
right-minded  from  their  numbers  were  properly  representative.  From  the  context,
**  well-doing  "  is  to  be  understood  in  its  less  restricted  sense.  Those  were  doing  well,  in
honouring  the  Lord's  appointment  of  labour.  The  position  in  which  they  were  placed
was  trying.  It  was  hard  for  them  to  work  on  amid  all  the  excitement  that  prevailed,
especially  if  they  themselves  had  the  impression  that  the  coming  was  impending.
What  need  was  there  for  work,  when  a  new  order  of  things  was  being  introduced  ?
Was  it  not  more  commendable  to  lay  down  their  tools  and  devoutly  wait  for  the
heavens  being  opened  over  them  ?  By  this  unsettling  influence  some  of  their  number
had  been  carried  away.  And  the  position  of  matters  was  aggravated  by  the  support  of
these  unprofitable  members  being  thrown  upon  the  Church.  All  the  more  honour,  then,
to  them,  the  right-minded,  that,  amid  temptation,  they  held  to  the  old  order,  that  th^
thought  it  the  right  thing  to  labour  on  diligently,  till  they  actually  heard  their  Lord  s
Toice  on  earth  commanding  them  to  cease  from  labour.  Let  them  not  weary  in  follow-
ing an  upright  course.  When  an  upright  man  sees  his  unscrupulous  neighbours  taking
many  an  advantage  which  in  his  conscience  he  is  not  free  to  take,  he  is  tempted  to
ask  what  advantage  there  is  in  uprightness.  But,  though  the  disadvantages  were  a
hundred  times  greater  than  they  really  are,  it  would  still  be  our  duty  to  follow  the
Divine  leadings.  Let  us  not  weary  in  the  path  that  leads  to  God  and  life.  There  is
nothing  that  is  in  the  end  wearying  and  wearing  out  but  a  mind  that  is  conscious  of
wrong-doing.

VII.  Further  specification  op  the  course  to  be  followed  with  the  disorderly
brother.  *'  And  if  any  man  obeyeth  not  our  word  by  this  Epistle,  note  that  man,
that  ye  have  no  company  with  him,  to  the  end  that  he  may  be  ashamed."  The  right-
minded  being  numerous  could  act  in  the  name  of  the  Church.  The  disorderly  brother
could  be  called  before  them,  or  before  a  court  representative  of  the  Lord's  authority  in
the  Church.    In  some  way  his  attention  was  to  be  specially  directed  to  the  part  of  the


80       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.    [ch.  m.  1—18.

letter  which  pertained  to  him.  And  obedience  was  to  he  demanded  of  him  to  what
was  laid  down  in  the  letter,  llie  ground  was  taken  from  under  the  position  he  occu-
pied by  the  announcement  that  the  coming  was  to  be  preceded  by  an  apostasy  and
the  revelation  of  the  man  of  sin.  That  put  the  coming  into  the  distance,  and  gave
an  aspect  of  stability  to  the  old  order  of  thin^,  including  the  six  days'  labour  of  the
fourth  commandment.  But  it  was  not  easy  to  get  rid  of  all  the  false  excitement  at
once.  And  the  habit  of  idleness  had  to  be  overcome,  so  far  as  it  had  been  formed.
Against  these  hindrances  the  authority  of  the  teachers  was  to  be  brought  to  bear.  If
after  trial  be  persisted  in  neglecting  to  work,  then  the  course  to  be  followed  was  to
note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him.  He  was  to  bo  dealt  with  even  as
others  who  are  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  v. :  "  But  now  I  write  unto  you  not  to  keep
company  if  any  man  that  is  named  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an
idolater,  or  a  reviler,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner ;  with  such  a  one,  no,  not  to  eat"
The  idler  among  them  was  to  be  a  marked  man,  even  as  the  greater  offender ;  ibe
whole  sentiment  of  the  Church  was  to  be  brought  to  bear  agalDst  his  idleness.  They
were  not  to  have  free  intercourse  or  companionship  with  him.  They  were  not  to  admit
him  into  their  privacy.  They  were  not  to  invite  nim  to  their  houses,  to  contribute  to
his  support,  or  in  any  way  to  show  him  countenance  in  his  disorderly  course.  Th^
were  to  do  this  with  a  disciplinary  end  in  view,  viz.  to  shame  him  out  of  his  idleness.
It  was  a  shame  for  a  man,  being  able-bodied,  to  be  idle  and  to  throw  himself  as  a
burden  upon  others..  It  was  especially  a  shame  in  a  Christian,  who  was  surely  not  to
be  behind  his  heathen  neighbour  in  the  ordinary  duties  of  life.  By  producing  in  him
a  feeling  of  shame  his  amendment  would  be  secured.  Caution  to  he  obaerved,  **  And
yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother."  They  were  not  to
take  the  extreme  step  of  cutting  him  off  altogether  from  Church  fellowship.  He  was
not  hopelessly  removed  from  good.  There  was  nothing  decisive  against  the  rwdity  (tf
his  Christianity.  They  were  therefore,  while  withdrawing  from  him,  to  acknowledge
him  as  a  brother,  giving  him  to  feel  that,  on  returning  to  orderliness,  they  would
welcome  him  back  to  freedom  of  Christian  intercourse.  TAere  is  a  rule  laid  down  here/or
our  guidance  in  Christian  intercourse.  We  are  only  to  have  free  intercourse  with  those
who  are  at  one  with  us  in  the  great  essentials  of  the  Christian  faith  and  life.  We  are
not  to  be  on  easy  terms  with  those  of  whose  sentiments,  or  of  whose  mode  of  life,  we
cannot  approve.  That  would  be  to  tolerate  their  sentiments,  to  tolerate  their  conduct,
and  thus  to  compromise  our  position  and  open  up  the  way  for  our  own  deterioration.
It  would  also  be  to  encoura;{e  them  in  their  position  and  prevent  their  amendment
Our  duty  is  to  withdraw  from  them,  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  conserve  our  own  posi-
tion, and  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  to  convince  them  that  we  do  not  countenance  them
in  their  position.  But  we  are  not  to  go  to  the  extreme  of  bearing  ourselves  toward
them  as  though  they  did  not  belong  to  the  Christian  circle.  We  are  not  to  treat  them
as  enemies.  But  we  are  to  perform  toward  them  the  brotherly  duty  of  trying  to
remove  sin  from  them,  so  as  to  open  up  the  way  for  the  restoration  of  all  suitable
Christian  intercourse.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  Christians  are  not  sufficiently
careful  as  to  those  with  whom  they  freely  associate.  Thoy  look  to  position,  to  con-
venience, to  com{)anionableness,  to  sympathy  in  smaller  matters,  and  not  so  much  as
they  should  do  to  the  great  ends  of  intercourse.  There  are  even  those  belonging  to
the  Christian  circle  ac^ainst  whose  ideas  and  conduct  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  protest
When  they  are  habitually  worldly,  or  unsettling,  or  uncharitable,  or  unbrotherly  in
conversation,  or  given  to  intemperance,  even  as  we  love  the  order  which  Christ  approves,
and  as  we  would  not  be  partakers  with  them  in  their  sins,  we  must  withdraw  from
them,  while  not,  in  moral  cowardice,  shirking  the  duty  of  speaking  out  what  we  think
and  admonishing  them  for  their  good, — R,  F.

Vers.  16 — IS.^'ConcJuding  words,  I.  Salutation.  1.  Invocation  of  peace.  (1)
From  whom  peace  is  invoked.  *'  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself."  We  are  to  nse
above  what  we  can  do  for  others  to  the  Lord  of  peace  himself.  He  has  purchased
peace  for  us  by  his  death.  '*  He  is  our  Peace ; "  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was
upon  him."  He  is,  therefore,  the  sovereign  Disf^nser  of  the  blessing  of  peace  in  the
Churches.  Peace  was  the  lejiacy  he  left  to  his  believing  people  in  the  world.  *'  Peaco
I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I  give  unto  you :  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  imto  yon.


CH.  in.  1^18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        81


Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  When,  after  his  resurrection,
he  appeared  to  his  discioles,  he  hailed  them  with  the  salutation  of  peace.  "  As  they
thus  spake,"  we  are  tola,  "  Jesus  himself  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  saith  unto
them.  Peace  be  unto  you ; "  and  yet  again,  on  the  same  occasion,  he  said,  "  Peace  be
unto  you."  We  wish,  then,  for  all  in  whom  we  are  interested,  that  our  ascended  Lord
would  bestow  peace  upon  them,  even  as  he  bestowed  peace  upon  the  disciples  before
he  ascended.  (2)  The  peace  invoked.  "  Give  you  peace."  "  Peace  be  with  you,"  is  a
sentiment  which  we  should  have  in  our  hearts,  and  often  on  our  lips,  especially  in
parting  with  our  friends,  as  Paul  here  in  his  letter  parts  with  the  Thessalonians.  They
leave  us  for  a  time,  but  not  without  our  sincere  wishes  for  their  peace.  Now,  what  is
the  peace  that  we  wish  especially  for  those  that  we  are  interested  in  ?  To  he  dear  with
Ood,  There  is  no  greater  evil  than  to  be  in  a  state  of  unreoouciledness  to  Qod.  "  There
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  They  have  sometimes  a  peace,  a  want
of  such  dispeace  as  might  be  expected,  but  only  by  blinking  the  facts  of  their  case.
They  do  not  thus  get  quit  of  their  sins,  any  more  than  men  can  get  out  of  debt  by
pertinaciously  refusing  to  look  into  their  accounts.  Their  state  remains  unaltered.
Their  sins  will  find  them  out,  it  may  be  in  this  life.  Certainly,  when  earthly  things
cannot  longer  preoccupy  them,  and  in  the  presence  of  eternal  realities  they  are  thrown
back  upon  themselves,  then  will  conscience  fill  them  with  dispeace.  For  persons  who
are  insensible  to  their  actual  condition  as  sinners  we  can  only  wish  dispeace.  **  Let
sinners  in  Zion  be  afraid,  let  fearfulness  surprise  the  hypocrites."  What  we  wish  for
our  friends  is  a  peace  that  corresponds  to  facts.  We  wish  them  to  be  in  a  state  of
reconciliation,  and  to  be  conscious  of  that.  We  wish  them  to  be  so  that  they  can
inquire  most  narrowly  into  their  state,  and  honestly  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they
have  an  interest  in  Christ,  while  repeated  self-examination  can  only  result  in  the
discovery  of  something;  more  in  their  character  that  needs  to  be  removed.  To  have  a
feeling  ^repose  in  Ood,  We  are  such  beings  that  our  peace  is  only  to  be  found  in
dependence,  in  leaning.  We  are  apt  to  seek  a  resting-place  in  the  creature ;  but,  alas,
all  that  is  beneath  the  highest  fails  us,  and  we  are  driven  from  one  resting-place
to  another,  like  the  dove  that  could  find  no  rest  on  the  unstable  waters.  '*  Return  unto
thy  rest,  0  my  soul.*'  True  peace  is  only  to  be  found  in  him  from  whom  our  being
has  come  and  to  whom  it  tends,  in  leaning  our  weakness  on  his  strength,  our  ignorance
on  his  wisdom,  our  sinfulness  on  his  grace.  This  is  a  rest  out  of  which  we  cannot  be
driven,  which  makes  us  independent  of  the  creature,  which  cures  our  restlessness  of
spirit.  And  as  this  is  what  we  so  much  wish  for  ourselves,  so  we  wish  it  for  our
friends.  2\)  have  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  in  being  employed  as  Ood  wants  them  to  he
employed.  It  is  essential  to  our  peace  that  our  faculties  sbould  be  truly  and  healthily
employed.  "  Great  peace  have  they  who  love  thy  Law."  And  what  we  wish  for  our
friends  is  that,  in  some  worthy  way,  they  should  work  out  the  plan  of  their  life  given
them  by  God.  To  have  peace  from  unthout.  It  is  said  that,  when  a  man's  ways  please
the  Lord,  he  makes  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  And  that  is  often
strikingly  fulfilled.  But  it  is  not  what  every  one  can  enjoy.  Even  Christ  had  his  enemies,
who  gave  no  cause  of  offence  to  any.  And  we  cannot  calculate  on  escaping,  who  fail  so
much  in  our  social  duties.  But  still  we  wish  this  outward  peace  for  our  friends  so  far
as  it  may  please  God.  Let  them  be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  evil  men.  ''Let
no  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  them."  May  causes  of  annoyance,  elements
of  discord,  be  removed  from  families  and  from  Churches!  (3)  Time  for  which  peace  is
invoked.  "At  all  times."  That  would  not  be  a  good  wish  which  was  limited  to
a  certain  time,  and  was  not  made  to  extend  over  a  longer  period.  If  we  wish  peace
at  all,  we  will  not  wish  it  merely  for  a  day,  or  for  a  month,  or  for  a  year,  but  for  all
time.  Let  them  not  by  carelessness  lose  their  evidences.  Let  not  the  coming  years
bring  discord  into  their  hearts  or  into  their  circle.  The  Lord  give  them  peace  in  the
seasou  of  affliction.  The  Lord  especially  give  them  peace  in  their  dying  hour.  The
Lord  give  them  peace  when  they  enter  upon  a  new  and  solemn  scene.  May  peace
abide  with  them  for  ever.  (4)  Ways  in  which  pectce  is  invoked,  "  In  all  ways."  The
Lord  of  peace  knows  best  how  to  see  to  the  peace  of  our  friends  ;  with  him,  therefore,
the  ways  may  be  left.  1'he  Lord  use  us,  if  we  are  his  way  of  promoting  their  peace.
The  Lord  work  even  against  them  in  his  providence,  if  that  is  necessary  to  their  being
ejected  from  their  false  confidences.    The  Lord  especially  increase  their  faith,  that  their

II.  THESSALONIANS.  Q


S2       THB  SEGOlsn)  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa    [oh.  m.  1—18.

peace  xoAy  flow  as  a  riTer»  broadening  and  deepening,  until  it  loses  itself  in  the  ocean
of  eternity.  2.  Invooatian  of  the  LwrdTs  presence,  **  The  Lord  be  with  yon  alL*  This
is  a  brief  but  comprehensiye  form  of  salutation.  The  Lord  be  with  our  Mends,  wherever
iheir  lot  is  cast.  The  Lord  so  with  them  where  they  go,  and  dwell  with  tham  where
they  dwelL  The  Lord  be  yn&  them  in  their  going  out  and  in  their  coming  in.  The
Lord  be  with  them  in  their  basket  and  in  their  store.  The  Lord  especially  be  with
them  in  the  great  work  of  their  life.

XL  Rehabk  beqabdino  the  hahdwritino  of  the  salutatiok.  *'  The  salutation
of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  whioh  is  the  token  in  every  Epistle :  so  I  write.*'
Paul,  here  dissociating  himself  from  Silas  and  Timothy  as  joint-writers,  dngles  out
himself  by  name.  It  is  he  who  has  given  turn  and  form  to  the  thought  throughout
It  is  he  who  pre-eminently  had  the  care  of  the  Gtotile  Churches.  At  the  close  of
1  Corinthians,  and  also  at  the  dose  <^  Colossians,  there  is  the  same  language  as  here.
**  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  In  those  places  there  is  no  salutation
preceding ;  we  require,  therefore,  mentally  to  supply  a  salutation.  Here,  where  there  is
a  salutation  preceding,  we  are  supplied  with  what  the  salutation  is.  We  are  to  think
of  the  weak-eyed  Paul  as  seated  in  his  room  in  the  city  of  Corinth,  and  dictating  the
letter  to  the  amanuensis  beside  him.  While  he  had  anything  on  his  mind  to  say  to
these  Thessalonians  in  the  way  of  commendation,  or  direction,  or  advice,  the  amanuensis
continued  to  write.  But,  having  fully  unburdened  his  mind,  he  took  the  roll  of  pardi-
ment  into  his  own  hand,  and,  in  his  own  handwriting,  put  down  these  words :  **  Now
the  Lord  of  peace  himself  give  you  peace  at  all  times  in  all  ways.  The  Loord  be  with
you  all."  Still  continuing  to  write,  he  adds  the  explanatory  note:  ''The  salntatioB
of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  In  his  explanation  he  includes  his  reason  for  giving
his  own  handwriting :  *'  Which  is  the  token  in  erery  Epistle :  so  I  write  "  (».e.  in  these
characters).  A  forged  epistle  in  his  name  had  been  circulated  in  Thessalonica;  to
preyent  such  imposition  in  future,  he  gives  them,  in  the  few  wcsds  in  his  own  hand-
writings a  token  or  seal  by  which  to  assure  themselves  of  the  genuineness  of  his
letters.  Let  them  accept  of  no  letter  which  did  not  carry  with  it  the  evidence  of  its
genuineness.

ni.  Benediction.  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  alL"  ThiB
is  the  short  form  which  is  found  in  the  First  Epistle,  with  the  thoughtful  addition  of
"  all."  There  were  some  persons  in  the  Thessalouian  Church  who  had  come  under  his
censure.  As  in  the  sixteenth  yerse  he  has  included  them  in  his  salutation  (''  with  you
all "),  so  now  he  includes  them  in  his  benediction.  He  leaves  the  Thessalonians  for  the
time,  with  no  grudge  in  his  heart  against  any,  but  with  the  catholic  desire  that  they
should  all  be  dealt  with,  not  according  to  their  own  demerit,  but  according  to  tibe  merit
of  their  Saviour,  of  which  he  is  soyereign  Imputer. — K.  F.

Yer.  1. — Prayer  far  missions.  Money  is  not  the  sinew  of  the  spiritual  wars  of  the
Church.  The  necessary  appeals  for  money  so  urgently  pressed  by  the  friends  ik
missions  should  not  bliud  our  eyes  to  the  higher  needs  of  those  great  enterprises.  All
the  wealth  of  the  Stock  Exchange  could  not  convert  one  souL  As  it  was  in  Israel's
great  battle  with  Amalek,  when  Joshua  could  only  prevail  in  the  field  so  long  as  Moses
prayed  on  the  mountain,  the  missionary  is  successful  in  proportion  as  the  Church  is
prayerful.  In  order  that  this  assertion  may  not  flBill  powerless  as  an  empty,  dogmatic
platitude,  inquire  how  it  may  be  substantiated  by  a  consideration  of  the  a^oi  elements
of  true  success  in  the  mission  field.

L  The  spmiruAL  ohabaoteb  of  the  laboub  of  the  kissionabies.  Money  cannot
make  missionaries.  It  may  send  men  abroad,  feed,  clothe,  and  house  them,  but  it
cannot  put  an  apostolic  spirit  in  them,  nor  cheer  and  strengthen  that  spirit  when
it  flags ;  and  yet  without  such  a  spirit  no  missionary  work  can  be  looked  for.  Oareys
do  not  come  with  good  balance-sheets,  nor  are  Moffats  evolved  out  of  glowing  fim^nrift]
reports.  The  great  want  of  the  missionary  societies  is  men,  not  money.  1.  Prayer
is  necessary  that  the  right  men  may  be  forthcoming,  God  only  can  find  the  men,  and
the  most  gifted  men  will  fail  except  they  go  in  pursuit  of  a  Divine  vocation.  St.  Pad
was  appointed  "not  from  men,  nor  through  man"  (Gal.  i.  1);  he  was  sent  on  his
specific  mission  through  indications  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  response  to  the  prayers  of  the
Qiurch  at  Antiooh  (Acts  xiii.  2).    2.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  missionaries  may  be


CH.  ra.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        83

sustained.  There  is  mucli  to  damp  the  ardour  and  depress  the  spirit  of  the  missionary
amid  all  the  degraded  scenes  of  his  work.  St.  Panl  had  been  praying  for  his  friends  at
Thessalonica ;  in  return  he  sought  their  prayers  for  his  work.  He  so  identified  himself
with  his  mission  as  to  regard  prayer  for  the  mission  as  prayer  for  himself.

II.  The  external  pbogbess  op  the  truth.  St.  Paul  asks  for  prayer  **  that  the
Word  of  the  Lord  may  run."  Nothing  is  more  striking  than  the  fact  that  the  rate
of  progress  of  Christian  missions  is  not  at  all  proportionate  to  the  perfection  of  the
mechanism  with  which  they  are  organized.  The  years  of  biggest  subscriptions  are  not
always  the  years  of  most  numerous  conversions.  1.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  Ood  may
remove  obstructions  to  the  progress  of  Christianity.  Governments  may  hinder  missions.
Countries  are  sometimes  closed  against  missionaries.  Then  we  must  pray  that  Gk>d
would  open  a  way.  What  doors  has  he  opened  in  our  day !  Tiie  Word  is  now  free
to  run  through  the  vast  populations  of  China.  "  The  great  dark  continent "  is  opening
up  to  the  light.  This  is  not  done  by  money.  **  It  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is
marvellous  in  our  eyes."  2.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  Ood  may  dispose  tJie  minds
of  men  to  receive  the  truth.  In  a  neighbouring  Macedonian  Church  lived  the  first
European  resident  converted  by  St.  Paul,  and  of  her  it  is  said,  "  whose  heart  the  Lord
opened,  to  give  heed  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul"  (Acts  xvi.  14).
Therefore  we  must  pray  that  Gkxi's  Spirit  may  go  with  the  Word,  to  prepare  the  soil  to
receive  it  and  to  quicken  it  when  it  is  sown.

III.  The  internal  fbuitfulness  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle  is  not  satisfied
with  desiring  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  "  run ; "  he  wishes  also  that  it  may  be
"  glorified."  This  further  wish  strikes  a  high  noto.  It  reminds  us  that  missionary
success  cannot  be  measured  by  the  numbers  of  the  converts.  The  great  question  ish—
what  is  the  character  of  them  ?  Statistical  reports  are  delusive.  The  missionary  who
can  make  no  sensational  return  of  long  lists  of  converts  may  be  doing  the  most  real,
solid,  lasting  work  in  laying  the  foundation  of  true  Christian  character  in  a  few.
There  are  nominal  Christians  in  heathen  lands  who  are  a  dishonour  to  the  name  they
bear,  as  there  are  also  at  home.  Prayer  is  necessary  that  a  right  character  may  be
cultivated  in  mission  Churches.  Christ  was  glorified  when  the  man  who  had  been
a  fierce  demoniac  sat  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind  at  the  feet  of  his  Deliverer.  The
Christian  who  has  been  a  savage  is  the  finest  witness  of  the  power  of  the  gospeL  But
it  is  very  difficult  to  irradicate  the  vices  of  heathenism,  as  missionaries  know  to  their
sorrow.    Let  us  pray  for  this  most  hard  but  most  needful  work. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  3. — Security.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  much  anxiety  St.  Paul  spends  on
the  normal  and  permanent  character  of  his  Christian  converts.  He  is  not  satisfied  with
havinz  won  their  first  confession  of  faith,  nor  is  he  content  that  now  and  again  they
should  flash  out  with  some  brilliant  display  of  spiritual  energy.  His  chief  concern  is
with  their  life  throughout,  his  chief  desire  for  the  strength  and  persistence  of  its  higher
character.  It  is  important  for  all  of  us  to  bear  in  mind  that  salvation  is  not  an  isolated
act,  that  it  is  a  chronic  condition.  We  are  always  in  danger  of  falling  unless  we  are
kept  in  a  continuous  Divine  security.

I.  Tbe  two  elements  of  security.  1.  Internal  stability.  We  are  in  danger  of
falling  through  our  own  weakness.  Badly  built  houses  do  not  wait  for  an  earthquake
to  throw  them  down  ;  they  crumble  to  pieces.  (1)  The  first  requisite  for  security  is
a  good  foundation.  Christians  should  see  to  it  that  they  are  building  on  Christ,  and
not  on  their  own  doings  and  habits.  (2)  The  next  requisite  is  compact^  solid  building.
The  building  of  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  is  fragile,  thou«zh  it  may  be  erected  on  a  founda-
tion of  rock.  We  want  firm  principles,  sound  habits,  decided  convictions.  2.  External
protection.  (1)  We  are  in  danger  from  the  evil  one.  In  estimating  our  measure  of
security  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  character  of  our  environment.  The  ship
may  be  well  built  and  yet  it  may  not  be  able  to  withstand  the  pressure  of  ice-floes.
The  strongest  house  may  give  way  before  an  avalanche.  The  Christian  is  beset  by
temptations.  It  is  not  enough  that  he  is  firm  in  his  personal  will  to  do  right ;  he
needs  protection  from  external  inducements  to  go  astray.  (2)  To  be  secure  against  this
danger  we  need  to  be  guarded.  We  can  never  be  strong  enough  to  withstand  the
whole  force  of  an  attack  of  Satan.  Some  providential  warding  ofif  of  the  fiercest  blows
seems  to  be  necessary.


8i       THE  6ECX)ND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANa    [oh.  in.  1—18.

IL  The  qbeat  oround  of  secubitt.  St.  Paul  d(>es  not  wish,  or  hope,  or  pray  for
tlie  security  of  bis  friends.  He  knows  and  is  confident  that  they  have  a  good  ground
of  security.  Our  fears  are  due  to  our  unbelief.  Faith  bas  ber  feet  on  an  immovable
rock.  1.  The  ground  of  our  security  is  Christ,  (1)  He  atrengthens  us  with  internal
stability.  The  indwelling  Christ  is  the  source  ana  secret  of  Christian  vigour.  Weak,
wavering  Christians  have  too  little  of  Christ  in  tboir  lives.  (2)  He  guards  us  against
external  assaults.  Christ  has  faoed  and  met  and  defeated  the  tempter.  He  interposes
the  presence  of  his  Holy  Spirit  between  the  evil  spirit  and  our  hearts.  2.  The  reason
for  trusting  in  Christ  for  security  is  his  faithfulness.  It  should  be  sufficient  for  us  to
bave  confidence  in  his  soodness.  He  is  so  gracious,  so  kind,  so  generous  to  help,  that
we  mav  be  sure  that  he  will  aid  his  people  in  their  greatest  dangers.  But  we  have
more  than  this  assurance.  He  has  promised  help  (Matt,  xzviii.  20) ;  he  is  appointed
by  God  as  our  Saviour,  and  therefore,  in  fulfilment  of  his  great  mission,  fideli^  leads
him  to  see  to  the  security  of  his  people. — ^W.  F.  A.

Yer.  6. — The  patience  of  Christ,  The  Christian  life  has  two  aspects,  a  heavenwaid
and  an  earthward  aspect.  In  its  heavenly  relations  it  should  be  filled  with  love  to
God;  in  its  earthly  relations — especially  when  under  such  trials  as  befell  the  early
Christians — ^it  needs  to  be  fortified  to  endure  with  patience.  The  latter  grace  claims
particular  attention.

I.  Great  patience  is  requisite  for  the  endurance  of  earthly  ufb.  Very
great  differences  in  successive  ages  and  in  various  individual  lots  make  the  amounts  of
patience  necessary  for  each  man  to  be  very  unequaL  It  would  be  foolish  for  one  in  our
own  day,  to  whom  the  lines  have  fallen  in  pleasant  places,  to  pose  with  the  solemn,
martyr-like  demeanour  which  was  natural  to  Christians  in  the  days  of  persecution.
They  needed  patience  to  face  cruel  calamities  which  we  happily  are  spared.  Neverthe-
less, **  man  is  bom  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  flv  upward;"  the  quietest  public  times  see
the  bitterest  private  sorrows  in  some  households ;  great,  awful  spiritual  troubles  come
upon  men  whose  external  circumstances  are  placid  and  sunny ;  and  even  where  no  one
heavy  blow  falls,  innumerable  small  vexing  cares,  like  the  Egyptian  plague  of  flies,  fret
and  wear  the  soul.  Therefore  patience  is  still  greatly  needed.  It  is  one  thing  to  suffer
trouble  and  quite  another  thing  to  bear  it,  not  to  be  crushed  by  it,  not  to  re^l  against
the  Power  that  sends  it,  even  in  secret  thought,  but  to  stand  up  under  it,  with  dumb,
unmurmuring  endurance,  like  those  sad,  calm  Caryatides  that  have  stood  for  centuries
bearing  on  their  patient  heads  ponderous  temple  structures.

II.  THE  patience  OF  ChRIST  IS  THE  MODEL  AND  THE  INSPIRATION  FOR  THE  PATIENCE

OF  Christians.  1  his  wonderiul  patience  of  Christ  may  be  best  appreciated  when  we
come  to  meditate  on  its  relation  to  his  circumstances  and  experience.  1.  His  previous
glory.  They  who  have  once  known  better  days  feel  the  smart  of  adversity  most
keenly.  From  heaven's  throne  to  the  cross — what  a  descent !  2.  His  extreme  suffer-
ings. Was  ever  there  sorrow  like  his  ?  Gross  insult  was  added  to  cruel  torture ;  and
insult  tries  patience  worse  than  pain.  3.  His  sensitive  nature.  There  are  men  who
seem  to  feel  a  needle-prick  more  acutely  than  others  feel  a  sword-thrust  Our  Lord
was  one  who  felt  most  acutely,  with  the  painfully  delicate  perception  of  the  most
refined  nature.  4.  Bis  powers  of  resistance.  He  might  have  summoned  legends  of
angels  to  his  assistance.  5.  The  marvellous  spirit  with  which  he  endured  all.  "  He
was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter."  He  not  only  prayed  for  his  murderers,  but  he
calmly  weighed  the^r  guilt  and  defended  them  on  account  of  their  ignorance.  This
wonderful  patience  of  our  Lord  is  a  model  for  us ;  it  is  also  an  inspiration.  As  we
turn  from  the  petty  complaints  of  men  to  the  sight  of  that  awful.  Divine  patience,
surely  our  murmurings  must  be  shamed  and  silenced.

III.  It  is  requisite  that  God  should  direct  our  hearts  into  the  patience  of
Christ.  1.  The  patience  must  penetrate  to  our  hearts.  Patience  of  language  and  of
constrained  demeanour  is  superficial  and  will  not  satisfy  Gk>d,  nor  can  it  remain  long
without  the  deeper  patience  of  the  heart.  2.  Our  hearts  cannot  receive  this  patience
till  they  are  directed  aright  by  God.  It  depends  on  our  disposition,  which  we  must
have  moulded  by  the  hand  of  God  into  a  firm  faith  and  a  calm  endurance.  3.  This
patience  follows  love  to  Ood,  Our  hearts  are  to  be  first  directed  into  love.  When  we
love  as  Christ  loved  we  can  endure  as  he  endured. — W.  F.  A.


CH.  m.  1— 18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.        86

Ver.  10. — Pauperizing  charity.  There  appear  to  have  been  idle,  talkative  persons  in
the  Thessalonian  Church  who  neglected  their  trades  while  they  made  themselves  very
prominent  in  the  Christian  assemblies,  expecting  to  be  supported  out  of  the  common
funds,  St.  Paul  justly  rebukes  their  disgraceful  conduct.  He  points  to  his  own
example.  Even  he,  an  apostle,  devoted  to  the  work  of  the  Churches,  did  not  draw  from
the  funds  of  the  Churches,  but  supported  himself  by  his  own  labour.  The  wholesome
direction  which  he  ^ves  has  a  certain  grim  humour  about  it.  Here  is  his  remedy  for
the  tiresome,  loquacious  idlers:  starve  them  into  industry.  That  process  will  brins
them  to  their  senses.  It  would  have  been  well  if  the  same  wise,  manly  counsel  had
always  prevailed  in  the  Church.  A  weak  and  foolish  administration  of  Christian
charity  has  too  often  fostered  the  poverty  it  aimed  at  curing.  Some  of  the  reasons
which  make  it  positively  wrong  for  the  charitable  to  support  the  idle  should  be  well
weighed  by  those  persons  who  are  more  kind-hearted  than  reflective.

I.  It  injures  the  recipient.  Thus  paupers  are  bred  and  multiplied.  1.  The  sin
of  idleness  is  encouraged ;  for  idleness  is  a  sin.  Those  who  encourage  it  will  have  to
bear  part  of  the  guilt  of  it.  2.  The  indolent  are  tempted  to  many  vices.  The  idle
meml^rs  of  the  Church  gave  to  the  Thessalonians  the  greatest  trouble.  Work  is
a  moral  antiseptic.  3.  Independence  is  destroyed.  The  able-bodied  pauper  is  quite
unmanned  by  the  loss  of  his  independence.  There  was  some  sense  in  those  stern  old
Elizabethan  laws  against  sturdy  beggars  and  vagrants.

IL  It  injures  the  giver.  1.  Where  public  funds  are  thus  misappropriated^  an
injustice  is  done  to  those  who  contribute  to  them.  We  do  not  pay  poor  rates  m  order  to
encourage  idleness,  nor  do  we  give  communion  offerings  for  that  unworthy  object.
District  visitors  who  have  the  administration  of  moneys  subscribed  by  other  people
should  remember  this,  and  not  permit  soft-heartedness  to  oust  justice.  2.  Where  only
private  benevolence  is  concerned,  the  heart  is  hardened  in  the  end  by  the  sight  of  ins
abiue  of  charity.

IIL  It  injures  the  truly  needy.  We  take  the  children's  bread  and  give  it  to
dogs,  and  the  children  starve.  The  idlers  are  the  most  clamorous  for  assistance,  while
the  deserving  are  the  most  backward  to  make  their  wants  known.  Suffering  in  silence,
they  are  often  neglected,  because  greedy,  worthless  persons  step  in  first  and  ravage  the
small  heritage  of  the  poor.

IV.  It  injures  the  community.  1.  It  discourages  industry  generally.  Not  only
are  the  idle  encouraged  in  their  discreditable  way  of  living,  but  a  tax  is  put  upon
industry,  and  men  do  not  feel  so  strongly  inclined  to  work  honestly  for  their  daily
bread.  2.  It  propagates  the  worst  class  of  society.  The  idle  part  of  the  population  of
great  cities  are  the  canker  of  civilization.  There  vice  and  crime  breed  most  freely.  It
is  the  law  of  England  that  no  man  need  starve.  But  it  is  right  and  necessary  that
when  the  state  gives  bread  it  should  compel  labour— t.e.,  of  course,  if  there  is  health
lor  work.  Idleness  is  the  curse  of  the  East ;  Syrian  felahin  will  sit  to  reap  their  corn.
Wise  Christians  will  ever  protest  against  this  fatal  vice,  and  all  who  administer  Church
funds  should  feel  a  heavy  responsibility  resting  upon  them  to  guard  against  increasing
it  by  well-meant  but  foolish  doles  of  charity. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  14. — Church  discipline.  There  are  several  references  to  Church  discipline  in  the
writings  of  St.  Paul,  showing  that  he  was  desirous  to  see  order  and  a  healthy  character
of  Church  life  maintained  among  his  readers.  In  an  earlier  verse  of  the  present  chapter
(ver.  6)  he  advises  the  Thessalonians  to  withdraw  themselves  "  from  every  brother  that
walketh  disorderly ; "  now  he  bids  them  not  keep  company  with  those  who  refuse  to
obey  his  apostolic  message.

I.  Idleness  is  an  offence  heavy  enough  to  merit  Church  disoiplike.  The
preceding  verses  show  that  St.  Paul  has  in  mind  those  idle  busybodies  who  walked
disorderly  (ver.  11,  etc.).  We  visit  dishonesty,  intemperance,  etc.,  with  censure.  The
apostle  goes  further,  and  selects  idleness  for  special  notice  by  the  Church.  So  great
docs  he  feel  the  evil  of  it  to  be.

II.  Neglect  of  apostolic  injunctions  is  the  immediate  occasion  fob  the
EXERCISE  OF  Church  DISCIPLINE.  The  idle  are  first  to  be  admonished  (ver.  12).  When
admonition  fails,  further  measures  must  be  taken.  The  apostles  had  no  ambition  to  be
lords  over  Christ's  heritage ;  though  their  commanding  influence  naturally  gave  great


86       THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIiJra.    [oh.  m.  1— 1&

iv«]ght  to  tbeir  directions,  similar  to  that  which  comes  unsoiiffht  to  the  European
missionary  among  conTerts  firom  heathen  savagery.  NoTertheless,  it  was  not  thii
adventitious  anUunity  that  St.  Paul  relied  upon.  He  wrote  under  inspiratioo.  His
message  was  prompted  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  When  we  refuse  to  hearken  to  the
admonitions  of  the  l^ew  Testament  we  are  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Ckd.

in.  ChUBGH  DISdPLDni  IB  TO  BB  XXEBGISBD  BT  MSAKB  OV  QUXBT  SEPABATIOXL     TheTB

is  no  word  here  of  physical  force.  It  was  impossible  for  a  Christian  community  living
in  a  pagan  city  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  civil  power  to  execute  its  decrees ;  but  there  is
every  reason  to  believe  that,  had  the  possibility  of  anything  of  the  kind  been  oontem*

Elated  in  the  mind  of  St  Paul,  he  would  have  repudiated  it — ^holding  as  he  did  that
is  weapons  were  not  camaL  Further,  there  is  no  reference  to  spiritual  exoonmiunica-
tion,  no  cursing  with  bell  and  book.  Simple  separation  is  all  that  is  advised.  This  is
a  peaceful,  gentle,  but  effective  mode  of  censure.  It  would,  of  course,  directly  stop  the
evil  practice  of  idlers  living  on  the  Church  funds.  And  it  would  administer  a  rebuke
that  would  be  all  the  more  eloquent  that  it  was  silent.  It  is  always  our  duty  to  see
that  our  Church  fellowship  is  kept  pure.  We  should  have  the  courage  to  separate
from  those  who  disgrace  the  Christian  name.  We  should  be  careful  for  our  own  sakm
that  the  society  we  select  to  move  in  is  healthy  and  elevated  in  moral  tone.  For  the
sake  of  others  we  should  discourage  unworthy  conduct  by  refusing  to  associate  with
those  who  are  guilty  of  it.  Some  who  are  not  brave  enough  to  do  this  are  guilty  of
great  meanness  in  talking  against  offenders  behind  their  backs,  while  treating  them  in
the  most  friendly  way  when  in  their  presence.

IV.   TbX  OBJXOT  of  ChUBCH  DIBCIPLINK  IB  TO  BEOOVBB  THE  OFFENDER.      The  mOlt

stem  penalties  are  to  be  inflicted  with  a  merciful  end.  Here  the  mild  punishment  of
quiet  separation  is  to  aim  at  restoring  the  wrong-doer.  First  he  is  to  be  shamed,  as  he
will  be  if  there  be  any  right  spirit  in  him.  Men  should  feel  ashamed  of  idleness.
Then  and  throughout  he  is  to  be  regarded,  not  as  an  enemy,  but  only  as  an  emsg
brother.  Thus  tender  and  sympathetic  should  Christians  be  with  one  another  in
regard  to  their  failings,  remembering  that  it  is  only  through  the  forgiving  grace  of
Christ  that  any  of  us  enjoy  the  privileges  of  Chnstianity.  There  is  no  room  for
a  Pharisee  in  the  Church,  and  we  must  beware  lest  the  exercise  of  Church  discipline
develop  his  ugly  spirit. — W.  F.  A.

Yer.  16. — Peace  from  the  Ood  of  peace.  After  giving  directions  about  the  smsU
trouble  that  disturbed  the  Thessalonian  Christians — small  indeed  when  compared  with
the  bitter  factiousness  and  the  graver  sin  that  subsequently  disturbed  the  Church
at  Corinth — St.  Paul  prays  that  peace  may  reign  among  them  and  that  the  Lord  may
be  with  all  of  them,  with  the  erring  in  their  restoration  as  well  as  with  the  faithful
brethren.  The  peace  which  he  desiderates  so  earnestly  is  clearly  more  than  mutual
concord ;  it  is  that  deep  peace  of  God  in  the  heart  which  is  at  the  root  of  peace  among
men,  and  is  itself  the  greatest  of  blessings.

I.  Peefegt  Chbistian  peace  IB  UNiVEBSAL.  What  most  strikes  us  in  regard  to  the
peace  here  referred  to  is  the  universality  of  its  scope  and  area.  1.  Fetfect  Chrisiian
peace  is  continuous  and  unbroken.  It  is  to  be  enjoyed  ^  at  all  times."  In  closing  tiie
First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  St.  Paul  wished  his  readers  to  **  rejoice  alway"
(1  Thess.  V.  17).  Now  he  prays  that  they  may  have  continuous  peace.  If  we  cannot
have  the  joy  of  the  angels  we  may  have  the  peace  of  GK)d,  which  is  better.  As  there
are  some  who  have  happiness  without  peace,  so  there  are  others  who  have  peace  without
happiness.  There  is  a  transient  superficial  calm  which  the  world  calls  peace ;  but  volca-
noes slumber  beneath,  and  in  a  moment  it  may  be  shattered  as  with  an  earthquake.
There  is  no  peace  in  the  wicked.  There  is  an  eternal  peace  for  the  people  of  God.
2.  Perfect  Christian  peace  comes  through  various  means.  St.  Paul  adds  the  curious
phrase,  "  in  all  ways."  It  is  not  only  that  peace  may  be  enjoyed  continuously  in  spite
of  changing  and  adverse  circumstances,  but  those  very  circumstances,  even  the  most
unfriendly  of  them,  are  to  minister  to  the  peace.  This  may  appear  paradoxical,  but  in
experience  we  find  that  the  troubles  and  distractions  which  would  upset  all  peace  if  we
only  had  the  surface  peace  of  earth  drive  us  nearer  to  God,  and  so  help  us  to  realize
more  perfectly  the  eternal  peace  of  heaven.

IL  Tebfeot  Chbibtian  peace  flows  fboh  Christ.    It  is  not  to  be  got  by  any


cam.  1—18.]    THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.       87


efforts  of  our  own  wills.  We  cannot  pacify  ourselves  any  more  than  the  sea  can  calm
the  raging  of  its  own  wild  waves.  He  who  said,  "  Peace,  be  still  1 "  to  the  storm  on  the
lake  is  the  only  One  who  can  auell  the  tempests  that  surge  in  human  hearts.  Christ
infuses  his  own  peace  because  ne  is  the  Lord  of  peace.  1.  He  is  at  peace  in  his  own
§(nU,  Peace  is  contagious.  The  peaceful  gives  peace.  We  may  often  see  how  much
one  quiet,  self-possessed  man  can  do  to  allay  the  panic  of  a  whole  crowd.  **  My  peace
I  give  unto  you,"  said  Jesus  (John  xiv.  27).  2.  He  reigns  in  peace,  Christ  does  not
provoke  enmity  and  warfare  except  against  eviL  Among  his  own  people  he  reigns
pacifically.  3.  He  directly  bestows  peace,  St.  Paul's  wish  is  a  prayer.  We  pray  that
Christ  may  breathe  his  peace  into  us  by  a  direct  inspiration.  This  richest,  deepest,
purest  blessing  is  for  those  who  dwell  near  to  their  Lord  and  drink  of  his  Spirit.
— W.  F.  A,


HOMHETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OP


ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.


■•o«-


CHAPTER  I.

TBKini

Christian  Patience
A  Future  State  of  Betribution
The  Manner  of  Christ's  Second  Com-
<  '*}y      •••  •••  •••  •••

The  Coming  of  Christ  for  Judgment
Christ  Glorified  in  his  Saints
Thanksgiving  for  the   Spiritual  Pro-
gress of  the  Thessalonians
The  Apo8tlo*8  Interest  in  the  Thessa-
Ionian  Church  as  manifested  by  hlB
Praises  of  it  to  other  Churches
The  Significance  of  these  Sufferings
in  Relation  to  Divine  Judgment    ...
The  Future  Judgment  as  to  its  Riglit-
eousncss.  Time,  Circumstances,  and
Results  to  the  Two  Classes  concerned

Ul  Iv         ...  ...  ...  ...

Prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  in  Pro-
spect of  their  Glorification
The  Introduction  ...
The  I'ersecutions  of  the  Thessalonians
The  Great  Day     ...
St  PauPs  Prayer  for  the  Thessalonians
lianifestation  of  Solemn  Interest
Grace  and  Peace  ...
Growing  Faith      ...
A  Token  of  Righteous  Judgment
The  Judgment-Day
Worthy  of  the  Christian  Calling
Glorified...


PAGE
4

4


5


5
5


5
6


6

8

9
10
11
13
14
18
19
19
20
21
22  I


CHAPTER  II.

The  Second  Advent  ...  ...      27

Importance  of  Religious  Knowledge ...      28
The  Doctrine  of  Antichrist  ...      28

Sanctification        ...  ...  ...      28

Retention  of  Scripture        ...  ...      28

A  Misapprehension  respeotingthe  Time
of  the  Second  Advent      ...  ...      28

The  Rise  of  the  Apostasy  and  the
Revelation  of  the  Man  of  Sin  must
precede  the  Second  Advent  ...      29

The  Methods  of  the  Man  of  Sin  and
the  Retribution  that  overtakes  his
Victims  ...  ...  ...      31

Apostolic  Thanksgiving  for  the  Elec-
tion and  the  Calling  of  the  Thessa-
lonians ...  ...  ...      32

Exhortation  to   a  Steadfast  Mainte-
nance of  Apostolic  Traditions        ...      82
Prayer  after  Exhortation    ...  ...      33

The  Day  of  Christ  not  Immediate    ...      83
The  Man  of  Sin    ...  ...  34,46


St  Paul's  Hopes  for  the  llicssalonians

Antichrist

Exhortation  to  Steadfastness

A  Great  Delusion ...

The  Mystery  of  Lawlessness

The  Love  of  the  Truth

The  Divine  Work  of  Salvation

A  Benediction      ...

EXOUBSXTS  OK  TBI  MaH  OF  SiK


37
38
42
45
47
47
48
49
50


ii


INDEX.


CHAPTER  IIL


Interoenory  Prayer
PenoTeranoe  of  the  Suinta  ...
The  Patience  of  Christ
Avoidance  of  Evil  Company
The  Sanctity  of  Labour
Evil  of  being  Busy  bodies    ...
Weariness  in  Well-Doing    ...


TAOr.

.  CG

.  66
66,84

.  66

.  66

.  66

.  67


Tho  Prayers  of  the  Thessalonians
asked  by  tho  Apostle       ...  ...      67

The  Apostle's  Cheerful  Assurance  and
Oonfidenoo  on  Behalf  of  the  Thessa-
lonians ...  ...  ...      67

The  Apostle's  Further  Prayer  for  his
Converts  ...  ...  ...      68

The  Apostle's  Method  of  Dealing  with
the  Idle  Busybodies  of  the  Thessa-
lonian  Church  ...  ...  ...      68

The  Example  of  tho  Apostle  himself
as  a  Support  to  his  Command        •••      69


THBMB

Exhortation  to  Well-Doing

The  True  Spirit  of  Faithful  Dealing
with  an  Erring  Brother  ...

A  Prayer  for  Peace

The  Closing  Salutation,  with  its  Auto-
graphic Signiflcauoe

Prayer  for  Missions

St  Paul's  Confidence

The  Importance  of  the  Common  Duties
of  Daily  Life  shown

Conclusion

Intimation  of  the  Close  of  the  Epistle

Duty  of  Withdrawing  from  a  Disorderly
Brother  ...

Concluding  Words

Security

Pauperizing  Charity

Church  Discipline

Peace  from  the  God  of  Peace


•••


FAOI

69

70
70

70
71,82
.      71

72
75
75

77
80
83
85
85
86


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY


EDITED  BY  THE


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,


DEAN  OF  OLOU0E8TEB;


AND  BY  THE


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EIELL,  M.A.


I.   TIMOTHY.


Exposition  anU  f^omilttics

By  the  right  HON.  AND   RIGHT   REV.
LORD  A.  C.  HERVEY,  D.D.,

LORD  BISHOP  OF  BATH  AND  WELLS.

f^omtltes  bg  Fattous  ^utfiors.

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,  D.D.  REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A.

REV.  W.  M.  8TATHAM.


2L  0  n  ti  0  n :
KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.


INTRODUCTION.


■c»


Three  main  inquiries  present  themselves  to  the  student  of  tbe  pastoral
Epistles:  (1)  their  authenticity ;  (2)  their  chronology;  (3)  their  contents,
including  the  matters  treated  of  in  them,  and  the  style  in  which  they
are  written.  These  three  inquiries  necessarily  touch  one  another,  and
run  into  one  another,  at  many  points.  Still,  they  may  well  be  separately
treated  of.

§  1.  The  Authenticity  op  the  Pastoral  Epistles.

The  authenticity  of  these  Epistles,  as  the  genuine  works  of  the  Apostle
Paul,  whose  name  is  prefixed  to  all  three,  rests  upon  the  twofold  authority
of  external  witnesses  and  internal  evidence.

1.  The  external  witness  is  as  follows.  Eusebius  reckons  them  (''the
fourteen  Epistles  of  Paul ")  among  the  universally  acknowledged  books  of
Holy  Scripture,  and  speaks  of  them  as  manifest  and  certain  Q  Eccl.  Hist.,'
in.  iii.  and  xxv.),  with  some  reservation  as  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.
The  Muratorian  Canon  (about  a.d.  170)  includes  thirteen  Epistles  of  St.
Paul,  excluding  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  the  Peschito  Canon  (of  about
the  same  date)  reckons  fourteen  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  including  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  ("  Canon,"  in  *  Dictionary  of  Bible ')  ;  and  they  have  never
been  doubted  by  any  Church  writers,  but  have  held  their  place  in  all  the
canons  of  East  and  West.  Phrases  identical  with  those  in  these  Epistles,
and  presumably  qu(jted  from  them,  occur  in  almost  contemporary  writers.
Clemens  Romanus  ('  1  Cor.,'  ii.)  has  ^EroifAoi  cts  ttSi'  tfryov  &yoJB6v  (comp.  Titus
iii.  1).  In  C.  xxix.  he  says,  TLpoa-iXOiafitv  avrw  ci'  ba-ioTrjri  ^X^^,  ayvas  Kal
afiidvTovs  x"p<*5  aipovTcs  Trpos  avTov  (comp.  1  Tim.  ii.  8).  Polycarp  (c.  iv.)
uses  St.  Paul's  very  words,  'Apxrj  Trdvriav  xaXeTrwv  ffuXapyvpia  (oomp.  1  Tim.
vi.  10) ;  Ou^ci'  €i<rqv€yKafi€v  ct9  top  Koafiov^  dAA*  ovSi  l^tviyKuv  Tt  ll^ofuv
(oomp.  1  Tim.  vi.  7).  Theophilus  of  Antioch  (a.d.  181)  quotes  1  Tim.  ii.
1,  2  verbatim  as  being  the  utterance  of  ©ctos  Adyos,  "the  Word  of  God"
('  Ad  Autol.,'  iii.  14).     The  same  writer,  in  a  passage  in  general  harmony


il  INTBODUCTION  TO


witli  TiitiB  iii.  t3 — 7,  uses  the  very  words  of  Titus  iii.  5,  At^  Xxivrpov  iroXcyyc-
y€vla%  (*  Ad  Autol./  i.  2).  The  different  liturgies,  as  quoted  in  the  notes
on  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  are  manifestly  founded  on  that  passage.  Irensdus  (A.a
1 78),  in  his  book  '  Against  Heresies,*  repeatedly  quotes  by  name  all  three
Epistles  (1  Tim.  i.  4;  2  Tim.  iv.  21 ;  Titus  iii.  10,  eta).  Tertullian  (a.d.
200),  in  '  Do  Prsescript.,'  oap.  xxv.,  quotes  again  and  again  by  name  St.  Paul's
First  and  Second  Epistles  to  Timothy.  Clement  of  Alexandria  (a.d.  194)
Again  and  again  quotes  both  Epistles  to  Timothy,  and  says  that  the  heretics
wjoct  thorn  because  their  errors  are  refuted  by  them  ('  Strom.,'  ii.,  iiL,  and  i.).
Ho  (luotoM  also  the  Epistle  to  Titus.  Many  other  references  and  quotati(»is
may  1h>  found  in  Lardner  (vol.  i.),  as  well  as  in  various  '  Introductions,'
as  Huthor,  Olshausen,  Alford  (where  they  are  very  dearly  arranged);
'Speaker's  Commentary;'  'Now  Testament  Commentary,'  edited  by  the  Bishop
of  Gloueostor  and  Bristol;  'Dictionary  of  Bible,'  art.  "Timothy,"  eta
But  the  alH>vo  establish  oondusively  the  aoceptanoe  of  these  Epistles  as
authentio  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  Church  writers  of  the  three  first
conturie«  of  the  Christian  era — a  unanimity  which  continued  down  to  the
premont  ivntury.

2.  The  internal  evidence  is  no  less  strong.  We  must  remember  that,  if
tUe«io  Kpistlea  aro  not  St  Paul's,  they  are  artful  forgeries,  written  for  the
oxpn>«a  pxir|xiso  of  deceiving.  Is  it  possible  to  suppose  that  writings  so
gravt^«  »o  lioWr,  si^  simple  and  yet  so  powerful;  breathing  such  a  nobk
i&pirit  of  love  and  gxxKlness,  of  high  courage  and  holy  resolves ;  replete  with
Mioh  gredt  wi^lom  and  sucb  exalted  piety :  having  no  apparent  object  but
the  vcxxlUWing  of  the  Christian  societies  to  which  they  refer;  and  ao  well
\>AlouUt\\l  to  pnnuote  th;it  well-l>eing :  wew  written  with  a  pen  steeped  in
U^'^  AVtd  fal$eV.\\xr-  U  is  im|XY!«ible  to  suppose  it.  The  transparent  truth
of  ;heQW>  V.pistUv^  is  their  v>wu  credential  that  they  and  the  work  of  him

l^t  ail  the  dotiub  of  ihe  Kpistlos  pcdni  to  the  same  conclusion.  Whfle
ibcn^  i:^  a  warkwl  and  *:nk;na:  difference  in  the  vooibTilaiy  of  inese  Epistles,
which  a  for^-^T  x«\>^:ld  h^vo  avoided  i^tv>  which  we  siiaii  revert  bv-and-by),
tWtv  i^  a:\  iacr.uty  of  to^ie  a;:)vl  s^'nt:r.)en?«  and  al>o  of  woris  and  phrases,
x^  V,io>,  KNs^y^^V-s  ^is^ni  :o  Kr  the  1  irth  v>f  ihe  sas^e  brsin  as  *Jie  oiiier  nniversaliy
*>^ktK"x\ *iV.px^  VV;".is?I«i  of  S:.  l^axiL  Cs cipjire^  tVr  irsttsce^  tiie  opening  and
tlSe  xNx'^irc  >5^1xitAl.i^^5:is  of  5he  Three  Fvisilo*  wiii.  th.ise  cf  Si.  F^urs  oiher
>^vsM*'Os  i>iev  are  i>ie  «ar.u\  iVc.\v»A:e  i!hf  scciziiiri  ir.  1  Tizi.  L  5  with  B<Hn.
\v.x  *  *^ .  v^Ax,  \.  N  art,^  ?^:o  pcrjerftl  Aiui'aie  cf  tie  wriTer's  :^ii.d  lowazds  the
,''4'\x'iN>,  o.;-|\v.'^rtti  A*^,x  i>ji  l^w  cc  M.ts«s»  as  s^wn  ir  1  Tin.  L  4 — II ;  Titus
i  ; .'•  ; ^ ,  i  1>;^**.  ^..v  >  N  '•Jiiih  M.  PaxVs  Ur.raage a::»i cccluc^  tow^aids  the
>ft^,>v*,Nxv".'^  «>*^  .''^•^^sv r*  ar.vir^c  *^  •''cw^  Jis  «vct  jr*2>*rallv ir  ijie  Ac%s of
1>v    V;vieii\ts.  A5rs\  ^,*  ?t5oo>,  iMteS^fccw^  ir.  lib*  ETCKiks  as  L:cl.  iL  17 — ^2$;  viL

♦^N\  xv'X  :wv*  i>x"  vt<^  «^4V  Ti", .Y>,*,  N^c.x"^^  ji^TfciT..  II.* w  u*ir  wT:T*r  .ii  5ie  pastani
V^tiwviY,  v«K^]Ni9RM^tsas  I  T'.T^vv  II— :f  ;  u.  ^^ — T;  vi.  15 — 1*;  2Tim.L


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  nx

8 — 11 ;  iv.  7, 8 ;  Titus  ii.  11 — 13 ;  iii.  4 — 7,  breaks  out  into  rapturous  exhibi-
tions of  the  grace  of  the  gospel,  and  refers  to  his  own  office  as  a  preacher  of  it ;
and  the  similar  sentiments  in  such  passages  as  Bom.  i.  5,  14 — 17 ;  xv.  15,
16;  1  Cor."i.  17;  xv.  1 — 11 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4 — 7;  Gal.  i.  1 — 6  (and  throughout
the  Epistle);  Eph.  iii.  7 — 12;  Col.  i.  23,  and  in  many  others.  Compare,
again,  the  allusions  to  his  own  conversion,  in  1  Cor.  xv.  9  and  Eph.  iii.  8,
with  that  in  1  Tim.  i.  12, 13 ;  the  allusion  to  his  special  office  as  the  apostle
of  the  Gentiles,  in  Bom.  xi.  13,  with  that  in  1  Tim.  ii.  7 ;  and  the  references
to  his  own  sufferings  for  the  gospel,  e,g.  in  2  Cor.  i.  4 — 10 ;  iv.  7 — 12 ;  vi.
4—10;  xi.  23—28;  1  Thess.  ii.  2,  with  those  in  2  Tim.  i.  8,  12;  ii.  9,  10;
iii.  10,  11.  Comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35  with  1  Tim.  ii.  11,  12.  Then  the
doctrinal  teaching  is  exactly  the  same ;  precepts  of  holy  living,  in  all  its
details  of  character,  temper,  and  conduct,  flow  from  dogmatic  statements
just  as  they  do  in  the  other  Epistles  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  15,  16;  vi.  12 — 16;
2  Tim.  i.  8—12;  ii.  19;  Titus  ii.  11—14;  iii.  4—8;  and  Eph.  iv.  20—32;
V.  1 — 4;  Col.  iii.  1 — 5,  8 — 17,  etc.).  The  interposition  of  the  doxology  in
1  Tim.  i.  17  is  exactly  in  the  manner  of  Bom.  i.  25 ;  ix.  5 ;  xi.  36 ;  xvi.  27 ;
Eph.  iii.  20,  21,  etc.  Compare,  again,  the  two  sentences  of  excommunication
— the  one  mentioned  in  1  Cor.  v.  3 — 5,  the  other  in  1  Tim.  i.  20.  Compare
the  two  notices  of  the  temptation  of  Eve  by  the  serpent,  in  2  Cor.  xi.  3  and
1  Tim.  ii.  13,  14 ;  and  the  reference  to  Deut.  xxv.  4  in  1  Cor.  ix.  9  and
1  Tim.  V.  18.  Compare  the  directions  to  Christian  slaves,  in  1  Tim.  vL  1,2,
with  those  in  Eph.  vi.  5 — 8  and  Col.  iii.  22 — 25;  the  metaphor  from  the  games,
in  1  Tim.  vi.  12;  2  Tim.  ii.  5;  iv.  7,  8,  with  that  in  1  Cor.  ix.  24—27;
that  of  the  different  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  and  wood  and  earth,  in  2  Tim.
iL  20,  with  that  of  the  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble,  of
1  Cor.  iii.  12;  and  compare  also  Bom.  ix.  22,  23  and  2  Cor.  iv.  7.  Compare
the  prophetic  announcement  of  the  apostasy,  in  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  with  that  in
1  Tim.  iv.  1.  We  see  exactly  the  same  tone  of  thought  in  Acts  xxiii.  1  as
in  2  Tim.  i.  3;  in  Bom.  xiv.  14,  20,  and  1  Cor.  xii.,  and  Col.  ii.  16 — 23,  as
in  1  Tim.  iv.  3—5  and  Titus  i.  14,  15;  in  Phil.  iv.  11  as  in  1  Tim.  vi.  8;
and  in  Bom.  xiv.  6  as  in  1  Tim.  iv.  3.  Many  precepts  are  common  to  the
pastoral  and  the  other  Epistles,  as  e.g,  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Titus  i.  8,  and  Bom.
xii.  13;  1  Tim.  v.  10  and  Bom.  xii.  13;  1  Tim.  vi.  5  (A.V.)  and  2  Thess.
iii.  14 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  6,  7,  and  2  Thess.  iii.  15 ;  to  which  it
would  be  easy  to  add  more  examples.  The  directions  for  public  worship
in  1  Cor.  xiv.  34  and  1  Tim.  ii.  8 — 13  are  also  very  similar.  The  repeated
i*eference  to  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  is  another  feature  common  to
the  pastoral  and  the  other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  14;  2  Tim.
iv.  1,  8 ;  Titus  ii.  13,  compared  with  1  Cor.  i.  7 ;  xv.  23 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19 ;
iiL  13;  V.  23;  2  Thess.  ii.  1,  8;  PhiL  iii.  20,  etc.).  There  is  a  marked
resemblance  in  thought  between  Titus  iii.  3 — 7  and  Eph.  ii.  2 — 8 ;  between
Titus  iii.  5  and  Eph.  v.  26.  Note,  again,  St.  Paul's  manner  of  communicating
information,  to  those  to  whom  he  wrote,  concerning  his  affairs  and  surround-
ings, as  seen  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  5 — 8,  in  Col.  iv.  7 — 13,  and  in  2  Tim.  iv.  9 — 17 ;


iv  INTRODUCTION  TO


and  the  affectionate  remembrance  of  past  days,  shown  alike  in  1  Thees.  i.
2 — 8  and  2  Tim.  i.  3 — 5,  16 — 18.  Then  there  is  the  same  estimate  of
individuals  shown  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  as  is  seen  in  the  other  Epistles.
Compare  the  mention  of  Timothy,  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  10  and  Phil.  ii.  19,  20  with
those  in  1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2 — 5 ;  iv.  9,  21 ;  that  of  Luke,  in  CoL  iy.  14,
with  that  in  2  Tim.  iv.  11 ;  that  of  Mark,  in  Col.  iv.  10,  with  that  in  2  Tim.
iv.  11 ;  and  observe  also  the  coincidence  of  the  statements  which  represent
Mark,  in  Col.  iv.  10,  as  going  to  Colosssd,  and  in  2  Tim.  iv.  11  as  being  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Ephesus,  where  Timothy  might  pick  him  up  and
bring  him  to  Home  with  him.  It  may  be  added,  generally,  that  we  have
a  certain  number  of  the  same  workers  associated  with  St.  Paul  in  both  sets
of  Epistles,  as  Timothy,  Titus,  Luke,  Apollos,  Tychicus,  Trophimns  (Acts
XX.  4 ;  xxi.  29),  Demas,  Mark,  Priscilla  and  Aquila ;  and  at  the  same  time,
as  was  to  be  expected  after  an  interval  of  several  years,  the  disappearance
of  some  old  names,  as  Sopater,  Aristarchus,  Gains,  Secundus,  Tertios,
Qnartus,  Onesimus,  Justus,  Epaphras,  Epapbroditus,  Sosthenes,  Lucius,
Jesus  called  Justus,  etc. ;  and  the  introduction  of  some  new  ones,  as
Phygellus  and  Hormogenes,  Onesiphorus,  Cresceus,  Carpus,  Eubulus,  Linns,
Pudens,  Claudia,  Artemas,  Zenas,  and  others.  The  same  thing  may  be
said  of  places.  While  we  have  the  old  familiar  scenes  of  St.  Paul's  apostolic
labours — Miletus,  Ephesus,  Troas,  Macedonia,  Corinth — still  before  us,  some
new  ones  are  introduced,  as  Crete,  Nicopolis,  and  Dalmatia.

The  other  quite  different  class  of  resemblances  is  that  of  words  and
phrases,  and  literary  style.  St.  Paul  had  a  way  of  stringing  together  a
number  of  words,  substantives  or  adjectives,  or  short  sentences.  Examples
of  this  may  be  seen  in  Rom.  i.  29 — 31 ;  viii.  35,  39 ;  xvi.  14;  1  Cor.  iii.  12,
V.  11 ;  vi.  9,  10;  xii.  8—10,  28;  2  Cor.  vi.  4—10;  xi.  23—27 ;  Gal.  v.  19—
23;  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  5,  8,  12,  and  elsewhere.  An  exactly  similar  mode
is  seen  in  1  Tim.  i.  9,  10;  vi.  4,  5;  2  Tim.  iii.  2—4,  10,  11 ;  Titus  i.  7,  8;
ii.  3 — 8;  iii.  3.  St.  Paul's  ardent  and  impulsive  mind  led  to  frequent
digressions  and  long  parentheses  in  his  writing,  and  occasional  grammatical
anomalies.  Take  the  familiar  examples  of  Rom.  ii.  13 — 15;  v.  13 — 17;
Gal.  ii.  6 — 9;  Eph.  iii.  2 — 21,  etc.  With  these  compare  the  long  parenthesis
in  1  Tim.  i.  5 — 17 ;  that  in  1  Tim.  iii,  5  and  in  2  Tim.  L  3 ;  and  the  gram-
matical difficulties  of  such  passages  as  1  Tim.  iii.  16  (R.T.) ;  iv.  16.  Again,
St.  Paul  was  fond  of  the  preposition  wcp,  of  which  examples  are  given  in
the  note  to  1  Tim.  i.  14;  and  the  aira^  Xcyo/xcvoj'  in  that  passage,  vTrcpeirAco-
vao-c,  is  in  marked  agreement  with  this  use.  The  verb  <f>av€p6<0y  in  1  Tim.
iii.  16 ;  2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  Titus  i.  3,  is  of  very  frequent  use  by  St.  Paul  in  Romans,
1  and  2  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  and  Colossians.  The  use  of  vo/jio9  in  1  Tim.
i.  9  is  the  same  as  that  in  Rom.  ii.  12 — 14;  of  evSwofwu)  in  1  Tim.  i.  12;  2
Tim.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  17  as  that  in  Rom.  iv.  20 ;  Eph.  vi.  10 ;  Phil.  iv.  13 ;  Heb.  xL  34;
and  of  KaXco)  in  1  Tim.  vi.  12  and  2  Tim.  i.  9  as  that  in  Rom.  viii.  30 ;  ix.  24;

1  Cor.  i.  9 ;  vii.  15,  etc. ;  Gal.  i.  6,  etc. ;  Eph.  iv.  1 ;  Col.  iii.  15 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  12;

2  Thcss.  ii.  14,  etc.     We  find  d<t>6apTo^  in  Romans,  Corinthians,  and  1  Tim.


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.


i.  17  (elsewhere  only  in  1  Peter) ;  dirwOofiai  in  Bom.  xi.  1,  2  and  in  1  Tim.  i.
19  (elsewhere  only  in  the  Acts) ;  avorjros  in  Kom.  i.  14  and  Gal.  iii.  1,  3,  and
in  1  Tim.  vi.  9  and  Tihis  iii.  3  (elsewhere  only  in  Luke  xxiv.  25) ;  dwTroKpiros
in  Bomans,  Corinthians,  and  in  1  Tim.  i.  5  and  2  Tim.  i.  6  (elsewhere  only  in
1  Pet.  i.  22  and  Jas.  iii.  17).  Compare  irvcv/jia  SciAiias  in  2  Tim.  i.  7  with
wtvfjja  SovXctas  ct9  <f>6Pov  in  Bom.  viii.  15 ;  ')(p6vwv  aicoviW  in  2  Tim.  i.  9  and  Titus
i.  2  with  Bom.  xvi.  25  and  1  Cor.  ii.  7.  St.  Paul  applies  the  noun  irXda-fia
to  the  man,  and  the  verb  TrXao-o-co  to  God  his  Maker,  in  Bom.  ix.  20 ;  and  the
writer  of  1  Tim.  ii.  13  also  uses  TrXao-cro/iai  of  the  formation  of  man  by  God.
The  term  aytao-ftds,  which  is  used  by  St.  Paul  seven  or  eight  times  (and
only  once  by  St.  Peter  besides),  is  also  found  in  1  Tim.  ii.  15.  St.  Paul
speaks  of  the  gospel  as  the  "  mystery  of  Christ,"  "  the  hidden  mystery ^'^  etc.,
in  Bom.  xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  iii.  3,  4 ;  Col.  i.  26,  and  frequently  elsewhere ;  and  so
we  have  the  phrases,  "  the  mystery  of  the  faith,"  "  the  mystery  of  godliness,"
in  1  Tim.  iii.  9,  16.  The  following  thirty  words  are  also  peculiar  to  St.
Paul  and  to  the  pastoral  Epistles:  dvcyKXi/ros,  avrap#c€ui,  ooparos,  vTrcpo;^!;,
<r€/AV09,  fi€<TLTrjs,  vwoTayq,  vPpi(TTrj%^  'jrpota-TtjfiL,  evScucrv/ii,  -Trp^ionys,  'XprrifTTorq^,
dvcucaiVa>o-i9,  TTpoKoin^iv  (except  Luko  ii.  52),  TrpoKowrjf  oXc^pos,  Karapycoi
(except  Luke  xiii.  7),  do-rpoKtvo?,  iKKaOaip<a,  ^ttios,  aXa^tav^  aoropyo?,  atrjrovSos
(T.B.),  fx6p(l>(o(TL^y  al)(fw.\ii}T€vii},  a-iapivio,  a8oKtfio9»  fiajcpoOvfiia  (except  James
and  1  and  2  Peter),  irdOrjfia  (except  1  Peter),  wkdaa-m.

But  when  we  pass  from  these  resemblances  in  mere  diction  to  consider
the  intellectual  power,  the  verve,  and  Divine  glow  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,
the  evidence  is  overwhelming.  Place  by  their  side  the  epistle  of  Clement
of  Bomo  to  the  Corinthians,  or  the  epistles  of  Ignatius  and  Polycarp,  or
the  (so-called)  *  Epistle  of  Barnabas,'  and  you  feel  the  immeasurable
diflference  between  them.  The  combination  of  mental  vigour  and  sober,
practical  good  sense,  and  sagacious  intuition  with  regard  to  men  and
things,  and  extensive  knowledge,  with  fervent  zeal,  and  enthusiasm  of
temperament,  and  ardent  piety,  and  entire  self-sacrifice,  and  heavenly
mindedness,  and  the  upward,  onward  movement  of  the  whole  inner  man
under  the  guidance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  producing  an  inartistic  eloquence
of  immense  force  and  persuasiveness,  is  found  in  these  pastoral  Epistles,  as
in  all  the  other  Epistles  of  this  great  apostle ;  but  it  is  found  nowhere  else.
St.  Paul,  we  know,  could  have  written  them;  we  know  of  no  one  else  who
could.  To  attribute  them  to  some  unknown  fraudulent  impostor  instead  of
to  him,  the  stamp  of  whose  personality  they  bear  in  every  line  as  distinctly
as  they  bear  his  name  in  their  superscriptions,  is  a  caricature  of  criticism,
and  a  burlesque  of  unbelief.

Applying,  further,  the  usual  tests  of  authenticity,  we  may  observe  that
all  the  historical  and  chronological  marks  which  we  can  discover  in  these
Epistles  agiee  with  the  theory  of  their  being  written  in  the  reign  of  the
Emperor  Nero.  The  earnestness  with  which  the  apostle  directs  prayers  for
rulers  to  be  used  in  all  churches — "that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  life"  (1  Tim.
ii.  1,  2 ;  Titus  iii.  1) — tallies  well  with  the  idea  that  the  attitude  of  Nero


INTBODUOnON  TO


towards  tho  Christians  was  beginning  to  excite  considerable  anxiety.  Svoh
thoughts  as  those  in  1  Tim.  i.  1  and  vi.  15  derive  fresh  significance  firom
such  an  idea;  while  the  later  utterance  of  2  Tim.  iv.  16 — 18  shows  that
what  was  only  feared  before  had  become  a  fact,  and  that  the  writer  of
2  Timothy  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Neronian  persecution.

Again,  the  restless  state  of  the  Jewish  mind,  and  the  unhealthy  crop  of
heresies,  containing  the  germ  of  later  Gnosticism,  springing  up  amongst
the  semi-Christian  Jews,  which  is  reflected  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  is  in
accordance  with  all  that  we  know  of  Jewish  sectarianism  at  ihia  tinte,  as
depicted  by  Pbilo,  Josephus,  and  other  later  writers  quoted  by  Bishop
Lightfoot  ('Introduction  to  Colossians,'  p.  83,  note).  OnoaUcUmj  as  it
appears  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  and  as  it  was  taught  by  Cerinthus —
Gnosticism,  evidenced  by  a  few  Gnostic  allusions,  as  aWi^co-cis  t^9  ^cv&mfv-
jun)  yv«tfo-cQ)9  (1  Tim.  vi.  20) ;  by  a  mystical  instead  of  the  real  resurrection
(2  Tim.  ii.  18);  by  abstinence  from  meats  and  from  marriage;  by  old
wives*  fables  and  ascetic  practices  (1  Tim.  i.  8,  9)  ; — docs  indeed  appear  in
the  pastoral  Epistles,  as  was  inevitable,  considering  their  scope ;  but  it  is
a  Gnosticism  distinctly  of  Jewish  origin  (Titus  i.  10,  14),  and  as  different
from  the  later  Gnosticism  of  Marcion  and  Valentinian  and  Tatian  as  the
acorn  is  from  the  oak  tree,  or  the  infant  from  the  grown-up  man.  These
passages,  which  the  great  ingenuity  and  learning  of  Baur  have  laboured
to  wrest  into  evidences  against  the  authenticity  of  these  Epistles,  are  reaUy
very  weighty  evidences  in  their  favour.

So,  too,  are  all  the  marks  of  the  then  ecclesiastical  polity  which  stand
out  in  thcs6  Epistles.  The  case  may  be  thus  stated.  Towards  the  end  of
the  second  century,  when  it  is  argued  by  Baur  and  his  followers  that  these
Epistles  were  forged,  diocesan  episcopacy  was  universal  in  the  whole
Church,  and  the  word  liria-KOTro^  meant  exclusively  what  we  now  mean  by
a  hisliop  as  distinguished  from  presbyters.  And  not  only  so,  but  it  was  the
universal  belief  that  such  episcopacy  had  existed  in  regular  succession  from
the  apostles  themselves,  and  lists  of  bishops  were  preserved  in  several
Churches,  of  whom  the  first  was  said  to  have  been  appointed  by  an  apostle.
Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  to  be  absolutely  impossible  that  a
forger,  writing  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century,  and  personating
St.  Paul,  should  represent  the  clergy  in  Crete  and  at  Ephesus  under  the
name  of  cirtViccwrot  (1  Tim.  iii. ;  Titus  i.  7),  and  should  not  make  mention
of  any  bishop  presiding  over  those  Churches.  So,  again,  the  use  of  the
word  *'  presbyter "  in  these  Epistles  distinctly  shows  the  term  not  yet
hardened  down  into  an  exclusively  technical  term.  The  same  thing  is  also
true  of  the  words  Sicucovo?,  StaKovta,  and  hiaxovuv  (see  1  Tim.  v.  1 ;  iv.  6 ;
i.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6,  11 ;  i.  18),  so  that  the  use  of  these  ecclesiastical  terms
in  tho  pastoral  Epistles  is,  when  properly  weighed,  an  evidence  of  very
great  weight  in  favour  of  their  belonging  to  the  fii*st,  not  the  second,
century.

In  like  manner,  the  missionary  and  movable  episcopates  of  Timothy  and


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  Tii


Titns,  and,  apparently,  of  Tychicns  and  Artemas  likewise,  is  strongly
indicative  of  the  third  quarter  of*  iiie  first  century,  and  was  not  at  all
likely  to  occur  to  a  writer  of  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century.  As  far
as  appears  from  the  pastoral  Epistles,  bishops  with  settled  dioceses  did  not
exist  at  the  time  when  they  were  written.  The  apostles  exercised  full
episcopal  powers  themselves;  and  appear  to  have  had  in  their  train  a
certain  number  of  missionary  bishops,  whom  they  sent  for  a  time  to  take
the  oversight  of  particular  Churches,  as  they  were  needed,  and  then  passed
on  to  superintend  other  Churches.  Bishops  with  &  fixed  diocese  arose  from
these,  but  did  not  become  the  rule  till  the  apostles  who  appointed  them
had  passed  away.

A  further  indication  of  the  time  when  these  Epistles  were  written  may
also  be  found  in  their  style,  which  does  belong  to  the  latter  part  of
the  first  century,  and  does  not  belong  to  the  latfer  part  of  the  second.
Frequent  resemblances  in  style  and  matter  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews^
to  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,  to  the  Epistle  of  James,  as  well  as  to  the
diction  of  Philo,  Josephus,  the  later  Books  of  the  Maccabees,  Plutarch,  and  to
the  sentiments  of  Seneca,  indicate  a  writer  of  the  Neronian  age,  and  not
one  at  the  time  of  the  Antonines.

But,  as  hinted  above,  there  are  features  in  •  the  literary  style  of  the
pastoral  Epistles  which  are  very  peculiar,  and  whicli,  if  taken  alone,  would  be
suggestive  of  a  different  authorship  from  that  of  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles.
In  the  Appendix  to  this  Introduction  will  be  found  a  list  of  a  hundred
and  eighty-seven  words,  of  which  one  hundred  and  sixty-five  are  found
only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,^  eleven  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  and  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  eleven  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  Hebrews,
St.  James,  St.  Peter,  St.  Luke,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Of  these,
about  forty-four  are  found  in  the  LXX.,  but  in  some  instances  very  rarely,
so  that  the  LXX.  cannot  be  the  quarry  from  which  St.  Paul  dug  these
new  additions  to  his  vocabulary.  But  they  are  almost  all  good  classical
words ;  and  it  is  further  remarkable,  with  regard  to  other  words  which  are
found  in  other  parts  of  Holy  Scripture,  that  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  they
follow  the  classical  rather  than  the  Hellenistic  usage.

The  natural  inferences  from  the  above  facts  are  (1)  that  these  pastoral
Epistles  were  written  later  than  the  other  Epistles;  (2)  that  in  the
interval  the  writer  had  enlarged  his  acquaintance  with  Greek  classics;
"(3)  that,  as  his  two  correspondents  were  Greeks,  he  wrote  to  them  in
the  purest  Greek  he  could  command.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  theory  which  assigns  the  pastoral  Epistles  to
the  time  after  St.  Paul's  return  from  Spain  fully  agrees  with  the  first  two
of  the  above  inferences.  It  places  an  interval  of  two  or  three  years  between
the  latest  of  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles  and  these  Epistles  to  Timothy  and
Titus,  and  it  also  indicates  a  space  of  two  years  (Acts  xxviii.  31),  during
which  he  may  well  have  had  leisure  to  increase  largely  his  acquaintance
'  Ono  of  tlieae  {tlixpv<^To^)  ^  found  also  once  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon.


vm  INTRODUCTION  TO


with  Greek  classical  literature.  If  among  those  that  *'  came  in  unto  him  "
at  his  own  hired  house  (Acts  xxviii.  30)  were  any  men  like  Seneca,  or  the
elder  Pliny,  or  Sergius  Paulus,  St.  Paul  may  well  have  thought  it  useful
to  read  Greek  classical  writers — Aristotle,  Polybius,  Plutarch,  Demosthenes,
and  others — with  the  view  of  increasing  his  influence  with  men  of  culture
and  learning  in  the  great  capital  of  the  world.  And  the  fruit  of  such
studies  would  be  seen  in  the  enlarged  vocabulary  of  the  pastoral  Epistles.
It  is  curious  that  this  conjecture  is  somewhat  strengthened  by  the  cir-
cumstance that  St  Paul  appears  to  have  made  his  residence  in  Crete
the  occasion  of  reading  the  poems  of  the  great  Cretan  prophet  and  poet
Epimenides  (Titus  i.  12).  It  may  also  be  added  that  the  e£fect  of  fresh  read-
ing upon  a  person's  style  would  bo  much  greater  in  the  case  of  an  oc^trad
language,  as  Greek  probably  was  to  St.  Paul,  than  in  the  case  of  a  person's
mother-tongue.  The  variation  in  the  vocabulary  of  the  pastoral  Epistles
may,  of  course,  also  partly  be  accounted  for  by  the  difference  in  the  matters
treated  of  in  thorn  ;  and  by  the  books  of  the  heretics,  which  St.  Paul  may
have  read  with  a  view  to  refuting  them.  Such  phrases  as  the  opriOmu
Trj9  ^€vStji)yvfiov  yvctfo-ccos  (1  Tim.  vi.  20),  and  the  allusion  to  the  )3^^Xoc
K€vo<lHoviai  of  the  heretics,  indicate  some' acquaintance  with  their  writings.

The  conclusion,  then,  with  regard  to  the  internal  marks  of  style,  diction,
sentiment,  doctrine,  incidental  allusions  to  men,  and  things,  and  places,  and
institutions,  is  that  they  are  in  full  accordance  with  the  external  testimony
which  assigns  these  Epistles  undoubtingly  to  the  apostle  whose  name  they
bear ;  and  that  the  pastoral  Epistles  are  the  authentic  works  of  St.  PauL

§  2.  The  Curonology  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles.

Our  next  task  is  to  ascei-tain  the  chronology  of  these  Epistles;  their
chronology  (1)  relatively  to  each  other ;  (2)  to  the  incidents  in  St.  Paul's
life  ;  (3)  the  absolute  time  of  their  compasition.

1.  To  begin  with  their  chronology  relatively  to  each  other.  Drawing
our  conclusions  solely  from  the  Epistles  themselves,  the  order  which
naturally  presents  itself  is  the  following :  (1)  the  Epistle  to  Titus;  (2)  the
First  Epistle  to  Timothy ;  (3)  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.  And  this
order  is  founded  upon  the  following  reasons.  All  the  internal  marks  of
the  Epistles  indicate,  according  to  the  almost  unanimous  opinion  of  com-
mentators, that  they  were  written  at  no  long  interval  from  one  another.
This  is  indicated,  as  regards  Titus  and  1  Timothy,  by  the  close  resemblance
of  matter  and  words,  analogous  to  the  resemblances  of  the  Epistles  to  the
Ephosians  and  Colossians ;  and,  as  regards  2  Timothy  and  the  two  other
Epistles,  partly  by  the  same  kind  of  resemblances  (though  less  frequent),  by
the  evidences  of  the  same  enemies  and  the  same  difficulties  having  to  bo
encountered  by  Timothy  at  the  time  of  the  writing  of  the  Second  Epistle  that
existed  at  the  time  of  writing  the  fii*st ;  and  further,  by  the  route  indicated
in  2  Timothy  as  taken  by  St.  Paul  shortly  before  that  Epistle  was  written,
agreeing  exactly  with  that  which  may  be  inferred  from  the  Epistle  to  Titus


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  ix

and  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy.  Assnming  that  the  three  Epistles  were
written  in  the  same  year,  and  that  "the  winter"  spoken  of  in  Titus  iii.  12
and  2  Tim.  iv.  20  is  the  same  winter,  we  get  the  following  itineraiy  for
St.  Taul :  Crete  (Titus  i.  3),  Miletus  (2  Tim.  iii.  20),  possibly  Ephesus
(1  Tim.  i.  3),  Troas  (2  Tim.  iii.  13),  Macedonia  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  Corinth  (2
Tim.  iii.  20),  Nicopolis  (Titus  iii.  12),  Rome  (2  Tim.  i.  17 ;  iv.  16—17).  As,
then,  it  is  clear  that  when  St.  Paul  left  Crete  he  intended  to  go  to  Nicopolis,
and  as  the  places  above  enumerated  lie  exactly  on  the  route  which  he
probably  would  have  taken,  we  conclude  that  the  journey  which  we  thus
gather  from  1  and  2  Timothy  is  that  of  which  Titus  furnishes  us  with  the
terminus  a  quo  and  the  terminus  ad  quern.  Again,  as  the  leaving  Titus  in
Crete  is  the  first  incident  disclosed  in  this  journey  from  south  to  north,
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  this  Epistle  was  written  first,  probably  imme-
diately after  St.  Paul  left  Crete,  as  the  instructions  in  it  would  be  needed
immediately.  Timothy  would  not  be  sent  to  Ephesus  till  a  little  later,
probably  from  Miletus,  and  1  Timothy  would  not  be  written  till  after  he  had
been  a  t^hort  time  there  (1  Tim.  i.  3) — written,  perhaps,  from  Troas,  with
the  intention  of  soon  joining  Timothy  at  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  iii.  14;  iv.  13).
St.  Paul's  intention  probably  was  to  go  no  further  than  Macedonia  in  the
firiit  instance  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  and  return  from  thence  to  Ephesus  before  going
on  to  Kicopolis.  But  circumstances  of  which  we  know  nothing  led  him  on
to  Corinth,  and  he  abandoned  his  intention  of  returning  to  Ephesus.  Did
he  send  for  Timothy  to  Macedonia  when  he  found  he  could  not  go  to
Ephesus,  and  there  part  from  him  with  many  tears  (2  Tim.  i.  4)?  This
would  well  agree  with  the  mention  of  the  subsequent  events  relating  to
Demas,  Crescens,  Titus,  Tychicus,  and  Erastus.  But  then  there  is  the
clause  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  "  But  Trophimus  I  left  at  Miletus  sick."  But  that
may  have  been  added,  as  it  were,  out  of  its  proper  place,  to  account  for  the
absence  of  the  only  other  member  of  the  missionary  band  not  yet  noticed.
Demas,  Crescens,  Titus,  Luke,  Mark,  Tychicus,  Erastus,  were  all  accounted
for,  and  so  ho  adds,  *'  Trophimus  can't  be  with  me,  because  I  left  him  at
Miletus  sick,  when  I  was  on  my  way  to  Macedonia."

The  above  theory  also  will  explain  the  clause  in  2  Tim.  iv.  12  which  has
a  good  deal  puzzled  commentators.  St.  Paul,  of  course,  would  not  bring
Timothy  away  from  Ephesus  for  any  length  of  time  without  sending  some
one  to  take  his  place.  We  learn  from  Titus  iii.  12  that  Tychicus  was  one
of  those  whom  St.  Paul  contemplated  sending  to  Crete  to  take  Titus's  place
when  he  came  to  Nicopolis.  Ho  probably  did  send  Artemas.  Tychicus
was  therefore  free ;  and  so  St.  Paul,  having  summoned  Timothy  to  Home,
tells  him  that  Tychicus  will  take  his  place  at  Ephesus  during  his
absence.

But  to  follow  St.  Paul.  From  Corinth  he  appears  to  have  gone  to
Nicopolis,  because  the  mention  of  Titus  as  gone  to  Dalmatia  seems  to  imply
that  he  had  met  St.  Paul  at  Nia^polis  according  to  appointment,  and  from
thence  had  been  sent  by  him  to  the  neighbouring  province  of  Dalmatia


INTRODUCTION  TO


when  Crescens  also  went  to  Galatia.  At  Nicopolis,  apparently,  the  first
signs  of  danger  began  to  show  themselyee ;  and  Demas  made  some  excuse
for  going  to  his  native  city  of  Thessalonica,  leaving  St.  Panl  to  confront  the
danger  without  his  aid.  Whether  he  was  arrested  while  at  Nioopolis,  which
was  in  the  province  of  Achaia,  and  taken  to  Eome  as  a  prisoner,  which
seems  most  probable,  or  whether  he  voluntarily,  for  reasons  we  know  not
of,  sailed  from  Apollonia  to  Brundusium,  and  thence  proceeded  to  Bome,  and
was  seized  and  imprisoned  there,  we  have  no  certain  means  of  deciding.
All  that  the  existing  documents  enable  us  to  conclude  with  anything  like
certainty  is  that  he  did  go  on  to  Rome,  and  was  a  prisoner  there  when  he
wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.

The  reasons  for  concluding  that  2  Timothy  was  written  from  Borne  are
(1)  the  tradition  that  it  was  at  Rome  that  he  was  tried  and  condemned  to
death  and  suffered  martyrdom.  This  tradition,  though  surprisingly  vagne^
is  constant  and  unanimous.  The  earliest  witness,  that  of  Clement  of
Rome,  who  could  have  told  us  all  about  it,  is  most  provokingly  indefinite.  He
tells  us  that  Paul,  after  many  sufferings,  "  having  come  to  the  boundary  of
the  West,  and  having  testified  (fKLpTvprja-asi^  before  the  rulers  (riav '^yov/jiartov)^
so  departed  from  this  world  "  (*  1  Epist  to  the  Corinth.,'  o.  5).  Dionysius,
Bishop  of  Corinth  (about  a.d.  170),  says  that  Peter  and  Paul  both  taught  in
Italy,  and  suffered  martyrdom  there  at  the  same  time  ('  Ap.  Euseb.,'  ii.  25).
Caius  the  presbyter  says  that  the  '*  trophies  of  those  who  founded  the
Church  of  Rome  (i.e.  Peter  and  Paul)  may  bo  seen  both  at  the  Vatican  and
(m  the  Via  Ostia" — meaning  the  churches  or  monuments  dedicated  to  them
(ibid.).  Eusebius  also  quotes  Tertullian  as  saying  expressly  that  Nero  was
the  first  emperor  who  persecuted  the  Christians ;  that  ho  was  led  on  to  the
slaughter  of  the  apostles,  and  that  Paul's  head  was  cut  off  at  Rome  itself,
and  Peter  in  like  manner  was  crucified,  in  Nero*s  reign.  Eusebius  adds
that  this  narrative  is  confirmed  by  the  inscription  (irp6(rpri<n%)  still  extant  on
their  respective  tombs  at  Rome.  Eusebius  also  states  in  the  following  book
(iii.  1,  2)  that  St.  Paul,  having  preached  the  Gospel  from  Jerusalem  to
Illyricum,  at  last  suffered  martyrdom  at  Rome  under  Nero,  and  quotes
Origen  as  his  authority.  He  adds  that  St.  Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  to
Timothy,  in  which  ho  mentions  Linus,  from  Rome.

(2)  The  internal  evidence  of  that  Epistle  also  points  to  Rome  as  the  place
where  it  was  written.  If  ch.  i.  17  relates  to  a  recent  visit  of  Onesiphorus,
that  would,  of  course,  be  in  itself  decisive  evidence.  But,  omitting  that  as
doubtful,  wo  may  take  ch.  iv.  17  as  at  least  probably  indicating  Rome
as  the  place  whore  he  was  at  the  time.  The  seat  of  judgment,  the  presence
of  the  emperor,  the  concourse  of  the  Gentiles,  the  names  of  the  persons
sending  salutations,  including  Linus,  the  first  Bishop  of  Rome,  and  the
expressions  of  the  near  approach  of  his  death  in  ch.  iv.  7,  8,  leave  little
doubt  that  he  was  now  at  Rome ;  and,  if  so,  2  Timothy  must  have  been  the
last  of  the  three  pastoral  Epistles.

2.  But  at  what  period'of  St.  Paul's  life  were  these  Epistles  written  ?    The


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.


question  has  already  been  partially  answered  in  the  preceding  seotion,  but
it  is  important  enough  to  demand  a  separate  consideration.

Hug,  in  his  *  Introduction  to  the  Writings  of  the  New  Testament'  (vol.
ii«  sects,  zc,  ciii.,  cxxii.,  czxiii.),  assigns  the  Epistle  to  Titus  to  St.  Paul's
second  missionary  journey.  He  supposes  that,  when  he  left  Corinth  (Acts
xviii.  18)  to  go  to  Ephesus,  he,  either  voluntarily  or  by  stress  of  weather,
went  round  by  Crete,  and  that  he  left  Titus  there ;  that  he  then  pur-
sued his  journey  to  Ephesus,  wrote  the  Epistle  to  Titus,  recommended
Apollos  to  him,  who  he  knew  was  going  on  from  Corinth  (Acts  xxiii.
27)  ;  then  proceeded  to  Ceesarea,  Jerusalem,  and  Antioch  ;  and  from
thence,  passing  through  Galatia  and  Fhrygia,  so  returned  to  Ephesus
(Acts  xviii.  22,  23;  xix.  1),  having  wintered  by  the  way  at  Nicopolis
in  Cilicia,  a  city  lying  between  Antioch  and  Tarsus,  near  to  Issus.
But  the  objections  to  this  scheme  are  insuperable.  The  narrative  of  his
passage  from  Cenchrea  to  Ephesus  with  Aquila  and  Priscilla  is  quite
incompatible  with  a  sojourn  at  Crete  by  the  way.  So  important  an  incident
oould  not  have  been  omitted.  There  is  every  appearance,  moreover,  of
haste  in  the  apostle's  movements  from  Corinth,  in  order  to  enable  him  to
reach  Jeruisalem  by  the  feast  (probably  of  Pentecost)  in  connection  with
the  fulfilment  of  his  vow  (Acts  xviii.  18,  21),  which  makes  the  notion  of  a
sojourn  in  Crete  as  unseasonable  as  possible.  Then  Nicopolis  in  Cilicia  is
the  most  unlikely  place  imaginable  for  him  to  winter  in.  It  was  an  obscure
city,  not  connected  with  any  missionary  work  of  St.  Paul's  that  we  know
of,  and  it  is  obvious  to  suppose  that  he  would  rather  have  wintered  at
Antioch,  or,  if  so  near  his  own  home,  at  Tarsus.  Nor  is  it  possible  to
account  for  the  omission  of  the  mention  of  Nicopolis  in  the  account  given
by  St.  Luke,  in  Acts  xviii.  22,  23,  of  how  Paul  spent  his  time,  if  he  passed
some  three  months  of  the  winter  there.  By  Hug's  own  admission  there  is
no  other  time  in  the  compass  of  St.  Luke's  narrative  when  St.  Paul  could
possibly  have  gone  to  Crete.

He  assigns  1  Timothy  to  St.  Paul's  third  missionary  journey — to
the  time,  viz.,  when  St.  Paul  left  Ephesus,  after  the  tumult,  to  go  to
Macedonia  (Acts  xx.  1).  But  it  is  surely  absolutely  fatal  to  this  theory
that  we  read,  in  Acts  xix.  22,  just  before  the  tumult,  that  he  "  sent  into
Macedonia  two  of  them  that  ministered  unto  him,  Timotheus  and
Erastus  (to  precede  him) ;  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  season."
Nor  is  it  less  in  flat  contradiction  to  St.  Paul's  declared  purpose  (Acts  xix.
21 ;  XX.  3)  of  going  from  Macedonia  and  Achaia  to  Jerusalem,  that  he  tells
Timothy,  in  1  Tim.  iii.  14,  15,  that  it  is  his  intention  to  return  very  shortly
to  Ephesus.  We  know,  in  fact,  that,  though  he  was  obliged  by  the  violence
of  the  Jews  (Acts  xx.  3)  to  return  by  way  of  Macedonia,  yet  he  would  not
even  so  much  as  go  to  Ephesus  for  a  day,  but  sent  for  the  elders  to  meet
him  at  Miletus  (Acts  xx.  16,  17).  We  know  also  that  Timothy,  whom  he
had  sent  before  him  to  Macedonia,  returned  with  him  from  Macedonia  into
Asia  (Acts  xx.  4),  and  was  with  him  when  he  wrote  2  Cor.  i.  1.    So  that


xii  INTRODUCTION  TO


every  detail  is  directly  opposed  to  the  idea  that  the  journey  into  Macedonia
of  1  Tim.  L  3  is  the  same  as  the  journey  of  Acts  xix.  21  and  xz.  1,  and,  con-
sequently, that  1  Timothy  was  written  at  this  time.

Hug  assigns  2  Timothy  to  the  time  of  St.  PauVs  first  imprisonment  at
Borne,  and  places  it  after  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  and  before  those
to  the  Colossians  and  Philemon.  There  are,  no  doubt,  some  coincidences
which,  taken  alone,  encourage  such  a  conclusion.  For  example,  Timothy
was  not  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  to  the  Ephesians  (i.  1),  but  in  that
same  Epistle  (vi.  21)  he  tells  the  Ephesians  that  he  has  sent  Tychicus  to
them,  and  wo  find  that  Timothy  was  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  CoL
L  1.  But  in  2  Timothy  we  find  St.  Paul  writing  to  Timothy  and  bidding
him  come  to  him  quickly,  and  telling  him  that  he  had  sent  Tychicus  to
Ephesus.  Again,  in  Col.  iv.  10 — 14  we  find  the  following  persons  with  St.
Paul :  Mark,  Luke,  Demas,  besides  Timothy  (i.  2),  and  Tychicus,  who  had
just  left  him.  But  in  2  Tim.  iv.  we  find  Luke  with  him,  Demas  had  just
forsaken  him,  Tychicus  had  just  been  sent  away  by  him,  and  Timothy  and
Mark  were  immediately  expected.  But  the  force  of  these  coincidences  is
very  much  weakened  by  the  following  considerations.  St.  Paul's  staflf  of
missionar}"^  companions  and  associates  consisted  of  about  twenty-two  persons,
of  whom  mention  is  made  either  during  his  imprisonment  at  Borne  or
shortly  before.  They  are  the  following :  ApolloSy  Aquilc^  Aristarchus,  DemoM^
Epaphras  or  Epaphroditus,  Erastus^  Gains,  Justus,  Lucius,  Luke^  Mark^
Onesimus,  PriaciUa,  Secundus,  Silas,  Sopater,  Sosthenes,  Sylvanus,  Ttmo%,
Tiiusy  Trophimus,  Tychicus.  Of  these,  eleven  (those  in  italics)  appear  in  the
pastoral  Epistles  as  still  at  work  with  St.  Paul.  The  other  eleven  are  not
mentioned  in  the  pastoral  Epistles.  But  nine  new  names  appear :  Artemas,
Carpus,  Claudia,  Crescens,  Eubulus,  Linus,  Onesiphorus,  Pudens,  and  Zenas.
This  is  very  much  the  proportion  of  change  in  the  personnel  which  three
or  four  years  might  be  expected  to  produce.

Again,  if  we  look  closely  into  the  supposed  coincidences  in  the  situation
exposed  by  Col.  iv.  and  2  Tim.  iv.,  some  of  them  are  transformed  into
contradictions.  Thus  2  Tim.  iv.  10,  11  represents  Demas  as  having  for-
saken St.  Paul  and  gone  to  Thessalonica,  whereas  Col.  iv.  14  (written,
according  to  Hug,  after  2  Timothy)  represents  him  as  still  with  St.  Paul.
Again,  2  Tim.  iv.  11  represents  Mark  as  probably  coming  from  the
neighbourhood  of  Ephesus  to  St.  Paul  at  Rome  to  minister  to  him;  but
Col.  iv.  10  represents  him  as  likely  soon  to  go  from  Borne  to  Colosste,  and
apparently  as  a  stranger.  Once  more,  the  notice  of  Erastus  and  of  Trophi-
mus,  in  2  Tim.  iv.  20,  naturally  implies  that  Erastus  had  been  in  Corinth
with  Paul,  but  remained  there  when  Paul  came  away,  and,  in  like  manner,
that  he  and  Trophimus  had  both  been  at  Miletus  together,  which,  of  course,
is  fatal  to  Hug's  theory.  His  expedient  of  translating  airekLwov,  "  they  left,"
is  very  unnatural  and  forced,  and  his  rendering  of  efjL^ivev  does  not  suit  the
aorist,  which  rather  gives  the  sense  **  When  I  came  away,  he  stopj>ed  at
Corinth.'*


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xiii

Other  circumstances  militate  strongly  against  the  composition  of  2
Timothy  at  the  time  of  St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment.  St.  Luke's  account
of  that  imprisonment  by  no  means  prepares  the  reader  for  a  tragic  termina-
tion of  it  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31).  Nor  does  St.  Paul's  own  language,  in  the
Epistles  to  the  Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon,  indicate
any  expectation  on  his  part  that  he  would  be  condemned  to  death ;  rather,
on  the  contrary,  he  expresses  the  hope  of  a  speedy  deliverance  (Eph.  vi.  21,
22 ;  Phil.  ii.  24 ;  Col.  iv.  8 ;  Philem.  22).  But  in  2  Timothy  his  strain  is
wholly  different.  Ho  writes  with  the  feeling  that  his  work  is  done,  and
his  departure  is  near  at  hand  (2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8,  18) ;  not  a  word  of  being
delivered  in  answer  to  their  prayers,  nor  of  expectation  of  being  set  free.
The  difference  is  marked,  and  surely  most  significant.

The  necessary  conclusion  is  that  Hug's  scheme  is  quite  impracticable.
Various  other  hypotheses,  assigning  the  date  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  to  some
part  of  St.  Paul's  life  unwritten  by  St.  Luke  in  the  Acts,  of  which  the
principal  are  enumerated  and  explained  by  Huther  in  his  '  Introduction,*
are  equally  incompatible  with  one  or  more  plain  statements  in  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles  or  in  the  Epistles  themselves,  and  must  therefore  alike  be
abandoned.

Moreover,  they  all  fail  to  account  for  those  peculiarities  in  the  diction  of
the  pastoral  Epistles  which  are  pointed  out  in  the  first  part  of  this  Intro-
duction. If  the  diflBculties  in  finding  any  place  in  the  narrative  of  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles  in  which  to  fit  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  with  their  allusions
could  be  got  over  (which  they  cannot),  wo  should  be  landed  in  the  no  less
formidable  difficulty  of  having  to  account  for  great  changes  of  language  as
compared  with  St.  Paul's  other  Epistles,  and  a  difference  in  the  aspect  of
the  institutions  of  tho  Church  and  of  the  rising  heresies,  as  reflected  in
these  Epistles,  from  what  we  see  either  in  the  Acts  or  in  St.  Paul's  other
Epistles.

We  are  driven,  therefore,  to  accept  the  hypothesis  which  assigns  these
Epistles  to  a  time  posterior  to  that  embraced  in  the  narrative  of  St.  Luke.
And  we  will  now  state  the  case  for  this  hypothesis  from  its  positive  side.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  close  with  the  statement  that  St.  Paul  "  abode
tw^o  whole  years  in  his  own  hired  dwelling,  and  received  all  that  went  in
unto  him,  preaching  tho  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching  all  things  concern-
ing tho  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  all  boldness,  none  forbidding  him."  It  is
quite  as  natural  a  sequel  to  this  statement  that,  at  the  end  of  the  two  years,
the  apostle  resumed  his  active  career  as  "the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,"  as
that  he  was  led  out  to  execution  as  a  criminal :  most  people  will  think  it  is
a  more  natural  one.  However,  in  the  absence  of  any  further  information
from  Holy  Scripture,  wo  must  have  recourse  to  such  other  sources  of  infor-
Tuation  as  aro  open  to  us.  Eusebius,  who  was  the  great  collector  of  history
from  works  now  lost,  and  of  traditions  current  in  the  Church,  after  citing
the  closing  words  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  tells  us  (*Eccl.  Hist.,'  ii.  xxii.)
that  the  current  account  was  that  the  apostle,  having  then  made  his  defence,


xlr  INTRODUCTION  TO


afterwards  started  again  on  his  work  of  preaching ;  but  t}iaty  haying  oome
to  Borne  a  second  time,  he  was  made  {)erfect  by  martyrdom.  At  which
time,  being  in  prison,  he  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy.  Eosebios
adds,  after  commenting  somewhat  confusedly  upon  the  last  chapter  of
2  I'imothy,  that  he  wrote  thus  much  to  show  that  St.  Paul  did  not
accomplish  his  martyrdom  during  that  sojourn  at  Bome  which  is  narrated
by  St.  Luke.  He  adds  that  Nero  was  comparatively  mild  and  clement  at
the  time  of  Paul's  first  visit,  and  so  received  his  defence  favourably ;  but
that  later,  having  fallen  into  monstrous  crimes,  he  attacked  the  apostles
along  with  others.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  Eusebius,  with  such  means
of  information  as  he  could  command,  believed  the  account  which  was
current  in  his  time  to  be  true.

Clement  of  Bome,  again,  in  his  'Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,'  in  the
passage]  quoted  above  (p.  x.),  uses  language  which,  in  the  light  of  the
above  traditions,  certainly  points  strongly  to  the  visit  to  Spain :  to  r^/ia
T^s  8i;<r€<D9,  "  the  utmost  bound  of  the  West,"  could  not  mean  "  Italy  "  in  the
mouth  of  a  person  living  at  Bome,  but  is  a  natural  description  of  Spain.
Following  the  order  used  by  Clement,  this  visit  to  Spain  immediately
preceded  his  testimony  before  the  rulers  of  the  world,  and  his  departure
from  this  life :  'Eirl  to  ripfia  rrj^  Svotccds  iXOoyv^  koX  fiaprvpT^a'ai  iwl  rtov  i^yov-

The  Muratorian  Fragment  on  the  Canon  adds  another  early  testimony  to
the  belief  of  the  Church  that  St.  Paul  went  to  Spain  after  his  captivity  in
Bome.  For,  though  the  passage  is  so  corrupt  and  mutilated  as  to  defy
translation,  yet  the  words,  "  profectionem  Pauli  ab  urbe  ad  Spaniam  pro-
ficiscentis,"  tell  us  certainly,  as  Bouth  observes  (*Beliq.  Sac.,'  vol.  iv.
p.  20),  that  St.  Paul,  on  leaving  Bome,  went  to  Spain.  If  to  these  early
testimonies  we  add  the  later  one  of  Venantius  Fortunatus,  in  the  six^
century,  who  expressly  asserts  that  St.  Paul  went  to  Cadiz  (which  is
described  by  the  line,  "  Transit  et  oceanum,  vel  qu4  facit  insula  portum  "),
etc.;  of  Theodoret  (*  Ps.  xvi.'),  who  says  of  St.  Paul  that  "he  came  to  Spain;"
of  St.  Jerome,  who,  following  Eusebius'  '  Chronicon  *  (A.  2083),  places  Paul's
martyrdom  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Nero  (a.d.  67  or  68),  three  or  four
years  after  his  liberation  from  his  first  confinement  (*  Catal.  Script.  Eccle-
siast.'); — -we  have  suflBcient  external  testimou}'^  on  which  to  rest  an  attempt
to  assign  a  later  date  to  the  pastoral  Epistles  than  that  which  is  bounded
by  the  close  of  St.  Luke's  narrative.  Assuming,  then,  that  Paul's  first  con-
finement at  Bome  terminated  in  the  spring  of  a.d.  63,  and  that  he  imme-
diately, according  to  his  original  intention  (Bom.  xv.  24),  went  to  Spain,
we  may  assign  two  years  to  his  visit  to  Spain,  and  possibly  to  Britain,  and
place  his  return  to  Cadiz  in  the  early  spring  of  a.d.  65.  Proceeding  thence
toward  the  former  scene  of  his  labours,  he  would  go  to  Crete,  and  perhaps
stay  one  month  there  (Titus  i.  3).  Leaving  Titus  there,  he  sailed  to
Miletus,  say  on  the  1st  of  April  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  and  wrote  from  thence  the
Epistle  to  Titus.    He  may  have  gone  to  Ephesus  from  Miletus,  but  more


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xv


probably  (Acts  xx.  25)  sent  Timothy  there,  perhaps  intending  to  follow  him;
but,  from  circumstances  with  which  we  are  unacquainted,  he  thought  it  better
to  go  straight  to  Macedonia  (1  Tim.  i.  3),  and  wrote  1  Timothy  from  Troas,
where  he  had  his  writing  apparatus  (2  Tim.  iy.  13).  He  had  intended  to  go
back  from  Macedonia  to  Ephesus  (1  Tim.  iii.  14 ;  iv.  13),  bnt  again  his  inten-
tions were  frustrated,  and  possibly  he  sent  for  Timothy  to  Macedonia  (2  Tim.
i.  4)  before  he  proceeded  to  Corinth.  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  certainly  went
to  Corinth  (2  Tim.  iv.  20),  and  thence  to  NicopoUs,  situated  in  Epirus,
but  in  the  province  of  Achaia.  There  Titns  joined  him,  say  in  the  month
of  July,  having  been  relieved  by  Artemas  (Titus  iii.  12),  Nicopolis  being  the
general  rendezvous,  and  was  sent  by  him  into  Dalmatia.  At  the  same  time,
Cre8cens  went  to  Galatia.  Demas,  who  had  also  come  there  among  othei-s,
or  who  may  have  been  Paul's  travelling  companion,  on  the  appetkranoe  of
danger,  returned  precipitately  to  his  native  place  of  Thessalonica,  and  St.
Paul  proceeded  with  Luke  to  Home,  where  he  may  have  arrived  in  August.
As  bis  settled  plan  had  been  to  winter  in  Nicopolis  (Titus  iii.  12),  it  seems
most  probable  that  his  journey  to  Home  was  not  a  voluntary  one.  There  is
not  the  slightest  hint  in  Scripture,  or  in  any  history,  as  to  the  place  or  the
circumstances  of  his  arrest.  But  knowing  that  he  went  to  Nicopolis  in
Epirus,  intending  to  pass  the  winter  there,  and  that  very  shortly  after  he
was  a  prisoner  at  Borne,  the  natural  inference  is  that  he  was  arrested  by
the  authorities  of  the  province  of  Achaia,  and  by  them  sent  to  Rome  for
trial.  His*  route  would  be  from  Anion,  the  seaport  of  lllyria,  to  Bi-un-
dusium,  and  thence  by  the  Yia  Appia  to  Home.

The  cause  of  the  arrest  of  St.  Paul  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  great  fire  of
Bome,  supposed  to  have  been  the  work  of  Nero  himself,  took  place  "  on  the
night  of  July  19,  a.d.  64"  (Lewin,  vol.  ii.  p.  359).  Nero,  according  to  the
well-known  narrative  of  Tacitus  (*  Annals,*  xv.  44),  to  divert  suspicion  from
himself,  laid  the  blame  of  the  fire  upon  the  Chiistians,  and  inflicted  the
most  atrocious  punishments  upon  them.  The  persecution,  which  at  first
affected  only  the  Christians  at  Home,  was  afterwards  extended  to  Christians
in  the  provinces,  and  it  was  made  criminal  to  profess  the  Christian  faith
(see  the  passages  quoted  by  Lewin  from  Tacitus,  Sulpitius  Severus,  and
Orosius).  The  frequent  allusions  to  persecution  and  suffering  in  the  First
Epistle  of  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iii.  16;  iv.  1,  12—16;  v.  8,  9)  seem  to
point  distinctly  to  this  general  persecution.  It  only  required  the  active
malice  of  any  one  or  more  persons  to  bring  any  Christian  before  the  Boman
governors  on  a  charge  of  impiety.  It  is  very  likely  that  the  bitter  enmity
of  the  Jews  of  Corinth,  who  plotted  against  his  life  a  few  years  before  (Acts
XX.  3),  took  advantage  of  these  persecuting  edicts  to  accuse  him  before  the
Proconsul  of  Achaia.

Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  what  is  certcdn  is  that  St.  Paul  was  once
more  a  prisoner  at  Home,  and  may  have  ariived  there  iu  August,  as  above
suggested.  It  would  ap[)ear,  from  2  Tim.  iv.  16,  17,  that  his  case  had  come
before  Nero  soon  after  his  anival— say  in  the  end  of  August  or  September —


XTi  INTRODUCTION  TO


and  that  he  did  not  expect  it  to  come  on  again  before  the  winter  Taeatimi  (2
Tim.  iv.  21).  He  accordingly  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothj,  in  whidi
the  uppermost  thought  was  to  encourage  Timothy,  and  exhort  him  not  to  be
cast  down  by  the  calamitous  state  of  the  Church,  and  the  apostle's  imprison-
ment, of  which  the  news  had  doubtless  spread  rapidly  from  Corinth  to
Ephesus,  but  to  be  ready  to  endure  hardness  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.
St.  Paul  expresses  in  touching  language  his  own  unmoved  faith  and  constancy
and  trust ;  complains  gently  of  the  defection  of  false  friends ;  makes  loring
mention  of  old  kindnesses  receiyed  from  faithful  followers  now  departed ;
gives  earnest  counsel  to  Timothy ;  foretells  coming  dangers ;  prcnucs  home
^thful  warnings  and  loving  exhortations  to  fearlessness  in  the  duties  of
his  great  office ;  and  then  ends  with  a  brief  statement  of  the  chief  events
of  interest  which  had  occurred  since  they  parted,  including  his  own  defence
before  NeTO»  together  with  an  earnest  request,  twice  repeated,  to  Timothy
to  come  to  him  before  the  winter.  He  also  mentions  that  he  had  sent
TVchious — he  does  not  say  when,  or  from  whence — to  Ephesus,  doubtless  fer
the  purpc«e  of  taking  Timothy*s  place  when  he  came  to  Rome.

Here,  however,  it  may  be  well  to  emphasize  one  or  two  points.  One,
that  the  news  of  St.  Pianrs  being  a  prisoner  must  have  be«i  oommunicated
to  Timothy  by  some  previous  message,  either  from  St.  Pkul  himself  or,  witii
his  privity,  pocsibly  by  Tyehicus.  or  in  some  other  way,  as  this  Epistle
clearly  suppc^es  Timothy  to  be  already  acquainted  with  the  circumstanos.
The  other,  that  St.  P^ul  did  not  expect  to  be  called  for  his  final  trial  fat  the
next  three  months  at  least,  since  it  would  take  so  long  for  his  letter  to  reach
Timothy  ^nd  for  Timothy  to  travel  to  Rome.  A  third  point  is  important
to  no:e,  tiz.  that  the  details  given  in  the  la»t  chaprer  are  a  distinct  proof
that  the  jouraey  to  which  those  details  refer — embracing  Miletos,  Troas»
Maoedonii,  Corinth,  and  Rome — was  a  verv  recent  one,  and  that  as  the  last
st;A^  in  that  journey  was  RoTue,  it  is  demonstrated  that  this  was  not  tiie

liame  visit  to  Rome  as  that  related  bv  St.  Luke,  which  was  bv  way  of  Malta,

•  •        •

Syricuse,  Rhegium.  and  Puttoli.

Still  treading  upon  uncertain  srround.  we  go  on  to  observe  that,  taking
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  as  written  at  this  time,  it  would  appear  that
Tiraothy,  on  receipt  of  St.  Foul's  >eoxid  Epistle*  initaediately  started  to  come
to  Rome,  but  was  arre«?ted  on  the  way,  the  persectirion  of  Christians  being
now  active  in  the  prwiccecw  The  pWv  of  hi*  arretft  is  not  indicated,  but
i:  ELu»y  pr /brtbly  have  b»een  Achaia,  thrvmarh  which  he  would  he  passing  on
hi*  way  fr.^si  Epheeus  to  R^.^Qie.  The  wekx»cie  intelltgence,  however,  had
r.vw  reached  the  wri^?r  of  t^e  Hebrvw>ii  that  Tine  thy  was  se:  at  liberty,
and  wxs  on  his  way  Aprarently"  ro  R-cieL  If  St.  Faal  was  the  writer  of
the  EvLstle.  it  w:iili  avivar,  turth-er.  that  at  this  tizie — some  three  or  lour
=L:ccLth*  liter  than  2  Tini.thv — >*e  hai  hope*  of  bis  own  sreedv  libera-
t  ^ci-  Uroc  what  th-e^^e  hoter*  wtre  built  w^?  hav^  n?  mean*  of  decidinir.
l»^it  >evr:>--Al  r:  tths  hid  elar:<ed  sicc^  hi*  -£rs5  defence  :**  Timothy
'^Irfased:  'erhips  there  w;**  Sk^zne  jljkck-eain^  in  the  (?e^^<l^:1Itiom  axkd


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xvii


reason  to  hope  that  it  had  served  its  turn  in  diverting  snspioion  from  Nero,
and  was  near  its  close.  Anyhow,  he  hoped  to  bo  *'  restored  unto  them  soon/'
and  to  come  to  them  with  Timothy  (Heb.  xiii.  19,  23).^

But  this  expectation  was  not  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  Nor  do  we  know
whether  Timothy  arrived  in  time  to  see  him  alive.  Perhaps  he  did,  if  the
traditional  date  of  St.  Paul's  martyrdom,  June  29,  is  true  (Lewin,  vol.  ii.
p.  400),  as  that  would  allow  plenty  of  time  for  Timothy  to  reach  Borne.
It  would  also  be  intensely  interesting  to  know  whether  St.  Peter  and  St.
Paul  met  before  or  at  the  time  of  their  respective  martyrdoms.  Had  the
writing  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (supposing  it  to  be  St.  Paul's)  by
the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  anything  to  do  with  a  desire  on  the  part  of  the
apostle  of  the  circumcision  to  show  the  perfect  unity  that  existed  between
himself  and  St.  Paul?  Were  they  the  same  body  of  Hebrews  in  whole
or  in  part  as  those  to  whom  St.  Peter  wrote  his  First  Epistle  ?  It  is  certainly
remarkable  that  both  Epistles  imply  that  those  to  whom  they  were  addressed
had  lately  been  under  grievous  persecution,  and  both  have  a  strong  light
thrown  upon  them  by  the  circumstances  of  the  Neronian  persecution  (Heb.
X. 32—34;  xi.  32--40;  xii.  1—13;  xiii.  3;  1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iii.  14—18;  iv.  12—19;
V.  8 — 10).  Moreover,  the  passage  2  Pet.  iii.  15  distinctly  asserts  that  St  Paul
had  written  them  an  Epistle.  And  if  2  Peter  was  written  to  the  same  body  of
Christians  as  1  Peter  was  (2  Pet.  iii.  1),  then  we  are  told,  in  so  many  words,
that  the  Epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  which  allusion  is  made  was  addressed  to  the
Hebrews  *'of  the  Dispeision  in  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and
Bithynia."  Gould  this  Epistle  be  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews?  There  is
certainly  a  very  strong  resemblance  in  the  allegorical  teaching  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  to  that  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  Gompare
the  passage  about  Hagar  (Gal.  iv.  22—31)  with  that  about  Melchisedeo
(Heb.  v.,  vii.;  Gal.  iii.  11  with  Heb.  x.  38;  Gal.  iii.  20  with  Heb.  xii.  24,
etc. ;  and,  as  regards  the  particular  reference  in  2  Pet.  iii.  15,  it  seems  to  be
justified  by  Heb.  ix.  28  and  x.  35 — 39,  better  than  by  any  other  passage  in
St.  Paul's  Epistles.  But  if  it  is  St.  Paul's,  why  does  it  not  bear  his  name,
BB  all  his  other  Epistles  do  ?  It  is  impossible  to  give  a  decided  answer  to
this  question.  But  a  concurrence  of  several  slight  indications  suggests
a  possible  explanation.  The  mention  of  St.  Paul  by  St.  Peter  in  2  Pet.
ii.  15 ;  the  fact  that  St.  Paul  did  write  a  letter  to  those  Hebrew  Christians
who  were  under  St.  Peter's  special  charge  (2  Pet.  iii.  15) ;  the  coming  of
Mark  to  St.  Paul  at  Rome  (2  Tim.  iv.  11)  from  St.  Peter  at  Babylon  (1  Pet.
V.  13);  the  mission  of  Crescens  to  Galatia  (2  Tim.  iv.  10);  and  the  presence
of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  together  at  Bome  at  the  time  of  their  martyrdoms,
as  related  by  Clemens  Homanus,  Eusebius,  and  others ; — all  point  to  some
intercourse  between  the  two  apostles  about  this  time.  It  occurs  to  one,
therefore,  that  St.  Peter  might,  in  order  to  emphasize  the  union  between
himself  and  St.  Paul,  and  between  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  Churches,  have

*  If  the  reading  of  the  T  R.  of  f  Ich.  z.  34,  Ztaiiois  futv^  is  true,  it  supplies  a  direct  testimony
to  ilie  imprisonment  of  the  writer.    But  without  it  Ueb.  xiii.  18  is  sufficient


xviii  IKTBODUCTION  TO


requested  St  Paul  (tlmmgh  Mark  or  otherwise)  to  write  to  the  Jewa  of
the  Dispersion,  and  that  St.  Paul,  in  complying  with  the  request,  with  his
usual  delioaoj  of  feeling,  maj  have  withheld  his  apostolio  style,  and  giTea
his  Epistle  more  the  form  of  a  treatise  than  of  a  letter  (see,  too^  Heb.  ziiL  22).

Not,  however,  to  dwell  upon  uncertain  speculations,  the  praotioal  matt^
is  that,  if  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  written  at  this  time,  we  may
register  the  further  iaycit  of  Timothy's  imprisonment  and  release,  and,  if
written  by  St.  Paul,  that  of  his  own  expectation  of  being  released,  and
must  also  modify  the  statement  in  the  note  to  2  Tim.  iv.  22,  that  we  have
there  the  last  utterance  of  the  great  apostle.

Upon  the  whole,  we  conclude,  with  confidence,  that  the  pastoral  Epistles
were  written  subsequently  to  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  at  Bome  related  in
Acts  xxviii.,  and  shortly  before  his  martyrdom  in  the  imperial  city  as
related  in  ecclesiastical  history.

8.  As  regards  the  absolute  date  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  they  may,  with
most  probability,  be  assigned  to  the  year  a.d.  65,  a.d.  66,  or  a.d.  67,  accord*
ing  as  St.  Paul's  martyrdom  is  assigned  to  ▲.d.  66,  a.d.  67,  or  a.d.  68.
Eusebius  ('Chronic'  A.,  2083)  says,  under  the  thirteenth  year  of  Nero,
that  Peter  and  Paul  suffered  martyrdom;  while  Jerome  places  it  in  the
fourteenth  year.  It  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  certainty  in  the  matter.
Some  considerations  point  strongly  to  a.d.  65  for  the  Epistles,  and  a.d.  66
for  the  martyrdom.

§   3.   TUE  GONTBNTS  AND  StTLB  OF  THE  PaSTORAL  EpISTLBB.

The  contents  and  style  of  these  Epistles  need  detain  us  but  a  short  time^
having  been  already  partially  discussed  in  the  preceding  pages.  In  regard
to  style,  the  three  Epistles  go  together,  and  show  plain  indications  of
having  been  written  nearly  at  the  same  time.  But  in  regard  to  their
contents,  the  Epistle  to  Titus  and  the  First  Epistle  to  Timothy  go  together,
and  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  stands  alone.  The  object  and  motive  of
the  two  first  were  precisely  similar.  Paul,  having  left  Titus  in  the  tern*
porary  oversight  of  the  Churches  of  Crete,  and  Timothy  in  that  of  the
Church  of  Ephesus,  writes  plain  practical  instructions  to  both  of  them  how
to  order  and  rule  the  Churches  committed  to  them.  The  conduct  of  the
public  prayers,  the  qualifications  of  the  clergy,  the  discipline  of  the  Church
societies,  the  example  to  be  set  to  the  Christian  communities  by  the  chief
pastor,  together  with  earnest  warnings  in  regard  to  growing  heresies,  make
up  the  bulk  of  both  Epistles,  supplemented  by  a  few  directions  peculiar  to
each  case.  Nothing  can  be  more  obvious,  more  artless,  and  less  open  to
suspicion  of  any  concealed  motive,  than  the  treatment  of  the  subjects  in
hand.  The  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  is  of  a  different  character,  as  it  was
caused  by  wholly  different  circumstances.  Its  main  purpose  was  to  en-
courage Timothy,  under  the  new  danger  which  had  come  upon  the  Church
through  the  Neronian  persecutions,  and  the  apostle's  imprisonment  under
a  capital  charge.     By  his  own  noble  example  of  faith  and  constancy,  by


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xU


cogent  reasonings  and  exhortations,  and  by  the  strongest  Christian
motives,  St.  Paul  strives  to  comfort  and  sustain  Timothy  under  the  trying
and  perilous  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed,  and  adds  some  pro-
phetic warnings  concerning  coming  heresies,  and  directions  as  to  how
Timothy  is  to  meet  them.  A  brief  statement  of  the  present  oondition  of
his  affairs  at  Bome,  with  a  pressing  entreaty  to  Timothy,  twice  repeated,
to  hasten  to  him,  and  the  usual  salutations,  complete  the  Epistle.

Some  remarkable  features  of  the  style  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  have  been
pointed  out  in  the  preceding  sections.  They  cannot  be  too  carefully
weighed  by  those  who  would  form  a  sound  judgment  on  the  diflBcult
questions  connected  with  them.  The  fact  of  there  being  a  hundred
and  sixty-five  words,  nearly  all  good  classical  Greek,  which  occur  in  the
pastoral  Epistles,  but  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament,  and  few  of
them  in  the  LXX.  (see  Appendix) ;  about  thirty  common  to  the  pastoral
Epistles  and  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  not  found  elsewhere  in  the  New
Testament  (with  only  three  or  four  exceptions) ;  and  twenty-two  found  else-
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  Epistles
of  St.  Peter  and  St.  James,  in  St.  Luke  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (p.  9),
— are  significant  facts,  which,  if  rightly  used,  must  throw  light  upon  the
situation.  The  natural  inferences  from  them,  and  from  the  heretical
opinions  referred  to,  and  the  exact  phase  of  Church  government  and
Church  institutions  disclosed,  undoubtedly  is  that  these  Epistles  belong
to  a  somewhat  later  period  than  the  other  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ;  that  in
the  interval  St.  Paul  had  read  a  good  deal  of  classical  Greek;  that  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  either  St.  Paul's  composition,  or,  at  least,  that
he  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  it ;  that  St.  Peter  had  seen  St  Paul's
Epistles,  or  some  of  them ;  and  that  both  writurs  were  acquainted  with  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles.

With  regard  to  the  general  scheme  of  St.  Paul's  last  journey  to  Rome,
proposed  in  the  preceding  pages,  it  may  be  well  to  call  attention  to  the
fact  that  it  springs  directly  from  the  pastoral  Epistles  themselves.
Assuming,  as  a  starting-point,  the  expedition  to  Spain,  indicated  by
Clement  of  Bome  as  having  immediately  preceded  Paul's  mart3n:dom,  we
oome  in  regular  order  to  Crete,  Miletus,  possibly  Ephesus,  Troas,  Mace-
donia, Corinth,  Nicopolis,  Rome.  There  are  no  imaginary  journeys,  or
trials  at  Ephesus,  or  vacant  years  to  be  filled  up  with  supposed  events,
as  in  other  schemes.  But  we  have  one  consistent  journey,  every  stage  of
which  is  indicated  in  the  Epistles  themselves,  and  the  period  of  one  year
from  spring  to  winter  also  indicated,  within  which  the  events  naturally
&11.  And  it  is  further  satisfactory  to  find  that  these  indications,  together
with  others  above  referred  to,  fall  in  with  the  best  authenticated  ecclesias-
tical traditions,  which  bring  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  together  to  Rome  in
the  time  of  the  Neronian  persecution,  to  seal  with  their  blood  their  united
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.


INTRODUCTION  TO


Appendix:  List  of  Words  Peculiab  to  the  Pastoral  Epistlbs.


irtpoiOaffKaKtit^:  1  Tim.  L  3;  tL  8.         a*
kwtpdmos :  1  Tim.  i.  4.  0^  LXX.

iicCfiTfiffif :  1  Tim.  i  4.
fiveof :  1  Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  2  Tim.  W.  4;

TituB  L  14 ;  2  Pet  i.  16.       a,  LXX.,  X.
iurrox^orarrts:  1  Tim.  i  6.  C,  LXX.

iC^rpiwnffaM :  I  Tim.  L  6;  Heb.  xiL  13.

Cf  TiXX.y  X.
/utraioKoyta  I  1  Tim.  L  6.  0.

8ia/3«/9ai4»vKroi :  1  Tim.  L  7 ;  Titus  iil  8.

ex.

iwM^/ii»s :  1  Tim.  i.  8 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5.

C,  LXX.  (once).
hnnrordicTois:  1  Tim.  L  9;  Titos  i.  6;

Heb.  ii.  8.  C,  LXX.  (?),  X.

iu^oirlou:  1  Tim.  L  9;  2  Tim.  iiL  2.      LXX.
fi€$^\ois:  1  Tim,  L  9;  iv.  7;  it  20;

2  Tim.  U.  16 ;  Heb.  xiL  16.  a,  LXX.,  X.
vorpoA^oif :  1  Tim.  i.  9.  C.

/lyirpaXt^aus  i  1  Tim.  L  9.  G.

iMZpo^yoa :  1  Tim.  i.  9.  O.,  LXX.

iiifbpxwoliarais :  1  Tim.  i  10.  G.

iwi^pKon:   1  Tim.  i.  10.  G.

{tyiawoOirri  (in  the  sense  of  ^  sound,**

etc):   1  Tim.  L  10;  2  Tim.  iv.  3;

Titus  iL  1.  0.

fiKdaipritAos  (applied  to  a  person) :  1  Tmi.

i.  13 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  2.
iu&icrfis:  1  Tim.  i.  13.
^€ptwK€6¥aff9 :  1  Tim.  i.  14.
wiarhs  6  \^s:  1  Tim.  i.  15;   iii.  1;

i?.  9;  2Tim.  ii.  11;  Titus  iii.  8.
iwoSoxv* '  1  Tim.  i.  15 ;  iv.  9.
{nr<n{nruaw:  1  Tim.  i.  16;  2  Tim.  i.  12.     0.
irrt^^fts :  1  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  5.         C.,  LXX.
&w€fPox^  (in  the  senae  of  "  authority  ")  :

1  Tiin.  ii.  2.  G.

ffp€/iOf :  1  Tim.  ii.  2.  G.  (late).

iidytiy:  1  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  Titus  iii.  3.  G.

tbffffitia:  1  Tim.  ii.  2;  iu.  16;  iv.  7,  8;

vi.  3,  5,  6,  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5;  Titus

i.  1.    Elsewhere  only  in  Acts  iii.  12 ;

2Peti.  3,  6.  11;  iii.  7.  X.

atfiyoriis:  1  Tim.  iL  2;  iu.  4  (T.B.);

Titus  iL  7.  G.

iw6S(KToy:  1  Tim.  iL  3;  v.  4.  G.

fualrris  (as  applied  to  Jesus  Christ)  :

1  Tim.  ii.  5 ;  Hob.  viiL  6 ;  ix.  15 ;

xiL  24.  X.

ianlKxnpov :  1  Tim.  ii.  6.
KoraaroK'fi :  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  0.

icSafAios :  1  Tim.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  2.  C.

wKtyfiatTi :  1  Tim.  ii.  9.  G.

4wayy4\K€(r6ai  (in  the  sense  of  "to  pro-
fess ") :  1  Tim.  ii.  10 ;  vL  21.  C.
etwrtfida :  1  Tim.  iL  10.                  0.,  LXX.
r€Kvayovia  I  1  Tim.  ii.  15.


ip4y^Tai:  1  Tim.  iiL  1;  tL  10;  Heb.

xL  16.  C.,  X.

ajw(Ail»Tar2  1  Tim.  lit  2;  y.  7;  vL

14.  C.

pn^pd^ :  1  Tim.  iiL  2, 11;  Titus  iL  2.  c!
<ri^ra:  1  Tim.  iiL  2;  Titos  L  8;  IL

2,5.  a

^tX6^€np:  1  Tim.  iiL  2;  Titos  L  8;  1

Pet  iv.  9.  C.,  X.

8i3aicriir<(r :  1  Tim.  iiL  2 ;  2  TioL  iL  24.
vdpou^os :  1  Tim.  iiL  3 ;  Titus  L  7.  C

vAJfrmr :  1  Tim.  iiL  3;  Titos  L  7.

0.  (bot  rareiyi
ai^rxpoK€p97i :  I  Tim.  iiL  3  (T.B.),  8;

Titus  i.  7.  C.  (laae).

eUaxor:  1  Tim.  iiL  3;  Titos  iiL  2.

LXX<^C.
iupixdiryvpop :  I  Tim.  uL  8;  Heb.  xiiL  5.  X.
¥96^vro9 :  1  Tim.  iiL  6.  LXX.

Tv^eWf :  1  Tim.  iiL  6;  vL  4;  2  Tim.

uu  4.  (X

8iX<^ovf:  1  Tim.  iiL  8.
Zia&6\ovt  (in  the  sense  of  "slanderers '0 :

1  Tim.  iiL  11;  2  Tim.  iiL  3;  Titos

iL3.  a

SiOKOK^irarrcf  (in  the  sense  of  **  serving

as  deacons  *') :  1  Tim.  iiL  10,  la
i9pcUwfia :  1  Tim.  iii.  15.
6fu>\oyovfi4pms:  1  Tim.  iii.  16.        C,  LXX.
^riT&t :  1  Tim.  iv.  1 .  G.  (rare ;  ^t4s  common).
ttrr^pos :  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  C,  LXX.

wKdifos  (as  an  adi.) :  1  Tim.  iv.  1.  C.

tptvioK^y:  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  (X

KfKavTTiptafffiiyety :  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  CL

/i€TaAiy4^i#' :  1  Tim.  iv.  3.  C.

iw6fi\fiToy:  1  Tim.  iv.  4.  O.,  LXX.

&TOTt0ffifyos :  1  Tim.  iv.  6  (in  the  sense

of  "  putting  iu  miud  **).  C.,  LXX.

fitiprvpovfifKn  (in  the   sense  of  •'well

spoken  of"):  1  Tim.  v.  10,  frequent

in  the  Epistle  to  Hebrews,  and  Acts.    X.
imp€<p6fi€yos :  1  Tim.  iv.  6.  G.

7pa<5  Jeu :  1  Tim.  iv.  7.  C

yifjiya{€ :  1  Tim.  iv.  7 ;  Hob.  v.  14 ;  xiL

11 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  14.  G.,  X.

yvfiyaaia :  I  Tim.  iv.  8.  G.,  LXX.  (once).
ayv€i<f :  1  Tim.  iv.  12 ;  v.  2.  C.

iwiwKii^lii :  1  Tim.  v.  1.  C.

Kicyoyai  1  Tim.  v.  4.  O.,  LXX.

aftoifihs :  1  Tim.  v.  4.  C.,  LXX.

ikw69fKroy :  1  Tim.  v.  4.  C.  (rHxe>

fi€fioy(afi4yri  I  1  Tim.  v.  5.  C.

OTToXaTuffa :  1  Tim.  v.  6  (and  Jas.  v.  5).

O.,  LXX.
KaraXtyiffBta :  1  Tim.  v.  9.  C.

iTtKP(np6<pri(r«y :  1  Tim.  v.  10.  C.

i^(yod6xri<rty :  1  Tim.  v.  10.  C.


>  *'C**  denotes  that  the  words  to  which  it  is  affixed  are  found  in  good  classical  Greek;
•*  LXX.,"  that  the  words  so  marked  are  found  in  the  Septuagint ;  **  X.,"  that  they  are  found
in  tlie  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  also,  or  in  tlie  Acts,  or  1  or  2  Peter.


THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.


xx\


Mipicmw :  1  Tim.  v.  10,  IG.  C.

Kara(rrpii¥idirwat :  1  Tim.  v.  H.
4^6apoi :  1  Tim.  y.  18 ;  4  Mace.  G.

wtpltfiyot:  1  Tim.  v.  13  (und  Acts  xix.

19).  a,  X.

T9K¥oyor«t¥:  1  Tim.  v.  14.  0.  (rarely).

olKo9t<nr<nt7i^ :  1  Tim.  v.  14.
wpoKpifiaros :  1  Tim.  v.  21.
irp^kKiffivi  1  Tim.  y.  21.  G.

Upcw6ru :  1  IHm.  v.  23.  C.

wpoSiiXai:  1  Tim.  ▼.  24,  25;  Ileb.  vli.

14.  C,  LXX..  X.

rocfir:  1  Tim.  vi.  4.  C,  LXX.

\oyofiaxias  :  1  Tim.  vi.  4.
M^oitu :  1  Tim.  vi.  4.  C.

BiawaparpiBal :  1  Tim.  vi.  5.
wopurfA6s :  1  Tim.  vi.  5.  C,  LXX.

ffgndtrftara:  1  Tim.  vi.  8.  C.  (rare).

^tXapyvpla:  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  C,  LXX.

wwpUw9ipatn  1  Tim.  vi.  10.  G.  (rare).

«y»&;ra0ffW(R.T.):  1  Tim.vi.ll.  Philo.
i»p6<rtroy:  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  G.  (late).

fawcdptos  (applied  to  God) :  1  Tim.  i.  11 ;

▼i.  15.  C.

^KiritTi :  1  Tim  vi.  17.  G.

kyoBotpytip :  1  Tim.  vL  18  (JkyaBo9py6s^

kya$0€pyia),  G.

•^lirroZirovs :  1  Tim.  vi.  18.  C.  (rare).

«ro<vwWicovt :  1  Tim.  vi.  18.  G.

iarvldnaavpiCorTtt :  1  Tim.  vi.  18.

G.  (rare),  LXX.  (rare).
vapt^KTiy  (or  wapaKaraJHicriv) :  1  Tim.

vi.  20;  2  Tim.  i.  12,14.  0.

K9voipwla:  1  Tim.  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  16.
arTi04<rus :  1  Tim.  vL  20.  G.

ftdfifin :  2  Tim.  i.  5.  G.

8«'  $}ir  cdrlayi  2  Tim.  i.  6,   12;   Titus

L  13 ;  Heb.  ii.  n.  X.

ipa(tnrvpuy :  2  Tim.  i.  6.  '  G.,  LXX.

SciXios:  2Tim.  i.  7.  G.

^m^poyifffiov :  2  Tim.  i.  7.  G.  (rare).

trvyKOKoiriBfiaov :  2  Tim.  i.  8.
$X*'  2Tim.  i.  13;  1  Tim.  i.  19;  iii.  9

(in  a  peculiar  U8e).
iM9vrp£p7t(Tcaf    (with     an     accus.) :     2

Tim.  i.  15 ;  Titus  i.  14  ;  HeU  xii.  25.

iiM^l*v:  2Tim.  i.  16.  G.

irpaypLartlais :  2  Tim.  ii.  4.  G.,  LXX.

orparoKory^aayri :  2  Tim.  ii.  4.  G.

i$kff:  2Tim.  ii.5.  G.

Xayofuxx^'t^ '  2  Tim.  ii.  H  (2ira{  Xc7<{/iri'o>').
Xr^il*ov  :  2  Tim.  ii.  14.  G.,  T^XX.

netrwrrpo^ :  2  Tim.  ii.  14  (in  a  moral

sense  &wa^  Kty6fi9vov) ;  2  Pet.  ii.  6.

LXX.,  X.
i^twalffxvrroy :     2    Tim.   ii.    15    i&na^

X9y6iitv0v).
ipBorofiovtna  :  2  Tim.  ii.  15.  G..  LXX.

w^pitaraffo  (in  the  sense  of  **  avoid  ") :

2  Tim.  ii.  16;  Titus  iii.  9.    Josophus,

LnoiaD.
u9aTp4ifov(n :  2  Tim.  ii.  18;  Titus  i.  11.     G.


tCxpv<rTos:  2  Tim.  ii.  21 ;  iv.  11  (Philem.

11).  G.,  LXX.  (once).

yf<ortpiKds :  2  Tim.  ii.  22.  Josepbus.  G.
aw<u9€{rrovs  :  2  Tim.  ii.  23.  G.,  LXX.

ytrvwa-i  (in  a  figurative  sense) :  2  Tim.

u.  23.  0.

iLyt^Ucucov:  2  Tim.  ii.  2%.  G.  (late).

iufTiSiarietfityovs  I   2  Tim.  ii.  25  (£va^

\€y6fifyoy).
ayav^ilfwruf :  2  Tim.  ii.  26.

G.  (somewhat  rare).
4(ctyp^fi€yoi :  2  Tim.  ii.  26 ,  Luke  v.  10.

O.,  LXX.
^/Aavroi :  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  G.  (Aristotle).

^lAd/yyvpoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  2  ;  Luke  xvi.  J  4.

G.y    X.

dyc(p«rroi:  2  Tim.  iii.  2;  Luke  vi.  35.

G    LXX    X
^cnroySoi :  2  Tim.  iii  8  (omitted  hi  K.r.  *

Bom.  1.31).  G.

iucparus :  2  Tim.  iii.  3.  G.

irfifitpoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  3.  G.

h^iXdyoBot :  2  Tim.  iii.  3.

G.  {^t\dyaBotf  Aristotle).
^tKfi^oyoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  4.  G.

ipi\6etoi :  2  Tim.  iii.  4.  G.  (Aristotle).

kworpdwov :  2  Tim.  iii.  5.  G.

^vS^oKTcf :  2  Tim.  iii.  6.  G.

ywaiKdpia:  2  Tim.  iii.  6.  G.  (late).

icartipedptKya :  2  Tim.  iii.  8;  2  Pet.  ii.  12.

iLyt0yp  :  2  Tim.  iii.  10.  G.  (Aristotle),  LXX.
y6nr€s:  2  Tim.  iii.  13.  O

iwtffr^fisi  2  Tim.  iii.  14.  C.,  LXX.

OtAwytvaros:  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  G.

iway6peuaty:  2  Tim.  iii.  16.

G.  (Aristotle,  etc.),  LXX.
Aprtos :  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  G.

KyijBSfityoi :  2  Tim.  iv.  3.  G.

iwiawptvaovci  i  2  Tim.  iv.  3.

G.  (late  and  rare).

^oA^ffwf :  2  Tim.  iv.  6.  G.

ip€\6yny  '•  2  Tim.  iv.  13.

fi€fi$pdyas  :  2  Tim.  iv.  13.

Xa\Kt6s :  2  Tim.  iv.  14.  C.

wap€y4yfro{m  a  technical  sense) :  2  Tim.

iv.  16  (R.T.).  0.

i^9vHs :  Titus  i.  2.

G.,  LXX.  (once;  Symmaohus  once).
»»i«io^«i^:  Titus  i.  5.  G.  (late  and  rare).
opyiKos :  Titus  i.  7.  G.,  LXX.

<piKdya0os :  Titus  i.  8.

G.  (rare).  LXX.  (once,  Wisd.  vii.  22^.
iyKpariis :  Titns  i.  t<.  G.

/uiTaioA<^yoy :  Titus  i.  10.  G.

4wuTTOfil(6t :  Titus  i,  1 1 .  G.

i3«»Aw<rr<<f  :  Titus  i.  16.  LXX.

UpowptiHis :  Titus  ii.  3 ;  4  Mace,  (twice).  G.
Kardarrifux  :  Titus  ii.  3 ;  3  Mnoc.  (once).  G.
KoXoiiidaicakos  :  Titus  ii.  3  (jSiwa^  Key6'

fityoy).
(ri»<f>poylCwffi :  Titus  ii.  4.  G.

<f>iKdy9povs :  Titus  ii.  4.  G.


xxii  INTRODUCTION  TO


olicovp6$^  or  I  9idyotrr9s(rhw0lw):  TitUBuLS;  1  Tim.

oheovpy6s :  TitiM  ii.  5.  C.  iL  2.  C,  LXX


iSia^opla :  Titus  ii.  7.  0.  (iHid^opos).

oKardyimirros :  TitoB  ii.  8 ;  2  Mace.  iv.  7.
actr^tos  (adj.):    Titus  ii.    11;   Wisd.

i.  14;  3Macc.  Tii.  18.  C.

wtpto6aioy  :  Titus  ii.  14.  LXX.

vffpi^oy«<T« :  Titus  iL  15 ;  4  Maoc  wi.  9.


irrvynr6s :  Titns  iiL  3.  G.

4i>orri(mai :  Titus  iiL  8.  O,  LXX

drwip€\9u :  Titus  iiL  9 ;  Heb.  viL  18.

Cf  X.y  LXX.

oIpcTtir^y :  Titus  iiL  10.  G.

iiUrpawrcu :  TitUd  iii.  11.  a,  LXX.


The  result  of  the  above  enumeration  is  that  there  are —
165  words  found  onlj  in  the  pastoral  Kpistles.
11  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  and  Hebrews.
1 1  only  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  Peter,  James,  Luke,  and  the  Acta.

187

§5.  Literature  on  the  Pastoral  EnsTLES.

A  oonsidcrable  range  of  literature,  both  English  and  German,  has  gathered  round  the
question  of  the  authorship  of  the  pastoral  Epistles.  The  following  are  aome  of  the
cnief  works  bearing  on  it.

English :  Dean  Alford's  '  Prolegomena  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles/  a  very  able  and
conclusive  statement;  ''Introduction  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles,**  in  the  'Speaker's
Commentary,'  by  Professor  Wace ;  article  by  Dr.  Salmon,  io  the  Christian  Observer,
1877,  p.  801;  "Introduction  to  the  Epistles  to  Timothy,"  in  Dr.  Schaafs  'Popular
Commentary  on  the  Now  Testament,'  by  Dean  Plumptre;  article  on  "Timothy
Epistles,'*  in  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  by  Dean  Plumptre;  "Introduction  to  the
Pastoral  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,"  in  '  New  Testament  Commentary  for  English  Readers,'
edited  by  Bishop  EUicott,  by  Canon  Spence ;  "  Excursus  on  the  Genuineness  dl  the
Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  the  Appendix  to  vol.  ii.  of  Farrar's  '  Life  and  Work  of  St.
Paul ; '  "  Appendix  on  the  Date  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  Conybeare  and  Howson's
'  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ; '  see  also  Paley's  '  Horas  Paulinse,'  ch.  xi. — xiii.

Translated  from  the  Oerman :  *'  Introduction  to  Pastoral  Epistles,"  in  Meyer's
'  Commentary,'  by  Huther ;  "  General  Introduction  to  Pastoral  Epistles,"  by  Wiesinger,
in  Olshausen's  *  Biblical  Commentary.*

The  above  all  support  the  authenticity  of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  and  some  of  them
with  great  ability  and  learning.  Alford  adds  the  following  list:  Hug,  Bertholdt,
Fielmoser,  Guerike,  Bohl,  Curtius,  Elug,  Heydenreich,  Mack,  Planck,  Wegscheider,
Beckhaus.  Some  German  critics,  as  Scbleiermacher,  J.  E.  C.  Schmidt,  Ustin,  Lticke,
Neander,  and  Bleek,  only  reject  1  Timothy,  but  accept  Titus  and  2  Timothy  as  genuine
(Davidson,  vol.  ii.  p.  73).

Of  those  which  impugn  the  authenticity  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  in  whole,  the
following  are  the  most  important.

Of  English  writers :  Dr.  Davidson,  *  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  New  Testament*
(2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  21 — 93).  But  Dr.  Davidson  states  the  case  so  unfairly  as  to
make  his  argument  valueless.  The  statement  (p.  26),  most  weighty  if  true,  that  the
theory  of  *'  Paul's  release  and  second  imprisonment  arose  from  exegetical  difficulties
inherent  in  the  Epistles  them<;clves,"  and  that  "the  entire  hypothesis  is  a  fiction
intended  to  prop  up  the  authenticity  of  the  writings,"  is  absolutely  unfounded  in  truth.
The  testimonies  of  Clement,  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  Eusebius,  Jerome,  Chrysostom,
Venantius  Fortunatus,  and  others,  to  a  journey  to  Spain  and  a  second  imprisonment,
have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  "  exej^ctical  difficulties."  They  may  be  vague  and
unsatisfactory,  but  they  are  an  entirely  independent  evidence  of  a  belief  prevalent  in
the  early  Church,  that  St.  Paul  did  go  to  Spain,  and  did  imdergo  a  second  imprison-
ment at  Rome.  The  pabtoral  Epistles  confirm  this  belief.  Again,  such  criticisms  as
that  Clement  would  not  have  said  i\e^v  of  St.  Paul  "going"  to  Spain  (p.  22),  and
that  rh  ripfia  T^r  8u<r€a)j  means  "  the  western  part  of  the  empire  generally,"  are  surely
unworthy  of  a  scholar.  There  is  also  a  strange  incongruity  in  borrowing  Banr's
plausible  assertion  that  the  phnuse,  dyridta-fis  rris  ^fftv^coyv/Mv  yv^etMs  (p.  65),  is  due  to


THE   PASTORAL  EPISTLES.  xxiii

Marcion,  and  yet  placing  the  writing  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  between  a.d.  115  and
125  (p.  69),  when  Marcion  was  a  youth,  and  had  written  nothing*  The  objections,
too,  to  the  style  and  matter  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  are  most  captious,  and  for  the
most  part  irrelevant.  Tate's  *  Continuous  History  of  St.  Paul'  is  quoted  by  Dr.
Davidson.

Of  German  writers  the  first  was  Eichhom,  *  Introduction  to  the  New  Testament ; '
then  came  Baur's  elaborate  works, '  Die  Pastoral-briefe  des  Apostel  Paulus,'  and  *  Der
Apostel  Paulus ; '  De  Wette  followed  him,  more  or  less,  in  his  *  Eurz-gefassten  Hand-
buch,'  placing  the  Epistles,  however,  before  the  middle  of  the  second  century ;  Uien
Scliott,  Schrader  (*  Der  Apostel  Paulus '),  Credner  (*  Einleitung ') ;  and,  quoted  by  Dr.
Farrar  ('  St  Paul,*  ii.  614),  Zeller,  Hilgenfeld,  Schenkel,  Ewdd,  Hausrath,  Renan,
Pfleiderer  (*  Paulinism '),  Krenkel,  Reuss  (*  Les  Epitres '),  etc.

The  question  of  authenticity  really  turns  upon  whether  or  no  there  are  any  distinct
indications  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  of  the  Gnostic  heresy  having  then  assumed  the  pro-
portions that  it  attained  under  Marcion  in  the  middle  of  the  second  century.  The  one
suspicious  phrase  is  the  dvriOttrus  rris  ^l/fv^ay^fMu  yif^ff^vs,  because  dyriB^fffa  was  the
name  of  one  of  Marcion's  works,  and  yv&<ris  is  the  proper  designation  of  the  doctrine
of  the  Gnostics.  But  there  is  not  the  slightest  improbability  in  the  peculiar  style  of
teaching  meant  by  dprtddtrfis  having  begun  in  the  time  of  St.  Paul,  or  in  ^e  conceited
claim  to  exclusive  yyufri^  having  been  already  made  by  the  precursor  of  Marcion  and
his  brother  heretics.

ExcursiLs  an  the  Testimony  of  Hegesipptts  as  preserved  by  Eusehius^

*  Ecd,  Hist,y  Hi.  xxxii.

Eusebius  quotes  Hegesippus  as  saying  that,  till  the  death  of  the  apostles,  the  Church
had  been  as  a  pure  virgin ;  but  that  when  the  apostles  were  all  dead,  rris  oBtov  wKdtnif
T^y  dpxh''  ^Ac(/x/3ay(y  ^  (r{firraa'ist  impious  error  was  first  formed  into  a  compact  system,
through  the  deceit  of  the  false  teachers  (t«v  irtpo^i^aaKdKuy);  who,  now  having  no
apostle  to  oppose  them,  dared  to  oppose  the  preaching  of  the  truth  by  the  preaching
of  science  falsely  so  called  (r^y  ^tu^dyufioy  yy&triy).  The  natural  and  obvious  inference
from  this  passage  is  that  Hegesippus  was  acquainted  with  St.  Paul's  First  Epistle  to
Timothy,  and  quoted  its  ipsissima  verba  to  show  what  had  taken  place  in  spite  of  his
apostolic  warning,  though  in  accordance  with  his  apostolic  prediction  (1  Tim.  iv.).  The
krtpoZiZiffKdKoi  who  lurked  in  secret  in  the  apostle's  time,  and  carried  on  their  enterprise
**  against  the  sound  canon  of  saving  doctrine  "  in  darkness,  had  now  emerged  into  the
light,  and  formed  schismatical  and  heretical  communities.  The  passage  is  a  strong
testimony  to  the  authenticity  of  1  Timothy.  The  suc^gestion  that  Hegesippus  was  an
Ebionite  is  absolutely  baseless.  All  we  know  of  him  stamps  him  as  a  Catholic  Christian
(see  art.  **  Hegesippus,"  in  the  *  Dictionary  of  Christian  Biography ').  The  contradic-
tion between  Hegesippus's  statement,  and  the  representation  of  an  incipient  heresy
existing  in  St.  Paul's  time,  as  gathered  from  1  Timothy,  exists  only  in  Dr.  Baur's
imagination.

Excursus  on   the  Passage  in    Clements  *  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians '  bearing  upon

St,  Paulas   Visit  to  Spain.

The  passage,  as  found  in  Hefele's  edition  of  the  *  Apostolic  Fathers,'  is  as  follows :
*0  Utrpos  8id  (rjKoy  H^tKoy  ohy!  tya  ohh\  8vo,  iXXh  wXtloyas  MytyKty  w6yovs,  icat  ofhct  fioprth-
pilffas  iwopf6&ri  (is  rhy  6<p€i\6iJL€yoy  rSwoy  t^s  8({{^s.  Aid  Cv^ov  Koi  6  UavKos  iwofioy^s  0pa$ttoy
0TC<rx*>'»  iirrdKis  Zea/xd  <popfca$^  tpvyaifvOdSf  \i0a<rOfls.  K^pu|  yty6fi€yos  Hy  T€  t^  iya-roKf  ical
iy  rrj  Si/crci,  rh  ytvyaiov  rrjs  wlartots  avrov  k\^os  fXafity,  StxatocruvTjv  hUd^as  UXov  rhy  ic6<rfioyj
Koi  iwl  rh  rtpfia  rrjs  8v(r€o»s  4\0a>yy  Koi  fiaprvp-fiaas  iirl  r&y  ^ovfidyafy,  oUrcts  dmiXXdyri  rov
K6<rfioVf  ical  (is  rhy  ayiov  r6iroy  iwop€66riy  k.t.A.

The  exact  English  of  the  above  is  as  follows :  "  Peter,  on  account  of  imjust  envy,^
underwent  not  one  or  two,  but  many  labours,  and  so,  having  borne  witness  [suffered
martyrdom],  he  went  to  the  place  of  glory  which  was  his  due.     On  account  of  envy,

*  Zri\oyy  difficult  to  translate  cxuctly.  It  means  envy,  jealousy,  anger,  or  any  strong
pamirm.

I'A&T.   EPIST  C


xxiT  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.

Paul  too  received  the  prize  of  enduranoe,  haying  been  in  chains  seven  times,  expelled,
stoned.  Having  preacned  [the  gospel]  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  he  obtained
the  noble  reputation  due  to  his  faith.  Havins  taught  righteousness  to  the  whole  world,
and  having  come  as  &r  as  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  West,  and  having  borne  witness
Tsuffered  martyrdom]  before  the  rulers,  he  so  passed  out  of  the  world,  and  came  to  the
holy  place,**  etc

It  is  to  be  observed  on  the  above  passage :  (1)  That  the  coupling  together  of  Peter  and
Paul  as  martyrs  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  St.  Paul's  second  imi»isonment  at  Rome,  and  the
ecclesiastical  tradition  which  makes  him  and  Peter  suffer  martyrdom  at  the  same  time.
(2)  That  the  phrase  fu^rrvp^^iof,  being  used  of  both,  is  a  proof  Uiat  martyrdom,  and  not
mere  confeuion,  is  meant  in  St.  Paul*s  case.  (3)  That  his  having  come  to  "  the  hound*  of
the  West  **  must  mean  something  precise  and  definite,  different  from  the  general  statement
that  he  preached  the  gospel  in  uie  West.  (4)  That  Clement,  writing  from  Rome,  would
never  have  called  Rome  ^  the  bound  of  the  West,**  but  that  by  Bioman  writers  Spain,
and  especially  Gades,  or  Cadiz,  was  habitually  described  as  the  extreme  western  point
^  Omnibus  in  terris  quso  sunt  a  Oadibus  usque  Auroram  et  Ghmgem  "  (Juvenal, '  Sat,'
x.\  Statius  calls  Oades  **  cubUia  solis ; "  Horace,  "  remotis  Gadibus ;  **  Silius  Italicus,
"  nominum  finem  Gades."  Geiyon,  King  of  Hesperia  (the  West),  fed  his  oxen  in  the
island  of  Erythria  (the  isla  de  Leon,  %jb.  Grades),  which  was  also  the  name  of  one  of  the
Hesperides,  whose  abode  was  fixed  by  the  earliest  traditions  on  Oceanus,  in  the  extreme
West  Strabo  calls  Gadeira  ivx^'"!  l^pviiimi  rris  yris  (ilL  L  8),  *^  situated  at  the  extreme
end  of  the  earth.*'  He  calls  the  promontory  Hieron  (near  Gades)  '*  the  most  western
point  [or,  *  boundary-mark,'  <nj/t€«bi»],  not  only  of  Europe,  but  of  the  whole  world  "  (iii  L
4).  Pindar,  too,  speaks  of  Gades  as  the  point  beyond  which  no  mortal  could  advance
('  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography,'  art.  **  Herculis  Columns ").  So  that
to  a  Roman,  r\piM  rr^s  8^c»f  would  be  the  natural  description  of  Grades.  And  it
is  to  Gades  that  Venantius  Fortunatus  sends  St  Paul.  "  Transit  et  oceanum,  vel  qui
facit  insula  portum,"  etc.,  which,  of  course,  means  Gades.  (5)  The  visit  to  the
extreme  bounds  of  the  West  immediately  precedes  his  martyrdom  at  Rome,  in
Clement's  enumeration  of  St  Paul's  doings.  (6)  The  use  of  offroit,  in  the  passage  about
St  Peter  which  precedes,  teaches  us  not  to  put  a  full  stop  after  ih^ovfi^iwy,  and  begin
a  new  sentence  with  o^^y  as  in  the  Latin  version  in  Hefele,  and  Dr.  Farrar's  quota-
tion ;  but  to  construe  it,  as  is  much  more  natural  and  more  in  accordance  with  Greek
idiom,  with  SflniWdYn  (as  the  previous  o0t«  is  with  iiroptlt&ri),  as  referring  to  the  circum-
stances under  which  he  passed  away  and  went  to  a  better  place.  (7)  The  manuscript
text  of  Clement  is  very  imperfect  The  difiBculty  of  breaking  up  the  passage  into  its
component  parts,  due  apparently  to  the  absence  of  proper  copulative  particles,  may
probably  be  assigned  to  this  cause.  But  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  saying,  with
br.  Farrar  (p.  606),  that,  "  if  Spain  is  intended,  and  if  fuiprvfrfiaas  means  *  martyrdom,'
then  the  author,  taken  literally,  would  imply  that  St  Paul  perished  in  Spain."  What
the  writer  says  is  that,  having  successively  tauc;ht  righteousness  to  the  whole  world,
reached  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  West,  and  suffered  martyrdom  before  the  rulers,  he
at  last  passed  out  of  this  world  and  received  his  reward  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
(See  translation  of  the  *  Epistle  of  Clement'  in  Bishop  Lightfoot's  *  Appendix  to  St
Clement  of  Rome,'  which  agrees  substantially  with  that  given  above.)


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF


PAUL    TO    TIMOTHY,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  I.


Ver.  1. — Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Christ,
A.V.  and  T.R. ;  according  to  for  6y,  A.V. ;
Okrid  Jesus  our  hope  for  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
u^ich  is  our  hope,  A.Y.  and  T.R.  For  the
intcription,  comp.  Rom.  i.  1,  5 ;  1  Cor.  L  1 ;
t  Cor.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  1 ;  Col.  i.  1;
2  Tim.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  1 ;  in  all  which  St.  Paul
Msertshifl  apostleship,  and  ascribes  it  directly
to  "  the  will  of  God  "  (comp.  GaL  i.  11. 12,
etc).  According  to  the  commandment  (as
Titus  1. 3)  expresses  the  same  truth,  but  pos-
sibly with  a  more  direct  reference  to  the
command,  **  Separate  me  Paul  and  Barnabas,"
recorded  in  Acts  xiii.  2.  This  asst-rtion  of
his  apostolic  authority  indicates  that  this
is  not  a  private  letter  to  Timothy,  but  a

Eublic  Cliurch  document  for  all  time.  Our
ope  (comp.  Col.  i.  27 ;  Acts  xxviii.  20).
Ver.  2. — My  true  child  in  faith  for  my  own
mm  in  the  faith,  A.V. ;  peace  for  and  peace,
A.V. ;  the  Father  for  our  Father,  A.V.  and
T.B. ;  Christ  Jesus  fur  Jesus  Christ,  A.V.
and  T.R.  My  tme  child  in  faith.  A  most
awkward  phrase,  which  can  only  mean  that
Timothy  was  St.  Paul'd  true  child  because
his  faith  was  equal  to  St.  Paul's,  which  is
not  St.  Pauls  meaning.  Timothy  was  St
Paurs  own  son,  because  he  hod  begotten
him  in  the  gospel  (I  Cor.  iv.  14 — 16 ;  Philem.
10) — his  spiritual  son.  This  is  best  expre&ised
as  in  the  A.V.  by  "  in  the  faith"  (comp.  Titus
i.  4,  where  the  same  idea  is  expressed  by
mtn-ii  Koiyiiv  wlffnv).  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace.
This  varies  from  the  blessing  at  tho  begin-
ning of  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  Corin-
thians, Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippians,
Colossians,  and  Thessalunians,  by  the  addi-
tion of  the  word  **  mercy,"  as  in  2  Tim.  i.  2  and
Titas  i.  4  in  the  T.R.,  and  also  in  2  John  3
and  Jude  2.  It  seems  in  St.  Paul  to  con-
nect itself  with  that  deeper  sense  of  the  need
and  of  the  enjoyment  of  mercy  which  went

I.  TIMOTHY.


with  his  deepening  sense  of  sin  as  he  drew
towards  his  eud,  and  harmonizes  beautifully
with  what  ho  says  in  vers.  12 — 16.  The
analogy  of  the  other  forms  of  blessing
quoted  above  strongly  favours  the  sense  our
Father  rather  than  the  Father.  Whether
we  read  y^/jLuw  with  the  T.R.  or  omit  it  with
the  R.T.,  the  idea  of  Father  is  contrasted,
not  with  that  of  Son,  but  w  th  that  of  Lord;
the  two  words  express  the  relation  of  tho
Persons  of  the  Godhead,  not  to  each  other,
but  to  the  Church.

Ver.  3. — Exhorted  for  hesoughl,  A. V. ;  tarry
for  abide  still,  A.V. ;  teas  going  for  uieniy
A.V. ;  certain  men  for  some,  A.V. ;  not  to
teach  a  different  for  tJiat  they  teach  no  other^
A.V.  Exhorted  (irapcirdUccra).  In  about  sixty
places  thia  word  haa  tho  sense  of  *'  beseech,*'
**  entreat,"  **  desire,"  *•  pray,"  which  is  more
suitable  to  this  passage  than  the  R.V.  exhort.
It  is  a  strong  expression,  and  seems  to  imply
that  Timothy  had  been  anxious  to  ffo  with
St.  Paul  to  Macedonia,  to  share  his  laboura
and  wait  upon  him ;  but  that  St.  Paul,  with
that  noble  disinterestedness  which  charac-
terized his  whole  life,  had,  not  without  diJQQl-
oulty,  persuaded  him  to  abide  at  Ephesus.
Tarry.  Hero  again  the  R.V.  is  unfortunate.
The  exact  sense  of  wpoantiwtu  ia  "  to  stay
on,"  or,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  •*  to  abide  stilL"  Tlie
word  tells  us  that  Timothy  was  already  at
Ephcsus  when  he  received  the  request  ucm
St.  Paul  to  stay  on  there  instcadf  of  going
to  Macedonia.  There  is  nothine  in  the
phrase  that  implies  that  St  Paul  was  at
EphesuB  himself  when  he  made  the  request
to  Timothy.  It  may  have  been  made  by
message  or  by  letter.  When  I  wai  going.
Some  commentators  have  endeavoured  to
explain  woptv6ff¥os  as  applying  to  Timothy^
or  as  if  the  order  were  lya  wop9v6n9vos
mtpayytikus ;  but  the  Greek  will  not  admit
of  it.  Charge  («-c^»a77c(A]7s) ;  a  word  imply-
ing authority,  almost  invariably  rendered


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[cH.  1. 1^20.


••  command ••  or  "charge,"  It  is  taken  up
in  ver.  18  (Ta^tii'  tiiw  wapayytKlav)^  **  This
charge,"  etc.  Taaeh  a  different  doctrine
(lTCPo8(8a(rira\c7y).  This  is  ono  of  the  many
words  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles.  It
only  occurs  here  and  ch.  vi.  3.  It  is  formed
from  jrcpo8i8i(riraAof,  a  teacher  of  other  than
right  doc:rine,  and  means  ^  to  play  the  part
of  a  teacher  of  other  than  right  doctrine,"
just  as  in  ecchsiastii*al  languaice  irtp^io^os
means  **one  who  holds  opinions  conteary  to
that  which  is  orthodox,"  and  such  as  do  so
are  said  4Tcpodo(«iv.  The  cliisdical  sense  is
a  little  different,  **  one  who  holds  a  different
opinion  " — *'  t » bo  of  a  different  opinion."  The
iutrodurtion  of  the  wtird  into  the  vocabulary
of  Scripture  is  a  sig^  of  the  somewhat  later
age  to  whieh  this  Epistle  belongs,  when
heresies  were  growing  and  multiplying.
Other  similar  compounds  are  lTcp<^AcMr(ros
(1  Cor.  xi?.  21)  and  ir€po{vy^7r  (2  Oor.  ▼!.
14).

Ver.  4.— To  aive  for  give^  A.V. ;  the  which
for  whieh,  A.Y. ;  quest ioningi  for  queiiions,
A.V. ;  a  difpcnsation  of  God  for  goaiy  edify-
ing^ A.y.  and  T.li.  {olKoyofilai^  Btov  for
otKo^ofAiay  ecoO)  \  90  do  I  now  for  ao  do,  A.y .
Tables  (see  ch.  iv.  7).  If  the  spirit  which
gave  birth  to  the  fables  of  the  Talmud  was
already  at  work  amonv:  the  Jews,  we  hKve  a
ready  explanation  of  the  phrase.  And  that
they  were  Jewish  fables  (not  later  Gnostic
delusions)  is  proved  by  the  parallel  passage
in  Titus  i.  14,  *'  Not  giving  heed  to  Jewish
fables."  The  prevalence  of  sorcery  amting
the  Jews  at  this  timo  is  a  further  instance
of  their  inclination  to  fable  (sec  Acts  viii.
9;  xiii.  6;  xix.  13).  Zndless  genealogies.
What  was  the  particular  abuse  of  genealogies
which  St.  Paul  here  condemns  we  have  not
gufficient  hiHtorical  knowledge  to  enable  us
to  decide.  But  that  they  were  Jewish  forms
of  **  vain  talking,"  and  not  Gnostic,  and
related  to  human  pedigrees,  not  to  **  emana-
tions of  flBons,"  may  be  concluded  from  the
connection  in  which  thev  are  mentioned  in
Titus  iii.  9,  and  from  the  invariable  mcaidng
of  the  word  ytutaKoyia  itself.  It  is  true
that  IrensBus  (*Contr.  Haer.,*  lib.  i.)  applies
this  passage  to  tiie  Valentinians  and  their
succession  of  ceons  (By thus,  Nous,  Logos,
Anthropus,  etc. — in  all  thirty,  male  and
female^ ;  and  ho  doesTertuliian,  who  speaks
of  the  seeds  of  the  Gnostic  hen  sies  as  already
budding  in  St.  Paul's  days  (*  Advers  Valen-
tin./ cap  iii.  and  el^ewhere),  and  Grotius  sup-
ports this  explanation  ('  Comment.,'  1  Tim.
1.  4).  But  it  was  very  natural  that  Irenzeus
and  TertuUian,  living  when  the  heresies  of
Valentinus,  Marcion,  and  others  were  at
their  height,  should  so  accommodate  St.
Paurs  words — which  is  nil  tiiat  Irensus
does.  On  tlie  otiier  hand,  neither  Ireneeus
nor  TertuUian  shows  that  y(vta\oyia  was  a


word  applied  to  the  emanatione  of  the  mxne
in  the  Gnostic  vocabulary.  The  geneaJogiet^
then,  were  Jewish  pedigrees,  either  used
literally  to  exalt  indiviouals  as  being  of
priestly  or  Davidio  origin  (aa  the  pedigrees
of  the  Deepoeyni,  or  later  of  the  princes  of
the  Oiptivity),  or  used  eabbaliaiieaUyy  eo  as
to  draw  fiinoiAil  doctrines  from  the  names
composing  a  genealogy,  or  in  some  other
wav  which  we  do  not  know  of  (see  the
writers  'Genealogies  of  Christ,'  ch.  iiL  {
ii.  1 :  and  note  0  at  the  end  of  Uie  volame).
Endless  (iar^paunos);  found  only  here  m
the  Now  Testament  and  so  one  of  the
words  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistka,  hot
used  in  the  LXX.  for  "infinite,"  ** im-
measurable." It  means  either  '^endlees,*
**  interminable,"  or,  **  haviug  no  useM  end
or  purpoeo ; "  oMw  xP^^'Mf'  (Chrysostom).
But  the  former  (**  interminable ")  is  the
better  rendering,  and  in  aooordaiioe  with
its  classical  use.  Questionings  ((irH^fu  or
i ic(firii<r 9tSy  B.T.).  (For  (i^r^o'is,  see  John
iiu  25;  Acts  xxv.  20;  and  below,  ch.  tL
4;  2  Tim.  iL  23;  Titus  iiL  9;  and  for  the
kindred  (frjiiuL,  Acts  xv.  2 ;  xviii.  15 ;  xxiiL
2  J ;  xxv.  19 :  xxvi  3.)  The  reading  UCirnitns
is  only  found  here.  A  dispeniatioii  of  Ood.
This  version  arises  from  the  Greek  olxoM^iky,
which  is  the  reading  of  the  R.T.  and  almost
all  manuscripts.  The  T.B.  ciiKiAoidw  is
thought  to  oe  a  conjecture  of  Erasmus,
whieh,  from  its  much  easier  sense,  was  taken
into  the  T.B.  Taking  the  reading  oijcorofJav,
the  phrase,  **  a  dispensation  of  God  whidi
is  in  faith,"  must  mean  the  gospel  as  do*
livered  by  revelation  and  receivea  by  iaith.
These  fables  and  genealogies  address  them-
selves, the  apostle  says,  to  the  disputatious,
itching  curiosity  of  men's  minds,  not  to
their  faith.  The  substance  of  them  is  matter
of  doubtful  disputation,  not  revealed  truth.
**"  The  dispensation  "  is  better  English  than
**a  dispensation."  So  do  I  now;  or,  as  the
A.y.,  so  do,  is  the  conjectural  filling  up  of
the  unfinished  sentence  which  began  '^  as  I
exhorted  theo."  But  it  is  much  more  natural
and  simple  to  take  ver.  18  as  the  apodosis,
and  the  intermediate  verses  as  a  dig^ression
caused  by  St.  Paul's  desire  to  show  how
exactly  the  charge  was  in  agreement  with
the  true  spirit  of  the  Law  of  God.

Ver.  5. — But  for  now,  A.V. ;  charge  for
commandment,  A.V. ;  love  for  charity,  A.V.;
a  good  for  of  a  good,  and  faith  for  offaiik,
A.y.  But  Uie  end  of  the  charge.  Before
proceeding  with  his  sentence,  in  which  he
was  about  solemnly  to  commit  the  trust  of
the  episcopate  of  the  Cliurch  of  Ephesus  to
Timothy,  he  breaks  ofi*  abruptly  to  show  the
beneficent  chare cter  of  the  charge,  vix.  the
furlhcmnce  of  that  brotherly  love  and  purity
of  heart  and  life  which  are  the  true  fruit  of
the  gospel  dispensation,  but  whioh  somc^  by


CB.  1. 1—20.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


their  false  doctrine,  were  so  rathlessly  im-
peding. Each  of  these  phrases,  **a  pure
Deart "  and  **  a  good  conscience  "  and  *^  faith
unfeigned/'  seems  to  rebuke  by  contrast  the
merely  eeremoniaX  cleanness  and  the  de/Ued
eonscienee  and  the  merely  nominal  (fhris*
tianity  of  these  heretical  Judaizers  (comp.
Titus  L  10— K;).

Ver.  6. — Which  things  for  iohieh,  A.V.;
talking  (or  jangling^  A.V.  Having  swerved
(&<rTox^(ra«^€s);  literally,  Aartn^  mtMe<2  the
mark^  as  in  the  margin.  It  is  found  in
tibe  New  Testament  only  here  and  ch.  vL
21;  2  Tim.  ii.  18.  In  Eccles.  vU.  19  (21,
A.V.)  and  viii.  9  (11,  A.V.)  it  is  used  in
a  slightly  differrnt  sense,  "forego"  and
"rnids.**  In  Polybius  and  Plutarch  repeat-
edly, **to  miss  the  mark,"  **to  fail,"  with
the  kindred  Atrroxosy  AoTox^Ot  a(rT6xilM^
These  men  missed  the  true  end  of  the
gospel — -purity  of  heart  and  conscience  and
life — and  only  reached  vain  and  boastful
talking.  Have  turned  aside  {i^trpdmiaay) ;
oh.  V.  15 ;  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4 ;  Heb.  xii.  18 ;
bat  not  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament.  It
is  found  in  the  active  voice  in  the  LXK.,  and
is  common  in  all  voices  in  classical  Greek.
Vain  talking  c^araioAoy/a) ;  here  only  in  the
New  Testament,  and  not  found  in  the
LXX.,  but  used  by  Strabo,  Plutarch,  and
Porphyry.  The  aidjcctive  narcuoKSyos  is
used  in  Titu-i  i.  10.  and  applied  especially
to  those  "of  the  cirumfision."  The  Latin
equivalents  are  vaniloquus  and  vaniloquium,
Livy's  description  of  a  vanihtquus  is  "  Maria
terrasque  inani  sonitu  verborum  complevit"
(lib.  XXXV.  48;  comp.  Jude  16).

Ver.  7. — Tliough  they  understand  for  un-
derstanding,  A.V. ;  confidently  affirm  for
affirm^  A.V.  Teachers  of  the  Law  (vofio-
ii^dtricaXoi.  as  Luke  v.  17 ;  Acts  v.  34).  This,
again,  distinctly  marks  the  Jewish  origin  of
these  heretics.  Though  they  onderstand,
etc.  So  our  Lord  rebnkel  the  scribes  and
teachers  of  the  Lavo  in  his  day :  "  Ye  do  err,
not  knowing  the  Scriptures  nor  the  power
of  God ; "  "  Ye  do  greatly  err"  (Matt.  xxii.
29 ;  Mark  xii.  27;  Matt.  xii.  7,  etc. ;  compare,
too,  Rom.  ii.  17—24).  They  confidently
affirm  {^la&f&aiovvrai).  Elsewhere  in  the
New  Testtment  only  in  Titus  iiL  8,  "I
will  that  thou  affirm  confidently."  So  in
classical  Greek,  "  to  maintain  strongly,"
**to  be  posilive."  This  was  right  in  the
minister  of  Christ  d<  daring  Divine  truth,
but  very  wrong  in  these  vain  janglers.  The
nature  of  their  confident  assertions  is  ap-
parent from  what  follows — they  spoke  of
the  Law,  but  not  lawfully.

Ver.  8. — The  Law  is  good  (see  the
•imilar  statmcnt  in  Rom.  vii.  12).  The
Jews  thought  that  St.  Paul  spoke  against
the  Law  (comp.  Acts  vi.  13.  14),  because  he
vindicated  its  true  use  (Rom.  x.  4;  Gkil.


iii.  24 ;  iv.  4,  5,  etc.).  But  he  everywhere
speaks  of  the  Law  as  good  and  holy.  If  a
man — t.e.  a  teacher  of  the  Law — nse  it  law-
folly  ;  knowing  its  proper  use,  as  it  followB
in  the  next  verse.

Ver.  9. — As  knowing  for  knotoing,  A.V.;
Law  for  the  Law,  A.V.;  unruly  for  diso-^
bedientf  A.V.;  and  sinners  for  and  for
sinners,  A.V. ;  the  unholy  for  unholyf  A.V.
Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteons  man.  It  is
much  better  to  render  v6fiosj  with  the  A.V.y
"the  Iaw,"  as  e.g,  Roul  ii.  12-^14.  The
whole  prof)osition  relates  to  the  Law  of
Moses,  which  these  teachers  perverted  and
tried  to  force  upon  Christians,  being  igno-
rant that  the  Law  was  made,  not  for  the
righteous,  but  for  sinners.  For  is  noi  made,
we  might  render  does  not  apply  to  or  is  not
in  force  c^ainst,  Ktircu  with  the  dative  fol-
lowing (as  2  Maco.  iv.  11)  suggests  some
such  meaning,  somewhat  different  from  the
simple  v6fjMs  Kurat.  This  freedom  of  the
righteous  from  the  Law  is  what  St.  Paul
everywhere  asserts  (Rom.  vi.  14;  viii.  2;
Gal.  ii.  19 ;  iii.  25 ;  v.  18,  etc.),  the  Law  being
viewed,  not  as  a  holy  rule  of  life,  but  as  a
system  of  penalties — **a  Law  of  sin  and
death."  That  vSfios  here  means  the  Law
of  Moses  is  further  evident  from  this,  that
in  the  following  list  the  apostle  clearly
follows  the  general  order  of  the  Decalogue,
taking  fii-st  the  oifences  against  the  first
table,  and  then  sins  against  the  fifth,  sixth,
seventh,  and  ninth  commandments  (compare,
too,  ver.  11  with  Rom.  ii.  16).  LawleM
(^i.v6fiois);  with  no  special  reference  to  its
etymology,  but  meaning  simply  "  trans-
gressors,'* "  wicked,"  as  Luke  xxii.  37 ;  Acts
u.  23;  2  Thess.  ii.  8  (A.V.),  and  very  fre-
quently in  the  LXX.  Unmly  (ivinror^-
KTois);  insubordinate,  resisting  lawful  au-
thority. In  the  LXX.  for  the  Hebrew  hv^^
(1  Sam.  ii.  12,  Symmachu8),and  perhaps  Pro  v.
xvi.  27.  In  the  New  Tistament  it  is  peculiar
in  this  sense  to  the  pastoral  Epistles,  being
only  found  here  and  in  Titus  i.  6, 10.  In  Heb.
ii.  10  it  has  the  classical  sense  of  '*  unsub-
dued." The  express  application  of  the  word
in  Titus  i.  10,  to  the  "  unruly  talkers  of  the
circumcision,"  shows  that  St.  Paul  has  them
in  view  here  also.  Ungodly  and  sinnen,  for
the  unholy  and  profane.  All  terms  im-
plying offences  against  the  first  table.  'Acrc-
fidffi (with  the  kindred  i.<r($tia and  i.af$4w)  is
always  rendered  ** ungodly,"  '*ungf>dlin(S8,"
**  to  act  ungodly ; "  afiapTw\o7sf  sinners,  viz.
against  God;  ivoaiois^  unholy  (f«»un<l  only
here  and  at  2  Tim.  iii.  2  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, but  frequent  in  the  liXX.)  is  the
contrary  to  ficriof,  holy,  saintly;  fitfii^Kois
(whence  0t$rik6vj  to  profane.  Matt  xiL
5;  Acts  xxiv.  6),  profane,  of  persons  and
things  not  consecrated  to  God — peculiar  in
the  New  Testament  to  the  pastoral  Epistles


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TMOTHT.


[CB.  L  1— >20t


Ceh.  ir.  7 ;  Ti.  20 .  2  Tim.  iL  16 :)  ukI  HeK  xiL
16,  b«it  f*mnd  commonly  in  the  LXX.  and  in
r\mtnrm\  Greek.  Hmr^mXifmsmMid  fafrftm^moj
not  Bazd«rtit,  bat,  m  in  the  margin,
*'9miUn,  m-Mten  of  father  and  moiber."
Both  words  are  onW  fonTid  here  in  the
New  Teitameot,  bat  fonnd  in  Demaatht-nea,
Aristophane«.  etc.  The  allntion  here  is  to
Ex  d  zxi.  15,  where  the  Hebrew  word  ibr
*^  imiteth  "  is  -:3s,  which  dnea  not  uoceasaril  j
mean  **to  smite  to  death**  anj  more  than
iXoAm  docs.  'Artpof^yMf,  man-daytn;
foond  onlj  here  in  the  New  Testament,
but  used  in  2  Maoc.  is.  28  and  in  classical
writers.     The  n  ferenoe  is  to  Ezod.  zxL  12.

Ver.  10. — Fontieat€r$  for  wharemtrngen,
A.y. ;  alnuen  of  ihemadvtM  teith  men  for  them
thai  dftfile  them»elve$  with  mankinds  A.V. ;
false  tteeartn  (or  perjured  persons,  A.V. ;  eom-
trary  for  that  is  eotUrary,  A.Y. ;  <7i«  sound  tor
sound,  A.y.  n6ppots,ipff*roicolrais.  The  Utter
word  is  onlj  t'onnd  in  the  New  Ti-stament
here  and  1  Cor.  tL  9.  and  nowliere  else;
but  the  reference  is  to  Lev.  zTiii.  22,  wlure
the  two  word:!  ipatpos  and  icoini  occnr,
tliough  not  in  nctual  composition.  *Ar8pa-
vo9i<rratSf  men-stealers;  only  here  in  the  New
Testament,  but  very  common,  with  its  many
kindred  forms,  iLp9pmro9iCtiv,  Ay9pam9ian6sf
w9pdwoioif^  etc.,  in  classical  Greek.  The
last  word  is  found  once  in  the  LXX.,  viz.
in  3  Maco.  vii.  5.  The  crime  of  man-
stealing  is  denounced  Exod.  xxi.  16;  Deut.
xxiT.  7.  Vtdirraifj  iwi6ffKois,  lian,  false
■wearers.  The  latter  word  only  occurs  here
in  the  New  Testament — the  verb  imopKw  in
Matt  V.  33— and  twice  in  the  LXX.,  where
kniopKia  is  also  found  (Wisd.  xiv.  25) ;  all  are
common  in  clasHicul  Greek.  The  reference
is  to  Lev.  xix  11,  12.  The  order  of  the
offences,  as  al)ovo  noted,  is  that  of  the
Decaloguo.  The  loond  doctrine.  The
article  is  bettor  omitted,  as  iu  the  A  V.
This  iH  ono  of  the  many  phrases  peculiar  to
the  potttoral  Epistles.  Though  tho  verb
vyialveiv  occurs  three  times  in  St.  Luke's
Gospd  and  once  in  3  John  2  in  its  literal
sonMo  of  hfnlily  health,  it  is  only  in  the
pastoral  Epistles  that  it  is  applied  to
doctrine  (seo  ch.  vi.  3;  2  Tim.  i.  13;  iv.  3;
Titus  i.  [)j  13;  ii.  1,  2;  and  note  on  2  Tim.
iv.  3).

Vrr.  11. — The  gospel  of  the  glory  for  the
ffhrioHs  gospcly  A .  V.  The  gospel  of  the  glory
of  the  blessed  Ood.  The  piirase,  rh  euay^/-
Kiov  Tf;s  Z6^ris  rov  naxapiou  6(ou,  cannot  mean,
OS  in  tho  A. v.,  **  the  glorious  gospel  of  the
bloMsod  God,"  except  by  a  very  forced  con-
struction. It  miglit  moan  three  tilings  :  (1)
Tf;y  8<<{Tjy  rov  Of  oO  might  be  a  periphrasis  for
•*  Go«l,"  as  Rom.  vi.  4,  or  Exod.  xxiv.  16, 17 ;
xxxiii.  18;  Lev.  ix.  6,  23;  Ps.  civ.  31;  2
( 'or.  iv.  () ;  or  OS  *»  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "
(Prov.  xviil.  10 ;  Isa.  xxx.  27.  etc.) ;  and  as


we  WSJ  '^tiie  qneen**  najestr.**  the  *'kin^
graee."  Or  (2)  **the  gWy  of  God  **  mi|^i
mean  Jeans  Christ,  who  is  the  BrightoeMi  of
God's  glorj,  the  Image  of  the  Invisible  God»
in  whose  fiwe  the  glo^  of  God  shinei  (2  Oar.
iv.4,6).  Or(3)itnugfatmeanthegowpelwhidi
telb  of  the  glory  of  God,  whiefa  revoals  and
proclaims  his  glory,  the  glorj  of  his  graoe
(Eph.  i.  C,  ISX  or  pethaps  here  imlher  the
glory  of  his  holiness,  which  St.  Flsnl's
**  aoand  doctrine  "  pressed  for  imitatioii  npon
all  Christians  (s  e  ch.  Ti.  3) ;  oomp.  2  Oor.
It.  4,  *«  The  gtwpel  of  the  glory  of  Clirist"
Eitlier  the  first  or  last  is  doubtless  the  trae
meaning.  Ihe  blssiBi  God.  This  and  oh.
vL  15  are  the  only  pa  singes  in  the  New
Testament  where  ^uwdE^Mt,  blessed,  la  an
epithet  of  God.  Elsewhere  ^'bh-sBed"  i>
cirA#yifref ;  as  tjg.  Mark  xiv.  61 ;  2  Cor.  zL
31.  In  clHssical  Greek  fi&ca^  is  the  proper
epithet  of  the  gods ;  iUkop^s  Sf  ^r  /ucurdf^Mt  Is
usually  spoken  of  men  or  qnalitiea,  and  es-
pecially of  the  happy  dead.  It  does  not
appear  how  or  why  the  apostle  here  applisa
fioxdotof  to  God.  Committed  to  my  tniit;
literally,  with  which  I  was  entrusted,  A.
thoroughly  Pauline  statement  (oomp.  Rom.
L  1,  5;  iL  16;  GaLL  11, 12;  Epbu  i£L  1—8,
etc.).

Ver.  12.-1  thank  for  and  I  thank^  A.Y.
and  T.R. ;  him  that  enabled  me,  even  CkHsl
Jesus  our  Lord  for  Christ  Jesus  our  Lofd,  who
hath  enabled  me,  A.Y. ;  appointing  me  iohis
service  for  putting  me  intt  the  mitUstry,  AJV,
I  thank,  etc.  This  outburst  of  praise  for
the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ChrisC  who  had
called  him  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  is
caused  by  the  tliougiit,  which  immediately
precedes,  of  his  being  entrusted  with  the
gospel.  He  thus  disclaims  any  notion  of
merit  on  his  part.  That  enabled  me  (^v9iira-
fjLt&travri).  This  verb  occurs  once  in  the
Acts  (ix.  22);  three  times  in  St  Planl's
other  Epistles  (Bom.  iv.  20;  Kph.  vi.  10;
Phil.  iv.  13);  three  times  in  the  pastoral
Epibtlcs  (here ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1  and  iv.  17) ;  and
Heb.  xi.  34.  It  denotes  the  giving  that
peculiar  power  which  was  tho  gift  of  the
Holy  (>'ho8t,  and  which  was  necessary  for
tho  work  of  an  apostle  to  enable  him  to  bear
witness  to  Christ  in  tho  face  of  an  adverse
world.  This  power  (Bvycmis)  Christ  pro-
misfd  to  his  apostles  before  his  ascension
(Acts  i.  8).  St  Paul  received  it  after  his
conversion  (Acts  ix.  22).  He  continued  to
hold  it  throughout  his  apostleship  (Phil.  iv.
13) ;  he  enjoyed  it  especiully  at  the  approach
of  his  martyrdom  (2  Tim.  iv.  17).  It  oom-
prised  strength  of  faith,  strength  to  testify
and  to  preach,  strength  to  endure  and  suffer.
St.  Paul's  whole  course  is  tho  best  illos-
tration  of  the  nature  of  tho  S^vafus  which
Christ  gave  him  (see  in  Eph.  iii  6  the  x^<^
tho    SioKovio,  and  the  S^f^oftti  all  brought


THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.


together  a»  bcre).  Apprintii^  bm  to  Ua
NrriM.  The  A.T.,  puUiag  nu  into  the
Mutifry,  is  k  better  rendering,  beouae  "  the
miniatry  "  exacH;  eipreuea  tba  paiticulor
kind  of  lerrico  to  nhkh  the  Lord  appointed
hira  (fiee  the  cioctlj  parallel  pauage,  Bph.
iiL  7).  Tlie  abaoace  of  the  artiole  u  unim-
portaiit  (Bum.  lii.  7 ;  1  Ckir,  ivi.  15 ;  2  Tim,
IT.  11).  (For  the  general  phiase.  oomp.
Acta  IS.  28 ;  1  Cor  lii.  28 ;  or,  itill  mure
«Kactl;  u  regards  the  gramnur,  1  Thesa.

T.9.)

Ver.  -13.— Though  loot  for  who  uai,  A.T.
«Dd  T.B.:  hotcitil  for  but,  A.V.  A  blu-
phemtr  (SAu-f rfia*) :  applied,  w  here,  to
persoiu,  only  in  2  Tiiu.  iiL  iu;  applied  to
wonU,AcUvi.ll,13(T.R.).  TboTtsrb^Xaa-
■^miiir,  and  Iho  lubatuntive  ;BAair^;Ja,  are
very  cammna,  both  ia  the  aeuae  at  "bla>-
pbeniing  "  and  of  "  miling  "  or  "  leviling."
St  Paul  wae  a  bloaphomer  beoauen  ho  spoke
kgsinst  the  Name  of  Jegiu,  which  he  had
■inoediacovereilwaaaNamrabuveall  namea.
A  penaontor  (9uijm)i):  only  here;  but  the
Terb  Iimjh;*  is  applied  to  St.  Paul  r»-
peatedly  (Acts  ii.  i,5;  xiii.  4;  iiri.  11,
-etc.),  and  the  SIiIk7tii  here  refer*  pouibly
to  that  very  oarrntiife,  Injnrlona  {iBpiarfit) ;
only  here  aud  Roni,  i.  30,  where  it  is  ren-
dered "iuBoleut,"  B.V,  The  verb  ipplittr,
both  in  the  New  Toatamont  and  in  cliuaioal
Greek,  mt-ans  to  "treat  oi  lue  othera  de-
■pitvfiilly,"  "to  oDtrsge  and  ineult"  them,
not  without  personal  violence  (Matt  xxii.
6;  Lulie  xriii.  32;  Acta  xiv.  5;  1  Theas.
iL  2).  Tho  iBpuni,  is  ouo  who  bo  ttvati
nthcra.  St.  Paul  was  (limking  of  hi*  own
-conduct  toward  thu  Christians,  whom  ho  not
only  roTilt-d,  but  bandied  roughly  and  oast
into  piiaiin  (Atta  viiL  3;  ii.  1;  iiiL  19).
There  ia  no  English  word  nhich  exacUy
fendera  i0fiirriii.

Ter.  14. — Abounded  exixedingly  for  mu
^xeeeiting  aliuruiant,  A.V.  Abonnded  az-
Medingly  {liwpiw\tivairf) ;  only  here  in  tho
New  Testament  or  elsewhere  uicopt  "in
Fsaltcrio  SatnmoTiis  Pa.  v.  19,  ot  in  fnigniento
Hermteap.  Fubricium  Bibl.OrffiO.,  lib.  v.  cap.
l''(Schleusuer).  But  tlio  word  ia  thoroughly
Fsuline  (comp.  Owipaipeiiai,  frripoufiiw,  iaip-
MaA^  iiriii€iirilrm,  dw,(Fw,piiririia,  vVtp-
uf&a,  and  other  compounda  with  6wip,  It
i*  further  remarkable,  ns  regarda  hrJp  itself,
that  of  the  Itundred  and  fifty-eight  times  (or
thereaboutdj  that  it  ooours  in  the  New  Tea-
tament,  one  hundred  and  aii  are  in  6L  Paul's
Epiidlea,  and  twelve  in  the  Epistle  to  the
HcbrewB,  and  only  forty  in  all  tho  other
bouka.  With  bith  and  love,  etc.  The
nace  benl^wed  upon  St.  Paul  at  end  after
hia  coDTersiOD  showed  itself  in  Iho  wonder-
ful faitli  and  love  toward  Jcaiia  Christ,  whom
he  had  prcviooaly  disbelieved  in  and  re-
viled, which  acoompanied  that  grace  Oiani)


and  waa  the  fruit  of  it,  and  charaoterized
hiB  whole  after-life.

Ver.  \5.~Fai0iful  is  the  taytag  for  tAis
ii  a  faithful  laying,  A.V.  7aithfDl  ii  tha
paying  (xunii  i  Kiyot).  This  formula  la  pe-
onliar  lo  the  poatonil  Epistlts  (ch.  iii,  1 ;  it.
9 :  2  Tim.  il  [  I ;  Titus  iii.  8),  and  seetna  to
indioate  that  thi>re  were  a  number  of  pithy
OBfinga,  maxims,  portions  of  hymns  or  of
catpohetical  teBchiug,  current  in  the  Church,
and  posaiMy  originating  in  the  iaspirud  aay-
ings  of  tho  Church  prophets,  to  which  the
apnatle  appeals,  and  to  which  he  gives  his
aanction.  Tlie  one  appoalud  to  horo  would
bo  simply,  "  Jesus  Christ  corno  into  the  world
to  save  ainners."  This,  St.  Paul  adds,  ia
worthy  of  all  acoeptation — -by  all,  and  with-
out any  reserve.  AoMptatioiL  (iirsSixQi):
only  here  and  oh.  iv.  9,  in  connection  with
tho  same  formula.  The  verb  i,w6iixiiiiMi
occura  in  Luke  viiL  40 ;  Acle  iL  41 ;  xv.  4 ;
iviiL  29;  iiiv.  3;  xiviii.  30.  It  onntaina
the  idea  of  a  elad,  willing  acceptaiioe  (see
note  on  Acta  ii.  41).  So  doubtleu  iviisx^
alao  meana  "  hearty  reception."  I  am  ehlaf ;
in  reapectof  hia  having  beea''abl>iaphemeT,
a  persecutor,  and  injurious."  That  great
ain  was  indeed  freely  forgiven  by  Uoirs
grace,  but  it  could  never  be  forgotten  bj
him  who  had  been  guilty  of  it.  "  Manet
altl  meote  repostuni     (comp.  Eph.  iiL  8).

Ver.  16.— .^s  chUf  for  firit,  A.V. ;  miqhl
Jews  ChriU  for  Jaiu  Chnit  might,  A.V. ;
hi*  hng-nifftring  for  loag-tajfring,  A.V, ;  an
»manpU  of  for  a  pal'tern  to,  A.V. ;  unto
eternal  life  for  to  life  everlattiitg,  A.V.
That  in  ma  U  ehief ;  rather,  as  A.V.,  fint;
Le.  both  in  order  of  time,  and  in  respeet
also  of  the  greatneaa  of  the  ain  forgiven.
Show  forth  {irStitnrai ;  aee  2  Tim.  iv.  It.
note).  All  hia  long-anffering ;  more  pro-
perly, as  Alford,  (jta  teholelong-iuffering;
I.e.  the  entirety  of  lonn-suffLTing— all  that
was  possible,  every  kind  and  degree  of  long-
auCfering.  'O  wis  with  the  substantive
denotes  the  whole  of  a  thing:  rir  wirra
Xpirof,  "thowbolo  time"  (Acta  xi.  18);
6ntyi^ai,  "  the  whole  Law"  (Qal.  v.  14).
Bo  in  the  two  examples  from  Polybiua,  vqt
winii  i^B-riarias  and  t^i  »ii*i]i  irottlat,
"  the  utmost  unreoannableneaa,"  and  "  the
utmost  Btrangeneas,"  the  eODstnittion  ia
exactly  tbo  same.  long-anffering  (jAoxpaSit-
Hia) ;  more  literally,  longaHtmUy ,-  very  fra-
qaeot  both  in  tho  New  Tcsb-mont  and  ia
ihe  LXX.  The  adjeetiro  iuuipA9»iint
(LXX.)  ia  a  tranahition  of  the  Hebrew  -nM
EPOK,  "  hmg,"  or  "  slow  to  anger,"  to  whlo£
the  oppoaite  ia  crGi«  -nt,'5,  JfMufiai  (LXX.),
"abort  to  anger,"  i.e.  hasty,  paaaionate.
The  verb  nacpBtaii-iit  alao  occura  frequently,
bnih  in  the  New  Testament  and  in  the
LXX.:  ■THkyi.m  juwM"*"!.  "Charity  a.if-
fereth  loug "  (1  Cor.  xiiL  4).     Tor  an  an-


6


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[coLX.!— 20L


MmpU  (wphs  tSvoT^rwo'iv).  The  word  onlj
oootin  iD  the  New  Testament  here  And  2
Tim.  L  12 ;  but  both  it  ami  the  verb  ^ro-
rvw6m  are  good  claBsical  worde.  The  mean-
ing of  0w6Hwmiris  is  **  a  sketch  "  or  *«  oatlin^'*
and  henee^'a  pattern."  This  pattern  is
spoken  of  as  being  the  property  of,  being  for
tne  use  of,  them  which  should  hereafter
believe.  Just  as  the  workman  looks  at  his
plim,  or  outline,  by  which  he  is  to  work,  so
those  future  believers  would  see  in  Christ's
dealings  with  St  Paul  the  exact  pattern  of
the  long-suffering  which  they  mignt  expect
Ibr  themselves.  Others  take  bwor^wmvis  in
the  sense  of  **  instruction,"  but  this  sense
cannot  be  made  good.  BeUsre  on  him  nato
eternal  Ufe.  These  words  hang  together.
The  particular  force  of  wiar96€tp  /v*  aOrf,
^  found  in  the  New  Testament  only  here
and  Bom.  ix.  83;  x.  11 ;  and  1  Pet  ii.  6"
(Huthcr) — as  distinguished  from  the  other
constructions  of  wiar^Cfip ' — is  to  **  rest,**
**  lean  on  "  (Ellicott).  St  Paul  thus  inoi-
dentally  afflrros  that  his  own  faith  rested
open  (Jesus  Christ  in  the  full  psauranoe  of
attaining  to  eternal  life  (see  oh.  vL  12 ;  2
Tim.  i.  1,  2).

Ver.  17. — IncorrupiibU  for  immortal^  A.V. ;
only  God  for  only  wise  God^  A.y.  and  T.B.
The  Xing  etemsl  The  Greek  has  the  un-
usual phrase, T^ $afftKuruv  oic^i^wv,** the  king
of  the  worlds  or  ages,"  which  isnot  found  else-
where in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  found
twice  in  the  LXX.—Tobit  xiii.  6  and  10—
and  in  the  Liturgy  of  8t.  James,  in  the  c^x^
T^f  iifdp^tMs  and  elsewhere.  The  similar
phrase,  6  Bfhs  r&p  aldywv,  is  also  found  in
Eoclus.  xxxvi.  17.  In  all  these  passages  it
is  quite  clear  that  the  phrase  is  equivalent
to  Myios,  Eternal,  as  a  title  of  the  Lord,  as
in  Rom.  xvi.  26.  The  genitive  rwy  aitltvwif
is  qualitative.  In  Tobit  xiii.  6  he  is  **  the
Lord  of  righteousness,"  t.e.  the  righteous
Lord ;  and  *^  the  King  of  the  ages,"  i.e.  of
eternity,  i.e.  **  the  eternal  King,"  the  King
through  all  the  ages.  And  in  ver.  10  it  is
said,  **  Bloss  the  eternal  King,"  who,  it
follows,  will,  as  King,  ^  love  the  miserable
cif  trcUraf  ras  ytvias  tov  cumvos;"  and  then  it
follows,  in  ver.  12,**  They  that  love  thee  shall
be  blessed  « 15  rbv  alwvay*  and  agiiin  in  ver.  18,
'^  Bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  exalted  Jerusalem
clf  ir^rrar  rovs  alwvas; "  and  the  same  concep-
tion is  in  the  phrase,  oh  tl  6  Sths  rUp  oi<a¥ot¥,
Satan,  on  the  other  hand,  is  6  dtht  rov
aiuyos  roirov,  "  the  god  of  this  world  "  (com-
pare such  passages  as  Ps.  cii.  24 ;  civ.  81 ;
cv.  8 ;  cxxxv.  13 ;  cxlv.  13 ;  and  the  doxo-
logy  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  •*  Thine  is  the
kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  tis
robs  aiwrat ").  It  seems  to  be,  therefore,  quite

*  Uiffrtvfaf  a^T^,  iw  avrtft  •«»  cMirrfr,  and
4w*  a^0ffi


certain  that  St  Paul  is  here  using  a  &iiuliar
Jewish  phrase  for  ^  eternal "  whioh  has  n«>>
thing  whatever  to  do  with  Onoetio  maim,
Perlutpe  in  the  use  of  the  phrase,  Bmrikth
Twr  olAm^w^  we  may  trace  a  contrast  pasring
through  the  writer^s  mind  between  the
short-lived  power  of  that  hateful  iSaviXf^
Nero,  by  whom  his  life  would  soon  be  takm
away,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  eternal  King
(comp.ch.vi.  15, 16).  Xnoorraptlble  (i^tfi^tv);
applied  to  God  also  in  Bom.  L  23,  where,  as
here, it  means  ** immortal"  (4 /i^yos  %x**^  ^^^
yoffUu^t  ch.  vL  16),  not  subject  to  the  oomip-
tion  of  death,  just  as  i/pBaptria  is  coupled  with
•'lire"  (2 Tim.  1 10)  and  opposed  to  *" death"
80  on  we  other  hand,  fjfo^  means  **  death."
^9apr^s,,** perishable."  Elsewhere  it  isapplied
to  a  eroton,  to  the  rai ssd  dead,  to  the  inherit
anee  of  the  saints,  to  the  seed  of  the  new
birtii,  to  the  avpard  of  a  holy  heart,  which
no  mst  or  moth  corrupts  (1  (jor.  ix.  25 ;  zr.
52 ;  1  Pet  i.  4, 23 ;  iii.  4).  Inyiaihle  Oopir^):
as  OoL  L  15 ;  Heb.  xL  27.  (See  also  B4^
L  20 ;  and  comp.  oh.  vi.  16,  for  the  senaCi)
The  word  is  used  by  Philo  of  God,  and  oc
the  Word.  Here  it  is  especially  predicated
of  God  the  Father,  according  to  what  our
Lord  says  (John  i.  18;  vi  46;  xir.  9);
though  some  of  the  Fathers,  Nicene  and  port-
Nicene,  predicate  it  also  of  the  Wora  or
Second  Person  (Hilary,  Ghrysostom,  etc.).
But  in  Scripture  the  Son  is  spoken  of  as  tiie
Manifestation,  the  Image  (tiicAw  and  XV^
Hip)  of  the  Father,  through  whom  the  Father
is  seen  and  known;  d6paTos^  therefore,  applies
to  the  Father  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  note
on  Col.  i.  15).  The  only  God.  The  best
manuscripts  omit  ao^if^  which  seems  to  have
crept  in  here  from  Rom.  xvL  26.  The  exact
construction  is,  **  To  the  eternal  King,  the
Immortal,  the  Invisible,  the  only  God  [or,
•  who  alone  is  God '],  be  honour,"  etc.  Be
honour  and  glory.  A  little  varied  from  St
Paul's  usual  doxologies  (see  Rom.  xL  36 ;
xvL  27 ;  Gal.  i  5 ;  Eph.  iii.  21 ;  and  ch.  vL
16,  where  96^a  stanus  aluue,  aud  has  the
article — Ellicott  on  Gal.  i.  5).  In  Rom.  iL
10  ^6^a  and  ri^ii  are  coupled  tog;ethcr,  but
applied  to  man.  This  interposition  of  a
doxolugy  is  quite  in  St  Paul's  manner.

Ver.  18. — My  child  for  son,  A.  V. ;  by  them
thou  mayeU  for  thou  by  them  mighteit,  A.Y. ;
the  good  fur  a  qood,  A.V.  This  charge.  The
apostle  now  picks  up  the  thread  which  he
had  dropped  at  ver.  4,  and  solemnly  com-
mits to  Timothy  the  episcopal  care  of  the
Ephesian  Church,  for  whu-h  he  had  bid
him  stop  at  Ephesus.  Omitting  ti^e  long
digrt'ssion  in  vers.  5 — 17,  the  sense  runs
clearly  thus:  **As  1  besought  thee  tetany  at
Ephesus  in  order  that  thou  mightest  charge
some  not  to  teach  a  different  doctrine,  so  now
do  I  place  this  charge  in  thy  hands,  accords
ing  to  the  prophecies  which  points  to  thee,


CH.  1. 1—20.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


that  thou  mayest  war  the  good  warfare  ac-
cording to  the  tenor  of  theua/*  He  thus  adds
that  he  entrusted  thU  charge  to  Timothy,  not
mero  motu^  but  accunling  to  direct  indications
of  Ihe  Holy  Ghost,  through  the  prophets  of
the  Church,  which  pointed  out  Timothy  as
the  person  who  was  to  war  that  good  war-
fare. The  words,  tya  <rrpar(6rj  iv  aCrcus  T^r
ica\^¥  arpartiavy  might  possibly  depend  upon
rh,i  irpoayovaai   4irl  <rc,  meaning  that  those

?rophecies  had  this  end  in  pointing  to
'imothy,  viz.  that  he  might  war  the  good
warfare,  that  he  might  be  placed  iu  the
difficult  post  of  (TTpaT'ny6s,  and  the  iu  avraTs
follows  rather  more  naturally  in  this  case.
But  it  is,  perhaps,  better  to  take  them  as
dependent  upon  vaoaTidtfiai.  By  them  (iu  au'
reus).  Here  iu  may  be  either  the  caumefficiena,
indicating  that  by  the  influence  of  these  pro-
phecies Timothy  would  war  the  good  war-
fere,  or  be  equivalent  to  koto,  "according
to  "  (see  Schleusner*8  *  Lexicon  ').

Ver.  19. — Thruit  from  them  for  put  atDay,
A.V. ;  made  shipicreck  concerning  the  faith
for  concerning  faith  have  made  ahipioreckj
A.y.  Throat  from  them.  The  addition
'*  from  them  "  is  meant  to  give  the  force  of  the
middle  Toice  as  in  Acts  vii.  39,  A.V.  The
▼erb  dntaOofiai  occurs  Acts  vii.  27,  39 ;  Rom.
zi.  1,  2.  It  is  a  strong  expression,  implying
here  the  wilful  resistance  to  the  voice  of
conscience.  The  form  &irwd^w,  -^o/xat  is  found.
Acts  xiii.  46,  and  frequently  in  the  LXX.
Which  (9iu)  applies  to  the  good  conscience
only.  Hence  the  important  lesson  that
deviations  from  the  true  faith  are  preceded
by  violations  of  the  conscience.  The  surest
way  to  maintain  a  pure  faith  is  to  maintain
a  good  and  tender  conscience  (comp.  ch.
ii.  9;  John  vii.  17).  The  faith.  It  is  by
no  means  certain  that  rj  ma-Tts  hero  means
"the  faith"  rather  than  ** faith"  (subjec-


tive).  Both  the  grammar  and  the  sense
equally  admit  the  rendering  '•  faith,"  refer-
ring to  the  preceding  wltrns.  (For  the  phrase,
irepl  r^u  irlariu,  "  with  respect  to,"  comp.
ch.  vi.  4;  2  Tim.  ii.  18 ;  Titus  ii.  7.)

Ver.  20. — Delivered  for  have  delivered,
A.V. ;  might  be  taught  for  may  learnj  A.V.
HymensBUs;  probably  the  same  as  is  men-
tioned 2  Tim.  ii.  17,  18,  as  holding  heretical
doctrine  concerning  the  resurrection,  and
overthrowing  the  faith  of  some.  It  is  an
uncommon  name,  though  borne  by  a  Bishop
of  Alexandria  in  th«)  ss^cond  century,  and
by  a  Bishop  of  Jerusalem  in  the  third.
Alexander;  doubtless  the  same  as  **  Alex-
ander the  coppersmith"  of  2  Tim.  iv.  14.
I  delivered  onto  Satan.  The  passages  in
Scripture  which  throw  light  on  this  difficult
phrase  are,  chiefly,  the  following :  the  almost
identical  pa^isage,  1  Oor.  v.  5 ;  Job  i.  12 ;
ii.  6,  7 ;  Luke  xiii.  16 ;  Acts  v.  5, 10 ;  x.  88 ;
xiii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  30;  2  Oor.  xii.  7;  and
Heb.  ii.  14.  Putting  these  together,  it  ap-
pears that  sickness  and  bodily  infirmity
and  death  are,  within  certain  limits,  in  tho
power  of  Satan  to  inflict.  And  that  the
apostles  were  able,  on  fitting  occasions,  to
hand  over  peccant  members  of  the  Church
to  this  power  of  Satan,  that  by  such  disci-
pline **  the  spirit  might  be  saved."  In  the
case  of  Hymenseus  and  Alexander  (as  in  that
of  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth),  the
punishment  incident  on  this  delivery  to
Satan  would  appear  to  have  been  short  of
death,  but  in  the  case  of  the  two  first  not  to
have  had  the  effect  of  bringing  them  to  a
true  repentance.  Might  be  taught  (trouSev-
dwri);  viz.  by  correction  and  punishment,
as  children  are  taught  (Heb.  xii  6—8).
The  metaphor  in  the  word  KoKapli^iM  (2  Cor.
xii.  7)  is  similar.


HOMILETICS.

Vera.  1,  2, 19,  20. — Church  government,  St.  Paul  was  about  to  commit  extensive
powers  in  the  Church  to  Timothy.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  he  should  define
clearly  the  source  of  his  own  authority.  This  he  does  very  distinctly.  He  was  an
apostle  according  to  the  commandment  of  (rod  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hence
his  power  to  delegate  authority  to  his  son  Timothy,  and  hence  the  duty  of  the  Church
to  submit  to  Timothy's  ruling.  Among  the  powers  committed  to  Timothy  was  that  of
ordaining  bishops  and  deacons  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  (ch.  iiL  and  v.  22,  compared
with  2  Tim.  ii.  2),  which  seems  to  give  us  very  clearly  the  doctrine  of  apostolical
succession.  For  it  should  be  observed  that  this  succession  is  alone  consistent  with  what
St.  Paul  here  writes.  If  the  power  to  appoint  and  ordain  their  ministers  had  been
vested  by  Christ's  ordinance  in  the  congregation,  St.  Paul  would  have  been  violating
the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  Church  by  sending  Timothy  to  do  that  which  really
belonged  to  the  Ephesian  congregation  to  do.  But  the  theory  that  the  government  of
the  Church  is  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  received  their  commission  by  succession
from  the  apostles  is  in  exact  accord  with  what  St.  Paul  here  writes  to  Timothy.


8  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TmOTHT.  [cH.  L 1-20.

Vera.  3 — 11,  19,  20.—  The  heretic.  We  have  in  these  veraee  some  of  the  chano-
tcrifltics  of  heresy  very  graphically  portrayed.  First,  there  is  the  teaching  of  other  or
different  doctrine  from  that  which  they  had  received.  The  Fathers  always  lay  stress
upon  noveltv  as  characteristic  of  heresy,  while  it  was  characteristic  of  the  Church  to
teach  the  old  truths  which  had  hcen  handed  down  to  them  hy  those  who  went  hefore
them.  And  they  are  right.  "  I  delivered  unto  you  that  which  I  also  received,"  is  the
spirit  of  sound  teaching.  To  invent  new  doctrines,  and  to  preach  things  of  <me'8  own
cnoosing,  is  the  npirit  of  heresy.  Then,  again,  it  is  characteristic  of  heresy  to  start
curious  questions,  not  with  a  view  to  real  edification  in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  hat
for  the  sake  of  displaying  suhtlety  in  disputing,  and  keemng  up  controversy  and  a  wtr
of  words,  and  factious  partisanship.  The  unity  of  the  Cburch,  and  loving  agreement
amongst  the  hrethren,  is  the  last  thing  that  heretics  tlunk  of.  Puffed  up  with  self-
importance,  desirous  of  heing  leaders,  despising  others,  treating  with  contempt  all  who
will  not  follow  them,  they  turn  the  Church  into  a  bear-garden,  and  substitute  vsin
jangling  for  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness.  Especiallv  is  arrogance  combined  with
ignorance  a  leading  feature  in  the  heretic ;  and  in  his  method  of  handling  Divine  troth
he  makes  a  display  of  both.  Another  feature  may  be  noted,  as  set  forth  in  ver.  19,  vii.
the  divorce  between  conscience  and  faith.  The  heretic  handles  the  things  of  God  as
matter  for  mere  intellectual  contests,  apart  from  reverence  and  godly  fear.  He  disputes
about  God  and  about  Christ,  and  thinks  it  imimportant  whether  his  own  heart  is  puie
or  impure.  He  walks  in  open  disobedience  to  God's  commandments,  and  yet  thinks
himself  competent  to  judge  of  God's  nature  and  attriiiutes.  Ho  darkens  his  own  soul
by  sin,  and  yet  dares  to  approach  the  mystery  of  godliness.  Lastly,  it  is  characteristic
of  the  heretic  that  ho  rarely,  if  ever,  repents,  and  returns  to  the  faith  which  he  denied.
Hymenacus  and  Alexander,  in  spite  of  tne  godly  discipline  ministered  to  them  fw  their
correction,  are  still  found  subverting  the  faith  of  many,  and  withstanding  the  apostle
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  tho  latest  mention  of  them.  They  wore  in  this  respect  like  their
brethren  in  heresv,  Simon  Magus,  Cerinthus,  Marcion,  Valentinus,  Montanus,  Manes,
Anus,  Socinus,  and  many  more.  The  shipwreck  of  faith  is,  for  the  most  part,  total  and
irremediable.

Vers.  12 — 18. — 77ie  apostle.  The  character  of  the  apostle  and  true  minister  of  the
gospel  stands  out  here  in  striking  and  glorious  contrast  with  that  of  tho  heretic  Called
by  the  grace  of  God  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  not  self-appointed ;  enabled  by  the  grace
of  GKxl,  not  trusting  in  his  own  cleverness ;  seeking  the  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation
of  souls,  not  aiming  at  his  own  self-exaltation ; — the  apostle  and  minister  of  Christ  moves
altogether  in  a  diti'erent  plane  from  the  heretical  leader.  A  humble  sense  of  his  own
imwortbincss,  instead  of  arrogant  self-conceit ;  a  lively  apprehension  of  the  mercy  and
love  of  God  to  his  own  soul,  instead  of  a  self-sufficient  reliance  upon  his  own  intellect;  a
faithful  delivery  of  the  truth  committed  to  him,  instead  of  a  presumptuous  fabrication
of  new  doctrines ;  and  a  glowing  faith  and  love,  with  a  growing  apprehension  of  the  glory
of  tho  central  truths  of  the  gospel.  Instead  of  a  vain  reaching  after  new  things,  and  an
itching  for  exciting  fables, — mark  off  the  true  servant  of  Christ  from  the  pretentious
heretic  by  unmistakable  distinctions.  Well  were  it  for  the  Church  if  these  charac-
teristics of  the  true  bishop  of  souls  were  more  distinctly  visible  in  all  her  ministers.
Questions,  and  strifes  of  words,  and  fables,  and  speculations,  which  tend  to  division  more
than  to  imity,  may  bo  found  in  the  teaching  and  writing  of  professing  Churchmen,  as
well  as  in  those  of  avowed  heretics.  Let  '*  the  faithful  saying  "  hold  its  supreme  place
in  the  heart  and  in  the  teaching  of  tlio  Churches  ministers,  and  the  unity  as  well  as  the
holiness  of  the  Church  will  be  proportionately  increased.  Its  streugth  to  resist  heresy
will  bo  increased  in  the  same  degree.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Apostolic  address  and  greeting.  As  this  Epistle  was  designed  to  bear
an  oflicial  character,  it  was  necessary  that  its  address  should  set  forth  the  authority
under  which  tho  apostlo  gave  his  instructions  concerning  Church  order  and  Christian
work.


cn.i.  1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  9

L  The  apostle's  authority.  "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  according  to  the
commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  our  Hope."  The  apostle-
fthip  was  his,  not  merely  because  he  was  called  to  it  ^om.  L  1),  or  destined  to  it  by  the
will  of  God  (1  Cor.  i.  1),  but  according  to  express  Divine  commandment.  1.  It  was
the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  evidently  in  allusion  to  the  command  of  the
Spirit  at  Antioch,  "  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have
appointed  them  "  (Acts  xiii.  2),  but  more  distinctly  to  his  earlier  Ciill  (Acts  xxvi.  16),
as  **  a  vessel  of  election  "  (Acts  ix.  15),  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.  As
the  things  of  the  Father  are  the  Son's,  so  the  things  of  the  Son  are  the  Spirit's.  Thus
God — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost — gave  him  his  original  appointment.  Thus  the
salvation  would  be  seen  to  be  of  God's  purpose  and  agency ;  for  he  is  "  God  our  Saviour."
2.  It  was  also  the  commandment  of  Christ  Jtsus,  our  Hope.  Therefore  his  ordinary
title  is  '*  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  aged  apostle,  in  the  near  prospect  of  death,
dwells  on  the  thought  of  Christ  as  his  one  blessed  hope.  He  is  our  Hope  (1)  as  its
Author ;  (2)  as  its  Object ;  (3)  as  its  Revealer ;  (4)  as  its  Procurer ;  (5)  but,  above  all,
AS  its  Sutetance  and  Foundation.    He  is  our  very  "  Hope  of  glory  "  rCol.  i.  27).

IL  The  apostle's  greeting.  "  To  Timothy,  my  true  child  in  the  faith."  1.  Hi$
early  life,  Timothy  was  a  native  of  Lycaonia  in  Asia  Minor,  probably  of  Lystra,
one  of  its  towns.  His  father  was  a  pagan,  his  mother  a  pious  Jewess,  named  Eunice,
who  trained  him  early  in  the  principles  of  true  religion.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the
apostle's  more  intimate  companions  were  Gentiles,  or  with  Gentile  blood  in  their  veins —
Timothy,  Titus,  Luke,  and  even  Demas.  2.  His  relationship  to  the  ApusUe  Paul,
(V)  He  was  converted  by  the  apostle.  (2)  He  was  associated  with  the  apostle  during
a  longer  range  of  time  than  any  other  aisciple.  (3)  He  was  an  interesting  disciple  of
the  Lord,  (a)  There  was  great  personal  affection  between  Timothy  and  Paul.  (6)  There
was  "  no  one  like  minded  "  with  Timothy  who  could  be  brought  to  take  care  of  individual
Churches,  (c)  Timothy  was  a  constant  organ  of  personal  communication  between  the
apostle  and  individual  Churches,  (d)  He  seems  to  have  been  of  a  soft  and,  perhaps,
tunid  temperament,  (e)  He  was  very  abstemious  in  his  habits  (ch.  v.  23).  3.  The  salu-
tation, "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."
Q.)  The  blessings  invoked  upon  Timothy,  (a)  Grace — a  fresh  discovery  of  Divine  favour,
an  increase  of  grace,  a  fuller  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  (U)  Mercy — a  fresh
application  of  the  pardoning  mercy  of  Gk)d  in  Christ.  It  occurs  only  here  and  in  the
Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  —suggested,  perhaps,  by  the  nearness  of  his  own  death,  and
the  increasing  difficulties  of  his  last  days;  for  he  hopes  that  Timothy  may  share  in  the
mercy  he  has  sought  for  himself,  (c)  Peace — peace  of  conscience  through  the  blood
of  Christ,  so  necessary  "  to  keep  heart  and  mind  "  in  the  midst  of  the  perturbations  and
■distractions  of  his  service  at  Ephesus.  (2)  The  Source  of  these  blessings.  They  spring
alike  from  the  Father  and  the  Son — a  proof  of  the  coequal  Godhead  of  the  Son ;  for  they
Are  strictly  Divine  gifts. — T.  C.

Vera.  3,  4. —  Tlie  object  of  Timothy's  continued  sojourn  at  Ephesus,    I.  Consider  thi

TENDER  care  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  TAKES  OF  THE  EPHESIAN  ChURCH.      **  As  I  bcSOUght

thee  to  abid*'  still  at  Ephesus,  when  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  so  do  I  beseech  thee  now
that  thou  charge  some  that  they  teach  no  other  doctrine."  As  Timothy  was  with  the
Apostle  in  his  first  journey  through  Macedonia  (Acts  xvL  3, 12 ;  xx.  3,  4),  this  must
refer  to  a  later  journey,  occurring  after  the  tirst  imprisonment  at  Rome.  1.  Mark  the
affectionate  style  of  his  culdress—**  I  besought  thee ; "  whereas  to  Titus  he  said,  "  I  gave
tJbeo  command"  (Titus  i.  5).  Timothy  received  no  authoritative  injunction,  but  merely
A  tender  request  that  he  would  prolong  his  stay  so  as  to  check  the  waywardness  of  false
teachers  who  had  risen  to  mar  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  2.  Mark  the  tendency  of
the  purest  Churches  to  be  spoiled  by  false  doctrine.  The  apostle  had  foretold  the  rise
of  a  separatist  party  when  he  was  addressing  the  elders  of  Ephesus  at  Miletus  (Acts
XX.  29,  30).  They  may  have  been  few — "  some ; "  but  if  they  were  like  **  the  grievous
wolves "  of  the  prediction,  they  might  succeed  in  "  drawing  away  disciples  after  them,
fipeaking  perverse  things."

II.  The  charge  which  the  apostle  gives  to  be  addressed  to  the  false  teachers*
1.  It  was  a  charge  that  they  should  teach  no  doctnne  different  from  the  gospd.  "That
4hey  teach  no  other  doctrine."    (1)  This  implied  that  the  apostle's  doctrine  was  the  true


10  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  1. 1— 2a

standAid  of  tenchiDg  by  which  all  other  teaching  was  to  be  judged.  (2)  There  may  have
been  no  doctrinal  heresy  at  Ephesus ;  but  the  teaching,  being  of  a  morbid,  imedifying,
speculative  character,  would  tend  to  reduce  the  warmth  of  ** uie  Brst  love"  of  Ephesian
Hiints,  if  not  to  lead  to  serious  departures  from  the  faith.  (3)  Ministers  must  take
hpecial  care  that  no  false  doctrines  be  broached  in  the  Church  of  Qod.  2.  It  woi  a
charye  that  the  errorists  should  give  no  heed  to  fdblee  and  genealoffies,  (1)  Fables.
Evidently  rabbinical  fftbles  and  fabrications  in  the  regions  of  history  and  doctrine.  The
1'almud  is  full  of  them.  (2)  Endless  genealogies.  The  genealogies  of  the  Pentateuch
were  actually  made  the  foimdation  of  allegorical  interpretations  by  Jews  like  Philo,  who
largely  intluenced  their  coimtrymen.  There  may  have  been  a  disposition  likewise^
on  the  part  of  Jews,  to  establish  their  genealogical  connection  with  Abraham,  as  if  the
bond  of  a  physical  relationship  could  add  strength  to  that  firmer  bond  which  allies  all
to  Abraham,  whether  they  are  Jews  or  Gkntiles,  who  believe  in  Christ  (GraL  iiL  29).
3.  Consider  the  ground  upon  which  the  apostle  condemns  this  injurious  teaching,  **  Inas-
much as  they  minister  questions,  rather  than  the  dispensation  of  God  which  is  in
faith."  (1)  The  teaching  was  unprofitably  disputatious.  It  ministered  questions  not
easily  answered,  and  which,  if  aaswered,  had  no  practical  bearing  upon  Christian  ILb.
(2)  It  did  not  tend  to  promote  the  scheme  of  salvation  as  set  forth  by  the  apostles-*
"  the  dihpensation  of  Grod  which  is  in  faith."  (a)  God*s  dispensation  is  simply  his
method  of  salvation,  as  unfolded  in  the  gospel  TEph.  L  10),  with  which  the  Apostle
Paul  was  specially  entrusted  (1  Cor.  iv.  1).  (6)  'rhis  dispensation  has  its  principle  in
faith ;  unlike  the  fables  and  genealogies,  which  might  exercise  the  mind  or  the  imagina-
tion, but  not  the  heart.  Faith  is  the  sphere  of  action  upon  which  the  dispensation
turns.  (3)  The  apostle's  anxiety  to  check  this  false  teaching  at  Ephesus  had  evidently
two  grounds,  (a)  This  rabbinical  teaching,  if  allowed  to  enter  into  the  training  ol
Gentile  congregations,  would  cause  Christianity  to  shrink  into  the  narrow  limits  of
a  mere  Jewish  sect.  Judaism  might  thus  become  the  grave  of  Christianity.  (6)  It
would  despiritualizc  the  Christian  Church,  and  rob  it  of  its  **  first  love,"  and  prepare
the  way  to  bitter  apostasy. — T.  C.

Vers.  6—7. — Nature  of  the  charge  connected  with  the  fulfilment  of  Ood*8  dispensa^
tion.  In  resisting  these  false  teachers,  Timothy  must  remember  the  true  scope  and
design  of  the  practical  teaching  which  sets  forth  the  scheme  of  Divine  salvation
for  man.

I.  The  end  op  this  teaching  is  love.  1.  TTie  teaching,  as  opposed  to  "fahUi
and  genealogies^^*  is  of  the  itature  of  a  solemn  charge  or  practiced  exhortation.  It  is
not  (1)  the  Mosaic  Law,  nor  (2)  the  evangelical  law,  but  (3)  sound  doctrine  in  its  pre-
ceptive, and  therefore  practical  form.  2.  The  end  or  aim  of  it  is  love,  "  The  end  of
the  charge  is  love."  It  is  love  to  men,  not  to  Gt)d ;  for  the  charge  stands  in  contrast
with  **  the  questionings  which  minister  strifes "  ^2  Tim.  ii.  23).  Practical  religious
teaching  has  a  tendency  to  unite  men  in  love.  (1)  It  is  hard  to  maintain  brotherly
love  in  presence  of  active  difft^rences  of  doctrine.  (2)  It  is  impossible  to  edify  without
love ;  for  **  love  edifieth  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  1),  as  speculations  and  contentions  cannot.

II.  The  natube  of  the  love  which  is  related  to  this  gospel  charge.  It  is
**  love  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned."  This  is  the
threefold  foundation  on  which  it  rests.  1.  It  springs  out  of  a  pure  heart  as  its  inward
seat.  (1)  Such  a  heart  is  purified  by  faith  (Acts  xv.  9).  (2)  Sprinkled  from  an  evil
conscience  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  (3)  Directed  into  the  love  of  Grod  (2  Thess.  iiL  6).
(4")  Inclined  to  God's  testimonies  (Ps.  cxix.  36).  (5)  Therefore  it  is  a  heart  pure  from
selfish  desires,  ignoble  aims,  and  sinister  policy.  The  love  springing  from  such  a  heart
must  be  "  without  dissimulation ; "  for  it  is  loving  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  2.  It
springs  from  a  good  conscience,  (1)  Such  a  conscience  is  made  good  by  the  sprinl
of  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  reconciles  us  to  God.  Thus  we  have  the  answer  of  a
conscience  before  God.  (2)  It  is  purged  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living
(3)  Therefore  a  man  is  enabled  to  keep  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and
man ;  to  be  true  to  his  convictions  of  truth  and  duty,  and  to  respond  faithfully  to  every
moral  obligation.  Love  springing  from  such  a  source  will  have  its  actings  wisely
determined.  3.  It  springs  from  faith  unfeigned,  (1)  This  is  its  true  origin;  for  '^fBiith
worketh  by  love,"  and  must  therefore  be  in  existence  before  love.    (2)  It  gives  reality


CH.I.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11

and  power  to  love,  because  it  is  itself  not  the  pretence  of  faith,  but  faith  in  real  existence
and  power.  There  was  thus  a  marked  contrast  with  the  life  of  the  false  teachers —
corrupted  in  mind  (ch.  vi.  5),  seared  in  conscience  (ch.  iv.  2),  and  "reprobate  con-
cerning the  faith  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  8).  4.  Mark  the  order  of  grace  here  followed.  In  the
order  of  nature,  faith  must  be  placed  first.  The  apostle  follows  the  order  of  practical
working.  Furthest  down  in  man's  inner  nature  is  the  deep  well  of  a  purified  heart ;
then  the  love,  as  it  comes  forth  into  exercise,  must  be  arrested  on  its  way  by  a  good
conscience,  to  receive  restraint  and  regulation ;  then,  to  sustain  the  vigour  of  love  in
its  continuous  exercise,  there  must  be  faith  unfeigned,  grasping  the  promises  of  God,
and  in  intimate  relation  to  things  not  seen.

III.  The  evil  effects  of  swERviNa  from  this  threefold  foundation  of  love.
"From  wiiich  things  some  having  swerved  have  turned  aside  to  vain  talking."  1.  The
persons  referred  to  had  evidently  belonged,  if  they  did  not  still  belong  to,  the  Church  at
Uphesus,  Timothy  could  not  otherwise  have  exercised  authority  over  them.  2.  The
swerve  was  moral  in  its  natui^,  but  it  would  have  intellectual  effects  of  an  injurious
character.  How  often  does  the  heart  determine  the  bias  of  the  mind !  3.  Its  actual
result  was  a  persistent  habit  of  vain  talking.  It  was  empty  babbling,  without  sense
or  profit — about  mere  trifles,  to  the  neglect  of  weightier  matters  of  doctrine.

IV.  The  presumptuous  ignorance  of  this  party.  "  Desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the
Law,  not  understanding  either  what  they  say,  or  concerning  what  things  they  con-
fidently affirm."  1.  Jt  is  no  new  fact  in  life  to  find  the  least  qualified  the  Tnost
ready  to  undertake  the  task  of  instruction.  They  were  ignorant  and  unlearned  men,
who  were  only  able  to  wrest  the  Scriptures  to  their  own  destruction.  2.  Their
ignorance  was  of  the  most  unquestionable  character;  for  they  neither  imderstood
their  own  averments  or  argmnents,  as  to  their  nature  and  drift,  nor  did  they  compre-
hend the  things  concerning  which  they  were  so  ready  to  give  their  foolish  but  deliberate
judgment.  (1)  It  is  evident  they  did  not  reject  and  disparage  the  Mosaic  Law,  but
rather  exalted  it  by  their  interpretations.  (2)  They  were  not  mere  Jud<usts  such  as
the  apostle  contended  with  in  Galatia  and  elsewhere ;  for  they  are  not  charged  with  any
attempt,  either  to  maintain  the  ancient  customs  or  to  bring  in  legal  observances  out  of
their  proper  place.  (3)  'J  hey  rather,  as  misunderstanding  the  true  nature  and  design  of
the  Law,  tried  to  work  up  a  compost  of  Judaic  and  Gnostic  elements,  which  explained
the  Law  according  to  the  philosophic  views  of  the  East.  Therefore  their  theology  was
marred  by  fanciful  allegorizings  of  the  Law,  which  eliminated  its  moral  element,  and  thus
robbed  it  of  all  power  to  touch  the  heart  or  conscience  of  men.  (4)  The  case  in  hand
illustrates  the  progress  of  error  in  the  Church.  The  incipient  Gnosticism  of  Ephesus
gradually  developed  into  the  more  pronounced  Gnosticism  bo  pointedly  condenmed  by
the  Apostle  John  in  his  First  Epistle. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  nature  and  design  of  the  Law,  "  We  know  that  the  Law  is  good,
if  a  man  use  it  lawfully."  This  passage  contains  the  last  recorded  utterance  of  the
apostle  concerning  the  Law,  and  of  which  he  speaks  with  all  the  conscious  authority  of
an  apostle.  He  asserts  the  goodness  of  the  Law — the  moral  Law,  not  the  ceremonial,
which  was  now  disannulled,  for  the  context  refers  expressly  to  the  precepts  of  the
Decalogue — and  this  goodness  is  manifest  if  you  keep  in  view  the  moral  end  for  which
it  was  given.  Perhaps  the  apostle  may  have  had  in  view  the  lax  moral  practice  of  the
errorists  at  Ephesus.

I.  The  lawful  use  of  the  Law.  Scripture  sets  forth  its  design  in  plain  language.
1.  It  WHS  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ,  (Gal.  iii.  24.)  Thus  "  Christ  is  the  end  of
the  Law  for  righteousness  "  (Rom.  x.  4).  2.  But  it  only  brings  us  to  Christ  as  it  reveals
to  us  our  imperfections  and  our  sins,    "  For  by  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  "

Sum.  iii  20).    It  was,  indeed,  "  added  because  of  transgressions "  (Gal.  iii.  19).    The
w  shows  us  our  sinfulness,  and  drives  us  to  the  Saviour.    It  thus  '*  shuts  us  up  to
faith  "  (Gal.  iii.  23).

II.  The  unlawful  use  of  the  Law.  1.  To  make  it  tJie  occasion  of  endless  logo-
tnachits—oi  vain  talking,  of  "  strivings  about  the  Law.**  2.  To  seek  justification  by
obedience  to  its  precepts,  3.  To  strive  for  the  attainment  of  holiness  by  a  use  of  the
Law,  interpreted,  not  in  its  plain  sense,  but  with  meanings  imposed  upon  it  by
mystical  allegorizings  and  theosophic  culture.     The  errorists  at  Ephesus  were  no


TUE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  1. 1— 20.


Pharisaic  legalists  or  mere  Judaists,  but  persons  ignorant  c^  the  true  nature  and  design
of  tho  Law ;  who  abstained  from  things  lawful  and  good,  and  were  yet  morally  corrupt
(Titus  i.  10 ;  Rev.  ii.  9,  14,  20,  24).

III.    GrOUKD    of    the    DI8T1KCTI0N    BETWEEN    ITS    LAWFUL    AND    UNLAWFUL    USE.

'^  Kuowing  this,  that  the  Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless."  L
The  Law  is  not  madt  for  a  righteous  man.  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  a  righteous
man— that  is,  a  man  right  with  God,  whose  experience  has  made  the  principles  of
righteousnesR  habitual  with  him — has  no  relation  whatever  to  the  Law.  (a)  Because
the  Law  had  relation  to  (a)  Adam  in  innocence,  who  had  the  Law  written  in  his  heart ;
(3)  to  Abraham,  who  was  a  righteous  man ;  (7)  to  David,  who  was  a  righteous  man ;
(8)  and  to  all  the  Old  Testament  saints ;  (c)  it  had  even  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  him-
Sflf,  who  was  **  made  under  the  Law  " — the  very  "  Law  that  was  in  his  heart "  (P*.  xL
8),  of  which  he  was  *'  the  end  for  righteousness  (Rom.  x.  4),  because  he  came  to  fulfil
it  (Matt.  V.  16).  (h)  Because  the  Law  has  relation  to  believers  under  the  Christian
dii>i)eni>ation ;  for  this  very  apostle  enforces  the  obligation  to  obey  it,  specifying  six  of  its
enactments  (Rom.  xiiL  8,  9 ;  Eph.  vi.  1).  James  says  that  believers  who  show  respect
of  persons  become  "  transgressors  of  the  Law."  Therefore,  when  the  apostle  says  ^  the
Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,"  he  does  not  mean  that  the  righteous  man  is  no
longer  bound  to  obey  it.  He  delights  in  it ;  he  actually  serves  it  ^Rom.  vii.  25).  If  any
should  bay  that  the  apostle  means  that  the  righteous  do  not  need  the  Law  to  direct  them,
we  answer  that  they  might  as  well  say  they  do  not  need  the  Scripture  to  direct  them,  as  the
Law  is  already  in  their  hearts.  How  is  a  righteous  man  to  know  sin  but  by  the  Law?
'*  For  by  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  (2)  His  statement  has  an  abstract  cast,
like  our  Lord's  saying,  **  I  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."
(a)  The  Law  was  not  made  because  of  righteous,  but  because  of  wicked,  men.  ''It
was  added  because  of  transgressions."  It  is  similar  to  the  statement  of  the  apoetle  OOQ-
ceming  the  nine  graces  of  the  Spirit — **  against  such  there  is  no  Law"(GaL  v.  23).
The  Law  does  not,  cannot  condemn,  any  one  of  these  graces.  (6)  The  Law  was  never
made  for  the  righteous  man  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  made  for  the  imnghteoos
man,  to  condcnm  him ;  for  the  righteous  man  is  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  Law
(Gal.  iii.  13).  Its  penalty  cannot  affect  him ;  its  burden  does  not  weigh  him  down ;  its
terrors  do  not  bring  him  into  bondage.  On  the  contrary,  he  delights  in  it  as  he  serves
it.  Thus,  while  in  one  sense  the  righteous  man  delights  in  it  and  serves  it,  he  Is  in
another  sense  **  not  under  the  Law,  but  under  grace  "  (Rom.  vL  14).  It  may  be  further
observed  that  if  Adam  had  continued  in  his  original  righteousness,  the  Law  of  Sinai
would  never  have  been  given  to  man.  "  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions."  2.  The
Law  is  made  for  the  wicked.  They  are  described  according  to  the  two  tables  of  the
Decalogue.  Those  in  the  first  table  go  in  pairs.  (1)  The  lawless  and  unruly.  These
terms  describe  opposition  to  the  Law — the  one  in  its  more  subjective,  the  other  in  its
more  objective  side ;  the  one  representing,  perhaps,  a  more  passive,  the  other  a  more
active  hostility  to  Law.  (2)  The  ungodly  and  sinful.  These  terms  describe  the  opposi-
tion to  God — the  one  without  reverence  for  him,  the  other  living  in  defiance  of  him.  (3)
The  imholy  and  profane.  These  terms  describe  the  manifestation  of  the  wicked  snd
godless  spirit  toward  the  Name  or  ordinances  of  Grod.  They  touch  upon  the  violation  of
the  first  four  commandments.  (4)  Those  in  the  second  table  begin  with  (a)  sins  against
the  fifth  commandment:  "smiters  of  fathers  and  smiters  of  mothers; "  (6)  sins  against  the
sixth :  "  man-slayers ; "  (c)  gins  against  the  seventh :  "  fornicators,  sodomites ; "  (d)  sins
against  the  eighth:  " meu-stealers " — this  special  form  of  transgression  being  selected
because  the  theft  of  a  man  himself  is  a  far  more  serious  offence  than  the  theft  of  his
goods;  (c)  sins  against  the  ninth:  "for  Hars,  for  perjurers" — the  one  being  a  great
advance  in  enormity  upon  tho  other.  (/)  Strange  that  the  apostle  docs  not  enumerate
the  tenth,  which  operated  uix>n  himself  so  powerfully  (Rom.  vii.  7).  Perhaps  it  was
desijjned  by  the  inclusive  reference  no  longer  to  the  committers  of  sin,  but  to  the  sins
themselves :  "  And  if  there  be  any  other  thing  that  is  contrary  to  the  sound  instructian,
according  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  God  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  This
language  implies  (1)  that  the  list  is  not  designed  to  be  exhaustive  of  the  various  forms
of  evil  in  the  world ;  (2)  that  the  Law  and  the  gospel  are  in  perfect  hannony  respecting
what  is  sin ;  (3)  that  the  design  of  the  gosjxjl  is  to  set  forth  the  glory  of  God's  mercy,
goodness  and  love ;  (4)  that  the  gospel  is  a  precious  deposit  committed  to  human  handi^


CH.I.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  13


to  be  dispensed  for  the  benefit  of  the  race  of  man.  The  apostle  did  not  shrink  from
such  a  solemn  trust,  but  rather  rejoiced  in  it. — ^T.  G.

Vers.  12,13. — Ejaculation  of  thankfulness  for  this  high  trust.  Though  he  appears  to
torn  aside  for  a  moment  from  the  false  teachers,  he  is  still  carrying  out  his  design  to
mspire  Timothy  with  a  proper  view  of  the  true  nature  and  importance  of  the  gospel.

L  The  subject-matter  op  his  thanksgiving.  "  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,
that  enabled  me,  for  that  he  counted  me  faithful,  appointing  me  to  the  ministry."  1.
The  Lord  gave  him  strength  for  his  work,  *•  He  enabled  me."  He  gave  him  all  his
intellectual  abilities,  all  his  capacity  for  winning  men  to  the  truth,  all  his  firmness,
endurance,  and  patience  in  preaching  the  gospel.  2.  The  Lord  gave  him  his  appoint-
ment to  the  ministry.  (1)  The  apostle  did  not  thrust  himself  into  it,  nor  take  this
honour  to  himself,  neither  was  he  called  unto  it  by  men.  (2)  It  was  the  Lord  himself
who  made  a  minister  of  him ;  for  the  apostle  speaks  of*  the  ministry  which  I  received  of
the  Lord  Jesus  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  24).  The  ministry
here  signifies  the  more  humble  service,  rather  than  the  apostleship ;  for  he  refers  rather
to  the  work  to  bo  done  than  to  the  prerogatives  of  his  office.  (3)  The  Lord  counted  him
fiuthful  for  the  work ;  not  that  the  faithfulness  was  a  foreseen  quality  which  became
the  ground  of  his  call  to  office,  but  that  he  counted  him  faithful  because  he  made  him
80,  for  he  speaks  of  himself  as  "  one  who  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  faithful "
fl  Cor.  viL  25).  Faithfulness  must  be  the  pre-eminent  quality  of  the  steward  of  God
(1  Cor.  iv.  2).

n.   HiB  THANKSGIVING  IS  GREATLY   ENHANCED    BY  THE   THOUGHT  OP  HIS  DEEP  UN-

•WOBTHINE88.  "  Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  a  doer  of  outrage."
These  are  words  of  bitter  self-accusation.  1.  Ee  had  been  a  blasphemer.  He  spoke  evil
himself  of  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  compelled  others  to  follow  his  example  (Acts  xxvL
11).  This  was  the  highest  wn  that  could  be  committed  against  GK)d.  2.  He  had  been  a
persecutor,  "  I  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  death,  binding  and  delivering  into  prisons
both  men  and  women**  (Acts  xxii.  4).  He  "breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter
against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  *'  (Acts  ix.  1).  He  not  only  spoke  evil  of  Christ,  but
persecuted  Christ  in  his  members.  3.  He  had  been  a  doer  of  outrage.  Not  content
merely  with  reproachful  words,  he  broke  out  into  deeds  of  violence.  His  conduct  was
contumelious  and  injurious  in  the  last  degree. — T.  C.

Ver.  13. — The  Lord's  mercy  contrasted  with  his  own  want  of  it.  Great  as  his  sin  had
been,  he  became  a  subject  of  Divine  mercy.

I.  The  Lord's  mercy  to  him.  "I  obtained  mercy."  1.  The  mercy  included  the
pardon  of  his  great  wickedness.  It  was  mercy  unsought  for  as  well  as  unmerited.  2.
It  was  mercy  with  the  grace  of  apostJeahip  added  to  it,

II.  The  ground  and  reason  of  this  mercy.  "  Because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbe-
lief.** 1.  The  true  ground  of  mercy  is  nothing  whatever  in  man,  bat  the  companion
of  God  himself  (Titus  iii.  5).  2.  The  apostle  does  not  signify  that  he  had  any  daim  to
Ood^s  mercy,  for  he  calls  himself  in  the  next  verse  "  the  very  chief  of  sinners.'*  3.  He
does  not  mean  to  lessen  the  enormity  of  his  guilt ,  but  sets  it  forth,  in  all  its  attending
circumstances,  as  not  being  such  as  excluded  him  from  the  pale  of  mercy,  because  he
had  not  sinned  npjainst  his  own  convictions.  (1)  Ho  did  it  ignorantly ;  but  imoranco
was  no  excuse  where  there  were  the  means  of  knowledge ;  and  unbelief,  out  of  which  the
ignorance  springs,  could  not  be  accepted  as  an  excuse,  since  he  had  heard  the  statement
of  Stephen.  Besides,  all  sins  spring  from  ignorance,  and  are  aggravated  by  unbelief.
(2)  But  he  did  not  sin  wilfully  against  light  and  conscience,  and  so  commit  the  sin
against  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3)  He  who  has  compassion  on  the  ignorant  had  compassion
upon  him,  when  ho  found  him  an  ignorrtnt  and  blinded  zealot.  Thus  were  confirmed  the
words  of  Christ,  that  every  sin  against  the  8on  of  man  will  be  forgiven,  so  long  as  there
is  no  blasphemy  against  the  Spirit  (Matt.  xii.  31).  The  apostle  had  not  deliberately  set
at  nought  the  counsel  of  God,  but  stood  on  exactly  the  same  ground  with  those  sinners
converted  at  Pentecost,  who  had  acted  *'  in  ignorance  **  (Acts  iii.  17).  The  sin  was
great  in  both  cases,  but  it  was  not  unpardonable.  (4)  There  is  nothing  in  the  apostle's
statement  to  justify  the  opinion  that  those  who  have  never  heard  of  Christ  will  be  for-
given on  account  of  their  ignorance.    Our  Lord's  words  warrant  the  expectation  that


14  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ca.x.1— 20.

there  will  be  a  mitigation,  but  not  a  remission,  of  punishment  in  such  cases.  *'  He  that
knew  not,  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of  stripes,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes"
(Luke  xii.  48).  The  language  in  both  passages  justifies  charitable  judgments  even
respecting  persecutors. — T.  C.

Yer.  14. — The  jntperahounding  grace  of  ihe  Lord  to  ihe  aposUe,  He  now  explains
how  fully  he  receive!  of  God's  mercy  in  spite  of  his  unbelief.

I.  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  overflowed  in  grace  on  God's  bide.  *'But  the
grace  of  our  Lord  suprabounded."  Hid  salvation  was  of  free  grace.  He  had  done
nothing  to  deserve  it,  but  rather  evervthing  to  forfeit  his  claim  upon  it.  It  was  grace
first  that  made  him  a  Christian,  and  then  made  him  an  apostle.

IL  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  overflowed  in  faith  and  love  on  man's  bids.
"  With  faith  and  love  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  These  two  graces  are  the  fruits  rf
grace.  When  grace  abounds,  they  will  necesi^arily  abound.  2.  Faith  stands  in  oppoti'
Hon  to  his  old  unbelief.  It  b  that  grace  which  receives  every  blessing  from  Christ,  and
gives  him  all  the  glory,  bringing  peace,  joy,  and  comfort  into  the  heart,  and  ending  in
eternal  life.  3.  Love  stands  in  opposition  to  his  former  rage  and  cruelty.  He  now  has
love  to  God  and  man.  4.  His  faith  and  love  find  their  true  spring  in  Jesus  Christy  ai
in  him  all  fulness  dwells. — ^T.  C.

Yer.  15. — The  summary  of  the  gospel.  This  statement  is  grounded  on  his  own
experience  of  God's  saving  mercy.

I.  The  truth  and  certainty  of  the  gospel  revelation.  **  Faithful  is  the  Word,
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.'*  Five  times  does  this  phrase  occur  in  the  pastoral
Epistles.  It  was  a  sort  of  formula  or  watchword  of  the  early  Christian  Churches.  1.  Hie
doctrine  of  salvation  is  entitled  to  all  credit.  It  is  certain  that  Christ  came  to  save
sinners.  2,  Jt  is  to  he  received  by  all  sorts  of  people^  with  heartiness  and  gladness^  as
a  doctrine  suitable  to  the  necessities  of  aU  men.  With  what  zeal  it  ought,  therefore,  to
.be  set  before  men!

n.  The  substance  of  the  oosfel  revelation.  '*That  Christ  Jesus  came  into
the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  whom  I  am  chief."  1.  This  language  implies  Chrises
pre-existence.  He  left  the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was
(John  xvi.  28).  2.  It  implies  that  lie  came  voluntarily  of  his  own  free  wUL  It  ii
true  that  God's  love  is  manifest  in  the  sending  of  Jesus,  but  Christ's  love  is  equaUy
■  manifest  in  his  advent.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  come  into  the  world,  because
;  he  could  not  otherwise  suffer  and  die  in  our  stead.  The  fact  that  he  came  as  man  in
the  fulness  of  time  implies  that  the  mere  forth-putting  of  spiritual  power  from  heaven
did  not  suffice.  A  man's  work  had  to  be  done  that  God's  mercy  might  reach  us.  3.  It
suggests  the  truf  design  of  his  coming.  "  To  save  sinners."  (1)  Thi-  implies  the  revelation
,of  God's  will  to  man.  (2)  The  impetration  of  salvation  through  Christ's  suffering  and
obedience.  (3)  The  application  of  the  salvation  to  the  objecte  of  it.  (4)  That  sinners
need  salvation,  and  are  lost  without  it.  (5)  That  the  greatest  sinners  have  no  right  to
despair  of  salvation — **of  whom  I  am  chief."  (a)  The  apostle  speaks  of  himself  in  the
present  tense,  not  in  the  past,  for  ho  still  feels  himself  to  be  but  a  believing  sinner.  (6)
The  language  recalls  his  frequent  allusions  to  his  persecutions  of  the  Church  of  God.
God  had  forgiven  him,  but  ne  could  never  forgive  himself.  He  places  himself  in  the
very  front  rank  of  transgressors  because  of  his  share  in  the  devastation  of  the  ChurcL
(c)  The  language  implies  his  deep  humility.  It  was  an  element  in  his  spiritual  great-
ness that  he  had  such  a  sense  of  his  own  sin.  He  calls  himself  elsewhere  "  less  than
the  least  of  all  saints  "  (Eph.  iii.  8).  (d)  It  is  well  to  be  mindful  of  our  sin  in  a  way
of  godly  sorrow,  as  a  means  of  keeping  us  humble  and  thankful  for  the  rich  grace  of  the
gospel  dispensed  to  us. — T.  C.

Vers.  16,  17. — The  aposUe  an  example  of  the  Divine  long-buffering  to  all  ages.
There  was  an  economical  purpose  in  the  salvation  of  the  Apostle  Paul.

I.  The  EXEKciBE  OF  THE  Lord's  long-sufferinq  toward  the  apostle.  "How-
beit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy."  1.  The  mercy  takes  the  form  of  long-svffering;
for  the  Lord  bore  long  with  the  ways  of  this  fierce  persecutor  of  the  saints,  when  ho
might  have  cut  his  career  short  in  judgment.    2.  It  took  tlieform  of  positive  deliverance


CT.I.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  15

fnmi  guUt  and  sin  and  death.  How  oflen  "  the  long-sufiering  of  the  Lord  is  to  usward
salvation  "  (2  Pet.  iu.  9) !

XL  Thb  design  of  this  bemabkable  exhibition  of  mebcy.  "That  in  me  as
the  chief  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  who
should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  everiasting."  1.  The  long-suffennfj  is  exercised
hy  the  Lord  himself.  It  is  he  who  is  wounded  in  the  persecutions  of  his  members.
*•  Saul,  Saul  1  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  "  Yet  it  is  he  who  shows  mercy.  2.  The
greatest  persecutors  may  not  despair  of  mercy.  The  Lord  will  tarry  long  with  them
if  peradventure  they  may  repent  and  turn  to  him.  3.  The  case  of  Paul — "  the  chief
of  sinners  " — ought  to  encourage  sinner n  of  ev*rry  class  and  sort  to  exercise  h>pe  and
trust  in  the  Lord,  as  well  as  to  meet  the  misgivings  of  those  who  think  they  have
^ned  too  much  to  warrant  the  expectation  that  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  upon  them.
4.  Trust  in  Jesus  Christ  necessarily  brings  vnth  it  eternal  life.  There  is  nothing  needed
but  faith  for  this  purpose.     "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."

m.   ASCBIPTION  OF  PBAISE   AND  THANKFULNESS  TO  GOD  FOB  HIS  MEBCY.      1.    Con-

nder  the  titles  by  which  Ood  is  a  f dressed.  "  Now  to  the  King  of  the  a«ies,  incorruptible,
invisible,  the  only  God."  (1)  He  is  King  of  the  ages,  as  his  kingdom  is  called  the
kingdom  of  all  the  ages  (Ps.  cxlv.  13);  because  as  God,  knowing  the  end  from  the
beginning,  he  fixes  the  periods  or  stages  of  the  development  through  which  this  world
is  destined  to  pass,  shaping  all  events  according  to  his  pleasure,  and  making  all  things
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  him.  (2)  Incorruptible ;  because  "  he  only
hath  immortality"  (ch.  vi.  16).  (3)  Invisible;  for  no  man  hath  seen  him  at  any
time,  as  he  dwells  in  light  inaccessible.  (4)  The  only  God ;  in  opposition  to  the  false
gods  of  the  heathen,  or  to  the  multitudes  of  angels  and  principalities  and  powers.  2.
Consider  the  doxology.  "  Unto  him  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever."  (1)  They
already  belong  to  him  alone.  (2)  They  will  belong  to  him  to  all  eternity.  (3)  The
thought  of  the  overruling  wisdom  and  mercy  and  goodness  of  God  in  his  case  leads  to
this  devout  acknowledgment. — T.  C.

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  solemn  charge  to  Timothy.  The  apostle  here  returns  to  the  duty
of  directing  Timothy.

L   It  is  NECESSARY  FOB  EVEN  GOOD  MINI8TEB8  TO  BE   BEMINDED  OF    THEIB  DUTIES

AHD  BESPONSiBiLiTiES.  "  This  charge  I  commit  to  thee,  my  son  Timothy."  1.  The
charge  may  have  indirectly  alluded  to  the  commands  already  given,  but  refers  immC"
diaiely  to  the  good  warfare  in  which  he  is  to  war  as  the  fulfilment  of  his  calling.  2.
It  is  ct/mmitte'l  to  him  like  a  precious  deposit  to  be  guarded  and  kept.  How  anxious
the  apostle  is  that  Timothy  should  be  faithful  to  his  position  and  his  responsibilities  I

IL  It  IS  A  SOLEMN  THING  TO  INVOKE  THE  MEMORY  OF  PROPHECIES  OB  PIOUS  ANTI-
CIPATIONS IN  AID  OF  A  DIFFICULT  cAiiEEB.  "According  to  the  prophecies  that  went
before  on  thee,  that  by  them  thou  mijijhtest  war  a  good  warfare."  1.  The  allusion  is  to
prophecies  uttered  probably  at  his  ordination  by  the  prophets  <f  the  Church,  foretelling
his  future  zeal  and  success.  Such  prophetic  intimations  were  not  uncommon  in  the
primitive  Church.  We  trace  them  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xi.  27,  28),  at  Antioch  (Acts
xiii.  1),  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  xiv.),  at  Ccesarea  (Acts  xxi.  8 — 10).  2.  Such  prophecies
would  ctct  with  a  stimulating,  self-protective  power  upon  a  temperament  like  that  of
Timothy,  inclined,  perhaps,  to  softness  ahd  timidity.  They  would  encourage  him  in
the  midst  of  his  present  perils  and  trials  at  Ephesus.  3.  It  is  a  serious  thing  to
disappoint  the  hopes  of  the  pious.

III.  The  PUBP08E  contemplated  by  the  command  as  well  as  its  immediate
SUBJECT.  '*  That  by  them  " — that  is,  in  virtue  of  them — "  thou  mightest  war  a  good  war-
fare." The  figure  is  a  familiar  one  with  the  apostle  (Eph.  vL  12 ;  2  Cor.  x.  3,  4  ;  2  Tim.
IL  3).  1.  Christian  life,  and  above  all  that  of  a  minister,  is  a  good  warfare.  (1)  It  is
good  because  it  is  against  evil — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  (2)  because  it  is
directed  toward  the  good  of  men ;  (3)  because  it  is  for  a  good  end,  the  glory  of  God.
2.  It  is  to  be  carried  on  (1)  under  Christ  as  Captain  (Heb.  ii.  10) ;  (2)  with  watch-
fulness and  sobriety  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13;  1  Thess.  v.  6);  (3)  with  an  enduring  hardness
(2  Tim.  ii.  3, 10) ;  (4)  with  self-denial  (1  Cor.  ix.  25—27) ;  (5)  with  prayer  (Eph.  vi.  18).

IV.  The  weapons  in  this  wabfabe  abk  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  "  Hold-
ing faith  and  a  good  conscience.^    The  two  must  go  together,  but  faith  must  necessarily


16  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  1. 1—20.

go  first.  You  cannot  have  a  good  conscience  without  faith,  nor  faith  in  its  reality  with-
out a  good  conscience.  There  must  be  faith  in  your  teaching,  conscience  in  your  actions.
1.  Faith,  There  is  "  the  shield  of  faith."  It  is  not  the  mere  doctrine  of  faith,  but  the
grace  of  faith.  It  is  by  this  faith  we  overcome  (1)  the  world  (1  John  v.  4,  5) ;  (2)
the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  24) ;  (3)  the  devil  (I  John  iL  14) ;  (4)  everything  that  exalU  itself
(2  Cor.  X.  5) ;  (5)  death  and  the  grave  (1  Cor.  xv.  54,  55).  A  mere  intellectual  belief
could  not  produce  such  results ;  for  **  the  devils  believe  and  tremble."  2.  A  good  conscienoe.
(I)  It  is  good  because  it  is  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ  THeb.  ix.  14).  (2)  Be-
cause it  helps  to  keep  the  faith  in  purity  (1  Tim.  iii.  9).  (3)  Christians  ought  to  seek
the  approval  of  their  consciences  in  all  things  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  (4)  Its  testimony  ought
to  be  a  Hource  of  joy  (2  Cor.  L  12 ;  1  John  iii.  21).  ^5)  Ministers  ought  always  to  com-
mend themselves  to  the  consciences  of  their  people  @Cor*  ^^'  2).

y.  The  woeful  shipwreck  of  ooireaENOE.  *' Which  some  having  put  away  con-
cerning faith  have  made  shipwreck."  The  flgure  is  a  nautical  one.  When  the  cargo  or
ballast  of  a  good  conscience  is  tossed  overboourd,  the  ship  becomes  unmanageable,  and  is
easily  shipwrecked.  "  Some "  at  Ephesus  resolutely  stifled  the  admonitions  of  con-
science, and  thus  turned  faith  into  a  mere  matter  of  speculation,  with  no  influence
whatever  upon  their  practice.  1.  These  persons  made  ship'tjreck  of  the  doctrin*f  o/faiih ;
for  they  held  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already  (2  Tim.  ii.  18).  2.  J[f  they  made
shipwreck  of  the  grace  of  faith,  it  may  not  have  been  a  total  shipwreck ;  for  the  discipline
imposed  upon  them  by  the  apostle  was  for  the  saving  of  the  spirit,  "  not  for  the  dcAtruc-
tion  of  the  flesh  '*  (2  Cor.  v.  5).  3.  The  aposiU^s  method  of  dealing  with  these  off  nders,
"  Of  whom  are  Hymenseus  and  Alexander ;  whom  I  delivered  unto  Satan,  that  they  may
be  taught  not  to  blaspheme."  (1)  Hymenasus  was  almost  certainly  the  same  as  the
impugner  of  a  future  resurrection  (2  Tinh  ii.  17) ;  and  Alexander  was  probably,  but
not  80  certainly,  the  same  as  Alexander  the  coppersmith  (2  Tim.  iv.  14),  wno  was  a  reso-
lute personal  enemy  of  the  apostle.  (2)  The  apostle  delivered  them  unto  Satan,  which
seems  to  have  included  (a)  a  solemn  excommunication  from  the  Church,  carried  out  no
doubt  by  the  Church  at  the  apostle's  command ;  and  (6)  the  infliction  of  bodily  disease.
Cases  of  the  exercise  of  this  terrible  apostolic  power  are  those  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira»
Elymas,  and  the  incestuous  person  at  Corinth.  (3)  It  was  not  an  irrevocable  sentence,
for  its  remission  depended  upon  the  return  of  me  offenders  to  faith  and  repentance.
"  That  they  may  be  taught  through  chastisement  not  to  blaspheme."  The  design  was
the  recovery  of  the  offenders ;  but  neither  this  Epistle  nor  the  next  throws  any  light
upon  the  ultimate  effect  of  the  severe  discipline  inflicted  by  the  apostle. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Divine  benediction,  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  Gk)d  our
Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  This  is  a  trinity  of  blessing.  The  gospel  is  to  be
preached  as  a  new  life.  This  contrasts  with  vain  jangling  in  the  sixth  verse.  Some
had  Kwervedy  or  literally  turned  aside,  as  an  arrow  that  misses  the  mark.  Paul  speaks  of
**  questions,  rather  than  godly  edifying  which  is  in  faith."  And  there  are  questions
mysterious,  questions  curious,  which  unregenerated  hearts  may  discuss  to  the  hindrance
of  true  religion,  lliis  salutation  of  the  young  apostle  begins,  therefore,  with  a  high
spiritual  tone :  "  Grace,  mercy,  peace."

I.  Who  the  gifts  were  from.  "God  our  Father  and  Jesua  Christ  our  Lord."
But  in  the  first  verse  Paul  speaks  of  God  as  our  Saviour.  Notice  this ;  it  is  peculiar^
and  may  keep  us  from  confining  ideas  of  pity  and  tenderness  to  Christ  alone.  God  is
the  Author  of  salvation.  lie  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Here,  then,  we
come  to  the  Fountain-head  of  the  river  of  grace.  Paul  cannot  give  grace,  mercy,  and
peace ;  they  are  from  "  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Paul  was  the
ambassador  of  the  gospel,  not  the  author  of  it ;  a  preacher,  not  a  priest.  The  priest
never  dies,  because  proud  human  nature  never  dies.  Men  like  to  say, "  through  us."  In
aft^T  years,  when  Paul  was  dead,  there  might  have  come  some  temptation  to  Timothy
to  say,  **  I  derived  my  apostolate  from,  I  stood  next  to,  him."  But  a  salutation  is  not  a
consecration.

II.  What  are  the  gifts  themselves  ?  Emphatically  Christian  gifts.  The  Soman
motto  would  have  been,  **  Courage,  skill,  force."  The  Athenian  motto  would  have  been,
"  Pleasure,  beauty,  philosophy."  1.  Orace,  God*s  favour.  The  beautiful  Divine  nature
revealing  itself  on  the  cross  as  forgiveness,  and  in  a  life  of  tenderness,  pty,  and  holiness  to


ciLi.  1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY


which  the  Christian  is  to  be  conformed.  Grace  forgives  and  grace  rcn<»ws.  It  is  a  largo
word.  It  carries  at  its  heart  all  that  we  mean  by  moral  loveliness  and  gracefulness,  it
is  the  fulfilment  of  the  ancient  prayer,  "  Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon
us."  2.  Mercy.  What  a  picture  of  cruelty  we  see  in  the  Roman  age,  with  its  amphi-
' theatres,  its  gladiators,  its  horrors  on  a  Roman  holiday,  and  its  slave  quarters!  No
hospitals  for  the  sick,  no  asylums  for  the  poor  and  needy.  "  Mercy. "  The  cross  meant
mercy.  The  parables  meant  mercy.  The  prayer  was  fulfilled,  "  Lord,  show  us  the
Father.*'  3.  Peace,  The  Jews  had  their  disputations  about  eatings  and  drinkings  and
genealogies.  Their  Church  was  alive,  only  with  vigorous  disputation.  The  gospel  meant
true  peace — peace,  not  of  condition,  but  of  conscience.  Ever  must  it  be  so.  Peace  with
God !  Peace  with  our  brethren !  Peace  within  ourselves !  So  the  Saviour's  leo;acy  was
realized :  **  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you :  not  as  the  world  giveth,
give  I  unto  you." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — The  vital  end  of  religion,  "  Now  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity."
When  we  know  the  Divine  end  or  purpose,  we  get  light  on  all  that  leads  to  that
end.  Charity,  or  love  that  is  like  God's  own  love,  is  the  end  of  all.  Religious
principle  in  its  root  and  stem  is  to  blossom  into  the  beauty  of  Christ-like  character.
Christianity  is  a  truth,  that  it  may  be  a  life.  It  is  not  to  be  mere  doctrine,  or  mere
ritual.  We  may  be  fiery  disputants  without  being  faithful  soldiers.  We  may  even  be
workers  in  the  vineyard,  without  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love.  Ecclesiasticism  is
not  necessarily  religion.  There  may  be  Church  uniformity.  Church  harmony,  and
SBSthetic  ceremonial,  and  yet,  so  far  as  Divine  life  is  concerned,  there  may  be  "  no  breath
at  all  in  the  midst  of  it."     Let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  first  word.

I.  Charity  is  higher  than  uniformity.  With  Constantino  Christianity  meant
uniformity,  with  liildebrand  it  meant  supremacy.  But  in  its  spirituality  and  simplicity
the  gospel  remains  the  j^ame  in  all  ages.  We  are  to  live  Christ ;  and  to  live  Christ  is
to  live  in  love,  as  Christ  also  loved  us,  and  gave  himself  for  us.  Ecclesiasticism  is  often
a  system  of  severe  outward  drill,  an  obedience  to  outward  rite  and  cult.  So  the  Romish
Church  in  Spain,  centuries  ago,  forcibly  converted  the  Moors  by  dashing  holy  water  in
their  faces,  and  so  admitted  them  into  the  communion  of  the  Church.  The  gospel
cannot  be  spread  by  a  rough-and-ready  **  multitudinism  "  like  that.  It  must  begin  in
personal  faith,  and  work  in  the  spirit  of  love.

II.  Charity  finds  its  image  in  God.  We  need  not  ask  what  this  love  is.  For  we
have  seen  it  incarnated  in  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  Christ,  and  in  his  sufferings  for
"our  sakes"  upon  the  cross.  1.  It  is  not  the  selfish  love  which  gives  affection  where  it
receives  affection,  and  turns  even  a  gift  into  barter  and  exchange.  2.  It  is  not  the  costless
love  which  will  be  an  almoner  of  bounty  where  there  is  no  personal  self-denial  and
suffering ;  but  it  gives  itself.  3.  It  is  not  the  love  of  a  passing  mood,  which  ministers  in
affectionate  ways  in  times  of  high-wrought  emotion ;  but  a  love  which  is  full  of  forbear-
ance with  our  faults,  and  is  triumphant  over  our  faithlessness.  So  the  end  of  the  com-
mandment is  worthy  of  the  God  who  gives  the  commandment.  Like  himself,  it  is  charity.
And  we  have  reached  the  highest  vision-point  in  Revelation,  when  wo  see  in  its  sublimo
teachings,  not  viere  commandments  which  may  be  arbitrary,  but  an  unfolding  of  the
nature  of  God. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — Lifers  inner  springs,  "Out  of  a  pure  heart."  This  is  the  soil  in  which  the
heavenly  grace  grows,  and  this  soil  is  essential  to  the  purity  and  beauty  of  the  grace.  It
ia  not  enough  to  plant  the  seed ;  we  must  till  and  nourish  the  soil.

I.  The  heart  is  the  testing-place  of  what  we  like.  Here  I  would  give
emphasis  to  the  fact  that  "  the  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart  brings
forth  good  things."  There  must  be  jxission  in  all  true  life.  As  Mr.  Ruskin  truly  says,
"  The  entire  object  of  true  education  is  to  make  people  not  merely  do  the  right  things,
but  enjoy  the  right  thinj^s ;  not  merely  industrious,  but  to  love  industry ;  not  merely
learned,  but  to  love  learning ;  not  merely  pure,  but  to  love  purity ;  not  merely  just,  but
to  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness.  Taste  is  not  only  a  part  and  index  of  morality ;
it  is  the  only  morality.  The  first  and  last  and  closest  trial-question  to  any  living  crea-
ture is — What  do  you  like  ?  Tell  me  what  you  like,  and  Til  tell  you  what  you  are."
Ejtactly !    So  says  the  gospel.     "  Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life ; "    "  As  a  man

L  timothy.  c


18  TUB  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  l  1—20.


tkinkcth  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."     This  is  a  true  teaching,  and  may  open  up  a  new  view  of
moral  and  sxuritual  life  to  the  thoughtful  mind.

II.  The  heart  is  the  revbalino  part  of  the  true  man.  You  must  watch  life  in
its  temper  and  spirit  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  You  may  be  deceived  by  good  actions.
Men  may  build  almshouses  and  yet  live  so  as  to  break  hearts ;  they  may  be  courageous  in
confronting  tyrannies  abroad,  and  yet  live  impure  lives  in  the  indulgence  of  besetting  sins.
Think  of  this.  Good  actions  do  not  make  a  good  man ;  it  is  the  good  man  that  makes
the  gixxl  actions.  A  man  may  be  beneficent  and  give  thousands  to  hospitals,  or  brave
and  rescue  drowning  men  from  death,  or  patriotic  and  save  a  nation  in  penlous  times,
and  yet  he  may  not  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  his  heart  may  be  unrenewed.  "  A  pure
heart."  We  oil  love  pure  things — the  white  marble,  the  rain-washed  sky,  the  peerless
alabaster,  the  silver  wings  of  the  dove.  So  Christ  would  have  us  all  desire  and  seek  the
pure  heart. — \V.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — The  sense  of  rectitude.  **  And  of  a  good  conscience."  We  here  come  to  the
ethical  region  of  rectitude,  showing  us  how  complete  the  gospel  is,  and  how  it  stands
related  to  the  whole  of  our  complex  nature.  We  notice  here  the  connection  of  "  good  "
with  conscience ;  let  us  see  what  it  means.  May  there  be  another  conscience  that  is
not  good  ?

I.  There  mat  be  the  casuist's  conscience.  We  see  this  in  the  case  of  the  scribes
and  Pharisees  in  the  time  of  our  Lord.  The  simple  instincts  of  justice  and  mercy  were
perverted  by  ecclesiastical  routine,  and  the  minutia  of  legal  ordinations.  They  overlaid
the  Law,  which  appealed  to  the  native  instincts  of  conscience,  by  their  traditions,  which
did  not  so  appeal,  and  which  were  burdensome  and  troublesome.  So  in  Luther's  time  the
consciences  of  men  were  in  the  keeping  of  the  priests,  and  an  artificial  and  Jesuitical
morality  made  even  immorality  sometimes  expedient  and  lawful.  Men  lost  the  native
instincts  of  right  and  wrong  in  obedience  to  an  artificial  and  ecclesiastical  code  of  morals;
they  worried  themselves  about  sins  that  were  no  sins,  and  they  lost  the  consciousness
that  men  may  be  sinners  even  when  they  are  obedient  sons  of  the  Church.

IL  There  may  be  the  worldly  conscience.  This  makes  custom  into  a  god.
Conscience  is  ruled  and  regulated  by  what  is  expedient,  or  what  society  expects  of  men.
They  are  pained  at  the  sin  which  brings  shame  before  men,  but  are  not  disconcerted  at
desires,  emotions,  and  actions  which  are  evil  in  the  sight  of  Grod.  It  is  a  wonderful
interesting  study  this — the  relation  of  society  to  sin.  For  there  are  fashionable  vices
and  respectable  sins  which  are  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  the  conscience  is  at  ease
because  the  spirit  of  the  ago  does  not  condemn  them.  How  important,  then,  it  is  to
keep  conscience  enlightened  by  the  Word  of  God  and  invigorated  by  the  Holy  Ghost!
The  end  of  the  comniandiiient  is  in  the  best  sense  to  make  you  a  law  unto  yourself  It
is  important  to  have  the  Bible  in  our  heads,  but  it  is  most  important  to  have  Christ
enthroned  in  the  tribunal  of  conscience  within. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Tlie  ahsence  of  hypocrisy,  "And  faith  unfeigned."  We  all  dislike  shams.
Led  by  Carlyle,  the  English  nation  has  lately  heard  many  prophetic  voices  against
them.  We  insist,  in  art,  in  dress,  in  manners,  and  in  religion,  on  sincerity.  Without
this  nothing  is  beautiful,  because  nothing  is  real.  We  hate  feigned  learning,  feigned
skill,  feigned  culture,  and  feigned  superiority.  The  apostle  tells  us  here  that  faith
must  be  unfeigned.  Now,  if  the  end  of  the  cumniandment  is  love^  the  argument  is  this,
that  the  faith  which  is  to  be  worked  by  such  a  glorious  inspiration  of  charity  must  be
iui  honest,  tamest,  real  faith.

I.  We  must  believe  ix  humanity  before  ^VE  can  love  men.  Believe,  that  is,  thai
there  is  an  ideal  of  God  in  every  man ;  that  underneath  his  depravity  and  degnuiation
there  is  a  moral  nature  which  may  be  renewed,  and  a  life  which  may  be  transfigured
into  the  glory  of  Christ.  For  man's  conscience  was  made  to  know  the  truth,  his  heart
to  feel  it,  and  his  will  to  be  guided  and  energized  by  it.  If  we  think  of  men  cynically
or  contemptuously,  then  there  will  be  no  canie>t  eflorts  to  save  that  which  is  lost.

II.  We  must  believe  in  the  powkr  of  Chuist  and  his  cross,  or  we  shall
NOT  BE  enthusiastic  IN  PREACHING  THEM.  Ko  doubtcr  cau  be  a  good  preacher.  Men
know  and  feel  the  i)(>wer  of  ardent  faith.  The  arrow  will  miss  the  mark  if  the  hand  of
the  archer  shakes,  or  distrusts  its  \veaxx)n.     The  one  great  element  of  success  is  unfeigned


CH.I.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  10

faith — a  faith  which  says,  *'  I  believed,  and  therefore  have  I  spoken."  There  may  be  a
variable  fsuth,  like  that  of  the  Vicar  of  Bray's,  which  believed  anything — Romanistic,
Rationalistic,  or  Evangelical — for  the  sake  of  position.  But  the  mask  soon  drops,  and
men,  instead  of  receiving  the  truth,  despise  the  false  teacher.  "  We  believe  and  are  sure
that  thou  art  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,**  is  the  essential  basis  of  a  true
ministry.  Such  a  faith  will  be  touched  ^vith  enthusiasm  like  imto  his  who  said,  "  God
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."

HL  We  must  believe  in  a  vital  sense  so  as  to  live  cub  belief.  An  unfeigned
faith  is  one  that  we  practise  ourselves ;  one  that  fills  every  channel  of  our  being — our
ethical  life,  our  philanthropies,  our  missionary  endeavours,  our  home  joys  and  sanctities.
There  is  a  faith  which  is  merely  dogmatic — which  holds  fast  the  Christian  doctrines,  but
faUs  to  translate  them  into  life.  The  atonement  itself,  so  august  and  awful,  must  ever
stand  alone  as  a  Divine  sacrifice ;  but  its  moral  effect  is  to  be  lived,  "  We  thus  judge,  that
if  One  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead ;  and  that  we  who  live  should  not  henceforth  live
unto  ourselves,  but  imto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again."  Faith  is  not  to  be  a  wax-
work fruit — something  artificial  and  unreal — but  the  living  vine,  of  which  Christ  is  the
root.— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  11. — A  gospel  of  glory.  **  According  to  the  glorious  gospel."  These  are  the
words  of  a  true  enthusiasm.  St.  Paul  gloried  in  the  gospel.  We  may  read  it,  however,
as  in  the  Revised  Version,  "According  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  God."  Either  way  the
glory  of  it  fills  the  heart  of  the  apostle  with  intense  rapture.  No  good  work  is  done
without  enthusiasm.  The  great  Italian  artists — men  like  Angelico,  Fra  Bartolomeo,  and
Michael  Angelo — associated  heaven  with  earth  in  their  work,  and  did  it,  not  for  mere
pay,  but  for  great  ideal  results.  So  also  great  apostles  and  reformers,  like  Paul,  Wicklifie,
and  Luther,  were  enthusiasts.  But  all  healthy  enthusiasm  is  inspired  by  reaUty  and
truth.  Some  men  have  made  shipwreck  of  religion  because  they  lost  the  compass  of
the  Word  of  God ;  and  others,  dependent  on  feeling  alone,  have  wandered,  being  led  by
the  ignis-faiuus  of  imagination  alone.

I.  Paul  sees  in  himself  what  the  gospel  can  do.  "Take  m«,"  he  says;  "I  was
before  a  persecutor,  and  injurious."  What  could  account  for  such  a  change  as  is  embodied
in  the  man  who  from  Saul  became  Paul  ?  No  theory  of  moral  dynamics  can  stand,  that
suggests  he  lifted  himself  into  so  great  a  change.  Neither  could  the  Hebrew  Church  of
that  age,  which  was  coldly  ritual,  sterile,  and  barren.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  of
whom  I  am  chief.  Howlx-it  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that  in  me  first  Christ
Jesus  might  show  forth  all  long-sufi'ering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  which  should  hereafter
believe  on  him  to  life  everlasting."  No  man  can  be  so  ardent  about  a  cure  as  he  who
has  tried  a  physician ;  no  man  admires  the  great  artist  so  much  as  he  who  has  tested
his  own  feeble  powers.  And  now  "  what  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak
through  the  flesii,  God  sending  his  own  Son,"  had  done,  and  done  in  Paul :  he  is  a
proof  of  the  gnsi)el  before  he  becomes  a  preacher  of  it.

II.  Paul  gives  a  new  significance  to  the  word  "gi/)by."  On  his  lips  glory  takes
a  new  meaning.  He  had  seen  the  glories  of  the  Caesars,  who  raised  their  thrones  on
hecatombs  of  human  lives,  and  filled  their  courts  with  unbounded  luxuries  and  lustr.
Surroundetl  by  soldiers  and  courtesans,  their  glory  was  in  their  shame.  He  had  seen  the
glories  of  the  architects,  sculptors,  and  artists,  at  Athens,  Corinth,  and  Rome.  But  the
glory  of  which  he  Bix)ke  was  in  a  life  that  gave  itstlf — that  came,  not  to  be  ministered
unto,  but  to  minister,  and  that  on  the  cross  died  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  It
was  the  glory  of  gocnlness,  the  glory  of  compassion,  the  glory  of  self-sacrifice.

III.  Paul  ri^joices  to  tkll  the  good  news  of  this  glory.  It  is  the  glorious
gospel, or  the  glorious  "  gtxxi  news"  for  all  men — Greek  and  Jew,  barbarian  and  Scythian,
bond  and  free.  How  simple  a  thing  it  seems — "  good  news  " !  and  yet  it  is  speech  that
moves  the  world!  Homer  is  remembere^l,  when  the  miUtary  heroes  of  Greece  are  for-
gotten. Songs  live  lonj:cer  than  thrones.  This  good  news  was  of  a  Christ  who  had  died
and  risen,  and  was  working  then  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Paul  lived  long  enough  to  plant
Churchis,and  to  show  that  the  cross  could  turn  men  "from  darkness  to  light,  and  from
the  power  of  Satan  unto  (iod.''  He  could  show  them  not  only  the  root,  but  the  tree ;
not  only  the  seed,  but  the  flower.     It  was  good  news  in  relation  to  man  himself —to  hla


20  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [cH.  1. 1— 20;

present  history  and  his  everlasting  destiny.  The  ^pel  had  made  life  desirable,  and
checked  the  false  euthanasia  of  Roman  suicide;  and  it  had  spread  a  great  sky  of  immor-
tality above  meu's  heads,  so  that  to  live  was  Christ,  and  to  die  was  gain. — W.  M.  8.

Vcr.  11. — The  nature  of  Ood.  **  Of  the  blessed  God."  Prove  that  the  gospel  comes
from  Gud,  and  it  must  be  blessed ;  for  God  is  blessed  in  himself.  His  nature  is  light,
which  is  always  beautiful ;  and  love,  which  is  always  beneficent.

I.  This  is  a  description  of  th£  Divine  natube.  Not  of  sotne  of  the  attributes
of  that  nature,  but  of  the  very  heart  and  centre  of  it.  Not  the  Omnipotent,  the
Omnipresent,  the  Omniscient ;  but  the  Blessed !  Look  at  nature !  Study  its  purity,
its  harmony,  its  exquisite  adaptations  of  provision  and  plenty  to  the  varied  wants  of  all
living  things,  show  that  God  is  not  a  Being  of  mere  power  or  wisdom,  but  One  whose
works  are  very  good.  One  who  wished  his  creatures  to  share  in  his  own  blessedness.  1.
Look  at  his  revelation.  Do  we  want  beatitudes  ?  Duty  turned  to  joy  ?  We  find  the
way  of  peace  and  rest  and  joy  in  obedience  to  his  wilL  2.  Look  at  the  ChrUt  hinnte^.
Blessed  within,  amid  all  outward  forms  of  temptation  and  all  endurances  of  trial.  "  That
my  joy  may  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  fulL"  3.  Look  at  the  cross.  Designed
to  make  atonement,  to  reconcile  man  to  God,  and  so  to  renew  his  image  within,  and
to  make  man  understand  that  separation  from  Gbd  was  the  root-cause  of  all  his  misery.
The  gospel  is  not  only  a  revelation  of  doctrine ;  it  is  an  unfolding  of  the  Divine  nature,
into  which  wo  may  be  changed  "  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."

II.  This  is  the  unique  revelation  of  ihe  gospel.  False  religions  give  prominence
to  aspects  of  power,  and  merge  into  dreads.  The  gospel  alone  shows  that  God  is  Love.
And  in  revealing  the  blessed  nature  of  Qod.  in  his  Son,  it  has  shown  us  that  evil  is
misery  because  it  is  another  nature.  Life  apart  from  God  is  death— death  to  peace,  purity,
harmony,  holiness.  Men  have  in  their  exp>  rience  testified  to  this.  All  is  vanity  apart
from  him.  Over  all  life  may  be  inscribed,  "  Nihil  sine  Deo  ** — "  Nothing  without  God."
So  Christ  would  lead  us  to  the  Father,  unite  us  with  the  Father,  and  transform  us  into
the  likeness  of  the  Father — One  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,
and  Lord  of  lords. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  11. — Trustees  of  the  truth.  "Which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  Here
Paul  speaks  of  the  preacher  of  this  glorious  gospel  as  a  trustee.  It  is  not  a  gospel  of
merely  personal  salvation ;  it  is  not  designed  to  awaken  only  moral  and  spiritual
admiration  for  its  teachings ;  nor  for  the  culture  of  immortal  happiness,  so  far  as  we  are
ourselves  alone  concerned.

I.  The  gospel  is  ours  in  trust.  Water  is  sweet,  but  others  are  perishing  with
thirst.  The  open  sky  is  beautiful,  but  others  are  in  prison.  Peace  is  restful,  but
others  are  in  pain.  What  do  you  think  in  earthly  matters  of  fraudulent  or  neglectful
tru8t«*c8?  You  rank  them  amongst  the  very  worst  of  men.  How  many  sons  and
dauf^hters  of  the  careful  and  the  prudent  have  been  ruined  through  the  long  years  by
negligent  trustees !

II.  The  gospel  affects  all  trusteeships.  Its  spirit  is  to  pervade  all  that  we
have  and  arc.  Men  are  coming  to  see  that  knowledge,  skill,  wealth,  are  not  only
to  be  enjoyed  for  personal  gratification,  but  to  be  used  for  the  uplifting  and  bettering  of
others.  These  will,  and  always  must  be,  "  our  own ;  *'  but  we  are  to  lo<.»k  also  **  on  the
things  of  others."  Do  not  fence  in  the  park  of  your  life,  but  act  the  steward  of  its
beauties  and  its  joys.  Rights  of  possession  there  are,  and  yet  resiwnsibilities  of  posses-
sion too.  Look  at  Christ.  1.  He  knew  the  secret  of  blessedness,  and  came  to  earth  to
reveal  it.  2.  He  knew  the  grandeur  of  human  nature,  and  came  to  live  in  it  and  to
restore  it.  3.  He  knew  the  mastery  that  evil  had  over  us,  and  he  came  to  break  the
fetters.  4.  He  knew  that  sin  separated  us  from  God,  and  he  came  to  die,  "  the  just  for
the  unjust,  to  bring  us  unto  God."  Our  captains  at  sea  are  guardians  of  life,  and  bravely
do  they  do  their  duty.  Our  soldiers  are  trustees  of  a  nation's  honour,  and  never  have
failed  in  the  great  crises  of  her  life.  And  our  great  citizen-fellowships  are  trustees  of
broad  rivers,  o])cn  commons,  and  the  health  and  well-being  of  the  poor,  and  have  striven
to  protect  their  interests.  As  Christians  we  are  each  and  all  trustees  of  the  gospel.  It
is  no  mere  ecclesiastical  privilege ;  for,  alas !  ecclesiastics  have  too  often  been  trustees  only
of  their  own  rights,  or  the  rights  of  their  special  Churches.    We  are  all  trustees  of  the


cii.  1. 1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  21

glorious  gospel  of  tho  blessed  God,  and  woe  bo  to  any  of  us  who  sliirk  our  responsibilities
or  idly  neglect  our  trust ! — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  19. — ffuman  wreckage,  "Some  have  made  shipwreck."  Words  sound
differently  to  difl'erent  men.  Language  is  a  "  word-picture/*  and  we  must  see  the
facts  before  we  imderstand  the  word.  Paul  chooses  a  metaphor  applied  to  character,
which  is  so  terrible  when  applied  to  disasters  at  sea.  M&aj  a  beautiful  vessel  has
arrested  the  gaze  of  admiring  spectators  as  she  spread  her  sails  to  the  favouring  breeze,
find  breasted  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life.  But,  on  another  shore,  her  shivered  timbers
and  her  shattered  prow  have  been  washed  up  as  the  wreckage  of  a  once  gallant  ship,  her
half-defaced  name  the  only  testimony  to  her  fate.  So  Paul  had  seen  men  wrecked  on
the  breakers  of  self-indulgence,  vice,  and  folly.  Paul  associated  loss  of  character  with
loss  of  faith.  "  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience ;  which  some  having  put  away
have  made  shipwreck."

I.  Shipwreck  sometimes  comes  at  the  vert  commencement  op  the  voyage.
The  ship  scarcely  leaves  the  river  before  she  runs  aground.  There  has  been  too  much
self-contidence,  and  the  Divine  Pilot  has  not  had  the  ship  in  hand.

IL  Shipwreck  sometimes  comes  at  the  close  of  the  votaqe,  when  the  ship  is
almost  home ;  when  from  the  masthead  land  was  almost  in  sight.  But  the  watch  has
not  been  kept.  In  the  voyage  of  life  we  may  have  the  cross  on  the  flag,  and  the  chart
in  the  cabin,  and  the  compass  on  the  deck  ;  but  we  sleep,  as  do  others,  and  we  are
A?recked  with  the  land  almost  in  sight.

in.  Shipwreck  affects  the  very  highest  elements  of  our  being.  **A  good
conscience,"  the  sweetest  meal  to  which  ever  a  man  sat  down  I  The  sublimest  music,
which  no  Beethoven  or  Mendelssohn  can  approach !  The  noblest  heritage  that  a  Moses
could  sacrifice  Egypt  for !  A  conscience  cleansed  by  Christ's  blood,  enlightened  by  the
Word  of  God,  and  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  A  good  conscience ! "  Wealth  cannot
purchase  it,  envy  cannot  steal  it,  poverty  cannot  harm  it,  and  nought  but  sin  can  denude
it  of  its  crown.  It  is  the  strength  of  the  confessor's  endurance,  the  lustre  of  the  suf-
ferer's countenance,  the  peace  of  the  martyr's  heart.  "  A  good  conscience."  Wreck  thatf
and  all  is  lost ;  and  the  sun  of  the  moral  firmament  sets  in  darkness. — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Introduction.  1.  Sender,  "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Clirist  Jesus  according
to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Hope."  It  is  usual  for
Paul  to  begin  his  letters  by  taking  the  designation  of  apostle.  He  thus  claimed  to
write,  and  to  order  ecclesiastical  afl'airs,  under  infallible  direction.  In  thus  writing  to
Timothy,  who  had  no  special  need  of  being  reminded  of  his  authority,  he  would  seem
to  give  an  official  character  to  the  letter.  While  he  claimed  authority,  it  was,  at  the  same
•time,  as  himself  belonging  to  Christ  Jesus.  Not  satisfied  with  stating  to  whom  he  belonged
in  the  authority  he  exercised,  he  further  traces  his  apostleship,  not,  as  in  previous  Epistles,
up  to  its  primal  source  in  the  will  of  God,  but  more  immediately  to  the  commandment
of  Qod  or  actual  appointment  after  his  conversion.  He  received  his  appointment  from
Ood  our  Saviour — a  designation  of  God  which  in  tho  New  Testament  is  peculiar  to  tho
pastoral  Epistles.  It  is  introduced  here  as  carrying  with  it  tho  obligation  on  the  part  of
Paul  and  Timothy  to  bo  the  bearers  of  tho  Divine  salvation  to  their  fellow-men.  He
also  received  his  ap{H)intment  from  Christ  Jesus,  whom  ho  thus,  the  second  time  in
the  short  space,  introduces.  By  Christ,  as  acting  for  God,  all  appointments  are  made.
The  seven  stars,  i.e.  Christian  ministers,  are  held  by  him  in  his  right  hand ;  and  he  has
the  whole  ordering  of  their  locality  and  time  of  service.  In  this  second  introduction  of
his  name  he  is  designated  onr  Hope,  i.e.  he  from  whom  the  appointed  have  their  reward,
and  in  whom  it  subsists.  2.  To  whom  addressed,  "Unto  Timothy,  my  true  child  in  faith."
Not  according  to  the  flesh,  but  in  the  sphere  of  faith,  was  Timothy  his  child.  Thus  he
is  accustomed  to  regard  his  converts ;  he  is  both  father  and  mother  to  them.  We  may,
therefore,  conclude  that  Timothy,  though  of  godly  iwirentage  and  with  godly  influences
■working  efficaciously  in  him,  owed  it  to  Paul's  instrumentality  that  he  was  converted
to  Christianity.  It  was  in  Lystra,  a  city  of  Lycaonia,  on  Paul's  second  visit,  that
Timothy  joined  him  as  his  assistant.  He  was  his  true  child,  not  only  in  his  being
h\B  convert,  but  in  his  having  the  evidence  of  that  in  his  being  after  the  same  stamp
— like-minded,  as  he  is  called  in  Phil.  ii.  20 ;  one  who  seemed  instinctively  to  enter


22  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  i.  1—20.

into  his  views  and  plans,  and  therefore,  wo  may  say,  the  ideal  of  an  asgistant  3.
'  Salutation,  *•  Grace,  mercy,  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."
The  insertion  of  mercy  in  the  salutation  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Epistles  to  Timothy.
There  is  invoked  grace  on  him  as  untoorthy^  mercy  on  him  as  estposeo  to  suffering^  peace
on  him  as  the  result  of  his  being  graciously  and  mercifully  dealt  with.  The  Source
from  which  the  blessing  is  invoked  is  Ood  the  Father,  It  is  to  the  fatherly  feding  in
God — that  which  is  highest  in  his  nature,  and  with  which  redemption  originated — that
our  appeal  is  to  be  made  for  saving  blessings  for  ourselves  and  for  our  friends.  In  the
thought  of  Christ  as  the  second  Source  of  blessing,  Paul  finds  occasion  for  the  third
introduction  of  the  name  of  Christ.  Ho  is  thought  of  as  our  Lord,  i.e,  the  sovereign
Dispenser  of  the  saving  blessings  in  his  Fathei^s  house,  of  which  there  are  enough
and  to  spare.

I.  Charge  devolved  on  Timothy.  "As  I  exhorted  thee  to  tarry  at  Ephesus,
when  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  that  thou  mightest  charge  certain  men  not  to  teach
a  different  doctrine,  neither  to  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies,  the  which
minister  questionings,  rather  than  a  dispensation  of  Gtxl  which  is  in  faith  \  so  do  I
fiow,**  The  time  of  the  journey  into  Macedonia  would  seem  to  be  after  the  first
Imprisonment  at  Rome,  beyond  the  period  included  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  This
brings  the  date  of  the  Epistle  well  on  to  the  close  of  the  apostle^s  life.  If  this  is  correct,
then  Paul's  confident  anticipation  of  never  again  being  in  Ephesus  was  not  verified.
For  it  is  here  mentioned  as  his  i)oint  of  departure  for  Macedonia.  He  would  have  taken
Timothy  with  him ;  but  there  were  manifestations  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus  which
necessitated  him  to  leave  him  behind.  There  were  certain  persons  not  otherwise
characterized,  who  taught  a  different  doctrine,  t.e.  different  from  the  gospel  as  preached
by  Paul.  It  could  not  be  called  a  different  gospel  as  in  the  Galatian  Churches ;  it  was
rather  something  taught  by  itself  which  tenaed  to  frustrate  the  ends  of  the  gospel.
It  was  a  giving  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies.  We  come  upon  incipient  Gnostidsm
here,  of  which  we  have  already  seen  traces  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians.  This  is
best  known  as  Eastern  mysticism  in  contact  with  Christianity.  But  there  seems  reason
to  believe  that  there  was  a  prior  contact  of  Eastern  mysticism  with  Judaism  in  the
form  of  Kssenism,  This  has  many  elements  in  common  with  Gnosticism;  the  peculiarity
is  that  it  is  Jewish  materials  that  are  thrown  into  the  mystic  form.  A  great  feature
in  Gnosticism  is  the  interposing  of  intermediate  agencies^  to  account  for  the  creation  of
the  world,  supposed  to  bo  evil,  so  that  God  could  not  come  into  immediate  contact  with
it  in  its  creation.  What  were  afterward  known  as  ajons  or  emanations,  in  the  Epistle  to
the  Colossians  are  called  angels.  Here  the  interminable  genealogies  found  in  rabbinical
speculations  are  associated  uith  the  intermediate  agencies.  God  created  a  being  at
a  certain  remove  from  himself,  with  a  name  which  they  were  in  a  jwsition  to  give.
This  being  created  another  at  a  further  remove  from  God,  who  also  was  named.  The
object  was  to  come  down  to  the  name  of  one  who  was  bad  enough  to  create  the  world ;
but  it  was  diflicult  to  know  where  to  stop.  Upon  these  genealogies  ingenuity  was
exercised ;  but,  as  there  was  nothing  of  the  element  of  certainty  in  them,  they  only
ministered  questionings  or  disjmtings  as  to  the  names.  What  Tiriiothy  was  to  direct
his  efforts  to  was  to  set  forth  the  dispejisation  of  God  which  is  in  faith,  i.e.  the  Divine
order  of  things,  as  seen  partly  in  creation  and  specially  in  redemption,  in  which  faith
can  lay  hold  on  certainty.  "  Jiy  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  have  been  framed
by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  what  is  seen  hath  not  been  made  out  of  thmgs  which  do
appear."  By  faith  also  we  understand  that  Infinite  Love  has  in  Christ  Jesus  provided
a  full  atonement  for  our  sins.

II.  The  end  of  the  charqe.  "  But  the  end  of  the  charge  is  love."  The  link  of
connection  is  the  charge  to  be  given  by  Timothy  to  the  false  teachers.  The  thought
which  follows  is,  these  teachers  missing  the  aim  of  what  is  charged  on  them.  We  have
here,  then,  not  the  end  aimed  at  in  others,  as  the  end  of  the  physician  is  health  (which
is  Ellicott's  idea),  but  plainly  the  end  aimed  at  in  what  is  charged  on  the  teacher.  The
words  are  suitable  to  one  who  is  receiving  a  charge,  **  What  is  the  end  of  what  I  chanro
on  youV"  says  the  giver  of  the  charge;  "it  is  that  you  have  your  being  filled  with  lovc.*^
This  is  the  qualitication  of  the  healer  of  the  body :  he  must  be  thoroughly  intere^t^Ki  in
the  recovery  of  his  patients.  So  it  may  bo  said  to  be  the  main  qualitication  of  the
healer  of  the  soul :  he  must  be  thoroughly  interested  in  the  spiritual  health  of  those


CH.  1.1-20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  23

who  are  committed  to  his  care.  1.  The  love  of  the  teacher  must  he  associated  with  pure
elcinents.  "  Out  of  a  pure  heart.**  He  mu>t  have,  mingled  with  his  affection,  and  giving
character  to  it,  an  antipathy  to  sin  in  every  form,  to  unreality,  to  superficiality ;  and
a  passion  for  holiness  in  every  form,  for  reality,  for  depth.  2.  The  love  of  the  teacher
must  he  associated  with  conscientiousness,  "  And  a  good  conscience.**  He  must  have,
in  the  first  place,  a  conscience  that  faithfully  witnesses  to  his  duty,  to  the  methods  he
should  follow  in  his  work,  to  the  forms  of  service  his  love  for  the  people  should  take.
And  he  must  have,  in  the  second  place — which  is  also  included  in  the  scriptural  idea  of
a  good  conscience — the  approval  of  his  own  mind,  the  consciousness  that  he  is  using  all
diligence  in  carrying  out  his  ideas  of  duty,  in  following  his  methods,  in  his  endeavours
to  be  serviceable.  3.  The  love  of  the  teacher  must  he  fed  from  the  highest  Source.  "  And
faith  unfeigned."  His  faith  brings  him  into  contact  with  an  invisible  Saviour,  by  whom
he  is  elevated  in  his  whole  spirit  as  a  teacher,  at  the  fountain  of  whose  love  his  love
is  fed,  and  not  only  in  intensity  but  in  all  that  it  needs  of  purity  and  direction.  Only
his  faith  must  be  unfeigned ;  for  if  it  is  not  in  his  life,  if  it  is  only  as  a  mask,  then
he  can  only  come  into  contact  with  his  own  imaginings,  by  which  certainly  he  cannot
be  elevated,  from  which  source  his  love  cannot  properly  be  fed.

III.  Tke  end  missed.  "  From  which  things  some  having  swerved  have  turned  aside
unto  vain  talking ;  desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  Law,  though  they  understand  neither
what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  confidently  affirm.**  The  end  was  missed  by  the  false
teachers.  They  did  not  hit  the  purity  of  motive,  conscientiousness,  imfeignedness  of
faith,  that  should  have  given  character  to  their  affection.  Being  thus  incapable  of
profitable  discourse,  they  **  turned  aside  unto  vain  talking.**  They  gave  themselves  out
to  be  "  teachers  of  the  Law,'*  i.e.  the  Mosaic  Law,  especially  the  Law  of  the  ten  com-
mandments, afterward  referred  to  in  detail.  But  they  were  doubly  disqualified.  They
were  confused  in  what  they  said.  They  were,  therefore,  different  from  the  teachers  of
the  Law  who  were  opposed  in  the  Churches  of  Galatia.  For  these  were  not  chargeable
with  incoherencics ;  they  knew  well  enough  what  they  said  in  seeking  to  subvert
Christian  liberty.  We  are  rather  to  think  of  mystical  interpretation  of  the  Law.  They
were  further  disqualified  in  not  understanding  their  subject,  viz.  the  Law;  the  confidence
of  their  affirmations  being  in  proix)rtion  to  the  extent  of  their  ignorance.

IV.  Use  of  tue  Law.  "But  we  know  that  the  Law  is  good,  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully,
as  knowing  this,  that  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless  and
unruly,  for  the  un<;odly  and  sinners,  for  the  unholy  and  profane,  for  murderers  of  fathers
and  murderers  of  mothers,  for  man-slayers,  for  fornicators,  for  abusers  of  themselves  with
men,  for  men-stealers,  for  liars,  for  false  swearers,  and  if  there  be  any  other  thing  contrary
to  the  sound  doctrine.*'  The  apostle  begins  by  laying  down  a  proposition  about  the
Law  which  no  one  would  be  disposed  to  controvert.  It  was  a  boon  from  Heaven  if  used
according  to  its  intention.  In  the  next  proposition  he  indicates  the  intention  of  the
law  as  comin;:^  under  the  intention  of  all  law.  His  position  is,  that  law  is  not  made  for
a  righteous  man.  "  Let  us  think  of  the  relation  in  which  a  good  man  stands  to  the
laws  of  his  country.  In  one  sense,  indeed,  he  is  under  them;  but  in  another  and
higher  sense  he  is  above  them,  and  moves  along  his  course  with  conscious  freedom,
as  if  he  scarcely  knew  of  their  existence.  For  what  is  the  object  of  such  laws  but
to  prevent,  under  severe  penalties,  the  commission  of  crime?  Crime,  however,  is  already
the  object  of  his  ahhorrence;  he  needs  no  penalties  to  keep  him  from  it.  Ho  would
never  harm  the  person  or  property  of  a  neighbour,  though  there  were  not  a  single
enactment  in  the  statute-book  on  the  subject.  His  own  love  of  good  and  hatred  of  evil
keep  him  in  the  path  of  rectitude,  not  the  fines,  imprisonments,  or  tortures  which  the
law  hangs  around  the  path  of  the  criminal.  The  law  was  not  made  for  Aim."  As  truly
can  it  be  said  that  the  Law  of  the  ten  commandments  is  not  made  for  the  Christian,
who  is  the  rij::htcous  man.  For  he  is  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  i.e.  he  is  regarded
as  having  fulfilled  the  whole  Law  in  Christ.  What  more,  then,  has  the  Law  to  do  with
him?  And  further,  so  far  as  ho  answers  to  the  conception  of  a  Christian,  he  is
sanctified  by  the  faith  of  Christ.  He  is  in  Christ  as  the  Source  of  his  holiness.  He
has  got  beyond  the  discii)line  of  the  Law,  inasmuch  as  he  has  got  it  already  in  his
heart.  Thus  dues  the  ai)ostle  take  the  ground  from  under  the  would-be  teachers  of  the
Law,  whose  position  would  be  that  the  Law  mystically  interpreted  was  necessary  to
putting  the  crown  of  perfection  on  the  Christian.    The  Law  is  made  for  unrighteous


24  TEE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  i.  1—20.


persons^  of  whom  many  classes  aro  mentioned.  These  are  grouped  with  reference  to  the
two  tables  of  the  Law.  Under  the  head  of  breakers  of  the  first  table,  ije.  the  unrighteous
toward  God,  are  given  six  classes  in  pairs.  There  are  the  lawless  and  unruly.  With
aggravation,  they  refuse  to  be  under  law,  making  their  own  pleasure  their  law.
There  are  the  ungodly  and  sinners.  They  have  thrown  off  all  awe  of  God.  There  are
the  unholy  and  pio/ane.  Instead  of  being  consecrated  to  God,  they  trample  on  holy
things.  If  the  division  of  commandments  had  been  followed,  the  classes  would  have
been  deniers  of  God,  idolaters,  the  profane,  sabbath-breakers.  Generally,  it  is  disregard
of  what  is  Divine  that  is  brought  out  under  this  head.  Under  the  second  head,  of
breakers  of  the  second  table,  t.^.  the  unrighteous  toward  man,  are  given  eight  classes,
six  of  them  in  pairs.  Here  the  division  of  commandments  is  followed.  There  are
murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers  of  mothers,  "  Smiters"  is  preferred  by  some.  These
are  the  breakers  of  the  fifth  commandment  with  the  greatest  aggravation.  Next  by
itself  stands  the  class  of  man-slayers.  These  are  the  breakers  of  the  sixth  commandment.
There  are  fornicators  and  abusers  of  themselves  with  men.  These  workers  of  abomina-
tion are  the  breakers  of  the  seventh  commandment.  Next  by  itself  stands  the  class
of  men-st<a2ers.  The  apostle  puts  the  man-stealer  as  the  most  flagrant  of  all  breakers  of
the  eighth  commandment.  No  theft  of  a  man*s  goods  can  be  compared  with  that  most
atrocious  act  which  steals  the  man  himself ^  and  robs  him  of  that  free  will  which  is  the
first  gift  of  his  Creator.  And  of  this  crime  all  are  guilty  who,  whether  directly  or
indirectly,  are  engaged  in,  or  uphold,  from  whatever  pretence,  the  making  or  keeping
of  nlavcs.  There  aro  liars  and  false  swearers.  These  are  the  breakers  of  the  ninth
commandment.  He  does  not  go  on  to  the  breakers  of  the  tenth  conmiandment,
but  concludes  with  the  greatest  inclusiveness,  "  And  if  there  be  any  other  thing
contrary  to  the  sound  doctrine"  (t.c.  not  morbid,  as  the  teaching  of  the  mystical
interpreters).  The  apostle's  position  is  that  the  Law  is  made  for  all  these  unrighteous
persons.  But  for  things  being  in  an  abnormal  state  there  would  not  have  been  the
writing  do^vn  of  so  plain  duties  in  the  ten  commandments,  especially  in  the  form,
**  Thou  shalt  not."  The  Law  is  made  for  sinners,  in  being  intended  to  hold  up  before
them  a  proper  representation  of  righteousness,  by  which,  if  they  are  convicted,  they
should  also  feel  shut  up  to  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith.  Has  the  Law,  then,
no  use  for  the  Christian?  Only  in  so  far  as  he  is  not  Christianized.  It  is  of  use
in  keeping  him  under  grace  as  the  source  of  his  security  and  happiness.  And  it  is  of
use  in  so  far  as  it  holds  up  a  representation  of  righteousness  that  reaches  beyond  his
attainment.  The  truth  ia  well  brought  out  in  one  of  the  symbolical  books  of  the
Luthernns.  "  Although  the  Law  was  not  made  for  the  righteous  (as  the  apostle  testifies,
1  Tim.  i.  0),  yet  this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  the  righteous  might  live  without  law;
for  the  Divine  Law  is  written  upon  their  hearts.  The  true  and  genuine  meaning,
therefore,  of  Paul's  words  is,  that  the  Law  cannot  bring  those  who  have  been  reconciled
to  God  through  Christ  under  its  curse,  and  that  its  restraint  cannot  be  irksome  to  the
renewed,  since  they  delight  in  the  Law  of  God  after  the  inner  man.  But  believers  are
not  comj)letely  and  perfectly  renewed  in  this  life ;  and  though  their  sins  are  covered
by  the  absolutely  perfect  obedience  of  Christ,  so  as  not  to  be  imputed  to  believers  to
their  condemnation,  and  though  the  mortification  of  the  old  Adam  and  the  renovation
in  the  spirit  of  their  mind  has  been  begun  by  the  Holy  Si)irit,  yet  the  old  Adam  still
remains  in  nature's  powers  and  affections."

V.  Accordance  with  the  gospel.  "  According  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the
blessed  God,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  The  gospel  may  be  presented  either
in  relation  to  man,  or  in  relation  to  God.  In  relation  to  man,  the  gospel  is  manifold.
It  is  a  gospel  of  peace;  it  quiets  the  guilty  conscience.  It  is  a  gosi)el  of  purity;  it
purifies  the  heart.  It  is  a  gos])el  of  comfort;  it  imjxirts  to  us  a  strong  consolation
under  all  the  ills  of  this  life.  It  is  a  gus|)cl  of  hoi^e ;  it  opens  up  to  us  beyond  this
bounded  life  the  boundless  prospect  of  the  life  everlasting.  In  relation  to  God,  too,  the
gospel  is  manifold.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  righteous  God ;  it  is  a  satisfaction  of  Divine
justice.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  gracious  God ;  it  is  an  overflow  of  Divine  mercy  and
compassion.  It  is  the  gospel  of  a  wise  God ;  it  is  the  application  of  Divine  intelligence
to  a  very  difllcult  ])roblem.  It  is  the  gos];)el  of  an  almighty  God;  it  is  an  agency
charged  with  Divine  power.  It  is  here  the  gospel,  not  of  a  righteous  God,  not  of  a
gracious  God,  not  of  a  wise  God,  not  of  an  almighty  Grod,  but  of  a  blessed  God.    And


cii.  1. 1—20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  25

in  this  connection  it  is  put  forward  as  embodying  the  glory  of  the  blessed  God.  "The
gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  blessed  God."  Such  are  the  words  of  Paul,  the  great  gospel
preacher,  to  his  pupil  Timothy.  Consider,  in  the  first  place,  how  it  belongs  to  the
blessed  God  to  communicate  his  blessedness ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  how  the  gospel
is  a  communication  of  the  glory  of  the  blessedness  of  God.  First,  then,  how  it  belongs
to  the  blessed  Qod  to  communicate  his  bless&iness.  The  **  blessed  Grod  "  is  an  uncommon
conception  in  Scripture.  We  indeed  find — "Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the
Blessed?"  **The  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever;"  "God  blessed  for  ever."  But
"blessed"  there  is  adorable,  worthy  to  be  praised;  literally,  "worthy  to  be  well
spoken  of."  It  is  the  word  which  conveys  an  acknowledgment  of  God's  claim  to
undivided  worship.  Whereas  "blessed"  here  is  equivalent  to  "happy"  as  applied
to  us.  God  is  said  to  be  blessed,  as  we  are  said  to  be  happy.  And  seeing  "  blessed "
is  used  in  a  totally  dififerent  sense  in  Scripture,  the  "  happy  God "  would  best  conrey
the  sense  here.  And  we  see  no  reason  why  we  should  not  say  that  God  is  happy,
when  in  the  original  the  word  which  is  applied  to  God  is  the  same  which  is  applied
to  man.  There  is  only  one  other  place  in  Scripture  where  God  is  said  to  be
thus  blessed;  and,  noticeably,  it  is  in  this  same  Epistle:  "The  blessed  and  only
Potentate ; "  literally,  "  the  happy  and  only  Potentate."  It  is  as  if  the  inspired  writer
consciously  supplied  a  want.  It  had  never  been  said  that  God  was  happy.  So  twice  he
introduces  this  conception  into  this  late  Epistle.  And  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  in  the
Revised  Version  "happy"  has  not  been  substituted  for  "blessed"  in  the  two  places.
The  blessedness  of  God  is  not  different  in  kind  from  ours.  If  there  is  any  deep  calm
in  our  minds,  that  is  the  same  with  the  calm  of  God.  If  any  true  thrill  of  joy  passes
through  our  hearts,  that  is  the  same  which  passes  through  the  heart  of  God.  But
blessedness  is  God's  in  a  way  that  it  is  not  ours.  We  are  only  blessed  in  him  who
gave  us  being,  and  for  whom  we  have  being.  And  ours  is  a  blessedness  that  can  be
added  to.  We  are  finite,  and  there  will  always  be,  in  the  fact  of  our  finitude,  a  desire
to  be  more  blessed.  But  God  is  self-blessed.  We  thiuk  of  this  by  means  of  the  con-
ception of  God  existing  far  away  in  a  past  eternity,  when  there  was  yet  no  other
intelligence,  not  even  the  faintest  reflection  of  his  glory  in  any  created  object,  and  as
happy  then  as  now  when  he  has  peopled  a  universe.  Such  a  thought  is  not  bearable
by  us,  and  God  has  not  asked  us  to  dwell  upon  it ;  and  we  would  say  that,  while  we
may  be  forced  thus  to  think  of  Godhead  as  self-poised,  or  resting  in  self,  we  may  at
the  same  time  be  allowed  to  dwell  upon  the  far  more  pleasing  thought  of  the  Three
Persons  of  the  Godhead  as  resting  in  one  another.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are
happy  in  one  another's  society  and  fellowship.  It  will  be  felt  that  that  thought,  which
is  denied  to  the  Unitarian,  greatly  relieves  the  thought  of  a  God  isolated,  in  his  blessed-
ness, away  before  and  out  of  time.  Still  the  fact  remains,  that  as  the  one  God  is
infinitely  blessed,  so  also  he  is  blessed  in  himself.  As  there  is  in  his  boundless
being  no  void  of  blessedness  to  fill  up,  no  jarring  note  to  correct,  so  there  can  be  no
desire  to  make  himself  more  blessed.  But  it  perfectly  consists  with  that  that  he  should
desire  to  make  others  blessed.  This  is  in  keeping  wnth  what  we  find  among  men.  It
is  true  of  the  miserable  man  that  he  is  selfish.  It  is  there  that  he  is  wrong,  at  the
very  commencement.  In  the  very  act  of  enclosing  himself,  or  in  the  habit  of  keeping
himself  enclosed  within  his  own  shell,  he  shuts  himself  out  from  blessedness.  He  does
not  go  out  to  God.  At  every  approach  and  overture  of  God,  he  draws  back  further
within  himself.  His  sin  is  that  he  will  keep  within  himself,  and  will  not  go  out  in
confession  and  desire  and  faith  toward  God.  And  so  God  does  not  bless  him.  Ho
does  not  go  out  in  love  to  God's  creatures,  and  so  these  do  not  bless  him.  And  thus,
shutting  him^elf  out  from  blessedness,  his  tendency  is  to  grudge  blessedness  to  others.
He  has  a  secret  joy  in  misfortune.  He  could  see  a  funeral  pall  drawn  over  all  that  is
fair  in  nature.  Ho  would  have  the  smile  to  vanish  from  our  countenance.  He  would
have  sweet  voices  hu>hed.  He  would  have  all  things  brought  down  to  his  own  dull
level.  And,  worst  outcome  of  all — yet  we  would  say  a  necessary  outcome — ^he
grudges  even  God  his  blessedness.  His  feeling  is  that,  being  miserable  himself,  he
could  hce  God  less  happy  than  he  is.  The  ha|)py  man,  on  the  other  hand,  is  unselfish.
It  is  by  being  open  that  he  comes  to  be  hai)i)y.  He  goes  out  to  God  in  meek  abnega-
tion of  self,  and  so  God  blesses  him.  He  goes  out  to  God's  creatures  in  delight  and
gratitude  and  mercy,  and  so  ho  receives  contributions  to  his  happiness  on  every  side.


26  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  1. 1—20.

Now,  just  OS  tho  miserable  man  would  have  a  miserable  world  around  him»  so  the
happy  man  would  have  a  happy  world  around  him.  He  would  distribute  happiness
most  lavishly.  He  would  admit  all  to  a  share  of  it.  He  would  have  all  to  be  happy  as
he  is  happy.  "  I  would  to  Grod,'*  said  Paul  to  Agrippa,  "  that  not  only  thou,  but  also
all  that  near  me  this  day,  were  both  almost  and  alto<];cther  such  as  I  am,  except  these
bands"  The  happy  man  is  magnanimous ;  he  wishes  ill  to  no  one ;  he  invokes  blessing
even  upon  his  enemies.  Out  of  his  own  heart  of  blessedness  there  seems  to  rise  the
desire  to  make  others  blessed.  And  so,  although  Grod  can  have  no  desire  to  make  him-
self more  blessed,  yet,  being  full  of  blessedness  himself,  he  desires  to  make  others  blessed.
Creation  may  be  taken  as  an  expression  of  that  desire  on  the  part  of  Ood.  Creation
is  just  God  flowing  out  in  blessedness.  It  is  Ood  saying,  ''Let  me  not  keep  my  blessed-
ness to  myself;  let  others  be  blessed  with  me."  \Vhat  purpose  in  creation  can  we  con-
ceive into  which  that  does  not  enter  ?  It  is  true  that  we  are  created  to  give  praise  to
God ;  but  that  is  more  from  our  side.  From  God's  side,  it  is  perhaps  better  to  say
that  he  created  us,  not  so  much  that  he  might  receive  our  praise,  as  that  we  might
receive  his  blessedness.  God,  we  may  suppose,  would  not  have  created  for  the  mere
purpose  of  creating,  however  pleasurable  that  is  to  him.  Neither  would  he  have
created  merely  to  have  a  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  his  power.  What  to  him  were
empty  worlds  in  which  to  store  up  his  ix)wer,  through  which  at  will  to  roll  the  thunder
of  his  power  ?  Neither  would  he  have  created  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  working  accord-
ing to  a  2)lan,  or  of  having  the  marvels  of  his  wisdom  set  forth  before  him.  What  to
him  were  the  clothing  matter  with  plants  and  trees,  touching  each  minutest  part  with
his  plastic  hand,  and  varying  every  form?  The  blessed  (jod  created,  not  to  have
pleasure  himself,  but  to  give  pleasure.  It  was  that,  we  think,  that  moved  him  to  create.
And  therefore  he  made  living  creatures — creatures  cai)able  of  receiving  pleasure.  And
he  cared  for  having  nothing  in  the  world  which  was  not  to  bless  them.  From  the
tiniest  iusect  that  dances  out  its  lifetime  in  a  summer  sun,  through  all  the  orders  of
living  beings  up  to  man  himself,  invested  with  lordship,  he  has  only  one  design — to
make  existence  pleasurable  to  his  creatures.  True,  there  is  evil  in  the  world,  reaching
down  from  man  to  the  other  creatures  which  necessarily  share  with  him  his  earthly
lot.  But  there  is  reason  for  the  evil ;  and  the  evil,  it  is  to  be  observed,  is  not  in  the
creation.  It  has  been  induced  on  an  all-good  creation.  In  no  case  does  God  as  a  final
end  make  a  being  to  indict  pain  on  it.  Aid  even  as  it  is,  with  the  evil  introduced  into
our  world,  who  will  say  that  God  intends  our  destruction  ?  It  would  have  been  a  very
diflfercnt  world  if  there  had  been  the  shadowing  forth  of  any  such  intention.  It  is  of
things  as  they  are  that  Paul  says,  taking  a  broad  retrospective  view  of  God's  dealings
in  providence,  "  He  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that  ho  did  good,  and  gave  us
rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.**  He
would  not  continue  to  make  provi>ion  for  our  support,  did  ho  mean  our  destruction.
And  not  only  does  he  make  provision  for  our  support,  but  he  gives  us  all  things  richly  to
enjoy.  He  gives  us  food,  and  the  other  necessaries  of  life  in  abundance.  And  not  only
so,  but  he  gives  us  many  things  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  them.  He  arranges  objects  in
nature  with  a  regard  to  beauty.  He  richly  colours  them ;  he  floods  them  with  a  kindly
light.  He  gives  us  flowers ;  he  gives  us  the  song  of  birds.  He  gives  us  rainbows  and
sunsets,  and  clouds  of  many  a  form.  And  he  curtains  the  earth,  that  he  may  show
us  the  glory  of  the  starry  heavens.  And  all  these  things  he  gives  us  chiefly  as  luxuries.
We  say,  then,  that  even  in  nature  God  testifies  to  his  desire,  to  his  intention  to
make  us  happy.  Even  in  nature,  which  has  been  spoken  of  as  **  red  in  tooth  and
claw  with  ravin,"  God  gives  us  the  promise  of  the  coming  gospel.  Consider,  in  the
second  place,  how  the  gospel  is  a  carmnuniaitton  of  the  glory  of  the  blessedness  of  God,
We  remark  (1)  that  this  is  true  of  the  gosiKil,  if  we  consider  who  are  made  blessed  by  it.
It  is  a  gosi)el  of  blessedness  to  us.  It  does  not  need  to  be  proved  that  we  are  not  in
the  state  for  which  God  intended  us.  We  do  not  bear  the  impress  of  the  blessed  God.
The  lark  mounts  up  on  wings  of  joy  to  the  sky.  Song  seems  to  be  of  its  very  nature.
And  as  soon  as  it  has  got  strength  of  wing,  it  mounts  up  and  pours  out  its  song.  We
could  scarcely  think  of  a  lark  in  a  summer  day,  hiding  itself  away  from  the  light  and
refusing  to  sing.  But  it  is  not  so  natural  for  us  to  be  happy.  We  are  accustomed  to
misery.  We  do  not  expect  men  to  be  highly  joyous.  We  do  not  expect  men  to  bo
musical  to  the  height  of  their  nature.    We  expect  a  certain  depression,  a  certain  note


CH.  1.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  27


of  sadness  in  all  their  joy.  What  better  confession  could  there  be  that  we  are  miserable  ?
We  are  sadly  out  of  tune.  Who  can  bring  joy  out  of  us  ?  Now,  here  comes  in  the
gosjiol  to  make  us  happy.  Qtod  could  have  made  others  happy.  If  there  had  not  been
enough,  he  could  have  created  more,  and  poured  out  his  happiness  upon  them.  But
no;  here  are  a  few  miserable  beings.  Out  of  the  himdred  sheep,  here  is  one  that
has  strayed  away  in  the  wilds  and  haunts  of  beasts  of  prey.  Out  of  the  countless
myriads  that  are  in  God's  universe,  here  are  a  few  that  are  miserable.  And  the  blessed
Grod  says,  "  I  would  make  them  happy ;  I  would  bring  back  joy  to  their  hearts ;  I  would
pour  out  my  blessedness  on  them."  As  if  one  more  philanthropic  than  the  rest  should
say,  "  I  will  not  go  to  the  homes  of  i)eace  and  health  and  plenty,  and  try  to  make  those
already  ble^sed  doubly  blessed  ;  but  I  will  go  to  the  prisons,  and  to  the  hospitals,
and  to  the  alleys,  and,  wherever  I  see  suffering,  I  will  attempt  to  relieve  it."  Glorious
gosj^el,  then,  that  has  respect  to  us  who  are  miserable  1  But  far  more  glorious,  if  it  is
considered  how  we  are  miserable.  We  are  miserable  by  our  own  act.  In  our  folly  and
sin,  we  have  thrown  away  blessedness.  We  have  sold  it  for  a  mess  of  pottage.
Strange  it  is,  yet  it  is  truly  none  other  than  this,  that  we  have  willed  our  own  misery.
And,  having  guiltily  willed  our  own  misery,  God,  we  can  suppose,  might  have  willed
it  too.  He  might  have  said,  "  I  have  made  all  my  creatures  for  happiness ;  but  these —
these  whom  1  have  honoured  above  others — they  will  not  have  it ;  they  have  spumed
it  away  from  them,  and  so  by  their  own  act,  not  by  my  wish,  they  are  miserable."
But  glorious  gospel,  in  s])ite  of  our  sin,  the  blessed  God  willed  our  happiness.  And  in
his  compassions  he  said,  "  I  will  raise  them  out  of  their  misery."  And  so  his  language
now  is,  •*  I  have  no  pleasure  iu  your  misery."  Thrice  to  this  effect  he  speaks  in  Ezekiel :
"Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die?  saith  the  Lord  God;"  "For
I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  hini  that  dicth,  Kaith  the  Lord  God ; "  "  Say  unto
them  that  pine  away  in  their  sins,  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in
the  death  of  the  wicked."  Hero,  then,  is  our  glorious  gospel.  The  blessed  God,  the
Fountain  of  blessedness,  wishes  you  to  be  blessed.  Whoever  you  are  that  are  unhappy,
that  are  pining  away  in  your  sins,  that  are  afraid  of  eternal  misery,  believe  it,  that
18  not  according  to  God's  heart.  To  the  most  wretched,  woe-bcgone,  sin-distracted
soul  on  the  face  of  the  cartli,  wo  are  warranted  in  the  Name  of  the  happy  God  to  say —
Be  happy.  We  remark  (2)  the  gospel  is  glorious,  if  we  consider  (he  means  hy  which  we
are  made  lleKred.  l(  creation  was  pleasing  to  God,  it  was  also  easy.  He  had  simply
to  will  the  existence  of  happy  creatures.  But  he  had  to  do  more  than  will  us  sinners
to  be  happy.  We  look  upon  a  great  city ;  we  think  by  what  means  it  has  been  built
up;  we  think  of  the  incalculable  labour  that  has  been  sixjnt  upun  it.  We  think  how
generations  of  men  have  toiled  hard  at  it,  with  what  anxietj''  they  have  contrived,
with  what  j^atience  and  endurance  they  have  laid  stone  ujwn  stone,  and  added  house
to  house  and  street  to  street.  We  think  how  many  able  men  have  spent  their  lives,
sacrificed  their  available  strength,  in  the  building  up  of  this  city,  and  then  we  think
with  what  majestic  case,  and  how  in  a  moment  of  time,  God  might  have  ])laccd  it  there
complete.  But  to  make  us  sinners  happy,  was  work  more  diflicult  for  God  than  for  us
the  building  up  of  a  city — work  requiring  greater  sacrifice  of  life.  But  glorious  gospel,
glorious  beyond  all  parallel,  glorious  beyond  all  concei)tion,  the  blessed  Son  in  the
bosom  of  the  blessed  Father  said,  "I  will  undertake  it;  I  will  suffer  and  die  to  make
men  happy."  And  so  he  takes  measures  to  sutler  and  die.  He  descends  into  our
humanity.  And  do  you  say  it  is  man  who  is  there,  sutlering  and  agonizing  and  dying  ?
Say,  rather,  it  is  God  in  our  humanity.  Why,  the  means  used  to  make  us  happy  are
altogether  stupendous  in  their  proiX)rtions.  And  dreadfully  hard-hearted  and  void  of  all
feeling  must  we  be,  if  we  can  see  tliese  means  used  lx)ft)re  our  eyes,  and  yet  we  be  content
to  rem.iin  in  our  misery,  as  though  Gotl  had  done  nothing  but  had  allowed  us  to  suffer
the  consequences  of  our  sins.  Oh,  let  us  learn  the  lesson  that  Calvary  has  to  teach  us
about  God's  desire  to  make  us  happy.  Let  us  dismiss  every  dark  conception  of  God
from  our  minds  which  an  evil  heart  may  throw  up.  Let  us  feel  that  on  God's  part
there  is  an  infinite  willingness,  nay,  an  infinite  anxiety  and  longing  to  bless  us.  And
let  us  heartily  respond  to  God's  desire  to  bless  us,  in  the  way  prescribed  by  him.  Let
us  take,  as  the  object  of  our  faith,  what  has  come  out  of  that  heart  of  blessedness,
and  is  now  evidently  set  before  us.  Let  us  take,  as  the  object  of  our  laith,  the  full
and  free  and  meritorious  righteousness  of  the  crucified  Son  of  God,  to  make  us  just  and


28  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  1. 1—201


lioly,  that  80  wo  may  be  happy.  We  remark  (3)  that  the  gospel  is  glorious,  if  we  con-
bidcr  the  nature  of  the  blessedness  that  is  communicated  oy  it  The  blessedness  for
which  man  was  intended,  and  to  which  he  would  have  attained  through  obedience,  was
very  great.  Passing  safely  through  the  gate  of  trial  and  peril,  he  would  have  attained —
shall  we  say  ? — to  a  God-like  blc>sedness.  He  would  have  had  the  blessedness  of  a  free,
intelligent  being.  He  would  have  been  made  blessed  with  Ood,  and  in  the  enjoyment
of  God,  to  all  eternity.  Now,  the  gospel  is  glorious  in  proclaiming  this,  that  man  is
not  to  be  less  blessea  than  ho  would  have  l^n  had  he  never  fallen  from  blessedness.
He  is  not  to  be  mulcted  in  blessedness.  He  is  not  to  have  a  stigma  upon  him  to  mark
the  dishonour  he  formerly  did  to  God.  He  is  not  to  be  plac«i  on  a  lower  order  of
blessed  beings.  Kny,  in  the  fact  that  Christ  has  taken  our  human  nature  into  glorious
imion  with  his  Divine  nature,  have  we  not  thereby  been  made  capable  of  a  higher
blessedness  ?  And  not  only  so,  but  we  have  been  redeemed.  And  how  peculiarly  bles^
it  is  to  be  redeemed  I  It  is  more  than  if  we  had  stood.  We  can  now  not  only  say,
"Our  God,"  but  "Our  Redeemer."  How  often  does  God  take  the  name  in  Isaicdi !  **  Thus
saith  the  Lord,  thy  Redeemer."  It  is  a  new  tie,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,
0  Jacob,  and  he  tliat  lormed  thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  Our
peace  is  peculiarly  blessed ;  it  is  the  feeling  of  reconciliation,  the  sweet  sense  of  sin
forgiven.  Our  joy  is  peculiarly  blessed;  it  is  the  joy  of  salvation.  It  is  the  sense  of
indebtedness  to  Divine  grace.  We  were  on  the  broad  road  to  destruction.  We  were
down  in  the  horrible  pit,  and  in  the  miry  clay ;  but  we  have  been  saved,  we  have  been
redeemed.  And  does  not  the  woe  we  have  escaped  sweeten  our  present  joy  ?  Can  we
ever  forget  it  ?  Our  heaven,  we  think,  will  begin  with  a  sight  of  the  w^oe  of  which  we
were  worthy.  And  then  we  have  been  redeemed  by  Gtjd.  "  Your  Redeemer,  the  Holy
One  of  Israel."  And  does  it  not  heighten  our  blessedness  to  remember  that  we  owe  it
to  the  grace  of  the  most  holy  God  ?  And  then  he  has  redeemed  us  by  no  less  glorious
a  Being  than  his  own  well-l>eloved  Son,  and  at  the  expense  of  that  Son's  life.  Is  that
not  fitted  to  raise  the  soul  to  its  most  joyful  exercise?  The  blessedness  of  every
intelligent  being  has  been  heightened  in  connection  with  this  salvation.  For  views  have
been  presented  by  it  of  the  character  of  God  which  could  not  otherwise  have  been  pre-
sented. Still,  there  is  always  this  additional  in  our  case.  We  are  the  parties  concerned ;
we  are  the  parties  for  whom  all  this  has  been  done ;  we  are  the  parties  for  whom  this
great  salvation  has  been  provided.  It  is  a  glorious  gospel,  then,  we  say.  It  makes  us
doubly  blessed.  It  seems  to  contain  the  elements  of  an  ecstatic  bliss.  Ever  as  we  realize
the  greatness  of  the  redemption,  we  shall  become  more  gloriously  blessed.  We  conclude
with  two  practical  remarks.  First,  let  us  keep  near  to  the  Source  of  blessedness  by
faith  and  prayer  and  meditation.  Let  us  not  go  out  to  any  creaturely  good,  far  less  to
evil,  as  though  it  were  the  fountain  of  pleasure;  but  let  us  go  out  to  the  blessed  God
himself,  especially  in  the  glorious  gosjMjl,  that  wo  may  have  our  hearts  filled  with  a
hallowed  and  satisfying  joy.  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  this  w^ater" — of  mere  creaturely
pleasure — "  shall  thirst  again :  but  whosoever  shall  drink  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give
him  shall  never  thirst ;  but  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of
water  springing  up  to  everlasting  life."  In  the  second  place,  being  blessed  ourselves,
let  us  seek  to  make  blessed.  That  is  to  be  like  the  happy  God.  Let  us  make  sacrifices
for  the  happiness  of  others.  Let  us  count  those  moments  the  happiest  of  our  existence
in  which  we  lose  sight  of  self,  in  prayerful  or  active  devotion  to  the  interests  of  those
whom  Providence  i)uts  in  our  way,  or  more  specially  commits  to  our  care.  And  if  sin
was  not  an  inseparable  obstacle  in  the  way  of  Grod  blessing  us,  let  it  not  be  an  inseparable
obstacle  in  the  way  of  our  seeking  to  bless  others.  "But  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your
enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them
that  despitefuUy  use  you,  and  jxirsecute  you ;  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your
Father  which  is  in  heaven :  for  he  makcth  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,
and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.'* — R.  F.

Vers.  12 — 17. — Pers'^nal  digression,  L  Thankfulness  for  being  ArroiNTED  by
Christ  to  his  service.  "  I  thank  him  that  enabled  me,  even  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,
for  that  he  counted  mo  faithful,  appointing  me  to  his  service."  At  the  close  of  the
eleventh  verse  Paul  brings  in  his  relation  to  the  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  happy  God.  It
was  a  trust  committed  to  him,  t.e.  it  was  made  his  great  business  to  convey  the  message


CH.I.1— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  29

of  happiness  to  his  fellow-men.  And  as  ho  Avas  made  responsible,  so  also  he  was
empowered.  He  was  not  sent  a  warfare  on  his  own  charges.  He  was  supplied  with  all
that  was  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  the  duties  connected  with  the  trust.  And  so
he  cannot  refrain  from  turning  aside  for  a  little,  to  poiu:  forth  his  soul  in  gratitude  to
him  who  empowered  him  as  he  also  gave  him  the  trust,  even  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,
the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  from  whom  proceed  all  ministerial  appointments  and
all  ministerial  qualifications.  What  called  forth  his  gratitude  was,  that  Christ  reposed
confidence  in  him  in  appointing  him  to  his  service.  He  saw  that  he  was  one  who  could
be  used  and  trusted  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel ;  and  so  he  gave  him  the  appoint-
ment and  the  qualifications.  To  be  assured  of  this  as  Paul  was  is  great  joy.  How
thankful  ministers  should  be,  if  they  have  some  evidence,  in  their  own  earnestness
and  in  the  fruits  of  their  ministry,  that  they  have  not  mistaken  their  calling !

IL  The  considekation  of  his  previous  life.  "  Though  I  was  before  a  blasphemer,
and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious :  howbeit  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  ignorantly
in  unbelief."  The  gratitude  of  the  apostle  was  enhanced  by  the  consideration  of  his
persecuting  career.  He  was  before  a  blasphemer,  his  evil  speaking  being  directed
against  the  Name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  was  also  a  persecutor  even  in  this  respect,
that  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme.  And  he  rose  to  the  full  conception  of  a  perse-
cutor in  the  iyrannical  way  in  which  he  went  about  the  work  of  persecution.  At  this
stage  of  his  life  he  was  far  removed  from  being  the  minister  of  Christ.  But  though  ho
showed  no  mercy,  he  obtained  mercy.  There  was  this  to  be  said  for  him,  that  what
he  did  against  Christ  he  did  ignorantly.  He  acted  under  an  erroneous  impression.  It
was  not  that  he  knew  Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  hated  him  for  his  Divine  cre-
dentials, especially  because  he  manifested  the  Divine  goodness.  But  ho  was  carried
away  by  zeal  for  the  Jewish  religion,  which,  he  thought,  was  greatly  endangered  by
the  triumphs  of  Christianity.  Ho  was  thus  not  in  the  most  direct,  most  deliberate
way,  against  Christ.  And,  so  far  as  ho  was  not  throwing  away  the  most  sacred  con-
victions, he  was  within  the  pale  of  mercy.  He  was  within  the  scope  of  the  Saviour's
intercession  from  the  throne,  if  wo  are  to  regard  it  as  conformed  to  his  intercession
from  the  cross,  which  was  in  these  words :  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not
what  they  do  " — words  which]  are  echoed  by  Peter  in  his  address  to  the  Jews,  "And  now,
brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers."  It  was  in
a  state  of  unbelief  that  he  was  ignorant.  This  implied  that  he  had  not  followed  his
lights  as  others  had  followed  theirs,  not  greater  than  his.  He  had  been  directed  away
from  Christianity  by  confidence  in  his  own  righteousness.  And  he  had  given  way
to  the  disposition,  so  natural  to  the  depraved  heart,  to  make  a  tyrannical  use  of  power.
He  was,  therefore,  most  culpable,  standing  in  need  of  repentance  and  forgiveness,  as
Peter  went  on  to  impress  on  the  Jews  in  the  address  just  referred  to :  **  Kepent  ye,
therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."

IIL  Grace  abounding  exceedingly.  "  And  the  grace  of  our  Lord  aboimdcd  exceed-
ingly with  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  In  Rom.  v.  Paul  says  of  sin
that  it  abounded ;  here  the  same  word  is  used  of  grace,  with  an  addition  to  it  which
gives  it  the  force  of  a  superlative.  He  labours  to  express  the  stretch  of  grace  which
our  Lord  had  to  make  toward  him  when  he,  a  guilty  persecutor,  was  saved.  His  salva-
tion w^as  accomixinied  by  the  two  graces, /ai7/t  and  love.  From  being  a  disbeliever  in
Christianity  he  became  a  humble  believer  in  it,  even  preaching  the  faith  of  which
formerly  he  made  havoc.  From  having  the  spirit  of  the  persecutor  he  came  to  have
the  spirit  of  the  Christian,  forgiving  those  who  persecuted  him,  and  seeking  to  subdue
men,  not  by  force,  but  by  the  i>ower  of  Christian  truth  and  example.  It  is  said  of  this
love  that  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus — subsisting  in  him,  and  determinetl  in  its  outgoings  by
him.  We  can  understand  that  his  own  experience  of  salvation  had  to  do  with  his
eminence  as  a  minister  of  Christ.  It  filled  him  with  deep  personal  gratitude  to  his
Saviour.  It  urged  him  to  labour,  so  as  to  take  revenge  on  himself  for  the  evil  he  had
done.  It  fitted  liim  for  sympathizing  with  others  in  such  condition  as  that  in  which
he  had  been.  And  it  enabled  him  the  better  to  understand  the  sweet  gentle  spirit
of  the  religion  of  Christ,  that  he  could  contrast  it  with  his  own  unlovely  persecuting  zeal.

IV.  Thk  gospel  through  which  grace  operated.  1.  L'eliableness  of  the  gospcL
**  Faithful  is  the  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  When  our  Epistle  was  written,
thitt  was  one  of  the  sayings  that  passed  as  proverbs  in  Christian  circles.    This  pre-


30  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  l  1—20.

fjEktory  formula  is  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles.  The  first  clause,  which  occun  five
times,  points  to  tue  certitude  of  the  gospcL  The  would-be  teachers  of  the  Law — appa-
rently Essenes — dealt  in  fables  for  wluch  there  was  no  ground  of  certainty,  ana  in
genealogies  or  namings  of  intermediate  agencies,  which  only  ministered  disputing  as
to  the  names.  The  apostle  regards  the  gospel  as  the  embodiment  of  certainty.  Yen-
turing  our  inmiortal  souls  upon  the  truth  of  this  sayirg,  it  will  not  prove  a  myth,  but
a  glorious  reality.  The  second  clause,  which  occurs  twice,  points  to  the  saying  as
worthy  of  a  universal  welcome.  Let  all  men  lay  hold  upon  it  as  an  essentially  good
saying — good  for  the  whole  nature ;  it  is  only  the  reception  it  deserves.  2.  Particular
f</rm  in  uhich  the  gospel  is  presented.  "  That  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save
sinners.**  This  is  the  go.spcl  in  all  simplicity,  to  which  the  ap^ed  apostle  cleaves.  The
Anointed  of  God  for  salvation  said  of  himself,  "  I  came  out  from  the  Father,  and  am
come  into  the  world.*'  The  world  is  to  be  understood  in  the  physical  sense ;  it  is  the
earth,  however,  not  in  the  purity  of  the  conception,  but  the  earth  as  it  has  become
the  congenial  abode  for  sinners.  It  could  not  be  said  of  Christ  when  he  was  here,  that
this  was  his  original  or  congenial  abode.  He  came  into  the  world,  ho  came  from  a  pure
world,  from  the  Father,  and  that  meant  a  world  of  highest  purity.  And  what  Srew
him  to  this  world,  with  all  its  uncongeniality  f  Jesus,  the  Name  which  he  has  made
his  own,  the  Name  which  is  above  every  name,  points  to  Iuh  nature  as  love.  It  is
of  the  nature  of  love  to  find  a  congenial  outlet  in  saving.  But  whom  on  this  earth
did  Christ  come  to  save  ?  Men  who  were  wronged,  upon  whom  superhuman  powers
were  causelessly  inflicting  tortures?  Did  become  to  assert  their  innocence  against
their  strong  oppressors?  No;  men  who  were  in  the  wrong  themselvet^,  who  were
wrongers  oi  God,  and  were  the  causes  of  their  own  misery.  It  was  sinners  that  drew
the  Saviour  down  to  earth.  Ue  longed  to  save  them  from  their  misery,  from  themselves
as  the  guilty  causes  of  their  misery,  from  their  sinful  habits  and  associations,  and  to
make  them  pure  as  the  heaven  from  which  he  came.  In  saving  sinners,  he  had  to
suffer  from  sinners,  in  his  purity  coming  into  contact  with  their  impurity,  and  exposing
him  to  their  hate.  He  had  especially  to  sufier  in  the  room  of  sinners,  in  all  the  loneli-
ness of  a  pure,  perfect  life,  treading  the  wine-press  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  sin.
3.  Individualization  of  the  gospel,  **  Of  whom  I  am  chief."  He  was  not  at  the  head
of  sinners  in  this  sense,  that  at  one  time  he  had  reached  a  point  beyond  which  sinning
could  not  go  in  heinousness.  He  had  not  committed  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.
He  had  not  sinned  like  Judas,  in  close  neighbourhood  to  Christ  and  in  clear  impression
of  his  Divinity.  Ho  had  never  been,  in  sinning,  beyond  the  pale  of  mercy.  Neither
was  he  in  the  position  to  compare  himself  with  all  who  had  obtained  mercy,  and  to  say
infallibly  that  he  was  the  greatest  of  them  all.  But  ho  was  at  the  h^d  of  sinners
in  his  sense  of  his  own  utter  unworthiness  apart  from  Christ.  That  unwortliiness  he
viewed  chiefly,  we  may  say,  in  the  lurid  light  of  his  persecuting  career.  It  was  so
complete  a  self-revelation,  that  he  could  not  keep  it  from  coming  up  before  his  imagina-
tion when  he  thought  of  self.  But  this  self-revelation  was  not  all  before  his  conversion.
He  knew  how  self  was  ever  seeking  to  mingle  with  all  he  did.  In  the  whole  discovery,
then,  of  what  he  was  apart  from  Christ,  as  one  for  whom  the  gospel  was  intendti,
he  could  say  in  all  truthfulness  of  feeling,  and  with  no  decrease  of  truthfulness  as  he
advanced  in  the  Christian  life,  but  rather  an  increase,  that  he  was  at  the  head  of  the
class  of  sinners.

V.  ExcouRAGEMEXT  TO  SINNERS.  "  Howbcit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy,  that
in  me  as  chief  might  Jesus  Christ  show  forth  all  his  long-suffering,  for  an  en>amplc
of  them  which  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  unto  eternal  life.'*  There  was  a  fitness
in  Paul  as  chief  in  obtainin^i  mercy  dX^o  coming  at  an  early  period  in  the  hist<»ry  of  the
Christian  Church,  for  the  sake  of  future  generations.  He  was  a  typical  illustration
in  what  happened  in  his  case  of  the  fulness  of  the  long-suffering  of  Christ.  For  the
first  thirty  years  of  his  life  he  was  going  in  the  wrong  direction  altogether.  As  he
drew  near  the  end  of  that  period  he  seemed  far  enough  away  from  believing,  in  the
active  violent  part  he  took  against  Christ.  But  Christ  did  not,  as  he  cnuld  have  d«»ne,
make  his  hostility  to  recoil  up(»n  his  own  head.  But  he  treated  him  magnanimously,
as  one  who  is  conscious  of  pure  intention  and  forgiving  love  can  do  his  foe.  He  treated
him  without  haste,  giving  him  space  for  experience,  for  thinking  about  the  Divine
dealing,  and  for  seeing  his  error.    And,  in  the  end,  Paul  was  subdued  into  believing,


<;n.Ll— 20.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  31

to  the  praise  of  the  long-suflfering  of  Christ.  Whoever  thinks  he  is  f.ir  enough  away
from  believing,  in  resistance  to  the  Divine  leadings,  in  hostility  offered  to  Christ,  Paul
would  have  him  to  be  encouraged  by  his  example  to  believe  on  Christ,  the  certain  end
of  this  believing  being  eternal  life,  or  possession,  up  to  our  capacity,  of  the  blessedness
of  the  Divine  life.

VI.  DoxoLOQY.  "Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  incorruptible,  invisible,  the  only
God,  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  The  apostle  concludes  his
personal  digression  with  a  doxology  which  is  unique  in  its  character,  and,  we  may  be
sure,  appropriate.  God  is  styled,  as  he  is  nowhere  else  in  the  Scriptures,  literally  "  King
of  the  ages,'*  i.e.  Sovereign  Controller  of  the  vast  periods  under  which  centuries  and
millenniimis  are  included.  Outside  of  them  himself  in  his  absolute  eternity,  he  sways  all
that  takes  place  in  them.  He  can  be  long-suffering  as  he  is  in  Christ ;  he  does  not  need
to  be  in  haste,  having  the  ages  in  which  to  work  out  his  purposes.  He  is  also  styled
"  incorruptible,"  as  he  is  also  in  Rom.  i.  23 ;  and  **  invisible,"  as  he  is  in  Col.  i.  15  and  Heb.
iL  27.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  all  religions  in  rising  above  gross  notions  of  God.  As
a  pure  Spirit  there  is  denied  of  him  the  corruptibility  and  visibility  which  pertain  to
our  corporeal  nature.  There  is  not,  therefore,  permitted  a  corporeal  representation,  or
any  image  of  him,  as  tending  to  degrade  our  conception  of  him.  He  is  further  styled
"  the  only  God,"  as  in  ch.  vi.  15  he  is  styled  "  the  only  Potentate."  This  seems  to  bo
chiefly  directed  against  the  Essene  religion,  which  invested  their  intermediate  agents
with  Divine  powers  of  creation.  To  GK)d,  as  thus  exalted,  is  ascribed,  with  a  fulness  of
expression,  honour  and  glory  (as  in  Rev.  v.  13)  to  the  ages  of  ages  over  which  the
Divine  existence  extends. — R.  F.

Vers.  18 — 20. — Becurrence  to  Timothy.  1.  The  charge.  "This  charge  I  commit
unto  thee,  my  child  Timothy,  according  to  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  thee,
that  by  them  thou  mayest  war  the  good  warfare ;  holding  faith  and  a  good  conscience."
The  reference  seems  back  to  ver.  3,  which,  though  distant,  is  the  only  charge  which  has
been  defined,  viz.  the  charge  laid  on  Timothy^  that  he  should  charge  certain  men  not
to  teach  a  different  doctrine,  neither  to  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies.
This  involved  his  coming  mto  contact  with  these  men,  and  so  there  is  naturally  intro-
duced the  idea  of  warfare.  Ue  was  to  embrace  his  opportunity  in  Ephesus  of  warring
the  good  warfare.  "  Knighthood  "  is  Luther's  word,  the  suggestion  being  the  whole  service
in  war  that  is  required  of  a  good  Christian  knight,  such  as  he  would  wish  the  youthful
Timothy  to  be.  It  is  the  good  warfare ;  for  it  is  not  mere  romance,  but  a  warfare
against  all  forms  of  sin — a  warfare  in  the  Name  of  the  Saviour  and  with  his  gospel,  and  a
warfare  which  has  the  promise  of  success.  To  call  forth  the  knightly  qualities  iu
Timothy,  Paul  calls  up  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on  him.  These  were  founded
on  the  good  hopes  which  he  awakened  in  good  men,  when  first  he  began  to  show  his
quahties ;  he  must  not  disappoint  these  good  hopes.  As  prophecies,  or  uttered  under
the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  prior  to  or  at  his  introduction  into  office,  they  were  to  bo
taken  as  a  Divine  indication  that  he  was  being  put  to  his  proper  work.  They  would
also,  we  may  believe,  jwint  to  the  hard  work  which,  as  a  good  knight,  he  would  not  fear
to  face.  Thus  using  the  prophecies,  they  would  be  a  Divine  assistance  to  him ;  they
would  be  as  armour  in  which  he  was  clad.  Especially,  however,  with  a  view  to  what  is
to  follow,  would  the  apostle  impress  on  him  the  imjx)rtance  of  holding  faith  and  a  good
conscience.  Prophecies,  expressions  of  good  opinion,  are  only  useful  in  so  far  as  they
help  us  to  lay  hold  by  faith  ujxm  the  great  Source  of  strength,  in  whom  alone  we  can
show  all  knightly  activity  and  endurance.  They  are  also  useful,  only  if  we  do  not  allow
them  to  seduce  us  to  part  with  a  good  conscience,  our  better  self — that  inward  monit/^r
that  from  moment  to  moment  points  to  us  our  duty,  and  in  whose  approval  we  can  feel
that  w^e  have  the  approval  of  God.  2.  Warning.  "  Which  some  having  thrust  from  them
made  shipwreck  concerning  the  faith  :  of  whom  is  Hymenajus  and  Alexander;  whom  I
delivered  unto  Satan,  that  they  might  be  taught  not  to  blaspheme."  For  Timothy's
wamins:,  Paul  ix)infs  to  the  heretics.  Instead  of  holding  faith  and  a  good  conscience,
these  thrust  away  from  them  the  latter,  as  men,  with  a  certain  violence,  put  away
something  that  is  disagreeable.  Their  truest  friend  they  thrust  aside,  as  they  would  a
troublesome  creditor.  The  result  was,  that  they  made  shipwreck  of  their  faith.  Throw-
ing away  all  that  was  needed  to  direct  them,  all  that  served  as  chart,  compass,  rudder,


32


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[en.  n.  1 — 16.


they  mado  shipwreck  of  themselves  concerning  faith  in  Christ,  thus  coming  short  of
eternal  life,  now  disastrous,  especially  for  those  who  seemed  to  make  a  fair  start  in
the  voyage  of  life !  The  teaching  of  the  apostle  is  suggestive  regarding  the  causes  of
heresy.  "  As  unbelief  nearly  always  leads  to  grosser  or  more  refinud  immorality,  so  not
rarely  it  begins  from  an  immoral  ground,  at  least  when  fiEdth  existed  before  (Rom.  i  21).
This  is  a  di'cp  mental  truth ;  for  it  is  far  too  common  to  represent  faith  or  infidelity  as  a
matter  of  abstract  opinion."  Earnestness  in  life  leads  to  correct  opinion  (John  viL  17),
whereas  moral  inditlcrcnce  makes  it  for  our  interest  to  doubt.  Heresies  have  a  secret
moral  genesis  which  will  one  day  be  made  plain.  Two  notable  heretics  are  mentioned
here — ^Hymemeus  and  Alexander.  In  2  Tim.  iL  17  HymensBUs  is  associated  with
Fhiletus  in  this,  that  their  teaching  did  cat  like  a  cancer.  He  and  Alexander  (not  the
coppersmith  of  2  Tim.  iv.  14)  are  here  referred  to  as  having  been  delivered  unto  Satan.
This  seems  strong  language  to  us  who  have  nothing  to  impress  us  in  the  shape  of  such
apostolic  discipline  in  our  time.  It  is  properly  regarded  as  **  a  form  of  Christiaa  excom-
munication, declaring  the  person  to  be  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  heathen,  accompanied
with  the  authoritative  indiction  of  bodily  disease  or  death."  In  this  case  the  intiiction
of  punishment  was  with  a  view  to  reformation.  There  was  nothing  to  hinder  their  being
received  back  into  the  Christian  Church.  Their  probation  was  not  at  an  end;  there
was  reason  for  further  dealing,  and  what  was  suitable  to  their  case  was  the  hard
dealing  here  referred  to.  Better  that  men  should  be  excommunicated — with  which
power  the  Church  is  still  invested — better  that  men  should  have  disease  sent  upon
them,  than  that  they  should  remain  in  a  state  of  religious  indifTercnce  or  be  spreaders
of  error, — R.  F.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IL


Ver.  l.--First  of  all,  that  for  ihaUfint  of
aZ2,  A  V. ;  VtanhBgiving$  for  and  giving  of
thank*^  A.V.  I  exhort  therefore.  I'ho  inser-
tion of  the  connecting  particle  "  therefore  "
marks  that  this  arraingcment  of  Church
prayers  is  a  part — ns  the  following  words,
first  of  all,  mark  that  it  is  the  first  part —
of  that  charge  or  lulministration  which  was
now  committed  to  Timothy.  Supplications,
prayers,  intercessions,  thanksgivings  (see
tho  Prayer  for  the  Cliurch  Militant).  Tho
question  naturally  arises  whether  the  first
words  hero  used — Se^orctj,  ir poaiuxdsf  and
iyr(v^€ts — have  any  distinctive  meaning,  or
are  merely  accumulated,  like  synonyms  in
legal  documents,  or  various  phrases  in
rhetorical  addresses,  to  ensure  completeness
and  to  add  force.  It  is  against  the  notion  of
any  distinctive  meaning  attaching  to  them
that  no  such  distin  tion  can  be  supported  by
actual  use.  In  Phil.  iv.  6  two  of  the  words
(irpoffevxh  and  S4'n(ri5)fiie  used  in  conjunction
as  here  with  eifxctpiarla^  with  no  apparent
d'fference,  both  being  the  way  of  making
known  tiioir  requests  to  God  (so  also  Kph.
vi.  18  and  ch.  v.  5).  Again,  in  the  ancient
Liturgies,  the  words  B4ta0ai  and  irpo<rf{txf<^^<'u
are  constantly  used  of  the  same  prayer.  It
may,  however,  perhaps  be  said  that  every
i4riats  is  a  wpoatvx'fii  though  every  irpoatvx'fi
is  not  a  8^170-19.  The  Striaii  is  a  "  petition" —
a  distinct  asking  something  of  God,  which  a
irpofffvx'h  need  not  necessarily  be.    It  may


be  merely  an  act  of  adoration,  of  confession,
of  recital  of  God's  mercies,  and  so  on.  So
as  regards  ivrti^usy  here  rendered  *'  inter-
cessions." There  is  nothing  in  the  eb^-
mology  or  in  tho  use  of  this  word,  which  only
occurs  elsewhere  in  the  Now  Testament  in
ch.  iv.  5,  to  limit  tho  meaning  of  it  to
"intercession."  Nor  has  it  this  meaning  in
the  passage  where  it  occurs  in  tho  Liturgy  of
St.  Clement,  near  the  close,  where  God  is
addressed  as  'O  koX  t<£u  aiww^trrw  iviffrdr
fitvos  rks  ivrti^fist  "  Who  understandest  the
petitions  even  of  those  who  are  silent."  In
2  Mace.  iv.  8  and  Diod«  Sic,  xvi.  55  it  seems
to  mean  "  a  request  preferred  in  a  personal
interview,"  w^hich  is  an  extension  of  its
common  meaning  in  classical  Greek  of
•*acces«,"  "an  interview,"  "social  inter-
course," or  the  like.  But  when  we  turn  to
the  use  of  the  verb  itnvyxdvot  in  the  New
Testament,  we  seem  to  get  the  idea  of**  inter-
cession." *Etrrvyx^€ty  tiki  is  to  go  to  some
one  to  ask  him  to  tako  action  against  or  in
favour  of  sumo  third  party  (see  Acts  xxv.
24 ;  Rom.  xi.  2 ;  viii.  27,  28,  34 ;  Heb.  vii.
25) ;  and  so  Chrysostom  (quoted  in  Stepb.,
*Theeaur.')  explains  iyrvxla.  to  be  the
action  of  one  who  applies  to  Grod  to  avenge
him  of  those  who  have  done  him  wrong.  So
that  perhaps  "  intercessions'*  is,  on  the  whole,
the  best  rendering  here,  though  an  imperfect
one ;  and  would  comprise  the  prayers  for  the
en  peror,  for  the  Ciiurch,  for  the  sick,
travellers,  slaves,  captives,  etc.,  fur  tho
bishops,  clergy,  and  laity,  etc.,  &nd  such


en.  n.  1 — 15.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


33


prayers  as  •*  Turn  away  from  us  every  plot
liwifiovK^if)  of  wicked  men  *'  (Liturgy  of  St.
Mark).

Ver.  2. — And  aU  for  and  for  oH,  A.V. ;
high  place  for  authority^  A.V. ;  tranquil  and
Quiet  for  quiet  and  peaceable,  A.Y. ;  gravity
for  honesty,  A.V.  For  kixigs,  etc.  The  early
Liturgies  closely  followed  these  directions.
**  Every  day,  both  in  the  evening  and  the
morning,  we  offer  prayers  for  the  whole  world,
for  kingd,  and  for  all  in  authority"  (Chrysost.,
tfi  loc.).  So  in  the  Liturgy  of  St  Mark :
*•  Preserve  our  king  in  peace,  in  virtue,  and
righteousness.  .  . .  Subdue  his  enemies  under
him  .  .  .  incline  him  to  peace  towards  us
and  towards  thy  Holy  Name,  that  in  the
serenity  of  his  reign  we  too  may  lead  a
tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  piety  and
honesty  [or,  *  gravity  *].' '  In  the  Liturgy  of  St.
Clement :  **  Let  us  pray  for  kings  and  those
in  authority,  that  they  may  be  peaceably
inclined  toward  us,  and  that  we  may  lead  a
tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all  piety  and
honesty  [or,* gravity  *]."  In  the  Liturgy  of  St.
Chrysostom:  '*Let  us  pray  for  our  most
religious  and  God-protected  emperors,  and
all  their  palace  and  court.'*  "  We  offer  this
our  reasonable  service  on  behalf  of  our  most
faithful  and  Christian  (<pt\oxp((rro»v)  em-
l^erors,  and  all  their  palace  and  court."  And
in  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Basil:  "Remember,
Lord,  our  most  religious  and  faithful  kings
.  .  •  that  in  their  serenity  we  may  lead  a
tnuK^uil  and  quiet  life  in  all  godliness  and
gravity.  Remember,  O  Lord,  all  rulers  and
all  in  authority,  and  all  our  brethren  in  the
palace,  and  the  whole  court."  In  high  place
(^K  vwtpoxv)  I  elsewhere  only  in  1  Cor.  ii.  1,
where  it  is  rendered  "  excellency."  But  in
Bom.  xiii.  1  we  have  ^^ovaiais  Oirrpexo^
trais,  **  the  higher  powers ; "  and  in  1  Pet.  ii.
13,  r<f  /ScuriAci  uis  virtp4xovrt,  **  the  king  as
supreme."  In  2  Mace.  iii.  1 1  the  phrase,  dy^pbs
i¥  {fwtpoxf  K€tfi(yoVf  occurs ;  and  in  Polybius,
ol  fy  vTfpoxj)  6vrts.  It  is  often  used  in  Poly-
bius for  "authority"  or  **  power."  That  we
may  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all
goJUiness  and  gravity.  The  prayer  for  the
rulers  is  recommended  (as  was  explained  in
the  above  extracts  from  the  Liturgies)  in
order  to  obtain  for  Christians  a  tranquil  life,
undisturbed  by  persecution  and  molestation,
in  spite  of  their  peculiar  way  of  life.  Their
wiw  was  to  be  allowed  to  live  in  the  faith
and  obedience  of  the  gospel,  "  in  godliness
and  gravity,"  without  being  interfered  with
by  the  heathen  magistrates.  The  clause  in
the  Prayer  for  the  Church  Militant  which
corresponds  to  this  is  "  that  under  her  we
may  be  godly  and  quietly  governed."  Tran-
quil  (<Jp€/Ltot);  found  only  here  in  the  New
Testament.  The  derivatives,  fip4fiioSy  ^p^ixita,
etc,  are  common  in  tlie  LXX.  They  all
apply  to  a  still,  undisturbed,  life.  Quiet
I.  TIMOTHY.


(ifffvxios) ;  found  only  here  and  I  Pet.  iiL  4
in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  the  LXX.  in
Isa.  Ixvi.  2.  But  the  noun  riavxla  and  the
verb  r)avx<^C*iy  &'fe  common.  Godliness  (c'/o-c-
$tla).  One  of  the  words  almost  peculiar  to
tiie  pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  iii.  16;  iv.  7,  8;
vi.  3, 5,  6, 11 ;  2  Tun.  iii.  5;  Titus  L  1) ;  but
elsewhere  only  in  Acts  iii.  12;  2  Pet.  i.  8,
6,  7;  iii.  11.  Cornelius  was  tva-^firis,  and
so  was  one  of  the  soldiers  who  waited  upon
him  (Acts  x.  2,  7).  Ananias  was  ay^p
%vff€f^i  (Acts  xxii.  12,  T.R.).  The  adverb
f{ta«$oSs  is  also  peculiar  to  the  pastoral
Epistles  (2  Tim.  iii.  12;  Titus  ii.  12).
Gravity  (<r€/AKOT^y) ;  so  rendered  also  in  the
A.V.  of  ch.  iii.  4  and  Titus  ii.  7 — the  only  other
places  in  the  New  Testament  where  it  is
found.  So  also  the  adjective  o'(fiy6s  (ch.  iii.
8,  11 ;  Titus  ii.  2).  Elsewhere  in  the  New
Testament  only  in  Phil.  iv.  8,  where  it  is
rendered  "  honest "  in  the  A.V.,  and  "  honour-
able" in  the  R.V.  In  classical  Greek
<r€fiy6s  is  properly  spoken  of  the  gods,
"  august,"  **  venerable,  and,  when  applied
to  persons,  indicates  a  similar  quality.  Here
(Tfixvoriii  is  the  respectable,  venerable,  and
dignified  sobriety  of  a  truly  godly  man.

Ver.  3.— ITiis  for  for  thU,  A.V.  and  T.B.
Aooeptable  {i.w6BfKroy) ;  only  here  and  ch.  v.
4  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  one  doubtful
passage  in  Aquila's  version  of  Cant.  L  13.
Found  in  Plutarch.  The  verb  iaroStxofiat,
to  receive  gladly,  is  frequently  used  by
St.  Luke  (viii.  10;  Acts  it  41,  where  see
note;  etc.).  Ood  our  Saviour  (see  ch.  i.  1
and  Luke  i.  47;  Titus  i  3;  ii.  10, 13  (per-
haps); iii.  4;  2  Pet.  i.  1  (perhaps);  Jude
25,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  phrase  is
confined  to  the  pastoral  among  St.  Paul's
Epistles).  In  the  Old  Testament  the  phrase
occurs  frequently  (see  2  Sam.  xxii.  3;  Ps.
cvi.  21 ;  Isa.  xliii.  8 ;  xlv.  21,  etc.).

Ver.  4. —  Willeth  that  all  men  should  he
saved  for  loill  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  A.V. ;
come  to  for  to  come  unto,  A.  V.  All  men,  etc. ;
to  show  that  it  is  in  accordance  with  God's
will  to  pray  for  **all  men"  (ver.  1).  (For
the  doctrinal  statement,  oomp.  ver.  6 ;  Titus
ii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  iu.  9,  etc.)

Ver.  5. — One  .  .  .  also  for  and  one,  A.V. ;
himself  man  for  the  man,  A.V.  For  there
is  one  God,  etc.  The  connection  of  ideas
indicated  by  yiip  seems  to  be  this :  Prav  to
God  for  all  men,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  bar-
barians, Scythians,  bond  and  free.  For  this
is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  the
one  God,  who  is  the  God  of  all  the  nations
of  the  earth.  And  God  wills  that  all  should
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it  is
in  Jesus,  because  Jesus  Christ  is  the  One
Mediator  between  God  and  all  men,  by  whom
alone  men  can  come  to  the  Father,  and  who
gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all.  One  Media-
tor.   The  term  fitalrris  is  only  applied  to


u


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[cH.  n.  1 — ^15.


our  Saviour  in  the  New  Testament  here  and
in  Heb.  viii.  6 ;  ix.  15 ;  xii.  24.  In  the  only
other  paBBage  where  St.  Paul  nsrt  it  (Gal.
iii  19,  20)  it  is  applied  to  Moses  tlie  media-
tor of  the  Old  Testaineut  In  the  LXX.  it
only  ocours  in  Job  ix.  33.  Himself  man.
Surely  an  infrlicitousand  unneeessary  change
from  the  A.V.  Even  supposing  that  the
exact  construction  of  the  bcntenoe  requires
**  Christ  Jesus "  to  be  taken  as  the  subject
and  '*  man  '*  as  the  predicate,  the  English
way  of  expressing  that  sense  is  to  say,  ^  the
man  Christ  Jesus."  But  it  is  very  far  from
certain  Uiat  &p0pc$vost  standing  as  it  does  in
opposition  to  S*6s,  is  not  the  subiect,  and
must  not  therefore  be  rendered  **the  man."
The  man.  The  human  nature  of  our  Lord  is
here  insisted  upon,  to  show  how  fit  he  is  to
mediate  for  man,  as  his  Godhead  fits  him  to
mediate  with  God.

Ver.  6.-7^  tetlimony  to  he  borne  in  it$
Olon  times  for  to  be  testified  in  dwB  fo'ms,  A.y.
T^  fiapr^ptov  Kcupois  ihiuis.  This  phrase  is
somewhat  obscure,  and  is  dififerently  ex-
plained. But  the  moHt  literal  rendering  and
the  best  sense  seems  to  be :  **  The  testimony,
at  its  proper  time,  to  which  I  was  appointed
a  preacher  and  an  apostle,"  meaning  that
the  mediation  and  redemption  of  Jesus
Christ  was  the  subject-matter  of  that  testi-
mony which  he  Paul  was  appointed  to  bear
at  the  proper  time.  Th  futpripiow  tls  h  must
be  taken  together,  without  any  intervening
stop.  This  accounts  for  the  article  r6.  The
exactly  parallel  place  is  Titus  i.  1,  2,  as  a
close  comparison  of  the  two  passages  will
show.  A  further  proof  of  the  identity  of
thought  in  the  two  passages  is  the  recurrence
in  both  of  the  phmso,  4iriyyu<ris  iiKrjOflas.
A  ransom  (ii.vrlKvTpoy) ;  here  only  in  the  New
Testament,  but  it  id  used  perhaps  by  Sym-
machus  in  Ps.  xlvUi.  9  (xlix.,  A.V.),  where
■  the  LXX.  haveT^K  rifi^v  t^s  AurpcGcrcMS
T^j  ^vxris  aurov,  following  the  reading  np;.,
instead  of  np;..  as  in  the  Hebrew  text.
**  What  means  a  ransom  ?  .  .  .  They  were
about  to  perish,  but  in  th^ir  stead  he  ^ave  his
8on,  and  sent  us  as  heralds  to  proclaim  the
cross  "  (Chrysostom).  The  equivalent  word
in  the  Gospels  is  avrdWayfia  (Matt.  xvi.  26;
Mark  viii.  37).  'AyriKvrpov  does  not  seem  to
differ  materially  in  meaning  from  K^poy,  the
common  classical  word  for  "ransom"  (i.e.
redemption  money),  and  used  by  our  Lord
of  his  own  life  given  as  a  ransom  for  many
<Matt.  XX.  28 ;  Mark  x.  45).  It  is  the  price
given  as  an  equivalent  for  setting  free  the
prisoner,  or  sparing  the  forfeited  life ;  \vrp6ta
<Luke  xxiv.  21,  etc.),  \{nptt(ris  (Luke  L  68,
etc.),  \vrpcor-fjs  (Acts  vii.  H5),  d.vo\{rrpv(ris
(Luke  xxi.  28;  Rom.  iii.  24,  and  pasinm),
haveall  tlicsenbcof  *'  n  deem,"  "redemption,"
and  the  like.  In  its  own  times.  The  notion
of  a  time  specially  appoiuto<l  for  Christ's


coming  into  the  world  is  frecjnently  dwelt
upon  in  Scripture ;  e^.  GaL  iv.  4 ;  Eph.  i
10;  Heb.  L  2  (oomp.  Acts  xvii.  80,  31;  2
Cor.  yL  2).  (See  the  same  phrase,  oh.  tL  15.)
Ver.  7. — Wm  appointed  for  am  ordained^
A.V. ;  truth  for  truth  in  Christ,  AJV.  and
T.R :  I  lie  for  and  lie,  A.Y. ;  truth  for  verOy,
A.V.  I  wai  appointed,  etc.  It  is  quite  in
St  PauUs  manner  thus  to  refer  to  his  own
apostolic  mission  (see  Boul  L  5;  xL  13;
XV.  16;  1  Cor.  L  1, 17;  iii.  10;  2  Oor.v.  18;
GaL  i.  I,  eta;  Eph.  iii.  2,  8;  and  many
other  places).  A  preacher  (ac^pv|;  as  in  2
Tim.  i.  11).  So  Mark  xvi.  15,  **  Preach  the
gospel"  is  Knp^art  rh  evoyy^Xior;  and  in
ver.  20,  "They  .  •  .  preached  everywhere"
is  'Eic^pv(ay  irarraxov;  and  2  Tim.  iv.  2,
** Preach  the  word"  U  K^pv^or  rhw  X^yor;
and  generally  it  is  tlie  word  rendered
**  preaol  i."  It  combines  the  idea  of  anth<mty
in  the  preacher  who  is  the  authorized  herald
(Rom.  X.  15),  and  publicity  for  his  message
(Matt  X.  27;  Luke  xu.  8).  I  speak  tho  tnUlw
eta  The  reason  for  this  strong  asseveratkm
of  his  olfice  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  is
not  at  first  sight  apparent  But  it  was
probably  made  in  view  of  the  antagonism  of
the  Jndaizing  teachers  referred  to  in  oh.  L
8, 19,  20  (comp.  Bom.  xL  18 ;  xv^  15, 16).

Ver.  8. — ^Dsftre  for  will,  A.y. ;  As  men  for
men,  A.y.;  tii  every  plaoe  for  everyuihere,
A.y. ;  disputing  for  doubting,  A.Y.  I  dsdn^
eta  He  takes  up  the  subject  again  whidi
he  had  opened  in  Ter.  1,  but  had  somewhat
digressed  from  in  Ters.  4—7,  and  gives
further  directions  as  to  the  persons  who
are  to  make  the  prayers  sicken  of  in  ver.
1,  viz.  men  (robs  &y8/>as),  not  women,  as  it
follows  more  at  large  in  vers.  9 — 15.  The
stress  is  clearly  upon  "  men  "  (or, "  the  men  "
— it  makes  no  difference) ;  and  there  is  no
force  in  Alford's  remark  that  in  that  case  it
would  have  been  robs  ta^^pas  -rpoat^ftrBoi.
The  prayers  had  been  already  ordered  in
Ter.  1 ;  the  additional  detail,  that  they  were
to  be  offered  by  men,  is  now  added.  In  ersxy
place;  not,  as  Chrysostom  thinks,  in  contrast
to  the  Jewish  worship,  which  was  confined
to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  but  merely
meaning  wherever  a  Chribtian  congregation
is  assembled.  Lifting  np  holy  hands.  Alford
quotes  Clem.  Bom.  *•  To  the  Corinthians,*  Ep.
i.  ch.  29 :  Hpotr4\Bti»fify ,  ,  ,  4y  6ai6T9iri  ^xv^
ayyiis  ical  iifitdirrovs  x^V^  alpowrts  itphs
adrSy  (comp.  Ps.  xxvi.  6 ;  xxviiL  2 ;  xlUL  20 ;
Ixiii.  4 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  12, 13).  Without  wrath.
It  appears  from  several  passages  in  Chrysos-
torn  that  the  habit  of  prating  angry  prayers
was  not  unknown  in  his  day.  ^Do  yon
pray  against  your  brother  ?  But  your  prayer
is  not  against  him,  but  against  yonraelf.
You  provoke  God  by  uttering  thoee  impious
words,  *  Show  him  the  same ;'  *  So  do  to  him ; '
*6mitehim;'  'Beoompensehim;'  •  •  .and


OH.  n.  1 — 15.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


35


maoh  more  to  the  same  effect "  ('Horn.'  yi.).
Iq  *  Hom.'  ¥iii.  bis  comment  on  this  passage
is:  ** Without  bearing  malice. .  .  .  Let  no
oneappioach  God  in  enmity,  or  in  an  unami-
able  temper."  And  disputing  (piaXoyurfiov),
The  exact  meaning  of  Sta\oyifffi6s  is  perhaps
best  seen  in  Luke  t.  21,  22,  where  both  the
Torb  and  the  substantive  are  used.  The  Bia-
XoyuTfioi  are  eaviUings,  qtiestionings  proceed-
ing from  a  captious, unbelieving  spirit.  They
lire  BiaXoyiff/jLol  rorripol  (Matt.  xv.  19).  The
word  is  always  used  in  a  bad  sense  in  the
New  Testament.  Forms  of  prayer  were  not
yet  established  in  the  Church,  but  these
cautions  show  the  need  of  them.

Ver.  9.— Jn  like  manner  for  in  like  manner
oZm),  A.V.  and  T.B.;  braided  for  hroided,
A-V. ;  and  gold  for  or  gold,  A.V. ;  raiment  for
arravy  A.V.  The  apostle  here  pnsses  on  to
the  duties  of  women  as  members  of  the  con-
gregation, and  he  places  first  modeiitv  of
demeanour  and  dress,  the  contrary  to  these
being  likely  to  prove  a  hurt  and  a  hindrance
to  their  fellow-worshippers.  Adorn  them-
•elTes  in  modest  appareL  This  is  obviously
the  true  construction,  Koafiuv  depending
vpon  fio^Koftau  There  is  a  little  doubt  as  to
the  exact  meaning  of  KaTaaTok-fi  here,  the
only  place  where  it  occurs  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. Alford  argues  strongly  in  favour  of
the  meaning  '*  apparel."  But  it  may  also
mean  "steadiness"  or  "quietness"  of  de-
meanour ;  and  then  the  phrase  will  be  exactly
parallel  to  1  Pet  iii.  5,  "  The  incorruptible
apparel  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit."  And
the  meaning  «ill  be,  "Let  Christian  women
adorn  theniselves  with  a  decent  and  well-
ordered  quietness  of  demeanour,  in  strict
accordance  with  [or,  *  together  with ']  shame-
fastness  and  sobriety  {jxtrdy  *in  strict  accord
with,*  or  •  together  with  *]  not  with  braided
hair,"  etc.  A  woman's  true  ornament  is  not
the  finery  which  she  gets  from  the  milliner,
but  the  chaste  discretion  which  she  has  from
the  Spirit  of  God.  Modest  (jviJo-fuos) ;  only
found  in  the  New  Testament  here  and  in
eh.  iii.  2»  where  it  is  rendered  **  of  good  be-
haviour" in  the  A.V.,  and  "  modest"  in  the
margin,  "orderly  "  in  the  R.V.  It  is  common
in  classical  Greek  in  the  sense  of  "well-
*ordered,"  "well-behaved."  Shamefastness
(aii^s,  bashfulness).  So  the  edition  of  1611 ;
**  shamefacedness  "  in  the  later  editions  is  a
corruption.  Archbishop  Trench  compares
"steadfast,"  "  so*  th  fast,' ' "  root  fast,"  "  mabter-
fast,"  "  footfast,"  "  bedfaat,"  with  their  sub-
stantives (*  t^ynonym8  of  New  Test.,'  §  xx.).
Sobriety  {aoKppooivriy  as  in  ver.  15,  g.r.);
soundness,  health,  purity,  and  integrity
of  mind.  *Air5  rod  (rdlias  ras  (^phat  ^x*^^
(Chrysostom,  *  Ap.  Trench.').  Braided  hair
(irA^/Acuriy) ;  found  only  here  in  the  New
Testament,  but  u^cd  in  Aquila  and  Theodo-
4ioii,  instead  of  the  irAf  icc/s  or  vKoKiis  of  the


LXX.,  in  Isa.  xxviii.  5,  for  rn»D^,  a  "dia-
dem," or  "twined  garland."  tn.  classical
Greek  irA/y/iora  are  anything  twined,  ten-
drils of  the  vine,  wickerwork,  chaplets,  etc.
The  corresponding  word  in  1  Pet  iii.  8  is
ifiir\oich  rpix&v, "  plaiting  the  hair."  Costly
raiment  (Ifianfffif  iroAvrcAe?).  For  IfxaruTfibSf
oomp.  Luke  vii.  25;  ix.  29;  Acts  xx.  83;
Ps.  xlv.  10,  LXX ;  etc.,  which  show  that  the
word  is  used  icar'  i^ox'fiy  of  any  splendid
garment  (Schleusner).  noAtrr«A^f,  costly
(see  Mark  xiv.  3;  1  Pet.  iii.  4,  and  fre-
quently in  the  LXX.).  St.  Peter  manifestly
had  this  passage  before  him,  from  the  marked
verbal  coincidences,  as  well  as  close  similarity
of  thought  (^/AvAoac^,  xP^ioK,  xSafiosy  IfidrioWf
voAuTcA^s,  iryaBowoiovaai  (compared  with  8^
Mpywv  dyaB&v),  ijavxioy  diroray^,  (compared
with  6itorcurff6fi€vat),  kylat  ywcuKts,  ic.t.A.
(compared  with  iwayy(\K6fi€ifais  0€o<r40€ieuf),
(See  reference  to  St.  Paul's  Epistles  in  2
Pet.  iii.  15.)

Ver.  10,— TJirough  for  unlh,  A.V.  (The
change  from  "  with  "  to  *'  through  "  is  quite
unnecessary,  though  more  strictly  accurate.
"  With  '*  does  equally  well  for  iy  and  Bid,  the
one  applied  to  tne  ornaments  and  dress  tn  or
with  which  the  woman  adorns  herself,  the
other  to  the  good  works  by  which  she  is
adorned.)  Professing  godliness.  In  all
other  passages  in  the  New  Testament  where
it  occurs,  iTrayylKKtirBai  means  "  to  promise,"
except  in  ch.  vi.  21,  where,  as  here,  it  means
"  to  profess,"  as  it  frequently  docs  in  classi-
cal Greek  :  '£irary^AA((r0a<  &p«rj^y,  <ro4>iay,
etc.  0€O0-ci9efa  only  occurs  here  in  the  New
Testament ;  but  it  is  used  in  the  LXX.  in
Job  xxviii.  28 ;  Gen.  xx.  11 ;  also  in  Xeno-
phon.  In  John  ix.  31  we  have  e^ocrciS^fy
"  a  worshipper  of  God."  Through  good  works.
Compare  the  description  of  Dorcas  (Acts  ix,
36,  39).  "Epya  dyaOd  mean  especially  acts
of  charity  (comp.  ch.  v.  10;  2  Cor.  ix.  8,
9;  Col.  i.  11;  elsewhere  it  is  used  more
generally,  like  fpya  Ka\d,  though  this  phrase
also  sometimes  points  especially  to  acts  of
charity,  as  in  ch.  v.  10;  vL  18;  Titus  iii.
14 ;  Heb.  x.  24).

Ver.  11.— il  for  the,  A.V.;  quietness  for
silence,  A.y.  Quietness  is  not  so  good  a
rendering  as  "  silence,"  because  the  quietness
here  meant  is  silence,  as  appears  clearly  by
the  parallel  direction  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  34.  So
Acts  xxii.  2,  irapicrxoy  rja-uxiay  is  properly
rendc  red  in  the  A. V.,  "  They  kept  silence,"
And  rjffvxcurav  (Luke  xiv.  4  and  Acts  xi.
18)  is  rendered,  both  in  the  A.V.  and  the
B.V.,  "They  held  their  peace."  With  all
Bubjeetion  {4y  vdcrp  tnrarayf);  as  ch.  iiL  4.
The  words  occur  also  in  2  Cor.  ix.  13;
Gal.  iL  5.  But  the  verb  {nroroffffofuu  is
very  common  in  the  sense  of  "being  sub-
ject." It  is  used  of  the  subjection  of  the
wife  to  her  husband  (1  Cor.  xiv.  34 ;  £ph.


36


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[en.  n.  1 — 15i


▼.  22;  Col.  iiL  18;   Titus  iL  5;    1  Pet
iiL  1).

Ver.  12. — Permit  for  tuffer^  A.V. ;  have
dominion  for  umrp  auihonty,  A.\. ;  a  for  tfte,
A. v.;  quietnent  for  ttienoe,  A.V.  Fennit.
Why  ** permit"  is  better  than  *•  suffer"  it
is  difficult  to  see.  *EvtTp4wtaf  is  reudorod
-suffer"  in  the  R.V.  in  Matt  viu.  21 ;  xix.
8;  Biark  x.  4;  Luke  ix.  59,  etc.  Quietness
(see  preceding  note).  The  true  type  of  the
womanly  attitude  is  that  of  Mary,  who  ^  eat
at  Jesus'  feet,  and  hoard  his  Word  "  (Luke
x.3y).

Ver.  13.~Was  fonnsd  (iwXdtrefi),  The
word  used  in  the  LXX.  in  Gen.  ii.  7,  "EwXeurtw
6  Sfhs  rby  iySfwirov^  k.t.a.,  **  The  Lord  God
fanned  man  out  of  the  dost  of  the  ground ; "
an<l  in  Gen.  ii.  19  of  the  beasts  of  the  field ;
whence  the  word  vpwriwkaaros  (Wisd.  YiL
1;  X.  1),  "first  made;"  "first  formed,"
A.y.  So  in  Rom.  ix.  20  man  is  called  r6
wKAfffM,  "the  thing  made;"  and  God  is  6
nxAraj,  "he  that  mude  it"  ''Plaster,**
•*  plastic,"  "  protoplasm,"  ore,  of  course,  from
the  same  root  (For  the  argument  see  the
Tery  similar  one  in  1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9.)

Ver.  14. — Beguiled  (twice)  for  deceivedj
A.V. ;  hath  fallen  into  for  vdom  in  they  A.V.
Beguiled  (^or^^).  The  same  word  as  is
used  in  Gen.  iii.  13,  '^  The  serpent  beguiled
me ; "  irirdrfiff4  /u,  LXX.  (couip.  2  Gor.  xL
3,  where  the  verb  used  is  k^rtrdrria'tyy.
Hath  fallen  into  transgression.  Fell  (not
hath  fallen)  is  the  right  tense  to  use  hero  in
En<;liHh,  though  the  Greek  perfect  it  is
true,  contains  the  further  idea  of  eontintianee
in  the  fall,  as  in  1  Gor.  ix.  22 :  xiii.  11 ;  1
These,  ii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  il  20.  So  also  Matt  L
22;  xix.  8;  xxi.  4;  xxv.  6;  Mark  v.  33;
John  i.  3 ;  2  Cor.  L  19 ;  and  elsewhere,  ye-
yov€  is  best  rendered  by  the  past  (not  the
perfect)  tense.  It  has  fre(^uently  the  notion
of  transition  into  a  certain  condition  (see
Rom.  vi.  5 ;  vii.  13;  1  Cor.  ix.  22 ;  xiii.  11 ;
2  Cor.  V.  17 ;  xii.  11 ;  Gal.  iv.  16,  etc.).
Bishop  Ellicott  gives  the  passages  in  which
ylyvofjLoi  is  followed,  as  here,  by  4tf  (Luke
xxii.  44;  Acts  xxii.  17;  2  Cor.  iii.  7;  1
Thess.  ii.  5),  "  denoting  entrance  into,  and
continuance  in,  any  given  state."  As  re-
gards the  apostle's  statement  Adam  was
not  beguiled,  we  must  understand  it  as
ba^ed  merely  upon  the  text  in  Genesis  to
which  he  refers,  in  which  Eve  (not  Adam)


says,  *0  6^  ^dtnfov  fu,  ''The  wrpeDt
beguiled  me."  Just  as  in  GmL  iii.  16  he
reasons  from  ev4pfiari  being  in  the  singular
number,  and  as  the  writer  to  the  Hmews
(viL  8)  reasons  from  the  siZsnee  of  Gen.  xir.
regarding  the  parentage  of  Melchiaedek.
Huther  (tii  loo,)  says  that  this  mode  of
reasoning  is  peculiar  to  allegorical  interpre-
tation.

Ver.  15.— But  for  noiwitkMtemding^  A.y. ;
through  the  child-bearing  for  in  ehiid^iearing,
A. v.;  love  for  eharitif,  A.y.;  tometijteation
for  hdinetiy  A.V.  She  shall  be  taTed ;  f.e.
the  toonuMi  geDerieally.  The  transitiim  from
the  personal  Eve  to  the  generio  vnmmm  is
further  marked  hj  the  transition  from  the
singular  to  the  plural,  "  if  they  continue,'',
etc.  The  natural  and  simple  explanation
of  the  passage  is  that  the  special  temporal
punishment  pronounced  against  the  woman,
immediately  after  her  sin,  ^  In  sorrow  shalt
thou  bring  forth  diildren  "  (Gen.  iiL  16)— <to
which  St  Paul  hare  evidently  allade8)-rand
endured  by  all  women  ever  since,  was  a  set-
off, so  to  speak,  to  the  special  guilt  of  Eve
in  yielding  to  the  gmle  of  the  serpent;  so
that  now  the  woman  might  attain  salvation
as  well  as  the  man  (although  she  was  not
suffered  to  teach)  if  she  continued  in  faith
and  charity.  Hie  ddld-heazinff  (riis  rcucro-
yoylas) ;  here  only ;  but  the  verb  rcicyoysrni,
which  occurs  in  ch.  v.  14,  is  found  (though
Tery  rarely)  in  classical  Greek.  The  equiva-
lent, both  in  the  LXX,  and  in  classical
Greek,  is  rticifOToUef,  The  reference  to  the
birth  of  Christ — the  Seed  of  the  woman —
which  some  commentators  (Hammond,  Peile,
Wordsworth,  EUieott  etc. ;  not  Bengt* t  Al-
ford,  or  the  German  school  generally)  see
here,  is  rather  strained,  and  anyhow  cannot
be  proved  without  an  inspired  interpreter.
The  stress  which  is  laid  by  some  of  the
above  on  the  use  of  the  definite  article  here
has  no  justification  (see  e.g.  2  Pet  i.  5 — 7,
where  even  the  R.V.  does  not  think  of
translating  "  the  virtue,"  "  the  knowledge,"
"  the  temperance,"  etc.).  Nor  is  the  metm-
ing  of  Sidi,  which  Alford  and  others  press,
"  through."  i.e.  "  in  spite  of,"  like  Bia  irvp6s
in  1  Cor.  iii.  15,  at  all  probable  from  the  con-
text 8anctification(&7(cur/i<$f;  Rom.  vi  19;
1  Thess.  iv.  3,  etc.).  Sobriety  {ffw^^pwrini) ;
as  in  Ter.  9.  It  only  occurs  besides  in  Acts
xxvL  25.


HOMILETICS.


Vers.  1 — 15. — Pttblic  worship.  The  whole  chapter  is  given  up  to  directions  concern-
ing the  public  worship  of  the  ChurclL    We  may  notice  the  following  particulars.

I.  The  subjects  op  public  prayer.  When  the  Church  meets  together  in  the  Name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  meets  as  pre-eminently  the  friend  of  the  human  race.  As
the  Church  of  him  who  is  the  world's  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  it  must  manifest  the
same  spirit  of  universal  love  which  animated  him.    It  is  not  as  being  haters  of  the


cu.u.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  37


human  race  (as  their  enemies  falsely  said),  hut  as  heing  true  lovers  of  their  kind,  that
Christians  handed  themselves  together  and  refused  all  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful
works  of  darkness.  This  love,  then,  was  especially  to  he  shown  in  their  united  prayers.
When  they  came  together,  though  perhaps  their  enemies  were  thirsting  for  their  blood,
they  were  to  offer  up  their  xmited  prayers  for  all  men.  Specially,  with  a  view  to  the
peace  and  order  of  society,  should  they  pray  for  kings  and  governors  and  all  in  authority,
that  by  God*s  blessing  upon  their  government  the  course  of  this  world  might  be  so
peaceably  ordered  that  his  Church  might  serve  him  joyfully  in  all  godly  quietness.
And  if  we  consider  how  much  human  happiness  depends  upon  good  government  on  the
part  of  the  rulers,  and  upon  quiet  obedience  to  the  laws  on  the  part  of  the  people,
we  shall  see  how  much  need  there  is  for  such  prayers.  In  our  own  days  the  restless
spirit  that  is  abroad,  the  impatience  of  all  control,  and  the  general  weakening  of  rule
and  authority  all  over  the  world,  increases  the  need  both  of  wisdom  and  strength  in
rulers,  and  consequently  for  the  strengthening  of  their  hands  by  the  prayers  and
intercessions  of  the  people  of  God.

II.  The  persons  who  abe  to  pray  in  the  Christian  assemblies.  These  are
limited  to  the  men.  The  prayers  and  the  teaching  in  the  congregation  are  to  be
<X)nducted  by  men  only.  The  difference  of  sex,  and  the  different  social  and  religious
functions  of  each  sex,  are  really  of  Divine  appointment.  As  St.  Paul  says  to  the
Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xi.  9),  '*  the  woman  was  made  for  the  man,  and  not  the  man  for
the  woman ; "  and  all  the  subsequent  relations  of  the  man  and  woman,  in  the  family,
in  the  state,  and  in  the  Church,  are  naturally  evolved  from  their  primeval  state  as
ordered  by  God.  It  is  obvious,  too,  that  there  must  be  harmony  in  these  various
relations,  and  that  the  principle  which  rules  in  one  department  of  life  must  rule  in
the  others  also.  Anyhow,  it  is  distinctly  laid  down,  on  the  apostolic  authority  of  St.
Paul,  that  in  the  Church  assemblies  the  functions  of  public  prayer,  and  public  teaching
^nd  preaching,  are  confined  to  men.  The  wide  field  of  more  private  female  ministra-
tions is  still  open  to  godly  women,  and  seems  to  be  amply  justified  by  the  existence  of
prophetesses  in  the  primitive  Church,  and  by  such  examples  as  that  of  Priscilla  (Acts
xviiL  26).  As  regards  the  character  of  the  men  who  lead  the  prayers  of  the  congrega-
tion, three  qualifications  are  named :  holiness,  quietness  of  spirit,  simplicity  in  the
petitions.  The  hands  that  are  lifted  up  to  God  in  prayer  must  be  clean  hands,  unstained
oy  blood,  untainted  by  bribes  or  dishonest  gains,  unpolluted  by  any  evil  deeds.  The
prayers  that  are  offered  must  come  from  hearts  where  no  malice  or  ill  will  dwells,  no
resentment  for  wron^rs  received  or  injuries  endured ;  and  from  minds  where  the  spirit
of  controversy  is  dumb,  and  no  cavilling  is  to  be  found.  Sincerity  and  godly  simplicity,
with  an  honest  faith  in  the  faithfulness  of  God,  are  essential  to  acceptable  prayer.

HL  The  third  feature  in  the  public  assemblies  of  the  saints  on  which  St.  Paul  insists

is  THE  MODEST  DBE8S  AND  DEMEANOUR  OF  THE  CONGREGATION.      This  appUcS  CSpCCiaUy

to  the  women,  but  it  is  true  of  the  men  also.  Christians  come  to  church  to  worship
the  glorious  God,  to  humble  themselves  before  his  holy  presence,  and  to  hear  his
Word,  not  for  display,  not  to  attract  notice,  not  for  vain-glory  or  worldly  vanity.
It  is,  therefore,  quite  out  of  place  for  either  men  or  women  to  make  a  parade  of  finery
in  church.  The  ornaments  best  suited  for  persons  professing  godliness  at  all  times,
but  especially  when  they  approach  the  throne  of  God,  are  those  of  a  pure  heart  and
a  meek  spirit,  and  an  abundance  of  good  works.  It  is  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart
"which  needs  adorning  for  its  access  to  the  court  of  heaven.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  l.^'The  regulation  of  pMic  worship.  The  apostle  gives  Timothy  a  series  of
injunctions  respecting  the  assemblies  for  public  worship,  which  sprang  naturally  out  of
the  solemn  charge  he  had  given  him  in  the  previous  chapter.

I.  The  PARAMOUNT  DUTY  OP  PUBLIC  PRAYER.  "  I  exhort  therefore,  first  of  all,
that  petitions,  prayers,  supplications,  thanksgivings,  be  made  for  all  men."  1.  The
leading  place  given  to  prayer  in  this  series  of  instructions  respecting  the  administration
<^  the  Church,  proves  its  pre-eminent  importance.  It  is  the  breath  of  vital  godliness.
4(1)  God  promises  to  hoar  public  prayer  (2  Chron.  viL  14 — 16) ;  (2)  Christ  sanctifies  it


88  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  n.  1— 15.

by  his  presence  rMatt.  xviii.  20) ;  (3)  the  saints  delight  in  it  (Ps.  xliL  4) ;  (4)  they
are  to  be  exhorted  to  the  exercise  of  it  (Heb.  x.  25) ;  (5)  it  is  not  to  be  conducted  in  an
mJmown  tongue  (1  Cor.  xiv.  14 — 16).  2.  The  variety  of  terms  in  which  it  i$  here
described  implies  the  diversity  of  circumstances  in  which  God^s  jieople  are  piaced.  (1)
^  Petitions.**  This  term  expresses  the  sense  of  insufficiency  and  need,  and  may  be  a
special  form  of  a  particular  prayer.  (2)  *'  Prayers."  This  is  prayer  in  general,  as  repre-
senting the  spirit  of  devotion.  (3)  "Supplications."  This  signifies  a  closer  deanng
with  God, a  more  childlike  confidence  in  prayer.  (4)  "Thanksgivings."  This  suggests
that  element  v^hich  ought  never  to  be  absent  from  our  supplications — gratitude  for  past
mercies.

n.  Fob  whox  are  wb  to  fbat?  "For  all  men."  1.  It  would  not  he  acceptable
prayer  if  we  were  to  pray  only  for  ourselves.  It  is  not  Christ-like  to  look  down  with
a  sense  of  superiority  upon  the  mass  of  men  as  somk  in  perdition.  2.  We  are  hound  to
hve  all  men,  and  there/ore  to  pray  for  their  welfare.  Much  of  our  happiness  depends
upon  our  identifying  ourselves  lovingly  with  others.

III.  PbATERS   ABE   8PECIALLT   TO   BE    MADE   FOB   KIKG8   AND   ALL   IN   HIGH   PLACE.

^For  kings  and  for  all  in  high  place."  1.  Buch  persons  pre-eminently  need  our  prayers^
n.^  They  wield  great  power  for  good  or  evil ;  (2)  they  are  exposed  to  many  dangers  f
?8)  they  are  liable  to  greater  temptations  than  other  men.  2.  God  has  power  t^
influence  their  public  action,  (1)  The  hearts  of  kin^  are  in  his  hands ;  (2^^  he  sets
them  up  and  ne  removes  them  (Dan.  ii.  21) ;  (3)  he  can  establish  their  throne  iB
righteousness  and  justice  (Prov.  xvL  12).  3.  Kings  can  do  much  to  promote  the  weU-
being  of  the  Church  of  God,  "  That  we  may  pass  a  quiet  and  tranqml  life  in  all  godli-
ness and  gravity."  We  should  pray  for  kings,  because  they  can  promote  our  outward
peace  and  our  inward  tranquillity,  by  restraining  the  bad  and  encouraging  the  good.
Kings  can  thus  protect  us  in  the  exorcise  of  our  religion  and  in  the  practice  of  godliness.
WicKed  kings  can  expose  the  godly  to  cruel  risks,  and  expose  their  gravity  to  luiseemly
perils.  4.  The  duty  of  praying  for  kings  is  not  affected  by  the  consideration  that  they
are  pagans,  or  oppressors,  or  persecutors,  (1)  Christians  will  pray  the  more  earnestly
for  them  that  Ood  will  change  their  hearts.  All  the  kings  were  pagans  in  the  days  of
the  apostle,  and  many  of  them  persecutors.  (2)  It  was  specially  necessary  to  enjoin
prayer  for  kings  upon  Christian  communities,  consisting  largely  of  Jews  who  had  an
intense  longing  to  throw  off  the  Roman  yoke.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  it  was  the
cessation  of  prayer  by  the  Jews  on  behalf  of  the  Roman  emperor  that  led  to  the  final
war  four  years  after  this  injunction  was  given  by  the  apostle.  It  may  have  been  owing
to  his  injunction  that  the  Christians  were  not  involved  in  the  disasters  of  that  ffttai
rebellion. — T.  C.

Vers.  3, 4. — The  lei\cficial  and  accepUibJe  nature  of  such  catholic  prayer,  **  For  this  is
good  and  acceptable  before  God  our  ISaviour."

I.  Such  prayer  for  all  sorts  of  men  is  oood.  It  is  good :  1.  Because  it  springs
from  a  good  motive,  a  loving  interest  in  our  fellow-men,  2,  Because  it  is  directed  to  a
good  end,  the  promotion  of  their  highest  welfare,  3.  Because  it  is  a  divinely  commanded
duty,

II.  Such  prater  is  acceptable  before  God  our  Saviour.  It  meets  God's
highest  approval  because  it  is  in  accordance  with  his  own  gracious  designs  toward
the  sons  of  men.

III.  Reason  or  ground  for  this  universality  of  our  public  prayers.  It  is  good
and  acceptable  **  before  God  our  Saviour,  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come
to  the  knowletlge  of  the  truth."  He  wills  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  therefore  we
should  pray  for  all  men.  Our  prayers  will  thus  be  in  conformity  with  his  will.  1.  Con-
sider the  nature  of  the  salvation  here  described,  (1)  It  is  not  mere  salvation  from
intellectual  error,  for  it  is  that  which  is  involved  in  "  the  full  knowledge  of  the  truth."
(2)  It  is  not  mere  salvability,  as  if  he  made  the  salvation  of  all  men  possible.  (3)  It
is  not  salvation  merely  ottered  for  man's  acceptance,  but  salvation  actually  obtain^  and
enjoyed.  The  immediate  end  is  "  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  the  ultimate  end  salva-
tion in  its  completeness.  2.  Consider  the  relation  of  the  Divine  will  to  this  salvationk
"  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved."  (1)  There  is  nothing  in  the  lang\iage  to  justify
the  theory  of  Universalists  that  all  men  will  ultimately  be  saved,    (a)  The  apostle  used


CH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  39

the  tenn  0/a»,  not  the  stronger  term  $ov\4reu,  which  implies  will  with  a  pmpose  or
intent,  (h)  If  he  had  uned  the  term  ff&C<^y  he  must  have  saved  all ;  but  the  word  is
ffwBriirat,  implying  his  will  that  they  shoidd  be  brought,  through  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  to  salvation,  (c)  If  we  are  to  interpret  the  will  of  God  by  his  providence,  we
must  xmderstand  it  in  consistency  with  the  fact  that  the  large  majority  of  mankind
have  never  heard  of  salvation  and  have  no  knowledge  of  it.  (d)  It  must  be  remembered
that  many  must  have  failed  to  reach  this  salvation  before  Christ  died  at  alL  (2)  The
language  of  universality  is  consistent  with  other  language  of  Scripture,  (a)  Christ
says,  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me  "  (John  xii.  32) ;  **  All  men
shall  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  "  (Luke  iii.  6).  The  Messiah  "  shall  pour  out  his
Spirit  upon  all  flesh  "  (Joel  ii.  28).  Christ "  died  for  all,"  and  he  may  therefore  be  truly
called  Salvator  hominum.  He  died  for  all  to  arrest  the  immediate  execution  of  the
sentence  of  the  Law  upon  man  for  sin ;  to  obtain  for  him  unnumbered  blessings  in  this
life,  that  he  might  secure  a  proper  foundation  for  the  offer  of  salvation  through  his
blood,  (fi)  But  the  design  of  God  in  the  death  of  Christ  had  not  the  same  relation  to
alL  He  is  *'  the  Saviour  of  all,  but  especially  of  them  that  believe."  He  is  the  Saviour
of  his  people,  of  his  Church,  of  the  elect,  (c)  The  language  of  universality  used  in  the
passage  was  suggested  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  restrictiveness  of  Gnostic  teaching,
which  led  the  apostle  to  say  to  the  Colossians  that  his  aim  was  "  to  present  every  man
perfect  in  Christ "  (Col.  i.  28) ;  perhaps,  likewise,  the  restrictiveness  of  a  narrow  Judaism,
lor  he  emphasizes  in  the  context  his  mission  as  '*  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles."  There  is
deep  mystery  in  God's  counsels.  But  he  here  sets  forth  his  good  will  to  man,  and
charges  it  on  the  conscience  of  believers  to  pray  that  all  without  exception  should  be
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. — T.  C.

Vers.  5 — 7. — Beasonsfor  tJiis  universality  of  prayer  in  the  relation  of  all  men  to  God
and  Christ.  "  For  there  is  one  God,  one  Mediator  also  between  God  and  men,  himseff
man,  Christ  Jesus."  The  salvation  of  men  cannot,  therefore,  be  to  us  a  matter  of  selfish
indifference.

L  Tub  relation  op  all  men  to  God.  The  unity  of  God  is  consistent  with  all
differences  of  dispensation.  "  There  is  one  providence  belonging  to  the  one  God."  The
apostle  tells  the  Komans  that,  **  as  God  is  one,"  he  is  the  God  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as
the  Jews  (Rom.  iii.  30).  There  is,  indeed,  "one  God  and  Father  of  all"  (Eph.  iv.  4,  6).
The  apostle  also  says,  "  The  mediator  "  (Moses)  "  is  not  of  one  " — one  seed,  i.e.  including
Jew  and  Gentile,  for  Moses  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Gentile — "  but  God  is  one,"  in
relation  to  Jew  and  Gentile  (Gal.  iii.  20).  In  these  passages  the  apostle  sets  forth  the
universality  of  the  gospel  offer.  But  in  the  text  he  infers  the  universality  of  the
Divine  good  will  from  the  provisions  made  for  man's  salvation.

II.  The  relation  of  all  men  to  the  Mediator.  **One  Mediator  also  between
God  and  men,  himself  man,  Christ  Jesus."  1.  Tliere  is  but  one  Mediator,  The  Gnostic
mediation  of  anp;els  is,  therefore,  excluded  (Col.  ii.  16, 18).  Likewise  the  mediation  of
saints  and  angcL^,  as  held  by  the  Church  of  Rome.  This  idea  is  dishonouring  to  the
only  Mediator.  There  is  no  Scripture  for  the  distinction  made  between  a  mediator  of
redemption  (Christ)  and  mediators  of  intercession  (saints  and  angels).  2.  The  Mediator
was  man  as  well  as  God,  (1)  He  was  truly  man,  in  opposition  to  the  Docetic  notion
that  he  did  not  possess  a  real  human  nature.  (2)  He  was  God  as  well  as  man  in  his
Mediatorship,  in  opposition  to  the  Roman  Catholic  theory  that  he  only  mediated  in  his
human  nature.  The  desij^n  of  this  error  is  to  make  way  for  human  mediators.  It  is
said  to  be  absurd  to  conceive  of  Christ  as  God  mediating  between  sinners  and  himself.
(a)  We  answer  that  the  Divine  nature  oi)erated  in  Christ's  priestly  work  as  well  as  the
human,  for  "  he  through  the  eternal  Spirit "  (his  own  Spirit)  **  offered  himself  to  God  "
(Heb.  ix.  14).  (b)  If  he  did  not  mediate  in  his  Divine  nature  as  well  as  his  human
nature,  he  could  not  have  been  in  any  sense  Mediator  of  the  Old  Testament  saints,
because  their  redemption  was  completed  before  he  came  in  the  flesh.  The  himsan
nature  is  naturally  emphasized  because  of  the  work  of  suffering  and  death  which  is  here
ascribed  to  him.  3.  2'he  passage  does  not  imply  tJiat  Christ  was  not  God.  He  is  else-
where frequently  called  God  and  true  God,  but  here  there  is  a  necessary  reference  to
the  catholic  doctrine  of  a  subordination  of  office.  4.  The  reference  to  the  mediatorship
brings  up  the  idea  of  a  covenant  between  God  and  man.    Christ  is  the  Head  of  humanity,


40  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  [ch.  n.  1-16.

the  new  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven,  able  to  restore  the  loet  relationship  between  God
and  man.  5.  TTie  mediatory  agency  is  wrought  through  Chruf$  mfferingt  and  dmA.
"  Who  ^ave  himself  a  Ransom  for  alL"  (1)  This  proves  that  idl  the  bleasines  of
redemption  come  from  the  death  of  Christ,  not  merely  from  his  incarnation.  (2)  He
Tolimtarily  gave  himself  as  the  Victim,  yet  he  is  ^  God's  imspeakable  Gift."  (3)  His
death  was  strictly  substitutionary.  The  words  of  the  apostle  resemble  those  of  our
Lord  himitelf — "  he  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  many  **  (Matt.  xx.  28).  He  was  thus
the  Substitute  contemplated  by  the  aportle  as  the  Messiah  who  had  obtained  from  the
Father  the  heritage  of  all  flEunilies  and  nations  of  the  earth,  not  Jews  alone,  but  Gentiles.
III.  The  tbue  purpose  of  the  gospel  message.  "The  testimony  to  be  borne  in
its  own  times."  1.  Thus  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  great  meuage  to  be  carried  toaUthe
world.  It  is  not  his  birth,  or  his  example,  or  his  truth,  but,  above  all,  what  is  the
completion  of  them  all — his  death  on  Calvary.  2.  It  ie  to  be  preached  in  aU  time$  till
the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  8.  Tfie  apostles  own  rdation  to  this  testimony.
*^Whercunto  I  was  appointed  a  herald  and  an  s^postle  (I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not);
a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  futh  and  truth."  Thus  the  universality  of  the  remedial
scheme  is  represented  by  the  very  mission  of  the  apostle  himself.  He  was  ''a  herald"
to  proclaim  the  glad  tidings  here ;  "  an  apostle" — ^let  men  say  what  they  will,  he  is  an
apostle,  therefore  the  surpassing  importance  of  his  message — and  "a  teacher  of  the
Cfentiles  " — ^to  mark  the  world-embracing  character  of  his  gospel — "  in  feith  and  truth,"
to  signalize  respectively  the  subjective  and  the  objective  elements  in  which  his  apostle-
ship  was  to  find  its  appropriate  sphere. — ^T.  C.

Yer.  8. — The  conduct  of  public  prayer  by  men.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  indicate
the  persons  by  whom  public  })rayer  is  to  be  conducted,  and  the  spirit  which  is  to
govern  this  part  of  public  worship.

L  Prater  in  the  Christian  assemblies  is  to  be  conducted  bt  men.  **  I  wish
then  that  prayer  be  made  in  every  place  by  men."  1.  It  is  for  men  to  manctge  and
direct  the  public  services  of  the  Church ;  it  is  for  women  to  tiJce  a  more  quiet  though
not  less  real  place  in  worship.  As  woman  had  been  emancipated  by  the  gospel— £r
there  were  no  longer  ''male  and  female"  in  Christ — and  as  she  had  taken  such  a
prominent  place  in  ministering  to  Christ,  the  apostles,  and  the  saints,  there  may  have
been  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  female  converts  to  assert  themselves  actively  in  the
public  life  of  the  Church  at  Ephesus  and  elsewhere.  The  apostle  expresses  not  a  mere
wish  or  desire,  but,  what  is  equivalent  to  a  solemn  command,  that  the  men  alone  should
be  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the  public  services.  The  injunction  does  not  affect
the  right  or  duty  of  women  to  conduct  prayer  in  private  life  or  in  meetings  of  their
own  sex.  2.  Prayer  is  to  be  made  in  every  place.  This  rule  is  to  obtain  in  all  public
assemblies  of  the  saints,  wherever  held.  There  is,  perhaps,  a  recollection  of  our  Lord's
words  that  there  is  to  be  no  restriction  of  prayer  to  one  holy  place  (John  iv.  21).

11.  The  spirit  and  manner  in  which  public  prayer  is  to  be  conducted.  **  Lifting
up  holy  hands  without  wrath  or  disputing."  1.  The  posture  must  be  reverent.  It  was
customary  for  the  Jews  to  pray  with  uplifted  hands.  It  was  likewise  the  general
attitude  adopted  by  the  early  Christians.  It  was  the  attitude  significant  (1)  of  the
elevation  of  the  heart  to  God ;  (2)  of  the  expectation  of  an  answer  from  heaven.  2.
The  uplifted  hands  must  be  holy.  They  must  be  hands  unstained  by  vice.  "  Cleanse
your  hands,  purify  your  hearts "  (Jas.  iv.  8).  The  hands  must  be  free  from  any  sin
that  would  render  prayer  unacceptable  to  God.  "Wash  you,  make  you  clean"  (Isa.
i.  16).  3.  Prayer  should  be  free  from  all  passionate  feeling.  "Without  wrath  and  dis-
puting." Perhaps  arising  from  religious  altercation  or  debate.  Prayer  belongs  to  the
peaceful  heart.  Faith  and  love  are  its  two  sustaining  principles,  and  exclude  the  idea
of  passion  against  our  fellow-men. — T.  C.

Vera.  9, 10. — Hie  attire  and  deportment  of  women  in  the  Christian  assemblies.  The
apostle  continues  his  directions  in  relation  to  public  prayer.  "  Likewise,"  he  says,  in
effect,  "  let  women  when  they  pray  be  modestly  adorned."

I.  TiiEiR  apparel  and  deportment.  "  Likewise  also  that  women  adorn  themselves
in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefastness  and  sobriety ;  not  with  braided  hair,  and  gold,
and  pearls,  and  costly  raiment."    1.  The  injunction  refers  specially  to  the  dress  if


<;u.  n.  1— 15.]  TEE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  41

women  in  the  Christian  assemblies^  which  ought  not  to  he  showy  or  conspicuous^  calcu-
lated either  to  swell  the  heart  of  the  wearer  with  pride,  or  to  attract  the  eyes  of  others
in  forgetf Illness  of  the  solemnity  of  public  worship.  2.  While  adornment  is  expressly
allowed,  according  to  age  and  station,  to  the  exclusion  of  anything  slovenly,  there  must
be  nothing  in  the  attire  or  deportment  inconsistent  with  modesty,  self-restraint,  or
Christian  simplicity.  There  must  be  no  excessive  care  bestowed  upon  the  adjustment
of  the  hair,  and  no  adornment  with  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array  inconsistent  with  the
attire  previously  recommended.  Plaiting  the  hair  may  be  the  most  convenient  way  of
Arranging  it,  and  wearing  ornaments  is  no  more  sinful  in  itself  than  wearing  apparel.
The  injunction  is  that  women  should  not  seek  such  adornments  as  would  either
«ndanger  piety  or  draw  away  their  affections  from  higher  things.

II.  The  tbue  adornment  op  women.  "But  (which  becometh  women  professing
godliness)  through  good  works."  1.  Religion  is  external  as  well  as  internal.  There
is  the  form  which  must  be  clothed  with  the  power  of  godliness ;  religion  must  not  be
secret,  but  manifest  to  the  world.  Therefore  women  must  profess  the  Christian  name,
and  take  part  in  the  worship  of  the  Church.  2.  There  must  he  a  harmony  hetween  the
profession  of  godliness  and  those  deeds  of  mercy  and  piety  which,  Dorcas-like,  show  the
true  disciple  of  Jesus.  3.  The  highest  distinction  of  women  does  not  spring  from  dress
or  decoration,  but  from  the  lustre  that  is  thrown  round  their  character  by  works  of
goodness.  They  will  thus  "adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour"  (Titus  iL  10),
— T.C.

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  proper  sphere  and  hehaviour  of  women.  The  cpostle  is  still
thinking  of  the  public  services  of  the  Church.

I.  The  woman  is  forbidden  to  teach  ob  preach  in  the  Church.  "  Let  a  woman
learn  in  silence  in  all  subjection.  But  I  permit  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  lord  it
over  the  man,  but  to  be  in  silence."  This  injunction  has  a  threefold  relation — first  to
herself,  then  to  her  husband,  then  to  the  Church.  1.  She  is  to  learn  in  silence.  This
duty  concerns  herself.  She  is  to  be  a  learner,  not  a  teacher.  She  is  to  give  all  devout
attention  to  the  public  instruction,  so  as  to  learn  more  and  more  of  Christ  and  his
gospel.  And  if  what  she  heard  was  either  difficult  or  doubtful,  she  was  to  ask  her
nusoand  at  home  (1  Cor.  xiv.  34) ;  and,  in  case  of  his  inability  to  meet  her  difficulties,
she  could  resort  privately  to  the  authorized  teachers  of  the  Church.  This  learning
attitude  was  to  be  "  in  all  subjection "  both  to  her  husband  and  to  the  rulers  of  the
Church.  Yet  it  did  not  imply  that  she  was  to  accept  false  teaching,  or  forego  her  just
right  to  prove  all  things  and  reject  what  was  unsound.  2.  She  is  not  to  lord  it  over  the
man.  As  teaching  or  preaching  is  the  act  of  those  in  authority,  her  assumption  of  this
function  would  imply  a  lordship  over  her  husband.  Husband  and  wife  are  "heirs
together  of  the  grace  of  life,"  but  the  gospel  has  not  exalted  woman  to  a  position  of
Authority  over  her  husband.  3.  She  is  not  to  teach  in  the  Church,  (1)  This  injunction
of  the  apostle  does  not  forbid  her  teaching  privately,  either  her  children,  as  Timothy
was  taught  by  his  mother,  or  her  servants,  or  the  younger  women  (Titus  ii.  4),  or  even
her  husband  privately  on  fit  occasions,  or  even  strangers,  as  Priscilla  taught  Apollos
^Acts  xviii.  26).  (2)  It  forbids  her  teaching  in  public,  (a)  It  is  suggestive  that  the
-words  usually  translated  in  the  New  Testament  "to  preach"  (lojp^crw,  tvayyt\i(t»,
tcarayy^Wto)  are  not  used  in  connection  with  this  prohibition,  as  if  women  were  merely
forbidden  to  preach,  but  still  allowed  to  teach.  The  word  used  here  is  "to  teach"
(SiScb-icw),  and  the  word  used  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  (AoX/m) — "to  talk,  chatter,  babble"— is
«ven  more  comprehensive.  These  words  all  include  preaching  as  the  greater  includes
the  less;  therefore  preaching  is  also  forbidden  to  women.  (6)  Prophesying  was  for-
bidden to  women  as  well  as  teaching.  This  was  a  supernatural  gifb  enjoyed  both  by
men  and  women  in  the  primitive  Church,  but  is  not  enjoyed  now  by  either  men  or
women.  It  is  never  in  the  New  Testament  used  for  preaching,  or  for  mere  speaking  in
meeting.  But  were  there  not  women  who  prophesied  in  the  Corinthian  Church?
(1  Cor.  xi.  4,  5.)  (o)  The  gift  of  prophecy  being  connected  with  the  rift  of  tongues,
and  both  being  now  obsolete,the  title  of  women  to  the  exercise  of  such  a  ^t  in  this
age  utterly  fails.  (j8)  The  apostle,  in  his  discussion  concerning  prophecy  and  the  gift
of  tongues,  forbids  women  to  speak  at  all  in  the  Churches  (1  Cdh  xiv.").  It  was  in  the
irery  midst  of  his  injunctions  respecting  the  use  of  supernatural  gifts  that  he  says,  "  Aa.


42  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  [ch.  n.  1— 15.


in  all  Churches  of  the  ftaints,  let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  Churches,  for  it  is  not
permitted  to  them  to  speak  ...  for  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the  Churches.**
Inophcsying  as  well  as  preaching  is  forbidden  to  women,  (y)  Much  unnecessary
difficulty  has  been  caused  by  the  passage  respecting  ''  a  woman  praying  or  prophesying
with  her  head  uncovered "  (1  Cor.  xL  5).  The  apostle  seems  for  the  time  to  idbw
the  practice,  while  he  condemns  the  manner  of  its  performance;  but  afterwards  he
forbids  the  practice  itself.  In  the  earlier  passage  he  rebukes  merely  the  indecency  of
an  existing  custom,  and  then  in  the  later  he  forbids  the  custom  itself.  Calvin
says,  **  By  condemning  the  one  he  does  not  commend  the  other."  Tou  cannot  regard
as  of  equal  authority  a  practice  and  a  command,  both  explicit  and  repeated,  which
destroys  the  practice.  (8)  '*  But  these  directions  were  given  to  Greek  Churches,  and
cannot  apply  to  the  women  of  our  day."  We  answer  that  they  apply  to  all  Churches;
for  the  apostle  says,  "  As  in  all  Churches  of  the  saints,  let  your  women  keep  silence  in
the  Churches."  The  reasons  given  for  the  prohibition  prove  that  it  has  nothing  to  do
with  usages,  or  customs,  or  times,  or  races.

IL  The  reason  ob  oboukd  of  the  apostle's  FEoniBinov.  It  is  to  be  found  in
the  original  law  of  the  relation  of  woman  to  man.  1.  Man'M  headship  in  creation.  **  For
Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve."  Man's  priority  of  creation  is  the  first  reason,  but  it  is
to  be  taken  together  with  the  statement  in  1  Cor.  xi.  8,  9,  "  For  the  man  is  not  of  the
woman,  but  the  woman  of  the  man ;  for  also  the  man  was  not  made  for  the  sake  of  the
woman,  but  the  woman  for  the  sake  of  the  man."  Besides,  as  **  the  Head  of  every  man
is  Christ,  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  3).  '*  The  husband  is  the  head
of  the  wife  "  (Eph.  v.  23).  The  woman,  therefore,  stands  under  law  to  her  husband,  and
therefore  any  attempt  on  her  part  to  assume  the  part  of  head  or  guide  is  to  overturn
the  primal  order  of  creation.  2.  Woman's  priority  in  transgression,  ^  And  Adam  was
not  deceived,  but  the  woman  being  altogether  deceived  fell  into  transgression."  They
both  sinned ;  but  Adam  was  not  deceived,  for  he  fully  understood  the  sin  he  was  com-
mitting when  ho  yielded  to  the  persuasiveness  of  his  wife.  (1)  This  reference  implies
the  truly  historical  character  of  the  narrative  in  Genesis.  It  is  no  myth  or  legend.
The  fall  of  man  is  an  historic  fact  of  the  greatest  importance,  for  it  grounds  the  doctrine
of  original  sin,  without  which  hmnan  nature,  says  Pascal,  is  an  inexplicable  riddle.
(2)  The  deception  was  practised  ujwn  Eve,  not  upon  Adam,  for  she  confessed  that  the
serpent  beguiled  her.  (3)  This  facility  of  deception  on  her  part  seems  to  suggest  to
the  apostle  her  inferiority  to  man  in  strength  of  intellect,  and  the  consequent  wrongness
of  allowing  to  woman  an  intellectual  supremacy  over  man.

III.  The  blessing  upon  woman  standing  within  hee  true  sphebe.  "But  ahe
shall  be  saved  through  the  child-bearing,  if  they  abide  in  faith  and  love  and  holiness
with  sobriety."  1.  It  is  here  implied  that  woman  is  to  find  her  riyht  sphere  in  the
relations  of  motherhood.  The  change  of  number  implies  that  Eve  is  here  to  be  regarded
as  the  representative  of  her  sex.  Her  sphere  is  in  the  home  life ;  her  destiny  lies  in
the  faithful  discharge  of  its  duties.  Eve  was  to  be  the  mother  of  all  living ;  it  was  to
be  through  the  seed  thus  given  her  that  the  curse  was  to  be  lifted  off  the  world,  and
the  head  of  the  serpent  bruised.  There  is  an  evident  allusion  in  "the  cliild-bearing "
to  the  Incarnation,  but  it  points  likewise  to  the  collective  seed  associated  with  Christ.
2.  It  implies  that  women  are  not  saved^  as  Roman  Catholics  contend^  by  mere  child-
hearing,  so  that  a  woman  dying  in  her  travail  is  necessarily  saved,  for  the  apostle  links
with  it  certain  spiritual  qualifications  as  necessary  to  salvation.  (1)  Faith — implicitly
resting  in  the  Divine  promise  and  ujwn  the  Divine  Redeemer,  "as  the  seed  of  the
woman ; "  (2)  love,  as  the  inspiration  of  all  her  wifely  and  motheriy  duties ;  (3)  holiness,
as  implying  purity  of  life,  circumspectness  of  walk,  and  devotedness  to  God ;  (4)  with
sobriety,  as  marking  the  self-ett'aciug,  self-restrainmg,  self-governing  spirit  which  she
is  to  carry  into  all  the  conditions  of  her  life  as  a  Christian  mother. — ^T.  C,

Ver.  2. — "^  quiet  lifeP  Nothing  in  the  gospel  was  revolutionary.  Its  aim  was  not
to  upset  thrones,  but  to  purify  all  the  centres  of  power ;  not  to  make  assault  at  once  on
polygamy  and  slavery,  but  to  undermine  them  by  the  Christian  spirit  and  sacrifice.  Prayer
is  here  made  for  kings  and  all  in  authority.  Rulership  there  must  be.  Anarchy  is
misery.  Fields  must  be  ploughed;  grain  must  be  stored;  homes  must  be  protected;
or  else  weakness  becomes  the  prey  of  strength.    The  purpose,  then,  of  God,  in  ordination


ch.il  1—15.]  THE  PmST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  43


of  law  and  government,  is  that  we  may  enjoy  a  quiet  life.  To  some  a  quiet  life  is  the
least  de!«irable  thing ;  but  it  is  the  life  of  nature,  and  it  is  the  most  blessed  life.  How
quietly  the  flowers  blow,  the  stars  shine,  the  dew  descends,  the  birds  wing  their
iiight,  the  light  falls !  1.  "^  quiet  life ; "  for  if  there  he  disorder,  aJl  life  is  at  a  stand'
still.  Even  great  artists  like  Gerome,  during  the  last  French  Revolution,  had  to  bury
their  pictures,  for  the  time,  beneath,  the  earth.  2.  "  Quiet ; "  for  think  of  the  forces
around  us.  We  need  good  government  to  preserve  us  from  the  violent,  the  lewd,  and
the  criminal.  The  sea  of  human  passion  is  always  ready  to  break  its  barriers;  the
volcano  would  soon  burst  through  the  crust.  3.  "  Quiet ;**  for  this  is  the  great  enjoys
ment  of  life.  Our  happiest  hours  have  been  quiet  ones — at  home ;  by  the  river  or  the
sea ;  in  the  valleys  and  in  the  forests ;  and  in  the  Church  of  God-  "  That  we  may  lead,"
which  implies  continuance;  life  wi  hout  trepidation;  absence  of  the  disorders  which
check  industry,  prudence,  and  enterprise. — W.  M.  S,

Ver.  2. — "-4  peaceable  life^  Christ  said,  **  Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  and  he  intended
this  to  be  the  element  in  which  nations  and  families  and  individuals  should  live.
Through  faith  in  him,  we  have  peace  with  God,  peace  with  our  brother,  and  peace  in
ourselves.  The  world  delights  in  noise  and  tumult;  fills  its  forums  with  fierce  dis-
cussions and  debates ;  hangs  the  pictures  of  Wouvermans,  with  their  fierce  battle-fields,
on  its  walls.  Some  people  are  said  to  delight  in  strife — to  be  what  is  called  **  law-thirsty;"
and  in  quiet  villages,  even,  you  meet  wiih  antagonisms  that  are  fierce  and  frequent.  1.
"Peacca6/e;'*/or  the  gospel  is  to  overcome  evil  unth  good.  To  triumph,  not  by  carnal
weapons,  but  those  that  are  mighty  through  God,  and  which  have  the  secret  majesty  of
their  power  in  the  cross.  2.  "  Peaceable ; "  for  passion  must  be  governed  by  conscience
and  Christ,  Unquestionably  the  microscope  shows  us  insects  at  war  in  the  globule  of
water ;  and  the  beasts  of  the  forest  meet  in  deadliest  conflict.  But  man  is  to  triumph
over  himself ;  reason  is  to  be  lord  over  passion,  and  Christ  is  to  be  Lord  over  alL  3.
** Peaceable;"  for  a  home  without  this  is  misery.  Where  jarring  and  disputation  are,
there  the  atmosphere  is  destructive  of  all  holy,  happy  life.  4.  *^  Peaceable ;  "for  this  is
the  end  of  law.  Forms  of  government  are  not  all  in  all.  Greece  and  Rome  alike  fell
under  the  same  form  of  government  under  which  they  rose.  6.  "  Peaceable ;  "for  the
Prince  of  Peace  is  to  reign.  He  came  to  fulfil  the  angels*  song,  "  Peace  on  earth,  and
good  will  to  man ; "  and  one  day,  by  his  cross,  he  will  draw  all  hearts  unto  himself. —
W.  M.  S.

Ver.  2. — Moral  loveliness,  "In  all  godliness  and  honesty."  It  may  be  said  that
**  godliness  "  includes  "  honesty ;  *'  but  we  must  not  be  the  slaves  of  pedantry  in  words ;
it  is  good  sometimes  to  emphasize.

I.  Godliness  is  essential  to  the  obdeb  op  the  state.  Rousseau  remarks,  **  A
country  cannot  well  subsist  without  liberty,  nor  liberty  without  virtue."  Peaceable
lives  must  be  godly  lives.  The  safety  of  a  nation  is  not  "  lions  chained,"  but  "  lions
turned  to  lambs."  Modem  sociology  thinks  it  can  do  without  godliness.  It  has
invented  some  philosophy  of  morals  of  its  own;  some  ideal  of  utility  called  "  the  greatest
good  of  the  greatest  number."  Philosophers  may  imderstand  it,  but  common  people
cannot.  So  much  depends  on  what  is  meant  by  "  the  greatest  good."  For  if  you  exclude
the  soul,  the  greatest  good  is  only  a  secular  paradise,  and  thatSs  death  to  all  the  heroism
which  can  deny  itself  earthly  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  high  spiritual  ends.  By  "  godli-
ness *'  we  understand  Qod-likeness  in  men.  Some  talk  of  seraphic  holiness ;  we  prefer  the
old  word  "  godliness."  Let  a  seraph  be  a  seraph ;  we  want  to  be  men.  It  is  not  wise
for  children  to  sing,  "  I  want  to  be  an  angel ; "  they  should  want  to  be  good  children.
We  want  godliness;  purity  like  God's;  pity  like  God's;  fidelity  like  God's;  holiness
like  God's.     "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy."

II.  Honesty  is  essential  to  the  tbue  Chbistian  life.  No  fine  ideas  of  spirituality
that  set  at  nought  common  morality  must  find  honour  amongst  us.  WhUe  our  hearts
are  in  heaven,  our  feet  are  upon  the  earth.  1.  We  must  be  honest  to  our  convictions;
act  out  what  we  think ;  dare  to  be  true  to  ourselves.  2.  We  must  be  honest  in  word ;
dealing  in  good  coin ;  not  pretending  to  be  what  we  are  not.  Better  honest  silver  than
counterfeit  gold.  3.  We  are  to  be  honest  in  deed.  Whether  we  build,  or  buy,  or  sell,
whether  we  paint  with  the  artist,  or  miDgle  in  the  marts  of  commerce,  we  are  to  see  to


44  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  u.  1—15.

it  that  the  stamp  of  honesty  is  on  all  we  do.  For  all  this  we  are  to  pray ;  for  there  !i
a  great  sky  over  uh  all,  and  a  great  Father  in  heaven,  and  a  great  Saviour  in  whose  Name
we  may  pray.  So  life  will  be  peaceful  and  holy ;  baiied  upon  the  granite  rock,  but  bathed
in  the  delicate  haze  of  the  firmament  of  heaven ;  solidity  clothed  with  beauty ;  and  he  to
whom  we  pray  heareth  us  always. — ^W.  M.  S.

Vcr.  6. — The  seJf-givina  </  Christ  "Who  cave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all,  to  be
testified  in  due  time.'*  Wo  are  indebted  to  the  slavery  of  St.  Paul's  time  for  the  use  of
the  word  *'  ransom."  So  literature,  in  its  words,  enshrines  history.  We  cannot  make  a
perfect  theory  of  the  Atonement.  Many  have  tried.  Some  have  ta^en  the  idea  of  slavexy ;
some  have  taken  the  idea  of  debt  There  has  been  the  **  commercial "  theory,  and  the
'*  legal "  theory ;  but  no  theory  is  complete  that  does  not  contain  all  the  ideas.  The
idea  of  "  ransom  "  has  had  its  false  theory ;  for  in  the  seventh  century  some  theolc^ians
said,  "  It  was  a  price  paid  to  the  deviL"  That  we  are  ike  tdaves  of  sin,  and  that  Christ
ransoms  us,  is  the  great  doctrine  of  the  gospeL

L  Christ  gave  himself.  The  humanity  of  that  age  gave  others.  What  is  the  great
study  of  the  dying  Roman  age?  Selfishness.  The  patricians,  wrapped  up  in  togas,
saw,  in  the  Colosseum,  the  gladiators  fiedl  to  amuse  them.  The  great  generals  brought
home  as  slaves — physicians,  musicians,  and  workmen,  and  used  them  as  good  invest-
ments. Rome  bore  away  the  native  art  of  Greece  to  decorate  its  own  homes.  Not  only  the
humanity  of  that  age,  but  the  humanity  of  every  age  without  Christ,  tends  to  sclf-iim.
The  philosophy  of  the  cross  is  the  only  social  philosophy.  It  does  not  take.  It  leaves
men  to  the  personal  use  of  their  gifts  and  possessions ;  but  it  says,  "  Give  yourself—
your  purest  ideals,  your  best  impulses,  your  noblest  powers,  for  the  good  of  otSiers."

II.  The  Cjesabb  of  that  aqe  had  no  tbue  power.  They  held  men  by  the  throat,
and  not  by  the  heart;  and  they  were  lifted  to  Caesarship  by  the  Praatorian  guards.
They  rose  and  fell  by  the  sword ;  and  the  dagger  or  the  Tiber  saw  the  last  of  them.
The  words  were  a  satire  on  the  Saviour,  **  saying  that  he  also  himself  is  Christ,  a  King"
— an  unconscious  prophecy,  and  yet  how  true  I  His  kingdom  came  without  observation;
it  was  an  empire  within  the  heart;  it  was  not  in  word,  but  in  power ;  it  was  not  with
observation,  but  it  silently  grew  like  the  mustard  seed.  Its  foundation  was  in  this,
''Ho  gave  himself" — ^his  exquisite  sensibilities,  his  sacred  energies,  his  unwearied
endurance,  his  contact  with  shame  and  scorn ;  and  then,  on  the  cross,  ho  died, "  the  Just
for  the  imjust,  to  bring  us  to  God." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  9. — Modest  adornment,  "That  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  appareL"
The  gospel  never  permits  asceticism.  As  God  is  the  GtxL  of  beauty,  and  nature  is
clothed  with  garments  Qike  the  high  priest  of  old)  of  glory  and  beauty,  so  here  we
have  the  true  idea  carried  out  in  religion.  Women  are  "  to  adorn  themselves."  (rod^s
most  beautiful  work  in  creation,  the  human  frame,  is  to  be  fitly  apparelled ;  for,  to  this
day,  art  knows  no  higher  subject  than  the  human  face  and  form.    But —

I.  Modesty  is  to  be  the  spirit  of  all  adornment,  because  the  nature  of  the  being
adorned  is  a  sacred  nature.  Woman  is  the  true  guardian  of  virtue.  Her  manner,  her
temper,  her  spirit, — all  these  constitute  the  best  defence  of  virtue.

IL  Dress  is  the  btmbol  of  character.  If  there  is  absence  of  shame-heartcdness,
there  will  be  absence  of  shame-facedness.  The  womanhood  of  that  age  had  sunk  very
low.  By  turns  woman  had  been  the  toy  or  slave  of  man.  The  gosijel  uplifted  her;
for  we  are  all  equal  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  was  neither  male  nor  female  there ;  and
she  must  help  the  great  ideal,  and  by  modest  apparel  show  the  innate  modesty  of
her  thought  and  feeling.  For,  say  what  we  like,  dress  acts  upon  the  mind  and  character.
Dress  like  a  clown,  and  you  will  feel  like  a  clown.  Modest  apparel  need  not  be  shorn  of
taste  and  refinement  and  true  beauty.  It  is  no  dishonour  to  a  woman  that  she  likes
dress.  It  is  not  Christian  to  destroy  that  taste ;  but  that  which  becometh  women  pro-
fessing godliness  is  modest  though  beautiful  apparel. — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Universalism.  I.  Universality  in  oub  appearing  before  God  on
dehalf  of  others.  1.  Broad  teaching,  **  I  exhort  therefore,  first  of  all,  that  suppli-
cations, prayers,  intercessions,  thank  >givings,  be  made  for  all  men."  This  is  the  tirst
duty  which  pressed  upon  the  apostle's  mind,  as  claiming  attention.    If  a  priest  is  ons


CH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  45

who  acts  for  others,  then  there  is  here  required  of  us  priestly  service,  which  is  only  in
accordance  with  our  being  called,  in  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  a  holy  priesthood.    Our  priestly  service
is  here  regarded  as  twofold.    (1)  Frayerfor  all.    For  the  sake  of  emphasis  and  fulness
three  words  are  used  to  denote  prayer,  which  a  Greek  would  be  better  able  to  distinguish
than  we  can  do  now.    The  first  word  seems  to  mark  the  state  of  need  out  of  which
petitions  take  their  rise.    The  second  word  seems  to  mark  our  approaching  Grod  with
our  petitions.    The  third  word  seems  to  mark  the  urgent  way  in  which  we  are  to
approach  God  with  our  petitions.    An  intercessory  character  is  ^iven  to  all  three  by
the  accompanying  words.    It  is  right  that  we  should  turn  our  wants  into  petitions  for
ourselves,  that  wc  should  approach  God  with  these  petitions,  and  that  we  should  press
them  with  all  urgency.    But  there  is  a  range  of  want  beyond  ourselves  which  we  are  hero
directed  to  cover  by  intercession.    We  are  to  turn  the  wants  of  others  into  intercessions
for  them ;  with  our  intercessory  petitions  we  are  to  go  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  we  are
to  press  them  there  with  all  the  urgency  of  which  we  are  capable.    We  are  not  to  be
80  8el6sh  as  to  think  only  of  ourselves  in  our  prayers.     The  Spirit,  even  in  the  way  of
blessing  us,  would  direct  us  away  from  ourselves  to  what  others  need.    But  for  whom
are  we  to  intercede  ?    This  is  the  point  to  which  the  teaching  of  the  apostle  specially
refers.     It  is  certainly  our  duty  to  intercede  for  our  family  and  friends.     "  He  that  pro-
videth  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  hath  denied  the  faith,
and  is  worse  than  an  infideL**    And,  if  we  do  not  take  the  wants  of  our  own  before  God,
we  are  not  acting  the  natural  part,  which  is  to  be  expected  of  us  as  Christians.     But
there  is  also  a  family  selfishness,  from  which,  if  we  would  have  the  larger  blessing,  we
must  be  freed  in  our  prayers.     "  0  Gkxi,  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  mankind,  wo
humbly  beseech  thee  for  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men ;  that  thou  wouldest  be  pleased
to  make  thy  ways  known  unto  them,  thy  saving  health  unto  all  nations."    We  are  not
to  be  prevented  from  interceding  for  others  by  reason  of  their  ill  desert.   God  has  shown
us  Abraham,  that  prince  of  the  elder  covenant,  using  his  privilege  on  behalf  of  unde-
serving Lot,  and  also  on  behalf  of  ungodly  Sodom.    He  has  also  shown  us  his  afflicted
patriarch  under  direction  to  pray  for  the  uncharitable  Eliphaz,  Zophar,  and  Bildad.
They  were  to  olTer  sacrifice ;  but  God  said, "  My  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you :  for  him
will  I  accept."     "  We  are  to  pursue  the  sinner  with  love ;  we  are  to  weave  around  tho
impenitent  a  network  of  prayer  from  which  he  may  find  it  hard  to  extricate  himself."
We  are  not  to  allow  obscurity  or  distance  to  separate  us  from  souls.     St.  Vincent  do
Paul  conveys  some  of  his  prayers  (as  by  a  definite  grant)  **  to  the  most  forgotten  soul
in  purgatory."     Surely  we  are  entitled  to  convey  our  prayers  to  the  most  forgotten  soul
in  this  world.     Koman  Catholic  writers  are  to  be  commended  for  the  htress  they  lay  on
the  ties  which  unite  us  to  the  great  human  society  in  which  QnA  has  placed  us.     It  is
not  their  truth,  for  it  is  simply  the  spirit  of  our  being  here  enjoined  to  offer  up  prayer
for  all  men.    We  are  to  think  of  ourselves  as  belonging  to  a  great  world  of  need,  belong-
ing to  it  more  than  we  do  to  ourselves ;  and  we  belong  to  it  in  this  way,  that  we  aro
boimd  to  pray  for  it  with  all  earnestness  that  the  ends  of  Christ  may  be  advanced  in  it ;
thus,  we  believe,  making  our  influence  felt  in  circle  after  circle  to  its  utmost  boimd.
(2)  Tfianksgiving  for  all.    It  is  the  frequent  teaching  of  the  apostle  that  thankj^giving
is  to  accompany  the  presentation  of  petitions.     We  are  not  to  be  so  much  taken  up
with  our  wants  as  to  forget  our  mercies.     While,  then,  we  are  to  be  quick  to  see  tho
wants  of  others,  we  are  also  to  bo  quick  to  see  their  mercies.     And  while  we  turn  their
wants  into  intercessions,  we  are  to  turn  their  mercies  into  thanksgivings.   But  for  whom
are  we  to  thank  God  ?     We  are  especially  to  give  thanks  for  those  who  are  bound  up
with  us  in  the  family  unity,  if  they  are  free  from  calamity,  and  more  so  if  they  are  tho
subjects  of  saving  grace.     There  may  be  those  in  our  homes  who  cannot  thank  God  for
themselves,  and  we  are  to  do  this  for  them.     But  we  are  to  give  our  thanksgivings  a
wider  sweep.     We  are  to  give  thanks  for  our  neighbour,  even  when  he  may  bear  us  a
grudge,  even  when  his  interests  may  seem  to  conflict  with  ours.     We  are  to  got  beyond
all  that  would  narrow  our  souls,  and  lay  hold  upon  this,  that  God  sees  fit  to  bless  him ;
and  why  should  we  begrudge  the  Giver  his  due  of  praise?     We  are  to  thank  God  for
those  who  are  sensible  of  their  mercies,  and  aro  not  remiss  themselves  in  thanking  God.
We  do  not  need  to  be  afraid  of  God  receiving  too  much  gratitude  for  mercies  bestowed.
If  there  are  those  who  are  ungrateful  for  mercies  and  do  not  give  God  the  glory,  it  is
meet  that  we,  who  have  a  right  understanding  of  things  and  aro  jealous  of  God*s  glory,


46  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [cH.n.1— 16.

should  see  that  he  is  not  robbed  of  his  sacrifice  of  praise.  Our  thanksgiving  is  to
extend  far  beyond  our  knowledge.  We  are  to  seize  the  spirit  of  universality  which  the
aposUe  here  inculcates.  **  Almighty  God,  Father  of  all  mercies,  we  thine  unworUiy
servants  do  give  thee  most  hiunble  and  hearty  thanks  for  all  thy  goodness  and  loving-
kindness  to  us  and  to  all  men."  A  requirement  for  both  parts  of  this  priestly  work  is,
that  we  take  pains  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  men  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  and  with
what  is  taking  place  among  them.  A  second  requirement  U  that  we  open  our  hearts
to  their  needs  and  mercies.  By  intelligence  and  large-heartedness,  our  work  shall
answer  its  end,  viz.  the  calling  down  of  luessing  on  men.  2.  UpeckU  teachina,  ^  For
kings  and  idl  that  are  in  high  place ;  that  we  msy  lead  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life  in  all
godliness  and  gravity."  We  are  to  understand  the  highest  and  the  subordinate  repre-
sentatives of  authority  in  the  state.  Our  duty  branches  out  in  the  same  way  as  befure.
(D  Prayer  for  kings  and  tnagistratei.  We  are  to  pray  for  them  especially  in  their
official  capacity,  that  they  may  be  enabled  faithfully  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their
office,  and  to  glorify  God  therein.  (2)  Thanksgiving  for  kings  and  mtigistrates.  In
this  land  we  can  give  unfeigned  thanks  to  God  that  we  enjoy  so  largely  the  blessings
of  good  government  The  public  recognition  of  kings  and  magistrates  would  be  con-
ducive to  their  leading  a  tranquil  and  quiet  life.  The  first  word  points  to  the  state  not
using  its  power  against  them.  The  second  word  points  to  their  not  provoking  a  coUitdoQ
with  the  state.  jBy  the  course  enjoined,  a  right  impression  would  go  abroad  re^irding
them,  that  they  were  not  decriers  of  dignities,  seer  t  plotters  against  the  existing  form
of  government.  It  was  good  advice  which  was  siven  to  the  Jews  of  the  Captivity:
**  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city,  whither  I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captives,  toA
pray  unto  the  Lord  fur  it :  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace."  So  the  good
advice  of  the  apostle  here  saved  the  Christians  (in  the  midst  of  the  Roman  empire)
from  many  a  false  step.  They  could  follow  the  quiet  course  in  all  godliness  and  gravity.
The  first  word  points  to  the  habit  of  the  Christian's  mind,  which  is  that  he  has  a
regard  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  The  second  word  points  to  his  having  a
re^urd  to  the  propriety  of  things,  which  is  *^  tiie  appropriate  e«tting  of  higher  graces  and
virtues."  Not  mere  policy,  but  the  God-regarding  habit,  and  the  sense  of  propriety,
kept  the  Chri>tians  in  the  quiet  course.  3.  Motive.  **  This  is  good  and  acceptable  in
the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour."  The  intermediate  reference  is  brought  in  to  illustrate
the  universality  of  our  service  for  others.  This  service  in  its  universality  is  recom-
mended, as  having  a  high  excellence  in  itself.  Moreover,  it  is  peculiarly  pleading  to  God
in  his  character  as  Saviour,  which  is  to  be  further  brought  out.  Even  Rousseau  is  our
teacher  of  ^miver^ality.  "  The  good  man,"  he  says,  "  plans  his  life  with  a  reference  to
the  whole,  while  the  wicked  man  would  gladly  order  all  things  with  reference  to
himself,  llie  latter  makes  himself  the  centre  of  all  things,  the  other  orders  all  with
reference  to  a  common  Centre,  even  to  God."

II.  Universality  op  the  pubpose  op  salvation.  "Who  willeth  that  all  men
should  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  It  would  be  making  feeble-
ness of  the  words  to  suppose  the  apostle's  idea  to  be  that  God  is  wUlimf  that  all  men
should  be  saved,  as  it  is  plainly  dogmatic  prejudice  that  accounts  for  Cahin  s  assertion
that  the  apostle  is  thinking,  not  of  individuals,  but  of  classes  of  men.  It  is  a  great
truth,  of  which  we  are  not  to  be  robbed,  that  of  every  man  it  can  be  said  that  God
willeth  that  he  should  be  saved.  We  are  to  think  of  his  will  as  in  a  state  of  active
volition.  It  was  in  this  state  when,  in  the  depths  of  eternity,  he  formed  the  purpose
of  our  salvation.  It  is  in  this  state  now  when,  in  the  pleadings  of  the  exalted  Christ,
in  the  workings  of  the  Spirit,  in  all  the  dealings  of  Providence,  he  is  seeking  to  secure
the  condition  of  our  salvation,  viz.  our  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  We  are
to  understand  not  mere  intellectual  knowledge,  but  experimental  knowledge-— our
laying  hold  by  faith  upon  our  Representative,  and  coming  to  know  in  our  experience
that  there  b  salvation  in  him.  This  his  active  volition  b  directed  toward  all ;  it  can-
not be  said  that  he  desires  the  salvation  of  one  more  than  of  another.  He  uses  means,
not  towards  one  here  and  another  there,  but  towards  all  alike  coming  to  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,  and  finding  ample  and  everlasting  shelter  in  his  love.  And  if  it  is  so
with  God,  it  is  made  plain  as  it  could  not  otherwise  be,  that  we  are  not  to  narrow  down
our  petitions  and  thanksgivings  (which  are  expressive  of  active  volition)  to  a  little
circle  of  our  own,  but  are  to  widen  them  out  even  toward  all  men.


<jH.n.l— 15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  47

m.  TJNivEnsALiTY  OF  THE  DISPENSATION  OP  SALVATION.  1.  Presided  over  hy  the
one  Ood.  **  For  there  is  one  God.**  The  pagan  idea  was  that  there  were  many  gods.
There  was  a  god  for  every  nation,  a  god  for  every  small  community,  a  god  for  every
household.  The  god  so  attached  was  supposed  to  be  devoted  to  the  interests  of  his
devotees,  in  preference  or  even  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  all  others.  What  was
that  but  breaking  up  the  race  into  factions,  and  under  the  most  powerful  example?
We  have  a  much  nobler  conception — all  men  under  one  God,  and  not  different  men
tmder  different  gods.  As  we  are  all  under  the  canopy  of  heaven,  so  we  are  all  under
the  same  canopy  of  the  Divine  love.  *'  Is  he  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  Is  he  not
also  of  the  Gentiles  ?    Yes,  of  the  Gentiles  also."

•'The  great  God  that  loveth  all,
Uath  made  both  great  and  Bmall.**

That  shuts  out  all  clashing  of  administration.  As  all  are  imdcr  the  same  Divine  govern*
ment,  so  all  are  governed  on  the  same  impartial,  imivorsal  principles,  and  governed
toward  the  one  end  of  their  salvation.  2.  In  the  hands  of  the  one  Mediator.  "  One
Mediator  also  between  God  and  men,  himself  man,  Christ  Jesus."  A  mediator  is  one
who  acts  between  two.  Christ  Jesus  is  here  said  to  be  Mediator  between  God  and
man.  God,  as  it  were,  allows  the  administration  to  go  out  of  his  hands,  but  it  does  not
suffer  in  doing  so;  for  it  passes  into  the  hand,  not  of  many  mediators  with  many
administrations,  but  into  the  hands  of  one  Mediator,  by  which  there  is  preserved  the
grand  equality  and  universality  of  the  administration.  Christ  could  mediate  on  the
Divine  side,  being  God  himself,  thus  carrying  into  the  administration  the  whole  mind
of  him  whom  he  represented.  The  remarkable  thing  which  alone  is  noted  was  that,  to
mediate  on  the  human  side,  he  became  man,  being  linked  not  to  some  men,  but  to  all
men ;  so  that  his  mediation  could  be  in  the  interest,  not  of  some,  but  of  alL  It  is  matter
for  solemn  thought  to  every  man  that  Christ  is  linked  to  him,  and  linked  to  him  wiUi
a  view— according  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  administration — to  his  being  saved.

rV.  Univehsality  of  THE  RANSOM.  "  Who  gave  himself  a  Ransom  for  all."  If  the
language  had  been  that  Christ  gave  himself  for  all,  there  would  not  have  been  excluded
the  idea  of  substitution.  But  emphasis  is  given  to  this  idea  by  the  word  which  is
translated  "  ransom.**  It  is  literally  '*  loosing-price  instead  of."  It  is  implied  that  we
were  captives,  hopelessly  bound  in  the  consequences  of  our  sins.  Not  able  to  do  any-
thing for  ourselves,  we  needed  to  be  indebted  to  a  substitute.  The  price  our  Substitute
paid  as  ransom  was  himself,  t.c.  his  life,  which,  being  the  life  of  him  who  was  God  as
well  as  man,  was  more  than  equal  to  the  lives  of  all  men  together.  Such  is  the  way —
not  to  be  too  much  literalized — in  which  the  truth  is  conveyed  here.  The  stress  of
the  thought  is  to  be  laid  on  aU.  Time  was  when  it  was  considered  dangerous  to  say
that  Christ  died  for  all.  The  apostle  does  not  shrink  from  it,  neither  here  nor  where
his  language  is  that  "  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man."  It  adds  a  deep  solemnity  to
the  existence  of  a  man,  that  this  price  has  been  paid  for  him.  How  shall  he  get  rid  of
the  obligation  incurred,  unless  by  doing  as  the  captive  does  for  whose  ransom  the  stipu-
lated money  has  been  paid  ?  As  the  captive  goes  forth  into  the  possession  of  freedom,
grateful  to  his  redeemer,  so  let  each  of  us  go  forth  into  the  possession  of  our  freedom
in  Christ,  grateful  to  hira  as  having  redeemed  us  with  his  blood.

V.  Universality  of  the  TEbTiMONY.  "The  testimony  to  be  borne  in  its  own
times."  It  is  generally  assumed  that  the  reference  is  to  the  universal  proclamation  of
the  gospel.  But  there  is  this  to  be  considered,  that  what  is  to  be  witnessed  to  is,  that
Christ  Jesus  gave  himself  a  Bansom  for  all,  Le.  all  that  ever  lived,  that  live  now,  or
isQiall  ever  live.  And  this  does  not  seem  to  be  properly  witnessed  to  or  borne  out  merely
by  the  men  of  a  disUmt  time,  or  of  distant  times  or  ages,  all  having  the  knowledge  of
the  gospel.  It  is  better  not  to  fix  down  the  manner  of  the  testimony,  but  to  allow  the
verse  to  remain  in  its  own  universality,  to  have  its  due  weight  as  one  of  many  verses
that  bear  upon  the  same  point.  There  is  suggested — not  more  than  suggested — some
great  tcbtiraony  to  the  universality  of  the  ransom.  We  cannot  tell  what  the  testimony
will  be,  as  it  is  here,  for  good  reason,  not  condescended  on.  It  is  not  borne  now,  but  it
is  to  be  borne— it  may  be  after  long  ages — yet  in  its  own  times.

VL  Paul's  contribution  to  thb  universality  of  thb  testimony.    •'Where-


48  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  n.  1— 15,

unto  I  was  appointed  a  preacher  and  an  apostle  (I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not),  a  teacher
of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth.**  Paul  was  privDeged  in  his  day — before  the  arrival
of  the  times — to  help  forward  the  demonstration  of  the  universal  ransom.  For  this  he
was  appointed  a  preacher,  literally  a  herald,  ».e.  one  that  cried  aloud  in  the  Name  of
Christ  and  spared  not  He  was  also  appointed  to  the  high  office  of  apostle,  with
which  is  connected  the  double  asseveration,  **  I  speak  the  truth,  I  lie  not."  We  cannot
think  of  it  being  made  thus  strong  for  the  sake  of  Timothy,  but  for  the  sake  of  some
who  were  to  be  reached  through  Timothy.  He  was  further  appointed  a  teacher  of  the
Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth.  In  this  he  overstepped  Jewish  limitR,  and  was  entering  at
far  as  he  could  into  the  universality  of  the  gospel.  And  what  he  called  upon  men
everywhere  to  do  was  to  believe,  the  object  of  their  faith  being  the  truth  that  Christ
died  for  them  and  for  all. — 11.  F.

Vers.  8 — 15. — The  sexes  in  the  Christian  assembly.  I.  Thb  pabt  of  the  men — to
LEAD  IK  PRATER.  *'  I  dcsire  therefore  that  the  men  pray  in  every  place,  lifting  up
holv  hands,  without  wrath  and  disputing.**  The  mind  of  the  apostle,  as  here  expressed^
is  that  in  every  place  where  men  and  women  assemble  for  Divine  worship,  the  duty  of
conducting  the  public  devotions  shall  devolve  upon  the  men.  They,  and  not  the
women,  as  appears  from  the  followiug  contrast,  are  to  be  the  mouth  of  the  congregation
in  prayer  ofi'ered  to  God.  This  assignment  of  leading  in  prayer  to  them  is  mentioned
along  with  the  appropriate  bodily  posture,  viz.  the  lifting  up  of  the  hands  (as  toward
heaven)  in  the  way  of  invoking  the  Divine  blessing  upon  tne  congr^tion.  With  this
is  connected  the  inward  qualification — ^lifting  up  holy  hands,  t.e.  that  do  things  that
accord  with  their  being  engaged  in  so  sacred  a  service.  It  is  not  the  place  that  is  to
hallow  the  hands,  but  it  is  the  hands  that  are  to  be  holy,  to  be  in  keeping  with  the
place.  The  orderliness  implied  in  the  men  having  their  proper  jdace  woidd  tend  to
prevent  the  use  of  imholy  perturbation  of  feeling,  and  the  or^king  forth  of  unseemly
disputing,  such  as  would  imfit  the  congregation  for  engaging  in  payer.  **  He  that  prays
to  God,**  says  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  *  The  Retmn  of  Prayers,'  "  with  an  angry,  that  is,  with
a  troubled  and  discomposed  spirit,  is  like  him  that  retires  into  a  battle  to  meditate,  and
sets  up  his  closet  in  the  out-quartcrs  of  an  army,  and  chooses  a  frontier  garrison  to  be
wise  in.  Anger  is  a  perfect  alienation  of  the  mind  from  prayer,  and  therefore  is  con-
trary to  that  attention  which  presents  our  prayers  in  a  right  line  to  God.  For  so  have  I
seen  a  lark  rising  from  its  bed  of  grass,  and  soaring  upwards,  and  singing  as  he  rises,
and  hopes  to  get  to  heaven,  and  rise  above  the  clouds ;  but  the  poor  bird  was  beaten
back  with  the  loud  sighings  of  an  eastern  wind,  and  his  motion  made  irregular  and
inconsistent,  descending  more  at  every  breath  of  the  tempest  than  it  could  recover  by
the  libration  and  frequent  weighing  of  his  wings,  till  the  little  creature  was  forced  to
sit  down  and  pant,  and  stay  till  the  storm  was  over ;  and  then  it  made  a  prosperous
flight,  and  did  rise  and  sing,  as  if  it  had  learned  music  and  motion  from  an  angeL"

II.  The  part  op  the  women.  1.  To  be  becomingly  dressed,  "In  like  manner,
that  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefastness,  and  sobriety;
not  with  braided  hair,  and  gold  or  pearls  or  costly  raiment ;  but  (which  becometh
women  professing  godliness)  through  good  works."  It  is  with  regard  to  dress  that
the  apostle  charges  the  women.  They  are  not  forbidden  to  adorn  themselves.  In
nature  God  has  a  regard  to  adornment ;  the  flowers  are  painted  chiefly  in  the  way  of
appealing  to  the  sense  of  the  beautiful.  So  the  apostle  regards  it  as  particulariy
appropriate  to  the  women  that  they  are  to  adorn  themselves ;  but  they  are  to  adorn
themselves  in  modest  apparel.  There  seems  to  be  a  wider  reference  than  modest,  and
a  twofold  reference,  it  is  apparel  that  is  suitable  to  women  as  such.  This  certainly
excludes  dress  that  shocks  the  womanly  feeling  of  modesty.  But  it  also  includes  dress
that  is  tasteful.  Apart  from  what  is  expensive,  good  taste  may  be  displayed  in  dress,
as  in  the  proper  blending  of  colours.  There  is  no  religion  in  negligence  as  to  dress.  A
woman  should  never  be  above  attending  to  what  is  clean  and  whole  and  neat  in  dress;
and  especially  should  she  attend  to  this  in  appearing  in  the  house  of  God.  It  is  appard
that  is  suitable  to  women  in  respect  of  their  circumstances.  Age,  rank,  means,  demands
of  religion,  come  in  as  modifyingconditions.  A  brightness  of  colom:  that  is  in  place  in
youth,  is  out  of  place  in  age.  The  servant  is  not  to  dress  as  her  mistress.  She  who
dresses  upon  a  small  income  is  not  to  be  as  she  who  dresses  upon  a  large  income.


OH.  n.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  49

There  is  not  to  be  dressing  as  thougli  this  world  were  a  paradise,  and  not,  as  it  really
is,  full  of  humsm  want.    With  outward  deportment  as  to  dress,  are  connected  the
inward  feelings.     There  is  sTuimefastness,  as  the  word  originally  was  in  the  Authorized
Version.    This  feeling  given  to  the  woman  should  make  her  shrink  from  all  impropriety
in  dress.    There  is  also  sobriety,  or  the  feeling  that  keeps  the  love  for  dress  within  the
bounds  of  reason  and  religion.    The  apostle  descends  to  particulars.    Women  are  not
to  adorn  themselves  with  braided  hair  and  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  raiment.    It  cannot
be  meant  that  these  things  are  absolutely  forbidden.    Long  hair  is  an  ornament  to  a
woman,  and  it  is  natural  that  it  should  be  braided.    Grold  is  an  excellent  substance,
and  can  be  wrought  into  most  beautiful  forms.    It  is  Gkxi  who  has  ^ven  the  lustre  to
pearls.    Ideas  of  what  is  beautiful  can  be  carried  to  a  great  extent  m  garments,  as  in
the  garments  prescribed  for  the  Jewish  high  priest.    It  can  only  be  meant  that  they
are  to  be  duly  svbordinated  by  women.    They  are  not  to  make  ends  of  them,  as  women
of  the  world  do.    They  are  not  to  vie  with  one  another  in  the  use  of  them.    They  are
not  to  be  used  in  the  way  of  gratifying  personal  vanity,  or  in  the  way  of  ostentation
and  drawing  attention  upon  them.    They  are  not  to  be  used  as  though  they  were
essential,  being  only  on  the  outsidt,  and  an  imcertain  possession  which  cannot  be  carried
beyond  the  world.    They  are  only  to  be  sought  in  connection  with,  and  in  due  sub-
ordination to,  imoard  virtues.    This  is  the  Uiought  to  which  the  apostle  carries  us
forward.    There  is  that  which  becomes  a  woman  professing  godliness,  i,e,  professing  to
be  regulated  by  the  will  of  Gk)d  in  dress  as  in  all  matters,    ^d  the  will  of  Gk)d  win  be
considered  in  connection  with  the  state  of  the  world.    It  is  such  a  world  that  Christ
needed  to  come  into  it  to  save  it.    Moreover,  it  is  such  a  world  that  Christ's  servants
need  to  do  much  saving  work  in  it.    And  a  true  Christian  woman  will  not  set  her  heart
on  what  is  showy  or  genuinely  beautiful  in  dress  or  ornament,  but  will  set  her  heart
on  what  is  more  valuable.    She  will  seek  to  be  adorned  with  the  ornament  of  a  meek
and  quiet  spirit,  which  in  the  sight  of  Gk)d  is  of  great  price.    She  will  seek  to  be
adorned,  as  the  idea  is  here,  with  a  kindly,  benevolent  msposition,  such  as  finds  its
medium  in  ^ood  works.    She  will  consider  that  the  time  and  money  unnecessarily
spent  upon  tne  braiding  of  the  hair,  and  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  raiment,  is  so  much
taken  from  her  power  of  performing  good  works.    It  must  be  said  that  tiie  position  of
a  true  Christian  woman  has  its  d&&culties.    Fashion  which  exercises  such  a  sway  is
not  the  expression  of  pure  Christian  sentiments.    It  is  to  a  large  extent  the  expression
of  worldliness,  or  the  striving  after  externals.    The  true  Christian  woman,  then,  has
it  as  her  task,  on  the  one  hand,  not  to  go  altogether  against  fashion  so  as  to  be  singular
and  to  call  attention  to  her,  which  would  offend  her  feeling  of  modesty ;  on  the  other
hand,  to  attain  to  simplicity  and  inexpensiveness  in  dress,  so  as  to  leave  her  free  for
discharging  her  Christian  function  as  a  doer  of  good  works.    2.  To  he  a  learner,  and
not  a  teacher,    **  Let  a  woman  learn  in  quietness  with  all  subjection.    But  I  permit  not
a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  have  dominion  over  a  man,  but  to  be  in  quietness."    Tho
woman  is  to  be  receptive  with  regard  to  public  teachings.    She  is  to  he  a  learner,  not
breaking  the  silence  even  to  the  extent  of  asking  a  question.    For  the  language  here
is  partly  to  bo  explained  by  what  is  said  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  36,  **  And  if  they  will  learn
anything,  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  home."    The  position  of  the  apostle,  that  a
woman  is  not  to  be  a  teacher  in  the  house  of  Grod,  is  very  implicit :  "  I  permit  not  a
woman  to  teach."    Whatever  her  qualifications — and  some  women  are  better  qualified
to  teach  than  some  men — ^the  apostolic  enactment  is  against  her  teaching.    This  enact-
ment is  grounded  in  what  is  natural.    It  would  be  reversing  the  natural  order  of
superiority  for  men  to  sit  imder  a  woman  as  their  teacher.    It  would  also  be  giving
woman  a  publicity  from  which  every  one  who  is  unsophisticated  and  retains  her  native
modesty  must  shrink.    Her  natural  unfitness  set  forth  in  two  facts,    (1)  Eve  was  created
after  Adam,    "  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve."    The  apostle  regards  this  fsLCt
as  emblematic  of  a  headship  originally  given  to  the  man,  which  carries  with  it  his
exclusive  right  to  be  a  teacher  in  the  house  of  Grod.    (2)  The  woman  was  first  in  the
transgression,    "And  Adam  was  not  beguiled,  but  the  woman  being  beguiled  hath
fiedlen  into  transgression."    We  are  not  to  understand  that,  for  introducing  sin  into  the
world,  she  was  thrown  into  a  subordination  which  did  not  originally  belong  to  her.   But
rather  the  way  in  which,  acting  for  herself  without  regard  to  her  husband,  she  was
worked  upon  by  the  tempter  was  emblematic  of  a  natural  dispofiition  which  unfits  her

I.  TIMOTHY,  E


50


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  m.  1 — ^16«


for  taking  a  public  positiozL  Prwnite  annexed.  "  But  ahe  shall  be  saved  through  the
ehild-bearins,  if  they  continue  in  fiuth  and  love  and  sanctification  with  sobriety."  So
eminent  an  interpreter  as  Ellicott  interprets  this  of  the  child-bearing  by  pre-eminence —
woman  giving  birth  to  the  Messiah — ^but  without  good  reason.  Tlie  apostle  has  been
excludix^  woman  from  activity  in  Church  life  in  connection  with  whidi  there  is  pub-
licity ;  here  he  points  to  her  proper  destiny  as  activity  in  family  life.  There  is  reference
to  the  form  in  which  the  curse  fell  upon  the  woman ;  in  connection  with  this  is  there
promise  of  blessing.  There  is  not  excluded  from  the  promise  the  lower  salvatiozL  A
mother,  laying  hoM  upon  this  promise,  can  hope  in  her  danger  to  be  preserved  alive,  with
due  submission,  as  is  right  in  the  sphere  of  temporal  blessing,  to  the  disposing  of  God.
There  is  special  reference  to  the  hi^er  salvation.  "  She  shaU  be  saved,"  shall  find  the
path  of  her  highest  well-being,  '*  if  they "  (there  is  a  change  to  the  class  of  Christian
mothers,  or  more  generally  of  Christian  women,  one  depending  to  a  certain  extent  on
all)—"  if  they  contmue  in  faith,"  ue.  toward  Christ,  '<  and  love,"  i,e.  especially  toward  the
needy,  "and  sanctification,"  t.e.  attention  to  the  rules  of  personal  purity,  with  such  aobiiety
as  sliall  keep  them  to  their  proper  sphere. — ^B.  F.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  in.


Ver.  l.—Faithftd  u  the  taying  for  ihi$  %$
a  true  eauing,  A.V. ;  teekeih  for  denre,  A.V.
Taithful  is  the  saying  (see  above,  oh.  i.  15,
note).  This  manifestly  refers  to  what
follows,  not,  as  Chrysostom  and  others,  and
margin  of  the  R.V.,  to  the  saying  which
pieces,  in  ch.  ii.  15.  Seeketh  (hpiyrrcu);
nterally,  8tret€he$  out  hit  hand$  after.  It
is  peculiar  in  the  New  Testament  to  the

Skstoral  Epistles  and  the  Epistle  to  the
ebrewB,  though  common  in  classical  Greek
(see  ch.  vi  10 ;  Heb.  xi.  16).  The  noun  6pt^is,
appetite,  desire  (which  is  found  several
times  in  the  LXX.),  is  used  once  by  St.  Paul
(Rom.  L  27).  The  office  of  a  bishop ;  mean-
ing here,  as  everywhere  else  in  Scripture,
that  of  a  presbyter,  or  priest.  'Eirto-icoxi^,  in
the  sense  of  **  the  episcopate,"  occurs  only
here  and  Acts  i.  20,  where  it  is  rendered
•* bishopric '*  in  the  A.V.,  and  "overseer-
ship  "  in  the  margin  of  the  R. Y.,  being  the
translation  in  the  LXX.  of  Ps.  cviiL  (cix.,
A.V.)  9  of  the  Hebrew  vinp^^  **  his  office."
Elsewhere  (Luke  xix.  44V  1  Pet.  ii.  12;
V.  6)  it  means  "  visitation."  But  ^ir(<ricoiroj,
** bishop"  (ver.  2)— except  in  1  Pet.  ii.  25,
where  it  is  applied  to  Christ — ^always  means
the  overseer  of  the  particular  flock,— the
presbyter (Acte  xx.  28 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  7);
and  fwnTKowfiv  the  functions  of  such  ivicKO'
xos  (1  Pet.  V.  2  compared  with  1).  It  was
not  till  the  sub-apostolic  age  that  the  name
of  iirlffKonos  was  confined  to  the  chief  over-
seer who  had  **  prients  and  deacons  "  under
him,  as  Timothy  and  Titus  had.  Possibly
this  application  of  the  word  arose  from  the
visits  of  the  apostles,  and  afterwards  of
men  sent  by  the  apostles,  as  Timothy  and
Titus,  Tychicus  and  Artemas,  were,  to  visit
the  Churches,  being  occasional  and  tem-


porarjr  only,  as  those  of  Yisitors.  For  such
occasional  visitation  is  implied  in  the  verb
ixtfficiwr^ffeai  (Matt.  xxv.  86,  48 ;  Luke  L
68,  78;  Acts  vii.  23;  xv.  36;  Jas.  1.  27).
Afterwards,  when  the  vrants  of  the  Churches
required  permanent  oversight,  the  name
hriffKowos — veecovo  Qt),  ^v4^  (Fr.),  hieehof
^Ger.),  bieoeop  (A.-S.),  aiptAaupu$'(Uiouo-
Goth.),  eta— -became  universal  ror  the  chief
overseer  of  the  Church.  A  good  work
(koXjov  dpyovf  not  oto^ov,  as  ver.  101  EokS^
means  **  honourable,"  ''beooming,"  **  bene-
ficial," and  the  like.

Ver.  2.— The  for  a,  A.V. ;  therefore  for
then,  AV. ;  toithout  reproach  for  MameleeSj
A. v.;  temperate  for  vigUanty  A.V.;  eober-
minded  for  tober,  A.Y. ;  orderly  for  of  good
behaviour,  A.Y.  The  bishop  (see  note  on
ver.  1) ;  *^  a  bishop  "  is  better  English.
Without  reproaoh  (iuftwlK-nirros) ;  only  here
and  ch.  v.  7  and  vi.  14  in  the  New  Testament :
not  found  anywhere  in  the  LXX.,  but  used
by  Thucydides,  Euripides,  and  others,  in
the  sense  of  **  not  open  to  attack,"  **  bbune-
less."  The  metaphor  is  said  (though  denied
by  others)  to  be  from  wrestling  or  boxing,
when  a  man  leaves  no  part  of  his  body
exposed  to  the  attack  of  his  adversary.
The  husband  of  one  wife  (comp.  Titus  L  6).
Three  senses  are  possible.  The  passage
may  be  understood  (1)  as  rehiring  a  oishop,
(or  presbyter)  to  have  a  wife,  and  so  some
took  it  even  in  Chrysostom*s  time  (tiiough
he  does  not  so  understand  it),  and  so  me
Russism  Church  understands  it ;  (2)  as  pro-
hibiting his  having  more  than  one  wire  at
a  time ;  (3)  as  prohibiting  seoond  marriages
for  priests  and  bishops.  Bishop  Woras-
wortn,  Bishop  Ellicott,  and  Dean  Alford,
among  English  commentators,  all  ag^ree  in
thinking  that  (3)  is  the  apostle's  meaning.
In  spite  of  such  conaeneuSf  it  appears  in


CH.  m.  1 — 16.]


THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


61


the  highest  degree  improbable  that  St  Paul
Bhoold  have  laid  down  such  a  condition
for  the  priesthood.  There  is  nothing  in  his
writings  when  treating  expressly  of  second
marriages  (Bom.  vii.  2,  8 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  8,  89)
to  suggest  the  notion  of  there  being  any-
thing disreputable  in  a  second  marriage,
and  it  would  obviously  cast  a  great  slur
upon  second  marriages  if  it  were  laid  down
as  a  principle  that  no  one  who  had  married
twice  was  fit  to  be  an  ixlffKowos.  But  if
we  consider  the  general  laxity  in  regard
to  marriage,  and  the  facility  of  divorce,
which  prevailed  among  Jews  and  Bomans
at  this  time,  it  must  have  been  a  common
thing  for  a  man  to  have  more  than  one
woman  living  who  had  been  his  wife.  And
this,  as  a  distinct  breach  of  the  primeval
law  (Gen.  ii.  24),  would  properly  be  a  bar
to  any  one  being  called  to  the  "  ofBce  of  a
bishop."  The  same  case  is  supposed  in
1  Cor.  viL  10 — 13.  But  it  is  utterly  unsup-
ported by  any  single  passage  in  Scripture
that  a  second  marriage  should  disqualify
a  man  for  the  sacred  ministry.  As  regards
the  opinion  of  the  early  Church,  it  was  not
at  all  uniform,  and  amongst  those  who  held
tiiat  this  passage  absolutory  prohibits  second
marriages  in  the  case  ojf  an  episcopusy  it
was  merely  a  part  of  the  asceticism  of  the
day.  As  a  matter  of  course,  such  writers
as  Origen  and  Tertullian  held  it.  The
very  early  opinion  that  Joseph,  the  husband
of  Marv,  had  children  by  a  former  wife,
which  finds  place  in  the  Protevangelium  of
James  (ix.),  is  hardly  consistent  with  the
theory  of  the  disreputableness  of  second
marriages.  In  like  manner,  the  phrase  in
<sh.  V.  9,  4vhs  iviphs  yvirfi,  is  best  explained
in  accordance  with  the  apostle's  doctrine
about  the  lawfulness  of  a  woman's  second
marriage,  as  meaning  that  she  was  the
husband  of  one  man  only,  as  long  as  her
husband  lived.  (For  the  chief  patristic
opinions  on  the  subject,  see  Bishop  Words-
worth's note,  and  Bingham's  *  Christian
Antiquities,'  bk.  iv.  ch.  v.)  Temperate
{yri^oKtov) ;  peculiar  to  the  pastoral  Epistles
(see  ver.  11  and  Titus  ii.  2),  but  found
in  classical  Greek.  The  verb  yiitptiv  means
♦♦  to  be  sober"  (1  Thess.  v.  6;  2  Tim.  iv.  5 ;
1  Pet.  i.  13;  iv.  7;  v.  8).  It  denotes  that
temperate  use  of  meat  and  drink  which
keeps  the  mind  watchful  and  on  the  alert,
and  then  the  state  of  mind  itself  so  pro-
duced. The  opposite  state  of  mind  is
described  in  Luke  xxi.  34.  Sober-minded
(^ff^iPpoya) ;  in  the  New  Testament  only
^ere  and  in  Titus  i.  8;  ii.  2,  5.  But
aw^oviw  is  found  in  the  Gbspels  and
Epistles ;  (rt»^povi(wy  <ro»<ppovi(rfi6sf  caippSvasj
in  the  pastoral  Epistles ;  and  (rot<ppo<r^pri  in
ch.  ii.  15  (where  see  note).  Orderly  (KScfuov ;
.see  ch.  iL  9,  note).     Given  to  hospitality


(<t>tXif^tvov ;  as  Titus  i  8  and  1  Pet.  iv.  9).
llie  substantive  <pi\o^tyia  is  found  in  Bom.
xii.  13;  Heb.  xiii.  2.  Apt  to  taaoh  (Si-
9aKruc6v) ;  only  here  and  2  Tim.  iL  24,  iod
Philo,*I)ePr8Bm.etVirt,'4(Huther).  The
classical  word  is  9iieurKaXuc6st  though  chiefly
applied  to  things.  In  the  above-quotea
passage  in  1  Pet  iv.  the  gifts  of  meaking
and  ministering  are,  as  here,  placed  along-
side ^at  of  hospitdliiy.

Ver.  8. — No  trawler  for  not  given  to  wine,
A.Y. ;  tiie  B.T.  omits  the  clause  fi^  olo'xpo'
iccp8q ;  genUe  for  patient,  A.y. ;  conteniioue
for  a  bratufor,  A.  V. ;  no  lover  of  money,  for
not  covetous,  A.y .  Ko  brawler  (ji  ii  irdpoivov) ;
only  here  and  Titus  L  7;  but,  as  well  as
Topoivtos,  common  in  classical  Greek,  in  the
sense  of  ''quarrelsome  over  wine."  In
Matt.  xi.  19  and  Luke  vii.  34  **  wine-
bibber"  is  olvomirris*  In  1  Pet.  iv.  8  the
word  for  "excess  of  wine"  is  otyo4>\vyUu
Ko  striker  (jih  vx4«cTT}y);  only  here  and
Titus  i.  7.  It  is  used,  though  rarely,  in
classicid  Greek  for  a  **  striker,"  ••brawler."
There  is  but  weak  manuscript  authority
for  the  reading  in  the  T.B.,  fiii  edaxpoKtp^^ '
not  given  to  filthy  Inore,  which  is  thou^t
to  have  been  derived  from  Titus  i.  7  (q.v.).
The  internal  evidence,  however,  is  in  ite
favour,  as  something  is  wanted  to  correspond
to  h/piXiiprfvpov,  just  as  xdpoivov  and  irX'^Kruw
correspond  to  ^iricur^  and  Afiaxov  respeo-
tivelv.  Gentle  (iTttucrj);  as  Titus  iii.  2.
So  also  it  is  rendered  in  the  A.Y.  of  Jas.
iii.  17;  1  Pet.  ii.  18.  It  is  very  common
in  classical  Greek,  in  the  sense  of  "fair,"
**  meet,"  **  suitable,"  of  things ;  and  of
"  fair,"  **  kind,"  **  gentle,"  of  persons.  The
substantive  iirituctia  means  "  clemency,"
**  gentleness,"  (Acts  xxiv.  4 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1).
Hot  eontentioTiB  (JifAuxov) ;  only  here  and
Titus  iii.  3  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in
Ecclus.  xix.  5  in  the  Complutensian  edition.
It  is  also  used  in  this  sense  in  uEschylus,
'  PersfB,'  955,  though  its  more  common  mean-
ing in  classical  Greek  is  "  invincible."  Ko
lover  of  money  {h<pt\dpyvpoy) ;  only  here
and  Heb.  xiii.  5.  *A4>i\apyvpia  occurs  in
Hippocrates.  The  positive  ^txipyvpot,
ipiXapyvpla,  occurs  in  ch.  vi.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iii.
2;  Luke  xvi.  14.  Neither  the  A.V.  nor
the  B.y.  quite  preserves  the  form  of  the
original  sentence,  where  the  three  negative
qualities  (jiii  xipoofov,  /ui)  irX^im)}',  fii^  aia'xp<>'
Ktpiri,  T.B.)  are  followed  by  three  positive
qualities  (jixtstKij,  tfiaxov,  iufuXdpyvpov-^
"gentle,"  "peaceful,"  and  "indifferent
al^ut  money").

Ver.  4. — One  that  mleth  well  hit  own
home.  The  4xl<rKovos  is  one  who  has  to
preside  over  and  rule  (xpoltrreurOat)  the  house
of  God  (ch.  V.  17 ;  Bom.  xii.  8 ;  1  Ttiess.  v.
12),  as  the  high  priest  was  called  "  ruler  of
the  house  of  CK)d"  (1  Chron.  ix.  11;  Neh.


62


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[cH.  in.  1 — ^16.


xi  11).  So  in  Jottin  Martyr  the  biihop  is
Oidled  6  xoo9errms  rStv  AZtXAmv  (*  Apology/ 11)
andeimpiy  6  wpottrrws,  and  aimilarly  in  Heb.
xiiL  7  the  clergy  are  ol  4tyo6fMwoi  ifmVf  **  ther
which  have  the  rule  over  yon."  How  needful,
then,  is  it  that  he  should  mle  well  his  own
house,  and  have  his  own  children  in  sub-
jsetkm  1  The  testimony  given  in  this  passage
to  a  married  clergy  is  tuo  dear  to  need  any
comment.  In  saldeotio&  {4w  Avorm);  as
above,  oh.  ii.  11,  where  see  note.  Ix>r  the
sense,  comp.  Titus  i  6,  which  leads  us  to
tkj^lj  the  words,  with  all  gravitj  {v^iu^
rwros,  the  contrary  to  ^^ru^"  iLrmriajy  to
the  children.  The  children  of  the  Mmtowos
are  to  exhibit  that  seriousness  and  sobriety
ci  oonduct  which  is  in  accordance  with  their
father's  office,  /urcC,  together  with,  as  hi
ch.  i.  14.

Ver.  5. — But  for  for,  A.V.,  Icnoweth  for
Jmow,  A.V.

Ver.  6,—Pufed  up  for  lifted  up  with  ffide^
A.y.  A  noviee  (y^vrov) ;  only  here  m  the
New  Testament,  but  found  repeatedly  in  the
LXX.  in  its  literal  sense  of  **a  tree"  or
*' plantation "  newly  planted  (Ps.  ozxviL
8  (cxxviii.  3,  A. V.) ;  cxUv.  12 ;  Isa.  v.  7).
Here  tho  novice  or  neophtfte  is  one  recently
converted  and  received  into  the  Church
(comp.  1  Cor.  iiL  6;  Isa.  Ixi.  3).  As  sudi
he  is  not  yet  fit  to  be  a  ruler  and  a  teacher
of  the  brethren.  Tho  reason  follows.  Lsst
Mng  pufEsd  up  he  ihll  into  the  eondemna-
tlonof  the  deviL  Tv^0c(f,  puffed  up,  is
peculiar  in  tho  New  Testament  to  tho
pastoral  Epistles  (ch.  vi.  4;  2  Tim.  iii.  4),
irom  rv^6st  smoke  (comp.  Xivov  rMpSfAtvoy^
"smoking  flax,"  Matt.  xii.  10).  The  idea
seems  to  bo  "lightness,"  "emptiness,"
and  "elation."  Some  add  that  of  "  obscura-
tion" as  by  smoke;  rwf>6(0,  to  wrap  in
smoke;  rcrti^jueu,  to  be  wrapt  in  clouds
of  conceit  and  folly  (Liddell  and  Scott).
The  condemnation  of  the  devU.  A  some-
what obscure  phrase.  It  means  either  (1)
the  same  condemnation  as  that  into  which  ihe
devil  foil  through  pride, — and  so  Chrysostom,
Olahauisen,  Bishop  Ellicott,  Wordsworth,
Alford,  etc.,  take  it ;  or  (2)  the  condemnation
or  accusation  of  the  d(iviL  In  the  latter
case  KpTfia  would  be  used  in  the  same  sense
as  Kpicis  in  Judo  9,  and  would  mean  the
chaige  preferred  against  him  by  "the
accuser  of  the  brethren"  (comp.  Job  L  9;
ii.  4,  5).  One  of  the  senses  of  Kpiyw  is  "  to
accuse  "—like  icoTtryoptiv (Liddell  and  Scott).
And  this  view  agrees  with  oytiitcfibv  koI
'xceyi^a  rov  ^ia$6\ov  in  ver.  7,  which  means,
not  the  trap  into  which  the  devil  fell,  but
the  tra,p  laid  by  the  devil.  It  remains  doubt-
ful which  is  the  true  sense,  but  (2)  seems,  on
the  whole,  the  most  probable.  The  devU
(rod  9iafi6\ov)  can  only  mean  Satan  (Matt,
iv.  1;  xiii.  3D,  etc),  though  possibly  con-


ceived of  as  qpeaking  hr  the  mmith  of
traducers  and  vuifiers  of  tne  Church,  as  in
ver.  7.

Yer.  7. — Oood  teetimony  from  for  a  good
report  of,  A.y. ;  that  for  uAich,  A.y.  eood
tsstimonj  (jiaprvoie»  KtuJiw;  see  ch.  ▼.  10).
So  it  is  said  of  Timothy  himself  that  i/wp-
rvpcvTA,  "he  was  well  reported  of  by  tho
brethren"  (Acts  xvi.  2).  In  aooordanoo
with  this  rule,  letters  testimonial  are  re-^
ouirsd  of  all  persons  to  be  ordained.  Nofe»
Uie  importance  of  charaeter  in  a  dergymaa
(oomp.  2  Cor.  vL  3).  Thsm  that  an  withMit
(rdv  4^m$w) ;  used  in  Matt  xxiii.  27 ;  Luke
xL  89;  1  Pet  iii  3;  Bev.  xL  2,  ete.,  of  that
which  is  outeide  or  extmmdl  literally,  as
the  outside  of  the  cup,  the  outer  ornament  of
the  body,  the  outside  of  the  sepulchre^  the
outer  oourt  of  the  temple.  It  is  synonvmona
vrith  ihe  more  common  form,  t^m,  (Fox  ihe
phrase,  "they  that  are  without "  (ol  lf|^),  aa
applied  to  those  who  are  not  memoers  of  the
(jhuroh,  see  Mark  iv.  11 ;  John  ix.  34,  35;
1  Cor.  Y.  12, 13;  CoL  iv.  5;  1  Thess.  iv.  12.)
The  oppcMdte  is  f<r»,  (hrmBwr  (1  Cor.  ▼.  12;
Matt  xxiiL  22s  etc.).  So  espotsrto  and  esoteric,
of  doctrines  intended  respectively  for  the
outside  world  or  the  inner  circle  of  disciples.
Beproaeh  (^vci^Mr/Mfy);  the  rsproaohes  and
reelings  oast  upon  him  by  unbelievers
(Bom.  XV.  3;  Heb.  x.  33;  xL  26;  xiiL  13).
The  verb  ov^UHftuf  has  the  same  sense  (ch.
iv.  10 ;  Matt  t.  11 ;  Mark  xr.  32 ;  Luke  vi.
22 ;  1  Pet  iv.  14),  and  so  in  classical  Qreek.
This  reproach  is  further  described  as  the
snare  of  the  devil  (comp.  ch.  vi  9 ;  2  Tim.
ii.  26),  because  it  is  through  these  revilings
that  the  devil  seeks  to  impair  the  power  of
his  ministry  and  frighten  him  from  the
exercise  of  it.  The  genitive  rov  9tafi6\mf
depends  only  upon  ira7^8a,  not  upon  irtft-
9urfi6y.  The  itaL  does  not  indicate  that  there
are  two  separate  things  into  which  he  fiills,
but  adds,  as  a  description  of  the  6v9i9urti6s,
that  it  is  "a  snare  of  the  devil."  The  idea
in  1  Pet.  V.  8  is  analogous.  There  it  is  by
offlictionB  that  the  devil  seeks  to  devour  the
(Usciple  who  is  w^ik  in  faith.  Those  afflic-
tions might  well  be  described  as  ircryfSa  rov
9ta&6hov, "  a  snare  of  the  devil,"  set  for  weak
souls.

Ver.  8. — Beacons  in  like  manner  must  for
liketoise  must  the  deacons,  A.V.  Grave
(a€fiyo6s);  in  Phil.  iv.  8  rendered  "honest"
in  the  A. V.,  and  "  honourable  "  in  the  R.V.,
and  "venerable"  in  the  margin.  None  of
the  words  are  satisfactory,  but  "  honest "  in
the  sense  of  honnete,  i.e.  "respectable"
"becoming  the  dignity  of  a  man,"  comes
nearest  to  the  meaning  of  <rtfiv6s.  "Awiip
<r€fiy6s  is  a  man  who  inspires  respect  by  his
conduct  and  deportment.  It  occurs  again  in
ver.  11  and  in  Titus  ii.  2.  Double-tongued
(9i\6yovs) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,


-CH.  ni.  1 — 16.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


53


or  indeed  anywhere.  The  verb  SiXo^civ  and
the  noun  9i\oyia  are  found  in  Xenophon  and
DiodoruB  SiculuB,  but  in  a  different  sense
— "  to  repeat,"  **  repetition."  Here  ii\oyos  ia
used  in  the  sense  of  ^lyKo»<r<ros  (Pro?,  xi.  18 ;
Eoclus.  xxviii.  13),  ^  a  slanderer,"  "  a  false-
tongued  man,"  who,  as  Theopbylact  (ap.
Scmeusner)  well  explains  it,  thinks  one  thing
and  says  another,  and  says  different  things
to  different  people.  The  caution  here  given
is  of  incalculable  importance  to  young
curates.  They  must  not  allow  themselves
to  be  either  receptacles  or  vehicles  of  scandal
and  detraction.  Their  speech  to  rich  and
poor  idike  must  be  perfectly  sincere  and
ingenuous.  Hot  given  to  muoh  wine.  The
effect  of  the  best  sermon  may  be  undone,  and
more  than  imdone,  if  the  preacher  sinks  into
the  pot-companion  of  his  hearers.  He  at
once  ceases  to  be  atfiyds,  to  inspire  respect
<comp.  Titus  ii.  8  where  the  additional  idea,
most  true,  of  the  davery  of  drunkards,  is  in-
trodu(^).  Greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (alaxpo-
KcoScif);  only  here  and  in  ver.  8  (T.B.)  and
Titus  i.  7.  The  adverb  cuffxpoictpiws  occurs
in  1  Pet  V.  2,  and  is  one  of  many  points  of
resemblance  between  the  pastoral  Epistles
and  1  Peter.  Balaam,  Gehazi,  and  Judas
Iscariot  are  the  three  prominent  examples  of
professed  servants  of  God  being  lovers  of
filthy  lucre.  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  21)  is  another
(see  ch.  vi.  10).  When  lucre  is  the  price
for  doing  wrong,  it  is  "  filthy."  When  lucre
is  sought  on  occasions  where  none  is  due,  it
is  •* filthy;"  and  when  the  desire  of  even
just  gains  is  excessive,  it  ceases  to  be  clean.
Ver.  9. — Holding  the  mystery  of  the  fidth
in  a  pure  eonsoience.  Mvo-r'^piov,  a  mystery,
is  that  which,  having  been  long  hidden,  is  at
length  disclosed,  either  to  men  generally  or
to  elect  disciples.  It  is  derived  from  /tv^»,
to  initiate,  of  which  the  passive  fivto/iat,  to
be  instructed  or  initiated,  is  found  in  Phil,
iv.  12,  and  is  common  in  classical  Greek,
being  itself  derived  from  /ut^,  **  to  close  the
Ups  as  in  pronouncing  the  syllable  fiv"
whence  also  muius.  The  idea  is  of  some-
thing secret^  which  might  not  bo  spoken  of.
In  the  New  Testament  we  have  "the
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt,
xiii.  11;  Luke  viii.  10;  Mark  iv.  11);  and
St.  Paul  brings  out  the  full  force  of  the  word
when  he  speaks  (Rom.  xvL  25)  of  "the
mystery  which  was  kept  secret  ((rf<rtyrifi4rov)
since  the  world  began  .  .  .  but  is  now  made
known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of
faith"  (see  too  Eph.  iii.  3—6;  Col.  ii.  26,
etc.).  **The  faith"  is  equivalent  to  "the
gospel,"  or  "the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  or
the  "  godliness  "  of  ver.  16  (where  see  note);
and  "the  mystery  of  the  faith"  might  be
paraphrased  by  "the  revealed  truth  of
•Christianity."  What  is  added,  **in  a  pure
conscience,"  teaches  us  that  orthodoxy  with-


out personal  holiness  is  little  worth.  Holding
"  the  truth  in  unrighteousness  "  is  severely
condemned  by  St  Paul  (Bom.  i.  18).  He
says  of  himself  (Acts  xxiii.  1),  **  I  have  lived
in  all  good  conscience  before  G^  until  thii
day"  (comp.  Acts  xxiv.  16;  2  Cor.  i.  12;
ch.  L  5, 19,  etc).  It  is  much  to  be  observed
how  St  Paul,  the  great  teacher  of  the
doctrine  of  grace,  lays  constant  stress  upon
the  functions  of  the  conscience,  and  the
necessity  of  having  a  pure  conscience.

Ver.  10. — Serve  as  deacons  for  use  th9
ojfice  of  a  deaoony  A.V. ;  if  they  he  for  being
found,  A.V.  Aiid  let  these  also,  etc  There
is  an  ambiguity  in  the  English  here.  It  is
not  **  these  also  " — these  in  addition  to  others*
f.e.  the  bishops  before  named — ^but "  these  be
also  first  proved."  Their  general  character,
as  described  in  vers.  8,  9,  must  not  be  taken
upon  loose  hearsay,  but  must  be  put  to  the
test  by  examination,  by  special  testimony,
by  inquiry,  and  then,  if  they  are  i.viyKXttroit
not  accused,  not  open  to  just  blame,  Wame*
less,  let  them  be  admitted  to  serve  as  deacons
(see  ver.  18,  note).  The  Church  of  England
scrupulously  acts  up  to  these  directions  by
requiring  written  testimonials,  by  personal
inquiries  made  by  the  bishop,  by  the  Si  qui$^
by  the  appeal  to  the  congregation  in  the
Ordination  Service,  "Brethren,  if  there  be
any  of  you  who  knoweth  any  impediment,  or
notable  crime,  in  any  of  these  persons  pre-
sented to  be  ordained  deacons,  for  the  which
he  ought  not  to  be  admitted  to  that  office,
let  him  come  forth  in  the  name  of  Qtodiy  and
show  what  the  crime  or  impediment  is ; "  as
well  as  by  the  careful  examination  of  the
candidates.  Blameless  Tcomp.  Titus  i.  6»
7);  av4yK\jrrosy  rendered  in  the  Vulgate
nnXlum  crimen  habentee  (which  seems  to
explain  the  "  notable  crime  "  of  the  Ordina-
tion Service),  and  in  Col.  i.  22  "  unreprov-
able"  both  in  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V.  The
whole  passage,  from  ver.  2  to  ver.  13,  shows
the  supreme  importance  of  a  holy  and
blameless  conversation  in  the  clergy.

Ver.  11. — Women  in  like  manner  must  for
even  so  must  their  wives,  A.V. ;  temperaie  for
sober,  A.V.  Women.  What  is  meant  by
those  "  women  "  ?  Certainly  not  women  in
general,  which  would  be  quite  out  of  harmony
with  the  context.    The  choice  lies  between

(1)  the  wives  of  the  deacons,  as  in  the  A.V.;

(2)  the  wives  of  the  episcopi  and  deacons;

(3)  deaconesses.  This  last,  on  the  whole,  is
the  most  probable.  The  male  dcacous  liad
just  been  spoken  of,  and  so  the  apostle  goes
on  to  speak  of  the  femalo  deacons  (a/
JitdKoyotj  Bom.  xvL  1).  He  conceives  of  the
deacon's  office  as  consisting  of  two  branches
— (1)  the  deacons,  (2^  the  deaconesses ;  and
gives  appropriate  directions  for  each.  It
must  be  remembered  that  the  office  of  the
early  deacon  was  in  a  great  measure  secular.


54


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  in.  1— IR


•o  that  there  is  nothing  strange  in  that  of
the  deaconess  being  coupled  with  it  Tho
xetnm  in  ver.  12  to  the  male  deacon  is  in
&your  of  understanding  **  the  women  "  of  the
deaconesses,  as  showing  that  the  subject  of
the  diaoonate  was  not  done  with.  Ghry-
■ostom  (who  says,  **  He  is  speaking  of  those
irho  hold  tho  rank  of  deaconesses  ")  and  all
the  ancient  commentators,  and  De  Wette,
Wiesinger,  Wordsworth,  Alibrd,  and  Ellicott
amon^  the  moderns,  so  understand  it  (see
following  notes).  OrtTe  (<rc/u^f ;  see  ver.  8,
note).  Hot  sUnderen  0*^  9tdfi6\ovs,  corre-
sponding to  the  fiii  9i\^ov$  of  ver.  8).  This
use  of  iidfioKos,  which  is  the  olassical  one^
is  peculiar  in  the  New  Testament  to  the
Mstoral  Epistles  (see  2  Tim.  iii.  3;  Titus  IL
8).  Temperate  {yri^a\lov$ ;  see  yet,  2,  note).
It  oorresponds  here  to  the  fiij  oIp^  woXXJif
wpoadxoyras  of  ver.  8.  7aithM  in  idl  things
(vioT^  iw  iracriv).  This  seems  to  refer
speoiaUy  to  their  being  the  almoners  of  the
dhurch  charities,  and  so  faTours  tho  explana-
tion of  ** women"  as  meaning  deaconesses.
TU(rr6s  means  especially  "trusty"  (Matt
xxiy.  45;  xxv.  21;  Luke  xiL  42;  xvL  10,
etc.).

Ver.  12,— Deac(m8  for  the  deacons,  A.V. ;
hutbands  for  the  htUbands,  A.V.  Husbands
of  one  wife  (see  above,  ver.  2,  note).  Buling,
etc.  (vpourrdfit¥ot);  literally,  being  cU  the
head  ofy  presiding  over  (see  ver.  4,  note).  In
Bom.  xii.  8  and  1  Thess.  v.  12  it  is  appUed  to
the  spiritual  ruler,  the  M<TK<ntos  or  frp9<rfi6-
Tfpost  of  tho  Ohurch.  Elsewhere  only  in  the
pastoral  Epistles  (above,  vers.  4  and  5 ;  ch.
v.  17;  Titus  iii  8,  14).  Their  own  houses
(above,  ver.  5).  "  Their  oton  **  is  in  contrast
to  "  God^s  house."

Ver.  13. — Served  well  as  deacons  for  used
(he  office  of  a  deacon  well,  A.V. ;  gain  to
themselves  a  good  standing  for  purdiase  to
themselves  a  good  degree,  A.V.  Served  .  .  .
as  deacons  (Suucoi^crainrcs) ;  as  in  ver.  10.  In
this  technical  sense  only  found  in  these  two
passages ;  which  well  agrees  with  the  late
date  of  this  Epistle,  when  the  technical  sense
of  diducovos  was  established.  Gain  to  them-
selves a  good  standing.  The  sense  of  tho
passage  depends  a  good  deal  upon  the  exact
meaning  of  fiaBfi6s.  In  1  Sam.  v.  4,  5,  in  the
LXX.,   ^aBfkSs   is  tho   rendering   of   jrQD

(rendered  aXdpioy  in  £zek.  ix.  3;  x.  4),  a  some-
what unusual  word  for  a  '*  threshold."  In
2  Kings  XX.  9, 10,  11,  it  is  the  rendering  of
^VB^  "*  degree  on  the  sun-dial."  This
latter  seems  to  suit  better  the  verb  irepiroi-
oGrrai,  they  gain  or  acquire,  which  suggests
the  idea  of  advancement.  It  does  not  follow
that  St.  Paul  had  in  his  mind  their  advance-
ment from  the  •*  inferior  oflBce"  to  "Uie
higher  ministries  in  the  Church  "  (Ordination
Service) ;  he  may  merely  have  meant  to  say
tliut  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  a  deacon


in  an  efSoient  and  exemplary  manner  raised
a  man  to  high  estimation  in  the  Church,  and
so  gave  him  oonfidenoe  in  confessing  the
faith  of  Jesus  Christ  both  by  word  and  deed.
Oain  to  themselves  (vfpnroioiWax);  aoqnire
bypnrchase  or  otherwise.  Frequent  in  tiie
LXiL;  but  only  elsewhere  hi  the  New
Testament  in  Acts  xx.  28.  Boldness  (wufptt-
ffUuf);  very  common  in  the  New  Testament
(oomp.  Acts  iv.  13,  29,  31;  Eph.  vi  19;
FhiL  i  20,  etcX  where  it  is  especially  applied
to  boldness  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ
This  seems  to  imply  that  St  raul  contem-
plated preaching  as  a  part  of  the  deacon's
work.  We  know  that  Philip  the  deacon  and
Stephen  the  deacon  were  both  prea^ers.

Ver.  14.— To  some  onto  thee;  to  Epheens^
where  Timothy  was  (oh.  i.  3).

Ver.  15. — Men  ouaht  to  behave  ihem»eive»
for  thou  cughtest  to  behave  thyself,  A.y.  T6
behave  thyself  (i»affrpi^fffhi)%  variously
rendered,  both  in  the  A.y.  and  the  R.y.,  '*to
haveone*s  conversation,"  "to  live,"  "to  pass
(one's  time),"  ''to  be  used"  (Heb.  x.  83).
It  is  literally  "to  go  up  and  down"  a  giveit

Slace,  **  backwards  and  forweirds,"  hence  "  to
well  in  it."  The  substantive  dycurrpo^,  in
the  thirteen  places  where  it  occurs  in  the
New  Testament. is  always  rendered  "con-
versation "  in  the  A.V. ;  in  the  R.V., "  man-
ner of  life,"  •*  life,"  "  issue  of  Ufe,"  "  manner
of  living,"  "behaviour,"  "living."  It  is  a
favourite  word  in  the  two  Epistles  of  8t
Peter,  where  it  occurs  eight  times.  The
house  of  God.  This  phrase  here  denotes,  as
it  is  explained  in  the  following  words,  tho
Church  on  earth.  So  Heb.  iiL  6,  "  (jhrist  as
a  Son  over  his  house ;  whose  house  are  we,"
where  the  reference  is  to  Numb.  xii.  7,  "  My
servant  Moses  ...  is  faithful  in  all  mine
house."  The  Ghuroh  of  the  living  Ood.  Here
is  again  a  somewhat  remarkable  resemblance
to  the  phraseology  of  the  Epistle  to  tho
Hebrews, "  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, ...  to
the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the
Firstborn"  (Heb.  xii.  22,  23).  However,
the  phraseology  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews.  Thus  we  read  in  2  Cor.  vL
16,  "  Ye  are  tho  temple  of  the  living  God."
The  phrase,  "  the  living  God,"  occurs  seven
times  in  St  Paul's  Epistles,  and  four  times
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  It  occurs
three  times  in  tho  Gk)spels,  once  in  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles,  and  once  in  the  Revelation.
Hero  it  is  used  by  St  Paul  to  enhance  tho
obligation  to  a  holy  and  blameless  walk  in
those  who  have  the  oversight  of  his  Church.
The  pillar  and  groimd  of  the  trutiL  Some
apply  these  woids  to  Timothy  liimsclf  (Gre-
gory of  Nyssa,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  BasiU
and  others  cited  by  Alford),  after  the  analogy
of  Gal.  it  9,  where  James,  Ophas,  and  John
arc  said  to  be  "pillars"  (trrvKoi),  and  Bev.


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


iiU  1Z|  nhere  it  ia  laid  of  him  that  over-
Cometh,  "I  irill  make  him  a  pillar  (stijAdv)
in  the  bonae  of  my  God."  And  eo.  in
Vcnantius  Fortunatua,  St  Paul  ia  called
"itilos  iUe."  Bat  the  metaphon  of  "a
pillar"  and  "a  foundation"  do  not  all
suit  the  verb  irairtpi^nrSiu;  and  it  ia  well
argaed  that  the  atseQce  of  the  piononD  at
ia  nnfavoarable  lo  the  application  of  "the
pillar  and  Broond  of  the  truth  "  to  tha  sub-
jectof  the  first  clauee.  It  is  therefore  better
to  nnderataod  this  clause  aa  descriptive  of
the  Church  of  God.  The  Cliorch  is  the
pillnr  of  the  troth.  It  aupports  it;  boldt  it
together — bindii  together  its  different  parls.
And  it  ia  the  ground  of  the  truth.  By  it  the
tmtll  U  made  fast,  firm,  and  fixed.    Tht

Cnnd  (Jlpnfu^).  Thia  irard  onl;  ocotus
e  at  all;  jSpaTai,  common  both  ia  the
New  Testament,  the  LXX.,  and  in  clnulcal
Greek,  means  "  filed,"  "  flno,"  or  "  fast."  In
the  A.V.  of  1  Cor.  vii.  37  and  it.  58.  "  stead-
itat;"  Col.  i.  23  (where  it  is  coupled  with
rtttiuKia/iJra),  "settled."  Thence  iiBai6a,
in  late  Greek,  "to  make  firm  or  fast,"  and
itpal^/ia,  the  " eatablishmeiit "  or  "groand-
iug  "  of  the  truth ;  that  in  and  by  which  the
truth  is  placed  on  a  euro  anil  fixed  basis.

Ver.  16.— He  who  (nr  Gorf,  A.V.and  T.R.;
vtanifetted  for  mani/ftt,  A.V. ;  among  the
nalioTU  for  unio  the  GenliUi,  A.V. ;  in  for
info,  A.V.  Without  eontroTeny  (iito^oyeu-
^4iHtt):  onl;  hero  in  tho  New  Testament,
but  used  in  tho  same  sense  in  the  LXX.
and  in  clasaiMil  Greek,  "confessedly,"  by
oonunon  coDfeBsioD.  Orsat  ij  the  myiteiy  of
godllnaM.  ThiB  is  said  to  enhance  the  glory
at  the  Church  juat  spoken  of,  lo  whom  thia
nytlery  has  been  entrusted,  and  so  Blill
fiuiher  lo  impress  upon  Timothy  the  vital
.ty  of  a  »ise  and  lioly  walk  in  the


f  sodlin.


9  all


Uiat  truth  which  ■'  in  other  ages
made  known  unto  Iho  sons  of  men,  us  it  ia
now  revealed  unto  bis  holy  nposllca  and
prophets  by  tho  Spirit."  OD^Uineu  (t^i
tbriSiias);  I.e. "  tho  Christian  faith;"  what
In  eh.  vi.  3  is  called  "  Thcwordsof  oar  Lord
Jetns  Christ,  and  tho  doctrine  which  is
aocording  to  godliness  (tiJ  kot'  tbmB'lar
Bil«r«a*l»),"  and  in  2  Tim,  i.  1,  "  The  trath
which  is  atfcording  to  godliness."  In  ver.  i)
it  is"  the  mystery  of  the  faith,"  where  h  rlrrii
iB«qnivalent  to  n  tbatSila.  Biahop  Ellicott,
however,  does  not  admit  this  objective  aense
of  i  irfrTTiT  01  ii  liaffSiia,  but  ciplatns  the
genitife  as  "  a  pure  possessive  genitive,"
U)e  mystery  appertaining  to,  or  the  property
of,  mbjective  &ith  and  godliness;  but  this
is  a  use  not  homo  out  by  any  passage  in
which  the  word  "  mystery  "  occura.  It  is
•Iwaya  myataries  (or  mystery)  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  of  Christ,  of  God,  of  the  gospel,
■Bd  tile  like.    In  the  following  passagea  the


objective  sense  of  4  irCirrif  la  either  aeoesia^
or  by  far  the  most  natural :  Acta  iii.  7 ;  ziiL
8;  xiv.  22;  »vl.  .1;  Gal.  i.  23;  Eph.  Iv.  S';
Phil.  1.27;  Col.  i.  23;  ii.  7;  oh.  i.  19;  v.
8;  vi.  J0,2:;  2Tim.iv.7;  TitusLIS;  Jaa,
ii.  1 ;  Judo  3.  Having  thus  exalted  the
"mystery  of  godliness,"  St.  Paul  goea  onto
expound  it.  Ba  who  (It).  This  ia  generallj
adopted  now '  as  tho  tme  reading,  instead
of  »t6$  (OZ,  instead  of  ez>  Bishop
Ellicott  satisfied  himself,  by  most  careful
personal  examination,  that  the  original
reading  of  the  Cod.  Alex,  was  02,  and  that
it  had  been  altered  by  a  later  hand  to  02.
The  Cod.  fiinait.  certainly  has  St,  and  to
this  all  the  older  vorBJons  agree.  The  Tnl"
gate  has  qttod,  agreeing  with  Ktcramentum
and  representing  the  Greek  i.  Accepting
this,  then,  aa  the  tme  reading,  we  proo^  to
explain  it  *0i,  who,  ia  a  reUtive,  and  mnrt,
therefore,  luve  an  antecedent  But  tliere  it
no  expressed  antecedent  of  the  masculine
gender  for  it  to  agree  with.  The  antecedent,
therefore,  must  be  understood,  and  gathered
from  the  preceding  words,  ri  luiOT^picv  t^i
tirttja.Iot.  It  can  only  bo  Christ  The
ayatery  of  the  whole  Old  Testament,  that
which  was  wrapped  ia  types  and  hidden
under  veils,  was  Christ  (Col.  i.  27>  Moeos
spake  of  bim,  the  Paalois  speak  of  him,  the
prophets  speak  of  him ;  but  all  of  them
spake  darkly.  But  in  the  gospel  "the
mystery  of  Christ"  (CoL  iv.  3)  is  revealed.
Christ  ia  the  Mystery  of  Christianity.  It  is.
therefore,  DO  difficult  step  to  pass  from  "the
mystery "  to  "  Christ,"  and  to  supply  the
word  "  Christ "  aa  the  antecedent  to  "  who."
Wai  manifested  (Ifucpwh)) ;  a  word  tn-
quenlly  applied  to  Christ  (John  i.  31 ;  I
John  L  2;  \\\.  5,  8,  cto.).  The  idea  is  the
same  in  John  i.  14.  Justified  in  the  spirit.
This  is  rather  an  obscure  expression.  But
it  seems  to  describe  our  Lord's  spotless
righteousness,  perhaps  with  special  reference
lo  the  declaration  of  it  at  his  ijaptism,
"  This  ia  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well

E leased."  We  have  (he  same  contrast
atween  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in
I  Pet.  iii.  18.  And  between  the  fiesh  and
the  apiritof  a  Christian  mania  Bom.  viiL  10,
"Tho  body  ia  dead  tieoause  of  sin,  but  tho
spirit  ia  life  because  of  righteousness."  To
this  clause  apparently  the  remark  of  Chry-


"Godb


became  God."  "The  spin
the  moral  nature — the  inner  man.  mm  tu
angels.  Perhaps  the  moltitnile  of  the
heavenly  host  who  vrolcomod  the  birth  of
Christ  were  permitted  to  see  the  new-born
Bahe,as  he  seems  to  have  done  who  deaeribed
him  to  the  ahepherda  as  "  wrapped  in  awad-


56


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.


[cs.  in.  1— 16L


aiiDg  clothes'*  (Lake  IL  12—14).  Angeh
ininiiftered  oDto  him  after  the  temptation
<Mark  i.  IS),  and  in  the  Garden  of  Geth-
aemane  (Matt.  zzii.  43,  where  the  word
J^ftfiy  is  naed ),  and  at  his  retnrrection  (Matt
zzTiiL  2).  The  spooial  interest  of  angels  in
the  "  great  mysterj  "  is  referred  to  in  1  Pet
L  12;  Heb.  L6.  PxMohedamoiiffthaaatiQiif
(Uiip^Bn  iw  IfArfa-ir).  It  would  hsTo  been
better  to  keep  the  rendering  "Gentiles'*
here,  to  mark  the  identity  of  thought  with
Eph.  iii.  6,  8,  where,  in  the  apostle's  Tiew,
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,
thai  they  migiit  be  fellow-heirs  with  the  Jews
of  tiie  promises  of  God,  is  one  main  feature
of  the  mystery  (oomp.  oh.  iL  7).  Beliefed
OB  in  the  world.  The  next  step  in  this
Mocnding  scale  is  the  aooeptanoe  of  Christ
in  the  world  as  the  Saviour  thereof.  The
language  here  is  notstronji^r  than  that  of  Gol.
i.  5,  6,  **  The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospd,
which  is  come  unto  you;  even  as  it  is  also  in
all  the  world,  and  bearethfhiit''  AndinOoL
i  28,  "The  gospel  which  was  preached  in  all


oreation  under  hearen  *'  (oomp.  Bom.  L  8).
The  statement  in  Mark  xtL  15—20  might
almost  have  been  in  St  Paul's  mind.  Note
the  use  there  of  tho  words  wy^arc,  Jwy^aar,
r^  a^/MT,  6  nrrc^rat,  Tiorc^ari,  ^b^cXiifff,
BioaiTediip  in  glory.  Thedhangoof^into"
(▲.V.)  into  "in*^  is  of  Yery  doubtful  proprietr.
in  New  Testament  Greek  4v  nequentiy
fcillows  Tcrbs  of  motion,  and  means  tlio  same
as  «/f  ,  liko  tho  Hebrew  ^  Our  Lord  it  not
•aid  to  have  ascended  in  glor^  (as  ho  ap-
peared at  tho  Transfiguration),  but,  asbt
Mark  has  it  "He  was  received  np  into
heaven,  and  [thore]  sat  down  at  tho  lUht
hand  of  (Sod,"  fulfilUog  John  xviL  &
This  grand  bunt  of  dogmatic  *^»^^>ii"g  is
somewnat  like  that  in  ch.  ii.  5—7.  Tliaie  is
no  adequate  evidence  of  its  being,  as  many
oommontators  have  thought,  a  pcrtion  of  a
hynm  or  creed  used  in  the  OhuidL  It
rather  implies  the  same  tension  in  the
apostle's  mind  which  is  apparent  in  other
parts  of  tho  Epistle  (oomp.  ch.  vi.  11  and
following  Tones).


HOMILETIGS.

Yers.  1 — 16. — The  chrgy.  It  was  one  of  the  weightiest  duties  laid  upon  l^mothv,
when  called  to  be  the  spiritual  ruler  of  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  to  take  care  that  the
priests  and  deacons  were  men  well  qualified  for  their  holy  office.  The  condition  of  a
congregation  depends  so  largely  upon  the  spiritual  character  of  those  who  minjiitffl'  to
it,  Uiat  the  choice  of  fit  persons  to  serve  in  the  sacred  ministry  of  CKxi's  Church  is
a  matter  of  vital  imix>rtance  to  the  welfare  of  the  peo^de,  and  demands  the  utmost
wisdom  and  fidelity  of  those  who  have  the  chief  oversight  of  the  house  oi  God.
Accordingly  St.  Paul  lays  down  with  great  care  the  qualifications  of  priests  and  deaoons
rcs|iectively.  For  tho  priest  an  irreproachable  character  amongst  those  outside  as  well
as  those  inside  the  Church,  in  order  to  ensure  re8i)ect;  a  lijfie  of  chastity,  that  his
example  may  give  no  countenance  to  a  lax  morality;  strict  temperance  in  the  use
of  meat  and  dnnk,  both  for  his  own  sake  and  as  an  example  to  others ;  a  staid,  sober
mind  and  demeanour,  as  becomes  one  who  lives  near  to  God,  and  handles  holy  things ;
a  large  hosi>itality,  as  one  who  counts  all  ho  has  to  belong  to  the  Church,  whose  servant
he  is;  aptitude  to  teach  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  a  delight  in  teaching;  a
placable,  gentle  disposition,  abhorring  brawls  and  quarrels,  and  studying  peaco  with
all  men;  the  absence  of  aJl  greediness  and  covetousness,  as  one  whose  conversation
is  in  heaven,  and  as  one  determined  to  be  fair  and  impartial  in  all  his  dealinzs  with
men ; — these  are  the  things  needful  for  one  who  is  a  priest  in  the  Church  of  Go<L  But
besides  these  strictly  personal  qualifications  he  must  have  a  well-ordered  house.  His
family  must  bear  the  traces  of  a  gentle  but  firm  parental  discipline.  He  that  is  a  ruler
in  the  house  of  God  must  show  that  ho  can  rule  his  own  children  and  servants ;  and  a
portion  of  tho  gravity  and  sobriety  of  the  man  of  God  must  be  seen  in  the  membere
of  his  household.  With  regard  to  deacons,  they  too  must  be  grave  in  their  demeanour
and  conversation ;  in  all  their  private  intercourse  with  the  members  of  the  Church  where
they  serve,  they  must  be  conspicuously  honest  and  ingenuous.  In  all  social  intercourse
they  must  show  themselves  temi)cnite  and  abstemious.  In  handling  the  public  money,
and  ministering  the  alms  of  the  faithful,  they  must  make  it  clear  that  none  sticks  to
their  own  fingers,  and  that  they  have  no  eye  to  gain  in  the  ministrations  they  under-
take. The  spirit  of  their  ministrations  must  bo  "  all  for  love  and  nothing  for  reward."
Nor  must  they  bo  only  honest  men ;  they  must  be  devout  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  thoruu^hly  instructed  in  the  mystery  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  adorning  that
faith  by  their  ^)er6onal  holiness.    As  regards  their  families,  the  same  rule  appUes  to


-CH,  m.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTflT.  67

them  as  to  the  priests.  Like  the  priests,  they  hold  office  in  the  Church  of  God ;  they
minister  in  that  temple  where  Grod*s  pure  truth  is  fixed  and  established  for  ever  ;  they
are  the  ezpoimders,  with  the  priests,  of  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  the  incarnate
Word,  the  preached  Jesus,  the  glorified  Christ.  What,  then,  ought  their  character  to
be;  how  high  above  things  earthly,  how  closely  assimilated  to  the  glorious  holiness
of  heaven !


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Yer.  1.-27^  Christian  pastorate  a  good  toork.  The  apostle,  having  in  the  previous
•chapter  regulated  the  worship  of  the  congregation  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  men,  not
women,  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  qualifications  of  the  pastors  of  congregations,  as
if  to  imply  that  the  pastorate  did  not  belong  to  all  men.

L  The  office  of  pastor  is  a  good  work.  ''  Faithful  is  the  saying,  If  any  one
§eeketh  the  office  of  pastor  [or, '  bishop '],  he  desireth  a  good  work.**  1.  Tht^M  in  question
toas  held  by  persons  called  by  the  itvo  names  of  bishop  and  elder,  (1)  I'ne  apostle  uses
the  terms  of  the  same  office  (Titus  L  5 — 7).  (2)  The  terms  came  from  two  different
quarters.  The  term  **  elder,"  or  "  presbyter,"  was  of  Jewish  origin,  and  was  earlier  than
the  other,  having  been  long  in  use  in  the  sjmagogue  administration.  It  had  respect
primarily  to  the  age  of  those  presiding  over  the  religious  community,  but  came  by-and-
by,  and  especially  in  the  Christian  Church,  to  signify  its  head,  and  was  a  title  of  dignity
and  gravity.  The  other  term,  '*  bishop,**  came  from  the  Greek  world,  and  was  a  designa-
tion of  the  duties  of  the  office  as  involving  an  oversight  of  the  Churches.  (3)  The
term  "bishop"  is,  therefore,  mostly  employed  of  the  Churches  in  Asia  Minor,  consisting
of  converted  Greeks,  but  the  Jewish  term  "  elder  "  had  precedence  of  it  at  that  earlier
stage  when  the  Church  consisted  of  a  nucleus  of  converted  Jews.  In  Crete,  where
the  Greek  and  Jewish  elements  were  about  equally  powerful,  both  terms  are  used.
2.  The  office  in  question  is  a  good  work.  This  was  one  of  the  faithful  sayings  of  the
apostle.  It  was  (1)  a  work,  not  a  sinecure,  or  title  of  honour,  but  a  laborious  office,
4md  therefore  pastors  are  called  "  labourers  in  the  Word  and  doctrine ; "  (2)  a  good
work,  being  excellent  in  itself,  and  in  its  aims  as  for  the  good  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God.

IL  The  pastorate  is  a  worthy  object  of  ambition.  "  He  desireth  a  good  work."
It  may  be  laudably  desired,  not  as  an  office  of  profit  or  honour,  but  with  a  supreme
regard  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  man,  and  ought  not  to  be  undertaken
except  by  those  who  have  a  real  delight  and  pleasure  in  acting  upon  these  great  prin*
<:iples. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  J. — Hie  positive  qualifications  of  the  Christian  paster.  The  apostle  first  sets
forth  those  qualifications  which  respect  the  personal  life  of  the  pastor,  and  afterwards
those  which  affect  his  family  life.  His  personal  qualifications  are  those  of  a  spiritual
and  moral  order  presented  positively.

L  He  ought  to  be  blameless.  It  may  be  hard  for  a  faithful  man  to  avoid  the
censure  of  a  critical  society,  but  he  must  be  irreproachable  as  being  guilty  of  no  scandal,
and,  above  all,  free  from  the  vices  enumerated  imder  the  negative  aspect  of  his  qualifi-
cations.    He  must  be  held  in  high  moral  repute  by  the  community  around  him.

II.  He  is  to  be  the  husband  op  one  wife.  1.  This  condemns  the  rule  of  celibacy
in  the  Church  of  Home,  It  is  quite  absurd  to  say  that  the  "  one  wife  "  is  the  Church ;
for  the  context  regards  the  minister  as  having  relation  both  to  a  Church  and  to  a  wife
(ver.  5).  Besides,  this  Roman  idea  would  make  the  Church  the  wife  of  many  husbands.
Where  the  apostle,  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  I  Corinthians,  seems  to  favour  a  celibate
condition  "  on  account  of  the  present  distress,"  it  is  not  on  account  of  any  superior
holiness  belonging  to  the  unmarried  state,  but  because  it  sometimes  affords  a  better
opportimity  for  pursuing  Christian  work  under  trying  conditions.  2.  It  does  not  neces^
aarily  compel  pastors  to  marry,  like  the  Greek  Church,  which  yet  inconsistently  reserves
its  bishoprics  for  immarried  monks.  But  it  clearly  gives  the  preference  to  a  married
ministry.  3.  It  does  not  nuxtn  that  a  pastor  is  to  avoid  a  second  marriage — as  the  Greek
Fathers  generally  understood  it  under  the  growing  influence  of  Eastern  asceticism —
l)ecau8e  the  apostle  sanctions  such  marriages  (1  Cor.  viL  1) ;  and,  secondly,  because  a


58  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  hi.  1— i(L

remarrying  does  not  make  a  pastor  more  than  the  husband  of  one  wife.  4.  It  seems,
then,  to  mean  that  the  pcutor  was  to  he**  the  htuband  of  one  wifej^  avoiding  the  polygamy
that  was  then  so  common  among  the  Jews,  and  the  system  of  divorce  still  so  common
in  that  age,  and  remaining  faithnil  to  the  wife  of  his  choice.

III.  SoBEB.  He  must  be  not  only  so  in  eating  and  drinking,  but  watchful  over  him-
self, his  work,  and  his  actions.

IV.  Discreet.  With  a  sound  judgment  and  good  understanding,  capable  of  directing
himself  wisely  in  the  midst  of  difiicult  situations.

y.  Orderly.  With  a  due  proportion  in  his  life,  modest  in  deportment,  courteous  to
all,  of  a  calm  temper  and  grave  demeanour.

VL  Given  to  hobpitalitt.  In  an  age  when  Christians  travelled  from  place  to
place,  and  were  exposed  to  the  risks  of  evil  companionship  in  public  inns,  it  was  impor-
tant that  pastors  should  be  able  to  show  hospitality,  and  assist  with  their  counsel  as
well  as  with  the  necessaries  of  life.

YU.  Apt  to  teach.  The  pastor  must  have  the  capacity  to  impart  Christian  know-
ledge, the  ability  to  interpret  Scripture,  to  explain  its  doctrines,  to  enforce  its  precepts,
and  to  defend  it  against  errorists  of  everv  class.  He  must  possess  the  gifts  of  utterance
and  knowledge.  He  must  have  both  "  skill  and  will,  ability  and  dexterity,  being  neither
ignorant  of  h^  duty  nor  negligent  in  the  performance  of  it." — T.  C.

Ver.  3. — The  negative  qualifications  of  the  Christian  pastor.  I.  Not  violent  over
wine.  In  allusion  not  so  much  to  drunkenness  as  to  the  noisy  and  quarrelsome
temper  which  is  generated  by  wine-bibbing.  The  word  impliedly  condemns  both  cause
and  effect.

II.  No  striker.  In  evident  allusion  to  the  previous  temper,  llie  pastor  must
never  lift  his  hand  in  anger  or  violence.

III.  Forbearing.  Reasonable  and  gentle,  rather  disposed  to  take  wrong  than
avenge  it.

IV.  Not  contentious.  Neither  litigious  nor  quarrelsome,  seeking  peace  with
all  men.

V.  No  LOVER  OP  MONEY.  He  must  appear  to  be  perfectly  disinterested,  not  mercenary
in  his  aims,  not  seeking  his  own  things  rather  than  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  he  must  himself  be  generous  and  hospitable  and  kind,  with  a  heart  and
a  hand  ever  ready  to  relieve  distress. — T.  C.

Vers.  4,  5. — The  Christian  pastor  in  his  home  life.  The  apostle  here  turns  to  the
family  life  of  the  pastor  as  an  important  element  affecting  the  public  examination  ot
his  character.

I.  The  importance  of  a  well-ordered  household.  "One  that  rulcth*weU  his
own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity."  1.  Hie  pastor  is  no
ascetic  recluse,  but  shares  in  the  everyday  life  of  the  world.  2.  He  must  have  firmnexs
and  authority  to  rule  his  family — wife,  children,  and  servants ;  not  slack  in  his  rule
like  old  Eli,  but  faithful  as  Abraham,  who  not  only  taught  but  commanded  his  children
and  household  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord.  3.  He  is  to  rule  gently  yet  firmly^  so
as,  while  securing  subjection  in  his  household,  he  creates  that  gravity  of  deportment
which  is  the  accompanying  grace  of  obedience  in  children  reared  under  wise  and  loving
mastery.

II.  The  well-ordered  household  the  test  op  fitness  for  the  rule  of  the
house  of  God.  "  For  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take
care  of  the  Church  of  God?"  1.  The  argument  is  from  the  less  to  the  greater.  The
family  is  the  lesser  sphere,  the  Church  the  larger  family.  The  family  needs  much
prudence,  care,  forethought,  affection.  But  while  it  is  the  narrowest  sphere,  it  is
governed  with  peculiar  advantages,  arising  from  the  feelings  of  love  and  dependence  on
the  part  of  the  children.  If  there  is  failure  here,  there  is  a  self-evident  unfitness  for
the  wider  and  more  complex  administration  of  the  Church.  2.  The  Church  of  God  is
to  he  a  subject  of  anxious  care  to  the  pastor.  The  Greek  word  implies  this  thought.
The  apostle  himself  had  the  care  of  all  the  Churches  upon  him.  But  the  pastor  has
a  care  for  the  individual  members  of  his  flock,  to  seek  the  conversion  of  sinners,  t»
instruct  the  ignorant,  to  guide  the  perplexed,  to  comfort  the  doubting,  to  check  the


OT.  m.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  69

wayward,  and  to  defend  the  flock  against  errorists.    ''Who  is  sufficient  for  these
things?"— T.  C.

Ver.  6. — The  pastor  must  not  he  a  novice,    '*  Not  a  novice."

L  The  advantages  op  experience  in  a  pastor.  The  apostle  does  not  refer  to
youth,  but  to  inexperience.  Yet  the  qualification  must  be  regarded  relatively;  for
a  longer  or  a  shorter  probation  might  be  required,  according  to  circimistances.  The
Church  at  Ephesus  had  been  long  enough  established  to  admit  of  a  selection  being
made  out  of  men  of  Christian  experience  and  wisdom.  It  is  significant  to  remark  that
no  definite  age  is  assigned  for  candidates  for  the  ministry.  Li  a  Church  like  that  of
Ephesus,  threatened  with  heresy  within  and  violence  without,  it  was  necessary  that
the  elders  should  be  men  with  a  rare  understanding  of  the  mysteries  of  the  faith,  and
with  a  large  fund  of  sanctified  experience.

II.  The  reason  or  ground  of  the  apostle's  counsel.  '*  Lest,  being  besotted  with
pride,  he  should  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil."  1.  The  risk  of  the  novice  is
an  undue  self-elation^  arising  from  the  thought  of  the  dignity  of  his  office  and  of  the
estimation  in  which  he  is  held  on  account  of  his  gifts.  His  judgment  would  thus
become  clouded,  and  he  would  fail  to  see  the  true  relation  of  things.  2.  The  consequence
would  he  his  falling  under  the  very  condemnation  pronounced  upon  the  devil.  Thus
a  blinding  pride  would  receive  its  just  retribution.  3.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle
hdieved  in  the  existence  of  a  personal  evil  spirit,  the  adversary  of  God.  and  man.  It
is  equally  evident  that  he  regarded  the  fall  of  the  deviljas  due  to  pride,  and  that  he
regarded  him  as  the  tempter  of  man. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  7. — The  pastor  must  have  an  honest  reputation  he/ore  the  uforld.  He  must  stand
well  both  without  and  within  the  Church.

I.  The  importance  of  an  unblemished  reputation.  "  But  he  must  also  have
a  good  testimony  from  them  that  are  without."  1.  It  is  a  mistake  to  ignore  or  defy  the
opinion  of  the  world  in  matters  falling  fairly  within  its  judgment.  What  we  do  ought
not  only  to  be  "  acceptable  to  God,  but  approved  of  men "  (Rom.  xiv.  18).  "  Let  not
your  good  be  evil  spoken  of"  (Rom.  xiv.  lt>).  The  world  understands  the  principles  of
natural  justice.  The  minister  cannot  violate  these  without  loss  of  reputation  and
influence.  2.  A  hlameless  life  is  calculated  to  make  a  deep  impression  on  the  world,
•*  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they,  seeing  your  g(X)d  works,  may  glorify
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven "  (Matt.  v.  16).  Your  holy  walk  ought  to  attract
**  those  that  are  without  "  into  the  happy  communion  of  the  Church.  3.  It  is  a  great
mnl  to  hlast  the  reputation  of  Christian  ministers,  for  it  undermines  their  influence  for
good.

II.  The  dangers  op  a  doubtful  reputation  before  the  world.  **  Lest  he  fall
into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  the  devil."  It  would  be  a  great  risk  to  introduce  into
the  ministry  one  who  had  once  followed  a  loose  life,  because  those  who  were  familiar
with  his  history  would  be  ready  to  suspect  the  purity  of  his  congregation  from  the
blemished  reputation  of  its  pastor.  The  effect  in  the  minister  might  be  diverse.  1.  He
might  he  excited  to  an  angry  resentment  of  such  disagreeable  attacks.  2.  He  might  fall
into  despair,  and  thv^  hecome  reckless,  and  ultimcUely  justify  the  worst  imputations
of  the  world,  3.  He  might  cease  to  reprove  transgressors  because  he  had  not  the  courage
to  condemn  faults  which  were  only  too  observable  in  himself.  Thus  the  devil  womd
set  its  snares  around  him  for  his  undoing.  When  George  HI.  was  asked  to  give  a
bishopric  to  a  clergyman  who  had  made  a  serious  lapse  from  virtue,  and  was  told  that
the  clergyman  had  long  ago  repented  of  it,  his  appropriate  answer  was,  "  I  would  rather
appoint  bishops  who  had  not  that  particular  sin  to  repent  of." — T.  C.

Vers.  8, 9. — The  qualifications  of  deacons.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to  direct  Timothy
respecting  the  character  and  appointment  of  another  class  of  office-bearers.

I.  The  order  of  deacons.  1.  Their  origin.  We  find  the  first  trace  of  the  order
about  two  years  after  the  Ascension  (Acts  vi.  1 — 4).  It  owed  its  origin  to  a  necessity
that  arose  from  the  extension  of  the  Church.  Seven  deacons  were  appointed  as  almoners.
They  are  not  so  called,  but  their  name  is  traceable  in  the  two  terms  which  indicate  the
sphere  of  their  office,  ** serving  tables"  and  '* ministry  "  (8iaicoy(a,  SMucorffcr  rpoir^Cats).


^  THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  [oh.  m.  1— 16L

2.  Their  fphere  of  duty.  It  is  expreaily  distinguiflhed  from  ^  the  mixustry  of  the  Woid*
and  "  prayer  **  (vcr.  4),  and  was  therefore,  as  the  **  serving  of  tahles "  signifies,  sa
office  for  the  care  of  the  poor  and  strangers  who  might  be  connected  with  the  ChiuncL
The  deaconship  was,  therefore,  a  purely  secular  ofiG^  8.  Hittorie  notion  ofdeaoom.
The  earliest  notices  of  the  order  are  apparently  in  Bom.  xiL  7,  **  Or  ministry  (deaconship),
let  us  wait  on  our  ministering  "  (deaconship) ;  in  1  Cor.  xiL  28,  '^  hdps  *'  (di^iX^ftii) ;  iui
at  a  later  tune  in  1  Pet  iv.  11,  **•  U  any  man  minister"  (htamm).  We  read  in  PhiL  L  1
of  "the  bishops  and  deaoonsi''  andin  Bqdl  xtI.  1  of  Phoebe  as  'a  deaconess*  of  the
Church  at  Cenchrea.

II.  The  qualificatioks  OFDiAOom.  L  ^(haye.**  Of  a  serious  demeanour,  befitting
the  position  of  responsibility  held  by  them.  2.  ''Not  double-tongued."  Not  sa^ng
one  thing  to  one  person  and  another  to  another,  under  the  pressure,  perhaps,  of  applica-
tions for  asslBtance;  or,  not  promising  aid  which  is  aftexwards  withheld.  Misunder-
standings would  necessarily  arise  from  any  kind  of  prerarioation.  3.  **  Not  addicted  to
much  wine."  The  deacons  must  not  be  given  to  pleasures  of  the  table,  which  raider
people  imfit  for  disagreeable  duty,  and  tempt  to  the  consumption  of  the  weidth  ocmmitted
to  tneir  keeping.  4.  **  Not  lovers  of  base  gain.**  There  might  otherwise  arise  a  Judas
among  the  deacons  to  embezzle  the  Church  fonds.  5.  **  Holding  the  mystery  of  the
faith  in  a  pure  conscience.**  (1)  The  mystery  is  what  fiuth  is  conversant  with — a  thing
once  secret,  but  now  revealed  by  Christ*s  gospel ;  called  variously  **  the  mysteiy  of  Qod,**
**  the  mystery  of  Christ,**  **  the  mvstery  of  his  will,"  ''the  mystery  of  godliness,"  and  "the
mystery  of  the  gospe^"  which  is  the  great  subject  ^gospel-preaching.  It  was  the  mystery
of  redemption  Uirough  the  blood  of  Christ  (2)  The  mystery  of  faith  was  not  to  be
speculatively,  but  practically,  held  and  maintained.  "In  a  pure  conscience."  The
deacons  were  to  be  sincerely  attached  to  the  truth,  and  to  realize  its  practical  power  in
their  life  and  experience.  (3)  They  are  to  "  hold  the  mystery,"  not  to  preach  it.  Then
is  no  intimation  that  the  deacons,  as  such,  were  preachers,  though  two  of  them  (Stephen
and  Philip)  are  afterwards  foxmd  acting  as  evangelists.

ni.  The  method  of  theib  appointment.  "  And  these  also  let  them  first  be  proved ;
then  let  them  serve  as  deacons,  if  they  are  without  blame."  1.  The  election  af  As  100011
cJeoooiM  woe  left  in  the  hands  of  the  Christian  peofie  themsdves.  (Acts  vi.  3.)  2.  There
is  no  formal  method  prescribed  for  testing  their  qualifications.  Their  fitness  oould  be
easily  judged  of  without  any  regular  investigation.  The  moral  element,  however,  was
to  be  supreme  in  such  appointments ;  for  they  were  not  chosen  unless  they  were  "  wi^out
blame.*'  3.  Their  formal  appointment  to  service.  Let  them  serve  in  the  various  branches
of  their  office  as  deacons. — T.  C.

Ver.  11. — The  qualifications  of  deaconesses.  "  Women  in  like  manner  must  be  grave,
not  slanderers,  sober,  faithful  in  all  things."  The  allusion  is  evidently  not  to  the  wives
of  deacons,  but  to  deaconesses.  Why  should  the  duties  of  deacons*  wives  be  set  forth
when  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  duties  of  ministers*  wives  ?  The  omission  of  all  mention
of  domestic  duties  in  this  case  is  significant.

L  The  obdeb  of  deaconesses.  There  was  evidently  such  an  order  in  the  primitive
Church.  Phaibe  of  Cenchrea  (Rom.  xvi.  1),  Euodias  and  Syntyche  (PhiL  iv.  2),  and
probably  the  association  with  which  Dorcas  was  connected  at  Joppa  (Acts  ix.  36-— 41),
seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  order.  The  order  did  not  cease  to  exist  till  the  fifth
century  in  the  Latin  Church,  and  till  the  twelfth  in  the  Greek  Church.  It  had  its
origin,  probably,  in  the  extreme  jealousy  which  guarded  the  relations  of  the  sexes  in
early  times,  for  women  were  comparatively  secluded  from  the  society  of  men.  Deacon-
esses were,  therefore,  appointed  to  maintain  the  religious  intercourse  of  Christian  women
with  a  Church  whose  ministrations  were  in  the  hands  of  men.

II.  The  qualifications  of  deaconesses.  1.  "  Grave.**  Not  given  to  levity  or  gay
manners,  but  sober  in  speech,  gesture,  and  dress.  2.  "  Not  slanderers.**  Not  too  rwiiy
to  take  up  an  accusation  against  the  poor,  or  too  ready  to  use  the  tongue  in  the  way  of
false  insinuation.  3.  "  Sober.**  Not  to  bo  given  to  pleasures  of  the  table,  but  sho^winc
a  seemly  abstemiousness.  4.  "Faithful  in  all  thirds.**  Faithful  in  all  ecclesiastics
duties.  (1)  Faithful  to  the  poor,  whose  secrets  are  to  be  jealously  kept ;  (2)  faithful
to  the  Church,  which  entrusts  its  funds  to  their  wise  and  discriminating  distribution;
and  (3)  faithful  to  God  in  all  religious  obligations  whatsoever. — ^T.  C


CH.  in.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  61

Yen.  12, 13. — The  domestic  duty  of  deacons.  The  apostle  here  returns  to  add  some
farther  injunctions  about  deacons,  as  well  as  to  suggest  a  reason  for  exacting  the  quiJifi-
cations  already  described.

L  Thb  dsagons'  DOMEsno  BELATiONS.  1.  "  Let  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  one
-wife.**  The  same  qualification  is  needed  for  deacons  as  for  bishops,  for  their  houses  were
to  be  examples  of  purity,  peace,  and  orderliness.  2.  ^  Ruling  their  children  and  their
own  houses  welL"  The  father  of  a  loving  household  would  be  best  fitted  for  the
sympathetic  administration  of  funds  allocated  to  the  poor,  while  the  pious  order  of  his
fiunily  would  enhance  the  public  confidence  in  the  reality  of  his  religious  character.

n.  Reason  for  the  yabious  qitalifioations  described.  "For  those  who  have
done  the  work  of  a  deacon  well  obtain  for  themselves  a  good  degree,  and  much  boldness
in  the  &ith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  The  good  degree  does  not  refer  to  promotion
to  higher  ecdesicLstical  office.  The  idea,  indeed,  would  be  quite  an  anachronism.  2.  It
refers  to  the  place  of  honour  and  distinction  that  will  be  given  to  the  faithful  deacon  in
the  day  of  final  recompense.  The  doctrine  of  rewards  is  that  of  Scripture,  and  especially
of  our  Lord's  parables  (Matt.  xxv.  45 ;  Luke  xix.  11 — ^27).  3.  There  is  the  further  idea
of  the  joyful  confidence  toward  Ood  which  would  characterize  him  in  view  of  a  faithful
ducharge  of  his  duties — a  confidence  springing  out  of  faith  resting  in  Jesus  Christ. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  14, 15. — The  importance  of  a  due  regulation  of  Church  order.  The  apostle
expected  to  visit  Ephesus  shortly,  but  in  case  of  his  visit  being  delayed  by  necessary
causes,  he  deemed  it  right  to  give  Timothy  these  instructions  in  writing  respecting  the
appointment  of  bishops  and  deacons,  and  other  details  of  Church  order.  "  These  things
I  write  to  thee,  hoping  to  come  shortly ;  but  if  I  should  tarry,  [I  write  them]  that  thou
mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to  conduct  thyself  in  GKxL's  house."

L  The  necessity  of  a  due  obdeb  in  the  Chubch.  1.  Darhyites  suppose  that  it  is
wrong  for  man  to  make  arrangements  in  GocPs  Church — that  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  who
should  regulate  the  order  of  worship  and  service,  and  that  his  presidency  should  be
recognized  in  everything.  In  that  case  why  should  the  apostle  have  been  at  such  pains
to  regulate  even  the  ministrations  of  prophets  and  speakers  with  tongues  at  Corinth  ?
God  is  a  GK)d  of  peace,  not  of  confusion  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  2.  It  uxis  not  enough  for
Timothy  to  stir  up  his  own  personal  gifts  and  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  but  he  must
execute  the  special  commission  he  had  received  firom  the  apostle,  to  regulate  the  appoint-
ment of  the  ofiice-bearers  of  the  Church,  and  the  details  of  Church  worship.  The  Church
was  to  be  guided  in  choice  of  ministers  by  the  considerations  suggested  by  the  apostle.
3.  There  was  special  reckon  for  these  instructions  in  the  rise  of  heresies  at  Ephesus  and
diewhere,    (Ch.  iv.  1 — 3.)

XL  The  dignity  and  office  of  the  Chtjbch.  It  is  "  Good's  house,  which  indeed
IB  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  basement  of  the  truth."  1.  It  is  the
Church  of  the  living  Ood.  (1)  It  is  so,  regarded  either  as  the  Christian  congregation
with  a  local  reference,  or  as  the  whole  Church  of  the  redeemed,  in  communion  with
Christ  and  with  each  of  its  members.  (2)  Its  internal  glory  consists  in  the  fact  that  it
18  no  material  temple  of  dead  deities,  like  the  proud  temple  of  Diana  which  reared  itself
aloft  over  the  roofs  of  Ephesus ;  but  a  spiritual  community,  realizing  the  Hving  and
personal  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  it.  2.  It  is  the  house  of  Ood.  (1)  This
term  denoted  primarily  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  secondarily  the  covenant  people
QJ^umb.  xii  7 ;  Hos.  viii.  1),  who  had  God  for  a  Sanctuary  or  Dwelling-place  (Ps.  xc.  1 ;
Ezek.  xi.  16).  There  was  a  mutual  indwelling — they  in  him,  and  he  in  them.  (2)  It
now  denotes  the  Church  of  God,  represented  variously  as  (a)  a  spiritual  building
resting  on  Christ  as  chief  Comer-stone  (Eph.  ii.  20);  (h)  as  the  true  temple  in
which  God  dwells  (1  Cor.  vi.  16);  (c)  as  the  household  or  "house  of  God,  over
which  is  Christ  as  Son  (Heb.  iii.  6)—"  whose  house  are  we."  Moses  was  servant  in  this
house,  Jesus  a  Son  over  it ;  it  was,  therefore,  the  same  house  in  the  two  dispensations.
A  proof,  in  opposition  to  Darbyism,  that  the  Church  existed  in  Old  Testament  times,  and
did  not  first  come  into  existence  at  Pentecost.  3.  It  is  the  pillar  and  basement  of  the
truth.  (1)  Negatively,  Christ,  and  not  the  Church,  is  the  only  ground  of  truth.  **  For
other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus  "  (1  Cor.  iiL  11).
This  passage  implies  that  the  Church  rests  upon  the  truth  rather  than  that  the  truth
rests  on  the  Church.    But  a  misapprehension  arises  firom  confounding  the  truth  as  it


62  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  in.  1—16.

is  in  itself  with  the  truth  as  apprehended  by  believers  and  acknowledged  before  the
world.  Further,  the  truth  does  not  derive  its  authority  from  the  Church,  but  tosn.
Christ.  (2)  Positively,  the  passage  sets  forth  (a)  the  presentative  manifestation  of  the
truth ;  for  **  the  Church  is  the  pillar  of  the  truth."  The  Church  is  to  hold  up  the
saving  truths  of  the  gospel  before  the  eyes  of  men.  It  is  a  pillar  inscribed  all  over  with
the  truth.  Without  the  Church  **  there  would  be  no  witness,  no  guardian  of  archives,
no  basis,  nothing  whereon  acknowledged  truth  would  rest."  It  is  the  Church  which
holds  the  deposit  of  truth,  and  perpetuates  it  from  generation  to  generation,  (h)  The
passage  sets  forth  the  stability  or  the  truth.  "  The  Qiurch  ib  the  basis  of  truth."  The
truth  finds  its  true  basiB  in  the  hearts  of  believing  men,  who  hold  forth  the  glories
of  redemption  amidst  all  the  fluctuations  of  the  worl£  There  is  nothing  in  this  exposi-
tion to  sanction  the  assumptions  of  the  Church  of  Home,  because  she  must  first  sub-
stantiate her  clauns  to  be  a  teacher  of  the  truth  before  she  can  be  regarded  as  ''a
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth." — ^T.  C.

Yer.  16.-7!^  treasure  of  trtdh  eommiUed  to  the  Church'e  guardtatuhip,  L  It  s
Chbist  in  all  his  BELATioire  A8  THB  Mtstbbt  OF  GODLINESS.  This  implies  that  he
is  the  Revelation  of  God  to  man ;  for  God  '*  has  made  known  what  is  the  wealth  of  the
slory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles,  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of  glory "
(CoL  L  27).  Thus  Christianity  is  Christ.  He  is  the  Centre  of  Christian  thedogy,  as
he  is  the  Object  of  Christian  faith  and  love.

n.  The  manifestation  of  the  febson  of  Chbist.  He  is  set  forth  as  the  Life  of
the  Church,  and  if  he  were  not  God  as  well  as  man,  the  mystery  would  not  be  so  obvious
to  our  understanding.  1.  He  tmu  **  manifested  in  the  fleshJ^  This  very  ezpressioa
implies  the  divinity  of  Christ ;  for  it  would  be  superfluous,  if  not  absurd,  to  say  these
words  of  any  mere  man.  The  words  imply  (1)  that  it  was  essential  Deity  that  was
manifested ;  ^2)  that  it  was  a  manifestation  made,  not  to  our  understanding,  but  to  our
senses ;  (3)  tnat  there  was  a  real  incarnation,  for  he  was  manifest  in  the  fleshy  or,  as
John  says,  '*  The  Word  was  made  flesh."  It  was  not  only  by  the  flesh,  but  in  the  flesh.
2.  He  was  **jwtified  in  the  spirit"  He  was  approved  to  be  righteous  in  the  hidhier
principle  of  spiritual  life  within  him.  There  is  no  idlusion  to  Sie  Holy  Sprit.  The
spirit  here  is  the  counterpart  of  the  flesh.  Christ  fulfilled  all  righteousness.  If  his
manifestation  in  the  flesh  exhibited  his  true  and  real  humanity,  his  justification  in  the
spirit  exhibited  his  holiness  and  perfection.  The  passage  consists  of  a  series  of  parallel
clauses,  of  which  every  two  form  a  connected  pair.  3.  Ee  was  *'  seen  of  angels,^  In  the
sense  of  showing  himself  to  them  in  his  incarnation.  They  announced  his  advent,  they
ministered  to  his  wants,  they  heralded  his  resurrection,  they  attended  him  in  his
triumphant  return  to  heaven,  and  they  now  see  him  in  lus  glorified  humanity.  4.  Ee
was  *^ preached  among  the  GentUesP  Here,  again,  is  another  pair  of  opposites;  the
angels  inhabitants  of  a  holy  heaven,  the  Gentiles  inhabitants  of  a  sinful  earth.  It  was
one  of  the  six  glories  of  our  Redeemer  that  he  was  to  be  a  "Light  to  the  Gkntiles"
(Isa.  xlix.  6).  6.  He  was  **  believed  on  in  the  worldJ"  Christianity  is  a  world-wide
religion,  embraced  by  men  of  all  nationalities ;  unlike  Mohammedanism  and  Buddhism,
which  are  restricted  to  the  East.  The  gospel  finds  acceptance  alike  in  East  and  West.
G.  He  was  **  received  up  in  glory/*  In  reference  to  Christ's  historical  ascent  to  heaven
amidst  circumstances  of  marvellous  glory.  The  last  pair  of  opposites  is  the  world  and
glory.  How  far  they  are  apart  I  let  they  are  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ.
This  passage,  from  its  antithetical  structure,  would  seem  to  have  been  an  andent  hymn
of  the  Church,  setting  forth  the  leading  facts  of  the  Messianic  story. — T.  C.

Ver.  15. — Behaviour  in  church.  "  That  thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest
to  behave  thyself  in  the  house  of  God."  "Behaviour"  seems  a  commonplace  word
enough,  and  we  often  assign  it  a  subordinate  place  in  religion.  It  is,  however,  a  word
large  as  "  character."  It  is  a  vocabulary  in  itself.  It  is  not  "  do  "'haviour,  but  "  be  "-
haviour !  What  I  do  may  be  accidental ;  what  I  am  is  everything.  Paul  has  been
addressing  pastors,  deacons,  women  professing  godliness,  and  wives.  He  has  dealt  with
marriage,  and  the  ruling  of  children;  and  now  he  speaks  to  the  Church  about  the
conduct  of  men  in  church.

What  is  behavioub  ?    A  man's  behaviour  reveals  much  of  what  he  is.    Earnest


€H.m.l— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  63

or  frivolous ;  gentle  or  hard ;  forgiving  or  unforgiving ;  selfish  or  generous ;  pitiful
or  censorious;  appreciative  or  unthankful  Behaviour  is  an  every-hour  sermon.  It
corrects  the  notion  that  a  man's  religion  is  mainly  in  his  doctrine  or  opinions,  his  ritual
or  ceremoniaL  Manners  are  not  to  be  pat  on  like  a  garment,  nor  can  we  masquerade
in  them  and  pretend  to  be  what  we  are  not.  Bending  the  knee  is  nothing,  if  we  are  not
reverent  at  heart.  A  gift  is  nothing,  imless  given  from  love.  Prayer  is  nothing,  unless
our  life  is  a  prayer.  Praise  is  nothing,  unless  our  life  be  a  garment  of  praise.  Manners
are  not  etiquette,  nor  best  dresses,  nor  courtesies  of  speech ;  they  are  the  expressions  of
a  life.  In  this  aspect  their  potency  is  wonderful.  In  church  we  are  to  behave  well ;
not  to  give  ourselves  airs,  as  rich,  or  learned,  or  superior  people,  but  to  remember  that
we  are  bought  with  a  price.  But  behaviour  is  not  much  thought  about.  There  is  an
idea  that  some  men  are  good  at  heart,  though  they  are  brusque,  if  you  knew  how  to
approach  them.  This  is  nonsense.  The  flower  does  not  wait  for  me  to  unfold  it ;  it
does  not  say, "  If  you  knew  how  to  tempt  my  kindness,  I  would  give  you  fragrant
incense."    It  is  a  flower  everywhere,  to  everybody. — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  16. — *^  WJuU  "  Church  **  means.  "  In  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Chiuxh  of
the  living  Gbd."  The  idea  of  what  the  Church  is,  is  to  regulate  what  our  behaviour  is.
The  worn  ** church"  comes  from  the  Greek  words  Kurios  oikos.  These  two  words
abbreviated  make  "  church  **  or  "  kirk."

I.  If  rr  BE  the  Ghubch  of  God,  in  oub  behavioub  thebe  must  be  bevebenoe.
Beverence  is  at  the  root  of  all  religion.  Flippancy  of  manner,  indevoutness  of  heart,
will  destroy  the  best  service.  We  read  the  old  command,  "Ye  shall  reverence  my
sanctuary,  saith  the  Lord;"  and  wherever  we  meet  together,  even  in  the  humblest
church,  **  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,"  and  we  are  to  "  keep  silence  "  or  "  be  reve-
rent "  before  him.

IL  Behavioub  means  life.  It  is  the  Church,  not  merely  of  the  God  of  Abraham,
or  Isaac,  or  Jacob,  but  of  the  living  God.  We  do  not  build  temples  as  monuments  of
a  past  glory.  Christ  said,  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me."  Before  his  departure  he
said,  '*  I  go  away  and  come  again ; "  and  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in
his  Name,  there  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them.  This  Church  of  God  is  further  described  as
the  pillar,  or  groimd  and  stay,  of  the  truth ;  that  is  to  say,  that  no  sacred  books  will
preserve  religion  without  a  sacred  life.  Men  may  answer  an  argument  or  adopt  a
theory,  but  the  victory  of  the  early  Church  was  won  by  the  Church's  life  or  behaviour.
'*See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another."  Learn,  then,  the  great  lesson,  that
behaviour  is  everything.  "  How  unblamably  we  behave  ourselves,"  says  Paul  to  the
Thessalonians.  "  I  will  behave  myself  wisely  in  a  perfect  way,"  says  the  psalmist. —
W.M.S.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Qualifications  of  three  classes  of  office-hearers,  L  Qualifications  of
A  BISHOP.  Preliminary  direction  to  Timothy,  "Faithful  is  the  saying,  K  a  man  seeketh
the  office  of  a  bishop,  he  desireth  a  good  work."  The  Scripture  idea  of  the  episcopate  is
that  of  oversight,  viz.  of  souls.  A  bishop  was  one  who  had  the  duty  of  overseeing  a  con-
gregation in  spiritual  matters,  being,  in  respect  of  gravity  and  dignity,  called  presbyter
or  elder.  Timothy  was  to  encourage  any  who  sought  to  enter  into  the  episcopate.  The
saying  in  Christian  circles  was  to  be  relied  on,  "  If  a  man  seeketh  the  office  of  a  bishop,
he  desireth  a  good  work."  It  is  not  a  sinecure,  but  a  work  or  employment  taxing  the
energies.  Its  excellence  lies  in  its  having  respect  to  men's  highest  interests.  But  if  he
toas  to  encourage  entrance  into  the  episcopate,  he  was  not  to  do  so  without  regard  to  the
proper  qualifications  which  he  has  laid  dovm  for  him,  "  The  bishop  therefore  must  be
without  reproach.*'  This  is  a  general  qualification.  A  minister  is  not  to  be  chosen
without  regard  to  character.  If  a  man  gives  just  ground  for  reproach — has  not  character
behind  his  gifts — he  is  not  fitted  for  the  office  of  a  minister,  which  is  to  influence  men
in  the  production  of  Christian  character.  "  The  husband  of  one  wife."  Some  high
authorities  take  the  meaning  to  be  that  the  contraction  of  a  second  marriage,  even  after
the  death  of  the  first  wife,  was  a  disqualiHcation  for  the  office  of  a  bishop.  But  this
forbidding  to  ecclesiastics  of  what  in  the  New  Testament  is  expressly  permitted  to  others,
seems  to  belong  to  a  post-apostolic  asceticism.  The  language  seems  to  be  directed
against  '*  any  deviation  from  morality  in  respect  of  marriage,  whether  by  concubinage.


64  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ca  m.  1— 16;

polygamy,  or  improper  second  marriiges.**  ^  Temperate,  sober-minded,  orderly."  One
"who  is  to  be  chosen  as  a  minister  must  be  temperate,  i.e.  most  have  command  of  his
desires  and  his  temper.  He  most  also  be  sober-minded,  Ce.  must  bring  soxmd  sense  to  the
consideration  of  all  matters.  He  must  also  be  orderly, «.«.  must  have  a  loye  for  good  rules.
**  Griven  to  hospitality."  He  must  be  raised  above  all  meanness  toward  those  whom  he
ought  to  entertain.  How  is  he  to  commend  the  genenmty  of  God,  if  he  is  niggardly  in
his  own  dealings?  **  Apt  to  teach.**  This  is  a  special  qualification.  With  all  that  is
righteous  and  sensible  and  even  lovely  in  his  character,  he  must  have  skill  in  teaching—*
in  opening  the  Word,  and  in  bringing  it  to  bear  for  all  its  uses  on  the  wants  of  men.
However  excellent  a  man's  character  is,  he  is  not  fit  for  being  a  minister  if  he  cannot
skilfully  handle  Divine  truth.  **  No  brawler,  no  striker ;  but  gentle,  not  contentious.'^
A  disqualification  is  being  quarrelsome  over  wine,  and  consequently  coming  to  blows.
He  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  gentle ;  t.e.  while  he  is  to  be  thoroughly  reasonable,  he  ia
to  be  kindly  and  forbearing,  waiving  even  his  rights  for  the  sake  of  gaining  his  end  as  a
minister,  viz.  the  spiritual  good  of  those  with  whom  he  deals.  It  is  a  disqualification
to  be  contentious,  i.e.  to  be  in  one's  element,  and  to  give  way  to  unholy  feelings,  in
fighting.  '^No  lover  of  money.**  It  is  a  further  disqualification  to  have  a  grovelling
desire  for  money,  instead  of  having  a  feeling  of  responsibility  with  regard  to  its  proper
uses.  **  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all
gravity."  This  is  in  one  view  an  ordinary  qualification,  inasmuch  as  it  is  what  is
expected  of  every  one  who  is  in  authority  in  a  house.  It  is  expected  even  of  a  man
who  is  not  qualified  to  teach  that  he  can  rule  well  his  own  house,  t.e.  lay  down  proper
rules  for  his  household,  and  see  to  their  being  carried  out.  The  apostle's  idea  of  mlmg
the  house  well,  is  the  having  the  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity.  **  In  the  phrase,
'all  gravity,'  he  is  looking  at  a  kind  of  obedience  that  touches  the  deepest  notes  of
principle  and  character.  Contrary  to  this,  there  is  an  obedience  without  principle,  whidi
is  obedience  with  all  levity ;  that  which  is  paid  to  mere  will  and  force ;  that  which  is
another  name  for  fear;  that  which  is  bou^t  by  promises  and  paid  by  indulgenoes;'
tiiat  which  makes  a  time-server,  or  a  coward,  or  a  lying  pretender,  as  the  case  may  be,
uod  not  a  Christian.  This  latter — ^that  which  makes  a  Christian — is  the  aim  of  aU  true
government,  and  should  never  be  out  of  sight  for  an  hour."  Farentftesia  ahawmg  how
a  bishop  ought  to  he  able  to  rule  his  own  house  wdl,  "  But  if  a  man  knoweth  not
how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take  care  of  the  Church  of  God  ?  "  A  bishop
has  to  manage  men.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  family  enlarged  and  heightened.  If
one  fails  in  the  lower  sphere,  how  can  he  be  expected  to  succeed  in  the  higher  sphere?
Even  Confucius  had  before  this  time  said,  **  It  is  impossible  that  he  who  knows  not  how
to  govern  and  reform  his  own  family  should  rightly  govern  and  reform  a  people.**  "  Not
a  novice,  lest  being  puffed  up  ho  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil."  By  a  novice
we  are  to  understand  a  recent  convert  to  Christianity.  Such  a  one  being  necessarily
inexperienced  in  the  truth,  and  also  in  the  evil  of  his  own  heart,  was  imfitted  for  office.
And  the  putting  him  into  office  was  fitted  to  have  a  bad  effect  upon  him.  llie
introducer  of  evil  into  the  universe  was  in  high  position,  but  gave  way  to  a  feeling  of
pride.  How  this  feeling  operated  is  described  by  a  word  which  means  enveloped  with
smoke,  as  if  that  were  the  kind  of  atmosphere  that  pride  throws  around  a  person.  In
some  matter  in  which  his  rank  was  involved,  under  the  clouding  of  pride,  instead  of
bending  to  the  will  of  GK)d,  which  would  have  been  his  approval,  he  asserted  his  self-
importance,  which  was  his  condemnation.  So  the  novice,  instead  of  being  weighed
down  imder  the  responsiblities  of  office,  is  more  likely,  imder  the  clouding  of  pride
occasioned  by  his  elevation,  to  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  deviL  "  Moreover  he
must  have  good  testimony  from  them  that  are  without  lest  he  fckll  into  reproach ;  and  the
snare  of  the  deviL"  He  must  be  able  to  command  the  respect  of  non-Christians,
especially  for  his  acting  in  a  way  consistent  with  his  professions.  For  if  he  falls  so  low
as  not  to  be  respected  by  those,  then  this  want  of  respect  is  sure  to  be  used  as  a  snare
by  Satan  for  his  destruction.

IL  Qualifications  of  deacons.  "Deacons  in  like  manner."  Deacons,  originally
the  almoners  of  the  Church,  came  to  be  r^arded  as  assistants  of  the  elders,  having  the
oversight  of  the  temporal  affairs  as  these  of  the  spiritual  afi'airs  of  a  congregation.
«  Must  be  grave."  They  must  feel  the  responsibility  of  life,  and  especially  tiie  respon-
sibilty  connected  with  their  office.    **  Not  double-tongued,  not  given  to  much  wine,  not


CH.in.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  65


greedy  of  filthy  lucre.'*  Of  the  three  disqualifications,  the  first  has  respect  to  a  tempta-
tion connected  with  the  desire  for  public  favour,  the  second  has  respect  to  a  temptation
<x>nnected  with  the  enjoyment  of  hospitality,  the  third  has  respect  to  a  temptation
connected  with  the  use  of  office.  Those  who  serve  God  in  the  management  of  the
temporal  affairs  of  a  congregation  must  be  free  from  obsequiousness,  from  intemperate
habits,  from  avarice.  **  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience."  Their
duty  to  the  truth,  regarded  as  the  object  of  faith  which  was  formerly  concealed  from
men,  was  not  to  teach  it,  but  to  enshrine  it  in  a  holy  life,  characterized  by  the  power
which  has  to  do  with  the  production  of  it.  **  And  let  these  also  first  be  proved ;  then
let  them  serve  as  deacons,  if  they  be  blameless.**  The  deacons,  no  more  than  the  bishops,
were  to  be  put  suddenly  into  office.  Opportimity  was  to  be  given  for  their  being  proved,
and,  if  found  to  be  blameless  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  had  opportimity  of  watching
their  conduct,  they  were  to  be  appointed  to  service.

nL  Qualifications  op  deaconesses.  "  Women  in  like  manner."  The  apostle  has
not  yet  given  all  the  qualifications  of  the  deacons ;  we  must,  therefore,  think  of  these
women  as  closely  associated  with  the  diaconate.  We  might  think  of  the  wives  of  the
deacons,  but,  as  nothing  has  been  said  about  the  wives  of  bishops,  and  as  by  the  inser-
tion of  the  phrase,  "  in  like  manner,**  we  are  led  to  think  of  the  election  of  women  to
office,  it  is  better  to  think  of  deaconesses.  We  have  an  example  of  a  deaconess  in
Phoebe  of  Cenchrea,  mentioned  in  Rom.  xvi.  1.  They  were  probably  assistants  in  the
same  way  as  the  deacons,  in  so  far  as  they  had  the  care  of  the  sick  and  the  destitute.
**  Must  be  grave,  not  slanderers,  temperate,  faithful  in  all  things.*'  It  was  fitting  that
those  who  were  engaged  in  such  service  should  be  women  who  were  serious,  or  free  from
frivolity.  They  were  not  to  go  about  from  house  to  house  as  bearers  of  evil  reports.
They  were  to  be  temperate,  or  free  from  all  imholy  excitement.  And  they  were  to  be
faithful  in  all  things,  not  abusing  their  charge.

IV.  Qualifications  of  deacons  resumed.  **  Let  deacons  be  husbands  of  one  wife,
ruling  their  children  and  their  own  house  well."  In  these  two  particulars  the  apostle
requires  the  same  qualifications  of  the  deacons  as  of  the  bishops.  **  For  they  that  have
served  well  as  deacons  gain  to  themselves  a  good  standing,  and  great  boldness  in  the
&ith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  old  translation  is  preferable  here — "purchase  to
themselves  a  good  degree."  The  idea  is  that  they  obtain  for  themselves  a  step,  or  get
higher  up.  hi  those  days  this  might  mean  their  elevation  to  the  episcopate.  They
also  obtain  Christian  boldness,  such  as  was  especially  required  in  those  days  of  peril.
For  getting  up,  and  the  encountering  of  greater  difficulties,  go  together. — R.  F,

Vers.  14 — 16. — Upholder  of  the  truth,  and  grandeur  of  ti*uth  upheld,  I.  Reason  for
oiviNa  I'iMOTHY  written  INSTRUCTIONS.  "  These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to
come  unto  thee  shortly ;  but  if  I  tarry  long,  that  thou  mayest  know  how  men  ought  to
behave  themselves  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar
and  ground  of  the  truth."  Paul  hoped  to  come  to  Timothy  at  Ephesus  shortly ;  there  was
a  possibility,  however,  of  his  hope  not  being  realized.  In  the  event  of  his  tarrying  long,
Timothy  had  written  instructions  for  his  conduct  as  an  ecclesiastic.  It  would  he  held
to  be  of  great  consequence  that  any  one  who  officiated  in  the  temple  of  Diana  should
be  in  a  fit  state  of  body  and  of  mind,  and  should  be  conversant  with  the  ceremonial.
It  was  of  far  greater  consequence  that  Timothy  should  know  what  was  suitable
behaviour  for  the  house  of  Grod.  This  was  not  the  temple  of  a  dead  idol,  but — passing
over  fit)m  the  material  structure  to  what  was  typified  by  it — the  Church  of  the  living
God.  It  was  "  a  living  and  spiritual  community,  a  life-stream  of  believers  in  an  ever-
living  God."  It  was  fitting,  then,  that  there  should  be  those  arrangements  which  are
most  conducive  to  the  life  of  the  community.  This  Church  of  the  livmg  God  is  declared
to  be  the  piUar  and  ground  of  the  truth.  There  was  a  singular  appropriateness  in  the
language.  The  columns  in  the  temple  of  Diana  were  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  in
number,  sixty  feet  high,  each  the  gift  of  a  king.  Massive  in  their  form,  substantial  in
their  basement,  they  gave  promise  of  the  structure  being  upheld  in  its  integrity  down
through  the  centuries.  And  such  it  seemed  to  Paul  was  the  Church — a  columnar
structure,  substantially  based,  by  which  the  truth  is  to  be  upheld  from  age  to  age.  It
is  a  great  honour  which  God  has  laid  on  such  imperfect  believers  as  we  are ;  and  wo
should  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  belie  the  representation,  that  we  do  nothing  to  tak&

Z.  TniOTHT,  w


66  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  in.  1—16.


ftway  from  the  strength  of  the  Btructure,  that  we  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  Church*8
life,  that  we  witness  laithfully  to  what  God  is  and  to  what  he  has  done.

n.  Gbandeub  of  the  truth  upheld  by  the  Chubch.    "  And  without  controversy

great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness."    The  truth  is  here  called  **  the  mystery  of  godliness."

A  mystery  is  that  which,  being  concealed  for  a  time,  is  brought  out  of  concealment  by  a

revelation.    It  is  also  something  above  our  comprehension.    And  that  meaning  is  not

excluded  here.    For  it  is  the  mystery  of  godliness  or  piety.    It  is  the  mystery  by  which

the  Divine  life  is  nourished  in  the  soul.    As  religious  beings,  we  need  somethmg  that

stretches  away  into  infinitude.    We  can  only  breathe  freely  in  an  element  of  mystery.

All  religions  that  have  ever  been  have  sought  to  provide  for  the  appetite  for  the  wonderfiil.

And  where  there  has  not  been  found  real  mystery,  there  have  been  dark  inventions.

But  confessedly  great  is  the  mystery  which  the  Christian  religion  provides  for  our

nourishment.    It  is  pronounced  great  by  all  who  are  capable  of  judging.     And  even

those  who  reject  it  do  so  not  unfrequently  on  the  ground  of  its  being  incredible,  or  too

great  to  be  true.    The  subject  of  the  mystery  is  Christ.    As  set  forth  in  the  luiguage

which  follows  it  is  entirely  Christ,  or  the  facts  about  Christ.    And  the  teaching  is  ihkt

it  is  by  meditating  upon  these  facts  that  we  become  pious  or  religious.     Of  the  facts

themselves  we  can  take  tangible  hold ;  it  is  when  we  try  to  explain  them  to  ourselves

that  we  rise  into  the  region  where  our  religious  feelings  are  excited  and  receive  their

nourishment.    The  rhythmic  way  in  which  the  facts  are  presented  has  led  some  to

suppose  that  they  are  taken  from  a  Christian  hymn  in  existence  at  the  time  when  Paul

wrote.     We  can  believe  them  to  have  been  written  by  Paul.    In  either  case  they  have

the  stamp  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    They  are  to  be  divided  into  threes,  the  first  two  in  each

division  pointing  to  earthly  relations,  the  third  to  heavenly.    Of  the  earthly  relations,

the  first  in  each  division  is  external,  the  second  internal.    Facts  particularized.    "  He

who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh."    There  is  good  reason  for  the  change  from  **  Grod  "  to

**  He  who."    We  are  not  dependent  on  the  old  reading  for  the  proof  of  our  Lord's  divinity.

The  manifestation  of  Christ  implies  previous  concealment.    And  the  language  is  more

suggestive  of  the  concealment  of  prc-existence  than  of  the  concealment  of  non-existence.

The  beginning  of  the  mystery  is  Christ  coming  out  of  that  concealment.     "  The  Word

became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."    The  Creator  descended  into  the  conditions,

circumstances,  of  a  creature.    He  was  made  of  the  substance  of  a  woman.    The

almighty  Builder  of  the  universe  was  a  helpless  infant  on  a  mother's  knee.     The  eternal

8on  was  the  infant  of  days.     He  descended  so  low  that  he  had  to  proceed  from  weakness

to  strength,  from  ignorance  to  knowledge.     That,  however,  is  only  part  of  the  mystery.

It  is  said  here  that  he  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  and  that  means,  not  our  nature  as  it

came  from  the  hand  of  God,  but  our  nature  as  it  has  suffered  from  the  falL    He

descended  into  our  tveak,  passible,  mortal  nature,  to  which  the  unfallen  Adam  was  a

stranger.    He  was  in  a  state  of  utter  bodily  exhaustion  from  want  of  food  when  he  was

tempted  in  the  wilderness.    He  sat  down  wearied  with  his  journey  at  Jacob's  well.

He  was  often  worn  out  with  the  arduous  nature  of  his  work.     His  compassion  brought

sorrow  to  his  heart,  which  found  vent  in  tears  and  sighs  and  groans.     At  last  his  flesh

succumbed,  could  not  bear  any  longer  the  burden  laid  on  it ;  and  his  lifeless  body  was

laid  in  the  tomb.     But  still,  as  we  consider,  the  mystery  deepens.     He  died,  not  as

paying  the  common  debt  of  nature,  but  imder  the  stroke  of  the  Divine  vengeance.

**  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  against  the  Man  that  is  mine  equal,  saith  the

Lord  of  hosts."    This  is  not  so  much  for  the  understanding  as  for  the  inner  sanctuary  of

the  heart.     It  is  not  so  much  to  be  fixed  in  words  as  to  be  pondered  and  admired  and

felt.     "Justified  in  the  spirit."    In  the  flesh  he  did  not  appear  to  be  the  pre-existent

Son  of  God,  and  the  Sent  of  God  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  but  he  was  this  in  his

spirit  or  higher  nature,  and  was  vindicated  as  such  both  in  the  Divine  marks  which  were

put  upon  him,  and  in  the  principle  which  pervaded  his  life.     There  was  a  mark  put

upon  him  at  the  very  first  in  his  being  separated  from  the  taint  of  our  nature  through

the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     The  glimpse  we  have  of  him  in  his  youth  shows  him

right  in  spirit  both  toward  his  Father  and  that  Father's  earthly  representatives.     At  his

baptism  he  received  not  the  Spirit  by  measure,  and  there  was  the  attestation  of  the

voice  from  the  excellent  glory,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."

At  the  outset  of  his  public  career,  under  extreme  temptation,  he  showed  that  he  was

not  to  be  turned  aside  from  his  mission.  .  His  starry  pathway  of  miracles  witnessed  to


tsff.in.1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  67


the  truth  of  his  claims.  And  not  less  did  his  opening  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  applica-
tion of  the  truth  to  human  need,  witness  to  the  singleness  and  loftiness  of  his  spirit.
There  was  a  reiterated  attestation  from  heaven  to  his  Divine  nature  and  mission  at  his
transBguration.  But  especially  was  he  justified  in  the  manner  in  which  he  died  He
resisted  unto  hlood,  striving  against  sin.  As  we  with  some  degree  of  resignation  may
bear  a  light  trial,  so  he  with  perfect  resignation  bore  the  immitigated  weight  of  the
Divine  vengeance.  As  we  with  some  degree  of  self-forgetfulness  may  labour  for  those
who  are  near  to  us,  so  he  with  perfect  self-forgetfiilness  and  magnanimity  sacrificed
himself  for  sinners.  That  death  in  all  its  terribleness,  reaching  far  beyond  our  concep-
tion, was  what  pre-eminently  made  proof  of  him,  and  it  showed  his  spirit  to  be  in  perfect
sccord  with  the  will  of  God  in  salvation.  Last  of  all,  he  was  justified  by  his  resurrection.
It  is  said,  in  Bom.  i.  4,  that  by  this  he  was  declared  with  power  to  bo  the  Son  of  God.
It  was  Qod  setting  his  seal  upon  his  whole  career.  Because  he  was  pleased  with  the
manner  in  which  he  had  acted  all  along,  saw  the  ends  of  justice  and  mercy  carried  out
successfully  in  human  salvation,  therefore  it  was  that  he  raised  him  from  the  dead.
**  Seen  of  angels."  He  was  an  object  of  interest  to  the  heavenly  world.  We  find  angels
jubilantly  ushering  him  into  this  world,  within  sight  and  hearing  of  men.  They  appear
at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  strengthening  him  after  his  temptation.  And
again  they  appear  at  the  close,  strengthening  him  after  his  agony,  and  also  watching
over  his  tomb.  But  were  they  not  always  there  behind  the  veil?  Unseen  by  us,  they
go  about  our  world  ministering  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  Would  they  not  minister,
more  than  was  seen,  to  the  Audior  of  salvation  ?  They  came  forward  upon  the  scene  at
critical  times.  It  was  enough ;  we  can  imagine  the  rest.  But  the  language  seems  also
to  point  to  the  fact  that,  in  becoming  incarnate,  Christ  made  himself  to  be  seen  by
angels.  In  the  hiunan  form  assiuned  by  him  he  held  them  in  rapt  gaze.  They  could
not  turn  away  from  beholding  and  wondering.  They  saw  the  Son  of  God  in  a  form  that
was  level  to  them,  that  was  even  below  them ;  for  he  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the
angels.  What  cause  for  wonder  in  the  change  from  that  ineffable,  imapproachable  glory
to  this  frail  flesh ;  from  that  God  most  high,  to  this  infant  lying  in  a  manger !  And  as
the  mystery  was  developed,  how  would  their  wonder  increase !  He  was  degraded  until
he  could  to  no  lower  depth  be  degraded.  Well  might  they  be  overwhelmed  with  wonder
as  they  looked  on  at  Calvary.  Having  a  desire  to  look  into  these  things,  as  we  are  told,
they  would  be  lost  in  trying  to  account  for  them.  Even  when  knowing  the  object  con-
templated, they  would  be  amazed  to  think  that,  for  the  accomplishment  of  it,  the  Divine
Son  should  descend  into  such  a  condition  of  mortal  woe.  *'  Preached  among  the  nations."
This  is  quite  a  new  interest.  Angels  merely  saw,  admired  from  a  distance.  They  were
spectators  contemplating  that  in  which  they  were  not  directly  involved.  It  was  different
with  men.  He  was  the  subject  of  an  evangel  to  them.  He  was  proclaimed  as  their
personal  Saviour,  without  whom  they  were  lost,  in  whom  alone  they  had  standing
before  God  and  everlasting  blessedness.  But  stress  is  laid  upon  the  universal  reference
of  the  preaching.  He  was  preached,  not  to  one  nation,  but  among  the  nations  (Jews
included),  without  distinction.  This  was  being  realized  as  historical  fact.  He  was
being  proclaimed  without  respect  to  national  distinction,  without  respect  to  social
condition,  without  respect  to  culture,  with  respect  simply  to  the  fact  that  all  were
sinners  and  in  need  of  salvation.  Following  upon  his  having  taken  the  common  nature,
and  his  having  wrought  out  the  common  salvation,  the  message  of  salvation  was  being
conveyed  with  the  utmost  impartiality.  This  was  part  of  the  mystery  which  was  then
being  disclosed,  and  which  the  unprejudiced  agreed  in  calling  great.  It  was  impressive
to  the  early  Church  to  witness  the  proclamation  of  a  world-wide  salvation.  "  Believed
on  in  the  world."  God  does  not  force  us  to  believe.  There  must  be  a  sufficient  cause
for  our  faith,  sufficient  to  move  our  hearts  and  gain  us  over.  Our  faith  must  be  caused
in  a  rational  way,  in  a  way  consistent  with  the  nature  of  God  and  our  own  nature.
The  cause  must  bo  homogeneous  with  respect  to  the  effect,  spiritual  as  faith  is  a  spiritual
effect.  How,  then,  is  Christ  to  be  believed  on  in  the  world,  t.e.  in  that  which  is  naturally
unbelieving,  which  contains  no  germ  of  faith  which  can  be  cultivated?  How  can  light
be  brought  out  of  darkness,  how  can  faith  be  brought  out  of  unbelief?  And  yet  what
have  we  here?  There  is  such  a  potency  in  the  fact  of  God  incarnate  as  to  work  a  moral
miracle,  to  evoke  faith  from  that  which  is  naturally  incapable  of  fjEtith.  And  wherein
-does  the  potency  lie?    It  is  in  the  love  which  the  fact  manifests.    "The  Son  of  God,


68


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  IV.  1 — 16^


who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  up  for  me.**  He  did  not  spare  himself  all  the  humilia-
tion of  the  death  of  the  cross.  That  is  a  &ct  which  requires  to  be  contemplated ;  but»
as  it  is  contemplated,  it  asserts  its  power  over  hearts,  so  as  to  make  the  insensate  feel,
the  unbelieving  believe.  Now,  the  apostle  regards  it  as  glorious  testimony  to  the
neatness  of  the  mystery  that  Christ  should  actually  be  believed  on  in  the  world,  that
there  should  be  some  trophies  of  the  power  of  his  love  over  unbelief,  that  there  should
be  some  to  offer  him  a  home  in  tneir  hearts.  *' Received  up  in  glory."  In  thfr
biographies  of  great  men  we  are  told  of  one  achievement  gained  after  another,  of  one
honour  conferred  after  another.  But  however  long  and  glorious  the  scroll  which  can  be
shown,  it  has  to  end  with  their  bidding  a  long  fiELrewell  to  all  their  greatness.  And,
though  monuments  are  raised  to  their  memory,  it  cannot  take  away  the  essential
ingloriouHuess  of  the  termination  to  their  career.  With  Christ  it  is  at  the  earthly
termination  that  to  outward  appearance  he  becomes  great.  He  had  indeed,  like  others*
and  more  than  others,  to  undergo  the  ingloriousness  of  dying,  and  of  being  laid  in  the
tomb.  But  that  ingloriousness  was  completely  reversed  by  his  resurrection.  He  lingered
long  enough  on  earth  for  history  to  attest  the  fact  that  he  was  indeed  risen.  And  then
he  made  his  triumphal  entry  into  heaven.  ^  Why  leap  ye,  ye  hi^h  hills?  this  is  the
hill  which  God  desireth  to  dwell  in;  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  m  it  for  ever.  The
chariots  of  Ood  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels :  the  Lord  is  among  them,
as  in  Sinai,  in  the  holy  place.  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity
captive."  He  was  received  up  into  glory — into  glorious  exaltation  in  our  nature  at  the
right  hand  of  GKxl — and  in  glory  he  for  ever  remains.  This  is  conclusive  evidence  to-
the  greatness  of  the  mystery.  The  go<ily  delight  to  dwell  upon  and  to  feed  their  Itfe,  not*
only  with  the  humiliation,  but,  beyond  that,  with  the  exaltation. — ^R.  F.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Ver.  1. — But  for  now,  AV. ;  taith  for
tpedketh,  A.V. ;  later  for  the  latter,  A.Y. ;
foM  atcay  for  depart,  A.Y.  The  Spirit  saith
sxpressly  (Prrrus);  only  here  in  the  New
TestumcDt,  and  very  ruro  in  classical  Greek.
But  tho  adjective  ^6s,  in  the  sense  of
something  **  laid  down,"  **  definite,"  *'  ex-
pressly mentioned/*  is  common.  It  was,
doubtless,  on  account  of  those  prophetic
warnings  of  a  falling  away  from  the  faith,
that  the  apostle  gave  the  preceding  heads
of  Christian  doctrine  in  such  a  terse  and
tangible  form,  and  laid  such  a  solemn  charge
upon  Timothy.  (For  examples  of  these
prophetic  utterances,  see  Actd  xi.  28 ;  xiii.
2;  XX.  23;  xxi.  11;  1  Cor.  xii.  8;  xiv.  80,
82,  etc.)  Shall  fall  away  {iirotrr'fiffovrai).
So  St.  Paul  says  (2  Thess.  ii.  8)  that  the
day  of  Christ  will  not  be,  "  except  the
falling  away  (yi  ixoaracria)  come  first"  (comp.
Hcb.  iii.  12).  The  faith ;  objective  (see  en.
iii.  9  and  16,  note).  This  "  falling  away  "
is  to  take  place  4tf  la-rdpots  xaipois ;  not,  as
in  tho  11. v.,  in  "later  times,"  but  as  in
the  A.V.,  *»  the  latter  times."  The  adjective
HffTtpos  is  only  found  here  in  the  New
Testament.  But  in  tho  LXX.  {e.g.  1  Chron.
xxix.  2U;  Jer.  1.  19  [xxviL  17,  LXX.]),
t<rrtpos  means  "the  last,"  as  opposed  to
"the  first."  And  so  the  adverb  darfpow
always  in  the  New  Testament  (see  Idatt.  iv.
2 ;  xxi  37 ;  xxtL  60 ;  or  more  folly  ffo-rtpor


wdrrwp,  zxii.  27).  Here,  therefore,  iw  dovA
pots  KoipoU  is  equivalent  to  iw  reus  4vx<irais.
4ifi4pats  (Acts  ii.  17)  and  ir  iirxdrcus  ^/Upats
(2  Tim.  iii.  1 ;  oomp.  Jas.  v.  3 ;  1  Pet  L  5;
2  Pet.  iii.  3 ;  Jude  18).  It  should  be
observed  that  in  all  these  passages  there
is  no  article.  Giving  heed  {Tpoatxorrts) ;
as  in  ver.  13;  in  ch.  L  4;  Titus  L  14;
Acts  viii.  6,  and  elsewhere.  Sedndng  spirits
(wytifuuri  TXdtfois).  Such  were  the  "lying
spirits "  who  deceived  {iiwdrria'caf)  Ahab  to
his  destruction  (2  Kings  xxii.  22).  nxdyos,.
seducing,  is  not  elsewhere  found  in  the
New  Testament  as  an  adjective  (see  Matt,
xxvii.  68;  2  Cor.  vi.  8;  2  John  7,  in  all
which  place.s  however,  it  is  almost  an
adjective).  The  idea  is  "  causing  to  wander,"
or  "  go  astray."  St.  John  warns  his  people
against  such  deceiving  spirits  (John  iv.
1 — 6).  He  calls  them  generically  irvt^/ict
rrjt  T\dyrjs,  **  the  spirit  of  error."  Doetrines
of  devils ;  i.e.  teachings  suggested  by  devils.
So  the  unbelieving  Jews  suggested  that
John  the  Baptist  had  a  devil  (Luke  viL  33),
and  that  our  Lord  himself  had  a  devil
(John  vii.  20 ;  viii.  48,  52 ;  x.  19).

Ver.  2. — Through  the  hypocrisy  of  men
that  epeak  lies  for  tpeaking  ties  in  hypocrisy,
A.Y. ;  branded  in  their  oton  conecienee  as
with  for  having  their  conscience  seared  with,
A.y.  Through  the  hypoozisy  of  men,  etc
The  construction  is  rather  obscure,  as  the
most  obvious  way  of  construing  is  that  of
the  AY.,  where  ^w96Koywp  must  agree  with


CH.  IV.  1— IC]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


69


iaifiowlw.     But  then  tho  clause,  **  having
iheir  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron,
does  not  suit  **  devils."     It  is   therefore,
perhaps,  best  to  translate  the  clause  as  the
K.Y.    does,  and  to  explain,  with  Bishop
EUicott,  that  the  prep98ition  ^i^,  which  pre-
o»ies  (nroKpiati,  defines  the  inttrumetd  by
which  they  were  led  to  give  lieed  to  seduc-
ing spirits,  viz.  the  hypocritical  pretences
of  the  men  who  spake  lies,  and  wnose  con-
fidences were  seared.     If  y^^v^oX^yxav  agrees
with  ^aiiJLovlwvy  we  must  conceive  that  St.
Paul  passes  insensibly  from  **the  devils"
to  the  false  teachers  who  spake  as  they
ianght  them.    In  the  Gospels,  the  speech
of  the  devils,  and  of  those  possessed  by
devils,  is  often  interchanged,  as  e.g.  Luke
iv.  33,  34.  41 ;  Mark  1.  23,  24.    Men  that
«peak  lies  (r^tvZoXAyav) ;  only  found  here  in
"the   New  Testament,  but  occasionally  in
classical  Greek.     Branded  (KfKdxnriptaarfi4'
imv) ;  here  only  in  tho  New  Testament,  but
used  in  Greek  medical  and  other  writers
"for  "  to  brand,"  or  "  cauterize ; "  Kavrfip  and
Kcarrtipioy^  a  branding-iron.     The  applica-
tion of  ^e  imago  is  somewhat  unceitain.
If  the  idea  is  that  of  **a  brand,"  a  mark
burnt  in  upon  the  forehead  of  a  slave  or
criminal,  then  the  meaning  is  that  these
-men  have  their  own  infamy  stamped  upon
their  own  consciences.      It  is   not  patent
only  to  others,  but  to  themselves  also.    But
if  the  metaphor  is  from  the  cauterizing  a
iround,  as  the  A.Y.  takes  it,  then  the  idea
is  that  these  men's  consciences  are  become
4W  insensible  to  the  touch  as  the  skin  that
lias  been  cauterized  is.    The  metaphor,  in
rthis  case,  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of
«wp^c0,  irdpooais  (Mark  iii.  5;  vi.  52;   John
adi.  40.  etc.).      The    latter   interpretation
•seems  to  suit  the  general  context  best,  and
^he  medical  use  of  the  term,  which  St.  Paul
might  have  learnt  from  Luke.   The  emphasis
of  riis  iJfof,  **  their  own  conscience,*'  implies
that  they  were   not    merely  deceivers   of
others,  but  were  self-<leceived.

Ver.  3. — Created  for  hath  created^  A.V. ;
•by  for  o/,  A.V. ;  that  for  which,  A.V.  For-
fil^a^ng  to  marry.  This  is  mentioned  as
-showing  itself  first  among  the  Esscncs  and
Therapeuta)  by  Josephus  (*Bell.  Jud.,*  ii.
viii.  2,  and  *Ant.  Jud.,'  xviii.  i.  5).  It
became  later  a  special  tenet  of  the  Gnostics,
«R  stated  by  Clem.  Alex.,  *  Strom.,'  iii.  6 ;
Irenaeus,  *  Hser.,'  i.  22,  etc.  (quoted  by
Ellioott).  See  other  quotations  in  Pole's
Synopsis.  Gommanding  to  abstain  from
meats;  fipafxdraiv  (1  Cor.  viii.  9;  Heb.  ix.
10 ;  comp.  fipuxTfi,  Col.  ii.  IG ;  Rom.  xiv.  17).
The  word  "commanding"  has  to  be  sup-
plied from  the  preceding  KU)Xv6vruv,  *'  com-
manding not."  Some  of  the  sects  prohibited
the  use  of  animal  food.  A  trace  of  this
^Moeticism  in  regard  to  food  is  found  in


Col.  ii.  16,  21,  23.      (For  a  full  list  of
authorities  on  the  asceticism  of  the  Jewish
sects,  ^see  Bishop  Light  root,  '  Introduction
to  the  Epistle  to  the  Cnloss.,'  pp.  83,  84.)
The  chief  passages  relating  to  it  are  those
referred   to  above  from  Josephus :   TdifjLov
(nrfpo^ia  wop*  avrois,  "They  despise  mar-
riage ;  "    *E<r<rai(ay    ou8c2f    AytTcu    yvvaiKc^
"  None   of  the   Essenes    marry "    (Philo,
*  Fragm.,*  p.  633) ;    "  Gens  sine  ull&  feminl^
venere  abaicat&  '' — "  A   people  without   a
single  woman,  for  they  renounce  marriage  "
(Plin.,  *Nat.  Hist.,'  v.   15).     As   regards
their  food.  Bishop  Lightfoot  says,  "The
Essene  drank  no  wine ;  he  did  not  touch
animal  food.    His  meal  consisted  of  a  piece
of  bread,  and  a  single  mess  of  vegetables  "
CIntrod.,'  p.   86).      Professor   Burton  (in
Kitto's  *Cyclopajdia,'    art.  "Gnosticism")
says  of  the  later  Gnostics  that,  from  their
principle  of  the  utter  malignity  of  matter,
and  the  elevating  nature  of  yyaaris,  two  very
opposite    results    ensued — one   that   many
Gnostics  led  very  profligate  lives ;  the  other
that    many  practised  g^eat  austerities    in
order  to  mortify  the  body  and  its  sensual
appetites  (p.  770).     Some  of  our  modem
Encratites,  in    their  lang^ge  concerning
the    use    of    wine    and    b^,    approach
Gnosticism  very  closely.     To  be  receiyed
(tls  fttrdxri^fiv) ;  a  classical  word,  but  only
found  here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  used
bytheLXX.  With  thanksgiving.   Observe
the  identity  of  thought  with  Rom.  xiv.  6.
These  passages,  together  with  our  Lord's
action  at  the  last  Supper  (Luke  xxii.  17,
19),  at  the  multiplication  of  the  loaves  and
fishes  (Luke  ix.  16),  and  St.  Paul's  on  board
ship  (Acts  zxvii.  35),  are  conclusive  as  to
the  Christian  duty  of  giving  thanks,  com-
monly called   "saying    grace"    at    meals.
The  truth  (see  ch.  iiL  15;  John  xvui.  37;
Eph.  iv.  21,  etc.).

Ver.  4. — la  to  he  rdected  for  to  he  refuted^
A.Y.  Nothing  is  to  be  rejected.  The  A.Y.,
"nothing  to  be  refused,"  manifestly  uses
"nothing"  in  its  adverbial  sense  ("in  no
degree,"  "  not  at  all,"  Johnson's  *  Dict'X  as
ovZiv  in  Greek  is  also  commonly  used
(Liddell  and  Scott).  In  fact,  it  is  veiy
difficult  to  construe  the  passage  as  the  R. V.
does.  To  say  "nothing  is  to  be  rejected
if  it  is  received,"  is  scarcely  sense.  But  to
say  that  every  creature  of  (iod  U  good  (and
on  that  account  not  to  be  rejected)  if  it  is
received  with  thanksgiving,  is  very  good
and  edifying  sense.  Creature  (icr{(7/iia).  The
form  commonly  used  by  St  Paul  is  icriais
(Rom.  vui.  20,  21,  22;  2  Cor.  v.  17,  etc.).
But  Krlfffia  stands  by  the  side  of  tcrlais,
like  fip&fia  by  the  side  of  fipcotnt,  Zpa^a  by
the  side  of  Bpairts,  it6na  by  the  side  of
ir(^if,  and  many  more.  The  form  Kriafia  is
found  in  Jas.  L 18 ;  and  twice  in  Revelation.


70


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  IV.  1 — 10^


Good  (KoA^y) ;  with  referenoe  to  Gen.  L  10,
12,  etc.  To  be  roftiMd  (kw6fi\rrrop);  only
here  in  the  New  Testament,  bat  found  in
claarieal  Greek,  and  not  uncommon  in  the
liXX.  and  other  Greek  versions,  for  that
which  is  **  unclean,"  or  *' abominable."  If
St  be  reoeiyed  wiUi  thankigiTiiig.  This
(dearly  refers  to  **  every  creature  of  God,"
and  is  the  condition  on  which  it  is  good
in  relation  to  the  receiver.  Nothing  can
be  clearer  or  more  certain  than  that  the
apostle  is  not  arguing  against  tho  Mani-
onean  doctrine  of  the  evil  of  matter,  or  the
works  of  the  Demiurge,  but  against  Jewish
■oruples  about  meats.  **  Every  creature  of
God,"  he  says,  **is  good" — words  which
would  have  no  force  if  the  creatures  in
question  were  not  admitted  to  be  the  works
A  God,  but  thought  to  be  the  works  of  the
Demiurge.  But  applied  to  the  Jewish
•omplcs,  the  words  are  perfectly  relevant
Every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  on  no
account  to  bo  treated  as  common  or  unclean
(Acts  z.  15,  28),  provided  only  that  it  be
received  with  thanksgiving.

Ver.  5.— Through  for  by,  A,  V.  It  is  saneti-
lled  through  the  Word  of  Ood.  Considerable
difference  of  opinion  prevails  among  com-
mentators as  to  the  precise  meaning  of  this
verse,  especially  of  the  phrase,  ^  the  Word
of  God."  Some  refer  to  Gen.  i.  4,  10. 12,
etc. ;  others  to  Gen.  i.  29 ;  iz.  4,  as  contain-
ing the  original  gpunt  of  meats  for  the  use  of
man;  others  to  the  scriptural  phrases  em-
bodied in  the  words  of  the  ^in-e<J|«j,  the  prayer
of  thanksgiving.  Another  possible  refer-
ence would  be  to  the  Word  of  God  recorded
in  Acts  X.  13,  15,  28,  by  which  that  which
had  previously  been  unclean  was  now  made
clean  or  hcjly;  or,  lastly,  it  might  mean
"  the  blessing  of  Gotl "  given  in  answer  to
the  "  prayer  "  on  each  occasion,  which  suits
well  tho  present  tcnso,  ayid(tTcu,  Prayer
(<rr«w|ij;  BOe  ch.  ii.  1,  note).

Ver.  6. — Mind  for  remembrance,  A.V. ;
Christ  Jesus  for  Je«u«  ChrUt,  A.V.  and  T.R. ;
nourished  for  nourished  up,  A.V. ;  the  faith
for  faithj  A.V. ;  the  good  for  good,  A.V. ;
which  thou  hast  followed  until  now  for  wherc-
unto  thou  hast  attained,  A.V.  If  thou  put
the  brethren  in  mind  of  these  things  (ravra
^oriQffitvos  roTs  dJeX^oiy);  if  thou  suggest
these  things  to  the  brethren,  lay  them  down
as  winciples  upon  which  their  conduct  is  to
be  uased ;  or,  enjoin  them  (Liddell  and  Scott).
It  only  occurs  in  this  metaphorical  sense
hero  in  the  New  Testament,  but  is  very
common  in  classical  Greek,  and  not  unfre-
^uent  in  the  LXX.  It  has  often  the  mean-
ing of  **  to  advino  "  or  **  counsel."  Of  course,
**  hypothesis,"  the  assumed  basis  from  which
you  start,  is  the  hamo  root.  Tlie  brethren  (rois
dScA^ois).  Tho  distinctive  name  for  the
members  of  Christ's  Church,  throughout  the


Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles.
The  whole  body  is  called  ^  &8cX^^f, ''  tha
brotherhood  "  (1  Pet  iL  17 ;  v.  9).  A  good
miniitar  (Sutirorot).  The  application  of  this
term  to  Timothy,  like  that  of  MvKcmos  to
presbytors  (ch.  iiL  2),  is  an  indication  of
the  early  date  of  the  Epistle,  before  the  dis-
tinctive names  of  the  Church  officers  had
quite  hardened  down  into  a  technical  mean-
ing. Vouriihed  (im-fM^/iwos);  here  only
in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  used  in  thie
LXX. ;  but  in  classical  Greek  not  unoom-
nion  in  the  sense  of  **  brought  up  in,"
"trained  in  firom  childhood."  In  JLatin,
innutritu8.  The  phrase,  **  nourished  in  the
words  of  the  faith,"  etc,  explains  the  jcoX^t
9idKOPos,  and  shows  what  a  man  muat  be  to
deserve  the  appellation — one,  viz.,  who  il^
nourished  in  the  words  of  the  taiih,  ete.
The  fsith;  here  again  objective,  as  in  ver.  ^
(see  note).  The  good  dootrine,  etc.  In
opposition  to  the  **  doctrines  of  devils "  in
ver.  1.  The  different  epithete  of  this  true
Christian  doctrine  are  ii  icaX^  (as  here);  i
tyudtwvtra  (ch.  i.  10 ;  Titus  L  9 ;  ii.  1) ;  ^  men^
iitrtfitlop  SiSoiriraAta  (ch.  vi.  8) ;  and  in  ch.
vi.  1  we  have  simply  ^  8i8curiraXia,  without
any  epithet  In  like  manner,  ^  viorts,  ^
ii\n$9ia,  ii  c&<rff/3«(a,  severally  denote  the
Christian  religion.  Whieh  thou  hait  fol-
lowed until  now  (^  iropijKoAovi^icas).  This
is  a  rather  more  'faithful  rendering  than
that  of  the  A.V. ;  it  is,  literally,  whieh  thou
hasi  kept  close  to,  either  for  the  purpose  of
imitating  it,  or,  as  2  Tim.  iii.  10,  for  the  pur-
pose of  observing  it.  Or,  to  put  it  differently,
in  one  case  so  as  to  teach  it  identically,  and
in  the  other  so  as  to  know  it  perfectly.  In
this  last  aspect  it  is  also  used  in  Luke  L  8.
The  classical  use  is  ^  to  follow  closely  any
one's  steps,"  or  •*  the  course  of  events,"  when
used  literally ;  or,  metephorically,  **  to  fol-
low with  one's  thoup:hte,"  **  to  understand.*^
Ver.  7. — Unto  godliness  (oT  rather  unto  god*
liness,  A.V.  The  R,V.,  by  putting  a  full  stop
after  "  fables,"  disturbs  the  natural  flow  of
the  thought.  The  two  imperatives  Tapeurov
and  y^fjLya(§  connect  and  contrast  the
thoughts  in  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse,  as
the  A.V.  indicates  by  the  insertion  of
"  rather."  Profane  (/3€/3^Xouf ;  ch.  i.  9,  note)
Old  wives*  (ypduitis) ;  only  here  in  the  New
Testament;  not  used  in  LXX. ;  rare  in  classi-
cal Greek.  Exercise  thyself  unto  godliness
(yvfiua^t  ertavrSv),  Tho  verb  yvfivdC^iy
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  this
place,  twice  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
(v.  14;  xii.  11),  and  once  in  2  Peter  (ii.
14).  In  the  LXX.  it  occurs  only  once  (2
Mace.  X.  15),  but  is  common  in  classical
Greek.  The  metaphor  is  drawn  from  train-
ing for  gymnastic  exercises.  As  regards
the  whole  passage,  it  seems  that  there  were
ourrent  among  me  Jews  at  this  time  man^


en.  IV.  1—16.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


71


**  fables  "  (ch.  i.  4 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4 ;  Titua  i.  14 ;
2  Pot  L  IG),  childish  legends  and  doctrines,
some  of  them  directed  especially  to  enforcing
certain  rales  about  eating  and  drinking,  and
other  "bodily  exercises,"  which  St.  Paul
utterly  discountenances,  and  contrasts  with
that  **good  doctrine"  which  he  directs
Timothy  continually  to  teach.  This  would
account,  naturally,  for  the  introduction  of
the  phrase,  yvfjLva^t  (riavr6v.

Ver.  8. — J«  profitable  for  a  little  for  pro-
fiteth  little^  A.V. ;  for  for  unto,  A.V. ;  tchich
for  ViaU  A.V.  Bodily  ezeroise.  Exercise
which  only  affects  the  body,  such  as  those
roles  which  the  Jewish  ascetics  enforced.
rvfumffia  only  occurs  here  in  the  New  Tes-
tament, and  not  at  all  in  the  LXX.,  but  is
not  uncommon  in  classical  Greek.  Another
form  is  y{>iivaffii^  and  yviuniaiov  is  the  place
where  such  yifxyaais  takes  place.  For  a
little;  margin,  for  little,  which  is  the  best
rendering.  IIp^s  ohiyov,  as  EUicott  well  re-
marks, may  mean  either  "  for  a  little  while  "
or  "for  a  little"  (better,  "for  little"),  but
cannot  mean  both.  The  contrast  with  xphs
Tdvra  determines  its  meaning  here  to  be
*•  for  little,"  which  is  exactly  the  same
meaning  as  the  A.V.  Promise  of  the  life.
The  genitive  hero  is  the  genitive  of  the
thing  promised,  as  in  Acts  ii.  33 ;  Gal.  iii.
14;  2  Tim.  i.  1.  And  the  thing  promised
if  "  Uie  life  that  now  is,"  meaning,  of  course,
its  enjoyment  in  peace  and  happiness  (comp.
Ps.  xxxiv.  12  [xxxiii.,  LXX].,  where  6
64Kttv  (viiv  is  parallel  to  iiymrSav  rjfi4pas  .  .  .
ieyoBds) ;  and  "  that  which  is  to  come,"  viz.
eternal  life).  There  is  no  occasion  to  strain
after  greater  grammatical  precision.  There
18  no  contradiction  between  this  statement
of  the  happiness  of  a  godly  life  and  St.
Paul's  statement  in  1  Cor.  xv.  19.  Another
possible  way  of  construing  the  words  is  that
of  Bishop  Ellicott  and  the  *  Speaker's  Com-
mentary : '  '*  Having  the  promise  of  life,  both
the  present  and  the  future."  But  in  this
case  we  should  have  had  rris  rt  vvv  koI,  k.t.X.

Ver.  9. — Faithful  w  the  saying  for  tlm  is
a  faiOiful  saying,  A.V.  (see  ch.  i.  15,  note).
Here,  however,  thoxMrT^j  \6yos  is  that  which
precedes,  viz.  that  "godliness  is  profitable
for  all  things,"  etc.,  which  wc  thus  learn  was
a  proverbial  saying.

Ver.  10.— To  thin  end  for  therefore^  A.V. ;
labour  and  strive  for  lK)th  labour  and  suffer
reproach,  A.V.  and  T.R. ;  have  our  hope  set
an  for  trust  in,  A.V. ;  Viem  for  those,  A.V.
7or  to  this  end ;  or,  with  this  in  view.  He
thus  justifies  his  assertion  that  tho  saying
he  hod  quoted  is  a  faithful  one,  by  showing
that  the  promise  and  nil  that  it  contained
was  tho  ground  of  uU  his  labours  and  those
of  iiis  fellow-labourers  in  the  gospel.  Strive
(&7»i'(C<^/i€0a) ;  so  ninny  good  manuscripts,
ibstead  of  T.B.  ovuZiiofLtda ;  but  tho  read-


ing is  doubtful.  The  sense  of  the  T.B.,
**  suffer  reproach,"  seems  preferable,  and
the  expression  more  forcible,  as  conveying
something  more  than  mere  labour — ^the  bitter
reproaches  and  persecutions  which  he  en-
dured (2  Tim.  iii.  11 ;  1  CJor.  iv.  9—13 ;  2  Cor.
xi.  23 — 27) ;  and  all  because  of  his  firm  trust
iu  the  promises  of  the  living  God.  Our  hope
set  on.  Bather  a  clumsy  phrase,  though  it
expresses  accurately  the  ^K-wiKayL^v  ivX  S§^
C&yri ;  but  it  was  hardly  worth  altering  the
A.V.,  "we  trust  in  the  living  God."  In
oh.  V.  5  we  have  ffXTiicfv  M  e«<Jv,  with  no
appreciable  difference  of  sense.  Speeiallj
of  them  that  believe ;  and  therefore  we  who
believe  have  special  cause  to  hope  in  him,
and  to  trust  his  promises.

Ver.  11.— Command  (rapdyytWt ;  see  ch.
i.  3,  note;  v.  7;  vi.  13.  17).  It  is  used  very
frequently  in  the  Gospels  of  our  Lord's
commands  to  the  apostles  and  others,  and  by
St.  Paul  of  his  own  apostolic  directions  to
the  Churches  (1  Thess.  iv.  11 ;  2  Thess.  iii.
4,  6,  etc.).

Ver.  12,— An  ensample  to  them  that  6c-
lieve  for  an  example  of  the  believers,  A.V.;
manner  of  life  for  conversation,  A.V. ;  love
for  charity,  A.V. ;  B.T.  omits  in  spirit,
A.V.  and  T.B.  Let  no  man  despise  thy
youth  (comp.  1  Cor.  xvi.  11 ;  Titus  ii.  15).
The  construction  of  tho  sentence  is  mani-
festly that  adopted  in  the  A.V.  and  followed
in  the  B.V.  Timothy  would  certainly  be
under  forty  years  at  this  time,  and  might
be  not  above  thirty-five.  Either  age  would
be  decidedly  early  for  so  responsible  an  office
— one  in  which  ho  would  have  many  elders
(rptafi^tpot)  under  him  (ch.  v.  1,  17,  19).
An  ensample  (tux-ot)  ;  properly  the  original
"  pattern  "  or  **  model "  after  whi(^  anything
is  made  or  fashioned;  hence  a  ''pattern
or  *^  example."  It  is  used  in  the  same  sonso
ns  here  in  Phil.  iii.  17;  1  Thess.  i.  7;  2
Thess.  iii.  9;  Titus  ii.  7;  1  Pet  v.  8.  Them
that  belieye.  Tho  B.V.  has  apparently  so
tmnslated  r&y  iriarSov  in  order  to  assimilate
it  with  the  Tirruy  in  ver.  10.  But  ol  tivtoI
aro  simply  "believers,"  or  "Christians" —
"the  fiock,"  as  St.  Peter  has  it,  and  had
better  be  so  rendered.  Timothy  is  exhorted
to  make  it  impossible  for  any  one  to  question
his  authority  on  the  score  of  his  youth  by
being  a  model  of  the  Christian  graces  required
in  believers.  In  word.  Specially  in  his
teaching.  Tho  exhortation  to  Titus  (ii.  1, 7,
etc.)  is  very  similar,  "  Speak  thou  the  things
which  befit  the  sound  doctrine.  .  .  .  In  idl
things  showing  thyself  an  ensample  of  good
works ;  in  thy  doctrine  showing  uncormpt-
ness,  gravity,  sound  speech  (\6yoy  iytrjy*
etc.  (comp.  too  ch.  V.  17;  2  Tim.  i.  13).
Manner  of  life  iiufoarpo^ ;  see  ch.  iii.  15,
note).  Purity  (kywtlif);  elsewhere  in  the
New  Testament  only  in  oh.  v.  2,  where  it


72


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  IV.  1 — 16.


has  the  nine  special  sense  (compare  iyp6%  2
Cor.  xi.  2 :  eh.  v.  22 ;  Titus  it  5 ;  1  Pet.  ui.  2).

Ver.  13. — Heed  for  attendance,  A.Y,;  Uach-
4ng  for  doctrine,  A.Y.  Till  I  oome  (ch.  iii.
14;  i.  8).  Beaiding  (t^  iawyrtiatt).  The
public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  (the  Lessons,
as  we  should  say).  This  we  know  was  the
practice  in  the  synagogue  (Luke  It.  16,  etc.;
Acts  xiii.  27 ;  xv.  21 ;  2  Cor.  iiu  15).  We
see  the  beginning  of  reading  the  New  Testa-
ment in  the  Christian  assemolies  in  £ph.  iii.
4 ;  and  Col.  It.  1 6 ;  and  generally  in  the  fact  of
Epistles  being  addressed  by  the  apostles  to
Cnurohes.  The  di^cryi^onis,  the  reader,
lector,  was  a  regular  order  in  the  third  and
fourth  centuries  (Bingham,  toI.  1.  p.  288).
The  office  is  being  revived  in  our  day.  Ex-
hortation (if  vcuMMcA^o^cO;  see  Acts  iv.  36,
where  Barnabas  s  name  is  interpreted  as
meaning  *'  Son  of  exhortation  "  (B.y.),  and
xiiL  15 ;  comp.  Rom.  xiL  7  (where,  as  here,
wtipdK\fi<rts  and  diBoffKoXta  are  coupled  to-
gelher) ;  1  Thess.  ii.  3,  etc.  Teaching  (hi^a-
aica\ia) ;  almost  always  rendered  ** doctrine*'
in  the  A.Y.  But  here,  where  Vie  act  of
teaching  (like  the  act  of  reading,  the  act  of
exhorttMj,  in  the  two  preceding  clauses)  is
intended,  "teaching"  is  perhaps  the  best
word  according  to  our  modem  usage.  As
regards  the  difforence  between  9i9curKa\la
and  TopdjcKfjo'ts,  the  former  would  express
^doctrinal  teaching,**  whether  of  dogma  or
of  precept,  the  latter  entreaties  to  believe  the
one  ana  practise  the  otlier  (see  Acts  xi.
23  and  xiv.  22  for  good  examples  of  wapd-
icXfiaris).

Ver.  14. — The  gift  (xapiafia).  The  verb
XaplCofiai  means  *'to  give  anything  freely,"
gratuitously,  of  mere  good  will,  without  any
payment  or  return  (Luke  vii.  42 ;  Acts  xxvii.
24 ;  Rom.  viii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  12,  clc).  Hence
X^pioTfia  came  to  be  especially  applied  to  the
gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  are  pre-
eminently "fri'C  gifts"  (see  Acts  viii.  20).
It  is  so  applied  in  Rom.  i.  1 1 ;  xii.  6 ;  1  Cor.
i.  7 ;  xii.  4, 9,  28,  30, 31 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10.  Here,
then,  as  in  the  similar  passage,  2  Tim.  i.  6,
the  **gift**  spoken  of  is  the  special  grace
given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  those  who  are
separated  for  "  the  office  and  work  of  a  priest
in  the  Church  of  God  by  the  imposition  of
hands  "  (Ordering  of  Priests).  This  gift  St.
Paul  bids  him  not  neglect  (n^  ^/acAci).  The
word  contains  the  idea  of  contemptuous
neglect — neglect  as  of  an  unimportant  thing.
In  Matt.  xxii.  5  the  persons  invited  to  the
feast  made  light  of  it,  and  went  away  to
other  things  which  they  cared  more  about
In  Heb.  ii  3,  rriXiKa^rrris  ifieX-fjaaMres  (rurri-
pias,  and  viii.  9,  imply  a  contemptuous  disre-
gard. So  here  Timothy  is  reminded  that  in  his
ordination  ho  received  a  great  xap«''M<>>  *"d
that  he  must  valuo  it  duly,  and  use  it  dili-
gently.   It  must  not  be  let  lie  slumbering


and  smouldering,  but  must  be  stirred  up  into
a  flame.  The  lesson  here  and  in  2  TinL  L  6
seems  to  be  that  we  must  look  back  to  oar
ordination,  and  to  the  spiritual  grace  given
in  it,  as  things  not  exhausted.  The  grace
is  there,  but  it  must  not  be  lightly  thought
of.  Whieh  WM  given  thee  by  propheoj.
This  seems  to  be  explained  bv  Acts  xiiL
1 — 3,  where  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  sepa-
rated for  their  work  by  the  laying  on  of
the  hands  apparently  of  the  prophets  and
teachers,  at  the  express  command  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  speaking  doubtless  by  the  mouth  o[
one  of  tne  prophets.  Timothy,  it  appears,
was  designated  for  his  work  by  a  like  com-
mand of  the  Holy  Ghost,  speaking  by  one  of
the  Church  prophets,  and  received  his  com-
mission by  a  like  **  laying  on  of  hands  "  by
the  elders  of  the  Church.  If  St  Paul  refers,
as  he  appears  to  do,  to  the  same  occasion  in
2  Tim.  i.  6,  then  it  appears  that  he  laid  his
hands  on  Timet  I  ly,  together  with  the  pres-
byters, as  is  done  by  the  bishop  in  the  ordi-
nation of  priests.  The  presbytery  (rod  wpter-
BvTtpiou).  The  word  is  borrowed  from  the
Jewish  nomenclature  (see  Luke  xxii.  6;  Acts
xxii.  5).  In  a  slightly  different  sense  for
**  the  office  of  a  presbyter,"  Sua.,  v.  50  (Cod.
Alex.).

Ver.  15. — Be  diligent  in  for  meditate  upon,
A.V. ;  progress  for  profiting ^  A.V. ;  be  mani'
feet  unto  for  appear  to,  A.V.  Be  diligenti
etc.  (ravra  fitxira).  Give  all  your  atten-
tion and  care  and  study  to  these  things.
It  is  just  the  contrary  to  /u^  iifUKu  in  ver.
14.  The  verb  /teXcrciw,  besides  this  pas-
sage, occurs  in  its  classical  sense  of  "pre-
meditating" or  "getting  up  a  speech,"  in
Maik  xiii.  11  (where,  however,  the  reading  is
doubtful),  and  again  in  Acts  iv.  25,  in  the
sense  of  *'  prometlituting "  certain  actions.
A  kindred  use  in  classical  Greek  is  "to

Practise  "  or  "  exercise  "  an  art,  as  rhetoric,
ancing,  shooting  with  a  bow,  and  the  like.
It  is  very  common  in  the  L^X.,  in  the  sense
of  '*  meditating,"  practising  in  the  thoughts*
Oive  thyself  wholly  to  them  (4v  rovrois  Tcrdi);
literally,  he  in  these  things;  i.e.  be  wholly
and  always  occupied  with  them.  The  simi-
lar phrases  in  Greek  and  Latin  classics  are
*Ey  ro^rois  6  Keuaap  ^v  (Plutarch) ;  "  Omnis  in
hoc  sum"(Hor.,  *Ep.,'  i.  1.  1);  "Nescio
quid  meditans  nugarum,  ct  totus  in  illis**
(Hor.,  ♦Sat.,'i.  9. 2):  and  in  theLXX.,  *Ek  ^iSy
Kvplov  Iffdi  h\rjv  r^y  rjfifpav  (Pro v.  xxiii.  17).
Thy  progress  (^  irpoKoirfi).  Progress,  advance,
or  growth,  is  the  idea  of  irpoKonrfi.  It  is  used
twice  in  Phil.  i.  12,  25.  A  good  example  of
its  use  in  classical  Greek  is  that  in  Polyb.,
iii.  4,  Af^^ricris  Koi  irpoKOir^  r^s  Pufiaioty  Svva-
CT^las.  The  use  of  the  verb  irpoK6irr<»  for  "to
advance,"  "  make  progress,"  is  still  more
common  (Luke  ii.  52 ;  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  GaL  L
14;  2  Tim.  u.  16;   iii.  9,  14).    It  is  used


OB.  IV.  1 — 16.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


73


equally  of  progress  in  good  or  evil.  Vnto  alL
Ijie  K.T.  reads  xa<riy  for  i^  waaw  in  the
T.B.,  which  may  be  rendered  either  **  to  [or,
•among']  all  persons"  or  **in  all  things."

Ver.  16. — To  for  untOy  A.V.  (twice);  thy
teaching  for  the  doctrine,  A.\. ;  thess  things
for  them,  A.V. ;  save  both  for  both  save,  A.V.
Take  heed  (fxexe) ;  as  in  Acts  iii.  5  (see  too
Luke  xiv.  7^.  Thy  teaching.  The  A.V.,
the  doctrine,  is  the  better  rendering,  though
the  difference  of  meaning  is  very  sli^rht
The  use  of  ^  iiicurKokia  in  ch.  vi.  I  and  3
and  Titus  ii.  10  strongly  supports  the  sense
of  *' doctrine,"  %.e.  the  thing  taught  (see
note  on  ver.  13).  Continue  in  these  things
(iv^fiCKc  ainoTs) ;  comp.  Acts  xiii.  43 ;  Rom.
yL  1 ;  XL  22,  23;  Col.  i.  23.  It  is  impos-
sible to  give  a  satisfactory  solution  to  the


question — ^What  does  o^rot^  refer  to?  It  seems
to  mo  necessarily  to  refer  to  what  immedicUdy
precedes,  viz.  o-eavr^  koH  rff  StdcuricaA^,  and
so  to  refer  rather  to  the  sense  of  the  words
than  to  the  exact  grammar.  The  things
which  he  was  to  '*take  heed  to"  were  his
own  conduct  and  example  (included  in
a€avT<f)  and  the  doctrine  which  he  preached;
and  in  a  steady  continuance  in  these  things
— ^faithful  living  and  faitiiful  teaching —
he  would  save  both  himself  and  his  hearers.
The  application  of  the  words  to  the  ravra
of  ver.  l5,  or  to  all  the  things  enumerated
from  ver.  12  onwards,  or,  taken  as  a  mascu-
line, to  the  Ephesians,  or  the  hearers,  as
variously  proposed  by  eminent  commentators,
seems  alike  impossible.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1— 16. — Latter-day  apostasies.  The  history  of  the  Christian  Church  is  the  history
^f  the  sowing  of  tares  as  well  as  of  the  sowing  of  good  grain ;  and  it  describes  the  work
of  seducing  spirits  as  well  as  that  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  work  of  heresy  is  not
merely  the  denial  of  true  doctrine,  but  it  is  the  invention  and  propagation  of  a  multitude
of  false  doctrines.  Nor,  again,  are  the  false  doctrines  so  invented  and  promulgated,  on
the  face  of  them,  necessarily  ungodly  doctrines.  On  the  contrary,  they  often  assume  to
themselves  to  be  holier,  stricter,  more  heavenly  doctrines,  than  those  of  the  Church  of
God.  The  Church  of  (}od  is  not  holy  enough  for  these  spirit-taught  separatists ;  the
precepts  of  Jesus  Christ  do  not  attain  a  standard  high  enough  for  their  exalted  aspira-
tions ;  the  apostles  do  but  grovel  in  the  dust  of  commonplace  piety,  while  these  self-sent
teachers  soar  to  the  heights  of  the  true  knowledge  of  the  Infinite  I  But  not  only  does
Church  history  record  the  rise,  in  a  lamentable  succession,  of  the  various  troublers  of
the  spiritual  Israel,  the  men  who  have  done  more  to  hinder  God*s  work  on  earth  than
-all  the  persecutors  and  atheists  put  together  have  accomplished — the  Cerinthuses,
-and  Marcions,  and  Montanuses,  and  Manicheuses,  and  Socinuses,  and  countless  other
-sectaries  of  later  times — but  the  spirit  of  prophecy  revealed  beforehand  for  the  Church's
-warning  that  so  it  should  be.  The  Holy  Ghost,  in  no  obscure  or  doubtful  words,  made
it  known  to  the  Church  that  there  would  be  apostasies  many  and  grievous  from  the
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  that  the  leaders  of  those  apostasies  would  be  seducine
-spirits — spirits  of  antichrist,  as  St.  John  has  it — and  that  some  of  them  at  least  would

5ut  on  the  hypocritical  appearance  of  greater  holiness,  for  the  purpose  of  the  better
eceiving  the  hearts  of  the  simple.  Thus  while  Christ  taught  by  his  apostle  that
**  marriage  is  honourable  in  all,"  these  forbade  to  marry ;  while  the  Word  of  God  declared
that  "  every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  nothinj;  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with
thanksgiving,"  these  commanded  "  to  abstain  from  meats,"  saying,  "  Touch  not,  taste
•not,  handle  not."  The  Word  of  Grod  teaches  that  God  gives  us  richly  all  things  to
«njoy ;  these  enjoined  every  kind  of  austerity  to  the  body — "  bodily  exercises  "  which
profited  little.  The  Word  of  God  bids  us  approach  bodily  to  the  throne  of  grace
through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ;  these  would  keep  men  back  from  God,  and
substitute,  in  the  name  of  humility,  the  worship  of  angels.  And  that  these  pernicious
doctrines  were  not  confined  to  the  first  ages  of  the  Church,  the  history  of  the  Church
too  sadly  teaches.  The  most  opposite  forms  of  heresy  which  have  in  all  ages  distracted
the  Church  have  always  had  this  in  common,  that,  pretending  to  improve  upon  the  sound,
sober,  and  wise  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  they  have  corrupted  and  forsaken  it.
Enforced  celibacy  for  pure-minded  chastity;  artificial  rules  of  abstinence  for  habitual
temperance  and  self-restraint ;  grovelling  saint  and  image  worship  for  direct  communion
-with  the  living  God ;  sqlf-righteous  separation  from  the  world  for  holy  living  in  the
•world;  bruising  the  body  for  mortifying  the  soul;  pretentious  rejection  of  wealth  for
self-denying  use  of  it ;  leaving  the  state  of  life  in  which  God  has  placed  a  man,  instead


74  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.  [ch.  iv.  1—10*


of  adorning  the  gospel  in  it ;  making  those  things  to  be  sins  which  Gkxl  has  not  made
sins,  and  those  things  to  be  virtues  which  Gkxl  luis  not  made  virtues ; — these  have  ever
been  the  characteristics  of  those  **  doctrines  of  devils,"  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  turn
the  simple  away  from  the  truth.  '*  The  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ "  must  hold  his
course  boldly  and  straightforwardly  in  the  teeth  of  all  such  false  doctrine.  He  must
not  parley  with  the  teachers  of  heresy,  nor  mix  the  wine  of  the  gospel  with  the  water
of  falsehood.  He  knows  that  the  Word  of  God  is  purer,  and  holier,  and  wiser,  and
higher,  than  all  the  subtleties  of  human  invention,  and  will  stand  in  its  glory  when
they  are  all  swept  away  into  nothingness.  And,  knowing  this,  he  must  give  himself
wholly  to  teaching  the  truth,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  being
fully  assured  that  in  so  doing  he  will  both  save  himself  and  them  that  hear  him.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2.—^  predicted  apostasy  in  the  Christian  Church,  In  opposition  to  thie
exhibition  of  the  mystery  of  godliness,  the  apostle  places  the  prediction  of  a  seiioas
apostasy  from  the  faith.

I.  The  apostasy  is  a  subject  of  express  prediction.  ''But  the  Spirit  speaketh
expressly,  that  in  after  times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith."  It  may  seem  strange
that  apostasy  should  be  thought  of  so  soon  after  the  foundation  of  Christianity,  but  the
Church  is  fully  forewarned  of  the  coming  dan^ter.  It  was  foretold,  not  obscurely,  but
expressly,  in  the  prophecies  by  Daniel  (viL  25 ;  viiL  23),  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxiv.
4, 11),  and  of  the  apostle  himself  (2  Thess.  iL  ;  Acts  xx.  29, 30 ;  Col.  iL).  But  he  here
alludes  more  specifically  to  a  development  of  error  in  the  future,  the  germs  of  which
he  discerns  in  the  present.

IL  The  time  of  its  appearance.  ''In  after  times."  The  words  signify  any  period
subsequent  to  the  age  in  which  the  apostle  lived,  for  he  saw  in  the  apostasy  of  the
present  the  beginning  of  a  still  more  serious  apostasy  in  the  future.  The  mystery  of
iniquity  had  already  begun  to  work.  But  it  would  project  its  evil  shadow  fieur  forward
into  the  dispensation,  in  many  various  forms.

ni.  The  extent  of  the  apostasy.  "  Some  shall  depart  from  the  faith."  1.  SomCy
not  all.  Not  the  whole  visible  Church,  but  a  considerable  part  of  it.  Thus  an  assur-
ance is  given  that  the  true  Church  of  God  shall  not  be  extinguished.  2.  ITie  apostasy  is
from  the  doctrine  of  faith — though  it  be  the  mystery  of  godliness — not  the  grcux  offaithy
which,  being  of  an  incorruptible  origin,  cannot  be  lost.  Christ  is  the  Author  and
Finisher  of  faith.  The  elect  cannot  be  finally  deceived.  The  doctrine  of  faith  was  to
be  corrupted  by  "  denying  what  was  true,  by  adding  what  was  false."

IV.  The  reason  or  process  of  the  apostasy.  "  Giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,
and  doctrines  of  devils."  The  prime  movers  were  not  false  teachers,  but  unseen  agents
in  the  spirit- world.  1.  Man  docs  not  stand  isolated  in  this  world.  If  he  is  not  intiuenced
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  ho  is  influenced  by  the  spirits  of  delusion,  who  are  the  emissaries  of
Satan.  If  we  are  not  possessed  by  the  truth,  error  will  make  an  easy  conquest  of  us.
Often  the  heart  that  is  made  empty  by  scepticism  is  the  most  ready  to  welcome  super-
stition. 2.  It  is  possible  for  evil  spirits  to  inflttcnce  the  human  mind.  (1)  Satan  could
tempt  David  to  number  the  people  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1).  As  the  father  of  lies,  the  suggestion
of  error  would  be  a  congenial  work.  The  coming  of  the  man  of  sin  is  to  be  after  the
working  of  Satan.  (2)  There  is  a  sacrifice  to  devils,  a  communion  with  devils,  a  cup
of  devils,  a  table  of  devils  (1  Cor.  x.  20,  21).  There  is  a  spiritual  wickedness  in  high
places  capable  of  compassing  great  destruction  by  error.  (3)  The  apostle  teaches  the
personality  of  such  evil  spirits.  (4)  There  is  no  more  difficulty  in  understanding  their
communication  of  thought  to  man,  than  in  understanding  the  commimication  of  thought
from  one  evil  man  to  another.  An  evil  man  can  communicate  evil  by  a  glance  of  his
eye.  But  if  the  Spirit  of  God  can,  without  the  intervention  of  the  senses,  influence  the
minds  of  believers,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  seducing  spirits  can  have  access  to  the
centres  of  thought  and  feeling  without  any  similar  intervention.

V.  The  character  of  the  false  teachers  under  such  evil  inspiration.  "  In
the  hypocrisy  of  speakers  of  lies,  being  branded  in  their  own  conscience  as  with  a  hot
iron."    1.  They  assumed  a  mask  of  holiness  which  they  did  not  possess,  with  the  view


CH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  75

of  giving  better  currency  to  their  lies.  Their  assumed  sanctity  would  throw  the  unwary
ofif  their  guard,  and  lead  to  the  confounding  of  truth  with  error.  The  lies  they  taught
were  that  holiness  was  to  be  attained  through  abstinence  from  marriage  and  particular
kinds  of  food.  2.  They  were  essentially  corrupt,  for  their  conscience  had  become  sa
8eared  through  transgression  that  they  had  lost  the  true  distinctions  between  right  and
wrong,  error  and  truth.  They  were  incapable  of  relishing  the  "  mystery  of  godliness,"
and  therefore  devoted  themselves  to  the  arts  of  religious  seduction  in  the  interests  of  an
essentially  unspiritual  asceticism. — ^T.  0.

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  practical  features  of  the  apostasy.  The  apostle  does  not  enumerate
the  doctrinal  errors  of  the  apostates,  but  touches  upon  two  practical  characteristics
which  would  fall  under  general  observation.

I.  There  was  a  prohibition  or  restraint  upon  marriage.  "  Forbidding  to  marry."
1.  This  was  an  ascetic  tendency  already  manifested  in  the  East,  especially  among  the
Essenes  of  Palestine  and  the  Therapeutaa  of  Egypt.  2.  It  may  have  already  influenced
Christian  opinion  in  the  Corinthian  Church ;  for  the  apostle  is  obliged  to  solve  spiri-
tualistic doubts  regarding  marriage  (1  Cor.  vii.).  3.  The  tendency  developed  in  less
than  a  century  into  a  Gnostic  contempt  for  marriage.  4,  It  entered  patristic  theology
in  the  form  of  an  exaggerated  admiration  for  virginity,  to  the  disparagement  of  married
life.  5.  It  developed  inside  the  Latin  and  Greek  Churches  into  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy
and  the  religious  orders,    6.  It  tvas  a  tendency  wholly  opposed  to  Scripture  teaching,

SI)  It  forbade  what  Scripture  allowed :  "  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all  **  (Heb.  xiii.  2).
2)  It  forbade  the  marriage  of  ministers,  while  Old  Testament  priests  and  New  Testa-
ment ministers  were  to  be  "  husbands  of  one  wife  "  (ch.  iii.  2).  **  Have  we  not  power
to  lead  about  a  wife,  a  sister  ?  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  6).  Several  of  the  apostles  made  use  of  this
power:  "As  well  as  other  apostles,  .  .  .  and  Cephas."  (3)  The  reason  why  the  apostle
says  so  little  here  concerning  the  restriction  on  marriage,  and  so  much  on  that  respect-
ing meats,  is  probably  because  the  one  was  so  manifestly  opposed  to  the  whole  plan  of
creation,  that  the  common  sense  of  men  would  reject  it  as  unnatural  and  wrong.  Per-
haps, also,  the  one  tendency  had  not  assumed  so  definite  a  form  as  the  other.  The  very
liberty  allowed  under  the  gospel  to  abstain  from  marriage  was  not  grounded  on  the  idea
of  the  superior  holiness  of  celibacy  or  virginity,  but  on  its  affording  in  special  circum-
stances greater  opportunities  and  freedom  for  spiritual  work  (1  Cor.  vii.  32 — 37).

II.  There  was  a  prohibition  or  restraint  upon  the  use  op  certain  kinds
OF  food.  "  And  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created  to  be
received  with  tbanljsgiving  by  them  who  believe  and  know  the  truth."  Probably  the
restriction  was  as  to  the  use  of  flesh.  The  Essenes  and  the  Therapeuta9  abstained  from
particular  kinds  of  food.  The  Gnostic  schools  developed  the  tendency  still  more,  and
in  due  time  it  was  stereotyped  into  the  penitential  usages  of  Romanism.  The  apostle
argues  strenuously  against  this  abuse.  1.  It  was  contrai'y  to  God's  design  in  creation.
(1)  All  food  was  from  the  hand  of  the  Maker ;  nothing  was  therefore  to  be  accounted
common  or  unclean  under  the  gospel.  (2)  All  food  was  good.  "  For  every  creature  of
God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused."  It  was  not,  therefore,  for  man  to  place  restric-
tions upon  what  God  had  given  with  such  a  liberal  hand  for  his  use.  "  The  earth  is
the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof.-'  2.  The  conditions  under  which  the  true  design  of
God  in  creation  is  fulfilled.  (1)  The  food  was  for  all  creatures ;  but  '*  believers  and
those  who  have  known  the  truth  "  had  a  covenant  right  to  it,  and  the  true  end  of  crea-
tion was  only  fully  satisfied  in  them.  (2)  The  right  manner  of  receiving  the  food  pro-
vided. "  If  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving ; "  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God
and  prayer.  This  implies  (a)  that  food  is  to  be  gratefully  received  as  God's  gift ;  (h)
that  our  thanksgiving  is  presented  on  the  objective  side  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  on
the  subjective  side  by  prayer.  Thus  the  custom  of  grace  before  and  after  meat  is
grounded  in  a  Divine  command. — T.  C.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  due  equipment  and  duties  of  a  minister  of  Christ.  L  The  MnnsTEB
MUST  BE  ALWAYS  TEACHING.  "By  Setting  forth  these  things  to  the  brethren,  thou
shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ."  It  was  the  duty  of  Timothy  to  counsel  the
brethren  at  Ephesus  concerning  the  present  signs  of  the  coming  apostasy,  and  to  instruct
them  how  they  should  counteract  its  mischiefs.    It  is  probable  that  some  at  Ephesus


76  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  L^n.  iv.  1—16.

had  already  been  betrayed  by  ascetic  seductions  into  an  unhealthy  mode  of  life.
Timothy  was  to  be  mindful  of  the  present  truth  and  the  present  error.

II.  The  MINI8TEB  MUST  BE  ALWAYS  LEABNIKO.  ''Nourishing  thyself  up  in  the
words  of  the  faith  and  of  the  good  instruction  which  thou  hast  diligently  followed."  1.
Sf%e;'6  must  be  a  continuous  and  permanent  process  of  sel/'instruction,  as  the  tense  of
the  participle  signifies.  The  minister  must  never  cease  to  learn,  because  he  has  to  set
the  truth  in  new  liuhts,  and  to  counteract  error  out  of  the  large  storehouse  of  Divine
truth.  2.  The  minister*  a  armoury  is  the  Word. of  faith  and  good  instruction  thoroughly
mastered,  (1)  Nothing  but  God*s  Word  received  by  faith  will  enable  Timothy  to  fight
the  battle  of  truth.  He  is  not  to  overcome  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power
of  God.  (2)  He  is  to  adhere  faithfully  to  the  truth  already  attained.  Progress  in
knowledge  does  not  imply  a  constant  changing  of  opinions.

ni.  The  minister  must  be  always  working  towabd  a  profitable  result.  ''But
the  profieme  and  old  wives*  fables  avoid,  and  rather  exercise  thyself  unto  godliness."
1.  Negatively,  the  minister  is  to  avoid  foolish  and  unprofitable  studies.  The  apostle
referred  to  fables  famiiiarily  known,  Jewish  in  origin,  perhaps  with  a  mixture  of  Gentile
theosophy,  which  were  morally  unfruitful,  but  practically  dangerous  as  preparing  the
way  for  the  apostasy  of  the  future.  The  minister  must  himself  stand  free  from  all
83rmpathy  with  such  injurious  formalism  as  was  embodied  in  the  rabbinical  studies,  as
leading  to  the  neglect  of  the  weightier  matters  of  the  Law.  2.  Positively^  the  minister
is  to  exercise  himself  unto  godliness.  (1)  This  implies  that  godliness  is  a  pursuit  that
demands  the  strenuous  application  of  all  our  energies  of  mind,  body,  and  spirit.  ^2)  It
implies  that  godliness  must  be  the  chief  business  of  a  minister  as  well  as  the  chief  aim
of  nis  life  to  promote  it  among  the  members  of  his  flock,  (a)  It  has  its  inner  seat  in
the  heart,  (o)  It  works  outward  into  the  life,  (c)  It  is  a  progressive  state,  (d)  It
was  the  one  chief  concern  of  the  apostle  himself.    "  One  thing  I  do." — ^T.  G.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  advantage  of  true  godliness.  The  apostle  gives  a  reason  for  his
exhortation  to  ^rodliness.

II.  The  superiority  of  godliness  to  any  mere  bodily  exercise.  "  For  bodily
exercise  profiteth  to  a  small  extent."  1.  The  allusion  here  is  not  to  the  ascetic  discipline
already  noticed,  because :  (1)  Though  it  might  apply  to  the  more  developed  austerities  of
later  times — flagellations,  pilgrimages,  and  weary  vigils — it  cannot  fairly  apply  to  the
disuse  of  marriage  and  of  certain  kinds  of  food.  There  is  no  bodily  exercise  implied  in
such  a  quiescent  habit  or  aspect  of  life.  (2)  It  is  impossible  to  think  that  the  apostle
should  even  concede  that  such  austerity  was  profitable  to  the  smallest  extent,  for  he
is  opposed  to  the  whole  idea  of  it.  (3)  Besides,  this  was  not  the  immediate  subject  in
hand,  which  was  the  excellence  of  true  piety.  2.  The  allusion  is  to  the  gymnastic
training  which  occupied  so  much  of  the  time  and  energy  of  the  Greek  youth.  It  was
profitable  for  the  healthful  development  of  bodily  life,  but  by  its  very  nature  it  was
i)oth  temporal  and  temporary  in  its  results  and  its  rewards.

n.  The  ground  of  the  superiority  of  godliness.  "  But  godliness  is  profitable
unto  all  things,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."
It  has  the  profit  and  the  promise  of  a  double  life.  1.  It  has  the  profit  and  the  promise
of  this  present  life.  (1)  There  is  the  promise  of  length  of  days.  "  The  wicked  live
not  half  their  days."  (2)  There  is  the  prophetic  promise  that  they  "  shall  inherit  the
•earth."  (3)  There  is  the  profit  (a)  of  a  good  name,  (6)  of  riches  and  honour ;  for  they
will  want  no  good  thing.  (4)  G^liness  is  profitable  for  all  things  included  in  the
scheme  of  a  holy  life.  2.  It  has  the  profit  and  the  promise  of  the  life  to  come.  (1)  This
does  not  signify  that  it  merits  eternal  life,  but  that  it  is  essentially  connected  with  it  in
the  Divine  scheme  of  salvation.  (2)  Thus  godliness  is  **  great  gain  "  for  the  whole  life
of  man  in  the  next  life.  It  involves  the  highest  blessedness  of  man.  (3)  Happy  is
the  man  whose  future  is  provided  for  as  well  as  his  present.

III.  Corroboration  of  the  apostle's  assertion  respecting  godliness.  "  Faithful
is  the  sayiojx,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.'*  It  was  a  truth  of  universal  acceptance
among  Christian  |)eople,  because,  in  spite  of  all  the  drawbacks  of  a  persecuting  time,
it  had  been  happily  realized  in  their  checkered  experience. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  10. — TJie  practical  effects  of  this  truth  in  apostolic  experience.     Looking  to  the


CH.  IV.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  77-


realization  of  this  promise,  the  apostle  reminds  Timothy  how  he  was  borne  up  by  it  in
all  his  labour  and  suffering.

L  Its  sustaining  efficacy.     "  For  to  this  end  do  we  labour  and  suffer  reproach."

1.  The  apostle  did  not  regard  the  life  promised  to  godliness  as  one  of  mere  corporeal
enjoyment.  2.  His  life  was  actually  one  of  severe  and  toilsome  labour  as  well  as  of
trying  hut  unmerited  reproach,  3.  Yet  he  toas  stimulated  to  increased  toil  and  supported
under  the  infliction  of  unjust  reproach  by  the  thought  of  the  promise  involved  in  the
life  of  true  godliness.

IL  The  solid  basis  of  Christian  expectation  under  toil  and  shame.  "  Because
we  have  set  our  hope  upon  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of
those  that  believe."  1.  The  blessed  nature  and  continuity  of  this  hope,  (1)  It  is  the
good  hope  through  grace  which  we  enjoy.  (2)  Life  would  be  a  blank  ■without  it.  "  If  in
this  life  only  we  have  hope,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  (3)  It  is  linked  with
patience.  "  But  if  we  hope  for  that  which  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  patience  wait
for  it"  (Rom.  viL  25).  (4)  It  is  a  permanent  and  continuous  hope,  as  the  tense  of  the
verb  here  signifies.  2.  The  ground  or  basis  of  this  hope,  "  Upon  the  living  GK)d,  who
is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  believe."  (1)  This  hope  is  from  the
**  Gk)d  of  hope  "  (Rom.  xv.  13),  who  is  the  living  God ;  that  is,  no  mere  God  of  imagina-
tion, but  a  real  personal  Agent,  the  very  Fountain  of  life  in  infinite  sufficiency.  (2)
It  is  a  hope  linked  to  salvation  in  its  widest  sense — both  "  the  life  that  now  is,  and  that
which  is  to  come."    For  God  is  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  believe ."^

(0)  The  Saviourship  here  has  relation  to  the  two  lives  of  men,  as  expressed  in  the  con-
text. In  the  one  sense,  God  is  a  Saviour  of  all  men,  since  by  his  watchful  and  sustain-
ing providence  he  preserver  them  from  destruction ;  in  the  other,  he  offers  and  bestows
eternal  Ufe.  (b)  Tlie  words  do  not  warrant  the  Universalist  conclusion  that  all  men
will  be  ultimately  saved.  The  passage  makes  an  express  distinction  between  all  "  men  "
and  "  believers"  inconsistent  with  this  view. — T.  C.

Vers.  11, 12. — A  series  of  admonitions  for  the  guidance  of  Timothy,  I.  Timothy  is
enjoined  to  exercise  a  due  authority.  **  These  things  command  and  teach."  He
is  to  instruct  the  Church  at  Ephesus  with  all  authority  in  all  that  concerned  the
nature  of  true  piety,  the  dangers  to  be  guarded  against,  and  the  duties  to  be  faithfully
discharged.

II.  Timothy  is  enjoined  to  cultivate  a  gravity  op  deportment  that  would
MAKE  his  youth  RESPECTED.  "  Let  no  man  det^pise  thy  youth."  1.  Timothy  tvas  only
rdatively  a  young  man.  It  is  highly  probable  that  he  was  very  young  when  he  first
joined  the  apostle  (Acts  xvi.  1 — 3) — perhaps  nearly  twenty-five  years  of  age — and  as
eleven  years  had  since  intervened,  he  would  probably  now  be  about  forty  years  old.

2.  As  1  imothy  had  to  give  counsel  to  persons  much  older  than  himself  (ch.  v.  1),  and
even  to  call  them  to  account  (ver.  19),  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  cultivate  a  gravity
of  manner  that  would  admit  of  his  age  being  forgotten.  Perhaps,  also,  as  he  was  of
a  rather  timid  disposition — more  disposed  to  obey  than  to  command — the  counsel  of  the
apostle  was  more  needed.  He  must  be  firm  and  manly,  and  destitute  of  every  aspect
or  clement  of  pretentious  assumption.

m.  Timothy  is  enjoined  to  become  a  pattern  to  all  believers.  "  But  become
thou  a  pattern  of  the  believers  in  word,  in  behaviour,  in  love,  in  faith,  in  purity."  Thus
would  he  counteract  any  disadvantage  arising  from  his  youth.  He  was  to  be  a  pattern
in  all  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  Christian  minister.  1.  "  In  word,^  (1)  As  to
his  public  teaching,  which  must  be  according  to  God's  Word,  showing  in  it  uncorruptness,
gravity,  sincerity,  sound  speech  that  could  not  be  condemned.  (2)  As  to  social  inter-
course, which  must  be  (a)  not  corrupt,  vain,  or  foolish ;  (b)  but  always  with  grace,
seasoned  with  salt — wise,  grave,  edifying.  2.  "  Jn  behaviour,"  In  the  Church,  the  family,
the  world,  he  must  maintain  a  deportment  becoming  the  gospel  of  Christ,  in  all  godliness
and  honesty,  with  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  so  as  to  stop  the  mouths  of  gainsayers
and  earn  a  good  report  from  them  that  are  without.  3.  "  In  love,  in  faith,"  These  are
the  two  motive  forces  of  the  Christian  life  to  influence  both  the  speech  and  conduct  of
the  minister.     The  one  is  set  in  motion  by  the  other ;  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love."

(1)  He  is  to  be  a  pattern  in  love  to  God  and  man,  without  which,  even  if  he  has
the  tongue  of  angels,  ho  is  nothing.    (2)  In  faith,  in  the  grace  of  faith,  in  the  doctrine


78  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1—16.

of  faith,  in  the  profession  of  faith.    4.  **In  purity.^    The  minister  must  be  pure  in  life,
in  thought,  in  language,  and  in  all  his  relations  to  the  world. — T.  G.

Yer.  13. — The  duties  o^  Timoihu*9  pMic  ministry.  The  apostle  urges  him  to  the
diligent  exercise  of  his  calling.  *^  Till  I  come  give  attention  to  the  reading,  the  exhor-
tation, the  teaching."

I.  The  beadiko.  This  referred  to  the  public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  Church.
The  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  probably  part  of  the  New  Testament,  would  thus  be
read  at  such  meeting  of  the  saints.  This  reading  was  necessary  because  (1)  the
Scriptures  were  the  sources  of  all  religious  knowledge;  (2)  the  test  or  standaurd  of
doctrine  by  which  opinions  were  to  be  tried ;  (3)  the  means  of  saoctification  (John  xviL
17) ;  (4)  the  spring  of  Christian  hope  and  comfort  (Rom.  xv.  13).

II.  The  exhobtation.  This  refers  to  public  ministry.  Timothy  was  practically  to
enforce  the  duties  of  Christian  life  out  of  the  Scriptures.

IIL  The  teachino.  This  refers  to  the  matter  of  doctrinal  instruction.  Thus  full
provision  would  be  made  for  building  up  the  saints  in  their  most  holy  fEuth,  and  in  dl
the  graces  and  virtues  of  a  holy  life. — ^T.  C.


u


Yer.  14.^jr^6  duty  of  improving  ifte  Divine  gifts  of  exhortation  and  teaching.

Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,  which  was  given  thee  through  prophecy,  with
laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery."

L  The  spibitual  gift  oonfebbed  ok  Tikotht.  1.  It  is  not  mere  intellectual
equipment^  nor  the  mere  possession  of  Divine  grace^  but  the  gift  which  gtuUified  Timothy
JOT  preaching  the  gospel.  '*  For  the  work  of  an  evangelist."  It  was  a  gift  of  interpreting
the  Scriptures,  of  dispensing  the  mysteries  of  grace  with  edification,  of  bringing  forth
things  new  and  old  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  a  holy  heart  informed  with  truth.  2.
Jt  was  a  gift  conferred  by  means  of  prophecy.  The  Holy  Spirit  had,  by  one  or  more  of
the  prophets,  declared  his  will  to  confer  this  gift  upon  Timothy.  The  prophecy  was  the
Divine  assurance  as  to  Timothy's  qualifications.  3.  The  response  to  this  Divine  act  is
signified  by  the  action  of  the  presbytery  in  formally  designating  him  to  his  special
ministerial  work.

n.  The  dutt  of  exebcisiko  and  impboviko  this  gift.  ''Neglect  not  the  gift
that  is  in  thee."  There  were  several  reasons  to  enforce  this  duty.  1.  The  pr<ypJ^Hc
declaration  accompanied  by  the  concurrence  of  the  whole  body  of  presbyters  would  fill  his
mind  with  a  sense  of  his  high  privilege  and  great  responsibility  in  the  possession  of  such
a  gift.  £.  Tlie  exercise  of  a  gift  is  the  only  method  of  preventing  its  complete  lapse.  The
disuse  of  a  limb  causes  it  to  decay.  All  feu^ulties  must  be  kept  bright  and  vivid  by
constant  exercise.  3.  Our  Lord,  by  the  parable  of  the  talents^  teaches  us  the  sin  and
danger  of  hiding  our  talent  uselessly  in  the  ground. — ^T.  C.

Yers.  15, 16. — The  necessity  of  a  minister  giving  his  whole  energies  to  his  work.  The
apostle  here  concludes  his  solemn  instructions  to  his  chosen  representative  at  Ephesus.

I.  The  duty  of  bedcg  mindful  and  devoted  to  one's  ministby.  •*  These  things
do  thou  care  for :  be  in  them."  1.  A  minister's  heart  ought  to  be  anxious  about  his
loork.  It  is  this  anxiety  that  seciu-es  the  efficiency  of  work  in  this  world.  But  the
minister's  concern  is  full  of  an  inspiring  zeal  for  God's  honour,  and  is  sustained  by
encouraging  promises  of  help  from  on  high.  2.  A  minister  ought  to  devote  himself
exclusively  to  his  work.  **  Be  in  them."  The  obstacles  to  this  devotion  are  (1)  sloth-
fulness,  (2)  worldliness,  (3)  the  pressure  of  duties  right  in  themselves,  but  lying  outside
the  sphere  of  the  ministry.

II.  The  motive  fob  this  exclusive  devotion.  "  Tliat  thy  progress  may  appear  to
all."  1.  This  does  not  imply  that  Timothy  was  to  have  exclusive  regard  to  his  right
standing  with  the  Church.  This  might  be  a  questionable  motive.  2.  It  implies  that
his  devotion  to  his  work  should  be  so  altogether  conspicuous  that  it  could  not  but  be  seen
by  all.

III.   The  C0NNEC3TI0N   BETWEEN   THE   PEBSONAL   LIFE    AND    THE  OFFICIAL  WOBK    OF

THE  MINI8TEB.  "Take  hccd  to  thyself  and  to  the  teaching;  continue  in  them :  for  in
SO  doing  thou  shalt  save  both  thyself  and  them  that  hear  thee."  1.  The  direct  object  of
the  minister  of  the  gospel  is  the  salvation  of  souls.    2.  This  salvation  comes  by  hearing


i3H.  IV.  1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  79

tJie  gospel,  ''  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  minister  to  persevere
with  a  pious  insistency  on  aU  the  objects  of  his  ministry,  **  Continue  in  them."  4.
Nothing  is  so  well  adapted  for  the  salvation  of  ministers  as  their  piotis  labours  in  behalf
of  the  salvation  of  others.  6.  There  is  to  be  a  double  service  in  this  ministry^  The
minister  must  first  look  well  to  his  life,  exemplifying  the  holiness  of  the  gospel  in  word
and  deed  (ver.  12) ;  and  then  his  teaching  must  be  good  (ver.  6)  and  salutary  (ch.  1. 10).
Thus  he  will  be  the  instrument  of  much  good ;  he  will  thus  cover  the  multitude  of  sinSy
and  save  a  soul  from  death  (Jas.  v.  20). — T.  G.

Ver.  4. — A  false  asceticism.  "For  every  creature  of  Grod  is  good."  The  gospel
stood  in  a  difficult  position.  On  the  one  hand  was  asceticism,  with  its  hermits  of  every
creed,  and  its  retreats  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  Egypt ;  on  the  other  hand  was  Epicureanism
^ith  its  philosophy  of  enjoyments,  which  ran  into  lawless  excess.  We  must  judge  a
new  religion  by  its  first  teacher ;  for  Christ  was  his  own  religion  alive  and  in  action.
John  the  Baptist  was  an  ascetic ;  but  Christ  came  eating  and  drinking,  and  his  enemies
said,  "  Behold,  a  wine-bibber,  and  a  friend  of  publican  and  sinners."  His  first  miracle
was  at  a  marriage  festival,  and  he  dined  with  the  Pharisees.  We  have  here  an  example
in  morals.  Every  creature  or  creation — not  necessarily  a  living  thing — is  good.  Show
that  it  is  from  Gbd,  and  then  it  must  be  good.  In  the  story  of  Creation,  after  every
new  day,  "  God  saw  that  it  was  good.'*

L  AsGETTCisM  MAKES  A  FALSE  WORLD  OF  ITS  OWN.  It  narrows  life,  it  empties  the
fountains  of  joy,  it  destroys  the  hopes  of  youth,  it  degrades  the  body,  and  treats  matter
as  though  it  were  evil.  God's  idea  of  life  is  that  body,  soul,  and  spirit  are  to  be
redeemed.

IL  The  Christian  faith  makes  a  true  world  of  men.  We  are  to  be  trained
through  use,  even  when  use  is  dangerous ;  for  test  makes  manhood.  "  Blessed  is  the
man  that  endureth  temptation."  We  are  to  have  the  analogy  in  Nature.  She  is  to
stand  the  storm,  and  be  strenc^thened  by  it.  So  the  atmosphere  is  pimfied,  so  the  roots
of  the  trees  take  faster  hold  of  the  soil.  What  a  world  of  disease  and  death  this  would
loe  without  currents  and  waves  and  storms  I

III.  The  Christian  faith  had  false  interpreters.  It  could  but  be  that  the
surrounding  tendencies  afiected  the  Christians.  Just  as  there  were  Judaistic  Chris-
tians, 80  there  were  those  afiected  by  the  old  Manichean  doctrine  '*  that  matter  was
eviL"  Consequently  they  would  treat  the  body  as  corrupt  and  evil.  The  apostle,
therefore,  is  not  only  general,  but  specific  in  his  statement,  "  Some  forbid  to  marry  and
forbid  to  eat  meats : "  and  he  repeats  the  expression,  "  which  Gkxi  hath  created."  The
same  tendency  appeared,  and  was  fatally  developed,  in  the  monastic  life  of  the  Church.
The  monk  and  the  nun  appeared  to  possess  a  special  sanctity,  but  it  was  not  really  so.
The  forces  of  nature,  if  they  have  not  pure  avenues  of  enjoyment,  will  be  sure  to  find
impure  channels ;  and  history  shows  that  monasteries  have  been  associated  with  bidden
vice  and  criminal  deeds  of  shame,  though  softened  over  with  vesper  chants  and  morbid
garments  of  melancholy  hue. — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  4. — A  universal  use.  "And  nothing  to  be  refused."  The  apostle  has  shown
that  government  is  a  creation  of  God ;  we  are  to  pray  for  kings  and  all  in  authority,
and  this  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour.  And  he  has  taught  us  to  obey
the  powers  that  be;  for  they  are  ordained  of  God.  He  has  shown  that  the  place  of  man
in  the  Creation  is  of  God.  A  woman's  lot  is  not  to  be  the  world*s  leader  or  teacher,
but  the  equal  companion  of  man.  All  social  economies  break  to  pieces  that  deny  God's
ordinations  in  the  universe.     No  order  that  he  has  created  is  to  be  refused.

To  refuse  is  to  imply  a  superior  judgment  to  that  of  God.  The  wisest
must  know  best.  He  who  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  has  given  a  revelation
for  all  aspects  of  society  and  all  ages  of  men.  Individual  liberty  is  left.  We  are
not  to  forbid  to  marry  or  to  command  to  abstain  from  meats ;  though,  if  any  thought
the  meat  was  ofi'ered  to  idols,  and  that  they  sanctioned  idolatry,  they  might  refuse  it ;
as  our  temperance  friends  think  that  when  use  runs  to  abuse,  and  is  a  stumbling-
block,  they  have  a  perfect  rinht  to  use  liberty  of  abstinence.  "  Nothing  to  be  refused."
Wonderful  words !  The  imagination  of  the  mind  is  a  creation  of  God.  Poetry,  afiec-
iion,  and  art  alike  may  be  used  in  the  Christian  sphere.    The  intellect  of  the  wise  is  t,


80  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  iv.  1—161

creation  of  Ood ;  it  is  not  to  be  blindfolded.  We  are  not  to  say,  as  Rome  said  to
Galileo,  "  Faith  does  not  inquire ; "  but  we  are  to  use  it  in  its  own  sphere,  reverently
looking  up  to  Ood  for  more  light.  "  Come,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord."
All  natural  beauty  is  of  God.  It  is  no  sign  of  religion  to  love  ugliness.  Only  let  your
beauty  not  be  meretricious  beauty.  Let  it  be  pure,  as  Ghxi  is  pure.  **  Nothing  to  be
refused."— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  4. — A  grateful  heart.  "If  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving.*'  We  are  alway9
to  be  conscious  of  dependence,  or  else  our  very  blessings  turn  to  curses.  We  become
full,  and  we  deny  God.  There  is  a  prosperity  without  Gx)d  which  mi^es  men  proud
and  hard.  Men  lose  the  consciousness  of  the  transitoriness  of  earthly  good,  and  of  their
entire  dependence  upon  God.  We  are,  therefore,  to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  gratitude.
We  are  not  to  receive  mercies  as  though  we  had  a  right  to  them,  but  always,  as  Paul
Bays,  "  Be  ye  thankful.*'

I.  Think  of  the  thought  manifested  in  these  gifts.  Every  student  of  nature
becomes  surprised  that  beauty  is  bom  out  of  such  strange  elements,  and  that  there
should  be  such  harmony  of  forces  that,  taken  alone,  would  be  terribly  destructive.
God*s  thoughts  are,  toward  us,  precious  thoughts,  spoken  in  all  ages  by  holy  men,  and
symbolized  in  the  world  of  nature.  Gkxl  has  thought  out  all  that  is  needful  for  our
life.  He  has  stored  the  earth,  interlaced  it  with  rich  metallic  veins,  filled  it  with
limestone  and  coal,  that  all  might  be  ready  for  his  child.  And  in  srace  we  see  how
God  promised  a  Saviour,  and,  when  his  Son  came  into  the  world,  "  ul  things  are  now
ready.'*

IL  Think  of  the  fobbeabance  that  odwtinueb  them.  Men  have  abused  GhxL'a
mercies.  If  men  destroy  the  nobleman's  shrubs,  he  closes  his  grounds.  If  men  deface
the  pictures,  the  galleries  are  no  longer  free.  And  vet  Gkxl  bears  with  all  the  sin  and
frailty  of  man ;  and  from  generation  to  generation  this  is  the  thought  that  should  move
man  most — ^not  only  the  forgiveness,  but  the  forbearance,  of  Ghxi.

in.  Think  of  the  fleabubes  becetved  fbom  them.  What  millionfold  minis-
trations of  pleasure  there  are!  What  has  not  nature  been  to  you,  and  love,  and
thought,  and  home!  lliere  is  no  more  wonderful  contemplation  than  the  varied
pleasures  of  heart  and  mind.

IV.  Think  of  the  uxckeative  poweb  of  man.  We  cannot  create  an  atom ;  we
can  only  readjust  and  combine.  And  the  artist  cannot  create  his  colours ;  he  can  only
mix  them.  The  physician  cannot  create  his  remedies ;  he  can  only  find  them.  The
builder  cannot  create  his  stones,  he  can  only  quarry  them.  The  child  can  gather  the
flower ;  but  a  whole  universe  of  men  cannot  give  it  life  again.  Let  every  creation  of
God  be  received  with  thanksgiving. — ^W.  M.  S,

Ver.  5. — Creation  sanctified,  "For  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  Grod  and
prayer."  Here,  then,  is  an  exquisite  harmony.  We  have  been  tsflking  of  creation,  and
now  we  come  to  consider  the  Word  of  God.  And  these  creative  things  are  to  be
*'  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer."  Men  can  talk  with  God.  His  fellowship  is
a  test  of  all  our  pleasures  and  companionships  and  associations — "  Would  the  Bible  be
out  of  place  here  ?  "  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  nature's  gardens  and  groves.  The  best
descriptions  of  nature  are  in  the  Bible.  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  pure  festivities.  It
records  the  marriage  supper,  and  the  music  and  the  dance  when  the  prodigal  came
home.  It  is  never  out  of  place  in  children's  joys ;  for  it  gives  the  picture  of  a  glad  and
happy  childhood.  The  prophet  says,  "  The  streets  of  the  city  shall  be  full  of  girls  and
boys  playing ; "  and  Christ  took  up  little  children  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  them.  It  ia
never  out  of  place  in  pure  human  love ;  for  that  is  poetized  in  one  entire  book  of  the
Bible.  It  is  not  out  of  place  in  the  earnest  pursuit  of  secular  things ;  for  the  proverbs
appeal  to  personal  endeavour,  and  to  the  right  enjoyment  of  riches  and  honour.  The
Bible  sanctifies  life  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  and  any  social  economy  apart  from  the
Word  of  God  is  only  a  paper  defence  against  tyranny  and  wrong.  "And  prayer."
For  we  may  speak  to  God.  The  neutral  face  of  nature  is  ghastly  without  him.
"  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  Can  I  ask  God  to  be  there  at  all  ?  Can  I  ask
him  to  aid  me  in  my  work  ?  Can  I  ask  him  to  comfort  me  if  I  fail  ?  Can  I  ask  him  to
quicken  my  powers  and  enlarge  my  opportunities?    Can  I  ask  him  to  sanctify  my


CH.rr.1— 16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  81

aaBOcIations?  These  areyital  questions;  for  nothing  is  sanctiGed  without  him,  and
eveiytiiing  is  "  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  (Jod  and  prayer." — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — A  wise  reminder.  "If  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remembrance."  Wo
cannot  create  truth,  any  more  than  the  artist  can  create  nature.  Revelation  is  not
imagination.  A  teacher  can  combine,  harmonize,  reproduce,  and  call  to  remembrance.
Timothy  cannot  add  to  the  gospel.  In  the  eleventh  verse  of  the  first  chapter  it  is
called  "  the  glorious  gospel,  which  was  committed  to  my  trust."  A  trustee  does  not
alter  the  will,  neither  does  he  add  to  it.  All  that  he  has  to  do  is  sacredly  to  carry
out  the  last  wishes  of  the  testator.  And  when  Christ  had  finished  the  gospel  by  his
ascension,  then  he  sent  them  into  all  the  world  to  preach  it.

I.  The  Church  a  brotherhood.  "  Put  the  brethren."  Here  is  no  priestly  domi-
nation, no  hierarchical  pretension.  1.  Brotherhood  in  service.  We  may  have  dififerent
functions,  but  we  are  all  servants.  We  have  it  in  type  in  the  great  Servant,  "  who
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  We  ought  never  to  be  ashamed  of
service.  The  old  guilds  in  England  were  beautiful  things.  It  is  a  pity  now  that
retirement  is  thought  more  honourable  than  service.  2.  Brotherhood  in  sympathy.  The
most  precious  element  in  life  is  the  sentiment  of  pity.  Some  men  despise  sentiment ;,
but  without  it  you  take  away  the  atmosphere  of  life,  as  in  nature  atmosphere  is
the  drapery  of  the  hills  and  the  haze  of  the  mountains.  This  sympathy  is  subtle,  not
merely  spoken,  but  breathed  in  tones  and  glances  at  us  in  looks  of  thou^tful  love.  It
is  an  angel  of  help,  always  swift  to  help,  and  ready  to  fly  to  sorrow.  Shakespeare  calla
it  "  Heaven's  cherubim  horsed."  3.  Brotherhood  in  pilgrimage.  In  Church  life  there
will  be  absence  of  mere  etiquette  and  ceremony.  It  will  be  a  contrast  to  the  world..
It  will  not  be  easy  to  come  and  go  from  a  true  pilgrim  Church.  Pride  may  not  care  for
it ;  fashion,  in  its  novelistic  literature,  may  laugh  at  it ;  but  the  Christian  knows  that
there  is  something  strengthening  in  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.

II.  The  gospel  a  remembrance.  '*  Put  them  in  remembrance ; "  because  of  their
preoccupation.  Business  life,  the  cares  of  home,  make  us  forget  the  heavenly  Word.
Too  often  the  angels  of  Grod  stand  outside  the  heart.  In  a  busy  age  like  the  present
there  is  nothing  men  so  much  need  as  quiet  hours  for  the  quickening  of  memory.
**  Remembrance ;  *'  because  of  familiarity.  As  the  Swiss  mountaineer  thinks  little  of  the
beauty  which  the  traveller  goes  miles  upon  miles  to  see,  so  the  gospel  has  been  round
about  our  childhood  and  youth,  and  there  is  a  danger  lest  we  make  light  of  that  which
is  so  familiar  to  our  thought.  '*  Remembrance ; "  because  of  pride.  We  forget  that  we
need  the  gospel,  and  once  felt  ourself  to  be  chief  of  sinners ;  forget  that  we  were  slaves*
and  can  now  go  back  and  take  up  the  broken  chains  of  old  sins.  '*  Remembrance ; "
because  we  may  seek  to  make  a  new  religion  for  ourselves.  Earnestness  may  take  the
forms  of  Pharisaism  and  asceticinm;  we  may  try  Emersonian  self-dependence.  Wo
are  to  remember  that  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  Grod  is  what  we  all  need  unto  the
end.— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Ministerial  vocation.  ''Thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ,
nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctrine,  whereunto  thou  hast  attained."
Taking  your  own  medicines.  Eating  the  bread  you  recommend.  A  good  horti-
culturist will  show  you  his  own  garden.  The  test,  therefore,  of  Christian  fiuth  and
good  doctrine  \& — ^being  nourished  up.

L  It  makes  men  stronq  to  endure.  Ministers  are  men  of  like  passions  with
others ;  as  Shakespeare  says —

**  We  are  all  men  I
In  our  own  nature,  frail,  incapable.
Of  our  flesh,  few  are  angels."

Paul  realized  all  this  himself,  and  said,  "We  are  men  of  like  passions  with  yourselves.'^
In  the  daily  conflict,  the  soul  that  is  nourished  up  and  made  strong  in  Christ  can  "  endure
as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."

XL  Made  strong  to  enjoy.  Full  of  deep  and  quiet  joy.  It  is  a  poor  strength  that
can  merely  show  self-denial !  There  must  be  self-exercise — the  ability  to  show  that  lif»
in  God  leads  to  a  ministry  of  service  that  shall  be  full  of  heart  and  hope.

I.  timothy.  o


65  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1—16.

IIL  Madb  btiioko  to  TBanrr.  **  Nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith,"  so  m  not
merely  to  expound  them  or  to  give  elaborate  exegesis  of  doctrine,  but  to  live  out  the
heavoily  truths.  Timothy  was  to  attain  unto  this,  and  to  let  no  man  despise  his  youth,
because  age  aloneisnot  wisdom,  and  Paul  speaks  of  him  as  having  '^attained.*' — ^W.  IL  8.

Yer.  8. — Rdigiom  fteompmte.  **  Godliness  is  profitable  mito  all  thinos,  having
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is.**  It  is  a  Mr  charge  against  medisBvalism,  that  it  left
out  of  sight  the  ChristianizatioQ  of  this  present  life,  and  became  only  another-worldisoL
The  host  carried  to  the  dying  was  everything;  the  elevaticm  of  Uie  earthly  life  was
nothing.  Marshes  might  remain  undrained,  habitations  unimproved,  knowledge  be
imprisoned,  science  be  garotted,  and  this  earth  neglected,  provided  the  poople  became
true  sons  of  the  Church  and  possessed  the  priestly  passports  to  eternity  I  ^1^  religious
nature  (and  there  is  that  in  every  man")  was  perverted.  Man  became  the  subjeot-power
of  those  who,  in  the  name  of  God,  oarkened  the  moral  sense,  and  degraded  human
nature  under  the  pretence  of  saving  it.  The  gospel  has  always  had  the  promise  of  the
life  that  now  is ;  it  saves  men  fix)m  selfishness  and  sin,  as  well  as  from  Gehenna.

L  Thb  lipb  that  now  is  was  cbbatbd  bt  CK)d.  Human  life  and  human  history
«re  not  accidents.  God  created  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.  Better  to  be  bom  and  to  die
in  the  same  hour,  than  to  live  on  through  weary  years,  if  human  life  has  not  a  heavenly
purpose  in  it.  God  thought  out  this  world.  GM  designed  us  to  use  it ;  and  when  we
mourn  over  sin  and  ignorance  and  darkness,  we  rejoice  that  Christ  came  to  put  away
dn,  and  to  bring  in  an  everiasting  righteousness.  Nature  is  ours,  with  all  her  mountains
and  seas,  her  pastures  and  flocks,  the  silvery  thread  of  her  rivers,  and  the  Gh)thic  axx;hes
of  her  forests,  richly  to  enjoy.  Christ  came  to  claim  humanity,  to  redeem  humanity.
The  broken  harp  he  will  restring  and  set  to  divinest  music  We  will  not  put  sepia
into  all  the  pictures  of  earth's  to-morrow ;  for  **  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and
the  rough  places  plain :  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  see  it
together."

II.  Thb  lite  that  now  is  is  to  be  xoitlded  bt  gospel  influences.  We  read
that  Paul  "  persuaded  and  turned  away  much  people.''  If  the  gospel  has  the  promise,  we
must  help  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  When  we  see  wrongs,  we  must  try  to
remedy  them.  When  God  gives  us  the  remedy,  we  must  take  care  to  point  to  the  great
Physician  alone.  We  need  not  be  afraid.  The  gospel  is  unique ;  it  stands  alone.  It
has  done  more  for  this  sin-stricken  world  than  any  words  of  man  can  tell.  And  Christ
still  lives  on,  and  his  Spirit  is  one  of  restraint  in  men,  even  when  it  is  not  a  salva-
tion. If  caricature  could  have  crushed  Christianity,  it  would  have  been  silenced  long
ago.  The  life  that  now  is  was  moulded  by  the  gospel,  so  that  men  who  were  once
darkness  had  light  in  the  Lord.  Humanity  breathed  again;  slavery  felt  its  grasp
grow  weaker ;  polygamy  became  a  cruelty  and  a  shame ;  and  as  we  look  at  its  beneficent
progress,  and  see  orphanages  and  homes  and  refuges  rising  up  on  every  hand,  we  have
abimdant  evidence  that  the  gospel  is  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is.  Suicide,  that  had
been  the  euthanasia  of  Rome,  ceased.  Men  who  had  lost  their  love  of  life  in  the  satiety
of  its  pleasures,  and  to  whom  death  was  a  relief  from  its  ennui,  gave  place  to  a  race  who
found  new  hope  and  new  joy  in  the  pursuit  and  pleasures  of  the  life  that  now  is,  under
the  lordship  of  Christ. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  8. — The  great  beyond,  "And  of  that  which  is  to  come."  It  is  not  too
much  to  say  that  the  gospel  alone,  in  this  age,  is  the  witness  to  immortality — a  witness
preserved  in  three  aspects :  it  is  taught  by  Christ's  words ;  illustrated  in  Christ's  life ;
and  attested  by  Christ's  resurrection.  Outside  the  gospel  we  have  materialism,  which
denies  it;  agnosticism,  which  says  it  does  not  know  about  it;  and  the  modem  school
who  use  the  word  "  immortality,"  but  mean  immortality  of  influence,  or  a  life  which  has
on  earth  its  permanent  pervasive  power  after  we  are  gone :  just  as  the  oak  is  immortal
which  sends  on,  from  acorn  to  acorn,  its  being.  Before  Christ  came :  1.  Immortality
had  its  place  as  an  instinct.  The  philosophers  admitted  that.  2.  It  had  its  place  as
an  imagination.  The  poets  made  dreams  out  of  it.  3.  It  had  its  place  as  an  ancient
revelation,  llie  Hebrews  had  knowledge  of  it.  But  secularism,  in  the  fashionable
school  of  Sadducees,  had  darkened  it.  Christ  came  to  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light
by  the  gospel.    It  is  this  light  in  which  the  gospel  is  bathed ;  the  x>erspective  behmd


CH.  IV.  1— IG.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  83

all  its  picture-teachings ;  the  consoladon  of  apostles,  confessors,  and  martyrs.  But  Paul
links  it  with  the  life  that  now  is,  because  he  would  not  let  the  doctrine  of  immortality
become  basely  used,  as  it  was  in  Persia.  There  slavery  and  wrong  were  unredressed.
Persia  said  to  the  oppressed,  the  poor,  the  serf,  the  miserable, ''  Never  mind,  Ormuzd  will
make  it  right  hereaiter  I "  Not  so  says  Paul.  Helicon  has  its  rectitudes  and  its  rewards
hero  as  well,  llie  gospel  has  the  promise  of  the  hfe  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is
to  come.

L  Then  life  is  ooNmrnous;  thebe  is  ko  break.  Death  is  not  a  dividing  power.
It  is  a  dark  arch  through  which  the  river  flows.  If  a  pure  river,  then  he  which  is  holy
shall  be  holy  still.  If  a  foetid  river,  then  he  which  is  filthy  shall  be  filthy  still.  This
is  life  eternal — to  know  Christ ;  and,  having  him,  we  have  glory  and  immortality.  The
insect  does  not  die  when  it  changes  its  garment  from  the  grub  to  the  winged  being,  when
it  exchanges  earth  for  air.  Nor  do  we  die.  We  are  unclothed  that  we  may  be  clothed
upon  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven.  The  body  sheds  iU^elf  often.  At  seventy
we  have  had  ten  bodies ;  but  the  mind,  the  heart,  the  conscience,  the  memory,  have  a
consciously  unbroken  continuity.  We  never  shed  them  I  The  road  is  seen  tonday  from
the  child's  first  step ;  the  river  flows  through  town  and  city,  but  it  is  the  same  river.
We  feel  this ;  it  is  the  mystery  of  personality ;  it  is  the  symbol  of  continuity.  Through
all  the  years  we  have  had  one  being,  and  through  the  dark  arch  of  death  it  flows  on  into
the  life  that  is  to  come.

n.  Then  life  is  a  pbophecy.  There  is  no  difficulty  here.  As  the  child  is  the
prophecy  of  the  man,  so  the  man  is  the  prophecy  of  the  immortaL  In  a  mirror,  and  that
mirror  himself,  man  may  read  the  future  world.  His  tastes,  desires,  pursuits,  pleasures,
all  globe  themselves  in  the  microcosm  of  his  heart.  He  need  consult  no  augurs  about
future  destiny.  Here  are  the  mystic  pages :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life ; "
its  form,  shape,  colour,  quality.  Christ  has  changed  the  natiu'e,  and  made  it  God-like
and  Divine.  The  Christian  life  may  be  shady,  imperfect,  and  stained  with  evil ;  but  it
is  a  Qod-like  thing ;  its  pity,  purity,  righteousness,  holiness,  are  attested.  Perfect  it,
and  you  have  heaven.  It  were  well  for  men  to  think,  not  only  of  what  is,  but  of  what
is  to  come.  Even  bad  men  hope  to  alter.  Men  think  a  sudden  change  at  last  may
<come ;  a  turn  of  the  helm  just  as  the  vessel  nears  the  rapids  may  cause  it  to  glide  into
the  river  of  life.  But  life  here  is  a  prophecy.  It  is  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance  of
reward  or  shame — the  life  that  is  to  come,  with  its  advent  hour  so  quiet,  so  siure,  so
solemn;  coming  but  once,  but  coming  to  all.  We  thank  God  for  the  great  sky  of
immortality  above  us,  and  for  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  10. — Adequate  reasons.  "For  therefore  we  [both]  labour."  To  understand
a  man*s  history,  we  must  understand  his  philosophy  of  life — ^that  is,  his  motives  and
his  reasons.  For  no  life  has  unity  without  this.  It  may  have  spasmodic  activities
and  instinctive  virtues,  but  no  completeness  or  consistency.    Here  is —

I.  The  argument  of  a  true  faith — "therefore."  A  man's  thought  does  not
always  rule  his  life,  even  though  conscience  enforces  truth  as  a  duty.  A  man*s  conscience
does  not  always  rule  his  life.  It  is  said  that  man  is  a  will ;  and  this  is  true,  for  it  is  ever
the  supreme  power.  Man  is  made  up  of  three  things — **  I  can,**  "  I  ought,"  •*  I  will."
Christ  had  become  the  Master  of  PauFs  life ;  therefore  he  laboured,  because  the  gospel  was
a  fact,  not  a  fable  (ver.  7)  spun  out  of  Jewish  brains.  Men  like  Strauss  have  tried  to
prove  it  a  myth — something  that  grew  up  in  the  minds  of  men.  Imagine  the  Jewish
mind  that  had  grown  more  ritual  and  legal,  developing  into  the  simplicity  of  Christianity !
Imagine  philosophy  that  had  grown  more  and  more  proud  and  exclusive,  developing  a
religion  for  the  coniinon  people !  The  gospel  was  a  faithful  saying,  and  St.  Paul  did  not
alter  and  improve  his  doctrine  and  teaching.-* ;  he  preaches  the  same  gospel  in  his  earlier
and  later  Epistles.  He  was  a  man  of  sober  judgment  and  of  intellectual  power,  and  no
mere  rhapsodist.  He  says,  "  It  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation  " — by  the  scholar  and  the
peasant,  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  the  bond  and  the  free.  The  Jew  would  find  it  ful-
filled his  Law,  his  symbols,  his  prophecy.  The  Gtentile  would  find  it  answered  to  his
instinct,  his  hidden  desire,  his  deei)est  intuition.  "  Therefore  "  is  the  argument  of  a
true  faith.  We  are  not  the  disciples  of  a  new  sentiment  or  a  mere  romantic  embassy ;
for  the  new  temple  is  built,  like  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  upon  a  rock.

II.  The  toil  of  a  true  faith.    ''Therefore  we  laboiu","  not  simply  "we  teach"  nor


84  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  iv.  1— IG,

*'fonnulate  opinions.'^  Thai  might  be  done  with  ease,  like  philosophic  teachers,  in
the  garden  and  the  porch.  ^  We  labour  1 "  A  word  tnyolving  pain  ana  tears,  as  well  as
toiL  The  tendencies  of  the  times  are  against  us.  The  corrupt  taste  of  a  degenerate  age
is  against  us.  The  cross  is  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness.
We  do  not  please  men,  like  the  rhetoricians.  We  do  not  amuse  men,  like  the  sophists.
We  labour  in  ioumeyings,  in  perils,  in  hunger*  in  stripes.  Think  of  St.  Paul's  outcast
condition,  so  &r  as  his  own  oounti^rmen  were  concerned.  Think  of  his  relation  to  the
Acnnan  power — suspected  of  sedition ;  and  accusations  of  his  feUow-coimtiymen,  the  Jews.
At  a  time  when  Rome  swarmed  with  spies,  he  was  labouring  in  the  face  of  certain
danger  and  death. — ^W.  M.  S.

Yer.  10. — Apostolic  endurance.  ^  We  suffer  reproach.**  This  is  hard  to  bear,  even
when  it  is  not  deserred.  All  who  have  broken  old  ties  of  Church  ex  home  know
its  power.  Men  ever  brand  with  heresy  that  which  conflicts  with  their  own  opinions.
Against  St.  Paul  men  brought  false  charges.  We  must  not  surround  the  gospel  then
with  the  glory  associated  with  it  now.  We  put  the  nimbiis  on  the  heads  of  the  saints
and  martyrs ;  their  enemies  crowned  them  with  shame.

I.  ThEBB  WASTES  CONSCIOUS  LOSS  OF  ALL  THAT  THS  WORLD  HOLDS  DEAB.    AgOOdname

and  a  fair  fame,  how  precious  these  are  to  us  all  1  But  if  we  move  daily  in  an  atmosphere
uf  suspicion  and  false  accusation,  how  full  of  misery  the  outward  lot  becomes  I  It  is  a
proof  of  how  precious  Christ  was  to  Paul,  that  he  counts  all  things  but  offal  that  he  may
win  Christ.  Reproach  itself  became  a  source  of  joy  when  he  felt  that  it  was  endured  for
the  Master's  cause.    '^  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye."

IL  It  was  a  sube  fboof  of  the  bealitt  of  thkib  belioion.  *',Beaiuse  I  testify  of  it
that  the  works  thereof  are  evil,"  said  Christ,  ^  therefore  they  have  hated  me."  The  Master
was  reproached  as  a  blasphemer,  a  wine-bibber,  a  seditionist,  a  friend  of  publicans  and
sinners.  It  was  a  testimony  to  his  earnest  character  that  Paul  sufficed  reproach.
Wolves  do  not  worry  a  painted  sheep^  and  the  world  does  not  persecute  a  mere  professor.
In  every  age  of  religious  earnestness  reproach  has  had  to  be  endured.  The  Covenanters
of  Scotland  in  their  wilderness-worship,  when  they  spread  the  white  communion  doth
on  the  yet  whiter  snow ;  the  Puritans  in  their  hidden  assemblies ;  and  missionaries  like
Carey,  satirized  by  the  reviews !  Even  now  it  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  be  a  Christian ;
but  we  find  in  the  gospel  that  which  no  secular  inspiration  can  give — the  power  to  live
in  the  face  of  an  antagonistic  world. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  10. — Stutaining  motive,  "  Because  we  trust  in  the  living  God."  One  remark-
able fact  in  the  history  of  St.  Paul  was  that  nothing  damped  his  ardour.  It  was  not
so  with  such  men  as  Luther,  who  seemed  to  feel  at  last  that  all  is  vain.  Tliere  were
no  outward  forces  to  sustain  the  life  of  the  new  Church.  Well  may  the  ancient  words
be  used  in  contrasting  the  cause  of  Mohammed  with  that  of  the  gospel :  **  Some  trust  in
chariots,  and  some  in  horses,  but  we  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  Grod."

L  *'  In  the  living  God."  The  tendency  of  Judaism  was  to  leave  (jod  in  the  past !
The  age  of  inspiration  had  passed,  the  prophetic  roll  bad  closed,  and  the  Jews  became
scribes  and  traditionists.  They  had  a  codex  of  finished  Law,  and  gathered  up  the
opinions  of  the  rabbis  upon  the  minutest  matters  of  ceremonial  and  duty.  Paul
preached  a  God  who  was  then  baptizing  men  with  fire — a  Holy  Spirit  that  was  working
in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.

II.  **The  living  God;"  because  the  gospel  showed  all  the  kabks  of  life.  It
embodied  Divine  power,  it  manifested  a  living  purpose.  It  had  an  echo  in  the  con-
science and  heart  of  men.  God,  who  in  times  i^ast  had  spoken  to  the  fathers  by  the
prophets,  liSd  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  them  by  his  Son.  Qtod  was  manifest  in
the  flesh.  The  Spirit  had  descended  after  Christ's  ascension,  and  Pentecost  had  already
taken  its  place  in  history.

III.  "The  living  God"  had  shown  that  he  could  take  cabe  of  his  bebvants.
He  had  opened  ways  for  them;  he  had  touched  the  hearts  of  men.  As  they  preached,
the  message  had  been  accompanied  with  power  from  on  high ;  and  Paul  in  his  imprison-
ment bad  received  grace  according  to  his  day.

IV.  **Thb  living  God"  who  would  continue  his  work  if  his  sebvants  died..
Empires  might  fall ;  dynasties  might  change ;  the  ancient  Jewish  Church  might  fulfil


\


CH.iv.l— IC]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  85

its  day ;  but  the  living  God  had  designed  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein
righteousness  should  dwell ;  and  thus  his  apostles  trusted,  not  in  an  arm  of  fleshy  hut  in
a  Uving  God.--W.  M.  S.

Ver,  10. — The  universal  JRedeemer,  "  Who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of
those  that  believe."  Paul  had  no  limited  atonement  to  preach,  but  that  Christ  di^  for
all,  and  was  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  There  was  no  court  of  the
Gentiles ;  for  all  alike — Jew  and  Greek — were  included  under  sin,  that  the  grace  of  God
might  appear  to  all  men.  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  bond  nor
free ;  all  are  one  in  the  provision ;  all  need  it ;  all  must  have  it.  ''  Qo  ye  into  all  the
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."    But

I.  He  is  the  Saviour  specially  op  them  that  believe  ;  for  unless  faith  looks  up
and  lays  hold  on  Christ,  the  virtue  will  not  come  out  of  him,  either  of  forgiveness  or  life.
It  matters  not  that  the  lifeboat  is  provided  for  all  in  the  sinking  ship,  imless  men  will
leap  into  the  lifeboat.  It  matters  not  that  the  electric  cord  conveys  the  current,  unless
men  adjust  it  to  their  wants.

II.  And  this  salvation  is  made  manifest  in  every  age.  In  that  age  it  stayed
suicide,  it  raised  hospitals,  it  emancipated  Ephesians  and  Corinthians  from  lust,  it
uplifted  women,  it  purified  law,  and  it  created  brotherhood  between  Samaritan,  Gentile,
and  Jew.  In  the  early  centuries  we  see  it  at  work  in  the  varied  peoples  that  united
in  its  worship,  whilst  the  bishops  of  the  Church  were  African,  Greek,  Roman,  and
Armenian.  It  saved  men  in  the  catacombs  from  despair,  and  constrained  them  to
write  on  their  epitaphs  words  that  breathed  of  hope ;  and  it  continues  to  save.  It  enlarges
the  kingdom  of  Christ;  it  breaks  up  the  heptarchy  of  evil  in  the  heart,  as  province  after
province  becomes  loyal  to  God ;  and  it  redeems  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  **  Beside  me
there  is  no  Saviour  "  is  as  true  to-day  as  ever.  The  love  of  beauty  often  ends  in  mere
sensuous  aistheticism.  The  seeking  after  righteousness  often  leaves  the  upas  tree  of  the
heart  with  its  deadly  leaves  within.  New  ideals  of  social  economy  find  man's  selfishness
supremo  in  every  new  adjustment  of  law.  Selfishness  never  has  been  slain,  save  at  the
cross.  But  this  gospel  saves  them  that  believe  t<hdai/.  Men  too  often  prefer  costly
ritual  and  formal  ceremonial ;  but  a  new  heart  means  a  new  life,  and  the  gospel  saves
them  that  believe. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  12. — A  young  teacher.  "Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth."  Apart  from  the
direct  reference  of  these  words  to  the  Christian  apostolate,  they  are  appropriate  to
us  all  in  the  season  of  youth.  Spring-time  is  so  difierent  from  autumn !  Nature  then
is  full  of  promise.  As  in  spring  the  buds  are  bursting,  and  the  birds  building,  and
Nature's  flower-show  preparing,  and  her  orchestra  tuning, — still  we  pause  to  think  what
may  come.  Locusts  may  eat  up  all  green  things ;  the  hot  sirocco  winds  may  wither
the  verdure,  and  the  fruit  of  the  vine  may  fail.  Still  there  is  a  blessed  promise  in  early
days.  No  sane  man  will  be  found  to  dcs])ise  youth  in  itself.  As  well  despise  the  acorn
because  it  is  not  an  oak,  or  the  orange  blossom  because  it  has  not  fruited.  The  spirit
of  the  text  is  this — Do  not  act  so  as  to  lead  men  to  despise  you.

I.  Men  despise  mere  word-heroism.  Be  an  example  in  word;  in  conversation,
which  means  citizenship;  in  charity,  which  means  every  aspect  of  love  to  God  and
man;  in  spirit,  which  means  the  atmosphere  that  surrounds  your  life;  in  faith,  which
means  vital  obedience  to  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  and  in  purity,  the  absence  of  which
was  the  curse  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  cities  of  the  East.  Nothing  gives  greater  power
than  conduct.     "  Character,"  says  Ossili,  "  is  higher  than  intellect."

IL  Men  despise  the  trifler  and  the  idler.  If  the  word  and  the  conversation  be
frivolous ;  as  death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue ;  then  the  man  who  is  the
rattle-brain  of  society  is  not  likely  to  be  the  ornament  of  the  Church  or  the  admira-
tion of  the  world.  Men  will,  and  ought,  to  despise  such.  There  may  be  a  dignified
youth  as  well  as  a  dignified  age.  It  is  not  necessary  to  have  a  formal  and  unnatural
decorum,  but  it  is  necessary  for  those  who  speak  on  the  high  matters  of  relijjion  to  show
that  they  live  in  that  world  of  solemn  realities  of  which  they  speak. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  14. — Spiritual  negligence,  **  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee."  This  is  a
coimsel  specisJly  for  Timothy  as  a  teacher;  but  it  applies  to  us  all.


8G  THE  FlUST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [CH.  iv.  1—16.

L  TiiK  GIFT  m  A  BiHFOKSiBiLiTT.  We  are  not  merely  rewptioe  beinss.  A  liike»
unkeB  the  liTing  waters  flow  throng  it»  is  stagnant  and  dangerous,  ^uie  world  <£
youth  and  beauty  is  a  world  of  life.  The  sun  parts  with  its  beams.  The  ocean  exhales
its  moisture.  The  tree  yields  its  fruit.  The  air  passes  through  the  lungs.  The  river
makea  music  of  progress  as  it  passes  to  the  sea.  Here  in  nature  there  is  no  arresting
hand,  no  force  of  self-restraint^  no  self-hood.  Gknl  has  **  set  in  order  "  the  courses  of  the
rivers,  and  made  a  path  for  the  light ;  and  they  obey  his  wilL  Man  can  say  *'  No  "  to
Qod*s  moral  ordinations — not,  of  course,  without  harm  and  penalty ;  but  he  oan^  and  too
often  he  does  (1)  pervmrt  the  sift,  and  turn  it  to  disloyal  uses ;  and  at  other  times  (2)  ht
negiecU  it—ht  lays  up  the  talent  in  a  napkin.  He  turns  selfish,  and  mars  the  use  of
his  gift  by  misuse  and  by  personal  ease  and  indulgence.  The  world  is  no  better  for  his
birth.    The  Church  finds  him  a  selfish  epicure  at  tiie  banquet  of  GKmI's  grace.

IL  The  eiFT  yabibs.  It  if,  however,  somewhere  vriuiin  us.  Th^  are  forces  of
life  hidden  in  the  soul,  gracious  gifts  of  help  and  healing ;  but  man  neglects  them.
Sometimes  he  undervalues  them  with  a  perilous  modesty,  which  forgets  that  the  weakest
vessel  can  hold  some  water ;  the  sim^dest  speech  be  eloquent  for  its  Lord ;  the  slender
time  be  rich  with  opportunities.  Qoii  has  not  made  a  mistake  in  our  creation.  There
are  gifts  of  service,  gifts  of  sympathy,  ^^ifts  of  prayer,  which,  if  envy  were  angelic,
ang&  might  envy.  Neglect  not  thy  eift  It  will  be  required  of  thee  again.  It
needs  not  age  to  ripen  it  and  make  it  ready.  "  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth ;  be  thou
an  example  of  the  believers,  in  word,  in  conversation,  in  charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in
purity."  **  Bo  great  in  act  as  you  have  been  in  thought,"  savs  Shakespeare.  This  is
our  danger — ^neglect  We  know  what  it  means  in  education,  which  has  its  now ;  in  the
dwelling,  which,  however  well  furnished,  soon  becomes  unhealthy  and  unlovely  through
disuse  and  dust ;  in  exercise,  which,  neglected,  imperils  muscle  and  blood  and  nerve.
So  in  religion  we  are  to  be  active  and  earnest,  not  resting  on  the  couch  of  personal
comfort,  or  merely  enjoying,  from  the  observatory  of  revelation,  the  vision  of  the
heavenly  shores. — ^W.  M.  S.

Yer.  15. — Mental  dbwrjption,  ''Meditate  upon  these  things."  They  need  and  will
bear  meditation.  Divine  truths  are  too  awful  and  august  m  their  deep  significance
to  be  exhausted  by  superficial  notice.  They  need  to  be  focused  to  the  eye,  and  studied
in  all  their  central  depth  and  beauty.

I.  Fob  meditation  is  the  yebt  atmosphere  of  eelioion.  It  requires  the  silent
study  that  we  may  enjoy  "  the  harvest  of  a  quiet  eye,"  and  see  deeply  into  the  "  wondrous
things  "  of  the  Divine  Law.  Meditate ;  for  thus  only  will  you  understand  your  real  self,
and  so  know  better  the  adaptation  of  the  gospel  to  your  need  and  your  sin.

II.  Fob  in  meditation  we  are  studying  (xod*8  thoughts;  these  require  on  our
part  time  and  insight.  This  is  the  fault  of  our  age — ^it  does  not  meditate.  It  is
superficially  critical ;  apt  to  fly  o£f  at  some  tangent  of  mental  difficulty ;  and  is  so
impatient  with  the  key  that  it  injures  the  lock.  We  cannot  think  well  in  a  hurry,  any
more  than  we  can  work  well  in  a  hurry.  Many  of  the  worst  human  mistakes  of
life  we  should  avoid  if  we  meditated  more.

**  Evil  is  wroujjht  by  want  of  thought.
As  well  as  want  of  heart."

Our  prayers  would  be  wider  in  scope  and  richer  in  feeling  if  we  meditated  more ;
and  our  judgment  would  not  be  so  hard  about  the  dealings  of  God  with  us  if  wo
meditated  on  "  the  way  the  fathers  trod,"  and  the  Divine  revelation  of  our  need  of
discipline.  Meditate,  and  then  the  cross  will  stand  out  in  its  august  significance ;  the
heart  will  feel  that  it  needs  a  Saviour  as  well  as  a  Teacher ;  and  instead  of  feeling  that
you  know  all  about  that  w^ondrous  mystery  of  Divine  provision,  you  will  pray  that  you,
like  Paul,  may  "  know  the  love  of  Christ,"  which  passeth  knowledge.  "  Meditate  on
these  things."  They  are  pluralized;  for  they  are  many.  The  gospel  facts  and  the
gospel  doctrines  constitute  a  wide  range  of  subjects  afifecting  alike  our  temporal  and
eternal  interest. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  15. — Observation  of  others,  "That  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all."  The
Christian  teachings  are  not  like  Eleusinian  Mysteries ;  they  are  revelations  to  be  lived


Off.  nr.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  87

oat  m  the  broad  daylight  of  history.  A  religion  that  ends  in  meditation  makes  the
mystic  a  religion  that  confines  itself  to  tUitudea — ^makes  the  cucetie,  who  shuts  himself
ovA  from  the  world.

I.  Thb  pbofitinq  is  kot  to  be  a  katteb  of  usbm  fsklikq  ;  or,  in  other  words,
is  no  mere  emotionaUam  that  may  coexist  with  lax  character  and  feeble  morality.  Tdo
often  this  has  been  the  case,  and  the  Church  has  been  apt  to  palliate  the  sins  of
the  fraudulent  trader  or  the  bankrupt  trustee,  if^  though  he  has  wronged  oth^v  and
brought  whole  families  to  beggary  and  ruin,  he  has  still  preserved  his  spiritual  emotions^
his  seraphic  rhapsodies  of  expression,  and  his  fervent  interest  in  missionary  agencies.

IL  Thb  PBOFiriKa  must  appsab  in  the  ohabaotbr.  It  must  come  to  the  touch-
stone of  action  and  character.  It  must  energize  the  conscience,  quicken  the  passive
virtues  of  humility  and  submission,  and  brace  the  will  for  the  stem  obedience  of  the
tioldier  and  the  faiUiful  obligations  of  the  steward. — W.  M.  S.

Yer.  16. — A  dual  heed,  ''  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  doctrine."  These
two  GK)d  hath  joined  together,  and  let  no  man  put  them  asunder.  Let  not  self-hood
become  a  self-righteousness,  which  ignores  the  doctrine  that  we  need  Christ  as  our
Strength  and  our  Saviour,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  our  Sanctifier.  Taking  heed  U>
owndves  must  not  make  ub  daringly  se^f-^onfideni.  Some  superficial  men  think  that
they  can  go  this  warfare  on  their  own  charges.  The  whole  armour  of  GKxl  is  needful,
and  not  the  mere  equipment  of  personal  judgment  and  unaided  strength.  But  taking
heed  to  the  doctrine,  let  us  remember  that  it  is  not  a  dead  dogma,  but  wat  the  Christian
verities  are  spirit  and  life.  We  must  not  be  hearers  for  others  or  critics  of  others,
judging  one  another,  and  measuring  our  own  virtue  by  the  shock  produced  in  us  at  the
inconsistencies  and  failings  of  others.

I.  TaKIKQ  heed  to  OUBSELVES  as  having  STHiL  THE  WEAK  FLESH  TO  DEAL  WITH.

Knowing  what  war  there  still  is  in  our  members.  Knowing  that  this  same  gospel
says,  ''The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."  Remembering  that  the
richest  lives  have  made  shipwreck,  and  the  loftiest  monuments  been  the  first  to  be
shattered  by  the  storm.  We  must  remember  that  the  teacher  elevated  by  honour  may
be  the  first  to  fall.

U.  Taking  heed  to  oubselves,  because  none  can  do  this  fob  us.  We  know
more  of  ourselves  than  any  other  can  know.  Our  tastes,  our  tendencies,  our  secret
desires,  our  constitutional  weaknesses.  We  see  how  the  "needle"  trembles  in  the
presence  of  certain  loadstones  of  evil,  and  we  must  therefore  look  within,  and  be
watchful.    *'  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  16. — The  life-endurance.  "Continue  in  them."  There  must  be  perseverance
or  pressing  forward.  And  this  is  the  great  point.  "  Ye  did  run  well"  applies  to  many
who  were  first  in  the  Atalanta  race.  "That  your  fruit  may  remain,"  said  Christ.
Permanence.  This  is  beaut  if uL  How  many  actual  blossoms  never  come  to  fruit  at
all  I  and  how  much  fruit  becomes  the  subject  of  blight  and  withering  I  Toung  life,
like  Timothy's,  Is  lovely  in  its  enthusiasm ;  but —

I.  What  a  world  is  befobe  him  !  How  little  he  knows  yet  of  the  perils  of  the
way  I  Churches  may  become  corrupt  like  Ephesus,  or  divided  like  Corinth.  Demas
may  desert ;  Hymemeus  and  Philetus  may  make  shipwreck.  Opposition  may  increase.
Enemies  may  multiply.  The  work  may  grow  harder ;  and  the  atmosphere  in  which
it  is  done  grow  colder.    Continue  in  them —

IL  Because  this  is  the  test  of  all  tbue  heboism.  The  vessel  with  her  freshly
painted  hull,  her  gay  bunting,  her  trim  sails,  her  beautiful  lines,  may  fioat  swan-like  in
the  harbour,  and  then  skim  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life.  But  she  is  nobler  when,  with
battered  sides,  and  gaping  bulwarks,  and  rent  saUs,  and  dismantled  rigging,  she  reaches
her  destined  haven.  "  Continue  in  them."  The  sword  may  not  be  so  bright  with  the
silvery  sheen  of  newness ;  the  helmet  may  not  be  so  undinted ;  the  apparel  may  not
be  so  unstained ;  but  the  hero  has  won  the  war,  fought  the  good  fight,  and  finished  his
course. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  IG. — Saving  others.  "  For  in  doing  this  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them
that  hear  thee.'    Not,  of  coiu^se,  as  providing  the  salvation  or  applying  it ;  the  first  is


68  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1-16.

clone  by  the  Saviour,  the  second  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  in  working  out  the  salviaticm
—in  making  use  of  all  Divine  means  and  instrumentalities.

I.  Pebsonal  salvation.  ''Save  thyself;"  for  in  the  heaven-voyage  the  captain
is  not  to  be  lost  while  the  company  and  the  crew  are  saved.  In  this  war  the  enemy
is  not  to  pick  off  the  sentinels  and  the  captains  alone.  No ;  Divine  grace  is  auffident
for  pastor  as  well  as  for  people ;  but  it  would  be  a  terrible  thine — alas  I  not  an  unknown
thing — that  the  minister  who  has  taught  others,  himself  shotud  be  a  castaway.  Next
ioUows —

II.  Thb  salyatiov  of  0THKB8.  **  Them  that  hear  thee.**  A  simple  word,  **  hear."
The  pulpit  must  not  be  the  place  for  the  airing  of  personal  crotchets,  or  the  use  of  arrows
and  shafts  of  mere  wit,  or  tne  discussion  of  mere  critical  themes.  "  The  things  that  ye
have  heard"  are  such  as  the  apostle  defines—august  and  real,  vital  and  eternal  realities.
To  hear  may  seem  a  light  thing,  and  so  it  is  if  the  message  be  light.  But  the  true
minister  does  not  tremble  before  his  audience,  any  more  than  Paul  did  before  Felix.
If  the  congregation  be  his  patron,  he  may  please  them  to  secure  his  living ;  if  they  are
his  iSanAeSftm,  he  may  be  heard  before  tiiem  in  test  of  his  judgments ;  if  they  are  his
puests,  and  not  the  Master's,  he  may  cater  for  a  banquet  suited  to  their  tastes;  but  if  he
is  the  minister  of  Ood  to  them  for  good,  if  woe  is  his  if  he  preach  not  the  gospel,  if
he  has  the  sacred  responsibiUty  of  one  who  is  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel, — then  hearing
is  a  solemn  thing.  On  that  may  hang  character,  influence,  destiny.  He  is  not  there  as
lord  over  Ood's  heritage.  He  is  not  there  to  have  dominion  over  their  faith.  He  appeals
to  reason,  to  conscience,  and  all  that  we  mean  by  heart  and  soul.  But  he  does  not
create  a  gospel  or  propound  some  new  philosophy — ^he  is  to  preach  (ch.  iL  5,  6)  **  one
Ood,  and  one  Mediator  between  Ood  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  yet  Christ
Jesus  the  Lord ;  the  God  who  was  ''  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen
of  angels,  preached  unto  the  Oentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory**
(ch.  iii.  16).  "  And  them  that  hear  thee."  Oars  is  a  solemn  relationship ;  but  it  may
be  a  sweet  and  sublime  one  too.  In  the  feur-away  land  we  may  greet  each  other  as  victors
in  the  same  war,  winners  of  the  same  race,  companions  on  the  same  pilgrimage.  Saved
with  the  ancient  swords  stored  in  the  heavenly  armoury.  Saved,  with  the  great  sea
behind  us  and  Canaan  in  possession,  with  sweeter  grapes  than  those  of  Eshcol,  and  more
triumphant  strains  of  victory  than  those  of  Miriam.  I  say  it  may  bo  so  with  us,  and
with  some  who  have  heard  and  whispered  the  sacred  words  to  themselves  as  on  the
last  pillow  they  went  home  to  God.  The  very  sentence,  "  them  that  hear  thee,"  has
in  it  all  the  pathos  of  the  past,  as  well  as  all  the  realism  of  the  present.  The  lips  that
speak  are  only  those  of  man,  but  the  message  is  the  Word  of  him  who  "  would  have
all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Is  it  true  of  us,
as  we  face  each  other,  that  we  shall  see  one  another  again — yea,  years  to  come — and
that  these  words  may  rise  up  against  preacher,  and  hearers,  or  both  ?  Is  it  true  that
waiting  angels  will  bear  back  the  message,  "This  and  that  man  [woman,  child]  was  bom
there  "  ?  The  living  Church  of  God  is  holy  ground.  Then  truly  we  need  no  meretricious
iiids  to  make  our  ministry  pleasant,  or  to  make  the  Church  harmonize  with  the  age.
Eternity  will  reverse  many  of  the  verdicts  of  time.  Much  of  our  judgment  now  is
touched  and  tarnished  with  the  worldly  ideal.  The  hour  is  coming  when  he  who  said,
**  Go,  .  .  .  and  speak  in  the  temple  ...  all  the  words  of  this  life,"  will  call  us  all
alike  into  his  presence ;  and  then  it  will  be  seen  and  known  before  God  and  the  holy
angels  whether  we  have  both  saved  ourselves  and  them  that  heard  us. — ^W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Timothy  warned.  I.  Apostasy.  "But  the  Spirit  saith  expressly,
that  in  later  times  some  shall  fall  away  from  the  faith."  This  was  to  be  properly  an
apostasy,  or  movement  away  from  Christ  from  within  the  Church.  Some  who  were
proft'ssed  believers  were  to  fall  away  from  the  faith.  They  were  unworthily  to  use  their
Christian  position,  Christian  enli«:htenment  and  reputation,  against  Christ.  This  was
to  take  place  in  "  later  times,"  not  in  the  times  before  the  completion  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  but  simply  in  times  subsequent  to  the  time  that  then  was,  not  all  in  one  time  but,
as  pointincj  to  more  than  one  anti-Christian  development,  in  times.  This  was  explicitly
foretold,  the  prophecy  being  traced,  not  to  the  consciousness  of  the  apostle,  but  to  the
inflatus  of  the  Spirit.  The  prophecy  had  already  been  made  known,  but  we  may  under-
stand that  it  was  still  already  witnessed  in  the  consciousness  of  the  apostle.    If  the


CH.IV.1— IC]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  69

mystery  of  godlioess  was  operating,  there  was  also,  as  announced  in  2  Thessalonians,
alreEuly  operating  the  mystery  of  iniquity.

II.  How  THE  APOSTASY  WAS  TO  BE  BBOUGBT  ABOUT.  1.  SouTcc,  "Giving  heed
to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils."  The  apostle  points  to  the  apostasy  as
having  its  origin  from  beneath.  There  is  the  agency  of  those  who  are  the  tools
of  the  devil.  These  are  seducing  spirits,  their  object  being  to  lead  away  from
Christ.  And  they  are  demons,  hostile  to  souls,  who  give  rise  to  soul-destroying
doctrines.  This  is  the  quarter  from  which  the  apostates  are  to  draw  their  inspiration
and  their  faith.  It  has  been  remarked  here  how  we  cannot  stand  isolated.  If  we  are
not  influenced  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  must  fall  under  the  power  of  one  or  other —
for  they  are  a  plurality,  and  do  not  agree  unless  in  their  end — of  the  deceiving  spirits.
If  we  do  not  give  heed  to  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour— one  and  thoroughly
consii»tent  as  well  as  sublime — we  must  give  heed  to  one  or  other  of  the  doctrines  of
devils,  many  and  inconsistent.  2.  Instrumentality,  '*  Through  the  hypocrisy  of  men
that  speak  lies,  branded  in  their  own  conscience  as  with  a  hot  iron."  The  evil  spirits
are  to  be  thought  of  as  working  in  and  through  these  heretical  teachers^  They  are
hidden  from  our  view  and  from  the  consciousness  of  the  teachers  themselves ;  but  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  those  who  pay  no  heed  to  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit  of
truth  lay  themselves  open  to  be  possessed,  in  an  ordinary  way,  by  one  or  other  of  the
spirits  of  falsehood  whose  instruments  they  become.  The  heretical  teachers  are  suitably
described  as  speakers  of  lies.  They  were  to  give  forth  as  truth  what  were  lies — what
did  not  agree  with  the  nature  of  things,  what  did  not  agree  with  the  nature  of  God,
with  the  facts  of  human  nature,  that  for  which  they  were  without  evidence,  and  of
which  they  had  no  clear  conviction.  They  were  to  be  like  men  wearing  a  mask,  laying
claim  to  superior  sanctity  and  to  show  the  way  to  sanctity,  but  only  to  conceal  their
own  turpitude.  For  they  were  to  be  branded  in  their  own  conscience,  branded  as
criminals  were  branded,  and  branded  where  the  marks  of  their  crimes  could  not  be
concealed  from  themselves.

III.   Two  POlNl'S  IN  THE  HERETICAL  TEACHINa  THAT  WAS  TO  BE  THE  PEBCURSOR  OF

THE  APOSTASY.  "Forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,"
This  asceticism  was  already  appearing  in  Essenism.  The  honourable,  and  even  exagge-
rated, estimate  of  marriage  which  was  characteristic  of  the  Jew,  and  of  the  Pharisee  as
the  typical  Jew,  found  no  favour  with  the  Essene.  Marriage  was  to  him  an  abomina-
tion. Those  Esscnes,  who  lived  together  as  members  of  an  order,  and  in  whom  tlio
principles  of  the  sect  were  carried  to  their  logical  consequences,  eschewed  it  altogether.
To  secure  the  continuance  of  their  brotherhood,  they  adopted  children,  whom  they
brought  up  in  the  doctrines  and  practices  of  the  community.  There  were  others,  how-
ever, who  took  a  different  view.  They  accepted  marriage  as  necessary  for  the  preserva-
tion of  the  race.  Yet  even  with  them  it  seems  to  have  been  regarded  only  as  an
inevitable  evil.  They  fenced  it  off  by  stringent  rules,  demanding  a  three  years'  proba-
tion, and  enjoining  various  purificatory  rites.  The  conception  of  marriage  as  quickening
and  educating  the  affections,  and  thus  exalting  and  refining  human  life,  was  wholly
foreign  to  their  minds.  Woman  was  a  mere  instrument  of  temptation  in  their  eyes,
deceitful,  faithless,  selfish,  jealous,  misled  and  misleading  by  her  passions.  But  their
ascetic  tendencies  did  not  stop  here.  The  Pharisee  was  very  careful  to  observe  the
distinction  of  meats  lawful  and  unlawful,  as  laid  down  by  the  Mosaic  code,  and  even
rendered  those  ordinances  vexatious  bypinute  definitions  of  his  own.  But  the  Esseno
went  far  beyond  him.  He  drank  no  wine,  he  did  not  touch  animal  food.  His  meal
consisted  of  a  piece  of  bread  and  a  single  mess  of  vegetables.  Even  this  simple  tare  was
prepared  for  him  by  special  officers  consecrated  for  the  purpose,  that  it  might  be  free
from  all  contamination.  Nay,  so  stringent  were  the  rules  of  the  order  on  this  point,
that,  when  an  Essene  was  excommunicated,  he  often  died  of  starvation,  being  bound
by  oath  not  to  take  food  prepared  by  defiled  hands,  and  thus  being  reduced  to  eat  the
very  grass  of  the  field  (Lightfoot).  In  Gnosticism,  which  came  to  its  full  development
after  the  apostle's  day,  these  points  had  great  prominence,  beiug  grounded  in  the  idea
of  matter  as  being  the  principle  of  evil.  The  same  points  come  out  ver  remarkably
an  Roman  Catholicism.  The  ordinance  of  marriage,  which  our  Lord  honoured,  is  thus
depreciated  in  a  decree  of  the  Council  of  Trent: ''  Whosoever  shall  say  that  the  married
•tate  is  to  be  preferred  to  a  state  of  virginity  or  celibacy,  and  that  it  is  not  better  and


90  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1— le.

mora  bleoed  to  remain  in  virginity  or  oelibaoy  than  to  bo  Joined  in  marriage,  let  h\m
be  accarsed."  In  the  same  line  fuperior  sanotityy  or  f peoial  merit,  it  connected  with
abatinenoe  from  meats.    Thus  the  piopheoj  reoelTed  atriking  ftdfifansnt.

lY.  Rbfutatiov  of  tbk  seoovd  foint  ni  thx  HnvnoAL  tbaghixo.  1«  PotUioik
to  yghick  it  %$  oppo§ecL  ^  Which  God  created  to  be  reoeiTad  with  thankigiyintf  by  Uiem
that  believe  and  know  the  troth.*  Qod  has  created  meats,  and  he  has  created  them  for
the  use  of  all.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  tme  that  the  purpose  of  creation  is  only  fulfiUed
in  the  case  of  them  that  believe  and  know  the  truth.  Thev  alone  can  appreciate  th»
condition  attached  to  the  use  of  meats,  via.  vecdving  with  thanksgiving.  **  A  bmtish
man  knoweth  not ;  neither  doth  a  fool  imderstand  this."  But  those  that  have  expe-
rience of  the  truth  as  believers  an  sensible  of  their  mercies,  and  give  Qcd  thanka  for
them.  2.  Sitbitaniiatum,  (1)  Broad  princijie.  ^  For  every  creature  of  Gk)d  is  good,
and  nothing  is  to  be  rejected,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving."  This  is  one  broad
prhidple  on  which  practice  is  to  be  based.  *'  And  GKxl  saw  everything  that  he  had
mads,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  We  must  lay  hold — against  a  false  asceticism—
of  the  essential  goodness  of  whatever  Gh>d  has  made  for  food.  It  may  have  to  bo
rafiiiied  on  the  ground  of  health,  on  the  ground  of  moral  disci[^e  as  expressed  in
1  Gor.  ix.  27,  on  the  ground  of  benefit  to  others  as  expressed  in  1  Cor.  viii.  13.  But
apart  from  such  conuderations,  to  which  only  their  due  weight  must  bo  attached,  a
cnature-comfort  as  good  in  itself  has  no  unholiness  to  us,  if  the  condition  is  fulfilled,,
vis.  reoeiviDg  with  thanksgiving.  It  is  a  very  important  consideration,  which  we  must
not  lose  sight  of  in  feeling  the  claims  of  abstinence,  that  by  our  creature-comibrts  Grod
is  seeking  to  make  us  glad,  and  to  attach  us  to  hims^  in  thankfulness.  (2)  Elueidatum
of  the  good  creature  of  Qod  having  no  unholineea  to  us,  **  For  it  is  sanctified  through
the  Word  of  God  and  prayer."  By  conversing  with  Qod  through  his  Word  we  rise  abova
our  own  low  ideas  and  aims,  and  get  into  the  region  of  his  thoughts  and  purposes.  We
get  at  the  principles  which  are  to  regulate  us,  and  the  feelings  which  are  to  animate  us,,
in  our  daily  life.  We  thereby  connect  Qod  with  our  daily  life,  and  are  prepared  for
sitting  down  to  the  meals  of  the  day.  But  we  are  to  connect  Qod  mora  immediately
¥nth  our  meals  by  grayer.  We  are  to  ask  Gk;d,  from  whom  our  table  mercies  come,  to
bless  us  in  the  use  of  them,  and  to  accept  our  thankfulness  for  thom.  Here  is  a  very
(lid  form  of  grace  before  meat :  '*  Blessed  be  thou,  0  Lord,  who  hast  fed  me  from  my
youth,  who  givest  food  to  all  flesh.  Fill  our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness,  that,  having^
always  what  sufficeth,  we  may  abound  unto  all  good  works,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,
through  whom  be  unto  thee  honour,  glory,  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever."  By  such
reasonable  acknowledgment  of  God  before  our  food  ii  it  sanctified  to  us.  We  can
partake  of  It  as  a  holy  thing,  as  that  which  we  have  as  a  covenant  privilege.  Nothing
is  said  about  the  first  point  in  the  heretical  teaching.  But  it  can  be  refuted  on  much
the  same  ground.  God  has  instituted  marriage  for  our  happiness.  The  end  of  the
institution  is  carried  out  in  the  case  of  them  tl^t  believe  and  know  the  truth,  by  their
thanking  Goti  for  the  happiness  which  is  thus  miniRtered  to  them.  The  married  life
is  made  holy  by  being  connected  with  the  Word  of  God  and  prayer. — B.  F.

Vers.  6 — 10. — Outdance  of  Timothy.  I.  As  to  the  true  faith.  1.  Po&itivdy,  **  If
thou  put  the  brethren  in  mind  of  those  things,  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Christ
Jesus,  nourished  in  the  words  of  the  fiftith,  and  of  the  good  doctrine  which  thou  hast
followed  until  now."  The  apostle  has  been  referring  more  immediately  to  the  principles
of  asceticism  which  were  to  nave  their  development  in  subsequent  times.  That  Timothy
should  put  the  brethren  (not  excluding  holders  of  office  like  himself)  in  mind  of  these
things,  was  the  condition  of  his  being  a  good  minister  of  Christ  Jesus.  Whereupon
Paul  takes  occasion  to  give  his  idea  of  *'the  good  minister,"  under  a  particular  aspect.
He  is  one  who  makes  the  Divine  words  his  continual  nourishment.  As  there  are  foods
which  are  nutritive  for  the  body,  so  what  is  nutritive  for  the  soul  is  what  Qod  says  to
us,  especially  about  himself  and  his  feelings  toward  us.  These  Divine  words  are  words
of  faith,  or  words  which  require  faith  for  their  apprehension.  They  are  also  words  of
good  doctrine,  or  words  in  which  instruction  is  given.  It  is  well  that  there  are  infallible
words  for  faith,  and  that  we  are  not  left  to  the  unreliable  guidance  of  reason.  It  is
upon  these  that  teaching  must  be  founded,  if  it  can  be  called  good.  The  good  minister
is  one  who  has  his  own  soul  nourished  in  words  which  he  cordially  believes,  and  ii>


CH.1V.1— IC]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY;  SI

which  he  is  well  instructed,  Paul  had  been  the  instructor  of  Timothy,  and  he  testifies
that  his  instructions  had  hitherto  been  followed  by  him.  2.  Negatively,  '*  But  refuse
profane  and  old  wives'  fables."  The  apostle,  we  may  understand,  refers  to  such  doctrines
of  the  current  philosophy  (mystic  in  its  character)  as,  mingling  with  Christianity^
would  form  what  was  known  as  Gnosticism.  These  doctrines,  such  as  that  of  emana-
tions (endless  genealogies),  were  myths,  or  what  bad  no  foundation  in  reality.  They  were
profane,  or  fitted  to  shock  religious  feeling.  They  were  also  anile,  or  only  fit  for
mindless  and  credulous  old  womoD.  Timothy  was  to  resist  all  tendency  to  incorporate
Eastern  mysticism  with  Christianity.  And,  when  we  consider  the  danger  that  arose  to-
the  Church  from  this  quarter,  we  must  recognize  the  wisdom  of  the  apostolic  advice.

U.  As  TO  THE  HiGHEB  QTMNASTic.  "  And  excrcise  thyself  unto  godliness."  There
was  a  straining  in  connection  with  ascetical  exercises.  Timothy  was  also  to  straiik
himself,  but  in  such  exercises  as  prayer  and  meditation,  which  lead  to  godlioes8,  or  the
cherishing  of  right  feelings  toward  God  and  the  practice  that  is  pleasing  to  him.  1.
Bodily  gymnastic,  *'  For  bodily  exercise  is  profitable  for  a  little."  The  apostle  appa*
rently  has  in  his  eye  such  bodily  exercise  as  was  associated  with  asceticism ;  but  it  is  as
separated  from  asceticism,  not  as  part  of  asceticism,  that  he  says  it  is  proBtable  to  a
sxnall  extent.  Of  asceticism  in  this  century  the  most  notable  example  is  Lacordaire.
"  Once  in  the  convent  at  Chalais,  after  having  delivered  an  affecting  sermon  on  humility,,
he  felt  irresistibly  impelled  to  follow  up  precept  by  example.  He  came  down  from  the
pulpit,  begged  the  assembled  brethren  to  treat  him  with  the  severity  he  deserved,  and^
unooveringhis  shoulders,  received  from  each  of  them  twenty-five  strokes."  ''  The  chapter-
room  of  the  convent  at  Flavigny  was  supported  by  a  wooden  piUar ;  he  made  of  it  a
column  of  flagellation,  to  which,  after  confession,  he  would  cause  himself  to  be  bound."'
*'  In  the  ancient  church  of  the  Carmelites  at  Paris,  there  is  a  certain  crypt  or  subter-
ranean chapel,  in  which,  one  Good  Friday,  he  raised  a  cross,  and,  bound  to  it  with  cords,
remained  upon  it  three  hours."  The  apostle  views  asceticism  in  respect  of  bodily
exercise.  For,  although  it  may  not  always  exalt  it  into  a  religion,  yet  it  lays  great
stress  on  it  as  a  means  of  suppressing  the  corruption  of  the  heart,  of  entering  into*
sympathy  with  the  crucified  Saviour,  and  of  making  atonement  for  the  sins  of  men.
The  apostle  lays  hold  upon  this,  and  says  that  it  is  profitable  to  a  small  extent.  It  is
profitable  for  the  health  of  the  body,  for  the  improvement  of  its  powers,  for  the  obtain-
ing of  a  living.  It  may  even  be  allowed  to  have  a  bearing,  not  by  itself,  but  in  connection
with  right  principle,  on  holy  living  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  2.  The  gymnastic  that  is  universally
profitable.  ''But  godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things."  The  apostle  regards  it  as
recommended  by  its  profitableness.  '*  It  is  that  which  will  exceedingly  turn  to  account,
and  bring  in  gains  unto  us  exceedingly  vast ;  in  comparison  whereto  all  other  designs,
which  men  with  so  much  care  and  toil  do  pursue,  are  very  unprofitable  or  detrimental,
yielding  but  shadows  of  profit  or  bringing  real  damage  to  us.  Godliness  enables  a  man
to  judge  of  things  in  their  true  nature  and  proportions,  and  to  fulfil  his  duties  in  all  hi»
relations.  It  enables  him  to  act  uniformly,  so  that  he  understands  what  he  is  doing,
and  can  make  himself  understood.  It  enables  a  man  to  act  in  his  own  best  interest."
"  If  we  mark  what  preserveth  the  body  sound  and  lusty,  what  keepeth  the  mind  vigorous
and  brisk,  what  saveth  and  improveth  the  estate,  what  upholdeth  the  good  name,  what
guardeth  and  graceth  a  man's  whole  life, — it  is  nothing  else  but  proceeding  in  our
demeanour  and  dealings  according  to  the  honest  and  wise  rules  of  piety."  It  tits  a  man
for  all  conditions,  makes  him  humble,  grateful,  and  faithful  in  prosperity,  makes  a  man
trustful,  and  full  of  comfort  in  adversity.  It  furnishes  us  with  fit  employment,  "  alone
iasteneth  our  thoughts,  afifections,  and  endeavours  upon  occupations  worthy  the  dignity
of  our  nature,  suiting  the  excellency  of  our  natural  capacities  and  endowments,  tending
to  the  perfection  and  advancement  of  our  reason,  to  the  enriching  and  ennobling  of  our
souls."  It  furnishes  us  with  the  best  friendships.  It  is  said  even,  *'  Thou  shalt  be  in
league  with  the  stones  of  the  field,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  with
thee."  It  unites  us  to  good  men  in  holy  communion.  It  makes  our  friends  doubly
precious  to  us.  (1)  Its  profitableness  for  this  life,  "  Having  promise  of  the  life  which
now  is."  Godliness  has  a  tendency  to  promote  a  man*s  earthly  good,  in  making  him
industrious,  temperate,  prudent.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  respects  in  which  it
may  be  said  to  hinder  his  earthly  good.  It  keeps  him  back  from  that  greed  which
would  lead  him  to  devote  his  whole  time  to  worldly  business,  which  would  forbid  him>


^2  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [cii.  iv.  1—16.

to  work  for  others.  It  debars  him  from  seeking  gaia  by  unworthy  means.  It  may
call  upon  him  to  make  liberal  contributions  from  his  income  for  benevolent  objects.  It
tnay  brin?  him  into  a  position  in  which  his  health  is  injured.  It  may  call  upon  him  to
give  up  all  his  goods,  and  even  life  itself.  Yet  it  is  true  that  it  has  the  promise  of  this
life.  '*  Although  God  hath  not  promised  to  load  the  godly  man  with  affluence  of  worldly
things ;  not  to  put  him  into  a  splendid  and  pompous  garb ;  not  to  dispense  to  him  that
which  may  serve  for  pampering  the  flesh  or  gratifying  wanton  fancy ;  not  to  exempt
him  from  all  the  inconveniences  to  which  human  nature  and  the  worldly  state  are  sub-
ject ;  yet  hath  he  promised  to  furnish  him  with  whatever  is  needful  or  convenient  for
him,  in  due  measure  and  season,  the  which  he  doth  best  understand.  His  care  will  not
be  wanting  to  feed  us  and  clothe  us  comfortably,  to  protect  us  from  evil,  to  prosper  our
good  undertakiugs.'*  He  has  promised  that,  if  we  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  all
things  that  certain  to  this  life  shall  be  added  thereto.  With  Christ,  he  has  promised
to  give  us  all  things.  He  has  promised  that  all  things  will  work  together  for  good  to
those  that  love  God.  It  is  the  godly  who  stand  in  a  right  relation  to  this  life.  They
put  the  right  value  upon  it.  They  regard  all  that  they  receive  as  a  gift  from  God,  as
what  they  are  unworthy  of,  as  what  may  be  taken  away  from  them,  as  what  they  ought
to  be  grateful  for,  as  what  they  are  faithfully  to  use  for  God.  (2)  Its  profitableness  jor
ihe  life  to  come.  **  And  of  that  which  is  to  come."  If  the  godly  man  has  the  true
enjoyment  even  of  this  life,  to  him  especially  belongs  the  life  to  come  with  its  inoom-

S^rably  greater  blessings.  He  has  the  inheritance  uncorruptible,  undedled,  never-fading,
e  has  an  exceeding,  even  an  eternal,  weight  of  glory.  He  has  the  beatific  vision  of
God,  the  satisfaction  of  awaking  with  Qod*8  likeness.  Formtda  of  confirmation.
"  Faithful  is  the  saying,  and  worth v  of  all  acceptation."  This  calls  attention  to  what
has  gone  before  as  deserving  of  our  best  consideration.

III.  Upbbabixo  hope.  "  For  to  this  end  we  labour  and  strive,  because  we  have  our
hope  set  on  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe."
With  a  view  especially  to  the  promised  life  to  come,  the  apostle  placed  himself  at  worldly
disadvantage.  Instead  of  consulting  his  ease,  he  toiled.  Instead  of  consulting  his
popularity,  he  suffered  reproach,  as  the  true  reading  is.  Under  this  he  was  borne  np
by  hope,  which  was  set,  not  on  a  dead  idol  which  could  do  nothing,  but  on  the  living
God  who  could  do  all  things  for  him.  He  who  was  able  to  fulfil  his  promise  was  also
disposed.  He  is  designated  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men."  There  is  a  universality  in  his
benevolence.  lie  willeth  that  all  should  be  saved.  And  what  he  has  performed  in
•<Jhrist  has  been  for  all  men.  Ho  has  provided  satisfaction  for  the  sin  of  all  men.  He
has  entered  into  a  covenant  on  behalf  of  all  men.  He  has  procured  competent  aids
for  all  men.  He  has  thus  made  all  men  salvahtles^  capable  of  salvation,  and  salvandos^
that  should  be  saved,  though  all  men  are  not  in  effect  saved.  '^As  he  that  freely
offers  a  rich  boon  is  no  less  to  be  accounted  a  benefactor  and  liberal,  although  his
^ift  be  refused,  than  if  it  were  accepted ;  as  he  that  opens  a  prison  is  to  be  styled  a
deliverer,  although  the  captive  will  not  go  forth;  as  he  that  ministers  an  effectual
remedy,  although  the  patient  will  not  use  it,  deserves  the  honour  and  thanks  due  to
a  physician ;  so  is  God,  in  respect  of  what  he  has  performed  for  men  and  offered  to
them,  to  be  worthily  deemed  and  thankfully  acknowledged  Saviour,  although  not  all
men,  yea,  although  not  one  man,  should  receive  the  designed  benefit."  While  this  is
true,  he  is  the  Saviour  specially  of  them  that  believe.  He  is  our  Saviour  before  we
believe,  but  it  is  when  we  believe  that  we  realize  in  our  personal  experience  all  that  he
is  and  has  done  for  us.  It  is  by  hoping  in  him  as  our  Saviour,  peculiarly,  that  we  arc
borne  up  under  toils  and  reproaches.— B.  F.

Vers.  11 — 16. — Directions  to  Timothy,  I.  Direction  pounded  on  pbecedino  con-
text. "  These  things  command  and  teach."  What  was  enjoined  on  him  he  was  to
hold  up  before  the  community  over  which  he  presided  at  Ephesus.  He  was  to  command,
or  hold  up  before  them,  an  authoritative  standard  of  conduct.  This  was  to  be  charac-
teristically godliness ;  not  a  working  on  the  mere  human  ground,  but  a  bringing  God
anto  connection  with  the  life,  cherishing  proper  feelings  towards  him,  and  observing  his
rules.  He  was  also  to  teach,  or  hold  up  before  them,  revealed  views  of  truth.  While
laying  down  faith  as  the  condition  of  salvation,  he  was  not  to  forget  to  set  forth  God  as
the  Saviour  of  all  men.


CH.  IV.  1^16.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  9^

11.  Direction  with  beferencb  to  his  youth.  "  Let  do  man  deapise  thy  youth ;
bat  be  thoa  an  ensample  to  them  that  believe,  in  word,  in  manner  of  life,  in  love,  in  faith.
in  purity."  Timothy  was  a  youth,  still  living  with  his  parents,  when  Paul  first  took
him  as  his  companion.  After  the  lapse  of  perhaps  fil'teeu  years,  he  is  still  regarded  as
a  young  man.  We  may  understand  that  he  was  stitl  young  for  the  work  entrusted  to
him ;  he  was  young  to  instruct,  and,  it  might  be,  to  exhort  (ch.  v.  1)  elders  (many  of
them  old  men).  A  young  minister  is  placed  in  the  same  position ;  he  has  to  speak  to
men  whose  experience  goes  far  beyond  his.  He  has  in  this  respect  a  difficult  positioa
to  fill,  and  it  becomes  him  to  consider  well  the  course  he  takes,  and,  if  need  be,  to  take
counsel  of  more  experienced  men  in  the  ministry,  so  that  he  shall  have  thus  the  gravity
of  years,  and  shall  give  none  occasion  to  despise  him  on  account  of  bis  youth.  The  idea
of  a  minister  is  that  he  is  to  be  an  ensample  to  them  that  believe,  especially  to  them
over  whom  he  is  placed.  There  are  five  things  in  which  he  is  to  lead  the  way.  The
first  two  go  together.  There  is  the  external  life  of  tuord.  A  minister  is  to  have  the
right  tone  in  his  private  utterances  (what  seem  principally  to  be  referred  to  as  public
utterances  are  introduced  in  the  next  verse) ;  he  is  to  be  able  to  direct  the  minds  o£
others  away  from  trifles  to  important  matters.  There  is  also  the  external  life  of  deed.
His  actions  are  to  go  along  with  his  words ;  he  is  to  give  direction  by  the  very  way  in
which  he  acts.  Word  and  deed  reveal  the  inner  life,  the  motive  forces  of  which  are
next  expressed.  There  is  the  motive  force  of  love.  He  is  impelled  by  love  for  an  unseen.
Saviour,  and  for  souls  purchased  by  him.  There  is  also  the  motive  force  of  faith.  He
is  impelled  by  what  faith  reveals,  viz.  a  Mastor  to  whom  he  is  responsible,  whose
honour  he  is  to  be  careful  of,  whose  reward  for  faithfulness  he  is  earnestly  to  covet..
Thus  moved  in  his  inner  being,  then,  as  the  fifth  and  last  thing,  his  life  is  characterized
\>y  purity.  He  does  not  receive  the  contamination  of  the  world,  but  a  pervading  holy
influence  from  a  source  above  the  world.  The  young  minister  who  seeks  to  go  before
his  people  in  these  five  things  is  taking  the  right  plan  of  placing  himself  above  being
despised  for  his  youth.

IIL  Direction  as  to  his  use  op  the  Scriptures.  "Till  I  come,  give  heed  to-
reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching."  Timothy  was  not  so  much  a  resident  minister
as  Paul's  assistant,  which  involved  his  moving  from  place  to  place.  The  special
arrangement  by  which  he  presided  over  the  central  Church  of  Ephesus  was  to  continue
in  force  until  Paul's  arrival,  which  was  expected  at  no  distant  date.  Meantime  he  was
to  give  his  attention  to  his  public  duties.  There  was  first  of  all  the  reading  of  the
Scriptures,  This  was  carried  down  from  the  Jewish  synagogue,  in  which  the  Old
Testament  Scriptures  were  regularly  read.  And  the  Chrih^tian  Church,  in  the  lifetime
of  the  apostles,  bein^  under  infallible  guidance,  we  can  understand  that  parts  of  the
New  Testament  would  gradually  be  introduced  into  the  Christian  sanctuary.  This
public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  served  a  purpose  then  beyond  what  it  does  now.  There
were  very  few  copies  of  the  sacred  Books  to  be  obtained  then.  Members  of  Churches
were,  therefore,  to  a  great  extent,  dependent  for  their  Bible  knowledge  on  what  was
publicly  read.  Meetings  would  require  to  be  frequent,  and  a  large  place  in  these  meet*
ings  would  require  to  be  given  to  mere  readin?,  in  order  that  the  people  might  become
familiar  with  the  exact  language  of  Scripture.  With  reading  was  associated  exhortation
and  teaching.  We  are  to  understand  this  as  being  on  the  basis  of  what  was  read*
"Scripture  is  the  fountain  of  all  wisdom,  from  which  pastors  ought  to  draw  whatever
they  bring  before  their  flock  "  (Calvin).  There  was  exhortation  to  duty,  or  an  appeal  to
the  feelings,  conscience,  to  influence  men  to  be  decided  for  Christ,  and  to  keep  closely
by  the  Law  of  Chnsr.  And  there  was  teaching  of  truth,  or  the  opening  up  of  Scripture
in  its  facts  and  principles,  to  show  especially  what  Christ  was  and  had  efiectcd  for  them*
It  was  posbible  to  combine  the  hortatory  and  instructive,  though  at  one  time  attention
would  be  directed  more  to  appeals,  at  another  time  more  to  explanations,

IV.  Dikection  as  to  the  use  of  his  gift.  "  Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee,
which  WHS  given  thee  by  prophecy,  with  the  laying-on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery.*^
There  is  reference  to  his  ordination,  which  probably  took  place  years  bff«»re  he  was
assigned  his  present  work  in  Ephesus.  At  that  interesting  time  the  ministerial  gift,
or  the  power  of  governin<;  and  the  power  of  handling  the  Woixi,  was  im|>arted  to  him'.
Not  that  he  was  altogether  without  qualification  before;  for  there  were  pro|hecies  going
before  on  him,  apparently  founded  on  the  proof  that  he  was  making  of  himself.    But-


■94  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  iv.  1—16.

then,  in  all  its  authoritatiTeirasB,  and  in  the  Mows  of  the  qnalifioatioti  in  a  special
influence  of  the  Spirit,  the  eift  was  imparted  to  him.  There  were  two  ooexistent  dr-
■oomstanoes  which  entered  mto  the  orainatlan.  The  first  was  whraordinary  in  its
nature,  viz.  prophecy,  or  any  inspired  utterance.  Apparently  It  amounted  to  an
intimation  to  the  assemhled  congregation  that  Timothy  was  really  called,  and  there
4md  then  fully  endowed.  The  seoond  concomitant,  or  drcumst^noe  entering  into  the
ordination,  was  the  kying-on  of  the  Imnds  of  the  preshytery.  This  was  ordinary,  and
therefore  continues  to  he  connected  with  ordination,  prophecy  hung  represented  by  the
ordination  prayer  and  address.  The  preshyterr  then  apparently  consisted  of  the  elders
of  the  particular  congregation  in  connection  with  which  the  ordination  took  pboe.  As
we  learn  from  the  Second  Epistle,  Fkiul  was  associated  with  them.  It  is  to  be  noted
that  ruling  elders  took  part  in  ordaining  a  teaching  elder.  The  imposition  of  hands  is
symbolic  oi  the  impartation  of  a  gift  Christ  emiuoys  those  who  hk^e  been  themselTes
|dfted  by  him  to  be  the  medium  of  imparting  his  gift  to  others.  The  ministerial  gift
Thnothy  was  not  to  neglect  or  to  allow  to  be  unused.  We  have  read  of  fishes  inhabiting
the  water  of  a  dark  cave  that,  never  needing  to  use  their  eyes,  eventually,  after  successive
generations  of  them,  a  modification  has  been  produced  in  their  organism.  And  there
not  being  the  need,  nature  has  ceased  to  make  provision  for  it,  the  strange  spectacle
bdng  presented  of  an  eyeless  race.  So,  for  want  of  use,  pleading  for  Christ  would  become
a  lost  sift  to  him.

v.  DiBBcnoN  AS  TO  HiB  AFPLTiiro  HIMSELF.  "Be  diligent  in  these  things;  give
thyself  wholly  to  them ;  that  thy  progress  may  be  manifest  unto  all.**  Paul  had  not
the  idea  that  a  oommimication  of  the  Holy  Spirit  superseded  application.  After  saying
that  the  gift  in  Timothy  was  not  to  lie  unused,  he  now  says  that  he  was  to  be  diligent
in  these  tilings,  viz.  in  the  duties  of  his  calling,  as  set  down  in  the  thirteenth  verse.
And,  in  the  way  of  strengthening  this,  he  adds  tiiat  he  was  to  give  himself  whoUy  to
them.  A  minister  has  to  make  himself  thoroughly  acouainted  with  the  meaning  of
Scripture,  in  order  that  he  may  open  it  to  others.  He  has  to  know  how  to  apply
Scripture  truth  to  the  wants  of  his  peonle,  that  he  may  incite  them  to  right  aotioo.
This  he  cannot  well  do  along  with  tne  demands  of  a  secular  business.  He  needs  to
have  his  whole  time  to  devote  to  it,  and  he  needs,  in  the  time  that  he  has,  to  put  out
to  purpose  his  whole  strcDgth.  Close  application  will  soon  tell.  His  profiting  will
Appear  in  a  more  skilful  handling  of  the  Word,  in  a  more  earnest  pleading  with  souls.

Vl.  Recapitulation  with  enforcement.  "Take* heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy
teaching.  Continue  in  these  things ;  for  in  doing  this  thou  shalt  save  both  thyself  and
them  that  hear  thee."  He  first  recapitulates  what  was  said  in  ver.  12.  "  Take  heed  to
thyself."  A  mioister  is  to  take  heed  to  himself,  that  be  is  really  a  subject  of  saving
grace,  that  he  is  making  satisfactory  increase  in  grace,  that  his  conduct  does  not  run
counter  to  his  teaching.  Ho  next  recapitulates  what  is  said  in  ver.  13.  '*  And  to  thy
teaching;."  A  minister  is  to  see  that  he  makes  every  endeavour  to  bring  out  the  mean-
ing of  the  Word  of  God,  and  to  bring  it  to  bear  upon  the  wants  of  his  hearers.  Having
thus  recapitulated,  he  makes  it  stronger  by  adding,  "  Continue  in  these  things,"  viz.
In  his  private  and  public  exercises.  And  a  minister  is  encouraged  to  do  this  by  the
consideration  that,  in  doing  this,  he  shall  save  the  souls  of  them  that  hear  him.  He
shall  reach  his  end ;  and  what  a  felicity  to  be  the  means,  under  God,  of  saving  souls !
He  can  only  expect  to  do  this  by  exacting  from  himself  a  high  standard  of  living  and
of  preaching.  And,  through  this,  he  shall  reach  the  end  of  his  own  salvation.  He  has
to  win  or  lose,  as  well  as  his  hearers.  "  And  many  shall  say  at  that  day,  Lord,  have  we
not  prophesied  in  thy  Name  ?  "  who  shall  be  answered  with,  "  I  never  knew  you ;  depart
from  mc,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  He  has  the  same  evil  heart  to  contend  with.  *'  Sin
dwelleth  in  us  when  we  have  preached  never  so  much  against  it ;  one  degree  prepareth
the  heart  for  another,  and  one  sin  inclineth  the  mind  to  more."  He  may  expect  to  be
more  severely  tempted  than  others,  as  the  honour  of  Christ  lies  more  on  him  than  on
others. — R.  F.


«H.  V.  1 — ^26.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOl'HY.


95


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.


Ver.  1. — Exhort  for  intreatf  A.V. ;  and
•omitted.  Rebuke  not  (jiii  iirnrK'fi^rjB);  only
here  in  the  New  Testament  for  the  more
usual  iwtrtfidM  (2  Tim.  iv.  2,  and  fre-
quently in  the  Gospels)  or  ^Afyx^>  ^  Titus
i.  13;  ii.  15;  Rev.  iii.  19,  and  elsewhere.
Jjk  olasBical  Greek  it  expresses  a  sharp  casti-
gation  with  words.  Compare  the  **patrufe
verbera  lingua  "  (Hor., '  Od.,*  iii.  xU.  3).  It
answers  to  the  Latin  objurqo.  An  elder
<vp(9jSirr^py).  The  context  shows  that  the
meaning  is  not  a  **  presbyter,"  but  **  an  old
man.**  The  precept  has  relation  to  Timothy's
youth  (ch.  iv.  12).  See  the  same  order  in
reepeot  to  the  persons  to  be  admonished
<Titu8  iL  1 — 6,  where,  however,  we  have  the
fonoB  irp^afi^ras  and  vptafivriias  with  p4as
and  w€9tT4povs).  The  direction  is  an  instance
of  that  admirable  propriety  of  conduct,
based  upon  a  true  charity,  which  vital
Christianity  produces.  A  true  Christian
never  forgets  what  is  due  to  others,  never
**  behaves  nhnself  unseemly."  Exhort  (irapa-
iccCAci);  certainly  a  much  better  rendering
than  inireat  in  the  A.V.  The  yoxuiger  men.
This  and  the  other  accusatives  in  this  and
the  following  verse  are  governed  by  irapa'
tedKti ;  the  prohibitive  fi^  iiriirK'titTis  is  con-
fined to  the  •Kptfffivripou  As  brethSren.  This
phrase  shows  that  Timothy  was  still  a  young
man  himself.  Observe,  too,  how  even  in
reproving  the  sense  of  love  is  to  be  main-
tained. The  members  of  the  Church  over
Which  he  rules  are  either  fathers  and
mothers,  or  brothers  and  sisters,  or,  it  may
he  added,  as  his  own  children,  to  the  faithful
pastor.

Ver.  2.— Jn  for  ttM'M,A.V.  Pnrity(d7if«ra);
see  ch.  iv.  12,  note.  See  how  jealously  the
apostle  guards  against  any  possibility  of
abuse  of  the  familiar  intercourse  of  a  clergy-
man with  the  women  of  his  flock.  They  are
his  sisters,  and  ayvtiio  is  to  be  the  constant
condition  of  his  heart  and  character.

Ver.  3. — Honour  (rf/io).  The  use  of  the
verb  rifiita  in  the  comment  on  the  fourth
commandment  in  Matt  xv.  4 — 6,  where  the
withholding  of  the  honour  duo  consists  in
saying,  "  It  is  corban,  by  whatsoever  thou
raightest  be  profited  by  me,"  and  so  with-
holding the  honour  due,  shows  clearly  that
in  the  notion  of  honouring  is  included  that
material  support  which  their  condition  as
widows  required.  So  again  in  ver.  17  of  this
chapter,  the  "  double  honour  "  due  to  ciders
who  labour  in  the  Word  and  doctrine  is
<*learly  sliown  by  ver.  18  to  include  payment
for  their  maintenance.  This  is  also  borne
out  by  the  frequent  use  of  ti/a^  in  the  soDse


of  **  price  "  (Matt,  xxvil.  C,  9;  Acts  iv.  84;
viL  IC;  xix.  19;  1  Cor.  vi.  20,  etc.).  The
passage  might,  therefore,  be  paraphrased,
**Pay  due  regard  to  the  wants  of  tiiose
widows  who  are  widows  indeed."  The
**  honour"  here  prescribed  would  be  exactly
the  opposite  to  the  *' neglect"  (irapc^cw
povvro)  complained  of  by  the  Grecian  Jewi
(Acts  vi.  1).  The  same  idea  is  in  the  Latin
honorarium,  for  a/ee.  Widowf  indeed;  i.0.
really,  as  in  vers.  5  and  16,  desolate  and
alone.  We  learn  from  this  passage  that  the
care  of  widows  by  the  whole  Church,  which
began  at  Jerusalem  in  the  very  infancy  of
the  Church,  was  continued  in  the  Churches
planted  by  St  Paul.  We  find  the  same  in-
stitution though  somewhat  different  in
character,  in  subseauent  ages  of  the  Church.
Widowhood,  as  well  as  vir^nity,  became  a
religious  profession,  and  widows  wore  ad-
mitted with  certain  ceremonies,  indudinfi^
the  placing  on  their  heads  a  veil  oonseorated
by  the  bishop.  Deaconesses  were  very  fre-
quently chosen  from  the  ranks  of  the  widows
(Bingham,  *  Antiq.,'  bk.  vii.  ch.  iv.).

Ver.  4. — Hath  for  have,  A.V.;  grand'
children  for  nephews,  A.V. ;  towards  their
ovon  family  for  at  home,  A.V. ;  this  for  that,
A.V. ;  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  for  good  and
acceptable  before,  A.V.  and  T.R.  Orandp
children  (^^Kyoya;  only  here  in  the  New
Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in
classical  Greek);  descendants,  children  or
grandchildren  (as  on  the  other  hand,  trpAyopoi
in  this  verse  includes  grandparents  as  well
as  parents).  In  Latin  nepotes,  **  descend-
ants ; "  nos  neveux  (in  French),  **  our  de-
scendants;'* and  so  Iho  English  word
"nephews"  (derived  from  neposy  through
the  French  neveu)  properly  means,  and  is  com-
monly so  used  in  all  old  English  writers,  as
e.g.  in  Holinshed  (Richardson's  Dictionary),
**  their  nephews,  or  sons*  »ons,  which  reigned
in  the  third  place."  Locke*s  phrase,  "a
nephew  by  a  brother,"  seems  to  show  the
transition  to  the  modem  use  of  *^  nephew."
But  as  the  old  meaning  of  "nephews"  iH
now  obsolete,  it  is  better  to  substitute
"  grandchildren,"  as  in  the  B.V.  Let  tiiem
learn.  Clearly  "the  children  or  grandchil-
dren "  is  the  subject.  To  show  piety  towards
(fiffff&uv).  In  the  only  other  passage  in
the  New  Testament  where  this  word  occurs.
Act:}  xvii.  23,  it  has  also  an  accusative  of
the  person  — *•  whom  ye  worship."  In  classioal
Greek  also  evtrtfifiy  rtva  is  used  as  well  as
C15,  or  irtp\,  or  vpht,  rtva.  Their  own  funily,
of  which  the  widowc<l  mother  or  grand-
mother formed  a  part.  The  force  of  rhy
SZiov  oIkov,  "  their  own  family,"  lies  in  the
implied  contrast  with  the  Church.    As  long


00


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY;


[oh.  y.  1— 25»


at  a  widow  hat  momben  of  her  own  house
who  are  able  to  rapport  her,  the  Church
ought  not  to  be  burdened  (aee  rer.  16).  To
requite  (hfioifiiit  iatoBlSopm):  literally,  to
ffiw  hack  the  return  or  exchange  due.  'AfioiiS^
If  only  found  here  in  the  Mew  Tea tameot,
but  la  not  uncommon  in  the  LXX.,  and  ia
miMh  naed  in  the  be»t  dassical  authora.
The  wp&yopoi  had  nouriahed  and  cared  for
them  in  tiieir  childhood ;  they  must  requite
that  care  bv  honouring  andaupportiog  them
in  their  old  age.  Thia  if  aooeptable  (dir^Scir-
Tor) :  only  here  in  the  New  Testament  or
LIULt  and  rarely  if  ever  in  classical  Greek.
The  aame  idea  is  expressed  in  ch.  i.  15,  by
wdfffis  &ro8ox^f  l^<of,  and  in  1  Pet  ii.  19,
20,  by  x<^<'*  Tovro  x^tp^*  ««>P^  ^fpt  ''Thia
if  acceptable  with  God.**

Ver.  6.-~IIath  her  hop§  $et  on  tot  trwteth
im,  A.y,  A  widow  indeed  (see  ver.  3).
Daaolata  (jitiMvwtiivyi ;  only  here  in  the  New
Teatament,  rare  in  Greek  yersions  of  Old
Testumentv  frequent  in  classical  Greek);
literally,  left  olons,  or  made  eolitary,  which
ia  also  the  exact  meaning  of  ^desolate,"
from  eolun,  alone.  A  widow  with  children
or  grandchildren  able  to  support  her  is  not
filtogether  desolate.  As  regards  the  connect-
ing 8^,  rendered  ^now"  both  in  the  A.y.
and  the  B.  V.,  Bishop  Ellicott  rightly  rendera
it  **but"  The  apostle  is  contrasting  the
condition  of  the  firrwi  x^P^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^7
God  to  look  to  for  help,  and  who  passes  her
time  in  prayer,  with  tnat  of  the  widow  with
children  and  grandchildren.  The  second
**but"  in  vor.  6  is  no  real  objection;  the
widow  who  **  giveth  herself  to  pleasure  "  is
oontrasted  in  her  turn  with  the  devout
prayerful  widow  whose  conduct  has  just
been  described.  The  inference  intended  to
be  drawn,  as  Ellicott  justly  remarks,  is  that
the  one  is  eminently  fit,  and  the  other
eminently  unfit,  to  be  supported  at  the  com-
mon charge  of  the  Ghurcn.  Hath  her  hope
set  on  God  (see  ch.  iv.  10).  Snpplicationfl
and  prayers  (see  ch.  ii.  1,  note).  Night  and
day.  Perhaps  by  night  and  by  day  would
express  the  genitive  better  (Matt.  ii.  14;
huko  xviii.  7),  as  indicating  time  when,
rather  than  time  how  long.  In  Luke  ii.  37,
Anna  tho  prophetess  is  said  to  worship
**  with  fastings  and  supplications  night  and
day  (y^iera  mX  iifi^paw),"  where  the  accusa-
tiye  conveys  rather  more  the  notion  of
vig^s  prolonged  through  the  night  As
regards  the  order  of  the  words,  *'day  and
night,"  or  "  night  and  day,"  there  seems  to
be  no  rule.  St.  Murk  always  has  "night
and  day"  (iv.  7;  y.  5);  ISt.  Luke  uses
both(ii.  37;  xviiL  7;  AcU  ix.  24;  xx.
81;  xxvi.  7).  St  Paul  alwiiys  "night
and  day,"  as  in  this  passage  (Acts  xx.  31 ;
1  Thess.  ii.  9;  iii.  10;  2  Thess.  iii.  8;  2
Tim.    i.    3).    St  John  always  **day  and


night"  (Bey.  iy.  8;  yiL  15;  xlL  10;  xiy.
11:  ZZ.10).

Ver.  e,—Giveih  hendf  to  tar  Uveih  in^
Ajy,  Oiyeth  herself  to  pleaanre  (^  mrara-
X«0'a);  only  here  and  Jas.  y.  5  (J<nrarax4-
rar«,  ** taken  your  pleasure,"  B.V.,  •'been
wanton,"  A.Y.)  in  the  New  Tebtament,  but
found  (as  well  as  oworiUii  and  awdroKos)  in
Eoduf.  zxL  15,  and  in  Polybius  (Liddell  and
Scott).  Trench  (*  Synon}ins  of  New  Testa-
mentt'  p.  191)  oompares  and  oontraats  vroir
ricfw,  Tpv^diw,  and  emn-aXdmf  and  aaya  that
the  latter  includes  the  idea  of  prodigality.
The  word  brings  into  the  strongest  possible
oontrast  the  widow  who  was  like  Anna,  and
ttioae  whom  St.  Paul  here  denounces.  Ia
dead  while  she  liretli;  or,  ha$  died  (is  dead)
in  her  lifetime.  She  is  dead  to  God,  and,  aa
Alford  suggests,  is  no  longer  a  living  mem-
ber of  the  Ghurch  of  Christ  Compare  St.
Jude's  expression  ** twice  dead"  (ver.  12).
The  expression  in  Bey.  iii.  1  is  different,
unless  ijktffa  here  can  haye  the  same  meau-
inpf  as  IroyM  fx«  ^(  CSt  *'  though  nominally
alive  as  a  Christian,"  etc.

Ver.  7. — Theee  thingi  aleo  command  for
and  theee  thinge  give  in  charge^  A.Y, ;  tri^.
oui  reproach  for  blameleee,  A.Y.  These
things,  etc.  The  apostle  had  been  giving
Timothy  his  own  instructions  concerning
widows  and  their  maintenance  by  their  own
relations.  He  now  adds  the  direction  that
he  should  give  these  things  in  charge  to  the
Ephesian  Churoh,  lest  they  should  be  guilty
and  blameworthy  by  acting  in  a  different
spirit.  He  probably  was  aware  of  a  disposi-
tion existing  in  some  quarters  to  throw  the
burden  of  maintaining  their  widows  upon
the  Church.  Without  reproaeh  (&ycv(xi7.
irroi);  above,  ch.  iii.  2,  note.  If  they  did  not
so  they  would  be  liable  to  the  terrible  re-
proach mentioned  in  ver.  8,  that  Christians
as  they  called  themselves,  they  were  in  their
conduct  worse  than  unbelievers.

Ver.  8. — Provideth  for  procide,  A.Y.;  his
otcn  houtehold  for /or  those  of  his  oitm  house^
A.Y.  and  T.B. ;  unbeliever  for  infidel,  A.Y.
Provideth  (irpoyoc?).  Elsewliere  in  tlie  Now
Testament  only  in  Bom.  xii.  17  and  2  Cor.
viii.  21,  where  it  bus  an  accusative  of  tho
thing  provided ;  h«-re,  as  in  classical  Greek,
with  a  genitive  of  tlie  person;  frequent  ir\
the  LXX.,  and  still  mora  so  in  classical
Greek.  The  »>ub>tHntive  irpowoia  occurs  in
Acts  xxiv.  2  and  Bom.  xiii.  14.  His  own
household ;  because  in  many  cases  the  widow
would  be  actunlly  living  in  the  house  of  her
child  or  grandchild.  But  even  if  she  were
not  filial  duty  would  prompt  a  proper  pro-
vision for  her  wants  He  hath  denied  the
faith ;  yiz.  by  repudiating  those  duties  which
tho  Christian  faith  required  of  him  (see  Eph.
vi.  1—3).

Yer.  9. — Let  none  he  enrolled  as  a  widow


CH.  V.  1 — 25.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


97


for  let  not  a  voidoio  he  talceti  into  the  number ^
A.V.  Let  none  be  enrolled,  etc.  The
proper  translation  seems  certainly  to  be
(Lllicott,  Alford,  Huther,  etc.)*  let  a  tcoman
he  enrolled  <u  a  vndow  not  under  sixty  years
old;  i.e.  xhp^  is  the  predicate,  not  the  sub-
ject.  It  follows  that  the  word  "widow"
here  is  used  in  a  slightly  different  sense
from  that  in  the  preceding  verses,  viz.  in
the  technical  sense  of  one  belonging  to  the
order  of  widoics,  of  which  it  appears  from
the  word  icoTaA.€7^(r0«  there  was  a  regular
roll  kept  in  the  Church.  Wo  do  not  know
enough  of  the  Church  institutions  of  the
apostolic  age  to  enable  us  to  say  positively
what  their  status  or  their  functions  were,
but  doubtless  thoy  were  the  germ  from
which  the  later  development  (of  which  see
Bingham,  bk.  vii.  ch.  iv.)  took  its  rise.  We
may  gather,  however,  from  the  passage  before
U8  that  their  lives  were  specially  consecrated
to  the  service  of  God  and  the  Church ;  that
they  were  expected  to  be  instant  and  cun-
Ktant  in  prayer,  and  to  devote  themselves  to
works  of  charity ;  that  the  apostle  did  not
approve  of  their  marrying  again  after  their
having  embraced  this  life  of  widowhood,  and
therefore  would  have  none  enrolled  under
sixty  years  of  age ;  and  generally  that,  once
on  the  rolU  they  would  continue  there  for
their  life,  ^urolled  (KaraXcyfcreof) ;  only  here
in  the  New  TestuTnent  or  (in  this  sense)  in
the  LXX. ;  but  it  is  the  regular  classical
word  for  enrolling,  enlisting,  soldiers,  etc.
Hence  our  word  "catalogue."  In  like
manner,  in  the  times  of  the  Empress  Helena,
the  virgins  of  the  Church  are  described  as
ityaytypafxfifvas  iu  rtp  ttjs  iKKXjjfflas  Kav6vt
(Socr.,  i.  17),  "registered  in  the  Church's
register,"  or  list  of  virgins.  Under  three
soore  yeaiB  old.  A  similar  rule  was  laid  down
in  several  early  canons,  which  forbade  the
yelling  of  virgins  before  the  ageof/or/y.  This
care  to  prevent  women  from  being  entangled
by  TOWS  or  engagements  which  they  had
not  well  considered,  or  of  which  they  did
not  know  the  full  force,  is  in  striking  con-
trast with  the  system  which  allows  young
girls  to  make  irrevocable  vows.  The  par-
ticiple ytyovvia^  "being,"  belongs  to  this
clause  (not  as  in  the  A.V.  to  the  following
one),  as  Alford  clearly  shows,  and  as  the
B.V.  also  indicates,  by  putting  having  heen
in  italics;  though  it  does  not  translate
ytyoyvia  in  this  clause,  unless  possibly  the
word  **old"  is  considered  as  representing
ytyoyvia.  It  should  be,  Let  none  he  en-
rolled  as  tcidows,  being  under  sixty  years  of
age.  The  wife  of  one  man;  sec  above,
ch.  iiL  2,  the  similar  phrase,  "  the  husband
of  one  wife  "  (which  likewise  stands  without
any  participle),  and  the  note  tiiere.  To
which  may  bo  added  that  it  is  hardly  con-
ceivable that  8t.  Paul  should  witiiin  the
I.  TIMOl'UT,


compass  of  a  few  verses  (see  ver.  14)  recom-
mend the  marriage  of  young  widows,  and
yet  make  the  fact  of  a  second  marriage  an
absolute  bar  to  a  woman  being  enrolled
among  the  Church  widows.

Ver.  \0.—Haih  for  have^  A.V.  (five  times) ;
used  hospitality  to  for  lodged^  A.V.  W^
reported  of  (jxapTvpovp,4prj ;  see  ch.  iii.  7  and
note).  This  use  is  frequent  in  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  (vii.  8  ;  xi.  2,  4,  5,  39),  also
in  3  John  G,  12.  Oood  works  {fpyots  Ka\otf).
The  phrase  occurs  frequently  in  the  pastoral
Epistles,  both  in  the  singular  and  in  ^e
plural  (ch.  ii.  10;  iii.  1;  in  this  Terse;
ver.  25 ;  vi.  18 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  21 ;  iii.  17 ;  Titu»
i.  16 ;  ii.  7, 14 ;  iii.  1. 8, 14).  Our  Lord  had
first  used  the  phrase,  and  taught  how  "  good
works  "  were  to  be  the  distinctive  marks  of
his  disciples  (Matt.  v.  16),  as  they  were
evidences  of  his  own  mission  (John  x.  32,
33).  It  denotes  all  kinds  of  good  actions  a»
distinguished  from  sentiments.  Love,  e.g,  is
not  a  good  tcork.  Feeding  the  hungry  and
clothing  the  naked  and  visiting  the  sick
are  good  worJts  (see  Matt.  xxv.  35,  etc.).
Brought  np  children  (jlrtKvorp6<prtfftv) ;  only
hero  in  the  New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but
found,  as  well  as  rfKvoTpo<pia,  in  Aristotle^
The  word  must  mean  "  brought  up  children
of  her  own,"  because  rUvov  does  not  mean
"  a  child  "  with  reference  to  its  ago,  but  "  a.
child"  with  reference  to  its  parent  who
baro  it.  The  only  apparent  exception  in
Holy  Scripture  is  1  These,  ii.  7,  where
the  nurse's  alumni  are  called  "her  own
children,"  but  obviously  this  is  no  real
exception.  The  classical  usage  is  the  same.
We  must,  therefore,  understand  the  apostle
hero  to  mean  "  if  she  hath  brought  up  her
children  well  and  carefully,  and  been  a  good
mother  to  them."  The  precept  corresponds
to  that  laid  down  for  an  iiclffKoiros  in  ch.  iii.
4.  Possibly,  as  Grotius  suggests,  a  contrast
may  be  intended  with  the  conduct  of  some
heathen  mothers,  who,  if  they  were  very
poor,  exposed  their  children.  Used  horai-
tality  to  (JifvoZ6xf](rfv)\  only  hero  in  the
New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but,  as  well  as
^€voZ6kos  and  {ci'oSox^a,  not  uncommon  in
classical  Greek.  The  common  form  in  the
New  Testament  is  ^tvlitar,  (For  the  in-*
culcation  of  hospitality,  see  ch.  iii.  2,  note,
and  3  John  5.)  Washed  the  saints'  feet  (see
John  xiii.  5---8;  and  comp.  Luke  viL  44^
where  the  omission  to  provide  water  ta
wash  the  feet  of  a  guest  is  reprobated  as
inhospitable).  The  saints  (Kom.  xii.  13).r
Hath  relieved  (^mf^icco-cv) ;  only  here  and
twice  in  ver.  16  in  the  New  Testament,  and
in  1  Mace.  viii.  26  and  xi.  35 ;  but  common
in  classical  Greek.  The  afi^ted  (ro7r
6Aii3ouf Voij) ;  used  of  any  kind  of  troublo
or  afflictions  (JUXi^is) ;  compare,  for  the  pre-
cept, Kom.  xiii.    15.    Diligently   followed

n


98


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,


[CH,  V.  1—25.


ihniKoxMnv,  oomp.  1  Pet  ii.  21).  Tho
idea  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  **  press-
ing on  toward  the  goal,"  in  Phil.  iii.  14
(see  also  ver.  12,  whore  Mim  is  rendered  in
A. v.,  *•  I  foUow  after  ").  Goodworit  Here
$oym  iyoB^,  as  in  Acts  ix.  86 ;  Rom.  ii  7,
10;  xiii.  3;  2  Cor.  ix.  8;  Eph.  it  10;  and
frequently  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  (oh.  ii
10).

Ver.  11. — Tountfer  for  the  younger,  AJV.;
wuced  for  begun  to  toox,  A.V. ;  deiire  to  for
ftfill^  A.V.  Seft&so.  Note  the  wisdom  of
Paul,  who  will  not  have  tho  young  widows
Admitted  into  the  roll  of  Church  widows,
lest,  after  the  first  grief  for  tho  loss  of  their
husbands  has  subsided,  they  should  change
their  minds,  and  wish  to  return  to  the  wond
and  its  pleasures,  and  so  incur  the  guilt  of
drawing  back  their  hands  from  the  plough.
Would  that  the  Church  had  always  imitated
this  wisdom  and  this  consideration  for  the
young,  whether  young  priests  or  young
monks  and  nuns!  Waxed  wanton  against
iKvrarrfniyida'mai),  This  word  only  occurs
here,  but  the  simple  arpriytdat  is  found  in
Rot.  xriii.  7, 9,  and  is  used  by  tho  Greek  poets
of  the  new  comedy  in  the  sense  of  rpv^y,  to
be  luxurious  (Sctilcusuer,  *Lex.').  Trench
<*  S3ruoDym8  of  New  Testament '),  comparing
this  word  with  rpv^a»  and  (nraToAoy,  ascribes
to  it  the  sense  of  **  petulance  "  from  fulness,
like  tiie  state  of  Jeshurun,  who  waxed  fat
and  kidded  (Dcut.  xxxii.  15)  ;  and  so  Liddell
and  Scott  give  tho  sense  of  **to  be  over-
atrong."  The  sense,  therefore,  is  that  these
young  widows,  in  the  wantonness  and  un-
subdued worMlinessof  their  hearts,  reject  the
yoke  of  Christ,  and  kick  against  tho  'Widow's
life  of  prayer  and  supplication  duy  and  night.
And  so  they  return  to  tho  world  and  its
pleosiures,  which  thi  y  had  renounced.

Ver.  12. — Condtmnation  for  damnation^
A.V. ;  rejected  for  cast  off,  AV.  Condemna-
tion ;  Kplfia,  variously  traiislaU'd  in  tho  A. Y.
"damnation,"  "condemnation,"  and  "judg-
ment." Tho  won!  means  a  **ju(jgment,"
** decision,"  or  "sentence,"  but  g»noraliy  an
adverse  sentence,  a  "  condemnation."  And
this  is  the  meaning  of  tho  English  word
«*  damnation,"  which  has  only  recently
acquired  the  signification  of  "  eternal  dam-
imtion."  Rejected  (Tjacrt^o-av) ;  lircrany,  have
set  aside,  or  displaced,  and  hence  disregarded,
an  oath,  treaty,  pmmise,  or  tno  like.  In  the
A.V.  variously  n-ndered  **  reject,"  "  despise,"
"  bring  to  nothing,"  "  frustrate,"  "  dis-
annul," "oust  oflf."  The  K^t/ia  which  tlieso
widows  brought  n])on  themselves  was  that,
whereas  they  iiad  devoted  them>clves  to  a
life  of  prayer  and  bpecial  servieo  of  the
Church,  they  had  now  set  usido  tiiis  their
iirat  faith,  and  retumttl  to  tho  ordinary
plcASurcs  Olid  avocations  of  the  world.
.  Ver.  13. — Also  to  be  lor  to  he,  A.V.;  going  I


for  wandering,  A.Y.  Also  seems  unneoessary,
as  "withal"  seems  to  represent  &fUL  iml.
Leam  to  be  idla  (ipyat  ftapedpovaa^).  This
is  a  construction  which  has  no  similar
passage  in  Greek  to  support  it,  except -one
very  doubtful  one  in  Plato,  ^Euthudemus*
(yoL  iv.  p.  105,  Bekker's  edit).  But  the
other  constructions  proposed,  yix.  to  con-
strue fioMitoueg,  **  they  are  inquisitiTe,  or,
curious,"  as  Grotius  and  substantially  Ben-
gel  ;  or  to  take  w^pupx^/ityeu  after  fuufSdirovn,
"they  leam  to  go  about"  (Vulgate,  De
Wettc,  etc),  cannot  be  justified  by  examples
either,  as  fuufOdyttw  has  always  either  an
aoousative  case  or  an  infinitive  mood  after  it,
unless  it  is  used  in  quiteadifierent  sense,  as
in  the  passage  from  Uerod.,  liL  1,  quoted  by
Alford:  AiafitfiknfjJvos . .  •  ob  futp6d^tis,**Y<m
are  slandered  without  being  aware  of  it"
In  this  difficulty  it  is  best  to  take  the  sense
giyen  in  the  A.V.  and  the  B.V.,  following
Chrysostom,  etc,  and  of  modems  Winer,
Ellioott,  Alford,  etc,  which  the  general  turn
and  balance  of  the  sentonce  favours.  Going
about  (wtpttpx^furat);  com  p.  Acts  xxix.  13,
where  there  is  the  same  idea  of  reproach  in
the  term.  It  is  used  in  a  good  sense  in
Heb.  xi.  87.  Tattlers  (^A^apot) ;  only  hero
in  the  New  Testament  ftud  once  only  in  the
LXX.  (4  Maoc.y.  10),  but  common  in  classical
Greek.  It  means  "a  trifling  siUy  talker."
The  verb  ^\vap4w  occurs  in  3  John  10.  Bnsj-
bodist  (wtplfpyoi);  only  hero  and  Acts  xix.
19  in  the  New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but
not  uncommon  in  classical  Greek,  in  the
sense  in  which  it  is  used  here.  The  verb
wtpi9pyd(€a$ai  occurs  in  2  Thess.  iii  11  in
the  same  sense, "  meddling  with  what  docs
not  concern  you."

Ver.  14. — Desire  for  wilU  A.V. ;  toidoies
(in  italic:})  for  tromefi,  A.V. ;  rule  tJie  house-
hold for  guide  the  house,  A.V. ;  for  reviling
for  to  speak  reproachfully,  A.V.  Widows.
As  the  whole  discourse  is  about  widows,  it  is
better  to  supply  this  as  the  substantiyo
understood  in  vaar^poLs.  In  ver.  1 1  we  have
vfuTtpat  x^P^^'  The  oZv  which  precedes  is
a  further  proof  that  this  direction  or  com-
mand of  the  apostle's  springs  from  what  ho
had  just  been  stiying  about  the  young
widows,  and  therefore  that  what  follows
relates  to  them,  and  not  to  women  generally.
In  order  to  avoid  tho  scandal  mentioned  in
ver.  1 1  of  tho  young  widows  first  dedicating
their  widowhood  to  Christ,  and  then  dLrawing
hack  and  marrying,  ho  directs  that  they
should  follow  tho  natural  courso  and  marry,
in  doing  which  they  would  bo  blameless.
Bear  children  (rtKvoyovu¥)\  hero  only  in
the  New  Testament  or  LXX. ;  but  tcitfo-
yovla  occurs  in  ch.  ii.  15  (where  tee  note).
Bule  the  household  (oiVoSccnrorciV ;  hero  only
ill  this  sense) ;  act  the  ]mrt  of  oiKol4notwa^
tho   mistress  of   a  family  (Plutaroh  and


CH.  V.  1 — 25.]


THE  FIRST  EnSTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


99


elsewhere).  Otico9c<rir($Tt}f  frequent  in  the
New  Testament,  and  kindred  words  are
used  in  claasical  Greek.  For  reviling  (Xoiio-
plas  x^P^")-  The  ativersary  (6  iumKtlixfvos)^
^  ^he  opponent  of  Christianity,  was  always
seeking  some  occasion  to  speak  reproach-
fully of  Christians  and  revile  them.  Any
onisoonduct  on  the  part  of  Christian  widows
would  give  him  the  occasion  he  was  looking
for.  They  must  bo  doubly  careful,  there-
fore, lest  they  should  briug  reproach  upon
Ihe  Name  of  Christ  (comp.  Jas.  ii.  7;
1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iv.  4,  14,  15).  ''Aaloplas
X^piy  is  added  ...  to  hipopix^v  ttZ6vai  to
specify  the  .manner  in  which  the  occasion
would  be  used  "  (Ellioott).  Do  not  give  the
-adversary  a  slarting-point  from  which  he
may  be  able  to  carry  out  his  desire  to  revile
the  people  of  God.

Ver.  15. — Already  torn?  are  for  some  are
4dready^  A.Y.  Some.  This  is  generally
understood  of  some  widows  who  had  already
given  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak
reproachfully,  by  turning  aside  from  the
path  of  Christian  virtue  which  they  had
begun  to  walk  in,  and  following  Satan  who
liad  beguiled  them  into  the  path  of  vice  and
folly.  But  the  words  are  capable  of  another
meaning,  equally  arising  from  the  preceding
verse,  viz.  tliat  some  have  already  followed
the  example  of  Satan,  "  the  accuser  of  the
brethren,  and  have  begun  to  revile  Chris-
tianity, taking  occasion  from  the  conduct  of
£ome  who  were  called  Christians.  These
jevilers  might  be  not  unbelieving  Jews  or
heathen,  but  apostate  or  heretical  Jews
like  those  of  whom  the  same  verb  (jKrpt-
TtffBcu)  is  used  iu  ch.  i.  6  and  2  Tim.  iv.  4.
In  something  of  the  same  spirit  St.  Paul
called  Elymiis  the  sorcerer  "  a  child  of  the
devil,"  because  he  sought  to  turn  away
Sergius  Paul  us  from  the  faith,  probably  by
speaking  evil  of  Barnabas  and  Saul.

Ver.  16. — Woman  for  man  or  woman,  A.V.
jftud  T.B. ;  hath  for  have^  A.V. ;  her  for  </*em,
A.V. ;  burdened  for  charged^  A.V.  If  any
woman,  etc  So  the  preponderance  of  the
'best  manuscripts,  and  the  texts  of  Lachmann,
Buttiuann,  Tischendorf,  etc.  But  the  T.R.
is  retained  by  Allord,  Ellicott,  'Speaker's
•Commentary,*  and  others.  If  the  R.V.  is
right,  the  woman  only  is  mentioned  as  being
the  person  who  has  the  management  of  the
housa  The  precept  here  seems  to  be  an
extension  of  that  in  ver.  4,  which  relates
ouly  to  children  and  grandchildren,  and  to
l>e  given,  moreover,  with  special  rcforenco
to  Chribtian  widows  who  had  no  believing
relations  to  care  for  them,  and  so  were  neces-
Biirily  cuMt  upon  the  Church.  Let  her  relieve
them  (<7rapicetT«,  OS  in  ver.  10).  Widows
indeed  (^rah  ovrcos  x^pa«y»  ns  in  vers.  2  and  5)

Ver.  17. —  Those  for  they^  A.V. ;  in  teach-
ing iot  doctr ine,  A.y,    The  elders  (irpc(r/3i^


r€poi);  here  in  its  technical  sense  of
"presbyters,"  which  in  the  first  age  were
the  ruling  body  in  every  Church  (see  Acts
xiv.  23 ;  XX.  2,  4,  6,  22),  after  the  analogy
of  the  elders  of  the  Jews.  Bnle  well  (ol
KoK&s  trpofffrwrts).  The  presbyters  or
elders  were  the  chiefs,  rulers,  or  presidents,
of  the  Church  (see  Rom.  xii.  8;  1  Thess.
y.  12 ;  and  above,  ch.  iii.  4,  5).  It  seems
that  they  did  not  necessarily  teach  and
preach,  but  those  who  did  so,  labouring  in
the  Word  and  teaching,  were  especially
worthy  of  honour.  Doable  honoiir  (see
note  on  ver.  3)  means  simply  incresuBed
honour,  not  exactly  twice  as  much  as  some
one  else,  or  with  arithmetical  exactness.
So  the  word  hirXovs  is  used  in  Matt,  xxiii.
15 ;  Rev.  xviii.  6 ;  and  by  the  LXX.  in  Isa.
xl.  2 ;  Jer.  xvi.  18 ;  and  elsewhere  also  in
classical  Greek.  And  so  we  say,  **  twice  as
good,"  "  twice  as  much,**  with  the  same  in-
definite meaning.  The  Word  and  teaching.
The  •*  Word  "  means  generally  **  the  Word  of
Grod,"  as  we  have  "preach  the  Word,"
"hear  the  Word,"  "the  ministry  of  the
Word,"  "  doers  of  the  Word,"  etc.  And  al-
though there  is  no  article  before  \6y^  here,
yet,  considering  the  presence  of  the  preposi-
tion 4y,  and  St.  PauFs  less  careful  use  of  the
article  in  his  later  Epistles,  this  absence  is
not  sufilcient  to  counterbalance  the  weight  of
those  considerations  which  lead  to  the  oon-
clusion  that  **  labouring  in  the  Worti "  re-
fers to  the  Word  of  GcS.  The  alternative
rendering  of  **  oral  discourse  "  or  "  in  speak-
ing" seems  rather  weak.  Teaching  would
moan  catechetical  instruction  and  similar
explanatory  teaching.  Labour  {oi  Kom&vrts) ;
a  word  very  frequently  used  by  St.  Paul  of
spiritual  labours  (Rom.  xvi.  6,  12 ;  1  Cor.
XV.  10  ;  Gal.  iv.  11 ;  Col.  i.  29,  etc.).

Ver.  18. — When  he  for  that,  A.V. ;  hire  for
revoardy  A.V.  Thou  shalt  not  mnnle,  etc.
This  passage,  from  Deut  xxv.,  which  is
quoted  and  commented  upon,  in  the  same
sense  as  here,  in  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  shows  dis-
tinctly that  reward  was  to  go  with  labour.
The  ox  was  not  to  be  hindered  from  eating
some  portion  of  the  grain  which  he  was
treading  out.  The  preacher  of  the  gospel
was  to  Uve  of  the  gospel.  The  labourer  ii
worthy  of  his  hire  (Jk^ios  6  ipydrris  rod
fjnadova&Tov).  In  Matt  X.  10  the  words  are
the  same  as  hero,  except  that  r^s  rpo^s  (his
meat)  is  substituted  for  rod  fiKrBov.  But  in
Luke  X.  7  the  words  are  identical  with
those  liere  used,  oven  to  the  omission  (in  the
R.T.)  of  the  verb  (any.  The  conclusion  is
inevitable  that  the  writer  of  this  Epistle  was
acx][iuiintcd  with  and  quoted  from  St.  LukeV
Gospel ;  and  further,  tliat  he  di  eme<l  it,  or  at
least  the  saying  of  tho  Lord  Jesus  recorded
in  it,  to  lie  of  equal  authority  with  **);
yp^<Mlt*  the  Scripture.    If  this  Epistle  was


100


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[en.  V.  1 — 25.


written  by  8t  Paul  after  hU  first  imprison-
ment at  Borne,  we  may  feel  tolerably  cer-
tain that  he  was  acquainted  with  the
Gospel  of  St  Lnke,  so  that  there  is  no
improbability  in  his  quoting  from  it  His
leierence  to  another  saying  of  the  Lord
Jflsos  in  Acts  xx.  35  gives  additional  prob-
ability to  it  The  passage  in  2  Tim.  iv.  18
seems  also  to  be  a  direct  reference  to  the
Lord's  Prayer,  as  contained  in  the  Gk)spels  of
St.  Ifatthew  and  St  Luke.  St  Paul  does
not  directly  oaII  the  words  ^  ypa^,  only
traats  them  as  of  equal  autliority,  which,  if
Ih^  were  the  words  of  Christ,  of  course
theT  were*

Ver.  Id.—Excepi  at  the  mouth  of  for  hut
before,  A.V.  Aa  elder;  here  clearly  a
pittbyter,  as  the  context  proves.  Beeeive
(««pa8^X^v);  give  ear  to,  entertain;  as  in
Acts  xxii.  18,  ''  They  will  not  receive  thy
testimony.**  At  the  mouth  of,  etc.  There
it  a  reference  to  the  law  in  Numb.  xxxv.
80 ;  Deut  xix.  15,  and  elsewhere  (to  which
our  Lord  also  refers,  John  viii.  17),  and  St
Paul  applies  the  principle  of  the  law  to
Timothv  s  dealings  with  presbyters  who
might  be  accused  of  not  **  ruling  well."
He  was  not  to  encourage  delatores,  secret
accusers  and  dofamers,  but  if  an^  one  had  a
charge  to  make  against  a  ruler,  it  was  to  be
done  in  the  preeenee  of  witnesses  (^ir/  with  a
genitive).  A  doubt  arises  whether  '*  the  w  it-
nesses  "  here  spoken  of  were  to  be  witnesses
able  to  suppoit  tlie  accusation,  or  merely
witnesses  in  whose  presence  the  accusation
must  bo  made.  The  juxtaposition  of  the
legal  terms  KOTTiyopia  and  ivl  fiaprvpoey
favours  the  strict  meaning  of  fiapr^pcop,
witnesses  able  to  support  the  Kar-nyopia.
And,  therefore,  the  direction  to  Timothy  is,
**  Suffer  no  man  to  accuse  a  presbyter  unlci^s
he  is  accompanied  by  two  or  three  witnesses
who  are  ready  to  bock  up  tho  accusation."
The  italic  ^0  mouth  of,  in  the  R.Y.,  is  not
necessary  or  indeed  justified.  There  is  no
ellipsis  of  trr6tiaTos.  *Eirl  Svo  ^  rpiSi>v
ftapr^pwy,  "  before  two  or  three  witnesses,"
is  good  cltissical  Greek.

Ver.  20. — Reprove  for  rebuke,  A.V. ;  in  the
eight  of  for  before,  A.V. ;  the  rest  for  others,
A.V. ;  be  in  fear  for  fear,  A.V.  Beprove ;
$\tyx*9  not  4irtir\'ff^rp,  as  in  ver.  1  (see
Matt  xviii  15).  There,  the  fault  being  a
private  one,  the  reproof  is  to  be  adminis-
tered in  private.  But  in  the  case  of  the
sinning  presbyter,  which  is  that  here  in-
tended, Timothy  is  to  reprove  the  offender
*•  betore  all,"  that  others  also  may  fear,  and
may  bo  deterred  by  tUeir  fear  from  commit-
ting a  like  offence.

Ver.  21. — In  the  siqht  of  for  before,  A.V. ;
Christ  Jtsus  for  the  Ixn-d  Jesus  Christ,  A.V.
and  T.B. ;  prejudtce  for  preferring  one  before
atiother,  A.  V.    I  charge  thee,  etc    It  has


been  well  remarked  tliat  the  solemniW  of
this  charge  indicates  the  temptation  which
there  mi^t  be  to  Timothy  to  shrink  tem
reproving  men  of  weight  and  influence —
**  rulers  "in  the  congregation,  and  ^^elden"
both  in  age  and  by  office,  young  as  he  him-
self was  (ch.  iv.  12).    Perhaps  he  had  in
view  some  particular  case  in  the  Ephesian
Church.     <uuu^  (9iafiapr6po/iati  not   wap'
eeyy4\\v,  as  ch.  vi.  13) ;  rather,  I  adjure  thee.
The  strict  sense  of  ZiafAopr^fxai  is  *'  I  call
heaven  and  earth  to  witness  the  truth  of
what  I  am  saying ; "  and  then,  by  m  very
slight  metonymy,  *'I  declare  a  thing,"  or
*'!  ask  a  thing,"  ^as  in  the  presence  of
those  witnesses  who  are  either  named  or
understood."  Here  tho  witnesses  are  named:
God,  and  Christ  Jesus,  and  thd  elect  angels.
In  2  Tim.  iL  14  it  is  ** the  Lord; "  in  2  Tim.
iv.  1  Gtod  and  Jesus  Christ,  as  also  in  ch.  vi.
13.    In  the  passages  where  tho  word  haa
the  force  of  "testifying"  (Luke  xvi.  18;
Acts  ii.  40 ;  x.  42 ;  xviii.  5 ;  1  These,  ir.  6,.
etc),  no  witnesses  are  named,  but  great
solemnity  and  earnestness  are  implied.    The^
daet   angels.     This  is  the  only  passage
where  it  is  predicated  of  the  angds  that
they  are  elect.     But  as  there  is  repeated
mention  in  Holy  Scripture  of  the  fallen
angels  (Matt  xxv.  41 ;  1  Cor.  vL  3;  2  Pet
ii.  4 ;  Jude  6 ;  Bev.  xiL  7,  9),  the  obviou»
interpretation  is  that  St  Paul,  in  this  solemn
adjuration,  added  the  epithet  to  indicate
more  distinctly  the  **holy  angels,"  as  they
are  frequently  described  (Matt.  xxv.  31 ;
Luke  ix.  26,  etc.),  or  "the  angels  of  God**
or  "of  heaven"  (Matt  xxii.  30;  xxiv.  36;
Luke  xii.  8,  9;  John  i.  51).    Possibly  the
mention  of  Satan  in  ver.  15,  or  some  of  tho
rising  Gno&tic  opinions  about  angels  (Col.
ii.   18),  may  have  suggested   tho  epithet
The  reason  for  the  nnusual  addition  of  **  tlie
angels"  is  more  difficult  to  adduce  with
certainty.    But  perhaps  2  Tim.  iv.  1  gives
us  the  clue,  where  the  apostle  shows  that
in  appealing  to  Jesus  Christ  he  has  a  special
eye  to  the  great  and  final  judgment.    Now,
in  the  descriptions  of  tho  last  judgment*
the    angels   are  constantly  spoken    of   as
acc<«mp«iiying  our  Lord  (Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  xxv.
31 ;  Murk  viii.  48 ;  Luke  ix.  26 ;  xii.  8,  9 ;
2  Thess.  i.  7,  etc.).    If  St.  Paul,  therefore,
had  in  his  mind   the  great  judgment-day
when  he  thus  invoked  the  names  of  God
and  of  Christ,  he  would  very  naturally  also
make  mention  of  the  elect  angels.    And  so
Bishop  Bull,  quoted  in  the  *  Speaker's  Com-
meutary.'     Without  prejudice  (x^p^s  irpo^
Kpip,aTos);  hero  only  in  the  New  Testament,
and  not  found  in  tho  LXX.  or  classical
Greek,  though  the  verb  irpoKpli/u  occurs  in
both.    Althoujih  tho   English  word  "pre-
judice" seems  at  first  sight  an  apt  rendering
of  wp6KpifjM,  it  does  not  really  give  the  sense


CH.  V.  1 — 25.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


101


4K)  accurately  as  "preference."  We  com-
monly mean  by  "prejudice"  a  judgment
formed  prior  to  examination,  which  prevents
oup  judging  rightly  or  fairly  when  we  come
to  the  examination,  which,  however,  is  not
the  meaning  of  the  Latiu  prxjudicium.  But
•wpoKplw  means  rather  **^  to  prefer  "  a  person,
•or  thing,  to  others.  And  therefore  irpoKptfia
means  **  preference,"  or  "  partiality,"  or,  as
the  A.V.  has  it,  **  preferring  one  before
another."  The  two  meanings  may  be  thus
expressed.  "Prejudice,"  in  the  English
use  of  the  word,  is  when  A  person  who  has
to  judge  a  cause  upon  evidence  prejudges  it
without  evidence,  and  so  does  not  give  its
proper  weight  to  the  evidence.  "Prefer-
ence "  is  when  he  gives  different  measure  to
different  persons,  according  as  he  is  swayed
by  partiality,  or  interest,  or  favour.  St
Paul  charges  Timothy  to  measure  out
exactly  equal  justice  to  all  persons  alike.
By  partiality  (kot^  irpSirKXiety).  Tiiis  also
is  an  &ira|  \€y6fifyov  OS  far  as  the  New  Tes-
tament is  concerned,  and  is  not  found  in
the  LXX.,  but  is  found,  ns  well  as  the  verb
wpoaKXivMf  in  classical  Greek.  It  means
literally  the  "  inclination "  of  the  scales  to
one  side  or  the  other,  and  hence  a  **■  bias  "
of  the  mind  to  one  party  or  the  other.  The
balance  of  justice  in  the  hands  of  Timothy
was  to  be  equal.

Ver.  22,^II(utily  for  suddenly,  A.V.  Lay
liandfl,  etc.  Surely  if  wo  are  guided  by  St.
PauVs  own  use  of  the  phrase,  iirldfo-is  xtip&v,
in  the  only  two  places  in  his  writings  where
it  occurs  (ch.  iv.  14  and  2  Tim.  i.  6),  we
must  abide  by  the  ancient  interpretation
of  these  words,  that  they  mean  the  laying  on
of  hands  in  ordination.  So  also  in  Acts  vi.
6  and  xiii.  3,  iienidtvai  x'tpas  is  "  to  ordain."
And  the  context  here  requires  the  same
sense.  The  solemn  injunction  in  the  pre-
ceding verse,  to  deal  impartially  in  judging
even  the  most  intiucntial  elder,  naturally
suggests  the  caution  not  to  be  hasty  in
ordmning  any  one  to  be  an  elder.  Great
«aro  and  previous  inquiry  were  necessary
before  admitting  any  man,  whatever  might
be  his  pretensions  or  position,  to  a  holy
office.  A  bishop  who,  on  the  spur  of  the
moment,*  with  improper  haste,  should  ordain
one  who  afterwards  required  reproof  as
nfiaprdvwvf  sinning  (ver.  20),  would  havo  a
partnership  in  the  man's  sin,  and  in  the  evil
consequences  that  flowed  from  it.  And  then
It  follows,  Keep  thyself  pure ;  i.e.  clear  and
-guiltless  (2  Cor.  vii.  11),  which  he  would
not  be  if  ho  was  involved  in  the  sin  of  the
guilty  elder.  Observe  that  the  stress  is
upon  "  thyself."

Ver.  23. — Be  no  longer  a  drinlter  of  for
drink  no  longer^  A.V.  Be  ...  a  drinker  of
water  (vSpovortt);  here  only  in  the  New
Testament.    It  is  found  in  some  codices  of


the  LXX.  in  Dan.  i  12,  and  also  in  olaamoal
Greek.  We  learn  from  hence  the  interestiiig
fact  that  Timothy  was,  in  modem  parlance,
a  total  abstainer ;  and  we  also  learn  that,  in
St.  Paul's  judgment,  total  abstinence  was
not  to  be  adhered  to  if  injurious  to  the
health.  The  epithet,  "  a  little,"  should  not
be  overlooked.  Was  Luke,  the  beloved
physician,  with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  this
prescription  (see  2  Tim.  iv.  11)?  It  is  also
interesting  to  have  this  passing  allusion
to  Timothy's  bad  health,  and  this  instance
of  St.  Paul's  thoughtful  consideration  for
him.  Infirmities  (iff0tvflas) ;  in  the  sense  of
siehnessesj  attacks  of  illness.

Ver.  24. — Evident   for  open   beforehand^
A.V. ;  unto  for  to,  A.V. ;  men  also  for  men^
A.V.    Borne  men's  linf,  etc.    St.  Paul  is
evidently  here  recurring  to  the  topic  which
he  had  been  dealing  with  ever  since  ver.  17,
viz.  Timothy's  duty  as  a  bishop,  to  whom
was  entrusted  the  selection  of  persons  for
the  office  of  elder,  or  presbyter,  and  also  the
maintaining  of  discipline  among  his  clergy.
Alford  sees  the  connection  of  the  precept
about  drinking  a  little  wine  with  what  went
before,  and  with  this  twenty-fourth  verse,  in
the  supposed  circumstance  that  Timothy's
weak  health  had  somewhat  weakened  the
vigour  of  his  rule;  and  that  the  recom-
mendation to  leave  off  water-drinking  was
g^ven  more  with  a  view  to  the  firmer  dis-
charge of  those  duties  than  merely  for  his
bodily  comfort.    This  may  bo  so.    But  there
is  nothing  unlike  St.  Paul's  manner  in  the
supposition  that  he  had  done  with  the  sub-
ject in  hand  at  the  end  of  the  twenty-second
verse,  and  passed  on  to  the  friendly  hint
with  regard  to  Timothy's  health,  but  then
subjoin^  the  fresh  remarks  in  vers.  24  and
25,  which  were  an  after-thought    Evident
(itp6dri\oi);  only  found  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, in  Heb.   vii.   14  besides  these  two
verses,  and  in  the  apocryphal  books  of  the
Old  Testament.    It  is  common,  with  the
kindred  forms,  irpobri\6M,  irpo$^\»cr<f,  eto.»
in  classical  Greek.    It  is  doubted  whether
irpb  in  this  compound  verb  has  the  force  of
"beforehand,"  as  in  the  A.V.,  and  not  rather
that  of  **  before  the  eyes  of  all,"  and  there-
fore only  intensifies  the  meaning  of  ZriXdv.
But  the  natural  force  of  wph  in  composition
certainly  is  "  before  "  in  point  of  time ;  and
hence  in  a  compound  like  irp6hj\os  would
meau  "  evident  before  it  is  examined,"  which
of  course  is  equivalent  to  "very  evident."
St.  Paul's  meaning,  therefore,  would  be:
Some  men's  sins  are  notorious,  requiring  no
careful  inquisition  in  order  to  find  them  out ;
nay,  they  of  themselves  go  before — before
the  sinner  himself — unto  judgmeut.    Bat
there  ore  also  somo  whose  sins  follow  after
them.    It  is  not  till  after  close  inquiry  that
they  aro  found  out.    They  go  up  to  the


102


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[ciL  V.  1— 25k


jndffinent-seat  oppaienUy  innocent,  bniaftor
ft  while  their  sina  come  trooping  up  to  their
oondemnation.  This  enforoet  the  caution,
**  Lfty  hands  hastily  on  no  man."

Ver.  25. — In  like  manner  for  likewise^
A.V. ;  there  are  good  teorke  that  are  evident
for  the  good  uforka  of  tome  are  mani/ett  before^
hamd,  A. v.;  eueh  <u  for  they  that,  A.Y.
Th«rt  are  good  works,  etc  It  is  much  best
to  understand  nyMr,  as  the  A.y.  does,  and
render  the  good  wcrhe  of  tome,  answering  to
rof&w  al  aitaprtoi  of  ver.  21.  Sneh  as  are
i^  not  manifest  beforehand —


oannot  be  hid.  **The]r  will  be  seen  and
recognized  some  time  or  other"  (Ellioott).
Alford  seems  to  catch  the  trao  spirit  of  the
passage  when  he  sajf^  **The  tendency  of
this  verse  is  to  warn  Timothy  against  hasty
condemnation,  as  the  former  had  done
against  hasty  approval.  Sometimes  thou
wilt  find  a  man's  good  character  go  before
him, .  .  .  bat  where  this  is  not  so,  ...  be
not  rash  to  condemn :  thou  mayest  on  ex-
amination discover  if  there  be  any  good
deeds  accomnanying  him:  for  they  .  .  .
cannot  be  hioden.**


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Propriety,  Propriety  of  conduct  in  the  different  relations  of  life  is  the-
afiplication  of  true  charity  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case.  Charity,  while
in  all  cases  it  has  the  same  essence,  seeking  the  real  good  of  the  person  with  whom  it
is  dealing,  varies  its  mode  of  application  according  to  various  circumstances.  There  is
in  diarity  always  a  consideration  of  what  is  due  to  others,  a  scrupulous  and  delicate
appreciation  of  the  difference  of  positions,  and  consequent  differences  of  feeling,  which
may  be  expected,  in  different  persons.  In  the  natural  family,  men  do  not  treat  their
fathers  and  their  children  in  tne  same  manner.  An  upper  servant  does  not  deal  out
the  same  measure  to  his  master  and  to  the  servants  that  are  under  him.  There  may  be
the  same  truth  and  the  same  charity,  but  there  is  a  different  outward  expression  of  them.
It  is  a  great  and  serious  mistake  to  think  that  impartiality  requires  an  identity  of  pro-
ceeding in  dealing  with  different  people.  A  wise  charity  knows  how  to  discriminate,
and  to  avoid  the  risk  of  defeating  its  own  ends  by  wounding  the  just  susceptibilities  of
those  with  whom  it  has  to  do.  It  is  in  accordance  with  this  view  that  St  Paul  here
gives  directions  to  the  youthful  Timothy  how  to  exercise  his  episcopal  authority  over
the  different  persons  subject  to  it.  The  same  sharp  rebuke  that  mis^ht  be  suitable  for
a  young  man  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  case  of  an  old  one.  Timothy  must  not
forget  the  respect  that  is  duo  from  a  youn<;  man  to  an  old  one,  even  while  exercising  his
episcopal  functions.  And  so  with  regard  to  the  elderly  women  of  his  flock,  he  will
know  how  to  treat  them  with  filial  respect ;  and  with  regard  to  the  young  women,  he
will  know  how  to  infuse  a  brotherly  spirit  into  his  intercourse  with  them,  avoiding
every  approach  to  any  kind  of  familiarity  inconsistent  with  that  purity  of  thought
which  regulates  the  intercourse  between  brothers  and  sisters.  Then  will  charity  have
her  perfect  work.

"Vers.  3 — 16. — Church  charities.  One  of  the  most  difficult  problems  to  solve  in  any
well-ordered  human  society  is  so  to  administer  charity  to  the  indigent  as  not  ta
encourage  indigence  which  might  be  avoided — not  to  injure  the  character  by  endeavoui's
to  benefit  the  body.  It  is  certain  that  the  expectation  of  being  provided  for  by  others,
without  any  efforts  of  his  own,  has  a  tendency  to  check  those  exertions  by  which  a  man
may  provide  for  himself.  But  it  is  no  less  certain  that  there  is  room  in  the  world  for
the  exercise  of  a  wholesome  charity,  and  that  to  dry  up  the  streams  of  benevolence
would  be  as  great  an  injury  to  the  givers  as  to  the  receivers.  The  result  is  that  great  care
and  much  wisdom  are  requisite  to  regulate  the  administration  of  all  charities  on  a  large
scale.  The  early  Church,  with  an  instinctive  wisdom,  directed  its  chief  care  to  tho
support  of  widows.  Here  the  main  cause  of  the  indigence,  at  least,  was  one  which  no
human  forethought  could  prevent — the  death  of  the  bread-winner.  But  even  in  their
case  many  prudent  cautions  were  interposed.  The  widow  must  have  age  of  not  less  than
threescore  years,  as  well  as  widowhood,  to  commend  her.  She  must  be  desolate,  with-
out any  relations  or  friends  whose  natural  duty  it  would  be  to  support  her.  She  must
have  established  a  good  Christian  character  in  the  days  of  her  prosperity,  and  shown
her  love  to  Christ,  and  the  people  of  Christ,  by  works  of  mercy  and  pity.  In  like
manner  all  public  charities  snould  be  administered  so  as  to  encourage  industry  and  to


CH.V.1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  103

check  idleness;  so  ns  to  countenance  virtne  and  rebuke  vice;  so  as  to  prevent  the
unworthy  from  appropriating  the  provision  that  was  intended  for  the  worthy  and
unfortunate.  In  a  word,  in  the  administration  of  charitable  funds,  charity  and  wisdom
must  work  hand-in-hand.

Vers.  17 — 25. — Duties  and  privileges  of  the  clergy.  The  duties  of  the  clergy  are  to  rule
and  to  labour.  The  privileges  of  the  clergy  are  honour  and  pay.  The  clergy  are  rulers ;
not  lords  and  tyrants,  not  domineering  over  conscience  or  deeds,  but  leaders  (irpoccrrwrcry
here ;  i^ok^/acvoi,  Heb.  xiii.  7),  presidents,  officers  of  the  great  Church  army,  going  before
them  in  every  hard  service  and  difficult  duty,  regulating  their  counsels  by  wise  advice,
leading  their  worship,  ordering  their  discipline,  taking  the  lead  in  the  management  of
their  common  affairs.  And  the  clergy  are  labourers.  Not  drones  doing  nothing,  and
eating  the  fruit  of  other  men's  toil,  but  labouring  in  the  Word  and  doctrine  of  Christ.
Theirs  is  a  double  labour :  they  labour  first  to  learn,  and  then  they  labour  to  teach
others  what  they  have  learnt  themselves.  They  study  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  give
the  Church  the  benefit  of  their  studies.  Nor  are  their  labours  light  or  desultory.  It  is
the  hard  toil  (Koniayrti)  of  mind  and  body,  the  continuous  toil  of  a  lifetime.  These  are
their  duties.  Their  privileges  are  honour  and  pay — honour  in  proportion  to  their  labours
for  the  Church  and  the  fruit  of  those  labours ;  honour  due  to  their  spiritual  dignity  as
those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  set  over  the  flock  of  Christ.  And  with  this  honour —
expressed  by  the  title  of  "  reverend  "  prefixed  to  their  names — is  also  due  pay,  support
and  maintenance  at  the  Church's  charge.  The  ox  must  not  be  muzzled  while  he  treads
out  the  com  for  others,  nor  must  the  labourer  be  defrauded  of  his  hire  when  his  honest
work  is  done.  They  that  preach  the  gospel  are  to  live  of  the  gospel.  The  Churches
which  they  serve  must  set  their  minds  free,  as  far  as  may  be,  from  worldly  cares,  by
providing  for  their  maintenance  while  they  give  themselves  to  the  Word  of  Gt)d  and
prayer.  It  is  obvious  how  entirely  in  accordance  with  these  apostolic  sayings  is  tho
setting  apart  of  endowments  for  the  permanent  support  of  those  who  are  engaged  in
the  ministry  of  the  Word,  and  the  feeding  of  the  flock  of  Christ.  The  exhortation
to  the  bishop  to  lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man,  and  to  be  impartial  in  all  his  dealings,
follows  naturally  from  the  consideration  of  the  duties  and  the  privileges  of  the  priesthood*


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Directions  how  to  treat  members  of  the  CJiurch  according  to  the  distinc^
tions  of  age  and  sex.  I.  The  conduct  op  Timothy  toward  elderly  men.  "  Reprimand
not  an  elderly  person,  but  exhort  him  as  a  brother."  The  allusion  is  not  to  an  official
elder  of  the  Church,  but  to  any  elderly  member  of  it.  1.  Such  persons  might  possibly
be  guilty  of  serious  shortcomings,  warranting  private  admonition,  if  not  the  exercise  of
discipline.  Their  conduct  would  have  a  worse  effect  than  that  of  more  youthful
offenders.  2.  Timothy  must  not  use  sharpness  or  severity  in  dealing  with  such  persons^
because  he  must  remember  what  is  becoming  on  account  of  his  own  youth.  He  should
rather  use  "entreaty  *'  on  a  footing  of  brotherly  equality.  His  zeal  ought  not  to  interfere
with  the  reverence  due  to  age.    Let  the  old  be  treated  with  humility  and  gentleness.

II.  The  conduct  of  'Jimothy  toward  younger  men.  "The  younger  men  as
brothers."  He  may  use  greater  freedom  with  them,  as  being  on  an  equality  as  to  age.
Ho  must  not  show  airs  of  assumption  toward  them,  but  may  use  more  freedom  in
reproving  their  faults.

III.  His  conduct  toward  elderly  women.  "Elderly  women  as  mothers."  He
must  show  them  due  deference  and  respect.  If  they  should  err  on  any  point,  they
must  be  entreated  with  all  tenderness,  as  children  entreat  their  mothers.

IV.  His  conduct  toward  the  younger  women.  "  The  younger  as  sisters,  with  all
purity.**  There  must  be,  on  the  one  hand,  the  freedom  of  a  brother  with  sisters;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  a  marked  circumspection  so  as  to  avoid  all  ground  of  suspicion  or
scandal.— T.  C.

Vers.  3 — 7. — Directions  with  regard  to  widows.    The  gos|)el  provides  for  the  helpless.
L  The  claims  of  widows.    1.  These  were  abundantly  recognized  in  Old  Testament


104  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  v.  1—25.

times.  The  fatherless  and  the  widow  -were  commended  to  the  special  care  of  the
Israelites.  The  garments  of  widows  were  never  to  be  taken  in  pledge.  The  man  was
cttised  who  perverted  the  judjnnent  of  the  widow.  The  widow  was  never  to  be  afflicted
or  made  a  prey  (Deut.  xvi.  11 ;  zxvii.  19;  Jer.  viL  6;  l8a.-x.  2).  2.  The  dainu  of
vfidotffs  were  officially  recognized  in  New  Testament  iimOL  The  order  of  deaconship
arose  out  of  the  necessity  of  widows  (Acts  vi.  1—7).

IL  Tub  differekt  classes  of  widows  in  thb  Ghubce.  ^'  Honour  widows  that  are
widows  indeed.*'  There  are  three  classes  of  widows  referred  to  by  the  apostle.  1.
Vkere  are  widows  who  are  not  only  deeply  rdigious^  hd  quite  destitute.  She  who  is  a
widow  indeed  is  "  desolate,  has  set  her  hope  in  God,  and  abides  in  supplications  and
prayers  night  and  day."  (1)  There  are  widows  without  husband,  without  children
or  grandchildren,  and  without  means  of  living.  They  have  no  friends  to  cheer  the
loneliness  or  relieve  the  necessities  of  their  widowed  life.  (2)  They  are  deeply  religious
and  trustfuL  *'  She  has  set  her  hope  in  God,"  who  is  the  Husband  of  the  widow;  and  is
constant  in  prayers  like  Anna  the  prophetess,  to  that  God  who  gives  her  a  daily  supply
of  comforts,  and  cheers  her  in  her  solitude.  2.  There  are  widows  who  are  not  so
destitute,  for  they  have  children  and  grandchildren  to  provide  for  their  wants.  3.
There  are  widows  who  are  fond  of  gaiety  and  pleamre,  and  destitute  of  religion.  *^  She
that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth.*'  Thev  are  dead  spiritually,  like  those
who  "have  a  name  to  live,  but  are  dead  "  (Rev.  iii.  1).  '* If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye
shall  die "  (Rom.  viii.  13).  This  class  of  widows  resembled  the  daughters  of  Sodom
(Esek.  xvi.  49).  There  was  in  their  case  the  union  of  soul  and  body,  but  no  quickening
principle  of  spiritual  life.  They  savour  the  things  that  bo  of  men  rather  than  the  things
that  be  of  GK>d.

III.  TUE  DUTY  OF  THE  ChUBCH  IN  P.ELATION  TO  TIIE8B  DIFFERENT  CLASSES  OF  WIDOWS.

1.  The  Church  was  not  hound  to  support  or  assist  widows  with  children  or  grands
children^  who  were  therefore  to  be  taught "  to  show  piety  at  home,  and  to  requite  their
parents."  The  Church  was  not  to  be  burdened  with  their  support.  Their  relatives
were  not  exempt  under  the  gospel  from  the  necessity  of  providing  for  them.  The
apostle  adds  that  the  discharge  of  this  oft-forgotten  duty  is  "  good  and  acceptable  before
God'*  (Eph.  vi.  2,  3;  Mark  vii.  10, 11).  2.  The  Church  owned  no  obligation  of  any
sort  to  pleasure-loving  widows,  except  to  warn  them  of  the  sin,  folly,  and  danger  of  their
life.  3.  The  Church  was  to  pay  due  regard  to  "  widows  indeed "  who  were  destitute
of  aU  resources.  "  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed."  The  term  implies  more
than  deference  or  respect ;  such  widows  were  entitled  to  receive  relief  from  the  Christian
community.    It  was  a  loving  duty  to  provide  for  such  sad-hearted,  friendless  beings.

IV.  The  NEGESsiry  of  making  a  rule  for  the  Church's  guidance.  "  These  tbincs
command,  that  they  may  be  without  reproach.**  The  injunction  was  necessary  for  tlie
Church's  sake,  that  it  might  not  neglect  its  proper  duty  to  this  destitute  class,  and  for
the  sake  of  the  various  classes  of  widows  and  their  relatives,  who  needed  to  be  without
reproach,  as  they  were  supposedly  members  of  the  Church. — T.  C.

Ver.  8. — The  duty  of  providing  for  oiie's  own  household.  The  growth  of  the  Church
necessitated  a  careful  regard  to  this  duty.

I.  The  duty  here  enjoined.  "  If  any  provides  not  for  his  own,  and  especially  for
those  of  his  own  house,  he  has  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  unbeliever."  1.
TTiis  passage  asserts  the  obligations  that  spring  out  of  family  relationship.  It  points  to
the  duty  of  supporting  relatives,  and  all  who  live  under  one  roof,  who  through  poverty
may  have  become  dejiendent  upon  us.  2.  The  gospel  does  not  relax,  but  rather
strengthens,  the  ties  of  natural  kinship.  The  Essenes  would  not  give  relief  to  their
relatives  without  the  permission  of  their  teachers,  though  they  might  help  others  in
need.

II.  The  neglect  of  this  duty  involves  a  practical  denial  of  the  fajth.  1.  It
is  a  denial  of  the  faith,  not  in  words,  but  in  works,  for  it  is  a  denial  of  the  duty  of  love,
which  is  the  practical  outcome  of  faith ;  for  "  faith  worketh  by  love.**  There  may  have
been  a  tendency  at  Ephesus,  as  in  Churches  to  which  James  wrote,  to  rest  content  with
a  mere  profession  of  the  truth,  without  the  habit  of  self-denial.  2.  Such  conduct  woxdd
idace  the  Christian  prof essor  in  a  position  far  below  that  of  the  heathen  unbeliever,  who
recognized  the  duty  of  supporting  relatives  as  one  of  his  best  principles.    It  would  be  a


CH.V.1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  105

gerions  dishonour  to  Christ  and  the  gospel  to  neglect  duties  held  in  highest  honour  by
tho  heathen.    The  light  of  the  gospel  greatly  aggravates  the  sin  of  such  persons. — T.  C.

Vers.  9, 10. — Particular  directions  as  to  the  class  of  widows  commended  to  the  Church's
sympathy  and  support.  These  persons  are  variously  regarded  by  commentators  as
simply  destitute  widows,  or  as  deaconesses,  or  as  presbytercsses.  The  most  simple  and
natural  explanation  is  that  they  belonged  to  the  first  class,  for  the  directions  here  given
■apply  to  what  the  Church  is  to  do  for  such  widows,  not  what  duty  is  required  of  them
in  the  Church  administration.

L  The  enrolment  of  widows  in  the  almoner's  list  op  the  Church.  "  Let  none
be  enrolled  as  a  widow  imder  threescore  years  old."  1.  The  existence  of  such  a  list  is
implied  in  Acts  vi,  1,  where  a  murmuring  is  said  to  have  arisen  because  '*  the  widows
were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration."  There  are  also  traces  of  such  a  list  in  tho
earlier  Christian  writers.  2.  Such  a  class  would  be  recruited  from  the  ordinary  vicissi-
tudes of  lifCf  from  the  special  persecutions  that  followed  the  gospel,  and  perhaps  also
from  the  separations  from  polygamous  husbands  brought  about  through  the  influence  of
Christianity.

II.  The  qualifications  op  widows  for  a  place  in  the  Church's  list.  1.  As  to
<ige,  **  Not  under  threescore  years  old."  As  this  age  marks  a  relatively  greater  degree
of  senility  in  the  East  than  in  the  West,  the  widows  must  be  regarded  as  of  the  intirm
class,  and  therefore  as  not  in  any  degree  able  for  the  active  duties  of  life.  This  one  con-
sideration inclines  us  to  believe  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  order  of  deaconesses  or
presbytercsses.  If  widows  had  been  enrolled  at  a  much  earlier  age,  they  must  have
become  a  serious  burden  for  a  great  length  of  time  upon  the  Church's  liberality.  There-
fore young  widows  were  not  to  be  enrolled  at  all.  2.  As  to  her  previous  married  life.
•*  The  wife  of  one  man."  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  she  should  not  have  been  twice
mamed,  because  (a)  the  apostle  counsels  the  younger  women  to  marry  again  (ver.  14),
and  sanctions  second  marriages  (Rom.  vii.  1) ;  (Jb)  because  the  ascetic  idea  of  marricHi
life,  which  some  would  associate  with  widows  holding  a  certain  ecclesiastical  rank,
received  no  sanction  from  the  apostle.  (2)  It  does  not  mean  that  she  should  not  have
had  several  husbands  at  one  time,  for  polyandry  was  quite  unusual.  (3)  It  signifies
that  she  should  never  have  stood  related  but  to  one  living  husband  ;  not  divorced  from
one  husband  and  then  married  to  another — a  chaste  and  faithful  spouse,  true  to  her
marriage  vow.  3.  As  to  her  reputation  for  good  works,  "  Well  reported  of  in  respect
to  good  works."  There  must  not  only  be  no  evil  spoken  of  her,  but  she  must  have  a
reputation  for  good  works.  This  reputation  covers  tive  facts  of  goodness.  (1)  "  If  she
hath  brought  up  children."  This  would  imply  self-sacrifice,  sympathy  and  zeal  for
youthful  training.  She  would  train  her  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the
Lord,  commanding  them  like  Abraham  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  from  which  they
would  not  so  easily  depart  in  after-life.  (2)  "If  she  hath  lodged  strangers."  She  may
have  seen  better  days,  and  had  frequent  op}X)rtunities  of  showing  hospitality  to  Christian
travellers  moving  from  place  to  place.  The  readiness  to  welcome  strangers  was  most
characteristic  of  the  early  Christians.  (3)  "  If  she  hath  washed  the  saints'  feet,"  in
token,  not  only  of  conventional  hospitality,  but  of  deep  humility  after  the  highest  of  all
examples.  (4)  "  If  she  hath  relieved  the  afflicted."  Not  by  mere  gifts,  but  by  matronly
sympathy  and  encouragement,  implying  the  visitation  of  the  distressed  in  their  homes.
(6)  *•  If  she  hath  diligently  followed  every  good  work."  She  must  not  have  wearied
in  wcllHloing,  but  have  followed  that  which  was  good  with  eagerness,  constancy,  and
true  fidelity  to  God  and  man. — T.  C.

Vers.  11 — 15. — Directions  ivith  regard  to  young  widows,  I.  The  younger  widows
were  not  to  be  enrolled  on  the  list  of  the  Church's  pensioners.  "Younger
widows  decline."  This  did  not  imply  that  destitute  widows,  however  young,  would  be
excluded  from  occasional  help  from  the  Church's  funds,  but  they  were  not  to  be  made
A  permanent  charge  upon  tho  resources  of  the  Church.  They  were  young  enough  to
labour  for  their  own  living,  or,  as  the  apostle  advised,  they  might  marry  a  second  time,
and  thus  obtain  a  provision  for  themselves.

II.  The  reason  for  declining  such  w^idows.  **  For  when  they  shall  wax  wanton
against  Christ,  they  desire  to  marry."    1.  This  language  does  not  imply  that  they  had.


106  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  v.  1— 25,

•0  to  speakt  taken  Christ  for  their  Bridegroom^  and  then  proved  Mhamdeesly  un/aith/ut
to  their  vows.  This  thought  belongs  to  the  ascetlo  ideas  of  a  later  period,  as  if  the*
widows  in  question  had  taken  the  irrevocable  engagement  of  nuns  or  of  other  ecclesi-
astical persons.  They  mi^ht,  indeed,  have  remarried  not  only  without  blame,  but  by  the
direct  counsel  of  the  apostle  himself.  2.  Neither  doee  it  imply  that  they  had  been  untrue
to  the  memory  of  their  first  husbands,  3.  The  case  supposed  is  that  ef  some  young
widows,  who  had  taken  their  place  among  others  of  their  world^renouncing  dan  in  the
list  of  the  Church's  widows,  and  had  drawn  back  into  a  luxurious,  pleaeure^oving  habit
of  life.  There  is  no  breach  of  the  promise  of  widowhood  either  expressed  or  implied  in
the  passage,  and  such  a  breach  could  not  be  interpreted  by  itself  as  equivalent  to  a
renunciaUon  of  the  Christian  faith.  The  case  supposed  is  that  of  a  departure  from  the
proprieties  of  widowed  life,  in  connection  with  a  Christian  profession,  which  only  too
surely  indicated  a  virtual  repudiation  of  the  faith.  4.  The  judgment  that  attacked  to
their  conduct  implied  this  virtual  renunciation  qf  faith,  "  Hanng  oondemnat  ion  because
they  set  at  nought  their  first  faith."  (1)  Not  their  faith  to  their  first  husbands ;  (2>
not  their  vow  or  promise  to  remain  in  widowhood,  which  might  be  called  their  former
fiuth,  but  not  their  first  failh ;  but  (3)  their  simple  faith  in  Christ,  when  they  were
baptized  into  his  Name  and  devoted  themselves  to  his  service.  They  set  it  at  nought
by  not  walking  according  to  it,  their  conversation  not  becoming  their  profession  of  it.
Ijieir  condemnation,  or,  rather,  their  judgment,  ia  not  to  be  regi^cd  as  eternal,  because
it  might  be  removed  by  a  timely  repentance.

IlL  The  injurious  and  scandalous  effects  of  such  a  life.  "  And  withal  they
learn  also  to  be  idle,  going  about  from  house  to  house ;  and  not  only  idle,  but  talkers
and  busy  bodies,  speaking  things  which  they  ought  not."  These  young  widows,  beini^
under  no  necessity  to  labour  for  their  living — for  they  were  supported  by  the  funds  o£
the  Church — ^uscd  their  leisure  badly.  1.  They  were  idle,  (1)  This  habit  of  life  is-
forbidden ;  for  Christians  are  to  be  "  not  slothful  in  business."  (2)  It  leads  to  mis-
directed activity ;  for  such  widows  "  wander  from  house  to  house,"  because  they  have  no-
resources  within  themselves.  2.  They  become  loose  talkers,  babbling  out  whatever  comes
into  their  minds.  "  From  leisure  springs  that  curiosity  which  is  the  mother  of  garrulity  ^
(Calvin).  3.  They  become  busybodies,  with  a  perverted  activity  in  the  concerns  of
others  which  implies  a  neglect  of  their  own.  Tnis  meddling  spirit  leads  to  misunder-
standings and  mischiefs  of  many  kinds.  4.  They  become  talkers  of  scandal,  "  speaking
things  which  they  ought  not " — things  which  may  be  false,  or,  if  true,  are  not  to  be
repeated  from  house  to  house. — T.  C.

Vers.  14, 15. — Directions  fa  such  young  widows.  The  case  is  one  for  special  guidance.

I.  A  return  to  the  sphere  of  domestic  duties  is  advised  by  the  apostle.
**  I  wish,  therefore,  that  the  younger  widows  marry,  bear  children,  manage  the  house,
give  no  occasion  for  the  adversary  to  reproach."  1.  There  is  nothing  in  this  counsel
to  encourage  a  resort  to  ascetic  life,  or  an  escape  from  the  ordinary  obligations  of  society.
The  over-valuation  of  ascetic  life  has  been  the  great  means  of  disparaging  and  dis-
couraging the  piety  of  common  iife.  Religion  was  made,  not  for  an  idle,  but  for  a  busy
world.  2.  The  return  to  home-ties  would  probably  break  the  farce  of  temptations  to  looi-e
living.  Idleness  would  thus  be  counteracted,  as  well  as  the  wantonnoss  against  Christ
previously  censured.  The  woman  would  thus  bo  "  saved  by  child-bearing,  if  she  con-
tinued in  faith  and  holiness  with  sobriety  "  (ch.  ii.  15).  3.  Mark  the  variety  of  her
net'}  relations.  First  to  her  husband,  then  to  her  children,  then  to  her  servants,  tihe  is
to  discharge  each  duty  faithfully,  so  as  to  avoid  the  reproach  of  the  adversary.

II.  The  reason  why  such  counsel  is  given.  "  Give  no  occasion  for  reproach  to
the  adversary ;  for  already  some  have  been  turned  away  after  Satan."  1.  The  adversary  i»
not  necessarily  the  devil,  nor  any  particular  individual,  but  that  collective  society  around
the  Church  which  is  always  watchful  for  the  halting  of  God's  servants.  For  good  cause
or  bad  the  reproaches  will  come,  but  they  ought  not  to  be  justified  by  the  injurious,
or  frivolous,  or  licentious  conduct  of  professors.  2.  Mischitf  of  this  sort  had  already
accrued  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  Some  widows  had  given  evidence  of  the  idle,  wanton,,
worldly  behaviour  already  condemned,  showing  a  distinct  swerve  toward  the  adversary
of  souls  and  the  accuser  of  the  brethren.  ^Christ  was  the  true  Spouso;  Satan  th&
seducer."— T.  C.


CH.  V.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  lOT


Ver.  16. — Further  directions  as  to  the  support  of  widows.  There  is  here  a  return  tw
the  subject  of  private  beneficence.

I.  Thb  duty  of  Christian  women  to  support  their  widowed  relatives.  "  If
any  woman  that  believes  hath  widows,  let  support  be  given  to  them."  77ie  allusion
is  probably  to  the  younger  widows,  whose  future  would  be  very  uncertain  till,  at  least,
they  should  marry.  The  apostle  had  already  provided  for  the  case  of  aged  widows.  It
was  the  plain  duty  of  relatives  to  watch  over  the  welfare  of  the  younger  women,  who
might  be  sisters,  sisters-in-law,  or  nieces.  The  apostle  founds  the  duty  upon  the
principle  that  the  gospel  has  not  superseded,  but  rather  strengthened,  the  claims  of  kinship.

IL  Reasons  for  the  discharge  of  this  private  duty.  "  And  let  not  the  Church
be  burdened,  that  it  may  relieve  those  that  are  widows  indeed."  1.  It  would  burden  the
Church  greatly  to  increase  the  number  of  the  pensioners  on  its  generosity,  2.  The  exercise
of  private  beneficence  would  allow  a  fuller  provision  to  be  made  for  those  aged  widows
who  were  recUly  friendless,  homeless,  and  destitute, — T.  C.

Vers.  17,  18. — Directions  respecting  the  honour  due  to  the  elders  of  the  Church,-
"  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  those
who  labour  in  the  Word  and  doctrine."

I.  The  class  of  persons  here  referred  to.  1.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle  knew
of  no  officers  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus  but  these  elders,  with  the  deacons.  2.  Their
principal  duty  vjas  government.  It  was  at  least  the  prominent  element  in  their  calling.
3.  JTie  passage  suggests  that,  while  all  the  elders  governed,  all  did  not  labour  in  the  Word
and  doctrine.  Each  Church  in  that  day  had  its  band  of  elders  at  its  head,  but  the
teaching  function  was  not  universal,  though  by-and-by  it  assumed  greater  prominence
and  commanded  greater  distinction  and  respect.

IL  The  honour  due  to  elders.  They  were  to  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour ; .
that  is,  they  were  to  be  liberally  provided  for  by  the  Church,  as  a  special  mode  of
showing  respect  to  their  office.

III.  The  ground  for  this  injunction.  "  For  the  Scripture  saith,  Thou  shalt  not
muzzle  an  ox  while  treading  out  the  corn.  And,  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."
These  two  sayings,  one  contained  in  Scripture  (Deut.  xxv.  4),  the  other  a  proverbial
saying  used  by  our  Lord  himself  (Luke  x.  7),  affords  an  argument  for  the  support  of
Christian  labourers.  1.  This  shows  that  both  the  Law  and  the  gospel  sanction  the  due
support  of  the  ministry,  2.  It  shows  that  the  minister's  support  is  a  matter  of  rights
and  not  of  compassion  or  kindness.  The  animals  that  laboured  had  a  right  to  the  fruit
of  their  labours. — T.  C.

Ver.  19. — Directions  as  to  accusations  against  elders,  "  Against  an  elder  receive  not
an  accusation,  except  it  be  upon  two  or  three  witnesses."

I.  Elders  may  be  exposed  to  such  accusations  by  their  very  zeal  and  faith-
rULNESS.  1.  Their  duty  being  to  convince  the  gainsay ers  and  to  reprove  the  faults  of
men,  they  would  be  exposed  to  the  risk  of  false  accusation.  Good  ministers  would.
be  oftener  accused  if  their  accusers  could  but  find  judges  willing  to  receive  their  charges.
2.  It  is  the  interest  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  maintain  the  reputation  of  its  ministers
unchallenged.  It  involves  a  sort  of  scandal  for  them  to  be  accused  at  all,  even  though
they  should  afterwards  be  cleared.

IL  The  course  recommended  in  cases  of  this  sort.  1.  It  diminishes  the  chances
of  such  charges  being  made,  that  the  testimony  of  a  single  malicious  witness  wUl  not
suffice  to  have  an  accusation  even  formally  considered.  2.  It  would  be  a  serious  dis-
couragement to  a  good  minister  for  such  charges  to  be  entertained  upon  partial  or  defec-
tive evidence.  3.  The  deference  due  to  the  position  of  a  man  chosen  by  the  Church  cm
its  pastor  demanded  a  wise  caution  in  the  reception  of  charges  against  him.  4.  Yet  it
was  the  duty  of  Timothy  to  make  an  investigation  supported  by  adequate  evidence.  There
is  nothing  in  the  minister's  position  to  exempt  him  from  a  just  inquiry  and  its  duo
consequences.— T.  C.

Ver.  20. — The  manner  of  public  rebuke.  The  apostle  refers  here,  not  to  offending
elders,  but  to  members  of  the  Church  generally,  as  we  justly  infer  from  the  change
of  number.    It  is  the  elder  in  the  one  case ;  it  is  *'  those  who  sin**  in  the  other.


108  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  v.  1—25.

T.  The  publicitt  op  bebukb.  ''Those  that  Bin  rebuke  before  all.**  1.  The  dan
T^erred  to  consists  not  qf  those  merely  overtaken  in  a/auU  (Ghd.  vi.  1),  but,  as  the  tense
01  the  word  sisnifies,  persons  given  to  sinning.  Thus  great  oonsidcration  and  caution
are  to  be  exercised.  The  casual  transgressor  might  be  dealt  with  privately,  and  would
not  need  further  dealing  on  his  exhiUting  evidence  of  repentance.  2.  It  was  to  be  merdy
rdfuke,  not  exclusion  from  the  Church,  If  the  rebuke  was  unheeded,  the  extreme
sentence  would  follow.  8.  The  reln^  was  to  be  public  (1)  The  transgression  may
have  been  very  public,  to  the  scandal  of  religion ;  (2)  the  publicity  would  involve  the
full  disclosure  of  the  sin,  and  involve  shame.

II.  The  design  op  public  bebukb.  "  In  order  that  the  rest  also  may  fear.**  Such
a  discipline  would  have  a  deterrent  icfluence  upon  others.  The  strictness  of  the  law
would  not  be  without  effects  upon  conscience. — T.  C.

Yer.  21. — A  solemn  charge  to  Timothy  to  he  conscientiously  impartial  in  these  eases,

1.  The  solemnity  of  the  chabge.  ''  I  solemnly  charge  thee  oefore  Grod,  and  Jesus
Christ,  and  the  elect  angels."  1.  Timothy,  who  is  exhorted  to  faithfulness  injudgment,
is  himself  brought  face  to  face  with  his  Lord  and  Judge,  who  will  appear  along  with  the
elect  angels  as  assessors  or  executors  of  the  Divine  commands.  (1)  Grod  is  omniscient
and  he  is  righteous,  for  with  him  is  no  respect  of  persons,  and  Timothy  was  a  minister
in  the  house  of  Crod,  answerable  for  his  discharge  of  all  ecclesiastical  duty.  (2)  Christ
is  likewise  omniscient  as  well  as  righteous,  Head  of  the  Church  and  Judge  of  the  quick
and  the  dead,  before  whose  judgment-seat  all  must  stand.  (3)  **  The  elect  angels?*  (a)
These,  who  left  not  their  first  estate,  but  have  been  preserved  in  their  integrity  by  Christ,
who  is  the  Head  both  of  angek  and  of  men,  are  the  ministers  and  attendants  of  God.
(b)  There  is  nothing  here  to  warrant  the  worship  of  angels,  because  they  are  not  hero
regiurded  as  judges, but  as  witnesses;  neither  are  they  sworn  by  nor  appealed  to  by  the
apostle.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  often  summoned  as  witnesses  in  the  same  sense.

2.  This  high  appeal  was  designed  to  elevate  the  mind  of  Jimothy  ahove  all  sinister  motives,
-and  secure  him  against  the  dangers  of  a  timid  complianee  with  evil.

II.  The  substance  of  the  charge.  "That  thou  keep  these  things  without  pre-
judging, doing  nothing  by  partiality."  He  refers  to  the  judicial  inquiries  respecting
•elders  and  members  of  the  Church.  I.  There  was  to  be  an  absence  of  prejudice.  There
must  be  no  prejudging  a  case  before  it  is  hcai-d,  under  the  influence  of  party  feeling.
Timothy  must  calmly  hearken  to  the  case  presented  by  both  sides,  and  weigh  the
•evidence  without  haste  or  favour  to  either  side.  2.  There  was  to  be  an  absence  of  all
partiality.  "Doing  nothing  by  partiality."  There  must  be  no  leaning  to  one  side
more  than  another.  The  scales  of  justice  must  be  held  evenly  in  Church  affairs.
Elders  and  members  were  alike  to  be  judged  with  all  fairness.— T.  C.

Ver.  22. — A  caution  against  hasty  induction  of  ministers.  If  such  judicial  inquiries
are  to  be  avoided,  there  ought  to  bo  great  care  in  the  original  appointment  of
ministers.

I.  There  must  be  due  care  in  ordaining  right  persons  to  the  ministry.  "  Lay
hands  on  no  one  hastily."  1.  This  does  not  refer  to  the  practice  qf  receiving  offenders
back  into  the  Church  by  the  imposition  of  the  bishops  hands.  No  such  practice  can  be
identified  with  the  aix)stolic  ago,  or  with  that  immediately  succeeding  it.  2.  It  refers^
OS  the  usage  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  suggests,  to  '•''the  laying  on  of  hands  in  ordination.''*
(1)  Saul  and  Barnabas  were  thus  designated  to  their  missionary  tour  (Acts  xiii.  1).
Timothy  was  thus  ordained  by  the  hands  of  the  presbytery.  It  was  the  solemn  recogni-
tion by  the  Church  of  the  call  which  the  minister-elect  had  received  from  on  high.
.(2)  Timothy  was  to  guard  against  the  possibility  of  rash  appointments  to  the  ministry
'by  a  due  inquiry  beforehand  into  the  spiritual  character  and  pastoral  qualifications  of
the  candidates  for  office.  The  glory  of  God,  the  salvation  of  man,  the  honour  of  religion,
.were  all  involved  in  such  appointments.

II.  The  serious  consequences  of  slackness  in  the  DiscnAR,oE  OF  such  a  duty.
"  Neither  participate  in  other  men's  sins."  Timothy  would  "  adopt  ttie  sins  he  over-
looked **  if  he  did  not  rightly  distinguish  between  the  worthy  and  the  unworthy.

III.  The  necessity  of  perfect  purity  on  Timothy's  own  part.  "  Keep  thyself
pure."     lie  must  be  pure  who  is  called  to  judge  others.    There  must  be  no  shadow  of


CH.V.  1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  109

evil  attaching  to  his  character  or  conduct.    Any  impurity  of  character  would  utterly
destroy  his  influence,  and  silence  his  rebukes  of  others. — T.  C.

Ver.  23. — Direction  to  Timothy  to  he  careftil  of  his  health,  "  No  lonc;er  drink  water,
but  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thy  frequent  ailments."

I.  The  apostle  lends  no  encouragement  to  an  ascetic  attitude  toward  meats
OB  DRINKS.  The  Essenes  abstained  altogether  from  wine,  and  as  there  was  a  close  con-
nection between  Ephesus  and  Alexandria,  where  such  views  were  held  by  a  small  section
of  Jews,  it  is  not  improbable  that  such  views  may  have  reached  Ephesus.  There  was-
no  harm  in  Timothy  abstaining  from  wine,  as  a  protest  against  excess  in  wine,  but
rather  something  highly  praiseworthy.  It  was  not  through  any  deference  to  Esseno
asceticism,  but  through  such  a  consideration  as  is  hero  suggested,  that  Timothy  was  an
habitual  water-drinker.

II.  The  apostle  has  exclusive  regard  to  Timothy's  health.  The  use  of  wine  was
regarded  in  its  purely  medicinal  aspect,  and  not  as  a  mere  pleasant  beverage.  Timothy
was  engaged  in  a  service  that  demanded  the  fullest  exhibition  of  all  mental  and  bodily
hardihood,  as  well  as  an  iron  endurance  of  disappointment  and  opposition.  Under  such
influences,  he  would  become  depressed  with  efiects  most  prejudicial  to  his  health.
The  counsel  shows  the  deep  interest  of  the  apostle  in  the  young  evangelist's  comfort
and  welfare. — T.  C.

Vers.  24, 25. — Final  directions  to  Timothy  respecting  his  attitude  toward  the  sins  and'
sinful  works  of  men,  I.  A  caution  against  his  being  too  precipitate  in  absolving
MEN  FROM  CENSURE.  "  The  sius  of  some  men  are  manifest,  going  before  to  judgment ;
with  some  again,  they  follow  after."  The  judgment  is  God's,  without  excluding  man's..
1.  One  doss  of  sins  is  public  and  open.  They  reach  the  Judge  before  the  man  himself
who  commits  them.  The  sins  are  notorious.  Timothy  will  have  no  excuse  for  absolving
such  persons.  2.  Another  class  of  sins  is  not  so  manifest.  Unknown  for  the  time  to  all
but  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God,  yet  going  forward  notwithstanding  to  the  final  judg-
ment^ where  nothing  can  be  hid.  The  judgment  of  man  may  have  meanwhile  absolved
such  a  sinner,  but  the  mournful  secret  comes  out  after  all.

IL  A  CAUTION  against  being  too  precipitate  in  his  censures.  "In  like  manner
also  the  works  that  are  good  are  manifest,  and  those  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid."
Some  are  open  witnesses,  others  are  secret  witnesses ;  but  there  can  be  no  effectual
suppression  of  their  testimony.  God  will  bring  works  of  all  kinds  into  light.  But  it
is  the  duty  of  Timothy  and  ministers  in  general  to  use  due  diligence  to  have  the  truth
brought  to  light  respecting  such  works.  Therefore  Timothy  was  not  to  be  rash  in
condemning  where  hidden  worth  had  not  disclosed  itself  sufficiently  to  his  eye.  The
good  tree  would  by-and-by  justify  itself  by  its  fruits. — T.  C.

Ver.  1. — Beverence  for  age.  "  Rebuke  not  an  elder."  Comprehensive  indeed  is
Scripture.  Its  virtue  is  no  vague  generality,  but  is  definite  and  distinct.  It  is  this
which  makes  the  Bible  a  daily  portion.  There  is  ever  in  it  some  special  counsel  and
comfort.  With  the  cross  for  a  centre,  all  the  precious  jewels  of  truth  are  set  in  their
places  around  it.  For  each  relationship  of  life  there  are  separate  behests  of  duty,  and
he  must  read  in  vain  who  does  not  feel  that  it  was  written  for  him.  With  this  light
none  need  go  astray ;  and  if  they  do,  it  is  because  they  love  the  darkness  rather  than
the  light.

I.  There  is  to  be  reverence  for  age.  We  are  to  entreat  the  elder  rather  than  to
rebuke  them.  Scolding  is  often  mistaken  for  fidelity;  and  there  is  a  scolding  preaching
which  holds  up  mistake  and  error  to  scorn  rather  than  to  pity.  The  Bible  reverences
age.  The  elder,  if  he  be  here,  must  have  seen  and  known  terrible  troubles  and  fierce
temptations.  His  bark  has  been  in  many  seas.  His  sword  lias  been  almost  shivered
in  many  fi<;hts.  His  countenance  tells  of  tears  and  tribulations.  He  lias  known  defeat
as  well  as  victory.  Rebuke  him  not.  With  the  soft  down  of  youth  on  your  cheeky
deal  reverently  with  the  grey-headed  men.  If  evil  seems  to  be  petting  the  mastery,
and  the  lingering  anjrels  are  about  to  leave,  ontrtat  age  by  the  memories  of  the  past
and  the  <;reat  hopes  of  the  rewnrd  so  nigh  at  hand.

II.  There  is  to  be  fellowship  with  youth.    Ec  a  son  to  the  aged,  but  a  brother


110  THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  v.  1— 25.

to  the  young.  "  And  tbo  younger  men  as  brethren ; "  not  as  a  proud  nriest  sent  to  rule
them  and  to  shrive  them,  but  as  one  who  has  the  passions  and  the  hopes,  the  duties
and  the  dangers,  of  a  brother. — W.  M.  S.

Yer.  2. — What  women  should  he,  ''The  elder  women  as  mothers;  the  younger  as
sisters,  with  all  purity."  Full  of  the  power  which  comes  from  feminine  pity.  Full  of
motherly  experiences  about  children.  Full  of  daily  care  and  the  diaconate  of  serving
the  home-taoles.  Full  of  a  great  heart-love  that  would  make  a  roof-tree  for  all,  as
a  hen  that  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings.  Timothy  will  yet  learn  in  the
Church  work  the  value  of  a  mother  in  IsraeL  1.  Mothers  were  our  first  paaiors.
2.  Mothers  were  our  earliest  examples,  "  The  younger  as  sisters,  with  all  purity.**
Beautiful  is  the  holy  grace  of  purity,  and  sensitive  is  the  girl-heart  to  the  loveliness
of  true  virtue  I  Put  them  not  into  confessionals  to  suggest  sins  that  they  never  knew,
and  deprave  the  nature  under  the  pretence  of  absolving  it. — ^W.  M.  8.

Yer.  3. — Sympathy  with  widows.  ''Honour  widows."  Let  them  have  a  special
place  in  reverent  care  and  common  prayer,  as  they  have  a  lot  which  is  so  isolated  and
80  hard — a  battle  so  keen  and  terrible,  and  as  they  find  that  the  slender  means  are  so
soon  spent.  The  lonely  hours  are  full  of  pictures  of  the  past:  as  wives  they  were  the
first  to  be  thought  of  and  provided  for — the  best  was  for  them,  the  first  place  at  the
table  and  in  the  heart  was  theirs ;  so  honour  them,  for  they  are  sensitive  to  slight  and
indififerenoe.    Let  the  Church  counteract  the  neglect  of  the  world.

L  The  spirit  op  children.  If  they  have  children,  or,  as  sometimes  happens,
nephews— or  sister's  children — who  lost  their  mother  in  life's  dawn  of  morning,  let  them
show  piety  at  home — the  piety  of  gratitude,  the  piety  of  help,  the  piety  of  reverence,
the  piety  of  requital  How  large  a  word  ''  piety  **  is  I  An  ungrateful  child,  who  never
thinks  on  a  parent's  past  self-denial  in  its  education,  a  parent's  watchfulness  in  times
of  weakness  and  sickness,  a  parent's  interest  in  its  pleasures  and  counsels  as  to
its  companionships,  and  a  parent's  long  interest  in  all  that  relates  to  mind  and  heart, —
is  an  impious  child.  Quick,  clever,  it  may  be  flattered  by  new  friends,  and  favoured
by  fortune  with  pleasant  looks,  and  yet  be  selfish,  indifferent,  and  forgetful

II.  The  requital  to  be  given.  Remember,  young  friends,  that  you  have  to  requite
your  parents,  not  with  the  patronage  of  commercial  payment  when  you  succeed,  but
with  the  requital  of  the  tender  inquiry,  the  watchful  love,  the  jealous  service,  the
gracious  respect. — W.  M.  S.

Yer.  4. —  What  jAeases  Ood.  "For  that  is  <];ood  and  acceptable  before  God."  He
looks  not  merely  on  the  great  heroisms  of  confessors  and  martyrs,  but  on  the  sublime
simplicities  even  of  a  child's  character.

I.  Avoid  mistakes  in  child  training  and  teaching.  I  am  one  of  those  who
think  that  it  is  a  monstrous  mistake  to  fill  their  hymns  with  rich  rhapsodies  about
heaven,  about  wanting  to  be  angels,  and  about  superior  emotions,  when  the  very
things  next  to  them  are  seldom  referred  to  at  all.  To  the  father  the  son  must  always
be  a  boy,  and  the  daughter  to  the  mother  a  girl;  so  that  all  manner,  even  which  is
Jiigh -flown  and  independent,  or  brusque  and  irreverent,  is  painful,  and  brings  tears  to
■the  hearts  of  parents.

II.  Remember  the  religiousness  op  home-life.  **  Piety  at  home,"  by  which  is  not
meant  precocity  of  religious  opinion,  or  plentifulness  of  reli;;ious  phraseology,  but  the
piety  of  respect,  attention,  obedience,  requital,  and  reverence.  This  is  '*  good  and  accept-
able before  God.''— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — Desolateness,  "  Now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  desolate."  Here  tlio
apostle  returns  to  widows  again,  showing  that  ho  has  theiii  very  much  in  his  mind.

I.  Desolate.  That  is  the  revealing  word.  "  Desolate."  She  may  be  poor  and  deso-
late, or  she  may  be  comixftent  and  desolate,  or  she  may  be  rich  and  desoUto — all
surrounding  thin^^s  making  her  feel  more  the  loss  of  that  which  is  not ;  all  framing
"emptiness; "  all  but  reminders  of  the  presence  which  gave  value  to  them  all.

II.  Desolate;  for  the  life-path  is  and  must  be  trodden  alone.  The  wakeful
hours  find  her  alone;  the  hours  when  pain  and  weariness  come  to  her  find  her  alone;


OT-v.  1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  Ill

for  the  difficult  problem  of  thought  has  none  to  aid  in  its  solution  now — she  is  alone.
:So  desolate ;  for  other  fellowships  are  not  for  life ;  they  only  help  to  vary  her  life.
Desolate ;  for  none  can  quite  understand  her  care  and  giief,  and  think  that  she  will  soon
put  thorn  off  with  the  weeds  and  crape. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — Confidence  in  the  Father.  '*  Trusteth  in  God."  Let  Timothy  remember
that  in  her  case  experience  has  ratified  truth.  She  will  need  no  elaborate  arguments
for  the  truth,  because —

L  She  has  the  evidential  proof  within.  Did  she  not  in  the  dark  hours  fling  her
arms  around  her  Fathcr^s  neck ;  did  she  not  tell  him  that  she  would  fear  no  want,
though  she  felt  such  change  ?  Did  not  that  trust — simple  trust— do  her  more  good
than  all  human  words,  all  kindly  letters,  all  change  of  place  and  scene?  Others
wondered  at  her,  rising  up  in  her  poor  strength  to  arrange,  to  order,  to  readjust  life  to
means  and  circumstances,  to  do  her  best  for  the  little  flock  that  she  was  shepherdess  to
in  the  wilderness.

II.  She  has  the  fellowship  of  prayer.  Yes,  0  man  of  the  world,  0  scorncr  of
truth,  0  soft-spoken  atheist,  she  prays!  Makes  the  air  quiver,  you  say.  Hears  the
echo  of  her  own  cry,  you  say.  Bends  before  an  empty  throne,  you  say.  It  may  be
you  have  never  felt  to  need  God  as  she  needs  him  now.  Her  need  is  an  instinct  and
iin  argument;  for  somehow  in  this  world  there  is  a  Divine  revealing,  call  it  what  you
like,  that  satisfies  the  desire  of  every  living  thing.  And  she  has  prayed,  and  the  secret
of  the  Lord  has  been  made  known ;  and  that  it  is  no  empty  experience,  is  now  to  be
proven  in  this  way.

III.  She  reveals  its  power  by  her  perseverance  in  it.  She  '^continueth  in  prayers
iind  supplications  night  and  day."  Then  there  must  be  relief.  The  burden  must  be
lighter,  the  load  must  be  easier,  the  vision  must  be  clearer.  None  of  us  continue  in
that  which  mocks  us.  The  invisible  world  is  as  real  as  the  visible  one.  We  know
when  there  is  a  whisper  within  us  and  an  arm  around  us,  and  so  does  she.  Surely
you  would  not  rob  her  of  her  only  wealth — her  trust.  But  you  cannot.  "  Night  and
day."  Mark  that.  She  finds  in  the  night  an  image  of  her  grief.  She  finds  in  the  night
silence.  The  children,  if  any,  are  asleep.  She  whose  tears  have  watered  her  couch,  whose
hand  has  reached  forth  into  the  empty  space,  whose  every  movement  would  once  have
awakened  solicitude,  as  of  pain,  or  weariness,  or  sleeplessness,  is  now  alone.  But  not
alone ;  for  the  lips  move  and  a  great  cry  goes  up :  '*  0  God,  be  not  far  from  me  I  Listen
to  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  King  and  my  God.  My  heart  within  me  is  desolate.  Hear
me  out  of  thy  habitation,  thou  Father  of  the  fatherless,  thou  Jitdge  of  the  widow.  I
mourn  in  my  complaint  and  make  a  noise.  Oh,  when  wilt  thou  come  to  me?"  And  God
does  come ;  and  it  may  help  Timothy  to  know  that  this  gospel  which  he  has  to  preach
is  a  Divine  living  seed,  bearing  its  harvests  in  the  hearts  and  homes  of  the  elders  and
of  the  widows.  We  shall  see  in  our  next  exposition  that  St.  Paul  knows  that  there
are  worldly  hearts  to  whom  affliction  brings  no  gracious  fruit;  and  if  there  be  a  sight
on  earth  more  api)alling  than  another,  it  is  the  frivolous  widow  whose  very  mourning
is  a  pride  and  a  stuiiy,  whose  manner  is  that  of  a  pleasure-seeker,  and  whose  heart  is
unafl^ected  by  the  reverences  of  the  memories  of  love  and  death.  It  is  very  evident
that  the  gospel  which  Timothy  was  to  teach  and  preach  was  no  mere  creed,  no  mere
perfect  ritual  or  ceremonial,  but  a  religion  human  and  Divine,  a  religion  that  anticipates
the  changes  and  sorrows  and  dangers  of  every  individual  life.  This  Book  is  a  vade-
mecum.  Here  we  go  for  all  the  medicines  of  relief  and  hope  that  our  poor  humanity
needs.  We  shall  never  outgrow  the  Book,  Its  leaves  are  still  for  the  healing  of  the
nations,  and  it  makes  life  calm,  restful,  and  beautiful.  How  comes  it  that  we  have
known  the  sweetest  an;;els  in  such  guises  as  these  afflictions  and  bereavements  bring?
Yet  so  it  is.  Where  shall  we  go?  Oh,  life  has  many  roads;  banditti  lurk  here  and
there,  and  there  are  swollen  rivers  to  be  forded,  and  dangerous  passes  to  be  entered.
How  bliall  we  g(^?  With  this  rod  and  staff  wc  may  go  anywhere.  If  we  take  a  fable,
let  it  bo  the  ancient  stone :  if  you  look  therein,  strange  translormations  take  place —
you  ask  me  wh'tt  I  see  f  Now  a  sword;  now  a  fountain ;  now  a  simple  loaf  of  bread  ;
now  a  touchstuiie  of  evil  and  of  good  ;  now  a  rock  high  above  the  waters ;  now  a  pilot
■on  a  dangerous  .sea ;  now  a  pillar  rising  on  the  plain  of  time;  now  a  harp  from  which
sweetest  music  breathes ;  now  a  pillow — a  simple  pillow.     Cowper  puts  aside  his  own


112  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  v.  1— 2a


*  Task '  and  takes  God's  Testament ;  so  will  we.    On  these  promises  of  God  we  will  fall
asleep. — AY.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Death  in  life.  *'6nt  she  that  livcth  Id  pleasure  is  dead  wbile  sho
livcth.**  ChristiaDity  purifies  and  harmonizes  the  whole  nature  of  man,  and  assimi-
lates whatever  is  pure  in  humanity  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  does  not  destroy  pure
earthly  joys ;  nay,  rather  it  plants  many  flowers  by  the  wayside  of  life.  But  pleasure
is  often  perverted  by  man,  and  in  that  age  it  had  become  so  associated  with  what  was
coarse  and  cnmal,  that  the  very  word  **  pleasure "  became  in  the  gospel  a  synonym
for  sin.  We  have  here  death  in  the  midst  of  life — ^'  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead
while  she  liveth  "—or  death  and  life  side  by  side.

I.  The  immobility  which  chabacterizes  the  dead  bodt  obaracterizes  the  dead
80UL.  There  is  no  movement  of  thought  towards  Grod ;  no  feet  swift  to  do  his  will ;  no
heart  that  beats  in  sympathy  with  his  Law.  Instinct  is  alive ;  but  the  brightness  of
the  eye,  and  the  music  of  the  voice,  and  the  activities  of  life,  are  like  flowers  upon
graves.

II.  The  iksexsibilitt  op  the  dead  body  charactehtzes  the  dead  soul.  All
around  there  may  be  signs  of  outward  life.  As  the  body  lies  in  the  churchyard,  the
murmuring  river  flows  by  its  banks,  the  birds  make  their  summer  music  in  the  trees,
and  men,  women,  and  children  stay  to  rest,  and  to  read  the  inscriptions  on  the  graves ;
but  to  all  these  things  the  sleepers  in  the  tombs  are  insensible.  So  the  dead  soul  is
insensible  to  the  august  realities  of  religion,  to  the  voice  of  God,  and  to  the  visions  of
the  great  day.

III.  The  corruption  of  the  dead  body  characterizes  the  dead  soul.  This  is  the
dread  thought  in  connection  with  death,  that  we  must  bury  it  out  of  sight.  When  decay
commenccH,  corruption  begins ;  and  he,  who  knows  all  that  is  in  man,  tells  us  that  cut
of  the  sepulchre  of  the  unrenewed  heart  of  man  come  evil  desires,  murders,  and  adulteries.
'*  They  that  sow  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption.'*  These  aspects  of  the
case  show  us  that,  as  there  are  graveyards  in  the  crowded  cities  with  all  their  busy  life,
so  in  the  unrenewed  heart  of  man  there  is  death  in  the  midst  of  life. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  8. — Care  for  the  home.  "  But  if  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and  specially  for
those  of  bis  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel."  The
gospel  does  not  leave  us  with  any  loose  ideas  of  responsibility.  There  is  often  a
universal  sentiment  of  goodness  which  finds  no  particular  application.

I.  Man  has  "his  own."  Ho  is  to  care  for  his  own  soul.  He  is  accountable  for  his
own  influence.  He  is  the  father  of  his  own  family,  and,  up  to  a  certain  age,  his  will  is
their  law.  Ho  is  to  provide  for  his  own ;  his  thought  and  skill  and  care  are  all  to  bo
laid  upon  the  altar  ot  the  household.  It  is  sad  to  see  men  sometimes  flattered  by  the
world,  and  welcomed  to  every  hearth,  who  yet  leave  "  their  own"  slighted  and  neglected
at  home.  The  gospel  says  that  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife ;  and  the  gospel
evidently  understands  the  design  of  God,  that  man  should  be  the  hard  worker  and
bread-winner  of  lile.

II.  He  has  a  faith  to  keep.  What  is  meant  here  by  denying  the  faith,  and  being
worse  than  an  infidel?  Surely  this,  that  the  faith  is  meant  to  make  us  Christ-like  ;
one  with  him  who  pleased  not  himself,  who  ministered  to  others,  and  who  revealed
to  us  that  great  law  of  love  by  which  every  Christian  life  must  be  inspired.  The  word
"  infidel  "has  often  been  used  to  represent  mere  sceptical  unbelief.  It  really  means
*'  wanting  in  faith;**  and  the. man  who,  whatever  he  professes, does  not  live  out  the
spirit  of  the  gospel  (which  sanctifies,  above  all  things  earthly,  the  marriage  life,  and
makes  it  the  image  of  the  union  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church),  that  man  is  worse
than  an  infidel,  if  by  infidel  we  mean  a  man  who  intellectually  has  not  accepted  the
Christian  faith.— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  13. — The  Ivsyhali/  life.  "And  withal  they  learn  to  be  idle,  wandering  about
from  house  to  house;  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also  and  busybodies,  speakinjj
things  which  they  ought  not."  Indolence  is  the  parent  of  all  sins,  because,  with  evil
so  active  in  the  world,  some  of  its  emissaries  are  sure  to  be  wanting  houbcroom  in  our
hearts.


CH.V.1— 25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11^'

I.  We  may  I.EARN  TO  BE  IDLE.  There  is  no  life  so  undignified  as  that  which  is  busy
in  trifles,  which  has  learned  to  enjoy  listless  honrs.  For  the  wandering  thought  pro-
duces the  wandering  life.  ''Wandering  about  from  house  to  house;'*  and,  having
nothing  else  to  build  with,  too  often  build  aerial  structures  of  untruths  and  half-truths.

II.  KoT  ONLY  IDLE,  BUT  TATTLERS.  The  harm  that  has  been  worked  in  this  world '
by  busybodies  cannot  be  over-estimated.  It  is  easy  to  send  an  arrow  into  the  air,  but
not  to  gather  it  up  again.  It  is  easy  to  poison  the  river  of  good  reputation,  but
we  cannot  re-purify  the  stream.  It  is  easy  to  pluck  the  flower  of  a  good  man's  fjEime»
but  we  cannot  restore  its  beauty.  "  Speaking  things  which  they  ought  not."  How
few  really  make  "  I  ought "  govern  their  lives !  Custom  and  convenience  and  pleasant-
ness too  often  constrain  our  speech.  People  like  to  startle  others,  to  give  the  shock  of
a  new  sensation,  to  amuse  them,  to  please  them.  And,  alas !  it  is  too  true  that  tattlers
and  busybodies  know  how  to  gratify  those  they  visit.  St.  Paul  thinks  in  this  next
verse  (14)  that  marriage  and  care  of  children  and  housewifery  are  good  things  (which
the  ascetic  Roman  Church  seems  not  to  think),  and  that  women  so  occupied  give  none
occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  reproachfully. — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  24. — Sins  that  go  he/ore,  "  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before
to  judgment ;  and  some  men  they  follow  after."  Primarily,  these  words  refer  to  the
ministry.  Never  act  suddenly.  You  may  be  deceived,  and  lay  hands  on  unfit  men,
damaging  the  Church  and  dishonouring  God.  Manner  may  deceive.  Latent  sins  may
slumber  beneath  specious  appearances.  Some  sins  blossom  at  once,  and  evil  is  unveiled.
At  times  the  poisonous  springs  send  forth  their  deleterious  waters  at  once.  Sometimes
they  are  like  bidden  watercourses  flowing  beneath  the  surface  soil,  and  appearing  in
unexpected  places.  Moral  government  always  exists,  but  diversity  characterizes  the
methods  of  God.  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne.  Sometimes
Cain  and  Ananias  are  punished  at  once;  the  one  is  outlawed,  the  other  dies.  But
Herod  and  Pilate  waited  for  a  revealing  day.  Subject — Sins  that  go  before.  They
have  outriders.  As  with  a  trumi)et-peal  attention  is  called  to  their  advent.  We  see
the  evil-doers ;  vile  in  countenance,  shambling  in  gait,  dishonoured  in  mien.  These
sins  are  revealed.  We  mark  lost  delicacy,  honour,  purity,  peace,  principle,  reputation,
joy  I

I.  This  is  special  or  exceptional.  "Some  men's  sins."  Do  not,  in  observing
them,  draw  an  argument  for  the  necessary  goodness  of  others.  The  openness  of  some
judgments  does  not  give,  necessarily,  fair  fame  to  others.  In  the  most  decorous  life
there  may  be  secret  sins.  The  slumbering  fire  may  be  in  the  hold  of  the  stately  ship.
The  hidden  vulture  may  be  waiting  for  the  carrion  of  the  soul.  But  here  there  is
judgment.  We  look  around,  we  see  it.  Our  newspapers,  our  neighbourhoods  say,
"Behold  the  hand  of  God  here."  Faith  is  departed;  hope  is  blighted;  beauty  is
destroyed  ;  the  dark  outriders  are  here.

IL  This  is  a  spectacle  to  men.  *'  They  are  open  beforehand,"  and  not  made  mani-
fest merely  in  the  sense  of  being  sins,  but  their  judgment  is  with  them.  For  there
are  two  ideas — you  may  see  a  sin  to  be  a  sin,  but  you  need  not  have  its  judgment
open.  But  the  translation  here  requires  that  we  shovdd  understand  that  the  judgment
is  open,  as  well  as  the  sin.  You  see  not  only  men's  corruption,  but  their  misery;  not
only  their  guilt,  but  their  shame.  A  child  might  see  a  poison  berry,  and  know  that
it  is  such ;  or  see  a  snake,  and  be  told  it  has  a  sting ;  but  how  clear  the  judgment  if,
under  the  one  tree,  a  little  child  lay  dead ;  and  beside  the  serpent  a  man  was  struggling
in  throes  of  agony  I

III.  TiiEY  ARE  open  BEFOREHAND.  That  implies  they  are  hints  in  this  world  (where
there  is  a  place  for  repentance)  of  troubles  yet  to  come.  They  do  not  exhaust  judg-
ment ;  they  are  premonitions  of  it.  The  light  of  mercy  plays  all  around  even  the  paths
of  judgment  here;  for  the  Saviour  of  men  is  able  to  deliver  from  every  prison-house.
The  beforehand  judgment  may  be  a  merciful  thing,  but  let  no  man  deal  lightly  with
it.  The  gathering  clouds  presage  the  fury  of  the  storm ;  the  pattering  drops  herald  tho
hail  and  rain;  the  reddening  light  of  the  volcano  tells  of  the  desolating  lava.  "Soma
men's  sins  are  open  beforehand." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  24. — Sins  that  follow  after,    "  Some  men  they  follow  after."    Here  is  a  revealed
I.  timothy.  I


114  I'HE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [cu.  v.  1—25.

hct  with  no  comment  upon  it,  but  it  is  very  terrible.  A  smooth  comfortftble  life,  and
▼ei  a  life  of  respectable  sin  1  No  blarney  no  opprobrium,  no  ostradsm  from  society.
Men  deceive  themselves.  They  go  into  the  streets  of  their  Nineveh,  but  no  projAiet
reproves  them.  The  waters  are  rising,  but  no  Noah  warns  them;  all  is  placid  iad  foil
of  repose.

L  I'he  ooxmcnoH  betwxen  ▲  mah  ahd  hib  snm.  "  And  some  fnen  they  follow
alter."  Our  sins  are  like  us;  they  reflect  our  faces;  tiiev  are  mirrors  which  will  one
dia^  show  us  ourselves ;  they  follow  after  us  by  a  moral  individuality ;  they  will  eadi
flv  to  their  own  centre.  Our  sins  are  not  resolvable  into  some  generic  whole  as  the  sin
•of  man.  The  blight  in  the  summer-time  is  not  so  disastrous  in  defacing  b«iuty,  the
locusts  of  the  East  are  not  so  devastins  in  their  all-devouring  flighty  as  aro  our  troops
of  dns.    They  follow  after  us,  and  blight  our  immortidity.

IL  The  oonkkgtion  between  shame  and  bin.  '*  They  follow  after.**  That  is  the
reason  we  are  not  ashsmed  of  them.  Shame  for  sin  is  not  sorrow  for  sin.  The  Hindoo
is  (mly  ashamed  when  he  is  discovered.  That  is  not  grief  at  sin :  it  is  horror  at  being
found  out  Sins  that  follow  after  are  not  much  thought  about  The  world  has  ^veu
us  carte  Uanche  if  we  preserve  our  position  in  society.  What  men  shrink  from  is
exposure  and  shame.  If  all  sins  were  revealed,  who  could  bear  it?  If  the  earth  were
A  moral  mirror,  who  could  walk  upon  it?  But  detection  surely  comes  in  God's  way —
in  Grod's  great  day  when  he  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ — ^W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 16. — Dealing  with  certain  cZouei  in  the  Church,  L  Behayioub  of  Timothy
rrowABD  the  elder  and  tounoeb  Chubch  members  of  both  sexes.  **  Rebuke  not  an
older,  but  exhort  him  as  a  father;  the  younger  men  as  brethren:  the  elder  women  as
mothers ;  the  younger  as  sisters,  in  all  purity."  A  minister  has  to  deal  with  people
differing  in  age  and  sex.  If  he  is  a  young  minister  like  Timothy,  he  has  a  difficult  part
to  act  It  may  happen  that  one  who  is  very  much  his  elder  is  guilty  of  an  offence.
How  is  he  to  conduct  himself  toward  him?  He  is  not  to  rebuke  him  sharply,  as  the
word  means,  being  different  from  what  is  employed  in  2  Tim.  iv.  2,  whore  authority  is
given  to  rebuke.  Along  with  the  authority  that  belongs  to  his  office,  there  is  to  bo
such  respect  as  is  due  by  a  child  to  a  father.  Entreaty  will  therefore  not  be  separated
from  the  presentation  of  duty.  If  it  is  younger  men  that  offend,  there  is  not  to  be
wanting  the  respect  that  is  due  to  brethren.  If  it  is  the  elder  women  who  are  fanlty,
they  are  to  be  addressed  as  mothers.  "  Plead  with  your  mother,  plead "  (Hoe.  ii.  2).
If  it  is  the  youD<;er  women  who  have  to  be  dealt  with,  there  is  to  be  sisterly  regard,
without  the  slightest  departure  from  propriety.

II.  The  Church  roll  of  widows.  **  Honour  widows  that  are  widows  indeed."  The
honour  requires  to  be  restricted,  to  harmonize  with  the  definition  of  them  that  are
widows  indeed.  It  comes  to  bo  their  being  placed  (ver.  9)  on  the  special  roll  of  Church
widows.  Let  the  honour  not  bo  lowered  by  being  too  widely  extended ;  let  it  be  con-
fined to  them  that  are  really  deserving.  1.  Exclusion  of  those  who  have  claims  on
children  or  grandchildren,  **But  if  any  widow  hath  children  or  grandchildren,  let
them  learn  first  to  show  piety  towards  their  own  family,  and  to  requite  their  parents :
for  this  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God."  The  Church  is  not  to  be  charged  with  the
care  of  widows  who  have  children  or  grandchildren  able  to  care  for  them.  Upon  them
the  duty  falls,  before  falling  upon  the  Church.  This  is  only  how  a  sacred  regard  for
parents  should  show  itself.  It  is  a  duty  founded  on  natural  justice,  viz.  requital  for
services  rendered  to  them  by  parents.  And  it  cannot  but  be  pleasin<;  to  God,  who  has
laid  the  foundations  of  it  in  nature,  and  who  is  represented  by  the  ])arents,  so  that  what
is  rendered  to  them  is  regarded  as  rendered  to  him.  2.  Qualification  of  being  desolate.
**  Now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  desolate.''  The  widow  indeed  is  defined  as
desolate  or  left  alone,  i.e.  who,  needing  to  bo  cared  for,  has  none  of  her  own  to  care  for
her.  (1)  Heligion  of  her  position,  "  Hath  her  hope  set  on  God,  and  continueth  in
supplication  and  prayers  night  and  day."  Having  no  expectation  from  any  earthly
heliwr,  she  hath  her  hope  set  on  God,  i.e.  primarily  for  earthly  blessings  that  she  needs.
She  is  also  by  her  destitution  led  to  dwell  more  u(ion  the  future  than  upon  the  present.
She  is  also  by  her  loneliness  led  to  bo  much  with  God.  She  addresses  God  in  connec-
tion with  her  own  requirements,  but  she  does  not  forget  the  requirements  of  othere ;  for
her  prayers  extend  Irom  day  into  the  night,  from  night  into  the  day.    Thus  is  her


en.  V.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  115

position  made  helpful  to  her  religious  life.  (2)  Irreligion  of  a  desolate  position,  ''But
she  that  giveth  herself  to  pleasure  is  dead  while  she  liveth."  In  the  absence  of  chUdren
or  grandchildren  that  can  care  for  her,  the  temptation  is,  where  a  woman  has  not  a
lawful  way  of  making  a  living,  to  seek  a  living  by  giving  herself  up  to  unlawful
pleasure.  Such  a  one  necessarily  loses  any  Christian  status  that  she  had  entitling  her
to  be  cared  for  by  the  Church.  It  can  be  said  of  her  more  radically,  that  she  makes  a
contradiction  of  her  life.  While  living,  she  is  making  of  herself  moral  rottenness.  As
in  this  state  she  is  a  fit  object  for  Christian  sympathy.  And,  if  she  comes  to  see  herself
to  be  in  this  state,  there  is  hope  for  her  from  him  who  hath  said,  ^  Him  that  cometh
unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  But  that  is  the  true  reading  of  her  state  upon
which  all  effort  after  her  salvation  must  proceed,  *'  She  is  dead  while  shejiveth.*'  Season
for  insisting  on  the  quodifioation,  "These  things  also  command,  that  they  may  be
without  reproach."  The  requirement  was  ta  be  laid  authoritatively  upon  the  Church,
in  the  interest  of  the  widows  themselves.  There  was  their  character  as  a  dass  to  bo
protected.  Let  none  be  admitted  into  their  number  who  were  not  fit  subjects  for
Church  support.  General  principle  by  which  this  case  is  ruled,  "  But  if  any  provideth
not  for  his  own,  and  specially  his  own  household,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse
than  an  unbeliever."  The  law  for  the  believer  is  that  he  is  to  provide,  more  widely,
for  his  own  and,  less  widely,  for  those  who  belong  to  the  family.  He  who  does  not
observe  this  is  virtually  unchurching  himself.  He  is  falling  below  the  unbeliever,  who
is  taught  by  nature,  or  by  his  religion  which  is  wrong  on  so  many  points,  to  do  as
much.  With  regard  to  caring  for  parents,  Plutarch  says  that  all  men,  though  some
may  think  otherwise,  say  that  nature  and  the  law  of  nature  requires  that  parents  should
have  the  highest  honour  next  the  gods;  that  men  can  do  nothing  more  acceptable  to
the  gods  than  by  readily  heaping  favours  upon  their  jiarents ;  and  that  nothing  is  a
greater  evidence  of  atheism  or  impiety  than  to  despise  them.  On  the  other  hand,  there
is  a  clear  obligation  also  founded  in  nature  for  parents  to  provide  for  their  children
while  they  are  in  a  state  of  dependence.  This  obligation  is  violated  by  the  man  who
spends  on  his  own  lusts  what  should  bo  spent  on  his  family.  3.  Qualification  of  age.
"  Let  none  bo  enrolled  as  a  widow  under  threescore  years  old."  In  accordance  widi
what  has  gone  before,  we  are  to  think  of  a  roll  of  widows  supported  by  the  Church,  for
which  the  minimum  requirement  of  age  is  here  laid  down  as  sixty.  4.  Qualification
of  regularity  of  marriage,  "  Having  been  the  wife  of  one  man."  It  is  diflScult  to  see
how  such  second  marriage  as  is  sanctioned  in  ver.  14  should  exclude  from  the  roll.  It
is  better,  therefore,  to  think  of  some  irregularity,  such  as  unlawful  divorce  from  a  first
husband.  5.  Qualification  of  serviceahleness,  "Well  reported  of  for  good  works;  if
she  hath  brought  up  children,  if  she  hath  used  hospitality  to  strangers,  if  she  hath
washed  the  saints'  feet,  if  she  hath  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she  hath  dSigently  followed
€very  good  work."  Some  of  the  works  are  mentioned  for  which  she  is  to  be  well  reported
of.  First,  what  she  has  done  for  children,  either  her  own  or  orphans.  To  bring  up
children  well  implies  great  self-denial  and  power  of  management,  and  is  to  do  a  great
service  to  the  Church.  Secondly,  what  she  has  done  for  strangers.  We  are  to  think  of
their  being  entertained  for  the  Church.  If  they  were  not  Christians,  they  would  bo
sent  away  with  a  good  impression  of  Christianity.  Thirdly,  what  she  has  done  for  the
saints.  The  washing  of  the  feet  is  common  in  the  East.  We  need  not  wonder  at
stress  being  laid  on  her  performing  a  humble  service.  Humble  services  are  to  be  per-
formed toward  the  members  of  the  Christian  circle,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  after  the
example  of  Christ.  Fourthly,  what  she  has  done  for  the  afflicted,  or  hard  pressed  in
any  way.  We  are  to  think  of  relief  being  afforded  by  a  visit  of  sympathy,  a  word  of
encouragement,  the  undertaking  of  work  as  well  as  the  bestowal  of  charity.  It  is  added
generally,  "If  she  hath  diligently  followed  every  good  work."  It  is  evident  that  one
who  had  been  so  serviceable  to  the  Church  would,  in  case  of  her  destitution,  have  a
claim  to  be  supported  by  the  Church.  It  can  easily  be  seen,  too,  how,  with  such  qualifi-
cations, she  would  be  exjxjcted,  in  lieu  of  the  support  rendered  to  her,  to  render  such
service  to  the  Church  as  was  in  her  power.  Thus  the  roll  of  Church  widows  would  have
the  honourable  character  of  a  roll  of  Church  workers.  And  we  can  think  of  widows
being  admitted  upon  the  roll  who  did  not  need  Chiurch  support,  but  wanted  to  do  Church
work.  And  there  seems  to  have  been,  in  accordance  with  this,  in  the  early  Church,  an
•order  of  presbytery  vndows,  who,  under  the  sanctions  of  the  Church,  attended  to  the


116  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.v.1— 25.


lick  and  instructed  and  advised  the  younger  members  of  their  sex.  6.  Exdusion  of
tfounffer  widowB,  ''But  younger  widows  refuse."  They  were  not  to  have  the  honour
of  being  put  upon  the  roily  though,  in  case  of  destitution,  not  beyond  Christian  help.
(V)  Their  changeMeness,  **  For  when  they  have  waxed  wanton  against  Glirist,  they
oedre  to  marry ;  having  condemnation,  because  they  have  rejected  their  first  fiedth."
Under  the  influence  of  gnef,  their  first  thought  might  be  to  devote  themselves  to  Christian
service,  and  with  that  view  to  apply  to  be  admitted  on  the  roll  of  Church  widows.
Bat  there  would  be  danger  of  their  departing  fi?om  that  idea  of  their  life.  The  fetct  of
their  desiring  to  marry  being  regarded  as  a  waxing  wanton  against  Christ  implies  that
the  being  admitted  to  the  roll  was  a  coming  under  some  obligation  to  continue  in
widowhood  for  the  sake  of  such  services  as  they  could  render.  Their  being  taken  off  the
roll  implies  the  condenmation  of  their  rejecting  their  first  faith,  f.e.  departing  from  the
idea  which,  at  the  first,  with  sacred  feelings,  they  had  adopted  for  their  future  earthly
life.  (2)  Their  triviality,  "  And  withal  they  learn  also  to  be  idle,  going  about  from
house  to  house ;  and  not  only  idle,  but  tattlers  also  and  busybodies,  speaking  things
which  they  ought  not.**  lliis  was  a  second  danger,  while  remaining  in  widowhood  and
having  their  names  on  the  roll,  their  departing  from  the  eeruminess  of  the  life  which  they
had  chosen.  There  is  a  way  of  going  about  from  house  to  house  which  is  simply  a  wasting
of  time.  This  leads  to  a  habit  of  sossipiDg,  and  a  habit  of  intermeddling.  Things  are
said  which  ought  not  to  be  said — as  being  coloured  and  mischievous  in  their  consequences.
(3.)  His  advice  to  them  confirmed  by  experience.  "  I  desire  therefore  that  the  younger
widows  marry,  bear  children,  rule  the  nousehold,  give  none  occasion  to  the  adversary
for  reviling;  for  already  some  are  turned  after  Satan.*'  In  view  of  the  dangers  mentioned,
the  apostle  appoints,  for  the  younger  widows,  marriage  and  its  duties.  That  would
take  away  occasion  for  reviling.  Some  who  had  given  themselves  to  Christ  as  presbyter-
widows  were  turned  aiter  Satan,  t.e.  married,  or  given  up  to  idle  habits.  (4)  Such  as
needed  to  he  relieved,  "  If  any  woman  that  believeth  hath  widows,  let  her  relieve  them,
and  let  not  the  Church  be  burdened ;  that  it  may  relieve  them  that  are  widows  indeed."
This  touches  the  former  poiot  of  support.  If  they  married,  then  they  did  not  need
Church  support.  But  what  was  to  be  done  with  lonely  and  destitute  young  widows
who  remained  unmarried  ?  The  apostle  lays  the  burden  of  their  support  upon  a  believ-
ing female  relative  (on  the  supposition  that  there  was  such).  She  is  to  undertake  the
burden,  rather  than  that  the  Church  should  be  burdened.  It  is  implied  that,  in  the
event  of  there  being  no  one  to  undertake  the  burden,  the  Church  is  to  step  in  and  act
the  part  of  the  relative,  without,  however,  placing  her  meantime  upon  the  honourable
roll  of  Church  widows. — R.  F.

Vers.  17 — 25. — The  preshyterate.  I.  Iloyoua  dur  to  elders.  "  Let  the  elders  tlunt
rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  esixjcially  those  who  labour  in  the  word
and  in  teaching."  As  associated  with  Paul,  Timothy  was  to  be  classed  as  an  extra-
ordinary office-bearer  in  the  Church.  Ho  had  the  organizing  of  the  Ephesian  Church,
but  it  was  intended  that  the  rule  should  permanently  reside  in  a  class  of  ordinary
office-bearers  who  are  here  called  elders.  The  fact  is  plainly  stated  that  elders  were
ordained  by  the  apostles  in  every  Church  (Acts  xiv.  23).  It  appears  that  the  organi-
zation of  a  Church  was  regarded  as  defective  without  the  appointment  of  elders  (Titus
i.  6).  In  the  Church  of  Ephesus,  as  in  all  other  Churches  that  we  read  of,  there  was
a  plurality  of  elders.  All  the  ciders  are  regarded  as  ruling  or  prcsidin;^,  i.e.  over  the
brethren  who  composed  the  Church.  To  elders  it  belongs  to  administer  the  laws
which  Christ  has  laid  down  for  the  government  of  his  Church,  and  to  take  the  general
superintendence  of  the  affairs  of  the  congregation  over  which  they  arc  placed.  It  is
a  rule  in  which  good  qualities  may  bo  evinced,  such  as  fidelity,  diligence,  impartiality,
aficctionateness,  a  habit  of  dependence  upon  Divine  grace.  Elders  as  such  are  to
be  counted  worthy  of  honour,  but  those  that  rule  well  are  to  be  counted  worthy  of
double  honour,  i,e,  the  honour  of  excellence  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  added
to  the  honour  belonging  to  their  office.  There  are  two  classes  of  elders — those  who
merely  rule,  and  those  who,  besides  ruling,  are  charged  with  the  Word  and  with
teaching.  It  is  an  honour  by  itself  to  have  to  do  with  the  Word,  and  especially  with
the  teaching  of  it,  t.e.  to  be  teaching  elders  ;  but  those  who  have  not  only  the  office  but
do  well  in  it — suggested  by  the  word  "labour** — are  to  be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour.


CH.V.1— 26.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  117

II.  Their  maintenance.  "For  the  Scripture  saith,  Thou  sbalt  not  muzzle  the
ox  when  he  treadeth  out  the  com.  And,  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  Under
the  honour  to  be  done  especially  to  the  laborious  teaching  elder,  is  brought  niaiuten-
ance.  This  is  enforced  by  a  reference  to  Deut.  xxv.  4.  The  Jewish  law  showed
consideration  for  an  animal  that  had  to  labour.  The  ox  was  not  to  be  muzzled  when,
in  Eastern  fashion,  treading  out  the  com.  It  was  not  to  be  prevented  from  enjoying
the  fruit  of  its  labours.  The  application  is  given  at  some  length  in  1  Cor.  ix.,  but
it  is  simply  brought  out  here  by  a  proverb,  which  is  also  made  use  of  by  our  Lord.
The  Christian  teacher  labours  as  really  as  the  ox  that  treads  out  the  com.  Not  less
than  the  ox  he  is  to  have  the  condition  of  labour,  viz.  maintenance.  Ho  is  to  have
it  not  as  a  necessity,  but  on  the  principle  that  he  is  entitled  to  it  as  the  reward  of
his  labour.

III.  Theib  just  treatment  under  accusation.  "AgaiDst  an  elder  receive  not
an  accusation,  except  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses."  There  is  reference
to  a  well-known  regulation  of  the  Jewish  law.  ItTwas  especially  to  be  observed  in
the  case  of  honoured  or  doubly  honoured  elders.  Ko  weight  was  to  bo  attached  to
unproved  private  complaints.  "It  might  easily  happen  in  a  Church,  so  large  and
mixed  as  the  Ephesian,  that  one  or  another,  from  wounded  feelings  of  honour,  from
mere  partisanship,  or  some  selfish  motive,  would  seek  to  injure  a  presbyter,  and  drag
him  down  from  his  influential  position ;  and  against  this  the  precept  of  the  apostle
was  the  best  safeguard."

IV.  Discipline  if  shown  to  be  sinning.  "Them  that  sin  reprove  in  the  sight
of  all,  that  the  rest  also  may  be  in  fear."  The  apostle  has  been  treating  of  elders ;
he  is  still  treating  of  elders  in  ver.  22,  If,  then,  ordinary  weight  is  to  be  attached
to  the  context  in  interpretation,  the  conclusion  seems  certain  that  public  reproof  was
only  enjoined  in  the  case  of  sinning  elders.  We  are  to  understand  that  the  accusation
against  them  has  been  substantiated  by  two  or  three  witnesses,  and  that  by  continuing
in  sin  they  exhibit  no  signs  of  repentance.  Let  such  be  publicly  reproved,  that,  if  the
publicity  does  not  do  them  good,  it  may  at  least  cause  a  wholesome  fear  to  fall  upon
others  of  their  class.

V.  Solemn  adjuration.  "I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  Christ  Jesus,
and  the  elect  angels,  that  thou  observe  these  things  without  prejudice,  doing  nothing
by  partiality."  The  form  of  the  adjuration  is  remarkable  for  the  proximity  in  which
Christ  Jesus  stands  to  God.  If  we  are  led  to  think  of  God  as  being  omniscient,  we
are  as  naturally  led  to  think  of  Christ  Jesus  as  being  omniscient,  i,e.  Divine.  The
form  of  the  adjuration  is  also  remarkable  for  the  bringing  in  of  the  elect  angels^
t.e.  honoured  to  be  the  chosen  objects  of  God's  love.  Their  omniscience  does  not
belong  to  them  singly,  but  to  their  class,  which  is  frequently  represented  as  very
numerous.  As  witnesses  of  what  is  now  done  on  earth  they  will  be  present  with  their
Lord  on  the  day  of  judgment.  The  matter  of  the  adjuration  is  the  upholding  of  the
])resbyterate.  Let  none  of  the  order  be  prejudged  unfavourably;  let  none,  through
favour,  be  spared,  if  their  sin  is  patent.  We  may  learn  from  the  solemnity  of  the
adjuration,  how  hiphly  the  a^KJStle  valued  the  honour  of  the  order.

VI.  Care  in  api^ointing  to  the  order.  "  Lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man,  neither
be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins:  keep  thyself  pure."  The  laying  on  of  hands  in
ordination,  which  is  clearly  referred  to  here,  is  symbolic  of  the  communication  of
spiritual  gift«.  We  also  leara  from  the  language  here,  that  it  is  equivalent  to  recogni-
tion on  the  part  of  those  ordaining.  They  are  accountable  thus  far,  that  if,  through
hastiness,  they  have  admitted  unworthy  persons  into  the  order,  then  they  are  partakers
of  their  sins.  As  having  to  pronounce  upon  others,  Timothy  was  to  keep  himself  pure;
his  own  conduct  was  to  be  above  suspicion.

VII.  Timothy  cautioned.  "  Be  no  longer  a  drinker  of  water,  but  use  a  little  wine
for  thy  stomach's  sake  and  thine  often  infirmities."  Paley  makes  a  point  of  the  want
of  connection.  ''  The  direction  stands  between  two  sentences,  as  wide  from  the  subject
as  ])ossiblc."  He,  however,  puts  more  upon  this  than  it  will  bear.  There  is  a  certain
Epistolary  negligence,  but  there  is  connection.  It  occurs  to  the  apostle  that  the
comicand  to  keep  himself  pure  might  be  too  strictly  interpreted  by  Timothy.  He
was  not  to  be  regarded  as  enjoining  the  utmost  abstinence  on  him.  On  the  contrary,
his  opinion  was  that  Timothy  was  abstinent  beyond  what  his  health  demanded.    U«


113


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  VI.  1 — 2U


wu  a  drinker  of  water,  i,e,  accustomed  to  the  exclusive  use  of  water  as  a  drink.
Whatever  his  reasons  for  a<loptin$!  this  course,  it  was  too  rigorous  for  him.  He  needed
a  UtUe  wine  for  his  stomach  s  sake  and  his  often  infirmities.  This  is  not  certidnly
to  be  construed  into  a  licence  for  the  unlimited  use  of  wine.  He  is  only  recommended
the  use  of  a  lUUe  wine.  And  the  very  reason  which  is  given  for  its  use  is  against
its  use  where  the  same  reason  does  not  exist.  It  is  only  too  obvious  that  i^hd
is  destructive  to  the  stomach,  and  the  fruitful  cause  of  infirmities.  It  is  destructive
to  the  brain  as  well  as  to  the  stomach.  "  There  is  quite  a  marked  type  of  mental
degeneration  which  may  result  from  continuous  drinking  during  ten  years  without
one  instance  of  drunkenness.  We  have,  as  a  statistical  fact,  that  from  fifteen  to  twenty
per  cent,  of  the  actual  insanity  of  the  country  is  produced  by  aloohoL"  In  the  name
of  health,  then,  its  use  is  to  be  feared ;  but,  where  health  demands  the  use  of  wine,
it  is  a  sin  not  to  use  it  For  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  have  his  strength  of  body
at  a  maximum  for  him.

VIIL  A  FOIKT .  TO  BS  OOKBIDEBED  IN  THE  JXTDOING  OF   KEN    FOB  OFFICE.      '*  Some

men's  sins  are  evident,  going  before  unto  judgment ;  and  some  men  also  they  follow
afker.  In  like  manner  also  there  are  good  works  that  are  evident ;  and  such  as  are
otherwise  cannot  be  hid."  Present  judging  has  a  look  forward  to  futxure  judging.
To  future  judgment  all  actions,  bad  and  good,  are  regarded  as  going  forward.  But
there  is  a  mfierence,  both  in  the  case  of  bad  actions  and  of  good  actions.  Some  men^s
sins  are  notorious ;  and,  as  heralds,  go  before  them  to  judgment,  proclaiming  their
condemnation.  With  regard  to  such,  judging  for  office  is  an  easy  matter;  but  it
is  not  so  with  others.  '*  Their  sins  are  first  known  after  and  by  the  judgment,  not
known  beforehand  like  the  first  named.  In  regard  to  those  whose  character  is  not
yet  clear,  circumspection  in  our  judgment  cannot  be  too  strongly  urged."  The  same
difference  applies  to  good  works.  Some  are  as  clear  as  noonday ;  and  therefore  there
can  be  no  hesitation  in  regard  to  the  doers  of  them.  There  are,  however,  other  good
works  which  are  not  thus  clear ;  these  cannot  be  hid  longer  than  the  judgment.  In
view  of  the  discovery  of  good  d^s  at  present  unknown,  we  cannot  be  too  ciicum*
spect  in  our  judgment  of  men,  lest  by  our  hastiness  we  do  injury  to  any. — ^E.  F.


EXPOSITIOX.


CHAPTER  VL


Ver.  1. — Are  serrants  for  servants  as  are^
AY.;  the  doctrine  for  his  doctrine^  A.Y.
Servants ;  literally,  slaves.  That  slaves
formed  a  considerable  portion  of  the  first
Christian  Churches  may  be  inferred  from
the  frequency  with  which  their  duties  arc
pressed  upon  them  (see  1  Cor.  vii.  21 — 24  ;
xii  13 ;  Eph.  vi.  5—8 ;  Col.  ui.  11, 22 ;  1  Pet.
ii  18  iol  oiKirai) ;  see  also  1  Cor.  i.  27—29).
It  must  have  been  an  unspeakable  comfort
to  the  poor  slave,  whose  worldly  condition
was  hopeless  and  often  miserable,  to  secure
his  place  as  one  of  Christ's  freemen,  with
the  sure  hope  of  attaining  **tho  glorious
liberty  of  the  children  of  Grod."  Under  the
yoke ;  t.c.  **  the  yoke  of  bondage  "  (Gal.  v.  1).
Perhaps  the  phrase  contains  a  touch  of  com-
pastfion  for  their  state  (comp.  Acts  xv.  10).
How  beautiful  is  the  contrast  suggested  in
Matt.  xi.  29,  30!  Masters  (5c(nr(ira;) ;  the
proper  word  in  relation  to  hovXos.  The
dootrine  (^  ZtZaaKoXia);  equivalent  to
"Christianity,"  as  taught  by  the  apostles
and  their  successors  (see  the  frequent  use  of
the  word  in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  though


with  different  shades  of  meaning  (ch.  i.  10;
iv.  6,  13,  16 ;  V.  17 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  10 ;  iv.  3 ;
Titus  i.  9 ;  ii.  10,  etc.).  Blasphemed  (compare
the  similar  passage,  Titus  ii.  5,  where  &  K6yos
Tov  ScoG  answers  to  tj  BtSaffxtiKlA  here).
BXaffipnfiuy  does  not  necessarily  mean
'*  blaspheme  "  in  its  restricted  sense,  but  as
often  means  "  to  speak  evil  of,"  "  to  defame,"
and  the  like.  If  Christian  slaves  withheld
the  honour  and  respect  duo  to  their  masters,
it  would  be  as  sure  to  bring  reproach  upon
the  Christian  doctrine  as  if  it  taught  in-
subordination and  rebellion.

Ver.  2. — Let  them  serve  them  the  rather  for
rather  do  them  service,  A.y. ;  that  partake  of
the  benefit  are  believing  and  beloved  for  are
faithful  and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  benefit^
A.V.  They  that  have  believing  masters.
The  direction  in  the  preceding  verse
applied  to  all  slaves,  though  chiefly  to  what,
as  Alford  says,  was  far  the  commonest  case,
that  of  those  who  had  unbelieving  masters.
But  now  he  adds  a  caution  with  regard  to
the  Christian  slave  of  a  Christian  master.
There  was  a  danger  lest  the  feeling  that
slaves  and  masters  are  brothers  in  Christ
should  unduly  interfere  with  the  xespect


CH.  VI.  1—21.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


11»


which  he  owed  him  as  his  master.  And  so
St.  Paul  addresses  a  word  of  special  advice
to  snoh.  Let  them  not  despise  them.  Let
not  their  spiritual  equality  with  their
roasters  lead  them  to  underrate  the  worldly
difference  that  separates  them ;  or  to  think
slightly  of  the  authority  of  a  master  rela-
tively to  his  slaves  (oomp.  2  Pet.  11.  10).
Bnt  let  them  serve  them  the  rather,  because
they  tiiat  partake  of  the  benefit  are  believing
and  beloved.  There  is  a  good  deal  of
obscurity  in  this  sentence,  but  it  may  be
observed  first  that  the  grammatical  render-
ing of  the  R.V.  is  clearly  right,  and  that  of
the  A.V.  clearly  wrong.  "They  that  par-
take of  the  benefit"  is  beyond  all  doubt  the
subject,  and  not  the  predicate.  Then  the
construction  of  the  two  sentences  (this  and
the  preceding  one)  makes  it  certain  that  the
subject  in  this  sentence  (o^  rqr  wfpyttrias
dyriXafificofSfxtyot)  are  the  same  persons  as
the  94<nroTai  in  the  preceding  sentence,
because  it  is  predicated  of  them  both  that
they  are  iri<rro(,  and  of  both  that  they  are,
in  convertible  terms,  Styatrrrroi  and  &8c\0of.^
And  this  leads  us,  with  nearly  certainty,  to
the  further  conclusion  that  the  cvepyco-fo,
the  heneficium^  or  "benefit,"  spoken  of  is
that  especial  service — that  service  of  love  and
good  will  running  ahead  of  necessary  duty,
which  the  Christian  slave  gives  to  tho
Christian  master;  a  sense  which  the  very
remarkable  ])assago  quoted  by  Alford  from
Seneca  strikingly  confirms.'  The  only  re-
maining difiiculty,  then,  is  the  meaning
"partake  of"  ascribed  to  airri\afxPav6fitvou
But  this  is  scarcely  a  difficulty.  It  is  true
that  in  tho  only  two  other  passages  in  the
New  Testament  where  this  verb  occurs,  and
in  its  frequent  use  in  tho  LXX.,  it  has  tho
sense  of  **  helping  "  (liuko  i.  54 ;  Acts  xx.
85);  but  there  is  nothing  strange  in  this.
The  verb  in  the  middle  voice  means  to  "  lay
hold  of."  You  may  lay  hold  of  for  the  pur-
pose of  helping,  supporting,  clinging  to,
laying  claim  to,  liolding  in  check,  etc.  (see
Liddell  and  Scctt).  Hero  tho  masters  lay
hold  of  the  benefit  for  the  purpose  of  enjoying

'  Of  the  sixty-two  times  which  dyomjrJf  ia
used  in  tho  New  Testament,  excluding  those
in  which  it  is  applied  to  Jesus  Christ  as
God*s  beloved  Son  (ten  times),  it  is  applied
thrice  to  tho  love  of  God  to  man,  and  forty-
nine  times  to  tho  lovo  of  brother  to  brother.

'  •*  Quajritur  a  quibusdani  an  heneficium
dare  servus  domino  possit,"  and  ho
resolves  the  inquiry  by  saying,  "Quicquid
est  quodon  ex  imperio  setl  ex  voluntato
pricstatur,  beneficium  ret"  (Seneca,  *Do
Beneficiis,'  iii.  18).  This  similarity  of
thought  is  untloubtedly  very  strong  evid.ence
that  St.  Paul  was  acquainted  with  Seneca's
writings.


it  There  is  possibly  an  ihdication  in  tho
word  that  the  masters  actively  and  willingly'
accept  it— they  stretch  out  their  hand  to
take  it.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any
sense  of  rteiprocity,  as  some  think,  in  th6
use  of  dvri,  Tho  sense  of  the  whole  passs^
seems  to  be  clearly,  "Let  not  those  who*
have  believing  masters  think  slightly  of
their  authority  because  they  are  brethren ;
but  let  them  do  them  extra  service,  beyond
what  they  are  obliged  to  do,  for  the  very
reason  that  those  whom  they  will  thus-
benefit  are  believing  and  beloved  brethren."
Teaoh  {ZiZauiK*),  Observe  the  connection  of
this  word  with  the  ^  8i8ao-<caA/a  of  vers.  1,  8,
and  elsewhere.

Ver.  Z,^Teacheth  for  Uach^  A.V.;  a
different  doctrine  for  otherwiu^  A.V.;  con-
senteth  for  consent^  A.y.;  mmnd  for  whole-
8ome,  A.Y.  Toaoheth  a  different  dootrin6
(4rcpo8(8a<riraAci) ;  see  above,  ch.  i.  8,  note.
Consenteth  (frpo<r4px*'rai);  very  common  in
the  New  Testament,  in  the  literal  sense  of
"coming  to"  or  "approaching,"  but  only
hero  in  the  metaphoncal  senso  of  *^  assenting
to."  The  steps  seem  to  be,^r«^,  approaching
a  subject  with  the  mind  with  a  view  of
consicfering  it ;  and  then  consenting  to  it —
coming  over  to  it.  The  term  irpoo^Xvrof,  a
convert  to  Judaism,  and  the  p))rase  from
Ircnnus  ('Fragm.,'  ii.),  quoted  by  Ellicott,  0&
To7s  rSav  *louSalo»v  i&yfiaffi  frpoff^pxoyrtu^
"  They  do  not  fall  in  with,  or  agree  to,  th&
doctrines  of  the  Jews,"  sufficiently  illustrate
tho  usage  of  the  word  here.  Sound  (lyied-
vovffi)]  see  ch.  i.  10,  note.  GodUnefi
(It/o-ciSefa) ;  see  ch.  ii.  2,  note.

Ver.  4,— Puffed  up  for  proud,  A.V.;
qttestionings  for  questunu,  A.\. ;  diiputet  for
elri/est  A.V.  He  if  puffed  np  (rtrv^tfTat) ;
see  ch.  iii.  6,  note.  Doting  (vocrwy);  hero
only  in  the  New  Testament,  but  found  occa-
sionally in  the  LXX.  Applied  in  classical
Greek  to  the  mind  and  body,  "  to  be  in  an
unsound  state."  Here  it  means  "  having  a
morbid  love  of"  or  "  going  mad  about."  In
this  morbid  love  of  questionings  and  disputes
of  words,  they  lose  sight  of  all  wholesome
words  and  all  godly  doctrina  Qnestionings
(fijT^crf «) ;  see  ch.  i.  6,  note.  It  corresponds
nearly  to  o\u  word  "controversies."  Dis-
pntes  of  words  (Xbyofiaxlas) ;  found  only
here.  Tho  verb  Xoyoftax^v  is  used  in  2
Tim.  ii.  14.  Would  that  the  Church  had
always  remembered  St  Paul's  pithy  oon-
dcmnation  of  unfruitful  controversies  about
words !  Surmisingi  (vfr6votai) ;  only  here  in
tho  New  Testament.  In  classical  Greek  it
means  "suspicion,"  or  any  under-thought
The  verb  viroyo4u  occurs  three  times  in  the
Acts — "  to  deem,  think,  or  suppose."  Hero
the  "surmisings"  are  those  uncharitable  in-
sinuations in  which  angry  controversialists-
indulge  towards  one  another.


120


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[en.  TL 1—21.


Yer.  5. — Wranglings  for  pervene  dinnU'
ings,  A.y.  and  T.VL, ;  oomipfed  tfi  mind  for
4>f  corrupt  mtndt,  A.V. ;  bereft  for  dedituie,
A.y. ;  ^Une$$  U  a  %eay  of  gain  for  gain  i$
MdUneu^  A.V.  Wrtnglingi  {luatatwrpi^^
ILT.  ;  frapoBtarpifiai,  T.R.).  The  K.T.  baa
fiur  the  largest  iveigbt  of  authority  m  its
fitTonr  (Ellicott).  The  sabstantive  wapa-
rptfiii  in  Polybioi  means  "provocation,"
*' collision,"  *'  uription,"  and  the  like.  Hence
Sw««^arpi34  (which  is  only  found  here) means
''continued  wranglings."  The  substantive
SiarpiiS^  (English  diatribe)  means,  among
other  things,  a  ^  discussion  "  or  **  argument"
The  addition  of  r<lpa  siyes  the  sense  of  a
''pervene  discussion,**  or  "disputing."
Aareft  ((drcarcpii^^^y).  The  difference
between  the  A.V.  "destitute "  and  the  B.V.
**  bereft "  is  that  the  latter  implies  that  they
once  had  possession  of  the  truth,  but  had  lost
it  by  their  own  fault  They  had  fallen  away
ftom  the  truth,  and  were  twice  dead.  God-
linsM  is  a  way  of  gain.  The  A.V.,  that  gain
4$  ^lineUf  is  dearly  wrong,  utterly  con-
fusing the  subject  with  tbo  predicate,  and
so  destroying  the  connection  between  the
clause  and  ver.  6.  A  way  of  gain  (iropi(rn6s) ;
only  here  and  in  ver.  6  in  the  Now  Testa-
ment but  found  in  Wisd.  xiii.  19 ;  xiv.  2 ;
Polybius,  eta  It  signifies  *'a  source  of
gain,"  **  a  means  of  making  money,"  or,  in
one  word,  "a  trade."  The  same  change  is
brought  a^inst  the  heretical  teachers  (Titus
1  11).  Tho  cause  in  the  A.V.  and  T.R.,
from  8tich  iciUidraw  thyself^  is  not  in  the
B.T.

Ver.  6. — Oodliness,  etc.  The  apostle
takes  up  the  sentiment  which  be  had  just
condemned,  and  shows  that  in  another  senBo
it  is  most  true.  The  godly  man  is  rich
indeed.  For  he  wants  nothing  in  this  world
but  what  God  has  given  him,  and  has  oc-
ouired  riches  which,  unlike  tho  riches  of
this  world,  he  can  take  away  with  him
(eomp.  Luke  xii.  33).  The  enumeration  of
his  acquired  treasures  follows,  after  a  paren-
thetical depreciation  of  those  of  the  covetous
man,  in  ver.  11.  Tiie  thought,  as  so  often
in  St.  Paul,  is  a  little  intricate,  and  its  flow
checked  by  parenthetical  side -thoughts.
But  it  seems  to  be  as  follows :  **  But  godli-
ness is,  in  one  sense,  a  source  of  great  gain,
and  moreover  brings  contentment  with  it —
oontentment,  I  say,  for  since  we  brought
nothing  into  the  world,  and  con  carry
nothing  out,  we  have  good  reason  to  be  con-
tent with  the  necessaries  of  life,  food  and
raiment.  Indeed,  those  who  strive  for  more,
and  pant  after  wealth,  bring  nothing  but
trouble  upon  themselves.  For  the  love  of
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  etc.  Thou,
therefore,  O  man  of  God,  instead  of  reaching
after  worldly  riches,  procure  the  true  wealth,
and  become  rich  in  righteousness,  godliness^  I


faith,"  etc  (ver.  11).  Tho  phrase,  "E^n  Si
woptauhs  lA^yas  ii  §bff§fi9ia  furit  avrapxtlmt^
should  be  construed  by  making  the  /urk
couple  woptfffi6s  with  o^ro^jcclay,  so  aa  to
express  that  "godliness"  is  boUi  "gain"
and  "contentment"  —  not  as  if  abrapK€ia
qualified  cvffci3c(»— that  would  have  been
expressed  by  the  collocation,  ^  /mt^  abrap-
jccfas  9^9$tia.  Contentiiient  (o^o^ircfa).
The  word  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Tes-
tament onlv  in  2  Cor.  ix.  8,  where  it  is  ren-
dered, bota  in  the  B.V.  and  the  A.y.,
"sufficiency."  The  adiective  a^^mis,
found  in  PhiL  iv.  11  (and  common  in  clas-
sical Greekl  ib  rendered  "content"  It
means  "  sufficient  in  or  of  itself" — ^needing
no  external  aid — and  is  applied  to  persons,
countries,  cities,  moral  qualities,  etc  The
substantive  airrapKfla  is  the  condition  of  the
person,  or  thing,  which  is  ndrdpteris.

Ver.  7.— 2%e  for  thU,  A.V. ;  for  neither
can  we  for  atid  it  i$  certain  toe  ean^  A.  V.  and
T.B. ;  anyViing  for  nothing,  A.y.  Tor  nai-
ther,  etc  The  omission  of  Btjxow  in  the
B.T.,  though  justified  by  many  of  the  best
manuscripts,  makes  it  difficult  to  construe
the  sentence,  unless,  with  Buttman,  we  con-
sider Sri  as  elliptical  for  Bfjkov  Sri,  The
B. V.  "  for  neither  "  seems  to  imply  that  the
truth,  "  neither  can  we  carry  anything  out,"
is  a  consequence  of  tho  previous  truui  that
"  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world,"  which
is  not  true.  The  two  truths  are  parallel,
and  the  sentence  would  be  perfectly  clear
without  either  SqXoy  or  Sn.

Ver.  8. — But  for  and,  A.V. ;  covering  for
raiment^  A.  V. ;  toe  thall  be  for  let  us  be,  A.V.
Pood  (piarpoipds) ;  here  only  in  the  New
Testament,  but  common  iu  the  LXX.,  rare
in  cladsical  G reek.  Covering  CffK€frdafuvra) ;
also  a  S.xa^  \ty6fifvoif  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, not  found  in  the  LXX.,  and  rare  in
classical  Greek.  The  kindred  words,  o-ic^ir
and  (TKcVos,  with  their  derivatives,  are  used
of  the  covering  or  shelter  of  clothes,  or  tents,
or  houses.  St.  Paul  may  therefore  have
used  an  uncommon  word  in  order  to  com-
prise tho  two  necessaries  of  raiment  and
house,  though  Uuther  thinks  this  "more
than  improbable."  Tho  use  of  the  word
"  covering  "  in  the  B.V.  seems  designed  to
favour  this  double  application.  Ellicott
thinks  the  word  "probably  only  refers  to
clotliing."  Alford  says,  **  Some  take  •  cover-
ing *  of  both  clothing  and  dwelling,  perhaps
rightly."  If  one  knew  where  6t  Paul  got
tho  word  (TKtvdfftiara  from,  one  could  form
a  more  decided  opinion  as  to  his  meaning.
We  shall  be  therewith  content  (af)irc(rO^(ro-
/jitOa),  The  proper  meaning  of  iLpKf7<r0at
followed  by  a  dative  is  "to  be  content  with  "
(Luke  iii.  14 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  There  is  pro-
bably a  covert  hortative  force  in  the  use  of
the  future  here


CH.  VI.  1—21.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


121


Ver.  9.— D«tr«  to  for  irtH,  A.V.;  a
iemptation  for  temptation^: A,\,;  many  for
into  many^  A.Y. ;  $uch  as  for  whichy  A.Y.
A  temptation.  Tbe  reaBon  of  the  insertion
•of  tbe  article  before  **  temptation '*  in  the
B.V.  seems  to  be  that,  as  tbe  three  snbstiin-
tives  all  depend  upon  the  one  preposition
«is,  they  ought  all  to  be  treated  alike.  But
if  80,  the  reasoning:  is  not  good,  because
*'  temptation  "  implies  a  state,  not  merely  a
single  temptation.  The  prefixing  of  the
article  is  therefore  improper.  It  should  be
**  temptation,"  as  in  the  A.Y.  and  in  Matt.
'?L  13 ;  xxvi.  41 ;  Luke  xxii.  40,  etc.  Snare
^waylia);  as  ch.  iii.  7,  note.  The  concur-
rence of  the  two  words  irtipaa'fx6s  and  vayis
iibow  that  the  agency  of  Satan  was  in  the
writer*s  mind.  Several  good  manuscripts,
Fathers,  and  versions,  add  the  words  rou
Ztafi6\ov  after  -jraylSa  (Huther).  Drown
</3u0t^ov0'O ;  only  here  and  Luke  v.  7  in  the
New  Testament.  Found  also  in  2  Maco.
xiL  4,  and  in  Polybius — "to  sink,"  tran-
sitive. Dettmction  and  perdition  (HKfOpoy
KoX  ix^^Kfiay).  The  two  words  taken  to-
gether imply  utter  ruin  and  destruction  of
body  and  soul.  "OXtdpos,  very  common  in
•classical  Greek,  occurs  in  1  Cor.  v.  5;  1
Thess.  V.  3 ;  2  Thess.  i.  9,  and  is  limited  in
the  first  passage  to  the  destruction  of  the
body,  by  the  words,  rqs  <rapK6s.  *Air»A.c(a,
less  common  in  classical  Greek,  is  of  fre-
•qnent  use  in  the  New  Testament,  and,  when
applied  to  persons,  seems  to  be  always  used
<except  in  Acts  xxv.  16)  in  the  sense  of
"  perdition  "  (Matt.  vii.  13 ;  John  xvii.  12 ;
Rom.  ix.  22 ;  Phil.  iii.  19 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  3  ;
Heb.  X.  39 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7;  Rev.  xvii.  3,  etc.).

Yer.  10. — A  root  for  the  rooU  A.Y. ;  all
hinds  of  for  alU  A.Y. ;  some  reaching  after
for  while  some  coveted  after ,  A.Y. ;  have  been
led  astray  for  they  have  erred,  A.Y. ;  have
pierced  for  pierced,  A.Y.  Love  of  money
'i^apyvpla) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
jnent,  but  found  in  the  LXX.  and  in  clas-
sical Greek.  The  substantive  piXdpyvpos  is
found  in  Luke  xvi.  14  and  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  A
root.  The  root  is  better  English.  Moreover,
•the  following  irdyrcov  rS>v  kukco^  (not  tr6\\oty
KUKay)  necessitates  the  giving  a  definite
sense  to  ^t'Co,  though  it  has  not  the  article ;
■and  Alford  shows  clearly  that  a  word  like
^iCo,  especially  when  placed  as  here  in  an
emphatic  position,  does  not  require  it  (comp.
1  Cor.  xi.  3,  where  in  the  second  and  third
clause  icc0aA^,  being  in  the  emphatic  place,
has  not  the  article).  Alford  also  quotes  a
striking  passage  from  Diog.  I^acrt.,  in  which
he  mentions  a  saying  of  tlie  philosopher
Diogenes  that  **  the  love  of  money  (^  ^iXap-
yvpla)  is  the  metropolis,  or  home,  itdyruv  r&y
KoKw.**  Eeaohing  after  (6pty6nfyoi).  It  has
been  justly  remarked  that  the  phrase  is
slightly  inaccurate.    AVhat  some  reach  after


is  not "  the  love  of  money,**  but  the  money
itself.  To  avoid  this,  Hofinann  (quoted  by
Huther)  makes  pi(a  the  antecedent  to  (f,
and  the  metaphor  to  be  of  a  person  taming
out  of  his  path  to  grasp  a  plant  which  turns
out  to  be  not  desirable,  but  a  root  of  bitter-
ness. This  is  ingenious,  but  hardly  to  be
accepted  as  the  tnie  interpretation.  Fieroed
themielveB  throngh  (wtpUfrtipca^);  only  here
in  the  New  Testament,  and  rare  in  classical
Greek.  But  the  simple  verb  ir€lpw,  to
"  pierce  through,"  **  transfix,"  applied  espe-
cially to  **  spitting"  meat,  is  very  common  in
Homer,  who  also  applies  it  metaphorically
exactly  as  St  Paul  does  here,  to  grief  or
pain.  *096yii(ri  irtwapfi4yos,  "pierced  with
pain  "  (*  Il.,»  V.  399).

Yer.  11. — 0  man  of  Ood.  The  force  of
this  address  is  very  great  It  indicates  that
the  money-lovers  just  spoken  of  were  not
and  could  not  be  '*  men  of  Grod,*'  whatever
they  might  profess;  and  it  leads  with  sin-
gular strength  to  the  opposite  direction  in
which  Timothy's  aspirations  should  point.
The  treasures  which  he  must  covet  as  "a
man  of  God"  were  ** righteousness,  godli-
ness, faith,  love,  patience,  meekness."  For
the  phrase,  "  man  of  God,"  hee  2  Tim.  iii.
17  and  2  Pet.  i.  21.  In  the  Old  Testament
it  always  applies  to  a  prophet  (Dent,  xxxiii.
1;  Judg.  xiii.  6;  1  Sam.  ii.  27;  1  Kings
xii.  22  ;  2  Kings  L  9 ;  Jer.  xxxv.  4 ;  and  a
great  many  other  passages).  St  Paul  uses
Uie  expression  with  especial  reference  to
Timothy  and  his  holy  ofiice,  and  here,  per-
haps, in  contrast  with  the  robs  iyOpilixous
mentioned  in  ver.  9.  Flee  these  things.
Note  the  sharp  contrast  between  *'  the  men  "
of  the  world,  who  reach  after,  and  the  man
of  God,  who  avoids,  ^i\apyvpia.  The  ex-
pression, **  these  things,*'  is  a  little  loose,
but  seems  to  apply  to  the  love  of  money,
and  the  desire  to  be  rich,  with  all  their
attendant  *'  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts."  Tlie
man  of  God  avoids  the  perdition  and  mani-
fold sorrows  of  the  covetous,  by  avoiding  the
covctousness  which  is  their  root.  Follow
after  (9iu>Kt) ;  pursue,  in  direct  contrast  with
^e^€,  flee  from,  avoid  (see  2  Tim.  ii.  22).
Meekness  (vpdtnrafftiay).  This  rare  word,
found  in  Philo,  but  nowhere  in  the  New
Testament,  is  the  reading  of  the  R.T.  (in-
stead of  the  vp^rnra.  of  the  T.R.)  and
accepted  by  almost  all  critics  on  the  autho-
rity of  all  the  older  manuscripts.  It  has
no  perceptible  difference  of  meaning  from
wpa&rrjs,  meekness  or  gentleness.

Yer.  12.-2^  faith  for  faith,  A.Y. ;  the
life  eternal  for  eternal  life,  A.  Y. ;  wast  for  art
also,  A.Y.  and  T.R. ;  didst  confess  the  good  eon'
fesnon  for  host  professed  a  good  profession,
A,Y. ;  in  the  sight  of  for  before.  A, V.  Fight
the  ^od  light.  This  is  not  quite  a  happy
rendering,    'Ayi&y  is  the  '^oontesl"  at  the


122


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  VL  1 — 2L


Olympic  anembly  for  any  of  the  prizes,  la
wrestling,  chariot-racing,  foot-racing,  mofio,
or  what  not  *Ayt0yi(t(r$€u  rhp  iyAva  i»  to
**  carry  on  such  a  oontett "  (oomp.  2  Tim.  iv.
7).  The  comparison  is  different  from  that
in  cb.  i.  18,  "lifa  <rrparf{n^  .  .  .  rifp  koK^w
ffrpartiav,  **  That  thou  mayest  war  the  good
warfare."  The  fiidth.  There  Is  nothing  to
determine  absolutely  whether  ^  irlffris  here
means  foith  tulijeeHvdy  or  **  the  &ith  "  ob-
jectively, nor  does  it  much  matter.  The
result  is  the  same ;  but  the  subjective  sense
seems  the  most  appropriate.  Lay  hold,  etc. ;
aa  the  fipafiuou  or  prize  of  the  contest  (see
1  Cor.  ix,  24,  25).  Wherennto  thou  wait
called.  Bo  St.  Paul  continually  (Rom.  i.  1,
6,  7 ;  viii.  28,  30 ;  1  CJor.  i.  29 ;  Eph.  iv.  1 ;
1  Thess.  ii.  12 ;  and  numerous  other  pas-
•ages).  Ho  seems  here  to  drop  the  metaphor,
as  in  tho  following  clause.  Didft  oonfefi
the  good  oonfesiion.  The  connection  of  this
phroso  with  tho  call  to  eternal  life,  and  the
allusion  to  one  special  occasion  on  which
Timothy  "had  confessed  the  good  confes-
sion "  of  his  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  seems  to
point  clearly  to  his  baptism  (see  Matt.  x.
32;  John  ix.  22;  xli.  42;  Hcb.  x.  23).
Tho  phrase,  "  the  good  confession,"  seems  to
have  been  technically  applied  to  the  bap-
tismal confessiou  uf  Christ  (compare  the  other
Churoh  sayings,  ch.  i.  15 :  iii.  1 ;  iv.  9 ;  2
Tim.  ii.  11 ;  Titus  iii.  8).  In  the  sight  of
many  witneMss.  The  wliole  congregation  of
tho  Church,  who  were  witnesses  of  his  bap-
tism (pco  the  rubric  prefixed  to  the  Order  of
"Ministration  of  Public  Baptism"  in  the
Book  of  Common  Prayer).

Ver.  13. — I  charge  thee  for  I  give  thee  charge,
A.V. :  o/forbf'/orc(initalics),  A.V. ;  //wjfora,
A.V.  Ichargethee.  It  has  been  well  observed
that  the  npostle's  langiiapo  increases  in  solem-
nity 08  ho  approaches  tlie  end  of  the  Epistle.
This  word  irapocyytWw  is  of  frequent  use
in  St.  Paul's  Epistles  (1  Cor.  vii.  10 ;  1  Thess.
iv.  11  :  2  Thess,  iii.  4,  6,  10,  12;  and  above,
ch.  i.  3 ;  iv.  11 ;  v.  7).  In  the  sight  of  God,
etc.  (compare  the  adjuration  iu  ch.  v.  21).
Who  quiokeneth,  t^tc.  The  T.R.  has  fwowoi-
ovyro^.  Tho  K.T.  has  (ujoyouovvrosy  with
no  difference  of  meaning.  Both  words  are
used  in  the  LXX.  as  the  rendering  of  the
Pihel  and  Hiphil  of  rpn.  As  an  epithet  of
**  God,"  it  sets  before  us  the  hijjhest  creative
act  of  the  Almighty  as  "  the  Lord,  and  the
Giver  of  life;"  and  is  equivalent  to  "the
living  God"  (Matt.  xxvi.  08),  "tho  God  of
tho  spirits  of  all  flesh"  (Numb.  xvi.  22).
The  existence  of  **  life "  is  the  one  thing
which  baffles  tho  ingenuity  of  science  in  its
attempts  to  dispense  with  a  Creator.  The
good  confession  refers  to  our  Lord*s  confes-
sion of  himself  as  "  the  Christ,  tho  Son  of
God,"  in  Matt,  xxvii.  11;  Luke  xxiii.  3;
John  xviii.  36,  37,  which  is  analogous  to


the  boptismal  confession  (Acta  viii.  37
(T.R.);  xvi  31;  xix.  4,  5).  The  natural
word  to  have  followed  /iuprvpcty  was  /Ltaprvplor,.
as  above  dfioXoylw  follows  &fio\AyTttras ;  but
St.  Paul  substitutes  the  word  of  cognate
meaning,  6/iokoylaaf,  in  order  to  keep  the
formula,  ^  jroX^  6fio\oyieu

Ver.  14. — The  for  thi9,A,Y.;  withoutreproach
for  unrebukabiUf  A.y.  The  commandment
(r^ir  ^rroX^y).  The  phrase  is  peculiar,  and
must  have  some  special  meaning.  Perhaps,,
as  Bishop  Wordsworth  expounds  it,  ^the
commandment**  is  tliat  law  of  faith  and  duty
to  which  Timothy  vowed  obedience  at  hi»^
baptism,  and  is  parallel  to  **  the  good  con-
fession." Some  think  that  the  command
given  in  vers.  11,  12  is  referred  to;  and
tills  is  the  meaning  of  the  A.Y.  **this.*'
Without  spot,  without  reproaeh.  There  is
a  difference  of  opinion  among  commentators,
whether  these  two  adjectives  (&(nriAoy,  &vev/-
Xrrrroy)  belong  to  the  commandment  or  to
the  person,  i.e.  Timothy.  The  introduction
of  a 4  after  rripriffcu ;  the  facts  that  rriprtaai
r^f  ^mroAaf,  without  any  addition,  means
**  to  keep  the  commandments,"  and  that  iu
the  New  Testament,  titmXos  and  dWiriXiyrror
always  are  used  of  persons,  not  things  (Jos.
L  27;  1  Pet.  i.  19;  2  Pet.  iii.  14;  ch.  iii.  2;
V.  7) ;  and  the  consideration  that  the  idea  of
the  person  being  found  blameless  in,  or  kept
blameless  unto,  the  coming  of  Christ,  is  a
frequent  one  in  the  Epistles  (Judc  24;  2
Pet.  iii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  Col.  i.  22 ;  1  Thess.
iii.  13 ;  V.  23), — seem  to  point  strongly,  if  not
conclusively,  to  the  adjectives  $.aitO<ov  and
h^iiriKirirrov  here  agreeing  with  rf,  not  with
ivT0\4\v.^  The  appearing  (t^k  iinipavfiay).
The  thought  of  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  always  prominent  in  the  mind  of  St.
Paul  (1  Cor.  i.  7,  8;  iv.  5;  xv.  23;  Col.  iii.
4:  1  Thess.  iii.  13;  iv.  15;  2  Thess.  i.  9,
etc.),  seems  to  have  acquired  fresh  intensity
amidst  the  troubles  and  dangers  of  the
closing  years  of  his  life,  both  as  an  object
of  hopo  and  as  a  motive  of  action  (2  Tim.
i.  10;  ii.  12;  iv.  1,  8;  Titus  ii.  13).

Ver.  15. — Its  own  for  hu,  A.V.  This  cor-
rection seems  to  be  manifestly  right.  The
same  phrase  is  rendered  in  ch.  ii.  6  and
Titus  i.  3  "  in  due  time,"  in  the  A.V. ;  but
in  the  R.V.  ii.  6  is  "its  own  times,"  and  in
Titus  i.  3  **  his  own  seasons.  In  Gal.  vi.  J>
Koiptf  lil(f>  is  also  rendered  "  in  due  season,"
in  both  tho  A.V.  and  the  R.V.  Such  a
phrase  as  iv  Katpdis  iSlois  must  be  taken
everywhere  in  the  same  sense.  It  clearly
means  at  tho  fitting  or  proper  time,  and  cor-
resjwnds  to  the  ir\'f)pwixa  rov  xp^^o^y  **  the
fulness  of  time,"  in  Gal.  iv.  4.    The  two

»  Bishop  EUicott,  Dean  Alford.  Huther.
and  others,  with  De  Wette,  refer,  however^
these  adjectives  to  r^w  imoKiiv,


CH.  VI.  1—21.]


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


123


ideas  aze  combined  in  Luke  i.  20  (ir\iipMi'
aovrai  tis  rhy  Kcuphp  aln&v)  and  xxi.  24
(comp.  Eph.  i.  10).  Sliall  ihow  (8(f|€i).
Acury^civ  ivi^aofttav,  *^io  show  an  appear-
ing/' is  a  somewhat  imusual  phrase,  and  is
more  classical  than  scriptural.  The  verb
and  the  object  are  not  of  cognate  sense  (as
''to  display  a  display,"  or  '*to  manifest  a
manifestation  "),  but  the  invisible  God,  God
the  Father,  will,  it  is  said,  display  the
Epiphany  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The
wonder  displayed  and  manifested  to  the
world  is  the  appearing  of  Clirist  in  his  glory.
The  Author  of  that  manifestation  is  God.
The  {blessed;  6  fmndpioi  (not  c^Xoyirr^f,  as
in  Mark  xiv.  61),  is  only  here  and  in  ch.  i.
11  (where  see  note)  applied  to  God  in  Scrip-
ture. The  blessed  and  only  Potentate.  The
phrase  is  a  remarkable  one.  Avvdarris
(Potentate),  which  is  only  found  elsewhere
in  the  New  Testament  in  Luke  i.  52  and
Acts  viii.  27,  is  applied  to  G^  here  onl^.
It  is,  however,  so  applied  in  2  Mace.  iii.
24;  xiL  15;  xv.  23,  where  we  have  ndtrns
d^ovoias  Zvvdffrris,  Toy  fi4yap  rod  K6(rfiov
8v»^ri}y,  and  Avudcra  r&u  obpavSov ;  in  all
which  places,  as  here,  the  phrase  is  used  to
signify,  byway  of  contrast,  the  superiority  of
the  power  of  God  over  all  earthly  power.  In
the  first  of  the  above-cited  passages  the  lan-
guage is  singularly  like  that  here  used  by
Dt.  Paul.  For  it  is  said  that  6  vdcrts  i^ovalas
8vr^9Ti}r,  •*  the  Prince  (or  Potentate)  of  all
power  made  a  great  apparition,"  or  •*  appenr-
mg  **  {iviipayfiav  fifyd\r]v  diroiritnv),  for  the
overthrow  of  the  blasphemer  and  pcr&ecutor
Heliodorus.  St.  Paul  must  have  hod  this
in  his  mind,  and  compared  the  effect  of  *'  the
appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  in  over-
throwing the  Xeros  of  the  jearth  with  the
overthrow  of  Heliodorus  (comp.  1  Thess.  i.
7 — 10).  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,
eto.  (compare  the  slightly  different  phrase
in  Bev.  xvii.  14  and  xix.  16,  applied  to  the
Bon).  So  in  Ps.  cxxxvi.  2,  3,  God  is  spoken
of  as  "  God  of  gods,  and  Lord  of  lords."

Ver.  16. — Ldght  unapproachable  for  the
Ught  which  no  man  can  approach  unto,  A.V. ;
eternal  for  everlasting^  A.V.  Unapproachable
(ktrpoatroif) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,
bat  found  occasionally  in  the  later  classics,
corresponding  to  the  moro  common  dfiaros.
Whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see  (comp.
oh.  i.  17  (where  see  note)  and  Exod.  xxxiii.
20—23).  The  appearance  of  the  *•  God  of
Israel"  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  Nadab  and
Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Israel,
related  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  9 — 11,  was  that  of
the  Son  in  anticipation  of  the  Incarnation.
The  invisibility  of  the  essential  Godhead  is
also  predicated  in  our  Lord's  saying,  *'  God
is  a  Spirit "  (John  iv.  24).  This  whole  pas-
sage is  a  magnificent  embodiment  of  the
attributes  of  the  living  God,  supreme  blessed-


ness and  almighty  power,  universal  dominion,^
and  unchangeable  being,  inscrutable  majesty,
radiant  holiness,  and  glory  inaccessible  and
unapproachable  by  hiscroatures,  save  through
the  mediation  of  his  only  begotten  Son.

VcT.n.^This  present  tor  this,  A.y.;  have
their  hope  set  on  the  uncertainty  of  for  trust
in  uncertain,  A.V. ;  on  God  for  in  the  living
God,  A.V.  and  T.K.  Charge  (impdyy9?i\§) ;
as  in  ch.  i.  3  ;  iv.  11 ;  v.  7 ;  and  in  ver.  13,
and  elsewhero  frequently.  Bich  in  this
present  world.  Had  St  Paul  in  his  mind
the  parable  of  Dives  and  Lazarus  (comp.
Luke  xvi.  19,  25)  ?  That  they  be  not  high-
minded  (jji^  v^Koppovuy) ;  elsewhere  only  in
Rom.  xi.  20.  The  words  compounded  witli
{/^k6s  have  mostly  a  bad  sense — **  haughti-
ness," **  boastfiilness,"  and  the  like.  The
nnoertainty  (d97}\ Jtttti)  ;  here  only  in  the
New  Testament,  but  used  in  the  same  sense
in  Polybius  (see  &9fi\os  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  8;  and
AJtJXwj  in  1  Cor.  ix.  26).  The  A.V.,  though
less  literal,  expresses  the  sense  much  better
than  the  R.V.,  which  is  hardly  good  English.
Who  giveth  ns  richly  all  thi^  to  enjoy ;
for  enjoyment.  The  gifts  are  God*s.  Trust,
therefore,  in  the  Giver,  not  in  the  g^ft.  The
gift  is  uncertain ;  the  Giver  liveth  for  ever.
(For  the  sentiment  that  God  is  the  Giver  of
all  good,  comp.  Jas.  i.  17 ;  Ps.  civ.  28 ;  cxlv.
16,  etc.)

Ver.  18. — That  (hey  he  ready  for  ready,  A,Y.
Do  good  {iyaBofpytty ;  hero  only,  for  the  moro
common  &yaBovoiu¥),  That  they  be  rich  in
good  works  (oh.  v.  10,  note) ;  not  merely  in
the  perishing  riches  of  this  present  world —
the  same  sentiment  as  Matt.  vi.  19 — 21 ;
Luke  xii.  33  and  21.  Beady  to  dlstribate
(f  &/Licra8(^ouf ) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  rarely  in  later  classical  Greek.
The  opposite,  "close-handed,"  is  tva-fjurd-
9oTOf,  Tho  verb  fitraSi^vfu  means  **  to  give
to  others  a  sharo  or  portion  of  what  one  has"
(Luke  ilL  11;  Rom.  i.  11;  xii.  8;  Eph.  iv.
28;  1  Thess.  ii.  8).  Willing  to  oommnnicate
{KoiywyUovs) ;  here  only  in  the  Now  Testa-
ment, but  found  in  clasbical  Greek  in  a
slightly  different  sense.  '*  Communicative  "
is  tho  exact  equivalent,  though  in  this  wider
use  it  is  obsolete.  Wo  have  the  same  precept
in  Heb.  xiii.  16.  "To  do  good  and  to  com-
municate forget  not."  (For  KoiywffTy  in  the
sense  of  "  giving  "  see  Rom.  xii.  13 ;  Gal.  vi.
6 ;  Phil.  iv.  15 ;  and  for  Koiyotyla  in  the  same
sense,  see  Rom.  xv.  26;  2  Cor.  ix.  13;  Heb.
xiii.  16.)

Ver.  19.— n«  life  which  is  life  indeed
for  eternal  life,  A.V.  and  T.R.  Laying  up
in  store  {aTo0rj(ravpl(ovr9s) ;  only  here  in
the  New  Testament,  but  once  in  Wisd.
iii.  3,  and  occasionally  in  classical  Groek.
A  good  foundation  {09fji4\ioy  Ktt\6y).  The
idea  of  a  foundation  is  always  maintained
in  the  use  of  0c/iAiof,  whether  it  is  used


124


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  VI.  1—21,


literally  or  figoratiTely  (Luke  li.  48 ;  Kpb.
iL  20:  Rev.  xxL  14,  etc.).  There  ii,  at
firtt  sight,  a  manifest  confusion  of  meta-
phors in  the  phrase,  **  laying  up  in  store  a
foundation."  Bishop  kllicott,  foUowinff
Wiesinger,  onderstandi  **a  wealth  of  good
works  as  a  foundation."  Alford  sees  no
difficulty  in  considering  the  **  foundation"
as  a  treasure.  Others  have  conjectured  «»•
fi^Ktoy,  **a  stored  treasure/'  for  •cmAxot.
Others  understand  BttUkiov  in  the  sense  of
Bitiau,  a  depotdL  Others  take  kwo9fivQ»^(9t»
in  the  sense  of  ^  acquiring,"  without  reference
to  \U  etymology.  But  this  is  unlikely,  the
<x)nti'Xt  being  about  the  use  of  money,  though
in  part  favoured  by  the  use  of  ^rioav^iCav  in
2  ret.  iii.  7.  The  reader  must  choose  for
himself  either  to  adopt  one  of  the  above
explanations,  or  to  credit  St  Paul  with  on
unimportant  confusion  of  metaphors.  Any-
how, the  doctrine  is  clear  that  wealth  spent
for  God  and  his  Church  is  repaid  with
interest,  and  becomes  an  abiding  treasure.
Life  indeed  (jris  6rrus  (otfis);.ao  ch.  v.  3,  5,
rks  oyrtvs  xhp^j  V  omtts  xhp^  **  widows
indeed ; "  and  (John  viii.  36)  Srrms  Ae^poi,
**  free  indeed,"  in  opposition  to  the  freedom
which  the  Jews  claimed  as  the  seed  of
Abraham.

Ver.  20. — Guard  for  heep^  A.V. ;  unto  thee
for  io  thy  trust,  A.V. ;  turning  aurayfrom  for
scolding,  A.  V. ;  the  profane  for  profane  and
rntn,  AV.;  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely  far
science,  falsely,  A.V.  Ouard  that  whidi  is
oommitted  unto  thee ;  r^y  tcoLpc^Knv  (irapa-
KaraOiiKriv,  T.R.).  Guard  for  heep  is  hardly
an  improvement.  The  meaning  of  "keep,"
like  that  of  0i/X<£tt«,  is  to  guard,  keep  waich
over,  and,  by  so  doing,  to  preserve  safe  and
uninjured.  This  meaning  is  well  brought
out  in  the  familiar  words  of  Ps.  cxxi.,  **  Ho
that  keepeth  thee  will  not  slumber.  .  .  .
He  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber
nor  sleep.  The  Lord  himself  is  thy  Keeper  "
(so  too  Ps.  cxxviL  1 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  15,  etc.).
TlapaO-fiKTi  or  irapoicara^ioj,  occurs  elsewhere
in  the  New  Testament  only  in  2  Tim.  i.  12,
14,  where  the  apostle  uses  it  (in  ver.  12)  of
his  own  soul,  which  be  has  committed  to  the
safe  and  faithful  keeping  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ;  but  in  ver.  14  in  the  same  sense  as
here.  **That  good  thing  which  was  com-
mitted unto  thee  guard  [*keep,*  A.V.]."
There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  difference
between  irapad^irTj  and  frapoKaraBriitri,  which
both  mean  "a  deposit,"  and  are  used  in-
differently in  classical  Greek,  though  the
latter  is  the  more  common.  The  precept  to
Timothy  here  is  to  keep  diligent  and  watch-


ful guard  over  the  faith  oommitted  to  his
trust;  to  preserve  it  unaltered  and  unoormpt,
fto  as  to  hand  it  down  to  his  successors  exactly
the  same  as  he  had  received  it.  Oh  that  the
successors  of  the  apostles  had  always  kept
this  precept  (see  Ordination  of  nriests)!
Turning  away  from  (4Krptir6/uros);  <mly
here  in  the  middle  voice,  **  turning  from,"
^  avoiding,"  with  a  transitive  sense.  In  the
passive  voice  it  means  *^  to  turn  out  of  the

eth,"  as  in  ch.  i.  6;  v.  15;  2  Tim.  iv.  4.
Jb  profiuie  babhlings  (see  ch.  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.
ii.  16):  Kfro^i»r/a;  only  here  and  2  Tim.  iL
16,  *'th*»  utterance  of  empty  words,"  **  words
of  the  lips  "  (2  Kings  xviii  20).  Oppodtions
(arrte4ff*i$):  here  only  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. It  is  a  term  used  in  logic  and  in
rhetoric  by  Plato,  Aristotle,  etc,  for  **  op-
positions" and  **  antitheses,"  laying  one
doctrine  by  the  side  of  another  for  compari-
son, or  contrast,  or  refutation.  It  seems  to
allude  to  the  particular  method  used  by  the
heretics  to  establish  their  tenets,  in  opposi-
tion to  the  statements  of  the  Church  on
particular  points — such  as  the  Law,  the
Besuriection,  etc  The  knowledge  whkh  ii
fUfoly  00  eallad.  There  is  a  very  aimflar
intimation  of  the  growth  of  an  empty  philo-
sophy, whose  teaching  was  antagonistic  to
the  teaching  of  Christ  in  Col.  iL  8,  and  with
which  St  Paul  contrasts  the  true  yv^is  in
ver.  3.  This  was  clearly  the  germ  (adled
by  Bishop  Lightfoot  ^  Gnostic  Judaism  ")  of
what  was  later  more  fully  developed  as  the
Gnostic  heresy,  which,  of  course,  derived  its
name  from  yvwrts,  knowledge  or  science,  to
which  they  laid  claim  (see  Bishop  Light-
foot's  able  'Introduction  to  the  Epistle  to
Colossians,'  specially  p.  100 ;  and  his  notes
on  ch.  ii.  8,  sqq.).

Ver.  21.— Ku  for  thee,  A.V.  and  T3.
Tiio  R.T.  omits  Amen.  Professing  (^irayytX-
\6nfyoi);  see  ch.  ii.  10,  note.  Have  erred
{iicr6xvo^ay) ;  ch.  i.  6,  note.  Grace  be  with
you.  The  authorities  for  <rov  and  vfjuip  re-
spectively are  somewhat  evenly  bahinced.
The  T.K.  aov  seems  in  itself  preferable,  as
throughout  St.  Paul  addresses  Timothy  per-
sonally, and  as  there  are  no  salutations  here,
ns  in  2  Timothy  and  Titus  (see  ch.  i.  18 ;  iii.
14;  iv.  6,  etc;  vL  11,  20).  This  shorter
form,  fi  x«^tf*  is  used  in  the  pastoral  Epistles
(2  Tim.  iv.  22 ;  Titus  iii.  35)  for  the  fuller
and  more  usual  form,  'H  xapn  rov  Kvpiov  ri^Sw
'l77<rou  Xpiarov  (Rom.  xvi.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  23 ;
2  Thess.  iiL  18,  and  elsewhere).  The  short
form  also  occurs  in  Heb.  xiiL  2J5.  Tho
words  are  a  gracious,  peaceful  ending  to  the
Epistle.


OH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,  125


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2, — The  doctrine  of  God,  Slaves,  led  doubtless  by  the  miseries  of  their
condition  to  seek  the  ennobling,  comforting  privileges  of  the  gospel,  formed  a  con-
siderable portion  of  the  first  congregations  of  disciples  (see  the  names  in  Rom.  zvi. ;.
1  Cor.  i.  27, 28 ;  Eph.  vi.  6—8 ;  Col.  iii.  22—25 ;  Titus  ii.  9 ;  Philem.  10, 16 ;  1  Pet  ii..
18,  etc.).  Hence  so  many  exhortations  addressed  specially  to  them.  In  nothing,
perhaps,  does  the  Divine  excellency  of  the  gospel  show  itself  more  strikingly  than  in
the  adaptation  of  its  precepts  to  such  different  classes  of  society,  and  in  the  wise  modera-
tion with  which  it  met  the  social  evils  of  life.  The  subjects  of  a  Nero  are  bid  to  honour
the  king,  the  slave  is  told  to  count  his  master  worthy  of  all  honour ;  and  the  motive
for  this  self-denying  moderation  is  the  paramount  desire  not  to  bring  any  reproach  upon
the  gospel  of  Christ.  The  world  shall  not  be  able  to  say  that  Christianity  is  a  brewer
of  confusion,  or  that  the  peaceable  order  of  society  is  endangered  by  the  fanaticism  of
the  servants  of  Christ.  And  yet  the  manly  self-respect  of  the  slave  is  wonderfully
increased  by  being  reminded  that  he  is  the  servant  of  Christ ;  or,  again,  by  the  thought
of  his  spiritual  freedom  as  a  child  of  God ;  or,  again,  by  his  brotherhood  with  his  master
and  partnership  with  him  in  the  faith  and  love  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  He  has  before
him  a  career  as  noble  and  as  dignified  as  his  master,  though  that  master  were  Csesar
himself.  And  while  he  patiently  submits  to  the  peculiar  trials  of  his  bodily  condition,
he  is  transported  into  a  region  where  bodily  distinctions  are  of  no  account — where  the
petty  differences  of  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  are  swallowed  up,  and  melt  away,,
before  the  common  glory  of  the  children  of  God  and  the  common  privileges  of  Christian
fellowship.  And  yet  all  the  while  he  maintains  the  respect  and  obedience  of  the  slave  to
the  master.  Truly  the  doctrine  of  God  is  a  wise,  an  excellent,  and  a  worthy  doctrine,
and  carries  with  it  its  own  credentials,  that  it  is  from  God.

Vers.  3 — 5. — EeUrodoxy.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  limit  the  notion  of  heterodoxy  to
the  holding  of  wrong  opinions  in  dogmatic  theoloccv.  Heterodoxy  is  teaching  anything
otherwise  than  as  the  Word  of  God  teaches  it.  Here  they  are  declared  to  be  heterodox
who  depart  from  the  wholesome  teaching  of  Christ  concerning  the  duties  of  slaves  to
their  masters,  and  use  language  in  speaking  to  slaves  which  is  provocative  of  strife  and
envy,  of  railings  and  suspicions.  Such  men,  instead  of  being  guided  by  a  disinterested
love  of  truth,  are  actuated  by  selfish  motives.  They  seek  to  curry  favour  with  those
whoso  cause  they  espouse,  and  receive  in  money  the  reward  of  their  patronage  of  the
cause.  And  so  we  may  generally  discern  between  the  orthodox  and  the  heterodox  by  the
methods  they  pursue,  and  the  results  they  attain.  The  one  seeks  to  promote  peace  and
contentment  by  gentle  words  and  by  counsels  of  love  and  patience,  and  has  his  reward
in  the  happiness  of  those  whom  he  advises.  The  other  flatters,  and  inflames  the  passions
of  those  whom  he  pretends  to  befriend;  plays  upon  the  bad  parts  of  human  nature;  raises
questions  which  tend  to  loosen  the  joints  which  bind  society  together ;  declaims  and
fumes  and  agitates,  and  receives  in  money  or  other  selfish  advantages  the  price  of  his
mischievous  patronage.  Disinterested  love  is  the  characteristic  of  orthodox  teaching,
selfish  gain  that  of  the  heterodox.  Peace  and  contentment  are  the  fmit  of  the  one,  strilo
and  suspicion  are  the  fruit  of  the  other.

Vers.  6 — 21. — Tlie  contrast.  There  is  no  more  effectual  way  of  bringing  out  the
peculiar  beauties  and  excellences  of  any  system  or  character  than  by  contrasting  with
it  the  opposite  system  or  character.  Let  us  do  this  in  regard  to  the  two  characters
which  are  here  broiiiiht  before  us,  and  the  uses  of  money  by  them  respectively.

I.  The  moxey-lover.  The  love  of  money  sits  at  the  helm  of  his  inner  man.  It  is
the  spring  of  all  his  thoughts,  desires,  and  actions.  Observe  what  is  his  ruling  motive,
what  takes  the  lead  in  his  plans  and  schemes  of  life,  and  you  will  find  that  it  is  the
desire  to  be  rich.  To  be  rich  ranks  in  his  estimation  before  being  good  or  doing  good ;
and  personal  goodness  and  benevolence  towards  others,  if  they  have  existed  before  the
entering  into  the  heart  of  the  love  of  money,  gradually  fade  and  die  away  under  its
withering  influence.  As  the  thistles  and  rushes,  the  docks  and  the  plantains,  prevail,  the
good  herbage  disappears.    A  hard  selfish  character,  indifferent  to  the  feelings  and  wants-


126  THE  PIBST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  ▼1.1—21.

of  others,  and  ready  to  brush  on  one  side  every  obstacle  which  stands  in  the  way  of
getting,  is  the  common  result  of  the  love  of  money.  But  in  many  cases  it  leads  on  into
impiety  and  crime,  and  through  them  to  sorrows  and  perdition.  It  was  his  greed  for
the  wages  of  unrighteousness  which  urged  Balaam  on  to  his  destruction ;  it  was  his  greed
for  money  that  made  Judaa  a  thief,  a  traitor,  and  a  murderer  of  his  Lord.  Many  an
heresiarch  has  adopted  liEdse  doctrines  and  led  schisms  merely  as  a  means  of  enriching
himself  at  the  expense  of  his  followers ;  and  every  dav  we  see  crimes  of  the  blackest  dye
springing  from  the  lust  of  riches.  In  other  cases  the  coveted  possession  of  wcadth  is
followed  by  inordinate  pride  and  contempt  of  those  who  are  not  rich,  by  a  feeling
of  superiority  to  all  the  restraints  which  bind  other  men,  and  by  a  headlong  descent
into  the  vices  and  self-indulgences  to  which  money  pives  the  way.  In  a  word^then,
the  lover  of  money  stands  before  us  as  at  best  a  selfish  man — a  man  of  low  and  narrow
ends ;  one  pandering  to  his  own  base  desires ;  one  sacrificing  to  an  ignoble  and  futile
purpose  all  the  loftier  parts  of  his  own  nature ;  one  from  whom  his  fellow-men  get  no
good,  and  often  get  much  harm ;  one  whose  toil  and  labour  at  the  best  end  in  empti-
ness, and  very  often  lead  him  into  sorrow  and  destruction.  His  progress  is  a  continued
■debasement  of  himself,  and  moral  bankruptcy  is  his  end.

IL  The  man  of  God  is  of  a  diffebemt  mould.  He  views  his  own  nature  and
his  own  wants  in  their  true  light.  He  is  a  man,  he  is  a  moral  agent,  he  is  a  child  of
Ood.  His  hunger  and  thirst  are  after  the  things  that  are  needful  for  the  life  and  the
growth  of  his  immortal  soul,  his  very  self.  He  is  a  man ;  he  is  one  of  those  whom  the
Lord  Jesus  is  not  ashamed  to  call  his  brethren,  and  who  has  been  made  partaker  of  his
Divine  nature,  and  therefore,  like  his  Divine  Lord,  he  wishes  to  live,  not  for  himself,  but
for  his  brethren,  whom  he  loves  even  as  Christ  loved  them  and  gave  himself  for  them.
And  so,  on  the  one  hand,  he  lays  himself  out  to  enrich  himself  with  those  treasures
which  make  a  man  rich  toward  Grod — righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,
meekness ;  and,  on  the  other,  he  uses  his  worldly  wealth  for  the  comfort  of  the  poor  and
needy ;  doing  good,  distributing  freely  of  his  substance  for  every  good  work,  and  admit-
ting others  to  a  share  of  the  wealth  that  Grod  has  given  him.  It  is  very  remarkable,  too,
how  he  both  degrades  and  yet  elevates  wealth.  He  degrades  it  by  depriving  it  of  all
its  false  value.  He  does  not  trust  in  it,  because  he  knows  its  imcertainty ;  he  does  not
desire  it,  because  he  knows  its  dangers ;  he  does  not  boast  of  it,  because  he  knows  it  adds
nothing  to  his  real  worth.  But  he  elevates  it  by  making  it  an  instrument  of  doing  good
to  others,  and  by  making  it  a  provocative  of  love  to  man  and  of  thankfulness  to  God;
'  and  though  it  is  so  fieetiog  and  so  uncertain  in  itself,  he  forces  into  it  an  element  of
■eternity  by  consecrating  it  to  God,  and  compelling  it  to  bear  witness  on  his  behalf  in
the  great  day  of  judgment  that  he  loved  Christ  and  did  good  to  those  whom  Christ
loves.

To  sum  up,  the  money-lover,  by  putting  a  false  value  upon  money,  makes  it  a  snare
and  an  instrument  of  hurt  to  himself  and  others,  and  an  eternal  loss  to  his  own  soul ;
the  man  of  God,  by  putting  the  true  value  upon  money,  makes  it  a  joyful  possession  to
himself  and  his  brethren,  a  nourisher  of  unselfish  virtue,  and  an  eternal  gain.

Vers.  11 — 16. — Tlie  man  of  Ood,  The  character  of  the  man  of  God  is  here  portrayed
with  a  master's  hand.  We  may  go  back  and  contemplate  it  with  a  little  more  exact-
ness. He  is  covetous,  he  is  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  good  things;  but  the  good  things
which  he  covets  and  pursues  are  the  everlasting  possessions  of  the  sou).  And  what  are
these?  RigliteoxLsness — that  great  quality  of  God  himself;  that  quality  which  makes
eternal,  unchanjijeable,  right  the  sole  and  inflexible  rule  of  conduct.  Righteousness —
that  condition  of  thought  and  will  and  purpose  which  does  not  fluctuate  with  the
clianging  opinions  and  fashions  of  inconstant  men,  which  does  not  vary  according  to
the  outward  influences  to  which  it  is  subject,  which  is  not  overborne  by  fear,  or  apjxitite,
or  persuasion,  or  interest;  but  abides  steadfast,  unaltered,  the  same  under  all  circum-
stances and  tlirough  all  time.  And  with  righteousness,  which  he  has  in  common  witli
God,  he  covets  godliness,  the  proper  relative  condition  of  the  rational  creature  towards
the  Creator.  Godliness  is  that  reverential,  devout  attitude  towards  God  which  we  some-
times call  piety,  sometimes  holiness,  sometimes  devotion.  It  comprehends  the  senti-
ments of  fear,  love,  and  reverence  which  a  good  man  entertains  toward  God ;  and  the
whole  conduct,  such  as  worship,  prayer,  almsgiving,  etc.,  which  springs  from  those


CT.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  127

sentiments.  And  though  it  cannot  be  predicated  of  God  that  he  is  tbatfi^s,  it  is  an
essential  feature  of  the  godly  man,  who  therefore  covets  it  as  an  integral  part  of  the
wealth  of  tlie  soul.  And  then,  by  a  natural  association  with  this  reverential  attitude
towards  God  described  by  *^  godliness,"  there  follows /at7^;  the  entire  reliance  of  the
soul  upon  God*s  goodness,  and  specially  on  all  his  promises — those  promises  which  are
yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus ;  faith  which  fastens  on  Jesus  Chnst  as  the  sum  and
substance,  the  head  and  completeness, of  Gtxl's  good  will  toman ;  as  the  infallible  proof,
which  nothing  can  detract  from,  of  God*s  purpose  of  love  to  man ;  as  the  immovable
rock  of  man's  salvation,  which  may  not  and  cannot  be  moved  for  ever.  And,  as  by  a
necessary  law,  from  this  faith  there  flows  forth  love :  love  to  God  and  love  to  man ;  love
which,  like  righteousness,  is  an  attribute  which  the  man  of  Qrod  has  in  common  with
God ;  love  which,  in  proportion  to  its  pureness  and  its  intensity,  assimilates  the  man  of
Gxxl  to  God  himself,  and  is  therefore  the  most  prized  portion  of  his  treasures.  Nor  must
another  essential  virtue  of  the  man  of  God  be  overlooked  by  him,  and  that  is  patience.
Just  as  godliness  and  faith  are  qualities  in  the  man  of  God  relatively  to  God,  so  is
patience  a  necessary  quality  relatively  to  the  hindrances  and  impediments  of  the  evil
world  in  which  he  lives.  The  primary  idea  of  {nroftattfi  is  continuance — **  patient  continu-
ance," as  it  is  well  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version  of  Rom.  ii.  7.  The  enmity  of  the
world,  the  outward  and  inward  temptations  to  evil,  the  weariness  and  tension  induced  by
prolonged  resistance,  are  constantly  pressing  upon  the  man  of  God  and  counselling  cessa-
tion from  a  wearisome  and  (it  is  suggested)  a  ftidtless  struggle.  He  has,  therefore,  need
of  patience ;  it  is  only  through  faith  and  patience  that  he  can  obtain  the  promises.  He
must  endure  to  the  end  if  he  would  grasp  the  coveted  salvation.  Patience  must  mingle
with  his  faith,  patience  must  mingle  with  his  hope,  and  patience  must  mingle  with  his
love.  There  must  be  no  fainting,  no  halting,  no  turning  aside,  no  growing  weary  in
well-doing.  Tribulations  may  come,  afflictions  may  press  sore,  provocations  mav  bo
multiplied,  and  labours  may  be  a  heavy  burden ;  but  the  man  of  G(xl,  with  the  sure  hope
of  the  coming  of  Christ  to  cheer  and  support  him,  will  go  steadily  forward,  will  endure,
will  stand  fast,  unto  the  end.  And  as  regards  the  provocations  of  men,  he  will  endure
them  with  meekness.  Not  only  will  he  not  turn  back  from  his  purpose  on  account  of
them,  but  ho  will  not  let  his  spirit  be  ruffled  by  them.  He  will  still  be  kind  to  those
who  are  unkind,  and  gentle  with  those  who  are  rough.  He  will  render  good  for  evil,
and  blessing  for  cursing,  if  so  be  ho  may  overcome  evil  with  good,  ever  setting  before
him  the  blessed  example  of  him  "  who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  when  he
suffered,  threatened  not;  but  committed  himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously."  Thus
fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith,  he  lays  hold  and  keeps  hold  of  eternal  life,  and  will  be
found  without  spot,  unrebukable,  in  that  great  and  blessed  day  of  the  appearing  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  everlasting.    Amen."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1.— 2%c  duties  of  slaves  to  unbelieving  masters.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to
deal  with  the  distinctions  of  civil  duty,  and  takes  up  the  case  of  a  very  numerous  but
miserable  class  which  appears  to  have  been  largely  attracted  to  the  gospel  in  primitive
times.

I.  The  honour  dub  to  pagan  masters.  "  Whoever  are  under  the  yoke  as  bond-
servants, let  them  reckon  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  honour.**  1.  T?ie  condition
of  the  slaves  was  one  of  much  hardship.  There  was  practically  no  limit  to  the  power  of
the  masters  over  the  slaves.  They  might  be  gentle  and  just,  or  capricious  and  cruel.
The  slaves  had  no  remedy  at  law  against  harsh  treatment,  as  they  had  no  hope  of  escape
from  bondage.  2.  Yet  their  liberty  had  not  been  so  restricted  that  they  had  not  tlie
opportunity  of  hearing  the  gospel.  There  were  Christian  slaves.  Their  hard  life  was
ameliorated,  not  merely  by  the  blessed  hopes  of  the  gospel,  but  by  the  privilege  of
spiritual  equality  with  their  masters  which  was  one  of  its  distinguishing  glories.  3.  The
gospel  did  not  interfere  with  the  duty  of  obedience  which  they  owed  to  their  masters.
They  were  to  give  them  all  honour — not  merely  outward  subjection,  but  inward  respect.
Christianity  did  not  undertake  to  overturn  social  relations.  If  it  had  done  so,  it  would
have  been  revolutionary  in  the  last  degree ;  it  would  have  armed  the  whole  forces  of  the


128  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  vi.  1—21.

Bonuui  emigre  against  it;  it  would  itself  havo  been  drowned  in  blood;  and  it  would
have  led  to  the  merciless  slaughter  of  the  slaves  themselves.  Tet  Christianity  prepared
the  way  from  the  very  first  for  the  complete  abolition  of  slavery.  The  fact  that  with
the  great  Master  in  heaven  ^  there  was  no  respect  of  persons,"  and  that  ^  in  Jesus  Christ
there  was  neither  bond  nor  free,  but  all  were  one  in  Christ,"  would  not  justify  the
slaves  in  repudiating  their  present  subjection,  while  it  held  out  the  hope  of  their  eventual
eroandpatioD.  They  must  not,  therefore,  abuse  their  liberty  under  the  gospel.  4.  Yet
there  tva$  a  limit  to  the  $lave*8  obedience.  He  could  only  obey  his  master  so  far  as  was
consistent  with  the  laws  of  God  and  his  gospeU  consenting  to  suffer  rather  than  outrage
his  conscience.  Cases  of  this  sort  might  arise,  but  they  would  not  prejudice  the  gospel,
like  a  simple  revolt  against  existing  relationships.

II.  Thb  reason  fob  the  due  honour  given  to  treib  pagan  masters.  **That
the  Name  of  God  and  his  doctrine  may  not  be  blasphemed."  1.  There  would  he  a  serious
danger  of  such  a  result  if  slaves  were  either  to  withhold  due  service  to  their  masters  or  to
repudiate  all  subjection.  Grod  and  his  doctrine  would  be  dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of  their
masters,  because  they  would  be  regarded  as  sanctioning  insubordination.  Thus  a  deep
and  widespread  prejudice  would  arise  to  prevent  the  gospel  reaching  their  pa^n  masters.
%  Itis  thus  possHiefor  the  meanest  members  of  the  Church  to  do  honour  to  €hd  and  the
gospd.  The  apostle  contemplates  their  adorning  **  of  the  doctrine  of  (jod  our  Saviour
in  all  things"  (Titus  ii.  10).  3.  The  same  considerations  opply  to  the  case  of  domettie
servants  in  our  own  day.  The  term  translated  here  '*  slaves  "  is  used  with  some  lati  tude
in  the  Scripture.  It  applies  sometimes  to  persons  entirely  free,  as  to  David  in  relation
to  Saul  (1  Sam.  xix.  4),  to  ChristiaDS  generally  (Bom.  vi.  16 ;  I  Pet.  ii.  16),  to  apostles,
prophets^  and  ministers  (Gal.  L 10 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  24),  and  to  the  higher  class  of  dependents
(Matt,  xviii.  23 ;  xxi.  34).  Thus  the  term  implies  a  relation  of  dependence  without
legal  compulsion.  Christian  servants  must  yield  a  willing  and  cheerful  service  that  they
may  thus  honour  the  gospel. — ^T.  C.

Yer.  2. — The  duties  of  slaves  to  Cliristian  masters.  This  relationship  would  be  less
common  than  the  other.

I.  The  REsrscT  due  to  Christian  masters.  '*And  they  that  have  believing
masters,  let  them  not  despise  them  because  they  are  brethren,  but  the  rather  serve
them."  The  duty  is  presented  in  a  twofold  form.  1.  Neijatively.  "Let  them  not
despise  them."  The  false  teachers  might  tell  the  slaves  that  their  servitude  was  incon-
sistent with  Christian  liberty.  The  slaves  might  thus,  especially  in  the  case  of  Christian
masters^  regard  them  as  fully  their  equals  on  the  ground  of  the  common  brotherhood  of
believers,  and  refuse  them  the  respect  due  to  their  position.  2.  Positively.  **  But  the
rather  servo  them."  The  best  way  of  effecting  a  partial  amelioration  of  their  condition
was  by  rendering  a  service  all  the  more  faithful,  because  it  was  rendered  to  a  brother  in
Christ.    Servants  must  never  under  any  circumstances  be  disrespectful.

II.  The  reasons  for  this  command.  They  arc  twofold.  1.  Because  their  masters
are  brethren.  The  slaves  ought,  therefore,  to  treat  them  with  Christian  respect  and
generosity,  knowing  that  such  a  service  is  showing  kindness  to  "  brethren."  2.  Becanse
those  who  were  "  to  receive  the  benefit "  of  their  hearty  and  willing  service  were  ^* faithful
and  beloved.*^  This  thought  ought  to  dignify  as  well  as  ameliorate  the  position  of  the
slave.     Such  masters  were  willing  to  receive  such  service.

III.  The  necessity  or  enforcing  these  duties.  **  These  things  teach  and  exhort."
1.  It  was  necessary  for  the  comfort  of  the  slave  himself  ax  well  as  for  the  interests  of  the
master,  2.  It  vjas  necessary  for  the  credit  and  honour  of  the  gospel^  which  would  be
gravely  compromised  by  restiveness  or  insubordination  on  the  part  of  the  great  subject
class.  3.  TJie  gospel  is  not  vulgarized  by  sucJi  counsel.  It  rather  dignifies  human  life
in  its  meanest  respects  by  infusing  into  it  a  new  beauty  and  a  new  generosity  of
feeling.— T.  C.

Vers.  3 — 6. — A  warning  against  those  who  oppose  such  wholesome  teaching.  I,  The
opposition  to  apostolic  teaching  on  the  duties  of  slaves.  '*  If  any  one  tcacheth
other  doctrine,  and  does  not  assent  to  sound  words,  even  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesns
Christ,  and  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness.**  1.  The  nature  of  this  false
teaching.    It  points,  as  the  word  signifies,  to  "  a  different  doctrine "  from  that  of  the


CH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  129

apostle.  There  were  false  teachers  in  Ephesas  who,  from  a  pretended  interest  in  the
ciMS  of  Christian  slaves,  taught  them  that  the  gospel  was  a  political  charter  of  emanci-
pation; for  the  yoke  of  Christ  was  designed  to  break  every  other  yoke.  They  must  have
been  of  the  class  referred  to  elsewhere  who  "despised  government"  (2  Pet.  ii.  10;
Jude  8),  and  encouraged  disobedience  to  parents.  The  tendency  of  their  teaching  would
be  to  sow  the  seeds  of  discontent  in  the  minds  of  the  slaves,  and  its  efifects  would  be  to
plunge  them  into  a  contest  with  society  which  would  have  the  unhappiest  efifects.
2.  The  opposition  of  this  teaching  to  Divine  truth.  (1)  It  was  opposed  to  "  wholesome
words/'  to  words  without  poison  or  taint  of  corruption,  such  as  would  maintain  social
relations  on  a  basis  of  healthy  development.  (2)  It  was  opposed  to  the  words  of  Christ)
either  directly  or  through  bis  apostles.  He  had  dropped  sayings  of  a  suggestive  character
which  could  not  but  touch  the  minds  of  the  slave  class :  *'  Render  to  Cassar  the  things
that  are  Csesai^s ; "  '^  Blessed  are  the  meek :  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth ;  '*  "  Resist
not  evil ; "  "  Love  your  enemies,  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you."  (3)  It
was  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  godliness.  It  was  a  strange  thing  for  teachers  in  the
Churcn  to  espouse  doctrines  opposed  to  the  interests  of  godliness.  The  disobedience  of
slaves  would  commit  them  to  a  course  of  ungodly  dishonouring  of  God  and  his  gospel.

II.  The  hobal  and  intellectual  chabaoteb  of  these  false  teachers.  1.
Hiey  were  **  besotted  with  prideJ*  They  were  utterly  wanting  in  the  humility  of
spirit  which  the  gospel  engenders,  but  were  pufifed  up  with  an  empty  show  of  know*
ledge.  2.  Yet  they  were  ignorant.  "  Knowing  nothing."  They  had  no  true  under-
standing of  the  social  risks  involved  in  their  doctrine  of  emancipation,  or  of  the  true
method  of  ameliorating  the  condition  of  the  slaves.  3.  They  "  doted  about  questions
and  disputes  about  words**  They  had  a  diseased  appetency  for  all  sorts  of  profitless
discussions  turning  upon  the  meanings  of  words,  which  had  no  tendency  to  promote
godliness,  but  rather  altercations  and  bad  feeling  of  all  sorts — '*  from  which  cometh
envy,  strife,  evil-speakings,  wicked  suspicions,  incessant  quarrels."  These  controversial
collisions  sowed  the  seeds  of  all  sorts  of  bitter  hatred.  4.  The  moral  deficiency  of
these  false  teachers.  They  were  "men  corrupted  in  their  mind,  destitute  of  the  truth,
who  suppose  that  godliness  is  gain."  (1)  They  had  first  corrupted  the  Word  of  Grod,
and  thus  prepared  the  way  for  the  debasement  of  their  own  mind,  leading  in  turn  to
that  pride  and  ignorance  which  were  their  most  distinguishing  qualities.  (2)  They
were  "  deprived  of  the  truth."  It  was  theirs  once,  but  they  forfeited  this  precious
treasure  by  their  unfaithfulness  and  their  corruption.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to
tamper  with  the  truth.  (3)  They  heard  that  "  godliness  was  a  source  of  gain."  They
did  not  preach  contentment  to  the  slaves,  or  induce  them  to  acquiesce  with  patience
in  their  hard  lot,  but  rather  persuaded  them  to  use  religion  as  a  means  of  worldly
betterment.  Such  counsel  would  have  disorganizing,  disintegrating  efifects  upon  society.
But  it  was,  besides,  a  degradation  of  true  religion.  Godliness  was  not  designed  to
be  a  merely  lucrative  business,  or  to  be  followed  only  so  far  as  it  subserved  the  promotion
of  worldly  interests.  Simon  Magus  and  such  men  as  "made  merchandise"  of  the
disciples  are  examples  of  this  class.  Such  persons  would  "  teach  things  which  they
ought  not  for  the  sake  of  base  gain  "  (Titus  i.  11).— T.  C.

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  real  gain  of  true  godliness.  The  apostle,  after  his  manner,
expands  his  idea  beyond  the  immediate  occasion  that  led  to  it.

I.  The  gain  of  godliness  with  contentment.  "But  godliness  with  content-
ment is  great  gain."  1.  Godliness  is  again  in  itself,  because  it  has  "  the  promise  of
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.'*  Godly  men  come  into  happy  and
thriving  circumstances,  for  they  are  taught  to  pursue  their  callings  with  duo  industry,
foresight,  and  perseverance.  2.  Oodliness,  allied  to  contentment,  is  great  gain.  (1)
This  does  not  mean  that  contentment  is  a  condition  necessary  to  the  gainlul  character
of  godliness,  but  is  rather  an  effect  of  godliness  and  part  of  its  substantial  gain.  It
is  a  calm  and  scdato  temper  of  mind  about  worldly  interests.  It  is  God's  wisdom
and  will  not  to  give  to  all  men  alike,  but  the  contented  mind  is  not  disquieted  by  this
fact.  (2)  The  godly  man  is  content  with  what  he  possesses ;  submits  meekly  to  Qod*A
will,  and  bears  patiently  the  adverse  dispensations  of  his  providence.  The  godly  heart
is  freed  from  the  thirst  for  perishing  treasures,  because  it  possesses  treasures  of  a  higher
and  more  enduring  character.

I.  TIMOTHY.  K


180  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,  [en.  vi.  1—21.


n.  The  reasok  fos  thib  BSHnicsirr.  "  For  we  brought  nothing  into  the  world,
becauae  neither  are  we  able  to  take  aoything  out  of  it**  1.  We  are  appointed  by  Ood
to  oofM  naked  into  the  world.  We  may  he  bom  heirs  to  vast  possessions,  but  they
do  not  become  ours  till  we  are  actually  bom.  'Rioh  and  poor  idike  bring  nothing
into  the  world.  2.  This  fact  i$  a  reason  for  the  ttaiement  that  toe  can  carry  nothing
out  qf  the  world.  It  is  between  birth  and  death  we  can  bold  our  wealth.  Tlie  ri^
roan  cannot  carry  his  estates  with  him  into  the  grave.  He  will  have  no  need  of  them
in  the  next  life.  3.  There  could  he  no  contentment  if  we  could  take  anything  with
u$  at  deathj  because  in  that  case  the  future  would  be  dependent  upon  the  present.
4.  The  lesson  to  he  learned  from  these  fade  is  that  we  ought  not  eagerly  to  grasp
such  essentially  earthly  and  transitory  treasures.

III.  The  tbub  wisdom  op  ooktbntmsnt.  "Bat  if  we  have  food  and  raiment,
with  these  let  us  be  satisfied."  These  are  what  Jacob  desired,  Agur  prayed  for,  and
Christ  taught  his  disciples  to  make  the  subject  of  daily  supplication.  The  contented
godly  have  these  gifts  along  with  God's  blessing.  The  Lord  does  not  encourage  his
people  to  enlarge  their  desires  inordinately. — T.  0.

Vor.  9. — 77^  dangers  of  the  eager  Juute  to  he  rich,  L  The  eager  fubsuit  of  the
woBLD  IS  to  BE  SHUKKED.  **  But  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation  and
a  snare."  1.  The  apostle  does  not  condemn  the  possession  <f  riches,  which  have,
in  reality,  no  moral  character;  for  they  are  only  evil  where  they  are  badly  used.
Neither  does  he  speak  of  rich  men;  for  he  would  not  condemn  such  men  as  Abraham,
Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  Qaius,  and  others;  nor  such  rich  men  as  use  their  wealth
righteously  as  good  stewards  of  Ood.  2.  He  condemns  the  Jiaste  to  he  rich,  not  only
bmuse  wealth  is  not  necessary  for  a  life  of  godly  contentment,  but  because  of  its
social  and  moral  risks.

IL  The  dangers  of  this  eager  pursuit  of  wealth.  They  "  fall  into  tempta-
tion and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in
destraction  and  perdition."  1.  There  is  a  temptation  to  unjust  gain  which  leads
men  into  the  snare  of  the  devil.  There  is  a  sacrifice  of  principle,  the  abandonment
of  conscientious  scruples,  in  the  hurry  to  accumulate  wealth.  2.  The  temptation  in
its  turn  makes  way  for  many  lusts  which  are  "  foolish,"  because  they  are  imreasonablev
and  exercised  upon  things  that  are  quite  undesirable ;  and  which  are  **  hurtful,"  because
they  injure  both  body  and  soul,  and  all  a  man's  best  interests.  3.  These  lusts  in  turn
carry  their  own  retribution.  They  "  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition."  (1)  This
is  more  than  moral  degradation.  (2)  It  is  a  wreck  of  the  body  accompanied  by  the
ruin  of  the  immortal  soul. — T.  C.

Ver.  10. — The  root  of  all  evil.  "  For  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."
This  almost  proverbial  saying  is  intended  to  support  the  statement  of  the  previous
verse.

I.  The  love  of  money  as  a  root  of  evil.  1.  TAc  assertion  is  not  concerning
money,  which,  as  voe  have  seeii,  is  neither  good  nor  bad  in  itself  y  but  concerning  the  love
of  money,  2.  It  is  not  asserted  that  there  are  not  other  roots  of  evil  besides  covetous
ness.  This  thought  was  not  present  to  the  apostle's  mind.  3.  It  is  not  meant  tltat
a  covetous  man  will  be  entirely  destitute  of  all  virtuous  feeling,  4.  It  means  that
a  germ  of  all  evil  lies  in  one  with  the  love  of  money ;  that  there  is  no  kind  of  evil
to  which  a  man  may  not  be  led  through  an  absorbing  greed  for  money.  It  is  really
a  root-sin,  for  it  leads  to  care,  fear,  malice,  deceit,  oppression,  envy,  bribery,  perjury,
contentiousness.

II.  Unhappy  effects  of  the  love  of  money.  "  Which  some  having  coveted  after
have  wandered  away  from  the  faith,  and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many
sorrows."  1.  It  led  to  apostasy.  They  made  shipwreck  of  their  Christian  principles.
They  surrendered  the  faith.  The  good  seed  of  the  Word  was  choked  by  the  deceitful-
ness  of  riches,  and,  like  Demas,  they  forsook  the  Word,  having  loved  this  present  world.
2.  It  involved  the  pangs  of  conscience,  to  the  destruction  of  their  own  happiness.  They
felt  the  piercings  of  that  inward  monitor  who  forebodes  the  future  destruction. — T.  C.

Ver.  11. — Personal  admonition  addressed  to  Timothy  himself.    The  apostle  now


OH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  181


tarns  from  his  warning  to  those  desiring  to  be  rich  to  the  practical  exhortation  to
strive  for  the  true  riches.

L  The  title  by  which  Timothy  is  addressed.  "0  man  of  God."  1.  It  wa»
ihe  familiar  title  of  the  Old  Testament  propMa,  and  might  appropriately  apply  to
a  New  Testament  evangelist  like  Timothy.  2.  But  in  the  Mew  Testament  it  has
a  more  general  reference,  applying  as  it  does  to  all  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus  (2  Tim.
iii.  17).  The  name  is  very  expressive.  It  signifies  (1)  a  man  who  belongs  to  Gk)d ;
(2)  who  is  dedicated  to  God ;  (3)  who  finds  in  €K)d,  rather  than  in  riches,  his  tme
portion ;  (4)  who  lives  for  (Jod's  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31).

II.  The  warning  addressed  to  Timothy.  "  Flee  these  things."  It  might  seem
unnecessary  to  warn  so  devoted  a  Christian  against  the  love  of  riches,  with  its  destruc-
tive results ;  but  Timothy  was  now  in  an  important  position  in  a  wealthy  city,  which
contained  "  rich  "  men  (ver.  17),  and  may  have  been  tempted  by  gold  and  ease  and
popularity  to  make  trivial  sacrifices  to  truth.  The  holiest  heart  is  not  without  its
inward  subtleties  of  deceit.

IIL  The  positive  exhortation  addressed  to  Timothy.  *'And  follow  after
righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meek-spiritedness."  These  virtues
group  themselves  into  pairs.  1.  Righteousness  and  godliness ;  referring  to  a  general
conformity  to  the  Law  of  Gtxi  in  relation  to  the  duties  owing  respectively  to  God  and
man,  like  the  similar  expressions — ^"live  righteously  and  godly"— of  Titus  ii.  12.
(1)  Righteousness  b  (a)  not  the  '*  righteousness  of  Qod/*  for  that  had  been  already
attained  by  Timothy ;  out  (h)  the  doing  of  justice  between  man  and  man,  which  would
be  for  the  honour  of  religion  among  men.  Any  undue  regard  for  riches  would  cause
a  swerve  from  righteousness.  (2)  Godliness  includes  (a)  holiness  of  heart,  (b)  holiness
of  life,  in  which  lies  the  true  gain  for  two  worlds.  2.  Faith  and  love.  These  are  the
two  foundation-principles  of  the  gospel.  (1)  Faith  is  at  once  (a)  the  instrument  of
our  justification,  (b)  the  root-principle  of  Christian  life,  and  (c)  the  continuously
sustaining  principle  of  that  life.  (2)  Love  is  (a)  the  immediate  effect  of  faith,  for
"  faith  worketh  by  love  "  TGal.  v.  6) ;  (ii)  it  is  the  touchstone  of  true  religion  and  the  bond
of  perfectness  ;  (c)  it  is  the  spring  of  evangelical  obedience,  for  it  is  "  the  fulfilling  of
the  Law  "  (Rom.  xiii.  8) ;  (d)  it  is  our  protection  in  the  iMLttle  of  life,  for  it  is  "  the
breastplate  of  love "  (1  Thess.  v.  8).  3.  Patience,  meek-spiritedness.  These  represent
two  principles  which  ought  to  operate  in  power  in  presence  of  gainsayers  and  enemies.
— T.C.

Ver.  12. — The  good  fight  and  its  results.  Instead  of  the  struggle  of  the  covetous
for  wealth,  there  ought  to  be  the  struggle  of  the  faithful  to  lay  hold  on  the  prize
of  eternal  life.

I.  The  Christian  struggle.  "Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  1.  The  enemies
in  this  warfare.  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  the  principalities  and  powers ;
the  false  teachers,  with  their  arts  of  seduction.  2.  The  warfare  itself.  It  is  ^  a  good
fight."  (1)  The  term  suggests  that  Christian  life  is  not  a  mystic  quietism,  but  an
active  efibrt  against  eviL  (2)  It  is  a  good  fight,  because  (a)  it  is  in  a  good  cause —
for  Gk>d  and  truth  and  salvation ;  (b)  it  is  under  a  good  Captain — Jesus  Christ,  the
Captain  of  our  salvation ;  (c)  it  has  a  good  result — ^**  eternal  life."  3.  The  weapons
in  this  warfare.  "  Faith."  It  is  "  the  shield  of  faith  "  (Eph.  vi.  16).  This  is  not  a
carnal,  but  a  spiritual  weapon.  Faith  represents,  indeed,  *'  the  whole  armour  of  Gk)d,"
which  is  mighty  for  victory.  It  is  faith  that  secures  "  the  victory  that  overcometh
the  world"  (1  John  iv.  4,  5).

II.  The  end  op  the  Christian  struggle.  "  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  1.  Eternal
life  is  the  prize^  the  crown,  to  he  laid  hold  of  hy  those  who  are  faithful  to  death.  2.  Ii
is  the  object  of  our  effectual  calling.  "  To  which  thou  wast  called  "  by  the  grace  and
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  It  is  the  subject  of  our  public  profession.  **  And  didst
confess  the  ^ood  confession  before  many  witnesses."  ffvidently  either  at  his  baptism,
or  at  his  ordination  to  the  ministry,  when  many  witnesses  would  be  present.  4.  This
eternal  life  is  to  be  laid  hold  of  (1)  It  is  held  forth  as  the  prize  of  the  high  calling
of  God,  as  the  recompeuse  of  reward.  (2)  But  the  believer  is  to  lay  hold  of  it  even
now  by  faith,  having  a  believing  interest  in  it  as  a  possession  yet  to  be  acquired  in
ail  its  glorious  fulness. — T.  C.


188  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  vi.  1^21.

Yen.  13 — 16. — The  solemn  charge  pressed  anew  upon  Timothy.  As  he  nears  the
eod  of  the  Epistle,  the  apostle,  with  a  deeper  eolemnity  of  tone^  repeats  the  charge  he
has  given  to  his  youn<;  disciple.

L  The  natdbb  and  be»fon8Ibilitie8  op  the  chabge.  **  I  charge  thee  .  .  .  that
thou  keep  the  commandment  without  spot  and  without  reproach.**  1.  The  command^
fnent  is  the  Christian  doctrine  in  its  aspect  a»  a  rule  of  Itfe  and  discipline,  2.  It
was  to  be  kept  with  aU purity  andfaitJ^fulness — **  without  spot  and  without  reproach  " —
so  that  it  should  he  unstained  hy  no  error  of  life,  or  suffer  from  no  reproach  of  unfidth-
folness.  He  must  preach  the  pure  gospel  sincerely,  and  his  life  must  be  so  circum-
spect that  his  ministry  should  not  be  blamed  by  the  Church  here  or  by  Christ
hereafter.

IL  The  solemn  appeal  bt  which  the  ohabgs  is  sustained.  ''I  give  thee
charge  in  the  sight  of  GKxi,  who  keepeth  all  things  alive,  and  Christ  Jesus,  who
witnessed  the  gcwd  confession  before  Pontius  Rlate."  The  apostle,  having  referred
to  Timothy's  earlier  confession  before  many  witnesses,  reminds  him  of  the  more
tremendous  presence  of  €K)d  himself,  and  of  Christ  Jesus.  1.  Ood  is  represented  here
as  Preserver,  in  (illusion  to  the  dangers  of  Timothy  in  the  midst  of  Ephesian  enemies,
2.  Christ  Jesus  is  referred  to  as  an  Example  of  unshaken  courage  and  fidelity  to  truth
in  the  presence  of  death,

IIL  The  charge  is  to  be  kept  without  spot  or  bepboach  till  Chbist's  second
ooxiNG.  "  Until  the  appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  to  be  '^  faithful
unto  death,"  yea,  even  unto  the  second  advent.  1.  It  is  according  to  apostolic  usage
to  represent  the  tnd  of  Christian  work  as  well  as  Christian  expectation  as  terminating,
not  upon  deathf  but  upon  the  second  advent  The  complete  redemption  will  then
be  fully  realized.  2.  It  is  not  to  he  inferred  from  these  words  that  the  apostle  expected
the  Lord*s  coming  in  his  own  lifetime.  The  second  Thessalonian  Epistle,  written
many  years  belore,  dispels  such  an  impression.  The  words  in  ver.  15,  '*  in  his  own
times,  imply  a  long  succession  of  cycles  or  changes.  3.  The  second  advent  is  to
he  hrwMht  about  by  God  himself  "  Which  in  his  own  times  he  shall  manifest,  who
is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.''  This  picture
of  the  Divine  Majesty  was  designed  to  encourage  Timothy,  who  might  hereafter  be
summoned  to  appear  before  the  little  kings  of  earth,  by  the  thought  of  the  immeasur-
able glory  of  the  Potentate  before  whose  throne  all  men  must  stand  in  the  final
judgment,  (1)  He  who  is  possessed  of  exhaustless  powers  and  perfections  is  essentially
immortal — **  wlio  only  hath  immortality  " — because  ho  is  the  Source  of  it  in  all  who
partake  of  it ;  for  out  of  him  all  is  death.  (2)  He  has  his  dwelling  in  the  glory  of
light  ineffable — ''dwelling  in  light  unapproachable,  whom  no  man  ever  saw  or  can  see.'^
(a)  God  is  light  (1  John  i.  5).  He  covereth  himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment
(Ps,  civ.  4) ;  and  he  is  the  Fountain  of  light,  (b)  God  is  invisible.  This  is  true,
though  **the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God"  (Matt  v.  8),  and  though  it  be  that
without  holiness  "  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord "  (Heb.  xii.  14).  God  is  invisible
(a)  to  the  eye  of  sense,  (fi)  but  ho  will  be  visible  to  the  believer  in  the  clear  intellectual
vision  of  the  supernatural  state.  4.  AU  praise  and  Tumour  are  to  be  ascribed  to  Ood,
"  to  whom  be  honour  ami  power  everlasting.  Amen."  The  doxology  is  the  natural
ending  of  such  a  solemn  charge. — T.  C.

Vers.  17 — 19. — A  word  of  admonition  and  encouragement  to  the  rich.  The  counsel
carries  us  back  to  what  he  had  been  saying  in  previous  verses.

L  The  rich  are  warned  against  a  twofold  danger.  *'  To  those  who  are  rich
in  this  present  world  give  in  charge  not  to  be  high-minded."  It  is  implied  that  there
were  rich  men  as  well  as  poor  slaves  in  the  Church  at  Ephesus.  1.  The  danger  of
high-mindedness,  A  haughty  disposition  is  often  engendered  by  wealth.  The  rich
may  be  tempted  to  look  down  with  contempt  on  the  poor,  as  if  they,  forsooth,  were
the  special  lavourites  of  Heaven  because  they  had  been  so  highly  favoured  with
worldly  substance.  2.  The  danger  of  trusting  in  wealth,  "Nor  to  set  their  hope
upon  the  uncertainty  of  riches."  (1)  It  is  a  great  risk  for  a  rich  man  to  say  to  gold,
"Thou  art  my  hoi)e;  and  to  the  fine  gold,  Thou  art  my  confidence"  (Job  xxxi.  24),
(2^  Our  tenure  of  wealth  is  very  uncertain.  It  is  uncertain  (o)  because  riches  may
take  to  themselves  wings  and  tlee  away ;  (6)  because  we  may  be  taken  away  by  death


CH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  138

from  the  enjoyment  of  our  possessions ;  (c)  because  riches  cannot  satisfy  the  deep
hunger  of  the  human  heart.  3.  The  safety  of  trusting  in  Ood,  "But  upon  the
living  God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  for  enjoyment."  (1)  GKxi  is  the  sole  Giver
of  all  we  possess.  (2)  He  giveth  to  us  all  richly  according  to  our  need.  (3)  He
giveth  it  for  our  enjoyment,  so  that  we  may  take  comfort  in  his  rich  provision.  (4)
As  the  living  Qod,  he  is  an  unexhaustible  Fountain  of  blessings,  so  that  no  uncertainty
can  ever  attach  to  the  supply.
n.  The   bich  abe   ekcoubaged   to  make   a  bight   use  of   theib  wealth.

1.  *'  That  they  do  goodP  (1)  Rich  men  may  do  evil  to  others  by  fraud  or  oppression,
and  evil  to  themselves  by  habits  of  luxury  and  intemperance.  (2)  They  are
rather  to  abound  in  acts  of  beneficence  to  all  men,  and  especially  to  the  household
of  faith,  after  the  example  of  him  who  "went  about  every  day  doing  good"  (Acts
X.  38).  2.  "  JStc/i  in  good  works,"  as  if  in  opposition  to  the  riches  of  this  world.
They  are  to  abound  in  the  doing  of  them,  like  Dorcas,  who  was  "full  of  good  works
and  almsdeeds."  Wealth  of  this  sort  is  the  least  disappointing  both  here  and  here-
after, and  has  no  uncertainty  in  its  results.  3.  "Beady  to  distribute"  Willing  to
give  unasked ;  cheerful  in  the  distribution  of  their  favours ;  giving  without  grudging
and  without  delay.  4.  **  Willing  to  commuhiccUe,"  As  if  to  recognize,  not  merely
a  common  humanity,  but  a  common  Christianity  with  the  poor.  The  rich  ought  to
share  their  possessions  with  the  poor.

III.  Encoctbagements  to  the  dischabge  of  these  duties.  "  Laying  up  iu  store
for  themselves  as  a  treasure  a  good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come,  that  they  may
lay  hold  upon  the  true  life.''  1.  It  is  possible  for  rich  believers  to  lay  up  treasure
in  heaven.  This  treasure  is  a  foundation  against  the  time  to  come.  (1)  Not  a
foundation  of  merit,  for  we  are  only  saved  by  the  merits  of  Christ ;  (2)  but  a  founda-
tion in  heaven,  solid,  substantial,  and  durable — ^unlike  uncertain  riches  of  earth;  good
in  its  nature  and  results — unlike  earthly  riches,  which  often  are  the  undoing  ojf  men.
**Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness"  (Luke  xvi.  9).

2.  Our  riches  may  have  an  influence  on  our  true  life  hereafter,  "That  they  may
lay  hold  on  the  true  life."  (1)  Not  iu  the  way  of  merit ;  (2)  but  in  the  way  of  grace,
lor  the  very  rewards  of  the  future  are  of  grace ;  (3)  the  end  of  all  our  efibrt  is  the
true  life,  in  contrast  to  the  vain,  transitory,  short-sighted  life  of  earth. — T.  C.

Vers.  20,  21. — Concluding  exhortation  and  benediction.  The  parting  counsel  of
the  apostle  goes  back  upon  the  substance  of  all  his  past  counsels,  ft  includes  a
positive  and  a  negative  counsel.

I.  A  POSITIVE  COUNSEL.  "  0  Timothy,  keep  the  deposit "  entrusted  to  thee.  This
refers  to  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  It  is  "  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints "
(Jude  3).  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  thus  not  something  discovered  by  man,  but
delivered  to  man.    2.  It  is  placed  in  the  hands  of  Timothy  as  a  trustee,  to  be  kept

for  the  use  of  others.  It  is  a  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  to  be  jealously  guarded  against
robbers  .and  foes.    3.  If  it  is  kept,  it  will  in  turn  keep  us.

II.  A  NEGATIVE  COUNSEL.  "Avoiding  profane  and  vain  babblings,  and  oppositions
of  knowledge  falsely  so  called :  which  some  professing  erred  concerning  the  faith."
1.  The  duty  of  turning  away  from  empty  discourses  and  the  ideas  of  a  false  knowledge.
(1)  Such  things  were  utterly  profitless  as  to  spiritual  result.  (2)  They  were  antago-
nistic to  the  doctrine  of  godliness ;  for  they  represented  theories  of  knowledge  put  forth
by  false  teachers,  which  ripened  in  due  time  into  the  bitter  Gnosticism  of  later  times.
It  was  a  knowledge  that  falsely  arrogated  to  itself  that  name,  for  it  was  based  on
ignorance  or  denial  of  God*8  truth.  2.  The  danger  of  such  teachings.  (V)  Some
members  of  the  Church  were  led  to  profess  such  doctrines,  perhaps  because  tney  wore
a  seductive  aspect  of  asceticism,  or  pretended  to  show  a  shorter  cut  to  heaven.  (2)
But  they  lost  their  way  and  **  erred  concerning  the  faith."  This  false  teaching  under-
mined the  true  faith  of  the  gospel.  (3)  As  the  tense  implies  an  event  that  occurred  in
the  past,  these  persons  were  not  now  in  the  communion  of  the  Ephesian  Ohurch. — ^T.  G.

Ver.  3. — The  health  of  religion.  "Wholesome  words."  There  is  no  word  more
representative  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  than  this  word  "  wholesome."  It  shows  iu
that  the  gospel  means  health.


184  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  vi.  1—21,.

L  Thbt  abb  WH0LB801CK  BECAUSE  THEY  ABE  HBALiNO  W0BD6.  They  heal  breaches
in  families ;  they  heal  the  dirision  between  Crod  and  the  soul ;  they  heal  the  heart
Uadf.  And  in  the  vade-m/Kum  of  ihe  Bible  we  find  a  cure  for  ail  the  diseases  of  the
inner  man.

II.  ThET  ABE  WHOLBSOXE  WOEDB  A%  OOKTBASTED  WITH  OTHEB  LITEBATUEB8.      With

much  that  is  good  in  the  best  of  authors^  there  is  much  that  is  harmful.  AH  is  not
wholesome  in  Dante,  or  Qoethe,  or  Shakespeare.  It  requires  an  infinite  mind  to
inspire  words  that  shall  always  and  ever  be  wholesome ;  and  it  would  be  difficult  to
speak  of  any  human  literature  that  is  wholesome  every  way.  Some  has  in  it  too  much
romance  and  sentiment;  some  has  too  great  a  power  upon  the  passions ;  some  feeds  the
intellect  and  starves  the  heart.

IIL  These  wobds  abe  wholesome  in  eyebt  sphebe.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  of
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  that  it  saves  and  sanctifies  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  It  has  no
word  01  encouragement  to  the  unwashed  monk,  or  to  the  ascetic  who  neglects  the  care
of  the  body.  It  supplies  a  true  culture  to  the  mind,  and  feeds  and  nourishes  all  the
graces  of  the  heart.    So  it  becomes  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness. — ^W.  M.  S.

Nvs,  Q.^The  wecdih  of  rdigion.  "But  godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain."^
We  learu  from  these  words —

L  That  men  abe  eich  in  what  they  abe.  It  is  a  mistake  to  think  of  riches  as
belonging  merely  to  the  estate.  We  may  catalogue  the  possessions  of  the  outward  life,
but  they  are  onlv  "  thinji^s."  How  many  men  learn  too  late  that  they  are  not  rich  in
what  they  have  I  Gkdliness  is  the  truest  riches,  because  it  is  Gk)d-likeness ;  the  image
which  no  earthly  artist  can  produce  \    The  highest  good  conceivable  is  to  he  like  Qod.

n.  Men  abe  eich  in  what  they  can  do  withoctt.  "  With  contentment."  Let  us
study,  not  so  much  what  we  may  secure,  as  what  we  are  able  to  enjoy  existence  without.
Men  multiply  their  cares  often  as  they  multiply  their  means ;  and  some  men,  with
competency  in  a  cottage,  have  not  been  sorry  that  they  lost  a  palace.  "  Ck>ntentment  is
great  gain ; "  it  sets  the  mind  free  from  anxious  care ;  it  prevents  the  straining  after  false
eiSect ;  it  has  more  time  to  enjoy  the  flowers  at  its  feet,  instead  of  straining  to  secure  the
meadows  of  the  far-away  estate.

III.  Men  must  leave  everything;  they  can  cabby  nothing  away.  That  is
certain ;  and  yet  the  word  must  be  read  thoughtfully.  Nothing  save  conscience  and
character  and  memory.  Still  the  words  are  true,  that  we  can  carry  nothing  out ;  for
these  aro  not  **  things,"  but  part  of  our  personality.  The  body  returns  to  the  dust,  but
the  spirit — to  the  God  who  gave  it.  Let  this  check  all  undue  anxiety,  and  cure  our
foolish  envy  as  we  look  around  upon  all  the  coveted  positions  of  men.  "  We  brought
nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out.** — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Slaves  and  heretics,  I.  Duties  or  Christian  slaves.  1.  Toward
unbelieving  masters,  *'  Let  as  many  as  are  servants  under  the  yoke  count  their  own
masters  worthy  of  all  honour,  that  the  Name  of  God  and  the  doctrine  be  not  blasphemed.'^
Paul  had  to  legislate  for  a  social  condition  which  was,  to  a  considerable  extent,  different
from  ours.  In  the  early  Christian  Churches  there  were  not  a  few  whose  social  condition
was  that  of  slaves.  They  are  pointed  to  here  as  being  under  the  yoke  as  servants.  To
service  there  was  added  the  oppressive  circumstance  of  being  under  the  yoke.  That  is^
they  were  like  cattle  with  the  yoke  on  them — having  no  rights,  any  more  than  cattle,
to  bestow  their  labour  where  they  liked,  but  only  where  their  masters  liked.  It  was  a
degradation  of  human  beings,  for  which  no  apology  could  bo  made.  Under  Christianity
the  eyes  of  Christian  slaves  could  not  be  altogether  closed  to  the  flagrant  injustice
inflicted  on  them.  They  would  also  see  that,  in  this  sonship  and  heirship  of  glory,
thev  were  really  exalted  above  unbelieving  masters.  It  would  have  been  easy,  with
such  materials,  to  have  inflamed  their  minds  against  their  masters.  But  Paul,  as  a  wise
legislator,  understood  better  the  obligations  of  Christianity.  No  inflammatory  word
does  he  address  to  them ;  he  tells  them,  not  of  rights,  but  of  duties.  Their  masters,
notwithstanding  their  being  identified  with  injustice,  were  still  their  own  masters,  t>.
men  to  whom  in  the  providence  of  Grod  they  were  subordinated.  Let  them  be  counted
worthy  of  all  honour,  even  as  he  has  already  said  that  the  presbyters,  or  ecclesiastical
rulers,  are  to  be  counted  worthy  of  honour.    And  we  need  not  wonder  at  this ;  for  still,.


CH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTUY.  135

at  the  basis  of  things,  they  are  the  representatives  of  Divine  authority.  As  such — and
who  are  wholly  entitled  to  be  called  worthy  representatives? — let  them  be  counted
worthy  of  all  proper  honour.  Let  them  be  treated  thus,  that  the  Name  of  Qod  and  the
doctrine  he  not  blasphemed.  There  was  involved  in  their  conduct  the  Name  of  Grod,  «.e.
of  the  true  God,  as  distin^niished  from  the  false  gods  which  their  masters  worshipped*
There  was  also  involved  the  teaching,  t.e.  what  Christianity  taught  about  things.  If
they  were  insubordinate,  both  would  be  evil  spoken  of.  The  heathen  masters  would
think  of  Christianity  as  upturning  the  fundamental  relations  of  things.  We  are  apt  to
forget  how  much  the  Divine  honour  is  involved  in  our  conduct.  We  should  give  such
a  living  representation  of  our  religion  as  will  give  none  occasion  to  blaspheme.  2.
Toward  believing  masters,  *'And  they  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them  not
despise  them,  because  they  arc  brethren ;  but  let  them  serve  them  the  rather,  because
they  that  partake  of  the  benefit  are  believing  and  beloved."  Men  might  be  despotic
masters,  holders  of  slaves,  and  yet  be  Christians,  their  conscience  not  being  educated
upon  that  point.  It  was  not  said  to  them  that  they  were  to  go  and  liberate  their  slaves.
It  was  better  that  they  should  receive  the  essence  of  Christianity  without  their  pre-
judices being  raised  on  that  point ;  correction  on  it,  from  the  working  of  Christian
influences,  was  sure  to  follow,  with  a  slowness,  however,  that  might  leave  many  unen-
lightened of  that  generation  of  them.  It  seems  to  be  implied  that,  though  unenlightened,
they  gave  their  slaves  Christian  treatment,  i.e,  treated  them  as  not  under  the  yoke,  in
the  avoidance  of  harshness  and  unreasonable  exactions  often  associated  with  the  yoke.
This  was  rightly  to  be  interpreted  as  a  homage  rendered  to  brotherhood  in  Christ.
But  let  not  slaves  be  led  into  a  mistaken  interpretation  of  brotherhood.  It  did  not
mean  that  respect  was  no  longer  duo  to  their  masters.  The  earthly  relation,  though  not
so  deep  as  the  new  relation  in  Christ,  still  stood,  as  giving  form  to  duty.  Let  them
not  despise  them,  i.e,  refuse  the  respect  due  to  superiors.  And,  instead  of  giving
them  less  service,  let  it  be  the  other  way.  Give  more  service,  because  they  that  get
the  benefit  of  it  are  of  the  same  faith,  and  beloved  as  masters  that  have  learned  from
Christ  the  law  of  kindness.  Emphasizing  what  has  been  said,  "  These  things  teach
and  exhort."    There  was  to  be  both  direction  and  enforcement.

II.  Heretics.  1.  Standard  in  relation  to  which  they  are  heretics,  "  If  any  man
teacheth  a  different  doctrine,  and  consenteth  not  to  sound  words,  even  the  words  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness.**  The  other
doctrine  is  that  which  departs  from  the  standard.  This  is  contained  in  the  words  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  Truth,  and  has  the  right  to  rule  all  minds.  There  is
a  healthy  vigour  in  his  words,  not  the  sickliness  that  there  was  in  the  words  of  the
heretical  teachers.  The  doctrine  contained  in  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
that  which  is  according  to  godliness.  There  is  grounded  in  our  nature,  apart  from  all
teachings,  a  certain  religiosity.  That  is,  we  are  made  to  have  certain  states  of  our
soul  toward  God,  such  as  reverence.  As  we  cherish  these  states  we  are  pious,  godly.
What  our  Lord  taught  was  in  accordance  with  the  norm  of  godliness  in  our  original
constitution,  and  was  fitted  to  effect  godliness  as  a  result.  The  condemnation  of  the
heretics  was,  that  in  not  consenting  to  the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  they  were
going  away  to  doctrines  which  were  not  fitted  to  promote  piety.  2.  Moral  characteriza-
tion, (1)  From  the  inflatedness  of  ignorance,  **  He  is  puffed  up,  knowing  nothing."
It  is  only  in  Christ  that  we  have  the  right  point  of  vievj.  If,  therefore,  we  are  not
taught  by  him,  we  know  nothing  aright.  Those  who  have  true  knowledge  are  humbled
under  a  sense  of  what  they  do  not  know.  The  heretics  who  had  not  even  a  smattering
of  true  knowledge  were  puffed  up  with  conceit  of  the  multitude  of  things  which  they
knew.  (2)  From  the  morbidness  of  sophistry,  "  But  doting  about  questionings  and
disputes  of  words,  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil  surmisings,  wranglings  of
men  corrupted  in  mind  and  bereft  of  the  truth."  Not  consenting  to  sound  words,  they
have  diseased  action.  That  in  which  they  show  themselves  diseased  is  in  busying
themselves,  not,  like  Christian  inquirers,  around  realities,  but,  like  the  sophists  with
whom  Socrates  had  to  do,  around  questionings  which  become  disputes  of  words.  This
disease  of  hair-splitting  is  attended  with  various  evil  consequences :  envy  toward  those
who  evince  superior  skill,  strife  with  those  who  will  not  admit  the  value  of  the  distinc-
tions, railings  where  there  is  not  reason,  evil  surmisings  where  there  is  not  charity,  and
frequent  and  more  bitter  collisions  where  the  truth,  not  honestly  dealt  with,  is  forcibly


136  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  tl  1— 2L

taken  away.  3.  The  ipedal  obnazwwnen  of  their  teaching,  (1)  JTiie  vku  in  aeaertimg
iJkat  godliness  was  a  way  of  gain,  ^  Supposing  that  godliness  is  a  way  of  gain."  Tluf
was  evidently  a  stratagem  on  the  part  of  the  heretics.  Saspected  of  a  worldliness  that
was  unbecoming;  their  religious  pretensions,  they  got  over  it  by  taking  up  the  position
that  godliness  was  a  gainful  trade.  They  app^ed  to  men  to  be  religious  for  the  nke
of  the  worldly  gain  it  would  bring  to  them.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  apostle  regards
the  heretical  maxim  with  contempt.  It  is  a  maxim  from  which  many  act  who  would
not  like  to  admit  it  in  words.  They  keep  up  religious  appearances,  not  because  they
have  any  love  for  religion,  but  because  it  would  be  damaging  to  them  to  appear
irreligious.  (2)  Oodliness  is  a  wag  of  gain  if  associated  with  contentment  "  But  god-
liness with  contentment  is  great  gain."  ** Elegantly,  and  not  without  ironical  correction
to  a  sense  that  is  contrary,  he  gives  a  new  turn  to  the  same  words'*  (Calvin).  God-
liness (what  wo  have  in  relation  to  God)  is  great  gain ;  but  its  gain  lies  in  its  producing
a  contented  mind  (in  reUtion  to  ourselves).  Where  a  man  is  contented  it  is  as  though  he
owned  the  whole  world.  (3)  Heasons/or  contentment.  Our  natural  bareness,  **  For  we
brought  nothing  into  the  world,  for  neither  can  we  carry  anything  out."  The  same
thought  is  expressed  in  Job  i.  21  and  in  Eccles.  v.  15.  Viewed  at  two  points  we  are
absolutely  poor.  There  was  a  time  when  earthly  good  was  not  ours,  and  there  will
come  a  time  when  it  will  cease  to  be  ours.  We  are  not,  then,  to  make  an  essential  of
what  only  pertains  to  our  earthly  state.  We  can  do  unth  little,  "  But  having  food  and
covering  we  shall  be  therewith  content."  Something  added  to  our  bore  natural  condi-
tion we  need  while  we  are  in  this  world,  and  it  will  not  be  wanting ;  but  it  does  not
need  to  be  much.  Food  and  covering,  these  will  suffice  for  us.  We  can  do  with  less
than  we  imagine.    Shakespeare  tells  us  that

**  The  poorest  man
Is  in  the  poorest  thing  suporfluons.
Demands  for  nature  more  than  nature  claims."

<(  The  rock  of  our  present  day  is  that  no  one  knows  how  to  live  upon  little ;  the  great
men  of  antiquity  were  generally  poor.  The  retrenchment  of  useless  expenditure,  the
laying  aside  of  what  one  may  call  the  relatively  necessary,  is  the  high-road  to  Christian
disentanglement  of  heart,  just  as  it  was  to  that  of  ancient  vigour.  A  great  said  in  a
small  house  is  the  idea  which  has  always  touched  me  more  than  any  other  "  (Lacordaire).
2'he  sad  result  of  the  opposite  state,  "  But  they  that  desire  to  be  rich  fall  into  a  tempta-
tion and  a  snare  and  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  such  as  drown  men  in  destruction
and  perdition."  By  them  that  desire  to  be  rich  we  are  to  understand  those  who,  instead
of  being  contented  with  what  they  can  enjoy  with  God's  blessing  and  what  they  can
use  for  Gt)d*8  glory,  make  riches  their  object  in  life.  They  fall  into  a  state  of  mind
that  is  seductive  And  fettering.  And  this  unnatural  craving  for  possession  does  not  stand
alone,  but  has  many  affiliated  lusts,  such  as  love  for  display,  love  for  worldly  company,
love  for  the  pleasures  of  the  table.  Of  these  no  rational  account  can  be  given,  and  they
are  hurtful  even  to  the  extent  of  drowning  men  in  misery,  expressed  by  two  very
strong  words — destruction  and  perdition.  Confirmation  of  the  last  reason.  Proverbial
saying,  "  For  the  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  kinds  of  evil."  The  proverb  is  in-
tended to  have  a  certain  startling  nature.  Desire  of  money  is  not  certainly  the  only
root  of  evils,  but  it  is  conspicuously  the  root  of  evils.  We  need  only  think  of  the  lies,
thefts,  oppressions,  jealousies,  murders,  wars,  lawsuits,  sensuality,  prayerlessncss,  that
have  been  caused  by  it.  The  victims,  "Which  some  reaching  after  have  been  led
•  astray  from  the  faith,  and  have  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  sorrows."  The
apostle  thinks  of  the  ravages  wrought  on  some  he  knew.  Within  the  Christian  circle,
they  unlawfully  reached  after  gain.  This  led  to  their  wandering  from  the  faith,  and  to
their  being  pierced  through,  as  with  a  sword,  with  many  sorrows ;  bitter  reflections  on
the  past,  disappointment  with  what  they  had  obtained,  apprehensions  of  the  future.
These  he  would  point  to  as  beacons,  warning  off  the  rock  of  avarice. — R.  F.

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  Christian  gladiator.  The  gladiator  was  one  who  fought,  in  the
arena,  at  the  amphitheatre  of  an  ancient  city,  such  as  the  Colosseum  at  Komc,  for  the
amusement  of  the  public.  It  made  life  real  and  earnest  to  be  compelled  to  enter  the  lists,
in  which  the  issue  was  generally  victory  or  death.


-CH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  187

"  And  now
The  arena  swims  around  him — ^he  is  gone  ?
Ere  ceased  the  inhuman  shout  which  hailed  the  wretch  who  won.
He  heard  it,  but  he  heeded  not— his  eyes
AVere  with  his  heart,  and  that  was  far  away ;
He  recked  not  of  the  life  he  lost  or  prize,
But  where  his  rude  hut  by  the  Danube  lay ;
There  were  his  young  barbarians  all  at  play —
There  was  their  Dacian  mother  1  he,  their  sire.
Butchered  to  make  a  Bomau  holiday."

I.  Need  of  preparation.  "  But  thou,  0  man  of  God,  flee  these  things ;  and  follow
after  righteousDess,  godliness,  faith,  love,  patience,  meekness."  We  know  what  can  be
undergone  by  men  of  the  lowest  order,  when  they  put  themselves  in  training  for
entering  the  prize-ring.  Accustomed  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  their  time  in  Uie
public-house,  they  are  found  rigorously  foregoing  their  pleasures  and  entailing  upon
themselves  hard  employment.  In  what  these  pugilists  forego  and  endure,  do  they  not
put  to  blush  many  Christians,  who  cannot  be  said  to  forego  much,  or  to  give  hard
service  for  their  religion  ?  There  is,  we  are  here  taught,  what  becomes  the  man  of  God,
i.e,  the  highest  type  of  man — the  man  who  tries  to  work  out  the  Divine  idea  of  his  life
and  to  come  to  be  God-like  in  his  character.  *'  0  man  of  God,  learn  from  these  men  of
a  low  order.  They  flee  their  wonted  pleasures ;  flee  thou,"  says  the  apostle  in  earnest
address, "  these  things,"  t.e.  as  appears  from  the  context,  those  habits  of  mind  which  we
call  wwldly^  tendencies  to  sink  higher  things  in  the  pursuit  of  worldly  ends,  money,
enjoyment,  position  for  ourselves,  and  for  our  children.  Christians  who  may  have  no
taste  for  what  are  regarded  as  coarse  pleasures,  may  yet  be  worldly  in  their  ideas  and
habits.  Such  world liness  is  unworthy  of  the  man  ot  God ;  vulgar,  demeaning  in  him.
0  man  of  God,  flee  thou  worldliness,  as  thou  wouldst  a  wild  beast.  Flee  it,  as  certain
to  eat  up  thy  true  manliness.  It  may  be  said  that  more  havoc  has  been  wrought  in
the  Church  by  worldlincss  than  by  intemperance.  And  the  one  is  not  so  easily  dealt
with  as  the  other.  The  intemperate  man  may  be  laid  hold  on,  and  aided  out  of  his
intemperance.  But  the  worldly  man  may  be  in  position  in  the  Church ;  and  who  is
likely  to  succeed  in  aiding  him  out  of  his  worldliness?  And  so,  while  the  one  may  be
rescued,  the  other  may  continue  to  be  the  prey  of  destructive  habits  that  are  growing
upon  him.  The  other  side  of  duty  refers  to  the  acquiring  of  good  habits  of  mind  that
are  required  for  the  fight.  And  as  the  word  for  worldly  habits  is  ftee^  so  the  word  for
^>od  habits  is  pursue.  It  is  implied  that  worldliness  seeks  us,  and  wo  need  to  get  out
of  its  way,  to  flee  from  it  as  from  a  wild  beast.  Good  habits,  on  the  other  hand,  retreat
from  us ;  they  are  a})t  to  evade  us,  and  we  need  to  pursue  them  with  all  the  keenness  with
which  a  ravenous  wild  beast  pursues  its  prey.  It  is  hard  for  us  to  come. up  to  them,
and  to  have  them  as  our  enjoyed  possession.  The  good  habits,  so  ill  to  grasp,  which  are
needed  for  the  fight  by  the  man  of  God  are  particularized.  First  of  all  he  must  have
righteousness,  or  the  habit  of  going  by  rule.  And  along  with  this  he  must  have  godU"
ness,  or  the  habit  of  re/erring  to  (Jod,  Then  he  must  have  faith,  which  covers  his
de/encelessness.  Along  with  this  he  must  have  love,  which  supplies  him  with  fire.  He
must  also  have  ^^leTice,  which  enables  him  to  hold  out  to  the  end.  And  along  with  this
he  must  have  meekness,  which  makes  his  spirit  ^>roo^  o^atns^  all  accumulation  of  torong.
In  the  eye  of  the  world,  those  habits  may  seem  unmanly ;  but,  0  man  of  (Jod,  be  true
to  thyself,  and  pursue  them ;  let  them  not  escape  from  thee ;  by  God's  decree  they  shall
reward  thy  eager  pursuit.

II.  Nature  of  the  fight.  "  Fight  the  good  fight  of  the  faith."  He  that  has  the
faith  of  a  Christian  is  necessitated  to  fight.  There  is  revealed  to  his  faith  a  God  in  the
heavens,  who  hates  sin,  and  who  also  seeks  the  salvation  of  souls.  In  the  light  of  this,
which  ought  to  be  an  increasing  light,  there  is  presented  an  exposure.  He  comes  to
see  that  there  are  in  his  flesh  tendencies  which  are  against  God.  Ho  comes  also  to  see
that  there  is  in  the  world,  in  its  opinion  and  custom,  much  that  is  against  God.  As,
then,  he  would  stand  by  God,  he  must  fight  against  the  fiesh  and  the  world — against
what  would  tempt  to  sin,  from  within  and  from  without.  It  is  a  good  fight,  being  for
the  cause  of  God,  which  is  also  the  cause  of  man  in  his  establishment  in  righteousness

^nd  love.    It  is  a  good  fight,  being  grounded  in  the  victory  of  Christ  and  carried  on


188  THE  FIRST  BPI8TLB  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  vi.  1— 21^

hopefully  under  bis  leadership.  It  is  a  iigbt  into  which  the  man  of  God  can  throir
bis  undivided  energies,  his  wannest  enthusiasm.  Many  a  fight  which  receives  the
plaudits  of  men  has,  in  the  strict  review,  only  a  seeming  or  superficial  goodness.  But
the  fight  into  which  the  man  of  GKxi  throws  himself  can  stand  the  severest  tests  of
goodness.    Bo  it  thine,  then,  0  man  of  Qod,  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  the  faith.

m.  The  PBICELE88  FBiZE.  "Lay  hold  on  the  life  eternal,  whereunto  thou  wast
called,  and  didst  confess  the  good  confession  in  the  sight  of  many  witnesses.*'  The
prize  for  which  the  gladiator  fought  was  not  all  unsubstantial.  It  was  life.  It  meant
the  enjoyment  of  liberty,  return  to  his  rude  hut,  his  young  barbarians,  and  their
*'  Dacian  mother.**  Still  that  life  had  in  it  elements  of  unsatisfactoriness  and  decay^
It  was  savage  life,  below  the  level  of  civilized  life.  Suoh  as  it  was  in  its  rude  delights,
it  was  not  beyond  accident  and  death.  But  the  prize  for  which  the  Christian  gladiator
fights,  is  life  eternal.  This  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  perpetuity  of  existeneeg  whXtm
may  bo  felt  to  be  an  intolerable  burden.  The  importance  of  existence  lies  in  its  joyous-
elements,  experience  of  healthful  activity,  and  of  communion  with  those  we  love.  So
the  life,  which  is  here  presented  as  the  prize,  is  that  kind  of  existence  in  which  there  is
a  firee,  unrestndned  plav  of  our  powers,  and  in  which  we  have  communion  with  the
Father  of  our  spirits  and  with  the  spirits  of  the  just.  And  the  life  has  such  a  principle
in  it,  such  subsistence  in  the  living  Qod,  as  to  be  placed  above  the  reach  of  death,  as
only  to  be  brought  forth  into  all  its  joyousness  by  death.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle
is  to  lay  hold  on  this  priceless  prize.  0  man  of  Gh>d,  do  not  let  it  escape  thee.  Stretch
forward  to  it  with  a  feeling  of  its  eupreme  deeiraldenesa.  It  is  worthy  of  all  the  strain
to  which  thou  canst  put  thyself.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle  is  supported  by  a  reference
to  a  marked  period  in  the  past — apparently  entrance  on  the  Christian  life,  or  that  which
was  expressive  of  it  to  Timothy,  viz.  his  baptism.  It  was  a  period  in  which  Divine
action  and  human  action  met.  It  was  Gh>d  calling  him  to  life  eternal.  It  was  at  the
same  time  Timothy  confessing  a  good  confession — apparently  saying  that  life  eternal
was  his  aim.  Come  persecution,  come  death,  life  eternal  he  would  seek  to  gain.  This
confession  he  made  in  the  sight  of  many  witnesses,  present  on  the  occasion  of  his
baptism,  who  could  speak  to  the  earnestness  of  spirit  with  which  he  entered  on  his
Christian  career.  0  man  of  God,  fight,  remembering  thy  Divine  calling  and  thy  solemn
engagements.

IV.  The  witnesses.  "  I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  qnickcneth  all  things,,
and  of  Christ  Jesus,  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  the  good  confession;  that
thou  keep  the  commandment,  without  spot,  without  reproach."  The  many  vntnesfes
just  mentioned  call  up  such  a  scene  as  was  to  be  witnessed  in  the  Colosseum.  There
was  an  assemblage  of  eighty-seven  thousand  people,  tier  above  tier  all  round.  As  the
gladiator  stepped  into  the  arena,  he  might  well  be  awed  by  so  vast  and  unwonted
a  crowd.  But  this  would  quickly  give  way  to  the  feeling  of  what  depended  on  the  way
in  which  he  quitted  himself.  And  there  would  not  be  absent  from  his  mind  the
thought  of  the  applause  which  would  reward  a  victory.  0  man  of  God,  thou  art  now
in  the  arena,  and  there  are  many  onlookers.  They  are  watching  how  thou  art  quitting
thyself  in  the  fight  of  the  faith — whether  thou  art  realizing  the  seriousness  of  thy
position,  thy  splendid  opportunity.  Their  approval  is  worthy  of  being  considered,
worthy  of  being  coveted  by  thee,  and  should  help  to  nerve  thee  to  the  fight.  But  there
was  one  pre-eminent  personage  who  was  expected  to  grace  a  Roman  gladiatorial  festival,
viz.  the  emperor.  As  the  gladiator  enter^,  his  eye  would  rest  on  the  emperor  and
his  attendants.  And  he  would  have  a  peculiar  feeling  in  being  called  upon  to  fight  under
the  eye  of  the  august  Caesar,  to  whom  he  would  look  up  as  to  a  very  god.  So,  0  man
of  God,  there  is  one  great  Personage  who  is  looking  down  on  the  arena  in  which  thou
art,  and  under  whose  eye  thou  art  called  upon  to  fight.  It  is  not  a  Caesar — a  man  born
and  upheld  and  mortal  like  other  men ;  but  it  is  God,  who  quickeneth  all  ihings^the
Substratum  of  all  created  existence,  the  almighty  Upholder  of  men,  the  almighty
Upholder  of  the  universe  with  all  its  forms  of  life.  There  is  another  Personage,  and  yet
not  another.  This  is  Christ  Jesus^  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  the  good
confession,  "  Pilate  therefore  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  a  King  then  ?  Jesus  answered.
Thou  saycst  that  I  am  a  King.  To  this  end  was  I  bom,  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into
the  world,  that  I  should  bear  witness  of  the  truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth,
heareth  my  voice.**    "  In  these  words  we  see  the  majesty  and  fearless  exposure  of  Jesus..


CH.  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  131^

'  I  cannot  and  will  not  deny  that  I  am  a  King.  It  is  my  office  to  declare  the  truth ;
it  is  by  the  influence  of  truth  that  I  am  to  reign  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  I  cannot
shrink  from  asserting  this  most  important  truth,  that  I  have  the  power  and  authority
of  a  sovereign  at  once  to  rule  and  to  defend  my  people.  Let  not  this  doctrine  offend.
Every  one  who  is  of  the  truth,  who  loves  the  light,  and  whose  mind  is  open  to
conviction,  heareth  and  acknowledgeth  this  and  all  my  doctrines.'  These  words,  spoken
at  80  interesting  and  trying  a  period,  discover  to  us  the  elevation  of  our  Saviour  in
a  very  striking  light.  We  see  his  mind  unbroken  by  suffering.  We  see  in  him  the
firmest  adherence  to  the  doctrines  be  had  formerly  taught.  We  see  in  him  a  conscious
dignity,  a  full  conviction  of  the  glory  and  power  with  which  he  was  invested.  He
asserts  his  royal  office,  not  from  ostentation,  not  amidst  a  host  of  flatterers,  but  in  the
face  of  enemies ;  and  when  he  made  this  solemn  declaration  his  appearance  bore  little
conformity,  indeed,  to  the  splendour  of  earthly  monarchs."  There  is  a  difference
between  the  good  confession  of  Timothy  and  the  good  confession  of  Christ  indicated  in
the  language.  Timothy  confessed  his  good  confession,  t.^.  in  the  way  of  saying  before-
hand what  he  would  do  in  the  trial.  Christ  witnessed  his  good  confession,  i,e.
authenticated  it  by  making  it  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  death.  He  went  forth  from
Pilate's  judgment-hall  and  sealed  his  confession  with  his  blood.  He  was  thus  the  first
and  greatest  of  confessors.  It  adds  much  in  the  way  of  definiteness,  that  we  can  thus
think  of  him.  It  also  adds  much  in  the  way  of  bracing.  There  is  a  halo  around  the
great  Onlooker  from  his  past.  The  presence  in  a  battle  of  the  hero  of  a  hundred  fights,
of  a  Napoleon  or  Wellington,  is  worth  some  additional  battalions.  So,  0  man  of  God,
be  braced  up  to  the  fight,  by  the  thought  that  thou  art  fighting  under  the  eye  of
thy  Qod,  under  the  eye  of  thy  Saviour.  And  do  not  think  of  getting  the  prize
surreptitiously,  but  only  by  fair  means,  keeping  to  the  rules  of  the  contest,  what  is  here
called  keeping  the  commandment^  so  that  no  little  spot  is  made  on  it,  no  little  dishonour
done  to  it.  For,  however  little,  it  means  so  much  taken  away  from  the  value  of  the
prize.  I  charge  thee,  then,  says  the  apostle,  in  these  great  presences  keep  the  com-
mandment.

V.  Final  event.  "  Until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  which  in  its
own  times  he  shall  show,  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and
Lord  of  lords ;  who  only  hath  immortaUty,  dwelling  in  light  unapproachable ;  whom
no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see :  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  eternal.  Amen."  The
final  event  of  the  day,  on  the  occasion  of  a  great  gladiatorial  show,  was  the  coming
forward  of  Caesar,  in  circumstances  of  pomp,  to  crown,  or  otherwise  reward,  the  victors.
So  the  final  event  of  time  will  be  the  coming  forward  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (as  from
looking  on)  to  crown  the  victors  in  the  good  fight  of  the  faith.  There  is  reference  to
the  same  event  in  2  Tim.  iv.  7, 8.  It  would  be  the  proudest  moment  of  a  man's  life
when  he  was  called  forth  to  receive  the  prize  from  the  hand  of  his  emperor.  So  it  will
bo  a  moment  of  greatest  satisfaction  to  the  believer  when  he  is  called  forth  (as  by  the
herald  proclaiming  his  name  before  a  great  assemblage)  to  receive  the  crown  from  the
hand  of  his  Lord.  He  will  not  certainly  be  filled  with  self-satisfaction.  He  will  feel
that  he  is  only  a  debtor  to  Christ,  and  his  first  impulse  will  be  to  cast  his  crown  at  the
feet  of  his  great  Benefactor.  This  appearing  God  is  to  show,  i,e,  to  effect  and  to  bring
forth  into  view.  He  is  to  show  it  in  its  own  times — at  present  hidden,  but  clear  to  the
mind  of  God,  and  to  be  shown  when  his  purposes  are  ripe.  He  who  is  to  effect  the
appearing  is  appropriately  adored  as  the  Potentate  (the  Wielder  of  power).  Not  loss
appropriately  is  he  adored  as  the  blessed  or  (better)  the  happy  Potentate,  i.e.  self-happy,
having  all  elements  of  happiness  within  himself,  no  void  within  his  infinite  existence  to
fill  up,  but  not  therefore  disposed  to  keep  happiness  to  himself,  rather  prompted,  in  his
own  experience  of  happiness,  to  bestow  it  on  others,  first  in  creation  and  then  in
redemption.  It  is  the  happy  Wielder  of  power  that  is  to  bring  about  an  event  that  is
fraught  with  so  much  happiness  to  believers.  He  shall  show  it,  for  he  is  the  only
Potentate ;  none  can  dispute  the  name  with  him.  There  are  powers  under  him  as  there
were  rulers,  with  different  names,  under  the  emperor ;  but  he  is  the  King  of  kings  and
Lord  of  lords — sovereign  Disposer  of  all  human  and  angelic  representatives  of  power.
^'The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  as  the  rivers  of  water:  he  turns  it

Eiiowever  impetuous]  whithersoever  he  will."    He  shall  show  it  in  its  own  times ;  for,
owever  distant  those  times,  he  shall  live  to  do  it^  being  the  only  One  who  hath


140  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh.  vi,  1— 2L

immortality  from  himself,  essential  impenrioxuness  to  decay.  He  shall  show  it,  who  is
himself  inaccesBihle  within  a  circle  of  light,  and  not  only  nerer  seen  hy  men  bat
necessarily  invisible  to  men,  ue,  in  the  nnvdled  brightness  of  his  glory.  All  honour
and  power  eternal,  then,  be  to  tlus  Qod,  We  may  judge  of  what  we  appoiring  is  to
be  that  is  to  be  effected  by  One  in  whose  praise  the  apostle  breaks  forth  in  so  lofl^
a  strain.  We  may  conclude  that  it  is  to  be  the  grandest  display  of  the  honour  ud
power  of  Ood.  And  what  a  privilege  that  the  huim>le  believer — ^victor  in  the  battle  of
life — is  to  be  called  forth  before  an  assembled  universe,  under  the  presidency  of  Christ
and  by  the  hand  of  Christ,  to  be  crowned  with  the  life  eternal  1  Let  every  one  add  his
Amen  to  Uie  ascription  of  honour  and  power  to  Gkxl,  as  displayed  in  the  appearing  of
Christ.— R.  F.

Vers.  17 — 21. — Parting  words.  I.  Wabkikq  to  the  bich.  *' Charge  them  that
are  rich  in  this  present  world,  that  they  be  not  high-minded,  nor  have  their  hope  set
on  the  uncertainty  of  riches,  but  on  Ghxl,  who  giveth  us  richly  all  thin^  to  enjoy."
The  apostle*s  fear  of  worldliness  in  the  Church  still  possesses  him.  He  does  not
now  regard  those  who  wish  to  be  rich,  but  those  who  are  rich.  He  at  once  reminds
them  of  the  relative  value  of  their  riches,  as  extending  only  to  tiiis  present  world.  He
warns  them  against  the  danger  of  being  high-minded,  i.e.  lifted  up  above  others  under  a
sense  of  their  importance  on  account  of  their  riches.  He  warns  them  also  against  the
kindred  danger,  which  separates,  not  so  much  from  men  as  from  God,  viz.  their  setting
their  hope  on  their  riches.  "  Jesus  looked  round  about,  and  saith  unto  his  disciples.
How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Qod  1  **  And  the
disciples  were  astonished  at  his  words.  But  Jesus  answered  again,  and  said  unto  them,
"Children,  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  I"
The  difficulty  of  the  rich  is  that  they  are  tempted  to  set  their  hope  on  their  riches.  One
reason  for  their  not  doing  so,  is  that  their  hope  should  not  be  set  on  an  uncertainty
such  as  riches  is.  The  true  Object  of  onr  hope  is  God,  who  is  of  a  liberal  disposition.
He  giveth  us  not  merely  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  he  giveth  us  richly  M  things.
In  his  disposition  we  have  a  better  guarantee  for  our  not  wanting,  than  in  clutching  to
any  riches.  Ho  giveth  us  things  to  enjoy,  not  to  draw  us  away  from  our  fellow-men,
not  to  draw  us  away  from  himself,  but  to  enjoy  as  his  gifts,  through  which  he  would
tell  us  of  tlio  kindness  of  his  heart.

XL  The  right  course  for  them.  "  That  they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good
works,  that  they  be  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate."  They  were  to  seek
to  promote  the  happiness  of  others.  As  they  were  rich,  they  had  it  in  their  power,
above  others,  to  do  beauti/tU  actions.  They  were  to  be  free  in  making  distribution  of
what  they  had.  They  were  to  be  ready  to  admit  others  to  share  with  them.  In
a  word,  they  were  to  counteract  worldly  habits  of  mind  by  cultivating  habits  of
benevolence.  There  is  the  duty  of  giving  the  Lord  the  firstfruits  of  our  substance,
a  proportion  of  our  income ;  there  is  here  inculcated  the  cultivation  of  the  disposition
toward  others  that  is  to  go  along  with  that.

III.  Advantage  of  the  right  course.  **  Laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good
foundation  against  the  time  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is
life  indeed."  What  they  took  from  their  plenty  and  gave  for  others  they  were  not  to
Jose,  but  were  to  have  it  as  a  treasure  laid  up  for  them.  "  Their  estates  will  not  die
with  them,  but  they  will  have  joy  and  comfort  of  them  in  the  other  world,  and  have
cause  to  bless  Grod  for  them  to  all  eternity  "  (Beveridge).  The  treasure  is  thought  of  as
a  good  foundation,  by  resting  on  which  they  would  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  was  life
indeed.  The  time  is  coming  when  this  world  will  be  taken  away  from  boneath  our
feet.  What  have  we  sent  before  us  into  the  next  world,  so  as  to  keep  us  from  sinking
in  the  new  condition  of  things,  to  bear  us  up  so  that  we  shall  not  earn,  but  receive,  from
•Christ's  hand  and  through  Christ's  merit,  the  life  indeed  ?  The  answer  here  is — what
we  have  denied  ourselves,  what  we  have  unselfishly  sacrificed  for  others.

rV.  CoNCLUDiKG  EARNEST  ADDRESS  TO  TiMOTHY.  1.  VHiat  he  wos  to  keep,  **  0
Timothy,  guard  that  which  is  committed  unto  thee."  The  deposit  is  the  doctrine
delivered  to  Timothy  to  preach,  as  opposed  to  what  follows.  "  We  have  an  exclamation
alike  of  foreknowledge  and  of  fondness.  For  ho  foresaw  future  errors,  which  he  mourned
over  beforehand.    What  does  he  meau  by  guarding  the  deposit  ?    Guard  it^  says  he,  on


OH,  VI.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  141

aoooont  of  thievoR,  on  account  of  enemies  who  while  men  sleep  may  sow  tares  amidst
the  good  seed.  What  is  the  deposit?  It  is  that  which  was  entrusted  to  thee,  not
found  by  thee ;  which  thou  hast  received,  not  invented ;  a  matter,  not  of  genius,  but  of
teaching ;  not  of  private  usurpation,  but  of  public  tradition ;  a  matter  brought  to  thee,
not  put  forth  by  thee;  in  which  thou  oughtest  to  be, not  an  enlarger,but  a  guardian;  not
an  originator,  but  a  disciple;  not  leading,  but  following.  Keep,  saith  he,  the  deposit;
preserve  intact  and  inviolate  the  talent  of  the  catholic  faith.  What  has  been  entrusted
to  thee,  let  the  same  remain  with  thee ;  let  that  same  be  handed  down  by  thee.  Gk>ld
thou  hast  received,  gold  return.  I  should  be  sorry  thou  shouldst  substitute  ought  else.
I  should  be  sorry  that  for  gold  thou  shouldst  substitute  lead,  impudently,  or  brass,
fraudulently.  I  do  not  want  the  mere  appearance  of  gold,  but  its  actual  reality.
Not  that  there  is  to  bo  no  progress  in  religion,  in  Christ's  Church.  Let  there  be
so  by  all  means,  and  the  greatest  progress;  but,  then,  let  it  be  real  progress,  not
a  change  of  faith.  Let  Uie  intelligence  of  the  whole  Church  and  its  individual
members  increase  exceedingly,  provided  it  bo  only  on  its  own  head,  the  doctrine
being  still  the  same."  2.  What  he  was  to  avoid,  **  Turning  away  from  the  profane
babblings  and  oppositions  of  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely  so  called;  which  some
professing  have  erred  concerning  the  faith."  The  errors  are  called  profane  babblings,
similarly  to  the  characterization  of  them  in  ch.  i.  6  and  iv.  7.  They  are  also  called
oppositions  of  a  falsely  named  gnosis,  t.e.  to  the  true  gnosis  in  the  gospel.  There  were
some  defections  on  account  of  Gnostic  tendencies  oven  in  the  apostle's  day ;  and  it  was
very  much  the  design  of  this  letter  to  warn  his  pupil  against  them.

Y.  Benediction.  "  Qrace  be  with  you."  It  seems  better  to  regard  the  benediction
for  Timothy  alone.  He  has  been  so  busy  in  laying  down  ecclesiastical  rules  for  the
direction  of  Timothy  as  superintendent,  that  he  has  no  space  left  for  personal  reference b,
but  closes  abruptly  with  the  briefest  form  of  benediction. — U.  F.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE    FIRST    EPISTLE    OP

ST.    PAUL   TO    TIMOTHY.


CHAPTER  I.

TUUIE

Church  Goverumcnt

The  Heretic

The  Apostle

Apofitolic  Address  and  Greeting

The  Object  of  Timothy's  Continued

Sojourn  at  Ephesus
Nature  of  the  Charge  connected  vnith

the  Fulfilment  of  God*s  Dispensa-

tion     •••  •••  •••  ••

The  Nature  and  Design  of  the  Law ..
Ejaculation  of  Thankfulness  for  this

High  Trust
The  Lord's  Mercy  contrasted  with  his

own  Want  of  it ...
The  Superabounding  Grace  of  the  Lord

to  the  Apostle  ...
The  Summary  of  the  Grospel
The  Apostle  an  Example  of  the  Divine

Long-suffering  to  all  Ages
The  Solemn  Cliarge  to  Timothy
The  Divine  Benediction
The  Vital  End  of  Religion
Life's  Inner  Springs
The  Sense  of  Rectitude
The  Absence  of  Hyiiocrisy
A  Gospel  of  Glory
The  Nature  of  God
Trustees  of  the  Truth
Human  Wreckage
Introduction


PAGE

7
8
8
8


10
11

13

13

14
14

14
15
16
17
17
18
18
19
20
20
21
21


THBMB  PAOB

Personal  Digression           ...            ...  28

Recurrence  to  Timothy      ...            ...  81

CHAPTER  II.

Public  Worship    ...           ...            ...  3G

The  Regulation  of  Public  AVorsliip  ...  37
The  Beneficial  and  Acceptable  Nature

of  such  Catholic  Prayer  ...            ...  88

Reasons  for  this  Universality  of  Prayer

in  the  Relation  of  all  Men  to  God

and  Christ         ...           ...            ...  39

Tlie  Conduct  of  Public  Prayer  by  Men  40
The  Attire  and  Deportment  of  Women

in  the  Christian  Assemblies  ...  40
The  Proper  Sphere  and  Behaviour  of

Women              •••            ...            ...  41

*♦  A  Quiet  Life " ...  42

"A  Peaceable  Life"           ...            ...  43

Moral  Loveliness...            ...            ...  43

The  Self-giving  of  Christ  ...            ...  44

Modest  Adornment             ...            ...  44

Universalism        ...            ...            ...  44

The  Sexes  in  the  Christian  Assembly  48

CHAPTER  IIL

The  Clergy           ...            ...            ...  56

The  Christian  Pastorate  a  Good  Work  57
The   Positive    Qualifications   of  the

Christian  Pastor              ...            ...  57

The  Negative  Qualifications  of   the

Christian  Pastor              ...            ...  58


»


INDEX.


FMB


The  Chriitian  Fiuior  in  hii  Home


Life


•••


The  PAftor  miut  not  be  a  Nofloe     ...
The  FMtor  mnit  have  an  Honeei  Bopo-

tation  befoie  the  World  •••
The  Qoalifloations  of  Deaeooi
The  Qnalifloationi  of  DeaooneeMi   ...
The  Domflftio  Duty  of  Deaoons
The  Impurtanoe  of  a  Doe  Begolation

of  Ohmoh  Order
The  Trearare  of  Tmth  committed  to

the  Ohnreh's  Gnaidianihip
Behavioor  in  Chnroh
What**Oharoh''meanB     ...
Qoalifloationf  of    Three  Cknet  of

OflBoe-Bearera  •••  •••

Upholder  of  the  Troth,  and  Grandenr

of  Troth  upheld


•••


CHAPTEBIV.

Latter-Daj  Apostaiiee

A  Ftodioted  Apoftaay  in  ^  Chrirtion

Ohnroh  •••  •.•  .••

The  Ftaotioal  Foatores  of  the  Apoetoi  j
The  Dae  Equipment  and  Duties  of  a

MiniiterofChriiit
The  Adfantage  of  True  (3odIino«    . . .
The  Practioal  Eifeots  of  this  Truth  in

Apostolic  Experience
A  Series  of  Admonitions  for  the  Guid-
ance of  Timothy
The    Duties    of    Timothy's    Public

Ministry  •••  ...  ...

The  Duty  of  Improving  the  Divine

Gifts  of  Exhortation  and  Teaching
The  Necessity  of  a  liinister  giving  his

-whole  Energies  to  his  Work
A  False  Asceticism
A  Universal  Use  ...
A  Grateful  Heart ...
Creation  Sanctified
A  Wise  Beminder
Ministerial  Vocation
Beligious  BecompciiNe
The  Great  Beyond
Adequate  BcasoDs
Apostolic  Endurance
Sustaining  Motive
The  Universal  Bedccmer    ...
A  Touug  Teacher
Spiritual  Kegligeiicu
Mental  Absorption


59

09
09
60
61

61

62
68
68

68

65


78

74
75

75
76

76

77

78

78

78
79
79
80
80
81
81
82
82
83
84
84
85
85
85
86


Observation  of  Others
A  Doal  Heed
The  Life-Endnranoo
Saving  Others      ...
Timothy  warned  ...
Guidance  of  Timothy
Direotioos  to  Timothy


•••
•••


CHAPTEB  V.


•  a.


Propriety

Ohoxeh  Charities

Duties  and  Privileges  of  the  Clorgy ...

Diieetions  how  to  treat  Members  of  the
Churoh  aooording  to  the  Distinc-
tions of  Age  and  Sex

Directions  with  regard  to  Widows    ...

The  Duty  of  Providing  for  one's  own
Household

Ptortioular  Directions  as  to  the  Class
of  Widows  oommended  to  iho
Chudi's  Sympathy  and  Support  ...

Directions  with  Begard  to  Young
Widows

Directions  to  such  Youog  Widows    ...

Further  Directions  as  to, the  Support
of  Widows         ...  ...

Directions  respecting  the  Honour  due
to  the  Elders  of  the  Church

Directions  as  to  Accusations  against
£lders  •..  •••  ...

The  Manner  of  Public  Bobuke

A  Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy  to  be
Conscientiously  Impartial  in  these
V/Bses  ...  ...  ...  ...

A  Caution  against  Hasty  Induction  of
Ministers  ...  ...  ...

Direction  to  Timothy  to  be  Careful  of
his  Health

Final  Directions  to  Timothy  respect-
ing hlB  Attitude  toward  the  Sins
and  Sinful  Works  of  Men

Beverenoe  for  Ago

What  Women  should  be     ...

Sympathy  with  Widows

What  pleases  God

Desolateness

Confidence  in  the  Father    ...

Death  in  Life

Care  for  the  Home

The  Busybody  Life

Sins  that  go  before

Sins  that  follow  after


PAaa
86
87
87
87
88
90
92


102
102
108


103
108

104


105

105
lOJ

107

107

107
107


108


108


109


109
101)
110
110
110
110
111
112
112
112
113
113


INDEX.


Ill


THKlUt  PAGB

Dealing  ^iih  Certain  Glasses  in  the

Church              ...            ...            ...  114

The  Presbyterate  ...            ...            ...  116

CHAPTER  VI.

The  Doctrine  of  God           ...           ...  125

Heterodoxy           ...            ...            ...  125

The  Contrast         ...            ...            ...  125

The  Man  of  God  ...            ...            ...  126

The  Duties  of  Slaves  to  UnbelieTing

Masters              ...            ...            ...  127

The   Duties  of   Slaves   to  Christian

Masters              ...            ...            ...  128

A  Warning  against  those  who  Oppose

such  Wholesome  Teaching            ...  128

The  Real  Gain  of  True  Godliness     ...  129


THKJIF.  PAOB

The  Dangers  of  the  Eager  Haste  to  be

Rich    ...           ...           ...           ...  130

The  Root  of  All  Evil          ...            ...  130

Personal    Admonition    addressed    to

Timothy  himself             ...            ...  130

The  Good  Fight  and  its  Resulto       ...  131
The  Solemn  Charge  pressed  anew  upon

Timothy            ...            ...            ...  132

A  Word  of  Admonition  and  Encourage-
ment to  the  Rich             ...           ...  132

Concluding  Exhortation  and  Benedic-
tion    ...           ...           ...           ...  133

The  Health  of  Religion      ...           ...  133

The  Wealth  of  Religion      134

Slaves  and  Heretics            ...            ...  134

The  Christian  Gladiator     ...            ...  136

Parting  Words      ...           ...           ...  140


I.  TIM.


THE


rULPlT    COMMENTARY.


EDITED  BT  THE


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,


DEAN  or  0L0U0E8TER;


AND   BT  THE


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


11.    TIiM()TiI\f.


(Sxposition  anU  l^omiletics

Bt  the  right  HON.  AND  RIGHT   REV.
LORD  A.  C.  HERVEY,  D.D.,


LORD  BISHOP  or  BATH  AND  WELLS.


f^omflfes  be  Farfous  ^utboift.

REV.  PROF.  T.  CBOSKERY,  D.D.       REV.  B.  FINLAYSON,  B.A.

REV.  W.  M.  BTATHAM.


KEG  AN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF


PAUL    TO    TIMOTHY,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  I.


Ver.  1. — Christ  Jesus  for  Jesus  Chrisit
A.V.  and  T.R. ;  the  life  for  life,  A.V.  Tho
life  is  a  little  clearer  than  life,  as  showing
that  ••life"  (not  "promise  )  is  the  ante-
cedent to  **  which."  Aooording  to  the  pro-
mise denotes  the  subject-matter  with  which,
as  an  apostle,  he  had  to  deal,  viz.  the  pro-
mise of  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  the
end  for  which  he  was  called,  yiz.  to  preach
that  promise  (comp.  Titus  i.  2).

Ver.  2. — Beloved  child  for  dearly  heiloved
scm,  A.V. ;  peace  for  and  peacCj  A.V.  My
beloTod  child.  In  1  Tim.  i.  2  (as  in  Titus  i.
4)  it  is  "  my  true  child,"  or  **  my  own  son,"
A.V.  Tho  idea  broached  by  some  commen-
tators, that  this  variation  in  expression  marks
some  chango  in  St.  Paul's  confidence  in
Timothy,  seems  utterly  unfounded.  The
exhortations  to  boldness  and  courage  which
follow  were  the  natural  results  of  the  danger
in  which  St.  Paul's  own  life  was,  and  tho
depression  of  spirits  caused  by  the  desertion
of  many  friends  (ch.  iv.  10 — 16).  St.  Paul,
too,  knew  that  the  time  was  close  at  hand
when  Timotiiy,  still  young,  would  no  longer
have  him  to  lean  upon  and  look  up  to,  and
therefore  would  prepare  him  for  it;  and
possibly  he  may  have  seen  some  symptoms
of  weakness  in  Timothy's  character,  which
made  him  anxious,  as  appears,  indeed,  in  the
course  of  this  Epistle.  Graee,  etc.  (so  1
Tim.  i.  2 ;  Titus  i.  4,  A.V. ;  2  John  3).  Jude
has  **  mercy,  peace,  and  love."  The  salutation
in  Eph.  i.  2  is  *•  grace  and  peace,"  as  also  in
Bom.  i.  7 :  1  Cor.  i.  3,  and  elsewhere  in  St.
Paul's  Epistles,  and  in  Rev.  i.  4.

Ver.  3. — In  a  pure  for  %oith  pure,  A.V. ;
how  uncetising  for  that  without  ceasing,  A.V. ;
is  my  remembrance  for  I  have  remembrance,
A.V. ;  supplications  for  prayers,  A.V.  For
whsm  I  MFve  from  my  fathen  in  a  pure
eonsdenee,  comp.  Acts  xxiii.  1.    How  un-

II.  TIMOTHY.


eeasuig,  etc.  The  constmotion  of  the  sen-
tence which  follows  is  difficult  and  ambigu-
ous. For  what  does  the  apostle  give  thanks
to  God  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  will
give  the  clue  to  the  explanation.  The  only
thing  mentioned  in  the  context  which  aeeu*a
a  proper  subject  of  thanksgiving  is  that
which  is  named  in  ver.  5,  viz.  the  ^  unfeigned
faith  "  that  was  in  Timothy.  That  this  was
a  proper  subject  of  thankiggiving  we  learn
from  Eph.  i.  15,  where  St  Paul  writes  that,
having  heard  of  their  faith  in  tho  Lord
Jesus,  he  ceased  not  to  give  thanks  for  them,
making  mention  of  them  in  his  prayers  (see,
too,  1  Thess.  L  2).  Assuming,  then,  that
this  was  the  subject  of  his  thanksgiving,  we
notice  especially  the  reading  of  the  B.T.,
Xafidy,  **  having  received,"  and  the  note  of
Bengel  that  {rrSfiyrtaty  Kofifidytiy  means  to
be  reminded  of  any  one  by  another,  as  dis-
tinguished from  dydfiyiiaiy,  which  is  used
when  any  one  comes  to  your  recollection
without  external  prompting;  both  which
fall  in  with  our  previous  conclusion.  And
we  get  for  the  main  sentence  the  satisfactory
meaning :  **  I  eive  thanks  to  God  that  I  have
received  (or,  oecause  I  have  received)  a
most  pleasant  reminder  (from  some  letter  or
visitor  to  which  he  does  not  further  allude)
of  your  unfeigned  faith,"  etc.  The  main
sentence  clearly  is:  **I  thank  Gkxl  .  .  ..
having  been  reminded  of  the  uofcigncd  faith
that  is  in  thee."  The  intermediate  words
are,  in  Paul's  manner,  parenthetical  and
explanatory.  Being  about  to  say  that  it  was
at  some  special  remembrance  of  Timothy's
faith  that  he  gave  thanks,  the  thought  arose
in  his  mind  that  there  was  a  continual
remembrance  of  him  day  and  night  in  his

{trayers ;  that  he  was  ever  thinking  of  him^
onging  to  see  him,  and  to  have  the  tears
shed  at  their  parting  turned  into  joy  at  their
meeting  again.  And  so  he  interposes  this
thought,   and  prefaces  it  with  As— not

B


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  L  1 — 18.


iaiely,**how;'  as  in  the  B-V.,  bnt  in  the
tame  of  Ka$4s,  **  as,"  **  just  as."  And  so  the
whole  passage  comes  out:  **  Just  a$  1  have
on  unceasing  remembrance  of  you  in  my
prayers,  day  and  night,  longing  to  see  you,
that  the  tears  which  I  remember  you  shed
at  our  parting  may  be  turned  into  joy,  90  do

1  give  special  thanks  to  God  on  the  remem-
brance of  your  faith."

Yer.  4. — Longing^  for  greaUy  denrina,  A.Y,;
femembering  for  being  mindful  o^,  A.  V.

Yer.  5.  —  Having  been  reminded  of  for
vfhen  I  eaU  to  remembranee,  A.Y. ;  t'fi  thee
for  (hoi  in  (Aee,  A.Y.  Unfeigned  (iunrwoicpl'
rev)  I  as  1  Tim.  i.  5  (see  also  Bom.  xiL  9 ;

2  Oor.  Ti.  6;  1  Pet  L  22;  Jas.  iU.  17).
Having  been  reminded,  etc.  (see  preceding
note).  Thj  grandmother  Lois.  Udfji/iri
properly  corresponds  exactly  to  our  wcod
^  mamma."  In  4  Biacc  ztL  9,  Ov  /ai^i}
KkiiOMa  /uucaptoBiiaofAMt  **1  shall  never  be
called  a  happy  grandmother,"  and  here  (the
only  place  where  it  is  found  in  the  New
Testament)  it  has  the  sense  of  **  grand-
mother." It  is  hardly  a  real  word,  and  has
no  place  in  Stephens'  *  Thes.,'  except  inci-
dentally by  comparison  with  irdwo.  It  has,
however,  a  classical  usage.  The  proper
wcnrd  for  a  ** grandmother"  is  r^Oi}.  Lds;
a  name  not  found  elsewhere,  possibly  mean-
ing **  good,"  or  **  excellent,"  from  the  same
root  as  Avtrcpot  and  \wfoTot.  This  and  the
following  Eunice  are  examples  of  the  fre-
quent use  of  Greek  or  Latin  names  by  Jews.
£unice,  wo  know  from  Acts  xvi.  1,  was  a
Jewess  and  a  Christian,  as  it  would  seem
her  mother  Lois  was  before  her.

Yer.  6. — For  tJie  which  cau»e  for  wherefore,
A'Y. ;  through  the  laying  for  by  the  putting,
A.Y.  For  which  cause  (8t*  V  aiWav) ;  sover.
12  and  Titus  i.  13,  but  nowhere  else  in  St.
PauPs  Epistles,  though  common  olsewhero.
The  clause  seems  to  depend  upon  the  words
immediately  preceding,  ^  I  am  persuaded  in
thee  also;  for  which  cause,"  etc.  Stir  up
ihyaCwTvptiy) ;  here  only  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, but  found  in  the  LXX.  of  Gen.  xlv.
27  and  1  Mace.  xiii.  7,  in  an  intransitive
sense,  **  to  revive."  In  both  passages  it  is
contrasted  with  a  previous  state  of  despon-
dency (Gen.  xlv.  26)  or  fear  (1  Mace.  xiii.  2).
We  must,  therefore,  conclude  that  St.  Paul
knew  Timothy  to  be  cast  down  and  depressed
by  his  own  imprisonment  and  imminent
danger,  and  therefore  exhorted  him  to  revive
*'  the  spirit  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a
sound  mind,"  which  was  given  him  at  his
ordination.  The  metaphor  is  taken  from
kindling  slumbering  ashes  into  a  flame  by
the  bellows,  and  the  force  of  &va  is  to  show
that  the  embers  Lad  gone  down  from  a  pre-
Tious  state  of  candescence  or  flame— **  to
rekindle,  light  up  again."  It  is  a  favourite
metaphor  in  ela^ical  Greek.     The  gift  of


Ood  (r^  x^^t^  ^^^  S€ov) :  as  1  Tim.  ir.  14
(where  see  note).  TheUymgonof  myhaadii
together  with  those  of  the  presbytery  (1  Tim.
iv.  14 ;  oomp.  Acts  ziiL  2,  3).  The  laying
on  of  hands  was  also  the  medium  througn
which  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  in  Con-
firmation (Acts  viiL  17),  and  in  healing
(Mark  xvi.  18 ;  comp.  Numb.  xxviL  18,  23).

Yer.  7. — Oave  ue  not  for  hath  not  given  us,
A.Y. ;  a  epirit  offearfulne8$  for  the  epirit  of
fear^  AY. ;  and  for  o/",  A.Y. ;  dieeipline  for
of  a  Bound  mind,  A.Y;  A  spirit  ox  feazfU-
neii ;  or,  cowardice,  as  the  word  ScixCa  ex-
actly means  in  classical  Greek,  where  it  is
very  common,  though  it  only  occurs  here  in
the  New  Testament.  A*ik6t  also  has  a
reproachful  sense,  both  in  classical  Greek,
and  also  in  the  LXX.,  and  in  the  New  Tee-
tament  (see  Matt  viii.  26;  Mark  iv.  40;
Bev.  xxi.  8).  It  seems  certain,  therefore,
that  St.  Paul  thought  that  Timothy's  gentle
spirit  was  in  danger  of  being  cowed  by  the
adversaries  of  the  gospel.  The  whole
tenor  of  his  exhortation,  combined  as  it
was  with  words  of  warm  aJfection,  is  in  har-
mony with  this  thought.  Compare  with  the
phrMC,  wrwfui  StiA/or,  the  wcOfui  SovXc/os
fit  ^$oy  of  Bom.  viii.  15.  Of  power  and
lore.  Power  (j^iyofus)  is  emphatically  the
attribute  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Luke  iv.  14 ;
Acts  X.  38 ;  Bom.  xv.  13 ;  I  Cor.  iL  4,  etc),
and  that  which  he  specially  imparts  to  the
servants  of  Christ  (Acts  i.  8 ;  vi.  8 ;  Eph.
iiL  16,  etc.).  Love  is  added,  as  showing  that
the  servant  of  Christ  always  uses  power  in
conjunction  with  love,  and  only  as  the  means
of  executing  what  love  requires.  Discipline
(ato^fpoyuTfjMv) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
ment; ffwppoylCtof  is  found  in  Titus  ii.  4,
"  to  teach,"  A.V. ;  "  to  train,**  B.V.  *•  Dis-
cipline"  is  not  a  very  happy  rendering,
though  it  gives  the  meaning ;  "  correction,"
or  "sound  instruction,"  is  i)erhap8  nearer.
It  would  seem  that  Timothy  had  shown
some  signs  of  weakness,  and  had  not  boldly
reproved  and  instructed  in  their  duty  cer-
tain offenders,  as  true  love  for  souls  required
him  to  do.  The  phrase  from  Plutarch's
*Life  of  Cato,'  quoted  by  Alford,  exactly
gives  the  force  of  (rw^poyi<rfi6s :  '£ir2  ^lopB^
<rci  Koi  aw^poyuTfi^  r&y  &AAwv,  **For  the
amendment  and  correction  of  the  rest."

Yer.  8. — Be  not  ashamed  Oierefore  for  he
not  Hmu  therefore  aduimed,  A.Y. ;  suffer
hardship  with  the  gospel  for  he  thou  partaJcer
of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel,  A.Y.  Be  not
ashamed,  etc  The  exhortation  based  upon
the  previous  statement  The  spirit  of  power
and  love  must  show  itself  in  a  brave,  unflinch-
ing acceptance  of  all  the  hardships  and
afflictions  incident  to  a  faithful  execution  of
his  episcopal  office  (oomp.  Bom.  i.  16).
Suffer  hardship  with  the  gospeL  This,  of
course,  is  a  possible  rendering,  but  an  un-


CH.  I.  1 — 18.]


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


3


natural  one,  and  not  at  all  in  hannony  with
tiie  context  ThetoroeofffhymauyKOKowdBrf
<rw  (only  found  here  in  the  New  Testament
and  in  the  R.T.  of  oh.  ii.  3)  is  manifestly  to
associate  Timothy  with  St  Paul  in  the
afflictions  of  the  gospel.  **Be  a  fellow-
partaker  with  me  of  the  afflictions,"  which
IS  in  obvious  contrast  with  being  ashamed
of  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  and  of  the
apostle  his  prisoner.  The  gotpel  (r^  tVay-
ythlif);  i.e.  for  the  gospel,  as  Phil.  i.  27,
''striving  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel"  (t^
wlffrti),  and  as  Ghrysostom  explains  it :  *Tir^p
rod  tifOY/fXlou  (Huther).  Aooording  to  the
power  of  Gk>d;  either  **  according  to  that
spirit  of  power  which  Gk>d  gave  you  at  your
ordination,"  or  **  according  to  the  mighty
power  of  Qod  manifested  in  our  salvation
and  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."  The  latter  seems  to  be  what  St
Paul  had  in  his  mind.  Timothy  ought  to
feci  that  this  power  was  on  his  side.

Ver.  9. — Saved  for  haUi  saved,  A.V. ;  a  for
an,  A.V. ;  times  eternal  for  the  world  began,
A.V.  Who  laTed  us,  and  called  ni.  The
saving  was  in  the  gift  of  his  only  begotten
Son  to  be  our  Saviour;  the  calling  is  the
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  drawing  indivi-
dual souls  to  Christ  to  be  saved  by  him.
{For  the  power  of  God  displayed  in  man's
salvation,  comp.  Eph.  i.  1!),  20.)  With  a
holy  calling  (comp.  Rom.  i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2).
Not  aooord&g  to  our  works  (see  Titus  iii.  5 ;
Eph.  ii.  4 — 10).  His  own  porpose  and  grace.
If  our  calling  were  of  works,  it  would  not  be
by  grace  (IU)m.  iv.  4,  5;  xi.  6),  but  it  is
**  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace  .  .  .
according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he
purposed  in  himself"  (Eph.  i.  9,  11).  Be-
fore times  eternal  (wph  x9^^^^  alotyltay).
The  phrase  seems  to  have  the  same  general
meaning  as  irph  KorafioXris  K6<rfjLov,  **  before
the  foundation  of  the  world"  (Eph.  i.  4),
where  the  general  context  is  the  same.  The
phrase  itself  occurs  in  Bom.  xvi.  25  (xf><Jvo<f
cuuylots)  and  Titus  i.  2,  in  which  last  place
time  is  indicated  posterior  to  the  creation  of
men.  In  1  Cor.  li.  7  we  have  simply  wph
rwy  Mvwy,  **  before  the  worlds,"  where  aldy
is  equivalent  to  aloovioi  xp6yot,  and  in  Eph.
iii.  11,  irp6dtaty  r&y  Mvwy,  "the  eternal
purpose."  In  Luke  i.  70  the  phrase,  &«-'
alwyosy  is  rendered  **  since  the  world  began/'
and  us  robs  alwyas  (Matt  vi.  13),  **  for  ever."
So  frequently  tts  rhy  cd&ya,  **for  ever"
(Matt.  xxi.  19;  John  vi.  51,  etc.),  and  tls
robs  cuwvas  ruy  aidywy  (Gal.  i.  5 ;  Eph.  iii.
21 :  1  Tim.  i.  17,  etc.),  "  for  ever  and  over."
The  uaago  of  the  LXX.  is  very  similar,
where  dv*  cuayos,  tis  rhy  cuuya,  irpb  ruy  ale6-
vwy,  oluy  rwy  cduywy,  etc.,  are  frequent,  as
well  as  the  adjective  cdt&yios.  Putting  all
these  passages  together,  and  adverting  to
the  classical  meaning  of  aiuyf  and  its  Latin


equivalent,  mvum,  a  **  lifetime,"  we  seem  to
arrive  at  the  primary  meaning  of  ol^y  as
beinp:  a  "generation,"  and  then  any  long
period  of  time  analogous  to  a  man's  lifetime.
Hence  XP^*^^  ol^ytoi  would  be  times  made
up  of  successive  generations,  and  wph  xp^ptt^
aiwyivy  would  mean  at  the  very  beginning
of  the  times  which  consisted  of  human
generations.  Alioy  r&y  al^ytty  would  be  one
great  generation,  consisting  of  all  the  sue*
cessive  generations  of  mankind.  The  whole
duration  of  mankind  in  this  present  world
would  be  in  this  sense  one  vast  al^y,  to  be
followed  by  we  know  not  what  succeeding
ones.  Thus  Eph.  L  21,  4v  rf  aiSyi  roir^  is
contrasted  with  iy  rf  ^/xxom,  the  idea
being  that  the  world  has  its  lifetime  analo«
gous  to  the  lifetime  of  a  man.  The  same
period  may  also  be  considered  as  made  up  of
several  shorter  aiuy^s,  the  prediluvial,  the
patriarchal,  the  Mosaic,  the  Christian,  and
such  like  (see  note  to  1  Tim.  i.  17).

Ver.  10. — HcUh  now  been  manifested  for  if
now  made  manifest,  A.V. ;  Christ  Jesus  for
Jesus  Christ,  A.Y. ;  abolished  for  hath  abo'
lished,  A.V. ;  brought  for  hcUh  brought,  A.V. ;
incorruption  for  immortality,  A.Y.  Hatiil
now  been  manifested  (paytp^oettaay);  a  word
of  very  frequent  use  by  St  Paul.  The  same
contrast  between  the  long  time  during  which
God's  gracious  purpose  by  hidden,  and  the
present  time  when  it  was  brought  to  light
by  the  gospel,  which  is  contained  in  Siis
passage,  is  forcibly  dwelt  upon  in  Eph.  ilL
1 — 12.  The  appearing  (rrjs  kirupay^ias),
applied  here,  as  in  the  name  of  the  Festival
of  the  Epipliany,  to  the  first  advent,  but  in
ch.  iv.  1  ana  Titus  ii.  13  and  elsewhere  applied
to  the  second  advent,  **  the  glorious  appear-
ing of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ"  (Titus  it
13).  Abolished  (KarapyfiffoLyros};  i.e.  "de-
stroyed," or  **  done  away,"  or  "  made  of  none
effect,"  as  the  word  is  variously  rendered
(1  Cor.  XV.  26;  2  Cor.  UL  11 ;  Gal.  iii  17;
comp.  Hcb.  ii.  14).  Brought  ...  to  light
(^ctfrfcravTos);  as  in  1  Cor.  iv.  15.  Elsewhere
rather  "to  give  light,"  or  "to  enlighten"
(see  Luke  xi.  36;  Heb.  vi.  4;  x.  32,  etc.).
For  a  full  description  of  the  abolition  of
death  and  the  introduction  of  eternal  life  in
its  stead,  through  the  death  and  resurrection
of  Jesus  Christ,  see  Rom.  v.  and  vi.,  and
especially  vi.  8--11.  Through  the  gotpal;
because  the  gospel  both  declares  the  death
and  resurrection  of  Chriet,  and  calls  us  to
share  in  them.  These  mighty  glories  of  the
gospel  were  good  reasons  why  Timothy
should  not  bo  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of
his  Lord,  nor  shrink  from  the  afflictions  of
the  gospel.  They  were  signal  evidences
of  the  power  of  God.

Ver.  11. — Was  for  am,  A.V. ;  teacher  for
teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  A.V.  and  T.R.  Waa
appointed  iM0riy) ;  comp.  1  Tim.  L  12,  0^


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[CH.  I.  1 — 18;


IUP9S  fit  ^toKovUuf^  "appointiog  me  to  the
ndniftiy ; "  and  ii.  7.  A  pramer,  and  an
■poiOe,  and  a  taaaher  (eo  alBo  1  Tim.  iL  7).
TaadMT  (iiMd^KoXoi)  U  one  of  the  spiritual
offioea  enumerated  in  1  Cor.  xii.  28  and
Eph.  iv.  11.  It  is  sorely  remarkable  that
neither  here  nor  elsewhere  does  St.  Paul
speak  of  any  call  to  the  priesthood  in  a
saoerdotal  sense  (see  Bom.  i.  1,  5 ;  sr.  16 ;
1  Cor.  i.  1,  etc.).

Yer.  12. — Suffer  dUo  for  alto  tuffer,  A.y . ;
yd  for  nevertndeis,  A.Y.;  him  whom  for
whom,  A.Y. ;  guard  for  km,  A.Y.  Tor  the
iHdoh  cause  (ver.  6,  note)  I  snfRv  also.  The
apostle  adds  the  weight  of  his  own  example
to  the  preceding  exhortation.  What  he  was
exhoirtmg  Timothy  to  do  he  was  actually
doing  himielC  without  any  wavering  or
hesitation  or  misgiving  as  to  the  result.  I
know  him  whom  I  hsTo  belisred,  and  I  am
psnoaded  that  he  is  able  to  guard  that
m^ddi  I  haTo  eommitted  unto  him.  The
ground  of  the  apostlo's  confidence,  even  in
the  hour  of  extreme  peril,  was  his  perfect
trust  in  the  faithfulness  of  God.  This  he
expresses  in  a  metaphor  drawn  from  the
oommon  action  of  ono  person  ontrusting
another  with  some  precious  deposit,  to  1x3
kept  for  a  time  and  restored  whole  and  un-
ixgured.  All  tho  words  in  the  sentence  are
part  of  this  metaphor.  The  verb  ircir/<rr(vKa
must  be  taken  in  tho  sense  of  **  entrusting  "
(eiirjB  ao  fidei  alicujus  committor  as  Luke
xvi.  11.  So  wtartvOrfyeu  rh  MbtxyyiXtoi^,  "to
be  entrusted  with  tho  gospel "  (1  Thess.  ii.
4);  oiKovonlay  irdricrrcDfiai,  *^  I  am  entrusted
with  a  dispensation"  (1  Cor.  ix.  17;  see
Wisd.  xiv.  5,  etc.).  And  so  in  classical
Greek,  inirrtiuv  rwi  n  means  "to  entrust
something  to  another"  to  take  oaro  of  for
you.  Here,  then,  St.  Paul  says  (not  as  in
the  R.V.,  •*!  know  him  whom  I  have
believed/'  which  is  quite  inadmissible,  but),
**I  know  whom  I  have  trusted  {i.e.  in
whom  I  have  placed  confidence,  and  to  whom
I  have  committed  the  keeping  of  my  deposit],
and  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep
that  which  I  havo  entrusted  to  him  (t^k
wapaBfiKTju  fiov)  unto  that  day."  The  irapa-
OfiKi^  is  the  thing  which  Paul  entrusted  to
his  faithful  guardian,  one  who  he  knew
would  never  betray  the  trust,  but  would
restore  it  to  him  safe  and  sound  at  the  day
of  Christ.  What  the  irapa0i)Kri  was  may  be
difficult  to  express  in  any  one  word,  but  it
comprised  himself,  his  life,  his  whole  treasure,
his  salvation,  his  joy,  his  eternal  hf^ppiness —
all  for  the  sake  of  which  he  risked  life  and
limb  in  this  world,  content  to  lose  sight  of
them  for  a  while,  knowing  that  he  should
receive  them  all  from  the  hands  of  God  in
the  day  of  Christ.  All  thus  haii^s  perr't  ctly
together.  There  can  bo  no  reasonable  doubt
that  itapQ$^icr\v  fiov  means  **  my  deposit " — that


wbich  I  have  deposited  with  him.  Neither
is  there  the  slightest  difficulty  in  the  different
applications  of  the  same  metaphor  in  ver.  14'
Mid  in  1  Tim.  vi.  20.  For  it  is  as  true  that
God  entrusts  to  his  faithful  servants  the
deposit  of  the  faith,  to  be  kept  by  them
with  jealous  fidelity,  as  it  is  that  his  serranta
entrust  to  him  the  keeping  of  their  souls^
as  knowing  him  to  be  faithuil.

Yer.  la— JTbId  for  holdfatt,  A.Y.;  paUem
for  form,  A.Y.;  from  for  </,  A.Y.  Hold
(lx«).  This  use  of  lxf<y  in  the  pasUnaT
Epistles  is  somewhat  peculiar.  In  I  Tim.
i.  19,  Ixtfi^  wlariy,  **  holding  faith ; "  in  iiL  6,.
Ixorrof  rh  ftvtrHipiov^  **  holding  the  mystery
of  the  faith ;  **  and  here,  **  hold  the  pattern,^'
etc  It  seems  to  have  a  more  active  sense
than  merely  ^'have,"  and  yet  not  to  haTo
the  very  active  sense  of  **ho1d  fieist."  It
may,  however,  well  be  doubted  whether  lfx«
here  is  used  in  even  as  strong  a  sense  as  in
the  other  two  passages,  inasmuch  as  here  it
follows  instead  of  preceding  the  substantive
(see  Alford,tn  loe.).  The  pattem(6Tor^rc»(riy)7
only  here  and  1  Tim.  i.  16  (where  see  note),
where  it  manifestly  means  a  ^  pattern,"  not
a  •*  form."  The  word  signifies  a  **  sketch,*'
or  **  outline."  St  Paul's  meaning,  thorefore,
seems  to  be:  ^For  your  own  guidance  in
teaching  the  flock  committed  to  you,  and  for
a  pattern  which  you  will  try  and  always
copy,  have  before  you  the  pattern  or  outline
of  sound  words  which  you  have  heard  of  mc,
in  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.**
Sound  words  (v^icuK^KTcvi'  \6ywy);  see  1  Tim.
i.  10,  note.  In  faith  and  loTe ;  either  hold
the  pattern  in  faith  and  love,  or  which  you
have  heard  in  faith  and  love.

Ver.  14. — Guard  for  keep^  A.V.;  through
for  by,  A.Y.  That  good  thing  (rV  koK^iv
irapaBiiKriu,  R.T.,  for  trapoKaraBfjicrif^;  see  1
Tim.  vi.  20,  and  note.  This  naturally
follows  the  preceding  verse.  Faithfulness
in  maintaining  the  fiiith  was  closely  con-
nected with  the  maintenance  of  sound
words.

Yer.  15. — That  are  for  they  tchich  are,
A.Y.:  turned  for  he  turned,  A.Y.;  Fhygclu^
for  PhygelluSj  A.V.  and  T.K.  Turned  away
from  (^ax€<rrpd^ri<r(iy  fit).  This  verb  is  used,
as  here,  governing  an  accusative  of  tho
person  or  thing  turned  away  from,  in  Titus
i.  14 ;  Heb.  xii.  25,  as  frequently  in  classical
Greek.  The  use  of  the  aorist  here  is  im-
portant, as  St.  Paul  does  not  me:in  to  say
that  the  Churches  of  Asia  had  all  forsaken
him,  which  was  not  true,  and  which  it  would
be  absurd  to  inform  Timothy  of  if  it  were  true,
living  as  he  was  at  Ephesus,  the  central  cit}-
of  Asia,  but  adverts  to  some  occasion,  pro-
bably connected  with  his  trial  before  Nero,
when  they  shrank  from  him  in  a  cowardly
way.  Iloyrcs  ol  iy  rp  'Airltf  means  "the
whole  party  in  Asia"  connected  with  the


€H.  1. 1— la]


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


particular  transaction  to  which  St  Paul  is
iillnding,  and  which  was  known  to  Timothy
though  it  is  not  faiown  to  ns.  Perhaps  he
had  applied  to  certain  Asiatics,  whether
-Christians  or  Jews  or  GrsBOO-Romans,  for  a
testimony  to  his  orderly  conduct  in  Asia,
and  they  had  refused  it;  or  they  may  have
T)een  at  Borne  at  the  time,  and  avoided  St.
Paul;  and  among  them  Phygelus  and
Hermogenes,  whose  conduct  may  have  been
uaztiouiarly  ungrateful  and  unexpected.
Nothing  is  known  of  either  of  them.

Ver.  J  6. — Grant  for  give,  A.V.  Grant
merey  (h^ri  f\fos).  This  connection  of  the
worda  is  only  found  here.  The  house  of
Onedphomi.  It  is  inferred  from  this  ex-
pression, coupled  with  that  in  ch.  iv.  19,
that  Onesiphorus  himself  was  no  longer
living ;  and  hence  ver.  18  (where  see  note)
18  thought  by  some  to  be  an  argument  for
•prayers  for  the  dead.  The  inference,  further
strengthened  by  the  peculiar  language  of
ver.  18,  though  not  absolutely  certain,  is
undoubtedly  probable.  The  connection
between  thiis  and  the  preceding  verse  is  the
contrast  between  the  conduct  of  Phygelus
nnd  Hermogenes  and  that  of  Onesiphorus.
They  repudiated  all  acquaintance  with  the
apostle  in  his  day  of  trial ;  he,  when  ho  was
in  Rome,  diligently  sought  him  and  with
difficulty  found  him«  and  oft  refreshed  him
with  Christian  sympathy  and  communion,
acting  with  no  less  courage  than  love.  He
was  no  longer  on  earth  to  receive  a  prophet's
reward  (Matt.  x.  41),  but  St  Paul  prays  that
ho  may  receive  it  in  the  day  of  Christ,  and
that  meanwhile  God  may  requite  to  his
family  the  mercy  he  hod  showed  to  St.  Paul.
Befreshed  me  (di^^if^v^cK) ;  literally,  revived
me.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  but
comp.  Acts  iii.  19.  Chain  (&\v<riy) ;  in  the
singular,  as  Eph.  vi.  20;  Acts  xxviii.  20
(where  see  note).

Ver.  17. — Sought  for  sought  out,  A.V. ;
diligently  for  very  dUigenthjj  A.V.  and  T.B.


Ver.  18.— 7o  find  for  that  he  tnay  fiftd,
A.y. ;  mini$tered  for  ministered  unto  me,
A.V.  (The  Lord  grant  unto  him>  The
parenthesis  seems  onlv  to  be  required  on,
the  supposition  that  the  words  8q»i|  ainm  6
K^ptos  tipuy  t\9os^  K.r.X.,  are  a  kind  of  play
on  the  tZpty  of  the  preceding  verse.  Otner-
wise  it  is  better  to  take  the  words  as  a  new
sentence.  The  repetition  of  **  the  Lord  "  is
remarkable,  but  nothing  seems  to  hang  upon
it.  The  second  wapit  Kvplov  seems  to  suppose
the  Lord  sitting  on  tne  judgment-tmone.
As  reguds  the  amount  of  encouragement
given  oy  this  passage  to  prayers  for  the
dead  (supposing  Onesiphorus  to  have  been
dead),  the  mere  expression  of  a  pious  wish  or
hope  that  he  may  &id  mercy  is  a  Tory  slender
foundation  on  which  to  build  the  super-
structure of  prayer  and  Masses  for  the
deliverance  of  souls  from  purgatory.  In
how  many  things,  etc.  St.  Paul  does  not
say,  as  the  A.V.  makes  him  say,  that  Onesi-
phorus **  ministered  unto  him  "  at  Ephesus.
It  may  have  been  so,  but  the  words  do  not
necessarily  mean  this.  **  What  good  service
he  did  at  Ephesus  "  would  faithfully  repre-
sent the  Greek  words;  and  this  might
describe  great  exertions  made  by  Onesi-
phorus after  his  return  from  Home  to
procure  the  apostle's  acquittal  and  release
by  the  intercession  of  the  principal  persons
at  Ephesus.*  This  would,  of  course,  be  known
to  Timothy.  It  may,  however,  describe  the
ministerial  labours  and  services  of  Onesi-
phorus at  Ephesus  after  his  return  from
Rome,  or  it  may  refer  to  former  ministra-
tions when  Paul  and  Timothy  were  at
Ephesus  together  (see  Introduction).  There
seem  to  be  no  materials  for  arriving  at  abso-
lute certainty  on  the  point.

*  An  almost  identical  explanation  ia
suggested  by  Hofmann,  as  quoted  by
Huther  in  a  note  to  this  passage.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Reminiscences.  A  ring  once  given  to  an  old  and  loved  friend,  who  in  later
life  had  been  cut  off  from  the  former  loving  intercourse  by  the  inevitable  course  of  eyents,
bore  this  touching  inscription,  •*  Cara  roemoria  dei  primieri  anni  **  (dear  memory  of  old
times).  The  memories  of  a  happy  unclouded  youth,  of  youthful  friendships,  of  joyous
days,  of  pursuits  lit  up  by  sanguine  hopes  and  bright  expectations,  are  indeed  often
ttmong  the  most  precious  treasures  of  the  heart.  And  in  like  manner  the  recollection
of  former  triumphs  of  faith  in  days  of  dark  doubt  and  difiBculty,  of  temptations  over-
come, of  victories  gained,  of  grace  received,  of  work  done  for  (jod,  of  Christian  inter*
course  with  God's  saints,  and  happy  hours  of  prayer,  and  treading  underfoot  all  the
powers  of  darkness,  are  not  only  bright  lights  illuminating  the  past  journey  of  life,  bat
are  often  among  our  strongest  incentives  to  perseverance,  and  our  best  encouragements
to  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering.  St.  Paul,  that  great  master
in  the  knowledge  of  human  nature,  knew  this  well.  And  so  with  inimitable  skill— «
skill  heightened  and  set  off  by  the  warm  affections  of  a  tender  heart— he  calls  back


6  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TDIOTHY.  [ch.  l  l—lSi

Timothy's  recollections  to  the  days  of  his  early  fidth.  That  there  had  been  anything
like  a  nlling  away  from  the  faith  in  Timothy,  any  real  declension  in  his  religious  life,
there  is  no  reason  to  believe.  But  the  quick  eye  of  the  anostle  had  detected  some
symptoms  of  weakness.  The  pulse  of  firm  resolution,  as  dangers  thickened  around
mmi  had  not  beaten  so  steadily  as  he  would  have  wished.  He  did  not  see  the  symp-
toms of  Christian  courage  rising  with  the  rising  flood  of  difficulty  quite  so  marked  as
to  set  his  mind  at  ease  as  to  what  might  happen  if,  after  his  own  death,  which  he  felt
was  near,  Timothy  were  left  alone  to  confront  the  perils  of  a  fierce  persecution,  or  to
fta&d»  the  wavering  purpose  of  timid  and  fainting  disciples.  And  so  no  calls  back  his
dearly  beloved  son  in  the  faXih  to  the  old  days  of  his  first  conversion.  The  lessons  of
ffdth  and  obedience  learnt  on  his  mothei^s  knee  in  the  dear  home  at  Lystra,  whose
bleaiefl  fruit  had  attracted  St  Paul's  notice ;  the  first  appearance  of  the  anostle  in  those
T^gioDS  in  the  noonday  of  his  apostolic  zfil ;  the  bold  front  with  which  he  had  met
the  storm  of  affliction  and  persecution ;  Timothy's  own  warm  surrender  of  himself  to
the  companionship  of  the  great  teacher,  and  his  exchange  of  a  happy,  peaceful  home
ibr  tiie  wandering  life  and  Uicessant  peril  of  an  evangelist ;  then  the  solenm  time  of  his
ocdination — the  time  when,  with  prayer  and  fitting,  he  had  knelt  to  receive  the  laying
on  of  hands,  and  had  exulted  in  the  new  gift  of  God  with  which  he  might  go  forth
teriessly  and  lovingly,  and  in  a  strength  not  his  own,  to  emulate  his  fiEkther  in  the  faith
in  preaching  the  gospel  of  God's  saving  grace, — Oh,  let  Timothy  cherish  those  dear
memories  of  former  times  1  And  there  were  later  memories  still.  Their  last  meeting,
and  their  last  adieu.  They  had  parted,  under  what  circumstances  we  do  not  know ;
St.  Piiul  hastening  on  to  his  crown  of  martyrdom,  Timothy  remaining  at  his  post  of
work  and  of  danger.  And  Timothy  had  wept  Were  they  tears  of  bitterness,  tears  of
oompunction,  tears  of  a  heart  broken  and  melting  under  a  gentle  loving  reproof,  or  were
they  only  tears  of  sorrow  at  parting  ?  We  cannot  say  for  certain ;  but  St  Paul  remem-
bered them,  and  he  recalls  them  to  Timothy's  memory  too.  He  adds  the  hope  that,  as
they  had  sown  in  tears,  they  would  reap  in  joy — the  joy,  perhaps,  of  a  healed  wound
and  renovated  spiritual  strength,  or,  at  all  events,  the  joy  of  meeting  once  more  before
the  fall  of  the  curtain  of  death  to  clone  the  drama  of  Paul's  eventful  life.  The  lesson
left  for  us  by  these  heart-stirring  words  is  the  value  of  the  memory  of  the  past  when
brought  to  bear  upon  the  work  of  the  future.  '*  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget
not  adl  his  benefits,"  is  a  sentiment  which  continually  comes  up  in  the  varied  experi-
ences of  the  psalmist.  He  quickened  hope  in  the  land  of  banishment  by  remembering
the  days  of  happy  worship  in  the  house  of  God  (Ps.  xlii.) ;  he  added  depth  to  his  sorrow
for  sin  by  recalling  the  memory  of  that  joy  of  salvation  which  he  hod  forfeited  by  his
fall  (Ps.  li.).  And  so  we  shall  do  well  in  times  of  weakness  to  remember  our  former
strength ;  in  days  of  darkness  to  call  to  mind  the  days  of  light  that  were  of  old ;  in
days  of  slackness  and  indolence  to  call  back  the  memory  of  the  time  when  we  were  all
on  fire  to  do  God*s  work ;  in  days  of  depression  to  think  of  old  mercies  shown  and  old
graces  given  to  us  of  Grod ;  to  quench  the  fear  of  defeat  by  the  recollection  of  ancient
victories ;  and,  in  a  word,  to  make  the  past  supply  the  present  with  incentives  to  an
imdving  zeal,  and  a  steadfast  courage  in  facing  ail  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel  according
to  the  unchanging  power  of  God.

Vers.  8 — 18. — Constancy  in  the  hour  of  danger.  There  are  great  differences  of  natural
temperament  in  different  men.  There  are  those  whose  courage  is  naturally  high.  Their
instmct  is  to  brave  danger,  and  to  be  confident  of  overcoming  it  They  do  not  know
what  nervousness,  or  sinking  of  heart,  or  the  devices  of  timidity,  mean.  Others
are  of  a  wholly  different  temperament.  The  approach  of  danger  unnerves  them.
Their  instinct  is  to  avoid,  not  to  overcome,  danger ;  to  shrink  from  suffering,  not  to
confront  it.  There  are  ever  in  the  Church  the  bold  and  dauntless  Gideons,  and  the
wavering  and  timid  Peters.  But  thegrace  of  God  is  able  to  strengthen  the  weak  hands
and  to  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  He  can  say  to  them  that  are  of  fearful  heart,  '*  Be
strong ;  fear  not."  He  can  give  power  to  the  faint,  and  increase  strength  to  them  that
have  no  might  And  there  is  perhaps  no  more  edifying  sight  than  that  of  the  quiet
un boasting  courage  of  those  whose  natural  timidity  has  been  overcome  by  an  over-
powering sense  of  duty  and  of  love  to  Christ,  and  who  have  learnt,  in  the  exercises  of
prayer  and  meditation  on  the  cross  of  Christ,  to  endure  hardness  without  fiincMng,  as


CH.  L 1—18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  7

good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  to  yield  to  fear,  and,  under  its  influence,  to  be
ashamed  to  confess  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  repudiate  fellowship  with  those
who  are  suffering  for  Christ's  sake  and  the  gospel's,  lest  we  should  fall  into  the  same
reproach  with  them,  is  sin,  and  sin  most  unworthy  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died,  and
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  so  great  salvation.  No  plea  of  natural  timidity  can
excuse  such  unworthy  conduct.  It  behoves,  therefore,  men  of  a  timid  and  gentle  spirit
to  fortify  their  faith  by  frequent  contemplation  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  habitually
to  take  up  that  cross,  and  by  it  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  Let
them  think  often  of  their  holy  calling,  remember  that  they  are  the  servants  of  him
who  **  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,"  and  look  forward  to  the  recompense  of
reward.  Let  them  contrast  the  base,  unmanly  conduct  of  the  men  of  Asia,  who  turned
away  from  the  noble  Paul  in  his  hour  of  danger,  with  the  faithful,  generous  conduct
of  OnesiphoruSf  who  sought  him  out  in  his  prison  and  was  not  ashamed  of  his  chain.
And  surely  they  will  come  to  the  conclusion  that  affliction  with  the  people  of  GK)d
is  better  than  immunity  from  suffering  purchased  by  shame  and  sin.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  ajposUe's  address  and  greeting.  This  Epistle,  which  has  been  well
described  as  "  the  last  will  and  testament "  of  the  apostle,  written  as  it  was  under  the
very  shadow  of  death,  opens  with  a  touching  evidence  of  personal  interest  in  Timothy.

I.  The  origin  and  design  of  the  afobtleship.  "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ
by  the  will  of  God.''  1.  He  was  an  apostle,  (1)  Not  by  the  will  of  man,  even  of
other  apostles.  (2)  Nor  by  his  own  will ;  for  he  did  not  take  this  honour  upon  him*
self.  (3)  Nor  was  it  owincr  to  his  personal  merits ;  for  he  always  speaks  of  it  as  '^  the
grace  of  apostleship."  (4)  He  was  an  apostle  by  the  will  of  Gbd,  whose  "  chosen  vessel "
he  was  for  this  purpose.  2.  The  design  of  his  apostleship  was  '*  according  to  the  promise
of  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus/*  Its  design  was  to  make  known  this  promise.  (1)
It  was  life  eternal ;  (2)  promised  in  Christ  Jesus,  because  (a)  it  was  '*  promised  before  the
world  began "  (Titus  i.  2) ;  (6)  in  Christ,  who  is  the  Prince  of  life,  who  procured  it»
who  applies  it  by  his  Spirit.

II.  The  person  addressed.  "  To  Timothy,  my  beloved  son.**  Not,  as  in  the  former
Epistle,  **  my  true  son,**  but  a  son  specially  dear  to  him  in  view  of  the  approaching
severance  of  the  earthly  tie  that  bound  them  together.

lU.  The  greeting.  "  Grace,  mercy^  and  peace."  (See  homiletical  hints  on  1  Urn*
i.  2.)-T.  C.

Vers.  3 — 5. — Thankful  declaration  of  love  and  remembrance  of  Timothy's  faOhm
1,  The  apostle's  afeectionate  interest  in  his  young  disciple.  *'I  give  thanks
to  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers  in  a  pure  conscience,  as  unceasing  is  the
remembrance  I  have  of  thee  in  my  prayers  night  and  day ;  greatly  desiring  to  see  thee,
being  mindful  of  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be  filled  with  joy.*'  1.  Tfie  apostle  begins  aU
Epistles  with  the  language  of  thanksgiving.  CK)d  is  the  Object  of  thanksgiving,  both
as  CK)d  of  nature  and  as  GKxi  of  grace,  and  there  is  no  blessing  we  have  received  that
ought  not  to  be  thankfully  acknowledged.  2.  It  is  allowahU  for  a  good  man  to  take
pleasure  in  the  thought  of  a  consistently  conscientious  career.  His  service  of  God  was
according  to  the  principles  and  feelings  he  inherited  from  his  ancestors  '*in  a  pure  con-
science "  (Acts  xxiii.  1 ;  xxiv.  14).  3.  Ministers  ought  to  be  much  engaged  in  prayer
for  one  another  so  as  to  strengthen  each  other's  hands.  4.  The  thought  of  approaching
death  makes  us  long  to  see  the  friends  who  have  been  most  endeared  to  us  in  l\fe.  (1)
The  apostle  remembered  Timothy's  sorrow  at  their  last  parting.  (2)  Though  he  had
commanded  him  before  to  stay  at  Ephesus,  he  now  desired  to  see  him,  because  he  was
alone  in  prison,  with  Luke  as  his  only  companion.  (3)  The  sight  of  Timothy  in  Rome
would  fill  him  with  joy  beyond  that  imparted  by  all  the  other  friends  and  companions
of  his  apostolic  life.

II.  The  apostle's  thanksgiyino  fob  Timothy's  faith.  "Being  put  in  lemem**
brance  of  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee,  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Loi8»
and  thy  mother  Eunice ;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  also  in  thee."    1.  The  quality  ff  Mis


8  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  Ich.  i.  1— la

faiUk.  ** UnfeigDed*  Timothy  wm  ''an  Imelite  indeed,"  who  belieTed  with  the
heart  unto  righteoosnefls,  his  &ith  working  by  lore  to  €k)d  and  man,  and  accompanied
by  good  works.  2.  lU  permanent  character,  **  It  dwelt  in  him."  Faith  is  an  aldding
grace ;  Christ,  who  is  its  Author,  is  also  its  Finisher ;  and  salvation  is  inseparably  con-
nected with  it  3.  The  eubfecU  if  ihU/aUh.  ^  First  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  in
thy  mother  Emiice."    (1)  Lois  was  his  grandmother  by  the  mothei^s  side,  for  his  &ther

.  was  a  Greek ;  and  Eunice,  his  mother,  was  probably  conTerted  at  Lystra,  at  no  great
distance  from  Tarsus,  the  native  city  of  the  apostle  (Acts  xvi.  1 ;  xir.  6).  (a)  It  is
pleasant  to  see  faith  transmitted  through  three  generations.  It  is  sin,  and  not  grace,  that
is  easily  transmitted  by  blood.  But  when  we  are  "  bom,  not  of  blood,  but  of  God,"  we
have  reason  to  be  thankfol,  like  the  apostle,  for  such  a  display  of  rich  family  mercy.
(b)  We  see  here  the  advantages  of  a  pious  education,  for  it  was  from  the  persons  named
be  obtained  in  his  youth  that  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  which  made  nim  wise  unto

'aalvation  (ch.  iii.  16).  (e)  How  often  Christian  mothers  have  given  remarkable
sons  to  the  ministry  of  God's  Church !  (Augustine  and  Monica.)  (2)  Timothy  was
himself  a  subject  of  this  faith.    He  did  not  break  off  the  happy  continuity  of  grace  in

'his  fiunily,  but  worthily  perpetuated  the  best  type  of  ancestral  piety. — T.  C.

Ter.  6.— 27ie  apostie^t  admonition  to  Timothy  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  vnihin  him.
It  was  because  of  his  persuasion  of  Timothy's  faith,  and  perhaps  of  the  apprehension
that  the  youn^  disciple  had  been  depress^  by  his  own  long  imprisonment^  that  he
addressed  him  in  this  manner.

L  The  spiBiruAL  gifts  possessed  bt  Timothy.  **  Wherefore  I  put  thee  in  remem-
bnmce  to  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  in  thee  by  means  of  the  laying  on  of  my  hands.**

1.  He  refers  to  the  special  gift  received  hy  Timothy  with  a  view  to  his  office  as  an
evangdist.  It  was  not  anything  either  natural  or  acquired,  but  something  bestowed
by  the  Spirit  of  God  which  would  fit  him  for  teaching  and  rulin<;  the  Church  of  Grod.

2.  It  was  conferred  by  the  hands  of  the  apostle  along  with  the  presbytery  (I  Tim.  iv.  14).
II.  The  necessity  of  stirriko  up  this  spiritual  gift.    1.  It  is  possible  there  may

have  been  some  dackness  or  decline  of  power  on  Timothy's  part,  arising  from  various
causes  of  discouragement,  to  make  this  injunction  necessary.  2.  The  gift  was  to  be  stirred
up  by  reading^  meditaiion,  and  prayer,  so  that  he  might  be  enabled,  with  fresh  zeal,  to
reform  the  abuses  of  the  Church  and  endure  hardship  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.
— T.C.

Ter.  7. — The  Divine  equipment  for  arduous  service  in  the  Church,  The  apostle  here
adds  a  reason  for  the  injunction  just  given.

I.  Negatively,  "For  God  did  not  give  us  the  spirit  of  cowardice."  1.  This
refers  to  the  time  of  the  ordination  of  Timothy  and  of  the  apostle.  Courage  is  an  essen-
tial qualification  tor  ministers  of  the  gospel.  2.  Cowardice  is  unworthy  of  those  who
Jtave  received  the  gospel  in  trust.  The  fear  of  man  has  a  very  wide  dominion,  but  those
who  fear  God  ought  to  know  no  other  fear.  (1)  This  fear  tends  to  unworthy  compli-
ances. (2)  Trust  in  God  is  a  preservation  Irom  fear  (Ps.  xxvii.  1).  (3)  Our  Lord
exhorts  us  strongly  against  such  fear  (John  xiv.  27).

n.  Positively.  "  But  of  power,  and  of  love,  and  of  self-control.**  1.  The  spirit  of
poufer,  as  opposed  to  the  weakness  of  cowardice ;  for  the  servants  of  Christ  are  fortified
against  persecutions  and  reproaches,  are  enabled  to  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of
Christ,  and  to  quit  themselves  like  men.  2.  The  spii-it  of  love.  This  will  make  them
earnest  in  their  care  for  souls,  indefatigable  in  labours,  fearless  in  the  midst  of  trying
exigencies,  and  self-sacrificing  in  love.  3.  The  spirit  of  self -control.  This  will  enable
the  servant  of  Christ  to  keep  his  whole  being  in  subjection  to  the  Lord,  apart  from  all
the  solicitations  of  the  world,  and  to  regulate  life  with  a  due  regard  to  its  duties,  its
labours,  and  its  cares. — T.  C.

Ver.  8. —  Warning  to  Timothy  not  to  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel,  nor  to  shrink  from
afflictions.    This  exhortation  is  dependent  upon  the  previous  counsel.

I.  The  minister  of  God  must  not  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  **  Be  not  thou  there-
fore ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  the  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner."  1.  The  testimony
^  the  Lord  is  that  borne  concerning  his  doctrine,  sufferings,  and  death ;  in  a  word,  the


CH.I.1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  9

gospel  itself.  2.  No  Christian  can  he  ashamed  of  a  gospel  of  such  pouter ,  so  true,  so
gracious,  so  usefuL  3.  No  Christian  can  be  ashamed  of  its  confessors.  The  apostle
was  a  prisoner  at  Rome  for  its  sake,  not  for  crime  of  any  sort.  The  gospel  then
laboured  underan  immense  load  of  pagan  prejudice,  and  Timothy  needed  to  be  reminded
o(  his  obligations  to  S3rmpathize  with  its  greatest  expounder.

II.  The  hinisteb  of  Ood  kust  shabe  in  the  afflictioks  of  thb  gospel.  **  But
be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel  according  to  the  power  of  Qod/*-  1.
HTumgh  it  is  a  gospel  of  peace^  it  brings  a  sword  wherever  it  goes,  and  involves  its
preachers  in  tribulations  arising  out  of  the  perverseness  of  men  who  thwart  and  despise
it.  2.  We  ought  to  suffer  hardship  for  the  gospel,  by  the  consideration  that  the  God
who  has  saved  us  with  such  a  strong  hand  is  able  to  succour  us  under  all  our  afflictions.
— T.C.

Yers.  9 — ^11. — The  power  of  Ood  in  the  salvation  manifested  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the
world.  He  now  proceeds  to  expound  in  a  glorious  sentence  the  origin,  conditions,
manifestations  of  tne  salvation  provided  in  the  gospel.

I.  The  hanneb  in  which  the  poweb  of  God  has  been  displayed  toward  us.
**  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not  according  to  our  works,
but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before
the  world  began."  1.  The  power  of  Ood  has  been  displayed  toward  us  in  salvation,
God  is  the  Author  of  salvation  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense,  as  including  both
its  impetration  and  its  application.  The  salvation  may  be  said  to  precede  the  ^ling,
as  (1)  it  has  its  origin  in  the  **  purpose  of  God,'*  (2)  as  Christ  has  procured  it  by  his
death.  2.  It  has  been  displayed  in  our  calling.  (1)  The  call  is  the  act  of  the  Father
(Gal.  i.  6).  (2)  It  is  a  '*  holy  calling,"  (a)  as  its  Author  is  holy ;  (b)  it  is  a  call  to
holiness;  (c)  the  called  are  enabled  to  live  holy  lives.  3.  The  principle  or  condition
of  our  salvation,  "  Not  according  to  our  works."  (1)  Negatively,  Works  are  not
(a)  the  moving  cause  of  it,  which  is  the  love  and  favour  of  God  (John  iii.  16) ;  (b)  nor
are  they  the  procuring  cause,  which  is  the  obedience  and  death  of  Christ  (Rom.  iiL
21 — 26) ;  (c)  nor  do  they  help  in  the  application  of  salvation ;  for  works  done  before
our  calling  are  not  good,  being  without  faith;  and  works  done  after  it  are  the  fruits
of  our  calling,  and  therefore  not  the  cause  of  it  (2)  Positively,  **But  according  to
liis  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  before  the  world  began."
Salvation  has  thus  a  double  aspect,  (a)  It  is  *'  according  to  the  purpose  of  God.**  It
is  a  gift  from  eternity ;  for  it  was  "  before  the  world  began,'*  and  therefore  it  was  not
dependent  upon  man's  works.  (6)  It  is  according  to  "  his  grace,  which  was  given  us  in
Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."  Though  those  to  whom  it  was  given  were  not
in  existence,  they  existed  in  Ciirist  as  the  covenant  Head  and  Representative  of  his
people.    They  were  chosen  in  him  (Eph.  i.  4).

II.  The  manifestation  of  this  purpose  and  grace  in  the  incarnation  and
WORK  OF  Christ.  "  But  manifested  now  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."
1.  Tlie  nature  of  this  manifestation.  It  included  (1)  the  Incarnation ;  for  the  Son  of
Ood  appeared  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  make  known  the  **  mystery  hid  from  ages,"  even
himself — "  the  Hope  of  glory  " — to  both  Jew  and  Gentile ;  (2)  the  work  of  Christ,  in  the
obedience  of  his  life  and  the  suffering  of  his  death — in  a  word,  the  whole  work  of  redemp-
tion. 2.  The  effects  of  this  manifestation.  '*  Who  abolished  death,  and  brought  to  light
life  and  incorruptibility  by  means  of  the  gospel."  (1)  Its  action  upon  death.  It  has
abolished  or  made  it  of  none  cfTect.  Death  is  regarded  both  in  its  physical  and  its
ethical  aspects,  (a)  In  its  physical  aspects,  Christ  has  (a)  deprived  it  of  its  sting,  and
made  it  a  blessing  to  believers  (Heb.  ii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55),  and  (iB)  secured  its  ultimate
abolition  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  (Jb)  In  its  ethical  aspects,  as  working  through  a  law  of  sin  and
death,  Christ  has  caused  us  '*  to  pass  from  death  unto  life"  in  regeneration  (1  John  iii.
14),  and  secured  us  from  "the  second  death"  (Rev.  ii.  11).  ^2)  Its  revelation  of  life
■and  incorruptibility,  (a)  Life  here  is  the  true  life,  over  which  aeath  has  no  power — ^the
tiew  and  blessed  life  of  the  Spirit.  This  was,  in  a  sense,  known  to  the  Old  Testament
"saints ;  but  Christ  exhibited  it,  in  its  resurrection-aspect,  after  he  rose  from  the  dead.
It  was  in  virtue  of  his  resurrection,  indeed,  that  the  saints  of  the  old  economy  had  life
at  all.  But  they  did  not  see  it  as  we  see  it.  Qi)  Incorruptibility.  Not  in  reference  to
the  risen  body,  but  to  the  life  of  the  soul,  in  its  imperishable  qualities,  in  its  perfect


10  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [csh.  1. 1— 18,

ezamption  from  death  (1  Pet  i.  4 ;  Ber.  zxi.  4).  (c)  The  means  of  this  rerelation  i&
the  goapel,  which  makes  this  life  perfeetly  known  to  men,  as  to  its  nature,  as  to  the
Wi^  into  it,  as  to  the  persons  for  wnom  it  is  prepared  or  designed.

IIL  The  ookkkotion  op  the  apostle  with  thib  betelation  of  lifb.  **  For  which
I  was  appointed  a  herald  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher  of  the  QentUes."  He  rehearses,
his  titles  of  dignity  at  the  Tsry  time  that  he  points  to  them  as  entailing  suffering  upon
him.— T,  C.


Yer.  12. — The  groundi  of  hi$  joyful  cor^fidenoe  under  aU  hU  Bufftrings.  L  His
▲F06TLE8HIP  WAS  THE  CAUSE  OP  BIB  BUPFEBnroB.  ^  For  whioh  cause  I  also  am  snffering
these  things  " — imprisonment,  solitude,  the  hatred  of  Jew  and  Gkntile.  He  estranged
the  Jews  oy  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  and  he  offended  the  Gentiles  by
denouncing  their  idolatries  and  undermining  their  lucrative  superstitions.

n.  He  owks  no  shame  jx  the  gospel.  It  may  be  an  offence  to  the  Greek  and  a
stumbling-block  to  the  Jew ;  but  he  is  not  ashamed  of  it,  becanse  he  is  not  ashamed:
1.  Cf  iU  Author.  2.  0/  iU  truths  and  ordinancei.  3.  0/  his  own  faith  in  it  ^  Of
hit  »uffering§for  it.

IIL  The  season  why  he  is  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel.  '*  For  I  know  whom
I  have  trusted,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  my  deposit  till  that  day."  1.
He  knows  ?Us  Bedeemer  through  faith  and  love  and  experience.  It  is  ^  eternal  Ufe  **  to
know  him  (John  xyiL  3).  It  is  not  that  he  merely  knows  of  him,  but  he  knows  him —
what  he  is,  what  he  can  do,  what  he  has  promised  to  do— cmd  therefore  he  can  trust
him.  2.  His  trust  is  in  a  known  Person,  (l)  The  apostle  would  have  been  very  foolish
to  trust  an  unknown  person.  We  distrust  strangers.  We  will  only  entrust  that  which,
is  dear  to  us— our  children  or  our  money — to  those  known  to  us.  (2)  There  are  foolish
people  who  think  it  a  wiser,  as  well  as  a  more  meritorious  thing,  to  believe  without
knowledge ;  like  the  Spanish  Jesuit  who  said,  ^  I  believe  in  this  doctrine,  not  in  spite
of  its  impossibility,  but  because  it  is  impossible."  The  apostle  held  a  very  different
view.  (3)  There  are  some  people  of  whom  we  may  say  that  the  more  they  are  knowa
the  less  are  they  trusted.  A  fuller  experience  discovers  flaws  in  their  character  forbidding
confidence.  But  our  Saviour  is  One  who  is  trusted  the  more  he  is  known,  in  all  the
various  circumstances  of  human  life.  3.  The  apostle  has  placed  his  soul,  as  a  precious
deposit^  in  the  hands  of  Christ,  with  the  assurance  of  its  perfect  safety.  '*  I  am  per-
suaded that  he  is  able  to  keep  my  deposit  till  that  day."  Several  circumstances  enhance
the  significance  of  this  act  of  the  apostle.  (1)  The  value  of  the  deposit.  What  can  be
more  precious  than  the  soul  ?  (Mark  viii.  37).  (2)  The  danger  of  its  loss.  The  soul  is  a
lost  thing,  and  but  for  grace  eternally  so.  (3)  The  sinner  feels  the  deposit  is  not  safe
with  himself.  Man  cannot,  any  more  than  man's  brother,  save  his  own  soul.  (4)  Who
will  take  charge  of  this  deposit  ?  Many  shrink  from  responsibility  in  cases  of  a  difficult
and  delicate  nature.  Buttfesus  Christ  has  undertaken  for  us ;  he  will  take  us  completely
in  charge ;  he  will  keep  our  deposit  till  the  day  of  judgment  (5)  Mark  the  limit  of
time  as  to  the  safety  of  the  deposit — '*  till  that  day."  No  day  short  of  that — not  even
the  day  of  death ;  tor  the  completed  glory  is  reserved  for  the  day  of  judgment.  That
will  be  the  day  for  the  bestowal  of  the  crown  of  lile.  4.  Mark  the  assurance  of  the
apostle  OS  to  the  safety  of  his  deposit.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  my
deposit."  This  shows  (1)  that  assurance  is  a  possible  attainment  (1  John  v*  13) ;
(2)  that  it  is  a  cheering  and  sustaining  experience.*-T.  C.

Ver.  13. — Importance  of  th  eform  of  sound  words.    "  Hold  the  pattern  of  sound  words."^
I.  This  ikjunction  implies  that  the  doctbines  of  the  gospel  had  been  already

MOULDED    into   A    CEBTAIN    SHAPE   OB   SYSTEM   WHICH   WAS    EASILY  GBA8PED   BY   THE!

fofulab  MIND.  As  necessity  arose,  there  was  a  restatement,  in  a  new  form,  of  the
fiuth  once  professed  so  as  to  neutralize  false  theories.  Thus  the  Apostle  John  recast  the
doctrine  of  Christ's  manifestation  in  the  world  in  his  Epistles.  There  are  other  examples
of  such  restatement.  As  errorists  often  seduce  by  an  adroit  use  of  words,  it  beoomea
necessary  to  have  *'  a  pattern  of  sound  words,"  not  merely  as  a  witness  for  the  truth,  but
as  a  protest  against  error.  Timothy  was  in  this  case  to  adhere  to  the  form  of  what  he
had  neard  from  the  apostle,  and  received  with  such  '*  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ
Jesns.**


CH.L1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  11


II.  The  use  of  such  a  fobm.  1.  It  teas  a  centre  of  doctrinal  unity  to  the  Church.
2.  It  exhibited  the  truth  in  a  consistent  light  to  the  world,  3.  It  afforded  a  rallying-pcint
in  the  conflict  with  systems  of  error.    4.  It  tended  to  spiritual  stability, — T.  C.

Ver.  14. — The  importance  of  preserving  the  precious  deposit  of  doctrine,    I.  Thebe

•  18  A  8T8TEH  OF  TRUTH  DEPOSITED  IN  THE  HAND8  OF  THE  ChUBCH.      ''  That  gOOd  deposit

,  Iceep  through  the  Holy  Ghost  who  dwelleth  ia  us."    1.  The  truth  is  not  discovered  by
:  the  Churchy  but  deposited  in  its  keeping.    This  is  the  significance  of  the  words  of  Jude,
^when  he  speaks  of  '*  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."  That  is  (1)  *Uhe  faith" — ^a
system  of  gospel  doctrines  recognized  by  the  Church  at  large ;  (2)  '*  delivered,"  not  dis-
covered or  elaborated  out  of  the  Christian  consciousness;  (3)  ''once"  delivered,  in
.  reference  to  the  point  of  time  when  the  revelation  was  made  by  inspired  men ;  (4)
deposited  in  the  hands  of  men — *'  to  the  saints  " — as  trustees,  for  its  safe  keeping.    It
is  "  a  good  deposit ; "  good  in  its  Author,  its  matter,  its  results,  its  end.

U.   It   18  THE    DUTY   OF    HIIOSTEBS  AND   MEMBERS  OF   THE    ChUBCH  TO   KEEP    THIS

DEPOSIT.  1.  They  ought  to  do  it,  because  it  is  a  commanded  duty,  2.  Because  it  is  for
the  Churches  edification^  wfety^  and  staJbHity,  3.  Because  it  is  for  the  glory  of  Ood,
4.  They  cannot  do  it  except  in  the  power  of  "  the  Holy  Ghost  who  dtodleth  in  us,"
(1)  Because  he  leads  us  into  all  truth ;  (2)  because  he  by  the  truth  builds  up  the  Church
as  "  a  habitation  of  God ; "  (3)  because  he  gives  the  insight  and  the  courtage  by  which
believers  are  enabled  to  reject  the  adulterations  and  mixtures  of  false  systems.— T.  C.

Ver.  15. — The  Asiatic  desertion  of  the  apostle.  He  reminds  Timothy  of  a  fact  well
known  to  him  already,  that  he  had  suifered  from  a  melancholy  desertion  of  friends.

I.  The  natube  and  extent  of  his  loss.    *'A11  who  are  in  Asia  turned  away
from  me."  1.  As  to  its  nature.   It  was  not  a  repudiation  of  Christianity.   It  was  a  deser-
tion of  the  apostle  himself,  either  through  fear  of  persecution,  or  through  a  repudiation
of  his  catholic  ideas  on  behalf  of  the  Gentiles.    The  Christian  Jews  seem  every  where  •
to  have  forsaken  him.    In  one  of  bis  prison-letters  he  can  only  name  two  or  three
Jews  who  were  a  comfort  to  him  in  the  gospel  (Col.  iv.  11).    2.  As  to  its  extent.    The
Asiatic  desertion  may  have  probably  taxen  place  in  Rome  itself,  probably  at  a  time
when  his  life,  and  that  of  all  Christians,  was  threatened  by  Nero ;  probably  at  the  time,
referred  to  in  the  end  of  this  Epistle,  when  he  could  say,  '*  No  man  stood  by  me ;  all'
men  forsook  me."   Those  who  would  identify  themselves  with  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles
at  such  a  time  would  probably  be  Gentiles  rather  than  Jews.     Thus  the  number  of.
the  deserters  might  not  be  great.    If  the  desertion  took  place  in  Asia  Minor,  it  would'
only  suggest  a  widespread  falling  away  from  the  aged  prisoner  at  Rome,  but  not  from
the  gospel    The  apostle  singles  out  two  persons  quite  unknown  to  us — *'  Phygelus  and
Hermogenes  " — as  the  ringleaders  of  this  movement.    The  fact  that  so  few  names  are
mentioned  tends  to  reduce  the  extent  of  the  sad  misfortune.

U.  The  effect  of  this  desebtion.  The  apostle  does  not  dwell  upon  it,  but  rather
dismisses  the  deserters  in  a  single  sentence.  Yet :  1.  It  would  be  a  severe  trial  to  the
faith  of  the  aged  apostle  in  his  dying  days.  The  desertion  of  friends  is  always  a  sore
trial,  but  when  the  friendship  is  cemented  by  religion,  its  intensity  is  peculiarly
enhanced.  2.  The  apostle  refers  to  it  with  the  view  of  stimulating  Timothy  to  still
greater  courage  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel. — T.  C.

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  praiseworthy  conduct  of  Onesiphorus,  In  contrast  with  th«
Asiatic  deserters,  he  dwells  upon  the  kindly  sympathy  of  one  Asiatic  Christian  whom
he  had  long  known  at  Ephesus.

I.  The  kindness  of  Onesiphorus.  '*  He  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of
my  chain :  but,  when  he  was  at  Rome,  he  sought  me  out  very  diligently,  and  found
me."  1.  TJie  apostle,  as  well  as  Timothy,  had  had  an  earlier  experience  of  this  good
man,  who  was  probably  an  Ephesian  merchant,  who  went  from  time  to  time  to  Rome
to  do  business,  for  he  says,  *'  In  how  many  things  he  ministered  at  Ephesus,  thou
knowest  very  well."  2.  lie  did  not  probably  come  to  Borne  from  Ephesus  for  the  special
purpose  of  visiting  the  apostle,  but^  having  found  himself  there,  he  made  it  his  business
to  visit  the  apostle.  (1)  He  took  pains  to  find  out  the  apostle.  "  He  sought  me  out  very
diligently."    Why  was  it  so  difiScolt  to  discover  the  prison  in  which  the  apostle  was


12  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [oh,  i.  1—18.

confined  ?  There  were  many  prisons  in  Borne,  and  he  may  have  been  transferred  from
vriaon  to  prison.  But  where  were  the  Boman  Christians  who  met  the  apostle  on  his
first  visit  to  the  city,  that  they  could  not  inform  Ooesiphorus  of  the  place  of  the  impri-
sonment? Had  they  too  turned  away  from  him?  Or  had  Nero  struck  an  unworthy
tenor  into  their  hearts?  Onesiphorus  persevered,  however,  in  his  search,  and  found
him  in  his  prison.  (2^  He  **  oft  refreshed  the  apostle,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  his
^hain."  This  implies  (a)  that  he  visited  him  more  than  once;  (6)  that  the  imprisonment,
though  severe,  did  not  quite  debar  all  access  to  the  outside  world ;  (c)  that  the  Christians
at  Borne  were  impliedly  ashamed  of  the  apostles'  chain,  else  such  prominence  would
not  have  been  given  to  the  kindness  and  courage  of  this  noble  Ephesian  saint.

II.  The  betubn  weigh  the  afobtle  makes  fob  the  kindness  of  Onesifhobub.
"  The  Lord  give  mercy  to  the  house  of  Onesiphorus  •  .  •  the  Lord  grant  unto  him  that
he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day.  He  cannot  make  any  other  return  for
kindness  than  a  fervent  prayer  for  Onesiphorus  and  for  his  family.  1.  The  prayer
suggests  ihcU  though  the  apoatleisshut  up  from  the  tvorld,  the  way  to  heaven  is  itUl  cpen»
He  cannot  pay  his  visitor  the  compliment  of  seeing  him  to  the  door,  but  he  can  remember
him  at  a  throne  of  grace.  2.  Me  remembers  the  hotisehold  of  this  good  man.  What
blessings  descend  upon  householders  who  are  blessed  with  such  a  head  I  The  apostle
prays  for  *'  mercy  "  on  this  happy  household.  Every  blessing  is  included  in  the  term.
3.  The  prayer  for  Onesiphorus  himself  is  likewise  a  prayer  for  mercy.  Some  have
inferred  that  he  was  now  dead,  and  that  we  have  here  an  example  of  prayer  for  a  dead
roan.  The  supposition  is  entirely  gratuitous.  Onesiphorus  may  have  been  absent  from
Ephesus,  as  he  necessarily  was  on  his  visit  to  the  apostle.  Besides,  his  visit  to  the  apostln
must  have  occurred  only  a  very  short  time  previously,  for  it  is  admitted  on  all  hands
that  the  apostle's  last  imprisonment  was  very  brief,  and  it  is  rather  improbable  that
Onesiphorus  should  have  died  immediately  after  his  visit  to  Home,  or  that  the  apostle
should  have  heard  of  it.  Onesiphorus  would  have  the  blessing  promised  by  our  Lord
in  the  memorable  saying,  "  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  visited  mc." — ^T.  C*

Ver.  1. — "  The  promise  of  life^^  It  was  an  age  of  death  when  St.  Paul  wrote  this
Epistle.  Beneath  all  the  gaieties  of  Boman  civilization  there  was  decay  of  morals,  and
corruption  of  the  inner  life.  Suicide,  as  we  have  seen,  was  common  iu  Home,  and  men,
tired  of  themselves,  and  disbelieving  alike  in  present  or  in  future  joy,  put  an  end
to  their  earthly  existence.  St.  Paul  was  now  enduring  his  second  imprisonment  at
Bome.  In  the  year  a.d.  63  the  great  conflagration,  for  which  that  master  of  crime,
Nero,  was  responsible,  took  place,  burning  half  the  city.  He  falsely  charged  his  ovm
crime  on  the  Christians,  some  of  whom  were  covered  with  the  skins  of  beasts  and  thrown
to  the  dogs;  some  were  covered  with  inflammable  materials,  and  burnt  as  human
torches,  which  illuminated  the  gardens ;  while  the  bestial  Nero  drove  abroad  in  his
chariot,  and  indulged  his  base  delight  in  the  carnival  of  fire  and  blood.  St.  Paul,
knowing  his  own  end  to  be  near  at  hand,  in  a  city  where  his  second  imprisonment  had
become  much  more  severe  than  the  first  one  had  been,  had  now  no  opportunity  of
preachinof,  as  he  did  under  the  milder  treatment  he  was  subjected  to  before,  and  gives  this
second  charge  to  Timothy,  whom  he  exhorts  to  be  courageous  and  earnest  in  the  defence
and  proclamation  of  a  faith  which  the  imprisoned  apostle  could  proclaim  no  more.

I.  The  promise  of  life  is  spoken  of  as  the  revelation  of  Christ.  It  is  in
Christ  Jesus.  That  is  to  say,  we  as  believers  have  in  vital  union  with  him,  the  pledge
and  promise  of  immortality.  No  power  of  earth  or  hell  could  touch  that  life.  St.  Paul
feared  not  those  who  could  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  had  no  more  that  they  could
do.  He  knew  that  the  life  within  no  sword  or  flame  could  slay,  and  he  rejoices  in
the  triumph  of  faith  in  Christ.

II.  The  promise  of  life  is  spoken  of  as  a  developing  power.  It  was  a  promise,
an  earnest,  of  the  inheritance.  He  was  yet  to  have  life  more  abundantly.  He  looked
forward  to  a  time  when  his  environment  would  be  heavenly  in  its  atmosphere,  and  ever
without  the  blight  of  sin  or  the  blastings  of  temptation,  he  should  enjoy  the  fruition  of
life  at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  3. — TJie  inner  self,  "With  pure  conscience."  There  is  no  music  in  the  world
comparable  to  this.    It  is  "  the  voice  of  melody,"  and  it  enabled  Paul  and  Silas  to  sing


CH.I.1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  13

in  prison.    The  conscience,  "  that  sole  monarchy  in  man,"  was  supreme  in  his  nature
under  the  Lordship  of  Christ.

L  It  was  a  cleansed  conscience,  and  so  pube.  St.  Paul  is  never  weary  of  preaching
the  great  doctrine  of  the  atonement — that  we  are  redeemed  and  renewed  through  the

Erecious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  he  rejoices  to  know  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  Ood's
on,  deanseth  from  all  sin.

II.  It  was  an  obeyed  conscience,  and  so  pure.  We  have  to  consider  that  the
conscience  may  speak  truly  and  authoritatively,  and  be  enlightened  by  the  truth,
and  yet  we  may  not  obey  the  truth ;  for  duty  may  be  recognized  as  duty,  and  yet
not  discharged  as  such.  Conscience  may  not  be  pure  as  regards  the  question  of
accountability.

III.  It  was  filled  with  the  Spirit,  and  so  pure.  "The  Holy  Ghost  which
dwelleth  in  us"  is  an  expression  of  St.  Paul's;  and  only  so  far  as  we  have  the
*' indwelling  of  the  Spirit"  in  thought,  imagination,  conscience,  and  desire,  can  we  be
said  to  be  pare  within. — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — A  holy  ancestry.  **  Thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice."  We
were  constituted  to  be  influenced  through  the  family  relationship,  and  it  is  sad  indeed
when  the  young  break  away  from  a  religious  ancestry,  and  forsake  their  fathers'  God.

L  Here  is  already  an  historic  pedigree  of  Christian  people.  The  gospel  had
been  long  enough  in  the  world  to  have  a  history  in  families.  We  find  three  generations
here.    The  grandmother  Lois,  the  mother  Eunice,  and  "  thee  also."

II.  Here  is  the  true  spirit  of  the  gospel  manifested.  Unfeigned  faith,  or
undissembled  faith.  No  mere  creed.  No  mere  appearance  of  piety.  In  that  age  men
of  education  despised  the  pagan  faiths  which  they  yet  professed  to  believe.  They
kept  up  their  actual  adherence  to  heathen  worship  beoiuse  of  custom  or  family
tradition,  or  because  they  believed  religion  in  some  sort  to  be  the  protective  police  of
society,  without  which  there  would  be  revolution.  This  unfeigned  faith  was  the
faith  of  conviction — the  faith  that  so  believed  in  the  risen  Christ  that  it  could  endure
persecution  and  suffer  loss,  and  live  or  die  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  with  the  sure  liope  of
eternal  life, — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Quickening  the  memory,  "  I  put  thee  in  remembrance."  Timothy  was  not
to  create  a  gospel,  but  to  preach  one.  The  facts  and  doctrines  were  matters  of  revelation,
and  Timothy  bad  the  humbler  task  of  expanding  and  applying  them.  All  through
his  gospel  was  to  be  that  of  the  faith  once  delivercMi  to  the  saints.

I.  Remembrance  is  needed.  Why  ?  Memory  is  liable  to  slumber  and  to  sleep.  Do
we  mourn  over  this  fact,  and  ask  why  this  precious  faculty  was  not  stronger  ?  Consider  1
Could  you  live  in  peace  or  joy  at  all,  if  all  your  sorrows  and  bereavements  kept  their
clear  details  before  your  mind  ?  No ;  their  harrowing  spectacles  would  deaden  all  the
springs  of  life,  and  crush  the  heart.  If  those  past  griefs  preserved  their  fulness  life
would  be  unendurable.  There  is  a  beautiful  side,  therefore,  even  to  forge tfulness.
Memory  may  slumber,  but  it  does  not  die.  It  may  be  awakened  and  quickened  for
high  and  noble  ends.  Thus  all  Christians  need  to  be  "  put  in  remembrance/'  that  they
may  hold  fast  the  Word  of  life.

II.  Kemembrance  is  comprehensive.  There  are  many  springs  to  be  touched.  We
become  proud,  and  need  to  remember,  as  the  Hebrews  did,  that  we  "  were  slaves."  We
become  self-dependent,  and  need  to  be  reminded  that  **  without  Christ  we  can  do
nothing.**  We  become  so  interested  in  life  that  we  try  to  make  "  home "  here,  and
forget  that  we  are  pilgrims  and  strangers.  We  become  negligent,  and  forget  that
responsibility  is  great  and  time  is  short. — W.  M.  S,

Ver.  6. — Stirring  the  fire,  "Stir  up  the  gift  that  is  in  thee.**  Literally,  " stir  up
(ivaCwm/pciK)  the  fire !  **  There  may  be  fuel — even  of  God*s  Word — but  all  fires  die  out
unless  from  time  to  time  they  are  stirred  up.

I.  The  fire  was  there.  His  heart's  altar  fire  had  been  lighted.  It  had  descended
as  a  Divine  fiame  from  on  high.  But  in  the  best  of  men  there  is  danger  of  absence  of
watchfulness,  for,  like  the  light  on  the  Jewish  altar,  the  fire  is  not  to  die  out  night
nor  day.


14  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  i.  1—18.

II.  ThEBB   WKBB    XAKT  ENBMIB8  WHO  WOULD  QUENCH   THE    FIEB.      The  Jodfthdllg

teachers  would  have  put  out  the  true  gospel  light,  by  turning  the  gospel  into  a  merely
refined  Judaism.  The  world  would  quench  it^  as  it  did  the  faith  of  Demas.  And
there  is  in  us  all  the  danger  of  spiritual  slumber,  which  leaves  the  fire  to  die  oat  by
Indolence  and  sloth.  Therefore  by  meditation,  by  prayer,  and  by  earnest  endeavour,
by  admiration  and  emulation  of  heroic  liveSy  we  must  '*  stir  up  the  fire  *  that  is  in
m.— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — li,'^Addre8$  and  tdlutation.  **  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Christ  Jesus  by  the
will  of  Gk)d,  according  to  the  promise  of  the  life  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  Timothy,
my  beloved  child :  Grace,  mercy,  peace,  from  Gk)d  the  Father  and  Christ  Jesus  our
Lord."  The  language  is  similar  to  what  is  found  in  other  of  Paul's  Epistles.  The
peculiarity  is  that  his  apostleship  is  here  associated  with  the  promise  of  the  goepel,
which  like  a  rainbow  spans  our  sky  in  this  dark  world.  It  is  the  promise  by  pre-
eminence ;  for  its  object  is  life,  which  is  a  name  for  all  that  can  be  needed  here,  or
manifested  under  better  conditions.  It  is  a  pronuse  which  has  actually  secured  sure
footUig  in  Christ  Jeeus,  being  the  realization  of  the  sure  mercies  of  David.  But,  in
<nder  that  this  promise  may  become  the  means  of  life  to  men,  it  must  be  proclaimed ;
and  this  points  to  the  employment  of  an  instrumentality  by  GtxL  It  was  according  to
the  promise  in  this  view  that  Paul  was  employed  as  an  apostle.  It  is  further  to  be
observed  that  his  true  child  ia  the  First  Epistle  is  here  his  hehved  child.  If  the  one
points  to  the  possession  of  his  spirit,  the  other  points  to  the  love  that  is  properly  founded
on  it.     Oood  past  to  hefdUowed  hy  a  good  future,

I.  Thanksgivino.  1.  Personal  association  in  giving  thanks.  *'  I  thank  Ch)d,  whom
I  serve  from  my  forefathers  in  a  pure  conscience.**  Ue  implies  that  Judaism  was  the
forerunner  of  Christianity,  and  lays  claim  to  the  possession  of  a  godly  ancestry.  The
pure  conscience  (notwithstanding  Acts  xxiii.  1)  is  not  to  be  absolutely  applied  to  his
whole  life.  He  did  turn  aside  from  the  godly  direction  in  an  unenlightened  and
culpable  resistance  to  Christianity  as  seeming  to  threaten  the  existence  of  his  inherited
and  beloved  Judaism.  But  in  the  Christian  position  which  he  had  so  long  maintained,
ns  he  had  been  indebted  to  godly  forefathers,  so  he  had  preserved  the  godly  continuity
in  his  family.  It  is  in  view  of  what  he  has  to  say  about  Timothy  that  he  makes  this
pleasing  and  interesting  reference  to  his  forefathers.  2.  Feelings  toward  Timothy  in
giving  thanks  for  him,  "How  unceasing  is  my  remembrance  of  thee  in  my  supplica-
tions, night  and  day  longing  to  see  thee,  remembering  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be  filled
with  joy.*'  Always  in  the  underground  of  the  apostle's  consciousness,  the  thought  of  his
beloved  Timothy  came  up  uninterruptedly  at  his  times  of  devotion.  Every  night  and
morning  he  felt  the  spell — so  tender  was  this  strong  man's  heart — of  the  tears  shed  by
Timothy  at  their  parting ;  and  the  desire  rose  within  him  that  he  might  be  filled  with
the  joy  of  another  meeting.  3.  Matter  for  thanksgiving  in  Timothy's  faith  which  was
hereditary,  **  Having  been  reminded  of  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  thee ;  which  dwelt
first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  thy  mother  Eunice ;  and,  I  am  persuaded,  in  thee  also."
Something  had  come  to  the  apostle's  knowledge  which  reminded  him  of  the  reality  of
Timothy's  faith.  It  was  not  feigned  faith,  that  fails  under  trial.  The  apostle  thinks
of  it  as  a  kind  of  heirloom  in  the  family.  He  could  go  back  himself  to  two  ancestresses
of  his  in  whom  it  dwelt.  There  was  first  Lois,  his  grandmother,  who,  we  can  believe,
besides  being  godly  according  to  the  Jewish  type,  was  before  her  end  a  Christian
believer.  She  had  to  do  with  her  daughter  Eunice  becoming  a  Christian  believer.
We  are  told  of  Eunice,  in  Acts  xvi.  1,  that  she  was  a  Jewess  who  believed,  while  her
husband  was  a  Gentile.  She  in  turn  had  to  do  with  her  son  becoming  a  Christian
believer.  The  ajwstle  had  all  the  greater  confidence  in  the  reality,  and  also  vitality,  of
Timothy's  faith  that  (apart  from  Jewish  influences  of  a  godly  nature)  he  was  a  Christian
believer  of  the  third  generation.  We  have  the  promise  that  God  will  keep  covenant
and  mercy  with  them  that  love  him  and  keep  his  commandments  to  a  thousand
generations.  God's  intention  is  that  godly  and  Christian  influence  should  be  transmitted.
He  made  one  generation  to  follow  another,  proceeded  on  a  principle  of  succession  and
not  of  contemporaneousness,  that  he  might  thereby  have  a  godly  seed  (Mai.  ii.  15).
The  best  established  Christians  are  among  those  who  are  of  a  godly  stock.  Therefore
let  the  goilly  upbringing  of  the  young  be  attended  to.    At  the  same  time,  let  those


CH.I.1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  15


■vrho  have  had  the  advantage  of  a  godly  upbringing  see  that  they  are  not  left  behind  by
those  who  have  been  reclaimed  from  ungodly  society.

U.  Exhortation.  1.  Timothy  is  to  stir  up  his  gift,  "  For  the  which  cause  I  put  thee
in  remembrance  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  thee  through  the  laying
on  of  my  hands."  Paul  is  an  adept  at  exhortation.  Timothy,  from  the  memory  of  Lois
and  EuDice,  must  catch  fire.  Nay,  he  had  a  personal  association  with  Timothy,  in
having  laid  hands  on  him  at  his  ordination.  On  that  ground  he  can  call  upon  him  to
stir  up  the  gift  then  received,  viz.  the  ministerial  gift.  Let  him  be  true  to  his  duties
as  a  minister  of  Christ.  2.  Confirmatory  reason  pointing  to  special  exhortation,  **  For
God  gave  us  not  a  spirit  of  fearfnlness ;  but  of  power  and  love  and  discipline."  Let
him  stir  himself  up  against  cowardice  to  which,  as  persecuted,  he  was  exposed,  and  by
this  consideration  that  the  imparted  spirit  in  its  amplitude  excludes  cowardice.  It  is  a
spirit  of  power,  6k)d  has  no  jealousy  of  us ;  he  wishes  to  be  served  with  oar  strength
and  not  with  our  weakness.  It  is  a  spirit  of  love ;  warmth  of  feeling,  and  not  coldness,
Ood  would  put  into  our  service.  It  is  a  spirit  of  discipline.  So  far  as  this  is  to  be
distinguished  from  the  other  two  words,  it  points  to  the  guidance  of  reason.  God
wishes  to  be  served,  not  with  our  ignorance,  but  with  our  well-disciplined  thoughts.
With  more  power  in  our  wills,  with  more  glow  in  our  affections,  with  more  reason  in
our  thoughts,  we  shall  not  cower  before  opposition.  3.  Timothy  is  called  upon  to  he
specially  on  his  guard  against  fcUse  shame,  *'  Be  not  ashamed  therefore  of  the  testimony
of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner :  but  suffer  hardship  with  the  gospel."  "  Shame
attends  fear ;  when  fear  is  conquered  false  shame  takes  flight "  (Bengell  He  had  no
reason  for  being  ashamed  on  account  of  his  association  with  the  Lord  to  whom  he
testified.  Neither  had  he  reason  for  being  ashamed  on  account  of  his  association  with
Paul,  who  was  not  the  Lord's  servant,  but,  more  honourably  (Gal.  vi.  17),  the  Lord's
prisoner,  i.e,  by  the  will  of  Christ,  more  than  by  the  will  of  Csesar — a  prisoner,  the
disposal  of  him  extending  to  the  time,  and  all  the  circumstances,  of  his  imprisonment.
To  suffer  hardship  with  the  gospel  involves  an  imusual  collocation  of  person  and  thing.
It  is  usual  to  interpret  the  hardship  as  being  sufiered  with  Paul  for  the  gospel.  But
OS  the  thought  requires  the  fixing  of  the  attention,  not  on  the  second,  but  on  both  of  the

E receding  clauses,  it  is  better  to  leave  indefinite  with  whom  he  is  associated  in  sufifering
ardship.  4.  Heason  against  false  shame  in  the  power  of  God,  **  According  to  the  power
of  God."  The  idea  is  that  we  should  be  free  from  shame  in  suffering  for  the  gospel,
according  to  the  power  on  which  we  have  to  rely.  (1)  It  is  a  saving  power,  •*  Who
saved  us,  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling."  Power  has  already  been  displayed  toward
us  in  salvation,  which  we  can  think  of  as  completed  outside  of  us.  It  has  also  been
operative  within  us,  in  our  being  called.  When  our  unwillingness  to  accept  of  salvation
was  broken  down,  then  we  were  called  of  God.  It  was  with  a  holy  calling  that  we
were  called,  and  it  belongs  to  it  as  holy  that  we  should  be  above  shame  in  connection
with  Christ's  cause.  The  power  that  has  already  been  displayed  toward  us  is  all  in
the  direction  of  our  being  saved  from  this  shame.  (2)  It  is  a  free  power,  *'  Not
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given
us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  times  eternal."  It  is  a  power  that  is  not  determined  in  its
exercise  by  our  works  or  deservings.  It  was  according  to  his  own  purpose,  t.e.  not
from  outward  occasion,  but  arising  in  the  depths  of  his  own  being.  It  was  according
to  a  purpose  of  grace,  i.e,  in  which  sinners,  or  the  undeserving,  were  contemplated  as  in
need.  It  was  according  to  a  purpose  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus,  i.e,  in  which  there  was  a
looking  to  human  merit  only  as  in  Christ  It  was  according  to  a  purpose  of  grace
before  times  eternal,  i.e.  long  before  man  could  have  to  do  with  it.  Being  a  power  bo
entirely  pending  on  God,  we  can  have  confidence  that  it  will  go  out,  in  the  freest,  most
gracious  manner,  toward  us.  (3)  It  is  a  glorious  power.  "But  hath  now  been
manifested  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour  Christ  Jesus,  who  abolished  death,  and
brought  light  and  incorruption  to  light  through  the  gospel."  Hidden  in  God  in  eternity,
it  was  for  a  time  partially  manifested.  The  time  of  its  full  manifestation  corresponded
with  the  appearing  of  Christ,  which  was  also  the  medium  of  the  manifestation.  This
is  the  only  place  in  the  New  Testament  in  which  the  appearing  is  to  be  identified  with
the  Incarnation,  or  the  whole  of  Christ's  appearance  in  flesh.  That  appearing  was  as
one  of  the  weak  things  of  the  world.  Especially  did  Christ  seem  to  be  the  very
impersonation  of  weakness  when  he  was  on  the  cross.     And  yet  this  was  the  grandest


16  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  i.  1— 18L


display  of  power,  confounding  the  mighty ;  for  it  is  here  said  that  by  this  appearing  he
abolished  death.    He  appeared  in  flesh,  and  endured  death  in  all  its  reality,  and,  bj
doing  so,  he  has  made  it  no  longer  a  reality  to  his  people.    He  has  made  it  of  none
effect.   Ho  has  made  it  so  that  it  cannot  tyrannize  over  them.   And,  though  they  have
to  endure  death,  it  is  not  as  a  token  of  God's  displeasure,  but  as  his  wise  and  good
arrangement,  and  introductioa  into  a  state  from  which  death  is  for  ever  excluded.    The
positi?e  side  of  the  benefit  derived  from  the  appearing  is  presented  under  a  slightly
different  aspect.    It  is  renrded  as  presented  in  the  gospel.    And  as  death  is  a  dark
power,  so  the  gospel  is  a  light-giviDg  power.    What  it  has  brought  to  light  is  of  the
utmost  consequence.    It  is  Ufe,  and  life  with  the  superlative  quality  of  imperishableness.
Under  heathenism  men  had  no  right  conception  of  life.    Even  with  all  the  help  that
phUoBOphy  could  give  them,  the  meaning  of  life  was  dark  to  them.    The  gospel  has
shown  it  to  consist  in  the  &vour  of  God,  and  the  quickening  of  all  our  faculties  under
the  breath  of  his  Spirit.    But  specially  are  we  to  think  of  Ufe  in  its  imperishableness.
We  know  that,  to  tne  heathen  generally,  the  future  was  an  absolute  blank.    A  few  of
them  had  glimmerings,  not  of  a  resurrection,  but  of  the  survival  of  the  thinking  part»
wiUi  some  reward  for  the  good.    The  gospel  has  brought  immortality  into  the  full
dear  light.    It  has  given  us  the  certainty  of  our  existence  after  death.    It,  moreover,
holds  out  before  us  the  prospect  of  a  life  that  is  to  be  spent,  without  intermission  or
end,  in  the  sunshine  of  God's  love,  with  ever  increased  quickening  of  all  our  powers — a
life  in  which  there  will  be  a  reunion  of  soul  and  body,  of  which  already  we  have  the
earnest  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ.    It  is  our  great  privilege  that  we  live  under  this
light  of  the  gospel.    It  is  the  imperishableness  of  the  life  of  God  that  is  here  begun
that  has  power  to  nerve  the  soul,  even  to  martyrdom.    5.  Beason  against  false  shame
in  the  example  of  the  apostle,    (1)  Suffering  connected  with  his  office.    "  Wbereunto
I  was  a])pointcd  a  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher.     For  the  which  cause  I
suffer  also  these  things."    As  in  1  Tim.  ii.  8,  he  takes  a  threefold  designation  of  office.
As  preacher  or  herald,  it  was  his  duty  to  cry  aloud.    As  apostle,  he  was  specially
invested  with  authority.    As  teacher,  he  had  to  go  among  the  Gentiles.     It  was  a  glad
message  iu  relation  to  which  he  exercised  his  office,  and  it  should  have  brought  hia\
mauy  a  welcome.    "How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that
bringeth  good  tidings,  tbat  publisheth  peace  I"    But  it  brought  him  many  a  rebuff,  and
much  outward  disgrace;  for  at  this  time  he  was  suffering  his  second  imprisunment  in
Borne,  and  was  nearing  his  martyrdom.    (2)  Triumjyh  over  shame,     "  Yet  I  am  not
ashamed."    The  apostle  docs  not  exhort  I'imothy  without  setting  bim  an  example.
It  was  no  small  matter  to  him  to  be  counted  by  men  only  worthy  of  imprisonment,
and,  very  soon,  of  death.    But  he  was  so  much  impressed  with  the  supreme  im|X)rtanco
of  the  gospel,  that  he  heeded  not  the  shame.    (3)  His  personal  assurance.    Its  strength.
"For  I  know  him  whom  I  have  believed."    As  he  is  here  speaking  of  his  being  a
prisoner,  we  naturally  take  the  reference  to  he  to  him  whose  prisoner  in  the  eighth
verse  he  declared  himself  to  be,  viz.  the  Lord,    He  had  lived  a  life  of  faith  on  Christ;
and  he  could  speak  confidently,  from  his  own  experience  of  him.    Not  /  think  I  knowt
him,  but,  as  one  would  speak  of  a  friend  whom  he  has  long  and  intimately  lived  with^
I  know  him*    Without  experience  we  cannot  have  the  assurance  that  excludes  doubt.
Only  when  we  have  tried  Christ,  and  found  him  sufficient  for  us  in  all  positions  of  life»
can  we  rise  above  the  language  of  hesitation.    Its  weU-supported  nature.    "And  I  am
persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  guard  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that
day."    What  is  guarded  is  literally  my  deposit,  and,  as  in  the  thirteenth  verssc  "  deposit "
is  something  committed  to  Timothy,  so  some  would  think  here  of  something  committed
to  Paul^  viz.  his  stewardship.    But,  as  the  guardian  is  also  naturally  the  bolder,  wo
naturally  think  of  something  committed  by  Paul  to  Christ;  and  what  was  that  but  his
interest,  his  stake  in  the  future  world,  dependent  on  his  faithfulness  in  this  ?     How
did  Paul  know  that  it  would  not  turn  out  a  blank,  or  be  much  diminished  by  future
failure?    The  explanation  was  that  he  had  put  it  into  Christ's  hands, and  he  trusted  in
him  being  able  to  guard  it  for  him  against  tbat  day,  viz.  the  day  of  judgment,  wlien  it
would  become  irreversibly,  gloriously  his,  being  as  it  were  handed  back  to  him  by
Christ.    One  who  has  this  well-grounded  assurance  can  meet  death  even  triumphantly.
6.  Timothy  is  further  called  upon  to  attend  specially  to  his  orthodoxy.    (1)  ITie  pattern.
**  Hold  the  pattern  of  sound  words  which  thou  hast  heard  from  me,  in  laith  and  lovo


CH.I.1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  17

which  18  in  Christ  Jesus.'*  There  is  a  form  of  sound  words,  %,e.  there  is  a  correct
expression  of  truth  which  is  to  he  coveted,  because  on  this  depends  the  health  fulness
of  the  life.  To  this  form  Paul  had  shaped  his  preaching.  He  had  not  indulged  in
logomachies,  or  private  speculations,  or  adaptations  to  other  systems,  hut  he  had  kept
himself,  as  a  well-disciplined  thinker,  to  a  plain,  rational,  forcible  statement,  and
urging  of  what  he  believed  to  be  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  Timothy  was
familiar  with  his  truthful  and  healthful  style;  let  it  be  the  pattern  to  which  he
disciplined  his  thoughts  and  his  preachin$r.  He  could  only  hold  the  pattern  in  the
Christian  element  of  faith  and  love.  (2)  The  good  deposit.  **  That  good  thing  which
was  committed  unto  thee  guard  through  the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us.*'  This
is  the  same  thing  under  a  different  aspect,  viz.  the  talent  of  the  catholic  faith,  which  a
preacher  has  to  guard.  It  is  good,  has  vast  blessings  connected  with  it ;  therefore  it  is
not  to  be  neglected,  it  is  to  be  kept  from  all  mischances.  The  preacher  must  pray^
think,  use  the  help  of  the  rule  of  faith,  practise  himself.  But  all  nis  keeping,  to  oe  of
any  avail,  must  be  allowing  the  Holy  Ghost  to  keep,  who  is  not  far  to  seek,  but  is  an
Indweller  in  our  souls.  ''So  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep,"  delivers  him  from  the
consuming  restlessness  which  would  haunt  him,  if  the  keeping  simply  depended  oa
himself.— R.  P.

Vers.  15 — 18. — Contracts.  I.  Phyoelus  and  Hermogei?es.  **  This  thou  knowest,
that  all  that  are  in  Asia  turned  away  from  me ;  of  whom  are  Phygelus  and  Hermo-
genes."  The  defection  here  referred  to  was  from  Paul  and  his  interests.  It  extended
to  all  that  were  in  Asia,  i.e.  all  Asiatics  who  at  one  time  had  been  attached  to
the  apostle,  and  whose  attachment  was  put  to  the  test  when  in  Home  during  his
imprisonment.  It  was  to  have  been  expected  of  them  that  they  would  h&ve  found
their  way  to  his  dungeon ;  but,  as  if  they  had  put  it  to  themselves  whether  they  would
go  or  not,  they  chose  the  latter  alternative.  They  turned  away  from  him.  They
probably  found  some  excuse  in  the  pressure  of  business ;  but  in  the  real  character  of
their  action  it  was  turning  their  back  on  the  imprisoned  apostle.  In  this  not  very
numerous  class  Phygelus  and  Hcrmogenes  are  singled  out  for  notice,  probably  because
they  had  showed  the  greatest  unbrotherliness.  We  know  nothing  more  of  them  than
is  mentioned  here.  It  has  been  their  destiny  to  be  handed  down  to  posterity  as  men
who  acted  an  unworthy  part  toward  a  noble  man  in  his  extremity.  They  did  not  know
that  such  an  evil  immortality  was  to  attach  to  their  action ;  but  their  action  was  on
that  account  only  the  more  free.  Let  all  our  actions  be  upright  and  generous ;  for  we
do  not  know  by  which  of  them  we  shall  be  known  among  men.  This  defection  is
referred  to  Timothy  as  being  within  his  knowledge ;  for  by  their  example  he  was  to  be
deterred  from  cowardice,  and  his  bravery  was  to  be  ail  the  greater  that  these  men  were
cowards.

II.  Onesifhobub.  There  is  a  distinction  observed  between  the  house  of  Onesiphorus
and  Onesiphorus  himself.  With  regard  to  the  house  of  Onesiphorus  they  are  objects  of
present  interest.  Blessings  are  invoked  upon  them  in  the  sixteenth  verse,  to  the  mani*
lest  exclusion  of  Onesiphorus  himself.  At  the  close  of  the  Epistle  the  same  thing  is
observable :  **  Salute  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  With  regard  to  Onesiphorus  himself^
nothing  is  said  about  his  present :  the  past  tense  is  used  of  him,  and  a  wish  is  expressed
about  his  future.  It  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  certain  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead.
1.  Interest  in  departed  friends  shown  in  kindness  to  beloved  ones  left  behind,  **  The
Lord  grant  mercy  unto  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  There  are  around  us  the  three
circles  of  lovers,  friends,  acquaintances  (Ps.  txxxviii.  18).  Our  love  to  the  innermost
circle  is  to  be  most  intense,  which  it  can  be  without  interfering  with  our  love  to  the
second  circle  of  friends.  The  proper  cultivation  of  our  affections  in  our  homes  will  the-
better  qualify  us  for  loving  our  friends.  There  is  an  absence  of  reserve,  and  opennesa
to  influence,  in  friendship,  which  makes  it,  when  properly  based,  a  ereat  blessing.
There  are  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  friends  when  they  are  with  us,  and  our  duties  &k
not  end  with  their  death.  Onesiphorus  had  been  the  friend  of  Paul,  and,  now  that  he
is  gone,  the  large-hearted  apostle,  in  writing  to  Timothy  from  his  dungeon,  breathes  a
prayer  on  behalf  of  the  house  of  Onesiphorus.  The  Lord,  i.e.  Jesus  Christ,  the  great
Overseer  of  the  Churches,  and  Appointer  for  the  several  households  of  which  the  Churches
are  composed,  grant  them  mercy.    They  were  objects  of  sympathy,  in  being  deprived

II.  TIMOTHY.  0


18  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  l  1— la

of  their  earthly  head  on  whom  it  deroWed  to  provide  for  them,  to  assist  and  counsel
especially  the  beginners  in  life.    The  Lord  merdfully  make  up  for  them  what  they  had
lost    Would  this  prayer  return  from  heaven  unanswered?    Would  not  this  kindly
remembranoe  of  them,  read  in  their  desolate  home,  bring  good  cheer  to  their  hearta,  and
be  an  influence  for  good  in  all  their  future  life?    Would  it  not  also  be  the  means  of
ndsing  up  friends  for  them?    2.  Interest  in  the  living  founded  on  the  past  kindneee  ef
ike  dwd,    "  For  he  oft  refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  my  chain ;  but,  when  he
was  in  Rome,  he  sought  me  diligently,  and  found  me.**    This  was  after  his  first  answer,
apparently  during  his  second  imprisonment,  when  awaiting  his  second  answer.     Paul
leaned  very  mudi  on  human  sympathy.    On  one  occasion  he  said,  **  The  Lord  that
<x)mforteth  them  that  are  cast  down,  comforted  me  bv  the  coming  of  Titus.**    So  the
Lord  refreshed  him  by  those  visits  of  Onesiphorus.    This  friend  was  true  to  his  name ;
he  was  a  real  Ae^>-ftrtiijier— bringer  of  comfort  and  strength  to  the  great  warrior  whose
battles  were  nearly  over.    He  was  a  helper  in  presence  of  difficulties.    He  was  not
ashamed  of  his  chain,  t.e.  braved  all  the  dangers  connected  with  his  being  regarded  as
the  prisoner's  friend.    There  was  difficulty  of  access  to  him,  such  as  there  had  not  been
fkning  the  first  impriscmment,  when  he  had  his  own  hired  house,  and  received  all  that
CKme  to  him ;  but  Onesiphorus  sought  him  all  the  more  diligently  that  he  knew  of  his
imbefriended  condition,  and  overcame  all  official  hindrances.    In  the  strange  working
of  providence,  Onesiphorus  came  to  his  end  before  Paul,  but  his  good  deeds  lived  after
him,  and  caused  him  to  be  remembered  by  Paul,  and  in  that  form  which,  had  he  been
conscious  of  what  was  taking  place  on  earth,  would  have  been  most  pleasing  to  Onesi-
phorus.   And  this  was  not  to  be  wondered  at.    Onesiphorus  loved  his  nome  circle — this
IS  an  element  in  the  case ;  but  it  did  not  absorb  all  his  attention.    He  had  a  place  in
his  heart  for  friends,  and  was  ready  to  render  them  services.    And  this  was  acting  more
truly  for  the  interests  of  his  loved  ones  than  if  he  had  selfishly  confined  his  attention
to  them.    For  when  he  was  gone — taken  away  at  a  time  when  he  was  greatly  needed
by  his  children — there  were  those  who  were  their  well-wishers  for  the  father's  sake.
There  was  the  missionary,  by  whom  there  had  been  so  much  benefit,  invoking  his  bless-
ing on  them.    The  psalmist  says,  "  I  have  been  joung,  and  now  am  old ;  yet  have  I
not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  br^."   And  this  can  be  explained
without  brining  in  a  special  miracle.    Indeed,  the  psalmist  so  explains  it  in  the  follow-
ing verse:  '*He  is  ever  merci/idf  and  lendeth ;  and  his  seed  is  blessed."  That  is  to  say,  by
his  good  deeds  when  he  is  alive,  he  raises  up  friends  for  his  children  when  he  is  dead.
3.  Interest  in  departed  friends  shovm  in  pious  wishes  with  respect  to  their  future,    "The
Lord  grant  unto  him  to  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."    The  folio wiug  is  to  be
noted  as  the  teaching  of  Luther :  '*  We  have  no  command  from  God  to  pray  for  the
dead,  and  therefore  no  one  can  sin  who  does  not  pray  for  them.     For  in  what  God  has
neither  commanded  nor  forbidden,  no  man  can  sin.    Yet  because  GKxl  has  not  granted
us  to  know  the  state  of  the  soul,  and  we  must  he  uncertain  about  it,  thou  dost  not  sin
that  thou  prayest  for  the  dead,  but  in  such  wise  that  thou  leave  it  in  doubt  and  say
thus, '  If  this  soul  be  in  that  state  that  thou  mayest  yet  help  it,  I  pray  theo  to  be  gracious
unto  it.'    Therefore  if  thou  hast  prayed  once  or  thrice,  thou  shouldest  believe  that  thou
art  heard,  and  pray  no  more,  lest  thou  tempt  God."    Beyond  that  Paul  does  not  go.
He  follows  Onesiphorus  into  the  next  world,  and,  when  he  thinks  of  him  coming  to  the
settling  for  what  his  earthly  life  had  been,  he  devoutly  breathes  the  wish  that  he  may  be
mercifully  dealt  with.    Such  an  expression  of  feeling  is  not  to  be  forbidden  us  as  we
think  of  departed  friends  going  forward  to  judgment ;  it  is  to  be  found  in  inscriptions
in  the  catacombs.     But  it  has  no  connection  with  a  belief  in  purgatory,  and  is  very
different  from  the  formal  inculcation  of  prayers  for  the  dead.     4.  Beference  to  Timothy
as  to  services  rendered  by  Onesiphorus  at  Ephesus,    "And  in  how  many  things  he
ministered  at  Ephesus,  thou  knowest  very  well."    This  was  additional  to  services
rendered  by  Onesiphorus  to  the  apostle  at  Home.    He  had  not  mentioned  it  before,
because  it  had  been  within  the  sphere  of  Timothy's  own  observation.     But  he  brings
it  in  now,  as  what  was  fitted  to  support  the  charge  of  constancy  he  is  laying  on
Timothy.— B.  F.


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  n.


Ver.  l.—CkOd  for  ton.  A,  V. ;  ilTeagOtmed
foritron^,  A.V.  Be  (tiwigftlHawI  (trJuiv^oC)  i
mora  exDctl;  (aa  Hntber),  tcoonu  itrong,  or,
which  ia  tbe  aatne  thing.  ilrenglA^n  thyulf;
implyiBg,  perbnpa,  thongb  gently  esprttiied,
«onio  piaviouB  weakueii,  as  in  Eeb.  zi.  34,
"  From  veakoeen  were  mode  Etrong ; "  whate
the  image  wema  to  be  that  of  recovery  from
■ickneu.  Id  Eph.  vi.IO,  boireTer(J>^iviuuv-
a9t  it  Ku|>(q>),  there  is  do  eTidcace  of  pre-
ceding wcalmesB,  bat  only  a  call  to  me  the
Btiength  they  had ;  and  it  may  be  so  here
too.  Tbe  Etrenglh,  Timothy  is  reminded,  by
which  be  was  tu  fight  the  good  fight,  naa
not  hii  ovD,  but  that  which  would  come  to
him  fium  the  grace  and  Iotc  of  Jeaus  Christ
<oomp.  1  Cor.  xt.  10;  Phil.  it.  13),

Ver  2.—  Which  for  tliat,  A.V. ;  /rom  for
of,  A.V,  The  thingi  whloh  thoit  liut  hMutt,
etc.  Here  we  have  distinctly  enunciated
the  sncceraioDof  apmtolical  doctrine  through
iipoBtolical  men.  Vie  have  also  set  before
U9  the  partnership  of  the  presbytetale,  and,
in  aeewindary  degree,  of  the  whole  Church,
with  tbe  apostk-B  and  binhopa  their  succea-
BOrs,  in  preserving  puro  and  nuadulte rated
the  faith  once  deliiferod  to  tlie  saiats.  There
can  be  litUe  doubt  that  St.  Paul  is  here
alluding  to  Timothy's  ordination,  as  in
1  Tim.  IT.  14;  ri.  12;  cb.  i.  6,  7,  13,  14.
Timothy  had  then  honrd  from  the  apoatle's
lip*  a  certain  "  form  of  sound  words  " — scnne-
thing  in  the  nature  of  a  creed,  some  sum-
mary of  gospel  troth,  which  waa  the  deposit
placed  in  his  chnrgc  ;  and  in  committing  it
to  him,  he  and  the  preabytcn  present  had
laid  their  hands  on  him,  and  the  whole
Church  had  aasenled,  and  confirmed  the
same.  "  Thus  tbrongh  many  wilneasea,"
whose  presence  and  assent,  like  that  of  nit-
□esses  to  the  execntiou  of  a  deed  of  trsnafer
of  land  (Gen.  xxiii.  10, 16, 18),  was  neeeuary
to  mnke  thi-  tranBacttou  valid  and  complete,
had  Timothy  received  his  commiaion  to
preach  the  Word  of  God ;  and  what  he  had
received  he  was  to  hand  on  in  like  manner
to  faithful  men,  who  should  be  able  to  teach
the  aamo  to  others  also.  Commit  (ropafiiiLi) ;
identifring  the  doctrine  coniniittcd  to  be
liandod  on  with  the  depotit  (wofioWioj)  of
1  Tim.  Ti.  20  and  ch.  i.  14.  It  U  important
to  note  hero  both  the  coQenrT>'nce  of  the
preabyters  mid  the  assent  of  iho  Church.
The  Church  has  eTcr  bten  averse  to  private
ordinations,  nnd  has  ever  associated  the
people  as  connenlient  parties  in  ordination
(Thirty-first  Canon;  Pn^face  to"Ff>Tm  nnd
Manner  of  Making  of  Uencona,"  anil  rubric
at  close — "Id  the   face    of  the  Church;"


**  Form  anil  Mnnner  of  Ordering  of  PriMti"
— "  Good  people,"  etc).

Ver.  3.— SujTer  hardihip  vrith  ma  for  Ami
therefora  siidurc  hardnetM,  A.V.  and  T.B. ;
Chrut  Jttiu  for  Jena  Chritl,  A.V.  and  T.B.
Suffsr  haidaMp  with  me  (vvyKiuowAttfrow),
which  is  tlie  reading  "supported  by  flia
weightiest  iiuthnrities"  (Uuther).aa  inch.
i.  8.  The  simple  form  vuHil^nirsr,  whicli  ia
the  reading  of  tbe  T.R.,  occurs  also  in  ver.
9  of  this  ohaptei,  in  ch.  iv.  5,  and  in  Jas.
V.  13,  and  KiuioraBtia  in  Jas.  T.  10.  Both
these  simple  forms  are  elasaical.  Bat  tha
context  favourB  the  compound  form,  Mid  i*
Buppoited  by  ch.  1.  8,  12.  (For  the  Mutl-
ment,  see  the  "  Ministration  of  Public  Bm).
tism  "~"  We  receive  this  child."  etc.)

Ver.  4.— Soldier  on  tervice  for  man  Oat
loarrett, 'A.V. :  in  for  toirt,  A.V.;  mnrfUd
him  at  for  halh  cAosmi  Aim  U>  b»,  A.V.
Soldier  on  serviM  (vT(>aT>uJ^(rai) ;  as  1  Cor.
ix.  7  (see,  too,  1  Tim.  i.  18).  In  Luke  iti.  14
oT(iBT(BiJ)i»Kn  is  rendered  simply  "  aoldiets,"
with  margin,  "  Greek,  »olditr$  on  srrnoe."
There  is  no  difference  in  meaning  between
the  "  man  that  warteth  "  in  the  A.V,,  anil
the  "soldier  on  service"  of  the  H.V.
ASbItb  (Tpoy^un-tliui) ;  only  here  in  tbe  New
Testament,  but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  tn
elasaical  Greek,  where  it  means,  as  here,
"busineia,"  "affairs,"  "occnpetion,"  "trade,"
and  the  like,  with  the  accessory  idea  of  its
being  an  "  absorbing:,  engroaaing  purBoit"
KOTolled  him.  etc.  (rrparo\oy^aam) ;  only
here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found  in
the  LXX.,  but  common  in  claasical  Greek
for  "  to  levy  an  army,"  "  to  enlist  BoldierB."
The  great  lesson  here  tauifht  is  that  the
warfare  of  the  Christian  Boidicr  requires  the
same  ooncentration  of  purpose  as  that  of  the
earthly  warrior.  If  ba  would  win  the  victory.

Ver.  S.—AUo  a  man  for  a  man  alio.  A.V! ;
conlmfl  in  the  game*  tot  itrive  for  matteriet,
A.V. ;  bi  is  not  fur  yet  M  he  nof,  A.V. ;  hoM
eonlfnded  for  sfn've,  A.V.  Contend  in  the
game*  (iB^f);  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but
common  in  classical  Greek.  It  means  **  to
contend  for  SSKor"  the  prize,  to  be  an
"  athlete."  This  Is  also  the  meaning  of  the
A.V.  "strive  for  masteries."  "To  strive,"
means  properly  to  contend  with  an  BDta-
goniat,  and  "mastery"  is  an  old  English
word  for  "  superiority,"  "  victory,"  or  the
like.  Dryden  has  "mastership"  in  Uw
seme  stnso —

"  When  noble  youths  for  mastership  should
To  ijuoit,  to  run,  and  steeds  and  cbwiott
(Ovid.,' Met,' bk.L)


90


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[cH.  ir.  1—26;


LawftiDy  (wofttttms,  •■  1  Tim.  i.  8) ;  accord-
ing to  the  laws  and  niag^of  the  games.  So
^miothy  must  conform  to  the  laws  of  the
Ohxiftian  warfare,  and  not  shrink  from
afflictions,  if  he  would  gain  the  great  Chris-
tian prize.

Ver.  e.—ThBftni  to  partake  for  fint  par-
folwr,  A.y.  That  labonreth  (rhw  tcowiinrra).
Let  not  Timothy  think  to  shirk  labour  and
yet  e^joy  its  fruits.  (For  Kortdm,  see  note  on
1  Tim.  ▼.  170

Yer.  7,^For  ike  Lord  AaJl  give  for  and
ike  Lord  give,  A,\.  Consider  what  I  say.
The  apostle's  lessons  had  been  given  in
parables  or  similitudes.  He  therefore  begs
Timothy  to  note  them  well,  lest  the  applica-
tion to  himself  should  escape  him,  snggest-
ifltt  fiuther  that  he  should  seek  the  necessary
wisdom  and  understanding  from  GKxL  So
our  L(»rd,  at  the  end  of  the  parables  recorded
in  Matt  xiii,  says  to  his  disciples  in  ver.  51,
**Haye  ye  understood  all  these  things?"
and  elsewhere,  ^  He  that  hath  ears  to  bear,
let  him  hear.**  Understanding  {a-^ptaiy);
one  of  the  special  gifts  of  the  Spirit  (Isa.
xL  2.  LXX. :  see  Col.  i.  9 :  ti.  2).

Yer.  8. — Je$u$  Chriet,  rieen/rom  the  dead
for  tkat  Je$u$  Chriet . . .  wa$  raited  from  tke
detid^  A.y. ;  of  (he  seed  of  David  for  Jetue
Chrik  of  the  seed  of  David,  A.  V.  Bemember
Jam  Christ.  The  A.Y.  seems  to  give  ^e
sense  more  correctly  than  the  B.y.    The

Joint  of  the  exhortation  is  to  remember  that
esus  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and
by  that  remembrance  to  be  encoun^^  to
face  even  death  courageously.  The  verb
funifioptiw,  in  the  New  Testament,  usually

governs  the  genitive  case  as  e.g.  Acts  xx.  35 ;
al.  ii.  10.  But  in  1  These,  ii.  9;  Matt.
xvi.  9 ;  Rev.  xviii.  5,  it  has  an  accusative,
as  here,  and  commonly  in  dassicnl  Greek.
There  seems  to  be  hardly  sufficient  ground
for  the  distinction  mentioned  by  Bishop
Ellicott,  that  with  a  genitive  it  means
simply  ^remember/'  with  the  accusative
••keep  in  remembrance.**  It  is  more  diffi-
cult to  determine  the  exact  force  and  intent
of  the  clause,  "of  the  seed  of  David."  It
teems,  however,  to  point  to  Christ^s  human
nature,  so  as  to  make  the  example  of  Christ's
resurrection  apposite  as  an  encouragement
to  Timothy.  And  this  view  is  much
strengthened  by  Bom.  i.  3,  where  the  addi-
tion, **  according  to  the  flesh,"  as  controsted
with  **  the  Son  of  God  according  to  the  Spirit
of  holiness,"  marks  the  clause.  *'  of  the  seed
of  David,**  as  specially  pointing  to  the
human  nature  of  Christ.  Tlio  particular
form  which  the  reference  takes  probably
arises  from  the  form  to  which  the  apostle
refers  us  as  **my  gospel."  In  that  creed,
which  was  the  epitome  of  tho  gospel  as
preached  by  St.  Paul,  there  was  no  doubt
mention  made  of  Christ's  Davidio  descent.


Others,  •■  Huther,  think  the  clause  points
to  the  Messianic  dignity  of  David.  Othen.
that  it  is  inserted  in  refutation  of  the
Doceta,  and  to  show  the  reality  of  the  death
and  resurrection  of  Christ;  or  that  it  is
meant  to  mark  especially  the  fulfilment  of
prophecy.  But  the  first  explanation  is  quite
satisfactory,  and  the  general  purpose  or  the
reference  to  our  Ix>rd  as  intended  to  en-
courage Timothy  to  endure  hardness  as  a
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  fully  borne
out  by  the  •'  fiedthful  saying"  in  vers.  11  and
12,  ••If  we  died  with  lum,  we  shall  also  live
with  him :  if  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign
with  him."

Yer.  9. — Hardship  for  trouble,  A.Y. ;  unio
for  even  unto,  A.  Y. ;  at  a  malefactor  for  as
an  evil-doer^  A.Y. ;  transposition  of  clause,
unto  honde.  Wherein  (Iv  f) ;  t .e.  in  which
gospel,  in  the  preaching  of  which.  Bvttn
hazdahip  (KaM<nro$&) ;  as  ver.  3,  T.B.  ITnto
bonds  (ji^xp^  ZtCfiAp),  So  fi^xpi  OoM^Tov^
Phil.  ii.  8;  fi^xpis  dl/laror,  Heb.  xiL  4 ;  bnt
most  firequenUy  of  time,  **  until,"  as  Matt  xi.
28;  xiii.  30;  Acts  x.  80,  etc.  A  male&etor
{KOKovpyos) ;  as  Luke  xxilL  32,  33,  39 ;  com-
mon in  classical  Greek.  Bonds  {JSta-fi&v) ;  as
Acts  xxvi.  29 ;  PhU.  i.  7, 13,  etc. ;  CoL  iv.  18.
So  St  Paul  calls  himself  Utrfuos,  in  respect
of  these  bonds  (Eph.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1 :  ch.  i.  8 ;
Philem.  1,  9).  The  Word  of  Ood  is  not
bound.  A  beautiful  reflection  of  an  utterly
unselfish  mind  I  The  thought  of  his  own
bonds,  likely  soon  to  be  exchanged  for  the
bonds  of  a  martyr's  death,  awakens  the  com-
forting thought,  **  Though  they  bind  me  with
an  iron  chain,  they  cannot  bind  the  gospel.
While  I  am  here,  shut  up  in  prison,  tho
Word  of  God,  preached  by  a  thousand
tongues,  is  giving  life  and  liberty  to  myriads
of  my  brethren  of  the  human  race.  The
tyrant  can  silence  my  voice  and  confine  it
within  the  walls  of  my  dungeon ;  but  all
the  while  the  sound  of  the  gospel  is  going
through  all  the  earth,  its  saving  words  to  the
ends  of  the  world ;  and  I  therein  rejoice,  yea,
and  will  rejoice ;  and  not  all  the  legions  of
Bome  can  take  this  joy  from  me."

Yer.  10. — Sake  for  takes^  A.Y. ;  also  may
for  may  also,  A.Y.  Therefore  (Bih,  rovro);
for  this  cause.  Some  (Wiesinger,  Alfoid,
etc.)  refer  this  to  what  follows,  viz.  "that
the  elect  may  obtain  the  salvation,"  etc.,
after  the  model  of  1  Tim.  i.  16  and  Philem.
15,  where  8xa  toDto  clearly  refers  to  the
words  which  follow.  But  the  interposition
of  the  words.  Sick  robs  ixXticrovs^  is  strongly
aiiverse  to  this  view.  It  seems,  therefore,
rather  to  refer  collectively  to  all  tho  con-
siderations which  he  had  just  lieen  urging
upon  Timothy,  perhaps  especially  the  last,
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  he  now
agftin  enforces  by  his  own  example  of  willing
suffering  in  order  that  the  elect  may  obtain


CH.  n.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


21


the  eternal  salvatioii  which  is  in  Jeras
Christ — adding,  in  tctb.  11  and  12,  the  en-
oooragement  to  suffering  derived  from  the
**  fait&ul  saying."  I  endure  (^rofi^yw) ;  the
exact  foroe  of  which  is  seen  in  the  snbstan-
tiye  ^ofiom^,  patience,  so  frequently  attri-
buted to  Uie  suffering  saints  of  Gk>d.

Ver.  11.— FaUhfulU  the  saying  for  U  is  a
faithful  saying,  A.V. ;  died  for  he  dead,  A. V.
Died ;  t .e.  m  liaptism  (Bom.  yi.  8),  as  denoted
by  the  aorist.  But  the  death  with  Christ
in  baptism  is  conceived  of  as  carrying  with
it,  as  a  consequence,  the  daily  death  of  which
St.  Paul  speaks  so  often  (Gal.  iL  20 ;  1  0>r.
XV.  81 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  10\  as  well  as  the  death
to  sin.

Ver.  12.~.^u2tfr6  for  ntfer,  A.V.;  skaU
deny  for  deny^  A.V.  and  T JL  Endure ;  as
ver.  10.  Mark  the  present  tense  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  aorist  in  dvcOivoftri^,
betokening  patient  continuance  in  suffering.
If  we  shsdl  deny  him  (&pin)(r<(/i«6a) ;  oomp.
Matt  X.  30 ;  Luke  xiL  9 ;  Acts  iu.  13, 14,
etc

Ver.  13. — Are  faithless  for  hdieve  not,  A.V. ;
he  for  yet  he,  A. V. ;  for  he  for  he,  A.V.  and
T.B.  Are  faithless  {inriarovfitv);  meaning
the  same  as  the  A.y.  hdieve  not,  which  is
everywhere  in  the  New  Testament  the  sense
of  i.'wia'r4u  (Mark  xvi.  11 ;  Luke  xxiv.  11 ;
Bom.  iii.  3,  etc.).  (For  the  contrast  between
man's  unbelief  and  God's  faithfulness,  see
Bom.  iii.  3.)  He  cannot  deny  himself,  by
coming  short  of  any  promise  once  made  by
him  (comp.  Titus  i.  2 ;  Heb.  vi.  18 ;  x.  23,
etc.).  This  and  the  two  preceding  couplets
in  vers.  1 1  and  12  make  up  **  the  faithful
saying  "  spoken  of  in  ver.  11  (see  1  Tim.  i.
15,  note).

Ver.  14. — In  the  sight  of  for  hefore,  A,V. ;
to  for  hut  to,  A.V. ;  them  that  hear  for  the
hearers,  A.V.  Put  them  in  remembrance
(vwouifiyritTKf ;  John  xiv.  26;  Titus  ilL  1;
2  Pet.  i.  12).  St.  Paul  skilfully  strengthens
his  preceding  exhortations  to  Timothy  by
now  charging  him  to  impress  upon  others —
referring,  perhaps,  especially  to  *'  the  faithful
men  "  spoken  of  in  ver.  2,  but  generally  to
the  whole  flock  committed  to  him — the  truths
which  he  had  just  been  urging  upon  Timothy.
Charging  (Sio^opr^oficyos) ;  as  1  Tim.  v.  21
and  ch.  iv.  1.  Strive . . .  about  words  (koyofia"
X*"') ;  oiiiy  here  in  the  New  Testament  or
elsewhere.  But  Kirfotuixia  occurs  in  1  Tim.
vi  4  and  in  late  Greek.  Another  reading
is  Xoyofidx^h  &8  if^  addressed  to  Timothy
himself,  but  XoyoyLax^'^^v  is  supported  by  the
best  authorities,  and  agrees  best  with  the
context.  To  no  profit;  literally,  useful  for
nothing ;  serving  no  good  purpose.  Xp^cifioy,
which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Tes-
tament, is  found  repeatedly  in  the  LXX.,
nnd  is  very  common  in  classical  Greek,
where  it  is  followed  by  ^Isf  My  and  vp6s.  The


construction  is  **  not  to  strive  about  words,
a  thing  usefiil  for  nothing,  but,  on  the  oon^
trary,  tending  to  subvert  those  who  hear
such  strife."  To  the  lubverting  (M  irara-
arpoipf) ;  elsewhere  only  in  2  Pet  ii.  6,  where
it  is  used  of  a  material  overthrow,  as  it  is
in  the  LXX.  of  Gen.  xix.  29,  to  which  St.
Peter  is  referring.  The  history  of  its  use
here  of  a  moral  overthrow,  which  is  not  borne
out  by  its  classical  use,  seems  to  be  that  the
apostle  had  in  his  mind  the  very  common
metaphor  of  ol«co8ofi4,  edification,  as  the
proper  result  of  spes^ng  and  teaching,  and
so  uses  the  contrary  to  *'  building  up,"  viz.
an  "overthrowing"  or  "destruction,"  to
describe  the  effect  of  the  teaching  of  those
vain  talkers  and  deoeivers  (comp.  ver.  18).

Ver.  15. — Oipe  dUigenee  to  present  for
itudy  to  show,  A.y.;  handling  aright  for
rightly  dividing,  A.\.  Give  diligenoe.  The
A.V.  "studv,"  if  we  give  it  its  proper  force,
as  in  the  Latin  etudeo,  siudium,  etudionts,
expresses  the  sense  of  <rKovZa<rov  exactly.
Zeal,  earnest  desire,  effort,  and  haste,  are
all  implied  in  it  (oomp.  ch.  iv.  9,  21 ;  Titus
iii.  12 :  2  Pet.  i.  10. 15 ;  iii.  14).  To  prsMnt
thyself  (irapa(rr^0'ai,  to  present);  as  in  Luke
iL  22;  Acts  i.  8;  ix.  41.  In  1  Cor.  viu.  8
it  has  the  sense  of  "  to  commend,"  nearly
the  same  as  96Kifioy  Tc^aarriffai,  The  render-
ing, to  show  thyself,  of  the  A.V.  is  a  very
good  one,  and  is  preserved  in  the  B.V.  of
Acts  i.  3.  Approved  (96Kifiov ;  Bom.  xvi.  10 ;
1  Cor.  xi.  19,  etc.) ;  one  that  has  been  tried
and  tested  and  found  to  be  sterling ;  properly
of  metals.  This,  with  the  two  following
qualifications,  **  a  workman  that  needeth  not
to  be  ashamed,"  and  "one  that  rightly
handles  the  Word  of  truth,"  is  the  character
which  Timothy  is  exhorted  to  appear  in
before  God.  The  dative  r^  ec^  is  governed
by  trapcurriiaai,  not  by  ZSmfiov.  A  worknuui
(Jpydrjtv),  How  natural  is  such  a  figpire  in
the  mouth  of  Paul,  who  wrought  at  his  trade
with  Aquila  and  Priscilla  (Acts  xviii.  Z),
and  was  working  night  and  day  at  Thessa-
lonica,  that  he  might  earn  his  own  living  f
That  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  (dvcrolf-
ax^'^ov) ;  not  found  anywhere  else,  either  in
the  New  Testament  or  in  the  LXX.,  or  in
classical  Greek.  Bengel  hits  the  right  foroe
of  the  word  when  he  renders  it  "  non  pnde-
factum,"  only  that  by  the  common  use  of
the  passive  participial  form  (compare  drf|i-
Xficurrot,  if^^tptvvriros,  iyaplSfirrrot,  etc.),  it
means  further  "that  cannot  be  put  to  shame.*'
The  workman  whose  work  is  skimped  is  pat
to  shame  when,  upon  its  being  tested,  it  is
found  to  be  bad,  dishonest  work ;  the  work-
man whose  work,  like  himself,  is  96Kifwtf
honest,  conscientious,  good  work,  and  more-
over sound  and  skilful  work,  never  has  been,
and  never  can  be,  put  to  shame.  St.  Paul
shows  how  to  secure  its  being  good  work;


X2


THE  SECOND  BHSTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[oh.  II.  1 — 26.


tIs.  by  iU  being  done  for  the  eye  of  God.
VmmAUr^Q  Alight  the  Woid  of  truth  (hpfhro-
fmrra  rhv  xiyov  t^s  hXtfi^lat).  The  verb
iptfbrofif iy  ocean  onlr  here  in  the  New  Tet-
tAment  In  the  LXX.,  in  Pro?.  iiL  6,  it
■tends  for  ''he  shall  direct  [or,  'make
•tmij^t']  thy  pAthi;**  and  so  in  Prov.  xL
A.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  that  in  Heb.  xiL
18,  **  liake  straight  P^ths  for  yonr  feet  (rpo-

2 lit  loB^  votfi<rttr€)r  But  this  does  not  at
11  fnit  the  oontext  We  must  look,  thereP-
fbve,  at  the  etymology  of  the  word.  *Op0o-
r4tu9f  must  mean  ^  to  eat  straight,*'  and!,  •■
the  apostle  is  speaking  of  a  good  workmian,
ha  must  be  thinking  ol*  some  work  in  which
the  workman's  skill  consists  in  cutting
straight :  why  not  his  own  trade,  in  which
it  was  all-important  to  out  the  pieces  straight
that  were  afterwards  to  be  joined  to  each
other  (see  hpB&roitos  and  bpBoroiAia)  ?  Hence,
by  AD  easy  metaphor,  **  divide  rightly,"  or
"handle  rightly,  the  Word  of  truth.''  pre-
sernng  the  true  measure  of  the  difierent
portions  of  Divine  truth.

Ver.  16. — Profane  for  profane  and  vain^
A,V. ;  proceed  further  in  ungodlineti  for  tfi-
erea$e  unlo  more  nngodUne$$f  A.\.  Shun
{wpiitrroffo,  OS  in  Titua  iii.  9) ;  literally,  tiep
mUof  the  tvay  of,  or  stand  away  from — an
unusual  use  of  the  word,  found  also  in
Josephus,  *Ant  Jud.,'  iv.  vi.  12.  Frofiuie
babblings  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  7;  vi.  20).  They
will  proceed  (irpoKS\^ov<rty) ;  see  note  on  rpo-
Koirfi  in  1  Tim.  iv.  15.  Farther  in  ungodli-
BSfs  {M  ir\t7ov  iiffffitias);  surely  better
rendered  in  the  A.Y.  to  more  tmgodlinesi.
It  may  be  questioned  whether  **  they  "  refers
to  the  babbllDgs  or  to  the  false  teachers.
It  makes  very  good  sense  to  say,  **  Avoid
these  profane  babblingn,  for  they  won't  stop
there — they  will  grow  into  open  impiety  and
blasphemy."  But  ver.  17,  as  Alford  observes,
is  in  favour  of  the  ** teachers"  being  the
subject  of  "will  proceed;"  but  it  is  not
conclusive.  If  a  full  stop  bo  put  after  •*  un-
godliness," as  in  the  A.  v.,  ver.  17  comes  in
quite  naturally  with  the  further  statement
tnat  "their  word  will  cat  as  doth  a  gan-
grene."

Ver.  1 7.— Gangrene  for  canker,  A.  V.  Their
word;  as  opi)osed  to  "the  Word  of  truth"
in  ver.  15.  Will  eat  {vofiij^  H^^l  <•«•
spread,  like  a  gangrene,  which  graidually
enlarges  its  area,  corrupting  the  flesh  that
was  sound  before.  So  these  heretical
opinions  spread  in  the  body  of  the  Church
wnich  is  aflectefl  by  them.  No/i^  is  literally
**  pasture  "  (John  x.  9),  **  grazing  of  flocks,"
and  hence  is  applied  to  fire  (Polybius),
which  as  it  were  feeds  upon  all  around  it,
and,  in  medical  language  (Hippocrates),
to  sores  and  gangrenes,  which  grow  larger
and  depasture  the  flesh.  Of  whom ;  of  the
number  of  those  pointed  at  in  the  phrase,


**  their  word."  KymsiUMii;  probably  the
same  person  as  is  mentioned  as  a  blasphemer
inlTim.L20.  Philetus.  Nothing  is  known
of  him.

Ver.  18. — Men  who  for  who,  A.Y.  Save
trred  (4(rr<(x^«^) :  see  1  Tim.  i.  6  (note)
and  vi.  21.  In  Bfatt.  xxii.  29  and  in  ICadc
xiL  24  our  Lord's  word  for  " erring**  is  vAa-
roff^ff.  It  is  remarkable  that  it  was  the
subject  of  the  resurrection  which  was  so
misunderstood  in  both  cases.  The  lieretios
to  whom  St.  Paul  here  alludes  probably  ex*
plained  away  the  resurrection,as  the  (3noBtica
in  the  time  of  Irenasus  and  Tertullian  did
(Huther),  by  spiritualising  it  in  the  sense
of  Bom.  vL  4  ;  Eph.  ii.  1 ;  Col.  ii.  12 ;  iU.  1,
etc  It  is  the  usual  way  with  heresy  to
corrupt  and  destroy  the  gospel,  xmdBr  pore-
tenee  of  improving  it  And  there  are  always
some  weak  brethren  ready  to  be  deceived
and  misled.  Overthrow  (iyarptwouai) ;  else-
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Titus
i.  11 ;  but  common  in  LXX.  and  in  classioal
Gredc.

Ver.  19.— HowbeU  for  nevertheleis,  A.V. :
firm  foundation  of  God  standeth  for  founda-
tion of  God  Btandeth  sure,  A.V. ;  t^iis  for  the
(1611  copy),  A.V. ;  the  Lord  for  Christ,  A.V.
and  T.R. ;  unrighteousness  for  iniquity,  A.V.
The  Arm  fbundation  of  Ood  ttandeth;  t.e.,
though  the  faith  of  some  is  thrown  down
like  a  wall  built  with  untempered  mortar,
the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  fast  and
firm  stands  unmoved  and  unmovable.  Thi»
is  equally  true  of  individual  souls  (the  al
(TTcpeal  «fa;xa(  of  Ghrysostom),  and  of  the
Church,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall
not  prevail.  Compare  our  Lord's  saying,
when  the  Pharisees  were  offended  at  him,
"Every  plant  which  my  heavenly  Father
hath  not  planted  shall  be  ruoted  up  "  (Matt.
XV.  13);  and  those  in  John  x.  28,  29;  and
1  John  ii.  19.  Sffx^kios  in  cliissical  Greek
is  always  an  adjective  agreeing  with  KlBos
expressed  or  understood.  In  the  New  Tes-
tament it  is  used  only  as  a  substantive  (Luke
vi.  48;  1  CJor.  iii.  10;  1  Tim.  vi.  19,  etc.).
Here  Uie  word  seems  to  be  employed,  not  so
much  to  denote  a  foundation  on  which  a
house  was  to  be  built,  as  to  denote  strength
and  solidity.  The  elect  of  God  are  like
foundation-stones,  which  may  not  be  moved.
Having  this  seal.  In  Rev.  xii.  14  the  twelve
foundation-stones  of  the  new  Jerusalem  were
each  inscribed  with  the  name  of  an  apostle.
In  like  manner  there  are  inscriptions,  of  the
nature  of  seals,  on  Grod's  strong  foundations,
showing  their  immutable  coiulition.  One
is,  "The  Lord  kkoweth  thkm  that  ark
His,^  taken  verbatim  from  the  LXX.  of
Numb.  xvi.  5 ;  the  other  is,  "  Let  every  onr

THAT  NAMETH  THE  NaMB  OF  THE  LoRD  DE-
PART FROM  UNRIGHTEOUSNESS."  This  is  no>
where  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament.


CH.  n.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


23


The  first  part  of  the  verse  is  indeed  equiva-
lent to  Ki/pic  ,  ,  •  rh  hvofid  ffov  6vofidiofi9y  in
Isa.  xzvi.  13,  but  there  is  nothing  to  answer
to  the  second  part.  The  passages  quoted  by
commentators  from  Numb.  xvi.  26  and  Isa.
lii.  11  are  far  too  general  to  indicate  any
particular  reference.  Possibly  the  motto  is
one  of  those  "faithful  sayings'*  before  re-
ferred to.  The  two  inscriptions,  taken  to-
gether, show  the  two  sides  of  the  Christian
standing — God's  election,  and  man's  holiness
(comp.  1  John  i.  6 ;  iii.  7,  8).

Ver.  20.— -^ow  for  but,  A.V. ;  nnlo  for  to,
A.y.  (twice).  How  in  a  great  house,  etc.
"  Now  **  is  hardly  the  right  conjunction.  It
should  rather  be  **  howbeit."  The  object  of
the  figure  of  the  various  vessels  in  the
'*  great  house  "  is  to  show  that,  though  every
one  that  names  the  Name  of  the  Lord  otight
to  depart  from  unrighteousness,  yet  we  must
not  be  surprised  if  it  is  not  so,  and  if  there
are  found  in  the  Church  some  professing
Chritttians  whose  practice  is  quite  incon-
sistent with  their  profession.  Perhaps  even
the  vilest  members  of  the  visible  Church
perform  some  useful  function,  howbeit  they
do  not  mean  it.  With  this  mention  of  the
vessels,  compare  the  enumeration  in  1  Cor.
iii.  12.  Of  earth  (^crrp^iriya) ;  only  here  and
2  Cor.  iv.  7,  where  it  is  also  applied  to  aKtiri,
*^  earthen  vessels ; "  as  it  is  in  the  LXX.,
e.g.  Lev.  vi.  28 ;  and  to  &yyos  (Numb.  v.  17).
"OffrpaKov  is  "  a  tile."  (For  the  same  figure,
see  Eom.  ix.  22,  23.)

Ver.  21. — Meet  for  and  meet,  A.V.  and
T.R. ;  prepared  for  and  prepared,  A.V.
Purge  himself  from  these  (^ic«ca0(i!7]7);  stronger
than  the  simple  Kaedfyp,  '*  thoroughly  purge
himself,"  as  in  1  Cor.  v.  7  (the  only  other
place  in  the  New  Testament  where  it  occurs)
and  as  in  classical  Greek.  It  is  used  also
by  the  LXX.  in  Judg.  vii.  4,  as  the  render-
ing of  cjHY,  to  try  metals.  The  idea,  there-
fore, seems  to  be  that  of  separation,  and,  if  so,
**  from  these  *'  may  certainly  mean  from  the
false  teachers  described  under  the  image  of
the  vessels  unto  dishonour,  as  usually  ex-
plaint.  At  the  same  time,  the  image  is  better
sustained  if  we  understand  ^from  these"  to
mean  the  babblings,  and  ungodliness,  and
eating  words  of  the  heretics  denounced.  It
is  hardly  natural  to  imply  that  one  vessel  in
the  house  will  become  a  golden  vessel  by
purging  itself  from  the  wooden  and  earthen
vessels.  Neither  is  separation  from  the  false
teachers  the  point  wnich  St.  Paul  is  here
pressing,  but  avoidance  of  false  doctrines.
Meet  for  .  .  .  use  (tUxpn^^O  l  only  here  and
ch.  iv.  11  and  Philem.  11.  Also  Pro  v.  xxix.
(xxxi.)  I3,  LXX.  Common  in  classical
Greek.  The  master  (ry  9f<nr6rp);  the
master  of  the  house,  the  oiVo8c0'1r<^^17f.

Ver.  22.— But  flee  {or  flee  alto,  A.V. ;  amd
follow  after  for  but  follow,  A.V. ;  love  tot


charity,  A.V.  Youthfol  (v§w§pucds) ;  .of  or
belonging  to  wt^tpot,  young  men;  ^'oupi-
ditates  adolescentisa  "  (Tacit,  *  Hist,'  i.  15).
The  word  only  occurs  here  in  the  New
Testament,  never  in  the  LXX.,  but  is  found
in  Josephus,  who  speaks  of  aiOaJitla  vtwt-
Rifcfi,  "youthful  arrogance,"  and  is  common  in
classical  Greek.  Lusts  (iinevfilou)  include,
besides  the  a-apKiKcd  hriBvyiou,  of  1  Pet  ii.  11,
all  those  ill-regulated  passions  to  which
youth  is  peculiarly  liable,  such  as  intem-
perance, love  of  company,  arrogance,  petu-
lance, ambition,  love  of  display,  levity^
vehemence  of  action,  wilfulness,  and  the
like.  Timothy  at  this  time  was  probably
under  forty  (see  note  on  1  Tim.  iv.  12,
and  Ellioott  on  ditto).  Follow  aftsr
(8(wicc) ;  as  1  Tim.  vi.  11,  where,  as  here,  it  is
in  contrast  with  ^cvyc.  Eagerness  in  pur-
suit, and  difficulty  in  attainment,  seem  to
be  indicated  by  the  word.  With  them,  etc.
(/bicrd  rSiv  4vuca\ovfi4¥wv,  jc.t.A.).  "With
them  "  ma^  mean  either  pursue  righteous-
ness, etc.,  m  partnership  with  all  who  call
upon  the  Lord;  i,e,  make  the  pursuit  of
righteousness,  etc.,  your  pursuit,  as  it  is
that  of  all  who  call  upon  the  Lord ;  or  it
may  be  construed  with  tlp^tnriw,  so  as  to
limit  the  exhortation  to  peace  to  those  who
call  upon  the  Lord,  tlfyfiniy  fitrii  r&p  ^iri«a\ou-
fi^vwy,  "peace  with  those  that  call,"  etc.,
which  is  the  construction  in  Heb.  xii  14
and  Bom.  xii.  18.  It  is,  however,  remarkable
that  in  both  these  passages,  which  are  re-
ferred to  for  the  grammar^  the  inference
from  the  doctrine  goes  rather  the  other  wi^,
as  they  teach  **  peace  with  all  men."  So
does  the  balance  of  the  sentence  here.

Ver.  23.— Ignorant  questioninga  for  iin-
leamed  quettiont,  A.V. :  refute  for  avoid,
A.V. ;  gender  for  do  gender,  A.V.  Ignorant
(Jkirai^k^novs) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, but  not  uncommon  in  the  LXX.,
applied  to  persons,  and  in  classical  Greek.
Ufdeamed  is  quite  as  good  a  rendering
as  ignorant.  It  is  a  term  applied  properly
to  ill-educated,  ill-disciplineu  people,  and
thence,  by  an  easy  metonymy,  to  the  ques-
tions such  persons  delight  in.  Qaestioiiisgi
(C^^<reiO ;  see  1  Tim.  i.  4,  note,  and  Titus
iii.  9.  Sefose  (iropoirou) ;  "  have  nothing  ta
do  with"  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  7;  Titus  iii.  10).
Gender  (ywv&vi).  This  is  the  only  place
in  the  New  Teetam^t  where  y^wiw  is
used  in  this  metaphorical  sense,  unless  Gkd.
iv.  24  is  included.  (For  the  sentiment  see
1  Tim.  vi.  4,  *♦  Whereof  oometh  envy,  strife,"
etc.)  Strifes  (ji^x^^)  i  oompare  iiAxcas  wofuicdsp
"fightings  about  the  Law"  mtus  iii.  9);
and  "wars  and  fightings"  (Jas.  iv.  1,  2).
Compare,  too,  the  verb  Koyofiax^iPt  in  ver.  14.
Nothing  can  be  more  emphatic  than  St.
Paul's  warnings  against  foolish  and  angry
oontroversies  about  words,  and  yet  nothuig


^


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


[cH.  II.  1 — ^26.


hat  been  more  n^leeted  in  the  Ohurob,  in
«Uitget.

Yer.  2i,-^The  Lor^z  MreatU  for  HhA  mt-
tMml  of  iht  Lord^  A.y. ;  toufardi  aU  for  tmto
«S  flMH,  A.y. ;  forbearing  for  paHent^  A.y.
TlM  Lord's  lemnt  (SoOxoy  Kvp^v).  So  St
Paul  repeatedly  describes  himself  (Bom.
i.  1;  GaL  i  10;  PhiL  L  1;  Titus  i.  1),
as  do  also  the  apostles  James,  Peter,  Jade,
and  John  (Jas.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet  L  1;  Jade  1 ;
Ber.  i.  1).  The  term  seems,  therefore,  espe-
cially (thoagh  not  exolosiyely,  Eph.  vL  6;
I  Pet  iL  16;  Bev.  xix.  2,  5;  zxii  8)  to
desoribe  those  whose  oi&ce  it  Is  to  preach
the  gospel,  either  as  apostles  or  as  ministers
(CoL  iv.  12).  Mast  not  striye  (fidx€<r0ai);
«  oonclusive  reason  against  engaging  m
those  foolish  and  ignorant  (^aestionings
whidi  necessarily  engender  stnfe.  OenUe
(finor);  only  here  and  in  1  Thess.  iL  7,
where  we  see  how  St.  Paul  carried  this  pre-
oept  into  practice.  A  nurse  does  not  meet
the  child's  waywardness  by  blows  or  threats,
bat  by  gentleness  and  love.  It  is  a  classical
word.  Apt  to  taaehXsee  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  note).
Jorbeazing  (duff^iKOMo^);  only  here  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,
and  only  in  late  Greek.  It  means  literally
**  bearing  up  against  ill  treatment,"  patiently
enduring  it.

Yer.  25. — Correcting  them  for  inatructing
thom^  A.Y. ;  peradventure  Ood  for  God  per-
adventure,  A.Y. ;  may  for  toill,  A.Y. ;  unto
the  knowledae  for  to  the  acknowledging,  A.Y.
Ck)rreoting  (tratlevoma),  fratMtw  means  pro-
perly to  **  educate,"  •*  oring  up,"  or  •*  train  "
a  child.  Hence  sometimes  the  idea  of
teaching  predominates,  sometimes  that  of
correcting  or  chastising.  Here  the  context
shows  tliat  the  idea  of  teaching  is  pre-
dominant— partly  becauso  the  word  suggests
something  contrary  to  the  airalhfvroi  (^r^-
fftis  of  ver.  23,  and  partly  because  the  end
of  this  ircuitia  is  to  bring  them  to  the  know-
ledge of  God's  truth.  The  A.  V.  "  instruct-
ing" is  therefore  the  right  word  here.
Them  that  oppose  themselves  (rovs  omi^iaTi-
dtfihovs) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testament
or  the  LXX.,  or  in  classical  Greek.  Lite-
rally, those  who  arrange  or  set  themselves  in
opposition;  or,  in  one  word,  •* opponents,**
referring,  no  doubt,  chiefly  to  such  avrtXc-
yovrts  as  are  mentioned  in  the  very  similar
passage,  Titus  i.  9  (see  too  Titus  ii  8).  If  per-
adventure (/i^itotc).  "  M^iroT€,  in  later  Greek,
loses  its  aversatiye  meaning  (Most  at  any
time  *),  and  is  almost  equivalent  to  f firorc  "
(Alford,  in  loc.) — equivalent  to  "  in  case  God
should,"  etc.  Bepentanoe  (/xcrayofa) ;  such
a  change  of  mind  as  shall  lead  them  to
embrace  the  truth.  Knowledge  (^iirlyvwa-ii);
almost  invariably  used  of  the  knowledge  of
God  or  of  God*s  truth  (ch.  iii.  7;  Kom.
i.  28;  Eph.  i  17;  iv.  18;   Col.  i.  9,  10;  |


ilL  10 ;  Titas  i.  1 ;  Heh.  x.  26,  etc).  The
trath;  that  truth  which  before  they  set
themselves  to  oppose,  disputing  against  tt
and  resisting  it.  The  servant  of  &e  Lord
must  never  despair  of  any  one,  never  throw
an  additional  obstacle  in  any  one's  way  by
roughness  or  harsh  speech,  and  never  allow
onlond  feelings  to  be  roused  in  his  own
breast  by  the  perverseness  or  unreasonable-
ness of  them  that  oppose  themselves  to  him.
Yer.  26.— They  for  that  Utey,  A.Y.:
having  been  taken  captive  by  the  Lord^t  ssr-
vatU  unto  the  wiU  of  Ood  for  who  are  taken
captive  by  him  at  his  toUl,  A.Y.  Havbig
been  taken  captive,  etc.  This  is  undoubtedly
a  difficult  passage.  We  will  first  take  the
individual  words,  and  then  turn  to  the
general  meaning.  Beeover  themielTBa
(iivay^^eiv);  only  fonnd  here  in  ttie  New
Testament,  and  never  in  the  LXX.  In
classical  Greek,  where  it  is,  however,  uncom-
mon, it  means  literally  **to  recover  from
drunkenness,"  hence, "  to  come  to  one's  self,"
''to  come  to  a  right  mind"  (see  Stepli.,
'Thes.').  Snare  (iro7rj);  as  1  Tun.  iii.  7;
vi.  9.  Compare  the  use  of  mryiSe^  (Matt
xxii.  15).  Having  been  taken  captive
(iCtayp^fuifoi) ;  only  found  in  the  New  Tes-
tament in  Luke  v.  10  besides  this  place,
but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in  classical
Greek,  in  the  sense  of  "  to  tcdce  alive,"  of
prisoners  of  war,  who,  if  not  ransomed,
always  became  slaves  of  the  conqueror.
Here,  therefore,  the  meaning  is  "  having
been  captured  and  enslaved."  By  him
(margin),  (6t*  abrou);  i.e.  of  course  the
devil,  who  had  just  been  named  as  having
ensnared  them.  Unto  the  will  of  him
(margin),  (iKtivov  SfKrifia).  The  difficulty
of  the  passage  lies  in  the  word  ixtitfov,
which  at  first  sight  seems  to  indicate  a
difierent  antecedent  from  tlio  antecedent  of
ainov.  This  grammatical  difficulty  has  led
to  the  strange  rendering  of  the  R.V.,  and  to
the  wholly  unjustifiable  intrusion  into  the
text  of  the  words,  "  tlie  Lord's  servant"  and
of  "  God,"  producing  altogether  a  sentence
of  unparalleled  awkwardness  and  grotesque-
ness,  and  utter  improbability.  But  there  is
no  real  difiiculty  in  referring  iKtivov  to  the
same  person  as  ahrov  (meaning  in  both  cases
the  devil),  as  in  the  passage  from  Plato's
*  Cratylus,*  cited  by  Huther,  after  De  Wette,
the  cause  of  the  use  of  iKtivov  being  that  St.
Paul  was  at  the  moment  emphasizing  the
fact  of  these  captives  being  deprived  of  their
own  will,  and  made  subservient  to  the  will
of  another.  The  passage  may  bo  para-
phrased :  **  If  peradventure  God  may  give
them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  so  as  to  recover  themselves  out  of  tho
snare  of  the  devil,  after  they  had  been  led
captive  by  him,  so  as  to  be  no  longer  their
own  masters,  but  obliged  to  do  his  will.**


CH.  n.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


25


The  implied  contrast  is  ob  rh  iavr&¥  &^A*
^Ktlwov  e4\iifut9  juBt  as  in  the  passage  from
the  •Oratylns/  p.  430  (vol.  iv.  p.  306,  Bek-
kez's  edit.),  ^Ktlyov  is  contrasted  with  yvpauc6s.
The  full  passage  is  Ati^tu  aJn^  &y  fiir  "^^XO
iKtlyov  ctWvo,  iy  5i  f^XV*  yvvauc6t.  Another
example  of  the  transition  from  ahr6s  to  ^jccivoi
is  in  John  i.  7,  8,  Olros  ^XBtv  tU  /laprvptayt
Tya  fiofnvp^irp  wtpl  roO  ipwrhs,  ^^  wdm^s
wnrrf6<rwat  8i*  abrov'  ohx  ^v  iiciiwos  rh  ^t,
ic.r.X.,  where  there  is  a  contrast  between
John  as  the  witness  and  Christ  as  the  true
Light(compare,  too.  John  iv.  25,  where  iKtivos
has  the  force  of  "  not  you,  but  he  ").  For
ihe  general  turn  of  phrase,  comp.  2  Cor.


X.  5,  '^  Bringing  into  captivi^  every  thought
to  the  obedience  of  Christ,"  where  o/xf^'^^^*'*'^*
(ovTcs  (see  ch.  iii.  6)  corresponds  to  iimypH'
fi^votf  and  els  r^y  ivtucoiip  rov  Xpurrov  to
CIS  rh  iK^ivov  B4Kfifuu  It  should  oe  noted
further  that  the  sentence  is  certainly  rather
a  peculiar  one,  from  the  use  of  such  uncom-
mon words  as  &mi^^  and  (wyp4of,  and  the
mixture  of  metaphors.  But  tne  sense  of
the  A.V.  is  fully  borne  out.  The  interpre-
tation preferred  by  Bishop  Ellicott  is  **  tney
may  recover  themselves  from  the  snare  of
the  devil  unto  his  will  (viz.  God*s),  having
(previously)  been  led  captive  by  him  (viz.
the  devil)."


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 14. — Endurance  ihe  lot  of  Chrisfs  ministers.  Continual  endurance  of  evil,
whether  directed  specially  against  himself,  or  generally  thwarting  the  cause  which
he  has  most  at  heart,  is  the  ordiuary  lot  of  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  exercising  his
ministry  in  an  evil  world.  And  in  order  to  be  ready  to  encounter  this  evil,  actively
or  passively,  as  the  case  may  require,  a  complete  concentration  of  purpose  on  the
fulfilment  of  his  ministry  is  absolutely  required.  If  the  heart  is  divided  between  the
ministry  of  God's  Word  and  the  enjoyment  of  an  easy  life,  there  will  be  a  constant
temptation  to  avoid  those  various  forms  of  "  hardship  "  which  properly  belong  to  the
campaign  of  the  soldiers  of  Christ.  Troubles  will  be  shirked  rather  than  endured ;
and  ministerial  duties  will  be  made  to  stand  on  one  side  when  they  interfere  with  the
inclinations  of  the  moment.  Labour  will  be  evaded  when  the  soul  calls  for  ease.  The
determined  struggle,  and  the  sturdy  stand  against  evil,  whether  in  his  own  heart
or  in  the  world  around  him,  will  l)e  postponed  to  a  more  convenient  season,  while  weak
compromises  and  sinful  compliances  take  their  place  in  the  inmiediate  present.  At
the  same  time,  contradiction  and  opposition,  crooks  and  crosses  of  various  kinds,  untoward
events,  troubles,  disappointments,  and  diihcultics  of  all  sorts,  will  be  met,  not  in  the
spirit  of  Christian  fortitude,  not  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  meekness  and  patience,  but
with  petulant  complaints,  or  with  roughness  and  ill  temper,  as  running  against  the
current  of  the  love  of  ease  in  the  soul.  It  is,  therefore,  incumbent  upon  the  servant
of  God  to  be  wholly  given  up  to  the  ministry  which  he  has  received.  He  must
resolutely  shake  off  the  entanglements  of  the  affairs  of  this  life,  that  he  may  please
him  who  called  him  to  be  a  soldier.  He  must  feel,  "  My  work  in  life,  my  mission,
the  dispensation  committed  to  me,  is  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world.
I  am  set  by  my  Lord  and  Master  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel — to  preach  it,  to  vindicate
it,  to  uphold  it  against  all  gainsayers,  to  adorn  it  with  my  own  life,  to  use  my  utmost
endeavour  for  its  m^ntenance,  its  propagation,  its  triumphs.  I  must  no  more  shrink
from  obloquy,  from  labour,  from  suffering,  from  troubles,  or,  if  need  be,  from  bonds
and  death,  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  work  and  ministry,  than  the  soldier  shrinks  from
fatigue  and  exposure,  from  hunger  and  hardship,  from  wounds  and  from  death,  in
bravely  discharging  the  duties  of  his  warfare."  For  his  encouragement  in  carrying
out  this  resolve,  he  has  the  example  of  his  Lord  who  suffered  unto  death  and  was
raised  a^ain  from  the  dead.  He  has  the  example  of  the  apostles  who  endured  troubles
and  bonds  and  imprisonment,  and  yet  saw  the  gospel  which  they  preached  triumphing
over  all  opposition.  He  has  the  promises  of  GK^  assuring  life,  ana  a  kingdom, to  those
who  suffer  and  die  with  Christ.  And  so,  accepting  endurance  as  the  portion  of  Christ's
servants,  he  pursues  his  ministry  diligently,  joyfully,  and  steadfastly,  throws  his
whole  strength  into  it,  and  looks  forward  with  an  unwavering  hope  to  obtain  the
salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory.

Vers.  16 — 26. — The  skilful  workman.    Besides  the  concentration  of  purpose,  and
the  willingness  to  endure^  which  are  ueceasary  to  the  faithful  minister  of  Christy  two


29  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  n.  1— 26^


other  qaalifications  are  no  less  needed.  The  one  Is  skill  in  his  work;  the  other  U
centleness  and  patience  in  dealing  with  thoee  that  oppose  themselves.  By  skill  in
his  work  we  mean  both  the  knowing  what  to  avoid  and  shun,  and  the  effectiye
handling  of  the  Word  of  truth.  The  minister  of  Christ  who  wastes  his  time,  and  spenda
his  strength  in  foolish  and  unlearned  questions  and  profane  babblings;  who  strives
about  words  to  no  profit;  who  dabbles  with  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the
traditions  of  men,  and  not  after  Christ ;  who  intrudes  into  things  which  he  hath  not
seen,  bringing  in  strange  doctrines  and  carnal  ordinances,  and  laying  burdens  upon
the  consciences  of  hrs  hearers,  which  God  has  not  laid ; — however  earnest  he  may  be,,
and  however  willing  he  may  be  to  endure  trouble  in  defence  of  his  teaching,  is  not
a  workman  approved  unto  God,  or  one  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed  of  his  work.
He  builds  upon  the  foundation  hay  and  stubble,  instead  of  gold  and  costly  stones.
Bat  the  skilful  workman  shuns  this.  He  will  not  allow  himself  to  be  enticed  into
unprofitable  controversies,  or  fritter  away  his  zeal  upon  things  of  no  moment.  But
he  Dends  all  the  powers  of  his  nUnd  to  divide  rightly  the  Word  of  truth.  Holy  Scrip-
ture is  his  modeL  What  is  made  much  of  in  Scripture  he  makes  much  of  in  his
teaching.  He  endeavours  to  preserve  the  relative  proportion  of  doctrines  which  he
finds  in  the  inspired  pages ;  to  treat  of  doctrine  and  of  practice  in  the  same  way  that
they  are  treated  of  in  the  Word — ^to  speak  as  do  the  oracles  of  GKxl.  His  aim  is  neither
to  exaggerate  nor  to  attenuate ;  to  speak  soberly,  but  not  to  speak  coldly ;  to  say
nothing  that  ought  not  to  be  said,  and  to  leave  unsaid  nothing  that  ought  to  be  said.
Thus  will  he  be  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  **  rightly  dividing  the
Word  of  truth.*'  The  other  qualification  is  scarcely  less  important.  *'  The  Lord's
servant  must  not  strive."    He  must  meet  contradiction,  opposition,  gainsaying,  with

gsntleness,  meekness,  and  love.  The  voice  of  his  Master  was  not  heard  in  the  street,
ftcd  up  in  anger,  or  cr}*ing  oat  in  wrangling  and  disputes.  He  neither  reviled  his
revilers  nor  threatened  his  persecutors.  His  servant  must  be  like  him.  Loving,
forbearing,  patient,  apt  to  teach,  with  a  burning  desire  to  save  his  opponents,  he  must
go  on  his  work,  despairing  of  none,  wearied  out  by  none,  praying  for  all,  if  God
peradventure  will  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  and  bring
them  out  of  the  captivity  of  sin  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — Exhortation  to  Timothy  to  he  strong.  The  apostle  founds  upon  the  fore-
going examples  and  warnings  an  admonition  to  Christian  firmness  and  courage.

I.  Thb  need  op  spiritual  strength.  "Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in
the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  Strength  was  necessary  to  meet  the  difficulties
and  dangers  of  his  official  life  ai  Ephesus.  2.  The  admonition  was  probably  needed
on  account  of  the  discouragements  which  Timothy  himself  must  have  felt  at  the  conduct
of  the  Asiatic  deserters,  3.  Strength  is  the  spring  of  happy  activity  in  any  sphere.
"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  your  strength."

II.  The  source  op  this  spirh'ual  strength.  **  The  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.**
It  seems  strange  to  say,  "  Be  strong,"  to  a  spiritually  discouraged  man,  as  it  would
be  strange  to  say  the  same  thing  to  a  physically  weak  man.  The  injunction  is  reason-
able, however,  when  we  consider  that  the  source  of  our  renewed  power  is  at  hand.
The  grace  of  Christ  is  the  inward  power  which  enables  us  •*  to  will  and  to  do  of  his
good  pleasure."  **  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might"  (Eph.  vi.  10).
Here  lies  the  true  source  of  our  strength.  The  apostle  declared  he  could  do  all  things
through  Christ  who  strengthened  him. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  2. — Admonition  to  Timothy  respecting  the  appointment  of  faithful  preachers.
At  such  a  period  of  unfaithfulness  and  timidity,  it  was  necessary  to  provide  for  the
continuous  wants  of  the  Church.

I.  The  trust  Timothy  is  to  deliver  to  faithful  men.  "  The  things  which
thou  heardest  from  me  anionz  many  witnesses."  1.  Timothy  heard  these  things  from
the  apostle  ai  his  ordination,  hut  oftener  stiU  during  his  long  missionary  trav^eis,  when
ho  would  hear  the  apostle  discourse  to  large  and  varied  congregations  of  both  Jewa


CH.  II.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  27

and  Grentiles.  2.  The  substance  of  his  preaching  would  he  the  grand  outlines  of  Pauline
theology,  as  they  are  exhibited  in  the  Epistles,  Jesus  Christ  being  the  central  theme.
3.  There  is  nothing  here  to  countenance  the  Roman  idea  of  traditiouy  as  if  Timothy
was  to  transmit  a  body  of  oral  instruction  to  the  latest  generations,  through  successive
generations  of  teachers.  The  instructions  in  question  are  actually  contained  in  the
Scriptures,  and  are  no  longer  committed  to  the  doubtful  custody  of  human  memory.

if.  The  persons  to  whom  the  trust  was  to  be  committed.  "The  same  com-
mit thou  to  faithful  men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."  1.  Timothy  was  to
judge  of  their  qualifications.  They  were  not  to  judge  of  their  own  fitness ;  they  were
not  to  find  their  place  as  teachers  by  self-appointment.  2.  Their  ordination  in  itsdf
was  to  he  no  quaiification ;  for  they  might  possibly  have  been  wholly  destitute  of
teaching  gifts.  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  justify  the  idea  of  apostolic  suc-
cession. 8.  Their  qualifications  were  to  he  twofold.  (1)  Faithfulness ;  for  '^  a  steward
of  the  mysteries  of  God  "  must  be  faithful,  not  betraying  the  charge  committed  to  him,
declaring  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  and  keeping  back  nothing  that  is  profitable.
(2)  Teaching  power.  "  Who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."  The  bishop  must  be
**  apt  to  teach/'  with  a  true  understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  a  gift  of  explication,  and
a  faculty  of  edifying  speech. — T.  0.

Vers.  3 — 7. —  The  apostle  hespeaks  from  Timothy  a  copartnership  in  affliction^
which  woxdd  have  its  due  reward.  I.  The  duty  of  suffebing  hardship  in  the
606PEL.  "  Sufier  hardship  with  me,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Christ."  1.  The  minister
is  a  soldier  of  Christ,  enrolled  hy  him,  trained  hy  him,  armed  hy  him,  supported  by
him,  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  The  ministry  is  a  warfare,  involving,  not  only
the  *'good  fight  of  faith,"  but  an  increasing  struggle  against  false  teachers.  2.  As  a
good  soldier,  he  must  he  prepared  to  suffer  hardships.  Like  the  soldier,  he  must  often
leave  home  and  friends,  expose  himself  to  cold  and  hunger  and  fatigue ;  he  must  fear-
lessly meet  the  enemies  of  his  Lord,  and  die,  if  need  be,  in  the  arms  of  victory.  3.  The
W>stle  strengthens  his  admonition  by  an  appeal  to  his  own  hardships  and  sufferings.
l^mothy  took  a  sympathetic  interest  in  the  career  of  the  greatest  of  the  apostles.  The
tried  veteran  appeals  to  the  young  soldier.

II.  Encouragements  to  be  drawn  from  the  duties  and  rewards  of  the
Christian  life.  There  are  three  pictures  presented  to  our  view— one  military,  another
agonistical,  and  another  agricultural.  1.  The  supreme  unembarrassed  devotion  of  the
soldier  to  his  commander.  "No  one  that  serveth  as  a  soldier  entangleth  himself  with
the  afiairs  of  this  life ;  that  he  may  please  him  who  enrolled  him  to  be  a  soldier."  The
Roman  soldier  was  isolated  by  express  law  from  all  trades  and  interests  and  agencies
that  would  interfere  with  the  discipline  of  his  profession.  (1)  The  minister  who  is
supremely  concerned  about  the  afiairs  of  the  next  life  must  stand  free  from  the
entanglements  of  human  occupation,  so  as  to  devote  his  whole  energies  without  dis-
traction or  dispersion  of  thought  to  the  business  of  his  Master.  The  apostle  had
himself  occasionally  to  resort  to  industry  for  his  own  support,  under  circumstances
of  a  purely  exceptional  nature ;  but  he  demands  an  extrication  of  the  ministry  from  all
secular  engagements  in  his  elaborate  plea  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  ix.).  (2)  His
sole  motive  is  to  please  the  Master  who  enrolled  him  in  this  service.  It  is  not  to
please  himself,  or  to  please  men  by  seeking  ease,  or  emolument,  or  social  position,
but  to  please  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  whose  book  of  life  his  name  is  written.  2.  The
severe  training  and  lawful  striving  of  the  athlete  in  the  games.  *'  But  if  any  one  also
strive  in  the  games,  he  is  not  crowned  unless  he  have  striven  lawfully."  The  figure
was  a  familiar  one  to  the  people  of  that  age  who  dwelt  in  cities.  (1)  It  is  implied
that  ministers,  in  striving  for  the  crown  of  life,  must  strip  off  all  encumbrances —
'Maying  aside  every  weight" — that  they  may  the  more  easily  press  to  the  mark,
looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  (2)  It  implies  that  they
must  undergo  the  discipline  of  severe  training  to  fit  themselves  for  the  work  of  ministry,
and  carry  on  their  service  according  to  the  high  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  3.  The
reward  of  the  labouring  husbandman.  **  The  labouring  husbandman  must  needs  first
partake  of  the  fruits  of  his  labour."  (1)  This  does  not  mean  that  the  husbandman
would  be  the  first  to  partake  of  the  fruits,  but  that  he  must  first  labour  before  he
obtained  the  reward.    There  is  evidently  an  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  a  laborious


28  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  il  1—28.

hnabandman  was  the  most  fully  entitled  to  rewaid.  (2)  The  miidster  of  Christ  mnit
plough  and  sow  before  he  can  reap ;  he  must  use  all  laborious  diligeooe  in  his  calling
not  disoouraged  because  he  does  not  at  onoe  see  the  fruits  of  his  labour,  for  the  seed
may  not  sprout  up  quickly,  but  eyer  looking  upward  for  the  dews  of  Heayen**  gnoe
to  descend  upon  the  wide  neld  of  his  ministry.

III.  Thb  duty  of  oiynra  oonbidbbation  to  all  thkb  facts.  ''Conddsr  what
I  say,  and  the  Lord  wiU  giye  thee  understanding  in  all  things.**  "L  It  is  ihe  Lord
only  who  can  give  us  a  true  insight  into  both  doctrine  and  duty.  2.  Those  who  m^oy
this  Divine  htJp  are  under  the  greatest  obligation  to  use  their  understandings  upon  the
highest  qf  all  themes.— T.  C

Yer.  8. — The  contemplation  qf  Christ  an  incentive  to  comfort  and  constancy.
Timothy  was  to  think  of  Christ's  yictory  for  himself  and  for  us  as  a  ground  of
encouragement.

L  Christ  thb  perpetual  Orject  of  Christian  rememrrance.  "Bemember
Jesus  Christ,  risen  firom  the  dead,  of  the  seed  of  Dayid,  according  to  my  gospel."  Tbid
two  great  facts  that  were  to  be  eyer  present  to  Timothy's  mind  were  the  Incarnation
and  the  Resurrection — ^the  two  miracles  that  stood,  respectiyely,  at  the  beginning  and
the  end  of  bis  earthly  history.  The  one  would  speak  of  the  hopes  of  the  race  of  man
springing  from  the  Saviour's  assumption  of  our  nature  in  the  royal  line  of  Dayid ;
tne  other  of  the  completeness  of  the  redemption  sealed  by  the  resurrection  from  the
dead.  Timothy  would  be  encouraged  to  bear  his  trials  by  the  thought  of  Christ's
victory  over  death.

11.  Christ  the  perpetual  Theme  of  the  gospel.  ''According  to  my  gospeL"
1.  These  two  facts  are  fundwnental  in  the  gospel.  Take  them  away,  there  is  no  hope
for  man,  no  atonement,  no  blessed  life  hereafter.  2.  These  two  facts  needed  to  be
taught  in  an  age  when  false  teachers  denied  a  real  incarnation,  saying  that  the  Saviour
had  a  phantom-body,  and  a  real  resurrection,  because  a  bodily  resurrection  was  not
to  be  thought  of,  as  matter,  being  essentially  evil,  could  not  attach  to  a  Divine  being.

— T.a

Vers.  9, 10. —  The  example  of  the  apostle's  own  sufferings — their  spiritual  motive  and
design.  I.  Timothy  was  to  be  encouraged  by  this  example.  **  Wherein  I  suffer
hardship  unto  bonds  as  a  malefactor."  He  was  now  a  prisoner  at  Borne,  because  he
preached  the  gospel  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection,  and  suffered  as  much  as  if  ho  had
been  a  breaker  of  all  laws,  human  and  Divine.

II.  The  apostle's  impbisonmekt  did  not  impose  fetters  upon  the  gospel.  **  But
the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  This  was  said  for  the  encouragement  of  Timothy,  who
may  have  feared  that  the  Boman  imprisonment  would  be  fatal  to  the  progress  of  the
gospel.  The  apostle,  though  a  prisoner,  had  liberty  to  add  many  pages  to  that  Word
of  God  which  Nero  could  not  bind,  for  we  have  no  less  than  three  or  four  prison-
Epistles  in  the  canon  of  inspiration.  The  imprisonment  of  John  Huss  in  a  fortress  on
the  Bhiuo  gave  him  leisure  to  write  the  trutn  he  could  no  longer  proclaim  with  fiery
lips  to  the  Bohemians.  The  Wartburg  seclusion  of  a  year  gave  Luther  the  leisure  to
translate  the  Scriptures  for  his  German  countrymen.  Verily  the  Word  of  God  is  not
bound.

III.  The  motive  or  design  op  the  apostle's  sufferings.  "  Therefore  I  endure  all
things  for  the  elect's  sake,  that  they  also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ
Jesus  with  eternal  glory.'*  1.  The  zealous  minister  of  Christ  thinks  no  sufferings  too
great  tliat  are  needed  for  the  sake  of  God's  elect.  The  apostle's  life  was  one  long  career
of  labour  and  affliction  on  their  behalf.  2.  Ministers  must  labour  for  the  salvation  of
the  elect.  Human  instrumentality  is  clearly  recognized  and  honoured  in  this  great  work.
Paul,  Apollos,  and  Cephas  were  "ministers  by  whom  the  Corinthians  believed."  3.
There  is  a  salvation  provided  for  the  elect.  They  are  "  chosen  in  Christ "  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  "  unto  holiness  "  (Eph.  i.  4).  4.  The  salvation  is  only  to  be
obtained  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ.  5.  It  is  a  salvation  that  finds  its  true  termina-
tion in  "  eternal  glory, ^ — T.  C.

Vers.  11 — 13. — A  faithful  saying  for  consolation  and  for  warning.     The  apostle


CH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  29"

introduces  the  familiar  formula,  **  This  is  a  faithful  saying,"  with  its  rhythmical  signi-
ficance and  arrangement,  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  what  is  to  follow.

I.  Fahiliab  truths  with  a  oonbolatoby  aspect.  "If  we  died  with  him,  we
shall  also  live  with  him ;  if  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him.**  There  is
here  an  expressive  climax,  setting  forth  two  different  aspects  of  the  union  hetween
Christ  and  his  people.  1.  Identification  vfith  Christ  in  his  death.  All  helievers  died
with  him,  as  their  Head  and  Representative,  and  thus  died  to  sin,  through  the  efficacy  of
his  death,  so  as  to  he  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death ;  and  thus,  heing  made
conformahle  to  his  death,  they  have  fellowship  with  him  in  his  sufferings.  2.  But
identification  with  Christ  in  his  life  follows  as  a  consequence  of  this  identification  in
death,  hecause  we  rose  with  him  from  the  dead,  to  he  planted  in  the  likeness  of  his.
resurrection,  that  we  should  walk  in  newness  of  life ;  and  thus,  heiog  made  alive  unto
God,  we  live  a  life  of  holiness  and  sanctification  with  him  (Rom.  vi.  5 — 8).  3.  Identic
ficcttion  with  Christ  in  endurance  involves  identification  in  his  reigning  glory.  Believers
who  suffer  shame  and  loss  and  outrage  for  Christ's  sake  shall  reign  with  him  in  glory
hereafter,  as  they  reign  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  with  him  now ;  for  they  are  *'  a  kingdom
of  priests,**  destined  for  everlasting  glory  (Rev.  i.  6).

II.  Fahiliab  truths  with  a  threatening  aspect.  "  If  we  deny  him,  he  also  will
deny  us ;  if  we  helieve  not,  yet  he  ahideth  faithful ;  for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  1.  The
denial  of  Christ  is  fated.  It  is  to  reject  the  only  Saviour.  Some  deny  his  Messiahship ;
some  deny  his  Divinity ;  some  deny  him  hy  their  works,  heing  ashamed  of  him  and
refusing  to  confess  him ;  some  deny  him  hy  open  apostasy.  In  all  these  cases  the
denial  involves  our  Lord's  denial  of  them  (Matt.  viL  23 ;  x.  23).  2.  Our  unbelief  does
not  affect  the  essential  faithfulness  of  Christ,  "  If  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful.**
1.  This  does  not  mean  that  he  will  save  us  whether  we  helieve  in  him  or  not ;  for  he  has
just  said  that  if  we  deny  him  he  will  also  deny  us,  and  faith  is  always  an  essential
condition  of  salvation.  3.  It  means  that  he  will  abide  faithful  to  his  ujord  of  threaten^'*
ing,  as  well  as  to  his  nature  and  perfections ;  for  he  cannot  falsify  his  declarations  that
**  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  condemned  "  (Mark  xvi.  16).  He  will  say  to  apostates
in  the  last  day,  **  I  never  knew  you."  It  would  be  to  deny  himself  to  act  otherwise.
He  cannot  consistently  with  his  character  regard  faith  and  unbelief  as  the  same  thing,
llius  the  apostle  stimulates  Timothy  to  fidelity  by  an  exhibition  at  once  of  the  bright
and  the  dark  sides  of  Divine  truth. — T.  C.

Ver.  14. — An  injunction  to  put  Ephesian  believers  in  remembrance  of  these  truths.
This  begins  a  new  portion  of  the  Epistle.

I,  Christian  people  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  truth  in  all  its  aspects.
"  Put  them  in  remembrance  of  these  things."  1.  We  are  apt  to  forget  the  consolatory
aspect  of  truth  under  the  pressure  of  present  trial,  as  worldly  men  are  apt  to  forget  its
threatening  aspect  under  the  absorbing  worldliness  of  their  lives.  2.  The  Lord  has  made
provision,  to  **put  us  in  remembrance,^  through  the  ministry  and  through  the  Word  of
God,  to  which  we  do  well  to  take  heed  as  to  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place.

II.  Christian  people  need  to  be  warned  against  ruinous  strifes  about  words.
"  Solemnly  charging  them  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  not  to  contend  about  words,  to  no
profit,  to  the  subverting  of  them  that  hear."  1.  There  are  many  religious  controversies
which  turn  rather  upon  words  than  upon  things,  B,nd  thus  involve  a  waste  of  intellectual
energy.  These  "strifes  of  words"  were  characteristic  of  the  false  teachers  (1  Tim.  vi.
4).  2.  There  is  nothing  in  the  passage  to  warrant  a  disregard  for  "  the  form  of  sound
words,"  for  the  "  wholesome  words  "  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  cover  things  as  well  as
thoughts.  3.  7^  apostle  condemns  a  urrangling  about  terms  which  brings  no  advantage
to  truth,  but  rather  tends  to  the  subversion  of  the  hearers,  misleading  their  judgments
and  overturning  their  faith.  Simple-minded  people  might  begin  to  doubt  the  truth  of
a  gospel  about  which  contending  controversialists  were  so  much  at  vnriance.  Unsettle*
ment  of  mind  is  dangerous,  while  it  lays  an  arrest  on  all  earnest  work. — T.  G.

Ver.  15. — The  qualifications  of  the  gospel-preacher,  "  Give  diligence  to  present  thy-
self approved  unto  Grod,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,"

L  He  must  be  laborious.  The  term  "  workman  "  implies  this  fact  as  well  as  the  direct
admonition  to  "  give  diligence  "  to  his  ministry.  The  ministry  is  a  good  work,  demanding


aO  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,  [cH.n.  1— 2«.


industry,  study,  and  care,  and  no  man  is  sufficient  for  it  without  the  grace  of  God.
It  is  a  comfort  as  well  as  an  honour  to  think  that  ministers  are  **  workm  with  God"
(1  Cor.  iiL  9).

n.  Thbt  must  8EBK  GoD^s  APPROVAL  IN  THXiR  WORK.  They  most  not  study  to
please  men,  else  tbey  will  not  be  the  servants  of  Christ ;  but  they  must  approve  them-
selves to  God,  showing  all  good  fidelity,  and  oommeod  themselves  to  every  man's
conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.

IIL  Thbt  must  work  with  a  amciRiTir  and  bfficienoy  that  will  hot  bbiko
SRAME  upon  thembelvbs.  The  negligent,  or  unskilled,  or  ignorant  workman  will  pro-
duce work  which  may  well  put  him  to  shame.  But  the  true  workman  loves  to  produce
good  and  abiding  work,  such  as  will  stand  the  fiery  test  of  the  last  day  (1  Cor,  iiL  13)l
He  may  often  feel  his  insufficiency ;  but  he  will  never  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel,  nor  of
his  sufierings,  nor  of  his  fiiithful  ministrations  of  the  Word.

IV .  He  must  have  skill  in  the  use  of  the  Word  of  God.  **  Handling  ari^t  the
Word  of  truth."  1.  His  one  booky  his  one  weapon^  hi$  one  interest^  m  the  Divine  Word,
His  mind,  his  heart,  his  will,  must  be  concentrated  upon  this  Word.  It  must  form  the
matter  of  bis  preaching,  the  mould  of  bis  thoughts,  the  inspimtion  of  his  imagination.
2.  ffe  must  he  aUe  to  handle  it  aright^  with  due  regard  /or  the  atUhority  qf  Chd,  to  ite
own  intriiuic  daimsy  and  to  the  welfare  of  the  souU  cf  men.  He  must  be  able  to  ^  divide
it  aright,**  distributing  to  babes  in  Christ  and  to  full-grown  men  according  to  their
capacities  and  their  circumstances ;  he  must  not  pervert  it  or  wrest  it  from  its  true  sense ;
he  must  not  keep  back  anything  that  is  profitable,  but  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God.
He  must  not  wander  to  the  right  or  loft,  but  keep  a  straight  course  forward  in  the  path
of  truth.— T.  C.

Vers.  IC — 18. — A  warning  against  vain  habUings,  with  their  tendency  to  heresy  and
immety,    *'  But  shun  profane  babblings."

I.  The  duty  of  the  minister  toward  such  babbltngs.  He  is  to  shun  them,
because  they  are  profitless — a  mere  sound  of  words,  without  solid  meaning ;  great  swelling
words  of  vanity,  not  only  unprofitable,  but  contrary  to  the  doctrine  that  is  according  to
godliness.  The  minister  must  shun,  discourage,  and  repudiate  them  in  the  interests  of
truth  and  piety.

II.  The  tendency  of  such  babblings.  "  They  will  proceed  further  in  ungodliness."
The  allusion  is  not  to  the  babblings,  but  to  the  false  teachers.  1.  There  is  a  close  con-
nection between  lax  doctrine  and  a  loose  life.  The  error  of  the  false  teachers  had  not
yet  appeared  in  its  fully  developed  form,  but  its  true  moral  tendency  was  clearly  fore-
seen from  the  first.  2.  ITiere  is  a  tendency  infoXse  teachers  to  carry  their  principles  to
iheir  last  logical  restdts.  They  have  thrown  off  the  checks  of  authority  and  conscience ;
they  have  been  emboldened,  perhaps,  by  a  temporary  success ;  and  so  they  insist  on
wresting  the  whole  Scripture  to  their  own  destruction  as  well  as  that  of  others.

III.  The  effects  of  such  false  teaching.  "  And  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a
gangrene."  1.  It  wxU  spread  further  and  further,  (1)  Through  the  subtlety  of  seducers ;
(2)  through  the  unwary  simplicity  of  Christian  professors;  (3)  and  as  a  judicial  inflic-
tion upon  such  as,  possessing  no  love  of  the  truth,  receive  delusion  to  believe  a  lie.
2.  It  vnll  have  corrupting  and  destroying  effects.  The  strong  figure  of  the  apostle  sets
the  matter  in  an  impressive  light.

IV.  The  ring-leaders  of  heresy.  "  Of  whom  is  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus ;  men  who
concerning  the  truth  have  erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already,  and  over-
throw the  faith  of  some."  1.  The  leading  apostles  of  error.  (1)  It  is  a  solemn  thought
that  the  Spirit  of  inspiration  has  given  an  immortality  of  infamy  to  these  two  names.
If  they  were  ambitious  of  notoriety,  they  have  gained  it  far  beyond  the  extent  of  their
expectations.  (2)  Hymenseus  is  evidently  the  person  referred  to  already  (1  Tim.  i.  25),
whom  the  apostle  had  "  delivered  unto  Satan ; "  but  he  seems  to  have  profited  in  no
way  in  the  interval  by  the  severe  discipline  applied  to  him.  Of  Philetns  nothing  is
known.  It  is  a  Greek  name,  but  it  occurs  in  Koman  inscriptions.  2.  JTie  nature  of
their  error.  Their  principal  error,  which  is  mentioned,  was  a  denial  of  the  resurrection
in  its  true  sense.  (1)  They  probably  perverted  the  words  of  the  apostle  himself  when
he  spoke  of  a  spiritual  resurrection  (Rom.  vi.  4,  etc. ;  Col.  ii.  12),  of  which  they  could
say  truly  enough  that  "  it  was  past  already ; "  but  they  denied  a  resurrection  of  the  body.


CH.U.1— 26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  31

which  was  just  as  expressly  taught  by  the  same  apostle.  (2)  The  error  had  its  ori^n
in  the  Greek  philosophy,  which  regarded  matter  as  essentially  evil,  and  as  therefore
imworthy  to  share  in  the  ultimate  glorification  of  the  redeemed.  3.  The  injuriouti  effects
of  their  error.  "  And  overthrow  the  faith  of  some."  (1)  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection
is  founded  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  is  the  foundation-doctrine  of  Christianity.
Those  errorists  seem  to  have  touched  with  unholy  hands  this  comer-stone  of  Christian
hope.  (2)  The  influence  of  the  errorists,  evil  as  it  was,  was  only  partial.  It  only
a^ected  "  some ;  **  but  even  this  thought  was  a  sad  one  to  the  apostle. — T.  C.

Yer.  19. — The  comfort  amidst  abounding  apostasy.  Though  some  turn  away  firom
the  truth,  God's  Church  stands  firm  in  its  grand  integrity.

I.  The  Church  of  God  in  its  ever-dubing  stabilitt.  ''Howbeit  the  firm
foundation  of  GKxl  standeth."  1.  The  Church  is  very  properly  called  a  foundation^
because  it  is  placed  in  the  world  as  the  platform  on  which  tne  whole  future  household
of  faith  is  to  rest  (Eph.  iL  20).  Christ  is  the  Comer-stone  of  the  foundation.  2.  It
stands  firm  from  age  to  age  on  its  unshaken  foundation^  notwithstanding  all  the
efforts  made  to  destroy  it.  It  was  to  be  the  constant  witness  to  the  trath  amidst  all
error  and  apostasy.

II.  The  Church  of  God  wirn  rrs  twofold  inscbiption.  **  Having  this  seal.  The
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  bis ;  and.  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord
depart  from  unrighteousness."  It  was  an  ancient  custom  to  engrave  upon  a  building
an  inscription  which  told  of  its  origin  and  purpose.  The  names  of  the  apostles  were
written  in  the  twelve  foundations  of  the  apocalyptic  city  of  Qod  (Rev.  xxi.  14).  The
Church  has  a  seal  with  a  double  inscription,  which  displays  the  tme  character  of  the
edifice.  1.  One  inscription  is  the  legend  of  comfort  and  hope,  "  The  Lord  knoweth
them  that  are  bis."  What  a  comfort  there  is  in  the  thought  of  this  individualizing
knowledge !  What  a  hope  there  is  in  the  thought  that  the  saints  are  God's  "  purchased
possession"!  2.  Another  inscription  is  the  legend  of  duty,  "Let  every  one  that
nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness."  There  is  no  place  for
imrighteousness  in  the  Church  of  God.  Therefore  believers  must  separate  themselves
from  all  evil— T.  C.

Vers.  20,  21. — The  Church  in  its  visible  aspect  before  the  world.  The  apostle  seems
to  be  answering  the  question  why  there  are  such  unworthy  members  in  the  visible
communion  of  the  Church.

I.  The  Church  is  like  a  gbeat  house  with  various  sorts  of  vessels.  "  Now  in
a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth ;
and  some  unto  honour,  and  some  unto  dishonour."  1.  It  is  contended  that  the  great
house  here  is  not  the  Church,  but  Christendom,  that  is,  aU  that  caUs  itself  Christian,  because
the  Church  consists  only  of  saints.  2.  It  is  the  Church,  however^  qf  which  the  apostle
is  speaking  in  tlie  context^  and  not  the  world;  but  whereas  in  the  last  verse  it  was
the  invisible  Church,  it  is  here  the  Church  visible — that  is,  the  Church  in  the  aspect  it
presents  to  the  world.  The  distinction  between  the  Church  visible  and  the  Church
invisible  is  clearly  recognized  in  Scripture.  The  one  represents  the  Church  as  it  is
seen  bv  God ;  the  other,  as  it  is  seen  by  man.  The  one  represents  the  Church  as  to  its
true  idea  and  constitution ;  the  other,  as  it  has  appeared  in  the  world  as  a  mixed  com-
munion. The  Church  visible  appears  like  a  great  house  with  two  distinct  kinds  of
vessels — some  very  precious  and  durable,  others  comparatively  valueless,  easily  and  soon
broken.  There  are  vessels  for  honour  and  vessels  for  dishonour.  The  idea  is  much  the
same  as  that  of  the  drag-net  in  the  parable  (Matt  ziii.  47 — 49).

II.  The  duty  of  sepabation  fbom  the  vessels  of  dishonoub.  "  If  a  man  there-
fore purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the
Master's  use,  prepared  unto  every  good  work."  The  thought  of  separation  from  the
false  teachers  was,  no  doubt,  uppermost  in  the  apostle*s  mind,  but  it  nas  a  wider  scope.
1,  It  is  our  duty  to  withdraw  from  error.  This  withdrawal  may  be  effected  in  sevml
ways.  The  apostle  says  to  Timothy,  "  From  such  withdraw  thyself"  (1  Tim.  vi.  6) ;
he  says  to  Titus,  "  A  man  that  is  a  heretic  avoid  "  (Titus  iii.  10).  The  separation
may  take  place  by  the  heretic  being  cast  out  of  communion;  or  avoided  in  the  inter-
course of  life ;  or,  in  the  last  resort,  the  believer  may  withdraw  himself  from  the  society


32  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  n.  1— 2a

which  fails  to  cast  him  out.  Or  the  heliever  may  he  called  upon  to  "  purge  himself* —
terms  which  seem  to  imply  personal  defilement  in  a  separate  walk  of  holiness  and
parity.  He  mast  purge  himself  from  heresy  and  impurity.  2.  The  right  dcdiaUum
and  destination  of  the  vend  for  honour,  (1)  He  will  become  "  sanctified,  in  ita  double
sense— consecrated  to  God  and  walking  in  the  parity  of  a  separated  life.  (2)  He
will  be  serviceable  to  the  Master  of  the  house  in  all  the  various  ministries  to  which
be  may  be  called.  ((3)  He  will  be  prepared  onto  every  good  work.  Unlike  the
unwise  and  the  evil  man,  who  is  to  all  good  works  reprobate,  he  is,  as  created  in
Ohrist  Jesus  unto  good  works,  enabled  to  run  in  the  way  of  the  Lord's  command-
ments.— ^T.  G»

Ver.  22.—  The  importance  of  a  pure  and  circumspect  walk,  L  Neoattvelt.  "  Flee
youthful  lusts."  1.  These  rrfer  to  those  passions  and  desires  which  are  so  tempting  to
tfOuM.  They  **  war  against  the  soul,"  and  are  most  inimical  to  holiness  and  salvation.
The  indulgence  of  corrupt  passions  would  also  lead  to  serious  scandals.  2.  They  rrfer
likewise  to  thoee  vehement  and  headstrong  passions  which  often  lead  young  men  into
foolish  courses,  or  to  the  rage  for  novelty  and  the  egotistic  vanity  which  so  often  lead  to
religious  errors  like  those  of  Hymennus  and  Philetus.

II.  PoBrrrvELT.  **  Follow  after  righteousness,  love,  peace,  with  them  that  call  on
the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  1.  Righteousness,  Fidelity  in  all  human  relations
especially,  but  a  right  manner  of  life.  Believers  are :  (1)  To  yield  their  members  as  instru-
ments of  righteousness  (Rom.  vi.  13).  (2)  To  be  armed  with  righteousness  as  a  breast-
plate (Eoh.  vi.  14).  (3)  Righteousness  tends  to  life  (Prov.  xi.  19).  (4)  It  brings  its  own
rewaru  (^rov.  zi.  18).  (5)  Its  effect  is  quietness  and  assurance  for  ever  (£a.  zzxii.
17).  2.  Love,  Love  to  all  men.  (1)  It  is  of  God  (1  John  iv.  7).  (2)  It  is  taught  by
God  (1  Thess.  iv.  9).  (3)  It  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  (4)  It  ought  to  be
an  active  and  abiding  principle  (Hob.  vi.  10;  1  Cor.  viii.  13).  (6)  The  greatest  sacri-
fices are  nothing  without  it  (1  Cor.  xiii.  3).  3.  Peace,  (1)  Its  nature  and  advantages
(a)  It  springs  from  heavenly  wisdom  (Jas.  iii.  17).  (h)  It  is  necessary  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  life  (1  Pet.  iii.  10, 11).  (c)  There  is  a  blessing  for  the  peacemaker  (Matt.  v.
9).  (2)  Its  objects.  "  Them  that  call  upon  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  That  is,
believers.  We  are  to  endeavour  to  have  peace  with  all  men  (Rom.  xii.  18).  But  we
are  to  seek  the  peace  of  the  Church  (Ps.  cxxii.  6 — 8)— of  those  who  worship  Christ  with
all  purity  of  heart,  as  contrasted  with  those  **  whose  mind  and  conscience  are  defiled  "*
(Titus  i.  15).— T.  C.

Ver.  23. — A  vurning  against  contentious  questionings,  I.  Thb  mikisteb  op  Christ
MUST  AVOID  iNAiT  DISCUSSIONS.  "  But  foolish  and  ignorant  questions  avoid."  The
false  teachers  wasted  their  energies  upon  questions  of  this  class,  because  they  had  no
just  idea  of  the  relative  importance  of  truth,  taking  small  things  for  great  and  great
things  for  small.  The  matters  in  dispute  were  useless  and  unedifying,  being  foreif^i  to
the  true  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  Four  times  in  these  two  Epistles  does  the  apostle
repeat  this  grave  warning.

IL  The  tendency  of  such  discussions.  "  Knowing  that  they  do  gender  strifes.**
They  break  the  peace  of  Churches,  alienate  the  hearts  of  ministers,  and  impede  the
progress  of  the  gospel. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  24 — 26. — The  importance  of  ministers  cultivating  a  peaceful  and  forbearing
spirit,  I.  The  true  temper  of  the  minister  of  Christ.  1.  Negatively,  ''The  servant
of  the  Lord  must  not  strive."  This  does  not  mean  that  (1)  he  is  not  to  contend  earnestly
for  the  faith  (Jude  4);  but  (2)  that  he  is  not  to  fight  about  trifles,  nor  to  argue  with
acerbity  of  temper,  nor  for  mere  victory.  The  "  bond  of  peace  "  must  be  maintained  in
controversy.  2.  Positively.  (1)  "  But  be  gentle  unto  all  men ; "  cultivating  a  spirit  of
habitual  conciliation,  while  using  arguments  of  the  greatest  cogency.  (2)  "  Apt  to
teach;"  showing  capacity  and  disposition  to  instruct  the  ignorant  and  the  obstinate.
(3)  *'  Patient; "  bearing  with  the  infirmities  of  weak  brethren,  with  the  irritating  opposi-
tions of  adversaries,  and  with  the  reproaches  of  evil  men  generally.  (4)  **  In  meekness
instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves"  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  thwarting  or
perverting  the  gospel.    The  minister  must  be  ready  to  instruct  such  persons  in  a  meek


OH.  n.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  33

and  humble  spirit,  because  they  may  be  ignorant,  or  ill-informed,  or  deeply  prejudiced
from  the  circumstances  of  their  early  training.

II.  The  benefits  that  will  accrue  from  such  methods  of  instruction.  "  If  Grod
peradventure  will  give  them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  they  may
recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by  the
Lord's  servant  unto  the  will  of  God."  1.  A  meek  and  gentle  address  may  bring  such
errorists  to  repent  of  their  sin  and  ac^t  the  true  doctrine  of  faith.  It  is  possible  to
repel  them  by  our  harsh  reproaches.  We  ought  rather  to  show  them  the  truth  without
passion,  and  enforce  it  with  all  the  kindly  urgency  of  true  affection.  The  necessity  of
repentance  in  such  a  case  marks  the  essentially  sinful  character  of  opposition  to  the
truth.  2.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  may  he  the  means  of  recovering  out  of  error  as  well
as  sin.  (1)  Error  is  the  devil's  snare  as  well  as  sin,  for  it  leads  downwards  to  sin.  It
acts  like  a  stupefying  drink.  (2)  Some  errorists  awake  out  of  their  intellectual  intoxi-
cation, if  they  are  wisely  dealt  with,  and  open  their  eyes  to  the  blessed  truth  of  the
gospel.  (3)  The  will  of  God  once  established  in  such  hearts,  as  the  guiding  principle  of
life,  completes  the  recovery  from  error. — T.  C,

Ver.  3. — Culture  of  strength,  "Endure  hardness."  We  are  all  endangered  by  ease
and  self-indulgence.  The  soft  south  wind  of  worldly  comfort  enfeebles  us.  Dangerous,
for  to  the  soldier  nerveless  strength  is  death ;  and  the  great  campaign  requires  on  our
part  energy  and  courage  all  through.

I.  It  is  hard  to  subjugate  the  present  world.  In  the  fourth  verse  Paul  speaks
of  the  **  affairs  of  this  life,"  in  which  Timothy,  like  the  rest  of  us,  was  in  danger  of  "being
entangled ; "  and  unquestionably,  apart  from  evil,  the  innocent  side  of  the  present  life
is  most  attractive  to  us,  in  all  its  forms  of  pleasure-seeking  and  outward  prosperity  and
honour.

IL  It  is  hard  to  sxtffer  reproach  and  shame.  How  hard  only  those  know  who
have  felt  the  constant  irritant  of  a  relentless  persecution  for  righteousness'  sake.  "  I
suffer  trouble,"  says  Paul,  "  as  an  evil-doer.^  And  this  was  the  great  trial  of  the  early
Christians — not  merely  "  bonds  and  imprisonments,  but  the  calunmies  which  made  them
the  scorn  of  men.  *ihe  grace  of  God  can  sustain  us  in  all  our  tribulations  ;  but  it
requires  "  hardness "  to  "  endure  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible"  when  the  character  is
subjected  to  human  scorn  and  hatred. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  21. — Fitness  for  service.  "Meet  for  the  Master's  use."  Christ  is  our  Lord  as
well  as  our  Saviour.  Wo  are  under  a  Master^  and  must  briog  our  thought  in  captivity
unto  him.

I.  Meetness.  For  in  man  there  is  a  power  that  grows  by  culture.  Not  so  with  the
inferior  animals.  Take  the  bee :  the  first  cell  it  makes  is  as  geometrically  perfect  as  the
last.  So  take  the  bird :  the  first  nest  it  makes  is  as  soft  and  complete  as  uie  last  But
man  can  grow  in  meetness.  Self-Discipline  meetens.  Sorrow  meetens.  Suffering
meetens.

II.  Ministrations.  Use,  This  characterizes  all  the  works  of  God.  The  river  is  not
only  a  silver  thread  running  through  the  landscape;  it  brings  freshness  and  verdure,
and  the  cattle  come  to  the  banks  to  drink,  and  there  is  emerald  verdure  by  the  river-
side. Ships,  too,  float  on  its  waters.  We  are  to  be  of  u^e  to  the  Master.  Ho  deigns  to
use  us.  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  Many  in  this  age  dislike  the  word
"  Master ; "  but  we  are  always  under  some  master,  consciously  or  unconsciously.  W«
serve  God  or  Mammon,  and  we  cannot  serve  both.  We  are  to  attend  to  spiritual  mean»
of  grace,  and  to  seek  out  modes  of  service,  so  as  to  be  of  use  to  the  Master. — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Hardship  in  connection  with  the  Christian  ministry.  I.  Preliminaet
EXHORTATION.  1.  As  to  personal  strength.  "  Thou  therefore,  my  child,  be  strengthened
in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  As  the  apostle's  power  of  working  was  already
much  crippled  by  close  imprisonment,  he  naturally  felt  anxious  regarding  the  future  of
Christ's  cause.  In  calling  Timothy  his  son,  he  does  not  formally  name  him  as  his
successor.  At  the  same  time,  he  may  be  regarded  as  looking  to  him  as  one  like-minded,
who  had  youth  on  his  side,  to  continue  the  work  which  he  felt  was  passing  out  of  his
hands.     While  Phygelus  and  Hermogenes  were  untrue  to  him,  and  Onesiphorus  waa

If.  TIMOTHY.  D


U  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  il  1—26.

dead,  Timothy  miut  stand  forwazd.  For  this  he  would  require  a  liberal  supi^y  of
strength.  With  paternal  anxiety,  then,  he  points  him  to  the  great  Source  of  strei^th,
Tia.  ue  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  and  obtained  by  him  for  us,  or  the  lordly  power
to  bless  without  respect  to  the  merit  of  the  recijuent.  In  John  L  14  he  Is  said  to  be
full  of  grace,  and,  in  the  nxteenth  verse  foUofring,  it  is  said  that  it  is  out  of  bis  fulnen
that  all  his  people  receive.  As  the  Fountain,  he  supplies  all  that  depend  upon  him
with  all  Uiat  is  necessary  for  the  proper  discharge  of  their  duties.  To  whom  else,  then,
oould  he  point  Timothy?  In  spiritual  work  there  is  a  giving-out  of  strength,  for
which  there  is  needed  renewaL  There  are  also  ooca^ons  for  which  there  are  needed
special  supplies  of  strength.  At  all  times  there  is  a  tendency  to  a  culpable  and
enfeebling  supineness,  against  which  there  is  needed  a  gracious  supply.  Let  the
Christian  minister,  then,  find  his  empowering  for  his  work  in  the  grace  that  is  centred
in  Christ  2,  A§  to  ike  regtdar  tranBrnisaion  of  the  trtUh,  **  And  the  things  which
thou  hast  heard  from  me  among  many  witnesses,  the  same  commit  thou  to  fsathful
men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  othera  also.**  Paul  himself  heard  directly  from  Christ,
who  is  as  full  of  truth  as  of  grace.  But  he  points  to  a  definite  and  solemn  occasion,
when  he  was  the  speaker  and  ^mothy  the  hearer,  viz.  the  occasion,  repeatedly  referred
to,  of  Timothy's  ordiaation.  What  he  heard  then  was  by  the  mediation  of  many
.  witnesses,  ix,  the  presbytera  who  were  present  at  his  ordination,  and  laid  their  hands
on  him,  and  who,  by  the  part  they  took  in  it,  gave  their  attestation  to  the  charee.
"What  Timothy  received  then  has  repeatedly  been  called  his  deposit,  or  talent  of  ue
catholic  faith.  This,  in  turn,  he  was  to  commit  to  trusty  men,  «.e.  men  who  could  be
entrusted  with  the  keeping  of  the  deposit.  They,  in  their  turn,  were  to  teach  others,
80  Uiat  they  also  could  be  entrusted  with  the  deposit.  Thus  there  was  to  be  a  regular
succession  of  teachers  for  the  handing-down  of  the  truth.  There  is  a  place  assigned  to
tradition  here ;  but,  as  it  is  made  to  depend  on  the  trustworthiness  of  each  individual
in  the  chain  of  succession,  we  must  think  of  a  tradition  that  is  to  be  tested  by  Scripture.
At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  handing-down  of  Scripture  truth  with  traditional  associar
tions  embodying  the  Church's  thinking  out  of  the  truth,  and,  if  this  is  what  it  ought
to  be,  then  it  is  important  that  it  should  be  handed  down  by  means  of  a  regular
succession  of  teachers.  All  encouragement,  then,  is  to  be  given  to  the  proper  education
of  young  men  for  the  ministry ;  and  yet  a  theological  institution  will  fail  of  its  end
unless  there  is  the  proper  keeping  up  of  the  Church's  life,  which  is  needed  to  influence
the  right  class  of  young  men  to  devote  themselves  to  the  ministry.

II.  The  Christian  minister  is  to  be  prepared  fob  hardship.  Three  figures
suggestive  of  hard  service,  1.  The  soldier,  "Suffer  hardship  with  me,  as  a  good
soldier  of  Christ  Jesus.  No  soldier  on  service  entanglcth  himself  in  the  affairs  of  this
life ;  that  he  may  please  him  who  enrolled  him  as  a  soldier."  The  soldier,  above  others,
has  to  have  his  mind  made  up  to  experiencing  hardship.  He  has  to  leave  home  and
friends.  He  may  have  to  encounter  hardships  on  the  march.  He  has  especially  to  face
the  hardships  and  dangers  of  the  battle-field,  **  seeking  the  bubble  reputation,  even  in
the  cannon's  mouth."  So  the  Christian  minister  is,  in  a  special  manner,  a  soldier  of
Christ  Jesus.  He  is  one  whom  Christ  has  in  a  solemn  way  bound  to  himself.  He
has  to  fight  under  Christ  and  for  Christ  in  an  unfriendly  world ;  and  he  need  not  be
surprised  if  he  is  called  upon  to  experience  the  hardships  of  a  soldier.  Let  Timothy,
then,  willingly,  nobly,  take  his  part  along  with  Paul  and  other  soldiers  of  Christ.  But
the  apostle  draws  attention  to  a  special  condition  of  excellence  in  a  soldier.  He  does
not  entangle  himself  in  the  affairs  and  businesses  of  this  life.  In  choosing  to  be
enrolled  under  a  commander,  he  leaves  his  former  employment  behind.  He  is  hence-
forth at  the  will  of  his  commander  for  whatever  hard  service  he  may  need  him.
Especially  does  this  condition  apply  to  a  soldier  on  service.  Before  entering  on  a
campaign,  he  would  need  even  to  have  family  affairs  arranged,  that  he  may  give  himself
up  undistractedly  to  the  service  required  of  him.  Only  thus  can  he  expect  to  approve
himself  to  his  commander.  The  Christian  minister  is  in  the  same  way  to  be  unen-
tangled  with  businesses,  which  he  leaves  to  others.  Paul  was  not  always  able  to  free
himself  from  the  necessity  of  making  his  own  bread ;  but  it  is  advisable  that  a  minister
should  be  left  free  in  this  respect,  and  it  is  wrong  for  him  unnecessarily  to  divide  his
energies,  or  to  mix  himself  up  with  what  can  be  better  done  by  others.  For  it  is  only
when  his  mind  is  thoroughly  undistracted  and  absorbed  in  service  that  he  can  approve


-en.  II.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY:  35

himself  to' the  great  Ck>minander.  2.  The  atMeie,  ''And  if  also  a  man  contend  in  the
games,  he  is  not  crowned,  except  he  have  contended  l<iwfully.*'  The  Greeks  were
great  admirers  of  physical  perfection.  Even  their  men  of  genius,  like  Plato,  engaged
in  athletic  contests  on  public  occasions.  Great  encouragement  was  given  to  the
athletic  art.  The  successful  athlete  was  crowned  under  very  inspiriting  circumstances.
There  were  many  subordinate  rules  to  be  observed  by  the  athlete,  but  the  great  rule
was  to  go  through  a  course  of  very  hard  preparation.  Only  thus  could  he  expect  to  be
crowned  when  the  occasion  of  the  games  came  round.  The  minister  is,  in  the  same
way,  to  aim  at  efficiency  in  his  art  He  has  many  examples  of  this  placed  before  him.
And  there  is  great  encouragement  given  by  that  royal  Personage  who  is  to  preside  on
the  occasion  of  award.  The  successful  minister  is  to  be  crowned.  There  are  many
subordinate  rules  to  be  observed  by  him,  but  the  great  rule  is  that  he  is  to  subject
himself  to  severe  discipline.  Only  thus  can  he  expect  to  have  a  fadeless  crown  for
efficiency  in  the  ministerial  art.  3.  The  husbandman,  "The  husbandman  that
laboureth  must  be  the  first  to  partake  of  the  fruits."  The  husbandman  has  to  extract
bread  from  the  unwilling  ground;  and  he  may  have  to  do  this  under  unfavouring
conditions  of  weather.  He  has  need,  then,  for  hard  and  persistent  labour,  especially  in
the  season  of  spring.  In  the  sweat  of  his  face  he  has  to  prepare  the  soil  and  put
in  the  seed.  It  is  only  the  husbandman  that  thus  exerts  himself  that  comes  to  the
front  in  the  time  of  fruit.  He  is  eating  of  the  new  com,  when  the  husbandman  who
has  not  exerted  himself  is  far  behind.  In  the  same  way  the  minister  has  to  extract
good  products  from  unwilling  hearts,  and  not  always  under  favouring  conditions  from
without.  Hard  work  is  needed  to  prepare  the  soil  and  to  put  in  the  seed.  If  he
engages  in  hard  work,  he  has  the  prospect  of  the  farmer,  viz.  the  fruit  of  his  own
labour.  He  will  have  joy  in  those  for  whom  he  has  laboured — partly  in  this  world,
chiefly  in  the  next  world.  It  is  the  minister  who  does  not  grudge  hard  service  that
comes  to  the  front  in  the  enjoyment  of  fruit,  while  he  who  gives  grudging  service  lags
behind  in  the  reward.  Appended  call  to  attention.  '*  Consider  what  I  say ;  for  the
Lord  shall  give  thee  understanding  in  all  things."  What  Paul  said  was  easily  under-
stood ;  but  it  needed  to  be  thoroughly  weighed  so  as  to  become  spiritual  strengthening
to  Timothy.  It  plainly  meant  that  he  was  to  set  himself  to  hard  work,  and  that  he
need  not  expect  easy  outward  conditions  of  working ;  when  the  mind  is  made  up  to  it,
the  hardest  work  is  often  felt  to  be  light.  This  was  a  lesson  which  he  wished  Timothy
to  learn,  with  the  Lord*s  ])romised  and  all-sufficient  assistance.

III.  Encouragements  under  hardship.  1.  Example  of  Christ,  (1)  Victorious
aspect  of  Christ's  resurrection.  "  Remember  Jesus  Christ,  risen  from  the  dead."  Paul's
principal  encouragement  is  to  go  back  in  memory  upon  the  historical  Jesus  at  the
victorious  point  of  his  history.  He  seemed  to  be  utterly  defeated  in  death.  His  body
was  laid  in  the  tomb,  a  stone  rolled  against  the  mouth  of  it  and  sealed,  and  a  watch
set ;  and  the  rulers  thought  they  had  conquered.  Could  he  be  released  from  the  power
of  death  and  the  grave  ?  Let  not  the  most  distressed,  the  most  maltreated  of  men,
despair ;  for  it  was  when  Christ  seemed  to  be  utterly  defeated  that  he  victoriously  got
for  his  people  victory  over  sin  and  over  death  and  the  grave.  (2)  His  resurrection
culminating  in  his  present  mediatorial  dignity.  "  Of  the  seed  of  David,  according  to
my  gospel.'*  As  of  the  seed  royal,  he  was  raised,  and  raised  to  sit  upon  the  throne
of  his  father  David.  That  is  the  high  position  he  has  won  for  himself.  The  govern-
ment of  the  universe  is  at  this  moment  upon  his  shoulders.  Under  all  outward  defeat,
then,  let  us  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  victorious  termination  of  our  Lord's  career  of
suffering.  2.  Example  of  Paul.  (1)  Appearance  of  defeat.  "Wherein  I  suffer
hardship  unto  bonds,  as  a  malefactor."  He  had  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood.  But
though  he  had  not  gone  the  length  of  the  Master,  he  had  gone  the  length  of  bonds,
and,  with  his  Master,  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors.  (2)  Promise  of  victory.
**  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  Not  only  was  his  conviction  strong  that  the
Word  proceeding  from  God  could  not  be  bound  by  any  tyrant,  but  he  had  the  fact  to
lay  hold  of  that  much  freedom  was  enjoyed  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  (3)  Vietcrioui
for  the  sake  of  the  elect.  "  Therefore  1  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sake,  that  they
also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory."  God  has
appointed  for  the  elect  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  a  salvation  which
is  to  blossom  forth  under  a  sunnier  sky  into  glory.    This  glory  will  be  ample  com-


36  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,  [en.  il  1—26.

pensation  for  jHresent  sofferiDgs,  not  only  in  its  qualUy,  but  ia  its  being  eternaL  How,
then,  was  he  to  help  forward  the  destiny  of  the  elect,  and  at  the  same  time  his  own
destiny  ?  He  could  not  preach  in  his  dungeon ;  but  he  could  follow  up  the  preaching
of  others  by  a  brave  bearing.  He  could  show  that  he  could  act  what  he  had  preached,
^nd  did  not  much  depend  on  his  going  forward  bravely  to  martyrdom?  3.  A  saying
of  the  martyi'^imes.  "Faithful  is  the  saying."  (1)  Bow  the  Chrisiiane  encouraged
one  another  to  constancy  I  Past  act,  ''  For  if  we  died  with  him,  we  shall  also  live
with  him."  They  first  went  back  to  a  definite  act  in  the  past,  viz.  the  profession  of
faith  with  which  they  commenced  their  Christian  career.  They  thus  in  obligation
came  up  to  the  martvr-point.  They  said  they  were  willing,  should  the  Master  call
them  to  it,  to  share  death  with  him.  If  this  was  the  true  reading  of  their  act,  the
bright  side  of  it  was  that  thev  would  also  be  called  to  share  life  with  Christ^  Abiding
state.  "U  we  endure,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him."  They  next  thought  of  their
present  suffering  calling  for  an  abiding  spirit  of  endurance,  and  they  used  to  say  to  one
another,  that,  if  they  did  not  fiinch,  their  future  would  be  brightened  to  them  by  their
beins  called  to  sit  with  Christ  on  his  throne.  (2)  How  the  Christians  discouraged  one
ano&er  against  apostasy  \  Future  act,  *'  If  we  shall  deny  him,  he  also  will  deny  us."
They  next  thought  of  their  being  put  to  a  severe  test  in  the  future.  The  time  might
come  when  their  choice  would  be  between  Christ  and  life.  Far  be  it  from  them,  for  the
sake  of  life,  to  deny  Christ ;  for  that  act  of  denial  on  their  part  would  carry  with  it  an
act  of  denial  on  his  part.  Abiding  state.  **  If  we  are  faithless,  he  abideth  &ithful ;
for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  lliey  next  thought  of  an  act  of  denial  followed  by  no
penitence,  and  they  said  to  one  another,  that  if  that  was  their  permanent  state,  their
future  would  be  darkened,  even  by  reason  of  the  unchanging  character  of  their  Saviour.
It  was  impossible  for  him  to  contradict  himself,  and,  as  surely  as  he  shows  his  approval
of  faith,  must  he  show  his  disapproval  of  unbelief.  The  martyr-times  had  au-eady
commenced.  The  first  persecution  was  under  Nero  in  the  year  64,  the  last  under
Diocletian  in  the  year  303.  The  first  persecution  had  not  yet  ceased.  Ilie  Christians,
charged  with  setting  fire  to  Rome,  were  subjected  to  the  most  inhuman  treatment.  As
the  historian  Tacitus  informs  us,  they  were  sewn  in  sacks  made  of  the  skins  of  wild
beasts,  and  thrown  to  be  torn  by  dogs.  They  were  smeared  with  pitch,  and  set  on  fire
as  torches  to  illuminate  the  imperial  gardens  at  night.  "  This  persecution  extended
beyond  the  walls  of  Rome,  and  continued  with  more  or  less  ssvcrity  to  the  end  of
Nero*s  reign,  four  years  afterwards."  It  was  in  the  last  year  of  Nero's  reign  that  Paul
was  now  awaiting  his  martyrdom.  This  martyr-saying  may  bo  viewed  as  the  fruit  ol
those  years  of  persecution.  As  here  incorporated  by  Paul  into  this  Epistle,  it  would
be  a  precious  legacy  to  the  Church  in  the  many  years  of  persecution  to  come. — R.  F.

Vers.  14 — 26. — Conduct  in  view  of  heresy  appearing  in  the  Church,  I.  Method  of
THE  HERETICS.  **  Of  these  things  put  them  in  remembrance,  charging  them  in  the  sight
of  the  Lord,  that  they  strive  not  about  words,  to  no  profit,  to  the  subverting  of  them
that  hear."  The  method  of  the  heretics  called  for  solemn  warning  from  Timothy.  Its
essential  character  was  word-fighting.  It  dealt  with  t^e  form,  and  not  with  the  reality;
and  so  it  came  to  be  controver»ial.  The  word  is  not  unimportant,  but  it  has  no  impor-
tance apart  from  its  being  the  vehicle  of  the  truth.  The  moral  defect  of  the  method
was  its  want  of  regard  to  edification.  The  disputants  only  used  it  for  dialectic  display.
There  was,  therefore,  no  good  result  to  be  laid  to  their  account.  The  only  result  to  be
expected  was  the  subversion  of  any  who,  by  hearing,  placed  themselves  within  their
influence.

II.  The  true  method.  "  Give  diligence  to  present  thyself  approved  unto  Grod,  a
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  handling  aright  the  Word  of  truth."  The
heretics  sought  to  be  approved  unto  them  that  heard  them,  for  their  skill  in  word-
fighting.  Timothy  was  to  follow  another  course,  and  to  display  his  zeal  in  quitting
himself  so  as  to  bo  approved  unto  God.  The  way  in  which  ho  was  to  do  this  was  by
answering  to  the  idea  of  a  workman.  He  was  not  to  amuse  himself  with  profitless  dis-
putation, but  he  was  to  give  profitable  work.  He  was  to  work  with  such  rigorous
regard  to  the  Divine  rule  that,  whether  he  met  with  approval  or  disapproval  from  men,
he  did  not  need  to  be  ashamed.  Especially  was  he  to  show  the  better  way  of  dealing
with  the  Word.    He  was  to  cut  rightly,  or  cut  straight,  the  Word  of  truth.    W^hatevei


CH.  n.l— 26.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  37

the  metaphor  is,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  idea  is  that,  instead  of  trifling  with  the
Wordy  he  was  to  go  right  into  and  lay  open  the  Divine  truth  it  contained.

III.  Why  the  method  of  the  hebeticb  was  to  be  avoided.  **  But  shun  profane
babblings :  for  they  will  proceed  further  in  ungodliness,  and  their  word  will  eat  as  doth
a  gangrene.''  The  method  of  the  heretics  is  characterized  in  keeping  with  what  has
been  already  said.  It  was  using  empty  speech,  or  speech  without  reference  to  reality.
That,  applied  to  Divine  things,  was  necessarily  profane.  Its  natural  association  was
Gk)d-di8honouring  representations,  operating  against  devout  feelings  and  corresponding
practice.  This  ungodly  tendency  had  not  taken  its  worst  form.  The  heretics  would
yet  say  worse  things.  Their  word  was  of  the  nature  of  a  gangrene,  that  eats  into  tiie
life,  and,  always  in  an  aggravated  form,  spreads  over  the  spiritual  body.

IV.  Two  bebetics  kamed.  *'  Of  whom  is  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus ;  men  who  con-
ceming  the  truth  have  erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already,  and  overthrow
the  faith  of  some.'*  The  way  in  which  these  men  were  heretics,  or  darted  aside  from
the  truth  as  the  mark,  was  by  applying  the  method  described  to  the  doctrine  of  the
resurrection.  Under  the  influence  of  an  incipient  Gnosticism,  in  which  the  body  was
regarded  as  evil,  they  got  rid  of  the  reference  of  the  resurrection  to  the  body  by
quibbling  about  the  word.  The  word  was  simply  ^'  rising  again,"  and  its  meaning  was
sufliciently  met  by  what  had  already  taken  place  in  a  Christian  believer,  viz.  the  rising
of  the  soul  to  newness  of  life.  With  their  verbal  skill,  they  were  succeeding  in  the
case  of  some.  But  what  was  success  to  these  dialecticians  was  to  those  with  whom
they  succeeded  nothing  less  than  the  subversion  of  their  faith,  so  essential  is  the
resurrection  of  the  body  to  Christianity.

V.  The  stability  op  the  Chubch.  **  Howbcit  the  firm  foundation  of  GK)d  standeth,"
Though  the  faith  of  some  is  overturned,  the  Church  standeth.  The  Church  is  not
thought  of  as  a  completed  structure^  which  it  will  not  be  till  ages  still  have  passed.  But
it  is  thought  of  as  a  substructure  in  a  satisfactory  state,  as  having,  indeed,  been  laid  by
(rod.  It  had  that  firmness  which  is  essential  for  the  commencement  of  a  building.  As
firm,  it  was  standing,  notwithstanding  the  strain  to  which  it  had  been  subjected.  As
firm,  it  promised  to  stand  a  long  time,  and  the  promise  has  not  been  belied.  For  upon
the  foundation  part  of  the  building  much  has  been  laid  since,  and  we  have  no  reason  to
fear  its  overthrow,  but  rather  increased  reason  to  anticipate  its  completion.  The  Church
is  a  structure  in  connection  with  which  there  is  solemn  engagement,  **  Having  this  seal."
Tlie  seal  on  the  substructure  Aos  two  sides.  1.  The  obverse,  or  Divine  side,  "  The  Lord
kuoweth  them  that  are  his."  The  language  from  this  point  to  the  close  of  the  twenty-
first  verse  seems  to  have  been  suggested  by  a  memorable  passage  in  Jewish  history,
recorded  in  the  sixteenth  of  Numbers,  viz.  the  rebellion  of  Eorah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram.
These  men  charged  Moses  and  Aaron  with  taking  too  much  upon  them  in  acting,  the
one  as  prophet  by  pre-eminence  and  the  other  as  priest  by  pre-eminence.  The  reply  of
Moses,  as  given  in  the  Septuagint,  was  that  God  knew  them  that  were  his,  t.0.  would
maintain  their  cause  against  opposers,  as  he  did  signally  in  that  case,  in  causing  the  earth
to  open  and  swallow  up  these  men  and  their  company.  2.  The  reverse,  or  human  side.
"  And,  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  Name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness."
The  Jewish  congregation  was  composed  of  them  that  named  the  Name  of  God,  %,e,  that
professed  to  worship  him  as  the  Most  Holy  One,  and  to  obey  his  commands.  In  the  case
referred  to,  the  Divine  call  to  the  whole  congregation  was, "  Depart  from  the  tents  of  those
wicked  men,  and  touch  nothing  of  theirs,  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  sins."  The
application  is  the  following  :  Let  Timothy  be  comforted  by  the  thought  that  the  Lord
would  judge  between  him  and  such  opposers  as  Hymenasus  and  Philetus,  who  would
not  be  able  to  move  the  substructure  that  had  been  laid.  On  the  other  hand,  let
Christian  congregations  be  warned.  They  are  composed  of  those  who  name  the  Name
of  the  Lord,  i.e.  profess  faith  in  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  and  promise  obedience  to  his
laws.  In  the  Christian  religion,  even  more  than  in  the  Jewish  religion,  unrighteousness
appears  as  receiving  terrible  condemnation.  Let  not,  then,  a  Christian  have  anything  to
do  with  departure  from  the  truth  and  fellowship  with  ungodliness.

YI.  Mixed  society.  "  Now  in  a  great  house  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  and
of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth ;  and  some  unto  honour,  and  some  unto  dis-
honour." In  the  Jewish  Church  Twhich  is  called  the  house  of  God)  there  were  faithful
and  unfaithful,  with  degrees  of  faithfulness  and  degrees  of  unfaithfulness,  compared  here.


38  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TDiOTIlY.  [en.  ii.  1— 2G.

the  ono  class  to  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  and  the  other  class  to  vessels  of  wood  and
of  earth — vessels  put  to  honourable  uses  and  vessels,  put  to  dishonourable  uses.  In  the
former  class  were  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  in  the  latter  class  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,
as  shown  in  the  day  of  trial.  The  Christian  Church  is  also  a  great  house,  presided  over,
as  we  are  told,  not  by  a  servant,  but  a  Son.  "  And  Moses  indeed  was  faithful  in  all
(Sod's  house  as  a  servant,  for  a  testimonv  of  those  things  which  were  afterward  to  be
apdken ;  but  Christ  as  a  Son,  over  Ood's  house ;  whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fiut  onr
boldness  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end."  The  Church  is  meant  to  bo
a  fmr0  society^  but  it  is  impossible  under  present  conditions  to  have  this  realized  to  the
fullest  extent.  In  the  apostolic  circle  around  Christ  there  were  vessels  of  gold  and
vessels  of  silver-— of  superior  use  and  of  inferior  use  in  the  service  of  the  Master ;  but
there  was  also  shown  to  be  a  vessel  of  more  than  ordinary  baseness  of  material  pat  to
the  most  dishonourable  use.  In  the  Church  as  it  was  forming  there  were  men  and
women  with  gold  and  silver  in  their  natures,  **  who  having  lands  or  houses  sold  them
and  laid  the  prices  down  at  the  apostles'  feet ; "  but  there  were  also  Ananias  and  Sapphjia,
whose  earthaness  moved  them  to  keep  bctck  part  ef  the  price.  So  while  Pai^  was  of
gold  use,  we  may  say,  at  that  period  of  the  Church's  history,  and  Timothy  compara-
tively of  silver  use,  HymensBUs  and  Philetus  belonged  to  the  other  category,  having
nothing  better  than  wood  in  them,  and  put  to  no  honourable  use.

YII.  PuBOATioN.  "  If  a  man  therefore  purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a  vesflel
unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the  MastePs  use,  prepared  unto  every  good  work."*
There  was  a  purgation  of  the  congregation  of  Israel  in  connection  with  the  rebellion
that  has  been  referred  to.  Every  Israelite  was  to  get  up  from  the  tabernacle  of  Korah,
Dathan,  and  Abiram ;  that  was  the  condition  of  his  b^g  classed  among  the  pure— of
his  being,  according  to  the  language  formerly  used,  a  vessel  unto  honour.  We  may
think  of  the  censers  used  by  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  Eorah's  company ;  their
sacredness  was  recognized  by  their  being  taken  out  of  the  fire,  and  put  to  another  sacred
use.  **  The  censers  of  those  sinners  against  their  own  souls,  let  them  make  them  broatl
plates  for  a  covering  of  the  altar."  The  same  thing  has  to  take  place  in  the  Ciiristiaii
Church.  A  member  of  a  Christian  congregation  is  not  to  have  fellowship  with  such
snbverters  as  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus  were,  or  with  those,  whether  subverted  or  not  as
to  creed,  who  engage  in  ungodly  practices.  He  is  not  even  to  throw  himself  into  the
society  of  the  merely  indifferent.  Thus  only  can  he  be  a  vessel  unto  honour.  Three
things  are  said  about  him  who  is  a  vessel  unto  honour.  They  turn  upon  the  idea  of
usefulness ;  for  that  is  essential  to  a  vessel.  The  first  has  reference  to  an  act  of  con-
secration. The  second  has  reference  to  a  use  the  Master  has  for  the  vessel.  The  third
has  reference  to  a  course  of  preparation  for  the  use.  Christians  are  set  apart  to  holy
uses.  This  is  partly  their  own  act,  in  the  dedication  of  themselves  to  Grod ;  and  partly
the  Divine  act  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Christ  and  anointing  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  There  is  a  use  the  Master  has  for  every  Christian.  This  use  may  be  said  to  be
(distributively)  every  good  work,  A  Christian  can  be  turned  to  more  uses  than  a  par-
ticular kind  of  vessel.  It  rather  needs  all  kinds  of  sacred  vessels  to  express  his  useful-
ness. ^\9 preparation,  then,  is  no  simple  matter;  it  cannot  be  carried  through  in  a  day
or  a  year.  In  and  through  experience,  embracing  our  own  exercise  of  soul  and  the
Divine  blessing,  we  acquire  habitudes  for  various  kinds  of  service,  which  are  not  always
in  actual  requisition,  but  may  at  any  time  be  in  requisition.  Let  us,  then,  be  in  such  a
state  of  preparation  that  the  Master  of  the  house  can,  as  it  were,  take  us  up,  and  use  us
for  whatever  work  he  has  to  be  done.

VIII.  Pure  fellowship.  "  But  flee  youthful  lusts,  and  follow  after  righteousness,
£EUth,  love,  peace,  with  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  In  this
punctuation  peace  is  not  specially  connected  with  what  follows.  The  idea  is  certainly,
even  from  the  context,  pure  fellowship,  llmothy  was  to  act  his  part  well  iu  tho
Christian  society  with  which  he  was  connected.  He  had  yet  youth  on  his  side,  and,
while  that  had  its  large  possibilities  of  service,  it  had  also  its  risks.  It  had  fiery
impulses,  from  which  even  a  youthful  minister  was  not  exempt,  and  by  giving  way  to
which  the  Christian  society  would  be  seriously  injured.  Let  him  flee  to  a  distance  from
his  peculiar  temptations ;  on  the  other  hand,  let  him  be  in  close  pursuit  of  the  virtues
on  which  pure  fellowship  depends.  There  is  that  universal  virtue,  righteousness,  whidi
may  be  thought  of  as  the  observance  of  the  Divine  rules.    Then  there  is  faith,  or  reliance


en.  iiL  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


39


on  promised  strength.  Then  there  is  love^  or  proper  regard  for  the  common  or  individnal
good.  There  is,  lastly,  peace^  or  the  keeping  up  of  cordial  intercourse  and  co-operation
with  brethren.  The  society  by  which  he  has  to  do  his  duty  is  regarded  as  composed  of
'*  them  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart."  All  the  more  that  some  called  on  the
Lord  without  the  pure  heart  must  he  be  faithful  to  the  terms  of  communion  with  all
who,  in  good  faith,  were  servants  of  the  Lord.

IX.  Treatment  of  opposers.  1.  Avoidance  of  controversy  with  them,  "But  foolish
and  ignorant  questionings  refuse,  knowing  that  they  gender  strifes."  The  apostle  does
not  say  all  questionings;  for  some  might  arise  from  honest  difficulties,  and  these
deserved  to  be  met.  But  he  says  such  questionings  as  were  foolish,  i.e.  betrayed  no
honest  struggle  after  the  truth,  and  such  as  were  ignorant^  i.e.  betrayed  ignorance  of
the  position  questioned.  Such  questionings  as,  arising  from  egoism,  did  not  deserve  to
be  met,  and  the  proper  course  was  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  For  they  could
not  gender  conviction,  but  petty  strifes,  in  which  the  contest  is  not  for  the  truth,  but  for
personal  or  party  victory.  2.  The  arts  of  gentleness  with  them,  "And  the  Lord's
servants  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  towards  all,  apt  to  teach,  forbearing,  in  meek-
ness correcting  them  that  oppose  themselves."  The  Lord's  servant,  such  as  Timothy
was  in  a  special  sense,  was  not  to  strive.  For  how  in  that  way  could  ho  be  the  servant
of  him  who  did  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  let  his  voice  be  heard  in  the  streets?  What
became  the  Lord's  servant  was  to  practise  the  arta  of  gentleness  towards  all.  His  part
was,  not  to  fight  but  to  teach,  not  to  be  fiery  under  opposition,  but  to  be  patient.  In
accordance  with  his  being  a  teacher  and  not  a  mere  disputant,  he  was  to  communicate
knowledge  of  the  truth,  by  way  of  correcting  false  impressions  to  those  who  opposed
themselves ;  and,  in  doing  so,  he  might  expect  provocation,  but  in  the  character  of  the
Lord's  servant  he  was  to  exhibit  meekness.  3.  Object  aimed  at,  "  If  peradventure  GK)d
may  give  them  repentance  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  they  may  recover  them-
selves out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by  the  Lord's  servant  unto
the  will  of  God."  The  interpretation  which  is  introduced  into  the  Revised  Translation
in  the  concluding  words  is  not  likely  to  find  acceptance.  There  is  a  strong  characteriza-
tion of  the  opposers.  They  are  in  the  snare  of  the  devil,  having  been  taken  captive  by
him  at  the  will  of  that  person  whose  will,  it  is  hinted,  is  decided  enough  for  evil.  Tho
grammatical  objection  holds  no  more  in  Greek  than  in  English;  the  thought  is  the
badness  of  their  case,  for  whom  notwithstanding  he  asks  efforts  to  be  made.  In  con-
nection with  these  efforts  it  was  not  impossible  for  God  to  grant  them  repentance,  that
change  of  moral  disposition  which  was  necessary  to  the  right  appreciation  of  the  truth,
and  thus  to  recover  them  as  from  a  state  of  spiritual  intoxication,  and  to  bring  them
out  of  the  devil's  snare.  The  Lord's  servant  is  not  soon  to  give  up,  but  is  to  hope  on,
even  with  those  who  seem  to  be  the  devil's  willing  tools. — R.  F.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  III.


Ver.  1. — But  "know  this  for  this  know  also,
A.V. ;  grievous  for  perilous^  A. V.  Grievouf
times  (xaipol  xoAcToO*  "  Grievous  "  is  not  a
very  good  rendering.  **  Perilous/*  though
in  some  contexts  it  is  a  right  rendering,  is
a  little  too  restricted  here.  "Difficult,"
**  trying,"  **  uneasy,"  or  the  like,  is  nearer  tlje
sense.  They  are  times  when  a  Christian
hardly  knows  wliich  way  to  turn  or  what  to
do.  He  has  to  live  under  a  constant  sense
of  hindrance  and  difficulty  of  one  sort  or
another.

Ver.  2. — Self  for  their  oxen  selves^  A.V. ;
lovers  of  money  for  covetous^  A.V. ;  hoatstM
for  boasters^  A.V. ;  haughty  for  proud,  A.V. ;
railers    for    blasphemers,    A.V.      X«n   {ol


ivSptovoi) ;  men  in  genera),  the  bulk  of  men
in  the  Church ;  for  ne  is  speaking,  not  of  the
world  at  large,  but  of  professing  Christians.
Lovers  of  self  (<pi\avroi) ;  only  here  in  the
New  Testament,  and  not  found  in  the
LXX. ;  but  used  by  Aristotle  in  a  striking
passage  (quoted  by  Alford),  where  he  dis-
tinguishes those  who  are  <fflXavroi  in  a  good
sense,  and  those  who  are  justly  blamed  for
being  ^Aavroi,  i.e.  selfish  and  greedy.
The  Christian  character  is  exactly  the  oppo-
site (see  1  Cor.  x.  24;  xiiu  5).  Lovtn  of
money  (<pi\df>yvpoi) ;  elsewhere  in  the  New
Testament  only  in  Luke  xvi.  14,  though  not
uncommon  in  classical  Greek ;  ipo<af>yvpia  is
found  in  1  Tim.  vL  10.  Boastful  (iL\dCopts) ;
as  Bom.  i.  30,  and  in  classical  Greek.  If
the  derivation  of  the  word  is  i\ii,  wander-


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHT.        [oa.  hl  1—17,


ing,  we  nay
AoUix.l8,-T«»l
booib  ir«ie  ntiullj  booitcra.  Hsdog  i^aiiii'
OHue  to  mean  "a.  boaster."  BmBgbtj,
idlni.  "Tripq^wta  nnd  Bkaa^itia  are
coupled  together  in  Murk  ni.  ^ ;  and
6n/nH>irinn  and  lUiC'""  in  Bom. !.  80.  In
the  yew  Teitament  ^^lEtf^fui  and  ^Au-^
fjs  ue  meat  oommonl j  used  of  eril-ipeakiDg
•ninit  God  and  holy  thinga;  bnt  not
iJw&ys  (aee  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iiL  8 ;  1  Tim.
tL  4).  Here  appaienlly  it  meana  generally
"  evil-speekera.*'  Vnthaakfnl  (ix^""»')  ■
aa  Luke  tL  35.  Found  oooatiooally  in  the
LXX.,  and  oommoa  in  olaMioal  Greek.
The  Ingratitade  which  they  (bowed  to  their
parents  was  a  put  of  their  general  chatae-
tsr.  Wo  ought  to  take  ipMlal  note  of  this
paailTe  eio — tbo  not  being  thankfol  for  good
received  from  Qod  and  man.  Unholy  (ar^
mei) ;  aa  1  Tim.  i  9  (where  aee  note).

Ter.    3 ImplaedbU    for    imee-brealcen,

A.V. :  dandtrert  for  faltt  aoetutn,  A.V. ;
iri(A«ut  lAt-etmtnl  tot  inmntinait,  A.V.;
M  loom  of  gooi  toi  deapiwn  of  Ihate  that
are  good,  A.V.  Wlthont  natural  aflMlon
(iuToirYai) ;  ai  in  Rom.  i.  31,  wboro  in  the
T.B.  it  is  coupled  with  dmrartoi,  aa  here.
Tho¥erb»T^Pl»iB  "to  love,"  usod  primarily
of  the  natural  affection  of  parents  '-  ■'


tbcir  parents,
ra.    These  pt


ntai    at    firat

such  a  truce,

applied  to  D  war,

admitting  of


vrapfi  is  that  natural  love.  These  pcr»on:
were  witliout  thia  artpy^,  of  which  PlalO
Mja,  "  AcldldlnTC«hisparcntB,anditlovnl
by  them ;  "  and  so,  according  to  St.  Paul's
judcment  in  1  Tim.  t.  8,  were  "wnrBe  than
infldcls."  Implacable  (iatariai) ;  only  here
eccnrding  to  the  R,T.,  not  at  all  in  tlio
LXX.,  but  frequent  iu  <
Jwoi'Sif  WM  a  Buli'inn  trui
Ubalion  to  tbo  gods,  'Ai
mertly  oxprcsaos  that  anytb
any  person  was  left.  -  ■"■-
But,  in  a  secondary

no  truco ;  and  tboncc.  as  here,  applied  to  a
person,  it  means  "implacable,"  one  who  will
make  no  trace  or  treaty  with  his  enemy.
Tbo  senao  "  truce-bruakcra  "  ia  not  juatilied
by  any  oinmple.  Blandarsra  iivtBaXoi) ;  aa
1  Tiui.  iii.  11  and  Titus  ii.  3.  The  aroh-
slaudcter  ia  i  lufdo^i,  the  devil,  "  the
accuser  of  tlie  brethren  (i  saTifysfiot  -rar
48<\(iif>)"  (llev.  lii.  10;  see  John  vj.  70).
Without  lalf-ODntrDl  (inparth);  here  only
in  the  New  Teatament,  not  iu  tlie  LXX.,
but  frequent  iu  classical  Greek,  in  the  sense
of  iiilemjKrale  in  tlic  pursuit  or  use  of  aoy-
thing,  t.g.  money,  the  tongue,  pleasure,  tlie
appetite,  etc.,  which  are  put  in  the  genitive
case.  Used  absolutely  it  means  gonerally
"without  aelf-control,  as  here  rendered  in
the  R.V.  The  A.V.  "  incnnlinent  *  (conip.
1  Ckir.  vii.  6)  expresses  only  one  part  of  the


meaoitig  (see  txpavia,  Uatt.  xxllL  S5).
nnM(from/cnM,  wild,  savage) ;  irfiitftt;
only  here  in  the  New  Tettament,  and  not
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  frequent  in  the
Greek  tragediana  and  others,  of  penona,
oonntriea,  plants,  etc;  e.g.  "Beware  of  the
Chalnbea,  for  the;  are  aavage  (lunffMpat),
and  canuot  be  approached  by  Btruigen "
(.aiohyluB.  Trom.  VinoL,"  734,edit.8cholef.).
It  oorreaponda  with  irfAnffiartt,  onmBrcilill
(Rom.  i.  SI).  So  loren  of  good  (ifiX-
dTofct);  only  here  iu  the  New  Teatament,
and  not  at  all  iu  the  LXX.  or  in  claMioal
Greek.  But  fiAifTseat  is  found  in  Wbd.
viL  22,  and  in  Ariitotle,  iu  the  aenae  of
"  lovers  of  that  which  is  good ; ''  and  in
Titus  L  8.  The  R.V.  accma  tberefbrelto  be
right  in  rendering  here  "  no  lovert  of  good,"
rather  than  as  tlio  A.V.  "  deapiaora  of  tboaa
which  are  good,"  after  the  Vulgate  and  the
new  version  of  Sanctes  Fagninua.
Ver.  i.—irtadttToy    for    fteody.  A.V. ;

Sftd  up  for  hiiA-minded,  A.V, ;  pleantrt
'  pUamra,  A.V. ;  ratlur  for  more,  A.V.
Traiton  (irf»ll<fT(u):  Luke  vi.  IG;  Acts
TiL  52,  It  does  not  mean  traitora  to  their
king  or  oountry,  but  geuentUy  betrayers  of
the  persons  who  trnst  in  them,  and  of  the
Canso  of  tbo  trust  cnnimitted  to  them ;  per-
haps specially,  as  Bishop  Ellicott  suggests,
of  their  brethren  iu  times  of  peraeontioit.
HeadatronB  (vamriTiro ;  as  in  Acts  lix.  36,
Neither  "heady"  nor  " headstrong "  gives
the  exact  meaning  of  irporcrqt,  which  is
"rash," '■hasty .""headlong."  "Ileadatrong"
rather  denotes  obstinacy  which  will  not  be
influenced  b;  wise  advice,  but  wpmnrtit  is
the  person  who  acts  from  impulse,  without
ronsiderinc  eonscijucncoa,  or  wcigliing  prin-
eJj)lo9.  Puffed  up  (TtTi^/i.W);  seelTijn.
ill.  G,  note.  lovers  of  pleaaoie  (ipiX^Saroi) ;
only  here  iu  tlio  Kcw  Testament,  and  not
found  in  tlio  LXX..  but  occasionally  in
classical  Greek.  "Fond  of  pleasure"  (Lid-
dcll  and  Scott).  It  is  used  here  aa  an  anti-
tliesia  to  lovers  of  God  {^iKiBeoi),  which  alaa
occurs  only  here  eirber  in  the  New  Teata-
ment or  the  LXX.,  but  ia  uaed  by  Aristotle.
Pbilo,  quoted  by  Bishop  Ellicott  (from
Wetstein),  haa  exactly  the  same  contruxt :
*.MfSoco»  .  .  .  fiaWiir  ft  .  .  .  ^iXABmv.  It
lix)ka  as  if  tbo  men  spoken  of  cliiiined  to  he
•piKAeiai.  A  somewhat  similar  pirnnomasia
occurs  in  Isa.  v.  7,  where  ncbD  is  opposed  to
DQi^c,  and  np^  to  ^j^TX-

Vcr.  5. — HoWinj  for  hnring.  A,V, ;
haciiig  'Itnied  for  denyiny,  A.V. ;  IhtK  altn
for  luch,  A,V.  Holding  {tx""")-  There
is  no  reason  to  change  "  iiaving."  Peihapa
"  indec<l  "  after  "having"  would  give  the
emphasis  conveyed  by  txorrn  preceding  the
object.  A  form  (/iipipairir).  It  should  be
the  form;  i.e.  "tlie  outward  semblance,"  i,j.
)iip^lia,  form,  sliape,  figure  (Liddell  and


CH.  III.  1—17.]        THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


41


Scott),  here  in  contrast  with  S^ro/xit,  the
reidity.  In  Rom.  ii.  20,  the  only  other  place
in  the  New  Testament  where  fi6p^ait
oconrs,  there  is  no  contrast,  and  so  it  has
the  sense  of  a  *'  tme  sketch  **  or  **  delinea-
tion." HaTing  denied  {iipytifxtvoi) ;  possibly
more  correct  than  the  A.V.  "denying,"
though  the  difference,  if  any,  is  very  slight
The  meaning  is  that  by  their  life  and
•cliaracter  and  conyersation  thev  gave  the
lie  to  their  Christian  profession.  Christianity
with  them  was  an  outward  form,  not  an  in-
ward living  power  of  godliness.  From  these
alio  does  not  give  the  sense  at  all  clearly.
The  A.V.  does,  though  it  omits  the  ical,
which  is  not  wanted  in  English.  In  the
<lreek  it  marks  an  additional  circumstance
in  the  case  of  those  of  whom  he  is  speaking,
viz.  that  they  are  to  be  turned  away  from  as
hopeless.  Txum  away  (<kvorp4-rov) ;  only  here
in  the  New  Testament,  or,  at  least  in  the
middle  voice,  in  the  LXX. ;  but  frequent  in
classical  Greek  in  different  senses.  St.  Paul
uses  itcrp^wofjLfyos  in  the  same  sense  in
1  Tim.  vi.  20.  "  This  command  shows  that
the  apostle  treats  the  symptoms  of  the  last
times  as  in  some  respects  present "  (Alford).
With  this  catena  of  epithets  comp.  Bom.
i.  29 — 31;  and,  though  of  an  opposite
charucter,  the  strmg  of  adjectives  in  Wisd.
vii.  22,  23.

Ver.  6. — These  for  this  sort,  A.V. ;  thai
for  tchick,  A.V. ;  taJce  for  lead,  A.V. ;  hij  for
tciih,  A.V.  Creep  into  (iMuovrfs);  here
only  in  the  New  Testament.  It  has  the
sense  of  ''sneaking  into,"  "insinuating
themselves  into,"  as  in  Xenophon,  *  Cyrop./
2.  1.  13.  Take  captive  (aixMoAarrcvovrcs) ;
fis  in  Eph.  iv.  3.  The  other  form,  cuxfutXunl-
(om-fs,  which  is  that  of  the  R.T.,  is  in  Luke
xxi.  24;  Rom.  vii.  23;  2  Cor.  x.  5.  The
word  well  describes  the  blind  surrender  of
the  will  and  conscience  to  such  crafty
teachers.  Silly  women  (reb  yvvatKdptaf  dimi-
nutive of  7VKri);  nowhere  else  in  the  New
Testament  or  LXX.,  but  is  used  by  some  late
Greek  authors.  It  is  a  term  of  contempt —
lie  will  not  call  them  ywatKas — they  'are
only  yvvaiKdpia.  In  the  passages  quoted  by
Alford  from  IrcnsBus  and  Epiphanius,  the
women  made  use  of  by  the  later  Gnostics
are  called  ywaiKopia.  See,  too,  the  striking
quotation  in  the  same  note  from  Jerome,
specifying  by  name  the  women  whom  Nico-
las of  Antioch,  Marcion,  Montanus,  and
others  employed  as  their  instruments  in
spreading  their  abominable  heresies.  So
true  is  St.  Paul's  forecast  in  the  text.
Laden  with  sins  ((rccro^pcu/i/ya  ofiapricus) ;
elsewhere  only  in  Rom.  xii.  20,  "heap  coals  of
fire."  It  occurs  in  Aristotle  and  other  Greek
writers  in  the  sense  of  heaping  one  thing
upon  another,  and  heaping  up  anything
with  something  else.    The  last  is  the  sense


in  which  it  is  here  used.  It  seems  to  con-
vey the  idea  of  passive  helplessness.  Lad
away  (i.y6fitva) ;  with  a  strong  intimation  of
unresisting  weakness  (comp.  I  Cor.  xii  2 ;
Acts  viiL  82 ;  Luke  xxiii.  32).  Lnrti  (ivt-
Ov/xicus);  all  kinds  of  carnal  and  selfish
desires  (see  Matt.  iv.  19;  John  viii.  44;
Rom.  i.  24;  vi.  12;  vii.  7,  8;  GaL  v.  24;
Eph.  ii.  3;  iv.  22;  Col.  iii.  5;  1  Tim.  vi.
9;  ch.  ii.  22;  iv.  3;  Titus  ii.  12;  iii  3;
1  Pet.  i.  14,  eta;  2  Pet.  u.  18;  1  John
ii.  16,  etc.).

Ver.  7.— Ever  learning,  etc.  This  is  the
crowning  feature  of  this  powerful  sketch  of
those  "silly  women,"  whose  thoughts  are
busied  about  religion  without  their  affections
being  reached  or  their  principles  being  in-
fluenced by  it.  They  are  always  beating
about  the  oush,  but  they  never  get  posses-
sion of  the  blessed  and  saving  truth  of  the
gospel  of  Qod.  Their  own  selfish  inclina-
tions, and  not  the  grace  of  God,  continue  to
be  the  motive  power  with  them.

Ver.  8. — And  like  for  now,  A.V. ;  tcith-
stand  for  resist,  A.  V. ;  corrupted  in  mind
for  of  corrupt  minds,  A.V.  And ;  hut  would
be  better.  Jannet  and  Jambret ;  the  tradi-
tional names  of  the  magicians  who  opposed
Moses ;  and,  if  Origen  can  be  trusted,  there
was  an  apocryphal  book  called  by  their
names.  But  Theodoret  ascribes  their  names
to  an  unwritten  Jewish  tradition.  Their
names  arc  found  in  the  Targum  of  Jonathan
on  Exod.  vii.  11;  xxii.  22;  and  are  aUo
mentioned,  in  conjunction  with  Moses,  with
some  variation  in  the  name  of  Jambres,  by
Pliny  (*  Hist.  Nat.,'  xxxi.  2),  who  probably
got  his  information  from  a  work  of  Sergius
Paulus  on  magic,  of  which  the  materials
were  furnished  by  Elymas  the  sorcerer
(Acts  xiii.  6 — 8).  Withstood  (i.yr4<mi<raw) ;
the  same  word  as  is  used  of  Elymas  in
Acts  xiii.  8  (so  ch.  iv.  15  and  elsewhere).
Cormpted  in  mind  (Kar€^apfx4ya  r6v  vovti) ;
elsewhere  only  in  2  Pet.  ii.  12,  in  the  sense
of  " perishing,"  being  "utterly  destroyed,"
which  is  the  proper  meaning  of  Koro^tf^ioo-
fiau  Here  in  a  moral  sense  KarttpBaofitpoi
rhv  yovy  means  men  whose  understandmg  is
gone,  and  perished,  as  ^it<p0apfx4yo5  r^v  iueo^v
means  one  whoso  hearing  has  perisheid — who
is  deaf.  In  1  Tim.  vi.  5  St.  Paul  uses  the
more  common  dit<peapfi4v(oy.  Beprohate
(MKtfia);  as  Titus  i.  16,  and  elsewhere
frequently  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  It  is  just
the  contrary  to  h6Kttios  (ch.  ii.  15,  note).

Ver.  9. — Evident  for  manifest,  A. V. ;  came
to  he  for  teas,  A.V.  Shall  proceed  (wpoic6i^ov-
<riv) ;  as  ch.  ii.  16  (where  see  note)  and  ver.
13.  The  apostle's  meaning  here  is,  as  ex-
plained by  the  example  of  the  msigicians,
that  heresies  shall  not  prevail  against  the
truth.  'Eirl  vXcibv  means  beyond  the  point
indicated  in  his  description  of  their  future


42


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  m.  1—17


proere88i?e  evil.  They  would  "proceed
further  in  ungodlineBs/'  as  he  said  in  cb.  it.
16,  but  not  up  to  the  point  of  destroying  the
eospel,  as  history  has  shown.  The  vurious
forms  of  Gnosticism  have  perished.  The
gospel  remains.  Ai  thsirt  also  eame  to  be
(Exod.  viii.  18, 19).  Surely  the  A.V. "  was  "
is  better.

Ver.   10.— Did9t  foUow  my  teaching  for
haU  fuUy  known  my  doctrine,  A.V.  and  T.K. ;
conduct  for  manner  of  life^  A.V. ;   love  for
ekarity^  A.y.     Didst  follow  (irafn)«coXo^(rar,
which  is  the  B.T.  for  ira^Ko\o{AiiKasy  in
the  perfect,  which  is  the  T.R.).    The  evi-
dence for  the  two  readings  is  nicely  ba-
lanced.   But  St.  Paul  uses  the  perfect  in
I  Tim.  iv.  6  (where  see  note),  and  it  seems
highly  improbable  that  he  here  used  the
aorist  in  order  to  convey  a  rebuff  to  Timothy
by  insinuating  that  he  had  once  followed,
but  that  he  was  doing  so  no  longer.    Tlio
sentence,  "  thou  didst  follow,"  etc.,  is  singu-
larly insipid.    The  A.V.  **  thou  hast  fully
known  "gives  the  sense  fully  and  clearly.
Timothy  had  fully  known  St.  Paul's  whole
career,  partly  from  what  he  had  heard,  and
partly  from  what  he  had  been  an  eye-wit-
ness of.    Xy  teaching.    How  different  from
that  of  those  impostors  !    Condnot  (Jaytrf^) ;
hero  only  in  the  New  Testament,  but  found
in  the  LXX.  in  Esih.  ii.  20  (jhv  oyuyiiu
ainrist  **  her  manner  of  life" — her  behaviour
towards  Mordecai,  where  there  is  nothing  to
answer  to  it  in  the  Hebrew  text) ;  2  Mace,
iv.  16  (t^s  iyoryeCj) ;  vi.  8  ;  xi.  24.     Aristotle
uses    iycoyi}  for  "conduct,"    or  *'mode  of
life"  (*  Ethics 0,  and  Polybius  (iv.  74,  14),
quoted  by  Alford,  has   07^7^  nnd  a7W7ai
rod  /S(ou,  •'  way  "  or  "  manner  of  life."     The
A.V.   "manner  of   life"    is   a    very   good
rendering.    Purpose  ( irp6e€<Tiv) ;  that  which
a  person  sets  before  him  ns  the  end  to  be
attained  (Acts  xi.  23;   xxvii.  13;  2  Maco.
iii.  8;    and    in    Aristotle,    Polybius,    and
others).     Used  often  of  God's  eternal  pur-
pose,   as  e.g.  ch.  i.  9;  Eph.  i.  11,  etc.      In
enumerating  these  and  the  following, "  faith,
long-sufferinj^,  charity,  and   patience,"    St.
Paul    doubtless    had    in    view,    not    self-
glorification,  which  was  wholly  alien  to  his
earnest,  self-denying    character,    but     the
mention  of  those  qualities  which   he  saw
were  most  needed  by  Timothy.    Long-suffer-
ing {rrf  fioKpoBvfilq,)  ;  as  1  Tim.  i.  10,  of  the
long-suffering  of  Jesus  Christ  towards  him-
self,  and  elsewhere    frequently   of  human
patience   and  forbearance    towards    others.
Patience  (ttJ"  uiro/iovif).    This  is  exercised  in
the    patient    endurance    of   afflictions    for
Christ's  sake.    It  is  coupled,  as  here,  with
ficucpoBvfilay  long-suffering,  in  Col.  i.  11.

Ver.  11. — Suffering  for  affliciionsy  A.V. ;
what  things  hejeil  me  for  which  came  unto
me,  A.y. ;  and  for  but,  A.\.    Peneoutions


(8i»7/Ao?0;  as  Matt.  xiii.  21;  Acts  riii.l;
xiii.  50;  2  Cor.  xii.  10,  etc.  Boffexings
(roff  waiijfiaffiy) ;  usually  so  rendered  in  the
A.V.  (Rom.  viii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  L  5 ;  Col.  L  24,
etc.);  rendered  "afflictions'*  in  Heb.  x.  82;
1  Pet.  V.  9.  At  Antioeh ;  in  Pisidia  (Arts
xiii.  14).  For  an  account  of  the  peneentions
encountered  by  St.  Paul  at  Antioeh,  loo-
nium,  and  Lystra,  see  Acts  xiiL,  xiv.  It  was
at  St.  Paul's  second,  or  rather  third,  Tisit  to
Lystra  that  he  chose  Timothy  for  Ms  com-
panion (Acts  xvi.  1 — 3).  I  endured  (M-
rt 7ira^ ;  not  simply  **  suffered,"  but  **  onder-
went,"  willingly  and  firmly  suffered  (see
1  Pet.  li.  19).  As  regards  the  oonstrnction,
the  antecedent  to  ota  is  waB'tifiaaiyy  and  the
difference  between  a  and  ota  is  that  a  would
limit  the  reference  to  the  actual  troB^ifjiaTa  at
Antioeh,  Iconium,  and  Lystra,  but  ofa  ex-
tends the  reference  to  all  similar  sufferings.
The  proper  English  rendering  is  ^  such  as
befell  me."  But  the  clause  at  the  end  of
the  sentence  should  be  rendered  ''what
great  persecutions  I  endured."  As  Bengel
notes,  *'  oJos  demonstrat  rei  gravitatem,'*  and
oTous  preceding  the  substantive  with  which
it  agrees  (S«v7/iovi),  cannot  be  construed  the
same  as  oJa  the  relative.  The  sentence,  oTbvs
di(aytiovs  ^T^j'cyKo,  is  an  amplification  of  the
preceding  Hidyfiois  :  "  Thou  hast  fully
known  my  persecutions  . .  .  viz.  what  great
persecutions  I  endured."  And  oat  of  them
all,  etc.  This  is  added  for  Timothy's  en-
couragement, that  he  might  stand  fast  in
the  face  of  persecutions  and  sufferings.
Delivered  me  {fie  ipffva-aro).  Had  the
B[)ostle  in  his  mind  the  clause  in  the  Ix)rdV
Prayer,*'  Deliver  us  from  evil "  (Matt  vi.  13)  ?
Comp.  ch.  iv.  18,  where  the  resemblance  is
still  more  striking.  Observe  the  testimony
to  Chribt*8  omnipotence  in  this  ascription
to  him,  in  both  passages,  of  St.  Paul's  de-
liverance (comp.  Acts  xviii.  10).

Ver.  12— Would  for  will  A.V.  Yea  and
all  (ifoi  irdtnts  Se).  As  though  he  liad  said.
"  Mine  is  not  a  solitary  example  of  a  servant
of  God  being  persecuted ;  it  is  the  common  lot
of  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  "
(comp.  John  xv.  20  and  1  Pet.  iv.  1, 12,  13).

Ver.  13. — ImjMBtors  for  seduc^rs^  A.V.
Evil  men  (jroyrjpoC).  In  ch.  iv.  18  it  is  war-
rhs  ipyov  irovr)pov.  The  adjective  is  applied
indifferently  to  persons  and  things — evil
men,  evil  servants,  evil  persons,  evil  gene-
ration, evil  spirits,  "etc.,  and  evil  deeds,  evil
fruits,  evil  eye,  evil  works,  etc.  Satan,  the
embodiment  of  evil,  is  6  irovr\p6s.  Impoftors
iy6r\rts) ;  only  hero  in  the  New  Testament.
In  classicid  Greek  y6r\s  is  a  juggler,  a  cheat,
an  enchanter.  St.  Paul  still  had  the
Egyptian  magicians  in  his  mind.  Shall  wax
worse  and  worse  {TrpoK6i^ov<Tiv  kir\  tI*  x^^P^*')  >
see  above,  ver.  9,  note.

Ver.  14. — Abide  for  continue,  A.V.   Abide


CH.  III.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY,


4a


thoHf  etc.  Be  not  like  these  iuggling  heretics,
blown  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine,  and
always  seeking  some  new  thing,  bnt  abide
in  the  old  truths  which  thou  hast  learnt
from  thy  childhood.  Hast  been  asBiired  of
(4Tt<rrweris) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, but  found  in  2  Maco.  vii.  24  and
1  Kings  i.  3G.  In  classical  Greek  it  has  the
same  sense  as  here  (among  others),  **  to  be
made  sure  of  a  thing.**  Of  whom  ti^ou  hast
learned  them  (vapa  riuos  l/xodc;,  or,  according
to  another  reading  of  nearly  equal  authority,
iraph  rlvav).  If  riyos  is  the  right  reading,
it  must  refer  either  to  God  or  to  St.  Paul.
In  favour  of  its  referring  to  God  is  the  ex-
pression in  the  Prophet  I^iah  commented
upon  by  our  Lord  in  John  vi.  45,  where  iropA
Tov  UaTp6s  answers  to  vaph,  riyos ;  the  pro-
mise concerning  the  Comforter,  "He  shall
tench  you  all  things  **  (John  xiv.  26,  etc.)  ;
and  the  very  similar  reasoning  of  St.  John,
when  he  is  exhorting  his  **  little  children  **  to
stand  fast  in  the  faith,  in  spite  of  those  that
seduced  them :  **  Let  that  therefore  abide  in
you  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning ;  **
for  •*  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received
of  him,  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need  not
that  any  man  teach  you :  but  as  the  same
anointing  tcacheth  you  of  all  things, . .  .  and
even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  abide  in  him*'
(1  John  ii.  24 — 28);  and  other  similar  pas-
sages. There  would  obviously  bo  great
force  in  reminding  Timothy  that  he  had
received  the  gospel  under  the  immediate
teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  it
would  be  a  shameful  thing  for  him  to  turn
aside  under  the  influence  of  those  impostors.
If  rhos  does  not  refer  to  God,  it  must  refer
to  St.  Paul.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  riuuv  is
the  true  reading  (which  is  less  probable),  it
must  refer  to  Ix)is  and  Eunice,  which  seems
rather  feeble.

Ver.  15. — Babe  for  child,  A.V.;  sacred
vorxiingt  for  Holy  Scripture$t  A,\.  And  that
from  a  babe,  etc.  Another  consideration
urged  as  a  reason  for  standing  fast.  He
was  no  novice  in  the  Scriptures.  His  mother
and  grandmother  had  been  careful  to  imbue
him  with  that  sacred  literature  which  should
make  him  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith
in  Jesus  Christ,  from  his  very  earliest  years.
Surely  he  would  not  throw  away  such  a
precious  advantage.  The  saored  writingf  (reb
Updi  ypdn/xara) ;  literally,  the  holy  lettered  or
learning.  An  ordinarily  educated  child  learns
ypi^ifuira  (John  vii.  15),  in  contradistinction
to  the  uneducated,  who  are  iypafifiaroi  (Acts
iv.  13).  But  Timothy  had  learnt  rd  Uph,
ypdfifjLaTo,  whoso  excellence  is  described  in
the  next  verse.

Ver.  16. — Every  Scripture  intpired  of  Ood
is  aUo  profitable  for  all  Scripture  ia  given  hy
intpiration  of  God,  and  t«  profitable^  A.V. ;
tetu:hing  for  doctrine,  A.y. ;  which  is  in  for


tn,  A.V.  Every  Scriptore,  etc.  There  are^
two  ways  of  construing  this  important  pas-
sage :  (A)  As  in  the  A. V.,  in  which  0c^cv-
aros  is  part  of  the  predicate  coupled  by
K(d  with  the  following  uKp4\ifios ;  (B)  as  in
the  R.y.,  where  0t6irv€v<rros  is  part  of  the
subject  (as  »oy  fpyop  iya06p,  "  every  good
work,'*  2  Cor.  ix.  8,  and  elsewhere) ;  and  the
following  Kol  is  ascensive,  and  to  be  rendered
**  is  also.**  Commentators  are  pretty  equally
divided,  though  the  older  ones  (as  Origen,
Jerome  (Vulgate),  the  versions)  m<»tly
adopt  (B).  In  favour  of  (A),  however,  it
may  be  said  (1)  that  such  a  sentence  as
that  which  arises  from  (B)  necessarily  im-
plies that  there  are  some  ypa<pal  which  are
not  0§6irv(va'roi,  just  as  Tlav  fpyov  dtya06y
implies  that  there  are  some  works  which
are  not  good ;  ira<ra  tuKoyia  wvfvfianicii  (Eph.
i.  8),  that  there  are  some  blessings  which
are  not  spiritual ;  way  ^pyoy  woyripoy  (2  Tim.
iv.  18),  that  there  are  some  works  which
are  not  evil;  and  so  on.  But  as  ypa<^  is
invariably  used  in  the  New  Testament  for
**  Scripture,**  and  not  for  any  profane  writing ;
it  is  not  in  accordance  with  biblical  language
to  say,  *•  every  inspired  Scripture,**  because
every  Scripture  is  inspired.  (2)  The  sen-
tence, taken  according  to  (B),  is  an  ex-
tremely awkward,  and,  as  Alford  admits,
harsh  construction,  not  supported  in  its
entirety  by  one  single  parallel  usage  in
the  whole  New  Testament.  (3)  The  sen-
tence, taken  according  to  (A),  is  a  perfectlv
simple  one,  and  is  exactly  parallel  with
1  Tim.  iv.  4,  Uav  Kricrfia  ecoD  Ka\&y,  ical
ol'^iy  d'r6^\riroy,  "Every  creature  of  God
M  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused.**  (4)
It  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  context.
Having  in  the  preceding  verse  stated  the
excellence  of  the  sacred  writings,  he  accounts
for  that  excellence  by  referring  to  their
origin  and  source.  They  are  inspired  of
God,  and  hence  their  wide  use  and  great
power.  (5)  This  interpretation  is  supported
oy  high  authority:  Chrysostom,  Gregory
of  Nyssa,  etc.,  among  the  ancients  (Alford) ;
and  Bengel,Wiesinger,  DeWette,  etc.,  among
modem.  The  advocates  of  (B),  as  Bishop
Ellicott,  Dean  Alford,  etc.,  speak  very
doubtfully.  With  regard  to  the  rendering
of  tratra  ypa^,  no  doubt,  strict  grammar,  in
the  absence  of  the  article,  favours  the  render-
ing in  the  R.V.,  **  every  Scripture,"  rather
than  that  of  the  A. V.,  »*  all  Scripture.**  But
Aiford*s  remark  on  Matt.  L  20  applies  with
full  force  here:  **When  a  word  or  an  ex-
pression came  to  bear  a  technical  conven-
tional meaning,  it  was  also  common  to  use
it  without  the  article,  as  if  it  were  a  proper
name,  e.g,  B«^y,  k^/aot,  vihs  eeov,**  etc.  There-
fore, just  as  xaffa  'Upoff6\vfia  (Matt.  ii.  3)
means  "all  Jerusalem,**  not  "every  Jem-
ealem/'  so    here  waaa  ypapi   means  "all


44


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [en.  in.  1—17.


Scripture."  *  What  follows  of  the  TariouB
uses  of  Holy  Scripture  is  not  true  of  **  every
Scripture."  One  Scripture  is  profitable  for
doctrine,  another  for  reproof,  and  so  on.
Examples  of  ypa^  without  the  article  are
2  Pet.  i.  20  and  Bom.  i.  2;  and  of  was
not  followed  by  the  article,  and  yet  meaning
**  all,*'  are  in  Eph.  ii.  21  and  iii.  15.  Inspired
of  Gi>d,  etc.  {dtSrvtvirros) ;  here  only  in  the
New  Testament  or  LXX.,  but  occasionally
in  classical  Greek,  as  Plutarch.  For  teach-
ing, etc.  Tlie  particular  uses  for  which
Scripture  is  said  to  be  profitable  present  no
difliculty.  Teaching,  of  which  Holy  Scrip-
ture is  the  only  infallible  source.  Beproof
{(^Ktyxoy  or  i\fyfi6y);  only  here  and  Heb.
xi.  1 ;  but  in  classical  Greek  it  means  **  a
proof,"  specially  for  the  purpose  of  "  refuta-
tion" of  a  false  statement  or  argument.
Here  in  the  same  sense  for  the  **  conviction  "
or  '* refutation"  of  false  teachers  (comp.
Titus  i.  9,  13),  but  probably  including  errors
in  living  (compare  in  the  *  Ordering  of
Priests,*  **  That  there  be  no  place  left  among
you,  either  for  error  in  religion  or  for
viciousness  in  life  ").  Z  Correotion  (^4way6p'
6ci<ny);  only  here  in  the  New  Testament,
but  occasionally  in  the  LXX.,  and  fre-
quently in  classical  Greek,  as  Aristotle,
Plato,  etc,  in  the  sense  of  *'  correction,"  i.e.
setting  a  person  or  thing  straight,  **  revisal,"
**  improvement,"  **  amendment,"  or  the  like.
It  may  be  applied  equally  to  opinions  and
to  morals,  or  way  of  life.  Instruction  which
is  in  righteousness.  There  is  no  advantage
in  this  awkward  phraseology.  *'  InBtruction
in    righteousness "    exactly   expresses    the

*  Compare,  too,  iracra  ffdp^,  "all  flesh  "
(Luke  iii.  G);  nas  oIkos  'lapdrjKy  "all  the
house  of  L-rael"  (Acts  ii.  3G);  ^v  ircierp  4-irt-
aroXr),  *'  in  his  whole  Epistle  "  (Iguat.,  *  Ad
Ephes.,'  xii.).


meaning.  The  Greek,  riiw  4v  Zucau»ff{»rn^
merely  limits  the  vcuSe^a  to  the  sphere  of
righteousness  or  Christian  virtue.  By  the
use  of  Holy  Scripture  the  Christian  is  being
continually  more  perfectly  instructed  in
holy  living.

Ver.  17. — Complete  for  perfeH^  A.V. ;  /nr-
nUhed  completely  for  throughly  fumuhed,
A.y. ;  every  good  toork  for  ctU  good  toorlcs,
A.y.  Complete  {iprios);  only  here  in  ^e
New  Testament,  but  common  in  ^l^Mwri^l
Greek.  ''Complete,  perfect  of  its  kind"
(Liddell  and  Scott).  Tnmiihed  completely
(^^riprifffi^vosi  containing  the  same  root  as
&prios);  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament
only  in  Acts  xxi.  5  in  the  sense  of  *'  com-
pleting" a  term  of  days.  It  is  neatly
synonymous  with  Karapri(M  (Matt,  xxi  16;
Luke  vi.  40;  2  Ck)r.  xiii.  11 ;  Heb.  xiii  21;
1  Pet.  Y.  10).  In  late  classical  Greek  i^ap-
rl(u  means,  as  here,  **  to  equip  fully .**  As
regards  the  question  whetner  the  man  of
Ood  is  restricted  in  its  meaning  to  the
minister  of  Christ,  or  comprehends  all
Christians,  two  things  seem  to  decide  in
favour  of  the  former :  the  one  that  *•  the
man  of  God"  is  in  the  Old  Testament  in-
variably applied  to  prophets  in  the  im-
mediate service  of  God  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  11,
note);  the  other  that  in  1  Tim.  vi.  11  it
undoubtedly  refers  to  Timothy  in  bis  cha-
racter of  chief  pastor  of  the  Church,  and
that  here  too  the  whole  force  of  the  descrip-
tion of  the  uses  and  excellence  of  Holy
Scripture  is  brought  to  bear  upon  the  ex-
hortations in  ver.  14,  "Continue  thou  in  the
things  which  thou  hast  heard,"  addressed
to  Timothy  as  the  Bishop  of  the  Ephcsian
Church  (see,  too,  ch.  iv.  1 — 5,  where  it  is
abundantly  cleur  that  all  that  precedes  was
intended  to  bear  directly  upon  Timothy's
faithful  and  vigorous  discharge  of  his  office
as  an  evangelist).


HOMILETICS.

Tors.  1 — 17. — Hall/  Scripture  the  strength  of  the  man  of  Ood.  There  is  marvellous
force  in  the  application  to  the  Christian  bishop  and  evangelist  of  the  title  tue  man  of
God.  When  we  remember  the  course  of  faithful  and  untiring  labour,  and  patient
unflinchinjT  suffering,  which  was  run  by  those  to  whom  alone  this  title  was  given  in
the  Old  Testament — Moses  and  Samuel  and  Elijah,  and  other  prophets  of  God — we
feel  at  once  that  the  application  of  this  title  to  the  ministers  of  Christ  under  the  New
Testament  teaches  them  with  incisive  power  that  the  like  spirit  must  be  found  in  them
if  they  are  worthy  to  be  classed  with  the  men  of  God.  Evidently  the  "  man  of  God"
must  not  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die,  or  a  son  of  man  which  shall  be  made  as
grass ;  he  must  not  shrink  from  bearing  witness  for  God  before  an  unbelieving  and
gainsaying  world  ;  he  must  not  be  a  lover  of  ease  or  pleasure,  or  of  the  praise  of  men ;
he  must  not  be  greedy  of  gain  or  covetous  of  reward ;  he  must  not  be  a  man  of  strife
and  brawls,  but  a  man  of  love  and  peace ;  he  must  be  zealous  for  God's  honour  and
glory ;  he  must  be  a  staunch  upholder  of  God's  truth  against  errors  and  false  doctrines ;
and  he  must  be  a  man  of  prayer,  and  very  devout  towards  God ;  for  otherwise  how
shall  he  be  called  a  "  man  of  God  "  ?    But  how  shall  this  unearthly  character  be  main-


CH.  III.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  45

tained  ?  When  those  perilous  times  are  at  their  height  in  which  all  the  natural  aflfec-
tions  of  men  seem  to  he  blighted,  and  all  the  natural  safeguards  against  the  growth  of
evil  seem  to  be  overborne  by  the  floods  of  ungodliness,  when  a  proud  boasting  spirit,  as
empty  as  it  is  pretentious,  carries  men  into  all  kinds  of  unseemly  action,  and  when
religion  itself,  far  from  guiding  men  in  holy  paths,  degenerates  into  hypocrisy  and
faction  and  opposition  to  that  which  is  good,  how  shall  the  man  of  Grod  maintain  his
integrity,  abide  in  the  true  doctrine  of  God,  and  hold  his  own  against  the  teachers  of
lies,  and  the  seducers  of  weak  and  silly  souls?  Gtod  has  provided  him  with  an  all-
sufficient  weapon  of  attack  and  of  defence.  In  those  holy  Scriptures  which  were  given
by  inspiration  of  God,  the  man  of  GK)d  finds  a  spiritual  furniture  suitable  for  every  need.
By  the  study  of  it  he  acquires  fresh  wisdom  for  his  task,  and  by  its  spirit  his  own  spirit
is  nouri^ed  and  refreshed.  In  the  light  of  its  bright  truth  the  pernicious  errors  of
seducers  are  exposed ;  by  its  counsels  waverers  are  established,  the  weak  are  strength-
ened, the  crooked  are  set  straight  again.  Conversant  with  its  heavenly  doctrine,  the
man  of  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  a  word  of  rebuke,  of  comfort,  or  exhortation.  And
while,  on  the  one  hand,  he  is  able  to  refute  every  new  heresy  that  arises,  by  reference  to
the  unchanging  Word  of  God,  on  the  other  he  daily  acquires  some  new  insight  into  the
depths  of  revelation  for  his  own  edification  and  that  of  others.  He  finds  that  the
manifold  and  many-sided  wisdom  of  the  Scriptures  is  as  able  to  cope  with  the  intellec-
tual difficulties  of  the  nineteenth  century  as  it  was  with  the  Gnosticism  of  the  East  in
the  first  centuries  of  Christianity.  And  so,  while  some  turn  away  their  ears  from  the
truth,  and  turn  aside  unto  fables,  the  man  of  God  finds  his  faith  daily  strengthening
and  increased,  and  looks  forward  fearlessly  to  the  time  when  the  folly  of  the  sceptic
shall  be  evident  to  all  men,  and  the  truth  of  God*s  Word  shall  be  vindicated  before  the
whole  creation  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  glory  of  his  kingdom.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — The  perilous  times  of  the  apostasy.  The  apostle  next  proceeds  to  predict
a  further  progress  in  error,  with  the  view  of  putting  Timothy  on  his  guard  and  sharpen-
ing his  diligence.

I.  The  period  of  this  apostasy.  "  This  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous
times  shall  come.**  1.  The  language  does  not  point  to  the  dosing  days  of  the  Christian
dispensation,  for  it  resembles  the  language  of  the  Apostle  John — '*  It  is  the  last  time  "
— where  the  present  is  undoubtedly  referred  to,  and  not  the  future.  2.  The  contextual
injunction,  "from  such  turn  atvay,*  aj)plies  to  the  present  rather  than  to  afar-distant
future.  The  Christian  Church  has  in  all  ages  shown  a  condition  of  things  only  too
closely  represented  by  the  moral  picture  in  the  context.  The  apostle  implies  that  there
were  "  vessels  of  dishonour  "  in  the  "  large  house  "  in  his  own  day,  such  as  Hy menasus
and  Philetus,  as  well  as  *'  vessels  unto  honour.**  3.  The  language  has  a  wide  latitude,
covering  the  whole  space  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  evil  had  begun  to  work  in
the  age  of  Timothy,  but  the  worst  development  of  anti-Christian  apostasy  will  be  in  the
closing  days  of  the  dispensation.  The  ''days  of  the  Messiah  "are  often  alluded  to  in
the  Hebrew  prophets  as  *'  in  the  last  days;"  literally,  **  the  end  of  days  "  (Isa.  ii.  2 ;  Hos.
iii.  5 ;  Micah  iv.  1).

II.  The  DAN0EK0U8  CHARACTER  OP  THIS  APOSTASY.  "  Perilous  timcs  shall  come."
1.  It  will  he  a  timt  of  danger  to  the  faith  of  God's  people.  2.  It  will  he  a  time  of  peril
to  their  litres.    3.  It  will  he  a  time  of  abounding  wickedness  as  well  as  error. — T.  C.

Vers.  2 — 5. — Characteristics  of  the  apostasy.  The  doctrinal  degeneracy  is  marked  by
a  widespread  moral  decay.  The  apostle,  after  his  usual  manner,  groups  the  characters
into  classes  for  more  distinct  consideration.

I.  The  SELFISH  class.  **  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  self,  lovers  of  money."  Self-
ishness heads  the  dreary  list.  It  is  regarded  by  many  theologians  as  the  root-principle
of  all  sin.  As  the  opposite  of  love,  however,  is  not  selfishness,  but  hatred,  this  position
cannot  be  maintained.  Yet  selfishness  is,  above  all  things,  the  hard  represser  of  love.
The  "  love  of  money  "  has  been  called  "  the  daughter  of  selfishness."

IL  The  class  of  arrogant  boasters.    ^  B<msters,  arrogant,  railers."    The  first  are


46  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  lu.  1— 17.


ostentatious  in  speech ;  the  second,  full  of  pride  and  contempt  for  others ;  the  third  are
full  of  insults  to  men.

III.  The  class  which  is  defiantly  regardless  of  human  relationships.
"  Disohedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unholy,  without  natural  affection,  implacahle."
He  who  is  regardless  of  filial  duty  will  he  ungrateful  to  others,  and  he  that  is  ungrate-
ful will  have  no  regard  for  holiness  of  character ;  for  he  will  keep  covenant  with  no  one
who  disregards  his  parent  or  his  benefactor.

IV.  TUE    CLASS  DISTINGUISHED  BY  RECKLESS  AND  PASSIONATE    DEFIANCE    OF    GOOD.

•*  Slanderers,  without  self-control,  fierce,  no  lovers  of  good,  traitors."  The  first  term
points  to  the  disposition  to  bring  the  good  down  to  the  level  of  the  base ;  the  second,  to
the  absence  of  all  i-estraint  from  law,  human  or  Divine ;  the  third,  to  the  savage  temper
that  delights  in  cruelty;  the  fourth,  to  the  spirit  that  *' loves  darkness  rather  than
light ; "  the  fifth,  to  the  class  of  men  who  could  betray  their  Christian  brethren  to  their
persecutors,  or  behave  falsely  in  any  of  their  existing  relationships.

V.  The  CLASS  of  heady  and  conceited  actors.  "  Headstrong,  puffed  up.'*  Rash-
ness and  conceit  are  often  allied.

YI.  The  class  of  pleasure-seekers.  "  Lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than  lovers  of
God."  It  represents  a  dissipated  class  under  a  Christian  profession,  who  have  no  serious
pursuits,  and  prefer  the  friendship  of  the  world  to  the  friendship  of  God.

Thus,  the  long  catalogue  of  moral  enormity  developed  by  the  apostasy  began  with
**  the  love  of  self,"  and  ends  with  "  the  love  of  pleasure,"  to  the  utter  exclusion,  first
and  last,  of  the  "  love  of  God."— T.  C.

Ver.  5. — The  relation  of  the  apostasy  to  the  Christian  prof  ession.  I.  The  external
FORM  OF  piety  IS  TO  EXIST  UNDER  THE  APOSTASY.  "Having  a  foHR  of  godliness."
The  picture  is  that  of  a  Christianized  paganism  in  the  Church.  There  was  to  be  a
scrupulous  regard  for  all  ritualistic  regularity ;  an  outward  show  of  devoutness  under
strict  forms,  and  the  mask  of  godliness  over  all  to  cover  a  heart  in  secret  enslaved
by  sin.

II.  There  will  be  a  repudiation  of  real  godliness.  "But  denying  the  power
thereof."  1.  The  power  of  godliness  consists  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbour.
These  were  both  repudiated.  The  class  referred  to  were  strangers  to  experimental  reli-
gion, which  they  dishonoured  by  saying  one  thing  with  their  lips  and  another  thing
with  their  lives.  2.  Stich  a  repudiation  involves  graver  sin  and  deeper  condemnation
than  if  they  had  never  knoitni  the  truth  or  heard  of  the  way  of  life.

III.  The  duty  of  believers  in  the  apostasy.  "  From  such  turn  away."  We
ought  to  withdraw  from  their  fellowship,  avoid  all  familiarity  with  them,  hold  no  terms
with  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  kingdom. — T.  C.

Vers.  6,  7. —  T1\e  insidiously  proselytizing  habits  of  these  apostates.  I.  The  arts  of
the  seducers.  *'  For  of  this  sort  are  they  who  creep  into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly
women."  1.  They  were  of  a  most  proselytizing  spirit.  Like  the  Pharisees,  they  would
compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte.  2.  They  practised  unworthy  arts.  They
wormed  their  way  insidiously  into  the  confidence  of  families.  There  was  a  deceitful
and  tricky  method  of  gaining  access  to  their  victims,  3.  They  used  their  stratagems  to
snare  women  rather  than  men.  They  knew  that  women,  as  the  weaker  vessels,  were
more  accessible  to  soft  blandishments  and  specious  pretences  of  piety.  They  counted
upon  an  accession  of  female  converts  as,  above  all  things,  most  contributing  to  the
success  of  their  propaganda.

II.  The  character  of  their  victims.  "  Silly  women  laden  with  sins,  led  away  by
divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."
These  victims  of  their  specious  arts  were  morally  and  intellectually  prepared  for  them.
I.  They  were^  morally ,  tinder  the  sway  of  evil  passions  and  desires^  full,  no  doubt,  of
"  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Such  women  would
welcome  a  short  cut  to  peace,  or  any  reeonciliation  between  religion  and  worldliness
that  could  be  devised  by  the  arts  of  apostasy.  The  words  seem  to  point  to  the  weight
of  former  sins  burdening  the  conscience,  from  which  they  hoped  to  be  released  under
easier  conditions  than  those  prescribed  by  the  gospel.  2.  They  were  incapible,  through
their  sinful  lifcj  of  attaining  a  true  knowledge  of  the  truth.     They  were  **  silly  women,"'


CH.  III.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  47

with  light,  frivolous,  unhalanced  judgments;  *'ever  learning" — with  a  morbid  love  of
novelties  in  religion,  an  insatiable  curiosity  for  the  mysteries  promised  by  their  false
guides,  and  a  constant  craving  for  an  adaptation  of  doctrinal  views  to  their  evil  desires
— *'  aod  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Because  their  hearts  had
become  indurated  through  an  evil  life,  and  so  made  inaccessible  to  the  truth. — T.  G.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  character  and  aims  of  the  false  teachers.  The  apostle  vividly
depicts  their  attitude  toward  the  truth.

J.  They  have  their  historical  prototypes.  "  As  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood
Moses,  so  do  these  also  withstand  the  truth."  1.  These  were  two  Egyptian  magicians^
called  "  wise  men  and  sorcerers "  (Exod.  vii.  11 — 22),  who  appeared  at  the  court  of
Pharaoh  to  resist  the  wonder-working  power  of  Moses.  Their  names  do  not  occur  in
the  Old  Testament,  but  they  are  fouud  in  the  Targum  of  Jonathan,  and  are  also  quoted
by  heathen  writers.  What  was  more  natural  than  that  the  apostle  should  quote  to
Timothy  one  of  the  two  traditions  of  his  country?  2.  These  magicians^  reported  to
have  been  sons  of  Balaam,  were  thwarted  in  their  arts  by  the  superior  power  that  worked
through  Moses,    The  parallel  was  therefore  in  a  double  sense  apt.

II.  The  false  teachers  directly  withstood  the  truth  op  the  gospel.  1.
Tficy  may  have  used  occult  arts  like  their  Egyptian  prototypes  to  attrctct  disciples ;  for
the  word  "seducers,"  applied  to  them  in  the  context  (ver.  13),  has  this  signification.
The  claim  to  possess  such  powers  was  not  unusual  in  that  day  (Acts  viii.  9—24 ;  xiii.
G — 12  ;  xix.  18^20).  2.  But,  like  Elymas^  they  withstood  the  truth  of  the  gosvel,  by
representing  themselves  <m  possessing  as  much  authority  as  the  apostle  himself,  and  thus
neutraliziug  its  exclusive  claims.    They  subverted  the  hopes  of  the  gospel.

III.  The  explanation  of  their  anti-Christian  attitude.  "Men  of  corrupt
minds,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith."  1.  Corrupt  affections  depraved  their  mental
judgments.  Even  that  mind,  which  is  the  medium  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit
jnakes  his  communications  to  man,  had  become  darkened.  "  A  corrupt  head,  a  corrupt
heart,  and  a  vicious  life,  usually  accompany  each  other."  2.  The  doctrines  of  these
teachers  had  been  tested  and  discovered  to  be  worthless^  like  silver  which  was  to  be
rejected  by  man.    They  had  nothing  but  the  name  in  common  with  the  Christian  faith.

IV.  The  check  that  would  be  given  to  their  progress.  "But  they  shall  pro-
ceed no  further ;  for  their  folly  shall  be  evident  to  all  men,  as  theirs  also  came  to  tie."
This  passage  seems  opposed  to  ch.  ii.  16,  where  it  is  said  that  "  they  shall  advance  to
more  ungodliness ; "  but  in  that  place  (1)  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  an  immediate  diffu-
sion of  error,  in  this  of  its  ultimate  extinction ;  (2)  in  that  place  the  advance  toward
ungodliness  is  asserted,  here  there  is  a  denial  of  its  successful  advance  without  expo-
sure. The  evil  would  advance,  but  only  to  a  certain  point,  and  the  true  character  of  its
promoters — "  their  folly " — would  be  made  as  manifest  as  was  that  of  the  Egyptian
magicians. — T.  0.

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  career  of  the  apostle  commended  as  an  example  to  his  youthful
disciple.  The  apostle  recalls  to  Timothy's  mind  the  facts  of  his  own  checkered  career.
partly  to  mark  the  contrast  between  his  life  and  that  of  the  false  teachers,  partly  to
stimulate  Timothy  to  like  faithfulness  and  endurance.

I.  It  is  good  for  young  ministers  to  observe  and  follow  the  ways  of  their
elder  brethren.  "  But  thou  didst  follow  my  teaching,  conduct,  purpose,  faith."  1.
They  will  thus  be  stimulated  to  greater  effort,  2.  They  wiU  be  guided  by  wiser  counsels,
o.  They  will  be  guarded  against  many  mistakes,  4.  They  will  be  better  able  to  endure
persecutions  and  trials,

II.  It  is  allowable  for  a  Christian  minister  to  speak  of  what  God's  grace
has  enabled  him  to  do  and  to  suffer  for  the  gospel.  1.  It  glorifies  God's  grace,
Tlie  apostle  always  made  this  grace  the  supreme  factor  in  his  success.  "  By  the  grace
of  God  I  am  what  I  am ; "  "  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  in  me  "  (1  Cor.
XV.  10).     2.  It  is  an  encoura/jement  to  other  ministers  to  labour  with  equal  self-denial.

III.  The  method  of  the  apostle's  ministry  and  life.  "  My  teaching,"  in  allusion
less  to  his  doctrine  than  to  his  manner  of  giving  instruction ;  "  conduct,"  or  manner  of
life,  in  allusion  to  "my  ways  which  be  in  Christ"  (1  Cor.  iv.  17);  "purpose,"  for  he
remained  true  to  the  spiritual  objects  of  his  life,  and,  above  all,  to  his  mission  to  the


48  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [cH.  in.  1—17.

Gentiles ;  '*  faith,"  in  allusion  to  his  belief  in  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  gospel,
linked  with ^* long-suffering**  toward  his  bitter  adversaries,  whom  he  longed  to  lead  into
truth — *'  the  faith  and  the  patience  *'  being  necessary  to  the  inheritance  of  the  promises
(Heb.  yL  12) ;  **  love,"  which  seemed  never  to  fail,  **  believing  all  things,  bearing  all  things,
hoping  all  things;"  linked  with  "endurance,**  as  before  (1  Tim.  vL  11 ;  Titus  IL  2),
because  it  is  the  sustaining  element  of  this  endurance ;  *'  persecutions,  afflictions,  which
came  to  me  at  Antioch,"  in  Pisidia,  whence  he  was  expellea  by  the  Jews ;  **  at  Iconiimi,''
where  both  Jews  and  (Gentiles  made  an  assault  upon  him ;  *'  at  Lystra,"  where  he  was
stoned  and  left  for  dead — the  three  cities  being  named  because  of  Timoth3r's  intimate
acquaintance  with  them,  the  apostle's  sufferings  there  being  the  earliest  in  his  missionary
life.  He  gratefully  records  his  deliverance  out  of  all  his  persecutions  by  the  good  band
of  the  Lord.

rV.  The  attitude  op  the  world  toward  godliness.  "  Yea,  and  all  that  would
live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution."  1.  Tfie  persons  thus  described,
(1)  ITiose  who  aim  at  a  godly  life — who  "  wish  to  live  godly."  This  is  the  highest  aim
of  man  in  a  world  with  many  lofty  ideals.  (2)  They  are  not  merely  godly,  but  live  in
all  the  outward  amenities  of  gospel-godliness.  "  As  ye  have  received  Christ  Jesus  the
Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him."  (3)  This  life  of  godliness  finds  its  source  and  spring  in  Jesus
Christ.  It  is  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Their  lot  in  this  life.  «*  Shall  suffer  persecution."
(1)  This  was  Christ's  prediction.  "If  they  persecuted  me,  they  will  also  persecute
you "  (John  xv.  20).  (2)  The  world  is  essentially  at  war  with  the  kingdom  of  God.
**  Because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you  "  (John  xv.  19).  (3)
Better  to  suffer  as  Christians  than  as  evil-doers. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  13. — The  downward  course  of  seducers.  The  apostle  connects  the  persecation
with  the  ways  of  evil  men,  while  he  warns  Timothy  against  them.

I.  Their  degenerate  course.  "  But  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and
worse."  1.  The  persons  here  described,  (1)  Evil  men.  (a)  They  are  those  in  contrast
with  the  men  who  "  would  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus."  (6)  They  are  not  simply
sinners  as  all  men  are  by  nature  and  practice,  but  rather  wicked  men  who  wear  a  mask
of  godliness,  yet  are  full  of  malice  agaiust  the  saints  of  Grod.  (2)  Seducers,  literally
magicians,  in  allusion  to  those  of  E^ypt ;  men  who  are  full  of  sorceries  to  captivate  and
betray  the  unwary  into  error.  2.  They  shall  go  from  bad  to  worse — both  in  principle
and  in  practice,  in  the  use  of  their  seductive  arts  and  in  the  gradual  depravation  of
their  character.  There  is  nothinj:?  to  arrest  their  downward  course;  there  is  no  grace
in  the  heart ;  the  principles  of  evil  will  work  with  unchecked  energy  in  their  natures.

II.  The  explanation  of  this  degeneracy.  "  Deceiving  and  being  deceived."
1.  The  method  of  mental  and  moved  debasement.  Let  men  repeat  falsities  with  sufficient
frequency  and  deliberateness,  and  they  will  come  by-and-by  to  believe  them  themselves.
They  begin  by  deceiving  others.  They  cannot  deceive  God  nor  the  elect,  but  by  their
good  words  and  fair  speeches,  their  lying  wonders  and  their  specious  arts,  they  may
seduce  the  simple  into  error.  2.  The  retribution  that  follows  upon  deception  is  self-
deception.  Such  deceivers  have  become  sincere  in  their  error,  because  they  have
blinded  their  spiritual  eyesight ;  but  now  they  see  truth  as  error,  and  error  as  truth.
— T.  C.

Vers.  14, 15.^-4n  admonition  to  Timothy  to  abide  in  the  ways  of  truth.  Amidst  all
the  seductions  of  the  false  teachers,  the  apostle  urges  Timothy  to  hold  fast  the  doctrines
which  he  had  received  in  his  early  training.

I.  The  duty  and  necessity  of  holding  fast  by  the  Divine  verities.  "But
do  thou  continue  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned  and  hast  been  assured  of."
1.  The  strength  and  comfort  of  an  undoubling  persuasion,  Timothy  was  not  to  be
moved  away  from  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  either  by  persecutions  or  seductive  arts.
He  found  his  strength  and  peace  in  them.  2.  He  had  really  learned  them,  unlike  those
ever  learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  for  he  had  an
experimental  knowledge  of  them.  He  was,  besides,  fully  assured  of  them,  with  '*  the
full  assurance  of  understanding."  It  is  a  very  unbecoming  attitude  for  a  teacher  of
others  to  be  sceptical  in  his  opinions.  He  ought  to  affirm  with  certainty,  and  if  he  is
fully  assured,  he  has  no  right  to  surrender  the  truth.


CH.  in.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  49

II.  The  grounds  op  his  certainty  and  assurance.  "Knowing  of  whom  thou
hast  learned  them ;  and  that  from  a  babe  thou  hast  known  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which
are  able  to  make  thee  wise  to  salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  1.  He
had  been  taught  sound  doctrine  hy  Lois  and  Eunice,  It  is,  therefore,  proper  for  parents
to  instruct  children  in  doctrine  from  their  earliest  days.  2.  He  had  been  trained  from
his  very  infancy  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  It  was,  therefore,  a  right  thing  for  him  to  be
instructed  in  the  Old  Testament,  since  it  was  all  the  Scripture  he  could  have  had  in  his
childhood.  3.  The  Scripture  he  studied  was  sufficient  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  "  Through
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  (1)  This  marks  the  means  by  which  the  salvation
can  be  attained ;  for  Christ  is  "  the  end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that
believeth  *'  (Rom.  x.  4).  (2)  The  effect  of  the  salvation  is  not  merely  to  instruct,  but
to  make  wise  in  the  highest  sense — giving  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding  in  the
knowledge  of  Ghxl's  will ;  for  men  are  naturally  without  spiritual  discernment.  (3)  The
salvation  cannot  be  enjoyed  without  faith,  resting  upon  the  person  of  the  Redeemer.
— T.  C.

Vers.  16, 17. — Hie  authority  and  utility  of  the  Scriptures.  The  apostle  is  led  to
emphasize  the  value  of  the  Scriptures  generally  for  the  purposes  of  spiritual  life.

L  The  authority  op  Scripture.  "  Every  Scripture  inspired  of  Qod  is  also
profitable."  1.  This  does  not  signify  that  there  may  he  Scripture  not  divinely  inured,
but  merely  asserts  that  the  Scripture  being  thus  inspired  is  profitable.  2.  The  words
"  inspired  hy  God  ^  point  to  the  entire  agency  of  God  in  producing  that  Divine  element
which  makes  the  Bible  differ  from  every  other  booh.  The  inspired  person  was  the  organ
of  God  in  what  he  said,  so  that  his  words  were  the  words  of  GU)d.  3.  Scripture  says
nothing  concerning  the  mode  of  inspiration.  The  process  is  supernatural,  and  it  cannot
be  explained.  It  is  not  with  the  mode  but  with  the  result  we  are  concerned.  4.  Inspi-
ration differs  from  revelation — this  being  that  through  which  apostles  and  prophets
came  into  possession  of  Divine  information,  inspiration  being  that  through  which  they
were  able  infallibly  to  communicate  it  to  others.  5.  There  is  nothing  in  the  doctrine
of  inspiration  inconsistent  with  the  idea  that  the  inspired  penman  used  their  own
peculiarities  of  verbal  expression  or  personal  idiosyncrasies,  6.  The  inspiration  extends
to  words  as  wdl  as  thoughts — to  the  form  as  well  as  the  substance  of  Scripture.  So  far
as  the  record  is  inspired  at  all,  infallible  thought  must  be  definite  thought,  and  definite
thought  implies  words.  The  apostle  claimed  that  the  Holy  Spirit  guaranteed  his  words
as  well  as  his  thoughts  (1  Cor.  IL  13,  **  Not  in  the  didactic  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but
in  the  didactic  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost ").  Besides,  Christ  and  the  apostles  argue  from
the  very  words  of  Scripture  (Matt.  xxii.  45 ;  Gal.  iii.  16).  7.  The  term  "  every  Scrip-
ture "  in  the  text  seems  to  include  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament  so  far
as  it  had  been  written ;  else  there  would  have  been  no  necessity  for  a  difierent  term
from  that  used  in  the  fifteenth  verse,  "  Holy  Scriptures."

II.  The  utility  op  the  Scripture  "Is  also  profitable  for  teachinjic,  for  reproof,
for  correction,  for  discipline  in  righteousness."  1.  Jt  is  useful  for  teaching — as  a
medium  for  communicating  instruction,  that  we  may  know  and  believe  what  is  neces-
sary to  salvation.  2.  It  is  useful  for  reproof— (or  the  refutation  of  error,  for  convinc-
ing a  man  of  his  error.  3.  It  is  useful  for  correction — as  to  what  is  practically  wrong
in  life.  4.  It  is  useful  for  *^  discipline  in  righteousness** — righteoui<ness  being  the
element  in  which  this  discipline  is  to  take  effect,  through  the  agency  of  Scripture.

III.  The  result  or  design  of  the  Scripture.  *'  That  the  man  of  God  may  be
complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work."  1.  The  design  is  the  perfection
of  the  believer  in  life  and  service.  The  description  supplies  the  man  of  God  with  all
due  appliances  for  this  end.  They  help  to  make  us  perfect  in  knowledge,  faith,  and
holiness,  as  well  as  to  furnish  us  with  wisdom  and  guidance  in  all  holy  service.
2.  Inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  design  of  Scripture,  It  is  a  perfect,  a  plain,
a  sufiicient  rule  of  faith  and  life,  in  answer  to  Roman  C'atholics.  If  it  can  make  wise  to
salvation,  perfect  the  man  of  God,  and  furnish  him  for  all  holy  work,  then  there  is  no
need  for  tradition  to  supplement  its  imaginary  defects. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  4. — The  love  of  pleasure,     "Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God."
"  Pleasure  "  is  a  word  used  in  Scripture  to  denote,  not  lawful  and  wise  enjoyment,
II.  timothy.  k


60  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [en.  in.  1—17.


but  a  carnal  sensuouaness  which  often  leads  to  sensuality.  We  see  what  an  absorbing
power  pleasure  is,  and  how  by  degrees  it  destroys  the  sense  of  duty  and  ignores  the
voice  of  conscience.

I.  Hebe  is  a  great  force.  "  Lovers  1  **  Love  wUl  surely  be  exercised  in  some  form.
Sin  is  perversion.  We  are  so  constituted  as  to  love  something.  There  is  an  enthosiasni
of  evil.     Men  delight  in  sin  ;  and  so  the  forces  of  the  soul  run  to  weeds.

II.  Here  is  a  wrong  object.  Pleasure — instead  of  Qod.  What  a  contrast  1  We
find  that  there  is  sometimes  an  aesthetic  sensuousness  that  finds  pleasure  in  immoral
**  art" — where  God  is  not,  where  there  is  no  reverence,  no  righteousness,  no  purity,  no
goodness.  And  men  worship  before  the  shrine  of  pleasure  till  they  become  idolaters,
worshipping  worldly  applause,  fleshly  satisfaction,  and  carnal  joy.  There  is  a  pleasure
that  is  lawful  and  healthful ;  without  it  brain  and  body,  mind  and  heart,  sufl'er ;  but
it  must  ever  be  subordinated  to  an  earnest  life  and  a  godly  devotion,  or  we  become
"  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — The  hypocrite's  garb,  "Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the
power  thereof."  There  may  bo  conscious  and  unconscious  hypocrisy.  Either  way
godliness  is  **  feigned.**  There  is  no  pulsing  heart  of  life  in  it  its  appearance  is  only
like  phosphorus  on  the  face  of  the  dead ;  its  activity  is  only  the  galvanized  motion  of
a  corpse.

I.  We  may  discover  the  signs  of  mere  formausm.  What  are  they  ?  See  vers.
2,  3,  and  4,  in  which  men  who  are  "  covetous,  and  lovers  of  their  own  selves,"  are  asso-
-ciated  with  blasphemers  and  false  accusers,  unthankful  and  unholy.  All  alike  find
their  hypocrisy  is  detected  by  the  Divine  insight.  We  may  well  search  and  examine
ourselves ;  for  do  not  men  think  lightly  sometimes  of  covetousness  and  selfishness,  or  of
being  unthankful  or  high-minded  ?  Often,  indeed,  we  look  to  great  vices  only  as  onr
destroyers,  and  we  forget  that  hypocrisy  may  be  seen  in  masked  ingratitude.  Yet  here
it  is  discovered,  not  under  the  cloak  which  hides  evil  enormities,  but  under  the  veil
which  hides  from  our  eyes  the  presence  of  the  more  respectable  sins.

II.  We  may  study  the  secret  of  this  formalism.  1.  Prayerless  habit  which
leaves  the  spirit  unsupplied  with  the  nutriment  of  communion  with  God.  2.  Con-
sciousness of  the  fact  that  in  the  world  appearances  are  enough,  and  that  religion  is  so
respected  and  so  respectable  that  it  will  not  do  to  live  without  its  appearance.  3.
Fellowship  with  the  world,  which  denudes  us  of  all  earnest  endeavours  alter  the  Divine
life.— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  8. — Corruption  within,  "Men  of  corrupt  minds.'*  It  is  here  that  evil
begins,  though  it  does  not  end  here.  "  As  a  man  thinkcth  in  his  heart,  so  is  he.'*  But
he  does  not  show  in  himself  the  development  of  evil  at  once.  The  hour  of  revelation,
however,  will  surely  come ;  for  "  thoy  that  be  otherwise  [than  good]  cannot  be  hid."

I.  They  resist  the  truth.  For  this  reason  the  truth  will  not  let  them  alone.  It
is  an  active  searching  power.  It  is  "  a  discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the
heart,"  and  men  resent  the  intrusion  of  this  all-discovering,  all-judging  power.  Im-
purity hates  purity.  Falsehood  hates  truth.  Worldly  minds  resist  the  claim  of  Grod*s
Word  to  supremacy  over  their  hearts  and  lives.  They  resist  its  right  to  reign,  and  its
claim  to  dominate  thought  and  action  too.

n.  They  become  reprobate.  Keprobation  is  no  hard  decree  of  (rod's ;  it  is  man's
own  act  and  deed,  and  it  is  the  result  of  the  "  corrupt  mind."  This  breeding  cor-
ruption spreads.  The  seeds  of  evil  are  scattered  here  and  there  till  the  soul  is  like  a
wilderness,  and  the  mind  which  was  made  to  be  a  garden  of  holiness  becomes  a  grave-
yard of  sin.     Moral  death  ensues,  and  with  death  always  comes  corruption.

III.  They  become  revealed.  "Their  folly  shall  be  made  manifest"  (ver.  9).  The
secret  sin  becomes  a  public  shame.  The  thought  incarnates  itself  in  deed,  and  retri-
bution takes  the  fsrm  of  disgrace. — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 17. — Grievous  times,  **But  know  this,  that  in  the  last  days  grievous  times
shall  come."  They  were  in  the  first  days  of  the  Christian  era ;  the  times  foretold  were
to  be  in  the  last  days  of  that  era.  There  is  an  intended  indefiniteness  about  the  days ;
nothing  is  said  about  their  commencement,  or  about  the  period  over  which  they  are  to


cH.ni.l— 17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  51

extend.  They  are  to  embrace  distinct  times,  bnt  all  characterized  by  grievonsness.
From  what  follows  we  may  infer  that  the  grievousness  of  the  times  will  consist  in  the
prevalence  of  moral  evil,  and  in  the  strange  coexistence  of  moral  evil  with  Christian
forms.  There  will  be  difficulty  in  knowing  how  to  act,  and  also  in  acting  according  to
knowledge  in  the  face  of  strong,  quasi-Christian  solidarities  of  evil.  From  a  source  of
revelation  open  to  him,  the  apostle  was  able  to  write  with  certainty  regarding  the
coming  of  grievous  times  in  the  last  days.  There  is  not  excluded  the  ultimate  triumph
of  religion  in  this  world  which  is  taught  elsewhere.

L  Characteristics  of  the  men  in  the  grievous  times.  "  For  men  shall  be  lovers
of  self."  **  Such  men  as  the  apostle  here  describes  there  have  been  at  all  times,  and  the
apostle  does  not  say  that  they  will  be  then  such  for  the  first  time,  nor  that  all  men
without  exception  shall  be  such,  but  he  describes  the  moral-spiritual  physiognomy  of
the  times  which  he  beholds  approaching."  We  are  not  to  include  in  this  first  part
of  the  description  all  who  are  influenced  by  self-love ;  for  it  is  only  right  before  Qod
that  we  should  be  influenced  by  an  intelligent  regard  to  our  interest.  The  persons
intended  are  the  selfish — a  word  which  was  only  brought  in  by  the  Puritan  divines
toward  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  They  are  those  who  exclude  God  from
the  central  place  to  which  he  is  entitled  in  their  life.  They  are  those  who  exclude
<ithers  from  the  place  of  interest  to  which  they  are  entitled.  They  thus  put  self  in  a
false  position — ^make  it  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  their  thoughts  and  actions.  They
properly  take  the  place  of  pre-eminence  in  the  apostle's  list ;  for  all  classes  of  sinners
are  after  the  selfish  type,  i.e,  put  forward  self  in  some  way  or  other  that  does  not  accord
with  eternal  truth.  In  the  grievous  times  will  be  large  developments  of  selfishness.
*'  Lovers  of  money."  From  similarity  of  composition  in  the  Greek  words,  the  apostle
passes  on  from  lovers  of  self  to  lovers  of  money.  Under  this  head  are  not  to  be  included
all  seekers  of  money ;  for  it  is  right  to  seek  money  for  good  ends.  Neither  are  there
to  be  included  all  who  seek  money  for  selfish  ends.  But  we  are  to  think  rather
of  the  avaricious,  i.e.  those  who  seek  to  retain  money  in  a  selfish  way.  They  look
upon  it  as  that  which  will  make  them  self-sufficient  in  the  future;  and  therefore
they  grudge  to  spend  it  even  on  present  necessity.  The  times  will  be  grievous  when
the  avaricious  increase.  "  Boastful."  Derived  from  a  word  signifying  **  a  wandering
about,"  this  word  designated  first  the  vagabond  mountebanks,  conjurors,  quacksalvers,
or  exorcists,  "  full  of  empty  and  boastful  professions  of  cures  and  other  feats  which  they
could  accomplish."  Men  do  not  need  to  go  about  crying  up,  advertising,  that  which  is
of  great  value.  What  men  generally  boast  of  is  some  external  advantage  which  is  of  little
consequence  in  comparison  with  the  moral  worth  which  should  be  associated  with  it.
The  times  will  be  grievous  when  the  gift  is  exalted  above  the  moral  use  to  which  it  is
put.  ''  Haughty."  The  haughty  are  literally,  in  the  Greek,  those  who  show  themselves
above  their  fellows.  In  the  glass  of  their  own  minds,  they  behold  themselves  standing
along  with  others;  and  the  comparison  they  make  is  in  their  own  favour.  Their
estimate  is  false  in  respect  of  the  importance  attached  to  that  in  which  they  pride
themselves,  and  in  respect  of  the  importance  attached  to  that  for  which  they  despise
others.  Birth  is  an  advantage,  but  not  the  only  advantage,  nor  the  greatest  advantage,
and  must  be  taken  along  with  service  and  character.  In  the  grievous  times  there  will
be  a  great  amount  of  pride.  ''  Railers."  The  word  is  "  blasphemers,"  but  it  would  be
inconsistent  with  holding  the  form  of  godliness  to  think  of  blasphemers  in  the  usual
sense  in  English.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  think  of  those  who  use  evil  words  to  each
other,  t.0.  words  of  contempt,  or  words  of  bitterness.  There  is  to  be  a  large  development
of  evil-speaking  in  the  grievous  times.  "  Disobedient  to  parents."  Selfishness  is  early
to  show  itself  in  the  form  of  self-wilL  The  young  generation  are  to  show  impatience  of
being  ruled  by  their  parents,  which  is  sure  to  grow  into  impatience  in  respect  of  all
rightful  rule.  In  the  grievous  times  there  is  to  be  a  large  development  of  lawlessness,
banning  in  the  family  circle.  "Unthankful."  Those  who  are  allowed  to  have  their
own  way  in  early  life  are  not  likely  to  grow  up  to  show  gratitude  to  parents  for  what
they  have  sacrificed  for  them,  nor  are  they  likely  to  show  gratitude  in  the  ordinary
intercourse  of  life,  nor  can  we  think  of  them  showing  gratitude  to  God  for  his  mercies.
Ingratitude  is  to  be  a  striking  feature  of  the  grievous  times.  "  Unholy."  There  are
certain  sanctities  which  are  everlasting,  which  are  anterior  to  all  law  and  custom,  which
belong  to  the  Divine  constitution  of  tlungs,  e.g,  the  sanctities  of  the  marriage  bond.    The


52  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [en.  m.  1—17.

unholy  are  those  who  have  no  reverence  or  love  in  their  hearts  for  these  everlasting
sanctities.  In  the  grievous  times  the  most  sacred  bonds  are  to  be  disregarded.  **  With-
out natural  affection."  Affection  is  that  which  sweetens  life.  In  the  grievous  times
affection  is  to  die  out,  even  for  those  for  whom  nature  specially  claims  affection.  Parents
will  act  unnaturally  toward  their  children.  "  Implacable."  The  word  supposes  a  state
of  variance.  In  the  grievous  times  men  are  not  to  come  to  terms  with  those  who  have
given  them  offence,  but  are  to  pursue  them  with  all  the  might  of  their  vengeance.
"  Slanderers."  They  are  not  to  be  content  with  pouring  contempt  and  bitterness  on  one
another  in  ordinary  evil-speaking,  but  they  are  to  attack  one  another  with  falsehoods.
Thus  the  diabolic  character  is  to  be  developed  in  the  grievous  times.  '*  Without  self-
control."  With  self-will  uncurbed  in  early  life,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the
men  of  the  grievous  times  are  to  be  men  who  have  lost  self-control.  *'  Fierce."  In  the
grievous  times  there  will  be  loss  of  self-control,  proceeding  to  deeds  of  violence.  **  No
lovers  of  good."  In  keeping  with  the  personal  reference  before  and  after,  we  prefer  to
translate,  **  no  lovers  of  good  men."  With  evil  so  active  in  them,  the  presence  of  good
men  will  be  burdensome  to  them.  They  are  therefore  likely  to  make  the  times  grievous
to  the  good,  by  unjustly  treating  them.  *'  Traitors."  Fidelity  is  the  sacred  bond  that
joins  friend  to  friend.  In  the  grievous  times  friend  will  be  often  found  betraying  friend.
'*  Headstrong."  In  the  grievous  times  men  will  go  to  daring  lengths.  "  Puffed  up."
The  explanation  of  their  daringness  is,  that  they  have  no  right  sense  of  their  own  position
before  Qod — their  insignificance,  impotence,  and  responsibility.  *'  Lovers  of  pleasure
rather  than  lovers  of  God."  Men  will  be  daring  especially  in  sensual  gratification.
Pleasure  will  be  preferred  to  God.  "  Holding  a  form  of  godliness,  but  having  denied
the  power  thereof."  The  remarkable  thing  is  that  the  men  who  have  been  described
(we  do  not  need  to  think  of  the  characteristics  being  all  combined)  should  hold  a  form
of  godliness.  The  relation  of  the  form  of  godliness  to  the  men  who  make  the  grievous
times,  is  that  it  conceals  their  true  character.  It  is  self  throughout,  in  a  more  or  less
hateful  form,  and  therefore  the  real  power  of  godliness  is  denied.  But  it  does  not  appear
so  nakedly  and  hatefully  to  be  self  where  there  is  a  form  of  acknowledging  God.  The
relation  of  the  form  of  godliness  to  the  grievous  times  is,  that  it  allows  evil  to  work  more
insidiously.  It  is  not  so  difficult  to  meet  pure  heathenism  as  it  is  to  meet  a  Christianity
that  has  become  heathenish.  Advice.  "From  these  also  turn  away."  Paul  would  have
things  put  on  a  basis  of  reality.  Between  Timothy  and  such  men  there  could  be  no
sympathy.  Why  keep  up  a  semblance  of  fellowship?  Both  for  them  and  for  him  it
was  better  that  the  line  of  demarcation  should  be  drawn,  and  that  all  further  intercourse
should  proceed  on  tho  footing  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  same  Christian  society.

II.  The  men  of  the  grievous  times  anticipated.  "  For  of  these."  The  apostle
follows  up  his  description  of  tho  men  of  the  evil  times  by  tho  advice  to  turn  away  from
them,  as  though  they  were  already  present.  The  explanation  he  gives  is  that  there
were  forerunners  of  them,  men  of  the  same  spiritual  kith.  Characteristics,  1.  Influ-
ence with  women,  (1)  Manner  of  their  influence,  "  Are  they  that  creep  into  houses,
and  take  captive  silly  women."  Their  converts  were  among  women,  which  was  not
matter  of  reproach  to  them.  But  it  was  matter  of  reproach  that  it  was  women  so
habitually  that  they  sought  to  influence,  and  that  they  did  not  go  openly  about  the
work  of  influencing  them.  They  crept  into  houses,  as  though  they  did  not  wish  to  be
seen.  And  that  mode  of  entrance  suggested  the  employment  of  other  methods  than  the
direct  force  of  truth.  By  the  methods  employed  they  got  the  women  completely  into
their  power.  It  was  matter  of  reproach  to  the  women  that  they  gave  themselves  up  to
such  teachers,  and  therefore  they  are  called  silly  women.  (2)  Explanation  of  their  influ-
ence. "  Laden  with  sins,  led  away  by  divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and  never  able  to  come
to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  They  were  not  women  of  the  right  stamp.  In  relation
to  their  past  they  were  laden  with  sins.  In  relation  to  their  present  they  were  led  away
by  divers  lusts — led  away  to  divers,  and  even  conflicting,  sources  of  gratification.  They
needed  a  salve  for  their  conscience,  and  yet  a  salve  that  allowed  continued  gratification.
This  salve  was  supplied  by  the  false  teachers.  They  were  always  getting  some  new
point  from  them,  which  gave  satisfaction  for  the  time,  but  they  never  came  any  nearer
resting  in  the  truth.  The  reason  was  that  they  had  not  the  right  moral  conditions.
Their  object  was,  not  to  get  such  truth  (to  be  found  in  the  gospel)  as  would  have
delivered  them  from  the  guilt  of  their  sins  and  the  power  of  their  lusts,  but  to  have


CH.IIL1— 17.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  63

leDgthened  out  to  them  a  niDgliDg  of  sensual  and  intellectual  gratification.  2.  With-
standing the  truth,  (1)  Type  of  their  opposition.  *'  And  like  as  Jannes  and  Jambres
withstood  Moses,  so  ao  these  also  withstand  the  truth ;  men  corrupted  in  mind,  repro-
bate concerning  the  faith.**  The  apoetle  here  makes  use  of  Hebrew  tradition.  Jannes
and  Jambres  are  not  menUoned  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  Hebrew  tradition  identifies
them  with  the  chief  of  the  magicians  who  withstood  Moses.  Aaron  cast  down  his  rod
before  Pharaoh,  and  it  became  a  serpent ;  and  the  magicians  "  they  also  did  in  like
manner  with  their  enchantments."  It  is  also  recorded  that  they  succeeded  in  imitating
the  first  two  plagues.  They  thus  withstood  Moses— -stood  between  him  and  the  eflfect
which  his  miracles  were  intended  to  produce  on  Pharaoh.  So  the  false  teachers  produced
a  spurious  imitation  of  the  truth,  teaching  what  resembled  the  gospel  without  being
the  gospel.  As  the  gospel  teachers  had  also  to  a  late  period  (QsS,  iii.  5)  the  power  of
working  miracles,  so  we  can  imderstand  that  these  teachers  made  use  of  magical  arts  in
confirmation  of  their  quasi-gospel  teaching.  They  thus  withstood  the  truth — came
between  the  gospel  and  the  effect  it  was  fitted  to  produce.  In  thus  acting  they  were
corrupted  in  mind ;  their  motives  were  not  good.  Their  object  was  not  to  advance  the
truth,  or  to  benefit  those  whom  they  taught,  but  to  advance  themselves  and  to  obtain
their  own  ends  with  their  female  converts.  They  were  also  reprobate  concerning  the
faith ;  they  were  making  it  abundantly  clear  that  their  adherence  to  the  faith  was  a
complete  failure.  (2)  Type  of  their  defeat  "  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further :  for
their  folly  shall  be  evident  unto  all  men,  as  theirs  also  came  to  be."  So  Luther  used  to
say  of  the  priests  by  whom  he  was  opposed.  The  &Ise  teachers  used  secret  and  spurious
methods  with  success ;  but,  though  they  might  wax  worse  and  worse  themselves  (ver.
13),  the  time  of  their  exposure  was  come.  So  was  it  with  Jannes  and  Jambres.  They
were  in  undisturbed  possession  of  power  till  Moses  appeared  on  the  scene.  They  seemed
to  be  succeeding  when  they  turned  their  own  rods  into  serpents ;  but  they  suffered  defeat
when  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods.  They  seemed  to  be  recovering  their  success
when  they  imitated  the  first  plague,  and  a^in  when  they  imitated  the  second  plague ;
but  they  were  baffled  in  their  attempt  to  imitate  the  third  plague.  They  were  in  con-
nection with  another  plague  shown  to  be  defeated,  when  they  could  not  stand  before
Moses  because  of  the  boils.  Moses  succeeded  in  getting  the  children  of  Israel  out  of
Egypt ;  and  Hebrew  tradition  tells  that  Jannes  and  Jambres  perished  in  the  Bed  Sea.
This  is  the  history  of  all  false  teaching,  of  all  spiritual  trickery.  It  may  succeed  for  a
time,  but  its  very  success  often  works  its  ruin.  The  time  comes  when  its  impostures
are  found  out,  and  it  can  proceed  no  further.  So  we  can  believe  that  the  great  develop-
ment of  evil  in  the  last  days  will  end  in  complete  exposure,  and  in  the  brilliant  triumph
uf  good.

III.  Contrast  in  Timothy.  1.  Timothy  reminded  of  his  conduct  at  a/ormer  period,
which  was  a  foUotving  of  Paul  as  his  guiding  star,  (I)  A  leading  up  to  sufferingt,
*'  But  thou  didst  follow  n^  teaching,  conduct,  purpose,  faith,  iong-suffering,  love,
]mtience,  persecutions,  sufferings."  The  period  referred  to  is  Timothy's  early  ministry.
He  then  acted  as  assistant  to  Paul,  and  what  Paul  gratefully  calls  to  mind  was  his  do^e
following  of  him  as  a  disciple.  He  not  only  followed  him  so  as  to  be  familiar  wlUi
details,  but  followed  him  so  as  to  direct  his  course  by  what  he  saw  in  him.  The  great
lines  of  his  teaching,  the  great  lines  of  his  conduct,  Timothy  made  his  own.  The
apecial  purpose  of  his  life  (ruling  so  many  details),  which  was  to  spread  the  gospel  of
Onrist,  was  also  after  Paul.  So,  too,  was  his  disposition  towards  Christ,  viz.  faith,
especially  in  his  power  to  make  his  gospel  to  tell  upon  men.  So,  too,  was  his  dispo-
sition toward  opponents,  viz.  his  long-suffering  with  their  bitter  opposition.  So,  too,
was  his  disposition  toward  those  in  whose  interest  he  laboured,  viz.  love  for  their  souls.
So,  too,  was  his  disposition  under  all  the  adverse  conditions  of  his  ministry,  as  appointed
for  him,  viz.  patience.  This  forms  a  point  of  transition  to  past  troublous  times  when
Paul  was  persecuted,  and  persecuted  so  as  to  be  a  sufferer  in  many  ways.  Even  to  the
apostle's  persecutions  and  sufferings  Timothy's  following  extended ;  t.e.  he  thoroughly
appreciated  the  fidelity  which  led  to  them  and  brave  bearing  under  them.  They  may
have  had  to  do  with  his  joining  the  apostle,  and  determined  his  own  relation  to  perse-
cutions and  suffenngs.  (2)  Sufferings  specified.  '*  What  things  befell  me  at  Antioch,
at  Iconium,  at  Lystra;  what  persecutions  I  endured."  At  Antioch  he  suffered  expul-
sion.   At  Iconium  he  had  to  flee  from  maltreatment,  particularly  stoning.    At  Lystra,


54  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOl'HY.         [cu.  iii.  1—17.

under  Jewish  instigation,  the  mob  stoned  Fanl  and  dragged  him  oat  of  the  city,
supposing  that  he  was  dead.  Such  were  the  persecutions,  the  last  especially  sharp  and
extreme,  under  which  Paul  bore  up,  of  which  Timothy  had  a  distinct  iropressiony  and
which  were  fitted  to  embolden  him  still.  (3)  Comfortable  tsstie  of  the  sufferings.
"And  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me."  He  was  cared  for  by  the  great  Head  of
the  Church,  to  whom  all  power  in  earth  had  been  committed,  to  whom  it  belonged  to
order  the  earthly  destiny  of  his  servants.  The  Lord,  who  had  more  work  for  him  to  do,
delivered  him  out  of  all  the  machinations  of  his  enemies — gave  him  up  to  sorrowing
friends  when  he  was  left  for  dead  by  his  enemies.  2.  Timothy  forewarned,  (1)  Regard"
ing  persecutions.  **  Yea,  and  all  that  would  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer
persecution."  To  live  godly  is  to  take  the  rule  of  our  life  from  God.  This  can  only
oe  carried  out  in  communion  with  Christ  Jesus.  Were  all  living  according  to  the
Divine  rule  around  us,  we  should  be  abundantly  encouraged.  But  seeing  we  live  in  the
midst  of  so  many  who  hate  goodness  and  do  not  like  to  be  reminded  of  Grod,  we
must  expect  to  suffer  persecution,  t.e,  to  be  misjudged,  to  be  opposed,  to  be  assailed,
if  our  godliness  is  active  and  aggressive  against  evil,  as  it  should  be.  We  must
have  a  mind  to  live  godly,  whatever  consequences  it  entails.  It  was  because  he  lived
according  to  the  Divine  rule  that  Paul  was  stoned.  As  the  principle  involved  was
universal,  Timothy,  in  proportion  to  the  yitality  of  his  godliness,  must  expect  to  suffer
persecution.  (2)  liegarding  evil  men,  and  especially  one  class  of  them,  **  But  evil  men
and  impostors  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving  and  being  deceived."  Of  the  evil
men  that  make  persecutions,  the  worst  specimens  bad  not  yet  been  seen.  The  rule  is
that  good  men  wax  better  and  better,  the  good  men  of  one  generation  outstripj^g  the
good  men  of  former  generations.  This  may  not  apply  to  particular  specimens,  for  we
do  not  find  any  to  outstrip  Paul.  But  it  is  true  of  good  men  as  a  class  that,  with  better
helps,  more  experience  to  go  by,  better  education,  better  books,  better  methods,  better
organization,  they  are  of  more  value  to  the  society  to  which  they  belong.  We  have  lay-
men in  our  Churches  now  whose  Christian  enlightenment  and  activity  is  above  what
any  previous  generation  has  seen.  While  the  good  are  better,  the  bad  are  worse.  This
applies  especially  to  the  class  specified,  who,  with  reference  to  what  has  before  been  said,
are  called  im|)Ostor8,  or  tricksters  in  religion.  The  original  reference  of  the  word  is  to  those
who  chanted  their  spells  in  a  sort  of  howl.  Wo  have  worse  specimens  of  withstanders
of  the  truth  than  Jannes  and  Jambres  were,  or  their  successors  in  the  early  times  of
Christianity.  Infidels  are  a  worse  class  of  men  now  than  they  were  half  a  century  ago.
The  incantations  used  in  the  free-thinking  press  are  of  a  more  dangerous  nature  than
any  potions  or  bowlings  that  were  resorted  to  by  maj^icians  of  old.  Our  free-thinkers
are  deceivers ;  they  habitually  subject  Scripture  to  the  most  unfair  treatm(nt.  And
deceiving,  they  are  also  deceived  ;  conscious  of  their  own  trickery,  they  do  not  subject  the
statements  of  their  friends  to  examination,  but  are  known  for  their  amazing  croduUty.
3.  Timothy  incited  to  present  duty  founded  on  past  early  training.  (1)  Early  teach-
ing. "  But  abide  thou  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  learned."  Timothy  was  no
longer  in  the  position  of  the  child  taught,  but  in  the  position  of  a  teacher  of  others.  To
one  in  that  position  it  might  have  been  thought  that  the  appropriate  thing  would  have
been  advice  about  his  reading- — and  he  does  appear  to  have  had  books  and  parchments
from  the  apostles — but  the  advice  which  he  gives  him  hero  is  to  continue  in  the  things
which  he  had  learned,  i.e.  as  a  child.  And  there  was  really  nothing  better  for  him ;
nothing  except  this,  that  the  Messiah  whom  Lois  and  Eunice  taught  him  to  look
forward  to  was  now  come,  and  that  there  had  been  done  to  him  and  by  him  all  that  the
Old  Testament  Scriptures  had  said  of  him.  And  so  to  those  who  are  grown  up,  and
have  jwwer  to  think  and  to  read  and  to  grasp  things  with  a  firm  grasp,  there  is  never
anything  better  than  the  old  story  of  Jesus  and  his  love,  learned  at  a  mother's  knee.
(2)  Early  teaching  along  with  early  convictions.  **  And  hast  been  assured  of."  We
should  read,  **  Thou  didst  learn,  and  wast  assured  of.**  It  is  Timothy's  early  convictions
that  we  are  to  think  of.  He  not  only  got  the  teaching  from  Lois  and  Eunice,  but  it
became  matter  of  personal  conviction  to  him.  He  could  set  to  his  own  seal  to  what  he
had  been  taught.  Ho  knew  the  worth  of  a  mother's  religion  in  the  peace,  restraint,
hope,  it  brought  into  his  own  soul.  It  was  a  legitimate  argument  for  Paul  to  use  with
Timothy,  not  to  turn  his  back  on  his  early  convictions,  to  hold  to  the  God  of  his  child-
hood.    When  life  was  lived  according  to  God's  ideas,  such  as  Timothy's  was,  he  was  not


CH.  III.  1—17.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  56-


to  be  inconsistent  and  to  make  the  latter  part  disagree  with  the  former.  ''  There  is  but
one  way  of  making  all  our  days  one,  because  one  love,  one  hope,  one  joy,  one  aim,  binda
them  all  together ;  and  that  is  by  taking  the  abiding  Christ  for  ours,  and  abiding  in
him  all  our  days.  Our  true  progress  consists,  not  in  growing  away  from  Jesus,  but  in
growing  up  into  him ;  not  in  passing  through  and  leaving  behind  the  first  convictions
of  him  as  Saviour,  but  in  having  these  verified  by  the  experience  of  years,  deepened  and
cleared,  unfolded  and  ordered  into  a  larger  though  still  incomplete  whole."  (3)  Fer^
sonal  element  in  teaching,  '*  Knowing  of  whom  [what  persons]  thou  hast  learned
them."  ''  Timothy  was  supposed  to  have  a  complete  set  of  recollections  from  his  mother
woven  into  his  very  feeling  of  the  truth  itself.  It  was  more  true,  because  it  had  been
taught  by  her.  There  was  even  a  sense  of  her  loving  personality  in  it,  by  which  it  had
always  been,  and  was  always  to  be  endeared.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  be  always
found  that  every  kind  of  teaching  in  religion  which  adds  no  personal  interest  or  attrac-
tion to  the  truth,  sheds  no  light  upon  it  from  a  good  and  beautiful  life,  is  nearly  or
quite  worthless.  And  here  is  the  privilege  of  a  genuinely  Christian  father  and  mother
in  their  teaching,  that  they  pass  into  the  heart's  feeling  of  their  child,  side  by  side
with  God*s  truth,  to  be  for  ever  identified  with  it,  and  to  be,  themselves,  lived  on  and
over  with  it,  in  the  dear  eternity  it  gives  him."  (4)  When  teaching  begins,  "  And
that  from  a  babe  thou  hast  known."  Those  who  carry  the  idea  of  individual  respon-
sibility through  everything  have  a  difficulty  here  in  the  dating  of  religious  instruction
from  the  very  earliest  age.  James  Mill,  the  author  of  the  '  History  of  India,'  taking
the  education  of  his  more  remarkable  son,  John  Stuart  Mill,  into  his  own  hands,
proceeded  on  the  principle  that  a  religious  upbringing  would  be  an  interference  with
free  development,  and  systematically  kept  all  religious  ideas  out  of  his  mind  till  ho
considered  him  able  to  form  an  independent  and  unbiassed  judgment  upon  the  subject
of  religion.  Our  objection  to  that  course  is  that  it  is  a  virtual  selling  of  the  child  to
the  devil.  If  God  and  truth  are  not  presented  to  the  mind  till  a  matured  judgment  can
be  formed,  it  is  not  as  though  there  had  not  been  experience,  but  the  mind  is  already
warped  and  religion  is  placed  at  a  fearful  disadvantage.  Eunice  proceeded  on  the  right
principle  when  she  seized  the  earliest  opportunity  of  influencing  the  mind  of  Timothy
in  favour  of  religion.  (5)  Scriptural  teaching,  (a)  Name,  **  The  sacred  writings."
The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  first  place,  of  a  written  revelation,  which  has  the
advantage  over  oral  tradition  (the  form  of  revelation  which  obtained  for  the  first  two  or
three  thousand  years)  in  that  it  docs  not  lie  so  open  to  the  action  of  prejudice.  Men
may  come  with  all  manner  of  prejudices  to  it,  but  it  is  there  to  witness  for  itself  to
every  unprejudiced  mind.  The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  second  place,  of  many  writers
being  employed  in  the  communication  of  Divine  truth,  which  is  much  better  than  one
with  his  particular  idiosyncrasy  entering  into  his  writings,  inasmuch  as  all  classes  of
minds  can  be  thus  suited,  and  if  they  are  not  attracted  by  one  mode  of  stating  the
truth,  they  may  be  attracted  by  another.  The  name  is  suggestive,  in  the  third  place,
of  writings  connected  with  religion,  such  as  there  do  not  seem  to  have  been  in  connec-
tion with  the  religions  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The  Bible  can  be  employed  for  the
instruction  of  children,  inasmuch  as  it  is  truly  a  child's  book  as  well  as  a  man's  book.
What  is  needed,  at  the  first  stage  at  least,  is  truth  in  the  concrete  form  ;  and  this  is  to
be  found  in  the  Bible,  which,  with  some  things  hard  to  be  understood,  has  yet  many  a
simple  statement  and  story  that  is  fitted  to  fill  the  child's  imagination  and  to  touch
the  child's  heart.  Eunice  had  only  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  to  draw  upon :  the
Christian  parent  has  now  an  immense  advantage,  in  the  addition  of  the  New  Testament,
and  especially  of  the  four  Gospels,  and  in  the  greater  facilities  which  a  printed  Bible
gives  him  for  getting  Bible  images  and  lessons  into  the  mind  of  the  child,  (b)  Property.
**  Which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation."  They  form  a  directory  to  salva-
tion, containing  all  the  information  and  pleading  with  the  soul  which  are  necessary.
To  one  inexperienced  in  the  ways  of  the  world  it  is  a  great  advantage  to  have  a  friend
at  hand,  able  on  every  occasion  to  give  a  sound  advice,  to  expose  fallacies,  to  put
forward  weighty  considerations.  Inexperienced  in  the  ways  of  the  world  we  certainly
are,  liable  to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  to  be  buoyed  up  with  false  hopes.  In  giving
us  the  Scriptures,  God  acts  the  part  of  a  friend,  giving  us  the  best  advice,  opening  our
eyes  to  reality,  so  that,  with  all  our  inexperience,  it  is  as  though  we  possessed  boundless
stores  of  wisdom.    They  are  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,  but  they  may  not ;  for


o6  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  in.  1—17.

there  are  feome  who  make  themselyea  wiser  than  God's  Word,  and  think  they  know
better  about  things  than  Grod  does,  and  so  perish  by  being  wise  in  their  own  conceits
and  refusing  to  be  guided,  (c)  Condition  of  efficiency,  ''  Through  £aith  which  is  in
Christ  Jesus.*'  The  Scriptures  cannot  do  more  than  make  us  wise  unto  salvation ;
they  are  not  to  be  put  in  the  place  of  Christ,  whose  connection  with  salvation  is  more
than  that  of  a  directory — is  of  the  most  intimate  nature,  who  is  really  the  efficient
Cause  of  salvation,  the  Receptacle  of  salvation ;  and  they  only  do  their  work  when  they
bring  us  up  to  Christ,  and  also  induce  in  us  that  state  of  mind  which  is  here  called
faith,  which  instrumentally  appropriates  the  salvation  which  is  in  him.

IV.  Sufficiency  of  Scbipturb.  1.  Ground  of  sufficiency,  "Every  Scripture
inspired  of  God."  According  to  this  translation  the  inspiration  of  Scripture  is  taught,
not  explicitly  but  implicitly.  We  are  to  regard  it  as  taken  for  granted  that  Scripture
is  Qod'hreathed,  Inspiration  extends  to  every  part  of  Scripture.  This  is  a  doctrine  of
vital  importance  to  the  Church.  Its  bearing  is  that  there  is  not  only  the  absence  of
error,  but  the  presence  of  positive  perfection  in  relation  to  the  whole  want  of  man  under
the  present  order  of  things.  The  Divine  influence,  however  operating,  is  guarantee  that
in  Scripture,  in  its  manifoldness,  we  have  all  fundamentally  that  needs  to  be  said  toman
on  the  subject  of  religion,  and  in  the  form  that  is  best  fitted  to  have  deep  and  lasting
effect  upon  his  spiritual  nature  as  a  whole.  The  difference  is  very  perceptible  in  the
post-apostolic  literature.  "  Even  where  we  recognize  a  lofty  flight  of  the  spirit  as  in  the
ignatian  Epistles,  the  inspiration  repeatedly  is  merely  a  religious  enthusiasm,  a  subjective
romance,  showing  itself  in  an  almost  revelling  desire  for  martyrdom,  moving  and  even
infectious ;  so  that  many  who  read  an  Ignatian  Epistle  for  the  first  time  feel  themselves
doubtless  more  excited  and  stirred  than  by  a  Pauline  one ;  but  this  very  feature  proves
that  it  is  not  really  inspired ;  for  the  Spirit  who  founded  the  Church  does  not  tolerate  the
extolling  of  one  isolated  tendency  in  the  soul,  and  cannot  bear  such  subjective  partiality
of  view,  be  it  ever  so  strong,  ever  so  apparently  admirable."  2.  Fourfold  use,  **  Is
also  profitable.*'  In  reading  the  Scriptures  what  we  are  to  seek  above  all  things  is  that
the  truth  contained  in  them  may  be  brought  into  contact  with  our  minds  for  our  profit.
*'  For  teaching."  There  is  first  a  revealing  power  in  the  Bible.  It  teaches  us  much
that  we  could  not  otherwise  have  known.  It  supplies  us  with  what  is  necessary  not
only  for  a  correct,  but  a  lofty,  conception  of  God.  It  acquaints  us  with  our  fallen  state,
and  with  God's  dealings  with  us  for  our  salvation.  **  For  reproof."  The  reproving
power  of  the  Bible  results  from  its  great  revealing  power,  along  with  the  state  in  which
it  finds  us.  The  light  it  sheds  is  not  for  our  justification,  but  for  our  being  convicted
of  deijartures  l">oth  from  truth  and  righteousness.  *'  For  correction."  Ilie  corrective
power  of  the  Bible  starts  from  our  being  convicted  as  out  of  the  straight  path.  By
proper  directions,  admonitions,  warninj;s,  encouragements,  it  brings  us  back  into  the
straight  path.  "  For  instruction  which  is  in  righteousness."  The  disciplinary  power
of  the  Bible  is  specified  as  being  within  the  sphere  of  righteousness.  In  tho  lofty
demands  it  makes — the  loftier  the  further  we  advance — it  gives  us  the  spiritual  drill
which  makes  for  right  habits.  3.  Completeness  aimed  at.  "  That  the  man  of  God  may
be  complete,  furnished  completely  unto  every  good  work.**  The  man  of  God  is  man
according  to  the  Divine  idea.  Many  excellences  go  to  make  the  complete  man,  intel-
lectual, emotional,  practical.  God  desires  to  see  the  complete  man  ;  and  he  has  given
the  Bible  for  that  end.  The  completeness  thought  of  is  that  of  man  as  a  worker,
producing  good  thoughts,  good  words,  good  actions.  God  desires  to  see  the  completely
furnished  worker,  and  he  has  given  the  Bible  for  that  end.  It  is  true  that  we  come
very  far  short  of  the  Divine  ideal  of  our  humanity ;  the  reason  will  be  found  to  be
that  we  neglect  the  help  provided  for  us.  We  do  not  consult  God,  but  our  own
prejudiced  thoughts.  Let  us  go  back  to  the  Bible,  to  be  convicted  of  our  error,  atid
corrected,  and  severely  exercis^  toward  the  complete  man. — R.  F.


€H.iv.  1— 22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


67


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Ver.  1.— In  (he  sight  of  God,  and  of  Christ
Jesus  for  therefore  before  God  and  me  Lord
Jesiis  Christy  A.V.  and  T.R. ;  and  by  for  at,
A.V.  and  T.R.  I  charge  thee  (^lofiaprvpoficu);
as  ch.  ii.  14  and  1  Tim.  v.  21  (where  see
note).  The  words  odv  iyd,  wanting  in  some
of  the  best  mannscripiB,  are  **  rejected  by
Griesbach,  Tischendorf,  Lachmann,"  and  by
Huther,  Alford,  EUicott,  and  others.  The
chapter  opens  rather  abruptly  without  the
connecting  "  therefore."  And  by  hia  appear-
ing and  Us  kingdom.  The  reading  of  the
T.R.,  KOTO  r^y  iwupdytiayy  k.t.X.,  **at  his
appearing  and  kingdom,"  makes  such  ex-
cellent sense,  and  is  in  such  perfect  accord-
ance with  the  usual  grammar,  and  with  the
usual  connection  of  events,  that  it  is  difficult
not  to  believe  that  it  is  the  right  reading
(see  Matt,  xxvii.  15,  kotA  hpri^y,  **  at  the
feast ; "  icarck  irav  (rd$$(vroy,  "  on  every  sab-
bath ; "  Acts  xiii.  27,  Korck  r^y  ifi^payy  "  in
the  day ; "  Heb.  iii.  8  for  the  grammar ;  and
the  universal  language  of  Scripture  and  the
Creeds  connecting  the  judgment  with  the
Lord's  appearing  and  kingdom).  On  the  other
hand,  the  reading  koI  is  almost  impossible  to
construe.  No  two  commentators  scarcely  are
agreed  how  to  do  so.  Some  take  r^y  iiri<f>a-
yfiav  Kcd  r^y  fiaaiXday  as  the  object  governed
by  ^la/Mprvpofiai,  as  in  the  LXX.  of  Deut.
iv.  26,  "I  call  to  witness  .  .  .  Christ's
epiphany  and  kingdom,"  taking  hafiaprvpo-
fiau  in  two  senses  or  two  constructions.
Others  tako  them  as  the  accusatives  of  the
things  sworn  by,  **  I  charge  thee  before  God
and  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  his  epiphany  and
kingdom,"  as  Mark  v.  7,  rhy  etSy^  *'bv
God ; "  Acts  xix.  13,  rhy  'Iriaovyy  ** by  Jesus;"
1  Thess.  V.  27,  rhy  Kupiov,  "  by  the  Lord."
But  how  awkward  such  a  separation  of  the
thing  sworn  by  from  the  verb  is,  and  how
unnatural  it  is  to  couple  with  koI  the  two
ideas,  "before  God"  and  **by  Christ's
epiphany,"  and  how  absolutely  without
example  such  a  swccuing  by  Christ's
epiphany  and  kingdom  is,  nobody  needs  to
be  told.  Others,  as  Huther,  try  to  get  over
part  at  least  of  this  awkwardness  by  taking
the  two  ical's  as  "both:"  "by  both  his
epiphany  and  his  kingdom."  EUicott
explains  it  by  saying  that  as  you  could  not
put "  the  epiphany  and  the  kingdom "  in
dependence  upon  iy<i»iriov  (as  if  they  were
persons  like  God  and  Christy  they  "  natu-
rally pass  into  the  accusative."  But  surely
this  is  all  thoroughly  unsatisfactory.  The
T.R.  is  perfectly  easy  and  simple.  Appear-
ing (9in<pavtia);  ver.  8;  ch.  i.  10 ;  2  Tness.
il  8 ;  1  Tim.  vL  14 ;  Titus  ii.  13.    His  king.


dom.  So  in  the  Niccne  Creed  :  "  He  shall
come  again  with  ^lory  to  judge  both  ti^e
quick  and  the  dead:  whose  kingdom  shall
have  no  end"  (comp.  Matt.  xxv.  81,
followed  by  the  judgment).

Ver.  2. — Teaching  for  doctrine,  A.V.
Preach  the  Word  (icfipv^oy  rhy  \^oy).  It  is
impossible  to  exaggerate  the  dignity  and
importance  here  given  to  preaching  by  its
being  made  the  subject  of  so  solemn  and
awful  an  adjuration  as  that  in  ver.  1
(compare  the  designation  of  trfipv^  which
St,  Paul  gives  to  himself  in  1  Tim.  iL  7;
ch.  i.  11).  Be  instant  (4ir(crTrj0i).  The  force
of  the  exhortation  must  be  found,  not  in  the
verb  itself  taken  alone,  but  by  coupling  cJico/-
pots  iucaipas  closely  with  it.  Be  at  your
work,  attend  to  it  always,  in  and  out  of
season;  let  nothing  stop  you;  be  always
ready,  always  at  hand.  Reprove  (f^ty^oy);
see  ch.  iii.  16,  note  (comp.  Matt.  xviiL
15;  Eph.  V.  11;  1  Tim.  v.  20).  Generally
with  the  idea  of  bringing  the  fault  home  to
the  offender.  'Re'bTike(^4iriTlfiri<roy);  a  stronger
word  than  ^X67|oy,  implying  moreof  authority
and  less  of  argument  (Matt.  viii.  26 ;  xviL
18 ;  Luke  xix.  39 ;  Jude  9,  etc.).  Exhort
(napaKd\t(roy),  Sometimes  the  sense  of
"  exhort,"  and  sometimes  that  of  "  comfort,"
predominates  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  1 ;  vi.  2,  etc.).
Every  way  of  strengthening  and  establishing
souls  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God  is  to  be
tried,  and  that  with  all  long-Buffering  and
teaching.  (For  fuucpoeufiia,  see  ch.  iii.  10,
note.)  For  "  teaching  "  or  "  doctrine "
(5i5ax^),  St.  Paul  more  frequently  uses
8i5a<ncaA.(a  in  the  pastoral  Kpistles  (1  Tim.
i.  10;  iv.  6,  13.  16;  v.  17;  ch.  iii.  10,  16,
etc.);  but  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  great
difference  of  meaning.  Possibly  HtSaxii
points  more  to  the  act  of  teaching.  The  nee
of  it  here,  coupled  with  **  long- suffering,"
directs  that  the  man  of  God,  whether  he
preaches,  reproves,  rebukes,  or  exhorts,  is
always  to  be  a  patient  teacher  of  Grod's
Word  and  truth.

Ver.  S.—The  sound  for  sound,  A.V.;
having  itching  ears,  unU  heap  to  themselves
teachers  after  their  own  liuts  for  after  their
own  lusts  shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers,
having  itching  ears,  AJV.  The  lonnd  (r^r
{fytatyovtrris).  Nothing  is  gained  by  the
addition  of  the  article  in  Fnglish.  The
phrase,  ^  {ryiadyova'a  8i8a(rica\/a,  is  character-
istic of  the  pastoral  Epistles,  having  arisen,
no  doubt,  from  the  growth  of  heresy  (see  1
Tim.  i.  10 ;  vi.  3.  ch.  i.  13;  Titus  i.  9, 13;  iL  1 ;
also  Titus  ii.  8).  In  classical  Greek,  i/yiift
is  frequently  applied  to  words,  sentiment
advice,  etc,  in  the  sense  of  **  sound,"  "  wise ;  '*
and  iyioLpsuf  is  also  applied  to  the  mind  and


58


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [en.  iv.  1—22.


character.  Endure  (ay^|ovrai);  usually,  as
Bishop  Ellicott  observes,  applied  by  St.
Paul  to  persons  as  the  object,  as  elsewhere
in  the  New  Testameut  (Matt.  xvii.  17;  Acts
xviii.  14 ;  Eph.  iv.  2,  etc.) ;  but  not  invariably
(see  2  Thcss.  i.  4 ;  so  too  Heb.  xiii.  22).  In
classical  Greek,  iiy^x^adat^  followed  by
persons  or  thinprs,  usually  governs  an
accusative  case,  if  any,  but  a  genitive  fre-
quently in  Plato.  HaTing  itching  ean
(icrnB6fi€yoi  rijy  iutoj^y);  only  here  in  the
New  Testament.  The  phrase,  Kvr\(ri<»%  &r<gr,
ia  ascribed  by  Plutarch  to  Plato  (AlfordX
**  scratching  the  (itching)  ear ; "  Kyacrdai  ri
j^o,  **  to  tickle  the  ears  "  (Lucian) ;  &iroKva/-
oveip  iitiAy  T&  tfra  (Philo,  ap.  Ellicott).  The
verb  imfdw  (i.q.  Kydw)  means  **  to  scratch  ; "
"  to  tickle,"  and  in  the  passive  **  to  itch."
Will  heap  to  themselyei(/iri(rwpc^oi;(n);  a
contemptuous  word  (found  only  here  in
the  New  Testament,  and  nowhere  in  early
classical  Greek), implying  the  indiscriminate
multiplication  of  teachers  (compare  our  use  of
**  exaggerate  ").  The  simple  avptimy  occurs
in  di.  iii.  6.  After  their  own  lofti.  The
measure  of  the  number  or  the  quality  of
their  self-chosen  teachers  will  he  their  own
insatiable  and  ever-varying  fancies  and
mental  appetites,  not  the  desire  to  be  taught
God*s  truth  by  teachers  sent  from  God.
Compare  Jeroboam*8  conduct  in  ordaining
a  feast  *'  in  the  month  which  he  had  devised
of  his  own  heart "  (1  Kings  xii.  33).

Ver.  4. —  lf'i7Z  turn  for  they  shall  <«m,
A.V. ;  turn  amh^  fir  shall  ho  turned,  A.V.
Will  turn  away,  etc.  The  sober,  sound
doctrine  of  the  Word  of  God,  teacliinp^  self-
discipline,  humility,  and  purity  of  heart  and
life,  will  not  assuage  their  itching  ears,  and
tlierefore  they  will  turn  away  from  it,  and  go
after  more  congenial  fables— those  taught  by
the  heretics.  Turn  aside  (^/rrpax^troin-ai);
as  1  Tim.  i.  0,  note.  Fables  {^vBovs);  see  1
Tim.  i.  4;  iv.  7;  Titus  i.  14 ;  2  Pet.  i.  16
(on  the  Jewish  origin  of  these  fables,  see
Bishop  EUicott's  note  on  1  Tim.  i.  4).

Ver.  5. — Be  thou  s(jher  for  watch  thoUy
A.V. ;  suffer  hardship  for  endure  njflidionSy
A.V. ;  fulfil  for  make  full  proaf  of,  A.V.
Be  thou  sober  (»^<^<);  as  1  Thess.  v.  G,  8;
1  Pet.  i.  13;  iv.  7 ;  v.  8.  The  adjective
yri<pd\ios  occurs  in  1  Tim.  iii.  2  (where  see
note),  11 ;  Titus  ii.  2.  Hero  *'  Be  sober  in
all  tilings"  clearly  does  not  refer  to  literal
sobriety,  which  Timothy  was  in  little  danger
of  transgressing  (1  Tim.  v.  23),  but  com-
prehends clearness,  calmness,  steadiness,
and  moderation  in  all  things.  Suffer  hard-
ship (KOKoirddrjffov) ;  as  ch.  ii.  3  (T.li.)  and  9.
An  evangelist  (^tvayytKiarov)-,  one  whose
business  it  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  accord-
ing to  Matt.  xi.  5.  The  verb  (ifayyf\i((tv,
"  to  preach  the  gospel,"  and  fvayy e\ioy, "  the
gosiKil,"  are  of  very  frequent  use  in  the  New


Testament  But  €ltayy€Xtrr^s^  an  evangelist,
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Acts  xxi.  8  and
Eph.  iv.  11.  Fulfil  thy  miniitrj.  This  is
rather  a  weak  rendering  of  the  Greek  vAi|^-
^^co¥^  adopted  also  in  the  R.y.  of  Luke  i.
1.  The  verb  occurs  elsewhere  in  Luke  L  1  ;
Rom.  iv.  21 ;  xiv.  5,  and  Ter.  17  of  tlus
chapter.  The  phrase  is  metaphorical,  but
it  is  uncertain  whether  the  metaphor  is  that
of  a  ship  borne  along  by  full  sails,  or  of  full
measure  given.  If  the  former  is  the  metaphor,
then  the  derived  meaning,  when  applied  to
persons,  is  that  of  full  persuasion,  entire  and
miplioit  faith,  which  carries  men  forwud  in
a  bold  and  unwavering  course ;  or,  when
applied  to  things,  that  of  being  undoabtedly
believed.  But  if  the  metaphor  is  taken  fimn
^*  bringing  full  measure,"  then  the  sense  in
the  passive  voice  when  applied  to  persons
will  bo  **  to  bo  fully  satisfied,"  t.e.  to  have
full  assurance,  and,  when  applied  to  things,
*»  to  be  fully  believed  "  (Liddell  and  Scott}.
Applying  the  last  metaphor  to  the  passage
before  us,  the  sense  will  be  '*  discbarge  thy
ministry  to  the  full."  Let  there  be  no  stint
of  ministerial  labour,  but  carry  it  out  in  its^
completeness,  and  to  the  end.

Ver.  G. — Already  being  offered  for  nmr
ready  to  he  offered,  A.V. ;  come  for  at  hcmd,
A.V.  I  am  already  being  offered.  The  iy6
is  emphatic,  in  contrast  with  the  a6  of  ver.
5 :  **  Thou,  who  hast  still  life  before  thee,
suffer  hardship,  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,
make  full  prf>of  of  thy  ministry.  I  can  do
so  no  longer,  for  my  martyrdom  has  alreadv
commenced,  and  my  end  is  close  at  hand.
Tliou  must  take  my  place  in  the  grout  con-
flict." Am  .  .  .  being  offered  (<rircV5ouai) ;  am
hnnij  poured  out,  as  the  drink  oflfering,  or
libation,  is  poured  out.  St.  Paul  uses  the
same  figure  in  Phil.  ii.  17,  where  he  couples
it  with  the  sacrifice  and  service  (or  offering-
up)  of  the  faith  of  the  Pliilippians  by  him-
self as  the  priest,  and  looks  upon  tlie  pour-
ing out  of  his  own  life  as  the  completion  of
that  sacrifice  (see  Ellicott  on  Phil.).  **The
libation  always  formed  the  conclusion  of  the
sacrifice,  and  so  the  apostle's  martyrdom
closed  his  apostolic  service"  (Hnther),  which
had  been  a  continual  sacrifice,  in  which  ho
had  been  the  ministering  priest  (Rom.  xv.
IG).  So  that  the  use  of  (nrty^ofxat  here
exactly  agrees  with  that  in  Phil.  ii.  17.
"  My  sacrificial  work,"  St.  Paul  says,  "  being
now  finished  and  ended,  I  am  performing
the  last  solemn  act,  the  pouring  out  of  my
own  life  in  martyrdom,  to  whicli  I  shall  pass
out  of  the  prison  where  I  now  am."  The
time  of  my  departure  (rfis  i/xris  dyaXvatus).
The  word  is  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New
Testament,  but  St.  Paul  uses  the  verb  ava-
\v(Tai,  "  to  dejuirt,"  in  Phil.  i.  23,  where,  the
verb  being  in  the  active  voice,  the  metaphor
clearly  is  from  weighing  anchor,  as  in  com*


CH.  IV.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


5^


.^^_


mon  use  in  classical  Greek;  hence  simply
**  to  depart."  The  classical  use  of  &vclXi/(nr
rather  favours  the  sense,  either  of  **  release  "
or  of  *'  dissolution."  But  St.  Paul's  use  of
&yax6<a  in  Phil.  i.  23,  and  the  frequent  use  of
the  same  yerb  io  the  LXX.  and  by  Josephns,
in  the  sense  of  "  to  depart,"  favours  the  ren-
dering of  dydXvais  by  "  departure,"  as  in  the
A.y.  and  K.Y.  Is  come;  rather,  is  at  hand
(i<p4(rrriKt);  the  same  verb  as  iirl<rrri0i  in
ver.  2.  (On  the  difference  between  iydtrrriKt
("  is  come  ")  and  i<picr-ntKt  ("  is  at  hand  "),
see  Alford  on  2  Thess.  ii.  2,  and  comp.  Acts
xxii.  20.)

Ver.  l.—The  for  a,  A.V. ;  the  for  my,  A.V.
I  have  fought  the  good  fight ;  as  I  Tim.  vL
12  (rhy  iryuya  rhy  KaX6y),  meaning  that,
however  honourable  the  contests  of  the
games  were  deemed,  the  Christian  contest
was  far  more  honourable  than  them  all.
The  word  **  fight "  does  not  adequately  ex-
press rhv  dyciya,  which  embraces  all  kinds  of
contests — cliariot-race,  foot-race,  wrestling,
etc.  **I  have  played  out  the  honourable
game*'  would  give  the  sense,  though  in-
elegantly. The  oouTBe  (rhy  9p6fioy);  Acts
xiii.  25 ;  xx.  24.  The  runner  in  the  race
had  a  definite  Jip6fiost  or  course  to  run,  marked
out  for  him.  St.  Paul's  life  was  that  course,
and  he  knew  that  he  hod  run  it  out.  I  have
kept  the  faith.  St.  Paul  here  quits  metaphor
and  explains  the  foregoing  figures.  Through
his  long  eventful  course,  in  spite  of  all
difficulties,  conflicts,  dangers,  and  tempta-
tions, ho  had  kept  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ
committed  to  him,  inviolable,  unadulterated,
whole,  and  complete.  He  had  not  shrunk
from  confessing  it  when  death  stared  him  in
the  face;  he  had  not  corrupted  it  to  meet
the  views  of  Jews  or  Gentiles ;  with  courage
and  resolution  and  perseverance  he  had
kept  it  to  the  end.  Oh !  let  Timothy  do  the
same.

Ver.  8. — TJte  for  a,  A.V. ;  to  me  for  me,
A.V. ;  only  to  me  for  to  me  only,  A.V. ;  also
to  all  them  for  unto  all  them  also^  A.V. ;  hare
loved  for  love.  Henceforth  (\oiirdy) ;  as  Heb.
X.  13.  The  work  of  conflict  being  over,  it
only  remains  to  receive  the  crown.  The
crown  of  righteonsness  means  that  crown
the  possession  of  which  marks  the  wearer
as  righteous  before  God.  The  analogous
phrases  are,  "the  crown  of  glory"  (1  Pet.
v.  4)  and  »*  the  crown  of  life "  (Jas.  i.  12 ;
Rev.  ii.  10).  The  righteousness,  tho  glory,
and  the  life  of  the  saints  are  conceived  as
displayed  in  crowns,  as  tho  kingly  dignity
is  in  tho  crown  of  royalty.  The  righteoui
Judge  (irpiT^s).  In  Acts  x.  42  tho  Lord
Jesus  is  said  to  be  ordained  of  God  Kpirijs
C^yruy  irol  ytKpuy,  "  the  Judge  of  quick  and
dead ;  "  and  in  Heb.  xii.  23  wo  read,  Kpirf
St^  irdyTuy,  ''  God  the  Judge  of  all."  Bat
nowhere  else,  either  in  the  Old  Testament


or  the  New  Testament,  is  this  term  applied
directly  either  to  God  or  to  Christ.  Surely
its  use  here  is  influenced  by  the  preceding
metaphor  of  ^e  iydy  and  the  Bp6fios  and
the  <rr4^tayos ;  and  "  the  righteous  Judge  "  is
the  impartial  $pa$(6s,  or  "judge,"  who
assigned  the  prizes  at  the  games  to  those
who  had  fairly  won  them.  And  this  is  tho
proper  meaning  of  icpir^;,  "the  umpire,"
applied,  especially  atJA thens,  to  the  "  j  uages  "
at  the  poetic  contests  (Liddell  and  Scott).
Thucydides  contrasts  the  Kpir-ns  and  the
dywFKrTiir ;  Aristophanes  the  Kpirai  and  the
Otarai,  the  "spectators;"  and  the  word
** critic"  is  derived  from  this  meaning  of
Kiriis  and  KptrucSs,  The  whole  picture  ia
that  of  the  apostle  running  his  noblo  race
of  righteousness  to  the  very  end,  and  of  tho
Lord  himself  assigning  to  him  the  well-
earned  crown  of  victory  in  the  presence  of
heaven  and  earth  assembled  for  the  solem-
nity of  that  great  day.  That  have  loved
his  appearing.  It  will  bo  a  characteristic
of  those  who  will  be  crowned  at  that  day
that  all  the  time  they  were  fighting  the
good  fight  they  were  looking  forward  witli
hope  and  desire  for  their  Lord's  appearing
and  kingdom.  "  Thy  kingdom  come  "  was
their  desire  and  their  petit:on.  They  will
bo  able  to  say  at  that  day,  "  lo,  this  is  our
God ;  wo  have  waited  for  him,  «md  he  will
save  us :  this  is  tho  Lord ;  we  have  waited
for  him,  wo  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his
salvation"  (Isa.  xxv.  9).  Eis  appearing;
as  ill  ver.  2.

Ver.  9. — Do  thy  diligence  ((rrot/Sao-oy) ;  see
ch.  ii.  15,  note.  St.  Paul's  affectionate  long-
ing for  Timothy's  company  in  present
danger  and  desertion  is  very  touching.  (For
the  chronological  bearing  of  this  passage,
see  Introduction.)

Ver.  10. — Forsook  for  hath  forsaken,  A.V. ;
went  for  is  departed,  A.V. ;  to  for  nnto,  A.V.
(twice).  Demas.  Nothing  more  is  known  of
Demas  than  what  is  gathered  from  tbo
mention  of  him  in  Col.  iv.  14  and  Philem.
24.  We  learn  from  those  passages  that  he
was  a  fellow-labourer  of  the  apostle,  and  it
is  remarkable  that  in  them  both  he  is
coupled,  as  here,  with  Luke  and  Mark  (Col.
iv.  10).  (See  Introduction.)  Having  loved
this  present  world.  It  would  appear  from
this  that  Demas  had  not  the  faith  or  the
coumge  to  run  tho  risk  of  sharing  St.
Paul's  imminent  martyrdom  at  Rome,  but
lolt  him,  whilo  he  was  free  to  do  so,  under
pretence  of  an  urgent  call  to  Thessalonica ;
just  as  Mark  left  I*aul  and  Barnabas  (Acts
xiii.  13).  But  there  is  no  ground  to  believe
that  he  was  an  apostate  from  the  faith.
The  coupling  together  of  Demas  and  Aris-
tarchus  m  Philem.  24  suggests  that  Demas
may  have  been  a  Thessalonian,  as  we  know
that  Aristarchus  was  (Acts  xx.  4).    Dema$


CO


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TQIOTHT.


[cH.  IV.  1—22.


is  th<'mght  to  be  a  shortened  form  of  Demar-
chu*.    If  so,  we  )ia?e  a  slight  additional
iodi'-ation  of  his  being  a  Thessalonian,  as
oompfmndt   with    areho§   or   arehei    would
seem  to  have  lx;en  common  in  The«alonica
(oomparo  Aristnrchus  and  woXsrdpx^s,  Acts
xrii.  (),  8).    Creseens  (Kpiicicns} :  only  men-
tionrMl  here.    It  is  a  Latin  name,  like  IlovSiyt,
PudenM^  in  ver.  21.     There  was  a   cynic
phikjsopher  of   tliis  name   in  tiie    second
century,  a  great  enemy  of  the  Christians.
The   tradition    (*Apost.   Constit,'  vii.  46)
that  ho  preachc<l  the  gospel  in  Galatia  is
probably  derived  from  Uiis  passage.    Titus,
etc.    The  last  mention  of  Titus,  not  reckon-
ing the  Epistle  to  Titus,  is  that  in  2  Cor.
xii.  18,  frr)m  whicli  it  appears  that  8t  Paul
liad  sent  him  to  Corinth  just  before  his  own
lost  visit  to  that  city.    How  the  interval
was  fill(-<l  up,  and  where  Titus  passed  the
time,  we  know  not    He  is  not  once  named
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  nor  in  any  of
Kt.  Paurs  Epistles  written  during  his  first
imprihonm^nt.    But  we  gather  from   Titus
i.  5  that  he  accompanied  St.  Paul  to  Crete,
presumably  after  tho  apostle's  return  from
Spain  ;  that  ho  was  left  there  for  a  time  to
organize  tho  Church ;  that  later  he  joined  the
apoBtle  at  Nicopoiis  (Titus  iii.  12),  and,  doubt-
less by  St.  Paul's  desire,  went  to  Dalmatia,
as  mentioned  in  this  tenth  verso.     And  here
our    knowledge    of   him    ends.    Tradition
pretty  consistently  makes  him  Bisliop  of
Gortyna,  in  Crete,  where  arc  the  ruins  of  a
very  ancient  church  dedicated  to  St.  Titus,
in  whicli  service  is  occasionally  performed
by  priebtrf  from  tho   neighbourhood  (Dean
IlowHon,  in  'Diet,  of  Bible:*  art.  "Titus").
Ver.     ll.—  lW/nl    for    profitahU,    A.V. ;
minhteriiuj   (or  the  mini»try^  A.V.     Luke;
j)rol)al)ly   a    sliortcned    form    of    Lucanus.
Luke  was  witii  St.  Paul  in  his  voyage  to
ltoin.>  (Acts  xxvii.  1;  xxviii.  11,  1<;),  and
when  he  wrote  the  Kpistles  to  the  Col'ssians
and    IMiilemon   (Col.   iv.    14;    Philem.   4),
having  doubtless  compo.sod  tlio  Acts  of  tho
Apohtles  (luriii;^  St.  I^aul's  two  years*  im-
prisoiinuMit  (Acts  xxviii.  30).     How  he  spent
his  time  between  that  date  and  tho  mention
of  him  hero  as  still  with  St.  Paul,  we  have
no  knowledge.     But  it  looks  as  if  ho  may
have  been  in  close  personal  attendance  upon
him  all  the  time.     If  he  had  been  permitted
to  write  a  supplement  to  tho  Acts,  perhaps
the  repeated  "  we  "  would  have  8ho^vn  this.
Take    Mark.     Alark    had  apparently   been
recently   riK'oncileil   to  St.   Baul   when   he
wrote  C<d.  iv.  10,  and  was  with  him  when
ho  wrote  Philem.  24.     We  know  nothing
more  of  him  till  we  learn  from  this  passage
that  he  was  with  or  near  to  Timothy,  and
liki'ly  to  acc<mipany   him  to  Komo  in  his
last   visit   to   St.   l*anl.     He   is  mentioned
again  in  1  Pet.  v.  13,  as  being  with  St


Peter  at  Babylon.  Theexpramoii,  "taka'
(h^aXafi^^  seems  to  iinpl  j  that  Timotfay
was  to  pick  him  up  on  the  way,  as  the  woid
is  used  in  Acts  xz.  13, 14 ;  and,  though  ka
certainly,  in  Acts  xiiii.  31.  He  is  mfiil  to
ma,  etc.  (c0x^rrof);  as  ch.  ii.  21  (when
see  note).  This  testimoDy  to  Mark's  minis-
terial osefolness,  at  a  time  when  his  fiulili-
fulness  and  courage  would  be  pat  to  a  seven
test,  is  Tery  satisfacftory.  Yor  alaiitsnig
(cif  Sfcucorfor).  It  maj  be  doubted  whether
iiatcoifla  here  means  ^the  ministry,"  as  in
the  A.V.  and  1  Tim.  L  12.  or,  as  in  the
R.V.,  more  generally  **  for  miniBtering,**  i«.
for  acting  as  an  assistant  to  mo  in  mj
apostolic  labonrB.  The  wofda,  ^'to  met"
favour  the  latter  rendering.  The  sense
would  then  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  Teri)
in  Acts  xix.  22,  where  we  read  that  Timothy
and  Erastus  *^  ministered  nnto  him,"  ue.
it}  St.  Paul,  and  that  of  imjipirris  applied  to
Mark  in  Acts  xiii.  5.

Ver.  12.— ^tt^  for  and^  A.V. ;  tejU  for  Jkose
9ent^  A.y.  Tychieus  was  with  St  Paul
when  he  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Coloesians
(Col.  iv.  7),  as  was  also  Timothy  (CoL  i  1>
Tlie  presence  of  Luke,  Timothy,  Tychicos,
Mark,  with  Paul  now,  as  then,  is  remazk-
able  (see  ver.  10,  note).  I  sent  to  Sjihesat.
Theodoret  (quoted  by  Alford,  *Proleg.  to
2  Tim.,*  ch.  ix.  sect.  1)  says,  '*It  is  plain
from  this  that  St  Timothy  was  not  at  this
timo  living  at  Ephcsus,  but  somewhere  else."
And  that  certainly  is  the  natural  inference
at  first  sight.  But  Bishop  Ellicott  suggests
the  possibility  of  Tychieus  being  the  beearer
of  tho  First  Epistlo  to  Timothy,  written  not
very  long  before,  and  this  being  merely  an
allusion  to  that  well-known  fact.  Another
and  more  probable  idea  is  that  he  was  the
bearer  of  this  Epistle,  that  the  object  of  his
mission,  like  that  of  Artemas  (Titus  iii.  12),
was  to  take  Timothy's  place  at  Ephesua
during  Timothy's  absence  at  Rome,  and
that  ho  is  thus  meutioned  in  the  Epistle  in
order  to  commend  him  to  the  reverent
regard  of  tlie  Ephesian  Church  (Words-
worth). It  is  argued  against  this  that
Trp6s  <x€  would  have  been  the  more  natural
expression  after  the  analogy  of  Col.  iv.  7
and  Titus  iii.  12.  But  this  objection  would
be  removed  if  we  suppose  that  the  Epistle
was  sent  by  another  hand,  and  that  it  was
very  possible  that  Timothy  might  have
started  for  Rome  before  Tychieus  could
arrive  at  Ephesus.  He  might  have  orders
to  visit  Corinth  or^Iacedonia  on  his  way.
(For  the  arguments  for  and  against  Timothy
being  at  Ephesus  at  this  time,  see  Alford*s
*  Prolog./  OS  above.)

Ver.  13. — Bring  ichen  thou  comest  for  when
thou  eomest  bring  tcith  thee,  A.V. ;  especially
for  but  cfpecicMy,  A.V.  The  eloke  (r^
^f\6injy9  more  properly  written   ^oir^iyr);


CH.IV.  1— 22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


61


the  Latin  pmnula,  the  thick  overooat  or
oloke.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament
Some  think  it  was  the  bag  in  which  the
books  and  parchments  were  packed.  The
parchments  (rks  fxtfifipdvas).  This,  again,  is
a  Latin  worid.  It  occurs  only  here  in  the
New  Testament.  They  would  probably  be
for  the  apostle  to  write  his  Epistles  on.
Or  they  may  have  been  valuable  manuscripts
of  some  kind.  In  yer.  20  we  learn  that  St.
Paul  had  lately  been  at  Miletus;  and  in
1  Tim.  i.  3  that  he  was  then  going  to
Macedonia.  Troas  would  be  on  his  way
to  Macedonia,  Greece,  and  Bome  (Acts  xvi.
8,  9,  11),  as  it  was  on  the  return  journey
from  Macedonia  to  Miletus  (Acts  xz.  5,  15).
It  should  further  be  observed  that  the
journey  here  indicated  is  the  same  as  that
referred  to  in  1  Tim.  L  3,  which  confirms
the  inevitable  inference  firom  this  chapter
that  St.  Paul,  on  his  way  to  Bome  from
MiletuB,  whither  he  had  come  from  Oete
(Titus  i.  5),  passed  through  Troas,  IMaco-
donia,  and  Corinth  (vcr.  20),  leaving
Timothy  at  Ephesus.     (See  Introduction.)

Ver.  14. — Will  render  to  him  for  reward
himy  A.V.  and  T.B.  Alexander ;  apparently
an  Ephcsian,  as  appears  by  the  words,  **  of
whom  be  thou  ware  also."  It  seems
probable,  though  it  is  necessarily  uncertain,
that  this  Alexander  is  the  same  person  as
that  mentioned  in  1  Tim.  i.  20  as  ^*a
blasphemer,"  which  agrees  exactly  with
what  is  here  said  of  him,  *'  he  greatly  with-
stood our  words"  (comp.  Acts  xiii.  45,
"  contradicted  the  things  which  were  spoken
by  Paul,  and  blasphemed").  He  may  or
may  not  be  the  same  as  the  Alexander
named  in  Acts  xix.  93.  Supposing  the
Alexander  of  1  Tim.  i.  20  and  this  place  to  be
the  same,  the  points  of  resemblance  with  the
Alexander  of  Acts  xix.  33  are  that  both
resided  at  Ephesus,  that  both  seem  to  have
been  Christians  (see  noto  on  1  Tim.  i.  20),
and  both  probably  Jews,  inasmuch  as  1
Tim.  i.  relates  entirely  to  Jewish  heresies
(vers.  4,  7,  8),  and  Acts  xix.  33  expressly
states  that  he  was  a  Jew.  The  coppersmith
(4  xa\K€us;  only  hero  in  the  New  Testa-
ment); properly,  a  coppersmith^  hut  used
generally  of  any  smith — silvuramith,  or  gold-
smith, or  blacksmith.  Did  me  much  evil
(iroWd  /xoi  Kana  ivt^fi^aro).  This  is  a
purely  Hellenistic  idiom,  and  is  found  in
the  LXX.  of  Gen.  i.  15. 17 :  Song  of  the  Three
Children,  19 ;  2  Mace.  xiii.  9.  In  classical
Greek  the  verb  ivitiKWfiaty  in  the  middle
voice,  "  to  display,"  can  only  be  followed  by
a  subjective  quality,  as  "good  will,'*  "virtue,"
•* long-sufferin;;,"  an  "opinion,"  and  the  like
(see  Alford,  in  loe.).  And  so  it  is  used  in
1  Tim.  i.  IG;  Titus  ii.  10;  iii.  2.  The
question  naturally  arises— When  and  where
did  Alexander  thus  injure  St.   Paul?— at  '


Ephesus  or  at  Bome?  Ben  gel  suggests
Bome,  and  with  great  probability.  Perhaps
he  did  him  evil  by  stirring  up  the  Jews  at
Bome  against  the  apostle  at  the  time  of
"his  first  defence;"  or  by  giving  adverse
testimony  before  the  Boman  tribunal,
possibly  accusing  him  of  being  seditious,
and  bringing  up  the  riot  at  Ephesus  as  a
proof  of  it ;  or  in  some  other  way,  of  which
the  memory  has  perished.  Will  render.
The  B.T.  has  the  future,  inro^wa'd  for  the
optative  ^itoSc^t;,  "  a  late  and  incorrect  form
for  AtoSo^t?"  (Kllicott,  in  loc).

Ver.  15. — Withstood  (orhath  withstood,  A.V.
Of  whom  be  thou  ware  (hv  <pv\d(y(rov).
This  is  the  proper  construction  in  classical
Greek,  the  accusative  of  the  person  or  thing,
after  <pv\d(r(rofiau  But  it  is  only  found  in
Acts  xxi.  25.  In  Luke  xii.  15  the  equally
correct  phrase,  ^v\dff<r(ff6e  dvh  r^s  tAcovc-
{/af,  is  used.  The  inference  from  this  cau-
tion to  Timothy  is  that  Alexander  had  left
Bome  and  returned  to  his  native  Ephesus.
The  Jews  were  always  on  the  move.  He
greatly  withstood  our  words  {iLvriarri).  For
an  exactly  similar  use,  see  Acts  xiii.  8,  where
Elymas  *' withstood ''  Paul  and  Barnabas;
and  ch.  iii.  8,  where  Jannes  and  Jambres
"  withstood  "  Moses.  In  this  case  we  may
be  sure  that  Paul,  in  pleading  for  his  life,  did
not  omit  to  preach  the  gospel  to  his  Gentile
audience.  Alexander  tried  to  refute  his
words,  not  without  effect.  The  apostle  says
"  our  words  "  (not  "  my  words  "),  perhaps  to
associate  with  himself  those  other  Chris-
tians who  were  with  him.  It  certainly
cannot  mean  "yours  and  mine,"  as  Timothy
was  not  with  him  when  the  "  words  "  were
spoken.

Ver.  16. — Defence  for  ansxcer,  A.V. ;  no  one
took  my  part  for  no  man  stood  with  me,  A.V. ;
all  for  all  men,  A.V. ;  may  it  not  for  I  pray
God  it  may  not,  A.V. ;  account  for  charge,
A.V.  Defence  {kvoXoyicf),  "The  technical
word  in  classical  Greek  for  a  defence  in
answer  to  an  accusation ; "  as  Acts  xxii.  1
(where  see  note  for  further  illustration),  and
Phil.  i.  7.  Took  my  part ;  tcaofyivtro  B.T.,
for  avfijrapcyfvfTo  T  B.,  whicn  occurs  else-
where in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Luke
xxiii.  48,  in  a  somewhat  different  sense.
The  simple  napaylyofiai  is  very  common  in
the  New  Testament,  but  nowhere  in  the
technical  sense  in  which  it  is  used  here.  In
classical  Greek  b.>th  forms  are  common  in
the  sense  of  "  coming  to  aid,"  "  standing  by
anyone,"  "assibting."  Here  it  represents
the  Latin  assistere  or  adcsse  in  its  technical
sense  of  "standing  by  "  an  accused  person
as  friend  or  a.<<sistant,  to  aid  and  abet  them
in  their  defence.  Powerful  men  sometimes
brought  such  a  multitude  of  assistants  as  to
overawe  the  mappstrate,  as  Orgetorix  the
Helvetian,  when  summoned  to  trial,  appeared


€2


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  iv.  1—22.


with  ten  thoiusand  followers,  and  to  there
was  no  trial.  Paal,  like  his  Lord  and  Master,
of  whom  it  is  written,  **A11  his  disciples  for-
sook him  and  flod,"  had  no  one  to  stand
with  him  in  nis  hour  of  noed.

Ver.  17. — But  for  noticithttanding^  A.V. ;
by  for  withf  A.V. ;  through  for  hy,  A.V. ;
meuage  for  preaching^  A.V. ;  proclaimed  for
knoien,  A.V.  Stood  by  me  {fiol  mapdarri);
as  in  Acts  xxvii.  23 ;  Itom.  xvi.  2  (where  see
also  tho  use  of  irpoffrdris^  a  helper).  Tlapl-
ffrofuu  mcAUs  simply  to  stand  by  the  side  of  a
person — to  be  preseut.  But,  like  wapaylrofjieu^
it  acquires  the  meaniug  of  standing  by  for
the  purpose  of  helping.  The  contrast  be-
tween tbe  timid  faithless  friends  who  faile<l
him  like  a  deceitful  brook  (Job  vi.  15),  and
tho  faithfulness  of  tho  Lord  who  was  a  very
present  Help  in  trouble,  is  very  striking.
Strengthened  me  (ivt^vydfiwrt  mc);  see  1
Tim.  i.  12,  note,  and  Acts  vi.  8.  The  message
{itfipvyfia).  The  A.V.  preadiing  is  far  better.
St.  Paul  means  that  go8{)el  which  ho  was
€ommissioue<l  to  })reach,  and  which  he  did

E reach  openly  in  full  court  when  he  was  on
is  trial  (see  ver.  15,  note).  ICight  be  folly
proclaimed  (tXtj^o^p^^)  ;  see  ch.  iv.  5,  note;
and  comp.  Kom.  xv.  It).  All  the  Gentiles
might  hear  (comp.  Phil.  i.  12—14).  Tho
brave,  unselfish  spirit  of  the  apostle  thinking
more  of  the  proclamation  of  tho  gospel  than
of  his  own  life,  is  truly  admirable.  I  was
delivered  out  of  the  month  of  the  lion.
8urely  there  can  bo  no  doubt  that,  as  Ikngrl
says,  this  is  a  quotation  from  Ps.  xxii.  20,  21.
Tho  verb  d^fiva-drjy,  **  I  was  delivered,"  comes
from  the  twentieth  verse,  "  Deliver  my  soul
from  the  sword,"  and  the  phrase,  ^k  (TT^/iaroy
\tovTosy  is  found  vtrhatim  in  ver.  21.  The
apostle  means  his  deliverance  from  tlie  execu-
tioner's sword.  In  the  next  verse  we  find  both
tlie  words  pvtrtrai  and  (ruxTfi^  and  the  whole
tone  of  tho  psalm  breathes  the  same  spirit
as  the  saying,  "Tho  I^rd  stood  by  me."
Dean  Alford's  8ug«i:i.'stion  that  the  lion  here
is  Satan,  as  in  1  Pet.  v.  8,  and  tho  danger
which  the  apostle  escaped  was  not  death,
which  he  di<l  not  fear,  but  betraying  the
gospel  under  tho  fear  of  death,  is  ingenious,
but  rather  far-fetched,  though  not  impos-
sible. It  may  jwssibly  have  been  part  of
what  was  in  St.  Paul's  mind.

Ver.  \8.—The  Lord  for  ami  the  Lord  A.V.
and  T.R. ;  icill  lor  nhdll,  A.V. ;  save  for
presercey  A.V. ;  the  glory  for  glory,  A.V.
Deliver  me  .  .  .  save  me  (see  preceding
note).  The  language  here  is  also  very  like
that  of  tlie  Lord's  Prayer :  ^Pvaai  Tjfias  dirh
Tovtrotrrjpov'  (Tov  yiip  f<rriv  rj  ^a<n\fia  .  .  .  Kcd
rj  ho^Oy  fis  rovs  alwvas.  'Ayurj*/  (Matt.  vi.  13).
Every  evil  work.  Alford  goes  altogether
astray  in  liis  remarks  on  this  passage.  In-
terpreted by  tho  Lord's  Prayer,  and  by  its
own  internal  evidence,  tho  meaning  clearly


is,  *'  The  Lord,  who  stood  by  me  at  my  trial,
will  continno  to  be  my  Saviour.  He  will
deliver  me  from  every  evil  design  of  mhie
enemies,  and  from  all  the  wiles  and  ■mnnlti
of  the  devil,  in  short,  from,  the  whole  power
of  evil,  and  will  bring  me  safe  into  his  own
kingdom  of  light  and  righteoosneas."  There
is  a  strong  contrast,  as  Bengel  pithily  ob-
serves, between  "  the  evil  work  •*  and  "  hii
heavenly  kingdom."  A  triumphant  martyr-
dom is  as  true  a  deliveranoe  as  escape  from
death.  Compare  our  Lord's  pTonuse,  '*  Then
shall  not  an  hair  of  your  head  perish"
(Luke  xxi.  18  compared  with  ver.  16).  8t
Paul's  confidence  simply  is  that  the  Lord
would,  in  his  own  good  time  and  way,  tranirfiBr
him  from  this  present  evil  world,  and  from
the  powers  of  darkness,  into  his  eternal
kingdom  of  light  and  righteousnees.

Ver.  Id.—HoutetoT  household^  A.\,  Prina
andAqnila.  Prisca  is  elsewhere  always  called
PriseUla  (Acts  xviii.  2,  18,  26 ;  Rom.  xvi
3 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19).  A  similar  variation  of
names  is  seen  in  Drusa  and  Drtuillat  Livia
and  Livella,  etc.  She  is  named  before  her
husband,  as  here  in  Acts  xviii.  18 ;  Bom.  xvL
3.  Tho  mention  of  them  here  is  in  fietvoar
of  Timothy  being  at  Ephesus  at  this  time,
as  Ephesus  is  one  of  the  places  where  they
were  wont  to  sojourn  (Acts  xviii.  19,  26).
The  house  (as  in  A.V.  ch.  L  16)  of  Onsn*
phorus  (see  ch.  i.  16, 18,  note).  This  repeti-
tion of  the  *'  house  of  Onesiphorus  "  is  almost
conclusive  as  to  the  recent  death  of  Onesi-
phorus  himself.

Ver.  20.— 7  hft  for  have  I  left,  A.V.;
Mil4!tus  for  Miletumy  A.V.  Erastus  abode  at
Corinth.  We  learn  from  Uom.  xvi.  3  that
Ernst  us  was  the  chamberlain  of  Corinth,
which  accounts  for  his  abiding  there.  He
was  one  of  St.  Paul's  companions  in  his
missionary  journey,  and  we  learn  from  Acts
xix.  22  that  he  was  sent  by  St.  Paul  with
Timothy  into  Macedonia  just  before  the  great
rit)t  at  Ephesus.  The  mention  of  him  here
clearly  indicates  that  St.  Paul  had  gone
from  Troas,  where  he  left  his  cloke,  to
Corinth  on  his  way  to  Home.  Trophimus  is
first  mentioned  in  Acts  xx.  4,  where  we  learn
that  he  was  an  Asiatic,  and  more  definitely
in  Arts  xxi.  29,  that  he  was  an  Ephesian.
He  had  travelled  with  St.  Paul's  party  from
Macedonia  to  Troas,  and  thence  to  Miletus
and  Jerusalem,  where  we  lose  sight  of  him
till  we  find  liim  again  in  this  passage  journey-
ing towards  Kome  with  St.  Paul  and  others,
but  stopped  at  Miletus  by  sickness,  il/t/^ut,
not  Miletuviy  is  tho  correct  form.

Ver.  21.—Saluteth  for  greet4ith,  A.V.  Do
thy  diligence  {(rirovSatrov) ;  see  ver.  i)  and  ch.
ii.  15,  note.  Before  winter;  lest,  when  winter
storms  come,  it  be  iuiiX)8siblo  to  do  so.  St.
Paul's  longing  to  have  Timothy  with  him  is
apparent  througliout.    Eubulus ;  mentioned


CH.  IV.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.


63


nowhere  else.  The  name  is  not  uncommon
OS  a  Greek  name,  and  appears  also  in  the
patronymic  EubulideSf  and  the  female  name
EvbuU,  And  Fudens,  and  Liniu,  and  Claudia.
Of  these  persons  Linui  is  probably  the  Mime
ns  is  mentioned  by  Irenieus  and  Eusebius  as
the  first  Bishop  of  Rome.  Iremeus  (iii.  Ill,  3)
says,  ^  When  the  apostles,  therefore,  had
founded  the  Church  (of  Rome)  they  entrusted
the  oflSce  (x^irov^iav)  of  the  episcopate  to
Linus,  of  whom  Paul  makes  mention  in  his
Epistles  to  Timothy."  Eusebius  OEcc
Hist.,'  iii.  2)  says,  **  Linus  was  ordained  the
first  Bishop  of  Rome  (irpwrof  KKupovraa.  r^y
drnffKorrfi^)  after  the  martyrdom  of  Paul  and
Peter"  (see,  too,  §  4  of  the  same  book).
Some  identify  him  with  a  certain  LI  in  in
Welsh  hagiography,  said  to  be  the  son  of
Caractacus.  As  regards  Pudena  and  Clatidia,
nothing  is  known  about  them  unless  the
very  ingenious  and  interesting  theory  of
Archdeacon  Williams  is  true,  which  is  neces-
sarily very  uncertain.  According  to  this
theory,  Claudia  is  the  foreign  lady,  a  Briton^
whose  marriage  with  Pudens  is  spoken  of  by
Martial  in  two  epigrams,  and  who  also  bore
the  cognomen  of  Bufina.  It  is  supposed  that
she  was  the  daughter  of  the  British  king
Cogidubnus,  the  ally  of  the  Romans  and
of  the  Roman  governor,  Aulus  Plautius,
whose  wife  Pomponia  is  said  by  Tacitus  to
have  been  impeached  of  the  crime  of  em-
bracing  a  **  foreign  superstition,"  which  was

Erobably  Christianity.  Cogidubnus  appears
y  an  ancient  inscription  now  at  Goodwood
to  have  taken  the  name  of  the  Emperor
Claudius,  being  called  Tiberius  Claudius
Cogidubnus,  which  would  naturally  lead
to  his  daughter  being  called  Claudia.  And
if  further  she  was  adopted  by  the  wife  of
her  father's  ally,  the  name  Rufina  would  be
accounted  for,  as  a  distinguished  branch  of
the  gens  Pomponia  bore  the  name  of  Rufus.
And  Martial's  epigram  is  addressed  to
<«  Rufus/'  as  one  interested  in  the  marriage.


Claudia  may  either  have  learnt  Christianity
fi-om  Pomponia,  or  may  have  conveyed  the
knowledge  of  the  gospel  to  her.  On  the
other  hand,  the  name  of  Fudens  appears  on
the  Goodwood  inscription  as  having  g^ven,
while  still  a  heathen,  a  site  for  a  temple
of  Neptune  and  Minerva,  which  was  buUt
**  pro  salute  "  of  the  imperial  family  under
the  authority  of  King  Cogidubnus— curi-
ously connecting  him  with  the  British  king.
It  is  probable  thiat  Pudens  and  Claudia  were
not  vet  married.  Thus  it  will  be  seen  thal^
while  this  theory  is  borne  out  by  many
coincidences,  it  cannot  by  any  means  uq
adopted  as  certain  (see  Dean  Alford's  ex-
eunus  in  the  *  Prolog,  to  2  Tim. ; '  and  Cony-
beare  and  Howson's  *  Life  of  St.  Paul,*  vol.
ii.  p.  501).  Lewin  (*  Life  and  Epist  of  St.
Paul,'  vol.  ii.  p.  392)  warmly  espouses  the
theory,  but  hesitat€»  between  Caractacus
and  Cogidubnus  as  the  father  of  Claudia.
Farrar  rejects  the  whole  theory  **as  an
elaborate  rope  of  sand  "  Q  Life  of  St.  Paul,'
vol.  ii.  p.  569).  If  Linns  was  the  son,  and
Claudia  the  daughter,  of  (Caractacus,  they
would  be  brother  and  sister.

Yer.  22.-1^  Lord  for  the  Lord  Jemu
Christ,  A.y.  and  T.R.  The  Lord  be  with
thy  spirit,  etc.  The  manuscripts  vary.  The
salutation  as  it  stands  in  the  R.T.  is  like
the  versicles,  **  The  Lord  be  with  you.  A.
And  with  thy  spirit."  It  is  a  peculiarity  of
the  salutation  here  that  it  is  double— one  to
Timothy  personally,  iirrk  rov  irpt6futr6s  aov ;
the  other  to  the  Church,  ^  x^^^  M<^  ifiwy,
1  Cor.  xvi.  24  exhibits  another  variety.
Grace  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  21,  note).  The  R.T.
omits  the  ^  amen  "  at  the  end,  as  in  1  Tim.
vi.  21.  Thus  closes  our  last  authentic  ac-
count of  this  great  apostle ;  these  are,  per-
haps, the  last  words  of  him  who  wrought  a
greater  change  in  the  condition  of  mankind
by  his  speech  than  any  man  that  ever  lived.
All  honour  be  to  his  blessed  memory  1


HOMILETICS.

Vera.  1 — 8. — Uie  last  charge.  The  words  of  this  chapter  have  the  peculiar  interest
which  attaches  to  the  last  words  of  one  who  was  prominent  above  his  fellow-men,  and
they  have  this  striking  character,  that  the  apostle,  knowing  that  the  time  of  his  departure
was  at  hand,  when  the  great  work  of  his  life  must  cease  as  Delt  as  he  was  concerned,  was
intensely  solicitous  that  the  work  should  go  on  after  his  death  with  uninterrupted
course  and  with  imdiminished  force.  It  is  one  of  the  features  of  the  holy  unselfishness
of  St.  Paul's  character  that  he  was  not  anxious  for  the  success  of  the  gospel  only  as
far  as  that  success  was  connected  with  his  own  labours,  and  was  the  fruit  of  his  own
apostolic  energy ;  but  that  the  growth  of  Christ^s  kingdom,  and  the  increase  of  Christ's
Church,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  were  things  that  he  intensely  longed  for  for  their
own  sake,  and  without  the  slightest  reference  to  himself.  Accordingly,  in  the  words
before  us,  he  throws  his  whole  soul  icto  the  task  of  urging  Timothy  to  carry  on  the
work  of  the  ministry  with  a  vigour  equal  to  his  own.    By  the  most  solemn  motives.


64  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  nr.  1-22.

■peaking  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  great  Judge  of  the  quick  and  the  dead,
with  the  exi)cctation  of  the  groat  epiphany  in  fall  view,  with  all  the  glories  of  the
mediatorial  kinj^dom  spread  out  before  his  mind's  eye,  he  ni^gts  him  to  the  work — the
ministerial  work;  the  erangellstio  work;  the  work  in  wmoh  Paul  had  apent  his
strength,  and  ungrudgingly  used  his  splendid  faculties ;  the  work  which  is  described
in  three  words,  **  Preach  the  Word.^  For  these  words  do  really  comprehend  all  the
details  which  are  added.  Gro  as  God's  herald,  and  deliver  to  the  people  God's  menage
— ^his  message  of  abounding  grace,  his  Word  of  pardon  and  forgireness,  his  Word  of
lore  and  reconciliation.  Preacn  the  Word  which  tells  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  death  to  sin
by  his  death  upon  the  cross,  of  life  to  Chxl  by  his  resurrection  from  tlie  dead.  Pteach
the  Word  of  holy  obedience,  of  charity,  and  purity,  and  patience,  and  gentleness,  sod
pMce ;  the  Word  of  like-mindodness  with  Christ,  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  Qod ;  the
Word  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  the  unerring  Word,  which  is  like  God,  and  cannot  lie.
Preach  the  Word  as  one  who  knows  its  worth  and  its  power ;  as  one  who  knows  that
the  issues  of  life  and  death  are  bound  up  with  it ;  as  one  who  will  brook  no  delay  in
preaching  it  Preach  it  with  special  application  to  the  varying  needs  of  those  who
hear  it.  Reprove  sin, by  its  searching  light.  Rebuke  offenders  by  its  sharp  two-edged
blade.  Exhort  the  weak  and  sluggish  by  its  comforting  and  animating  tmttis.
Exemplify  its  excellence  by  the  spirit  in  which  you  teach  it.  And  be  prepared  for
hardships  and  opposition  and  contradiction  in  your  work.  Tou  may  have  to  stand
alone.  You  may  see  popular  preachers  all  around  you,  leading  astray  silly  souls  by
hundreds  and  thousiinds ;  tickling  their  ears  with  foolish  fancies ;  ministering  to  their
idle  lusts;  leading  them  away  from  the  truth.  Rut  do  thou  "preach  the  Word."
Flinch  not,  shrink  not,  wince  not  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  faithfully,  stead-
fastly, boldly.  Fill  my  place ;  take  up  my  work ;  witness  for  Christ  as  I  have  witnessed ;
suffer  for  Christ  as  I  have  suffered ;  and  then  join  me  in  the  kingdom  of  glory.  Such
is  the  tenor  of  the  last  ap<.)Stolic  charge.  The  Lord  grant  to  his  Church  an  nnfiiilmg
succession  of  men  to  carry  uuc  its  directions,  and  to  fulfil  it  in  its  spirit  and  in  its
letter  1

Vers.  9 — 22. — **Orpah  kused  her  mother-in-law;  hut  Ruth  clave  unto  herj*  In  this
little  social  incident  of  some  three  thousand  years  ago,  which  may  have  passed  at  the
time  with  little  observation,  we  have  a  pithy  and  pregnant  example  set  before  as,
witli  the  usual  searching  wisdom  of  Holy  Scripture,  of  the  difference  between  friend-
Bhip  and  friendship,  reli<;ion  and  religion,  according  as  they  lie  deep  in  the  roots  of  the
heart  or  merely  lie  on  the  surface.  The  contrast  between  Demas  and  Luke  affords
another  example  of  this  important  difference.  We  may  believe  that  Demas  had  faith  in
Christ,  and  also  that  he  had  a  measure  of  friendship  for  St.  Paul.  We  need  not  sup-
pose that,  when  he  was  a  "  fellow-worker  "  with  St.  Paul  in  the  good  work  of  evangelizing
the  world,  when  he  was  his  companion  with  Luke  and  others  during  his  first  impri-
sonment at  liome,  and  travelled  with  him  a;;aiu  Homewards,  he  was  playing  the
byix)crite,  and  that  he  was  either  false  in  his  profession  of  faith  to  the  Lord  Jesus  or  of
attachment  to  his  a|K>stle.  But  neither  his  faith  nor  his  friendship  had  been  put  to  a
severe  t«st.  The  force  of  St.  Paul's  character  had  hitherto  borne  him  along  like  an
impetuous  torrent.  He  had  confidence  in  his  star ;  he  felt  sure,  perhaps,  that  the  cause
which  Paul  espoused  would  triumph ;  and  no  difficulties  had  arisen  sufficient  to  make  him
waver  in  his  purpose.  But  suddenly  all  was  changed.  This  second  imprisonment,  with
its  ominous  trial,  with  the  defection  of  the  Asiatic  Christians,  and  the  desertion  of
friends,  had  altered  the  whole  aspect  of  affairs.  Instead  of  the  triumphs  of  the  faith
and  the  supremacy  of  the  great  apostle,  he  saw  the  probability  of  a  cruel  death  for  St.
Paul  and  his  nearest  companions.  The  trial  was  too  great  for  his  weak  faith  and  his
superficial  friendship.  Without  denying  Christ,  and  without  withdrawing  fn»m  his
outward  attachment  to  St.  Paul,  we  can  fancy  him,  perhaps,  with  prote^tations  of
undiminished  love,  and  regrets  at  the  necessity  which  called  him  away,  hurrying  off  to
Thessalonica,  his  native  place.  But  Paul  felt  it  to  be,  what  it  was,  a  desertion.
**  Orpah  kissed  her  mother-in-law ;  but  Kuth  clave  unto  her."  In  the  words,  "  Only
Luke  is  with  me,'*  wo  see  the  different  stamp  both  of  his  faith  and  of  his  friendship.
Luke  the  physician  was  as  loving  as  he  was  loved.  With  admirable  fidelity  and
unshaken  constancy,  he  had  followed  his  great  master  from  Philippi  to  Troas,  and  from


CH.  IV.  1-22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  65

Troas  to  Jerusalem.  In  the  graphic  narratives  of  St.  Paul's  trials  before  the  Sanhedrim,
before  Felix,  before  Festus  and  Agrippa ;  in  his  account  of  the  shipwreck  and  of  the
arrival  at  Rome, — we  trace  his  presence  at  all  those  eventful  scenes.  Through  the  two
whole  years  of  imprisonment  he  had  never  left  him.  And  now  that  the  end  of  that
great  career  was  drawing  nigh,  and  the  clouds  were  gathering  up  and  darkening  the
evening  of  that  glorious  life,  and  various  sorrows  were  thickening  around  that  noble
spirit,  we  read  still,  not  in  the  inferences  of  Luke's  modest  narratives,  but  in  the
testimony  of  St.  Paul  himself,  "Only  Luke  is  with  me."  "Ruth  clave  unto  her."
"  Whither  thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  and  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge :  thy  people  shall
be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God.  .  .  .  The  Lord  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  if
aught  but  death  part  me  and  thee."  We  see,  too,  how  he  who  had  recorded  in  such
graphic  words  "all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  teach,  until  the  day  in  which  he  was
taken  up,"  had  imbibed  the  spirit  of  his  Divine  Master.  He  had  not  taught  others  to
know  Jesus  Christ,  without  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  him  himself.  And  so  his  faith
was  firm  in  that  day  of  shaking.  He  was  ready  to  lose  his  life  that  he  might  gain  it ;
and  he  stands  before  us,  not  only  as  the  evangelist  who  teaches  and  delights  us,  but  as
the  strong  believer  and  the  faithful  friend,  whose  example  is  as  persuasive  as  his  words.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — A  solemn  charge  to  Timothy  to  make  full  proof  of  his  ministry.  The
prospect  of  his  approaching  death  led  the  apostle  to  address  his  young  disciple  with  deep
and  earnest  feeling.

I.  The  solemn  adjuration.  "I  charge  thee  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  Christ  Jesus,
who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  by  his  appearing  and  his  kin<;dom."  The
object  of  the  apostle  is  to  impart  to  Timothy  a  solemn  sense  of  responsibility  in  the
discharge  of  his  ministry.  1.  All  preachers  must  one  day  give  an  account  of  their
stewardship.  Such  a  thought  ought  to  stimulate  them  to  greater  faithfulness.  2.
2'heir  responsibility  is  to  Ood  and  Jesus  Christy  who  are  Witnesses  of  their  work,  as  they
have  made  them  good  ministers  of  the  New  Testament  3.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Judge  of
the  two  classes  of  living  and  dead  saints^  who  in  the  last  day  shall  appear  before  his
judgment-seat.  All  judgment  is  committed  to  him,  and  he  will  exercise  it  righteously.
4.  The  judgment  wHl  take  place  at  *^his  appearing  and  his  kingdom; "  that  is,  at  his
second  coming.  5.  The  reward  of  fidelity  is  also  held  out  to  faithfvX  servants  in  con^
nection  with  the  glory  of  "  his  kingdom,^*

II.  The  duties  op  the  faithful  minister.  "  Preach  the  Word ;  be  instant  in
season,  out  of  season ;  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching."
1.  His  first  and  pre-eminent  duty  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  because  it  is  the  p)wer  of  God
to  salvation.  There  is  no  injunction  to  administer  the  sacraments,  thouo;h  that  would
be  included  in  his  duties.  There  is  nothing,  therefore,  to  justify  the  higher  place  which
Tractarians  assign  to  the  sacraments  beside  the  Word.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  the
success  of  the  apostles,  as  recorded  in  the  Acts,  is  never  once  attributed  to  the  sacra-
ments, but  always  to  the  Word.  2.  The  minister  must  have  an  earnest  urgency  in  every
part  of  his  work.  He  must  create  opportunities  where  be  cannot  find  them ;  he  must
work  at  times  both  convenient  and  inconvenient  to  himself;  he  must  approach  the
willing  opportunely  and  the  unwilling  inop|)ortunely.  3.  lie  must  reprove,  or  convince^
those  in  error  as  to  doctrine.  4.  He  must  rebuke  the  unruly,  or  immoral  in  life,  6.
He  must  *^ exhort  with  all  long-suffering  and  teaching" — exercising  due  patience,  and
using  all  the  resources  of  a  sanctified  understanding,  to  encourage  men  to  keep  to  the
ways  of  good  doctrine  and  holiness. — T.  C.

Vers.  3,4. — The  waywardness  and  restiveness  of  so-called  Christians  a  fresh  incentive
to  fidelity  in  ministers.   This  is  an  argument  from  the  future  to  tell  upon  present  duty.

I.  The  reason  of  the  apostasy.  **  For  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not
endure  the  sound  doctrine."  1.  The  gospel-doctrine  is  sound,  because  it  necessitates  a
holy  life,  and  holds  the  gratification  of  sinful  passions  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  hopes
of  salvation,  2,  Evil  men  cannot  endure  it,  because  it  is  so  opposed  to  the  corruptioa
of  human  nature,  and  therefore  treat  it  with  neglect,  if  not  with  contempt.    3.  The

II.   TIMOTHY.  F


66  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  nr.  1—22.


apoiile  foresees  the  growth  o/evU  in  the  Church,  and  therefore  seeks  to  preparo  ministen
to  war  against  it.

II.  The  effect  of  this  moral  disgust  at  the  gospel.  **  But,  having  itching  ean,
will  heap  to  themselves  teachers  after  their  own  lusts.**  1.  They  will  not  discard  the
ministry  ahsoltUely,  They  will  only  exchange  one  class  of  ministers  for  another.  But
they  will  vastly  multiply  the  number  of  their  religious  guides.  2.  The  itch/ar  novdty
led  to  the  multiplication  of  teachers.  They  were  fickle,  unsettled,  and  uneasy.  Th^
wanted  to  hear  new  things  or  smooth  things,  such  as  would  reflect  the  caprices  of  a
corrupt  nature.  3.  The  reason  for  the  whole  rahUe  of  teachers  thai  they  gathered  to
themselves  is  to  be  found  in  their  wish  to  have  their  fancies  gratified — **  after  their  own
lusts.**  They  wanted  indulgent  guides,  who  would  flatter  the  pride  of  human  nature,
and  not  lay  too  great  a  stress  upon  the  importance  of  a  holy  life.  The  sound  doctrine
was  necessarily  allied  to  a  pure  morality.

III.  The  retribution  that  awaits  on  such  a  perversion  of  judgment.  **  And
will  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  turn  aside  unto  fables.**  1.  It  is  a  solemn
fact  in  Divine  providence,  that  when  men  do  not  like  to  return  *to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  God  gives  them  up  to  a  reprobate  mind,  so  that  they  lose  all  relish  for  sound
doctrine.  2.  It  is  an  equally  solemn  fact  that,  if  the  truth  is  repudiated,  the  heart  wiU
not  therefore  cease  to  exercise  itself  abotU  religious  concerns.  The  heart  cannot  long
remain  empty.  Fables  rush  in  to  occupy  the  place  which  denies  a  footing  to  truth,
just  as  infidelity  has  a  vacuum-creating  power,  which  superstition  immediately  rushes
in  to  fill  up.  What  a  waste  of  soul ! — profitless  fables  taken  in  exchange  for  soul-saving
truth  1— T.  a

Ver.  5. — Ihe  duty  of  Timothy  in  trying  times,    I.  "  But  be  thou  sobkb  ts  all

THINGS."    1.  The  presence  of  false  teachers  necessitated  a  wakeful  attitude,  a  constant

presence  of  mind,  a  quick  discernment  of  opportunities  for  advancing  the  truth,    2.

21iere  ought  to  he  a  consistently  sober  and  uxUchful  care  extending  through  the  whde  life

of  the  minister,  who  has  to  '*  give  account  of  souls.*'

II.  "  Suffer  hardship.**  1.  If  the  minister  fears  the  anger  of  men,  lie  will  not  he
faithful  to  God.  2.  There  is  a  reward  for  hrave  suffering,  (1  Tim.  ii.  3 — 12.)  3.  The
example  of  the  apostle*  s  life  was  ever  hefore  Timothy  as  a  powerful  incentive  to  endurance,
(1  Tim.  id.  10—12.)

III.  "  Do  THE  WORK  OF  AN  EVANGELIST."  1.  Tlicre  was  a  separate  class  of  officers
called  evangelists  in  the  apostolic  Church  (Eph.  iv.  11),  whose  special  business  was  to
break  new  «;round  in  the  open  fields  of  heathenism  or  the  narrower  confines  of  Judaism.
They  preached  the  gospel,  while  pastors  shepherded  the  flocks.  But  we  are  not  to  sup-
pose that  pastors  did  not  also  **  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist."  They  had  saints  and
sinners  under  their  care  in  all  places.  2.  As  Timothy  had  been  lately  occupied  in  organ-
izing the  Churdi-life  of  Ephesus,  the  admonition  was  not  needless  that  he  should  hence-
forth devote  himself  to  the  direct  work  of  evangelization,  as  the  best  antidote  to  heresy
and  impiety.

IV.  "  Make  full  proof  of  thy  ministry."  This  was  to  be  done :  1.  By  constant
labours,  2.  By  unswerving  faithfulness  to  Qod  and  man,  3.  By  efforts  to  save  sinners
and  edify  saints,  which  were  seen  to  be  successftd.  Such  a  man  fulfils  his  ministry,  for
he  seeks  not  his  own  things,  but  the  things  of  Christ. — T.  C.

Vers.  6 — 8. —  The  nearness  of  the  apostle^s  deaths  and  his  prospects  in  connection  with
it.     He  urges  Timothy  to  increased  zeal  on  account  of  his  own  approaching  departure.

I.  The  IMMINENCE  OF  HIS  DEATH.  "  For  I  am  already  being  offered,  and  the  time  of
my  departure  is  at  hand."  1.  Mark  the  calmness  with  which  the  apostle  contemplates  a
violent  death.  There  is  no  tremor,  or  hurry,  or  impatience  in  his  last  days.  The
language  is  singularly  comi)osed.  He  knew  that  Nero  would  soon  put  an  end  to  his
life,  for  that  monster  of  cruelty  and  crime  was  even  then  striking  out  wildly  against
the  Christians.  Nothing  but  an  assured  hope  and  a  living  faith  could  maintain  the
spirit  in  such  trying  circumstances.  2.  The  apostle  is  not  too  preoccupied  with  his  own
af>proaching  sufferings  to  forget  the  cause  for  which  he  is  now  about  to  surrender  his  Vfe,
He  is  now  more  urgent  than  ever  in  his  instructions  to  Timothy.

II.  The  HAPPY  iiETiiosPECT  OF  A  USEFUL  LIFE.     "I  havc  lought  thc  good  fight.


<TH.  IV.  1— 22.]  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  67


I  have  finished  the  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith."  1.  The  good  fight  ended,  (l)
Every  Christian  is  a  soldier.  (2)  He  has  to  fight  against  the  threefold  enmity  of  tne
world,  the  fiesh,  and  the  devil.  (3)  He  overcomes  through  faith  as  his  sole  weapon
{1  John  v.  4y  5).  (4)  There  is  a  limit  to  the  duration  of  the  fight.  Death  ends  it.
2.  The  race  ended,  (I)  It  is  a  long  race ;  (2)  a  wearying  race ;  (3)  yet  a  glorious
race,  because  it  has  a  happy  ending.  3.  The  faith  preserved.  (1)  It  is  a  precious
deposit  placed  in  our  hands  (ch.  i.  14).  (2)  Errorists  of  all  sorts  are  contiDually
striving  to  wrest  it  out  of  our  hands  by  their  specious  sophistries.  (3)  Believers  keep
it  safest  who  treasure  it  in  their  hearts  as  well  as  their  minds.

III.  The  blessed  pbobpects  in  store  fob  him.  "  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for
me  the  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  to  me
^t  that  day :  and  not  only  to  me,  but  also  to  all  them  that  have  loved  his  appearing."

1.  The  reward.  '*  The  crown  of  righteousness.**  (1)  It  was  the  symbol  of  excellence
and  glory.  (2)  It  was  a  recognition  of  the  righteousness  of  the  wearer.  It  was  not
a  crown  of  ambition.     It  was  not  won  by  inflicting  miseries  on  the  human  race.

2.  The  certainty  and  manner  of  its  bestotuaJ.  (I)  It  is  laid  up  in  reserve  securely
for  its  wearers.  (2)  It  is  conferred  (a)  as  matter  of  grace,  for  the  Judge  **  awards "
it  of  grace ;  and  (b)  as  matter  of  righteousness,  for,  as  righteous  Judge,  he  will  not  allow
the  works  of  believers  to  go  unrewarded  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  3.  The  character  of  those
receiving  the  reward.  "  Them  that  have  loved  his  appearing."  (1)  Believers  do  not
dread  ChrisVs  appearance  in  judgment.  (2)  They  look  forward  with  hope^satisfaction,
<indjoy,  to  the  day  of  final  account.  (3)  All  who  love  him  now  will  love  him  cU  his
appearing,  when  they  shall  see  him  in  his  glory.  (4)  The  day  of  reward ;  the  day  of
judgment. — T.  C.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Hie  apostle^s  loneliness  and  need  of  assistance  and  comfort.  The
longing  for  sympathy  and  help  in  his  hour  of  trial  was  natural.  **  Do  thy  diligence
to  come  shortly  unto  me."  There  were  several  reasons  for  his  desire  to  see  Timothy,
apart  from  the  natural  anxiety  to  see  the  most  attached  of  his  faithful  disciples.

I.  The  apostle  had  been  deserted  by  Demas.  "Demas  hath  forsaken  me."
1.  This  brought  great  distress  to  the  apostle:  (1)  Because  Demas  had  been  a  fellow-
labourer  and  friend  (Col.  iv.  14).  (2)  Because  he  forsook  him  at  a  critical  time  in  his
personal  history,  when  he  was  already  disheartened  by  the  Asiatic  deserters  and  in
the  near  prospect  of  death.  (3)  Because  there  was  a  special  need  for  such  as  Demas
to  stand  by  the  gospel  in  the  city  which  was  the  heart  of  paganism,  and  to  show
courage  and  constancy  in  persecution.  2.  The  cause  of  the  desertion  was  more  dis"
iressing.  "  Having  loved  this  present  world."  It  may  have  been  love  of  life  or  love
of  ease,  or  the  desire  to  get  back  to  old  associations  at  Thessalonica  (probably  his  native
place),  or  the  desire  for  pleasure  or  wealth.  But  it  was  a  fatal  passion.  The  love  of
this  world  is  inconsistent  with  the  true  life,  for  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  evil — "the
lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eve,  and  the  pride  of  life."  It  is  all,  in  the  present  order
of  things,  opposed  to  God  and  destructive  to  man.  Nothing  but  Christ  can  deliver
us  from  the  power  of  this  present  evil  world  (Gal.  i.  4).

II.  The  apostle  was  now  almost  alone.  Other  fellow-labourers  had  gone  on
their  errands  of  usefulness  to  various  quarters — no  doubt  with  his  heart's  consent:
Cresceos  to  Galatia ;  Titus  to  Dalmatia,  on  the  Adriatic ;  Tychicus,  an  old  friend,  and
once  before  sent  to  Kphesus,  goes  back  there  by  the  apostle's  directions.  Luke  alone
of  all  the  ministers  of  Christ  keeps  the  aged  apostle  company ;  for  though  such  brethren
as  Eubulus,  Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia  now  dutifully  attend  upon  him,  yet  the
apostle  is  anxious  to  see  Timothy,  and  begs  that  Mark  may  accompany  him,  for
*^  he  is  useful  to  me  for  ministering,'*  both  in  evangelistic  and  in  personal  service,
— T.  C.

Ver.  13. — The  apostle* s  directions  concerning  his  dohe.  It  has  been  considered
beneath  the  dignity  of  inspiration  that  there  should  be  such  a  trivial  record.  But  the
<;riticism  is  singularly  superficial.

I.  The  apostle's  directions.  "  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  bring
when  thou  com  est,  and  the  books,  especially  the  parchments."  1.  There  is  no  evidence
that  the  cloke  was  an  ecclesiastical  vestment ;  for  tnere  is  no  evidence  of  vestments  being


«8  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  it.  1—22.


worn  at  all  in  the  primitive  Church.  It  was  a  thick  cloke  or  mantle  which  the  apostle
needed  in  view  of  the  approaching  winter.  His  death  might  bo  near  at  hand,  but,
as  its  day  was  uncertain,  it  was  natural  he  should  provide  against  the  winter  cold.
2.  It  was  a  precious  consignment  that  was  left  with  Carpus,  the  Christian  disciple,
at  Trous.  It  included,  besides  his  cloke,  books  and  parchments.  (1)  Even  an  apostle
could  not  do  without  books  for  his  ministry.  (2)  The  parchments  were  more  valuable
thaa  the  books,  containing,  as  they  did  probably,  some  of  his  own  writings,  if  not  the
Holy  Scriptures.

II.  The  significance  of  the  apostle's  directions.  1.  The  request  concemin§
his  doJce  implied  that  he  was  a  poor  9/ian,  as  well  as  exposed  to  hardship  and  cold,
2.  It  suggests  thai  he  was  partially  deserted  by  the  Roman  Christians,  Why  could
they  not  give  him  or  lend  him  a  cloke?  What  had  become  of  the  Roman  Christ ums
who  met  him,  so  many  years  before,  fifty  miles  from  the  city,  and  gave  him  sndi  a
hearty  welcome  ?  3.  It  proves  his  personal  independence.  He  will  not  ask  a  cloke
from  any  one. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  14,  15. — 77ie  warning  against  Alexander  the  coppersmith,  I,  The  chabacteb
OF  THIS  MAN.  '*  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much  evil  .  ,  .  for  he  greatly
withstood  our  words."  This  implies  that  he  had  been  at  Rome,  and  was  still  an  enemy
to  the  gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  20),  as  in  the  day  when  the  apostle  delivered  him  and
Hymeuieus  over  to  Satan  at  Ephesus.  Probably  trade-interests  may  have  inspired
the  fierceness  of  his  hatred  to  the  apostle,  for  he  may  have  been  an  idol-maker.  He
was  insulting  and  spiteful  and  obstinate  in  his  gainsaying.

II.  The  retribution  that  would  overtake  him.  "  The  Lord  will  render  to  hun
according  to  his  works."  1.  This  is  to  state  a  fact  in  Divine  provid*:nce^  quite  irre-
spective of  the  apo8tle*s  wishes  or  feelings.  2.  Transgressors  against  the  caitse  of  God
have  to  reckon  in  the  last  resort^  not  with  humble  apostles^  hut  with  Ood  himself.

III.  Warning  against  his  ways.  "Of  whom  be  thou  ware  also."  He  was  a
heretic  and  a  blasphemer,  and  as  such  had  been  delivered  to  Satan,  and  was  still
perversely  opposed  to  the  truth.  Timothy  was  warned  to  be  watchful  ac^ainst  his
devices.  It  was  no  personal  injury,  but  resistance  to  the  gospel,  that  dictated  this
counsel. — T.  C.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Tlie  apostle's  trial  before  Nero,  with  its  memorable  incidents.  I.  His
desertion  by  man.  *'  At  my  first  defence  no  one  took  my  part,  but  all  forsook
me ;  may  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account."  1.  The  apostle  had  to  inake  his  defence
before  the  emperor.  There  is  no  record  of  the  nature  of  the  charge.  It  was  probably
a  charge  of  sedition  or  disobedience  to  the  pagan  authorities,  which,  on  account  of
the  close  complication  of  civil  and  religious  duties  in  the  state,  could  not  be  explained
to  the  satisfaction  of  a  ruler  jealous  of  civil  obedience.  2.  The  saints  at  Home  deserted
the  apostle  through  fear.  They  failed  to  support  him  either  by  their  presence  their
sympathy,  or  their  witness  in  his  favour.  Their  weakness  and  timidity  must  have
been  a  sore  trial  to  the  apostle.  Yet  he  could  remember  that  his  Divine  Master  had
been  similarly  deserted  in  his  last  hours.  3.  The  apostle's  prayer  for  these  timorous
saints.  **  May  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account."  This  implies :  (1)  That  they  had  been
guilty  of  a  grave  trespass  in  forsaking  the  apostle.  (2)  That  a  single  sin,  unpardone*^
would  be  destructive  to  the  saints.  (3)  That  the  a}X)stle  had  a  deep  int^^ro^t  in  their
welfare,  (a)  He  would  be  concerned  for  the  great  weakness  of  tlieir  laith  with  its
accompanying^  depression  and  discomfort;  (6)  for  the  eflects  of  their  weakness  on  the
high  repute  of  the  gospel ;  (c)  and  he  would  seek  their  restoration  in  the  very  spirit
of  his  Divine  Master.

II.  If  man  forsook  him,  he  was  not  forsaken  by  God.  "  But  the  Lord  stood
by  me,  and  strengthened  me ;  that  through  me  the  message  might  be  fully  proclaimed,
and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear."  Like  his  Divine  Master,  he  might  say,  **  Yet
I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me."  1.  The  Diviut  supjyart  accorded  to
him.  The  secret  but  gracious  presence  of  the  Lord  delivered  him  lrt»m  all  unworthy
fears  of  man.  He  would  feel,  "if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  He  was
strengthened  inwardly  unto  all  long-sufiering  with  joyfulness;  so  that  he  could  make
his  defence  with  all  clearness  and  courage,  with  all  presence  of  mind,  and  with  all


CH.  IV.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  6^

freedom  of  thought  and  expression.    2.  The  end  of  this  Divine  support  was  that  the
gospel  might  he  still  moreftMy  known  at  Borne  and  elsewhere  by  all  Oentiles,

UI.  The  effect  of  his  defence.  "  And  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the
lion."  He  had,  for  a  time,  escaped  condemnation.  Nero  was  the  cruel  lion  out  of
whose  power  the  Lord  had  delivered  him.

IV.  The  apostle's  anticipation  of  a  still  higheb  deliverance.  "And  the
Lord  will  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,  and  will  save  me  unto  his  heavenly
kingdom.**  1.  This  is  no  declaration  that  the  apostle  shall  escape  death,  for  he  had
already  spoken  of  himself  as  "  already  heing  offered,^  (Ver.  6.)  2.  It  is  a  declaration
that  he  shall  be  carried  beyond  the  sphere  of  evil  in  every  form,  and  translated  securdy
into  the  heavenly  kingdom.  All  the  evil  influences  at  work  around  him  would  not
affect  him.    There  is  not  a  note  of  fear  in  his  last  days.

V.  Ascription  of  glory  to  his  Divine  Deliverer.  "  To  whom  be  the  glory  for
«ver  and  ever.**  1.  The  glory  is  here  ascribed  to  the  Son  of  Ood,  an  express  evidence  of
his  Divinity,  2.  There  is  no  time  more  appropriate  for  such  an  ascription  of  glory  <u
after  deliverance  from  death  and  evil, — T.  C.

Vers.  19 — 22; — Salutations  and  personal  notices,  1,  Salutations.  "  Salute  Prisca
and  Aquila,  and  the  house  of  Onesiphorns."  1.  The  apostle  remembers  his  absent  friends
in  his  solitude,  but  especially  those  wlio  gave  him  such  hearty  co-operation  at  Corinth
or  Ephcsus.  2.  He  likewise  transmits  to  Timothy  the  Christian  salutations  of  Eubulus,
Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia,  Homan  saints,  of  eminence  and  grace  in  the  Church,
yet  who  failed  to  stand  by  him  on  his  memorable  trial.

II.  Notices.  "  Erastus  abode  at  Corinth."  Probably  the  chamberlain  of  that  city
-(Rom.  xvi.  22),  who  once  showed  much  kindness  to  the  apostle,  and  afterwards  accom-
panied Timothy  on  a  juurney  into  Macedonia  (Acts  xix.  22).  "  Trophimus  I  left  at
Miletus  sick.**  This  was  a  Gentile  Christian  of  Ephesus,  whose  presence  with  the
apostle  at  Jerusalem  caused  such  an  uproar  (Acts  xxi.  29).  Miletus  was  a  seaport
of  Caria,  thirty  miles  from  Ephesus.  Trophimus  would  have  been  with  the  apostle
at  Home,  probably,  but  for  his  sickness.  The  apostle  left  him  at  Miletus,  probably,
shortly  before  his  present  imprisonment.

III.  Final  words  for  Timothy.  "  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter."  We
see  here  the  tender  anxiety  of  the  apostle  to  see  his  young  friend  before  death.  If  he
did  not  come  at  once,  the  severities  of  the  winter  might  prevent  his  journey  altogether.
^'  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  spirit.  Grace  be  with  you."  We  have  here  a
double  benediction — one  addressed  singly  to  Timothy,  the  other  to  Timothy  and  the
Ephesian  Church.  The  presence  of  Christ  would  be  his  comfort  and  stay  in  every
difficulty,  and  strengthen  him  for  every  duty. — T.  C.

Ver.  2. — The  apostolic  injunction,  *'  Preach  the  Word.**  Timothy  had  not  to  oreaie
a  gospel,  but  to  preach  one ;  and  the  "  Word  **  is  broad  and  vast  enough  for  any  preacher.
The  cross  has  for  its  circumference  all  truth,  and  is  to  be  carried  into  all  spheres  of  life.

I.  Preach  it  with  instancy.  It  is  not  a  mere  philosophy  to  interest  students  as
an  esoteric  study ;  nor  is  it  a  mere  elaborate  theological  thesis  to  be  proven  true.  It
has  to  do  with  **  the  present  salvation  **  and  the  future  well-being  of  man.  Instancy ;
for :  1.  The  season  may  be  only  now.  To-morrow  preacher  or  hearer,  or  both,  may  be
gone.  2.  The  truth  can  never  be  out  of  season.  We  need  it  always — ^in  all  places,  in
all  our  duties,  temptations,  and  trials.

II.  Preach  it  with  authority.  That  is,  with  the  authority  of  truth,  not  your
own  ex-cathedra  authority.  "  Meekly ;  **  but  not  as  though  your  congregations
were  patrons  to  be  pleased,  or  Sanhedrims  to  try  your  opinions.  Modestly;  but  with
authority ;  not,  as  I  said,  your  own  authority,  but  the  authority  of  truth,  which  has  its
own  witness  within.  So  you  will  reprove  men  fearlessly,  never  hiding  them  from
themselves  by  cunning  words  of  flattery.  And  you  will  "  rebuke  ** — for  evil  soon  spreads
if  it  be  not  expased  and  condemned  at  once— just  as  Nathan  boldly  faced  David,  and
«aid,  "  Thou  art  the  man.**

III.  Preach  it  with  exhortation.  The  teacher  is  not  to  be  merely  a  soomfal
satirist  of  immorality — a  sort  of  JuvenaL  Nor  is  he  to  be  a  lightning-conductor  of
Divine  wrath ;  he  is  to  seek  to  save  men.    He  has  not  done  his  work  when  he  has


70  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1—22.

revealed  the  Law  of  Ood  against  eyil.  Ho  is  to  remember  that  the  Christ  he  preaches
is  the  Son  of  man  who  is  come,  "not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through
him  might  be  saved.**  1.  Long-suffering  is  to  he  the  spirit  of  his  method,  Bemembering
that  humanity  is  frail  and  fallen,  the  preacher  must  be  sympathetic,  as  himself  needing
mercy.  2.  Doctrine  is  to  be  his  remedy.  The  great  revelation  of  s  Divine  SaTiouraiil
the  promised  Spirit,  the  Comforter. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Life's  evening  hour.  "  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time
of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  St.  Paul  felt  sure  that  the  enemies  of  the  ^oepel  would
be  successful  in  their  designs  upon  his  life.  Sooner  or  later  he  knew  that  the  lions
or  the  tiames,  the  executioner's  axe  or  the  cruel  cross,  would  complete  his  emithly
course.  But  as  he  had  made  an  *' offering**  of  his  life  to  Christ,  ao  he  was  ready  in
death  to  be  offered  up  for  the  Master's  sake.

L  The  apostolic  readiness.  Although  a  prisoner,  he  had  been  permitted  to  be
a  preacher  in  the  neighbouring  camp  of  Csesar*s  palace  during  his^rs^  imprisonment  at
Rome.  But  not  so  now.  Amid  the  Prsetorian  Guard  alone  could  he  testify  now ;  and
as  the  soldier  to  whom  he  was  chained  by  the  wrist  would  often  be  changed,  he  had
the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  each  one  in  turn  the  good  word  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
His  imprisonments  had  been  preceded  by  missionary  journeys,  in  which  he  had  planted
Churches  of  Christ  everywhere — Churches  which  had  become  centres  of  evangeUaitioQ
and  edification.  He  was  '* ready;**  for  his  character  had  been  moulded  by  ''great
tribulation ; "  so  that  his  soul  was  purified  by  the  grace  of  God  working  there  the  s^-
conquests  of  his  nature.  The  righteous  indignation  of  a  strong  nature— which  we  know
full  well  once  in  his  apostolate  would  have  been  aroused  at  his  adversariee — ^had  been
softened  into  a  calm  submission  to  the  Divioo  will,  and  he  was  conscious  that  God
would  take  care  of  his  own  Church  in  the  perilous  times  which  had  come.  Moreover,
Timothy  was  there  to  take  up  the  great  work  and  to  preach  the  Word.  Paul  was  ready
for  the  **  rest ;  **  and  the  "  rest "  was  ready  for  him.

II.  The  apostle's  time.  "  The  time  of  my  departure."  All  our  times  are  in  CSod's
hand :  "  the  time  to  be  born  and  the  time  to  die.**  This  was  with  Paul  no  fatalistic
creed ;  he  did  not  forget  that  there  was  a  divinely  wise  will  ordering  all.  1.  Death  toas
a  departure.  It  was  not  the  habit  of  St.  Paul  to  dwell  on  death  in  itself,  but  rather  on
its  glorious  issues  to  the  Christian.  The  faith  was  strong  in  him.  The  motto— 3fof»
janua  tnice — "  Death  is  the  gate  of  life,**  was  the  spirit  of  his  creed.  2.  But  death
was  not  the  dejxirinre  of  the  Christ.  He  was  here.  By  his  Spirit  he  was  still  working
in  the  hearts  of  all  who  believed,  llie  Christ  in  him  was  the  Christ  in  Timothy  too";
and  St.  Paul  well  knew  that  the  triumphant  chariot  of  the  Redeemer  stops  at  no  man*s
grave. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  7. —  The  battle  finished.  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight.**  Nothing  in  nature
is  more  beautiful  than  the  all-glorioiis  sunset ;  even  the  storm-clouds  make  it  a  more
magnificent  scene.  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul.  Amid  the  threatening  clouds  of  perse-
cution the  Saviour's  glory  shone  all  around  and  about  him,  and  lighted  up  the  dark
firmament  of  the  martyr-experiences.

I.  The  past  fight.  He  was  a  man  of  war  in  the  best  sense,  and  had  fought  a  good
fight.  He  had  conflicts  in  hiiuself — "  fij^htings  without,  and  fears  within."  He  had
opposition  from  the  Jews  of  the  ancient  Church,  and  from  the  Judaistic  Christians,  who
were  trying  to  pervert  the  gospel!  Kume,  that  dreaded  sedition,  looked  upon  him  as
a  stirrer-up  of  strife,  and  though  St.  Paul  was  not  an  enemy  of  Cassar,  this  gave  Csesar*s
enemies  an  opportunity  for  casting  opprobrium  on  him.  He  had,  too,  as  we  all  have^
invisible  enemies,  so  that  he  did  not  war  only  "against  flesh  and  blood."  The  past  fight
was  a  lifelong  one  with  him,  for  he  had  at  first  to  withstand  even  his  Christian
coadjutors  in  his  determination  to  proclaim  and  to  preserve  the  universality  and
spirituality  of  the  gospel  kingdom ;  he  boldly  and  triumphantly  withstood  even  Peter  to
the  face,  and  so  gave  to  the  Church  of  all  ages  the  Magna  Cbarta  of  its  Divine  freedom.

II.  Thk  finished  course.  He  cuuld  k>ok  back  upon  the  racecourse  now  and  he
varies  his  imagery.  Now  he  introduces  the  idea  of  the  Grecian  games.  We  can  see
the  eager  athlete  girding  his  loins  for  the  race — a  race  which  taxed  all  his  energies.  In
heat  and  cold,  amidst  enemies  and  friends,  St.  Paul  **  pressed  toward  the  mark."     There


cn.iv.  1— 22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  71

is  no  tone  of  finality,  however,  about  his  language  in  the  strictest  sense.  The  end
was  only  a  post  which  he  had  to  pass,  not  a  grave  in  which  he  had  to  sleep.  For  to  him
to  live  was  Christ,  and  to  die  was  gain. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  8. — The  great  reward,  "Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of
righteousness.*'  This  is  the  key-note.  Many  successful  Roman  generals  and  some
of  the  philosophers  of  the  old  world  committed  suicide  in  weariness  and  disgust  of  life.
To  live  was  ennui,  and  worse ;  for  all  was  "  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."

I.  The  future  is  provided  for.  "  Henceforth  [or,  *  as  to  the  rest  *]  there  is  laid  up
for  me."  Christ  will  not  let  any  one  of  his  faithful  servants  go  uncrowned ;  all  receive
the  prize— only  their  crown  will  be  the  perfecting  of  character,  as  the  flower  blossoms  in
its  summer  beauty.  Heaven  is  the  everlasting  summer  of  the  saints ;  and  there  *'  the
crown  of  righteousness,"  which  never  was  fully  attained  upon  earth,  will  be  given  to  all
those  who  endure  unto  the  end.  Sometimes  it  is  called  **  the  crown  of  glory,"  sometimes
"  the  crown  of  righteousness,"  and  sometimes  "  the  crown  of  life ; "  for  the  crowns  of
God  are  not  the  tinsel  of  earth^s  corruptible  gold,  but  crowns  of  conscience,  mind,  and
character — in  one  word,  crowns  of  l{fe,

II.  The  righteous  Judge  will  be  there.  He  before  whom  all  hearts  are  open,
he  whose  judgment  is  according  to  knowledge,  and  who  imderstands  all  the  unknown
and  unnoticed  conflicts  of  every  earnest  soul.  He  is  the  righteous  Judge.  Human
judgment  at  its  best  cannot  bo  perfectly  righteous — it  may  approach  to  it,  but  "  What
man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him  ? "  Kone,
indeed,  but  himself  and  God.

III.  The  universal  Church  will  share  in  the  coronation.  "And  not  to  me
only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that  love  his  appearing!*  Some  men  dread  that  appearing.
They  never  have  liked  thoughts  of  God,  and  how  shall  they  like  the  presence  of  God?
Those  who  have  lived  in  pleasure,  and  said  to  God,  "Depart  from  usl"  may  well  tremble  at
his  appearing.  But  the  true  Christian,  who  has  walked  by  faith,  loves  Christ's  appearing.
1.  We  long  to  see  equity  or  righteous  judgment  triumphant  in  the  universe.  So  much
judgment  seems  to  miscarry  now.  2.  We  long  to  see  the  Saviour,  whom  not  having
seen,  we  love ;  for  at  his  appearing  "  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he
is."  St.  Paul  was  no  rhapsodist,  but  ho  desired  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  was
far  better.— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  21. — Timothtfs  presence  desired,  "Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter."
Travelling  would  be  difiicult  then,  if  not  impossible,  and  perhaps  the  white  snow  would
be  the  shroud  of  the  apostle.  Anyway,  he  has  been  delivered  once  for  a  brief  space  out
of  the  mouth  of  that  lion — Nero.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  believe  that  this  ferocious
lion,  satiated  for  the  time  with  blood,  should  seek  to  devour  him  no  more.  But  a
Roman  prison  in  winter  is  a  very  desolate  place,  and  he  who  has  been  hurried  from
place  to  place  by  bis  keepers  has  left  even  his  warm  cloke  behind  him,  and  hopes  to
cover  himself  with  that  black  goat's-hair  skin  when  winter  comes.  Bring  the  cloke,
Timothy,  and  the  papyrus  books— old  vellum  manuscripts,  perhaps  the  roll  of  Isaiah
and  the  prophets;  let  not  Timothy  forget  them^  for  there  are  son^  of  prisoners  in
those  inspired  prophetic  rolls.  And  let  Timothy  remember  that  St.  raul  wants  to  see
his  face  again.

L  Here  is  absence  of  murmuring.  We  may  and  ought  to  learn  what  the  sospel
can  achieve.  Here  is  Paul  prevented  from  preaching,  with  arrest  laid  on  all  his
missionary  work.  In  a  dreary  Roman  dungeon  he  is  "  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  **
"  struck  down,  but  not  destroyed."  Yet  mark  this — ^he  never  suffered  one  munnuring
word  to  pass  his  lips.

II.  Here  is  presence  of  greeting.  He  would  cheer  Timothy,  and  sends  him
various  greetings,  from  the  Roman  saints,  as  we  may  see  by  their  names— Eubulus,
Pudens,  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren — send  greeting.  What  sublime  self-
abnegation  there  was  in  St.  Paul !  Forgetful  always  of  himself  1  How  like  the  Master  1
In  the  hour  of  expected  dissolution  he  is  thinking  only  of  others. — ^W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Solemn  charge  to  Timothy,  L  Charged  to  be  faithful  in  the  pb»-
FOBMANCB  OF  HIS  OFFICIAL  DUTIES.    1.  Witnessing  the  charge.    (1)  Chritt  aseociateil


72  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  [ch.  iv.  1—22.

ioith  God,  '*  I  charge  thee  in  the  si^bt  of  God,  and  of  Jesos  Christ."  Unseen  by
Timothj,  they  were  really  present  as  Witnesses  of  the  charge  now  to  be  laid  on  hizD.
The  first  Witness,  who  is  the  First  Person  of  the  GKxihead,  is  simply  designated  Qiji,
It  is  the  highest,  most  comprehensive,  of  names.  With  God  is  associated  the  historical
Jesus  with  the  Divine  commission.  While  the  apostle  is  very  careful  to  place  himself
and  other  ministers  at  a  distance  from  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.),  he  does  not  hesitate  to  bring
him  into  the  closest  association  with  Grod.  The  spirits  of  the  departed  cannot  com-
municate  with  us ;  but  Jesus,  who  died  thirty-eight  years  before  the  writing  of  this
Epistle,  is  thought  of  as  present  with  Paul  in  his  dungeon,  witnessing  to  the  charge  in
all  its  particulars  that  is  to  be  sent  on  to  Timothy.  (2)  Christ  at  the  time  nf  grtaJbuA
solemnity  for  Timothy.  **  Who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.**  Timothy  is  not
mentioned ;  but,  as  the  quick  and  the  dead  are  all-inclusive,  he  was  to  regard  himself
as  included.  The  time  was  to  come  when  Christ  was  to  return  to  earth.  Before  ius
judgment-seat  were  to  be  gathered  the  quick  (suddenly  chanc^ed)  and  the  dead  (raised
from  their  graves).  Timothy  (changed  or  awakened)  would  have  to  take  his  place
along  with  others,  to  give  an  account  to  the  Judge  especially  of  his  official  week.
(3)  Christ  at  the  time  of  greatest  joy  to  his  people.  "And  by  his  appearing  and  his
kingdom.'*  Christ  is  now  concealed  from  human  view,  and  men  may  dispute  his  being
the  Son  of  God,  may  dispute  the  fact  that  he  died.  At  his  appearing,  his  relation  to
thu  Father  and  to  human  salvation  will  be  made  clear  beyond  all  possibility  of  doubt
Christ  is  now  reigning,  but  there  is  not  a  full  acknowledgment  of  his  power.  Many
never  think  of  his  reigning  at  all.  The  time  is  to  come  when  bis  kingdom  is  to  be
established  as  it  is  not  established  now — established  in  the  full  acknowledgment  of
his  power — established  to  know  neither  modification  nor  end.  On  his  return  to  heaven
he  is  to  come  into  a  certain  subordination  to  the  Father,  and  yet  is  the  order  of  things
that  is  to  last  through  eternity  called  his  kingdom.  To  his  people  the  time  of  his
appearing,  and  from  which  his  kingdom  dates,  will  be  full  of  joy  as  the  timo  when
their  Master  shall  be  publicly  honoured,  and  when  their  own  sharing  with  him  shall
stand  out  in  its  full  meaning.  Timothy  must  not,  by  unfaithfulness,  take  from  the  joy
of  the  future  disclosure  of  Christ  to  him.  2.  Particulars  of  the  charge.  These  are
given  in  rapid  succession,  without  connecting  words,  by  which  there  is  gain  in  force.
(1)  Duty  of  preaching.  **  Preach  the  Word."  The  Word,  i.e.  of  God,  was  what  he  was
to  preach ;  but  the  stress  is  more  on  the  preaching.  That  was  his  work  ;  let  him  preach,
preach;  let  him  utter  Divine  truth;  let  him  utter  it  loudly  as  a  herald,  so  that  men
may  hear.  (2)  Season  for  preaching.  "Be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season."  He  was
to  be  ready  for  every  opportunity  of  preaching.  He  was  to  have  his  stated  season  for
preaching,  so  that  men  might  know  when  they  could  hear  the  Word ;  but  he  was  also
to  preach  beyond  the  stated  season.  His  season  was  to  be  every  season,  i.e.  within
natural  and  moral  limits,  lie  was  to  preach,  strength  permitting,  whenever  an  oppor-
tunity of  doing  good  thereby  was  presented  to  him.  (3)  Parts  of  'preaching,  "  Reprove,
rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-suflering  and  teaching."  He  was  to  reprove,  t.e.  to  expose
the  real  nature  of  sin.  He  was  to  rebuke,  i.e.  to  impute  blame  for  sin.  He  was  to
exhort,  i.e.  to  use  persuasion  against  continuing  in  sin,  and  toward  leading  a  better  life.
He  was  to  execute  the  three  offices  of  a  reprover,  rebuker,  exhorter,  with  all  Ions-
suffering — not  vehemently,  but,  as  with  all  proper  restraint  on  himself,  so  with  ail
proper  consideration  for  others ;  and  with  all  teaching — not  unintelligently,  but  with
repeated  instruction,  and  not  out  of  his  own  thoughts,  but  out  of  the  Word.

H.  Argument  DRAWN  from  a  disturbed  future.  1.  The  intolerdbleness  of  sound
doctrine.  "For  the  time  will  come  when  they  will  not  endure  the  sound  doctrine."
Tiie  sound  or  healthful  teaching,  according  to  1  Tim.  iii.  IG,  is  that  which,  founded  on
the  facts  of  redemption,  leads  to  godliness.  Men  find  it  intolerable,  because  it  binds
them  down  to  thoughts  and  courses  which  are  contrary  to  "  their  own  lusts."  2.  The
teachers  that  spring  up  for  those  who  find  sound  doctrine  intolerable.  "  But  havin^
itching  ears,  will  heap  to  themselves  teachers  after  their  own  lusts."  Their  relief  is
not  to  get  rid  of  all  teachers  (which  would  be  too  drastic),  but  to  get  teachers  af^er
their  own  lusts.  These  teachers  are  the  birth  and  reflection  of  their  own  depraved
sentiments.  Those  who  strive  to  have  their  desires  regulated  by  the  Word  of  God  are
satisfied  with  the  gospel  teachers;  those  who  have  their  desires  unregulated  (i,e.  in  the
state  of  lusts)  are  not  easily  satisfied.     "  Having  itching  cars,  they  heap  to  themselves


CH.  IV.  1-^22.]         THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  73

teachers."  They  have  a  constant  uneasy  feeling  which  seeks  to  be  gratiBed  with  new
teachers,  both  many  and  indiscriminate.  3.  The  abandonment  of  those  who  have  itching
-ears  to  myths,  "  And  will  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  truth,  and  torn  aside  unto
fables."  Their  duty  is  to  turn  their  ears  to  the  truth,  but,  as  they  have  itching  ears,
they  turn  aside  to  listen  to  fables — not  truth,  but  inventions.  When  men  do  not  find
the  truth  agreeable  to  the  ear,  they  may  take  the  wildest  fancies,  the  most  childish
beliefs.  There  were  anticipations  of  these  myths  of  the  future  with  which  Timothy
had  to  do.

III.  Charge  resumed.  1.  Sobriety.  ''But  be  thou  sober  in  all  things."  Those
who  had  to  do  with  myths  had  not  clearness  and  caution  of  mind,  but  were  intoxicated
with  their  own  wisdom.  Timothy  was  to  avoid  their  fault.  There  is  a  sobriety  which
is  germane  to  the  truth.  It  does  not  flatter  a  man,  but  keeps  him  to  the  humility  of
fact.  It  may  deeply  move  him,  but  does  not  take  away  his  clearness  and  caution.  It
does  not,  like  many  myths  of  the  false  teachers,  morbidly  excite  the  imagination,  or
leave  room  for  morbid  gratification,  but  acts  as  a  principle  of  self-restraint.  Timothy,
in  seeking  to  influence  others,  was  to  exercise  all  self-restraint  in  manner  and  matter
of  preaching  and  in  personal  dealing.  2.  Hardihood,  "Suffer  hardship."  This  is
not  the  first  time  that  he  has  been  thus  exhorted.  In  ch.  ii.  3  there  was  the  added
idea  of  association  with  PauL  The  exhortation  is  reintroduced  in  this  comprehensive
charge,  again  and  more  impressively  to  remind  him  of  hardships  that  he  might  expect
in  his  future  ministry.  3.  Ilts  evangelistic  office,  "  Do  the  work  of  an  evangelist."
There  was  need  to  remind  Timothy  of  this,  inasmuch  as  for  the  time  he  was  settled  in
Ephesus.  Paul  had  been  very  much  of  an  evangelist,  i,e,  an  itinerant  preacher,  himselfl
However  important  the  establishing  of  congregations,  he  was  not  to  overlook  the
importance  of  circulating  the  gospel,  with  a  view  to  new  congregations  being  formed.
4.  Ml  the  parts  of  his  ministry  to  he  attended  to,  *' Fulfil  thy  ministry."  He  has
mentioned  one  part ;  in  the  concluding  direction  he  includes  all.  His  ministry  was
partly  determined  by  his  talents  and  circumstances.  He  was  rightly  to  proportion
between  the  various  parts  ol  his  ministry,  giving  each  the  attention  to  which  it  was
entitled,  though  one  might  be  attended  with  greater  hardship  than  another.  He  was
to  fill  up  the  Divine  measure  in  all,  and  to  the  end  of  his  life.

IV.  Consideration  drawn  from  the  apostle's  end.  1.  His  end  api^roaching.
First  mode  of  conceiving  of  his  end.  **  For  I  am  already  being  offered.**  The  force  of
the  connection  is  that  Timothy  was  to  bo  faithful,  because  Paul  was  no  longer  to
remain  to  carry  on  Christ's  work.  Upon  him  the  mantle  of  his  master  was  to  fall.
The  language  in  which  Paul  describes  his  end  is  Jewish,  and  sacrificial,  in  its  colouring.
The  conclusion  of  the  sacrifice  was  the  libation,  or  pouring  out  of  the  drink  ofierine  of
wine  around  the  altar.  His  service  of  Christ  had  been  all  of  the  nature  of  sacrifice.
He  "  counted  not  his  life  dear  unto  himself.**  He  was  among  those  who,  for  Christ's
sake,  were  killed  all  the  day  long,  who  were  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.
There  was  now  only  the  concluding  libation,  viz.  the  pouring  out  of  his  blood  as  a
martyr  around  Christ's  altar.  The  concluding  ceremony  was  already  commenced,  in
what  he  was  suffering  in  his  dungeon.  It  had  a  painful  significance,  and  a  rich  signifi-
cance too ;  for  it  was  as  the  pouring  out  of  strong  wine  (Numb,  xxviii.  7).  Second
mode  of  conceiving  of  his  end,  "  And  the  time  of  my  departure  is  come."  The  word
translated  "departure"  has  a  common  nautical  application,  viz.  to  the  loosening  of
the  cable  that  binds  the  vessel  to  land,  that  it  may  speed  on  to  its  destination.  By
his  martyrdom  the  connection  between  Paul  and  earth  was  to  be  let  loose,  that  he
•might  speed,  as  with  the  quickness  of  lightning,  to  the  haven  where  he  was  for  ever
to  rest.  The  time  of  the  loosening  was  all  but  come;  there  on  the  pier  was  the  man
appointed  to  let  slip  the  fastenings.  2.  Feelings  with  which  he  regarded  his  approach-
ing end,  (1)  Consciousness  of  faithfulness  in  view  of  the  past.  First  mode  of  con-
ceiving of  his  faithftdness.  "I  have  fought  the  good  fight."  The  language  is  taken
from  the  games.  The  fight  is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  fight  of  faith.  It  is  the  good
fight,  being  on  behalf  of  Christ,  on  behalf  of  souls.  He  had  the  testimony  of  his  con-
science that  he  had  "  fought  the  good  fight"  By  faithful  preaching,  by  holy  example,
by  fervent  prayers,  by  patient  sufferings,  he  had  sought  to  advance  Christ's  cause,  he
had  sought  to  save  souls.  Now  the  end  of  the  conflict  was  come,  little  being  left  but
its  effects,  these  effects  partly  shown  in  his  own  wearied  frame.    Second  mode  of  con-'


74  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [ch.  iv.  1—22.

ceiving  of  his  faithfulness.  "  I  haTo  finished  the  course."  The  language  is  taken
specially  from  the  racecourse.  At  one  point  we  find  him  nobly  anxious  to  finish  his
course  (Acts  xx.  24).  At  another  point  we  find  him  conscious  of  the  space  that  lay
between  him  and  the  goal  (Phil.  iii.).  Here  he  is  conscious  of  his  standing  at  the  goal.
He  had  finished  his  course,  not  in  the  sense  of  having  done  with  it,  but  in  the  sense
of  having  done  what  properly  belonged  to  it.  He  had  followed  on  (after  the  Master),
without  stopping,  without  abating  zeal,  till  he  now  had  come  up  to  the  goal.  l%ird
mode  of  conceiving  of  his  faithfulness,  "  I  have  kept  the  faith."  He  had  been  specially
entrusted  with  the  talent  of  the  Catholic  faith.  It  had  been  his,  to  let  it  be  known
that  Christ  was  the  Friend  of  man,  that  as  Incarnate  God  he  had  made  infinite  satisfisc-
tion  for  sId,  that  he  was  longing  to  embrace  all  in  his  saving  love.  Amid  all  tempta-
tions  to  lose  it,  to  substitute  something  else  for  it,  he  had  kept  it  inviolate.  He  had
not  allowed  the  truth  to  suffer  in  his  bands ;  nor  must  Timothy  allow  it  to  suffer  in
his  hands  now  that  more  depended  on  him.  (2)  Full  assurance  of  hope  in  view  of  the
future,  (a)  Present  laying  up,  "  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  the  crown  of
righteousness."  There  is  the  idea  of  laying  up,  as  for  future  use  or  enjoyment.  What
was  laid  up  was  the  crown  of  righteousness,  %.e,  the  reward  of  him  who  conquers,  and
of  him  who  rightfully  conquers.  In  the  Christian  view  this  is  he  who  does  the  work
which  is  appointed  for  him  by  Christ.  From  that  time  forth  the  crown  of  righteous-
ness was  laid  up  for  him.  To  such  a  height  the  assurance  of  the  apostle  rose.  There
was  no  self-exalting  element  in  his  assurance,  as  though  he  had  been  working  in  his
own  strength,  or  as  though  he  had  the  deciding  of  what,  comparatively,  his  reward  was
to  be.  But  that,  from  his  experience  of  assisting  grace  in  the  doing  of  bis  work,  he
was  among  those  who  were  to  be  crowned,  he  had  no  more  doubt  than  he  had  of  his
own  existence.    (6)  Future  bestouxU,    "  Which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall

S've  to  me  at  that  day."  The  Rewarder  is  the  Lord — whose  prerogative  is  indisputable
e  is  to  reward  at  that  day — the  day  of  the  future  by  pre-eminence.  He  is  then  to
act  as  the  righteous  Judge — whose  judgments  are  all  to  be  founded  on  rigbteousness.
From  his  reserved  treasures  he  is  to  bring  forth  the  crown  due  to  faithful  service,  and
place  it  on  his  head,  (c)  General  occasion.  "  And  not  only  to  me,  but  also  to  all
them  that  have  loved  his  appearing."  He  expressly  excludes  the  thought  of  bis  being
exceptionally  crowned.  His  beinjij  crowned  would  not  prevent  others,  such  as  Timothy,
from  being  crowned.  All  would  be  crowned  who  continued  to  love  Christ's  appearing.
This  event  is  to  be  affectionately  regarded,  because  it  is  the  time  when  his  loveliness  is
to  be  fully  displayed,  when  also  his  love  for  his  people  is  to  be  fully  displayed.  It  is
an  event  which  is  fitted  to  purify  and  elevate  our  spiritual  life.  Let  it  be  the  test  by
which  we  try  our  beiog  included  in  the  number  of  the  faithful.  Does  it  occupy  our
thoughts  ?  does  it  inflame  our  affections  ? — R.  F.

Vers.  9 — 22. — Personal,  I.  Timothy.  1.  Pequested  to  come  to  Pome,  **I>o  thy
diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me."  His  formerly  expressed  longing  to  see  him
(ch.  i.  4)  is  now  turned  into  a  formal  request  to  come,  and  to  come  shortly,  unto  him.
In  the  diligence  he  was  to  show  in  this  there  is  not  the  idea  of  pure  haste,  but  of  the
utmost  haste  that  was  compatible  with  the  interests  of  Christ  at  Ephesus.  Certain
arrangements  would  require  to  be  made,  not  merely  for  his  journey,  but  for  the  carrying
on  of  the  work  after  his  departure.  But  as  soon  as  these  arrangements  could  be  made
he  was  to  hasten  to  him  at  Rome.  2.  Special  reason  in  Paul's  isolation.  "  For  Demas
forsook  me,  having  loved  this  present  world,  and  went  to  Thessalonica ;  Crescens  to
Galatia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia.  Only  Luke  is  with  me."  The  fundamental  reason  for  the
request  was  the  apostle's  approaching  martyrdom;  but  there  was  an  additional  and
special  reason  in  his  isolation  at  Rome.  This  should  not  have  been  the  case;  for
Demas,  who  had  been  his  trusted  assistant,  had  been  there,  and  if  he  had  done  his
duty  would  still  have  been  with  him.  But  he  forsook  him  in  his  hoiu:  of  distress,
which  may  probably  be  associated  with  his  first  defence  (ver.  16).  The  reason  for
desertion  was  that  he  loved  the  present  world.  We  are  not  to  understand  world  in  the
ethical  sense  in  which  it  is  sometimes  used ;  the  world  as  it  has  become  by  the  entrance
of  sin,  in  opposition  to  the  world  as  it  was  intended  to  be.  He  loved  the  good  things  of
the  world — absence  from  the  scene  of  peril,  ease  in  his  own  home — in  preference  to
what  would  have  advantaged  him  in  the  future  world — bravely  standing  by  Paul  and


CH.IV.  1— 22.]         THE  SECX)ND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  75

lovingly  ministeriDg  to  his  sufferiDgs.  The  conduct  of  Demas  was  dastardly  and  cruel^
calculated  to  destroy  his  influence  as  a  Christian  teacher.  We  are  not  warranted  in
saying  that  it  excluded  after-penitence  and  wrecked  his  destiny.  It  has  been  his
earthly  destiny  to  be  associated  with  a  black  act  done  to  one  of  the  noblest  of  men  at
a  time  when  his  nobility  shone  forth  most  clearly.  In  explanation  of  his  isolation,
Paul  mentions  without  comment  the  departure  of  Grescens  to  Galatia,  and  of  Titus  to
Dalmatia.  In  their  case  we  may  understand  that  there  was  not  desertion  of  Paul,  but
pressure  of  Christian  work  and  a  mission  from  PanL  The  only  one  of  Paul's  assistants
who  was  with  him  was  Luke,  so  often  mentioned  in  connection  with  Paul.  In  connec*
tion  with  the  mention  of  his  name  here,  it  is  remarkable  that  he  who  was  with  Paul
during  his  second  imprisonment  in  Home  only  brings  down  the  apostolic  history  to  the
period  of  th*e  first  imprisonment  there.  With  the  exception  of  Luke  there  were  no
Christian  workers  with  Paul  who  could  enter  intelligently  and  sympathetically  into
his  plans  and  render  assistance  on  the  spot.  3.  Bequeated  to  take  Mark,  and  bring
him  with  him,  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee :  for  he  iff  useful  to  me  for
ministering.  But  Tychicus  I  sent  to  Ephesus."  After  what  had  happened,  the
honourable  mention  of  Mark  in  Col.  iv.  16  and  again  here  is  honourable  to  Paul.  His
opinion  of  him  had  under^^oiie  great  change.  He  had  made  a  firm  stand  against  him
as  an  unsuitable  companion  in  labour ;  now  he  bases  his  request  for  the  presence  of  the
evangelist  at  Rome  on  his  being  useful  for  ministering.  Tychicus,  who  is  warmly
commended  in  Eph.  vi.  21,  had  been  thus  useful ;  but  he  had  been  under  the  necessity
of  sending  him  on  a  mission  to  Ephesus.  The  ministering  to  be  thought  of  was  not
so  much  to  Paul  the  prisoner  as  to  Paul  in  his  imprisonment  planning  for  the  future  of
Christianity.  These,  then,  we  are  to  think  of  as  the  three  workers  who  surrounded
the  apostle  in  Rome  as  he  neared  his  mart3nrdom — Timothy,  Mark,  Luke.  They  were
men  of  like  spirit,  to  whom  he  could  freely  communicate  his  plans  and  also  the
enthusiasm  necessary  for  carrying  them  out.  All  three  had  the  evangelistic  faculty.
If  Timothy  had  more  of  the  administrative  faculty,  marking  him  out  as,  more  than
the  other  two,  the  successor  of  Paul,  they  had  more  of  the  literary  faculty,  marking
them  out  for  service  to  future  generations.  4.  Requested  to  bring  belongings  of  the
apostle  with  him  from  Troas.  **  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  bring
when  thou  comest,  and  the  books,  especially  the  parchments."  The  apostle  had  not
lived  to  accumulate  property;  and  none  would  be  much  the  richer  by  what  he  left
behind.  He  possessed  a  cloke,  which  some  friend  may  have  gifted  to  him — a  large
warm  cloke  for  winter,  when  lately  at  Troas — since  the  previous  winter,  we  may
suppose — ^he  had  not  been  able  to  bring  it  with  him,  but  had  left  it  with  Carpus.  As
Timothy  would  pass  Troas  on  his  way  to  Rome,  he  is  requested  to  bring  it  with  him.
Paul  did  not,  in  the  spirit  of  modem  monasticism,  court  suffering ;  he  provides  against
the  coming  winter,  even  when  that  winter  was  to  bring  his  martyrdom.  He  also
possessed  books,  which  are  a  necessity  for  the  preacher.  He  who  has  influenced  so
many  by  his  books  was  himself  influenced  by  the  books  of  others.  He  also  possessed
parchments,  on  which  he  laid  greater  stress  as  his  own  compositions,  containing  records
and  statements  of  truth  in  which  he  was  deeply  interested,  as  fitted  to  keep  the
current  of  Christianity  clear  and  pure.  Timothy,  who  in  the  First  Epistle  is  charged
to  attend  to  reading,  would  find  in  these  books  and  parchments  good  pabulum  and
companionship  on  his  journey  from  Troas  to  Rome.

IT.  Alexander.  1.  Bis  injurious  conduct.  '^  Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me
much  evil."  The  fact  of  his  being  styled  the  coppersmith  seems  to  point  to  his  being
distinguished  from  others  of  the  same  name.  We  would  not,  therefore,  identify  him
with  the  Alexander  of  the  First  Epistle,  or  the  Alexander  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.
We  may  conclude,  from  the  language,  that  he  bore  personal  animosity  to  Paul.  2.  The
Righter  in  heaven,  "  The  Lord  will  render  to  him  according  to  his  works."  This  ia
very  difierent  from  invoking  a  curse  on  Alexander.  He  found  it  in  his  heart  to  make
matters  much  worse  for  Paul.  The  Lord  would  judge  between  them.  This  would
issue  in  evil  to  Alexander,  imless  his  present  spiteful  works  were  followed  by
repentance.  3.  No  confidence  to  be  placed  in  him,  "  Of  whom  be  thou  ware  also ;  for
he  greatly  withstood  our  words."  Paul  had  good  reason  to  be  on  his  guard  against
him.  We  can  understand  his  having  a  certain  connection  with  Christianity,  which
would  give  him  all  the  more  power  to  injure  PauL    But  he  had  not  the  spirit  of


76  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.         [en.  nr.  1—22.

Christianity,  when  on  the  occasion,  we  may  suppose,  of  the  fint  defence^  he  made
injurious  statements  against  the  great  champion  of  Christianity.  If  he  still  professed
to  be  a  friend  of  Christianity  at  a  distance  from  Rome,  he  was  to  be  regarded  with
suspicion.

UI.  Paul.    1.  Fir^i  d^enee.    "At  my  first  defence."    This  first  defence  was  in
connection  with  a  second  imprisonment,  of  which  there  can  be  no  doubt    The  account
of  Eusebius  is  that  "  after  defending  himself  successfully,  it  is  currently  reported  that
the  apostle  again  went  forth  to  proclaim  the  gospel,  and  afterwards  came  to  Borne  a
second  time,  and  was  martyred  under  Nero."    Some  would  place  an  intennd  of  five
years  between  the  first  and  second  imprisonments.    We  have  not  the  means  of  knowing
the  precise  charge  against  which  ho  had  to  defend  himself  on  this  second  ooca^n.
There  is  apparently  this  fact  to  go  upon,  that,  after  the  conflagration  of  Home  which
was  attributed  by  Nero  to  the  Christians,  Paul  as  their  leader  was  liable  at  any  moment
to  be  arrested.    The  supposition  is  adopted  by  some  that  on  this  ground  he  was
arrested  at  Nicopolis,  whero  Titus  was  to  join  him  (Titus  iii.  12),  and  taken  across
the  Adriatic  to  Rome.    His  trial,  which  does  not  seem  this  time  to  have  been  long
delayed,  was  yet  recent ;  for  Timothy  had  not  been  informed  of  it.     The  trial  would
probably  take  place,  not  before  Nero,  as  on  the  previous  occasion,  but  before  the  city
prefect,  who,  as  more  the  emperor's  creation,  was  supplanting  the  regular  judges.     The
scene  of  the  trial  would  probably  be  in  one  of  the  basilicas  in  the  Roman  forum,  where
a  large  audience  could  be  accommodated.    **  A  dense  ring,"  says  Pliny,  '*  many  circles
deep,  surrounded  the  scene  of  trial.    They  crowded  close  to  the  judgment-seat  itself,
and  even  in  the  upper  part  of  the  basilica  both  men  and  women  pressed  elose  in  the
eager  desire  to  see  (which  was  easy)  and  to  hear  (which  was  difficult)."     We  may
conclude,  from  the  language  here  (first  defence),  and  also  from  his  being  still  in  bonds
as  a  malefactor  (oh.  ii.  9),  that  the  trial  resulted  neither  in  his  condemnation  nor  in
his  full  acquittal.    Some  imagine  that  he  was  acquitted  on  a  first  charge ;  but  that
there  was  a  second  charge  on  which  he  was  yet  to  be  tried.    The  more  probable
supposition  is  that  there  was  a  postponement  in  consequence  of  the  case  not  being
clear,  and  that  the  apostle  was  looking  forward  to  a  second  trial  when,  on  the  whole
case,  he  would  have  to  make  a  second  defence.    2.  Assistance  at  his  trial.     *'  No  one
took  my  part,  but  all  forsook  me :  may  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account.     But  the  Lord
stood  by  me,  and  strengthened  me ;  that  through  me  the  message  might  be  fully  pro-
claimed, and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear."     He  had  not  the  assistance  which  was
usually  enjoyed  by  the  accused  on  his  trial.     No  stress  need  be  laid  on  the  absence  of
a  professional  advocate ;  for  Paul  was  well  able  to  defend  himself.     But  there  was  no
one  beside  him   to  give  him  countenance.     There  was  no  one — which   would   have
rendered  great  assistance — to  come  forward  and  testify  that  his  relation  to  the  Roman
law,  in  his  conduct  and  teaching,  had  been  all  that  Romans  could  have  desired.     It
was  his  fortune  to  be  put  in  the  position  in  which  his  Master  had  been  put  before  him.
"  All/'  be  says, "  forsook  me."    The  resemblance  extended  not  merely  to  his  position,  but
to  his  gentleness  of  spirit.     The  Master  had  said  on  the  cross,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;
for  they  know  not  what  they  do."    The  servant  echoes  this  sentiment  when  he  says,
"  May  it  not  be  laid  to  their  account"    The  absence  of  earthly  friends  was,  however,
more  than  made  up  by  the  presence  of  a  heavenly  Friend.     This  was  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  who  stood  by  him,  not  merely  as  his  Friend,  but  as  his  Advocate,  and  strengthened
him  as  such.     That  is  to  say,  he  supplied  him,  in  matter  and  spirit,  with  all  that  was
necessary  for  his  defence.     This  was  according  to  the  Master's  own  promise,  "And
when  they  bring  you  before  the  synagogues,  and  the  rulers,  and  the  authorities,  be
not  anxious  how  or  what  yo  shall  say :  for  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  teach  you  in  that  very
hour  what  ye  ought  to  say."    We  learn  that  the  defence  of  himself  was  adroitly  turned
into  a  defence  of  the  gospel.     If  there  was  a  charge  of  arsouj  it  would  be  open  to  him
to  show  that  the  gospel  did  not  encourage  crime  or  resistance  to  the  powers  that  be.
It  would  also  fall  naturally  to  him  to  give  a  statement  of  the  points  on  which  he  laid
greatest  stress  in  his  teaching.     The  assistance  he  received  was  of  the  highest  avail;
for  it  brought  his  life-work  to  its  culmination.     He  had  been  proclaiming  the  gospel  in
many  places,  and  in  many  places  the  Gentiles  had  heard.     Now,  when  his  opportunity
had  come  before  Koman  officials  and  before  a  Boman  multitude,  as  apparently  it  had
not  come  before,  he  could  say  that,  as  far  as  his  instrumentality  was  concerned,  his


CH.IV.  1— 22.]         THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  TO  TIMOTHY.  77

proclamation  had  reached  its  climax,  and  the  last  of  the  Gentiles  hnd  heard.  3.  His
description  of  the  result  of  the  trial,  "  And  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the
lion."  The  ancient  opinion,  that  the  lion  here  was  Nero,  may  be  taken  as  substantially
correct.  We  are  not  to  understand  that  Paul  had  become  personally  obnoxious  to
Nero  since  his  acquittal  by  him.  Away  from  Eome,  he  may  not  have  attracted  the
attention  of  the  tyrant.  But  it  suited  Nero,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Tacitus,
to  avert  the  rage  of  the  populace  from  himself  to  the  Christians.  As  the  result  of  that
rage,  Paul,  as  the  ringleader  of  the  Christians,  was  apprehended,  and  put  on  his  triaL
In  the  state  of  feeling  which  prevailed,  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  Paul  to  get  a  calm
hearing.  He  was  more  likely  to  meet  with  fierceness  than  with  justice.  The  Eoman
f  ower,  of  which  Nero  was  the  fit  embodiment,  was  like  a  lion  opening  its  mouth  to
devour  him.  That  he  was  not  instantly  devoured  was  nothing  less  than  a  miracle.
The  Lord  standing  by  him,  he  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion.  We  must
not  put  more  meaning  into  this  than  it  will  bear.  It  simply  means  that  he  got  a
respite.  Roman  fierceness  was  not  then  gratified;  the  lion  did  not  get  him  then
between  its  teeth.  But  Roman  fierceness,  consequent  on  the  conflagration,  had  not
died  out;  the  lion  might  again  open  its  mouth  on  him.  4.  Confident  hope  of  future
and  everlasting  deliverance,  "The  Lord  will  deliver  mo  from  every  evil  work,  and
will  save  me  unto  his  heavenly  kingdom.*'  His  respite  gave  him  this  confidence.  It
did  not  make  him  self-confident;  but,  mindful  of  the  source  whence  his  respite  had
come,  his  confidence  was  in  the  Lord,  that  he  would  deliver  him  still.  It  was  not
a  deliverance  from  death  that  he  expected,  as  appears  from  the  second  clause.  But  it
was  deliverance  from  all  that  would  intimidate  him  or  unfit  him  for  bearing  a  worthy
testimony  on  the  occasion  of  his  second  trial.  A  wicked  attempt  might  be  made  to
damage  Christianity  in  him,  as  may  have  been  made  by  Alexander  on  the  occasion
of  the  first  trial.  The  Lord  would  not  allow  that  attempt  to  succeed.  Christianity
would  come  forth  out  of  the  trial  untarnished.  The  issue,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,
would  be  his  being  placed  safely  in  Christ's  heavenly  kingdom.  This  would  be  his
receptacle  after  and  through  death.  For  Christ's  kingdom  is  already  commenced  in
heaven.  The  sale  placing  of  Paul  in  it  meant,  on  the  one  side,  removal  from  the
sphere  of  all  evil,  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  coming  under  the  highest  conditions  of
happiness  in  the  enjoyment  of  Christ — barring  what  is  associated  with  the  completing
of  the  number  of  the  elect  and  the  reunion  of  soul  and  body.  5.  Doxology,  "To
whom  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen."  Doxology  is  an  accompaniment  of
the  highest  spiritual  mood.  It  is  offered  here  to  the  Son,  as  elsewhere  to  the  Father.
For  it  was  the  Lord's  assistance  that  he  had  enjoyed,  and  still  ex|jected,  and  into
whose  kingdom  in  heaven  he  was,  by  the  same  assistance,  to  be  safely  brought.  It
would  take  the  ages  of  ages  to  declare  all  that  Christ  had  been  and  was  still  to  be
to  him.

IV.  Salutations.  1.  The  distant  to  whom  salutations  are  sent,  "Salute  Prisca
and  Aquila,  and  the  house  of  Onesiphorus."  Prisca  and  Aquila  were  workers  with
Paul,  who  for  his  life  had  laid  down  their  own  necks.  Prisca  being  mentioned  before
her  husband  would  seem  to  point  to  her  characteristics  being  more  remarkable.  The
house  of  Onesiphorus  is  saluted,  apparently  for  the  reason  that  Onesiphorus  himself
was  dead.  Appended  notices,  "  Erastus  abode  at  Corinth :  but  Trophimus  I  left  at
Miletus  sick.  \)o  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter."  Erastus  and  Trophimus,  who
were  associated  with  Ephesns,  he  did  not  salute,  because  they  were  not  at  the  time
there,  as  far  a-*  he  knew.  His  feeling  with  regard  to  Timothy  himself  was  to  have  his
immediate  fellowship.  Let  not  winter  come  on  and  prevent  his  coming;  for  his
martyrdom  was  imminent.  2.  The  near  who  send  their  salutations,  **Eubulu8
saluteth  thee,  and  Puden><,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren."  The
brethren  in  Rome  all  sent  their  salutations.  They  were  numerous  enou<;h  to  be  known
as  Christians  by  Nero.  The  members  of  the  Roman  Church  whose  names  are  given
would  be  sfecially  interested  in  Timothy.

V.  Benediction.  "The  Lord  be  with  thy  spirit.  Grace  be  with  you."  The
peculiarity  ot  the  benediction  is  that  it  is  twofold — first  to  Timothy  separately,  and
then  to  Timothy  an<i  those  with  him.  What  Timothy  is  to  have  separately  is  the
presence  of  the  Lord  with  his  nobler  part;  what  he  is  to  have  along  with  others  is
undeserved  Idvour. — R.  F.


i  V

I  [


7


I


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE    SECOND    EPISTLE    OP

ST.   PAUL   TO   TIMOTHY.


CHAPTER  I,

TREUS  PAOK

BeminiBcenoes      ...  •••  •••        5

ConstaDcy  in  the  Hour  of  Danger  ...  6
The  Apostle's  Address  and  Greeting  7

Thankful   Declaration   of  Love  and

Bemembrance  of  Timothy's  Faith ...  7
The  Apostle's  Admonition  to  Timothy

to  stir  up  the  G ift  of  God  within  him  8
The  Divine  Equipment  for  Arduous

Service  in  tlie  Church     ...  ...        8

Warning  to  Timothy  not  to  be  ashamed

of  the  Gospel,  nor  to  shrink  from

Afflictions         ...  ...  ...        8

The  Power  of  God  in  the  Salvation

manifested  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the

World...  ...  ...  ...        9

The  Grounds  of  his  Joyful  Confidence

under  all  his  Sufferings  ...  ...      10

Importance  of  the  Form  of   Sound

Words...  ...  ...  ...      10

The    Importance  of  Preserving   the

Precious  Deposit  of  Doctrine  •••  II
The  Asiatic  Desertion  of  the  Apostle  II
The  Praiseworthy  Conduct  of  Ouesi-

phorus...  ...  ...  ...      II

"The  Promise  of  Life"      ...  ...      12

The  Inner  Self     ...  ...  ...      12

A  Holy  Ancestry  ...  ...  •..      13

Quickening  the  Memory     ...  ...      13

i^tirring  the  Fire  ...  ...  ...      13

Address  and  Salutation      •.•  •••      14

Contrasts  ...  •••  ...      17


CHAPTER  IL

THKMS  PAQS

Endurance  the  Lot  of  Chri8t*s  Mini»-
tors     ...  ...  ...  •••      25

The  Skilful  Workman        ...  ...      25

Exhortation  to  Timothy  to  be  Strong        26

Admonition  to  Timothy  respecting
the  Appointment  dT  Faithful
Preachers         ...  ...  ...       26

The  Apostle  bespeaks  from  Timothy
a  Copartnership  in  Affliction,  which
would  have  its  Due  Reward  ...      27

The  Contemplation  of  Christ  an  Incen-
tive to  Comfort  and  Constancy      ...      28

The  Example  of  the  Apostle's  own
Sufferings — their  Spiritual  Motive
and  Design        ...  ...  ...      28

A  Faithful  Saying  for  Consolation
and  for  Warning  ...  ...      28

An  Injunction  to  put  Ephesian  Be-
lievers in  Bemembrance  of  these
Truths  ...  ...  ...      29

The  Qualifications  of  the  Gospel-
Preacher  ...  ...  ...      29

A  Warning  against  Vain  Babblings,
with  their  Tendency  to  Heresy  and
Impiety  ...  ...  ...      80

The  Comfort  amidst  Abounding  Apos-
lasy     ...  ...  ...  ...      ox

The  Church  in  its  Visible  Aspect
before  the  World  ...  ...      81

The  Importance  of  a  Pure  and  Circum-
spect Walk        ...  ...  •••      82


ii


INDEX.


A  Warning  against  Contentious  Ques-
tionings ...  •••  •••

The  Importance  of  Ministers  culti-
Tatlng  a  Peaceful  and  Forbearing
Spirit  ...  .«•

Culture  of  Strength

Fitness  for  BcrYice

Hardship  in  Connection  with  the  Chris-
tian Ministry    ...  •••  •••

Conduct  in  View  of  Heresy  appearing
in  the  Church    ...


•••
•••

•••


•••
•••
••I


•••


•••


TAQM
82

82
33
33

83

86


CHAPTER  ni.

Holy  Scripture  the  Strength  of  the
ManofQod       ...  .*.  •••

The  Perilous  Times  of  the  Apostasy
Characteristics  of  the  Apostasy
The  ReUition  of  the  Apostasy  to  the

Christian  Profession
The  Insidiously  Proselytizing  Habits

of  these  Apostates
The  Character  and  Aims  of  the  Ytlse

Teachers
The  Otreer  of  the  Apostle  commended
as  an  Example  to  his  Youthful  Dis-
ciple   ...  •••  •••  •••

Tlio  Downward  Course  of  Seducers  ...
An  Admonition  to  Timothy  to  abi<le

in  the  Ways  of  Truth
The    Authority  and    Utility  of   the

Scriptures  ...  •.•

The  Love  of  Pleasure
The  Hypocrite's  Garb


•••


44
45
45

46

46

47


47
48

48

49
49
50


TmxB

Corruption  Within

Grievous  Times    ..


•••
•••


•••


rAGB

50
50


CHAPTER  IV.


•••


The  Last  Charge  ...

"  Orpah  kissed  her  Mother-in-law ;  but
Ruth  clave  unto  her  "

A  Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy  to  moke
Full  Proof  of  his  Ministry

The  Waywardness  and  Restiveness  of
So-called  Christians  a  Fresh  Incen-
tive to  Fidelity  in  Ministers

The  Duty  of  Timothy  in  Trying  Timet

The  Nearness  of  the  Apostle's  Death,
and  his  Prospects  in  Connection
with  it  •..  •••  •••

The  Apostle's  Loneliness  and  Need  of
Assistance  and  Comfort  ...

The  Apostle's  Directions  concemtiig
his  Cloke  •••  ••*

The  Warning  against  Alexander  the
Coppersmith      ...

The  Apostle's  Trial  before  Nero,  with
its  Memorable  Inoiden  ts  . .  •  ...

Salutations  and  Personal  Notices

The  Apostolic  Injunction

Life's  Evening  Hour

The  Battle  Finished

The  Great  Reward  •••

Timothy's  Presence  Desired

Solemn  Charge  to  Timothy...

Personal...  •••  •••


..•


.••


•••


€8
(A
65


€5
G6


66

67

67

68

61^
6»
CD
70
70
71
71
71


74


.     I


i


1


,


I
t

t

1

I


I-

■  ■■

I"


>RI


M


f'


i  .1


1 '


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


lOITKD  BT  THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,

DKAH  OF  OLOUaUTBB;


AND  BT  THK


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


'1'  I  'i;  1  ■  S  .


C^xposftfon  ant  f^omfletin

By  the  right  HON.  AND  RIGHT  REV.
LORD  A.  0.  HERVEY,  D.D.,

LOBO  BUHOP  OF  BATH  AND  WILLI.

REV.  PROP.  T.  0R08KERY,  D.D.  REV.  D.  TH0MA8,  D.a

REV.  W.  M.  8TATHAM.


tl  0  u  D  0  n  :

KEGAN  PAUL,  TBENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


I :

!i

1  I


THE  EPISTLE  OF


PAUL   TO    TITUS.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  I.


Vcr.  1. — Knowledge  for  acknowledging^
A. v.;  according  to  for  after,  A.V.  A  ser-
vant of  God  (SoiJAoj  B€ov) ;  so  in  the  super-
scriptions:  llom.  i.  1;  Phil.  i.  1,  iov\os
'Irjaov  Xpiarov;  Jas.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1;  Jude
1;  Bev.  i.  1.  St.  Paul  also  calls  himself
"the  servant  of  Christ"  (Gal.  i.  10);  and
the  phrase,  SovKoy  Kvpfov,  occurs  in  2  Tim.  ii.
24.  But  neither  **  servant  of  God  "  nor  any
equivalent  is  in  the  superscription  of  either

1  or  2  Timothy.  "Servant"  is  a  better
rendering  than  "slave,"  as  Farrar  renders
it.  An  apostle,  etc.;  as  in  both  1  and  2
Timothy,  and  also  in  Rom.  i.  1 ;  1  Cor.  i  1 ;

2  Cor.  i.  1,  etc.;  showing  that  this  is  not
a  private  letter,  but  a  public  and  official
document,  conveying  official  authority  to
Titus  over  the  Church  in  Crete.  According
to  the  faith  of  Ood's  elect  The  phrase  is
peculiar  to  this  passage,  and  the  exact  force
of  Karh  is  not  easy  to  determine  (see  Bishop
Ellicott*s  notes,  who  renders  xard  "for,"
and  explains  that  "  the  faith  of  G^'s  elect
is  the  destination  of  the  apostleship,"  with
the  further  explanation  that  this  meaning
of  Kard  is  about  equivalent  to  "  with  special
reference  to,"  or  "destination  for,"  as  its
object).  It  is  nearly  the  same  thing  to  say
that  the  true  faith,  and  the  })erfect  know-
ledge of  the  truth,  and  the  hope  of  eternal
life  promised  by  God,  are  the  sphere  in
which  the  apostolic  office  moves  and  acts.
•*The  faith  of  God's  elect,"  etc.,  seems  to
imply  that  there  was  in  some  who  were  not
elect  (1  John  ii.  19,  20)  a  corruption  of  the
faith,  a  departure  from  it— a  faith  that  was
no  faitli,  and  something  calling  iiaeU  truth
which  was  not  "according  to  godliness,"
and  so  to  point  to  rising  heresies.'     The

'  Chrysostom,  however,  understands  the
phrase,  dAT}9«tas  r^r  irar'  cvtrc jSc/oy,  to  denote'
religious  truth  as  distinguished  from  any  |
other  kind  of  truth.  '

TITU8.


authors  of  these  heresies  were  chiefly  Jews
(ver.  10),  of  whom  there  was  a  considerable
colony  in  Crete  (Conybeare  and  Uowson,
vol.  ii.  p.  475 ;  and  Lewin,  vol.  ii.  p.  337).  Ac-
cording to  godliness  (for  the  use  of  tixrtfitia
in  the  pstoral  Epistles,  see  1  Tim.  it  2  •
iii.  16;  iv.  7,  8;  vi.  3,  5,  6,  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.
5,  and  notes).

Ver.  2.— IFAo  for  that,  A.V. ;  times  eternal
for  the  world  began,  A.V.  In  hope  of  eternal
life.  This  seems  to  be  a  further  description
of  the  scope  or  sphere  of  the  apostolate,.
which,  as  some  take  M,  is  based  upon  the
hope  of  eternal  life.  Who  cannot  lie
(aalftvSris);  here  only  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, rarely  in  the  LXX.,  but  common  in
classical  Greek.  The  epithet  is  here  used
to  show  the  certainty  of  tho  fulfilment  of
the  promise  made  before  the  ages  (comp.
Heb.  vi.  18 ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19).  Before  times
eternal  (see  2  Tim.  i.  9,  note).  The  trans-
lation, **  before  times  eternal,"  conveys  no
sense ;  xp^i'ot  cd^tnoi  are  "  the  times  of  ages
past "  (Rom.  zvi.  25),  placed  in  opposition
to  the  Kcupoi  <8io/,  or  to  the  *•  now  "  of  2  Tim.
i.  10,  in  which  the  manifestation  of  the
promise  took  place,

Ver.  3. — In  his  own  seasons  for  hath  in-
due  times,  A. V. ;  in  the  message  for  through
preaching,  A.V. ;  wherewith  I  was  entrusted
for  whidi  is  oommiiled  unto  me,  A.V.  In.
hii  own  seasons.  The  margin,  tt«otmfea«on«,
is  preferable  (see  1  Tim.  ii.  7,  note).  The
phrase  is  equivalent  to  "the  fulness  of
the  time"  (Gal.  iv.  4).  Manifested  Ma
Word.  There  is  a  change  of  construction.
"The  relative  sentence  passes  almost  im-
perceptibly into  a  primary  sentence  "  (Butt-
mann  in  HutherX;  "his  Word"  becomes
the  object  of  the  verb  "made  manifest^"
instead  of  "  eternal  life,"  as  one  would  have
expected.  His  Word  is  the  whole  revela-
tion of  the  gospel,  including  the  Person
and  work  of  J^us  Christ.  Compare  St.
Peter's  address  to  Cornelias  (Acta  x.  36).
This  "  Word,"  which  lay  in  the  mind  of  CK)d

B


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


[CH.  I.  1 — 16.


through  the  ages,  and  was  only  dimly
expressed  in  the  promises  given  from  time
to  time  (1  Pet.  i.  10 — 12),  was  now  **  made
manifest/'  and  proclaimed  openly  in  that
preaching  of  the  gospel  of  God's  grace
which  was  entrusted  to  St.  Paul.  This
£amc  idea  is  frequently  expressed  (see  Rom.
xvi.  25 ;  Eph.  i.  9,  10;  iu.  3—11 ;  2  Tim.  i.
9—11;  1  Pet.  i.  20).  In  the  message.
Sorely  a  poor  and  a  false  rendering.  *Ev
ienp^ryfiaeri  means  **by  the  open  proclama-
tion" which  St.  Paul,  as  God's  herald,
itfipv^,  was  commanded  to  make.  But  this
is  better  expressed  by  the  word  which  is
appropriated  to  the  proclamation  of  the
gospel,  viz.  "preaching."  So,  as  above
quoted.  Bom.  xvi.  25;  2  Tim.  1.  11,  and
elsewhere  frequently.  Aoeordisg  to  the
eommandment  (icar*  iwirayi^y,  ic.tA.)  ;  Bom.
xvi.  26;  1  Tim.  L  1  (comp.  Gal.  i.  1).
eod  cor  BaTioor  (1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  ii.  3;  ch.  ii.
10;  liL  4;  Jude  25;  and  also  Luke  i.  47).
Elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  the  term
**  Saviour  "  (Sctfrrfp)  is  always  applied  to  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Ver.  4. — My  true  child  for  mine  oum  ton,
A.V. ;  a  common  for  the  common,  A.V.;
^ace  and  peace  for  grace,  mercy,  and  peace,
A.V.  and  T.R. ;  Chrigt  Jesut  for  the  Lord
Jeeut  Christ,  A.V.  and  T.R.  Mj  tnie  ohild
{^yyjjffl^  T^Kvy :  1  Tim.  L  2)  after  a  oomnioii
faith  (kotc^  Kotyiiy  rriffriv).  In  1  Tim.  L  2
it  is  iv  trlarti  (where  see  note).  Beyond  all
doubt,  Alford  is  right  in  both  cases  in
rendering  "the  faith"  (see  his  note  on
1  Tim.  i.  2).  The  "common  faith"  means
the  faith  of  all  God's  elect  Grace  and  peace.
So  the  R.T.,  omitting  fxcoy,  mercy,  which
is  found  in  1  Tim.  i.  2  and  2  Tim.  i.  2.
But  the  manuscripts  vary,  and  the  critics
are  divided  as  to  whether  i\(os  ought  to  be
retained  here  or  not.

Ver.  5. —  Were  for  are,  A.V. ;  appoint  for
ordain,  A.V. ;  gave  thee  charge  for  liad
appointed  thee,  A.V.  Left  I  thee  in  Crete,
ne  have  no  account  of  St.  Paul's  visit  to
CJreto,  nor  do  we  know  liow  the  gospel  was
first  brought  to  Crete.  It  may  have  been
by  some  of  those  **  Cretes "  who  were  at
Jerusalem  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and
heard  the  apostles  spiak  in  their  tongue
*'  the  wonderful  works  of  God  "  (Acts  ii.  11),
or  by  other  Christian  Jews  visiting  the
Jewish  community  in  Crete  (note  to  ver.  1).
If  St.  Paul  was  returning  from  Spain,  and
travelling  by  ship  eastward,  Crete  would  bo
on  liis  way.  The  importance  of  the  island,
with  whicJi  he  made  some  acquaintance  on
his  voyage  from  Casarea  to  Rome  (Acts
xxvii.  7,  8),  and  the  large  Jewish  colony
there,  may  naturally  have  inclined  him  to
visit  it.  How  long  ho  remained  there  we
do  not  know,  but  he  did  not  stay  long
enough  to  organize  the  Church  there  com-


pletely. There  were  still  things  ^want-
ing" (t^  AffvorraX  as  it  follows.  This
mention  of  Crete  is  an  important  chrono-
logical mark.  The  order  of  St.  Paul's  pro-
fress,  as  gathered  from  the  three  pastoial
Spistles,  is  very  distinct — Crete,  Miletus,
Troas,  Macedonia,  Corinth,  Nioopolis,  Rome.
He  dropped  Titus  at  Crete,  and  left  'Timothy
behind  at  Ephesus.  The  Epistle  to  Titus,
therefore,  is  the  first  of  the  three  pastoral
Epistles,  and  this  is  borne  out  by  another
circumstance.  When  he  wrote  to  Titus  he
had  not  made  up  his  mind  whether  be
should  send  Artemas  or  Tychicos  to  take
his  place  in  Crete  when  he  rejoined  the
apostle  (oh.  iii.  12).  But  when  he  wrote
2  Timothy  he  had  sent  Tychicua  to  Ephesni
to  replace  Timothy  (2  Tim-  iv.  12),  and
Titus  had  already  joined  him,  and  been  a^it
on  by  him  to  I>almatia,  presumably  from
Nicopelis.  Bet  in  order  (^«-«S(op6^<rp) ;  only
here  in  the  New  Testament,  and  not  found
in  the  LXX.  nor  in  dassicai  Greek,  except
as  a  technical  word  in  the  art  of  rhetoric.
But  Zuip96v  is  very  common  in  claasicsl
Greek  (see  iireaf6pe»ffis^  2  Tim.  iit  16)l
The  force  of  M  in  the  compound  here  is
"  further,"  or  "  in  addition."  St.  Paul  had
set  the  Church  in  order  up  to  a  certain
point.  But  there  were  still  certain  things
wanting,  tA  Xtlvorra  (see  ch.  iiL  13 ;  Luke
xviii.  22);  and  these  Titus  waa  to  supply
and  give  the  finishing  touch  to.  Appoist
(KaTturri^(rps).  This  is  a  better  rendering
than  the  'A.V.  "  ordain,"  because  it  is  a
general  word  for  *'  to  appoint,  make."  Pro-
bably  the  A.V.  *'  ordain  "  was  not  intend^
to  be  taken  in  a  strictly  technical  senses
but  is  used  as  in  Heb.  v.  1 ;  viii.  3.  The
technical  word  was  usually  **  to  order."
"  The  Ordering  of  Deacons,*'  or  "of  Priests,"
is  the  title  of  the  service  in  the  Book  of
Common  Prayer.  '*Moet  to  be  ordered,"
**  shall  surcease  from  ordering,"  occur
repeatedly  in  the  rubrics.  £lders  («-^€<r-
$vT€povs) ;  i.e.  presbyters,  or  priests  (comp.
Acts  xiv.  23 ;  and  see  Acts  xi.  30,  note>
In  every  city  (icarck  w6\iy) ;  city  by  city.
The  phrase  has  a  peculiar  significance  in
Crete,  which  used  to  bo  famous  for  its
hundred  cities.  It  shows,  too,  that  Chris-
tianity was  widely  spread  among  the  cities
of  tho  island.  The  germ  of  the  episcopal
oiBce,  one  bishop  and  many  presbyters,  is
hero  very  conspicuous.

Ver.  6. — Any  man  is  for  any  he,  A.V.;
children  that  believe  for  faithful  children,
A.V. ;  who  are  not  for  not,  A.V.  Blameles
(di/€7«\T;To$);  see  1  Tim.  iii.  10,  note.  Tlie
husband  of  one  wife  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  note  *>

1  Tyndalo  contends  that  St.  Paul's  mean-
ing is  that  every  priest  ought  to  have  a
wife,  but  only  one  alive  at  the    same  time


CH.  I.  1—16.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


Eaving  ehildren  thatbeliere  (see  1  Tim.  ill
4).  Mark  tbe  importance  given  to  the
**  elder's  "  family  as  well  as  to  big  personal
character.  Not  aooosed  (^^  iv  Koryrfoplt^
K.r.A.):  literally,  not  under  an  accusation
<8ee  1  Tim.  v.  19).  Biot  (ha-arias);  see
Eph.  V.  18;  1  Pet.  iv.  4;  Luke  xv.  13.
Used  in  Plato  and  Aristotle  for  "  debauchery  "
or  "profligacy,"  with  the  kiodied  words
itrcpTos,  iurwT*6onat^  etc.  Unmlj  (^dyxntS'
raKTo) ;  ver.  10  and  I  Tim.  i.  9,  note
<comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  4,  where  tbe  children  are
required  to  be  ^v  drorcry^,  '•  under  rule,"  in
subjection).

Ver.  7. — The  for  a,  A.V. :  GocCs  stetoard
for  the  ttevoard  of  God,  A.V. ;  no  brawler
for  not  given  to  wine,  A.V. ;  greedy  of  for
given  to,  A.V.  Blameless  (see  ver.  6).  God's
steward  (oUoydfioy) ;  comp.  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2 ;

1  Pet.  iv.  10.  (For  the  office  of  tbe  steward,
see  Luke  xii.  42,  43.)  Self-willed  {cdteddn)  ;
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament  only  in

2  Pet.  ii.  10 ;  in  the  LXX.  Gen.  xlix.  3,  9
And  Prov.  xxi.  24 ;  and  common  in  classical
Greek.  It  is  always  used  in  a  bad  sense —
stubborn,  harsh,  remorseless,  and  the  like.
Soon  angry  (6pyi\oy);  only  here  in  the
New  Testament,  found  occasionally  in  the
LXX.,  and  common  in  classical  Greek —
passionate,  quick-tempered,  irascible  (comp.
Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  8).  Brawler  (irdpoiyov) ;
see  1  Tim.  iii.  3.  note.  Striker  (1  Tim.  iii.
3,  note).  Greedy  of  filthy  liLore  (oiVxpo-
X«p8^) ;  1  Tim.  iu.  3,  8,  note.

Ver.  8.^  Given  to  for  a  lover  of,  A.V.  ;
good  for  good  men,  A.V. ;  sciber-minded  for
sober,  A.  Y .  Given  to  hospitality  (pi\6^*yoy) ;
1  Tim.  iiL  2,  note.  A  lover  of  good  {pt\i-
yoBoy) ;  see  2  Tim.  iii.  3,  note  on  d^i\dya6oy.
Only  here  in  tbe  New  Testament,  and  only
once  in  tbe  LXX.,  Wisd.  vii.  22,  where  it
seems  to  mean  *'a  lover  of  that  which  is
good,"  and  where  the  long  string  of  adjectives
is  very  similar  to  that  here ;  found  occasion-
ally in  classical  Greek.  Sober-minded
((Tctf^pova) ;  see  ch.  ii.  2,  5,  and  1  Tim.  iii.  2,
note.  The  rendering  "  discreet "  in  ch.  ii.
5  (A.V.)  expresses  the  meaning  very  well.
Juit,  holy.  aIkmos  is  usually  considered
as  describing  that  side  of  a  good  man's
character  which  is  in  relation  to  his  fellow-
men,  and  ^trios  that  side  which  has  respect
to  God.  Joseph  was  BUcuos  (Matt.  i.  19)  in
his  conduct  towards  Mary ;  the  Lord  Jesus
was  God's  Holy  One  (rhy  tai6y  crov).  In
classical  Greek  the  words  are  more  com-
monly applied  to  things.  "Ooia  iral  BUaia
are  things  sanctioned  by  Divine  and  human
laws  respectively.  Temperate  (iyKparrj);
only  hero  in  the  New  Testament,  and  never
in  this  sense  in  the  LXX. ;    but  it  has

<*  Answer  to  Sir  Thos.  More,*  bk.  iii.  ch.
xiii.).


exactly  the  same  meaning  in  Aristotle,  viz.
"  master  of  one's  self,"  having  the  appetites
under  controL

Yer,  9.— Holding  to  for  holding  fast,  A.V. ;
which  is  according  to  the  teaching  for  a«  he
hath  been  taught,  A.V. ;  both  to  exhort  in  the
sound  doctrine  for  by  sound  dodrine,  both  to
exhort,  A.V. ;  convict  for  convince,  A.V.
Holding  to  (&KTex(^evof).  Holding  fast  is
a  better  and  more  forcible  rendering  than
holding  to.  It  answers  to  the  Latin  ad-
herere,  to  cling  to.  The  faithful  word
which  is  aooord^  to  the  teaohixig  is  awk-
wardly expressed.  'H  diBaxh  is  "the  Christian
truth  "  as  taught  by  the  apostles,  and  **  the
faithful "  or  **  sure  word  "  to  which  Titus  is
to  cleave  is  described  as  being  "  according  to
that  truth"  (oomp.  ch.  i.  1,  iiKfiBdas  rrjs
KOT*  thcri^uaof).  The  A.V.  gives  substan-
tially the  apostle's  meaning.  The  result  of
this  adhesion  to  the  faithful  word  is  that
he  will  be  able  to  comfort  and  encourage
believers  by  (iy)  his  wholesome  teaching,
and  also  to  oonviot  the  opposers  of  the  trutL
The  gainsayers ;  or,  contradictors  {rohs  hni-
k^oyras)  \  such  as  those  Jews  described  in
Acts  xiii.  45  and  xxviiL  19  as  **  contradicting
and  blaspheming."

Ver.  10. — Unruly  m/en  for  unruly  and,
A.V.  and  T.R.  Unruly  (^kymr^oKToi) ;  see
ver.  6.  Vain  talkers  (jitarcuox^i);  only
here  in  tbe  New  Testament,  not  found  i*A
the  LXX.,  and  rare  in  classical  Greek  (see
fiarcuoKoyla,  1  Tim.  L  6).  Kfyo\6yos  and
K€yo\oyla  are  used  in  tbe  same  sense  of**  vain,
empty,  talking."  Deceivers— (0/)«yair({Tai) ;
here  onlv  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found
in  the  LXX.  or  in  classical  Greek — literally,
soul-deceivers,  or,  as  some  take  it,  set/"
deceivers  (compare  ipptyairardu,  Gal.  vi.  8,
and  for  the  sense  Jas.  i.  26;  but  in  both
these  instances  the  idea  of  •eZ/'-deceiving  is
imported  by  the  context,  iavriy  and  KopSla^
alnov).  Here  the  word  means  **  deceivers,"
whoso  character  is  described  in  2  Pet.  ii.  14
as  **  beguiling  unstable  souls."  They  of  the
oiroumcision ;  Judaizing  Christians,  the  most
obstinate  and  difficult  adversaries  with
whom  St.  Paul  had  to  cope  (see  Gal.
passim;  Phil.  iii.  2,  3,  etc.).

Ver.  11. — Men  who  overthrow  for  who  sulh
vert,  A.V.  Whose  months  must  be  stopped
(ots  8ci  iTiarofiiCtiy) ;  here  only  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but
common  iu  classical  Greek.  **To  curb"
(comp.  Ps.  xxxii.  9 ;  Jas.  iiL  2,  3).  The
meaning  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  x^*'
yceycty4w  in  Jas.  i.  26 ;  some,  however,  assign
to  it  the  sense  of  **  to  muzzle  "  (Olshausen,
etc.)  or  **stop  the  mouth,"  which  Bishop
Ellicott  thinks  is  "perhiips  the  most
common"  and  **the  most  suitable."*    So

*  It  may  be  worth  noticing  that  the  hone*


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


[CH.  I.  1 ^16.


also  Hntber.  It  often  moans  simply  **  to
nlence"  (see  Stephan,  ^Thesaur.'),  and  is
applied  to  wind  instruments.  Overthrow
(warphrovcri);  as  2  Tim.  ii.  18,  which  shows
the  kind  of  overthrow  hero  meant,  that  viz.  of
the  faith  of  whole  families,  well  expressed  in
tho  A.V.  by  ♦*  subvert."  The  phrase,  oUias
ovarp^veiy,  of  the  literal  overthrow  of  houses,
occurs  in  Phito  (Alfurd).  For  filthy  Inore's
•ake;  contrary  to  the  apotttolic  precept  to
bishops  and  deacons  (1  Tim.  iii.  3,  8,  and
above,  ver.  7).  Polybius  has  a  striking
passage  en  the  at<rxpoKipBfia  of  the  Cretans,
qnoted  by  Bbhop  EllicottCHist./  tL  146. 3).

Ver.  12. — A  prophet  for  even  a  prophet,
A.V. ;  Cretane  for  the  Cretians,  A. V. ;  idle
gluttons  for  alow  bellies,  A.Y.  A  prophet  of
their  own ;  viz.  Epimcnides,  a  native  either  of
Phfflstus  or  of  Cnossus  in  Crete,  the  original
author  of  tbis  line,  which  is  also  quoted  by
Callimaohus.  Epimenides  is  here  called  a
prophet,  not  simply  as  a  poet,  but  from  his
peculiar  character  as  priest,  bard,  and  seer ;
called  by  Plato  0e7of  iy^p,  and  coupled  by
Cicero  with  Bacis  the  BoDotian  prophet,  and
tho  sibyl  (Bishop  EUicott);  described  by
other  ancient  writers  as  a  prophet  (Alford) ;
'*  everything  wo  hear  of  him  is  of  a  priestly
or  religious  nature  "  (*  Diet,  of  Gr.  and
Bom.  Biogr.  and  Mythol.').  Cretans  are
always  lian,  etc.  So  truly  was  this  their
characteristic,  that  KpririCftv  was  used  to
denote  "  telling  lies" — "  to  lie  like  a  Cretan  "
(Plutarch,  etc.).  From  their  general  bad
character  arose  the  line,  Kprjrts,  KamtdioKoif
Kl\iK€s,  Tpia  Kd-nra  KdKKrra ;  and  Livy,  Poly-
bius, and  Plutarch  alike  bear  witness  to
their  covetousness  and  dishonesty:  Tis
KprjTwy  oXBf  SiKaioavuriy ;  "When  was  there
ever  an  upright  Cretan  ?  "  asks  Leonides  in
an  *  Epigram'  (Farrar,  *St.  Paul/  vol.  ii.  p.
534).  Evil  beasts.  Siipiov  is  **  a  wild  beast ;  '*
applied  to  men  as  a  term  of  reproach  (1  Cor.
XV.  32),  it  implies  brutality,  stupidity,  un-
reasonableness, and,  with  the  epithet  Kand,
mischief,  like  the  French  mechante  bete.  The
*  Epigram '  above  quoted  calls  them  ATjio-rai
Kal  a\i<p66poi,  "  pirates  and  wreckerd."  Idle
gluttons ;  literally,  idle  bellies.  Tho  substan-
tive denotes  their  gluttony  and  sensuality
(comp.  Rom.  xvi.  18;  Phil.  iii.  19,  where  ij
KoiKla  is  equivalent  to  yaa-rjip  ^),  and  the
adjective  their  sloth  (apyai,  i.e.  atpyai)  ;  in  old
Greek  it  is  usually  of  the  common  gender.

Ver.  13. — Testimony  for  witness^  A.Y. ;  for
vohich  cause  for  icherefore,  A.V. ;  remove  for
rebuke,  A.V.    Sharply  (oiroTo/t«s) ;  elsewhere

on  Etruscan  vases  are  usually  represented
as  in  effect  muzzled  by  the  bridle,  and  have
their  mouths  shut ;  so  that  the  two  senses  of
the  word  would  really  be  only  one.

*  In  the  New  Testament,  yatrHip  is  applied
exclusively  to  the  womb.


only  in  2  C!or.  xiii.  10  (see  also  Rom.  xi.
22).  That  l^ey  may  be  sonnd  (see  eh.  ii.  2).
The  faithful  pastor  must  use  severity  when
it  is  necessary  to  the  spiritual  health  of  the
flock,  just  as  the  skilful  surgeon  Yuea  the
knife  to  save  the  patient's  life.

Ver.  14. —  Who  for  that,  A.V. ;  turn  away
for  turn,  A.V.  Jewish  fiibles  (see  1  Tim.
i.  4 ;  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4,  whore  the  Jewish
origin  of  the  fables  is  implied,  though  not
so  distinctly  stat^  as  here).  Commanii-
ments  of  men  {irroKaii  ay$pdhr»p) ;  80  in  CoL
ii.  22  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  precepts
"touch  not,"  "taste  not"  (originating  with
the  Judaizing  teachers),  as  t&  4yTd\fiara  vol
SiSao-KoAiaf  r&if  hfBpirr^v  (see  following
note).  Tnming  away  from  (d«-o<rrp«^fi^m»r);
see  2  Tim.  i.  15,  note.

Ver.  15.— To  for  unto,  A.V.  (twice):
nothing  is  for  is  nothing,  A.  V. ;  both  for  eti«ii,
A.V. ;  iheir  conscience  for  oonsct^tioe,  A.V.;
are  for  is,  AV.  To  the  pure,  etc.  This
allusion  shows  clearly  that  the  **  command-
ments of  men,"  here  condemned,  are  of  the
same  kind  as  those  referred  to  in  ttie  ahove-
quoted  passage  in  the  Golossians.  We  learn
also  from  Rom.  xiv. ;  1  Cor.  viii. ;  and  else-
where, what  were  the  kind  of  questions
which  agitated  the  Judaizing  Christians.
But  St.  Paul  in  a  few  wise  words  shows  the
utter  worthlessness  of  such  controyersi^.
"  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  •«  There
is  nothing  from  without  a  man,"  said  our
Lord,  "that  entering  into  him  can  defile
him"  (IVIark  vii.  15);  "Neither  if  we  eat
are  we  the  better,  neither  if  we  eat  not
are  wo  the  worse "  (1  Cor.  viii.  8) ;  "  The
kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and*  drink,
but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in
the  Holy  Ghost"  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  But
unto  those  that  are  defiled  by  what  comf^
from  within  them,  and  have  no  faith
(Rom.  xiv.  23),  nothing  is  pure.  Their
mind  and  conscience,  being  defiled  defile
everything  they  do.  The  words  ]ca0ap6p
and  fiiaiyta  arc  the  proper  words  for  cere-
monial "cleanness"  and  ''defilement"  re-
spectively.

Ver.  Hi.— By  their  for  in,  A.V.  They  pro-
fess that  they  know  God  (comp.  Rom.  iiT  17
—20).  The  arrogant  claim  to  be  (Jod's
people  and  to  superior  holiness,  while  all
the  while  they  were  denying  God  by  their
evil  deeds,  and  brincring  dishonour  upon
his  Name  among  the  Gentiles,  was  a  marked
feature  of  the  Jews  in  St.  PauPs  time  (comp
2  IHm.  iii.  5).  Abominable  C^S^j^vktoI);
objects  or  causes  of  disgust;  only  liere  in
the  New  Testament,  but  found  in  tho  LXX.
But  fiBt\vyfxa  and  ^ZtXvcraofxai  are  not  un-
common. Beprobate  (&8({/ct^oi) ;  as  2  Tim  iii
8  (where  see  note).  This  picture  of  the
circumcision  is  indeed  sad  (comp  1  Thess.
ii.  15, 16;  Acts  xxviii.  25—28).


CH.1. 1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  ministry  ofcltaracter.  The  pastoral  Epistles,  and  this  cliapter  in
particular,  bring  prominently  before  ns  the  Christian  ministry  as  of  commanding
importance  in  the  scheme  of  Christianity.  Christianity,  the  sum  and  substaDce  of
Christian  doctrine,  was  to  be  diffused  among  all  nations ;  and  the  great  instrument  for
maintaining  it  in  efficiency  and  power  was  to  be  the  ministry.  But  in  describing  the
ministerial  qualifications  the  apostle  lays  so  much  stress  upon  the  personal  character  of
the  ministers,  as  to  make  us  feel  that  the  Christian  ministry  of  which  he  speaks  is  a
ministry  of  character  as  much  as  of  preaching,  or  teaching,  or  any  other  ministration.
Looking  at  this  side  of  the  ministry,  we  learn  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  the  great  Head
of  the  Church,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  that  his  doctrine  and  the  truth  which  ne  brought
down  from  heaven  should  be  presented  to  the  world  in  the  lives  and  characters  of
his  accredited  servants  and  ambassadors.  Those'servants  of  his  were  to  be  scattered
among  the  people,  "  in  every  city,"  and  every  village,  where  the  gospel  message
had  been  brought,  and  the  people  were  not  only  to  hear  from  their  lips,  but  were
to  see  in  their  lives,  the  nature  and  practical  effect  of  the  doctrine  delivered  to  them.
And,  in  truth,  the  eloquence  of  holy,  loving,  and  self-denying  lives  is  more  persua-
sive than  that  of  any  words,  however .  good  and  however  beautiful  We  feel,  even
after  reading  the  words  of  the  Master  himself,  and  having  felt  their  power,  that
there  is  a  still  greater  power  in  that  life  and  death,  wherein  were  embodied,  in  all  the
beauty  of  love  and  goodness,  the  sublime  precepts  which  he  taught.  While,  therefore,
we  see  the  importance  of  a  learned  clergy,  an  eloquent  clergy,  an  orthodox  clergy,  and
withal  a  clergy  of  business  habits,  we  shall  do  well  to  keep  steadily  in  view  the
commanding  and  essential  quality  of  high  and  consistent  Christian  character,  showing
itself  in  all  the  details  of  the  daily  intercourse  of  life.  The  clergy  of  the  Church  should
be  the  epistle  of  Christ,  known  and  read  of  all  men  in  every  place  where  they  are
located,  as  bishops,  priests,  or  deacons.  In  theii  manner  of  life  and  whole  conversation
should  be  seen  worked  out  in  practice  what  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
intended  to  effect  in  the  renewal  of  human  nature.  Their  conduct  and  character  should
be  a  living  commentary  on  the  Word  of  God  which  they  preach  to  the  people,  and  their
silent  argument  for  pressing  it  upon  the  people's  acceptance.  And  hence  we  may
deduce  the  importance  of  a  resident  ministry.  The  functions  of  preaching  and  minis-
tering the  sacraments  may  be  performed  by  strangers.  The  effectual  sermon  of  a  holy
Christian  life  requires  ''  elders"  resident  amidst  the  community  to  whom  they  preach.
The  pure  morals,  the  well-ordered  families,  the  meek  and  patient  behaviour  under
provocation,  the  kindly  genial  sympathies,  the  fair  and  equitable  dealing,  the  sober
gravity,  the  self-control  and  self-mastery  of  the  servant  of  God,  must  be  seen  near  in
the  daily  intercourse  of  life,  to  be  judged  of  and  appreciated.  It  is  the  glory  of  the
English  Church  that,  by  means  of  her  endowments,  she  is  able  to  place  a  minister  of
Christ  to  reside  in  every  parish.  Let  every  such  minister  remember  that  the  interests
of  the  Christian  faith  are  bound  up  with  his  own  manner  of  life  and  that  of  his  house-
hold, and  do  his  utmost  endeavour  that  that  life  may  be  a  faithful  reflection  of  the
grace  of  God,  which  teaches  men  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world,  while  we  wtdt  for  the  appearing
of  the  glory  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—4. — Apostolic  address  and  salutation.  The  full  representation  which  the
apostle  gives  of  bis  aix)stolic  office  is  designed  at  once  to  mark  the  authority  by  which
he  gives  the  instructions  that  follow,  and  to  serve  as  an  index  to  the  contents  of  the
whole  Epistle.

I.  The  claims  of  the  apostle.  "  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus
Christ."  1.  He  is  servant  a  of  God,  Not,  as  he  often  describes  himself,  "  a  servant  of
Jesus  Christ"  The  title  seems  to  mark  the  relation  (1)  of  one  who  had  once  been  a
slave  to  sin,  but,  having  become  free  through  Christ  tfesus,  was  still,  so  far  as  obliga-
tion, service,- and  life  were  concerned,  a  servant  of  God ;   (2)  his  devotion  to  God  after


6  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa  [oh.  i.  1— 1ft.

the  type  of  Old  Testament  service,  Moses  and  the  prophets  being  pre-eminently  called
the  '*  servants  of  God  ; "  (3)  his  ministry  in  the  service  of  a  royal  Master  (Matt.  XTiiL
23 — 32),  who  makes  him  a  member  of  his  household,  a  pillar  of  his  temple,  a  sharer  of
his  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21).  2.  lie  is  an  apostle  of  Jesua  Christ,  This  is  a  more  exact
definition  of  his  office.  (1)  He  had  his  commission  and  his  doctrine  from  him.  (2)  He
had  all  the  signs  and  proofs  of  an  apostle  in  him,  for  he  had  received  power  to  work
miracles  as  well  as  to  declare  Divine  truth.  (3)  It  is,  therefore,  vain  and  deceptive  for
any  to  assume  the  name  who  cannot  show  the  signs  of  an  apostle.

II.  The  end  of  the  apostolic  office.  "  For  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  and  the  fall
knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  after.'godliness.**  It  was  desired  for  the  fartherance
of  the  faith  and  knowledge  of  believers.  1.  The  apostle  fdi  that  he  tuas  appointed  to
preach  the  doctrine  offaith^  and  to  he  the  instrument  of  bringing  men  to  the  <ifedienee  <f
faith,  (Rom.  i.  5 ;  x.  17.)  (1)  Therefore  all  claims  to  apostolio  authority  by  men
who  have  abandoned  the  faith,  or  overlaid  it  with  error  and  superstition,  are  to  be
rejected  by  the  Church  of  God.  (2)  All  true  £aith  rests  on  the  Divine  foreordination;
for  it  is  "  the  faith  of  GKxi's  elect."  Election  is,  therefore,  not  to  be  regarded  as  equi-
valent to  faith,  much  less  as  its  consequence  (Eph.  L  4) ;  for  it  is  its  true  cause.  The
Father  is  the  Elector,  as  the  Son  is  the  Redeemer,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Sanctifier.
2.  The  apostolic  office  uxu  designed  likewise  to  impart  thefuU  Jenowledge  €^  the  trvik
which  is  afltr  godliness"  (1)  Truth,  is  the  object — the  Word  of  truth,  which  comes
from  him  who  is  the  Grod  of  truth,  who  is  Christ  the  Truth  itself,  who  is  the  Spirit  of
truth.  It  was  this  truth  that  the  apostle  preached  with  all  faithfulness  and  clearness.
(2)  Knowledge  is  the  subjective  aspect  of  it,  and  becomes  oars  through  faith.  (3)  The
fruit  of  this  truth  is  "godliness.  It  is  designed  to  promote  holiness  of  life  and
character.     It  is  impossible  that  this  knowledge  can  be  morally  unfruitful.

III.  The  basis  of  this  truth.  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  Ife,
promised  before  eternal  times."  The  ground  and  condition  of  this  truth  is  the  hope  of
eternal  life,  which  is  the  animating  principle  at  once  of  the  apostle  and  of  the  Church
of  God.  1.  The  principle  of  Tiope,  The  word  occurs  fifty-two  times  in  the  New
Testament,  and  is  always  connected  with  God,  with  the  Mediator,  and  with  believers.

(1)  Its  author  is  God,  who  is  "  the  God  of  hope"  (Rom.  xv.  13),  who  has  given  us  "a
good  hope  through  grace**  (2  Thess.  ii.  16),  and  given  us  Christ  as  "our  Hope,**  even
**  the  Hope  of  glory."  (2)  Hope  connects  us  with  the  future  as  memory  with  the  past,
and  is  intended  to  neutralize  the  materializing  influence  of  earthly  life  around  us.
Thus,  God  has  given  us  prophecy  and  promise  to  gratify  the  wants,  the  longin<^s,  and
the  anticipations  of  the  human  soul.  2.  The  object  and  sum  of  Christian  hope,
"  Eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  before  eternal  times."  (1)  This  life
is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  "  for  the  free  gilt  of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  **
(Rom.  vi.  23).  But  it  includes  (a)  the  full  fruition  of  God  to  all  eternity ;  (h)  the
fellowship  of  the  Redeemer's  throne ;  (c)  the  fulness  of  joy ;  {d)  likeness  to  Christ.

(2)  It  is  eternal  life,  without  a  break  in  the  happy  continuity  of  bliss ;  for  it  is  life  with-
out sin  or  death  to  mar  its  perfectness.  It  is  eternal,  because  he  is  at  once  its  Author
and  Support,  as  being  that  "Eternal  Lile  that  was  with  the  Father"  (1  John  i.  2).

(3)  The  age  of  this  promise.  "  Before  eternal  times."  (a)  This  is  not  merelj'  before  the
times  of  the  world,  or  (h)  before  the  world  began,  (c)  but  really  in  the  eternitv
past ;  l>ecause  the  reference  is  not  to  the  covenants  of  Adam  or  Abraham,  but  to  the

covenant  of  redemption  in  Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  (2  Tim.  i.  9 11).

The  apostle  does  not  merely  say  that  the  promise  of  eternal  life  was  the  result  of  a
Divine  purpose  fixed  from  eternity,  but  that  it  was  made  from  eternity  to  believers,
because  it  was  made  to  Christ,  whose  members  they  are.  It  is  impossible  to  under-
stand the  meaning  of  these  words  without  reference  to  the  federal  transaction  between
the  Father  and  the  Son  (Zech.  vi.  13).  This  was  the  very  "  promise  of  life  in  Christ
Jesus  "  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  i.  1).  (4)  The  guarantee  for
the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  **  God,  that  cannot  lie,  promised  **  it.  God  gave  both  a
promise  and  an  oath  to  Abraham,  that  **  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was
impossible  that  God  should  lie,"  we  should  have  a  sure  hope  (Heb.  vi.  18).

IV.  The  manifestation  of  this  ancient  promise.  "  But  in  his  own  seasons  mmni-
fested  his  Word  in  the  message  wherewith  I  was  entrusted,  according  to  the  command-
ment of  God  our  Savioui*.**     1.  The  manifestation  t(\is  made  in  God's  oum  seoions^


CH.I.1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  i

(1)  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  it  was  made  only  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  for  it  was  made
by  the  other  apostles ;  and  ages  before  their  day  it  was  manifested,  with  more  or  less
clearness,  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  (2)  But  the  Apostle  Paul  was  one  of
those  specially  entrusted  with  the  Word,  and  specially  with  '*  the  revelation  of  the
mystery  hid  for  ages*'  (Rom.  xvi.  25).  2.  The  Word  of  God,  and  the  whole  order  and
fulness  of  the  Church,  are  io  he  regarded  as  the  unfolding  of  the  ancient  promise  of
eternal  life,  3.  The  Word  is  made  manifest  by  preaching,  (Rom.  x.  17.)  Preaching
is  an  institute  peculiar  to  Christianity,  which  it  formed  for  itself  as  its  chosen  mode
of  utterance.  Christianity  is  not  a  philosophy  or  a  thaumaturgy.  It  is  propagated,
not  by  priests,  but  by  preachers.  There  are  no  priests  in  Christianity  but  the  one  High
Priest  of  our  profession,  who,  if  he  were  on  earth,  would  not  be  a  priest  (Heb.  viiL  4),
4.  The  preaching  is  done  in  virtue  of  a  Divine  aUl  or  commission,  *'  Wherewith  I  was
entrusted  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour."  All  the  ministries  of  the
New  Testament,  high  and  low,  are  committed  as  trusts  to  the  Church.  Therefore  a
minister  ought  to  have  a  true  call  from  on  high  before  accepting  the  responsibilities
of  office.  The  apostle  was  very  emphatic  in  announcing  his  call  to  the  apostleship,
not  as  in  any  way  due  to  his  own  will  or  wish,  but  to  Divine  command.  It  was  the
command  of  "  God  his  Saviour ;  "  not  the  Son,  but  the  Father — the  usual  phrase  of
the  apostle  being  "  according  to  the  will  of  God  "  (2  Tim.  i.  1).

V.  The  apostolic  salutation.  "  To  Titus,  my  true  son  after  the  common  faith.**  i
1.  The  person  thus  addressed.  (1)  Titus  was  a  pure  Gentile.  It  is  interesting  to  remem*
ber  that  the  dearest  friends  and  companions  of  the  apostle's  life  were  Grentiles,  and
not  Jews — such  as  Luke,  Titus,  and  Timothy,  who  was  half-Gentile.  Was  this  leaning
caused  in  any  degree  by  the  distrusts  and  enmities  with  which  he  was  pursued  through
life  by  his  Jewish  countrymen  ?  (2)  Titus  was,  like  Timothy,  one  of  the  apostle^s
converts.  This  fact  would  endear  him  to  the  apostle's  heart.  He  was  a  genuine  son
of  the  apostle  in  virtue  of  the  faith  common  to  all  Christians;  implying  that  (a)  there
is  but  one  faith  (Eph.  iv.  5) ;  (b)  one  Object  of  faith,  Jesus  Christ ;  (c)  one  end  of  faith,
eternal  life.  (3)  Titus  was  evidently  one  of  the  apostle's  most  trusty  disciples,  though
he  was  less  a  companion  than  Timothy,  and  less  allied  to  him  on  the  terms  of  an
affectionate  intimacy.  Titus  was  firm,  strong,  and  capable,  with  adaptability  in  the
way  of  administration  and  of  repressing  moral  disorders  among  distracted  or  disturbed
communities.  2,  The  greeting,  **  Grace  and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  (1)  The  blessings  sought  for  Titus.  "  Grace  and  peace.*
(a)  Grace  is  the  full  and  eternal  fountain  of  the  goodness  of  God,  opened  to  the  wants
of  men  in  the  blessed  gospel;  (b)  peace  is  the  blessing  of  the  saints,  to  which  they  are
called  in  one  body,  and  the  safeguard  of  heart  and  mind  through  him  who  is  their
Peace  (Phil.  iv.  7).  (2)  The  source  of  these  blessings,  alike  God  the  Father  and  God
the  Son,  as  being  equally  the  Author  and  Giver  of  all  spiritual  blessinjrs.  The  whole
structure  of  the  Epistle  is  based  on  the  doctrine  of  the  Deity  of  Christ — T.  C.

Ver.  5. — Titus's  commission  in  Crete.  Its  object  was  principally  to  supply  the
deficiencies  in  the  Church  organization  of  the  island.

I.  The  scene  of  Titus's  labours — Crete.  1.  Its  situation  and  history.  It  lies
almost  equidistant  from  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa;  a  large  and  populous  island  of  the
Mediterranean  ;  the  Caphtor  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  now  known  as  Candia.  It  was
a  place  of  ancient  civilization,  noted  for  its  hundred  cities,  and  became  a  Roman  posses-
sion about  seventy  years  before  Christ.  2.  T?ie  foundation  of  the  Cretan  Church,
This  probably  occurred  immediately  after  Pentecost,  for  it  is  said  that  men  of  Crete
were  present  on  that  occasion  (Acts  ii.  11),  and  we  know  that  the  island  abounded  with
Jews  of  wealth  and  influence.  The  false  teachers  in  Crete  were  Judaists.  There  are
several  reasons  for  believing  that  the  Church  must  have  been  a  considerable  time  in
existence.  Time  must  be  allowed  for  the  development  of  heresy.  Time  must  likewise
be  allowed  for  the  growth  of  character  and  reputation,  so  that  Titus,  guided  by  the
Church,  might  have  no  difficulty  in  selecting  the  right  class  of  office-bearers.  The
fact,  likewise,  that  the  bishops  were  to  "  have  believing  children  "  affords  a  strong  pre-
sumption that  the  Church  must  have  been  in  existence  at  least  twenty  or  thirty  years.
3.  Its  existence  without  organization.  The  Church  in  Crete  seems  to  have  had  ^no
regular  parties,  the  ordinances  were  probably  in  confusion,  and  though  the  power  of


6  THE  EnSTLB  TO  TITUS.  Ich.  i.  1—11


beatbenism  bad  been  broken  in  one  of  its  qnafii-ttrongholdt,  the  Christians  had  not
utterly  escaped  contamination.  Tbe  state  of  matters  in  tbis  interesting  island  pniTm
(1)  that  there  may  be  a  true  Church  where  there  is  no  regular  ministiy.  Thus  there
is  no  foundation  for  the  theory  that  the  clergy  are  the  Church,  or  even  essential  to  iU
existence,  though  they  are  necessary  to  its  edification.  ^)  It  proyes  also  that  a  regolar
ministry  is  necessary.  Therefore  the  arguments  of  Darbyites  go  for  nothing.  A
ministry  was  specially  needed  to  check  the  unruly  and  vain  talkers  in  Crete,  as  iml  as
to  apply  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  gospel,  as  well  as  a  wholesome  Christian
discipline  to  the  cure  of  moral  disorders.

IL  The  scope  of  Titus's  labours.  "  For  this  cause  left  I  thco  in  Crete,  that  thofu
mightest  set  in  order  the  thiugs  that  were  wanting,  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city."
The  apostle  had  himself  successfully  laboured  in  the  island,  and  the  gospel  had  in  con-
sequence spread  among  many  of  its  cities.  But  he  had  been  summoned  away  from  tbe
scene  before  he  could  do  anything  to  organize  ,the  community  or  regulate  its  Tsried
Church  life.  He  therefore  sent  Titus  as  his  delegate  to  discharge  this  duty.  1.  TUut
vxu  to  set  in  order  the  things  that  loere  wanting.  As  Crete  was  a  most  luxurious
and  corrupt  place,  as  heathenism  affected  its  whole  family  and  public  life,  as  the
Church  had  got  into  disorder  through  its  contiguity  to  paganism,  or  was  unable  to
organize  itself  strongly  in  the  face  of  a  hostile  world,  Titus  was  left  behind  to  fix  the
torder  and  circumstances  of  public  worship,  including  the  celebration  of  Christian
ordinances,  to  establish  a  godly  discipline  which  would  purify  family  life,  to  instraet
the  Cretans  more  fully  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  which  were  attacked  by  design-
ing Judaists,  and  generally  to  superintend  the  development  of  all  matters  affecting
Christian  faith  and  practice.  2.  lie  was  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  (1)  The  elders
were  tbe  pastors  or  teachers  of  congregations,  and  were  so  called  on  account  of  their
age  and  gravity  of  manner.  They  were  also  called  "  bishops "  (ver.  2 ;  Acts  xx.
17,  28),  on  account  of  their  office  as  overseers  of  the  flock.  It  is  now  universally
conceded  that  these  names  are  but  diflerent  designations  of  the  same  ofifice-bearers.
We  read  in  Scripture  of  "  bishops  and  deacons  "  (Phil.  i.  1),  but  never  of  "  bishops  and
elders,"  simply  because  bishops  and  deacons  represent  two  different  orders,  but  bishops
and  elders  do  not.  These  bishops  were  simply  the  pastors  of  congregations.  (2)  There
were  several  elders  in  each  congregation.  Titus  was  "  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city,"
that  is,  a  plurality  of  elders  for  each  Church.  There  was  certainly  a  plurality  in
several  Churches  (Acts  xiv.  23 ;  xv.  22).  (3)  These  elders  were  to  be  ordained  or
solemnly  set  apart  to  their  oflicc.  (a)  The  word  "ordain"  throws  no  light  on  the
question  whether  the  appointment  took  place  with  or  without  the  co-operation  of  tbe
Church.  But  the  same  word  is  used  in  the  account  of  the  ordination  of  the  deacons
who  were  chosen  by  the  Christian  people  (Acts  vi,  3).  In  another  case  (Acts  xiv.
23)  the  ordination  of  elders  did  not  take  place  without  the  co-operation  of  the
Church,  which  selected  by  a  show  of  hands,  as  the  word  signifies,  the  candidates
for  ordination.  The  directions  given  by  the  apostle  to  Titus  with  regard  to  the  quali-
fications of  elders  imply  that  the  choice  lay,  not  with  Titus,  who  was  a  complete
stranger  to  Crete,  but  with  the  body  of  the  Christian  people  who  were  familiarly
acquainted  with  the  private  work  and  public  gifts  of  believers,  (h)  The  ordination  was
the  act  of  Titus,  wlio  was  the  delegate  of  the  apostle.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Zenas
and  xVpollos,  who  were  then  in  Crete,  were  associated  with  him  in  the  act  of  ordination.
It  is  now  generally  admitted  that  ho  was  not  appointed  permanent  Bishop  of  Crete,
for  his  stay  was  designed  to  bo  short  (ch.  iii.  12).  This  whole  passage  proves  the
importance  of  Church  organization,  while  it  presupposes  a  certain  amount  of  Christian
knowledge  and  feeling  among  the  members  of  the  Cretan  Church. — T.  C.

Vers.  6,  7. —  TJie  character  o/hishops — their  negative  qualifications.  The  apostle  first
mentions  their  qualifications  in  a  moral  point  of  view  before  he  speaks  of  their  duties  as
teachers.

I.  Blamelessness.  The  minister  must  be  one  against  whom  no  charge  can  be
brought.  His  name  must  be  spotless  (1  Cor.  i.  8 ;  Col.  i.  22).  The  Church  must  be
able  to  respect  him.  1.  Because  he  mu^t  he  an  example  to  the  believers,  2.  because
he  could  not  otherwise  consistently  check  or  reprove  the  blameworthy  tuays  of  others,
(Ch.  i.  13.)    Christian  life  in  Crete  was  unsound  both  as  to  morals  and  doctrine*    3.


CH.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  9


Became  as**  a  steward  of  Ood*^  lie  hcu  grave  responsibilitieSy  both  to  Gtod  and  to  tlie
flock.  He  must  be  both  wise  and  faithful  in  relation  to  the  '*  house  of  God,  .  •  •  the
Church  of  the  living  God"  (1  Tim.  iii.  15),  which  is  entrusted  to  his  keeping.

II.  The  husband  of  one  wife.  His  family  relationships  are  of  mucn  moment,  for
polygamy  was  the  established  rule  of  heathenism.  1.  This  passage  does  not  make  the
marriage  of  ministers  compulsory ,  as  it  is  In  the  case  of  priests  in  the  Greek  Church.
2.  It  is  totally  inconsistent  with  the  principle  of  the  celibacy  of  ministers  in  the
Church  of  Borne.  3.  It  does  not  prevent  the  second  marriage  of  a  minister,  which  is
sanctioned  by  Scripture,  (Rom.  viL  1 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  8,  9,  39.)  4.  It  simply  condemns
polygamy,

III.  The  conduct  op  his  children.  "Having  believino:  children,  who  are  not
4icoused  of  riot  or  unruly.**  1.  The  bishop  will  be  judged  by  his  family  life.  The
&mily  is  the  nursery  of  the  Church,  and  these  two  societies  act  and  react  upon  each
•other  reciprocally,  so  that  a  bad  or  weak  or  injudicious  father  can  never  be  an  efficient
or  respected  minister.  If  he  cannot  rule  his  children,  how  can  he  rule  the  Church  of
God  (1  Tim.  iii.  5)?  2.  His  children  ought  to  be:  (1)  Believers,  adorning  the  doctrine
of  the  gospel  by  purity  and  obedience.  There  must  be  evidence  that  they  have  been
brought  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  (2)  They  ought  to  be  free
from  the  imputation  of  dissoluteness.  There  must  be  no  ill  reports  concerning  pro-
:fligacy.  (3)  They  must  not  be  unruly,  that  is,  disobedient  to  parents.  Those
ministers  would  be  unfit  to  govern  the  Church  whose  authority  was  disregarded  by
their  own  children.  The  minister's  home  in  Crete  was,  therefore,  to  be  a  pattern  of
order,  purity,  and  piety.

IV.  Not  self-willed.  The  elder  ought  not  to  cherish :  1.  A  self-loving  spirit,
which  leads  to  the  disregard  of  the  rights,  or  claims,  or  feelings  of  others.  2.  A
Jiaughty  and  imperious  temper.  One  who  is  both  obstinate  and  proud  can  have  no
influence  over  his  flock.  He  ought  to  be  humble,  easy  to  be  entreated,  able  to  rule
his  own  spirit,  and  considerate  to  others.

V.  KoT  soon  angry.  1.  He  ought  to  have  a  temper  not  quickly  provoked  by  con-'
tradiction  or  evil-speaking.  Many  tongues  will  be  busy  with  him,  as  many  eyes  will
be  watchfully  turned  upon  his  walk.  2.  He  ought  to  remember  the  temper  of  his
Master,  "  who,  when  ho  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again.'*  He  ought  to  be  **  slow  to
wrath,*'  and  imitate  the  Divine  long-suflering  and  patience.

VI.  No  BRAWLER,  The  word  suggests  the  conduct  of  one  insolent  through  wine,
quarrelsome  and  furious.  The  minister  must  not  only  abstain  from  drunkenness,  but
avoid  the  passionate  folly  of  men  carried  away  by  this  sin.

VII.  No  STRIKER.  He  must  never  lift  his  hand  against  his  fellows.  1.  He  is  the
peacemaker  of  his  parish,  2.  How  can  he  restrain  the  violence  of  others  if  he  cannot
hold  his  own  hands  f

VIII.  Not  given  to  filthy  lucre.  1.  Covetousness  is  idolatry  in  a  minister  as
well  as  in  the  members  of  his  flock.  It  implies  the  existence  of  a  divided  heart.  2.
An  avaricious  temper  is  condemned  by  the  example  of  Christ,  who,  "though  he  was
rich,  became  poor  to  make  many  rich.  3.  It  is  a  peculiarly  heinous  sin  to  make
<t  gain  of  godliness,  4.  A  covetous  minister  wUl  seek  his  own  things,  not  the  things  of
Jesus  Christ, — T.  C.

Ver.  8. — The  bishop's  positive  qualifications,  I.  But  a  lover  of  hospitality.  1.
This  trait  was  specially  suitable  to  a  time  when  Christians,  travelling  from  one  place  to
another,  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  kindly  entertainment  from  brethren.  2.  This
Jiabit  may  bring  blessing  to  our  houses.  Some  have  thereby  "  entertained  angels
unawares'*  (Heb.  xiii.  2).  3.  It  recommends  the  gospel  to  find  its  ministers  ready  at
all  times  to  feed  the  hungry,  opening  heart  and  house  to  the  poor  and  needy  (Luke
xiv.  13).    4.   Yet  the  hospitality  is  not  to  be  that  of  luxury  or  sensuality,

II.  A  ix)ver  of  good.  It  points  to  a  heart  in  sympathy  with  everything  good  and
noble  and  of  good  report,  as  opposed  to  the  corrupt  tendencies  at  work  in  Cretan
society.

III.  Sober.  1.  TAe  u;ord  points  to  the  self-restraint  which  controls  the  passions,  in
^accordance  with  the  dictates  of  conscience,  reason,  and  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is
opposed  to  the  irascibility  already  condenmed  in  ministers  (ver.  7).    2.  It  points  to


10  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  1. 1— 16^.

tobriety  (f  intellect;  for  the  minister  must  not  be  led  away  by  false  enthusiasm, or
entangled  with  spiritual  fanaticism.  He  is  to  follow  quietly  the  eyen  tenor  of  his
way,  under  the  guidance  of  truth.

IV.  Just.  1.  There  must  he  the  full  recognition  of  the  rights  of  others.  2.  There
must  he  such  a  management  of  pastoral  duty  that  poor  and  rich,  ignorant  and  learned,
will  be  treated  with  the  most  impartial  fairness.  There  must  be  ''no  respect  of
persons."  3.  TTiere  must  he  no  casting  of  stumbling-blocks  in  the  tiniy  of  others.  4.
There  must  be  sincerity,  uprightness,  and  faithfulness  in  admonitions  and  counsels.

Y.  Holy.  The  minister  must  be  true  in  his  relations  to  God.  1.  JBe  rejoices  to  be
numbered  with  the  company  of  the  faints.  2.  His  conduct  must  flow  from  a  holy  hearty
as  the  effect  of  a  new  heart.  3.  His  holiness  must  rebuke  the  ungodly j  and  make  his
words  like  ointment  poured  forth.  4.  It  implies  a  separateness  of  walk^  like  him  '*  who
was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.'*

VI.  Temperate.  This  word  points  to  eating  and  drinking,  to  lasts  of  the  flesh,  t^
abstinence  even  from  things  lawful  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  the  glory  of  God. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  9. — The  hishop^s  qualification  as  to  doctrine.  The  apostle  reserres  to  the  last
place  the  most  important  of  all  the  qualifications  needed  by  elders.

I.  The  duty  op  adhering  to  the  truth.  "  Holding  fast  the  faithful  Word  which
is  according  to  the  teaching."  1.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  "  the  faithful  word:  "  (1}
Because  it  contains  nothing  but  the  truth.  (2)  Because  it  never  deceived  any  that
trusted  in  it.  (3)  Because  it  truly  displays  the  faithfulness  of  God.  2.  It  is  no  mere
subjective  opinion  of  the  preticher,  but  is  based  upon  or  in  agreement  with  the  teaching
of  the  apostles.  "Which  is  according  to  the  teaching."  The  truth  is  not  to  be  dis-
covered by  the  preacher,  but  delivered  to  him.  3.  It  is  to  be  stead/cutly  maintained.
The  preacher  is  not  to  allow  it  to  be  wrested  from  his  grasp  by  false  teachers.  The
apostle  was  always  emphatic  as  to  the  importance  of  this  duty.  "  Hold  fast  the  form
of  sound  doctrine,  which  thou  heardest  from  me  "  (2  Tim.  i.  13) ;  "  Continue  thou  in
the  things  thou  hast  learned "  (2  Tim.  iii.  14).  It  was  a  powerful  lever  in  his  hands
for  moving  the  hearts  of  men.

n.  The  design  of  this  qualification.  "  That  he  may  be  able  both  to  exhort  ia
the  sound  doctrine  and  to  convince  the  gainsayers."  1.  The  preacher  mitst  be  gualified
for  exhortation  in  the  sphere  of  a  sound,  healthy,  practical  teaching.  This  implies  that
men  had  some  knowledo;e  of  the  truth,  but  they  need  to  be  persuaded  to  follow  it
rather  than  a  morbid  and  unpractical  teaching  that  can  in  no  way  minister  to  edifica-
tion. 2.  lie  mtist  he  (jualified  to  refute  the  arguments  of  false  teachers.  And  nothin«^
is  so  powerfully  conducive  to  this  end  as  sound  doctrine  firmly  held  and  wisely
applied. — T.  C.

Vers.  10 — 13. —  Tlie  character  of  the  adversaries  at  Crete.  They  were  within  the  com-
munion of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was,  therefore,  all  the  more  necessary  that  the
ministers  should  be  holy,  laborious,  and  uncorrupt.

I.  The  moral  and  intellectual  characteristics  of  these  adversariis.
"  For  there  arc  many  unruly  men,  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  especially  they  of
the  circumcision."  1.  They  were  refractory.  Though  standing  in  Church  relation-
ships, they  refused  all  obedience,  and  pursued  purely  factious  and  divisive  courses  that
led  to  the  subversion  of  discipline  and  the  distraction  of  families.  Such  persons  mar
the  prosperity  of  many  a  Church.  2.  They  were  vain  talkers.  Corruption  quickly
makes  its  way  from  the  heart  to  the  lips,  and  flows  forth  in  glib  and  empty  babbling.
(1)  There  is  no  allusion  here  to  heresy,  for  the  vain  talking  is  merely  opposed  to  \iseful
and  solid  doctrine.  The  teachers  were  fluent  and  superficial,  speaking,  perhaps,  o^reat
swelling  words  of  vanity,  which  were  of  no  profit  to  the  hearers.  (2)  The  tontyufTwas
made  for  speaking,  but  it  is  the  Lord's  will  that  it  should  always  be  used  for  his  trlory.
It  ought  to  be  the  utterer  of  the  *' wisdom  that  is  from  above,"  which  is  •*  fi.rst'pure,
then  peaceable."  (3)  Vain  talkers  are  the  pest  of  Churches  and  families,  sowing  the
seeds  of  distrust  and  turning  men's  minds  against  the  gospel.  3.  They  were  deceivers.
They  deceived  others  by  their  good  words  and  fair  speeches,  their  vain  speculations  and
their  dexterous  arpjuments,  and  thus  became  very  dangerous  pei*sons.  4.  They  toen
of  **  the  circumcision "  party  in  the  Church.    (1)  They  were  members  of  the  Churchy


CH.  1. 1— IG.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  U

and  thercforo  in  a  position  to  do  much  mischief.  (2)  They  were  Judaizing  Christians^
who  blended  the  Law  and  the  gospel,  teaching  that  circumcision  was  necessary  to  salva-
tion. (3)  They  were  the  persistent  enemies  of  the  Apostle  Paul  through  his  whole  life,
and  thwarted  him  in  his  labours  in  every  part  of  Asia  and  Europe.

II.  The  effect  of  theib  seduction.  "  Subverting  whole  houses."  They  pursued
a  process  of  sapping  and  mining,  subverting  the  faith  (2  Tim.  ii.  18),  and  bringing
whole  families  to  disorder  and  ruin.  It  was  not  a  case  of  mischief  done  to  a  few
isolated  individuals.  Thus  they  undermined  the  peace  and  stability  of  the  Church
itself.

IIL  The  motive  of  their  teaching.  "  Teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for
filthy  lucre's  sake."  The  real  root  of  the  evil  is  laid  bare  by  the  apostle.  It  was  a
sordid  love  of  gain.  Therefore  the  teaching  was  such  as  would  accommodate  itself  to
the  prejudices  of  men.  These  men  had  no  regard  for  God's  honour,  for  the  interest  of
Christ,  or  for  the  welfare  of  souls ;  they  only  sought  to  increase  their  worldly  substance
by  gaining  popular  applause.  1.  Money  in  itself  is  no  evil,  for  it  has  no  moral  character.
It  is  only  a  blessing  or  a  curse  according  to  the  use  that  is  made  of  it.  2.  "  The  love  of
money  is  the  root  of  all  evilP  It  leads  men  to  dishonour  God,  to  ignore  the  claims  of
truth,  to  sacrifice  the  peace  of  the  Church.  The  Pharisees  in  our  Lord's  time  devoured
widows'  houses.  How  many  people  still  sacrifice  religion  so  far  as  they  imagine  it  to
conflict  with  their  worldly  advancement !  3.  The  motive  of  these  Cretan  adversaries
ivas  baser  than  if  it  had  been  mere  fanaticism  or  the  love  of  proselytism.  (Matt,
xxiii.  15.)

IV.  The  justification  of  the  apostle's  strong  language  concerning  them.
''  One  of  themselves,  a  prophet  of  their  own,  said,  Cretans  are  always  liars,  evil  beasts,
idle  gluttons,"  This  testimony  is  true.  These  words  refer  not  to  "  those  of  the  circum-
cision," but  to  the  inhabitants  of  Crete,  who  had  generally  welcomed  the  injurious
teaching  referred  to.  1.  The  aposUe^s  quotation  of  a  heathen  poet,  Epimenides,  shows
that  it  is  not  improper  for  Christians  to  study  the  literature  of  heathen  nations.  Classical
studies  were  once,  on  moral  grounds,  discouraged  by  the  Church.  Calvin  says  that
nothing  learned  ought  to  be  rejected,  even  though  it  should  proceed  from  *'the  god-*
less."  2.  The  quotation  is  the  unbiassed  judgment  of  a  Cretan  poet,  held  in  high
honour  for  so-called  prophetical  gifts.  It  represents  the  character  of  the  Cretans  in  the
darkest  light,  as  if  to  justify  a  heathen  proverb,  "  The  three  worst  C's  in  the  world
are  Cappadocia,  Crete,  and  Cilicia."  (1)  "Cretans  are  always  liars."  This  estimate  is
fully  borne  out  by  profane  writers,  as  well  as  by  the  proverb  that  makes  "  Cretizing  "
synonymous  with  "deception."  (2)  They  were  "evil  beasts."  In  allusion  to  their
fierceness,  their  wildncss,  their  cruelty.  (3)  They  were  *'  idle  gluttons."  They  were
sensual  and  slothful,  corpulent  and  idle,  and  therefore  fit  disciples  of  teachers  whose
**  god  was  their  belly,"  and  were  content  to  eat  the  bread  of  others  without  working.

3.  The  apostle  endorses  this  heathen  testimony,  showing  that  the  Cretans  had  not
changed  their  national  character  in  six  hundred  years.

V.  The  true  method  op  dealing  with  the  Cretan  adversaries.  "Whose
mouths  must  be  stopped."  1.  This  does  not  warrant  civil  persecution,  2.  It  vmrrants
the  use  of  cogent  arguments  to  silence  gainsayers,  such  as  those  by  which  our  Lord
silenced  the  Sadducees  and  the  Pharisees,  as  well  as  the  use  of  faithful  and  stringent
discipline  to  repress  ecclesiastical  and  moral  disorders.  The  adversaries  were  to  be
opposed  by  reason,  faithfulness,  and  love,  above  all,  by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the
gospel  in  its  positive  as  well  as  its  negative  aspects. — T.  C.

Vers.  13,  14. — The  necessity  of  godly  rebuke.  At  this  point  the  aiwstle  drops  the
reference  to  bishops,  and  lays  upon  Titus  himself  the  duty  of  applying  the  proper
remedy.

I.  The  utility  of  rebuke.  "  Wherefore  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be
sound  in  the  faith."  The  nature  of  the  people  demanded  sharp  treatment.  "  Sharpness
and  severity  are  but  the  other  side  of  love  itself,  when  the  wounds  can  only  be  healed
by  cutting."  Ministers  are  sent  to  give  rebuke  (Jer.  xliv.  4;  Micah  iii.  8).  1.  They
may  give  it  privately.    2.  Or  publicly  (1  11m.  v.  20).    3.  Fearlessly  (Ezek.  ii.  3 — 7).

4.  With  all  authority  (ch.  ii.  15).  5.  With  long-suffering  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  6.  If
sharply,  yet  with  Christian  love  (2  Thcss.  iii.  15).     7.  The  good  receive  rebuke


12  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa  [CII.1.I--I&

(1)  kindly  (Ps.  cxlL  5) ;  (2)  with  love  to  those  who  ftdminister  it  (Pror.  ix.  8 ;  xxir.
25) ;  (3)  they  attend  to  rebuke  (Prov.  xv.  5).

II.  The  design  of  the  rebuke.  ''That  they  may  be  aoond  in  the  faith.'*  It  wat:
1.  That  they  might  he  recovered  from  their  errors^  and  receive  unind  doctrine,  and  mm
Bound  ipeedi  (hat  cannot  be  condemned,  2.  That  they  maybe  9ound  in  the  ffraee  <f
faith,  and  manifest  it  by  departing  from  their  evil  works.  This  aoundnesa  of  fidth  is
described  negatively  by  their  **  not  giving  heed  to  Jewish  fjableB,  and  oommandmeDts
of  men,  that  turn  from  the  truth.  (I)  Jewish  fables.  These  are  mentioned  in
1  Tiro.  L  4 ;  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4.  They  were,  no  doubt,  rabbinical,  and  nitimatdy
crystallised  into  the  Talmud.  Our  Lord  condemned  them  (Matt.  xv.  3).  The  tzi-
ditionary  principle  has,  in  spite  of  this  warning,  spread  widely  in  the  Chnrch«  We  see
it  in  the  Latin  Church,  in  the  Grreek  Church,  in  Islamism.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  mlh^
principle  of  all  thette  communities,  which  have  no  real  love  for  the  Scriptares.  (2)  Hie
commandments  of  men.  (a)  They  stand  in  antithesis  to  the  ocnnmandments  of  God
(Matt.  zv.  9 ;  Col.  iL  22).  (b)  They  evidently  were  of  a  ceremonial  character,  and
involved  ascetic  peculiarities,  touching  the  question  of  abstinence  from  meats,  and  from
other  things  created  by  GKxi  for  man's  enjoyment,  (e)  Their  orig;in  was  evil,  for  thef
sprang  from  men  turning  away  from  the  truth.  It  was  not  merely  Moeaical  prohibi-
tions with  regard  to  food  that  they  enforced,  but  ascetic  additions  and  exaggerations  in
the  spirit  of  the  later  Gnosticism.  The  course  of  these  men  was  downward.  Thej
were  departing  fast  from  the  gosj^l. — T.  C.

Ver.  15. — A  great  counter-principle  against  this  ascetic  tendency,  •*  Unto  the  pore
all  things  are  pure :  but  to  the  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure  ;  but  eyen  their
mind  and  conBcience  are  defiled."

I.  The  I'Rivileoes  of  the  fure.  1.  The  pure  are  not  those  ceremonially  pmt,
but  those  (1)  justified  from  all  sin  by  Christ's  righteousness;  (2)  clean  through  the
Word  spoken  to  them ;  (3)  with  hearts  purified  by  faith ;  (4)  with  the  graces  of  fiuth
unfeigned,  iovo  without  dissimulation,  and  hope  without  hypocrisy.  2.  Their  priviU^^
purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  was  the  lawful  liberty  of  using  all  meats  under  ik
gospel  which  were  forbidden  by  the  ceremonial  law,  (1)  Jesus  had  taught  that  defile-
ment comes  from  the  heart,  not  from  the  shambles  (Luke  xi.  39 — 41).  (2)  The  Church
solemnly  at  Jerusalem  decreed  the  abolition  of  this  old  distinction  of  meats  (Acts  xv.).
'*].  The  apostle  elsewhere  teaches  the  same  truth.  "  For  meat  destroy  not  the  work  of  Chxi
All  things  indeed  are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  that  man  that  eateth  with  offence"  (Rom.
^:.,  oA\       All  .^««*„  «-^ r.  ♦^  i^jjQ  p^j.g  jjj  heart.     4.  Tlie  distinction  of  meats  amcmg

-gleet  of  the  Divine  Iaiw  altogether.  People  on  the  Col-
day  who  will  feel  their  souls  in  danger  from  eatin*'  as
ejzg  on  Friday.  5.  The  saying  of  the  apostle  has  an  almost  proverbial  cast  ;  for  it  ass^
that  "all  things" — that  is,  more  than  mere  food — may  have  a  purifying  tendency  in
the  case  of  the  pure.  Kothing  is  unclean  of  itself,  but  good,  and  to  be  received  with
thank8f]5iving  (1  Tim.  iv.  3 — 5).

II.  The  mokal  retribution  of  the  impure.  It  is  that  they  pollute  all  they  touch,
and  everything;  becomes  the  means  of"  increasing  their  depravity.  1.  There  is  nothing
impure  or  evil  in  creation ;  it  is  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  men ;  these  can  turn  the
choicest  gifts  of  God  into  the  means  of  moral  defilement.  2.  Unbelief  is  the  fountain
from  which  all  the  evil  flows ;  for  to  the  "  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure."  The
woryhippers  may,  by  their  distinctions  of  food,  only  foster  pride  and  self-righteous-
ness; but  all  alike  springs  from  unbelief,  which  disregards  the  authority  of  the  Word
of  God.  3.  71ie  impurity  is  not  merely  external,  such  as  many  dread,  but  internal*  for  it
extends  to  "  iho  mind  and  conscience,"  to  the  whole  intellectual,  volitional  and 'moral
nature  of  man.  Thus  the  last  safeguard  of  the  soul  disappears,  as  the  retribution  upon
man's  neglect  of  God,  truth,  and  purity.  There  is  no  longer  a  taste  for  the  simple  truth
of  the  gosi)el,  but  a  frightful  facility  lor  self-deception. — T.  C.

Ver.  1 G. —  The  great  contradiction.  The  apostle  here  describes  their  moral  deficiency.
"  They  contcvss  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they  deny  him."

I.  They  wkre  mere  professors  of  religion,  possessing  its  form  but  dexyino  its
POWER.     1,  llieir  knowledge  of  God  was  purely  theoretical  or  spectUative,  hut  they  wew


CH.1. 1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  13

practical  atheists.  2.  Hypocrites  often  pro/ess  great  knowledge  of  Ood.  3.  Even  in
apostolic  times  the  communion  of  the  Church  was  considerably  mixed.  There  is  no  trace
of  a  pure  Church  anywhere  on  earth.  The  Church  in  Crete  had  unhelievers  in  its
visible  membership,

U.  Their  denial  of  God  took  a  most  practical  shape.  Their  conduct  gave  the
lie  to  their  profession.  They  were :  1.  Abominable  in  the  sight  of  God.  They  were
morally  abandoned.  They  were  as  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God  as  the  idols  of  the
nations.  2.  Disobedient,  They  were  refractory  and  incorrigible,  despising  all  order
and  repudiating  obligation.  3.  Beprobate  unto  every  good  work.  They  were  as  useless
for  the  service  of  God  as  reprobate  silver,  which  cannot  bear  the  fire  of  the  refiner.
(1)  They  did  no  good  works.  (2)  They  had  neither  knowledge  nor  inclination  to  do
good  works.  (3)  Therefore  they  were  quite  useless  in  the  service  of  God  and
man. — T.  C.

Ver.  1. — Christian  ministry.  "  A  servant  of  God."  One  of  the  great  revelations
of  the  gospel  is  the  dignity  of  service.  "To  be  ministered  unto"  was  the  end  of
Roman  ambition.  Pride  and  precedence  ruled  supreme.  The  Jews  sought  to  be
"  Herods ; "  the  Gentiles  sought  for  consulships  and  praetorships.  Everywhere  we  see
patrician  selfishness  in  proud  palaces,  and,  as  a  dark  opposite,  whole  colonies  of  slaves.
The  words  that  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  Master  were  illustrated  in  his  life :  "The  Son
of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom
for  many."

I.  A  SERVANT  OF  A  STRONG  MASTER.  God !  Nonc  cau  staud  against  him.  In  the
end  sin  will  reveal  its  weakness.  It  may  storm  and  plot  and  fume  against  his  will,
but  it  is  impotent  at  heart.  "  The  Lord  reigneth."  The  dominion  of  sin  is  undermined,
and  through  the  cross  its  leadership  in  the  prince  of  this  world  is  destroyed.  Christ  is
"  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool."    He  must  reign  I

II.  A  SERVANT  OF  A  KIND  MASTER.  One  who  wiU  uot  expect  more  service  than  we
can  render,  and  who  knows  and  appreciates  the  kind  of  service  we  can  render,  and  who
will  "  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works."  Kind  in  the  law  of  service,  which
is  a  law  of  blessedness ;  causing  it  to  be  not  a  yokedom,  but  the  joy  of  a  child's  freedom.
*'  Blessed  are  they  that  do  his  will."  Happiness  never  to  be  attained  when  sought  as
an  end,  is  here  found  in  the  highway  of  duty.

III.  A  SERVANT  OF  A  FAITHFUL  Master.  One  who  will  stand  by  his  servants  in  all
times  of  disheartenment,  obloquy,  and  difficulty.  One  who  keeps  his  promises,  so  that
they  are  all  "  Yea  and  Amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  Ever  faithful  to  his  holy  tryst.  "  Draw
nigh  imto  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  unto  you."  Faithful  to  his  vouchsafed  protection.
"Giving  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways."  Faithful  to  the
great  Messianic  promise,  that  to  his  Son  "  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  Paul
gloried  in  such  a  service,  and  he  would  have  Titus  know  him  by  no  higher  name  than
"  a  servant  of  God."— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  1. — Truth  and  life,  "The  truth  which  is  after  godliness."  This  was  to  be
"  acknowledged  "  or  obeyed.  For  truth  is  not  a  library  for  the  leisurely,  or  a  mine  for
the  curious.  It  is  the  present  truth — the  practical  truth ;  a  truth  that  is  always  to  be
translated  into  life.

I.  This  is  a  Divine  test  of  truth.  **  After  godliness."  Like  inspiration,  it  is  profitable
for  instruction  in  righteousness.  It  is  a  seed  whose  preciousness  is  tested  by  the  golden
grain  in  its  ripened  ear.  It  docs  not  produce  a  mere  "  pietism  "  or  sentimental  emotion*
alism;  it  produces  godliness.  Some  are  valiant  for  theoretical  and  doctrinal  truths
who  bring  forth  no  "  fruit  unto  holiness."  We  are  able  to  take  the  vantage-ground  of
Christian  history,  and  to  argue  that  there  are  no  lives  like  Christian  lives:  that  in  this
typo  of  character  are  all  the  essentials  of  godliness — a  life  within,  which  cleanses  the
heart,  energizes  the  will,  quickens  the  conscience,  elevates  the  taste,  and  purifies  and
sanctifies  the  life.  This  is  the  Divine  test  of  truth;  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall
know  them."

II.  This  is  a  Divine  mark  of  tbe  apostolatb.  Paul  claims  to  be  **an  apostle
of  Christ,  according  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect."  He  does  not  say  that  the  evangelists,
Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  gave  sacred  and  special  commission  to  him;  for


14  THE  EPISTLE  TO  T1TU8.  [cb.i.1— IfiL

• — ■ — ■ 1

there  U  do  record  that  they  did.  He  does  not  claim,  like  Peter,  to  h^Te  beea  witii
ChriHt  on  the  holy  mount ;  or  to  have  heeD  with  those  diaciiAes  who  were  with  Christ  it
hif  asccnftion,  when  **  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany,  and  lifted  up  his  haoda  and
blessed  them,**  or  to  have  heard  the  command  then  given,  "  Go  je  into  all  the  worid,
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Nor  does  he  rest  his  apostolate  oa  anything
ceremonial  or  fonnal  alone.  By  the  manifestation  of  the  truth  he  commended  himsdf
to  every  man's  conncicnce  in  the  sight  of  God.  llie  truth  of  his  message  was  one  gnmad
of  authority  and  the  godliness  of  it  another,  and  those  two  bases  of  authority — tndk
ami  ffoodnesi—are  strong  and  eternal.  None  can  shake  the  temple  biult  on  sodli  granite
founciations  as  these.  Philosophies  may  change  and  councils  may  err,  but  these  abide
for  ever.  80  Titus  had  to  learn  that  his  ministry  was  connected  with  a  truth  that  must
be  livedf  as  well  as  a  truth  that  must  be  taught. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  2. — 77ie  immortal  hope,  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life."  How  often  these  wordi
have  been  inscribed  over  the  resting-place  of  the  dead!  How  restful  they  are!
How  such  inscriptions  in  the  dark  catacombs  tell  of  the  new  and  blessed  era  that
Christianity  introduced !  But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  connect  them  only  with  heaven,
"  This  is  life  eternal"  wc  read,  **  to  know  thee  the  only  true  Ood,  and  Jetus  Christ,  whom
thou  hast  sent.**

I.  HopK  AND  LIFE  ABE  HERE  CONNECTED.  It  was  not  SO  in  paganism.  Hen  lost
hope.  Uliey  lived  in  and  for  the  present  day,  and  when  tired  of  life  committed  suicide.
Hone,  such  as  the  great  Christian  hope,  brightens  all  human  duties  and  joys.  Life  if
real  and  eamcBt,  all  through  the  years.  Age  does  not  dim  the  brightness  of  the  eye
of  the  soul.  So  "w^e  are  saved  by  hope" — saved  from  ennui,  disbeartenment,  and
miHcry.  We  find  Paul  rejoicing  in  hope  and  patient  in  tribulation  because  of  the  life
within,  that  was  hid  witli  (/hrist  in  God.

II.  Skiivick  is  associatkd  with  etebnal  life.  Paul  is  a  servant  of  God,  and
that  service  is  quickened  by  faith  and  sustained  by  hope.  The  Christian  teacher  sees
not  only  man  in  his  fall  and  misery,  but  he  sees  the  ideal  man  in  him— one  who  may
bo  re-created  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  desert  blossoms  as  the  rose,  as  hope  cheers  the
sower  who  plants  the  immortal  seed  of  the  kingdom  in  human  hearts.  *The  measure
of  our  life  is  the  measure  of  (1)  the  cheerfulness  and  (2)  the  continuance  of  our  service.
And  what  hojK)  1     It  iucludcs  glory,  honour,  immortality,  and  eternal  life. — W,  M-  S.

Ver.  2. — The  Divine  veracity,  "  God,  who  cannot  lie."  Man  can  lie.  Man  does
lie.  His  word  is  not  alwciys  his  bond.  Ho  indulges  in  exaggeration.  Ho  tells  half-
truths,  which  are  ever  the  worst  of  lies.

I.  Some  things  God  cannot  do.  He  who  gave  the  moral  Law  embodies  in  himself
that  Law.  He  cannot  do  that  which  is  untrue,  unrighteous,  unjust !  *•  God  is  not  a
man,  that  he  should  lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent."  This  is  our  con-
solation in  trouble.  God  is  faithful,  who  hath  promised — faithful  in  all  that  is  exquisitely
minute  as  well  as  all  that  is  magnificently  great.  And  in  the  wide  sweep  of  the  Divine
promises  wo  may  find  our  rest  in  all  times  of  tribulation.  **  All  the  promises  of  God  in
him  [in  Christ]  are  Yea  and  Amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."     He  cannot  lie.

II.  SoMK  TiiiNr.s  that  we  TOO  OFTEN  DO.  1.  Carry  our  own  cares,  because  we  will
not  trust  our  Father,  and  cast  all  our  care  on  him.  2.  Recall  our  jxist  sins,  and  so
torture  our  hearts  with  remembrance  of  them,  when  God  has  said  that  he  has  blottal
them  all  out,  and  will  remember  them  against  us  no  more.  3.  Lose  the  bright  vision  of
JicdvcHf  and  so  become  cast  down  in  old  age,  forgetting  that  there  can  be  no  suppressio
veri,  or  suppression  of  truth,  with  our  Saviour.  "  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you ;  if  it
were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you.^  This  should  be  the  rest  of  our  hearts,  lY  we  have
iH'lieved  in  Christ  to  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  "  We  are  in  him  that  is  true.^^ —
W.  M.  S.

Ver.  2. — The  Divine  foresight.  "  Before  the  world  began."  This  is  one  of  the
glories  of  the  gospel.  It  foresees  all  events  in  history,  and  provides  for  all  the  necessities
of  a  being  who  is  born  to  be  redeemed.

I.  TiiKUE  ARE  NO  AFTKR-TiiouGHTS  WITH  GoD.  Our  visiou  IS  imperfect.  Our  plans
miscarry,  because  we  have  not  taken  in  all  aspects  of  the  future.     SSometimes  our  pro-


<;h.i.1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  16

Tision  for  that  future  is  too  limited ;  sometimes  it  is  ill  adapted,  and  we  say,  had  we
foreseen,  we  could  have  avoided  disappointment,  disaster,  and  defeat.  All  the  future
lies  clearly  before  the  omniscient  gaze  of  God.  "  The  Lamb  was  slain  before  the  foundation
■of  the  world."

II.  God's  purposes  are  revealed  m  his  promises.  Not  before  the  earth  began,
but  before  the  world  began — the  world  of  busy  men  and  women ;  the  world  of  toil  and
strife,  of  sin  and  sorrow,  and  the  developments  of  guilt  and  grief.  Then  it  was  that
Ood  declared  that  "the  Seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  This
involves  all.  Sin  would  have  involved  death ;  but  the  eternal  life  which  St.  Paul  speaks
of  here  was  the  gift  of  God  in  the  incarnate  Saviour.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  3. — The  Divine  proclamation,  "But  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  Word
through  preaching,  .  .  .  according  to  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour."  The
entire  dispensation  of  Divine  mercy  from  the  earliest  ages  is  a  manifestation,  or  a
**  showing  forth."  This  takes  place  in  Gt)d*s  own  way  and  in  God's  own  time.  We
who  are  Christians  now  wait  for  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."

I.  There  is  always  a  due  time.  The  clock  of  time  is  set  to  the  order  of  Divine
events.  Generations  give  place  to  the  age,  and  the  age  to  the  day,  and  the  day  to  the
hour.  "  Father,  the  hour  is  come."  This  was  the  fulness 'of  time.  Then  the  Romans
had  prepared  the  roads  for  the  ambassadors  of  Christ  to  travel ;  and  the  Greeks  had
provided  a  perfect  language  for  the  written  record  of  the  revelation ;  and  the  dispersed
Jews  had  circulated  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  had  settled  in  foreign  lands
and  planted  synagogues ;  and  Philosophy  had  confessed  her  failures  in  the  opinion  of
her  leaders,  that  there  must  he  a  Divine  Deliverer,  if  deliverance  comes  at  all ;  so  that
when  men  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  Cfod  in  such  a  fulness  of  time  to  send
forth  his  Son.

II.  There  will  always  be  the  preacher.  Truth,  like  the  gospel,  needs  a  loving
heart  and  a  living  voice  and  a  living  experience  to  utter  its  sweet  enchantments.  U
has  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  such  as  believe.  That  is  to
say,  what  the  world  calls  foolishness.  But  men  will  always  listen  to  and  love  the
human  voice  when  charged  with  truth  and  tenderness  and  pity.  The  press  is  doing
a  noble  work,  but  it  will  not  supplant  the  pulpit.  Style  changes, and  methods  change;
but  God  *'  fjEishioneth  their  hearts  alike."  Dickens  spoke  his  own  works,  and  thousands
flocked  to  hear.  Carlyle  and  Emerson  both  acknowledge  the  mighty  and  immortal
power  of  speech.  A  preaching  which  has  intelfect,  conscience,  and  heart  in  it,  and
which  is  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  and  the  cross,  will  never  become  efifote.  It  is
God's  own  way,  and  his  ways  are  higher  than  our  ways. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  4. — Believed  in  everywhere.  "  The  common  faith."  Amid  all  diversities  there
is  unity.  In  this  sense  we  know  that  what  is  called  "Catholio"  authority  rests  on  what
was  believed  "always,  everywhere,  and  by  all."  Theories  of  religion  vary,  but  the
great  facts  and  doctrines  are  the  things  which  cannot  be  shaken,  and  still  remain.  The
word  "  faith  "  is  sometimes  used  for  that  experience  of  the  soul  which  we  call  trust,
and  as  such  is  an  inward  reception  of  Christ  and  his  cross ;  but  it  is  also  used,  and  is
so  used  here,  as  descriptive  of  the  gospel  revelation  itself.

I.  The  apostles  die,  but  the  faith  remains.  We  are  not  disciples  of  Paul,  or
Barnabas,  or  Timothy,  or  Titus,  but  of  Christ,  These  apostles  did  not  draw  men  to
themsdveSy  but  to  Christ.  They  were,  as  Paul  declares, "  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed.'*
To  be  in  the  true  succession  is  to  have  the  spirit  of  the  apostles,  and  to  hold  the  faith
of  the  apostles.  So  far  as  the  gospel  has  been  perverted  by  mediaBval  superstition  oi
the  earlier  traditions  of  the  fathers,  it  is  not  the  common  faith.  An  inspired  revelation
of  truth  enables  us  in  every  age  to  preserve  the  common  feith.  As  the  philosophic
Coleridge  said, "  It  is  evident  that  John  and  Paul  held  Christ  to  be  Divine."  The
glorious  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  is  preserved  to  us  intact  by  the  holy  Gospels  and
the  Epistles,  and  men  true  to  the  Bible  harmonize  in  their  acceptance  of  "the
common  faith."

II.  The  life  of  the  true  Church  is  the  same  in  every  aqe.  The  root  must
be  the  same,  because  the  fruit  is  the  same.    First  truth  and  then  l\fe.    The  cry  for


16  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTUa.  [ch.  l  1— 16.

forgiTeness,  and  the  peace  that  comes  throogh  the  cron.  The  power  of  the  mtoneixMDt
to  cruelty  selfi^thneM,  and  to  lead  men  to  live  as  not  their  own.  The  coDsciousness  of
human  Impotence,  and  of  the  mi^ht  of  the  Holj  Spirit  in  the  inner  man.  All  these
are  inward  experiences  of  life,  resulting  from  a  common  liuth.  Added  to  these  are  the
experiences  which  attest  life  in  conduct.  We  know  the  same  artistes  touch  in  the
picture,  the  same  sculptor's  hand  in  the  moulding  of  a  figure,  the  same  architect's
design  in  the  buildings ;  and  we  know  Christians  by  the  **  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God,*
producing  those  ^  truits  of  the  Spirit "  which  attest,  in  their  beauty  and  their  parity,
the  energy  and  the  sanctity  of  the  Divine  lile.  It  is  *^  the  common  Jiaith  "  which  gives
to  Christians,  in  every  land  and  every  age,  the  same  likeness  to  their  LK>rd. — W.  II.  S.

Ver.  5. — Apcstdic  prepaniUon.  **  Set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting."  Chris-
tian life  is  destined  for  development  and  for  continuance.  To  thia  end  the  Church  is  to
be  the  centre  alike  of  evangelistic  effort  and  of  Christian  culture.     Here  is —

L  TuE  JUaTiFicATiox  OF  THE  EccLEsiA,  OR  THE  **  Chubch."  **  And  ordain  elden  ia
every  city."  The  New  Testament  gives  no  sanction  to  the  idea  that  an  unorffanixtii
Christianity  is  the  simplest  and  the  best.  The  precedents  of  the  early  Christian  Chuick
were  to  be  faithfully  adhered  to.  Whether  the  organization  of  the  Church  was  to  be  a
growth  conditioneti  by  the  circumstance  of  every  age,  is  a  question  we  do  not  hen
discuss ;  but  that  theru  was  to  be  organization  is  here  settled  for  ever.  The  ezpressioD,
"  in  every  city/'  shows  that  the  life  of  the  Church  was  not  to  be  spasmodic,  but  settkd.

II.  There  must  be  life  as  well  as  oroanizatiox.  This,  too,  is  manifest  hen.
Christians  were  enjoying  *' grace,  mercy,  and  peace;"  were  *^ renewed  m  the  spirit  of
their  minds."  Divine  Ufe  comes  from  faith  in  Christ  alone,  and  is  not  dependent  upon
aught  else.  The  declaration  of  Paul  is  there  always  and  everywhere,  **  Believe  on  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.**  We  are,  therefore,  to  recognize  the  fruits
of  the  Spirit  everywhere,  whether  the  gardens  in  which  they  grow  be  according  to  our
plan  and  ideal  or  no.  Bat  as  all  Christian  life  needs  constant  care  and  discipline,  as
the  disciple  needs  teaching,  and  the  justified  need  sanctification,  so  there  was  to  be  the
'*  setting  in  order  *'  of  all  that  we  mean  by  the  organized  Christian  Church  ;  not  that
every  detail  is  to  be  binding,  or  to  be  reproduced  by  every  Church  in  eyery  age.*
W.  M.  S.

Vers.  7 — 9. — TJte  ovtrsetrs,  "For  a  bishop,"  etc.  Here  we  have  the  moral  qnalifi-
CAtion  necessary  for  an  overseer  or  bishop  of  the  Churches.  These  bishops  were
to  be  an  order  by  themselves,  not,  as  Baxter  would  have  them,  "  Primus  inter  pares,"
or  "first  among  equals."  Each  overseer  who  was  naturally  placed  in  a  leadint'  city
ought,  from  his  prominence  as  overseer  of  the  district,  to  be  a  ministerial  example  loliis
brethren.  The  practical  counsels  here  given  apply  equally  to  all  aspects  of  the  "over-
seer," or  bishop.

I.  The  bishop  at  home.  Polygamy  was  so  widespread  that  it  could  not  be  arrested
and  done  away  with  at  once.  But  the  bishops,  as  leaders  of  men,  were  to  set  tbe
exam])lc.  Polygamy,  like  slavery,  was  to  be  destroyed  by  the  influence  of  the  cross-
by  the  crucifixion  of  human  selfishness,  and  the  realization  of  God's  ideals  in  the
dignity  of  woman  and  in  the  sacredness  of  human  life.  "  Having  faithful  children  '  to
whom  "  riot,"  or  the  indulgence  of  unruly  appetites  and  habits,  was  unknown.

II.  The  bishop  as  a  steward.  Haviuj;  elevated  position  and  large  opportunity  for
good.  V/o  must  remember  that  character  makes  the  good  steward,  not  ex-cathedra
commands  and  exhortations.  "Not  self-willed;"  but  remembering  that  the  measure  of
his  power  is  to  be  the  measure  of  his  humility.  "  Not  soon  angry  ;  ■*  for  if  there  be  no
self-repression,  if  the  volcanic  fires  of  the  heart  be  not  subdut-d,  it  will  be  of  no  use
for  him  to  preach  about  the  cross  which  crucifies  self.  **  Not  given  to  wine  •  **  for
intemperance  bereaves  a  man  alike  of  reason  and  of  religion.  "  No  striker  ; "  for  althou'^h
the  Ilomans  of  that  day  used  their  power  over  slaves  and  dependents  by  buffeting  them,
and  sometimes  killing  them,  the  eervant  of  Christ  must  be  gentle  unto  all  men.
"  Not  given  to  filthy  lucre ; "  for  covetousness  kills  other  virtues,  and  draws  by  its
tap-root  all  nourishment  from  the  plants  of  grace.

III.  The  bishop  as  a  brother,     "A  lover  of  hospitality."     Remembering  how  many
woidd  like  to  share  his  counsels,  to  walk  in  the  light  of  his  influence,  and  to  be  refreshed


CH.I.1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  17


by  his  sympatliies,  "  A  lover  of  good  men."  Not  great  men,  merely  as  men  o{  genius
and  power;  but  men  whose  hearts  were  true  and  pure.  '*  Sober,  just,  holy,  temperate  " —
a  "  city  that  lieth  four-square."

IV.  Thk  bishop  as  a  teacheb.  Not  indulging  in  novelties  or  new  philosophies.
Not  a  creator  of  truth,  but  a  teacher  of  it,  remembering  that  he  is  a  trustee  of  truth.
"Holding  fast  the  faithful  Word  as  he  hath  been  taught."

Finally,  we  see  that  all  was  not  so  harmonious  and  peaceful  even  in  the'early  Church ;
for  the  bishop  is  to  exhort  and  convince  the  gainsayers,  which  show  that  he  must  be
"  able  "  as  well  as  "  good."— W.  M.  S.

Ver.  15. — Pure-heartedness,  "Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.''  The  gospel
centres  morality  as  well  as  religion  in  the  heart.  Men  of  corrupt  tastes  cannot  have
correct  morals,  because  a  man  may  sin  against  himself  as  well  as  against  society.
An  impure  heart  makes  an  impure  world  of  its  own  within ;  and  that,  if  it  hurts  none
else,  hurts  the  man  himself,  wrongs  his  own  soul.  Here  we  see  that  the  eye  sees  what
it  wishes  to  see,  or  what  the  inward  taste  desires  to  see.  A  pure  man  does  not  under-
stand the  dovhle  entendre ;  does  not  see  the  vision  of  evil  beneath  the  veil  of  words
or  the  disguise  of  art.

L  The  first  requibement.  "  A  pure  heart."  Make  the  tree  good.  A  bad  man
will  find  impure  suggestion  anywhere  and  everywhere — even  in  religious  literature,  even
in  the  unsuspecting  words  of  holy  men — for  his  heart  is  not  renewed.  So  possible  is  it
for  men  to  find  evil  even  in  things  good.

II.  The  great  safeguard.  "  All  things  are  pure."  There  is  no  false  delicacy.  No
prudery,  no  afiectation.  In  meditation  or  conversation  they  catch  no  stain  of  defile-
ment from  the  subjects  they  are  mentally  brought  into  contact  with.  Their  safety  is
from  within ;  for  **  out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life.*' — ^W.  M.  S.

Ver.  15. — Inner  defilement,  **  But  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is
nothing  pure;  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled."  This  is  the  worst
Nemesis  of  evil;  it  hurts  the  man.  We  can  injure  the  physical  senses — the  eye,
the  ear ;  so  we  can  injure  the  mind  and  the  moral  senses.

I.  The  description  of  character.  Wby  this  couplet  ?  "  Defiled  and  unbelieving  "
seems  at  first  a  strange  combination  of  ideas.  Not  so.  To  defile  is  to  march  ofif — to
file  away  from.  So  men  leave  the  King's  highway  of  holiness,  purity,  truth,  and  righteous-
ness ;  and  they  do  this  because  they  are  unbelieving.  They  will  not  accept  the  revelation
of  God,  that  sin  is  loss,  shame,  misery,  death ;  and  that  holiness  is  happiness  and  life
eternal.

II.  The  dread  issue.  Nothing  is  pure.  All  waters  take  the  colour  of  the  soil  over
which  they  pass.  The  stained  windows  make  a  stained  light.  An  impure  heart  colours
everything — thought,  imagination,  observation,  conversation,  and  common  life.  And
this  is  the  doom.!  Their  mind  and  conscience  are  defiled.  They  feel  it.  They  know  it,
and  at  times  Ihey  confess  it.  Many  shrink  from  themselves  who  have  never  had
resolution  to  seek  him  who  can  ''create  a  clean  heart  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within
them."— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1—4. — Pedemptive  truth,  **Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus
Christ,"  etc.  These  words  direct  our  attention  to  certain  phases  of  redemptive  truth.
The  substratum  of  the  gospel  is  not  merely  truth,  but  redemptive  truth.  Truth,  not
merely  to  enlighten  the  intellect  and  to  discipline  the  mental  faculties,  but  to  raise  the
human  soul  from  spiritual  ignorance  to  intelligence,  from  spiritual  bondage  to  liberty,
from  selfishness  to  benevolence,  from  materialism  to  spirituality,  from  the  **  prince  of
darkness  "  to  the  true  and  living  God.    Here  it  appears —

I.  As  A  grand  enterprise.  1.  An  enterprise  devoted  to  the  highest  purpose.  What
18  the  purpose  ?  It  is  here  described :  (1)  As  the  promotion  of  the  faitb  of  God's  elect.
*'  According  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect."  The  idea  is,  perhaps,  the  furtherance  of  true
liith  amongst  those  to  whom  Grod  had,  in  the  exercise  of  his  sovereignty,  sent  the
gospel.  Asa  fact,  all  men  have  not  had  the  opportunity  of  receiving  the  gospel ;  indeed,
only  an  insignificant  fraction  of  the  race  have  had  it  brought  to  them.  This  fraction
is  a  class  so  highly  privileged  that  they  may  be  designated  the  *' elect*"    Why  should

TITUS.  0


18


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITdS.


[CIL  L 1—16.


they  have  the  ^^oepel  sent  to  them,  and  not  others  ?    Ask  why  aotna  thonld  inherit
health,  oihen  disease ;  some  wealth,  others  poverty;  some  intellectaal  powers  of  a  hi^
order,  others  minds  but  little  removed  from  brute  intelligenoe.     '*  All  these  worketh
the  selfsame  Spirit,  devising  to  every  man  severally  as  he  wilL"     Now,  to  further  sod
promote  faith  among  those  to  whom  the  gospel  goes  is  one  of  its  muid  purposes.   (2)
As  the  promotion  of  the  knowledge  ^  of  the  truth  which  la  after  [according  to]  godli-
ness.*'   More  accurately  rendered,  **  The  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  besde,  or
which  leadeth  to  godliness  *'  (EUicott).    The  grand  purpose  here  indicated  seems  to
be  that  all  who  are  divinely  favoured  with  the  gospel  should  so  believe  it»  and  pradiK
it,  that  they  may  become  godly  in  their  lives.    What  a  sublime  design  is  this,  to  w*«>r«
men  God-like !    Or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  next  chapter,  **  The  grace  of  God  hstk
appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us  that,  denying  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberij,
righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world."    2.  An  enterprise  empioying  the  highai
human  agency,    "  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  ChrisL"    "  Ftol's
mode  of  designating  himself  here,*"  says  Dr.  Fairbaim,  ''does  not  exactly  coincide  vith
his  form  of  expression  in  any  other  Epistle.    Elsewhere  he  calls  himself  a  semot,
a  bondman  of  Christ  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  10 ;  PhiL  L  1 ;  CoL  iv.  12),  but  here  onlj  of
Qod,    A  noteworthy  variation,  not  on  its  own  acoountf  but  as  a  mark  of  genuineness;
for  it  is  iroposMible  to  conceive  what  motive  could  have  induced  any  imitator  to  deput
in  such  a  manner  from  the  apostle's  usual  phraseology.    The  94  coupling  his  calling  u
an  apostle  of  Christ  with  his  relation  to  God  as  a  servant,  cannot  be  taken,  in  an  adrer-
sative  sensC)  for  there  is  really  no  opposition ;  but  it  is  used,  as  not  unfrequentlj,  to
subjoin  something  new,  different  and  distinct  from  what  precedes,  though  not  stzictlj
opposed  to  it."    Paul  was  one  of  the  greatest  of  men.    In  natural  endowments,  peoe
trating  insight,  vigour  of  thought,  logical  force,  and  rhetorical  aptitude,  he  had  in  ks
age  but  few  equals.    His  acquirements,  too,  were  great.    Brought  up  at  the  feet  of
<&maliel,  acquainted  with  Grecian  culture,  and  master  of  rabbinic  law,  he  could  stand
side  by  side  with  the  greatest  reasoners,  sa^es,  and  orators  of  his  time.     But,  beyond
all  this,  he  was  specially  called  and  qualified  by  Grod  for  propagating  the  gospel  of  ks
Son.    There  is  no  enterprise  on  this  earth  demanding  a  higher  kind  of  human  ag^icy
than  the  gospel,  nor  (notwithstanding  the  mental  feebleness  and  the  moral  mcaonesi
of  the  thousands  in  every  age  who  have  worked,  and  are  working,  in  connection  with
it)  can  there  be  found  a  higher  class  of  men,  both  intellectual  and  moral,  than  some
who  have  been,  and  still  are,  employed  in  indoctrinating  men  with  the  truths  of  the
gospel.

II.  As  A  TRANSCENDENT  PROMISE.  "In  hopc  of  etcmal  life,  which  God,  that  [who]
cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  bejran  [times  eternal].**  This  promise  is:  L
Transcendent  in  value.  "  Eternal  life.**  This  means  something  more  than  an  endless
existence.  An  interminable  existence  might  be  an  interminable  curse.  It  means  D0t
only  an  existence  without  end,  but  an  existence  without  cvt/,  without  sin,  error  sorrow,
misery.  Ay,  and  more  than  this,  an  endless  existence  in  connection  with  good^  and
with  pood  only,  with  knowledge,  holiness,  liberty,  and  companionship  with  the  best
creatOT  spirits,  and  with  the  great  God  himself.  Eternal  life  is  eternal  goodnesi
2.  Transcendent  in  certitude.  It  is  made  by  God,  "that  cannot  lieJ**  Are  not  all
things  possible  with  him?  Yes,  in  what  may  be  called  a  physical  sense.  It  is  possible
for  him  to  destroy,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  present  creation,  and  to  produce
a  new  one.  But,  in  a  moral  sense,  there  is  an  impotency.  His  **  cannot  *'  here  is  his
will  not,  and  his  "  will  not  *'  is  his  glory.  A  higher  eulogy  you  cannot  pronounce  on  any
man  than  to  say  he  cannot  be  ungenerous,  he  cannot  be  false,  ho  cannot  be  unjust,  h«
cannot  be  dishonourable.  Inability  to  do  wrong  is  the  glory  of  the  Infinite.  Thi*
promise,  then,  cannot  fail ;  it  must  be  realized.  *'  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot
or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  away.**  3.  Transcendent  in  age.  **  Promised  before
the  world  began  [times  eternal].**  When  was  that?  Before  the  foundation  of  the
earth  was  laid,  or  the  wheels  of  time  began  their  revolutions.  When  he  occupied  the
boundlessness  of  immensity  alone.  The  gospel  is  an  old  promise:  the  Lamb  was
slain  "  Ixifore  th-  foundation  of  the  world. ^    The  gospel  is  not  a  threat,  but  a  promise.

III.  As  A  GRADUAL  KEVELATiON.     "  But  hath  iu  due  times  [in  his  own  seasons"'


manifested  his  Word  throuj^h  preaching,  [in  the  message]  which  is  committed  unto  mf
I  wherewith  1  was  entrusted]  according  to  the  commandment  of  Grod  our  Saviour."


<JH.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  19

lliere  are  three  thoughts  here  suggested  concerning  the  revelation  of  this  promise  of
«ternal  life.  1.  It  wca  manifest^  at  a  proper  time.  ''Iti  due  times  [in  his  own
seasons]  manifested  his  Word."  God  has  a  season  for  everything,  everything  in  the
material  and  the  moral.  Nothing  hut  sin  appears  in  his  universe  that  does  not  come
''^  according  to  bis  time."  Oceans  ehh  and  flow,  planets  perform  their  revolutions,
kingdoms  rise  and  fall,  generations  come  and  go  **  according  to  bis  time."  He  had
iJL  time  for  the  revelation  of  his  redemptive  truth,  and  when  the  time  dawned  it  heamed
on  the  world.  2.  It  was  manifested  by  apostolic  preaching,  "Through  preaching.'',
Bedemptive  truth  came  into  tbe  world  through  man,  and  it  is  Heaven's  design  that  it
should  be  propagated  through  the  world  hy  man.  It  is  to  be  preached,  not  only  with
the  lips,  but  by  the  life.  The  true  preacher  must  incarnate  it.  His  life  must  illustrate
and  confirm  the  doctrine  that  his  lips  declare.  It  was  before  the  gospel  came  to  men
in  written  documents  that  it  won  its  greatest  victories.  Some  tbink  that  too  much
importance  is  attached  to  the  Bible  in  tbis  work,  and  that  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  the
circulation  of  tbe  Scriptures  will  answer  the  end.  History  shows  it  has  not  done  so,
■and  the  philosophy  of  the  work  explains  the  reason ;  hence  it  must  be  revealed  in  the
Toice  and  the  life.  3.  It  was  manifested  hy  the  Divine  comfnand,  "  Which  was  com-
mitted unto  me  [wherewith  I  was  entrusted]  according  to  the  conmiandment  of  Grod
our  Saviour."  The  Divine  command  came  to  the  apostle  to  preach  the  gospel  at
various  times — came  to  him  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  came  to  nim  in  the  temple  at
•Jerusalem,  came  to  him  in  the  ship  on  the  Adriatic.  Yes ;  the  Divine  command  comes
to  all :  **  Go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  tbe  gospel."  Not  only  was  it  by  command
that  Paul  preached  to  mankind,  but  now  to  Titus.

IV.  As  A  LOVE-BEGETTiNG  POWER.  "  To  Titus,  mine  own  son  [my  true  child]  aftei
the  common  faith."  **  Mine  own  son."  What  an  endearing  expression  I  The  gospel
•converter  becomes  the  father  in  the  highest  and  divinest  sense  of  the  converted.  No
relation  so  close,  vital,  and  tender  as  the  spiritual  relation  of  souls.  Paul's  desire  is,
for  Titus,  "Grace,  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  our  Saviour."  Here  is  the  wish  of  heavenly  philanthropy,  a  philanthropy  that
embraces  the  complete  and  everlasting  well-being  of  its  object.  Having  tbe  '*  grace,
peace,  and  mercy  "  of  God,  we  have  everything  we  require ;  we  have  "  all  and  abound."

Conclusion.  Prize  tbis  redemptive  truth,  practise  this  redemptive  truth,  preach
ibis  redemptive  truth.    It  is  the  "  power  of  God  unto  salvation."—!).  T.

Vers.  5 — 9. — Church  order,  '*  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou  shouldest
set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting,"  etc.  Titus  was  now  at  Crete.  '^  Crete,  over
-whose  Christian  population  Titus  had  been  placed  by  Paul,  was  a  well-known,  large,
and  populous  island  in  the  Mediterranean.  It  lies  geographically  further  south  than
any  of  the  European  islands,  and,  roughly  speaking,  almost  at  an  equal  distance  from
each  of  the  three  Old  World  continents,  Europe,  Asia,  Africa.  We  identify  it  with  the
•Caphtor  of  tbe  Old  Testament  (Dcut.  ii.  23 ;  Jer.  xlvii.  4 ;  Amos  ix.  7).  In  modem
times  it  is  known  by  us  as  Candia.  Very  early  it  was  the  scene  of  an  advanced
civilization.  In  the  'Odyssey'  it  is  mentioned  as  possessing  ninety  cities;  in  the
'Iliad'  as  many  as  one  hundred.  Metullus  added  it,  b.c.  69,  to  the  Roman  dominion.
In  tbe  days  of  Augustus  it  was  united  into  one  province  with  Cyrene.  It  abounded
with  Jews  of  wealth  and  influence;  this  we  learn  from  tbe  testimony  of  Pbilo  and  of
^osephus.  It  probably  received  the  gospel  from  some  of  those  of  Crete  who,  we  are
expressly  told,  were  present  when  the  Spirit  was  poured  on  the  apostles  on  the  first
Pentecost  after  the  Resurrection  (Acts  ii.  11).  The  apparently  flourishing  state  of
Christianity  on  the  island  at  this  time  was  in  great  measure,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the
residence  and  labours  among  them  of  the  Apostle  St.  Paul,  whose  work  appears  to  have
been  mainly  directed  to  preaching  the  gospel,  and  to  increasing  the  number  of  the
converts,  which,  from  the  wording  of  vcr.  5,  was  evidently  very  great,  elders  being
required  in  every  city."    Tbe  following  tboughts  are  deducible  from  these  words.

I.  That  in  every  Chmstian  community  there  should  be  the  maintenance  or
ORDER.  *'Thou  shouldest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  wanting."  "The  words,"
says  Dean  Spence,  '*  explain  the  cause  of  Titus's  appointment  in  Crete.  The  •  things
that  are  wanting  *  were  what  Paul  meant,  no  doubt,  to  have  done  himself,  but  was
prevented  by  being  hurried  away ;  for  him  the  end  was  nigh  at  hand.    These  '  things'


no  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTUSl  [caLl-lft


were  want  o(  Church  officials,  lack  '^f  irhorch  ^Yemnwat,  wmnt  of  eohenon  betvwa
the  Churches  of  the  bLsLnd :  in  &  word,  there  was  plentj  of  Ckrtstiaii.  lifc^  bat  no  Christiii
or^nizarioQ  aii  yet  in  Crere.  h  wa.i  ncher  a  nnmfaer  of  Chriitiaa  bcvtherfaoods  ti>«!
one."*  **Set  in  order.**  f'rA  Ia  the  fjod  of  order,  as  wioicaaod  in  the  harmooioas
operaticQ.4  of  Dotiir^.  Disorder,  both  in  the  mental  aod  morml  docnainsy  is  abnormal
and  pemicioos;  it  impiie:i  erermcre  a  deTiadon  fironi  the  catafalished  law  of  Almightr
love.  A  di.«jrderffi  bc«ij  is  dideaiieii,  ^)  is  a  disoriered  sooL  A  disordered  fiunilj  lacks
the  oiTi*iirltn  hi>th,  tjf  piice  and  pn.speritv.  A  disordered  Chnrcfa^  for  manj  reasoBS^ir
the  grresLr^t  of  ail  tnU,  LoDf  ision  in  a  Church  is  a  calomnj  of  Christ, azkd  obacmetift
at  once  to  its  peace,  piiwer,  prrj«perity, acd  luef illness^  ** Order,*  sajs  Southejr,  "is  tiie
sanity  of  the  mind,  the  health  of  the  b.xiy,  the  peace  of  the  city,  tike  aeconty  of  tkt
fltate.  A.4  the  beams  ^>  a  house,  as  the  bi:>nes  to  the  microcoszn  of  man,  ao  is  order  to
all  thincTi*.'*

II.  That  the  nxmrryxyci:  or  ^/hubch  obdeb  jult  bkqctre  the  xctistbt  ixr
iPTjaAL  SUPER iNTEJfDEyrs.  The  words  "elder,"  "bishop,"  **  pastor ,**  eux,  all  refer  tt
the  jwime  office,  aLd  that  office  means  "superintendent,"  or  ** OTeraeer.**  ••These  prei-
byters  were  Ut  be  most  carefully  selected,  according  to  the  instmctions  Titus  mut
remember  Paul  had  siven  him  on  some  previoos  occasion.**  There  was  to  be  some  <ne
in  orerlook  all.  S'lch  a  one  is  to  maintain  order,  not  bj  legislating  but  by  loTiof ;
not  by  the  a.ssumption  of  anth*;nty,  but  by  a  hnmble  deyotion  to  the  spiritual  intexests
of  all.  The  ministry  of  such  a  man  is  needed  becaose  of  the  many  elements  of  diacoid
that  exiflt,  even  in  the  best  communities,  such  as  temper,  self-will,  pride,  etc

III.  That  the  supebixten dents  shoctld  be  hes  or  Di^nxorisHEo  excelle5cl
**  I'lamelesA,"  etc.  The  his^hest  offices  in  Church  and  state  should  always  be  fiUedbj
the  hi;;hest  characters.  The  morally  small  man,  elevated  to  a  high  office,  is  an  incoa-
gruity  and  a  curse;  and  yet  how  common  is  such  a  sight!  Moral  serfs  <hi  thiooei,
moral  r^^pies  on  the  bench,  moral  sycophants  in  the  ecclesiastical  world  I  Hef«  Fknl
denotes  the  style  of  men  required  to  superintend  the  Church.  ••If  any  be  blsmeksB^
the  hiiitband  of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children  not  accused  of  riot  or  onruly,"  eic
**  The  expressions/'  says  Dr.  Fairbaim, "  indicate  one  possessed  of  that  prudence  sod
self-cr^ntrol,  that  uprightness  of  character,  that  kind,  generous,  disinterested,  gracioas
dispr,sition,  wliich  were  fitted  to  command  the  respect  and  secure  the  confidence  and
affection  of  a  Christian  community — one  altogether  such  as  might  serve  for  a  pattern
to  a  i\f>ck  ovfT  whom  he  was  appointe<i  to  preside,  and  guide  their  affairs  with
disrrotion."  The  qualifications  of  this  office  are  here  given  in :  1.  A  negative  form.
"  Not  self-wiiled,  not  Hfxm  ansjry,  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to  filtiy
Incn-."  2.  A  positiue  form.  "The  husband  of  one  wife,  having  faithful  children,
a  lovr;r  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just,  holy,  temperate,  holdino-  last  the
faithful  Word  as  he  hath  been  taught." — D.  T.  ^

VerH.  10 — 14. —  llie  sins  of  the  sect  and  tlie  sins  of  the  tribe.  "  For  there  are  manv
unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  they  of  the  circumcision,"  etc.  In  the
preceding;  verses  Paul  stated  one  purpose  for  which  he  left  Titus  in  Crete  viz.  to  set
in  order  **  the  things  that  are  wanting,"  and  to  ordain  elders  in  every  city/  He  recot'-
nizod  at  once,  not  only  the  importance  of  order  in  the  new  community,  but  also  the
importJiricc  of  ai)}X)inting  men  who,  intellectually  and  morally,  were  qualified  for  its
eftablishmont  and  contiauance.  In  these  verses  he  gives  Titus  directions  as  to  his
ag'^ressivo  work  in  Crete.  He  was  to  do  battle  with  sin.  "For  there  are  many  unmly
[men]  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers,  specially  tliey  of  the  circumcision  :  whose  mouths
niUHt  1x3  stopped,  who  subvert  [overthrow]  whole  houses,  teaching  things  which  they
out^ht  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake."  The  great  work  of  the  gospel  minister  is  to  do  battie
with  sin.  In  the  text,  sin  is  referred  to  as  appearing  in  two  aspects,  in  religious  sect
and  in  natloncd  character,

I.  I.v  up:lioiodh  kkct.  "  Specially  they  of  the  circumcision."  These  xindoubtedlv
arc  Judaizing  Christians,  men  who  pretended  to  be  converted  to  Christianity  men  who
sought  not  only  to  mingle  Judaic  elements  with  the  new  religion,  but  to  inculcate  and
disHcminato  it  in  that  form.  Observe  the  description  of  sin  as  it  appeared  in  this
rcsligioiiH  sect — these  men  of  the  circumcision.  Here  is :  1.  Factioxisness.  **  Unruly."
iNot  only  would  they  not  bow  to  the  established  order  of  the  Church,  but  not  to  the


CH.  1. 1—16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  1>1

spirit  and  priDciples  of  the  new  religion.  They  would  not  yield  to  the  masterhood  of
Christ,  the  Author  and  Substance  of  the  gospel ;  they  were  self-willed.  They  would  have
a  sect  of  their  own.  2.  Ostentation,  **  Vain  talkers."  Vain,  not  merely  in  the  sense
of  proud,  but  in  the  sense  of  emptiness.  In  truth,  as  a  rule,  the  emptiest  men,  intel-
lectually, are  at  once  the  most  conceited  and  loquacious.  They  talk,  not  for  the
edification  of  others,  but  for  the  gratification  of  themselves.  Their  fluency,  whilst  it
wins  the  admiration  of  fools,  deludes  the  ignorant,  and  disgusts  the  thoughtful.  3.
Falsehood*  "Deceivers."  All  merely  nominal  Christians  are  deceivers.  Theyprac-
tically  misrepresent  the  doctrines  they  profess  to  hold.  4.  Mischievousness,  "  Whose
mouths  must  be  stopped,  who  subvert  [overthrow]  whole  houses."  "  The  translation
should  run, '  seeing  they  subvert,'  etc.  There  was,  indeed,  grave  cause  why  these  men
should  be  put  to  silence :  the  mischief  they  were  doing  in  Crete  to  the  Christian  cause
was  incalculable.  It  was  no  longer  individuals  that  their  poisonous  teaching  affected,
but  they  were  undermining  the  faith  of  whole  families.  For  an  example  how  Titus
and  his  presbyters  were  to  stop  the  mouths  of  these  teachers  of  what  was  false,  comp.
Matt.  xxii.  34 — 46,  where  the  Lord,  by  his  wise,  powerful,  yet  gentle  words,  first  put
the  Sadducees  to  silence,  and  then  so  answered  the  Pharisees  '  that  neither  durst  any
man  from  that  day  ask  him  anymore  questions'"  (Dr.  Ellicott).  6.  Oreed.  " Teaching
things  which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake."  All  the  speeches  they  made,  all
the  influence  they  exerted,  sprang  from  sordid  motives.  Sin  has  a  thousand  branches
and  but  one  root,  and  that  root  is  selfishness.  How  many,  in  what  we  call  the  religious
world,  are  found  teaching  things  which  they  ought  not,  for  "  filthy  lucre's  sake  "—
things  that  gratify  popular  taste,  that  agree  with  popular  prejudice,  chime  in  with  the
popular  thought  I  All  this  to  fill  their  pews  and  to  enrich  Uieir  coffers.  Now,  these
4siDs  which  are  discovered  in  the  religious  sect  are  prevalent  outside  of  all  religions ;
hnt  they  receive  a  peculiar  colour,  shape,  enormity,  and  mischievousness  when  we  find
them  in  the  religious  realm.  The  devil  is  less  hideous  amongst  his  fellows  in  hell  than
he  is  amongst  the  sons  of  God.  Hence,  to  do  battle  with  sin  in  these  religious  forms  is
the  grand  work  of  a  true  preacher ;  and  truly,  in  this  age,  and  here  in  England,  he  will
£nd  these  sins  on  every  hand.  He  will  see  factiousness  building  up  sects,  and  little
sects  within  sects;  ostentation — ^vain  speaking,  braggardism,  sometimes  cooing  and
sometimes  bawling,  everywhere ;  falsehood — rogues  robing  themselves  in  the  garb  of
sainthood,  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing;  mischievousness — by  their  empty  words  and
pernicious  example  subverting  "  whole  houses/'  filling  the  domestic  air  with  poisonous
cant ;  greed — the  gospel  itself  made  a  trade,  and  vested  interests  created  in  connection
with  doctrines  and  doings  antagonistic  to  the  life  and  spirit  of  him  whom  they  call
Master.  Ah  me !  conventional  religion  is  a  calumny  on  the  religion  of  Christ.  Never
was  a  Luther  wanted  in  Christendom  more  than  now.  He  is  wanted  to  substitute  the
pure  gospel  of  Christ  for  the  denominationalized  gospel.

II.  In  national  character.  "One  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own,
said.  The  Cretans  are  alway  liars,  evil  beasts,  slow  bellies  [idle  gluttons]."  There  are
three  sins  mentioned  here  which  seem  to  have  prevailed  amongst  the  Cretans  as  a  race.
1.  Lying.  "  The  Cretans  are  alway  liars."  Who  made  this  charge  against  the
Cretans  ?  Paul  says, "  One  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet  of  their  own."  The  quotation
is  from  a  poem  on  *  Oracles,'  by  Epimcnidcs,  of  Phccstus,  who  flourished  b.c.  600,  lived
to  the  ago  of  a  hundred  and  fifty,  and  was  supposed  to  have  been  a  sleeper  in  a  cave
for  fifty-seven  years.  He  appears  to  have  deserved  the  title  prophet  in  the  fullest
sense.  Plato  speaks  of  him  as  a  Divine  man.  The  Cretans  were  characterized  by  the
sin  of  lying — "alway  liars."  This  expression  was  quoted  by  Callimachus  in  his
•  Hymn  to  Zeus,'  and  well  known  in  antiquity.  "  The  very  word  *to  Cretize'  (Kretizein),
or  to  play  the  part  of  a  Cretan,  was  invented  as  a  word  synonymous  with  *  to  deceive,'  *  to
utter  a  lie ; '  just  as  Corinthiazein,  *  to  play  the  inrt  of  a  Corinthian,'  signified  '  to  commit
a  still  darker  moral  ofience.'  Some  writers  suggest  that  this  despicable  vice  of  lying
was  received  as  a  bequest  from  the  early  Phoenician  colonists."  2.  Sensuality,  "  Evu
beasts."  Not  only  liars,  but  gross  and  sensual,  living  in  animalism  and  for  it.  All
men  may  be  called  "  beasts  "  who  attend  to  their  animal  appetites  as  means  of  gratifica-
tion rather  than  of  relief.  He  who  seeks  happiness  from  his  senses  rather  than  from
liis  soul  is  a  beast ;  he  who  seeks  it  from  without  rather  than  from  within  is  not  better
than  a  beast.    The  happiness  of  a  true  man  cannot  stream  into  him  from  without ;  it


22  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  i.  1— 16L


must  well  up  from  the  depths  of  his  own  high  thinkings  and  pare  affections.  Gluttony,
"Slow  bellies  [idle  gluttons]."  Their  gluttony  made  them  dull,  heavy,  and  indolent
Such  are  what  may  be  called  tribal  or  national  sins.  They  were  not  confined  to  the
Cretans,  but  for  them  the  Cretans  were  notorious.  These  are  naiioncU,  But  are  these
sins  extinct  in  England?  Have  we  no  lying  here?  Our  social  ah*  is  impregnated  with
falsehood.  Have  we  no  sensuality  and  gluttony?  Yes,  alas!  tens  of  thousands  are
every  day  pampering  themselves  with  luxuries,  whilst  miliioDS  are  being  starved  to
death.  Here,  then,  are  common  sins  with  which  the  preacher  has  to  do  battle.  He  has
to  "rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith."

Co^XLU8ION.  A  true  preacher,  then,  has  no  easy  task.  He  has  to  wage  fierce  battle
with  the  sins  that  are  around  him — the  sins  of  the  sect  and  the  sins  of  the  tribe  He
is  not  to  ])ander  to  men^s  tastes,  nor  to  battle  with  mere  opinions  and  theories,  but  with
iins ;  he  must  "  resist  unto  blood,  striving  asainst  sin."  "  For  this  purpose  the  Son  d
God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL" — D.  T.

Vers.  15,  16. — ITie  supreme  importance  of  moral  character,  **Tjnto  the  pure  sD
things  are  pure :  but  unto  them  that  are  deBled  and  unbelieving  Is  nothing  pare,**  etc.
We  notice,  at  the  outset,  two  facts  suggested  by  the  passage.  1.  That  there  'is  an
essential  difference  in  the  moral  characters  of  men.  There  are  some  ''pure**  and  some
"defiled,"  some  holy  and  some  unholy.  What  is  the  underlying  inspiring  princij^e
that  makes  this  difference?  '^lXiq predominant  disposition.  Perhaps  there  is  no  mond
being  in  the  universe  who  is  not  under  the  masterhood  of  some  one  sentiment  or  passicHi,
to  which  can  bo  traced,  as  to  a  mainspring,  all  the  motions  of  his  being.  This  con-
trolling tendency  is  the  moral  monarch  of  souls,  or,  in  Scripture  language,  is  the  moni
"  heart  of  the  man.**  This  supreme  disposition  exists  in  all  men  in  two  distinct  snd
opposite  forms,  either  in  sympathy  with  the  true,  the  right,  and  the  spiritual,  or
in'  sympathy  with  the  false,  the  wrong,  and  the  materiaL  That  soul  alone  is  pwn
whose  governing  sympathy  is  God  and  the  true.  Supreme  love  for  the  supremely  good
is  the  true  life  of  the  soul,  and  the  fountain  of  all  its  virtues.  He  whose  controlling
sympathies  run  not  thus,  is  impure  and  corrupt.  2.  That  the  outvxird  world  is  to  men
cuxording  to  this  difference.    The  whole  external  universe  is  to  a  man  according  to  the

moral  state  of  his  soul.     "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  " so  is  he  in

relation  to  himself,  to  all  without,  and  to  God.     This  being  so,  the  text  teaches  the
supreme  importance  of  moral  character.     Let  us  look  at —

I.  The  morally  pure  i5f  relatiox  to  all  things.  "  Unto  the  pure  all  thinc^s
are  pure."  This  is  true  in  relation  to  three  things.  1.  In  relation  to  appearance.
The  proverb  goes  that  the  <;reate8t  rogues  are  ever  the  most  suspicious.  A  thoroudilv
selfish,  ungodly  soul  will  see  but  little  good  even  in  the  best  men.  It  is  a  law  "that
man  judges  his  fellow  by  himself,  and  the  more  corrupt  a  man  is,  the  more  severe  his
judgment  on  others.  A  good  man  is  neither  given  to  suspicion  nor  censoriousness-  he
sees  some  good  in  all  men.  2.  In  relation  to  influence.  The  influence  of  all  out\^*ard
things  uj)on  men  is  dependent  on  their  moral  cliaracter.  Our  Lord  says,  '*  Kot  that
which  goetli  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man,  but  that  which  cometh  out  of  the  mouth
defileth  a  man."  The  moral  character  is  an  all- transformative  power  in  the  centrf
of  man's  being.  It  turns  the  unclean  into  the  clean,  and  the  reverse.  A  good  man.
like  the  bee,  can  extract  honey  from  the  bitterest  plant ;  or,  like  the  -^olian  harp,  can
turn  the  shrieking  wind  into  music.  3.  In  relation  to  ajypropriation.  As  the  bodv
lives  by  appropriating  the  outward,  so  does  the  soul ;  and  as  the  eilects  of  the  appn>
priation,  whether  universal  or  otherwise,  depend  on  the  condition  of  the  body's  health,
as  the  appropriation  of  a  diseasetl  lx>dy  only  increases  the  physical  ailment ;  so  with
the  soul.  A  corrupt  soul  approi)riates,  even  from  the  most  strengthening  and  refreshin'^
means  of  spiritual  improvement,  that  which  weakens  and  destroys.  Pharaoh  and  his
host  got  moral  mischief  out  of  the  ministry  of  Moses ;  and  the  men  of  Capernaum  were
pressed  into  a  deeper  and  darker  hell  through  the  elevating  and  enlightening''  ministrv
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.     Mark,  then,  the  supreme  importance  of  moral  character.

II.  The  morally  defiled  in  relation  to  all  things.  "Unto  them  that  are
defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure;  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is deOled.**
Here  is  the  converse.  Mark,  in  passing,  three  things.  1.  The  sphere  of  the  defilement.
"  The  mind  and  conscience."    "  The  mind,"  says  a  modem  expositor,  **  is  the  willing  as


CH.1. 1— 16.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  23

well  as  the  thinkiDg  part  of  man,  as  it  has  been  well  defined  the  human  spirit  (pneuTna)
in  one  of  its  aspects,  not  simply  qualenus  cogitat,  et  intelligity  but  also  quatenus  vtUL
Defilement  of  this  mind  (noii«)means  that  the  thoughts,  wishes,  purposes,  activities,
are  all  stained  and  debased.  The  second  of  these,  the  conscience  (suneidesis),  is  the
moral  consciousness  within,  and  that  which  is  ever  bringing  up  the  memory  of  the
past,  with  its  omissions  and  commissions,  its  errors,  its  cruel,  heartless  unkindness,  its
selfish  disregard  of  others.  When  this  is  defiled,  then  this  last  safeguard  of  the  soul  is
broken  down.  The  man  and  woman  of  the  defiled  conscience  is  self-satisfied,  hard,
impenitent  to  the  last.  Every  part  and  fiEu;ulty  of  the  soul  is  stained  with  sin.  The
body  may  be  cleansed  by  ceremonial  ablutions,  and  the  external  manners  and  speech
kept  pure  by  culture  and  civilization,  but  the  soul  be  black ;  the  outside  of  the  "  cup
and  of  the  platter  clean,"  but  inside  full  of  corruption.  2.  TU  cause  of  the  defilement.
••  They  profess  that  they  know  Grod,  but  in  works  they  deny  him."  There  is  nothing,
perhaps,  so  morally  defiling  to  the  soul  as  religious  hypocrisy.  The  man  who  with  the
lip  professes  to  know  Gk>d,  and  who  in  the  life  denies  him,  gets  deeper  stains  upon  his
soul  than  the  agnostic  who  professes  that  he  knows  nothing  about  him.  What  millions
in  our  churches  every  Sunday  publicly,  at  each  service,  avow  with  their  lip  their  belief
in  God,  but  in  their  week-day  life  "he  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts"!  Thus  souls  get
deeply  dyed  in  corruption  in  Christian  churches.  3.  The  hideousness  of  the  defilement,
**  Being  abominable  and  disobedient,  and  imto  every  good  work  reprolmte."  However
fair  their  conduct  in  the  religious  observances,  they  are  **  abominable  "  within,  hideous
to  the  eye  of  God.  However  rigorous  in  their  observances  and  religious  ordinances,
they  are  "disobedient"  in  heart,  they  outrage  moral  laws;  however  useful  they  regwd
themselves  and  appear  to  others,  they  are  "  reprobate,"  they  are  rejected  and  worthless.
These  "  defiled  **  in  soul  defile  everything  without ;  all  outward  things  in  their  appear-
ance, influences,  and  appropriation  are  to  them  corrupt.

Conclusion.  Mark :  1.  The  natural  sovereignty  of  the  human  soul.  We  are  not
necessarily  the  creatures  of  the  outward ;  we  have  within  the  power  to  bend  circum-
stances to  oiu:  will,  to  get  good  out  of  evil,  to  turn  outward  dissonance  into  music,
deformity  into  beauty,  poison  into  nourishment.  Let  us  adore  our  Maker  for  this
wonderful  endowment^an  endowment  which  guards  us  from  the  coercion  of  outward
forces,  secures  to  us  an  inward  freedom  of  action,  and  enables  us  to  put  all  outward
things  in  subjection  to  our  own  spiritual  selves.  2.  The  dependency  of  the  souVs  destiny
on  itself  A  man's  destiny  depends  upon  his  moral  character,  and  his  character  depends
upon  himself.  As  food,  however  nutritious,  cannot  administer  strength  to  a  man's  body
without  the  digestive  and  appropriative  power,  so  no  external  influences,  however  good
and  useful  in  themselves,  can  raise  a  man's  soul  without  the  right  action  of  its  faculties.
Man  cannot  be  made  good.  His  body  may  be  borne  to  the  summit  of  a  lofty  mountain
without  the  use  of  his  limbs,  but  if  his  soul  is  to  ascend  "  the  holy  hill  of  the  Lord,"
ho  must  climb  it  every  inch  himself.  Fortune  or  patronage  may  raise  him  to  some
eminent  social  position,  but  he  cannot  reach  a  single  stage  of  moral  dignity — the  true
dignity  of  man — apart  from  his  own  earnest  endeavours.  The  transformative  power  of
the  soul  is  to  external  circumstances  what  the  builder  is  to  the  materials  out  of  which
he  rears  his  edifice.  The  choicest  materials  may  be  brought  together — gold,  marble,
and  cedar — but  unless  the  builder  use  them  with  artistic  skill  they  will  never  take  the
form  of  a  beautiful  structure.  So  the  providence  of  God  may  gather  around  man  all
the  facilities  and  elements  for  the  raising  of  a  noble  character,  but  unless  he  use  them
with  his  own  spiritual  hand,  he  will  never  produce  such  a  structure.  3.  The  grand  end
of  true  teaching.  What  is  that?  The  supreme  importance  of  every  man  obtaining
a  true  moral  character.  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be  bom  again."
In  moral  goodness  of  soul  alone,  can  we  not  only  find  our  heaven,  but  find  our  way
safely  and  happily  through  this  life.  We  live  in  a  world  of  evil.  We  cannot  escape
Its  smful  influence  by  endeavouring,  like  the  anchorite,  to  avoid  its  touch.  WhilBt
no  man  should  put  himself  in  the  way  of  temptation,  no  man  should  be  afndd  to
confront  evil,  to  go  into  its  most  malarial  regions  if  duty  call.  In  truth,  if  man's  well-
being  depended  upon  escaping  outward  evil,  it  could  never  be  realized,  because  to  live
in  the  world  he  is  bound  to  live  in  its  midst,  and  evil  must  stream  into  him  every  day.
How,  then,  is  he  to  reach  a  blessed  destiny  ?  Not  merely  by  endeavouring  to  frame
his  life  according  to  the  outward  rules  of  morality  and  religion,  but  by  a  right  use


24


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTDS.


[en.  TL 1—15.


of  hU  own  spiritual  powers.  There  is  a  power  ia  the  body,  'when  in  a  healthy  stih^
to  appropriate  whatever  goes  into  it  from  external  nature  that  is  wholesome  and  neoei*
aary,  and  to  expel  that  which  is  noxious  and  superfluous.  The  soul  has  a  pow
analogous  to  this ;  a  power  to  appropriate  the  wholesome  and  to  expel  the  injonou.
This  power  we  call  the  transformative.  Let  us  use  it  rightly— -use  it  as  Noah  used  it,
who,  amidst  the  blasphemy  and  ridicule  of  a  corrupt  generation,  walked  with  God,  and
fulfilled  a  noble  destiny ;  as  Paul  used  it  at  sceptical  Athens,  in  dissolute  Corinth,  and
in  pagan  Rome,  who  from  experience  left  the  world  this  testimony  :  '*  All  things  woik
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.'* — D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


Ver.  1. — Befit  for  hecomCf  A.V. ;  the  $ound
for  90und,  A.V.  But  speak  thou,  etc.  The
apostle  now  brings  out,  in  full  contrast  with
the  vain  talk  of  the  heretical  teachers,  the
BoUd,  sober  teaching  of  a  true  man  of  God,  in
harmony  with  the  sound  doctrine  of  the
gospel  of  Christ.  The  sound  doctrine  (rp
{ryiaiyo^  8i8a<ricaA(a) ;  as  in  1  Tim.  i.  10
(where  see  note).  In  1  Tim.  vi.  1  ^  5i5a-
0-iraA/a  by  itself  means  **tho  ChriBtian  faith,'*
•*  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel."  The  varying
phrases,  ^  «ca\^  HtHoffKoKla^  ^  icar*  tvctfiticw
itHaffKoXloj  and  ^  iyiaivov<ra  8i8a<ricaA/a,  all
mean  the  same  thing,  with  varying  descrip-
tive qualifications  (see  ver.  10).  The
article  **  the  "  is  not  required.

Ver.  2. — Aged  for  the  aged,  A.V. ;  teiri'
perate  for  «o6er,  A.V. ;  sober-minded  for  temr
perate^  A.V. ;  love  for  charity^  A.V.  Tem-
perate (yr}<p<i\io5);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  2 (where  see
note).  Grave  (trffiyov^);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  8,  11
(see  too  1  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  4).  Sober-minded
{(Tcixppovas)',  as  ch.  i.  8,  note.  Sound  (vyicUyov-
Toj);  see  ver.  1,  note,  and  ch.  i.  13,  where,
as  here,  the  word  is  applied  to  persons,  as  it
is  in  its  literal  sense  in  3  John  2.  Faith,  .  .  .
love, .  .  .  patience.  Wo  have  the  same  triad
in  1  Tim.  vi.  11.  In  1  Cor.  xiii.  13  wo  find
"  faith,  hope,  love."  In  1  Thess.  i.  3  the
apostle  joins  "  work  of  faith,  labour  of  love,"
and  "  patience  of  hope,"  wliicli  last  phrase
seems  almost  to  identify  patience  and  hope
(comp.  too  Rom.  viii.  25 ;  xv.  4).  We  must
not  miss  the  important  warning,  not  only  to
have  some  kind  of  faith,  love,  and  patience,
but  to  be  healthy  and  vigorous  in  our  faith,
love,  and  patience.  There  is  a  puny  faith,
a  sickly  love,  and  a  misdirected  patience.

Ver.  3. — Tfiat  for  the,  A.V. ;  Ite  reverent  in
demeanour  for  that  they  he  in  behaviour  as
hecometh  holiness,  A.V. ;  slanderers  for  false
accusers^  A.V. ;  nor  for  not,  A.V. ;  enslaved
for  given,  A.V. ;  that  which  is  good  for  good
things,  A.V.  Beverent  {Upoirptrrtls) ;  only
here  in  the  New  Testament,  twice  in
4  Maccabees  (in  ix.  25,  where  the  eldest  of
the  seven  brothers  wlio  suffered  martyrdom
under  Antiochus  Epiphanes  is  called  6  Upo"


wptThf  vtarUis ;  and  in  xL  20,  where  it  k
coupled  with  a/«Sr,«  •*  age/' or  "  generatioo");
it  is  not  unoommon  in  classical  Greek.  The
word  means  *•  beooming  a  holy  pezaon,  place,
or  matter ; "  otherwise  expressed  in  1  Tin.
iL  10,  "which  beoometh  women  profesnaf
godliness ; "  and  Eph.  v.  3,  *•  as  beoomeS
saints."  In  demeanonr  C^y  tcarwrrhiucrr,  d
much  vrider  meaning  than  KOTaar9\i  ii
1  Tim.  ii.  7);  hero  only  in  the  New  Testo-
ment,  once  in  3  Mace.  v.  45,  "a  state"  or
"condition,"  spoken  of  elephants;  and  «
in  classical  Greek,  applied  to  a  tn^n,  to
health,  to  the  air,  or  the  body  politic  Hat
mien,  demeanour^  or  deportment^  including,
as  St.  Jerome  expounds  it,  the  movemeoti
of  the  body,  the  expression  of  the  ooante-
nance.  what  is  said,  and  what  is  left  unsaid.
The  whole  habit  and  composition  or  structuN
of  mind  and  body  is  to  be  ltp6irp€wu,  what
becomes  a  holy  woman.  Slanderers  (9nfU-
\ovs) ;  as  1  Tim.  iii.  (gjy.).  Kor  enslaved  to
much  wine  (comp.  I  Tim.  iii.  8).  Observe
the  fitness  of  the  phrase  "  enslaved,"  The
drunkard  is  thoroughly  the  slave  of  his
vicious  appetite  (comp.  ch.  iii.  3;  Rom.  vL
IG;  2  Pet.  li.  19).  Teachers  of  that  which
is  good  (<caAo«t5o(rKd\oy5) ;  onlv  here  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,or
in  classical  Greek ;  teachers,  by  their  holy
demeanour  as  well  as  by  their  words.  For
as  Ignatius  (quoted  by  Kllicott)  says  of  the
Bisliop  of  the  Trallians,  '» His  very  demean-
our (avrb  TO  KaTdffTTjfia)  was  a  irreat  lesson
(jxaenT€ia)r

Ver.  4.— -Train  for  teach  .  .  .  (o  he  sober,
A.V.  Train  ((raxppopiCcoaO ;  only  here  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.,
but  common  in  classical  Greek  in  the
sense  of  to  *' correct,"  "control,"  or  "  mode-
rate," which  is  its  meaning  Jiero.  Ellicott
renders  it  "school"  (comp.  1  Tim.  v.  14>
Tlie  A.V.  "  teach  to  be  sol^r  "  is  manifestly
wrong.  To  love  their  husbands  C<pi\dpBpovs
(hat);  here  only  in  the  New  Teatamont, not
found  in  the  LXX.,  but  occasionally,  in  thii
sense,  in  classical  Greek.     To  love    their

*  But  another  and  more  probable  reading
is  ay<i}v,  conflict,  struggle.


cii.  n.  1 — 15J


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa


25


children  (^or/irrovs);  here  only  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.
€xcept  in  4  Mace.  xv.  4,  but  not  uncommon
in  classical  Greek.

Ver.  5. — Sober-minded  for  ditcreei^  A. V. ;
workers  for  keepers,  A.V.  and  T.R. ;  hind
for  good,  A.V.;  being  in  subjection  for
obedient,  A.V.  Sober-minded  (<rc^^yas);
as  in  ver.  2  and  ch.  i.  8;  1  Tim.  iii.  2.
*•  Discreet "  is  nearer  the  sense  than  **  sober-
minded."  Perhaps  the  French  sage  is  nearer
still.  Workers  at  home  (oiKovpyoCs,  for  the
T.R.  olKot}povs).  Neither  word  occurs  else-
where in  the  New  Testament  or  in  the
LXX.,  nor  does  oUovpySs  in  classical  Greek.
But  olKovp6s,  which  is  probably  the  true
reading  (Huther),  is  common  in  good  clas-
sical Greek  for  **  stayers  at  home."  It  is
derived  from  oIkos  and  olpos,  a  "keeper."
Kind  (dyaSds).  The  idea  of  kindness  or
aood  nature  seems  to  be  the  side  of  goodness
here  intended;  as  we  say,  "Ho  was  very
good  to  me  "  (so  Matt.  xx.  15  and  1  Pet.  ii.
18).  Kindness  is  the  leading  idea  in  ayaSSs,
Obedient  (vToraur(r6fx9vas).  These  identical
words  occur  in  1  Pet  iii.  1  (see  too  Eplj.  v.
22 :  Col.  iii.  18).  That  the  Word  of  GN>d  be
not  blasphemed  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  1).  8t.
Paul  complains  that  the  Name  of  God  was
Islasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  on  account
of  the  evil  deeds  of  the  Jews  (Rom.  ii.  24 ;
see  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20—23).  Our  Lord,  on  the
other  hand,  exhorts  that  Christians,  by
their  good  works,  should  lead  men  to  glorify
their  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  The  pas-
sage before  us  shows  how  much  the  honour
Of  Christianity  is  bound  up  with  the  faithful
discharge  by  Christians  of  the  simple
domestic  duties  of  life.  In  truth,  the  family
is  the  chief  seat,  and  often  the  main  test,
•of  Christian  virtue,  as  it  is  the  distinctive
feature  of  humanity  as  ordained  by  God.

Ver.  6. — The  younger  for  young,  A.V.  The
younger  (see  1  Pet  v.  5,  where,  however,
the  ytd^tpoi  are  contrasted  with  the  Tpt<rP6'
rtpot,  as  in  1  Tim.  v.  1 ;  here  with  irp^trfiif
ras  in  ver.  2).

Ver.  7. — An  ensample  for  a  pattern,  A.V. ;
thy  doctrine  for  doctrine,  A.V. ;  R.T.  omits
sincerity  (a<pe<ip(rlay),  which  is  in  the  T.R.
In  all  things  (ircpl  wdtna);  as  1  Tim.  i.  19
(irfpi  r^v  iritmv) ;  **  concerning,  in  the  matter
of"  (Ellicott  on  1  Tim.  i.  19).  St.  Jerome
and  others  connect  these  words  with  the
preceding  clause,  "  to  be  sober-minded  in  all
things."  But  it  is  usually  taken  as  in  the
text,  "in  all  things  showing  thyself,"  etc.
Showing  thyself;  etc  With  regard  to  the
somewhat  unusual  addition  of  the  reflexive
pronoun  to  the  verb  in  the  middle  voice.
Bishop  Ellicott  remarks,  **  Emphasis  and
perspicuity  are  gained  "  by  it.  An  ensample
\rintov),  Huther  remarks  that  this  is  tiie
only  passage  in  the  New  Testament  wht.ro


rxntos  is  followed  by  a  genitive  of  the  thing.
In  1  Tim.  iv.  12  the  genitive  is  of  tho
person  to  whom  the  example  is  given,  in
word,  in  conversation,  etc.,  and  in  1  Pet.  v.  3,
r^os  rov  mifivtov.  Of  good  works  (comp.
oh.  iii.  8).  ^  Note  the  stress  laid  by  St  Paul
upon  Christian  practice  as  the  result  of
sound  doctrine.  Mere  talk  is  absolutely
worthless.  Uncormptness  (iip$opiay,  or,  as
T.R.,  it,9ia4»$oplav);  only  here  in  the  New
Testament,  and  not  in  the  LXX.  or  in
classical  Greek.  *A^Oopla  has  the  best
manuscript  authority ;  but  the  sense  of  ddio-
^opla  as  deduced  from  the  good  classical
word  iSid^opost  which  means  among  other
things  **  incorruptible" — not  to  be  influenced
by  entreaties  or  bribes — seems  to  make  it
preferable.  The  word  describes  the  quality
of  the  teacher  rather  than  of  his  doctrine.
He  is  to  preach  the  truth  without  fear  or
favour.  Gravity  (atftvSrrira) ;  as  1  Tim.  ii.
2;  iii.  4.  This,  again,  is  a  quality  of  the
teacher.  These  accusatives  depend  upon
irapcx<^Mc>'OS'  I^^^  ^^^  construction  of  the
sentence  is  somewhat  irregular  for  brevity's
sake.

Ver.  S.—US  for  you,  A.V.  and  T.R.
Sound  ipeeoh  (KSyov  i/ytrj) ;  still  depending
upon  iraptxofiffos.  Besides  his  personal
qualities  as  a  teacher,  his  speech,  or  doc-
trine, must  be  sound.  The  word,  common
of  bodily  health,  is  only  hero  applied  to
speech  or  doctrine ;  the  common  phrase  in
the  pastoral  Epistles  is  6ytairo6<rn  8i8a(r/caA/a,
vymivoviTi  \6yoit,  and  the  like.  That  oannot
be  eondemned  (dKarri.yv»arov) ;  only  hero  in
the  New  Testament,  once  in  2  Mace.  iv.  27.
This  marks  the  care  that  the  Christian
teacher  must  take,  not  to  say  anything  in
his  teaching  rash,  or  reprehensible,  or  that
can  give  offence  or  cause  the  ministry  to  be
blamed  (comp.  1  Tim.  v.  14).  May  be
ashamed  (impairp).  In  tho  active  voice
iyrphrtiv  is  "  to  put  to  shame "  (1  Cor.  iv.
14),  and  in  classical  Greek.  In  the  middle
voice  ivrpirtonat,  followed  by  a  genitive  of
the  person,  or  an  accusative  in  later  Greek,
means  to  "  respect,  reverence "  (3Iatt  xxi.
37 :  Luke  xviii.  2,  etc.).  In  the  passive,  as
here  and  2  Thess.  iii.  14,  it  means  "to  be
put  to  shame,"  "to  be  ashamed"  (comp.
Ps.  xxxiv.  4  [LXX.,  XXXV.  4]).  (Compare,  for
the  sentiment,  1  Pet.  ii.  15 ;  iii.  16 ;  and  note
the  frequent  resemblances  between  the  pas-
toral Epistles  and  those  of  St.  Peter.)  The
shame  of  the  detractors  consists  in  their
being  put  to  silence,  having  nothing  to  say,
being  proved  to  bo  slanderers.  Ho  eiil  thing
(jari^^p  ^v\ov)\  as  Jas.  iii.  16;  John  iii.  20;
V.  29.  The  word  means  **  monn,  worthless,
paltry,"  and  is  hence  synonymous  with
icaK6s,

Ver.  9. — In  subjection  tn  for  obedient  unto^
A.V, ;    be  well-'plea^ing  to  tJiem  for  pUas*


26


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


[cR.  n.  1 — 15


Vtem  well,  A.V. ;  gainmying  for  anntering
again,  A.V.  SaryanU;  t.e.  dates  (8o</AovO>
the  conrelativo  to  which  is  ittnrSrais,  masters,
who  had  abBolutc  power  over  their  slaves,
and  property  in  them  (comp.  1  Pot.  ii.  18,
where  tney  are  called  by  the  name  of
otK^rai,  house-slaves).  The  construction  is
carried  on  from  the  "exhort"  of  ver.  6.
Well-pleMing(«uapc(rTovf);  elsewhere  spoken
with  reference  to  God  (Uom.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.
y.  9;  Eph.  v.  10,  etc.).  In  all  things
(iv  iraci*') ;  nearly  the  same  as  irtpl  irdm-a  in
ver.  7 ;  to  bo  taken  with  thapitrrovs.  Some,
however, connect  the  words  with  ^iroreCao-co^cu,
'*  to  be  obedient  in  all  things."  Gainnying
(i>m\iyovrai)\  as  in  ch.  i.  9  (see  note),
iflore,  however,  the  **  answering  again  **  of  the
A.V.  is  a  better  renderinj?.  It  implies,  of
course,  a  resistance  to  the  will  of  their
master,  and  impatience  of  any  rebuke
(comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  18—20).

Ver.  10. — Purloining  {yotr^iiotiivovs);  lite-
rally, aeparating  for  their  own  use  what
does  not  belong  to  them.  So  Acts  v.  2,  3,
**to  keep  back  part."  It  is  used  in  the  same
sense  by  the  LXX.  Josh.  vii.  1  of  Achan,
and  2  Maoo.  iv.  32  of  Menelaus,  and  occa-
sionally in  classical  Greek  (Xenophon,
Polybius,  etc.).  Showing  (MtiKyvfiiyovs).
It  occurs  eleven  times  in  tlie  New  Testament,
viz.  twice  in  Hebrews,  and  nine  times  in
St.  Paul's  acknowledged  Epistles.  All  good
fidelity.  All  fideli  ty  means  fidelity  in  every-
thing where  fidelity  is  required  in  a  faithful
servant — care  of  his  master's  property,  con-
scientious labour,  keeping  of  time,  acting
behind  his  master's  back  the  same  as  before
his  face.  The  sint^ular  addition  dyadiiy,
cominjEj  after  ivhtiKWfxtvovs,  must  mean,  as
Ben  gel  say.y,  "in  all  \:[,oo{{  things."  The
duty  of  fidtlUy  does  not  extend  to  crime  or
wrong-doin;;.  The  word  "  good  "  is  like  the
addition  in  the  oath  of  canonical  obedience,
"in  all  honest  things,"  and  is  a  necessary
limitation  to  the  preceding  "  all  "  (see  ch.
iii.  1,  and  note).  The  doctrine  (r^v  Sidaana-
hlav) ;  as  in  ver.  1  (where  see  note).  In  ch.
i.  9  (where  see  note)  rj  SiSoxif  is  used  in  the
same  way.  This  use  of  SiSac/coAta  is  con-
firmed by  the  reading  of  the  R.T.,  which
inserts  a  second  rr)u  before  rov  (ruT^pos.
Adorn  the  doctrine.  The  fccntimcnt  is  the
same  as  that  in  1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iv.  11.  Chris-
tians are  exhorted  to  give  glory  to  God,  and
support  and  honour  to  the  gospel  of  God*s
gnice,  by  their  good  works  and  holy  lives.
God  our  Saviour  (see  1  Tim.  i.  1 ;  ii.  3 ;
iv.  10;  and  above,  ch.  i.  3,  note).  In  all
things  (4v  watTjv);  as  1  Pet.  iv.  11.

Ver.  11. — Hath  appeared,  bringing  aalvu'
Hon  to  all  men,  for  that  hringeth  salvation,
hath  appeared  to  all  men,  A.V.  and  T.R.
Bringing  salvation  to  all  men  {aoimipios).
The  R.T.  omits  the  article  ri  before  aroniipiosy


which  necessitates  oonstrciing  wSi^iw  hipm-
wots  with  actr^pios^  ^BaTing  to  all  m^"
'*  bringing  lalvation  to  all  men.**  With  the
article  ^  aa  in  the  T.R.,  it  may  be  taken
either  way,  bat  it  is  rather  more  natural  to
oonstrao  nwrir  d$piiwots  with  ^vc^rq,  *^hath
appeared  to  all  men."  The  meaning  of  the
phrase,  "hath  appeared  to  all  men,**  is  the
same  as  the  saying  in  the  song  of  Simeoo,
"  Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,  which
thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all
people**  (Luke  ii.  30,  31 ;  comp.  CoL  I  6)l
The  gospel  is  not  a  bidden  mystery,  bat  is
proclaimed  to  the  whole  world.  Xt^pt^s  ss
an  adjective  is  foond  only  here  in  the  Nev
Testament,  in  Wisd.  i.  14  and  3  Maoc  viL
18,  and  frequently  in  classical  Greek.

Ver.  U.—Inttructing  for  teaching^  A.V.;
to  the  intent  that  for  Vtai^  A.V. ;  and  r^JU-
eoudy  for  righteotishj,  A.V.  TuMtrueting  «»
to  the  inteat  that  This  is  an  nnneoessazy
refinement.  Hather  is  right  in  saying  that
the  sentence  beginning  with  tma  might  hsTS
been  expressed  by  the  infinitiTe  mood,  ss  in
1  Tim.  i.  20,  and  that  we  ought  to  render  it
not  "in  order  that,"  but  simply  "thaL"
The  phrase  iu  1  Tim.  i.  20,  &a  watZm4in
fiil  fiXatr^/itiy,  manifestly  would  justify  the
phrase,  iroiSc^uo-a  iiftas  ^m  8ticaf «s,  **  t^»t>^}nfr
us  to  live  righteously."  Alford  sorely  is
wrong  in  saying  that  the  univenal  New
Testament  sense  of  vcuSci^iy  is  ''to  disci-
pline,"  ue,  teach  by  correction.  In  Acts
vii.  22;  xxii.  3;  1  Tim.  i.  20;  2  Tim.iL25,
the  idea  of  te^iching,  not  of  correcting,  is  pre-
dominant But  even  if  it  waa  so,  the  pastoral
Epistles  are  so  decidedly  classical  in  their
use  of  words,  that  the  classical  use  of  ircuScwtr
in  such  phrases  as  iratScucxv  Tiva  Kieapi(fv
or  ffdxppova  fXvai  (Liddell  and  Scott)  is  an
abundant  justification  of  a  simihir  rendering
of  this  paspage.  And  as  regards  the  use  of  to,
such  phrases  as  EiVt  %va  ol  \ldoi  otroi  iproi
ytvwvrai,  "  Command  that  these  stones  be-
come bread  "  (Matt.  iv.  3 ;  xx,  21 ;  Luke  iv.
3 ;  X.  40)  ;  Ait<TTfl\aro  .  .  .  Ti^a  /x^Sf vl  ftrvcir,
'*  He  commanded  them  not  to  tell "  (Matt,
xvi.  20);  2vM<^«'p€t  a{n<p  tya,  «  It  is  profitable
for  him  that "  (Matt,  xviii.  G) ;  UpoatvYf^r^t
Iva,  "  Pray  that"  (Matt.  xxiv.  20) Tnopf'icdiXci
avThv  tva  ixri,  "  He  besought  him  not  to  send
them  away"  (Mark  v.  10);  UapaKoXowra
ai/rhy  Iva  ^rrrat,  "  They  beseech  him  to
touch"  (Mark  viii.  22,  30;  ix.  9-  x  37;
xiii.  34;  Luke  i.  43;  vii.  3G);  'Ebe^erjr  .  .  !
Tva,  "I  asked  .  .  .  to"  (Luke  ix.  40):
*Epa>Tw  tr€  Iva  ir€M'^»  "  I  intreat  theo  to
send"  (Luke  xvi.  29;  Col.  iv.  IG,  etc);—
prove  tliat  tlie  sense  "  in  order  that "  is  not
necessarily  attached  to  tm,  but  that  we  may
proi)erly  render  the  passage  before  us
"  teaching  us  ...  to  live  soberly,"  etc

Ver.  VS.— The  for  that,  A.V.';   apj^ring
of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Savumr


en.  II.  1—15.]


THE  EPISTLE   TO  TITUS.


27


for  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God^
and  our  Saviour ,  A7V.  Looking  for  (wpoffHtx^
fitvoi) ;  the  word  commonly  applied  to  wait-
ing for  the  kingdom  of  God  (Mark  xv.  48 ;
Luko  ii.  25,  38;  xii.  36;  xxiii.  51;  Jude
21).     The  blessed   hope.     The  hope  here
means  the  thing  hoped  for,  as  in  Acts  xxiv.
14  (whero  both  the  subjective  hope  and  the
thing  hoped  for  are  included);  Gul.  v.  5;
Col.  i.  5  (comp.  too  Rom.  viii.  24,  25).
Here  the  hope  is  called  emphatically  *'  the
blessed  hope,'*  the  hope  of  Christ's  second
coming  in  glory,  that  hope  which  is  the  joy
and  li^,  tlie  strength  and  comfort,  of  every
Christian  soul.    'Hiis  is  the  only  place  in
the    New    Testament    where    naxipiof    is
applied  to  an  object  which  does  not  itself
enjoy  the  blessing,  but  is  a  source  of  bless-
ing to  others.    Of  the  fifty  passages  where
it  occurs  it  is  applied  in   forty-three  to
persons,  twice  to  God,  three  times  to  parts
of  the  body  (the  Virgin's  womb,  and  the
eyes  and  ears  of  those  who  saw  and  heard
Christ),  once    impersonally  (**It    is    more
blessed  to  give,"  etc..  Acts  xx.  35),  and  once,
in  this  passage,  to  the  hope.   And  appearing
of  the  glory.    In  construing  this  clause,  as
well  as  the  following,  the  same  difficulty
occurs.     There  is  only  one  article  to  the
two  subjects.     The  question  arises — Can
two    dilTerent    subjects    stand    under   one
article  ?    Huther  affirms  that  they  can,  and
refers  for  proof  to  Buttman  and  Winer ;  and,
indec<l,  it  is  impossible  to  treat  ^  the  hope  "
and  the  *•  appearing "  as  one  subject.    Ac-
cepting this,  the  clause  before  us  should  be
rendered.  Looking  for  the  blessed  hope,  and
the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God.
This  is  a  description  of  the  second  coming
of  the  Lord,  of  whom  it  is  expressly  said
that  he  will  "come   in   the  glory  of  his
Father"  (Matt.  xvi.  27;   3Iark  viii.  38).
The  appearing  of  Christ  will  be  the  appear-
ing of  the  glory  of  the  great  God,  not  the
appearing  of  God  the  Father,  to  whom  the
term    ^vKfxu^tia  is   never    applied,  but  of
the    Son,  who   is  the   Brightness    of  his
Father's  glory.    Onr  great  God  and  Sayionr
Jesns  Christ.    No  doubt  the  Greek  words
can  be  so  rendered,  and  perhaps  (grammati-
cally) most  naturally,  as  e.n.  in  2  Pet  i.  11,
whero  we  read,  **  The  kingdom  of  our  Lord
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ; "  and  so  2  Pet.
iii.  18.    But,  on  the  other  hand,  according
to  what  is  said  above,  they  need  not  be  so
rendered.      **The   great    God"   and  "our
Saviour  Jesns  Christ "  may  be  two  separate
subjects,  as  **the  blessed  hope"  and  "ap-
pearing of  the  glory  "  are.    And  we  have  to
inquire,  from  the  usual  language  of  Scrip-
ture, which  of  the  two  is  most  probable.
Alford,  in  a  L.ig  note,  shows  that  artrr^p  is
often  used  without  the  article  (1  Tim.  i  1 ;
iv.  10;  PhiL  iii.  20);   that  in  analogous


sentences,  whero  Kvptos  is  used  as  our  Lord's
title,  an  exactly  similar  construction  to  that
in  the  text  is  employed,  as  2  Thess.  L  12 ;
2Pet.i.l;  2Ck)r.  i.  2;  Gal.i.3;  Eph.  i.  2;
vi.  23,  etc.    He  also  observes,  after  Winer,
that  the  insertion  of  ri/iwy  after  ^arijpos  is
an  additional  reason  for  the  omission  of  the
article  before   ^orrrjpos,  as  in  Luke  i.  78;
Bom.  i.  7 ;  1  Cor.  i.  3,  and  elsewhere ;  and
that  the  epithet  fifyd\oo  prefixed  to  Qtov
makes  it  still  more  difficult  to  connect  ecov
with    liwrripos  rifAuv  'Ii^trov    Xptarrov;    and
lastly,  he  compares  this  passage  with  1  Tim.
ii.  3,  5,  6,  and  thinks  the  conclusion  inevi-
table that  the  apostle,  writing  two  sentences
so  closely  corresponding — written,  it  may  be
added,  so  near  to  one  another  in  time—
would  have  had  in  view,  in  both  passages,
the  same  distinction  of  persons  which  is  so
strongly  marked  in  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  5.    On
these  grounds  he  pronounces  against  the
rendering  which  is  adopted  by  the  Revised
Version.    Huther's  conclusion  is  the  same ;
partly  from  the  grammatical  possibility  of
two  subjects  (hero  OcoO  and  'Iriaov  Xpitrrov)
having  only  one  article,  which  leayes  the
question  of  whether  there  are  hero  one  or
tufo  subjects  to  be  decided  on  other  grounds
than   simple    grammar;    and    partly    and
chiefly  from  the  double  consideration  that
(1)  nowhere  in  Scripture  is  Bt6s  connected
directly  with  'Iricovs  Xpi<rr6s,  as  Kvptos  and
Xwrnp  so  often  are;  and  (2)  that  the  colloca-
tion of  God  (ecJs)  and  Christ  as  two  subjects
is  of  constant  occurrence,  as  e.g.  1  Tim.  i.
1,  2 ;  V.  21 ;  vi.  13 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2 ;  iv.  1 ;  Titus
i.  4;  to  which  may  probably  be  added  2
Pet.  i.  1 ;  Jude  4 ;  2  Thess.  i.  12 ;  he  de-
cides, surelv  rightly,  that  the  clause  should
be  renderecf,  tJte  great  God  and  our  Saviour
Jesus  Christ.  Another  question  arises  whether
the  glory  belongs  to  both  subjects.    Pro-
bably, though  not  necessarily,  it  does,  since
we  are  told  in  Matt.  xvii.  27  that  "  the  Bon
of  man  shall   come  in  the    glory  of  the
Father ; "  and  in  Mutt.  xxv.  31,  **  the  Son  of
man  shall  come  in  his  glory"  (comp.  Matt,
xix.  28).    The  whole  sentence  will  then
stand  thus:  Loohing  for  the  blessed  hope,
and  for  the  appearing  of  the  glory  of  the
great  God  ana  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christy
etc.    The  great  Ood  (rov  ikwyixmi) ;  not  else-
where in  the  New  Testament  (except  in  tho
T.B.  of  Bev.  xix.  17),  but  familiar  to  us
from  Ps.  xcv.  3,  "  The  Lord  is  a  great  God,'*
and  elsewhere,  as  Dent  x.  17 ;  vii.  21 ;  Ps.
Ixxvii.  14,  etc.    In  Matt.  t.  35  we  read
"the  great  King"  of  God.     This  grand
description  of  rod  fitWomos  alAvos,  **the
world  to  come,"  is  in  contrast  with  ry  t^vv
alSnn,  "this  present  world,"  in  which  our
present  life  is  passed,  but  which  is  so  deeply
influenced  by  ^  the  blessed  hopo  "  of  that
future  and  glorious  world.


28


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TTTOa


[en.  n.  1— li


Ver.  14. — A  people  for  hi$  own  p09$eM9ion
for  a  peculiar  veople^  A.V.    Who  g^w  bia-
Mlf  for  u.    The  resemblance  in  thought
and  diction  to  1  Tim.  ii.  3 — G  has  been
already  pointed  ont     ^'Wlio  gave  himself"
{hs  (9mKtp  iavritf)  is  there  expressed  by  6  Soirs
javTor,  and  **that  he  might  redeem  us"  (Ini
Avr^<nfrcu  ilfias)  bv  amiXtnpoy  iv^p  wdrrmp.
<For  the  great  truths  contained  in  the  'words
**who  gave  himself/'  comp.  John  x.  11,  17,
18;  Gal.  i.  4;  Eph.  t.  2,  25;  1  Pet.  ii.  24;
Heb.  ix.   14.)     The  Toluntary  offering  of
himself  is  also  implied  in  the  office  of  oor
Lord  as  High  Pnest  (Heb.  ix.  1 1—14).    7or
U  (vrip  rift»»p);  on  our  behalf;  not  exactly
synonymous  with  ojrrl  rffiAv,  **  in  oar  stead."
Both  phrases,  howeyer,  are   used  of  our
redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.    We  find  drip
in  Luke  xxii  19,  20;  John  vi.  51:  x.  11,
15;  xL  50 — 52;  xv.  13;  xviii.  14;  Rom.  v.
6,  8 ;  viii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  ▼.  7 ;  2  Cor.  t.  14,  15,
21;Gal.i.4;  Eph.  v.2.25;  1  Thess.  iii.  10 ;
Heb.  ii.  9;  1   IVt.  ii.  21;  iii.  18;  iv.  I;  1
John  iii.  16 :  and  we  find  iirrl  in  Matt  xx.
28  nnd  Mark  x.  45,  and  in  eurrlxvrpow^  1  Tim.
it  6.     The  literal  meaning  of  vw^p  is  **in
defence  of,"  and  hence  generally  **on  be-
half of."  "  for  the  gnod  of."    The  primary
idL*a  of  irrt  U  **  standing  opposite,"  and
henco    it    donot<»«    ''exchange,"    "price,"
" worth,"  '*  instead,"  etc.    Bedeem  (xvrpiiinr
Tcu);  as  Luke  xxiv.  21;  1  Pet.  i.  18;  com-
mon  in  cla^ical  Greek.     In  the  middle
▼oice,  as  here,  it  means  " to  release  by  pay-
ment of  a  run:>om; "  in  the  active  voice,  "to
release  on  receipt  of  a  rin.som."     In  1  Pet.
i.  IS  tht^  ransom  prici*  is  statcl,  viz.  **the
precious  blood  of  Christ ; "  as  in  Matt.  xx.
28  it  is  "tlu-  lifo  of  the  ^^on  of  man."     The
effect   of    this    redemption   is  not    merely
deliverance   t'n^ni   tlie   fn^nalty  of   sin,   but
from   its   powt-r    als »,   as    appears    by   the
following:  %\orvls  :  "  a  j^Kouliar  people,  zeal- -us
of  good  works,"  and  by  the  pass^iire  iu  St.  •
Peter  aVK)vc  referred  t.\     Tuntj  (KoBapiin;) :
as  very  tre«]uently  in  the  New  Testament  of  .
ck-iin>ini:r  lei»iTs,  the  outside  of  the  platter,   I
etc.,  cli.ausinir   the   Gentiles  (Acts  x.   lo),
putting  away  all  sin  (2  Cor.  vii.  1\  cleans-   '
iuff  thf  Ciiurch  (Eph.  v.  26),  punrin;:  the
iX)nsoieiice  (Heb.  ix.  14\  etc.     The  invfuity
just  sp<:kvii  of  was  a  delilement ;  the  rekUmp-
tim  fntrn  inhjuHtj  T\}n\c>\Qi\  that  defilement.  |
The  blo-d  of  Jt-sus  Christ,  the  price  paid
for  thf  ndoniption,  was  the  instrument  of
cleauc^iug  (1  Jchn  L  7.  9).     A  people  for  his


(X«W  wm^mt);  only  hot
in  the  New  Testmmentv  bat  frequent  in  tk
LXX^  ooopled,  aa  here,  with  Kmi%  (Eioi
xlx.  5;  Deal.  tIL  6L:  xit.  2;  xxtL  18X  to
exprett  the  Hebrew  rh^  or  n|?^  c^,  i
people  the  peemiiar  property,  or  treasnre,  d
God;  **peoiiliar"  bein^  deriTcd  from  the
Latin  peadimwi^  €nke^m  own  priTate  propeftr.
resenred  for  one*s  own  piirate  nae.  The
Authorized  VersioQ  **pecnliar''  cxptai
the  sense  exactly,  and  the  wmptminn  of  ov
text  and  of  the  LXX.,  from  whom  it  ii
borrowed,  is  meant  to  define  either  tfait
special  reserred  portion  of  a  man's  pR>>
perty  orer  and  above  what  he  spends  fir
ordinary  expenses^  which  nobody  can  »•
terfere  with,  or  thoee  jewels  on  iriiieh  ht
sets  a  special  Talne,  and  places  afely  xi
his  treasury.  In  1  Pet.  iL  10  Xm^s  m  v^
volfi<nw  C*a  peculiar  people,**  Authorind
Version)  means  the  same  thing,  that  leaf
the  LXX.  translation  of  the  same  Hefaiev
word,_n^:q,  in  Mai.  iiL  17  (-"jcw^*
Xuthoris^  VeraionX  **  They  shall  be  ny
reserved  portion  or  possession.**  The  tf-
plication  of  the  phrase,  XaAm  rtptmmrm,
descriptiTe  in  the  Old  Testament  of
Israel,  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  is  very  ii-
structive.  The  passage  in  1  Pet  ii  10  ii
exactly  analogrous,  as  is  the  phrase,  "tiir
Israel  of  God"  (GaL  Ti.  16>.  Zsaloss  ({vA»-
T^j):  as  AcU  xxL  20;  xxiL  3;  1  Cor.  xif .
12;  Gal.  L  14.  From  iu  special  applia*
tion  to  those  who  were  zealous  for  the  L»«
of  Moses  it  became  the  name  of  the  sect  or
party  of  the  ZealcU  who  plaved  sarli  a
terrihle  port  in  the  Jewish  war  (see  Luke
iv.  13).  Cananite  (Matt.  x.  4;  Mark  iii
IS)  is  the  Hobrtw  for  Z.Ji\mriis.  Zeal  fcr
p>i.l  works  is  the  indispensable  mark  of
Gixi's  peculiar  people,  the  insoparabk  frmi"^
the  redtiuption  and  purification  which  iiW
tho  blood  of  Jtsus  Christ  (comp.  1  FeL  L  il
Ver.  \o,  —  Reprove  for  refjuh".  A.V.
Authority  (^iriTa7^j);  gee  1  Tim.  L  1  oi
above,  ch.  L  3,  **  authoritative  command-
nient."  Let  no  man  despise  thee  (T€^J^
vtlr<^)\  hen-  only  in  the  Xew  Tt^ameat:
iK^d  in  a  different  souse  by  the  LXX  b
Wi:Mi.  i.  1.  but  in  the  same  seuie  as  htre  i;
4  3Iacc.  vi  0.  and  also  in  classical  Greet
In  1  Tim.  IV.  12  and  vL  2  St.  Paul  cs«
the  more  common  word,  «irTa^vor*««.  The
apostle  tlius  wmds  up  the  preceding  portkn
of  his  Epistle.


HOMILETICS.


Vers.  1 — 1'. — Practical  godliness  the  end  of  spiritual  doctrine^     The  teachTn<*'  of  St.


Paul  soars
were  given


very  high  iu  re>j)ect  of  the  hidden  things  of  God.     To  none  of  the  aiMstles
more  abundar.t  revelations  of  heavenly  mysteries,     (taught  up  into  the


CH.n.  1— 15.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  £9


third  heaven,  hearing  unspeakable  words,  saturated  with  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he
was  able  to  lead  men's  souls  into  depths  and  heights  of  unseen  things  as  no  other
teacher  was.  His  eloquent  tongue,  pouring  forth  the  riches  of  knowledge  of  an
eidightened  heart,  could  speak  of  God's  love  to  man,  of  his  eternal  purposes,  of  his  pre-
destinating grace,  of  the  coming  and  kingdom  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  the  resurrection  of
the  dead,  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  in  words  of  wisdom  and  power
certainly  not  inferior  to  those  of  the  very  chiefest  apostles  of  Christ.  And  yet,  in
dealing  with  the  practical  duties  of  Christian  men  and  women,  and  in  teaching  morality
as  an  essential  part  of  Christianity,  there  is  a  particularity  of  detail,  a  searching  appli-
cation of  truth,  an  earnest  tone  of  warning  and  of  exhortation,  which  could  not  be
exceeded  by  any  teacher  of  ethics  who  knew  of  nothing  else  but  human  conduct  and
the  present  interests  of  society.  With  St.  Paul,  familiarity  with  the  highest  doctrines
of  revelation  does  not  depreciate  the  importance  of  the  humblest  duties  of  daily  lifb ;  it
rather  magnifies  it,  and  raises  those  duties  from  an  earthly  to  a  heavenly  platform.
If  St.  Paul's  sole  end  and  aim  in  his  apostolic  labours  had  been  to  bring  the  daily  life
of  every  class  of  the  community  to  whom  he  wrote  into  accordance  with  the  law  of
righteousness,  and  to  make  human  life  on  earth  pure  and  happy,  he  could  not  have
dwelt  upon  those  details  of  practice,  on  which  the  economy  of  society  depends  for  its
comfort  and  happiness,  with  more  earnestness  and  particularity  than  he  has  done.
The  demeanour  of  old  men,  the  behaviour  of  old  women,  the  influence  of  the  aged  upon
the  young,  the  innermost  domestic  duties  of  the  wife  and  the  mother,  words,  deeds,
looks,  dress,  temper,  disposition,  affections,  all  comes  under  the  constraining  influence
of  the  gospel  as  preached  by  St.  Paul.  In  like  manner  that  degraded  portion  of  man-
kind whose  condition  was  so  pitiable  in  the  Roman  empire,  the  slaves,  of  whom  there
were  such  numbers  in  every  considerable  household,  is  brought  under  the  elevating
influence  of  Christian  motive.  Belations  and  duties  full  of  nought  but  pain  and
humiliation  in  themselves,  and  leading  naturally  to  the  vices  which  are  bom  of
degradation,  are  elevated  at  once  into  platforms  of  eminent  virtue.  Under  the  holy
influences  of  Christian  faith  new  principles  are  called  into  life,  new  motives  of  thought
and  action  are  awakened,  and  the  low  life  of  the  dishonest,  insolent,  and  deceitful  slave
becomes  the  arena  for  the  exercise  of  some  of  the  highest  virtues  of  the  saint.  What
a  lesson  we  have  here  for  the  Christian  teacher !  If  the  parish  priest,  whose  intercourse
with  his  flock  brings  him  into  contact  with  the  infirmities  and  sins  of  the  various
classes  of  his  parishioners,  would  bend  his  strength  in  this  direction,  and  upon  the
l^sls  of  the  doctrine  of  grace  would  build  the  superstructure  of  a  severe  and  minute
instruction  in  the  details  of  a  really  holy  life,  the  value  of  a  parochial  ministry  would
be  seen  to  the  full.  Christianity  in  the  family,  Christianity  in  the  shop,  Christianity
in  the  daily  intercourse  of  man  with  man,  would  be  a  preaching  of  Christ  to  the  world
which  would  put  the  caviller  to  shame,  and  which  no  adversaries  would  be  able  to
gainsay  or  to  resist.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — Special  instructions  as  to  Titus's  own  preaching,  '*  But  speak  thou  the
things  which  become  sound  doctrine  " — respecting  the  special  deportment  of  Christians
of  every  age,  sex,  and  rank.

I.  Christianity  is  a  system  op  doctbinb  as  well  as  life.  It  is  a  doctrine  that
it  may  be  a  life.  1.  The  doctrine  is  contrasted  with  the/ables  of  the  false  teachers,  who
did  nothing  by  their  speculations  but  lower  the  tone  of  Christian  life.  A  true  moral
life  was  only  possible  on  the  basis  of  the  facts  of  the  gospel  plan  of  salvation  (ver.  11).
2.  Its  soundness  contrasts  with  the  unhealthy  teaching  of  the  false  teachers.  It  is  callcKl
*'  the  good  doctrine"  (1  Tim.  iv.  6),  and  the  "doctrine  according  to  godliness"  (1  Tim.
vi.  3).  Every  other  system  corrupts;  the  sound  doctrine  renovates,  elevates,  purifies;
for  our  Lord  said,  '*  Sfmctify  them  through  thy  truth."  It  is  milk  for  babes  and  meal
for  strong  men.


II.  It  is  the  duty  op  hinisters  to  pbeach  this  soukd  doctrine.  It  ought  to
be  prenched :  1.  PxMicly  and  plainly,  since  there  are  so  many  "  vain  teachers."  2.  With
certainty,  as  being  the  undoubted  truth.    3.  With  all  boldness,  as  without  fear  of  man


80  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  xl  1—16.

or  seeking  to  please  man.    4.  At  all  times,  in  season  and  out  of  season.    5.  In  it*  due
relation  to  the  duties  of  religion,  as  the  spring  of  obedience. — ^T.  C

Ycr.  2. — The  duties  of  aged  men.  The  apostle  begins  with  the  most  important  class
in  the  Church — those  who  are  the  leaders  of  the  young.  Their  characteristic  deport-
ment is  to  be  fourfold.

I.  Sobriety.  1.  This  habit  of  mind  is  contrasted  with  the  thoughtlessness  and  levity
of  youth.  2.  It  is  combined  with  (1)  watchfulness  (1  Thess.  v.  6)  and  (2)  pratfer
(1  Pet.  iv.  7).     3.  Ihere  are  lofty  motives  to  sobriety.    (1  Pet.  iv.  7 ;  v.  8.^

II.  Gravity,  in  the  sense  of  a  dignified  deportment.  I.  Old  men  ought  not  to  lend
ihemselves  to  the  levity  and  flippancy  of  the  young.  2.  If  they  are  grave  in  speech  and
gait,  they  will  have  more  weight  in  the  community.  There  must  be  no  undue  excita-
bility.

III.  Temperance,  or  SELr-RESTRAiKT.  1.  The  aged  ought  to  show  an  example  of  self-
government  in  regard  to  the  passions,  the  appetites,  and  the  wUl.  The  pleasures  of
sense  ought  not  to  allure  them,  or  the  love  of  the  world  to  carry  them  away.

IV.  Soundness  in  faith,  love,  and  patience.  Here  is  the  trilogy  of  graces  once
more,  only  that  patience  takes  the  place  of  hope,  to  which  it  is  nearly  allied.  1.  There
is  to  be  a  healthy  auction  of  these  graces  in  old  age.  As  if  in  contrast  with  the  diseases,
weakness,  and  age  of  the  body.  The  aged  have  seen  their  best  days,  and  they  ought
to  reconcile  the  decay  of  nature  with  the  increase  of  grace,  so  as  to  make  human  life  to
its  extreme  limit  resplendent  with  beauty  and  truth.  2.  EacJi  of  the  graces  has  its
appropriate  place  in  the  cJiaracter  of  the  aged.  (1)  Faith.  It  is  the  subjective  condi-
tion of  it.  The  old  have  their  hopes  sustained  by  faith ;  their  hearts  are  cheered  by
faith ;  they  remain  steadfast  through  fsiith.  It  must  be  at  once  the  principle  of  their
worship,  their  piety,  and  their  endurance.  (2)  Love,  The  old  are  apt  to  become
contracted  and  cold  in  their  sympathies.  But  Christian  love  keeps  the  heart  young
and  tender  and  sincere,  and  the  old  illustrate  its  power  in  growing  tolerance,  wisdom,
and  kindliness.  (3)  Patience.  They  have  to  bear  with  mauy  infirmities  of  body,  with
declining  faculties,  with  growing  decrepitude.  But  Christian  jiatience  must  be  more  than
a  dull  acquiescence  with  the  inevitable ;  it  must  be  a  cheerful  acceptance  of  suffering,
that  patience  may  have  her  perfect  work  in  the  closing  days  of  life. — T.  C.

Vers.  3 — 5. — TJie  duties  of  aged  women  and  young  women.  As  woman  had  attained
through  Christianity  a  position  of  equality  beside  man,  it  was  necessary  to  remind
her  that  her  new  position  involved  serious  resix)nsibilities.

I.  The  duties  of  aged  women.  1.  In  demeanour  as  becometh  holiness.  (1)
There  is  an  appeal  to  their  own  judgment  as  to  what  is  decorous  and  beautiful  in  the
Christian  character.  They  had  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  and  they
understood  the  nature  and  extent  of  its  obligations  as  affecting  their  sex.  (2)  There
was  to  be  a  liarmony  between  their  ix)sition  and  their  character  as  godly  women —
"women  professing  godliness"  (1  Tim.  ii.  10).  Their  holy  calling  should  manifest
itself  in  their  deportment,  dress,  speech,  silence,  and,  above  all,  "in  a  meek  and  quiet
spirit."  2.  Not  slanderers,  (1)  Old  age  has  no  active  employment,  but  it  has  an
active  memory  and  a  busy  tongue.  Thus  there  is  a  temptation  for  the  old,  unless  the
grace  of  God  has  given  the  tongue  of  kindness,  to  become  censorious,  malignant,  and
bitter,  avenging  themselves  the  more  with  their  tongues  for  their  very  incapacity  to
avenge  themselves  in  other  ways.  (2)  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  or  saintly  in
this  world  than  a  true  mother  in  Israel,  the  presiding  genius  of  her  family  circle,
speaking  the  words  of  charity,  softness,  and  kindness  to  all  within  her  reach.  (3)  It
would  be  an  utter  travesty  of  the  gospel  for  aged  Christian  women  to  be  slanderers,
because  they  would  thus  (a)  separate  friends  (Prov.  xvi.  28) ;  (b)  inflict  deadly  wounds
in  character  (Prov.  xviii.  18) ;  (c)  bring  dishonour  on  the  gospel ;  (d)  and  cause  discords
in  the  Church.  3.  Not  enslaved  to  much  wine.  (1)  The  warning  was  needed  on
account  of  the  national  habits  of  the  Cretans.  (2)  It  was  a  moderate  demand  that
they  should  give  up  the  slavish  addictedness  to  wine  so  common  in  Crete.  She  who
follows  the  habit  is  a  slave,  and  would  soon  lose  the  sense  of  her  degradation.  The
early  converts  would,  perhaps,  plead  the  privileges  of  their  age  and  country,  and  use
wine  as  a  solace  in  old  age;  but  Titus  is  to  teach  them  that  hoary   hairs  give  no


€H.n.l— 15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  31

liberty  to  such  a  habit.  (3)  We  see  bow  the  gospel  purifies  the  habits  and  usages  of
social  life.  4.  Teachers  of  good  things.  (1)  The  apostle  thus  prescribes  the  right
use  of  the  tongue  to  those  who  were  to  be  "  no  slanderers."  (2)  Their  teaching  was
not  to  be  in  public  addresses,  which  were  forbidden  (1  Tim.  ii.  12),  but  in  private  life.
{3)  The  substance  of  their  teaching  was  not  to  be  '*  old  wives*  fables,"  not  superstitious
ceremonies,  or  things  of  evil  report,  but  things  sound,  pure,  and  honest

II.  Thb  duties  of  young  woBfEN.  They  are  regarded  as  under  the  instruction  and
guidance  of  the  aged  women.  In  Ephesus,  Timothy  was  exhorted  to  teach  the  younger
women,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  state  of  the  Cretan  community  required  that  the
instructions  of  Titus  should  be  supplemented  by  the  more  practical  and  continuous
guidance  of  the  elderly  women.  Tne  young  women  were  to  be  schooled  to  their  duties
in  a  wise  manner.  1.  They  were  to  he  lovers  of  their  husbands,  (1)  The  wife  would
find  in  this  love  the  source  of  her  strength,  the  husband  the  solace  for  his  cares,  and
the  children  the  guarantee  for  their  happiness  and  welfare.  (2)  A  loving  wife  is
(a)  a  blessing  to  her  husband  ^Prov.  xii.  4) ;  (6)  brings  him  honour  (Prov.  xxxi.
23);  (c)  secures  his  confidence  (Prov.  xxxi.  11);  (d)  earns  his  praises  (Prov.  xxxL
28).  2.  Lovers  of  their  children,  (1)  The  love  of  a  mother  may  be  instinctive,  but
religious  fanaticism  and  brutal  separation  can  make  her  more  unfeeling  than  the  brutes.
Eousseau  would  not  keep  his  children  in  his  house,  but  sent  them  to  a  public  hospital ;
A  sign,  said  Burke,  that  **  bears  love  their  young  and  lick  them  into  shape,  but  bears
are  not  philosophers."  In  India  infants  are  often  destroyed  by  a  mother's  hands,  under
the  influence  of  religious  delusion.  (2)  The  first  duty  of  a  Christian  woman  is  to  make
her  home  happy,  which  is  impossible  except  on  a  basis  of  love  to  husband  and  children.
(3)  Religion  revives  natural  afifection  as  it  revives  all  the  weakened  faculties  of  our
nature,  and  gives  ^,  it  new  power  for  good.  The  religious  training  of  the  young  is
impossible  without  the  experience  of  a  mother's  love.  3  Discreet,  Young  women,  in
a  new  position  of  Christian  privilege,  might  be  tempted  to  rashness,  enthusiasm,  and
impulsive  conduct  They  were  to  be  wise  and  careful  in  their  conduct  both  at  home
and  abroad.  4.  Chaste,  In  act,  speech,  thought,  and  dress,  finding  their  true
happiness  in  their  husband's  society.  There  are  many  high  motives  for  a  pure  woman-
hood (1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  7).  5.  Workers  at  home,  (1)  The  wife's  business  is
in  her  household,  not  in  the  great  world  of  society.  Religion  gains  no  honour  when
home  duties  are  neglected.  (2)  Her  husband's  interests  are  preserved  by  her  industry
at  home.  (3)  Gadding  abroad  and  busjring  one's  self  in  other  people's  affairs  tends  to
the  spreading  (of  evil.  6.  Good,  Such  women  are  to  be  kindly  and  thoughtful  in
their  family  relationships,  especially  to  servants,  and  not  niggardly  or  exacting.
''Their  thnftiness  must  not  degenerate  into  avarice."  7.  Obedient  to  their  oum
husbands.  (1)  This  is  their  great  duty,  and  thus  they  become  types  of  the  Church's
submission  to  Christ.  (2)  Obedience  would  recommend  the  gospel  to  unbelieving
husbands,  for  attention  to  this  precept  would  prevent  *'  the  Word  of  God  from  being
blasphemed."  Grrace  does  not  deliver  ub  from  the  obligations  of  nature  (1  Cor.  viL
4—16).— T.  C.

Yer.  6. — ITie  duty  of  young  men.  The  apostle  next  thinks  of  those  who  are  to  be
the  strong  stays  of  the  Church  in  the  coming  generation.  "Young  men  exhort  to
be  sober-minded."

L  The  nature  of  this  duty.  1.  Toung  men  ought  to  he  thoughlfuly  not  rash  and
impulsive.  The  Lord  says  to  them, "  Consider  your  ways."  2.  They  should  be  circum-
spectt  not  heady  and  reckless^  using  that  Word  which  "giveth  to  the  young  man
knowledge  and  discretion."  3.  They  should  not  he  self-indulgent,  but  self-denying.
Not  **  lovers  of  pleasure,  but  lovers  of  Grod."  "  Turn  away  mine  eyes  from  viewing
vanity."  4.  They  should  be  settled  in  feeling  and  conduct,  not  vacillaiiug  or  giddy,  "  Let
your  hearts  be  fixed  "  (Ps.  cviii.  1).     "  He  that  wavers  is  as  a  wave  of  the  sea  "(Jas.  i.  6).

IL  Reasons  fob  soder-kikdedness.  1.  It  is  according  to  the  dictates  of  right
reason.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  receive  the  spirit  of  a  *'  sound  mind."  Young  men  are
never  in  a  right  mind  till  they  sit  clothed  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  2.  Consider  the  snares
and  sorrows  and  drawbacks  of  life,     3.  Consider  that  death  may  early  reach  the  young.

4.  Consider  the  number  of  young  men  who  are  ruined  by  the  want  of  sober-mindedness,

5.  The  young  must  answer  in  the  judgment  for  their  follies  in  this  life, — T.  C


32  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [en.  n.  1— 15»

Vers.  7,  8. — Titus  hirMeJf  a  patteiti  of  good  works.  As  a  faithful  minister  of  God,
he  was  to  mirror  forth  in  his  life  and  teachiDg  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.

I.  TUE  MINISTER  OUGHT  TO  BE  A  PATTERN  OF  GOOD  WORKS.      1.    HiS  teaching  18  UtdeSS

unless  it  is  enforced  by  thi  poiver  of  a  holy  example.  There  must  be  a  harmony
between  his  doctrine  and  his  life.  2.  Good  wtrrks  are  the  natural  proofs  (^  good
;principle8t  and  can  only  issue  from  the  fountain  of  a  purified  heart.  The  very  principles
are  tested  by  the  preacher's  life.  3.  His  whole  life  is  to  he  an  ensainpU.  "In  all
things."     This  implies  consistency  in  toil,  endurance,  and  teaching.

II.  The  MINISTER  MUST  BE  A  PATTERN  BOTH   IN  THE  SUBSTANCE    AND   IN   THE  SPTBIT

OF  HIS  TEACHING.  Teaching  is  his  special  sphere.  1.  It  must  he  imparted  in  a  right
spirit.  "  In  doctrine  showing  uncorruptness  and  gravity."  (1)  He  must  exhibit  an
example  of  personal  sincerity,  not  like  one  either  seeking  for  applause  or  influenced  by
interested  motives — like  the  ifalse  teachers  who  were  in  quest  of  filthy  lucre.  Sincerity
has  a  very  penetrative  force  among  a  people.  (2)  He  must  have  a  diguified  gravity  of
manner,  to  indicate  his  profound  seriousness  of  purpose  and  spirits  Foolish  jesting
and  vain  talking  are  very  inconvenient  in  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  doctrine
imparted  must  be  sound  and  convincing,  "  Sound  speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned.''
(1)  It  must  be  wholesome  doctrine,  as  contrasted  with  a  sickly  pietism ;  free  from  enor
b^use  drawn  from  "  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word,"  conveyed  not  in  the  **  enticing
words  of  man*s  wisdom,"  but  as  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth.  (2)  It  must  have  convincing
power.  "  That  cannot  be  condemned."  (a)  Ministers  must  expect  their  words  to  be
sharply  criticized  as  well  as  their  lives.  (6)  The  truth  ought  to  be  conveyed  in  such
a  spirit  and  with  such  a  regard  to  the  analogy  of  faith  that  it  cannot  be  justly  found
fault  with,  (c)  It  must  effectually  silence  gainsayers.  *'  That  he  that  is  of  the  contrary
part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  bad  thing  to  say  of  us."  Whether  the  adversary  be
a  false  teacher  or  a  pagan,  the  sound  speech  ought  to  reduce  him  to  shame  and  silenca
— T.  C.

Vera.  9,  10. — The  duties  of  servants.  The  class  of  servants,  or  rather  slaves,  had
received  a  wonderful  elevation  through  the  gospel.  They  were  an  oppressed  classy  and
may  have  been  tempted  to  imagine  that  their  religious  emancipation  would  necessarily
change  their  relations  to  their  old  masters.  Thus  we  account  for  the  large  body  of
practical  counsel  that  is  addressed  by  the  apostle  to  this  class  of  believers.

I.  The  DUTIES  of  servants.  1.  Obedience,  "Exhort  servants  to  be  obedient  to  their
own  masters."  This  was  a  manifest  obligation  which  the  gospel  did  not  annul.  It
may  have  been  a  hard  duty,  but  the  gospel  supplied  grace  for  the  faithful  discharge  of
it.  It  mattered  not  whether  the  master  was  a  Christian  or  a  pagan ;  the  gos|)el  did  not
destroy  his  claims  to  obedient  service.  But  the  obedience  was  necessarily  limited  by
the  Divine  Law,  for  a  servant  could  not  sin  at  a  master's  command.  He  must  in  that
case  williniily  suffer  the  consequences  of  disobedience.  2.  A  cheerful  compliance  with  a
masters  ivilL  "  And  to  please  them  well  in  all  things ;  not  answering  again."  It  denotes
that  temper  which  anticipates  a  master's  pleasure,  rather  than  the  disf>osition  to  thwart
it  by  sullen  and  capricious  ways.  Thus  they  would  be  doing  the  will  of  God  and
serving  the  common  Master  of  all,  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  them  an  example  of  meek-
ness and  submission.  3.  Honesty  and  fidelity,  "2^ot  purloining,  but  showin*'  all
good  fidelity."  Many  slaves  in  ancient  times  were  entrusted  with  the  property  of  their
masters,  as  merchants,  physicians,  and  artists.  Thus  they  had  many  ways  of  showin*
their  honest3^  It  was  in  their  power  to  defraud  them  by  embezzlement,  or  to  waste
the  property,  or  to  allow  it  to  be  wasted  without  check  or  rebuke.  Servants  were  to
have  family  interests  at  heart,  and  they  were  thus  to  commend  themselves  to  the
love  and  confidence  of  their  masters.

II.  The  design  oh  motive  of  this  faithful  and  ready  obedience.  "  That  they
may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things."  1.  The  Saviour  is  as  fully
glorified  in  tJie  servant  as  in  the  mastery  in  the  poor  as  in  the  rich,  in  the  peasant  as  in
the  king.  Indeed,  the  adornment  of  the  gospel  seems  more  manifest  in  the  obedience
of  the  lowest  class ;  for  of  the  other  classes  specified  it  was  only  said  **  that  God's  Name
might  not  be  blasphemed."  Calvin  says  God  deigns  to  receive  adornment  even  from
slaves.  2.  The  Lord  lifts  the  slave  out  of  his  mean  conditions  when  he  scats  him  on
equal  conditions  of  blessing  and  honour  at  the  same  holy  table.     3.   Tlie  spectacle  of


en.  II.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  33

eheer/fd  and  tdf-denying  obedience  (m  the  pari  of  this  class  wotdd  have  an  arresting
influence  upon  an  age  of  sel/'love  cuid  cynicism,  such  as  that  which  influeDced  the
world  at  thiat  time. — T.  G.

Vers.  11 — 13. — The  grace  of  God  the  true  ground  of  aU  sanctification.  The  apostle
now  sets  forth  the  real  foundation  on  which  this  exhortation  to  practical  duty  on  the
part  of  servants,  and,  indeed,  of  people  of  every  age  and  sex,  is  based.

I.  The  grace  of  God.  '*  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men
hath  appeared.**  1.  This  gr<ice  is/rom  God^  as  its  eternal  Founiain,/rom  which  it  flows
to  men,  (1)  He  was  not  made  gracious  by  the  work  of  the  Son,  for  he  was  the  God  of
grace  from  the  beginning.  The  work  of  the  Son  only  manifested  it  (John  iii.  16).
(2)  The  grace  is  from  the  Son  as  well  as  the  Father.  Grace  is  in  every  conceivable
way  connected  with  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  in  Scripture  (1  Cor.  xvi.  23 ;  Gal.  i.  6 ;
1  Thess.  V.  28).  The  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  in  the  freeness  of  their  love  to  man-
kind. ^3)  Grace  is  also  connected  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  called  **  the  Spirit  of
grace  "  (Heb*  x.  29),  because  he  applies  it  and  seals  us  to  the  day  of  redemption.  Thns
firace  has  its  origin  in  the  Father,  its  manifestation  in  the  Son,  its  end  in  the  Holy
Ghost.  2.  T?ie  nature  of  this  gr<ice,  (1)  It  is  the  free  gift  of  Qod  to  mankind  in  the
gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  thus  opposed  to  the  idea  of  merit  in  man.  Works,  therefore,  do
not  procure  our  salvation.  (2)  The  grace  must  necessarily  be  worthy  of  the  character
of  God.  (a)  The  gift  is  worthy,  for  it  is  his  own  Son.  (b)  The  end  is  worthy,  for  it
is  his  own  glory  and  man's  salvation,  (c)  The  instrumental  condition  is  worthy,  for
it  is  faith.  3.  The  scope  of  this  grace.  "  That  bringeth  salvation  to  all  men."  (1)  It
is  the  only  thing  that  can  bring  salvation  to  man.  He  cannot  be  saved  by  works,  nor
by  philosophy,  nor  by  man.  (2)  It  has  a  wide  scope.  It  *'  bringeth  salvation  to  all
men.**  (a)  This  does  not  imply  that  all  men  will  eventually  be  saved,  for  Scripture
expressly  asserts  the  very  contrary,  (h)  The  connection  of  the  passage  explains  the
universality  of  the  reference :  "  Servants,  be  obedient  to  your  masters,  that  you  may
adorn  the  doctrine  of  Qod  your  Saviour ;  for  his  grace  is  for  slave  and  master  alike.**
There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  him.  (c)  it  signi6es  that  grace  is  the  only  means
by  which  salvation  is  possible  for  the  race  of  man.  4.  The  manifestation  of  grace,  (1)
In  the  Incarnation.  (2)  In  the  work  of  Christ.  (3)  In  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
^  The  darkness  is  past ;  the  true  light  now  shineth  **  (1  John  ii.  S;.

II.  The  ErFECTS  of  the  grace  of  God.  **  Teaching  us  that,  denying  ungodliness
and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world."
1.  This  grace  first  manifests  itself  by  teaching,  just  as  the  first  thing  in  creation  was
light.  It  must  begin  with  teaching,  and  the  Spirit  of  Gk)d  is  given  "  to  teach  ns  all
things  "  (John  xiv.  26).  The  original  word  implies  the  idea  of  a  disciplining  process,
effected  by  the  grace  of  Gk)d  to  correct  the  inherent  naughtiness  of  the  heart.  2.  The
grace  of  God  works  toward  the  rejection  of  evUf  for  it  teaches  us  **  to  deny  ungodliness
and  worldly  lusts.**  (1)  The  denial  is  in  heart  and  deed.  It  involves  the  denial  of  self
(Luke  ix.  23).  (2)  It  is  the  repudiation  of  ungodliness  in  heart  and  life,  (a)  Ungodli-
ness includes  impiety,  blasphemy,  and  in6delity.  (b)  It  includes  all  living  without
relation  to  God,  whether  we  are  blasphemers  or  not.    Thus  a  man  may  be  ungodly


who  seeks  his  own  pleasure,  or  distinction,  or  happiness  in  the  world,    (c)  It  implies

lial  of  worldly
lusts ;  including  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  vain  glory  of  life — **  all


the  deeper  enmity  of  the  heart  to  God  (Bom.  viii.  7).    (3)  It  is  the  denial  of  worldly


that  is  in  the  world  ** — which  embody  the  enmity  to  God.  Thus  it  denies  (a)  sensnal
lusts  (2  Tim.  ii.  22) ;  (b)  the  inordinate  desire  of  worldly  things,  which  may  be  lawful
in  themselves.  3.  The  grace  of  God  produces  certainjpositive  effects.  "  We  should  live
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world.**  (1)  It  secures  the  due  regula-
tion of  individual  life.  "Soberly."  This  refers  to  the  duties  we  owe  to  ourselves,  (a)
In  keeping  a  fair  balance  of  judgment  intellectually ;  (b)  in  keeping  a  due  mastery
over  our  passions — '*a  sobriety  in  speech,  in  behaviour,  in  apparel,  in  eating  and
drinkine,  in  recreations,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  lawful  satisfactions."  (2^  It  secures
the  faithful  discharge  of  all  duties  to  our  fellow-men.  "  Righteously.**  Justice  is  an
exact  virtue,  which  can  be  easily  measured,  and  is  therefore  the  basis  of  commercial
and  civil  life.  A  single  failure  in  justice  makes  a  man  unjust.  Therefore  it  is  most
necessary  we  should  give  our  neighbour  his  due,  and  not  compromise  ourselves  by

TITUS.  D


84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  n.  1— 15.


conduct  redonndinjr  to  the  injury  of  the  gospel.  (3)  It  secnrea  ^rodlinera.  •'Gkx^ly;*
that  \n,  with  Gud,  in  God,  for  God.  This  godly  life  is  a  life  dedicated  to  Qod  and  spent
in  his  fear.

III.  The  sphere  in  which  this  grace  of  God  produces  rra  kxtenbtve  ajtd
INTENSIVE  EFFECTS.  **  In  this  present  world.*'  1.  True  pu^ty  does  not  disregard  or
denp'M  the  dntien  of  common  life,  2.  It  is  in  a  hostile  world  this  gmce  is  to  operate
with  such  purifying  results.  It  is  called  "  this  wick^'d  world  "  (Gal.  L  4) ;  for  the  dt'Til
is  its  ^ttd,  xnd  sin  in  its  prevailing  character.  3.  It  is  a  world  that  cannot  he  overcome
hut  by  faith,  (1  John  iv.  4,  n.)  4.  It  is  a  transitory  world,  in  contrast  with  the  world
to  come,  of  which  tUe  apostle  immediatelv  speaks.

IV.     The     ATTITUDE     OF    THE     BELIEVER     IN     RELATION    TO    THB      FUTTTK*     6L0BT.

**  Looking  for  the  hlessed  hope  and  manifestation  of  our  great  Qod  and  Saviour  Jesos
Christ.*'  This  attitude  of  blessed  expectation  tells  powerfully  upon  the  life  of  grace.
The  believer's  position  is  that  of  waiting  for  and  looking- unto  the  coming  of  the  Lorl
The  patriarchs  wait«d  for  his  first  coming;  we  wait  for  his  second  coining.  1.  The
helievei^s  waiting  attittule  is  lit  up  by  a  blesi^ed  hope.  (1)  This  is  **  the  hope  of  glory*
laid  up  for  us  in  heaven,  which  is  associated  with  the  Son  of  God,  when  we  shall  see
him  as  he  is.  (2)  It  is  a  b]et«8ed  hope,  because  of  all  the  blessings  it  hrings  to  the
believer.  2.  The  believer^s  waiting  attitude  has  respect  to  the  manifestation  ef  the
Lord's  glory.  This  is  connected  with  his  second  coming.  It  is  the  glory  of  "our
great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,**  and  not  of  the  Father,  because  :  (1)  In  all  the  five
places  in  which  the  manifestation  is  s{)oken  of,  it  is  Christ,  not  the  Father,  who  is
reft^rred  to.  The  term  "  Epiphany  "  is  never,  indeed,  applied  to  the  Father.  (2)  This
is  the  inttinmatical  interpretation  of  the  sentence,  and  is  accepted  by  the  Greek  fsthers
generally.  (3)  The  imme'liate  context  applies  only  to  the  Son.  (4)  The  term  "great
God"  would  seem  to  be  uncalled  for  as  applied  to  the  Father,  hut  stands  in  Scriptiue
the  perpetual  and  emphatic  witness  of  the  Deity  of  Christ. — T.  CL

Ver.  14. —  The  purport  and  extent  of  Chrisfs  Saviourship,    Mark —

I.  The  Person  who  gave  himself  for  us.  '*Our  great  God  and  Savionr  Jem
Christ."  Here  the  atonement  is  connected  with  the  Deity  of  the  Saviour,  as  if  to  show
that  the  true  Godhead  of  the  Son  pave  infinite  value  to  his  sufferings.

II.  The  atoning  work.  "Who  gave  himself  for  us.*'  Two  thin^  are  here
implied.  1.  Priestly  action.  For  he  "gave  himtielf**  freely,  the  language  being
borrowed  from  Levitical  worship.  That  typical  economy  could  not  unite  priest  and
victim  as  they  were  united  in  Christ.  The  Father  is  often  said  to  have  given  his  Son;
but  the  S«»n  here  gives  himself,  the  priestly  action  exhibiting  at  once  immeasurable
lo\e  and  voluntary  obedience.  He  is  himself  "the  unspeakable  Gift  " — the  best  of  all
gifts  to  man.  2.  It  was  a  vicarious  action.  For  he  "gave  himself  for  us,"  the  words
in  the  original  signifying  rather  for  our  benefit  than  in  our  stead ;  but,  from  the  nature
of  the  case,  the  gift  was  substitutionary,  that  it  might  be  for  our  benefit.  When  we
were  "  in  all  iniquity,"  and  so  exposed  to  Divine  wrath,  our  Surety  permitted  that
iniquity  to  be  charged  to  himself.

III.  The  design  op  the  atoning  work  of  Christ.  "To redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,
and  purify  us  to  himself  a  |)eculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.**  It  was  a  two-
fold design.  1.  A  redemption  from  ail  iniquity.  (1)  The  redemption  signifies  deliver-
ance by  the  payment  of  a  price.  Here  there  is  a  clear  causal  connection  between
Christ's  blood  as  the  ransom  T>rice  and  the  redemption.  This  is  Scripture  usage  (1  Pet.
i.  18;  Rev.  v.  9;  Gal.  iii.  13).  (2)  The  scope  of  this  redemption.  It  la  "from  all
iniquity."  This  is  to  be  understood  under  a  double  aspect,  (a)  The  iniquity  includes
all  sin,  considered  as  guilt  and  as  entailing  the  curse  of  the  Divine  Law.  His  redeeming
sacrifice  dissolved  the  connection  between  our  sin  and  our  liability  to  punishment  on
account  of  it.  (h)  The  iniquity  includes  all  sin  as  morally  evil,  and  in  this  sense  the
redemption  delivers  bis  people  from  all  impurity.  2.  The  purification  of  a  peculiar
people  for  himself,  (1)  The  primary  signification  is  sacrificial ;  for  the  term  "purify,"
like  the  cognate  terms  "sanctify,"  "sprinkle,*'  "wash,**  "cleanse,"  points  to  the  effect
produced  by  sacrifice  upon  those  defiled  by  sin.  These  are  now,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,
readmitted  to  fellowship  with  Gxxi.  Thus  believers,  like  Israel  of  old,  obtain  a  new
standing.     (2)  The  design  of  redemption  is  to  consecrate  a  people  for  holy  service,  for


cii.  n.  1— 15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  85

priestly  worship,  in  separation  from  the  world.  Thus  they  are  "  a  peculiar  people,"
not  singular  or  eccentric,  but  his  peculiar  treasure,  held  to  be  most  precious,  and  kept
with  all  Divine  care.  (3)  This  i^eople  is  separated  to  good  works — "zealous  of  good
works,"  because  partakers  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness  (Rom.  i.  4),  and  of  the  sanctification
of  the  Spirit  (I  Pet.  i.  2).  This  blessed  fruit  is  worthy  of  a  dedicated  people.  They
must  be  zealots  for  practical  holiness,  for  they  fiud  their  best  motives  in  two  advents.
— T.  C.

Ver.  15. — Pastoral  work  and  autJiority,  "The«»e  things  speak,  and  exhort,  and
rebuke  with  all  authority."  The  business  of  the  minister  is  concerning  all  the  things
commanded  in  this  chapter  both  as  to  doctrine  and  duty.

I.  These  doctrines  and  duties  were  to  be  "  spoken  of,"  so  as  to  be  bbouoht  to

BEAR   with  power  ON   THE   HEARTS   AND   MINDS  OF   THE   PEOPLE.

II.   ThET  were  to  be   made   matters  OF  OBLIGATION  IN  THE  CONSOIENOB ;   for  TltuS

was  to  practise  exhortation.

III.  Rebuke  was  to  bb   applied  with  all   authority   where  exhortation

FAILED  OF    ITS   EFFECT.

IV.  Titus  was  to  live  so  circumspectly  that  the  Cretans  could  not
DESPISE  him.  *'  Let  no  man  despise  thee."  Contempt  would  be  the  natural  effect  of
observed  iuconsistency  in  the  life  of  the  young  evangelist. — T.  C.

Ver.  2. — Aged  Christian  men.  **  That  the  aged  men  be  sober,  grave,  temperate,
sound  in  faith,  in  cliarity,  in  patience."  There  are  appropriate  fruits  ifor  every  time  of
life,  and  the  Chrintian  man  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  season.  A  frivolous,  fantastical
age  is  a  distasteful  spectacle.  Old  age  should  be  cheerful ;  but  fun  should  be  without
frivolity,  and  latighter  without  levity.

I.  The  REVERENCE  DUE  to  AGE.  We  look  for  sobriety  of  character  as  the  result  of
the  experience  of  a  man  who  has  found  that  there  are  limits  to  all  expectations;
gravity  in  one  who  is  nearing  his  great  account;  and  temperance  in  one  who  is
supposed  to  have  trampled  down  the  fierce  passions  of  youth.  We  reverence  age  for
the  consistency  of  the  long  years  of  lif(>,  and  for  fidelity  to  conscience  and  to  Christ.

II.  The  fruits  that  may  ripen  in  age.  They  are :  1.  Faiths  which  is  a  grace
that  grows.  As  men  know  more  of  Christ  by  heart-experiences  and  life-experiences,  so
ought  their  faith  to  increase  in  him  whose  promises  have  all  been  "Yea  and  Amen."

2.  Charity,  alike  in  kindly  estimate  of  others,  in  less  bigotry,  and  in  more  compre-
hensiveness of  embrace  to  all  who  may  belong  to  other  folds  under  the  great  Shepherd.

3.  Patience.  For  while  manhood  has  to  work,  age  at  eventide  has  to  wait,  sometimes
in  pain  or  in  weakness.  Still  "they  serve"  while  they  wait,  by  prayer  and  quiet
submission  to  the  great  will,  the  Lord's  will.  They  are  "  examples  to  the  flock." —
W.  M.  S.

Ver.  3. — Aged  Christian  women.  " The  aj^ed  women  likewise."  Our  "behaviour"
is  a  Hign  of  our  character.  We  cannot  hide  the  "  roots  "  of  our  life.  Weeds  or  flowers
soon  appear  upon  the  earth.

I.  Holy  women.  Not  sanctimonious,  or  stiff,  or  prudish ;  but  holy.  Never  suffering
irreverence  to  characterize  their  speech,  levity  to  mark  their  looks,  or  folly  to  appear  in
their  dress  or  demeanour.  Uuly,  so  that  their  quiet  fellowship  with  God  may  affect
their  influence,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  "  earnest  of  the  heaven  "  they  are  approaching
in  their  old  age  may  be  known  by  their  conversation.

II.  True  women.  "  Not  false  accusers."  This  does  not  apply  to  courts  of  law,  but
to  common  life.  The  word  is  expressive ;  it  is  "  make-bates,*'  from  which  our  word
"  abate."  They  do  not  lessen  the  honour,  the  reputition,  the  good  report  of  others  by
accusations  which  are  unworthy  and  untrue.

III.  Temperate  women.  "Not  given  to  much  wine."  Never  flushed  with  the
semi-intoxication  of  indulgence.  Never  made  frivolous  and  foolish  in  Sfieech  through
strong  drink.  Avoiding  this  as  the  tyranny  of  a  habit  which  may  become  with  them
a  second  nature.    "  Not  given  to  much  wine."

IV.  Useful  women.  "  Teachers  of  good  things."  Of  the  highest  truths  that  make
for  salvation,  and  of  all  the  truths  which  they  have  leanied,  that  minister  to  industry,  to


36  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  ten.  n.  1—15.

household  economy,  to  thrift  and  piety  and  prosperity.  Every  aged  woman  has  a  large
ministry  to  fulfil  when  she  remembers  how  large  is  the  category  of  ^  good  things." —
W.  M.  S.

Vers.  4,  6. — CounneU  to  young  women.  Here  there  are  what  may  be  termed
"  instructions'*  to  the  aged  women  as  to  the  counsels  to  be  given  by  them  to  the  youn?
women.  Such  authority  does  the  gospel  give  to  age ;  such  reverence  and  respect  for
age  does  it  expect  from  young  women.  Nations  deteriorate  in  character  whenev^
youth  becomes  insolent  in  its  own  independence,  and  resentful  of  aathority.

L  Sobriety,  or  wisdom ;  that  calm  quietude  of  heart  and  mind  which  ia  not  intoxi-
cated by  vanity,  or  carried  away  with  the  sensationalism  of  pleasure.

II.  Chastity.  Alike  in  thought,  in  speech,  and  in  manner  and  conduct.  Parity
makes  queenly  women.  One  stain  spoils  the  most  exquisite  sculpture.  The  beauty  of
marble  is  its  purity,  and  the  beauty  of  womanhood  is  chastity.

III.  Home-keepers.  Making  home  first  of  all  a  centre  of  attraction  by  its  order  and
cleanliness  and  comfort ;  then  by  its  harmonies  of  peace  and  love,  so  that  no  discordant
notes  may  mar  the  music  of  its  joy ;  and  then  by  avoiding  gossiping  visits,  and  the
excitements  of  habitual  restlessness,  and  a  too  great  love  of  shopping,  securing  the
safety  of  economy  and  the  honour  of  a  wife  who  "  weaves  **  all  into  beauty  and  order
at  home.

IV.  Obedience.  Not  slavish  submission  toman;  for  woman  is  his  equal,  and  "wis
not,"  as  an  old  divine  says,  "  taken  from  his  feet,  to  be  beneath  him,  or  his  head,  to  be
above  him ;  but  from  his  side,  to  be  equal  with  him."  Still,  there  is  the  obedience
which  consists  in  consulting  him,  judging  and  conforming — where  conscience  is  not
ofifended — to  his  judgment  and  his  wishes.

All  this  that  "  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed,"  or  its  fame  injured^  which  is
the  true  meaning  of  blaspheme,  viz.  to  blast  the  fame  of  it. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  6. — Counsels  to  young  men,  "  Young  men  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober-minded,"
so  that —

I.  They  may  take  such  a  view  of  life  as  to  include  its  difficulties  a5d
responsibilities.

II.  They  may  be  kept  free  from  the  undue  disappointment  of  too  enthusi-
astic MINDS.

III.  They  may  be  kept  from  the  wine-cup  and  all  harmful  STnruLANTs,

IV.  They  may  remember  that  life  is  a  solemn  thing,  full  of  acoountabiuty.

V.  They  may  keep  their  minds  open  to  counsel  from  age  and  experience.
— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  7,  8. — A  teacJier's  influence.  Titus  is  to  remember  that  personal  character  is
the  most  eloquent  counsel  and  the  most  convincing  argument  of  the  gosi>el.

I.  Pattern.  Not  a  slavish  example  of  mere  deeds.  For  this  is  not  the  gospel  ideal
We  are  not  to  copy  mere  actions,  but  to  catch  the  spirit  of  the  teacher.  This  makes
true  arty  and  it  makes  also  true  religion.  We  admire  the  pattern,  but  we  do  not  copy
it  by  *'  the  rule  of  thumb,"  but  by  the  adoption  of  the  same  spirit.  Christ  in  us  I  The
mind  of  Christ.

II.  Doctrine.  Not  mere  dogma,  which  is  an  artificial  thing,  and  may  or  may  not
be  true,  according  as  the  authority  which  gives  it  may  be  wise  and  enlio-htened  or
ignorant  and  superstitious.  Doctrine  is  different.  It  is  a  revealed  truth  which  has'  its
response  in  the  heart  and  conscience,  and  its  attestation  in  life.  This  the  o-ospel  has.
And  he  is  to  show  "  uncomiptness ;  '*  that  is,  he  is  not  to  defile  it  with  wc^ldly  com-
promises. And  "gravity;**  for  it  is  not  meant  to  be  the  light  theme  of  intellectual
discussion,  but  the  gravest  matter  of  obedience.  And  "  sincerity."  It  is  not  to  be
preached  for  expedient  reasons,  as,  for  instance,  the  security  of  life^  or  the  safety  of  the
statcy  or  the  ways  in  which  even  Socrates  would  have  men  honour  the  gods  although
inwardly  he  disbelieved  in  them  ;  but  with  sincerity  of  conviction  as  to  their  reali'ty
and  truth.

III.  Sound  speech.  No  hollow  rhetoric.  No&tatementsinexcessof  fact  for  the  sake
of  impression ;  but  sound  all  through  in  argument,  illustration,  and  attestation.


CH.  II.  1—15.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


Such  conduct  and  speech  will  shame  those  who  "see  the  fruits/'  and  can  say  no
"  evU  "  of  us.— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  9, 10. — Counsels  to  slaves.  This  Epistle  was  circulated  in  Asia  Minor,  where
there  were  some  eighty  thousand  slaves.  *'  Exhort  slaves,  or  hond-servants,"  etc.
The  gospel  cured  slavery,  as  it  cured  polygamy,  by  a  slow  and  steady  development  of
the  doctrine  and  spirit  of  the  cross — that  we  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  we  are
not  our  own,  and  that  we  ought  to  love  others  even  as  oursdves.  And  no  man  would
like  to  be  a  slave  himself.

I.  Obedience.  They  were  slaves,  and  they  had  masters.  While  that  relationship
remained,  let  them  show  the  conquests  of  the  gospel  in  their  endeavours  to  please,
and  in  their  not  "  gainsaying,"  or  answering  again.  Masters  would  see  in  such  conduct
the  divinity  of  the  gospel ;  and  slaves  would  not  suffer  in  vain — it  would  give  the  dignity
of  "  ministry  "  even  to  their  lives.

II.  Beauty.  Not  "purloining,"  which  slaves  are  tempted  to  do.  Having  been
purloined  or  "  stolen  "  themselves,  it  would  not  seem  very  harmful  to  them  to  steal
things  from  their  masters.  But  they  were  to  "adorn  the  goepel" — to  show  how
"  beautiful "  it  could  make  their  rude  life,  and  the  rough,  hard  lot  of  a  slave.

So  we  all  have  here  the  gospel  in  its  beauty.  "Adorn,"  and  in  its  breadth,  "all
things."- W.  M.  S.

Ver.  11. — Christ  for  every  man.  The  gospel  is  universal.  It  knows  nothinj;  of
race,  or  country,  or  clime.  It  is  the  grace  of  the  Father  to  every  child.  It  reveals
the  nature  of  God  himself,  which  is  love.

I.  Here  is  a  question  to  be  considebed.  It  is  said  by  the  apostle  that  it  "  has
appeared  unto  all  men."  Is  this  so?  Are  there  not  multitudes  ignorant  of  the  gospel
— multitudes  who  have  never  heard  the  joyful  sound  ?  Unquestiunably.  But  for  all
that,  it  has  appeared  for  all  men,  and  this  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  expression.  Its
invitation  is  to  all.  Its  provisions  are  for  all,  and  it  rests  with  us  to  go  into  all  the
world  and  preach  a  gospel  which  has  room  yet  for  the  world  at  its  banquet-table  of
grace.

II.  Hebe  is  a  salvation  to  be  brought.  This  explains  everything.  It  brings
salvation.  Some  will  not  accept  it.  Some  will  only  use  it  as  a  miraculous  charm,
without  applying  it  to  the  conscience  and  the  character.  What  is  it,  then,  to  be  saved  ?
To  be  delivered  from  the  condemnation  of  the  Law  is  not  all.  We  are  to  be  saved  from
ourselves,  from  every  tyrannous  yoke  of  habit,  every  corrupting  cancer  of  evil,  every
relic  of  selfishness  and  bin ;  and  this  is  illustrated  and  explained  in  the  succeeding  verses.
So  that  salvation  is  as  broad  in  its  application  as  it  is  beautiful  in  its  results.—
W.  M.  8.

Ver.  12. — True  self-denial.  Here  we  see  that  the  cross  of  Christ  has  its  influence
within  ourselves  as  well  as  on  the  moral  government  of  God.  We  are  not  left  passive
in  a  mere  receptivity  of  blessing ;  we  are  actively  to  co-operate  with  the  Spirit  of  God
in  working  out  our  salvation.

I.  Here  is  self-denial.  But  what  are  we  to  deny?  Our  better  selves?  No;  wo
are  to  please  our  conscience,  to  satisfy  our  sense  of  moral  order  and  beauty,  to  gratify
the  spiritual  being.  All  depends,  in  our  consideration  of  self-denial,  upon  which  self
we  are  to  deny,  the  lower  self  or  the  higher  self.  Ungodliness  is  to  be  denied ;  for
nothing  can  minister  to  the  true  ends  of  our  being  that  is  not  of  Ood.  Without
"godliness"  we  are  graceless,  and  all  seeming  beauty  is  meretricious  and  unreal.
Worldly  lusts  are  numerous.  Lust  is  love  in  wrong  directions.  It  is  not  merely  excess
or  a  question  of  degree;  it  is  a  question  of  kind.  Love  may  be  pure,  or  it  may  be  the
lust  of  the  eye,  which  is  sensuality.  The  pride  of  life  is  the  lust  of  pride  in  mere  carnal
enjoyment  and  ambitious  aim.  We  must  deny  the  thorns  and  the  tares  of  the  one  to
leave  room  for  the  harvest  of  holiness.     But —

II.  Negations  are  not  enough.  We  are  not  good  by  what  we  give  up  simply,
but  by  what  we  take  up.  The  cross  has  its  creative  as  well  as  its  destructive  influence.
"  I  am  crucified  with  Christ ;  nevertheless  I  live ; "  and  how  f  "  Soberly ; "  giving  room
for  reason  to  take  the  place  of  passion,  and  for  conscience  to  conquer  the  excitements  of


38  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUa  [ch.  n.  1—15.

iDtoxicatod  desire.  *'  Righteously ;  **  so  that  it  may  be  seen  that  wickedness  is  wroog—
our  life  "  wrung,'*  that  is,  twistc-d  from  the  '*  straight."  **  Godly ;  **  that  is,  not  goTt-rxiai
by  laws  of  cuKtom,  or  expediency,  or  self-r>leaKiDg,  but  by  God's  will,  and  the  Spirit  of
CKjd  in  the  heart.  For  as  nature  is  beautiful  because  therein  we  see  the  ideal  of  God—
DO  art  being  really  beautiful  that  is  not  true  to  nature — so  no  life  is  pnre  and  holy  that
has  not  God's  thought  and  purpiMte  in  iL  And  we  are  to  do  ail  this  amid  teuiptatioa
and  hesitation,  in  "  this  present  world." — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  13. —  The  coming  day.  We  are  to  live  with  a  great  sky  of  immortality  above
ui;  for  no  mere  secularism  has  motive  power  enough  to  sustnin  a  noble  life.  It
breaks  down  always  through  the  consciousness  that  nothing  matters  much,  for  death
ends  all ;  as  the  sceptic  in  Ecclcsiastes  is  supposed  to  feel  when  be  says,  "  All  things
come  alike  to  sll :  there  is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked.'*

L  The  upward  look.  *'Lo<'king  for  that  blessed  hope.*  What  is  that  hope?
This — that  one  day  all  inequalities  will  be  adjusted,  all  wrong  redressed,  all  laitiifui
service  rewsrded,  and  all  true  character  revealed.

II.  The  revf.alino  day.  "  At  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  Qod  and  our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  Bow  his  appearing  will  take  place  we  know  not.  Nor  when.
Nor  whe*e.  But  all  Scripture  teaches  that  there  is  a  day  for  '*  the  manifestation  of  the
sons  of  God,"  and  for  the  judgment  on  worldly  and  wicked  men.  Our  apostle  prajs
that  "  we  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  diay."  The  exile  has  the  hope  of  seeing
his  native  land.  The  child  at  school  looks  for  and  longs  for  home.  And  this  with  us  is
a  hle^Btd  hope,  becau^  it  makes  us  happy  and  restful  here  and  now,  and  mak«  us
joyiiil  even  m  tribulation;  for  we  look  for  '*a  city  which  hath  foundations  whose
Builder  and  Maker  is  God."— W.  M.  S.  '

Ver.  14. —  The  giving  of  the  self.  This  is  the  most  beautiful  of  the  sentences  in  this
Epistle.  Chiibt  came  not  merely  to  teach,  or  to  reveal  the  fatherhood  of  GKxi,  but  to
give  himself.

I.  He  did  this  in  his  life.  All  his  exquisite  sensibilities  were  bruised  in  a  world
of  selfishness  and  sin.  The  sorrowK  and  griefs  of  men  hurt  him.  He  did  not  mertly
give  his  thoughts,  or  j^ive  his  time^  or  give  his  infinite  hilp.     He  **gave  himself."

II.  He  did  this  in  his  death.  As  our  Sitcrifice  he  gave  himself,  **  that  he  misht
redeem  us  from  all  inicjuity  ;"  not  from  jiuilt  alone,  but  Irom  every  form  of  eviL  The
pel  feci  ly  voluntary  character  of  our  Saviour's  redemptive  mission  is  seen  in  such
expressions  as  **  1  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  G«'d/'  and  when  concerning  his  life  he  says
**  No  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself."  This  voluntary istn  on  his  mrt
itself  destroys  all  those  critical  objections  to  the  atonement  which  were  once  raiseil
against  the  sufferiiig  of  the  innocent  one  for  the  guilty;  f<)r,  in  the  first  place,  Christ
*'  gives  himself,"  aud,  in  the  second  place,  he  does  it  for  a  worthy  end ;  not  that  he  mav
apjjease  the  wrath  of  his  Father,  but  that  he  may  honour  his  moral  government  by  his
perfect  obedience  unto  death,  and  that  he  may  redeem  men  from  more  than  the  curse

of  the  Law,  viz.  from  all  iniquity.     Thus,  again,  the  end  of  the  gospel  is  character that

this  eanh  may  be  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  in  which  all  iniquity  may  be  down-
trodden and  destroyed. — W.  ^L  tS.

Ver.  15. —  Cultivation  of  rt sped,  "Let  no  man  despise  thee."  For  through  the
personal  influence  even  the  first  apostles  and  teacliers  had  to  win  their  way.

I.  Religious  teachers  need  especially  to  remember  that  even  worldly  men
DESPISE  hypocrites.  If  men  recommend  a  medicine  they  do  not  take,  df  exliort  to
obedience  of  a  law  which  they  do  not  themselves  obey,  or  seek  to  inspire  admiratiou
for  a  virtue  which  they  only  wear  as  a  cloak,  or  aflfect  a  love  to  ihe  Saviour  which  euds
in  no  s<  If-dei.ial  or  sacriHce,  they  are  hypocrites,  and  men  despise  them.

II.  Religious  teachers  need  especially  to  remember  that  men  who  are
DESPISED  have  no  real  POWER.  That  is,  of  course,  rightly  despise<l  ;  fur  they  mav  l>e
wrongly  despised.  It  is  written  of  our  Lord,  "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men."
So  that  wo  must  keep  in  remembrance  the  fact  that  what  St.  Paul  means  is  '*  deservedly
despised.'*  Ko  rhetoric,  no  argument,  no  brilliancy  of  thought,  no  ability  of  application
or  illustration  can  make  any  minister  of  Christ  really  useful  and  eflective  if  hia  cha-


CH.  n.  1— 15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  89


racier  and  reputation  are  justly  despised.    As  "  O^ili "  says,  *'  character  is  higher  than
intellect."— W.  M.  a

Vers.  1 — 10. — Oenuine  morality,  "But  speak  thou  the  things  w^ich  become
sound  doctrine,*'  etc.  Paul,  having  given  Titus  directions  as  to  the  organization  of  a
Christian  Church  in  Crete,  and  cba*ged  him  to  contend  against  those  who,  in  the  name
of  Christianity,  prop>)gated  doctrines  at  variance  both  with  the  trutlis  and  the  S|irit  of
the  gospel,  here  urges  that  genuine  morality  which  should  be  the  grand  aim  and
tendency  of  all  gospel  preaching.  The  grand  subject  presented  in  this  past^ge  is
genuine  morality.  There  have  been,  and  still  are,  those  who  regard  morality  and
religion  as  two  distinct  subjects  or  lines  of  conduct  But  they  are  essentially  one ;  one
cannot  exist  without  the  other.  The  essence  of  both  consists  in  supreme  regard  tu  the
Divine  will  as  the  only  standard  of  character  and  rule  of  life.  From  these  verses  we
may  draw  three  general  truths  in  relation  to  this  subject.

I.  Genuine  morality  legislates  alike  fob  all  mankind.  It  speaks  to  man
authoritatively,  whatever  his  personal  peculiarities,  adventitious  distinctions,  social
relations,  secular  circumstances,  official  position,  the  number  of  his  years,  or  the  charac-
teristics of  his  country.  Moral  law  meets  him  everywhere ;  he  can  no  more  escape  it
than  he  can  the  atmosphere  he  breathes.  In  these  words  persons  are  mentioried  dis-
tinguished by  three  fundamental  facts.  1.  The  fact  of  age.  Amongst  tho  millions  of
the  race,  not  many  in  any  generation  can  be  found  that  came  into  existence  exac  ly  at
the  same  minute.  Hence  there  are  those  differing  in  age  from  one  year  to  a  huiidred
or  more.  Hence  Paul  speaks  here  of "  aged  men  "  and  "  aged  women,"  "  young  men  "  and
"  young  womeo."  At  the  first  dawn  of  moral  consciousness,  up  to  the  last  breath  of
earthly  existence,  the  voice  of  duty  speaks — "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  No  one  has
strength  enough  to  extricate  himself  from  the  ties  of  moral  obligation.  N«>t  even  that
mighty  spirit  who  leads  the  ''world  captive  at  his  will'' can  break  the  shackles  of
moral  responsibility.  2.  The  fact  of  aex.  Here  are  "  men  "  and  "  wt)men,"  both  the
aged  and  the  young.  However  closely  identified  in  affection  and  interest,  moral  duty
treats  each  as  a  distinct  personality.  In  human  legislation  the  obligation  of  the  woman,
in  some  cases,  is  absorbed  in  that  of  the  man.  Not  so  with  the  moral  legislation  of
Heaven.  Each  must  bear  its  own  burden.  Inasmuch  as  the  woman  is  as  bound  to
follow  the  will  of  God  as  the  man,  no  man  has  a  right  to  interfere  with  the  freedom
of  her  thought,  the  dictates  of  her  conscience,  or  the  independency  of  her  devotions.
For  long  ages  men  have  not  recognized  this  fact,  and  they  have  treated  women  as  iheir
toys  of  pleasure  and  instruments  of  gratification.  Women  are  beginning  to  wake  up  to
their  rights,  and  the  day  of  man's  tyranny  is  drawing  to  a  close.  3.  The  fact  of  rela-
tionship.  Paul  says,  "  Exhort  servants  to  be  obedient  unto  their  own  masters."  Why
the  duty  of  servants  should  be  here  referred  to  and  not  that  of  masters,  is  not  because
masters  have  not  their  duty,  but  perhaps  at  this  time  in  Crete  there  were  slaves  who
were  disloyal  and  rebellious.  Whilst  the  duty  of  servants  is  here  referred  to,  the  fact
must  not  be  overlooked  that  morality  is  bindmg  on  men  in  every  social  relationship,  on
the  rulers  as  well  as  the  ruled,  the  judges  as  well  as  the  criminals,  the  parents  as  well
as  the  children,  the  employers  as  well  as  the  employes.  What  is  wrong  for  one  is
wrong  for  all,  and  the  reverse.

IL  Genuine  morality  reaches  to  the  springs  op  the  heart,  it  does  not  con-
cern itself  with  the  external  conduct.  "  Bodily  exercise  prufiteth  but  little."  But  as  it
regards  external  conduct  as  the  evolutions  of  the  states  of  the  heart,  it  legislates  lor  those
states.  It  says,  "  Keep  the  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."
Glance  at  the  virtues  here  inculcated.  '^Th^it  the  aged  men  l>e  sober  [soi>er-uiinded],
grave,  temiK*rate."  The  exhortation  to  sobriety  is  also  a<idrease<l  to  aiied  women  :  **  That
they  be  not  j^iven  to  much  wine."  Also  to  the  young  women  :  "  Teach  the  younsj  women
to  be  sober.''  And  to  the  young  men :  "  Exhort  to  be  suber-minde<i."  Although  physical
sobriety  is  undoubtedly  referred  to,  moral  sobiiety,  serious  thong- itfulness,  and  >elf-
reitraint  are  evidently  included  and  regarded  as  fun<lainenral.  Moral  sober-mindedness
is  the  effective  preventative  and  cure  of  all  physical  intemperance.  No  arjcumenr,  either
for  total  abstinence  or  against  it,  can  be  sustained  by  the  phrase,  "  Not  f^iveu  to  much
wine."  All  the  words  convey  is — Do  not  get  drunk.  "  Sound  in  faith,  in  charity  [l<»ve],
in  patience."    This  means — Have  a  healthy  faith,  a  fitith  well  founded ;  a  healthy  love.


40  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  n.  1-15.

a  love  fastened  on  the  supremely  loyable;  a  healthy  patience^  a  patienoe  that  shall
bear  up  with  fortitude  and  magnaDimity  under  all  the  trials  of  life.  **  As  beoometh
holiness" — reverent  in  demeanour.  Let  the  whole  life  be  full  of  that  **  hoUness  withoat
which  no  man  can  soe  the  Lord."  **  Not  false  accusers  " — not  slanderers*  It  has  been
observed  that  old  women  are  specially  tempted  to  garrulity  and  querulousness ;  hencs
the  exhortation  here.  **  Teachers  of  good  thmgs  " — of  that  which  is  good.  Things  good
in  themselves  as  well  as  in  their  tendencies  and  issues;  teachers,  not  merely  by  words^
but  by  example.  **  That  they  may  teach  [train]  the  young  women  to  be  sober."  The
expression,  "  to  be  sober/*  should  be  omitted.  "  To  love  their  hosbands."  The  dntr
implies  that  the  husband  is  loveworthy ;  there  are  some  men  who  are  called  husbsodi
so  morally  abhorrent  and  disgusting,  that  to  love  them  would  be  inipoesible.  The  idol
husband  must  be  loved.  **  To  love  their  children.**  A  mother's  love,  of  a  certain  kind,
is  proverbial.  Maternal  love,  wrongly  directed,  has  been  one  of  the  chief  corses  of  the
race.  *'  To  be  discreet  '* — sober-minded.  A  proper  cheerfulness  in  mothers  is  a  pieciooi
virtue,  but  volatile  frivolousness  is  a  serious  evil.  "  Chaste  " — purity  of  the  body,  free-
dom from  obscenity  in  language  and  life.  Nothing  in  society  is  more  bc»autifal  than  s
thoroughly  chaste  woman — chaste  in  language,  chaste  in  dress,  chaste  in  movement;
and  nothing  is  more  disgusting  than  the  reverse — a  woman  unclean  in  appearance,  is
costume,  in  language,  in  manners.  "  Keepers  [workers]  at  home."  Wives  must  woik
as  well  as  husbands.  Work  is  a  condition  of  health  and  of  true  enjoyment.  An  idle  wife
is  a  bane  both  to  herself  and  her  family.  **  At  home."  This  may  not  mean  entirely  in
her  own  house,  but  in  her  own  sphere,  it  may  be  in  the  garden,  the  field,  the  school-
room,  the  Church,  etc.  "  Good  ** — kind,  amiable,  sympathetic,  generous,  free  from  til
that  is  malign,  envious,  and  jealous.  "  Obedient  [being  in  subjection j  to  their  own
husbands.*'  This  implies,  of  course,  that  the  husband's  commands  are  wise,  right,  and
usefuL  "  That  the  Word  of  God  be  not  blasphemed."  This  refers,  perhaps,  to  all  the
previous  exhortations,  and  expresses  a  grand  reason  for  the  cultivation  of  all  virtues.
Our  conduct  in  all  things  should  be  such  aa  to  bring  honour  rather  than  dishonour  on
our  Lord  and  Master.  "  Let  your  light  also  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  '*  Young  men  likewi>«
exhort  to  be  sober-minded."  Touth,  in  the  swelling  streams  of  its  passions,  the  wild
play  of  its  fancy,  and  its  craving  for  the  romantic,  is  fearfully  exposed  to  mental  inao-
briety.  Hence,  no  duty  for  the  young  is  more  urgent  than  that  of  obtaining  a  self-
masterhood.  Titus,  whom  Paul  commands  to  exhort  young  men  to  this  duty,  w&s
himself  a  comparatively  young  man.  He  could  scarcely  have  been  more  than  forty
years  of  age.  "  Brought  up  in  a  pagan  home,  not  improbably  in  the  luxurious  and
wicked  Syrian  Antioch,  drawn  to  the  Master's  side  in  the  fresh  dawn  of  manhood,  tried
in  many  a  difficult  task  and  found  faithful,  the  words  of  Titus  exhorting  the  youth  of
Crete  to  be  sober-minded  or  self-restrained  would  be  likely  to  have  great  weight."
"  In  all  things  showing  thyself  a  pattern  [ensample]  of  good  works,  in  doctrine  showin*'
uncorruptnesvs,  gravity,  sincerity,  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned  ;  that  he  that
is  of  the  contrary  part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of  you  [us]."  In
order  that  the  exhortations  of  Titus  miii^ht  have  full  force,  Paul  here  addresses  an
admonition  to  hira.  He  is  to  show  himself  a  "pattern  of  good  works**  in  all  things;
he  is  to  be  a  model  of  excellence  in  all  his  relations  to  the  men  and  women  of  Crete,
both  the  aged  and  the  young.  He  must  be  pure,  grave,  and  sincere.  His  preachin*^
too,  should  be  such  that  could  not  be  "  coudemned  " — sound,  healthy,  practical  not
fimcifnl,  sentimental,  and  morbid.  Ah!  how  many  sermons  preached  every  Sunday
men  of  reason,  thoughtfulness,  conscience,  recoil  from  and  condemn  !  '*  Exhort  servants
to  be  obedient  [in  subjection]  to  their  own  masters,  and  to  please  them  well  [to  be  well
pleasing  to  them]  in  all  things;  not  answering  again  [not  gainsaying] ;  not  purloining,
but  showing  all  good  fidelity."  Herein  is  enjoined  on  servants  obtdience,  acquiesceuc^
honesty,  faithfulness.  All  this  implies,  of  course,  that  the  master  is  what  be  ought  to
be,  that  his  commands  are  righteous,  that  his  words  are  truthful,  and  that  the  work  he
enjoins  is  lawful  and  right,  **  That  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  Grod  our  Saviour
in  all  things."  From  this  it  would  seem  that  even  slaves,  in  righteously  serving  their
masters,  may  even  honour  God  in  their  humble  service.  Thus  from  this  passa^^e  we
learn  that  genuine  morality  reaches  the  very  springs  of  the  heart,  the  fountain  of  all
actions.    He  is  not  a  moral  man  who  only  acts  in  strictest  conformity  to  the  conven-


CH.  II.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  41

tional  rules  of  society,  nor  is  he  even  a  moral  man  who  merely  fulfils  the  letter  of  the
Divine  commands.  **  AH  these  commandments  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up. . . .  Yet
one  thing  thou  lackest,"  etc.  He  only  is  the  true  man  whose  governing  sympathies
flow  in  the  channels  of  eternal  right,  and  whose  activities  are  ever  engaged  in  endeavours
to  please  the  mighty  Maker  of  his  being.  The  will  of  God,  and  that  only,  is  the  datum
of  true  ethics.

III.  Genuine  moralitt  is  the  grand  pitrpose  op  gospel  teaching.  '*But  speak
thou  the  things  which  become  [befit]  sound  doctrine,  that  the  aged  men,"  etc.  His
teaching  is  to  be  in  contrast  with  that  of  the  false  teachers  mentioDed  in  the  previous
verses,  and  which  led  to  immorality  of  conduct.  This  verse  and  the  seventh,  urging
Titus,  as  a  preacher,  to  be  a  pattern  in  all  things,  both  in  his  teaching  and  his  conduct,
justifies  the  inference  that  the  grand  end  of  gospel  teaching  is  the  promotion  of  genuine
morality.  In  the  eighth  verse  of  the  next  chapter,  Paul  distinctly  states  that  Titus
was  so  to  teach  that  his  hearers  might  be  '*  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  This  is  a
point  which  what  is  called  the  "  Church  '*  has,  in  its  teachings,  practically  ignored.  The
gospel  has  been  preached  to  sustain  theologies,  to  establish  sects,  and  to  maintain  certain
institutions,  ecclesiastical  and  political,  instead  of  making  men  morally  good,  honest,
faithful,  and  heroically  loyal  to  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus."  Here,  then,  we  have  the
only  in/allihle  teat  qf  pulpit  usefulness.  In  what  does  the  real  utility  of  the  pulpit  con-
sist ?  In  gathering  large  audiences  ?  Any  charlatan  can  do  this ;  and,  frequently,  the
greater  the  charlatan  the  most  successful.  In  generating  in  the  congregation  the  largest
amount  of  superficial  religious  sentiment  ?  This  often  emasculates  the  reason,  diseases
the  conscience,  enervates  the  will,  and  renders  the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  soul  insalu-
brious and  depressing.  No;  but  in  making  men  moral,  the  living  agents  evermore  of
good  works,  i  estimate  a  true  Church,  not  by  the  number  of  its  members,  the  apparent
earnestness  of  its  devotions,  or  the  amount  of  its  contributions,  but  by  the  number  of
its  professors  who  are  too  truthful  to  lie,  too  honest  to  defraud,  too  morally  noble  to  do
or  to  countenance  a  mean  or  a  dishonourable  act — to  whom,  in  short,  all  worldly  wealth
and  power,  and  life  itself,  are  held  cheap  as  dirt  compared  with  the  right.  When
Churches  are  made  up  of  such  members,  then,  and  not  until  then,  they  will  command
the  confidence,  the  sympathy,  the  trade,  and  the  influence  of  the  world.  Well  does
Emerson  say,  "  There  is  no  morality  >vithout  religion,  and  there  is  no  religion  without
morality.  '  This  is  the  love  of  Grod,  that  we  keep  his  commandments.'  He  who  loves
God  keeps  the  commandment,  loves  God  in  action.  Love  is  obedience  in  the  heart,
obedience  is  love  in  the  life.  Morality  is  religion  in  practice,  religion  is  morality  in
principle." — D.  T.

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  soul-culture  of  the  world.  "  For  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth
salvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,"  etc  "  Taking  occasion  from  what  he  had  just
said  of  the  connection  between  the  conduct  of  Christians  and  the  doctrine  they  pro-
fessed to  have  received,  and  the  connection  of  both  with  the  glory  of  God,  the  apostle
proceeds  in  these  verbes  to  ground  the  whole  of  his  exhortations  respecting  the
behaviour  of  Christians  in  the  essentially  moral  nature  and  design  of  the  grace  of
God,  as  now  manifested  in  the  gospel "  (Dr.  Fairbairn).  As  if  the  apostle  had  said,
'*  Tou  must  exhort  all  orders,  those  of  every  age  and  condition,  of  each  sex,  bond  as  well
AS  free,  to  struggle  after  spiritual  goodness  because  the  '  grace  of  Grod,'  or  the  gospel,
has  come  to  you."  Our  subject  is  the  soul-culture  of  the  world.  Man  requires  training.
He  needs  physical  training,  intellectual  training,  and,  above  all,  spiritual  training,
the  training  of  the  soul  into  a  higher  life.  We  have  here  the  instrument,  the  process,
and  the  end  of  true  soul-culture.

L  The  instrument  of  true  soul-culture.  What  is  it?  Not  science,  legisla-
tion, philosophy,  poetry,  or  any  of  the  arts.  What,  then  ?  **  The  grace  of  God.'
What  is  that  ?  Undoubtedly  God's  merciful  plan  and  ministries  to  restore  the  fallen
world.  The  Epiphany,  or  manifestation  of  this  redemptive  love  of  God  for  the  world,
we  have  in  the  advent  and  ministry  of  Christ  to  this  earth.  "  The  grace  of  God  "
stands  for  the  gospel.  Concerning  this  instrument,  observe :  1.  It  is  the  love  of  Ood,
Divine  love  is  the  cause,  the  essence,  and  the  effective  energy  of  all  God's  redemptive
ministries.  2.  It  is  the  love  of  Ood  to  save.  "That  bringeth  [bringing]  salvation."
Salvation,  that  is,  the  restoration  of  man  to  the  knowledge,  the  image,  and  the  friend-


42  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  n.  1— 15.

ship  uf  God.  This  is  the  aim  and  the  work  of  the  **  grace  of  GKxl.*'  Without  this
^race  there  would  be  no  salvation.  S,  It  is  the  love  of  Ood  revealed  to  ail.  **  Hath
appeared  to  all  men."  The  gospel  is  not  for  a  tribe  or  a  class,  but  for  man  as  man.
Like  the  coDcave  heavens,  it  eoibraces  the  wide  world ;  it  is  for  **  €M  fnen/*

IL  The  process  op  true  soul-culture.  This  process  involves  three  things.
1.  The  renunciation  of  a  wrong  course.  *'  Denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  loAta."
'i'hese  expressions  are  an  epitome  of  all  that  is  sinful  and  wrong  in  human  life.  Are
they  not  all-prevalent  and  all-potent?  **  Ungodliness,"  or  practical  atheism,  where  is
it  not?  "  Worldly  lusts,**  the  impulses  of  seusuality,  selfishness,  pride,  aud  ambitioo,
they  are  the  springs  of  worldly  action  the  world  over.  Now,  these  are  not  only  to  be
renounced,  repudiated,  but  they  are  to  be  defied,  resisted,  and  renounced ;  they  must
be  given  up.  "  Ungodliness**  must  give  way  to  true  piety,  "worldly  lusts'*  must  be
renounced  for  impulses  spiritual  and  Divine.  2.  The  adoption  <^  a  right  ccmrae.
"  We  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  aud  godly  in  this  present  world.**  It  is  not
enough  to  renounce  the  evil ;  the  good  must  be  adopted.  Negative  excellence  is  not
holiness.  Strip  the  soul  of  all  evil,  and  if  it  has  not  goodness  in  it,  it  **  lacks  the  one
thing  **  without  which,  Paul  says,  **  I  am  nothing."  We  must  live  *•  soberly,**  holding
a  mastery  over  our  own  passions  and  impulses;  ''righteously,'*  rendering  to  all  men
their  due;  "  godly,**  practically  realizing  the  presence,  the  claims,  and  the  love  of  God
in  our  every-day  life.  All  this  "  in  this  present  world,"  or  in  the  present  course  of
things.  This  "present  world"  urgently  requires  such  a  course  of  life,  for  it  is  dan-
gerous and  transitory  withal.  3.  7'he  fixing  of  the  heart  upon  a  gloriotu  /uturt,
**  Looking  for  that  blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearance  of  the  [appearing  of  the
glury  of  our]  great  Go<i  and  our  Saviour  Je^^us  Christ."  Are  there  two  personalities
here,  or  one  ?  One,  I  think.  "  The  great  Grod  our  Saviour,"  or  our  great  God  and
Saviour.  The  object  of  hope  is,  then,  the  future  epiphany  of  the  Divine,  all  glorious
to  behold.  To  see  the  redemptive  God  as  we  have  never  yet  seen  him  in  this  morally
hazy  scene,  this  is  the  "blessed  hope.**  Such  a  hope  implies:  (1)  A  vital  interest
in  the  epiphany.  We  never  hope  for  that  for  which  we  have  not  a  strong  desire.
(2)  An  assurance  that  such  an  epiphany  will  take  place.  Desire,  of  itself,  is  not
hope.  We  desire  many  things  we  caimot  hope  for.  It  becomes  hope  when  it  is  com-
bined with  expectation,  and  exjxjctation  implies  the  existence  of  grounds  or  reasons.
That  there  will  be  such  a  manifestation,  there  are  abundant  reasons  found  in  the
apparent  irregularities  of  Divine  Providence  in  its  operations  here,  ia  the  instinctive
longings  of  the  human  soul  throughout  all  lands  and  ages,  as  well  as  in  the  clear  and
frequent  declarations  of  the  written  Word.

III.  The  end  of  true  soul-culture.  "Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  mi<yht
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good
works."  Observe:  1.  The  end  is  moral  redemption.  **  Redeem  us  from  all  iniquity.'*
Redemption  is  not  something  that  takes  place  outside  of  a  man ;  its  achievement  is
within.  It  is  a  raising  of  the  soul  from  ignorance  to  knowledge,  from  vice  to  virtue,
from  selfishness  to  disinterestedness,  from  materialism  to  spirituality,  from  the  maj*tery
of  the  devil  to  the  reign  of  God.  2.  ITie  end  is  spiritual  restoration  to  (Thrist
'*  Purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  [a  j)eople  for  his  own  possession]."  Restoration
to  his  likeness,  his  friendship,  his  service.  3.  The  end  is  complete  devotedness  to  holy
labour.  "  Zealous  of  good  works."  What  are  good  works?  Not  any  particular  class
of  works.  .  All  works  are  good  that  spring  from  a  good  motive;  and  the  good  motive
is  supreme  love  for  the  Supremely  Good.  Works  springing  from  this  motive  whether
manual  or  mental,  social  or  personal,  civil  or  ecclesiastic,  public  or  private  all  are
good.  4.  The  end  involves  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  "  Who  gave  himself."  Here
is  the  grandest  sacrifice  ever  made  in  the  universe.  Nothing  grander  could  be.  (1)
TTie  (/reatest  possession  a  man  has  is  himself  What  are  millions  of  acres,  or  the  rule
of  kiuizdoms,  in  the  estimation  of  the  owner  as  compared  to  himself?  **  Skin  for  skin  "
etc.  (2)  The  greatest  self  in  the  whole  creation  is  Christ.  He  was,  in  some  special
sense  impenetrable  to  us,  the  only  l)eg()tten  Son  of  Gtxl,  and  he  gave  himself.  If  he
had  given  a  universe,  his  gift  would  not  have  been  equal  to  this.  His  gift  teaches
the  enormity  of  moral  evil. — D.  T.


CH.  III.  1 — 15.]


THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITDS.


43


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Uh


Ver.  1. — In  subjection  for  subject,  A.V. ;
rulers  for  principalities,  A.V. ;  to  authorities
for  and  powers^  A.V.  and  T.B. ;  to  be  obedient
for  to  obey  magistrates,  A.V. ;  unto  for  to,  A.V.
Put  them  in  mind  (inrofiifurnffKt) ;  as  2  Tim.  ii.
14.  To  rxdera,  to  anthoritieB.  Many  uncials,
which  the  H.T.  follows,  omit  the  Kal,  but  it
seems  necessary  to  the  sense.  The  change
from  "principalities  and  powers**  to  *'  mlers"
and  **  authorities  "  does  not  seem  desirable.
'Apx^t  and  4^ov(r (ai  is  a  favourite  juxta-
position of  St  PauPs  (1  Cor.  xv.  24 ;  Eph.
L  21 ;  iiL  10;  vi.  12  ;  Col.  i.  16;  ii.  10,  15;.
It  occurs  also  in  1  Pet.  iii.  22.  In  all  the
above  examples  the  words,  it  is  true,  apply
to  the  angelic  hosts,  but  the  words  are  else-
where applied  separately  to  human  govern-
ment, and  in  Luke  xx.  20,  they  are  applied
togetlier  to  the  authority  of  the  Komau
governor.  To  be  obedient  (nttdapx^'ii') ;  only
here  and  in  Acts  v.  29,  32;  xxvii.  21.  It
f»»llows  here  its  classical  use,  '*to  obey  a
superior,"  well  expressed  in  the  Authorized
Version  **  to  obey  magiairutes.*'  The  simple
•*to  be  obedient"  of  the  Revised  Version
does  not  express  the  sense.  To  be  ready
nnto  every  good  work.  St.  Paul  is  still
speaking  wiih  e^pecial  reference  to  magis-
trates aud  the  civil  power.  Christians  were
to  show  themselves  good  citizens,  always
ready  for  any  duty  to  which  they  were
called.  Christianity  was  not  to  be  an
excuse  for  shirking  duties,  or  refusing
obedience  where  it  waa  due.  The  only
limit  is  expressed  by  the  word  "good."
They  were  to  give  tribute  to  whom  tribute
was  due ;  custom  to  whum  custom ;  fettr  to
whom  fear;  honour  to  whom  honour;  but,
if  ordered  to  do  evil,  then  they  must  resist,
and  obey  God  rather  than  man  (Acts  iv.  19).
(See  the  similar  limitation  in  ch.  ii.  10,  note,
and  compare,  for  the  whole  verse,  the  very
similar  passa^^e,  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 7.)

Ver.  2. — Not  to  be  contentious  for  to  be  no
brawlers,  A.V. ;  to  be  for  but,  A.V. ;  toward
for  unto,  A.V.  To  speak  evil  of  no  man
OiTjScVa  fi\a<r^rjfji9Ty).  Probably  especially
pointed  in  the  first  place  at  a  natural  ten-
dency of  oppressed  Christians  to  speak  evil
of  their  rulers  (2  Pet.  ii.  10;  Jude  10),  but
extended  into  a  general  precept  which  might
be  especially  needful  for  the  rough  aud
turbulent  Cretans.  Not  to  be  contentions
(iudxovs  tXyou);  as  1  Tim.  iii.  3,  note.  To
be  gentle  (ktrttiKfis);  coupled,  as  here,  with
dfidxovs  in  1  Tim.  iii.  3.  Showing  (dy9w
Kyvfi4yovs) ;  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in
St.  Paul's  vocabulary  (Kom.  ii.  15 ;  ix.  17, 22;
Eph.  ii,  7,  etc. ;  see  above,  ch.  ii.  10,  note).


Meekness  (irpai^T^ra) ;  another  Pauline  word
(1  Cor.  iv.  21 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1 ;  Gal.  v.  23,  etc. ;

1  Tim.  vi.  1 1  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  25).  The  precept
is  given  its  widest  extension  by  the  double
addition  of  "all"  and  "to  all  men."  The
roughness,  or  want  of  courtesy,  of  others  is
no  excuse  for  the  want  of  meekness  in  those
who  are  the  disciples  of  him  who  was  meek
and  lowly  in  heart  (Matt.  xi.  29).  All  men,
whatever  their  station,  the  highest  or  the
lowest,  are  to  receive  meek  and  gentle
treatment  from  the  Christian.

Ver.  3. —  We  for  we  ourselves,  A.V. ;  afore-
time for  sometimes,  A.V. ;  hatin<j  for  and
hating,  A.V.  Foolish  (avSfttroC);  a  PHuline
word  (Gal.  iii.  1, 3),  found  also  in  Luke  xxiv.
25  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  9);  of  frequent  use  in
classical  Greek.  Disobedient  {awuBth);  as
ch.  i.  16.  In  Luke  i.  17  it  stands  as  here,
absolutely,  meaning  disobedieut  to  God  and
his  Law.  Deceived  {irKavtatifvoi) ;  led  astray,
made  to  wander  from  the  path  of  truth  and
right,  either  by  false  8y^tema  of  religion,  or
by  our  own  evil  affections  and  appet.tes
(see  2  Tim.  ii.  13;  1  Pet.  ii.  25;  2  Pet.  ii.
15,  etc.).    Serving;  slaves  to  (SouAfuoyrcs) ;

2  Pet.  ii.  19  (aco  above,  ch.  ii.  2).  Lnsts
{iiriQvfdaii);  nut  always  in  a  bad  sense,  as
here,  though  usually  so  (see  Luke  xxii.
15;  Phil.  i.  23;  1  TiiCan.  ii.  17;  Rev.  xviii.
14).  Pleasures  (jihoyah);  always  in  a  had
sense  in  the  New  Testament  (Luke  viii.  14;
Jas.  iv.  1,  3;  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  Living  {hd-
yourts) ;  see  1  Tim.  ii.  2,  where  it  is  followed
by  $ioy,  which  is  here  understood.  Aidyttp
rhv  fiiov,  aiuva,  XP^*'^^^  ad$fiaroy,  etc.,  aro
common  phrases  ooth  in  the  LXX.  and  in
clasiiical  Greek  for  passing  or  spending  one's
life,  time,  age,  etc.  But  it  is  only  found
in  the  New  Testament  here  and  in  1  Tim.
ii.  2.  Malioe  (iraicif).  This  word  is  some-
times used  of  wickednesii  generally,  as  Acts
viii.  22;  Jas.  i.  21  ;  1  Cor.  v.  8;  and  pro-
bably Rom.  i.  29;  and  even  of  badness  in
things,  £18  Matt.  vi.  34.  But  it  frequently
in  the  New  Testament  denotes  malice,  the
desire  to  do  harm  to  others,  as  £ph.  iv.  31  ;
Col.  iii.  8,  etc.  Envy  (4>e6y<f>);  almost
always  found  in  St.  Paul's  enumeration  of
sins  (Rom.  i.  29;  Gal.  v.  21  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  4,
etc.).  Hateful  (<rruyr)rol) ;  only  here  in  the
New  Testament,  not  found  in  the  LXX.
(though  the  verb  (rrvydw  occurs  once  or
twice  in  the  Maccabeeii),  but  used  in  good
classical  Greek.  The  above  is  a  siid  but
too  true  picture  of  human  life  without  the
sweetening  influences  of  God's  Holy  8pirit.

Ver.  4. —  When  for  after  that,  A.V.;  the
kindness  of  Ood  our  Saciour,  and  hi*  love
toward  man  for  the  kindness  ami  love  of  Ood
our  Saviour  toward  man,  A.V.     Kindness


44


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


[cH.  in.  1 — 15.


(xpv<TT6rni) ;  used  by  St  Paul  only  in  tho
New  Testament,  and  by  him  frequently  in
the  aense  of  **  kindness,"  whether  of  God  (as
Rom.  ii.  4;  xi.  22;   Eph.  ii.  7)  or  of  man
(as  2  C5or.  vi.  6;  Gal.  v.  22:  Col.  iii.  12).
In  Rom.  iii.  12,  when?  it  has  the  wider  sense
of  •♦  jfood  "  or  **  right,"  it  is  the  phrase  of  the
LXX.,  who  use  xp^<''T<^t|j  for  the  Hebrew
3^Q.     In  like  manner,  xp^^"^^^  ^^  frequently
used  in  the  sense  of  **  kind  '*  (Luke  vi.  35 ;
Kom.  ii.  4 ;  Co\.  iiL  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  3).     This
is  exactly  analogous  to  the  use  of  KaK6s  and
icaicia,  in  the  limited  sense  of  **  malicious/'
"malice"  (see  preceding  note  to  ver.  3).
LoTO  toward  man  (^iAay6p«nrla) ;  only  here
and  Acts  xxviii.  2  in  the  New  Testament
It  occurs  repeatedly  in  the  Books  of  the
Maccabees,  and  is  common  in  good  classical
Greek.    Ood  our  Sayionr  (see  1  Tim.  i.  1 ;
ii.  3;  ch.  ii.  10,  etc.).    Appeared  (ch.  ii.  11).
Ver.  5. — Done  in  for  of,  A.V. ;  did  our-
$elve$  for  have  done,  A.V. ;  through  for  by,
A.V.     By  works  (4^  ffryvy);   i.e.  in  conse-
quence of.     God*8  kindness  and  love  to  man
«lid  not  spring  from  man's  good  work  as  the
preceding  and  producing  conditions  (comp.
(lal.  ii.  1(),  and  tho  notes  of  Bishops  Ellicott
and  Lightfoot).  Done  in  righteoiiine8B(Twy  4y
StKaioTi/i']?) ;  the  particular  description  of  the
works  wrouglit  in  a  sphere  or  element  of
righteousness  (Alford  and  Ellicott).    Which
we  did  onnelves;  emphasizing  that  they
were  our  good  works,  done  by  us  in  a  state
of  righteousness.     All  this,  as  the  cause
of  our  salvation,  tho  apostle  emphatically
denies.    Not,  etc.,  but  aoeording  to  his  mercy
he  saved  us.     The  predisposing  cause,  the
rule  and  measure  of  our  salvation,  was  God's
mercy  and  pTHce,  originating  and  completing
that  salvation.    TLroogh    the  washing  of
regeneration    (Sm    \ourpov    iraWiyfyfa-ias).
Here   we  have   the  means   through   or   by
which  God's  mercy  saves  us.     The  washing
or  rather  later  of  regeneration  {\ovrp6y) —
found   elsewhere   in    the    New   Testament
only  in   Eph.  v.  26,  in   exactly  tho   same
connection — is  the  laver  or  bath  in  whicli  the
washing  tikes  i)lace.     The  nature  or  quality
of  this  bath  is  described  by  the  words,  *'  of
regeneration"  (rfjy  naKtyytufalas);  elsewhere
in  tho  New  Testament  only  in  Matt.  xix.  28,
where  it  seems  rather  to  mean   the  great
restoration    of    humanity    at     the    second
advent.     The  word  is  used  by  Cicero  of  his
restoration  to  political  power,  by  Josephus
of    the    restoration    of    the    Jews     under
Zerubbabel,  and  by  several  Greek  authors ;
and   tho   LXX.  of  Job  xiv.  14   have   the
phnise,  €ws  irdKtv  yfycofiai,  but  in  what  sense
is  not  quite  clear.     naAi77€i'e(r/a,  tlierefore,
very  fitly  describes  the  new  birth  in  holy
baptism,    when    tho    believer  is  put    into
possession  of  a   new  spiritual   life,  a  new
nature,  and  a  new  inheritance  of  glory.   And


the  laver  of  baptism  ia  called  **  the  laver  of
regeneration,^  because  it  ia  the  ordained
means  by  or  through  which  regeneration  it
obtained.  And  renewing  of  the  Holy  ffluat
It  is  doubtful  whether  the  genitive  iwwcm-
y^ffcws  depends  upon  Sijb  or  upon  Knrpn.
Bengel,  followed  by  Alford,  takes  the  fonnei;
**  per  lavacrum  et  renovationem ;  *  the
Vulgate  (Zatwonim  regeneratumis  el  rtnom-
tionit  Spiritus  Saneti)^  the  latter,  foUowed
by  Uutber,  Bishop  Ellicott,  and  otboa  It
is  difficult  to  hit  upon  any  conclusive  aigo-
ment  for  one  side  or  the  other.  But  it  ii
against  the  latter  construction  that  it  gitet
such  a  very  long  rambling  aentenoe  depen-
dent upon  Xoirpou.  *♦  The  laver  of  regenen-
tion  and  of  the  renewing  of  the  HcJy  Gbot,
which  he  shed  on  ua  abundantly  thioogb
Jesus  Chiigt  our  Saviour.**  And  it  is  ia
favour  of  the  former  that  the  •*  laver  of
regeneration "  and  »•  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost"  seem  to  describe  very  clearlT
the  two  parts  of  the  sacrament,  the  ootwaid
visible  sign  and  the  inward  spiritual  grace:
the  birth  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Gboit.
So  that  Bengel's  rendering  seems  on  the
whole  to  be  preferred.  Benewing  (dtranr
vdxrfus);  only  here  and  Rom.  xii.  2,  sod
not  at  all  in  the  LXX.  or  in  classical  Greet
But  the  verb  iLvtucaip6w  is  found  in  2  Gor.  iv.
16;  0)1.  iii.  10.  The  same  idea  is  in  tJie
Katy^i  Kriffis,  the  **  new  creature  "  of  2  Cor.  f.
17  and  Gal.  vi.  15,  and  the  jcoim^s  Ms  of
Roiu.  vi.  4,  and  the  KaafSrris  irvti/Aoros  of
Horn.  vii.  6,  and  in  the  contrast  between
tlie  "old  man  "(the  waKcuhs  ivBowwos)  ajii
"the  new  man"  (the  kcuv6s  ebrdpanrof)  d
Eph.  iv.  22—24.  This  renewal  is  the  work
of  tiie  Holy  Ghost  in  the  new  birth,  when
men  are  "  born  again  "  of  the  Spirit  (John
111.  5).  Alford  IS  wrong  in  denying  it*
application  here  to  the  first  gift  of  the  new
life.  It  is  evidently  parallel  with  the
nahtyytala.  The  connection  of  baptism
with  the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  fully
set  forth  in  Acts  ii.  (see  especially  ver  38  •
comp.  Matt.  iii.  16,  17).

Ver.  6.— Poured  out  upon  us  HcMy  for  ih^
on  U8  abundantly,  A.V.  Which  Col)-  vit
the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  in  the  genitive  (in-
stead of  the  accusative  6,  which  is  another
reading),  by  what  the  grammarians  call
attraction.  Poured  out  ii^^x^^p) ;  the  same
word  as  IS  applied  to  the  Holy  Ghost  in
Acts  ii.  17,  18,  33,  and  in  the  LXX  of  Joel

V;^^//f  •••^'I'^W'',^*'*''"^*'*)'  ^  1  Tim.  vi.
17;  Co\.  111.  16;  2  Pot.  i.  11  (comp:ire  the
use  of  trXodros  in  Eph.  i.  7 ;  ii.  7).  Through
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  our  baptism  into  Christ
which  entitles  us  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit*
which  we  hav^  only  in  virtue  of  om  union
with  him.  The  Spirit  flows  from  the  H^ad
to  the  members.  In  Acts  ii.  3H,  34  Chrirt
IS  eaid  to  have  received  the  promise  of  ti.e


CH.  ni.  1 — 15.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


45


(loly  Spirit  from  the  Father,  and  to  have
poured  it  forth  upon  the  Church.

Ver.  7.— Might  for  thotddt  A.V.  Boing
jostifled  by  his  graoo ;  showing  very  clearly
that  righteousness  in  man  did  not  precede
and  cause  the  saving  merov  of  God,  but
that  mercy  went  before  and  provided  the
justification  wMch  is  altogether  of  grace,
and  which  issues  in  the  possession  of  eternal
life.  Heirs  aooordixur  to  tho  hopo  of  otomal
lifo.  This  seems  to  oe  the  right  rendering
rather  than  that  in  the  margin,  heirs,
according  to  hope,  of  eternal  life,  making
"eternal  life"  aepend  upon  "heirs."  The
passage  in  ch.  i.  2,  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life,"
is  a  very  strong  reason  for  taking  the  same
construction  here.  The  answer  in  the
Church  Catechism,  "Wherein  I  was  made
a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an
inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  follows
very  closely  St.  Paul's  teaching  in  the  text
(see  Bom.  iv.  13, 14 ;  viii.  17 ;  Gal.  iii.  29,
i?.  7).

Ver.  8. — Faithful  is  the  saying  for  this  is  a
faithful  saying,  A.V. ;  concerning  these  things
for  these  Viings,  A.V. ;  confidently  for  can-
ttantly,  A.V. ;  to  Vie  end  thai  for  that,  A.V. ;
God  for  in  God,  A.V. ;  may  for  might,  A.V. ;
full  stop  after  good  works,  and  colon  after
men.  Faithful  is  the  taying;  as  1  Tim.
i.  15  (where  see  note).  Here  the  faithful
saying  can  only  be  the  following  maxim:
**  That  they  which  have  believed  in  God  may
be  careful  to  maintain  good  works;"  tho
words,  **  These  things  I  will  that  thou  afiSrm
confidently,"  being  interpolated  to  give  yet
more  weight  to  it.  Concerning  these  things ;
i.e.  with  respect  to  the  things  or  truths
which  are  the  subject  of  the  faithful  saying.
I  will  that  then  amnn  oonfldently  {9iafif$ai'
ova-Bat) ;  see  1  Tim.  i  7.  "  Never  be  weary
of  dwelling  on  these  important  truths,  and
asserting  them  with  authority.  For  such
doctrine  is  really  good  and  profitable  for
those  whom  you  are  commissioned  to  teach.
But  leave  alone  the  foolish  and  unprofitable
controversies."  To  the  end  that  (tya).  It  is
not  necessary  to  give  to  Xva  the  meaning
**to  the  end  that,"  in  such  a  sentence  as
this  (see  note  on  ch.  ii.  12).  After  words  of
oommancf  especially,  7yu  frequently,  has  simply
the  force  of  **  that."  So  here,  **  lay  it  down
as  a  rule  that  they  which  have  believed  God
must  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."
If  the  sentence  had  run  on  without  inter-
ruption, it  would  have  been  mffrhs  6  xiryos
8t(,  K.r.A.  But  the  interposition  of  tho
iioS*B(iiov(T9ai,  with  the  idea  of  oommaudini^
obedience,  has  caused  the  use  of  fva.  Be-
lieved Ood  (o/  trfwiartvK^ts  0«f,  or  rf  6c^).
The  meaning  is  not  the  same  as  iri<rrffvciy
4y,  or  4ir^  "to  believe  in,"  or  "on,"  bat  "to
believe"  (as  Rom.  iv.  3, 17  and  1  John  v.  10,
where  the  ooutixt  shows  that  it  is  the  act  of


believing  God's  promise  that  is  meant).  And
so  here,  the  believing  refers  to  the  promises
implied  in  the  preceding  reference  to  the
hope  and  the  inheritance.  May  be  oarefol
(^poyTl^uffi) ;  only  here  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, but  common  in  the  LXX.  and  in
classical  Greek.  The  word  means  **to  give
thought"  about  a  thing,  " to  be  careful^  or
"  anxious  "  about  it.  To  maintain  (irpot(rra-
a6ai);  usually  in  the  sense  of  "presiding
over "  or  "  ruling "  (as  Bom.  xii.  8 ;  1
Thess.  V.  12 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  4,  5,  12 ;  v.  17).
Here,  alter  the  analogy  of  the  classical  use,
npolaraaScu  t^x»^»>  ^  *"  undertake,"  to  "carry
on,"  or  the  like,  fairly  expressed  by  to
"  maintain."  The  idea  does  not  seem  to  bo
"to  stand  at  the  head  of,"  or  "to  be  fore-
most in."  Good  works;  i.e.  practical  godli-
ness of  all  kinds  (see  ver.  14).  These
things  are  good,  etc.  If  the  reading  of  the
T.R.,  tA  KoXiL,  K.r.\.,  is  retained,  the  render-
ing ought  to  be,  "  These  are  the  things  that
are  really  good  and  profitable  unto  men,  not
foolish  questions,  etc.,  they  are  unprofitable."
But  the  B.T.  omits  the  rL  With  regard  to
the  interpretation  above  given  of  ver.  8,  it
must  be  admitted  that  it  is  very  doubtful.
But  the  great  difficulty  of  the  other  way  of
rendering  it,  as  most  commentators  do,  is
that  it  is  impossible  to  say  which  part  of
what  precedes  is  "the  faithful  saying"
alluded  to ;  and  that  the  "  care  to  maintain
good  works"  is  not  that  which  naturally
springs  from  it ;  whereas  the  reiteration  in
ver.  8  implies  that  "good  works"  is  the
special  subject  of ''  the  faithful  saying."

Ver.  9. — Shun  for  avoid,  A. V. ;  gues/ton-
ings  for  questions,  A.V.;  strifes  for  oonten^
tions,  A.V. ;  fightings  for  strivings,  A.V.
Shun  (irtpd<rreuro) ;  see  2  Tim.  ii.  16.  Foolish
questionings ;  as  2  Tim.  ii.  23.  Oenealo|des ;
as  1  Tim.  1.  4.  Strifes  (fpus);  as  1  Tim.
vi.  4.  Fighting!  abont  the  Law  (jidxas
vofuKds);  such  as  St.  Paul  alludes  to  in
1  Tim.  i.,  and  are  probably  included  in  the
Xayofiaxicu  of  1  Tim.  vL  4.  Unprofitable
(ovw^cAcrs);  only  here  and  Heb.  vii.  18;
but  it  is  found  in  the  LXX.  and  other
Greek  Versions,  and  in  classical  Greek
(compare,  for  tho  sense,  2  Tim.  ii.  14).  Vain
(jidraioi) ;  compare  the  use  of  iiaratoKiyoi,
"  vain  talkers  "  (ch.  i.  10),  and  iMxaioKoyia,
"vain  talking"  (1  Tim.  i.  6).  The  whole
picture  is  unmistakably  one  of  the  perverse
Jewish  mind.

Ver.  10. — Heretical  for  an  heretick,  A.V. ;
a  for  the,  A.V. ;  refuse  for  reject,  A.V.  He-
retical (a/pcTi#r<$y) ;  only  here  in  the  New
Testament^  not  found  in  the  LXX.,  but
used  in  classical  Greek  for  "intelligent,"
i.e.  able  to  choose.  The  use  of  it  here  by
St.  Paul  is  drawn  from  the  use  of  alp^fftt
for  "  a  sect"  (Acts  v.  17;  xv.  5;  xxiv.  5, 14;
xxvi.  5;  xxviii.  22;  1  Cor.  xi.  19;  Gal.  v.


46


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


[cH.  riL  1—15.


20 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1),  or  the  doctrinea  taught  by
a  sect.  The  heretic  ia  one  wlio  forsakes  the
truth  held  hv  the  Church,  and  rhoofe$  some
d«»f'trine  of  hiH  own  devising  (aXpttris).  The
tendency  of  such  departures  from  the  doc-
trine of  the  Church  to  assume  more  and
more  of  a  deiidly  character,  and  to  depart
wider  and  wider  from  the  truth,  gave  to  the
name  of  her  tic  a  darker  slade  of  condem-
nation in  the  mouth  of  Churih  writers  aa
time  advanced.  But  even  in  apostolic  times
some  denied  the  resurrection  (2  Tim.  ii.  11,
12);  others  denied  the  Lord  that  bought
them  (2  Pet.  ii.  1);  and  there  were  some
who  were  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan  (ReT.
ii.  9) ;  so  that  already  an  heretical  man,
drawing  away  diseiples  aftvr  him,  was  a
great  blot  in  the  Church.  Admonition  (vov
$taia);  as  1  Cor.  x.  11 ;  Eph.  vi.  4.  Aft6r
a  flrtt  and  leoond  admonition  refoie  (rapa<-
rov);  see  1  Tim.  iv.  7;  v.  IL  It  does  not
clearly  appear  what  is  intended  by  this
term  In  I  Tim.  v.  11  it  meant  refusing
admis^sion  into  the  college  of  Church  widow.«.
If  these  had  been  persons  seeking  admission
into  the  Church,  or  ordination,  it  would  mtan
"  refuse  them."  Vitringa  (Huther)  thinks  it
means  **  excommunication."  Beza,  Ellicott,
Huther,  Allord,  etc.,  render  it  **hhun,"  "let
alone,"  "  cease  to  admoui»h,"  and  the  like.

Ver.  11.— ^'MC^  a  one  for  he  that  it  stwh,
A.V. ;  perverted  for  subverted,  A.V. ;  self-
condemtied  for  condemned  of  himself  A.V.
Is  perverted  (^{«<rTpoirTtti) ;  only  h«  re  in  the
New  Testiinunf,  but  common  in  the  LXX.,
and  found  in  classical  Greek  in  a  material
sense,  "to  turn  iusitie  out,"  'Mo  root  up,"
and  the  like.  Here  it  means  the  complete
perversion  of  the  man's  Christian  character,
so  HS  to  leave  no  hopcf  of  his  amendment.
But  this  is  not  to  bo  presumed  till  a  first
and  second  a(hnonition  have  been  given  in
vain.  Self  -  condemned  {avTOKar6iKpiros)\
only  here  in  the  New  Testament,  not  found
in  the  LXX.  nor  in  classical  Greek.  It
means  what  Cicero  (quoted  by  Schleu.sner)
says  of  C.  Fahricius,  liiat  he  was  tuojudicio
cojidemnatuSy  c(^n<lomned  hy  his  own  judg-
m<  nt,  which,  he  says,  is  a  heavier  con<lernna-
tion  than  even  that  of  the  law  and  of  the
jmli^es  (*Pro  Cluentio,*  21,  at  the  end).
Fabrioius  was  self-condemned  because  lie
had  left  the  court  in  confusion  at  a  critical
part  of  his  trial.  So  the  heretics  were  sclf-
C(ni-!enin(d  by  the  very  fact  that  they  con-
tinued to  head  the  schism  after  repeated
admonitions.

Ver.  12. —  Give  diligence  for  he  diligent^
A.V. ;  thtre  1  hare  determined  for  I  have
determined  there,  A.V.  When  I  shall  send
Artemas,  etc.  The  action  of  St.  Paul  in
sending  Artemas  or  Tychicus  to  take  the
place  of  Titus  in  Crete  is  exactly  the  same
us  he   pursued   with   regard    to  Ephesus,


whither  he  sent  Tychicns  to  take  TimothVg
place  (2  Tim.  It.  11,  I2>.     He  wonld  not
leave  the  presbyters  in  either  place  without
the  direction  and   super intendenoe  of  ooe
having  his  delegated   apostolic  anthcnity.
This  led  to  the  final  placing  of  a  re^iident
bishop  in  the  Churches,  such  as  we  find  in
the  sicond  cenlury.     We  may  oondade  that
Artemas  (otherwise  unknown)  was  the  per-
son eventually  sent  to  Crete,  as  Tyehisu
(Col.  iv.  7)  we  know  went  to  Ephesos  (2
Tim.  iv.  12).    We  have  also  an  important
note  of  time  in  this   expression,  slioviof
clearly  that  this  Epistle  was  written  before
the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  (as  it  pro-
bably also  was  before  1  Timothy)— an  inf»a^
ence  abundantly  corroborated  by  2  Tim.  iv.
10,  by  which  it  appears  that  Titus  had  then
actually  ioined  St.  Paul,  either  at  Nicopolii
or  elsewhere,  and  had  started  off  again  to
Dalmatia.    GiTO  diligence   (irrot^iurov) ;  2
Tim.  ii.  15,  note;    iv.  9,  21.     Rieopolii,' ia
Epirus.    The  most  obvious  reason  for  St
Paul's  wintering  at  Nicopolis  is  that  it  was
near  Apollonia,  the  harbour  opposite  Brin-
disiura,  which  would  be  his  way  to  Rome,
and  also  well  situated  for  the  mi8>ion.'irT
work  in  Dalmatia,  which  we  learn  from  2
Tim.  iv.  10  was  in  hand.    Nicopolis  (the  city
of  victory)  was  built  by   Augustu:i  Cesar
to  commemorste  the    great    naval   victory
at  Actium  over  Antony.     It  is  now  a  com-
pMe  ruin,  uninhabited   except   by  a  few
shepherds,  but  with  vast  remains  of  broken
columns,  baths,  theatres,  etc.  (Lewin,  voL
ii.  p.  253).    To  winter  (»opax<«/*<^oO ;  Act*
xxvii.  12;  xxviii.  11;    1  Cor.  xvi.  a    (On
the  question  whetlier  the    winter  here  re-
feired  to  is  the  same  winter  as  that  men-
tioned in  2  Tim.  iv.  21,  see  Introduction.)

Ver.  13.— Set  forward  for  luring,  A.V.
Set  forward  (irp6irefi\l,oy) ;  the  teehnlcal  ex-
pres^ion  both  in  the  New  Testament  and
the  LXX.,  and  also  in  classical  Greek,  for
helping  a  person  f<»rwar<l  on  their  journey
by  supplying  them  with  money  food,  letUn
of  recommendation,  escort,  or  whatever  else
they  might  require  (see  Acts  xv.  3;  xx.  3t,
xxi.  5 ;  Rom.  xv.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  6 ;  2  Cor.
i.  16;  3  John  6).  Zenas  the  lawyer.  He  is
uttrily  unknown.  His  name  is  short  for
Zt-nodorusy  but  whether  he  was  **a  Jewish
scribe  or  Roman  legist  '*  can  hardly  be  de
cided.  But  his  companionship  with  Apoilos,
and  the  frequent  application  of  the  term
yofiiK6s  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  Jewish
scribes  and  lawyers  (Matt.  xxii.  35;  Luke
yii.  :;0;  x.25;  xi.  45,  48,  52;  xiv.  3),* makes
it  most  probable  that  he  was  a  Jewish
lawyer.  ApoUos;  the  well-known  and  emi-
nent  Alexandrian  Jew,  who  wns  instructed
in  the  gospel  by  Aquila  and  Piisodla  at
Ephesus,  and  became  a  favourite  teacher  at
Orinth  (AcU  xviii.  24 ;  xix.  i ;  i  Cor.  L  12,


CII.  IIL  1—15.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.


47


and  the  following  chapters,  and  xvi.  12).
It  is  a  probable  conjecture  of  Lewin's  that
Apollos  was  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  written
at  Corinth,  and  was  on  his  way  to  Alexan-
dria, his  native  place,  taking  Crete  on  the
way.

Ver.  14. — Our  people  for  ours,  A.V.  Our
people  also.  The  natural  inference  is  that
Titus  had  some  fund  at  bis  disposal  with
which  he  was  to  help  the  travelhrs,  but  that
St  Paul  wished  the  Cretan  Christians  to
contribute  alsa  But  it  may  also  mean,  as
Huther  suggests,  **  Let  our  Christians  learn
to  do  what  Jews  do,  and  even  heathens  too,
viz.  provide  for  the  real  wants  of  their  own."
To  maintftin  good  worki  (ver.  8,  note)  for


neeestary  uses  (tts  rks  iiyayxaias  xp*^^^)l
such  as  the  wants  of  the  missionnries  (comp.
3  John  5,  6 ;  see  also  Rom.  xii.  13 ;  Phil.  ii.
25 ;  iv.  16,  etc.).  The  phrase  means  **  urgent
necessities,"  the  ••  indispensable  wants."
In  classical  Greek  rh,  iivdyKaia  are  **the
necessaries  of  life."  That  they  bo  not  nn-
frnitful  C&Kapiroi);  comp.  2  Pet.  i.  8  and
Col.  1.  6,  10.

Ver.  15. — SaluU  for  greets  A.V. ;  faith  for
Ihe  faith,  A.V.  That  love  ns  in  fai'tii  has  no
sense.  "The  faith"  is  right  (see  1  Tim.  i.
2,  note).  Graco  be  with  yon  all.  So,  with
slight  varieties,  end  St.  PauFs  other  Epistles.
The  T.H.  has  Amettf  as  have  most  of  the
other  Epistles.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Mercy  begetting  mercy.  The  practical  lesfions  of  the  gospel  were  not
exhausted  in  the  preceding  chapter,  nor  the  motives  which  urge  believers  to  godliness.
The  call  to  holiness  in  the  last  chapter  was  based  upon  the  holy  character  of  God's
saving  grace  and  the  purpose  of  Christ's  redeeming  love.  In  these  verses  the  grace
and  love  of  God  are  still  the  basis  of  the  exhortation,  but  it  takes  its  peculiar  colouring
from  the  thought  of  what  we  were  ourselves.  Tenderness,  indulgence,  and  meekness
toward  our  tellow-men  are  the  duties  to  which  these  verses  call  us ;  and  it  is  supposed
that  those  fellow-men  may  be  rou^h  and  evil-minded  toward  us,  and  provoking  in  their
ways,  and  perhaps  obstinate  in  evil-doincr.  The  natural  heart  might  be  ready  to  speak
evil  of  them,  to  contend  fiercely  with  them,  utterly  to  reject  them  as  reprobates,  to
thrust  them  beyond  the  pale  of  hope  and  kindness.  But  stay  1  What  were  you  your-
selves when  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  tirst  appeared  unto  you?  Were  you  walking
in  righteousness?  Were  your  works  the  things  which  attracted  God's  love  toward
you?  Nay  1  you  were  living  in  that  folly  which  you  now  condemn  in  others;  you
were  children  of  disobedience  then  as  truly  as  they  are  now ;  you  were  deceived  by  sin
then  as  they  are  new ;  you  were  the  slaves  of  your  own  lusts  then  even  as  they  are
now ;  you  lived  in  malice  and  envy  then,  both  hateful  and  hating  one  another.  But
God's  mercy  found  you  out ;  God's  love  threw  a  veil  over  your  sins ;  he  provided  a
fountain  to  wash  away  your  guilt ;  he  sent  his  Holy  Spirit  to  create  in  you  a  clean
heart,  and  to  renew  a  right  spirit  within  you ;  he  justified  yon  by  his  grace ;  he  made
you  his  heirs,  and  gave  you  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  And  will  not  you  have  mercy
upon  your  fellow-men  ?  Will  not  you,  for  whom  the  Divine  gentleness  and  patience
has  done  so  much,  be  gentle  and  patient  too?  Will  not  you,  humble  in  the  remem-
brance of  your  own  sins,  and  abashed  at  the  thought  of  your  own  unworthiness,  deal
meekly  and  kindly  even  with  unruly  and  sinful  men,  and  cherish  the  hope  that  GxmI's
boundless  grace  may  at  last  reach  them,  even  as  it  reached  you  ?  Thus  the  doctrine  of
God's  mercy  toward  men  begets  mercy  from  man  to  man,  and  the  doctrine  of  grace  is
the  strongest  conceivable  motive  to  charity.

Vers.  8 — 15. — Pearls  he/ore  sunne.  There  is  in  some  a  habit  of  mind  utterly  out  of
harmony  with  the  Word  of  Qod,  It  is  not  that  dogmas,  or  creeds,  or  ceremonies  are
despised  and  forgotten  by  them,  as  they  usually  are  by  the  pleasure-seeking  or  money-
making  world.  On  the  contrary,  these  things  are  often  in  their  minds  and  upon  their
lips.  But  they  handle  everything,  not  with  a  view  to  growth  in  goodness,  not  with
a  view  to  the  formation  within  ot  a  humble,  pure,  and  holy  character,  but  merely  as
matters  of  disputation.  They  raise  questions,  the  solution  of  which  has  no  bearing
upon  our  duty  to  God  or  roan,  but  which  only  give  occasion  for  strife  of  words,  and
utterly  unprofitable  contentions.  The  most  solemn  truths,  the  most  sacred  mysteries
of  the  Christian  faith,  are  only  food  for  a  wrangling,  disputatious  spirit  They  are
always  ready  to  start  difficulties,  to  suggest  doubts,  or  to  propose  new  forms  of  doctrine


48  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  fcH.  in.  1—15.


in  lieu  of  those  ODce  delivered  to  the  saints.  Strong  !n  their  own  conceits  and  wise  in
their  own  esteem,  they  will  not  ham,  no,  not  from  Christ  himself,  but  are  alwmys
forward  to  teach  some  new  thing.  They  value  nothing  which  they  have  not  infented
themselves.  They  accept  no  truth  which  they  have  not  adnlterated  with  their  own
imnginations.  Disciples  they  will  not  be.  Masters  they  must  be.  When  this  habit
of  rniLd  has  clearly  developed  itself,  the  servant  of  God  has  only  to  withdraw  from
such.  He  must  not  be  drawn  into  the  whirlpool  of  vain  jangling  and  unprofitable
disputes.  He  must  not  go  on  casting  his  jiearls  before  the  swine.  Silence  i%  in  such
cases,  the  best  rebuke.  When  honest  and  gentle  efforts  to  bring  home  to  such  penont
the  truths  of  God's  Word  in  a  reverential  and  practical  way  have  utterly  failed,  and  it
is  become  evident  that  there  is  no  desire  in  their  hearts  for  Christ  and  bis  Woid,  it  is
time  to  cease  from  such  ofiforts.  **  From  such  turn  away  "  is  the  authoritatiye  advice
of  St  Paul.  Nothing  can  be  in  sharper  contrast  with  the  "unprofitable  striyings*  hen
condemned  than  the  unobtrusive  works  of  kindness,  and  active  help  to  the  furthenooe
of  the  gospel,  inculcated  upon  Titus.  Zenas  and  Apollos  are  to  be  brought  on  their
way.  Care  is  to  be  taken  that  they  want  for  nothing.  The  Church  In  Crete  is  to  be
fruitful  in  good  works  for  the  wants  of  their  brethren  ;  and  even  the  closing  salutatioD
is  redolent  of  love  and  kindness.  When  Christians  feel  that  the  very  essence  of  Chris-
tianity is  unobtrusive  love  and  kindness,  shown  in  unselfish  acts,  and  a  readiness  to
help  wherever  help  is  needed,  then  will  the  Church  be  Christ's  true  witness  upon  eardi;
witnessing  to  Christ  as  the  embodiment  of  the  law  of  love,  and  witnessing  to  the  Spirit
of  Christ  as  dwelling  in  her  of  a  truth.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — Political  duties.  The  apostle  now  turns  to  the  duties  which  Christians  owe
to  the  pagan  world  around  them.

I.  The  necessity  of  the  injunction  to  political  submission.  ''Put  them  in
mind.**  The  words  imply  that  the  duty  was  already  known,  but  needed  to  be  recalled
to  Cretan  memory.  It  is  but  too  certain  that  the  injunction  was  needed.  Once  a
democratic  state,  now  for  over  a  century  under  Roman  law,  and  always  remarkable  ibr
a  factious  and  turbulent  spirit,  the  Cretan  impatience  of  authority  was  reinforced  bj
the  spirit  of  iDSubordioation  which  was  such  a  characteristic  of  the  Jewish  part  of  the
community.

II.  The  duty  of  submission  to  constituted  authority.  "  Put  them  in  mind  to
be  subject  to  authorities,  to  powers,  to  obey  the  magistrate,  to  be  ready  towards  every
good  work.**  The  very  redundancy  of  words  used  here  is  significant,  as  if  to  exclude
the  possibility  of  an  evasion  of  the  command.  1.  Oovernment  is  of  Ood,  "  The  powers
that  be  are  ordained  of  God*'  (Rom.  xiii.  1 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13).  2.  The  form  of  government
does  not  affect  the  duty  of  obedience.  Monarchies,  republics,  oligarchies,  have  in  them
alike  the  ordination  and  power  of  God  for  the  welfare  of  society.  3.  T?iere  are  limits  to
this  obedience,  but  the  apostle  does  not  fix  them.  The  exceptional  cases  are  not  men-
tioned, because  they  are  summed  up  either  in  the  primary  law  of  self-preservation,
which  is  antecedent  to  all  government,  or  in  the  supremacy  of  conscience,  which  must
always  obey  God  rather  than  men.  A  king  may  become  insane  and  murder  his  snbjects,
but  the  first  principles  of  nature  justify  their  resort  to  force  in  self-protection  (Act*
V.  29 ;  iv.  9,  20).  The  king  may  command  his  subjects  to  practise  idolatry.  In  that
cane,  if  the  Christian  cannot  resist,  he  must  die.

III.  Political  duty  in  the  case  of  Christians  includes  more  than  subhissiov.
They  must  be  "  ready  toward  every  good  work."  As  the  magistrate  is  appoioted  to  be
a  terror  to  evil-doers  and  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well  (Rom.  xiii.  3),  the  disposition
of  Christian  subjects  to  every  good  work  has  a  tendency  to  make  government  easy  and
light.— T.  C.


•o*


Ver.  2.—  TIie  right  deportment  of  Christians  toward  all  men.  It  is  described  first
negatively,  then  positively.

I.  'J'hey  must  not  be  revilers.  "To  speak  evil  of  no  man."  1.  What  evils  spring
from  the  wrong  use  of  the  tongue !     "  It  is  an  unruly  evil "  (J as.  iii.  8).     2.  If  the  evil


CH.  ra.  1— 15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  49

we  speak  of  others  is  falser  we  are  slanderers ;  if  it  is  trae,  we  sin  against  charity.
It  usually  betokens  a  malignant  spirit.  3.  It  is  to  forget  the  example  of  Christ — "who,
when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again ;  '*  and  the  precepts  of  Cnrist,  who  taught  us
"to  love  our  enemies."  Let  Christians,  therefore,  guard  their  tongues,  and  let  their  words
be  few  and  well-ordered.

n.  Thky  must  not  bb  oontentioub*    "  No  brawlers."    1.  Buck  a  disposition  mars
the  influence  of  Christian  people,    2.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  ojhim  who  did
not  strive^  nor  was  his  voice  heard  in  the  streets,    8.  It  leads  to  unseemly  r^aliations
from  the  world,  to  the  dishonour  of  Christ,

III.  Thet  must  be  fqrbeabiko.  "  But  gentle."  It  suggests  the  idea  of  giving  way,
of  taking  wrong  rather  than  of  revenging  the  injuries  we  receive.

IV.  I'het  must  be  meek  to  all  men.  ^Showing  all  meekness  to  all  men."  1.
Meekness  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (GaL  y.  22.)  2.  It  is  precious  in  Cod's  sight.
(1  Pet.  iii.  4.)  3.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  true  wisdom.  (Jas.  iii.  17.)  4.  It  is  neces-
sary to  a  Christian  walk.  (Eph.  iv.  1,  2.)  6.  It  is  specially  needed  in  our  conduct
toward  our  feUouhmen  (Jas.  iii.  13) ;  in  our  efforts  to  restore  the  erring  (Gral.  vi.  1)
and  to  instruct  opposers  (2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25). — T.  G.

Ver.  3. — An  humiliating  retrospect.  The  apostle  adds,  as  a  reason  for  the  duties  first
specified,  that  "  we  also,"  including  himself  with  the  Gentile  Christians,  were  once  in
a  similar  condition  to  the  heathen,  and  had  received  mercy.  It  is  a  dark  picture  of  men
in  their  natural  state,  proceeding  from  a  description  of  the  inward  source  to  the  outward
facts  of  this  evil  life.

I.  Human  nature  defioted  as  to  its  more  inward  oharaoter.  "  For  we  our-
Belves  "  were  once  foolish.  1.  It  is  foolish.  As  wisdom  is  the  choice  of  proper  means
of  attaining  our  ends,  so  folly  must  be  the  direct  contrary.  (1)  The  fool  despises
instruction  and  wisdom,  and  hates  knowledge  (Prov.  i.  7,  22).  (2)  He  walks  in  the
darkness  of  a  false  education  (Eccles.  ii.  14).  (Z)  He  is  self-sufficient  and  self-confident
(Prov.  xiv.  8, 16\  (4)  He  ia  a  self-deceiver  (Prov.  xiv.  8).  (5)  He  makes  a  mock  at
sin  (Prov.  xiv.  9).  2.  It  is  disobedient.  The  word  implies  that  the  root  of  all  true
obedience  is  faith.  Human  nature  is  without  faith,  and  is  therefore  disobedient.  (1)
Disobedience  forfeits  Grod's  favour  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14).  (2)  Provokes  his  anger  (rs.
Ixzviii.  10,  40).  (3)  Forfeits  promised  blessings  (Josh.  v.  6).  (4)  Brings  a  curse
(Deut.  xi.  28).  (5)  There  are  many  warnings  against  it  (Jer.  xii.  17).  3.  It  is
deceived.  Because  it  is  separated  from  Christ,  who  is  the  Light  of  the  world.  It  is
easily  led  astray  by  all  sorts  of  delusion.  It  has  no  pole-star  or  compass  to  steer  by,
and  is  therefore  in  constant  danger  of  shipwreck.  It  is  deceived  by  itself  as  well  as  by «.
the  devil.

II.  Human  nature  depicted  as  to  its  more  outward  oharaoter.  1.  Its  service
was  impure.  ^  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures."  This  was  the  character  of  heathen
life  in  an  island  like  Crete,  where  the  propensities  of  human  nature  would  have  free
scope.  The  pleasures  of  this  life  were  of  a  sinful  and  debasing  nature.  Such  a  service
was  bondage  (Bom.  vi.  6,  16 ;  xvi.  18).  2.  It  implied  a  life  qf  malice.  (1)  The
wicked  speak  with  malice  (3  John  10).  (2)  Are  filled  with  it  (Bom.  L  29).  (8)
Visit  the  saints  with  it  (Ps.  IxxxiiL  3).  (4)  God  requites  it  Obsl.  x.  14).  8.  It
implied  a  life  of  envy.  (1)  Envy  is  a  work  of  the  flesh  (GaL  ▼.  21).  (2)  The  wicked
are  full  of  it  (Bom.  i  29).  (3)  It  leads  to  every  evU  work  (Jas.  iii.  16>  (4)  It  is
hurtful  to  its  possessors  (Job  v.  2).  (5)  It  will  be  punished  (Ps.  cvi.  16, 17).  4.  It
implies  hattfulness,  "Hateful;**  that  is,  possessing  the  qualities  that  excite  hatred
ana  dislike.  5.  It  implies  a  return  of  hate  for  hate.  "Hating  one  another."  (1)
It  is  characteristic  of  those  without  love  to  God  (1  John  iL  9,  11).  (2)  It  is  a  work
of  the  fiesh  (GaL  v.  21).  (3)  It  stirs  up  strife  (Prov.  x.  12).  (4)  It  emitters  life
(Prov.  XV.  17).    (5)  It  will  be  punished  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21).— T.  C.

Vers.  4 — 7, — The  origin^  nature^  means,  and  end  of  salvation.  The  apostle  reflects
that  he  and  other  believers  had  no  excuse  for  treating  the  heathen  with  haughtinessy
since  it  was  owing  to  no  merit  of  his  or  theirs  that  their  own  lives  had  become  purer.

I.  The  manifestation  of  the  Divine  goodness  and  love  to  man.  "But  when
the  kindness  of  Qod  our  Saviour  and  his  love  to  man  appeared.*'    1.  The  time  qf  thi%

TITU8.  ■


60  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  m.  1— 15.


mani/tstation.  The  expression  implies  a  definite  point  of  time.  It  was  **  the  fuiam
of  the  time "  (Oal.  iv.  4).  (1)  It  was  the  period  fixed  in  the  Divine  patpoee  from
eternity.  (2)  It  was  the  time  of  the  probation  of  the  Jew^  ending  in  the  most  avftd
series  of  judgments  that  ever  befell  a  people.  (3)  It  was  a  time  when  the  Greek  tongoe
and  the  Roman  arms  made  a  highway  tor  the  sospel.  (4^  It  was  a  time  when  psgu
thought  had  exhausted  every  experiment  in  &e  art  of  living,  to  find  that  aU  wu
"  vanity  and  vexation  of  spiriL"  (5)  Yet  it  is  not  implied  that  the  manifestatioa  of
Divine  kindness  had  not  been  enjoyed  already  in  pre-OhriBtian  agee ;  for  it  was  invirtw
of  this  manifestation,  in  the  fulness  of  times,  that  Grod's  loye  flowed  forth  in  blenii^
during  Jewish  ages.  2.  T?ie  nature  of  this  manifesUUion.  (1)  It  was  a  manifestitka
of  kindness  and  love  to  man.  (a)  Kindness  is  the  more  general  term,  nnlimited,
undefined,  all-embracing,  touching  the  whole  creation.  (6)  Liove  to  man  is  his  speed
and  dibtinguishing  love  to  the  chUdren  of  men  as  distinct  from  angels.  (2)  It  was  tki
love  of  the  Father — "  our  Saviour-God."  (a)  The  titie"  Saviour,**  so  often  giyoi  to  the
Son,  is  here  given  to  the  Father,  because  he  is  the  Fountain  from  whence  flow  all
the  streams  of  Divine  mercy.  The  Son  is  '*  the  XJnmakable  of  the  Father ; "  for  k
*'  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  "  (John  iiL  16).  The  ato»
ment  was  not,  therefore,  the  cause,  but  the  effect,  of  the  Facer's  love,  (h)  This  hei,
exhibiting  the  mine  of  power  and  love  in  the  Creator,  greatly  enhances  the  certaiotj
and  glory  of  redemption,  (c)  It  is  our  Father  who  is  our  Mvioiir.  Mark  the  cktf
relationship,  in  spite  of  all  our  waywardness  and  sin.

II.  The  method  op  this  Divine  manifestation.  **  Not  by  works  of  righteoasMS
we  did,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us.*'  The  Divine  goodness  and  love  mn
manifested  in  salvation.  *'  He  saved  us.**  This  salvation,  procured  by  the  obedieooe
and  death  of  Christ,  has  its  origin,  not  in  works  of  righteousness  done  by  mf,  y
entitling  him  to  it,  but  solely  in  Divine  mercy.  Mark  tibe  conditions  and  the  msui
of  this  salvation.  1.  The  conditions  of  salvcUion.  (1)  Not  by  works  of  righteousnA
(a)  We  are  not  saved  by  our  own  works,  even  thougn  they  should  be  done  in  obediooe
to  a  righteous  law  (Rom.  iii.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  16 ;  Eph.  iL  4,  8,  9 ;  2  Tim.  L  1,  91  (h)  If
we  were  saved  in  this  way,  Christ  should  have  died  in  vain  (GaL  iL  21).  &§  dath
would  have  been  quite  unnecessary,  (c)  Experience  proves  the  impossibility  of  oar
being  able  to  do  the  works  of  perfect  righteousness  (Rom.  iii.  23).  (2)  The  OMidilMfl
of  salvation  is  Divioe  mercy.  "  According  to  his  mercy."  (a)  Grod  is  rich  in  macj
(Eph.  ii.  4).  (h)  It  streams  forth  from  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ  (B«n.
iii.  24,  25 ;  vi.  23).  (c)  It  was  through  the  tender  mercy  of  God  that  Christ  as  tk
Dayspring  from  on  hij^iih,  visited  the  earth  (Luke  i.  78).  (d)  The  pardon  of  sin  is
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  tender  mercies  (Ps.  IL  1,  2).  (c)  Eternal  life  is  tla
efifect  of  God's  mercy.  2.  ITie  means  of  salvation,  "  By  the  washing  of  regenerttioo
and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  he  poured  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesas
Christ  our  Saviour."  The  Greek  word  is  **  laver,"  as  if  to  show  that  the  reference  is  to
baptism.  (1)  The  washing  of  regeneration  refers  to  the  beginning  of  the  spiritual
process  in  the  soul,  as  it  is  the  Spirit  who  regenerates  the  soul.  There  is  nothing  ia
the  passage  to  support  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  (a)  The  connection  d
baptism  with  regeneration  no  more  proves  that  all  the  baptized  are  regenerated  thtf
the  expression,  "  we  are  sanctified  by  the  truth,"  implies  that  the  truth  in  all  cases  has
this  effect,  or  that  "the  gospel  of  your  salvation"  implies  that  salvation  alwa?s
follows  the  hearing  of  the  gospeL  (b)  As  a  matter  of  fact,  believers  in  apostolic  tinw
were  regenerated  before  they  were  baptized ;  therefore  they  were  not  regenerated  by
baptism.  This  was  the  case  with  the  three  thousand  at  Pentecost  (Acts  uX  with
Lydia  and  the  Philippian  jailor  (Acts  xvi.).  (c)  There  is  no  necessary  connectiiS
between  baptism  and  regeneration,  for  Simon  Magus  was  baptized  without  henfi
regenerated  (Acts  viii.  9 — 24).  (d)  It  is  strange  that,  much  as  John  speaks  of  r^cene
ration  in  his  First  Epistle,  he  never  connects  baptism  with  it.  He  says  that  those  who
are  "  born  of  God"  do  righteousness,  and  overcome  the  world.  Why  should  he  mention
these  tests  at  all,  when  he  might  have  known  that,  had  they  been  baptized  they  most
have  been  regenerated  ?  (c)  The  Apostle  Peter  shows  us  the  meaning  of  baptism  wha
he  says  that  "  baptism  doth  now  save  us  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  21).  How  ?  **  Not  by  putting
away  the  filth  of  the  flesh  " — which  is  easily  done  by  the  external  application  of  water
— "  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  Gk)d ;"  as  if  to  show  that  such  an  answer,


CH.  ni.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  61


representing  the  reality  and  sincerity  of  our  profession,  was  separable  from  the  putting
away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh.  {/)  The  expression,  ''baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins,
does  not  imply  that  baptism  is  the  cause  of  their  remission,  for  in  all  the  cases  referred
to  the  remission  had  already  taken  place  before  baptism  (Acts  ii.  38 ;  xxii.  16).  The
baptism  was  a  sign  or  seal  of  a  remission  already  accomplished.  Saul  was  a  true
believer  before  Ananias  said  to  him,  "Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,
calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  Besides,  it  was  by  calling  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord
that  his  sins  were  washed  away.  ^This  is  the  force  of  the  Greek  construction.  (2)  The
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  refers  to  the  continuance  of  the  spiritual  process  in  the
sonl.  Thus  "  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  This  points  to
progressive  sanctification.  (a)  The  renewed  are  the  children  of  God,  the  heirs  of  the
eternal  inheritance.  (6)  The  effects  are  the  fruits  of  righteousness  in  our  life  and  con-
versation. Thus  there  is  a  firm  connection  between  the  regeneration  and  the  renewal,
which  cannot  be  said  of  baptism  and  renewal.  Christendom  is  baptized,  yet  how  little
grace  is  manifest  among  its  millions  I  (c)  The  source  of  this  renewal  is  the  Holy  Ghost,
who  has  been  poured  out  upon  us  richly  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.  It  was  in
virtue  of  the  mediatorship  that  the  Spirit  was  given,  and  still  works  in  the  Church  of
Gk)d.  For  (a)  all  salvation  is  by  him ;  (jS)  the  grace  of  regeneration  is  out  of  his
fulness ;  (7)  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  eternal  life,  is  through  him.

III.  The  end  of  this  manifestation  of  Divine  goodness  and  love.  "  That  being
justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."
God  saves  us  according  to  his  mercy  by  regeneration  ;  but  the  first  effect  of  regenera-
tion is  faith,  and  faith  is  the  instrument  of  our  justification.  There  is  no  difference  in
the  order  of  time  between  regeneration  and  justification,  but  regeneration  must  precede
justification  in  the  order  of  nature.  Therefore  the  apostle  here  goes  upon  the  order  of
nature.  1.  The  nature  of  justification.  It  includes  pardon  of  sin  and  acceptance  into
God's  favour.  2.  ITie  ground  qf' justification,  •*  Being  justified  by  his  grace."  (1)  Not
by  works ;  (2)  but  by  the  grace  of  the  Father,  who  is  the  Justifier.  It  is  by  grace,
because  (a)  it  is  of  faith  (Rom.  v.  1 ;  iii.  28) ;  (b)  it  is  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.
3.  TJie  privileges  of  justification,  "  That  we  should  be  made  heirs  according  to  the
hope  of  eternal  life."  (1)  Eternal  life  is  an  inheritance;  it  is  not  earned  by  our
obedience  and  our  righteousness ;  it  is  a  free  gift.  (2)  We  are  predestinated  to  this
inheritance  in  Jesus  Christ  (Eph.  L  5, 11).  (3)  The  grace  of  adoption,  which  is  linked
with  our  justification,  opens  the  way  to  our  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance.  (4)  It  is
an  inheritance  which  is  not  yet  fully  enjoyed;  for  we  are  heirs  ''according  to  the
hope  of  eternal  life."    (a)  There  are  *'  things  hoped  for  "  held  out  to  us  through  faith

iHeb.  xi.  1).    (6)  ''  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ; "  but  when  ''  we  shall  be
or  ever  with  the  Lord,"  we  shall  actually  possess  and  enjoy  our  inheritance. — T.  C.

Yer.  8. — The  necessary  connection  between  gospel  doctrine  and  good  works,  I.  The
Uf pobtance  of  gospel  doctrine.  **  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  these  things  I  will
that  thou  afiBrm  constantly."  He  refers  here  to  the  sum  of  the  doctrine  of  Christian
salvation  contained  in  the  three  preceding  verses.  1.  The  doctrine  of  salvation  is
worthy  of  aU  acceptance,  "  This  is  a  faithful  say inz."  This  formula,  contained  only
in  the  pastoral  Epistles,  points  to  some  weighty  truth  which  had  become  a  watchword
among  the  Christian  brotherhood  of  early  times.  (1)  There  is  a  tendency  in  our  days
to  decry  dogma.  The  apostle  always  insists  on  its  importance  as  the  root-principle
and  moving  spring  of  morality.  ^2)  The  saying  implies  that  the  heavenly  inheritance
just  spoken  of  is  no  figment  of  uie  imagination,  but  ought  to  be  accepted  as  one  of
the  commonplaces  of  Christian  belief.  2.  It  ought  to  he  confidently  put  forth  at  (Ul
times  by  Christian  ministers,  "  And  these  things  I  will  that  thou  afarm  constantly."
This  was  the  strain  of  all  apostolic  preaching,  and  it  ought  to  be  ours  also.  There  is
no  true  practical  preaching  which  does  not  involve  the  exhibition  of  God*s  character
and  our  relations  to  him  in  grace — ^the  glorious  Person  of  the  Mediator  in  his  various
oflBces,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  appl3nng  Divine  salvation.  "  These  things
are  good  and  profitable  to  men ; "  that  is,  these  doctrines,  for  they  lead  to  good  woru,
and  benefit  men  spiritually  and  morally.

II.  The  design  of  gospel  doctbine.  ''  In  order  that  they  which  have  believed  QoA
might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."    The  faithful  saying  of  the  apostle  was  not


62  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  ra.  1— 15.


the  necessity  of  good  works,  but  the  necessity  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  being  preadied
as  the  only  method  of  producing  good  works.  1.  1^  apottie  Meems  to  cMiieiptUe  «
tendency  of  later  times  to  exalt  morality  at  the  toDpefue  qf /aiih.  The  dociainM^  he
says,  are  the  true  fountains  from  which  all  good  works  flow.  These  are,  therefon^
probably  called  doctrines  according  to  godliness  (ch.  LI);  the  wholesome  doctnoe
(ch.  i.  9).  2.  He  sets  forth  the  duty  of  aU  bdievers  to  he  earrfuZ  about  good  %DOfhL
It  ought  to  be  a  matter  of  earnest  striving,  because  (1)  God  is  gl<»ified  thereby  (Joha
XV.  8) ;  (2)  because  they  are  means  of  blessing  to  man  (Jas.  L  25^ ;  (3)  becsose  God
remembers  them  (Heb.  vi.  9, 10) ;  (4)  because  they  will  be  an  eiidenoe  of  £uth  in  the
judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  34 — 40).  3.  He  insists  on  their  fnainiaining  good  works.  The
word  signifies  that  they  must  be  excelling  in  them.  (1)  They  mast,  therefion^  bi
Eealous  of  them  (ch.  ii.  14) ;  (2)  furnished  unto  them  (2  Tim.  ilL  17) ;  (3)  ridi  in
them,  and  stablished  in  them  (1  Tim.  vi.  18 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  17) ;  (4^  ready  nr  sU  good
works  (ch.  iiL  1) ;  (5)  provoking  each  other  unto  them  (Heb.  x.  24)^ — ^T.  GL

Ver.  9. — A  warning  against  frivolous  and  disputative  teaching.  This  Is  in  oootmt
to  the  sound  teaching  just  referred  to.  **  But  avoid  foolish  questions,  and  gensskgia,
and  contentions,  and  strivings  about  the  Law ;  for  they  are  unprofitable  and  vaS"^

I.    ThS   THIKOB   which    ABE  TO  BB   PLACED   0UT8IDB   THB    BPHKU   OF    li  I  w  ^wp'f^itTAT.

THOUGHT  AND  ooNCERM.  1.  Foolish  questions.  Questions  not  easily  answered,  yet  if
answered  without  practical  bearing  upon  Christian  lif&  Such  were  many  of  thi
Jewish  discussions  about  the  oral  Law,  the  nature  of  God  and  the  angels,  the  pomrof
the  Name  Jehovah.  In  Christian  times  papists  have  discussed  for  a  whole  omtaj
"which  side  of  Jesus  was  pierced  by  the  spear?"  Such  are  "foolirii  qnesticnL*
2.  Genealogies,  Jerome  tells  us  the  Jews  were  as  well  acquainted  with  the  geneakpa
from  Adam  to  Zerubbabel  as  with  their  own  names.  It  is  possible  that  Uie  Jewi^
Christians  attached  great  importance  to  their  family  registers.  The  genealogies,  how-
ever, are  significantly  linked  by  the  apostle  with  &bles.  8.  Contentions  and  strimaa
about  the  Law,  There  were  many  disputed  and  disputable  points  in  the  Law,  eroed^
respecting  the  authority  and  confirmation  of  the  commandments  (ch.  L  14).

II.  The  attitude  op  the  minibteb  towabd  buch  things.  •*  Avoid  them."  L
ThiH  implies  that  he  is  not  even  to  discuss  them^  on  account  of  their  utter  fiivolousooL
2.  The  reason  is  that  they  are  "  unprofitahle  and  vain,^^  and  therefore  exactly  oroowd
t<)  the  things  "good  and  profitable  to  men."  The  apostle  would  deliver  all  ministen
from  such  folly  and  trifling,  by  placing  before  them  Jesus  Christ,  the  one  glorion«
Object  of  the  Church's  love  and  adoration,  leaving  questions  of  another  sort  to  the  dad.
Huch  questions  had  eaten  the  heart  out  of  Judaism.  They  must  not  he  allowed  in
Christianity. — T.  C.

Vers.  10,  11. —  The  right  attitude  of  Christian  ministers  toward  divisive  errorisU.
"  A  man  tliat  is  an  heretic  after  a  first  and  second  admonition  avoid."

I.  The  true  nature  of  his  offence.  1.  It  is  not  a  case  of  /undameniai  or
doctrinal  error,  such  as  the  words  "  heretic "  and  "  heresy  "  came  to  imply  in  after-
ages.  Yet  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  separatist  ways  are  not  caused  by  direr-
geuces  of  judgment  on  some  points  from  the  settled  belief  of  the  Christian  community.
2.  It  was  a  case  of  a  turbulent  sectary,  dissatisfied  with  the  Church,  who  withdrew  fitan
her  communion  to  the  disturbance  of  her  peace.  He  would  try  to  justify  his  couree  by
a  difference  of  opinion  upon  matters  of  doctrine,  worship,  or  organization.

II.  The  method  of  dealing  with  the  offender.  1.  He  tvcu  to  receive  tw
admonitions  in  succession.  He  was  to  be  twice  warned  not  to  pursue  his  divisive  course*;
he  was  not  to  be  contended  with,  but  rebuke  was  to  be  employed  to  recover  him  &t>iD
his  error.  2.  Jf  his  pride  or  his  ambition  would  not  allow  him  to  yield  to  ctdmoniti^
he  was  to  he,  not  excommunicated — the  course  adopted  by  the  apostle  himself  in  another
case  (1  Tim.  i.  20) ;  but  simply  avoided.  There  must  be  no  intercourse  with  hio.
This  was  a  virtual  excommunication,  for  he  no  longer  held  the  place  of  a  ChristiaB
brother.

III.  The  justification  of  this  method.  "Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is
perverted,  and  sinneth,  being  self-condemned."  The  case  is  an  utterly  hopeless  one.
Vou  must  have  done  with  the  divisive  sectary ;  let  him  alone.     1,  For  he  ie  perverted;


OH.  in.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  53


impljing  an  inward  corruption  of  character,  which  steels  him  against  all  ofiBcial  admoni-
tion of  the  Church.  2.  He  nnneth.  He  errs  knowingly,  for  his  course  has  been
authoritativelj  condemned  by  the  messenger  of  God.  3.  He  is  self-condemned.  This
does  not  mean  that  he  consciously  acts  a  part  he  knows  to  be  wrong,  but  that  he  has
condemned  himself  by  his  own  practice,  practically  consenting  by  his  separation  that
he  is  unworthy  the  fellowship  of  the  Church,  and  thus  justifying  the  Church  in  its
rejection  of  him,  or  that  he  stands  condemned  by  the  Scriptures  which  he  himself
accepts  as  his  rule  of  faith  and  life. — T.  0.

Vers.  12,  13.  —  Personal  directions.  The  connection  of  Titus  with  the  Cretan
Church  was  to  be  but  temporary ;  therefore  the  apostle  gives  him  two  commands.

L   A    COMMAND    FOR  TiTXTB  TO  JOIH  THE    APOSTLE   AT  NiCOPOLIS.       1.     The   apostls

needed  his  service*,  either  at  this  city  in  Epirus,  where  he  determined  to  spend  the
winter— no  doubt  in  apostolic  labours— or  to  ascertain  from  him  the  exact  condition
of  the  Church  at  Crete,  or  to  send  him  forth  on  an  errand  to  some  of  the  other  Churches.
2.  But  the  place  of  Titus  was  not  to  he  left  unsupplied.  Two  brethren,  Artemas  and
Tychicus,  were  to  go  to  Crete— -one  altogether  unknown  by  us,  but,  as  he  is  first
mentioned,  probably  a  minister  of  high  distinction  and  zeal;  the  other,  Tychicus,  one
of  the  most  esteemed  of  the  apostle's  friends  (Acts  xx.  4 ;  Col.  iv.  7 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12).

XL  A    COMMAND    FOR   TiTUS   TO  HASTEN  THE   DEPAETUBE   OF    ZeNAS   AND    APOLLOS

FROM  Crete.  These  brethren  had  been  labouring  in  the  Church  there,  probably,  before
Titus  was  left  behind  by  the  apostle.  2ienas,  the  lawyer,  was  probably  a  Jewish  scribe
converted  to  Christianity,  who  had  been  acting  as  an  evangelist  in  Crete.  Apollos  was
the  eloquent  preacher  of  Alexandria,  and  now  as  always  in  perfect  sympathy  with  the
apostle,  though  there  seemed  a  rivalry  between  them  at  Corinth.  The  apostle  implies
that  the  Cretan  Christians  were  to  provide  the  necessary  help  for  such  a  journey. — T.  C.

Yer.  14. — A  last  reminder  concerning  good  works.  The  suggestion  just  made  leads
to  this  adjunction  :  **  And  let  ours  also  learn  to  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses,
that  they  be  not  unfruitful."

I.  It  is  an  injunction  to  the  brethren  generally.  "Ours  also."  It  is  the  duty
of  all  believers,  sharers  in  the  common  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  grace  of  life,  to  learn  to
do  good  works.

II.  Believers  need  to  be  trained  to  this  service.  ^  Let  ours  also  learn."  They
will  learn  it  from  the  Scriptures,  which  tell  us  what  is  the  good  and  perfect  and
acceptable  will  of  Grod ;  and  from  the  doctrines  of  grace,  which  teach  us  to  follow  as  an
example  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  went  about  every  day  doing  good.

IIL  These  good  works  are  to  have  a  practical  bisarino  upon  the  wants  of
OTHERS.  They  are  '*  for  necessary  wants."  1.  Not  to  atone  for  sin,  or  recommend  us
as  sinners  to  God's  favour.  2.  But  to  glorify  Ood  by  doing  for  others  wliat  he  so
aJmndanUy  does  for  us.  By  adorning  the  doctrine  of  Christ  by  our  beneficence ;  by
puttingto  silence  the  gainsaying  of  foolish  men,  because  they  see  we  are  **  not  imfruit-
ful."  We  are  thus  seen  to  be  trees  of  righteousness,  bearing  all  manner  of  fruits.  It  is
an  interesting  fact  that,  in  the  last  inspired  teachings  of  the  apostle,  he  should  have
eight  times  enforced  the  duty  of  maintaining  good  works. — T.  C.

Ver.  15. — Salutation  and  conclusion,  "  All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee.  Greet
them  that  love  us  in  the  faith.    Grace  be  with  you  alL    Amen."

I.  Mark  how  the  Epistle,  which  began  with  the  faith  of  God's  elect,  ends

WITH  grace  and  love.

II.  Mark  the  close  relationships  established  bt  grace  between  the  widely
scattered  members  of  the  Church.  They  are  one  holy,  happy  family,  united  by
love.  The  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  "  all "  suggests  the  deep  imity  of  the  body
of  Christ,  in  spite  of  its  inward  distractions  and  errors  and  bins.

III.  The  salutation  implies  that,  though  addressed  to  Titus,  the  Epistle

WAS  TO  be  communicated  TO  THE   WHOLE  ChURCH   IN  CrETE. — T.  C.

Vers.  1,  2. — Subjection  to  the  state.  Society  has  reached  no  ideal  perfection  in
government,  nor  has  God  himself  laid  down  any  outward  form  as  an   ideal.     All


54  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  in.  1—15.

nations  are  justified  in  yariety  of  choice.  There  has  been  govemment  by  judges,  and
governments  monarchical,  republicau,  autocratic,  and  constitutional.  All  that  we  need
to  notice  is  that  society  neeos  to  be  governed.  Lawlessness  alwajB  ends  in  anarchy,
misery,  and  desolation.

L  Lbabn  subjection  to  the  state.  This  is  beautiful.  Restraint  is  better  thaa
the  liberty  of  licentiousness.  Compare  a  river  that  keeps  its  bounds  to  one  that  over-
flows its  banks.  Men  are  justified  m  resistinz  tyrannies,  whether  of  autocrats  or  mobs;
but  they  must  not  forget  that  all  well-ordered  societies  exist  only  by  subjection,

II.  Leabn  self-conquest  in  yourselves.  Controlling  the  tongue,  avoiding  all
bitterness  and  '*  brawling,"  and  showing  that  there  is  a  magistracy  of  the  Tieart  as  well
as  a  magistracy  of  the  state, — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  5. — The  mercy  of  God,  "  According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us."  Mercy  is
the  key-note  of  redemption.  It  is  the  music  of  the  Psalms ;  the  spirit  of  Christ's
ministry,  and  the  motive  of  the  atonement  It  is  the  very  heart  of  i3toa- — as  permanent
as  his  justice  and  his  righteousness ;  '*  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.'*

I.  Salvation  is  not  a  bupebstructube  of  man's.  "Not  according  to  works  of
righteousness  which  we  have  done."  Gk)od  actions  do  not  make  a  good  man  ;  it  is  the
good  man  that  makes  the  good  actions.  If  man  is  to  be  saved,  he  must  have  new
life  from  within,  Mercy  meets  his  case.  Ood's  pity  and  compassion  are  seen  in  thiSi
He  gives  the  new  heart  that  makes  the  new  life,  and  so  he  saves  us  from  self  and  sin.

if.  Salvation  is  a  dual  work.  This  is  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,"  the  redemp-
tion that  comes  to  the  heart  through  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  But
the  removal  of  the  stain  of  sin  is  not  all.  The  heart,  however  clean,  is  not  to  be  a
blank.  A  new  likeness  is  to  be  brought  out.  So  there  is  to  be  the  *'  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost."  We  are  made  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.  God's  likeness  comes  out
again  in  the  soul.  We  are  made  holy  with  God*s  holiness,  and  beautiful  with  God'?
beauty.— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  8, 14. — Christian  character,  "To  maintain  good  works."  This  is  a  repeated
counsel,  and  shows  how  much  need  there  was  of  showing  that  the  ''  belief*  spoken
of  in  the  eighth  verso  should  not  be  a  mere  speculative  creed.  This  Titus  is  to
"affirm  constantly,"  showing  that  there  were  those  then  who  had  a  tendency  to
antinomianiam,  or  neglect  of  the  Law  of  moral  order  and  beauty.

I.  Permanence.  "  Maintain."  Men  weary  of  their  efforts  after  the  attainment  of  a
Divine  ideal.  Holiness  is  not  a  pift,  it  is  a  growth;  and  a  g^rowth,  not  like  that  of  a
plant,  which  is  unconscious,  but  a  growth  that  involves  obedience.  Maintain  "  works"
— give  them  continuance,  by  aliment  and  nurture.

II.  Comprehensiveness.  "  Works."  For  life  covers  a  large  sphere.  We  are  apt
to  forget  that  Christianity  covers  all  spheres — the  civil,  social,  moral,  spiritual.  For
ages  the  Church  was  merely  ecclesiastical.  "The  religious"  were  such  as  shut  them-
selves out  from  the  world,  deeming  its  pursuits  and  duties  below  the  dignity  of  a
spiritual  religion,  which  made  the  soul  and  its  feelings  and  devotions  every thin*^.  Now
we  have  moved  into  a  wider  inheritance ;  we  believe  in  the  Christianization  of  coramon
life ;  the  consecration  of  art  and  science  and  common  duty  to  Christian  ends.  We  are
simply  to  ask  if  the  work  given  us  to  do  is  a  good  work,  and  we  are  to  be  earnest  in
"  every  good  work."  And  we  have  seen  that  the  tree  must  first  be  made  good  ;  for  it  is
"  the  good  man  that,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  brings  forth  good  things."
— W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Duty,  "  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  principalities  and  power?,'
etc.  "  Very  careful,"  says  Dean  Speuce,  '*  and  searching  have  been  the  apostle's
charges  to  Titug  respecting  the  teachers  of  the  Church,  their  doctrine  and  their
life;  very  particular  have  been  his  directions,  his  warnin<;s  and  exhortations,  to
men  and  women  of  different  ages,  on  the  subject  of  their  home  life.  But  with  the
exception  of  a  slight  digression,  in  the  case  of  a  slave  to  a  pagan  master,  his  words  had
been  written  with  a  reference  generally  to  Christian  life  among  Christians.  But  there
was  then  a  great  life  outside  the  little  Christian  world :  how  were  the  people  of  Christ
to  regulate  their  behaviour  in  their  dealings  with  the  vast  pagan  world  outside?     PauI


CH.  III.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  55

ffoes  to  the  root  of  the  matter  at  once  when  he  says, '  Put  them  in  mind/  etc."  We
have  here  duty  in  a  threefold  relation — in  relation  to  civil  government,  in  relation  to
general  society,  and  in  relation  to  moral  self.    Here  is  duty —

I.  In  relation  to  civil  govebnment.  "Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  [in
subjection]  to  principalities  [rulers]  and  powers  [authoritien],  to  obey  magistrates  [to  be
obedient].  It  is  here  implied,  and  fully  taught  elsewhere  (Kom.  xiii.  1 — 7),  that
civil  government  is  of  Divine  appointment,  "There  is  no  power  but  of  God,"  says
Paul.  That  the  principle  of  civil  government  is  Divine  is  not  only  revealed  but
implied  in  the  very  constitution  of  society.  1.  Man's  social  tendencies  indioite  it
Some  men  are  royal  in  their  instincts  and  powers,  and  are  evidently  made  to  rule.
Others  are  servile,  cringing  in  tendency,  feeble  in  faculty,  and  made  to  obey.  There  is
a  vast  gradation  of  instinct  and  power  in  human  society,  and  it  is  an  eternal  principle
in  God's  government  that  the  lesser  shall  serve  the  greater.  2.  Man's  social  exigencies
indicate  it.  Every  community,  to  be  kept  in  order,  must  have  a  recognized  head— one
who  shall  be  allowed  to  rule,  either  by  his  own  will  or  the  organized  will  of  the  whole.
Hence  man,  in  his  most  savage  state,  has  some  recognized  chief.  The  principle  of
civil  government  is,  therefore,  manifestly  of  Divine  appointment.  We  may  rest
assured  that,  civil  government  being  of  Divine  appointment,  it  is  for  good  and  good
only.  Indeed,  we  learn  that  Paul's  idea  of  a  civil  ruler  is  that  he  is  a  "  minister  of  Gkxl
to  thee  for  good."  But  what  is  good?  The  answer  in  which  all  will  agree  is  this —
obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  What  is  the  standard  of  virtue  ?  Not  the  decree  of  an
autocrat,  not  public  sentiment,  even  when  organized  into  constitutional  law ;  but  the
will  of  God.  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than
unto  God,  judge  ye."  The  civil  government,  therefore,  that  does  not  harmonize  with
his  will,  as  revealed  by  Christ  the  infallible  Logos,  is  not  the  government  of  which  Paul
speaks.  Taking  Christ  as  the  Revealer  of  GcnI's  will,  we  may  infer  that  the  infringe-
ment of  human  rights  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God,  and  therefore  not
good.  Also  that  the  promotion  of  injustice,  impurity,  and  error  is  not  according  to  the
will  of  God,  and  therefore  not  good.  The  Bible  never  teaches,  nor  does  moral
philosophy,  that  we  are  bound  to  obey  laws  that  are  not  righteous,  to  honour  persons
that  are  not  honourworthy.  If  we  are  commanded  to  honour  the  king,  the  precept
implies  that  the  king's  character  is  worthy  of  his  office.  Some  kings  it  is  religious  to
despise  and  loathe.  If  we  are  commanded  to  honour  our  parents,  the  language  implies
that  our  parents  are  honourworthy.  Some  parents  display  attributes  of  character
suited  to  awaken  the  utmost  hatred  and  contempt.  In  like  manner  we  are  commanded
to  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers,  and  the  injunction  implies  that  what  these  higher
powers  enact  is  right.  The  obligation  of  obedience  is  ever  dependent  upon  the
righteousness  of  the  command.

II.  In  EEiiATiON  to  general  society.  There  are  three  duties  here  indicated  which
every  man  owes  to  his  fellows.  1.  Usefulness,  "  Be  ready  to  every  good  work."  The
law  of  universal  benevolence  which  we  see  in  nature,  our  own  instincts  and  faculties,
as  well  as  the  written  Word,  teach  us  that  man  was  made  to  serve  his  brother ;  the
grand  end  of  each  is  to  promote  the  happiness  of  others.  No  man  fulfils  his  mission  or
realizes  his  destiny  who  is  not  an  altruist^  who  is  not  ever  actuated  by  regard  for  the
happiness  of  others.  Altruism  is  God's  social  law  and  is  binding  on  every  one;
disregard  to  it  is  the  source  of  all  social  disorders  and  miseries.  "  The  soul  of  the  truly
benevolent  man  does  not  seem  to  reside  much  in  its  own  body.  Its  life,  to  a  great
extent,  is  a  mere  reflex  of  the  lives  of  others.  It  migrates  into  their  bodies,  and,
identifying  its  existence  with  their  existence,  finds  its  own  happiness  in  increasing  and
prolonging  their  pleasures,  in  extinguishing  or  solacing  their  pains."  2.  CharitaUene$s,
"  To  speak  evil  of  no  man."  "  This,"  says  a  modem  author,  "  imports  more  than  to
speak  evil  in  the  ordinary  sense :  it  is  to  act  the  part  of  a  reviler  or  slanderer ;  and
when  used  of  conduct  from  one  man  towards  another,  always  betokens  the  exercise  of  a
very  bitter  and  malignant  spirit.  Titus  was  to  charge  the  Christians  ot  Crete  to  give
no  exhibition  towards  any  one  of  such  a  spirit,  nor  to  show  a  quarrelsome  disposition,
but,  on  the  contrary,  to  cultivate  a  mild,  placable,  and  gentle  temper."  There  are
evils  of  some  sort  or  other  attaching  to  all  men,  and  in  some  men  they  are  of  the  most
hideous  and  heinous  character.  To  ignore  them,  if  possible,  would  be  wrong ;  to  feel
them  is  natural  to  the  pure,  and  to  denounce  them  is  right     But  to  speak  of  them


66  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ch.  ni.  1—16.

before  others,  to  parade  them  berore  the  eves  of  others,  argues  a  base  and  maligDSDt
nature.  Should  occasion  require  us  to  speak  of  them,  it  should  be  in  the  saddest  tones
of  tenderness,  and  even  with  comnassionate  indignation.  3.  Cowrteoutneas,  '^  To  be  do
brawlers  [not  to  be  contentious],  but  gentle,  showing  all  meekness  unto  all  men.^  How
much  there  is  in  society,  how  much  in  every  department  of  life — ^mercantile,  mechanicsl,
and  mental — one  meets  with  to  annoy  and  irritate,  especially  those  fated  with  an
irascible  nature  I  StUl,  amidst  the  strongest  provocations,  courtesy  is  our  duty,  jei^
and  our  dignity  too.

III.  In  relation  to  our  moral  sklf.  The  apostle  urges  the  dutj  of  forbeartnoe
to  what  was  wrong  in  government  and  society,  by  reminding  them  of  the  wrong  in
their  own  past  lives.  "  We  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  foolish  *' — we  had  no  ptopet
understanding  of  the  true.  **  Disobedient  '* — ^indisposed  to  do  what  is  right.  **  Deceived  *
— swerving  from  the  true  mode  of  life.  ^  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures  **— -alavesof
impure  passions,  revelling  in  the  sensual  and  the  gross.  "  Living  in  malioe  ^tiH  envy,
hateful,  and  hating  one  another  " — we  once  spent  our  days  in  the  atmosphere  of  hatt
and  malign  passions.  It  is  a  duty  which  every  man  owes  to  himself  to  remember  all
the  wrong  of  his  past  life—remember  it :  1.  That  he  may  be  charitable  totvatxU  othat,
2.  That  he  may  be  $HrMUated  to  efforts  of  8el/'4mprovement»  8.  That  he  may  adon
the  forbearance  of  God  in  his  past  dealings.  4.  That  he  may  devoutly  appreciate  tki
morally  redemptive  agency  of  Christ,  5.  That  he  may  realize  the  necessity  of  seekin§
the  moral  restoration  of  o&ers.  Two  things  may  be  inferred  from  Paul's  language
concerning  the  past  moral  condition  of  himself  ana  others.  (1)  The  possibility  of  xhs
moral  improvement  of  souls.  The  rough  stone  can  be  polished,  the  unfertile  soil  can
be  made  fertile,  the  wilderness  can  blossom  as  the  rose.  (2)  The  Migation  of  the
moral  improvement  of  souls.

Ck)NOLn8ioN.  Let  us  find  out  our  duty  and  follow  it,  through  storm  as  well  as  sun-
shine, even  unto  death.  "  After  all,**  says  Canon  Einesley,  ^  what  is  speculation  to
practice  ?  What  does  God  require  of  us  but  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk
htunbly  with  him  ?  The  longer  I  live  this  seems  to  me  more  important,  and  all  other
questions  less  so.  If  we  can  but  live  the  simple,  right  life,  do  the  work  that^s  nearest,
though  it's  dull  at  whiles,  helping,  when  we  meet  them,  lame  dogs  over  stiles."  In
the  realization  of  our  duty  is  our  strength,  our  nobleness,  our  heaven.

**  Yet  do  thy  work :  it  shall  succeed
In  tliine  or  in  another's  day ;
And  if  denied  the  victor's  meed.
Thou  shalt  not  lack  the  toiler^s  pay.

**  Then  faint  not,  falter  not,  nor  plead
Thy  weakness :  truth  itself  is  strong ;
The  lion's  strength,  the  eagle's  speedy
Are  not  alone  vouchsafed  to  wronj^."

(Whittier.)

D.  T.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Salvation,  not  of  works,  hut  of  grace.  "  But  after  that  the  kindoess
and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,"  etc.  The  great  subject  here  ie
salvation.  This  includes  the  restoration  of  the  soul  to  the  knowledge,  the  ima<Te  the
fellowship,  and  the  service  of  the  great  God.  The  passage  leads  us  to  offer  two  remarks
on  the  words.

I.  That  works  of  righteousness  w^e  cannot  perform,  and  therefore  thet
CANNOT  save  US.  "  Not  by  works  of  [done  in]  righteousness  which  we  have  done
[which  we  did  ourselves]."  What  are  righteous  works  ?  Condensely  de6ned  works
inspired  ever  by  supreme  sympathy  with  the  supremely  good.  No  other  works,  what-
ever their  sacred  semblance,  whatever  their  popular  appreciation,  are  righteous.  Now,
such  righteous  works  we  cannot  render  in  our  unrenewed  state,  because  we  have  lost
this  affection,  and  the  loss  of  this  is  the  death  and  damnation  of  the  soul.  1.  Could
we  render  such  works  they  would  save  us.  They  secure  the  blessedness  of  the  unfallen
angels.  2.  Without  rendering  such  works  we  cannot  he  saved.  Moral  salvation  con-
sists iu  holiness  of  character.  Character  is  made  up  of  habits,  habits  made  up  of  acts,
and  the  acts,  to  be  of  any  worth,  must  be  righteous.


CH.ni.  1— 16.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  67

11.  That  bedehftiyb  msbot  has  been  vouchsafed  to  us,  and  thebefobb  we
MAT  be  saved.  "According  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us.*'  Observe:  1.  The  special
work  of  this  redemptive  mercy.  What  is  the  work  ?  (1)  Cleansing.  '*  The  washinz
of  regeneration,"  or  the  "  laver  of  regeneration/'  as  some  render  it.  Sin  is  represented
as  a  moral  defiler,  and  deliverance  from  sin,  therefore,  is  a  cleansing.  (2)  Renewal.
''Renewing."  Sin  is  represented  as  death,  and  deliverance  from  it  is,  therefore,  a
qnickening,  a  renewaL  2.  The  Divine  Administrator  of  this  redemptive  mercy,  ''The
Holy  Ghost."  No  agency  but  that  of  God  can  either  morally  cleanse  or  renew.  That
Divine  Agent  which  of  old  brooded  over  the  face  of  the  deep  can  alone  morally  recreate.
3.  The  glorious  Medium  qf  this  redemptive  mercy,  "  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour.'*
Christ  our  Saviour  is  the  Medium.  Through  him  the  Spirit  came,  by  him  the  Spirit
works,  in  him  the  Spirit  is  abundant.  4.  The  sublime  reiuU  of  this  redemptive  mercy,
"  That  being  justified  Vy  his  grace,  we  should  [might]  be  made  heirs  according  to  the
hope  of  eternal  life.'*  The  word  "lustified"  means  to  be  made  right — right  in  heart,
right  in  life,  right  in  relation  to  self,  the  universe,  and  Gbd.  What  is  it  to  be  made
right?  To  be  put  in  possession  of  that  spirit  of  love  to  GK>d  which  is  the  spring  of
alT  "  works  of  righteousness."  This  rectitude :  (1)  Inspires  with  the  highest  hope.
"  Hope  of  eternal  life."  What  a  blessing  is  hope  I  But  the  "  hope  of  eternal  life,"  what
hope  like  this  ?  (2)  Inaugurates  the  highest  relationship.  "  Heirs."  We  are  "  heirs  of
God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ."^-D.  T.

Vers.  7,  8. — Justification ;  faith ;  works,  "That  being  justified  by  his  grace,  we
should  be  made  heirs,"  etc.  There  are  three  subjects  in  these  verses  of  vitid  interest
to  man  which  require  to  be  brought  out  into  prominence  and  impressed  with  indelible
force.

I.  The  mobal  bectifigation  of  the  boul.  "Being  justified  by  his  grace,  we
should  be  made  heirs  accordine  to  the  hope  of  eternal  iSe."  Iliis  means,  I  presume,
not  that  being  pronounced  right,  but  that  being  made  right.  Forensic  justification  is
an  old  theological  fiction.  Those  who  have  held  it  and  who  still  hold  it  have  ideas  of
God  incongruous  and  debased.  They  regard  him  as  such  a  one  as  themselves.  "  To
be  justified  "  here  means  to  be  made  right.  There  are  three  ideas  here  suggested  in
relation  to  this  moral  rectification  of  the  soul.  1.  AU  sotds  in  their  unrenewed  state
are  unrighteous.  We  do  not  require  any  special  revelation  from  God  to  give  us  this
information.  Man's  moral  wrongness  of  soul  is  revealed  in  every  page  of  human  history,
is  developed  in  every  scene  of  human  life,  and  is  a  matter  of  painful  consciousness  to
every  man.  We  have  all  "erred  and  strayed  from  the  right  like  lost  sheep."  2.
Restoration  to  righteousness  is  the  merciful  work  of  God,  "  Being  justified  bv  his  grace  "
—"his  grace,"  his  boundless,  sovereign,  unmerited  love.  Who  but  God  can  put  a
morally  disordered  soul  right?  To  do  this  is  to  resuscitate  the  dead,  to  roll  back  the
deep  flowing  tide  of  human  sympathies  into  a  new  channel  and  a  new  direction,  to
arrest  a  wandering  planet  and  plant  it  in  a  new  orbit.  He  does  it  and  he  alone.  He
does  it  by  the  revelation  of  his  Son,  by  the  dispensations  of  life,  the  operations  of  con-
science. "  Lo,  all  these  things  worketh  God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  back  his
soul  from  the  pit,  to  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living."  3.  There  is  the  heir-
ship qf  eternal  good,  "  Being  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be  made  heirs  according
to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."  Eternal  Ufe  must  mean  something  more  than  endless
existence ;  for  mere  endless  existence,  under  certain  conditions,  might  be  an  object  of
dread  rather  than  hope.  It  might  mean  perfect  goodness.  Goodness  is  eternal,  for
God  is  eternal:  Goodness  is  blessedness,  for  GKxi  is  blessed.  A  virtuous  hope  is  not
hope  for  happiness,  but  a  hope  for  perfect  goodness.  He  whose  soul  is  made  morally
right  becomes  an  heir  to  all  goodness.  This  heirship  is  not  something  added  to  this
inner  righteousness.  It  is  in  it  as  the  plant  is  in  the  seed.  Man's  heaven  is  in
righteousness  of  soul  and  nowhere  else.  No  man  can  be  happy  who  is  merely  treated
as  righteous  if  he  is  not  righteous.  Such  treatment,  even  by  God  himself,  would  only
enhimce  his  misery.  To  he  treated  as  righteous  if  you  are  not  righteous,  is  an  outrage
on  justice  and  a  revulsion  to  moral  nature.

IL  The  essential  foundation  of  all  tbue  faith.  "And  they  which  have
believed  in  Qod  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.  These  things  are  good  and
profitable  unto  men."    The  basis  of  all  true  faith  is  faith  in  God.    In  Aim,  not  in  it.


58  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  [ce.  in.  1-15.


Ill  hinif  not  in  men's  representations  of  him.  **  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  belieTe
that  he  is."  To  believe  in  him  implies :  1.  To  believe  in  whai  he  is  in  himadf.  The
only  absolute  existence,  without  beginning,  without  succession,  without  end,  who  is
in  all  and  through  all,  the  all-mighty,  the  all-wise,  the  all-good  Creator  and  Sustainer
of  the  universe.  This  faith  in  him  is  the  most  philosophic,  the  most  universal^  and
the  most  blessed  and  ennobling  faith.  2.  To  believe  in  whctt  he  is  to  us — ^the  Father,
the  Proprietor,  and  the  Life.  "  Not  willing  that  any  should  perish/'  This  is  the  fiiith
that  is  enjoined  upon  us  everywhere  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New ;  not  &ith  in
infallible  propositions,  in  infinite  personality ;  not  faith  in  man*8  ideas  of  God,  bat  in
Ood  himself,  as  the  Source  of  all  life,  the  Fountain  of  all  virtue,  the  Standard  of  all
excellence.    **  Trust  in  him  that  liveth  for  ever."

**  Not  in  priesthoods,  not  on  creed.

Is  the  faith  we  need,  O  Lord ;
Tiieso,  more  fragile  than  the  reed,

Can  no  rest  for  souls  afford.
Human  systems,  what  are  they?

Dreams  of  erring  men  at  best,
Visions  only  of  a  day.

Without  substance,  without  rest.
Firmly  fix  it,  Lord,  on  thee.

Strike  its  roots  deep  in  thy  love ;
Growing  ever  may  it  be,

Like  the  faith  of  these  above.
Then  though  earthly  things  depart.

And  the  heavens  pass  away,
Strong  in  thee  shall  rest  the  henrt.

Without  fainting  or  decay."

(*  Biblical  Litargy.*)

III.  The  supreme  purpose  of  a  true  life.    "  To  maintain  good  works.**    Whflt
are  good  works  ?     1.   Works  that  have  right  motives.     Works  that  society  may  con-
sider good,  that  Churches  may  chant  as  good,  are  utterly  worthlese  unless  they  spring
from  supreme  love  to  the  Creator.     "Though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned   if  I  have
not  love,  I  am  nothing."    **  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law."    2.  Works  that  have  a  right
standard.     It  is  conceivable  that  man  may  have  a  right  motive  and  yet  his  work  be
bad.     Was  it  not  something  like  this  with  Saul  of  Tarsus  when  he  was  persecuting
the  saints?     We  make  two  remarks  in  relation  to  these  good  works.      (1)  The  main-
tenance of  these  works  requires  strenuous  and  constant  effort.    "  I  will  that  thou  affirm
confidently,  to  the  end  that  they  which  have  believed  in  Q-od  may  be   careful  to
maintain  good  works."     There  are  so  many  forces  within  and  without  us  to  check  and
frustrate  the  maintenance  of  good  works,  that  we  require  to  be  constantly  on  our  guard
to  see  that  our  motives  are  right.     It  may  be  that  good  works  flow  from  angelic  natures
as  waters  from  a  fountain,  as  sunbeams  from  the  sun ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  us.     Their
light  in  us  is  the  light  of  the  lamp,  and  to  be  clear  and  useful  there  must  be  constant
trimmini:  and  feeding  with  fresh  oil ;  for  the  streams  to  be  pure,  the  fountain  must  be
kept  clean.    We  must  "  watch  and  pray,  lest  we  enter  into  temptation.**    (2)  The  great
work  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  to  stimulate  this  effort.     "  I  will  that  thou  affirm
confidently,  to  the  end  that  they  which  have  believed  God  may  be  careful  to  maintain
good  works."     "This  is  a  faithlul  saying,  and  these  things  I  will  that  thou  aflSrm  con-
stantly, that  they  which  have  believed  in  God,"  etc.     In  four  other  texts  of  Scripture
we  have  **  a  faithful  saving."     The  first  is  1  Tim.  i.  15,  **  That  Jesus  Christ  came  into
the  world  to  save  sinners."     The  second  is  1  Tim.  iv.  8,  9,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saving,
Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things."    The  third  is  2  Tim.  ii.  11 — 13,  **  It  is  a  faithful
saying,  If  we  be  dead  with  him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him."     The  fourth  is  our  text,
**  This  is  a  faithful  saying."    What?    That  God  makes  men  morally  right  by  his  grace.
This  is  an  undoubted  fact.     That  God  is  the  essential  Foundation  of  all  true  faith.
Who  can  question  this  ?    Or  that  the  supreme  purpose  of  moral  existence  is  to  maintain
"good  works."     Who  will  gainsay  this?     Or  that  all  ministers  of  the  gospel  should
faithfully  and  constantly  exhort  their  hearers  to  maintain  gOi>d  works.     These,  indeed
are  all  faithful  sayings,  and  should  be  practically  realized  by  every  man. — D.  T.


CH.  in.  1—15.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TITUS.  59

Vers.  9 — 15. — The  worthless,  the  pernicious,  and  the  desirable  in  social  life.  **  But
avoid  foolish  questions,*'  etc.    The  text  hrings  under  our  attention  three  things.

I.  The  avoidance  of  the  wobthless  in  social  life.  "  Avoid  foolish  questions
and  genealogies."  The  "  questions "  and  "  genealogies "  are  referred  to  in  1  Tim.  i.  4.
The  apostle  characterizes  them  as  foolish  ^cause  they  were  of  an  utterly  impractical
nature,  and  consumed  time  and  powers  which  were  ne^ed  for  other  and  Setter  things.
*'  Genealogies  as  found  in  the  Books  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  to  which  wild  allegorical
interpretations  had  been  assigned.  Such  purely  fanciful  meanings  had  been  already
devek>ped  by  Philo,  whose  religious  writings  were  becoming  at  this  time  known  and
popular  in  many  of  the  Jewish  schools.  Such  teaching,  if  allowed  in  the  Christian
Churches,  Paul  saw,  would  effectually  put  a  stop  to  the  growth  of  Gentile  Christendom.
It  would  inculcate  an  undue  and  exaggerated  and,  for  the  ordinary  Gentile  convert,
an  impossible  reverence  for  Jewish  forms  and  ceremonies."  Old  was  the  habit  and
strong  was  the  tendency  of  the  Hebrews  to  concern  themselves  about  their  ancestry  or
geneiuogy.  A  truly  contemptible  state  of  mind,  this  I  What  matters  it  whether  we
were  born  of  kings  or  of  paupers  ?  **  And  contentions,  and  strivings  about  the  Law.**
The  ceremonial  law  is  here  meant,  evidently — the  law  concerning  meats  and  drinks  and
holy  days.  *'  For  they  are  unprofitable  and  vain.*'  How  rife  in  Christendom  have
been  in  past  ages,  and  still  are,  these  miserable  discussions,  which  are  generated  for  the
most  part  by  the  most  ignorant  and  narrow-minded  of  the  human  race  —  mere
*'  unfeathered  bipeds  *'  that  Christianity  has  not  converted  into  true  manhood  I  The
grand  end  of  every  member  of  the  social  realm  should  be  ^  charity,  that  of  a  pure  heart
and  of  a  good  conscience.*'    The  only  true  Christianity  in  social  life  is  altruism,

II.  The  excommunication  of  the  pernicious  from  social  life.  The  former  class
— the  irritating  disputants  about  genealogies  and  ceremonies — are  described  as  **  unpro-
fitable and  vain."  They  are  a  worthless  class,  doing  no  good  whatever,  but  otherwise.
The  class  we  have  here,  however,  is  represented  as  pernicious,  and  to  be  rejected.  "  A
man  that  is  an  heretic  after  the  first  and  second  admonition  reject.*'  The  word
**  heretic  '*  (alptTut6s)  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  All  heretics  may  be
divided  into  three  classes.  1.  The  theoretical  unbeliever.  They  do  not  believe  what
others  believe  to  be  true  and  orthodox.  Though  bigots  denounce  this  as  the  worst  of
sins,  true  wisdom  justifies  it.  It  says  that  uniformity  of  opinion  is  an  impossibility —
an  impossibility  arising  from  a  variety  in  the  faculties,  education,  and  external  circum-
stances of  men.  And  not  only  an  impossibility,  but  an  inexpediency.  Did  all  men
think  alike,  all  minds  would  sink  into  a  dead  monotony.  **  Every  man  should  be  fully
persuaded  in  his  own  mind."  That,  therefore,  which  the  Church  most  fiercely  denounces
It  should  encoura<;e  and  develop.  There  is  more  good  in  honest  doubt  than  in  half
the  creeds.  2.  Tlie  professional  believer,  A  heretic  more  execrable  know  I  not  than
he  who  every  Sunday  in  the  great  congregation  declares  his  faith  in  creeds,  and  every
day,  not  only  ignores  them,  but  denies  them  in  his  life.  These  heretics  make  our  laws,
rule  our  commerce,  fill  our  temples,  create  wars,  and  swindle  the  millions.  3.  The
practical  disbeliever.  These  are  insincere.  They  do  not  act  according  to  their  innate
convictions,  their  intuitive  beliefs.  They  believe — and  they  cannot  help  it — that  the
greatest  Being  should  have  the  most  reverence,  the  best  Being  the  most  love,  the
kindest  Being  the  most  gratitude;  and  yet,  forsooth,  they  live  lives  of  irreverence,
unlovingness,  and  ingratitude.  These  are  the  worst  kind  of  heretics.  And  how  are  they
to  be  treated  ?  They  are  to  be  excommunicated.  "  After  the  first  and  second  admoni-
tion reject."  They  should  be  morally  ostracized.  "  Knowing  that  he  that  is  such  is
subverted,  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself."  They  are  insincere  men,  and  not
to  be  accepted  or  continued  in  the  circle  of  brotherhood.  Whilst  you  have  no  authority
to  persecute  them  or  crush  them  by  force,  you  are  bound  to  treat  them  as  insincere
men.    Their  own  conscience  condemns ;  they  are  self-condemned.

IIL  The  supbemact  of  purpose  in  social  life.  In  all  the  changes  in  social  com-
panionship and  scene  of  residence  to  which  the  aix)stle  here  points,  he  urges  the
aiming  at  one  thins,  viz.  to  '*  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  uses,  that  they  bo
not  unfruitful."  What  the  "good  works"  are  I  have  intimated  in  my  remarks  on
the  preceding  verses.  They  are  works  that  have  a  right  motive,  a  right  standard,  and  a
right  influence.  The  grand  end  in  the  life  of  all  rational  and  moral  bein;;^  should  l>e
the  maintenance  of  good  works.    The  apostle  intimates  that  this  should  be  the  aim  :


60  THE  EPISTLE  TO  Tn'US.  [ch.  hi.  1—15.

1.  In  all  the  eoenU  of  life.  He  was  now  despiitching  to  Titus  from  his  society  two
dear  friends  and  fellow-workers,  Artemas  and  Tychicus,  inviting  him  to  come  at  oooe
to  Nicopolis,  where  he  had,  in  the  use  of  his  discretionary  power,  determined  to  remain
through  the  winter.  Moreover,  he  had  requesUid  Titos  to  bring  with  him  Zenas  the
lawyer  and  Apollos.  Apollos  was  a  man,  not  only  of  distineuished  learning  and
influence,  but  raurs  intimate  friend  and  fellow-labourer.  In  all  this  Paul  keeps  the
one  end  in  view,  viz.  that  they  should  maintain  good  works.  ^'Ckwd  works,**  the
culmination  of  all  good  ideas,  good  impressions,  good  emotions,  and  good  resolves.
'*  Show  me  your  faiSi  by  your  works."  In  a  good  character  man  can  alone  find  hif
heaven  and  from  good  works  alone  can  man  produce  a  good  character.  2.  Jn  tkt
prending  tpkii  of  life,  "  All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee,**  eta  Brotherly  love  vai
to  animate^  directi  and  rule  all  their  social  movements  and  activities. — ^D.  T.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE  EPISTLE    OF


PAUL    TO    TITUS.


CHAPTER  L

The  Ministry  of  Charaotcr ...           ....  5

Apofltolio  AddreBB  and  Salutation    ...  6

Titus's  Commission  in  Crete  ...  7
The   Character   of    Bishops  —  their

Negative  Qualifications ...           ...  8

The  Bishop's  Positive  Qualification ...  9
The    Bishop's    Qualification    as    to

Doctrine            ...            ...            ...  10

The  Character  of  the  Adversaries  at

Orete ...           ...            ...           •••  ''"

The  Necessity  of  Oodly  Behuke  ...  11
A   Great   Counter-Principle   against

this  Ascetic  Tendency    ...           ...  12

The  Great  Contradiction    ...            ...  12

Christian  liinistry             ...            ...  13

Truth  and  Life    •••           ...           ...  13

The  Immortal  Hope           ...            ...  14

The  Divine  Veracity          ...            ...  14

The  Divine  Foresight        ...           ...  14

The  Divine  Proclamation   ...            ...  15

Believed  in  Everywhere     ...            ...  15

Apostolic  Preparation         ...           ...  16

The  Overseers      ...            ...            ...  16

Pure-heartedness ...           ...           ...  17

Inner  Defilement ...            ...            ...  17

Redemptive  Truth              ...            ...  17

Church  Order      ...           ...           ...  19

The  Sins  of  the  Sect  and  the  Stns  of

the  Tribe          ...           ...           ...  20

The  Supreme  Importance  of  Moral

Character         ...            ...           ...  22


CHAPTER  IL

Practical  Godliness  the  End  of  Spiritual

Doctrine  ...  ...  ...  28

Special  Instructions  as  to  Titus's  own

Preaching         ...  ...  ...  29

The  Duties  of  Aged  Men  ...  ...  30

The    Duties   of  Aged  Women    and

Young  Women ...  ...  ...  80

The  Duty  of  Young  Men    ...  ...  31

Titus  himself  a  Pattern  of  Good  Works  32

The  Duties  of  Servants      32

The  Grace  of  God  the  Truu  Ground

of  all  Sanctification         ...  ...  33

The  Purport  and  Extent  of  Christ*s

Saviourahip       •••  ...  ...  34

Pastoral  Work  and  Authority  ...  85

Aged  Christian  Men  ...  ...  35

Aged  Christian  Women      ...  ...  35

Counsels  to  Young  Women  ...  36

Counsels  to  Young  Men     •••  ...  36

A  Teacher's  Infiuence        ...  ...  36

Counsels  to  Slaves  •••  ...  37

Christ  for  Every  Man         ...  ...  37

True  Self-Denifd  ...  ...  •••  37

The  Coming  Day ...  ...  ...  38

The  Giving  of  the  Self       ...  ...  38

Cultivation  of  Respect       ...  •••  38

Genuine  Morality  ...  •••  89

The  Soul-Culture  of  the  World         •••  41


CHAPTER  IIL
Mercy  begetting  Mercy


.*•


47


ii


INDEX.


THKMR  PAOK

Peurla  before  Swine  ...  ...      47

Political  Duties    ...  ...  ...      48

The  Right  Deportment  of  Ghriitiana
toward  all  Men  ...  ...      48

An  Humiliating  Retrospect  ...      49

The  Origin,  Nature,  Means,  and  End
ofSaWation       ...  ...  ...      49

The  Neoessary    Connection   between

Godpel  Doctrine  and  Gkxxl  Works ...      51
A  Warning   against    Frivolous   and
DispntatiTO  Teaching     ...  ...      52

The  Right  Attitude  of  Christian  Minis-
ters toward  Divisive  Errorists       ...      52


THEME  rACB

Personal  Directions              ...  ...  53

A  Last  Reminder  oonoemiDg   Good

Works               ...             ...  ...  53

Salutation  and  Omd  asion  ...  ...  53

Subjection  to  the  State       ...  ...  53

The  Mercy  of  God               ...  ...  54

Christian  Character             ...  ...  54

Duty       ...            ...             ...  ...  54

Salvation,  not  of  Works,  but  of  Grace  56

Justification;  Faith;  Works*  ...  57
The  Worthless,  the  Pemicioas,  and

the  Desirable  in  Social  Life  ...  59


4       *
f


I


!   ^    1


'i


\


4'


i

I
I

i  I


I
»  *

I
I  •


r,   !


THE


PULriT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED  BT  THE


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,  D.D.,


DEAN  or  olouokiitbb;


AND  BT  THE


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


r  IT  T  L  E  M  O  N .


<!Bxpos(t{on  anil  l^omnetics
By  rev.   S.  J.  BALES,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,

80MSTUCE  PRINCIPAL  OF  ST.    BOMIFAOE  MISSION  OOLLi:am.


I^omflfes  bg  Farfous  ^utbois.

BEV.  PROP.  T.  CBOSKEBY,  D.D.       BEV.  W.  M.  STATHAM.


U  n  ]i  ti  0  It  r

KEGAN  PAUTi,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  1,  PATERNOSTER  SQUARE.

1887.


THE    EPISTLE    OF


PAUL  TO  philemo:n".


-•o*-


INTRODUCTION.


-•o»-


This  brief  letter  is  the  only  8pecimen  preserved  to  tis  of  St.  Panrs  privaie
eorresjtondence.  It  is,  perhaps,  surprising  that  no  more  of  St.  Paul's  private
letters  have  come  down  to  historic  times ;  for  it  hardly  admits  of  doubt  that
he  must  have  written  very  many.  His  vigour  and  activity  of  mind  were
so  great,  his  affections  were  so  warm  and  tender,  and  his  acquaintances
(not  to  say  friends)  throughout  Asia  Minor,  Greece,  and  Syria  were  bo
numerous,  that  he  could  hardly  fail  to  have  correspondents  in  many  lands ;
and  we  may  be  permitted  to  wonder  that  only  a  single  letter  should  have
remained  out  of  so  many.

Philemon  (i.e.  **  a  friend ; "  but  the  word  occurs  only  as  a  proper  name),
to  whom  this  Epistle  was  addressed,  was  a  Greek  Christian,  who  owed  his
conversion,  it  is  inferred  &om  ver.  19,  to  St.  Paul  himself.  He  was  pro-
bably a  native  of  Golossad,  in  Phrygia,  or  at  all  events  was  settled  there
at  the  time  when  St.  Paul  wrote  this  letter  to  him.  This  appears  (1)  from
comparing  ver.  1  with  CoL  iv.  17,  whence  it  appears  that  Philemon  was  of
the  same  place  as  Archippus,  and  that  the  '*  ministry  "  of  Airchippus  was  in
C0I0688B ;  (2)  because  Onesimus,  who  was  (ver.  16)  a  slave  of  Philemon,  is
referred  to  as  "  one  of  you  "  in  the  same  Epistle  to  the  Golossians  (iv.  9).

It  is  an  inconclusive  argument  that  is  used  by  Wieseler  (*  Chronologie ')»
that  Col.  iv.  17,  where  Archippus  is  mentioned,  should  be  connected  wiih
Col.  iv.  15,  16,  and  that  therefore  Archippus  belonged  to  Laodicea;  for
these  verses  are  evidently  a  digression  or  parenthesis.  Yet  it  would  seem
that  St.  Paul  himself  had  never  been  to  Colosssd,  and  that  his  meeting  with
Philemon,  and  the  conversion  of  the  latter,  must  have  taken  place  elae-
where  (Col.  ii.  1).

In  any  case,  the  question  is  one  of  small  import,  since  Laodicea  and
Colossae  were  neighbouring  places,  perhaps  not  more  than  ten  miles  apart.

FHJLXMOH,  B


ii  INTRODUCTION  TO


Philemon  was  evidently  a  man  of  wealth  and  importance,  wHoee  house-
hold was  large,  and  who  was  accustomed  to  exercise  hospitality  on  a  liberal
scale.  This  is  the  only  occasion  upon  which  he  is  mentioned  in  the  Epistles,
but  tradition  asserts  that  he  became  Bishop  of  Colossse  (*  Apoet.  Constit,'
vii.  46).  Theodoret,  Bishop  of  Cyrus  in  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century
A.D.,  states  that  the  house  of  Philemon  remained  entire  at  Colossse  in  his
day  (*  Proem,  in  Epist.  Phil.').

It  is  probable  that  Philemon  was  a  layman.  The  apostle,  indeed,  addiessee
him  in  ver.  1  as  **  fellow-labourer ; "  but  <rwc/jyos  is  not  in  any  sense  an
official  designation.  It  is  used  in  this  very  Epistle  (ver.  24)  of  several
persons,  *'  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Demas,  Lucas,"  respecting  whom  it  is  unoer-
tain  whether  they  or  all  of  them  held  ecclesiastical  offices  of  any  kind;
while  in  other  passages  it  unquestionably  denotes  laymen  (but  see  Exposi-
tion on  ver.  2).  It  was  rather  a  favourite  word  with  St.  Paul,  and  he  uses
it  and  its  cognates  sixteen  times  in  his  Epistles.

Onesimus,  the  slave  of  Philemon,  on  whose  account  the  Hpistle  im
written  to  him,  was,  as  it  would  seem  from  the  expression  in  Col.  iv.  9
in  which  he  is  spoken  of  as  "  one  of  you,"  a  native  of  that  city.  And  this
is  probable  on  other  grounds,  since  Coloss®  was  a  city  of  Greater  Phiyinft,
and  the  name  of  "  Phrygian  "  was  long  a  synonym  for  **  slave."  Its  popu-
lation had  the  reputation  of  being  sullen  and  intractable,  only  to  be
governed  by  blows ;  and  there  was  a  proverb,  Phryx  plagis  melior  fieri  solet,
to  which  Cicero  refers :  "  Utrum  igitur  nostrum  est  aut  vestrum,  hoc  pro-
verbium,  Phrygem  plagia  fieri  aolere  meliorem "  ('  Pro  Flacco,*  cap.  27).
Onesimus  means  "  useful,"  or  **  profitable  "  (Revised  Version  renders  **  help-
ful ").  It  is  rather  an  epithet  than  a  name,  and  is,  at  all  events  such  an
appellative  as  would  be  easily  bestowed  upon  a  slave.

The  notices  in  ecclesiastical  writers  referring  to  the  subsequent  life  of
Onesimus  are  few  and  brief.  The  'Apostolic  Canons'  (^Ixxiii.)  state  that
he  was  made  free  by  Philemon,  according  to  the  request  of  St.  Paul  •  and
the  *  Apostolic  Constitutions '  (vii.  4G)  add  to  this  the  further  statemeDt
that  he  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Beraea  by  St.  Paul,  and  that  he  was
finally  martyred.  An  Onesimus,  referred  to  in  the  first  epistle  of  St
Ignatius  to  the  Ephesians  as  their  bishop  (ch.  i.  Fr.  Xav.  Funk.  *Patr.
Apostol.  Opera,'  p.  174),  is  in  all  probability  another  person.

§  1.  Date.

We  learn  from  Col.  iv.  7 — 9  that  that  Epistle  was  brought  to  Colossas  bv
Tychicus  and  Onesimus;  and  our  Epistle  suggests  in  almost  ever^-  line,
though  there  is  no  distinct  statement  on  the  subject,  that  the  same  persons,
or  possibly  Onesimus  alone,  were  the  bearers  of  it  also.  The  date  of  this
Epistle  will  therefore  be  determined  by  that  to  the  Colossians  (Introduction
to  which,  see) ;  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  notice  here  that  it  must  in  all
probability  be  assigned  to  the  very  end  of  St.  Paul's  first  imprisonment  at


THE  FPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  iii


Home,  viz.  (the  spring  of)  a.d.  62  to  (the  spring  of)  a.d.  64,  i.e.  the  autumn
of  A.D.  63.

Some  notice  should  here  be  taken  of  the  theoiy  (supported  by  Schulz,
Schott,  Bottger,  "Wiggers,  Thiersch,  Eeuss,  Schenkel,  Zockler,  Meyer)  that
this  Epistle,  with  those  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians,  was  written,  not
from  Bome,  but  from  Caesarea.

The  evidence  for  or  against  this  opinion  is  not  very  abundant,  but,  such
as  it  is,  it  mostly  looks  in  one  direction.  It  is  clear  from  vers.  9  and  10
that  the  Epistle  was  written  during  a  long  imprisonment  of  the  writer.
Now,  the  outline  of  St.  Paul's  career  up  to  about  a.d.  62  is  clearly  known
from  the  account  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  there  are  in  it  only  two
long  imprisonments — at  Caesarea,  and  that  (the  first)  at  Eome.  If  it  does
not  date  from  the  one  of  these,  then  it  must  from  the  other.

1.  But  (ver.  1)  Timothy  was  with  him  when  he  wrote.  Now,  it  would
appear  from  Phil.  i.  1  that  Timothy  was  with  St.  Paul  at  Eome,  but  there
is  no  trace  of  his  ever  having  been  at  Caesarea.

2.  He  was  at  Caesarea  kept  in  a  confinement  (Acts  xxiv.  23)  which,
during  the  latter  part  of  the  time,  was  a  close  and  severe  one  (Acts  xxiv.  27),
and  this  would  at  once  hinder  him  from  preaching  the  gospel,  and  render  it
improbable  that  Onesimus  would  come  under  his  notice.  No  such  difficulty
existed  at  Eome  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31).

3.  There  is  not  the  slightest  indication  that  at  Coesarea  the  apostle  could
have  had  any  such  expectation  of  speedy  release  as  is  implied  in  ver.  22
(Acts  xix.  21 ;  xxiii.  11 ;  Eom.  i.  13,  15).  His  imprisonment  steadily
deepened  in  severity  towards  the  end.  At  Eome,  on  the  contrary,  the  mild-
ness of  his  treatment  (Acts  xxviii.  30,  31)  might  well  encourage  such  a  hope.

All  the  indications,  therefore,  point  steadily  towards  Eome,  as  the  place
where  the  Epistle  was  written,  and  are  thus  in  favour  of  the  traditional
view.  Meyer's  argument  from  the  presumed  order  of  the  journey  (Eome,
Ephesus,  Colossae ;  or  Caesarea,  Colossae,  Ephesus)  is  ingenious,  but  so  pre-
carious that  nothing  can  be  founded  upon  it.  Colossae  was  about  midway
from  the  sea,  from  one  end  of  the  road  at  Ephesus,  from  the  other  at  Attalia;
and  it  does  not  appear  but  that  either  might  have  conceivably  been  the
route,  even  from  Eome.

§  2.  Occasion  and  CracuMSTANCES.

These  are  entirely  a  matter  of  inference,  and  the  essentially  private
nature  of  the  entire  incident  renders  it  by  no  means  surprising  that  no
historical  corroborations  of  them  can  be  adduced.  Onesimus  had,  it  is
not  obscurely  intimated,  escaped  from  the  rule  of  his  master,  and  fied.
Whither  he  went  at  the  time  must  be  doubtful ;  but  at  length  ho  found
his  way,  as  it  seems,  to  Eome.  The  number  of  slaves  in  Asia  Minor,  as
in  Attica,  was  very  large.  The  Greek  colonies  in  Asia  Minor  were  long
the  chief  sources  of  the  supply  of  slaves,  and  they  were  chiefly  obtained,  no
doubt,  from  the  interior  of  Asia,  which  lay  behind  these  colonies ;  just  as


\y  INTBODUCTION  TO


even  up  to  the  preBont  day  Egypt  has  been  the  chief  slaYO-market,  because
the  breadth  of  the  continent  of  Africa  lies  behind  it,  and  affords^  or  did
afford,  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  this  human  merchandise.

Then,  as  now,  the  trade  of  the  slave-dealer  was  disreputable,  but  laige
fortunes  were  frequently  amassed  by  it.  It  was  customary  to  cany  on
workshops  and  manufactories  by  slave-labour,  and  as  a  mere  investment
of  ciEtpital  (Demosth.,  *  In  Aphob.,'  i.).  The  form  of  slavery,  therefore,  wa»
somewhat  more  severe  in  Greece  and  Asia  Minor  than  in  Borne  and  Italy^
where  it  was  principally  prsBdial  or  domestic,  and  on  the  -whole  milder  in
character.  Hence  escapes  of  slaves,  and  even  insurreotious  among  them,
were  not  unfrequent;  and  manumissions  were  more  seldom  granted  than
at  Bome.  It  was  contrary  to  law  to  receive  or  assist  a  fiigitive  slave.  He
could  not  be  legally  sold  by  a  new  possessor,  and  to  conceal  him  from
pursuit  was  equivalent  to  theft  (icXoir^,  furium).  It  is  not,  therefore,  so
improbable  a  circumstance  as  Baur  seems  to  have  thought  (^  PanI :  his  life
and  Works,'  vol.  ii.  ch.  6)  that  Onesimus  should  have  escaped  from  his
slavery,  which  it  was  a  common  occurrence  for  a  slave  to  do,  or  at  least  to
attempt ;  or  that,  succeeding,  he  should  have  then  directed  himself  towards
Rome.  There  may,  too,  have  been  momentary  circumstances  w^hich  deter-
mined the  direction  of  his  flight,  of  which  we  can  now  lesum  nothing.  He
may  have  been  to  Eomc  on  some  former  occasion,  or  even  have  been  sent
there  upon  his  master's  affairs,  and  have  absconded  instead  of  returning.
And  it  is  not  to  be  overlooked  that  a  Boman  connection  is  at  least  sug-
gested by  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Philemon  (Apphia,  t.e.  Appia).  Com-
mentators generally  assume  the  identity  of  the  two  names.  But  this
conclusion  is  weakened,  if  not  destroyed,  by  the  fact  that  Apphia  is  a
native  Phrygian  name,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  has  shown  ('  Introduction,'
p.  372).

**  All  roads  lead  to  Bome,"  said  a  mediasval  proverb,  and  it  is  probable
that,  while  travelling  would  be  comparatively  easy  and  unobserved  on  the
main  lines  of  communication,  and  among  the  crowds  that  used  them,  a
runaway  slave  would  have  been  noticed  and  stopped  instantly  had  he
turned  aside  into  less-frequented  towns.  The  stream  flowed  forward  and
backward  from  the  provinces  to  Itome,  and  fugitives  naturally  go  with  the
stream.     So  Onesimus.

Onesimus,  however,  whether  he  were  oUirq^  (purchased)  or  oucoTpiilr
(bom  in  the  master's  house),  must  have  been  of  considerable  value  to  his
master,  and  his  flight  must  have  occasioned  a  certain  loss  to  Philemon,
though  it  hardly  seems  a  damage  which  the  apostle  would  think  it  ri^^ht
to  assess  or  offer  to  make  good,  as  he  does  in  vers.  18,  19.

It  would  be  otherwise  if  Onesimus  had,  at  the  time  of  his  flight,  appro-
priated funds  or  property  belonging  to  his  master,  and  it  is  not  altogether
clear  how  he  could  have  made  his  way  from  his  home  in  or  near  Colossse  to
Rome — a  journey  of  probably  a  thousand  miles — without  any  funds  at  all,
or  even  by  the  help  of  any  peculium  which  he  might  have  acquired.     It  has


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


not  Tiiinatnrallyy  therefore,  been  supposed  by  commentators  (Chrysostom,
Scipio  Gentilis,  Grotius,  Conybeare  and  Howson,  •  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.
Paul')  that  Onesimus  had  robbed  his  master;  and  the  inference  would
seem  to  be  well  founded.  St.  Paul  speaks  as  one  in  possession  of  the  whole
of  the  circumstances,  in  his  two  phrases  *'  wronged  "  and  *'  owes,"  and  dis-
tinguishes accurately,  no  doubt,  between  various  offences  against  his  master
which  the  repentant  Onesimus  may  have  confided  to  him.  As  a  slave,  he
could  not,  indeed,  in  strict  law,  otoe  anything  to  his  master,  as  the  master
could  not  owe  anything  (even  the  peculium)  to  his  slave  (*  Gains,'  i.,  ii.,
iv.).  But  he  might,  of  course,  steal  &om  him,  and  then  would  be  liable
for  the  theft.

In  some  way,  St.  Paul  does  not  mention  how,  he  and  Onesimus  met  in
Bome,  and  the  latter  yielded  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  He  was,  perhaps,
attracted  by  the  winning  earnestness  of  the  great  preacher's  manner  and
conversation,  and  entered  into  personal  and  confidential  relations  with  him.
Very  soon  the  apostle  knew  all  the  events  of  the  young  man's  brief  history,
and  had  counselled  him  to  make  such  amends  for  his  wrong-doing  as  might
be  possible.  Onesimus  seems  to  have  put  himself  entirely  into  the  hands
of  St.  Paul,  who,  on  his  part,  must  have  felt  all  the  responsibility  of  his
decision.  It  was  evident  that  Onesimus  had  ability  which  might  be  of
great  service  to  the  Church  and  to  St.  Paul  himself.  A  strong  attachment
had  sprung  up  between  the  aged  man  and  the  youth,  and  St.  Paul  calls
him  by  the  unusual  appellation,  betokening  very  strong  feeling  (but  it  was
St.  Paul's  custom  to  use  strong  and  vivid  expressions),  of  "  my  bowels,"  i.e.
"  my  son  "  (Eevised  Version,  ••  my  very  heart ").  Yet,  before  all  things,
what  was  right  must  be  done.  The  law,  as  it  stood ,  gave  certain  rights  to
Philemon,  and  St.  Paul  would  have  been  the  last  man  to  wish  to  violate
the  law.  Onesimus,  therefore,  must  return  to  his  master ;  and  his  consent
to  do  so  is  no  small  proof  of  the  respect  and  affection  which  St.  Paul  had
inspired  in  him.  The  resentment  of  a  master  towards  a  ruiiaway  slave
would  be  hard  to  endure.  St.  Paul  had  no  intention  of  exposing  his
penitent  to  this  considerable  danger  without  taking  every  means  in  his
power  to  ensure  to  him  a  full  and  ready  forgiveness.  The  sum  of  which,
possibly,  Onesimus  had  defrauded  his  master,  the  apostle  gave  his  personal
undertaking  to  repay.  An  opportunity  was  found,  or  made,  for  his  return,
in  the  approaching  visit  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Ephesian  Tychicus,
who  was  a  well-known  and  trusted  brother,  and  had  several  times  (Col.  iv.
7,  8 ;  Eph.  vi.  21,  22 ;  Titus  iii.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  Acts  xx.  4, 17)  been  the
messenger  of  St.  Paul.

The  '' letter  of  introduction"  which  was  put  into  his  hands  is  that
which  later  ages  have  known  as  the  Epistle  to  Philemon.

§  3.  Contents.

To  analyze  minutely  so  brief  and  private  a  letter  may  well  seem  super*
fluous.    It  falls,  however,  naturally  into  five  divisions.


vl  INTRODUCTION  TO


1.  Vers.  1 — 4:  The  snperscription,  comprising  salutations  to  Philemon
•himself,  to  Apphia  (probably  his  wife),  to  Archippus,  and  either  to  the
"whole  family,  or  to  a  small  assembly  which  met  in  the  house  of  Philemon.

2.  Vers.  5 — 7 :  The  apostle  thanks  Grod  for  the  good  report  of  Philemon
which  he  has  heard,  concerning  his  faith  towards  God,  and  kindnett
towards  all  his  fellow-Christians.  After  this  exordium,  lie  introduces  the
specific  occasion  of  his  letter,  viz.

3.  Vers.  8 — 21 :  His  intercession  on  behalf  of  Onesimus,  -which  (vers.
8,  9)  he  has  a  right  to  make  with  much  authority,  because  of  his  reverend
age,  and  his  sufferings  for  Jesus  Christ ;  but  (ver.  9)  he  does  not  command,
he  entreats  as  a  favour,  the  granting  of  his  request.     Ver.  10  explains  what

it  is,  viz.  a  kind  and  forgiving  reception  of  Onesimus,  whom  (vers.  11 14)

he  would  have  wished  to  retain  with  himeolf,  but  would  not  do  this  without
the  leave  of  Philemon.  Vers.  15 — 17  :  The  hopes  there  were  of  the  young
man's  reformation  and  future  usefulness.  Vers.  18,  19  :  The  apostle*s  pro-
mise that  he  will  make  good,  if  desired,  whatever  sum  of  money  Onesimus
may  have  wronged  his  master  of.  Vers.  20,  21 :  He  expresses  a  friendly
confidence  in  Philemon's  ready  compliance  with  his  request,  and  that  he
would  even  go  beyond  it.

4.  Ver.  22 :  He  states  his  intention  (which,  however,  it  would  seem  was
never  fulfilled)  of  paying  a  visit  to  Colossas,  and  asks,  with  the  frankness  of
one  who  knows  that  his  presence  will  be  esteemed  an  honour  and  a  pleasure
that  a  lodging  («c.  in  Philemon's  own  house)  may  be  prepared  for  him.

6.  Vers.  23 — 25 :  The  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  staff  engaged  in  the
mission  at  Eome  appears  to  have  joined  in  the  concluding  salutations;
Paul  and  Timothy  at  the  beginning;  Epaphras,  Marcus,  Aristarchus,  Deraas,
Lucas,  at  the  close ;  and  thus  associated  themselves  with  the  apostle's
request.     Yer.  25:  It  closes  with  the  apostolic  benediction.

§  4.  The  Authenticity  of  the  Epistle,  and  its  Special  CnARACTERisrics.

'ITiat  this  brief  Epistle  was  written  by  the  Apostle  Paul  seems  the
clearer  the  longer  it  is  studied.  Meyer  does  not  at  all  exaggerate  -when  he
declares  that  it  bears  "directly  and  vividly  the  stamp  of  genuineness."
And  it  is  so  brief  that  it  enters  not  at  all  upon  debatable  ground.  It  has
no  directions  for  Church  organization,  such  as  are  found  in  the  Epistles  to
Timothy ;  nor  warnings  against  Gnosticism,  which  are  objected  to  as  anachro-
nisms belonging  to  a  later  age.  Slavery  belongs  to  all  ages  of  the  ancient
world,  and  it  is  an  incident  in  the  life  of  a  Phrygian  slave  that  occasioned
the  writing  of  this  Epistle.  Nor  does  it  travel  scarcely,  if  at  all,  out  of  the
sphere  of  the  household,  and  of  the  simpler  moral  principles  and  human
emotions.  It  moves  in  the  plane  of  practical  life ;  the  doctrinal  or  devo-
tional it  barely  enters.

It  follows  that  the  Epistle  presents  the  least  possible  surface  for  attack  ;
and  even  that  it  partially  disarms  the  habitual  objector.  So  persistent  a
critic  even  as  Baur  ('  Paulus/  in  loc.)  acknowledges,  with  a  touch  of  unusual


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  vii

■^■^^^^i— ^^^^— ^^-^^^^^^— ^— ^—^"^i^— ^^^^^^^^^^^^■^^^™'—       ^•~^—       —^—^—  '  ■  ■  .

frankness,  ''In  the  case  of  this  Epistle,  more  than  any  other,  if  criticism
should  inquire  for  evidence  in  favour  of  its  apostolic  name,  it  seems  liable
to  the  reproach  of  hypercriticism,  of  exaggerated  suspicion,  trustless  doubts
from  the  attacks  of  which  nothing  is  safe.  "What  has  criticism  to  do  with
this  short,  attractive,  and  friendly  letter,  inspired  as  it  is  by  the  noblest
Christian  feeling,  and  which  has  never  yet  been  touched  by  the  breath  of
suspicion  ?  "  It  is  evident  throughout  his  treatment  of  this  Epistle  (pt.  ii.
ch.  6)  that  he  is  being  driven  by  the  exigencies  of  his  preconceived  theory
to  deny  a  genuineness  which  he  secretly  acknowledges.

It  is  the  importance  of  the  niche  which  this  Epistle  fills  in  the  general
scheme  of  St.  Paul's  life,  as  handed  down  by  the  Christian  tradition,  in
^'  its  historical  and  critical  connection  with  the  other  Epistles  which  stand
nearest  to  it,"  that  arouse  his  hostility.  He  holds  that  the  entire  group  of
Epistles,  which  consists  of  those  to  the  Colossians,  Ephesians,  and  to  PhUe-
mon,  is  un-Fauline ;  and  since  the  testimony  of  each  of  these  supports  the
rest,  he  dares  admit  of  no  exceptions  from  the  sentence  of  rejection.  There-'
fore  he  must  regard  Philemon  as  "  a  Christian  romance,  serving  to  convey  a
genuine  Christian  idea."  No  introduction  to  the  Epistle  can  be  said  to  be
complete,  therefore,  which  does  not  reckon  with  his  doubts  and  those  of  his
school,  though  his  reasoning  is  somewhat  forced.

1.  External  evidence^  The  character  of  its  contents  fitted  it  but  little
for  quotation.  The  apostolic  Fathers,  therefore,  present  no  reference  to  it;
for  the  Onesimus  referred  to  in  Ignatius, '  Ad  Ephes.,'  ii.  and  '  Ad  Magnes.,'
xii.  is  probably  another  person,  and  in  '  Ad  Polycarp.,'  vi.  the  resemblance  of
phrase  is  too  vague  to  rest  upon.  It  is  included  in  the  Muratorian  Canon,
and  Eusebius  classes  it  with  the  received  books  (6/ioXcyov/icva).  Marcion
received  it  as  Paul's,  and  that  without  altering  or  modifying  it — a  circum-
stance which  drew  forth  the  criticism  of  TertuUian  that  its  brevity  had
been  of  advantage  to  it  in  one  respect  at  least,  that  it  had  escaped  the  cor*
rupting  hands  of  Marcion.  "  Yet  I  wonder,"  he  adds,  "  that,  since  he  has
received  a  letter  to  one  man,  he  should  have  rejected  the  two  to  Timothy
and  one  to  Titus,  which  treat  of  the  organization  of  the  Church.  He
affected,  I  suppose,  to  alter  even  the  number  of  the  Epistles"  ('Adv.
Marcion.,'  lib.  v.  c.  21).  It  was  sometimes  placed  thirteenth  in  order,
before  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  but  in  other  copies  last  of  all.

Origen  has  repeated  references  to  this  Epistle  (see  'Homil.  in  Jerem»
xix. ; '  '  in  Matt.  Tract.,'  xxxiii.  and  xxxiv.).

We  find,  nevertheless,  by  the  time  of  St.  Jerome,  that  there  were  already
persons  who  argued  against  this  Epistle,  that  either  it  was  not  written  by
Paul  at  all,  or  that,  if  it  were,  it  contained  nothing  edifying.  ''  Aut  Epistolam
non  esse  Pauli  •  .  .  aut  etiam,  si  Pauli  sit,  nihil  habere,  quod  tedifioare
nos  possit."

Baur,  unlike  most  commentators,  argues  that  either  the  circumstances
are  altogether  fictitious,  or  that,  if  they  rest  on  a  basis  of  fact,  they  have
been  freely  treated  in  order  to  embody  dramatically  the  idea  "  that  what  one


▼iii  INTRODUCmON  TO


10868  in  the  world,  one  Teoovers  in  Christianity,  and  that  for  ever;  that  ihi
world  and  Christianity  are  related  to  eaoh  other  as  sepaxmtion  and  reunion,
as  time  and  eternity;"  and  this  he  thinks  is  expressed  in  Ter.  15.  Hk
arguments  on  the  improbability  of  what  he  oalls  **  a  vary  remaikaUe  oob-
onrrenoe  of  chanoes  "  are  so  evidently  without  serious  'weight  that  we  shaD
not  linger  npon  them.^

But  he  further  objeots  to  the  style  as  un-Panline.  The  ^nfftapgfw  he
gives,  however,  are  not  very  snbstantiaL  When  he  saya  that  awrrparwnfi
(ver.  2),  in  the  figurative  sense,  belongs  to  later  writingB,  he  means  a;^
rently  that  it  is  found  in  the  pastoral  Epistles  once  (2  Tim.  ii.  3,  <rr/wn-
wrjsi).  The  word  appears  to  be  somewhat  rare  even  in  olaaaical  literatom
But  it  is  found  in  Xenophon  (*  Anab.,'  i.  2, 26),  Plato  Q  Bepnb.,'  556  o.),  and
precisely  in  this  metaphorical  sense  as  here  in  Joeephns  (*  BelL  Jud^'  tL
9.  1).  And  as  far  as  wo  can  discover  after  search,  the  metaphorical  sense
cannot  be  said  to  be  popular  until  a  very  much  later  age  (see  Eusebins,
*  Presparat.  Evangel.,'  lib.  xiii.  c.  7)  than  it  is  possible  to  name  for  tkii
Epistle.  In  ver.  15  aTr^co  has  not  the  sense  of  **have  back,"  as  Banr  aigaes,
which  would  be  unexampled,  but  of  "  have  fully,'*  as  in  Phil.  iv.  18  (see
Lightfoot's  note  here).  The  fact  that  it  was  a  having  bodb  again  in  the
case  of  Onesimus  is,  so  to  speak,  an  aeeiderUal  circumstance  in  this  case.
*AiroT4a>,  irpofTOf^tCXM  (ver.  19)  and  ovrfjjuu  (ver.  20)  are,  it  is  true,  peculiar  to
the  places  where  they  occur;  and  while  it  is  curious  that  so  many  mi
Xcyofieva  should  cluster  in  this  brief  Epistle  of  twenty-five  verses,  the
character  of  its  subject-matter,  which  is  different  from  the  nsnal  subjects
treated  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  fully  accounts  for  this.  It  is  a  letter
upon  business,  and  as  such  it  naturally  contains  business  termer  such  as  theee
words  are.

(2)  In  the  considoration  of  the  internal  characteristics  of  this  Epistle,  the
same  over-subtle  analysis  and  excessive  suspicion  of  "  tendency  "  seems  to
cloud  and  disturb  the  judgment  arrived  at  by  Baur  and  those  of  his  school.
It  does  not  appear  to  us  that  to  praise  the  Epistle  as  *'  invaluable  "  because
it  exhibits  "  the  apostle's  cheerful  and  amiable  personality  "  is  in  any  wise
an  accurate  or  closely  fitting  description.

Surely  St.  Paul's  temperament  was  fervid,  emotional,  mobile,  subject  to
great  heights  and  depths  of  mood,  and  not  what  would  be  called  equable
or  "  cheerful."  This  characteristic  is  faithfully  reflected  in  the  Epistle
before  us.

It  is  a  courteous  and  even  affectionate  communication  from  the  apostle
to  one  who,  though  bound  to  respect  his  official  position,  and  under  great
personal  obligations  to  him,  was  yet  not  familiarly  known  to  him.  He  had
to  do  a  very  difficult  thing — to  come  between  a  master  and  his  slave,  to
take  what  by  some  men  and  in   some  circumstances  might    have  been

*  For  those  who  can  accept  it,  a  very  easy  way  of  avoiding  these  **  impossibilities,"  such
as  they  are,  is  presented  by  that  hypothesis,  upheld  by  Schulz,  Schneckenburger,  Reoss,
Sclionkel,  Ziickler,  ^leyer,  which  assigns  this  Epistle,  with  those  to  the  Ephesians  and
Colossiuns,  to  the  imprisonment  at  Cassarea  instead  of  at  Home.


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  ix


thonglit  a  great  and  nnwananted  liberty.  Did  he  demand  the  freedom
of  Onesimns  by  his  apostolic  authority,  it  might  appear  that  he  was  magni-
fying his  office  overmuch.  If  he  should  put  into  too  great  prominence  the
spiritual  obligations  under  which  Philemon  lay,  the  act  would  be  ungene-
rous, and  would  go  far  to  cancel  them.  Yet  he  could  not  send  back  the
young  man  Onesimus  to  meet  the  punishment  of  a  runaway— ./ku/eZZw  ad
mortem  ecBstu.

The  tact  and  skill  with  which  all  these  opposite  dangers  are  avoided  in
the  letter  before  us  is  remarkable.  The  writer  persuades  without  alien-
ating, and  wins  his  correspondent  to  obedience  without  seeming  to  demand
it.  At  once  the  reverend  senior,  the  confiding  friend,  and  the  persuasive
suppliant,  he  requests  on  behalf  of  his  protSgS  a  favour  which  we  can
hardly  doubt  was  as  willingly  and  gladly  granted  as  it  was  gratefully
received.

The  letter  of  Pliny  to  Sabinianus  on  behalf  of  the  ofifending  servant  of
the  latter,  has  often  been  referred  to  as  an  exact  parallel  to  the  Epistle  to
Philemon,  and  is  at  all  events  a  useful  contrast  to  it.  It  is  given  below
for  the  purpose  of  comparison : —

**  To  Sabinianus.

"  Your  freedman,  whom  you  lately  mentioned  to  me  with  displeasure,
has  been  with  me,  and  threw  himself  at  my  feet  with  as  much  submission
as  he  could  have  done  at  yours.  He  earnestly  requested  me,  with  many
tears,  and  even  with  all  the  eloquence  of  silent  sorrow,  to  intercede  for
him ;  in  short,  ho  convinced  me  by  his  whole  behaviour  that  he  sincerely
repents  of  his  fault.  I  am  persuaded  he  is  thoroughly  reformed,  because
he  seems  deeply  sensible  of  his  guilt.  I  know  you  are  angry  with  him,
and  I  know  it  is  not  without  reason ;  but  clemency  can  never  exert  itself
more  laudably  than  when  there  is  the  most  cause  for  resentment.  You
once  had  an  affection  for  this  man,  and,  I  hope,  will  have  again ;  in  the
mean  while,  let  me  only  prevail  with  you  to  pardon  him.  If  he  should
incur  your  displeasure  hereafter,  you  will  have  so  much  the  stronger  plea
in  excuse  for  your  anger,  as  you  show  yourself  the  more  exorable  to  him
now.  Concede  something  to  his  youth,  to  his  tears,  and  to  your  own
natural  mildness  of  temper;  do  not  make  him  uneasy  any  longer,  and  I
will  add,  too,  do  not  make  yourself  so;  for  a  man  of  your  benevolence  of
heart  cannot  be  angry  without  feeling  groat  uneasiness.  I  am  afraid,  were
I  to  join  my  entreaties  with  his,  I  should  seem  rather  to  compel  than
request  you  to  forgive  him.  Yet  I  will  not  scruple  even  to  unite  mine
with  his ;  and  in  so  much  the  stronger  terms,  as  I  have  very  sharply  and
severely  reproved  him,  positively  threatening  never  to  interpose  again  in
his  behalf.  But  though  it  was  proper  to  say  this  to  him,  in  order  to  make
him  more  fearful  of  offending,  I  do  not  say  so  to  you.  I  may,  perhaps,
-again  have  occasion  to  entreat  you  upon  his  account,  and  again  obtain  your
forgiveness ;  supposing,  I  mean,  his  fault  should  be  such  as  may  become  me


INTRODUCTION  TO


to  intercede,  and  you  to  pardon.     Farewell "   (Pliny's  *  Letters,'  bk.  ii.
No.  21,  edit.  Melmoth).

Pliny  was  a  man  of  high  rank  and  considerable  culture ;  he  was  a  pro-
fessed letter-writer;  he  regarded  it  as  an  accomplishment  to  compose
elegant  epistles  to  his  friends.  But  even  so,  how  far  is  the  letter  to
Philemon  superior !  The  other  haughty,  curt,  and  frigid,  not  so  much
persuades  his  correspondent  as  a  favour  to  what  he  asks,  as  demands  it
as  a  thing  due  to  his  condescension  in  asking.  The  one  is  based  through-
out on  a  religious  motive ;  the  other,  on  a  casual  and  somewhat  coDtemptaous
feeling  of  kindliness.  In  fact,  the  two  letters  are  apt  types  respectively  of
the  "  friendship  of  the  world  "  (Jas.  iv.  4)  and  of  the  Christian  charity
that  '*  seeketh  not  her  own  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5).  Erasmus  aptly  observoB^
*'  Quid  festivius  etiam  dici  poterat  vel  ab  ipso  Tullio  in  hujusmodi  arga-
mento  ?  "

It  has  been  well  said  by  Bishop  Wordsworth  that  the  gospel,  ''by
Christianizing  the  master,  enfranchised  the  slave."  It  did  not  pursue  the
method  (far  more  imposing  and  showy  indeed,  but,  as  all  history  would
teach,  one  sure  to  purchase  temporaiy  success  by  eventual  failure)  of  at
once  declaring  slavery  unlawful.^  That  would  have  been  to  excite  a
servile  war,  to  uproot  existing  institutions  of  society,  and  to  make  itaelf
the  occasion  of  unnumbered  atrocities.  Another  was  adopted  which,  if
slow  and  gradual  in  the  extreme,  created  no  disturbance  at  the  time,  and
brought  about  a  permanent  elevation  of  the  class  of  slaves.  To  benefit  the
slave,  it  filled  the  heart  of  the  master  with  the  love  of  Christ.

For  a  long  time,  therefore,  the  ownership  of  slaves  was  not  in  the
Christian  Church,  held  to  be  unlawful.  As  late  as  the  time  of  Theodosius,
as  we  learn  from  St.  Chrysostom,  there  were  wealthy  persons  who  held  as
many  as  two  or  three  thousand  slaves.  But  Christian  w^riters  were  con-
stant in  inculcating  the  duty  of  behaving  considerately  and  humanely
towards  thorn  (Clem.  Alex.,  '  Piedagog.,'  iii.  12).  The  laws  of  Justinian
also  introduced  many  ameliorations  into  the  treatment  of  slaves,  or  more
probably  recognized  those  already  accepted  by  Christian  society.  The
barbarian  incursions  which  brought  about  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire
threw  back  the  cause  of  the  slave  for  a  time,  since  theso  new-comers  not
only  brought  with  them  great  numbers  of  slaves,  principally  Sclaves
(whence  our  word  "slave"),  but  brought  into  bondage  manv  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  conquered  provinces.  But  at  length  slavery  became
altogether  transformed  into  the  milder  form  of  serfdom — at  least  in  Europe.

We  may  see  in  this  letter  before  us  the  first  stage  of  tliis  beneficent
process.

*  "  The  word  *  emancipation,' "  says  Bishop  Lightfoot, "  scorns  to  be  trembling  on  his  Uvs
and  yet  he  does  not  once  utter  it "  (*  Introduction,'  p.  389).  '


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  xi


§  5.  LiTEBATUBE  ON  PHILEMON.

William  Alexander,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Deny  and  Baphoe, '  Philemon :  Introduction,
Commentary,  and  Critical  Notes,'  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  iiL  (Lond.:  1881).
William  AttersoU,  minister  of  the  Word  of  God  at  Isfield,  Sussex, '  A  Commentary
of  the  Epistle  to  Philemon,'  2nd  edit,  fol.  (Lond. :  1633).  John  Calvin,  *  Com-
mentarius  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,'  •  Opera,'  xii.  (Gen. :  1617).  St.  Chrysostom,  *  Com-
mentarius  et  Homilisd  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,' '  Opera,'  xi.  J.  L.  Davies,  Rector  of  Christ
Church,  Marylehone,  '  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Ephesians,  the  Colossians,  and
Philemon,  with  Introductions  and  Notes '  (Lond. :  1867).  C.  J.  EUicott,  D.D.,  Bishop
of  Gloucester  and  Bristol, '  Critical  and  Grammatical  Conmientary  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles
to  the  Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon,  with  a  Revised  Translation '  (Lond. :  1857).
Scipio  Gentilis,  professor  of  law  at  Altdorf,  '  Commentarius  in  Epistolam  ad  Phile-
monem.  Norimb.'  (1610).  Paton  J.  Gloag,  D.D.,  *  Introduction  to  the  Pauline  Epistles :
Philemon '  (Edinb. :  1874).  St.  Hieronymus,  *  Comment,  in  Epist.  ad  Philem.,'  *  Opera,'
(vii.  741).  William  Jones,  D.D., '  A  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  to  Philemon  and  the
Hebrews '  (Lond. :  1635).  Cornelius  k  Lapide, '  Commentarius  in  Epistolam  ad  Phile-
monem '  (Antverpiaa :  1635).  J.  B.  Lightfoot,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Durham,  *  St.  Paul's
Epistles  to  the  Colossians  and  Philemon :  a  Revised  Text,  with  Introductions '  (Lond. :
1875).  H.  A.  W.  Meyer,  Th.D.,  Oberconsistorialrath,  Hanover,  *  Critical  and  Exege-
tical  Handbook  to  the  Epistle  to  Philemon '  (1848),  English  edit.  (Edinb. :  1880).
J.  J.  van  Oosterzee,  professor  of  theology  at  Utrecht, '  Die  Pastoralbriefe  und  der  Brief  an
Philemon,'  Lange's  '  Bibelwerk,'  xi.  (Bielefeld :  1861).  Bishop  Parry, '  Exposition  on
Philemon '  (Lond. :  1834).  Matthew  Poole,  D.D., '  Synopsis  Criticorum  in  Epist.  ad
Philem.,*  vol.  v.  (Francofurti:  1694).  Bishop  Smalridge,  *The  Epistle  to  Philemon
explained,'  'Sermons,'  399.  Chr.  Wordsworth,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  'Epistle  to
Philemon,  with  Introduction  and  Notes,'  Gr.  Test.,  vol.  iii.  (Lond. :  1875).


I

I       ■

I    t


^    !  T


!


.  I


I:

•  i
I   .


If


i


(  i


fl


THE    EPISTLE    OF


PAUL   TO    PHILEMON.


-•o»-


EXPOSITION.


Ter.  1.— A  priioner  of  Chrift  Jesni.  He
writes  a  private  letter,  as  friend  to  friend,
and  therefore  does  not  describe  himself  by
his  official  title  of  apostle.  Having  to
plead  the  cause  of  a  slave,  ho  be^ns  by
putting  himself  into  a  similar  position  as
the  **  bK)ndman  of  Jesus  Christ " — "  to  obtain
thereby  the  more  ready  compliance  "  (Chry-
sostom).  By  such  a  reverend  bondage  he  be-
seeches Philemon,  **  and  the  bondage  of  Paul
was  liberiy  to  Onesimus  *'  (Scipio  Gentilis).
Timothy,  etc.  He  was,  then,  with  6t  Paul
at  the  time  of  writing ;  therefore  at  Rome ;
and  this  fixes  the  date  of  composition  at  all
events  before  that  of  the  Second  Epistle  to
Timothy,  when  the  apostle  was  again  at
Rome  (2  Tim.  i.  17;  iv.  6,  16).  Fellow-
worker  with  St.  Paul  in  promoting  the
spread  of  the  gospel,  either  by  his  wealth
and  influence,  less  probably  by  preaching.
The  time  when  would  be  that  of  St.  PauTs
long  stay  at  Ephesus  and  its  neighbourhood
(Acts  xix.  8—22).

Yer.  2. — Our  beloved  Apphia.  Codices
A,  D*,  E»,  F,  G,  and  N  (Sinaiticus)  read
adelphS  (sister^  for  agapeti  (beloved),  and  also
Jerome,  Griesoach,  Meyer ;  which  also  has
been  adopted  in  the  Revised  Version.  The
name  Appia,  or  Apphia,  is  either  the  Roman
Appia  Hellenized,  which  was  the  conjecture
of  Grotius  (see  IntroductionX  or  more  pro-
bably a  native  Phrygian  name,  from  Appa  or
Apphay  a  term  of  endearment.  The  name  does
not  occur  elsewhere  in  Scripture.  The  word
&dcA^  is  not  unlikely  to  nave  been  added
by  way  of  explanation.  St.  Paul  has  used
it  in  five  other  places,  and  always  in  the
same  sense,  viz.  Kom.  xvi.  1, 15 ;  1  Cor.  vii.
15 ;  ix.  5 ;  1  Tim.  v.  2.  Most  oonmientators,
and  particularly  Chrysostom^  Theodoret,  and
Theophylact,  among  the  ancients,  infer  that
Applua  was  the  wife  of  Philemon.  Other-
wise, why  mention  her  name  here  ?  Arohip-
pm;  oomp.  CoL  iv.  17,  where  he  is  said  to


have  received  a  Zitucovioj  i,e.  a  ministry  or
service,  in  the  Church.  This  word,  when
used  without  a  determining  genitive,  denotes
service  to  others  in  a  gcnend  and  undefined
sense.  But  more  oonmionly  with  some
limiting  word;  as  Huucoyia  \6yov,  office  of
teaching  (Acts  vi.  4) ;  iteucovia  rov  Baydrov^
office  or  function  of  death  (2  Cor.  iii  7).
The  general  view  is  that  Archippus  was
the  presbyter  who  ministered  to  that  con-
gregation which  assembled  at  the  house  of
Philemon,  though  Ambrose  and  Jerome,
with  other  commentators  ancientand  modem,
think  that  he  was  the  bishop.  Grotius,  how-
ever, takes  him  to  have  been  a  deacon.  (It
is  a  very  precarious  inference  that  he  was
a  son  01  Fhilemon  and  Appia.)  Probably
he  was  fulfilling  a  temporary  mission  only
in  Colossa),  and  that  would  be  the  itaucowia
in  the  passage  cited.  Epaphras,  a  resident
in  ColossiB  (Col.  iv.  12),  is  spoken  of  as
having  been  the  founder  of  the  (^urch
there  (Col.  i.  7,  8),  and  as  still  being  respon-
sible for  it  (C6L  iv.  IS).  Primasius  calls
Epaphras  bishop  and  Archippus  deacon ;  and
so  Grotius.  It  may  be  that  these  theories  err
in  ascribing  too  rigid  and  technical  a  meaning
to  the  terms  of  ecclesiastical  service  at  this
early  stage  of  their  employment  Epaphras
was,  however,  at  this  time  in  Rome  with  St.
Paul  (Col.  iv.  12, 18),  and  it  is  possible  that
Archippus  was  filling  his  place  temporarily.
U  will  be  safer  to  call  him  (with  Bishop
Wordsworth)  a  presbvter.  It  is,  as  we  have
said,  an  unsupported  idea  of  some  writers
ancient  and  modem  (Theod.  Mopsuest.,
Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller,  Olshausen,  Light-
foot)  that  he  was  the  son  of  Philemon  Qmt
see  below).  Oar  fellow-ioldier ;  t.e.  of  him-
self and  St  Timothy,  as  engaged  in  the
same  warfare  for  (^rist  (1  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  2  Cor.
z.  4 ;  1  Tim.  i.  18).  The  same  term  is  ap- ,
plied  in  Phil.  ii.  25  to  Epaphroditus,  aud
also  the  o'vrc^s  of  vcr.  1.    And  to  the


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


[1—25.


Chareh  in  thy  hoQM.  Mede  (so  Chrysnetom
and  Theodoret  also)  undentanda  this  as
meaning  "  and  to  tho  whole  of  thy  famil^v  "
(which  is  a  ChriBtian  one)— a  suggestion
quite  worth  considering.  For  a  separate
letter  **to  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren
in  Christ  which  are  at  Co1oss«b"  (Col.  i.  2]
Avas  brought  by  the  same  messengers,  ana
it  would  seem  natural  that,  in  a  matter  so
personal  to  Philemon,  salutations  should  be
confined  to  his  own  family.  The  phrase  is
used  more  than  once  (see  Rom.  xvi.  5;  1
Cor.  xvi.  19,  which  seems  rather  to^  point
the  other  way;  but  especially  0)1.  iv.  15,
"  Nymphas  and  the  Church  which  is  in  his
house,'*  which,  since  it  was  in  Colossa  itself,
Hoems  almost  conclusive  for  that  meaning).
The  Eeeletia  domettiea  was  very  familiar  in
the  apostolic  times.  Theodoret  states  that
the  house  of  Philemon  was  still  pointed  out
us  late  as  the  fifth  century.

Ver.  8.— OnuM  to  yoii,  and  peace.  Tho
secular  formula  of  salutation  was  x^P*^^
(Acts  xxiii.  26);  in  Latin,  multam  oi  j^uri"
mam  saltUem  aut  plenisHmam,  St.  rauFs
formula  was  almost  invariably  as  above,
"  Grace  to  you,  and  peace "  (Item.  i.  7 ;  1
Cor.  i.  y ;  Gal.  i.  3 ;  and  others).  To  Timothy
(1  Tim.  i.  2;  2  Tim.  i.  2)  and  Titus  (i.  4),
**  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace."

Ycr.  4. — I  thank  mj  Ood  alwayi.  We
ought,  therefore,  to  thank  God,  not  only  for
^fts  bestowed  upon  ourselves,  but  also  for
those  bestowed  upon  others.  This  is  an
liabitual  i)lirase  of  St.  Paul  (comp.  Rom.
i.  8;  1  Cor.  i.  4;  Eph.  i.  16;  Phil.  i.  3;
1  Thess.  i.  2 ;  2  Thcss.  i.  3 ;  2  Tim.  i.  3).
**  It  is  to  be  noted  that  for  tho  thing  on
account  of  wliich  he  gives  tlianks,  ho  at
the  same  time  prays"  (Calvin).  For  no
good  work  is  ever  so  complete  in  us  that
it  does  not  need  to  be  **  continued  and
ended  "  in  us  by  God.  Making  mention  of
thee  in  my  prayers.  The  foregoing  remark
again  applies.  Grotius  observes  that  "  we
learn  from  this  that  all  addresses  to  God
may  be  called  prayers  (irpoireux^s)*  even  those
in  which  nothing  is  asked  but  thanks  aro
given."  But  this  is  apparently  not  such  a
case;  tho  petition  which  St.  Paul  ofiered
for  Pliilemon  being  stated  in  ver.  6.  And
thus  Chrysostom  explains  the  passage.
"Always  "  may  be  connected  with  "  1  thank,"
or  with  '*  making  mention,"  preferably  tho
former  (Clirysostom,  Theophylact,  Calvin,
Lightfoot).

Ver.  5. — Hearing  of  thy  love,  and  of  the
faith  .  .  .  saints.  lie  would  hear  of  these
instances  of  Philemon's  faith  and  love  na-
turally through  Epaphras  (see  on  ver.  2).
Refer  "faith"  to  "tho  Lord  Jesus"  and
"love"  to  "all  the  saints"  (a  chiasmusy  or
cross-reference).  Note  that  tho  phrase  is
irpbs  (i.e.  crga,  towards)  rhv  Kvptoy,  but  €ts


({.e.  upon)  Tohs  hyiovs;  perhaps  because
Christ  cannot  now  be  reach^  by  bodilj
efforts,  but  only  (upircd  iowardB  by  the  sod;
while  the  poor  can  actually  be  reached  a^
ministered  unto.  **  Ye  haye  the  poor  al-
ways with  yon,  bat  me  je  have  not  alwaji"
(Matt  xxvi.  11).  All  Christians  are  called
**  saints  "  in  the  Scriptures,  as  £ph.  i.  1,  and
invariably.  What  a  reminder  to  them  of
their  **holy  calling"  (2  Tim.  L  9)1  Meyer
notes,  however,  that  it  is  not  uncommon
with  6t  Paul  to  vary  the  preposition  (Bom.
iii.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  16).

Yer.  G. — Render  thus:  8o  that  the  9am-
mnnity  of  thj  Mth  [with  other  COiristiaiifl,
whom  you  may  be  able  to  serve]  maj  Aaw
itself  in  act,  eausin^  full  aeknowledgmsat
[from  the  world  without]  of  9wwrj  good
work  for  Jesus  Christ  that  is  in  yon  (Be-
vised  Version  is  not  clear  here);  htenJly,
may  become  worlnng.  Not  a  theoretical  or
merely  quiescent  faith.  He  was  to  confm
Christ  before  men  (and  see  Jas.  ii.  22).  **  For
whatever  good  thing  is  in  ns  makes  manifiest
our  faith  "  (Calvin).  In  yon.  Bishop  Words-
worth reads  ii/uy,  •*  us  "  —  the  body  of
Christians,  following  A,  C,  D,  £,  K,  L,  wi^
many  Fathers  and  versions.

Ver.  7.— We  have  great  joy  and  eonsols-
tion.  The  preferable  reading  is,  as  in  A,
C,  F,  G,  N,  and  Revised  Version,  I  had
much  joy  and  comfort  (see  ver.  5).  •*  Plenins
inculcat  et  edooet,  quare  dixerit,  gratiss
ago,"  etc.  (Jerome).  The  bowels  of  ths
saints;  hearts  (Revised  Version).  Either
(1)  their  bodily  wants,  the  cravings  of  their
hunger;  or  (2)  their  hearts  and  affections,
supplied  and  natisficd  by  the  good  deeds  of
Pliilemon.  This  is  another  peculiarly  Pan-
line  expression  (see  2  Cor.  vi.  12 ;  vii.  15—
tliese  two  are  very  similarly  used  in  ver?.
7,  12,  20— and  three  other  places).  **  To
refresh  the  hoicels  is  (in  Paul)  to  be  taken
as  meaning  a  lightening  of  troubles,  so  that
they  may  rest  with  minds  free  from  all  sor-
row and  annoyance"  (Calvin).  Brother.
How  persuasively  the  sentence  is  turned!
An  old  commentator  remarks,  '*  Paul  does
not  yet  como  to  liis  request,  but  prepares
and  softens  beforehand  tho  mind  of  Phile-
mon "  (Scipio  Gentilis).  This  course  of
proceeding  is  exactly  what  Quintilian  pre-
scribes to  an  advocate,  "  His  velut  fomentis,
si  quid  erit  asperum,  prtemolliemus,  quo
fftcilius  aures  judicum  admittant"  (*De
lustitut.  Oral.,*  iv.  8).

Ver.  8. — Render:  Although  I  have  abon-
dant  freedom  [boldness,  or  even  licence]  in
Christ  to  eigoin  upon  thee  that  which  is
fitting.  It  was  only  in  Christy  and  by  his
authority  as  an  apostle,  that  he  could  claim
to  come  between  a  slave  and  his  master.
Secular  warrant  for  doing  so  he  had  none.
Such  authority  and  licence,  however,  he


1—25.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


would  not  use  on  this  occasion.  He  prefera
to  rely  wholly  on  the  respect  and  personal
attachment  felt  towards  him  by  Philemon,
for  Uie  granting  of  his  request,  which  ho
now  proceeds  to  state.

Yer.  9. — ^Being  sueli  a  one  ai  Paul  the
aged ;  a  veteran.  Theodoret  comments  thus :
"  For  he  who  hears  Paul,  hears  the  preacher
of  the  whole  world,  the  traverser  of  land
and  sea,  the  chosen  vessel,  and  other  things
besides  he  is.  ...  He  adds  also  '  the  aged,'
showing  the  grey  hairs  which  have  grown
during  his  labours."  "Non  setatem,  sed
offlcium  "  (Calvin).  Presbutes  may  mean  "  an
ambassador" — "the  ambassador  of  Christ
Jesus,  and  now  also  his  prisoner,"  as  in
Eph.  vi.  20  (and  see  iii.  1  and  iv.  1  of  the
same  Epistle.  A  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ ;  i.e.
for  his  cause.  The  apostle  was  in  custody
at  Rome,  owing  to  a  long  suspension  of  his
trial,  for  causes  not  known  to  us.  **  Have
regard  for  Paul ;  have  regard  for  my  bonds,
which  I  wear  as  a  preacher  of  the  truth  "
(Theodoret).  "Great  reverence  is  due  to
those  who  endure  sufferings  for  the  most
honourable  causes  "  (Grotius).

Yer.  10. — I  bese6<di  thee  for  my  son  .  .  •
Onesimna;  m^  c/a'/d  (Revised  Ycrsion).  The
name  of  Onesimus  could  not  have  been  a
pleasing  one  in  the  ears  of  Philemon.  Note
with  what  caution  and  almost  timidity  it  is
at  length  introduced.  He  does  not  interpose
for  the  ingrate  with  apostolic  dignity,  but
pleads  for  him  with  fatherly'  love.  He  puts
himself  side  by  side  with  him,  and  calls  him
his  Mm.  Some  of  the  old  commentators  con-
clude, from  Col.  iv.  9,  that  Onesimus  was  a
native  of  Coloss8B,and  thence  discuss  whether
ho  could  have  been  a  slave  bom  in  Phile-
mon's house  of  a  slave-mother,  or  whether
he  was  sold  in  his  youth  by  his  father — a
custom  so  common  to  the  Phrygians  (as  to
the  Circassians  in  later  times)  as  to  have
been  noticed  by  Cicero.

Yer.  11. — ^Who  was  aforetime  nnprofitable
...  to  me.  The  play  upon  words  seems
unmistakable,  and  is  peculiarly  Pauline.
Onesimus  means  "  useful,"  or  "  profitable ;  '*
&XPVff^osy "  unprofitable,"  and  tiixpv<f"ros  is
emphatic,  '*  very  profitable."  **  Useful  he  is
named,  but  in  time  past  he  was  (I  confess
•it)  not  useful,  but  useless;  in  future,  how-
over,  he  will  be  of  great  use  to  us  both."
Compare  with  this  the  corresponding  pas-
sage of  Pliny's  *  Letter  to  Sabinianus,'  given
in  the  Introduction.  **  Unprofitable  "  is  a
-figure  of  speech,  a  euphemism^  for  "useless
and  even  injurious.''  St.  Paul  makes  the
best  of  Onesimus's  fault  that  it  will  in  justice
allow.  But  an  old  commentator  says  bluntly
that  Onesimus  was  "  damnosus  fug&  et  furto."
How  could  he  have  been,  in  his  unconverted
state,  otherwise  than  "  unprofitable  "  to  his
master?    **Ohm  paganus,"  says  2t  Lapidci


**jam    Christianus;    olim    fur,  jam  fidelis
servus ;  olim  profug^s,  jam  redux."

Yer.  12.— Whom  I  sent  back  [to  thee,
according  to  A,  C,  D*,  E,  N*]  (aorist  for
present);  but  the  decision  reflects  the
struggle.  It  had  not  been  altogether  easy
for  the  apostle  to  part  with  the  youth,  whom
he  might  not  see  again.  The  whole  £2pistle
is  full  of  this  strong  and  yearning  affection.
Thon  therefore  receive  him.  Do  thou  also
act  as  becomes  a  Christian;  receive  him
as  my  son.  "  Wonderfully  efficacious  this
method  for  appeasing  the  anger  of  Phile-
mon I  For  he  was  not  able  to  rage  or  to
do  anything  harshly  against  one  whom  Paul
had  called  his  own  bowels  "  (Estius).  A,  F,
G,  and  K*  omit  "  receive,"  as  also  Tischen-
dorf.    The  Revised  Yersion  omits  this  clause.

Yer.  13.— I  was  wishing ;  I  icould  fain
have  kept  (Revised  Yersion).  The  story
tclld  itself  if  we  read  between  the  lines.
What  steadfast  adherence  to  principle  on  the
part  of  the  apostle,  when  the  help  of  Onesi-
mus would  liave  been  so  welcome  to  him  in
his  weak  health,  and  his  position  as  a  prisoner !
Philemon  could  hardly  fail  to  think  more
favourably  of  Onesimus,  when  he  saw  how
much  importance  the  apostle  attached  to
his  services.  In  the  bonds  of  the  gospeL
"  Which  I  am  enduring  for  the  sake  of  the
gospel "  (see  ver.  9) — a  variation  of  phrase
from  ver.  9  (and  cf.  our  Lord's  words,  Mark
viii.  35;  x.  29).

Yer.  14.— But  without  thy  mind  I  would
do  nothing.  The  "would"  of  ver.  13  is
4$ov\6nritf;  the  "would"  here  is  ii04\ria-a.
The  former  denoted  natural  but  indetermi-
nate impulse ;  the  latter  deliberate  conclu-
sion of  the  will  (cf.  Rom.  vii.  15, 16).  Mi2id ;
t,e.  knowledge  and  decision.  "  Why  was  ho
unwilling?  For  many  causes.  (1)  Because
grave  penalties  were  denounced  by  Roman
law  upon  those  who  received  or  retained
fugitive  slaves.  (2)  That  he  might  not
seem  to  keep  back  something  which  was
due  to  Philemon,  perhaps  to  his  injury ;  of
which,  perhaps,  Philemon  might  have  com-
plained. (3)  Because  Onesimus  himself
chose  to  go  back,  in  order  that  he  might
show  conclusively  that  he  had  not  embraced
the  Christian  religion  that  he  might  with-
draw himself  from  the  power  of  his  lawful
lord.  (4)  That  the  gospel  might  not  be  by
this  means  slandered,  as  if  under  the  pre-
text of  it  slaves  might  withdraw  themselves
with  impunity  from  their  lords"  (Estius  and
others).  Thy  benefit — goodness  (Revised
Yersion) — as  it  were  of  necessity,  but  will-
ingly. Ptiilemon  would  not  really  have
had  the  choice  of  granting  or  refusing  g^veo
to  him,  had  St.  Paul  kept  Onesimus  still  at
Rome,  and  merely  written  to  inform  him  of
the  fact.  His  consent  might  then  fairly  have
been  said  to  be  extorted^  not  freely  given.


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


[1—25.


This  latter  word  is  an  &«a|  Xry^iMvop
(unique  phrase)  bo  far  as  the  New  Testa-
ment is  concerned,  though  it  is  found  in
Numb.  XY.  3  of  tho  LXX.,  as  in  Xenophon
and  other  classical  writers.  In  Heb.  x.  26
and  1  Pet.  v.  2  tho  adverb  kKovci^t  is  found.

Ver.  15. — ^Therefore;  for  this  purpose
(final  cause).  Departed  for  a  season.  He
was  therefore  parted  from  thee  for  a  time
(Royised  Version).  For  ever ;  everlastingly
(accusative,  not  an  adverb).  The  relation
of  master  and  slave  would  have  been  in  any
case,  and  would  still  be,  terminated  by  death.
But  it  was  now  replaced  by  a  new  relation
of  Christian  brotherhood,  which  would  be
permanent — a  great  advantage.  So  Calvin,
Grotius,  and  many  others.  Meyer's  objec-
tion does  not  seem  of  much  weight  (compare
the  Ferpdua  maneipia  of  £iod.  xxi  6;
Deut  XV.  17).  Baur  thinks  that  in  this
verse  he  has  reached  the  core  of  the  Epistle —
the  ethical  truth  which  it  seeks  to  embody
(but  see  Introduction  :  **  Authenticity  and
Characteristics  ").

Ver.  16. — Hot  now  ai  a  servant,  but  above
a  servant,  a  brother  beloved.  So  great  a
difference  had    his  Christian  calling  and

Erofcssion  made  to  him  and  to  others.  Both
I  the  flesh  and  in  the  Lord.  A  hyrieron
proteron.  The  apostle  is  pleading  on  behalf
of  Oncsimus  this  new  bond  of  Christian
relationship,  which  was  in  the  Lord,  that  it
should  bring  about  a  renewed  fulness  of
personal  relation.  In  the  fleth,  because  **  in
tho  Lord."

Ver.  17. — If  then  count  me  therefore  a
partner ;  if  Viou  holdest  me  for  a  friend — by
our  friendship  I  entreat  this.  The  strongest
form  of  entreaty  possible  to  bo  used.  Koi-
ywyia  in  Acts  ii.  42  refers  to  tho  Holy
Communion,  and  in  1  Cor.  x.  16 — 21  par-
takers of  it  are  plainly  called  by  implication
KoiyoMfol — partahtrSj  or,  as  we  should  say,
"communicants."  But  here  the  sense  is
apparently  as  above ;  literally,  a  partner.

Ver.  18.— [But]  if  he  hath  wronged  thee
[at  all].  It  would  have  been  needlessly
irritating  to  Philemon  to  pro  into  the  details
of  Onesimus*8  offences.  No  doubt  St.  Paul
had  had  an  account  of  them  from  tho  re-
pentant youth,  but  ho  had  far  too  much
tact  to  occupy  himself  and  Philemon  in  the
discussion  of  details.  The  hypothetic  form
avoids  the  whole  of  these.  It  suffices  that
he  assumes  the  responsibility  of  repayment.
Owes  thee  anything.  As  a  matter  of  moral
right  at  the  bar  of  conscience.  For  in  a
secular  court  tho  slave  could  be  neither
debtor  nor  creditor^  properly  speaking,  as
against  his  master.  This  offence  was  pro-
bably embezzlement  or  purloining  while  in
service.  A,  C,  D*,  F,  G,  K,  read  {ellogd),
reckon  it  to  me.

Ver.  19. — I  Paul  have  written— im'^  it


(Revised  Version) — ^with  mj  own  hand,  I  will
repay  it.  Thus  St  Paul  took  upon  himself
legally  the  repayment  of  the  debt  **  Priod-
bus  verbis  proprie  oautio  [a  bail  or  seoarity]
continetur:  his  antem  oonsittnti  obligatiix
Hoc  Latin^  dioitur  pecimiam  oonatituen:
de  quo  titulns  est  in  bigestis  CAvoScYc^fci)
diount  Gnecl"  (Scipio  GentUia).  Albeit  I
do  not  say  to  thae,  etc  ;  **•  though  I  do  not
remind  thee  [while  ao  aayiDg]  that  tboa
owest  even  thyself  to  me  I  '*  Philemon  owed
to  the  apostle  that  debt  of  which  the  obfi.
gation  outweighed  every  other — the  help  by
which  he  had  been  led  oat  of  spiritoal
darkness  and  brought  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth.  St  Paul  was  (as  we  must  con-
clude from  this  allusion)  the  '*  spiritual
father"  of  Philemon — a  phrase  he  himself
uses  in  1  Cor.  iv.  15.

Ver.  20. — ^Tea,  indeed,  brother,  let  ne
have  Joy  of  thee.  This  word  (irol^r)  is
from  the  same  root  as  the  word  ^  Onesimas,''
and  the  apostle,  more  mia,  relaxing  into  his
friendly  familiar  manner  after  the  grave
and  touching  language  of  the  loat  few  veises,
plays  upon  the  word.  Let  me  have  pn^
of  thee — ^let  me  have  Onesimus  of  thee.  In
the  Lord  (comp.  1  Cor.  x.  81).  The  phnse
is  twice  repeated  in  this  vcrae,  and  is  very
characteristic  of  St.  PauL  But  A,  C,  D%
F,  6,  L  read  en  Christo  in  the  second  daose.
K  has  been  altered,  x»  ^or  km,  seeund, ;  •'re-
fresh my  heart  in  Christ "  (Bevised  Veisbn).

Ver.  21.— I  wrote  nnto  thee ;  write  (Be-
vised Version ;  see  ver.  19),  or  perhaps  re-
ferring back,  as  in  ver.  19,  to  the  request  is
ver.  17.  The  strong,  fervid,  and  repeated
appeals  of  the  apostle  had  not  been  caused
by  distrust  of  Philemon,  nor  of  their  own
efficacy,  but  were  the  natural  outcome  of
the  strong  interest  he  felt  in  the  case  of
Onesimus,  and  the  desire  he  felt  to  replace
him  in  the  favour  of  his  master;  partly
also,  perhaps,  to  the  warmth  and  fervour  of
his  natural  character,  which  uttered  itself
involuntarily  in  forcible  expressions.

Ver.  22.— Lodging.  There  was  this  one
additional  inducement  that  could  be  brought
to  bear  upon  the  mind  of  Philemon,  vii.
the  expectation  of  speedily  seeing  him  in
person,  and  this,  in  conclusion,  he  uses.
*'I  do  not  think  that  the  apostle  was  a>
rich  or  encumbered  with  such  great  pack-
ages that  he  needed  a  lodging  prepared
beforehand,  and  was  not  content  with  a
narrow  dwelling-place,  but  thought  the  most
spacious  houses  scanty  for  tho  accomm<^
dation  of  his  small  body ;  but  that,  while
Philemon  was  expecting  [the  apoetle]  to  come
to  him,  he  would  the  more  do  what  he  had
requested "  (Jerome).  Meyer  makes  much
of  the  improbability  that  St  Paul,  starting
from  Rome,  should  bespeak  a  lodging  in
Colo68».    Yet  he  suggests  that  it  was  per-


1—25.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


5


fectlj  natural  that,  starting  from  Csssarea,
the  apostle  should  take  Colossx  on  the  road
to  Borne,  But  the  one  seems  almost  as  pro-
bable as  the  other.  The  apostle,  on  his
release,  had,  so  far  as  we  know,  no  definite
plans ;  the  cities  of  Asia  Minor  were  familiar
to  him,  and  he  would  naturally  prepare  to
go  wherever  the  first  pressing  occasion,  that
of  Onesimus,  called  him.  K  reads  &<nr(£|crai,
*«  salutes."

Vers.  23,  24.— Salute.  The  salutations
correspond  generally  to  those  with  which
the  Epistle  to  the  Golossians  closes,  but
they  are  fuller,  as  is  natural,  in  the  longer
Epistle.    The  order  is  in —


Colossiaru :

Philemon :

Tychicus
Onesimus

Epaphras
Marcus

Aristarchus

Aristarchus

Marcus

Demas

Jesus  Justus

Lucas

Epaphras
Lucas

Dcmns

My  fellow-prisoner.    The  word  occurs  else-
where only  in  Bom.  xvi.  7,  besides  the  paral-


lel passage  in  Col.  iv.  10.  As  to  Epaphras,
see  above.  Marens,  haviug  once  forsaken
the  apostle  (Acts  xiii.  13 ;  xv.  37 — 39),  had
now  returned,  and  was  with  him  in  Rome.
Aristarohns  was  **  a  Macedonian  of  Thessa-
lonica,"  and  had  accompanied  St.  Paul  in
his  memorable  voyage  to  liome  (Acts  xxvii.
2).  Demas  was  now  the  "co-worker"  of
the  apostle  at  Rome,  but  at  a  later  period
he  had  departed  unto  Thessalonica  (2  Tim.
iv.  10),  and  we  know  nothins:  of  his  subse-
quent history.  Tradition  (Epiph.,  'HsBr.,'
xli.  6)  relates  that  he  also  apostatized  from
Christianity ;  but  the  apostle*s  phrase,  though
a  strong  one,  does  not  necessarily  mean  this.
Lncas  (see  2  Cor.  viii.  18).

Yer.  25. — The  grace.  A  omits  &^^»'.
Theodoret  has  appended  the  following  to
his  commentary:  "It  is  fitting  that  tlioso
who  have  obtained  the  privilege  of  handing
on  the  holy  doctrine  should  so  teach  ser-
vants to  submit  themselves  to  their  lords,
that  through  all  things  Jesus  Christ  may  be
praised,  to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the
most  Holy  Spirit  belong  glory  and  greatness
now  and  always  and  for  ever.    Amen."


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 3. —  'Jlie  hallowing  of  the  ordinary  intercourse  of  life.  The  salutatioji.
Philemon's  house  had  become  a  church,  and  the  Church  was  in  his  house ;  thereby  the
household  was  made  holy.  Every  household  should  likewise  be  made  holy  by  the
Christian  profession  and  practice  of  its  heads — the  master  and  mistress.  A  profession
of  religion  alone  will  not  have  this  effect ;  there  must  be  the  daily  practice  of  self-
restraint,  forbearance,  Christian  charity,  and  mutual  love.  Religion  not  wholly  or
chiefly  an  intellectual  or  doctrinal  belief,  though  it  is  founded  upon  historical  facts
and  shaped  by  the  truths  of  the  Creed.  It  is  essentially  pi-actical ;  belief  issuing  in
action—"  faith  which  worketh  by  love  "  (Cxal.  v.  6  ;  Jas.  ii.  20—22).

I.   No   KIND  OF  INTERCOURSE  BETWEEN   CHRISTIANS  BUT    18  CAPABLE   OF  BEING  THUS

HALLOWED.  As  e.g,  that  arising  from  the  relations  of  hwhand  and  wife  (Eph.  v.
25 — 31 ;  Titus  ii.  4) ;  of  parents  and  children  (Eph.  vi.  1 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  4) ;  of  masters
and  servants  (Eph.  vi.  5^9 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  21,  22) ;  of  citizens  hound  to  obey  the  govern-'
ing  power  of  the  state  in  all  things  lawful  (1  Pet.  ii.  13, 14) ;  of  friends  and  equals
(John  xiii.  34 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13) ;  of  rich  persons  and  poor  persons,  unequal  in  worldly
station,  but  brethren,  nothing  less  than  brethren,  as  they  can  bo  nothing  more,  in
Christ  (Jas.  iL  G— 9).

II.  How  THESE  RELATIONS  ABE  TO  BE  HALLOWED.  1.  Speaking  generally,  by  the
practice  of  religious  principles.  But  specifically,  by  restraining  the  natural  selfishness
of  human  hearts.  Love  draws  people  together ;  selfishness  separates  them — ^isolates
each  in  the  pursuing  of  his  own  objects :  **  All  seek  their  own,  and  not  the  things  which
are  Jesus  Christ's."  2.  By  the  endeavour  to  restrain  the  tongue  from  speaking  evil
(Ps.  xxxiv.  13).  Angry  words,  retorts  reckless  of  truth  and  only  meant  to  wound  tho
hearer,  scandal,  angry  and  inconsiderate  words  to  dependents, — what  frequent  occasions
of  sin  are  these  I  The  tongue  is  the  great  medium  of  social  intercourse,  and  it  must
be  brought  under  control,  if  that  is  to  be  hallowed  (Jas.  iii.  5,  6).  3.  The  family
relation  is  haHUoioed  especially  by  family  prayer,  Grod  dwells  in  an  especial  manner
in  the  homes  where  he  has  been  thus  invoked  by  tho  family  as  a  whole.  Family
prayer  at  once  the  expression  of  the  Christian  chai-acter  and  the  means  of  preserving
It  and  making  it  purer.

rUILKMON.  c


C  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25.

Yer.  3. — Hie  Christian  family.  The  family  of  Philemon  was  Christian,  doubtles,
both  in  profession  and  practice.  Many  families  at  the  preseot  day  are  Christian  in
profession,  but  not  in  practice.  The  family  really  Christiaa  may  be  known  (like
the  individual)  by  its  fruits  (Matt.  vii.  20).

J.  In  it  God*8  Naue  is  honoured.  He  is  habitually  regarded  and  spoken  of
as  the  Qiver  of  all  the  family  happiness,  and  of  whatever  measure  of  prosperity  it
enjoys.  The  parents  have  received  from  him  their  children  as  a  charge  to  be  broaj;ht
np  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.'*  Children  recognize  without  hesits-
tion  the  duty  of  obedience  as  paramount  to  all  self-pleasing  (Eph.  tL  1).

II.  In  it,  therefore,  the  Law  of  God  is  beooqnizso  as  ths  guide  of  life
by  both  parents  and  children.

III.  In  it  (that  is,  by  its  members)  the  fubuo  obsebvakcrs  of  rkuoion  ah
DILIGENTLY  KEPT.  The  hohits  of  the  household  are  so  arranged  as  not  to  put  unneces-
sary hindrance  in  the  way  of  either  the  family  or  servants  attending  public  worship
at  the  proper  times.  Unnecessary  labour  on  Sunday  is  not  required,  nor  eren
permitted.

IV.  In  it,  fubthebhoue,  God  is  willinoly  ektbusted  with  its  destikibs.  "In
everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made
known  unto  6od  "  (Phil.  iv.  6),  and,  as  the  correlative  of  this, "  be  careful  for  nothing ; "
that  is,  anxious  and  distressed  about  it.  These  are  the  rules  which  have  been  £>aod
of  sovereign  power  in  the  Christian  family.

y.  As  the  law  of  God  is  in  it  the  restraining  rule,  so  the  IjOve  of  God  n  the
INSPIBINO  MOTIVE,  "  FoUowers  of  God,  as  dear  children  "  (Eph.  v.  1),  not  performing  the
mechanical  and  enforced  obedience  of  the  slave,  nor  even  merely  the  habitual  obedi-
ence which  can  be  instilled  by  education  and  training ;  but  the  free,  unforced^  williog,
elastic  service  which  is  prompted  by  the  love  of  a  child.

VI.  Lastly,  in  the  Christian  family  charity  is  taught  by  precept  and  bt
example.  The  voice  of  slander  is  not  heard  in  it.  The  elders  are  not  ^  weary  in  well-
doing," and  the  younger  leam  (I  John  iii.  17)  that  to  help  those  who  have  need  is  to
have  something  of  the  likeness  of  God,  and  to  act  under  the  direction  of  God's  good
Spirit.

Vers.  4,  5. — 77ie  constituent  parts  of  acceptable  prayer:  thanksgiving^  tntercessicn,
personal  petitions,  1.  An  example  of  these  here,  incidentally  given,  not  purposely,  i'
St.  Paul's  practice  with  regard  to  Philemon.  He  was  not  familiarly  known  to  th'*
apostle.  Perhaps  it  was  with  a  certain  surprise  he  learned  that  the  great  apostl'
habitually  "  made  mention  of  him  "  in  his  prayers.  In  like  manner,  many  Christians
are  being  heli)ed,  without  their  own  knowledge,  by  the  prayers  of  others.  The  apostle'^
example  to  he  followed,  2.  Ttianksgiving  a  necessary  part  of  prayer,  *'  I  thank  my
God."  If  this  be  omitted,  we  are  ungrateful,  and  so  our  devotion  will  not  be  acceptable
to  God.  We  must  thank  God  for  past  mercies  bestowed  upon  us  and  upon  others.
Our  service  is  not  really  devotion  without  this,  but  the  reverse.  A  \vant  of  dut^
towards  God  therefore]  a  sin  (Ps.  cix.  7).  3.  Intercession  for  others.  ''Making  men-
tion of  thee  always  in  my  prayers."  This  the  duty  thrown  upon  us  by  our  Christian
fellowship.  In  this  the  "communion  of  saints"  is  shown  forth.  It  is  not  to  be  con-
fined to  our  immediate  connections  and  friends.  Philemon  was  not  intimately  known
to  St.  Paul,  yet  he  was  remembered  by  him.  Prayer  without  intercession  is  scljid,
and  therefore  unacceptable  to  God.  It  may  be  that  their  too  manifest  selfishness
of  tone  is  the  reason  that  many  of  our  prayers  do  not  obtain  from  God  the  answer  they
crave  (Isa.  i.  15).  It  ought  always  to  embrace  the  whole  Church  of  Christ,  not  merely
that  part  of  it  in  Avhich  we  are  immediately  interested.  This  w^ould  have  a  reflex
action  upon  ourselves,  and  would  tend  towards  eventual  union  amonc;  us ;  for  when
the  sympathies  of  the  heart  are  wide,  the  sj'mpathies  of  the  intelicct  will  haidly
remain  narrow.  4.  Petitions  for  our  personal  needs  are  never  likely  to  be  absent  from
our  prayers.  The  danger  will  be  that  they  should  form  too  large  a  part  of  them.
They  need  to  be  restrained  and  regulated,  not  indulged.  As  the  Christian  grows  in
saintliness,  his  prayers  for  self  will  come  to  be  more  and  more  for  spiritual  blessings
instead  of  temporal.  At  length  they  will  be  merged  in  the  comprehensive  i^etition  tliai
God's  will  may  be  done  in  the  petitioner,  and  his  Name  glorified.    5.  To  cease  analysis,


1—25.1  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.


and  take  a  complete  view  of  prayer,  we  find  it  to  sum  up  in  itself  all  the  sentiments
which  the  human  soul  should  entertain  towards  its  Divine  Creator.

**  Prayer  is  the  soul's  sincere  desire,
Uttered  or  uneipressed."

Therefore  gratitude,  confidence,  afifection,  hope,  anxiety  for  others  or  for  ourselves,
penitence,  should  all  in  their  degree  enter  into  our  prayers.  But  none  of  these  should
monopolize  them.

Vers.  5,  6. — Man  glorifying  Ood.  Man  is  created  for  God's  glory,  and  finds  the
highest  end  of  his  being,  therefore,  in  glorifying  him.  Four  ways  may  be  dis-
tinguished in  which  he  does  this.

I.  The  way  of  good  deeds  done  in  his  strength,  which  cause  others  to  glorify
him.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and
glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven "  (Matt.  v.  16).  This  is  the  mode  referred
to  here :  "  That  thy  faith  may  become  efifectual  by  the  acknowledging  of  every  good
thing  which  is  in  you."  The  mutual  benevolence  of  Christians  was  thus  to  God's  glory,
and  tended  to  bring  others  into  the  fold.

II.  The  way  of  worship — an  ancient,  universal,  and  proper  way.  Acts  of  worship
are  directed  to  God.  That  they  may  be  really  to  his  glory,  they  must  be  for  God ;
that  is,  he  must  be,  not  their  object  merely,  but  their  end  (Manton).  As  far  as
secondary  motives  prevail  in  our  worship,  so  far  it  is  for  those  motives,  and  not  purely
to  God's  glory.  The  sole  element  to  be  reckoned  in  worship  is  the  earnestness,  piety,
and  sincerity  of  the  worshipper.  God  is  no  more  glorified  of  necessity  by  great  outward
beauty  and  splendour ;  he  is  no  less  glorified  by  the  barest  simplicity,  if  the  devotion
be  equal.  The  accessories  of  worship  are  for  man's  help,  and  to  assist  man's  feeble  and
purblind  view  of  eternal  realities ;  and  are  not  otherwise  to  God's  glory  than  as  they
are  fit  vehicles  of  man's  devotion.

III.  I'hb  third  way  of  obedience.  Man  glorifies  God  when  he  becomes  that
which  GK)d  intended  him  to  be.  He  realizes  by  obedience  the  thought  of  God  when  he
said,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image."  This  was  lost  through  the  sin  of  Adam,  and
it  is  in  process  of  restoration  through  the  obedience  of  Christ,  in  individual  Christians
as  they  succesdvely  live  upon  the  earth.

IV.  God  is  best  glorified,  therefore,  by  the  obedience  of  the  soul  and
life.  Hooker  says,  *' Should  you  erect  to  him  a  temple  more  magnificent  than
Solomon's,  and  load  his  altars  with  hecatombs  of  sacrifices,  and  make  it  perpetually
riug  with  psalms  and  resounding  choirs  of  hallelujahs,  it  would  not  be  comparably
80  great  an  honour  to  him  as  to  convert  your  own  souls  into  living  temples,  and  make
them  the  habitations  of  his  glory  and  prfection.  For  he  values  no  sacrifices  like  that
of  an  obedient  will,  delights  in  no  choir  like  that  of  pure  and  heavenly  affections,  nor
bath  he  in  all  his  creation  an  ensign  of  honour  so  truly  worthy  of  him  as  that  of  a
Divine  and  God-like  soul,  a  soul  that  reflects  his  image,  and  shines  back  his  own  glory
upon  him."

Vers.  8 — 10. — The  religion  of  Christ  a  defence  of  social  order,  not  a  disturbing  force.
There  have  been  religions  which  have  been  simply  forces  of  destruction.  Moham-
medanism, when  it  was  first  preached,  and  even  to  this  day,  as  far  as  its  power  extends,
has  the  Koran  in  one  hand  and  the  scimitar  in  the  other,  and  ofiers  but  the  alternatives
of  conversion,  slavery,  or  death.  The  actors  in  the  French  Revolution  of  1789  strove
to  spread  their  new  gospel  of  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  at  the  point  of  the  sword.
Communism  in  1870,  and  Nihilism  since,  make  war  upon  all  that  is  old,  and  desire  to
destroy  all  existing  social  organizations  to  make  room  for  their  own  schemes.  These
are  destructive  forces  in  human  nature,  and  nothing  more.

L  The  religion  of  Christ  is  not  itself  a  secular  polity  or  form  of
GOVERNMENT.  It  does  uot,  therefore,  seek  to  uproot  the  social  order  which  exists
in  any  country.  It,  indeed,  acts  upon  the  individuals  which  compose  the  nation,  and
so  in  course  of  time  transforms //*o;»  within  the  institutions  of  the  country.  But  it
does  not  attack  them  from  without ;  and  therefore  it  is  compatible  with  any  form  of
government.


8  THE  EPISTLE  TO   PHILEMON.  [1—25.


II.  It  exercises  ko  gohpulsort  power,  no  pnTsicAL  FORCE.  It  works  through  the
tnll  of  the  pcrtton  addressed,  and  UadSy  hut  does  not  compel.  That  is  the  characteristic
method  of  Christianity.  Thus  St.  Paul  would  not  force  the  will  of  Philemon.  His
Apostolic  authority  would  have  warranted  his  speaking  in  a  tone  of  command :  ^  I  might
he  much  hold  in  Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  convenient."  But  he  preferred
to  persuade :  **  For  love's  sake  I  rather  heseech  thee."

III.  The  Christian  religion,  therefore,  hakes  good  cttizenb.  "Pear  God.
Honour  the  king"  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  It  expressly  recognizes  the  ruling  powers  de  /ado
as  entitled  to  ohedience,  and  as  the  representatives  of  the  Divine  principle  of  authoiitj
and  government  (1  Pet.  ii.  13) ;  as  having  the  right,  therefore,  to  be  legally  obeyeiL
It  inculcates  quiet  and  peaceful  conduct,  harmless,  law-ahiding,  observant  to  perfonn
contracts  and  ohIi<ratioDS  (1  Thess.  iv.  11, 12),  and  directs  each  to  be  careful  of  the
rights  of  others  (1  Thess.  v.  15 ;  Phil.  ii.  4).  These  are  the  characteristics  of  its  tne
followers ;  and  in  all  its  system  it  keeps  in  mind  the  great  objects  of  promoting  peace
and  unity,  of  qualifying  its  people  by  the  elevation  of  their  personal  characters  for  the
fullest  measure  of  liberty,  and  at  length  of  eternal  happiness.  It  is  the  surest  defence
of  nations.

Ver.  11. — Ungodly  men  are  unprofitable  to  themselves  and  to  others,  I.  Is  set,
THEN,  PROFITABLE  TO  THE  SINNER  ?  Whether  the  pleasures  of  sense  or  the  posse^cHis
nnd  honours  of  the  world  have  prompted  him  to  sin,  it  will  be  found  that  they  alike
issue  in  vanity  and  vexation.  Should  the  desires  not  be  satisfied,  then  the  discontented
appetite  thirsts  for  more,  and  renders  the  man  unhappy.  If  it  &e  satisfied,  yet  it  is  a
satisfaction  of  weariness,  not  contentment  (Rom.  vi.  21),  and  there  is  a  sting  of  shame
in  the  recollection  of  such  pleasures.

II.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Rom.  vL  23)— a  penalty  which  must  neces-
sarily outweigh  any  apparent  profit  or  pleasure  arising  from  sin,  however  great  it  can
1)0  supposed  to  be.  "What  shall  a  man  give  [or,  *  receive']  in  eschange  for  his  soul?"
(Mark  viii.  36,  37).  Sin  were  unprofitable  if  we  should  only  consider  the  ultimate
consequences  of  exhaustion  and  satiety  which  it  has  on  the  sinner.  When  the  judg-
ment of  God  is  taken  into  account,  it  becomes  absolute  and  manifest  folly.  Two  facts
to  bo  borne  in  mind  :  (1)  man  is  accountable  for  what  he  does ;  and  (2)  he  has  an  immor-
tality of  future  existence  in  which  to  bear  the  penal  consequences  of  his  doings.  Gould
the  sinner  have  but  a  sinc;le  sight  of  the  awful  fires  of  hell,  he  could  never  a<min  doubt
whether  the  sin  which  leads  men  thither  were  in  any  sense  of  the  word  profitabU  to
any  human  being.

III.  Is  THE  SINNER,  THEN,  PROFITABLE  TOOTHERS?  He  18  rendered  unprofitable  to
others  in  so  far  as  ho  is  given  up  into  the  power  of  sin.  Onesimus  had  been  "  unprofit-
able" (ver.  11)  in  time  past  to  Philemon,  because,  imder  the  influence  of  sinful  motlTes
(we  do  not  know  of  what  precise  kind),  he  had  sought  dishonestly  his  own  interest,  cot
his  master's.  The  dishonest  person  will  cheat  his  master  or  employer;  the  deceitful
person  will  deceive  others;  and  they  are  thus  **  unprofitable"  in  various  ways  to  thos*
who  are  brought  into  communication  with  them.  Onesimus  had  become  Christian,  and
hia  unprofitableness  had  disappeared.  He  was  transformed  by  the  grace  of  Grod.  Self-
scoking,  dishonesty,  untruthfulness,  need  not  thenceforth  be  looked  for  from  him
(although  these  were  the  usual  vices  of  the  slave).  He  wotdd  be  able  to  be  trusted,  and
therefore  he  was  profitable.  See  the  influence  of  Christian  motives.  He  would  be
faithful  to  Philemon  as  to  others,  kind,  preferring  others  to  himself  (Phil,  ii,  3,  4).

Ver.  15. — Treasures  in  heaven.  I.  Christians  have  the  promise,  not  oxly  or  the
i-iKE  that  now  is,  but  OF  THAT  WHICH  IS  TO  cx)ME.  (1  Tim.  iv.  8.)  Philemon  had  had
before  a  legal  property  in  Onesimus,  which  was,  however,  temporary,  because  it  neces-
sarily ended  at  latest  with  the  life  of  either  man.  But  in  gaining  the  tie  of  Christian
fellowship  with  him,  he  obtained  an  interest  in  him  which  would  endure  permanently;
and  so  Philemon  had,  in  a  sense,  "  received  him  for  ever."

II.  This  is  therefore  a  typical  instance.  The  world  has  only  temywral  and
temporary  treasures  to  offer ;  religion  has  eternal  and  abiding  ones.  "  The  thin<^  that
are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  Avhich  are  not  seen  are  eternal"  (2  Cor.  iv.  18);
the  one  has  time  for  its  sphere  of  action,  and  is  bounded  by  time ;  the  other  has  eternity.


1-25.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  PniLEMON.


in.   SpIBITUAL  GUTS  AND   BLESSINGS  ABE   BEGUN   IN  THIS  WOBLD,   but  wiU  not  be

fully  possessed  by  the  blessed  until  after  the  final  judgment.  They  are  an  inheritance —
**  treasures  in  heaven."  The  Christian,  as  he  "  grows  in  grace,"  possesses  more  and
more  completely :  1.  Love  and  subjection  towards  God,  2.  Love,  sympathy,  and  for-
giveness towards  his  neighbour.  3.  Watchfulness  and  self-control  over  himself.  The
apostle  enumerates  these  spiritual  blessings  without  classification  (Gral.  v.  23),  as  '*  love,
joy,  peace,  long-sufiering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance."  The
sum  and  substance  and  crown  of  them  all  is  righteousness — an  approximation,  by  the
transforming  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  to  the  ideal  of  perfect  manhood ;  that  is,
•*  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  (see  Eph.  iv.  13).  And  this
righteousness  prepares  the  soul  for  the  presence  of  God  (Luke  xviL  21).  While  other
treasures,  therefore,  are  possessions  of  the  body,  or  at  most  of  the  mind,  *'  treasures  in
heaven"  belong  to  the  sotd,  that  is,  to  the  immortal  and  permanent  part  of  man^s
nature,  and  are  to  be  valued  accordingly.

rV.   How  ETERNAL  BLESSINGS  ABE  TO  BE   DESIBED  AND  SOUGHT  FOR.      1.   In  prefer-

ence  to  all  other  things,  because  of  their  greater  importance.  "  Seek  ye  first  the
kingdom  of  God  "  (Matt,  vi,  33),  and  also  vers.  19, 20,  "  Lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures
in  heaven,"  etc.  2.  With  all  earnestness.  "  Strive  to  enter  in  "  (Luke  xiii.  24),  as  men
who  are  so  much  in  earnest  as  to  be  "  violent "  (Matt.  xL  12).  3.  By  the  practice  of
graces  given  :  oi faith  (2  Pet.  i.  5),  of  charity  and  almsgiving  (1  Tim.  vi.  18,  19),  of  the
Knowledge  of  the  Saviour  and  of  heavenly  things  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).

V.  The  Christian  has  the  guabantee  op  God  himself  that  his  hopes  for  eternal
happiness  shall  not  be  disappointed  (2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  19).

Ver.  16. — Christianity  not  permanently  compatible  with  slavery  as  an  institution,
1.  It  follows  fbom  the  considebation  of  Christian  brotherhood  that,  although  it
finds  many  slaves,  yet  it  shall  gradually  raise  them  to  a  state  of  freedom.  It  frees
their  souls  at  once.  They  become  "the  Lord's  freemen"  (1  Cor.  viL  22),  and  ike
body  cannot  always  remain  bound  when  the  soul  is  free.  Thus,  though  it  does  not  cut
down  the  tree  (of  slavery),  it  severs  the  roots,  and  a  state  of  slavery  cannot  therefore
permanently  flourish  among  Christians.

II.  This  is  also  the  teaching  of  history.  It  was  an  age  of  slavery  in  which  this
Epistle  was  written.  Europe  and  Asia  were  occupied  by  an  immense  population  of
slaves,  far  outnumbering  the  free  persons.  In  the  province  of  Attica  alone  there  were
four  hundred  thousand  slaves  and  only  thirty-one  thousand  freemen.  In  Corinth
there  were  four  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  slaves.  It  was  not  uncommon  in  Rome
(where  the  apostle  was  at  the  time  of  writing)  for  one  rich  man  to  possess  as  many  as
ten  or  even  twenty  thousand  slaves.  They  cultivated  the  fields;  they  monopolized
all  the  trades.  It  was  an  age  of  slavery.  Into  this  state  of  society  the  gospel  of  Christ
came.  It  did  not,  indeed,  propose  to  break  the  bonds  of  all  slaves,  and  reach  the  king-
dom of  God  through  social  convulsion  and  much  bloodshed.  Its  propagators  did  not
preach  a  servile  revolt,

III.  It  proposed  not  a  TEMPOHaL  BUT  A  SPIBITUAL  FBEEDOM  TO  ITS  FOLLOWERS.      It

recognized  all  alike  as  immortal  beings.  There  was  one  Church  for  all,  whether  bond
or  free;  and  the  same  sacraments  in  which  all  should  participate.  Other  forms  of
religion  had  treated  the  slave  as  a  chattel;  this  alone  regarded  him  as  a  man.  It
raised  into  activity  the  moral  powers  of  his  nature.  He  had  been  managed  by  the  fear
of  punishment  merely.  But  the  gospel  spoke  to  him  of  moral  differences  in  conduct —
of  right  and  wroug;  it  awoke  in  his  soul  an  inspiring  hope.  It  predicted  a  day  of
judgment,  in  which  the  difiference  between  a  good  and  evil  life  should  have  the  most
momentous  consequences  to  each  individual.  Thus  it  transformed  the  slave  altogether.
He  began  to  look  before  and  after ;  to  raise  his  thoughts,  his  hopes,  and  his  voice  to
heaven;  and  to  understand  what  was  the  "liberty  wherewith  Christ  had  made  him
[though  a  slave]  free  "  (GaL  v.  1),  even  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God"
(Rom.  viii.  21).

IV.  To  THE  MASTER  ALSO  THE  VERY  SAME  ENDS  WERE  PROPOSED.      He,  tOO,  WaS  tO

run  the  same  Christian  course  with  his  slave,  guided  by  the  same  principles,  helped
by  the  same  hopes,  and  constrained  by  the  same  sanctions.  A  similar  object  soon  pro-
duced a  similarity  of  character;  and  a  similarity  of  (Christian)  character  brought  about


10  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [l-2a.

uympathy  of  feeling.  In  the  rising  tide  of  Christian  fellowship  the  worst  hardships  of
slavery  melted  away,  even  long  before  it  was  formally  abolished.  It  hecame  aa
anachronism,  a  relic  of  a  vanii«hed  and  gone-by  condition  of  thmgs.

V.  And  as  it  was  in  the  fibst  period  of  the  gospel,  so  it  has  beest  skce.
There  have  been  periods  when  circumstances  had  brought  about  partial  revivals  of  the
spirit  of  slavery.  But  the  working  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel  have  proved  irrecon-
cilable as  ever  with  slavery,  and  has  either  brought  it  to  an  end  or  cast  it  out.  Tske,
for  example,  the  civil  war  in  America.

Ver.  16. —  Hie  brotherhood  of  all  ChrUtiann,  Onesimus,  hefore  his  conversion  to  the
fj&ith,  was  the  servant  of  Philemon ;  and  afterwards,  though  he  did  not  cease  to  be  his
servant,  yet  he  became  something  more,  viz.  his  brother  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  mtj
learn  from  this —

I.  That  the  Chbistian  beliqion  does  not  take  away  the  diffkrence  of  baisj
AND  conditions,  NOR  BEOABD  THEM  AS  UNLAWFUL.  The  Apostle  Paul  instrocts
masters  how  to  behave  towards  servants,  and  servants  towards  masters  (Eph.  vL  5, 9);
governors  how  to  conduct  themselves  towards  the  governed  (Rom.  xii.  8),  and  the
governed  towards  their  superiors ;  and  thereby  acknowledges  each  state  as  lawful.

II.  Yet  THESE   DIFFERENCES  ARE  ACCIDENTAL,  AND  CONSISTENT  WITH  AN  ESSENTIAL

EQUALITY  OF  ALL  CHRISTIANS.  The  gospel  coDsiders  all  Christians  (as  they  are  in  the
sight  of  Grod)  without  reference  to  their  rank  and  station,  their  wealth  or  poverty,  and
classes  them  on  moral  considerations  alone.  *<  The  poor  man  hath  the  Word  of  God
offered  unto  him,  read  unto  him,  and  preached  imto  him  as  well  as  the  rich ;  he  hath
the  sacraments  of  Qod  provided  for  him  as  well  as  for  them  that  are  of  high  place;
he  may  pray  imto  God  as  freely,  as  comfortably,  as  cheerfully,  as  the  great  men  c«f
the  earth ;  and  he  hath  a  gracious  promise  to  be  heard  and  respected  as  well  as  they.
Though  thou  farest  hardly  and  meanly  at  home,  yet  God  hath  prepar^  thee  a  feast,  sod
hiddeth  theo  to  his  table  richly  furnished  and  plentifully  stored  with  all  proviaon.
Though  thou  do  not  get  up  and  down  in  silks  and  velvets,  and  hast  no  gorgeous  attire
to  put  on,  yet  God  hath  provided  thee  a  better  garment— he  giveth  thee  his  own  Soti  to
put  on,  and  clothcth  thee  with  his  righteousness  "  (W.  Attersoll).

III.  The  consideration  that  their  servants  and  inferiors  in  station  have  an  equal
l>ortion  in  Christ  and  in  tho  means  of  salvation  ought  to  be  an  instruction  to  those
highly  placed  in  this  world  to  snow  auldness  and  consideration,  patiknce,  and  evex
MEEKNESS  TO  THEIR  INFERIORS  AND  SERVANTS.  Their  advantages  are  great;  thej
ought  not  to  abuse  those  advantages  by  treating  unfairly  those  who  are  committed  to
their  charij^e  (Jas.  v.  3,  4).

IV.  The  RESPONSIBILITY  OF  THE  RICH  MAN  FOR  THE  POOR.  The  higher  his  rank
above  others,  tho  more  humble  and  unassuming  should  ho  be ;  for  his  obligations  al?^'
arc  great:  **  For  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required"
(Luke  xii.  48).  His  authority,  his  influence,  his  example,  must  needs  produce  good  ur
evil  effects  ou  others,  and  for  these  ho  will  be  held  responsible  in  the  judgment.

Ver.  19. — Spiritual  benefits  the  most  xulwable  of  all.  Since  St.  Paul  had  (as  i^
appears)  won  to  the  embracing  of  the  faith  of  Christ  as  well  Philemon  himself  as
Onesimus  his  slave,  he  rightly  reminds  him,  as  his  first  and  most  powerful  argument,
that  Philemon  owes  himself  and  his  very  life  (that  is,  the  life  of  his  soul)  to  him.

I.  He  does  NOT  SUM  UP  THIS  OBLIGATION.  He  Icavcs  it  to  the  conscience  of  Philemon
to  consider  how  much  he  was  indebted.  It  was,  j^erhaps,  incommensurahle  with  the
favour  he  was  asking.  But  it  is  clear  that  such  an  obligation  must  exceed  every  other.
A  man's  self  is  more  valuable  than  his  lands  or  his  goods  (Job  ii.  4).  It  is  therefcffe  a
lifelong  obligation  that  men  arc  under  to  those  who  have  been  to  them  the  instruments
of  great  spiritual  benefits,  and  one  not  capable  of  being  fully  discharged.  So  it  is  said,
**  Jfoiu  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  tho  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,
that  publisheth  peace  !"(Isa.  Hi.  7;  Rom.  x.  15).  St.  Paul  bears  witness  that  the
Galatians,  whose  spiritual  father  he  was,  regarded  nothing  as  being  too  good  or  too
costly  to  show  their  affection  for  him  (iv.  14,  15);  and  he  lays  down  in  1  Cor.  ix.  11
that  tho  spiritual  benefits  of  which  he  had  been  the  means  were  supreme  in  kind  to
any  possible  carnal  recompense.


1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON,  U

n.   SpIBITUAL'  benefits  ABE  INDEED  THE  GIFTS  OF  GOD  AND  THE  EFFECTTS  OF    lUS

GBACE ;  but  he  uses  the  services  of  men,  and  particularly  of  bis  ministers,  in  tbe  dis-
pensing of  tbem.  "  It  is  better  to  help  our  friends  to  recover  lost  grace  than  lost
money '^Thomas  Aquinas).  And  those  who  receive  them  rightly  will  be  suitably
gratefuL

UL  Spieitual  BENEFITS  THE  MOST  VALUABLE,  bccause  the  soul  of  man  is  his  most
precious  poasessian  (Mark  viii.  36,  37).  The  life  of  the  soul  is  impaired  and  at  length
wholly  lost  by  sin ;  but  is  regained  and  strengthened  by  Divine  grace.  1.  The  soul  is
more  noble  than  earth  or  heaven ;  for  of  these  the  one  is  for  its  temporary  habitation,
the  other  for  its  eternal  one.  2.  It  hears  the  image  of  Qod.  It  is  like  the  piece  of
silver  in  the  parable  (Luke  xv.  8),  for  which,  when  lost,  such  diligent  search  was  made.
The  heavens  were  created  with  a  word,  but  the  redemption  of  the  soul  needed  the
incarnation  of  Christ,  and  his  death  upon  the  cross.  3.  Hence  its  value,  and  the
corresponding  value  of  a  service  rendered  to  it — a  value  so  great  as  not  to  be  capable
of  being  expressed  (e.^.)  in  money.

IV.  It  is  incommensubate  with  tehpobal  things.  So  St.  Paul  does  not  give  the
sum  of  it.  The  freedom  of  Onesimus  was  a  service  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  It  was  a
benefit  to  Onesimus  himself;  and,  if  he  were  employed  as  St.  Paul  proposed  (ver.  13),
in  the  service  of  the  Church,  might  be  the  means  of  good  to  many  other  souls.

V.  It  was  a  fitting  pledge,  therefore,  of  the  gratitude  of  Philemon.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  sceptre  of  love,  "Fellow-labourer  .  .  .  fellow-soldier."  These  are
terms  expressive  of  the  spirit  of  St.  PauL  He  was  not  only  an  ecclesiastic,  speaking
ex-cathedrdf  so  as  to  have  dominion  over  men's  faith.  He  was  a  brother  amongst
brethren ;  he  ruled  by  force  of  character  and  by  depth  of  love ;  he  addresses  them  in
words  which  had  not  then  degenerated  into  a  formula :  **  Dearly  beloved."

L  Common  wobk.  "  Fellow-labourer."  For  Paul  believed  in  work — in  hard  work.
He  had  '*  journeys  oft ; "  he  returned  to  confirm  the  faith  of  the  disciples.  He  worked  in
sorrow  of  brain  and  sweat  of  heart,  and  sometimes  in  sweat  of  brow.

II.  Common  oosflict.  "Fellow-soldier."  For  all  through  the  ages  the  Christian
has  a  battle  to  fight — within  himself,  and  with  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil.
Men  are  sustained  by  the  sight  of  men  nobler  than  themselves  risking  life  and  health.
In  the  Crimean  War,  when  a  young  officer  headed  his  troops,  nmning  by  their  side  in
the  heat  of  the  conflict,  a  private  remarked,  "  There  runs  ten  thousand  a  year  I "  Paul
did  not  direct  a  campaign  from  alar;  he  did  not  do  tbe  dainty  work,  and  leave  others
to  hard  fare  and  dungeons.  He  "  fought  a  good  fight,"  and  in  that  fight  he  fell,  to  be
crowned  with  honour  hereafter.  How  inspiring,  therefore,  would  such  a  maa  be  to
other  apostles — "  a  fellow-soldier  "  I  — ^^V.  M.  S.

Ver.  4.— iovc's  outcome  in  prayer,  "  Making  mention  of  thee  always  in  my  prayers."
We  may  judge  of  the  reality  of  our  affection  by  the  current  of  our  thoughts.  Do
we  find  them  tending  towards  some  absent  friends  daily  ?  Then  we  have  evidence
that  ours  is  not  the  superficial  love  that  can  live  only  in  the  presence  of  its  object.
With  the  Christian  thought  turns  to  prayer.  There  on  the  throne  of  the  universe  is
One  who  can  best  befriend  our  dearest  friends.

L  Thebe  was  blessedness  in  the  expebience.  "I  thank  my  God,  making
mention,"  etc.  It  was  not  a  prayer  touched  with  sorrow  for  Philemon,  Apphia,  and
Archippus,  or  with  anxiety  about  their  faith  and  character.  It  was  the  prayer  of  one
who  rejoiced  that  the  Christ  above  could  keep  them  from  falling.

II.  Thebe  was  pubpose  in  the  pbaybb.  Paul  remembers  its  subject-matter.
When  he  heard  of  their  love  and  fiiith  towards  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  prayed  that  their
faith  might  not  be  merely  personal  or  selfish,  but  that  their  religion  might  be,  in  the
modem  speech,  "altruistic,"  which  is  ''otherism"  as  opposed  to  "selfism."  Paul
prayed  tl^t  the  communication  of  their  &lth  might  be  effectual,  that  the  light  might
shine  on  others  so  as  to  guide  ihem^  that  the  fountain  might  flow  into  other  hearts  so
as  to  refresh  them. — W.  M.  S.


12  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1-23.

Vera.  9,  10. — Lov^^  moUve-paioer,  **Fot  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee  .  .  .
for  my  son  ODesimus.'*  Onesimus  was  a  sUve— one  who  in  past  times  had  been,  as
was  natural,  unmoved  by  any  inspiration  to  good  service — and  was  **  unprofitable."
He  had  been  be^tten  again  through  the  ministry  of  Paul,  and  now  that  he  sends  him
back,  he  tells  Philemon  that  the  new  Divine  life  in  him  will  make  him  Daithful,  earnest,
and'*  profitable."

I.  Tbuth  TBI17MPHS  IN  TIME.  Slavery  did  not  &11  at  once,  nor  was  polygtmy
destroyed  at  once.  Revolution  would  have  been  the  cost  of  any  such  attempt.  Paul
left  the  cross  to  do  its  mighty  work.  The  spirit  of  the  gospel  made  slavery  tod
polygamy  alike  imixiesible,  because  the  cross  destroys  self,  teaches  us  that  we  are  not
our  own,  and  emancipates  all  who  are  oppressed  through  a  love  which  gives  itself  for
others  instead  of  holding  them  in  bondage.

II.  Love  is  the  supreme  command.  He  will  not  enjoin.  Men  resist  orden  tnd
commands.  They  find  excuses  for  inaction,  and  their  pride  is  hurt.  But  when  lore
intreats,  and  when  that  love  is  like  that  of  Paul  the  aged,  and  Paul  a  prisoner,  and
Paul  to  whom  Philemon  owed  his  own  self  (ver.  19),  we  need  not  wonder  that  love  won
the  day ;  so  Onesimus  would  be  received  back  as  a  servant  (a  bond-servant),  '**  but  above
a  servant,  a  brother  beloved.** — W.  M.  S.

Vers.  19,  20.— Personal  obligation,  ^  Thine  own  self."  This  is  more  than  all
else.  We  can  call  nothing  "  our  own  "  but  "  the  self."  We  are  not  rich  in  what  we
have^  but  iu  what  we  are.  All  things^  houses,  estates,  lands,  are  outside  us.  The  self
is  all.

I.  IxDEBTEDNESS  OF  Philemon.  Philemon  owed  his  spiritual  conversion,  all  the
rich  inheritance  in  the  soul,  to  the  ministry  of  Paul ;  and  he  delicately  enough  reminds
him  of  this  in  an  indirect  form  of  speech,  "  Albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest
unto  me  even  thine  own  self."  It  is  one  of  those  touches  which  show  what  a  true
gentleman  St.  Paul  was.  There  is  more  than  claim  of  right  to  counsel  him,  viz.  the
modest  reminder  that,  if  need  be,  he  would  repay  any  loss  that  Philemon  might  have
sustained  through  the  detention  by  Paul  of  Onesimus.

II.  Expectation  concerning  uim.  "Let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord."
**  Refresh  me."  What  by  ?  Tliat  which  alone  can  rejoice  the  heart  of  a  true  father  in
the  gospel,  viz.  Christ's  own  Spirit  in  Christ's  disciples.  The  gospel  was  to  be  spread,
not  alone  by  eloquence  or  erudition,  but  by  Christ's  own  religion  alive  and  in  action
in  all  who  confesscil  his  Name. — W.  M.  S.

Ver.  22. — Xccdful  j^reparaf ion,  "  Prepare  me  ...  a  lod^ng."  Their  prayers  he
hoped  would  open  the  door  for  him  to  come  and  see  them.  He  knew  that  the  golden
key  of  prayer  had  opened  many  doors  closed  as  fast  as  his  own.

I.  A  LODGING  SEEMS  ALL  HE  EVER  HAD.  And  uot  always  had  he  that.  A  prison
can  scarcely  be  called  a  lodging — for,  in  one  sense,  when  we  lodge  we  have  protection
and  rest,  and  are  at  liberty  in  our  onward  journey  in  life.  This  man  gave  up  friends,
country,  home,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  now  he  is  completing  his  course  and  gives  up  dear
life  itself.  Will  he  ever  have  this  lodging?  No;  it  is  the  time  of  his  first  imprison-
ment ;  he  is  treated  as  a  malefactor,  and  we  know  what  his  end  will  be.

II.  His  NEXT  Lo DOING-PLACE  WILL  BE  THE  GRAVE.  But,  in  One  sense,  the  idea  that
we  associate  with  this  resting-place  was  not  fulfilled  in  his  life.  His  death  was  probably
one  by  the  lions,  or  the  executioner's  axe,  or  the  cross,  which  would  leave  even  his
\x>0T  body  a  prey  to  cruel  hands.

IIL  His  lodging  was  to  give  place  to  home.  Soon  now,  very  soon,  his  words
were  fulfilled,  "I  have  finished  my  course,  .  .  .  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a
crown  of  righteousness."  Here  the  volume  of  his  life,  illustrated  with  so  many  etchings
from  his  own  hands  of  his  pains,  forsakements,  temptations,  and  tribulations,  now  comes
to  a  close.  "Finis"  is  written  upon  all.  Yet  it  is  not  Vahf  va2e^  in  cetemum  vale  I
that  we  inscribe  upon  his  aims  and  hopes.  No;  it  is  the  catacomb  motto.  In  pace;
lor  henceforth  ho  enjoys  the  immortal  reward,  the  great  peace;  he  is  at  rest  in  God. —
W.  M.  S.

Vers.  1 — 3. —  TJie  address  and  salutation.     This  strictly  private  letter,  which  hns


1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  13

been  well  called  '*  the  polite  Epistle,"  carries  upon  the  fiice  of  it  a  clear  explanation  of
its  contents.

L  The  wbiteb  op  the  Epistle.  **  Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  does  not
describe  himself  as  an  apostle,  for  there  was  no  need  here  to  assert  his  authority,  but
as  a  prisoner,  to  bespeak  the  sympathy^  of  Philemon.  He  was  not  a  prisoner  for  crime,
but  for  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  therefore  *'  not  ashamed  of  his  chain."  Several  of  his
weightiest  Epistles  were  written  in  prison,  as  if  to  show  that  "  the  Word  of  God  was
not  bound."  He  associates  with  himself  in  the  address,  but  with  a  separate  title,  the
name  of  "  Timothy  our  brother,"  who  was  known  to  the  Colossians  (Col.  L  1),  and
now  in  sympathy  with  himself  respecting  the  object  of  this  Epistle.

U.  The  persons  to  whom  the  Epistle  was  addressed.  1.  *'  Unto  Philemon  our
hdoved,  and  fdlow-worker^  (1)  He  was  probably  a  native  of  Colossae,  for  his  slave
Onesimus  belonged  to  it  (Col.  iv.  9).  (2)  He  was  a  convert  of  the  apostle  (ver,  19).
(3)  He  was  an  evangelist.  ^4)  He  was  a  person  of  mark  at  Colossas ;  for  the  Church
gathers  in  his  house ;  be  is  able  to  "  refresh  tne  hearts  of  the  saints"  both  with  temporal
and  spiritual  mercies.  (5)  It  is  a  sign  of  the  apostle's  humility  that  he  places  Philemon
on  an  equality  with  himself  as  **  a  fellow-worker."  Love  bound  the  two  servants  of
Christ  closely  together.  2.  "  Apphia  our  sister.^  This  name  occurs  in  many  Phrygian
inscriptions.  (1;  She  was  probably  the  wife  of  Philemon.  The  apostle  addresses  her
because,  as  the  mistress  of  the  household,  her  consent  would  be  necessary  to  the
reception  of  Onesimus  on  a  new  footing.  (2)  She  was  a  true  child  of  God ;  for  she  is
addressed  as  ''a  sister"  of  the  apostle.  Therefore  Philemon  and  Apphia  were  not
unequally  yoked  together.  (3)  Mark  how  ready  the  apostle  is  to  recognize  the  graces
of  the  saints,  and  especially  to  acknowledge  the  true  place  of  woman  in  her  household.
S,  *'Archippus  our  fdlow-soldier,**  (1)  He  was  probably  the  son  of  this  worthy  pair.
(2^  He  was  a  minister  of  the  gospel  either  at  Colosssa  or  Laodicea  (CoL  iv.  7);  for  he  is
called  "  our  fellow-soldier,"  as  Epaphroditus  is  called  •*  a  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  The
title  suggests  the  idea  of  conflict  and  hard  service  for  the  truth,  with  a  view  to  final
victory.  4.  **  The  Church  in  thy  house"  This  does  not  mean  merely  the  private
family  of  Philemon,  though  the  object  of  the  Epistle  has  the  look  of  being  a  matter  of
strictly  private  concernment;  but  the  assembly  of  Christians  who  met  for  worship
under  Philemon's  roof.  The  restoration  of  Onesimus  to  his  home  under  new  relations
would  be  a  matter  of  profound  interest  and  signiflcance  to  the  whole  Church  at  Colossas.

IIL  The  salutation.  "Grace  to  you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (see  homiletical  hints  on  Eph.  i.  2). — T.  C.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Recognition  qf  the  Christian  character  and  services  of  Philemon.  This
is  after  the  apostle's  usual  manner.

I.  The  thanksgiving.  "  I  thank  my  God  always,  making  mention  of  thee  in  my
prayers."  1.  Though  it  is  not  unlawful  to  praise  men  for  their  graces  or  virtues,  God
if  first  to  he  thanked  as  the  Author  of  these  dispositions,  **  We  rejoice  [or,  *  boast  *]  in  God
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Rom.  v.  11).  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  believer  to
speak  of  God  as  "  my  God,"  according  to  the  tenure  of  the  covenant :  "  I  will  be  thy
God."  Therefore  the  apostle  says, "  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve"  (Acts  xxviL  23).
2.  The  occasion  of  his  thanksgiving,  "  Making  mention  of  thee  in  my  prayers."  It
mingled  with  his  daily  prayers.  (1)  Though  fa  prisoner,  the  apostle  had  constant
opportunities  for  secret  devotion.  (2)  He  was  always  miodful  of  others  in  his  supplica-
tions. Many  have  no  secret  prayer ;  others  pray  only  for  themselves ;  the  apostle  prays
for  others.  The  saints  had  an  iodividual  place  in  the  apostle's  heart.  (3)  It  is  right
to  pray  even  for  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  thanksgiving.  The  saints  are  not
perfect,  and  therefore  need  to  be  prayed  for,  that  they  may  enjoy  a  more  abundant  life
in  Christ  Jesus  (John  z.  10).

II.  The  cause  ob  season  of  the  thanksgiving.  **  Hearing  of  thy  love  and  of  the
&ith  which  thou  hast  toward  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  toward  all  the  saints."  1.  A  good
report  extols  God's  Name  and  recommends  religion,  "  By  it  the  ancients  obtained
a  good  report "  (Heb.  xi.  3).  2.  Good  men  love  to  hear,  as  well  as  report,  the  praises  of
good  men,  3.  We  ought  to  pray  fervently  for  those  who  enjoy  the  greatest  graces.  4.
The  graces  of  Philemon  were  faith  in  Christ  and  love  to  the  saints.  (1)  These  graces,
though  distinguished  from  one  another,  never  exist  separately.    "Faith  worketh  by


14  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25.

loye,"  and  never  without  it.  Love  proceeds  from  faith,  even  love  to  the  saints  (1  These,
ii.  3^.  (2)  The  Object  of  faith  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  therefore  it  is  called  the  faith
of  Jesus  Christ  (Uom.  iii.  26).  Faith,  as  an  act  of  the  understandinc,  sees  Christ,  and,
as  an  act  of  will,  trusts  in  him  for  eternal  life.  (3)  The  objects  of  love  are  the  saints.
Christ  i  is  to  be  loved  in  the  saints,  who  are  to  be  loved  next  to  Christ.  All  the
saints  are  to  be  loved,  no  matter  what  their  character,  disposition,  or  talents.

III.  The  object  or  purport  of  the  apostle's  prayer.  •*  That  the  fellowship  of
thy  faith  may  become  effectual  in  the  knowledge  of  every  good  thing  which  is  in  you
unto  Christ."  1,  The  fellowship  re/erred  to  the  kindly  offices  of  sympaihy  and  charity
which  were  the  offspring  of  Fhilemon^B  faitli.  The  apostle's  prayers  had  in  view  th^
furtherance  of  Philemon's  faith  on  its  practical  side.  Faith  is  a  bountiful  grace,  and  is
communicative  in  its  very  nature.  2.  7^  energetic  opercUion  of  faith  (1)  glorifie
Ck)d ;  (2)  refreshes  the  saints ;  (3)  stops  the  mouths  of  malicious  men  ;  (4)  and  attests
the  true  character  of  the  saints  even  in  the  society  of  hypocrites.  '  3.  The  drift  of  a
pmctical  faith  is  towards  a  fuller  knowledge  and  appreciation  of  good  in  Christian  men.
**  The  knowledge  of  the  result  and  the  reward  of  faith  manifesting  itself  in  deeds  d
love."  Insight  springs  from  obedience.  4.  The  growth  of  faith  in  its  upward  tendency
is  **  unto  Christ,"  as  its  Gk>al  and  final  Besting-place,  depending  as  it  does  upon  union
with  him,  and  tending  to  intensify  the  experience  of  that  union.

IV.  I'he  motive  for  the  apostle's  thanksgiyino.  ''For  I  had  great  joy  azkd
consolation  in  thy  love,  because  the  bowels  of  the  Baints  have  been  refreshed  by  thee,
brother."  1.  Whatever  causes  joy  and  consolation  is  Just  ground  for  thanksgiving,
"  For  what  thanksgiving  can  we  render  again  unto  God  for  you,  for  all  the  joy  where-
with we  joy  for  your  Fakes  before  our  God  ?  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  9).  Thanks  ever  be  to  that
God  who  fills  our  hearts  *'  with  food  and  gladness."  The  Apostle  John  found  his  joy  in
learning  that  his  children  walked  in  truth  (2  John  4).  2.  The  proofs  of  Philemon's
love  to  the  saints,  (I)  The  apostle  rejoices  in  a  love  which  carries  blessings  to  otheis
rather  than  himself.  (2)  The  saints  ought  to  be  refreshed  in  several  ways,  (a)  By
words  of  consolation,  which  we  can  easily  extract  from  the  promises  of  our  Lord  in  the
Word.  (6)  By  our  deeds  of  charity.  So  the  apostle  himself  was  "  oft  refreshed "  bj
Onesiphonis  during  his  long  imprisonment,  (c)  By  our  prayers  for  the  afiSicted  saints.
(3)  The  motives  that  prompt  to  this  compassionate  dealing  with  the  saints  are  (a)
that  we  herein  imitate  God,  "who  comforteth  those  who  are  cast  down"  (2  Cor.  L  4);
(b)  wo  refresh  the  bowels  of  Christ  himself;  (c)  God  will  not  forget  our  labour  of
love  (1  Thess.  i.  3).— T.  C.

Vers.  8 — 11. — Appeal  by  entreaty  rather  than  command,  Tho  apostle  here  enters
on  the  main  subject  of  his  letter,  and  introduces  it  with  a  singular  mixture  of  courtesy,
affection,  and  authority.

I.  It  is  sometimes  wise  to  forego  the  exercise  of  authority.  "  Wherefore,
though  I  have  all  boldness  in  Christ  to  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  befitting,  yet  for  love's
sake  1  rather  beseech  thee."  1.  Ministers  possess  authority.  They  are  required  to
speak  with  authority.  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich  that  they  be  not  high-minded."
2.  Their  authority  is  not  in  their  own  name,  but  in  that  of  Christ,  **  I  have  all
boldness  in  Christ."  They  are  but  servants  in  the  Church,  as  Moses  was  (Heb.  iii.  5) ;
"not  having  dominion  over  our  faith,  but  helpers  of  our  joy"  (2  Cor.  i.  24);  for  it  is
the  authority  of  ambassadors  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  3.  Tfiere  are  limits  to  thi^  authority.
"To  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  befitting."  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  Christ  oives
the  command.  He  can  only  command  that  which  is  befitting.  Thus  it  is  rio^htlfora
believer  to  do  even  more  than  strict  law  would  demand,  for  he  must  do  what  reason
and  propriety  dictate.

II.  It  is  tue  delight  as  well  as  the  wisdom  of  ministers  to  use  entreaty
rather  than  command.  1.  Ministers  often  wisely  forego  their  right  in  prosecuting
their  Master^ s  work.  Christians  likewise  find  it  needful  to  forego  the  use  of  thin<^
lawful,  because  their  use  would  be  inexpedient.  They  must  not  **  abuse  their  liberty^"
or  "hinder  the  gospel"  (1  Cor.  ix.  12,  18).  2.  Love  is  the  principal  motive  to  prompt
to  this  action,  "  Yet  for  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech  thee."  Not  the  love  of  the  apostle
to  Philemon,  nor  the  love  of  Philemon  to  him,  but  love  absolutely  as  a  principle  hcM
in  highest  regard  by  all  Christians.    It  is  love  that  "  seeketh  not  her  own."    Z,  An


1—26.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  16

entreaty  derives  added  weight  from  the  age  and  sufferings  of  him  who  offers  it.  "  Being
such  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged,  and  now  a  prisoner  also  of  Jesus  Christ.**  (1)  Reverence
is  due  to  age.  It  is  "  a  crown  of  glory  when  it  is  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness.**
The  apostle  was  not  now  old,  as  the  years  of  a  life  are  reckoned,  but  he  b^re  the  signs
of  age  in  exhaustion  and  weariness  and  cares.  (2)  Ministers  are  to  be  regarded  with
peculiar  respect  and  sympathy  on  account  of  their  afflictions.  The  apostle  was  now  a
prisoner  at  Home  for  the  sake  of  Christ — "  an  ambassador  in  bonds.*'

III.  The  object  op  the  apostle's  entreaty.  "  I  beseech  thee  for  my  child  whom
I  have  begotten  in  my  bonds,  Onesimus.**  1.  Onesimus  was  the  runaway  slave  of
Philemon  of  Colossm,  who  had  made  his  way  to  Rome,  and  come  into  contact  with  the
apostle  during  his  imprisonment.  2.  He  was  a  convert  of  the  apostle.  (1)  The  apostle
was  the  instrument  of  his  conversion  at  Rome.  (2)  Ministers  ought  to  use  private  and
casual  opportunities  of  doing  good  to  others.  (3)  Though  the  apostle  was  a  prisoner,
the  Word  of  Grod  was  not  bound.  (4)  God  often  sweetens  the  afflictions  of  his  ministers
by  special  favours.  3.  His  conversion  became  manifest  by  his  better  Itfe.  **  Who  was
aforetime  unprofitable  to  thee,  but  now  is  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me.**  (1)  Good  meji
may  have  bad  servants.  This  Onesimus  had  been  unprofitable,  not  only  as  a  pilferer,
but  as  an  idler.  The  example  of  his  godly  master  and  mistress  had  no  infiuence  upon
his  conduct.  (2)  Conversion  always  results  in  a  change  of  social  character.  It  makes
people  conscientious  in  the  discharge  of  all  duties  incident  to  their  calling.  Onesimus
was  henceforth  **  profitable  **  both  to  Philemon  and  the  apostle,  (a)  He  was  profitable
to  the  apostle.  Religious  servants  are  the  most  profitable.  Ooesimus  gave  new  joy
to  the  apostle  by  his  conversion,  while  he  waited  on  him,  no  doubt,  in  the  ministry  of
private  service  and  kindness.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  sinner  cease  to  do  evil ;  he  must
learn  to  do  well.  We  see  in  Onesimus  the  practical  side  of  the  apostle's  counsel,  "  Let
him  that  stole  steal  no  more,  but  let  him  rather  work  with  his  hands  that  which  is
good  *'  (Eph.  iv.  28).  (6)  He  was  profitable  to  Philemon,  in  so  far  as  he,  in  Philemon's
stead,  did  that  service  to  the  apostle  which  his  master  would  have  readily  done  if  it
had  been  in  his  power.  He  would  be  yet  more  profitable  to  his  master  in  the  spirit  and
conditions  of  his  new  service,  on  his  return  back  to  Colossas. — T.  C.

Vers.  12 — 16. — Tlie  motives  that  prompted  the  apostle  to  send  bcuik  Onesimus  to  his
master.  I.  He  did  bend  him  back.  "Whom  I  have  sent  back  to  thee  in  his  own
person  J  that  is,  my  very  heart."  1.  Onesimus  did  not  return  of  his  own  accord.  He
might,  perhaps,  have  had  some  not  unnatural  misgivings  as  to  the  character  of  the
reception  he  would  meet  with  as  a  returned  slave  who  had  acted  a  dishonest  part,  and
might  have  been  asbaoied  besides  to  appear  again  in  a  community  where  his  misdeeds
had  been  made  known.  2.  Hie  apostle  recognized  FhUemon^s  right  to  the  restored
services  of  his  fugitive  slave.  The  gospel  does  not  abolish  civil  rights.  The  conversion
of  Onesimus  did  not  secure  his  manumission.  Yet  the  gospel  planted  principles  in
society  which  in  due  time  abolished  slavery  everywhere.  *'  Wast  thou  called  being  a
bond-servant?  care  not  for  it:  but  if  thou  canst  become  free,  use  it  rather"  (1  Cor.
vii.  21).  3.  He  did  not  even  wait  till  he  had  received  an  answer  from  Philemon  as  to
the  terms  in  which  Onesimus  would  be  received  back  into  the  Cdossian  household.  He
sent  Onesimus  at  once  in  charge  of  his  two  letters,  namely,  that  to  the  Colossian  saints
and  that  to  Philemon  himself.  4.  Yet  the  apostle  acted  in  the  whole  matter  with  the
deepest  affection  for  the  poor  bond-servant.  He  speaks  of  him  as  "  his  own  heart."
What  account  Christianity  makes  of  the  meanest  classes  of  society  1

II.  The  apostle's  explanation  of  his  conduct  and  motives  in  the  whole
TRANSACi'iON.  1.  His  first  feeling  was,  to  retain  Onesimus  about  his  person  to  do  him
the  service  that  Philemon  himself  would  have  glcLdly  done.  He  had  now  become
profitable,  according  to  the  happy  significance  of  his  name.  But  it  was  not  for  the
apostle  to  interfere  with  another  man's  servant.  2.  The  true  cause  of  his  sending
Onesimus  was  that  he  would  do  nothing  without  the  consent  of  his  master.  ''But
without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing."  But  the  motive  that  prompted  this  determina-
tion was  that  '*  thy  goodness  shonld  not  be  as  of  necessity,  but  of  free  wilL**  If  the
apostle  had  kept  Onesimus  for  the  sake  of  the  benefit  to  be  derived  from  his  personal
ministration,  the  whole  transaction  would  have  worn  a  semblance  of  constraint.  We
Imve  no  right  to  extort  benefits  from  our  friends  against  their  will.    3.  The  providential


16  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25.

aapeet  cf  Vie  matter,  **  For  perhaps  he  wts  therefore  parted  from  thee  for  a  aeaaon,
tbkt  thou  shouldest  have  him  for  ever.**  (1)  Nothing  ia  this  statement  extenuates
the  misdeeds  of  Onesimos,  which  Grod  overruled  for  good.  (2)  The  acts  of  the  meanest
indiTidual  in  society  are  included  in  the  spheie  of  Dirine  proYidenoe.  (3}  God  makes
up  for  the  losses  of  his  saints  in  his  own  time  and  way.  Philemoo  has  his  once
nofkithful  servant  restored  to  him  on  an  entirely  new  footing  of  advantage.  (4)  The
restoration  of  the  fugitive  slave  is  to  an  eternal  relationudp.  The  earUdy  tie  is
sundered  hy  death,  hat  grace  gives  an  eternity  to  the  holy  relationshipa  of  earth.
4.  Tfie  new  rdatwn  estMUhed  between  ma$ter  and  dervanL  "  Not  now  as  a  savant,
hut  ahove  a  servant,  a  brother  beloved,  most  of  all  by  me,  but  more  than  moat  of  all
by  thee,  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  Lord.**  The  apostle  does  not  say,  "  not  a  servant/'
but  ^  not  as  a  servant ; "  for  grace  did  not  abrogate  the  old  tie  of  master  and  servant
(1)  The  brotherhood  of  saints  is  common  to  all  the  relationships  of  life.  Philemon  and
Unesimas  are  now  brethren  beloved.  (2)  Pious  servants  are  to  be  more  regarded,  as
they  are  more  faithful,  than  servants  without  religion.  (3)  There  are  none  dearer  to
ministers  than  their  converts.  (4)  There  was  a  double  obligation  to  duty  on  PhilenKxi's
part  corresponding  to  the  double  tie — that  of  the  flesh  and  that  of  the  Spirit — ^by  which
ne  was  now  connected  with  Onesimus. — T.  G.

Ver.  17. — The  plea  of  Christian  /dlowthip.  The  apostle  here  directly  puts  his
request,  *'if  then  thou  countest  me  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself."  He  regards
Philemon  as  a  partner  in  faith  and  love  and  life.  It  is  a  recurrence  to  an  old
argument,  "  If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  .  .  .  fulfil  ye  my  joy."

I.  The  fellowship  of  believebs.  It  subsists  in  the  fellowship  with  the  Father  and
the  Sony  and  derives  all  Us  force  therefrom.  (I  John  i.  3.)  That  fellowship  implies
that  all  saints  have  a  common  Father  (Eph.  iv.  6),  a  common  elder  Brother  (Heb.  IL 11),
a  common  inheritance  (Eph.  ii.  19;  Rev.  i.  9),  a  common  grace  (PhiL  L  7),  a  common
suffering  (1  Cor.  zii.  26 ;  Heb.  z.  33,  34).  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Author  and  the
Power  of  this  fellowship  (2  Cor.  xiii.  13),  as  love  is  the  "  bond  of  perfection  "  (Col.  iii.
14).    Thus  believers  become  of  "  one  heart  and  one  soul.**

II.  The  plea  founded  upon  this  fellowship.  "  Receive  him  as  myself."  1.  It
is  a  genuine  plea;  for  the  ajxjstle  elsewhere  says,  "If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the
Spirit  .  .  .  look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of
others"  (Phil.  ii.  4).  "  Love  seeketh  not  her  own."  2.  Onesimus  was  now  a  partner
as  v'vU  as  the  apostle.  Therefore,  as  the  old  Puritan  says,  "Love  me,  love  my  partner:
one  partner  receives  another,  even  for  a  partner's  sake."  If  Philemon  loves  Christ  in
the  apostle,  why  not  in  Onesimus?  "Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  one  of  these
little  ones,  yc  have  done  it  unto  me"  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  We  are  to  love  Christ  in  the
meanest  of  his  servants. — T.  C.

Vers.  18, 19. — Tlie  a  posticus  frank  acceptance  of  pecuniary  responsibility  for  Onesimus,
The  injured  master  might  plead  that  it  was  enough  for  him  to  forbear  punishing  his
unfaithful  servant,  but  the  injuries  he  had  received  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  replace
him  in  his  household.

I.    TllEUE  IS  UERE  AN  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  THE  WBONG  DONE  BY  THE  NOW  PENITENT

SLAVE.  "If  ho  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee  aught,  put  that  to  mine  account."
It  is  evident  that  Onesimus  had  frankly  confessed  his  misdeeds  to  the  apostle.  1.  Mark
the  mild  language  in  which  the  apostle  describes  them.  He  does  not  say  that  Onesimus
robbed  his  master,  as  he  did  not  wish  either  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  the  slave  or  to
irritate  the  feelings  of  the  master;  but  simply  speaks  of  a  wrong  done,  of  a  possible
debt  incurred.  If  a  sinner  is  penitent,  why  should  his  old  sins  or  follies  be  thrown  in
his  teeth?  12.  llestitution  in  case  of  civil  injury  is  a  first  thing.  It  is  one  of  the  most
practical  proofs  of  repentance.

II.  There  is  a  responsibility  assumed  for  the  debt  of  Onesimus.  "  Put  that  to
mine  account ;  I  Paul  write  it  with  mine  own  hand,  I  will  repay  it."  The  apostle  here
puts  his  name,  as  it  were,  at  the  foot  of  the  bond.  1.  It  teas  an  act  of  felf-sacrificing
considerat  1071  for  OnesimtiSy  as  if  the  apostle  would  remove  every  possible  obstacle  to
the  restoration  of  the  jHjnitent  slave  to  his  Colossian  home.  2.  Yet  it  is  so  put  as  to
imply  that  Philcnion  would  hardly  exact  the  dtht.


1-26.]  THE  EPISTLE   TO   PHILEMON.  17

III.  ThEBE  18  THE  STATEMENT  OP  A  MUCH  LARGER  COUNTER-CLAIM.      "  Not  tO  say  tO

thee  that  thou  owest  to  me  even  thine  own  self  besides."  1.  It  was  a  true  claim.  The
apostle  had  heen  the  instrument  of  Philemon's  conversion.  2.  Jt  v>as  an  overpowering
claim.  The  blessing  that  accrues  to  a  man  from  his  conversion  cannot  be  weighed  in
the  balance  against  all  a  man's  property.  3.  I7iere  ought  to  he  mercy  in  the  exaction  of
debts.  This  is  implied  in  the  nature  of  the  apostle's  appeal.  Oacsimus  was  utterly
unable  to  make  restitution,  and,  if  the  apostle  became  his  surety,  it  was  with  an
implied  wish  that  Philemon  would  take  a  liberal  view  of  his  duty  in  the  matter. — T.  G.

Ver.  20. — A  plea  for  personal  consideration.  The  apostle  now  becomes  more
personal  in  his  urgency.  **  Yea,  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee  in  the  Lord :  refresh
my  heart  in  Christ."

I.  Christians  ought  to  aim  at  the  spiritual  gratification  op  each  other.
It  is  not  well  to  make  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad  (Ezck.  xiii.  22).  The  apostle
had  care  and  anxiety  and  sadness  enough  to  depress  him,  and  it  was  natural  he  should
seek  some  fresh  joy  from  the  obedience  of  his  disciples.

II.  The  obediekce  of  Christians  is  a  great  source  of  refreshing  to  ministers.
The  ready  obedience  of  Philemon  would  revive  the  drooping  spirit  of  the  apostle,  and
inspire  him  with  fresh  vigour.  As  the  refreshing  was  to  be  "  in  the  Lord  "  as  the  aim
of  all  a  Christian's  actions,  so  we  see  how  constantly  the  apostle  rejoiced  and  gloried
in  the  Lord,  and  commended  his  example  to  his  converts  and  to  Christians  generally.
— T.C.

Vers.  21,  22. — Hie  apostle^ s  concluding  appeal.  He  now  glides  insensibly  into  the
language  of  authority,  which  all  along  he  had  a  right  to  assume.  "Haviog  conddence
in  thine  obedience,  1  write  unto  thee,  knowing  that  thou  wilt  do  even  beyond  what
I  say."

I.  The  most  willing  may  be  fairly  urged  to  the  course  of  duty.  The  apostle
asisures  Philemon  that  he  does  not  doubt  his  obedience,  yet  he  thinks  it  necessary  to
stir  up  his  pure  mind  to  a  remembrance  of  his  obligations.  1.  An  obedient  people
make  zealous  ministers,  2.  A  good  conscience  ensures  confidence  in  the  wise  and  zealous
conduct  of  life,  "  Credit  and  a  good  conscience  are  shipped  both  in  one  bottom."  3.  A
good  heart  entitles  us  to  expect  a  liberal  construction  of  the  extent  of  our  duty.  The
apostle  seems  here  to  hint  that  Philemon  might  possibly  manumit  his  slave.  That
the  apostle  had  not  demanded ;  yet  it  was  within  the  possible  scope  of  Philemon's  liberal
understanding  of  his  duty  to  Onesimus.

IL  The  apostle  bespeaks,  on  his  approaching  visit  to  Coloss-e,  a  favourable
reception  to  Onesimus.  **But  withal  prepare  me  also  a  lodging:  for  I  ho)X3  that
through  your  prayers  I  shall  be  granted  to  you."  1.  The  presence  of  the  apostle  at
Colossx  wotUd  enable  him  to  see  that  his  expectations  had  not  heen  disappointed,  A
Puritan  writer  says,  "  Who  would  not  willingly  receive  Onesimus,  coming  as  Paul's
harbinger,  to  provide  him  lodging?"  2.  The  most  eminent  servants  of  God  need  the
prayers  of  the  humblest  in  his  Church,  (1)  Because  they  are  exposed  to  many  dangers
and  temptations.  (2)  Because  they  have  a  responsible  charge  in  God's  kingdom.
(3)  Because  their  liberty  to  preach  the  gospel  is  often  threatened,  if  not  temporarily
destroyed,  by  wicked  men.  (4)  The  apostle  believed  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  The
prayers  of  the  Colossian  household  would  or  might  unlock  his  prison-doors,  "The
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  "  (Jas.  v.  16). — T.  0.

Vers.  23 — 25. — Salutations  and  prayer,  I.  Salutations.  These  are  the  expressions
of  Christian  sympathy  and  kindness.  1,  They  are  the  salutations  of  the  apostle sfellouh'
prisoner,  "There  salute  thee  Epaphras  my  fellow-prisoner  in  Christ  Jesus."  (1)
Epaphras  was  a  Colossian  evangelist  (Col.  i.  7 ;  iv.  12).  (2)  Ho  was  imprisoned  at
Rome  in  the  immediate  society  of  the  aix)8tle.  (a)  This  was  an  alleviation  to  both
prisoners,  on  account  of  their  common  faith,  their  common  hopes,  and  their  common
interests.  Epaphras,  as  probably  the  younger  man,  would  be  very  helpful  to  the
apostle.  (6)  The  cause  of  the  imprisonment  in  both  cases  was  'Mn  Christ  Jesus."
They  suffered  for  the  preaching  of  his  gospel.  2.  They  are  the  salutcUions  of  the
apostle's  fellovhlabaurers,    ''Marcus"  (Acts  xii.  12),  once  temporarily  estranged  from


I


18  THE  EPISTLE  TO  PHILEMON.  [1—25.

the  apostK  but  now  at  bis  side;  " Aristarcbns "  (Acts  xix.  29,  SO;  CoL  iv.  10);
"Demas,"  whose  apostasy  was  yet  futnre  (2  Tim.  iv.  10);  "Luke,"  tbe  beloved
pbysician  and  evancelist  (Col.  iv.  14).  The  apostle  was  happily  circumstaDced,  even
as  a  prisoner,  throuffh  the  constant  or  occasional  society  of  these  men.

II.  Prater.  "The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit."  It  is
curious  to  find  no  allusion  to  Qod  the  Father  in  this  prayer.  If  Christ  is  not  God,
how  can  we  account  for  such  a  prayer?  It  is  a  simple  but  beautiful  prayer  addressed
to  the  whole  Philemon  household. — T.  C.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE    EPISTLE    OF


PAUL   TO    PHILEMON.


•••


•••


5
G


G
7


THEMR  PAGB

Tho  UallowiDg  of  the  Ordinary  Inter-
courso  of  Life    •••  ...  •••

The  Christian  Family

The  Gonstitaent  Parts  of  Acceptable
Prayer :  Thanksgiying,  Intercesaion,
Personal  Potiiiuus

Man  glorifying  God

The  Religion  of  Christ  a  Defence  of
Social  Order,  not  a  Disturbing  Force

Ungodly  Men  are  Unprofitable  to
themseWes  and  to  others

Treasures  in  Heaven

Cliristiauity  not  permanently  Com-
patible with  Slavery  as  an  Institu-
uon     •••  •••  ...  a*.        %f

The  Brotherhood  of  all  Christians    ...      10

Spiritual  Benefits  the  most  Valuable
ofall  ...  ...  ...  ...      10  I

The  Sceptre  of  Love  ...  ...      11  i


8
8


TIlESn

Love's  Outcome  in  Prayer  ...

Love's  Motive-Power

Personal  Obligation

Needful  Preparation

The  Address  and  Salutation

Recognition  of  the  Christian  Clioracter

and  Services  of  Philemon
Appeal  by  Entreaty  rather  than  Com-

manci  •••  •••  •.•  *••

The  Motives  that  prompted  the  Apostle

to  send  back  Onesimus  to  his  Master
The  Plea  of  Christian  Fellowship  ...
The  Apostle's  Frauk  Acceptance  of

Pecuniary        Bosponsibility       for

Onesimus  ...  •••  ...

A  Plea  for  Personal  Consideration  ...
The  Apostle's  Coucluding  Appeal  ...
Salutations  and  Prayer


PAGB

11
12
12
12
12

13

14

15
16


16
17
17
17


/;/  course  of  publication^  Super-Royal  Svo.

The  Pulpit  Commentary

ON  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS.

Edited  by  the  Very  Rev.  H.  D.  M.  8PEN0E,  M.A.,  D.D.,

Dean  of  Gloucester  ;  and

By  the   Rev.  JOSEPH  8.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH  INTRODUCTIONS

By  the  Ven.  Archdeacon  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  the  late  BISHOP  COTTERILL,
the  late  Principal  TULLOCH,  D.D.,  the  Rev.  Canon  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.,  and

the  Rev.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. ;  and

HOMILIES  AND  EXPOSITIONS  BY  UPWARDS  OF  A  HUNDRED

CONTRIBUTORS.


The  aim  of  The  Pulpit  Cobimentart  is  to  provide  scholarly  Introductions  to  the  sacred
books ;  to  divide  the  text  of  Scripture  into  paragraphs,  and  to  supply  each  paragraph  with  such
Exposition  as  shall  meet  the  wants  of  the  Student,  and  such  Homiletical  suggestions  as  shall
assist  the  preparations  of  the  Preacher.

The  EXPOSITIONS  give  Textual  Criticism,  Revised  Translation  where  necessary,  Explan-
ation.  Apologetics,  Reference  to  Ancient  Customs,  Contemporary  History,  Natural  History,
Geographical  Research,  Science,  and  anything  that  tends  to  light  up  the  Text,  and  make
it  available  for  practical  instruction.  These  are  followed  by  a  comprehensive  SERMON
OUTLINE,  embracing  the  salient  points  of  the  preceding  critical  and  expository  section,  and  by
brief  HOMILIES  FROM  VARIOUS  CONTRIBUTORS,  designed  to  show  different  modes  of
treatment,  and  to  bring  into  relief  different  aspects  of  the  passages  under  consideration.


OLD  TESTAMENT  SERIES.

THE   FOLLOWING    VOLUMES  ARE   NOW  READY:^

GENESIS.

By  Rev.  T.  WHITELAW,  M.A. ;  with  HomUics  by  Very  Rev.  J.  F.  MONTGOMERY,  D.D.,
Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  F.  HASTINGS,  and  Rev.  W.
ROBERTS,  M.A.  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  the  Old  Testament  by  Ven.  Archdeacon
FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S. ;  and  Introductions  to  the  PenUteuch  by  the  Right  Rev.
H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  and  Rev.  T.  WHITELAW,  M.A.    (Eighth  Edition.)  Price  151.


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


"  It  is  quite  impossible,  in  the  limits  of  a  brief  notice,
to  review  and  chanurterize  these  ponderous  volumes  as
they  deserve.  But  I  may  sa^  at  once  that  the  exposi-
tions contained  in  them,  especially  considering  that  thev
are  meant  for  popular  use,  maintain  a  very  nigh  level.
From  the  strictly  orthodox  point  of  view,  I  doubt,  for
instance,  whether  any  better  commentary  on  the  Book
of  Genesis  has  been  written  than  that  of  Mr.  Whitelaw,
or  has  been  written  in  a  better  spirit." — Expositor,

"We  are  bound  to  say  that  the  more  we  see  of  this
Commentary  the  better  we  like  it ;  and  the  more  highly
do  we  estimate  the  ability,  piety,  and  sound  judgment
with  which  it  is  being  earned  on.  Most  readers  will
feel  that  they  understand  fiur  better  the  plan  and  purpose
of  the  entire  Commentary  after  an  attentive  perusal  of
the  volume  upon  Genesis ;  and  it  would  not  be  too  much
to  say  that,  take  it  altogether,  there  is  no  other  Com-


mentary upon  Genesis  in  the  English  language  ^uito
equal  to  it.  Fuller  and  more  comprehensive  than  either
Bishop  Wordsworth's,  J.  H.  Blunt's,  or  the  'Speakei^s
Commentary,'  it  yet  avoids  the  prolixity,  the  faults  of
style,  the  somewhat  pedantic  and  over-learned  dis*
quisitions  of  Lange's  *Bib*l-w€rk^  which  it  sometimes
tasks  even  a  scholar  to  disentangle ;  while  its  comments
are,  in  all  respects,  adequate  and  learned,  and  wherever
we  have  testied  them  pious  and  orthodox."— ^A^imi^
ChurchmuH.

"  The  Introductions  of  the  volume  on  Genesis  are
specially  able  and  complete.  Canon  Farrar  contributes
a  General  Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament — setting
forth  the  way  in  which  for  hcnniletical  purposes  it  is  to
be  interpreted  and  used— lull  of  scholany  and  common-
sense  canons  and  suggestions;  Bishop  CoCterill  an
elaborate  dissertation  on  tlie  derelopoient  of  the  idea  of


THE  PULPIT  COMMBNTARY.'-OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


law,  from  its  hogiiming  in  htunn
adounataoii  in  tfa*  iwmlion  of  Ood


to  its
Mr.Whitdnw


oiiminsnflM  in  ttM  rawtntion  or  Ood ;  Mr.  wbitelnw  a
dsConos  of  tlis  Mosaic  Aothonhip  of  the  Psntafoch,
dsaling  in  detail  with  objecdoos.  Mr.  Whitelaw  b  also
tho  antfaor  of  the  Expositioo  of  Geossu  and  of  Its
Homiletics.  The  Homilies  are  hy  Dr.  Monttomery,
ProlesMr  Redford,  Rer.  W.  Roberts,  and  Rev.  F.
Hastings.  The  volume  b  throoghottt  a  very  able  and
loBDortant  expositioo  of  thb  first  ud  ssmiaal  book  of  the
HUe."— ^nWM  QumrUHy  RewUm.

"  We  do  not,  of  coone,  commit  ourselves  to  all  the
positiooi  of  this  massive  introduction,  nor  indeed  to
the  exegetical  conclusions  without  excepticm  of  the  rest
of  the  volume,  but  that  does  not  pcevent  our  laying
with  reference  to  the  *  Pulpit  Commentary '  on  GenesM
that  there  is  nothing  like  it,  and  that  no  one  who
wishes  to  be  thoroughly  informed  on  this  pcedous
portioo  of  Holy  Writ  can  afford  to  be  without  it."—
JittksduL

"  In  the  two  volumes  befiwe  «s  ws  have  the  plan  of
the  'pulpit'  Commentary  suflSdentlv  matured  to  enable
us  to  jud^  of  iu  value.  Eadi  Kapler  in  the  Com*
■•ntary  u  examined  mostly  verse  by  verse,  sjad  the
li|ht  accumulated  by  modem  discoveries,  and,  let  us
aod,  by  modem  oontrovenies,  is  used  to  dear  up  the
mwining  of  the  text.  This  is  succeeded  by  homiletic
leflections  in  which  the  chapter  is  examined  in  a  broader
sweep,  and  the  lesions  which  may  fiuily  and  rsasooably
be  deduced  firom  the  scriptund  narrative  are  stUed  in
•udi  a  manner  as  to  make  them  useful  as  outlines  of
■snnoos,  or  at  least  as  suggestive  of  the  ruling  thoughts
which  would  rise  in  the  nunds  of  beams,  and  demand  a
recognitioo  in  any  exposition  of  the  chapter.  Such  a
design  faithfully  adhered  to  and  earned  out  with
a  larseness  of  view,  limited  onlv  by  the  plain  and
settled  meaning  of  the  text,  will  place  in  the  hands  of
those  called  upon  to  expound  the  Scriptures  of  truth  a
selection  of  materials  of  nnfsiling  value,  and  ready  for
ooastant  use."— /«A»  Buil,

y  In  fact,  these  expositions  are  a  new  testimony  that
ioeooe  and  rsvelatkm  are  simply  two  revolving  wheels
with  indentations  intended  from  the  very  fint  to  fit  into
each  other,  and  neither  of  which  has  anythLng  to  fear,
the  only  thing  sure  to  suffer  being  the  mistaken,  because
prenuuure,  interpretations  thrust  in  between.  The  whole
book  reminds  us  very  much  of  Lange,  although  the
great  German  oommenutor  has  none  of  those  honuletical


otttliiies  wUch  are  fitted  to  be  of  such  sernce  in
busy  days  to  the  self<«sliant  neadier  who  knows  how  to
use  them,  namely,  not  to  stflle  but  to  suggest  thought.
In  another  impoittnt  sense  the  Commentary  differs  from
Lange  even  in  its  best  English  attire,  as  well  as  from  the
series  «tf  commentaries  of  the  old  Puritan  divines  pub-
lidied  by  Nichol,  of  Edmburgh ;  we  mean  in  this,  that
it  u  not  overloaded,  and  that  you  can  get  at  once  what
you  need.  This  U  a  great  boon,  saving  both  time  and
temper,  while  every  word  tells.  As  a  book  spedally
intraded  for  ministers  of  religion,  as  the  title  indicates
this  Commentary  will  pass,  when  completed,  into  the
front  rank  of  Biblical  expositions  in  the  English  or  in-
deed  in  any  other  Isngusge.**— i^Aw^^Wg/  Mercury.


"  There  are  two  poinU  to  be  specially  noted  in  this
woric  One  b  that  it  b  brought  out  under  the  auspices
of  dergjrmen  and  Dissenting  ministers  working  together
in  its  production  \  the  other  b  that  it  b  a  gigantic
ina|;anne  of  matenab  prepared  for  being  promptly  made
up  uto  sermons."— <rsmmrVm.


««^


We  repeat  emphatically  the  high  encomium  which
ws  have  passed  upon  former  volumes  of  *The  Pulpit
Coounentary.'    This  b  a  grand  book."— Rev.  '^    "
Spukgbon,  m  Sw^rdmnd  Trowel,


C.  H.


"The  result  of  our  inspection  bys  it  on  us  as  a  simple
dutv  to  say  that  'amongst  all  the  commentaries  which  it
might  occur  to  the  readier  to  compare  with  thb  one  (and
those  are  sodi  as  Lange'sX  thb  amongst  them  all  b  the
best  *  Genesb'  for  homiletical  purpoees  that  we  have.
And  let  it  be  remarked  that  thb  'GenesU '  will  be  found
to  serve  these  purposes  in  a  manner  much  more  learned
and  schdarly  than  the  ordinary  homilist  will  likefy  or
can  reasonably  expect.  .  .  .  Altogether,  the  exposition
b  one  of  threat  practical  avail,  extremely  satisfactory,  we
should  think,  to  the  scholar,  and  of  the  utmost  uulity,
at  the  same  time,  §at  the  pulpit — a  utOity  greatly  en-
hanced by  the  '  Homiletics,'  that  is,  Homiletical  aa^yses
of  these  succesBveparagn^hs.  Theaa '  HomiUlics  *  are,
whib  keoMng  to  their  proper  office  of  analysing  the  text
and  fanaucing  it  up  for  nrearhing  purposes,  the  freshest
and  most  snggestivs  pulpit  matmial  we  have  seen."—
Edimhtrgk  Dmify  Review,

"  We  look  forward  with  interest  to  the  continuance  of
this  bold  undertaking,  and  hope  to  see  it  brought  to  a
successful  condusion.  —  Church  Times,


EXODUS.

By  Rev.  Canon  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. ;  with  HomiUcs  by  Rev.  J.  ORR,  M.  A.,  B.D.,  Rev.
D.  YOUNG,  B.A.,  Rev.  C.  A.  GOODHART,  M.A.,  Rev.  J.  URQUHART,  and
Rev.  II.  T.  ROBJOHNS,  B.A.    (Fotirth  Edition.)    2  vols.    Price  i8j.


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


"Taken  as  a  whole,  the  'Introduction'  must  be
regarded  as  an  especially  valuable  help  to  the  student,
and  as  throwing  a  flood  of  light  upon  this  sbgularly
interesting  period  of  the  worldl  hutory.  The  notes  on
particular  verses  are  full  of  information  bearing  on  the
point  required.  ...  On  the  whole,  this  portly  volume
marks  the  highest  level  yet  attained  by  the  work  of
which  it  forms  a  psat."— Literary  Churthman.

**  The  expositions  and  homibtics  are  all  in  the  well-
known  style  with  which  Canon  Kawlinson  supporU  his
reputation  as  a  scholar  and  theologian;  while  the
homilies  are  the  work  of  five  other  authors,  whose  share
in  the  task  is  conspicuously  deserving  of  praise.  It  is
extraordinary  what  light  is  here  thrown  upon  the  least
interesting  and  most  difficult  passages.  A  deeply
solemn  impression  is  created  by  the  homilies  on  the
•Giving  of  the  Law/  the  ' Manilesution  of  God  to
Moses,  etc.  >^ther  for  pulpit  preparation  or  private
meditation,  saiolany  hands  and  sympathetic  hearts  have


provided  a  volume  for  universal  use.**— T'A^  Cleixjman's
Magazine.

"  What  we  have  been  able  to  read  of  '  Exodus*  has
given  us  unfeigned  pleasure.  Not  merely  do  the  various
writers  give  us  their  views,  but  show  us  the  tooU  with
which  they  have  worked,  the  Ixx^s  they  have  consulted,
the  storehouses  where  fuller  material  may  be  found,  and
minute  cautions  and  advice  how  to  make  the  best
sermons  out  of  the  sacred  text  are  strewn  in  abundance.
No  weak  pulpit  addresses  will  be  pardoned  afler  the
completion  of  thb  truly  national  work.*' — Ecclesiasticai
Gtuette.

"Professor  Rawlinson  has  dene  hb  very  important
portion  of  the  work  with  admirable  judgment  and
learning." — British  Quarterly  Review.

"Thb  may  fairiy  take  rank  as  one  of  the  best  instaU
ments  of  the  **  Pulpit  Commentary'  yet  issued." — CMnrtk
Times.


THE  PULPIT  COMMBNTARY.^OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


LEVITICUS.

By  Rev.  Preb.  MEYRICK,  M.  A. ;  with  Introductions  by  Rev.  R.  COLLINS  and  Rev.  Prof.
A.  CAVE ;  and  with  HomiUes  by  Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  W.
CLARKSON,  B.A.,  Rev.  J.  A.  MACDONALD,  Rev.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  B.A.,  LL.B.,
and  Rev.  McCHEYNE  EDGAR,  M.A.    {Fourth  Edition.)    Price  15J.


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS,


"  A  valuable  addition  to  our  stock  of  conunentaries
on  this  part  of  the  Books  of  Moses." — yoht  Bull.

"This  volnme  is  of  substantial  worth,  and  will  form
a  valuable  addition  to  the  preacher's  library." — Primi'
live  Methodist,

"  We  know  not  where  the  reader  will  find  more  ample
dis()uisitions  on  all  the  Levitical  sacrifices  and  rites,  and
theu"  manifold  relations,  than  in  this  volume.  It  is  also
very  rich  in  the  homiletic  treatment  of  these  subjects." —
Jrish  Ecclesteutical  Gazette.

**  For  the  religious  cultivation  of  the  imagination  and
the  development  of  the  true  spirit  of  poetry  there  is  no
better  help  than  the  Book  of  Leviticus.  In  it  is  fotmd
how  the  kingdom  of  nature  corresponds  to  that  of  grace,
and  in  some  sense  typifies,  figures,  or  symbolizes  it.
The  study  of  nature  is  thus  ennobled.    But  in  order  to


discover  these  resemblances,  there  is  needed  a  clear-
sighted, sober,  and  experienced  guide.  Such  is  one  of
the  many  benefits  rendered  to  students  and  ordinary
readers  by  this  scholarly  and  exhaustive  Pulpit  Com*
mentary  on  Leviticus." — Leeds  Mercury,


(I


We  question  whether,  for  working  purposes,  better
commentaries  on  the  Old  Testament  are  to  be  had
anywhere  than  in  this  *  Pulpit  Commentary'  series.
They  are  scholarly,  without  bein^  tediously  erudite;
fuU,  without  being  prolix ;  ludd,  without  descending  to

})latitude ;  conservative,  yec  with  moderation ;  rarely
iailing  to  hit  the  true  sense  of  a  passage,  yet  careful  to
furoiux  the  reader  with  the  materials  for  correcting  a
wrong  judgment,  if  in  any  case  he  should  think  that
they  nave  misse^  the  mark.  We  admire  in  them,  above
all,  their  buunesslike  directness  and  their  usually  just
appreciation  of  what  are  likely  to  be  the  points  on  wnich
information  is  sought" — Glasgow  HertUd,


NUMBERS.

By  Rev.  R.  WINTERBOTHAM,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  B.Sc. ;  with  an  Introduction  by  Rev.  T.
WHITELAW,  M.A. ;  and  with  HomiUes  by  Rev.  Prof.  W.  BINNIE,  D.D.,  Rev.  E.  S.
PROUT,  M.A.,  Rev.  D.  YOUNG,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.  (Fifih  Editi^.)
Price  1 5  J.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


**  Competent  scholarship,  exact  thought,  and  reverent
handling  of  the  Scriptures  are  apparent  on  every  paMge.
He  has  mastered  the  voluminous  literature  whicn  has
gathered  round  this  special  book  of  Scripture^  and  is
acquainted  at  first  hand  with  all  the  critical,  historical,
and  geographical  problems  which  await  solution."—
Daily  Free  Press.

"  Of  course,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  read  care-
fully the  whole  of  these  five  hundred  closely  printed
large  octavo  pages,  and  it  may  be  there  are  some
opinions  in  it  from  which  we  might  dissent ;  but  judging
from  what  we  have  read,  we  can  confidently  recommend
it.  Whilst  it  may  be  inferior  in  scholarship  to  the  sreat
works  of  Keil  and  Delitzsch,  Ewald,  Kurtz,  and  Heng-
sienberg,  it  will  be  found  more  useful  than  those,  not
only  generally,  but  also  for  its  special  purpose.  It  may
be  confidently  asserted  that  when  completed  the  '  Pulpit
Commentary'  will  be  the  best  purely  English  com-
mentary in  existence.  It  divides  the  Dook  mto  short
^uragraphs,  of  each  of  which  there  is  a  good  exposition.
The  homiletic  outlines  follow,  which  may  be  used  or
read  as  a  substitute  for  sermons.  Then  come  homilies
or  sermon  outlines  on  the  same  paragraphs  by  Rev.
Prof.  W.  Binnie,  D.D.,  Rev.  E.  S.  Prout,  M.A.,  Rev.
D.  Young,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  J.  Waite,  B.A.  In  different
parts  of  the  work  there  are  special  articles — for  instance,
on  the  position  of  Kadesh,  the  thirty-eight  years'  sub-
mergence of  the  history  after  the  rebellion  at  Kadesh,
the  history  of  Balaam,  Balaam's  prophecies,  the  zeal  of
Phinehas,  the  extermination  of  the  Midianites,  and  the
two  Hsu  of  stations  between  Egypt  and  the  Jordan.  A
homiletical  index  at  the  end  of  the  volume  adds  greatly
to  its  value." — Leeds  Mercury.

"As  the  Book  of  Numbers  has  never  yet  been  fully
expounded,  we  all  the  more  heartily  welcome  this
volume.  If  by  any  good  word  of  ours  we  could  increase
the  sale  of  this  noble  series  of  commentaries,  we  should
count  the  time  and  space  to  be  most  profitably  employed.
Messrs.  C.  K^an  F^nl  and  Co.  deserve  to  be  supported
lUmndantly  in  aa  entcrprtM  so  daringly  planned  and  so


admirably  executed.  Perhapt  the  best  service  we  can
render  both  to  our  readers  anid  the  publishers  is  to  quote
from  the  prospectus  the  following  statement  as  to  the
design  of  these  volumes,  upon  which  the  best  scholars
of  the  age  are  employed. "—Rev.  C.  H.  Spukcbon,  in
Sword  and  Trowel,

"The  great  difficulties  created  by  the  gaps  of  time  in
the  Book  of  Numbers^  by  the  slaughter  of  the  Midianitish
women,  the  perplexities  created  by  Kuenen  and  Colenso
with  reference  to  the  two  censuses,  and  the  number  of
fighting  men  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  are  handled  by  Mr
Whiteuw  very  judiciously  and  ably,  and  the  textual
commentary  by  Mr.  Winterbotham,  with  its  spedaJ
notes,  does  not  shirk  difficulties  which  have  been  often
felt.  Some  very  happy  homiletic  use  is  made  of  the
grander  portions  of  tne  sublime  story." — EvetngeliceU
Mag€uitu.

"  The  wisdom  of  the  editors  has  in  no  instance  been
more  clearly  exhibited  than  in  the  selection  of  Mr.
Winterbotham  as  expositor  and  homilist ;  and  we  are
glad  to  meet  him  on  ground  where  his  exegetical  powers
are  tested  to  the  utmost.  ^  His  colleagues,  too,  bear
names  which  guarantee  ability  and  soundness.  The
difficulties  of  the  book  are  dealt  with  mainly  in  two
elaborate  introductions;  one  by  Mr.  Whitelaw,  whose
valuable  contribution  on  Genesb  we  have  already  re-
viewed ;  and  one  by  Mr.  Winterbotham.  Of  the  former
it  is  impossible  to  speak  too  highly.  The  questions
raised  by  the  thirty-seven  years'  chasm,  the  number  of
fighting  men,  and  of  the  congregation,  the  duties  of  the
priest,  the  marshalling  of  the  host,  the  Midianitish
victory,  etc ,  are  handled  in  the  clearest  and  most  satis-
factory manner.  With  regard  to  the  so-called  barren
details  of  the  book,  we  have  seldom  read  anjrthinf  more
interesting  and  suggestive  than  the  manner  in  which
some  of  them  are  &alt  ytniYi.**— Methodist,

'*  Fully  up  to  the  level  of  the  former  issues,  and  we
may  specify  the  epUode  of  Balaam  as  bmng  worked  oitt
with  great  care."— CAtircA  Times.


THE  PULPIT  COMMBmARY.^OPmiONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


DEUTERONOMY.

By  Rev.  W.  L.  ALEXANDER*  D.D. ;  with  HomiUes  by  Rev.  D.  DAVIES,  M.A.,  Rev.  C.
CLEMANCE,  D.D.,  Rev.  J.  ORR,  M.A.,  B.D.,  and  Rev.  R.  M.  EDGAR,  M.A.  (Fourth
EdiHoH.)    Price  151.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


"The  Commentanr  is  learching,  guarded,  and  able.
Dr.  Alexander  has  the  candour  as  well  as  the  learning
of  a  true  scholar,  and  does  not  affirm  beyond  what  the
evidence  justifies.  .  .  .  It  is  one  of  the  best  of  the  series,
and  especially  welcome  as  a  contribution  to  a  present
conlroTcrsy.' — .5nYi«*  Qumrterij  Revitw,

"The  present  volume  seems  to  be  auite  on  a  level
with  iu  predecessors.  ...  It  is  carefully  written,  and
ably  copM  with  the  modem  objections  which,  in  oppo-
sition to  the  whole  consenstu  of  antiquity,  would  ascribe
the  authorship  of  Deuteronomy  to  soom  one  other  than
Moms."— i?«c#n/.


"  The  present  volume  contains  a  considerable  amount
of  sound  and  moral  instruction."— %S'rtf/«i»ia«.

"  If  we  might  be  allowed  to  suggest  one  Society  more
it  would  be  this :  to  secure  the  presentation  on  nominal
tehns  of  all  really  valuable  boolcs  like  the  '  Pulpit  Cxim*
mentary '  to  every  teacher  of  religion  in  the  three  king-
doms. Nothing  would  more  certainly  produce  an  able
clergy  than  a  radly  first<lass  Mhniy.—EccUsim^icml
GaxetU,

"The  exposition  is  very  full  and  careful,  and  the
homtletics  and  homilies  are,  as  usual,  fresh,  vi^rous,
comprehensive,
Urian.


and   suggestive."  —  CatkcUc  rres^


JOSHUA.


By  Rev.  J.  J.  LIAS,  M.A. ;  with  Introduction  to  the  Historical  Books  by  Rev.  A.
PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D.;  and  with  HomiUes  by  Rev.  E.  DE  PRESSENS^,  D.D.,
Rev.  RICHARD  GLOVER,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Rev.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  B.A.,
LL.B.,  and  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.    (Fifth  Editum.)    Price  12s.  6d.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

"Joshua  is  treated  by  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  and  his  entire
won  is  fully  deserving  of  similar  praise.  ....  But
of  publications  of  our  own  day,  the  work  before
tts  must  easily  bear  away  the  pahn  for  method  and
comnrehensiveness.  There  has  been  nothing  like  it
for  tne  methodical  way  in  which  the  whole  surface  of
the  Holy  Scriptures  has  been  treated  with  a  homiletical
intention,  and  we  must  say  also  in  the  general  power
and  ability  with  which  the  work  is  done.  .  .  .  All  that
learning,  mndi  industry,  and  an  excellent  method  can
do  has  Deen  done  to  produce  a  work^  in  which  the
laborious  preacher  may  find  the  exact  information  for
suggestive  thought  or  careful  generaltiation  which  he
needs  for  his  pulpit  work,  ready  to  his  hand.  And  this
is  no  small  praise." — Ecclesiastical  Gazette.

**  No  commentary  worthy  of  the  sacred  text  of  Joshua
has  appeared  in  an  English  dress  till  the  publication
of  the  present  volume.  Kcil  is  hardly  up  to  his  usual
mark.  Fay,  in  Lange,  is  far  below  even  the  average
of  that  unequal  work  ;  even  Calvin's  masculine  intellect
seems  at  fault  here,  and  Mr.  Espin,  in  the  '  Speaker's
Commentary,'  while  reasonably  full  and  sound  on  the
whole,  hardly  reaches  a  high  standard  of  excellence.
We  have  examined  this  volume  with  much  care,  and
have  no  hesitation  in  pronouncing  it  immeasurably  the
best  interpretation  of  Joshua  in  the  language.  Mr.  Lias,
in  addition  to  having  the  whole  existing  literature  on
the  subject  to  work  upon,  has  brought  tonis  task  critical
and  exegetical  powers  of  a  rare  order,  and  the  industry,
judgment  and  literary  skill  of  the  late  learned  Hebrew
professor  at  Lampeter,  have  produced  a  commentary


that  will  be  the  standard  work  for  this  and  the  next
gpMndxm,**-^MetAcduL

"The  Commentary  on  Joshua  by  Mr.  Lias  is  as
scholariy,  painstakim^.  and  effective  as  his  contributions
to  the  Cambridge  Bible  for  schools,  which  have  been
characterixed  in  these  pages  more  than  onoe."—
£x/0siicr*

'*  The  present  volume  opens  with  an  introduction  to
the  historical  books  from  Joshua  to  Nehemiah,  b)r  the
Rev.  A.  Plummer.  Although  there  is  nothing  specially
original  in  this  introduction,  the  materials  of  previoos
investigations  and  criticisms  are  well  arranged  and
grouped ;  and  the  whole  affords  a  concise  ^t  graphic
account  of  the  history  of  Israel  during  the  time  referred
to.  The  special  introduction  to  the  Book  of  Joshua,
from  the  pen  of  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Lias,  ably  deals  with
the  various  critical  questions  involved ;  vindicates  the
integrity  and  early  authorship  of  the  book ;  and  di^
cusses  with  candour  and  clearness  the  so-called  moral
and  miraculous  difhcultics  which  it  presents.  Mr.  Lias
also  supplies  the  exposition  and  homilies  in  a  scries  of
concise  and  condensed  notes,  which  presents  the  latent
results  of  scholarship.  The  homilies  are  valuable  and
suggestive.  The  volume  throughout  is  a  useful  help  to
the  homiletical  student  of  the  Book  of  Joshua." — LccJs
Mtrcury.

•"We  repeat  with  even  fuller  emphasis  the  opinion
we  expressed  in  noticing  previous  volumes  of  the  Com-
mentary, that  it  stands  first  in  its  own  department."—
British  and  Foreign  Exfanffelical  Review.


JUDGES   AND   RUTH.

By  the  Bishop  of  BATH  and  WELLS  and  Rev.  J.  MORISON,  D.D.  ;  with  Homilies  by
Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  W.  M.  STATHAM,  Rev.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.,
and  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.     {Fifth  Edition,)    Price  loj.  6</.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

*'  In  the  volume  before  us  we  have,  too,  the  work  of  a
scholar  who  has  made  this  part  of  Scripture  his  peculiar
study.  The  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells  speaks,  there-
fore, with  the  confidence  of  one  who  is  familiar  with  hb
subject;  and  his  notes  and  'homiletics*  can  hardly  €iiil
to  be  of  great  use  to  the  preacher,  wherever  he  may
consult  them.  .  .  .  The  commentary  on  Ruth  is  itseff
as  good  and  edifying,  and  the  entire  volume  quite  equal


•*The  introduction,  as  well  as  the  commentary,  is
vigorous  and  suggestive."— ^rrVwA  Quarterly  Review.

"The  Book  of  Judges  has  been  entrusted  to  Lord
Arthur  Hervey,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  for  'expo-
sition and  homiletics,'  and  is  well  and  thoroughly  done,
as  would  be  expected  from  a  divine  who  has  made  that
portion  of  Scripture  to  some  extent  his  special  study." —
Ecclesiasticmi  Casette.


TffS  PULPir  COMMBNTARY.-~OPimONS  OF  THE  J>/t£SS.


S


H  which  hin  preceded  it." — CAur,


}  clEiEymsn  01


jmplun  of  the  diSculIy  o


nsn  ougbl  to  csmpliio  of

lion  wiiK  iDch  o  work  in  hit  lumli ;  the

dered  too  easy,  and  the  prcadker  hifflielf  robbed  of  hii

hofpilelic  Dotea  are  more  luggeitive  (Aa  it  ii  &o  dviTmble
lluC  ther  iboold)  thu  exhaiulive.    The  rudet  will  And

whil  it  ii  intended  he  ibould  find.  Jtaiiiilrlk  mitH,  lo  be

Ahape  for  the  pulpit  by  dint  orvranffemcnl  and  tboogbt

trnlmtot  which  »me  af  the  more  difficult  paiu^ca  ia
t^e  ^  Judga'  have  received  at  the  handa  of  the  com-
DHntalan,  and  Bnd  It  emiaenlly  latiklactory.  FoT
aaimple,  Mr.  Adeoey's  note,  the  Blinder  of  SiKra  by
Jael,  La  to  ho  conuncnded  forita  good  aenae  and  noeoD-
ablencaa.  Kothine  vt,  aaid  that  iDiocka  the  moral  aenai-
bililiei.  The  ngie  on  Jephtbah'i  vow  is  al»  good."—
/rut  EccUiiailicmi  GoMitlr.
"Homiliea  full  of  auefealive  thought."— AVflfsx-


xa  are  got  up  in  the  nnie  handaome  ityle ;  aulhan
ill  for  abUIty  aud  uely  fbrniah  the  maleiial :  and
HBOeticalohJiKtia^eptGoiulaBUyiDnew.  When
ndertaluns  vai  bcfun,  one  feared  leal  it  ihoold  be

-'"^-  (runuhtanr  and  crude;  but-'-'  —  ■■ *  '*

he  heat


aay  that  the  -
thorouih  and
credit  Tar  bil

fheotosical  ac


ive  bee'o  taken  to  m^  it  b
hy  work.  Mr.  Eiell  deaerro
n  the  ciuie.     He  haa  halpcd

-  "  'jil  ""'■    "■

.    I


'  speak  in  detail  of  the  fulneta  and
V  uL  iui»  cuiauaiive  Commentaty.  a  hbrary  in
id  which  every  clcigyman'a  library  ought  lo

r." — CitrcymoM's  MagotiKt.


VaH^klU  MmgOBltu.


I.  SAMUEL.

By  Very  Rev.  R.  PAYNE  SMITH,  D.D.  (Dean  of  Canterbury);  with  Hooulies  bjr  Re*.
D.  FRASER,  D.D.,  Rev.  Prof.  CHAPMAN,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  BRYAN  DALE,  M.A.
{Sixth  EdUien.)    Price  15^.


"The  Dean  of  Canter

would  eipect,  quite  the  beat  help  la  the  reading
altiactive  hook  10  be  found  in   Eegliah  literal

"1  ihanb  you  much  for  Uw  Urge  and  ha
volume  OB  1  Sanad  wbldi  you  have  kindly  eeni


muei     have  ii."— Stuki.bv  Ibathss,  D.D„  PnJ,  of  Hitm,
Itudy     Kin^i  Cilitf,  Lmdn.

■hit        "  Theie  waa  ample  room  for  acommenl  upon  Sannel,

e.  —     for    Ihere  ia  acarcely  anything  upon  that   bonk  worth

meniioning.  Thia  noble  volume  fiiri  the  (n;>  eioedingly


iuapccialcbaiaeterofahomiletiealcoBimenlary,  ii  will  "on  10  ihiaajeihat  Jaini'i '  Life  ofCbnu   doei;

prove  of  the  greateal  uk  to  itodenu  of  Holy  Saiptuie."  '''ve  with  beiun'  of  tlyle  and  vigour  of  Ihoughi,

-The  Right  Rev.  C.  J.  EluCOIT,  D.D.,  Lard  Bitkap  coiiHioua  of  all  itie  hghl  thai  ncenl  yeara  havt  ca

c/CUucitl,r,u^Brf,M.  thealudyoflhe«uiedScnpturea.     We  do  no.  he.


- , helpful

eapecially,  whether  in  cburcb  or  tchool,'  will
'     iiiiu  (II?  inapinilion  that  they  too  ofken  acelc  in  vain  in
(he  dull  and  dreary  platitudes  of  many  ao-ialled  aida

"The  book  ._  .^ ,.__._._.


"Pnrfeaa
caofea


great  storehouse  of  expoblory  and
Ur.  Don


C<MnDKntaTy  *  that  was  publi^ed  only  a  few  months  aKO     Bryan  Dale  aiipply  homilita  on  (he  prindpal  ideas  and
ia  already  in  italhird  edition,  and  a  second  tdilion  of  the     verae^.    Tboae  of  Mr.  Dale  e&pedally  are  happy  and


I.   KINGS.

By  Kev.  JOSEPH  HAMMOND,  LL.B.  ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  E.  DE  PRESSENSt,
D.D.,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Kev.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  J.  A,  MAC-
DONALD,  and  Rev.  J.  URQUHART.     [Fi/ili  Ediiion.)     Price  151.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

■e  find  elaewbcrt,  thai  moal  of  Ihtm  would  have  10  do  [  and  iinorani  of  men,  who  can  fail  u  be  mateiiaJly
witbont  it  alwaeiber  onleaa  auch  a  volniae  had  been  t  helped,  and  oRen  atimolated,  by  the  maleriala  which  an
fBonkd.     Tixn  ia  no  occaaioa  fai  trt  mlniitcr  to  I  here  placed  within  hia  reach,    fi  U 10  be  hoped  thai  ihit


TBB  PULPIT  COMtaNTAttY.—OPimOlfS  OF  THE  PXBSS.


I.   CHRONICLES.

Bt  Re*.  Prof.  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.  A.,  LL.B. ;  with  Homilict  br  Rn.  ProC  I.  R.  THOMSON,
M.A.,  Rev.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A.,  Rev.  R.  TUCK,  &A.,  Rev.  F.  WHITFIELD,
M.A.,  and  Rev.  RICHARD  GLOV£R.     Price  151.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


an  •!■  nuT  mfMl  iMiui.'— OkvEt  rtan.


ii«d  nrealr  uU  tbU  tfaade^  iriU  be  mndi  be


"  ApotherwtdBUi  inwalniHit  ct  ilu«  ml  noA.  .  .
Upon  du  dreaiclH  w«  hmn  dBlnadr  uai^t,  rU
tUTnlu*  wiU  ba,  thnfcn,  d«iUr  Wcome.    Ssfu


"  Willi  mdi  ■  blip  u  tUi  npca  tha  book ,  1  Chnnidei

.■>_. . ,  ^  p,oa,j4,  diKDunc  B)  the

u  CDDld  not  da  bMtcT  thu  jn-


ijttrituCIUinlumMM.


EZRA,   NEHEMIAH,   ESTHER.

BrRev.  Cuum  G.  RAWUNSON,  M.A. ;  with  HomUia  bv  Rev.  Piof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,
M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.REDFORD,M.A.,LL.B.,Rev.  W.  S.  LEWIS,  MJl.,  Rev.  J.  A.
MACDONALD,  Rev.  A.  MACKENNAL,  B.A.,  Rev.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A.,  Rer.
F.  HASTINGS.  Rev.  W.  DINWIDDIE,  LL.B..  Rev.  Prof.  ROWLANDS,  B.A,
Rev.  G.  WOOD,  B.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.A.,  LL.B..  and  Rev.  I.  S.
EXELL,  M.A.     {Sixth  Edilien.)    Piiceiw.W,

OP/N/ONS  OF  THE  F/iESS.

1  10  u  Tciy  well  done  Ibroughout."— /.I'ttmrj
So  f«r,  howrvtr,  it  kcsu  to  hive  bc«  cinied  sul

"Tbm  »»  certain  amount  or no»dl»  in  the  pl»n    KnnDiK    on    thou    picu    of   Seripluit*— (?Wii
of  iha  '  Pulpit  CommtnUTT,'   end   [he   We»   rtrikci  ■  QatrUriy  Rtviea.

"  VJinT'^r'tl"™™?'  .'Sd'"dX'dc'^J^»  i      "W..luU  watch  with  end,  in..««U«co™of.bi.
13  .iTTBJhR^lJi.Mi™^  Ir  i.  no.  ;„i„7i  »l,^^lJ    CommeBtary,  iuid  we  ihall  be  ditippointed  if  il  ihould

i„En,lL»hwLllprov.r.oreadap.«Jp,l«ially.oEnBhJ.  ■  ^I'^^i^t'^nUm  ^'UeU  «^'  .he  <5^--
udiencet  than  one  which  muil  of  McesMiy,  cood  u  11    ^L  i  ,,'      '°  '"°="  "  """  "  "  ""  aergy.  —
il,  beai  the  murks  of  i»  Getmiu.  origin.  W  pUin    ■'•*"  *"''■
■dopladhereijioprovide^fof  eath  ehaptti  ot  Kdion  of  ,      "PKaditn  muil  have  mistaken  Ibcir  calling  alio-

fiwn  hlnoiy  and  archaolofr.    Thi  part  of  the  wwk  1  H.  Spuboeon,  in  Jnwrrf«U  Tnail.

ISAIAH.


3  vols.    Price  151.  cacli.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  FFESS.
ime  (VoL  l.tof  nearly  iSi  hundred  p)<e«  ii


THE  PULPIT  COMMENTARY. ^OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


enected,  by  great  hhtorical  kaowledfe,  bat  \xj  con-
sioerable  finMhness  of  trMtmcnt  and  spuitual  insist."
— LiUrmry  W9H4L

"  The  introduction  is  concise,  but  teeming  with  vahi-
able  information*  methodicalljr  arranged.  • . .  The  Com*
mentary  will  be  found  essentially  usefoL  It  is  brief,
pithy,  and  plain.  .  .  .  The  work  is  one  which  must  be
of  great  service,  especially  as  it  deals  >yith  a  book  which


furnishes  texts  for  io  many  Mnaon%,*'~^£ccUti4uticai
Gautti,


•< '


'  It  is  certain  that  the  preacher  who  makes  a  liberal
use  of  this  Commentary  will  not  lack  variety  of  topic
nor  freshness  in  his  method  of  treatment.  The  subjects
are  finely  stated,  and  most  of  them  are  well  and  some-
times elaborately  expounded." — Primitive  MethoditU


JEREMIAH  AND   LAMENTATIONS.

By  Rev.  Canon  T.  K.  CHEYNE,  M.A.,  D.D. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOM-
SON, M.A.,  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.,  Rev.  D.  YOUNG.  B.A.,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,
B.A.,  Rev.  S.  CONWAY,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.  {Third  Edition,)
2  vols.     Price  15J.  each.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

"We  are  glad  to  recei\-e  this  new  Commentary  upon
the  many  interesting  questions  which  still  remain  to  be
dealt  with,  connected  with  the  Prophecy  of  Jeremiah ;
and  we  are  particularly  glad  to  receive  it  from  the  hands
of  Mr.  Cheyne,  who  is  one  of  the  comparatively  small
number  of  men  among  us  whose  views  on  the  prophetical
literature  deserve,  and  will  be  sure  to  receive,  careful
and  respectful  attention,  and  no  common  degree  of  con-
fidence. —/-iVrrary  CkMrcAmaa.


<«'


We  have  read  many  parts  with  intense  interest,
feeling  more  than  ever  that  Jeremiah  was  indeed  an
evangelioU  prophet  of  the  most  earnest  kind"— £ccU-
siastical  Gazette.


"The  introduction  is  short,  but  furnishes  an  in-
teresting  account  of  the  Prophet  Jeremiah,  while  a
great  deal  of  valuable  information  relating  to  his  pro-
phecies is  introduced  throughout  the  volume." — Ruerd.


"Both  introduction  and  exposition  are  good^  and
reveal  ever]rwhere  the  hand  of  a  master.  The  homtletics
and  homilies  are  full  of  good  matter,  which  will  doubt-
less be  of  much  use  to  many  who  have  not  time  or
ability  to  think  out  their  sermons  for  themselves.  .  .  .
The  volume  before  us  is  quite  equal  to  anv  of  its  prede-
cessors. If  it  promote,  as  we  earnestly  nope,  a  more
careful  study  of  the  prophecies  and  the  times  of  Jere-
miah, it  will  reveal^  aoundant  and  most  valuable  matter
for  pulpit  ministrations." — Methodist  Recorder,


HOSEA  AND  JOEL.

By  Rev.  Prof.  GIVEN,  Ph.D.,  D.D. ;  with  HomiUes  by  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.  A.,
Rev.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D.,  Rev.  C.  JERDAN,
M.A.,  LL.B.,  and  Rev.  J.  ORR,  M.A.,  B.D.     Price  15J.


NEW  TESTAMENT  SERIES.

THE  FOLLOWING    VOLUMES  ARE  NOW  READY:^

ST.  MARK.

By  Very  Rev.  EDWARD  BICKERSTETH,  D.D.  (Dean  of  Lichfield) ;  with  HomUics  by
Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  E.  JOHNSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  J.  J.
GIVEN,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Rev.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  Rev.  A.  F.  MUIR,  M.A.,
and  Rev.  R.  GREEN.    (Fifth  Edition.)    2  vols.     Price  21s.

OPINION  OF  THE  PRESS.


"  We  have  had  the  pleasant  duty  in  months  past  of
welcoming  the  Old  Testament  instalments  as  they  were
issued,  and  in  urging  our  readers  to  purchase  the  whole
of  St.  Mark's  Gospel  we  feel  warranted  in  speaking
with  equal  decision.  It  was  well  to  select  it  as  the  first,
as  it  stands  alone  and  unique  in  many  parts,  dealing
man  with  deeds  than  words,  and  compressing  a  life  of
activity  into  a  very  limited  space.    The  introduction  is


extremely  valuable,  gathering  up  all  the  points  which
lend  such  a  charm  to  St.  Mark.  Of  the  general  Coon-
mentary  we  have  no  room  now  to  speak  at  any  length.
We  have  examined  the  two  volumes,  but  the  notes
disarm  our  criticism  by  their  candour,  alnlity,  and
absence  of  mere  verbal  reconstruction.'*— ^rr/rrmx/Aco/
Gazette.


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.

By  the  Bishop  of  BATH  and  WELLS ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  Prof.  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.A.,
LL.B.,  Rev.  Prof.  E.  JOHNSON,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  M.A.,  LL.B.,
Rev.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A.,  and  Rev.  R.  TUCK,  B.A.  {'Third  Edition.)  2  vols.
Price  21s.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


''Anything  calculated  to  make  this  important  and
interesting  section  of  the  inspired  Scriptures  better
understood,  and  any  attempt  to  esublish  its  authority
and  to  enforce  its  lessons  on  the  modem  church,  must
be  peculiarly  acceptable.  .  .  .  The  contributions  are
full  and  scholarly.  It  is  important  in  a  Commentary  of
this  90ft  that  room  shonla  be  afforded  not  only  lor
various  viawi,  but  fiar  different  styles.  Wo  have  ex*
'  fSbttm  vofauBes  widi  modi  care  and  with  great


satisfaction.  .  .  .  We  commend  this  as  an  invalnaUe
contribution  to  the  exegesis  of  the  Acts  and  to  tlM  eft-
dency  of  the  Christian  Pu\iAt,"—/Hetkodtst.

"  The  BishoD  of  Bath  and  Wells  is  one  of  the  highest
authorities  in  the  land  on  some  points,  chronologioJ  and
other,  which  are  especially  involved  in  this  document.
His  introduction  is  sunply  pcifcct ;  and  on  every  passage
OQ  wMdi  we  have  ooosolted  it,  the  cxpositloo  tt  admv-
whU."^L&m/OH  Qmmrterfy  Rewitw.


THE  PULPIT  COMMBNTARY^-OPimONS  OF  THE  PRESS.


CORINTHIANS  AND  GAIJVTIANS.

By  the  Ven.  Archdeacon  FARRAR,  D.D.,  and  Rer.  Preb.  E.  HUXTA6LE ;  with  Homiliei
by  Rev.  DAVID  THOMAS,  D.D.,  Rev.  DONALJ)  ERASER,  D.D.,  Rev.  Ex-Chancellor
LIPSCOMB,  LL.D.,  Rev.  \V.  E.  HURNDALL,  M.A.,  Rev.  Prof.  J.  R.  THOMSON,
M.A.,  Rev.  R,  TUCK,  B.A.,  Rev.  J.  WAITE,  B.A.,  Rev.  H.  BREMNER,  B.D.,  etc.

Vol.  I.,  containing  I.  CORINTHIANS.     (Third  Edition,)    Price  1$/.

Vol.  II.,  containing  II.  CORINTHIANS  and  GALATIANS.    Price  2Ij.

OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

"We  can  but  add  that,  under  the  learned,  we  had
nearly  written  magic,  penA  of  the  writers,  we  see  Corinth
alive,  and  iu  numerous  doctrinal  difftreoces  given
depth  and  breadth  to,  and  Paul  proved  a  more  pro-
found and  a  clearer  theologian  than  the  critics  have
often  acknowledgedi  The  '  Pulpit  Commentary*  ought
to  be  in  the  hanids,  and  largely  in  the  heads,  of  every
man  who  enters  a  pulpit.** — EccUsiatticml  Gmaetie,

"The  new  volume  of  this  truly  great  work  is  fully
equal  to  the  best  of  lis  predece«sors.  Archdeacon
Farrar^s  exposition  is  a  monument  of  learning,  industry.
Judgment,  and  literary  skill,  and  reveals  critical  and
•xeg^tical  powers  of  a  very  high  order.  Dr.  Thomas's
homiletic«  abundantly  pnive  that  the  eye  of  this  great
homilist  is  not  dim,  nor  is  his  natural  force  abated.


The  various  homilies  are  generally  able,  suggestive
and  helpful.  There  are  no  words  in  our  vocabulary
expreuive  enough  to  represent  our  profound  and
deepening  conviction  of  the  priceless  value  of  this  noble
series  of  commentaries.  No  preacher,  desiring  to  be
a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  can  afford
to  be  without  these  volumes.  To  young  ministers  in
particular  we  say  most  emphatically,  'Sell  all  that  you
have,  if  need  be,  to  get  them.'  "--Primitivt  Mttkodist.

^ "  Marked  by  dear  thinking  and  equally  clear  expres-
sion,^ and  the^  comments  are  frequently  enriched  by
classical  allusions  and  illustrations  drawn  from  the
writers'  wide  study  of  the  great  Latin  and  (!ceek
writers."— ^4^/u/.


EPHESIANS,  PHILIPPIANS,  AND     <>

COLOSSIANS.

By  Rev.  Prof.  W.  G.  BLAIKIE,  D.D.,  Rev.  B.  C.  CAFFIN,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  G.  G.  FIND-
L.\V.  B.  A. ;  with  Homilies  by  Rev.  DAVID  THOMAS,  D.D.,  Rev.  Prof.  T.  CROS.
KERY,  D.D.,  Rev.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.,  Rev.  R.  l!L  EDGAR,  M.A.,  Rev.  R.
FINLAYSON,  B.A.,  Rev.  Canon  HUTTON,  Rev.  U.  R.  THOMAS,  D.D.,  and  Rev.
E.  S.  PROUT,  M.A.    (Stcond Edition.)    Price_2i/.

OPINIONS  ~0F  THE  PRESS,

"The  exposition  and  homiletics  of  the  Epistle  to
Ephesus  by  Ftof.  Blaikie  are  firm  and  reverent,  yet
ripe  and  suggestive ;  and  the  additions  by  his  coUahora-
tntrt  are  excellent.  ...  As  this  Commentary  proceeds,
it  seems  somehow  to  gain  both  in  excellence  and  value."
^British  and  Foreign  Kvangtlical  Kevif.v,

"  He  who  intends  to  preach  on  any  passage  in  these
three  Epistles  mast  indeed  be  hard  to  please  if  he  cannot
find  some  help  in  thiit  book  towards  the  elucidation  of
his  text  and  the  drawing  up  of  his  sermon."— £'tr/«i-
astical  Gazette.


"  For  quickening  thought  and  assistiiic  to  keep  pulpit
utterances  abreast  of  the  a^,  these  volmn  poness  great
value,  and  continue  to  vmdicate  tJieir  cla&totake  a
phux  of  honour  on  the  shelves  of  ministerial  and  other
biblical  students  throughout  the  \ind"~'y0mam/armist.

'*  One  of  the  most  remarkable  literary  enterprises  of
our  day.  ...  It  has  created  by  this  time  a  sundard  and
tradition  of  its  own,  which  we  have  several  times  given
an  account  of.  and  which  has  been  maintained  for  the
most  part  with  considerable  success,  in  succe^\%
volumes.  The  volume  before  us  certainly  conforms  to  it
with  sufficient  fidelity."— i^i/rrary  CAttrrkman,


THESSALONIANS,  TIMOTHY,  TITUS,  AND

PHILEMON.

By  Rev.  Dr.  GLOAO,  Right  Rev.  Lord  A.  HERVEY,  D.D.,  and  Rev.  S.  J.  EALES,  D.C.L.;
with  Homilies  by  Rev.  B.  C.  CAFFIN,  M.A.,  Rev.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A.,  Rev.  Prof.
T.  CROSKERY.  D.D.,  Rev.  \V.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.,  Rev.  W.  M.  STATHA.M,  and
Rev.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D.     Price  151.


HEBREWS  AND   JAMES.


OPIXIONS


"We  cannot  give  higher  praise  to  the  new  volume  of
the  '  Pulpit  Commentary  *  th.in  we  do  when  we  honestly
say  that  it  amply  and  worthily  sustains  the  promise  of
the  earlier  volumes.    It  is  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the


OF  THE  PRESS.

requirements  of  the  pulpit,  is  known  to  u<."— Z?.?/.-'.'
Maf^azine,


requirements  of  the  preacher,  both  in   exposition  and
homilctii ."— />V/V«/i  atid  Fotrign  Evangelical  Revic^v.


«


We  have  here  a  satisfactory  and  excellent  volume  of
this  important  Commcntar)'.  Mr.  Hamiby's  introductory
dissertation  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  marked  by
a  breadth  of  learning,  a  judicial  calmness  of  tone,  and  a
*•  For  preachers  the  work  is  of  altogether  unique  worth,  sound  critical  insight,  which  leave  nothinc  to  be  d«siml.
combinin;:.  as  it  docs,  the  critical,  the  exegetical,  the  ...  We  think  very  highly  of  this  volume.  It  is  a  s*^liJ.
homilctical,  and  practical  elements.  No  other  Commen-  I  trustworthy,  and  valuable  addition  to  our  evegetical
tary  so  comprehensive  in  its  conception  and  its  range,  ^  literature."— i^f'/rrwy  Ckurchman.
so  thorouRh  in  its  execution,  and  so  well  adapted  for  the

LONDON:  KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH  &  CO.,  i,  Paternoster  Square,  E.C.


«   .
