( t'i 


DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe20wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-Cellim , Oxford. 


Volume  XX. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Jlrine-Stred. 
' MDCCLXXIZI, 


' • 

'i  i i : 


. ..  - * 


W$r,£Ws 


v,  AO 


THE 


SCRIPTURE  DOCTRINE 


O F 


PREDESTINATION,  ELECTION, 


AND 


REPROBATION. 


^HEfcripture  faith,  t God  hath  chofen 
as  in  Chrift,  before,  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  that  we  fiould  be  holy,  and  without  blame 
before  him  in  love.  And  St.  Peter  calls  the 
faints,  ^ elecl  according  to  the  Jore-knowledoe  of 
God  the  Father,  through  fanEhf cation  of  the  /frit, 
unto  obedience.  And  St.  Paul  faith  unto  them, 
[|  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chofen  you  to  fal~ 


A 2 

X i Pet. i.  2, 


vation, 

||  2 Theff.  ii,  13,  14. 


+ Ephef.  i.  4. 


[ 4 3 

vation,  through  fantlif cation  of  the  fpuit,  and 
belief  of  the  truth ; zvhereunto  he  hath  called  you 
by  our  gofpel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Cbt  id. 

2.  From  all  thefe  places  of  fcripture  it  is 
plain  that  God  had  chofen  fome  to  life  and  glory 
before,  or  from  the  foundation  of  tire  world. 
And  the  wifdom  of  all  Chrifiians  is,  to'labour 
that  their  judgments  may  be  informed  herein, 
according  to  the  fcripture.  And  to  that  end 
let  us  confider  the  manner  of  God’s  fpeaking  to 
the  fans  of  men. 

3.  God  faith  to  Abraham,  Rorn.  iv.  17,  As  it 
is  written,  I have  made  thee  a father  of  many  na- 
tions, before  him  whom  he  believed,  even  God 
who  quickeneth  the  dead  and  calletli  things  ihal 
are.  not  as  though  they  were.  Obferve,  God 
fpeaks  then,  at  that  p re  Cent  time,  to  Abraham 
faying,  I have  made  thee  a father  of  many  nations, 
notwithftanding  Abraham  was  not  at  that  time 
the  father  of  one  child,  but  IJhmael.  How  then 
mud  we  undei  Hand  1 have  made  thee  a father  of 
many  nations  ? 

4.  The  apofile  tells  us  plainly,  it  svas  fo,  Be- 
fore God  who  calleth  things  that  are  not  as  though 
they  1 vyre.  And  fo  he  calleth  Abraham , the  fa- 
ther of  many  nations , though  he  was  not  as  vet 
the  father  eveiT"  oUJaac,  in  whom  lus  feed  was  to 
be  called. 

g.  God  ufeth  the  Tame  manner  of  fpeaking, 

when 


[ 5 ] 

when  he  calleth  Chrift,  t The  Lamb  fain  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world-,  although  indeed  he 
was  not  {lain  for  fonie  thoufand  years  after. 
Hence  therefore  we  may  eafily  underhand  what 
he  fpeaketh  of  eleEiing  as  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world, 

6.  God  calleth  Abraham  a father  of  many 
nations,  though  not  fo  at  that  time.  He  calleth 
CJirifl,  I he  Lamb fain  from  the  foundation  oj  the. 
world,  though  not  {lain  ’till  he  was  a man  in  the 
flefh.  Even  fo  he  calleth  men  Eh  tied  from  the 

foundation  of  the  world,  though  not  defied  till 
they  were  men  in  the  flefh.  Yet  it  is  all  fo 
before  God,  who  knowing  all  things  from  eter- 
nity, calleth  things  that  are  not  as  though  they 
were. 

7. ' By  all  which  it  is  clear,  that  as  Chrifl  was 
called  The  Lamb  fain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
-world,  and  yet  not  flain  till  feme  thoufand  years 
after,  till  the  day  of  his  death;  fo  alfo  men  are 
called  eletl from  if  foundation  of  the  world,  and 
yet  are  not  defied  perhaps  till  fome  thoufand 
years  afte/,  till  the  day  of  their  converfion  to 
God. 

8.  And  indeed  this  is  plain,  without  going 
farther,  from  thofe  very  words  of  St.  Peter,  eletl, 
according  to  the  fore-knowledge  of  God,  through 
fan  edification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience.  For, 

If  the  elefl  are  chofen  through  fanflification 
of  the  Spirit,  then  they  were  not  chofen  before 
A 3 they 

f Revel,  xiii.  8. 


[ 6 J 


they  were  fanflified  bv  the  Spirit.  But  they  were 
not  fanfhfied  by  the  Spirit,  before  they  had  a 
being.  It  is  plain  then  neither  were  they  chofen 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  God  cal' 
Uih  things  that  art  not,  as  though  they  were. 

9.  This  is  alfo  plain  from  thole  words  of  St. 
Paul,  Giod  hath  jrom  the  beginning  chofen  you  to 
Jalvation,  t hr ovghjan&if  cation  of  the  Spirit,  and 
belif  of  the  truth.  Now, 

If  the  faints  are  chofen  to  falvation,  through 
bel.eving  cf  the  truth,  and  were  called  to  believe 
that  truth  by  the  hearing  of  the  gofpel,  then  they 
were  not  chofen  before  they  believed  the  truth, 
and  before  they  heard  the  gofpel,  whereby  they 
were  called  to  believe.  But  they  were  chofen 
through  belief  of  the  truth,  and  called  to  believe 
it  by  the  gofpel.  Therefore  they  were  not  chofen 
before  they  believed  ; much  lefs  before  they  had 
a being,  any  more  than  Chrift  was  {lain  before  he 
had  a being.  So  plain  is  it,  that  they  were,  not 
elefted,  till  they  believed ; although  God  cal- 
leth  things  that  are  not,  as  though  they  were. 

* 10  Again,  how  plain  is  it,  where  St.  Paul 
faiih,  that  they  whom  t God  did  pr  edeftinate,  ac- 
cording to  the  council  oj  his  own  will,  to  be  to  the 
praife  of  his  glory,  were  fuch  as  did  frjl  trujl 
in  Chi  if!  ? And  in  the  very  next  verfe,  he  faith 
that  they  trufed  in  Chrift  after  they  heard 
the  word  of  truth  (not  before).  But  they  did 
not  hear  the  word  before  they  were  born.  There- 
fore 


+ Eph.  i.  11,  ia. 


L 7 3 


fore  it  is  plain,  the  aEt  of  ele&ion  is  in  t'-inc,-- 
though  known  of  God  before  ; who,  according 
to  his  knowledge,  often  fpeaketh  of  the  things 
which  art  not , as  though  they  were.  And  thus  is  the 
great  ftumbling-block  about  election  taken  away, 
that  men  may  make  their  calling  and  election  /are. 

11.  The  fcripture  tells  us  as  plainly  what  pre- 
deflination  is  : it  is,  God’s  fore-appointing  obe- 
dient believers  to  falvation,  not  without,  but  ac- 
cording to  his  fore-knowledge  of  all  their  works, 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  And  fo  like- 
wife  he  predeflinates  or  fore-appoints  all  difobe- 
dient  unbelievers  to  damnation,  not  without,  but 
according  to  his  fore-knowledge  of  all  their  works, 

from  the  foundation  oj  the  world. 

12.  We  may  confider  this  a little  farther, 
God  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  fore- knew 
all  men’s  believing  or  not  believing.  And  ac- 
cording to  this  his  fore-knowledge,  he  chofe  o.r 
elefted  all  obedient  believers,  as  fucb,  to  falva- 
tion, and  refufed  or  reprobated  all  difobedient 
unbelievers,  as  fuch,  to  damnation.  Thus  the 
fcriptures  teach  us  to  confider  eledion  and  repro- 
bation, according  to  the  fore-knowledge  of  God 

from  the  foundation  of  the  w,orld. 

13.  But  here  fome  may  cbje£t,  that  I hold 
our  faith  and  obedience  to  be  the  caufe  of  God’s 
elefting  us  to  glory. 

I anfwer,  I do  hold,  that  faith  in  Chrifl:  pro- 
ducing obedience  to  him  is  a caufe  without  which 
God  elefled  none  to  glory ; for  we  never  read 
A 4 ol 


[ 8 J 

©f  God's  decking  to  glory,  any  who  lived  and 
died  a difobedient  unbeliever.  But  I do  not 
hold,  that  it  is  the  caufe for  which  he  elefts  any  : 
the  contrary  of  this  is  eafily  {hewn  thus  : 

Suppofe  my  obedience  is  a caufe  of  my  elec- 
tion to  falvation,  What  is  the  caufe  of  my  obe- 
dience ? Anf  My  love  to  Chrift. 

But  what  is  the  caufe  of  my  love  to  Chrift. 

AnJ.  My  faith  in  Chrift. 

But  what  is  the  caufe  of  my  faith  in  Chrift  ? 

Anf  The  preaching  of  the  gofpel  of  Chrift. 

But  what  is  the  caufe  of  the  preaching  of  the 
gofpel  to  us  ? Anf.  Chrift’s  dying  for  us. 

But  what  is  the  caufe  of  Chrift’s  dying  for  us? 

AnJ.  God’s  great  love  of  pity  wherewith  he 
loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  trefpaffes 
and  fins. 

14.  Thus  all  men  may  fee,  that  I do  not  hold 
God  chofe  any  man  to  life  and  falvation  for  any 
good  which  he  had  done,  or  for  any  which  was 
in  him,  before  he  put  it  there.  And  this  I fhall 
now  fhew  more  at  large  from  the  oracles  of  God. 

x.  God’s  great  love  of  pity,  wherewith  he 
loved  the  fons  of  men,  even  while  they  were 
dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins,  was  the  caufe  of  his 
fending  his  Son  to  die  for  them ; as  appears 
from  the  following  fcriptures;  +God  fo  loved 
the  world , that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  to 
the  end  that  all  who  believe  in  him,  f 10 aid  not  penfi 
but  have  everlcfling  life,  for  i when  we  wereyet 

without 

+ John  iii.  16.  + Rom.  v.  6,  &c; 


[ 9 ] 

without  firength,  in  due  time  Chrifl;  died  for  the 
ungodly.  And,  God  commendeth  his  love  to  us, 
in  that  while  we  were  yet firmer  s,  Chrifl  died for  us. 

2.  Chrift’s  dying  for  our  fins  is  the  caufe  of 
tbegofpel’s  being  preached  to  us,  as  appears  from 
thofe  feriptures,  S Jefus  came  and.fpake  unto 
them,  faying.  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven 
and  earth.  Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations. 
\Go  ye  into - all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gofpel  to 
every  creature. 

3.  The  gofpel’s  being  preached'  to  dinners  is 
the  caufe  of  their  believing,  as  appears  from  thofe 
feriptures,  j How  fiall  they  call  on  him  in  whom 
they  have  not  believed  ? And  how  JJiall  they  believe 
in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard?  And  how 
Jha.ll  they  hear  without  a preacher  ? So  then  faith 
cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing,  by  the  word  of 
God. 

4.  Men’s  believing  is  the  caufe  of  their  jufti- 
fication,  as  appears  from  thofe  feriptures,  ||  By 
him  all  that  believe  are  jujlified  from  all  things , 
\ He  is  the  JuJl ifi er  of  all  that  believe  in  Jefus. 
Therefore  we  conclude  that  a man.  is  jujlified  by 

faith,  zvithout  the  deeds  of  the  la-w.  WAbrahatn 
believed  God,  and  it  was  imputed  to- him  for  rigk- 
teoufiefs.  Now,  it  was  not  written  for  his.  fake 
alone , that  it  was  imputed  to  him-,  but  for  us  alfo 
to  whom  it  [hall  be  imputed,  if  we  believe  on  him 
.that  raifed  up  Jefus  from  the  dead ; who  was  de- 
A.  3 liver-ed 

S Matt,  xxviii.  18-.  + Mark  xvi.  15..  j Rom.  x,  15,  &c. 

HAfts  xiii.39.  \ Rom.  iii.  26,  &c.  M Rom.  iv.  3, 


[ 10  ] 

liver td for  our  offences , and  rofe  again for  our juf 
tif cation. 

g.  Our  knowing  ourfelves  juftified  by  faith  is 
the  caufe  of  our  love  to  Chrift,  as  appears  from 
thefe  fcriptures,  + Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  lov- 
ed God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  fent  his  Son  to 
be  the  propitiation  for  our  fins.  ^ IVe  love  him , 
becaufe  he  firjl  loved  us. 

Our  love  to  Chrift  is  the  caufe  of  our  obey- 
ing him,  as  appears  from  thofe  fcriptures,  ||  If  ye 
love  me,  keep  my  commandments.  He  that  hath  my 
commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 
me.  And,  If  any  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my 
words.  § For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  use  keep 
his  commandments. 

7.  Our  obeying  Chrift  is  the  caufe  of  his 
giving  us  eternal  life,  as  appears  from  thofe  fcrip- 
tures, t+  Not  every  one  that  faith  unto  me.  Lord, 
F.orA,Jhall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven-,  but  he 
that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  inheaven, 
it  Biff  id  are  they  that  do  his  commandments  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter 
in  thro ' the  gates  into  the  city.  And  ||j|  Chrift  being 
made  perfetl  thro'  fujferings,  he  became  the  author 
of  eternal  falvation  to  all  that  obey  him. 

15.  This  may  be  more  briefly  expreft  thus  : 

1.  God’s  love  was  the  caufe  of  his  fending 
his  Son  to  die  for  fmneis. 

2.  Chrift’s 

+ 1 John  iv.  10.  J l John  iv.  19:  ||  John  xiv.  15,  21,  &c. 

^ 1 John  v.  3,  +t  Matt.  vii.  21.  Rev.  xxii.  14.  ||j  Heb.  v.  9. 


C li  ] 

£.  Chrifl's  dying  for  Tinners  is  the  caufe  of  the 
gofpel’s  being  preached. 

3.  The  preaching  of  the  go fp el.  is  the  caufe 
(or  means)  of  our  believing. 

4.  Our  believing  is  the  caufe  (or  condition) 
of  our  juflification. 

5.  The  knowing  otirfelves  juhified  thro’  his 
blood,  is  the  caufe  of  our  love  to  Chriil. 

6.  Our  love  to  Chrifl  is  the  caufe  of  our  obe- 
dience to  him. 

7.  Our  obedience  to  Chrifl  is  the  caufe  of 
his  becoming  the  author  of  eternal  falvation  to 

us. 

16.  Thefe  following  things  therefore  ought 
well  to  be  confidered  by  all  that  fear  God. 

1.  There  was  a neceflity  of  God’s  love  in  fend- 
ing his  Son  to  die  tor  us,  without  which  he  had 
not  came  to  die. 

2.  There  was  a neceflity  of  Chrifl’s  love  in 
dying  for  us,  without  which  the  gofpel  could  not 
have  been  preached. 

3.  There  was  a neceflity  of  the  gofpel’s  be- 
ing preached,  without  which  there  could  have 
been  no  believing. 

4.  There  is  a neceflity  of  our  believing  the 
gofpel,  without  which  we  cannot  be  jufti- 
fied. 

5.  There  is  a neceflity  of  our  being  juftified 
by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Chrifl,  without  which 
we  cannot  come  to  know  that  he  loved  us  and 
wajhed  us  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood. 

A 6 


6,  There 


[ « ] 

6.  There  is  a neceffity  of  our  knowing  his 
love,  who  firflloved  us,  without  which  we  cannot 
Jove  him  again, 

7.  There  is  a neceffity  of  our  loving  him, 
without  which  we  cannot  keep  his  command- 
ments. 

8.  There  is  a neceffity  of  our  keeping  his. 
commandments,  without  which  we  cannot  enter 
into  eternal  life. 

By  all  which  we  fee,  that  there  is  as  great 
a neceffity  of  our  keeping  the  commandments 
of  God,  as  there  was  of  God's  fending  his  Son 
into  the  world,  or  of  Chrifl’s  dying  for  our 
fins. 

17.  But  for  whofe  fins  did  CI11  ill  die  ? Did  he 
die  for  all  men,  or  but  for fome  ? 

To  this  alfo  I (hall  anfwer  by  the  feriptures, 
Shewing  1.  The  teflimony  ol  all  the  prophets. 
2.  Of  the  angel  of  God.  3.  Ol  Chrilt  himfelf. 
And  4 Of  his  apoftles. 

Firjl , the  prophet  Ifaiah  faith  thus  t Surely  he 
hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  furrows  : 
yet  did  zve  ejleem  him  Jlricken , fmitlcn  of  God  and 
ajjlitled.  But  he  was  wounded  for  our  tranfgref 
j ions , he  was  bruifed for  our  iniquities,  the  chaftfe- 
ment  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his 
fripes  we  are  healed.  All  we  likejheep,  have  gone 
ajlray  : we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  ; 
and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquities  oj  us 
all.  Thus  Ifaiah  fheweth  plainly,  that  the  ini- 
quities 


■}  Ifaiah  lifi,  5,  5,  6. 


[ *3  1 

q-ultes  of  all  thofe  who  went  aft  ray,  were  laid 
upon  Chrift.  And  to  him  the  tefiimony  of  all 
the  other  prophets  agreeth  : + To  him  give  all 
the  prophets  witnefs,  that  thro’  his  name  zvhojoever 
beheveth  in  him  Jliall  receive  ranijficn  of  fins . 
The  fame  faith  that  great  prophet,  John  the 
Baptift,  who  i came  to  bear  witnejs  oj  the  light, 
that  all  men  thro ’ it  might  believe.  And  again, 
|).  Behold , faith  he , the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh 
away  the  fin  of  the  world.  Thus  have  all  the 
prophets  with  one  con  Tent  teftified  that  God 
laid  upon  Chrift  the  iniquities  of  all  that  were 
gone  afiray  : that  he  is  the  Lamb  of  Gcd  which 
taketh  away  the  fn  of  the  world ; that  all  men  thro ’ 
him  may  believe  : and  that  trim  his  name  whofo- 
cver  believeth  in  him,  Jliall  receive  remiffon  of  fins. 

Secondly , The  angel  of  God  teflified  tjpe  fame 
thing,  faying,  § Fear  not for  I bring  you  glad 
tidings  of  great  joy , which  Jliall  be  to  all  people , 
which  was,  that  there  was  born  unto  them  a Sa- 
viour, even  Chrifl  the  Lord.  By  this  alfo  it  ap- 
pears, that  Chrift  died  for  all  men.  For  elfe  it 
could  not  have  been  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to 
all  people  ; but  rather  fad  tidings  to  all  thofe  for 
whom  he  died  not. 

Thirdly,  We  come  now  to  the  words  of  Chrift 
himfelf,  who  knew  his  own  bulinefs  better  than 
any  man  elfe;  and  therefore  if  his,  tefiimony 
agree  with  thefe,  we  mu  ft  needs  be  convinced 

that 

•f  43-  + Joha  i,  7.  j]  Verfe  29,  § Lukeii.  re, 


r *4  k 

that  they  are  true.  Now  he  fpeaks  thus,  i As 
MoJ'es  lifted  up  the  fcrpent  in  the  wilder  nefs,  even 
Jo  mujl  the  Son  of  Man  be  lifted  up,  that  wkofoever 
helieveth  in  him  Jhov.ld  not  penjh,  but  have  everlaji- 
ing  life.  For  God Jo  loved  the  world , that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whofoever  believetii  in 
him  Jhould  not  perijh , but  have  everlafing  lif  e. 
For  God fent  not  his  Son  to  condemn  the  ivorld,  but 
that  the  world  through  him  might  be  faved.  Thus 
we  fee  the  words  of  Chr-ilf  agree  with  the  words 
of  the  prophets;  therefore  it  mull  needs  be  own- 
ed that  Chrih  died  for  aii. 

Fourthly,  And  now  we  will  hear  what  the 
apohles  fay  concerning  this  thing.  § The  love  of 
Chrijl,  faith  the  apofile  Paul,  conjlraineth  us,  be- 
caufe  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then 
were  all  dead ; and  that  he  died  for  all  that  they 
which  live fnould  not  henceforth  live  unto  themftlves, 
but  unto  him  that  died  Jor  them,  and  rojc  again. 
And  to  Timothy  he  faith,  ||  There  is  one  God,  and 
one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man 
Ch nfl  Jefus,  who  gave  himfelf  a ranfom  jor  all, 
to  be  tejlifedin  dut  time.  Again,  he  faith  to  Titus, 
t The  grace  of  God,  which  bringeth  falvation  to 
all  men,  hath  appeared.  And  yet  again  to  the 
Hebrews,  ^ That  he,  by  the  grace  of  God,  taflcd 
death  for  every  man.  And  to  this  agreeth  St. 
John,  witnelfing,  §§  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our 
Jins\  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  aljo for  the  fins  of 

the 

J John  iii.  14,  &c.  ^ 2 Cor.  v.  14,  &c.  |]  » Tim.  ii. 

5,6.  +Tit.  ii.  11.  }JHcb.ii.9.  ^ 1 John  ii.  2. 


[ J5  ] 

the  whole  world.  And  again,  fpeaking  of  himfelf 
and  the  reft  of  the  apoftles,  he  faith,  ||  JVe  have 
feev  and  do  teflify  that  the  lather  fent  the  Son  to  be 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Thus  we  have  the  tef- 
timony  of  all  the  prophets,  of  the  angel  of  God, 
of  Chrift  himfelf,  and  of  his  holy  apoftles,  all 
agreeing  together  in  one  to  prove,  that  Chrift 
died  for  all  mankind, 

18.  What  then  can  they,  who  deny  this 
fay  ? Why,  they  commonly  fay,  All  men , in 
thefe  fcriptures,  does  not  mean  all  men , but  only 
the  eleB ; that  every  man  here  does  not  mean 
every  man , but  only  every  one  of  the  eleft  ; that 
the  world  does  not  mean  the  whole  world , but 
only  the  world  of  believers;  and  that  the  whole 
world,  in  St.  John’s  words,  does  not  mean  the 
whole  world,  but  only  the  whole  world  of  the 
ele£l. 

19.  To  this  fhamelefs,  fenfelefs  evafion,  I an- 
fwer  thus  : 

If  the  fcripture  no  where  fpeaks  of  a world  of 
believers  or  eledf,  then  we  have  no  ground, 
reafon,  pretence,  or  excufe  for  faying,  Chrift 
died  only  for  a world  of  believers  or  eleft.  But 
the  fcripture  no  where  fpeaks  of  fuch  a world. 
Therefore  we  have  no  ground  or  pretence  for 
fpeaking  thus. 

Nay,  the  fcripture  is  fo  far  from  calling  be- 
lievers or  elefted  perfons,  the  world,  that  they 
are  every  where  in  fcripture  plainly  and  exprefly 

di  fti  p 


(I  1 John  iv.  14. 


*6  ] 

diftinguifhcd  from  the  world,  r If  ye  were  of  the 
world,  faith  Chrift,  the  world  would  love  its  own  ; 
but  becaufe  1 have  chofen  you  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  you. 

20.  Bjut  let  the  fcripture  itfelf  fpeak,  what 
world  Chrift  died  fcr.  1 When  we  were  yet  with- 
out jlrength,  Chrijl  died  for  the  ungodly.  While 
we  were  yet  [inner s,  Chrijl  died  for  us.  When  we 
zuere  enemies,  vte  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
death  of  his  Son.  From  all  which  we  may  clearly 
fee,,  that  Chi  ill:  died  for  the  world  oj  the  ungodly, 
for  the  world  cf finner  s,  for  the  world  of  his  ene- 
mies-, the  Juft  One  for  the  world  of  the  unjufL 
But  the  eiefl,  as  el  eft,  are  not  unjuft.  There- 
fore he  died  not  for  the  elecf,  as  elect;  but  even 
for  that  world  St.  John  fpeaks  of,  when  he  fays, 
The  whole  world  lieth  in  wickednefs. 

21.  If  it  be  fa  id,  “The  eleft  were  Tinners 
once  as  well  as  others;'-’  I anfwcr,  true;  but  not 
as  they  are  eleCl  in  Chrijl,  but  as  they  were  out  of 
Chrijl,  without  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world. 
Therefore,  to  fay  that  Chrift  died  lor  the  eletr, 
as  eleft,  is  abfolute  non  fen fe  and  confufion. 

22.  To  put  this  matter  out  of  doubt,  I would 
commend  thefe  following  confrderations  to  all 
fober-minded  men. 

i.  The  fcripture  faith,  Chrijl  came  to  feck  and 
to  fave  that  which  was  lojl. 

But  the  eleft,  as  el  eft,  were  not  loft. 

Therefore  Chrift  died  not  for  the  eledl,.  sss 

or. 


i John  xv.  1 9. 


| ticm.  v.  G— ic. 


[ 17  ] 

or  becaufe  they  were  eleft  ; for  that  had  beea 
to  feek  and  fave  what  was  found  and  faved 
before.  r ' 7* 

2.  The  fcripture  faith,  Chr i ft  died  for  the 
unjujt. 

But  the  eleft,  as  fuch,  are  not  unjuft. 

Therefore,  Chrift  died  not  for  the  eleft,  as  eleft; 
for  that  had  been  to  juftify  them  who  were  juft 
before. 

3.  The  fcripture  faith.  He  came  to  preach  deli- 
verance to  the  captives. 

But  the  deft,  as  eleft,  are  not  captives;  for 
Chrift  hath  fet  them  free. 

Therefore  he  died  not  lor  the  eleft,  as  efeft ; 
for  that  had  been  t o fet  them  at  liberty  who  were 
at  liberty  before. 

4.  1 he  fcripture  faith,  He  quickened  them  who 
were,  dead  in  trejpcjfes  and Jins,  fuch  as  were  with- 
out Chrift  t aliens  Jrom  the  common-wealth  of  If  rad 
and  fir  angers  to  the  covenant  of  promife,  without 
hope  and  without  God  in  the  world. 

But  the  eleft,  as  fuch,  are  not  dead  in  tref 
paffe.s  and  fins,  but  alive  unto  God.  Neither  are 
they  witnout  Chrift;  for  they  are  chofen  in  him  ; 
noraie  they  aliens  from  the  common-wealth  of  If 
rael,  and  flrangers  to  the  covenant  of  promife . 
But  they  ar  e fellow-  citizens  with  the  faints,  and  the, 
hoifhold  of  God. 

dherefoie  Chrift  died  not  for  the  eleft,  as  or 
becaufe  they  were  eleft.  for  that  had  been  to 

quicken 


[ i8  ] 

quicken  them  that  were  alive  before,  and  to  bring 
them  into  covenant,  who  were  in  covenant  be- 
fore. And  thus,  by  thefe  mens  account  oar  Lord 
loft  his  labour  of  love,  and  accomplifhed  a so- 
lemn NOTHING. 

£3.  Thus  having  fhewn  the  grievous  felly  of 
thofe  who  fay,  that  Chrijl  died  for  none  but  the 
eleEl,  I fliall  now  prove  by  undeniable  reafor.s, 
that  he  died for  all  mankind. 

Reaf.  1.  Becaufe  all  the  prophets,  the  angel 
of  God,  Chrift  himfelf,  and  his  holy  apoftles 
with  one  confent,  affirm  it. 

Reaf.  2.  Becaufe  there  is  not  one  feripture, 
from  the  beginning  of  Genefis  to  the  end  of  the 
Revelation,  that  denies  it,  either  negatively,  by 
faying,  that  he  did  not  die for  all ; or  affirmatively, 
by  faying,  that  he  died  but for  fome. 

Reaf.  3.  Becaufe  he  himfelf  commanded, 
that  the  gofpel  lhould  be  preached  to  every  crea- 
ture. 

Reaf.  4.  Becaufe  hecallelh  all  men,  every  where, 
to  repent. 

Reaf.  5.  Becaufe  thofe  who  perifh  are  damn- 
ed  for  not  believing  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God.  Therefore,  he  muft  have  died  for 
them.  Elfe  they  would  be  damned  for  net  believ- 
ing a lye. 

ReaJ.  6.  Becaufe  they  which  are  damned 
might  have  been  faved.  for  thus  faith  the  word 
of  God.  t They  received  not  the  love  of  the  inn  i 

that 


t 2 Tf-dT.  ii.  xo. 


C 19  ] 

that  they  might  he  faved.  Therefore  God Jhall  fend 
them  frong  delufons,  to  believe  a lye,  that  they  all 
may  be  damned. 

Reaf.  7.  Becaufe  fome  deny  the  Lord  that  bought 
them,  and  bring  upon  themfelves  fwift  defiruthon. 
But  they  could  not  deny  the  Lord  that  bought 
them,  if  he  had  not  bought  them  at  all. 

24.  I {hall  now  briefly  fhew  the  dreadful  abfur- 
dities  that  follow  from  faying  Chrijl  died  only  for 
the  el  ell. 

1.  Chrift  died  not  for  all,  then  unbelief  is  no 
fin  in  them  that  finally  perifh  ; feeing  there  is 
not  any  thing  for  thofe  men  to  believe  unto  fal- 
vation,  for  whom  Chrift  died  not. 

2.  If  Chrift  died  not  for  all,  then  it  would  be 
a fin  in  the  greateft  part  of  mankind  to  believe 
he  died for  them-,  feeing  it  would  be  to  believe 
a lye. 

3.  If  Chrift  died  not  for  thofe  that  are  damn- 
ed, then  they  are  not  damned  for  unbelief. 
Otherwife,  you  fay,  that  they  are  damned  for  not 
believing  a lye. 

4.  If  Chrift  died  not  for  all,  then  thofe  who 
obey  Chrift  by  going  and  preaching  the  gofpel 
to  every  creature,  as  glad  tidings  of  grace  and 
peace,  of  great  joy  to  all  people,  do  fin  thereby,  in 
that  they  go  to  mof  people  with  a lye  in  their 
mouth. 

5.  If  Chrift;  died  not  for  all  men,  then  God  is 
not  in  earneft  in  calling  all  men  every  where  to  re - 

; r pent ; 


[ 20  ] 

pent  : for  what  gr  od  could  repentance  do  thofe, 
for  whom  Chrift  died  not  ? 

6.  If  Chrift  died  not  for  all,  then  why  does- 
he  fa)’  he.  is  not  willing  any Jhou'd perijli?  Surely 
he  is  willing,  yea,  refolved  that  inoft  men  fhould 
perrfh  ; e!fe  he  would  have  died  for  them  alfo. 

7.  How  fhall  God  judge  the  world  by  the  mart 
Chrift  Jefus,  if  Chrift  did  not  die  for  the  world  ? 
Or  how  fh,!ll  he  judge  them  according  to  the goj- 
pel , when  there  was  never  any  gofpel  or  mercy 
for  them  ? 

* 2.5.  But,  fay  fome,  “ If  Chrift  died  for  all, 
why  are  not  all  faved  ? ’ 

I anlwer,  Becaufe  they  believe,  net  in  the  name 
of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  Becaufe  God 
called,  and  they  refufed  to  anfzver ; he  jlrctchtd  out 
hs  hand , and  they  regarded  not ; he  counfelled 
them,  but  they  would  none  of  his  counfls  ; he  re- 
proved them  ; but  they  fet  at  nought  all  his  re- 
proofs ; they  followed  after  lying  vanities , and for • 
Jock  their  oum  mercies  ; they  denied  the  Lord  that 
bought  them,  and  Jo  brought  upon  themflves  fwift 
deflruElion  ; and  becauje  they  received  not  the  love 
oj  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  faved,  therefore  (if 
you  would  know  wherefore)  God  gave  them  up 
to  believe  a lye,  and  to  be  damned.  How  often 
(faith  our  Lord)  would  I have  gathered  you  toge- 
ther, and  ye  would  not  ? Ye  would  not.  Here  is 
the  plain  reafon,  why  all  men  are  not  faved. 
For  God  proinifeth  no  man  falvation,  whether 
he  will  or  no ; but  Icaveth  them  to  everlafting 

deftruttionv 


t 21  3 

delfru&ion,  who  will  not  believe  and  obey  the  gof- 

.pti 

2 6.  “ O,  then  you  are  an  Ar'minian  ! You  are 
a free-wilier.  You  hold  free-will  in  man  !” 

I hold  nothing  but  what  the  fcripture  faith  ; 
and  that  you  fhall  give  me  leave  to  hold.  I do 
■not  hold,  that  any  man  has  any  will  or  power 
of  himfelf  to  do  any  thing  that  is  good  ; but  by 
the  grace  of  God  we  may  dual!  things.  I have 
already  (hewn,  he  hath  given  Chrift  for  all  men. 
And  he  who  Jpared  not  his  own  Son  but  delivered 
mm  lip for  us  a/l,  how  Jhall  he  not  with  him  jreely 
give  us  all  things?  And  whatman  knoweth  not 
that  if  he  make  ufe  of  all  the  will  and  power 
God  hath  given  him;  God  will  double  his  ta- 
lent and  give  him  more  ? If  any  therefore  defire 
to  have  more,  let  him  faithfully  improve  -.’hat  he 
has.  Likewife  what  man  is  he,  who  doth  not 
know  that  he  is  not  condemned  for  not  doing  what 
he  could  not  do,  but  fox  leaving  undone  what  he  could 
have  done  if  he  would.  Let  any  man  deny  it  if  he 
can. 

27.  “ What  then,  may  all  men  be  faved  if 
they  will  ?” 

Before  I anfwer  this  queflion  direPtly,  I fhall 
fhew  that  thole  who  afk  it,  are  themfelves  com- 
pelled to  grant  as  much  freedom  of  will,  as  we 
defire  to  plead  for. 

For  1.  The  Affembly  of  Divines,  in  their  con- 
feffion  of  faith  C.  9.  do  exprefsly  fay,  God  hath 
endowed  the  will  of  man  with  that  natural  liberty 

that 


[ 22  ] 

that  it  is  neither  forced , nor  hy  any  abfolute  neeefjity 
determined  to  do  good  or  evil.  2.  Mr.  Baxter  in  the 
preface  of  his  call  to  the  unconverted , fays  that'  Cal- 
vin as  well  as  Arminius  held  free  will,  and  that  no 
man  of  brains  demeth,  that  man  hath  a will  that  is 
naturally  Jree\  it  is  free  from  violence , it  is  a f elf- 
determining principle,  Sure  here  isasmuchfaid 
for  free-will,  as  any  man  need  to  fay,  and  per- 
haps more.  For, 

The  difference  between  us.  is  this.  They 
fay,  Alan  hath  a will  which  is  naturally  free.  We 
fay,  Man  hath  this  freedom  of  will,  not  naturally, 
but  by  grace. 

We  believe,  that  in  the  moment  Adam  fell, 
he  had  no  freedom  of  will  left ; but  that  God, 
when  of  his  own  free-grace  he  gave  the  promife 
of  a Saviour  to  him  and  his  poflerity,  gracioufly 
reflored  to  mankind  a liberty  and  power  to  ac- 
cept of  proffered  falvation.  And  in  all  this,  man’s 
boafling  is  excluded  ; the  whole  of  that  which 
is  good  in  him,  even  from  the  firfl  moment 
of  his  will,  being  of  grace  and  not  of  nature. 
And  now  we  come  dire6lly  to  the  queflion, 
whether  all  men  may  be  faved  if  they  will  ? 

28.  To  thofe  who  have  confidered  what  has 
been  premifed  ; I anfwer,  1.  What  fhould  hin- 
der them,  if  they  be  willing  ? For  2.  God  is 
not  willing  that  any  fhould  perifh  ; yea,  3.  He 
is  willing  that  all  men  fhould  be  faved.  And 
Chrift  is  willing  ; for  he  came  not  to  judge  the 
world,  but  to  fave  the  world.  And  how  did  he 

weep 


[ 23  1 

weep  over  Jerufalem  ? How  often  would  he 
have  gathered  them  together,  even  as  an  hen 
gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  but 
they  would  not  ? And  now  what  hinders  mens 
falvation,  but  that  fame,  they  would  not? 

29.  They  would  not ; they  will  not  come  at 
Chrift’s  call,  and  hearken  to  his  reproof,  and 
wait  for  his  counfels,  and  receive  power  from 
on  high  to  live  to  him  who  died  for  them,  walk- 
ing in  all  his  commandments  and  ordinances 
blamelefs,  and  following  him  witherfoever  he 
goeth.  This  way  is  fo  narrow  that  few  care  to 
walk  therein  ; and  therefore  they  are  not  faved 
even  becaufe  they  rejeB  the  counfel  of  God  agauifl 
thetnfelves ..  They  chofe  death  ; therefore  they 
perilli  everlaftingly. 


[ M ] 


An  EXTRACT  from  a 

Short  View  of  the  DIFFERENCE 


BETWEEN  THE 

Moravian  BRETHREN, 

(so  called) 

And  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wejley. 


To  the  READER. 


S thofe  who  are  vnder  the  direBion  of  Count 
Zinzendorf  (vulgarly  called  Moravian  bre- 
thren are  the  mojl  plav.fible , and  therejore far  the 
mof  dangerous , of  all  the  Antinotnians  now  in 
England,  Ifrjl  endeavour  to  guard  fuck  as  are 
firnple  of  heart , againji  being  taken  by  thofe  cunning 
■hunters.  Mr.  Cudworthb  writings  (though  lefs 
con (ider able ) are  likewife  frequently  cited,  in  the 
dialogue  that  follows. 

A 


[ ^5  ] 


A fhort  V I E W,  &c. 

THE  difference  between  the  Moravian  doc- 
trine and  ours,  (in  this  refpetlj  lies  here  ; 
They  believe  and  teach, 

i.  That  Chnji  has  done  all  which  was  necejf  try, 
for  the  falvation  of  all  mankind. 

2.  That  confequently,  we  are  to  do  nothing. , 
as  neceffary  to  falvation,  but  limply  to  believe  in 
him. 

g.  That  there  is  but  one  duty  now,  but  one 
command , viz.  To  believe  in  Chrift. 

4.  That  Chrift  has  taken  away  all  other  com- 
mands and  duties,  having  wholly  abvlifhed  the 
law  : that  a believer  is  therefore free  from  the  law, 
is  not  obliged  thereby  to  do  or  omit  any  thing;  it 
being  inconfiftent  with  his  liberty  to  do  any  thing 
as  commanded. 

5.  That  we  are  fan9.ift.ed  wholly  the  moment 
we  are  juftified,  and  are  neither  more  nor  lefs 
holy  to  the  day  of  our  death  ; entire  fanclifi ca- 
tion, and  entire  juftification,  being  in  ene  and 
the Jame  inftant. 

6.  That  a believer  is  never  fanftified  or  holy 
in  himfelf  but  in  Chrift  only;  he  has  no  kolinejs 
in  himfelf  at  all,  all  his  holinefs  being  imputed, 
not  inherent. 

Vol.  XX. 


B 


7.  That 


[ 26  ] 

That  if  a man  regards  praver,  or  fearch- 
ing  the  fcriptures,  or  communicating,  as  matter 
of  duty  ; if  he  judges  himfelf  obliged  to  do  thefe 
things,  or  is  troubled  when  he  does  them  not; 
he  is  in  bondage  ; he  has  no  faith  at  all,  but  is 
fceking  falvation  by  the  works  of  the  law. 

We  believe  that  the  firfl  of  thefe  propofttions 
is  ambiguous,  and  all  the  reft  utterly  falfe. 

1.  “ Chrift  has  done  all  that  was  necejfary,  for 
the  falvation  of  all  mankind.” 

This  is  ambiguous.  Chrift  has  not  done  all 
which  was  neceftary  for  the  abfolute falvation  of 
all  mankind.  For  notwithftanding  all  that  Chrift 
has  done,  he  that  believeth  not  fhali  be  damned. 
But  he  has  done  all  which  was  neceftary  for  the 
conditional  falvation  of  all  mankind;  i.  e.  if  they 
believe;  for  through  his  merits  all  that  believe 
to  the  end,  with  the  faith  that  worketh  by  love, 
fhali  be  faved. 

2.  “ We  are  to  do  nothing  as  neceftary  to  fal- 
vation,  but  limply  to  believe  in  him.” 

If  we  all  jw  the  Count’s  definition  of  faith  (fix- 
teen  difcourfes,  p.  57.)  viz.  The  hiftorical  know- 
ledge of  this  truth , that  Chrift  has  been  a man  and 
[offered  death  for  us,  then  is  this  propofirion  di- 
refclly  fubverftve  of  the  whole  revelation  of  Je- 
fus  Chrift. 

g “ There  is  but  one  duty  now,  but  one  com- 
mand, viz.  To  believe  in  Chrift.” 

Ahnoft  every  page  in  the  New  Teftament, 
proves  the  falfhood  of  this  aftertion. 

it 


ft- 


Chrift 


[ 2 7 ] 

4.  “ Chrift  has  taken  away  all  other  commands- 
and  duties,  having  wholly  abolifhed  the  law.” 

How  absolutely  contrary  is  this  to  his  own  fo- 
^lemn  declaration  ! Think  not  that  lam  come  to  de- 
firoy  the  law  or  the  prophets.  I am  not  come  to 
dejlroy,  but  to fulfil.  One  jot  or  one  tittle  Jhall  in 
no  wife  pafs  from  the  law , till  heaven  and  earth 
pafs. 

“ Therefore,  a believer  is  free  from  the  law.” 
That  he  is  free from  the  curfe  of  the  law  we  know, 
and  that  he  is  free  from  the  law,  or  power,  of 
fin  and  death.  But  where  is  it  written,  that  he 
is  free  from  the  law  of  God. 

“ He  is  not  obliged  thereby  to  do  or  omit  any 
thing,  it  being  inconfilfent  with  his  liberty  to  do 
any  thing  as  commanded.” 

So  your  liberty,  is  a liberty  to  difobey  God  ; 
whereas  ours  is,  a liberty  to  obey  him  in  all 
things.  So  grofsly,  while  we  efiablifh  the  law, 
do  you  make  void  the  law  through  faith. 

5.  “ We  are fandlified  wholly  the  moment  we 
are  juftified,  and  are  neither  more  nor  lefs  holy  to 
the  day  of  our  death  : entire fiandlification  and  en- 
tirejuftiftcation  being  in  one  and  the  fame  inftant.” 

Juft  the  contrary  appears  both  from  the  tenor 
of  God’s  word,  and  the  experience  of  his  chil- 
dren. 

*6.  “A  believer  is  never  fanffified  or  holy  in 
himfelf  but  in  Chrift  only.  He  has  no  holinefs 
B 2 in 


[ 28  ] 

pi  himfelf  at  all ; all  his  holinefs  being  imputed, 
not  inherent 

Seripture-hoiinefs  is,  the  image  of  God  ; the 
mind  which  was  in  Chrift ; the  love  of  God  and 
man;  lowlinefs,  gentlenefs,  temperance,  pa- 
tience, ehaftity.  And  do  you  coolly  affirm,  that 
this  is  only  imputed  to  a believer,  and  that  he 
has  none  at  all  of  this  holinefs  in  him  ? Is  tem- 
perance t^tiWonly  to  him  that  is  a drunkard  ftill? 
Or,  ehaftity,  to  her  that  goes  on  in  whoredom  ? 
Nay  ; but  a believer  is  really  chafte  and  temper- 
ate. And  if  fo,  he  is,  thus  far,  holy  in  himfelf. 

* Does  a believer  love  God  or  does  lie  not  ? 
If  he  does  he  has  the  love  of  God  in  him.  Is  he 
lowly,  or  meek,  or  patient  at  all  ? If  he  is, 
he  has  thefe  tempers  in  himfelf.  And  if  he  has 
them  not  in  himfelf  he  is  not  lowly,  or  meek 
or  patient.  You  cannot  therefore  deny,  that 
every  believer  has  holinefs  in,  though  not from, 
himfelf:  elfe  you  deny,  that  he  is  holy  at  all  ; 
and  if  fo,  he  cannot  fee  the  Lord. 

* And  indeed,  if  holinefs  in  general  be  the 
mind  Avhich  was  in  Chrift,  what  can  any  one 
poffibly  mean  by,  “ A believer  is  not  holy  in 
himfelf,  but  in  Chi  ill  only?  That  the  mind 
which  was  in  Chrift  is  in  a believer  alfo  ; but 
it  is  in  him,  not  in  himfelf,  but  in  Chrijt  ! What 
aheap  of  palpable  felf-contradifcfion,  what  fenfe- 
lefs  jargon  is  this  ? 

7.  “ If  a man  regards  prayer,  or  fearehing  the 
feriptures,  or  communicating,  as  matter  of  duty , 

if 


[ ] 

if  he  judges  hi'HJfdlf  obliged  to  do  thefe  things,  or  is 
troubled , when  he  does  them  not,  he  is  in  bondage 
he  has  no  .faith  at  all,  but  is  feeking  falvatiort 
by  the  worksofthe  law*” 

Thus  obedience  with  you  is  a proof  of  unbe- 
lief and  difobedierree  a proof  of  faith  ! What  is 
it,  to  put  darkhefs  for  light,  and  light  for  dark- 
nefs,  if  this  is  not  ? 


An  EXTRACT  from  a 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN  AN 

ANTINOMIAN  and  his  FRIEND. 


Antinomian. 

T"\  O you  believe,  that  the  whole  work  of  mans 
^ falvation,  was  accomplijhed  by  Jefus  Chrift 
on  the  crofs  ? 

B 3 


\ 


friend. 


C 30  ] 

Friend.  I believe,  that  by  that  one  offering,  he 
made  a fall  fatisfaftion  for  the  fins  of  the  whole 
world. 

A.  But  do  you  believe  that  Chrif' s blood  and 
eur  fins  went  away  together  ? 

F.  To  fay  the  truth  I do  not  underftand  it. 

A.  No!  Why  did  not  Chrift,  when  he  was 
upon  the  crofs,  take  away , put  an  end  to,  blot  out 
and  utterly  dejlroy  all  our  fins  for  ever  ? 

F.  He  did  then  pay  the  price,  for  the  fake  of 
which  all  who  truly  believe  in  him,  are  now 
faved  from  their  fins  ; and  if  they  endure  to  the 
end  fhall  be  faved  everlaftingly.  Is  this  what 
you  mean  ? 

A.  I mean  he  did  then  heal,  lake  away,  put  an 
end  to,  and  utterly  dejlroy  all  our  fins. 

F.  Did  he  then  heal  the  wound  before  it  was 
made  ? And  put  an  end  to  our  fins,  before  they 
had  a beginning  ? This  is  fo  glaring,  palpable  an 
abfurdity,  that  I cannot  conceive  how  you  can 
fwallow  it. 

A.  I thought  you  would  come  to  your  carnal 
reafoning.  What  has  faith  to  do  with  reafon- 
wg  ? 

* F.  Do  you  ever  read  the  bible  ? Does  not 
God  himfelf  fay  to  finners,  Come  now  and  let  us 
reafon  together  ? Ifai.  i.  18.  Does  not  our 
Lord  reafon  continually  with  the  Scribes  and 
Pharifees  ? St.  Peter  with  the  Jews  ? ABs  ii.  14, 
Be.  and  St.  Paul,  both  with  the  Jews  and 
Gentiles  ? Nay  is  not  great  part  of  his  epiflles, 

both 


[ 31  J 

both  to  the  Romans  and  to  the  Galatians,  and  the 
far  greateft  part  of  that  to  the  Hebrews,  one  en- 
tire chain  of  reasoning  ? 

A,  You  may  do  what  you  pleafe.  But  I 
don’t  reafon,  I believe. 

F.  Now,  I believe  and  reafon  too  : for  I find 
no  inconfiftency  between  them.  And  I would 
juft  as  foon  put  out  my  eyes,  to  fecure  my  Jaitk , 
as  lay  afide  my  reafon. 

A.  But  do  not  men  abufe  their  reafon  conti- 
nually ? therefore  ’tis  belt  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it. 

F.  So  ! Now  you  are  doing  the  very  thing  you 
condemn.  You  are  reafoning  againft  reafoning. 
And  no  wonder for  it  is  itnpoffible,  without 
reafoning  either  to  prove  or  difprove  any 
thing. 

A.  But  can  you  deny  the  fadts  ? Do  not  men 
abufe  their  reafon  continually  ? 

F.  They  do.  The  fad!  I deny  not.  But  I 
deny  the  inference  drawn  from  it.  For  if  we 
muft  lay  afide  whatever  men  abufe  continually, 
we  muft  lay  afide  the  bible  ; nay,  and  meat  and 
drink  too. 

A.  Well,  but  come  to  the  point.  In  what  do 
you  truft,  for  juftification  and  falvation? 

F.  In  the  alone  merits  of  Chrift,  which  are 
mine,  if  I truly  believe,  that  he  loved  me,  and 
gave  himfelf  for  me. 

A.  If!  So  you  make  falvation  conditional! 

B 4 F.  And 


[ 32  J 

F.  And  do  not  you  ? Eife  you  make  God  3 
liar  : for  his  exptefs  words  ate,  He  that  beiievetk 
Jhall  be.  [and,  he  that  beiievetk  not,  JLall  be  damn- 
'd. What  is  this  but  to  fay,  If  thou  believed, 
there  is  the  condition)  thou  (halt  be  faved. 

A.  But  I do  not  like  that  word  condition. 

F.  Then  find  a belter,  and  we  will  lav  it  afide. 

A.  Blowever,  I infill  upon  it,  nothing  etfe  be- 
fdc faith  is  required  in  order  to  juflification  and 
falvation. 

F.  What  do  you  mean  by  nothing  elfe  is  re- 
quired ? 

A.  I mean,  There  is  but  one  duty,  which  is  that 
e/Telieving.  One  mujl  do  nothing,  but  quietly  at- 
tend the  voice  of  the  Lord.  The  gates  oj  heaven  are 
fiut  upon  workers,  and  open  to  believers.  If  we 
do  nothing  for  heaven,  we  do  as  much  as  God 
requires.  And  when  the  apojllc  Paul  preffeth  men 
to  believe,  it  is  as  much  as  if  he  had  bid  them  not 
to  work. 

F.  Let  Paul  be  permitted  to  anfwer  for  "him- 
fe If.  In  the  26th*  chapter  of  the  Alls  to  the  apof- 
ties,  he  relates  how  our  Lord  fent  him,  to  open 
the  eyes  of  the  Gentiles — that  they  might,  receive 
remiff  on  of  [ns.  (Ver.  17,  18.)  Whereupon 
(faith  he)  I was  not  df obedient  to  the  heavenly  vi- 
fion  : butfhewed — to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  Jhould 
repent  and  turn  to  God,  and  do  works  meet  for 
repentance.  Obferve  ; he  obeyed  the  heavenly  vi- 
[on,  by  teaching  the  Gentiles,  before  they  were 
juftified,  before  they  had  received  forgivenefs  of 

fns 


[ 33  ] 

J/ns,  to  repent  and  do  works  meet  for  repentance 
So  far  was  he  from  bidding  them  to  work,  while  he 
was  prefing  them  to  believe. 

A.  You  are  got  to  your  carnal  reafoning  again. 

F.  Carnal  reafoning,  I perceive,  is  a cant 
term  which  you  ufe,  when  you  know  not  what 
elfe  to  fay.  But  I have  not  done  with  this  in- 
ltance  yet.  Did  St.  Paul  indeed  preach  to  thofe 
Heathens  according  to  the  inllruftions  given  him 
from  heaven,  or  did  he  not  ? 

A.  Without  doubt  he  did;  otherwife  he  would' 
have  been  difobe.dient  unto  the  heavenly  vifion. 

F.  How  then  fay  you,  that  a minifter  of  Chrift 
ought  to  preach  nothing  but  “ Believe,  be- 
lieve ?:’  And,  that  to  tell  men  of  doing  any  thing, 
is  preaching  the  law  ? Do  you  not  herein  con- 
demn not  only  the  great  apoftle,  but  alfo  him. 
that fent  and  commanded  him  thus  to  preach? 

A.  Why,  furely,  you  would  not  have  us  to  be 
under  the  law ! 

F.  I fear  you  know  not  what  that  expreffion: 
means.  St.  Paul  ufes  it  thrice  in  his  eptftie  to 
the  Romans,  five  times  in  that  ;o  the  Galatians, 
and  in  one  paffage  of  h.s  former  eptftie  to  the  Co- 
rinthians : where  he  declares,  in  what  fenfe  he 
was  himfelf  under  the  law.  and  in  what  fenfe  he 
was  not.  Unto  them  that  are  under  the  lazv,  f-bat 
ftill  adhere  to  the  whole  Jewifh  dtfpenfationj  I. 
became  as  urn/er  the  lazv,  (I  conformed  to  their 
ceremonies)  that  I might  gain  them  that  are  under : 
the  t aw  : but  unto  them  that  are  without  the.  lazv  : 
(unto  the  Gentiles  or  Heathens)  as  without  the.  law  ; 

B-.  bang 


[ 34  ] 

being,  mean  time,  not  without  law  to  God,  bat 
under  the  law  to  Chrifl,  (1  Cor.  ix.  20,  21.)  It 
is  plain,  therefore,  the  apoflle  was  under  the  law 
ej  Chrifl,  though  he  was  not  under  the  law  of  ce- 
remonies. 

A.  But  does  not  St.  Paul  fay  to  the  believers 
at  Rome,  Ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under 
gr ace  ? 

F.  He  does;  and  his  meaning  is,  Ye  are  not 
under  the  Jewilh,  but  the  gracious  Chriflian  dif- 
penfation  : as  alfo  in  the  next  verfe,  where  lie 
fays,  We  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace. 

A.  But  what  does  he  mean  when  he  fays  to  the 
Galatians,  Before  faith  came  wc  were  kept  under 
the  law  ? 

F.  Doubtlefs  he  means,  we  were  kept  under 
(ch.  i)i.  19.)  the  Jewilh  difpenfation  till  we  be- 
lieved in  Chrifl.  And  fo  we  read  in  the  next 
chapter,  (ver.  4,  5.)  When  the  fulnfs  of  time  was 
come,  God  fent  forth  his  Son,  made  under  the  law, 
(the  Jewifh  difpenfation)  to  redeem  them  that  were 
under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption 
of fons\  might  ferye  God  without  fear,  in  righ- 
teoufnefs  and  holinefs,  with  a free,  loving  child* 
likefpirit. 

A.  You  cannot  pcrfuade  me  to  this  ; I know 
better.  The  law  of  Forks  (the  moral  law-,  as  you 
call  it)  is  nothing  to  me.  - From  any  demand,  of 
the  law , no  man  is  obliged  to  go  one fcp,  to  give 
away  one  farthing,  to  eat,  or  omit  one  morfel.  For 
what  did  cur  Lord  dff  with  the  law  ? He  ahohjhea  n. 

F.  However, 


[ 35  T 

F.  However,  ought  not  we,  after  we  believe 
in  him,  to  obey  all  the  commandments  of 
Chrift  P 

A.  Obey  ! Law  ! Works  1 Commandments  ! 

0 what  legalnejs  is  in  your  fpiY.it ! So,  I fnppofe, 

' your  comforts  vanifli  away  when  you  ate  not  ajfutccl 

that  you  obey  alt  Ckriji's  commandments ! On  the 
contrary,  a fpiritual  man  behohleth  jufiifying 
grace  in  believing , without  his  obedience  to  com- 
mands for  external  worjhip  and  good  works j 

F.  But  how  does  this  agree  with  numberlefs 
texts  of  fcripture  ? In  particular,  with  thofe 
words  of  our  Lord,  Think  not  that  I am  come  to 
dejlroy  (or  abolith)  the  law : I am  not  come  to  cle- 
firoy  but  to  fulfil.  For  verily  1 fay  unto  you,  till 
heaven  and  earth  pafs,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  fiall  In 
no  wife  pafs  from  the  law. — IV hofoever,  therefore, 
fia'l  break  one  of  thefeleafi  commandments,  he  fiall 
be  called  the  leaf  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  Matt, 
v.  17,  &c. 

A.  T tell  you  plainly,  I won’t  reaforu 

F.  That  is  as  much  as  to  fay,  “ I won’t 
be  convinced.  I love  darknefs  rather  than 
hght.” 

A.  No  : it  is  you  that  are  in  darknefs.  I was 
fo,  till  a few  weeks  fince.  But  now  my  eyes  are 
opened.  I fee  my  liberty  now.  Now  I am  free<. 

1 was  in  bondage  long  enough. 

F.  What  are  you  free  from  ? 

A.  From  fin  and  hell,  and  the  devil  and- the 
law. 

B 6 F.  You  ? 


I 36  1 

F.  You  put  the  law  of  God  in  goodly  com- 
pany. But  how  came  you  to  be  free  Jrorn  the 
law  ? 

A.  Chrifl.  made  me  free  from  it. 

F.  What ! From  his  own  law  ! Pray,  where  is 
that  written  ? 

A.  Here,  Gal.  iii.  13.  Chrifl  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curfe  of  the  law , being  made  a curfe 
for  us. 

F.  What  is  this  to  the  purpofe  ? This  tells  me, 
that  Chrifl  hath  redeemed  us  (ail  that  believe) 
from  the  curfe , or  punifhment  juflly  due  to  our 
paft  tranfgreflions  of  God’s  law.  But  it  fpeaks 
not  a word  of  redeeming  us  from  the  law , any 
more  than  from  love  or  heaven.  But  what  do 
you  mean  by  bondage  ? 

A.  Why,  the  being  bound  to  keep  the  law. 

F.  You  have  no  tittle  of  fcripture  for  this. 
Bondage  to  fear  and  bondage  to  fin  are  menti- 
oned there  ; and  bondage  to  the  ceremonial  law 
of  Mofes  : but  according  to  your  fenfe  of  the 
word,  all  the  angels  in  heaven  axe  in  bondage. 

A.  Well,  I am  not  bound.  St.  Paul  bimfelf 
fays  to  believers,  Why  are  ye fubjetl  to  ordinances. 
Col.  it.  20. 

F.  True  : i.  e.  Why  are  you  Chriflian  believers 
fubjeff  to  Jewifh  ordinances?  Such  as  ihofe 
which  are  mentioned  in  the  very  next  verfe, 
Touch  not,  tajie  not,  handle  not. 

A.  I wifh  you  would  not  build  fo  much  upon 

the 


[ 37  ] 

the  letter  : it  is  your  letter-learning  too  makes 
you  talk  of  inherent  righteoufnefs 

F.  Do  you  fay  then  a believer  has  no  inherent 
righteoufnefs  ? 

A.  That  I do.  1 fay,  God  will fave  us  to  the 
utmojl  without  any  righteoufnefs  or  holinefs  of  our 
own.  To  look  for  inherent  righteovfnefs , is  to 
deny  the  Spirit,  and  trample  under  foot  the  blood  of 
the  covenant.  Believe)  s have  not  any  inherent 
righteoufnej's  in  them.  Our  righteoufnefs  is  no- 
thing but  the  imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Ckrijl. 

F.  Now  I believe,  that  Chi  iff  by  his  Spirit 
works  righteoufnefs  in  all  thole  to  whom  faith  is 
imputed  for  righteoufnefs. 

A.  By  no  means ; all  our  righteoufnefs  is  in 
Chrijl.  It  is  wholly  imputed,  not  inherent.  IVe  are 
always  righteous  in  Chnjt,  but  never  righteous  in 
ourfclves. 

F.  Is  not  then  every  believer  righteous  or 
holy  ? 

A.  Doubtlefs  ; but  he  is  holy  in  Chrijl,  not  in 
him f elf. 

F.  Does  he  not  live  a holy  life  ? And  is  he 
not  holy  in  heart  ? 

A.  Mod  certainly. 

F.  Is  he  not,  by  plain  confequence,  holy  in 
himfeij? 

A.  No,  no,  in  Chrijl  only:  not  holy  in  himfelf : 
he  has  no  holinefs  at  all  in  himfelf 

F.  Has  he  not  in  him  the  lov£  of  God,  and 
' ©f 


[ 38  ] 

of  his  neighbour  ? Yea,  the  whole  image  of 
God? 

A.  He  has.  But  this  is  not  gofpel  holinefs. 

F.  What  vain  jangling  is  this  ? You  cavil  at 
the  name,  while  you  allow  the  whole  thing  I con- 
tend for.  You  allow,  a believer  is  holy  both  in 
heart  and  life.  This  is  all  I mean  by  inherent 
righteoufnefs  or  holinefs. 

A.  But  I tell  you,  this  is  not  gofpel-holincfs. 
Gofpel-holinefs  is  faith. 

F.  Stand  to  this,  and  you  Hill  give  up  the 
whole  caufe.  For,  on  your  fuppofition,  I aigue 
thus : 

Faith  is  holinefs  or  righteoufnefs : 

But  faith  is  in  every  believer: 

Therefore  holinefs  or  righteoufnefs  is  in  every 
believer. 

A.  Alas,  alas ! I pity  you.  Take  my  word 
for  it  you  are  in  utter  darknefs.  You  know 
nothing  yet  of  true  faith  ; nothing  at  all  about  it. 

F.  Will  you  then  be  fo  kind  as  to  explain  it  to 
me  ? 

A.  I will.  I will  make  it  as  clear  as  the  fun. 

I will  fliew  you  the  very  marrow  of  that  doc- 
trine, which  I recommend,  with  all  my  heart  to  all, 
as  the  mojl  wholefome  doBrine  of  Jef us  Chrifl. 

We  believe,  that  the  blood  fied  upon  the  crofs 
has  put  away  and  blotted  out  all  our fins,  and  that 
then  there  was  an  everlafing  righteoufnefs  brought 
in  : by  believing  which  our  hearts  and  conferences 
are  made  as  perfedly  clean  as  though  we  had  never 

Fumed. 


[ 39  ] 

finned.  In  this  confifls  true  punty  of  foul,  and  not 
in  habitual  qualities.  And  whofo  are  thus  made 
pure  and  perfeEl  are  delivered  from  the  dominion 
of fin.  They  do  alfo  hear  forth  the  fruits  ofrigh- 
teoufnefs , not  in  order  to  become  more  holy,  but 
becaufe  they  are  perfeldly  holy,  through faith.  It  is 
true , we  have  fill  the  vile,  firful  body , which  con- 
tinually difpofes  the  mind  to  evil.  But  the  blood  of 
jfefus  makes  us  free  from  fin. 

F.  You  fay,  We  believe,  that  the  blood Jhed  upon 
the  crofs  has  put  away  and  blotted  out  all  our  fins. 
Why,  who  believes  otberwife  ? If  you  mean 
only,  that  Chrift  then  put  away  the  punifhment  of 
all  our  fins  who  believe  in  him.  What  a mar- 
vellous difeovery  is  this?  I pray,  whom  doth  this 
arguing  reprove  ? 

A.  It  reproves  you,  who  deny,  that  an  everlafi- 
ing  righteoufnefs  was  then  brought  in. 

F.  I do  not  deny  it ; no  more  than  you  un- 
derhand it.  But  I afk,  in  what  fenfe  was  it  brought 
in?  What  was  it  brought  into  ? Was  it  then  fir  ft 
brought  into  the  world  ? You  cannot  fay  this, 
without  faying  that  all  who  went  out  of  the 
world  before  that  hour  were  loft.  Or  was  it 
brought  into  the  fouls  of  believers  ? Then  be- 
lievers have  an  inward  or  inherent  righteoufnefs. 
You  had  better  therefore  let  this  text  alone.  It 
will  do  no  fervice  at  all  to  your  caufe. 

A.  I fee  plain,  you  areas  blind  as  a beetle  ftill. 
Iam  afraid  your  head-knowledge  will  deftroy  you. 

Did 


[ 4°  J 

Did  not  I tell  you,  our  hearts  and  confciences  aft 
made  perfectly  clean  by  our  believing?  And  that  in 
this  conf/fls  true  purity  of  foul ; and  not  in  habitual 
qualities?  Thus  zee  are  made  per f telly  holy.  And 
though  lilt  vile  •finjul  body  continually  difpofos  the 
mind  to  evil,  yet  the  blocd  of  Chrfl  makes  us  fret 
from  fin. 

F.  How  can  rnv  mind  at  the  fame  time  it  is 
continually  difpofed  to  evil,  be  free  from  fin,  per- 
fectly clean,  perjedly  holy  ? 

A.  O the  dulnefs  ol  Tome  men  ; I do  not 
mean  really  holy,  but  holy  by  imputation.  I told 
you  plainly,  the  holinefs  of  which  we  fpeak,  is 
not  in  us,  but  in  Chrift.  The  fruits  o)  the  Spirit 
(commonly  called  Janthfication ) foch  as  love,  gen- 
tlenefs,  long  f f eting,  goodnefs,  meeknefs , temper- 
ance, neither  make  us  holy  before  God , nor  in  our 
own  confciences . 

F.  I know  thefe  cannot  atone  for  one  fin. 
This  is  done  by  the  blood  of  Chiiit  alone  ; 
for  the  fake  of  which  God  forgives,  and  works 
thefe  in  us  by  faith.  Do  I reach  your  meaning 
now  ? 

A.  No,  no.  I wonder  at  your  ignorance.  I 
mean,  we  are  not  made  good  or  holy,  by  any  in- 
ward qualities  or  difpofilions  : but  being  made  pu  re 
and  holy  in  our  confciences,  by  believing  in  Chrift, 
we  beat  forth  inwardly  .and  outwardly  the fruits  cf 
holinefs.  Now,  I hope,  you  underhand  me. 

F.  1 hope,  not.  For  if  I do,  you  talk  as  grofs 

nonfenfe 


r **  j 

nonfenfe  and  con  tradition  as  ever  came  out  of 
the  mouth  of  man. 

A.  How  fo  ? 

F.  You  fay.  fr'f  are  -rot  made  good  or  holy  by  any 
inward  qualities  or  difpoflions  ! No  ! Are  we  not 
made  good  by  inward  goodnefs?  (Obferve  we 
are  not  (peaking ofjuftification  but  fanftification.} 
Holy  by  fnward  holinefs  ? Meek  by  inward 
meeknefs  ? Gentle  by  inward  gentleness  ? And 
are  not  all  thefe,  if  they  are  any  thing  at  all,  in- 
ward qualities  or  difpofitions  ? 

Again,  |u(t  after  denying,  that  u'e  have  any 
inward  holinefs,  you  (ay,  we  are  made  holy  in  our 
confciences,  and  bear  forth  inwardly  and  outwardly 
the  fruits  of  holinefs.  What  heaps  of  felf-contra- 
diffion  are  here  ? 

A.  You  do  not  take  me  right.  I mean  thefe 
inward  difpofitions  are  not  our  holinefs.  For  we 
are  not  more  holy , if  we  have  more  love  to  God  and 
man , nor  lefs  holy,  if  we  have  lefs. 

F.  No  ! Does  not  a believer  increafe  in  holi- 
nefs as  he  mcreafes  in  the  love  of  God  and  man? 

A.  I fav,  no.  The  very  moment  he  is  jujlified 
he  is  wholly  Jane!  fed.  And  he  is  neither  more  nor 
lefs  holy  from  that  hour  to  the  day  of  his  death. 

F.  You  do  well  to  except  againfl:  fcripture  and 
reajon.  For  till  a man  has  done  with  them  he 
can  never  fwallow  this.  I underhand  your  doc- 
trine now,  far  better  than  I like  it.  In  the  main, 
you  are  talking  much  and  faying  nothing:  labour- 
ing as  if  you  had  found  out  the  mod  important 

truths, 


[ 42  ] 

truths,  and  fuch  as  none  ever  knew  before.  And 
what  does  all  this  come  to  at  the  lafl  ? A mere, 
empty  Jlrife  of  words.  All  that  is  really  uncom- 
mon in  your  do&rine,  is  a heap  of  broad  abfur- 
dities,  in  fnoft  of  which  you  grofsly  contradift 
yourfelves,  as  well  as  fcripture  and  common  fenfe. 
In  the  mean  time  you  boaft  and  vapour,  as  if 
ye  were  the  men,  and  wifdom  JJiould  die  with  you . 
I pray  God  to  humble  you,  and  prove  you,  and Jhew 
you  what  is  in  your  heart ! 


{The  End  of  the  Prefervative. ] 


A DIA- 


A 


DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN  A 

PREDESTIN  ARIAN 

And  his  FRIEND. 


Out  of  thine  own  mouth  ! 


To  all  PREDESTINARI  ANS. 

i.  T Am  informed fome  of  you  have f aid  that  the 
X following  quotations  are  falfe  ; that  thefe 
words  were  not  fpoken./'jy  thefe  authors : others , 
that  they  were  not  fpoken  'm  this  fenfe  : and  others , 

that 


[ 44  ] 

that  neither  you  you-rfef,  nor  an y (rue  Predeflt- 
narian  ever  did,  or  ever  would  fpeak  fo. 

2.  My  friends,  the  authors  here  quoted  are  veil 
known,  in  whom  you  may  read  the  words  with  )our 
own  eyes.  And  i ou  who  have  read  them , know 
in  your  own  ■ conjcienie , they  vert Jpoken  in  this 
fenfe,  and  no  other  : nay,  that  this  fenfe  oj  them 
isproffedly  defended,  throughout  the  whole  trea- 
ties whence  they  are  taken. 

3*  But  be  this  as  it  may,  do  you  indeed  fay.  No 
true  Predefhnarian  ever  did  or  would  fpeak  fo  ? 
Why  every  true  Predcjhnaticm  rtrujl /peak  fo,  and 
Jo  mvfyou  yourfelf  too, if  you  dare  fpeak  out,  unlefs 
they  and  you  renounce  your  fundamental  principle. 

4.  } our  fundamental  principle  is  this,  God 
from  eternity  ordained  whatfoever  fhould 
come  to  pa'fs.  But  from  this  ftngle  poftion 
undeniably  follows  every  affection  hereafter  men- 
tioned. It  remains  therefore  only  that  you  chufe 
which  you  pleafe  f for  one  you  mufl  chufe ) of  thefe 
three  things either , 1.  To  equivocate,  evade  the 
quefion,  and  prevaricate  without  end ; or,  2.  To 
fwdttow  dll  thffe  affertmns  Together , cmd  honefidy  to 
avow  them  ; or,  3.  To  renounce  them  all  together , 
and  believe  in  Ghrif,  the  Saviour  of  all. 


A D I A L O G U E,  &c. 

Friend.  Q IR,  I have  heard  that  you  make 
^ God  the  author  of  all  fin,  and  the 
deftroyer  of  the  greater  part  of  mankind  without 
mercy. 

Fred, 


f 4<5  ] 

Pred.  I deny  it;  I only  fay,  + God  did  from 
all  eternity  unchangeably  ordain  whatfoever  comes 
to  pafs. 

Friend.  Do  you  make  no  exception  ? 

Pred.  No  furely : for  \ Nothing  is  more  ah. 
Jurd  than  to  think  any  thing  at  all  is  done  but  by- the 
ordination  of  God. 

Friend.  Do  you  extend  this  to  the  aftions  ol 
men  ? 

Pred.  Without  doubt  t \\  Every  aSkon  and  mo- 
tion of  every  creature  is  Jo  governed  by  the  hidden 
counfel  of  God , that  nothing  can  come  to  pafs , but 
what  was  ordained  by  him. 

Friend.  But  what  then  becomes  of  the  wills  of 
men? 

Pred.  § The  wills  of  men  are  fo  governed  by  the 
will  of  God,  that  they  are  carried  onfraight  to  the 
mark  which  he  has  fore-ordained. 

Friend.  I fuppofe  you  mean  the  permifive 
will  of  God  ? 

Pred.  No,  I mean,  SL ill  things  come  to  pafs , 
by  the  efficacious  and  irrefiflible  will  of  God. 

Friend.  Why  then,  all  men  muf  do  jull  what 
they  do. 

Pred.  True,  fit  is  imp  ojfible  that  any  thing  fhould 
ever  be  done,  but  that  to  which  God  impells  the  will 
of  man. 

Friend L 

E Aflembly’s  Catcchifin,  Chap.  3 J Calvin’s  Inflitules.  Book 
I.  Chap  16.  Seft.  8.  ||  Ibid.  left.  3.  § Ibid  feft.  8.  I Dr, 

Twifs.  Vindicis  Gratis  Poteftatis  & Providential  Dei.  Edilio 
Jeiifoaiana.  Pars  Ilf.  p.  19.  + Ibid.  p.  19. 


[ 46  ] 

Friend.  But  does  not  this  imply  the  neceffity 
of  all  events  P 

Pred.  i / will  not  fcruple  to  own  that  the  will  oj 
God  lays  a neceffity  on  all  things , and  that  every 
thing  he  wills , necejfarily  comes  to  pajs. 

Friend-.  Does  fin  then  neceffarily  come  to  pafs. 

Pred.  Undoubtedly.  F or  ||  The  almighty  power 
oj  God  extends  itfelf  to  the  frf fall , and  all  other 
fms  of  angels  and  men. 

Friend.  I grant  God  forefaw  the  firft  man 
would  fall. 

Pred.  Nay,  § God  not  only  forefaw  that  Adam 
would fall , but  alfo  ordained  that  he  fiould. 

Friend.  I know  God  permitted  Adam's  fall. 

Pred.  I tell  you,  §§  he  fell  not  only  by  the  per- 
mij/ion,  but  alfo  by  the  appointment  oj  God.  He 
finned  becaufe  God  fo  ordained , ++  becaufe  the  Lord 
jaw  good. 

Friend.  But  do  not  thofe  who  differ  from  you, 
raife  many  objections  againft  you  as  to  this 
point  ? 

Pred.  Y es.  i j;  Thofe  poifonous  dogs  vomit  out 
many  things  againjl  God.  |jj]  They  deny  that  the 
fcripture  Jays  God  decreed  Adam’ sjall.  They  fay 
he  might  have  chofe  either  to  fall  or  not : and  that 
God Jore- ordained  only  to  treat  him  according  to  his 

defert. 

J Calvin’s  Inft.  b.  3.  c.  24.  fcft.  8.  ||  ^ffembly’s  Catechifm. 

c.  5.  t)  Calv.  Inft.  b.  3.  c.  23.  fc£b  7.  Calvini  Itefponfio 

ad  Calumnias  Nebulonis  cujufdam  ad  Articulnm  primum. 

Calv.  Inft.  b 3.  c.  24.  fcf).  8.  Ibid.  b.  3.  c.  23. 
left.  2.  HU  Ibid.  fe&  7. 


C 47  ] 

defert.  As  if  God  had  created  the  nohlejl  of  all  his 
creatures,  without  fore-ordaining  what  Jhould  be- 
come of  him ! 

Friend.  Did  God  then  make  Adam  on  purpofe 
that  he  might  fall  ? 

Pred.  Undoubtedly.  + God  made  Adam  and 
Eve  to  this  very  purpofe,  that  they  might  be  tempt- 
ed and  led  into  fin.  And  by  force  of  his  decree,  it 
could  not  olherwife  be  blit  they  mujl  fin. 

Friend.  But  do  not  you  ground  God’s-  decree 
on  God’s  fore-knowledge  rather  than  his  will  ? 

Pred.  No.  ^ God  forefees  nothing  but  what  he 
has  decreed , and  his  decree  precedes  his  Inowledo-e. 

Friend.  Well,  this  may  truly  be  termed,  A 
horrible  decree. 

Pred.  ||  / confefs  it  is, a horrible  decree : yet  no 
one  can  deny,  but  God fore-knew  Adam ’s  fall,  and 
therefore  fore-knew  it,  becaufe  he  had  ordained  it 
fo  by  his  own  decree. 

Friend.  Do  you  believe  then  that  God  has  by 
his  own  pofuive  decree,  not  only  defied  fome 
men  to  life,  bur  alfo  reprobated  all  the  reft  ? 

Pred.  Moll  furely  if  I believe  one,  I believe 
the  other.  § Many  indeed  ( thinking  to  excufe 
God)  own  eledion,  and  yet  deny  reprobation:  but 
this  is  quite  filly  and  childifh.  For  without  repro- 
bation, e 'eflionitfelf  cannot  Jl and ; whom  God paf- 
fes  by,  thofe  he  reprobates. 

Friend. 

+ Pifcator  Difput.  Prsedeft.  prsf.  p.  6.  J Pifcat.  Difput. 
Prxdcft.  |j  Calv.  Inft.  1.  3.  c,  23.  f.  7.  ^ Calv.  Inft.  b.  3- 

c.  23.  f.  j. 


[ 4§  ] 

'Friend.  Pray  explain  what  you  mean  by  elec- 
tion and  reprobation. 

Pred.  With  all  my  heart,  f A]l  men  are  not 
created for  the  fame  end  ; but fome  are  for  e-or  darn- 
ed to  eternal  lift ; others  to  -eternal  damnation. 
So  according  as  every  man  was  created for  the  one 
end  or  the  other , we  fay  he  was  elccled  or  predef 
tinated  to  life,  or  reprobated,  i.  e.  predef  mated  to 
defruclion. 

Friend.  Pray  repeat  your  meaning. 

Pred.  HU  God  hath  once  for  all  appointed  by  an 
eternal  and  unchangeable  decree,  to  v.'hom  he 
woudd  give  falvation,  and  whom  he  would  devote  tc 
dejlruftian. 

Friend.  Did  God  make  any  man  on  purpofe 
that  he  might  be  damned  ? 

Pred.  Did  not  I tell  you  before  ? t God's  frf 
conjlitution  was,  that  fome  fwuld  be  defined  to 
eternal  ruin ; and  to  this  end  their  Jins  were  or- 
dained, and  denial  op  grace  in  order  to  their  fins. 

Friend. But  is  not  God’s  predehinating  men 
to  life  or  death  grounded  on  his  fore-knowledge  ? 

Pred.  ± So  the  vulgar  think ; that  God  as  he 
fore  fees  every  man  will  defer  ve,  elrcls  them  to  life, 
or  devotes  them  to  death  and  damnation. 

Friend.  And  do  not  you  think  that  reproba- 
tion, at  leaif,  is  grounded  on  God’s  fore-know- 
ing men's  fins  ? 

Pred. 

£ Ibid.  c.  2i.  f.  r.  HI]  Ibid.  f.  7.  + Zanchius  de 

natura  Pei  p.  553,  554.  J Calvin.  Inft.  b.  3.  c.  26, 

f.  1. 


[ 49  1 

Pred.  No  indeed.  ||  God  of  his  own  goof  pi  Ad- 
jure ordains  that  many  Jhould  be  borrt , who  are. 
from  the  womb  devoted  to  inevitable  damnation. 
If  any  man  pretend  that  God's  fore- knowledge  lays 
them  under  no  necejfity  of  being  damned,  but  ra- 
ther that  he  decreed  their  damnation,  becaufe  he 
foreknew  their  wickednefs  ; I grant  that  God's  fore- 
knowledge alone  lays  no  necefity  on  the  creature ; 
but  eternal  life  and  death  depend  on  the  will  rather 
than  the  fore-knowledge  of  God.  If  God  only  fore- 
knew all  things  that  relate  to  all  men,  and  did'not 
decree  and  order  them  alfo,  then  it  might  be  enquir- 
ed whether  or  no  his fore-knowledge  necejjitates  the 
thing  fore-known.  But  feeing  he  therefore  fore- 
knows all  things  that  will  come  to'  pafs,  becaufe  he 
has  decreed  they  fhall  come  to  pafs,  it  is  vain  to 
contend  about  fore-knowledge,  fnce  it  is  plain  all 
things  come  to  pafs  by  God's poftive  decree. 

Friend.  But  if  God  has  pofitively  decreed  to 
damn  the  greater  part  of  mankind,  why  does  he 
call  upon  them  to  repent  and  be  faved  ? 

Pred.  (fs  God  has  his  ejftElual  call,  whereby 
he  gives  the  elecl  the  J'alvation  to  which  he  ordained 
them  ; fo  he  has  his  judgments  towards  the  repro- 
bates, whereby  he  executes  his  decree  concerning 
them.  As  many  therefore  as  he  created  to  live  mi- 
ferably,  and  then  perijh  everlajlingly  : the/'e,  that 
they  may  be  brought  to  the  end  for  which  they  were 
created,  he  fometimes  deprives  of  the  poffibility  of 

Vol.  XX.  C hearing 

||  Ibid.  c.  23,  f.  6.  § Ibid.  c.  24.  f.  12. 


[ 50  ] 

hearing  the  word,  and  at  other  times , by  the  preach- 
ing thereof,  blinds  and Jlupifes  them  the  more. 

Friend.  How  is  this  ? I fay,  if  God  lias  creat- 
ed them  for  never-ending  death,  why  does  he 
call  to  them  to  turn  and  live  ? 

Pred.  t He  calls  to  than,  that  they  may  be  more 
deaf ; he  kindles  a light,  that  they  may  be  the  more 
blind  ; he  brings  his  dodnne  to  them,  that  they 
may  be  more  ignorant ; and  applies  the  remedy  to 
them,  that  they  may  not  be  healed. 

Friend.  Enough,  enough.  Yet  you  do  not 
make  God  the  author  of  fin  ! 

Fred.  No  certainly.  + God  cannot  be  termed 
the.  author  of  fin,  though  he  is  the  caufe  of  thofe  ac- 
tions which  arc  fins. 

Friend.  How  is  he  the  caufe  of  them  then  ? 

Pred.  Two  ways:  firft,  by  his  eternal,  un- 
changeable decree:  fecondly,  by  his  prefent  ir- 
refiftible  power. 

Friend.  Did  God  then  fore-ordain  the  fins  of 
any  man  ? 

Pred.  ||  Both  the  reprobates  and  the  elcR  were 
fore  ordained  to  fin,  as  fin,  that  the  glory  of  God 
might  be  declared  thereby.  § The  reprobates,  more 
efpecially,  who  were  predefi mated  to  da/nnaiion, 
and  the  caujes  of  damnation,  and  created  to  that 
end,  that  they  may  Hue  wickedly,  and  be  veffels 
full  of  the  dregs-  of  fin. 

Friend. 

+ Ibid.  Inft.  b.  3.  c.  24.  f.  13.  J Petri  Martyris  Ver- 
milli  Com.  in  Roman,  p.  413.  ||  Zanchius  de  nat.  Dei,  p.  5.5'. 

^ Pifcator  contra  Tautfium,  p.  47. 


C 5*  ] 

Friend.  But  furely  the  fins  of  the  elefi  were 
not  fore-ordained  ! 

Pred.  Yes  but  they  were.  For  f we  neither 
can  do  more  good  than  we  do,  nor  lefs  evil  than  w't 
do : becaufe  God  from  eternity  has  precifely  decreed 
that  both  the  good  and  the  eviljhould  befo  done. 

Friend.  I underftand  you,  as  to  God's  decree- 
ing fin.  But  how  is  his  irrefifiible  power  now 
concerned  in  the  fins  of  men  ? 

Pred.  | God  is  the  author  of  that  aSlion,  which 
is  Jinful,  by  his  irrefjlible  will. 

Friend.  How  do  you  mean  ? 

Pred.  t God  procures  adultery,  curfings,  lyings. 

||  He  fupphes  wicked  men  with  opportunities  of  fin- 
ning, and  inclines  their  hearts  thereto.  He  blinds, 
deceives  and  ftduces  them.  He,  by  his  working  on 
their  hearts,  bends  and  firs  them  up  to  do  evil. 
And  thus,  §§  Thieves,  murderers,  and  other  male- 
faElors  are  God's  injlr aments , which  he  ufes  to 
execute  what  he  hath  decreed  in  himfelf. 

Friend.  Do  you  not  then  charge  God  himfelf 
with  fin  ? 

Pred.  No.  5?  God  necejftates  them  only  to  the 
aEl  of fin,  not  to  the  deformity  of fin.  Befides, 
it  When  God  makes  angels  or  men  fn,  he  does  not 
C 2 fin 

5 Pifcatoris  Refponfio  ad  amicam  duplicationem  Conradi 
Vorftii.  p.  176.  f Dr.  Twils.  Pars  III.  p.  21.  + Pifcat.  Re- 

fponfio ad  Apologiam.  Bertii.  ||  Pet.  Martyr.  Ver.  Comment, 
in  Rom.  p 36.  413.  §§  Calv.  Inft.  b.  1.  c.  17.  f.  5.  HI  Twits 
Vindicate,  Pars  III,  p.  22.  ++  Zuinglius  in  Serna,  de  Provid. 

c.  5,  6. 


[ 52  ] 

fin  himfelf,  becaufe  he  does  not  break  any  law.  For 
God  is  under  no  law,  and  therefore  cannot  fin. 

Pred.  ^ The  devil  and  wicked  men  are  fo  held 
in  on  every  fide  with  the  hand  of  God,  that  they 
cannot  conceive,  or  contrive,  or  execute  any  mifchitf 
any  farther-  than  God  himfelf  doth  not  permit  only, 
but  command.  Nor  are  they  only  held  in  fetters, 
but  compelled  alfo  as  with  a bridle,  to  perform 
obedience  to  thofe  commands. 

Friend.,  This  is  true  Turkfh  doftrine,  and 
ought  fo  to  be  exploded  as  that  ufed  to  be  in 
fhefe  words  : 

“ I do  anathematize  the  blafphemy  of  Maho- 
med, which  faith,  that  God  deceiveth  whom  he 
will,  and  whom  he  will  he  leadeth  to  that  which 
is  good.  Himfelf  doth  what  he  willetb,  and  is 
himfelf  the  caufc  of  all  good  and  all  evil..  Fate 
and.  dcdiny  govern  all  things.”  Nicetas  Sara- 
centra* 

Pred.  Nay,  our  doflrine  is  more  ancient  than 
Mahomed.  It.  was  maintained  by  St.  Augufine. 

Friend.  Augufine  fpeaks  fometimes  for  it,  and 
hornet  Lines  again  ll  it.  But  all  antiquity  for  the 
four  ftrd  centuries  is  againlt  you,  as  is  the  whole 
Ealtern  church  to  this  day  ; and  the  church  of 
Endand , both  in  her  catechifm,  articles'  and 
homilies.  And  fo  are  divers  of  our  mod  holy- 
mar  tvrs,  bifhop  Hooper  and  bifliop  Latimer  in 
particular. 

Pred, 

J Calv.  Inft.  b.  i.  c,  17.  f.  11. 


C 53  ] 

Pred.  But  does  not  antiquity  fay,  Judas  was 
predeftinated  to  damnation  ? 

Friend.  Quite  the  contrary.  St.  Chryfoftom's 
exprefs  words  are,  Judas,  my  beloved , was  at 
JirJl  a child  of  the  kingdom , and  heard  it  faid  to 
him  with  the  difciples,  “ ye  Jhall  Jit  on  twelve 
thrones.''  But  afterwards  he  became  a child  of 
hell 

Fred.  However  you  will  own  Efau  was  pre- 
deftinated to  deftruftion. 

Friend.  Indeed  I will  not.  Some  of  your 
own  writers  believe  he  was  finally  laved,  which 
was  the  general  opinion  of  the  ancient  fathers. 
And  that  fcripture,  Jacob  have  I loved , and  Efau 
have  I hated,  plainly  relates  not  to  their  perfons 
but  their  pofterities. 

But  fuppofing  Efau  or  Judas  to  be  damned, 
what  is  he  damned  for  P 

Pred.  Without  queftion  for  unbelief.  For 
as  we  are  faved  by  faith  alone,  fo  unbelief  is  the 
only  damning  fin. 

Friend.  By  what  faith  are  you  faved  ? 

Pred.  By  faith  in  Chrift,  who  gave  himfelf 
for  me. 

Friend.  But  did  he  give  himfelf  for  Efau  and 
Judas  ? If  not,  you  fay,  they  are  damned, 
for  not  believing  a lie. 

This  confideration  it  was  which  forced  arch- 
bifliop  Ufher  to  cry  out, 

“ What  would  not  a man  fly  unto,  rather  than  . 
yield,  that  Chrift  did  not  die  for  the  reprobates  ; 

C 3 and 


[ 54  ] 

and  that  none  but  the  eleft  had  any  kind  of  title 
to  him  ; and  yet  many  thoufands  fhould  be' 
bound  in  confcience  to  believe  that  he  died  for 
them,  and  tied  to  accept  him  for  their  Redeemer 
and  Saviour  ? Whereby  they  Ihould  have  believed 
that  which  in  itfelf  is  molt  untrue,  and  laid 
hold  of  that  in  which  they  had  no  kind  of  in- 
terefl.” 

Pred.  But  what  then  do  you'  mean  by  the 
words,  elcchon  and  reprobation  ? 

Friend.  I mean  this.  ill.  God  did  decree 
from  the  beginning  to  eleft  or  chufe  (in  Chrifl) 
all  that  Ihould  believe,  to  falvation.  And  this 
decree  proceeds  from  his  own  goodnefs,  and  is 
not  built  upon  any  goodnefs  in  the  creature. 
2dly.  God  did  from  the  beginning  decree  to 
reprobate  all,  who  fhould  obflinately  and  finally 
continue  in  unbelief. 

Pred.  What  then  do  you  think  of  abjolute,  un- 
conditional eledlion  and  reprobation  ? 

Friend.  I think  it  cannot  be  found  in  holy 
writ,  and  that  it  is  a plant  which  bears  difinal 
fruit.  An  inflance  of  which  we  have  in  Calvin 
himfelf ; who  confeffes,  that  he  procured  the 
burning  to  death  of  Michael  Servetus,  purely  for 
differing  from  him  in  opinion  in  matters  of  re- 
ligion. 


FREE 


[ 55  ] 


FREE  GRACE. 


A 

SERMON 

Preached  at  BRISTOL. 


Rom.  viii. 

He  that  /pared  not  his  own  Son,  hut  delivered  hitn 
up  for  us  all,  how  Jhall  he  not  with  him  al/o 
freely  give  us  all  things  ? 

i.TTOW  freely  does  God  love  the  world! 
J-  While  we  were  yet  finners,  Chrifl  died 
for  the  ungodly.  While  we  were  dead  in  fin,  God 
j pared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  vp  for  us 
all.  And  how  freely  with  him  does  he  give  114  all 
things ! Verily  free  grace  is  all  in  all  ! 

2.  The  grace  or  love  of  God,  whence  cometh 
our  falvation,  is  free  in  all,  and  free  for  all. 

C 4 * 3.  Firf. 


C 56  ] 

* 3.  Firjl.  It  is  free  in  all  to  whom  it  is  given. 
It  does  not  depend  on  any  power  or  merit  in 
man  : no,  not  in  any  degree  ; neither  in  whole 
nor  in  part.  It  does  not  in  any  wife  depend  ei- 
ther on  the  good  works  or  righteoufnefs  of  the  re- 
ceiver : not  on  any  thing  he  has  done,  or  any 
thing  he  is.  It  does  not  depend  on  his  endea- 
vours. It  does  not  depend  on  his  good  tempers, 
or  good  defires,  or  good  purpofes  and  intentions. 
For  all  thefe  flow  from  the  free  grace  of  God  : 
they  are  the  flreams  only,  not  the  fountain. 
They  are  the  fruits  of  free  grace,  and  not  the 
root.  They  are  not  the  caufe,  but  the  the  effe&s 
of  it.  Whatfoever  good  is  in  man,  or  done  by 
man,  God  is  the  author  and  doer  of  it.  Thus  is 
his  grace  free  in  all,  that  is,  no  way  depending 
on  any  power,  or  merit  in  man  ; but  on  God 
alone,  who  freely  gave  us  his  own  Son,  and  with 
him  freely  givtth  us  all  things. 

4.  But  is  it  free  for  all,  as  well  as  in  all  ? To 
this  fome  have  anfwered,  “ No  : it  is  free  only 
for  thofe  whom  God  hath  ordained  to  life  ; and 
they  are  but  a little  flock.  The  greater  part  of 
mankind  God  hath  ordained  to  death  ; and  it  is 
not  free  for  them.  Them  God  hateth  ; and  there- 
fore before  they  were  born,  decreed  they  fhould 
die  eternally.  And  this  he  abfolutely  decreed ; 
becaufe  fo  was  his  good  pleafure  ; becaufe  it  was 
his  fovereign  will.  Accordingly,  they  are  born 
for  this,  to  be  dellroyed,  body  and  foul,  in  hell. 
And  they  grow  up  under  the  irrevocable  curfe 

cf 


C 57  3 

of  God,  without  any  poflibility  of  redemption. 
For  what  grace  God  gives,  he  gives  only  for 
thife,  to  increafe,  not  prevent,  their  damnation.” 

r).  This  is  that  decree  of  predeftination.  But 
methinks  I hear  one  fay,  “ This  is  not  the  pre- 
deflination  which  I hold.”  I hold  only,  “ The 
eleftion  of  grace.  What  I believe  is  no  more 
than  this,  that  God,  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  did  cleft  a certain  number  of  men  to  be 
juftified,  fanftified  and  glorified.  Now  all  thefe 
will  be  faved,  and  none  elfe.  For  the  reft  of 
mankind  God  leaves  to  themfelves.  So  they 
follow  the  imaginations  of  their  own  hearts, 
which  are  only  evil  continually,  and  waxing 
worfe  and  worfe,  are  at  length  juflly  punifhed 
with  everlafting  deftruftion.” 

6.  Is  this  all  the  predeftination  v.  hi-'h  you  hold  ? 
Confider.  Perhaps  this  is  not  all.  Do  not  you 
believe,  “ God  ordained  them  to  this  very 
thing  ?”  If  fo,  you  believe  the  whole  decree  ; 
you  hold  predeftination  in  the  full  fenfe,  which 
has  been  above  deferibed.  But  it  may  be  you- 
think  you  do  not.  Do  not  you  then  believe  God 
hardens  the  hearts  of  them  that  perifh  ? Do  not 
you  believe,  he  (literally)  hardened  Pharaoh’s 
heart,  and  that  for  this  end  he  raifed  him  (or 
created  him  ?)  Why  this  amounts  to  juft  the 
fame  thing.  If  you  believe  Pharaoh,  or  any  one 
man  upon  the  earth,  was  created  for  this  end,  to 
be  damned,  you  holdall  that  has  been  faid  of  pre- 
deftination, And  there  is  no  need  you  fhould. 

C 5 a4£ 


[ 58  ] 

add,  that  God  feconds  his  decree,  which  is  fup- 
pofed  unchangeable  and  irrefiftible,  by  hardening 
the  hearts  of  thofe  veffels  of  wrath,  whom  that 
decree  had  before  fitted  for  deftru£Hon. 

7.  'Well,  but  it  may  be  you  do  not  believe 
even  this.  You  do  not  hold  any  decree  of  repro- 
bation. You  do  not  think  God  decrees  any  man 
to  be  damned,  nor  hardens,  irrefi ftibly  fits  him  for 
damnation.  You  only  fay,  “ God  eternally  de- 
creed, that  all  being  dead  in  fin,  he  would  fay 
to  fome  of  the  dry  bones,  live,  and  to  others  he 
would  not.  That  confequently,  thefe  fhould  be 
made  alive,  and  thofe  abide  in  death  : thefe 
fhould  glorify  God  by  their  falvation,  and  thofe 
by  their  deflruflion.” 

* 8.  Is  not  this  what  you  mean  by  the  eleElion 
of  grace?  If  it  be,  I would  afk  one  or  two  quef- 
tions.  Are  any  who  are  not  thus  defied,  faved  ? 
Or  were  any,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world? 
Is  it  poffible  any  man  fhould  be  faved,  unlefs  he 
be  thus  elefled  ? If  you  fay  no,  you  are  but  where 
vou  was.  You  are  not  got  one  hair’s  breadth 
farther.  You  fl ill  believe,  that  in  confequence 
of  an  unchangeable,  irrefiflible  decree  of  God, 
the  greater  part  of  mankind  abide  in  death,  with- 
out any  poffibility  of  redemption;  inafmuch  as 
none  can  fave  them  but  God  ; and  he  will  not 
fave  them.  You  believe  he  hath  abfolutely  de- 
creed, not  to  fave  them  ; and  what  is  this,  but 
decreeing  totlamn  them  ?.  It  is,  in  effect,  neither 
more  nor  lefs:  it  comes  to  the  fame  thing.  For 

if 


[ 59  ] 

if  you  are  dead,  and  altogether  unable  to  make 
yourfelf  alive;  then  if  God  has  abfolutely  de- 
creed, he  will  make  only  others  alive,  and  not 
vou,  he  hath  abfolutely  decreed  your  everlafl- 
ing  death  ; you  are  abfolutely  configned  to  dam- 
nation. So  then,  though  you  ufe  fofter  words 
than  fome,  you  mean  the  fell-fame  thing.  And 
God’s  deciee  concerning  the  election  of  grace, 
according  to  your  own  account  of  it,  amounts  to 
neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  what  others  call, 

“ God’s  decree  of  reprobation.” 

* 9.  Call  it  therefore  by  whatever  name  yoa 
pleafe,  “ Eleftion,  Preterition,  Predeflination  or 
Reprobation,”  it  comes  in  the  end  to  the  fame 
thing.  The  fenfe  of  all  is  plainly  thi ..  “ By- 
virtue  of  an  eternal,  unchangeable,  irrefifl  ble 
decree  of  God,  one  part  of  mankind  are  infallibly 
faved,  and  the  reft  infallibly  damned  : it  being 
impoflible,  that  any  of  the  former  fhould  be 
damned,  or  that  any  of  the  latter  fhould  b& 
faved.” 

10.  But  if  this  be  fo,  then  is  all  preaching 
vain.  It  is  needlefs  to  them  that  are  elefted. 
For  they,  whether  with  preaching  or  without, 
will  infallibly  be  faved.  Therefore  the  end  of 
preaching,  “ to  fave  fouls,”  is  void  with  regard  to 
them.  And  it  is  ufelefs  to  them  that  are  not 
elefled,  for  they  cannot  poffibly  be  faved..  They, 
whether  with  preaching  or  without,  will  infalli- 
bly be  damned.  The  end  of  preaching  is  there- - 
fore  void  with  regard  to  them  likewifje-  So  that 
C b -■  in- 


C 6o  ] 

in  either  cafe,  our  preaching  is  vain,  as  your  hear- 
ing is  alfo  vain. 

11.  This  then  is  a plain  proof,  that  the  doc- 
trine of  predeflination  is  not  a doflrine  of  God, 
becaufe  it  makes  void  the  ordinance  of  God  ; and 
God  is  not  divided  againfl  himfelf.  A fecond  is, 
that  it  direftly  tends  to  deltroy  that  holinefs, 
which  is  the  end  of  all  the  ordinances  of  God.  I 
do  not  fay,  “ None  who  hold  it  are  holy.”  (For 
God  is  of  tender  mercy  to  thofe  who  are  un- 
avoidably intangled  in  errors  of  any  kind.)  But 
that  the  doflrine  itfelf,  “ That  every  man  is  ei- 
ther defied  or  not  defied  from  eternity,  and  that 
the  one  mull  inevitably  be  faved,  and  the  other 
inevitably  damned,”  has  a manifefl  tendency  to 
deftroy  holinefs  in  general.  * For  it  wholly 
takes  away  thofe  firft  motives  to  follow  after  if, 
fo  frequently  propofed  in  fcripture,  the  hope  of 
future  reward  and  fear  of  punifhment,  the  hope 
of  heaven  and  fear  of  hell.  That  iheje  Jliall 
go  away  into  everlajhng  punijhment , and  thofe  into 
life  eternal , is  no  motive  to  him  to  ftruggle  for 
life,  who  believes  his  lot  is  caft  already  : it  is  not 
reafonable  for  him  fo  to  do,  if  he  thinks  he  is 
unalterably  adjudged  either  to  life  or  death.  You 
will  fay,  “ But  he  knows  not  whether  it  is  life  or 
death.”  What  then  ? This  helps  not  the  matter. 
For  if  a fick  man  knows,  that  he  mull  unavoid- 
ably die,  or  unavoidably  recover,  though  he 
knowsnotwhich,itis  unreafonable  for  himto  take 

any 


: [6 1 ] 

any  phyfic  at  all.  He  might juftly  fay,  (and  fo  I 
have  heard  feme  fpeak,  both  in  bodily  ficknefs 
and  in  fpiritual)  “ If  I am  ordained  to  life,  I fhall 
live;  if  to  death,  I fhall  die.  So  I need  not  trou- 
ble myfelf  about  it.”  So  diredlly  does  this  doc- 
trine tend  to  (hut  the  very  gate  of  holinefs  in  ge- 
neral, to  hinder  unholy  men  from  ever  approach- 
ing thereto,  or  driving  to  enter  in  thereat. 

* 12.  As  direftly  does  this  doftrine  tend  to  de- 
ftroy  feveral  particular  branches  of  holinefs. 
Such  are  meeknefs  and  love  ; love  I mean  of  our 
enemies,  of  the  evil  and  unthankful.  I fay  not, 
that  none  who  hold  it  have  meeknefs  and  love  : 
(for  as  is  the  power  of  God,  fo  is  his  mercy.)  But 
that  it  naturally  tends  to  infpire  or  increafe  a 
(hatpnefs  or  eagernefs  of  temper,  which  is  quite 
contrary  to  the  meeknefs  of  Chrifl : as  then 
efpecially  appears,  when  they  are  opp'ofed  on  this 
head.  And  it  as  naturally  infpires  contempt  or 
coldnefs  towards  _ thole  whom  we  fuppofe  out- 
cafls  from  God.  “ O,  (but  you  fay)  I fuppofe 
no  particular  man  a reprobate.”  You  mean,  you 
would  not,  if  you  could  help  it.  You  cannot 
help  fometimes  applying  your  general  do&rine  to 
particular  per  forts.  The  enemy  of  fouls  will  ap- 
ply it  for  you.  You  know  how  often  he  has 
done  fo.  “ But  you  reje&ed  the  thought  with 
abhorrence,”  True  ; as  foon  as  you  could.  But 
how  did  it  four  and  iharpen  your  fpirit  in  the 
mean  time  ? You  well  know  it  was  not  the  fpirit 
of  love,  which  youthen  felt  towards  that  poor' 

fumer. 


[ 62  ] 

firmer,  whom  you  fuppofed  or  fufpe&ed,  whether 
you  would  or  no,  to  have  been  hated  of  God 
from  eternity. 

lg.  Thirdly,  This  do&rine  tends  to  deftroy 
the  comfort  of  religion,  the  happinefs  of  Chrif- 
tianity  : this  is  evident  as  to  all  thofe  who  believe 
themfelves  to  be  reprobated,  or  who  only  fufpecl 
or  fear  it.  All  the  great  and  precious  promifes 
are  loft  to  them.  1 hey  afford  them  no  ray  of 
comfort.  “ For  they  are  not  the  eletl  of  God. 
Therefore  they  have  neither  lot  nor  portion  in 
them.-’  This  is  an  effectual  bar  to  their  finding 
any  comfort,  or  happinefs  even  in  that  religion, 
“ whofe  ways  were  defigned  to  be  ways  oj plea- 
Jantnefs , and  all  her  paths  peace .” 

14.  And  as  to  you  who  believe  yourfelves  the 
eleff  of  God,  what  is  your  happinefs  ? I hope  not 
a notion,  a fpeculative  belief ; a bare  opinion,  of 
any  kind ; but  a feeling  pofTetfion  of  God  in  your 
heart,  wrought  in  you  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  ; or, 
The  witnejs  of  God’s  Spirit  with  your  f pint,  that 
you  are  a child  of  God.  This,  otherwife  termed  the 
fullajfurance  of  faith,  is  the  true  ground  of  a Chrif- 
tian’s  Uappinefs.  And  it  does  indeed  imply,  a full 
affurance,  that  all  your  paft  fins  are  forgiven,  and 
that  you  are  now  a child  of  God.  But  it  does 
not  necelfarily  imply,  a full  alfurance  of  our  fu- 
ture perfeverance.  I do  not  fay,  this  is  never 
joined  to  it  : but  that  it  is  not  necelfarily  implied 
therein  ; for  many  have  the  one,  who  have  not 
the  other. 


*5.  Now 


[ 63  3 

lg.  Now  this  witnefs  of  the  Spirit  experience 
(hews  to  be  much  obftru&ed  by  this  doflrine  : 
and  not  only  in  thofe  who  believing  them- 
felves  reprobated,  by  this  belief  thruft  it  far  from 
them;  but  even  in  them  that  have  tajled.  of 
that  good  gift , who  yet  have  foon  loft  it  again, 
and  fallen  back  into  doubts,  and  fears,  and  dark- 
nefs,  horrible  darknefs  that  might  be  felt.  And 
I appeal  to  any  of  you  who  hold  this  doflrine, 
to  fay  between  God  and  your  own  hearts,  whe- 
ther you  have  not  often  a return  of  doubts  and 
fears  concerning  your  eleftion  or  pei  feverance  ? 
If  you  afk,  who  has  not  ? I anfwer  very  few  of 
thcfe  that  hold  this  doQrine.  But  manv,  very 
many  of  thofe  that  hr  Id  it  not,  in  all  parts  of  the 
earth:  many  of  thole  who  know  and  feel,  they 
are  in  Chrift  to-day,  and  take  no  thought  for  the 
morrow  : who  abide  in  him  by  faith  from  hour 
to  hour,  or  rather  from  moment  to  moment. 
Many  of  thefe  have  enjoyed  the  uninterrupted 
witnefs  of  his  Spirit,  the  continual  light  of  his 
countenance,  from  the  moment  wherein  they  firft 
believed,  for  many  months  or  years  to  this 
day. 

16.  That  afturance  of  faith  which  thefe  enjoy, 
excludes  all  doubt  and  fear.  It  excludes  all  kind 
of  doubt  and  fear,  concerning  their  future  per- 
feverance:  though  it  is  not  properly  (as  was  faid 
before)  an  afthrance  of  what  is  future  ; but  only 
of  what  now  is.  And  this  needs  not  for  its  fup- 
port,  a fpeculative  belief,  that  whoever  is  once 

ordained 


r 64  ] 

ordained  to  life,  mull  live.  For  it  is  wrought 
from  hour  to  hour,  by  the  mighty  power  of  God 
by  the  Holy  Ghoji  which  is  given  unto  than.  And 
therefore  that  do&rineis  not  of  God,  becaufe  it 
tends  to  obflruft,  if  not  deflrcy,  this  great  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  whence  flows  the  chief  com- 
fort of  religion,  the  happinefs  of  Chrifliani- 
ty. 

* 17.  Again,  how  uncomfortable  a thought  is 
this,  that  thoufands  and  millions  of  men,  without 
any  preceding  offence  or  fault  of  theirs,  were 
unchangeably  doomed  to  everlafling  burnings  ? 
How  peculiarly  uncomfortable  mu  ft  it  be,  to 
thofe  who  have  put  on  Chrifl ! To  thofe  who 
being  filled  with  bowels  of  mercy,  tendernefs  and 
companion,  could  even  wifi  themfelves  accurjt  for 
their  brethren  s fake. 

* 18.  Fourthly,  This  uncomfortable  doftrine 
direfrly  tends  to  deffroy  our  zeal  for  good  works. 
And  this  it  doesfirft,  as  it  naturally  tends  (ac- 
cording to  what  was  obferved  before)  to  deftroy 
our  love  to  the  greater  part  of  mankind,  namely 
the  evil  and  unthankful.  For  w hatever  leffens 
our  love  rnuft  fo  far  leffen  our  defire  to  do  them 
good.  This  it  does  fecondly,  as  it  cuts  off  one 
of  the  ftrongeft  motives  to  all  a£ls  of  bodily 
mercy,  fuch  as  feeding  the  hungry,  cloathing 
the  naked,  and  the  like,  viz.  The  hope  of 
faving  their  fouls  from  death.  For  what  avails 
it  to  relieve  their  temporal  wants,  who  are  juft 
dropping  into  eternal  fire  ? “ W ell  ; but  run 


I.  «4  J 

and  fnatch  them  as  brands  out  of  the  fire.”  Nay 
this  you  fuppofe  impoflible.  They  were  appoint- 
ed thereunto  you  fay  from  eternity,  before 
they  had  done  either  good  or  evil.  You  believe 
it  is  the  will  of  God  they  fhould  die.  And  who 
hath  rejijled  his  will  ? But  you  fay,  “ you  do  not 
know,  whether  thefe  are  defied  or  not,”  What 
then  P If  you  know  they  are  one  or  the  other, 
that  they  are  either  defied  or  not  defied,  all  your 
labour  is  void  and  vain.  In  either  cafe  your 
advice,  repoof  or  exhortation,  is  as  needlefs 
and  ufelefs  as  our  preaching.  It  is  needlefs  to 
them  that  are  defied  ; for  they  will  infallibly  be 
faved  without  it.  It  is  ufelefs  to  them  that  are 
not  defied : for  with  or  without  it  they  will 
infallibly  be  damned.  Therefore  you  cannot, 
confidently  with  your  principles,  take  any  pains 
about  their  falvation.  Confequently  thofe  prin- 
ciples direflly  tend  to  dedray  your  zeal  for  good 
works  : for  all  good  works  : but  particularly 
for  the  greated  of  all,  the  having  of  fouls  from 
death. 

19.  But,  fifthly,  This  doQrine  not  only  tends 
to  dedroy  Chridian  holinefs,  happinefs,  and 
good  works,  but  hath  alfo  a direfl  and  manifed 
tendency  to  overthrow  the  whole  Chridian  reve- 
lation. The  point  which  the  wifed  of  the  mo- 
dern unbelievers  mod  induflrioufly  labour  to 
prove  is,  that  the  Chridian  revelation  is  not  ne- 
cedary.  They  well  know  could  they  once  fhew 
this,  the  conclufion  would  be  too  plain  to  be 

denied. 


[ 66  .] 

denied,  If  it  be  not  neceflary  it  is  “ not  true.” 
Now  this  fundamental  point  you  give  up.  For 
fuppofing  that  eternal,  unchangeable  decree,  one 
part  of  mankind  mud  be  faved,  though  the  Chrif- 
tian  revelation  were  not  in  being:  and  the 
other  part  of  mankind  mud  be  damned  notw  ith- 
ftanding  that  revelation.  And  what  would  an 
Infidel  dehre  more  ? You  allow  him  all  he  afks. 
In  making  the  gofpel  thus  unneceffary  to  all  forts 
of  men,  you  give  up  the  whole  Chriftian  caufe. 
0 tell  it  > not  in  Gath  ! Publifti  it  not  in  the  flreets  of 
Afhkelon  ! Left  the  daughters  of  the  uncircumcifed 
rejoice , left  the  fons  of  unbelief  triumph  ! 

* 20.  And  as  this  doCtrine  manifeftly  and 
direCtly  tends  to  overthow  the  whole  Chriftian 
revelation,  fo  it  does  the  fame  thing,  by  plain 
confequence,  in  making  that  revelation  con- 
tradict itfelf.  For  it  is  grounded  on  fuch  an  in- 
terpretation of  fome  texts  (more  or  fewer  it 
matters  not)  as  flatly  contradicts  all  the  other 
texts,  and  indeed  the  whole  fcope  and  tenor  of 
fcripture.  For  inftance  ; the  affertors  of  this 
doCtrine,  interpret  that  text  of  fcripture, 
“ Jacob  have  I loved , but  Efau  have  I hated,’ 
as  implying  that  God  in  a literal  fenfe  hated 
Efau,  and  all  the  reprobated  from  eternity. 
Now  what  can  poflibly  be  a more  flat  contradic- 
tion than  this,  not  only  to  the  whole  fcope  and 
tenor  of  fcripture,  but  alfo  to  all  thofe  particular 
texts,  which  exprefly  declare,  “ God  is  love  P ’ 
Again,  the,y  infer  from  that  text,  I will  have, 

- mercy 


[ 67  ] 

mercy  on  whom  I will  have  mercy”  (Rom.  ix. 
lj.)  That  God  is  love  only  to  fome  men,  viz. 
The  ele£f,  and  that  he  hath  mercy  for  thofe  on- 
ly : flatly  contrary  to  which  is  the  whole  tenor 
of  fcriptnre,  as  is  that  exprefs  declaration  in  par- 
ticular, “ The  Lord  is  loving  unto  every  man,  and 
“ lus  mercy  is  over  all  his  works.”  (Pf.  cxlv.  g.) 
Again,  they  infer  from  that  and  the  like 
texts,  “ It  is  not  of  Kim  that  imlleth , neither  of 
him  that  runeth,  but  of  God  that  fieweth  mercy” 
that  he  fheweth  mercy  only  to  thofe  to  whom  he 
had  refpeft  from  all  eternity.  Nay,  but  who  re- 
plieth  agaivf  God  now  ? You  now  contradift 
the  whole  oracles  of  God,  which  declare  through- 
out, “ God  is  no  refpetder  of  p erf ons.”  (A£fs  x. 
34.)  “ There  is  no  refpeR  of  perfons  with  him.” 
(Rom.  ii.  11.)  Again,  from  that  text,  “ The 
children  being  not  yet  born,  neither  having  done 
good  or  evil,  that  the  purpofe  0/  God  according  to 
ele&ion,  might jl  and,  not  of  works,  but  of  him  that 
calleth,  it  was  /aid  unto  her,  (unto  Rebecca)  The 
elder  fhall  ferve  the  younger  :”  you  infer,  that 
our  being  predeflinated  or  eleft  no  way  depends 
on  the  fore-knowledge  of  God  : flatly  contrary 
to  this  are  all  the  fcriptures  ; and  thofe  in  parti- 
cular, “ eleB,  according  to  the fore-knowledge  of 
God.”  (1  Pet.  i.  2.)  “ Whom  he  did  foreknow, 
he  alfo  did predejhnate.”  (Rom.  viii.  sg.) 

21.  And,  “ The  fame  Lord  over  all  is  rich  in 
mercy  to  all  that  call  upon  him.  (Rom.  x.  12.) 
But  you  fay,  No,  he  is  fuch  only  to  thofe  for 

whom 


[ 68  ] 

whom  Chrifl  died.  And  thofe  are  not  all,  but 
only  a few,  whom  God  hath  chofen  out  of  the 
world : for  he  died  not  for  all,  but  only  for  thofe 
who  were,  chofen  in  him  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  (Eph.  i.  2.)  Flatly  contrary  to  your 
interpretation  of  thefe  feriptures  alfo  is  the 
whole  tenor  of  the  New  Teflament  ; as  are  in 
particular  thofe  texts,  “ Dejlroy  not  him  with  thy 
meat,  for  whom  Chrifl  died"  (Rom.  xiv.  1^.)  A 
clear  proof  that  Chrifl  died,  not  only  for  thofe 
that  are  faved,  but  alfo  for  them  that  perifh.  He 
is,  “ the  Saviour  of  the  world."  (John  iv.  42.) 
He  is  “ the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the 
fins  of  the  world."  (John  i.  29.)  “ He  is  the  pro- 
pitiation, not  for  our  fins  only , but  alfo  for  the  fins 
of  the  whole  world"  (1  John  ii.  2.)  “ He  (the 
living  God)  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men"  (1  Tim. 
iv.  10.)  “ He  gave  himfelf  a ranfom  for  all.  (1 
Tim.  ii.  6.)  “ He  tafed  death  for  all  men."  (Heb. 
ii.  9.) 

21.  If  you  afk,  “ Why  then  are  not  all  men 
faved  ?”  The  whole  law  and  the  teflimony  an- 
fwer,  firfl,  not  becaufe  of  any  decree  of  God, 
not  becaufe  it  is  his  pleafure  they  fhould  die. 
For,  “ as  I live,  faith  the  Lord  God,  / have  no 
pleafure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dielh."  (Ezek. 
xviii.  32.)  Whatever  be  the  caufe  of  their  perifh- 
ing,  it  cannot  be  his  will,  if  the  oracles  of  God 
are  true  ; for  they  declare,  **  He  is  not  willing  that 
anyfiouldperifi,  but  that  all  faould  come  to  re- 
pentance." (2  Pet.  iii.  9.)  He  willeth  that  all  men 

fhould 


[ % J 

fhould  be  faved.  And  they,  fecondly,  declare, 
What  is  the  caufe  why  all  men  are  not  faved  ; 
namely,  that  they  will  not  be  faved  : fo  our 
Lord  exprefly,  “ They  will  not  come  unto  me  that 
they  may  have  life."  (John  v.  40.)  “ The  power 
of  the  Lord  is  prefent  to  heal  them."  But  they 
will  not  be  healed.  “ They  rejedl  the  counfelf 
the  merciful  counfel  of  God  agairft  themfelves , as 
did  their  (lifF-necked  fore-fathers.  And  there- 
fore are  they  without  excufe,  becaufe  God  would 
fave  them,  but  they  will  not  be  faved:  this  is 
the  condemnation,  “ How  often  would  I have 
gathered  you  together,  and  ye  would  notT  (Matt. 
xxiii.37.) 

22.  Thus  manifeftlv  does  this  doftrine  tend 
to  overthrow  the  whole  Chriftian  revelation, 
by  making  it  contradift  itfelf;  by  giving  fuch 
an  interpretation  of  fome  texts,  as  flatly  con- 
tradifls  all  the  other  texts  ; and  indeed  the 
whole  fcope  and  tenor  of  fcripture.  An  abun- 
dant proof  that  it  is  not  of  Godu  but  neither 
is  this  all.  For,  feventhly,  It  is  a dofhine  full 
of  blafphemy  ; of  fuch  blafphemy  as  I fhould 
dread  to  mention,  but  that  the  honour  of  our 
gracious  God,  and  the  caufe  of  his  truth,  will 
not  fuffer  me  to  be  filent.  In  the  caufe  of  God 
then,  and  from  a fincere  concern  for  the  glory 
of  his  great  name,  I will  mention  a few  of  the 
horrible  blafphemies  contained  in  this  horrible 
doftrine.  But  firft,  I mull  warn  every  one  of 
you  that  hears,  as  ye  will  anfwer  it  at  the  great 

day, 


t 70  ] 

day,  not  to  charge  me  (as  fome  have  done)  with 
blafpheming,  becaufe  I mention  the  blafphemy 
of  others.  And  the  more  you  are  grieved  with 
them  that  do  thus  blafphetne,  fee  that  ye  confirm 
your  love  towards  them  the  more,  and  that  your 
heart’s  defire,  and  continual  prayer  to  God  be, 
“ 'Father,  Jo r give  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do." 

* 23.  This  premifed,  let  it  be  obferved,  that 
this  dottrine  reprefents  our  blelfed  Lord,  Jefus 
Chrift  the  righteous , the  only  begotten  Son  ofi the 
Father,  fiull  of  grace  and  truth,  as  an  hypocrite, 
a deceiver  of  the  people,  a man  void  of  common 
finceritv.  For  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  he  every 
where  fpeaks,  as  fi  he  was  willing  that  all  men 
fhould  be  faved.  Therefore  to  fay,  he  was  not 
willing  that  all  men  fhould  be  faved,  is  to  repre- 
fent  him  as  a mere  hypocrite  and  difTembler.  It 
cannot  he  denied,  that  the  gracious  words  which 
came  out  of  his  mouth,  are  full  of  invitations  to 
all  Tinners.  To  fay  then,  he  did  not  intend  to 
fave  all  finners,  is  to  reprefent  him  as  a grofs 
deceiver  of  the  people.  You  cannot  deny,  that 
he  fays,  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  are  weary  and 
heavy  laden.  If  then  you  fay  he  calls  thofe  that 
cannot  come,  thofe  whom  he  knows  to  be  una- 
ble to  come,  thofe  whom  he  can  make  able  to 
come  but  will  not,  how  is  it  pofTible  to  deferibe 
greater  infincerity  ? You  reprefent  him  as  mock- 
ing his  helplefs  creatures,  by  offering  what  he 
never  intends  to  give.  You  deferibe  him  as  fay- 
ing 


ing  one  thing,  and  meaning  another  : as  pretend- 
ing the  love  which  he  had  not.  Him  in  whofe 
mouth  was  no  guile,  you  make  full  of  deceit,  void 
of  common  fincerity : then  efpecially,  when 
drawing  nigh  the  city,  He  wept  over  it,  and faid, 

“ 0 Jerufalem,  Jerufalem , Thou  that  killejl  the 
prophets,  and  jlonejl  them  that  are  fent  unto  thee  : 
how  often  would  I have  gathered  thy  children  to- 
gether  and  ye  Would  not.”  ( Jj0£»*<ra  Jt) 

Now  if  you  fay,  They  would,  but  he  would  not, 
you  reprefeut  him,  (which  who  could  hear?)  as 
weeping  crocodile’s  tears,  weeping  over  the 
prey  which  himfelf  had  doomed  to  deftrufldon. 

* 24.  Such  blafphemy  this,  as  one  would  think 
might  make  the  ears  of  a Chriftian  to  tingle.  But 
there  is  yet  more  behind  ; for  juft  as  it  honours 
the  Son  fo  doth  this  doftrine  honour  the  Father. 
It  deftroys  all  his  attributes  at  once.  It  overturns 
both  his  juftice,  mercy,  and  truth.  Yea,  it  repre- 
fents  themoft  holyGod  as  worfe  than  the  devil,  as 
both  more  falfe,  more  cruel  and  more  unjuft.  More 
falfe  : becaufe  the  devil,  liar  as  he  is,  hath  never 
faid,  “ He  willeth  all  men  to  be  fayed."  More 
unjuft,  becaufe  the  devil  cannot,  if  he  would, 
be  guilty  of  fuch  injuftice  as  you  afcribe  to  God, 
when  you  fay  that  God  condemned  millions  of 
fouls  to  everlafting  ■ fire  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels,  for  continuing  in  fin,  which 
for  want  of  that  grace  he  will  not  give  them,  they 
cannot  avoid  ; and  more  cruel,  becaufe  that  un- 
happy fpirit  feeketh  rejl  and findeth  none  ; fo  that 

his 


[ 7*  ] 

his  own  reftlefs  mifery  is  a kind  of  temptation 
to  him  to  tempt  others.  Rut  God  rcfltth  in 
his  high  and  holy  p alee  : fo  that  to  fuppofe  him 
of  his  own  mere  motion,  of  his  -pure  will  and 
pleafure,  happy  as  he  is,  to  doom  his  creatures 
whether  they  will  or  no  to  endlefs  mifery  ; is 
to  impute  fuch  cruelty  to  him,  as  we  cannot 
impute  even  to  the  great  enemy  of  God  and 
man.  It  is  to  reprefent  the  moft  high  God 
(he  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  !)  as 
more  cruel,  falfe,  and  unjuft  than  the  devil. 

25.  * This  is  the  blafphemy  cleaily  contained 
in  the  horrible  decree  of  predeftination.  And 
here  I fix  my  foot.  On  this  I join  iftue  with 
every  aflerter  of  it.  You  reprefent  God  as  worfe 
than  the  devil  : more  falfe,  more  cruel,  more 
unjuft.  “ But  you  fay,  you  will  prove  it  by 
feripture.”  Hold  ! What  will  you  prove  by 
feripture  ? That  God  is  worfe  than  the  devil  ? 
It  cannot  be.  Whatever  that  feripture  proves, 
itnever  can  prove  this.  Whatever  its  true 
meaning  be,  this  cannot  be  its  true  meaning. 
Do  you  alt,  “ What  is  its  true  meaning  then  ?” 
If.  I fay,  “ I know  not,”  you  have  gained 
nothing.  For  there  are  many  feriptures,  the 
true  fenfe  whereof  neither  you  nor  I {hall  know, 
till  death  is  fwallowed  up  in  viftory.  But  this 
I know,  better  it  were  to  fay,  it  had  no  fenfe  at 
all,  than  to  fay  it  had  fuch  a fenfe  as  this.  It  can- 
not mean,  whatever  it  mean  befides,  that  the 
God  of  truth,  is  a liar.  Let  it  mean  what  it  will, 

it 


[ 73  ] 

ii  cannot  mean  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  world  is 
unjuft.  No  fcripture  can  mean,  that  God  is  not 
love,  or  that  his  mercy  is  not  over  all  his  works: 
that  is,  whatever  it  prove  befide,  no  fcripture 
can  prove  predeftination. 

* 2 6.  This  is  the  blafphemy  for  which,  (how- 
ever I love  the  perfons  who  affert  it)  I abhor  the 
do&rine  of  predeftination  : a doftrine  upon  the 
fuppofition  of  which,  if  one  could  polfibly  fup- 
pofe  it  for  a moment,  (call  it  eleftion,  reproba- 
tion, or  what  you  pleafe,  for  all  comes  to  the 
fame  thing)  one  might  fay  to  our  adverfary  the 
devil,  “ Thou  fool,  why  doll  thou  roar  about 
any  longer?  Thy  lying  in  wait  for  fouls  is  as 
needlefs  and  ufelefs  as  our  preaching.  Heareft 
thou  not,  that  God  hath  taken  thy  work  out  of 
thy  hands  ? And  that  he  doth  it  much  more  ef- 
feftually  ? Thou,  with  all  thy  principalities  and 
powers,  canft  only  fo  alfault  that  we  may  refill 
thee.  But  he  can  irrefiftibly  deftroy  both  body 
and  foul  in  hell ! Thou  canft  only  intice.  But 
his  unchangeable  decree,  to  leave  thoufands  of 
fouls  in  death,  compels  them  to  continue  in  fin, 
till  they  drop  into  everlafting  burnings.  Thou 
tempteft.  He  forceth  us  to  be  damned.  For  we 
cannot  refill  his  will.  Thou  fool,  why  goell 
thou  about  any  longer,  feeking  whom  thou 
mayeft  devour  ? Heareft  thou  not,  that  God  is 
the  devouring  lion,  the  deftroyer  of  fouls,  the 
murderer  of  men  ? Moloch  caufed  only  children 
to  pafs  through  the  fire  ; and  that  fire  was  foon 

Vol.  XX.  D quenghed : 


£ 74  0 

quenched  : or  the  corruptible  body  being  con- 
fumed,  its  torment  was  at  an  end.  But  God, 
thou  art  told,  by  his  eternal  decree,  fixed  before 
they  had  done  good  or  evil,  caufes  not  only 
children  of  a /pan  long,  but  the  parents  alfo  to 
pafs  through  the  fire  of  hell : the  fire  zchich  never 
fhall  be  quenched ; and  the  body  which  is  caft 
thereinto,  being  now  incorruptible  and  immortal, 
will  be  ever  confirming,  and  never  confumed  : 
but  the  fmohe  of  their  tormevt,  becaufe  it  is 
God’s  good  pleafure,  afeendeth  lip  for  ever  -and 
ever.” 

* 27.  O how  would  the  enemy  of  God  and 
man  rejoice  to  hear  thefe  things  were  fo  ! How 
would  he  cry  aloud  and  fpare  not!  How  would 
he  lift  up  his  voice  and  fay,  “ To  your  tents,  O 
Ifrael!  Flee  from  the  face  of  this  God,  or  ye  fhall 
utterly  perifir.  But  whither  will  ye  flee  ? Into  hea- 
ven ? He  is  there.  Down  to  hell  ? Fie  is  there 
alfo.  Ye  cannot  flee  from  an  omniprefent,  almigh- 
ty tyrant.  And  whether  ye  flee  orflay.I  call  hea- 
ven his  throne,  and  earth  his  footflool,  to  wit- 
neis  againfl  you,  ye  fhall  perifh,  ye  fhall  die 
eternally.  Sing,  O hell,  and  rejoice  ye  that  are 
under  the  earth  1 For  God,  even  the  mighty 
God,  hath  fpoken,  and  devoted  to  death  thou- 
fands  of  fouls,  from  the  rifing  up  of  the  fun,  un- 
to the  going  down  thereof.  Here,  O death,  is 
thy  fling  ! They  fhall  not,  cannot  efcape.  For 
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  fpoken  it.  Here, 

O grave, 


[ 7b  1 

O grave,  is  thy  vi£lory  ! Nations  yet  unborn,  or 
ever  they  have  done  good  or  evil,  are  doomed 
never  to  fee  the  light  of  life,  but  thou  (halt  gnaw 
upon  them  for  ever  and  ever.  Let  all  thofe 
morning-liars  fingtogether, who  fell  with  Lucifer, 
fon  of  the  morning.  Let  all  the  Tons  of  hell 
fhoutforjoy!  For  the  decree  is  pad,  and  who 
lhall  difannul  it  ?” 

28.  Yea,  the  decree  is  pad.  And  fo  it  w'as 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  But  what 
decree  ? Even  this : “ I will fet  before  the  fons  of 
men,  life  and  death , hleffvng  and  curfng.  And 
the  foul  that  chufeth  life  fhall  live,  as  the 
foul  that  chufeth  death  fhall  die.”  This  decree, 
whereby  “ whom  God  did foreknow , he  did pre- 
dejlinatef  wras  indeed  from  everlading : this, 
whereby  all  who  fuffer  Chrid  to  make  them 
alive,  are  “ Efebl]  according  to  the  fore-knowledge 
of  God,”  now  fandeth fafi,  even  as  the  moon , and 
as  the  faithful  witnejfes  in  heaven  : and  when  hea- 
ven and  earth  lhall  pafs  a Way,  yet  this  lhall  not 
pafs  away;  for  it  as  unchangeable  and  eternal,  as 
i's  the  being  of  God  that  gave  it.  This  decree 
yields  the  dronged  encouragement,  to  abound  in 
all  good  works,  and  in  all  holinefs  : and  it  is  a 
well-fpring  of  joy,  of  happinefs  alfc,  to  our  great 
and  endlefs  comfort.  This  is  worthy  of  God.  It 
is  every  way  confident  with  all  the  pcrfe&ions 
of  his  nature.  It  gives  us  the  nobled  view  both 
of  hisjudice,  mercy  and  truth.  To  this  agrees 
the  whole  fcope  of  the  Chridian  revelation,  as 
D 2 well 


[ 76J 

well  as  all  the  parts  thereof.  To  this  Mofts  ana 
all  the  prophets  bear  witnefs,  and  our  bleffed 
Lord  and  all  his  apoflles.  Thus  Mofes,  in  the 
name  of  his  Lord,  “ I call  heaven  and  earth  to 
record  againf  you  this  day,  that  I have  fet  before 
you[life  and  death,  blefling  and  curfing  ; therefore 
chuje  life  that  thou  and  thy  feed  may  live .”  Thus 
Ezekiel  (to  cite  one  prophet  for  all)  “ The  foul 
that  finneth  it  Jhall  die  : the  fon  fhall  not  bear 
(eternally)  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  (xviii.  20.) 
the  righteoufnefs  of  the  righteous  fhall  be  upon  him, 
and  ilie  zoickednefs  of  the  wickedfiall  be  upon  him f 
Thus  our  bleffed  Lord,  “ If  any  man  tkirfr,  let 
him  come  to  me  and  drink.”  (John  vii,  37.)  Thus 
his  great  apofllc  St.  Paul,  (Adds  xvii.  30.)  “ God 
commandeth  all  men,  every  where,  to  repent.”  “ All 
men,  every  where  every  man  in  every  place, 
without  any  exception,  either  of  place  or  perfon. 
Thus  St.  James,  “ If  any  of  you  lack  zoifdom,  let 
him  afk  of  God,  who  giveth  io  all  men  liberally, 
and  upbraideth  not,  and  it  fnall  be  given  him.” 
(James  i.  3.)  Thus  St.  Peter,  (2  Pet.  iii.  9.)  “ The 
lord  is — not  willing  that  any  fiould  perifi,  but 
that  all  fiould  come  to  repentance  and  thus  St. 
John,  “ If  any  man  fin,  we  have  an  advocate 
with  the  Father, — and  he  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  fins  : and  not  for  ours  only,  but  for  the fins 
of  the  whole  world.”  (1  John  ii.  1,  2.) 

29.  O hear  ye  this,  ye  that  forget  God ! Ye 
cannot  charge  your  death  upon  him.  “ Have  I 

any 


C 77  J 

any  pleafure  at  all , that  the  wicked Jhould  die,  faith 
the  Lord  God  ? (Ezek.  xviii.  23,  &c.)  Repent 
and  turn  from  all  your  tr  anfgrejjions  : fo  iniquity 
Jhall  not  be  your  ruin.  Cojl  away  from  you  all 
your  tranfg reffions,  whereby  ye  have  irarfgrejl, — 
for  why  will  ye  die,  0 hoife  of  If  rad  f For  I have 
no  pleafure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  faith 
the  Lord  God.  Wheref  ore  turn  yourf elves  and 
live  ye."  As  I live,  faith  the  Lord  God,  1 have 
no  pleafure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked. — Turn  ye, 
turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways : for  why  will  ye  die , 
0 houfe  of  Ifrael  ?"  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11,  &c.) 


UNIVERSAL  REDEMPTION. 

HEAR,  Holy,  Holy.  Holy,  Lord, 

Father  of  all  mankind, 

Spirit  of  love,  eternal  Word, 

In  myftic  union  join’d. 

Hear,  and  infpire  my  Hammering  tongue, 
Exalt  my  abjeff  thought, 

Speak  from  my  mouth  a facred  fong, 

Who  fpak’il  the  world  from  nought.' 

Thy  darling  attribute  I praife, 

Which  all  alike  may  prove, 
i he  glory  of  thy  boundlefs  grace, 

Fhy  uniyerfal  love. 

03 


Mercy 


C 78  ] 

Mercy  I fing,  tranfporting  found  ; 
The  joy  of  earth  and  heaven, 

Mercy  by  every  {inner  found, 

Who  takes  what  God  hath  given. 

Mercy  for  all  thy  hands  have  made, 
Immenfe  aud  unconfin’d, 

Throughout  thy  every  work  difplay’d, 
Embracing  all  mankind. 

Thine  eye  furvey’d  the  fallen  race 
When  funk  in  fin  they  lay. 

Their  mifery  call’d  for  all  thy  grace, 
Butjuftice  flopp’d  the  way. 

Mercy  the  fatal  bar  remov'd. 

Thy  only  Son  it  gave  ; 

To  fa*e  a world  fo  dearly  lov’d, 

A finful  world  to  fave. 

For  every  man  he  tailed  death, 

He  buffer'd  once  for  all, 

He  calls  as  many  fouls  as  breathe. 
And  all  may  hear  the  call. 

A power  to  chufe,  a will  t’obey. 
Freely  his  grace  reflores  ; 

We  all  may  find  the  living  way. 

And  call  the  Saviour  ours. 

Whom  his  eternal  mind  foreknew , 
That  they  the  power  would  ufe, 

Afcribe  to  God  the  glory  due. 

And  not  his  grace  refufe  ; 


Them 


[ 79'  ] 

Them,  only  them,  his  will  decreed , 

Them  did  he  chuft  alone, 

Ordain'd  in  Jefa  s fteps  to  tread, 

And  to  be  like  his  Son. 

Them,  thv elect , consenting  few. 

Who  yield  to  proffer’d  love, 

JaJiijy  d here  he  forms  anew „ 

And  glorifies  above. 

For  as  in  Adam  all  have  dy’d, 

So  all  in  Chrift  may  live. 

May  (for  the  world  is  juftify’d) 

His  righteoufnefs  receive... 

Whoe’er  to  God  for  pardon  fly, 

In  Chrift  may  be  forgiven, 

He  fpeaks  to  all,  “ Why  will  ye  die, 

And  not  accept  my  heaven  ! 

No!  in  the  death  of  him  that  dies, 

(God  by  his  life  hath  fworn) 

He  is  not  pleas’d  ; but  ever  cries, 

Turn,  O ye  Tinners,  turn. 

He  would  that  all . his  truths  Should  own, 
His  gofpel  all  embrace, 

Bejuftify’d  by  faith  alone. 

And  freely  Sav’d  by  grace. 

* And  fhall  I,  Lord,  confine  thy  love,  * 
As  not  to  others  free  ? 

And  may  not  every  Tinner  prove, 

The  grace  th  at  found  out  me  P 

D 4 


Donbtlefs 


[ 8°  ] 

Doubtlefs  thro’  one  eternal  now 
Thou  ever  art  the  fame, 

The  univerfal  Saviour  thou, 

And  Jefus  is  thy  name. 

Ho  ! every  one  that  thirfteth  come  ? 

Chufe  life  ; obey  the  word  ; 

Open  your  hearts  to  make  him  room, 

And  banquet  with  your  Lord. 

* When  Gcd  invites,  fhall  man  repel  ? 

Shall  man  the  exception  make  ? 

“ Come,  freely  come,  whoever  will, 

And  living  water  take  !” 

Thou  bid’ll  : and  would'ft  thou  bid  us  chufe. 
When  purpos’d  not  to  fave  ? 

Command  us  all  a power  to  ufe, 

Thy  mercy  never  gave? 

Thou  can'll  not  mock  the  fons  of  men, 

Invite  us  to  draw  nigh, 

Offer  thy  grace  to  all,  and  then 
Thy  grace  to  moll  deny  ! 

Horror  to  think  that  God  is  hate  ! 

Fury  in  God  can  dwell, 

God  could  an  helpefs  world  create, 

To  thrull  them  into  hell! 

Doom  them  an  endlefs  death  to  die. 

From  which  they  could  not  flee, 

No,  Lord!  thine  inmoft  bowels  cry, 

Agair.lt  the  dire  decree! 


Believe 


L 81  1 

Believe  who  will  that  human  pain 
Pleafing  to  God  can  prove  : 

Let  Molo'ck  feaft  him  with  the  (lain, 

Our  God,  we  know,  is  love. 

* Lord,  if  indeed  without  a bound, 

Infinite  love  thou  art, 

The  horrible  decree  confound, 

Enlarge  thy  people's  heart  ! 

* Ah  ! Who  is  as  thy  fervants  blind, 

So  to  misjudge  their  God  ! 

Scatter  the  darknefs  of  their  mind,.. 

And  filed  thy  love  abroad. 

Give  them  conceptions  worthy  thee,. 

Give  them  in  Jefu’s  face, 

Thy  merciful  delign  to  fee, 

Thy  all-redeeming  grace. 

Stir  up  thy  flrength,  and  help  us,  Lord, 

The  preachers  multiply, 

Send  forth  thy  light,  and  give  the  word. 

And  let  the  fhadows  fly. 

Oh  ! if  thy  fpirit  feud  forth  me, 

The  meaneft  of  the  throng, 

I’ll  fing  thy  grace  divinely  free, 

And  teach  mankind  the  fong. 

Grace  will  I fing,  thro’  Jefus  name. 

On  all  mankind  bellow'd  ; 

The  everlafting  truth  proclaim, 

And  feal  that  truth  with  blood. 

D 5 * Corner 


t 82  3 

* Come  then,  thou  all-embracing  love. 

Our  frozen  bofom  warm  ; 

Dilating  fire  within  us  move, 

With  truth  and  meeknefe  arm. 

* Let  us  triumphantly  ride  on. 

And  more  than  conquerors  prove, 
Mightily  bear  the  oppofers  down. 

And  bind  with  cords  of  love. 

* Shine  in  our  hearts,  Father  of  light, 

JeJ'u  thy  beams  impart, 

Spirit  of  truth  our  minds  unite, 

And  keep  us  one  in  heart. 

Then,  only  then  our  eyes  fhall  fee 
Thy  promis’d  kingdom  come  ; 

And  every  heart  by  grace  fet  free, 

Shall  make  the  Saviour  room. 

* Thee  every  tongue  fhall  then  confefs, 

And  every  knee  fhall  bow. 

Come  qrnckly,  Lord,  we  wait  thy  grate, 
We  long  to  meet  thee  now. 


SERIOUS 


[ 83  ] 


Serious  CONSIDERATIONS 


CONCERNING  THE 


DOCTRINES 


O F 


ELECTION  and  REPROBATION. 


Extrafled  from  a late  Author. 


To  the  READER. 

J Should  be  glad  to  fee  any  account  of  God's 
dealings  with  man  which  might  reBify  all 
our  errors  with  convincing  evidence,  and  fat- 
ter out  darknefs  like  a fifing  fun.  But  in  the 
mean  time,  let  us  bear  with  one  another,  re- 
D 6 member  ing 


C 84  ] 

numbering  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  great  God 
only , to  pierce  through  all  his  own  infinite  fche.rn.es 
with  an  unerring  eye,  to  furround  them  with  an 
all-compr ehenfive  view,  to  grafp  them  all  in  one 
jingle  jurvey,  and  to  fpread  a reconciling  light 
over  all  their  immenfc  varieties,  man  mujl  yet  grap- 
ple with  difficulties  in  this  dufky  twilight  ; but  God 
in  his  time  will  irr acliate  the  earth  more  plentifully 
with  his  light  and  truth.  Then  darknefs  and  con- 
tentions fall fly  away  for  ever  / Amen  ! 


Serious  CONSIDERATIONS,  &c, 

r g 'HAT  there  is  a general  fufficiency  of  par- 
don,  grace  and  happinefs  provided  for  all 
mankind  thro’  Jefus  Chrift,  which  it  is  left  to 
themfelv.es  to  accept  or  refufe,  may,  I think, 
be  proved  by  the  following  confiderations  ; 

I.  It  is  very  hard  to  vindicate  the  flncerity  of 
the  bleffed  God,  or  his  Son  in  their  univerfal 
offers  of  gnace  and  falvation  to  men,  and  their 
fend: n<r  minifters  with  fuch  meffacres  and  invi- 

O 0 

tations  10  accept  of  mercy,  ii  there  be  not  fuch 
a conditional  pardon  and  falvation  provided  for 
them. 


His 


[ ] 

His  miniters  indeed,  as  they  know  not  the 
event  of  things,  may  be  fincere  in  offering  fal- 
▼ation  to  all  perfons,  according  to  their  general 
commiffior),  Go,  ye  into  all  the  ivorld,  and  preach 
the gojpel  to  every  creature.  But  how  can  God 
or  Chrid  be  fincere  in  fending  them  with  this 
cotnmiffion,  to  offer  this  grace  to  all  men,  if  God 
has  never  provided  fuch  grace  for  any  but  the 
eleft,  no,  not  fo  much  as  conditionally? 

JTis  hard  to  fuppofe,  that  the  great  God, 
who  is  truth  iifelf,  and  faithful  in  all  his  deal- 
ings, fnould  call  upon  dying  men  to  trull  in  a 
Saviour  for  eternal  life,  when  this  Saviour  has  not 
eternal  life  intruded  with  him  to  give  them  if 
they  do  as  he  requires  ? !Tis  hard  to  conceive, 
how  the  great  Governor  of  the  world  can  be 
fincere,  in  inviting  finners,  who  are  on  the  brink 
of  hell  to  cad  themfelves  upon  an  empty  word 
of  invitation,  a mere  lhadow  and  appearance  of 
fupport,  if  there  be  nothing  real  to  bear  them 
up  from  thole  deeps  of  dedru&ion,  nothing  but 
mere  words  and  empty  invitations.  Can  we 
think  that  the  righteous  and  holy  God  would 
encourage  his  miniders,  to  call  them  to  lean  and 
red  the  weight  of  their  immortal  concerns  upon 
a gofpel,  a covenant  of  grace,  a mediator,  and 
his  merit  ; all  which  are  a mere  nothing  with  re- 
gard to  them,  a heap  of  empty  names,  an  unfup- 
porting  void,  which  cannot  uphold  them  ? 
\v  hen  our  bleffed  Redeemer  charges  the  Jews 
with  aggravated  guilt  for  refufing  his  grace,  can 


we 


[ 86  ] 

we  fuppofe,  he  had  no  grace  in  his  hand  to  of- 
hei  them  ? Or  when  lie,  as  it  were,  configns 
them  over  to  death,  becaufe  (fays  he)  eye  will  net 
come  unto  me,  that  ye  may  have  life  ; can  we  fiip- 
pofe, he  has  no  eternal  life,  not  fo  much  as  a 
conditional  grant  of  it  in  his  hands  for  them  ? 

To  avoid  tbefe  hard  and  abfurd  confequences 
of  the  calls  of  grace  and  offers  of  falvation,  u-here 
none  is  really  provided,  fome  roundly  alfert,  there 
are  no  calls  of  grace,  no  offers  of  falvation  at  all 
in  the  word  of  God  to  any  but  the  deft.  But  this 
runs  counter  to  a great  many  plain  feriptures, 
wherein  pardon  and  falvation  are  propofed  to  all 
finners]  whatfoever,  without  any  regard  whether 
they  are  chofen  of  God  or  not.  And  it  is  the 
defign  and  voice  of  the  whole  current  of  ferip- 
tnre,  to  call  linnets  to  repentance  by  promifes 
of  mercy,  and  to  inforce  that  which  Ifaiah 
fpeaks,  (chap.  Ixv.  6,  7.)  Seek. ye  the  Lord  while  he 
may  be  found  : Call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near. 
Let  the  wicked  jorfahe  his  way,  and  the  unright- 
eous man  his  thoughts  ; let  him  return  unto  the 
Lord , and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him:  and  to 
our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon. 

II.  It  is  very  hard  to  defend  the  fincerity  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  awakening  the  confciences 
of  thofe  perfons  who  are  not  defied,  [as  appears 
from  this,  that  they  live  and  die  in  their  fins] 
and  ftirring  them  up  to  think  of  receiving  the 
falvation  of  Chrift  upon  the  terms  of  the  gofpeh 

if 


[ 87  j 

if  there  be  no  fuch  falvation  provided  for  them, 
to  receive  upon  any  terms.  It  is  hard  to  fuppofe 
he  ffiould  excite  the  confciences  of  fuch  finners 
in  any  degree,  to  any  repentings  for  fin,  and 
bring  them  near  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in 
the  beginnings  of  conviflion,  if  there  was  no 
pardon  provided  in  any  fenfe  for  thofe  who  are 
not  chofen,  whether  they  repent  or  no.  It  is 
hard  to  fuppofe  he  fhould  give  them  any,  even 
theweakell  excitations,  to  truft  in  the  merit  of  a 
Saviour,  if  that  merit  has  obtained  no  falvation 
for  them,  not  fo  much  as  conditional, 

* Shall  itbe  ever  faid,  that  God  the  Father,  and 
his  Son  and  Spirit,  have  done  each  their  parts 
to  encourage  and  excite  non-ele£l  finners  to  ac- 
cept of,  and  trull  in  the  gofpel  for  falvation, 
when  there  is  not  fo  much  as  the  lead  falvation, 
even  in  a conditional  fenfe,  provided  for  them 
to  accept  of? 

III.  It  is  equally  difficult  to  vindicate  the 
equity  of  God,  as  the  judge  of  all  men,  in  con- 
demning unbelievers  for  not  accepting  the  offers 
of  pardon,  if  no  pardon  was  provided  for  them  ; 
and  in  punifhing  them  eternally  for  not  relting 
on  the  merit  of  Chrift,  and  receiving  his  falva- 
tion, if  there  was  no  fuch  merit  for  them  to  reft 
upon,  nor  any  fuch  falvation  for  them  to  receive. 
Surely  it  will  appear  in  that  day,  that  the  con- 
demnation of  finners,  and  their  eternal  mifery, 
was  merely  the  fruit  of  their  refufing  to  receive 

the 


[ 88  ] 

the  grace  of  God  provided  for  them,  and  offered 
to  them,  and  not  of  any  want  of  fuffieient  pro- 
vifion  made  for  them,  by  him  who  calls  them  to 
receive  it.  The  language  ofChriff,  in  his  miniflrv 
to  Tinners,  is,  Come  to  thefeaft  of  the  gofpel,  for 
ail  things  are  ready.  This  is  the  condemnation,  that 
when  light  came  into  the  -world , they  loved  dar  - 
nej's  rather  than  light . Men  are  exprefsly  con- 
demned, becaufe  they  would  not  come  unto  Chrijl, 
that  they  might  have  life.  And  (as  the  apoftle 
John  often  reprefents)  therefore  they  die  in  their 
Jins.  And  finely  the  Lord  Jefus  would  never  be 
fent  in  flaming  fife,  to  take  vengeance  on  them  that 
obey  not  the  gofpel,  if  there  was  no  fuffieient  pro- 
vifion  made,  whereby  they  might  be  enabled  to 
obey  it  1 

* It  will  render  this  confideration  much  more 
iorcible,  when  we  obferve,  that  there  is  a much 
feverer  condemnation  to  thofe,  who  have  heard 
of  this  gofpel,  and  not  embraced  it,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  light  wherein  it  was  fet  before  them. 
It  {hall  be  lefs  tolerable  for  thofe  who  refufed  the 
gofpel  that  Cbrift  preached,  than  for  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment.  So  their  hav- 
ing it  thus  propofed,  makes  their  cafe  much 
worfe,  than  if  it  had  never  been  propofed  to 
them.  And  can  we  think  that  the  righteous 
Judge  of  the  world  will  fend  forth  words  of  grace 
and  falvation,  when  there  is  no  real  grace  or 
falvation  in  thofe  words,  on  purpofe  to  make 
his  creatures  To  much  the  more  miferable  ? It  is 
very  hard  indeed  to  vindicate  the  righteoufnefj 

of 


[ % ] 

of  the  fentence,  of  their  double  condemnation, 
for  refufing  pardon  and  falvation,  if  there  was 
not  any  pardon  nor  any  falvation  provided  for 
them  ! 

* IV.  The  word  of  God,  by  the  general  com- 
mands, promifes,  and  threatnings,  given  to  all 
men  whatsoever,  and  often  repeated  therein,  re- 
prefents  mankind  as  in  a ftate  of  trial,  and  in  the 
way  to  eternal  rewards  or  punifhments,  accord- 
ing to  their  behaviour  in  this  life.  Now  it  is  very 
hard  to  fuppofe,  all  this  fhould  be  no  real  and 
juft  reprefentation,  but  a mere  amufement : it  is 
hard  to  fuppofe,  that  all  thefe  propofals  of  mercy, 
and  difplays  of  the  gracious  dealings  of  God, 
fhould  be  an  empty  {hew  with  regard  to  all  the 
millions  of  mankind,  befides  the  few  that  are 
chofen  to  happinefs.  It  is  hard  to  fuppofe,  that 
they  fhould  be  fo  fixed  in  a wretched,  hopelefs, 
and  deplorable  ftate,  under  the  firft  fin  of  the  firft 
man,  as  to  be  utterly  irrecoverable  from  the  ruins 
of  it : yea,  as  unalterably  loft,  as  the  very  devils 
are,  for  whom  there  was  no  Saviour  provided,  and 
whom  God  has  not  treated  in  this  way  of  pre- 
cept, promife  and  threatning.  Is  there  not  a 
plain  difference  made  in  Scripture,  between  the 
angels  who  finned,  whom  God  /pared  not , hut  cafi 
them  down  from  heaven,  under  chains  of  dark - 
nef,  until  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  ; and 
mankind  who finned,  to  whom  God  giveth  time 
and  Space  for  repentance,  means  of  grace,  offers 


[ 9°  ] 

of  pardon,  conditional  promifes  of  falvation, 
with  a command  to  all  men  to  accept  it  ? What 
can  manifeft  the  bleffed  God  to  be  upon  terms 
of  mercy  with  them,  if  this  does  not  ? 

V.  T his  feems  to  be  a fair  and  eafy  way,  to 
'anfwer  thofe  texts  of  fcripture,  which  reprefent 
God  as  + the  Saviour  of  all  men,  efpecially  of  them 
that  believe  ; and  alfert,  That  ^ God  calls  and  com- 
mands all  men  every  where  to  repent : That  § Chrijl 
tafled  death  for  every  man  ; That  |j  he  gave  himfelf 
a ranfom  for  all  men,  to  be  tejlifed  in  due  time  ; 
That  f he  died  for  all ; That  tt  he  gave  himfelf 
to  be  the  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world  ; 
That  ^ the  Father  fent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour 
of  the  world : That  f God  fo  loved  the  world , 
that  he  fent  his  Son,  not  to  condemn  the  world, 
but  that  thro ' him  the  world  might  be  faved,  and 
that  whofoever  believeth  in  him,  Jhould  not perifh, 
but  have  everlafing  life. 

If  we  fuppofe  that  there  are  other  texts 
which  affert,  that  there  is  a fpecial  number 
whom  the  Father  chofe  and  gave  to  the  Son, 
whofe  falvation  is  abfolutely  fecured  by  the  death 
and  interceflion  of  Chrifl.  But  why  fhould 
this  hinder  out  interpreting  the  foregoing  in  a 
more  general  fenfe  ? Why  fhould  we  affedt  to 
limit  that  grace  of  God,  which  God  himfelf  ex- 

preffes 

+ i Tim.  iv.  jo.  J Afls  xvti.  30.  § Hcb.  iii.  9.  |i  1 Tim. 

ii.  6.  t 2 Cor.  v.  14.  1 John  ii.  2.  Ch.  iv.  l-i-  John 

iii.  16. 


[ 9'  ] 

preffes  in  an  unlimited  manner  ? The  allowing 
the  abfolute  falvation  of  the  eleff,  by  the  righte- 
•oufnefs  and  death  of  Chrifl  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  conditional falvation  provided  for  all  mankind, 
and  offered  to  them  in  the  gofpel,  on  the  other, 
thro’  the  all-fufficient  valueof  the  fame  righteouf- 
nefs  and  death,  is  a fair,  natural  and  eafy  way 
of  reconciling  thefe  different  texts  of  fcriptures, 
without  any  flrain  or  torture  put  upon  any  of 
of  them. 

Agreeable  to  this  are  Mr.  Calvin’s  own  words, 
on  Matt.  xxvi.  5.  8.  This  is  my  blood  of  the  New 
Tef  ament,  which  was fhed for  many  for  theremifion 
off  ns.  “ Sub  multorum  nomine  non  partem  rrrundi 
tantum  defignat,  fen  totum  kumanum  genus. 
Under  the  name  of  many,  he  fignifies  not  a 
part  of  the  world  only,  but  all  mankind .”  And 
in  many  other  parts  of  his  writings  (particularly 
in  his  comment  on  Rom.  v.  18.  1 John  ii.  2. 
2 Pet.  ii.  l-.J  he  clearly  ejXpreffes  the  fame  fen- 
timent,  viz.  That  Chriff  died  for  all. 

I think  it  is  clear  from  thefe  confiderations, 
that  thofe  who  are  not  abfolutely  eleRed  to  eternal 
J'alvaticn , yet  are  not  predeffinated  to  eternal 
mifery  by  any  abjolute  decree  oj  reprobation. 
Nor  are  they  left  in  the  Plate  of  fallen  angels  or 
devils,  for  whom  no  Saviour  is  appointed.  But 
there  is  a conditional  falvation  provided  for  all 
men,  and  thro’  the  merits  of  Chrift  offered  to 
them  in  the  gofpel. 


The 


[ 92  J 

* The  do&rine  of  abfolute  reprobation  ftands 
in  fuch  a dire&  contradi&ion  to  all  our  notions 
of  kindnefs,  and  love  to  others,  in  which  the 
blefled  God  is  fet  forth  as  our  example,  that  we 
cannot  tell  how  to  receive  it.  Yet  if  it  were 
never  fo  true,  and  never To  plainly  revealed  in 
fcripture,  it  would  only  be  a do&rine  which 
might  require  our  Jilent  fubmifjion  to  it,  with 
awful  reverence  of  the  majefly  of  the  great  God. 
But  it  is  by  no  means  a do&rine  in  which  we 
could  or  fhould  rejoice  and  glory,  or  take  plea- 
fure  in  it,  becaufe  it  has  fo  dreadful  an  afpe&  on 
far  the  greateft  part  of  our  fellow-creatures. 
Nor  do  I think  the  blefled  God  would  require 
us,  fo  far  to  divert,  ourfelves  of  humanity,  as  to 
take  a fecret  fatisfa&ion,  in  the  abfolute  and  eter- 
nal appointment  of  fuch  numbers  of  our.  kin- 
dred flefh  and  blood,  to  everlafting  perdition. 
Much  lefs  fhould  we  make  this  awful  and  ter- 
rible article  a matter  of  our  public  boajl  and 
triumph,  (even  if  we  could  prove  it  to  be  reveal- 
ed) but  rather  mourn  for  it. 

And  fince  fo  many  fcriptures  aflert,  that  Chrift 
lived  and  died  as  a common  mediator  of  mankind, 
methinks  this  do&rine  of  the  extenfive  goodnefs  of 
God,  is  a much  moredefirableopinion,  and  fhould 
be  more  cbearfully  received  by  us,  as  it  is  fo 
agreeable  to  our  charity  to  all  men,  and  fo  necef- 
fary  for  vindicating  the  jurtice,  goodnefs,  and  fln- 
cerity  of  the  blefled  God,  in  his  tranfa&ions 
with  mankind. 


When 


C 93  ] 

When  therefore  I hear  men  talk  of  the  doc- 
trine of  Reprobation,  with  a fpecial  gull  and  relilh, 
as  a favourite  doftrine,  I cannot  but  fufpeft  their 
good  temper,  and  doubt,  whether  they  love  their 
neighbour  as  themfelves.  The  cafe  is  very  dif- 
ferent, when  faints  are  faid  in  fcripture,  to  re- 
joice in  the  public  judgments  of  God,  upon  the 
Antichriftian  ftate,  or  upon  the  wicked  oppref- 
fors,  and  incorrigible  finners  of  the  world. 
For  that  is  the  effeft  of  God’s  equity  and  righte- 
oufnefs,  as  a wife  and  faithful  governor.  But 
this  would  be  an  inftance  merely  of  his  dreadful 
fovereignty,  and  hardly  confiftent  with  goodnefs. 

I would  afk  leave  aifo  to  enquire.  What  great 
advantages  can  be  derived  to  religion,  by  endea- 
vouring to  limit  the  extent  of  the  death  of  Chrifl, 
and  confequently  to  take  away  all  manner  of 
hopes,  and  endeavours,  and  prayers,  from  thofe 
who  are  fuppofed  not  to  be  defied  ? Does  the 
goodnefs  and  fpecial  grace  of  God  acquire  any 
honour  by  this  limitation  ? No  certainly.  Di- 
vine grace  is  the  fame  toward  the  elefl,  whether 
others  are  faved  or  loft.  Are  the  eleft  any  way 
difcouraged  by  it  ? Not  in  the  leaft.  But  by  the 
contrary  doflrine,  many  perfons  who  are  awak- 
ened to  a fenfe  of  fin,  and  are  feeking  after 
Chrift  for  falvation,  may  be  terribly  difcouraged 
from  receiving  his  offers  of  grace,  when  they  are 
taught  to  doubt  whether  there  be  any  grace  pro- 
vided for  them,  and  whether  Jefus  be  appointed  to 
a£l  as  their  Saviour.  It  may  be  a means  to  drive 
fome  poor  fouls  to  defpair,  when  they  hear  that 

unlefs 


[ 94  } 

unlefs  they  are  defied,  they  may  feek  after  fai- 
vation  by  Chrift  in  vain,  for  there  is  none  pur- 
chafed  for  them.  And  it  may  tempt  them  to  be- 
gin at  the  wrong  end,  and  feek  to  pry  into  the 
counfels  of  God,  before  they  dare  trttft  in  his 
grace,  or  fubmit  to  the  gofpel  of  Chrifl. 

Now  if  many  inconveniences  may  arife  from 
thus  limiting  the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Chrift, 
and  if  no  valuable  end  or  advantage  to  religion 
can  be  obtained  by  this  narrow  opinion  : what 
fhould  make  men  fo  zealous  to  get  the  greateft 
part  of  the  world  utterly  excluded  from  all  hopes 
and  all  falvation  ? 

The  great  objeflion  againft  what  I have  faid  is 
this  ; 

“ If  there  be  only  an  outward fufficitncy  of  fal- 
vation provided  for  them  who  are  not  elefled,  or 
falvation  on  condition  that  they  believe,  but  no 
inward f efficiency  of  grace  to  change  their  hearts, 
and  enable  them  to  believe,  the  event  will  be 
the  fame,  as  if  no  falvation  were  provided  : 
Since  they  themfelves  cannot  believe,  being  by 
nature  dead  in  find' 

I anfwer,  it  is  true,  no  Tinner  can  believe,  but 
by  the  almighty  power  of  God.  And  there- 
fore fuch  are  faid  to  be  dead  in  fin  ; and  the  ne- 
ceftity  of  a divine  power,  to  raife  them  from  this 
fpiritnal  death , is  held  forth  in  many  places  of 
feripture.  Yet  we  muft  fay  ftill,  that  fmners  are 
not  under  fuch  an  impoflibility  of  believing,  as  if 
they  were  naturally  dead.  For  if  they  were, 

there 


[ 95  ] 

•there  would  be  no  manner  of  need  or  ufe  of  any 
moral  means  or  motives , fuch  as  commands,  pro- 
-mifes,  threatninjs,  exhortations  : Thefe  would  all 
be  impertinent  and  abfurd.  For  they  could  have 
no  more  influence  on  finners,  than  if  we  com- 
manded or  exhorted  a dead  body  to  rife  or  move  ; 
which  commands  and  exhortations  would  appear 
ridiculous  and  ufelefs.  Since  therefore  the  blef- 
fed  God  in  his  word  does  ufe  thefe  moral  means 
and  motives , to  call  finners  to  faith  and  repent- 
ance, it  is  certain,  there  is  power  Jiifficient  given 
them,  to  hear  and  obey  the  call  : And  that  they 
are  not  under  any  neceffity  of  continuing  in  fin , 
and  of  being  deftroyed. 

With  regard  to  faith,  or  believing  in  Chrift,  in 
particular,  our  Saviour  thus  explains  his  own 
words.  In  one  place  he  faith,  No  man  can  come 
unto  me,  except  my  Father  draw  him.  And  in 
another  place  he  charges  the  Jews  with  this  as 
their  fault.  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  may 
have  life. 

Let  this  then  be  conflantly  maintained,  that 
there  is  not  only  an  outward  fifptciency  of  falva - 
tion  provided  through  the  merits  and  death  of 
Chrift,  for  every  one  who  repents  and  believes 
thegofpel;  but  alfo  that  there  is  an  inward Juff- 
ciency  of  power  given  by  God  to  every  one,  to 
hearken  to  the  calls  of  God’s  grace,  and  by  faith 
to  receive  that  falvation.  And  thus  much  is  fuf- 
ficient  to  maintain  the  fincerity  of  God,  in  his 
univerfal  offers  of  falvation  thro’  Chrift,  and  his 

many 


[ 96  ] 

many  commands  to  all  men  every  where,  to  re- 
pent and  believe  the  gofpel : As  well  as  to  vindi- 
cate his  equity  at  the  great  day,  in  condemning 
the  impenitent  and  unbeliever.  For  fince  there 
was  both  an  outward  and  inward  fufficiency  for 
their  recovery,  their  death  lies  at  their  own  door, 
being  wholly  owing  to  their  wilful,  obftinate  re- 
jeftion  of  God  and  Chrift,  and  his  falvation. 

I have  only  this  to  add,  If  ferious  Chriftians 
are  but  defirous  to  come  as  near  each  other  as 
they  can,  if  they  are  but  willing  to  be  reconciled 
to  one  another,  as  far  as  the  prefent  darknelfes 
and  difficulties  will  allow  : may  they  not  heartily 
embrace  one  another  notwithftanding  fome  differ- 
ence in  their  fentiments  ? Surely,  the  defire  to 
do  this,  will  take  away  a thoufand  cavils  and 
contentions,  and  a thoufand  unchriftian  re- 
proaches from  the  lips  and  pens  of  thofe  who 
profefs  to  worlhip  the  fame  God,  to  believe  in 
the  fame  Saviour,  to  hope  for  the  ope/ations  of 
the  fame  bleffed  Spirit,  and  who  defire  to  afcribe 
their  falvation  to  the  fame  grace  of  God,  who  is 
bleffed  for  evermore  ! Amen. 


SERIOUS 


[ 97  ] 


SERIOUS 


' CONSIDERATIONS 


O N 


Absolute  Predestination. 


Extrafted  from  a late  Author. 


i.  OD  out  of  his  infinite  love,  who  delight- 
eth  not  in  the  death  of  a Jinner,  but  that 
all  Jhould  live  and  be Javed , hath  given  his  ordy 
Son,  to  the  end  that  whojoever  believeth  on  him 
Jhould  not  perijh,  but  have  ever  lafling  life.  He  is 
the  true  light,  who  enlighteneth  every  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world.  And  this  light  would  work 
Vol.XX.  E out 


[ 98  ] 

out  the  falvation  of  all,  if  not  refilled.  Nor  is  it 
lefs  univerfal  than  inbred  fin,  being  the  purchafe 
of  his  death  who  lajlcd  death  for  every  man.  For 
as  in  Adam  all  died , even  fo  in  CkriJ}  Jhall  all  be 
made  alive. 

2.  But  fome  are  not  afraid  to  allert,  That 
“ God  by  an  eternal  and  unchangeable  decree 
hath  predellinated  to  eternal  damnation  the  far 
greater  part  of  mankind,  and  that  abfolutely, 
without  any  refpefl  to  their  works,  but  only  for 
the  {hewing  the  glory  of  his  jullice  : and  that  for 
the  bringing  this  about,  he  hath  appointed  thefe 
miferable  fouls  neceflarily  to  walk  in  their  wick- 
ed ways,  that  fo  his  jullice  may  lay  hold  on  them: 
and  that  he  juftly  condemns  thefe,  although  he 
hath  withheld  from  them  that  grace  by  which 
alone  they  could  have  laid  hold  of  falvation,  as 
having  decreed,  (without  any  refpeft  to  their 
works)  that,  they  fhall  not  obey ; and  that  the 
gofpel,  which  he  publicly  invites  them  to  accept, 
(hall  never  prove  effectual  for  their  falvation,  but 
only  ferve  to  aggravate  their  guilt,  and  occafion 
their  greater  damnation.  ’ 

g.  We  may  fafely  call  this  doflrine  a noveltv, 
feeing  in  the  firlt  four  hundred  years  after  Chrill 
there  is  no  mention  made  of  it  by  any  writer, 
great  or  fmall,  in  any  part  of  the  Chrillian 
church.  For  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  teflimonv 
of  feripture,  and  to  the  tenor  of  the  gofpel;  fo 
all  the  antient  writers,  teachers  and  doctors  of 
the  church  pafs  it  over  with  a profound  filence. 

The 


[ 99  ] 

The  firfl:  foundations  of  it  were  laid  in  the  latter 
writings  of  Augufline,  who  in  his  heat  againft 
Pelagius,  let  fall  fome  exprefficns,  which  fome 
have  unhappily  gleaned  up  for  the  eflablifhing 
of  this  error;  thereby  contradicting  many  others, 
and  many  more  and  frequent  expreffions  of  the 
fame  Augufline.  It  was  afterwards  taught  by 
Dominicus,  a Popifii  frier,  and  tire  monks  of  his 
order;  and  at  laft  it  was  unhappily  taken  up  by 
John  Calvin,  (otherwife  a man  in  divers  refpefls 
to  he  commended)  to  the  gieat  flaining  of  his 
reputation,  and  defamation  both  of  the  Protefiant 
and  of  the  Chriflian  religion.  However,  we 
fhould  not  rejeft  it  for  the  filence  of  the  antients, 
if  it  had  any  real  bottom  in  the  word  of  God, 
and  if  it  were  not  highly  injurious  to  God  himjelf 
to  Jefus  Chrijl  our  Mediator  and  Redeemer,  to  the 
power,  virtue,  nobility  and  excellency  of  his  biffed 
gojpel,  and  laflly  to  all  mankind . 

4.  Firfl,  It  is  highly  injurious  to  God,  becaufe 
it  makes  him  the  author  of  fin.  I confefs,  the 
allertors  of  this  doflnne  deny  tilts  confequence 
of  it  : but  that  is  but  a mere-illufion,  and  is 
equally  ridiculous  as  if  a man  fhould  deny  that 
two  and  two  make  four.  For  if  God  has  decreed, 
that  the  reprobated  fhafi  perifli,  and  if  be  bath 
alfo  decreed  that  they  fhould  walk  in  thofe  wick- 
ed ways  by  which  they  are  led  to  that  end  ; who, 
I pray,  is  the  firfl  author  and  caufe  thereof  but 
God,  who  fo  willed  and  decreed?  This  is  as 
plain  and  natural  a confequence  as  any  can  pof- 
E 2 ' bly 


[ 100  J 

ubiy  be.  And  therefore  although  many  of  the 
preachers  of  thisdoftrine  have  fought  out  various 
flrange,  drained,  and  intricate  didinftions  to 
avoid  it ; vet  fome,  and  that  of  the  mod  emU 
nent  among  them,  have  openly  acknowledged  it. 

1 fhall  indance  a few  among  mam'  paffages.  + I 
fay,  that  by  the  ordination  and  will  of  God  Adam 
fell.  God  would  have  man  to  fall.  Man  is  blind- 
ed by  the  will  and  commandment  of  God.  We  refer 

the  caufes  of  hardening  vs  to  God.  Thehighejl  or  I 
remote  caufe  of  hardenings  is  the  will  of  God. 
Thefe  are  Calvin’s  words.  — ^ God  (faith  Beza) 
hath  predeflinated  whomfoever  he  fan)  meet,  net  i 
only  unto  damnation,  but  alfo  unto  the  caujes 

■of  it- 

||  It  is  certain  (faith  Zanchius)  that  God  is  the 
firf  caufe  of  ob duration.  Reprobates  are  held  fo 
jafl  under  God’s  almighty  decree,  that  they  cannot 
but  fn  and  perifu  — ^ God  (faith  Martyr)  doth 
incline  and force  the  wills  of  wicked  men  into  great 
fins.  — 5 God  (faith  Zuinglitts)  moveth  the  robber 
to  hill.  He  iil/eth,  God  forcing  him  thereunto.  — 
bf  Reprobate  perfons  (faith  Pifcator)  are  ah  fo  late- 
ly ordained  to  this  twofold  end,  to  undergo  ever- 
lafing  punijhment,  and  neeffarily  to  Jin:  and 
therefore  to  fin,  that  they  may  be  jufly  punijhed. 

5-  If 

+ Calvin  in  cap.  3.  Gen.  Id.  1 Inft.  c ill.  f.  1.  Id.  lib.  dc 
prted.  Slc.  J Bcza  lib.  de  praed.  ||  Zanch.  de 

txctec.  q.  j.  Id.  lib.  5.  de  nat.  Dei.  3 Martyr  in  Rom. 

5 Zuing.  lib.  deprovid.  c.  5.  Refp.ad  vorft-  par.  1 

p.  1 20. 


[ 301  3 

g.  * If  thefe  fayings  do  not  import,  That  God  is- 
the  author  of  fin , we  muft  not  th^n  feek  thefe 
men’s  opinions  from  their  words,  but  fome  way 
elfe.  It  feems  as  if  they  had  affirmed  to  them- 
felves  that  monftrous,  two-fold  will  they  feign  of 
God:  One  by  which  they  declare  their  minds 
openly  ; and  another  more  'fie ret  and  hidden, 
which  is  quite  contrary  to  the  other.  Nor  doth 
it  at  all  help  them  to  fay,  that  man  fins  willingly  ;■ 
fmee  that  willingnefs  to  fin  is  (according  to  their 
judgment)  fo  neceffarily  impofed  upon  him  that 
he  cannot  but  be  willing,  bacaufe  God  hath 
willed  and  decreed  him  to  be  fo.  This  fhift  is 
juft  as  if  I fhould  take  a child  unable  to  refill;  me, 
and  throw  it  down  from  a high  precipice.  The 
weight  of  its  body  indeed  makes  it  go  readily 
down,  and  the  violence  of  the  fall  beats  out  its 
brains.  But  though  the  sveigbt  of  its  body,  and 
not  any  immediate  ftroke  of  my  hand,  makes  the 
child  die  ; whether  is  the  child  or  I the  proper 
caufe  of  its  death  ? Let  then  any  man  judge, 
whether  they  who  make  God’s  part  as  great,  and 
more  immediate,  in  the  fins  of  men,  do  not  make 
God  the  author  of  fin,  and  fo  are  highly  injurious 
to  him  ? 

6.  Secondly,  This  doffrine  is  injurious  to  God , 
becaufe  it  makes  him  delight  in  the  death  of fnners, 
contrary  to  the  exprefs  words  of  God  bimfelf. 
As  1 live,  faith  the  Lord  God,  I have  no  pleafure 
in  the  death  of  the  zoiched,  but  that  the  uicled  turn 
from  his  way  and  live.  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from 
E 3 , your 


[ 1-02  ] 

your  evil  ways  : for  why  will  ye  die,  0 houje  of 
Ifrael?  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.  This  is  good  and  ac- 
ceptable in  the  fight  of  God  our  Saviour : who  wil - 
leth  all  men  to  be faved,  and  to  come  unto  the-  know- 
ledge of  the  truth,  1 Tim.  ii.  4.  The  Lord  is 
longfijfermg,  not  willing  that  any  fiould  perifh, 
but  that  all  fiould  come  unto  repentance.  But  if  he 
hath  created  men  only  for  this  very  end,  that  he 
might  fliew  forth  his  vengeance  upon  them  (as 
thefe  men  affirm)  and  for  effe&ing  this  end  hath 
withheld  from  them  that  grace  whereby  alone 
they  could  be  faved  from  periffiing,  yea.  and  alfo 
predellinated  the  evil  that  they  might  fall  into  if, 
certainly  he  mull  delight  in  their  death,  conuary 
to  his  own  exprefs  declaration. 

7.  Thirdly,  This  dotlrine  is  highly  injurious  to 
Chrift  our  Mediator,  and  to  the  tficaey  and  excel- 
lency of  his  gofpel.  For  it  fuppofes  his  mediation 
to  be  neceifardy  of  none  effect  with  tegard  to 
the  falvation  of  the  greater  part  of  the  world  : as 
if  he  had  not  by  his  fufferings  and  death  through- 
ly broken  down  the  middle  wall,  nor  yet  removed 
the  wrath  of  God , or  purchafed  the  love  oi  God 
for  all  mankind:  as  if  it  was  afoie  decreed,  that 
it  ffiould  be  of  no  fervice  to  the  far  greater  part 
of  mankind.  And  it  is  to  no  purpofe  to  fay, 
that  his  death  was  of  efficacy  enough  to  have 
faved  all  mankind  ; if  in  effefl  its  virtue  be  not 
fo  far  extended,  as  to  put  all  mankind  into  a ca- 
pacity of  falvation. 

8.  Fourthly,  It  makes  the  preaching  of  the  gof- 

pel 


C 103  ] 

pel  a mere  mock  and  illujion,  if  many  of  thofe  to 
whom  it  is  preached,  are  by  an  irrevocable  de- 
cree fhut  out  from  being  benefited  by  it.  It 
wholly  makes  ufelefs  the  preaching  of  faith  and 
repentance,,  and  the  whole  tenor  of  the  gofpel- 
promifes  and  threatnings.  For  if  fuch  a decree 
be  already  part,  man  needs  do  nothing  but  wait 
for  irrefijlible  grace,  which,  if  he  be  elected,  will 
come,  though  it  be  but  at  his  laft  hour  : and  if  he 
be  reprobated,  will  never  come,  be  his  diligence 
and  waiting  what  it  can. 

9.  * Fifthly,  This  do&rine  makes  the  coming  of 
Chrift,  and  his  facrifice  on  the  crofs,  which  the 
fcripture  affirms  to  have  been  the  fruit  of  God’s 
love  to  the  world,  to  have  been  rather  a tefli- 
mony  of  God's  wrath  to  the  world,  yea  one  of 
the  greateil  judgments  and  fevereft  afts  that  can 
be  conceived  of  God’s  indignation  toward  man- 
kind : it  being  only  ordained  (according  to  this 
do&rine)  to  fave  a very  few,  and  for  the  harden- 
ing and  increafing  the  damnation  of  the  far  great- 
er number  of  men,  namely  of  all  thofe  who  do 
not  truly  believe  : the  caufe  of  which  unbelief 
again,  (as  thefe  divines,  fo  called,  above  afiertj  is 
the  hidden  counfel  of  God.  Certainly  then  the 
coming  of  Chrill  was  never  to  them  a teffimony 
of  God’s  love,  but  rather  of  his  implacable  wrath  : 
and  if  the  world  may  be  taken  for  the  far  greater 
number  of  fuch  as  live  in  it,  God  never  loved  the 
world,  according  to  this  dottrine,  but  rather  hated 
it  greatly,  in  fending  his  Son  to  be  crucified  in  it. 

E 4 10.  Sixthly, 


C 104  ] 

10.  * Sixthly,  This  doElrine  is  highly  injurious 
to  mankind ; for  it  renders  them  in  a far  worfe 
condition  than  the  devils  in  hell.  For  thefe 
■were  fome  time  in  a capacity  to  have  flood  : they 
might  have  kept  their  happy  eftate,  but  would 
not:  whereas  many  millions  of  men  are  tor- 
mented for  ever,  according  to  them,  who  never 
were  happy,  nor  ever  can  be.  It  renders  them 
worfe  than  the  beafls  of  the  field,  of  whom  the 
mailer  requires  no  more  than  they  are  able  to 
perform  ; and  if  they  be  killed,  death  is  to  them 
the  end  of  all  forrow  : whereas  man  is  in  pain 
without  end,  for  not  doing  that  which  he  never 
was  able  to  do.  It  put?  him  into  a far  worfe  con- 
dition than  Pharaoh  put  the  Ifraelites  : for  tho’ 
he  withheld  flraw  from  them,  yet  they  could  get 
it  by  much  labour.  But  they  make  God  to 
withhold  from  men  all  means  of  falvation,  fo  that 
they  cannot  attain  it  by  all  their  pains.  Yea, 
they  place  mankind  in  that  condition  which  the 
poets  feign  of  Tantalus;  who  oppreft  with'thirfl, 
Hands  in  water  up  to  the  chin,  yet  can  by  no 
means  reach  it  with  his  tongue  ; and  being  tor- 
mented with  hunger,  hath  fruits  hanging  at  his 
very  lips,  yet  fo  as  he  can  never  lay  hold  of^ 
them  with  his  teeth.  And  thefe  things  are  fo 
near  him,  not  to  nourifh  him,  but  to  torment 
him.  So  do  thefe  teachers  make  God  deal  with 
mankind.  They  make  the  outward  creation,  the 
works  of  providence,  the  fmitings  of  confcience, 
fufficient  to  convince  the  reprobates  of  fin,  but 
never  intended  to  help  them  to  falvation.  They 


I io5  ] 

make  the  preaching  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  ofler- 
of  falvation  by  Chrifl,  fufficient  to  condemn 
them  : ferving  to  beget  a feeming  faith  and  a 
vain  hope ; yet  by  reafon  of  God’s  iirefiflible 
decree,  all  thefe  (fay  they]  are  wholly  ineffe&ua! 
to  bring  them  the  leall  ffep  towards  falvation, 
and  do  only  contribute  to  make  their  condemna- 
tion the  greater,  and  their  torments  the  more 
violent  and  intolerable. 

11.  In  direct  oppofition  to  this  we  affirm. 
That  Cod  out  of  his  infinite,  love,  mho  delta  fit  eth  not 
in  the  death  oj  a f inner , but  that  all Jhould  live  and 
be  fiaved,  hath  fait  las  only  begotten  Son  into  the 
world,  that  whofotver  believeth  in  him  might  be 
faved.  This  do£Mrie  is  fo  evident  from  the  ferip- 
ture  teflimony,  that  there  is  fcarce  found  any 
other  article  of  the  Chriftian  faith,  fo  frequently 
fo  plainly,  and  fo  pofitively  afTei  ted.  It  is  that 
which  maketh  the  preaching  of  Chrifl  to  be  in- 
deed the  gofpel,  or  glad  tidings  to  all ; as  the  an- 
gel declared  bis  coming  to  be,  (Luke  ii.  10.)  Be- 
hold I bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which 
fihall  be  to  all  people.  Whereas  if  this  coming  of 
Chrifl  hath  not  brought  a pofTibility  o£  falvation 
to  ad,  it  fhould  rather  have  been  accounted  bad 
tidings  of  great  for  row  to  mofi  people.  Neither 
would  the  angel  have  had  reafon  to  fiirg.  Peace 
on  earth  and  good  will  towards  men,  if  the  greateft 
part  of  mankind  had  been  neceffarily  fhut  out 
from  receiving  any  benefit  from  it.  And  indeed 
if  fo,  how  fhould  Chrifl  have  fent  out  his  fer- 
vants  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  every  creature  ? That 
E'5  Mr 


[ 106  ] 

is,  To  every  fon  and  daughter  of  mankind  ; far 
here  is  no  exception.  He  commands  them  to 
p reach  falvation  to  all , repentance  and  remiJJ'ion  of 
Jins  to  all , warning  every  one  and  exhorting  every 
one,d.s  Paul  did  Col.  i.  28.  But  how  could  they 
have  preached  the  gofpel  to  every  man,  as  became 
the  minifters  of  Chrilf,  in  much,  ajjurance,  if  fal- 
vation by  that  gofpel  had  not  been  pofhble  to 
all?  Wlrat  if  fome  of  thefe  had  afked  them. 
Hath  Chrijl  died  for  me?  Should  they  have  an- 
fwered  conditionally,  If  thou  repent,  Chrijl  died 
for  thee  ? The  fame  queftion  would  have  recur- 
red, Hath  Chrjl  died  for  me  that  I may  repent  ? 
Otherwije  my  repentance  is  impcjfible.  To  this  no- 
thing could  be  anfwered  but  the  fame  thing  over 
again.  Whereas  thofe  who  bring  the  glad  tidings 
of  the  gofpel  of  peace,  are  to  preach  thg  common 
falvation,  repentance  unto  all,  offering  a door  of 
mercy  and  hope  to  all,  through  Jefus  Chrift,  who 
gave  himfelf  a ranfom  for  all.  The  gofpel  invites 
all.  And  certainly  Chrift  intended  not  to  deceive 
and  delude  thegreaterpart  of  mankind,  when  he  in- 
vites and  cries,  faying;  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy-laden,  and  I will  give  you  ref.  If  all 
then  ought  to  feek  after  him,  and  to  look  for  faL- 
vation  by  1dm,  he  muft  needs  have  made  falvati- 
vation  pofible  to  all.  For  who  is  bound  to  feek 
after  that  which  is  impoffible  ! Certainly  it  were 
a mocking  of  men  to  bid  them  to  do  fo.  And 
fuch  as  deny,  that  by  the  death  of  Chrift  falva - 

Lon 


' [ *°7  ] 

•tion  is  made  poffible  to  all  men,  do  moft  blaf- 
phemoufly  make  God  mock  theworld,  in  giving 
his  fervants  a commiffion  to  preach  the  gofpel  of 
Jalvation  unto  all,  while  he  hath  before  decreed, 
that  it  (hall  not  be  poffible  for  them  to  receive  it. 
Do  not  they  make  the  Lord  to  fend  forth  his  fer- 
vants withalie  in  their  mouths , commanding  them 
to  bid  all  and  every  one  believe,  that  Chrift  died 
for  them,  and  had  purchafed  falvation  for  them  : 
whereas  (according  to  this  doffrine)  he  hath  done 
no  fuch  thing,  or  ever  intended  it  ? Seeing  then 
Chrift  hath  commanded  to  preach  repentance  and ■ 
remijjion  of  fins  to  all , it  is  certain  that  he  died 
for  all : And  that  it  is  poffible  for  all  to  repent 
and  believe.  In  as  much  as  he,  who  commiffion- 
ed  his  fervants  thus  to  preach,  is  a God  of  truth 
and  no  mocker  of  poor  mankind,  neither  doth  he 
require  of  any  man,  that  which  it  is  fimply  im- 
poffible  for  him  to  do. 

12.  Moroever,  if  we  regard  the  teflimony  of 
the  fcripture,  there  is  not,  that  I know  of,  one 
fcripture  which  affirms,  Chrift  did  not  die  for  all, 
whereas  there  are  divers  fcriptures  which  pofi- 
tively  and  expreflyaffit  m,  he  did.  As  1 Tim.  ii.i, 
3-,  4,6.  I exhorttherefore,  that  fa ft  of [all fupplications , 
prayers,  inter cefions,  and  giving  of  thanks  be  made 
for  all  men,  &c.  For  this  is  good  and  acceptable 
in  the  fight  of  God  our  Saviour,  who  will  have  all 
men  to  be  faved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth — Who  gave  him filf  a ranfiomfor  all,  to  be 
Ujlifed  in  due  time.  Except  we  make  the  apoftle 
E 6 • to; 


[ io8  ] 

to  affiert  quite  another  thing  than  he  meant,  there 
can  be  nothing  mote  plain  than  this.  For  firft  he 
here  direCts  them  to  pray  for  all  men  : and  to  pre- 
vent fuch  an  objeHion  as  this,  Chrijl  prayed  not 
for  the  world,  neither  willelh  he  us  to  pray  for  all ; 
Becaufe  he  willeth  not  that  all Jhould  be  faved,  but 
hath  ordained  ?nany  to  be  cLnnned,  he  adds,  This  is 
good  and  acceptable  with  God,  who  willeth  all  men 
to  be  faved.  I defire  to  know  what  can  be  more 
exprefsly  affirmed  ? Or,  can  any  two  propofitions 
be  hated  in  terms  more  contradictory,  than  thefe 
two, 

God  willeth  not  fomc  men  to  be  fated,  and 

God  willeth  all  men  to  be  faved ? 

If  we  believe  the  laft,  as  the  apoftle  hath  af- 
firmed, the  firft  cannot  be  true.  Whence  (to 
conclude)  he  gives  us  a reafon  of  Chrift’s  willing- 
nefs  that  all  men  fhould  be  faved,  in  thefe  words. 
Who  gave  lnmf elf  a ranfom  for  all.  As  if  he  had 
faid,  fince  he  gave  himfelf  a ranfom  for  all,  it  is 
plain  he  willeth  all  men  to  be  faved. 

13.  The  fame  thing  is  pofnively  affirmed, 
Heb.  ii.  9.  We  fee  Jefus,  who  was  made  a tittle 
lower  than  the  angels,  for  the  fuffering  0/  death, 
crowned  zcith  glory  and  honour,  that  ke  by  the 
grace  of  God  might  tajle  death  for  e very  man.  He 
that  will  but  open  his  eyes,  may  fee  this  truth  here 
affierted.  If  he  tafe < 1 death  for  every  man,  then  cer- 
tainly there  is  no  man  for  whom  he  did  not  taile 
death  ; and  then  there  is  no  man  who  may  not 
be  made  a fharer  of  the  benefit  ol  it. 


14.  Again 


[ 109  J 


14.  Again,  our  Lord  himfelf  fays,  he  came 
not  to  condemn  the  world , hut  that  the  world  thro’ 
him  might  be  f&vecl,  John  iii.  17.  Aral  John 
xii.  47.  hi  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to 
Jave  the  world ; whereas  according  to  that  doc- 
trine, he  did  come  rather  to  condemn  the  world, 
and  not  that  it  might  be  faved  by  him.  For  il 
he  did  not  come  to  bring  falvation  to  the  greater 
part  of  mankind,  but  to  increafe  their  con- 
demnation, it  neceffarily  follows,  that  he  did 
not  come  with  an  intention  to  fave  but  to  judge 
and  condemn  the  greater  part  of  the  world,  con- 
trary to  his  exprefs  teftimony. 

15.  Yet  again,  as  the  apoflle  Paul  a Herts,  That 
God  willeth  the  falvation  oj  all , fo  doth  the  a- 
poftle  Peter  alfert,  That  he  willeth  not  the  pe- 
r filing  of  any,  2 Pet.  iii.  9.  The  Lord  is  not 

Jack  concerning  his  promife,  as  fome  men  count 
faclnefs:  but  is  long-Jiijftring  to  us- war d,  not 
willing  that  any  fiould  penfh,  but  that  all 
Jhould come  to  repentance.  A.nd  this  is  agreeable 
to  that  of  the  prophet,  Ezekiel  xxxiii.  11. 
As  I live  faith  the  Lord , f have  no  pleafure  in 
the  death  of  the  wicked , but  that  the  wicked  turn 
from  his  way  and  live.  Now  if  it  be  fafe  to  be- 
lieve God,  we  mud  not  think  that  he  intends  to 
cheat  us  by  all  thefe  expreffions,  but  that  he  is 
in  good  earned.  And  if  his  will  take  not  effefi, 
the  blame  is  on  our  parts  ; which  could  not  be 
if  Chrift  had  never  died  foi  us,  but  left  trs  under 
an  impoffibilily  of  falvation.  What  mean  all  thole 

earned 


[ Iio  ] 

eafneft  invitations,  all  thofe  regretting  ex poflnla- 
riorts  the  fcripiuFe  is  full  of  ? As,  Why  will ye  eke, 
0 houfe,  of  Ifreal?  They  will  not  come  unto  me  that 
they  might  have  life.  1 have  waited  to  be  gra- 
cious unto  you.  How  often  would  I have  gathered 
you , and  ye  would  not  ? Are  men  who  are  fo  in- 
vited under  no  capacity  of  being  faved  ? Is  falva- 
tion  impoftible  to  them.  Will  you  then  fuppofe 
God  in  this,  to  be  only  like  the  author  of  a ro- 
mance, or  mailer  of  a comedy,  wbo  amttfes  and 
raifes  the  various  affeflions  and  paflions  of  the 
fpedlators  : fometimes  leading  them  into  hope  and 
fometimes  into  defpair  : all  this  being  in  effect,  but 
a mete  illufion,  while  he  hath  appointed  what 
the  ccncluft  m of  all  (hall  be  P 

16.  Farther  yet:  This  doftrine  is  abundantly 
confirmed  by  that  of  the  apoflle,  1 John  ii.  1, 
2.  If  any  man  fin ■ we  have  an  advocate  with  the 
Father , Jefus  Chrift  the  righteous  ; and  he  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  fns  ; and  not  for  curs  only,  but 
alfo  for  the  fns  of  the  whole  world.  The  way 
which  our  adverfaries  take  to  evade  this  telli- 
mony,  is  moff  foolifh  and  ridiculous.  The  world 
here,  fay  they,  is  the  world  of  believers  ; for  which 
we  have  nothing  but  their  own  affertion.  For 
firft,  let  them  Ihew  me  if  they  can,  in  all  the 
feripture,  where  the  whole  world  is  taken  for 
believers  only.  I fhall  fhew  them  where  it  is 
many  times  taken  for  the  quite  contrary  as,  The 
world knowelh  me  not : the  world  receweth  me  not : I 
am  not  of  this  world.  Defidesall  t'nefe  feriptures,. 

Pfalm 


[ ] 

Pfalm  xvii.  14.  Ifai.  xiii.  ix.  Math.  xvim  7. 
John  vii.  7-  and  viii.  26.  and  xii.  19.  and 
xiv.  17.  and  xv,  18,  ig.  and  xvii.  14.  and  xviir. 
20.  1 Cor.  i.  21.  and  ii.  12.  and  vi.  2.  Gal. 
vi.  14.  James  i.  27.  2 Peter  ii.  20.  1 John  ii. 

ij.  and  iii.  1.  and  iv.  4,5.  and  many  more. 
Secondly,  The  apoftle  in  this  very  place  con- 
tradiftinguifhes  the  world  from  \he  faints  thus,  and 
not  for  outs  only,  but  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world* 
What  means  the  apollle  by  ours  here  ? Is  not 
that  the  fins  of  believers?  Was  not  be  one  of 
thofe  believers  ? And  was  not  this  an  univer- 
fal  epiftle,  written  to  all  the  faints  that  then  were  ? 
So  that  according  to  thefe  men’s  comment,  there 
would  be  a very  unnecelfary  and  foolifh  redundan- 
cy in  the  apoftle’s  words,  as  if'ne  had  faid,  he  is 
a propitiation  not  only  for  the  fins  of  all  believers , 
but  alfo for  the  fins-  of  all  believers.  Is  not  this 
to  make  the  apoftle’s  words  nonfenfe  ? Let 
them  ihew  us,  where  ever  there  is  fuch  a man- 
ner of  fpeaking  in  all  the  fcripture  : where  any 
of  the  penmen  fir  ft  name  the  believers  together  v 
with  themfelves,  and  then  contradiftinguifhes 
them  from  fome  other  whole  world  of  believers. 

17.  But  we  need  no  better  interpreter  for  the 
apoftle  than  himfelf,  who  ufes  the  very  fame  ex- 
preftion  in  the  fame  epiftle,  c.  v.  19.  Saying, 
We  know  that  we  are  of  God  and  the  whole  world 
lieth  in  wickednefs.  There  cannot  be  found  in  all 
the  fcripture,  two  places  which  better  anfwerone 
another ; feeing  in  both,  the  fame  apoftle,  in  the 

fame 


L 112  ] 

fame  epiflle,  to  the  fame  perfons,  contiadiflin- 
guifhes  Imnfelf  and  the Jamts  to  whom  he  writes 
from  the  whole  world ; which  vet  according  to 
thefe  men’s  comments  ought  to  be  underftood  of 
believers-,  as  if  St  John  had  faid,  JVe  know  parti- 
cular believers  are  of  God,  but  the  whole  wot  Id  of 
believers  lieth  in  wichednefs.  What  abfurd  wreft- 
ing  of  fcripture  were  this  ? And  yet  it  may  be 
as  well  pleaded  for  as  the  other.  Seeing  then 
the  apofile  tells  us  plainly,  that  Chrift  died  not 
only  for  the  church  of  God  to  whom  he  wrote, 
but  alfo  for  the  whole  world,  let  us  hold  faff  this 
truth,  which  we  have  received  not  of  men  but  cf 
God. 

18  Eut  in  order  to  make  it  yet  more  plain, 
we  flia'l  fhetv  thefe  two  things  ; 

Firii,  That  God  hath  given  to  every  man  born 
into  the  world,  a time  or  day  of  vifitalion,  during 
which  they  may  be  favcd. 

Secondly,  That  for  this  end,  he  hath  given  to 
every  man,  a meafure  of  light  and  grace,  which  if 
it  is  not  ref  fled,  will  work  the  falvation  of  all ; but 
if  it  is,  will  become  then  condemnation. 

19.  Now  according  to  this  doferine,  the  mercy 
of  God  is  excellently  well  fet  forth,  in  that  none 
are  neceJTatily  fhut  out  from  falvation  ; and  his 
jufhee,  in  that  he  condemns  none  but  fuch  as 
might  have  been  faved  and  would  not. 

This  doftrine  agrees  with  the  whole  tenor  ofi the 
gofpel,  wherein' repentance  and  remillion  of;  fins 
are  commanded  to  be  preached  to  every  creature. 

It 


[ i>3  ] 

It  magnifies  the  merits  and,  death  of  Chrijl , in 
that  it  not  only  accounts  them  fufficient  to  fave 
all,  but  declares  them  to  be  brought  fo  nigh  to  all, 
that  they  are  thereby  put  into  a capacity  of  fal- 
vation. 

It  exalts  above  all  the  grace  of  God,  to  which  it 
attributes  all  good,  afcribing  thereto  not  only  the 
firft  motions  of  good,  but  alfo  the  whole  conver- 
fion  and  falvation  of  the  foul. 

As  it  makes  the  whole  falvation  of  man  to  de- 
pend upon  God,  fo  it  makes  his  condemnation  to  be 
wholly  ofhimfelf,  in  that  he  refilled  the  grace  of 
God,  and  when  he  might  have  been  faved,  would 
rtot. 

It  takes  away  all  ground  of  defpair,  in  that  it 
gives  every  man  caufe  to  hope  for  falvation,  nor 
yet  doth  it  feed  any  one  in  fecurity,  in  that  none 
know  how  foon  their  day  may  expire  : and 
therefore,  it  is  a compleat  incitement  and  live- 
ly encouragement  to  every  man,  if  he  forfake 
evil  and  clofe  with  that  which  is  good. 

Laftly,  It  is  really  and  in  effeEl,  tho’  not  in  fo 
many  words,  confirmed  and  efiablifhed  by  all  the 
preachers  of  the  Chrifiian  religion,  that  ever  were 
or  now  are,  even  by  thofe*  who  otherwife 
oppofe  this  doflrine : in  that  they  all,  what- 
foever  place  they  come  to,  do  preach  to  the  peo- 
ple, and  to  every  individual  among  them,  that 
they  may  be  faved,  intreating  them  to  believe 
in  Chrift,  who  hath  died  for  them.  So  that 
what  they  deny  in  the  general,  they  acknow- 
ledge 


[ 1 J4  ] 

ledge  of  every  particular  ; there  being  no  man 
to  w.hom  they  do  not  preach,  in  order  to  falva- 
tion,  telling  him  Jefus  Child  calk  and  wills  him 
to  believe  and  be  faved : and  that  if  he  refufe  he 
fhall  therefore  be  condemned,  and  his  condem- 
nation is  of  himfelf.  Such  is  the  power  of 
truth,  that  it  conftrains  its  adverfaries,  even 
againft  their  wills  to  plead  for  it. 

* 20.  We  do  not  indeed  by  this  day  of  vifta- 
iion  underftand  the  whole  time  of  a man’s  life  ; 
tho’  in  fomeit  may  be  extended  to  the  very  hour 
of  death  : but  Juch  afeafon  at  lead,  as  fufpcient- 
ly  dears  God  of  every  mans  condemnation,  which 
to  fome  may  be  fooner,  and  to  others  later,  ac- 
cording as  the  Lord  in  his  wifdom  fees  meet. 
So  that  many  men  may  outlive  this  day,  after 
which  God  fuffers  them  to  be  hardened,  as  a juft 
punifhment  of  their  wilful  unbelief, and  even  raifes 
them  up  as  inftruments  of  wrath,  and  makes  them 
a fcourge  one  againft  another.  To  men  in  this 
condition  may  be  fitly  applied  thofe  feriptures 
which  are  abufed  to  prove,  that  God  conftrains 
man  to  fin.  This  is  plainly  expreffed  by  the 
apoftle,  Rom.  i.  from  v.  17.  to  the  end  ; but 
efpecially  v.  28.  Even  as  they  did  not  like  to  re- 
tain God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them  up  to 
a reprobate  mind,  to  do  thofe  things  which  are  not 
convenient.  And  that  many  outlive  the  day  of 
their  vifttation,  appears  by  Chrifts  weeping 
over  Jerufalem,  Luke  xix.  42.  faying,  If  thou 

hadjl 


[ n-5  ] 

hadjl  known  in  this  thy  day  the  things  that  belong 
unto  thy  peace  ! But  now  they  are  hid  from  thy  eyes  : 
this  plainly  imports  a time  when  they  might  have 
known  them,  which  now  was  removed  from 
them. 

21.  But  though  we  affirm  there  is  a time 
given  to  all,  wherein  they  may  be  faved,  yet  we 
deny  not  fuch  grace  may  be  given  to  fome,  that 
they  mujl  be  faved.  There  may  be  fome  in 
whom  the  grace  of  God  fo  worketh,  that  they 
cannot  refijl  it . But  there  are  none  in  whom  it 
doth  not  work,  fo  that  they  might  be  laved,  if 
they  did  not  wilfully  rejeft  falvation. 

22.  By  thefe  pofitions,  two  great  cbjeffions 
are  eafily  folved.  The  firfl.  is  brought  from  thofe 
places  of  feripture,  wherein  God  feems  to  have 
predominated  fome  to  falvation.  We  do  not  de- 
ny it : fo  here  is  no  difficulty  at  all.  The  fe- 
cond  is  drawn  from  thofe  places,  wherein  God 
feems  to  have  predominated  fome  to  defhuHion  ; 
becaufe  he  is  faid.  To  harden  their  hearts , and 
to  have  raifed  them  up,  that  they  might  caufe  his 
power  to  be  known.  But  if  they  be  numbered 
among  thofe  men,  whofe  day  of  vifitation  is 
over,  this  objeftion  alfo  is  at  an  end. 

23.  We  come  now  more  direftly  to  fhew. 
That  God  hath  given  to  every  man  a day,  or  time 
oj  vifitation,  wherein  it  is  pofjible  for  him  to  be 

faved.  Now  if  we  prove,  that  there  is  a time  or 
day  given,  in  which  thofe  might  have  been  fav- 
ed, who  actually  perifh,  the  matter  is  done.  (For 

none 


[ *■«  ] 

none  deny  that  thofe  who  are  faved  have  a day 
of  vifitation)  And  this  appears  by  the  complaints 
the  Spirit  of  God,  throughout  the  whole  fcrip- 
ture,  makes,  even  to  thole  that  did  peri fh,  chal- 
lenging them  for  not  accepting  God’s  vifitation 
and  offered  mercy.  Thus  the  Lord  exprelfes 
himfelffirft  of  all  to  Cain,  Gen.  iv.  6,  7.  And 
the  Lord faid  unto  Cain,  why  art  thou  wroth,  and 
why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ? If  thou  doji  well, 
Jhalt  thou  not  be  accepted  ? If  thou  doji  not  well, 
fin  lieth  at  the  door.  This  was  faid  to  Cain,  be- 
fore he  flew  his  brother.  We  fee  how  God  gave 
him  warning  ; and  offered,  in  the  day  of  his  vifi- 
tation, acceptance  if  he  did  well.  For  thofe  words, 
Shalt  thou  not  be  accepted?  Muff  import,  Thou 
Jhalt  be  accepted,  if  thou  doji  well.  So  that  if  we 
may  truft  God,  the  fountain  of  all  truth,  there 
was  a day  in  which  it  was  pofhble,  even  for  Cain 
to  be  accepted.  The  Lord  himfelf  alfo  fhews, 
that  he  gave  a day  of  vifitation  to  the  old  world, 
Gen.  vi.  3.  And  the  Lord faid,  my  Spirit  fall 
not  always  jl rive  with  man  : manifeftly  implying, 
that  his  Spirit  did  ffrive  with  him  for  a feafon, 
which  feafon  expiring,  God  ceafed  to  ffrive  with 
him  in  order  to  his  falvation.  From  this  day  of  vi- 
fitation which  God  hath  given  to  man,  it  is,  that 
he  is  faid  to  wait  to  be  gracious,  Ifai.  xxx.  6.Num. 
xiv.  18.  And  to  be  longfufering,  Exod.  xxxiv. 
18.  Pfal.  lxxxvi.  15.  and  Jer.  xv.  15.  where  the 
prophet  in  his  prayer,  lavs  hold  on  the  long f of- 
fering of  God ; and  in  his  expoffulating  with 

God, 


Cod,  he  (huts  out  the  objedlion  ofouradver« 
faries  in  the  1 8th  verfe,  Why  is  my  pain  perpetual 
and  my  wound  incut  able,  which  refufeth  to  be 
healed  ? Wilt  thou  altogether  be  unto  me  as  a Rar 
and  as  waters  that fail?  Whereas,  according  to 
our  adverfaries  opinion,  the  pain  of  the  moft  part 
of  men  is  perpetual,  and  their  wound  altogether  in - 
curable.  Yea  the  offer  of  falvation  unto  them,  is 
as  a lie  and  waters  that  Jail,  being  never  intend- 
ed to  be  of  any  effeft  unto  them.  The  apoftle 
Peter  fays  exprefsly,  that  this  long-fujfering  of 
God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah , for  thofe  of  the 
old  world ; anfwerable  to  Gen.  vi.  3.  And  that 
none  may  objeft  that  this  long-fujfering  or  flnv- 
ing-of  the  Lord  was  not  in  order  to  their  falva- 
tion, the  fame  apoftle  faith  as  exprefsly  (2  Pet. 
iii.  15.}  That  the  long-fujfering  of  God  is  to  be 
accounted falvation  : and  with  this  long- fuff ering, 
a little  before  he  couples,  that  he  is  not  willing 
any  fhould perijh.  Where  taking  him  for  his  own 
interpreter,  as  is  moft  fit,  he  teaches,  that  thofe 
to  whom  the  Lord  is  long-fujfering  (which  he  de- 
rlareth  he  was  to  the  old  world,  and  is  now  to 
all,  not  willing  that  any  fhould  per ifh)  they  are  to 
account  this  long- fuff  ering  of  God  to  them  falva- 
tion. But  how  can  they  account  it  falvation,  if 
there  be  not  fo  much  as  a poffibility  of  falvation 
conveyed  to  them  therein  ? 

24.  St.  Peter,  further  refers  to  the  writings  of 
Paul,  fhewing  this  to  have  been  the  univerfal 
dodtrine.  Whereit  is  obfervable  he  adds,  In 

which 


I ] 

Xvhich  are fovie  things  hard  to  be  underflood,  which 
they  that  are  unlearned  and  unjlable  wrejl  to  their 
own  defir  uclion  : intimating  plainly  thefe  expref- 
fions  in  Paul's  epiftles,  as  Rom.  ix.  &c.  which 
fome  unlearned  in  fpiritual  things  wrejled  fo  as 
to  contradift  God' s longf offering  towards  all,  not 
willing  that  any  of  them  Jhou/d penjh  but,  that 
all Jhould  come  to  the  faving  knowledge  of  his  truth. 
Would  to  God  many  had  taken  more  heed  than 
they  have  to  this  advertifement ! 

That  place  of  the  apoftle  Paul  which  Peter 
feems  here  more  particularly  to  hint  at,  doth 
ntuCh  contribute  alfo  to  clear  the  matter,  Rom. 
ii.  4.  Defpifejt  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodnejs  and 
forbearance,  and  long-fiffering,  net  knowing  that 
the  goodnefs  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ? 
St.  Paul  fpeaks  here  to  the  unregenerate  and 
wicked,  who  (in  the  following  verfe  he  faith) 
treafure  up  wrath  unto  the  day  of  wraih . And 
to  fuch  he  commends  the  riches  of  the jor- 
btarnce  and  longfuffering  of  God , (hewing  that 
its  tending,  is  to  lead  them  to  repentance.  But 
how  could  it  have  this  tendency,  to  lead  them 
to  repentance  ? Or  how  could  it  be  called  nehes 
of  goodnejs  to  them,  if  there  was  not  a time 
wherein  they  might  repent  by  it,  and  come  to 
be  fharers  ot  the  riches  thereof? 

26.  The  fum  is  this  : if  God  plead  with  the 
wicked,  from  the  poffibilitv  of  their  being  ac- 
cepted ; ii  God's  Spirit  drive  with  them  for  a 

feafem. 


I “9  ] 

feafon,  in  order  to  fave  them  who  afterwards 
-periflr;  if  he  wait  to  be  gracious  unto  them  ; if 
.lie  be  long-fuffering  towards  them  ; if  during  the 
time  of  this  long-fuffering  God  willeth  them  not 
to  perifh,  but  by  the  riches  of  his  goodnefs  and 
forbearance  leadeth  them  to  repentance;  then 
there  was  a day  of  vifitation,  even  to  thofe  who 
have  perifhed,  wherein  they  might  have  been 
faved. 

27.  Secondly,  This  appears  from  Ifaiah  v.  4. 
Whctt  could  1 have  done  more  to  my  vineyard P For 
in  verfe  2,  he  faith,  He  had  fenced  it  and  gather- 
ed  out  the  Jlones  thereoj , and  planted  it  with  the 
choice ft  vines.  And  yet  (faith  he]  when  I looked  it 
Jhould  have  brought  forth  grapes,  it  brought  forth 
wild  grapes.  Wherefore  he  oalieth  the  men  of 
Judah  to 'be  judges  between  him  and  his  vine- 
yard, faying,  What  could  l have  done  more  to  my 
vineyard  than  I hjtve  done  in  it  ? And  yet  (as  is 
faid)  it  brought  forth'  wild  grapes  : which  was 
applied  to  thofe  in  Ifrael,  who  refufed  God’s 
mercy.  The  fame  firmiitude  is  ufed  bv  Chrifl, 
Matt.  xxi.  33.  Mark  xii.  i.  and  Luke  xx.  g. 
where  Jelus  fhews,  how  to  fome  a vineyard  was 
planted,  and  all  things  given  neceffary  for  them, 
to  get  them  to  render  fruit  to  their  matter,  and 
how  the  matter  many  times  waited  to  be  merci- 
ful to  them,  in  fending  fervants  after  fervants, 
and  pafTing  by  many  offences,  before  he  deter- 
mined to  dettroy  and  ca'tt  them  out.  Now  this 

cannot 


[ 12<>  ] 

cannot  be  underftood  of  the  faints,  or  of  fuch  a» 
repent  and  are  faved  : for  it  is  faid  exprefsly. 
He  will  dejlroy  them . Neither  would  the  parable 
any  way  anfwer  the  end  for  which  it  is  brought, 
if  thefe  men  had  not  been  in  a capacity  to  have 
done  good.  Yea  fuch  was  their  capacity,  that 
Chrift  faith  in  the  prophet,  what  could  I have 
done  more  ? So  that  it  is  manifeft,  by  this  para- 
ble, repeated  by  three  Evangelifls,  that  Chrift 
declares  his  long-fuffering  towards  thofe  men, 
who  when  means  of  falvation  were  afforded  to 
them,  did  neverthelefs  reftft  and  would  not  be 
faved. 

28.Laftly,  That  there  is  a day  of  vifitationgiven 
even  to  the  wicked,  wherein  they  maybe  faved, 
and  which  being  expired  they  are  then  fhut  out 
from  falvation,  appears  evidently  by  Chrift’s  la- 
mentation overjerufalera,  expreft  in  three  fundry 
places,  Matt,  xxiii.  37.  Luke  xiii.  34.  and  xix. 
41,  42.  And  when  he  was  come  near,  he  beheld 
the  city  and  wept  over  it,  faying.  If  thou  hadjl 
known , even  thou,  at  leaf  in  this  thy  day,  the 
things  that  belong  to  thy  peace  ! But  now  they  are 
hid  from  thine  eyes  ; than  which  nothing  can 
be  more  plain.  For  firft,  he  here  fhews,  that 
there  was  a day  wherein  the  inhabitants  of  Je- 
rufalem  might  have  known  thofe  things  that  belong- 
ed to  their  peace  ; Secondly,  that  during  that  day 
he  was  willing  to  ha ve.  gathered  them  even  as  a hen 
gather  eth  her  young  : Thirdly,  that  becaufe  they 
refufed  the  things  belonging  to  their  peace , they 

wer^ 


[ ] 

were  at  length  hid  from  their  eyes.  Why  were 
they  hid  ? Becaufe  ye  would  not  fuffer  me  to 
gather  you  : ye  would  not  fee  thofe  things  that 
were  good  for  you,  in  the  feafon  of  God’s  love 
towards  you  : and  therefore  now , that  day  being 
expired,  ye  cannot  fee  them . And  for  a farther 
judgment,  God  fuffers  you  to  be  hardened  in  un- 
belief. 

29.  So  it  is  after  they  have  rejected  the  offer 
of  merev,  and  falvation,  and  not  before,  that 
God  hardens  mens  hearts.  And  thus  To  him  that 
hath  fliall  be  given  ; and  from  him  that  hath  not , 
fiall  be  taken  away,  even  that  which  he  hath  : he 
hath  not-,  becaufe  he  hath  loft  the  feafon  of  uf- 
ing  it,  and  fo  to  him  it  is  now  as  nothing.  For 
Chrift  ufes  this  expreffton,  Matt.  xxv.  26.  on 
occafion  of  the  taking  the  one  talent  from  the 
flothful  fervant : which  talent  was  no  way  inef- 
ficient of  itfelf,  but  of  the  fame  nature  with  thofe 
given  to  the  others.  And  therefore  the  Lord 
had  reafon  to  exadt  the  profit  of  it,  proportiona- 
bly,  as  of  the  reft.  So  (I  fay)  it  is  after  rejefting 
the  day  of  vifitation,  that  the  judgment  of  ob- 
duration  is  infliffed  on  men  : as  Chrift  pro- 
nounces it  on  the  Jews,  out  of  Ifaiah  vi.  9. 
which  all  the  four  Evangelifts  mention.  Matt, 
xiii.  14.  Markiv.  12.  Luke  viii.  ro.  John  xii. 
40.  And  laft  of  all,  St.  Paul,  after  he  had  offer- 
ed falvation  to  the  Jews  at  Rome,  pronounces 
the  fa  ue,  Afts  xxviii.  26.  Well  fake  the  Holy 
Gkojl  by  Ifaiah  the  prophet  unto  our  fathers,  fay- 
Vol.  XX.  F ijjg. 


[ 122  ] 

ing,  Go  unto  this  people  and  fay , Hearing  ye  fall 
hear,  and fall  not  unde  rf  and,  and  feeing  ye  fall 
fee,  and  fall  not  perceive.  For  the  heart  of  this 
people  is  waxed  grofs,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of 
hearing,  and  their  eyes  have  they  clofed ; lef  they 
fiould fee  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears, 
and  underf  and  with  their  hearts,  and  fiould  be 
converted  and  I fould  heal  them.  So  it  appears, 
that  God  would  have  had  them  to  fee,  but  they 
clofed  their  eyes  ; and  therefore  they  were  juflly 
hardened. 

30.  What  now  remains  to  be  proved  is,  That 
God  hath  given  to  every  man  during  the  day  of  his 
viftation,  a meajure  of faving,  fujfcient  light  and 
grace . And  this  I fhall  prove,  through  God's 
afiiftance,  by  plain  and  clear  teftimonies  of  ferip- 
ture. 

31.  Firll,  that  of  St.  John  i.  9.  That  was  the 
true  light  which  Hghtetk  every  man  that  cometh  in- 
to the  world.  He  hath  faid  before,  The  life 
that  is  in  him  is  the  light  of  men,  and,  the  light 
f hineth  in  the  darknefs  : and  to  this  he  adds,  He 
is  the  true  light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh 
into  the  world. 

32.  From  whence  we  may  in  {hurt  obferve, 
that  the  apollle  cails  Chrifl  the  light  of  men.  And 
as  he  is  the  light,  if  we  walk  with  him  in  that  light 
which  he  communicates  to  us,  we  come  to  have 

felloufip  and  communion  with  him,  as  the  fame 
apollle  faith  elfewhere,  1 John  i.  7.  Secondly, 

That 


[ 123  ] 

That  this  light  Jhineth  in  the  darknefs,  though  the 
darknefs  comprehend  it  not.  Thirdly,  That  this 
true  light  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the 
world.  Here  the  apoftle  carefully  avoids  their 
captioufnefs,  who  would  reftrain  this  to  a certain 
number;  for  where  every  one  is,  there  is  none 
excluded.  And  fhould  they  fay,  that  this  every 
man  is  only  every  one  of  the  eledl,  the  following 
words  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world  would 
plainly  refute  them.  So  that  it  is  clear,  there 
comes  no  man  into  the  world,  whom  Chrift  hath 
not  enlightened  in  fome  meafure,  and  in  whofe 
dark  heart  the  light  hath  not  fliined.  Tho’  thedark - 
nefs  comprehend  it  not,  yet  it  Jhineth  there,  and  the 
nature  thereof,  is  to  difpel  the  darknefs,  where 
men  fhut  not  their  eyes  upon  it. 

gg.  And  for  what  end  this  light  is  given, 
is  expreft  in  verfe  7.  where  John  is  faid  to- 
come  for  a witnefs  to  bear  witnefs  to  the  light,  that 
all  men  through  it  (&  a.1  rS)  might  believe.  Our 
tranflators  indeed  (to  fuit  their  doffrine)  have 
turned  the  words  through  him,  as  if  all  men  were 
to  believe  through  John.  For  which  as  there  is 
nothing  in  the  text,  fo  it  is  contrary  to  the  whole 
ftrain  of  the  context.  For  feeing  Chrift  hath 
lighted  every  man  with  this  light,  is  it  not,  that 
they  may  come  to  believe  through  it?  John  fhin- 
ed  not  in  the  darknefs,  but  this  light  Jhineth  in  the 
darknefs,  that  having  difpelled  the  darknefs,  it 
may  beget  faith. 

F 2 


gp.  Seeing 


[ «4  3 

v 34.  Seeing  then  this  light  is  the  light  of  Jefus 
Chrift,  and  the  light  through  which  men  come 
to  believe,  it  needs  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  it 
is  a fupernatural,  faving  and  fufficient  light.  It 
cannot  be  any  of  the  natural  faculties  of  our  foul, 
becaufe  it  is  faid  to  fhine  in  the  darknefs,  which 
darknefs  is  no  other  than  the  natural  ftate  of  man. 
And  that  this  is  fufficient  and  faving,  I prove 
thus : 

That  which  is  given  that  all  men  through  it 
-nay  believe  ; t hat  by  walking  in  which  we  have 
fellowffiip  with  God,  muff  be  fufficient  to  falva- 
tion:  but  fuch  is  this  light.  Therefore  it  is  fuf- 
ficient  for  faivation. 

Again,  That  which  we  are  commanded  to  he - 
'll  eve  w,  that  we  may  become  the  children  of  the  light, 
mull  be  a fupernatural,  fufficient,  and  faving 
principle:  But  wo  are  commanded  fo  to  believe 
in  this  light.  Therefore,  it  is  a fupernatural,  fuf- 
ficient, and  faving  principle. 

The  firft  propofition  cannot  be  denied  : the 
fecond  is  Chr ill’s  own  words,  John  xii.  36. 
While  ye  have  the  light,  believe  in  the  light,  that 
\e  may  be  the  children  of  the  light. 

33.  If  it  be  faid.  That  by  light  here  is  meant 
•Chrifi’s  outward  perfon,  this  is  fufficiently  an- 
fwered  by  the  words  themfelves,  and  bv  the  verfe 
going  before.  Walk,  while  ye  have  the  light,  lefl 
darknefs  come  upon  you  ; plainly  importing,  that 
when  that  light  in  which  they  were  to  believe 
was  removed,  they  ffiould  lofe  the  capacity  or 

feafon 


[ »4  ] 

feafon  of  believing.  Now  this  could  not  be  un- 
deiftood  of  Chrift’s  perfon  ; for  many  did  fa- 
vingly  believe  in  him  (as  we  do  at  this  day) 
when  his  outward  perfon  was  far  removed  from 
them.  So  that  this  light  in  which  thev  were 
commanded  to  believe,  muff  be  that  inward 
light  from  Chriff,  which  fliines  in  every  man’s 
heart  for  a feafon,  even  during  the  day  of  his 
vifitation:  while  this  continueth  to  call,  invite  and 
exhort,  men  arc  faid  to  have  it,  and  may  believe 
in  it.  But  when  they  have  rejected  it,  it  is  at 
length  withdrawn,  and  then  they  know  not 
where  to  ?'*.  And  therefore  to  fuch  rebellious 

C 

ones,  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  faid  to  be  darknefs 
and  not  light.  Amos  v.  18. 

g 6.  That  a meafure  of  this  faving  light  or  gr  act 
is  given  to  all,  Chriff  telleth  us  exprefsly  in  the 
parable  of  the  fower,  Matt.  xiii.  Mark  iv.  and 
Luke  viii.  where  he  faith,  That  this  feed  fown 
in  thofe  feveral  forts  of  ground  is  the  word  of 
the  kingdom , even  that  word  which,  as  St.  James 
faith,  is  able  to  fave  the  foul.  Now  we  may  ob- 
ferve,  that  the  feed  which  was  fown  by  the  way 
fide,  and  in  the  Jlony  and  thorny  ground,  although 
it  did  not  profit  there,  was  the  fame  feed  which 
was  fown  on  the  good  ground.  But  the  cares  of 
the  world,  or  the  deceitfulnefs  of  riches,  or  the 
defire  of  other  things,  or  the  fear  of  perfection, 
hinders  this  feed  from  growing  in  the  hcaits  cf 
many.  Not,  but  that,  in  its  own  nature,  it  is 
fufiicient  to  falvation  ; being  the  very  fame  with 
F 3 that, 


[ 126  J 

that,  , which  groweth  up  and  profpereth  in  the 
hearts  of  thofe  who  receive  it.  So  that,  though 
all  are  not  faved  by  it,  yet  there  is  a feed  of  fal- 
vation  fown  in  the  hearts  of  all,  which  would 
grow  up  and  fave  the  foul,  if  it  were  not  choak- 
ed  and  hindered. 

37.  To  this  anfwers  the  parable  of  the  talents, 
Matt.  xxv.  He  that  had  two  talents  was  accepted 
as  well  as  he  that  had  five,  becaufe  he  ufed  them 
to  his  mailer’s  profit.  And  he  that  had  one 
might  have  done  the  fame.  His  talent  was  of  the 
fame  nature  with  the  reft,  and  was  as  capable  to 
have  brought  forth  an  increafe  in  proportion,  as 
any  of  theirs.  And  fo,  though  there  be  not  a 
like  proportion  of  grace  given  to  all,  but  to  fome 
five  talents,  to  fome  two,  and  to  fome  one  talent 
only,  yet  there  is  given  to  all  that  which  is  fuffi- 
cient,  and  no  more  is  required  than  according  to 
what  is  given:  For  unto  whomfioever  much  is  given, 
of  him  alfo  much  Jhall  be  required.  Luke  xii.  48. 
He  that  had  the  two  talents  was  accepted  in  giving 

four , nothing  lefts  than  he  that  gave  the  ten.  So 
fbould  he  alfo  that  gave  the  one,  if  he  had  given 
two.  And  no  doubt  one  was  as  capable  of  pro- 
ducing two,  as  five  of  producing  ten,  or  two  four. 

38.  I lhall  add  but  one  proof  more.  That  all 
men  have  a me afure  of  fining  grace,  which  is  that 
of  the  apoftle  Paul  to  Titus  c.  li.  1 1.  The  grace  of 
God  that  bringelh  falvation  hath  appeared  unto  all 
men:  Than  which  there  can  be  nothing  more 
clear,  it  comprehending  both  parts  of  the  cotitro- 

ver  fy. 


[ *7  J 

verfy.  Firil,  it  teddies,  that  it  is  no  naturai 
principle,  but  th  t grace  of  God  bringetli  falvation. 
Secondly,  it  fays  that  this  hath  appeared,  not  to 
a fan , but  to  all  men.  And  there  is  nothing  (as 
the  following  words  declare)  required  of  man, 
which  this  grace  teacheth  not.  Yet  I have  heard 
a public  preacher,  to  evade  the  ftrength  of  this 
text,  and  deny  his  grace  to  be  faving,  fay,  It 
means  only  common  graces,  fuck  as  is  the  heat  of 
the  fre  and  the  light  of  the  fun.  Such  is  the 
darknefs  of thofe  that  oppofe  the  truth!  Where- 
as the  text  faith  exprefsly,  it  is  faving  (Yvrrpios.) 
Others  that  cannot  deny  but  it  is  faving,  fay, 
This  all,  means  not  every  individual,  but  only 
fome  of  all  kinds.  But  is  a bare  denial  fufficient 
to  overturn  a pofitive  afTertion  ? If  the  fcriptures 
may  be  fo  abufed,  what  fo  abfurd  as  may  not  be 
pleaded  for  them  ? Or  what  fo  manifeft  may  not 
be  denied  ? We  have  then  no  reafon  to  be  ftag- 
gered  at  their  denying  what  the  fcripture  exprefly 
affirms.  They  may  as  well  perfuade  us,  that  we 
do  not  intend  that  which  we  affirm,  as  make  us 
believe  the  apoftle  fpeaks  a thing  in  plain  words, 
and  yet  intends  quite  the  contrary. 

39.  And  indeed  can  there  be  any  thing  more 
abfurd,  than  to  fay  where  the  word  is  plainly  all, 
it  does  not  mean  all,  but  only  fezu?  It  is  true 
that  all  is  Tometirnes  taken  for  the  greater  number, 
of  two  numbers  mentioned;  but  let  them  fhew 
us  if  they  can,  either  in  fcripture,  or  profane 
or  ecclefiallical  writings,  that  any  man  who  wrote 
F 4 fe-nfe, 


C 123  ] 

fenfe,  did  ever  ufe  the  word  all,  to  exprefs  of 
two  numbers  the  teller.  Whereas  they  affirm, 
that  the  far  leffer  number  have  received  faving 
grace,  and  yet  will  have  the  apoflle  to  fignify 
them  only  by  the  word  all : contrary  to  all  the 
rules  of  fpeaking,  as  well  as  to  the  whole  tenor 
of  the  gofpcl. 

40.  We  conclude  then,  That  the  gofpel  is  in- 
deed good  tidings  of  great  joy  which  may  he  unto 
all  people:  That  the  minifters  thereof,  are  to 
preach  to  every  creature,  to  declare  to  all  the  com- 
mon falvation,  and  to  offer  repentance  and  remiffi- 
cn  of  fins  to  all,  warning  every  one,  and  exhorting 
every  one  : That  Chrift  died  for  all  who  died  in 
Adam , that  he  gate  himfelf  a ranfom  for  all ; tabl- 
ing death  for  every  man  : That  he  came  not  to  con- 
demn the  world,  hut  that  the  world  through  him 
might  be  faved : That  he  wil/etk  that  all  men  Jhould 
be  faved,  and  willeth  not  that  any  Jhould  perifh  : 
That  he  is  the  propitiation  not  for  our  fins  only, 
who  believe,  but  alfo  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world : 
That  accordingly  he  giveth  to  ail  a day  of  vifita- 
tion,  wherein  it  is  pofftble  for  them  to  be  faved; 
and  therein  a meafure  of  faving  grace,  fo  that  if 
they  die,  their  blood  is  on  their  own  heads;  tee- 
ing, when  they  might  they  would  not  come  unto 
him,  that  they  might  have  life. 


SERIOUS 


SERIOUS  THOUGHTS 

UPON 

THE  PERSEVERANCE 

o F 

THE  SAIN  T S. 


i.  yT ANY  large  volumes  have  been  already 
TVA  publifhed  on  this  important  fubjeft. 
But  the  very  length  of  them  makes  them 
hard  to  be  underltood,  or  even  purchafed  by 
common  readers.  A Ihort,  plain  treatife  on  this 
head,  is  what  ferious  men  have  long  defired,  and 
what  is  here  offered  to  thofe  whom  God  has  en- 
dowed with  love  and  meeknefs  of  wdfdom.  - 
2.  By  the  faints  I underlland,  thofe  who  are 
holy  or  righteous  in  the  judgment  of  God  him- 
felf:  thofe  who  are  endued  with  the  faith  that 
F 5 purifies 


[ *3°  ] 

purifies  the  heait,  that  produces  a good  con- 
fidence : thole  who  are  grafted  into  the  good 
olive-tree,  the  fpiritual,  invifible  church  : thofe 
who  are  branches  of  the  true  vine,  of  whom 
Chrift  fays,  I am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches : 
thofe  who  fo  effectually  know  Clirift,  as  by  that 
knowledge  to  have  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the 
world  : thofe  who  fee  the  light  of  the  glory'  of 
God  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift,  and  who  have 
been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  of  the 
witnefs  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit:  thofe  who 
live  by  faiih  in  the  Son  of  God  : thofe  who  are 
fanflified  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant : thofe 
to  whom  all,  or  any  of  thefe  characters  belong, 
I mean  by  the  term  faints. 

3.  Can  any  of  thefe  fall  away'  ? By  falling  away 
we  mean,  not  barely  falling  into  fin.  This,  it  is 
granted,  they  may.  But  can  they  fall  totally? 
Can  any  of  thefe  fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  perifii 
everlaftingly  ? 

4.  I am  fenfible,  either  fide  of  this  queftion 
is  attended  with  great  difficulties  ; fuch  as  reafon 
alone  could  never  remove.  Therefore  to  the  law 
and  to  the  teftimony.  Let  the  living  oracles  de- 
cide: and  if  thefe  fpeak  for  us,  we  neither  feek 
nor  want  farther  witnefs. 

5.  On  this  authority,  I believe  a faint  may- 
fall  away  ; that  one  who  is  holy  or  righteous  in 
the  judgment  of  God  himfelf,  may  neverthelefs 
fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  perilh  everlaftingly. 

I.  For 


C ] 

I.  For  thus  faith  the  Lord,  + When  the  righte- 
ous turneth  away  from  his  righteoufnefs,  and  com- 
• mittetk  iniquity , in  his  trefpafs  that  he  hath  tnf- 
paffed , and  in  his  Jin  that  he  hath  finned \ in  them 
(hall  he  die. 

That  this  is  to  be  underflow!  of  eternal  death, 
appears  from  the  26th  verfe  : 

When  a righteous  man  turneth  away  from  his 
righteoufnefs  and  committetk  iniquity,  and  dieth  in 
them,  (here  is  temporal  doath)  for  his  iniquity 
that  he  hath  done,  he  Jhall  die:  (here  is  death 
eternal.)  • 

It  appears  farther  from  the  whole  fcope  of  the  - 
the  chapter,  which  is  to  prove,  \ The  foul  that 
Jinneth,  it  Jhall  die. 

If  you  fay,  “ the  foul  here  means  the  body,” 

I anfwer,  that  will  die  whether  you  fin  or  no. 

6,  Again,  thus  faith  the  Lord,  § When  l Jhatt 
fay  to  the  righteous,  that  he  Jhall  furely  live,  if  he 
trujl  to  his  own  righteoufnefs,  (yea,  . or  to  that 
promife  as  abfolute  and  unconditional)  and  com- 
mitteth  iniquity,  all  his  righteoujnefs  Jhall  not  he 
remembered  but  for  the  iniquity  that  he  hath  com- 
mittedJhall  he  die. 

Again,  ||  When  the  righteous  turneth  from  his 
righteoufnefs  and  convnitteth  iniquity,  he  Jhall  even, 
die  thereby. 

Therefore  one  who  is  holy  and  righteous  in 
F 6 the 

i Ezek,  xviii,  24.  ^ ver.  4.  § c.  xxxiiii  v.  13* 

(1  v.  18, 


[ 132  ] 

the  judgment  of  God  himfelf,  may  yet  fo  fall  a 3 
to  perifh  everldflingly. 

7.  “ But  how  is  this  confident  with  what  God 
declared  elfewhere,  \ If  his  children  forj'ake  my 
law  and  walk  not  in  my  judgments — I will  vifit 
their  offences  with  the  rod,  and  their  Jin  with 
fcourges.  Neverlhelejs  my  loving- kin dnejs  will  I 
not  utterly  take  from  him,  nor  Jufftr  my  truth  to 
fail.  My  covenant  will  I not  break,  nor  alter  the 
thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips  : I have  fworn 
once  by  my  holme fs,  that  I will  not fail  David.” 

I anfwer,  There  is  no  manner  of  inconfidency 
between  one  declaration  and  the  other.  The 
prophet  declares  the  jud  judgment  of  God,  a- 
gaind  every  righteous  man  who  falls  from  his 
righreoufnefs.  The  pfaimid  declares  % the  old 
lovin g-kindnffes  which  God  fzi'aie  unto  David  in 
his  truth.  I have  found,  faith  he,  David  my  fer- 
vant ; with  my  holy  oil  have  I anointed  him.  My 
hand  fall  hold  him  faff  and  my  armfliall freng - 
then  him — His  feed alfo  will  I make  to  endure  for 
ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  days  of  heaven.  It 
follows,  \ But  if  his  children  fo  fake  my  law , and 
walk  not  in  my  judgments — Neverlhelejs  my  loving- 
kindnefs  will  I not  utterly  take Jrom  him,  nor  Juffer 
my  truth  to  fail.  My  covenant  will  I not  break. 
1 will  not  fail  David.  His  feed  fhall  endure  for 
ever,  and  his  throne  as  the fun  before  me. 

May  not  every  man  fee,  that  the  covenant 

here 

+ Plain)  Ixxxix.  v.  51 — 34. 

S vcr.  31,  & e. 


V.  48.  21,  22;  30. 


[ 133  1 

here  fpoken  of,  relates  wholly  to  David  and  his 
feed  or  children  ? Where  then  is  the  inconfif- 
tency  between  the  moil:  abfolute  promile  made 
to  a particular  family,  and  that  folemn  account 
which  God  has  here  given  of  his  way  of  dealing 
with  mankind  ? 

* Befides,  the  very  covenant  mentioned  in 
thefe  words  is  not  abfolute,  but  conditional. 
The  condition  of  repentance  in  cafe  of  for faking 
God's  law  was  implied,  though  not  exprell. 
And  fo  ftrongly  implied,  that  this  condition 
failing,  not  being  performed,  God  did  alfo  fail 
David . He-did  alter  the  thing  that  had  gone  out 
of  his  lips,  and  yet  without  any  impeachment  of 
his  truth.  He  ||  abhorred  and  jorfook  his  anoint- 
ed, the  feed  of  David,  whofe  throne,  if  they 
had  repented,  fhould  have  been  as  the  days  of 
heaven.  He  did  5 break  the  covenant  of  his  fer- 
vant , andcajt  his  crown  to  the  ground.  So  vain- 
ly are  thefe  words  of  the  Pfalmift  brought  to 
contradifl  the  plain,  full  teflimony  of  the  Pro- 
phet. 

8.  Nor  is  there  any  contradiction  between  this 
teftimony  of  God  by  Ezekiel,  and  thofe  words 
which  he  fpake  by  Jeremiah:  I have  loved  thee 
with  an  everlajling  love ; therefore  with  loving- 
kindnefs  have  I drawn  thee.  For  do  thefe  words 
affert,  that  no  righteous  man  ever  turns  from 
his  righteoufnefs  ? No  fuch  thing.  They  do 
not  touch  the  queftion,  butfimpiy  declare  God’s 

love 


II  V.  37. 


5 v.  38, 


[ 134  ] 

love  to  the  Jewifh  church.  To  fee  this  in  the 
cleared  light,  you  need  only  read  over  the 
whole  femence.  i At  the  fame  time,  faith  the 
Lord,  I zuili  he  the  God  of  all  the.  families  of  IJ- 
rael,  and  they  fiall  be  my  people.  Thus  faith  the 
Lord,  the  people,  which  were  left  of  the  floor d, 
found  grace  in  the  wilder  nefs,  even  Ifrael , a hen  I 
caufedhun  to  reft.  The  Lord  hath  appeared  of  old 
unto  me,  faith  the  prophet,  fpeaking  in  the  per- 
fon  of  Ifrael,  faying,  I have  loved  thee  with  an 
everlafling  love,  therefore  with  loving-lindnefs  have 
L drawn  thee.  Again  I will  build  thee,  and  thou 
fhalt  be  built,  0 virgin  of  Ifrael. 

* Suffer  me  here  to  obferve  once  for  all,  a fal- 
lacy which  is  eonlfantly  u fed  by  aimed  all  writers 
on  this  point.  They  perpetually  beg  the  quef- 
tion  by  applying  to  particular  perfons,  affertions, 
or  prophecies,  which  relate  only  to  the  church 
in  general  : and  fome  of  them  only  to  the  Jewifh 
church  and  nation,  as  didinguifhed  from  all 
other  people. 

If  you  fav,  “ But  it  was  particularly  revealed 
to  me,  that  God  had  loved  me  with  an  everlaft- 
ing  love I anfwer,  Suppofe  it  was,  (which 
might  bear  a difpute)  it  proves  no  more,  at  the 
mod,  than  that  you  in  particular  fhall  perfevere  : 
but  does  not  affeft  the  general  quedion,  Whe- 
ther others  fhall,  or  fhall  not  ? 

9.  Secondly,  One  who  is  endued  with  the 
faith  that  purifies  the  heart,  that  produces  a good 

con- 


+ Cb.  xxxi.  v.  i,  2,  3,  4. 


[ 135  ] 

confcience,  may  neverthelefs  fo  fall  from  God 
as  to  perifti  everlallingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  infpired  apoflle,  + War  a 
good  warfare , holding  faith  and  a good  confcience , 
which  form  having  put  away,  concermngfaith  have 
made  fiipwreck. 

Obferve,  1.  Thefe  men  (fuch  as  Hymeneus 
and  Alexander)  had  once  the  faith  that  purifies 
the  heart,  that  produces  a good  confcience. 
This  they  once  had,  or  they  could  not  have  put 
it  away. 

Obferve,  2.  They  made fiipvireck  of  the  faith, 
which  necefTarily  implies  the  total  and  final  lofs 
of  it.  For  a veffel  once  wrecked  can  never  be 
recovered.  It  is  totally  and  finally  loft. 

And  the  apoftle  himfelf  in  his  fecond  epiftle  to 
Timothy,  mentions  one  ol  thefe  two  as  irrecover- 
ably loft.  ^ Alexander,  fays  he,  did  me  much  evil: 
The  Lord flail  reward  him  according  to  his  works. 
Therefore  one  who  is  endued  with  the  faith  that 
purifies  the  heart,  that  produces  a good  confci- 
ence, may  neverthelefs  fo  fall  from  God  as  to 
perifti  everlaftingly. 

10.  “ But  how  can  this  be  reconciled  with  the 
words  of  our  Lord,  He  that  helieveth  fall  be 
faved." 

Do  you  think  thefe  words  mean,  he  that  be- 
lieves at  this  moment,  fall  certainly  and  inevita- 
bly be  faved? 

If 

+ 1 Tim.  i.  18,  19,  + 2 Tim.  iv.  14. 


[ 136  J 

If  this  interpretation  he  good,  then  by  all  the 
rules  of  ’ fpeech,  the  other  part  of  the  fentence 
muff  mean,  he  that  does  not  believe  at  this  mo- 
ment, Jhali  certainly  and  inevitably  be  damned. 

Therefore  that  interpretation  cannot  be  good. 
The  plain  meaning  then  of  the  whole  fentence, 
is,  lie  that  believeth,  il  he  continue  in  faith, 
Jhali  be faved ; he  that  believeth  not,  if  he  continue 
in  unbelief,  Jhali  be  damned . 

11.  “ Bat  does  not  Chrift  fay  elfewhere,  t He 
that  believeth  hath  everlafting  li/e  ? And  ^ He  that 
believeth  on  him  that  Jent  me,  hath  everlajling  life, 
and Jhali  not  come  into  condemnation,  but  is  pafftd 

from  death  unto  life." 

I anfwer,  1.  The  love  of  God  is  everlafling 
life.  It  is,  in  fubftance,  the  life  of  heaven. 
Now  every  one  that  believes,  loves  God,  and 
therefore  hath  everlajling  life. 

2.  Every  one  that  believes  is  therefore  pajfed 
from  death,  fpiritual  death,  unto  life ; and 

3.  Shall  not  come  into  condemnation,  if  he  en- 
dureth  in  the  faith  unto  the  end  : according  to 
our  Lord's  own  word,  He  that  endureth  to  the 
end  fhall  be  faved : and  \ Verily  I fay  unto  you,  if 
a man  keep  my  faying,  he  fiall  never  fee  death. 

12.  Thirdly,  Thofe  who  are  grafted  into  the 
good  olive  tree,  the  fpiritual,  invifible  church, 
may  neverthelefs  fo  fall  from  God  as  to  perilh 
everlaflingly. 

For 


+ John  ii.  36.  J c,vi.  v.  24.  $ John  viii.  51* 


[ *3  7 ] 

For  thus  faith  the  apodle,  ^Some  of  the  branches 
are  broken  off,  and  tliou  art  grafted  in  among  them, 
and  with  them  part ahef  of  the  root  andfatnefs  oj 
the  olive-tree. 

Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear : if  God  fpared  not 
the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lef  he  [pare  not 
thee. 

Behold  the  goodnefs  and  feventy  of  God!  On 
them  which  fell feverity  ; but  toward  thee  goodnefs, 
if  thou  continue  in  his  goodnefs  ; othei  wife  thou 
fhodt  be  cut  off. 

We  may  obferve  here,  i.  The  perfons  fpoken 
to  were  a&ually  grafted  into  the  olive-tree. 

2.  This  olive-tree  is  not  barely  the  outward, 
vifible  church,  but  the  invifible,  confiding  of 
holy  believers.  So  the  text.  + If  the  frfl  fruit 
be  holy,  the  lump  is  holy  ; and  if  the  root  be  holy , 

fo  are  the  branches.  And,  Becaufe  of  unbelief 
they  vjere  broken  off,  and  thou  Jlandef  by  faith. 

3.  Tbefe  holy  believers  were  dill  liable  to  be 
cut  off  from  the  invifible  church,  into  which 
they  were  then  grafted. 

4.  Here  is  not  the  lead  inli-mation  of  thofe 
who  were  fo  cut  off,  being  ever  grafted  in  again. 

Therefore  thofe  who  are  grafted  into  the  good 
olive-tree,  the  fpiritual,  invifible  church,  mav 
neverthelefs  fo  fall  from  God  as  to  perifh  ever- 
ladingly. 

13.  “ But  how  does  this  agree  with  the  29th 

verfe, 

II  Rom.  xi.  17,  £0,  2l,  22.  + ver,  16. 


L >3*  ] 

verfe,  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without 
repentance  ? ’ 

1 he  preceding  verfe  fhews  : as  touching  the 
eledlion  (the  unconditional  eledtion  of  the  Jewifh 
nation)  they  are  beloved  for  the father  s fake  : for 
the  fake  of  their  fore-fa:hers.  It  follows  (in 
proof  of  this,  that  'they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers 
Jake,  that  God  has  flili  bleflings  in  fiure  for  the 
Jewilh  natron)  For  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God , 
are  without  repentance : for  God  doih  not  repent 
of  any  bleflings  he  hath  given  them,  or  any  pri- 
vileges he  hath  called  them  to.  The  words  here 
referred  to,  were  originally  fpoken  with  a pecu- 
liar regard  to  thefe  national  bleflings.  t God  is 
net  a man , that  he  fiould  not  lie,  neither  the  fon 
of  man,  that  he fiould  repent. 

14.  * “ But  do  not  you  hereby  make  God 
changeable  ? Whereas  | with  him  is  no  variable - 
nefs,  neither  Jhadow  of  turning?”  By  no  means, 
God  is  unchangeably  holy.  Therefore  he  al- 
ways loveth  righteoufnefs  and  kateth  iniquity . He 
is  unchangeably  good.  Therefore  he  pardoneth 
all  that  repent  and  believe  the  gofpel.  And  he  is 
unchangeably  juft  ; therefore  he  rewardetk  every 
man  according  to  his  works.  But  all  this  hinders 
not  his  refilling  when  they  are  proud,  thofe  to 
whom  he  gave  grace  when  they  were  humble. 
Nay,  hi*  unchangeablenefs  itlelf  tequires,  that  if 
they  grow  high  minded,  God  fhould  cut  them 

off: 

+ 'Numb,  xxiii.  19.  + Janies  i.  17. 


C m ] 

)ff : that  there  flrould  be  a proportionable  change, 
in  all  the  divine  difpenfations  toward  them. 

15.  * “ But  how  then  is  God  faithful  ?”  I an- 
fwer,  in  fulfilling  every  promife  which  he  hath 
nade,  to  all  to  whom  it  is  made,  all  who  fulfil 
the  condition  of  that  promife.  More  particu- 
larly, ill,  ||  God  is  faithful  in  that  he  will  not fuf- 
fer  you  to  be  tempted  above  that  you  are  able  to 
bear.  2d,  % The  Lord  is  faithful,  to  ejlablifh  and 
keep  you  from  evil  (if  you  put  your  truft  in  him) 
from  all  the  evil  which  you  might  otherwife  fuf- 
fer,  through  unreafonable  and  wicked  men.  3. 
f Quench  not  the  Spirit ; hold  faf  that  which  is 
good  ; abfain  from  all  appearance  of  evil : and 
your  whole  fpirit , foul  and  body  (hall  be  preferved 
blamelefs  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lcrd  Jefus 
Chrifi.  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  alfo 
will  do  it.  4.  Be  not  difobedient  unto  the  hea- 
venly calling,  and  ^ God  is  faithful  by  whom  ye 
were  called , to  confirm  you  unto  the  end , that  ye 
may  be  blamelefs,  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jefus 
Chrifi.  Yet  notwithftanding  all  this,  unlefs  you 
fulfil  the  condition,  you  cannot  attain  the  pro- 
mife. 

“ Nay,  but  are  not  all  the  promifes,  yea  and 
amen  ?”  They  are.  They  are  firm  as  the  pillars 
of  heaven.  Perform  the  condition  : and  the 
promife  is  lure.  Believe,  and  thou  fhalt  be 
faved. 

“ But 

(1  1 Cor.  x.  13.  [§  2 ThefT.  iii.  2,  3.  +1  ThetT.  v.  io,  &c. 
£ i Cor.  i.  8,  9. 


[ 34°  1 

“ But  many  promifes  are  abfolute  and  un- 
conditional.” In  many,  the  condition  is  not 
expreft.  But  this  does  not  prove,  there  is  none 
implied.  No  promifes  can  be  expreft,  in  a more 
abfoluteform,  thatthofeabove  cited  fromthe  89th 
pfalm.  And  yet  we  have  feen,  a condition  was 
implied  even  there,  though  none,  was  expreft. 

16.  “ But  there  is  no  condition  either  expreft 
or  implied,  in  thofe  words  of  St.  Paul,  ||  I am  < 
perfuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  height 
nor  depth,  nor  any  creature,  Jhall  be  able  to fepa-  " 
rate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Chrijl 
Jefus  our  Lord." 

Stippofe  there  is  not  (which  will  bear  a dif- 
pute)  yet  what  will  this  prove?  Juft  thus  much,  '! 
that  the  apoflle  w'as  at  that  time  fully  perfuaded 
of  his  own  perfeverance.  And  I doubt  not,  but 
many  believers  at  this  day,  have  the  very  fame 
perfuafion,  termed  in  fcripture,  the  full  affur- 
ance  of  hope.  But  this  does  not  prove,  that  .i 
every  believer  fhall  perfevere  : any  more 
than  that  every  believer  is  thus  fully  perfuaded 
of  his  perfeverance. 

IV.  17.  Fourthly,  Thofe  who  are  branches  of 
the  true  vine,  of  whom  Chrift  fays,  I am  the  1 
vine,  ye  are  the  branches,  may  neverthelefs 
fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  perifh  everlaftingly. 

For  thus  faith  our  blefied  Lord  hirofelf, 

I am 


|j  Rom,  viii.  38,  39. 


lam  ike  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the  hufband- 
man. 

Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he 
tahcth  it  away. 

I am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches.  If  a man 
abide  not  in  me,  he  is  caf  forth  as  a branch  and  is 
withered,  and  men  gather  them,  and  caf  them, 
into  the  fi re,  and  they  are  burned. 

Here  we  may  obferve,  1.  The  perfons  fpoken 
of  were  in  Chrif,  branches  of  the  true  vine : 

2.  Some,  oftbefe  branches  abide  not  in  Chrift, 
but  the  father  taheth  them  away. 

g.  The  branches  which  abide  not  are  cafl forth , 
cad  out  from  Chrift  and  his  church  : 

4.  They  are  not  only  caji  forth  but  withered  ; 
confequently  never  grafted  in  again.  Nay, 

5.  They  are  not  only  caf  forth  and  withered, 
but  alfo  caf  into  the  fre.  And 

6.  They  are  burned.  It  is  not  poffible  for 
words  more  ftrongly  to  declare,  that  even  thofe 
who  are  now  branches  in  the  true  vine,  may  yet 
fo  fall,  as  to  perifh  everlaftingly. 

18.  By  this  clear,  indifputable  declaration  of 
our  Lord,  we  may  interpret  thofe  which  might 
be  otherwife  liable  to  difpute  : wherein  it  is 
certain,  whatever  he  meant  befide,  he  did  not 
mean  to  contraditt  himfelf.  For  example,  This 
is  the  Father  s will,  that  of  all  which  he  hath  given 
me  I Jhould  lofe  nothing.  Moft  fure  ; all  that 
God  hath  given  him , or  (as  it  is  expreft  in  the 


[ *42  J 

next  verfe)  every  one  which  believeth  on  him, 
namely,  to  the  end,  he  will  raife  up  at  the  lajl  day 
to  reign  with  him  for  ever. 

Again,  t I am  the  living  bread — If  any  man  eat 
of  this  bread  (by  faith)  he fiat l live  for  ever.  True; 
if  he  continue  to  eat  thereof.  And  who  can 
doubt  of  it  ? 

Again,  \ My  fieep  hear  my  voice  and  I know 
them,  and  they  follow  me.  And  I give  unto  them 
eternal  life ; and  they  fall  never  perif,  neither 
fall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand. 

In  the  preceding  text,  the  condition  is  only 
implied.  In  this  it  is  plainly  expreft.  They 
are  my  fetp  that  hear  my  voice,  that  follow  me 
in  all  holinefs.  And  if ye  do  thofe  things  ye fall 
never  fall.  None  {hall  pluck  you  out  of  my  hands. 

Again,  ^ Having  loved  his  own  which  werein 
the  world , he  lovelh  them  unto  the  end.  Having  lov- 
ed his  own,  namely  the  apoflles,  (as  the  very  next 
words  which  were  in  the  world  evidently  fhew) 
he  loved  them  unto  the  end  of  his  life,  and  mani- 
fefted  that  love  to  the  laft. 

19.  Once  more,  ||  Holy  Father,  keep  through 
thine  own  name  thofe  whom  thou  hajl  given  me,  that 
they  may  be  one,  as  we  are  one. 

Great  flrefs  has  been  laid  upon  this  text  ; and 
it  has  been  hence  inferred,  that  all  thofe  whont 
the  Father  had  given  him  (a  phrafe  frequently 

occurring 

tjohnvi.  51.  $ Chap.  x.  14.  { John  xiii.  1,  j)  Ch,  17. 

v.  n. 


[ *43  ] 

occurring  in  this  chapi'er)  mull  infallibly  perfe- 
vere  to  the  end. 

And  yet  in  the  very  next  verfe,  our  Lord  him- 
felf  declares,  that  one  of  thofe  whom  the  Father 
had  given  him,  did  not  perfevere  unto  the  end, 
but  perilhed  everlaftingly. 

His  own  words  are.  t Thofe  that  thou  gavefi 
me,  I have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is  lofi,  but  the 
fen  of  perdition. 

So  one  even  of  thefe  was  finally  loft!  A de- 
monftration  that  the  phrafe  Thofe  whom  thou  liafi 
given  me,  fignifies  here  (if  not  in  raoft  other 
places  too)  the  twelve  apoftles  and  them  only. 

£ o.  On  this  occanon,  I cannot  but  obferve 
another  common  inftanceof  begging  the  quefti- 
on,  of  taking  for  granted,  what  ought  to  be 
proved  : it  is  ufually  laid  down,  as  an  indifputa- 
ble  truth,  that  whatever  our  Lord  fpeaks  to  or  of 
his  apoftles,  is  to  be  applied  to  all  believers. 
But  this  cannot  be  allowed  by  any  who  impar- 
tially fearch  the  feriptures.  They  cannot  allow, 
without  clear  and  particular  proof,  that  any  one 
of  thofe  texts,  which  related  primarily  to  the 
apoftles  (as  all  men  grant)  belong  to  any  but 
them. 

V.  21.  Fifthly,  Thofe  who  fo  effectually 
- know  Chrift,  as  by  that  knowledge  to  have  ef- 
caped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  may  yet  fall 

back 


+ 2 Pet.  ii.  ao.  sr. 


'[  M4  ] 

back  into  thofe  pollutions,  and  perifh  everlaft- 

For  thus  faith  the  apoftle  Peter,  t If  after 
they  have  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  thro' 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrif, 
(the  only  poflible  way  of  efcaping  them)  they  are 
again  intangled  therein  and  overcome,  the  latter 
end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  beginning. 

For  it  had  been  better  for  them,  not  to  have 
known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs , than  after  they 
had  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment 
delivered  unto  them. 

That  the  knowledge  of  the  way  of  righteoufnefs , 
which  they  had  attained,  was  an  inward,  expe- 
rimental knowledge,  is  evident  from  that  other 
exprefhon,  They  had  efcapcd  the  pollutions  of  the 
world:  an  exprelhon  parallel  to  that  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  J Having  efcaped  the  corruption 
which  is  in  the  world.  And  in  both  chapters, 
this  effefl  is  afcribed  to  the  fame  caufe  : term- 
ed in  the  firft.  The  knowledge  of  him  who  hath 
called  us  to  glory  and  virtue  ; in  the  fecond,  more 
explicitly,  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jefus  Chrijl. 

And  yet  they  loft  that  experimental  know- 
ledge of  Chrift  and  the  way  of  righteoufnefs : 
they  fell  back  into  the  fame  pollutions  they 
had  efcaped  ; and  were  again  intangled  therein 
and  overcome.  They  turned  from  the  holy  com - 

mandment 

i v.  4. 


4 2 Ptuii.  20,  21 , 


C H5  ] 

mandment  delivered  to  them,  fo  that  their  latter 
end  was  worfe  than  their  beginning . 

Therefore  thofe  who  fo  effectually  know 
Chrift,  ashy  that  knowledge  to  have  efcaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world,  may  yet  fall  back  into 
thofe  pollutions  and  perifii  everlaltingly. 

22.  And  this  is  perfectly  conhftent  with  St. 
Peter’s  words,  in  the  firft  chapter  of  his  former 
epiflle  : Who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  falvation.  Undoubtedly  fo  are  all 
they  who  ever  attain  eternal  falvation.  It  is 
the  power  of  God  only,  and  not  our  own,  by 
which  we  are  kept  one  day  or  one  hour. 

VI.  23.  Sixthly,  Thofe  who  fee  the  light -of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift,  and 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  of  the  wiinefs  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ; 
may  neverthelefs  fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  perifii 
everlaltingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  infpired  writer  to  the  He- 
brews, + It  is  impojjille  for  thofe  zvho  were  once 
inlightened,  and  have  taped  of  the  heavenly  gif  t , 
and  were  made  partakers  of  the  floly  Gho/l — If 
they  fall  away,  to  renezu  them  again  to  repentance  ; 
feeing  they  crucify  to  theivf elves  the  Son  of  God 
afrefi,  and  put  him  to  an  open  fiame. 

Muff  not  every  unprejudiced  perfon  fee,  the 
exprefftons  here  ufed,  are  fo  ftrong  and  clear, 
that  they  cannot  without  grofs  and  palpable 

Vol.  XX.  G wrefling 

+ Ch.  6.V.4,  6.  Ephef.i.  i7,i3,  19. 


[ 546  ] 

wrefting,  be  underftood  of  any  but  true  be- 
lievers ? 

They  were  once  inligklened : an  exprefTton 
familiar  with  tbe  apoftle,  and  never  by  him 
applied  to  any  but  believers.  So,  The  God  of 
our  Lord  Jtfiis  Chrifl,  give  unto  you  the  fpirit 
of  wifdom  and  revelation. — The  eyes  oj  your  un- 
derfunding being  inlightened,  that  ye  may  know 
what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling — And  what  is  the 
exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  glory,  to  us-war d that 
believe.  So  again,  + God  who  commanded  the 
tight  to  f line  out  of  darknefs,  hath  fhined  into  our 
hearts , to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  oj  God  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrifl.  This  is  a 
light  which  no  unbelievers  have.  They  are 
utter  {hangers  to  fuch  inlightening.  \ The  God 
of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which 
believe  not,  lef  the  light  of  the  glorious  gofpel  of 
Chrifl,  fhoiild fhine  unto  them. 

They  had  tafed  of  the  heavenly  gift  (empha- 
tically fo  called]  and  were  made  partakers  of 
the  Holy  Ghoft.  So  St.  Peter  hkewife  cou- 
ples them  together  ; ||  Be  baptized for  the  remiff  on 
of  fins,  and  ye  fhall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghofl : whereby  the  love  of  God  was  fhed  a- 
•broad  in  their  heart,  with  all  the  other  fruits  of  the 
Spirit.  Yea,  it  is  remarkable,  that  our  Lord 
himfelf  in  his  grand  commiffion  to  St.  Paul 
./to  which  the  apoflle  probably  alludes  in  thefe 
words)  comprizes  all  thefe  three  particulars. 

/ 

t 2 Cor.  iv.  6.  J v.  4.  J Afts  ii.  38. 


[ >47  ] 

§ I fend  thee  to  open  their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them 
fr om  darknefs  to  light  and  from  the  porter  of  Satan 
unto  God,  (here  contracted  into  that  one  ex- 
prefiion,  They  were  inlightened)  that  they  may 
receive jorgivenfs  of  fins  [the  heavenly  gift)  and  an 
inheritance  among  them  which  are  fanEhfied : 
which  are  mad  e.  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghojl,  of  all 
the  fanftifying  influences  of  the  Spirit. 

The  exprelfon,  They  tailed  of  the  heavenly  gift, 
is  taken  from  the  pfalmifl,  t Tajle  and  fee  that 
the  Lord  is  good.  As  if  he  had  faid,  be  ye  as 
affured  of  his  love,  as  of  any  thing  you  fee  with 
your  eyes.  And  let  the  affurance  thereof  be 
fweet  to  your  foul,  as  honey  is  to  your  tongue. 

And  yet  thofe  who  had  been  thus  inlightened, 
had  tafed  this  gift,  and  been  thus  partakers  of 
the  Holy  Ghof,  fo  fell  away,  that  it  was  impoj - 
Jible  to  renew  them  again  to  repentance. 

“ But  the  apoflle  only  makes  a fuppofition, 
If  they  fall fall  away.” 

I anfwer,  The  apoflle  makes  no  fuppofition 
at  all.  There  is  no  if  in  the  original.  The 
words  are,  AojvmIov  t«s  aflraf  — 4^7 Toc.^airecoila;. 

That  is,  in  plain  Englifh,  It  is  impojjible  to  renew 
again  unto  repentance,  thofe  who  were  one  inlight- 
ened and  have  fallen  away  : therefore  they  mull 
perifh  everlaflingly. 

24.  “ But  if  fo,  then  farewel  all  my  com- 


^ Ch,  z6.  v.  18. 


i Pfalm  xxxiv.  8; 


Then 


[ H8  '] 

Then  your  comfort  depends  on  a poor  foun- 
dation. My  comfort  ftands  not  on  any  opini- 
on, either  that  a believer  can,  or  cannot  iall 
away,  not  on  the  remembrance  of  any  thing 
wrought  in  me  yejierday  ; but  on  what  is  to-day. 
On  my  prelent  knowledge  of  God  in  Chrifl, 
reconciling  me  to  himfelf.  On  my  now  behold- 
ing the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Jefus  Chrifl  ; walking  in  the  light  as  lie  is  in 
the  light,  and  having  fellowfhip  with  the  Father 
and  with  the  Son.  My  comfort  is,  that  thro’ 
grace  I now  believe  in  the  Lord  Jefus  Chrilf, 
and  that  his  Spirit  doth  bear  witnefs  with  mv 
-fpirit,  that  I am  a child  of  God.  I take  comfort 
in  this  and  this  only,  that  I fee  Jefus  at  the  right 
■hand  of  God  ; that  I perfonally  for  myfeif,  and 
not  for  another,  have  an  hope  full  of  immorta- 
lity ; that  I feel  the  love  of  God  fhed  abroad 
in  my  heart,  being  crucified  to  the  world, 
and  the  world  crucified  to  me.  My  rejoicing 
is  this,  the  teflimonv  of  mv  confcience,  that  in 
fimplicity  and  godly  fincerhy,  not  with  flefhly 
wifdom,  but  by  the  grace  of  God,  I have  mv 
converfation  in  the  world. 

Go  and  find,  if  you  can,  a more  folid  joy,  a more 
blifsful  comfort,  on  this  fide  heaven.  But  this 
comfort  is  not  fhaken,  be  that  opinion  true  or  faffe; 
whether  the  faints  in  general  can  or  cannot  fall. 

If  you  take  up  wfith  any  comfort  fhort  of  this, 
you  lean  on  the  ffaff  of  a broken  reed,  which  not 
only  will  not  bear  your  weight,  but  will  enter  in- 
to your  hand  and  pierce  you. 

25.  Seventhly, 


I >49  J 

23.  Seventhly,  Tliofe  who  live  by  laith,  may 
yet  fall  from  God  and  periffi  everlaRingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  fame  infpired  writer,  t The 
juj}  j halt  live  by  faith  ; but  if  any  man  draw  back, 
my  foul  [hall  nave  no  plcafure  in  him.  Thejujl. 
the  juftified  perfon,  fnall  live  by  faith , even 
now  fhall  he  live  the  life  which  is  hid  with  Chr'rlt 
in  God  : and  ii  he  endure  unto  the  end,  he  fhall 
live  with  God  for  ever.  But  if  any  man  draw 
back , faith  the  Lord,  my  fouljhal!  have  no  pi cafn  c- 
in  him:  That  is,  I will  utterly  call  him  off;  and 
accordingly  the  drawing  back  here  fpojten  of,  is 
termed  in  the  verle  immediately  following,  draw- 
ing bach  to  perdition. 

“ But  the  perfon  fup-pofed  to  draw  back,  is 
not  the  fame  with  him  that  is  faid  to  live  by 
faith.” 

I anfwer,  1.  Who  is  it  then  ? Can  any  man 
draw  back  from  faith  who  never  came  to  it  ? 
But 

2.  Had  the  text  been  fairly  tranflatech  there 
had  been  no  pretence  for  this  objection.  For 
the  original  runs  thus  : ’o  y.zaioT  l*-  fczeilai 
?a»  viro^zlca.  If  o oF.aior,  the  jufl  man  that  lives 
by  faith  (fo  the  expreflion  neceffarily  implies, 
there  being  no  other  nominative  to  the  verb) 
draws  back,  my  foul fhall  have  no  pie  aft  re  zn  him. 

“ But  the  apoftle  adds,  JTe  are  not  of  them 
who  draw  back  unto  perdition And  what  will 
G 3 • yeti 


+ Hcb.  x.  3S. 


[ W ] 

you  infer  from  thence  ? This  is  fo  far  from  con- 
tradidiing  what  lias  been  obferved  before,  that  it 
manifeftly  confirms  it.  It  is  a farther  proof,  that 
there  are  thofe  who  draw  back  unto  perdition , al- 
though the  apoftle  was  not  of  that  number. 
Therefore  thofe  who  live  by  faith,  may  yet  fall 
from  God  and  perifh  evei  lallingly. 

26.  “ But  does  not  God  fay  toevery  one  that 
lives  by  faith,  I will  never  leave  thee  nor  for  fake 
thee  ?” 

The  whole  fentence  runs  thus.  Let  your  con- 
verjation  be  without  covetoujnefs,  and  be  content  with 
fuch  things  as  ye  have ; for  he  hath  faid,  I will 
never  leave  thee  nor forjakt  thee.  True  ; provided 
your  conver fation  be  without  covetoujnefs,  and  ye 
be  content  with  fuch  things  as  ye  have.  Then  you 
may  boldly  fay.  The  Lord  is  my  helper , and  I will 
not  fear  what  man  Jhall  do  unto  me. 

Do  you  not  fee,  1.  That  this  promife,  as  here 
recited,  relates  wholly  to  temporal  things  ? 2. 

That  even  thus  taken,  it  is  not  abfolute  but  con- 
ditional, and  3.  That  the  condition  is  exprefsly 
mentioned  in  the  very  fame  fentence  ? 

27.  Eighthly,  Thofe  who  are  fandfified  by  the 
blood  of  the  covenant,  may  fo  fall  from  God  as 
to  perifh  everlaflingly. 

For  thus  again  faith  the  apoflle,  + If  wejin  wil- 
fulh,  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  facnfce  for  fin , but 
a certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fery 

indig - 


+ Heb.  x,  26. 


[ w ] 

indignation , which  JliaH  devour  the  adver fanes 
He  that  dcfpifecl  Mofs  law  died  without  meny  un- 
der two  or  three  wkneffes.  Of  how  much  /ura  pu- 
nijhment  Jkall  he  be  thought  worthy , who  hath  trod- 
den under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  artel  hath  counted 
the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  wasf'anch- 
fed,  an  unholy  thing. 

It  is  undeniably  plain,  l.  That  ihe  perfon  men- 
tioned here,  was  once  lan&ified  by  the  blood  of 
the  covenant,  a.  That  he  afterwards  by  known,, 
wilful  fin,  trod  under  foot  the  Son  of  God  : 
And  3.  That  he  hereby  incurred  a forer  punilh- 
mentthan  death,  namely,  death  everlafting. 

Therefore,  thofe  who  are  fanflified  by  the 
blood  of  the  covenant,  may  yet  fo  fall  as  t>  per- 
ifli  everlaftingly. 

28.“  What!  Can  the  blood  of  Chrift  burn 
in  hell  ? Or  can  the  purchafe  of  the  blood  of 
Chrift  go  thither  ?” 

I anfwer  1.  The  blood  of  Chrift  cannot  burn 
in  hell,  no  more  than  it  can  be  fpilt  on  the  earth. 
The  heavens  muft  contain  both  his  flelh 
and  blood,  until  the  reftitution  of  all  things. 
But 

2.  If  the  oracles  of  God  are  true,  one  who 
was  purchafed  by  the  blood  of  Chrift  may  go  thi- 
ther. For  he  that  was  fan&ified  by  the  blood  of 
Chrift,  was  purchafed  by  the  blood  of  Chrift. 
But  one  who  wasfanfHfied  by  the  blood  of  Chrift, 
may  nevertheless  go  to  hell ; may  fall  under  that 
G 4 fiery 


_ [ *5®  ] 

fiery  indignation,  which  fhallfor  ever  devour  the 
adverfaries. 

29.  “ Can  a child  of  God  then  go  to  hell  ? 
Or  can  a man  be  a child  of  God  to-dav,  and  a 
child  of  the  devil  to-morrow  ? If  God  is  our 
Father  once,  is  he  not  our  Father  always  ?”  I 
anfwer, 

1.  * A child  of  God,  that  is  a true  believer  (for 
he  that  believeth  is  born  of  God)  while  he  conti- 
nues a true  believer,  cannot  tjo  to  hell.  But  2. 

1 O 

If  a believer  make  fhipwreck  of  the  faith,  he  is 
no  longer  a child  of  God,  And  then  he  may  go 
hell,  yea,  and  certainly  will,  if  he  continues  in 
unbelief.  3.  If  a believer  may  make  thipwreck 
of  the  faith,  then  a man  that  believes  now,  may 
bean  unbeliever  fome  time  hence;  vea,  very 
poiiibiy,  to-morrow  ; But  if  fo,  he  who  is  a child 
of  God  to-day,  may  be  a child  of  the  devil  to-mor- 
row. For  4.  God  is  the  Father  of  them  that  be- 
lieve, fo  long  3s  they  believe.  But  the  devil  is 
the  father  of  them  that  believe  not,  whether 
the}'  did  once  believe  or  no. 

30.  The  fum  of  all  is  this.  If  the  fcriptures  are 
true,  thofe  who  are  holy  or  righteous  in  the 
judgment  of  God  himfelf:  thofe  who  are  indued 
with  the  faith  that  purifies  the  heart,  that  produces 
a good  confcience  : thofe  who  are  grafted  into 
the  good  olive  tree,  the  fpiritual,  invifible 
church  : thofe  who  are  branches  of  the  true 
vine,  of  whom  Chrifi:  fays,  I am  the  vine,  ye  are 
the  branches:  thofe  who  fo  effeflually  know 

Chrift, 


[ 03  J 


Chrift,  as  by  that  knowledge  to  have  efcaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world  : thofe  who  fee  the  light 
of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift, 
and  who  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  of  the  witnefs  and  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit: 
thofe  who  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God : 
thofe  who  are  fan  til  Tied  by  the  bloo'd  of  the  co- 
venant ; .may  neverthelefs  fo  fail  from  God,  as 
to  periih  everlaftingly. 

Therefore,  let  him  that  ftandeth,  take  heed 
left  he  faW. 


PREDES- 


[ *54  ] 


fcar . — ataaeai 


PREDESTINATION 

CALMLY  CONSIDERED. 


T7z<^  to  the  height  of  this  great  argument , 

/ aJJ'trt  eternal  providence. 

And  yujhfy  the  ways  oJ'Ged  with  man. 

Milton. 


I,  T AM  inclined  to  believe,  tliat  many  of 
thofe  who  enjoy  the  faith  which  work- 
eth  by  love,  may  remember  fome  time,  when 
the  power  of  the  Higlielf  wrought  upon  them  in 
an  eminent  manner ; when  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  laid  the  mountains  low,  brake  all  the  rocks 
in  pieces,  and  mightily  (lied  abroad  his  love  in 
their  hearts,  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  given  unto 
them.  And  at  that  time  it  is  certain,  they  had 
no  power  to  refijl  the  grace  of  God.  They  were 

then 


L '55  1 


then  no  more  able  to  flop  the  conrfe  of  that  tor- 
rent which  carried  all  before  it,  than  to  flem  the 
waves  of  the  fea  with  their  hand,  or  to  flay  the 
fun  in  the  mid  ft  of  heaven. 

II.  And  the  children  of  God  may  continually 
obferve,  how  his  loveleads  them  on  from  faith 
to  faith  : with  what  tendernefs  he  watches  over 
their  fouls ; with  what  car, e he  brings  them  back 
if  they  go  affray,  and  then  upholds  their  going  in 

' his  path,  that  their  foot  fteps.  may  not  Aide.  They 
cannot  but  obferve,  how  unwilling  lie  is,  to  let 
them  go  from  ferving  him;  and  how,  notvvith- 
flandingthe  flubbornnefs  of  their  wills,  and  the 
wlldncfs  of  their  paflions,  he  goes  on  in  his 
work,  .conquering  and  to  conquer,  till  he  hath 
put.  all  his  enemies -under  his  feet.. 

. III.  The  farther  this  work  is  carried  on  in 
their  hearts,  the  more  earneflly  do  they  cry  out. 
Not  unto  us,  0 Lord,  but  unto  thy  name  give  the 
praife,for  thy  mercy  andjor  thy  truth’ s fake.  The 
more  deeply  are  they  convinced,  that  by  grace 
we  are  J'aved ; not  of  works,  left  any  man  fiould 
boajl : that  we  are  not  pardoned  and  accepted 
with  God,  for  the  fake  of  any  thing  we  have 
done,  but  wholly  and  folely  for  the  fake  of 
Chrift,  of  what  he  hath  done  and  buffered  for  11s. 
The  more  affuredly  likewife  do  they  khow,  that 
the  condition  of  this  acceptance  is  faith  alone  : 
before  which  gift  of  God  no  good  work  can  be 
G 6 done,. 


[ *56  J 


done,  none  which  hath  not  in  it  the  nature  of 
fin. 


IV.  How  eafdy  then  may  a believer  infer, 
from  what  he  hath  experienced  in  his  own  foul, 
that  the  true  grace  of  God  always  works  irrefifli- 
bly  in  every  believer  ? That  God  will  finifh 
wherever  he  has  begun  this  work,  fo  that  it  is 
impoffible  for  any  believer  to  fall  from  graze  ? 
And  lallly,  that  the  reafon  why  God  gives  this, 
to  fome  oniv,  and  not  to  others,  is  became  of  his 
own  will,  without  any  previous  regard  either  to 
their  faith  or  works,  he  hath  abfolutely , uncon- 
ditionally pt ecleJUnaled  them  to  life,  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world. 

V.  Agreeable  hereto,  in  the  Proteftant  con- 
feffion  of  faith,  drawn  up  at  Paris,  in  the  year 
1<559>  we  have  thefe  words:  (article  12.) 

“ We  believe,  that  out  of  the  general  corrup- 
tion and  condemnation,  in  which  all  men  are 
plunged,  God  chaws  thofe  whom  in  his  eternal 
and  unalterable  counlll,  he  has  defied  by  his 
own  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  through  our  Lordje- 
fus  Chrift,  without  cor. f: dering  their  works,  leav- 
ing the  others  in  the  fame  corruption  and  con- 
demnation."— 

VI.  To  the  fame  effect  fp'eak  the  Dutch  di- 
vines affembled  at  Doit,  in  the  year  1618.  Their 
words  arc  : (Art.  6.  et Jeq.) 


V'hereas 


[ Ll57  ] 

“ Wbeffeas  in  procefs  of  time,  God  bellowed 
faith  on  fome,  and  not  on  others,  this  procee/is 
from  his  eternal  decree — According  to  which,  he 
fbftens  the  hearts  of  the  el'eft,  and  ieaveth  them 
that  are  not  eleft  in  their  wickednefs  and  hard- 
nefs. 

“ And  herein  is  difcovered  the  difference  put 
between  men  equally  loft,  that  is  to  fay,  the  de- 
cree of  election  and  reprobation. 

Eleftion  is,  the  unchangeable  decree  of 
God,  by  which,  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  he  bath  chofen  in  Cbrifl  unto  faivation, 
a fee  number  of  men.  This  election  is  one  and 
the  fame  or  all  which  are  to  be  faved. 

“ Not  all  men  are  elefled,  but  fome  not-eIe£l- 
ed  ; whom  God  in  his  unchangeable  good  plea- 
fure  hath  decreed,  to  leave  in  the  common  mi- 
fery,  and  not  to  beflow  having  faith  upon  them: 
but  leaving  them  in  their  own  ways,  at  1 all  to 
condemn  and  punifh  them  everlaftingly,  for  then- 
unbelief,  and  alfo  for  then  other  fins.  And  this 
is  the  decree  of  reprobation.” 

VII.  Likewife  in  the  confeflion  of  faith,  fiet 
forth  by  the  affembly  ofEnglifh  and  Scotch  di- 
vines, in  the  year  1 5^6,  are  thefe  words,  (.ctiap. 
3-) 

“ God  from  all  eternity  did  unchangeably  or- 
dain whatfeeve!  comes  to  pafs, 

“ By  the  decree  of  God,  for  the  manifefta- 
tion  of  his  glory,  fome  men  and  angels  are  pre- 

deftinated 


[ 15*  ] 

deftinated  unto  everlafting  life,  and  ethers  fore- 
ordained to  eyerlafting  death. 

“ Thefe  angels  and  men,  thus  predefiinatc-d 
and  fore-ordamed,  are  particularly  and  unchange- 
ably defigned,  and  their  number  fo  certain 
and  definite,  that  it  cannot  be  either  increafed 
or  diminifhed. 

“ 1 hofe  of  mankind  that  are  predominated 
unto  life,  God  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world — hath  chofen  in  Chrilt  unto  everlafhng 
glory — without  any  forefight  of  faith  or  good 
works. 

“ The  refi  of  mankind  God  was  pie  a fed — 
for  the  glory  of  his  fovereign  pow'er  over  his 
creatures,  to  pafs  bv,  and  to  ordain  them  to  dif- 
honour  and  wrath.” 

No  lefs  exprefs  are  Mr.  Calvin’s  words,  in 
his  Chrijlian  Injlitutions,  (chap.  21.  fefd.  1.) 

“ All  men  are  not  created  for  the  fame  end  ; 
but  fotne  are  fore-ordained  to  eternal  life,  others 
to  eternal  damnation.  So  according  as  every 
man  w'as  created  for  the  one  end  or  the  other, 
we  fay,  he  was  eleffed,  i.  e.  predeftinated  to 
life,  or  reprobated , i.  e.  predeftinated  to  dam- 
nation.” 

VIII.  Indeed  there  are  fome  who  affert  the 
decree  of  ele£lion,  and  not  the  decree  of  repro- 
bation. They  affert,  that  God  hath  byapofitive, 
unconditional  decree,  chofen  fome  to  life  and 
falvatoni  : but  not  »hat  he  hath  by  any  fuch 

decree, 


[ 159  ] 

decree,  devoted  the  reft  of  mankind  to  deftruc- 
tion.  Thefe  are  they  to  whom  I would  addrefs 
mylelf  firft.  And  let  me  befeech  you,  brethren, 
by  the  mercies  of  God,  to  lift  up  your  hearts  to 
him,  and  to  beg  of  him  to  free  you  from  all 
prepoireffion,  from  the  prejudices  even  of  your 
tender  years,  and  from  whatfoever  might  hinder 
the  light  of  God  from  fhining  in  upon  your  fouls. 
Let  us  calmly  and  fairly  weigh  thefe  things  ill 
the  balance  of  the  fanfluary.  And  let  all  be 
done  in  love  and  meeknefs  of  wifdom,  as  be- 
comes thofe  who  are  fighting  under  one  captain, 
and  who  humbly  hope,  they  are  joint-heirs 
thro’  him  of  the  glory  which  fhall  be  re- 
vealed. 

I am  verily  perfuaded,  that  in  the  uprightnefs 
ofyour  hearts,  you  defend  the  decree  of  uncondi- 
tional eleflion  ; even  in  the  fame  uprightnefs 
wherein  you  rejefl  and  abhor  that  of  uncondi- 
tional reprobation.  But  confider,  I intreat  you, 
whether  you  are  confident  with  ycurfelves ; 
confider,  whether  this  election  can  be  feparate 
from  reprobation  ; whether  one  of  them  does 
not  imply  the  other,  fo  that  in  holding  one,  you 
muft  hold  both. 

IX.  That  this  was  the  judgment  of  thofe 
who  had  the  moll  deeply  confidered  the  nature 
of  thefe  decrees,  of  the  afifembl)  of  Englilh  and 
Scotch  divines,  of  the  reformed  churches  both 
in  France  and  the  Low  Counti  ies,  and  of  Mr. 
Calvin  himfelf,  appears  fiom  their  own  words, 

beyond 


[ 160  ] 

beyond  allpoffibility  of  contradiction.  *•  Out  of  the 
general  corruption  (faith  the  French  church)  he 
draws  thofe  whom  he  hath  elected  ; leaving  the  o- 
thers  in  thejame  corruption,  according  to  his  im- 
moveable decree.”  “ By  the  decree  of  God  (fays 
the  affembly  ofEnghfh  and  Scotch  divines,)  fome 
are  predeftinated  unto  eveilafling  life,  others 
fore-ordained  to  everlafiing  death.”  “ God 
hath  once  for  all  (faith  Mr,  Calvin,)  appointed, 
by  an  eternal  and  unchangeable  decree,  to  w hom 
he  would  give  falvation,  and  whom  he  would 
devote  to  definition.”  (Infi.  cap.  3.  feet.  7.) 
Nay,  it  is  obfervable,  Mr.  Calvin  fpeaks  with 
utter  contempt  and  difdain  of  all,  who  endea- 
vour to  feparate  one  from  the  other,  who  affert 
election  without  reprobation.  ‘“Many  (fays  he) 
as  it  were  to  excufe  God,  own  election,  and  de- 
ny reprobation.  But  this  is  quite  filly  and 
childifh.  For  election  cannot  ftand  without  re- 
probation. Whom  God  paffes  by,  thofe  he  re- 
probates. It  is  one  and  the  fame  thing.”  Inlf.  1. 

3.  c.  23.  fe£t.  1. 

X.  Perhaps  upon  deeper  confideration,  you  ! 
will  find  yourfelf  of  the  fame  judgment.  It  may 
be,  you  alTo  hold  reprobation,  though  you  know 
it  not.  Do  not  you  believe,  that  God  who  r 
made  one  veffel  unto  honour,  hath  made  another  | 
unto  eternal  -dijhonour  ? Do  not  you  believe, 
that  the  men  who  turn  the  grace  of  our  God  into  j 
lafeivioufnefs , were  before  ordained  of  God  unto 
this  condemnation  ? Do  not  you  think,  that  for 

this  i 


this  fame,  purpofe  God  raifed  Pharaoh  up,  that 
he  might  fhew  his  fovereign  power  in  his  dedruc- 
tion  ? And  that  Jacob  have  I lov£d',bufYX-&\x  have 
1 hated , refers  to  the  eternal  date  ? Why  then,  you 
hold  abfolute  reprobation,  and  you  think  Efau  and 
Pharaoh  were  indances  of  it  as  well  as  all  thofe 
vejfels  made  unto  difionour , thofe  men  before  or- 
dained unto  condemnation  ? 

iXI.  To  fet  this  matter  in  a Hill  clearer  light, 
you  need  only  anfwer  one  quedion.  Is  any 
man  faved  who  is  not  elected  ? Is  it  poffible, 

!that  any  not  defied  fhould  be  faved  ? If  you  fay, 
No,  you  put  an  end  to  the  dotibt.  You  efpoufe 
eleflion  and  reprobation  together.  You  confirm 
Mr.  Calvin’s  words,  that  “ without  reprobation, 
eleflion  itfelf  cannot  dand.”  You  allow  (though 
you  was  not  fenfible  of  it  before,  that  “ whom 
God  elefls  not,  them  he  reprobates.’’ 

* Try  whether  it  be  podible,  in  any  parti- 
cular cafe,  to  feparate  eleflion  from  reprobation. 
Take  one  of  thefe  who  are  fuppofed  not  to  be 
defied  ; one  whom  God  hath  not  chofen  unto 
life  and  falvation.  Can  this  man  be  faved  from 

fin  and  hell  ? You  anfwer.  “ No,” Why 

not,  “ Becaufe  he  is  not  defied.  Becaufe 
God  hath  unchangeably  decreed,  to  fave  fo  many 
fouls,  and  no  more  ; and  he  is  not  of  that 
number.  Him  God  hath  decreed  to  pafs 

! jy  ; to  leave  him  to  everlafiing  dedruflion  : 
m confequence  of  which  irrefidible  decree,  the 
il  | " man 


[ ] 

man  perifhes  everladingly.”  O my  brethren, 
how  fmall  is  the  difference  between  this,  and. 
broad,  barefaced  reprobation  ? 

XII.  Let  me  intreat  you  to  make  this  cafe 
your  own.  In  the  midd  of  life,  van  are  in 
death  ; your  foul  is  dead  while  you  live,  if  you 
live  in  fin,  if  you  do  not  live  to  God.  And  who 
can  deliver  you  from  the  body  of  this  death? 
Only  the  grace  of  God  in  Jefus  Chri ft  our  Lord. 
But  God  hath  decreed  to  give  this  grace,  to 
others  only,  and  not  to  you  ; to  leave  you  in 
unbelief  and  fpiritual  death,  and  for  that  unbe- 
lief to  punilh  you  with  death  everlalling.  Well 
then  mayft  thou  cry,  even  till  thy  throat  is  dry, 
“ O wretched  man  that  I am  !”  For  an  unchang- 
able,  irrefiflible  decree  flandeth  between  thee 
and  the  very  poffibility  of  falvation.  Go  now 
and  find  out  how  to  fplit  the  hair,  between  thy 
being  reprobated,  and  not-elefted  ; how  to  fe- 
parate  reprobation  in  its  mofl  effeQual  fenfe,  from 
unconditional  ele&ion ! 

XIII.  Acknowledge  then,  that  you  hold  re- 
probation. Avow  it  in  the  face  of  the  fun.  To 
be  confident  with  yourfelf,  you  mud  openly  affert 
that  “ without  reprobation  this  eleftion  cannot 
dand.”  You  know  it  cannot.  You  know  if 
God  hath  fixt  a decree,  that  theft  men  only  fhall 
be  faved  in  fuch  a decree  it  is  manifeflly  impli- 
ed, that  all.  other  men  fhall  be  damned.  If  God 

hath 


hath  decreed,  that  this  part  of  mankind,  and 
no  more  (hall  live  eternally,  you  cannot  but  fee 
it  is  therein  decreed,  “ that  the  other  part  fhall 
never  fee  life.”  O let  us  deal  ingenuoufly  with 
each  other.  What  we  really  hold,  let  us  openly 
profefs.  And  if  reprobation  be  the  truth,  it  will 
bear  the  light,  for  the  zvord  of  our  God fiall 'fund 
for  ever. 

XIV.  Now  then,  without  any  extenuation 
on  the  one  hand,  or  exaggeration  on  the  other, 
let  us  look  upon  this  doftrine,  call  it  what  you 
pleafe,  naked  and  iaits  native  colour.  Before 
the  foundations  of  the  world  were  laid,  God  of 
his  own  mere  will  and  pleafure  fixt  a decree 
concerning  all  the  children  of  men,  who  fhould 
be  born  unto  the  end  of  the  world;  This  de- 
cree was  unchangeable  with  regard  to  God,  and 
irrelilHble  with  regard  to  man.  And  herein  it 
was  ordained,  that  one  part  of  mankind  fhould 
be  faved  from  fin  and  hell,  and  all  the  reft  left 
to  perifh  for  ever  and  ever,  without  hope.  That, 
none  of  thefe  fhould  have  that  grace,  which 
alone  could  prevent  their  dwelling  with  everlafN 
ing  burnings,  God  decreed,  for  this  caufe  alone, 
“ becaufe  it  was  his  good  pleafure  ' and  for 

i this  end,  “ to  fhew  forth  his  glorious  power,  and 
hisVovereignty  over  all  the  earth.” 

XV.  Now  can  you,  upon  refle&ion,  believe 
. this  ? Perhaps  you  will  fay,  li  I don’t  think 

about 


[ l64  ] 


about  it.”  That  will  never  do.  You  not  only 
think  about  it  (tho’  it  may  be,  confufedly)  but 
fpeak  about  it  too,  when  ever  you  fpeak  of  un- 
conditional election.  You  don’t  think  about  it  ! 
What  do  you  mean  ? Do  you  never  think 
about  Efau  or  Pharaoh  ? Or  in  general,  about 
a certain  number  of  fouls,  whom  alone  God  hath 
decreed  to  fave  ? Why,  in  that  very  thought 
reprobation  lurks  : it  entered  your  heart  the 
moment  that  entered.  It  (lavs  as  lone;  as  that 
flays,  and  you  cannot  fpeak  that  thought,  with- 
out fpeaking  of  reprobation.  True,  it  is  cover- 
ed with  fig-leaves,  fo  that  a heedlefs  eye  may  not 
obferve  it  to  be  there.  But  if  you  narrowly  ob- 
ferve,  unconditional  eleflion  cannot  appear, 
withoutthe  cloven  foot  of  reprobation. 

XVI.  But  do  not  the  feriptures  fpeak  of 
elettion  ? They  fay,  St.  Paul  was  “ an  eleSIecl 
or  chofen  veffel.”  Nay,  and  fpeak  of  great  num- 
bers of  men,  as,  “ eleft,  according  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God.”  “ You  cannot  therefore 
deny,  there  is  fuch  a thing  as  eleflion.  And 
if  there  is,  what  do  you  mean  by  it  ?” 

I will  tell  you,  in  all  plainnefs  and  fimplicity. 

I believe  it  commonly  means  one  of  thefe  two 
things ; firfl,  a divine  appointment  of  feme 
particular  men,  to  do  fome  particular  work  in  the 
world.  And  this  eleflion  I believe  to  be  not  only 
perfonal,  but  abfolute  and  unconditional.  I bus 
Cyrus  was  elebled  to  rebuild  the  temple,  and  St. 

Paul 


[ ] 


Paul  with  the  twelve  to  preach  the  gofpel.  But 
I do  not  find  this  to  have  any  neceflary  con- 
nexion with  eternal  happinefs.  Nay,  it  is  plain 
it  has  not  ; for  one  who  is  eleBed  in  this  fenfe, 
may  yet  be  loft  eternallv.  Have  I not  cliqfen 
(elefcted)  you  twelve , faith  our  Lord  ■ Yet  one  of 
you  hath  a devil  ? Judas,  you  fee  was  elected 
as  well  as  the  reft.  Yet  is  his  lot  with  the  devil 
and  his  angels. 


XVII.  I believe  eleftion  means,  fecondly, 
a divine  appointment  of  fome  men  to  eternal  hap- 
pinefs. But  I believe  this  election  to  be  con- 
ditional, as  well  as  the  reprobation  oppofue 
thereto.  I believe  the  eternal  decree  concerning 
both,  is  expteft:  in  thofe  .words,  He  that  believeth 
Jhall  be  javed  : he  that  believeth  not  fall  be  damned. 
And  this  decree  without  doubt  God  will  not 
change,  and  man  cannot  refill.  According  to 
this,  all  true  believers  are  infcripture  termed  elecl, 
as  all  who  continue  in  unbelief,  are  fo  long  pro- 
perly reprobates,  that  is,  unapproved-  of  God  and 
without  difcei ament  touching  the  things  of  the 
Spirit. 

XYIII.  Now  God  to  whom  all  things  are 
prefent  at  once,  who  fees  all  eternity'  at  one 
view,  calleth  the  things  that  are  not  as  tho’  they 
were  ; the  things  that  are  not  yet  as  tho’  they  were 
now  fubfifting.  Thus  he  calls  Abraham  the 
father  of  many  nations , before  even  Ifaac  was 

born. 


[ 1 66  ] 

born.  And  thus  Chrifi  is  called  the  Lamhjlaia 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world . thoJ  he  was  not 
flain,  in  faft,  tiil  fome  thoufand  years  after.  In 
like' manner  God  calleth  true  believers,  tied 
from  tkefoundation  of  the  world  : although  they 
were  not  a&uaily  ele£t  or  believers,  till  man- 
ages after,  in  their  feveral  generations.  Then 
only  it  was  that  they  wereaflually  ele£ted,  when 
they  were  made  the  fons  of  God 'by  faith.  Then 
were  they  in  faft,  chofen  and  taken  out  of  the 
world ; eh  cl  (faith  St.  Paul)  thro'  belief  of  the 
truth  : or  (as  St.  Peter  expreffes  it)  eletl,  accord- 
ing to  the  fore-knowledge  of  God,  thro'  fantlif ca- 
tion of  the  Spi  nt. 

XIX.  This  ele&ion  I as  firmly  believe,  as  I 
believe  the  fcripture  to  be  of  God.  But  uncon- 
ditional election  I cannot  believe ; not  only 
becaufe  I cannot  find  it  in  fcripture,  but  alfo(to 
wave  all  other  confiderations)  becaufe  it  necefTa- 
rily  implies,  unconditional  reprobation.  Find 
out  any  ele&ion  which  does  not  imply  reproba- 
tion, and  I will  gladly  agree  to  it.  But  repro- 
bation I can  never  agree  to,  while  I believe 
the  fcripture  to  be  of  God  : as  being  utterly 
irreconcileable  to  the  whole  fcope  and  tenor 
both  of  the  Old  and  New  Teflament. 

O that  God  would  give  me  the  defire  of  mv 
heart  ! That  he  would  grant  the  thing  which  I 
long  for  1 Even  that  you  might  now  be  free 
and  calm,  and  open  to  the  light  of  his  Spirit  ? 

that 


[ l67  ] 

that  you  would  impartially  confider,  how  it  is 
pollible  to  reconcile  reprobation  with  the  fol- 
lowing fcriptures  1 

'Gen.  iii.  17.  Becauft  thou  kafi  eaten  of  the 
tree  of  which  1 commanded  thee,  faying,  thoufia.lt 

not  eat  of  it In  the  fweat  of  thy  face  Jhalt 

thou  eat  bread The  curfe  fhall  come  on  thee 

and  thine  offspring,  not  becaufe  of  any.abfolute 
decree  of  mine,  but  becaufe  of  thy  fin. 

Chap.  iv.  7.  If  thou  doji  well,  fait  thou  not 
he  accepted?  And  if  thou  dof  not  well,  fin  lieth  at 
the  door.  Sin  only,  not  the  decree  of  repro- 
bation, hinders  thy  being  accepted. 

Deut.  vii.  g.  Know  that  the  Lord  thy  God,  he 
is  the  faithf  ul  God,  which  keepeth  covenant  and 
mercy  with  them  that  love  him  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments to  a thou  fund  generations : and  repayeth 
them  that  hate  him  to  their  face  to  defroy  them. 

Ver.  ia.  Wherefore  if  ye  hearken  to  thofe  judg- 
ments and  keep  and  do  them,  the  Lord  thy  God 
Jhall keep  unto  thee  the  covenant  which  he  fiuare  un- 
to thy  fathers. 

Chap.  xii.  v.  26,  27,  28.  Behold  L fet  before 
you  this  day  a blefrg  and  a curfe:  a biefiug,  if 
you  obey  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  your  God ; 
and  a curfe , if  you  will  not  obey. 

Chap.  xxx.  1^5,  &c.  See,  I have  fet  before  thee 
this  day,  life  and  good,  and  death  and  evil : in  that 
L command  thee  this  day  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God, 
to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  commandments 
— arid  the  Lord  thy  God fall  blefs  thee.  But  if 

thou 


1 68  ] 


thou  wilt  not  hear,  I denounce  unto  you  this  day , 
that  ye  Jhall furely  perijh.  I call  heaven  and  earth 
to  record  this  day , that  I have  Jet  hejore  you  life 
and  death,  biffing  and  eurfng.  Therefore  chuje 
Ife , that  both  thou  and  thy  Jced  7?ia\  live. 

2 Ch  ron.  c.  xv.  v.  l,  c3c.  And  the  Spirit  of  God 

came  upon  Azariah , and  he  faid, The  Lord  is 

with  you  while  ye  be  with  lnm  : and  j ye Jeek  him, 
he  will  be  found  of  you  ; but  if  ye  forfahe  him,  he 
will  forfake  y ou. 

Ezra  ix.  13,  14.  After  all  that  is  come  upon 
us,  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trefpajfes  : 
fiould  we  again  break  thy  commandments,  would f 
thou  not  be  angry  with  us,  till  thou  haclf  cc  fum- 
ed us  ? 

fob  xxxvi.  5.  Behold  God  is  mighty  and  de- 
fpifeth  not  any.  Could  he  then  reprobate  any  ? 

Pfal.  cxlv.  9.  The  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  his 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  Ins  works. 

Prov.  i.  23,  &c.  Turn  you  at  my.  reproof  \ be- 
hold I will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  you. 

Becaufe  1 have  called  and  ye  rfufed,  I have 
Jh  etched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded — / 
alfo  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I will  mock  when 
your  fear  cometh.  Then  fall  they  call  upon  me, 
but  I will  not  anfwer  ; they  Jhall feek  me  early,  but 
they  fiall  not  fnd  me.  Why  ? Becaufe  of  my 
decree  ? No.  But  becaufe  they  hated  knowledge, 
and  did  not  chufe  the fear  of  the  Lord. 

Ifaiah  Ixv.  2,  &c.  I have  fpread  out  my  hands 

all  the  day  unto  a rebellious  people  ; — a people  that 

provoked 


C ] 


provoked  me  to  anger  continually  to  my  face — - 
'Ther fore  will  I meafure  their  former  work  into 
their  bofom — Ye  fhall  all  bow  down  to  the  faughter , 
becaufe  when  I called , ye  did  not  anfwer — There- 
fore ye  fiall  leave  your  name  for  a curfe  unto  my 
chofen  : for  the  Lord  God fall flay  thee , and  call 
his  fervants  by  another  name . 

Ezek.  xviii.  20,  &c.  The  foul  that  finneth,  it 
fall  die.  The fon  fall  not  bear  (eternally)  the  ini- 
quity of  the  father , neither  fall  the  father  bear 
the  iniquity  of  the  Jon — Have  I any  pleafure  at  all 
that  the  wicked  fall  die,  faith  the  Lord ; and  not 
that  he  fould  return  from  his  ways  and  live  ? 

Matt.  vii.  26.  Every  one  that  heareth  thefc 
fayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them  not,  fall  be  lik- 
ened unto  a fool if  man , which  built  his  houfe  upon 
the J'and.  Nay,  he  could  not  help  it,  if  he  was 
ordained  thereto. 

Chap.  xi.  20,  &c.  Then  began  he  to  upbraid 
the  cities  wherein  rtiof  of  his  mighty  works  were 
done,  becoAife  they  repented  not.  Wo  unto  thee, 
Chorazin,  wo  unto  thee,  Bdhjaida : for  if  the 
mighty  works  which  were  done  in  you,  had  been 
done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they  would  have  repented 
long  ago  in  fackcloth  and  afes.  (What  ? If  they 
were  not  elebled?  And  if  they  of  Bethfadia  had 
been  elebled,  would  they  not  have  repented  too  ?'") 
Therefore  l fay  unto  you,  it  fall  be 'more  tolera- 
ble. for  Tyre  and  Sidon  in  the  day  of  judgment  than 
for  you.  And  thou,  Capernaum,  which  art  exalt- 
ed unto  heaven,  fait  be  brought  djown  to  hell.  For 
Vol.  XX.  • Ii  if 


[ 37°  ] 

if  the  mighty  works  which  have  been  done  in 
thee,  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  it  would  have  re- 
mained until  this  day.  But  I fay  unto  you,  it  fall 
be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  in  the  day 
of  judgment  than  for  thee. 

Chap.  xii.  41.  The  men  of  Nineveh  fall  rife 
in  judgment  with  this  generation,  and  fhall  con- 
demn it : becaufe  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of 
Jonas,  and  behold  a greater  than  Jonas  is  here. 
But  what  was  this  to  the  purpofe,  if  the  men  of 
Nineveh  were  elefted,  and  this  generation  of  men 
were  not  ? 

Chap.  xiii.  11,  12.  It  is  given  unto  )ou,  to 
know  the  my f cries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but 
unto  than  it  is  not  given.  For  whofoever  hath 
(i.  e.  ufes  what  he  hath)  to  him  Jhall  be  given,  and 
he  Jhall  have  more  abundance.  But  whofoever  hath 
.not,  from  him  fhall  be  taken  away  even  that  he  hath. 

Chap.  xxii.  v.  8.  They  which  were  called  were 
not  worthy,  were  (hut  out  from  the  marriage  of 
the  Lamb  : why  fo  ? Becaufe  they  would  not 
come,  v.  3. 

The  whole  twenty-fifth  chapter  requires,  and 
will  reward  your  mod  ferious  confideration.  If 
vou  can  reconcile  unconditional  reprobation 
with  this,  you  may  reconcile  it  with  the  18th  of 
Ezekiel. 

John  iii.  18.  This  is  the  condemnation,  that 
light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  love  (or 
chufe)  darknefs  rather  than  light. 


Chap. 


C ] 

Chap.  v.  44.  How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive 
honour  one  of  another,  and  feek  not  the  honour 
that  cometh  of  God?  Obferve  the  reafon  why 
they  could  not  believe  : it  is  not  in  God,  but  in 
themfelves. 

A£ts  viii.  so,  & c.  Thy  money  perijh  with  thee, 
(and  fo  doubtlefs  it  did)  Thou  hajl  neither  pari 
nor  lot  in  this  matter  ; for  thy  heart  is  not  right 
in  the  fight  of  God.  Repent  therefore  of  this  thy 
wickednefs , and  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought 
of  thine  heart  may  be  forgiven  thee.  So  that  St. 
Peter  had  no  thought  of  any  abfolute  reprobation 
even  in  the  cafe  of  Simon  Magus. 

Rom.  i.  20,  &c.  They  are  without  excufe ; be - 
c&ufe  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not 
as  God — wherefore  God  alfo  gave  them  up  to  un- 
cleannefs — who  changing  the  truth  of  God  into  a 
lie — For  this  caufe  God  gave  them  up  to  vile  affec- 
tions— As  they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge,  God  gave  them  over  to  a reprobate  mind , 
to  do  thofe  things  which  are  not  convenient. 

2 ThefT.  ii.  10,  & c.-  Them  that  perifh,  becaufe 
they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they 
might  be  faved.  And for  this  caufe  God Jhall  fend 
them  frong  delufons,  to  believe  a lie  ; that  they  all 
might  be  damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but 
had  pleafure  in  unrighteoufnefs. 

XX.  How  will  you  reconcile  reprobation  with 
the  following  fcriptures,  which  declare  God’s 
willingnefs  that  all  fhould  be  faved  ? 

H 2 


Mat. 


[ 172  ] 

Mat.  xxii.  g.  As  many  as  yejhall fnd,  bid  (in- 
vite) to  the  marriage. 

Mark  xvi.  lg.  Go  ye  into  all  the  world , and 
preach  the  go fp el  to  every  creature. 

Luke  xix.  41,  & c.  And  when  he  came  near , he 
.beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it,  faying.  If  { rather 
0 that)  thou  hadf  known,  at  Icajl  ui  this  thy  day, 
the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  ! 

John  v.  34.  Thefe  things  I Jay,  that  ye  may  be 
favtd,  viz.  thofe  who  perfecuted  him,  and  fought 
tojlay  him,  ver.  16.  and  of  whom  he  complains, 
ver.  40.  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  may 
have  life. 

A£is  xvii.  24,  &c.  God  that  made  the  world  and 
all  things  therein — giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath, 
and  all  things,  and  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  na- 
tions of  men,  for  to  dvjell  on  all  the  face  of  the 
earth — That  they  fiould  feel  the  Lord  — Obferve, 
this  was  God’s  end  in  creating  ail  nations  on  all 
the  earth. 

Rom.  v.  18.  As  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment 
came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation,  fo  by  the  righ- 
teou fiefs  of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men 
unto  juf  ft  cation  of  life. 

Chap.  x.  ver.  12.  The  fame  Lord  over  all,  is 
rich  (in  mercy)  unto  all  that  call  upon  him. 

1 Tim.  ii.  3,  4.  This  is  good  and  acceptable  in 
the  f gilt  of  God  our  Saviour,  who  willeth  all  men 
tobefaved  : Chap.  iv.  ver.  10.  Who  is  the  Savi- 
our of  all  men,  efpecially  of  thofe  that  believe,  \ 
i.  e.  intentionally  of  all : and  a&ually  of  be- 
lievers. 


[ »7  3 ] 

James  i.  5.  If  any  man  lack  wifdom , /e/  /«;«  afk 
of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and 
upbraidetk  not. 

2 Pet.  iii.  9.  The  Lord  is  longfuffering  toward 
us,  not  willing  that  any  Jkould  perifh,  but  that  all 
Jhffuld  come  to  repentance. 

1 John  iv.  14.  We  have feen  and  do  teflfy,that 
the  Father  fent  the  Son , to  be  the  Saviour  of  the 
world. 


XXI.  Plow  will  you  reconcile  reprobation 
with  the  following  feriptures,  which  declare  that 
Chrift  ctme  to  fave  all  men,  that  he  died  for  all, 
that  he  atoned  for  all,  even  for  thofe  that  finally 
perifh  ? 

Mat.  xviii.  11.  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  fave 
that  which  is  lojl,  without  any  reilriclion. 

John  i.  29.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketk  away  the  fin  of  the  world. 

Chap.  iii.  17.  God fent  his  Son  into  the  world, 
that  the  world  through  him  might  be  faved. 

Chap.  xii.  47.  I came  not  (now)  to  judge  the 
world , but  to  fave  the  world. 

Rom.  xiv.  15.  Defray  not  him  with  thy  meat, 
for  whom  Chrif  died. 

1 Cor.  viii.  11.  Through  thy  knowledge  fiall  thy 
weak  brother  perifh,  for  whom  Chrif  died , 

2 Cor.  v.  14,  &c.  We  thus  judge,  that  if  one 
died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead : and  that  he  died 

for  all,  that  thofe  (or  all)  who  live  fiould  live  unto 
him  which  died  for  them.  Here  you  fee,  not 
H 3 only 


‘ C *74  ] 

only  that  Chrift  died  for"  all  men,  but  likewife 
the  end  of  his  dying  for  them. 

1 Tim.  ii.  6.  Chrift  Jefus , who  gave  himfclf  a 
ranfom  for  all. 

Heb.  viii,  9.  We  fee  Jefus  made  lower  than  the 
angels , that  he  might  tafie  death  for  every  man . 

2 Pet.  ii.  1.  There faall  be falfe  teachers  among 
you , who  Jhall privately  bring  in  damnable  hcrefics , 
even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them , and  bring 
upon  themfelves  fwift  de fir  action.  You  fee,  he 
bought  or  redeemed  even  thofe  that  perifh,  that 
bring  upon  themfelves  fwift  deftruftion. 

1 John  ii.  1,  2.  If  any  man  fin,  we  have  an  ad- 
vocate with  the  Father,  Jefus  Chrift  the  righteous',  ' 
and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  fins , (who  are 
elect,  according  to  the  knowledge  of  GodJ  and  ■ 
not for  ours  only,  but  alfo  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  ! 
world. 

You  are  fenfible,  thefe  are  but  a very  fmall  . 
part  of  the  feriptures  which  might  be  brought  on 
each  of  thefe  heads.  But  they  are  enough  : and 
they  require  no  comment:  taken  in  their  plain, 
eafy,  and  obvious  fenfe,  they  abundantly  prove, 
that  there  is  not,  cannot  be  any  fuch  thing  as 
unconditional  reprobation. 

XXII.  But  to  be  a little  more  particular. 
How  can  you  poflibly  reconcile  reprobation 
with  thofe  feriptures  that  declare  the  juftice  of 
God  ? To  cite  one  for  all. 


E^ek. 


[ 1 75  J 

Ezek.  xviii.  2,  &c.  What  mean  ye  that  ye  ufe 
this  proverb.  The  j others  have  eaten  four  grapes, 
and  the  children  s teeth  are  Jet  on  edge?  As  I live, 
faith  the  Lord , ye  fiall  not  have  occajion  any 
more  to  life  this  proverb  in  lfrael.  Behold , all 
fouls  are  mine  : as  the  foul  op  the  father,  fo  the 
foul  oj  the  Jon  is  mine ; (and  however  I may  tem- 
porally vifit  the  fins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  chil- 
dren, yet  this  vifitation  extends  no  farther,  but) 
the  foul  that  fuineth,  it  fiall  die,  for  its  own  fin, 
and  not  another’s.  But  if  a man  bejuf,  and  do 
that  which  is  lawful  and  right — he fall  J'urtly  live, 
faith  the  Lord  God.  Lf  he  begat  a fen  which  is 
a robber — / hall  he  thin  live?  He  fall  nut  live  ; he 
fall furely  die — Yet  fay  ye,  why,  doth  not  the  fon 
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father?  (Temporally  he  - 
doth,  as  in  the  cafe  of  Achan,  Korah,  and  a 
thou fand  others  : but  not  eternally.)  When  the 
fon  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he 
fall furely  live.  The  foul  that  fnnetli  it  fiall  die, 

(fhall  die  the  fecond  death.)  The  fon  fall  not 
bear -the  iniquity  of  the father,  neither  fall  the  fa- 
ther bear  the  iniquity  of  the  fon.  The  righteouf 
nefs  oj  the  righteous  fiall  be  upon  him,  _ and - the 
wickednefs  oj  the  wicked fall  be  upon  him.  Yet  ye 
fay,  the  way  of  the  'Lord  is  not  equal.  Hear  now, 
0 lfrael.  Is  not  my  way  equal?  (equitable,  jvuft) 
Are  not  your  ways  unequal?  When  a righteous 
man  turneth  away  from  his  right eoufnefs,  and 
commit  feth  iniquity,  and  dieth  in  than,  for  his  ini- 
quity that  he  hath  done  fall  he  die.  Again,  when 
H q.  the 


[ *76  ] 

the  wicked  man  turneth  away  from  his  wickednejs 
that  he  hath  committed , and  doth  that  which  is 
lawful  and  right,  he  fall  fave  his  foul  alive — 
Therefore  I will  judge  you,  0 houfe  of  Ifrciel,  every 
one  according  to  his  ways,  faith  the  Lord  God. 
Repent  and  turn  yourfelves  from  all  your  tranf 
greffions.  So  iniquity  fall  not  be  your  ruin. 

Through  this  whole  palfage  God  is  pleafed  to 
appeal  to  man  himfelf,  touching  the  juftice  of 
his  proceedings.  And  well  might  he  appeal  to 
our  own  confcience,  according  to  the  account  of 
ihem  which  is  here  given.  But  it  is  an  account 
which  all  the  art  of  man  will  never  reconcile 
wilh  unconditional  reprobation. 

XXIII.  Do  you  think  it  will  cut  the  knot  to 
fay,  “ Why,  if  God  might  jullly  have  paft  by 
all  men,  (Tpeak  out,  if  God  might  jtfly  have 
reprobated  all  men,  for  it  comes  to  the  fame 
point)  then  he  may  juftly  pafs  by  fome.  But 
God  might  jufly  have  palled  by  all  men.'’  Are 
you  fure  he  might?  Where  is  it  written  ? I can- 
not find  it  in  the  word  of  God.  Therefore  I re- 
je£l  it  as  a bold,  precarious  alfertion,  utterly  un- 
fupported  by  holy  fcripture. 

* If  you  fay,  “ but  you  know  in  your  own 
confcience,  God  mig  ht  juftly  have  paft  by'  you 
I deny  it.  That  God  might  jufly,  for  my  un- 
faithfulnefs  to  his  grace,  have  given  me  vp  long 
ago,  I grant : But  this  conceftion  fuppofes  me 

to 


[ *77  ] 

to  have  bad  that  grace,  which  you  fay  a repro- 
bate never  had. 

* But  befides,  in  making  this  fuppofiiton,  of 
what  God  might  have  juftly  done,  you  fuppofe 
his  juftice  might  have  been  feparate  from  his 
other  attributes,  from  his  mercy  in  paiticular. 
But  this  never  was,  nor  ever  will  be  : ncr  in- 
deed is  it  pofiible  it  fhould.  All  his  attributes 
are  inseparably  joined  : they  cannot  be  divided, 
not  for  a moment.  Therefore  this  whole  argu- 
ment Hands  not  only  on  an  unfcriptaral,  but  on 
an  abfuid,  impoffibie  fuppoficion. 

XXIV.  Do  you  fay,  “ Nay,  but  is  j u ft  for 
God  to  pafs  by  whom  he  will,  becaufe  of  his  fo- 
vereignty  : for  he  faith  himfelf,  May  not  I do 
zuhat  I zuill  with  my  own  ? And,  hath  not  the 
poltei  power  ova  his  own  day  ?”  I anfwer,  the 
former  of  thefe  fentences  Hands  in  the  conclu- 
sion of  that  parable,  (Mat.  xx.)  wherein  our 
Lord  reproves  the  Jews  for  murmuring  at  God’s 
giving  the  fame  reward  to  the  Gentiles  as  to 
them.  To  one  of  thefe  murmurers  ft  is  that 
God  fays,  Friend,  I do  thee  no  wrong- . lake 
that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way.  I will  give  unto 
this  lajl  even  as  unto  thee.  Then  follows,  Is  it 
not  lawful for  me  to  do  what  I will  with  mine  own? 
Is  thine  eye  evil,  becaufe  I am  goad?  As  if  he  had 
Laid,  “ May  I not  give  my  own  kingdom  to 
whom  I pleafe  ? Art  thou  angry  becaufe  I am 
merciful?”  It  is  then  undeniably  clear,  that  God 
H 5 does 


[ l7%  ] 

does  not  here  aflert  a right  of  reprobating  every 
man.  Here  is  nothing  fpoken  of  reprobation, 
bad  or  .good.  Here  is  no  kind  of  reference 
thereto.  This  text  therefore  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  concluftcn  it  was  brought  to  prove. 

XXV.  But  you  add,  hath  vet  the  poller  power 
over  his  own  day?  Let  us  confider  the  context 
of  thefe  words  alfo.  They  are  found  in  the  ninth 
chapter  of  the  epiftle  to  the  Romans;  an  epiftle, 
the  general  fcope  and  intent  of  which  is,  to  pub- 
lifh  the  eternal,  unchangeable  w-joSeo-i?,  purpofe 
or  decree  of  God,  He  that  believetk,Jhall  be  fared: 
he  that  believeth  not,  Jhall  he  damned.  The  juRice 
of  God  in  condemning  thofe  that  believed  not, 
and  the  necellity  of  believing  in  order  to  falvation, 
the  apoflle  proves  at  large  in  the  three  firfi  chap- 
ters, which  he  confirms  in  the  fourth  by  the  ex- 
ample of  Abraham.  In  the  former  part  of  the 
fifth  and  in  the  hxth  chapter,  he  deferibes  the 
happinefs  and  hoh  iefs  of  true  believers.  (The 
latter  part  of  the  fifth  is  a digreflioti,  concerning 
the  extent  of  the  benefits  flowing  from  the  death 
of  Chrift.j  In  the  feventh  he  {hews,  in  what  fenfe 
believers  in  Chrift  are  delivered  from  the  law: 
and  deferibes  the  miferable  bondage  of  thofe  who 
are  ft  ill  under  the  law;  that  is,  who  are  truly 
convinced  of  fin,  but  not  able  to  conquer  it.  In 
the  eightn  he  again  deferibes  the  happy  liberty  of 
thofe  who  truly  believe  in  Chrifi  : and  encou- 


rages 


[ *79  ] 

rages  them  to  fuffer  for  the  faith,  as  by  other  con- 
fiderations,  fo  by  this  in  particular,  we  know  that 
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God,  (ver.  28.)  to  them  that  are  called  (by  the 
preaching  of  his  word)  accct ding  to  his  purpofe, 
or  decree,  unalterably  fixt  from  eternity,  he  that 
bclieveth  Jhall  be  Javed.  For  whom  he  did  foreknow 
as  believing,  he  alfo  did  predejlinate  to  be  conform- 
ed to  the  image  of  his  Son.  Moreover  whom  he  did 
predejlinate,  them  he  alfo  called,  by  his  word  (fo 
that  term  is  ufually  taken  in  St.  Paul’s  epi files) 
And  whom  he  called,  them  he  alfo  jufifed, 
(the  word  is  here  taken  in  its  widefl  fenfe, 
as  including  fa  notification  alfo)  and  whom  hejujli- 
fed,  them  he  glorified.  Thence  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter,  he  flrongly  encourages  all  thofe,  who 
had  the  love  of  God  filed  abroad  in  their  hearts, 
to  have  a good  hope,  that  no  fufferings  fhould 
ever  be  able,  to  feparate  them  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Chnfi  Jefis. 

XXVI.  But  as  the  apofUe  was  aware,  how 
deeply  the  Jews  were  offended  at  the  whole  tenor 
of  his  doOtrine,  and  more  efpecially  at  his  affert- 
ing,  1.  That  the  Jews  themfelves  could  not  behav- 
ed without  believing  in  Jefus,  and  2.  That  the 
Heathens  by  believing  in  him.-might  partake  of 
the  fame  falvation  : he  fpends  the  whole  ninth 
chapter  upon  them  : wherein  1.  He  declares  the 
lender  love  he  had  for  them,  ver.  1 — 3.  2.  Allows 
she  great  national  privileges  thev  enjoyed  above 
H.6  any. 


[ i8o  ] 

any  people  under  heaven,  ver.  4 — 5.  3.  Anfwers 
their  grand  objection,  to  his  doctrine,  taken  from 
thejuftice  of  God,  to  their  fathers,  ver.  6 — 13. 
4.  Removes  another  objection,  taken  from  the 
juflice  of  God,  inter-weaving  all  along  ftrong  re* 
proofs  to  the  Jews,  for  priding  themfelves  on  thofe 
privileges,  which  were  owing  merely  to  the 
good  pleafure  of  God,  not  to  their  father’s  good- 
nefs,  any  more  than  their  own,  ver.  14 — 23.  5. 

Refumes  and  proves  by  fcripture  his  former  afler- 
tion,  that  many  Jews  would  be  loft,  and  many 
Heathens  faved,  ver-  24 — 29.  Andlaftiy,  fums 
up  the  general  drift  of  this  chapter,  and  indeed 
of  the  whole  epiftle.  What  Jhall  we  fay  then? 
What  is  the  conclufion  from  the  whole?  The 
fum  of  all  which  has  been  fpoken?  Why,  that 
many  Gentiles  alreadv  partake  of  the  great  falva- 
tion,  and  many  Jews  fall  fhort  of  it.  Where- 
fore ? Becaufe  they  would  not  receive  it  by  faith. 
And  whofoever  believeth  not,  cannot  be  faved: 
whereas,  whofoever  believeth  in  Chrift,  whether 
Jew  or  Gentile,  Jhall  not  be  ajliam&d. — ver. 

3°— 33- 

XXVII.  Thofe  words,  hath  not  the  potter  pow- 
er over  his  own  clay?  Are  part  of  St.  Paul’s  an- 
fwer  to  that  objection,  that  it  was  unjuft  for  God 
to  ftietv  that  mercy  to  the  Gentiles,  which  he 
with-held  from  his  own  people.  This  he  'firft 
limply  denies,  faying  God  forbid  ! And  then  ob- 

ferves. 


? 


C *81  ] 

ferves,  that  according  to  his  own  words  to  Mofes, 
God  has  a right  to  fix  the  terms  on  which  he  will 
{hew  mercy,  which  neither  the  will  nor  the  pow- 
er of  man  can  alter,  ver.  lg,  16:  and  to  with- 
draw his  mercy  from  them,  who  like  Pharaoh, 
will  not  comply  with  thofe  terms,  ver.  17.  And 
that  accordingly  he  hath  mercy  on  whom  he  will 
have  mercy,  namely,  thofe  that  truly  believe.* 
and  v<hom  he  will,  namely  obftinate  unbelievers, 
he  buffers  to  be  hardened. 

XXVIII.  But  why  then,  fay  the  objedlors,  doth 
he  find  fault  with  thofe  that  are  hardened?  For 
who  hath  refjled  his  will?  ver.  19.  To  this  in- 
folent  mifconftru&ion  of  what  he  had  laid,  the 
apoftle  firfl:  gives  a fevere  rebuke,  and  then  adds, 
[hall  ike  thing  formed fay  unto  him  that  formed  it, 
why  haft  thou  made  me  thus?  Why  hall  thou  made 
me  capable  of  falvation  only  on  thofe  terms? 
None  indeed  hath  refjled  this  wdl  of  God,  he 
that  helieveth  not,  Jhall  be  damned.  But  is  this 
any  ground  for  arraigning  his  juftice  ? Hath  not 
the  great  potter  power  over  his  own  clay?  to  make, 
or  appoint  one  fort  of  veffels,  namely,  believers, 
to  honour , and  the  others  to  dijhot  our  ? Hath  he 
not  a right  to  difiribute  eternal  in.trour  and  dtf- 
honour,  on  whatever  teims  he  pieafes?  Efpe- 
ciallv,  .confidering  the  goodnefs  and  patience  he 
Ihews,  even  towards  them  that  believe  not:  con- 
fidering 


[ i8>  ] 

fidering  that  when  they  have  provoked  him  to 
Jhezu  Ins  wrath,  and  to  make  the  power  of  his  ven- 
geance known,  yet  he  endures  uith  much  long- 
fujfering,  even  thofe  vejjcls  oj  wrath,  who  had 
before  fitted  themfelves  to  dejtruclion.  There  is 
then  no  more  room  to  reply  again  ft  God,  for 
making  his  vengeance  known  on  thofe  veffels 
of  wrath,  than  for  making  known  his  glorious 
love  on  the  veffels  of  viercy  whom  he  had  before  bv 
faith  prepared f or  glory : even  us,  whom  he  hath 
called , not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  alfo  of  the  Gen- 
tiles. 

XXIX.  I have  fpoken  more  largely  than  I de- 
ftgned,  in  order  to  fhew,  that  neither  our  Lord, 
in  theabove  mentioned  parable,  nor  St.  Paul,  in 
thefe  words,  had  any  view  to  God's  fovereign 
power,  as  the  ground  of  unconditional  reproba- 
tion. And  beware  you  go  no  further  therein, 
than  you  are  authorized  by  them.  Take  care, 
when  you  fpeak  of  thefe  high  things,  to  fpeak  as 
the  oracles  of  God.  And  if  fo,  you  will  never 
fpeak  of  the  foveveignty  of  God,  but  in  conjunc- 
tion with  his  other  attributes.  For  the  fcripture 
no  where  fpeaks  of  this  ftngle  attribute,  as  fepa- 
rate  from  the  reft.  Much  lefs  dees  it  any  where 
fpeak  of  the  fovereignty  of  God,  as  fingly  difpof- 
ing  the  eternal  Rates  of  men.  No,  no  : in  this 
awful  work,  God  proceeds  according  to  the 
known  rules  of  his  juftice  and  mercy.  But  never 

affign 


[ ‘83  ] 

affign  his  fovereignty  as  the  caufe  why  any  man 
is  punifhed  with  everlafting  deftru&ion. 

XXX.  Now  then,  are  you  not  quite  out  of 
your  way  ? You  are  not  in  the  way  which  God 
hath  revealed.  You  are  putting  eternal  happi- 
nefs  and  mifery,  on  an  unfcriptural,  and  a very 
dreadful  footing.  Make  the  cafe  your  own. 
Here  are  you,  a Tinner,  convinced  that  you  de- 
ferve  the  damnation  of  hell.  Sorrow  therefore 
and  fear  have  filled  your  heart.  And  how  fhall 
yon  be  comforted  ? By  the  promifes  of  God  ? 
But  pei haps  you  have  no  part  therein  ; for 
they  belong  only  to  the  elefh  By  the  con- 
fideration  of  his  love  and  tender  mercy  ? But 
what  are  they  to  you,  if  you  are  a reprobate? 
God  does  not  lo vt  you  at  all  : you , like  Efau,  he 
hath  hated  even  from  eternity.  What  ground 
then  can  you  have  for  the  lead  fhadow  of  hope  ? 
Why,  it  is  pofible,  (that  is  all)  that  God’s  fove- 
reign  will  may  be  on  your  fide:  pojjihly,  God 
may  fave  you,  becawle  he  will  ! O poor  encou- 
ragement to  defpairing  Tinners  ! I fear  faith  rarely 
cometh  by  hearing  this  ! 

XXXL  The  fovereignty  of  God  is  then  never 
to  be  brought  to  fu'perfede  his  jufiice.  And  this 
is  the  prefent  objeflion  againft  unconditional  re- 
probation (the  plain  confenuence  of  uncondi- 
tional eleftion ;)  it  flatly  contradifts,  indeed  ut- 
terly overthrows  the  fcripture-account  of  thfe  juf- 
tice  of  God.  This  has  been  proved  in  general 

already : 


[ *4  ] 

already  : let  us  now  weigh  a few  particulars. 
And  * 1 . The  fcripture  defcribesGod  as  the  judge 
of  the  earth.  But  how  fhall  God  in  ■ n ft  ice  judge 
the  world,  (O  confider  this,  as  in  the  prefence  of 
God,  with  reverence  and  godly  fear ! How  fliall 
God  in  juftice  judge  the  world,  ii  there  be  any 
decree  of  reprobation  ? On  thisfuppofition,  what 
fhould  tliofe  on  the  left-hand  be  condemned  for  ? 
For  their  having  done  evil?  They  could  not  help 
it.  There  never  was  a time  when  they  could 
have  helped  it.  God,  you  fay,  of  old  ordained 
them  to  this  condemnation.  And  who  hath  rcjijled 
his  will?  He  fold  them,  you  fay,  to  work  wicked - 
nefs,  even  from  their  mother's  womb.  He  gave 
them  up  to  a reprobate  mind , or  ever  they  hung 
upon  their  another  s breajl.  Shall  he  then  con- 
demn them  for  what  they  could  not  help  ? Shall 
the  juft,  the  holy  one  of  Ifrael,  adjudge  millions 
of  men  to  everlafting  pain,  becaufe  their  blood 
moved  in  their  veins  ? Nay  this  they  might  have 
helped  by  putting  an  end  to  their  own  lives.  But 
could  they  even  thus  have  efcaped  from  Gn  ? Not 
without  that  grace  which  you  fuppofe  God  had 
abfolutely  determined  never  to  give  them.  And 
yet  you  fuppofe  him  to  fend  them  into  eternal 
fire,  for  not  efcaping  from  fin  ! That  is,  in  plain 
terms,  for  not  having  that  grace,  which  God  had 
decreed  they  fhould  never  have  ! O Grange  juftice  1 
What  a pifture  do  you  draw  of  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth  ? 


XXXII, 


[ l85  ] 

XXXII.  Are  they  not  rather  condemned,  for 
not  doing  good,  according  to  thofe  folemn  words 
of  the  great  Judge,  Depart,  ye  curfed — For  I was 
an  hungered  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat : I was  thirjly  . 
and  ye  gave  me  no  drink  ; a Jlr  anger,  and  ye  took 
me  not  in  : I was  naked  and  ye  cloathed  me  not ; 
Jick  and  inprifon,  and  ye  vifited  me  not.  Then  Jhall 

they  anjiver But  how  much  better  an  anfwer 

do  you  put  into  their  mouths?  *Upon  your  fup- 
pofition,  might  they  not  fay  (O  confider  it  well  in 
meeknefs  and  fear!)  Lord,  we  might  have  done 
the  outward  work : but  thou  knoweft,  it  would 
have  but  increafed  our  damnation.  We  might 
have  fed  the  hungry,  given  drink  to  the  thirfty, 
and  covered  the  naked  with  a garment.  But  all 
thefe  works,  without  thy  fpecial  grace,  which  we 
never  had,  nor  poffibly  could  have  (feeing  thou 
haft  eternally  decreed  to  with-hold  it  from  us) 
would  only  have  been  fplendid  fins.  They  would 
only  have  heated  the  furnace  of  hell,  feven  times 
hotter  than  before.  Upon  your  fuppofition, 
might  they  not  fay,  “ Righteous  art  thou,  O 
Lord,  yet  let  us  plead  with  thee.  O why  doft 
thou  condemn  us  for  not  doing  good?  Was  it 
poffible  for  us,  to  do  any  thing  well  ? Did  we 
ever  abufe  the  power  of  doing  good  ? We  never 
received  it,  and  that  thou  knoweft.  Wilt  thou 
the  Holy  One,  the  juft,  condemn  us  for  not  do- 
ing, what  we  never  had  the  power  to  do  ? Wilt 
thou  condemn  us  for  not  calling  down  the  ftars 

from 


[ *86  ] 

from  heaven?  For  not  holding  the  winds  in  our 
fift  ? Why  it  was  as  polfible  for  us  to  do  this,  as 
to  do  any  work  acceptable  in  thy  fight!  O Lord, 
correfl  us,  but  with  judgment ! And  before  thou 
plungeflus  iuto  evei  lading  fire,  let  us  know,  how 
it  was  ever  poflible  for  us  to  efcape  the  damnation 
of  hell.” 

XXXIII.  Or  how  could  they  have  efcaped 
(fuppofe  you  affign  that,  asthecaufe  of  their  con- 
demnation) from  inward  fin?  From  evil  defires?  ! 
From  unholy  tempers  and  vile  affe&ions  ? Were 
they  ever  able  to  deliver  their  own  fouls  ? to  ref- 
cue  themfelves  from  this  inward  hell  ? If  fo,  their 
not  doing  it  may  juftly  be  laid  to  their  charge,  and  t 
would  leave  them  without  excufe.  But  it  was  not  I 
fo:  they  never  were  able  to  deliver  their  own  fouls. 
They  never  had  power  to  refcue  themfelves 
from  the  hands  of  thofe  bofom  enemies.  This  i 
talent  was  never  put  into  their  hands.  How  then 
can  they  be  condemned,  for  hiding  in  the  earth  ? , 
for  non-improvement  of  what  they  never  had  ? i 
Who  is  able  to  purify  a corrupt  heart;  to  bring  a 
clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ? Is  man,  mere  man 
fufficient  for  this?  No  certainly.  God  alone. 
To  him  only  can  the  polluted  of  heart,  fay,  Lord,  j 
if  thou  wilt  thou  canjl  make  me  clean.  But  what  if  J 
he  anfwer,  “ I will  not,  becaufe  I will  not:  be 
thou  unclean  dill.”  Will  God  doom  that  man  1 
to  the  bottomlefs  pit,  becaufe  of  that  uncleannefs,  ; 

which 


[ *87  ] 

which  he  could  not  favehimfelf  from,  and  which 
God  could  have  faved  him  from,  but  would 
not  ? Verily  were  an  earthly  king  to  execute  fuch 
juftice  as  this  upon  his  helplefs  fubje&s,  it  might 
well  he  expended  that  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord, 
would  foon  fweep  him  from  the  face  of  the 
earth. 

XXXIV.  Perhaps  you  will  fay,  they  are  not 
condemned  fora&ual,  but  for  original  fin.  What 
do  you  mean  by  this  term  ? The  inward  corrup- 
tion of  our  nature  ? If  fo,  it  has  been  fpoken  of 
before.  Or  do  you  mean,  the  fin  which  Adam 
committed  in  paradife  ? That  this  is  imputed  to 
all  men,  1 allow  ; yea  that  by  reafon  hereof, 
the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travelletk  in  pain 
together  until  now.  But  that  any  will  be  damn- 
ed for  this  alone,  I allow  not,  till  you  fhew  me 
where  it  is  written.  Bring  me  plain  proof  from 
feripture,  and  I fubmit.  But  till  then  I utterly 
deny  it. 

XXXV.  Should  you  not  rather  fay,  that  un- 
heliefis  the  damning  fin?  And  that  thofe  who 
are  condemned  in  that  day,  will  be  therefore  con- 
demned, becaufethey  believed  not  on  the  name  of 
the  only-begotten  Son  of  God  ? But  could  they 
believe  ? Was  not  this  faith,  both  the  gift  and 
the  work  of  God  in  the  foul?  And  was  it  not 
a gift  which  he  had  eternally  decreed,  never  to 
give  them  ? Was  it  not  a work  which  he  w'as  of 

old 


[ i88  ] 

old  unchangeably  determined,  never  to  work  in 
their  fouls  ? Shall  thefe  men  then  be  condemned, 
becaufe  God  would  not  work  ; becaufe  thev  did 
not  receive  what  God  would  not  give : could 
they  “ ungrafp  the  hold  of  his  right  hand,  or 
force  omnipotence  ?” 

* XXXVI.  There  is,  over  and  above,  a 
peculiar  difficulty  here.  You  fay,  Chrift  did  not 
die  for  thofe  men.  But  if  fo,  there  was  an  im* 
poffibility,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,  that 
they  ffiould  ever  favingly  believe.  For  what 
is  faving  faith,  but  “ a confidence  in  God  thro’ 
Chrift  that  loved  me,  and  gave  himfelf  forme  ?'' 
Loved  th ee,  thou  reprobate  ! Gave  himfelf  for 
thee?  Away  ! Thou  haft  neither  part  nor  lot 
herein.  Thou  believe  in  Chrift,  thou  accurfed 
fpirit ! Damned  or  ever  thou  wert  born ! There 
never  was  any  objedl  for  thy  faith  : there  never 
was  any  thing  for  thee  to  believe.  God  himfelf 
(thus  mult  you  fpeak,  to  be  confiflent  with  your- 
felf)  with  all  his  omnipotence,  could  not  make 
thee  believe  Chrift  atoned  for  thy  fins,  unlefs  he 
had  made  thee  believe  a lie. 

XXXVII.  If  then  God  be  juft,  there  cannot, 
on  your  fcheme,  be  any  judgment  to  come. 
We  may  add,  nor  any  future  ftate,  either  of 
reward  or  punifnment.  If  there  be  fuch  a ftate, 
God  will  therein  render  to  every  man  according  to 
his  works.  To  them  who  by  patient  continuance  in 

well- 


[ l89  3 

well-doing  feel  for  glory  and  honour  and  immor- 
tality, eternal  life  : but  to  them  that  do  not  obey 
the  truth,  but  obey  uririghteoufnefs , indignation, 
and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguijh  upon  every  foul 
of  man  that  doelh  evil. 

* But  how  is  this  reconcileabie  with  your 
fcheme  ? You  fay,  the  reprobates  cannot  but  do 
evil,  and  that  the  eleft,  from  the  day  of  God’s 
power,  cannot  but  continue  in  well-doing.  You 
ftippofe  all  this  is  unchangeably  decreed  : in  con- 
fequence  whereof,  God  afts  irrefiflibly  on  the  one, 
and  Satan  on  the  other.  Then,  it  is  impofiible 
for  either  one  or  the  other,  to  help  ailing  as 
they  do;  or  rather,  to  help  being  ailed  upon,  in 
the  manner  wherein  they  are.  For  if  we  fpeak 
properly,  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  be 
faid  to  aft  at  all.  Can  a hone  be  faid  to  aft, 
when  it  is  thrown  out  of  a fling  ? Or  a ball,  when 
it  is  projefted  from  a cannon  ? No  more  can  a 
man  be  faid  to  aft,  if  he  be  only  moved  by  a 
force  he  cannot  refill.  But  if  the  cafe  be  thus, 
you  leave  no  room,  either  for  reward  or  punifh- 
ment.  Shall  the  Rone  be  rewarded,  for  rifing 
from  the  fling,  or  punifhed  for  falling  down  ? 
Shall  the  cannon-ball  be  rewarded  for  flying 
towards  the  fun,  or  punifhed  for  receding  from 
it  ? As  incapable  of  either  punifhment  or  reward 
is  the  man,  who  is  fuppofed  to  be  impelled 
by  a force  he  cannot  refiR.  Juflice  can 
have  no  place  in  rewarding  or  punifhing 
mere  machines,  driven  to  and  fro  by  an  external 

force. 


[ *9°  ] 

force.  So  that  your  fuppofition  of  God’s  or- 
daining from  eternity  whatfoever  Oiould  be  done 
to  the  end  of  the  world  ; as  w'ell  as  that  of 
God’s  adiing  iirefiftibly  in  the  eleft,  and 
Satan’s  a£ling  irrefillibly  in  the  reprobates  ; ut- 
terly overthrow's  the  fcripture-do£l:rine  of  re- 
wards and  punifhments,  as  well  as  of  a judgment 
to  come. 

XXXVIII.  Thus  ill  does  that  ele&ion  which 
implies  reprobation,  agree  with  the  fcripture 
account  of  God’s  juflice.  And  does  it  agree  any 
better  with  his  truth  ? How  will  you  reconcile 
it  with  thofe  plain  affertions  [Ezek  xviii.  23, 
&c.)  have  I any  pleajure  at  alt,  that  the  wicked 
Jhould  die,  Jaith  the  Lord  God  ? And  not  that  he 
JJiould  return  from  his  ways  and  live  ? Cajl  away 
from  you  all  your  tranfgreffons  whereby  ye  have 
tranfgrejfed ■ — for  why  will  ye  die,  0 houfe  of Ifrael? 
For  I have  no  pleafure  in  the  death  of  him  that 
dieth,  faith  the  Lord : Wherefore  turn  your  fives, 
and  live  ye. 

Ezek.  xxxiii.  it,  &c.  As  1 live,  faith  the 
Lord  God , I have  no  pleafure  in  the  death  oj  the 
wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and 
live.  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways;  for 
why  will  ye  die,  0 houfe  of  IJrael? 

XXXIX.  But  perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ Thefe 
ought  to  be  limited  and  explained  bv  other  paf- 
fages  of  fcripture  ; wherein  this  doflrine  is  as 
clearly  affirmed,  as  it  is  denied  in  thefe  ?”  I 

mull 


[ *9*  ] 

mufl  anfwer,  very  plain  ; if  this  were  true;, 
we  mu  ft  give  up  all  the  fcriptures  together  : nor 
would  the  infidels  allow  the  bible  fo  honourable  a 
title,  as  that  of  a cunningly  devifed  fable.  But  it 
is  not  true.  It  has  no  colour  of  truth.  It  is  ab- 
folutely,  notorioufly  falfe.  To  tear  up  the 
very  roots  of  reprobation,  and  of  all  do&rines 
that  have  a neceflary  connexion  therewith,  God 
declares  in  his  word  thefe  three  things,  and 
that  explicitly,  in  fo  many  terms,  1.  Chrf  died 
for  all,  (2  Cor.  v.  14.)  namely,  all  that  were  dead 
in  fin,  as  the  words  immediately  following  fix 
the  fenfe  : here  is  the  faff  affirmed.  2.  He  is  (he 
propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world,  (1 
John  ii.  2.)  even  of  all  thofe  for  whom  be  died  ; 
here  is  the  confequence  of  his  dying  for  all.  And 
3.  He  died for  all,  that  they  fiould  not  live  unto 
themfelves,  but  unto  him  which  died for  them,  (2 
Cor.  v.  13.)  that  they  might  be  faved  from  their 
fins : here  is  the  defign,  the  end  of  his  dying 

I for  them.  Now  fhew  me  the  fcriptures  wherein 
God  declares  in  equally  exprefs  terms,  1.  Chrif 
did  not  die  for  all,  but  for  fome  only.  2.  Chrif 
is  not  the  propitiation  for  the  fns  of  the  whole 
world ; and,  3.  He  did  not  die  for  all,  at  leaft, 
not  with  that  intent,  that  they  Jhould  live  unto 
him  who  died  for  than.  Shew  me,  I fay,  the 
fcriptures  that  affirm  thefe  three  things,  in  equally 
exprefs  terms.  You  know,  there  are  none.  Nor 
is  it  poffile  to  evade  the  force  of  thofe  above  re- 
cited, but  by  fupplying  in  number,  what  is  want- 
ing 


[ *92  ] 

ing  in  weight ; by  heaping  abundance  of  texts 
together,  whereby  (though  none  of  them  fpeak 
home  to  the  point)  the  patrons  of  that. opinion, 
dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  unwary,  and  quite  over- 
lay the  underftandirig  both  of  tkemfclves,  and 
thofe  that  hear  them. 

XL.  To  proceed.  What  an  account  does 
this  dodfrine  give,  of  the  fincerity  of  God  in  a 
thoufand  declarations,  fuch  as  thofe.  0 that  j 
there  were  Juch  an  heart  in  them , that  they  would 
fear  me,  and  keep  my  commandments  always  ! That 
it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with  their  chil-  < 
dr en  jor  ever,  Deut.  v.  29.  My  people  would  riot  ' 
hear  my  voice,  and  Ifrael  would  not  obey  me.  So  | 
I gave  them  up  unto  their  own  heart's  hf Is,  and 
let  them  follow  their  own  imaginations.  0 that  my  j 
people  would  have  hearkened  unto  me  '.For  if  Ifrael  a 
had  walked  in  my  ways,  I fhould  foon  have  put 
down  their  enemies,  and  turned  my  hand  againjl  ] 
their  adverfaries,  Pfal.  lxxxi.  12,  &.c.  And  all  , 
this  time,  you  fuppofe  God  had  unchangeably  J 
oidained,  that  there  never  fhould  be  fuch  an 
heart  in  them ! That  it  never  fhould  be  poflible 
for  the  people  whom  he  thus  feemed  to  lament 
over,  to  hearken  unto  him,  or  to  walk  in  his  ' 
way  s ! 

XLI.  Our  blefTed  Lord  does  indifputably  com- 
mend and  invite  all  men  every  where  to  repent. 
He  calleth  all.  He  fends  his  ambafladors,  in 

his 


[ *93  J 

his  name,  To  preach  thegofpel  to  every  creatute.  He 
him  felf  preached  deliverance  to  the  captives , without 
any  him  of  reftriHion  or  limitation.  But  now,  in 
what  manner  do  you  reprefent  him,  while  he  is 
employed  in  this  work  ? You  fuppofe  him  to  be 
(landing  at  the  prifon  doors,  having  the  keys 
thereof  in  his  hands,  and  to  be  continually  in- 
viting the  prifoners  to  come  forth,  commanding 
them  to. accept  of  that  invitation,  urging  every 
motive  which  can  poffibly  induce  them  to  com- 
ply with  that  command  ; adding  the  molt  pre- 
cious promifes,  if  they  obey,  the  moll  dreadful 
threatnings,  if  they  obey  not : and  all  this  time 
you  fuppofe  him  to  be  unalterably  determined  in 
himfelf,  never  to  open  the  doors  for  them  ! Even 
while  he  is  crying,  Come  ye,  come  ye,  from  that 
evil  place  ; for  why  will  ye  die , 0 houfe  of  If  rad ! 
“ Why  ! (might  one  of  them  reply)  becaufe  we 
cannot  help  it.  We  cannot  help  ourfelves  P And 
thou  wilt  not  help  us.  It  is  not  in  our  power  to 
break  the  gates  of  brafs,  and  it  k not  thv  plea- 
fure  to  open  them.  Why  will  ye  die  ? We  mull 
die  : becaufe  it  is  not  thy  will  to  fave  us.:J  Alas  ! 
my  brethren  ! What  kind  of  fincerity  is  this, 
which  you  afcribe  to  God  our  Saviour  ? 

XLII.  So  ill  do  elefiion  and  reprobation 
agree  with  the  truth  and  fincerity  of  God.  But 
do  they  not  agree  lealt  of  all,  with  the  fcrip- 
tural  account  of  his  love  and  goodnefs  ! That 
attribute  which  God  peculiarly  claims,  where- 
Vol.  XX.  I 


in 


[ *94  ] 

in  he  glories  above  all  ihe  reft.  It  is  not  written, 

“ God  isjullice,  or  God  is  truth,”  (although  he 
isjult  and  true  in  all  his  ways.)  But  it  is  written, 
God  is  love,  love  in  the  abltraft,  without 
bounds  ; and  ther  eis  no  end  of  his  goodnejs.  His 
love  extends  even  to  thole  who  neither  love  nor 
fear  him.'  He  is  good,  even  to  the  evil  and  the 
unthankful : yea,  without  any  exception  or  li- 
mitation, to  all  the  children  of  -men.  For  the 
Lord  is  loving  (or  good)  to  every  man,  and  his 
mercy  is  over  all  his  works. 

* But  how  is  God  good  or  loving  to  a reprobate, 
or  one  that  is  not  circled  P (You  mav  chufe 
either  term  ; for  if  none  but  the  unconditionally 
eleflare  faved,  it  comes  precifely  to  the  fame 
thing.)  You  cannot  fay.  he  is  an  ohjeft  of  the 
love  orgoodnefs  of  God,  with  regard  to  his  eter-  1 
nal  hate  whom  he  created  (fays  Mr.  Calvin  f 
plainly  and  fairly)  in  vitce  contumeham  et  mortis 
exitium,  to  live  a reproach,  and  die  ever lajhngly. 
Surely  no  one  can  dream,  that  the  goodnefs  of 
God  is  at  all  concerned  with  this  man’s  eternal 
hate.  “ However  God  is  good  to  him  in  this 
world,”  What  ! when  by  reafon  of  God’s  un- 
changeable decree,  it  had  been  good  for  this  man, 
never  to  have  been  born  ? When  his  very  birth 
was  a curfe,  not  a blefTing  ? “ Well,  but  he 
now  enjoys  many  of  the  gifts  of  God,  both  gifts 
of  nature  and  of  providence.  He  has  food  and 
raiment,  -and  comforts  of  various  kinds.  And 
are  not  all  thefe  great  bleffings  ?”  No  not  to  him. 

At 


[ *95  ] 

At  the  price  he  is  to  pay  for  them,  every  one 
of  thefe  alfo  is  a curfe.  Every  one  of  thefe 
comforts,  is  by  an  eternal  decree,  to  coft  him 
a thoufand  pangs  in  hell.  For  every  moment’s 
pleafure  which  he  now  enjoys,  he  is  to  fuffer  the 
torments  of  more  than  a thoufand  years  : for  the 
fmoke  of  that  pit  which  is  preparing  for  him, 
afcendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever.  God  knew 
this  would  be  the  fruit  of  whatever  he  fliould 
enjoy,  before  the  vapour  of  life  fled  away.  He 
deligned  it  fliould.  It  was  his  verypurpofe,  in 
giving  him  thofe  enjoyments.  So  that  by  all 
thefe  (according  to  your  account)  he  is  In  truth 
and  reality,  only  fatting  the  ox  for  the  flaughter. 
“ Nay,  Jiut  God  gives  him  grace  too.'’  Yes ; 
butvvhatkind  of  grace  ? Saving  grace,  you  own, 
he  h as  none:  none  of  a fa ving  nature.  And 
the  common  grace  he  has,  was  not  given  with 
any  defign  to  fave  his  foul  : nor  with  any  defign 
to  do  him  any  good  at  all ; but  only  to  reflrain 
him  from  hurting  the  clecf.  So  far  from  doing 
him  good,  that  this  grace  alfo  neceflarily  in- 
-creafes  his  damnation.  And  God  knows  this, 
you  fay ; and  deligned  it  fhould  : it  was  one 
great  end  for  which  he  gave  it  ! Then  I defire  to 
know,  how  is  God  good  or  loving  to  this  rnan  ■ 
Either  with  regard  to  time  or  eternity  ? 

XLIII,  * Let  us  fuppofe  a particular  inftance. 
Here  Hands  a man,  who  is  reprobated  from  all 
eternit  y ; or,  if  you  would  exprefs  it  more 
I 2 fraoothly, 


ffnoothly,one  who  is  not  defied,  whom  God  eter- 
nally decreed  to  pa-fs  by.  Thou  haft  nothing 
therefore  to  expert  from  God  after  death,  but 
to  be  call  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brim- 
llone  : God  having  configned  thy  unborn  foui  .. 
to  hell,  by  a decree  which  cannot  pafs  away. 
And  form  the  time  thou  waft  born  under  the 
irrevocable  curfe  of  God,  thou  canll:  have  no 
peace.  For  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked, 
and  fuch  thou  art  doomed  to  continue,  even 
from  thy  mother’s  womb.  Accordingly  God 
giveth  thee  of  this  world’s  goods,  on  purpofe 
to  inhance  thy  damnation.  He  giveth  thee 
now  fubftance  or  friends,  in  order  here- 
after to  heap  the  more  coals  of  fire  upon  thy 
head,  lie  filleth  thee  with  food,  he  maketh 
thee  fat  and  well -likintj,  to  make  thee  a more 
ipecious  fucrifice  to  his  vengeance.  Good-nature, 
generofity,  a good  underflanding,  various  know- 
ledge it  maybe, oreloquence, are  the  flowers  where- 
with  he  adorneth  thee,  thou  poor  viflim,  before 
thou  art  brought  to  the  {laughter.  Thou  haft  grace 
too!  but  what  grace  ? Not  faving  grace.  That  is 
not  for  thee  but  lor  the  ele£l  only.  Thine  mav  pro- 
per ly  be  termed  damning  grace;  fince  it  is  not 
only  fuch  in  the  event,  but  in  the  intention.  Thou 
received!!  it  of  God  for  that  very  end,  that  thou 
migheft  receive  the  greater  damnation.  It  was  given 
not  to  convert  thee,  but  only  to  convince  ; not 
to  make  thee  without  fin,  but  without  excufe  ; 
not  to  deftrov,  but  to  arm  the  worm  that  never 
dietb,  and  to  blow  up  the  fire  that  never  {ball  be 
quenched.  XLIV.  I 


C *97  3 

XLIV.  Now  I befeech  you  to  confider  calmly, 
how  is  God  good  or  loving  to  this  man  ? Is  not 
this  fuch  love  as  makes  your  blood  run  cold  ? 
As  caufes  the  ears  of  him  that  heareth  to  tingle  ? 
And  can  you  believe,  there  is  that  man  on  earth 
or  in  hell,  who  can  truly  tell  God,  “ Thus  haft 
thou  done  ?”  Can  you  think,  that  the  loving, 
the  merciful  God  ever  dealt  thus  with  any  foul 
which  he  hath  made  ? But  you  muft,  and  do  be- 
lieve this,  if  you  believe  unconditional  eleftion. 
For  it  holds  reprobation  in  its  bofom  : they  never 
were,  never  can  be  divided.  Take  then  your 
choice.  If  for  the  fake  of  election  you  will  fwal- 
low  reprobation,  well.  But  if  you  cannot  digeft 
this,  you  muft  neceflarily  give  up  unconditional 
elefHon. 

XLVI.  “ But  you  cannot  do  this : for  then 
you  fhould  he  called  a Pelagian,  an  Arminian, 
and  what  not  ?”  And  are  you  afraid  of  hard 
names  ? Then  you  have  not  begun  to  be  a dif- 
ciple  of  Jefus  Chrift.  “ No,  that  is  not  the  cafe. 
But  you  are  afraid,  if  you  do  not  hold  eleftion, 
you  muft  hold  free-will,  and  fo  rob  God  of  his 
glory  in  man’s  falvation.” 

1 anfwer,  i.  Many  of  the  greateft  maintained 
of  eleftion,  utterly  deny  the  confequence,  and  do 
not  allow,  that  even  natural  free-will  in  man,  is 
repugnant  to  God’s  glory.  Thefe  accordingly 
alfert,  that  every  man  living  has'a  meafure  cf 
natural  free-will.  So  the  affembly  of  divines  (and 
I 3-  therein 


[ >98  j 

therein  the  body  of  Calvinilts  both  in  England  • 
and  Scotland)  “ God  hath  endued  the  will  of 
man  v/ith  that  natural  liberty,  that  is  neither 
forced,  nor,  by  an  abfolute  necefliiv  of  nature, 
determined  to  do  good  or  evil  (chap,  ix.)  And 
this  ihev  alfert  of  man  in  his  fallen  ffate,  even 
before  he  receives  the  grace  of  God. 

But  I do  not  carry  free-will  fo  far  ; (I  mean 
not  in  moral  things)  natural  free-will,  in  the  pre- 
fent  (late  of  mankind,  Ido  not  underfland,  I 
onlyaflert,  that  there  is  a meafure  of  free-will 
Jupernatur  ally  reflored  to  every  man,  together 
with  that  fupernatural light,  which  enlightens  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world.  But  indeed, 
whether  this  be  natural  or  no,  as  to  your  objec- 
tion it  matters  not.  For  that  equally  lies  againfl 
both,  againfl  any  free-will  of  any  kind:  your  af- 
fertion  being  thus,  “ If  man  has  any  free-will, 
God  cannot  have  the  whole  glory  of  his  falva- 
tion.”  Or,  “ It  is  not  fo  much  for  the  glory  of 
God,  to  fave  man  as  a free-agent,  put  into  a ca- 
pacity of  concurring  with  his  grace  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  refilling  it  on  the  other  : as  to  fave 
him  in  the  way  of  a neceffarv  agent,  by  a power 
•which  he  cannot  poflibly  refill.” 

XLVI.  With  regard  to  the  former  of  thefe 
afferlions,  “ 11  man  has  any  free-will,  then  God 
cannot  have  the  whole  glory  of  his  falvation,”  is 
your  meaning  this  : “ If  man  has  any  power  to 
work  out  lus  own  falvation,  then  God  cannot 

have 


C 199  J 

have  the  whole  glory  ? If  it  be,  I rauft  alk 
again,  what  do  you  mean,  by  God’s  “ having 
the  whole  glory  ?”  Do  you  mean,.  “ his  doing 
the  whole  work,  without  any  concurrence  on 
man’s  part  ?”  If  fo,  your  aifertion  is,  “ If  man 
do  at  all  ivork  together  with  God,  in  working  out 
his  own  Jalvation,  then  God  does  not  do  the 
whole  work,  without  man’s  working  together 
with  him."  Molt  true,  molt  fure  : but  cannot 
you  fee,  how  God  neverthelefs  may  have  all  the 
glory  ? Why  the  very  power  to  work  together 
with  him,  was  from  God.  Therefore  to  him  is 
all  the  glory.  Has  not  even  experience  taught 
you  this  ? Have  you  not  often  felt,  in  a particu- 
lar temptation,  power  either  to  refill  or  yield  to 
the  grace  of  God  ? And  when  you  have  yielded 
to  work  together  with  him,  did  you  not  find  it 
very  pofiible  notwithllanding,  to  give  him  all 
the  glory  P So  that  both  experience  and  ferip- 
ture  are  again!!  you  here,  and  make  it  clear  to 
every  impartial  inquirer,  that  though  man  has 
freedom  to  work  or  not  work  together  with  God, 
yet  may  God  have  the  whole  glory  of  his  falva- 
tion. 

XLVII.  If  then  you  fay,  “ we  aferibe  to  God 
alone,  the  whole  glory  of  our  falvation.”  I an- 
fwer,  So  do  we  too.  If  you  add,  “ Nay,  but 
we  affirm,  that  God  alone  does  the  whole  w'ork, 
without  man’s  working  at  all in  one  fenfe,  we 
tallow  this  alfo.  We  allow,  it  is  the  work  of 
I 4 God 


[ 200  ] 

God  alone,  tojuftiry,  to  fanctify,  and  to  glorify, 
which  three  comprehend  the  whole  offalvation. 
Yet  we  cannot  allow,  that  man  can  only  refift, 
and  not  in  any  wifez vork  together  with  God  : or, 
that  God  is  fo  the  whole  worker  of  our  falvation, 
as  to  exclude  man's  working  at  all.  This  I dare 
not  fay  : for  I cannot  prove  it  by  feripture  : nay, 
it  is  flatly  contrary  thereto  : for  the  feripture  is 
exprefs,  that  (having  received  power  from  God) 
we  are  to  work  out  our  com  fahation  : and  that 
(after  the  work  of  God  is  begun  in  our  fouls)  we 
are  workers  together  with  him. 

XLVIII.  Your  objediion  propofed  in  another 
from,  is  this  : “ It  is  not  fo  much  for  the  glory 
of  God,  to  fave  man  as  afree-agent,  put  into  a 
capacity  of  either  concurring  with,  or  refilling 
his  grace;  as  to  fave  him  in  the  way  of  a ne- 
ceffary  agent,  by  a power  which  he  cannot  poflibly 
refift.” 

O that  the  Lord  would  anfwer  for  himfelf 
That  he  would  arife  and  maintain  his  own  caufe  !. 
That  he  would  no  longer  fuffer  his  fervants,  few 
as  they  are,  to  weaken  one  another’s  bands,  and 
to  be  wearied  not  only  with  the  contradithon  of 
finners,  but  even  of  thofe  who  are  in  a meafure 
faved  from  fin  ! TVo  is  me  that  1 am  conjlrained 
to  dwell  with  Mejheck  ! Among  them  that  are  ene- 
mies to  peace!  I labour for  peace:  but  when  If  peak 

thereof 


[ 201  ] 

thereof  they  fall  make  t hen f elves  ready  for 
battle. 

XLIX.  * If  it  mull  be  then,  let  us  look  one  ano- 
ther in  the  face.  How  is  it  more  lor  the  glory  of 
God,  to  fave  man  irrefiflibly,  than  to  fave  him 
as  a Iree-agent,  by  fuch  grace  as  he  may  either 
concur  with  or  refill  ? I fear  you  have  a confuf- 
ed,  unfcriptural  notion  of  “ the  glory  of  God.'’ 
What  do  you  mean  by  that  expreflion  P The 
glory  of  God,  Rriflly  fpeaking  is  his  glorious  ef- 
fence  and  his  attributes,  which  have-been  ever 
of  old.  And  this  glory  - admits  of  no  increafe, 
being  the  fame  yeflerday,  to-day;  and  for  ever. 
But  the  feripture  frequently  fpeaks  of  the  glory 
of  God,  in  a fenfe  fomething  different  from 
this:  meaning  thereby,  the . manifellation  of 
his  eflential  glory,  of  his  eternal  power  and  god- 
head, and  of  his  glorious  attributes,  more  ef-_ 
pecially  his  jullice,  mercy,  and  truth.  And  it 
is  in  this  fenfe  alone,  that  the  glory  of  God,  is 
faid  to  be  advanced  by  man.  Now  then  this 
is  the  point  which  it  lies  on  you  to  prove,  “ that 
it  does  more  eminently  manifelt  the  glorious 
attributes  of  God,  more  efpecially  his  jullice, 
mercy,  and  truth,  to  fave  man  irrefiflibly,  than 
to  fave  him  by  fuch  grace  as  it  is  in  bis  power 
either  to  concur  with,  or  to  refill.” 

L.  But  you  mull  not  imagine,  I will  be  fo 
unwife,  as  to  engage  you  here  on  this  fingle 
I 5 point. 


[ 202  ] 

point.  I fhallnot  now  difpute  (which  yet  might 
be  done]  whether  falvation  by  irrefiflible  grace 
(which  indeed  makes  man  a mere  machine  and 
confequently  no  more  rewardable  than  punifh- 
ablej  whether  I fay,  falvation  by  irrefiflible 
grace  confidered  apart  from  its  confequences, 
manifefl  the  glory  of  God  more  or  lefs,  than 
falvation  by  grace  which  may  be  refilled.  Not 
fo  : (but  by  the  affiflance  of  God)  I fhall  take 
your  whole  fcheme  together  ; irrefiflible  grace 
fur  the  elebt,  implying  the  denial  of  faving 
grace  (o  all  others:  or  unconditional,  eleblion 
with  its  infeparable  companion,  unconditional 
reprobation 

Tbe  cafe  is  clearly  this.  You  may  drive  me, 
on  the  one  hand,  unlefs  I will  contradibl  rnyfeit 
or  retrabl  my  piinciples,  to  own  a meafure  of 
free-will  in  every  man  ^tho’  uot  by  nature,  as 
the  alfembly  of  divines.)  And  on  the  other 
hand,  I can  drive  you,  and  every  aflertor  of 
unconditional  elebiion,  unlefs  you  will  con-  p 
jradibt  yourfelf,  or  retraft  your  piinciples,  to 
own  unconditional  reprobation. 

Stand  forth  then,  free-will,  on  the  one  fide, 
and  reprobation  on  the  other.  And  let  us  fee, 
whether  the  one  fcheme  attended  with  the  ab- 
furdity  (as  you  think  it)  of  free-will  ; or  the 
other  fcheme,  attended  with  the  abfurdity  of 
reprobation,  be  the  more  defenflble.  Let  us  fee 
(if  it  pleafe  the  Father  of  lights,  to  open  the  eyes 
ef  our  undei  (landing)  which  of  thefe  is  more  for 

the 


[ 203  ] 


the  glory  of  God,  for  the  difplay  of  his  glorious 
attributes,  for  the  manifeftation  of  his  wifdom, juf- 
tice  and  mercy  to  the  fons  of  men. 

LI.  Firft,  his  wifdom.  If  man  be  in  fome 
meafure  free,  if  by  that  light  which  lighteth  every 
man  that  comes  into  the  zuor Id,  there  be  fet  before 
him  life  and  death,  good  and  evil-,  then  how  glo- 
rioufly  does  the  manifold  wifdom  of  God  appear 
in  the  whole  ceconomy  of  man's  falvation  ? * Be- 
ing willing  that  all  men  fhould  be  faved,  yet  not 
willing  to  force  them  thereto  ; willing  that  men 
fhould  be  faved,  yet  not  as  trees  or  Hones,  but  as 
men,  as  reafonable  creatures,  endued  with  un- 
derfranding  to  difcern  what  is  good,  and  liberty 
either  to  accept  or  refufe  it:  how  does  he  fuit  the 
whole  fcherne  of  his  difpenfations  to  this  his 
•3-£&0£c-!c,  his  plan,  the  counfel of  his  will?  His  firft 
flep  is,  to  enlighten  the  underftanding,  by  that 
general  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  To  this  he 
adds  many  fecrct  reproofs,  if  they  a£l  contrary 
to  this  light:  many  inward  convictions,  which 
there  is  not  a man  on  earth  who  has  not  often  felt. 
At  other  times  he  gently  moves  thefr  wills,  he 
draws  and  wooes  them  (as  it  were)  to  walk  in  the 
light.  He  infills  into  their  hearts  good  defires, 
though  perhaps  they  know  not  from  whence  they 
come.  Thus  far  he  proceeds  with  all  the  children 
of  men,  yea  even  with  thofe  who  have  not-  the 
knowledge  of  his  written  word.  But  in  this, 
what  a field  of  wifdom  is  difplay  eel,  fuppofe  man 
L 6 to 


[ 2°4  ] 

to  be  in  fome  degree  a free  agent  ? How  is  every 
part  of  it  fnited  to  this  end  ? To  fave  man,  as 
man;  to  fet  life  and  death  before  him,  and  then 
perfuade  (not  force)  him  to  chufe  life  : Accord- 
ing to  this  grand  purpofe  of  God,  a perfefd  rule 
is  firll  fet  before  him,  to  ferve  as  a lantern  to  his 
feel,  and  alight  in  all  his  paths.  This  is  offered 
to  him  in  it  form  of  a law,  inforced  with  the  drong- 
cd  fanftions,  the  mod: glorious  rewards  for  them 
that  obey,  the  fevered  penalties  on  them  that 
break  it.  To  reclaim  thefe,  God  ufes  all  manner 
of  wavs;  he  tries  every  avenue  of  their  fouls.  He 
applies  fometimes  to  their  underdanding,  (hew- 
ing them  the  folly  of  their  fins:  fometimes  to 
their  affeHions,  tenderly  expodulating  with 
ihem  for  their  ingratitude,  and  even  condescend- 
ing to  afk,  what  could  I have  done  for  you  (con- 
fident with  my  eternal  purpofe,  not  to  force  you) 
which  I have  not  done?  He  intermixes,  fome- 
times threats,  except  ye  repent,  ye Jhall  all  likewije 
perifh:  fometimes  promiles,  your  fins  an  d your  iniqui- 
ties will  I remember  no  more.  * Now  whatwifdom 
is  feen  in  all  this,  if  man  may  indeed  chufe  life 
cr  death  ? But  if  every  man  be  unalterably  con- 
signed to  heaven  cr  hell,  before  he  comes  from 
his  mother's  womb,  where  is  the  wifdomof  this  ; 
of  dealing  with  him  in  every  refpeff,  as  if  he  were 
fn;e,  when  it  is  no  fitch  thing?  What  avails, 
what  can  this  w'hole  difpenfation  of  God  avail 
a'  reprobate  ? What  are  promifes  or  threats, 

expof- 


[ 205  'I 

expoftulations  or  reproofs  to  thee,  thou  firebrantf 
of  hell.?  What  indeed  (O  my  brethren,  buffer  me 
to  fpeak,  for  I am  full  of  matter)  but  empty  force, 
but  mere  grimace,  founding  words,  that  mean  juft 
nothing?  O where  (to  wave  all  other  confidera- 
tions  now)  is  the  wifdom  of  this  proceeding  ? To 
what  end  does  all  this  apparatus  ferve?  If  you 
fay,  to  infure  his  damnation  : alas,  what  needeth 
that?  Seeing  this  was  infured  before  the  foundation 
of  the'  world.  Let  all  mankind  then  judge,  which 
of  thefe  accounts  is  more  for  the  glory  of  God’s 
wifdom ! 

LII.  * We  come  next  to  hisjuftice.  Now  if 
man  be  capable  of  chufing  good  or  evil,  then  he 
is  a proper  objefl  of  the  juftice  of  God,  acquit- 
ing  or  condemning,  rewarding  or  purnfhing.  But 
otherwife  he  is  not.  A mere  machine  is  not  ca- 
pable of  being  either  acquitted  or  condemned- 
Juftice  cannot  punifh  a Hone  for  falling  to  the 
ground:  noi  (on  your  fcheme)  a man  for  falling 
into  ftn.  For  he  can  no  more  help  it  than  the 
ftone,  if  he  be  (in  your  fenfe)  jore-ordained  to 
this  condemnation.  Why  does-  this  man  fin? 
“ He  cannot  ceafe  from  fin  ?”  Wrhy  cannot  he 
ceafe  from  fin  ? “ Becaufe  he  has  no  faving 
grace?”  Why  has  he  no  faving  grace?  “ Be- 
caufe God  of  his  own  good  pleafure,  hath  eter- 
nally decreed,  not  to  give  it  him.”  Is  he  then 
under  an  unavoidable  neceffity  of  finning  ? “ Yes : 
as  much  as  a ftone  is  of  falling.  He  never  had 

any 


[ 20  6 j 

any  more  power  to  ceafe  from  evil,  than  a ftone. 
has  to  hang  in  the  air.”  And  fhall  this  man,  for 
not  doing  what  he  never  could  do,  and  ior  doing 
what  he  never  could  avoid,  be  fentenced  to  de- 
part into  everlafling  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels  ? “ Yes,  beeaufe  it  is  the  fovereiga 

will  of  God.”— Then  “ you  have  either  found 

a new  God,  or  made  one!”  This  is  not  the  God 
of  the  Chriliians.  Our  God  is  juft  in  all  his  wavs  i 
he  reapeth  not  where  he  hath  not  ftrewed.  He 
requireth  only  according  to  what  he  hath  given: 
and  where  he  hath  given  little,  little  is  required. 
The  glory  of  his  juftice  is  this,  to  reward  every 
man  according  to  his  works.  Hereby  is.  that  gloii- 
ous  attribute  thewn,  evidently  fet  forth  belore 
men  and  angels,  in  that  it  is  accepted  of  every 
man  according  to  that  he  hath,  and  not  accord- 
ing to  that  he  hath  not.  This  is  that  juft  decree 
which  cannot  pafs,  either  in  time  or  in  eternity. 

Thus  one  fcheme  gives  the  juftice  of  God  its 
full  fcope,  leaves  room  lor  it  to  be  largely  di!- 
piayed  in  all  its  branches:  whereas  the  other 
makes  it  a mere  fhadotv,  yea,  brings  it  abfolutely 
to  nothing. 

LIII.  Juft  as  glorioully  does  it  difplay  his 
love ! fuppofing  it  to  be  fixt  on  one  in  ten  oi  his 
creatures,  (might  I not  rather  lay,  one  in  an 
hundred  ?)  and  to  have  no  regard  to  the  reft.  Let 
the  ninety  and  nine  reprobates  perifh  without 

mercy. 


[ 207  ] ' 

mercy.  It  is  enough  for  him,  to  love  and  fave  the 
one  elefft.  But  why  will  he  have  mercy  on  thefe 
alone,  and  leave  all  thole  to  inevitable  deftruc- 
tion  ? “ He  will — becaufe  he  will!”  O that  God 
would  give  unto  you  who  thus  fpeak,  meeknefs 
of  wifdom  ! Then  would  I alk,  What  would  the 
univerfal  voice  of  mankind  pronounce  of  the  man 
that  fhould  a£h  thus  ? That  being  able  to  deliver 
millions  of  men  from  death,  with  a tingle  breath 
of  his  mouth,  fhould  refufe  to  fave  any  more  than 
one  in  an  hundred,  and  fay,  “ I will  not,  becaufe 
I will  not.”  How  then  do  you  exalt  the  mercy 
ofGod,  when  you  afcribe  fuch  a proceeding  to 
him  ? What  a ftranse  comment  is  this  on  his 

O 

own  word,  that  his  mercy  is  over  all  his  works  l 
* Do  you  think  to  evade  this  by  faying,  “ his 
mercy  is  more  difplayed,  in  irrefiltibly  faving 
the  cleft,  than  it  would  be  in  giving  the  choice 
of  falvation  to  all  men,  and  actual  falvation  to 
thofe  that  accepted  it  ?”  How  fo?  Make  this  ap- 
pear if  you  can.  What  proof  do  you  bring  of 
this  aflertion?  I appeal  toeveiy  impartial  mind, 
whether  the  reverfe  be  not  obvioulTy  true  ? Whe- 
ther the  mercy  of  God  would  not  be  Hr  lefs  glori- 
oully  difplayed,  in  faving  a few  by  his  irrefiftible 
power,  and  leaving  all  the  reft  without  help, 
without  hope,  to  perilh  everlaftingly,  than  in  of- 
fering falvation  to  every  creature,  actually  faving 
all  that  confent  thereto,  and  doing  for  the  reft 
all  that  infinite  wifdom,  almighty  power,  and 
bcundlcfslove  can  do,  without  forcing  them  to 

be 


[ 20S  ] 

be  faved,  which  would  be  to  deftroy  the  very  na- 
ture that  he  had  given  them.  1 appeal,  I fav, 
to  every  impartial  mind,  and  to  your  own,  if  no: 
quite  blinded  with  prejudice,  which  of  tliefe  ac- 
counts places  the  mercy  of  God  in  the  moff  ad- 
vantageous ligh'. 

LIV.  Perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ But  there  are 
other  attributes  of  God,  namely,  his  fovereignty, 
unchangeablenefs,  and  faithful nefs.  I hope  you 
do  not  deny  thefe.”  I anfwer,  No;  by  no  means. 
The  fovereignty  of  God  appears,  1.  In  fixing 
from  eternity  that  decree  touching  the  fons  of 
men,  He  that  behevelh  Jhall  be  faved  : he  that  be- 
lieveth  not  Jhall  be  damned.  2.  In  all  the  general 
circumfiances  of  creation  -T  in  the  time,  the  place, 
the  manner  of  creating  all  things  : rn  appointing 
the  number  and  kinds  of  creatures,  vifible  and 
invifible.  3.  In  alloting  the  natural  endowments 
of  men,  thefe  to  one,  and  thofe  to  another. 
4.  In  difpofing  the  time,  place,  and  other  out- 
ward circumflances  (as  parents,  relations)  attend- 
ing the  birth  of  every  one.  ,5.  In  difpenfing 
the  various  gifts  of  his  Spirit,  for  the  edification 
of  his  church.  6.  In  ordering  all  temporal 
things,  (as  health,  fortune,  friends)  every  thing 
fhort  of  eternity.  But  in  difpofing  th  e eternal 
Hates  of  men,  (allowing  only  what  was  obferved 
under  the  firft  article)  it  is  clear,  that  not  fo- 
vereignty alone,  but  jufiice,  mercy,  and  truth 
hold  the  reins.  The  governor  of  heaven  and 

earth, 


[ 2«9  ] 

earth,  the  I AM,  over  all,  God  blefifed  for  ever, 
takes  no  ftep  here  but  as  thefe  direfl,  and  pre- 
pare the  way  before  his  face.  This  is  his  eternal 
and  irrefiftible  will,  as  he  hath  revealed  unto  us 
by  his  Spirit;  declaring  in  the  ilrongeft  terms, 
adding  his  oath  to  his  word,  and  becaufe  he 
could  fwear  by  no  greater,  fwearing  by  bimfelf, 
As  I live , faith  the  Lord  God,  I have  no  pie  afurt 
in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth.  The  death  of  him 
that  dieth  can  never  be  refolved  into  my  plea- 
fure  or  fovereign  will.  No ; it  is  impoflible. 
We  challenge  all  mankind,  to  bring  one  clear, 
fcriptural  proof  to  the  contrary.  You  can  bring 
nofcripture  proof  that  God  ever  did,  or  affertion 
that  he  ever  will,  a Si  as  mere  fovereign  in  eter- 
nally condemning  any  foul  that  ever  was,  or  will 
be  born  into  the  world. 

LV.  Now,  you  are  probably  thinking  of 
Efau  and  Pharaoh.  Do  you  then  fet  it  down  as 
an  unqueftionable  truth,  that  thefe  were  eter- 
nally condemned  by  the  mere  fovereign  will  of 
God?  Are  you  fure,  that  they  were  eternally  con- 
demned? Even  that  point  is  not  altogether  cer- 
tain. It  is  no  where  afierted  in  holy  writ : and 
it  would  coft  you  fome  pains  to  prove  it.  It  is 
true,  Pharaoh’s  death  was  a punifliment  from 
God  : but  it  does  not  follow,  that  he  was  pu- 
nifhed  everlaflingly.  And  if  he  was,  it  was  not 
by  the  mere  fovereign  will  of  God , but  becaufe  of 
his  own  ftubbornnefs  and  impenitence. 


Of 


[ 210  ] 

Of  this  Mofes  has  given  us  a particular  ac-  ' 
count:  accordingly  we  read,  When  Pharaoh  faw 
that  there  was  refpite  (after  he  was  delivered 
from  the  plague  of  frogs)  he  hardened  his  heart, 
and  hearkened  not  unto  them,  (Exod.  viii.  13.) 
So  after  the  plague  of  flies,  Pharaoh  hardened 
his  heart  at  this  time  alfo,  neither  would  he  let  the 
people  go,  (ver.  32.)  Again,  When  Pharaoh  faw 
that  the  rain  and  the  hail  were  ceafed,  he Jinned  yet 
more,  and  hardened  his  heart,  he  and  his  fervants, 
(Exod.  ix.  34.)  After  God  had  given  him  all  this 
fpace  to  repent,  and  had  expoflulated  with  him 
for  his  obflinate  impenitence  in  thofe  foiemn 
words,  Plow  long  wilt  thou  refufe  to  humble  thy - 
felf  before  me?  (chap.  x.  3.)  What  wonder  is  it, 
if  God  then  hardened  his  heart,  that  is,  permitted 
Satan  to  harden  it?  If  he.  at  length  wholly  with- 
drew his  foftening  grace,  and  gave  him  up  to  a 
reprobate  mind? 

LVI.  The  cafe  of  Efau  is  widely  different 
from  this:  although  his  conduft  alfo  is  blamea- 
ble  in  many  points.  The  firft  was,  the  felling 
his  birth-right  to  Jacob,  (Gen.  xxv.  31,  &c.) 
The  next,  his  marrying  againft  his  father’s  con- 
fent,  (chap.  xxvi.  34,  35.}  But  it  is  highly  pro- 
bable he  was  fenfible  of  his  fault;  becaufe  Ifaac 
appears  to  have  been  fully  reconciled  to  him, 
when  he  faicl.  My  fon,  make  me  Javoury  meat, 
that  my  foul  may  blefs  thee  before  I die,  Gen. 
xxvii.  4. 


In 


t ] 

In  the  following  verfes  we  have  an  account  of 
the  manner  wherein  he  was  fupplanted  by  his 
brother  Jacob.  Upon  Ifaac’s  relation  of  this, 
Efau  cried  with  a great  and  exceeding  bitter  cry , 
(ver.  34.)  and faid  unto  his  father , Blefs  me,  even 
me  alfo , 0 my  father ! But  he  found  no  face, 
fays  the  apoflle,  for  repentance,  for  recovering 
the  blefhng,  though  he  fought  it  carefully  with 
tears.  Thy  brother , faid  Ifaac,  hath  taken  away 
thy  blejfing  ; 1 have  blejfed  him,  yea,  and  he  Jhall 
be  bleffed.  So  that  ail  Efau’s  forrow  and  tears 
could  not  recover  his  birth-right,  and  the  blefhng 
annexed  thereto. 

And  yet  there  is  great  reafon  to  hope,  that 
Efau  (as  well  as  Jacob)  is  now  in  Abraham’s  bo- 
fom.  For  although  for  a time  he  hated  Jacob, 
and  afterward  cameagainfl  him  with  four  hundred 
men,  very  probably  defigning  to  take  revenge 
for  the  injuries  he  had  fuftained ; yet  we  find, 
when  they  met,  Efau  ran  and  embraced  him,  and 
fell  on  his  neck  andkffed  him.  So  throughly  had 
God  changed  his  heart.  And  why  fhould  we 
doubt  but  that  happy  change  continued? 

LVII.  You  can  ground  no  folid  obje&ion  to 
this,  on  St. Paul’s  words  in  the  epiftle  to  the  Ro- 
mans It  was  faid  unto  her,  the  elder  fiall  ferve 
the  younger : as  it  is  written,  Jacob  have  I loved, 
but  Efau  have  I hated,  chap.  ix.  12,  13.  For  it 
is  undeniably  plain,  that  both  thefe  fcriptures 

relate 


[ 212  ] 


relate  not  to  the  perfons  of  Jacob  and  Efau,  but 
to  their  defendants  ; the  Ifraelites  fprung  from 
Jacob,  and  the  Edomites  fprung  from  Efau.  Irt 
this  fenfe  only  did  the  elder  (Efau)  ferve  the 
younger;  not  in  his  perfon,  (for  Efau  never 
ferved  Jacob)  but  in  his  poflerity.  The  pofle- 
rity  of  the  elder  brother  ferved  the  poflerity  of 
the  younger. 

The  other  text  referred  to  by  the  apoflle,  runs 
thus:  I loved  Jacob,  and  1 hated  Efau,  and  laid 
his  mountains  and  his  heritage  wafle  for  the  dra- 
gons of  the  wildernefs,  Mai.  i.  2.  Whofe  heri- 
tage  was  it  that  God  laid  wafle  ? Not  that  which 
Efau  perfonally  enjoyed : but  that  of  his  pofle- 
rity, the  Edomites,  for  their  enormous  fins, 
largely  defcribed  by  feveral  of  the  prophets.  So 
neither  here  is  there  any  inflance  of  any  man  be- 
ing finally  condemned  by  the  mere fovereign  will 
of  God. 

LVIII.  * The  unchangeablenefs  of  God  we  allow 
likewife.  In  him  is  no  variablenefs , neither  fia - 
dozv  of  turning.  But  you  feem  to  lie  under  a 
miftake  concerning  this  alfo,  for  want  of  obferv- 
ing  the  fcripture-account  of  it.  The  fcripture 
teaches,  1.  That  God  is  unchangeable  with  re- 
gard to  his  decrees.  But  what  decrees  ? The 
fame  that  he  has  commanded  to  be  preached  to 
every  creature,  “ He  that  believeth  fall  befaved  ; 
he  that  believeth  not  fall  be  damned,”  The  fcrip- 
ture- 


[ 213  ] 

ture  teaches,  2.  That  God  is  unchangeable  with 
regard  to  his  love  and  hatred.  But  how  ? Ob- 
ferve  this  well  ; for  it  is  your  grand  miftake,  and 
the  root  of  almoft  all  the  reft.  God  unchangea- 
bly loveth  righteoufnefs,  and  hateth  iniquity. 
Unchangeably  he  loveth  faith,  and  unchangeably 
hateth  unbelief.  In  confequence  hereof  he  un- 
changeably loves  the  righteous,  and  hateth  the 
workers  of  iniquity.  He  unchangeably  loves 
them  that  believe,  and  hates  wilful,  obftinate 
unbelievers.  So  that  the  fcripture-account  of 
God’s  unchangeablenefs  with  regard  tq  his  de- 
crees. is  this  : He  has  unchangeably  decreed  to 
lave  holy  believers,  and  to  condemn  obdinate, 
impenitent  unbelievers.  And  according  to  fcrip- 
ture,  his  unchangeablenefs  of  affetlion,  properly 
and  primarily  regards  tempers  and  notperfons: 
and  perfons  (as  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham)  only  as 
thofe  tempers  are  found  in  them.  Let  then  the 
unchangeablenefs  of  God  be  put  upon  the  right 
foot,  let  the  fcripture  be  allowed  to  fix  the  objects 
of  it,  and  it  will  as  foon  prove  tranfubftantiation, 
as  unconditional  election. 

LIX.  The 'faitlifidnefs  of  God  may  be  termed 
a branch  of  his  truth.  He  mil  perform  what  he 
hath  piormjed.  But  then  let  us  enquire  of  the 
oracles  of  God,  to  whom  are  the  promifes  made  P 
The  promifes  of  life  and  immortality?  The  an- 
fwer  is.  To  Abraham  and  Ins  feed,  that  is,  to  thofe 

who 


[ 214  ] 

who  walk  in  the  Jleps  of  the  failli  of  their  father 
Abraham.  To  thofe  who  believe,  as  believers, 
are  the  gofpel-promifes  made.  To  thefe  hath 
the  faithful  God  engaged,  that  he  will  do  what 
he  hath  fpoken.  He  will  fulfil  his  covenant  and 
promife  which  he  hath  made  to  a thoujand  genera - 
ticns  : the  fum  of  which  is,  (as  we  find  it  ex- 
prefiy  declared  by  the  Spirit  of  God)  the  Lord 
will  give  grace,  (more  grace)  and  glory , and  no 
good  thing  will  he  with-hold from  them  that  live  a 
godly  life. 

LX.  This  covenant  of  God  I underhand  : but 
I have  heard  of  another  which  I underfiand  not. 
I have  heard,  “ that  God  the  Father  made  a co- 
venant with  his  Son,  before  the  world  began, 
wherein  the  Son  agreed  to  fuffer  fuch  and  fuch 
things,  and  the  Father  to  give  him  fuch  and  fuch 
fouls  for  a recompence  : that  in  confequence  of 
this,  thofe  fouls  mufl  be  faved,  and  thofe  only, 
fo  that  all  others  mujl  be  damned.”  I befeech 
you,  where  is  this  written  ? In  what  part  of 
fcripture  is  this  covenant  to  be  found  ? We  may 
well  expebl  a thing  of  this  moment  to  be  re- 
vealed very  exprefly,  with  the  utmoft  clearnefs 
and  folemnity.  But  where  is  this  done  ? And  if 
it  is  not  done,  if  there  is  no  fuch  account  in  all 
the  bible;  which  lhall  we  wonder  at  mod,  that 
any  ferious  man  fhould  advance,  or  that  thou- 
fands  fhould  believe,  fo  flrange  an  aflertion, 

without 


[ 215  ] 

without  one  plain  text  of  fcripture  to  fupport  If, 
from  Genelis  to  the  Revelation  ? 

LXI.  I fuppofe  you  do  not  imagine,  that  the 
bate  word  covenant,  if  it  occurred  ever  fo  often 
in  holy  writ,  is  a proof  of  any  fuch  covenant  as 
this.  The  stand  covenant  which  we  allow  to  be 
mentioned  therein,  is  a covenant  between  God 
and  man,  eflablifhed  in  the  hands  of  a Mediator, 
who  tafted  death  for  every  man.  and  thereby  pur- 

chafed  it  for  all  the  children  of  men.  The  tenor 

\ 

of  it  (fo  often  mentioned  already)  is  this,  “ Who- 
foever  believeth  unto  the  end,  fo  as  to  fhew  his 
faith  by  his  works,  I the  Lord  will  reward  that 
four  eternally.  But  whofoever  will  not  believe, 
and  confequently  dieth  in  his  fins,  I will  punifh 
Him  with  everlaf ing  defruflion  ?” 

LXII.  To  examine  throughly  whether  this 
covenant  between  God  and  man  be  uncondi- 
tional or  conditional,  it  may  be  needful  to  go 
back  as  far  as  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faith- 
ful : to  enquire  what  manner  of  covenant  it  was, 
which  God  made  with  him?  And  whether  any 
reafon  be  affgned,  of  God's  peculiarly  blefling 
Abraham,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  in 
him  ? 

The  firfl  mention  of  the  covenant  betv/een 
God  and  him,  occurs  Gen.  xv.  i8.  The.  fame  day 
the  Lord  made  a covenant  with  Abram,  faying , 
unto  thy  fed  will  I give  this  land.  But  this  is 

much 


much  more  explicitly  related  in  the  feventeenth 
chapter,  ver.  1,  & c.  The  Lord  appeared  unto 
Abram,  and  fold  unto  him,  I am  the  almighty 
God : walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfeB.  And  I 
will  make  my  covenant  between  me  and  thee,  and 
will  multiply  thee  exceedingly.  And  Abram  jell  on 
his  face\  and  God  talked  with  him,  faying.  As  for 
me,  behold  my  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou  Jhalt 
be  a father  of  many  nations.  Neither  foall  thy 
name  any  more  be  called  Abram,  but  thy  name  foall 
be  Abraham  : for  a father  of  many  nations  have  I 
made  thee.  And  I will  eflabhfo  my  covenant  between 
?ne  and  thee,  and  thy  feed  after  thee,  for  an  ever - 
l fling  covenant,  to  be  a God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy 
feed  after  thee — Every  man  child  among  you  foiall 
be  circumcifd — it  foall  be  a token  of  the  covenant 
betwixt  me  and  you — The  uncircumcifed  man-child 
foall  be  cut  off ; he  hath  broken  my  covenant.  So 
we  fee,  this  original  covenant,  though  everlafing, 
was  conditional,  and  man’s  failing  in  the  condi- 
tion cleared  God. 

LXIII.  We  have  St.  Paul's  account  of  this 
covenant  of  God  with  Abraham,  in  the  fourth 
chapter  of  his  epiftle  to  the  Romans  (ver.  3,  &c.) 
Abraham,  faith  he,  believed  God,  and  it  was  count- 
ed to  himfor  righteou fiefs.  (This  was  a little  be- 
fore God  ellablifhed  his  covenant  with  him,  and 
is  related  Gen.  xv.  6.)  And  he  received  the  fign  cf 
circumcifon,  a foal  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  the faith 
which  he  had  yet  being  uncircumcifed,  that  he 


C 217  ] 

might  be  the  father  of  all  them  that  believe , though, 
they  be  not  circumcifed , that  nghteoufnefs  might  be 
imputed  unto  them  alfo : and  the  father  of  oircum - 
•cifion  (i.  e.  of  them  that  are  circumcifed)  to  them 
zoho  are  not  of  the  circumcifon  only,  but  alfo  walk 
in  the  feps  of  that  faith  of  our  father  Abraham , 
which  he  had  being  yet  uncircumcifed.  Now,  if 
thefe  words  do  not  exprefs  a conditional  cove° 
nant,  certainly  none  can. 

LXIV.  The  nature  and  ground  of  this  cove- 
nant of  God  with  Abraham  is  farther  explained, 
Gen.  xviii.  19,  And  the  Lord  f aid,  Jhall  I hide 
from  Abraham  that  thing  which  I do,  feeing  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  fhall  be  bleffcd  in  him?  For 
l know  him,  that  he  will  command  his  children , 
-and  his  hcufhdld  after  him : and  they  fhall  keep  the 
way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  juft  ice  and  judgment,  that 
the  Lord  may  bring  unto  Abraham  that  which  he 
hath  fpoken  of  him. 

Does  God  fay  here,  I will  do  it,  hecaufe 
I will?  Nothing  lefs.  The  reafon  is  explicitly 
■afligned  : All  nations  Jhall  -be  blijfed  in  him : -For 
;;  he  will  command  his  children,  and  they  fiall  keep 
the  way  of  the  Lord. 

The  reafon  is  yet  more  (clearly,  it  cannot,  bat 
more)  fully  fet  down  in  the  twenty  fecond  chap« 
ter  (ver.  1-6,  See.) 

By  myfelf  have  1 fiuorn,  faith  the  Lord,  be- 
cause thou  haft  dune  this  thing,  and  haf  not 
with-held  thy  fon , thine  only  fon:  that  in  biffing 

IVol.  XX.  K I will 


[ 2*8  3 


J will  blefs  tliee— and  in  thy  feed  Jhall  all  thenati- 
• ons  of  the  earth  be  blefjed ; that  is,  the  Mefliah  fhall 
fpring.from  thee,  becauS£  thou  haf  obeyed  my 
■ voice. 

This  is  yet  again  declared,  chap.  xxvi.  (ver.  2, 
&c.j  And  the  Lard  appeared  unto  Lfaac,  and fai'd 
— Sojourn  in  this  land,  and  I will  be  with  thee,  and 
blefs  thee  : for  unto  thee,  and  unto  thy  feed  I will 
perform  the  oath  which  I fware  unto  Abraham  thy 
father.  In  thy feed  fall  all  nations  of  the  earth  be 
bleffed:  BecauJe  that  Abraham  obeyed  my  voice,  and 
kept  my  charge,  my  commandments , my  fatutes, 
and  my  laws. 


LXV.  This  covenant  made  to  Abraham  and 
bis  feed,  is  mentioned  again  Exod.  xix.  (ver.  3, 
&c .)  And  the  Lord  called  unto  Mofes , faying. , lj 
Thus  [halt  thou  fay  to  the  houfe  of  Jacob,  and  tell 
.the  children  cf  Ifrael,  ye  have  feen  what  I did  to  \ 
the  Egyptians,  and  how  I bare  you  on  eagles  wings,  i 
and  hr  ought  you  unto  myfelf.  Now  therefore,  if 
ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  cove- 
nant, then  ye fall  be  a peculiar  treafoe  unto  me 
1 above  all  people. 

In  the  following  chapter  God  declares  the 
terms  of  the  covenant  they  were  to  keep,  in  ten 
commandments.  And  thefe  t’nemfelves  are  fome- 
tirnes  termed  the  covenant , fometimes  the  book  cf  4 
the  covenant . So  chap.  xxiv.  (ver.  4,  &c.)  after 
God  had  made  an  end  of  fpeaking  to  the  people, 
it  is  faid,  And  Mofes  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  Lord, 

and 


[ 2i9  ] 

and  roje  up  early  in  the  morning — and  he  took  the  book 
of  the  covenant , and  read  in  the  audience  of  the  peo- 
ple ; and  they  faid,  all  that  the  Lord  hath  faid  will 
we  do.  And  Mofes  took  the  blood  (of  the  burnt- 
offering)  and  f prinked  it  on  the  people,  and  faid, 
behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord 
hath  made  with  you  concerning  all  thefe  words. 

After  the  people  had  broken  this  covenant  by 
worfhipping  the  golden  calf,  God  renews  it, 
chap,  xxxiv.  where  we  read,  (ver.  27,  28.)  And 
the  Lord  faid  unto  Mofes,  Write  thou  thefe  words, 
for  after  the  tenor  of  thefe  words  L have  made  a 
covenant  with  thee  and  with  Lfrael — and  he  wrote 
upon  the  tables  the  words  of  the  covenant,  the  ten 
■commandments. 

LXVI.  According  to  the  tenor  of  this  cove- 
nant made  to  Abraham  and  his  feed,  God  after- 
ward declares,  (Levit.  xxvi.  3,  & c.)  If  ye  walk 
in  my  Jlatutes,  and  keep  my  commandments,  and 
do  them,  then  l will  efablifh  my  covenant  with  you, 
and  I will  be  your  God,  and  ye  fhall  be  my  people — • 
But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me,  fo  that  ye  will 
not  do  all  my  commandments , but  that  ye  break  my 
covenant,  I vnll  ft  my  face  again  ft  you,  and  I will 
avenge  the  quarrel  of  my  covenant — yet  if  they  fall 
confefs  their  iniquity,  and  if  their  uncircumcife'd 
hearts  be  humbled — then  will  I remember  .my  cove- 
nant with  Jacob,  and  alfo  my  covenant  with  Ifaac, 
and  alfo  my  covenant  with  Abraham  will  I remem- 
K 2 her. 


[ 2SO  ] 

her.  Ccmfequently  the  covenant  with  Abraham, 
Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  was  conditional,  as  well  as 
that  with  their  pofterity. 

LXVII.  “ But  is  not  the  faithfulnefs  of  God 
engaged  to  keep  all  that  now  believe  from  falling 
away  ?”  I cannot  fay  that.  Whatever  affurance 
God  may  give  to  particular  fouls,  I find  no  ge- 
neral promife  in  holy  writ,  “ That  none  who 
once  believes  fltall  finally  fall.”  Yet,  to  fay  the 
truth,  this  is  fo  pleafing  an  opinion,  fo  agreea- 
ble to  flelh  and  blood,  fo  fuitable  to  whatever  of 
nature  remains,  in  thofe  who  have  tailed  the 
grace  of  God,  that  I fee  nothing  but  the  mighty 
power  of  God,  which  can  reftrain  any  who 
hears  it  from  doling  with  it.  But  Hill  it  wants 
one  thing  to  recommend  it,  plain,  cogent  fcrip- 
ture-proof. 

Arguments  from  experience  alone  will  never 
determine  this  point.  They  can  only  prove  thus 
much,  on  the  one  hand,  that  our  Lord  is  ex- 
ceeding patient,  that  he  is  peculiarly  unwilling 
any  believer  Ihould  perifh;  that  he  bears  long, 
very  long  with  all  their  follies,  waiting  to  be  gra- 
cious, and  to  heal  their  backfiiding ; and  that 
he  does  actually  bring  back  many  loft  Iheep 
who,  to  man's  apprehenfions  were  irrecoverable: 
but  all  this  does  not  amount  to  a convincing  proof, 
that  no  believer  can  or  does  fall  from  grace.  So  that 
this  argument,  from  experience,  will  weigh  little 
with  thofe  who  believe  the  polfibility  of  falling. 

And 


[ 221  3 

And  it  will  weigh  full  as  little  with  thofe  who- 
do  not.  For  if  you  produce  ever  fo  many  exam- 
ples of  thofe  who  were  once  ftrong  in  faith,  and 
are  now  more  abandoned  than  ever,  they  will 
evade  it  by  faying,  “ O,  but  they  will  be 
brought  back ; they  will  not  die  in  their  fins.” 
And  if  they  do  die  in  their  fins,  we  come  no 
nearer  ; we  have  not  gained  one  point  ftill.  For 
it  is  eafy  to  fay,  “ They  were  only  hypocrites  ; 
they  never  had  true  faith.*’  Therefore  fcripture 
alone  can  determine  this  queftion.  And  fcrip- 
ture does  fo  fully  determine  it,  that  there  needs 
only  to  fet  down  a very  few  texts,  with  fome 
fhort  refle&ions  upon  them. 

LXVIII.  That  one  who  is  a true  believer,  or, 
in  other  words,  one  who  is  holy  or  righteous  in 
the  judgment  of  God  himfelf,  may  neverthelefs 
finally  fall  from  grace,  appears  1.  From  the  word 
of  God  by  Ezekiel,  (chap,  xviii.  24.)  When 
the  righteous  turneth  away  from  his  righteoufnefs, 
and  committeth  iniquity,  in  his  trefpafs  that  he 
hath  trefpaffed,  and  in  his  fin  that  he  hath  finned , 
in  them  fhall  he  die. 

Do  you  obje£l,t  “ This  chapter  relates  whol- 
ly and  folely  to  the  J ewifli  church  and  nation  ?” 
I anfwer,  prove  this  : till  then  I fhall  believe 
that  many  parts  of  it  concern  all  mankind. 

If  you  fay,  2.  “ The  righteoufnefs  fpoken  of 
K 3 in 

■{■See  a pamphlet,  intitled,  The  iaClrim  ef  the  faint's  fnatperfe- 
ttrance,  ajjevtcd  and  vindicated. 


[ 222  J 

% • 

in  tins  chapter,  was  merely  an  outward  righteouf- 
nefs,  without  any  inward  principle  of  grace  or 
holinefs:”  I afk,  how  is  this  confillent  with  the 
31ft  verfe,  Cajl  away  from  you  all  your  iranfgrtf- 
fions  whereby  ye  have  tranfgrejfed,  and  make  you  a 
new  heart,  and  a new  Jpirit?  Is  this  a “ merely 
outward  righteoufnefs,  without  any  inward  prin- 
ciple of  grace  or  holinefs  ?” 

"Will  you  add,  “ But  admitting  the  perfon 
here  Jpoken  of,  to  be  a truly  righteous  man,  what 
is  here  faid  is  only  a fuppofition.”  That  I flatly 
deny.  Read  over  the  chapter  again,  and  you 
will  fee  the  fa£Is  there  laid  down,  to  be  not  bare- 
ly fuppofed,  but  exprefly  qfftrled. 

That  the  death  here  mentioned  is  eternal  death, 
appears  from  the  26th  verfe. 

When  a 1 igktems  man  iurneth  away  from  his 
righteoufnefs,  and  committeth  iniquity,  and  aieth 
in  them  (here  is  temporal  death)  for  his  iniquity 
that  he  hath  done  he  jhali  die.  Here  is  death 
eternal. 

If  you  affert,  “ Both  tbefe  exprellions  hgnify 
the  fame  thing,  and  not  two  different  deaths 
vou  put  a palpable  force  upon  the  text,  in  order 
to  make  the  Holy  Ghoff  fpeak  nonfenfe. 

“ Dying  in  his  iniquity  (you  fay)  is  the  fame 
thing  as  dying for  his  iniquity."  Then  the  text 
means  thus,  “ When  he  dieth  in  them,  he  fhall 
did  in  them.”  A very  deep  difeovery  ! 

But  you  fay,  “ It  cannot  he  underflood  of 
eternal  death;  bccaufe  they  might  be  delivered 

from 


[ 223  3 

from  it  by  repentance  and  reformation.”  And 
why  might  they  not  by  fuch  repentance  as  is 
mentioned  in  the  gift  verfe,  be  delivered  from 
eternal  death  ? 

But  “ the  whole  chapter,  you  think  has  nor 
thing. to  do  with  the  fpiritual  and  eternal  affairs 
of  men.” 

• I believe  every  impartial  man  will  think  quite 
the  contrary,  if  he  reads  calmly  either  the  be- 
ginning of  it:  All  fouls  are  mine,  Jaith  the  Lord 
God-,  the  foul  that finneth,  itjhall  die ; (where  I 
can  by  no  means  allow  that  by  the  death  of  the  >. 
foul  is  meant  only  a temporal  affliftion  :”)  or  the 
eonclufion,  Repent,  and  turn  your felves  from  all 
your  tranfgreffons  ; fo  iniquity  Jhall  not  be  your 
ruin.  Cajl  away  from  you  all  your  tran/greffons, 
whereby  ye  have  tranfgreffed,  and  make  you  a new 
heart,  and  a new  fpirit,Jor  why  will  ye  die , 0 
houfe  of  Ifrael  ? 

It  remains  then,  one  who  is  righteous  in  the 
judgment  of  God  himfelf,  may  finally  fall  from 
grace. 

LXIX.  Secondly,  That  one  who  is  endued  with 
the  faith,  which  produces  a good  confcience, 
may  neverthelefs  finally  fall,  appears  from  the 
words  of  St.  Paul  to  Timothy  (1  Tim.  i.  18,  19.) 
War  a good  warfare,  holding  faith  and  a good 
confcience,  which  fame  having  put  aivay,  concern- 
ing faith  have  madefhipiurcck. 

K 4 


Obferve 


[ 224  3 

Obferve  i.  Thefe  men  had  once  the  faith  that 
produces  a good  confcience,  which  they  once  had, 
or  they  could  not  have  put  it  away. 

Obferve  2.  They  made Jhipwreck  of  the  faith, 
which  neceffarily  implies  the  total  and  final  lofs 
•f  it. 

You  objefl,  “Nay,  the  putting  away  a good 

confcience  does  not  fuppofe  they  had  it  but 
“ rather  that  they  had  it  not.” 

This  is  really  furprizing.  But  how  do  you 
prove  it  ? “ Why,  by  Atls  xiii.  46.  where  St. 
“ Paul  fays  to  the  Jews,  It  was  ntcejfary  that  the 
“ word  of  God Jliould firfl  have  been  Jpoken  to  you. 
“ But  feeing  ye  put  it jromyou — lo , we  turn  to  the 
“ Gentiles .”  Here  you  fee  the  Jews,  who  never 
had  the  gofpel,  are  faid  to  put  it  away. 

How  ! Are  you  fure  they,  “ never  had  what 
they  are  here  faid  to  put  away  ?”  Not  fo.  What 
they  put  away,  it  is  undeniable  they  had,  till 
they  put  it  away  : namely,  the  word  of  God fpolun 
by  Paul  and  Barnabas.  This  infiance  therefore 
makes  full  again!!  you.  It  proves  juft  the  reverfe 
of  what  you  cited  it  for. 

But  you  objeft  further,  “ men  may  have  a 
good  confcience  in  fome  fenfe,  without  true  faith.” 

I grant  it,  in  a reftrained,  limited  fenfe  ; but 
not  a good  confcience , {imply  and  abfolutely  fpeak- 
ing.  But  fuch  is  that  of  which  the  apoftle  here 
fpeaks,  and  which  he  exhorts  Timothy  lo  hold 
fajl.  Unlefs  you  apprehend,  that  the  holding  it 
fafl  likewife  “ rather  fnppofeshe  never  had  it.”; 

“ But 


[ 32  5 ] 

“ But  the  faith  here  mentioned  means  only 
the  do&rine  of  faith.”  I want  better  proof  of 
this. 

It  remains  then,  one  who  has  the  faith  which 
produces  a good  confidence,  may  yet  finally  fall. 

LXX.  Thirdly,  Thofe  who  are  grafted  into- 
the  .good  olive-tree,  the  fpiritual,  invifiblo 
church,  may  neverthelefs  finally  fall. 

For  thus  faith  the  apoftle,  Some  of  the  branches 
a re  broken  off,  and  thou  art  grafted  in  among  them,, 
and  with  them  partake ft  of  the  root  and  fatnefs  of 
the  olive-tree.  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear  : if 
God  fpared  not  the  natural  branches , take  heed  le/l 
he  fpare  not  thee . Behold  the goodnefs  and feveri 
ty  of  God ! On  them  which  fell , feverity , but  to - 
ward  thee,  goodnefs,  if  thou  continue  in  his  good^ 
nefs  : otherwife  thou  Jhalt  be  cut  off,  Rom.  xi.. 
17,  &c. 

We  may  obferve  here,  1.  The  perfons  fpoken. 
to,  were  aftually  engrafted  into  the  olive-tree  : 

2.  This  olive-tree  is  not  barely  the  outward,, 
vifible  church,  but  the  invifible,  confuting  of 
holy  believers-  So  the  text.  If  the fiijl fruit  be 
holy,  the  lump  is  holy  : and  if  the  root  be  holy,  fo^ 
are  the  branches.  And,  becaife  ofunbelif  they 
were  broken- off,  and  thou fandejl by  faith. 

3.  Thofe  holy  believers  were  ftill  liable  to  ba 
cut  off  from  the  invifible  church,  into  which,  they 
were  then  grafted. 


4.  Here- 


[ 226  ] 

4.  Here  is  not  the  leaft  intimation  of  their 
being  ever  grafted  in  again. 

To  this  you  obje£l,  1.  “ This  olive-tree  is 
not  the  invifible  church,  but  only  the  outward 
gofpcl  church-ftate.”  You  affirm  this;  and  I 
prove  the  contrary  : namely,  that  it  is  the  in- 
vifible church  : for  it  “ confifts  of  holy  believers,” 
which  none  but  the  invifible  church  does. 

You  object,  2,  “ The  Jews  who  were  broken 
“ off,  were  never  true  believers  in  Chrift.” 

] am  not  (peaking  of  thejews,  but  of  thofe  Gen- 
tiles who  are  mentioned  in  the  22a  \ erte  : whom 
St. Paul  exhorts  to  continue  in  his  goodnejs  ; other- 
wife,  faith  he,  thou  Jhali  be  cut  ojf.  Now,  I 
prefume,  thefe  were  true  believers  in  Chrift.  Yet 
they  were  ftill  liable  to  be  cut  off. 

You  affert,  3.  “ This  is  only  a cutting  off, 
from  “ the  outward  church-ftate.”  But  how 
is  this  proved  ? So  forced  and  unnatural  a con- 
ftrudlion,  requires  fome  argument  to  fupport 

1U  r ; 

You  fay,  4.  “ There  is  a ftrong  intimation, 

that  they  ffiall  be  grafted  in.  again.”  No.  Not 
that  thofe  Gentiles  who  did  not  continue  in  his 
goodnefs,  fhould  be  grafted  in,  after  they  were 
once  cut  off!  I cannot  find  the  leaft  intimation 
of  this.  “ But  all  I/rael Jhali  be  faved."  I believe 
they  will  ! but  this  does  not  imply  the  reingraft- 
ing of  hefe  Gentiles. 

It  remains  then,  that  thofe  who  are  grafted 

into 


[ 227  ] 

into  the  fpiritual,  invifible  church,  may  never- 
thelefs  finally  fall. 

LXXI.  Fourthly,  thofe  who  are  branches  of 
Chrift  the  true  vine,  may  yet  finally  fall  from 
grace. 

For  thus  faith  our  blefted  Lord  himfelf,  I am 
the  true  vine , and  my  Father  is  the  hufbandman. 
Every  branch  in  me  that  bear  eth  not  fruit,  he  taketh 
away.  I am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches.  If  a man 
abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cajl forth  as  a branch,  and 
ts  withered,  and  men  gather  them,  and  cafl  them 
into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned.  John  xv.  1,, 
See. 

Here  we  may  cbferve,  l.  The  perfons  fpoken 
Of  were  in  Chrifl  branches  of  the  true. vine  : 

2.  Some  of  thefe  branches  abide  not  in  Chrift,, 
but  the  father  taketh  them  away 

3.  The  branches  which  abide  not,  are  cafl v 
forth,  caft  out  from  Chrift  and  his  church. 

4.  They  are  not  only  cajl  forth  but  withered f 
confequently,  never  grafted  in  again. 

3.  They  are  not  only  cafl  forth  and  withered 
but  alfo  cafl  into  the  fire:  And 

6.  They  are  burned.  It  is  not  poftible  for, 
words  more  ftrongly  to  declare,  that  thofe  who 
are  branches  of  the  true  vine  may  finally  fall. 

But  this,  you  fay,  furnHhes  an  argument 
for,  not  againft,  the  perfeverihg  of  the  faints.” 

Yes,  juft'fuch  an  argument  for  final  perfeve-> 
K 6 ranees, 


[ *2*  ] 

ranee,  as  the  above  cited  words  of  St.  Paul  to 
Timothy. 

But  how  do  you  make  it  out  ? Why  thus. 
"*  There  are  two  forts  of  branches  in  Chrift  the 
vine : the  one  fruitful,  the  other  unfruitful. 
The  one  are  eternally  chofen,  and  thefe  abide 
in  him,  and  can  never  withdraw  away.”  Nay, 
this  is  the  very  point  to  be  proved.  So  that  you 
now,  immediately  and  dire&ly  beg  the  queftion. 

11  The  other  fort  of  branches  are  fuch  as 
are  in  Chrift  only  by  profeffion  : who  get  into 
churches,  and  fo  are  reckoned  in  Chrift,  and 
thefe  in  time  wither  away.  Thefe  never  had 
any  life,  grace  or  fruitfulnefs  from  him.” 

Surely  you  do  not  offer  this  by  way  of  ar- 
gument ! You  are  again  taking  for  granted  the 
very  point  to  be  proved. 

But  you  will  prove  that*'  thofe  ar  t branches 
in  Chrift,  who  never  had  any  life  or  grace from  him, 
becaufe  the  churches  of  Judea  and  Theffalonica 
are  faid  to  be  in  Chrift,  tho’  every  individual 
member  was  not  favingly  in  him.”  I deny  the 
confequence,  which  can  never  be  made  good, 
unlefs  you  can  prove,  that  thofe  very  Jews  or 
Theffalonians  who  never  had  any  life  or  grace 
from  him,  are  neverthelefsfaid  by  our  Lord  to  be 
tranches  in  him. 

It  remains,  that  true  believers,  who  are  branches 
®f  the  true  vine,  may  neverthelefs  finally  fall. 

LXXII.  Fifthly,  Thofe  who  fo  effeftually  know 
Chrift,  as  by  that  knowledge  to  have  efcaped 

the 


[ i89  3 

the  pollutions  of  the  world  may,  yet  fall  back 
into  thofe  pollutions  and  perilh  everlallingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  apoltle  Peter , If  after  they 
have  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  thro ’ the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrift, 
(the  only  poffible  way  of  efcaping  them)  they  are 
intangled  again  therein  and  overcome , the  latter 
end , is  worfe  with  them  than  the  beginning,  2 Pet. 
ii.  20,  21. 

But  you  fay  1.  “ Their  knowledge  was  not 
“ an  experimental  knowledge.”  And  how  do 
you  prove  this  ? “ Becaufe  had  it  been  fuch, 
they  could  not  have  loll  it.”  You  are  begging 
the  queltion  again. 

You  fay,  2.  “ Efcaping  the  pollutions  of  the  world , 
'*  ftgnifiesno  more  than  an  outward  reformation.” 
How  prove  you  that  ? You  aim  at  no  proof  at  all. 
But  he  that  will  grant  it,  may. 

You  fay,  g.  “ Thefe  perfons  never  had  any 
change  wrought  upon  them.  They  were  no 
other  than  dogs  and  fwine,  not  only  before  and 
after,  but  even  while  they  outwardly  abltained 
from  grofs  enormities.” 

I grant,  that  before  and  after  that  time,  during 
which  they  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  (or 
as  St.  Peter  words  it  in  his  former  epiflle,  the 
corruption  that  is  in  the  world)  they  might  well 
be  termed  either  dogs  or  fwine,  for  their  grofs 
enormities.  But  that  they  deferved  fuch  an  ap- 
pellation during  that  time,  I cannot  grant  with- 
out fome  proo£ 

It 


[ 23°  ] 

It  remains,  that  thofe  who  by  the  inward 
knowledge  of  Chrift,  have  efcaped  the  pollutions 
of  the  world,  may  yet  fail  back  into  thofe  pollu- 
tions and  peri fh  everlaftingly. 

LXXIII.  Sixthly,  Thofe  who  fee  the  light  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jefus  Chrift,  and 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  of  the  witnefs  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spi- 
rit, may  nevert’nelefs  fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  pe- 
rifh  everlaftingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews,  It  is 
impofible  for  thofe  who  were  once  inUghtened , and 
have  tajled  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made 
partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghojl — If  they  fall  away,  to 
renew  them  again  to  repentance  ; feeing  they  cru- 
cify to  themf elves  the  Son  of  God  ajrefi,  and  put 
him  to  an  open  fhame. 

Muft  not  every  unprejudiced  perfon  fee,  the 
expreftions  here  ufed  are  fo  ftrong  and  clear, 
that  they  cannot  without  grofs  and  palpable 
wrefting,  be  underftood  of  any  but  true  be- 
lievers ? 

“ But  the  apoftle  makes  only  a fuppofition, 
“ -If  they  fall  fall  away.” 

The  apoftle  makes  no  fuppofition  at  all.  There 
is  no  if  in  the  original.  The  words  are  Aoba~c» 
mi  a.7rxi;  IpaTicrSsiloig — xai  7ra£a77E<7£>1a?'  That  is,  in 
plain  Englifb,  It  ts  impojfible  to  renew  again  unto 

repentance 


[ 231  ] 

repentance,  thofe  who  were  once  inlightened,  and 
have  fallen  away.” 

“ No.  The  words  in  the  original  lie  literally 
thus.  It  is  impojfible  for  thofe  who  were  once  in- 
,, lightened — and  they  falling  away,  to  renew  them 
again  unto  repentance:  that  is,  fhould  they  fall 
awav,  which  is  in  plain  Englifh,  if  they  fall 
away.” 

Excufe  me  for  fpeaking  plain  Englifh  here. 
Shall  a man  lie  for  God?  Either  you  or  I do; 
for  I flatly  aver  (and  let  all  that  underftand  Greek 
judge  between  us)  that  the  words  in  the  original 
do  not  lie  literally  thus,  And  they  falling  away , 
(if  fo,  they  mult  be  ^a^TriTrVla;,  in  the  pre- 
fent  tenfe;  not  7ra^~£<rc in  the  indefinite'] 
but  that  they  are  cranflated,  And  have fallen  away ; 
as  literally  as  the  Englifh  tongue  will  bear. 

Therefore  here  is  no  ij  in  the  cafe,  no  fuppo- 
fition  at  all,  but  a plain  declaration  of  matter  of 
fa£t. 

LXXIV.  “ But  why  do  you  imagine  thefe 
perfons  were  true  believers  ?”  B.ecaufe  all  the 
expreffions  in  their  eafy,  natural  fenfe,  imply,  it. 

They  were  once  inlightened ; an  expreflion  fa- 
milar  with  the  apoftle,  and  never  by  him  appli- 
ed to  any  but  believers.  So  the  God  of  our  Lord 
Jejus  Chrifi,  give  unto  you  the  fpirit  of  wifdom, 
and  revelation — The  eyes  of  your  underfunding  ' 
being  inlightened,  that  ye  may  know  vdiat  is  the 
hope  of  his  calling— And  what  is  the  exceeding 

greatnefs 


[ 232  ] 

greatnefs  of  his  glory,  to  us-zoard  that  believe 
Eph.  i.  17,  &c.  So  again,  God,  who  command - 
ed  the  light  to  Jkine  out  oj  darknefs,  hath  fliinedzV? 
cur  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  fefus  Chrifl , 2 Cor, 
iv.  6. 

“ Nay,  they  were  inlightened  means  only,  they 
were  baptized  ; or  knew  the  doftrines  of  thegof- 
pel.” 

I cannot  believe  this,  till  you  bring  me  a few 
paffages  from  St.  Paul’s  writings,  wherein  that 
expreflion  is  evidently  taken  in  either  of  thefe 
fenfes. 

Again.  They  had  tafled  of  the  heavenly  gift 
(emphatically  fo  called)  and  were  made  partakers 
of  the  Holy  Ghofl.  So  St.  Peter  likewife  couples 
them  together,  (Ads  ii.  38,)  Be  baptized  for 
the  remiffionoffins,  and  ye Jhall  receive  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghojt.  Whereby  the  love  of  God  was 
£hed  abroad  in  their  hearts  with  all  the  other 
fruits  of  the  fpirit. 

The  expreflion  they  had  tafled  of  the  heavenly 
gift,  is  taken  from  the  pfalmift,  Tafe  and  fee 
that  the  Lord  is  good.  As  if  he  had  faid,  Be  ye 
as  allured  of  his  love,  as  of  any  thing  ,'you  fee 
with  your  eyes.  And  let  the  affurance  thereof 
be  Tweet  to  your  foul,  as  honey  is  to  your 
tongue. 

But  this  means  only,  they  had  fome  notions 
©f  remifiion  of  fins  and  heaven,  and  fome  de- 
ires  after  them.  And  they  had  received  the  ex- 
traordinary 


[ m ] 

iraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.”  This  you 
affirmed-,  but  without  any  colour  of  proof. 

It  remains,  that  thofe  who  fee  the  light  of  the 
glory  of  God,  in  the  faith  of  Jefus  Chrifl,  and  who 
have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghoff,  of 
the  witnefs  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  may  ne- 
verthelefs  fo  fall  from  God,  as  to  perifh  ever- 
laflingly. 

LXXV.  Seventhly,  Thofe  who  live  by  faiths 
may  yet  fall  from  God  and  perifh  everlaflingly. 

For  thus  faith  the  apoflle.  Thejuji Jliall  live  by 
faith  ; but  if  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul Jhall 
kave  no  pleafure  in  him,  Heb.  x.  38.  Thejuji , 
(the  juftified  perfon,  of  whom  only  this  can  be 
faid  )f tall  live  by  faith,  even  now  fhall  live  the 
life  which  is  hid  with  Chrifl  in  God  ; and  if  he 
endure  unto  the  end,  fhall  live  with  God  for 
ever.  But  if  any  man  draw  back,  faith  the  Lord, 
my  foul fall  have  no  pleafure  in  him  : that  is,  I 
will  utterly  cafl  him  off,  and  accordingly  the 
drawing  back  here  fpoken  of,  is  termed  in  the 
verfe  immediately  following,  drawing  back  to 
perdition. 

“ But  the  perfon  fuppofed  to  draw'  back,  is 
not  the  fame  with  him  that  is  faid  to  live  by 
faith.” 

I anfwer,  1.  Who  is  it  then  ? Can  any  man 
draw  back  from  faith  who  never  came  to  it  ? 
But 


2.  Had 


[ 234  ] 

2.  Had  the  text  been  fairly  tranflated,  there 
had  been  no  pretence  for  this  objection,  f or  the 
original  runs  thus:  'o  s*  m<r^i  fa/lxe  xsu 

ta,vvmrti\ylxi — If  o thejujl  mm  that  lives 

by  faith  (fo  the  expreffion  neceflanly  implies, 
there  being  no  other  nominative  to  the  verb)  draws 
back,  my  foul fhall  have  no  pleajurt  in  him. 

“ But  your  tranflation  is  too  inaccurate.  Be 
pleafed  to  fhew  me  wherein  ? 

“ I grant  he  may  draw  back:  and  yet  not  draw 
back  to  perdition.’*  But  then  it  is  not  the  draw- 
ing back  which  is  here  fpokenof. 

“ However  here  is  only  a fuppofition,  which 
proves  no  fa£t.”  I obferve  you  take  that  as  a 
general  rule,  fuppofitions  prove  no  facts.  But 
this  is  not  true.  They  do  not  always:  but  many 
times  they  do.  And  whether  they  do  or  no  in  i 
particular  text,  mufl  be  judged  from  the  nature 
of  the  fuppofition,  and  from  the  preceding  and 
following  words. 

“ But  the  inferting  any  man  into  the  text,  is 
agreeable  to  the  grammatical  conflrubiion  of  the 
words.”  This  I totally  deny.  There  is  no  need 
of  anyfuch  infertiom  The  preceding  nominative 
fuffices. 

“ But  one  that  lives  by  faith,  cannot  draw 
back.  For  whom  he  jifified,  them  he  alfo  glo- 
rified;' 

This  proves  no  more,  than  that  all  who  are 
glorified,  are  pardoned  and  fan&ified  fir  ft. 

“ Nay, 


[ 235  ] 

“ Nay,  but  St.  Paul  fays,  ye  are  dead.-,  and 
your  life  is  hid  with  Chrijl  in  God.  When  Chrift 
who  is  our  life,  Jhall  appear,  then  Jhallye  alfo  ap- 
pear with  him  in  glory.” 

Moll:  fure,  if  you  endure  to  the  end.  Whofo- 
ever  believeth  in  him  to  the  end  Jhall  never  die. 

LXXVI.  “ But,  to  come  more  home  to  the 
point.  I fay,  this  text  is  fo  far  from  militating 
againft  perfeverance,  that  it  greatly  eftablilhes 
it.” 

You  are  very  unhappy  in  your  choice  of  texts 
to  eftablifh  this  doctrine.  Two  of  thefe  eftablifh 
it,  juft  as  this  does,  as  we  have  feen  already. 
Now  pray  let  us  hear,  how  you  prove  perfever- 
ance from  this  text. 

“ Very  eafily.  Here  are  two  forts  of  perfons 
mentioned;  he.  that  lives  by  faith,  and  he  that 
draws  back  to  perdition.” 

Nay,  this  is  the  very  queftion.  I do  not  al- 
low that  two  perfons  are  mentioned  in  the  text. 
I have  fhewn,  it  is  one  and  the  fame  perfon, 
.who  once  lived  by  faith,  and  afterwards  draws 
back. 

Yet  thus  much  I allow;  two  forts  of  believers 
are  in  the  next  verfe  mentioned  ; forae  that  draw 
back,  and  fome  that  perfevere.  And  I allow, 
the  apoftle  adds,  We  are  not  of  them  who  draw 
hack  unto  perdition.  But  what  will  you  infer 
from  thence  ? This  is  To  far  from  contradicting 
what  has  been  obfervecl  before,  that  it  mani- 
feftly  confirms  it.  It  is  a farther  proof,  that 

therQ 


[ 23<>  I 

there  are  thofe  who  draw  back  unto  perdition, 
although  thefe  were  not  of  that  number. 

“ I muft  {till  aver,  that  the  text  is  rightly 
tranflated  : which  I prove  thus : 

“ The  original  text  (Hab.  ii.  4.)  runs  thus: 
Behold  his  foul  who  is  lifted  up,  is  not  upright  in 
him  ; but  the  jujl  fiall  live  by  faith. 

“ This  the  Seventy  render  Ea?  «cors^’sl«»>  ** 
v>  ■Sfvyy  pa  tt  ailu"  o Sc  ciy-oti1^  tx  Gsinuf  V* 
fyc-flaa.  If  a man  draw  back , my  foul  hath  no  plea - 
fare  in  him.  But  the  juf  Jhall  live  by  faith,  (i,  e. 
faith  in  me.) 

“ Now  here  the  man  in  the  former  claufe  who 
draws  back,  is  diftinguifhed  from  him  in  the  for- 
lowing  claufe,  who  lives- by  faith. 

“ But  the  apoftle  quotes  the  text  from  this 
tranflation.” 

True;  but  he  does  not  “ diftinguifh  the  mao 
in  the  former  claufe  who  draws  back,  from  him 
in  the  latter  who  lives  by  faith."  So  far  from  it, 
that  Ire  quite  inverts  the  order  of  the  fentence, 
placing  the  latter  claufe  of  it  firft.  And  by  this 
means  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  although  in  tranflat- 
ing  this  text  from  the  Septuagint,  we  muft  infert 
a man,  (becaufe  there  is  no  nominative  preceding) 
yet  in  tranflating  it  from  the  apoftle,  there  is  no 
need  or  pretence  for  inferting  it,  feeing  0 &«*»©» 
Hands  juft  before. 

Therefore  fuch  an  infertion  is  a palpable  vio- 
lence to  the  text,  w’hich  confequently  is  not 
rightly  tranflated. 


It 


I 237  ] 

ft  remains,  thit  thofe  who  live  by  faith,  may 
yet  fall  from  God,  and  perilh  everlaftingly. 

LXXVII.  Eighthly,  Thofe  who  are  fan&ified 
%y  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  may  fo  fall  as  to 
perilh  everlaftingly. 

For  thus  again  faith  the  apoftle  : If  we  fin  wil- 
fully, after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth , there  remaineth  no  more  facrifice  for  fin  ; 
■but  a certain  fearful  looking-for  <f  judgment  and 
fery  indignation,  which  J. hall  devour  the  adverfa- 
ries.  He  that  defpifecl  Mofes ’ law  died  without 
mercy  under  two  or  three  wtlnefes.  Of  how  much 
forer  punijhment  fiall  he  be  thought  worthy,  who 
hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath 
counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was 
Jan 61  fed,  an  unholy  thing . 

It  is  undeniably  plain,  I.  That  the  perfon 
-mentioned  here  was  once  fanftified  by  the 
blood  of  the  covenant:  2.  That  he  afterward,  by 
known,  wilful  fin,  trod  under  foot  the  Son  of 
God  : and  3.  That  he  hereby  incurred  a forer 
punilhment  than  death,  namely,  death  everlaft- 
ing. 

“ Nay,  the  immediate  antecedent  to  the  rela- 
tive he,  is  the  Son  of  God.  Therefore  it  was 
he,  not  the  apoftat-e,  who  was  fanclified  ffet 
•apart  for  his  prieftly  office)  by  the  blood  of  the 
covenant.” 

Either  you  forgot  to  look  at  the  original,  or 
your  memory  fails.  The  Son  of  God  is  not  the 

immediate 


[ ^8  j 

immediate  antecedent  to  the  relative  he.  The 
words  run  thus  : Of  how  much  forer  punifhment 
Jhall  he  be  thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under 
foot  the  Son  of  God?  y.Xi  To  a. lux.  T r,c  a.ccbr/s.r.c  y.oiiot 
ryyvo’ay.tv®',  iv  u nytucOh/l.  \ OU  fee  not 

Vi&,  is  the  immediate  antecedent  to  the  relative 
he.  Confequently  it  is  the  apoflate,  not  the  Son 
of  God,  who  is  here  faid  to  be  fanctified. 

“ If  he  was  fanftified,  yet  this  cannot  be  un- 
derftood  of  inward  fanflification.  Therefore  it 
muft  mean,  either  that  he  faid  he  was  fanftified, 
or  that  he  made  an  outward  profeffion  of  reli- 
gion.” 

Why  cannot  the  word  be  underflood  in  its 
proper  natural  fenfe,  of  inward  fanftification  ? 

“ Becaufe  that  is  by  the  Spirit  of  God.” 
From  this  very  confideration  it  appears,  that  this 
muft  be  underflood  of  inward  fanflification  : for 
the  words  immediately  following  are,  and  hath 
done  defpite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace,  even  that  grace 
whereby  he  was  once fanclified. 

It  remains,  that  thofe  who  are  fandtified  by 
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  may  yet  perifh  ever- 
laftingly. 

LXXVIII.  If  you  imagine  thefe  texts  are  not 
fufficient  to  prove,  that  a true  believer  may 
finally  fall,  I will  offer  a few  more  to  your  con- 
fideration, which  I would  beg  you  to  weigh  far- 
ther at  your  leifure. 


Matt. 


[ 239  ] 

Matt.  v.  13.  Ye  (Chriftians)  are  the.  fait  of  the 
earth.  But  if  the  fait  have  lojl  its favour,  where- 
' With  (hall  it  be  failed?  It  is  thenceforth  good  for 
-nothing,  but  to  be  cafl  out,  and  trodden  under  foot 
of  men. 

Chap.  xii.  45.  When  the  unclean  fpirit  goeth 
out  of  a man,  (as  he  does  out  of  every  true  be- 
liever) he  walketh  through  dry  places, feeking  ref, 
and fndeth  none.  Then  he  faith , I will  return — 
and  he  taketh  with  him  feven  other  fpirits — and 
they  enter  in,  and  dwell  there.  And  the  lajl fate  of 
that  man  is  zvorfe  than  the  firf. 

Chap,  xxiv,  to,  &c.  And  then  fall  many  be 
offended— and  the  love  (toward  God  and  man)  of 
many  fall  wax  cold.  But  he  that  fall  endure  to 
the  end,  the  fame  fall  be  faved. 

Ver.  4,5,  &c.  Who  then  is  a faithful  and  wife 
fervant,  whom  his  lord  hath  made  ruler  over  his 
houfold?  — But  if  that  evil  fervant  (wife  and 
faithful  as  he  was  once)  fall  begin  to  finite  his 
fellow  fervant  s — the  Lord  fall  cut  him  afunder, 
and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites , 
apoftates,  being  no  better  than  they. 

Luke  xxi.  Take  heed  to  yourfelves  (ye  that  be- 
lieve) lef  at  any  time  your  heart  be  overcharged 
ju'ith  the  cares  of  this  life,  and fo  that  day  come  upon 
you  unawares.  Plainly  implying,  that  otherwife 
they  would  not  be  accounted  worthy  to  Jland  be- 
fore the  Son  of  man. 

John  viii.  31,  32.  If  ye  continue  in  my  word, 

then 


[ 24°  ] 

then  are  ye  my  difciples  indeed.  And  ye  Jkall  knew 
the  truth,  and  the  truth  Jhall  make  you  fret. 

1 Cor.  ix.  27.  I keep  my  body  under — leji  by 
any  means,  when  I have  preached  to  others,  l my - 
ftlf  Jhould  be  a cajl-away. 

1 Cor.  x.  g,  &c.  Our  fathers  did  all  eat  the 
fame  fpiritual  meat,  and  did  all  drink  the  fame 
fpiritual  drink  (for  they  drank  of  that  fpiritual 
rock  that  followed  them,  and  that  rock  was  Chriji.) 
But  with  many  of  them  God  was  not  well  pleafed  • 
for  they  were  overthrown  in  the  wildernefs — Sow 
ihefe  things  were  for  our  examples — JVherefore  let 
him  that  thinketk  he  fandeth,  take  heed  left  he 

fall. 

2 Cor.  vi.  1.  We  therefore^  as  workers  together 
with  him,  befeech  you,  that  ye  receive  not  the  grace: 
of  God  in  vain.  But  this  were  impoffible,  if  none 
that  ever  had  it  could  perifh. 

Gal.  v.  4.  Ye  are  fallen  from  grace. 

Chap.  vi.  q.  We  Jhall  reap,  if  we  faint  not. 
Therefore  we  Hi  all  not  reap,  if  we  do. 

Heb.  iii.  4.  We  are  made  partakers  of  Chriji,  if 
wehold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  fedfafl  unto 
the  end. 

2 Pet.  iii.  17.  Beware,  left  ye  alfo  being  led 
away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your 
own  JledfaJhefs. 

2 John  v.  8.  Look  to  \ov  fives,  that  we  lofe 
not  the  things  which  we  have  wrought. 

Rev.  iii.  11.  Hold  that  fajl  which  thou  hap, 
that  no  man  take  thy  crown.  And  to  conclude, 

So 


[ 24*  ] 

So  likemfe JJlall  my  heavenly  Father  do  alfo  unto 
you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one 
lus  brother  their  trefpaffes.  Matt,  xviii.  g£.  So! 
How?  He  will  retrafil  the  pardon  he  had  given, 
and  deliver  you  to  the  tormentors. 

LXXIX.  “ Why  then  you  make  falvation 
conditional.”  I make  it  neither  conditional  nor 
unconditional.  But  I declare  juft  what  I find  in 
the  btble,  neither  more  nor  left  ; namely,  that  it 
is  bought  for  every  child  of  rnan,  and  aflually 
given  to  every  one  that  believeth.  If  you  call 
this  conditional  falvation,  God  made  it  fo  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world  : and  he  hath  declared, 
it  fo  tobe,  at  fundry  times  and  in  divers  man- 
ners: of  old  by  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  and  in 
latter  times  by  Chrift  and  his  apoftles. 

“ Then  I never  can  be  faved;  for  I can  per- 
form no  conditions;  for  I can  do  nothing.”  No, 
nor  I:  nor  any  man  under  heaven, — without  the 
grace  of  God.  But  I can  do  all  things  through 
Chrift Jlrengthemng  me.  So  can  you.  So  can  every 
believer.  And  he  has  ftrengthened,  and  will 
ftrengthen  you  more  and  more,  if  you  do  not 
wilfully  refill,  till  you  quench  his  Spirit. 

LXXX.  “ Nay,  but  God  mud  work  ineffli- 
bly  in  me,  or  I fhall  never  be  faved.”  Hold! 
Confider  that  word.  You  are  again  advancing  a 
doffrine  which  has  not  one  plain,  clear  text  to 
flipport  it.  I allow,  God  may  poftibly  at  fornt 

Vol.  XX.  L times. 


C 242  ] 

times,  woik  irrefiftibly  in  fame  fouls.  I believe 
lie  dots.  But  can  you  infer  from  lienee,  that  he 
always  works  thus  in  all  that  are  faved  ? Alas,  my 
brother,  what  kind  of  conclufion  is  this?  And  by 
what  feripture  will  you  prove  it?  Where,  I pray, 
is  it  written,  that  none  are  faved  but  by  irrefiftible 
grace?  By  almighty  grace,  I grant ; by  that  pow- 
er alone,  t«o  which  all  things  are  poflible.  But 
fhew  me  -any  one  plain  feripture  for  this,  That 
“ all  faring  grace  is  irrefiftible.” 

LXXX1.  But  this  doctrine  is  not  only  unfup- 
ported  bv  fcnpttire.  It  is  flatly  contrary  thereto. 
How  will  you  reconcile  it  (to  inflance  in  a very 
few)  with  the  following  texts? 

Matt.  xxii.  3,  &c.  He  fait  to  call  them,  and 
they  would  not  come. 

Mark  vi.  5.  He  could  do  no  mighty  works  there , 
becanfe  of  their  unbelief. 

Luke  v.  17.  There  were  pharifees,  and  the  power 
cf  the  Lord  was  prefent  to  heal  them.  Neverthe- 
lefs  they  were  not  healed  in  fa£l,  ^s  the  words 
immediately  following  fhew. 

Luke  vii.  29.  The  pharifees  and  lawyers  made 
void  the  court /el  of  God,  again  jl  themfelves. 

Luke  xiii.  34.  0 jferufalem,  Jerufalem,  how 
often  would  I have  gathered  thy  children,  and  ye 
would  not. 

John  vi,  63,  See.  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quicken- 
eth ; -the  words  that  If  peak  unto  you,  they  are  Spirit. 

But 


But  there  are  fome  of  you  that  believe  not.  There- 
fore that  Spirit  did  not  work  irrefiftibly. 

Acts  vii.  41.  Ye  do  always  reff  the  Holy  Ghof  : 
as  your  fathers  did,  Jo  do  ye. 

Chap.  xiii.  46.  Ye  put  it  from  you,  and  judge 
yourftlves  unworthy  of  eternal  life. 

Heb.  iii.  8.  While  it  is  called  to-day,  harden  not 
your  heart. 

Ibid.  ver.  12.  Take  heed  lef  there  be  in  tiny  of 
you  an  evil  heart  cf  unbehej,  departing  from  the 
living  God. 

Heb.  xii.  25.  See  that  ye  rfufe  not  him  that 
fpeaketh. 

LXXXII.  I do  but  juft  give  you  a fpecimen  of 
the  innumerable  fcriptures  which  might  be  pro- 
duced on  this  head.  And  why  will  you  adhere 
to  an  opinion  not  only  unfupported  by,  but  utter- 
ly contrary  both  to  reafon  and  fcripture?  Be 
pleafed  to  obferve  here  alfo,  that  you  are  not  to 
tonfider  the  dodbine  of  irreftftible  grace  by  itfelf, 
any  more  than  that  of  unconditional  election,  or 
final  perfeverance : but  as  it  ftands  in  connexion 
with  unconditional  reprobation,  that  millftone 
which  hangs  about  the  neck  of  your  whole  hypo- 
thefis. 

Will  you  fay,  “ I adhere  to  it,  becaufe  of  its 
ufefulnefs ?”  Wherein  does  that  ufefulnefs  lie? 
M It  exalts  God  and  debafes  man.”  Inwhatfenfe 
does  it  exalt  God?  God  in  himfelf  is  exalted 
above  all-praife.  Your  meaning  therefore  I fup- 
L 2 pofe 


I 

[ *44  ] 

pofe  is  this:  it  difplavs  to  others  how  highly  he 
is  exalted,  in  jullice,  mercy,  and  truth.  But 
thedirecl  contrary  of  this  has  been  fhewn  at  large  : 
it  has  been  {hewn  by  various  confiderations,  that 
God  is  not  exalted,  but  rather  diihonoured,  and 
that  in  the  higheft  degree,  by  fuppofing  him  to 
defpifethe  work  of  his  own  hands,  the  far  great- 
er part  of  the  fouls  which  he  hath  made.  And 
as  to  the  debafing  man ; if  you  mean,  “ This 
opinion  truly  humbles  the  men  that  hold  it,”  I 
fear  it  does  not ; I have  not  perceived  ( and  I have 
had  large  occalion  to  make  the  trial)  that  all,  or 
even  tire  generality  of  them  that  hold  it,  areunore 
humble  than  other  -men.  Neither,  I think,  will 
you  fav,  that  none  are  humble,  whohold  it  not: 
lo  that  it  is  neither  a nec^fary,  nor  a certain 
means  of  humility.  And  if  it  be  fo  fometimes, 
this  only  proves  that  God  can  bring  good  out  of 
evil. 

LXXXIII.  The  truth  is,  neither  this  opinion 
nor  that,  but  the  love  of  God  humbles  man,  and 
that  only.  Let  but  this  be  Ihed  abroad  in  his 
heart,  and  he  abhots  himfelf  in  dull  and  afhes. 
As  foon  as  this  enters  into  his  foul,  lowly  lhame 
covers  his  face.  That  thought,  what  is  God? 
what  hath  he  done  for  me?  Is  immediately  fol- 
lowed by,  what  am  I ? And  he  knoweth  not  what 
to  do,  or  where  to  hide,  or  how  to  abafe  him- 
felf  enough,  before  the  great  God  of  love,  of 

whom 


[ 2 45  3 

whom  he  now  knowetb,  that  as  his  majefly  is,  fo 
is  his  mercy.  Let  him  who  has  felt  this,  (what- 
ever be  his  opinion)  fay,  whether  he  could  then 
take  glory  tohimfelf?  Whether  he  could  afcribe 
to  himfelf  any  part  of  his  falvation,  or  the  glory 
of  any  good  word  or  thought  ? Lean  then,  who 
will,  on  that  broken  reed  for  humility:  but  let 
the  love  of  God  humble  my  foul ! 

LXXXIV.  “ Why  this  is  the  very  thing  which 
recommends  it.  This  do&rine  makes  men  love 
God.”  I anfwer  as  before : accidentally  it  may ; 
becaufe  God  can  draw  good  out  of  evil.  But  you 
will  not  fay  all  who  hold  it  love  God  ; fo  it  is  no 
certain  means  to  that  end.  Nor  will  you  fay,  that 
none  love  him  who  hold  it  not.  Neither  there- 
fore is  it  a necrjfary  means.  But  indeed  when 
you  talk  at  all  of  its  “ making  men  love  God,” 
you  know  not  what  you  do.  You  lead  men  into 
more  danger  than  you  are  aware  of.  You  almoft 
unavoidably  lead  them  into  re  fling  on  that  opi- 
nion: you  cut  them  off  from  a true  dependence 
on  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  ftrengthen 
them  in  hewing  to  themfelves  broken  cifterns, 
which  can  hold  no  water. 


LXXXV.  This  is  my  grand  objection  to  the 
dofclrine  of  reprobation,  or  (which  is  the  fame) 
unconditional  eleftion.  That  it  is  an  error  I 
know;  becaufe  if  this  were  true, the  whole  fcripture 
mult  be  falfe.  But  it  is  not  only  for  this,  becaufe 
L3  it 


[ 1 

it  is  an  error,  that  I fo  earneflly  oppofe  it,  but 
beraufe  it  is  an  error  of  fo  pernicious  confequen- 
ces  to  the  fouls  of  men;  becaufe  it  directly  and 
naturally  tends  to  hinder  the  inward  work  of  God 
in  every  ftage  of  it. 

LXXXVI.  For  inflance.  Is  a man  carelefsand 
unconcerned,  utterly  dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins? 
Exhort  him  then  (fuppofe  he  is  of  your  own  opi- 
nion) to  take  fome  care  of  his  immortal  foul.  “ I 
take  care  fays  he!  What  fignifies  my  care  ? Why 
what  muft  be,  mud  be.  If  I am  ele£t,  I muff  be 
faved:  and  if  I am  not,  I muff  be  damned.” 
And  the  reafoning  is  as  juft  and  ftrong,  as  it  is 
obvious  and  natural.  It  avails  not  to  fay,  “men 
may  abufe  any  doffrine.”  So  they  may.  But 
this  is  not  abufing  your3.  Ii  is  the  plain,  natural 
vje  of  it.  The  premifes  cannot  be  denied  (on 
your  fcheme)  and  the  confequence  is  equally  clear 
and  undeniable.  Is  he  a little  feriousand  thought- 
ful now  and  then,  though  generally  cold  and 
lukewarm  ? Prefs  him  then  to  ftir  up  the  gift  that 
is  in  1 im,  to  work  out  his  own  falvation  with 
fear  and  trembling.  Alas,  fays  he,  what  can  I do? 
You  know  man  can  do  nothing.  If  vou  reply, 
but  you  do  notdefire  falvation.  You  are  not  wil- 
ling to  be  faved.  It  may  be  fo,  fays  he,  but 
God  {hall  make  me  willing  in  the  day  of  his  pow- 
er. - So  waiting  for  irrehftible  grace  he  falls  fafter 
afleep  than  ever.  See  him  again,  when  he  tho- 
roughly awakes  out  of  fleep ; when,  in  fpite  of 

Ida 


[ 247  ] 

fits  principles,  fearfulaefs  and  trembling  are  come 
upon  him,  and  an  horrible  dread  hath  over- 
whelmed him.  How  then  will  you  comfort  one 
who  is  well-nigh  fwallowed  up  of  over- much 
follow?  If  at  all,  by  applying  the  promifes  of 
God.  But  againd  thefe  he  is  fenced  on  every 
fide.  Thefe  indeed,  fays  he,  are  great  and  pre- 
cious promifes.  But  they  belong  to  the  eleft 
#nly.  Therefore  they -are  nothing  to  me.  Iam 
not  of  that  number.  And  I never  can  be:  for 
his  decree  is  unchangeable.  Has  he  already  tail- 
ed of  the  good  word,  and  the  powers  of  the  world 
to  come?  Being  jullified  by  faith  hath  he  peace 
with 'God?  Then  fin  hath  no  dominion  over 
him.  But  by  and  by,  confidering  he  may  fall 
foully  indeed,  but  cannot  fall  finally , he  is  not  fo 
jealous  over  himfelf  as  he  was  at  firff,  he  grows  a 
little  and  a little  flacker,  till  e’re  long  he  falls 
again  into  the  fin,  from  which  he  was  clean  ef- 
caped.  As  foon  as  you  perceive  he  is  intangfed 
again  and  overcome,  you  apply  the  fcriptures 
relating  to  that  date.  You  conjure  him  not  to 
harden  his  heart  any  more,  led  his  lad  date  be 
worfe  than  the  frd.  “ How  can  that  be,  fays 
he,  once  in  grace,  always  in  grace  : and  I am  fure 
I was  in  grace  once.  You  fliall  never  tear  away 
my  fh i e 1 d . ’ So  he  fins  on,  and  fleeps  on,  till 'he 
awakes  in  hell. 

LXXXVII.  The  obferving  thefe  melancholy 
examples  day  by  day,  this  dreadful  bavock 
L g which 


C **8  ] 

which  the  devil  makes  of  fouls,  efpeciaily  of  thofe 
who  had  begun  to  run  well,  by  means  of  this 
anrifcriptural  dofhine,  condrains  me  to  oppofe 
it  from  the  fame  principle  whereon  I labour  to 
fave  fouls  from  dedruflion.  Nor  is  it  fufficient 
to  aflt,  are  there  not  alfo  many  who  wred  the  op- 
pofite  doffrine  to  their  own  dedruction  ? If  there 
are,  that  is  nothing  to  the  point  in  quedion:  for 
that  is  not  the  cafe  here.  Here  is  no  wreding  at 
all : the  dof'trine  of  abfolute  prededination  na- 
turally leads  to  the  chambers  of  death. 

Let  an  indance  in  each  kind  be  propofed,  and 
the  difference  is  fo  broad,  he  that  runneth  may 
read  it.  I fay,  “ Chrift  died  for  all.  He  taded 
detuh  for  every  man,  and  he  tvilleth  all  men  to 
be  faved.  O fays  an  hearer,  then  I can  be  faved, 
when  I will;  fo  I may  fafely  fin  a little  longer.” 
No,  this  is  no  confequence  from  what  I faid  : 
the  words  are  wrejlcd  to  infer  what  does  not  fol- 
low. You  fay,  “ Chrid  died  only  for  the  eleft: 
and  all  thefe  mud  and  fli all  be  faved.  O,  fays  an 
hearer,  then  if  I am  one  of  the  eleft,  I mud  and 
fhall  be  faved.  Therefore  I may  fafely  fin  a little 
longer;  for  my  falvation  cannot  fail.”  Now  this 
is  a fair  confequence  from-  what  you  faid:  the 
words  are  not  wreded  at  all.  No  more  is  infer- 
red than  what  plainly  and  undeniably  follows 
from  thepremifes.  And  the  very  fame  obferva- 
ticn  may  be  made  on  every  article  of  that  doc- 
trine. Every  branch  of  it,  as  well  as  this,  (how- 
ever the  wifdom  of  God  may  fometimes  draw- 

good 


[ 249  ] 

good  out  of  it)  has  a natural,  genuine  tendency, 
without  any  wrefting,  either  to  prevent  or  cbftrufjfc 
holinefs. 

LXXXVIII.  Brethren,  would  ye  he  for  the 
caufe  of  God  ? I am  perfuaded,  ye  would  not. 
Think  then  that  as  ye  are,  fo  am  I : I fpeak  the 
truth,  before  God  my  judge;  not  of  thofe  who 
were  trained  up  therein,  but  of  thofe  who  were 
lately  brought  over  to  your  opinion.  Many  of 
tbefe  have  I known,  but  I have  not  known  one 
in  ten  of  all  that  number,  in  whom  it  did  not 
fpeedily  work  feme  of  the  above-named  effects, 
according  to  the  hate  of  foul  they  were  then  in. 
And  one  only  have  I known  among  them  all,  af- 
ter the  clofefl  and  moft  impartial"  obfervation, 
who  did  not  evidently  fhew,  within  one  year, 
that  his  heart  was  changed,  not  for  the  better, 
but  for  the  worfe. 

LXXXIX.  I know  indeed,  ye  cannot  eafily 
believe  this.  But  whether  ve  believe  it  or  no,, 
you  believe,  as  well  as  I,  that  without  holinefs 
no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lord.  May  we  not  then, 
at leaft,  join  in  this,  in  declaring  the  nature  of 
inward  holinefs,  and  teflifying  to  all  the  necefli- 
ty  of  il  ? May  we  not  all  thus  far  join,  in  tearing 
away  the  broken  reeds  wherein  fo  many  reft, 
without  either  inward  or  outward  holinefs,  and 
which  they  idly  truft  will  fupply  its  place  ? As  far 
as  is  poflible  let  us  join  in  deftroying  the  woidts 
L 5 of 


[ 25°  J 

of  the  devil,  and  in  fetting  up  the  kingdom  of 
God  upon  earth,  in  promoting  righteoufnefs, 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

Of  whatever  opinion  or  denomination  we  are, 
we  muft  ferve  either  Godor  the  devil.  If  we  ferve 
God,  our  agreement  is  far  greater  than  cur  differ- 
ence. Therefore,  as  far  as  may  be,  fetting  aftde 
that  difference,  let  us  unite  in  dedroyjrg.  the 
works  of  the  devil,  in  bringing  all  we  can  from 
the  power  of  darknefs  into  the  kingdom  of  God’s 
dear  Son.  And  let  us  affifl  each  other  to  value 
more  and  more  the  glorious  grace  whereby  we 
ftand,  and  daily  to  grow  in  that  grace  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jefus  ChrifL 


IHE 


[ 25x  ] 


T H E 


C O N S EOU  E N -C  E 

P ROVED, 


/TR.  Toplady,  a young,  bold  man,  lately 

-LVA  publifhed  a pamphlet,  an  exfratt  from 
which  was  foon  after  printed,  concluding  with 
thefe  words  : 

“ The  funi  of  all  is  this  ; One  in  twenty  (fup- 
pofe)  of  mankind  are  eieEled ; nineteen  in  twenty 
are  reprobated.  The  eki 3 fhall  be  faved,  do 
what  they  will  : the  reprobate  fhall  be  damned, 
do  what  they  can.” 

2.  A great  outcry  has  been  raifed  on  that  ac= 
count,  as  though  this  was  not  a fair  date  of  the 
cafe:  and  it  has  been  vehemently  affirmed,  that 
no  fuch  confequence  follows  from  the  doftrine 
of  abfolute  predeftination. 

L 6 


I cal  inly 


[ _ 25z  } 

I calmly  affirm,  It  is  a fair  hate  of  the  cafe: 
this  confequence  does  naturally  and  neceffarily 
follow  from  the  doftrine  of  abfolute  predeftina- 
tion,  as  here  hated  and  defended  by  bold  Mr. 
Auguftus  Toplady, 

Indeed  I have  not  leifure  to  confider  the  mat- 
ter at  large.  I can  only  make  a few  ftriftures, 
and  leave  the  young  man  to  be  farther  correfted 
by  (one  that  is  full  his  match)  Mr.  Thomas 
Olivers. 

3.  “ When  love  is  predicated  of  God,  it 
imples,  1 His  everlafling  will,  ptirpofe,  and 
determination,  to  fave  his  people  .+”  I appeal 
to  all  men,  whether  it  is  not  a natural  confe- 
quence even  of  this  that  “ all  t'nefe  ffiall  be  fav- 
cd,  do  what  they  will.” 

You  may  fay,  “ O,  but  they  will  do  only 
what  is  good.”  Be  it  fo.  Yet  the  confequence- 
hands. 

“ EleElion  fignifies,  that  Jovercign,  uncondi- 
tional, immutable  aft  of  God  whereby  he Jelc&ed 
fome  to  be  eternally  faved.”  Immutable , uncon . 
ditional  l From  hence  then  it  undeniably  follows, 
“ Thefe  lhall  be  faved,  do  what  they  will.” 

“ Predeftination,  as  relating  to  the  eleft,  is 
that  irreverfible  aft  of  the  divine  will,  whereby 
God  determined  to  deliver  a certain  number  of 
men  from  hell.”  Ergo , That  certain  number  lhall 
infallibly  he  faved  do  what  they  will.  Who  cam 
deny  the  confequence  ? 

" Not 

+ Mr.  T.’s  traft;  chap.  1, 


[ 2 <53  J 

si  Notone  of  the  eleff  can  perifb,  but  they 
nuillall  necelfarily  be  faved.t”  Can  any  affert 
this,  and  yet  deny  that  confequence,  therefore 
all  the  eleft  (hall  be  faved,.  do  what  they  will  ? 
Unlefs  you  would  fay,  it  is  the  propofition  itfelf, 
rather  than  a confequence  from  it. 

4.  So  much  for  the  former  part  of  tire  quef- 
tion  : let  us  now  confider  the  latter. 

“ Hatred  afcribed  to  God,  implies,  a refolu- 
tion  not  to  have  mercy  on  fuck  and  fuck  men. 
So  Efau  have  I hated  \ that  is,  I did  from  all  eter- 
nity determine,  not  to  have  mercy  on  him.};” 
In  other  words  -T 

I bv  my  dire  decree  did  feal 
Hisfixt,  unalterable  doom  ; 

Confign'd  his  unborn  foul  to  hell, 

And  damn’d  him  from  his  mother’s  womb. 

Well  then,  does  it  not  follow  by  unavoidable 
confequence,  that  Jack  and  Jiich  men,  poor,  hat- 
ed Elau  in  particular,  “ fhall  be  damned,  do 
what  they  can  ?” 

“ Reprobation  denotes  God’s  eternal  preteri- 
tion  of  fome  men,  and  his  predeftination  of 
them  to  deftruclion.’’  And  is  it  poffible  for  them, 
by  any  thing  they  can  do,  to  prevent  thatde- 
llrubfion  ? You  fay,  no.  It  follows,  they  “ fhall 
be  damned,  do  what  they  can.” 

“ Predefiination, 
+ Chap,  g,  } Chap.  1, 


L 2 .54  ] 

“ Predeflination,  as  it  regards  the  reprobate, 
is  that  immutable  aft  of  God’s  will,  wherebv  he 
hath  determined  to  leave  fame  men  to  periffi.”  And 
can  they  avoid  it,  by  any  thing'they  do  ? You 
affirm,  they  cannot.  Again  therefore  it  follows, 
thefe  “ fhall  be  damned,  do  what  they  can.” 

“ We  affert,  there  is  a predeflination  of  par- 
ticular pcrjbns  to  death  : which  death  they  fhall 
inevitably  undergo.”  That  is,  “ They  fhall  be 
damned,  do  what  they  can.” 

“ The  non-eleEl  were  predeflinated  to  eternal 
death.4”  &rgo,  “ They  fhall  be  damned,  do 
what  they  can.” 

“ The  condemnation  of  the  reprobate  is  ne- 
ceffary  and  inevitable.”  Surely  I need  add  no 
more  on  this  head.  You  fee,  that  “ the  repro- 
bate fhall  be  damned,  do  what  they  can,”  is  the 
whole  burden  of  the  fong. 

5.  Take  only  two  precious  fentences  more, 
which  include  the  whole  queflion. 

“ We  affert,  that  the  number  of  the  elefl,  1 
and  alfo  of  the  reprobate,  is  fo  fixt  and  determi- 
nate, that  neither  can  be  augmented  cr  duninijh- 
ed and, 

“ That  the  decrees  ofeleftion  and  reprobation 
are  immutable  and  irreverfible 
_ From  each  of  thefe  affertions,  the  whole  con- 
fequence  follows,  clear  as  the  noon-day  fun. 
Therefore,  “ The  eleft  fhall  be  faved,  do  what 

they 


f Chap.  2, 


i Chap.  a. 


C 2 <55  ] 

they  will : the  reprobate  fhall  be  damned,  do 
what  they  can.” 

6.  I add  a word,  with  regard  to  another  branch, 
of  this  kind,  charitable  dobhine. 

Mr.  Topladyfays  t,  “ God  has  a pofttive  will 
to  deftrov  the  reprobate  for  their  fins.”  For 
their fins  ! , How  can  that  be  ? I pofitively  afTerf, 
That  (on  this  fcheme)  they  have  no  fins  at  all. 
They  never  had  : they  can  have  none.  For  it 
cannot  be  a fin  in  a fpark  to  rife,  or  in  a flone 
to  fall.  And  the  fpark  or  the  Hone  is  not  more 
neceffarily  determined  either  to  life  or  to  fall,, 
than  the  man  is  to  fin,  to  commit  that  rape,  or 
adultery,  or  murder.  For  “ God  did  before  all 
rime,  determine  and  direbl  to  fome  particular 
end,  every  perfon  or  thing,  to  which  he  has 
given,  or  is  yet  to  give  being.”  God  himfeif  did 
“ predeliinate  them  to  fill  up  the  meafure  of  their 
iniquities  fuch  was  his  fovereign,  irrefiflible 
decree,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  To 
fill  up  the.  vieafure  cf  their  iniquities,  that  is,  to 
commit  every  abb  which  they  committed.  So 
“ God  J decreed  the  Jews  to  be  the  crucifiers  of 
Cbrift,  and  Judas  to  betray  him.”  Whofe  fault 
was  it  then  P You  plainly  fay,  it  was  not  his  fault, 
but  God’s.  For  what  was  Judas,  or  ten  thou- 
fand  reprobates  befides?  Could  they  refift  his 
decree?  No  more  than  they  could  pull  the  fun 
out  of  the  firmament  of  heaven.  And  would 
God  punifh  them  with  everlafting  deflrubtion,  for 

not 

i Chap,  i,  ^ Chap.  4. 


C *5$  J 

not  pulling  the  fun  out  of  the  firmament  ? He 
might  as  well  do  it  for  this,  as  for  their  not  doing 
what  (on  this  fuppofition)  was  equally  impofifible. 
“ But  they  are  punifhed  ior  their  impenitency,. 
fin,  and  unbelief.”  Say  unbelief  and  impeciten- 
cy  ; but  not  fin.  For  “ God  had  predellinated 
them  to  continue  in  impenitency  and  unbelief. 
God  had  pofnively  ordained  them  to  continue 
in  their  bltndnefsand  hardnefs  of  heart.”  There- 
fore their  not  repenting  and  behoving  was  no 
more  a fin,  than  their  not  pulling  the  fun  Irom 
heaven. 

7.  Indeed  Mr.  T.  hirafelf  owns,  “ The  fins  of 
the  reprobate  were  not  the  caufe  of  their  being 
pajl  by,  but  merely  and  intireiy  the  fovereign 
will  and  determinating  pleafure  of  God.” 

“ O,  but  their  fin  was  the  caufe  of  their  dam- 
nation,  though  not  of  their preterition  that  is, 
God  determined  they  fnould  live  and  die  in  their 
fins,  that  he  might  afterwards  damn  them  ! 

* Was  ever  any  thing  like  this  ? \es,  I have 
read  fomething  like  it.  When  Tiberius  had  de- 
termined to  deflroy  Sejanus  and  all  his  family,  as 
it  was  unlawful  to  put  a virgin  to  death,  what 
could  be  done  with  his  daughter,  a child  of  nine 
years  old  ? Why,  the  hangman  was  ordered  firft 
to  deflower,  and  then  to  frangle  her  ! Yet  even 
good  Tiberius  did  not  order  her  to  be  flrangled, 
“ Becauje  fhe  had  been  deflowered  !”  If  fo,  it 
had  been  a parallel  cafe  : it  had  been  juft  what  is 
here  affirmed  of  the  Moll  High. 


8.  One 


C 257  ] 

8.  One  word  more.  “ I will  obviate,  fays  Mr. 
T.  a fallacious  objection,  How  is  reprobation  re- 
concileable  with  the  doHrine  of  a future  judg- 
ment ? There  needs  no  pains  to  reconcile  tbefe 
two.”  No  pains!  Indeed  there  does:  more 
pains  than  all  the  men  upon  earth,  or  all  the  de- 
vils in  hell  will  ever  be  able  to  take.  But  go  on. 
“ In  the  laft  day,  Chrift  will  pafs  fentence  on  the 
Eon-eledti  1.  Not  for  having  done  what  they  could 
not  help,  but,  2.  For  their  wilful  ignorance  of  di- 
vine things,  3.  For  their  obfanate  unbelief  4.  For 
their  omiffons  of  moral  duty,  and,  5.  For  their 
repeated  iniquities  and  tranfgreffonsH 

* Fie  will  condemn  them,  l.  “ Not  for  having 
done  what  they  could  not  help.”  I fav,  yes; 
for  having  finned  againfl:  God  to  their  lives  end. 
But  this  they  could  not  help.  He  had  himfelf 
decreed  it.  He  had  determined,  they  fhould 
continue  impenitent.  2.  “ For  their  wilful  ig- 
norance of  divine  things.”  No.  Their  ignor- 
ance of  God,  and  the  things  of  God,  was  not 
wilful,  was  not  originally  owing  to  their  own 
will,  but  to  the  fovereign  will  of  God.  His  will, 
not  theirs,  was  the  primary  caufe  of  their  con- 
tinuing in  that  ignorance,  g.  “ For  their  obfii- 
nale  unbelief.'’  No  : how  can  it  be  termed  obfti- 
nate,  when  they  never  had  a poffibility  of  remov- 
ing it  ? When  God  had  abfolurely  decreed,  be- 
fore they  were  born,  that  they  fnould  live  and 
die  therein?  4.  “ For  their  omiffions  of  moral 
duty:''  that  is,  for  not  loving  God  and  their 

neighbour. 


[ J 

neighbour,  which  is  the  fum  of  the  moral  law. 
Was  it  then  ever  in  their  power  to  love  Gc.d  an  d 
their  neighbour?  No;  no  more  than  to  touch 
heaven  with  their  hand  Had  not  God  himfelf  un- 
alterably decreed,  that  they  fhould  not  love  either 
God  or  man?  If  therefore  they  are  condemned 
for  this,  they  are  condemned  for  what  they  never 
could  help.  5.  “ For  their  repeated  iniquities 
and  tranfgrejfionsi ” And  was  it  ever  in  their 
power  to  help  thefe  ? Were  they  not  predefti- 
nated  thereto  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  ? 
How  then  can  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  confign 
them  to  everlafting  fire,  for  what  was,  in  effeft, 
his  own  aft  and  deed? 

I apprehend  then  this  is  no  fallacious  objec- 
tion ; but  a folid  and  weighty  one  : and  defy 
any  man  living,  who  aliens  the  unconditional 
decree  of  reprobation  or  preterition  (juft  the 
fame  in  effeft)  to  reconcile  this  with  the  fcrip- 
ttjral  doftrine  of  a future  judgment.  I fay  again, 
I defy  any  man  on  earth  to  lhewr,  how,  on  this 
fcheme,  God  ca njifdge  the  world  in  righteoujnejs . 


T H OUGHTS 


C m ] 


THOUGHTS 

ON  THE 

IMPUTED  RIGHTEOUSNESS 


C H R I S T. 


l.  A Traci  lias  lately  been  publifhed  in  my 
-A-  name,  concerning  the  imputed  righteouf- 
ntfs  of  Chrifl.  This  calls  me  to  explain  myfelf 
upon  that  head;  which  1 will  do  with  all  the 
clearnefs  I can.  But  I quarrel  with  no  man  for 
thinking  or  fpeaking  otherwife  than  I do : I 
blame  none  for  ufing  thofe  expreffions  which  he 
believes  to  be  fcriptural.  If  he  quarrels  with  me 
for  not  ufing  them,  at  leafb,  not  fo  frequently  as 

hirafelf, 


£ 260  ] 

himfelf,  I can  only  pity  him,  and  wilh  him  more 
of  the  mind  which  was  inChriJl.  _ 

2.  The  righteoufnefs  q)  Chrijl  is  an  exprefhon 
which  I do  not  find  in  the  bible.  The  righteouf- 
nefs of  God  is  an  exprefiion  which  I do  find 
there.  I believe  this  means,  Firft,  The  mercy  of 
God,  as  2 Pet.  i.  1.  Them  that  have  obtained  bike 
precious  faith  with  us,  through  the  righteoufnefs  of 
God.  How  does  it  appear,  that  the  righteoufnefs 
of  God  here,  means  either  more  or  lefs  than  his 
mercy?  Pfalm  Ixxi.  lg,  See.  My  mouth  faall 
Otew  forth  thy  righteoufnefs  and  thy  falvation  : 
thy  mercy  in  delivering  me.  I will  make  mention 
of  thy  righteoufnefs  only.  Thy  righleoafnefs,  0 
God,  is  very  high.  Here  the  righteoufnefs  of  God 
is  exprefly  mentioned:  but  I will  not  take  upon 
me  to  fay,  that  it  means  the  righteoufnefs  or 
mercy  of  the  Son,  any  more  than  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft. 

3.  I believe  this  exprefiion  means,  Secondly, 
God’s  method  of  j unifying  finners.  So  Rom.  i. 
17.  I am  not  afhamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Chrijl,  for 
therein  is  the  righteoufnefs  of  God , his  way  of  jus- 
tifying finners,  revealed.  Chap.  iii.  21,  &x.  Now 
the  righteoufnefs  of  God  is  manifejled ; even  the 
righteoufnefs  of  God  which  is  by  faith;  (unlefs 
righteoufnefs  here  aifo  means  mercy']  jefus  Chrijl, 
whom  God  hath  fet  forth  to  be  a propitiation  thro' 
faith  in  his  blood:  io  declare  his  righteoufnefs  for 
the  remiffwn  oj  the  fms  that  are  pajl ; that  he  might 
be  jufl , and  yet  thejujlifer  of  him  that  believe!  h in 


C 261  ] 

7-efus.  Chap,  x.  3.  They  being  ignorant  of  God's 
righteoufnefs , method  of  j unifying  finners,  and 
going  about  to  ejlablijh  their  own  righteoufnefs,  a 
method  of  their  own,  oppofite  to  his,  have  not 
fubmitted  thenifelves  unto  the  righteoufnefs  of  God. 

4.  Perhaps  it  has  a peculiar  meaning  in  2 Cor. 
v.  21.  He  made  him  to  be  fin  for  us,  who  knew  no 
fin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteoufnefs  of  God, 
in  or  through  him:  that  we  might  be  jufiified 
and  fanftifted,  might  receive  the  whole  bleffing 
of  God  through  him. 

,5.  And  is  not  this  the  natural  meaning  of  Phil.  iii. 

-8,  9.  That  I may  win  Chrifi,  and  be  found  in  him, 
grafted  into  the  true  vine,  not  having  my  own 
'righteoufnefs,  the  method  ol  j uff i fication  which  I 
fo  long  cbofe  for  myfelf,  which  is  of  the  law,  but 
the  righteoufnefs  which  is  of  God,  the  method  of 
j-uftification  which  God  hath  chofen,  by  faith? 

6.  “ But  is  not  Chrifi:  termed  our  right  eouf- 
nefs?”  He  is,  Jer  xxiii.  6.  This  is  the  name 
whereby  he fall  be  called.  The  Lord  our  Righteouf- 
nefs. And  is  not  the  plain,  indifputable  meaning  ~ 
of  this  fcripture,  he  (hall  be  what  he  is  called,  the 
foie  purchafer,  the  foie  meritorious  caufe  both 
ol  our  jufiification  and  fan£f  ification  ? 

7.  Nearly  related  to  this  is  the  following  text, 

1 Cor.  i.  30.  Jefus  Chi  if  is  made  of  God  unto  us 
wifdom,  and  righteoufnefs,  and JanElification,  and  re- 
demption. And  what  does  this  prove,  but  that  he 
is  made  unto  us  righteoufnefs,  or  jufiification,  juft 
as  he  is  made  unto  us  fanclif  cation  ? In  what 

fenfe  ? 


[ 262  ] 

fenfe?  He  is  the  foie  author  of  one,  as  well  as 
of  the  other,  the  author  of  our  whole falvalicn. 

8.  There  feems  to  be  fomething  more  implied 
in  Rom.  x.  3.  Does  it  not  imply  thus  mu'ch  ? 
Chrijl  is  the  end  of  the  law,  not  only  of  the  Mo- 
faic  difpenfation,  but  of  the  law  of  works,  which 
was  given  to  Adam  in  his  original  perfe&ion, 

for  fight eo uf  le fs  to  every  one  that  believetk  ; to  the 
end  that  every  one  who  believeth  in  him,  though 
he  have  not  kept,  and  cannot  keep  that  law, 
may  be  both  accounted  and  made  righteous. 

9.  Accordingly  frequent  mention  is  made  in 
fcripture,  of  faith  counted for  righteoufnefs.  So 
Gen.  xv.  6.  He  (Abraham)  believed  in  the  Lord, 
and  he  counted  it  to  him  f or  righteoufnefs : a text 
iepeated,  with  but  little  variation,  over  and  over 
in  the  New  Teftament.  Rom.  iv.  3.  To  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him  who  juftifieth  the 
ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteoufnefs. 
Thus  it  was  that  Noah  became  heir  of  the  right e* 
oufntfs , the  jullification  which  is  by  faith,  Heb. 
xi.  7.  Thus  alfo  the  Gentiles,  when  the  Jews 
fell  fliort,  attained  to  righteoufnefs,  even  the  righ- 
teoufnefs which  is  by  faith,  Rom.  x.  30.  But  that 
expreflion,  The  righteoufnefs  of  Chrijl,  does  not 
occur  in  any  of  thele  texts. 

10.  It  feems  righteoufnefs  in  the  following 
texts  means  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  jujlifca- 
tion.  Gal.  ii.  21.  If  righteoufnefs  come  by  the 
law,  then  Chiifl  is  dead  in  vain.  Chap.  iii.  21. 
if  there  had  been  a law  which  could  have  given 

life, 


[ ^3  1 

life,  (fpiritual  life,  or  a title  -to  life  eternal)  then 
righteoufnefs  Jhou/d  have  been  by  the  law  : though 
fome  may  think  it  here  includes  fanftification 
alfo  : which  it  appears  to  do,  Rev.  xix.  8.  The 
fine  linen  is  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  faints. 

1 1.  But  when  St.  Paul  fays,  Rom.  v.  18.  By  the 
righteoufnefs  of  one  (called  in  the  following  verfe, 
the  obedience  of  one,  even  his  obedience  unto  death , 
his  dying  for  us)  the  free  gift  came , does  he  not 
mean  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift?”  Undoubtedly 
he  does.  But  this  is  not  the  queftion.  We  are 
not  enquiring  what  he  means,  but  what  he  fays. 
We  are  ail  agreed  as  to  the  meaning,  but  not  as 
to  the  expreffon.  The  imputing  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrijt ; which  I Hill  fay,  I dare  not  i r fill  upon, 
neither  require  any  one  to  ufe,  becaufe  I cannot 
find  it  in  the  bible.  If  any  one  can,  he  has  bet- 
ter eyes  than  me  : and  I wifh  he  would  Ihew 
me  where  it  is. 

12.  Now  if  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  we 
mean  any  thing  which  the  fcripture  does  not 
mean,  it  is  certain  we  put  darknefs  for  light.  'If 
we  mean  the  fame  which  the  fcripture  means  by 
different  expreffions,  why  do  we  prefer  this  ex- 
preflion  to  the  fcriptural  ? Is  not  this  correfting 
the  wifdom  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  oppofing  our 
own  to  the  perfedf  knowledge  of  God  ? 

13.  I am  myfelf  the  more  fparing  in  the  ufe 
of  it,  becaufe  it  has  been  fo  frequently  and  fo 
dreadfully  abufed  ; and  becaufe  the  Antinomians 
ufe  it  at  this  day,  to  juflify  the  groHeft  abomina- 


tions, 


[ E04  ] 

tlons.  And  ’tis  great  pity  that  thofe  who  love, 
who  preach  and  follow  after  holinefs,  fhould, 
under  the  notion  of  honouring  Chrift,  give  any 
countenance  to  thofe  who  continually  make  him 
the  minijler  of  Jin,  and  fo  build  on  his  righteouf- 
nefs,  as  to  live  in  fuch  ungodlinefs  and  unrig’nte- 
oufnefs  as  is  fcarce  named  even  among  the  Hea- 
thens. 

* 14.  And  doth  not  this  way  of  fpeaking  natu- 
rally tend  to  make  Chrift  the  miniller  of  fin  ? 
For  if  the  very  perfonal  obedience  of  Chrift  (as 
thofe  expreftions  direftly  lead  me  to  think}  be 
mine  the  moment  I believe,  can  any  thing  be 
added  thereto  ? Does  my  obeying  God  add  any 
value  to  the  perfe£l  obedience  of  Chrift  ? On 
this  fcheme  then,  are  not  the  holy  and  unholy 
on  the  very  fame  footing  P 

15.  Upon  the  whole,  I cannot  exprefs  my 
thoughts  better  than  in  the  words  of  that  good 
man  Mr.  Hervey.  “ If  people  may  be  fafe,  and 
their  inheritance  fecure,  without  any  knowledge 
of  thefe  particularities,  why  lhould  you  offer  to 
puzzle  their  heads  with  a few  unneceffary  terms  ? 
— We  are  not  very  folicirous  as  to  the  credit,  or 
the  ufe  of  any  particular  fet  of  phrafs.  Only 
let  men  be  humbled,  as  repenting  criminals , at  the 
Redeemer's  feet : let  them  rely,  as  devoted  pen - 
Ji oners,  on  his  precious  merits:  and  they  are  un- 
doubtedly in  the  way  to  a blifsful  immortality." 
Dialogues,  vol.  I-  p.  43.  Dublin  edition. 

Dublin,  April  5,  1762. 


A BLOW 


t 265  ] 


A 


BLOW  at  the  ROOT: 

o r5 

Chriji  (tabbed  in  the  Houfe  of  his  Friends. 


Judas,  hetrayefl  thou  the  fon  of  man  with  a kifs? 
Luke  xxii.  46. 


1,  J/Jfl  T HO  UT  holinefs  no  man  fhall fee  the 
Lord,  fhall  fee  the  face  of  God  in  glory. 
Nothing  under  heaven  can  be  more  fure  than 
this  : for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  fpoken  it. 
And  tho’  heaven  and  earth  pafs  away,  yet  his 
word  fhall  not  pafs  away.  As  well  therefore 

Vol.  XX.  M might 


[ 266  ] 

might'God  fall  from  heaven,  as  this  word  fall 
to  the  ground.  No,  it  cannot  be:  none  {hall 
1'rve  with  God,  but  he  that  now  lives  to  God. 
None  fliall  enjoy  the  glory  of  God  in  heaven, 
but  he  that  bears  the  image  of  God  on  earth. 
None  that  is  not  faved  from  flu  here,  can  be 
faved  from  hell  hereafter.  None  can  fee  the  king- 
dom of  God  above,  unlefs  the  kingdom  of  God 
be  in  him  below.  Whofoever  will  reign  with 
Chrift  in  heaven,  muft  have  Chrift  reigning  in 
him  on  earth.  He  muft  have  that  mind  in  him 
which  was  in  Chrift,  enabling  him  to  walk  as 
Chrift  alfo  walked. 

3..  And  yet  as  fure  as  this  is,  and  as  clearly  as 
it  is -taught  in  every  .part  of  the  holy  fcripture, 
there  is  fcarceone  among  all  the  truths  of  God, 
which  is  lefs  received  by  men.  It  was  indeed 
acknowledged  in  fonte  degree,  even  among  the 
wifer  Heathens.  Some  among  them  allowed, 
that  nothing  would  pleafe  God  but  the fandli  re~ 
cejfus  Mentis,  6?  incoclum  gener-ojo  pcclus  honejlo  ; 
A virtuous,  holy  mind,  and  an  heart  deep  dyed 
with  generous  honeflv.  But  though  they  could 
not  deny,  yet  how  eafily  and  effe£lually  did  they 
evade  this?  They  fancied  fomething  elfe  would 
do  as  well : that  fome  rites  or  ceremonies,  fume 
external  forms,  or  glorious  actions,  would  fup- 
ply  the  place  of  inward  holinefs.  So  the  famous 
Roman  entitles  to  future  happinefs,  not  only  the 
gcod  and  virtuous,  but  all 


Oh 


[ ^7  ] 

'Ob  pairin', n pugnando  vulnera  pqjfos, 

■Quique  pie  Fates,  & Pkccbo  digna  locuti ; 

Inventas  out  qui  vitam  excoluere  per  artes. 

So  to  fight  for  their  country,  to  write  good 
verfes,  or  to  invent  ufeful  arts,  was  abundantly 
fufficient,  in  the  judgment  of  the  wifelt  Hea- 
ihens,  to  give  men  a place  in  heaven  I 

3.  But  this  would  not  pafs  with  modern  Ro- 
mans. They  defpifed  fuch  grofs  imaginations. 
But  though  they  did  not  allow  thefe,  they  found 
out  another  way  to  get  to  heaven  without  holi- 
nefs.  In  the  room  of  them  they  fuhflituted  pe= 
•nances,  pilgrimages,  praying  to  faints  and  an- 
gels: and,  above  all  thefe,  malfes  for  the  dead, 
abfolution  by  a pried,  and  extreme  unftion. 
And  thefe  fatisfy  the  Rotnanifls  full  as  well,  as 
duftratiens  did  the  Heathens.  Thoufands  of  them 
make  no  manner  ol  doubt,  but,  by  a diligent 
ufe  of  thefe  without  any  holinefs  at  all,  they  lhall 

fte  the  Lord  in  glory. 

4.  -However  Prote Hants  will  not  be  fatisfied 
•thus  : the)'  know  this  hope  is  no  -better  than  a 
fpider’s  web.  They  are  convinced,  that  who- 
ever leans  on  this,  leans  on  the  ilaffef  a broken 
reed.  What  then  can  they  do  ? How  fha'l  they 
hope  to  fee  God  without  holinefs  ? Why,  by 
doing  no  harm,  doing  good,  going  to  the  church 
and  facrament.  And  many  thoufands  fit  down 
■content  with  this,  believing  they  are  in  the  high 
■road  to  heaven. 


M 2 


* Yet 


[ 268  ] 

5.  Yet  many  cannot  reft  here.  They  look  up- 
on this  as  the  very  popery  oj protejlanlfm.  They 
well  know,  that  although  none  can  be  a real 
Chriftian,  without  carefully  abftaining  from  all 
evil,  ufing  every  means  of  grace  at  every  oppor- 
tunity, and  doing  all  pofnbly  good  to  all  men: 
yet  a man  may  go  thus  far,  may  do  all  this,  and 
be  but  an  Heathen  ftill.  They  know  this  reli- 
gion is  too  ftiperficia!  : it  is  but  as  it  were  fkin- 
deep.  Therefore  it  is  not  Chriftianity  ; for  that 
lies  in  the  heart:  it  is,  worlhipping  God  in  Spi- 
rit and  in  truth.  It  isnoorher  than  the  kingdom  of 
God  within  us  : it  is  the  life  of  God  in  the  foul  of 
man.  It  is  the  mind  which  was  in  Chrift  Jefus  : 
it  is  righteovfnefs  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghcfl. 

6.  Befides,  they  fee  that,  be  this  religion  fhai- 
lower  or  deeper,  it  does  not  ftand  on  the  right 
foundation:  fin  ce.  other  foundation  for  true  reli- 
gion can  no  man  lay,  than  that  which  is  laid,  even 
Chrijl  Jefus:  fince  no  one  can  have  the  mind 
which  was  in  Chrift,  till  he  is  juftified  by  his 
blood  ; til!  he  is  forgiven  and  reconciled  to  God 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Jefus  Chrift. 
And  none  can  bejuftilied,  they  are  well  allured, 
but  by  faith,  eve<n  faith  alone  : feeing  to  him 
only  that  believeth  on  God  who  jujlfeth  the  un- 
godly, his  faith  is  counted  to  him  for  righteoufnefs. 

7.  What  evafion  now  ? What  way  could  Sa- 
tan take  to  make  all  this  light  of  none  effeff  P 
What  could  be  done  when  that  grand  truth,  By 

grace 


I 


[ s69  ] 

grace  ye  aiefaved  through  faith , was  more  and 
more  generally  received  ? What  indeed  but  to 
perfuade  the  very  men  who  had  received  it,  to 
turn  the  grace  of  God  into  lafcivioufnefs  ? To  this 
end  Simon  Magus  appeared  again,  and  taught 
“ That  Chrift  had  done,  as  well  as  buffered,  all : 
that  his  i ighteoufnefs  being  imputed  to  us,  we 
need  none  of  our  own  : that  feeing  there  was  io 
much  righteoufnefs  and  holinefs  in  him,  there 
needs  no  more  in  us : that  to  think  we  have  any, 
or  to  defire  or  feek  any,  is  to  renounce  Chrilt : 
that  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  falvation, 
all  is  in  Chrijl,  nothing  in  man ; and  that  thofe 
who  teach  otherwife  are  legal  preachers,  and 
know  nothing  of  the  gofpel.  ” 

* 8.  This  is  indeed  a blow  at  the  root,  the  root 
of  all  holinefs,  all  true  religion.  Hereby  Chiift 
is  Jlabbed  in  the  houfe  of  his  friends,  of  thofe  who 
make  the  larged  profeffions  of  loving  and  ho- 
nouring him:  the  whole  defign  of  his  death, 
namely,  to  defroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  being 
overthrown  at  a droke.  For  wherever  this  doc- 
trine is  cordially  received,  it  leaves  no  place  for 
holinefs.  It  demolifhes  it  from  -top  to  bottom  ; 
it  deflroys  both  root  and  branch.  It  effedluallv 
tears  up  all  deftre  of  it,  all  endeavour  after  it.  It 
forbids  all  fuch  exhortations  as  might  excite  thofe 
defires,  or  awaken  thofe  endeavours.  Nay  it 
makes  men  afraid  of  perfonal  holinefs,  afraid  of 
cherifhing  any  thought  of  it,  or  motion  toward  it 
led  they  fhould  deny  the  faith,  and  rejeft  Chrid 
M 3 and 


' [ 27°  ] 

and  bis  rlghteoufnefs.  So  that  inftead  of  being 
zealous  of  good  works , they  are  a ftink  in  their 
noftrils.  And  they  are  infinitely  more  afraid  of 
the  works  of  God,  than  of  the  works  of  the  devil. 

* 9.  Here  is-  wifdom  ! Though  not  the  wif- 
dom of  the  faints,  but  wifdom  from  beneath. 
Here  is  the  mafler-piece  of  Satan  : farther  than 
this  he  cannot  go.  Men  are  holy,  without  a 
grain  of  holinefs  in  them  ! Holy  in  Chrift,  how- 
ever unholy  in  themfelves-:  they  are  in  Chrift, 
without  one  jot  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Chrift. 
In  Chrift,  though  their  nature  is  whole  in  them. 
They  are  compleat  in  him,  though  dtey  are  in 
themfelves  as  proud,  as  vain,  as  covetous,  as  paf- 
fionate  as  ever.  It  is  enough  : they  may  be  un- 
righteous If  ill,  feeing  Chrift  has fulfilled  all  righte- 
oufnefs  ! 

10.  O ye  fimple  ones,  how  long  will ye  love  fim- 
plicily?  How  long  will  ye feek  death  in  the  error 
of  your  hfe?  Know  ye  not,  whoever  teacheth 
you  otherwife,  that  the  unrighteous  Jhall  not  in~ 
herit  the  kingdom  of  God?  Be  not  deceived : al- 
though there  are  many  lie  in  wait  to  deceive, 
and  that  under  the  fair  pretence  of  exalting  Chrift: 
a pretence  which  the  more  eafily  fteals  upon 
you,  becaufe  to  you  he  is  precious.  But  as  the 
Lord  livetlr,  Neither  fornicators,  nor  idolater  s,  nor 
adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  fodomites,  nor 
thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards , nor  revilers, 
nor  extortioners,  fall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Such  indeed  werefome  of you.  But  ye  are  wafied, 

but 


[ 271  ] 

but  ye  are  fan&ifed,  as  well  as  puffed,  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jefus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God '% 
You  are  really  changed  : you  are  not  only  ac - 
counted  but  aftually  made  righteous.  The  law , the 
inward  power,  of  the  fpiritoflife  in  Chrifl  Je- 
fus,  hath  made  you  free , really,  aftually  free, 
from  the  law  or  power  of  fin  and  death.  * This 
is  liberty,  true  gofpel  liberty,  experienced  by 
every  believer : not  freedom  from  the  iaw  of 
God,  or  the  works  of  God,  but  from  the  law  of 
fin,  and  the  works  of  the  devil.  See  that  ye 
fandfaf  in  this  real,  not  imaginary  liberty. .where- 
with Chrifl  hath  made  you free.  And  take  heed  ye 
be  not  intangled  again , by  means  of  thefe  vain 
boafters,  in  the  yoke  of  that  vile  bondage  to  fin, 
from  which  ye  are  now  clean  efcaped.  I teftify 
unto  you,  that  if  you  fli  11  continue  in  fin,.  Chrift 
fhall  profit  you  nothing:  that  Chrifl:  is  no  Savi- 
our to  you,  unlefs  he  faves  you  from  your  fins ; 
and  that  unlefs  it  purify  your  heart,  faith  fhall 
profit  you  nothing.  O when  will  ye  underfland, 
that  to  oppofe  either  inward  or  outward  holinefs, 
under  colour  of  exalting  Chrift,  is  direftly  to  aft 
thp  part  of  Judas,  to  betray  the  fon  of  man  with  a 
kifs  ? Repent,  repent  ! Left  he  cut  you  in  fun- 
der with  the  two-edged  fword  that  cometh  out  of 
his  mouth!  It  is  you  your / 'elves  that,  by  oppof- 
ing  the  very  end  of  his  coming  into  the  world, 
are  crucifying  the  Son  of  God  afrefh,  and  put- 
ting him  to  an  open  fhame.  It  is j you  that,  by  ex- 
pefting  to  fee  the  Lord  without  holinefs,  through 
M 4 the 


[ 2J2  ] 

the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  make  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  an  unholy  thing , keeping  thofe  unholy  that 
fo  truft  in  it.  O beware  ! For  evil  is  before  you  ! 
If  thofe  who  name  not  the  name  of  Chrift,  and 
die  in  their  fins,  fhall  be  punifhed  feven-fold, 
furely  you  who  thus  make  Chrift  a minifler  of 
fm , fhall  he  punifhed  feventy  and  feven-fold. 
What  ! Make  Chrift  deftroy  his  own  kingdom  ! 
Make  Chrift  a fafftor  for  Satan  ! Set  Chrift 
againft  holinefs  ! Talk  of  Chrift  as  faving  his  peo- 
ple in  their  fins  / It  is  no  better  to  fay,  he  faves 
them  from  the  guilt,  and  not  from  the  power  of 
fin.  Will  you  make  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
fuch  a cover  for  the  un righteoufnefs  of  man  ? So 
that  by  this  means,  the  unrighteous  of  every  kind 
Jkall  inherit  the  kingdom,  of  God l Stop!  Confi. 
der  ! What  are  you  doing  ? You  did  run  well : 
who  hath  bewitched  you  ? Who  hath  corrupted 
vou  from  the  fimplicity  of  Chrift,  from  the  pu- 
rity of  the  gofpel  ? You  did  know,  He  that  ke- 
lieveth  is  born  of  God:  and  whofoever  is  born  of 
God  finntth  not ; but  while  he  keepeth  himf elf  that 
wicked  one  toucheth  him  not.  O come  back  to 
the  true,  the  pure,  the  old  gofpel  ! That  which 
•ye  received  in  the  beginning.  Come  back  to 
Chrift,  who  died  to  make  you  an  holy  people, 
zealous  of  good  works.  Remember  from  whence 
you  are  fallen , and  repent , and  do  the  firjl  works. 
Your father  worketh  hitherto  : do  ye  work:  elfe 
your  faith  is  vain.  For  will  thou  know,  0 vain , 
O .empty  man,  that  faith  without  works  is  dead; 

Will 


[ 273  ] 

Wilt  thou  know  that  though  I have  all  faith * 
fo  as  to  remove  mountains , and  have  not  love , I 
am  nothing ? Wilt  thou  know,  that  all  the  blood 
and  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl,  unlefs  that  mind  be 
in  thee  which  was  in  him,  and  thou  likewife  walk 
as  Chrijl  walked,  will  only  increafe  thy  damna- 
tion ? If  any  man  teach  other  wife,  and  confent  not 
to  wholefome  words,  and  to  the  doBrine  which  is 
according  to  godlinejs,  he  is  proud,  knowing  no- 
thing, but  doting  about  f rife  of  words,  whereof 
come  railings,  evil  furmifings perverfe  difput- 
ings  of  men  of  corrupt  minds,  and  deflitute  of 
the  truth.  Be  no  longer  afraid  of.  the  ftrongeft 
exhortations  either  to  inward  or  outward  holinefs— 
Hereby  God  the  Father  is  glorified,  and  God  the 
Son  truly  exalted.  Do  not  ftupidly  and  fenfeief- 
ly  call  this  legal,  a filly,  unmeaning  word.  ■ Be 
not  afraid  of  being  under  the  law  of  God , but  of  ■ 
being  under  the  law  of  fin.  Love  the  ftri&efl 
preaching  belt,  that  which  mofi  fearcfres  thev 
heart,  and  fhews  you  wherein  you  are-  unlike- 
Chrift:  and  that  which  preffes  you  moll  to  love 
him  with  all  your  heart,  and  ferve  him  with  alb 
your  flrength. 

11.  Suffer  me  to  warn  you  of  another  filly  un- 
meaning word  : do  not  fay,  “ I can  do  nothing. ” 
Iffo,  then  you  know  nothing  of  Chrifl:  then  you 
have  no  faith.  For  if  you  have,  if  you  believe,, 
then  you  caw  do  all  things  thro'  Chrifl  who  ftreng- 
M 5 thepeth 


[ 2/4  ] 


theneth  you.  You  can  love  him  and  keep  his 
commandments  : and  to  you  his  commandments 
are  not  grievous.  Grievous  to  them  that  believe  ! 
Par  from  it.  They  are  the  joy  of  your  heart. 
Shew  then  your  love  to  Chrift  by  keeping  his 
commandments,  by  walking  in  all- his  ordinances 
blamelefs.  Honour  Chrift  by  obeying  him  with 
all  your  might,  by  ferving  him  with  all  your 
ftrength.  Glorify  Chrift  by  imitating  Chrifl  in 
all  things,  by  walking  as  he  walked.  Keep 
to  Chrift  by  keeping  in  all  his  ways.  Truft  in 
Chrift,  to  live  and  reign  in  vour  heart.  Have 
confidence  in  Chrift  that  he  will  ful fil  -in  you  all 
his  great  and  precious  promifes,  that  he  will  work 
in  you  all  the  good  pleafure  of  his  goodnefs, 
and  all  the  work  of  faith  with  power.  Cleave  to 
Chrift,  ’till  his  blood  have  cleanfed  you  from 
aft  pride,  all  anger,  all  evil  defire.  Let  Chrift 
do  all  ! Let  him  that  has  done  all  for  you,  do 
all  in  you.  Exalt  Chrift  as  a prince  to  give  re- 
pentance : a Saviour  both  to  give  remifiion  of 
fins,  and  to  create  in  you  a new  heart,  to  re- 
new a right  fpirit  within  you.  This  is  the  gof- 
gel,  the  pure,  genuine  gofpel ; glad  tidings  of 
great  fttlvation.  Not  the  new,  but  the  old,  the 
everlaftrng  gofpel,  the  gofpel  not  of  Simon  Ma- 
.gus,  but  of  Jefus  Chrift,  The  God  and  Father 
of  our  Lord  jefus  Chrift  give  you  according  to 
the  riches  of  his  glory , to  be  Jlrergthcned  with 
■might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  that  Chriji 

may 


[ 275  3 

may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith  : that , be- 
ing rooted  and  grounded  in  love , ye  may  be 
able  to  comprehend  with  all  faints,  what  is  the 
length,  and  breadth,  and  depth , and  height : 
and  to  know  that  love  of  Chrifl  which  paf 
felh  knowledge,  that  ye  may  be  filed  with  all  the 
filnefs  of  God! 


M£6- 


A SUEFICIENIT 


[ Z7* S  J 


A SUFFICIENT 

ANSWER 

T O 

LETTERS  to  the  AUTHOR 

O F 

THERO  N and  AS  PAS  10. 

In  a Letter  to  the  Author. 


BRISTOL,  November  i,  1757. 

S I R, 

IT  is  not  very  material  who  you  are.  If  Mr. 

Glafs-is  ffill  alive,  I fuppofe  you  are  he.  If 
not,  you  are  at  leait  one  of  his  humble  admirers, 
and  probablv  not  very  old:  So  your  youth  may 
in  fome  meafure  plead  your  excufe,  for  fuch  a 

peculiar 


[ 2 77  '1 

peculiar  pertnefs,  infolence,  and  felf-fufficiency, 
with  fuch  an  utter  contempt  of  all  mankind,  as 
no  other  writer  of  the  prefent  age  has  fhewn. 

As  you  ufe  no  ceremony  toward  any  man,  fo 
neither  fhall  I ufe  any  toward  you,  but  bluntly 
propofe  a few  objections,  to  your  late  perform- 
ance, which  ftare  a man  in  the  face  as  foon  as  he 
looks  in  it. 

I objefl,  Firft,  That  you  are  a grofs,  wilful 
flanderer.  For,  l.  You  fay  of  Mr.  Hervey, 

“ He  fhutsup  our  accefs  to  the  divine  righteouf- 
nefs,  by  holding  forth  a preliminary  human  one 
asnecelfary  to  our  enjoying  the  benefit  of  it.” — 
p.  4. 

Again,  “ You  fet  men  to  work  to  do  fome- 
thing,  in  order  to  make  their  peace  with  God.” 

— p.  9.  This  is  an  abfolute  flander,  founded  on 
that  poor  pretence,  that  he  fuppofes  thofe  who 
repent  and  believe,  and  none  but  thofe,  to  “ en- 
joy the  benefit  of  Chrift’s  righteoufnefs.”  And 
has  he  not  the  warrant  of  Chrift  himfelf  for  fo 
doing?  Repent  ye,  andielieve  tkegojpel?  If  this 
is  “ teaching  man  to  acquire  a righteoufnefs  of 
his  own,”  the  charge  falls  on  our  Lord  himfelf. 

You  fay,  2.  “ As  to  that  ftrange  fomething 
which  you  call  faith,  after  all  you  have  told  11s 
about  it,  we  are  at  as  great  a lofs  to  tell  diftinCily 
what  it  is,  as  when  you  began.” — p.  9.  ^ 

This  is  another  flander.  You  are  at  no  lofs 
(as  will  prefently  appear)  to  tell  what  Mr.  Hervey 

means 


[ 278  ] 

means  by  faith.  Whether  it  be  right  or  wrong, 
his  account  of  it  is  as  clear  and  diflinCt  as  any  that 
ever  was  given. 

You  fay,  3.“  The  popular  preachers,  (fo  you 
term  Archbifhop  Tillotfon,  Dr.  Lucas,  Crifp, 
Doddrige,  Watts,  Gill;  Mr.  Guthrie,  Boflon, 
Erfkine,  Willifon ; Mr.  Flavel,  Marfhal;  Mr. 
Griffith  Jones,  Hervev,  Romaine,  Whitefield, 
Wefley)  never  tell  us  what  they  mean  by  faith, 
but  by  fome  laboured  circumlocutions.” — 
p.  282. 

This  is  a third  palpable  {lander,  as  your  own 
words  prove,  “ They  fay,  faith  is  a real  perfua- 
fion  that  Chrift  hath  died  for  me.” — p.  3.  Are 
you  not  here  told,  what  they  mean  by  faith? 
And  that  without  any  circumlocution  at  all? 

You  confute  your  own  flander  frill  farther,  by 
adding  three  more.  4.  “ They  make  a pious  re- 
Jolve  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  — 
p.  360.  No,  never.  Not  one  of  the  writers  you 
have  named  ever  did,  or  does  fo  now.  5.  “ The 
faith  they  talk  of,  is  only  a timid  refolvs,  joined 
with  a fond  conjetture.  Or,  6.  It  is  a fond  pre- 
famptuous  zvijh,  greatly  embarrafTed  with  doubts 
and  difficulties.” — p.  404. 

Slander  all  over.  We  make  the  righteoufnefa 
and  blood  of  (Shrill,  the  only  ground  of  our  ac- 
ceptance with  God.  And  the  faith  we  talk  of  is- 
neither  more  nor  lcfs  than  a divine  conviction,, 
that  Chrift  loved  ms  and  gave  bimfelf  for  me. 

Yciij 


f? 

L 2 79  1 

You  fay,  7-  “ All  who  preach  this  doftnne 
are  of  the  world;,  and  fpeak  of  the  world  ; there- 
fore the  world  heareth  them. — p.  34.  Therefore 
they  will  always  be  attended  by  the  body  of  the 
people.” — p.  37. 

A fad  miflake  this,  in  point  offaft.  Forwhe- 
ther  they  are  of  the  world  or  no,  it  is  certain  the 
world,  the  generality  of  men  (good  or  bad]  doth, 
not,  and  never  did  hear  them.  At  this  day  tbofe 
who  hear  them  are  an  exceeding  fmall  number, 
in  comparifon  of  thofe  who  do  not.  And  if  the 
body  of  the  people  in  any  place  do  attend  fome  of 
them,  how  do  they  attend  ? Juft  as  they  would  a 
maddog:  with  flicks  and  ftones  and  whatever 
comes  to  hand. 

And  this  you  yourfelf  account  for  extremely 
well.  Sed  oportet  Palamonen  ffe  memorem. 
“ What  a figure  would  a fmall  number  of  mini* 
fters-  make  in  the  church  either  of  England  or 
Scotland,,  who  fhould  agree  to  maintain  the  plain 
obvious  fenfe  of  their  own  public  ftandards  of 
doflrine;  and  infill  upon  an  adherence  to  that 
fenfe,  as  a term  of  holding  communion  with  them 
in  the  facred  inftitutions  ? Their  fituation  in  the 
national, church  would  be  very  uncomfortable  as 
well  as  extremely  ridiculous.  For  many  enemies 
would  foon  be  awakened  againft  them,  to  diftrefs 
and  mifreprefent  them  in  various  refpedls.” — p, 
4 §5- 

Thus  much  as  a fpecimen  of  your  veracity.  I; 
sbjeft,.  Secondly,  that  you  know  not  what  faith 

is? 


[ 280  ] 

is?  You  talk  about  it,  and  about  it,  and  labour 
and  fweat,  and  at  laft  come  to  a moft  lame  and 
impotent  conclufton. 

You  fay,  “ That  Chrift  died  for  me  is  a point 
not  eafily  fettled,  a point  which  the  fcripture  no 
where  afcertains:”  (The  very  thought  and  nearly 
the  words  of  Cardinal  Bellarmine,  in  hisdifpute 
with  our  forefathers,)  “So  far  from  it,  that  it  af- 
firms the  final  perdition  of  many,  who  have  great 
confidence  of  their  interell  in  Chrrfi.”  (This 
only  proves,  that  many  fancy  they  have  what  they 
have  not;  which  I fuppofe  nobody  will  deny.) 
“ Yea,  and  declares,  that*  wide  is  the  gate , and 
broad  is  the  way  th,at  leadetk  to  dejir action p.  1 4. 
It  is  fo ; but  this  is  nothing  to  the  point,  The  na- 
ture of  true  faith. 

“ Nature,  thefe  men  fay,  begins  the  work:’' 
(I  know  none  of  them  who  fay  fo)  “ And  then 
grace  helps  out  the  efforts  of  nature,  and  per- 
fuades  a man,  though  he  be  nor  mentioned  in 
fcripture,  either  by  name  or  furname,  that  Chrift 

died  for  him. p.  33.  So  the  Spirit  whifpers 

fomethingto  the  heart  of  a finner,  befide  what  he 
publicly  fpeaks  in  the  fcripture?.  But  will  any 
lover  of  the  fcriptures  allow  tb  t pofibility  of  tins? 
That  the  Spirit  fhould  ever  fpeak  a lvllable  to  any 
man,  befide  what  he  publicly  fpeaks  there  ?’: — 
p.  2,5-  You  will  prefently  allow  fomething  won- 
derfully like  it.  And  you  fuppofe  yourfelf  to  be 
a lover  of  the  fcriptures. 


*'  Some 


[ *8i  ] 

“ Some  of  the  martyrs  were  allured  of  being 
the  friends  of  Chrifl.” — p.  398.  How,  which 
way  ? Neither  their  name  nor  their  furnamewas 
mentioned  in  fcripture  ! Why,  “ the  Holy  Ghoft 
affured  their  hearts  and  the  hearts  of  the  firft 
Chriflians,  That  their  joy  was  not  the  joy  of  the 
hypocrite,  but  the  beginning  of  eternal  life. 
Thus  their  joy  was  made  full  and  their  love  per- 
fefted  by  the  highefl  enjoyments  it  was  here  capa- 
ble of. — Every  believer  finds  a refrefbment  to  his 
mind,  far  fuperior  to  all  the  comforts  of  this  life. 
They  ftand  in  God’s  prefence  and  have  their  joy 
made  full  in  beholding  the  light  of  his  counte- 
nance.”— p.  402. 

Allow  this  and  we  will  never  difpute,  Whether 
the  Spirit  does  or  does  not  “ whifper  any  thing 
to  their  hearts,”  It  is  enough,  that  they  have 
the  Spirit  of  adoption , crying  in  their  hearts , Abba, 
Father:  And  that  this  Spirit  witnejfeth  zvilh  their 
fpirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of  God. 

“ The  chief  time  of  this  agency  of  the  Spirit 
is,  while  the  preachers  are  declaiming.  And  the 
people  are  in  continual  expectation  of  the  feafon 
of  power  in  hearing  them.” — p.  38. 

Yea,  and  reafongood,  if,  as  you  affirm,  “ Hear- 
ing is  the  only  mean  whereby  God  gives  faith.” 
— -p.  391.  But  we  do  not  affirm  fo  much.  We 
only  maintain,  That  faith  generally  cometh  by 
hearing. 

But  you  go  on.  “ They  who  partake  of  Chrifl 's 
joy,  receive  the  highefl  evidence  that  he  is  the 

Chrifl, 


[ 2§2  ] 

Chrifl,  Thus  then  faith  is  greatly  confirmed  by 
a kind  of  prefence  of  its  objeft.  • Their  love  is 
joyfully  inflamed,  and  they  obtain  the  affurance 
of  hope,  by  having  in  themfelves  an  experimen- 
tal foretafte  of  their  eternal  enjoyment.” — p.  415. 

Why  then  what  are  we  difputing  about,  feeing 
you  are  now  fo  kind  as  to  allow,  not  only  the 
pojfibility , but  the  real  exi/lence,  of  all  that  we  con- 
tend for? 

“ O,  but  this  is  not  faith.  Faith  is  quite  ano- 
ther thing.”  What  it  is?  Let  us  hearycztr  ac- 
count of  it. 

“ The  effence  of  true  faith  is  the  eternal  God.” 

— p.  288. 

“ What  is  faith?  It  is  the  blood  of  Chrifl.” 
~ P-  33°- 

Stark,  flaring  nonfenfe  ! Sir,  you  can  talk  fenfe, 
if  you  pleafe.  Why  lhould  you  palm  upon  your 
readers  fuch  fluff  as  this  ? 

* Very  little  better  than  this  is  your  third  defi- 
nition. “ The  truth  which  a man  believes  is  his 
faith.”' — p.  301.  No,  it  is  not:  no  more  than 
the  light  which  a man  fees  is  his  fight.  ^ ou 
muft  therefore  guefs  again.  “ To  believe  this 
faff,  Chrifl  rofe  from  the  dead,  is  faith.  — 
p.  169.  “ Aik  a man,  is  the  gofpel  true  or  not? 

If  he  holds  it  to  be  true,  this  is  faith.’ — p.  296. 
But  is  this  faving  faith?  “ Yes.  Every  one  that 
believes  the  gofpel  hiflory  fhall  be  faved.’  — 
P-  333- 


This 


[ 283  ] 

* This  is  flat  and  plain.  And,  if  it  is  but  true., 
every  devil  in  hell  will  be  faved.  For  it  is  abfo- 
lutely  certain  every  one  of  thefe  believes  this 
fa£l,  Chrifl  rofe  from  the  dead.  It  is  certain, 
every  one  of  thefe  believes  the  gofpel  hiflory. 
Therefore  this  is  not  faving  faith  : neither  will 
every  one  he  faved  who  believes  this  faff,  Chrifl 
rofe  from  the  dead.  It  follows,  That  (whatever 
others  do)  you  know  not  what  faith  is. 

I objeCt,  Thirdly,  1.  That  you  yourfelf  “ fhut 
up  our  accefs  to  the  divine  righteoufnefs.”  2. 
That  you  vehemently  contradift  yourfelf,  and  do 
the  very  thing  which  you  charge  upon  others. 

1.  You  yourfelf  flnit  up  our  accefs  to  the  di- 
vine righteoufnefs,  by  deftroying  that  repentance 
which  Chrifl  has  made  the  way  to  it.  “ Afk  men, 
you  fay,  have  they  finned  or  not  ? If  they  know 
they  have,  this  is  convi&ion.  And  this  is  prepa- 
ration enough  for  mercy.”  Soft  cafuiflry  in<- 
deedd  He  that  receives  this  faying,  is  never 
likely  either  to  repent  ox  believe  the  gofpel.  And 
if  he  do  not,  he  can  have  no  accefs  to  the  righ- 
teoufnefs of  Chrifl. 

Yet  you  ftrangely  affirm,  “ A carelefs  finner 
is  in  full  as  hopeful  a way  as  one  that  is  the  moft 
deeply  convicted.” — p.  292.  How  can  this  be, 
if  that  conviction  be  from  God  ? Where  he  has 
begun  the  work,  will  he  not  finifh  it  ? Have  we 
not  reafon  to  hope  this  ? But  in  a carelefs  fin- 
ner that  work  is  not  begun  ; perhaps  never  will 
be. 


Again, 


[ 2*4  ] 

* Again.  Whereas  our  Lord  gives  a general 
command,  Seek  and  ye  Jhall  find ; you  fay,  “ Sav- 
ing faith  was  never  yet  fought,  or  in  the  re- 
moteff  manner  zvifhed  for  by  an  unbeliever.” — - 
p.  372.  A propofnion  as  contrary  to  the  whole 
tenor  of  feripture,  as  to  the  experience  of  every 
true  believer.  Every  one  who  now  believes, 
knows  how  he  fought  and  wifiedfor  that  faith, 
before  he  experienced  it.  It  is  not  true  even 
with  regard  to  your  faith,  a belief  of  the  bible. 
For  I know  Deifls  at  this  day,  who  have  often 
U'ifhed  they  could  believe  the  bible,  and  owned 
“ it  was  happy  for  them  that  could." 

2.  You  vehemently  ccntradiff  yourfelf,  and  do 
the  very  thing  which  you  charge  upon  others. 

“ If  we  imagine  we  poffefs  or  defire  to  attain 
any  requifite  to  our  acceptance  with  God,  befide 
or  in  connexion  with  the  hare  work  of  Chrif , 
Chrift  fhali  profit  us  nothing.” — p.  96. 

Again.  “ What  is  required  of  us  in  order  to 
our  acceptance  with  God  ? Nothing.  The  leaft 
attempt  to  do  any  thing  is  damnably  criminal.”—' 

Very  good.  Now  forfelf-confiflency.  “What 
Chrift  has  done  is  that  which  quiets  the  con- 
fcience  of  man  as  foon  as  he  knows  it.  So  that  he 
need  afk  no  more  than,  “ Is  it  true  or  not?  If 
he  finds  it  true,  he  is  happy.  If  he  does  not,  he 
can  reap  no  comfort  from  it.  Our  comfort arifes 
from  the  perjuafion  of  this." — p.  12. 

Again,  “ Men  are  juftified  by  a knowledge 


[ 285  ] 

of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.” — p.  406.  And 
yet  again, 

“ The  foie  requifite  to  acceptance  is,  divine 
righteoufnefs  brought  to  view." — p.  291. 

So  you  have  brought  matters  to  a fine  conclu- 
fion,  confuting  an  hundred  of  your  own  affer- 
tions,  and  doing  the  very  thing  for  which  you 
have  been  all  along  fo  unmercifully  condemning 
others.  You  yourfeif  here  teach  another  “ re- 
quifite  to  our  acceptance,  befide  the  bare  work  of 
ChriJ viz.  the  knowing  that  work,  the  fading 
it  true.  Therefore  by  your  own  word,  “ Chrift 
fhall  profit  you  nothing.”  In  one  page  you  fay, 
“ Nothing  is  required  in  order  to  our  acceptance 
with  God  In  another,  “ Divine  righteoufnefs 
brought  to  view  is  requifite  to  our  acceptance.” 
Brought  to  view!  What  felf- righteoufnefs  is 
this  ? Which  of  the  popular  preachers  could 
have  done  worfe  ? Men  are  juflified  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.”  Know- 
ledge! What  our  own  knowledge!  Knowledge  in 
usd  Why  this  is  the  very  thing  which  we  call 
faith.  So  you  have  fairly  given  up  the  whole 
queftion,  juflified  your  opponents,  and  condemn- 
ed yourfeif  as  damnably  criminal! 

I objeft.  Fourthly,  That  you  have  no  charity, 
.and  that  you  know  not  what  charity  is.  That 
you  know  not  what  it  is,  manifeflly  appears  from 
the  wonderful  definition  you  give  of  it.  “ Cha- 
rity, you  fay,  is  fellowfhip  with  God  in  his  blef- 

fednefs.” 


[ 286  ] 

Fednefs.’ — p.  453.  Muddy,  confufed,  ut  nihil 
fupral  We  know,  he  that  loveth  hath  fellowfhip 
with  God.  But  yet  the  ideas  of  one  and  of  the 
other  are  widely  different.  We  know,  God  is 
iove : and  he. -that  dwdleth  in  love,  dwelldh  in  God, 
and  God  in  him.  But  yet  loving  him  is  not  the 
fame  thing  with  dwelling  in  him.  If  it  were* 
the  whole  fentence  would  be  flat  tautology. 

You  fay,  2.  Charity  is  “ the  love  of  the 
truth.” — p.  456.  Not  at  all:  No  more  than  it  is 
the  iove  of  the  fun.  It  is  the  love  of  God,  and 
of  man  tor  Qod’s  fake : No  more  and  no  lefs. 

You  fay,  3.  “ Chrift  is  known  to  us  only  by  re- 
port.” (1  bat  is  not  giantcd.)  “ And  charity  is 
the  love  of  that  report.” — p.  455.  Every  intel- 
ligent reader  will  want  no  further  proof,  that  you 
know  not  vvliat  charity  is. 

No  wonder  then  that  you  have  it  not : nay, 
that  you  are  at  the  utmoff  diflance,  both  from  the 
love  o!  God  an  I of  your  neighbour.  You  cannot 
love  Go  1,  becaufe  you  -do  not  love  your  neigh- 
bour. For  he  that  loves  God,  loves  his  brother 
alfo.  But  fuch  Iratred,  malevolence,  rancour, 
■bitfernefs,  as  you  fhew  to  all  who  do  not  exactly 
fall  in  with  your  opinion,  was  fcarce  ever  feen 
■in  a Jew,  ;m  Heathen,  or  a Popifh  inquifitor. 

“ Nay,  but  vau  abhor  perfection.  You  would 
perfecute  no  man.  ’ I fholild  he  very  loath  10 
•trull  you.  1 doubt,  were  It  in  your  power,  you 
■would  make  more  bonfires  in  Smithfidd  than 

Bonner 


[ aS7  ] 

'Bonner  and  Gardiner  put  together.  But  if  not, 
if  you  would  not  perfecute  with  fire  and  faggot. 

— — Mirum  ! 

TJt  neq ; calce  Lupus  quenquam,  neq ; dcnte  petit  bos; 

What  does  this  prove  ? Only  that  you  murder 
in  another  way.  You  finite  with  the  tongue: 
With  the  poifon  of  afps  which  is  under  your 
Tips. 

A few  fpecimens  follow  : 

“ The  popular  preachers  worfhip  another 
God.” — p.  338.  “ It  can  never  be  allowed  that 
Dr.  Doddridge  worlhipped  the  fame  God  with 
Paul.” — p.470.  “ Notice  the  difference  betwixt 
the  God  of  thefe  preachers  and  the  true  God; 
betwixt  their  Thrift  and  the  Chrift  preached  by 
the  apofiles:  betwixt  their  fpirit  and  the  Spirit 
that  influenced  the  apofiles.” — p.  40. 

“ I know  no  dinners  more  hardened,  none 
•greater  deffroycrs  efmankind  than  they.” — p.g8. 
**  By  no  finall  energy  of  deceit,  they  darken  the 
revelation  of  God,  and  change  the  dodlrine  of 
the  bleffed  God,  into  a dodtrine  of  felf-depend- 
ence.”  Strange!  That  you  yourfelf'lhould  do  the 
very  fame  thing!  Averring,  that  Men  are 
ju Rifled  by -a  knowledge  of  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chriit,'"  not  by  the  bare  work  which  Chrifi:  has 
vvroug  In!  You  put  me  in  mind  of  an  old  ufurer, 
who  vehemently  thanked  a minifier  that  had 
preached  a fevere  fermon  againfi  ufiiry.  And  be- 
ing 


[ 283  ] 

ing  alked,  Why  do  you  talk  thus?  Replied,  “ I 
wilh  there  were  no  ufurer  in  London  befide  my- 
JtlfV'  Sir,  Do  not  you  wilh  there  was  no  mini- 
fter  in  Great-Britain  who  taught  this  do&rine 

befide  your/elf? 

“ That  any  who  has  learnt  his  religion  from 
theNew  Tellament,  fhould  miftake  their  doftrine 
for  the  Chrillian,  is  aftoniihing.” — p.  40.  Theirs, 
or  yours;  for  it  happens  to  be  one  and  the  fame 
with  regard  to  the  prefent  point.  “ By  many  de- 
ceits they  change  the  truth  of  God  into  a lie." — ib. 
If  they  do,  fo  do  you.  Indeed  you  heavily  com- 
plain of  the  imputation.  You  fay,  “ It  is  both 
aftoniihing  and  provoking,  that,  after  all,  men 
will  fay,  there  is  no  difference  between  their 
fcheme  and  yours.''  And  yet,  after  all,  fo  it  is : 
Truth  is  great,  and  will  prevail.  In  the  leading 
point,  that  of  juftification,  both  you  and  they 
teach,  “ Men  are  jollified  by  a knowledge  of  the^ 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.”  Only  they  think,  it  is 
a divine,  fupernatural,  experimental  knowledge, 
wrought  in  the  inmoft  foul  : and  you  think,  it  is 
a bare  hiftorical  knowledge,  of  the  fame  kind 
with  that  which  the  devils  have. 

One  fpecimen  more  of  your  unparallelled  cha- 
rity, which  in  any  but  yourfelf  would  be  aftoniih- 
ing. “ If  any  one  chufes  to  go  to  hell  by  a de- 
vout path,  let  him  ftudy  any  one  of  thofe  four  fa- 
mous treatifes,  Mr.  Guthrie’s  trial  of  a faving  in- 
tereft  in  Chrift,  Air.  Marlhall’s  gofpel-myftery  of 
falsification,  Mr.  Bofton’s  human  nature  in  its 

four- 


C ] 

four-fold  Hate,  and  Dr.  Doddridge’s  rife  and 
progrefs  of  religion  in  the  foul.  If  any  profane 
perfon  who  defires  to  be  converted,  enter  into  the 
fpirit  of  thofe  books,  he  thereby  becomes  two- 
fold more  a child  of  hell  than  he  was  before.”— 
p.  436.  . 

Such  is  the  doftrine ! Such  is  the  fpirit  of 
Palsemon!  Condemning  the  whole  generation  of 
God’s  children ! Sending  all  his  opponents  to 
hell  at  once  : calling  arrows,  firebrands,  death 
on  every  fide  ! But  I Hop.  God  be  merciful  to 
thee  a (inner ! And  lhew  thee  compaffion,  though 
thou  halt  none  for  thy  fellow-fervants ! Other- 
wife  it  will  be  more  tolerable,  I will  not  fay  for 
Seneca  or  Epidletus,  but  for  Nero  or  Domitian9 
in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  thee  ! 


Vol.  XX, 


N 


AN 


[ ] 


AN  EXTRACT  OP 

TWO  DISCOURSES 

ON  THE 

Conflagration  and  Renovation 

O 

of  the  World. 


Written 'by  JAMES  KNIGHT,  D.  D.  late  Vicar 
of  St.  Sepulchre , London. 


2 Pet.  iii.  10,  11. 

But  the  day  cj  the  Lord  will  come  as  a thief  in  the 
night , in  the  which  the  heavens  fiall  pafs  away 
with  a great  noife , and  the  elements  fiall  melt 
with  fervent  heat , the  earth  alfo  and  the  works 
that  are  therein  fiall  be  burnt  up. 

Keverthelefs  vse,  according  to  his  promife,  look  for 
new  heavens  and  a new  earth,  wherein  dwel - 
leth  righteoufnefs. 

T T 7 AS  the  falhion  of  this  world  never  to 
* * pafs  away ; were  our  houfes  and  our 

lands  to  continue  for  ever,  and  ourfelves  in  pof- 

feflion 


[ 29*  ] , 

feffion  of  them  to  all  ages;  had  no  changes  hap- 
pened already  to  induce  us  to  believe,  that  great- 
er may  follow  in  heaven  and  earth;  the  aoftrines 
relating  to  a judgment  to  come,  the  fuddennefs 
of  it,  and  the  changes  following  in  heaven  and 
earth,  might  be  treated  as  the  fancies  of  the  fear- 
ful and  fuperflitious,  or  the  artifice  of  cunning 
and  ambitious  men,  to  awe  the  firnple,  and  fecure 
their  obedience,  by  working  on  their  fears.  But 
the  life  of  man  being  fhort  and  uncertain,  and 
the  earth  having  buffered  already  from  a flood, 
and  fcripture  a {Turing  us  (for  I fpeak  to  thofe 
who  believe  the  fcripture)  that  a worfe  evil 
will  again  diftrefs  it,  when  the  world  ihall  be 
burnt  and  purified  by  fire;  and  the  fame  fcrip- 
ture teaching  us  farther,  that  howfoever  things 
may  proceed  at  prefent  in  their  wonted  courfe, 
I through  the  patience  of  Chriff,  yet  the  time  will 

I come,  and  that  on  a fudden,  when  the  Son  fhall 
appear  in  the  terrors  of  juftice,  and  the  fweetnefs 
: of  mercy,  to  punifli  the  wicked,  and  reward  the 
righteous,  and  deliver  the  creature  from  the  ef- 
fects of  the  curfe  to  which  it  is  fubjefted  by  the 
fin  of  man;  it  highly  concerns  us  to  confider 
l the  effefls  of  the  coming  of  Chriff,  that  being 
1 timely  prepared,  we  may  efcape  the  evils  of  the 
terrible  burning  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  be 
heirs  of  the  bleffings  of  the  world  to  come. 

In  treating  of  the  text  I fhall  confider, 

N 2 


I.  The 


» 


[ 292  ] 

I.  The  extent  and  caufe,  the  end  and  time  of 
the  genera]  burning  or  difTolution  of  all  things, 
which  is  thus  exprefled  in  the  words  of  the  text. 
The  heavens  Jhall  pafs  away  with  a great  noifi , 
and  the  elements  Jhall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the 
earth  alfo  and  the  works  that  are  therein  Jliall  be 
burnt  up. 

N 

II.  The  extent  and  caufe,  the  end  and  tima 
of  the  renovation  following : Neverthelefs  we,  ac- 
cording to  his  promife,  took  for  new  heavens,  and 
a new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteoufnefs. 

I.  Firf,  I fhail  confider  the  extent  and  caufe, 
the  end  and  time  of  the  general  burning.  The 
extent  of  the  burning  is  to  heaven  and  earth;  for 
fays  the  apoflle,  The  heavens  fall  pafs  away,  the 
elements  Jhall  melt,  and  the  earth  be  burnt  up. 
The  heavens  Jhall  pafs  away,  that  is,  the  firll 
fymptom  of  nature’s  expiring  in  this  great  fever, 
is  the  darknefs  of  the  heavens : for  as  the  light  was 
the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  being 
the  firft  work  of  the  firfl  day;  fo  the  withdraw- 
ing of  the  light  will  fore-run  its  difTolution,  or 
returning  to  chaos.  For,  according  to  St.  John, 
The  fun  Jhall  become  black  as  fackcloth  of  hair,  and 
the  moon  become  as  blood--,  and  the  Jars  of  heaven 
fall  unto  the  earth,  even  as  a fig  tree  cafieth  her 
untimely  figs,  when  file  is  fitaken  of  a mighty  vend. 
Which  fcene  of  horror  is  thus  introduced,  Lo, 
there  was  a great  earthquake,  or  rather,  a great 

fhaking 


[ 293  ] 

Jhaking , that  is,  of  heaven  and  earth.  • For  the 
lights  are  fet  in  the  firmament  of  heaven , and 
when  that  fhall  vanifh,  they  cannot  but  fuffer  a 
notable  change.  It  {hall  pen fh  and  be  changed , 
fays- the  Pfalmift  : Itfihallvanijhlikefmoke  fays 
the  prophet  Ifaiah  : And  its  power  Jhall  be Jhaken, 
fays  the  Son  of  God.  Which  St.  John  repre- 
fents  after  this  manner,  The  heaven  departed  as  a 
fir  owl,  when  it  is  rolled  together. 

The  curtain  of  heaven  will  be  firft  drawn  back,, 
e’re  the  Son  will  appear  as  Judge  of  the  world 
in  power  and  glory,.  and  the  vifible  light,  which 
the  fcripture  reprefents  as  the  garment  of  God, 
will  firfl  be  put  off,  that  the  Sun  ofi  righteoufinefis 
may  rife  in  the  eafi,  and fiune  unto  the  wefl.  For 
the  moon  Jhall  be  confounded  and  thefiun  be  afiiamed 
at  the  glorious  prefence  of  the  Son  of  God,,  as 
the  ftars  grow  dim  at  the  approaching  brightnefs 
of  the  rifing  fun.  St.  Peter  tells  us,  That  the hea= 
yens  being  on  fire  Jhall  be  dijfolved.  By  which  it 
appears,  that  the  burning  of  the  heavens  fhall 
accompany  or  follow  the  great  concuffton,  as 
fhakings  of  the  earth  are  frequently  followed 
with  fiery  eruptions.  An  idea  of  which  you 
may  probably  form  from  the  frightful  + appear- 
ance fome  years  ago  obferved  in  the  fky  ; when 
fhoots  of  light  rifing  to  a point  from  the  feveral 
parts  of  the  vifible  horizon,  prefented  the  terrify- 
N 3 ing 

+ Thefe  appearances  were  about  the  time  of  the  rebellion  la 
Scotland,  in  the  reign  of  King  George  the  firft. 


[ £94  ] 

ing  figure  of  an  arch  of  fire  compafiing  the  earth, 
and  threatening  ruin  to  the  inhabitants  of  it. 
The  apoflle  adds,  that  the  elements Jha/l melt,  that 
is,  as  watiy  vapours  falling  from  above  in  impe- 
tuous fhowersj  met  with  the  water  of  the  great 
deep  rifirig  from  beneath,  and  covered  the  earth 
with  a fwelling  deluge  in  the  days  of  Noah;  fo 
fiery  meteors  and  burning  exhalations  fliot  and 
difeharged  from  the  regions  of  the  air,  and 
ifretigthetled  with  the  influence  of  the  labouring 
heavens,  will  defeend  on  the  earth  like  the 
brimftone  and  fire  from  God  upon  Sodom,  and 
together  with  the  central,  or  fubterraneous  fires 
hurfling  from  beneath,  will  lay  wade  its  furface, 
and  convert  the  whole  into  agiowing  monument 
of  God’s  indignation.  For  the  earth  alfo,  and  all 
the  works  that  are  therein  Jhall  be  burnt  up ; that 
is,  the  works  cf  the  pride  and  wantonnefs  of 
mart,  their  lofty  buildings,  curious  gardens,  and 
retirements  of  pleafure ; their  populous  cities, 
filled  with  oppreffion,  riot,  and  wealth;  their 
cafUes  and  fortrefies,  the  marks  of  fervitude,  and 
fupports  cf  violence  ; their  pompous  navies,  the 
fupply  of  luxury;  with  other  effects  of  vanity 
and  power,  will  all  be  confirmed  and  vanifh  into 
fmoke  in  this  dreadful  burning.  The  day  of  the 
Lord  of  hofs,  fays  Ifaiah,  fall  be  upon  every 
high  tower,  and  upon  every  fenced  wall,  and  upon 
all  the  flips  of  Tarfif,  and  upon  all  pleafant 
piths  res. 

Secondly, 


C 295  ] 

Secondly,  The  efficient  caufe  of  this  great  dit'h 
folution  is  the  power  of  God.  I faiv,  fays  Sf. 
John,  a great  white  throne,  and  hun  that  fat  on 
it,  from  whofe  face  the  eaith.  and  the  heaven  fed 
away,  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them. 
But  the  moral  caufe  is  the  fm  of  mankind.  If 
we  fearch  the  records  of  holy  fcripture,  it  will 
every  where  appear,  that  changes  in  the  elements 
from  better  to  worfe  are  owing  to  fin,  as  I final l 
endeavour  to  {hew  from  particular  infiances. 
The  earth  which  abounded  with  wholefome 
herbs  and  delicious  fruits,  the  fubfiflence  of  man. 
of  beafis,  and  of  birds,  was  curfed  with  barren- 
nefs  for  Adam’s  tranfgreflion,  and  fitews  its  fer- 
tility in  bringing  forth  thorns  to  increafe  the  la- 
bour and  forrow  of  man.  In  procefs  of  time, 
when  wickedneTs  increafed  and  fpread  with  pof- 
terity,  and  the  meafure  of  their  fin  was  equal  to 
their  numbers,  the  earth  was  ovet flown  with  a 
deluge  of  water,  to  purge  it  from  the  filth  of  a 
people  immerfed  in  the  pleafures  of  fenfe.  And 
in  after-ages,  droughts,  barrennefs,  earthquakes, 
and  devaluations  were  alike  owing  to  the  wicked- 
nefs  of  man.  He  turnctk  a fruitful  land  into 
barrennefs,  fays  the  Pfalmill,  for  the  zvickednef 
of  them  that  dwell  therein.  And  Ifaiah,  The.  earth 
fall  red  to  and  fro  like  a drunkard,  and  fall  he 
■removed  like  a eoUasre.  And  whv  ? The  IravT. 

O 

grejfnn  thereof  [hall  he  keavv  upon  it ; and  it  fall 
fall,  and  not  rife  again. 

N q 


If 


[ 296  ] 

If  we  pafs  to  the  waters,  it  will  no  lefs  appear- 
that  fprings  are  dried  up,  rivers  fail,  or  are  turn- 
ed into  blood,  and  the  fea  rages,  to  diflrefs  fin- 
ners,  and  afflift  them  in  a way  that  poin's  out 
their  fin.  He  turneth  the  rivers  into  a wildernefs , 
fays  the  Pfalmiff,  and  the  water -fprings  into  dry 
ground.  Thou  art  righteous,  0 Lord,  fays  the 
angel  of  the  waters,  becaufe  thou  haf  judged  thus, 
that  is,  in  turning  into  blood,  the  ocean,  the 
rivers  and  fountains  of  waters,  for  they  have  Jhed 
the  Hood  of  faints  and  prophets ; and  thou  haft 
given  them  blood  to  drink,  for  they  are  worthy.  If 
we  look  into  the  air;  thunder,  lightning,  hail- 
flones,  and  rain,  in  uncommon  meafure,  form, 
and  degree;  noxious  qualities,  fpreading  infec- 
tion wherefoever  they  go;  and  violent  tempefts 
lifting  up  the  fea,  and  ravaging  the  earth,  are  the 
weapons  and  inftruments  of  God’s  indignation, 
with  which  he  reflrains  and  punifhes  fin.  Take 
vie  up,  fays  Jonah,  and  cajl  me  forth  into  the  fea  ; 
fo  fiall  the  fea  be  calm  unto  you.  For  I know  that 
for  my  fake  this  great  tempef  is  upon  you.  And 
lafily,  if  we  afcend  to  the  fiats  and  luminaries  of 
heaven,  we  find  them  at  variance  with  the  wick- 
ed and  impenitent,  or  buffering  changes  on  ac- 
count of  their  fin.  The  ftars  in  their  courfs fought 
againjl  Sifera,  or  fhot  down  baneful  and  deffruc- 
tive  influences.  The  fun  was  darkened  in  a won- 
derful manner  at  the  noon  day,  while  the  Son  of 
God,  the  light  of  the  world,  was  dying  on  the  crofs. 

And 


[ * 97  ] 

And  its  heat  will  increafe  by  the  via!  of  wrath  to 
fuch  an  excefs,  as  to  fcorch  and  torment  the  bo- 
dies of  men,  it  was  made  to  cherifh.  And  it  is 
not  improbable  that  Job’s  words,  The  heavens  art 
not  clean  in  his  fight,  ox  the  /tars  are  not  pure  in 
his  fight,  maybe  fpoken  of  thofe  bodies  with  re- 
lation to  the  changes,  which  they  fuffer  through 
fin;  for  fin  is  reprelented  as  reaching  unto 
heaven. 

Thefe  are  the  effe&s  which  are  already 
wrought  in  the  world  through  the  wickednefs  of 
man.  And  if  fin  be  the  occafion  of  all  the  d i re- 
orders i n heaven  or  earth,  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  to  the  age  we  live  in,  we  may  well 
infer,  that  the  greateft  of  all,  the  diffo  ution  of 
the  world,  will  be  owing  to  the  fame  evil.  For 
fays  God,  Afire  is  kindled  in  my  anger,  and Jhall 
burn  unto  the  lowejl  hell,  and  Jhall  con  fume  the 
earth  with  her  increafie , and fiet  on  fire  the founda- 
tion of  the  mountains. 

Thirdly.  The  end  of  the  diffolution,  or  gene- 
ral burning,  is  to  abolilh  the  memory  of  part  fin, 
by  deftroying  the  works  and  monuments  of  it.- 
To  take  away  from  finners  the  fewel  of  their  lulls, 
and  the  means  of  offending,  the  goods  of  this  li'e.. 
To  change  the  fcene  of  their  wicked  a&ions,. 
where  they  have  long  gone  on  in  blafphemy 
again!!  God,  and  their  infults  upon  men;  and  to. 
punifh  the  wicked  for  the  fins  they  have  oblfi- 
nately  and  habitually  committed, 

N 5 Firfi,. 


[ *9®  ] 

Firjl,  The  end  of  the  diffolution,  is  to  abolifh 
the  memory  of  pah  fin,  by  deffroying  the  works 
and  monuments  of  it.  The  wickednefs  of  man 
frequently  difcovers  itfelf  in  lading  effefls ; and 
memorials  remain  to  this  very  day  of  the  cruelty, 
pride,  and  grofs  fuperflition  of  former  ages,  and 
people  renowned  for  their  riches  and  power.  The 
furface  of  the  earth  is  fcarred  with  the  effeQs  of 
military  rage.  And  the  nakednefs  of  countries, 
formerly  rich  in  the  produce  of  their  foil  and 
number  of  inhabitants,  and  the  ruins  of  ancient 
and  flout ifhing  cities,  proclaim  the  violence  and 
ambition,  of  the  powerful.  In  other  places,  where 
plenty  and  power  have  for  a long  time  flourifiied,. 
cities  begun  in  induftrv  and  jufiice,  but  increaf- 
ed  with  the  gain  of  avarice  and  fraud,  become 
the  feat  of  luxury,  pride,  and  all  forts  of  wicked- 
nefs.  Edifices  arife  for  effeminate  pleafure,  and 
fpiendid  feats  to  tranfmit  to  poflerity  the  names 
of  men,  who  attribute  their  greatnefs  to  their  own 
piudence,  courage,  and  forefight.  Delightful 
gardens,  cool  grots,  and  icfrefhing  dreams,  which, 
alike  proclaim  the  labourer’s  toil,  and  the  artifl’s- 
{kill,  are  fiequent  inffances  of  the  vanity  of  the 
rich,  and  ferve  for  retirements  to  wantonnefs  and 
ffjth.  To  which  may  be  added,  the  diforders  in 
the  elements  introduced  by  the  curfe,  the.puni fit- 
ment of  fin.  All  which  being  marks  and  memo- 
rials of  man’s  difobedience,  an  end  will  be  put 
to  this  ruinous  fiate  and  condition  of  things  by 
the  juftice  of  God,  when  the  time  of  his  patience 

and 


[ 299  ] 

and  forbearance  is  fulfilled,  and  the  righteoufnefs 
of  the  faints  and  their  number  is  compleated. 

Secondly,  The  end  of  the  diffolution  is  to  take- 
away from  Tinners,  the  fewe!  of  them  luff,  - and  the 
means  of  offending,  the  goods  of  this  lifer-  Ex- 
perience teaches  us  that  the  unjuft  will  opprefs 
fo  long  as  they  have  power:  That  the  drunkards- 
will  revel,  while  the  vineyards  are  fruitful-;  and' 

* that  the  riches-  of  the  earth,-  the  waters,  and  the/ 
air,  will  ever  be  the  fpoil  of  the  glutton  and 
fen-fualift.  If  fome  are  reclaimed  by  the  word  of 
God,  the  reproofs  of  confidence,  and  the  coun- 
fel  of  a friend,  by  Ioffes  in  fortune,  bodily  fick- 
nefs,  or  other  methods  of  divine  goodnefs,  y-et' 
others  go  . on  fo  long  as  they  have  power  and  op- 
portunity to  fin.  If  fome  are  cut  off,  and  re- 
moved from  the  comforts  of  this  prefent  life, 
which  they-  conflantly  abufe  to  their  own  fhame, 
and-  the  difhonour  of  God  ; yet  others  arife  and: 
come  in  their  dead,  but  in  the  pleafures  which 
corrupted  their  ancestors,  and  promife  a fuccef- 
fion  of  like  Tinners  in  the  next  age  from  the  bad- 
example  left  to  poflerity.  When  vice  is  propa- 
gated after  this  manner,  and  revives  in  the  youth 
who  rife  in  the  place  of  their  fading  anceflors, 
when  no  calls  nor  forbearance  of  God  can  recover 
them  from  fin,  no  promifes  of  greater  happinefs 
divert  their  purfuit  after  fenfual  entertainments, 
the  objefts  they  are  fond  of,  and  will  not  depart 
from, God  will  remove  them  by  his  j u ft  judgments," 
and  leave  them  naked  and  deftitute  of  good.  T 
N 6 will 


C 3°°  ] 

will  return , fays  God,  and  take  away  my  corn  in 
the  tune  thereof  , and  my  wine  in  the  feafon  thereof, 
and  will  recover  my  wool  and  my  fax  given  to  cover 
her  nakednefs , — and  none  fiafl  deliver  her  out  f 
my  hand. 

Thirdly . The  end  of  the  diffolution  is  to  change 
the  fcene  of  the  wickednefs  of  men,  where  they 
have  long  gone  on  in  their  blafphemies  againft 
God,  and  their  infults  upon  their  neighbour. 
The  myftery  of  iniquity,  which  began  in  this 
world,  will  here  be  compleated,  and  the  ablois 
of  it  receive  their  reward.  For  we  learn  from  the 
methods  of  divine  juflice,  that  places  fuffer  for 
the  wickednefs  of  the  inhabitants.  Thus  popu- 
lous cities,  thefcenes  of  avarice,  fraud,  and  un- 
cleannefs,  have  been  turned  into  ruins  by  the 
rage  of  man,  or  immediate  vengeance  of  Almigh- 
ty God,  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Adma  and 
Zeboim,  whofe  plains  are  witneffes  to  this  veiy 
day  of  the  fire  of  his  wrath,  which  burnt  up  a 
people  already  inflamed  with  unnatural  lull. 
And  the  fad  faie  which  has  happened  fucceflively 
to  the  parts  of  the  earth,  like  a deadly  difeafe 
which  cannot  be  cured,  will  at  lalt  prevail  and 
ruin  the  whole.  There  will  no  dens  be  left  for 
the  robbers  to  lurk  in,  no  fecret  chambers  for  the 
adulterers  and  unclean,  nor  any  repofitories  for 
the  fruits  of  unrighteoufnefs,  and  the  inflruments 
of  fin.  The  feat  of  the  fcorner  and  the  throne 
of  violence  will  be  over  turned,  and  nothing  re- 
main but  a place  of  torment,  where  he  who  flies 

from 


L 3°*  3 

from  the  prefent  diilrefs  can  have  no  relief,  but 
■ that  which  arifes  from  the  fad  experience  of  va- 
riety of  evil.  As  it  was  written,  Lie  who  Jlteth 
from  the  noife  oj  the  fear,  fnall  Jail  into  the  pit ; 
and  he  that  cometh  up  out  of  the  nndfl  of  the  pit, 
jhall  be  taken  in  the  fnare For  the  windows from 
on  high  are  open,  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
do  Jhake. 

Lajlly.  The  end  of  the  dilfolution  is  to  punifh 
the  wicked  for  their  pah  fins.  The  heavens  and  the 
earth  which  are  now,  fays  St.  Peter,  by  the  fame 
word  are.  kept  in  Jlore,  referved  unto  fre  againji 
the  day  of judgment and  perdition  of  ungodly  men. 
It  has  pleafed  God  in  difpenfing  punifhments  to 
correff  Tinners  fometimes  in  the  place  where  the 
fin  was  committed*  Thus  faith  the  Lord,  fays- 
Elijah  to  Ahab,  in  the  place  where  dogs  licked 
the  blood  oj  Naboth,  flail  dogs  lick  thy  blood,  even 
thine.  And  in  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  Becaufe 
they  have  forfaken  me,  faith  the  Lord,  and  have 
eftranged  this  place,  (that  is,  Tophet)  and  have 

burnt  incenfe  in  it  unto  other  Gods, And  have 

filed  this  place  with  the  blood  of  innocents-, — ■ 
Therefore  behold  the  day  is  come,  faith  the  Lord,, 
that — I will  make  void  the  counfel  of  Judah  and 
Jerufalem  in  this  place,  and  L will  caufe  them  to 
fall  by  the  fvord  before  their  enemies.  And  in 
like  manner,  finners  fhall  be  punifhed  in  the 
earth  thev  have  corrupted.  The  judge  of  the 
world  (hall  raife  them  from  the  duff,  to  be  wit- 
neffes  of  the  iffue  and  conclufion  of  fin  ; to  expe- 
rience 


[ 302  . ] 

rience  forrows  greater  thanthofe  they  have  crea- 
ted others;  to  feel  the  want  of  the  corn,  and 
the  wine,  and  the  bleffings  of  nature  they  have 
grofly  abufed:  and  fully  to  learn,  that  the  world 
is  the  workmanfhip  of  Almighty  God,  fubjecl 
to  his  power,  and  changed  at  his  will  for  a curfe 
to  the  wicked,  and  a blefiing  to  the  juft ; and  not 
of  necefTitv,  as  they  foolifhly  imagined,  or  by 
blind  chance.  The  wicked  prince  may  perhaps 
be  tormented  in  the  very  territory  where  he  has 
exercifed  cruelty,  and  opprefled  the  people  com- 
mitted to  his  care.  And  the  voluptuary  punifh- 
ed  in  his  garden  of  delight,  to  the  end  that  the 
memory  of  pall  joys  may  add  to  the  weight  of 
his  prefent  affli&ions,  and  accumulated  evils 
may  be  felt  there,  where  pleafures  were  crowned 
to  give  entertainment  to  every  fenfe.  In  fhort, 
the  windows  of  heaven  will  be  open  from  above 
to  difeharge  deflruflion  on  the  heads  of  Tinners, 
and  the  earth  from  beneath  will  vomit  out  dreams 
of  overflowing  fire  ; and  the  wicked  (hall  be  in- 
clofed  by  the  burning  elements,  the  furnace  they 
have  heated  with  the  briars  and  thorns  ol  their 
former  iniquities. 

Fourthly.  The  time  of  the  diflolution  is  the 
day  of  judgment,  or  the  fecond  coming  of  the 
Son  of  God.  For  St.  Peter  fays,  The  day  of  the 
Lord  will  come  as  a thief  in  the  night,  in  the  which 
the  heavens  Jhall  pafs  away  with  a great  noife,  &c. 
The  merciful  Saviour  bears  with  the  wicked, 
that  none  may  complain  that  he  wanted  time  to 

repent 


repent  and  be  faved.  He  continues  to  bear,  i? 
they  will  not  repent,  till  the  ineafure  of  their  fin 
be  full  and  overflow  ; till  the  myftery  of  iniquity, 
or  methods  of  error  be  difcovered  and  known, 
that  God  may  be  jollified,  and  finners  confound- 
ed ; that  his  goodnefs  may  be  acknowledged  in 
forbidding  wickednefs,  and  his  juflice  in  the  pu- 
nifhments  inflifted  upon  it.  He  bears  with  fin- 
ners, till  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  juft,  and  the 
number  of  the  fufferers  be  finifhed  and  compleat; 
till  virtue  and  truth  have  attained  to  the  maturity 
of  beauty  and  ftrength.  When  this  is  done, 
Chiift  will  appear  to  reward  the  righteous,  and  to 
punifh  the  wicked.  He  will  then  appear,  not  in 
weaknefs,  not  with  the  humble  and  defpifed  at- 
tendance of  a few  fifhermen,  nor  furrounded 
with  falfe  and  infidious  pharifees,  but  incircled 
with  faints,  attended  with  angels,  and  inverted 
with  power  and  great  glory.  He  will  then  ap- 
pear, not  as  a Lamb  appointed  to  be  flain  for  the 
fins  of  the  world,  but  in  the  charafter  of  a Lion 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  to  proteft  his  friends  and 
devour  his  enemies ; with  the  government  on 
his  fhoulder  inftead  of  the  crofs,  and  with  bis 
arms  ftretched  out  not  as  a fufferer,  but  to  em- 
brace the  righteous  and  bring  down  the  wicked. 
He  will  then  come,  not  to  propofe  the  covenant 
or  grace,  but  to  make  enquiry  how  it  has  been 
obferved ; who  have  maintained  or  corrupted 
the  truth  ; who  have  confeffed  or  denied  him  in 
public  ; what  fin  has  been  covered  with  the  clcak 


[ 304  ] 

of  hypocrify  and  guile ; what  committed  without 
figns  of  fhame  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  with 
no  remorfe  in  the  fecret  of  the  foul  ; what 
avowed,  defended,  and  applauded  by  profligate 
finners;  and  what  duties  omitted  or  defpifed  as 
hindrances  of  the  happinefs  of  this  prefent  life, 
and  the  badges  of  a fervile  and  degenerate  fpirit. 
Becaufe  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  is  great, 
fays  God,  and  becaufe  their  fin  is  very  grievous,  I 
will  go  down  now,  and fee  whether  they  have  done 
altogether  according  to  the  cry  of  it  which  is  come 
unto  me.  And  in  like  manner,  when. the  cry  of 
the  fins  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  lhall  reach 
unto  heaven,  the  Son  of  God.  the  Judge  of  the 
world,  will  defcend  to  enquire,,  arrd  utterly  de- 
flrov  it  as  he  did  Sodom. 

The  coming  of  the  Lord  to  perform  this  great 
and  wonderful  work  will  be  fudden  and  unex- 
pended, like  that  of  a thief,  who  furprizes  a care- 
lefs  and  fecure  family  in  the  filence  of  the  nieht. 
He  will  vifit  the  world  in  the  midnight  of  its 
wickednefs,  when  the  nations  fleep  in  the  dark- 
nefs  of  error,  and  the  fhadow  of  death,  for- 
getful of  God,  and  drunk  with  the  pleafures  of  a 
fenfual  converfation.  He  will  then  come,  and 
awaken  the  world;  as  he  did  Egypt,  with  the 
terrors  of  his  judgments,  and  deliver  his  church 
afflifted  and  diflreffed,  by  deftroying  the  oppref- 
for.  His  coming  will  be  hidden  as  the  fwift 
lightning,  not  to  the  righteous  who  watch  and 

pray. 


[ 4 °5  ] 

pray,  but  to  carelefs  finners,  fixed  on  the  plea- 
fures,  profits,  and  honours  of  this  prefent  world, 
who  fatisfied  or  amufed  with  fenfible  good,  have 
no  defire  of  heavenly  enjoyments;  and  who  lead- 
ing a life  which  confidence  condemns,  calf  off 
the  thoughts  of  the  Judge  of  the  world,  whofe 
coming  is  dreadful  to  unrepenting  finners. 

Since  then  Chrift  will  appear  when  finners  are 
fecure  ; fince  he  comes  as  a Judge  to  condemn 
finners;  fince  the  heavens  will  be  diffolved,  and 
the  earth  burnt,  and  the  wicked  perifih  in  this 
general  ruin  : how  does  it  concern  us  to  prepare 
fcr  his  coming  by  repentance  and  faith  ? If  Chrift 
be  our  Judge,  let  nothing  remain  that  may  make 
us  afraid  of  his  future  appearance.  If  the  heavens 
will  be  diffolved,  and  the  earth  burnt,  why 
fhould  we  purfue  the  things  of  this  world  with 
folicitude  and  fear!  To  what  purpofie  fhould  we 
amafs  riches,  which  are  out  of  proportion  to  the 
comforts  of  life  ? Build  pompous  and  expenfive 
feats,  which  we  cannot  fill,  or  but  feldom  vifit  ? 
And  multiply  lands,  whofe  cares  increafe  toge- 
ther with  their  fruits,  but  with  this  difference, 
the  fruits  for  others,  and  the  cares  for  ourfelyes  ? 
Why  fhould  we  wear  out  the  few  days  of  a tem- 
. porary  life  in  this  fruitlefs  labour,  which  is  little 
more  than  heaping  up  fewel,  for  the  dreadful 
fire  of  the  lafl  day.  And  if  this  change  is  the  ef- 
fe£l  of  fin,  and  the  punifhment  of  it,  why  do 
we  defer  to  part  with  our  fins,  which  end  in  fo 
certain  and  frightful  a ruin  P Let  none  deceive 

himfelf. 


[ 3°6  2 

himfelf,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  afar  off,  that 
ages  will  go  on  in  a long  fuccelfion,  a3  ages  are 
part,  before  his  appearance  ; but  rather  confider 
that  for  ought  he  knows  the  time  may  be  fhort  ; or 
fhouldit  beotherwife,  that  death  is  near,  though 
it  feems  to  lag,  and  come  in  the  rear  of  multi- 
tude of  days,  or  threefcore  and  ten  years.  And 
Solomon  tells  us,  Where  the  tree  falleth  there  it 
fhali  lie ; or  that  he  who  defeends  a finner  to  the 
grave,  can  have  little  hope  of  riling  a faint.  Ye 
therefore , beloved,  feeing  ye.  know  theft  things  be- 
fore, beware  lefl  ye  alfo  being  led  away  with  the 
errot  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  JledfaJt- 
nefs.  But  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jefus  Chrif.  To  him  be 
glory  both  now,  and for  ever . Amen, 

II.  I proceed  to  the  fecond  article  propofed  to 
be  coniidered  ; namely,  the  extent  andraufe,  the 
the  end  and  time  of  the  renovation  following  : 
neverthelefs  we,  according  to  his  promife,  look  for 
new  heavens  and  a new  earth,  wherein  dwel/eth 
righteoufnefs.  It  cannot  be  fuppofed  that  this 
viftble  world,  which  the  fire  fhali  confume, 
will  always  continue  a dcfolate  heap,  or  perpetual 
monument  of  God’s  indignation.  For  hew 
can  we  believe  that  the  goodnefs  of  God,  which 
raifed  this  beauteous  fyllem  cf  beings  from  the 
watry  chaos,  will  not  reltore  it  in  the  like  cha- 
racters of  wifdom  and  power,  from  the  rubbtfh 
and  difhonour  to  which  Lt  is  reduced  by  the  fire 


[ 3°7  ] 

of  Ills  wrath  ? If  he  raifes  the  bodies  of  deceaffd 
faints,  notwithflanding  they  are  blended  with 
common  dull,  to  immortality  and  glory:  how 
can  we  believe,  that  this  vifible  world,  the  dwel- 
ling of  man,  which  his  fin  has  corrupted,  fhall 
not  be  reltored  through  the  righteoufnefs  of  man, 
to  a new  flate  of  perfection  and  beauty  ? Can 
we  poffibly  think,  that  the  things  which  were 
made  for  the  pleajure  oj  God,  and  have  no  will  to 
refill  and  offend  him,  will  be  fuffered  to  con- 
tinue infuch  a condition,  as  difcovers  the  marks 
of  the  highelt  difpleafure  ? Or  that  Almighty 
God,  whom  none  can  contend  with  in  counfel 
and  might,  will  fuffer  the  devil  to  triumph  over 
his  work,  and  perfuade  Tinners  that  he  is  ftronger 
to  deliroy,  than  the  author  of  nature  to  preferve 
or  renew  it  ? No,  the  happy  flate  which  all 
things  fhall  be  placed  in  by  a fecond  a£l  of  di- 
divine goodnefs,  will  convince  the  wjcked  and 
their  proud  leader,  that  the  counfel  of  God  can- 
not be  fruftrated ; that  oppolition  tends  to  illuf- 
trate  his  power  and  goodnefs  the  more,  and  to 
finifh  the  fcheme  which  his  wifdom  has  contriv- 
ed, with  the  greateft  joy  to  the  creature  renew- 
ed, and  tribute  of  praife  and  honour  to  himfelf. 
Since  then  fcripture  affures  us  that  all  things  lharl 
be  rellored,  and  reafons  are  fuggefled  by  the 
mind  of  man  to  fecond  revelation  ; I fhall  enter 
upon  the  particulars  I promifed  to  confider. 

Fir  ft  then,  the  renovation  of  the  world,  which  the 
text  fpeaks  of,  is  of  equal  extent  with  the  ruin  of 

it  J 


[ 3°s  3 

it : that  is,  as  the  heavens  {hall  be  diffolved,  the 
elements  melt,  and  the  earth  be  burnt  up  : fo  the 
power  of  God  will  difplay  itfelf  again,  in  reform* 
ing  and  improving  them  with  frefh  oc'cafions  of 
perfe&ion  and  beauty,  which  will  never  give 
way  to  a fecond  change^  Whether  God  will  pro- 
ceed by  the  fame  heps  irr  renewing  the  world,  as 
he  did  in  creating  it,  none  can  determine  with- 
out revelation;.  but  this  we  are  fure  of,  there 
will  be  new  heavens  and  a new  earth.  The  moon 
that  appeared  in  the  likenefs  of  blood,  will  put 
on  the  fplendor  of  the  mid  day  fun ; and  the  fun 
that  was  black  as  fack-cloth  of  hair,  will  filed 
forth  his  light  with  vigorous  ravs  of  furprizing 
brightnefs.  As  it  is  written,  The  light  of  the 
moon  Jhall  be  as  the  light  of  the  fun  ; and  the  light 
of  the fun  Jhall  be  fcven-fold , as  the  light  of [even 
days,  in  the  day  that  the  Lord bindeth  up  the  b reach 
of  his  people,  and  healeth  the  flroke  of  their  wound. 
The  earth  will  pour  forth  its  richeft  ftores  from 
its  inmoft  bofom  ; and  the  air  infpire  immortali- 
ty and  joy  into  every  creature,  the  fitted  medium 
for  the  mouth  of  faints  continually  employed  in 
finging  the  praifes  of  their  great  Creator.  Every 
thing  will  fhare  according  to  its  rank  in  the  blef- 
fings  derived  on  redeemed  man.  As  it  is  writ- 
ten, The  creature  itfelf  alfo  Jhall  be  delivered from 
the  bondage,  of  corruption,  into  the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God.  That  is,  nothing  will  be 
left  of  the  noxious  qualities  of  the  old  world, 
which  fin  had  corrupted.  The  beams  of  the  fun 

will 


E 3 °9  ] 

will  torment  none  with  excefs  of  heat,  whofe 
mild  influence  fufFcrs  no  change  from  the  vial  of 
wrath ; nor  the  pale  light  of  the  moon  chill, 
where  the  fhadows  of  the  night  can  never  pre= 
vail,  nor  fucceed  the  brightnefs  of  eternal  day. 
The  terrors  of  thunder  will  reprove  none,  whom 
God  fpeaks  to  in  the  Hill  voice  of  tendernefs  and 
love  ; nor  the  ftorm  and  whirlwind  harrafs  the 
earth,  where  peace  reigns,  and  adjufts  and  com- 
pofes  the  paffions  of  men.  And  lafllv,  the  pillars 
of  the  earth  will  never  be  moved,  the  hearts  of 
whofe  inhabitants  are  unchangeably  fixed  on  the 
rock  of  ages.  For  it  isreafonable  to  believe,  that 
the  new  heavens  and  the -new  earth  will  be  every 
way  perfect  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  and  glory7 
of  man,  its  appointed  inhabitant. 

Secondly , The  caufe  of  the  renovation  of  the 
heaven  and  the  earth,  is  the  Son  of  God,  and 
that  in  refpefl, 

Firjl,  Of  his  merit. 

Secondly,  Of  his  power. 

Firjl.  The  Son  of  God  is  the  meritorious  caufe 
of  the  refiitution  of  all  things,  that  is,  all  things 
fhall  be  reftored  by  the  power  of  God,  for  the 
fake  of  the  righteonfr.efs  of  the  fecond  Adam,  as 
all  things  were  curbed,  and  confequently  undone, 
by  the  fin  of  the  firjl.  For  it  cannot  be  fuppofed, 
that  the  fin  of  the  one  fiiould. prevail  more  to 
provoke  the  juftice  of  Almighty  God,  than  the 
righteoufnefs  of  the  other  to  move  his  cvmpaf- 
fion.  And  if  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 

earth. 


[ 310  ] 

earth,  a world  of  perfeftion,  beauty,  and  delight, 
and  furnilhed  it  with  variety  of  natural  good  for 
the  happinefs  of  man,  who  had  no  being  till 
every  thing  was  prepared  to  receive  and  enter- 
tain him,  and  in  confequence  of  it  had  merited 
nothing  at  the  hand  of  God  : how  can  we  con- 
ceive, that  a new  world  will  not  be  framed  by 
the  fame  power,  and  ftored  and  enriched  with 
the  greateft  bleffings  which  the  nature  of  man  is 
capable  of  enjoying,  for  the  Son  of  his  love,  who 
fulfilled  righteoufnefs  in  a ft  rift  obfervance  of 
the  duties  of  the  law  ? If  we  take  a view  of 
events  paft,  or  of  changes  to  come,  as  recorded 
and  foretold  in  the  facred  writings,  it  will  evi- 
dently appear  that  natural  bleffings  are  generally 
the  reward  of  national  righteoufnefs.  If  ye  walk 
in  my Jiatutes,  fays  God,  and  keep  my  command- 
ments, and  do  them  : then  I mill  give  you  rain  in 
due  feafon,  and  the  land 'Jhall  yield  her  enaeafe , 
and  the  trees  of  the  field ' Jhall yield  their fruit,  and 
your  thref  ling  Jhall  reach  unto  the  vintage,  and  the. 
vintage  fiall  reach  unto  the  [owing  time:  and  ye 
Jhall  eat  your  bread  to  the  full , and  dwell  in  your 
land fafely.  And  we  do  not  find,  that  the  dews 
of  heaven,  the  riches  of  the  earth,  kind  feafons, 
and  domeftic  profperity  were  wanting  to  the 
Jews,  while  their  righteoufnefs  was  greater  to 
bring  down  a bleffing,  than  their  fin  to  prevent 
it.  Nay,  the  faith  of  one  has  prevailed  with 
God  to  remove  the  defefts  introduced  by  [ n into 
natural  bodies.  For  Elijah  prayed,  And  the  hea- 
ven 


[ 341  ] 

Ven  that  was  as  iron  poured  down  rain , and  the 
earth  which  was  as  brafs  gave  forth  her  fruit,  as 
he  faid,  to  Ahab  ; As  the  Lord  God  of  Ifrael  liveth 
before  whom  I fund,  there  fiall  not  be  dew  nor 
rain  theft  years,  but  according  to  my  word.  The 
power  of  the  keys  was  committed  to  his  bands  in 
anatural  fenfe,  to  (hut  heaven  and  open  it  again 
for  the  reproof,  convi&ion,  and  punifhment  of 
finners.  In  like  manner  the  barren  ground 
which  Jericho  flood  in,  was  made  fruitful  by 
another  prophet  healing  the  fprings  that  watered 
the  foil.  If  we  look  forwards,  and  confider  the 
changes  and  revolutions  to  come,  the  perfe&ion 
of  the  church  in  the  fulnefs  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
the  converfion  of  the  Jews,  will  be  followed 
with  improvements  in  the  fiate  of  nature.  Ye 
fiall  go  out  with  joy,  fays  the  prophet,  and  be 
Led  forth  with  peace  ; the  mountains  and  the  hills 
fhall  break  forth  before  you  into  fnging,  and  all 
the  trees  of  the f eld  fiall  clap  their  hands.  Infead 
of  the  thorn fall  come  up  the  fr  tree,  and  infead 
of  the  briar fall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree.  If  then 
vifible  things  will  receive  fuch  improvements  on 
account  of  the  church,  if  the  bleffings  of  nature 
were  difpenfed  to  the  Jews  in  proportion  to  their 
righteoufnefs  in  obferving  the  law ; and  pro- 
phets could  prevail  with  Almighty  God  to  re- 
new the  bleffings  which  heaven  and  earth  were 
deprived  of  through  fin  ; if  the  righteoufnefs  of 
man  could  prove  an  occafion  of  reviving  the 
world  in  the  manner  l have  mentioned,  notwith- 

ftanding 


I 3 12  ] 

fianding  it  mull  perifh  in'  the  general  burning  oi 
the  laft  day : what  perfection  will  it  not  recover, 
what  improvements  will  it  not  receive  through 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  when  the  church 
fha!l  be  united  in  one  pure  and  undefiled  body  to 
the  Lord  its  head,  and  become  the  objedi,  toge- 
ther with  Chrift,  of  the  riches  of  the  goodnefs, 
and  bounty  of  God  ? 

Secondly.  The  Son  of  God  is,  together  with 
the  Father,  the  efficient  caufe  of  the  new  heaven 
and  the  neu^earfk;  for  it  is  reafonable  to  believe 
that  the  world  will  be  renewed  by  the  fame  power 
which  created  it  at  firft.  I have  put  my  words  in 
thy  mouth , and  have  covered  thee  in  the  Jhadow  of 
my  hand , fays  the  Father  to  the  Son,  to  plant  the 
heavens,  and  lay  the  foundation  of  the  earth. 
The  miracles  he  wrought  in  {Idling  the  winds  and 
calming  the  fea,  {hewed  his  dominion  both  in 
heaven  and  earth,  and  the  cures  he  performed 
on  the  bodies  of  men,  as  healing  the  Tick,  giving 
feet  to  the  lame,  and  eyes  to  the  blind,  andraif- 
ing  the  dead,  are  undoubted  proofs  that  no  de- 
cay can  reduce  the  world  to  fuch  a condition, 
that  it  cannot  be  renewed  by  the  power  of  Chrift. 
For  what  can  be  impofiible  to  the  Son  of  God, 
the  refun  edion  and  the  life?  Or  what  creature 
cannot  be  reftored  by  the  power  of  him,  who 
will  raife  man,  the  moil  perfedt  of  all,  at  the 
laft  day  ? 

Thirdly.  The  end  cf  the  renovation  of  heaven 
and  earth  is, 

Firft, 


[ 3*3  I 

firjl.  That  the  goodnefs,  wifdorn,  and  powdf 
of  God  may  be  better  difcerned  in  his  new 
works  than  they  were  in  the  old.  The  works  of 
God  are  a kind  of  mirror  that  reflects  his  perfec- 
tions; which  if  fullied  through  fin,  conveys  but 
a faint  and  imperfeCt  idea  of  his  power  and  God- 
head. Hence  it  has  come  to  pafs,  that  men  un- 
acquainted with  the  rife,  progrefs,  and  confe- 
quences  of  fin,  obferving  the  defeCts  and  dif~ 
orders  in  the  world,  and  inferring  well  that  they 
could -not  proceed  from  a wife,  good,  and  all- 
powerful  being,  have  denied  his  efficiency  in 
producing  the  world,  and  have  rather  affigned  it 
to  blind  chance,  an  evil  God,  or  fome  other 
weak  and  infuflicient  caufe.  But  when  all  things 
fhall  be  renewed,  and  appear  in  the  brightnefs  of 
un'ullied  beauty  with  their  complement  of  per- 
fections, it  is  then  that  the  greatnefs  and  good- 
nefs of  God  will  fhine  in  his  works,  every  thing 
will  ftrike  and  conduCt  the  eye  to  the  author  of 
it:  the  characters  oflris  Godhead  will  be  deeply 
engraven  in  every  objeCt,  and  nothing  unwor- 
thy of  fo  perfeCt  a caufe  will  give  an  occafion  to 
queftion  the  truth  of  his  making  the  whole. 

Secondly,  The  end  of  the  renovation  of  hea- 
ven and  earth  is,  that  righteoufnefs  may  reign  in 
the  new  frame  and  fyffem  of  beings.  The  apof. 
tie  expreffes  it  in  the  following  words,  Ncverthe - 
lefs,  roe  according  to  his  promif'e,  look  for  new 
heavens  and  a new  earth,  wherein  ctweUdh  righie - 
oufnefs.  The  prefent  world,  through  the  wick- 
Vol,  XX.  O ednefs 


[ 314  1 

cdnefs  of  man,  and  the  malice  of  Satan,  is  the 
theatre  of  fin,  and  a confiant  provocation  of  the 
anger  and  jufiice  of  Almighty  God.  The  weak* 
nefsofthe  flefh,  the  myflery  of  iniquity,  and 
the  wrath  of  God  have  been  partly  difplayed, 
and  will  be  fully  difcovered  in  this  field  of  battle 
between  light  and  darknefs,  heaven  and  hell. 
Idols  have  been  fet  up  in  the  place  of  God,  and 
honoured  with  the  tribute  of  prayer  and  thankf- 
giving,  which  is  only  due  to  infinite  power  and 
infinite  goodnefs.  Evil  concupifcence  has  been 
mere  complied  with  than  the  dictates  of 
truth,  the  love  of  God,  and  obligations  to  cha- 
rity. And  authority  and  power  conferred  upon 
fome  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole,  have  been 
chiefly  employed  by  cruel,  faitldefs,  and  ambi- 
tious men,  in  adds  of  opprefiion,  and  building 
their  greatnefs  on  the  indufiry  of  others.  And  to 
fum  up  all,  the  reigning  city,  or  prevailing  date 
of  the  governments  of  the  world,  is  defciibed  in 
the  figure  of  Babylon  the  Great,  the  Mother  o) 
hay  lots,  and  abominations  of  the  earth . But  the 
cafe  will  be  otherwife  in  the  new  heaven  and  the 
new  earth,  which  will  pour  down  i ighteoufnefs 
and  bring  forth  truth.  The  Spirit  of  God, 
which  animates  the  faints  a*s  the  foul  the  body, 
will  unite  them  together  under  Chi  iff  their  head 
in  the  fame  knowledge  of  divine  truth,  in  the 
fame  love  and  obedience  to  God,  in  the  fame  af- 
fefilion  one  towards  another,  and  in  the  fame 
endeavours  to  preferve  and  promote  the  happi- 
neis  of  the  afTembly,  which  each  is  a part  of 

the 


r 3j5  j 

the  being  of  God,  his  perfe£lion,  and  authority 
will  be  fully  acknowledged  j his  laws  obeyed 
with  diligence  and  chearfulnefs ; his  myfteries 
underftood,  or  received  with  humility  ; his  juf- 
tice  revered;  his  goodnefs  admired  ; and  him- 
felf  worlhipped  in.  Spirit  and  truth.  The  oeco- 
nomy  of  the  word  in  a body  of  flefh,  the  feries 
of  wonders  enfuing  thereupon,  and  the  dignity 
of  his  nature  will  no  longer  be  matter  of  contra- 
diblion  and  ft  rife,  but  confeffed  in  a manner  be- 
coming thofe,  who  enjoy  the  redemption  ob- 
tained by  his  blood.  And  himfelf  will  be  joined 
with  the  Father  and  Spirit,  in  the  worfhip  and 
praifes  of  angels  and  men.  Religion  will  be 
pure,  and  without  the  mixture  of  hypocrify  and 
deceit,  virtue  without  prefumption,  love  with- 
out diffimulation,  honour  without  pride,  power 
without  oppreffion,  and  knowledge  without  con- 
ceit. No  one’s  abundance  will  create  envy 
where  every  one  is  full : no  one’s  diftinftion, 
where  every  one  is  fat.isfi ed  with  his  own  lot. 
The  modefty  of  all  will  render  it  agreeable  to 
prefer  each  in  honour  to  himfelf.  And  felfilh- 
nefs  will  be  loft  in  the  fpirit  of  love,  which  is 
public,  difinterefted,  and  direfts  the  ablions  of 
every  part  to  the  good  of  the  whole. 

Thirdly , The  end  of  the  renovation  of  heaven 
and  earth  is,  that  the  righteous  may  be  comfort- 
ed, and  receive  a reward  for  the  troubles  they 
have  buffered,  and  the  good  they  have  done  in 
this  pr.efent  life.  According  to  fcripture  the 
Q 2 righteous 


C 3l6  ] 

righteous  are  fir  angers  and  pilgrims  in  the  world. 
The  manners,  language,  and  profpeffs  of  men 
are  different  from  theirs.  The  God,  they  wor- 
fhip,  is  not  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  ; nor 
the  city,  they  feek,  Babylon  the  Great,  the 
feat  of  pride,  confufion,  and  injuftice.  For 
which  reafon  they  are  little  regarded  by  worldly- 
minded  men,  as  unfit  infliuments  for  the  pur- 
pofes  of  life,  who  for  want  of  complying  with 
the  fecret  maxims  which  the  world  fleers  by, 
whatfoever  {hew  it  may  outwardly  make  of  jus- 
tice and  tru'h ; and  who  fixing  their  thoughts  on 
a future  flate,  inltead  of  the  prefent,  are  unqua- 
lified thereby  to  fupport  the  grandeur  and  inteteft 
of  government,  and  bear  the  honours  and  re- 
wards of  merit.  Nay,  it  is  well  for  them  if  they 
efcape  fo,  and  are  not  reprefented  in  the  black 
charafterof  enemies  to  the  flate,  which  was  Ha- 
man’s  artifice  to  deftroy  the  Jews,  who  addrefl- 
ed  himfelf  thus  to  his  abufed  mafler.  There  is  a 
certain  people  fcattered  abroad,  and  difperjed  a- 
mong  the  people  in  all  the  provinces  of  thy  kingdom, 
and  their  laws  are  diverfe  from  all  people,  neither 
keep  they  the  king’s  laws  ; therefore  it  is  not  for 
the  king's  profit  to  fuffer  them . lfitpleafe  the  king 
let  it  be  written  that  they  may  be  defhoyed.  But 
howfoever  they  may  fare  in  this  prefent  life,  the 
world  to  come  is  alloted  to  the  righteous,  who 
■will  not  be  pilgrims  but  inheriters  of  it ; to  the 
righteous  and  defpifed,  who  have  walked  by 
faith  in  a fenfual  generation,  been  jufl  with  the 

fraudulent ; 


[ 3 \7  J 

fraudulent;  temperate  and  model},  in  affluence 
and  riches  ; pure  and  unfullied  in  the  midit  of 
temptations;  and  confiant  and  true  in  times  of 
defection.  Who  have  fed  the  hungry,  comfort- 
ed the  afflifie'1,  and  honoured  virtue  in  poverty 
and  dtfirefs,  and  will  therefore  bejullified  by 
the  Son  of  God  with  fuitable  returns  for  their 
confidence  and  hope.  The  countenance  ofthefe, 
whom  the  world  treated  as  madmen  or  fools,- 
will  fhine  like  the  fun  with  the  brightnefs  of  wif- 
dom  ; and  their  hands  be  ftrengthened  with  the 
rod  of  power,  whom  the  proud  crufhed  as  weak- 
and  contemptible.  The  fheep-fkins  and  goat-* 
Ikins  which  covered  their  nakednefs,  and  the 
dens  and  caves  winch  received  them  in  their  dif- 
trefs,  will  be  turned  into  garments  of  beauty  and 
jov,  and  everlafiing  manfions  of  pleafure  and 
peace.  The  bleffed  angels  which  affifted  them 
in  their  troubles  as  minifiring  fpints  and  conceal- 
ed friends,  wilt  converfe  with  them,  now  with- 
out any  referve,  as  companions  in  their  joy;  and 
will  join  in  praifes  to  Almighty  God  lor  the  hap- 
py llfue  of  their  care  and  fidelity.  And  the  Spi- 
rit of  God  by  prefenting  to  their  mind  the  beaurt- 
ful  vicifiitudes  ofjuftice  and  pity,  mutually  con- 
tending in  pafi  ages  to  punifh  or  forgive  the  in- 
halrams  of  the  earth,  will  enlarge  their  fouls' 
with  a vaft'profpett  of  the  depths  of  the  wifdoirr  - 
and  goodnefs  of  God,  that  will  prove  an  occa- 
iion  of  inc  reafe  of  joy,  and  of  repeated  ^praifes- . 
•to.Almighty  God  for  their  lafe  paffage  to  the  re-  .. 

O , 3, 


I & 1 

gions  of  blifs,  through  fueh  various  fcenes  of  tri- 
al and  danger.  The  bleflings  of  this  Hate  may 
partly  be  conceived  by  confidering  the  for  row  3 
and  evils  of  the  prefent.  For  if  bodily  pains  may 
prove  fo  exceflive  as  to  drive  the  patients  into 
fits  of  detftra&ion,  what  extafies  of  divine  joy 
will  not  be  raifed  frorn  impreflions  of  pleafure  on 
glorified  bodies  1 If'contempt  from  their  breth- 
ren juftly  deferved  becomes  infupportable,  and 
compels  many  for  prefent  relief  to  deprive  them- 
felves  of  life  and  fociety  together,  what  will  be 
the  pleafure  which  the  foul  will  experience  from 
honours  received  in  the  affembly  of  the  bleffed  ? 
And  if  lofs  of  fortune  fills  us  with  anxiety,  and 
the  fenfe  of  the  inllability  of  human  affairs  mixes 
our  enjoyments  with  the  fear  of  changes,  how  will 
the  happinefs  of  the  faints  in  light  be  perfeft  and 
confummate,  who  abound  with  the  riches  of  di- 
vine goodnefs,  and  have  this  added  to  their  other 
felicity,  that  the  comforts  they  enjoy  will  ever 
be  the  fame,  or  fuffer  no  change  but  that  of  im- 
provement? 

Fourthly  and  la/Uy,  The  end  of  the  renova- 
tion of  heaven  and  earth  is,  that  God  may  re. 
joiceany  reft  in  his  works.  The  vifible  world  is 
the  temple  of  God,  which  no  fooner  was  made, 
then  he  fhewed  his  delight  in  the  work  ot  his 
hands  bv  pronoucing  it  good.  But  this  pure  flate 
being  foon  corrupted  bv  man’s  difobed  ence  the 
fymbols  of  his  prefence  began  to  withdraw,  and  the 
World  was  expofed  to  a long  train  of  multiform 

evils. 


L 3*9  3 

evils,  that  in  procefs  of  time  will  utterly  difibive 
it.  Since  this  fatal  and  unhappy  divorce,  the 
world  is  in  bondage  to  a new  lord,  whom  the 
fcripturedylesthe  God  of  this  world  -r. an  impotent 
being,,  empty  of  good,  whofe  bed  returns  for 
the  honours  he  receives  are  diffapointment  and 
furrow  in  the  high-ell  degree.  But  the  raydery 
of  iniquity  being  once  finifhed  the  cafe  will  be 
otherwife  in  the.  new  heaven  anil  the  new  earth, 
which  righteoufnefs  dwells  in.  The  glory  of 
God  will  return  to  his  work,  which  is  perfe£i  in 
goodnefs,  and  cannot  be  defiled  with  a fecond 
offence.  That  is,  as  the  tabernacle  and  temple 
dnifhed  and  prepared  for  the  fervice  of  God,  were 
both  over  diadowed  with  the  fymbol  of  his  pre- 
fence : fo  God’s  delight  in  his  new  works,  will 
be  pubiickly  declared  by  his  vifible  prefence 
Tuning  through  the  whole,  and  dwelling  with 
his  church  for  ever  and  ever.  This  glorious 
date  is  defcribed  thus  in  figures  adapted  to  our 
prefent  conceptions.  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God 
is  with  men , and  he  will  dwell  with  them , and  they 
fiall  be  his  people,  and  God  hinfelf  / hail  be  with 
them , and  be  then  Gocl.  And  God  JJiall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  -,  and  therefhall 
be  no  more  death,  neither ; for  row,  nor  crying,  nei- 
ther Jhall  there  he  any  more  pain  : for  the  former 
things  are  pnffed  away.  And  again,  There  Jhall 
be  no  more  curje  : but  the  throne  of  God  a id  of 
the  Lamb  [hall  be  in  it ; and  his  fervants  [hail  ferve 
him. — And  there  Jhall  be  no  night  there,  and  they 

need 


[ 320  ] 

need,  no  candle , neither  light  of  the  fun : and  they 
fiall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  For  if  all  the  evils 
we  can  pollibly  fuffer,  principally  arife  from 
the  want  of  the  favour  of  Almighty  God,  or 
from  the  power  of  his  wrath,  how  will  the 
pleafiire  of  life  be  compleat  and  with  what  joys 
will  the  foul  fwell  when  the  light  of  his  counte- 
nance fhines  on  the  chruch  with  perpetual  fmiles, 
and  it  is  cherilhed  and  embraced  in  the  arms  oi 
his  love. 

The  laid,  particular,  I fhall  now  fpeak  to.  is 
the  time  of  the  renovation  of  heaven  and  earth. 
It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  new  fhould  appear 
till  the  old  vanilh.  It  will  fare  with  the  world 
as  it  does  with  man,  the  body  mull  perifh  be- 
fore it  can  rife,  and  the  world  be  dilfolved  before 
it  can  appear  in  the  new  drefs  of  immortality 
and  glory.  I faw,  fays  St.  John , a new  heaven 
and  a new  earth  ; for  the  fir jl  heaven  and  thefirjl 
earth  were  paffed  away,  and  there  was  no  more fea. 
This  is  the  end  orthe  oeconomy  of  Chiift  in  the 
nature  of  man,  to  exalt  ail  things  to  a fixed  fate 
of  perfefdion  and  glory  ; which  cannot  be  at- 
tained to  till  his  turimphs  are  compleated  in  the 
conqueft  of  death  the  laft  enemy.  But  death  be* 
mg  dellroyed  by  the  power  of  God  which  raif- 
eth  up  the  dead,  and  the  earth  with  the  wicked 
configned  to  the  fury  of  devouring  fire,  a new 
world  will  arife  for  the  refl  and  habitation  ofthe 
juft,  where  their  paft  furrows  will  be  no  more 
felt,  than  the  pleaftrres  of  wicked  in  their 

place 


r 321  3 

place  of  torment.  For  the  period  of  judgment- 
being  now  finifhed  the  feafon  of  love  will  immedi- 
ately commence  ; and  the  Son  of  God  like  a great 
conqueror,  who  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  enjoy 
the  peace  he  has  purchafed  with  his  fword,  will 
put  off  his  veflure  dipt  in  blood,  his  garments  of 
■vengeance,  and  his  clo/te  of  sseal,  an  1 converfe  with 
his  church  in  the  pleafing  drefs  of  meeknefs  and 
love  ; both  receiving  the  honours  of  a grateful 
people,  whofe  hearts  overflow  with  a fenfe  of  the- 
wonders  he  has  done  for  them,  and  filling  their 
fouls  again  in  return  with  the  fweet  variety  of 
divine  good,  the  treafures-  opened  to  his  great 
merit,  which  no  enjoyment  can  ever  exhauft. 

But  here  I muft  Hop,  being  loft  in  a ftate,. 
whofe  excefs  of  light  puts  out  the  eyes  of  our 
weak  minds,  and  whofe  excefs  of  good  inebriating 
the  foul  furpaffes  expreffton,  and  renders  the 
tongue  of  him  who  attempts  to  deferibe  his  hap- 
pinefs,  like  the  tongue  of  a man  aftonifhect 
with  wine.  All  that  I can  do,  having  thus  con- 
duced you  to  this  profpeC  of  blifs,  is  earneftly 
to  wiflt,  and  ferioufly  to  en  treat  you,  fo  to  de- 
mean yourfelves  in  this  life  of  trouble,  that 
your  labours  being  ended,  you  may  reft  for  ever 
with  the  Son  of  God,  in  the  world  of  peace,  in 
the  land  of  plenty,  in  the  joyful  city,  and  in 
the  bofom  of  his  love* 


The  End  of  the  Twentieth  Volume 


• ..... 

\ 


' 


T H E 

CONTENTS 

Of  the  Twentieth,  Volume. 


Page 

The  fcripture  dFS  trine  off predejtination,  election, 
and  reprobation.  3 

An  ext  rati  from  a ffkort  vino  cj  the  difference 
between  the  Moravian  B>  ethren  ( fo  lulled ) and 
the  Rev.  Mr.  John  and  Charles  Wtffley.  24 

■An  extract  jrom  a dialogue  between  an  Antino - 
mian  and  his  Friend.  29 

A dialogue  between  a Predejlinarian  and  his 
Friend.  43 

Free-Grace  : a ferrrton.  56 

Serious  confiderations  concerning  the  doilrines  off 
election  and  reprobation » 83 

'Serious 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

"Serious  confiderations  on  abfolute predefination.  97 
Serious  thoughts  upon  the  perfeverance  of  the 
faints.  129 

Predefination  calmly  confdered . 154 

T7ze  confequence  proved.  25  x 

Thoughts  0 1 the  imputed  right  ecu  fmfs  of  Chrij}.  259 

A blow  at  the  root ; or,  Chrif  fobbed  in  the 
houfe  of  his  friends.  265 

A fufficient  an  fiver  to  Letters  to  the  author  of 
Theron  and  Afpafo.  276 

An  ex tra&  of  two  difcourfs  on  the  conf  agna- 
tion and  'renovation  of  the  world.  290 


. 


Date  Due 


FEB  t 5 

Demco  293-5 

