DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe22wesl 


THE 


WORKS 

O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 


Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street . 

MBCCLX-XIII, 


. 


■» 


X 


• : 


. : --:.T 


) i 


R6R,- 

[ 3 ] '=3-'  O &V  { E-  ~ (&J& 

W.5'/3V/r 
v • 


FREE  THOUGHTS 

On  die  PRESENT  STATE  of 

PUBLIC  A F -FAIRS. 


In  a Letter  to  a Friend. 


Penculojk  plenum  opus  alece. 

Tratlas,  & incedis  per  ignes 
Suppo/itos  cineri  dolojo.  Hor. 


YOU  defire  me  to  give  you  my  thoughts 
freely  on  the  prefent  Hate  of  public  affairs. 
But  do  you  confider  ? 1 am  no  politician  : poli- 
tics lie  quite  out  of  my  province.  Neither  have  I 
any  acquaintance,  at  leaf!  no  intimacy,  with  any 
that  bear  that  charadler.  And  it  is  no  eafv  mat- 
ter to  form  any  judgment  concerning  things  of  fo 
complicated  a nature.  It  is  the  more  difficult, 
becaufe  in  order  to  form  our  judgment,  fuch  a 
A 2 multitude 


[ 4 ] 


multitude  of  faffs  fhould  be  known,  few  of  which 
can  be  known  with  tolerable  exaffnefs  by  any 
but  thofe  who  are  eye-witneffes  of  them.  And 
how  few  of  th'efe  will  relate  what  they  havefeen 
precifelv  as  it  was,  without  adding,  omitting  or 
altering  any  circumfrance,  either  with  or  without 
defign  ? And  mav  not  a flight  addition  or  alte- 
ration give  a quite  different  colour  to  the  whole  ? 

And  as  we  cannot  eafily  know  with  any  accu- 
racy, the  faffs  on  which  we  are  chiefly  to  form 
our  judgment,  *fo  much  lefs  can  we  expefi  to 
know  the  various  fprings  of  at t ion  which  gave 
rife  to  thofe  faffs,  and  on  which  more  than  on 
the  bare  afficns  themfclvcs,  the  charaffers  of  the 
aflors  depend.  It  is  on  this  account  that  an  old 
■writer  advifes  us  to  judge  nothing  before  the  time-, 
to  abftain,  as  far  as  poffible,  from  judging  pe- 
remptorily, either  of  things  or  perfons,  till  the 
time  comes,  when  the  hidden  things  of  daiknefs, 
the  faffs  now  concealed,  will  be  brought  to  light, 
and  the  bidden  fprings  of  affion  will  be  difco- 
vered,  the  thoughts  and  intents  oj  every  human 
'heart. 

Perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ Nay,  every  Englifh- 
“ man  is  a politician;  we  fuck  in  politics  with 
“ our  mother’s  milk.  It  is  as  natural  for  us  to 
“ talk' politics  as  to  breathe;  we  can  inftruft 
“ both  the  King  and  his  Council.  We  can  in  a 
“ trice  reform  the  flat e,  point  out  ever)  blunder 
“ of  this  or  that  minilter,  and  tell  every  Hep  they 
“ ought  to  take  to  be  arbiters  of  all  Europe . ’ 

I grant. 

D 7 


C o ] 

I grant,  every  cobler,  tinker,  porter  and 
hackney -coachman  can  do  this.  But  1 am  not 
fo  deep-learned : while  they  are  fare  of  every' 
thing,  I am  in  a manner  fure  of  nothing ; ex- 
cept of  that  very  little  which  I fee  with  my  own 
eyes,  or  hear  with  my  own  ears.  However, 
fince  you  defile  me  to  tell  you  what  I think,  I 
will  do  it  with  all  opennefs.  Only  pleafe  to  re- 
member, I do  not  take  upon  me  to  didlate  either 
to  you  or  to  any  one.  I only  ufe  the  privilege 
of  an  Englijhman,  to  fpeak  my  naked  thoughts  : 
fetting  down  juft  what  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
truth,  till  I have  better  information. 

At  prefent,  indeed,  I have  not  much  infor- 
mation, having  read  little  upon  this  head  but  the 
public  papers.  And  you  know,  thefe  are  moftly 
on  one  fide;  in  them  little  is  to  be  feen  on  the 
other  fide.  And  that  little  is  feldom  wrote  by 
maflerly  writers.  How  few  of  them  have  fuch  a 
pen  as  Junius? 

But  fuppofing  we  have  ever  fo  much  infor- 
mation, how  little  can  one  rely  on  it?  On  the 
information  given  by  either  party?  For  is  not 
one  as  warm  as  the  other?  And  who  does  not 
know  how  impofiible  it  ■ for  a man  to  fee  tinners 
light  when  he  is  angrv Does  not  pailion  blind 
the  eyes  of  the  undei  Handing,  as  fmpke  does  the 
bodily  eyes  ? And  hew  little  of  the  truth  can  we 
learn  from  thole,  who  iee  nothin?  but  through 

i i - ■iJ  °‘ 

a cioua  r 

1 Lis'  advantage  -.hen  I have  over  both  parties, 


[ 6 ] 

the  being  angry  at  neither.  So  that  if  I have  « 
little  underftanding  from  nature  or  experience, 
it  is  (in  this  inllance  at  1 e all}  unclouded  by  pai- 
fion.  I wifh  the  fame  happinefs  which  I wilh  to 
mylelf,  to  thofe  on  one  fide  and  on  the  other. 
I would  not  hurt  either  in  the  leaf!  degree ; I 
would  not  willingly  give  them  any  pain. 

I have  likewife  another  advantage,  that  of 
having  no  bias  one  way  or  the  other.  I have 
no  intereft  depending  : 1 want  no  man's  favour, 
having  no  hopes,  no  fears  from  any  man : and 
having  no  particular  attachment  of  any  kind,  to 
either  of  the  contending  parties. 

But  am  I fo  weak  as  to  imagine,  that  becaufe 
I am  not  angry  at  the??/,  they  will  not  be  angry 
at  me?  No,  I do  not  imagine  any  fuch  thing. 
Probably  both  will  be  angry  enough  ; that  is,  the 
warm  men  on  both  hues,  were  it  only  for  this, 
that  I am  not  as  warm  as  themfelves.  For  what 
is  more  infufferable  to  a man  in  a paflion,  than 
to  fee  you  keep  your  temper  ? And  is  it  not  a 
farther  provocation,  that  I do  not  behave  as  he 
does  to  his  opponent  ? That  I call  him  no  ill 
names  ? That  I give  him  no  ill  words  ? I expect 
therefore  to  be  abided  on  all  kdes;  and  cannot 
he  difappointed,  unlefs  by  being  treated  with 
common  humanity. 

This  premifed,  I come  to  the  point,  to  give 
you  my  free  Thoughts ; on  the  preftnt  State  of 
Public  Affairs,  the  caufcs  and  confluences  of  the 

prefent 


i?  7 ] 

prefent  commotions.  But  permit  me  to  remind’ 
you,  that  I fay  nothing  peremptorily.  I do  not 
take  upon  me  to  affirm,  that  things  are  thus  or 
thus.  I juft  fet  down  my  naked  thoughts,  and 
that  without  any  art  or  colouring. 

“ What  then  do  you  think  is  the  direft  and 
“ principal  canje  of  the  prefent  public  commo- 
64  tions,  of  the  amazing  ferment  among  the  peo- 
“ pie,  the-  general  difcontent  of  the  nation  ?” 
Which  now  rifes  to  an  higher  degree  than  it  has 
done  in  the  memory  of  man  : infomuch  that  I 
have  heard  it  aftirmed  with  my  own  ears, 
“ King  George  ought  to  be  treated  as  King 
“ Charles  was.”  Is  it  the  extraordinary  bad 
char  abler  of  the  King  ? I do  not  apprehend  it  is. 
Certainly  if  he  is  not,  as  fome  think,  the  bejl 
Prince  in  Europe,  he  is  far  from  being  the  worjh 
One  not  greatly  prejudiced  in  his  favour,  does 
not  charge  him  with  want  of  virtue,  (of  this  he 
judges  him  to  have  more  than  enough ) but  with 
wanting  thofe  royal  vices,  which  (with  Machiavel 
and  the  ingenious  Doftor  Mandeville J he  fuppo- 
fes  would  be  public  benefits. 

“ But  does  he  not  likewife  want  underjland- 
“ mg  ?”  So  it  has  been  boldly  affirmed.  And  it 
muft  be  acknowledged  this  charge  is  lupported 
by  fafts,  which  cannot  be  denied.  The  firft  is, 
he  believes  the  bible  ; the  fecond.he  fears  God; 
the  third,  he  loves  the  Oueen.  Now  fuppofe 
the  firft  of  thefe,  confidermg  the  prejudice  of 
education,  might  confift  with  fome  fhare  of  un- 
A 4 derftanding, 


[ 3 ] 

derftanding,  yet  how  can  this  he  allowed  with 
regard  to  the  fecond?  For  although  in  the  times 
of  ignorance  and  barbarifm,  men  imagined,  the 
fear  oj  God  was  the  beginning  oj  u jdorn , our  en- 
lightened age  has  difeovered  it  is  the  aid  cf  it: 
that  whenever  the  fear  of  God  begins,  wifdom 
is  at  an  end.  And  with  regard  to  the  third,  for 
a man  to  love  his  wife,  unlefs  perhaps  for  a 
month  or  two,  muff  argue  fuch  utter  want  of 
fenfe,  as  moil  men  of  rank  are  now  a fh  anted  of. 
But  after  all,  there  are  fome,  who,  allowing  the 
fa£ls,  deny  the  confequence.  Who  fiill  beiieve, 
and  that  after  the  moil  accurate  enquiry,  from 
fuch  as  have  had  the  heft  means  of  information, 
that  there  are  few  noblemen  or  gentlemen  in  the 
nation,  (and  we  have  many  not  inferior  to  moll 
in  Europe)  .who  have  either  fo  good  a nat  1 
underilanding,  or  .fo  general  a knowledge  o ..d 
tire  valuable  parts  of  learning. 

“ But  fuppofe  fomething  might  be  faid  for  his 
“ ivlaje fly’s  underilanding,  what  can  be  d in 
“ e::cufe  of  his  bad  aftions  ? As  firfl,  1.  - par- 
“ dotting  a murderer  ?”  I really  think  forr  ething 
may  he  laid  on  this  head  "Ifo.  Can  you  or  I 
believe,  that  the-  King  knew  him  to  be  fuch  ? 
Underilood  him  to  be  a wilful  murderer?  I am 
net  fare  of  it  at  all ; neither  have  you  any  rati- 
onal proof:  (even  fuppofmg  this  to  have  been 
the  cafe,  which  is  far  from  being  clear.'  And 
ii  he  did  not  know  or  believe  him  to  be  fuch, 
kw  can  he  be  blamed  for  pardoning  him  ? Not 

tq 


• [ 9 ] 

to  have  pardoned  him  in  this  cafe,  would  have 
been  inexcufable  before  God  and  man. 

“ But  what  can  be  faid  in  excufe  of  his  being 
"■governed  by  his  mother , and  fixing  all  his  mea- 
“ fures  at  Carlton  houfe  ?”  It  may  be  faid,  that 
if  it  was  fo,  it  is  pail,  and  fo  is  no  matter  of  pre* 
fent  complaint.  But  who  informed  you  that  it 
was  ? “ Any  eye  and  ear  witnefs  ? O,  it  is  in 
“ every  body’s  mouth.”  Very  well  : but  every 
body  is  no  body  ; fo  this  proof  is  no  proof  at  all. 
And  what  better  proof  have  you,  or  any  man, 
of  his  fixing  any  of  his  meafures  there  ? This 
has  been  affirmed  an  hundred  times,  but  never 
was  proved  yet.  . “ Nay,  but  is  it  not  undeniable 
“ faft,  that  he  fpent  hour  after  hour  with  her  ? 
“ And  efpecially  when  he  was  hard  preffied,  and 
‘‘  knew  not  which  way  to  turn?”  And  what  then  ? 
Who  loves  him  better  than  his  parent?  And 
whom  has  he  a right  to  love  better  than  her  ? 
Who  is  more  faithful  to  him,  more  fleadily  de- 
firous  of  his  welfare  ? And  whom  can  he  trufl 
better?  Suppqfe  then  it  was  true, (which  is  more 
than  any  man  can  prove)  that  he  did  confuit  her 
on  all  occafions,  and  particularly  when  he  .was  m 
trouble  and  perplexity,  who  can  blame  him  for  fo 
doing? 

“ Well,  be  this  as  it  may,  who  can -help  blam- 
“ ing  him  forgiving  fo  many  penfwns  ?”  Tins  is 
a thing  which  I do  not  underhand,  and  can 
therefore  neither  praife  nor  blame.  Some  in- 
deed, I think,  are  well  be/lowed,  oilmen  eminent: 

-A  5 in 


[ IQ'] 

in  their  feveral  profeflions.  All,  I believe,  are 
well  defgned,  particularly  thofe  given  to  men 
tvho  are  removed  from  public  emplovments. 
Yet,  I fear,  fome  of  thefe  are  ill  bejloued,  on 
thofe  who  not  only  fly  in  the  face  of  their  bene- 
factor, but  avail  themfelves  of  his  favours  to 
wound  the  deeper.  “ For  were  he  not  in  the 
“wrong,  thefe  would  never  turn  again  ft  him!'* 
What  pity  they  fhould  enjov  them  another  day, 
after  fuch  foul  and  flagrant  ingratitude  ? 

* This  fault  (if  it  were  really  fuch)  would  argue 
too  great  eajinejs  of  temper.  But  this  is  quite  the 
reverfe  of  what  is  commonly  objected,  inflexible 
Jlubbornnefs . “ Nay,  what  elfe  could  occafion 

“ the  fettled  difregard  of  fo  many  ptitions  and 
“ remonjtrances,  figned  by  fo  many  thoufand 
“ hands,  and  declaring  the  fenfe  of  the  nation/’ 
The  fenfe  of  the  nation  ! Who  can  imagine  this, 

that  knows  the  manner  v, ’herein  nine  in  ten,  I 
might  fay,  ninety-nine  in  an  hundred,  of  thofe 
petitions  are  procured  ? A Lord  or  Squire  Tome- 
times  two  or  more)  goes  or  fends  his  fteward, 
round  the  town  where  his  feat  is,  with  a paper, 
which'  he  tells  the  honeft  men  is  for  the  good  of 
their  King  and  Country.  He  defires  each  to  fet 
his  name  or  mark  to  this.  And  who  has  the 
hardinefs  togainfay;  efpecially  if  my  Lord  keeps 
open  hcufe  ? Mean  time  the  contents  of  it  they 
know  nothing  about. 

I was  not  long  fmee  at  a town  in  Kent,  when 
one  of  thefe  petitions  was  carrying  about.  I 

allied 


[ a ] 

afked  one  and  another,  “ Have  von  figned  the 
petition  ?-’  And  found  none  that  had  refufed  it. 
And  vet  not  one  fingle  p'erfon  to  whom  I fpoke, 
had  either  read  it  or  heard  it  read. 

Now  I would  a Ik  any  man  of  common  fenfe, 
what  {treks  is  to  be  laid  on  thefe  petitions  ? And 
how  do  they  declare  the  Jenfe  of  the  nation  ? 
Nay,  of  the  very  perfons  that  have  figned  them? 
What  a chocking  infult  is  it  then  on  the  whole 
kingdom,'  to  palm  thefe  petitions  upon  us,  of 
which  the  very  fubfcribers  have  not  read  three 
lines,  as  the  general  fenfe  of  the  nation  f 

* But  fuppofe  they  had  read  all  that  they  have 
fubfcribed,  what  judges  are  they  of  thefe  matters? 
To  put  this  beyond  dlfpute,  let  us  only  propofe  - 
one  cafe  out  of  a thoufand.  Step  back  a few 
years,  and  fuppofe  Mr.  Pitt  at  the  head  of  the' 
adminiftration.  Here  comes  up  a petition  from 
Newcaftle- upo n-Tyne,  figned  by  five  hundred 
hands,  begging  his  Majefty  to  difmifs  that  cor- 
rupt miriifter,  who  was  taking  finch  meafures  as 
tended  to  the  utter  ruin  of  the  nation.  What 
could  Mr.  Pitt  fay  to  this  ? Would  he  not  ark, 

“ How  came  thefe  colliers  and  keelmen  to  be  fo 
“ well  acquainted  with  affairs  of  ffate  ? -How  long 
“ have  they  been  judges  of  public  adminiftra- 
“ tion  ? Of  naval  and  military  operations  ? Howr 
“ came  thev  to  underftand  the  propriety  or  im- 
“ propriet','  of  the  meafures  I'  take?  Do  they 
“ comprehend  the  balance  of  'Europe-?  Do  they 
“ knew  the  weaknefs  and  fire. ‘.oh  of  its  feverah 

O 

A 6 “ kinc'doms-? ; 


C 1*  j 

“kingdoms?  The  characters  of  the  monarch;. 
“ and  their  miniflers  ? The  fprings  of  this  and 
“ that  public  motion  ? Elfe,  why  do  they  take 
“ upon  them  to  fcan  my  conduct  ? Ne  fa  or  ultra 
“ crepidaml  Let  them  mind  their  own  work, 
“ keep  to  their  pits  and  keels,  and  leave  date 
“ affairs  to  me;' 

“ But  finely  you  do  not  place  the  ci  izens  of 
“ Loudon  on  a level  with  the  colliers  of  Neiv- 
“ cajlle  ?”  I do  not.  And  yet  I fuppofe  they 
were  equally  incompetent  judges  of  the  meafures 
which  Air.  Pitf  took.  And  I doubt  they  are  full 
as  incompetent  judges  of  the  meafures  taken  by 
the  prefent  mimllry.  To  form  a tolerable  judg- 
ment of  them,  requires  not  only  a good  under- 
handing,  but  more  time  than  common  tradefinen 
can  fpare,  and  better  information  than  they  can 
poffibly  procure.  I think,  therefore,  that  the 
encouraging  them  to  pafs  their  verdict  on  mini- 
fters  of  date,  yea  on  King,  Lords  and  Commons, 
is  not  only  putting  them  out  of  their  way,  but 
doing  them  more  mifchief  than  you  are  aware 
of. 

“;fBut  the  remon finance ! Surely  the  King  ought 
“ to  have  paid  more  regard  to  the  remonftrance 
“ of  the  city  0/  London.''  Confider  the  cafe;  the 
city  had  prefented  a petition,  which  he  could 
by  no  means  approve  ol,  as  he  judged  it  was  de- 
figned  not  fo  much  to  inform,  him,  as  to  inflame. 
his  fubje&s.  After  he  had  rejefled  this,  as 
mildly  as  could  he  done,  whilft  he  viewed  it  in 

this 


[ l3  3 

this  light,  they  prefent  a remor.fh  mice  to  the 
fame  effeft,  and  (as  he  judged)  with  the  fame 
defign.  What  then  could  he  do  lefs  than  he 
did  ? Could  he  feem  to  approve  what  he  did  not 
approve  ? If  not,  how  could  he  leltify  his  full 
di'approbation  in  more  inoffenfive  terms  ? 

As  to  the  idle,  (hamelefs  tale  of  his  bunding; 
out  into  laughter  at  the  magi  Urates,  any  who 
know  his  Majelty’s  temper,  would  as  foon  believe 
that  he  fpit  in  their  faces,  or  ftruck  them  a- box 
on  the  ear. 

His  Majefly’s  character  then,  after  all  the 
pains  which  have  been  taken  to  make  him  odi- 
ous, as  well  as  contemptible,  remains  unim- 
peached ; and  therefore  cannot  be  in  any  degree 
the  caufe  of  the  prefent  commotions.  His  whole 
conduft,  both  in  public  and  private,  ever  fmee 
he  began  his  reign,  the  uniform  tenor  of  his 
behaviour,  the  general  courfe  both  of  his  words 
and  actions,  has  been  worthy  of  an  Englijhman, 
worthy  of  a Chriftian,  and  worthy  of  a King. 

“ Are  not  then  the  prefent  commotions  owinc 
“ to  Ins  having  extraordinary  bad  miniflers?  Can 
“ you  fay  that  his  miniflers  are  as  blamelefs  as. 
“ himfelf  ?”  I-  do  not  fay  this:  I do  not  think 
fo.  But  I think  they  are  not  one  jot  worfe  than 
thofe  that  went  before  them  : nor  than  any  fet 
of  miniflers  who  have  been  in  place  for  at  leaf! 
thirty  years  lafl  paft.  I think  they  are  not  a iot 
worfe  than  their  opponents,  than  thofe  who  bawl 
the  loudelt  again!!  them,  either  with  regard  to 

in  tel- 


[ ’4  3 

intellectual  or  moral  abilities,  -with,  regard  t« 
fenfe  or  ho  nelly.  Set  twenty  again  ft  twenty, 
jor  ten  againft  ten:  and  is  there  a pin  to  chafe  ? 

“ However,  are  not  thefe  commotions  owing 
“ to  the  ex iraor  itiary  lad  meafitres  they  have 
“ taken  ? Surely  v u will  not  attempt  to  defend 
“ all  their  meafures  P’  No  indeed.  1 do  not 
defend  general  a a>  rants.  But  1 obferve,  l.  I he 
giving  thefe,  be  it  good  or  bad,  is  no  extraordi- 
nary meafure.  Has  it  not  been  done  by  all 
roiniilers  for  many  years  and  that  with  little  or 
no  objection?  2.  This  ordinary  meafure  is  of 
exceeding  little  importance  to  the  nation  in  ge- 
neral: fo  little,  that  it  was  never  before  bought 
worthy  to  be  put  into  the  lift  of  public  grievan- 
ces : fo  little,  that  it  never  deferved  the  hun- 
dredth part  of  the  outcry  which  has  been  made 

concerning  it. 

I do  not  defend  the  kii'ivg  of  Mr.  A-  in.  But 
I would  have  the  1'afct  truly  reprefented.  By  the 
beft  information  I can  gain,  I believe  it  ftsnds 
juft  thus.  About  that  time  the  mob  had  been 
very  turbulent.  On  that  day  they  were  likelv  to 
be  more  infolent  than  ever.  It  was  therefore 
judged  proper  to  fend  a part}-  of  foldiers,  to  pre- 
vent of  reprefs  their  violence.  Their  prefence 
did  not  prevent  it  r the  mob  went  fo  far  as  to 
throw  Hones  at  the  foldiers  themfelves.  One  of 
them  hit  and  wounded  a fokher : two  or  three 
purfued  him : and  fired  at  one  whom,  being  in 
the  fame  arefs,  they  fuppofed  to.be  tae  lame 


man. 


C *5  1 

man.  But  it  was  not ; it  was  Mr  .Allen.  Now 
though  this  cannot  be  excufed,  yet,  was  it  the 
moll  horrid  villainy  that  ever  was  perpetrated  ? 
Surely  no.  Notwithftanding  all  the  tragical  ex- 
clamations which  have  been  made  concerning 
it,  what  is  th-is  to  the  killing  a man  in  cool  blood  ? 
And  was  this  never  heard  of  m England? 

I do  not  defend  the  meafures  which  have  been 
taken  re'ative  to  the  Middlejex  Eletlion.  But  let 
it  be  remembered,  iff.  That  there  was  full  as 
much  violence  on  the  one  fide  as  on  the  other  : 
2dly,  That  a right  of  expul/ton,  oi  putting  a mem- 
ber out  of  the  Houfe,  manifellly  implies  a right 
of  eXcluJion,  of  leeping  him  out ; otherwife  that 
right  amounts  to  juft  nothing  at  all  : gdly,  That 
confequentlv  a member  expelled  is  incapable  of 
being  re-eletted,  at  leaf!  during  that  Sellion  : as 
incapable  as  one  that  is  difqualified  any 
other  way.  It  follows,  qthlv,  That  the  votes 
given  for  this  difqualified  perfon  are  null  and 
void,  being  in  effeff  given  for  nobody.  There- 
fore, gthly,  If  the  other  candidate  had  two. 
hundred  votes,  lie  had  a majority  of  two  hundred. 

. Let  it  be  obfei  vcd  farther,  if  the  eleftors  had 
the  liberty  of  c hoofing  any  qualified  per/on,  it  is 
abfolute  nonfenfe  to  talk  of  their  “ being  depriv- 
“ ed  of.  the  liberty  of  choofing  becaufe  they 
were  not  permitted  to  clioofa  a perfidn  utterly  un- 
qualified\ 

But  fuppofe  a fmgle  borough  or  county  were 
deprived  of  this  in  a fingle  inllance  : (which  un- 
doubtedly 


[ 16  ] 

doubtedly  is  the  cafe,  whenever  a perfon  duly 
defied  does  not  fit  in  the  houfe  :)  How  is  this 
“ depriving  the  good  people  of  England,  the 
“ Nation  of  their  Birthright  ? What  an 
infult  upon  common  lenfeis  this  wild  way  of  talk- 
ing? If  Middlefex  is  wronged  (put  it  fo)  in  this 
inflance,  how  is  Y or  kf nr  t or  Cumberland  affected 
by  it?  Or  twenty  counties  and  forty  boroughs  be- 
fides  ? Much  lefs  all  the  nation  ? O,  but  they 
“ may  be  affefted  by  and  by”.  Very  true  ! And 
the  fky  may  fall  1 

To  fee  this  whole  matter  in  the  cleareft  light, 
let  any  one  read  and  confuler  the  fpeech  of  Lord 
Chief  Juftice  Mansfield , on  a motion  made 
by  Lord  Chatham , “ To  repeal  and  refcind  the 
“ refolutions  of  the  Lloufe  of  Commons,  in  regard 
“ to  the  expulfion  and  incapacitation  ol  Mr. 
“ Wilkes r 

“ In  this  debate,  though  it  has  already  been  fcok- 
“ ento  with  great  eloquence  and  perfpicuity.  I 
“ cannot  coment  mvfelf  with  only  giving  a ftngle 
“ vote  ; I feel  nryfelf  under  afcrong  necefht)rof 
“ faying  fomething  more.  The  fubjefls  requires  it, 
“ and  though  the  hour  is  late  \it  bung  then  near  ten 
“ o'clock]  I fli all  demand  your  indulgence,  while 
“ I offer  my  fentiments  onthis  motion. 

“ I am  fure,  my  Lords,  many  ofyoumuftre- 
“ member,  from  your  reading  and  experience, 
“ feveral  perfons  expelled  the  Houfe  of  Commons 
“without  ever  this  houfe  once  pretending  to  in- 
“ terfere,  or  call  in  queftion  by  what  authority 

“ they 

J- 


[ *7  ] 

“ they  did  fo.  I remember  feveral  myfelff here  his 
“ lordflup  quoted feveral  cafes']  in  all  which,  though 
“ moll  of  the  candidates  were  fare  to  be  re-chofen 
“ they  never  once  applied,  reding  contented 
“ with  the  expulfatory  power  of  the  houfe,  as  the 
“ only  felf-fujficient , dernier  refort  of  application. 

“ It  has  been  echoed  on  all  fi  les,  from  the  par- 
“ tizans  of  this  motion,  that  the  Houle  of  Com- 
“ monsa&ed  illegally,  in  accepting  Cof.  Lv.ttreL , 
“ who  had  but  296  votes,  in  preference  to  Mr. 
“ Wilkes,  who  had  1143.  But  this  is  a miftake 
“ of  the  grolfeft  nature  imaginable,  and  which 
“ nothing  but  the  intemperature  of  people’s  zeal 
“ could  pouibly  tranlport  them  to,  as.  Mr  .Wilkes 
“ had  been  previoufiy  confidered  by  the  laws 
“ as  an  unqualified  perfbn  to  reprefent  the  people 
“ iti  parliament ; therefore  it  appears  very  plain- 
“ ly,  that  Col.  Luttrel  had  a very  great  majority 
“ not  lefsthan  2 96,  Mr.  Wilkes  being  confidered 
“ as  nobody  in  the  eye  of  the  law  ; confequent- 
“ ly  Col.  Luttrel  had  no  legal  opposition. 

“ In  all  contefted  eleHions,  where  one  of  the 
“ parties  think  themfelves  not  legally  treated,  I 
“ fiiouldbe  glad  to  know  to  whom  it  is  they  refort? 
<(  Is  it  to  the  freeholders  of  the  borough,  or  the 
“ county  they  would  reprefent  ? Or  is  it  to  the 
“ people  at  large?  Who  cannot  fee,  at  once,  the 
“ abfurdity  of  fuch  a quelfion  ? Who  fo  ignorant 
“ of  our  laws,  that  cannot  immediately  reply  and 

fay,  “ It  is  the  Houfe  of  Commons  who  are  the 
“ only  judges  to  determine  every  nicety  of  the 

“ lav/s 


Z *8  ] 

n laws  ofele&ion;  and  from  whom  there  is  no 
" appeal,  after  they  have  once'given  their  deter- 
mination ? ' All  the  freeholder  has  to  do,  is 
“ to  determine  on  his  objeft,  by  giving  him  his 
vote  ; the  ultimate  power  lies  with  the  Houfe 
“ Commons,  who  is  to  judge  of  his  being  a 
f'  legal  objeft  of  reprefelitation  in  the  feveral 
branches  of  his  qualifications.  This,  mv  Lords, 

I beiieve,  is  advancing  no  new  doftrine,  nor 
“ adding  amotato  the  extenfion  ol  the  privilege 
“ of  a member  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  more 
than  what  the  confl.itu.tion  long  ago  has  given 
“ him  ; yet  here  is  a cry  made,  in  a cafe  thatdi- 
“ reftly  applies  to  what  I have  been  fpeaking  of, 
“ as  if  it  was  illegal,  arbitrary,  and  unprecedented. 

“ I do  not  remember,  my  Lords,  in  either 
“ the  courfe  of  mv  reading  or  obfcrvation  ever 
“ to  have  known  an  inftance  of  a perfon’s  being 
“ re-chofen,  after  being  expelled,  till  the  vear 
“ 1711  ; then  indeed,  mv  memory  ferves  me 
“ with*  a cafe  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole.  He  was  ex- 
“ pelled  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  and  was  after- 
“ wards  re-chofen  ; but  this  laft  event  did  not 
“ take  place  till  the  meeting  of  the  next  parlia- 
ment ; and  during  that  interval,  I find  no  de- 
“ bate  about  the  illegality  of  his  expulfion,  no  in- 
“ terference  of  the  Houfe  of  Lords,  nor  any  ad- 
“ drefies  from  the  public,  to  decry  that  roeafure 
“ by  a dilfolution  of  parliament. 

“ Indeed,  'as  for  a precedent  of  one  houfe 
f interferinff  with  the  rules,  orders,  or  bufinefs 

“ of 


r 19  ] 

Si  of  another,  my  memory  does  not  ferve  me  a £ 
“ prefent  with  the  recollection  of  a ftngle  one, 
“ As  to  the  cafe  of  Titus  Cates,  as  mentioned  by 
“ the  noble  Lord  in  my  eye  (Lord  Chatham ) he 
“ is  very  much  miftaken  in  regard  to  the  mode; 
“ his  was  a trial  in  the  King’s-Bench,  which,  on 
“ a writ  of  error,  the  Houfe  of  Commons  inter- 

“ fered  in,  and  they  had  an  authority  for  fo  do-’ 

“ mg,  A judge  certainly  may  be  miftaken  in 
“ points  of  law,  the  wifeft  and  the  heft  of  us  may 
“ be  fo  at  times,  and  it  reflects  no  difcredit ; on 
“ the  contrary,  it  does  particular  honour,  when 
“ he  finds  himfelf  fo  miftaken,  to  reverfe  his 
“ own  decree.  But  for  one  houfe, of  parliament 
“ interfering  with  the  bufinefs,  and  rcverfing 
“ the  refolutions  of  another,  it  is  not  only  unpre- 
“ cedented,  but  unconftitutional  to  the  laft  de- 
“ gree. 

“ But  fuppofe,  my  Lords  that  this  houfe  coin- 
“ cided  with  this  motion ; fuppofe  we  all  agreed 
“ nem.  con.  to  repeal  and  refcind  the  refolu- 
“ tions  of  the  Houfe  of  Commons,  in  regard  to 
“ the  expulfion  and  incapacitation  of  Mr, 
“ Wilkes  — Good  God!  What  may  be  the 
“ confequence  ! The  people  are  violent  enough 
“ already,  and  to  have  the  fuperior  branch  of 
“ legiflation  join  them,  would  be  giving  fuch  a 
“ public  encouragement  to  their  proceedings, 
“ that  I almoft  tremble,  while  I even  fuppofe 
“ fuch  a fcene  of  anarchy  and  confufion.” 

What 


[ 20  ] 

“ What  then  can  we  think  of  the  violent  out- 
“ cr)'>  That  the  nation  is  opprefied,  deprived 
“ of  that  liberty  which  their  anceftors  bought 
“ "with  fo  much  treafure  and  blood,  and  deliver- 
“ ed  down  through  fo  many  generations  ?”  Do 
thofe  who  raife  this  cry  believe  what  they  fay  ? 
If  fo,  are  they  not  under  the  highefl  infatuation? 
Seeing  that  England,  from  the  time  of  William 
the  Conqueror,  yea,  of  Julius  Caejar,  never  en- 
joyed fuch  liberty,  civil  and  religious,  as  it 
does  at  this  day.  Nor  do  we  know  of  any  other 
kingdom  or  (rate  in  Europe,  or  in  the  world  which 
enjoys  the  like. 

I do  not  defend  the  meafures  which  have  been 
taken  with  regard  to  America,  I doubt  whether 
any  man  can  defend  them,  either  on  he  foot  of 
law,  equity  or  prudence.  But  who!  meafures 
were  thefe  ? If  I do  not  miftake.  Mr.  George 
Grenville's.  Therefore  the  whole  merit  of  thefe 
meafures  belongs  to  him,  and  not  to  the  prefent 
miniftry. 

“ But  is  not  the  general  dilfatisfaction  owing 
“ if  not  to  any  of  the  preceding  caufes,  to  the 
“ extraordinary  bad  conduR  of  the  parliament, 
“ particularly  the  Houfe  of  Commons?"  This  is 
fet  in  fo  clear  a light  by  a late  writer,  that  I need 
only  tranforibe  his  words. 

“ The  laft  recefs  of  parliament  was  a period 
“ filed  with  unprecedented  troubles  : and  the 
“ feiTion  opened  in  the  midft  of  tumults.  Ambi- 
•“  tious  men,  with  a perfeverance  uncommon  in 

“ indolent 


[ 21  J 

“ indolent  and  luxurious  times,  rung  all  the 
“ changes  of  popular  noife  for  the  purpofe  of  in- 
“ timidation.  The  ignorant,  who  could  not  dif- 
“ ticruixh  between  real  and  artificial  clamours, 
“ were  alarmed;  the  lovers  of  their  own  eafewifii- 
“ ed  to  facrifice  the  juft  dignity  of  the  Houfe  of 
“ Commons  to  a temporary  relief,  from  the  grat- 
“ ine;  found  of  feditious  fcurrility. 

“ Hence  the  friends  of  the  conftitution  faw  the 
“ opening  of  the  feffion  with  anxiety  and  appre- 
“ henfion.  They  were  afraid  of  the  timidity  of 
“ others,  and  dreaded  nothing  more  than  that 
“ panic  to  which  propular  aflemblies  as  well  as 
“ armies,  are  fometimes  fubjedf.  The  event  has 
“ {hewn  that  their  fears  were  groundlefs:  The 
“ houfe  fupported  its  decifions  againft  the  cur- 
“ rent  of  popular  prejudice:  and,  in  defending 
“ their  ownjudicial  rights,  fecured  the  moft  folid 
“ part  of  the  liberties  of  their  conftitnents. 

“ Their  firm  adherence  to  their  refolutions 
“ was  not  more  noble,  than  their  conceftions  in 
“ the  matter  of  their  own  rights  was  difintereft- 
“ ed  and  generous.  The  extenfive  privileges, 
“ which,  in  a feries  of  ages,  had  accumulated  to 
“ the  members  of  both  houfes,  were  certainly 
“ inconfiftent  with  the  impartial  diftribution  of 
“ juftice.  To  facrifice  thefe  privileges  was  not 
“ only  diametrically  oppofite  to  the  idea  of  felf- 
“ intereft,  with  which  fome  afperfe  the  legifla- 
“ ture,  but  it  has  alfo  thrown  a greater  weight 
“ into  the  fcale  of  public  freedom  than  any  other 

“ a£l 


C *»  ] 

aH  paSed  fmce  the  revolution.  And  it  has  re« 
fleftcd  honour  on  the  prefent  adminiftration, 
“ that  a bill,  fo  very  favourable  to  the  liberty 
“ of  the  fubject,  was  brought  in  and  carried 
“ through  by  them. 

“ The  arbitrary  manner  of. determining  peti- 
“ tions  about  elections,  has  been  a feriouscom- 
■“  plaint  and  of  long  continuance.  I fhall  not  de- 
“ ny  to  Mr.  Grenville  the  merit  of  bringing  in 
**  a bill  for  remedying  this  grievance  ; but  its 
“ paffing  as  it  did  is  a certain  proof  that  the  pre- 
“ tended  influence  of  Admihiftration  over  a ma- 
“ jority  of  the  Houfe  is  a mere  bugbear,  held 
“ forth  tor  private  views  by  the  prefent  oppofi- 
*l  tion. 

“ * During  the  whole  Sefiion,  the  Houfe  of 
“ Lords  behaved  with  ib.at  dignity  and  unaltera- 
“ ble  firmnefs  which  became  the  hrlt  affcmbly  in 
■“  a great  nation.  Attacked  with  impertinent 
“ fcurrility,  they  fmiled  upon  rage,  and  treat- 
“ ed  the  ravings  of  a defpotic  tribune  with  con- 
“ tempt.  When,  with  an  infamous  perverfion 
“ of  bis  piretended  love  to  freedom,  he  attempt- 
“ ed  to  extend  the  control  of  the  Peers  to  the 
“ refolutions  of  the  reprefentatives  of  the  people, 
“ they  nobly  rejected  the  golden  bait ; and  fcorn- 
“ ed  to  raife  the  dignity  of  their  houfe  upon  the 
ruins  of  the  other.  They  in  fliort,  through- 
J‘  out  the  SelTion,  fliewed  a fpirit  that  difdained 
**  to  be  braved;  a magnanimity  that  diminifhed 

“ their 


r *3  i 

Ci  their  own  perfonal  power  for  the  eafe  and  com-*’ 
a‘  fort  of  the  inferior  fubjefh 

“ *If  the  conduft  of  Parliament^  in  any  in- 
“ fiance  blameable,  it  is  in  a lenity  that  is  incon- 
fifient  with  the  vulgar  idea  of  political  courage. 

“ They  have  been  attacked  with  fcurrility  in  the 
“ Lower  Houfe ; in  the  Upper,  they  have  been 
“ treated  with  indecency  and  difrefpecl.  Their 
“ prudence  and  love  for  the  public  peace  prevail- 
“ ed  over  their  refentment.  They  knew  that 
“ legal  punifhment  is  in  thefe  times  the  road  to 
“ popularity,  and  they  were  unwilling  to  raife 
“ infignificant  men  into  a confequence  that 
•“  might  diflurb  the  fiate.” 

So  far  we  have  gained.  We  have  removed 
the  imaginary  caufes  of  the  prefent  commotions. 
It  plainly  appears,  they  are  not  owing  to  the  ex- 
traordinary badnejs , either  of  the  King,  of  his 
Parliament,  of  his  minifters,  or  of  the  meafures 
which  they  have  taken.  To  what  then  are  they 
-owing  ? What  are  the  real  caufes  of  this  amaz- 
ing ferment  among  the  people  ? 

Before  I Lay  any  thing  on  this  fubjeft,  let  me 
remind  you  once  . more,  that  I do  not  dittate  : I 
do  not  take  upon  me  to  affirm  any  thing,  but 
fimply  tell  you  what  I think.  I think,  the  firfl 
and  principal  fpring  of  the  whole  motion  is 
French  gold.  “ But  why  do  you  think  fo  ?”  I 
will  tell  you  as  plainly  as  I can. 

A perfon  of  a complete  uniform  charafter,  in- 
•cumbered  with  no  religion,  with  no  regard  to 

virtue 


I 24  ] 

virtue  or  morality,  fquanders  away  all  that  he  has.' 
He  applies  for  a place,  but  is  difappointed.  He 
is  thoroughly  exafperated,  abufes  the  miniftry, 
afperfes  the  King’s  mother  in  the  groffeft  man- 
ner, is  profecuted,  (not  for  this,  but  other 
atchievements)  and  retires  to  France.  After  fome 
time,  he  fuddenly  returns  to  London,  fets  up  for 
a Patriot,  and  vehemently  inveighs  againft  evil 
Counfellors,  Grievances  and  Male-adminiftra- 
tion.  The  cry  fpreads : more  and  more  efpoufe 
his  caufe,  and  fecond  him  with  all  their  might. 
He  becomes  head  of  the  party  ; and  not  only  the 
vulgar,  but  the  world  runs  after  him.  He  drives 
on  with  Hill  increafing  numbers,  carrying  all  be- 
fore him,  inflaming  the  nation  more  and  more, 
and  making  their  minds  evil-affefted,  in  appear- 
ance towards  the  Miniflers  of  Hate,  but  in  reality 
towards  the  King.  Now  can  any  reafonable  man 
believe,  that  the  French  are  ignorant  of  all  this  ? 
Or  that  they  have  no  hand  at  all  therein,  but  are 
mere  unconcerned  fpecfators  ? Do  they  not  un- 
derhand their  own  intereft  better  ? If  they  do 
not  kindle  the  fire,  will  they  not  ufe  all  means  to 
prevent  its  going  out  ? Will  they  not  take  care 
to  add  fuel  to  the  flame  ? Will  they  not  think 
forty  or  fifty  thou  land  Louis-d’ors,  well  beftow- 
ed  on  fo  important  an  occafion  ? 

I cannot  but  think  this  is  (at  leaf!)  one  prin- 
cipal fpring  of  all  the  prefent  commotions  But 
may  not  other  caufes  likewife  concur  ? As,  ill, 
Covetoufnefs\  a love  of  Englifh  as  well  as  of 

French 


[ 25  ] 

French  gold-  Do  not  many  hunger  after  the  lu- 
crative employments  which  their  neighbours  en- 
joy ? They  had  rather  have  them  themfelves. 
And  will  not  thofe  that  are  hungry  naturally  cry 
for  food  ? adlv,  Ambition.  How  many  defire 
honour,  perhaps  more  than  they  do  money  it- 
felf?  And  how  various  are  the  fhapes  which 
they  will  put  on,  in  order  to  attain  it  ? 3dly, 
Thofe  who  are  not  fo  much  under  the  potter  of 
thefe,  are  yet  fufceptible  of  pride  or  envy ; and 
frequently  ol  both  together.  To  thefe  we  may, 
qthly,  add  Refentment.  Many  doubtlefs  look 
upon  themlelves  as  injured,  were  it  only  on  this 
account,  that  they  are  not  regarded,  yea  and  re- 
compenfed  as  their  merits  or  fervices  deferve. 
Others  are  angry  becaufe  they  are  difappointea ; 
becaufe,  after  all  their  fchemes,  which  they  ima- 
gined could  not  fail  of  fuccefs,  they  are  not  able 
to  carry  their  point. 

Now  all  thefe,  united  by  thefe  various  motives, 
Tome  encouraged  by  good  pay  in  hand,  (and  per- 
haps by  promifes  of  more)  others  animated  by  co- 
vetoufhefs,  by  ambition,  by  envy,  pride  and  re- 
fentment, by  every  means  animate  all  they  have 
accefs  to.  They  treat  both  rich  and  poor  (ac- 
cording to  their  rank)  with  all  elegance  and  pro- 
fufenefs.  They  talk  largely  and  vehemently. 
They  write  abundantly,  having  troops  enough 
in  their  fervice.  They  publifh  addreJJ'es,  petitions , 
remonjlrances,  directed  nominally  to  the  King, 
(otherwife  they  would  not  anfw-er  the  end;)  but 
Vol.  XXII.  B r tally 


C 26  ] 

really  to  the  people.  Herein  their  orators  make 
ule  of  all  the  powers  of  rhetoric.  They  bring 
forth  their  flrong  reafons,  the  very  bell  which 
the  caufe  will  bear.  They  fet  them  off  with  all 
the  beauty  of  language,  all  the  poignancy  of  wit. 
They  fpread  their  writings  in  pamphlets,  news- 
papers, magazines,  &c.  to  every  coiner  of  the 
land.  They  are  indefatigable  in  their  work  : 
they  never  Hop  to  take  breath  ; but  as  the)’  have 
tongues  and  pens  at  command,  when  one  has 
done,  another  begins,,  and  fo  on  and  on  with  a 
continuance.  By  this  means  the  flame  fpreads 
wider  and  wider ; it  runs  as  fire  among  the  Hub- 
ble. J he  madnefs  becomes  epidemic,  and  no 
medicine  hitherto  has  availed  again!!  it.  1 he 
whole  nation  fees  the Jlate  in  danger,  as  they  did 
the  church  fixty  years  ago  : and  the  world  now 
wonder  s after  Mr.  Wilkes , as  it  did  then  after  Dr. 
Sacheverel ! 

One  means  of  increafing  the  ferment  is,  the 
fuffering  no  contradiction : the  hooting  at  all 
who  labour  for  peace,  and  treading  them  down 
like  dirt:  the  ufing  them  juH  as  they  do  the 
King,  without  either  juHice  or  mercy.  If  any 
writes  on  that  head,  prefently  the  crv  is  raifed, 
“ O,  he  only  writes  for  pay.”  But  if  he  does, 
do  not  thofe  on  the  other  fide  too  ? Which  are 
paid  beff,  I do  not  know  : but  doubtlefs  both 
are  paid,  a very  few  old-fafltioned  mortals  ex- 
cepted, who  having  nothing  to  hope,  and  no- 
thing 


r ^7  ] 

thing  to  fear,  /imply  confider  the  good  of  their 
country. 

“ But  what  do  vou  think  the  end  will  be  ?”  It 
is  eafy  to  forefee  this.  Suppofing  things  to  take 
their  natural  courfe,  they  mull  go  from  bad  to 
worfe. 

In  flipulam  veluli  cum  Jlamma  furentibus  aujh  is 
lncid.it,  aut  rapidus  montano  Jlumine  torrens 
Exiit,  oppofitafque  evicit  gurgile  moles. 

The  people  will  be  inflamed  more  and  more: 
the  torrent  will  fwell  higher  and  higher,  till  at 
length  it  bur/ls  through  all  oppofition,  and  over- 
flows the  land.  The  confequences  of  thefe  com- 
motions will  be  (unlefs  an  higher  hand  interpofe) 
exaflly  the  fame  as  thofe  of  the  like  commotions 
in  the  laid  century.  Firft,  The  land  will  be- 
come a field  of  blood  : many  thoufands  of  poor 
Englishmen  will  (heath  their  fwords  in  each  others 
bowels,  for  the  diverfion  of  their  good  neigh- 
bours. Then  either  a commonwealth  will  enfue, 
or  elfe  a fecond  Cromwell.  One  mull  be  ; but 
it  cannot  be  determined  which  King  W — , or 
King  Mob. 

“ But  that  cafe  is  not  parallel  with  this.”  It 
is  not,  in  all  particulars.  In  many  tefpefils  it  is 
widely  different.  As,  x ft.  With  regard  to  the 
King  himfelf.  Few  will  affirm  the  charafter  of 
King  Charles , (even  allowing  the  account  given 
by  Lord  Clarendon , to  be  punftually  true  in  every 
B 2 refpeft) 


[ 28  ] 

rcfpeQ)  to  be  as  faultlefs  as  that  of  King  George. 
But  other  pafhons,  as  well  as  love,  are  blind. 

So  that  when  thefe  are  raifed  to  a proper  height, 
efpecially  when  Junius  has  thrown  a little  more 
of  his  magic  duft  into  the  eyes  of  the  people,  and 
convinced  them,  that  what  are  virtues  in  others, 
are  mere  vices  in  him,  the  good  patriots  will  fee 
jio  manner  of  difference,  between  a King  George 
and  King  Charles — or  even  a Kero. 

The  cafe  it  alfo  widely  different,  2 dly,  with  ' 
regard  to  the  Minijlry.  King  George  has  no  fuch 
furious  drivers  about  him,  as  poor  King  Charles 
had.  But  a Ikiiful  painter  may  eafilv  add  a few 
features,  either  to  one  or  the  otlrer,  and  by  a 
httle  colouring  make  Lord  North  the  very  pic- 
ture of  Lord  Strajjfor  d,  and  arclibilhop  Cornwallis 
•of  archbifhop  Laud. 

How  different  likewife  is  the  cafe,  gdly,  with 
regard  to  the  adminijiration  of  public  affairs  ? 
The  requiring  tonnage  and  poundage,  the  impof- 
ingJJiip-money,  the  profecutions  in  the  Bijhops 
Courts,  in  the  High  Commifli-on- c-ourt,  and  in  the 
Star-chamber,  were  real  and  intolerable  griev- 
ances. And  what  is  there  in  the  prefent  admi- 
niflration  which  bears  any  refemb'lanc-e  to  thefe  P 
Yet  if  you  will  view  even  fuch  an  affair  as  the 
Middle f ex  EleEhon , through  Mr.  Horne's  magni- 
fying glafs,  it  will  appeal'  a more  enormous  in- 
fiance of  opprelfion  than  a hundred  ftar-chain- 
bers  put  together. 


The 


[ 29  ] 

The  parallel  does  not  hold,  4thly,  With 
regard  to  the  oppofers  of  the  King  and  his 
Miniftry.  Is  Mr.  Burke  the  fame  calm,  wife, 
difintereffed  man,  that  Mr.  Hampden  was  ? 
And  where  fhall  we  find  twenty  Noblemen 
and  twenty  Gentlemen  (to  name  no  more)  in 
the  prefent  oppofition,  whom  any  impartial  man 
will  fet  on  a level  with  the  fame  number  of 
thofe  that  oppofed  King  Charles  and  his 
Miniftry  ? 

Nor  does  the  parallel  hold,  ^thly,  In  this 
refpedi.  That  was- -in  great  meafure  a conteft 
about  Religion  : at  Ieaft  about  rites  and  ceremo- 
nies, and  opinions,  which  many  fuppofed  to  be 
religion.  But  all  religion  Is  out  of  the  queftion 
now : this  is  generally  allowed,  both  by  the  one 
fide  and  the  other,  to  be  fo  very  a trifle,  that 
they  do  not  give  themfelves  the  leaft  concern 
about  it. 

In  one  circumftance  more  there  is  an  obvious 
difference.  The  parliament  were  then  the  King’s 
enemies.  Now  they  are  his  firmeft  friends.  But 
indeed  this  difference  may  eafily  be  removed. 
Let  the  King  only  take  Mr.  Wilkes's  advice  and 
diflolve  the  Parliament.  The  Parliament  of 
1640,  (the  firft  which  fat  after  the  troubles  be- 
gan) although  many  therein  were  much  diflatis- 
fied  with  the  meafures  which  had  been  taken,  yet 
would  never  have  been  prevailed  upon,  to  join 
in  the  fchemes  which  afterwards  prevailed.  But 
B 3 when 


r 30  j 

when  that  Parliament  was  fo  feafonably  diflolved, 
and  a few  men,  wife  in  tlieir  generation, 
prafclifmg  with  unwearied  induftry  on  the 
heated  fpirits  of  the  people,  had  procured  a 
new  Parliament  to  Le  chofen  after  their  own 
heart ; then  it  was  not  long  ere  the  train  took 
fire,  and  the  whole  conllitution  was  blown 
up  ! 

* But  notwithflanding  the  difparity  between 
the  prefent  and  pad  times,  in  the  preceding  re- 
fpefts,  yet  how  furprizingly  does  the  parallel 
hold  in  various  particulars?  1.  An  handful  of 
people  laid  a fcheme,  which  few  would  have  be- 
lieved, had  a man  then  declared  it  unto  them  : 
(though  indeed  it  is  probable,  that  at  the  begin- 
ning they  had  no  fettled  fcheme  at  all.)  2. 
Thefe  profeffed  great  zeal  for  the  good  of  their 
country , were  vehement  contenders  for  liberty , 
cried  aloud  againfl  evil  minijle.rs  and  the  evil  mea- 
fures  which  they  purfued,  and  were  continually 
declaiming  againfl  either  real  or  imaginary  grie- 
vances. 3.  They  were  foon  joined  by  men  emi- 
nent for  probity  as  well  as  for  underjlanding , who 
undoubtedly  were  what  the  others  appeared,  lo- 
vers of  their  King  and  Country,  and  defired  no- 
thing but  the  removal  of  bad  miniflers,  and  the 
redrefs  of  real  grievances.  4.  The  fpirits  even 
of  thefe  were  gradually  Jharpened  and  embit- 
tered againll  the  King.  And  they  were  drawn 
farther  and  farther  by  the  art  of  their  lead- 
ers, 


[ 3^  .1 

ers,  till  they  had  gone  fo  far,  they  knew  not 
how  to  retreat : yea,  till  they  (paffively  at  leaft) 
concurred  in  thofe  meafures,  which  at  firft  their 
very  fouls  abhorred,  g.  Mean  time  the  nation 
in  general  was  inflamed  with  all  pofhble  diligence, 
by  addrejfes,  petitions,  and  remon/lrances,  admi- 
rably well  devifed  for  the  purpofe  ; which  were 
the  mod;  effectual  libels  that  could  be  imagined 
againft  the  King  and  Government,  and  were  con- 
tinually fpread  throughoutthe  land,  with  all  care 
and  affiduity.  6.  Among  the  moll  inflamed  and 
embittered  in  all  England  were  the  people  of 
London,  as  the  managers  had  the  bed;  opportuni- 
ty of  pradlifing  upon  them.  7.  All  this  time 
they  profeffed  the  highefl  regard  for  the  King , 
for  his  honour  as  tvell  as  fafety  ; an  authen- 
tic monument  whereof  we  have  in'  the  flo- 
lemn  League  and  Covenant.  And  thefe  profef- 
fions  they  continued  with  equal  vehemence 
till  within  a fhort  time  of  the  cutting  off  his 
head ! 

Now  what  man  who  has  the  leaft  degree  of 
underftanding,  may  not  fee  in  the  cleared;  light, 
how  furprizingly  the  parallel  holds  in  all  thefe 
circumftances  P 

“ But  do  not  you  think  it  is  in  the  power  of 
“ the  King  to  put  an  end  to  all  thefe  coinmoti- 
“ ons,  by  only  fending  his  mother  away,  chang- 
“ ing  his  minifters,  and  diffolving  the  parlia- 
“ ment?”  He  may  fend  his  mother  away;  and 
3 4 fo 


C 32  ] 

fo  he  may  his  wife,  if  they  pleafe  to  rank  her 
among  his  evil  coimfellors.  He  may  put  out  his 
prefent  miniflers,  and  defire  the  Lord  Mayor  to 
put  others  in  their  place.  He  may  likewife 
dilTolve  the  prefent  parliament  (as  King  Charles 
did  that  of  1640)  and  exchange  it  for  one  chofen, 
animated  and  tutored  by  Mr.  IVilkes  and  his 
friends.  But  can  you  really  believe  this  would 
mend  the  matter  ? Would  put  an  end  to  all  thefe 
commotions?  Certainly  the  fending  his  mother 
to  the  Indies  would  avail  nothing,  unlefs  he 
removed  his  miniflers  too.  Nor  would  the  put- 
ting out  thefe,  yea  every  man  of  them,  avail  any 
thing,  unlefs  at  the  fame  time  he  put  ,in  every 
man  whom  Lord  Chatham  chofe.  But  neither 
would  this  avail,  unlefs  he  flruck  the  finifhing 
ftroke,  by  diffolving  the  parliament.  Then  in- 
deed he  would  be  as  perfectly  fafe  as  the  “ fheep 
“ that  had  given  up  their  dogs  ?” 

It  would  puzzle  the  wifeft  man  alive  to  tell 
what  the  King  can  do  : what  can  he  do,  that  will 
Hill  the  raging  of  the  fea,  or  the  madnefs  of  the 
people  ? Do  you  imagine  it  is  in  his  power  to  do 
any  thing  which  will  pleafe  all  parties?  Can  he 
do  any  thing  that  will  notdifpleafe  one,  as  much 
as  it  will  pleafe  the  other  ? Shall  he  drive  his 
f mother  out  of  the  land  ? Will  this  then  pleafe 
all  parties?  Nay  will  not  fome  be  apt  to  enquire, 
“ How  has  Ihe  deferved  it  at  his  hands  ?”  “Why, 
“ Hie  is  an  evil  counsellor.”  How  does  this 

appear  ? 

+ This  was  wrote  before  the  Princefe  Dowager  went  abroad. 


[ 33  ] 

appear  ? Who  are  the  witnefies  of  it  ? Indeed 
we  have  read  as  srrave  and  formal  accounts  of 

O 

the  conferences  at  Carleton- houfe,  as  if  the 
relater  had  flood  all  the  time  behind  the  curtain*, 
and  taken  down  the  whole  matter  in  fhort-hand, 
But  what  fhadow  of  proof  of  all  this  ? No  more 
than  of  the  conferences  related  in  Trijlrarn 
Shandy . 

“ But  ffie  is  a bad  woman.”  Who  ever  faid 
or  thought  fo,  even  while  {he  was  in  the  flower 
of  her  age  ? From  the  time  that  {he  firfi  fet  foot 
in  England , vras  there  a more  faultlefs  charafter 
in  the  nation  ? Nay,  was  not  her  whole  beha- 
viour as  a wife,  as  a mother,  as  a miftrefs,  and 
as  a princefs,  not  only  blamelefs  but  commenda- 
ble in  the  higheft  degree,  till  that  period  of  time 
arrived,  when  it  was'judged  proper,  in  order  to 
blacken  her  (fuppofed)  favourite,  to  afperfe  her 
too  ? And’  then  file  was  il'.ud  quod  die  ere  nolu ! 
One  would  think  that  even  the  ignob'ile  vidgus, 
the  beajls  of  the  people , the  loweft,  bafeft  herd, 
who  wore  the  human  form,  would  be  afhamed 
of  either  advancing  or  crediting,  fo  fenfelefs, 
fhamelefs  a tale.  Indeed- 1 can  hardly  think  it  is 
credited  by  one  in  an  hundred  even  of  thofe 
who  fouL  their  mouths  with  repeating  it.  Let  it 
die  and  be  forgotten  ! Let  it  not  be  remembered, 
that  ever  any  Englijhman  took  fo  dirty  a (lander 
into  his  mouth. 

“ However,  become  what  will  of  his  mother, 
M let  him  put  away  his  bad  xnijaifters.”  Suppofe? 

B 5 thee 


[ 34  ] 

the}’  really  are  bad,  do  you  know  where  he  can 
find  better  ? Where  can  he  find  twenty  men,  we 
will  not  lay  ol  C’nnjhan,  but  of  Roman  integrity  ? 
Point  them  out,  men  ol  found  judgment,  of  clear 
apprehenfion,  of  univerfal  benevolence,  lovers 
of  mankind,  lovers  of  their  country,  loveis  oi 
their  King:  men  attached  to  no  party,  but  lim- 
ply purfuing  the  general  good  of  the  nation: 
not  haughty  or  overbearing : not  addifted  to 
palfion  : not  of  a revengeful  temper  : fupericr  to 
covetoufnefs  on  the  one  hand,  free  from  pro- 
fu'enefs  on  the  other.  I fay,  Ihew  me  the  men, 
only  this  fmall  number  ; or  rather,  Ihew  them 
to  his  Majefty.  Let  clear  and  fatisfa&ory  proof 
be  given,  that  this  is  their  character.  And  if 
thefe  worthy  men  are  net  employed  in  the  place 
of  the  unworthy  ones,  you  w 11  then  have  fame 
reafon  to  llretch  your  throat  againfievil  mini- 
llers. 

“ But  if  the  matter  were  wholly  left  to  him, 

“ would  not  Lord immediately  employ 

“ twenty  fuch  ?”  That  may  bear  fome  doubt. 
It  is  not  certain  that  he  would ; perhaps  he  knows 
not  where  to  find  them.  And  it  is  not  certain  to 
a demonftration,  that  he  would  employ  them  if 
he  did.  It  is  not  altogether  clear,  that  he  is  fuch 
himfelf,  thV-  he  perfeftly  anfwers  this  character. 
Is  he  free  from  pride  ? From  any  thing  haughty 
in  his  temper,  or  overbearing  in  his  behaviour  ? 
Is  he  neither  pallionate  nor  revengeful?  Is  it 
'indifputably  plain,  that  he  is  ecpnally  clear  of 

covet- 


C 35-  ] 

covetouinefs  on  the  one  hand,  and  profufenefs 
on  the  other  ? Is  he  Heady  and  uniform  in  his 
conduct : always  one  thing  ? Is  he  attached  to 
no  party,  but  determined  at  all  events  fingly  to 
purfue  the  general  good  of  the  nation  ? Is  he  a 
lover  oj  the  ffing?  Is  he  remai  kalty  grateful  to 
him,  from  whom  he  has  received  no  common 
favours  ? If  not,  though  he  has  a ltrong  under- 
Handing,  and  a large  fhare  of  manly  eloquence, 
Hill  it  may  be  doubted,  whether  he  and  his 
friends  would  behave  a jot  better  than  the  mini- 
Hers  we  have  already. 

And  fuppofe  the-  King  were  to  diffolve  the 
parliament,  what  hope  is  there  of  having  a better, 
even  though  the  nation  were  as  quiet  and  peace- 
able as  it  was  ten  years  ago  ? Are  not  the  prefent 
members,  generally  fpeaking,  men  of  the  greateft 
property  in  the  land?  And  are  they  not,  the 
greater  part  of  them  at  lead,  as  honed  and  wife 
as  their  neighbours  ? How  then  fhould  we  mend 
ourfelves  at  any  time  • but  efpecially  at  fuch  a 
time  as  this  ? If  a new  parliament  were  chofe 
during  this  epidemic  madnefs,  what  probability 
of  a better  than  the  prefent?  Have  we  not  all  the 
reafon  in  the  world  to  apprehend  it  would  be  a 
much  worfe  ? That  it  would  be  the  parliament 
of  1641,  inHead  of  the  parliament  of  1640? 
Why,  this  is  the  very  thing  we  want,  the  very 
point  we  are  aiming  at.  Then  would  Junius 
and  his  friends  quickly  fay,  “ Sir  King,  know 
B 6 “ your 


[ 36  ] 

M your  place  !’’  Es  el  ipfe  lignum.  “ Take  youf 
“ choice!  Be  King  log,  or  to  the  block!’’ 

Does  it  not  then  appear,  upon  the  whole,  that 
it  is  by  no  means  in  the  power  of  the  King,  by 
any  ftep  which  he  can  poflibly  take,  to  put  a hop 
to  thfe  prefent  commotions  ? That  efpecially  he 
cannot  make  conceflions  without  making  a bad 
matter  worfe  ? That  the  way  he  has  taken,  the 
{landing  his  ground,  was  as  wife  a method  as  he 
could  take,  and  as  likely  to  reflore  the  peace  of  the 
nation,  as  any  the  wit  of  man  could  devife  ? If 
any  is  more  likely,  would  it  not  be,  vigoroufly 
to  execute  the  laws  againlfincendiaries  ? Againft 
thofe  who,  by  fpreading  all  manner  of  lies,  in- 
flame thepeople  even  to  madnefs:  to  teach  them, 
that  there  is  a difference  between  liberty,  which 
is  the  glory  of  Englifhmen,  and  licentioufnefs,  a 
wanton  abufe  of  liberty,  in  contempt  of  all  laws, 
divine  and  human  ? Ought  they  not  to  feel,  if 
they  will  not  fee,  that  fcandalum  r<gis,  fcandaliz-. 
ingthe  King,  is  as  punifhable  as  fcandalum  mag- 
natum  ? That  for  the  future  none  may  dare  to 
{lander  the  King,  any  more  than  one  of  his 
nobles : much  lefs  to  print  and  fpread  that  deadlv 
poifon  among  his  Majefty’s  liege  fubjects.  Is 
not  this  little  lefs  than  high  treafon  ? Is  it  not 
{owing the  feeds  of  rebellion? 

It  is  poffible  this  might  reflore  peace,  but  one 
cannot  affirm  it  would.  Perhaps  God  has  a con - 
troverfy  zvith  the  land,  for  the  general  rreglefl, 
nay  contempt  of  all  religion.  Perhaps  he  hath 

faid. 


[ 37  ] 

faid,  Shall  not  my  foul  be  avenged  on  fuck  a nation < 
as  this  ? And  if  this-  be  the  cafe,  what  can  avail, 
nnlefs  His  anger  be  turned  away  from  us?  Was 
there  ever  a time  in  which  there  was  a louder  call 
for  them  that  fear  God  to-  humble  themfelves 
before  him  ? If  haply  general  humiliation  and 
repentance  may  prevent  general  deffruciion  ! 


THOUGHTS 


THOUGHTS 

UPON 

L I B E Pv  T Y. 


/ / corn  to  have  my  free-born  toe 
Dragoon'd  into  a wooden  fioe.  Prior. 


l,  A LL  men  in  the  world  defire  liberty; 

-*■  whoever  breathes,  breathes  after  this  : 
and  that  by  a kind  of  natural  inftinfl,  antecedent 
to  art  or  education.  Yet  at  the  fame  time  all 
men  of  underftanding  acknowledge  it  is  a rational 
inftinfl.  For  we  'feel  this  defire,  not  in  oppofi- 
tion  to,  but  in  conference  of  our  reafon. 
Therefore  it  is  not  found,  or  in  a very  low  de- 
gree, in  many  fpecies  of  brutes,  which  feem, 
even  when  they  are  left  to  their  choice,  to  pre- 
fer fervitude  before  liberty. 


2.  The 


[ 39  ] 

2.  The  love  of  liberty  is  then  the  glory  of  rati- 
onal beings  : and  it  is  the  glory  of  Britons  in 
particular.  Perhaps  it  would  be  difficult  to  find 
any  nation  under  lieayen,  who  are  more  tena- 
cious of  it.  Nay,  it  may  be  doubted  if  any  na- 
tion ever  was  : not  the  Spartans,  not  the  Athe- 
nians: no,  not  the  Romans  themfelves,  who 
have  been  celebrated  for  this  very  thing  by  the 
-poets  and  hiftorians  of  all  ages. 

3.  Was  it  not  from  this  principle,  that  our 
Britifh  fore-fathers  fo  violently  oppofed  all  fo- 
reign invaders  ? That  Julius  Cafar  himfelf,  with 
his  victorious  legions,  could  make  fo-  little  im- 
prellion  upon  them  ? That  the  generals  of  the 
fucceeding  emperors  fullained  fo  many  Ioffes 
from  them  ? And  that,  when  at  length  they  were 
overpowered,  they  rather  chofe  to  lofe  all  they 
had  than  their  liberty;  to  retire  into  the  Cam- 
brian or  Caledonian  mountains,  where  if  they 
had  nothing  elfe,  they  might  at  leaft  enjoy  their 
native  freedom  ? 

4.  Hence  arofe  the  vehement  ftruggles  of  the 
Cambro-Britons  through  fo  many  generations 
again  ft  the  yoke,  which  the  Saxons  firft,  and 
afterwards  the  Lnglijh  ftrove  to  impofe  upon 
them  : hence  the  ftruggles  of  the  Englijh  Barons 
againft  feveral  of  their  Kings,  left  they  fhould 
lofe  the  bleffing  they  had  received  from  their 
fore-fathers.  Yea,  the  ScottiJJi  nobles,  as  all 
their  hiftories  fhew,  would  no  more  bear  to  be 
enflaved  than  the  Romans . All  thefe  therefore, 

however 


L 40  ] 

however  differing  from  each  other  in  a thoufand 
other  reflects,  agreed  in  tehifyjng  the  dpfirable- 
nefs  of  liberty,  as  one  of  the  greateft  bleffings 
under  the  fun. 

£•  Such  was  the  fenfe  of  all  our  anceftors, 
even  from  the  earliefl  ages.  And  is  it  -not  alfo 
the  general  lenfe  oi  the  nation  at  this  day  ? 
Vi'  ho  can.  deny,  that  the  whole  kingdom  is 
panting  for  liberty  ? Is  not  the  crv  ior  it  gone 
lorth,  not  only  through  every  part  of  our  vaft 
metropolis,  from  the  weft  end  of  the  city  to  the 
call,  from  the  north  to  the  fouth,  fo  that  in  head 
of  no  complaining  in  our  fijeets,  there  is  nothing 
but  complaining:  but  likewife  into  every  corner 
of  our  land,  borne  by  all  the  four  winds  of  hea- 
ven ? Liberty,  jibcrty,  founds  through  every 
county,  every  city,  every  town,  and  everv  ham- 
let. 

6.  Is  it  not  for  the  fake  of  this,  that  the  name 
of  our  great  patriot,  (perhaps  not  fo  admirable  in 
his  private  char  after  as  the  man  cf  Rojs,  or  fo 
great  a lover  of  his  country  as  Code  us,  or  cld 
Curiius.)  is  more  celebrated  than  that  of  anv 
private  man  has  been  in  England  for  thefe  thou- 
fand years?  That  his  vert'  piftnre  is  fo  joyfully 
received,  in. every  par*  ol  England  and  Ireland ? 
That  we  ftamp  Ins  (I  had  almofl.  faid,  adored  • 
name,  on  our  handkerchiefs,  on  the  chearful 
bowl,  yea,  and  on  our  veffels  of  various  kinds, 
as  well  as  upon  our  hearts  ? Why  is  all  this,  but 
becaufe  of  the  infeparable  connexion  between 

Wilkts 


[ 4>  ] 

Wilkes  and  Liberty?  Liberty  that  came  down,  if 
not  fell from  heai'en  ; whom  all  England  and'  the 
world  worjhippeth  ? 

7.  But  mean  time  might  it  not  be  advifabie  to 
confider,  (if  we  are  yet  atleifure  to  confidcrany 
thing,)  what  is  liberty  ? Becaufe  it  is  well  known 
the  word  is  capable  of  various  fenfes.  And  pof- 
fibly  it  may  not  be  equally  deli-ruble  in  every 
fenfe  of  the  word. 

8.  There  are  many  nations  in  America , thofe 
particularly  that  border  on  Georgia  and  Carolina , 
wherein  if  one  difapproves  ot  what  another  fat's, 
or  perhaps  dillikes  his  looks,  he  fco-rnsto  affront 
him  to  his  face,  neither  does  he  betray  the  lead 
diffatisfacfion.  But  as  foon  as  opportunity  ferves, 
he  Heps  from  behind  a tree  and  fhoots  him. 
And  none  calls  him  that  does  it  to  an  account. 
No : this  is  the  liberty  he  derives  from  his  fore- 
fathers. 

9.  For  many  ages  the  free-  natives  of  Ireland, 
as  well  as  the  Scottifh  Highlands,  when  it  was- 
convenient  for  them,  made  an  excurfion  from 
their  woods  or  faflnelfes,  and  carried  off  for  their 
own  proper  life,  the  flieep,  and  oxen,  and  corn 
of  their  neighbours.  This  was  the  liberty  which 
the  Oneals,  the  Campbells , and  many  other  fepts 
and  clans  ol  venerable  antiquity,  had  received -by 
immemorial  tradition  from  their  anceifors-. 

to.  Almoft  all  the  foldiers  in  the  C/ir ifhan 
world,  as  well  as  in  the  Mahometan  and  Ptarun 
have  claimed,  more  efpe.cially  in-  time  of  war, 

another. 


[ 42  ] 

another  kind  of  liberty:  that  of  borrowing  the 
wives  and  daughters  of  the  men  that  fell  into 
their  hands  ; fometimes,  if  they  pleaded  fcruple 
of  confcience  or  honour,  ufing  a little  necelfary 
force,  perhaps  this  may  be  termed  the  liberty  of 
war.  But  I will  not  pofitively  affirm,  that  it  has 
never  been  ufed  in  this  free  country,  even  in  the 
time  of  peace. 

11.  In  feme  countries  of  Europe , and  indeed 
in  England , there  have  been  inftances  of  yet 
another  fort  of  liberty , that  of  calling  a monarch 
to  account,  and,  if  need  were,  taking  off  his 
head;  that  is,  if  he  did  not  behave  in  a dutiful 
manner  to  our  fovereign  Lords  the  People. 

12.  Now,  that  we  may  not  always  be  talking 
at  random,  but  bring  the  matter  to  a determinate 
point,  which  of  thefe  forts  of  liberty  do  you  de- 
fire ? Is  it  the  fi'rfl  fort  ? The  liberty  of  knocking 
on  the  head,  or  cutting  the  throats  of  thofe  we 
are  out  of  conceit  with  ? Glorious  liberty  indeed! 
What  would  not  king  mob  do  to  be  gratified  with 
it  but  for  a few  weeks  ? But,  I conceive  calm, 
fenfible  men  do  not  defire  to  fee  them  entrufted 
with  it.  They  apprehend  there  might  be  fome 
confequences,  which,  upon  the  whole,  would 
not  redound  to  the  profperitv  of  the  nation. 

13.  Is  the  fecond  more  defirable?  The  liberty 
of  taking,  when  we  fee  befr,  the  goods  and  chat- 
tels of  our  neighbours  ? Undoubtedly,  thoufands 
in  the  good  city  of  London , (fuppofe  we  made 
the  experiment  here  firft  would  be  above  mea- 

fure 


[ 43  ] 

/ure  rejoiced  thereat,  would  leap  as  broke  from 
chains.  O hoiv  convenient  would  it  be  to  have 
free  accefs,  without  any  let  or  hindrance,  to  the 
cellars,  the  pantries,  the  larders,  yea,  and  the 
coffers  of  their  rich,  overgrown  landlords ! But 
perhaps  it  would  not  give  altogether  fo  much  joy 
to  the  Lord  Mayor  or  Aldermen:  no,  nor  even 
to  thofe  Launch  friends  of  liberty,  the  common 
councihnen.  Not  that  they  regard  their  own 
intereft  at  all  : hut,  fetting  themfelves  out  of  the 
queflion,  they  are  a little  in  doubt  whether  this 
liberty  would  be  for  the  good  of  trade. 

14.  Is  it  then  the  third  kind  of  liberty  we  con- 
tend for;  the  liberty  of  taking  our  neighbours 
wives  and  daughters  ? Ye  pretty  gentlemen,  ye 
beaux  efprits,  will  ye  not,  one  and  all,  give  your 
voices  for  this  natural  liberty  ? Will  ye  not  fay, 
“ If  we  cry  out  againfl  monopolies  of  other 
“ kinds,  fhall  we  tolerate  the  monopoly  of  wo- 
“ men  ?”  But  hold.  Are  there  not  fome  among 
you  too,  who  have  wives,  if  not  daughters,  of 
your  own?  And  are  you  altogether  willing  to 
oblige  the  firfl  comer  with  them  ? I fay,  the  firfl 
comer:  for  obferve ! As  you  are  to  give  the  li- 
berty you  take,  fo  you  mult  not  pick  and  chufe 
your  men  : You  know,  by  nature,  all  men  are  on 
a level.  Liberty!  Liberty!  No  reflraint ! We 
are  free-born  Engliflimen  : down  with  the  fences! 
Lay  all  the  inclofures  open  ! No:  it  will  not  do. 
Even  nature  recoils.  We  are  not  yet  pohjhed 
enough  for  this. 

15.  Are 


[ 44  ] 

1,5-  Are  we  not  ripe  however  for  the  fourth 
kind  of  liberty,  that  of  removing  a difobedient 
King?  Would  Mr.  Wilkes,  would  Mr.  Horne, 
would  any  free  Briton  have  any  objection  to 
tins?  Provided  only,  that,  asfoon  as  our  prefent 
monarch  is  removed,  we  have  a better  to  put  in 
his  place.  But  who  is  he  ? King  John  ? That 
will  not  foUnd  well  even  in  the  ears  of  hisgreateft 
admirers.  And  whoever  calmly  confiders  the 
characters  and  endowments  of  thofe  other  great 
men,  who  may  think  themfelves  much  fitter  for 
the  office  than  his  prefent  Majefly,  will  hardly 
concur  in  their  opinion  ; fo  that  a difficulty  lies 
in  your  way.  Whatever  claim  you  may  have  to 
this  liberty,  you  mufl  not  ufe  it  vet,  becaufe  you- 
cannot  tell  where  to  find  a better  Prince. 

16.  But  to  fpeak  ferioufly.  Thefe  things 
being  fet  afule,  which  the  bawling  mob  dignify 
by  fliat  name;  w'hat  is  that  liberty , properly  fb 
called,  which  every  wife  and  good  man  defires? 
It  is  either  religious  or  civil.  * Religious  liberty 
is,  aliberty  to  chufe  our  own  religion,  to  worfhip 
God  according  to  our  own  confcience,  according 
to  the  heft  light  we  have.  Every  man  living,  as 
man,  has  a right  to  this,  as  lie  is  a rational  crea- 
ture. The  Creator  gave  him  this  right  when  he 
endowed  him  with  underftanding.  And  every 
man  mufl  judge  for  liimfelf,  becaufe  every'  man 
mull  give  an  account  of  liimfelf  to  God.  Con- 
fequentlv  this  is  an  indefeifible  right;  it  is  infe- 
parabfe  horn  humanity.  And  God  did  never 

O 


[ 45  3 

give  authoritv,  to  any  man,  or  number  of  men,  to 
deprive  anv  child  of  man  ther  eof,  under  any  colour 
or  pretence  whatever.  What  an  amazing  thing  is  it 
then,  that  the  governing  part  ofalmoft  every  nation 
under  heavenfhould  have  taken  upon  them,  in  all 
ages,  to  rob  all  under  their  power  of  this  liberty  ? 
Yea,  Ihouldtake  upon  them  at  this  day  fo  to  do  ! 
To  force  rational  creatures,  into  their  own  reli- 
gion! Would  one  think  it  polfible,  that  the  moft 
ferifible  men  in  the  world  fhould  fav  to  their  fel- 
low creatures,  “ Either  be  of  my  religion  or  I will 
“ take  awav  \our  food,  and  you,  and  vour  wife, 
“ and  chldren  (hall  frarve?  If  that  will  not  con- 
“ vince  you,  I will  fetter  your  hands  and  feet,  anci 
“ throw  you  into  a dungeon.  And  it  ft  ill  you  will 
“ mot  /cc  as  I /<r,  I will  burn  you  alive."’ 

It  would  not  be  altogether  fo  ailomlhing, 
if  this  were  the  manner  ol  American  lavages. 
But  what  {hall  we  fav,  if  numberlefs  inftances 
of  it  have  .occurred,  in  the  polite!  nations  of 
Europe  ? Have  no  inllanccs  of  the  kind  been 
feeniu  Britain  f Have  not  England  and  Scotland 
been  the  horrid  fires  ?.  Have  not  tlie  flames  burn- 
ing the  die  Or  of  heretics  fhone  in  London  as  well  as 
in  Pans  and  Li/bon  ? Have  we  forgot  the  days  of 
good  Queen  Mary  ? No  ; they  will  be  had  in 
everlafting  remembrance.  And  although  burn- 
ing was  out  of  falhion  in  Ouee n Elizabeth  s days, 
yet  hanging  even  for  religion  was  not.  It  is 
irue,  her  fcuccelfor  did  not  go  quite  fo  far-  But 

did 


[ 4^  ] 

did  even  King  James  allow  liberty  of  confcience  ? 
Bv  no  means.  During  his  whole  reign,  what 
liberty  had  the  Puritans  ? What  liberty  had  they 
in  the  following  reign  ? If  they  were  not  per- 
fecuted  unto  death  ; (although  eventually  in- 
deed many  of  them  were,  for  they  died  in  their 
imprifonment)  yet  were  they  not  continually 
harraffed,  by  profecutions  in  the  bifhop’s  courts 
or  ilar-chamber  ? By  fines  upon  fines,  frequent- 
ly reducing  them  to  the  deepeft  poverty?  And 
by  imprifonment  for  months,  yea  for  years  to- 
gether, till  many  of  them,  efcaping  with  the  fLin 
of  their  teeth,  left  their  country  and  friends,  fled 
to  feek  their  bread  in  the  wilds  of  America  ? 
However,  we  may  fuppofe,  all  this  was  at  an  end 
under  the  merry  monarch,  King  Charles  the 
fecond.  Was  it  indeed  ? Where-  have  they 
lived  who  fuppofe  this  ? To  wave  a thoufand 
particular  inftances ; what  will  you  % to  thofe 
two  public  monuments,  the  a£l  of  uniformity, 
and  the  at!  againft  conventicles  ? In  the  former 
it  is  enabled,  to  the  eternal  honour  of  the  King, 
Lords  and  Commons,  at  that  memorable  period, 
“ Every  parfon,  vicar,  or  other  minifter,  what- 
“ ever,  who  has  any  benefice  within  thefe 
“ realms,  {hall/  before  the  next  twenty  fourth  of 
" Auguft,  openly  and  publicly  declare,  his  un- 
“ feigned  affent  and  confent,  to  all  and  e\  ery 
“ thing  contained  in  the  book  of  common 
“ prayer,  or  fhall  lpfo  fablo  be  deprived  oi  all  his 
“ benefices ! Likewife  if  any  dean,  prebendai  \ , 

“ mailer. 


[’47  ] 

“ matter,  fellow,  chaplain  or  tutor,  of  any  col- 
“ lege,  hall,  houfe  of  learning,  or  hofpital,  anv 
“ public  profeflor,  any  other  perfon  in  holy  or- 
“ ders,  any  fchoolmafter,  or  teacher,  or  tutor 
“ in  any  private  family,  do  not  fubfcribe  here- 
“ to  he  fhall  be  ipfo  fafto  deprived  of  his  place, 
“ and  lhall  be  utterly  difabled  from  continuing 
“ therein.’’ 

Property  for  ever!  See  how  well  EngliJ h pro- 
perty was  fecured  in  thofe  golden  days  ! 

So,  by  this  glorious  aft,  thoufands  of  men, 
gulitv  of  no  crime,  nothing  contrary  either  to 
juftice,  mercy,  or  truth,  were  ftript  of  all  they 
had,  of  their  houfes,  lands,  revenues,  and  driven 
to  feek  where  they  could,  or  beg  their  bread. 
For  what  ? Becaufe  they  did  not  dare  to  worlhip 
God  according  to  other  men’s  confciences  ! So 
they  and  their  families  were  at  one  ftroke  turn- 
ed out  of  houfe  and  home,  and  reduced  to  little 
lefs  than  beggary,  for  no  other  fault,  real  or  pre- 
tended ; but  becaufe  they  could  not  attent  and 
confent  to  that  manner  of  worfhip,  which  their 
worthy  governors  prefcribed  ! 

But  this  was  not  all.  It  was  further  enacted 
by  the  fame  merciful  lawgivers,  “ If  any  perfon 
“ aft  as  a teacher,  tutor  or  fchool-m after,  in  any 
“ private^family,  before  hehas  ftibfcribed  hereto, 
“ he  lhall  fuffer  three  months  imprifonment, 
“ without  bail  or  mainprize.” 

Liberty  forever!  Here  is  fecurity  for  your 
perfon,  as  well  as  your  property. 


By 


r 43  ] 

By  virtue  of  the  aft  againft  conventicles,  if 
any  continued  toworfhip  God  according  to  their 
own  confcience,  tltey  were  firft  robbed  of  their 
fubflance,  and,  if  they  perfifted,  of  their  li- 
berty : often  of  their  lives  alfo.  For  this  crime, 
under  this  our  niojl  religious  and  gracious  King 
(What  were  they  who  publicly  told  God, 
he  was  fuch  !)  Englifhmen  were  not  only  fpoil- 
ed  of  their  goods,  but  denied  even  the  nfe  of  the 
free  air,  yea  and  the  light  ol  the  fun,  being  thruft 
by  hundreds  into  dark,  and  loathfome  prifons ! 

18.  Were  matters  much  better  in  the  neigh- 
bouring kingdom  ? Nay,  they  were  inexpreffi- 
bly  worfe.  Unheard-of  cruelties  were  praftifed 
there,  from  foon alter  the  refloration  till  the  re- 
volution *.  What  fining,  plundering,  beating, 
maiming,  imprifoning,  with  the  mod  Hi oc king  cir- 
cumftances?  For  a fpecimen,  look  a*  Dunotter 
cable!  where  young  and  old,  ofboth  fexes  (fick 
or  well,  it  was  all  one)  were  thruft  together  be- 
tween bare  walls,  and  that  in  the  heart  of  bum- 
mer, without  a poftibihty  of  either  lying  -or  fit- 
ting : yea  without  any  convenience  o!  any  kind! 
till  many  of  them,  through  hunger,  tliirft,  heat 
arid  flench,  "were  let  a liberty  by  death  ! Con- 
fidering  this ; confiderring  how  many  others 
were  hunted  over  their  native  mountains,  and 
{hot  whenever  they  were  overtaken,  with  no 
more  ceremony  than  beafts  : confidering  tbe 
drowning,  hanging,  cutting  offof  limbs,  and  vari- 
ous 

* See  AVodrowV  Hift.  of  the  fufferings  of  the  church  of  Scaled, 


[ 49  ] 

<uis  arts  of  torturing,  which  were  praflifed  by 
order  of  king  Charles,  and  often  in  the  prefence 
of  king  James,  who  feemed  to  enjoy  fuch  fpec- 
tacles : it  would  be  no  wonder,  if  the  very  name 
of  an  Englijhman  was  had  in  abomination  from 
the  Tweed  to  the  Orkneys. 

19.  But  is  this  the  cafe  at  prefent  with  Us  ? 
Are  we  abridged  of  our  religious  liberty  ? His 
late  Majefty  was  defired,  about  thirty  years  ago 
to  take  a Hep  of  this  kind.  But  his  anfwer  was 
worthy  of  a king,  yea  the  king  of  a free  people, 
**  1 tell  you,  while  I fit  on  the  Enghfli  throne, 
“ no  man  fhall  be  perfeculed  for  confidence 
**  fake.”  And  it  is  certain,  he  made  his  promife 
good  from  the  beginning  of  his. reign  to  the  end. 
But  perhaps  the  cafe  is  altered  now.  But  does  his 
prefent  Majefly  tread  in  his  Heps  ? If  he  does  not, 
he  perfecutes  no  man  for  confcience  fake  ? If  he 
does  where  is  the  man  ? I do  not'afk,  whom 
has  he  committed  to  the  flames,  or  caufed  to  die 
by  the  common  hangman  ? Or,  whom  has  he 
caufed  to  die  many  deaths,  by  hunger  and  third, 
cold  and  nakednefs  ? But  whom  has  he  tortured 
ot  thruft  into  a dungeon,  yea  or  imprifoned  at 
all,  or  fined,  for  worfhipping  God  according  to 
his  own  confcience,  in  the  prefbyterian,  or  any 
■other  any  ? O compare  king  Charles,  Gracious 
Charles  the  fecond,  with  king  George.  And  you 
will  know  the  value  of  the  liberty  you  enjoy. 

20.  In  the  name  of  wonder,  what  religious  li- 
berty can  you  defire,  or  even  conceive,  which 

Vol.  XXII.  C you 


t 50  ] 

you  Have  not  already  ? Where  is  there  a 
nation  in  Europe , in  the  habitable  world, 
which  enjoys  fuch  liberty  of  confciehce  as  the 
Engl  if1  ? I will  be  bold  to  fay,  there  is  nothing 
like  it  in  Holland , in  Germany  (Protedant  or 
Popiib,)  in  either  the  protedant  or  popidr  can- 
tons of  Switzerland  ; no,  nor  in  any  country'  un- 
der the  fun.  Have  we  not  in  England,  full  liberty 
to  cliufe  any  religion,  yea,  or  no  religion  at 
all  ? To  have  no  more  religion,  yea — than 
a Hottentot  fhall  I fay  ? Nay,  no  more  than 
a bull  or  a fwinc?  Whoever  therefore  in 
England  dretches  his  throat,  and  bawls  for  more 
religious  liberty,  mud  be  totally  void  of  fliaiiic, 
and  can  have  no  excufe  but  want  of  umlerftand- 
ing. 

21.  But  is  not  the  ground  of  this  vehement 
outcry,  that  we  are  deprived  of  our  civil  li- 
berty ? What  is  Civil  liberty  ? A liberty  to  enjoy 
our  lives  and  fortunes  in  our  own  way  : to  ufe 
cur  property,  whatever  is  legally  our  own,  ac- 
cording to  our  own  choice.  And  can  you  deny, 
“ that  we  are  robbed  of  this  liberty  ? Who  are  ? 
Certainly  I am  not.  I pray,  do  not  face  me  down 
that  I am.  Do  not  argue  me  out  of  my  fenfes.' 
If  the  Great  Turk,  or  the  king  of  France,  wills 
that  a man  fhould  die,  with  or  without  caufe, 
die  be  mud.  And  indances  of  the  kind  conti- 
nually occur  : but  no  fuch  indances  occur  in 
England.  I am  in  no  more  danger  of  death  from 
king  George,  than  from  the  queen  of  Hungary. 

And 


L 51  ] 

And  If  I finely  to  be  quiet  and  mind  my  own  bufi-’ 
nefs,  I am  in  no  more  danger  of  lofing  my  liber-' 
ty  than  my  life.  No,  nor  mv  property  ; I mean 
by  any  aft  of  the. king;  If  this  is  in  any  degree 
invaded,  it  is  not  by ; the  king,  -or  his  parliament, 
or  army;  but  by  the  good  patriots. 

Hark  ! Is  hell  or  bedlam  broke  loofe  ? What 
roarino-  is  that,  loud  as  the  waves  of  the  fca  ? 

O 

“ It  is  the  patriot  mob.”  What  do  they  want  with 
me  ? Why  do  they  flock  about  mv  houfc?  “ Make 
“ hafte  ! Illuminate  your  windows,  in  honour 
“ of  Mr.  Wilkes."  I can’t  in  eonfcience;  I think 
it  is  encouraging  vice.  “ Then  they  will  all  be 
broken.”  That  is,  in  plain  Enghfh,  give  them 
twenty  {hillings,  or  they  will  rob  you  of  five 
pounds.  Here  are  champions  for  the  laws  of  the 
land!  For  liberty  and  property  ! Ovilehorfe- 
guards ! 

“ That  dafed,  fo  grim  and  terrible,  t’  advance 

“ Their  mifereated  fronts  athwart  the  way  i” 

Tine,  they  did  nothing,  and  faid  nothing.  Yet 
(in  default  of  the  civil  powers,  who  did  not  con- 
cern themfelves  with  the  matter',  they  hindered 
the  mob  from  finifhing  their  work. 

22.  Why  then  thefe  men,  inffead  of  an)- wav- 
abridging  it,  plainly  preferred  my  liberty  and 
property.  And  by  their  benefit,  not  the  care 
ofthofe  to  whom  it  properly  belonged,  I {fill  en- 
joy full  civil  liberty.  I am  free  to  live  in  every 
C 2 refpeft, 


[ S2  ] 

'rcfpeff,  according  to  my  own  choice.  My  life, 
my  perfon,  my  property,  are  fa!"e.  I am  not 
TTiUl'dered,  maimed,  tortured  at  any  man’s  plea- 
fur  e : I ain  not  thrown  into  prilon.  I am  not 
manacled  : See,  I have  not  one  letter,  either 
on  my  hands  or  feet.  And  are  .not  you  as  free 
as  I am  f Are  not  you  at  liberty  to  enjoy  the 
fruit  of  your  labours  ? Who  hinders  you  from 
doing  it  P Does  king  George?  Does  Lord  North  ? 
Do  any  of  his  Majeftv’s  officers  or  foldiers  ? No 
nor  any  man  living.  Perhaps  fomc  would  hinder 
you,  if  you  afted  contaiy  to  law  : but  this  is  not 
liberty';  it  is  licentioufnefs.  Deny  tlie  lact  who  can : 
atn  not  1 lree  to  ule  my  fubhance  according  to 
my  own  diferetion  ? And  do  not  you  enjoy  the 
felf-fame  freedom  ? You  cannot,  you  dare  not, 
deny  it.  At  tins  hour  lam  at  lull  libery,  to  ule 
my  property  as  J pleafe.  And  fo  are  you  : you 
do,  in  faff,  ule  your  houfe,  your  goods,  your 
land,  as  is  right  in  your  own  eyes.  Does  any  one 
take  them  from  you  ? No.;  nor  docs  any  one 
re  ft  rain  you  from  the  lull  enjoyment  of  them. 
What  then  is  the  matter  ? What  is  it  you  are 
making  all  this  pother  about  ? Why  are  you 
thus  wringing  your  hands,  and  fereaming,  to  the 
terror  of  your  quiet  neighbours,  “ Deflruftion  ? 
Slavery  ! Bondage  ! Help,  .countrymen  ! Our 
liberty  is  deilroyed  ;!  We  are  ruined,  chained 
“ fettered,  undone  l”  fettered  ! How  ? \\  here 
are  the  fetters,  but  in  your -own  imagination  ? 
There  are  none,  either  on  your  hands,  or  mine. 
Neither  you  nor  I can  ihew  to  any  man  in  his 

fenfes. 


[ 53  ] 

fenfes,  that  we  have  one  chain  upon  us,  even  f® 
big  as  a knitting-needle. 

23.  I do  not  fay,  that- the  mini  dry  are  with- 
out fault  ; or  that  they  have  done  all  things  well. 
But  dill  I alk,  What  is  the  liberty  which  we 
want  ? It  is  not  civil  or  religious  liberty.  1 hefe 
we  have  in  fuch  a degree  as  was  never  known 
before,  not  from  the  times  of  William  the  Con- 
quer or  t.  But  all  this  is  nothing  : this  will  never 
fatisfy  the  bellua  mult  or  um  ca-pitum.  That  many- 
headed bead,  the  people,  roars  for  liberty  of 
another  kind.  Many  want  Indian  liberty,  the 
liberty  of  cutting  throats,  or  of  driving  a brace 
of  balls  through  the  head  of  thofe  ugly-looking 
fellows,  whom  they  cannot  abide  the  fight  'Qf. 
Many  more  scant  the  old  High-land  liberty , the 
convenient  liberty  of  plundering.  Many  others 
there  are*  who  want  the  liberty  oj  war , of  bor- 
rowing their  neighbour’s  wives  or  daughters. 
And  not  a few  (though  they  do  not  always  avow 
it)  the  liberty  of  murdering  their  prince. 

24.  If  you  are  a reafonable  man,  a man  of 
real  honour  and  confequently  want  none  of  thefe, 
I beg  to  know,  What  would  you  have?  Con- 
fider  the  thing  calmly.  What  liberty  can  you 
reafonablv  defire,  which  you  do  not  already  en- 
joy ? What  it  the  matter  with  you  ; and  svith 
multitudes  of  the  good  people,  both  in  England 
and  Ireland?  That  they  are  crying  and  groaning 

c 3 

+ If  the  famous  Midilefex  demon  was  an  exception  t*  this; 
yet  obferve,  one  fwallow  makc6  no  hammer. 


[ 54  ] 

is  if  they  were  chained  to  an  oar,  or  barred  up  in 
the  dungeons  of  the  inquifition  ! The  plain  melan- 
choly truth  is  this  : there  is  a general  infatua- 
tion, which  fpreads,  like  an  overflowing  itream, 
from  one  end  of  the  land  to  the  other.  And 
a man  mud  have  great  wifdom  and  great  ftrength. 
or  he  will  be  carried  away  by  the  'torrent. 
But  how  can  we  account  for  this  epidemic  mad- 
nefs?  For  it  defer  ves  no  better  name.  We  mu  ft 
not  dare  to  give  the  lead  intimation,  that  the 
devil  has  any  thing  to  do  with  it.  No  ! This  en- 
lightened age  is  too  wife  to  believe  that  there  is 
any  devil  in  being.  Satan,  avaunt  ! We  have 
driven  thee  back  into  the  land  of  lhadows,  keep 
thou  among  thy  own  kindred  : 

“ With  Hydra’s,  gorgons,  and  chimera’s  dire.” 

Suppofe  it  then  to  be  a purely  natural  phae- 
nomenon  : I afk  again,  how  can  we  account  for 
it  ? I apprehend,  if  we  could  dived  oun'elvcs  ol 
prejudice,  it  might  be  done  very  ealily ; and 
that  without  concerning  ourfelves  with  the  hid- 
den fprings  ol  aftion,  the  motives  or  intentions 
of  men.  Letting  thefe.  alone,  is  there  not  a vifi- 
ble,  undeniable  caufe,  which  is  quite  adequate 
to  the  effeft  ? I he  good  people  of  England  have 
for  fome  years  pad,  been  co  ntinually  fed  with 
poilon.  Dofe  after  dofe  has  been  adminidered 
to  them,  for  fear  the  firft,  or  fecond,  or  tenth, 
fliould  not  fuffice,  of  a poifon  whofe  natural  ef- 
* • fee* 


C 55  ] 

fe£t  is,  to  drive  men  out  of  their  fenfes.  “ Is 
the  centuar  ^ot  fabulous  ?”  Neither  is  Circe  s cup. 
See  how,  in  every  county,  city,  and  village,  it 
js  now  turning  quiet,  reafonable  men,  into  wild 
bulls,  bears,  and  tigers  ! But,  to  lay  metaphor 
afide,  how  long  have  th  t public  papers  reprefent- 
ed  one  of  the  bed  of  princes  as  if  he  had  been 
one  of  the  word,  as  little  better  than  Caligula , 
Nero,  or  Donation  ? Thefe  were  followed  by 
P amphlds  of  the  fame  kind,  and  aiming  at  the 
fame  point,  to  make  the  king  appear  odious  as 
well  as  contemptible,  in  the  ey  es  of  his  fubjefts. 
Letters  fucceed,  wrote  in  fine  language,  and 
with  exquifite  art  : but  filled  with  the  gall  of  bit- 
ternefs.  “ Yes,  but  not  againd  the  king  ; Junius 
does  not  drike  at  him,  but  at  the  evil  adminis- 
tration.1’ Thin  pretence  ! Does  not  every  one 
fee  the  blow  is  aimed  at  the  king  through  the 
fides  ofhis  minrders  ?)  All  thefe  are  conveyed, 
‘week  after  week,  through  all  London  and  all  the 
nation.  Can  any  man  wonder  at  the  edefl  of 
this  ? .What  can  be  more  natural  ? What  can 
be  expecled,  but  that  they  who  drink  in  thefe 
papers  and  letters  with  all  greedinefs,  will  he 
thoroughly  embittered  with  and  infiamed  there- 
by ? Will  fird  defpife  and  then  abhor  the  King  ? 
What  can  we  expeft,  but  that  by  the  repeated 
dofes  of  this  poifon  they  will  be  perfectly  intoxi- 
cated, .and  only  wait  for  a convenient  feafon  to 
tear  in  pieces  the  Royal  Monder  (as  they  think 
him)  and  all  his  adherents  ? 

C 4 3,5.  At 


[ 56  ] 

zg.  At  prefent  there  are  hindrances  in  the 
way,  fo  that  they  cannot  ufe  their  teeth  as  they 
would.  One  is,  an  untoward  Parliament,  who 
will  not  look  upon  the  King  with  the  fame  eye 
•that  they  do  ; but  hill  think  he  has  no  more  de- 
fign  or  defire  to  enflavethe  nation,  than  to  burn 
the  city  of  London.  A Hill  greater  hindrance  is 
the  army  : even  lions  and  bears  do  not  chufe  to 
encounter  them,  fo  that  thefe  men  of  war  do 
really  at  this  time  prcferve  the  peace  of  the  na- 
tion. What  then  can  be  done  before  the  peo- 
ple cools,  that  this  precious  opportunity  be  not 
loft  ? What  indeed,  but  to  prevail  upon  the 
King  to  diftolve  his  Parliament  and  difband  his 
army  ? Nay,  let  the  Parliament  flay  as  it  is;  it 
will  fuffice  to  difband  the  army.  If  thefe  red- 
coats were  but  out  of  the  way,  the  mob  would, 
foon  deal  with  the  Parliament.  Probatum  eji : 
nothing  is  more  eafy  than  to  keep  malignant 
members  from  the  Houfe.  Remember  Lord 
North  not  long  ago  ;+  this  was  a tafte,  a fpecimen 
of  their  aftivity.  What  then  would  they  not  do 
if  they  were  mailers  of  the  field,  if  none  were 
left  to  oppofe  them  ? Would  not  the  avenues  of 
both  Houfes  be  fo  well  guarded,  that  none  but 
Patriots  would  dare  to  approach  ? 

26.  But  (as  often  as  you  have  heard  the  con- 
trary affirmed)  King  George  has  too  much  under- 
ftanding,  to  throw  himfelf  into  the  hands  of  thofe 

men 

+ Rudely  intuited  by  a turbulent  mob,  as  he  was  going  io 
to  the  Houle, 


'[  57  J 

men  who  have  given  full  proof  that  they  bear 
him  no  great  good-will.  Nor  has  he  reafon  to 
believe  that  they  are  much  more  fond  of  his  of- 
fice than  of  his  perfon.  They  are  not  vehement- 
ly fond  of  Monarchy  itfelf,  whoever  the  Monarch 
be.  Therefore  neither  their  c;ocd  nor  ill  words 
will  induce  him,  in  hade,  to  leap  into  the- fire 
with  his  eves  open. 

27.  But  can  any  thing  be  done  to  open  the 
eyes,  to  reftore  the  fenfes,  of  an  infatuated  na- 
tion ? Not  unlefs  the  ftill-renewed,  ftill  operat- 
ing caufe  of  that  infatuation  can  be  removed. 
But  how  is  it  poffible  to  be  removed,  unlefs  by 
refiraining  the  licentioufnefs  of  the  prefs  ? And 
is  not  this  remedy  worfe  than  the  difeafe  ? Let 
us  weigh  this  matter  a little.  There  was  an  an- 
tient  law  in  Scotland , which  made  Leafuig-mahng 
a capital  crime.  Bv  Leafing-making  was  meant, 
telling  fuch  wilful  lies , as  tended  to  breed-  dif- 
fentron  between  the  King  and  his  fubjefts.  What 
pity  but  there  fhould  be  fuch  a la,w  cna&ed  in 
the  prefent  Sefiiom  of  Parliament?  By  our  pre- 
fent  laws  a man  is  punifhable  for  publifliing  even 
truth,  to  the  detriment  of  his  neighbour.  This 
I would  not  wifh»  But  (hould  he  not  be  punifh- 
ed,  who  publifhes  palpable  lies  ? And  fuch  lies 
as  manifeftly  tend  to  breed  dilfention  between 
the  King  and  his  fubjefls  ? Such,  with  a thoufand 
more,  was  that  bare-faced  lie  of  the  King’s  bur  fl- 
ing out  into  laughter  before  the  city  Magiil rates  f 
Now  does  not  the  publilher  of  this  lie  deferve  -to 
C 5 l ofe 


C <53  J 

lofe  his  ears  more  than  a common  knight  of  the 
poll  ? And  if  he  is  liable  to  no  pumfhment  for  a 
.crime  of  fo  mifchievous  a nature,  what  a grievous 
defeft  is  in  our  law  ? And  how  loud  does  it  call 
for  a remedy  ? 

* 28.  To  return  to  the  point  whence  we  fet 
out.  You  fee  whence  arofe  this  outcry  for  liber- 
ty, and  thefe  difmal  complaints  that  we  are  roh- 
bed  of  our  liberty  echoing  through  the  land.  It 
is  plain  to  every  unprejudiced  man,  they  have 
not  the  leaft  foundation.  We  enjoy  at  this  day 
throughout  thefe  kingdoms  fuch  liberty,  civil 
and  religious,  as  no  other  kingdom  or  Common- 
wealth in  Europe,  or  in  the  world,  enjoys:  and 
fuch  as  our  ancellors  never  enjoyed  from  the 
conqueft  to  the  revolution.  Let  us  be  thankful 
for  it  to  God  and  the  Ling  ! Let  us  not,  by  our 
vile  unthankful ncfs,  yea,  our  denial  that  we  en- 
joy it  at  all,  provoke  the  King  of  Kings  to  take 
it  awav.  By  one  llroke,  by  taking  to  himfelf 
that  Prince  whom  we  know  not  how  to  value. 
He  might  change  the  fcene,  and  put  an  end  to 
our  civil  as  well  as  religious  liberty.  Then  would 
be  feen  who  were  patriots,  and  who  were  not  ; 
who  were  real  lovers  of  liberty  and  their  coun- 
try. The  God  of  lave  remove  that  day  far  from 
us ! Deal  not  with  us  according  to  our  deferv- 
ings;  but  let  us  know,  at  leaft  in  this  our  day, 
the  things  which  make  for  our  peace  ! 

Fthruary  24,  1772. 


Some 


T 


H O U G H T S 

Concerning  The  Origin  of 

P O W E R. 


1.  TJY  power,  I here  mea n/upreme  power,  the 
power  over  life  and  death,  and  confe- 
quently  over  our  liberty  and  property,  and  all 
things  of  an  inferior  nature. 

2.  In  many  nations  this  power  has  in  all  ages 
been  lodged  in  a (ingle  perfon.  This  has  been 
the  cafe  in  ahnoft  the  whole  eaflern  world,  from 
the  earlieft  antiquity:  as  in  the  celebrated  ern- 
-pires  of  Aff\  ria,  of  Babylon,  of  Media,  Perfia!,  and 
many  others.  And  fo  it  remains  to  this  day, 
from  Conftantinople  to  the  fartheft  India.  The 
fame  form  of  government  obtained  very  early, 
in  very  many  parts  of  Afric,  and  remains  in  mod: 
of  them  dill,  as  well  as  in  the  empires  of  Morocco 
and  Abydinia.  The  fird  adventurers  to  Ame- 
rica found  abfolut'e  monarchy  edablifhed  there 
C 6 alfo: 


[ ] 

«lfo  : the  whole  power  being  lodged  in  the 
Emperor  of  Mexico,  and  the  Ynca’s  of  Peru. 
Nay,  and  manyofthe’antient  nations  of  Europe 
were  governed  by  fingle  perfons;  as  Spain, 
France,  the  Ruflias,  and  feveral  other  nations 
are  at  this  day. 

3.  But  in  others,  the  power  has  been  lodged 
in  a few,  chiefly  the  rich  and  noble.  This  kind 
of  government,  ufually  Riled  arijlocracy,  obtained 
in  Greece,  and  in  Rome,  after  many  flruggle* 
with  the  people,  during  the  later  ages  of  the 
republic.  And  this  is  the  government  which  at 
prefent  fubfifts  in  various  parts  of  Europe.  In 
Venice  indeed,  as  well  as  in  Genoa,  the  fupreme 
power  is  nominally  lodged  in  one,  namelv,  the 
Doge : but  in  fad,  he  is  only  a royal  fhade  : it 
is  really  lodged  in  a few  of  the  nobles. 

4.  Where  the  people  have  the  fupreme  power, 
it  is  termed  a democracy . This  feems  to  have 
been  the  antient  form  of  government  in  feveral 
of  the  Grecian  flates.  And  fo  it  was  at  Rome, 
for  fome  ages  after  the  expulfion  of  the  kings. 
From  the  earliefl  authentic  records,  there  is  rea- 
fon  to  believe  it  was  for  efpoufing  the  caufe  of 
the  people,  and  defending  their  rights  again  11  the 
illegal  encroachments  of  the  nobles,  that  Marcus 
Coriolanus  was  driven  into  banilhment,  and 
Manlius  Capitolinus,  as  well  as  Tiberius  and 
Cains  Gracchus,  were  murdered.  Perhaps  for- 
merly the  popular  government  fubfifted  in  feveral 

fiates.  But  it  is  fcarce  now  to  be  found,  being 

every 


[ 6t  J 

even’  where  fwallowed  up  either  in  monarchy  of 
ariftocracy. 

§.  But  the  grand  quedio-n  is,  not  in  whom 
this  power  is  lodged,  but  from  whom  it  is  ulti- 
mately derived  ? What  is  the  origin  of  power? 
What  is  its  primary  fonree  ? This  has  been  long 
a fubjetl  of  debate.  And  it  has-  been  debated 
with  the  utmoll  warmth,  by  a variety  of  d'ifpu- 
tarns.  But  as  earned  as  they  have  been  on  eacli 
fide  of  the  quedion,  they  have  feldoro  come  to 
any  good  conclufion  : but  have  left  the  point 
undecided  dill,  to  be  a ball  of  contention  to  the 
next  generation. 

6.  But  is  it  impodible,  in  the  nature  of  things* 
to  throw  any  light  on.  this  obfeure  fubject  P Let 
us  make  the  experiment let  us  (without  pretend- 
ing to  ditlate , but  delating  every  one  to.  ule  his- 
©wn  judgment)  to-  try  to  find  out  fame  ground 
whereon  to  Hand,  and  go  as  far  as  we  can  toward 
anfwering  the  quedion.  And  let  not  any  man  be 
angry  on  the  account,  fuppofe  we  fliould  not 
exactly  agree.  Let  every  one  enjoy  his  own- 
opinion,  and  give  others  the  fame  liberty. 

7.  Now  I cannot  but  acknowledge,  1 believe 
an  old  book,  commonly  called  the  bible,  to  be 
true.  Therefore  I believe,  there  is  no  power  but 

from  God,  Rom.  xiii.  1.  The  powers  that  be,,  are 
ordained  of  God.  There  is  no  Jubordinate  power 
in  any  nation,  but  what  is  derived  from  the  fu- 
preme  power  therein.  So  in  England  the  King, 
in  the  United  Provinces  the  States  are  .the  foun- 


tain 


C 62  ] 


tain  of  all  power.  And  there  is  no  fupremt 
power,  no  power  of  the  fword,  of  life  and  death, 
but  what  is  derived  from  God,  the  fovereign  of 

all. 

8.  But  have  not  the  people,  in  every  age  and 
nation,  the  right  of  difpofing  of  this  power?  Of 
inverting  therewith  whom  they  pleafe,  either 
one  or  more  perfons ; and  that,  in  what  propor- 
tion they  fee  good,  and  upon  what  conditions  ? 
Confequently,  if  thofe  conditions  are  not  ob- 
fcrvcd,  have  they  not  a right  to  take  away  the 
power  they  gave  ? And  does  not  this  imply, 
that  they  are  the  judges  whether  thofe  conditions 
are  obferved  or  not  ? Otherwife,  if  the  receivers 
were  judges  of  their  own  caufe,  this  right  would 
fall  into  nothing. 

9.  To  prove  this,  that  the  people,  in  every 
country  are  the  fource  of  power,  it  is  argued 
thus:  “ All  men  living  upon  earth  are  naturally 
equal;  none  is  above  another.  And  all  are  naturally 
free,  marters  of  their  own  actions.  It  manifeflly 
follows,  no  man  can  have  any  power  over  ano* 
ther,  unlefs  by  his  own  confent.  The  power 
therefore  which  the  governors  in  any  nation  en- 
jov,  muft  be  originally  derived  from  the  people, 
and  prefuppofes  an  original compad  between  them 
and  their  firft’ governors  ?:’ 

10.  This  feems  to  be  the  opinion  which  is 
now  generally  efpoufed  bv  men  of  underftanding 
and  education  : and  that  (if  I do  not  miftake) 
not  in  England  alone,  but  almoft  in  ever)'  civi- 
lized 


[ ] 

fixed  nation.  And  it  is  ufually  efpoufed  with  the 
fulled: and  dronged  perfuafion,  as  a truth  little 
lefs;than  fell-evident;  as  what  is  clear  beyond  all 
poiffibiUt.y  of. doubt,  what  commands  the  aflent 
of  all  reafynable  men.  Hence  if  any  man  affecl- 
ed  to  deny  it,  he  would  in  moft  companies  be 
rather  hooted  at  than  argued  with  : it  being  fo 
abfiird  to  oppofe  what  is  confirmed  by  the  gene- 
ral fuBrage  of  mankind. 

■■  11.  But  flill  (Tunpofe  it  to  need  no  proof)  it 

may  need  a little  explaining,  for  every  one 
does  not  under  Band  the  term.  Some  will  afk, 
Who1  are  the  people  ? Are  they  every  man , wo- 
man, and  child  ? Whv  not,  is  it  not  allowed,  is 
it  not  affirmed,  is  it  not  our  fundamental  princi- 
ple, our  incomeltable,.  felf-evident  axiom,  that 
“ all  perfons  living  upon  earth  are  naturally 
equal  ? That  all  human  creatures  are  naturally 
free?  Maders  of  their  own  aQions?  That  none 
can  have  any  power  over  others,  but  by  their  own 
confent  ?:’  Why  then  fhould  not  every  man, 
woman,  and  child,  have  a voice  in  placing  their 
governors  ? In  fixing  the  meafure  of  power  to  be 
intruded  with  them,  and  the  conditions  on  which 
it  is  intruded  ? And  why  fhould  not  every  one 
have  a voice  in  difplacing  them  too  ? Seeing  it 
is  undeniable,  they  that  gave  the  power  have  a 
right  to  take  it  away.  Do  not  quibble,  or  fhuffle. 
Do  not  evade  the  quedion;  but  come  clofe  to 
the  point.  I afk,  by  what  argument  do  you 
prove,  that  women  are  not  naturally  as  free  as 
* men? 


r ] 

men  ? And  if  they  are,  why  have  they  not  as 
good  a right  as  we  have  to  chufe  their  own  go- 
vernors ? Who  can  have  anv  power  over  free, 
rational  creatures,  but  by  their  own  confent  ? 
And  are  they  not  free  by  nature,  as  well  as  we  ? 
Are  they  not  rational  creatures  ? 

is.  Butfuppofe  we  exclude  women  from  ufirvg 
their  natural  right,  bv  might  overcoming  right, 
by  main  flrength ; (for  it  is  hire,  that  we  are  Wrong- 
er‘than  they:  I mean  that  we  have  flronger 
limbs,  ifvve  have  not  flronger  reafom  what  pre- 
tence have  we  for  excluding  men  like  ourfelves, 
yea  thoufands  and  tens  of  thoufands,  barely  be- 
caufe  they  have  not  lived  one  and  twenty  years3 
“ Why,  thev  have  not  wifdom  or  experience  to 
judge  concerning  the  qualifications  necefTary  for 
governors  ?”  I anfwer,  1.  Who  has  ? How 
manv  of  the  voters  in  Great-Britam  ? One  in 
twenty  ? One  in  an  hundred  ? If  you  exclude  all 
who  have  not  this  wifdom  you  will  leave  few  be- 
hind. But,  2.  Wifdom  and  experience  are  noth- 
ing to  the  purpofe.  You  have  put  tire  matter 
upon  another  ifiue.  Are  they  men  J That  is 
enough.  Are  they  human  creatures  ? Then 
the-y  have  a right  to  chufe  their  own  governors : 
an  indefeifible  right : a right  inherent,  infepa- 
rable  from  human  nature.  “ But  in  England, 
at  leaf!,  they  wire  excluded  by  law.  But  did  they 
conlent  to  the  making  of  that  law  ? If  not,  by 
your  original  fuppofition,  it  can  have  no  power 
ever  them.  I therefore  utterly  deny,  that  we 

eau 


[ 65  ] 

can,  confidently  with  that  fuppofition,  debar 
either  women  or  minors  from  chufing  their. own 
governors. 

13.  But  fuppof’e  we  exclude  thefe  by  main 
force  ; (which  it  is  certain  we  are  able  to  da 
fince  though  they  have  moll  votes,  they  have 
lead  ftrength)  are  all  that  remain,  all  men  of  full 
age,  the  people  ? Are  all  males  then,  that  have 
lived  one  and  twenty  years,  allowed  to  chufe 
their  own  governors  ? “ Not  at  all : not  in  Eng- 
land, unlefs  they  are  freeholders,  unlefs  they  have 
forty  findings  a year.”  Worfe  and  worfe.  After 
depriving  half  the  human  fpecies  of  their  natural 
right  for  want  of  abeard  ; after  depriving  myriads 
more  for  want  of  a ftiff  beard,  for  not  having 
lived  one  and  twenty  years  ; you  rob  others  (pro- 
bably fome  hundered  thoufands)  of  their  birth- 
right for  want  of  money  ! Yet  not  altogether 
on  this  account  neither  : if  fo,  it  might  be  more 
tolerable.  But  here  is  an  Englifhman,  who  has 
money  enough  to  buy  the  eftates  of  fifty  free- 
holders and  yet  he  mull  not  be  numbered  among 
the  people  becaufe  fie  has  not  two  or  three  acres  of 
land  ! How  is  this  ? By  what  right  do  you  ex- 
clude aman  from  being  one  of  the  peoplebecaufe 
he  has  not  forty  findings  a year  ? Yea  or  not  a 
groat  ? Is  he  not  a man  whether  lie  be  rich  or 
poor  P Has  he  not  a foul  and  a body  ? Has 
he  not  the  nature  of  a man  ? Confequently. 
all  the  rights  of  a man,  all  that  flow  from 
human  nature  ? And  among  the  reft,  that  of  not 

being 


own  con' 


[ 66  ] 

being  controlled  by  any,  but  by  his 
fent^ 

14.  “ But  he  is  excluded  bylaw.”  By  7 hat 
jaw  ? By  a law  of  his  own  making  ? Did 
he  confent  to  the  making  of  it  ? Before  this  law 
was  part;,  was  his  confent  either  obtained  or  afk- 
ed  ? If  not,  what  is  that  law  to  him  ? No  man, 
you  aver,  has  any  power  over  another,  but  by 
his  own  confent.  Of  confequence,  a law7  made 
without  his  confent,  is  with  regard  to  him  null 
and  void.  \ ou  cannot  fay  otherwife,  without 
deftroying  the  fuppofition,  that  none  can  be  go- 
verned but  by  his  own  confent. 

15.  See  now,  to  what  your  argument  comes. 
^ ou  artirm,  all  pow7er  is  derived  from  the  people  : 
and  prefentiy  excluded  one  half  of  the  people, 
from  having  any  part  or  lot  in  the  matter.  At 
another  broke,  luppofe  England  to  contain  eight 
millions  of  people,  you  exclude  one  or  tw7o  mil- 
lions more.  At  a third,  fuppofe  two  millions 
left,  you  exclude  three  fourths  of  thefe.  And 
the  poor  pittance  that  remains,  by  I know7  not 
wbat  figure  of  fpeech,  vou  call,  The  people  of 
England ! 

16.  Hitherto  we  have  endeavoured  to  view 
this  point  in  the  mere  light  of  reafon.  And  even 
by  this  means  it  manifeftly  appears  that  this  fup- 
pofition, which  is  fo  high  in  vogue,  which  is  fo 
generally  received,  nay,  which  has  been  palmed 
upon  us  with  fuch  confidence,  as  undeniable  and 
felf-evident,  is  not  only  falfe,  not  only  contrary 

to 


[ «7  ] 

to  reafpn,  but  contradi&ory  to  itfelf : the  very 
men  who  are  moll  pofitive,  that  the  people  are 
the  fource  of  power,  being  brought  into  an  inex- 
tricable difficulty,  hy  thatfingle  queftion,  “ Who 
are  the  -pe.qple,  ?”  Reduced  to  a neceffity  of 
either' giving  up  tliej  point,  or  owning  that  by 
the  people  they  mean  fcarce  a tenth  part  of  them. 

17.  But  we  need-  not  reft  the  matter  entirely 
on  reafon;ng.;  let  us  appeal  to  matter  of  faft. 
And  bqcaufe  we  cannot  have  fo  clear  and  certain 
a profpedlof  what  i-s  at  too  great  a diftance,  whe- 
ther of  time  or  place,  l,et  11s  only  take  a view  of 
what  has  been  in  our  own  country,  for  fix  or  feven 
hundred  years.'  I afk  then,  when  and  where  did 
the  people  of  England,  (even  fuppofe  by  that 
word,  the  people , you,  mean  only  an  hundred 
thoufand  of  them)  chufe  their  own  governors  ? 
Did  they  chufe,  t,o,  go  ijo  farther,  William  the 
Conqueror  ? Did  they  chufe  King  Stephen  or 
King  John  ? As  to  thofe  who  regularly  fucceed- 
ed  their  fathers,  it  is  plain  the  people  are  out  of  the 
queftion,.  Did  they  chufe  Henry  the  Fourth  ? 
Edward  the  Fourth,  or  Henry,  the  Seventh  ? 
Who  wilf  be  fo  hardy  as  to  affirm  it  ? Did  the 
peoplt-o if  England,  or  but  fifty  thoufand  of  them, 
chufe  Queen  Mary,  or  Queen  Elizabeth  ? To 
come  nearer  to  our.  own  times,  did  they  chufe 
King.  James  the  Firft  ? Perhaps  you  will  fay, 
“ B.Uft  if:  the  people  did  not  give  King  Charles 
thq  (upreme  power,  at  leaft  they  took  it  away 

from 


[ 68  ] 

from  him.  Surely  you  will  not  deny  this.”  In- 
deed I will  : I deny  1 will  : I deny  it  utterly*. 
The  people,  of  England  no  more  took  away  his 
power,  than  thev  cut  eff  his  head.  “ Yes,  the- 
parliament  did,  and  they  are  the  people.”  No 
the  parliament  did  not.  The  lower  houfe,  the 
houfe  oT  commons  is  not  the  parliament , any" 
more  than  it  is  the  nation.  Neither  were  thofe~ 
who  then  fat,  the  houfe  of  commons : no,  nor 
one  quarter  of  them.  But  ftippofe  they  had 
been  the  whole  houfe  of  commons,  yea,  or  the 
whole  parliament;  by  what  rule  of  logic  will 
you  prove,  that  feven  or  eight  hundred  perfons 
are  the  people  of  England  ? “ Why,  they  are  the 
delegates  of  the  people  ; they  are  chofen  by 
them.”  No,  not  by  one  half,  not  by  a quarter, 
not  by  a tenth  part  of  them.  So  that  the  people , 
in  the  only  proper  fenfe  of  the  word,  were  inno- 
cent of  the  whole  affair. 

18.  “ But  you  will  allow,  the  people  gave  the 
fupreme  power  to  King  Charles  the  fccond  at  the 
reftoration.”  I will  allow  no  fuch  thing  ; unlefs 
by  the  people  you  mean  General  Monck.  and  fif- 
teen thoufand  foldiers.  “ However  you  will 
not  deny,  that  the  peof/le  gave  the  power  to  King 
William  at  the  revolution.”  Nav  truly,  I mull 
deny  this  too.  I cannot  poilibly  allow  it.  Al- 
though I will  not  fay,  that  William  the  Third 
obtained  the  royal  power  as  William  the  Firfl 

did; 


t 69  1 

vT  , - 

4id  : although  he  did  not  claim  it  by  right  of 
conqueff,  which  would  have  been  an  odious 
title  : yet  certain  it  is,  that  he'd  id  not  receive  it 
by  any  act  or  deed  of  the  people.  Their  eonfent 
was  neither  obtained  nor  afked  : they  were  never 
eonfulted  in  the  matter.  It  was  not  therefore 
the  people  that  gave  him  the  power:  no,  nor 
even  the  parliament.  It  was  the  convention,  and 
none  elle.  “ Who  were  the  convention  ?”  They 
were  a few  hundred  lords  and  gentlemen,  who 
obferving  die  defperate  Hate  of  public  affairs, 
met  together  that  important  occadon.  So 
that  Hill  we  have  no  {ingle  inflance  in  above 
ft? veu  hundred  years,  of  the  people  of  England’s 
conveying  the  fupreme  power,  either  to  one  or 
marepeffons. 

*19.  dnclced  I remember  in  all  hi  dory,  both  an- 
tient  and  modern,  but  one  inHance  of  fupreme 
power  conferred  by  the  people ; if  we  mean 
thereby,  though  not  all  the  people,  yet  a great 
majority  of  them.  This  celebrated  inHance  oc- 
curred at  Naples,  in  the  middle  of  the  lad  cen- 
tnryj  where  the  people,  properly  fpeaking,  that 
is,  men,  women,  and  children,  claimed  and 
exerted  their  natural  right  in  favour  of  Thomas 
Aniello,  (vulgarly  called  Mafanello)  a young 
fifliermen.  But  will  any  one  fay,  he  was  the 
only  governor  for  thefe  thoufand  years,  who  has 
had  a proper  right  to  the  fupreme  power  ? I be- 
lieve not : nor,  I apprehend,  does  any  one  defire, 

that 


[ ,7°  3 

that  the  people  fhould  take  the  fame  fleps  irt 
London. 

20.  So  much  both  for  reafon  and  matter  offafti 
But  one  fingle  confideraiion,  if  wc  dwell  a little 
upon  it,  will,  bring  the  queftion  to  a fiiort  iffue.- 
It  is  allowed,  no  man  can  difpofe  of  another's 
life  but  by  his  own  confent.  I add,  no, 
nor  with  his  confent.  For  no  man  has  a right 
to  difpofe  of  his  own  life.  The  Creator  of 
man  has  the  foie  right  to  take  the  life, which  he 
gave.  Now  it  is  an  indifputable  truth,  Nihil 
aat  quod  non  Jiabct : none  gives  what  he  has  not. 
It  plainly  follows,  that  no  man  can  give 'to  ano- 
ther a right  which  he  never  had  himfclf : a right’ 
which  only  the  Governor  of  the  world  has  ; even 
the  wifer  Heathens  being  judges  : but  which  no 
man  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  either  has  or  can 
have.  No  man  therefore  can  give  the  power  of 
the  fword,  any  fnch  power  as  implies  a right  to 
take  away  life.  Wherever  it  is,  it  mult  defeend 
from  God  alone,  the  foie  difpofer  of  life  and 
death. 

21.  The  fuppofition  then,  that  the  people  are 
the  origin  of  power,  is  every  wav  indcfenfible. 
It  is  abfolutelv  overturned  by  the  very  principle 
on  which  it  is  fuppofed  to  hand,  namely,  that  a 
right  of  chufing  his  governors  belongs  to  even' 
partaker  of  human  nature.  If  this  be  fo,  then  it 
belongs  to  evert  individual  of  the  human  fpecies: 
confequentlv,  not  to  freeholders  alone,  but  to  all 
men  ; not  to  men  only,  but  to  women  alfo:  nor 
only  to  adult  men  and  women,  to  thofe  who 

have 


[ 7*  1 

have  lived  one  and  twenty  years,  hut  to  thofe 
who  have  lived  eighteen  or  twenty,  as  well  as 
thofe  who  have  lived  three- fc ore.  But  none  did 
ever  maintain  this,  nor  probably  ever  will. 
Therefore  this  boafted  principle  falls  to  the 
ground,  and  tne  whole  fuperltrufture  with  it. 
So  common  fenfe  brings  us  back  to  the  grand 
truth,  There  is  no  power  but  of  God. 


Some 


£ r-  ] 


Same  R £ M ARKS  on 

Mr.  HILL’s  REVIE  W 

Cl'  ALL  THE 

DOCTRINES 

Taught  by  Mr.  JOHN  WESLEY. 


Hiananum  tj}  ncfcirr  et  err  art. 

Be  calm  in -arguing:  for  fiercenefs  makes 
Krror.a  fault,  and  truth  difcourtcfy. 

Why  fhould  I feel  another  man’s  mi  flakes. 
More  than  his  fickncfs  or  infirmity  P 
In  love  I fhould : hut  anger  is  not  love. 

Nor  wifdom  neither;  therefore  gentlv  move, 

Herbert, 


i.  TV  y^R.  HILL  has  an  imraenfe  advantage 
ItX  over  me:  he  abounds  in  time,  and  I 
in  bufinefs.  I cannot  therefore  undertake  to 


write 


r n 

L 73  J 


Write  page  for  page;  I have  not  leifure,  if  I had 
inclination.  And  indeed  it  is  not  needful.  For 
a full  confutation  of  whatsoever  is  cited  from  the 
Eleven  Letters  commonly  afcribed  to  Mr.  Her- 
vey,  I need  only  refer  to  Mr.  Sellon : who  has 
not  only  anfw'ered  every  Shadow  of  an  arguinent, 
contained  in  that  poor  piece  of  low  invefctive,  but 
even  the  reproaches  ; which  indeed  he  could  not 
pafs  over,  without  palling  over  great  part  of  the 
book.  If  Mr.  H.  is  afraid  to  read  that  anfwer, 
I am  forry  for  it.  And  for  whatever  he  advances 
on  particular  redemption,  or  any  of  the  point? 
connected  therewith,  I refer  every  one  who  is 
not  afraid  of  the  light,  to  thofe  three  tracts  of 
Mr.  Sellon,  “ The  Arguments  againlt  General 
Redemption  anfwered,”  “ God’s  Sovereignty 
vindicated  againlt  Elilha  Coles,”  and  “ The 
Church  of  England  vindicated  from  the  charge 
of  Calvinifm.”  I believe  it  Mr.  Hill  had  given 
this  lalt  a fair  reading,  he  would  know  the  1.7  th 
article  is  nothing  to  his  purpofe. 

2.  With  regard  to  his  objections  to  Mr. 
Fletcher,  I refer  all  candid  men  to  his  own 
writings : his  letters,  intitled,  a Firlt,  Second, 
and  Third  Check  to  Antinomianifm  ; the  rather, 
becaufe  there  are  very  few  of  his  arguments 
which  Mr.  H.  even  attempts  to  anfwer.  It  is 
true  he  promifes  “ a full  and  particular  anfwer  to 
Mr.  F.’s  Second  Check  to  Antinominanifin.” 
.But  it  will  puzzle  any  one  to  find  where  that  an- 
Vol.  XXII.  D fwer 


I 74  1 

ftver  is,  except  in  the  title  page.  And  if  any 
thing  more  is  needful  to  be  done,  Mr.  F.  is  ftill 
able  to  anfwer  for  himfelf.  But  if  he  does,  I 
would -recommend  to  his.confideration.the  advice 
formerly  given  by  a wife  man  to  his  friend, 
“ See  that  you  humble  not  yourfelf  to  that  man  : 
it  would  hurt  both  him  and  the  caufe  of  God.” 
’Tis  pity  but  he -had  confidered  it  fooner,  and  he 
might  have  efcaped  fome  keen  reflexions.  But 
he  did  not : he  imagined  when  he  fpoke  or  wrote 
in  the  fimplicity  of  his  heart,  that  his  -opponents 
jeould  have  received  his  words  in  the  fame  fpirit 
wherein  they  were  fpoken.  No  fuch  matter: 
they  turn  them  all  into  poifon:  he  not  only'  lofts 
his  freed  words,  but  they  are  turned  into  bitter- 
r.efs,  are  interpreted  as  mere  fnter  and  farcafml 
A good  leflon  for  me  l I had  defigned  to  have 
tranferibed  Mr.  F.’s  charaXer  of  Mr.  H.  and  to 
have  added  a little  thereto,  in  hope  of  foftening 
his  fpirit.  But  I fee  it  is  in  vain;  as  well  might 
one  hope  to  foften 

“ Inexorable  Pluto,  king  of  fhades !” 

Si  nee  he  is  capable  of  putting  fuch  a conflruXion, 
even  upon  Mr.  F.’s  gentlenefs  and  mildnefs  ; 
fmee  he  aferibes  even  to  him  “ a pen  dipt  in 
gall,”  what  will  he  not  aferibe  to  me?  1 have 
done  therefore  with  humbling  myfelf  to  thefe 
men,  to  Mr.  H.  and  his  affociates.  I have  hum- 
'bled  mvfelf  to  them  for  thefe  thirty  years : 

but 


[ 75  3 

but  will  do  it  no  more.  I have  done  with  at- 
tempting to  foften  their  fpirits : it  is  all  loll  la- 
bour. Upon  men  of  an  ingenious  temper,  I 
have  been  able  to  fix  an  obligation.  Bilhop 
Oibfon,  Dr.  Church,  and  even  Dr.  Taylor, 
were  obliged  to  me  for  not  pulhingmv  advantage. 
But  it  is  not  fo  with  thefe  : whatever  mercy  you 
Ihew,  you  are  to  expecl  no  mercy  from  them. 
Mercy  did  I fay  ? Alas,  I expeft  no  jufiice ; no 
more  than  I have  found  already.  As  they  have 
wrelted  and  diftorted  my  words  from  the  begin- 
ning, fo  I expect  they  will  do  to  the  end.  Mr. 
H.’s  performance  is  a fpecimen  ! Such  mercy, 
fuch  jufiice  lam  to  expefc't! 

3.  And  does  Mr.  H.  complain  of  the  unhappy 
Jpirit  in  which  Mr.  F.  writes  ? Many  writers 
have  done  marvelloufly  : but  thou  excetlefl  them 
all ! For  forty  or  fifty  years  have  I been  a little 
acquainted  with  controverfial  writers ; fome  of 
the  Romilh  perfua'fion,  fome  of  our  own  church, 
fome  dilfenters  of  various  denominations.  And  I 
have  found  many  among  them  as  angry  as  him: 
but  one  fo  bitter  1 have  not  found.  Or  one  only, 
the  author  of  thofe  “ excellent  letters,”  as  Mr. 
H.  ftiles  them : which  he  particularly  admires , 
(that  is  his  word)  and  the  whole  [pint  of  which 
he  has  drank  in.  This  is  his  peculiar  charafler, 
his  difiinguifhing  grace  : as  a writer,  his  name  is 
Wormwood.  Accordingly  he  charges  Mr.  F. 
with  a “ Jevere,  acrimonious  fpirit,”  with  “ fneer, 
farcafm  and  banter,  yea  with  notorious  fallhoods, 
D 2 calumny 


calumny  and  grofs  perverfions.”  p.  2.  Nay. 
“ I accufe  you,  lays  he,  of  the  groffed  perverfi- 
ons  and  mifreprefentations  that  ever  proceeded 
from  any  author’s  pend’  In  the  fame  fpirit  he  is 
reprefented,  p.  21.  as  *’  a flanderer  of  God’s 
people  and  miniders,  defcendmg  to  the  meaneft 
quibbles,  with  a bitter,  railing,  acrimonious  fpi- 
rit.” And  p.  27.  (to  go  no  farther)  as  “ ufing 
liratagem  and  ungenerous  artifices.”  Although 
“ I have  treated  you,  fays  Mr.  H.  with  all  the 
politenefs  of  a gentleman,  and  the  humility  of  a 
Chridiaii.”  Amazing  ! And  has  he  not  treated 
me  fo  too  ? At  prefent,  take  but  one  or  two  in- 
dances. “ Fore;eries  have  long  pad  for  no  crime 
‘with  Mr.  Wefiev.”  p.  27.  “ He  adminiders 

falfhoods  and  damnable  herefies,  rank  poifon, 
hemlock  and  ratfbane.  We  cannot  allow  him 
any  other  title  than  that  of  an  empiric  or  quack 
doftor.”  p.  29.  Which  fhall  we  admire  mod 
here!  The  Gentleman  or  the  Chridian  ? 

4.  There  is  fomething  extremely  odd  in  this 
whole  affair.  A man  falls  upon  another,  and 
gives  him  a good  beating : who  in  order  to  be 
revenged,  does  not  grapple  with  him  (perhaps 
fenfible  that  he  is  above  his  match)  but  giving 
him  two  or  three  kicks,  falls  upon  a third  man 
that  was  danding  by.  “ O fays  he,  but  I know 
that  fellow  well:  he  is  the  Jecond  of  him  that 
beatme.”  “ If  he  is,  difpatch  your  bufinefs  with 
the  former  fil'd,  and  then  turn  to  him.”  How- 


C 77  J 

ever  if  Mr.  H.  isrefoived  to  fall  upon  me,  I rauft 
defend  myfelf  as  well  as  lean. 

5.  From  the  fpirit  and  manner  wherein  he 
writes,  let  us  now  proceed  to  the  matter.  But 
that  is  fo  various,  and  fcattered  up  and  down  for 
an  hundred  and  fifty  pages,  without  much  order 
or  connection,  that  it  is  difficult  to  know  where 
to  begin.  However  all  tends  to  one  point:  the 
good  defign  of  the  writer  is,  to  blacken.  With 
this  laudable  view,  he  obferves  the  old  rule, 
“ throw  dirt  enough,  and  fome  will  flick.  ’’ 
Knowing  that  the  mud  may  be  thrown  in  a trice: 
but  it  will  take  time  and  pains  to  ferape  it  off. 
Indeed  he  takes  true  pains  to  fallen  it  on : to 
reprefent  Mr.  W.  as  a knave  and  a fool ; a man 
of  no  confidence,  and  no  underftanding.  ’Tis 
true  the  latter  is  infilled  on  moll  at  large  : by  an 
hundred  inftances  Mr.  H.  has  made  it  plain  to 
all  the  world,  that  Mr.  W.  never  had  three 
grains  of  common  fenfe  : that  he  is  the  veryeft 
weather-dock  that  ever  was:  that  he  has  not  wit 
enough  to  be  fixt  fn  any  thing,  but  is  “ toft  to 
and  fro  continually “ that  he  is  to  this  very 
moment  fo  abfolutely  unfettled  with  regard  to 
every  fundamental  dodrine  of  the  gofpcl,  that 
no  two  difputants  in  the  fchools  can  be  more 
oppofite  to  each  other  than  he  is  to  himfelf.” 

6.  But  fome  may  naturally  alk,  What  is  the 
matter  ? What  makes  Mr.  H.  fo  warm  ? What 
has  Mr.  W.  done,  that  this  gentleman,  this 
Chriflian,  ila  gladiatorio  animo  ad  eum  ajfeBat 

D 3 viam  ? 


r 78  ] . 

viam  ? That  he  falls  upon  him  thus  outrageoufly, 
dagger  out  of  (heath,  without  either  rhyme  or 
reafon  ? O,  the  matter  is  plain.  Befide  that  he 
is  Mr.  F.’s  friend,  he  is  an  Arminian  : and  nor- 
thing is  bad  enough  for  an  Arminian.  An 
Arminian ! What  is  that  ? “ I cannot  tell 
*xa£lly  : but  to  be  fure  it  is  all  that  is  bad.  For 
a Popifh  Fryar,  a Eentd.iB.inc  Monk,  bears  witnefs, 
(and  Mr.  H.  avers  the  fame)  that  the  tenets  of 
the  church  of  Rome  are  nearer,  by  half  to  Cai'vi- 
nifm  than  to  Arminianifm  ; nearer  by  half  to  Mr. 
H.’  s tenets  than  to  Mr.  W.’s.”  Truly  1 always 
thought  fo.  But  flill  I afk,  What  is  an  Armi- 
nian ? Why,  in  other  words,  an  clebhon-doubler. 
And  the  “ good  old  preacher,  (fays  Mr.  FI.) 
“ places  all  eledion-doublers  (i.  e.  thofe  who  aro 
'*  not  clear  in  the  belief  of  abfolute  predeftination) 
<l  among  the  numerous  holl  of  the  Diabolonians. 
“ One  of  thefe  being  brought  before  the  judge, 
" the  judge  tells  him,  To  queftion  election,  is  to 
“ overthrow  a great  dofhine  of  the  gofpel. — 
“ Therefore  he,  the  eleflion-doubter,  mull  die.’' 
p.  37.  That  is  plainly,  he  mud  die  eternally, 
for  this  damnable  fin.  The  very  fame  thing 
Mr.  H.  affirms  elfewhere.  p.  39.  “ The  only 

cement  of  Chriflian  union  is  the  love  of  God, 
and  the  foundation  of  that  love  mujl  be  laid  in 
believing  the  truths  of  God (that  is,  you  mujl 
believe  particular  redemption,  or  it  is  impoffible 
you  fhould  love  God)  for,  to  ufe  “ The  words 
♦ of  Dr.  Owen,  in  his  Difplav  of  Arminianifm, 

(fee 


[ 79  J 

'**  (fee  the  truths  which  Mr.  H.  means)  an  agree- 
” ment  without  truth  is  no  peace,  but  a covenant 
“ with  death,  and  a confpiracy  againft  the  king- 
“ dom  of  Chrift.” 

7.  I am  forry  Mr.  H.  fhould  think  fo.  But 
fo  long  as  he  remains  in  that  fentiment,  what 
peace  am  I or  Mr.  F.  or  indeed  any  Arminian,  to 
expett  from  him  ? Since  any  agreement  with  us 
would  be  “ a covenant  with  death,  and  a confpi- 
racy againft  the  kingdom  of  Chrift.”  I therefore 
give  up  all  hopes  of  peace  with  him,  and 
with  all  that  are  thus  minded.  For  I do  not  be- 
lieve what  he  terms  the  truths  of  God , the  doc- 
trine of  abfolute  predeftination.  I never  did 
believe  it,  nor  the  do&rines  connefted  with  it, 
no  not  for  an  hour.  In  this,  at  leaft,  I have  been 
confident  with  myfelf.  I have  never  varied  an 
hair’s  breadth  - 1 cannot  while  I believe  the  bible, 
while  I believe  either  the  Old  or  New  Te  (lament. 
What  I do  believe,  and  always  have  believed 
in  this  matter,  I will  declare  with  all  fimplicity. 

“ 1. 1 believe  no  decree  of  reprobation.  I do 
not  believe  the  Father  of  fpirits  ever 

“ Confign’d  one  unborn  foul  to  hell. 

Or  damn’d  him  from  his  mother’s  womb.” 

“ 2.  I believe  no  decree  of  pretention , which 
is  only  reprobation  white-\\raftied.  I do  not 
believe  God  ever  fent  one  man  into  the  world, 

D4 


to 


{ •] 

to  whom  he  had  decreed,  never  to  give  that  grace, 
whereby,  alp  tie  he  could  efcape  damnation. 

“ g.  I do  not  believe  (what  is  only  preterition 
or  reprobation  in  other  words)  any  fuch  abjolute 
eleElion , as  implies  that  all  but  the  abfolutely  clccl 
{hall  inevitably  be  damned. 

“ 4.  1 do  not  believe  the  dodftrine  of  irrefijlible 
grace,  or  of  infallible  perfevtrance\  becaufe  both 
the  one  and  the  other  implies  that  election, 
which  cannot  hand  without  preterition  or  repro- 
bation. 

“ 5.  I do.  not  believe  falvation  by  -works.  Yet 
if  any  man  can  prove  (what  I judge  none  ever 
did,  or  ever  will)  that  there  is  no  medium  be- 
tween this  and  abfqlute  predeftination  ; I will 
rather  fubfcribe  to  this  than  to  that,  as  far  lefs 
abfurd  of  the  two.” 

8.  Ihnc  ilia:  lachryma.  Here  is  the  fource  of 
Mr.  H.’s  implacable  hatred  to  me.  And  hence 
arifes  his  vehement  difpleafure  at  thofe  minutes, 
which  MrJ  Sih.  and  he  {file  “ dreadful  herefy.” 
Theappellation  is  juft,  fuppofe(as  Mr.  H.  a Herts) 
all  de  Elion- doubters  are  Diabolonians : fuppofeno 
man  who  is  “ not  clear  in  the  belief  of  abfolute 
predeftination,”  can  love  either  God  or  his 
neighbour. . For  it  is  certain  the  doftrine  of  the 
minutes  and  of  the  decrees  cannot  ftand  together. 
If  the  doftrine  of  the  decrees  Hands,  then  that  of 
the  minutes  mu  ft  fall;  for  vre  willingly  allow, 
that  the  one  is  incompatible  with  the  other.  If 
the  doblrine  of  the  minutes  Hands,  then  that  of 

the 


[ 8i  ] 

the  decrees  mu  ft  fall.  For  it  is  manifeft  this, 
particularly  the  laft  article,  ftrikes  at  the  very 
root  of  Calvinijin.  Of  what  confequence  is  it 
then,  to  one  who  is  perfuaded  the  belief  of  Cal- 
vinifm  is  eJJ~ential  to  Jalvation,  to  expofe  thofe 
minutes  to  the  uttermoft,  as  well  as  any  that 
dares  to  defend  them  ? 

9,  In  order  to  this  good  end,  Mr.  H.  publifhes 
“ a Review  of  all  the  do&rines  taught  by  Mr. 
John  Wefley.”  But  is  it  poftible  for  any  man  to 
do  this,  without  reading  all  the  writings  that  I 
have  publifhed  ? It  is  not  poftible  in  the  nature 
of  things : he  cannot  give  an  account  of  what 
he  never  read.  And  has  Mr.  H.  read  all  that 
I have  publijhed?  I believe  he  will  not  affirm 
it.  So  any  man  of  underftanding  may  judge, 
before  he  opens  his  book,  what  manner  of  re- 
view it  is  likely  to  contain  ! However  itmuft  be 
owned  that  he  and  his  faithful  allies  have  been 
at  the  pains  of  looking  into  many  of  my  writings. 
I fay  many  : for  I apprehend  there  are  many 
more,  ■which  they  have  not  fo  much  as  look- 
ed into  ; nor  does  it  appear  that  they  have 
ferioufly  looked  through  any,  fo  as  to  obferve  the 
fcope  and  tenor  of  them.  However  from  thofe 
whichhe  or  they  have,  after  a fafhion  reviewed, 
abundance  of  objeftions  are  extrafted.  It  is  true, 
none  of  them  (one  only  excepted)  are  new,  and 
there  is  hardly  one  that  has  not  been  anfwered 
again  and  again.  Yet  fince  they  are  propofed 
' ' D5  in 


[ *2  I 

in  a new  form,  they  may  feem  to  demand  a new 
anfwer. 

to.  The  grand  objeftion  is,  that  I am  incon- 
fiftent  with  myfelf.  This  therefore  I (hall  parti- 
cularly confider.  The  others,  which  flutter  up 
and  down  the  whole  work,  I can  but  juft  touch 
upon.  Mr.  H.  opens  the  charge  thus ; “ facing 
and  unfaying  is  nothing  new  with  Mr.  W.  who 
has  only  {hewn  himfelf  confident,  by  a regular 
feries  of  inconfiftencies.”  p.  3.  “ How  full  are 
you  of  contradictions  to  yourfeff?  How  full  of 
contrary  purpofes  ? How  often  do  you  chide 
with  yourfeff  ? How  oft  do  you  fight  with  your- 
felf  ?”  Title  page.  “ Mr.  W.  feems  well  con- 
tented you  fhould  fettle  his  creed.  If  you  can, 
you  will  do  in  a few  months,  what  he  himfelf 
has  not  been  able  to  effeCf  in  near  forty  years.'1 
“ On  this  fluCiuating  ocean  he  has  been  toft,  for 
fo  manv  years  together.”  p.  20.  “ All  his  jour- 
nals and  traffs  are  replete  with  proofs  of  his  hav- 
ing been  toft  from  one  fyfrem  to  another,  and 
from  one  opinion  to  another,  from  the  time  of 
his  ordination  to  this  prefent  moment/'  p.  143. 
“The  moft ignorant  collier  can  immediately  fee 
his  inconfiilency  with  himfelf.”  p.  145.  He  films 
up  the  whole  charge  in  the  lively  words  of  Mn. 
Cudworth,  graced  with  the  name  of  Mr.  Hervey  : 
“ ContradiClion,  didft  thou  ever  know  fo  truftv 
a friend,  fo  faithful  a devotee  ? Many  people 
are  ready  enough  to  contradiCl  others.  But  it 

feems 


[ 83  ] 

feems  all  one  to  tins  gentleman  whether  it  be 
another  or  himfelf,  fo  he  may  but  contradiCl.” 

11.  To  prove  this  indictment  (urged  home 
enough,  though  there  is  not  one  tittle  of  truth 
in  it}  Mr.  H.  has  cited  no  lefs  than  a hundred 
and  one  witneffes.  + Before  I enter  upon  the  ex- 
amination of  thefe,  I beg  leave  to  tranfcribe  what 
I wrote  fome  time  fince  to  Dr.  Rutherforth. 
“ You  frequently  charge  me  with  evafion  ; and 
others  have  brought  the  fame  charge.  The  plain 
cafe  is  this,  I have  wrote  on  various  heads  ; and 
always  as  clearly  as  I could.  Yet  many  have 
mifunderltood  my  words,  andraifed  abundance 
of  objections.  I anfwered  them  by  explaining 
myfelf,  Ihewing  what  I did  not  mean  and  what 
I did.  One  and  another  of  the.  objeCtors  ftretch- 
ed  his  throat,  and  cried  out  “ Evafion  ! Eva- 
fion!” And  what  does  all  this  outcry  amount  to? 
Why  exadly  thus  much*  They  imagined  they 
had  tied  me  fo  fall,  that  it  was  impoffible  for 
me  to  efcape.  But  prefently  the  cobwebs  were 
fwept  away,  and  ! was  quite  at  liberty.  And 
I blefs  God  I can  unravel  truth  and.  fallhood, 
altho’  artfully  twilled  together.  Q{  J'uch  evafion 
I am  not  alhamed.  Let  them,  be  alhamed  who 
eonllrain  me  to  ufe  it.” 

12.  Mr.  H.’s  numerous proo&  of  my  contra- 
dicting myfelf,  may  be  ranged  under  twenty  four 
D 6,  heads, 

*f-  The  very  number  of  proportions  e:ctra£ted  out  of  Ouefnell's 
writings,  and  condemned  “ as  dreadful  hercfies,’'  in  the  bull 
Unigentius  ! Exemplum  placet  1 See  how  good  wits  jump ! Mr.  H» 
Jatfter  Walfh,  and  the  pope  of  Rome  1 


[ 84  ] 


heads,  I (hall  examine  thefe  one  by  one,  in  what 
appears  to  me  to  be  the  moil  natural  order. 

I. 

There  never  was  any 


fuch  covenant,  between 
God  the  father  and  God 
the  fon.  p.  128. 


and  always  did. 


There  was  an  ever- 
lafting  covenant  be- 
tween God  the  father 
and  God  the  fon,  con- 
cerning man's  redemp- 
tion.' 

1 The  latter  of  thefe  I believe 
hnce  I could  read  my  bible. 

But  Mr.  H.  brings  a paifage  out  of  the  Chrif- 
tian  Library,  to  contradicl  this.  On  which  he 
parades  as  follows.  “ If  the  Chriftian  library  be,  as 
Mr.  W.  affirms,  all  true , all  agreeble  to  the  word  God , 
then  what  are  we  to  think  of  his  other  works  ? They' 
muflbe  an  adulteration  of  marts  deviling,  p.  1 *2  8- 
The  fame  may  be  faid  of  the  minutes  : if  thefe 
be  truly  orthodox,  upwards  of  forty  volumes  of 
the  library  mull  be  throughly  heterodox.  And 
then  there  is  great  reafon  to  lament,  that  fo 
many  poor  people’s  pockets  ffiould  be  fleeced 
for  what  can  do  their  fouls  no  good.” 

Peremptory  enough  ! But  let  us  examine  the 
matter  more  clofely.  “ Mr.  W.  affirms,  that 
the  Chriftian  library  is  all  true,  all  agreeable  to 
the  word  of  God .”  I do  not  ; and  I am  glad  I 
have  this  public  opportunity,  of  explaining  my- 
felf  concerning  it.  My  words  are  (preface  p.  a.) 
“ I have  made,  as  I was  able,  an  attempt  of 
this  kind.  I have  endeavoured  to  extra£f  fuch 


a 


C ] 

a collection  of  Engl  i fit  divinity,  as  I believe , is  all 
true,  all  agreeable  to  the  oracles  of  God.”  I did 
believe  and  I do  believe,  every  trail  therein  to 
be  true  and  agreeable,  to  the  oracles  of  God. 
But  I do  not  roundly  affirm  this,  (as  Mr.  H. 
afferts)  of  every  fentence  contained  in  the  fifty- 
volumes.  I could  not  poffibly  affirm  it  for  two 
reafons,  x.  I was  obliged  to  prepare  moll:  of  thofe 
trafts  for  the  prefs,  juft  as  I could  fnatch  time  in 
travelling,  not  tranfcribing  them  ; (none  expend- 
ed it  of  me)  but  only  marking  the  lines  with  my 
pen,  and  altering  or  adding  a few  words  here 
and  there,  as  I had  mentioned  in  the  preface.  2. 
As  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  attend  the  prefs, 
that  care  neceffiarily  devolved  on  others  ; through 
whofe  inattention  an  hundred  paftages  were  left 
in,  which  I had  fcratched  out : yet  not  fo  many 
as  to  make  up  “ forty  volumes,”  no,  nor  forty 
pages.  It  is  probable  too,  I myfelf  might  over- 
look fome  fentences,  which  were  not  fuitable  to 
my  own  principles.  It  is  certain,  the  correftors 
of  the  prefs  did  this,  in  not  a few  inftances.  I 
fltall  be  much  obliged  to  Mr.  H.  and  his  friends, 
if  they  will  point  out  all  thofe  inftances.  And  I 
will  print  them  as  an  index  expurgatorious  to  the 
work,  which  will  make  it  doubly  valuable. 

The  plain  inference  is,  if  there  are  an  hundred 
paffages  in  the  Chrijlian  Library,  which  contra- 
di£l  any  or  all  of  my  do&rines,  thefe  are  no 
proof  that  I contradift  myfelf.  Be  it  obferved, 
once  for  all  therefore,  citations  from  the  Chrif- 

tim 


r £6  y 

tian  Library,  prove  nothing  but  the  carelefTnels 
cl  the  correctors. 


For  election  and  per- 
feverance. 


Agalnft  elbFtion  and 
perfeverance.  p.  101. 


2.  Mr.  Seflon  has  clearly  fhewed,  that  the  17th 
article  does  not  aftert  abfolute  prede/iination. 
Therefore  in  denying  this,  I neither  contradift 
that  article,  nor  myfelft 

3.  I believe  there  is  [ But  I neverthonght  a 
a date  attainable  in  this  I babe  in  Chrift  was  in 


life,  from  which  a man 
cannot  finally  falL 
4.  Saved  beyond  the 
dread  of  falling. 


that  Rate;  though  he  is  a 
true  believer. 

So  fays  my  brother*. 
That  is  nothing  to  me. 


The  note  adds,  “ Mr;  W.  drew  lots,  whether 
or  no  he  fhould  preach  againft  the  17th  article.” 

“ That  paltry  dory  is  untrue.”  Thou gh  Mr.  H. 
potently  believes  it.  So  all  the  witticifms  built 
upon  it,  fall  to  the  ground  at  once;  1 never 
preached  againft  the  17th  article,  nor  had  the 
leaf!  thought- of  doing  it.  But  did  Mr.  Hill  ne- 
ver preach  againft  the  31ft  article,  which  expli- 
citly afferts  univerfal  redemption  ?' 

I-  mean;  thofe  that 
are  perfected  in  love , ( 1 
John  iv.  17.)  and  thofe 
only.  So  here  is  no 
contradifftion. 

So  my  brother  fpeaks. 
But  his  words  cannot 
prove 


5.  I do  not  deny,  that 
thofe  eminently  {filed 
the  eletl,  fliall  infallibly 
perfevere. 

6.  The  love  divine, 
Which  made  us  thine 


[ &7  1 


ftiall  keep  us  thine  for- 
ever. 

7.  From  all  eternity 
with  love 

Unchangeable-  thou 
haft  me  viewed. 

8.  Never  again  will 
he  take  him  away. 

9.  Jefus  the  lover  of 
his  own,  will  love  me 
to  the  end. 

10.  Chriit  is  in  the 
eleEl  world  of  his  church. 


prove  that  /contradict: 
myfelf: 

I believe  this  is  true 
on  the  fuppofition  of 
j aitfi / or efecn, not  other- 
wife':. 

They  are  my  Bro- 
ther’s words,  not  mine. 

So  are  thefe. 


This  is  cited  from, 
tile  Chrijhan  Library ». 
j So  it  goes  for  nothing 

0 O 

The  nine  witnefies  therefore  examined  on  this 
head,  prove  juft  nothing  at  all.  So  that  hitherto 
there  is  not  the  leaf!  proof  that  I contradict  my- 
felf. 

III. 


For  imputed  righte- 
oufnefs. 

1 1 . We  no  more  deny 
the  phrafe  (of  imputed 
righteoufnefs)  than  the 
thing. 

12.  This  do ft.rtnel  have 
believed  and  taught,  for 
near  eight  and  twenty 
yearsv 


AgainfF  imputed 
righteoufneft. 

Do  not  difpute  for 
that  particular  phrafe . 
Here  is  no  contradic- 
tion. I do  not  deny  it; 
yet  I dare  not  difputi 
for  it. 

The  u fe  of' that  term 
has  done  immenfehurt. 

It  has : but  here  is 
no  contradiftion. 

13.  This 


C M ] 


13.  This  is  a citation  from  the  Chriflian  Li- 
brary. So  it  goes  for  nothing. 


14.  I continually  affirm, 
that  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift  (in  the  fenfe 
there  explained)  is  im- 
puted to  every  believer. 


Where  is  the  ufc 
of  contending  fo  Jlrenu- 
oufly  for  thofe  cxpref 
fions ? I afk  it  again. 
But  where  is  the  con- 
tradiction ? 

15.  This  is  another  citation  from  the  Chrijlian 
Library.  So  it  proves  nothing. 


1 6.  The  wedding  gar- 
ment is  Chrift’ s righte- 
oufnefs, firft  imputed, 
and  then  implanted. 

17.  This  is  confiftent 
with  our  being  juftified 
through  the  imputation 
of  Chrift’s  righteouf- 
nefs. 


The  wedding  gar- 
ment isholinefs.  — This 
does  not  exclude,  but 
prefuppofes  the  other. 

John  Goodwin  con- 
tradicts this.  Perhaps  fo; 
but  John  Goodwin  is 
not  John  Wefley. 
Whatever  therefore  he 


fays,  (obferve  it  once 
for  all !)  does  not  prove,  that  I contradid  my- 
felf.  I am  no  way  engaged,  to  defend  every  ex- 
prefion  of  either  John  Goodwin  or  Richard 
Baxter’s  aphorifms.  The  fenfe  of  both  I general- 
ly approve,  the  language  many  times  I do  not. 

But  I obferve  here,  and  in  fifty  other  inftances 
Mr.  H.  mentions  no  page.  Now  (in  controver- 
fy)  he  that  names  no  page,  has  no  right  to  any 
anfwer. 

^ 18.  I 


f 


I . 

[ 89  ] 

18.I  frequently  put 
this  expreffion  into  the 
mouth  oj  a whole  con- 
gregation : that  is,  I fing 
an  hymn  wherein  it 
occurs. 

Here  comes  in  athundring  note,  “ Although 
molt  of  thefe  extrafts  from  Mr.  W.’s  fermonon 
Jer.  xxiii.  6.  have  a very  evangelical  appear- 
ance, yet  al \ their  excellency  vanijhdh  away,  tvhen 
we  are  told  in  the  fame  fermon,  that  the  right- 
eoufnefs  he  contends  for,  is  not  the  divine  right- 
eoufnefs  of  Chrift,  but  his  human  righteoufnefs. 
When  we  confider  the  exprefs  words  of  the  text, 
The  Lord  our  righteoufnefs,  one  might  wonder 
(if  any  thing  is  to  be  wondered  at  that  Mr.  W. 
affirms)  how  he  could  poffibly  fall  into  an  error, 
which  at  once  not  only  deflroys  the  meritorious 
efficacy  of  the  Redeemer’s  righteoufnefs,  but  un- 
dermines the  virtue  of  his  atoning  blood.”  This 
is  home : Mr.  H.  has  broke  my  head  fadly.  But 
he  will  fo on  give  me  a plaifter,  “ However,  if 
Mr.  W.  will  acknowledge,  that  by  Chrift’s  hu- 
man righteoufnefs  he  means  that  mediatorial 
righteoufnefs  which  was  wrought  by  God  in  the 
human  nature,  I entirely  acquiefce  with  him  on 
the  point.”  This  is  truly  marvellous  ! Why  what 
could  Mr.  W.  mean  befide  ? So  this  error  proves 
to  be  no  error  at  all ! And  all  the  excellency  which 
vanifheth  away , appears  again  in  Jlatu  quo ! 

But 


I dare  not  require 
any  to  ufe  it. — True ; 
but  here  is  no  contra: 
diftion.  I do  not  re- 
quire any  to  ufe  it.  Every 
one  in  the  congregation 
may  ufe,  or  let  it  alone. 


C 90  ] 


But  we  are  not  come  to  the  end  of  the  not* 
yet,  it  contains  another  dreadful  objection.  Mr. 

W.  is  unwilling”  (truly  I am)  “ to  be  ranked 
among  the  Dtabolonians,  and  therefore  with  more 
prudence  than  candor,  has  left  the  whole  paflage 
concerning  the  EU&ion-doubters,  out  of  the  Holy 
war.  And  if  Mr.  H.  had  omitted  it  too,  it  would 
have  been  no  mors  an  impeachment  of  his  pru- 
dence, than  it  was  of  my  candor,  to  omit  in  all  the 
tracts  I abridged,  whatever  I difapproved  of.  This 
was  what  I profelfed  at  my  fetting  out.  “ I have 
endeavoured”  (thefe  are  my  very  words)  “ to 
preferve  a confiflency  throughout,  that  no  part 
might  contradiEl  any  other.  But  in  order 
to  this,  I have  been  obliged  to  omit  the  far  great- 
ell  part  of  feveral  authors. — And  in  a defign  of 
this  nature  I apprehend  mvfelf  to  be  at  full  liberty 
fo  to  do.”  Preface  p.  5.  The  abridged  Bunyan 
is  not  therefore  “ the  counterfeit  Banyan,’  This 
is  a flburifh  of  Mr.  H.’s  pen. 

19.  This  inllance  fets  nothing  againft  nothing, 
the»  Ckrijhan  library  againjt  John  Goodui/t. 


20.  This  is  an  em- 
blem of  the  righteouf- 
tiefs  of  the  faints,  both 
of  theirjuflification  and 
£dn£lification. 


John  Goodwin  con- 
tradicts this.  So  he  may : 
but  I am  not  John 
Goodwin.  So  we  have 
examined  twenty  wit- 
rielfes  ; and  not  one  of 
all  thefe  proves,  that  I 
/ contradifl  mvfelf. 

91.  I. 


[ 5'1  1 


2i.  I would  addrefs 
myfelf  to  )’ou,  who  are 
fb  ready  to  condemn 
all  that  ufe  theje  expref 
fions , as  Antinomians.. 


On  Mr.  Hervey’s 
ufinfT  one  of  them,  Mr. 

O 

W.  fays,  why  are, you? 
at  fuch  pains  to  increafe 
tire-  number  ofantino- 
mians  ?” 

But  I do  not  condemn  him  as  an  Antinomian. 
Therefore  here  is  no  contradiction. 

22.  Again.  Is  not 
this,  that  Chrijl  has  fatif 
fed  the  demands  of  the 
law  the  very  quintef- 
fence  of  Antinomian - 
ifm  P 

Whether  it  is  or  no,  it  is  wide  of  the  mark  r 
~$or  this  is  none  of  the  expreffions  in  queffion. 

23.  Again.  To  fay 
the  claims'  of  the-  law  are 
all  anjzvered,  is  not  this 
antinomianifn  without 

malk  ? 

Yes  ; but  it  is  none  of  the  expreffions  in  quef- 

tion.  So  it  is  no  contradiction. 

24-.  Once  more* 
There  are  many  expref- 
fions  in  this  dialogue, 
which  direCtly  lead  to 
: Antinomianifn. 

So  I think.  Yet  I do  not  condemn  all  that  ufe  them 
as  Antinomians.  So  here  is.no  contradiction  ft.il  L 
23.  It  is  by  faith  we  If  faith  in  the  im- 
build  on  tliis  founda-  puted  righteottfnefs  of 

Chrift 


[ 92  ] 


non  the  imputed  righte- 
oufnefs of  Chrift. 


Chrift  is  a fundamental 
principle,  what  be- 
comes of  all  thofe  who 
think  nothing  about 
imputed  righteoufnefs  ? 

Here  is  no  contradiflion.  Suppofe  I build 
my  faith  on  this  foundation,  the  imputed  righte- 
oufnefs of  Chrift,  it  does  not  follow,  it  is  fo 
fundamental  a principle,  that  all  who  think  noth- 
ing about  it,  will  be  damned. 

26.  But  is  not  a be- 
liever cloathed  with 
the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  ? Undoubtedly 
he  is. 

27.  The  mantle  of 
Chrift’s  righteoufnefs. 

Chnjlain  Library. 

28.  Chrifiian  Li- 
brary. 

29.  The  foie  caufe 
of  our  acceptance  with 
God  is  the  righteouf- 
nefs, and  the  death  of 
Chrift,  who  fulfilled 
God’s  law,  and  died  in 
our  ftead. 


Goodwin,  i.e.  Noth- 
ing. 


Goodwin  again ; No- 
thing againft  Noth- 
ing. 


Nothing. 

I cannot  prove,  that 
it  was  requifite  for 
Chrift  to fulfil  the  moral 
law,  in  order  to  his  pur- 
chafing  redemption  for 
us.  By  his  fufferings 
alone  the  law  was  fatif- 
fied. 

Undoubtedly  it  was.  Therefore  although  I 
believe  Chrifi  fulfilled  God’s  law,  yet  I do  not  af- 
firm 


C 93  ] 

firm  he  did  this,  to  pur  chafe  redemption  for  us, 
This  was  done  by  his  dying  in  our  ftead. 


Let  him  arifwer. 
John  Goodwin . 
Nothing. 

Ditto. 


go.  Verfes  of  C.  W. 

3h  32’  33-  Title  t0 

Life.  Chriifi  an  library'. 

Nothing. 

34.  The  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Chrift  is  im- 
puted to  every  one 
that  believes. 

Here  follows  another  thundring  note.  “ When 
Mr.  Wefley  preached  this  fermon,  he  told  the 
congregation.  It  was  the  fame  doElrine  which  Mr. 
Romaine , Mr.  Madan  and  Mr.  Whitejield  preach- 
ed.” So  it  was  ; Mr.  Wh.  did,  Mr.  R.  and  Ma- 
dan do  preach  the  dofirine  contained  in  that  fer- 
mon, namely,  that  “ we  are  juftified,  fanflified, 
and  glorified  merely  for  the  fake  of  what  Ghrift 
has  done  and  fuffered  for  us.”  But  did  I fay, 
this  was  all  the  doffrine  which  they  preached  ? 
No  ; and  no  man  in  his  fenfes  could  underhand 
me  fo.  I did  not  therefore  “ impofe  on  the  cre- 
dulity of  my  hearers,  by  making  them  believe” 
any  more  than  was  ftriffly  true.  But  “ did  they 
ever  hold  the  tenets  pleaded  for  in  the  books  pub- 
lifhed  by  Mr.  W.  ?”  Whether  they  did  or  no  is 
out  of  the  prefent  queftion  : they  did  and  do 
hold  the  doff  line  contained  inthat/ermon.  “Mr. 
W.  knows,  they  from  their  hearts  fubfcribe  to 
Mr.  Hervey’s Eleven  letters.”  I hope  not:  from 
any  that  do,  I expeff  no  more  mercy  than  from 


a 


t si  2 


*mad  dog.  “ But  if  he  had  con  dandy  preached, 
that  do&rine,  how  came  fo  many  to  tedify  their 
furprize  at  that  difcourfe  ”?  Becaufe  God  fet  it 
home  upon  their  hearts.  Hence  it  appeared  new, 
though  they  had  heard  it  over  and  over.  “ How 
came  they  to  prefs  the  printing  of  it,  in  order  to 
flop  the  mouths  of  gainfaycrs  ?”  Becaufe  they 
iudged  it  weuld  affeft  others  as  it  affedted  them  ; 
though  I never  thought  it  would.  “ Ladly,  if  Mr. 
W.  had  condantly  maintained  this  do&rine,  win- 
mud  poor  John  Bunyan  be  einbowelled,  to  make 
-him  look  like  Mr.  W.  ?”  No  : his  calvinifm  is 
omitted,  to  make  him  like  the  authors  going 
before  him;  “ to  prcferve  a confidency  through- 
out the  work  which  dill  is  not  done  as  I could 
wilh.  However  thofe  that  are  fond  of  his  bcwels 
may  put  them  in  again,  and  fwalfow  them  as  they 
would  the  trail  of  a woodcock. 


35.  They  to  whom 
the  righteoufnels  of 
Chcift  is  imputed,  (I 
mean,  who  truly  be- 
lieve) are  made  ligh- 
teous  by  *he  fpirit  -of 
C hr  iff. 


The  nice,  metaphy- 
fical  doftrine  of  imput- 
ed righteoufnefs,  indead 
of  furthering  men  in  ho- 
linefs,  makes  them  fatis- 
fied  without  any  holi- 
nefs  at  all. 


I have  known  a thoufand  indances  of  this.  And 
<yet  “ they  who  truly  believe  in  Chrill  are  ma  le 
righteous  by  his  fpirit.”  Where  is  the  contra- 
diftion  between  thefe  propofitions  ? 

36.  ChriJHan  Library.  > Nothing. 


37.  Chrift  is  now  the 


O 

Baxter's 


aphorifms 

§° 


rlghteoufnefs  of  all  that 
truly  believe. 

Nothing 


• again  ft 


go  For  nothing.  .Richard 
Baxter  is  not  J.  W. 


Nothing. 


38,  39,  40, 

4*.  4*. 43-'  , 

44.  To  all  believers  Goodwin  : Noth- 
the  rigbteoufnefs  of  tn£. 

Chrift  is  imputed. 

We  have  now  examined  four  and  forty  witnef- 
fes  : but  ftill  have  no  proof,  that  I contradict 
myfelf,  either  with  regard  to  the  covenant,  elc&ion 
and per fever ance  or  the  imputed  righteoufnefs  of 
Chri/L  With  regard  to  (this,  the  thing  that  we  are 
juftifred  merely  for  the  fake  of  what  'Chrift  has 
.'done  and  [offered,  I have  conftantly  and  earn eftly 
maintained,  above  four  and  thirty  years.  And 
I'have  frequently  ufed  the  phrafe  hoping  thereby 
to  pleaje  others,  for  their  good  to  edification.  But  it 
has  had  a contrary  effeft,  fince  fo  many  improve 
it  into  an  objection.  Therefore  I will  ufe  it  no 
more,  unlefs  it  occur  in  an  hymn,  or  ileal  upon 
me  unawares  : I will  endeavour  to  ufe  onlyfuch 
phrafes,  as  are  jlri&ly'fcnptura'L  And  I will  advife 
all  my  brethren,  all  who  are  in  connexion  with 
me  throughout  the  three  kingdoms,  tolayahde 
that  ambiguous,  unfcriptural  phrafe,  which  is  fo 
liable  to  be  mifinterpreted,  and  to  fpeak  in  all 
mftances,  this  in  particular,  as  ■ the  oracles  of 
‘God. 

IV. 

Suffering  the  penalty  | Suffering  the  pe- 
nalty 


C 96  ] 


is  not  all  the  law  re. 
quires. 


alty  is  all  the  law  re- 
quires, p.  132. 

So  fays  John  Good- 
win. 

But  this  does  not  prove,  that  I contradifl  myfelf. 


45.  So  fays 
Chrijlian  library , 


the 


V. 


St.  Paul  fpeaks  of 
the  law  as  a perfon. 

46.  The  law  is  here 
fpokenof  as  a perfon,  to 
which  as  to  anhufband, 
life,  and  death  are  aj- 
cribed . 


St.  Paul  does  not 
fpeak  of  the  law  as  a 
per  fon.  p.  138. 

This  way  ol  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  law  as  a per- 
fon injured  and  to  be 
Jatisjitd,  feems  hardly 
defenfible. 

There  is  no  contradiction  here.  I do  affirm, 
St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  the  law,  “ as  a perfon  to 
Which,  as  anhufband,  life  and  death  are  afcribed.  ’ 
But  I deny,  that  he  fpeaks  of  it“  as  a perfon  in- 
jured, and  to  be  fatisfied/’ 

VI. 

For  a twofold  juftffi-  Againld  a two-fold 
cation.  juflification. 

47.  Mr  F.  affirms  The  j unification  fpok- 

ju ft ifi cation  is  two-  e>i  of  by  St.  Paul  to 

fold.  the  Romans,  and  in 

our  articles  is  one  and 
no  more.  p.  133. 

Moll  true.  And  yet  our  Lord  (Matt.  xii.  37.) 

fpeaks 


[ 97  ] 


fpeaks  of  another  juftification.  Now  I think 
one  and  one  make  two. 


VII. 


For  a juftified  ftate. 

48.  The  ftate  of  a 
juftified  perfon  is  in- 
expreffibly  great  and 
glorious. 


Againft  a juftified 
ftate.  p.  i3g. 

Does  not  talking  of 
a juftified  or  fan&ified 
ftate,  tend  to  miflead 
men  ? It  frequently 
does.  But  where  is  the 
contradiftion  ! 


VIII. 


They  who  are  once 
juftified  are  juftified 
for  ever. 

49.  Chrijiian  library. 
Nothing. 


They  who  are  jufti- 
fied, may  become  total 
apoftates. 


IX. 


Works  are  a condi- 
tion of  juftification. 

P-  *34- 

,50.  Salvation  (i.  e. 
glory)  is  not  by  the 
merit  of  works,  but 

by  works  as  a condi- 
tion. 

This  propofition  does 
not  fpeak  of  juftifi- 
cation. So  it  is  noth- 
■ ing  to  the  purpofe. 
Vol.  XXII. 


Works  are  not  a 
condition  of  iuftifica- 
tion. 

I believe  no  (good 
works  can  be  previous 
to  jujlification  ; nor 
confequently  a condi- 
tion of  it. 

51.  If  a man  could 
be  holy,  before  he  was 
juftified,  itwouldfet  his 
juftification  afide. 

E Whoever 


[ S>8  ] 


Whoever  defires  to 
find  favour  with  God, 
fhould  ceafejrom  evil  and 
learn  to  do  well . Who- 
ever repents,  fhould  do 
works  meet  Jor  repent- 
ance. And  if  this  is 
not  in  order  to  find 
favour,  what  does  he 
do  them  for  ? 


52.  Thou  canft  dd 
nothing  but  fin,  till  thou 
art  juflified. 

53*  We  allow, 
that  God  juftifies  the 
ungodly,  him  that  to 
that  hour  is  hill  of  all 
evil,  void  of  all  good- 
and  him  that  worketh 
not,  that  till  that  mo- 
ment worketh  no  good- 
nefs. 


All  this  I believe  full.  “ But  Mr-  W.  fays, 
whoever  defires  to  find  favour  with  Gad  fhould 
ceafe  from  evil  and  learn  to  do  well.”  & c.  Does 
not  the  bible  fay  fo  ? Who  can  denv  it  ? Nay  but 
Mr.  W.  afks,  “If  this  be  not  in  ordpf -to  find 
favour,  what  does  he  do  them  for  ?”  And  I alk  it 


again.  Let  Mr.  H.  or  any  one  elfe^  give  me  an 
anfw'er,  So  if  there  is  any  contradiction  here,  it 
is  not  I contradifl  mvlelf,  but  lfaiaH  and  our  Lord 
that  contradift'St.  rauli 

Hs  ' 

Againft  jollification  j For  j unification  by 
by  the  a6t  of  believing,  fire  a£f  of  believing. 


541.  But  do  not.  you 
put  faith  in  the  room  of 
Chrift  and  his  righte-j 
oufhefs  ? No  : I take; 
' particular  care  to.  'pit 4 
each  oj  tkefe  in  its  proi 
per  place. 


! The  da i th  which  is 
faid  to  be  imputed1  to 
Abraham  'for  tighteolii- 
"AelV,  Lis-daith-  ppopfcrJy 
taken  5 and  next  the  righ- 
teoufnefs  of  C brill  ap- 
prehended by  faith. 

This 


V 99  ] 


This  is  pulling  each  of  tlufe ■ -in.  its  proper 
place.  The  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  is  the  meri- 
torious caufe  of  our_j  unification.  That  is  its  pro- 
per place.  Faith  in  him  that  gave  himfelf  for 
- its,  is,  the  condition  of  juftificaticfh'.')  That  is  its 
: proper. place.  - , 

* I am  juifified  through  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  as  the  price. ; through  faith  as  the  condi- 
tion. I do  not  fay,  neither  does  Goodwin,  fiilh 
is  that,  for  which  we  were  accepted!  But  we 
both  fay,  faith  is  that,:  through  which  \le  a're  ac- 
cepted. We  are  jollified,  we  are  accepted  of 
God,  for  the  fake,  of  Ghrijl,  through  faith.  Now 
certainly  there  is'  no  contradiction  in  this  ; unlefs 
a contradiftion  to  Mr.  H.’s  notions/, 

That  which  is  the 


tjg.  Although 


vye 

have  faith,  hope  and, 
love,  yet  we  mull  re- 
nounce the  merit  of 
all,  as  far  too  weak  to 
deftrvt  our  j uftificadon; 
for  which  we  mu'ft  trull 
only  to  the  merits  Of 
Chrift. 


condition  ofji}.ftification, 
is,  not  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift. 

Moll  true;  otherwife 

we  confound  the  condi- 

I ij , 

tionys ith  the  meritorious 

r m •••• 


: cauf.  fpokeh  ; of  in  the 
oppofite  column. 

XI.  ' 


Juftification  hy  faith 
talone  is  Articulus  fla'n- 
tis  vel  cadentis  ecchfice). 

All  who  do  not  hold  it. 


Juftification  by  faith 
alone  is  not  Articulus 
f antis  vel  cadentis  eccle- 
fce.  Some  may  doubt 


£ 2 


tnull 


E 100  ] 


muft  perifh 
iiigly. 


e.verlafl- 


,56.  Of  this  may  be 
affirmed,  (what  Luther 
affirms  ofjuffification  by 
faith)  that  it  is  Articu- 
lus f antis  vel  ca.de.ntis 
ecclefice , the  pillar  of 
that  faith  of  which 
alone  cometh  falva- 
tion  ; that  faith  which 
unlefs  a man  keep 
whole  and  undefiled, 
without  doubt  he  fhall 
perifh  everlaffingly. 


of  it,  yea  deny  it,  and 
yet  not  perifh  everlafl- 
ingly.  p.  127. 

A pious  churchman 
who  has  not  clear  con- 
ceptions of  juflification 
by  faith,  may  be  faved  ; 
yea,  a myflic,  (Mr. 
Law  for  inftance)  w'ho 
denies  juflification  by 
faith.  If  fo,  the  . doc- 
rine  of  juflification  by 
faith,  is  not  Articulus 
Jlantis  vel  cadcntis  ec- 
clefioe. 


It  is  certain  here  is  a feeming  contradiflion  : but 
it  is  riot  a real  one.  For  thefe  two  oppofite  pro- 
pofitions,  do  not  fpeak  of  the  fame  thing.  The 
latter  fpeaks  of juf  if  cation  by  faith : the  former, 
of  trifling  in  the  righteoufnefs  or  merits  of  Ckrfl  : 
(juflification  by  faith  is  only  mentioned  incident- 
ally in  a parenthefis.)  Now  although  Mr.  Law 
denied  juflification  by  faith,  he  might  trujl  in  the 
merits'  of  Chrift.  It  is  this,  and  this  only  that  I 
affirm,  (whatever  Luther  does,)  to  be  Articulus 
Jlantis  vel  cadentis  ecclefuz. 

XII. 


' Mr.  W.  is  a Calvi- 
nifl  in  the  point  ofjuf- 
. tification. 

57.  I think  on  juf- 


Mr.  W.  has  leaned 
too  much  toward  Calvt- 
nifm  in  this  point. 

We  have  leaned  too 

much 


[.101  ] 


tification  juft  as  I have 
done  thefe  feven  and 
twenty  years,  andjuft  as 
Calvin  does. 


much  towardCalvinifm. 
p.  141. 

But  not  in  this  point: 
not  as  to  juftification  by 
faith. 


We  ftill  agree  with  him,  that  the  merits  of 
Chrift  are  the  caufe>  faith  the  condition  of  juftifi- 
cation. 


58. 1 have  occafionally 
ufed  thofe  expreflions, , 
imputed  righteoufnefs , 
the  righteoufnefs  of 
Ckri/l, and  the  like.  ButI 
never  ufed  them  in  any 
other  fenfe  than  that 
wherein  Calvin  does. 

59.  Mr.  W.  does 
approve  the  expreflion 
why  me  ? 

My  brother  ufes  it  in 
an  hymn. 


Goodwin.  Nothing. 


Mr.  W.  does  not  ap- 
prove the  .expreflion 
why  me? 

Mr.  F.  fays,  Mr.  W. 
doubts  concerning  it. 
p.  140. 


This  proof  halts  on  both  feet.  “ But  why  did 
not  Mr.W,  ftrike  out  of  Mr.  F.’smanufcript,  the 
honourable  expreflions  concerning  himfelf?” 
Becaufe  he  thought  them  a proper  coimter- 
ballance  to  the  contumelious  expreflions  of 
Mr.  II,  „ ■ V ' 


mijci 


8 


Our 


[ 10ft  ] 


XIV. 


Our  fin  is  imputed 
to  Chrift,  and  Chrift’s 
righteoufnefs  to  us. 

60.  ? Crijlian  Library , 
61* ) Nothing. 

XV 

Both  Adam’s  fin  and 
Ckift’s  righteoufnefs 
are  imputed,  p.  131. 


Our  fin  is  not  imput- 
ed to  thrift,  nor  Chrift’s 
righteoufnefs  to  us.  p. 
i3<3* 


Neither  Adam’s  fin 
nor  Chrift’s  righteouf- 
nefs  is*  imputed. 


63.  Nothing  againft  nothing. 

In  what  fenfe  I believe  the  Chriftian  Library 
to  be  all  true,  I have  declared  above. 

XVI. 


Mr.  W 
will. 

• 1 t:  b 


holds  free- 


Mf.W.  wonders  how  ’ 
any  man  can  hold  free- 
will. 

Mr.  V.  denies  it. 


/ .it/. 

' 64.  Mr.  F.  holds  free' 
will. 

This  may  prove,  that  Mr.  W.  contradicts  Mr. 
F.  but  it  can  never  prove  that  he  contradi&s 
himfelf.  But  indeed  both  Mr.  F.  and  Mr.  W. 
abfolutely  deny  natural  free-will.  We  both 
fteddily  aflert,  that  the  will  of  man  is  by  nature. 
free  only  to  evil.  Yet  we  both  believe,  that 
every  man  has  a meafure  of  free-will  reftored  to 
him  by  grace. 

XVII. 

For  thedo&rine  of 

Merit.  ^ Merit. 

63.  “ W# 


Sul 


Againft  the  doctrine  of 


f 103  1 


€5.  *l  We  are  reT 
warded  according  to  our 
works,  yea,  becaufe  of 
our  works.  How  does 
this  differ  from  for  the 
fake  of  our  works  p 
And  how  differs  this 
from  Secundum  menta 
operwn , or  as  our  works 
defer vt  ? Can  you  fplit 
this  hair  ? I doubt  I 
cannot.” — I fay  fo  ff ill. 


And  yet  I fill  main- 
tain, “ There  is  no  me- 
rit, taking  the  word 
ftri&ly,  but  in  the  blood 
of  Chrifl : that  falvation 
is  not  by  the  merit  of 
works.  And  that  there 
is  nothing  we  are,  or 
have,  or  do,  which  can, 
flriflly  fpeaking,  deferve 
the  leaf!  thing  at  God’sj 
hand.” 


Let  Mr.  H.  if  he  can. 

And  all  this  is  no  more  than  to  fay.  Take  the 
word  merit  in  a Jlritl  fenfe,  and  I utterly  re- 
nounce it.  Take  it  in  a loofer  fenfe,  and  though 
I' never  ufe  it,  yet  I do  not  condemn  it.  There- 
fore with  regard  to  the  word  merit,  I do  not  con- 
tradibl  myfelf  at  all. 


XVIII. 


For  afingle  life. 

66.  Mr.  W.  fays,  his 
thoughts  o.n  a'  fingle 
life,  are  jufl  the  fame 
they  have  been  thefe 
thirty  years,  p.  136. 

67.  He  advifes,  that 
we  fliould  pray  againfl 
marriage. 


Againfl  a fingle  life. 

Why  then  did  Mr. 
W.  marry? — For  rea- 
fons  bell  known  to  him- 
fell. 

I advife  fingleperfons 
to  pray,  “ That  they 
may  prize  the  advan- 
tages they  enjoyf 

E 4 


Be 


[ 104  ] 

Be  this  right  or  wrong,  ftill  here  is  no  contra- 

diction. 


XIX. 


For  gay  apparel. 

68.1  o makeit  a point 
of  confcience  to  differ 
from  others  (as  the 
Quakers  do)  in  the 
Jhape  or  colour  of  their 
apparel,  is  mere  fuper- 
ftition. 


Again!}  gay  apparel 
Letafingle  intention 
to  pleafe  God  prefcribe 
both  what  cloathing 
you  fhould  buy,  and  the 
manner  wherein  it  fhall 
be  made.  ibid. — This  I 
{land  to. 

W ear  nothing  of 
a glaring  colour,  or 
made  in  the  very  height 
of  the  fafliion. 

So  I advife : but  I do  not  make  it  a point  of 
confcience.  So  here  is  no  contradiction  ftill. 

XX. 


Againft  tea. 

69.  Mr.  W.  publifh- 
ed  a track  againft  drink- 
ing tea,  and  told  the 
tea-drinkers,  he  would 
fet  them  an  example  in 
that  pieceoffelf-denial. 


For  tea. 

I did  fet  them  an 
example  for  twelve 
years.  Then  at  the 
clofeof  a confumption, 
by  Dr.  Fothergill’s  di- 
reClion,  I ufed  it  again. 


But  muft  not  a man  be  fadly  in  want  of  argu- 
ment, who  ftoops  fo  low  as  this  ? 

XXI. 


For  baptifm  by  fprink- 
ling. 


Againft  baptifm  by. 
fprinkling. 

70.  As 


EL  1&5-  j 


; 70.  As  there  is  no’ 
clear  proof  of  dipping- 
in  fcripture,  fo  there  is 
very  probable  proof  to 
the  contrary. 


71.  Chrift  no, where, 
as  far  as  I can  find,  re- 
quires dipping,  but  only 
baptizing  ; which  word 
fignifies  to  pour  on,  or 
f pr inkle i as  well  as  to  dip. 


When  Mr.  W.  bap- 
tized Mrs..L.  S.  he  held 
her  fo  long  under  wa- 
ter, that  her  friends  - 
fcreamed  out,  thinking 
Hie  had  been  drowned. 

When  ? Where  ? I 
never  heard  of  it  before. 

Why  then  did  you  at 
Savannah  baptize  all 
children  by  immerfion, 
unlefis  the  parents  certi- 
fied, they  were  weak. 

Not becaufe Iliad  any 
fcruple,  but  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  rubric.  So 
here  is  no  felf-incon- 
filtcncy.  ...  . 


XXII.  > 


Mr.W.  never  adopted 
Mr.  Law’s  fcheme. 


Mr.-  W . ' highly  ap- 
proved of  Mr.  Law. 


Thefe  propofitions  are' not  contradiftory.  .1 
might  highly  approve  of  him,  and.  yet  -not  adopt, 
his ficlieme.  How  will  Mr.  H.  prove  that  I 
did?  Or  that  I contradifl  myfelf  on  this  ..head  ? 
Why  thus. 


72.  I had  been  eight 
years  at  Oxford,  before 
I,  read  any  of  Mr.  Law’s 
writings.  And  when  I 
did,  I was  fo  far  from 


To  infiruft,  a perfon 
in  the  nature  of  Chrifti- 
anity,  I.  fixed  an  hour  a 
day,  to  read  with  her  in 
Mr,  Law’s  treatife  on 


e5 


making 


[ io6  ] 


making  them  my  creed, 
that  I had  objections  to 
almoft  every  page,  p. 

»S5-;  ■ 


Chriftian  Perfection. — • 
I did  fo.  And  an  ex- 
cellent book  it  is,  tho’ 
liable  to  many  objecti- 
ons. 

73.  Another  little 
company  of  us  met:  we 
fung,  read  a little  of  Mr. 
Law,  and  then  conver- 

fed.  ii 

True : but  neither  does  this 'prove  that  l adopt - 


ed  his  fcheme. 

73.  1 believe  the 

myjlic  writers,  to  be  one 
great  Antichrift. 


74.  Mr.  F.  affirms, 
Solomon  is  the  chifefbf 
7 nyjlics:  and  Mr.  W. 
acquiefces ! in  the  affir- 


mation. 


Enoch  and  Elijah1  are  in’ 
’heaven. 


I retraCl  this.  It  is 
far  too  flrong.  But  ob-  • 
ferve ! I never  contra - 
dialed  it  till  now. 

I do  not.  I affirm  no 
fuch  thing.  Therefore 
‘all  Mr.  H.  builds  upon 
this,  is  only  a caflle  in 
the  air. 

XXIII. 

Enoch  and  Elijah  are 
•not  in  heaven. 

Enoch  and  Elijah  are 
not  in  heaven,  but  only 
in  paradife.  p.  138. 


75.  Enoch  and  Eli- 
jah entered  at  once  into 
the  higheft  degree  of 
glory. 

Notes  on  the  New  Teftament,  John  iii.  13. 
firft  edition. 


But 


[ 107  ] 

But  why  is  Mr.  H.  fo  careful  to  name  the 
firfl  edition  ? Becaufe  in  the  fecond  the  mi  hake 
is  correfited.  Did  he  know  this  ? And  could  he 
avail  himfelf  of  a miftake,  which  he  knew  was 
removed  before  he  wrote  ! 

XXIV. 

For  finlefs  perfection.  | AgainftfinlefsperfeCtion, 

Upon  this  head  Mr.  H.  employs  his  whole 
ftrength.  I will  therefore  the  more  carefully 
weigh  what  he  advances  : only  premifing,  before 
I defcend  to  particulars,  two  general  obfervati- 
ons. 

1.  Out  of  the  twenty-five  palfages  ’cited  for 
perfeElion , feventeen  are  taken  fro  nr  my  brother’s 
hymns.  Thefe  therefore  {trike  wide.  What- 
ever they  prove,  they  cannot  prove,  that  I con- 
tradict myfelf. 

2.  Out  of  the  twenty-five  cited  againft  perfec- 
tion, fourteen  are  cited  from  the  fermon  on  fin  in 
believers.  Do  I mean,  in  filch,  believers  as  are 
perfeBed  in  love?  Mr.  H.  himfelf  knows  I do 
not.  Why  then  every  one  of  thefe  fourteen 
arguments,  is  an  abufe  both  upon  me  and  his 
readers-  It  is  the  molt  egregious  trifling  that 
can  be  conceived.:  I affirm,  “ Thofe  perfected 
in  love,  are  faved  from  inward  fin/’  To  prove 
I- contradift  myfelf  herein,  fourteen  paffages  are 
alledged,  wherein  I affirm,  “ We  are  not  faved 
from  inward  fin,  till  we  are  perfected  in  love,” 

g.  The  fame  fallacy  is  ufed  in- every  infiance., 
when  fome  of  my  words  are  fet  in  oppofition  to 
E 6 others. 


[ 1°8  ] 


others.  The  fum  is,  weak  believers , babes  in 
(Thrift,  are  not ; adult  believer s,  are  faved  from 
inward  fin.  And  I {fill  aver,  there  is  no  contra- 
diction in  this,  if  I know  what  a contradiction 
means. 

Now  to  the  proofs. 


They  are  fenfible  of 
pride  remaining  in  their 
hearts. 


76.  The  Son  hath 
made  them,  who  are 
thus  born  oj  God,  free 
from  pride. 

Thev  ? Who  ? Not  thofe  who  are  thus  born 
of  God , who  are  per  ft  [led  in  love. 


77.  From  the  iniquity 
of  pride,  and  felf,  I fhall 
be  free. 

That  is,  when  I am 
perfeBed  in  love, 

78.  They  are  freed 
from  xvandringsxa pray- 


er. 


are 


God’s  children  are 
daily  fenfible  of  pride 
zn&Jelf-will.  That  is,  till 
they  are  perfeBed  in  love. 

Is  this  fpoken  of  all 
believers?  Mr.  H.  knows 
it  is  not. 

True,  adultCJviflians. 


79.  Chriftians 
faved  from  all  fin,  from 
all  unrighteoufnefs. 

8o.They  (adult  Chrif- 
tians)  are  freed  from  all 
evil  thoughts  and,  evil  I Jin  of  every  kind, 
tempers. 

81.  They  (fathers  in 
(Thrift)  are  freed  from 


The  (infant)  children 
of  God  have  in  them 


The  evil  nature  op- 
pofes  the  Spirit  even  in 
evil 


[ 109  3 


evil  thoughts. 


82.  Chrift  was  free 
from  fmful  thoughts- 
So  are  they  likewife 
( adult  believers.) 

83.  I believe,  fame 
would  fay,  “We  trull 
we  do  keep  the  whole 
law  of  love. 


believers — Till  they  are 
fathers  in  Chrift. 

This  doctrine  (that 
all  believers  are  thus 
free)  is  wholly  new. 

Believers  are  confci- 
ous  of  not  fulfilling  the 
whole  law  of  love  : not 
till  they  are perfeFted  in 
love. 

The  reader  will  pleafe  to  remember  all  along, 
the  queftion  is  not,'  Whether  the  doblrine  be 
right  or  wrong : (that  has  been  elfewhere  confi- 
dered)  but  whether  I contradift  mvfelf?  Up- 
wards of  fourfeore  witnefies  have  been  already 
examined  on  this  head  : but  no  contradiction  is 
proved  yet. 

84.  Some  do  love 
God  with  all  their  heart 
and  Jlrength. 

85.  From  that  hour , 
indwelling  fin,  thou  haft 
no  place  in  me. 

86.  A finlefs  life  we 
live. 

87.  While  one  evil 
thought  can  rife,  I am 
not  born  again. 

In  the  note  annexed  there  are  many  miftakds. 

1.  “The 


They  (weak  believers) 
do  notlove  God  with  all 
their  heart  and Jlrength. 

Believers  are  not  de- 
livered from  the  being 
of  fin,  till  that  hour. 

Chrijlian  Library , 

Nothing. 

My  brother  faid  fo 
once:  I never  did. 


[ 110  ] 

l.  w The  author  of  this  hymn  did  not  allow  any 
one  to  be  a believer,  even  in  the  lozoe/l  Jen/e, 
while  he  found  the  lead  flirting  of  fin.”  He 
did : but  he  took  the  word  born  again  in  too 
high  a fenfe.  2.  Yet  “ he  fuppofes  the  moft 
advanced  believers  are  deeply  fenfible  .of  their 
impurity/’  He  does  not:  neither  he  nor  I fup- 
pofe  any  fuch  thing.  3.  “ He  tells  us  in  his  note 
on  Eph.  vi.  13.  the'  war.  is  perpetual. True: 
the  war  with  principalities  and  powers  ; but  not 
that  with  jlejh  and  alood.  g.  So  you  canpot  reply, 
“ Mr.  Vd.Jpeaks  of  believers  of  different Jlature*  ' 
Indeed  I can  : and  the  forgetting  this  is  the  main 
caufe  of  Mr.  H.’s  humbling  at  every  flap.  5. 
“ The  pofition,  that  (any)  believers  are  totally 
free  from  fin,  is  diametrically  opposite  to  Calvi- 
nihu.”  This  is  no  mrftakc.  Therefore  mod 
Calvinids  hate  it  with  a perfeft  hatred.  6.. 
“ Many  of  the  groffefl  of  thefe-  contradictions, 
were  publifned  nearly  at  the  fame  time  : and 
probably  Mr,.  W.  was  the  fame- day  correCting- 
the  prefs,  both  for  andagaind  SinlefsTerfedlion.” 
An  ingenious  thought;  But  as  to  toe  trutrl,  or 
even  probability  of  it.  I cannot  fay  much.  7.. 
“ Thefe  hymns  contain  the  joint  fentiments  of 
Mr.  John  and  Mr.  Charles  Wefley/'  Not  al- 
ways; fo  that  if  jome  of  them  contradift  others,, 
it  does  not  prove,  that  I contradict  myfelh 

88.  Chrid  in  a pure  I There  are  dill  two 
&rd Jinle/s  heart.  J contrary  principles  in 

1 believers,'  nature  and 
grace*. 


f »<  3 


89.  Quite  expel  the 
tar nal  mind. 

...ii-,  • : ; ' 

90.  From  every  ' evil 
motion  freed'. 

But  how  floes  this 
myfelf  ? 

91.  A’i  the  fruggle 
then  is  o'er. 

92.  Iwrejlle  not.nw. 

02.  God  Is  thine: 
difdain  to  Icm  the  ene- 
my within. 


grace.  True,  till  they 
areperfefl  in  love. 

That' there  .is  .no  fin 
i n a {tv  e a k)  bel  i.cv  cr , no 
carnal.fr.ind,  is  contrary 
to  the  word  of  God. 

Flow  naturally  do 
men  think,  fin  has  na 
motion ; therefore  it  has 
no  being? 

prove,  that  I coiritrlidift 
1 

Thefe  are  two  ofany 
brother's  1 exp  re  (lions, 
which  1 clonot  fubfcribe 
to.  a.jr.d il-j  , . ; , 

j ' Letats  watch  andipfay 
I agah&ft  the ■ enemy  within* 


Are  thefe  lines  cited  as  implying,  the  enemy 
was  not  within?  Mod  unhappily*-  They  mean* 
the  enemy  which  -is  zyitjiin.  ■ For  the  very  next 
words,  which  Mr.  H.  hjmfe’lf  cited  but  the  page 
before,  are,  • ' .■  , 


God  fall  in  thy 
And  make  an 


flefli  appear, 
lend  of -fin. 


94,  We  wrcjlli  npf  j W,enirfle both  with 
with  fefi  and.  Uopd,  [jifs  and  blood  and  with. 

when 


[ ] 


when  we  are  grown  upj 
in  Chrift. 

No  contradiffion  yet 

95.  Sin  Jliall  not  in 
our  flefh  remain. 

96.  I cannot  reft  if 
fin  in  me  remains. 

97*  1 

98.  f My  Brother’s. 

99*  * 

100.  “ Do  not  the 
beft  of  men  fay,  We 
groan,  being  burden’d 
with  the  workings  of 
inbred  corruption  ?” 
This  is  not  the  mean- 
ing of  the  text  ; the 
whole  context  fhews, 
the  caufe  of  that  groan- 
ing was,  their  long- 
ing to  be  with  Chrift 
joi.  Nor  does  he 
that  is  born  of  God 
fin  by  infirmities  : for 
his  infirmities  have  no 
concurrence  of  his  will. 
And  without  this,  they 
are  not  properly  Jins 


principalities ; while  we 
are  babes  in  Chrift. 

I ,-»■  « - 'f  ~)  i 

Still  he  (the  babe  in  . 
Chrift)  feels  the  remains 
of  the  old  man. 

Sin  remains  in  them 

ft  ill.  In  all  weak 

believers. 


We  groan  being  bur- 
dened with  numberlefs 
infirmities, temptations, 

and  fins. This  is 

wrong.  It  is  not  the 
meaning  of  the  text.  I 
will  put  it  out,  if  I live 
to  print  another  edi- 
tion. So  iuft  one  fhot  in 
an  hundred  has  hit  the 
mark. 

Many  infirmities  re- 
main, whereby  we  are 
daily  fubject  to  what  are 
called  fins  of  infirmity. 
And  they  are  in  fome 
fenfe  fins  ; as  being  (in- 
voluntary) tranfgref- 
fions  of  the  perfeft  law. 

That 


[ i*3  ] 

That  is,  they  are  not 
voluntary  tranfgreffions 
of  a known  law. 

I fee  no  contradiction  here  : but  if  there  was, 
it  ought  not  to  have  been  mentioned.  It  could 
not  by  any  generous  writer  ; finceMr.  Hill  him- 
felf  tefiifies,  it  was  expunged  before  he  mention- 
ed it  ! But  fuppofe  it  flood  as  at  firft,  I flatly, 
denv,  that  it  is  any  contradiction  at  all. 
Thefe  infirmities  may  be  in  fome  finfe  fins  ; and 
yet  not  properly  fo  : that  is,  fins  in  an  improper, 
but  not  the  proper , fen  ft  of  the  word. 

13.  But  “ Mr.W.  has  not  yet  determined,  whe- 
ther Jins  of fuprife  bring  the'  foul  under  condemna- 
tion or  not.  p.  111.  However  it  were  to  be  wifh- 
ed,  that  fins  of  furprifz  and  fins  of  infirmity 
too  were  to  be  declared  mortal  at  the  next  con- 
ference ; fince  feveral  perfons  who  pretend  to  re- 
verence Mr.  W.  not  only  fall  into  outrageous 
pajfons,  but  cozen  and  over-reach  their  neigh- 
bours : and  call  thefe  things  little,  innocent  infir- 
mities. Reader,  weigh  well  thofe  words  of  Mr. 
W.  “ We  cannot  fay,  either  that  men  are  or 
are  not  condemned  for  fins  of  furprize.”  And 
yet  immediately  before  he  calls  them,  tranfgref- 
Jions  as  here  he  calls  them  fins.  Strange  divini- 
ty this,  for  one  who  for  near  forty  years  part  has 
profeffed  to  believe  and  teach  that  fin  is  the  tranf- 
greffion  of  the  law , and  that  tkewages  offin  is  death." 
He  then  brings  three  inftances  of  fins  of  fuprife 
(over  and  above  cozening  and  over-reaching ) drunk - 

ennefs, 


r ?n  3 

ennefs,,  fornication,  and  flying  into,  a pa  [fan  arid, 
knocking  a man  dozen  : and  concludes,  “ Mr.  W. 
had  better  fleep  quietly,  then  rife  from  his  own 
pillow  in  order  to  lull  his  hearers  afieep,  upon 
the  pillow  of  falfe  fecurity,  by  fpeaking  in  fo 
flight  a manner  of  fin,  and  making  the  breach  of 
God's  holy  law  a mere  nothing.” 

14.  This  is  a charge  indeed!  And  it  is  per- 
feQly  new  : I believe  it  was  never  advanced- 
before.  It  will  not  therefore  be  improper  to  give 
it  a thorough  examination.  It  is  founded  on 
fome  paffages  in  the  fennon  on  Rom.  viii.  1.  Ihere 
is  therefore  no  condemnation  to  than  that  are  in 
Chrif  JeJks,  who  walk  not  after  the  fejli , hut  after 
the  Spirit.  I11  order  to  give  a clear  view  of  the 
doctrine  therein  delivered,  I mull  extract  the  fum 
of  the  fermon. 

I fliew,  I.  Who  are  tliofe  that  are  in  Chiifi 
ffefus:  “ Tliofe  who  are  joined  to  the  Lord  in  one. 
fpirit,  who  dwell  in  Chriftand  Chrift  in  them.  And 
whofoever  ahideth  in  him  finneth  not,  walketh  not 
after  the  fkfhj  that  is  corrupt  nature.  Thefe  abftain 
frqin  every  defign,  and  word  and  work,  to  which 
the,  corruption,  cf  nature  leads,  fp.  145.)  They 
walk  ajter  the  Spin!  both' in  their  hearts  and  lives. 
By  him  they  are  led  into  everv  hciv  deGre,  into 
every  divine,  and  heavenly  temper,  till  every 
thought  of  their  heart  is  hohnefs  to  the  Lord. 

“ They  are  alfo  led  by  him  into  all  holinefs  of 
converfation.  They  exercifc  themfelves  day  and 
night,  to  do  only  the  things  which  pleafe  God  : 

ia 


[ J15xi]  1 

in  all  their  outward  behaviour,,  to  follow  him 
who  left  us  an,  example,  that  we  flight  tread  in  his '■ 
fleps  : iii  all  their  interpourf^with  their  neighs  , 
bpur,,  to  walk  in.jufkice;  mercy,,  and  truth  : and  ] 
wha.tfoe.ver  they  do  in  every  circumilance  of  life: 
to  do  alLto  iue  glory  ofQorff  p.,  246.  , 

Is  here  any  room  for  “ cozening  and  overreach- 
ing?” For  “flying'  int,o  outrageous pafhons  Tf 
Does  this  give  anv  countenance,  for  “ knocking 
men  ;dowii  Pi’ For  “ drunkennefs,  or  fornica- 
tion ?” 

.But  lei  us  go. on  to  the  Ildhead.  “ To  whom 
isr.theYfrno.  condeviYiation,  ? To  believers  in  Chrifi 
who  thus-,  walk  .after  the  fpirit,  there  is  no  con- 
demnation; for  their;  ppfi.fins,  (Ip.  127.)  Neither 
for  prefent,  fifty  ■fca&fgTpflipg'  tjie  command- 
ments of  God  for -they  do  not  traufgrefs  them. 
This  ?Ir  thetpr ppfpf  their  love  of  Gad,  that  they  keep 
his  commandments,  (p.  -148.)'  They  are  not  con- 
demned, 3.  for  inward  fm , fo  long  as  they  do- 
not  yield  thereto.;  fo  long  as  they  maintain  a con- 
tinual . war  with,  all  fa,  with  pride, 
delire,  fo.  that-  the,  ffefh-  hath,  no  dominion  .ovey 
them-,  but  they  flill  walk  aftpr-  .the  Spirit;.'’  ip. 
156.)  Is  any  encouragement  given  here  to  co- 
zeners or  whoremongers  ? 

It  follows.  “ They  areyrot  condemned  for  fins 
of  infirmity,  as  they  are  11  fu  ally  called,  perhaps 
it  were  advifable  rather  to  call  them  infirmities, 
that  we-  mav  not-  feem  to give  any : countenance  to 
fin,  cr  to  extenuate  it  in  any  degree,  by  thus 

coupling 


c 'ns  ] : 

coupling  it  with  infirmity.  But  ifwemuflufe 
fuch  an  ambiguous  and  dangerous  expreffion)  by 
fins  of  infir  n \ I would  mean,  fuch  involuntary 
failings,  as  the  faying  a thing  we  believe  true, 
though  in  facl  it  prove  to  befalfe  ; or  the  hurting 
our  neighbour,  without  knowing  or  defigning  it  j 
perhaps  when  edefignedto  do  him  good.”  p.  151. 

What  pretence  has  Mr.  H.  from  thefe  words 
to  flourifh  awr  upon  my  “ f range  divinity  ?" 
And  to  rep e fe  u me  as  giving  men  a handle,  to 
term  grofs  fins  innocent  infirmities  ? 

But  now  comes  the  main  point.  “ It  is  more 
difficult  to  determine,  concerning  thofe  which 
are  ufually  ftiled  fins  of  fur  prize,  (p.  152.)  As 
when  one  who  commonly  in  his  patience  pof- 
felTes  his  foul,  on  a hidden  or  violent  temptation, 
fpeaks  or  afts  in  a manner  not  confiftent  with 
the  royal  law  of  love.”  (For  inftance.  You  have 
the  gout.  A carelefs  man  treads  on  your  foot. 
You  violently  puffi  him  away,  and  it  may  be  cry 
out,  “ Get  away  : get  you  out  of  my  fight.”) 
“ Perhaps  it  is  not  eafy,  to  fix  a general  rule 
concerning  tranfgreffions  of  this  nature.  We 
cannot  fay  either  that  men  are,  or  that  they  are 
not  condemned  for  fins  oj fuprize  in  general:’  p. 

*<53- 

“ Reader,  fays  Mr.  H.  let  me  beg  thee  to 
weigh  well  the  foregoing  words.”  I fay  fo  too.  I 
go  on.  “ But  it  feems,  whenever  a believer  is 
overtaken  in  a fault,  there  is  more  or  lels  con- 
demnation, as  there  is  more  or  lefs  concurrence 

“r 

o: 


Cl  1:7  ] 

of  his  will Therefore  fome  fins  of  furprize 

bring  much  guilt  and  condemnation.  For  in 
fome  inffances  our  being,  furprized  may  be 
r owing  to  fome  culpable  negleft,  ortoafleepi- 
nefs  of  foul,  which  might  have  been  prevented 
or  fhaken  off,  before  the  temptation  came.  The 
falling'  even  by  furprize  in  fuch  an  inftance  ex- 
pofes  the  finner  to  condemnation  both  from  God 
and  his  own  confcience. 

“ On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be  fudden 
affaults,  which  he  hardly  could  forefee,  by  which 
he  may  be  borne  down,  fuppofe  into  a degree 
of  anger,  or  thinking  evil  of  another,  with  fcarce 
any  concurrence  of  the  will.  Now  in  fuch  a 
cafe  the  jealous  God  would  undoubtedly  fhew 
him,  that  he  had  done  foolifhly.  He  would  be 
convinced  of  having  fwerved  from  the  perfefr 
law,  and  confequently  grieved  with  a godly  bor- 
row, and  lovingly  ajhamed  before  God.  Yet 
need  he  not  come  into  condemnation.  In  the 
midft  of  that  borrow  and  fhame,  he  can  ftill  fay. 
The  Lord  is  my Jlrength  and  my  fong  : he  is  alfo 
become  my  falvation p.  154. 

Now  what  can  any  impartial  perfon  think  of 
Mr.  H.4s  eloquence  on  this  head  ? What  a repre- 
fentation  has  he  given  of  my  doflxine,  with  re- 
gard to  infirmities  and  fins  of  furprize?  Was 
ever  any  thing  more  unjuft  ? Was  ever  any 
thing  more  cruel  ? Do  I here  “ lull  my  readers 
afleep  on  the  pillow  of  falfe  fecurity  ?”  Do  I 
“ fpeak  in.  a light  manner  of  fin  ?”  Or  “ make 

the 


[ ii8  ] 

the  breach  of  God’s  holy  law  a mere  nothing  P* 
'What  excufe  can  be  made  for  pouring  out  all 
this flkJod-of calumny  ?-  Can  anv  thing  be  termed 
bearing  fal 'ft  uiitmjs  agdinjl  our  neighbour , if  this 
is  hot-?  Am  f indeed,  a loofe  cafuifl  ? Do  any 
of  my  writings  give  "countenance  to  fin  ? Not 
fo:  God  khdw-s,  Mr.  Hill  know's,  Mr.  Romaine 
'(who  CoVrfefled  this  tracij  knows  it  well.  So  does 
Mr.  Madan  : v-ea  fo  do  all  who  read  what  I 
write,  unlefs  they  Wilfully  (hut  their  eyes. 

lg.  “ Thu'S’ "have  I at  length,  fays  Mr.  H. 
-brought  this  extraordinary  Jctnago  %o  a cdnclu- 
•fion.  Notbecaufe  I could  nhf  have  found  many 
more  inconfiftencids.” p.  142.  Yes,  another  him- 
•dred,  fuch  as  thele.  But  lee  a group  of  them 
at  once ! “ H is-  extra®  from  bifiiop  Beveridge, 
•is  flatly  contradicted  hT-liis  edition  of  John  Good- 
win. Again,  Gobdwin  is  flatly,  contradifted,  bv 
his  fermon  dti  The  Lord  our  righteoufnef*  This 
Tcnnon  is  contradicted  in  his'  lJr  eferva'tive'r.gauijl 
un fettled  notions  in  religion.  1 his  Prefervative  is 
itfelf  contradi-6led,  by  hismbfiraet  from  Dr.  Pref- 
ton.  This  abflraft  -iafitfelf  contradicted,  by  his 
■edition  of  Baxter 'i'Attkchifih’i.  And  thefe-  are 
'flatly  contradifted/Wdiis  ettraCt  from  bi (hop 
Beveridge.  And  this  is  again  flatly  contradicted, 
by  his  own  thoughts  orr  rmputeJ  right eoufiufs. 
Thus  the  whee  funs  round!"’  Thus  Mr.  H.’s 
head  runs  rohnd, 'with  more  hade  than  good 
fpeed.  (If  this  curibhs  paragraph -be  not  rather, 

•as  I fufpecl,  lupplied  by  another  hand  ; even  as 

Sternhold’s 


t ] 


-Sf'ernhold’s  pfalms  are  now  and  then  eked  out, 
by  N.  N.  or  William  Wifdom.)  He  forgets, 
. that  generals  prove  nothing  ; and  that  he  has  fad- 
dy hilled  in  his  particular  charges  : juft  an  hund- 
red out  of  an  hundred  and  one,  having  proved 
Aroid.  So  that  notv  I have  full  right  to  fay, 
“ Whence  arifes  this  charge  ol  inconfiftency 
and  fe  1 f~co  1 1 trad i tlio n ? Merely  from  draining, 
Avmding  to  and  fro,  and  di  dotting  a few  inno- 
cent words.  For  wherein  have  I contradicted 
tnvlelf.  takirtd  words  in  their  unforced,  natural 
conllruction,  in  any  one  refpeef  with  regard  to 
judiFication, fiiice  the  year  1738  -?” 

16.  But  Mr.  H.'s  head  is  fo  full  of  my  felf- 
' inconfiftency,  that  he  dill  blunders  on.  “ Mr. 
W.’s  wavering  difpofition,  isiiot  an  affair  of yef- 
terday.  Mr-  Delamotte  fjralte  to  him  on  this 
head,  more  than  fhirty  years  agb.”  p.  143.  He 
never  foake  to  me  on  t/hrkehd  at  all.  Afk  him. 

I i < , • , ' ; 1 • , , ' . - 

He  is j dill  alive.  He  has  been  tod  from  one 


fyftein  to  another,  from  the  - time  of  ids  ordina- 
tion to  the prefent  'moment.’’  Nothing  can  be 
.morefalfet  as  hot  only  my  johfnals,  but  dill  my 
teft/fy. ' “ Arid  he  hiinfelf -cannot  but 
'aclniowled^e,  thaf'botlr  his  friends  and  foes  have 
accufed  hint  of  his  imfettl'ed  principles  in  reli- 


gion.” Idere  .'is  artifice  ! Would  any  man  liv- 
drier,  who" does.hot  know  tire  fact,  fnppofethata 
gentleman  would  face  a man  down,  in  fo  perelnp- 
tory  a manner,  dinlefs  the  tiling  were  abfolutely 
strue  ?'  And  yet  it  is  quite  the  reverfe,  “ He 

him- 


[ 12°  ] 

himfelf  cannot  but  acknowledge/’ — I acknow- 
ledge no  fuch  tiling.  My  friends  have  oftner  ac- 
cufed  me  of  being  too  ftiff  in  my  opinions,  than 
too  flexible.  My  enemies  have  accufed  me  of 
both;  and  of  every  thing  befides.  The  truth  is, 
from  the  year  1725,  I faw  more  and  more  of 
the  nature  of  inward  religion,  chiefly  by  reading 
the  writings  of  Mr.  Law,  and  a few  other  myjiic 
writers.  Yet  I never  was  “ in  the  way  oitny/h- 
cifm ” at  all  : this  is  another  miftake.  Although 
I did  not  clearly  fee,  that  we  are  faved  by  faith , 
till  the  year  1738,  I then  publifhed  the  fermon 
on  Salvation  by  Faith,  every  fentence  of  which 
I fubfcribe  to  now. 

17.  Tut  he  was  “ too  fcrupulous  about  ufing 
the  word  condition."  (p.  143.)  I was  fo,  till  I was 
convinced  by  Dr.  Church,  that  it  was  a very  in- 
nocent word,  and  one  that  none  of  the  reform- 
ers, Englipi  or  foreign,  objefted  to.  All  this 
time  I leaned  towards  Calvin  fin,  though  more  in 
expreflion  than  fentiment.  “ And  now  he  fair- 
ly gives  up  the  neceflity  of  a clear  belief  of  jufti- 
fication  by  faith  alone!”  That  is,  I fay,  A man 
may  be  faved,  who  is  not  clear  in  his  judgment 
concerning  it.  I do : I dare  not  “ rank  Mr. 
Law,  and  all  his  admirers,  among  the  hofts  of 
Diabolonians .”  Nay  more  : “ I have  proved, 
that  he  makes  man’s  righteoufnefs  the  procuring 
caufe  of  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  his  falva- 
tion,  from  frjl  to  lafl,  to  depend  upon  the  in- 
trinfic  merit  of  his  own  unajffled  works.”  p.  144. 

I think 


[ 12.1  ' 3 


I think  Mr.  H.  “ is  now  got  to  his  he  plus  ultra:' 
urvLefs  he  has  a mind  to  prove,  that  Mr.  W.  is  an 
horfe. 

1 8.  “ I eXpeft  you  will  tell  me,  that  I have 
expofed  Mr.  W.  particularly  in  the  loregoing 
contrail.  That  Mr.  W.  is  expofed,  I allow ; but 
that  I have  expofed  him,  I deny.”  Who  was  it 
then  ? Why,  “ out  ol  his  own  mouth  all  that  I 
have  brought  againft  him  proceeds.” 

Not  fo.  All  that  I have  wrote  (except  one 
fentence  out  of  an  hundred  and  one)  is  well  con- 
fident with  itlelf,  provided  the  words  be  taken 
in  their  plain,  natural  ferlfe,  and  one  part  of 
them  in  connexion  with  the  other.  But  who- 
ever will  ufe  Mr.  H.’s  art  of  twilling  and  tortur- 
ing woirds,  mav  make  them  fay  any  thing,  and 
extraft  pelagianilm,  arianifm,  or  any  thing  he 
pleafes,  out  of  anything  that  can  be  fpoken. 
Bv  this  art  he  that  cries  out  againft  Mr.  F.’s  art, 
has  found,  that  is,  created  above  an  hundred  con- 
tradictions in  my  works,  and  “ could  find  abund- 
ance more.”  Ay,  five  hundred  : under  his  form- 
ing hand,  contradictions  fpring  up  as  quick 
as  mulhrooms.  And  he  that  reads  only  (as  is  the 
manner  of  a thoufand  readers)  the  running  title  at 
the  top  of  each  page, 


For  ele&ion. 

For  finlefs  perfection. 

For  imputed  righteouf- 
nefs. 

VOL.  XXII. 


Againft  ele'dicn- 
Againft  finlefs  perfec- 
tion. 

Againft  imputed  righ- 
tebtifnefs, 

F And 


(j  122  ] 

And  fo  on  ; will  readily  fay,  “ What  a heap 
of  contradictions,  flat,  palpable  contradictions 
is  here?’’  Here!  Where?  “ Why,  at  the. top 
of  every  page.”  True  ; and  there  lies  the  flrengih 
of  the  caufe.  The  propofitions  them'd  Ives  are 
plain  enough,  but  neither  Mr.  H.  nor  a.  y man 
living  can  prove  them. 

19:  But  if  fo,  if  all  this  laboured-  contrafl,  be 
only  the  work  of  a creative  imagination,  what 
has  Mr.  H.  the  cat’s-paw  of  a party,  been  doing 
all.  this  time  ? Has  he  not  been  abundantly 
doing  evil,  that  good  might  come,  that,  the  dear 
decree  of  reprobation  might  {land  ? Has  he  not 
been  faying  all  manner  cj  evil  fa! fly,  pouring  out 
ftlander  like  water,  a fir  It,  a fecond,  a third  time, 
again  ft  one  that  never  willingly  offended  him  ? 
And  what  recornpence  can  he  make  (be  his  opi- 
nions right  or  wrong}  for  having  fo  deeply  in- 
jured me,  without  any  regard  either  to  mercy  or 
truth?  If  he  (not  I myfelf)  has  indeed  expofeS 
une  in  fo  unjnft  and  inhuman  a manner,  what 
amends  can  he  make,  as  a chriftian  and  a gentle- 
man, to  God,  to  me,  or  to  the  world  ? Can  be 
gather  up  the  foul  poifonous  water  which  he  has 
fo  abundantly  poured  out  ? If  he  (till  infills,  he 
has  done  me  no  wrong,  he  has  only  fpoksn  the 
truth  in  love,  "'if  he  is  refolved  at  all  hazards  to 
fight  it  out,  I will  me.pt  him  on  his  own  ground. 
Waving  all  things  elfe,  I fix  on  this  point,  “ Is 
that  fcurrilous  hotch-potch,  which  he  calls  a 
■Farrago  true  or  faille  ?”  Will  lie  defend  or  re- 
tract 


[ 123  J 

traft  it  ? An' hundred  and  one  propofitions  are 
produced  as  mine,  which  are  affirmed  to  eontra- 
didt  other  propofitions  of  mine.  Do  I in  thefe 
hundred  and  one  inllances,  contradxtl  myfelj?  or 
do  I not  ? Obfe-rve : the  queflion  is,  whether  I 
contradift  myjelf?  Not  whether  I contradi Etfoine 
body  d-Je ; be  it  Mr.  Baxter,  Goodwin,  Fletcher  ; 
tire  Chrillian  Library  ; or  even  my  own  brother, 
Thefe  are  not  myjelf.  “ Nay,  but  you  have  pub- 
liffied  them.”  If  I publilh  them  ten  times  over, 
(till  the  are  not  niyfdf  I infill  upon  it,  that 
no  man’s  words  but  my  own  can  ever  prove,  that 
/ contradict  myjelf.  New,  if  Mr.  Id.  fc  or  ns  to 
yield,  let  him  fall  to  work,  and  prove  by  my  own 
words,  that  / contradidl  myJHJ  (that  is  the  pre- 
fent  queflion)  in  thefe  hundred  inflances.  If  he 
can  prove  this,  I am  a blunderer  ; I mull  plead 
guilty  to  the  charge.  If  he  cannot,  he  is  one 
of.  the  moll  cruel  and  inhuman  Ilanderers,  that 
ever  fet  pen  to  paper. 

20.  I blefs  God,  that  the  words  cited  from 
the  fermon  on  Catkolic  [pint,  do  quite  “ come 
to  myfelf:”  not  indeed  as  I am  painted  by  Mr. 
H.  but  as  I really  am.  From  the  year  17^8,  I 
have  not  been  “ unfettled  as  to  any  fundamen- 
tal doFtrine  of  the  gofpel.”  No,  not  in  one  : I 
am  as  clear  of  this  charge,  as  of  that  wonderful 
one  advanced  in  the  note,  p.  146.  “ Though 

this  fernron  be  intitled,  Catholic  fpbit , yet  it  in- 
culcates an  attendance  upon  one  only  congrega- 
tion: in  other  words,  hear  me,  and  thofe  I fend 
F 2 out. 


[ 124  ] 

out,  and  no  body . elfe”  Mr.  H.  himfelf  knot's 
better  : he  knows  I advife  all  of  the  church,  to 
hear  the  pariih  minilter.  I do  not  advife,  even 
xhffenters  of  any  kind,  not  to  hear  their  own 
teachers.  But  I advife  all,  do  not  heap  to  your- 
fdves  preachers,  having  itching  ears.  Do  not 
run  hither  and  thither  to  hear  everv  new  thing; 
elfe  vou  will  be  elfablilhed  in  nothin?.  “ How- 

j O 

ever  it  is  by  J/ratagems  of  this  fort,  that  he  holds 
fo  roanv  fouls  in  his  Jhackles,  and  prevents  them 
from  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  all  the  glorious 
truths  of  the  go/pel.'' 

Obferve,  gofpel  is  with  Mr.  Id.  the  fame  as 
Calvinifn.  So  where  he  fat’s,  “ there  is  no 
gofpelp’  he  means  no  predejhnation.  Bv  the  fame 
figure  of  fpeeoh,  forne  of  his  admirers  ufe  to  fav, 

“ there  is  no  honey  in  the  book.”  Here  lies 
the  core  : this  is  the  wrong,  for  which  the  bigots 
of  this  gofpel  will  never  forgive  me.  And  all 
thofe  are  fucb,  who  “ rank  all  elechon  doubters' 
amonsi  Diabalonians .”  Such  is  Mr.  H.  a bimn  in 
grain,  while  he  fets  his  hand  to  that  gentle  fen-  , 
tence.  Nay  further  fays  he,  “ I cannot  help  in- 
forming my  readers,’’  (no,  if  he  did,  he  mull 
burll)  “.that  in  the  life  of  Mr.  Philip  Henrv, 
publifhed  imhis  Chriftian  Library,  he  has  artfully 
left  out  Mr.  Henry  ’s  Cpnfeflion  of  Faith.”  Art- 
JuL)  /.  j No  ; honejlly  ; according  to  the  open 
profcffiori  in  the  preface  cited  before. 

*21.  Yet  Mr.  H.  this  Air.  H.  fays  to  Air.  FI. 

” Suffer  not  bitter  u'ords  and  calumnious  exprej- 


[ 12-5  ] 

/ions  to  difguife  themfelves -undsr  the  appearance 
of  plainnefs.”  p.  *47.  Bitter  words ! Can  Mr. 
H.  imagine  there  is  any  harm  in  hcfe  ? Mr.  H. 
that  cites  the  judicious  Mr.  Topladv!  That  ad- 
mires the  famous  Eleven  Letters,  which  are 
bitlernefs  double  diflilled  ! Which  overflow  with 
little  elfe  but  calumnious  exprej/ions,  from"  the 
beginning  to  the  end!  Mr.  H.  that  himfelf 
wrote  the  Review,  and  the  Farrago  ! And  does 
he  complain  of  Mr.  Fl.’s  bitternefs  P Why,  he 
may  be  a little  bitter  ; but  not  .Mr.  F.  Altering 
the  perfon  alters  the  thing!  “ If  it  was  your  bull 
that  gored  mine,  fays  the  judge  in  the  fable,  that 
is  another  cafe !” 

22.  Two  objections  to  my  perfonal  conduft, 
I have  now  briefly  to  confider.  1.  “ M'ri  W. 
embraced  Mr.  Shirley  as  a friend  at  the  confer- 
ence, and  then  direflly  went  out  to  give  the 
fignal  for  war.”  p.  150.  This  is  partly  true. 
It  is  true,  that  although  I was  not  ignorant  of 

7 O O 

his  having  deeply  injured  me,  yeti  freely  for- 
gave him  at  the  conference,  and  again  “ em- 
braced him  as  a friend.”  But  it  is  not  true,  that 
I “ direfdly  went  out  to  give  the  fignal  for  war.” 
“ Nay,  why  elfe  did  you  confent  to  the  publifhing 
of  Mr.  F.’s  letters?”  Becaufe  I judged  it  would 
be  an  effeftual  means  of  undoing  the  mifehief 
which  Mr.  S.  had  done.  Not  that  I am  now 
forry  (though  I was)  for  what  he  has  done,  for 
his  publication  of  that  bitter  circular  letter.  For 
I now  clearly  difeern  the  hand  of  God,  through- 
F 3 out 


[ **6  ] 

, out  that  whole  affair.  Both  my  brother  and  I 
Hill  indulged  the  fond  hope,  of  living  in  peace 
With  our  warm  Calmnijl  brethren*,  but  we  now 
give  it  up  ; our  eyes  are  open ; we  fee  what  we 
have  to  expeft.  We  look  for  neither  mercy  nor 
juftice  at  their  hands  : if  we  find  any,  it  will  be 
clear  gains. 

23.  The  fecond  objefiion  is,  “ Mr.  W.  ac- 
knowledged the  unguarded  manner  in  which  the" 
Minutes  were  drawn  up : and  vet  immediately 
after  defended  them.'1  I anfwer,  How  did  I 
“ acknowledge  the  unguarded  manner-,?”  The 
plain  cafe  was  this.  I feek  peace,  and  would 
do  any  thing  for  it,  which  I can  with  a fafe  con- 
science. On  this  principle  it  was,  that  when 
Mr.  S.  read  over  his  declaration,  (I  fay  his ; for 
it  was  he  drew  it  up,  not  1}  and  afked,  if  we 
agreed  thereto  ? I was  heartily  defirous  to  agree 
with  him  as  far  as  pofhble.  In  order  to  this,  after 
altering  fume  words,  I afked  our  brethren,  if 
they  were  willing  to  fign  it?  One  immediately 
faid,  “The  Minutes  are  not  unguarded-,  they 
are  guarded  enough.”  I faid,  1 hey  are  guarded 
enough  for  you  ; but  not  for  thofe  who  feek  oc- 
cafion  againfl  us.  And  obferve,  it  is  only  in 
this  fenfe,  that  I fubferibed  to  that  expreflion. 
But  I will  not  affirm,  that  my  love  of  peace  did 
not  carry  me  a little  too  far.  I know  not  but  it 
would  have  been  better,  not  to  have  figned  the 
paper  at  all. 

24.  So  much  for  the  Minutes.  Perhaps  it 

may 


[ 127  ] 

may  be  cxpe&ed,  that  I fhould  alio  take  fome 
notice  of  what  Mr.  H.  fays  concerning  Perfec- 
tion. All  his  arguments  indeed,  and  ten  times 
more,  I have  anfwered  over  and  over-  But  if  it 
is  required,  I will  anfwer  once  more:  only  pre- 
mifing,  By  that  Perfection,  to  which  St.  Paul 
direfits  Mr.  H.  and  me  to  go  on,  Heb.  vi.  l.  I 
underftand  neither  more  nor  lefs,  than  what  St. 
John  terms  perjeCt  love,  x John  iv.  18.  and  our 
Lord,  Loving  the  Lord  our  God  with  . all  our  heart , 
and  mind,  and  foul,  and  flrength.  If  youchufe  to 
call  this  Jmf id  perfection,  (rather  than Jiplef)  you 
have  my  free  leave. 

Mr.  H.’s  main  argument  againft  this  is,  that 
“ it  is  a popijh  dofilrine.”  How  does  this  ap- 
pear ? “ O, -Luther  fays  fo.”  p.  25.  This  will 
not  do  : it  is  only  fecond  hand  evidence.  “ It 
crept  into  the  church  firft  in  the  fifth  century, 
and  has  been  fince  almoft  generally  received  in 
the  church  of  Rome.”  p.  49.  How  is  this 
proved  ? Either  that  the  dofiti  ine  of  perjeCl  love 
crept  firft  into  the  church  in  the  fifth  century  ? 
Or,  that  it  has  been  fince  almoft  generally  re- 
ceived in  the  church  of  Rome  ? Why,  “ we 
may  very  readily  perceive  this,  by  the  following 
extrafil  from  bifhop  Cowper.”  I anfwer,  1. 
This  is  but  fecond  hand  evidence  ftill.  2.  It  is 
wide  of  the  mark.  For  this  whole  extrafil  fays 
not  a word  about  the  church  of  Rome.  It  con- 
tains only  a few  citations  from  St.  Auguftin  and 
St.  Bernard,  foreign  totheprefent  queftion;  and 
F 4 one 


C »8  ] 

one  from  St.  Ambrofe,  if  it  be  poflible,  more 
foreign  full.  None  of  thefe  touch  either  of  the 

O 

points  in  queftion,  “This  doctrine  crept  into 
the  church  in  the  fifth  century:  ’ or,  “ It  has 
been  (ever)  fince  almoft  generally  received  in 
the  church  of  Rome.” 

* Here  I mult  beg  leave  to  put  Mr.  H.  in 
mind  of  one  ftated  rule  in  controverfy.  We 
are  to  take  no  authorities  at fecond  hand , but  al- 
wavs  ■ recur  to  the  originals.  Confequently, 
words  of  St.  Bernard,  or  twenty  faints  more, 
copied  from  bijhop  Cowptr , prove  juft  nothing. 
Before  we  can  urge  the  authority  of  St.  Bernard 
or  Ambrofe,  we  mull  confult  the  authors  them- 
felves,  and  tell  our  readers,  what  edition  we  life, 
with  the  page  where  the  words  are  found : 
otherwife  thet'  cannot  form  a judgment  either  of 
the  fairnefs  of  the  quotation,  or  of  the  feVife  and 
weight  of  it. 

* Hitherto  then  wrehave  not  one  tittle  of  proof, 
that  this  is  a popijh  doflrine;  that  it  ever  was, 
or  is  now,  “ almoft  generally  received  in  the 
church  of  Rome (although  if  it  had,  this 
would  be  no  conclufive  argument  againft  it:  as 
neither  is  it  conclufive  again  ft  the  do&rinc  of 
the  blefTed  Trinity  :)  I do  not  know  that  it  ever 
was : but  this  I know' ; it  has  been  folemnly  con- 
demned by  the  church  of  Rome.  It  has  been 
condemned  by  the  Pope  and  his  whole  conclave, 
even  in  this  prefent  century.  In  the  famous 
bull  Unigenitus,  (fo  called  from  the  firft  words, 

i Unigenitus 


C 129  ] 

Unigehitus  Dei  films)  they  utterly  condemn  the 
uninterrupted  aft  (of  faith  and  love,  which  fome 
then  talked  of,  of  continually  rejoicing,  praying, 
and  giving- thanks)  as  dr eadfiit  Jierejy!  Notv,  in 
what!  public,  adl  of  the  church  of  Rome  is  the 
dodtrine  ot  Perfedlion  maintained?  Till  this  is 
produced,  I pray  let  us  hear  no  more,  that  Per- 
fe.dfion  is  a popifh  doclrine. 

* 2,5.  However  “ the  diftindfion  between  Jins 
and  innocent  infirmities  is  derived  from  the  Rom- 
ifli  church."  p.  s6.  How  does  tins  appear.? 
Thus.  “ Two  of  her  devoted  champions,  Lin- 
denus  and  Andradius,  dilfinguifh  between  infir- 
mities and  fins/’  Lindenus  and  Andradius  I 
Who  are  they  ? From  what  country  did  they 
come  ? I do  not  know  the  men.  One  of  them, 
for  ought  I know,  might  ferve  as  an  interpreter 
at  the  council  of  Trent.  What  then?  Was  he 
an  authorized  interpreter  of  the  dodfrines  of  the 
church  ? Nav,  and  how  do  you  know,  that  they 
did  fpeak  of  htt/e,  trifling  faults,  or  of  minute  and 
trivial  Jins ? Did  you  ever  read  them?  Pray, 
what  edition  of  their  works  do  you  ufe  ? And  in 
what  page  do  thefe  words  occur?  Till  we  know 
this,  that  there  may  be  an  opportunity  of  exa- 
mining the  books,  (though  I fear'fcarce  worth 
examiningj  it  is  doing  too  much  honour  to 
fuch  quotations,  to  take,  any  notice  of  them, 
at  all. 

* 26.  Well,  now  for  the  bufkins!  Now  Spiral  . 
iragicum  fatis ! “ And  tips  is  the  doctrine, 

F 5 • which 


[ *3°  ] 

■which  is  preached  to  more  than  thirty  thoufand 
fouls,  of  whi  ch  Mr.  W.  has  the  charge.  Then  I 
am  fure  it  is  high  time,  that  not  only  the  Calvinift 
minifters,  but  all  that  ZL'ifli  well  lo  the  interejl  of 
proteflantifni ’ (fo  Mr.  S.  faid  before)  “ fhould 
in  a body  protejl  againlt  fuch  licentious  tenets.'1 
Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Sion  ! Gird  on  your  ar- 
mour ! Make  ye  yourfelves  ready  for  battle! 
Again  the  trumpet  founds:  acrufade!  An  holy 
war!  Down  with  the  heretics!  But  hold! 
What  fpirit  are  you  of?  Are  you  followers  of 
peace  ? Then  bring  forth  your  fir  png  reafons : 
fpeak  the  truth  in  love , and  we  are  ready  to  meet 
you.  But  really  all  this  talk  of  my  licentious 
doctrine,  is  a mere' copy  of  Mr.  H.  s counte- 
nance. He  knows,  and  all  in  England  know, 
(whoever  have  heard  my  name)  that  it  is  not 
too  loofe , but  too  flritl  doctrine  I am  conftantly 
accufecl  of.  Therefore  all  this  blufter,  about 
“ my  fuperceding  the  law,”  has  not  only  no 
truth,  but  no  colour,  no  plaufibilitv.  And  when 
Mr.  H.  calls  fo  gravely  for  Dr.  Crifp,  to  “ fweep 
away  all  my  Antinomian  rubbifh,  " lhall  we  laugh 
or  weep  ? 

Cuivis  faci/is  rigidi  cenfura  cachinni. 

Rather  let  us  drop  a tear  on  human  infirmity. 

27.  So  much  for  the  fil'd  grand  argument 
againft  Perfection,  That  it  is  generally  received 
in  the  church  of  Rome.  The  fecond  is,  “ It  was 

generally 


*[  ] 

generally  received  among  the  ranting  Anabaptifts 
in  Germany.”  p.  49.  What  author  of  note  tefti- 
fies  this?  I allow  no  fee  on  d hand  authority; 
but  defire  to  know,  what  German  hiftorianof 
credit  has  recorded  it?  And  in  what  page  of  his 
■works  ? When  this  is  afeertained,  then  we  may 
obferve,  it  proves  juft  nothing. 

A third  argument  againft  Perfection  is,  that 
M it  was  maintained  by  many  wild  ranters  ih 
London.”  'Wild  enough  ! Although  no  ftrefs  is 
to  be  laid  on  Mr.  H.'s  informations  concerning 
them  ; fome  of  which  are  altogether  falfe,  and 
the  reft  imperfect  enough.  But  fuppofe  they 
were  all  true,  what  would  follow  ? Many  .hear- 
ers abufingthe  do&rines  I teach,  no  more  prove 
rhat  thofe  dofliines  are  falfe,  than  the  German 
ranters  proved  that  Luther’s  were  fo. 

28.  Is  it  another  argument , that’  “ the  man- 
ftrous  dodbrine  of  Perieftion  turns  fome  of  its 
deluded  votaries  into  monfters  ? p.  44.  This 
may  be  proved  Irom  the  cafes  of  Bell  and 
Harris;  the  former  oi  whem  prophefied,  that 
the  world  would  be  at  an  end  thelaft  01  February: 
the  latter  was  feized  with  raging,  madmefs, 
and  died  blafpheming  111  a moft  dreadful  man- 
ner.” 

It  would  be  ftrange,  if  George  Bell  were  not 
brought  upon  the  ftage,  as  he  has  been  an  hun- 
dred times  over.  * As  for  poor  Benjamin  Har- 
ris, I believe,  as  a puniftnnent  for  his  pride  and 
unchadtablenefs,  God  permitted  him  to  be 
F 6 ftruck. 


[ 432  3 

flruck  in  an  inflant  with  diabolical  madnefs. 
But  it  did  not  continue  to  his  death  : he  did  not 
die  biafpheming.  I faw  him  mvfelf  quiet  and 
compoled : and  he  calmly  delivered  up  his  foul 
to  God. 

See  another  inflance.  “ A friend  of  mine 
lately  informed  me,  that  an  eminent  preacher  of 
Perfeftion  told  him,  that  he  had  not  linned  for 
fome  years,  and  that  the  Holv  Gliofl  had  de- 
feended  and  fat  on  him  and  many  others  in  a 
vifible  manner,  as  he  did  upon  the  apollles  on 
the  day  of  Pentecofl.  ” Pleafe  to  name  tire 
man:  othenvife  an  hundred  fucli  tales  will 
weigh  nothing  with  men  of  fenfe  and  candor. 

Behold  a fourth  “ Lalt  t ear  I mvfelf  con- 
verfed  with  a gentlewoman  of  fuch  high  Perfec- 
tion, that  file  laid,  No  man  could  teach  her  any 
thing,  and  went  to  no  place  of  worlhip  for 
years  * together : however  Ihe  was  a fcold,  and 
beat  her  maid.”  Perhaps  fo.  And  what  is  that 
tome?  If  fhe  is  a member  of  our  Society,  tell 
me  her  name  ; and, Ihe  will  be  in  it  no  longer. 
This  is  our  glorying.  It  mull  be,  that  .many 
members  of  our  Society  will  from  time  to  time 
grow  weary  of  well-doing:  yea,  that  fume  will 
fall  into  fin.  But  as  foon  as  this  appears,  they 
have  no  more  place  among  us.  A e regard  no 
man’s  perfon,  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor.  A 
diforderly  walker  carmot  continue  with  us.. 

Again.  “ One  told  God  in  prayer, that  Ihe 
was  perfect,  as  God  lnmfelfwas  perfect/'  “ Ano- 
n . ther 


[ *33  ] 

tlier  prayed,  Grant,  O Lord,  that  ail  hero  pre- 
fent  may  be  perfefcl  'as  I am  perfect.'3  p.  4 g. 
Till  vou  name  the  men,  this  too  muff  <ro  for  no- 
thing.  But  fuppofe  it  all  true,  what  will  it 
prove?  Only  that  there  are  madmen  in  the 
world. 

“ I could  alfo  tell  him  of  a woman,  who  teas 
fo  perfect,  that  {her  trien  to  fin  and  could  not.” 
Pray  name  her. 

“ fv'lr.  W.  muft  alfo  well  remember  a certain 
perfect  married  lady,  w no  was  got  with  child  by 
a perfeft  preacher.  1 do  not  remember  a:iy 
fuch  thing.  I never  heard  of  it  before. 

29.  But  “ I iiate.  fires  Mr.  H.  the  law  of  reta- 
liation.’— I’rulv  one  would  not  have  thought  it, 
— “ And  would  not  have  mentioned  thefe  things, 
but  that  vou  fet  me  the  example,33  e.  but  bv 
way  of  retaliation.  “ Should  vou  doubt  the  truth 
of  thefe  inftances,  I wi'l  lead  you  ro  the  foun- 
tain-head of  my  intelligence.'5  That  will  not 
do.  In  order  to  be  even  with  Mr.  F.  vou  have 
told  feven  blocking  dories.  Several  of  thefe  I 
know  to  be  falfe  : I doubt  if  anv,  but  that  of 
George  Bell,  be  true.  And  now  you  offer  to 
“ lead  Air.  F.  to  the  fountain-head  of  vour  intel- 
ligence !33  Probably  to  one  or  two  renegade  Me-- 
thedifts,  who  court  the  world,  bv  flanderino- 
their  brethren  1 “ But  Mr.  W.  adopts  this  way.35 
No,  never.  In  my  letter  to  Air.  Hervey,  I oc- 
cafionally  name  two  famous  men  ; but  I do  not 
dander  them.  In  my  journals  I name  feveral 

others. 


[ *34  ] 

others.  This  is  above  board:  but  Mr.  H.  ftahs 
m the  dark.  He  gives  us  no  names,  no  places 
of  abode;  but  calls  arrows  and  firebrands  abroad. 
And  let  them  light  where  thev  may,  on  guilty 
or  guiltlefs:  of  that  he  takes  no  care. 

30.  Tt  remains  only,  to  confider  the  queries, 
which  Mr.  H.  addrelfies  directly  to  me. 

1.  “ Did  not  you  in  adnnnilinng'  the  facra- 

j u 

rr.ent,  a few  years  ago  to  a pnjtcl  fociety  in 
Wr/t-Jbeet  chappel,  leave  out  the  confeflion  ? ’ 

Yes,  and  many  times  fince.  When  I am 
fhaitened  for  time,  (as  I generally  am  there,  'on 
a Monday]  I begin  the  cdmmnnion-fervice  at, 
“ We  do  not  prefume  to  come  to  this  thy  table.  ’ 
One  Monday  Mr.  Madan  defin  ed  to  flat7.  Here 
I fuppofie,  is  “ the  fountain-head  oi  this  intel- 
ligencer’ 

2.  “ Did  not  one  of  the  Enthufiafls  then  fiav, 
he  had  heard  a voice  telling  him,  He  ton  all  ho- 
linefs  to  the  Lord?' 

Poffibly  fo  : but  I remember  nothing  of  it. 

o.  “ Did  not  a fecond  declare  the  fame 
thing  r"’ 

Not  that  I remember. 

а.  “ Did  not  Georye  Beil  fav,  he  lhould  never 
die  ?’* 

He  often  did,  if  not  then. 

g.  “ Did  notone  p relent  confirm  it.’’ 

Not  unlikely:  but  I do  not  remember  if. 

б.  “ Did  not  another  pei  left  brother  fay,  lie 
believed  the  millennium  was  neaF  : lor  there  had 

been 


[ <35 : ] 

been  more  conflables  fworn  in  that  year  than 
heretofore  ?” 

Are  you  fure  he  was  a perfect  brother  ? i.  e. 
one  that  profeffed  fo  to  be  ? As  for  me,  I can  fay 
nothing  about  it.  For  1 neither  remember  the 
man,  nor  the  words. 

“ 1 Ills  I have  put  down  verbatim  from  the 
mouth  of  a judicious  friend  then  prefent ; but 
from  that  time  he  has  been  heartily  hck  of JinleJi 
perfection:’  Sav,  of  perftcl  love. 

Is  it  only  from  that  time  that  Mr.  Madan  has 
been  fick  of  it  ? Was  he  not  fick  of  it  before? 

7.  “ Do  not  you  know  a clergyman,  one  clofe- 
ly  con  necked  with  you,  who  ieiufed  a great  wit- 
nefs  for  perfection  the  facrament,  l.ecaufe  he 
had  been  detected  in  bed  with  a perfect Jijter  ?” 
No.  I never  heard  of  it  before.  Surely  Mr. 

M d is  not  fallen  io  low,  as  to  invent  fuch  a 

tale  as  this  ! 

I need  not  fay  any  thing  to  your  lafl  anecdote, 
fince  you  (for  once!)  “ put  a candid  conflruclion 
upon  my  words. ” If  I did  fpeak  them,  which 
I can  neither  affirm  nor  clenv*  undoubtedly  my 
meaning  was,  (as  yourfelf  obferve)  “ Though  I 
have  been  holding  forth  the  imputed  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Chrift  to  a mixt  congregation,  yet  I 
think  it  right  to  caution  you  of  the  fociety,  how 
you  abufe  that  doctrine,  which  to  fome,  who 
turn  it  into  licentioufnefs,  isafmooth  doftrine, 
of  which  you  ought  to  beware.”  p.  6i.  But 
your  friend,  it  feerus,  “ who  gave  you  this  ac- 
count,". 


[ *36  ] 

count,  ' did  not  put  fo  candid  a conftruction  on 
mv  words.  You  far,  “ he  was  fo  ftruck,  as 
hanllv  to  refrain  from  fpeaking  to  you  in  the 
chappel.  And  from,  that  hour  he  gave  up  all 
connections  with  you.  " i.  c.  Ke  Jougkt  a pre- 
tence ; and  Iac found, one. ! 

* And  now  what  does  all  this-  amount  to? 
Several  perfons  who  p,  feifcd  high. firings,  de- 
generated rn to  pru  i i enthufia&n,  and  then 
talked  like  lunatics,  about  the  time  that  they  re- 
nounced connection  v uh  me,  tor  mildly  reprov- 
ing them.  And  is  this  anv  objeftiort  agatnll  the 
exigence  of  that  love  which  they  profelTfid? 
Nav,  and  I verily  believe  once  enjoyed,  though 
they  were  afterward  aoved/rom  thnr  jiedfajhtef. 
Surely  no  morejhan  a juft  hied  performs  running 
mad,  is  an  objection  again  ft  juftification.  Every 
doctrine  mh  ft  ft  and  or  iall  by  u;e  hib!e.  If  tue 
perfection  I teach  agree  with  this,  it  will  (land, 
infpite  of  all  the  enlhufiafts  in  the  world  : il  not, 
if  cannot  Hand. 

* gi.  I now  look  back  on  a train  of  incidents 
tb  it  have  occurred,  for  many  it  - ntns  laii  pad, 
and  adore  a wife  and  gracious  Providence,  order- 
ing all  things  well  ! When  the  circular  letter  was; 
fir  ft  difperfed  throughout  .Great-Britain  and  Ire- 
land, I did  not  conceive  the  immenfe  good,  \s  inch 
God  was  about  to  bring  out  oi  that  evih  But 
no  fooner  did  Mr.  F.'s  full  letters  appear,  the  1 
the  fcer.e  began  to  open.  Arid  the  defign  ot  • 

Providence  opened  more  and  more,  when  Mr. 

• S.’s 

' A 


[ *37  ] 

.S.'s  narrative,  and  Mr.  H.’s  letters,  conflrainea 
him  to  write  and  publiih  his  feeond  and  third 
Check- to  Antinomianifm.  It  was  then  indif- 
putably.clear,  that  neither  mv  brother  nor  I had 
borne  a fufficient  teftimony  to  the  truth.  For 
many  years,  from  a well-meant,  but  ill-;udged 
tendernefs,  we  had  fuffered  the  reprobation 
preachers  (vulgarly  called  go/pel preachers  !)  to 
fpread  their  poifon,  alrnoft  without  oppofition. 
But  at  length  they  have  awakened  us  out  of 
fleep  : Mr.  H.  has  anfwered  for  all  his  brethren, 
roundly  declaring,  that  “ any  agreement  with 
eleddl on-doubters  is  a covenant  with  death.”  It 
is  well  : we  are  now  forewarned  and  fore-anned. 
'We  look  for  neither  peace  nor  truce,  with  any 
who  do  not  openly  and  exprefsly  renounce  tins 
diabolical  femiment.  But  fince  God  is  on  our 
fide,  we  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  us. 
We  never  before  faw  our  way  clear,  to  do  any 
more  than  act  on  the  defenfive.  But  fince  the 
circular  -letter  has  founded  the  alarm,  has  called 
forth  all  their  hofts  to  war:  and  fince  Mr.  H. 
has  anfwered  the  call,  drawing  the  fword,  and 
throwing  away  the  fcabbai^l : what  remains,  but 
to  own  the  hand  of  God,  and  make  a virtue  of 
neceflity?  I will  no  more  defire  any  Armiman, 
fo  called,  to  remain  only  on  the  defenfive.  Ra- 
ther qhafe  the  fiend,  Reprobation,  to  his  own 
hell,  and  every  doftrine  connected  with  it.  Let 
none  pify  or  fpare  one  limb  of  either  fpeculative 


or 


[ 138  ] 

cr  practical  Antinomianifm : or  of  anv  doftrine 
that  haturally  tends  thereto-,  however  veiled  un- 
der the  fpecious  name  of  Free  Grace.  Only  re* 
membering,  that  however  we  are  treated  by  men, 
who  have  a difpenfation  from  the  vulgar  rules  of 
juflice  and  mercy,  we  are  not  to  fight  them  at 
their  own  weapons,  to  return  railing  for  railing- 
Thofe  who  plead  the  caufe  of  the  God  of 
love,  are  to  imitate  him  they  ferve  : and  how- 
ever provoked,  to  ufe  no  other  weapons  than 
thofe  of  truth  and  love,  of  fcripture  and 
reafon. 

32.  Having  now  anfwered  the  queries  you 
propofed  ; fuller  trie,  Sir,  to  propofc  one  to  you  ; 
the  fame  which  a gentleman  of  your  own  opi- 
nion propofed  to  me  fome  years  fince.  “ Sir, 
how  is  it  that  as  foon-  as  a man  comes  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth -it  fpoils  his  temper  .J  * 
That  it  does  fo,  I had  obferved  over,  and  over, 
as  well  as  Mr.  J.  had.  But  how  can  we  account 
for  it  ? Has  the  truth  lo  Mr.  J.  termed  what 
manv  love  to  term  the  doch  ine  ojjr ee  grace)  a 
natural  tendency  to  fpoil  the  temper  ? Toinfpire 
pride,  hauglninefs  fnpercilioufnefs  ? To  make  a 
man  utifer  in  his  arm  eyes,  than  fti  en  men  that  can 
render  a rea/bn  ? Does  it  naturally  turn  a jnan 
into  a cynic,  a bear,  a Toplady  ? Does  it  at 
once  let  him  free  from  all  the  reitraints  of  good- 
nature, decency,  and  good-manners  ? Cannot 
a man  hold  dijlinguijling  grace,  as  it  is  called, 


[ *39  ] 

but  he  mud  diftinguifh  himfelffor  paflion,  foUr- 
nefs,  bitternefs  ? Muft  a man  as  foon  as  he  looks, 
upon  himfelf  to  be  an  absolute  favourite  of  hea- 
ven look  upon  all  that  oppofe  him  as  Diabolonians, 
as  predeltinated  dogs  of  hell  ? Truly,  the  melan- 
choly inllanre  now  before  us,  would  almoft  in- 
duce us  to  think  fo.  For  who  was  of  a more 
amiable  temper  than  Mr.  Hill,  a[few  years  ago  ? 
When  I fir  ft  converted  with  him  in  London,  I 
thought  1 had  feldom  feen  a man  of  fortune,  who 
appeared  to  be  of  a more  humble,  modeft,  gentle, 
friendly  difpofition.  And  yet  this  fame  Mr.  H. 

| when  he  has  once  been  grounded  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  is  of  a temper  as  totally  different  from 
this, as  light  is  from  darknefs  ! He  is  now  haughty, 
fupercilious,  difdaining  his  opponents,  as  un- 
worthy to  be  fet  with  the  dogs  of  his  flock  ! He 
is  violent,  impetuous,  bitter  of  fpirit  ! In  a word 
j the  author  of  the  Review! 

O Sir,  what  a commendation  is  this  of  your 
doctrine  ? Look  at  Mr.  H.  the  Arminian  ! The 
loving,  amiable  generous,  friendly  man.  Look 
at  Mr.  H.  the  Calvinijl ! Is  it  the  fame  per- 
fon  P This  fpiteful,  morofe,  touchy  man  P Alas, 
what  has  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  done  ? What 
a deplorable  change  has  it  made  ? Sir,  I love 
you  Rill  : though  I cannot  elleem  you,  as  I did 
once.  Let  me  intreat  you,  if  not  for  the  honour  of 
God,  yet  for  the  honour  of  your  caufe,  avoid  for 
the  time  to  come,  all  anger,  all  fpite,  all  four- 

nefs 


[ J4°  ] 

ncfs  and  bittcrnefs  ; all  contemptuous  ufage  of 
}'our  opponents,  not  inferior  to  you,  unlefs  in 
fortune.  0 put  on  again  bowels  of  mercies , kindnefs , 
gentle ne/s,  longj'ujfering;  endeavouring  to  hold , 
even  with  them  that  differ  from  you  in  opinion, 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bund  oj peace  ! 

Bristol, 

September  q,  1772. 


A N 


[ Ml  ] 


An  E X T-R  ACT  of 

Mr.  B A X T E R’s 

A P H O R I S M S 

Of  JUSTIFICATION. 

To  the  READER. 

I IIAD  not  heard  that  there  was  fucli  a booh  in 
the  world,  as  Mr.  Baxter's  Aphorifrns  of 
Juflification,  when  it  was  fent  me  by  a book  feller , 
to  whom  I had  fent  jur  another  traEl  on  the  fame 
[abject but,  before  I hda  read  many  pages  there- 
in, / jaw  the  wife  providence  of  God ; and  foon  de- 
termined ( ’ no  twit  [landing  a few  expr  effions,  which 
I do  not  altogether  .approve  of)  to  reprint  the  Jub- 
Jlance  thereof,  in  as  Jniall  a co'mpafs,  and  at  as 
low  a price  as  pojfible.  - 


r m2  ] 

0 may  he,  who  hath  fo  folemnly  declared. 
Think  not  that  I am  come  to  dejlroy  the  law  or 
the  prophets,  verily  I fay  unto  you,  not  one  jot 
or  one  tittle  fhall  pafs  from  the  law , till  heaven 
and  earth  pafs  away;  give  the  fame  bleffing  to  this 
little  treatife  now , as  he  did  near  an  hundred  years 
ago  ! May  he  once  again  make  it  a powerful  anti- 
dote again Jl  the  /pleading  poifon  cj  Aminomiati- 
ifm  ; And  thereby  face  many  fnnptc  unwary  Juuti 
from  feeking  death  in  the  error  of  their  life. 

Neivcaftlr  upon  Tyne,  JoH  N WESLEY. 

'March  25,  I'liS' 


PROPOSITION  I. 

The  ftrjl  covenant  made  b\  Had  with  Adam , did 
promije  life  upon  condition  of  perjcl  obedience, 
and  threaten  death  upon  the  lecjl  dijobedwnce. 

PROP.  II. 

This  covenant  being  foon  by  man  violated,  the 
threatning  mujl  be  fulfilled,  and  Jo  the  penalty 
fuffered. 

* r I ''HE  word  -of  his  threatning  being  once 
pad,  he  cannot  abfohitelv  pardon,  with- 
out the  apparent  violation  of  his  truth  or  wifdom. 

-Some  think  that  it  proceeded  lrom  his  wifdom, 

rather 


[ *4'3  ] 


Tather  than  his  juftice,  that  man  mud  fuffer. 
But  why  fliould  we  feparate  what  God  hath  join- 
ed ? However,’  whether  wifdom,  or  j; if! ice,  or 
truth,  for  rather  all  thcfe)  were  the  ground  of 
it : yet  certain  it  is,  that  a neceflitv  there  was  t lie 
penalty  fhould  he  infueded  or,  elfe  the  Son  of 
God  fhould  not  have  made  fatisfaetkm,  nor  fm- 
ners  bear  fo  much  themfelves. 


PRO  P,  III, 

This  penally  the.  offender  him/elf  con'd  not  hear? 

without  his  everli/Jlitio  undoing. 
np  H A T is,  not  the  full  penalty  ; for  part  of 
it  he  did  bear,  end  the  earth  for  his  fake, 
and  all  mankind  to  this  dav  ; hut  the  full  pe- 
nalty would  liave  been  an  everlaflingfuflci  ing. 

PROP.  IV. 


Jcfus  Chrijl,  at  the  will  oj  his  Talker,  and  upon 
>his"vzvn  zoill,  being  perejBI)  furnijhed  for  this 
work , with  a divine  power  cuid  perfonal  righte- 
ou/ne/s,  flip,  undertook,  and  afterwards  dif- 
charged  tins  d,  hi,  byfuffaing  what  the  daw  did 
threaten,  and  the  offender  InrnJtlJ  was  unable  to 
bear,. 


: : 
.a 


i.  r I "'PI  E love  of  God  to  -the  world  was  th« 
iirll  womb  where  the  work  of  redemp. 
tion  was  conceived,  John  ill.  16.  The  eternal 
•wifdom  and  love  found  out  and  refolved  on  this 
way  of  recovery. 


ilti 


2.  The 


[ Mi  ] 

.2.  The 'will  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one. 
The  Son  was  a voluntary  undertaker  of  this  talk. 
It  was  not  impofed  upon  him  by  confixaint. 
When  he  is  faid  to  come  to  do  his  Father's  will 
Heb.  x.  7,  o.  it  doth  alfo  include  his  own  will. 
And  where  he  is  faid  to  do  it  in  obedience  to 
the  father,  as  it  is  fpoken  of  a voluntary  obedi- 
ence ; fo  is  it  fpoken  of  the  execution  of  our 
redemption,  in  regard  to  the  human  nature  efpe- 
.ciallv,  and  not  of  the  undertaking  by  the  divine 
nature  alone.  Not  only  the  confent  of  Clirill 
did  make  it  lawful  that  lie  Ihould  be  punifhed, 
being  innocent  : but  alfo  that  fpecial  power, 
which  as  he  was  God,  he  had  oyer  his  own  life 
morcthan  any  creature  hath.  John  x.  18.  I have 
power  t (IfeAai)  faith  Chiijl  to  lay  m life. 

3.  No  meer  creature  was  qualified  for  this 
work:  even  the  angels,  ,that  are  righteous,  do 
but  their  duty,  and  therefore  cannot  merit  for  us, 
neither  were  thev  able  to  bear  and  overcome  the 
penalty. 

4.  It  muff  therefore  be  God  that  mull  fatisfy 
God  : both  for  the  perfe£Hon  of  the  obedience, 
for  the  bearing  of  the'  curfe,  and  for  the  over- 
coming of  it,  and  doing  the  relt  of  the  works  of 
the  mediatorfhip,  which  were  to  be  done  after 
the  refurreTion  : tetmeer  God  it  mull  not  be, 
but.  man  alfo,  or  elfe  it  would  have  been : forgive - 
nefs  without  fatislaction.  feeing  God  cannot  be 
faid  to  make  fatisfah-ion  to  hi  in  fell. 

n>.  Had  not  thrift  been  perfectly  righteous 

himfelf, 


[ 145  } 

himfelf,  he  had  not  been  capable  of  fatisfying 
for  others. 

6.  The  undertaking  of  the  Son  of  God  to  fa- 
tisfy,  was  effectual  before  his  actual  fatisfying  : as 
a man  that  makes  a purchafe,  may  poffefs  the 
thing  purchafed  upon  the  mere  bargain  made, 
or  earned  paid,  before  he  have  fully  paid  the 
fum. 

7.  I know  man’s  guilt  and  obligation  to  buf- 
fer is  but  metaphorically  called  his  debt,  yet 
becaufe  it  is  a fcripture  phrafe,  expending  our 
obligation  to  bear  the  penalty  of  the  violated 
law,  I ufe  it  in  that  fenfe. 

Chriit  did  fuffer  a pain  and  mifery  of  the 
fame  fort,  and  of  equal  weight  with  that  threat- 
ened ; but  yet  becaufe  it  was  not  in  all  refpecls 
the  fame,  it  was  rather  fatisfaclion  than  the  pay- 
ment of  the  proper  debt. 

8.  Many  fay  that  Chrift  did  as  properly  obey 
-in  our  head,  as  he  did  fuffer  in  our  Head  ; and 
that  in  God’s  efteem  we  were  in  Chriit  obeying 
and  buffering,  and  fo  in  him  we  did  both  perfect- 
ly fulfil  the  commands  of  the  law  by  obedience, 
and  the  threatnings  of  it  by  bearing  the  penalty. 
And  thus,  fay  they,  is  Thrift's  righteoufnefs 
imputed  to  us,  viz.  his  paffive  righteoufnefs 
for  the  pardon  of  our  fins,  and  delivering  us 
from  the  penalty  ; his  active  righteoufnefsfor  the 
making  of  ns  righteous,  and  giving  us  a title  to 
the  kingdom. 

. Vol.  XXII.  G 


This 


[ *4«  ] 


'*  This  opinion,  in  my  judgment,  containeth  a 
great  manymiftakes. 

1.  Ic  fuppofeth  us  to  have  been  in  Chrift, 
before  we  did  believe  or  were  born  ; and  that 
not  only  in  a general  fenfe,  as  all  men,  but  in  a 
ipecial,  as  juftified. 

2.  It  teacheth  the  imputation  of  Chrift’s  righte- 
oufnefs  in  fo  drift  a fenfe,  as  will  neither  Hand 
with  reafon,  nor  fcripture  ; which  mentioneth 
no  imputation  of  Chrift  or  his  righteoufnefs  to 
its  at  all  ; and  hath  given  great  advantage  to  the 
papifts  againft  us  in  this  doctrine  of  juftifica- 
tion. 

* g.  It  fecmeth  to  afcribe  to  God  amiftaken 
judgment,  to  efteem  us  to  have  been  in  Chrift 
when  we  were  not,  and  to  have  done  and  buffered 
fn  him  what  we  did  not. 

'*  4.  It  maketh  Chrift  to  have  paid  the  fame 
that  was  due,  and  not  the  value  : and  fo  to  jufti- 
fy 'us  by  payment  ol  the  proper  debt,  and  not  by 
ft  riff  latisfaftion.  And  indeed  this  is  the  Very 
core  of  the  miftake,  to  think  that  v.e  have  by  de- 
legation paid  the  proper  debt  ot  obedience  to  the 
whole  law.  or  that  in  Chrift  we  have  perfectly 
obeyed  : "Whereas,  1.  It  cannot  be  laid  that  we 
did  it.  2.  That  which  Chrift  did  was  to  fatisfv 
for  our  non-payment  and  difobedience. 

g:  It  fupnofetli  the  law  to  require  both  obe- 
dience  and  fuftering  in  refpect  ol  die  fame  time’ 
and  aftions,  wL  i doth  not.  And  whereas 
the)’ fay  that  the  law  requireth  buffering  lor  what 

is 


r *47  ] 

is  pafi,  -and  obedience  for  the  future  ; this  is  to 
deny  that  Chvift  hath  fatisfied  for  future  fins. 
The  time  is  near  when  thofe  future  fins  will  be 
alfo  .pad  : what  doth  the  law  require  then  ? 
If  we  do  not  obey  for  the  future,  then  we  fin  ; if 
we  fin,  the  law  requires  nothing  but  buffering. 

6.  It  fondly  fuppofeth  a difference  betwixt  one 
that  is  juft,  and  one  that  is  no  finner  : one  that 
hath  his  fin  or  guilt  taken  away,  and  one  that 
hath  his  unrighteoufnefs  taken  away.  Whereas, 
as  there  is  no  middle  betwixt  {freight  and  crook- 
ed ; fo  neither  between  conformity  to  the  law, 
(which  is  righteoufnefs)  and  deviation  from  it, 
(which  is  unrighteoufnefs.) 

7.  I1.maketh-0.ur  righteoufnefs  to  confiff  of 
two  parts,  viz.  The  putting  away  of  our  guilt, 
and  the  imputation  of  righteoufnefs,  i.e.  1.  Re- 
moving our  crooked nefs.  2.  Making  us  {freight. 

8.  It  afcribeth  thefe  two  fuppofed  parts  to  two 
difiinff  hippofed  caufes  : the  one  to  Chriff’s  ful- 
filling the  precept  by  his  aPrive  righteoufnefs  ; 
the  latter  to  his  fulfilling  the  atoning  by  his  pa  {five 
righteoufnefs;  as  if  there  muff  be  one  caufe  of  in- 
troducing light,  and  another  of  expelling  dark- 
nefs ; or  one  caufe  to  take  away  the  crookednefs 
of  aline,  and  another  to  make  it  {height. 

g.  The  like  vain  diftinPtion  it  maketh  between 
delivering  from  death,  and  giving  title  to  life,  or 
freeing  us  from  the  penalty,  and  giving  us  the 
reward  : for  as  when  all  fin  of  onnffion  and 
commiflion  is  abfent,  there  is  no  unrighteouf- 
G 2 nefs ; 


[ *4*  ] 

nefs ; fo  when  all  the  fpenalty  is  taken  away, 
both  that  of  pain,  and  that  of  lofs,  the  party  is 
reftored  to  his  former  happinefs.  Indeed 
there  is  a greater  fuper-added  degree  of  life  and 
glory  procured  by  Chrift,  than  we  loft  in  Adam : 
But  this  is  the  effeft  of  Chrifl’s  pafTive,  as  well 
as  of  his  aftive  rirditeotifnefs. 

O 

*The  other  opinion  about  our  participation  of 
Chrift’s  righteorfnefs,  is  this,  that  God  the  Fa- 
ther doth  accept  the  fufferings  and  merits  of  his 
Son  as  a full  fatisfadtion,  and  as  a valuable  ccn- 
fideration  upon  which  he  will  wholly  forgive  the 
offenders  themfelves,  and  receive  them  again 
into  his  favour,  and  give  them  the  addition  of  a 
more  excellent  happinefs  alfo  ; fo  they  receive 
his  Son  upon  the  terms  of  thegofpel. 

This  opinion,  as  it  is  more  fimple  and  plain, 
fo  it  avoideth  all  the  fore-mentioned  inconveni- 
ences. 

PROP.  V. 

Wherefore  the  Father  hath  delivered  all  things  in* 
into  the  hands  of  the  Son;  and  given  him  ail 
power  in  heaven  and  earth;  and  made  him 
Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living , John  xiii.  3. 
Matth.  xxviii.  18.  John  v.  21,  22,23,  27. 
Rom.  xiv.  9* 


PROP. 


I *49  3 

PROP.  VI. 

It  was  not  the  intent  either]  of  the  Father  or  the 


Son,  that  by  this  fatisfaEion  the  offenders 
Jhould  be  immediately  delivered  from  the  whole 
curfe  of  the  law,  and  freed  from  the  evil  which 
they  had  brought  upon  themfelves ; but  fome  part 
mujl  be  executed  on  foul  and  body,  and  the  crea- 
tures themfelves,  and  remain  upon  them  at  the 
pleafure  of  Chrifl,  Rev.  i.  18.  1 Cor.  xv.  2 6. 

HE  common  judgment  is,  that  Chrifl:  hath 


taken  away  the  whole  curfe  from  believ- 
ers, ["though  not  the  buffering)  by  bearing  it  him- 
felf;  and  now  they  are  only  affliftions  of  love, 
and  not  punifhments.  I do  not  contradifl  this 
doctrine  through  affectation  of  fmgularity,  but 
through  conftraint  of  judgment,  and  that  upon 
thefe  grounds  following. 

* l.  It  is  undeniable,  that  Chrift’s  taking  the 
curfe  upon  himfelf  did  not  wholly  prevent  the 
execution  upon  the  offender,  Gen.  iii.  7,  8,  10, 
15— 19- 

*2.  It  is  evident  from  the  event,  feeing  we 
feel  part  of  the  curfe  fulfilled  on  us  : we  eat  in 
labour  and  fweat ; the  earth  doth  bring  forth 
thorns  and  briars  : women  bring  forth  their  chil- 
dren in  borrow.  Our  native  pravitv  is  the  curfe 
upon  our  fouls,  we  are  fick,  and  weary,  and  full 
of  fears,  and  farrows,  and  fhame : and  at  laft 
ive  die  and  turn  to  duff. 


3.  The 


[ *5®  3 

3-  The  fcripture  tells  us  plainly,  that  we  all 
die  in  Adam,  (even  that  death  from  which  we 
muff  at  the  refurre&ion  be  raifed  by  Chrift) 
l Cor.  xv.  21,  22.  And  that  death  is  the  wages  of 
fin,  Rom.  vi.  23.  And  that  the  ficknefs,  and 
weaknefs,  and  death  of  the  godly,  is  caufed  by 
their  fins,  1 Cor.  xi.  30,  31.  And  if  fo,  then, 
doubtlefs  they  are  in  execution  of  the  threaten- 
ing of  the  law,  though  not  in  full  rigour. 

4.  It  is  manifehed,  that  our  bufferings  are  in 
their  own  nature  evils  to  us,  and  the  fanciifying 
ol  them  to  us  taketh  not  away  their  natural 
evil,  but  only  produceth  by  it,  as  by  an  oeca- 
fion,  a greater  good : doubtlefs  fo  far  as  it  is  the 
effeft  of  fin,  it  is  evil,  and  the  effeft  alfoof  the 
law. 

5.  They  are  afcribed  to  God’s  anger,  as  the 
moderating  of  them  is  afcribed  to  his  love,  Pfal. 
xxx.  3.  and  in  a thoufand  places. 

6.  They  are  called  punifhments  in  fcripture, 
and  therefore  we  may  call  them  fo,  Lev.  xxvi. 
41,  43.  Lam.  iii.  39.  and  iv.  6,  22.  Ezra  ix. 
13.  Hof.  iv.  9.  and  xii.  2^  Lev.  xxvi.  18,  24. 

7.  What  reafon  can  be  given,  why  God 
fliould  not  do  us  all  that  good  without  our  buf- 
ferings, which  now  he  doth  bv  them,  if  there 
were  not  fm,  and  wrath,  and  law  in  them?  Sure 
he  could  better  us  by  eafier  means. 

8.  All  thofe  fcriptures  and  reafons  that  are 
brought  to  the  contrary,  do  prove  no  more  than 
this,  that  our  affli&ions  are  not  the  rigorous  exe- 
cution 


[ 151  1 

cution  ofthe  threatnimg  of  the  law  ; that  they 
are  not  wholly  or  chiefly  in  wrath. 

a.  1 he  fcripture  faith  plainly,  that  death  is 
one  of  the  enemies  that  is  not  yet  overcome,  but 
fhall  be  laft  conquered,  1 Cor.  xv.  26. 

' 10.  The  whole  ftrearn  of  fcripture  maketh 
Chrift  to  have  now  the  foie  difpofing  of  us  and 
our-  fufferings?  to  have  prevented  the  full  execu- 
tion of  the  curfe,  and  to  manage  that  which  lieth 
on  us  for  our  advantage,  but  no  where  doth  it 
affirm  that  he  fuddenly  delivereth  us. 

PRO  P..  VII.. 

Man  having  not  only  broken  his  firjl  covenant,  bitt 
difablecl  himfelf  to  perform  its  conditions  for  the 
future  ; and  fo  being  out  of  all  hope  of  attain- 
ing righteoufnejs  and  liije  thereby,  it  plcafed  God 
to  prefcr.ibe  to  him  a new  law,  and  tender  him  a 
new  covenant  ; the  conditions  whereof fiould  be 
more  eafy  ter  the  fnner,  and  yet  more  abafing , 
and fiould  more  clearly  manifeft  the  unconceiv- 
able love  of  the  Father  and  the  Redeemer . 

l.Tf  Chrift  had  pardoned  all  that  was  pafl,  andre- 
X newed  the  firft  violated  covenant,  and  fet  man 
in  the  fame  eflate  that  he  fell  from,  in  point  ofguilt, 
yet  would  he  have  fallen  as  defperately  by  the  next 
temptation:  yea  tho’  he  had  reft ored  to  him  his 
primitive  ftrength  : yet  experience  hath  fhew- 
G 4 ed 


[ *52  ] 

*d  on  how  flippery  a ground  bis  happinefs 
would  have  flood. 

2-  God  the  Father  and  Chrid  the  Mediator, 
who  have  one  will,  did  therefore  refolve  upon  a 
more  fuitable  way  of  happinefs. 

3.  This  way,  as  the  former,  is  by  both  a law  and 
covenant.  As  it  is  a law,  it  is  bv  Chrid  enjoined ; 
and  either  obedience,  or  the  penalty,  fhall  be 
exafted.  As  it  is  a covenant,  it  is  only  tendered 
and  not  inforced. 

4.  Tho'  without  grace  we  can  no  more  believe, 
than  perfeftlvobey,  as  a dead  man  can  no  more  re- 
move a draw  than  a mountain  ; vet  the  conditions 
of  the  gofpel  confidered  in  themfelves,  are  far 
more  eafy  titan  the  old  conditions,  Matth.  xi. 
29,  30.  1 John  v.  3.  And  more  abafing  they 
an  to  the  finner,  in  that  he  hath  far  lefs  to  do 
in  the  work  of  his  falvation  : and  alfo  in  that 
they  contain  the  acknowledgment  of  his  lodedate 
thro  hisown  former  felf-dedroving  folly. 

PROP.  VIII. 

Ah/  that  Chrift  doth  abjoluleh  null  or  repeal  the 
old  covenant  hereby:  bui  he  fuperaddelh  this  as 
the  only  pofjible  way  of  Life.  The  former  Jill 
contmtietk  to  command,  prohibit,  provdfe,  end 
threaten  ; Jo  that  the  Jins  ez  en  cf  the  jujiiJUd 
are  JiiU  breaches  of  that  law,  and  are  threatned 
and  curfed  thereby. 

IT  is  thejudgment  of  manv,  that  the  law.  as 
it  is  a covenant  of  works  is  quite  repealed  in 

regard 


[ *53  3 

regard  to  the  fins  of  believers ; yea,  many  believe 
that  the  covenant  of  works  is  repealed  to  all  the 
world,  and  only  the  covenant  of  grace  in  force- 
Againft  both  thefe  I maintain  this  affection  by 
the  arguments  which  follow,  yet  notwithftanding 
that  I extol  free  grace  as  much,  and  preach  the 
law  as  little,  in  a forbidden  fenfe,  as  if  I held 
the  contrary  opinion. 

PROP.  IX. 

Therejore  we  mujl  not  plead  the  repeal. of  the  law 
for  our  jufification ; hut  mujl  refer  it.  to  our 
furety,  who , by  his  merits , doth  continually  fa- 
il sfy  it. 

O 

I Shall  here  explain  how  far  the  law  is  in  force, 
and  how  far  not,  and  prove  it  under  the  next 
head. 

You  muff  here  diftinguifh  betwixt, 
l.  The  repealing  of  the  law,  and  the  relaxing 
of  it.  2.  Betwreen  a dilpenfation,  abfolute  and  re- 
fpeflive.  3.  Between  the  alteration  of  the  law,  and 
the  alteration  of  the  fubjefts  relation  to  it.  4.  Be- 
tween a difcharge  conditional,  with  a fufpenlion 
of  execution,  and  a difcharge  abfolute  ; and  fo  I 
refolve  the  queftion  thus  : 

1.  The  law  of  works  is  not  abrogated,  or  repeal- 
ed, but  difpenfed  with,  or  relaxed.  Adifpenfation 
is  (as  Grotius  defineth  it)  an  aft  of  a fuperior, 
whereby  the  obligation  of  a law  in  force  is  taken 
away,  as  to  certain  perfons  and  things, 

G 5 2.  This 


C *<54  J 

2.  This  difpenfation  therefore  is  not  total  or 
'abfolute,  but  refpedtive.  For,  1.  Tho!  it  difpenie 
with  the  rigorous  execution,  yet  not  with  every 
degree  of  execution.  2 Tho’  the  law  be  difpenfed 
with  as  it  containeth  the  proper  fubjects  of  the 
penalty,  viz.  the  parties  offending,  and  alfo  the 
circumdances  of  duration,  yet  in  regard  of  the 
mere  puniihment,  abftrafted  from  perfon  and 
circum dance,  it  is  not  difpenfed  with  : for  to 
Chrid  it  was  not  difpenfed  with  ; his  fatisfadtion 
was  by  paying  the  full  value. 

g.  Tho’  by  this  difpenfation  our  freedom  may 
be  as  full  as  upon  a repeal  : yet  the  alteration 
is  not  made  in  the  law,  but  in  our  relation  to 
the  law 

* 4.  So  far  is  the  faw  difpenfed  with  to  all,  as  to 
fufpend  the  rigorous  execution  for  a time,  and 
a difcharge  conditional  granted  them  : but  an 
abfolute  difcharge  is  granted  to  none  in  this  life. 
For  even  when  we  do  perform  the  condition  ; 
yet  dill  the  difcharge  remains  conditional  til!  we 
have  quite  finiflied  our  performance.  For  it  is 
not  one  indantaneous  a£l  of  believing  w!  1 ch 
fitalf  quite  difcharge  us : but  a continued  faith, 
dso  longer  are  we  difchaiged  than  we  are  belieyers. 
"And  where  the  condition  is  not  performed,  the 
law  is  dill  in  force,  and  fhall  be  executed  upon 
the  offender  himfelf. 

I fpeak  nothing  in  all  this  of  the  directive  ufc 
of  the  moral  law  to  believers,  but  how  far  the 
law  is  yet  in  force  even  as  it  is  a covenant  of 

works  : 


L 3 <55  ] 


works  rbecaufe  an  utter  repeal  of  it  in  this  fenfe 
is  Co  commonl  y,  but  inconfiderately  aflerted.  That 
it  is  no  further  overthrown,  no  not  to  believers, 
than  is  here  exlpained,  1 now  come  to  prove. 

PROP.  X. 


If  this  were  hot  fo , but  that  Chrijl  had  abrogated, 
the  firf  covenant,  then  it  would  follow,  1.  That 
no  Jin  but  that  of  Adam,  and  final  unbelief,  is 
fo  much  as  threatened  with  death,  or  that  death 
is  deferved  by  it ; for  what  the-  law  in force  doth 
not  threaten,  that  is  not  deferved,  or  due  by  law. 
If  would follow,  2.  That  Chrijl  died  not  to  pre- 
vent or  remove  the  wrath  and  curfe  fo  deferved,. 
for  any  but  Adams  fin,  nor  to  pardon  our  fins 
at  all;  but  only  to  prevent  our  dcfert  of  wrath 
and  curfe,  and  conjequently,  to  prevent  our  need 
of  par  don.  It  would  follow,  3.  That  againjl  the 
eternal  wrath  at  the  day  of  judgment,  we  mifl 
not  plead  the  pardon  of  Jin  ; but  our  own  not 
deferving  wrath,  becaufe  oj  the  repeal  oj  that  law  . 
bejore  the  fin  was  committed , . 


QCripture  plainly  teachetb,  that  all  men  (even- 
the  eleft)  are  under  the  law,  till  they  be- 
1 lev e and  enter  into  the  covenant  of  the  gofpel^ 
therefore  it  is  faid,  John  in.  iB.  He  that  believ- 
eth  not v is  condemned  already:  and  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him,  ver.  26.  And  we  are  faid  to  > 
believe  for.  re  mi  (Eon  of  fins,  Ails  ii.  38.  Mari. 

G 6 i.  4* 


C ] 

i.  4.  Lake  Xxiv.  47.  Ads  x.  23.  ana  iii.  1 a. 
Which  fhew,  that  fin  is  not  before  remitted,  and 
ctjnfequently  the  law  not  repealed ; elfe  how 
could  the  redeemed  be  by  nature  the  children 
of  wrath  ? Eph.  ii.  3.  The  fcripture  hath  con- 
cluded all  under  fin  (and  fo  far  under  the  law  no 
doubt)  that  the  promife,  by  faith  in  Jefus  Chrift, 
might  be  given  to  them  that  believe,  Gal.  iii.  22. 
We  are  under  the  law  when  Chri ft  doth  redeem 
us,  Gal.  iv.  5.  See  alfo  James  ii.  9,  10.  1 Tim. 
i.  8.  1 Cor.  xv.  56.  Gal.  iii.  19,  20,  21.  There- 
fore our  deliverance  is  conditionally  from  the 
curfe  of  the  law,  viz.  if  we  obev  the  gofpel.  And 
this  deliverance,  together  with  the  abrogation  of 
the  ceremonial  law,  is  it  which  is  fo  often  men- 
tioned as  a privilege  of  believers,  and  an  effeft 
of  the  blood  of  Chrift  ; which  deliverance  from 
the  curfe,  is  yet  more  full  when  we  perform  the 
conditions  of  our  freedom  ; and  then  we  are 
faid  to  be  dead  to  the  law,  Rom.  vii.  4.  and  the 
obligation  to  punifhment  dead  as  to  us,  ver.  6, 
but  not  the  law  void  or  dead  in  itfelf. 

Again,  all  the  fcriptures  and  arguments,  which 
prove,  that  affli&ions  are  punifhments,  prove 
alfo,  that  the  law  is  not  repealed:  for  no  man 
can  fuffer  for  breaking  a repealed  law,  nor  by 
the  threats  of  it. 

PROP.  XI. 

The  tenor  of  the  nezu  covenant  is  this , that  Chrif , 
having  made  fuffiuent  fatisf adtion  for  us,  whofo- 

ever 


E l57  ] 

ever  will  repent  and  believe  in  him  to  the  end , fhall 
be  juflified,  through  that  fall  sfidlion,  from  a/l 
that  the  law  did  charge  upon  ' them,  and  be  more- 
over advanced  to  far  greater  privileges  than  they 
Jell  from  : but  zohofoever  fulfil feth  not  thefe  con- 
ditions, fhall  have  no  more  bent  fit  from  the  blood 
of  Chrijl,  than  what  they  here  received  and  abuf- 
ed,  but  muff,  an fwer  the  charge  of  the  l aw  them- 
felves ; and for  their  neglect  of  Chrijl  'mu ft  alfo 
f offer  a fir  greater  condemnation:  or  briefly , 
whofoever  believeth  in  Chrijl,  fhall  not  perfh , 
but  have  everlafling  life  ; but  he  that  believeth 
not,  fiall  not  fee  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abid- 
eth  on  him,.  Mark  xvi.  16.  John  iii.  ig — 18, 
36,  and  v. .24,  and  vi.  35.  40,  47.  and  vii. 
38.  and  xi.  25,  2 6,  and  xii.  46.  A61s  x. 
43.  Rom.  iii.  26.  and  iv.  g.  and  v.  x.  and  x. 
4,  10.  1 John  v.  10.  Mark  i.  13.  and  vi.  12, 
Luke  xiii.  3,  g.  and  xxiv.  47.  Afts  v.  31.  and 
xi.  18.  and  xx.  21.  and  ii.  38.  and  iii.  19.  and 
viii.  22.  and  xxvi.  20.  Rev.  ii.  g.  16.  Heb. 
vi.  x,  2.  2 Pet.  iii.  9. 

l.  /'THrill’s  fahsfaftion  to  the  law  goes  before 
the  new  covenant,  though  not  in  re- 
gard of  its  payment,  (which  was  in  the  fulnefs  of 
time)  vet  in  regard  of  the  undertaking  accept- 
ance, and  efficacy.  There  could  be  no  treating 
on  new  terms,  till  the  old  obligations  were  fatis- 
fied  and  fufpended. 

I account  them  not  worth  the  confuting,  who 

tell 


[ *6*  1 

tell  us,  that  Chrift  is  the  only  party  conditioned 
with  : and  that  the- new  covenant,  as  to  us  hath 
no  conditions.  The  place  they  alledge  for  this 
affertion  is  that,  Jer.  xxxi.  31,  32,  33.  cited  in 
Heb.  viii.  8,  .9,  10.  which  place  containeth  not 
tire  full  tenor  of  the  whole  new  covenant:  but  it 
is  called  the  new  covenant,  becaufe  it  expreffeth 
the  nature  of  the  benefits  oi  the  new  covenant,  as 
they  arc  offered  on  God’s  part,  without  mention- 
ing man's  conditions,  that  being  not  pertinent 
to  the  bufmefs  the  prophet  had  in  hand. 

Thofe  men  erroneoufiv  think,  that  nothing.is 
a condition,  but  what  is  to  be  performed  by  our 
own  flrength  : but  if  they  will  believe  fcripture, 
the  places  before  alledged  will  prove,  that  the 
new  covenant  hath  conditions  on  our  part,  as 
well  as  the  old. 

2.  Some,  benefit  from  C-irri fl  the  condemned 
did  here  receive,  as  the  delay  of  their  condem- 
nation, and  many  more  mercies,  though  they 
turn  them  all  into  greater  judgments, 

prop.  xy. 

Though  Cbirijl  hath JatisJiei  the  lair,  yet  it  is  not 
his  will,  hat  any  man  Jkould  te  jujhfud or  faved 
thereby,  mho  hath  not fame  ground  in  hw/elf  of 
perjonal  and  particular  right  and  ('aim  thereto ; 
nor  that  any Jhonld  be  j uglified  by  the  bicod  only 
as  Jliedor  offered  it,  except  it  be  a!Jo  received  and 
applied  .*  fo  that  no  man,  by  the  mc-:  e jlitisfac- 
..  . iitn.. 


[ *59  ] 

lion  made , is  freed  from  the  law  or  cur  ft  of  the 
ft  ft  violated  covenant  abfolutely,  but  conditionally 
only. 

I Have  (hewed  before,  that  C hr  id  intended  not 
to  remove  all  oar  mifery  as  (oon  as  lie  died, 
nor  as  foon  as  we  believed.  I am  now  to  (hew, 
that  he  doth  not  jullifv  by  the  (bedding  of  his 
blood  immediately,  without  foinewhat  of  man 
inter-veiling,  to  give  him  a legal  title  thereto. 
We  are  therefore  faid  to  be  judified  by  faith. 
Let  all  the  Antinomians  (hew  but  one  feripture 
which  fpeaks  of  juhnication  from  eternity. 

There  are  feveral  other  necellanes  to  jullifv 
and  fuve,  which  being  fuppofed,  the  blood  of 
Chrift  will  be  effectual  : not  that  it  receives  its 
efficacy  from  thefe,  or  that  thefe  do  add  any 
thing  at  all  to  its  worth  or  value  ; no  more  than 
the  cabinet  to  the  jewel ; or  the  applying  hand 
to  the  medicine  ; or  the  offender's  acceptation 
to  the  pardon  of  his  prince:  yet  without  this 
acceptation  and  application,  this  blood  will  not 
be  effectual  to  j nidify  us.  So  that,  as  Audio 
faith,  “ He  that  made  us  without  us,  will  not 
fave  us  without  us.”  A legal  title  we  mud  have, 
before  we  can  be  judified  ; and  there  muff  be 
fomewhat  in  ourfelves  to  prove  that  title,  or 
elfe  all  men  would  have  equal  right. 

PROP.  XIII. 

The  obeying  of  a law , and  performing  the  conditio 
» G12S 


r ] 

ons  of a covenant , or  fatisfying  for  difoledience, 
or  non-performance,  is  our  righteoufnefs,  in  re- 
ference to  that  law  and  covenant. 

IF  we  underhand  not  what  righteoufnefs  is,  we 
may  dispute  long  enough  about  juftification. 
There  is  a two-fold  righteoufnefs,  or  fulfilling 
of  God’s  lav/.  T he  primary,  and  molt  proper 
righteoufnefs,  lieth  in  the  conformity  of  our  ac- 
tions to  the  precept : the  fecondary  is,  when,  - 
though  we  have  hroke  the  precepts,  yet  we  have 
fatistied  for  our  breach,  either  by  our  own  buf- 
fering, or  fome  other  way. 

The  firlt  hath  reference  to  the  commands, 
when  none*can  accufe  us  to  have  hroke  the  law : 
the  fecond  hath  reference  to  the  penalty,  when, 
though  we  have  hroke  the  law,  yet  it  hath  no- 
thing againft  us  for  fo  doing, becaufe  it  is  fatisfied. 
Thefe  two  kinds  of  righteoufnefs  cannot  hand 
together  in  the  fame  perfon,  in  regard  of  the 
fame  lawr  and  aftions  : he  that  hath  one,  hath 
not  the  other  ; he  that  hath  the  firfl  needs  not 
the  fecond.  There  mull  be  a fault,  or  no 
latisl  action  : this  fault  mull  be  confeiTed,  and  fo 
the  lirll  kind  of  righteoufnefs  difclaimed,  before 
fatisfaftion  can  be  pleaded;  and  fatisfadlion  mud 
be  pleaded  before  a delinquent  can  be  juftified. 
This,  well  underllood,  'would  giv£  a clearer  in- 
fierht  into  the  nature  of  our  righteoufnefs  and 
juftification  than  many  have  yet  attained.  The 
great  queftion  is,  of  which  fort  is  gut  righteouf- 
nefs* 


[ i6i  ] 

iiefs  whereby  we  are  juftified  ? I anfwer,  Of  the 
fecond  fort.  The  find  kind  of  righteoufnefs,  as 
it  is  in  Chrift,  cannot,  retaining  its  own  form, 
be  made  ours.  The  law  commanded  our  own 
perfonal  obedience,  and  not  another  for  us. 
We  did  not  perfonally  obey,  obey  in  Chrift-,  and 
God  doth  not  judge  us  to  do  what  we  did  not : 
if  we  had,  vet  it  would  not  have  made  us  juft  ; 
for  one  fin  will  make  us  unjuft  though  we 
were  never  fo  obedient  before  and  after : 
therefore,  if  we  had  obeyed  in  Chrift , and 
yet  finned  in  our  [elves,  we  are  breakers  of  the 
law  ftill ; and  fo  our  righteoufnefs  cannot  be  of 
the  firft  fort.  This  breach  therefore  muft  be 
fatisfied  for,  and  confequently  our  righteoufnefs 
muft  be  of  the  fecond' fort,  feeing  both  cannot 
ftand  in  one  perfon.  Chrift  only  had  both  thefe 
kinds  of  righteoufnefs,  viz.  The  righteoufnefs  of 
perfect  obedience,  and  the  righteoufnefs  of  fatis« 
faction  for  obedience. 

PROP.  XIV. 

Therefore,,  as  there  are  two  covenants,  with  their 
diftinft  conditions  ; fo  is  there  a twofold  rigk- 
teoufnefs , and  bath  of  them  abfolutely  neceff  ary 
io fa! vatic  n. 

P R O P.  XV. 

Our  legal  righteoufnefs,  or  righteoufnefs  of  the  firft 
covenant,  is  not  perfonal,  or  confiftelh  not  in  any 
aclions  performed  by  us  (for  zue  never  per~ 

, . fonally 


[ 162  ] . 


Janally  fatisfied  the  law ) but  it  is  wholly  without  I 
us  in  Chrifti  And  in  this  fenfe  it  is  that  the 
apOjile  ( and  every  Chnjlian ) difclainneth  his 
own  righteoufnefs , or  his  ou  n works. 

Objctl.  l, T^\0TH  not  the  apoflle  fav,  that  as 
? touching  the  righteoufne/s  which  is 
in  the  law,  he  was  blamelefs?  Phil.  iii.  6.  Anf. 
That  is,  lie  fo  exactly  obferved  the  ceremonial 
law,  and  the  external  part  of  the  moral  law,  that 
no  man  could  blame  him  for  the  breach  of  them: 
but  this  is  nothing  to  fuch  a keeping  of  the  whole 
covenant,  as  might  render  him  blaraelefs  in  the 
fight  of  God. 

Object.  2.  Then  Chrifl's  righteoufnefs  and  our 
own  works,  do  concur  to  the  compofing  of  our 
perfect  righteoufnefs.  Anf.  Though  tins  objec- 
tion doth  puzzle  feme  ; yet  the  vanity  of  it  may 
be  eafilv  difeovered  thus  : 

i.  An  action  is  not  righteous,  which  is  not 
conformable  to  the  law  : if  in  feme  refpetts  it 
be  conformable,  and  in  feme  not,  it  cannot  be 
called  a righteous  action ; fo  that  we,  having  no 
actions  perfectly  conformed  to  the  law,  have 
therefore  no  one  righteous  action.  2.  If  we  had, 
yet  many  righteous  actions,  if  but  one  were  un- 
righteous, will  not  ferve  to  denominate  the  per* 
fon  righteous,  according  to  the  law  of  works. 
And  that  thefe,  joined  with  Chrifl's  righteouf* 

nefs,  do  not  make  up  one. righteoufnefs  for  us, 

is  plain  thus ; the  righteoufnefs  which  Are  have 

in. 


[ l63  ] 

I in  Clu  if  is  not  of  the  fame  fort  with  his,  for  hR 
is  a righteoufnefs  of  the  firftkirul,  viz.  c on f fling 
in  conformity  to  the  precept.  But  Chnft’s 
righteoufnefs,  imputed  to  us,  is  only  that  of  the 
fecond  fort,  (viz.  by  fatisfaction  for  our  difobe- 
: dience)  and  cannot  therefore  poflibiy  be  joined 
|j  with  our  perfefb  obedience,  to  make  up  on® 
righteoufnefs  for  us* 

PROP.  XVI. 

Thofe  only  Jhall  have  part  in  Chriftls  fails facliov , 
and  Jo  in  lurn  be  legally  righteous , who  believe 
and.  obey  the  gofptl,  and  fo  are  in  themf elves 
evangelically  righteous . 

P R O P.  XVII. 

Though  Clirijl  performed  the  conditions  of  the  lau\ 
and  fatisfied  for  our  nonperformance  ; yet  it  is 
ourf  elves  that  muf  perf  orm  the  conditions  of  the 
go/pel. 

j!  VIESE  two  pofuions  feem  to  me  fo  plain  and 

clear, that  they  need  not  much  explication: 

yet  becaufe  feme  Antinom;ans,oppofe  them,  T 
fhall  fay  fometlnng  thereto ; though,  for  my 
part,  I do  fo  much  wonder  that  any  able  divines 
fhould  deny  them,  that  metlunks  they  fhould  be 
articles  of  our  creed,  and  a part  of  children’s 
catechifms. 

1 he  righteoufnefs  of  the  new  covenant  being 

the 


[ l64  ] 

4lie performance  ofits  conditions,  and  its  conditi- 
ons being  our  obeying  thegofpel,  or  believing  it; 
Jt  is  plain,  chat  on  no  other  terms  do  we  partake 
of  the  righteoufnefs  ofChrifl.  To  affirm,  there- 
fore, that  our  evangelical,  or  new  covenant 
righteoufnefs,  is  in  Chriji , and  not  in  our  [elves  9 
or  performed  by  Chrill,  and  not  by  ourfelves, 
is  fuch  a monflrous  piece  of  Antinomian  doc- 
trine, as  no  man,  who  knows  the  nature  and 
difference  of  the  covenant,  can  poffibly  enter- 
tain. 

For,  1.  It  implieth  blafpliemy  againft  Chriff, 
as  if  he  had  fin  to  repent  of,  or  pardon  to  ac- 
cept, and  a Lord  that  redeemed  him  to  receive 
and  fubmit  to;  for  thefe  are  the  conditions  of 
the  new  covenant. 

* 2.  It  implieth,  that  Jews  and  Pagans,  and 
every  man  fhall  be  faved.  Do  not  fay  that  I 
odioully  wring  out  thefe  confequences ; they 
are  plain:  for  if  any  be  damned,  it  mull  be  ei- 
ther for  breaking  the  fu  ll  covenant  or  the  fecond: 
if  the  former  be  charged  upon  him,  he  may 
efcape  by  pleading  the  fecond  fulfilled  , if  the 
latter,  the  fame  plea  will  ferve  : fo  that  if  Chrill 
have  fulfilled  both  covenants  for  all  men,  then 
none  can  pern'll. 

3.  It  implies,  that  believing  is  needlefs,  not 
only  as  to  our  jullilication,  but  to  any  other  ufe. 
for  what  need  one  thing  be  twice  done  ? If  Chrill 
have  fulfilled  the  new  convenant  for  us,  as  well 
as  the  old,  what  need  we  do  it  again?  Shall 

we 


[ l65  ] 


Xve  come  after  him  to  do  the  work  Ire  hath  per- 
fefted  ? 

4.  It  confoundeth  law  and  gofpel ; it  over- 
throweth  all  the  laws  and  precepts  of  Chrift ; it 
comradifteth  the  whole  fcope  of  the  fcripture, 
which  telleth  us,  that  Chrift  was  made  under  the 
law,  (and  not  under  the  gofpelj  fulfilled  the  Jaw, 
(but  not  the  gofpel-covenant)  bore  the  curfe  of 
the  law,  (but  not  of  the  gofpel)  and  which  im- 
pofeth  a neceflity  of  fulfilling  the  conditions  of 
•the  gofpel  themfelves  upon  all  that  will  be  juft i- 
fied  and  laved.  To  quote  the  fcriptures  that 
affert  this,  would  be  to  transcribe  almoft  all  the  _ 
-dofih'inal  part  of  the  New  Teh  ament. 


PROP.  XVIII. 

* 

Not  that  we  can  perform  tliefe  conditions  without 
grace-,  (for  without  Chrijl  we  can  do  nothing) 
but  that  he  enabldli  us  to  perform  than  our- 
jtlves  ; and  doth  not  himf-IJ  repent,  believe,  love 
Chrijl,  obey  the  gofpel  for  us , as  he  did  fatisfy 
the  law  for  us. 

PROP.  XIX, 


In  this  fore-explained  fenfe  it  is,  that  men  in  fcrip- 
ture are  faid  to  be  perfoual/y  righteous:  and  in 
this  fevje  it  is,  that  the  faith  and  duties  of  be- 
Gocl,  viz.  as  they  are 
related. 


iievers  are  faid  to  pleafe 


r >66  3 

related  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  not  as  they 
arc  meajured  hy  the  covenant  of  u orks. 

r | ’‘HOSE  that  will  not  acknowledge  that  the 
godly  are-  called  righteous  in  fcripture,  by 
reafon  of  a pe'rfonal  righteoufnefs,  confining  in 
the  reclitude  of  their  own  difpofitions  and  acti- 
ons, as  well  as  in  regard  of  their  imputed  righ- 
teoufnefs, may  he  convinced  from  thcfe  fcrip- 
turcs.  Gen.  vii.  2.  and  xviii.  20,  24.  Job  xvii. 
<).  Pfal.  i.  5,  6.  and  xxxvii.  17,  21,  &c.  Ecclef. 
3x.  i-,  2.  Ezek.  xviii.  20,  24.  and  xxxiii.  12,  13, 
18.  Matt.  ix.  13.  and’xiii.  43.  and  xxv.  37,  46. 
Luke  i.  6-  Heb.  x-i.  4.  1 Pet.  iv.  18.  2 Pet.  ii. 
8.  1 John  iii.  7,  12.  Rev.  xxii.  11.  Matt.  x.  41. 
Rom.  v.  7.  So  their  ways  are  called  righteouf- 
nefs, Pfal.  xv.  2.  and  xxiii.  3.  and  xlv.  7,  &c. 
Matt.  v.  20.  and  xxi.  32.  Luke  i.  75.  Atls  x. 
45.  ' Rom.  vk  13,  16,  18,  19,  20.  1 Cor. 

xv.  34.  1 John  ii.  29.  and  iii.  10.  Eph.  iv. 

24,  &c. 

P,iffnteoufnefs  is  the  denomination  of  our  acti- 
ons or  perfons,  as  they  relate  to  fome  ru!<j. 

When  this  rule  is  the  law  of  man,  and  our 

aftions  fuit  thereto,  we  are  then  righteous  be- 
fore men.  \v  hen  tins  ride  is  Goct  s lat\,  it  is 
either  that  of  works,  or  that  of  grace  : in  rela- 
tion to  the  former,  there  is  none  righteous,  no 
not  one  ; for  all  have  ynr-td.  and  come  Jnori  of 
the  glory  of  God ; but,  in  relation  to  the  rule  of 
the  new  covenant,  all  the  regenerate  are  perfon- 

ally 


[ lt57  J ‘ 

ally  righteous,  becaufe  they  all  perforjm  the  con- 
ditions. of  this  covenant,  and  are  properly  pro- 
nounced righteous  thereby.  Neither  can  it  be 
conceived  how  the  works  of  believers  fhould 
either  pleafe  God,  or  be  called  righteoufnefs,  as 
they  relate  to  that  old  rule,  which  doth  pro- 
nounce them  unrighteous,  and  accurfed. 

But  the  Antinomians,  il  they  do  but  hear  a 
man  talk  of  a righteoufnefs'  in  hunjeif. , ff'artle, 
and  even  gnafh  the  teeth,  as  if  we  preached  flat 
■popery;  vea,  as  if  we  cried  down  Ghrift,  and  fet 
up  ourfelves : not  underftanding  the  difference 
between  the  two  forts  of  righteoufnefs ; that  of. 
the  old  covenant,  which  is  all  out  of  us  in  Chrijl; 
and  that  of  the  new  covenant,  which  is  all  out  of 
Chrilt  in  ourfelves , though  wrought  by  the  power 
of  the  Spirit  of  Chrifh 

PROP.  XX.  - 


j 'In  this  fnj'e  alfo  it  is  [q  far  from  being  an  error 
to  affirm , that  faith  if.  If  is  our  righteoufnefs, 
that  it  is  a truth  necejfary  for  every  Chrijlian 
to  know,  that  is.,  faith  is  our  evangelical  righte- 
oufnefs, as  Chrijl  is  our  legal  light  eoufnefs. 


HPHIS  aflertion,  To  odious  to  thofe  that  under-  . 

-**-  (land  not  its  ground,  is  yet  lo  clear 'from 
■what  is  Paid  before,  that  I need  add  no  more  to 
■prove  it.  For,  t.  a have  cleared  Leloie,  that 
there  muff  be  a perfonal  righteoufnefs,  beffdes 

that 


[ >68  ] 

that  imputed,  in  all  that  are  juftified.  And  that, 
2.  The  fulfilling  of  the  conditions  of  each  cove- 
nant is  our  righteoufnefs,  in  reference  to  that  co- 
venant : but  faith  is  the  fulfil'ino-  of  the  conditions 

O 

of  the  new  covenant;  therefore  it  is  our  righte- 
oufnefs in  relation  to  that  covenant. 

Q’tejl.  In  what  fenfe  then  is  faith  faid  to  be 
imputed  to  us  for  righttoujnefs,  if  it  be  our  righte- 
oufnefs itfelf ? 

AnJ.  Plainly  thus : man  i?  become  unrighteous' 
by  breaking  the  law  of  righteoufnefs  that  was 
given  him;  Chrifl  fully  fail  Tie  th  for  this  tranf- 
grcflion,'  and  buyeth  the  prifoners  into  his  hands, 
and  rnaketh  with  them  a new  covenant;  that 
whofoever  will  believe  in  him,  it  fhall  be  as 
effeffual  for  their  jufiification,  as  if  they  had  ful- 
filled the  law  of  works  themfelves.  A tenant 
forfeiteth  his  leafe  to  his  landlord,  by  not  pa'  ing 
his  rent.  He  rims  deep  in  debt  to  him,  and  is 
di fabled  to  pay  him  any  more  rent  for  the  future; 
whereupon  he  is  put  out  of  his  home,  and  cult 
into  prifon  till  he  pay  the  debt:  his  landlord's 
for.  payeth  it  for  him,  taketh  him  out  of  prifon, 
andputteth  him  in  his  houfe  again,  a-s  his  tenant, 
having  purchafed  houfe  and  all  to  himfelf : he 
maketh  him  a new  leafe  in  this  tenor,  that  paying 
but  a pepper-corn  yearly  to  him,  he  fhall  be  ac- 
quit, both  from  his  debt,  and  from  all  other  rent 
for  the  future,  which  by  his  old  leafe  was  to  be 
paid.  Yet  doth  he  not  cancel  the  old  leafe,  but 
keepeth  it  in  his  hands  to  put  it  in  firit  againft 

the 


r i69  i 

the  tenant,  if  he  fhould  be  fo  foolifh  as  to  deny 
the  payment  of  the  pepper  corn.  In  this  cafe 
the  payment  of  the  grain  of  pepper  is  imputed  to 
the  tenant,  as  if  he  had  paid  the  rent  of  the  ola 
leafe;  yet  this  imputation  doth  not  extol  the 
pepper  corn,  nor  vilify  the  benefit  of  his  bene- 
fadlor,  who  redeemed  him.  Nor  can  it  be  fair!, 
that  the  purchafe  did  only  ferve  to  advance  the 
value  and  efficacy  of  that  grain  of  pepper.  But 
thus,  a perfonal  rent  mull  be  paid  for  the  teftifi- 
cation  of  his  homage:  he  was  never  redeemed  to 
be  independent  as  his  own  landlord  and  mailer  t 
: the  old  rent  he  cannot  pay : his  new  landlord’s 
clemency  is  fuch,  that  he  hathrefolved  thisgrain 
ffiall  ferve  the  turn. 

Do  I need- to  apply  this  in  the  prefent  cafe ; 
or  cannot  every  man  apply  it  ? Even  fo  is  our 
evangelical  righteoufnefs,  or  faith,  imputed  to 
us  for  as  real  righteoufnefs,  as  perfetl  obedience. 
Two  thina's  are  confiderable  in  this  debt  of  rhh- 
teoufnefs;  the  value,  and  the  perlonal  perform- 
ance. The  value  of  Chi  ill’s  latisfaftion  is  im- 
puted to  us,  inllead  of  the  value  of  a perfect 
obedience  of  our  own  performing.  Tlje  value 
of  our  faith  is  not  fo  imputed  : but  becaufe  there 
mull  be  fome  perfonal  homage  ; therefore  faith 
ffiall  be  imputed  to  us  for  fufficient  perfonal 
payment  as  if  we  had  paid  the  full  rent;  becaufe 
Chrill,  whom  we  believe  in,  hath  paid  it,  and  lie 
will  take  this  for  fatisfablorv  homage.  So  it  is 
Vo L.  XXII.  H in 


[ 17°  ] 

in  point  of  perfonal  performance,  and  not  of 
value,  that  faith  is  imputed. 

PROP.  XXI. 

It  is  improper  to  fay , that  Chrijl  firjl  jufifed  our 
. perfons , and  then  our  duties  and  atlions. 

IT  is  improper,  in  the  heft  fenfe:  l.Becaufe  it 
is  contrary  to  the  fcripture  ufe  of  the  word 
jufifying-,  which  is  the  acquitting  of  us  from  the 
charge  of  breaking  the  law,  and  not  from  the 
charge  of  violating  the  new  covenant.  • 2.  It  is  * 
again!!  the  nature  of  the  thing;  feeing  juftifica- 
tion  implieth  accufation ; but  the  efteeming  a 
righteous  aftion  to  be  as  it  is,  doth  not  imply  any 
accufation.  3.  This  fpeech  joining  juftification 
of  perfons  and  aftions  together,  feems  to  intimate 
the  fame  kind  of  juftification  of  both,  and  fo 
tends  to  feduce  the  hearers  to  a dangerous  error. 
For  it  overthrows  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  im-  t 
puted,  and  the  whole  fcope  of  the  gofpel,  and  fets 
up  the  dofftrine  of  juftification  by  works.  For  if 
Godjuftify  our  works  from  anv  legal  accufation, 
as  he  doth  our  perfons,  it  will  follow,  that  our  1 
works  are  juft,  and  confequently  we  are  to  be 
juftified  by  them. 

PROP.  XXII. 

Neither  can  our  performance  of  the  conditions  of 
the  gofpel  he  faid  to  merit  the  ' reward ; feeing 
there  is  nothing  in  the  value  of  it,  which  may 

intitle 


[ ] 

in  title  it  meritorious  ; neither  is  there  any  pro* 
portion  betwixt  it  and  the  reward. 

PROP.  XXIII. 

The  gofpel  doth  e/labUJh,  and  not  repeal  the  moral 
law  ; and Jo  is  perfedl  obedience  commanded , and 
every  jin  forbidden  now  as  exactly  as  under  the 
covenant  of  works. 

• > 

PROP.  XXIV. 

The  pardoning  of  Jin  is  a gracious  acl  of  Cod,  dif- 
charging  the  offender  by  the  gofpel-grant,  from 
the  obligation  to  punijhment,  upon  confederation 
of  the  fatisfaclion  made  byChriff,  accepted  by  the 
finner,  and  pleaded  with  God. 

T CALL  pardon  a gracious  ad ; for  if  it  were 
not  gracious,  or  free,  it  were  no  pardon. 
Let  thofe  think  of  this,  who  fay,  we  have  per- 
fectly obeyed  the  law  in  Chrilt,  and  are  there- 
fore righteous.  If  the  proper  debt,  either  of 
obedience  or'  fuffering,  be  paid,  either  by  our- 
felves  or  by  another,  then  there  is  no  place  left 
for  pardon  : for  when  the  debt  is  paid  we  owe 
nothing,  except  new  obedience  ; and  therefore 
can  have  nothing  forgiven  us : for  the  creditor 
cannot  refufe  the  proper  debt,  not  deny  an  acquit- 
:ance  upon  receipt  thereof.  But  Chrift  having 
paid  the  value,  and  not  the  flrift  debt,  this  fa-> 
Lisfa&ion  the  father- might  accept  or  not;  which 
H 2 hecaufe 


[ i/2  .-]* 

becaufe  he  freely  doth,  therefore  is  his  gracious 
aft  properly  called  pardon. 

*The  ignorant  Antinomians  think,  it  cannot  be 
a free  aft  of  grace,  if  there  be  any  condition  on 
cur  part  for  enjoying  it  : as  if,  in  the  fore- 
mentioned  comparifon,  the  tenant’s  redemption 
were  the  lefs  free,  becaufe  his  new  Ieafe  requires 
the  rent  of  a pepper-corn  in  token  of  homage  ; 
as  if,  when  a pardon  is  procured  for  a condemn- 
ed malefaftor,  * upon  condition  that  he  fhall  not 
rejeft  it  when  it  is  offered  him,  this  was  there- 
fore no  free  pardon. 

PROP.  XXV. 

The  ju/lification  which  zve  have  in  Chnffs  own  j if- 1 
tifica  ion,  is  hut  conditional  as  to  the  particular 
offenders,  and  none  can  lay  claim  to  it  till lu 
have  performed  the  conditions  ; nor  fhall  an\  P 
per  [anally  jujlified  till  then  : even  the  + Elect 
remain  perfonally  unjufi[ed,  till  they  do  belieie 

PROP.  XXVI. 

Men  that  are  thus  conditionally  pardoned  and juj 
tified,  maybe  unpardoned  and  unjuflified  agai 
for  their  non-performance  of  the  conditions , aru 
all  the  debt  fo  forgiven  be  required  at  thei: 
hands  ; and  all  this  without  any  change  in  Geo 
or  in  his  laws. 

P R 01 

N.  B.  Mr.  Baxter  then  held  abfolute  Fredcflinacion. 


PROP.  XXVII. 


Yea,  in  cafe  the  juftified  by  faith fiuuld  ceaf  be- 
lieving, the  fcripture  would  pronounce  them  un - 
jufi  again  ; and  yet  without  any  change  in  God, 
or  fcripture,  but  only  in  themfelves ; becaufi 
their  jiff  cation  doth  continue  conditional  as 
long  as  they,  live  here.  The  fcripture  dothjufi- 
fy  no  man  by  name,  but  all  believers  as  fuch\ 
therefore,  if  they  fiould  ceafeto  be  believers,  they 
would  ceaje  to  bejufifed. 

PROP.  XXVIII. 

The  new  covenant  accufeth  no  than,  as  defervingils 
penalty,  but  only  ihofe  that  perform  not  its  con . 
ditions,  that  is,  the  finally  unbelieving  and  im- 
penitent rebels  againf  Chrijl,  their  rightful 
Lord. 

rT''HAT  the  gofpel  doth  not  condemn  men,  or 
threaten  them  with  damnation  for  any  fins, 
but  unbelief  I dare  not  fpeak  or  think  ; but  that 
the  gofpel  threateneth  no  man  with  damnation  but 
unbelievers  is  out  of  all  queftion ; and  confequent- 
ly  the  proper  fin  threatened  in  the  new  cove- 
nant, as  fuch  is  unbelief:  the  reft  are  but  left 
and  fettled  on  the  finner  by  this. 

PROP.  XXX. 

If  Satan  fiould  accufe  us  of  not  performing  the  con- 
ditions of  the  new  covenant,  we  muft  be  jufified 
H 3 only 


I *7*  J 

only  by  our  faiths  or  perfonal  gqfpel-rigliteouf- 
nefs,  and  not  by  any  thing  that  Chrijl  hath  done 
orfuffered:  for  in  allfalje  accufations  we  mujl 
defend  our  innocency,  and  plead  not  guilty. 

'J'O  tell  Satan,  that  Chrifl:  hath  fulfilled  the 
law  for  us,  when  he  is  accusing  its  of  not 
fulfilling  the  gofpel,  filly  women  are  made  be- 
lieve, by  antinomian  treachers,  is  a folid  way  of 
comforting,  but  Satan  is  a better  logician  than 
to  be  baffled  with  fuch  arguing  : and  as  filly  a 
fhift  it  will  be  to  tell  him,  that  Chrifl  hath  ful- 
filled the  gofpel-conditions  for  us. 

PROP.  XXXI. 

]Ve  muf  not  plead  for  our jujlif cation,  that  Cluijl 
hath  made  us  free  from-  ihe  very  faB ; nor  from 
the  fnfulnefs  ofthefaB ; nor  from  its  deferl'  of 
punifhment : if  Chrifl  had  done  any  of  this  for 
us,  he  mufl  verify  contradiBories.  But  we  muf 
plead,  that  the  penalty  is  not  due  to  our  perfons, 
notzathfanding  the faB,  and  its  fnfulnefs  and 
demerit,  becaufe  Chrif  hath  fatisfed  for  all  this. 

FOR,  lft,  That  the  fa£t  fflould  be  done,  and 
not  done,  is  a contradifilion.  2.  So  is  it,  That 
thefabl  fhould  be  finful,  and  not  finful.  3.  Of 
that  it  fhould  deferve  death,  and  not  deferve  it ; 
Or  that  it  fhould  be  a fin  againft  that  threatning 
law,  and  yet  not  deferve  the  penalty  threatened. 
Befides,  if  any  of  thefe  three  could  have  been 

taken 


[ *75  ] 

taken  off,  what  need  Chrift  have  died  ?' 
But  that  which  juftification  freeth  us  from,  is  the 
duenefs  of  punifhmentto  our  perfons,  notwith- 
ilanding  the  duenefs  of  it  to  the  fin  ; becaufe 
what  is  due  to  the  fin  is  infliffed  on  the  perfon 
of  another  already,  even  Chriff. 

PROP.  XXXII. 

Before fin  is  committed,  it  is  no  fin  ; and  where 
there  is  no  Jin,  the  penalty  is  not  due  ; and 
where  it  is  not  due,  it  cannot  be  forgiven ; there- 
forefin  is  not  forgiven  before  it  be  committed. 

PROP.  XXXIII. 

* It  is  faith  which  juf  ifeth  men,  l.  In  the  nearcfl 
fenfe,  direElly  and  properly,  as  it  is  the  fulfil- 
ling of  the  condition  of  the  new  covenant.  2.  In 
the  remote  and  more  improper  fenfe,  as  it  is  the 
receiving  of  Chrifl  and  his  fatisfatlory  right  e-- 
oufiefs. 

r B "'HAT  it  is  faith  in  a proper  fenfe  that  is  faid 
to  juftify,  and  not  Chrift’s  righteoufnefs 
only  which  it  receiveth,  may  appear  from  the 
plain  and  conftant  phrafe  of  fcripture,  which 
faith,  he  that  believeth  {hall  be  juflified;  and 
that  we  are  juftified  by  faith  ; and  that  faith  is 
imputed  for  righteoufnefs.  It  had  been  as  eafy 
for  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  have  faid,  that  Chrift 
H 4 only 


[ i76  ] 

only  is  imputed,  or  his  righteoufnefs  only,  or 
Chrift  onlyjuftifieth  if  he  had  fo  meant. 

Thatfaith  doth  moftdiredilv  and  properly  juftify, 
(as  it  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  coirdiiion  of  the  new  co- 
venant) appeareth  thus,  1.  The  new  covenant  only 
doth  put  the  {lamp  of  God’s  authority  upon  it  in 
making  it  the  condition.  A two-fold  (lamp  is  ne- 
ceiTary  to  make  it  a current  medium  of  ourjuflifi- 
cation.  1.  Command.  2.  Promife.  Now  God 
hath  neither  commanded  any  other  means  ; nor 
promifed  j unification  to  any  other  ; therefore  it 
is,  that  this  is  the  only  condition,  and  fo  only 
thus  juffifieth.  When  I read  this  to  be  the  tenor 
, of  the  new  covenant,  ( whofoever  believeth 
fliall  be  juflifiedj  doth  it  not  tell  me  plainly  why 
faith  juffifieth  ? Even  becaufe  it  pleafeth  the 
Law  giver  and  Covenant-maker  to  make  faith 
the  condition  of  it. 

That  faith’s  receiving  Chrift  and  his  righteouf- 
nefs, is  only  the  remote  reafon  why  it  doth  juftify 
appeareth  thus,  1.  I would  ask  this  queftion;  fup- 
pofe  that  Chrift  had  done  all  that  he  did  for  fin- 
ners,  and  they  had  believed  in  him  thereupon 
without  any  covenant  promifing  juftification  to 
this  faith,  would  this  faith  have  juftified  them  ? 
By  what  law  ? Or  whence  would  they  plead 
their  juftification  at  the  bar  of  God  ? Well  ; but 
fuppofe  that  Chrift,  having  done  what  he  did  for 
us,  had  in  framing  the  new  covenant,  putin  any 
other  condition ; and  faid,  [whofoever  lcveth 
God  fliall,  by  virtue  of  my  fatisfa&ion,  be  jufti- 

fiedj 


[ >77  ] 


fied]  would  not  this  love  have  juftified  ? No  doubt 
of  it.  I conclude  then  thus ; the  receiving 
of  Chrid,  is  as  the  diver  of  this  coin  : the  gob- 
pel  promife  is  as  the  king’s  {lamp,  which  makes 
it  current  for  juftifying.  If  God  had  feen  meet 
to  have  damped  any  thing  elfe,  it  would  have 
pafled  currently ; yet  take  this,  faith  is,  even 
to  our  own  apprehenfion,  the  mod  apt  and  fuitable 
condition  that  God  could  have  chofen  : for,  (as 
far  as  we  can  know)  there  cannot  be  a more  ra- 
tional and  apt  condition  of  delivering  a redeemed 
malefaflor  from  torment,  than  that  he  thankfully 
accept  the  pardon  and  favour  of  redemption  and 
hereafter  take  his  redeemer  for  his  Lord. 

* So  that  if  you  afk  me,  what  is  the  formal 
reafonwhy  faith  judifieth  ? 

I anfwer,  Becaufe  Chrid  hath  made  it  the  con- 
dition of  the  new  covenant,  and  promifed  judifi.- 
cation  upon  that  condition. 

But,  2.  If  you  aflt  me  further,  why  did  Chrid 
chufe  this,  rather  than  any  thing  elfe  for  the 
condition  ? 

I anfwer,  1.  To  afk  a reafon  of  Chrid’s  choice 
and  commands,  is  not  always  wife  or  fafe.  2. 
But  here  the  reafon  is  fo  appearent  that  we  may 
fafely  adventure  to  fay,  that  nothing  could  be 
.more  proportionable  to  our  poverty*  who  have 
nothing  to  buy  with,  than  thus  freely  to  receive. 
Nothing  could  be  more  reafonable,  than  to  ac- 
knowledge him  who  hath  redeemed  us  and  to 
take  him  for  our  redeemer  and  Lord. 

H 5 


PROP. 


[ ] 

PROP.  XXXIIL 


Juf if  cation  is  not  a fingJe  a El,  begun,  and  ended 
immediately  upon  our  believing  ; but  a conti/ru- 
ed aid,  which,  though  it  be  in  its  kind  complete 
from  the frfl,yet  is  it Jhll  in  doing,  till  thejinal 
jujlification  at  the  Judgment  day. 

THIS  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  att: 

it  being,  as  I (hewed  before,  an  act  of  God 
by  his  gofpel.  Now.  1.  God  flill  continueth 
that  gofpel  covenant  in  force.  2.  That  covenant 
flill  continueth  juftifying  believers.  3.  God 
himfelf  doth  continue  to  efteem  them  according- 
ly. This  fheweth  you  therefore  with  what  limi- 
tation to  receive  the  afTertion  that  j unification 
funul  & femel,  performed.  2.  That  the  jufl  ified 
may  pray  for  the  continuance  of  their  jufiifica- 
tion.  And  3.  That  Chrift’s  fatisfaftion  and  our 
faith  are  of  continual  ufe,  and  not  to  be  laid  bv, 
when  we  are  once  juftified,  as  if  the  work  was 
done. 

PROP.  XXXIV. 

The  bare  a El  of  believing  is  not  the  only  condition 
of falvation  by  the  new  covenant-,  but  federal 
other  duties  alfo  are  parts  of  that  condition. 

I Defire  no  more  of  thofe  that  deny  this,  but 
that  feripture  may  be  judge  ; and  that  they 
Will  put  by  no  one  text  to  that  end  produced,  till 

they 


[ *79  ] 

they  can  give  fome  other  commodious}  and  not 
forced  interpretation. 

1.  Then  that  pardon  of  fin  and  falvation  are 

promifed,  upon  condition  of  repenting,  as  well 
as  believing,  is  undeniably  afierted  from  thefe 
feriptures,  Mark  i.  15.  and  vi.  12.  Luke  xiii.  3... 
5.  Adis  ii.  38.  and  iii.  19.  and  viii.  22.  and 
xvii.  30.  and  xxvi.  20.  and  v.  31.  and  xi.  18. 
Luke  xxiv.  47.  Heb.  vi.  1.  2 Pet.  iii.  9. 

2.  That  praying  for  pardon,  and  forgiving 
others,  are  conditions  of  pardon,  is  plain,  Matt, 
vi.  12,  14,  15.  and  xviii.  35.  Mark  xi.  25, 
26.  Luke  vi.  37.  and  xi.  4.  1 John  i.  9.  James’ 
v.  15.  John  xiv.  13,  14,  1 John  v.  13.  Adds 
viii.  22. 

3.  That  love,  and  fincere  obedience,  and 
works  of  love,  are  alfo  parts  of  the  condition, 
appeareth  in  thefe  feriptures,  Luke  vii.  47.  Mat. 
v.  44.  Luke  vi.  27,  35.  John  xi.  12,  17.  1 
Cor.  ii.  9.  Rom.  viii.  28.  Ephef.  vi.  24.  1 Cor. 
xvi.  22.  James  i.  12.  and  ii.  .5.  John  xiv.  21. 
Pro.  viii.  17,  21.  John  xvi.  27.  Mat.  x.  37, 
Luke  xiii.  24.  Phil.  ii.  12.  Rom.  ii.  7,  10  1 
Cor.  ix.  24.  2 Tim.  ii.  3,  12.  1 Tim.  vi.  18, 
19.  Rev.  xxii.  14,  Luke  xi.  28.  Mat.  xxv.  41, 
42.  Jamesii,  21,  22,  23,  24,  26. 

' PROP.  XXXV. 

Therefore,  though  the  non-performance  of  any  hnr 
of  thefe  be  threatened  with  certain  death’,  yet 
H 6 there 


[ i8o  ] 

there  mujl  be  a concurrence  of  them  all,  to  make 
up  the  conditions  which  have  the  promife  of 
' life. 

THEREFORE  we  oftner  read  of  death 
threatened  to  thofe  that  repent  not,  than 
life  promifed  to  them  that  repent : and  when 
you  do  read  of  life  promifed  to  any  one  of  thefe, 
you  mull  underhand  it,  as  it  hands  conjunct 
with  the  reh.  And  though  I think  that  in  re- 
gard of  their  exihence,  they  never  are  divided  : 
(for  where  God  giveth  one,  he  giveth  all  yet  in 
cafe  they  were  feparated,  the  gofpel  would  not 
fo  own  them  as  its  entire  conditions. 

PROP.  XXXVI. 

Yet  faith  may  be  called  the  only  condition  of  the 
new  covenant,  becaufe  all  the  rejl  are  reducible 
to  it-,  either  being  prefuppofed,  as  nectjfary  an- 
tecedents or  means,  cr  contained  in  it-,  or  elfe 
implied  us  its  immediate  fruits. 

O UBSERVIENT  a£lionsare  in  common  fpeech 
implied  in  the  principal.  If  the  befieged 
be  bound  by  articles  to  furrender  a town  to  the 
befiegers  at  fuch  a time,  it  need  not  be  exprelf- 
ed  in  the  articles,  that  they  lha.ll  withdraw  their 
guards,  and  ceafe  rehhante,  and  open  the  gates, 
and  yield  up  this  houfe,  or  that  hreet.  All  this 
is  implied  clearly  in  the  article  of  furrender. 


So 


r is.  ] 

So  here,  the  great  condition  of  believing 
doth  include  or  imply  all  the  reft. 

1.  Hearing  the  word,  confideration,  convic- 
tion, godly  borrow,  repentance  irom  dead  works, 
&re  implied  as  neceifarv  means  antecedent. 

2.  Knowledge  of  Chrift,  and  alfent  to  the 
truth  of  the  gofpel,  as  eftential  parts  of  faith. 

3.  Preferring  of  Chnll  above  all  in  judgment, 
will,  and  affeftion,  is  (in  my  judgment)  the  very 
eftential  property  of  true  faith,  -differencing  it 
from  all  falfe  faith. 

4.  Love,  fincere  obedience,  and  works  of 
love,  are  the  immediate  products  of  faith  ; as 
heat  and  light  aie  of  five. 

5.  The  praying  for  forgivenefs,  the  forgiving 
of  others,  the  pleading  of  Chrift’s  fatisfaftion, 
are  both  parts  of  this  obedience,  and  necelfary 
confeqnents  of  faith,  and  aids  fubfervient  to  it. 

6.  1 he  denying  and  humbling  of  the  flefh,  the 
ferious,  conftant  ufe  of  God's  ordinances,  hear- 
ing, praying,  meditating,  &c.  are  both  parts  of 
the  forefaid  obedience,  and  alfo  the  neceftary 
means  of  continuing  and  exercifing  our  faith, 

PROP.  XXXVff. 

As  it  is  God’s  method  in  giving  the  moial  law , fir  ft; 
to  bring  men  to  take  him  only  for  their  God, 
(which  is  therefore  called  thef  rjl  and  great 
commandment ) and  then  to  prefcnbe  the  parti- 
cular duties  : f o is  it  the  method  of  Chrijl  inthe 

gofpf  ' 


[ ] 

gofpel,  jirjl  to  ejlablijh  with  men  his  ojjice  and 
authority , and  require  an  acknowledgment  of 
them,  and  fulqechon  to  them  ; and  then  to  pre- 
fcnhe  to  them  their  particular  duties  in  fubor- 
dination. 

PROP.  XXXVIII. 

Faith  therefore  is  the  fummary  condition  of  the 
gfpel , as  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  As 
taking  the  Lord  for  our  only  God,  is  the  fum  of 
the  decalogue,  implying  or  inferring  all  the  rejl, 
and fo  is  the  great  commandment  ; fo  taking  t 
Chrijl  for  our  only  Redeemer  and  Lord,  is  the 
Jam  of  the  conditions  of  the  new  covenant,  in- 
eluding,  implying,  or  inferring  all  other  putts 
of  its  conditions , and  Jo  the  great  command  cf 
the  gofpel. 

THE  full  fubjeOion  to  the  authority  command- 
ing, doth  imply  fubjeflion  to  the  particular 
commands  : therefore  God  doth  Hill  make  this  the 
fum  of  the  conditions  of  the  law,  that  they  take  him 
only  for  theirGod,  or  that  theyhave  no  other  gods 
but  him  : and  when  he  contrafteth  his  covenant 
into  an  epitome,  it  runs  thus,  L will  he  thy  God 
and  thou  Jhalt  be  my  people,'  Exod.'xx.  3.  and 
xxiii.  13-  Deut.  vii.  4.  and  viii.  19.  and  xiii.  2. 
3,  & c.  Jof.  xxiv.  2,  16,  &c.  Judges  ii.  12- 
57,  19.  and  x.  13.  1 Sam.  viii.  8.  2 Kings  v. 

17. 

T Although  this  is  not  the  fame  definition  (in  terms)  with  tbit 
cf  our  church,  yet  it  is  reducible  to  ihe  fame. 


[ lg3  1 

1 7,  and  xvii.  7.  Jer.  xxii.  9 and  vii.  23.  and 
xi.  4.  and  xxx.  22.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  28.  Dent. 
xx\i.  id,  17,  See.  And  as  God's  promife  of  tak- 
ing us  lor  his  people  doth' implv  his  bellowing 
upon  us  all  the  privileges  and  blefiings  of  his  peo- 
ple, and  fo  is  the  fum  ol  all  the  conditions  of 
the  covenant  on  his  part  : even  fo  our  taking 
the  Lord  lor  our  God,  and  Chrid  for  our  Redeem- 
er and  Lord,  doth  imply  our  fincere  obedience 
to  him  ; and  is  the  fum  of  the  conditions  on  our 
part. 

PROP.  XXXIX. 

Faith,  in  the  largef fen fe,  as  it  comprehendeih  all 
the  conditions  of  the  nezo  covenant , may  be  thus 
defined : it  is,  udien  a Jitnier,  by  the  word  and 
Spirit  oJChrift,  being  thoroughly  convinced  of 
the  nghteou fiefs  of  the  law,  the  truth  of  its 
threatmng,  the  evil  cf  his  own  fin , and  the 
great  ne fs  of  his  inifery  hereupon,  and  uithal  of 
the  nature  and  offices,  ftfficiency  and  excellency 
of  Jtfus  Chrijl,  the  J atisfaBion  he  hath  made, 
his  zvillingnejs  to  fave , and  his  free  offer  to  all 
that  will  accept  him  for  their  Lord  and  Saviour, 
doth  hereupon  believe  the  ti  nth  of  this  gnfpefand 
accept,  of  Chrifas  his  only  Lord  and  Saviour  t& 

■ bring  him  to  God,  his  chiefefl  good,  and  to  pre - 
fnt  him  pardoned  and  jujl  before  him , and  to  be- 
flow  upon  him  a more  glorious  inheritance ; and 
does  accordingly  ref  on  him  as  his  Saviour,  and 
obey  him  as  kis  Lord,  forgiving  others,  loving 

his 


[ 18*.  ] 

his  people,  bearing  what  J offerings  are  impofed , 
diligently  ufi.ig  his  means  and  ordinances,  and 
confeffng  and  bewailing  his  Jins  again f him, 
and  praying  [or  pardon  ; and  all  this  Jincerdy, 
and  to  the  end. 

r I 'HIS  is  the  condition  of  the  new  conve- 
A nant  at  large  : that  all  this  is  fometimes  cal- 
led faith,  is  plain  hence, 

x.  In  that  faith  is  oft  called  the  obeying  of  the 
gofpel,  but  the  gofpel  commandeth  all  this, 
Rom.  x.  16.  1 Pet.  i.  22.  and  iv.  17.  2 Thef. 
i.  8.  Gal.  111.  1.  and  v.  7.  Heh.  v.  9. 

2;  The  fulfilling  of  the  conditions  of  the  new 
covenant  is  oft  called  by  the  name  of  faith  and 
fooppofed  to  the  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  the 
old  covenant,  called  works  ; but  thefe  foremen- 
tioned  are  parts  of  the  condition  of  the  new  co- 
venant, and  therefore  implied  in  faith,  Gal.  iii. 
12,  23,  25. 


PROP.  XL. 

From  what  hath  been  [aid,  it  appeartlh  in  what 
fenfe  faith  only  jufiifeth,  and  in  what  ftrfe 
works  alfo  jujlify,  viz.  1.  Faith  only  jujiifeth , 
as  it  unplieth  all  other  parts  of  the  condition  of 
the  new  covenant.  2.  Faith  only  jufifieth  as  the 
great  m after  dutv  of  the  gofpel,  to  which  all  the 
ref  are  reducible.  3.  Faith  only  doth  not  jujlify 
in  oppofuion  to  the  works  of  the  gofpel-,  but 

thefe 


r i85  } 

tho/e  works  do  afo  juftify , as  the Jecondary  remote 
parts  of  the  condition  oj  the  covenant. 

T Know  this  is  the  doctrine  that  will  have  the 
loudefi  outcries  raifedagainft  it;  and  will  make 
fome.  cry  otlt,  llciefy , Popery,  Socinianifn ! and 
what  not?  For  my  own  part,  the  Searcher  of 
hearts  knoweth,  that  not  Angularity,  affetlation  or 
novelty,  nor  any  good-will  to  popery,  provoketh 
me  to  entertain  it : but  that  I have  earneilly 
fought  the  Lord's  direftion  upon  my  knees,  be- 
fore I duifl  adventure  on  it;  and  that  I refilled 
the  light  of  this  conclufion  as  long  as  I was  able: 
but  a man  cannot  force  his  own  underilanding, 
if  the  evidence  of  truth  force  it  not;  though  he 
may  force  his  pen,  or  tongue,  to  filence  or  dif- 
fenibling. 

PROP.  XLI. 

That  we  are  jufificd  by  fncere  obedience  to  ChriJ 7, 
as  the  fxondary  part  of  the  condition  of  our 
j unification,  is  evident  alfo  from  thefe  following 
fcriptures,  Matth.  xii.  37.  Mark  xi.  25,  2iji. 
Luke  vi.  37.  Matth.  vi.  12,  14,  15.  1 Johp 

i.p.  Afts  viii.  22.  A£ls  iii.  19.  and  xxii.  16, 
1 Pet.  iv.  18.  Rom.  vi.  16.  1 Pet.  i.  2,  2?. 

PROP.  XLII. 

Our full jujiifi cation^  and  our  everfajhn g falvation » 

have 


[ ^6  ] 

have  the  fame  conditions  cn  our  part : but  fn- 
ctre  obedience  is,  without  all  doubt , a condition 
erf  our  filvation therefore  afo  of  our  jujlifi- 
cation. 

T Say,  our  full  jufiification  ; becaufe,  as  I have 
■*-  fhewed,  our  firil  pqifeffion  of  it  is  upon  our 
mere  faith:  but  I think  our  glorification  willbe  ac- 
knowledged to  have  the  fame  conditions  with 
our  final  juflificadon  at  the  bar  of  Chrilt.  And 
why  not  our  entire  continued  jnfiification  on 
earth  ? You  may  objeft,  perfeverance  is  a con- 
dition of  our  glorification  ; but  'not  of  our  jufti- 
fication  here.  I anfwer,  1.  Perfeverance  is 
nothing  but  the  fame  conditions,  perfevering. 
2.  As  the  finccrity  of  faitli  isreqitifite  to  ourfirfi:’ 
polfefuon  of  jufiification ; fo  the  perfeverance  of 
faith,  is  the  condition  of  perfeveringjuftification. 
See  Hefi.  hi-  14* 

,2.  That  obedience  is  a condition  of  our  falva- 
tion,  is  undoubted,  Heb.  v.  g.  Chrifl  is  the  au- 
thor of  eternal  falvation  to  all  them  that  obey 
him;  fo  fully,  Rom.  ii.  7,8,9,10.  Rev.  x'xii. 
14.  Biffed  are  they  that  do  his  commandments,  that 
they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter 
by  the  gates  into  the  city-  And  hath  that  no  hand  in 
their  jufiification,  which  giveth  them  right  to 
the  tree  of  life  ? 

PROP.  XLIII. 

Th.is  do  chine  is  no  whit  derogatory  to  Chrifl  and  his 

righteoufnefs : 


[ i«7  1 

npjiteoufnefs  : for  he  that  afcribelh  to  faith  or 
obedience , no  part  of  that  work  which  belongetk 
to  Chefs  fatijahlory  righteoufnejs,  doth  not 
derogate  from  it:  but  he  that  makeih  faith  and 
obedience  to  Chrifi,  to  be  only  the fulfilling  of  the 
conditions  of  the  new  covenant,  and  fo  to  be  only 
conditions  of  full juftification  by  kirn,  doth  give 
them  no  part  of  the  work  oj  his  righle'oufnefs ; 
feeing  he  came  not  to fulfil  the  gofpel but  the  law . 

PROP.  XLIV. 

To  conclude,  it  is  mojl  clear  in  feripture , that  our 
jujiifkation,  at  the  great  judgment,  will  be  ac- 
cording to  our  works,  and  to  what  vjehave  done 
in  the  fiefii,  whether  gobd  or  evil.  And  Chnjl 
■will  then  give  the  reafon  oj  his  public  fentence 
from  mens  keeping  or  breaking  the  conditions  of 
his  covenant-,  that  fo  the  mouths  of  all  mdy  be 
fiopped , and  the  equity  of  his  judgment  may  be 
manifefi  to  all , and  that  he  inay  there  Jhow  forth 
his  hatred  to  the  fins,  and  not  only  to  the  per  fins 
of  the  condemned,  and  his  love  to  the  obedience, 
and  not  only  to  the  perfons  of  the  jiflificd. 

HERE  I have  thefe  things  to  prove  : 1.  T hat 
thejuftifying  fentence  fhall  pafs  according1 
to  works,  as  well  as  faith.  2.  That  the  reafon  is, 
becaufe  they  are  parts  of  the  condition. 

For  the  firft,  fee  Matth.  xxv.  21,  23.  Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  Jervant ; thou  hafl  been 

faithful 


r .ss  ] 

faithful  over  a few  things,  1 will  make  thee  ruler  over 
many  things:  enter  thou  in'o  the  joy  of  thy  Lcn  d. 
And  molt  plain  is  that  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Juoge  himfelf,  defcrtbing  the  order  of  the  pro- 
cefs  at  that  day,  Matth.  xxv.  34,  35.  Come  ye 
biffed,  inherit  the  kingdom , &c.  For  I was  hun- 
gry, &c.  So  1 Pet.  i.  17.  Who,  without  ref  peel 
°J Perfns,  judgetk  according  to  every  man's  work. 
So  2 Cor.  v.  10.  We  mujt  all  appear  before  the 
judgment-feat  of  Chrfl,  that  every  one  may  receive 
the  things  done  in  his  body , according  to  that  he 
hath  done,  whether  good  or  bad.  So  Rev.  xx.  12, 
13.  The  v were  judged  every  man  according  to  his 
works.  Heb.  xiii.  17.  Phil.  iv.  17.  Matth.  xii. 
36,  &c.  But  this  is  evident  alreadv. 

2.  As  it  is  bevond  doubt  that  Chrilt  will  then 
juftify  men  accordingto  their  works:  fo  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  this  is  not  only  to  difeover  the  fincerity 
of  their  faith;  but  that  it  is  alfo,  as  they  areparts 
of  that  evangelical  rigbteoufnefs,  which  i.<  the 
condmon  of  their  juflification. 

T]ie  very  phrafes  of  the  text  import  as  much, 
Matth.  xxv.  21,  23.  Well  do  -e,  good  and faithful 
fervant,  £?r.  Matth.  xxv.  3^,  35.  For  I was 
hungry,  &c.  And  in  the  red,  According  to  their 
works.  Can  anymore  be  faid  of  faith,  than  that 
we  are  jollified  or  adjudged  to  life,  both  for  it 
and  accordim:  to  it  ? 

O 

But  the  common  opinion  is,  that  it  is  to  fatisfv 
the  condemned  world  of  the  fmceritv  of  the  faith 
_of  the  godly.  But  this  cannot  Hand  with  the 

truth  : 


[ *s9  ] 


truth:  For,  1.  It  is  clearly  expreiTed  as  aground 
orreafon  of  the  featence.  2.  And  to  the  cortfola- 
tion  and  juilification  ot  the  juftihed;  and  not  to 
the  fattslattion  or  conviction  ol  others. 

If  God's  jultice  engage  him,  not  to  forget 
their  work  oi  faith  and  labour  of  love,  Heb.  vi. 
10,  11,  12.  if  the  dead  mChnll  are  bleiled  hecaufe 
their  works  follow  them.  Rev.  xiv.  13.  if 
in  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  God  and  work- 
eth  righteoufnefs,  he  accepted  of  him,  Acts  x. 
3,5.  if  men  fhall  reap  the  fruit  of  well  doing  in 
due  time,  Gal.  vi.  7,  8,  9.  if  ininiffers  fave  them- 
felves,  in  taking  heed  to  themfelves  and  to  their 
dottrme,  1 Tim.  iv.»  16.  if  he  that  doth  righte- 
oufnefs  is  righteous,  1 John  iii.  7.  if  whatfoever 
good  thing  anv  man  doth,  the  fame  he  fhall  re- 
ceive of  the  Lord,  Ephef.  vi.  8.  if  hearing  and 
doing  be  building  on  a rock,  Matth.  vii.  23.  if 
the  doers  of  God’s  will  be  the  mothers,  fibers 
and  brothers  of  Chrill,  Matth.  xii.  30,  See.  then 
the  mention  of  thefe  works  at  judgment,  is  more 
than  to  fignify  their  fincerity  to  the  condemned 
world. 

Let  me  conclude  with  two  or  three  cautionary- 
queries  concerning  the  inconvenience  of  the  con- 
trary' doftrine. 

Query  1.  Doth  it  not  needlefly  con/lrain  men 
to  wrefl  moll  plain  and  frequent  exprefhons  of 
feripture  ? 

* Q.  2.  Doth  it  not  uphold  the  dangerous 
pillar  of  the  Antinomian  do&rine,  that  we  rouft 


not 


[ x9°  ] 

not  work  or  perform  our  duties  for  life  and  falva- 
tion,  but  only  from  life  and  falvation;  that  we 
mull  not  make  the  attaining  of  juflification,  or 
falvation,  an  end  of  our  endeavours,  but  obey  in 
thanlcfnlnefs  only,  becaufe  we  are  faved  and 
juflified?  A dodlrine,  which,  if  it  were  reduced 
to  praflice  by  all  that  hold  it,  (as  I hope  it  is  iiol) 
would  undoubtedly  damn  them-.  for  he  that  feeks 
not,  and  that  ftriveth  not  to  enter,  fliall  never 
enter.  Now  if  good  works,  or  fincere  obedience 
, to  Cirri  (l  our  Lord,  be  no  part  of  the  condition 
oj  our  full  jollification  and  falvation,  who  will 
rife  them  to  that  end  f For  how  it  can  procure 
jullification  as  a means,  and  not  byway  oi  con- 
dition, I cannot  conceive, 

*,Q.  g.  Whether  this  doftrine  doth  not  tend 
■to  drive  obedience  out  of  the  world  for  if  men 
do  once  believe,  that  it  is  not  1 o much  as  a part 
of  the  condition  of  their  juflification,  will  it  not 
much  tend  to  relax  their  diligence  f 1 know 
mere  love  and  thankfulnefs  Jiiou/d  be  enough; 
-and  fo  thev  mil,  when  all  our  ends  are  attained 
in  our  ultimate  end:  then  we  fliall  have  nothing 
to  do  but  to  love,  and  joy,  and  praife,  and  be 
thankful ; but  that  is  not  vet.  Sure  as  God  hath 
given,  us  the  afleflions  of  fear,  and  defire,  and 
hope ; fo  he  would  have  us  ufe  them  for  the 
attainment  of  our  great  ends:  therefore  he  that 
tal'Vth  down  but  one  of  all  our  motives  to  obedi- 
ence, helps  to  deftroy  obedience  itfelf,  feeing 


we 


[ *9*  J 

we  have  need  of  every  motive  that  God  hath  left 

illS. 

Q.  4.  Doth  it  not  much  confirm  the  world  in 
their  imaginary  faith  ? Sure  that  faith,  which  is 
by  many  thought  to  jollify,  is  it  that  people  moil 
eafily  embrace ; that  is,  the  receiving  of  Chrift 
for  their  Saviour,  but  not  for  their  King,  not  de- 
livering up  themfelves  to  be  ruled  by  him. 

Men  are  eafilv  perluaded  to  believe,  that 
Chrift  will  pardon  and  lave  them,  and  to  expett 
jollification  Irom  him  alone  : but  it  is  the  hardelt 
thing  in  the  world,  "to  perfuade  them  really  to 
take  him  lor  their  Lord,  and  Ins  word  for  their 
law,  and  to  endeavour  faithful  obedience  accord- 
ingly. Sure]}- the  .bufinefsbf  the  former,  and  the 
difficulty  qi  the- hitter,  tells  us,  that  this  hath  more 
need  to  be  preached  than  the  other,  (though  fome 
think  that  nothing  is  preaching  Chrift,  but 
■ preaching  him  as  a pardoning,  jollifying  Saviour.) 
Indeed  among  the  Turks  or  Indians,  that  enter- 
tain not  the  gofpel,  it  is  as  necelfary  to  preach 
his  pardoning  office,  yea,  and  the.  variety  of  his 
-natures  and  commiffion  : therefore  the  ‘apoftles 
when  they  preached  to  Jews  or  Pagans,  did  fu  ll 
-and  chiefly  teach  them  the  perfon  and  offices  of 
'Chrift,  and  the  great  benefits  which  they  might 
receive  by  him.  But  when  they  preach  (as James.) 
to  profeffors  of  the  Chriftian  faith,  they  chiefly 
-urge  them  to.  ftrive  to  enter  ; to  fight,  that  they 
mav  conquer  ; fo  to  run,  that  they  may  obtain; 
to  lay  violent  hands  upon  the  kingdom,  and  take  it 

l-y 


[ x92  ] 

by  force,  and  to  be  unwearied  in  laborious  obedi- 
ence to  Chrifi  their  Lord  ; to  be  ftedfaft,  un- 
moveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  forafmuch  as  they  know  iheir  labour  is  not 
in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

,5.  La/lly,  Is  not  this  excluding  of  fincere  obe- 
dience from  final  jollification,  the  great  Ilumbling- 
block  of  Papi  11s,  and  that  which  hath  a great  hand 
in  turning  many  learned  men  from  the  protef- 
t.int  religion  to  popery  ? When  they  fee  the 
language  of'fcripture  in  the  fore-cited  places  fo 
plain  to  the  contrary:  when  Illvricus,  G alius, 
Amfdoifius,  &c.  fhall  account  it  a herefy  in 
George  Major  to  fay,  that  good  works  are  ne- 
ceffarv  to  falvation:  when  even  Mdancton  s 
credit  is  blalled,  for  being  too  great  a friend  to 
jgood  works,  though  he  afcribe  not  to  them  tire 
lead  part  of  the  work  or  office  of  Chrift:  and 
when  to  this  day  many  Antinomian  teachers, 
who  are  magnified  as  the  only  preachers  of  fiee- 
grace,  do  affiert,  that  there  is  no  more  required 
to  the  perfePt  irrevocable  juftification  of  the  vi  left 
murderer  or  whore-mafler,  but  to  believe  that 
he  is  jullified,  or  to  be  perfuaded  that  God  lo\  et'n 
him. 

Do  thefe  men  think  that  we  are  perfectly 
juRified  aiul  laved  already,  before  the  abfolving 
fentenceat  the.  great  tribunal,  or  the  pofiefiion  of 
the  kingdom,  for  which  we  wait  in  hope  ? In- 
deed when  we  have  that  perfeft  falvation,  see 
fhall  not  need  to  feek  it,  or  labour  to  attain  it ; 

but 


[ 193  ] 

but  muft  everlaftingly  be  thankful  to  him  that 
hath  purchafed  it,  and  to  him  that  hath  bellowed 
it.  But,  in  the  mean  time,  he  that  feeketh  not, 
fhall  not  find  ; and  he  that  runs  not,  fhall  not 
obtain  : no,  nor  all  that  feek  and  run  neither, 
Luke  xiii.  24.  Luke  xii.  31.  2 Tim.  ii.  5. 

* The  common  afiertion  then,  That  good 
works  do  follow  juflifi cation,  but  not  go  before  it, 
mull  be  thus  underftood,  viz.  Afftual  obedience 
goeth  not  before  the  firft  moment  of  juftification : 
but  yet  it  is  as  true,  1.  That  the  taking  of  Chrift: 
for  our  Lord,  and  fo  delivering  up  ourfelves  to 
his  government,  doth  in  order  of  nature  go  before 
our  juftification.  2.  That  aftual  obedience,  as 
part  of  the  condition,  doth  in  order  of  nature  go 
before  our  juftification,  as  continued  and  con- 
firmed. For  though  our  marriage-contraft  with 
Chrift;  do  give  us  the  firft  pofieffion ; yet  it  is  the 
marriage  duties  which  muft  continue  that  poffef- 
fion.  3.  That  perfeverance  in  faithful  obedience, 
doth,  both  in  nature  and  time,  go  before  our  com- 
pleat  and  final  juftification,  and  that  as  part  of  the 
condition  of  obtaining  it.  ffwe  walk  in  the  light, 
as  he  is  in  the  light , zue  have  felloufhip  one  with 
another,  and  the  blood  of  Jefus  Chrift  his  Son 
cleanfeth  us from  all Jin,  1 John  i.  7. 

For  being  made  perfed,  he  became  the  author  of 
eternal falvation  to  all  than  that  obey  him,  Heb.  v. 
9.  Of  whom  it  fhall  „ e faid,  when  they  are  glo- 
rified with  him,  Theft  are  they  that  came  out  of 

Vol.  XXII.  I great 


[ 194  3 

great  tribulation , and  have  ivajhed  their  robes  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  made  them  white: 
therefore  they  are  before  the  throne  of  God,  and 
ferve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple ; and  he 
that  ftteth  on  the  throne  fiall  dwell  among  them. 
Rev.  vii.  14,  15.  To  whom  be  glory  for  ever. 
Amen, 


A TREATISE 


C 195  ] 


A TREATISE 


O N 


JUSTIFICATION: 

Extracted  from  Mr.  John  Goodwin. 


With  a Preface,  wherein  all  that  is  perfonal,  in 
Letters  juft  publifhed,  under  the  name  of  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Hervey,  is  anfwered. 


The  PREFACE. 

*>  T3ERHAPS  I fhould  not  have  fubmitted, 
lcaft  not  fo  foon,  to  the  importunity 
of  my  friends,  who  have  long  been  folliciting  me 
to  abridge  and  pubiifh  the  enfuing  treatife,  had 
not  fome  warm  people  publiflred  a traft  intitled 
I 2 “ The 

* 


[ r-Sr6  ] 

“ The  fcripture  doctrine  of  imputed  righleouf- 
nefs  defended/’  I then  judged  it  abfolutciv  in- 
cumbent upon  me,  to  publlfh  the  real  fcnplure- 
do&rine.  And  this  I believed  I could  not  either 
draw  up  or  defend,  be.ttcr  than  I found  it 
done  to  my  hands  by  one  who  at  the  time  he 
wrote  this  book,  was  a firm  and  zealous  Calvinifl. 
This  enabled  him  to  confirm  what  he  advanced 
by  fuch  authorities,  as  well  from  Calvin  him- 
felf,  as  from  his  molt  eminent  followers,  as  I 
could  not  have  done,  nor  any  who  had  not  been 
long  and  critically  verfed  in  their  writings. 

2.  A greater  difficulty  was,  to  know  what 
notice  I ought  to  take  of  Mr.  Hervey’s  treatife 
wrote  (as  the  Leeds-publifher  fays)  with  a“  becom- 
ing and  ivell-lempend  tartnefs.”  The  cafe  was  pe- 
culiar. My  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Hervev 
commenced  about  thirty  years  ago,  when  I was 
a fellow,  and  he  was  a commoner,  of  Lincoln- 
College  in  Oxford.  At  my  requeft  he  was  per- 
mitted as  was  Mr.  Whitefield  fome  time  after, 
to  make  one  of  a little  company,  who  ufed  to 
fpend  the  evenings  together,  in  reading  the  holy 
fcriptures.  And  1 rejoiced  in  having  many  op- 
portunities of  affiflinghim  both  in  his  ftudies  and 
in  his  Chriftian  warfare  : which  he  acknowledg- 
ed in  very  ftrong  terms,  by  a letter  nowin  my 
hands,  wrote  not  long  after  the  publication  of 
his  “ Mediations  among  the  tombs.”  In  my 
anfwer  to  this,  I told  him  frankly,  “ There  were 
one  or  two  palfages  in  that  book,  which  it  I had 

feen 


f l97  ] 

{’cen  before  it  was  printed,  I fhould  have  advifed 
him  not  to  infert.  5 He  replied,  “ If  he  printed 
any  thing  more,  he  would  beg  of  me  to  correft 
it  firft.”  Accordingly  he  fent  me  not  long  after 
the  manufcript  of  his  there  firft dialogues.  I fent 
them  back  after  fome  days,  with  a few  inconfi- 
derable  corrections.  But  upon  his  complaining, 
“ You  are  not- my  friend,  if  you  do  not  take  more 
liberty  with  me.”  I promifed,  I would  ; fo  he 
fent  them  again,  and  I made  fome  more  impor- 
tant alterations.  I was  not  furprized  at  feeing  no 
more  of  the  copy,  ’till  I faw  it  in  print.  When 
I had  read  it,  I wrote  him  my  thoughts  freely, 
but  received  no  anfwer.  On  Oftober  the  5th, 
1756,  I fent  him  a fecond  letter  : which  I here 
infert,  that  every  impartial  perfon  may  under- 
hand the  real  merits  of  the  caufe.  I need  only 
premife,  that  at  the  time  1 wrote,  I had  not  the 
leaft  thought  of  making  it  public.  I only  fpoke 
my  private  thoughts  in  a free,  open  manner,  to 
a friend  dear  as  a brother.  I had  almoft  faid  to 
a pupil,  to  a fon : for  fonear  I hill  accounted  him. 
It  is  no  wonder  therefore  that  “ feveral  of  my 
objections,”  as  Mr.  Hervey  himfelf  obferv.es, t 
‘\appear  more  like  notes  and  memorandums,  than 
a juft  plea  to  the  public.”  It  is  true.  They  appear 
like  what  they  are,  like  what  they  were  origi- 
nally intended  for.  I had  no  thought  of  a plea  to 
the  public  when  I wrote,  but  of  “ Notes  and  me- 
morandums to  a private  man.” 

I 3 

+ Page  80. 


Dear 


[ *98  ] 


Dear  Sir,  OB.  15,  1756. 

AConfiderable  time  fince,  I fent  you  a few 
hafty  thoughts  which  occurred  to  me  on 
reading  the  dialogues  between  Theron  and  Afpa- 
fio.  I have  not  been  favoured  with  any  anfwer. 
Yet  upon  another  and  a more  careful  perufal  of 
them,  I could  notbutfet  down  fome  obvious  re- 
flections, which  I would  rather  have  communi- 
cated, before  thefe  dialogues  were  publifhed. 

In  the  firft  dialogue  there  are  feveral  juft  and 
flrong  obfervations,'  which  may  be  of  ufc  to 
every  ferious  reader.  In  the  fecond,  is  not  the 
defcription  often  too  laboured,  the  language,  too 
fliff,  and  affe&ed  ? Yet  the  reflections  on  the 
creation  (in  the  31ft  and  following  pages)  make 
abundant  amends  for  this.  (I  cite  the  pages  ac- 
cording to  the  Dublin  edition,  having  wrote  the 
rough  draught  of  what  follows,  in  Ireland.) 

P.  39.  Is  jujiification  nrore  or  lefs,  than  God’s 
pardoning  and  accepting  a finner  through  the 
merits  of  Chrift  ? That  God  herein  “ reckons 
the  jrighteoufnefs  and  obedience  which  Chrift 
performed  as  our  own,”  I allow  ; if  by  that  am- 
biguous exprefliori,  you  mean  onlv  as  you  here 
explain  it  yourfelf,  “ They  are  as  effectual  for 
obtaining  our  falvation,  as  if  they  were  our  own 
perfonal  qualifications.”  P.  41. 

* P.  43.  “ We  are  not  fo-licitous,  as  to  any 
particular  fet  of  phrafes.  Only  let  men  be 
humbled,  as  repenting  criminals  at  Chrifl’s  feet, 

let 


L 


*99  ] 

let  them  rely  as  devoted  penfioners  on  his  merits, 
and  they  are  undoubtedly  in  the  way  to  a blifsful 
immortality.”  Then  for  Chrift’s  fake,  and  for 
the  fake  of  the  immortal  fouls  which  he  has  pur- 
chafed  with  his  blood,  do  not  difpute  for  that 
particular  phrafe,  The  imputed  rigliteoujhefs  of 
Girif.  It  is  not  fcriptural;  it  is  not  necelfary. 
Men  who  fcruple  to  Life,  men  who  never  heard 
the  expreffion,  may  yet  “ be  humbled,  as  repent- 
ing criminals  at  his  feet,  and  rely  as  devoted  pen - 
ft oners  oij  his  merits.”  But  it  has  done  immenfe 
hurt.  I have  had  abundantrproof,  that  the  fre- 
quent ufe  of  this  unneceffary  phrafe.  inltead  of 
“ furthering  men’s  progrefs  in  vital  holinefs,” 
has  made  them  fatisfied  without  any  holinefs  at 
all  ; yea  and  encouraged  them  to  work  all  un- 
cleannefs  with  greedinefs. 

P.  45.  “To  afcribe  pardon  to  Chrifl’s  ptffive, 
eternal  life  to  his  a&ive  righteoufnefs,  is  fanci- 
ful rather  than  judicious.  His  universal  obedi- 
ence from  his  birth  to  his  death,  is  the  one  foun- 
dation of  my  hope.” 

This  is  unqueftionably  right.  But  if  it  be, 
there  is  no  manner  of  need,  to  make  the  impu- 
tation of  his  adlive  righteoufnefs,  a feparate  and 
labouied  head  of  difcourfe.  O that  you  had  been 
content  with  this  plain  fcriptural  account,  and 
fpared  fome  of  the  dialogues  and  letters  that  fol- 
low 1 

The  third  and  fourth  dialogues  contain  an  ad- 
mirable iliuftration  and  confirmation  of  the 
I 4 great 


[ 200  ] 

great  dodirine  of  Chrift’s  fatisfaflion.  Yet  even 
here  I obferve  a few  pallages,  which  are  liable  to 
feme  exception. 

P.  54.  “ Satisfadlion  was  made  to  the  divine 
law.  ’ I do  not  remember  any  fuch  expreflion 
tn  feripture.  This  way  of  fpeaking  of  the  law 
as  a perfon  injured  and  to  be  fatisfed,  feems 
hardly  defenfible. 

* P.  74.  “ The  death  of  Chrift  procured  the 
pardon  and  acceptance  of  believers,  even  before 
he  came  in  the  flefh.”  Yea,  and  ever  fince.  In 
this  we  all  agree.  And  why  fhould  we  contend 
for  any  thing  more  ? 

P.  120.  “ All  the  benefits  of  the  new  cove- 
nant, are  the  purchafe  of  his  blood."  Surely  they 
are.  And  after  this  has  been  fully  proved,  where 
;s  the  need,  where  is  the  ufe,  of  contending  fo 
fircnuoufly,  for  the  imputation  of  his  righteouf 
.nejs,  as  is  done  in  the  fifth  and  fixth  dialogues  ? 

P.  135.  “ If  he  was  our  fubftitute  as  to  penal 
Sufferings,  why  not,  as  to  juflifying  obedience  ?" 

The  former  is  exprefsly  aliened  in  feripture. 
The  latter  is  not  exprefsly  aliened  there. 

P.  145.  “ As  fin  and  mifery  have  abounded 
through  the  firft  Adam,  mercy  and  grace  have 
much  more  abounded  through  the  fecond.  So  that 
none  can  have  any  reafon  to  complain.”  No, 
not  if  the  fecond  Adam  died  for  all.  Otherwife 
all  for  whom  he  did  not  die,  have  great  reafon 

to 


C 201  ] 

to  complain.  For  they  inevitably  fall  by  the 
firft  Adam,  without  any  help  from  the  fecond. 

* P.  148.  The  whole  world  of  believers  ’ 
is  an  expreflion  which  never  occurs  in  fcripture : 
nor  has  it  any  countenance  there:  the  world  in 
the  infpired  writings  being  conftantly  taken  ei- 
ther in  the  univerfal  or  in  a bad  fenfe  : either 
for  the  whole  of  mankind,  or  for  that  part  of 
them  who  know  not  God. 

P.  149.  “ In  tke  Lord  Jhall  all  the  ‘houfe  of 
Ifrael  be  juJlifiedY  It  ought  unqueftionably  to  be 
rendered,  “ By  or  lhrou.fi  the  Lord  this  argu- 
ment therefore  proves  nothing.  “ Ye  are  com- 
plete in  him.”  The  words  literally  rendered  are 
Ye  are  filled  with  him.  And  the  whole  paffage, 
as  any  unprejudiced  reader  may  obferve,  relates 
to  fanttification,  not  juftification. 

P.  1,50.  “ They  are  accepted  for  Chrifl’s  fake ; 
this  is  juftification  through  imputed  right  eoufnefs  Y 
That  remains  to  be  proved.  Many  allow  the 
former,  who  cannot  allow  the  latter. 

* P.  151.  “ The  righteoufnefs  which  juftifies 
us,  is  already  wrought  out.” — A crude,  unfcrip- 
tural  exprelTion  ! “ It  was  fet  on  foot,  carried  on, 
compleated.” — O vain  philofophy  ! The  plain 
truth  is,  Chrift  lived  and  tajled  death  j or  every 
man.  And  through  the  merits  of  his  life  and 
death,  every  believer  is  juftifiedi . 

P.  152.  “ Whoever  perverts- fb  glorious  a doc- 
trine, fhews  he  never  believed.”  Not  fo.  They 
who  turn  back.  as.  a dog  to  tlie  vomit , had  once  ef- 
I 5 caped 


[ 202  ] 

caped  the  pollutions  of  the  world  by  the  knowledge 
of  Chrijl. 

P.  153.  “ The  goodnefsof  God  leadeth  to  re- 
pentance.” This  is  unqueftionably  true.  But 
the  nice,  metapkyfical  doctrine  ot  imputed  nghte- 
oujnejs,  leads  not  to  repentance,  Lut  to  licenti- 
oufnefs. 

* P.  154.  “ The  believer  cannot  but  .•  Id  to 
his  faith  works  of  righteoufnefs.”  During  his 
firft  love,  this  is  often  true.  But  it  is  not  true 
afterwards,  as  we  know  and  feel  by  melancholy 
experience. 

* P.  1,5,5.  “ We  no  longer  obey,  in  order  to 
lay  the  foundation  of  our  final  acceptance.”  No: 
that  foundation  is  already  laid  in  the  merits  of 
Chrift.  Yet  we  obey,  in  order  to  our  final  accep- 
tance through  his  merits.  And  in  this  fenfe,  by- 
obeying,  we  lay  a good  foundation,  that  we  may 
attain  eternal  life. 

* 5.  136.  “ We  efiablifh  the  law  : We  provide 
for  its  honour,  by  the  perfeft  obedience  ofChrifl.” 
Can  you  poflibly  think  St.  Paul  meant  .Iris  P That 
fuch  a thought  ever  entered  into  his  mind  ? The 
plain  meaning  is,  we  eflablilh  both  the  true 
fenfe,  and  the  effeflual  praftice  of  it : we  provide 
for  its  being  both  underflood  and  prablifed  in  its 
full  extent. 

* P.  1 57.  “ On  thofe  who  rejeft  the  atonement, 
juft  feverity.”  Was  it  ever  pofftble  for  them 
not  to  rejefl  it  ? If  not,  how  is  it  juft  to  caft  them 
into  a laJte  of  fire,  for  not  doing  what  it  was  im- 


[ 203  ] 

poffible  they  fhould  do  ? Would  it  be  j ail  (make 
it  your  own  cafe)  to  call  you  into  hell,  for  not 
touching  heaven  with  your  hand  ? 

* P.  1 gq.  “ Juffification  is  complete  the  firff 
moment  we  believe,  and  is  incapable  of  augmen- 
tation.” 

Not  fo  : there  may  be  as  many  degrees  in  the 
Javour  as  in  the  image  of  God. 

P.  190.  “ St.  Paul  often  mentions  a righteoufnefs 
imputed : (not  a righteoufnefs,  never  once  ; but 
Amply  righteoufnejs.)  “ What  can  this  be,  but 
the  righteoufnefs  ufChriif  ?'’  Pie  tells  you  himfelf, 
Rom.  iv.  6.  To  him  that  believeth  on  him  thatjujli- 
felh  the  ungodly , faith  is  imputed  for  righteoufnefs. 
“Why  is  Chrift  filled  Jehovah  our  righteoufnefs ?” 
Becaufe  we  are  both  juflified  and  fanciified 
through  him. 

P.  191.  “ My  death,  the  caufe  of  their  for- 
givenefs,  my  righteoufnefs,  the  ground  of  their 
acceptance.” 

How  does  this  agree  with  p.  .15.  “ To  aferibe 
pardon  to  Chrilt's  paffive,  eternal  life  to  his 
adlive  righteoufnefs,  is  fanciful  rather  than  judi- 
cious  r 

*P.  195.  “ He  commends  fuch  kinds  of  bene- 
ficence only,  as  were  exercifed  to  a difciple  as 
fuch.”  Is  not  this  a flip  of  the  pen  ? Will  not 
our  Lord  then  commend,  and  reward  eternally, 
all  kinds  of  beneficence,  provided  they  flowed 
from  a principle  of  loving  faith?  Yea,  that 
which  was  exercifed  to  a Samaritan,  a jew,  a 
16  Turk* 


C 204  1 

Turk,  or  an  Heathen  ? Even  tliefe  I would  not 
term  “ tranfient  bubbles,”  though  they  do  not 
procure  our  juftification. 

P.  197.  “ How  mull  our  righteoufnefs  exceed 
that  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees  ? Not  only  in 
being  fincere,  but  in  polfelTing  a complete  righte- 
oufnefs, even  that  of  Chrifh”  Did  our  Lord 
mean  this  ? Nothing  lefs.  He  fpecifies  in  the 
following  parts  of  his  fermon,  the  very  inftances 
wherein  the  righteoufnefs  of  a Chriftian  exceeds 
that  ofthe  Scribes  and  Pharifees. 

P.  198.  “ He  brings  this  fpecious  hypocrite  to- 
the  left.”  How  does  it  appear  that  he  was  an 
hypocrite?  Our  Lord  gives  not  the  leaf!  intima- 
tion of  it.  Surely  he  loved  him,  not  for  his  hy- 
pocrify,  but  his  fincerity  ! 

Yet  he  loved  the  world,  and  therefore  could 
not  keep  any  ofthe  commandments  in  their  fpi- 
ritual  meaning..  And  the  keeping  of  thefe  is  un- 
doubtedly the  viay  to,  though  not  the  caufe  of, 
eternal  life. 

P.  200.  “ By  works  his  faith  was  made  perftl : 
appeared  to  be  true.”  No  : the  natural  fenfe 
of  the  words  is,  by  the  grace  fuperadded  while 
he  wrought  thofe  works,  his  faith  was  literally 
made  perfeil. 

Ibid.  “ He  that  doth  righteoufnefs  is  righteous — 
manifells  the  truth  of  his  converfion.”  Nayr 
the  plain  meaning  is,  he  alone  is  truly  righteous, 
whofe  faith  worketh  by  love. 


P.  201. 


[ 203  ] 

P.  201.  “ St.  James  fpeaks  of  the j unification1 
of  oar  faith.”  Not  unlefs  you  mean  by  that  odd. 
expreffion,  our  faith  being  made  per  fed ; for  fo- 
the  apoftle  explains  his  Own  meaning.  Perhaps 
the  word  juJHfied  is  once  ufed  by  St.  Paul  for 
rnanifefed. — But  that  does  not  proyer  it  is  to  be 
fo  underftood  here. 

P.  202.  “ Whofo  dceth  theft  things Jhall never  fall 
into  total  apoftacy.”  How  pleaftng  is  this  to  flefh 
and  blood  ! But  David  fays  no  fitch-  thing.  His 
meaning  is,  Whofo  doeth  theft  things  to  the  end 
Jhall  never  fall  into  hell. 

The  feventh  dialogue  is  full  of  important 
truths.  Yet  fome  expreflions  in  it  I cannot  com- 
mend. 

P.  2i  6.  “ One  thing  thou  lackeft , the  imputed 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.”  You  cannot  think  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  text.  Certainly  the  one 
thing  our  Lord  meant  was,  the  love  of  GocL 
| This  was  the  thing  he  lacked. 

P.  222.  “Is  the  obedience  of  Chrift  infufficient 
to  aecomplifh  our  juflification  ?”  Rather  I would 
alk,  Is  the  death  of  Chrill  infufficient  to  purchafe 

I it? 

P.  226.  “ The  faints  in  glory  afcribeM<?  whole 
of  their  falvation  to  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.”  So- 
do  I : and  yet  I believe  “ he  obtained  for  all  a. 
pojfbility  of  falvation.” 

P.  227.  “ The  terms  of  acceptance  for  fallen 
man  were  a full fatisfadion  to  the  divine  juft  ice, 

and 


1 


[ 206  ] 

and  a complete  conformity  to  the  divine  law.”  This 
you  take  for  granted  ; but  I cannot  allow  it. 

The  terms  of  acceptance  for  fallen  man  are, 
repentance  and  faith.  Repent  ye  and  believe  the 
gofpe’. 

Ibid.  “ There  are  but  two  methods  whereby 
any  can  be  juflified,  either  by  a perjctl  obedience 
to  the  law,  or  becaufe  Chrift  hath  kept  the 
law  in  our  Head."’  You  fhould  far,  “ Or  by 
faith  in  Chrift.”  I then  anfwer,  This  is  true. 
And  fallen  man  is  juflified,  hot  by  perfeR  obedi- 
ence but  by  faith.  What  Chnfl  has  done  is  the 
foundation  of  our  juflificadoh,  not  the  term  or 
condition  of  it. 

In  the  eighth  dialogue  likewife  there  are  many 
great  truths,  and  yet  feme  things  liable  to  excep- 
tion. 

P.  233.  “ David  God  himfelf  dignifies  with 
the  niojt  exalted  of  all  characters.'’  Far,  very 
far  from  it.  YiTe  have  more  exalted  characters 
than  David's,  both  in  the  Old  Tethiment  and  tiie 
New.  Such  are  thofe  of  Samuel,  Daniel,  yea, 
and  Job,  in  the  former;  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  John 
in  the  latter. 

* “ But  God  Riles  him  a man  after  his  own 
heart.’’  This  is  the  text  which  has  caufed  many 
to  miftake  : for  want  ol  confidenng,  fo  il,  That 
this  is  faid  of  David  in  a t articuhr  refpecl,  not 
with  regard  to  his  whole  character  : fecondlv, 
The  time  at  which  it  was  _ fpoken.  When  was 
David  a man  a fa  Goa's  own  heart?  When 

- God 


[ 2o7  ] 

God  found  him  following  the  ewes  great  with 
xou rig , when  he  look  him  from  the  fhcep-f  Ids , 
Pfalm  Ixxix.  71.  It  was  in  the  fecond  or  third 
year  of  Saul's  reign,  that  Samuel  laid  to  him,  The 
Lord  hath  fought  him  a man  after  his  own  heart , 
and  hath  commanded  him  to  be  captain  over  his 
people , 1 Sam.  xiii.  14.  But  was  he  a man  after 
God’s  own  heart,  all  his  life  ? Or  in  all  particulars? 
So  far  from  it.  that  we  have  few  more  excep- 
tionable characters  amour  all  the  men  ol  God 

O 

recorded  in  feripture. 

P.  261.  “ There  is  not.  a jujl  man  upon  earth 
that  fw.neth  not.”  Solomon  might  truly  fay  fo, 
before  Ch rift  came.  And  St.  John  might  after 
he  came  fay  as  truly,  Whefofuer  is  horn  of  God fn- 
neth  not.  “But?/;  many  things,  we  offend  all.” 
That  St.  James  does  not  fpeak  this  of  himfelf,  or 
of  real  Chriitians,  will  clearly  appear  to  ail  who 
imoarfiaJly  confulerthe  context. 

The  ninth  dialogue  proyes  excellently  well, 
that  we  cannot  be  juf lifted  by  our  works. 

But  luye  you  throughly  confklered  the  words 
which  occur  in  the  270th  page  ? 

“ O children  of  Adam,  you  are  no  longer 
obliged  to  love  God  with  all  your  Strength,  nor 
! your  neighbour  as  yourfelves.  Once  indeed  I in- 
| lifted  on  absolute  purity  of  heart : now  I can  dif- 
penfc  with  fome  degrees  of  evil  defire.  Since 
Chrift  !‘ — has  fulfilled,  the  law  for  you,  “ you  need 
not  fulfil  it.  I will  connive  at,  yea  accommodate 
my  demands  to  your  weaknefs.” 


I agree 


[ *>8  ] 

I agree  with  you,  that  “ this  doftrine  makes 
the  Holy  One  of  God  a minifter  of  fin.  And  is 
it  not  your  own  ? Is  not  this  the  very  doctrine 
which  you  efpoufe  throughout  your  book  ? 

1 cannot  but  except  to  feveral  palfages  alfo  in 
the  tenth  dialogue.  I afk  firft, 

P.  29  x.  “ Does  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  ever 
mean'’  (as  you  affirm)  “ The  merits  oj  Chriji  I 
believe,  not  once  in  all  the  fcripture.  It  often 
means  and  particularly  in  the  epillle  to  the  Ro- 
mans, God's  method  of jujlifying  finners.  When 
therefore  you  fay, 

P.  292.  “ The  righteoufnefs  of  God  means, 
fuch  a righteoufnefs  as  may  juftly  challenge  his 
acceptance,”  I cannot  allow  it  at  all  : and  this 
capital  miltake  mull  needs  lead  you  into  many 
others.  But  I follow  you  Hep  by  llep. 

Ibid.  “ In  order  to  intitle  us  to  a reward, 
there  mull  be  an  imputation  of  righteoufnefs.” 
There  mull  be  an  intered  in  Chrift.  And  then 
every  man Jhall  receive  his  own  reward,  according 
to  his  own  labour. 

* P.  293.  “ A rebel  may  be  forgiven,  without 
being  reftored  to  the  dignity  of  a fonT  A rebel 
againll  an  earthly  king  may;  but  not  a rebel 
againlt  God.  In  the  very  fame  moment  that  God 
forgives,  we  are  the  fons  of  God.  Therefore 
this  is  an  idle  difpute.  For  pardon  and  accep- 
tance, though  they  may  be  dijlinguijhed,  cannot 
be  divided.  The  words  of  Job  which  you  cite 
are  wide  of  the  queftion.  Thofe  of  Solomon 

prove 


[ 209  ] 

prove  no  more  than  this,  (and  who  denies  it?) 
that  j unification  implies  both  pardon  and  accep- 
tance. 

P.  205.  “ Grace  reigneth  through  right  eon  fiefs 
unto  etejnal  life," — that  is,  the  free  love  of  God 
brings  us  through  juftification  and  fanfitificationto 
glory.  Ibid.  “ That  they  may  receive  jorgivenefs 
and  a lot  among  the JanBified that  is,  that  they 
may  receive  pardon,  holinefs,  heaven. 

Ibid.  “ Is  not  the  fads  faff  ion  made  by  the 
death  of  Chrift,  fufficient  to  obtain  both  our  full 
pardon  and  final  happinefs  ?”  Unqueftionably  it 
is,  and  neither  of  the  texts  you  cite  proves  the 
contrary. 

P.  296.  “ If  it  was  requifite  for  Chrift  to  be 

I baptized,  much  more  to  fulfil  the  moral  law.” 

I cannot  prove  that  either  one  or  the  other 
was  requifite  in  order  to  his  purchafng  redemp- 
tion for  us. 

*P.  297.  “ By  Chrift’s  bufferings  alone,  the  law 
was  not  fatisfied.”  Yes  it  was  ; for  it  required 
only  the  alternative,  obey  or  die.  It  required 
no  man  to  obey  and  die  too.  If  any  man  had 
perfectly  obeyed,  he  would  not  have  died.  Ibid. 
“ Where  the  fcripture  afcribes  the  whole  of  our 
falvation  to  the  death  of  Chrift,  a part  of  his  hu- 
miliation is  put  for  the  whole."  1 cannot  allow 
this  without  fome  proof.  He  was  obedient  unto 
death  is  no  proof  at  all ; as  it  does  not  neceffarily 
imply  any  more,  than  that  he  died  in  obedience  to 
the  Father.  In  fome  texts  there  is  a necejity  of 

taking 


[ 210  ] 

taking  a part  for  the  whole.  Eut  in  thefe  there 
is  no  fitch  necefjity. 

P.  300.  “ Chrift  undertook  to  do  ever)-  thing 
neceffary  for  our  redemption:'’  namely,  in  a 
covenant  made  with  the  Father.  It  is  fc*e,  he 
did  every  thing  neceflary  : but  how  does  it  ap- 
pear, that  he  undertook  this  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world,  and  that  by  a pofitive  covenant 
between  him  and  the  Father? 

You  think  this  appears  from  four  texts,  1. 
From  that,  Thou  gcivejl  iliem  to  me.  Nay,  when 
any  believe,  the  lather  gives  them  to  Chrijl.  But 
this  proves  no  fuch  previous  contract.  2.  God 
hath  laid  upon  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all.  Neither 
does  this  prove  an)-  fuch  thing.  3.  That  ex- 
prehion.  The  coun/cl  of  peace fhatt  he  between  them , 
does  not  ncceffarily  imply  any  more,  than  that 
both  the  Father  and  the  Son  would  concur  in  the 
redemption  of  man.  4.  According  to  the  counfel 
of  his  will, — that  is,  in  the  way  or  method  he  had 
chofen.  Therefore  neither  any  of  thefe  texts, 
nor  all  of  them,  prove  what  they  were  brought  to 
prove.  They  do  by  no  means  prove,  that  there 
ever  was  any  fuch  covenant  made  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son. 

* P.  301.  “ The  conditions  of  the  covenant  are 
recorded.  Lo , I come  to  do  thy  will.’' — Nay,  here 
is  no  mention  of  any  covenant , nor  any  thing 
from  which  it  can  be  inferred.  “ The  recom- 
pence  Populated  in  this  glorious  treaty " — But  I 
fee  not  one  word  of  the  treaty  itfelf.  Nor  can  I 
;i  poffibly 


[ 211  ] 

poftibly  allow  the  exiftenceof  it  without  far  other 
proof  than  this.  Ibid.  “ Another  copy  of  this 
grand  treaty  is  recorded  Ifaiah  xlix.  from  the  firft 
to  the  fixth  verfe.”  I have  read  them,  but  can- 
not find  a word  about  it,  in  all  thofe  verfes. 
They  contain  neither  more  nor  lefs  than  a pre- 
difiion  of  the  falvation  of  the  Gentdes. 

P.  302.  “ By  the  covenant  of  works,  man 
was  bound  to  obey  in  his  own  per fan:’  And  fo  he 
is  under  the  covenant  of  grace  ; though  not  in 
order  to  his  juftiftca'tion.  “ The  obedience ol  our 
furety  is  accepted  inftead  of  our  own."  This  is 
neither  afafenor  a fcriptural  way  of  fpeaking.  I 
would  firnply  fay,  We  are  accepted  through  the 
Beloved.  JVe  have  redemption  through  his  blood. 

* P.  303.  “ The  fecond  covenant  was  not  made 
with  Adam,  or  any  of  his  po {ferity,,  but  with 
Chrift  in  thofe  words,  The  feed  of  the  woman  Jhail 
bruife  the ferpent's  head.''  For  any  authority'you 
have  from  thefe  words,  you  might  as  well  have 
faid,  It  was  made  with  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Thefe 
words  were  not  fpoken  to  Chrift,  but  of  him,  and 
give  not  the  leaft  intimation  ofany  fuch  covenant 
as  you  plead  for.  They  manifeftly  contain,  if 
not  a covenant  made  with,  a promife  made  to 
Adam  and  all  his  pofterity. 

P.  303.  “ Chrift,  we  fee,  undertook  to  execute 
the  conditions.”  We  fee  no  fuch  thing  in  this 
text.  We  fee  here  only  a promife  of  a Saviour, 
made  by  God  to  man. 

Ibid . 


[ 212  ] 

Ibid.  “ ’Tis  true,  I cannot  fulfil  the  condi- 
tions.” Tis  not  true.  The  conditions  of 
the  new  covenant  are  repent  and  believe. 
And  thefe  you  can  fulfil,  thro’  Chrift  ftrength- 
ning  you.  “ ’Tis  equally  true,  this  is  not  requir- 
ed at  my  hands.”  It  is  equally  true,  that  is, 
abfolutely  falfe.  And  moll  dangeroufly  falfe. 
If  we  allow  this,  antinomianifm  comes  in  with  a 
full  tide.  “ Chrift  has  performed  all  that  was 
conditionary  for  vie.”  Has  he  repented  and  believ- 
ed Jor  you  ? You  endeavour  to  evade  this  by 
faying,  “ He  performed  all  that  was  conditionary 
in  the  convenant  of  u orks.”  This  is  nothing  to 
thepurpofe  ; for  we  are  not  talking  of  that,  but 
of  the  covenant  of  grace.  Now  he  did  not  per- 
form all  that  was  conditionary  in  this  covenant, 
unlefs  he  repented  and  believed.  “ But  he  did 
unfpeakably  more.”  It  may  be  fo.  But  he  did 
not  do  this. 

P.  308.  “ But  if  Chrift’s  perfect  obedience 
be  ours  we  have  no  more  need  of  pardon  than 
Chrift  himfelf.”  The  confequence  is  good.  You 
have  ftarted  an  obje&ion  which  you  cannot  an- 
fwer.  You  fay  indeed,  “ Yes,  we  do  need  par- 
don ; for  in  many  things  we  offend  all."  What 
then  P If  his  obedience  be  our's  we  fill  perfectly 
obey  in  him. 

Pt  309.  “ Both  the  branches  of  the  law,  the 
receptive  and  the  penal,  in  the  cafe  of  guilt  con- 
tracted, inuft  be  fatisfied.”  Not  fo.  “ Chrift  by 
his  death  alone,  (fo  our  church  teaches j fully  fa- 
tisfied 


[ 213  ] 

ti'sfxed  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world;”  The  fame 
great  troth  is  manifeftly  taught  in  the  3 ill  article. 
Is  it  therefore  fair,  is  it  honeft,  for  any  one  to 
plead  the  articles  of  our  church  in  defence  of 
abfolute  predeftination  ? Seeing  the  17th  article 
barely  defines  the  term,  without  either,  affirm- 
ing or  denying  the  thing  : whereas  the  3 iff  to- 
tally overthrows  and  razes  it  from  the  founda- 
tion. 

Ibid.  “ Believers  who  are  notorious  tranfgref- 
fors  in  themfelves  have  a finlefs  obedience  in 
Chriff.'-’  O firen  fong  ! Pleafmg  found,  to  James 
Wheatley  ! Thomas  Williams  ! James  Relev  ! 

I know  not  one  fentence  in  the  eleventh  dia- 
. loguc,  which  is  liable  to  exception  : but  that 
grand  doctrine  of  Chriftianity,  original  fin,  is 

I therein  proved  by  irrefragable  arguments. 

The  twelfth  likewife  is  unexceptionable,,  and 
contains  fuch  an  illuftration  of  tlie  wifdom  of 
God  in  the  flrufture  of  the  human  body,  as  b be- 
lieve cannot  be  parallelled,  in  either  antient  or 
modern  writers. 

The  former  part  of  the  thirteenth  dialogue  is 
admirable.  To  the  lattter  I have  fome  objeftion. 

Vol.  II.  P.  44.  “ Elijah  failed  in  his  refigna- 
tion,  and  even  Mofes  fpake  unadvifedly  with  his 
lips.”  It  is  true  : but  if  you  could  likewife  fix 
fome  blot  upon  venerable  Samuel  and  beloved 
Daniel,  it  would  prove  nothing.  For  no  feripture 
teaches,  that  the  holinefs  ol  Chriftians  is  to  be 
meafuredby  that  of  any  Jew. 


P.  46. 


[ 214  ] 

P.  4 6.  “ Do  not  the  beft  of  men  frequently 
feel  diforder  in  their  affections?  Do  not  they 
often  complain,  IV hen  I would  do  good,  evil  is 
prefent  with  me  ?”  I believe  not.  You  and  I are 
only  able  to  anfwer  for  ourfelv'es.  “ Do  not 
they  fay.  We  groan  bang  burihcned, — with  the 
workings  of  inbred  corruption  ?”  You  know, 
this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  text.  The  whole 
context' ffiews,  the  caufe  of  that  groaning  was 
their  longing  to  be  with  Chrifl. 

P.  47.  “ The  cure,”  of  fin  “ will  be  perfefled 
in  heaven.”  Nay  furely,  in  paradife  ifnoiooner. 
“This  is  a noble  prerogative  of  the  beatific  vifion.” 
No;  It  would  then  come  too  late.  If  fin  re- 
main in  us  Till  the  day  of  judgment,  it  will  re- 
main for  ever.  “ Our  prefent  bleffednefs  does 
not  confift  in  being free  from  fin.”  I really  think 
it  does.  But  whether  it  does  or  no,  if  we  are 
not  free  from  fin,  we  are  not  Chriflian  believers. 
For  to  all  thefe  the  apoflle  declares,  -Being 
made  free  from  fin,  ye  are  become  the  fervants  of 
rightecufnejs , Rom.vi.  18. 

“ If  we  were  peifecl  in  piety  (St.  John's 
word  is,  Perfect  in  love ) Clink's  prieftlv  office 
would  be  fuperfeded.”  No  : we  ffiould  Hill  need 
hisfpirit  (and  consequently  his  interceffion  for 
the  continuance  of  that  love  from  moment  to 
moment.  Bcfide,  we  fliould  Hill  be  enconrpafl 
with  infirmities,  and  liable  to  miflakes,  fn  in 
which  words  or  aft  ions  might  follow,  even 
though  the  heart  was  ail  love,  which  were  not 
exaftly  right.  Therefore  in  all  thefe  refpects, 

we 


[ 215  ] 


.We  fhould  Rill  have  need  of  Chrift’s  prieftly* 
office  : and  therefore  as  long  as  he  remains  in 
the  body,  the  greateft  faint,  may  fay, 

Every  moment,  Lord,  I need 
The  merit  of  thy  death. 

The  text  cited  from  Exodus  affects  nothing  lefs 
than,  That  Iniquity  “ cleaves  to  all  our  holy 
things  ’till  death.” 

P.  48.  “ Sin  remains,  that  the  righteoufnefs  of 
faith  may  have  its  due  honour.”  And  will  therigh- 
teoufnefs  of  faith  have  its  due  honour  no  longer 

<D 

than  fin  remains  in  us  ? Then  it  muft  remain, 
not  only  on  earth  and  in  paradife  but  in  heaven 
alfo — “ And  the  fan  edification  of  the  fpirit  its 
proper  efteem.”  Would  it  not  have  more  ef- 
teem,  if  it  were  aperfeft  work  ? 

Ibid.  “ It  (fin)  will  make  us  lowly  in  our  own 
eyes.”  What  will  pride  make  us  lowly?  Surely 
the  utter  dePiruftion  of  pride,  would  do  this  more 
effeftuaily.  “ It  will  make  us  compaffionate.” 
Would  not  an  entire  renewal  in  the  image  of 
God  make  us  much  more  fo  ? “ It  will 
teach  us  to  admire  the  riches  of  grace.” 
Yea,  but  a fuller  experience  of  it,  by  a tho- 
rough fanftification  of  fpirit,  foul  and  body,  will 
make  us  admire  it  more.  “ It  will  reconcile  us 
to  death.”  Indeed  it  will  not  ; nor  will  any 
thing  do  this  like  perfeft  love. 

P.  49.  “ It  will  endear  the  blood  and  inter- 
1 ceffion  of  Chirft.”  Nay  thefe  can  never  be  fo 
xlear  to  any  as  to  thofe  who  experience  their  full 

virtue. 


r 216  ] 

virtue,  who  are  filled  with  the  fulnefs  of  God. 
Nor  can  any  “ feel  their  continual  need'’  of 
C hri.fl.  or  “ rely  on  him”  in  the  manner  which 

the  re  do. 

Dialogue  14.  p.  57<  “ The  claims  of  the  law 
are  all  anfwered.”  If  fo,  Count  Zinzendorf  is  ab- 
folutelv  in  the  right : neither  God  nor  man  can 
-claim  my  obedience  to  it.  Is  not  this  Antinomi- 
anifm  without  a mafic  ? 

P.  59.  “ Your  fms  are  expiated  thro’  the 
death  of  Ch rift,  and  a righteoufnefs  given  you  by 
which  you  have  free  accefs  to  God.”  This  is 
not  fcriptural  language.  I would  fimply,  fay  By 
him  we  have  accefs  to  the  Father. 

There  are  many  other  expreffions  in  this  dia- 
logue, to  which  I have  the  fame  obje&ion, 
namely,  1.  That  they  are  unfcriptural,  2.  That 
they  directly  lead  to  Antinomianifm. 

The  firft  letter  contains  fome  very  ufeful 
heads  of  felf-examination.  In  the  fecor.d, 

P.  91.  I read,  “ There  is  a righteoufnefs  which 
fupplies  all  that  the  creature  needs.  To  prove 
this  momentous  point,  is  the  defign  of  the  follow- 
ing fheets.  ’ 

I have  feen  fuch  terrible  effects,  of  this  unfcrip- 
tural way  of  fpeaking,  even  on  thofe  who  had 
once  clean  eficaped  from  the  pollutions  of  the  zvorld, 
that  I cannot  but  earneftlv  wifh,  vou  •would  fneak 
no  otherwife  than  do  the  oracles  of  God.  Cer- 
tainlv  this  mode  of  expr  ffion  is  nGt  momentous.  It 
is  always  dangerous,  often fatal. 


Letter 


[ S17  ] 

Letterlll.  P.  93.  “ Where  Jin  abounded , grace  did 
much  more  abound:  that  as  Jin  had  reigned  unto 
death,  Jo  might  grace — The  free  love  of  God — 
reign  through  righteoujuejs,  through  our  juftifica- 
tion  and  fanftification,  unto  eternal  life , Rom.  v. 
20,  21.  This  is  the  plain  natural  meaning  of 
the  words.  It  does  not  appear,  that  one  word  is 
fpoken  here  about  imputed  righteoufnefs  : neither 
in  the  paffages  cited  in  the  next  page,  from  the 
common-prayer  and  the  articles.  In  the  homily 
likewife  that  phrafe  is  not  found  at  all,  and  the 
main  hrefs  is  laid  on  Chrift’s Jhedding  lus  blood. 
Nor  is  the  'phrafe  (concerning  the  thing,  there  is 
no  queftion)  found  in  any  part  of  the  homilies. 

P.  101.  “ If  the  fathers  are  not  explicit  with 
regard  to  the  imputation  of  atiive  righteoufnefs, 
they  abound  in  palfages  which  evince  the  JubJli- 
tution  of  Chrift  in  our  head  : paffages  which  dif- 
claim  all  dependence  on  any  duties  of  our  own, 
and  fix  our  hopes  whollv  on  the  merits  of  our 
Saviour.  When  this  is  the  cafe,  I am  very  lit- 
tle folicitous  about  any  particular  form  of  exprej 
Jon.''  O lay  afide  then  thofe  queftionable,  dan- 
gerous forms,  and  keep  cloddy  to  the  fcriptural. 

Letter  IV.  P.  105.  The  authority  , of  our 
church  and  of  thofe  eminent  divines,”  does  not 
touch  thofe  particular  for  ms  of  exprejfion  : nei- 
ther do  any  of  the  texts  which  you  afterwards 
cite.  As  to  the  dofirine  we  are  agreed. 

Ibid.  “ The  rigkteaujhefs  of  God  fignifies,  the 
righteoufnefs  which  God-man  wrought  out.” 
Vo  l.  XXII.  K ° No 


I 218  ] 

No.  It  fignifies  God’s  method  of  juftifying  Tin- 
ners. 

P.  107.  “ The  victims  figured  the  expiation  by 
Chrift’s  death,  the  cloathing  with  fkins,  the 
imputation  of  his  righteoufnefs.”  That  does  not 
appear.  Did  not. the  one  rather  figure  our  jufti- 
fication,  the  other,  our  fanftification  ? 

P.  109.  Almoft  every  text  quoted  in  this  and 
the  following  lefter,  in  fupport  of  that  particular 
form  of  exprejfion,  is  diftorted  above  meafure, 
from  the  plain,  obvious  meaning,  which  is  point- 
ed out  by  the  context.  I {hall  inftance  in  a few, 
and  juft  fet  down  their  true  meaning,  without 
any  farther  remarks. 

To  Jheto  unto  man  his  uprighlnefs.  To  con- 
vince him  of  God's  juflice,  in  fo  punching 
him. 

- P.  110.  Hejhall  receive,  the  blejjing — Pardon — 
from  the  Lord , and  rigk/eoujnefs — Holinefs — 
from  the  God  of  his  Jobation — the  Godwhofaveth 
him  both  from  the  guilt,  and  from  the  power  of 
fin. 

P.  111.  I will  make  mention  of  thy  righteoufnefs 
only — Of  thy  mercy — So  the  word  frequently' 
means  in  the  old  Teftanient.  So  it  unqueftiona- 
bly  means  in  that  text,  In  (or  by)  thy  righteouf 
nefs  Jhall  they  be  exalted. 

P.  112.  Sion  Jhall  be  redeemed  with  judgment — 
after  fevere  punifhment — and  her  converts  with 
righteoufnefs, — with  the  tender  mercy  of  God, 
following  that  puniflnnent. 


[ 219  ] 

P.  x 1 3.  In  (or  through)  the  Lord  I have  righte~ 
oufnefs  and Jlrength,  juftification  andfanftification. 
lie  hath  cloathed  me  with  the  garments  qffalvation, 
— fayed  me  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  fin  : both 
of  which  are  again  exprelt  by.  lie  hath  covered  me 
with  the  robe  of  righteoufnefs. 

P.  114.  My  nghteoujnefs — my  mercy— -jhd.il 
not  be  abo/ijhed. 

P.  116.  To  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity — 
to  atone  for  all  our  fins — and  to  bring  in  everlaf- 
ing  righteoufnefs , fpotlefs  holinefs  into  our  fouls. 
And  this  righteoufnefs  is  not  human , but  divine . 
It  is  the  gift  and  the  work  of  God. 

P.  117.  The  Lord  our  righteoufnefs — The  au- 
thor both  ol  our  juftification  and  fanftification. 

P.  127.  xi  What  righteoufnefs  fhall  give  us 
peace  at  the  laft  day,  inherent  or  imputed  ?” 
Both.  Chrift  died  for  us  and  lives  in  us,  That 
we  may  have  boldnefs  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Letter  V.  P.  131.  That  have  obtained  like  pre- 
cious faith  through  the  righteoufnefs — the  mercy — ■ 
of  our  Lord.  Seek  ye  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his 
xighteoufnefs — the  holinefs  which  fprings  from 
God  reigning  in  you. 

P.  132.  Therein  is  revealed  the  righteoufnefs  of 
God — God's  method  of  jollifying  Tinners. 

* P.  135.  “ We  efablifh  the  law,  as  we  expeft 
no  falvation  without  a perfect  conformity  to  it — - 
namely,  by  Chrift.”  Is  not  this  a mere  quib- 
ble ? And  a quibble,  which  after  all  the  laboured 
evafions  of  Wit.fi  u-s  and  a thoufand  more,  does 
K 2 totally 


[ 220  ] 

totally  make,  void  the  law ? But  not  fo  does  St. 
Paul  teach.  According  to  him,  without  holinefs, 
perfonal  holinefs,  no  wan  Jhall  fee  the  Lord. 
None  who  is  not  himfelf  conformed  to  the  law  of 
God  here,  Jhall  fee  the  Lord  in  glory. 

* This  is  the  grand,  palpable  objection  to 
that  whole  fcheme.  It  direftly  inah.es  void  the 
law.  It  makes  thoufands  content  to  live 
and  die  tranfgreffors  of  the  law,  becaufe 
Chrift  fulfilled  it  for  them.  Therefore  though 
I believe,  he  hath  lived  and  died  for  me, 
yet  I would  fpeak  very  tenderly  and  fparingly  of 
the  former,  (and  never,  feparately  from  the  lat- 
ter) even  as  fparingly  as  do  die  feriptures,  for 
fear  of  this  dreadful  confequence. 

P.  138.  “ The  gift  of  righteoufnefs  muft  figni- 
fy  a righteoufnefs  not  their  own.”  Yes,  it  fig- 
nifies  the  righteoufnefs  or  holinefs,  which  God 
gives  to,  and  works  in  them. 

P.  193.  “ The  obedience  of  one  is  Chriit’s  ac- 
tual performance  of  the  whole  law.”  So  here 
his  paflion  is  fairly  left  out  ! Whereas  his  becom- 
ing obedient  unto  Death,  that  is,  dving  for  man, 
is  certainly  the  chief  part,  if  not  the  whole  which 
is  meant  by  that  expreflion. 

Ibid  “ That  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  might 
be  fulfilled  \w  us  — That  is,  by  our  reprefentative 
in  our  nature.”  Amazing!  But  this,  you  fay 
“ agrees  with  the  tenor  of  the  apollle's  arguing. 
For  he  is  demonflrating  we  cannot  be  jufiified  by 
our  own  conformity  to  the  law.”  No  : not  here. 
He  is  not  fpeaking  here  of  the  caufe  of  our  juf- 

tificatioa 


[ 22  1 ] 

tification,  but  the  fruits  of  it.  Therefore  that 
unnatural  fenfe  of  his  words  does  not  at  all, 
“ agree  with  the  tenor  of  his  arguing.” 

P.  140.  T totally  deny  the  criticifm  oil 
Sixzt ocvvr)  and  hy-tih and  cannot  conceive  on 
what  authority  it  is  founded.  O how  deep  an  aver- 
fion  to  inward  holinefs  does  this  fcheme  naturally 
create  ? 

P.  142.  “ The  righteoufnefs  they  attained 
could  not  be  any  perfonal  righteoufnefs.”  Cer- 
tainly it  was.  It  was  implanted  as  well  as  imputed. 

P.  145.  “ For  ihft.ruEi.ion  in  righteoufnefs , 
in  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl.”  Was  there  ever 
fuch  a comment  before  ? The  plain  meaning  is, 
For  training  up  in  holinefs  of  heart  and  of  life. 

P.  146.  Hejhall  convince  the  world  of  righte- 
oufnefs— That  I am  not  a fmner,  but  innocent 
and  holy. 

P.  148.  That  we  might  be  made  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  God  in  him.  Not  intrinfically,  but  itn- 
putatively”.  Both  the  one  and  the  other.  God 
through  him,  firft  accounts  and  then  makes  us 
righteous.  Accordingly, 

P.  1,52.  The  righteoufnefs  which  is  of  God  by 
faith,  is  both  imputed  and  inherent. 

P.  153.  “ My  faith  fixes  on  both  the  merito- 
rious life  and  atoning  death  of  Chriil.”  Here 
we  clearly  agree.  Hold  then  to  this,  and  never 
talk  of  the  former  without  the  latter.  If  you  do, 
you  cannot  fay,  “ Here  we  are  expofed  to  no 
hazard.”  Yes,  you  are  to  an  exceeding  great 
K 3 one: 


[ 222  ] 

one  : even  the  hazard  of  living  and  dying  with, 
out  holinefs.  And  then  we  are  loft  for  ever. 

The  fixth  letter  contains  an  admirable  account 
of  the  earth  and  atmofphere,  and  comprizes  a- 
bundance  of  fenfe  in  a narrow  compafs,  expreft 
in  beautiful  language.. 

* P.  177.  Gems  have  “ a feat  on  the  virtuous 
fair  one's  breaft. ’ I cannot  reconcile  this  with 
St.  Paul.  He  fays,  1V0I  -with  pearls:  by  a pari- 
ty of  reafon,  not  with  diamonds.  But  in  all 
things  I perceive,  you  are  too  favourable,  both 
to  the  clejire  of  the  Jlefh  and  the  (lejire  of  the  eye. 
You  are  a gentle  cafuift  as  to  every  felf-indul- 
gence  which  a plentiful  fortune  can  furnifh. 

P.  182.  “ Our  Saviour’s  obedience.’  — O fay, 
with  the  good,  old  puritans,  our  Saviour’s  death 
or  merits.  We  fwarm  with  Antinomians  on 
every  fide.  Why  are  you  at  fuch  pains  to  in- 
creafe  their  number  ? 

P.  194.  My  mouth  fiall Jhew  forth  thy  righteouf 
nefs  and  thy  falvation. — Thy  mercy  which  brings 
my  falvation. 

The  eighth  letter  is  an  excellent  defcription 
of  the  fupreme  greatnefs  of  Clirift.  I do  not  ob- 
ferve  one  fentence  in  it,  which  I cannot  chcar- 
fully  fubfcribe  to. 

* The  ninth  letter,  containing  a defcription 
of  the  fea,  with  various  inferences  deduced 
therefrom,  is  likewife  a mafter-piece,  forjuft- 
nefs  offentiment,  as  well  as  beauty  of  language. 
But  I doubt  whether,  “ mere  JliHmps”  P.  241, 

be 


[ Z23  3 

fee- not  too  low  an  expreflion  : and  whether  you 
might  not  as  well  have  faid  nothing  of  “ Cod , 
the  handing  repall  of  Lent:'  01  concerning  “ the 
exquifite  relifh  of  turbot , or  the  delicioufnefs  ot 
Jlurgeon."  Are  not  fuch  obfervations  beneath 
the  dignity  of  a miniher  of  Chrift  ? I have  the 
fame  doubt,  concerning  what  is  faid,  P.  264,  of 
“delicately  flavoured  tez,  finely-fcented  coffee  ; 
the  friendly  bowl,  the  pyramid  of  Italian  figs,  and 
the  Pa/iacia-nut  of  Aleppo.”  Befide  that  the 
mentioning  thefe  in  fuch  a manner  is  a ftrong 
encouragement  of  luxury  and  fenfuality.  And 
does  the  world  need  this  ? The  Englifh  in  par- 
ticular P Si  non  infaniunt fads , injliga. 

Letter  10.  P.  271.  “ Thofe  treafures  which 
fpring  from  the  imputation  of  ChrifVs  right eouf 
nefs .”  Not  a word  of  his  atoning  blood  ? Why  do 
fo  many  men  love  to  fpeak  of  his,  righteoufnefs, 
rather  than  his  atonement  ; I fear,  becaufe  it 
affords  a fairer  excufe  for  their  own  unrighte- 
oufnefs.  To  cut  off  this,  is  it  not  better  to  men- 
tion both  together  ? At  lead  never  to  name  the 
former  without  the  latter  ? 

* P.  285.  “ Faith  is  a perfuaflon  that  Chrift 
has  fhed  his  blood  for  me,  and  fulfilled  all  right- 
eoufnefs in  my  (lead."  I can  by  no  means  fub- 
fcribe  to  this  definition.  There  are  hundreds, 
yea  thoufands  of  true  believers,  who  never  once 
thought,  one  way  or  the  other  of  Chrift’s  ful- 
filling all  righteoufnefs.  in  their  Head.  I perfon- 
allyknow  many,  who  to  this  very  hour  have  no 
K 4 idea 


[ 22d  1 

idea  of  it;  and  yet  have  each  of  them  a divine 
evidence  and  conviction,  Chrift  loved  me,  and 
gave  himfelfiox  me.  This  is  St.  Paul’s  account 
of  faith  ; and  it  is  fufhcient.  He  that  thus  be. 
lieves  isjuftified. 

P.  287.  “It  isafure  means  of  purifying  the 
heart,  and  never  fails  to  work  by  love.’*  It  furely 
purifies  the  heart— if  we  abide  inU  ; but  not  if 
we  drazv  back  io  perdition.  It  never  fails  to  work 
by  love  while  it  continues;  but  if  itfelf  fail,  fare- 
well both  love  and  good  works. 

“ Faith  is  the  hand  which  receives  all  that  is 
laid  up  in  Chrift.”  Confequently,  if  we  make 
fhipu'reck  of  the Jailh  how  much  fo  ever  is  laud 
up  in  Chrift,  from  that  hour  we  receive  nothing. 

Letter  11.  P.  288.  “ Faith  mike  imputed  ngh- 
ieoufnefs  ofChrif,  is  a fundamental  principle  in 
the  gofpel.”  If  fo,  what  becomes  of  all  thofe 
who  think  nothing  about  imputed  nghUouJ'nefs ? 
How  many  who  are  full  of  faith  and  love,  if  this 
be  true,  muft  perifh  everlaftinglv  ? 

P.  297.  “ Thy  hands  muft  urge  the  way  oi 
the  deadly  weapon,  thro’  the  fhivering  flefh, 
till  itbe  plunged  in  the  throbbing  heart.  Are 
not  thefe  defcriptions  far  too  ftrong  ? May  they' 
not  occafion  unprofitable  reaforiings  in  many 
readers  ? 

Ne  puei  um  coram  populo  medea  fi  uddet. 

P.  298.  “ How  can  he  juftify  it  to  the  world : 1 

Not 


[ 22<5  ] 

Not  at  all.  Can  this  then  jflify  his  faith  to  the 
world  P 

P.  304.  “ You  take  the  certain  way  to  obtain 
comfort,  the  righteoufnefs  of  Jefus  Chrift.” 
w hat,  without  the  atonement  ? Strange  fond- 
nefs  for  an  unfcriptural,  dangerous  mode  of  ex- 
prefion  / 

P.  30 6.  “ So  the  merits  of  Chrift  are  derived 
to  all  the  faithful.’’  Rather  the  fruits  of  the  Spi- 
rit : which  are  likewife  plainly  typified  by  t lie 
oil  in  Zechariah’s  vifion. 

P.  310.  “ Has  the  law  any  demand  ? It  mud 
go  to  him  for  falvation.”  Suppofe,  “ Thou  fhalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyfelf.”  Then  I am  not 
obliged  to  love  my  neighbour.  Chrift  has  fatis- 
fred  the  demand  of  the  law  for  me.  Is  not  this 
the  very  quinteftence  of  Ant-inomianifm  ? 

P.  311.  “ The  righteoufnefs  wrought  out  by 
Jefus  Chrift,  is  wrought  out  for  all  his  people , to 
be  the  caufe  of  their  juftification,  and  the  pur  chafe 
of  their  falvation.  The  righteoufnefs  is  the  caufe, 
and  the  purchafe.’  So  the  death  of  Chrift  is  not  fo 
muchasnamed!  “ For  all  his  people,’’  But  what 
becomes  of  all  other  people?  The  j ruifl  inevitably- 
perilh  forever.  The  die  was  caft,  or  ever  they 
were  in  being.  1 he  docirine  (apafs  them  by,  has 

Confign’d  their  unborn  fouls  to  hell, 

And  damn’d  them  from  their  mother's  womb  i 

Ii  5 ! could- 


[ 226  ] 

I could  fooner  be  a Turk,  a Deift,  yea  an  Atheid, 
than  I could  believe  this.  It  is  lefs  abfurd  to  deny 
the  very  being  of  God,  than  to  make  him  an 
almighty  tyrant. 

* P.  318.  “ The  whole  world  and  all  its  fea- 
fons,  are  rich  with  our  Creator’s  goodnefs.  His 
tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works.  ' Are 
they  over  the  bulk  of  mankind  ? Where  is  his 
goodnefs  to  the  non-ele£t  ? How  are  his  tender 
mercies  over  them ? “ His  temporal  blefiings 
are  given  to  thnn .”  But  are  they  to  them  blef- 
fings  at  all  ? Are  they  not  all  curfes  ? Does  not 
God  know  they  are  ? That  they  will  only  increafe 
their  damnation  ? Does  not  he  defign  the? 
fhould  ? And  this  you  call  goodnefs  ! This  is 
tender  mercy  ! 

P.  321.  “ May  we  not  difeern  pregnant  proofs 
of  goodnefs  in  each  individual  ob-jefit?”  No;  on 
your  fcheme  not  a {park  of  it  in  this  world  or  the 
next,  to  the  far  greater  part  of  the  work  of  his 
own  hands. 

P.  334.  “ Is  God  a generous  benefactor  to 
the  meanefl  animals,  to  the  lowed  reptiles  ? 
And  will  he  deny  my  friend  what  is  necelha  v to 
his  prefent  comfort,  and  his  final  acceptance  ?" 
Yea,  will  he  deny  it  to  any  foul  that  he  has 
made  ? Would  you  deny  it  to  any,  if  it  were  in 
your  power? 

But  if  vou  loved  whom  God  abhorr’d 
The  fervant  were  above  his  Lord. 


P-  3 97. 

\J\ji 


[ 227  ] 

P.  337.  The  wedding  garment  here  means 
holinefs. 

P.  330,  “ This  is  his  tender  complaint,  they 
will  not  come  unto  me  !”  Nay,  that  is  not  the 
cafe  ; they  cannot.  He  himfelf  has  decreed , not, 
to  give  them  that  grace  without  which  their 
coming  is  impohible! 

“ The  grand  end  which  God  propofes  in  all 
his  favourable  difpenfations  to  fallen  man,  is' to 
demonllrate  the  fovereignty  of  his  grace.”-  Not 
fo : To  impart  happinefs  to  his  creatures,  is  his 
grand  end  herein.  Barely  “ to  demonllrate  hi,s 
fovereignty,”  is  a principle  of  aflion  fit  for  the 
great  Turk,  not  the  moll  high  God. 

P.  341.  “ God  hath  pleafure  in  the  profperity 
of  his  fervants.  He  is  a boundlefs  ocean  of 
good.”  Nay,  that  ocean  is  far  from  boundlefs, 
if  it  wholly  palfes  by  nine-tenths  of  mankind. . 

* P.  342.  “You  cannot  fuppofe  God  would 
enter  into  a frelh  covenant  with  a rebel.”  I both 
fuppofe  and  know,  he  did.  “ God  made  the  new 
covenant  with  Chnft,  and. charged  him  with  the  ■ 
performance  of  the  conditions.”  I denv  both 
thefc  affections,  which  are  the  central  point 
wherein  Calvinifm  and  Antinomianifm  meet.  “7 
have  made  a covenant  with  my  chofeni ’ — Namelv,  - 
with  David  my fervant . . So  God  himfelf  explains 
it. 

P.  362.  “ He  will  'wafh  you  in  the  blood  which, 
atones,  and  invelt  you  with  the  righteoufnefs. 

- K 6 which. 


[ 228  ] 

which  juftifies.”  Why  fhouldyou  thus  continu- 
ally put  afunderwhat  God  had  joined? 

P.  440.  “ God  himfelf  at  the  laft  day  pro- 
nounces them  righteous,  bccaufe'  they  are  intcr- 
efted  in  the  obedience  of  the  Redeemer.  ’ Ra'- 
ther,  becaufe  they  are  wailied  in  his  blood,  and 
renewed  by  his  Spirit. 

* Upon  the  whole,  I cannot  but  wifh,  that  the 
plan  of  thefe  dialogues  had  been  executed  in  a 
different  manner.  Moll  of  the  grand  truths  of 
Chrillianity  are  herein  both  explained  and  proved 
with  great  ftrength  and  clearnefs.  Why  was 
any  thing  intermixt,  which  could  prevent  any 
ferious  Chrihian’s  recommending  them  to  all 
mankind  ? Any  thing  which  mull  necelfanly 
render  them  exceptionable,  to  fo  manv  thoufands 
of  the  children  ol  God  ? In  practical  writings  I 
ffudioully  abftain  from  the  very  lhadow  of  con- 
troverfy.  Nay,  even  in  controversial,  I do  not 
knowingly  write  one  line,  to  which  any  but  my 
opponent  would  objefl.  For  opinions  lhall  I de- 
ilroy  the  work  of  God  ? Then  am  I a bigot  in- 
deed. Much  more,  if  I would  not  drop  any 
mode  of  exprejjion,  rather  than  offend  either  Jew 
or  Gentile,  or  the  church  of  God. 

I am,  with  great  fincerity, 

Dear  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  brother  and  fervant, 

j.  w. 


* 3.  After 


[ 2i-9  ] 

* 3.  After  vi  ’.king  near  two  years,  and  receiv- 
ing no  anfwerto  the  fecond,.  any  more  than  the 
firlt  Letter,  in  1758  I printed  ‘ A Prefervative- 
againft  unfettled  Notions  in  Religion..”  I defigned. 
this  at  firft  only  for  the  preachers  who  were  in: 
connexion  with  me.  But  1 was  afterwards  in- 
duced to  think  it  might  be  of  ufe  to  others  that 
were  under  my  care..  1 defigned  it  for  thefe,  and 
thefe  alone,  though  I could  not  help  its  falling 
into  other  hands.  Accordingly  1 laid,  “ My 
defign  in  publiflung,  the  following  trails,  is  not 
to  reclaim ,.  but  to  pieja  vc .”  To  pr.eferve  thofe 
to  whom  I had  frequently  and  llrongly  recom- 
mended Mr.  Hervey  s dialogues,  from  what  I 
disapproved  of  therein,  I inferted  the  above  Let- 
ter: and  that  without  any  addition,  as  intending 
it  only,  “ for  thofe  who,  already  knew  the  truth,” 
whom  I wifhed  to  prefrrve  from  every  thing 
wrong,  while  they  profited  by  what  was  admira- 
bly right  in  his  dialogues.  No. wonder  therefore- 
that  thofe  notes  (as  Mix.  Hervev  remarks  in  the 
fame  page)  “ have  rather  the  air  of  a caveat  than 
a confutation*”  I never  intended  them  for  a 
confutation  t and.  even  when  I lent  them  to  the- 
prefs,  I defigned  them  mere’)'  as  a caveat  to  my 
friends  againft  imbibing  truth  and  error  toge= 
ther. 

4.  A confiderable  time  after,  I was  much,  fur- 
prized  by  an  information,,  that  Mr.  Hervey 
“ was  going  to  pubhfh  againll  me.”  I immedi- 
ately wrote  a flrort  letter  to  him,  which  his 

friends.: 


C 23°  ] 

friends  may  eafily  find  among  his  papers.  It 
was  to  this  effeft,  and  fo  far  as  I can  recollecf, 
nearly  in  thefe  words: 

* “ After  waiting  above  a rear  for  an  anfwer 
to  my  laft  letter,  I printed  it  in  the  clofe  of  a 
larger  treatife.  If  you  have  any  thing  to  objeft 
to  me,  I expect,  that  as  a gentleman  and  a Chrif- 
tian,  you  will  behave  to  me  as  I did  to  you.  Send 
me  the  letter  firfl.  And  if  I do  not  give  you  a 
fati's factory  anfwer  in  a year,  then  publiih  it  to 
all  the  world.”  I am  inclined  to  believe, 

this  prevented  the  publication  of  thefe  papers 
during  his  life.  And  with  his  dying  breath.  (I 
have  it  under  his  brother’s. hand)  lie  defired  they 
might  not  b«  publifhed  at  all.  How  comes  it 
then  to  be  done  now  ? 1 fuppofe  through  the  zeal 
of  tiiofe,  who  are  fo  vehemently  attached  to  their 
own  opinions,  that  they  would  larrifi.ee  all  things  to 
them  ; and  who  may  lincerelv  believe,  that  the. 
bringing  any  reproach  upon  me,  would  be  doing 
God fervice. 

r).  In  this  prefatory  difeourfe  I do  not  intend 
to  “ anfwer  Mr-Hervey’s  book.  Shall  my  hand 
be  upon  that  faint  of  God  ? No  : let  him  reft  in 
Abraham’s  boforrr.  When  my  warfare  is  accom- 
plilhed,  may  I reft  with  him.  till  the  refill' reftion 
of  the  jufl  ! Nor  do  I intend  to  fay  any  thing 
on  thofe  queftkms,  whether  Chrift  was  the  me- 
diator of  the  new  covenant,  or  one  of  the  ccn- 
Ir  aiding  parties  ? Or  both  the  mediator  and  a con- 
tracting party?  Neither  indeed  on  any  point  of 

Caivinifin ; 


[ 23d  ] 


Calvinifm  : herein  I think  and’  let  think-  I 
do  not  defign  to  contend  about  the  phrafeT  im- 
puted righteoufrief  i nor  yet  about  the  feafe  c/f 
it.  I cannot  explain,  this  more  fully  or  clear  1 v, 
than  it  is  done  in  the  enfuing  tradl.  I purpofe 
only  to  fpeak  a little  on'  the  perfonal  accufatious 
which  are  brought  againfl:  me  : and  I doubt  not, 
but  I lit  a LI  convince  all  impartial,  men,  that  Iain 
clear  of  the  things  laid  to  mv  charge; 

6.  The  chief  ol  thefe  are  twelve.  I mipiit 

O 

reckon  many  more  ; but  they  are  all  reducible  to 
one  or  other  of  thefe.  Each  of  thefe  accufatious 
is  frequently  repeated,  and.  in  great  variety  of 
language.  But  I lhall  be  safify  excufed  for  citing 
only  a few  out  of  numerous  paffagcs.  to-  the  fame 
effea. 

The  frrfl  is,  That  1 “ offer  t things  without 
proof."  This  is  undoubtedly  true.  In  the  letter 
before  us,  I touch  upon  many  things,  without 
once  attempting- to  prove  them.  For  I defigned 
only,  i-  To  warn  a friend,  and  give  him  matter 
for  farther  con  federation  ; 2.  To  guard  others* 

from  flipping  into  miftakes.  * Therefore  Mr.. 
Hervey  need  not  have  faid,  “ Never  did  I meet 
with  a perfon  who  feemed  fo  totally  ignorant,  that 
there  is  a wide  difference  between  faying  and; 
proving.?' — p.  236-  I am  not  ignorant  of  this  : 
and  fo  my  friend  would  have  found,,  had  he  fa- 
voured me  with  a private  anfwer.  It  would  then 
have  lain  upon  me  to  prove,  what  I had  barely 
faid  before. 


7.I 


C ^3 2 ] 

7.  I am  accufed,  fecondly,  of  being  felf-fuffi- 
cient,  pofitive,  magifferial.  “ Mr.  Wellev  cafed 
in  his  own  fdj-jufficiency , cheems  all  thefe  evi- 
dences as  mere  nothings.  Reafon,  grammar, 
precedents  are  eclipfed,  by  hi r bare  negative.  — 
p.2.46.. 

I know  notwhichway  this  can  can  be  inferred, 
from  any  thing  I have  fpoken  to  Mr.  Hervey. 

“ Mr.  Wefley  replies,  with  die  folemnity  of  a 
cenfor , and  the  authority  of  a dictator , NoJ  — ■ 
p.  90. 

I am  not  confcions,  that  in  making  that  reply, 
I affumed  any  authority  at  all. 

“Here  I fee  nothing,  but  the  ufual  argument, 
the  mcjlers  ipfc  dixit  j'' — p.  139. 

Love  might  have  feen  the  friend ( not  the 
majler)  taking  the  liberty  which  he  had  been  in, 
treated  to  take . 

“ Strange  ! That  a man  of  ordinary  difeern- 
ment  fhould.  offer  to  obtrude  upon  the  public , fuel* 
a multitude  of  naked,,  unfupported,  magiflerial 
affertions!  Should  ever  be  able  to  perfuade  him- 
felf,  that  a pofitive  air  would  pafs  for  demonil ra- 
tion 1” — p.  240. 

I thought  nothing  of  the  public  when  I wrote- 
this  Tetter,  but  fpoke  freely  and  artlcOy  to  a 
friend  : and  I fpoke  as  a friend,  (fo  far  as  I can 
judge]  not  a caijcr  or.  dictator.. 

8.  I am  accufed.  Thirdly,  of  reafon  tug  loqfly 

and  ici/dly „ “ Is  not  this  the  loofe  way  cj  argu- 

i)i<T  you  blame  in  Mr. Wedey  ? — p.  233. 

' ’ “ What 


[ 233  ] 

" What  wild  reasoning  is  here  ? Such  premif- 
fes  and  fuch  an  inference”  (but  they  are  none  of 
mine]  “ will  probably  incline  the  reader  to  think 
of  a fun-beam  and  a clod,  connected  with  bands 
offmoak.” — p.  103. 

When  I write  for  the  public,  efpecially  in 
controverfy.  I leek  for  connected  arguments* 

Sed  nunc  non  erat  his  locus. 

The  compafs  of  a letter  would  hardly  admit  of 
them. 

9.  I am  accufed,  in  the  fourth  place,  of  felt- 
contradiction.  “ See  how  you  are  intangled  in 
your  own  net : how,  without  being  chafed  by 
an  enemy,  you  run  yourfelf  a ground.  You 
avouch  palpable  inconjiflencies.'' — p.  195. 

“ Will  Mr.  Wejey  never  have  done  with  Jelf- 
■contradiElion  ? Why  will  he  give  me  fuch  repeat- 
ed caufe  to  complain 

Quo  tefieam  vidtum  nuitanlem  protea  nodo?”' — 

p.  142. 

“ See,  my  friend,  how  thy  own  mouth  con- 
demned! thee,  and  not  I : t ea,  thy  own  lips  tef- 
tify  againfl  thee  ! — If  you  perfilf  in  fueh  palpa- 
ble inconjiflencies,  who  can  forbear  taking  up  that 
taunting  proverb,  A double  minded  man  is  unjla- 
ble  in  all  Ins  ways.” — p.  293. 

“ Contradithon , didft  thou  ever  know  fo  truf- 
ty  a friend,  fo  faithful  a devotee  ? Many  peo- 
ple 


[ 234  ] 

pie  are  ready  enough  to  contradict  others.  But  it 
feems  all  one  to  this  gentleman,  whether  it  be 
another  or  himfelf,  io  he  may  but  contraditt.  ’ 
~p.  227. 

Could  one  imagine,  that  Mr.  Hervey  had 
added  to  this  very  page,  a note  wherein  are  thefe 
words,  “ 'I  he  contemptuous  and  the  reproachful , 
even  when  really  deferved,  can  have  no  tenden- 
cy to  confirm  our  argument,  but  to  provoke  re- 
fentment.  They  are  not  the  moft  promifing 
means,  of  joining  us  together  in  one  mind  and 
judgment ; but  rather  the  fure  way  to  widen  tile 
breach  and  increafe  animofity.” 

dhefe  I acknowledge  as  Mr.  Hervey’s  words  ; 
for  they  breathe  Air.  Hervey’s  fpirit.  But  if  foj 
the  former  came  from  another  heart,  though 
perhaps  they  were  tranferibed  by  his  hand. 

But  whence  arifes  this  whole  charge  oi  incon- 
fjjlency  and  f!f  co  n track  cl  io  n ? Merely  from  brain- 
ing, winding  to  and  fro,  and  diftorting  a few 
innocent  words.  For  wherein  have  I contradifled 
myfelf,  taking  words  iiy  their  unforced,  natural 
conftruction,  or  even  changed  my  judgment  in 
any  one  refpedh,  with  regard  to  juftification, 
(Nay,  Mr,  Hervey,  in  one  of  his  letters,  for- 
merly publilhed,  blames  me,  for  “ never  chang- 
ing my  judgment  at  all !”)  fince  I primed  the  fer- 
mon  on  * “ Salvation  bv  faith,”  in  the  vear 
1738?  From  that  dav  T have  Ileddily  believed 
and  uniformly  alferted,  as  all  mv  writings  teftify, 
j.  That  the  only  caufc  of  our  prefent  and  eternal 
falvation,  is  what  Chrift  has  done  and  fuffered 

for 


C 235  ] 

for  us  : 2.  That  we  arejultified  and  fanflified  by 
faith  alone , faith  in  him  who  lived  and  died  for 
us.  Let  my  words  be  twilled  and  wire-drawn 
ever  fo  long,  they  will  not  fairly  bear  any  other 
meaning,  nor  without  ‘apparent  violence,  con- 
tradift  either  of  thefe  propofitions.  It  is  true,  3. 
that  I have  during  this  whole  time,  pccafionaBy 
ufed  thofe  exprefhons,  imputed  rigkteoufnefs,  the 
righleoufncfs  of  Chrift,  and  others  of  the  fame 
kind  ; (although  the  verfes  cited  in  feveral  of  Mr. 
Hervey’s  letters,  are  not  mine,  but  my  brother's.) 
But  it  is  equally  true.  4thly,  That  I never  ufed 
them  at  all,  in  any  other  meaning  than  that 
found,  fcnptural  one,  wherein  they  are  ufed  by 
many  eminent  men,  Calvin  in  particular.  I 
chufe  not  to  fpeak  farther  on  this  head,  led  I 
fhould bounder  a difagreeable  neceflity  of  faying 
any  thing  that  might  even  feem  difrefpeftful  to 
my  ever  loved  and  honoured  friend. 

10.  I am  accufed,  ^thly,  of  not  underfland- 
ing  criticifm  and  divinity.  “ What  a piddling 
cntcifm  is  this.” — p.  220. 

“ I can  no  more  admire  your  tafle  as  a critic , 
than  your  doftrine,  as  a divine:’ — p.  14,5. 

“ In  this  interpretation  I can  neither  difcern 
the  true  critic,  not  the  found  c/ivine.” — p.  214. 

Iam  not  a judge  in  my  own  caufe.  What  I 
am  ignorant  of,  I defire  to  learn. 

I do  not  know  whether  the  following  charge, 
may  not  fall  under  this  head. 

f‘  In  another  perfon  this  would  look  like  pro- 
fane 


[ 236  ] 

fane,  levity  : In  Mr.  Wefley  the  fofteft  appella- 
tion we  can  give  it,  is  idle  pomp.  ' — p..  7. 

vVhat  ? I he  ufing  the  expreftion,  “ for  Chrift’s 
take.’  The  whole  paragraph  runs  thus. — p.  212. 

*’  M'e  are  not  iolicitous  as  to  any  particular 
fetof  pkruj'cs'' — Then  for  Chrift’s  fake  and  for 
the  fake  of  the  fouls  which  he  has  purchafed  with- 
lits  blood,  do  not  di.pu'e  for  that  particular 
phrafelhe  imputed right  ecvfnejs  of  Chrift-  It  is  not 
fciiptnral  ; it  is  not  neceftay.  Men  whofcruple 
to  uie,  men  who  never  heard  the  cxpreffion,  may 
yet“  be  humbled  as  repenting  criminals  at  his  feet, 
and  rely  as  devoted  penfione.rs  on  his  merits.”  But 
it  lias  done  immenfe  hurt.  I have  had  abundant 
proof,  that  the  frequent  ufc  of  this  uneceflary 
phrafe,  in  dead  of  “ furthering  men’s  progrefs  in 
vital  holinefs,”  has  made  them  fatisfied  without 
any  holinefs  at  all.”  Is  the  fpeaking  earneftlv; 
on  fuch  a fubjeft  11  idle  pomp?  " Are  not  the  fouls 
ofmen  at  ftake  ? And  moft  certainly  the  whole 
fentence  is  at  as  great  a diftance,  from  levity  as 
from  pr-famnefs. 

11.  I am  accufed,  6thlv,  of  acling  in  a man- 
ner un-wtorihy  a gentleman,  a Chriftian,  or  aman 
of  fenfe. 

“ lam  quite  afhamed  of  your  meannefsf  'ftrong 
words !)  11  and  grieved  at  your  uncharitable  rajh- 
nefs  ; ’ in  naming  three  men,  the  fellows  of 
whom  I h ipe  arc  not  to  be  found  in  England. 
“ How  unworthy  is  fuch  a proceeding  either  of 

the 


. £ 2 37  ] 

the  gentle  man, 'the  Ckrijlian , or  the  man  offenfcH 

— p.  186. 

I am  not  confcious  of  either  meannej’s,  rafhnefs , 
or  uncharitable!, fs\n  this  matter.  But  I am  wil- 
ling to  refer  it  to 'the' judgment  of  any,  who  know 
the  men  and  their  communication. 

12.  I am  accufed,  jthly,  of  impudence. 

*l  Harmlefs  enough,  I mud  own-:  but  what 
follows,  is  not  quite  fo  modtj!.  — p 201. 

“ Your  laft  daring  innovation/’  Affirming 
that  the  word  ufually  rendered  ngkteoiifnefs  does 
fometimes  mean  mercy.  I dare  not  fav-otherwife. 
■I  muff  affirm  this  Hill,  both  of  the  Hebrew  and 
Greek  word, 

“ Every  body'  know-s  that  the  particle  Beth 
dignifies  in,  and  every  body  but  Mr.  Welley 
would  inijh  to  alfert  the  contrary.” — p.  220. 

I never  aliened  the  contrary,  nor  did  I ever 
deny,  that  the  prarticle  h like  wife  fignifies  in. 
Yet  I .affirm  that  both  the  former  and  the  latter 
-ffiave  feveral  other  fignifications. 

13.I  am  accufed  Bthlv,  of  denying  juflifica- 
vtion  by  faith,  and  of  being  an  enemy  to  the  rig'i- 
teoufnefs  of  Chrift. 

“ We  have  liberty  to  look  upon  ourfelves  as 
jullified  without  any  works  of  our  own.”  (True  : 
but  not  without  faith.)  “ This  vou  would  fu- 
■perfede  and  aboliih.” — p.  261. 

The  whole  tenor  of  my  writing,  preaching 
sand  converfation,  clears  me  of  this  charge. 

•“  Why 


[ *a»  ] 


“ Why  fhould  you  be  fo  averfe  to  the  riglite- 
oufnefs  of  God  our  Saviour  ?” — p.  227. 

Far,  very  far  from  it.  I admire,  love  and  em- 
brace it,  as  the  ground  of  all  mv  hope,  as  the 
only  foundation  of  ever}-  blefhng,  in  time  and 
in  eternity. 

“ Why  fhould  you  ranfack  all  the  /lores  of 
your  learning  and  knowledge,  to  exclude  this 
glorious  truth  from  the  bible  ?” 

I do  juft  the  contrary.  I ufe  whatever  know- 
ledge God  has  given  me,  to  defend  that  glori- 
ous truth,  Jefus  Gbrift  is  made  of  God  unto  us t 
ufdom,  and  rigfueoufnefs , and  jantbfcaticn , and 
rtdembtior.. 

>uj_  The  ninth  accufation  is  fhort  ; vou  are 
an  hen-tic , and  your  doftrine  poifonous. 

“ You  fcarce  dillinguifh  yourfelf  by  this  lan- 
guage from  an  heretic.  You  may  rank  with  the 
Aricm  and  Socvnan..' — p.  1 _jo. 

What  is  this  language  ? 'I  he  faying,  “ Tlie 
free  love  of  God  brings  us  thro"  juflification  andf 
fanftification  toglory.”  True  ; neither  do  I dif- 
tinguifh  myielf  from  a Jew  by  faying,  “There  is 
one  God.”  Docs  it  follow,  that  I may  rank  with 
Jews  ? That  I am  a Jew  too  ? 

“ Such  errors  are  extreamlv  pernicious. 
They  are  like  poifon  mixt  with  food.” — p.iao. 

Let  thofe  errors  be  pointed  out  and  proved] 

I fhali  then  willingly  retraft  them. 

ij.  I am  accufed,  tenthly  with  being  an 

Aatinomian. 


[ 2-8.9  ] 

Antinomian.  “ Do  you  then  ejlablifh  the  law  ? Are 
not  you  the  Antinomian ” ? — p.  143. 

I fhould  not  imagine  Mr.  Hervey  was  in 
earned:  here  but  that  I read  in  another  place, 

“ It  is  one  of  your  leading  errors,  that  you 
form  low  fcanty  apprehenfious  of  G-odVIaw,'’ — 
P-  69. 

What  apprehenfions  I form  of  God's  law,  any 
one  may  lee  in  the  fecond  and  third  volumes  of 
my  fermons  ; wherein  after  -explaining  all  the 
particular  branches  ol  it  contained  in  our  Lord’s 
fermon  on  the  .mount, . I fay  of  it  in  general,  rol. 

•3-  P-  84- 

“ This  law  is  an  incorruptible  pitlure  of  the 
high  and  holy  one  that  inhabiteth  eternity.  It 

I is  he  whom  in  his  ellence  no  man  hath  feen  01- 
can  fee,  made  vifible  to  men  and  angels.  It  is 
:the  face  of  God  unveiled;  God m an i felled  to  his 
■ creatures,  as  they  are  able  to  bear  it.  It  is  the 
heart  of  God  difclofed  to  man,  yea,  in  fome  fen fe 
we  may  apply  to  his  law  what  the  apoPle  fays 
of  his  Son,  it  is  the fir  earning forth  or  out-beaming 
oj  his  glory,  the  exprtfi  image  of  his  per  fan.” 

“ What  is  the  law  but  divine  virtue  and  wif- 
dom,  alfuming  a vifible  form  ? What  is  it,  but 
the  original  ideas  of  truth  an  l good,  which  were 
lodged  in  the  uncreated  mind  from  .eternity  now 
•drawn  forth  and  cioathed  with  fuch  a vehicle, 
as  to  appear  ;ver  <0  human  underfianding  ? 

“ The  law  'of  God  is  a copy  ol  the  eternal 
•anind,  atranferipe  of  the  u.ivine  nature.  Yea  this 

the 


[ 24°  ] 

the  faireft  offspring  of  the  everlaffing  Father, 
the  brightest  efflux  of  his  effential  wifdom,  the 
vifible  beauty  of  the  Moft  High.1’ — Are  tliefc 
41  low  and  fcanty  apprehensions  of  God's  law  ? 
Or  are  any  fuch  found  in  the  preceding  fermons? 
Can  any  one  form  higher  apprehenfions  of  it  ? 
If  not,  let  this  accufation  fink  for  ever. 

t6.  I am  accufed  in  the  eleventh  place,  for 
teaching  popifh  doctrine. 

“ Mr.  Wefley  fetting  afi  le  pardon  and  recon- 
ciliation, together  with  the  one  perfect  righte- 
xntfnefs,  that  procures  them,’’  (I  fet  afide  neither 
the  one  or  the  -other)  “ aferibes  all  to  the  love 
of  God.  This  notion  may  pafs  current  at  Rome, 
but  not  among  the  prote/lant  churches." — p.  101. 

“ This  was  the  do&rine  eliablidhed  by  the' 
council  of  Trent.”  (But  it  is  not  mine.)  “ This 
is  itili  maintained  in  the  conclave  of  Rome.” — 
j).  117.  But  it  is  not  maintained  bv  r:e,  nor  any 
ofmv  friends.  We  teach  quite  the  contrary. 

“ I acquit  you  from  the  charge  of  being  a Jc- 
fuit,  ora  Pap  iff.”  So  far,  fo  good.  “ But  no 
body,  I apprehend,  can  acquit  your  principles 
from  haltingbetweenProteffantifm  and  Popery 
(no  more  than  the  principles  or  all  who  believe 
that  Cluiji  to j led  death  for  every  man,)  “ Yon 
have  flolen  the  unhallowed  fire,  and  are  in fe fled 
with  the  leven  of  antichrifl.  You  have  adopted 
papiftical  tenets.”  (I  know  not  which,  and 
fihould  be  glad  any  one  would  inform  me-)  “ and 
_are  liflcning  to  the  mother  cj  abominations  more 

than. 


r *4‘  ] 


than  yon  are  aware.’’ — p.  118.  But  let  it  be  ob- 
ferved,  the  holding  univerfal  redemption  is  no 
proof  of  this.  For  thoufands  of  Papifts.  yea  all 
the  Dominican  Friers  hold  particular  redemp- 
tion. 


“ The  moment  in  which  faints  depart  from 
the  body,  they  are  in  the  higheft  heavens. — Hez_e 
is  no  hint  of  any  intermediate  fate.— This  is  the 
popifh  notion.”  And  the  proteftant  too.  It  is 
the  notion  of  many  very  eminent  divines  of  our 
own  church.  Biihop  Smalridge  in  particular, 
has  puhlifhed  a celebrated  fermon  upon  it.  “ I 
am  very  forry  your  opinions  are  fo  much  like 
the  man  of fm." — p.  118. 

In  this  article  they  are  not  like  at  all  ; they 
are  direffly  oppofite.  For  the  Papifts  believe, 
even  good  men  undergo  a painful  purgatory  after 
death.  I believe  there  is  no  pain  after  death, 
unlefs  to  thofe  who  perilh  for  ever. 

17.  The  grand  charge  remains.  I am  accufed, 
laftly,  and  that  over  and  over,  in  great  variety 
of  expreflions,  of  being  a knave , a dijhoneft  man, 
one  of  no  truth , jujiice  or  integrity. 

“ 1.  The  firft  proof  of  it  is  this.”  “ We  have 
Afpafio’s  words ; but  in  a patched  and  disfigured 
condition.” — p.  20. 

The  words  I quoted  are,  “ As  fin  and  mifery 
have  abounded  through  the  firft  Adam,  merev 
and  grace  have  much  more  abounded  through  the 
fecond,  fo  that  now  none  have  reafon  to  com- 
plain.” 


Vol.  xxir. 


L 


That 


[ 242  ] 

That  Afpafio’s  words  are  here  abridged,  is 
true : that  they  are  patched  or  disfigured  is  not 
true,  as  every  man  of  common  fenfe  mud  fee. 
So  this  is  no  proof  of  dijhonejly , 

“ 2.  See'another.  “ Turn  inward,  and  you 
will  probably  difeern  more  than  a little  difingenuity 
in  your  own  procedure.  ” — p.  83. 

Mr.  Hervey  faid,  “ On  Chrift’s  death  Tinners 
are  to  rely  as  the  caufe  of  their  forgivtnefs , on 
Chrift’s  obedience  as  the  ground  of  their  accep- 
tanceI afked,  “ How  does  this  agree  with  p. 
58  ?”  Where  we  read  thefe  words  : “ However 
I may  exprefs  myfelf,  I would  always  have  the 
obedience  and  the  death  of  Chrift,  underftood  as 
a glorious  aggregate,  looking  upon  all  this — as 
the  foundation  of  my  hope.”  I afk  again,  “ How 
does  the  former  fentence  agree  with  this?  ’ And 
if  a man  think  it  agrees  perfectly  well,  yet  he 
has  no  ground  to  charge  me  with  difingenuity , for 
thinking  otherwife. 

“ 3.  A third  proof  is  brought,  p.  37.  “ Theron. 
calls  the  terms  inherent  and  imputed . nice  diftindti- 
ons  and  metaphyfical fabtilties.  Mr.  Wefley  makes 
Afpafio  applv  this  to  the  adtive  and  paflive  righ- 
teoufnefs  of  Chrift,  w hereas  he  is  treating  of  a 
fubjedt  totally  different.” 

Upon  recurring  to  the  dialogues,  I find  this  is 
true.  Here  therefore  is  a breacli  of  literary  juf- 
tice.  But  it  was  not  a defigned  one  : as  may  ap- 
pear from  hence,  that  this  was  originally  fent  to 
Mr.  Hervey  himfelf,  and  him  only.  How  had  I 

been 


[ 243  ] 

been  ever  fo  difhoneft,  I Ihould  not  have  been 
fo  foolifh,  had  I been  confcious  of  any  difhonell 
dealing,  as  to  appeal  to  him,  who  of  all  others 
could  not  fail  immediately  to  deteft  it. 

“ 4.  A fourth  runs  thus.  “ Barely  to  demon - 
Jlratehis  fovereignty,  is  a pr  inciple  of  adlion  fitfor 
the  great  Turk , not  the  mojl  high  God.'’  Such  a 
fraudulent  quotation  I have  not  feen ; no,  not  in 
the  Critical  Reviewers.  To  mark  the  firll  fen- 
tence  with  commas,  and  thereby  alTign  it  to  me, 
is  really  a mailer-piece,  efpecially  when  you 
have  thruft  in  the  word  barely , and  lopt  off  the 
word  gVace.” — p.  284. 

In  my  letter  the  w'hole  paragraph  is,  “ The 
grand  end  which  God  propofcs,  in  all  his  favour- 
able difpcnfations  to  fallen  man,  is  to  demon- 
flrate  the  fovereignty  of  his  grace."  (Is  the  word 
barely  thrull  in  here,  or  the  word  grace  lopt  off? 
And  could  any  one  who  had  eves  to  read  this  be 
deceived,  by  my  citing  afterward  part  of  this  fen- 
tence?)  “Not  fo  : to  impart  happinefs  to  his 
creatures,  is  his  grand  end  herein.  Barely  “ to 
demonllrate  his  fovereignty,”  is  a principle  of 
aftion  fit  for  the  great  Turk,  not  the  moll  high 
j God. 

You  fee,  there  needs  only  to  correct  the  mif- 
'!  take  of  the  printer,  who  let  the  commas  on  the 
wrong  word,  and  this  “ fpecimen  too  of  my 
want  of  integrity,"  vanifhes  into  nothing. 

Suffer  me  to  obferve  once  more  (and  let  it  be 
once  for  allj  that  the  fending  falfe  quotations  of 
L 2 a man’s 


[ 244  ] 

a man’s  book  to  himfelf  (and  that  while  there  was 
not  the  leaf!  delign  or  thought  of  publishing  what 
was  fo  fent)  could  never  be  a proof  of  want  of 
integrity,  but  of  attention,  or,  at  moil,  of  uudtr- 
J landing. 

“ g.  But  this  will  not  avail  in  the  following  cafe- 
“ Review  a palfage  of  j our  book  on  Original. ‘nn. 
Here  you  fcruple  not  to  overleap  the  bounds  of 
Jinienty  and  truth.  Afpafio  had  faid,  “ As  Adam 
was  a public  perfon  and  a'fled  in  the  dead  of  all 
mankind,  fo  Chrift  was  a public  perfon  and  acied 
in  behalf  of  all  his  people.  As  Adam  was  the  fiift 
general  ||prefentative  of  this  kind.  Chrift  was 
the  fecond  and  the  laft.”  Here  you  fubftitute  the 
word  mankind  inftead  of  this  kind.  I at  firft 
thought,  it  might  be  an  inadvertence,  or  an  e.ror 
of  the  prefs,  till  I looked  to  the  bottom  of  the 
page,  where  1 found  the  following  words  iuclofed 
within  the  marks  of  the  fame  quotation,1’  that 
is,  the  commas,  which  ought  to  have  been  fet 
five  lines  fooner,  are  fet  at  the  end  of  the  para- 
graph.) “ All  thefe  expreflions  demonftrate,  that 
Adam  (as  well  as  Chrift)  was  a repreftntath  e of 
all  mankind.  And  that  what  he  did  in  this  ca- 
pacitj',  did  not  terminate  in  himfelf,  but  affefted 
all  whom  he  reprefentedd’  t Then  I could  no 
longer  forbear  crying  out,  There  is  treachery,  O 
Ahaziah!” — p.  278. 

Treachery!  Cm  bono?  For  what  end?  Can 
any  guefs  ? What  was  I to  gain  thereby  ? Of 
what  poftible  advantage  could  it  he,  either  to  me, 

t Original  Sin,  p 268.  Dialogues-  g- >“7- 


or 


[ H5  ] 

or  to  the  caufe  I was  defending?  What  pofhble 
View  could  I have  therein  ? And  would  I cheat 
for  cheating-  fake  ? I was  not  here  talking  either 

^ O 

of  general  or  particular  redemption.  I purpofely 
declined  entring  into  the  queltion,  throughout 
that  whole  treatife.  Every  candid  man  will 
therefore  naturally  fuppofe,  that  both  the  mif- 
placingthe  commas,  and  the  putting  mankindlox 
this  kind,  were  the  printer’s  fault,  not  mine;  a 
part  of  thofe  numerous  errors  of  the  prefs,  which 
were  occafioned  by  my  abfence  fr.om  it,  and  the 
inaccuracy  of  the  correftor. 

18.  I will  not  tire  either  my  reader  or  myfelf, 
by  citing  any  more  palfages  of  this  kind  : al- 
though the  circumftanCes  are  fo  plaufibly  related, 
and  fo  flrongly  amplified,  that  upon  the  firft  read- 
ing of  each,  I was  myfelf  ready  to  cry  out, 
“ Surely  this  muft  be  true  !”  I hope  the  preced- 
ing fpecimen  may  fuffice,  and  prevent  impartial 
men  from  judging  rafhly.  I fhall  add  but 

one  paffage  more;  but  it  is  a very  extraordinary 
one  : fuch  as  none  can  deny  to  be  a home  thruft, 
a blow  under  the  fifth  rib. 

“ My  dear  Sir,  let  me  give  you  a word  of 
friendly  advice.  Before  you  turn  Turk,  Deift  or 
Atheift,  fee  that  you  firft  become  an  honefl  man. 
They  will  all  difown  you,  if  you  go  over  to  their 
party,  deftitute  of  common  honejiy.” — p.  277 
Upon  what  is  this  wonderful  advice  grounded  ? 
And  this  peremptory  declaration,  that  as  I am 
now,  even  Turks  and  Deifts,  yea  Atheifts  would 
L 3 difozen 


r m6  ] 

difown  me  ? Why  upon  the  printer’s  blunder, 
putting  mankind  for  this  kind,  and  fetting  the 
commas  in  the  wrong  place! 

And  is  this  thy  voice,  my  Jon,  David?  Is  this 
thy  tender,  loving,  grateful  fpirit  ? No  ! The 
hand  of  Joab  is  in  all  this.  I acknowledge  the 
hand,  the  heart  of  William  Cudworth.  I perceive, 
it  was  not  an  empty  boaft,  (as  I was  at  fii  fl  in- 
clined to  think)  which  he  uttered  to  Mr.  Pearfe, 
at  Bur}',  before  my  friend  went  to  paradife, 
“ Mr.  Hervey  has  given  me  full  power,  to  put 
out  and  put  in  what  I pleafe.” 

But  he  too  is  gone  hence  : and  he  knows  now, 
whether  I am  an  honeft  man  or  no.  It  cannot 
be  long,  even  in  the  courfe  of  nature,  before  I 
flhall  follow  them. 

“ My  race  ofglory’s  run,  and  race  of  fhame, 

And  I fhall  fhortly  be  with  them  that  reft.” 

1 could  wifh  till  then  to  beat  peace  with  all  men: 
but  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done  ! Peace  or  war, 
eafe  or  pain,  life  or  death  is  good,  fo  I mav  but 
jinijh  my  courfe  with  joy,  and  the  minijlry  which  I 
have  received  of  the  Lord  JeJus,  to  tejlify  the  gojpel 
of  the  grace  of  God. 

Hoxton’-Sou  are, 

Nov.  1 6,  1764. 


A TREA- 


C 247  ] 


A TREATISE  ON 

JUSTIFICATION. 


CHAP.  I. 

In  what  fenfe  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrijl  A imputed 
in  juf if  cation  ? 

FOR  the  clear  underftanding  the  Rate  of  the 
queftion,  fome  things  may  be  premifed, 
which  will  be  proved  by  and  by : as 

1.  That  the  terms  jufifying,  juffcation,  &c. 
are  not  to  be  taken  in  this  queftion  either  1.  in  a 
phyftcal  fenfe,  as  if  to  jufify  fignifiq^  to  make 
juft , with  any  pofitive  or  inherent  righteoufnefs. 
Nor  yet,  2.  in  a judiciary  fenfe,  properly  fo 
called,  where  the  judge  hath  only  a fubordinate 
power  of  judicature,  and  is  bound  to  give  fen- 
tence  according  to  the  ftrift  rule  of  the  law;  as 
if  to  jujiijy  were  to  pronounce  a man  juft,  or  to 
abfolve  him  from  punifhment,  according  to  the 
ftriff  terms  of  that  law  whereof  he  was  accufed 
as  a tranfgreflor.  But  3.  in  a judiciary  fenfe, 
L 4 lefs 


f 248  ] 


Id's  properly  fo  called,  viz.  where  he  that  fitteih 
Judge  being  the  fup’reme  Magi  fir  ate,  hath  fove- 
reign  power  to  moderate  and  difpenfe  with  the 
law,  as  reafon  or  equity  fhall  require  ; fo  that  to 
jujiify,  in  this  queftion,  imports  the  difcharging 
a man  from  the  guilt  and  punifhment  of  thofe 
things,  whereof  he  either  is,  or  juftly  might  be 
accufed  ; not  Lecaufe  he  is  clear  of  fuch  things, 
or  juflifiabie  according  to  the  ilri&nefs  of  the 
'lave,  but  becaufe  the  Judge  having  fovereign 
power  is  willing,  upon  fufficient  confiderations, 
to  remit  the  penalty  of  the  law,  and  to  difeharge 
him  as  if  he  were  innocent. 

* i 

Seel.  II.  Concerning  a judiciary  jollification 
flriftly  fo  called,  wherein  the  Judge  proceeds 
upon  legal  grounds  to  acquit  the  party  accufed, 
this  cannot  be  taken,  except  the  feriptures  be  for- 
faken  ; becaufe  they  conflantly  fpeak  of  God's 
jullifying  a finner,  not  as  an  a6l,  whereby  he 
will  either  make  him  or  pronounce  him  legally 
juft,  or  declare  him  not  to  have  offended  the 
law  ; bu?  an  a£l,  wherebv  he  freely  forgives  him 
all  that  he  hath  done  again!!  the  law,  and  acquits 
him  from  all  punifhment  due  thereto.  So  that 
in  that  very  a£l  of  God,  whereby  he  jullifies  a 
finner,  as  there  is  a difeharge  from  all  punifh- 
ment, fo  there  is  a plain  intimation  of  theguild- 
nefs  of  the  perfon  jullified,  and  that  he  is  not 
acquitted  upon  any  confideration  that  can  be 
pleaded  for  him  according  to  the  law’,  but  upon 

the 


r 249  ] 

the  confideration  of  fomewhat  done  for  hirft,  to 
relieve  him  from  thecurfe  of  it.  He  whofe  juf- 
tification {lands  in  the  forgivenefs  of  fin,  can  in 
no  conftruftion  be  faid  to  be  jollified  according 
to  the  law,  becaufe  the  law  knows  no  forgivenefs; 
of  fins,  neither  is  there  any  rule  for  any  fuch. 
thing  , there.  The  law  fpeaksof  the  car/'e,  dsathr 
and  condemnation  of  a jmner  ; but  for  the j unifi- 
cation of  a /inner , . it  gives  no  hope. 

Secondly,  That  Jefus  Chrift  obeyed  the  law, 
(as  well  ceremonial  as  moral)  and  held  out  with- 
every  letter,  jot,  and  tittle  of  it,  during  the, 
whole  continuance  of  his  life,  no  man  will  deny, 
but  thole  that  deny  his  Godhead.  Which  of  you. 
convinceth  me  ofi  fin?  Remains  through  all  ages  as. 
a challenge  to  the  world.  He  that  can  call  the 
leaf!  imputation  of  fin  upon  Chrift,  will  fhake  the. 
foundations  of  the  peace  and  fafety  of  the  world. 

Thirdly,  That  Chrift  offered  up  himfelf  as  a. 
lamb  without  fpot  on  the  crofs,  to  make  an  atone- 
ment for  the  world,  and  to  purge  the  fin  of  it, . 
there  is  no  Chriftian  that  denies. 

* Fourthly,  Jefus  Chrift  is  the  Cole  meritorious 
caufeof  every  man’s  juftification,  that  is  juftified 
by  God.  That  abfolution  from  condemnation, 
which  is  given  to  everv  man  in  his  juftification, 
is  a principal  part  of  the  great  purchafe  which 
•Chrift  hath  made  for  the  world. 

* Fifthly.  Faith  is  the  condition  appointed  by 
God,  and  required  on  man’s  part  to  bring  him  to 
that  juftification,  which  Chrift  hath  purchafed 

L ^ fore 


[ 2oo  3 

for  the  children  of  men.  Without  believing,  no 
man  can  have  part  or  lellowlhip  in  that  great  and 
bleffed  bufinefs. 

Sixthly,  It  is  evident  from  fcripture,  that  God 
in  every  man’s  juftification  doth  impute  righte- 
oufnefs  unto  him,  or  rather  fomewhat  for  or  in- 
ftead  of  righteoufnefs,  (the  fcripture  ufeth  both 
expreftKns)  by  means  of  which  imputation  the 
perfon  juftified  paffeth  in  accompt  as  a righteous 
man,  (though  he  be  not  properly  fuch  according 
to  the  law)  and  is  accordingly  invefled  with  tliofe 
great  privileges  of  a man  perfedly  righteous,  de- 
liverance from  death  and  condemnation,  and  ac- 
ceptance into  the  favour  of  God.  The  reafon 
why  God  is  pleafed  to  ufe  fuch  an  exprefTion,  of 
righteoufnefs  imputed  in  the  juftification  of  a fin- 
ner  feems  to  be  this  ; the  better  to  fatisfy  the  na- 
tural fcruple  of  the  confidences  of  men,  who  can 
hardly  think  ofbeing  juftified  (efpecially  by  God) 
without  a perfect  legal  righteoufnefs.  Now  the 
purpofe  of  God  in  the  gofpel  being  to  juftify  men 
without  any  fuch  righteoufnefs,  (being  a righte- 
oufnefs indeed  whereof  man  in  his  lapfed  condi- 
tion, is  wholly  uncapable)  the  belter  to  falve  the 
fears  of  the  confcience  touching  fuch  a defied,  he 
is  graciouflv  pleafed  fo  far  to  condefcend  to  men, 
as  (in  effed)  to  grant  and  fay  unto  them,  that 
though  he  finds  not  any  proper  or  perfed  righte- 
oufnefs in  them,  yet  if  they  truly  believe  in  him, 
as  Abraham  did,  this  believing  fhallin  the  confe- 

quences 


[ '251  ] 

quences  of  it,  be  as  good,  as  a perfe£l  righteouf- 
nefs  to  them. 

* Seft.  III.  So  that  the  queftion  is  not  either 
l.  whether  faith  as  feparated  from  Chrift,  be  im- 
puted for  righteoufnefs ; for  fuch  a faith,  in  the 
point  of  jujhf cation,  was  never  dreamt  of  by  any 
man  in  his  fenfes  : neither  2.  is  it  the  queftion, 
whether faith  be  the  meritorious  caufe  of  a man’s 
jujlification-,  for  both  they  that  affirm,  and  they 
that  deny  the  imputation  of  faith  for  righteouf- 
nefs, deny  the  meritorioufnefs  of  faith:  neither 
3.  is  it  the  queftion,  whether  Chrift  be  the  foie 
meritorious  caufe  of  the  jufiification  of  a finner; 
for  we  are  all  agreed  in  this  : neither  4.  do  we 
difpute,  whether  the  aftive  obedience  of  Chrift 
with  the  pallive,  confidered  in  conjunQaon  with 
it,  contributed!  towards  the  jufiification  of  fin- 
ners,  for  this  alfo  is  acknowledged  on  both  fidcs; 
but  5.  the  queftion  is,  whether  the  faith  of  him 
that  truly  believes  in  Chnft,  or  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift  himfelf,  that  is,  his  obedience  to  the 
moral  law,  be  that  which  God  imputes  to  a be- 
liever for  righteoufnefs,  in  his  jufiification : fo 
that  he  that  believes,  is  conftituted  as  perfefl- 
ly.  as  legally  righteous,  as  Chrift  himfelf  is  ; the 
juftified  and  the  juftifier,  both  being  righteous 
with  the  felf-fame  righteoufnefs,  only  the  juftifi- 
ed wears  it  by  imputation,  the  juftifier  by  inhe- 
rency. That  the  fcriptures  no  where  counte- 
nance any  fuch  imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift,  I truft  to  makemanifeft  in  this  difcourfe, 
L 6 and 


[ 252  ] 

and  to  give  good  meafure  of  this  truth,  heaped 
up,  and  p ref  Fed  down,  and  running  over ; heap- 
ed up  by  teftimonies  from  the  feriptures  t’nem- 
felves  ; preffed  down  by  the  weight  of  many  ar- 
guments; running  over,  with  the  clear  approba- 
tion of  many  authors,  learned  and  found,  and 
every  way  beyond  exception. 

*SeeI.  IV.  Only  give  me  leave  here  to  men- 
tion what  may  prevent  many  miflakes,  in  read- 
ing the  writings  of  many  divines,  touching  this 
point.  If  we  take  the  phrafe  of  imputing  Chrift's 
righteoufnefs  improperly,  viz.  for  the  bellowing 
(as  it  were)  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  including 
his  obedience  as  well  paflive  as  aflive,  in  the  re- 
turn of  it,  i.  e.  in  the  privileges,  blelHngs,  and 
benefits,  purchafed  by  it,  fo  a believer  may  be 
faid  to  be  juftified  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
imputed.  But  then  the  meaning  can  be  no  more 
than  this.  Godjuftifies  a believer  for  ihe  fake  of 
Chrili's  righteoufnefs,  and  not  for  any  righte- 
oufnefs of  his  own  : fuch  an  imputation  of  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  as  this,  is  no  way  denied  or 
queftioned.  So  Calvin , Chnjlus  fua  obedicntiagra- 
tiam  nobis  a pud  pair  an  acquijimt  (3  ptomerilus  ejl 
( Inflit.  1.  2.  c.  ij.  ss.  30.)  i.  e.  Chrift  by  his  obe- 
dience, procured  and  merited  for  us  grace  or  fa- 
vour with  God  the  Father.  And  again  on  Gal. 
iii.  6.  Omnes  iflix  locutiones  pererque  valent,  jufii- 
ficari  nos  Dei  gratia,  Chrijlum  tffe jujliiium  nojlram 
jufhtiam  moite  (3  rc  furre&ione  Chrifli  nobis  acqui- 
fitam , (3c.  i.  e.  All  fuch  expreftions  as  tliefe  im- 
port 


[ 2 <53  ] 

port  the  fame  thing,  that  we  are  juftified  by  the 
grace  of  God,  that  Chrift  is  our  righteoufnefs, 
that  righteoufnefs  was  procured  for  us  by  the 
death  and  refurreflion  ot  Chrift,  &c.  By  all 
which  paftages,  and  many  more  which  might  be 
produced  out  of  the  fame  author,  it  is  evident, 
that  when  he  mentioneth  any  imputation  of  die 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  in  j unification,  his  mean- 
ing is  only,  that  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  mean- 
ing chiefly  hispaffive  obedience  or  righteoufnefs, 
is  the  meritorious  caufe  of  our  purification,  and 
hath  procured  for  us  at  God's  hand,  that  upon 
our  believing  we  fhould  be  accounted  righteous 
by  him,  or  (which  is  the  fame)  that  our  faith 
fhould  be  imputed  for  righteoufnefs  to  us.  To 
which  purpofe  he  fpeaks  yet  more  exprefly  on. 
Gal.  iii.  6.  Quam  autem  jufiitiam  in  fe  repofitam 
non  habeant  homines impulatione  hanc  adibifeun- 
tur.  i.  e.  Men  not  having  any  righteoufnefs  lodg- 
ed in  themfelves,  obtain  it  by  imputation,  which 
imputation  he  thus  interprets,  quiaDcus  fidemillis 
Jcrt  acceptam  pro  jujiitia  : becaufe  God  doth  im- 
pute or  account  their faith  unto  them  for  righte- 
oufnefs. 

Se£L  V.  And  thus  Mufculus  expreiTeth  himfelf 
roundly,  Fides  reputitur  in  / ujhtiam propter  Chrifi- 
tum : faith  is  accounted  for  tighteoufnefs  for 
Chrift’s  fake.  So  Luther  alfo,  on  Gal.  iii.  6. 
Dcus  reputat  ifiam  vnperjtElam  fidem  ad  jiifiitiam 
perfcBam  propter  Chrifium.  i.  e.  God  for  Chrift’s 
fake  accounts  this  imperfeft  faith,  for  perfeft 

righteoufnefs. 


righteoufnefs.  Therefore  whevefoever,  whether 
in  the  homilies  of  our  own  church , or  in  other 
authors,  we  meet  with  any  fuch  expreflion,  as 
of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  imputed  i nju/tifi- 
cation , we  mull  not  underhand  this  righteoufnefs 
in  the  letter,  but  in  the  fpirit,  or  merit  of  it. 
And  this  manner  of  fpeech,  to  put  the  name  of 
a thing,  inhead  of  the  benefit  or  return  of  it,  is 
both  ufual  in  ordinary  difrourfe,  and  in  the  fcrip- 
•tures. 

Thus  Job  x.xxiii.  26.  God  is  /aid  to  1 coder  unto 
man  las  righteoufnefs.  i.  e.  The  fruit  or  benefit 
of  his  righteoufnefs,  in  the  favour  of  God  and 
manifehation  of  it,  in  his  deliverance.  So  Eph.  vi. 
8.  If  hat fo  ever  good  thing  any  man  dotth , the  fame 
Jhall  he  receive  of  the  Lord.  i.  e.  He  fhall  receive 
reward  from  God  for  it.  So  Rev.  xv.  12.  Here 
is  the  patience  of  the  faints , and  ch.  xiii.  to.  Here 
is  the  patience  and  faith  of  the faints , i.  e.  here  is 
the  benefir  and  tinfpeakable  reward  of  the  patience 
?nd  faith  of  the  faints  to  be  feen.  So  Pfal.  cxxviii. 
2.  Thou. Jhalt  eat  the  labour  of  thy  hands,  that  is, 
The  fruit  of  this  labour. t So  Ezek.  xvi.  ^8.  Thou 
haft  borne  this  lewdnefs,  and  thine  abominations  (faith 
the  Lord)  viz.  In  judgments  anfwerable  to  them. 
So  1 Kings  viii.  32.  To  bring  his  vay  upon  his 
head,  that  is,  the  punifmnent  he  hath  deferred 
by  his  way  of  hn.  In  fuch  a conhrufiion  as  the 
Holy  Ghohhimfeif  ufeth  in  thefe  and  manv  like 

paffages, 

So  work  is  often  put  for  the  wages  due  to  it.  Levit.  xix.  13. 
Job.  vii,  2.  Jer.  x\ii,  13.  Ifa.  xlix.  4 & c. 


[ 25.5  j 

palfages,  the  righteoufnefs  of  Clinlt  (aflive  and 
paffive)  may  be  laid  to  be  imputed  unto  us  in  our 
j unification. 

Sefl.  VI.  And  therefore  when  we  affirm  the 
faith  of  him  that  beli-eveth,  to  be  imputed  for 
righteoufnefs,  the  meaning  is  not  either  1.  that  it 
Ihould  be  imputed  asit  is  a man’s  own  aft:  nor 
2.  is  it  imputed  lor  righteoufnefs  in  refpeft  of 
the  objeft,  or  becaufe  it  laycth  hold  on  Clirift, 
(though  it  be  true,  that  jaith  that  is  imputed  for 
righteoufnefs,  mull  necelfarily  lay  hold  upon 
Chrift,)  becaufe  if faith  jollify,  as  it  lays  hold  on 
Chrilt,  it  mult  juftify  out  of  the  inherent  worth 
of  it,  and  by  virtue  of  that  which  is  natural  to  it, 
there  being  nothing  more  natural,  or  elfential  to 
Jaith , than  to  lav  hold  on  Chrift:  there  foie  to 
make  the  objeft  of  faith  as  fuch,  the  precife 
ground  of  the  imputation  of  it,  is  giving  the 
right-hand  of  fellowfhip  to  the  liomijh  jujlijica- 
tion.,  which  makes  faith  the  meritorious  caufe 
of  it  (in  part).  But  3.  when  with  the  fcriptuies 
we  affirm,  that  faith  is  imputed  for  righteoufnefs, 
our  meaning  is  this,  that  as  God  in  the  firft  co- 
venant of  works,  required  abfolute  obedience  to 
the  whole  law,  for  every  man’s  jujtifi cation, 
which  perfefl  obedience,  had  it  been  performed, 
would  havejuftified  him:  fo  in  the  new  cove- 
nant oi  grace,  God  requires  nothing  of  any  man 
for  his  j unification,  but  faith  ; which  faith' lhall 
be  as  available  to  him  for  his  juftification,  as  a 
perfefl  righteoufnefs  would  have  been  under  the 
firft  covenant  : and  this  is  nothing  but  what  is 

generally 


L *56  3 

generally  taught  by  divines  both  antient  and  mo- 
dern : Sic  decretum  dicit  a Deo,  ut  cffante  lege,  fc- 
lam  fidem  gratia  del  pofceret  ad falutem.  Ambrojius 
in  Rom.  iv.  That  is<  the  apoltle  faying  that  to  him 
that  believeth,  his  faith  is  imputed  for  righteouf- 
nefs,  affirmeth  God  hath  fo  decreed,  that  the 
law  ceafing,  the  grace  of  God  will  require  (of 
men)  only  faith  to  lalvation.  And  again,  upon 
Ch.  ix.  of  the  fame  epi file.  Sola  fides  pofita  ejl  ad 
falutem,  only  faith  is  appointed  for  falvation.  - 
Calvin  writing  upon  Rom.  x.  8.  hath  words  of 
the  fame  importance,  and  more  clear  and  full,  Ex 
liac  difindionis  nota,  colligimus,.fcuti  lex  opera 
exigit,  fc  evange/ium  nihil  aliud  pefulare,  nfi  ut 
fdemafferant  homines, ad  recipiendain  Dei gratiam. 
From  this  diftinftion  we  gather,  that  as  the  law 
requires  works,  fo  the  gofpel  requires  nothing 
elfe,  but  that  men  bring  faith  to  receive  the  grace 
of  God. 

Se£t.  VII.  Secondly,  when  we  deny  the  im- 
putation of  Chrilt’s  righteoufnefs  in  juf  if  ration 
we  do  not  deny  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  in  it- 
felf ; we  fuppofe  and  ellablifh-it  : neither  2. 
do  we  deny  the  abfolute  neceffity  of  it,  to  the 
juftif cation  of  a Tinner  ; neither  3.  do  we  deny 
a meritorious  efficiency  in  this  righteoufnefs 
i n ju/lif  cation  ; hut  verily  believe,  that  Godjuf- 
tifieth  ail  that  are  juhified,  not  barely  for  Chrift ’s 
fake,  but  for  the  merit’s  fake  of  Chrift ’s  righteouf- 
nefs, there  being  a full  confideration  in  this  right- 
eoufnefs 


f 257  J 

eoufnefs  of  Chrift  (I  mean  his  death  or  paffive 
righteoufnefs  chiefly)  why  God  fhould  juftify 
thofe  that  believe  in  him.  But  4.  what  we  deny 
is  this,  that  God  looks  upon  a believing  hnner  in 
his  ] unification;  and  accounts  him  one  that  has 
himfelf  done  all  that  Chrift  did  in  obedience  to 
the  moral  law, and  hereupon  pronounces  him  right- 
eous. Or  (which  is  the  fame)  that  God  imputes 
to  him  thofe  particular  afts  of  obedience  which 
Chrift  performed,  fo  that  he  ilands  as  righteous 
before  God,  as  Chrift  himfelf,  and  is  righteous 
with  the  felf-fame.  ’ righteoufnefs  wherewith 
Chrift  was  righteous.  In  a word,  this  is  what 
we  deny,  and  what  we  affirm  concerning  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  in  the  juflif  cation  of  a 
ftnner,  that  this  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  is  not  that 
which  is  imputed  to  any  man  for  righteoufnefs, 
but  is  that  for  which  righteoufnefs  is  imputed  to 
every  man  that  believeth. 

What  hath  been  affirmed,  and  what  hath  been 
denied  we  come  now  to  prove.  1.  from  ferip- 
ture  2.  from  reafon  ; and  3,  from  the  confent  of 
authors. 


[ ^8  ] 




CHAP.  II. 

The  imputation  of faith  for  rifiteoujiief,  proved 
from  the  Jiriptuies,  and  the  interpretation,  of 
thofe  friptures  confirmed  both  by  reajcn  and 
authority. 

WH  A T It  is,  that  is  imputed  for  righteouf- 
nefs  in  j ufiification  'all  die  wifdom  under 
heaven  is  not  fo  fit  to  determine,  as  the  Holy 
Ghoft  fpeaking  in  fcripture  ; being  the  great 
fecretary  of  heaven,  and  privy  to  all  the  coun- 
fels  of  God. 

Four  things  there  are  that  much  commend  an 
interpretation  of  fcripture*  when  they  are  found 
in  conjunction.  Firft  ifthe  letter  will  fairly  bear 
it.  Secondly,  if  the  fcope  of  the  place  clofe 
entirely  with  it.  Thirdly,  if  the  interpretation 
that  is  fet  up  again  ft  it  cannot  Rand  before  the 
context.  Fourthly,  if  the  judgment  of  learned, 
and  impartial  men,  is  found  in  prefect  concur- 
rence with  it.  But  if  tliefe  confiderations  be  fuf- 
ficient  to  confirm  an  interpretation,  then  fhall 
we  need  no  more  fcriptur'es  to  prove,  that  faith 
is  that  which  is  imputed  bv  God  for  righteouf- 
nefs  in  jufiification,  but  that  one  chapter,  Rom. 
iv. 

Se6t.  II.  For  firft  the  letter  of  this  fcripture 

fpeaks 


[ 259  ] 

fpeaks  whatweaffirm  once  and  twice,  yea,  the  third 
and  fourth  time.  Abraham  believed  God  and  it 
was' imputed  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs  ver.  3. 
Again,  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believtth  on 
him,  that  jufiijieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  count- 
ed unto  him  for-  righteoufnefs,  ver.  3.  So  again, 
We  fay  that  faith  was  imputed  to  him  for  righte - 
oufnefs,  ver.  9.  And  yet  again,  And  therefore  it 
was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteou fiefs,  ver.  22. 
The  fame  expreffion  is  ufed  alfo  ver.  23,  24. 
Certainly  there  is  not  any  truth  in  religion,  that 
can  boaft  of  the  letter  $f  the  fcripture,  more  full 
and  exprefs  for  it. 

Seft.  III.  Secondly,  the  fcope  of  the  place 
fhews  that  the  word  faith  is  taken  property,  in  all 
thefe  paffages.  Apparent  it  is,  that  the  apoftle’s 
main  drift  in  this  whole  di-feourfe  was  to  hedge  up 
with  thorns  (as  it  were)  that  falfe  way  oi  jujl  if  ca- 
tion, which  lay  through  works  and  legal  perfor- 
mances : and  to  difcover  the  true  way  of  juftif- 
cation : that  is  to  make  known  to  men  what 
God  jrequireth  of  them,  to  their  jollification. 
And  this,  he  fays,  is  faith,  or  to  believe,  in  the 
proper  fignification.  He  doth  not  require  of  us 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  for  our  jujlifiation. 
This  he  required  of  Chrift  himfelf  fork;  that 
which  he  requires  of  us  for  this  purpofe,  is  our 
I faith  in  Chrift.  ft  here  fore  for  Paul  to  have  faid 
I to  men,  that  t he  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  would 
be  imputed  for  righteoufnefs  to  them,  had  been 

quite- 


[ s,6o 


T 

J 


quite  befide  his  purpofe,  which  was  to  make 
known  the  good  pleafure  of  God,  concerning 
that  which  was  to  be'  performed  by  themfelves 
-(•though  not  by  their  own  flrength)  to  their  jujli- 
f cation.  1 his  he  affirmeth  from  place  to  place, 
to  he  nothing  elfe,  but  their  faith,  or  believing, 
1 o have  faid,  that  they  muff  be  juflified  by 
Chrifl,  or  by  Chrift’s  righteoufnefs,  and  withal 
not  to  have  plainly  fignified,  what  it  is  that  God 
requires  of  them,  to  give  them  part  in  that  righ- 
teoufnefs, had  been  rather  to  calf  a fnare  upon 
them,  than  to  have  ojmned  a door  of  life  and 
peace.  And  therefore  he  is  careful,  when  he 
fpeaks  of  juflification,  or  redemption  by  Chrilf, 
often  to  mention  faith,  as  the  means  whereby  this 
is  communicated.  See  Rom.  iii.  25.  Rom.  v.  1, 
2.  By  the  light  of  which  expreffions,  the  mean- 
ing of  thofe  feriptures  is  Ihewn  wherein  juflifica- 
tion or  redemption  by  Chrifl  are  taught,  without 
any  exprefs  mention  of  faith,  as  Rom.  iii.  24. 
Rom.  v.  9,  &c.  as  likewife  of  thofe  wherein  jus- 
tification by  faith  is  affirmed,  without  exprefs 
mention  of  Chrifl,  or  any  thing  done  or  buffered 
by  him.  As  Rom.  iii.  28,  30. 

Se6l.  IV.  Thirdly,  That  interpretation  which 
is  fet  up  againft  it,  that  by  the  word  faith,  or  be- 
lieving, in  all  thofe  paffages,  is  meant,  not  faith 
properly,  but  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl,  is  over- 
thrown by  many  paffages  in  the  context. 

Firfl,  it  is  not  likely,  that  the  apoflle  in  the 
weighty  point  of  juflification,  wherein  (doubtleis) 

he 


. 

r 261  ] 

Ik  defired  (if  in  any  fubj'ecl)  to  fpeak,  fo  that  he 
may  be  clearly  undcrftood,  Ihould  time  after - 
time,  without  ever  explaining  himfelf,  ufe  fo 
flrange  and  harfh  an  expreflion,  as  is  not  to  be 
found  in  all  his  writings,  nor  in  all  the  fcriptures. 
To  fay  that  faith , or  believing,  is  imputed  for 
righteoufnefs ; but  to  mean,  that  it  is  not  faith, 
but  the  righteoufnefs  of  C brill,  mult  needs  argue 
the  fpeaker’s  defign  to  be ; that  his  meaning 
fhould  not  get  out  at  his  mouth. 

Secondly,  the  faith  or  believing,  which  ver. 
g,  is  faid  to  be  imputed  to  Abraham  for  righteouf- 
nefs,  is  oppofed  to  works  or  working  ver.  5. 
Now  between  faith  properly  taken,  and  works, 

; between  believing  and  working,  there  is  a con- 
1 'ftant  oppofition  in  the  writings  of  this  apoftle. 
But  between  the  aftive  obedience  or  righteouf- 
f;  nefs  of  Cfrift,  and  works,  neither  doth  Paul  ever 
make  oppofnion,  neither  would  reafon  have  buf- 
fered him  to  have  done  it. 

Thirdly,  it  is  faid,  ver.  5.  That  to  him  that  be- 
; heveth  his  faith  is  imputed  to  him  for  righteoufnefs. 
Prom  which  itis  evident  that  faith  (whatfover  we 
tmderftand  by  it)  which  is  imputed  for  righteouf- 
nefs is  his,  that  is  fomewhat  that  may  truly  and 
properly  be  called  his,  before  Inch  imputation 
of  it  be  made  unto  him.  Now  it  cannot  be  faid 
of  the  righteoufnefs  of  drift  that  it  is  any  man's 
before  the  imputation  of  it  be  made  unto  him  ; 
but  faith  properly  taken  is  the  believer’s,,  before 
it  be  imputed  (at  leaf!  in  order  of  nature,  if  not 

of 


[ 262  ] 

of  time.)  Therefore  by  faith,  which  is  here  faid 
to  be  imputed,  cannot  be  meant  the  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Chrift. 

Se£l.  V.  Fourthly,  if  we  fhould  grant  that  by 
faith  is  meant  the  thing  that  is  to  be  believed  : 
yet  will  it  not  follow,  that  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrill  is  faid  to  be  imputed;  but  either  God 
himfeif,  or  the  promife  of  God  made  unto  Abra- 
ham. For  it  is  faid,  Abraham  believed  God  ver.  3. 
not  that  he  believed  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift, 
except  we  fay  that  by  God,  is  meant  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  Chrift.  Yea  whereas  the  object  of 
faith,  as  juftifying,  is  expreffed  with  great  variety 
of  words  in  the  feriptures  ; in  all  this  variety  there 
is  not  to  be  found  the  leaft  mention  of  the  right- 
eoufnefs of  Chrift.  As  if  the  Holv  Ghoft  fore- 
feeing  the  kindling  of  this  falfe  fire,  had  pur- 
pofelv  with-held  all  fuel  that  might  feed  it.  Some- 
times Chrift  in  perfon  is  made  the  objeft  ol  this 
faith , John  iii. — That  zvko/oever  believe th  1 n him. 
Sometimes  the  doftrine  of  Chrift.  John  v.  46. 
IJad  \e  believed  Mo/es,  ) e would  have  believed  me. 
Sometimes  the  raifing  up  of  Chrift  from  the  dead 
is  made  the  objeft  ol  th is/aith.  Rom.  x.  a.  For 
if  thou  fiall  con/ef  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jefus, 
and l halt  believe  in  thy  hear',  that  God  raffed  him 
u{)  from  the  dead , thou  fait  be  faved.  Laftly, 
(to  forbear  further  enumeration  of  particu- 
lars fometimes  the  teflimonv  of  God  concern- 
ing his  Son,  is  made  the  objeft  of  this  faith. 

1 John  v.  jo.  He  that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made 

him 


[ 263  ] 

him  a liar,  becaufs  he  believetk  not  the  record  that 
God  gave  of  his  [on  But  in  all  this  variety  of  ex- 
prefting  the  objefl  of  faith  as  juftifying,  there  is 
no  intimation  of  other  righteoufnefs  or  active  obe- 
dience of  Chrift. 

Se£l.  VI.  Fifthly,  the  faith  which  is  here  faid 
t©  be  imputed  unto  Abrahatm for  righteoufnefs  ver.  3. 
is  that  faith  by  which  he  believed  in  God,  that 
quickeneth  the  dead,  and  calleth  the  things  that  are 
not  as  if  they  were,  ver.  17.  But  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift  can,  in  no  wife  be  called  that  faith  bv 
which  Abraham  belies  ed  in  God  that  quiekeneth 
■ i the  dead,  d herefore  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
•is  not  that  faith,  that  is  here  faid  to  be  imputed 
for  righteoufnefs. 

Sixthly,  the  faith  which  was  imputed  unto 
Abraham  for  righteoufnefs,  ver.  3.  is  that  faith, 

1 wherein  it  is  faid  ver.  19,  that  Abraham  was  not 
weak,  and  is  oppofed,  to  doubting  of  the  promife 
> of  Gad  through  unbelief,  ver.  20.  But  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  Chrift  cannot  be  conceived  to  be  that, 
-wherein  Abraham  was  not  weak;  neither  doth 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  carry  anv  oppofition 
| with  it,  to  a doubting  of  the  promife  of  God 
|! through  unbelief.  But  between  faith  properly 
: taken  or  a firm  believing,  and  a doubting  through 
unbelief,  there  is  a dire/ft  oppofition.  Therefore 
it  is  faith  in  this  fenfe,  and  not  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift,  that  is  faid  to  be  imputed  unto  Abra- 
ham for  righteoufnefs. 


Seventhly, 


[ *$4  ] 

Seventhly,  the  faith  which  was  imputed  unto 
Abraham  for  righteoufirefs,  was  that  faith,  bv 
which  he  was  fully  alTured,  that  he  which  had 
promifed,  was  able  aljo  to  do  it,  ver.  21.  And 
the  imputation  of  faith  fo  defcribed,  is  plainly  , 
affirmed,  ver.  22.  And  therefore  it  was  imputed 
unto  him  for  righteoufnefs.  But  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrifi  is  not  capable  of  any  fucli  defcription 
as  this,  that  by  it  Abraham  was  fully  ajfured,  that 
he  that  had  promifed,  was  aljo  able  to  perform  it. 
Therefore  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifi,  is  not 
that  which  was  imputed  for  righteoufnefs  unto 
Abraham. 

Eightly,  that  which  fhall  be  imputed  unto  us 
for  righteoufnefs,  is  our  be'ieving  on  him,  that 
, raifed  up  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift  from  the  dead , 
ver.  24.  But  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifi  is  not 
our  believing  on  him,  that  raifed  up  our  Lord  Je- 
fus  Qhrijl from  the  dead.  Therefore  it  cannot  be 
that  which  is  imputed  to  us  for  righteoufnefs. 

Ninthly  and  laflly,  whereas  the  queflion  ofi:n- 
putation  in  juf  if  cation,  is  handled  only  in  this 
paffage  of  fcripture,  Rom.  iv.  (for  thofe  other 
places,  Gal.  iii.  and  James  ii.  only  mention  it, 
but  give  no  explication  thereof)  it  is  fure  the 
apofile  would  fpeak  diftindlly  and  plainly  of  the 
nature  of  it  here.  Otherwife  he  would  rather 
have  laid  a flumbling-block  in  the  way  of  men  ; | 
than  written  for  their  inftruttion.  Now  if  we 
take  the  word faith  or  believing,  fo  often  ufed  in 
this  chapter,  in  the  proper  and  plain  fignification 

of 


[ 2®<5  ] 

of  it,  for  that  faith  whereby  a man  believes  in 
Chrift,  or  the  promife  of  God  concerning 
Chrift,  then  the  tenor  of  the  difcourfe  is  as  clear 
as  the  day.  But-ifwe,by  faith,  will  needs  compel 
St.  Paul  to  mean  the  righteoufnefs  ol  Chrift,  we 
cloath  the  fun  with  fackcloth,  and  turn  his  per- 
fpicuity  into  the  greateft  obfcurity.  The  word 
jaith , though  frequently  ufed  in  the  fcripture,  is 
never  found  to  fignify  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  : neither  is  there  any  rule  in  grammar,  or 
figure  in  rhetorick,  that  can  falve  the  incon- 
fiftency  of  fuch  an  interpretation. 

Seft.  VII.  II  it  be  faid,  that faith  in  the  fcrip- 
ture is  fometimes  put  for  the  objeft  of  faith,  as 
Gal.  iii.  23.  But  before,  jaith  came  (that  is,  the 
doftrine  of  faith,  or  Chrift  himfcM  the  objeft  of 
faith)  we  were  kept  under  the  law. 

I anfwer,  Though  it  fliould  be  granted,  that  as 
well  the  aft  ilfelf,  as  the  faculty  or  habit,  may  be 
fometimes  put  for  the  objeft,  yet  when  the  aft  and 
objeft  have  been  named  together,  and  the  aft 
exprelfed  by  an  objeft  proper  to  it,  and  further, 
fomewhat  immediately  afcribed  to  this  aft  under 
that  confideration  ; (all  which  is  plainly  feen  in 
this  claufe  Abraham  believed  God , and  it  was  im- 
puted unto  him  for  righteoufnefs ) in  this  cafe,  to 
affirm,  that  what  is  fo  afcribed,  i$  neither  afcribed 
to  the  aftitfelf  there  mentioned,  (which  is  here, 
Abraham’s  believing)  nor  to  the  objeft  mentioned 
likewife  with  it,  (which  is  here,  God  : Abraham 
believed  God ) but  to  fome  third  thing  differing 
Vol.  XXII.  M from 


[ 266  ] 

from  them  both,  and  not  fo  much  as  once  men- 
tioned in  all  the  difcourfe ; (as  the  righteoufnefs 
ofChriftis  notonce  named  throughout  this  whole 
chapter,  no  nor  any  other  chapter  near  at  hand, 
either  antecedent  or  fubfequent)  what  is  this  but 
to  exchange  what  is  plainly  affirmed,  with  what 
is  not  fo  much  as  obfcurely  implied?  And  to 
make  the  apollle  fpeak  as  man  never  fpake,  not 
for  excellency  of  fpeech,  but  for  uncouth  abftrufe- 
nefs?  Doubtlefs  no  inftance  is  to  be  found  of 
any  author  whatfoever,  facred  or  prophane,  who 
fo  abhorred  to  be  underflood,  as  to  put  his  mind 
into  words  of  luch  a conftruftion- 

Again.  Neither  is  the  righteoufnefs  of  (Thrift 
tire  o\)]cOlo  faith  as  juflifying,  nor  doth  thefcripture 
where  it  fpeaks  of aith  asjuftifying,  make  the  leaft 
mention,  or  give  the  leaft  intimation  of  fuch  a 
thing.  It  is  true,  the  fcriptures  fometimes  pro- 
pound the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  or  his  obedi- 
ence to  the  law,  as  that  which  is  to  be  believed, 
and  fo  it  may  be  termed  a partial  object  of  faith: 
but  fo  the  creation  of  the  -world  is  to  be  believed, 
and  that  Cain  was  Adam’s  fon.  And  generally 
whatfoever  the  fcriptures  affirm,  mar-  be  called  a 
partial  objeft  of  faith.  But  the  objeft  of  faith 
properly,  as  it  jullifieth,  is  either  Chrift  himfelf, 
or  the  promife  of  God  concerning  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  world  by  him.  The  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  is  no  more  the  object  eft  faith  as  juftifying, 
than  either  his  being  born  of  a virgin,  or  his  af- 
cending  into  heaven;  and  either  the  one  or  the 
other,  may  (in  that  refpcctj  be  as  well  faid  to  be 

imputed 


[ 267  ] 

imputed  unto  Abraham  for  righteoufnefs,  as  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.  Thus  you  fee  at  large 
how  many  paffages  in  the  context  hand  up  againff 
that  expofition,  which  by  Abraham’s  faith  in 
.this  chapter,  will  needs  underhand  Chrift’s  righ- 
teovfnefs. 

Se£l.  VIII.  Laftly,  This  interpretation,  where- 
in the  word  faith  or  believing,  is  taken  properly 
in  all  the  paffages  mentioned,  was  the  common 
interpretation  antiently  received  and  followed  by 
the  principal  lights  of  the  church  of  God  ; and 
for  fifteen  hundred  years  together  (as  far  as  my 
memory  will  affift  me)  was  never  queftioned  or 
contradicted.  Neither  did  the  contrary  opinion 
ever  look  out  into  the  world,  tiff  the  laff  age. 
So  that  it  is  but  a calumny  to  make  either  Armi- 
nius  or  Socinus  the  author  of  it.  And  for  this 
laff  hundred  years  and  upwards,  from  about 
Luther’s  and  Calvin's  times,  the  ffream  of  inter- 
preters agrees  therewith.  You  will  eafily  be- 
lieve this,  if  you-  pleafe,  without  partiality,  to 
examine  thefe  few  teftimonies. 

Tertullian,  who  wrote  about  the  year  ipq,  in^ 
his  fifth  book  again/!  Marcion,  writeth  thus, 
t But  how  the  children  of  faith  ? Or  of  zvhofe faith, 
if  not  o)  Abraham's  ? For  if  Abraham  believed 
God,  and  that  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteouf- 
nefs, and  he  thereby  deferved  the  name  of  a father  of 
M 2 many 

+ Calerum  quomodo  flii  Fidei  ? it  cujus  fidci,  ft  non  Abraha  ? Si 
' enim  Abraham  Deo  ere Ji Jit,  el  deputatem  ejl  JuJUtiie,  alque  e.\inje  Pater 
multarum  nalionum  -meruit  nuncupori : Nos  autem  credendo  Deo , magis 
provide juJHjicamurficut  Abniham.  TcmiU.  contra  Marc,  l.  g.c.  3. 


[ 268  ] 

many  nations.,  we  more  by  believing  God,  are  jufli- 
fied  as  Abraham  was.  Therefore  Tertulhan’s 
opinion  direftly  is,  that  the  faith  imputed  to 
Abraham  for  righteoufnefs,  is  faith  properly  taken, 
and  not  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  apprehended 
by  faith. 

Origen,  who  lived  about  the  rear  £03,  in  his 
fourth  book  upon  the  Romans,  chap.  iv.  ver.  3. 
fpeaketh  thus  : i It  feems  therefore,  that  in  this 
place  alfo,  whereas  many  faiths  (that  is,  many  acls 
of  believing)  of  Abraham  had  gone  before , now  all 
his faith  was  colleclcd  and  united  together , andfo 
was  accounted  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs . And 
in  the  fame  place  not  long  after,  he  hath  more 
words  to  like  purpofe.  Therefore  he  joined 
with  Tertullian  in  the  interpretation  of  this  ferip- 
ture. 

Jullin  Martvr,  who  lived  before  them  both, 
and  not-long  after  the  apollle  John’s  time,  about 
the  year  too,  in  his  deputation  with  Trypho  the 
Jew,  led  them  both  the  wav  to  that  interpreta- 
tion. j Abraham  carried  not  av:ay  the  teftimony 
of  righteoufnefs,  becaufe  of  his  circumafwn,  but 
obecauf  of  his  faith.  For  before  he  was  circum- 

cifed, 

} Vidctnrergo  etiam  in  preefenti  loco , quart  muhx  Jidcs  Ahaha  prx- 
cijjcrint,  in  hoc  nunc  uniicrfi \Jidcs  ejus  cjjc  codetta  : £l  itu  ad jujluiam 
tircpuUitd.  Origen.  1.  y.ad Ro.  in  c.  4. 

§ Ordf  yf  AGgceciu.  ha  rr.t  KEgtrofnif  c necttof  =i:ai  Leri 
rov  Qbov  ty.xgTvfUn,  ctXKx  iri  dicty,  erf  rev  yap 

mg.ry.eF'rsa’,  avrov,  horrxi  crefi  avrev  ovrut;.  E7ri$T£t>5'6  bl 
ru  9 A&ga  by.,  V.CU  eAoytcrSv,  avrci  f i;  cnvMeclrrn.  -IifL 

Mar.  Dial,  cum  Tryph.  poll  medium. 


t 459  7 

cifed,  this  mas  pronounced  of  him , Abraham  be- 
lieved God , and  it  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righ - 
teoufnefs. 

Chryfortom,  who  lived  fomewhat  after  the 
year  380,  in  the  beginning  of  his  ninth  fermon# 
npon  the  Romans.  ||  Wherefore  was  it  written , 
but  that  we  might  learn  that  we  alfo  are  jufijied , 
as  he  was,,  becaufe  we  have  believed  the  fame  God ? 
The  fame  father  again  upon  Gal.  iii.  For  what 
was  he  the  worfe  for  not  being  under  the  law?  No- 
thing at  allr  for  his  faith  was  fufficient  unto  him 
for  righteoufnefs.  If  Abraham's  faith  was  fuffi- 
cient unto  him  for  righteoufnefs,  it  muff  needs 
be  imputed  by  God  for  righteoufnefs  unto  him ; 
for  it  is  this  imputation  from  God,  that  mult 
make  that  fufficiency  of  it  unto  Abraham. 

Seft.  IX.  Saint  Augufrine,  who  lived  about 
the  year  390,  gives  frequent  teftimony  to  this 
interpretation.  Upon  Pfal.  cxlviii.  t For  we  by 
believing  have  found  that,  which  they  (the  Jews) 
loft  by  not  believing.  For  Abraham  believed  God, 
and  it  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs. 
Therefore  his  opinion  clearly  is,  that  it  was 
Abraham's  faith  or  believing  properly  taken,  that 
was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs,  and  not 
M 3 the 

||  Ala.  r t yag  lyfpri,  L'/.li  "va.  ji.x&ajuv  or l r.ou  bjABu; 

vru  KoabyAa.  ; ru,  yxo  covra  6 eco  iremrtvy.ce.jABv.  Tt  yceo 
exeTv®-  jAi)  yevo/ABt/®^  viro  tojjoov,  Ov$\v.  WKK  r,gy.ecsv 

it  Art?  -U  Ay.onoav rr,v  hvrij.  Idem  ad  Gal.  g.  6. 

+ Credendo  quippe  invcnimus  quod  i/ti  ( Judai ) non  credendo  amifcrunt . 
Quia  oredidil  Abraham  Deo,  et  repututum  eft  Mi  ad  juftitiani,  Aug. 
in  Pfal.  1 48.  veijus fnem. 


C 27°  ] 

the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift.  For  that  faith  of  hi?, 
which  was  fo  imputed,  he  oppofeth  to  the  unbe- 
lief of  the  Jews,  whereby  they  loft  the  grace  and 
favour  ol  God.  Now  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
is  not  oppofed  to  unbelief,  but  faith  properly 
taken.  Again,  writing  upon  Pfal.  lxx.  For  I 
believe  in  him  that  jujlifieth  the  ungodly , that  my 
faith  may  be  imputed  unto  me  f or  righteoiifnefs . 
Where  by  faith  he  cannot  mean  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift,  becaufe  he  calleth  it  his  own  before 
the  imputation : whereas  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  can  noways  be  imagined  to  be  any  man’s, 
till  it  be  made  his  by  imputation. 

Beda,  who  lived  fomewhat  before  the  year 
700,  upon  Rom.  iv.  ver.  5.  hath  thefe  words. 
% What  faith , but  that  which  the  apojile  in  another 
place fully  dcfneth  ? Neither  circumcifion,  nor  un- 
circumcfion  availeth  any  thing,  but  faith  which 
zvorketh  by  love-,  not  any  faith,  but  that  faith 
zohich  worleth  by  love.  Certainly  that  faith, 
which  Paul  defineth  to  be  a faith  working  by  love, 
cannot  be  conceived  to  be  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  ; and  yet  this  faith  it  was,  in  the  judgment 
of  this  author,  that  was  imputed  unto  Abraham 
for  righteoufnefs. 

From  all  thefe  teftimonies  it  is  apparent,  that 
that  interpretation  of  this  fcnpture  which  we 

contend 

J Qua  fides,  rift  quam  alio  loco  plcnffimc  dcpnit  Apofotus  ? Neque 
circumcifo  neque  prccputium  aliquid  valet,  fed fides  quz  per  diteclionern 
operatur.  Non  qualfainquefdes,  fedfdes  quiz  per  dileclioncm  operate, 
Beda  ad  Ro.  4.  5. 


[ ^7*  ] 

Contend  for,  hath  antiently  ruled  in  the  church 
of  God,  and  no  man  opened  his  mouth  againft 
it,  for  above  a thoufand  years.  Come  we  to  the 
time  of  the  reformation  ; and  we  fhall  find  it  ftill 
maintained  by  men  of  the  greateft  authority  and 
learning. 

Seft.  X.  Luther  on  Gal.  iii.  6.  § Chrifiian 

righteoufnefs  is  an  affiance  or  faith  in  the  Son  oj 
God , which  affianre  is  imputed  unto  nghteoujnejs 
for  Chuffs fake.  And  in  the  fame  place  not  long- 
after.  |]  God  for  Chriffs  fake , in  whom  I have 
begun  to  believe , accounts  this  (my)-imperfett  faith , 
for  perfefl  righteoufnefs. 

Bucer,  upon  Rom.  iv.  3.  t Abraham  believed 
God,  and  it. was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteouf- 
nefs,  that  is,  he  accounted  this  faith  for  rigkteouf- 
nfs  unto  him.  So  that  by  believing  he  obtained 
this,  that  God  effeemed  him  a righteous  man. 

Peter  Martyr  declares  himfelf  of  the  fame 
judgment,  upon  Rom.  iv.  3.  J To  be  imputedfor 
righteoufnefs  in  another  Jenfe  fignifieth,  that  by 
which  we  oarf elves  ai  e reckoned  in  the  number  of 
M 4 the 

^ Chrifliana  jajlitia  eft fiduda  in flium  Dei : Qua  fducia  imputatur  ad 
jufitiam  propter  Chrifum.  Luther,  ad  Gal.  3 . 6. 

||  Deus  reputat  fam  imperfedam  fdem  ad  jufitiam  ptrfeda.ni  propter 
Chrifum,  in  quern  ccepi  credere,  ibid. 

+ Abraham  fdem.  habuit  Jehovae,  et  reputavitid  ci  jufitiam : Hoc 
ef,  habuit  ci pro juf  ilia  hand  fdem.  Credcndo  igitur  idaccepit,  ut  Deus 
eumpro  jufo  haberet.  Bucer  ad  Ro.  4.  3. 

% Imputari  ad  jufitiam,  alio  modo fgnifeat  id,  per  quod  nos  ipf,  ha- 
lemur  in  cenfu jujlorum.  Atque  id  Paulus  tantummodo fdes  tribuit,  &c. 
?.  Mart.  Ad.  Rom.  4.  3. 


[ 272  ] 

ill?-  righteous.  AndthisPaul  attributes  to  faith  only. 

Calvin  abetteth  the  fame  interpretation  upon 
§ Rom.  iv.  3.  Wherejore  Abraham  by  believing 
doth  only  embrace  the  grace  tendered  unto  him,  that 
it  might  not  be  in  vain.  If  this  be  imputed  unto  him 
for  righteonfnefs,  it  follows,  that  he  is  no  other-wife 
righteous , but  as  tr  lifting  or  r elying  upon  the  goodnefs 
of  God,  he  hath  boldnefs  to  hope  for  all  things  from 
him.  Again  upon  verfe  5.  Faith  is  imputed for 
righteonfnefs,  not  becaufe  it  carricih  any  merit  from 
us,  but  becaufe  it  apprehends  the  goodnefs  of  God. 
Hence  it  appears,  that  he  never  thought  of  a 
metonymical  fenfe  in  the  word  faith:  but  took 
it  in  the  plain,  grammatical  fignification. 

Seft.  XI.  Mufculus  engageth  for  this  imputa- 
tion alfo.  In  his  common  place  of juf  ideation, 
Seft.  v.  | This  faith  Jhould  be  in  high  ejleem  with 
us;  not  in  regard  of  the  proper  quality  of  it,  but  in 
regard  of  the  purpofe  of  God,  whereby  he  hath  de- 
creed, for  ChriJTs fake,  to  impute  it  for  righteouf- 
nefs  unto  thofe  that  believe  in  him.  The  fame  au- 
thor upon  Gal.  iii.  6.  + What  did  ( Abraham ) that 
Jhould  be  imputed  unto  him  foi  nghteoufnefs,  but 

only 

§ Quart  Abraham  credendo  nihil  al'.ud  quam  obLtam  phi  graticoi 
amp/elHtur,  ne irrita Jit.  Si  hoc  i/li  imputatar  in  jvJMtian;.  fern  turnon 
alittr  tjfejufium,  nip  quia  Dei  honitatc  conffus,  omnia  ah  ipfo fierarc 
eiudet.  Calvin,  ad  Rom.  4.  3. 

Fides  reputaturin jujliliam,  non  nuodulhcm  a nolis  mcrium  afferat, 
fed  quia  Dcibonilaltm  apprehtndii.  Una.  ini'.  4. 

\\Commenduta  debebat  tffe  hccc  fries , non  propria  qualitatis , fed 
Propofti  Dei  refpeSu,  quo  corfHtutim  ilia  crcdcniibus  in  Chrifum,  protter 
ipfum,  juflitioe  toco  imputarc.  Mufc.  Loc.  de.  Jutbf.  left.  5. 

+ Quid  enim fecit  (Abraham)  quod  imputarctur  iuiad jujhtiam,  nip 
quod  CTcitdit  Deo  ? Idem  Ad  Gal.  3.  6. 


[ 273  ] 

only  this.  that,  he  believed  God  ? Again,  1 But.  when 
he  firmly  believed&od promifng,that  very  faith  was 
imputed  to  him  in  the  place  of  righteou  fnefs,.  that  is, 
he  was  of  God  reputed  righteous  for  that  faith,  and 
abfolved from  all  his  fins. 

Bull inger  gives  the  fame  interpretation,  upon 
Rom.  iv.  § Abraham  committed  hurfelf  unto  God 
by  believing,  and  this  very  thing  was  imputed  unto 
him  for  righteou fnefs.  And  fo  upon  Gal.  iii.  6. 
jj  It  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteou fne fs  .thatis, 
that  very  faith  of  Abraham  was  imputed  to  him  for 
righteou  fnefs,  whilfl  he  was  yet  uncircumcifed. 

Gualter  comes  behind  none  of  the  former  in 
avouching  the  grammatical  interpretation,  upoii 
Rom.  iv.  4.  f Abraham  believed  God,  and  he, 
viz.  God,  imputed  unto  him  this  faith  for  righte- 
ovfncfs. 

Aretius  confirms  the  former  expofitions  upon 
Rom.  iv.  He  imputed  righteoufnefs  unto  him, 
which  is  as  much  as  to  fay , he  fo  accepted  of  his 
Me  faith, 

} Verim  td>i  promittenti  Deo  firmiter  crcdidit,  , p illi  cjufmodi  fades 
jujlithx  loco  imputata  ■ Hoc  ef , ob  earn pirn,  jufius  ef  a Deo  reputatus, 
ctab  omnibus  deticlis  abjbtutus.  ibid. 

(j  Concrcdidi  fe  Abraham  Deo , et  illud  ipfum  illi  pro  jufitia  inputa- 
lumcjl.  Bulling,  ad  Ro.  4. 

|]  Imputjtum  ejl  illi adjujlitiam  tSc.  hoc  ejl,  ilia  ip<a  Abrah®  tides 
ipfi  ad  jujlitiam  impuUtx  ejl,  cum  adlntc  agent  in  prxputio.  Idem,  ad 
Gal.  3,  6. 

+ Credidit  Abraham  Deo , et  imputxvit  eifeilket  Deus,  hancfdem,  pro 
juflitia,  Gualt.  Ad  Rom.  4.  4 

+ t Imputavit  ei  jujlitiam , quod  ejl,jidem  gra’am  habuit,  adeo  utjjfura 
iX eo  haberd  jujiitia  imputativa.  Aret.  ad  Rom.  4. 


[ 27 4 ] 

faith , as  thereupon  to  account  him  righteous  with 
an  imputative  righteoufnefs.  Where,  note  bv  the 
way,  he  doth  not  call  an  imputative  or  imputed 
righteoufnefs,  any  righteoufnefs  that  fhould  be 
in  one  perfon  inherently,  and  become  another's 
by  imputation,  (neither  do  I remember  the  phrafe 
of  an  imputed  righteoufnefs  in  thatfenfe,  in  anv 
good  author)  but  fomewhat  imputed  by  God  for 
righteoufnefs,  which  literally  and  in  llrittnefs  is 
not  fuch. 

Beza  on  Rom.  iv.  3.  fays,  f Here  the  bufiriefs 
is,  concerning  that,  zi'hick  was  imputed  unto  him , 
viz.  his  faith. 

Junius  and  Tremcllius  are  likewife  of  tire  fame 
mind,  on  Gen.  xv.  6.  ||  God  ejleemed  ( or  accounted \ 
him  for  righteous  though  wanting  righteoufnefs, 
and  reckoned  this  in  the  place  of  righteoufnefs,  that 
he  embraced  the  promife  with  a firm  belief. 

Paraeus  (the  laft  we  fhall  name  of  foreign  di- 
vines) gives  the  fame  interpretation,  on  Rom. 
iv.  3.  + We  underfund  by  the  word  faith  (which 

is  faid  to  be  imputed  unto  Abraham  for  righteoaf- 
nefs)  Abraham  s refling  not  in  himfelf  nor  in  his 
own  merits,  but  in  the  promife  and gracioufntfs  of 
God. 

Neither 

§ Hie  aoftur  dt  e o,  quod  ipje  iinhutatum  e/l,  nenpe  etc  ipjius  pat 
Beza  .ad  Rom.  4.  3. 

||  Eum  quamvis  jufiitii  carcntem  numeraiilque  pro  jujo,  JuSui:  in 
jitjlitiai  toco,  quod  pnmijfmes  Jrma  fide  ampUxus  ejl.  .Yu.  in  Cm. 
15.  6. 

t bitelligimns  Juki  nomine  acquiejcentim  Abraha;  non  in  fe  JuJe 
mentis, Jed  in  Dei  promij/ione  tt  bcnevolentia.  Par.  ad  Rom.  4.  3. 


[ 275  ] 

Neither  are  there  wanting  among  ourfelves, 
men  of  found  learning  and  judgment,  holding 
forth  the  fame  interpretation. 

Seft.  XIII.  Doclor  Robert  Abbot  (afterwards 
bifhop  of  Sarum)  in  his  apology  again!!  Bifbop, 
part  I.  chap.  Lx.  Having  fet  down  thofe  palfages 
of  the  apoitle,  Rom.  iv.  g,  and  6.  adds  as  follow- 
cth.  In  which  words  we  fee,  how  the  apoftlt 
ajfinneth  an  imputation  of  righteoufnefs  without 
works : which  he  expreJJ'eth  to  be,  the  reputing  of 
faith  for  right  eoujnefs ; for  that  thereby  we  obtain 
Jorgivenefs  of  fns.  Again  not  long  after  ; for 
the  imputation  of  righteoufnefs  without  works,  what 
is  it  that  is  reputed  for  righteoufnefs  ? Faith  (faith 
the  apojile ) is  reputed  for  right  eoujnefs. 

Dr.  Prelion  alfo  embraced  the  literal  fenfe. 
In  his  treatife  of  God’s  all-fuff ciency , page  12, 
13.  In  this fenfe  faith  is  faid  to  be  accounted  ( or 
imputed) for  righteoufnefs.  Abraham  believed  God, 
Gen.  xv.  God  tells  him  what  he  would  do  for  him  : 
and  (faith  the  text)  Ab  raham  believed  God,  and  it 
was  counted  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs.  K owlt 
was  accounted  unto  him  for  righteoufnefs  chi  fy  in 
■this  fenfe,  as  it.  is  interpreted  Rom.  iv.  that  his 
very  taking  of  the  promife,  and  his  accepting  of  the 
covenant,  m that  he  did  receive  that  which  God  gave, 
that  put  him  within  the  covenant,  and  therefore  the 
Lord  reckoned  him  a righteous  man,  even  for  that 
very  acceptation  and  believingi 

Mr.  John  Forbs,  late  pallor  of  the  Englifli 
M 6 church. 


C 276  ] 

church  at  Middleburgh,  a man  of  known  gravi.  . 
piety  and  learning,  in  his  treatife  of  jujlf nation , 
chap.  28.  page  135.  hath  thefe  words.  Faith  in 
this  fentence,  (where  -it  is  faid  faith  is  imputed 
unto  righteoufnefs)  is  in  my  opinion  to  betaken  pro* 
perly,  in  that  fenfe  whereby  in  itfelf  it  is  diflit > 
guifhed , bothfrom  the  word,  whereby  it  is  begotten, 
and  from  the  objcH  of  it  in  the  word,  which  is 
Chrifl. 

Thus  I have  cited  many  authors,  by  way  of 
Collateral  proof,  for  the  literal  interpretation  of 
this  feripture.  Not  that  the  interpretation  itfelf 
needeth  tali  auxilio  aut  defenfonbus  iflis  : but 
only  to  remove  that  great  ftumbling-flone,  (which 
lieth  in  many  mens  way)  called  prejudice. 


CHAP.  III. 

Other  proofs  from  feripture. 

SECT.  I.  That  the  aftive  obedience  ofChrii’t, 
his  fulfilling  the  moral  law,  was  never  in- 
tended by  God,  to  be  that  righteoufnefs  where- 
with we  are  jollified,  maybe  further  demonflrated, 
from  all  thofe  feriptures,  where  the  works  of  the 
law  are  excluded  from  jufification.  As  Rom. 
iii.  28.  Therefore  we  conclude  that  a man  is  jufh~ 
fed  by  faith,  without  the  works  of  the  law.  So 
Gal.  ii.  16.  Knowing  that  a man  is  not  jufifed 

by 


[ 277  ] 

by  the  works  of  the  laic,  but  by  the  faith  of  JefaS 
Ckrij'l,  evni  we  have  believed  in  fe/us  Chrif , that 
rie  might  he  ju fifed  by  the  faith  ofChrif,  and  not 
by  the  works  of  the  law.  Again.,  Rom.  iii.  20, 
Therefore  by. the  works  of  the  law  fka'l  no  fufh  be 
jc fifed,  in  his  fght : for  if  a man  be  juftified  by 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  imputed  to  him,  he  is 
juftified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  bccauie  that 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  confifts  of  thofe  works, 
as  every  man's  perfonal  righteoufnefs  would  have 
dene,  had  there  been  a continuance  in  the  hi  ft 
covenant.  Therefore  this  righteoufneis  of  Chrift 
cannot  be  imputed  to  any  man,  for  that  righte- 
oufnefs, whereby  he  is  to  he  juftified. 

Neither  wiii  thefe  feriptures  bear  any  fitch  in- 
terpretation as  this:  no  man  fit al  1 be  juftified  by 
the  works  of  the  law,  as  wrought  by  himfelf, 
hecaufe  no  man’s  works  will  hold  out  meafure 
with  the  perfeflion  of  the  law.  Rut  a man  may 
be  juftified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  wrought  by 
another,  fap poking  this  other  to  be  as  great  in 
obeying  as  the  law  is  in  commanding,  and  that 
God  is  willing  to  derive  thefe  works  upon  us  by 
imputation.  To  this  I anfwer, 

Seft.  II.  Firft,  where  the  Holy  Ghoft  deli- 
vers a truth  limply,  and  by  way  of  general  or 
univerfal  conclufion,  without  impofing  any  ne- 
ceffity  upon  men,  either  in  the  fame  place,  or 
elfewhere,  to  limit  it';  there  for  men  by  diftinc- 
iions  and  limitations,  to  over-rule  the  plain 
meaning  of  the  words,  is  not  to  teach  men  fub- 

miffion. 


[ 278  ] 

million-  unto,  but  to  exercife  authority  over  the 
fcriptures  : neither  is  there  any  opinion  fo  erro- 
neous,  -but  may  thus  efcape  the  fword  of  the  fpi- 
rit. 

Seft.  III.  Secondly,  if  the  apoftle's  commif- 
fion  had  been  to  have  made  any  fuch  diftinhtion 
between  the  works  of  the  law,  as  performed  by- 
men  themfelves,  and  the  fame  works  as  performed 
by  Chrift:,  that  thofe  indeed  fhould  have  no 
hand  in  juJUfication , but  thofe  fhould  be  all  in 
all ; certainly  he  would  have  been  very  injurious 
to  thefe  works  of  Chrift,  in  giving  away  that 
place  of  honour  which  was  due  to  them,  to  ano- 
ther thing  of  a far  inferior  nature,  viz.  faith,  as 
it  is  evident  he  doth,  in  the  fcripture  cited,  Gal. 
ii.  Knowing  that  a man  is  notjuflifiedbx  ike  works 
of  the  law , but  by  the.  jaith  of  Jejus  Chrifl.  He 
doth  not  fav,  but  by  the  works  of Jef us  Chrifl,  as 
if  the  opposition  Rood  between  the  works  of  the 
law  as  performed  by  men,  and  the  fame  works  as 
performed  by  Chrift,  which  in  all  reafon  he 
fhould  have  done,  had  the  works  ol  the  law,  as 
done  by  Chrift,  any  fuch  pre-eminence  this  way 
above  the  other;  and  not  have  afcrikcd  that  to 
faith,  (wherein  the  weak  creature  hath  fomewhat 
to  do)  which  was  the  prerogative  of  Chrift  srigh- 
teoufnefs.  Doubtlefs  Paul  was  no  fuch  enemv 
to  the  mhteoufnefs  o!  Chrift,  as  to  fet  an  ufurner 
upon  the  throne,  which  belonged  to  it.  Thirdly, 
if  Paul's  intent  had  been  to  have  referved.a  place 
in  juflif  cation,  for  the  atlive  rightecufnefs  of 

Chrift, 


O 


[ 2/9  1 


Chrift,  or  for  tire  works  of  the  law,  as  perform- 
ed by  Chrift,  by  way  of  oppofition  to  the  fame 
works,  as  performed  by  men  themfelves,  his  in- 
definite exprcflion,  excluding  the  works  of  the 
law  fimply,-  without  the  leaf!  intimation  of  any 
difference  of  thole  works,  either  as  from  the  one 
hand  or  from  the  other,  would  have  been  of  dan- 
gerous confequences. 

Seft.  IV.  Fourthly,  if  by  excluding  the  works* 
of  the  law  from  ju/tijicatwh,  Paul’s  meaning  had 
been  only  toexclude  thefe  works  as  done  by  men 
themfelves,  but  not  as  done  by  Chrift,  it  cannot 
be  thought,  but  he  would  have  tnade  ufe  of  fuch 
a diftin&ion  himfelf,  and  would  have  been  glad 
to  come  fo  near  to  his  couriny-men  the  Jews,  in 
the  great  point  of  jollification.  Such  a diftinc- 
tion  might  have  been  a happy  mediator,  between 
them.  For  what  was  it  that  chiefly  incenfed  the 
jews  againft  Paul,  and  the  preaching  of  the  gof- 
pel,  and  the  righteoufnefs  of  faith,  but  that  the 
law  and  the  obfervation  of  it,  were  not  taken 
into  the  great  bufmefs  oi  jujlification.  Now  if 
Paul  could  have  faid  unto  them,  you  have  no 
reafon  to  take  offence,  that,  I preach  ] unification 
by  faith  in  Chrift,  becaufe  1 do  not  exclude  the 
righteoufnefs  or  works  of  your  law,  no  not  from 
having  the  main  ftroke  in  you'r  j uftifi.ee tion : nay, 
that  which  I preach  concerning  faith,  is  purpofe- 
ly  to  advance  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law, 
and  to  lhew  you  how  you  may  be  juftified  by  it. 
I only  preach,  you  cannot  be  juftified  by  your 

own 


[ *8o  ] 

own  obferving  of  it  becaufe  the  perfection  of 
it  is  fucli  as  you  cannot  attain  ; but  God  hath 
fent  one  to  keep  it  for  you,  by  whofe  obfervation 
imputed  to  you,  you  fhali  be  juffified.  Tlierefore 
I a:n  no  enemv  to  your ] unification  by  the  works 
of  the  law  : but  only  teach  you,  that  thefe  works 
are  done  by  another  for  your  j unification. 
Who  feeth  not,  but  bv  fuch  mitigation  of 
matters,  Paul  might  have  taken  off  great  part  of 
their  furious  oppoution  P But  indeed,  the 
contention  between  him  and  them,  was  not  whe- 
ther they  were  to  be  juftifie.d  by  the  works  of  the 
law,  either  as  wrought  by  themfelves,  or  by  an- 
other, but  {imply  this,  whether  j unification  were 
by  the  works  of  the  law  (by  whomfoever  per- 
formed) or  by  faith  ? 

Seek  V.  Two  things  may  be  objefled.  Firft, 
that  there  is  a fufficient  ground  laid,  even  by 
Paul  bimfelf  upon  which  to  found  the  fore-named 
diftindtion,  viz.  1 hat  by  excluding  the  works  of 
the  law  from  jufiifi cation  be  only  excludes  them, 
as  done  by  men  themfelves,  but  not  as  done  by 
Chrift,  Ty.  iii.  r.  Secondly,  that  there  is  men- 
tion a Ifo  of  the  works  of  the  law,  as  done  by 
Chrift,  or  (which  is  the  fame)  of  Chrift's  being 
made  under  the  law.  Gal.  iv.  4. 

His  words  are  thefe:  Not  by  works  of  right  couf 
ref f,  Tifiii  h have  done  but  according  to  his  mercy 
he  [aved us.  Thence  feme  argue,  Paul  by  rej eff- 
ing works  of  righteoufnefs  done  by  us,  plainly  im- 
plies. 


[ 2Sl  ] 

piles  the  admitting  them  as  done  by  another  for 

us. 

To  this  I anfwer,  firfi,  that  the  aflive  obedience 
or  righteoufnefsof  Chrift  fhouldbe  wholly  exclud- 
ed, fo  as  to  have  nothing  to  do  in  juflijication,  I 
have  no  where  affirmed  : nay  it  hath  been  expref- 
ly acknowledged,  to  have  a Melted  influence 
therein,  as  it  falleth  into  his  paffive  obedi- 
ence. 

Secondly,  I anfwer,  that  this  inference  does 
not  follow  from  the  premiies.  The  Holy  Ghoft 
may  rejeft  the  works  of  men  from  being  the 
caufe  of  fuch  or  fuch  a thing,  and  yet  no  ways 
fuppofe  that  the  works  of  another  fhouIJ  be  the 
caufe  thereof. 

But  Thirdly,  to  put  the  matter  out  of  all  quef- 
tion,  that  in  excluding  the  works  of  the  law 
which  we  have  done,  he  had  no  intent,  by  way 
of  oppofition,  to  imply  the  works  which  another 
might  do,  he  expreffeth  plainly  the  oppofition 
bimfelf,  and  tells  us  that  it  was  according  to  his 
mercy  that  he  fayed  us  ; Not  by  works  of  righteouf- 
v efs  which  wchave  done,  but  according  to  his  mer- 
cy he  faced  us:  therefore  here  can  be  nothing 
implied  by  way  of  oppofition,  becaufe  the  oppo- 
fition is  diftinflly  fet  down.  And, 

Fourthly,  left  any  might  yet  fay,  that  it  may 
be  according  to  God’s  mercy,  and  yet  bv  the 
.works  of  righteoufnefs  wrought  by  Chrifi, 
the  apoftle  delivers  himfelf  diftinttly  of  that 
wherein  this  mercy  of  God  ccnfifteth,  not  in 

faving 


' * / ' - 

[ 2§2  ] 

faving  us,  by  the  works  of  Chrift  imputed  to  us, 
but  in  regenerating  us,  and  wajfiingus  in  the  new 
birth. 

Seft.  VI.  Con  cerning  the  latter  obje&ion* 
from  Gal.  iv..  4.  Where  Chrift  is  faid,  to  have 
been  made  under  the  late  : from  hence  it  is  infer- 
red, that  Paul  doth  mention  the  works  of  the 
law,  as  done  by  Chrift ; therefore  he  had  no 
intent  to  exclude  the  works  of  the  law,  as  done 
by  Chrift,  from  having  their  part  \n jujhfication^ 
Foranfwer,  (not  to  infill  upon  what  was  de* 
livered  before.)'  I add,  that  the  phrafe  of  Chrift’s 
being  made  under  the  law.  doth  not  fignify  Chrift's 
obedience  to  the  moral  law,  but  to  the  ceremonial , 
as  is  evident  from  that  which  is  delivered  im- 
mediately before,  (ver.  5.)  as  the  intent  of  his 
being  made  under  the  law,  viz.-  that  he  might  re- 
deem them  that  were  under  the  law.  There  is  no 
reafon  to  conceive,  that  Chrift  fhould  be  faid  to 
be  made  under  any  other  law,  than  that,  from 
under  which  he  was  to  redeem  others.  Where- 
fore we  being  not  redeemed  from  the  moral  laur 
that  being  an  eternal  law,  and  of  eternal  obliga- 
tion, but  from  the  law  of  ceremonies,  it  follows, 
that  it  was  this  law,  under  which  Chrift  is  here 
faid  to  have  been  made.  So  that  if  men  will 
gather  any  thing  from  hence,  for  the  imputation 
of  Chrift’s  obedience  in  juftification,  it  muft  be 
of  that  obedience  which  he  performed  to  the  ce- 
remonial lawr,  and  fo,  not  only  the  Jews,  but  see 
Gentiles  alfo,  muft  be  cloatlred  with  the  robes 

r- 

ox. 


[ 283  3 

©fa  ceremonial  righteoufnefs,  imputed  to  us  for 
our juf  if  cation. 


CHAP.  IV. 

This  farther  proved  from  Rom.  v.  16,  17.  An 
objeBion  anfwered. 

QE  C T.  I.  Thirdly,  againft  the  imputation  of 
^ the  rignteoufnefs  of  Chrift  in  thefenfe  already 
difclaimed,  I argue  from  Rom.  v.  16,  and  17. 
compared  together.  The  gift  of  7 ighteoufn efs  (as 
it  is*called  ver.  17,)  which  is  by  Chrift  in  the 
gofpel,  is  faid  (ver.  16,)  to  be  a free  gift  of 
many  offences  unto  juflifi cation.  From  whence 
I thus  reafon.  That  righteoufnefs,  which  is  the 
gift  of  many  offences,  that  is,  the  forgtvenefs  of 
many  offences  or  fins  unto  ]uflif  cation,  cannot 
be  a perfect  legal  righteoufnefs  imputed  to  us. 
But  the  righteoufnefs  which  is  by  Chrift  in  the 
gofpel,  by  which  wear  e jnfified  is  the  gift  of 
many  offences  unto  jujtif  cation : therefore  it  can- 
not be  a perfeft  legal  righteoufnefs  made  ours  by 
imputation.  The  latter  is  the  propofition  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.  The  former  I demonftrate  thus  ; that 
-righteoufnefs  which  extends  to  a mz.risjuf  if  ca- 
tion by  the  forgivenefs  of  fins,  can  be  no  perfefl 

legal 


[ *84  ] 

legal  righteoufnefs  imputed  r but  the  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Chrift,  in  the  gofpel  by  which  we  are 
jufhfi'ed,  extendeth  unto  a man's  ju/lification  by 
the  forgivenefs  of  fins  : therefore  it  can  be  no 
legal  righteoufnefs  imputed.  The  reafon  of  the 
former  propofition  is  this,  becaufe  a legal  or  per- 
fefl  righreoufnefs,  do:h  not  juflify  a man  by  way 
of  forgivenefs  : but  is  of  ltfelf  intrinfically  a man  s 
jujnjicalion  ; yea  fitch  a jujli fixation,  with  which 
forgivenefs  of  (ins  is  not  compatible.  For  what 
need  hath  he  that  is  legally  righteous,  or  hath  a 
legal  righteoufnefs  imputed  unto  him  of  forgive- 
nefs of  fins,  feeing  fuch  a righteoufnefs  excludes 
all  fin,  and  all  guilt  of  fin  from  him  ? 

Se£L  II.  i[  it  be  faid,  that  a man's  fins  are  firft: 
forgiven  him,  and  then  this  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  is  imputed  to  him,  and  fo  he  is  juftified  : 
I anfwer, 

Firft,  If  we  will  needs  diftinguifh  the  efiefts 
of  the  afitive  and  pafiive  obedience  of  Chrift,  fo 
as  from  the  aftive  to  fetch  a perfeft  righteoufnefs 
for  imputation,  and  from  the  pafiive  remiffion  of 
fins,  yet  whether  it  be  reafonable,  to  invert  the 
order  of  thefe  effetls,  I leave  to  fober  confider- 
ation.  Chrift  did  not  full  die,  and  after  death 
keep  the  law  for  11s,  but  he  find  kept  the  law, 
and  then  differed  death  for  us.  Therefore  if  we 
will  needs  make  the  imputation  of  1 he  one  a aif- 
tinft  benefit  from  the  imputation  of  the  other, 
reafon  requireth,  that  that  which  was  firft  pur- 
chafed,  Ihould  be  firft  received  or  applied,  and 

confequently 


[ ^5  ] 

confequently  that  imputation  of  righteoufnefs 
Should  precede  remillion  of  fins. 

Secondly,  If  a man  hath  once  finned, '(which 
mult  needs  be  acknowledged  of  everv  man  that 
hath  fins  forgiven)  it  is  not  any  legal  righteoufnefs 
whatloever  imputed  that  can  juitify  him  : no, 
il  it  were  pollible  for  him  to  keep  the  lav/ 
perfectly  in  his  own  perfon  ever  after,  this 
would  not  juitify  him,  becaufe  fuch  a juflifica- 
tion  is  repugnant  to  the  exprefs  tenor  of  the  law. 
Turfed  is  the  man  that  continiielh  not  in  all  things. 
Therefore  a man  that  hath  not  been  always  right- 
eous, can  never  be  made  righteous  by  the  right- 
eoufnefs of  the  law  imputed. 

Thirdly,  If  a man’s  fins  be  once  forgiven  him 
he  hath  no  need  ofthe  imputation  of  any  further 
righteoufnefs  for  jir/lificalion,  becaufe  forgive- 
nefs  of  finsamounteth  unto  a full  j uftif cation  with 
God.  This  is  plain  from  Rom.  v.  16.  The  gift, 
faith  Paul,  that  is  the  -gift  of  righteoufnefs  (as 
■it  is  explained  in  the  next  verfcj  is  of  maa\  of- 
fences unto  juft  if cation,  that  as  when  God  hath 
.given  men  their  offences,  or  forgiven  them,  (lor 
to  give  a debt,  or  forgive  it  is  all  one)  he  hath 
fully  j uHified  them.  For  that  righteoufnefs  which 
God  imputes  to  men  through  iaith,  is  nothing 
( telfe  but  the  for.given.efs  of  fins.  And  this  is  all 
the  juftification  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of.  The  not 
iobferving  this  has  been  the  chief  occafion  of  the 
■prefent  miltake.  For  men  reading  in  the  fcrip- 
stures  of  the  jujl f cation  of  finners,  or  of  their 


[ 286  ] 

being  made  righteous  by  Chrift,  ther  have  con- 
ceived that  fuch  a thing  cannot  be,  but  by  a 
pofitive  righteoufnefs  fomeways  put  upon  them, 
and  there  being  no  fuch  righteoufnefs  to  be 
found,  but  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  hence  they 
have  apprehended,  that  jujhfication  mutt  needs 
be  by  this  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  imputed  unto 
them.  Whereas  that  righteoufnefs  which  we 
have  by  Chrift,  and  wherewith  we  are  juflified 
■by  believing  is  a negative  righteoufnefs , not  a 
pofitive.  It  is  nothing  elfe  but  a non-imputation 
of  fin  ; which  we  therefore  call  a righteoufnefs, 
as  having  the  privileges,  tho’  not  the  nature  of 
a perfect  legal  righteoufnefs. 

Seil.  III.  The  fcripture  fhines  with  as  much 
clearnefs  on  this  truth,  as  »he  fun  doth  when  he 
rifeth  in  his  might.  Rom:  iv.  6.  compared  with 
ver.  - 8.  Even  as  David  dec/arerk  the  blejfednefs 
vf  the  marPunto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  righteeuf 
nefs  without  works.  A righteoufnefs  without 
works  irUift  needs  be  a nagative  'righteoufnefs, 
as  is  fully  expreffed  in  the  following  vcrfes, 
PBleffedare  theywhofe  iniquities  are  forgiven  : biffed 
is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  imputes  not  Jin.  You 
fee  the  imputation  ol  righteoufnefs  ver.  6.  is 
here  interpreted  to  be  nothing  elfe,  but  a not- 
imputing  of  ft  n.  And  fo  Calvin  upon  Rom.  iii. 
2i.  calls  this  a definition  of  the  right eoujnefs 
-of  faith  Bead  quorum  ranijfce  funt  iniquitates,  that 
is,  Biffed  are  they  who fe  Jins  are  forgiven.  And  not 
long  alter,  Paula's  trcidii,  Deum  homines  jujlifi - 


care 


[ 2«7  ] 


icare  peccata  non  imputando , Paul  teacheth  that  God 
■ Juflifieth  men  by  not  imputing  their  Jins.  So  A£ts 
xiii.  38,  39,  Be  it  known  unto  you  (faith  Paul  to 
die  Jews)  that  through  this  man  (Chrijl ) is  preach- 
ed unto  you  forgivenefs  off  ns.  Which  forgivenefs 
of  fins  he  immediately  call  their  jujliftcation.  And 
by  him  all  that  believe  are  jujhfied  from  all  things , 
_from  which  ye  could  not  be  juft  fed  by  the  law  of 
Mofes.  You  fee  how  he  exprefieth  the  nature  of 
tins  juft  fi cation  which  we  have  by  Chrifl,  viz.  by 
the  way  of  negative  righteoufnefs,  not  pofitive. 
All  that  believe  arc  jujhfied  from  all  things,  that  is 
from  all  fins,  Irom  which  ye  could  not  be jufiifed 
by  the  law  of  Mofes  : fo  that  thejuftification  which 
we  have  by  Cl, rill  in  the  gofpel,  is  not  a jufli- 
f fication  with  righteoufnefs,  (properly  fo  called) 
but  a jufhfi cation  from  fin  and  from  the  guilt  of 
-fin  and  condemnation  due  to  it.  So  when  Chrilt 
I'  faid  to  men  and  women  in  the  gofpel,  T hy/rns  aie 
forgiven  thee,  then  he  juflified  them  : the  forgive- 
,ne‘fs  of  their  fins,  was  their  juft  1 fication* 

‘Se£t.  IV.  This  is  the  moll  ufual  and  proper 
, signification  of  the  word,  jiffy,  both  in  the 
'fcriptures,  and  other  authors.  It  does  not  figni- 
ify  the  giving  a pofitive  righteoufnefs,  but  only 
; an  acquitting  a man  from  the  guilt  and  penalty 
due  to  fucli  things  as  were  laid  to  his  charge.  In 
-the  fcripture  it  is-ufualiy  oppofed  to  condemn- 
ing. He-  tha.t  juflifieth  the  wicked,  and  he  that  con- 
demneththe  juft, both  thefe  are  abomination  unto  the 
-Lord.  Prov.  xvii.  1,5.  What  is  here  meant  by 

jellifying 


[ *88  ] 

jufti Tying  the  -wicked  ? Not  making  them  righ- 
teous men,  b-v  putting  a moral  righteoufnefs  upon  ' 
them:  but  the  giving  them  the  privileges  of  juft 
men,  which  are  freedom  from  cenfure,  punifh- 
ment  and  condemnation,  as  appears  by  the  op- 
pofition  in  the  other  member  of  the  claufe,  and 
condemneih  the  nghteous.  So  that  by  jufhlying 
the  wicked,  is  nothing  elfe  meant,  but  the  not- 
condemning  him.  So  Rom.  viii.  33,  34.  Who 
Jhall  lay  any  thing  to  ihe  charge  of  God s el. cl?  It 
is  God  that  jujhjiet'i  : who  is  he  that  cor,- 
demnelk.  Where  you  fee  again  the  oppofi- 
tion  between  being  jollified  and  condemned. 
Therefore  by  juftilying  is  nothing  elfe  meant, 
but  acquitting  from  oondemation.  Gal.  iii. 
ver.  21. 

Sett.  V.  And  that  this  was  Calvin’s  opinion, 
that  jujlifi cation  is  forgivenefs  of  fins,  is  evident 
from  manf  paffages  in  his  writings,-  by  which  it 
is  apparent,  he  hefd  no  fuch  imputation  of 
•Chrill’s  righteoufnefs  for  jujlifi  cation,  as  fome  ; 
charge  him  with.  His  words  are  exprefs  again 
and  again,  on  Rom.  iv.  6.  Hue  accedil  oppojitum 
membrum , quod  Dais  homines  jujiificet  peccatum 
von  imputando , i.-e.  Add  her  tun  to  the  oppqfite  mem- 
ber, viz.  that  God  jujlifieth  men  bv  net  imputing  . 
fin.  And  immediately  after,  0 mbits  chain  verbs 
docemur,  juflitiam  Pau'o  nihil  alt ud  ejfe , quam  re- 
mijficnem  peccator  uni.  By  which  words  we  are 
taught , that  rigktcoujnejs  with  Paul  is  nothing 

elfe  ■ 


[ *89  ] 

elfi  but  rnnijjlon  of  (ins  A And  yet  again  not  long 
after  the  former  words ; Manet  ergo  falva  nobis  pul- 
cherrima  fententia,  juftificari  kominem  fide,  quia 
gr atuita peccatorum  remijfione  coram  Deo purgatus 
fit,  that  is,  this  molt  lovely,  faying  remains  un- 
fhaken,  that  a man  is  juft  fed  by  faith,  becaufe  he 
is  purged  by  a free  forgiven  fs  of  Ins  fins  before 
God. 

Se£L  VI.  Mufculus  is  as  far  engaged  for  the 
point  in  hand,  as  he.  So  on  Rora.  iv.  6.  Notandum 
primo,  remiffionem  peccatorum  effe  juftitiam  noflram, 
i.  e.  This  is firjt  to  be  noted,  that  forgivenefs  of  fins 
is  our  nghteoifiejs.  And  a little  alter:  Ergo 
jufitia  Dei  qucc  gratis  imputatur,  eft,  non  imputa- 
ri  peccatum . i.  e.  Therefore  the  righteoufnefs  of 
God  which  is freely  imputed,  is,  that  fin  is  not  im- 
puted. So  Luther  on  Pfal.  xxxii.  JuJtitia  vofitra 
proprie  eft  remiff io  peccatorum  feu,  lit  loquitur 
pfabnus,  pecca/a  non  vnputare,  peccata  tegere,  i.  e. 
Our  righteoufnefs  properly  is  the  forgivenefs  of  our 
fins,  or,  as  the  pf'ulni  fpeaketh,  the  non-imputation, 
or  covering  of  our fins.  So  Melanfton  upon  the 
twentieth  article  of  the  Auguftan  confeffion.  Sig- 
nificat jufificatio  in  Ins  Paudfententns,  remjfwn- 
em  peccatorum,  feu  reconciliationem,  feu  imputati- 
onem  qujhtice,  hoc  eft,  acceptationem per fionce.  i.  e. 
Jufiif  cation  in  Paul’s  fayings,  fignifeth  remif- 
fion  of  fins,  or  reconciliation,  or  imputation  ofi 
righteoufnefs,  that  is,  the  acceptation  of  a man’s 

Vo  l.  XXII.  N p erf  on. 

+ So  fome  Popifh  authors  charge  this  very  opinion  upon  Cal- 
vin as  his  eiror.  Alioqui error  CalvinLmus  iji  Jiccre,  nil  aliud  ejfcjujlifi- 
calionem,  quam  remijiontm  peccatorum.  Lorin.  in  Adt.  5.  v„r,  31. 


r a9°  ] 

per  fort.  Beza  himfelf  holds  the  truth  fall  in  this 
point,  (though  fometimes  he  feems  to  let  it  go) 
• in  his  treatife  of  the  J upper  oj  the  Lord : Cuinam 
jujhfcationem  tnbuemus  ? Uni  certe  Deo,  unusfi- 
quidem  Deus  peccata  remittit.  Pojita  eft  autem  om- 
nis  juftif catio  in  remiffone  peccatorum : Et  ideo 
juftitia  ha.  in  imputatione  pofta,  juftitia  Dei  vaca- 
tur. i.  e.  To  whom  fiall  we  afcribe  juftif  cation  ? 
Doubt lefs  to  God  alone , becaufe  it  is  God  alone  that 
Jorgiveth  fins.  And  all  purification  fiandchin  re- 
rnijfion  of  fins.  And  therefore  this  righteoufnefs 
which  ftandeth  in  imputation , is  called  the  righte- 
oufnefs  of  God.  Rom.  i.  17.  and  iii.  21.  & c.  The 
words  of  Zanchius  are,  Quod  juftitia  fidei  nihil 
aliud fit,  quam  reconciliatio  cum  Deo,  quct fola  re- 
mif tone  peccatorum  conftat.  i.  e.  That  the  righte- 
oufnefs of  faith  is  nothing  elfe,  but  reconciliation 
with  God,  which  Jtands  in  nothing  elfe  but  for- 
givenefs  of  fins . 

Seft.  VII.  Chamier,  in  the  third  tome  of  his 
Panflratia,  page  907,  challengeth  the  counfel 
of  Trent  for  denying  remiffion  of  fms  to  be  the 
form  of  juftif  cation,  evincing  this  to  have  been 
Auguflin’s  opinion.  And  fpeaking  of  the  pro- 
teflants,  faith  thus,  Sed  idem  juftitia  proram  et 
puppim  conftituimus  in  remiffone  peccatoi  urn,  m- 
nirum  quia  hcec  nos  apud  Deum  confituit  jufos. 
i.  e.  We  (proteflants)  place  the frf  and  la f,  the  be- 
ginning and  end  of  our  righteoufnefs  m the forgive- 
nefs  of  our  fins,  becaufe  this  makes  us  righteous 

before 


[ 29*  ] 

before  God.  And  a little  after,  It  aquae  jufliiiam 
noftram,  quatenus  conjlat  remiff  one  peccatorum , 
cum  Paulo  jufifcationem , earn  autem,  quae  perfec- 
tions virtutum,  fandifcationem  appellamus.  i.  e. 
Our  righteoufnefs,  as  it  conffts  in  remijjion  of  Jins, 
with  Paul  we  call , jujlification  : but  that  which 
J lands  in  perfeEhon  of  virtues , fanBif cation. 
Again.  Nos  vero  quod  dat,  ad/nitti/nus,  recipro- 
cari  inter  fe  jufifcationem,  et  remijfionem  pecca- 
torum. i.  e.  We  admit  oj  what  he  (Bellarmine) 
grants,  that  juftif  cation  and  remijjion  of  fins  are 
one  and  the  felf-J'ame  thing.  Laftly,  Amefius 
makes  remiflion  of  fins  and  juftification  terms 
equivalent.  Defcriptio  beatitudihis  petitura  caufa 
effciente,  qua:  eft  remffo  peccatorum,  vel  juftif  - 
catio  cum  ejus  effedis.  i.  e.  The  defer ibtion  of  blef. 
| fednefs  is  drawn  from  the  efficient  caufe  thereof, 
which  is  for givenefs  of  fins,  or  juftif  cation,  with 
its  ejfetts. 


CHAP.  V. 

Farther  proofs  from  feripture,  for  the  imputation 
of  faith.  Four  objections  anfwered. 

A FIFTH  argument  may  be  deduced  from 
Phil.  iii.  9.  And  be  found  in  him , not  hav- 
| mg  mine  own  righteoufnefs,  which  is  of  the  law,  but 
that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Chrift,  the  righ- 
N 2 teoufnefs 


[ 292  ] 

■ teoufnefs  which  is  of  God  through  faith.  In  the 
former  verfe  the  apoflle  profelfeth  what  effects 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Chrift  had 
wrought  in  him.  It  had  caufed  him  to  count 
all  things  lofs,  which  once  he  had  efteemed  tire 
greated  gain.  He  means  his  pharifaical  righteouf- 
nefs  and  legal  Jevifh  prerogatives.  He  fought 
nothing  now,  but  that  he  might  win  Chrift , and  be 
found  in  him.  Obferve  : he  does  not  fay,  that 
he- maybe  found  in  his  right  eoufnefs,  much  lefs 
in  his  righteoufriefs  imputed  to  him,  but  limply, 
that  he  might  be  found  in  him  ; which  is  an  ufual 
expreflion  in  fcripture,  of  the  date  of  a believer. 
Rom.  viii.  1.  There  is  no  condemnation  to  t’r.ofe 
■ who  are  in  Chrift  Jfus.  So  chap.  xvi.  7.  JVlioalfa 
Therein  Chrift  dsej ore  me,  i.e.  were  believers,  &c. 
What  it  is  to  be  found  in  Chrift , he  exprelfeth, 

1 Negatively  thus:  Not  having  mine  own  rigkte- 
oufnefs:  yet  not  fimply  and  altogether  no  righte - 
oufnefs,  that  may  in  any  fenfebe  called  his  own, 
but  no  fuch  right eouf  efs  of  his  own,  as  hands  in 
works  of  the  law.  Such  a righteoufriefs  of  his 
own.  he.  mud  be  fure  not  to  have,  i.e.  not  to 
trud  to,  or  to  flicker  himlelf  under  from  the 
broke  of  God's  juflice.  2.  Affirmatively’ thus  : ' 
but  that  (i.e.  that  right  eoufnefs ) which  is  of  God  by 
faith.  Here  is  not  the  lead  jot-  or  tittle,  nor  the 
lead  whifpering,  breathing  or  intimation  of  any 
righteouficf  he  fhould  have  by  the  inrputationof 
the  righteoufriefs  of  Chrift,  no  nor  of  any  righte- 
oufnels,  by  or  through  the  righteoufnefs  of 

Chrid : 


L 293  3 

Chrift  : butonly  fuch  a righteoufnefs  as  is  &<*  wUwt 
X%‘r°S-  through  the  faith  oJChrift , or  by  believ- 
ing in  him. 

Seft.  II.  .Now  becaufe  fuch  a righteoufnefs 
wherein  nothing  is  required  of  men,  but  only 
faith  in  Chrift,  mffiht  feem  a llender  righteouf* 
nefs  to  adventure  the  precious  foul  upon.  The*, 
apoftle  adds  by  way  of  commendation  of  tins- 
righteoufnefs , that  it  is  the  righteoufnefs  of  God. 
i.  e.  A righteoufnefs  which  God  himfelf  hath' 
found  out,  and  which  he  will  own  and  account 
for  righteoufnejs  unto  men,  and  no  other  but 
this  : even  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  (faith  he)  t/V 
etj-i  Ti?  Trtfai,  which  is  in  faith , i.  e.  which  is  deriv- 
ed upon  a man  by  faith.  The  mentioning  of 
this  righteoufnefs  the  fecond  time,  as  handing  in 
faith , is  doubtlefs  emphaticah  As  it  is  often  in 
fpeech  between  man  and  man,  -when  a man 
hath  fpoken  that  which  feems  improbable,  it  is 
ufual,  if  he  that  fpake,  be  able  to  make  good 
what  he  faid,  to  fpeak  the  fame  thing  over  again. 
So  Paul  here,  having  once  affirmed,  that  the 
righteoufnefs  wherein  he  defired  to  be  found,  was 
the  righteoufnefs  which  is  by  the  faith  ofChriJl,  left 
he  ffiould  feem  to  have  fpoken  that  which  he  could 
not  ftand  to,  he  fpeaks  the  fame  words  (in  effeft) 
the  fecond  time,  and  avoucheth  that  very  righ- 
teoufnefs which  is  by  the  faith  ofChrifi , to  be  that 
righteoufnefs  that  he  defired  to  be  found  with. 
If  Paul  had  any  inclination  at  all,  to  have  plac- 

vN  3 ed 


[ 294  ] 

ed  the  righteoufnefs  by  which  he  was  to  be  juf- 
tified,  in  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  imputed, 
here  was  a tempting  occafion  to  have  drawn  him 
into  exprefhons  of  it.  But  we  fee  here  is  loud 
fpeaking  again  and  again,  of  the  righteoufnefs  ' 
of  faith,  but  profound  filence  of  any  righteouf- 
nefs from  the  imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrifh 

Seft.  III.  Sixthly,  that  what  God  imputes  for 
righteoufnefs  \xsjuf  if  cation,  is  not  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  Chrifl,  but  faith  in  Chrifl,  may  be  prov- 
ed from  all  thofe  fcriptures,  where  jufif cation 
is  afcribed  to  faith.  Not  to  heap  up  places  of  this 
hind;  Therefore  we  conclude  that  a man  is  jufi- 
fed  by  faith,  Rom.  iii.  28.  Therefore  we  being 
juftifed  by  faith,  Rom.  v.  1.  Now  when  men  fay 
that  faith  juftifeth,  I demand  what  is  it  they 
mean  by  faith?  Do  they  not  mean  their  believ- 
ing, or  the  aft  of faith,  (ufually  fo  called)  which 
by  the  afTiflance  of  the  Holy  Ghofl  is  raifed 
within  them,  and  put  forth  by  them  ? For  men 
to  fay  that  faith  juftifeth,  and  yet  to  condemn 
it  for  an  error,  to  fay  it  is  an  aft  of  faith  that  juf- 
tifieth,  hath  in  my  apprehenfion,  as  much  in- 
confiflency  in  it,  as  if  a man  fhould  grant,  that 
Jerufalem  once  was  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth, 
and  yet  fhould  cenfure  him  that  faid,  the  city 
Jerufalem  wras  ever  fo  : as  Jerufalem,  and  the 
city  Jerufalem  are  the  fame.  So  are  faith,  and 
the  aft  of  faith  the  fame  : and  if  one  juflifieth, 
certainly  the  other  juflifieth  alfo. 

Seft. 


[ 295  3 

Seft.  IV.  Perhaps  it  will  be  faid,  they  what 
confefs  that  faith  juftifieth,  do  not  conceive  of  it, 
as  divided  frorn  its  objeft  Chrift.  No  more  did 
ever  any  man  in  his  fenfes.  For  a man  to  fay, 
that  he  feeth,  and  yet  to  affirm,  that  when  he 
feeth,  he  feeth  nothing,  is  to  profefs  open  en- 
mity againft  common  fenfe.  Neither  is  it  any 
other  in  him  who  ffiall  conceive  of  any  aft  of 
faith , that  is  not  exercifed  upon  its  objeft,  either 
Chrift  in  perfon,  or  Chrift  in  promife.  It  is  im- 
poffible  that  any  man  fhould  believe,  but  he 
muft  believe  fomething,  or  in  fome  perfon : 
and  fo  when  any  manfpeaks  of  faith  or  believing, 
he  muft  of  neceffity  imply  the  objeft  with,  or 
in  the  aft,  though  he  names  only  the  aft,  and  not 
the  objeft,  as  the  ufual  manner  of  the  fcripture 
is,  where faith  ox  believing  is  forty  times  menti- 
oned, without  addition  ot  the  objeft  Chrift,  or 
the  promife  of  God  in  Chrift,  or  any  thing  equi  - 
valent to  either. 

Secondly,  it  may  be  faid,  that  when  men 
profefs  faith juftifeth,  their  meaning  only  is,  that 
faith  juftifeth  inftrumentally.  I anfwer,  neither 
hath  any  thing  more  been  faid  by  me,  neither  is 
any  thing  intended  to  be  faid  to  the  contrary. 

Seft.  V.  But  it  may  be  farther  objefted,  that 
when  men  confefs  faith  juffeth,  their  meaning 
is,  it  juftifieth,  as  it  takes  hold  of  Chrift’s  righte- 
oufnefs.  I anfwer,  if  this  alto  fhould  be  grant- 
ed, (but  the  fcripture  never  fays  fo)  yet  it  is  the 
aft  of  faith  that  juftifieth.  So  let  men  put  what 
N 4 meaning 


[ 296  ] 

meaning  they  pleafe  upon  their  words,  when 
they  profefs  it  is  faith  that  juftifieth,  if  they 
mean  at  all  as  they  fay,  they  mud  mean,  it  is^he 
aft  of  faith  that  juflifieth,  becaufe  both  that  faith 
by  which  a man  believes  in  Chrift,  is  an  aft  of 
faith,  and  again,  that  faith  by  which  a man  is 
inftrumentally  juftified,  is  an  aft  of  faith : and 
that  faith  that  layeth  hold  upon  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift,  is  an  aft  of  faith  too.  Therefore  let 
men  turn  themfelves  any  way,  if  they  mean  as 
they  fay,  that  faith  indeed  juftifieth,  they  muft 
mean,  that  it  is  the  aft  of  faith  that  juftifieth. 

Seft.  VI.  If  it  be  yet  further  faid,  that  when 
men  fay,  we  are  jujtijied  by  faith  their  meaning  is 
we  are  jollified  by  that  which  faith  apprehendeth  : 
Ianfwer:  that  faith  juftifieth  ismofttrue  : But  that 
whatfover  faith  apprehendeth  fhould  juftifyis  not. 
For  by  faith  weunderjland  (or  apprehend)  the  words 
were  tnade,  Heb.  xi.  3.  Yet  no  man  will  fay,  that 
the  creation  of  the  world  juftifies  men.  In  fine, 
if  God  in  the  new  covenant  requires  faith  in 
Chrift  for  our  j unification  inftead  of  the  righteouf- 
nefs  of  the  law,  and  this  faith  will  not  pafs  in  ac- 
count with  him  for  fuch  righteoufnefs,  both  his 
commandment  and  covenant  for  believing,  will 
become  void  and  of  none  efteft  ; the  intire  ben- 
fit  of  them  being  fufpended  upon  the  gracious 
pleafure  of  God  in  the  defignation  of  them  to 
their  end. 


CHAP. 


[ 297  ] 


CHAP.  VI. 


The  lajl  proof  from  fcripture,  of  the  non-impu~ 


EC  T.  I.  If  the  fcirptures  do  not  only  no 


^ where  eftablifh,  but  absolutely  deny  a pof- 
fibility  of  the  translation  of  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  fro m .oneperfon  to  another,  this  willfully 
decide  the  queftion.  And  this  I conceive  will  be 
evinced  irrefragably  from  Gal.  iii.  12.  And  the 
law  is  not  of  faith  : but  the  man  that  doth  them, 
JJiall  live  in  them.  This  fcripture  doth  not  barely 
deny  a poffibility  of  tranfjating  the  righteoufnefs 
of  the  law  from  one  perfonto  another,  but  denies 
it  emphatically,  and  with  the  utmoft  advantage 
of  a denial.  For  it  denies  a poffibility  of  it  to  be 
done,  even  by  that  hand  exprefly,  (I  mean  the 
hand  of  faith)  which  was  the  likelieft  hand 
under  heaven  to  have  done  it,  if  the  nature 
of  the  thing  had  not  made  it  impoffible.  The  a- 
poflle  denieth  faith  itfelf  the  power  of  being  a me- 
diatrix in  this  cafe  to  carry  over  the  righteoufnefs. 
of  the  law,  from  one  perfon  to  another.  By 
which  it  appeareth  alfo,  that  he  had  an  intent 
particularly  to  make  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law 
as  performed  by  Chrift  himfelf,  incapable  of-this. 
tranflation  or  imputation  ; becaufe  faith  never 


pretended. 


t 298  ] 

pretended,  nor  could  have  colour  to  pretend  the 
tranflating  any  other  legal  right eoufnefs,  from 
oneperfonto  another  for  jollification,  but  only 
that  which  was  performed  byChrift.  If  there 
were  any  thing  in  all  the  world  that  could  have 
done  the  thing  which  is  pleaded  for,  faith  hath 
the  pre-eminence  : becaufe  it  doth  derive  a right- 
eoufnefs  from  one  to  another,  fuch  a righteouf- 
nefsas  is  deriveable,  an  imputative  righteouf- 
nefs  you  may  call  it,  feeing  it  is  fuch  by  account 
or  interpretation  (I  mean,  remilhon  of  fins  :)  This 
righteoufnefs  faith  derives  from  Chrift  upon  him 
that  beheveth : but  a righteoufnefs  of  the  law, 
it  cannot  derive,  becaufe  fuch  a righteoufnefs  is 
not  deriveable. 

Se£L  II.  Let  the  words  and  fcope  of  the  fcrip- 
ture  mentioned  he  narrowly  examined,  and  all 
that  hath  been  faid  will  be  found  in  it.  And  the 
IdW  IS  7l0t  oj'  faith  .'  toi  0 Mwa;  avrct  -tcroc, 
but  the  man  that  doth  them  Jhall  live  in  them  : the 
former  claufe,  after  Paul’s  fuccinft  manner  of 
exprefhng  himfelf,  is  very  brief,  and  therefore 
fomewhat  obfeure  : but  the  latter  claufe  eafetli 
the  difficulty,  and  cafteth  a fufficient  light  upon 
it.  Whereto  if  we  add  the  dependence  and  re- 
ference that  this  verfe  hath  upon  the  former, 
Paul’s  meaning  will  be  found  as  clear  as  the 
noon-day.  Therefore  when  he  faith  the  /arc  is  not 
faith,  Ik  by,  or  out  of  faith,  his  meaning 

can  be  no  other  but  this,  that  the  righleoujiijs 
of  the  law  doth  not  come  upon  any  man  out  of 

his 


C 299  ] 

his  faith  or  by  his  believing,  or  that  no  man  is 
made  partaker  of  a legal  righteoufnefs  by  believing. 
But  (faith  he)  the  very  doer,  that  man,  he  Jhall  live 
in  (or  by)  them.  He  proves  the  truth  of  the 
former  claule  from  the  exprefs  tenor  of  the  law 
or  legal  righteoufnefs,  as  handing  in  full  oppofi- 
tion  to  any  derivation  of  it  from  one  to  the  other 
even  by  faith  itfelf.  As  if  he  Ihould  fay,  no  le- 
gal righteoufnefs  can  come  upon  any  man  by  be- 
lieving, becaufe  it  is  only  the  man  that  doth  the 
things  of  the  law,  that  fhallbe  jollified  and  live  by 
them  ; the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  never  goeth 
farther  (in  the  propriety)  to  the  juf/if cation  of 
any  man,  than  to  the  perfon  that  fulfils  the  law. 
That  by  the  word  law,  in  this  place,  is  .meant  the 
righteoufnefs  or  fulfilling  of  the  law , may  appear 
by  the  like  acceptation  of  the  fame  word,  the 
law  in  other  palfages  of  this  apofile,  when  it 
is  ufed  upon  a like  cccafion.  Rom.  iv.  ig.  For 
the  promife  was  not  to  Abraham  or  his  feed  through 
the  law  i.  e.  Through  the  righteoufnefs  of  or  obedi- 
ence to  the  law,  viz.  That  it  fhould  be  obtained 
and  enjoyed  by  any  fuch  righteoufnefs  ; as  is  evi- 
dent by  the  oppofition  in  the  following  claufe, 
but  through  the  righteoufnefs  of  faith,  i.  e.  This 
promife  was  not  made  to  him  and  his  feed  that 
the  bleffing  of  it  fhould  be  obtained  by  the  form- 
er, but  by  the  latter  righteoufnefs.  The  word  is 
again  ufed  in  the  fame  fignification  in  the  very 
next  verfe.  For  if  they  that  be  of  the  law . be  heirs. 


[ 3oo  ] 

i.  e.  That  are  for  the  righteoufnej s of  the  lav, 
and  will  ftandto  be  juftified  by  that. 

SeCL  III.  The  fcope  likewife  of  the  place, 
and  the  dependence  of  the  claufe  on  the  former 
verfe  evinceth  this  interpretation.  The  apoftle 
in  the  former  verfe  had  delivered  that  no  man 
could  be  juftiftei  by  the  law , i.  e.  by  the  right- 
eoufnefs  or  works  of  the  law  for  this  reafon,  be- 
caufe  the  fcripture  faith,  the  juft  fhallhve  by  faith. 
Now  becaufe  this  confequcnce  might  feem  open 
to  fome  fuch  exception  as  this  , what  though 
the  juft  live  by  faith,  may  they  not  be  juftified 
by  the  works  of  the  law  too  and  live  bv  them  alfo  3 
May  not  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  be  made 
over  to  them,  by  faith  and  fo  a compound  riglt- 
eoufnefs  be  made,  of  both  together.  No  (faith  Paul) 
the  law  is  not  of  faith  ; there  can  be  no  legal 
righteoufnefs  derived  upon  men  by  faith  ; and 
that  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  fuch  righteoul- 
nefs  is  by  the  exprefs  letter  and  tenor 
of  the  law,  confined  and  appropriated  to  the  per- 
fon  of  him  that  fulfills  it : uKK  a a eroir, ?*<;  ccvto. 
the  man  himfelf  that  doth  them,  fhall  live  by 
them.  i.  e.  there  is  a contradiction  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  thing  that  the  righteoufnefs  of  the 
law  fhould  ever  be  removed  from  one  man's  per- 
lon  to  another,  though  it  were  attempted  by  the 
hand  of  faith  itfelfi  God  never  intended  that 
the  law  faith  Ihould  meet  together,  to  jum- 
ble up  a ju  Hi  ft  cation  for  any  man.  And  whereas 
it  is  frequently  charged  upon  the  opinion  we 

maintain, 


[ 3°*  ] 

maintain,  that  it  magnilieth  faith  above  mea- 
fure,  the  truth  is,  the  contrary  opinion,  which 
afcribes  to  it  a power  of  transferring  a legal  right- 
eoufntfs,  magnifieth  it  feven  times  more,  and  af- 
cribes a power  even  of  impofiibiiities  to  it.  Faith 
may  boalf  of  many  great  things,  and  mav  re- 
move mountains  : but  for  removing  any  legal 
righteou fief's,  (in  the  fenfe  we  fpeak  of)- it  muft 
let  that  alone  for  ever.  There  is  a greater  con- 
trariety m the  feveral  natures  of  faith  and  the 
law,  in  refpe£t  of  mixing  or  working  together, 
to  make  up  a juftiftcation,  than  was  between  the 
iron  and  clay  in  Nebuchadnezzar’s  vifion.  Dan- 
ii.  43.  Repugnantia  tegis  et  pda  ejl  (faith  Calvin 
on  Gal.  iii.  12.)  in  can  fa  jujlificationis  : facitius 
tnimequam  igni  copula.bis,  quamhcec  duo  concilia , 
homines  fide  et  lege  effe  juft 'os.  i.  e.  There  is  a re- 
pugnancy between  the  law  and  faith , in  the  matter 
of  j unification  : and  a man  may  fooner  couple  f re 
and  water  together ,.  than  make  .the fe  two  agree. 
that  men  are  righteous  by  faith,  and  by  the  lain 
too . Confonant  to  this  feripture,  'is  Rom.  iv. 

For  if  they  which  are  of  the  law  be  liars,  faith  is 
made  void,  and  the  promife  is  made  of  none  effeFl. 
Where  vou  fee  as  full  and  as  irreconcileable  art 
oppofition,  between  the  right eoufnefs  of  the  lam, 
and  the  righteoufnefs  of faitli,  in  refpect  of  juf- 
tifi cation,  as  is  between  eaft  and  weft  : it  is  im- 
poftible  they  fhould  be  brought  together:  there 
is  a greater  gulf  fixed  between  them,  than  was 
between  Abraham  and  the  rich  man  : faith  can- 
not 


[ 302  ] 

not  go  over  to  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law , to 
join  with  that  in  j uf  if  cation  : neither  can  the 
righteoufnefs  of  the  law,  be  brought  over  to 
faith. 


CHAP.  VII. 

' The  fir [l  argument  againfi  the  imputation  oj  the 
right eoujntjs  cj  Chrijl. 

HAYING  confidered  the  fcriptures  we  are 
next  to  propofe  fucb  arguments,  as  rea- 
fon  and  fobriety  have  fugged  ed. 

My  firft  argument  to  prove,  that  the  righteouf- 
nef  of  Ckrifl  (in  the  fenfe  now  under  difpiue, 
viz.  In  the  letter  and  proprietv  of  it)  cannot  he 
imputed  to  any  for  their  juflif cation,  is  this. 

The  righteoufnefs  which  will  notfnrnijh  all  believers 
with  all  parts  of  that  righteoufnejs,  which  the 
law  requires y cannot  be  imputed  to  them  to  juf- 
iification. 

But  the  obedience  that  Chrif performed  to  the  moral 
law,  will  not  furnifi  all  believers  with  all  parts 
of  righteoufnefs,  which  the  law  requires. 

Therefore  it  cannot  he  imputed  to  believers  for  their 
jujtifcaticn. 

The 


[ 3°  3 ] 

The  reafon  of  the  former  propofition  isbecaufe 
a perfeft  and complear  legal  'righteoufnefs,  and  fuch 
Certainly,  that  which  juftifieth  mull  be,  requires 
a punftual  and  thorough  obedience  to  all  things 
in  the  law,  which  any  way  concern  a man  to  do. 
If  there  be  but  a letter,  jot,  or  tittle  wanting  in  any 
man’s  righteoufnefs  of  all  that  was  his  duty  to  do, 
that  righteoufnefs  is  not  for  his juJH/tcahon.  The 
curfe  of  the  law  will  break  in  upon  a many  body 
and  foul,  as  well  through  the  fmalleft  defefils  of 
a legal  righteoufnefs  as  through  wider  breaches  ; 
in  cafe  a man  hath  not  wherewith  to  fecure 
himfelf  otherwifc.  Curfed is  every  one  that  conti- 
nueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the 
law  to  da  them , Gal.  iii.  10.  Therefore  there  is  no- 
efcapingthe  curfe  of  the  law  by  thelaw,  except 
a man’s  obedience  be  abfolute,  as  well  for  con- 
ftancy  as  univerfalky,  in  all  things  that  are  writ- 
ten, viz.  with  reference  to  him,  and  to  his  calling. 
For  otherwife  there  may  be  a complete  legal 
righteoufnefs  without  doing  many  things  enjoyn- 
ed  in  the  law,  in  cafe  they  have  no  relation  to  a 
man’s  calling.  For  inftance  : Adam  might  have 
been  Hill  juftified  by  a complete  legal  nghteouf 
nefs,  and  yet  never  have  performed  many  duties* 
which  thelaw  required  of  Eve,  for  the  continu- 
ance of  her  jujlifi cation.  So  Chrift  fulfilled  all 
righteoufnefs , and  confequentlv  held  an  exa& 
conformity  with  the  law,  fo  that  neither  man, 
nor  God  himfelf,  could  rebuke  him  of  Jin  : and 
yet  the  law  requires  many  things  of  many  others* 

both 


[ 3°d  ] 

both  men  and  women,  which  Chrift  never  per- 
formed. 

Se£r.  II.  How  many  duties  do  fervants  owe  to 
their  mailers  after  the  flelh,  by  the  obligation  of 
the  law,  which  Chrift  never  perlormed,  as  that 
theylhould  be  obedient  unto  them  with  fear  and 
trembling.  Eph.  vi.5.  Again,  Wives  ate  charged 
by  the  law,  with  manv  points  of  obedience  to  their 
hufband,  yea  and  hufbandswith  fome  towards  their 
wives,  which  certainly  Chrift  never  performed 
for  them.  Yea  he  exprefly  declined  doing  fome 
things,  as  lying  without  the  verge  of  his  calling, 
which  the  law  requires- as  matters  of  fpecial  duty, 
from  others.  When  he  was  defined  (Luke.  xii. 
13.  tq.)  to  dojuftice  between  a man  and  his 
brother,  his  anfwcr  was,  Man  mho  made  me  a judge 
or  divider  over  you?  Implying,  that  he  would 
meddfe  with  noafft  ofrighteoufnefs,  that  lay  with- 
out the  precinfts  of  his  calling  ; and  indeed  if  he 
had,  it  had  overthrown  the  inftnife  benefit  that  now 
redounds  unto  the  world,  from  thofe  afls  of  right- 
eovfnefs  which  were  performed  by  him  in  his 
calling.  So  when  the  people  would  have  taken 
and  made  him  king,  John-vi.  he  ahfolutelv  refuf- 
ed  : and  refufing  the  office  of  a king,  doubtlefs 
he  would  not  take  upon  him  the  execution-. 
Therefore  what  rigkteoufnefs  Ihould  kings  and 
magiftrates  have  imputed  unto  them  from  Chrift 
to  make  them  juft  and  righteous  in  their  callings^ 
when  Chrift  himfelf  refufed  to  perform  thofe  aft s 
of  right  eoujnefs,  which  are  proper  thereto  ? That 

which 


[ 3 °5  ] 

- which  never  was  done  by  Chrift  cannot  be  im- 
puted : tn.'.t  which  never  had  a being,  is  not 
capable  of  an  aft  of  imputation  to  pafs  upon  it. 

Seft.  III.  It  may  be  fome  will  objeft,  that 
love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  : jor  he  that  loveth 
another  hath  fulfilled,  the  law.  Rom.  xiii.  8.  And 
, this  fulfilling  of  the  lav)  by  love,  is  fuch  a righte - 
oufnefs  as  will  fit  all  perfons  of  all  callings. 
Therefore  the  perfect  love  ofChrift,  may  be  im- 
puted, for  nghteoufnefs  unto  all,  though  particular 
afts  of  obedience  be  w’ariting. 

I anfwer..  Firlf,  however  love  be  an  evange- 
lical fulfilling  the  law,  becaufe  God  accepteth 
of  it  gracioufiy,  and  rewardeth  it  accordingly, 
yet  is  it  not  a drift,  literal,  and  legal  fulfilling  of 
the  law.  It  is  not  fuch  a fulfilling  of  it  as  will 
hold  out  weight  for  any  man’s  juf  if  cation  in  a 
covenant  of  works'.  For  firfi,  the  law  requires 
many  duties  from  men,  and  feizeth  upon  them 
with  the  curfe  immediately  upon  their  firfi  non- 
continuance in  all  things.  Now  love  is  but  one 
duty  of  the  law,  and  therefore  cannot  be  many, 
much  lefs  all.  Secondly,  if  love  were  fuch  a ful- 
filling of  the  law,  as  is  required  in  a \egfjufiifi ca- 
tion, then  -would  all  believers  be  juflified , not  by 
an  imputed,  -but  by  a perfonal  righteoufnefs  : be- 
caufe no  man  is  a true  believer  but  he  that  loves 
his  brother.  Thirdly,  if  the  love  of  Chrift  were 
capable  of  that  imputation  for  righteoufnefs,  then 
•will  it  follow-,  (at  lead  according  to  the  principles 
of  that  opinion  againft  which  we  difpute)  that  the 

whole 


[ 3o6  ] 

whole  active  obedience  of  Chrift,  I mean  all  that 
righteoufnefs  of  his,  which  flood  in  holy  actions 
conformable  to  the  law,  was  in  vain  ; becaufe 
there  is  no  other  neceflity  granted  of  this  righte- 
ovfnefs  of  Chrift  by  thefe  men,  but  only  for 
imputation.  Therefore, 

Secondly,  I anfwer  again,  That  where  the 
fcripture  calleth  love  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  it 
fpeaketh  only  of  that  part  of  the  law  which  we 
call  the  fecond  table  : as  is  evident  in  the  place 
laft  named.  Rom.  xiii.  8,  9.  But  that  fulfilling 
of  the  law,  which  claims  the  honour  of  jujtifica- 
tion,  whether  by  imputation  or  perfcnal  perfor- 
mance, muft  comprehend  as  well  a fulfilling  of 
the  firft  as  of  the  fecond  table. 

Se£t.  IV.  But  fome  may  objedt : It  is  not 
neceffary  that  men  JJiould  have  all  paiticular  atls 
of  righteoufnefs  anfwer  able  to  their  calling, imputed 
unto  them  for  their  juf  if  cation.  It  is  fuffcient , 
if  they  have  a righteoufnefs  imputed  to  them,  which 
is  equivalent  to  fuck  a righteoufnefs. 

To  this  I anfwer:  Firft,  they  who  fpeak  fuch 
things,  do  not  confider  the  ftiiti  and  peremptory 
nature  of  the  law.  The  law  will  not  know  any 
thing  by  way  of  equivalency  : one  thing  as  good 
as  another  will  not  ferve  the  turn.  The  law 
muft  have  jot  for  jot,  tittle  for  tittle,  point  {or  point, 
letter  {ox letter,  every  thing  to  anfwer  in  the  moft 
exaft  conformity  to  it : otherwife  it  hath  a cuife 
in  readiaefs  wherewith  to  take  vengeance  on 
men. 

Secondly, 


, [ 3»7  ] 

Secondly,  to  impute  a£ls  of  rigkteoufnefs  to  a 
man  which  are  proper  to  another  calling,  and 
wholly  difagreei'ng  from  that  calling  wherein 
God  hath  placed  him,  is  rather  to  impute  fin  unto 
him  than  right eo ujnef's  : becaufe  though  fuch  aids 
were  rigkteoufnefs  to  him  that  wrought  them,  yet 
if  I,  being  in  a different  calling,  fhould  be  ac- 
counted by  God  to  have  done  them  (which  is  the 
Jaw  of  imputation ) I muft  bejudgedby  him  as  one 
that  had  tranfgreffed  the  bounds  of  my  calling, 
and  confequently  had  finned. 

Seft.  V.  Indeed  God  having  received  a full 
fatisfa&ion  for  all  the  tranfgreffions  of  the  law, 
may  by  a new  covenant  accept  of  what  he  pleafeth 
to  reinflate  men  in  the  benefit  of  that  fatisfaftion, 
and  fo  that  which  is  thus  accepted,  becomes  in 
this  refpeflyto  him  that  performs  it,  equivalent 
to  aperfeft  legal  rigkteoufnefs : becaufe  it juflifeth 
him  (in  refpeft  of  all  the  benefits  of  jufification ) 
as  well  as  fuch  a righteoufnefs  would  have  done. 
But  that  he  fhould  accept  on  any  man’s  behalf, 
as  a perfeft  legal  righteoujnefs , the  performance 
of  fuch  things  as  are  not  required  of  him,  neither 
by  the  firft  covenant  of  works,  noi  by  the  fecond 
of  grace,  hath  neither  correfpondence  nor  agree- 
ment with  the  one  covenant,  or  with  the  other. 
A man,  methinks,  muft  have  a rare  faculty  who 
can  conceive,  that  Chrift’s  preaching  on  the 
mount,  ordaining  difciples,  reproving  the  Scribes 
and  Pharifees,  working  miracles  and  the  like 
(which  were  parts  of  his  obedience  to  the  law) 

fhould 


[ S®8  ] 

fhould  be  imputed  to  a woman,  (for  example)  in- 
ftead  of  her  obedience  and  love  and  faitlifulnefs 
to  her  hufband  : and  that  fhe  fhouid  be  reputed 
before  God,  to  have  performed  all  thefe  duties 
according  to  the  ftri ct  form  of  the  law,  becaufe 
Chrift  performed  the  fore-named  duties,  and 
thefe  by  imputation  are  made  her’s. 


CHAP.  VI II. 

A fecond  argument  againjl  that  imputation  of  the 
righteoufnefs  cf  Ckrif,  drawn  f rom  the  nature 
of  it. 

SECT.  I.  A fecond  reafon,  whv  the  achve 
obedience  or  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift,  cannot 
(in  the  propriety  of  it)  be  imputed  to  any  man  for 
righteoufnefs,  is. 

That  righteoufnefs  which  is  prtcifly  flted  to  the 
pa  foil  and  office  of  him,  that  is  Mediator  be- 
tween God  and  man,  or  Redeemer  of  the  world, 
cannot  be  imputed  to  any  other  man  for  his 
righteoufnefs. 

Rut  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  is  precifely  fitted 
to  the  per fon  and  calling  of  a Mediator . 

Therefore 


[ 3°9  J 

Therefore,  it  cannot  be  imputed  to  any  other  man 

for  his  righteoufnefs. 

The  fecond  propofition,  I conceive,  will  be 
yielded  without  much  driving.  If  any  man  will  - 
undertake  to  find  any  fuch  flaw  in  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  Chrift,  as  doth  amount  to  the  leail  degree 
of  inconfidency  . with  his  office  of  Mediator.,  -he 
attempts  no  lefs  than  the  undermining  the  foun- 
dations ofthe  peace  of  the  world,  and  laying  the 
hope  of  the  falvation  of  men  in  the  duff. 

So  that  if  there  be  any  thing  weak  in  the  ar- 
gument, it  muff  be  fought  for  in  the  other  pro- 
pofftion  : -viz-  That  i ighteoujnefs. which  is  exadlly 
fitted -to  the  'perjon  and  office  of  a Mediator , cannot 
.be  tin  bated' for  righteoufnefs  to  any  other  man. 

Se;6h  II.  The  whole  generation  of  difputers 
Tor  that  imputation , which  we  oppofe,  interpret 
-the  p’nrafe  of  having  the.  nghteoufaejs  of  Chrijl 
imputed,  bv  being  clothed  with  this  right eou fiefs  of 
'■-.Chrifi ; or,  with  the  robes  of  his  right  eon  fief.  He 
then  that  affumeth  this  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  to 

• -himfelf,  and  apparellet'n  lrimfelf  with  it  repre- 

• fents  himfelf  before  God,  not  in  the  habit  of  a 
■juft  or  righteous  man,  but  m the  glorious  attire 

of  him,  that  makes  men  ]ujl  and  righteous,  the 
great  Mediator  of  the  world,  whofe  righteoufnefs 
hath  heights  and  depths  in  it,  a length  and  breadth, 
which  infinitely  exceed  the  proportions  of  all 
men  whatfoever.  It  was  peculiarly  appropriated 
to  him  that  wastheonly  begotten  of  the  Father,  the 

great 


[ 310  J 

great  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  the  world.  Now 
then  for  a filly  worm,  to  take  this  robe  of  unmea- 
furable  Majefty  upon  it,  and  to  conceit  itfelf  as 
great  in  holinef  and  righteoufnrfs  as'Jefus  Chrift 
himfelf,  (for  that  is  the  fpirit  that  rules  in  that 
opinion,  to  teach  men  to  affume  all  that  Chrift 
did  unto  themfelves,  and  that  in  no  other  way, 
nor  upon  any  lower  terms,  than  as  if  themfelves 
had  perfonally  done  it)  whether  this  be  right,  I 
earneftly  defire  men  would  ferioufly  confider. 
All  the  parts  of  his  nghteoufnefs,  all  the  acts  of 
obedience  that  he  performed,  he  performed  them 
as  one  that  had  received  the  Spirit  without  mea- 
sure. His  right eoujnefs  was  in  all  the  parts  and 
circumftances  of  it,  fuch  as  became  God  himfelf 
in  perfonal  union  with  the  human  nature.  Now 
whether  that  be  not  to  be  accounted  robberv, 
;(and  that  of  a high  nature)  for  the  creature  to 
.affume  an  equality  of  nghteou'cefs , whether  by 
imputation  or  however)  with  God  himfelf,  I leave 
to  the  fober  and  impartial  to  confider.  At  leaft 
there  are  fome  drains  in  this  right enufnejs  of 
Chrift,  that  cannot  be  applied  to  any  other 
without  notorious  impiety.  All  that  Chrift  taught 
and  preached  on  earth,  was  part  of  his  righte- 
oufnefs  and  obedience.  For  I have  not  fpoken  of 
myfejfdrth  he,  John  xii.  49.)  but  the  Father  that 
J'ent  me  gave  me  a commandment  what  1 Jhou/d  fay , 
and  what  I Jhou/d  fpeah.  Therefore  when  he 
fpeaketh  thefe  and  many  fuch  like  words,  I am 
■the  light  of  the  word : come  unto  me  all  that  are 

weary 


[ 3»  1 

rueary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I ivilt'refrejh  you  * is 
it  meet  for  any  other  to  conceive  them  as  fpoken 
by  himfelf  in  his  own  perfon  P Thofe  which 
were  words  full  oi' grace  and  truth  in  that  mouth 
that  fuake  them  and  lor  which  they  were  fitted, 
would  be  words  of  prefumption  and  blafphemy 
in  any  other. 

Seft.  III.  So  that  you  fee  one  main  reafon 
why  we  deny  the  imputation  of  C hr  ft's  nghteouf- 
ncfs , in  the  propriety  of  it,  in juJ/if cation,  is,  not. 

| becaufe  we  deny  the  nghteoujnefs  itfell,  nor  be- 
caufe  we  deny  the  neceflity  of  it,  nor  yet  becaule 
we  lefs  honour  and  magnify  it,  than  .others;  but 
■on  the  contrary,  becaufe  we  define  to  ellablifh  it 
upon  better  foundations,  and  {hew  a greater  ne- 
| -ceflity  of  it,  and  give  more  honour  to  it,  than  the 
-adverfe  opinion  can  do.  If  men  will  needs  un- 
-derfland  that  Ifaiah  xlii.  21.  of  Chrifl’s  fulfilling 
the  law ; The  Lord  vs  well  plea  fed  for  Ins  righte- 
•oufn etsfhke:  he  will  magnify  the  law  and  make  it 
■ honourable , there  is  no  fuch  wav  to  ratfe  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  words,  as  to  make  the  nghte- 
! oufnejs  of Chrift  (in  the  letter  of  it)  incommuni- 
cable. He  who  fhould  have  taken  the  reed  out 
' Ch  riff’s  hand,  that  was  put  into  it  inftead  of  a 
i fceptre,  and  broken  it  in  pieces,  and  fhould  have 
given  him  a fceptre  of  gold  inllead  of  it,  would 
have  honoured  Chrift  more,  than  the}'  that  gave 
him  the  reed  : fo  he  that  lhall  overthrow  a pre- 
tended neceflity  of  Chrifl’s  1 ighleoufnef , and 
demonftrate  a real  neceflity  of  it,  no  ways  dero- 
gates 


[ 312  ] 

gates  from  the  righteoufnefs  itfelf,  or  from  the 
neceftity  of  it,  but  addeth  weight  and  authority 
to  both.  He  who  denies  that  ever  any  man  lay 
in  the  womb  of  the  virgin,  wherein  C brill  was 
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghojl , befides  himfelf, 
neither  difparages  the  womb  that  bare  him,  ncr 
him  that  was  conceived  in  it,  but  rather  honours 
both.  No  more  is  it  any  difparagement  call 
upon  the  nghteoufnefs  cl  Chrift,  to  fay  that  there 
was  never  any  man  formally  juftified  with  it,  but 
himfelf:  that  it  is  a right eoufnejs  fit  for  no  man 
to  affume  to  himfelf,  but  the  perfon  that  wrought 
it.  Nay,  we  hereby  exalt  the  righteonfnefs  of 
Chrift;  and  maintain  the  honour  that  belongeth  | 
to  it. 

Sefl.  IV.  But  feme  mav  think  to  falve  this 
rn iputation  from  the  union  that  is  between  Chrift 
as  the  head,  and  believers  as  the  body  or  mem-  J 
hers  ; alter  this  manner.  Though  the  rigkteouf 
nejs  of  Cljrift  be  too  glorious  to  be  appropriated  , 
to  men,  as  they  are  men,  or  as  they  are  finful; 
yet  as  they  are  members  of  Chrift,  and  lie  their 
head,  it  may  be  aferibed  unto  them.  Mav  not 
that  which  is  done  by  the  head,  be  aferibed  to 
the  whole  body  ? 

To  this  I anfwer:  Firft,  Chrift  and  believers 
are  a myftical  body,  that  is,  a body  only  by  way 
of  refemblance  or  fimilitude  with  the  natural 
body.  Therefoie  an  agreement  in  all  things  be- 
tween them  cannot  be  : becaufe  then  a fimilitude 
would  be  no  longer  a fimilitude,  but  an  identity; 

and 


[ 313  ] 

and  a myftical  body  would  be  no  longer  a myfti- 
cal  body,  but  a natural.  Now  one  difference 
between  them  is  this  : what  one  member  of  the 
natural  body  doth,  as  the  head,  eyes,  or  ears,  the 
whole  may  be  faid  to  do  when  the  head  ftudieth, 
the  man  may  be  faid  to  ftudy  : fo  when  the  eye 
feeth,  or  ear  heareth.  Yea,  it  is  more  proper  to 
afcribe  thefe  afts  which  are  exercifed  by  the 
particular  members  of  the  natural  body  to  the 
whole  perfon,  than  to  the  members  themfelvcs 
by  which  they  are  aided  : it  is  more  proper  to 
fay,  the  man  feeth  by  the  eye,  than  to  fay  the 
eye  feeth:  but  in  the  myftical  body  it  is  other- 
wife.  When  Chrift  (the  head  of  this  body) 
wrought  miracles,  the  body  could  nor  be  faid  to 
have  wrought  them.  So  when  Paul  (a  fpeciai 
member  of  this  body)  reproved  Peter,  the  whole 
body  cannot  be  faid  to  have  reproved  him  : be- 
canfe  fome  of  the  members  joined  with  Peter  in 
his  fin  againft  Paul.  The  reafon  ofwhicb  differ- 
ence is  this;  in  the  natural  body,  the  members 
make  but  one  perfon,  and  fo  have  but  one  prin- 
ciple of  all  their  aft  ions  and  motions,  viz.  The 
reafonable  foul.  But  a myftical  body,  is  made 
up  of  man;.' perfons,  who  have  every  one  natural 
and  fubftantial  beings  themfelves  (befides  their 
relation  of  members  one  to  another)  and  fo  have 
every  one  principlesof  their  aftions  really  diftinft. 
One  man’s  will  is  not  numerically  the  dame  with 
another’s  : nor  one  man’s  grace  really  the  fame 
with  another’s.  And  hence  it  cometh  to  pafs, 
Vol.  XXII.  O that 


[ V-4  1 

that  what  one  of  thefe  members  do,isnotnecefTa- 
rily  to  be  afcribed  to  the  whole  body,  but  to- that 
member  only  which  doth  it,  inafmuch  as  it  hath 
a principle  within  itfelf,  which  is  not  numerically 
the  fame  with  the  relh 

But  fecondly,  I anfwer  more  plainly.  Though 
the  benefit  of  what  the  head  doth  be  communi- 
cated to  the  whole  body,  and  even'  member,  yet 
that  which  the  head  doth,  is  no  ways  to  be  im- 
puted either  to  the  hand  or  foot, -or  any  other 
member,  as  if  it  were  done  by  them.  So  the 
whole  myflical  body  of  Chrifr,  and  even’  mem- 
ber thereof  (even  the  whole  fociety  of  believers) 
reap  abundantly  the  benefit,  and  blefling  of  ail 
that  Chnlf  (the  head)  either  did  or  fuffered:  for- 
givenefs  of  fins,  peace  of  confidence,  fandtifica- 
tion,  glory.  All  thefe  are  grapes  gathered  from 
that  vine  ; the  aflivea nd  pajjive  obedience  or  righ- 
teoujhefs  of  Chrifl,  furnifheth  his  whole  body 
with  all  thefe  precious  riches.  And  yet  there  is 
no  neceffity  that  either  his  doings  or  bufferings 
fhould  be  afcribed  or  imputed  to  them,  no  more 
than  the  labour.or  fkill  of  the  bee  is  to  be  afcribed 
to  him  that  eats  the  honey. 

Sedf.  V.  Some  urge  the  marriage  between 
Chrifl  and  his  church , and  reafon  thus  : The  zv  if' 
by  marriage  hath  a right  to  all  that  is  her  hijkana's : 
fhe  is  endowed  with  all  his  goods:  they  areas 
well  her  s as  his.  Therefore,  a believer  being 
married  to  Chrifl,  hatha  right  to  all  that  Chrifl 

hath; 


[ 3*5  3 

hath;  all  that  Chrift  hath  is  his  : and  therefore  his 
righ/eoufnefs. 

To  this  I anfwer.  Firft,  it  is  true,  the  wife 
by  marriage  comes  to  be  endowed  with  all  that  is 
her  bufband’s  : but  this  endowing  is  not  the  mar- 
riage itfelf,  but  is  a fruit  or  conlequent  ol  it.  So 
the  right  which  a believer  hath  to  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift,  accrues  unto  him  by,  and  upon  the 
fpiritual  marriage.  But  the  marriage  mull  be 
lirft  made  between  Chrift  and  him  (which  is 
done  by  faith)  before  he  comes  to  have  this  right 
in  the  righteoujneji  of  Chrift.  Therefore  it  can- 
not be  imputed  to  him  in  the  very  aft  of  believ- 
ing, and  much  lefs  before  the  acb  of  believing: 
becanfein  both  thefe  cafes,  the  title  we  fpeak  of 
to  the  riglueoufnefs  ol  Chrift,  would  not  grow  to 
a believer , by,  or  from,  or  upon  his  marriage,  but 
either  in  or  before  it. 

But  fecondly,  I anfwer  yet  farther:  howfoever 
by  marriage  there  arifeth  artitle  to  the  wife  of  all 
that  is  her  hufband’s,  fo  that  it  may  be  faid,  all 
that  is  the' hufband’s,  becomes  the  wife’s:  yet 
this  is  fo  to  be  qualified,  that  no  law  of  natural 
decency  and  fobriety,  or  of  rational  expediency 
receive  prejudice.  All  that  is  the  hufband’s,  is 
not  every  way  the  wife’s,  nor  for  every  ufe  and 
purpofe.  for  inftance  : the  cloaths  of  the  huf- 
band,  are  the  wife's  by  marriage  : but  how  ? Not 
her’s  to  put  on  and  wear  upon  her  own  perfon. 
But  they  may  be  called  her’s  in  this  fenfe,  as  it  is 
a comfort  and  credit  to  her  that  her  hufband  be 
O 2 cloathed 


[ 3>6  ] 

cloathed  like  himfelf.  So  it  is  indeed  an  unfpeak- 
able  comfort  to  a believing  foul,  that  her  Lord  and 
hufbandjefus  Chrift,  is  cloathed  with  that  rich  and 
glorious  robe  of  righteoufnefs , that  he  is  fo  holy, 
fo  harmlefs , fo  far  feparate  from  ftnners.  But 
fhe  muft  take  heed  of  afTuming  thefe  things  to 
herfelf,  otherwife  than  in  the  benefit  and  comfort 
of  them  : file  muft  not  think  herfelf  as  holy,  as 
harmlefs,  as  far  feparate  from  finners,  as  Chrift 
himfelf  is.  The  inferior  pricfl  that  put  on  and 
ferved  in  the  high-prieft’s  garments,  was  by  tire 
Jews  adjudged  guilty  of  death.  So  again,  the 
wifdom  of  the  hufband  may  be  faid  to  be  the 
wife's  by  marriage.  But  how  ? The  woman  is 
not  as  wife  as  her  hufband,  becaufe  the  hufband’s 
wifdom  is  her’s  by  marriage : but  it  is  her’s  in 
the  benefit  and  comfort  of  it.  So  the  righteouf 
nefs  of  Chrift  becomes  ours  by  our  fpirkual  mar- 
riage with  him  : but  not  to  be  righteous  withal 
(formally)  for  this  is  ftill  his  perfonal  propriety, 
notwithftanding  the  giving  of  himfelf  in  marriage 
to  us  : but  fo  as  to  have  the  bl effing  communi- 
cated to  us,  in  our  juflificatioa , adoption,  and 
[alvation. 


CHAP. 


[ 3*7  ] 


G H A P.  IX, 

A third  argument  againjl  that  imputation,  viz.  The 
non-necejfiity  of  it. 

QECT.  I.  A third  reafon  again!!  this  imputa~ 
^ tion  of  Chnjl's  rigliteoufnejs,  is,  there  is  no 
neceffity  for  it.  Neither  God  the  mailer,  nor 
nature  the  fervant,  ever  make  any  thing  in  vain. 
If  God  had  provided  othenvife  for  thejufiificadon 
of  his  people,  certain  it  is,  Ire  doth  not  impute 
this  unto  them  for  that  end  : which  yet  is  the 
only  end,  for  which  the  neceffity  thereof  is  pre- 
tended. Now  that  a believer  is  jujlified  without 
any  fuch  imputation , I thus  demonftrate.  He 
that  is  comp\ctat\y  jujlified  by  having  his  fins  for- 
given, is  jujlified  without  the  imputation  of  this 
adive  obedience  or  lighteoufnefs  Chrift.  This 
propofition  is  generally  granted.  For  no  man 
contends  for  this  imputation  in  the  fenfe  we  fpeak 
of,  in  regard  of  forgiven efs  of  fins,  neither  is 
there  any  colour  for  it,  but  for  another  purpofe. 
But  a believer  is  jujlified  by  the  forgivenefs  of  his 
fins  : therefore  there  is  no  need  of  this  imputa- 
tion of  Chrilt’s  Tighteoufinejs  for  his  jujlifiicadon. 
The  latter  propofition,  that  men  are  fully  jujlified 
by  having  their  fins  pardoned,  hath  been  already 
O 3 proved 


[ 3>§  ] 

proved  at  large,  by  exprefs  teftimonies  of  fcrip- 
ture:  whereto  we  found  the  judgment  of  Calvin 
(with  other  learned  divines  of  the  reformed  reli- 
gion) fully  conformable. 

Sefh  II.  But  againft  this,  it  is  objected  : That 
forgivenefs  of  fins  is  indeed  a part  oj  juff cation, 
hut  not  the  whole : imputation  of  righteoufnefs 
mujl  be  likewife  added. 

To  this  I anfwer  : Firft,  Calvin  is  exprefly  of 
another  judgment  : a profelfed  enemy  to  this  by- 
formed  or  AovdAtjufification.  On  Rom.  iv.  ver. 
6,  7,  &c.  he  hath  thefe  words,  Quibus  verbis 
docemur  fuflitiam  Paulo  nihil  aliud  effe,  quamre- 
miffonem  peccatorum.  i.  e.  In  which  words  we  are 
taught , that  righteoufnefs  with  Paul  is  nothing elfe 
but  remiff  dn  of  fms.  He  doth  not  fay,  that  Paul 
placeth  righteoufnefs  or  juf  if  cation,  partly  in  re- 
miflion  of  fms,  partly  in  fomething  elfe  : but, 
that  the  righteoufnefs  by  which  we  are  jufifed 
before  God,  is  nothing  elfe  but  this  forgivenefs. 
Again,  in  his  inflitutions.  lib.  3.  chap,  n.feft.  21. 
iufitia  fidei  cf  reconciliatio  cum  Deo,  qua  fola 
remiffione  peccatorum  conf  at.  i.  e.  The  righteouf- 
nefs of  faith  is  our  reconciliation  with  God,  which 
confifls  oj  remiffon  of f ns  only. 

Again  in  the  fame  feftion  : Conf  at,  quos  Deus 
ampUElitur,  non  after fieri  juf  os,  mf  quod  abferfs 
peccatorum  remiffione  maculis  purifuentur , ut  talis 
jufitia  unoverbo  appellari  queat  remiffo  pecca- 
torum. i.  e.  It  is  evident , that  thefe  whom  God  em- 
bracetk,  are  no  other-ways  made  righteous,  but 

becauje 


[ 3 ^9  ] 

bee aufe  they  are  purified,  having their  fpots  wafned 
cjf  by  the forgivenefs  of  fins',  fothat  this  righteouf- 
nefs  may  in  one  word,  be  called  remiffion  of 
fins.  Laftly  in  the  fourth  feftion  of  the  fame 
chapter,  citing  the  teftimony  of  David,  Bleffed 
are  they  whofe  iniquities  are  forgiven , &c.  He 
Commenteth  thus  upon  the  words.  Iilic  fane,  von 
de  jufiificaiionis  parte,  &c.  i.  e.  Ouefiionlefs  he  doth 
not  here  difpute  of  a part  ofjufiification,  but  of  the 
whole  : the  definition  whereof  he  farther  affirmetk 
to  be  fiet  down  by  David,  when  he  pronouncetk 
ihoft  bleffed,  to  whom.afree  forgivenefs  of  fens  was 
given. 

Se£l.  III.  Secondly,  I anfwer,  from  the  ferip- 
tures  themfelves,  it  may  be  evidenced,  that  there 
is  no  more  meant  by jufification,  than  forgivenefs 
of  fins.  What  can  be  more  clear,  than  Rom.  vi. 
6,  7,  &c.  Even  as  David  alfo  deferibeth  the  bleffed- 
nefs  of  the  man,  unto  whom  Godimputeth  nghteouf 
nefs  without  works:  faying,  Bleffed  are  they 
whofe  iniquities  are  forgiven  and  whofe  fins  are 
covered  : bleffed  is  the  man,  to  whom  the  Lord  will 
not  impute  fin.  If  there  were  any  thing  more  be- 
longing to  this  righteoufnefs  which  is  by  imputa- 
tion, than  only  the  forgivenefs  of  iniquity,  or  the 
covering  of  fin,  would  the  Holy  Gholt  wholly 
have  omitted  it,  when  he  intended  a defeription 
of  it?  Efpeciallv  would  he  have  omitted  that 
which  is  the  principal  part  of  it,  as  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  Chrifi  imputed  is  pretended  to  be  ? 

Sefl.  IV.  It  is  true,  fometimes  in  feripture,  a 
O q part 


[ ] 

part  is  put  for  the  whole  : as  the  perfor.s  of  men 
and  women,  confining  of  bodies  and  fouls,  are 
called  fouls,  A6ts  vii.  14.  But  this  is  done  only 
when  things  are  plain  and  evident,  fo  that  by  the 
part  which  is  named,  that  may  readily  be  under- 
stood which  is  implied.  But  it  is  far  otherwile 
in  this  defcripdon  of  juflijication.  That  by  for- 
givenefs  of  fins,  fhould  be  meant,  both  forgive- 
nefs  of  a man’s  own  fins,  and  imputation  of 
ChrifTs  righteoufnejs,  if  it  were  true,  yet  is  it  no 
ways  neceirary  : neither  is  it  any  wavs  apparent 
that  thefe  are  parts  of  the  fame  whole,  of  one 
and  the  fame  jujlification  : neither  is  there  any 
thing  exprefiy  delivered  in  any  part  of  the  fcrip- 
ture  to  eftablifh  it.  Therefore  it  is  noways  pro- 
bable (even  in  thefe  refpefts)  that  when  Paul 
placeth  a man’s  jujlification  in  the  forgivenefs  of 
his  fins,  he  fhould  do  it  by  a figure,  only  menti- 
oning one  part,  and  implying  another. 

Seft.  V.  Again,  if  forgivenefs  of  fins  be  but  a 
part,  and  the  worfe  half  of  our  jujlification,  then 
when  the  fcripture  faith.  We  ar  e jujhfud  by  his 
blood  fas  Rom.  v.  9.)  The  interpretation  mull 
be:  we  are  hall  juftified  through  his  blood,  but 
the  better  half  of  our  jujlification  mud  come  ano- 
ther way.  For  by  his  blood  or  death , we  cannot 
have  his  affiv e right eoufnefs  imputed  to  us. 

Thirdly,  that  forgivenefs  of  fins  is  a compleat 
juflijication,  and  that  there  is  no  fuch  further  part 
of  it,  as  is  pretended  concerning  the  imputation 
of  Chrifl’s  nghteoufncjs,  will  appear  from  hence, 

becaufq 


r 321  ] 

becaufe  that  end,  for  which  this  imputed  rigkte- 
oufinefis  of  Chrift  is  thus  brought  in,  viz.  To  he 
the  title  of  the  jufiified  to  their  heavenly  inherit- 
ance, is  otherwife  fupplied  by  the  wifdom  of 
God,  namely  by  the  grace  of  adoption. 

Seft.  VI.  Fourthly,  if  men  will  have  the 
aElive  nghleoifnefs  of  Chrift  imputed  to  them  for 
one  part  of  their  jufiification,  and  the  death  of 
Chrift  for  another  part,  and  fo  divide  the  be- 
nefit of  his  a&ive  obedience  from  that  which  we 
have  by  his  pajfiwe,  in  j unification  ; that  is  a way 
to  deftroy  the  benefit,  both  of  the  one  and  the 
other.  For  if  men  fubftrafl  the  right eovfnejs  of 
his  life  upon  a conceit,  that  it  will  do  them  fer- 
vice  alone,  then  mull  they  want  it  in  his  death , 
or  in  \\ls blood,  and  fo  that  will  be  ineffe&ual  too. 
Neither  will  the  aHive  obedience  of  Chrift  profit 
men,  if  they  feparate  it  from  the  pa/five , John 
xii.  24.  Neither  will  the  pajjive- be  an  atonement 
for  fin,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  except  we 
bring  in  the  atlive  to  it.  For  as  it  is  moll  true, 
Heb.  ix.  22.  Without  Jhedcling  of  blood  there  is  no 
remfifion  cf  fins  : fo  is  it  that  zvitkout  Jhedding  of 
righteous  blood,  there  is  no  remiffion.  And 
howfoever  the  perfonal  union  of  the  human  na- 
ture with  the  god-head  in  Chrift,  was  the  great 
qualification  to  make  his  facrifice  compleatly  fa- 
ll sfactory  lor  the  fin  of  the  world  : yet  was  it  but 
a remote  qualification  in  this  refpeft,  there  being 
a neceflity  (not  only  in  refpeft  of  the  purpofe  of 
God,  but  of  other  ends  alfo)that  this  qualification 
O-  ,5  wo 


[ 322  ] 

we  now  fpeak  of,  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  fhould 
Tome  between  that  union  and  his  facrifice. 


CHAP.  X. 

A fourth  reafon  againfl  the  faid  imputation  ; it 
fruflrates  the  grace  of  adoption. 

JV  fTY  fourth  reafon  againfl  the  fuppofed  impu- 
tation  of  Chefs  righteoufnef,  is  this, 

Se£l  I.  That  which  takes  away  the  necejfily  and 
ufe  of  adoption,  cannot  agree  with  the  truth  of 
the  gofpel. 

But  this  imputation  of  ChriJTs  righteoufnefs, 
takes  away  the  neerffty  of  adoption.  Ergo, 
It  cannot  agree  with  the  truth  of  the  gofpel. 

The  feriptures  fpeak  much  of  the  grace  of 
adoption  or  fonfiip,  of  believers  being  made  the 
fons  of  God.  That  we  might  receive  the  adoption 
offons,  Gai.  iv.  5.  And  becaufe  ye  are  Jons,  ver. 
6.  Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a fervant,  but  a Jon, 
ver.  7.  Topafs  bv  other  places  without  number, 
John  i.  12.  But  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them 
he  gave  power,  or  prerogative  (U-vc'.av)  to  become 
the  fons  of  God.  Doubtlefs  this  prerogative  of 
adoption,  is  not  given  by  God  in  vain.  No  : it 


[ 323  ] 

c is  giv-en  to  thofe  tliat  believe , to  make  them  ca- 
pable of  their  everlaftlng  inheritance  : their 
Jonfhip  is  the  proper  and  next  ground  of  that 
inveftiture  unto  them.  The  fcriptures  are  in 
nothing  more  exprefs  than  this.  If  we  be  chil- 
dren, then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with 
ChriJ, },  Rom.  v.iii.  17.  So  again,  Wherefore  thou 
art  no  more  a fervant  but  a fon,  and  if  a foil,  then 
an  heir  of  God  through  Chrifl , Gal.  iv.  7.  As  if 
he  fhould  fay,  we'  are  therefore  adopted  to  be 
fons,  that  fo  by  right  of  this  fonlhip  we  might 
be  heirs  of  God,  and  by  the  right  of  this  heirfhip 
inherit  that  inheritance  which  fadeth  not  away, 
with  Jefus  Chrift  himfelf.  And  therefore  what- 
soever opinion  rifeth  up  to  magnify  itlell  againft 
this  adoption,  by  fru  lira  ting  the  ufe  and  end  of 
it,  is  certainly  anti-evangelical,  and  not  to  be 
received,  though  an  angel  from  heaven  fhould 
hr  life  it. 

O 

Sett.  II.  But  fuch  an  imputation  of  the  righte - 
oufrufs  of  Chrifl  as  is  contended for , fruf  rates 
the  end,  and  ufe  of  adoption. 

This  is  evident  from  the  exprefs  declaration 
which  they  make,  who  are  the  maintainers  of  it. 
For  wdierefore  is  this  imputation  of  Chrift’s 
nghteoufnef s introduced  into  thebufinefs  of  jufli- 
fi cation  ? The  introducers  fay  with  one  mouth, 
the  righteoufnef  of  Chrift  mud  be  imputed  to  us, 
that  fo  we  may  have  a right  and  title  to  life,  ox 
O 6 heaven. 


[ 324  ] 

Leaven.  For  by  remiflion  of  fins,  (fay  they)  a a 
man  is  only  delivered  from  death  and  condem- 
nation ; but  there  accrues  thereby,  no  right  or 
title  to  heaven.  And  fo  apprehending  nothing 
elfe  about  a believer,  fit  to  make  a title  of  thereto, 
they  have  compelled  the  righteoujnefs  oiCdanUlo- 
take  this  office  upon  it,  in  a way  of  imputation. 
Neither  is  it  eafy  to  conceive  what  other  fervice 
this  righteoufne fs  of  Chrifl  imputed  fhould  do  in 
JvJUjication.  Now  this  being  the  proper  end, 
ufe,  and  intent  of  adoption,  to  invert  a believer 
with  a capacity  for  heaven,  it  evidently  follows, 
that  whoever  fhall  offer  to  fet  any  thing  elfe  upon 
this  throne,  feeks  to  fruftrate  the  counfel  of  God 
concerning  the  grace  of  adoption. 

Se£i.  III.  If  it  be  faid,  both  may  fhand  toge- 
ther,  imputation  of  a perfeft  mghteoufnefs  from 
Chrift.  and  adoption. 

I anfwer,  No  : they  will  not  twirt,  or  rtand 
together:  not  fo  much  becaufe  of  the  diverfity 
of  their  natures,  as  becaufe  either  of  them  is  a 
complete  and  entire  title  within  itfelf.  Perfect 
righteoufne/s  is  a complete  title  alone : fo  is. 
adoption  or  fonjldp : as  to  be  an  heir  to  an  * 
earthly  inheritance,  gives  as  full  a right  to  the 
enjoyment  of  it  as  the  lawfulleft  purchafe  can  do. 
Now  it  is  certain,  that  God  never  ordains  a plu- 
rality of  means  for  one  and  the  fame  purpofe, 
when  one  is  every  way  fufficient  for  it,  either  in 
the  natural  or  fpiritual  world.  But  efpecially  in 
the  gofpel,  Gcd  allows  rtil!  but  one  means  for 
; one 


[ 3 25  1 

one  purpofe  (I  mean  but  one  adequate-  means  ii: 
one  kind,)  and  accordingly  the  bringing  in  a 
fecond  means  for  the  fame  end,  implies  the 
making  void  the  other.  Thus  St.  Paul,  Ij  nght- 
eoufnefs  beby  the laiv,  then  Chrijl  hath  dud  in.  vain*. 
He  calls  it  making  void  the  counfeis  of  God, 
when  another  thing,  is  fet  up  with  them,  to 
bring  the  fame  end  to  pafs,  or  to  ferve  in  the 
fame  place  and  office,  whereto  they  are  appoint- 
ed. And  doubtlefs,  we  may  fet  this  parallel 
proportion  at  the  right  hand  of  that  of  Paul  : If 
our  right  and  title  to  heaven  be  by  imputation  of 
ChrifTs  r ighteou fiefs , then  doth  God  give  the  grace 
of  adoption  in  vain... 


C PI  A P.  X. 

The  fourth,  fifth  and  fix th  arguments , again/I' 
the  faid  imputation , the  taking  away  the  nece fi- 
fty, 1.  of  repentance v 2.  of  ChriJTs  death,,  and 
the  taking  away for  given  ejs  of  Jins. 

SECT.  I.  God  is  not.  the  author  of  eonfufion * 
but  of  peace.  There  is  no  plant  of  his  plant- 
ing, that  hurts  any  other  plant  which  hiinfelf: 
hath  planted;  much  lefs  that  plucks  k up- by  the 
roots.  Now  repentance  is  a plant  of  his  plantings 
and  ofabfolute  neceffity  to  falvation.  Except  ye 

repent 


[ 3^6  ] 

repent  (faith  our  Saviour.  Luke  xiii.  3.)  Ye Jhall 
ail  liken  fe  perifh,  z3c.  But  fuch  an  imputation 
of  the  rigkteoufnejs  of  Chrift,  as  is  pleaded  forr 
wholly  cuts  olF  the  necelhty  of  repentance.  For 
hetliat  hath  a pen(e£t  nghteoujnefs  fo  imputed  to 
him,  that  ft  lhall  be  as  much  his  as  ll.hehadper- 
Ibnallv  wrought  it  himfelf,  cannot  (land  in  need 
ol  anv  repentance  ? If  Adam  had  kept  the  law, 
he  had  needed  no  repentance  more  than  Chrift 
needed  : and  thofe  that  kept  the  law  in  Chrift, 
as  perfeftly  as  he  did,  what  need  of  repentance 
have  thev,  more  than  he  ? For,  il  the  perfect 
obedience  of  Chrift  be  the  reafon  why  Chrift 
himfelf  needed  no  repentance : and  this  obedi- 
ence of  his,  in  all  its  perfection,  be  as  truly 
theirs  by  imputation,  as  it  could  have  been  by 
perfonal  perlormance  : :f  it  was  a fufficiept 
ground  of  a non-necefhtv  of  repentance  in  the 
one,  it  muft  be  the  fame  in  the  others.  He  that 
is  as  righteous  as  Chrift  is  (which  thofe  muft 
needs  be  that  are  righteous  with  his  right eaufnefs) 
needs  no  more  repentance  than  Chrift  himfelf 
needeth. 

Seft.  II.  If  it  be  faid,  that  notwithftanding 
the  imputation  of  a perfect  righteoujnejs  from 
Chrift,  yet  believes s have  their  perfonal  fins  and 
failings,  which  Chrift  had  not  : and  in  refpeff  of 
thefe,  they  need  daily  and  continual  repentance. 
Ianfwer:  true;  believers  indeed  ftand  in  need 
of  daily  repentance,  in  refpeft  ol  their  perfonal 
fins  and  failings:  but  they  that  have  a perfeft 
. jrighteoufnefs 


r 327  ] 

righteoufnefs  imputed  to  them,  have  no  fucli 
need  hr  any  refpeft.  Therefore  believers  are  not 
the  men,  that  have  any  fuch  righteoufnefs  imput- 
ed to  them.  Certain]}',  they  that  have  the  per- 
fect fulfilling  of  the  law  imputed  to  them,  can- 
not hand  guilty  of  any  breach  of  this  law,  bccaufe 
in  the  imputation  of  a perfect  righteoufnefs , an 
univerfal  non-imputation  of  Jin  is  included.  Be- 
fides,  if  God  doth  impute  a perfeft  righteoufnefs 
to  men,  the  rights  and  privileges  belonging  to 
fuch  righteoufnefs , mud  accompany  it : fo  that 
the  perfon  to  whom  fuch  imputation  is  made* 
Hands  really  polfelfed  of  them.  Otherwife,  God 
would  impute  the  Iheils  without  the  kernel,  and 
give  empty  titles  without  the  fubflanee  : now  one 
main  privilege  of  a perfeft  righteoufnefs,  is  to 
inveft  with  a full  right  to  life,  out  of  its  own  in- 
trinfic  dignity, 'which  is  a privilege  wholly  in- 
continent, with  the  leaf!  touch  of  fin,  in  the 
perfon  that  Hands  poffelTed  of  it.  Therefore 
where  fuch  a privilege  is,  there  can  be  no  occa- 
fien  or  necefiity  o {repentance. 

Seft.  III.  A fifth  reafon  againft  fuch  an  impu- 
tation of  the  a&ive  obedience  of  Chnjr,  is,  it  takes 
away  the  necefiity  of  his  death.  II  men  he  as 
righteous  as  Chrifl  was  in  his  life,  there  were  no 
more  necefiity  of  his  death  for  them,  than  there 
was  either  of  his  own  death , or  of  the  death  of 
any- -other,  for  himfelf.  If  we  were  perfeftly 
jujl  or  righteous  in  him,  or  with  him,  in  his  Ufe> 
then  the  jujt  would  not  have  died  for  the  unjujl, 

but 


r 3^8  ] 

but  he  would  have  died  for  die  juft,  for  whom 
there  was  no  neceflity  lie  .fhould  die.  This  rea- 
fon  the  apoftle  exprefly  delivers,  Gal.  ii.  21.  If 
righteoufnefs  be  by  the  lav , then  Chrift  died,  in 
vain.  I defire  the  impartial  reader  to  obferve 
narrowly  the  force  of  this  inference  made  by  the 
Holy  Ghoft.  If  righteou/nefs  (or  j unification)  be 
by  the  law,  then  Chrift  died  in  vain.  Men  can- 
not here  betake  themfelves  to  their  wonted  re- 
fuge, to  fay  that  by  the  lav,  is  to  be  underflood 
the  works  of  the  lav,  as  performed  by  a man's  felf 
in  perfon.  For  by  the  word  lau\  in  this  place, 
we  underhand  the  works  of  the  law,  as  per- 
formed by  Chrift,  the  confequence  will  rife  up 
with  the  greater  ftrength  againft  them.  If  right- 
eoufnefs  were  by  the  works  of  the  lav,  as  perform- 
ed by  Chrift,  that  is,  if  the  imputation  of  them 
were  our  eompleat  right  eon  fief,  the  death  of 
Chrift  for  us  had  been  in  vain,  becaufe  the  rigkt- 
eoufntfs  of  his  life  imputed,  had  been  a fufficient, 
and  eompleat  righleoufnefs  for  us. 

Se£L  IV.  Neither  can  it  be  faid.  that  there 
was  a neceflity  that  Chrift  fhould  die.  that  fo  the 
righteoujhefs  of  his  life  might  be  imputed  to  us. 
Tor  certainly  this  rjghttov/nefs  of  his  life  was  as 
capable  of  filch  an  imputation,  before  and  with- 
out his  death , as  after,  or  with  it.  For  what 
fhould  hinder  it  P Adam's  fin  was  capable  of  im- 
putation, as  foon  as  it  was  committed : andtvhy 
fhould  the  nghtcoujnef  of  Chrift  require  any  fur- 
ther 


[ 329  1 

ther  qualification,  but  only  the  performance  of 
it  ? 

If  it  be  yet  faid,  but  the  perfons  of  men  had 
not  been  capable  of  this  imputation , without  the 
death  of  Chrift  : I anfwer,  true,  the  perfons  of 
men,  are  not  capable  of  this  imputation , without 
the  death  oj  Chri/l : but  neither  are  they  made 
the  more  capable  by  it.  But  if  this-  righteoufnefs 
oj  Car  iff  were  in  itfelf  imputable  (in  the  fenfe 
contended  for)  why  fiiould  not  the  perfons  of 
men,  be  capable  of  the  imputation  thereof  in  the 
midfl  of  their  fins,  as  Chriil  was  capable  of  the 
imputation  of  their  fins,  in  the  midft  of  his  right- 
eoufnefs ? Efpecially  considering,  that  (as  it  ap- 
pears from  Rom.  v.  14.)  The  grace  and  gift  of 
God  which  is  by  Jefus  Chrift,  favetli  by  a higher 
hand,  than  fin  condemneth. 

Se£t.  V.  Sixthly,  That  opinion  which  makes 
men  perfcftly  righteous , as  righteous  as  Chrift 
himfelf,  leaves  no  place  for  forgivenefs  of  fins , 
in  perfons  fo- made  righteous  : it  evacuates  that 
high  and  fovereign  power  of  God  whereby 
he  forgiveth  fins.  God  (we  know)  forgave 
Chrift  no  fin:  Whv  ? Became  he  was ■ per- 
jeElly  righteous , and  in  turn  zcas  no  fin.  1 John 
v.  g.  Therefore  if  men  be  righteous  with  the 
fame  righteoufntfs,  wherewith  Chrift  was  right- 
eous, as  compleatly  right  ecus  as  he,  they  have 
no  more  fin  to  be  pardoned,  than  he  had*. 

If  it  be  faid  that  God  firft  gives  remijfion  of 
fins  to  men,  and  then  iinputes  his  perjtd  right- 

eoujnefs 


[ 33°  3 

eoufnefs  to  them  : I anfwer,  Chrift  hath  taught  us 
• to  pray  fox  for givenefs  off  ns,  even  after  this  im- 
putation of  righteoufnefs,  (if  any  fuch  thing  wercy  ! 
except  we  will  fay,  that  he  framed  tliat  pattern  of 
prayer  only  for  the  life  of  unbelievers.  Now  to  afk 
forgivenejs  of  Jins  of  God  and  yet  to  conceit  our- 
felves  as  rigliteous  as  Chrift  was,  is  rather  to 
mock  than  to  worfhip  him. 

Secf.  VI.  If  it  be  objebled,  that  this  inconvenience 
fits  as  clofe  to  the  imputation  of  faith  for  righ't- 
eoufnefs,  as  to  the  imputation  of  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrift  for  that  purpofe.  for  if  faith  be  imput- 
ed for,  or  inftead  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law, 
niuft  it  not  derive  a nghteoufnefs  upon  the  per- 
fon  to  whom  fuch  imputation  is  made,  as  perfect 
and  compleat,  as  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law 
itfelf,  and  confeqnentfv,  as  the  righteoujnefs  of 
Chrift  himfelf? 

I anfwer.  When  faith  is  faid  to  be  imputed  for 
i nghteoufnefs  in  juf  if  cation,  inftead  of  the  right- 
eoufnefs  of  the  law,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  the 
nghteoufnefs  of  the  law  itfelf  that  is  imputed  for 
nghteoufnefs , but  another  thing.  Now  any  other 
righteoufnefs,  or  anv  other  thing  imputed for  rigkt- 
eoujrtejs , befides-the  righieoufifs  of  the  law,  will 
bear  a confiftency  of  fin  with  it  andfo  leave  a place 
for forgivenefs  : but  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law 
excluding  the  former  cannot  admit  the  latter. 
When  a perfect  far  dif  cation  is  imputed  to  a man 
for  his  juf  if cation,  that  man  can  be  no  more  re- 
puted to  have  (in  in  him,  than  to  be  obnoxious  to 

death 


[ 33*  1 

death  and  condemnation  which  is  moft  oppbfitet® 
ju/lif cation.  But  when  that  which  either  is  no 
fanChf cation , or  at  moft  but  an  imperfetl  fanBifi- 
cation,  is  imputed for  right  to  u fiefs  in  a man’s  j uni- 
fication, there  may  be  as  full  a jujlification,  as 
perfect  a delieverance  from  death  and  condemna- 
tion as  in  the  former  cafe,  and  yetplace  left  i n the 
perfon  juftified,  for  an  inherency  of  fin  : and 
confequently,  for  the  forgivenefs  of  it. 


CHAP.  XL 

A Jeventh  reafon  a gain f this  imputation  viz . A ma- 
nifiji  compliance  with  that  dangerous  enor , that 
God Jeeth  no-  Jin  in  his  people. 

SECT.  I.  That  God  feeth  no  fn  in  his  people, 
is  an  error  fo  grots,  that  it  is  even  palpable 
and  may  be  felt.  But  the  opinion,  againft  which 
we  plead,  leads  men  direftlv  into  it,  as  may  ap- 
pear by  this  demonftration. 

Whofoever  is  per  felly  righteous,  or  as  righteous 
as  Chrif  is,  in  him  God  can  fee  no  fin. 

But  every  believer  (faith  this  opinion ) is  as  per- 
fectly righteous,  as  Chnf  himfelf  is : therefore 
' in  fitch  G'od  can  fie  no  fin. 


IJimad 


[ 332  ] 

Ijkmael'w as  not  a mere  genuine  fruit  of  Ha- 
gar’s  womb,  than  this  conclufion  that  God Jecth 
no  fin  in  his  children,  is  of  that  opinion,  which 
maintained  men  to  be  ccmpleatly  righteous,  by 
the  imputation  of  Chrifi’s  right eoufn  efs.  But,  ai 
fometimes  a man  failing  in  love  with  a woman- 
that  hath  children,  having  married  the  mother 
would  willingly  turn  the  children  out  of  doors  : 
fo  it  is  often  feen,  that  when  men  have  imbrac- 
ed  an  opinion,  feeming  in  their  eye  a lovely 
truth,  and  did  not  at  fir  fir  before  thev  were  wed- 
ded to  it,  apprehend  what  harfh  confequences  it 
had  attending  it,  they  fhift,  every  way,  to  quit 
themfclves  of  that  difhonourable  charge,  where- 
with they  find  themfelvesencu  inbred. . But  how- 
men  that  will  own  an  imputation  of  a perfect- 
righteoiifnefs  can  fhift  off  the  opinion  of  God’s 
not  feeing  fin,  in  thofe  that  are  cloathed  with  it, 
is,  beyond  my  apprehenfion.  If  God  could  fee 
no  fin  in  Chrift,  becaufe  lie  was  perfectly  righte- 
ous, how  he  fhould  fee  it  in  any  that  are  as  per- 
fectly righteous  as  he,  and  that  with  the  fame 
righteoiifnefs  wherewith  he  was  righteous,  is  a - 
riddle  that  cannot  be  made  out. 


C H A P, 


[ 333  ] 


C H A P.  XIL 

Four  more  arguments  again/}  this  imputation  : 
the  JirJi  A,  the  confounding  the  two  .cove- 
nants. 

SECT.  I.  ft  is  true  many  that  hold  the  wav  of 
imputation, ate  nothing  afliamed,  of  this  con- 
fequent,  the  confounding  the  two  covenants  of 
God  with  men,  that  of  worlds  with  tint  of  grace. 
Thefe  conceive  that  God  never  made  more  co- 
eye nants  than  one,  with  mart  : and  that  the  gof- 
- pel  is  nothing  elfe  but  a gracious  aid  from  God, 
«to  help  man  to  perform  the  covenant  of  works; 
fib  that  the  life  and  falvation  which  are  faid  to 
'■  come  by  Chrid,  in  no  other  fenfe  come  bv  him, 
but  as  he  fulfilled  that  law  of  works  for  man, 
which  men  thcmfelves  were  not  able  to  fulfil : 
■and  by  imputation,  as  by  a deed  of  gift,  make 
over  his  perfeft  obedience  and  fulfilling  of  the 
law,  to  thofe  that  believe  : fo  that  they  in  right 
of  this  perfeft  obedience,  come  to  inherit 
life  and  falvation,  according  to  the  drift  tenor 
-of  the  covenant,  of  works.  Do  this  and  live. 

But  men  may  as  well  fay,  there  was  no  fecond 
Adam,  really  differing  from  the  fil'd,  as  no  fe- 
cond covenant,  differing  from  the  find  ; or  that 

the 


[ 334  ] 

the  fpiiit  of  bondage  is  the  fame  with  the  fpiritof 
adoption.  If  the  iecond  covenant  of  grace,  were 
implicitly  contained  in  the  firft,  then  the  meaning 
of  the  firft  covenant,  conceived  in  thofe  words. 
Do  this  and  live.,  muft  be.  Do  this  either  by  thyfdj\ 
or  by  another  and  live.  Theie  is  no  other  way  to 
reduce  them  to  the  fame  covenant.  But  if  this 
were  God's  meaning  in  the  firft  covenant,  that 
keeping  the  -law,  either  by  a man  himfelf,  or  bv 
•another,  fhould  ferve  the  turn,  and  a man  Ihould 
live  by  either,  then  1.  It  muft  follow,  that  a me- 
diatorwas  piomifed  before  the  fall  : for  this  co- 
venant was  made  with  man  in  inrtocencv.  2.  That 
Adam  either  ur.derftood  not  his  covenant  that 
was  made  with  him  ; or  elfe  knew  of  a furety 
and  Redeemer  before  his  fall.  3.  If  keeping  the 
law,  either  bv  a man’s  f el f,  or  bv  another  were 
[in  God' s meaning)  a fufficient  means  of  life,  then 
anv  other  furety,  any  other  mediator,  would  have 
made  the  reconciliation  as  well  as  he  that  was 
God  and  man.  For  God  might  have  created  a 
mere  man  with  abilities  to  bas  e kept  the  law, 
as  fully  as  Adam  or  anv  of  his  pofterity  was  bound 
to  do.  4.  And  lafllv,  ti  the  fulfilling  of  the  law 
by  any  fu retv  whatfoever.  were  a fuflicient  means 
of  life  to  Adam  and  his,  then  was  the  deaih  of 
Chrift  no  ways  necefiary  ; becaufe  Chrift  had 
perfeMv  fulfilled  the  law  before  hrs  death. 

Sefr.  II.  Again,  If  the  firft  and  fecond  cove- 
nant were  in  fubftance  the  fame,  then  muft  the 
conditions  in  both  be  the  lame.  For  the  condi- 


tions 


[ 335  ] 

iions  in  a covenant,  are  as  elfential  a part  of  it, 
as  an)-  other.  Though  there  be  the  fame  parties 
covenanting,  and  the  fame  things  covenanted 
for  : yet  if  there  be  new  articles  of  agreement, 
it  is  really  another  covenant.  Now  if  the  conditions 
be  the  fame  inhoth  covenants,  then  to  do  this,  and 
to  believe,  faith  and  works,  are  the  fame : 
whereas  the  fcripture  from  place  to  place,  makes 
the  moll  irreconcileable  oppofition  between 
them. 

Seth  III.  If  it  be  objected  : That  thz  righteouf 
nefsof  the  law  imputed from  another.,  and  wrought 
by  a man’s  Jdf  are  two  differing  conditions  ; there - 
Jure  it  doth  not  follow  that  the  covenants  are  the 
fame  : 

I anfwer,  the  fubftance  of  the  agreement  will 
be  found  the-  fame  notwithstanding  : the  works, 
or  right  e.c  a fiefs  of  the  law  are  the  fame,  by  whom- 
Toever  wrought:  if  Adam  had  fulfilled  the  law 

■ as  Clint  did,  he  had  been  jujhfied  by  the  fame 
rigkteoufuefs  wherewith  Clint  himfelfwas  right- 

■ eous. 

.If  it  be  faid,  that  imputation  in  the  fecond  cove- 
nant, which  was  not  in  the  fir jl,  makes  a differ- 
ence in  the  condition u \ anfwer.  1.  Imputation  of 
works  or  of  right  eoujrtefs,  is  not  the  condition  of 
the  new  covenant,  but  believing.  If  imputation 
were  the  condition,  then  the  whole  covenant 
would  lie  upon  God,  and  nothing  be  required 
on  the  creature's  part  : for  imputation  is  an  aft 
•of  God,  not  of  men.  2.  If  it  were  granted, 

that 


[ 336  ] 

that  the  righteoufnefs. , or  the  works  of  the  low 
imputed  from  Chrijl , were  that  whereby  we  are 
juflijied , yet  they  muft  juftilV,  not  as  imputed , 
but  as  righteoufnefs  or  works  of  the  law.  There- 
fore imputation  makes  no  difference  in  this  re- 
fpefl.  Imputation  can  be  no  part  of  that  eighteen f- 
nef  by  which  we  are  jujlified becaufe  it  is  no 
conformity  with  any  law,  nor  with  anv  part  or 
branch  of  any  law,  that  man  was  ever  bound  to 
keep.  Therefore  it  can  be  no  part  of  that  righte- 
ou/hejs , by  which  he  is  juftified.  So  that  the  con- 
dition of  both  covenants  will  be  found  the  fame, 
{and  confequent’v  both  covenants  the  fame  if 
j unification  be  maintained  by  the  righteoufnefs  of 
C drift  imputed. 

Sect.  IV.  There  is  no  kind  of  error  that  re- 
quires more  ftrengih  of  argument  for  the  demo- 
lilhing  of  it.  Than  that  which  is  fortified  with  the 
appearance  of  promoting  the  glory  of  God  or 
the  honour  of  Chrilt.  Knowing  that  enemy 
againfl  which  we  now  contend,  to  have  more  ot 
that  advantage,  than  moil  other  opinions  have,  . 
I conceive  it  necelfary  to  ■employ  the  more  ar- 
guments, 
o 

Therefore  in  the  tenth  place,  againfl  the  impu- 
tation contended  for.  I oppofe  this  dem  mflra- 
tion.  That  jer  which  righteoufnefs  is  imputed  to 
thoje  that  believe , cannot  be  imputed  to  them  for 
righteoufnefs:  but  the  righteoufnefs  oj  Chtifl  is 
that  for  which  righteoufnefs  is  imputed  to  ihofe 
.that  believe  : therefore  itfef  cannot  be  imputed for 

righteoufnefs. 


C-  337  ] 

n'gh'teoufnefs.  The  fecond  propofition  no  man  will 
deny,  except  thole  that  deny  the  righteoufnefs 
of  Chrifl,  to  be  the  meritorious  caufe  of  that 
righteoufnefs  or  j unification,  which  is  conferred 
upon  men : the  other  propofition  I demonllrate 
thus : 

' If  it  be  impoflible,  that  the  tiling  merited, 
fliould  be  the  fame  thing  with  that  which  is  the 
meritorious  caufe  of  it,  then  it  is  impodible,  that 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  fhould  be  the  righteouf- 
nefs of  a believer . But  the  former  is  true  : there- 
fore the  latter.  The  confequenee  is  evident : 
becaufe  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl,  and  the  right- 
eoufnefs or  jufifi cation  of  a believer , Hand  in  that 
relation,  the  one  to  the  other,  as  the  caufe  to 
the  effefl : the  righteoufhefs  of  Chrifl  being  the 
(meritorious)  caufe,  and  the  righteoufnefs  of  a 
believer  or  perfon  jollified,  the  effeft  merited  by 
it.  And  it  is  every  whit  as  evident  that  the 
-thing  merited,  cannot  be  the  fame  with  that 
which  is  the  meritorious  caufe  of  it  : for  fo  the 
fame  thins:  would  be  the  caufe  of  itfelf. 

O 

Se£l.  V.  Again,  if  the  lighteoufnefs  of  Chrifl: 
be  imputed  to  a believer  for  righieoufnejs  in  his 
juflifi cation,  then  the  meritorious  caufe  of  his 
jufliflcation  is  imputed  to  him  for  righteoufnefs  : 
but  the  meritorious  caufe  of  a man’s  jufliflcation 
cannot  be  thus  imputed  to  him : therefore  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl  cannot  be  thus  imputed. 
The  truth  of  the  former  propofition  is  evident. 
The  reafon  of  the  latter  is  this : becaufe  the  me- 

Vol.  XXIT  P ritorious 


C 338  ] 

ritorious  eaufe  being  a kind  of  efficient,  cannot 
be  either  the  matter  or  the  form  of  that,  where- 
of it  is  efficient.  Wherefore,  if  the  right  eouf- 
vefs  of  Chrifl  be  the  meritorious  efficient  eaufe 
of  our  jujhjication,  impoffible  it  is,  that  either 
by  imputation  or  otherwife,  it  fiiould  ever  be 
made  either  the  matter  or  form  of  this juflifica- 
tion.  For  tins  is  an  inviolable  law  amongll  the 
four  kinds  of  caufes,  material,  formal,  final  and 
efficient : that  the  two  former  only  are  intrinfi- 
cal  and  effential  parts  of  the  elfeft  produced  : 
the  two  latter,  viz.  the  final  and  efficient,  are 
always  extrinfical.  As  lor  example,  when  a 
plaifterer  whites  a wall,  the  effefl  ol  his  wc  rk.  is 
the  whitenefs  of  the  nail.  Now  this  efleFt, 
this  whitenefs  of  the  wall,  is  none  of  the  effi- 
cient caufes  producing  it,  neither  anv  parr  o!  it, 
or  any  ingredient  in  it;  neither  the  pla  : tier 
him 'elf,  who  is  the  principal  efficient  eaufe  oi 
it,  nor  his  pencil,  which  is  the  inffiruniental  ef- 
ficient eaufe,  nor  the  wages  he  receives  for  do- 
itm  it,  which  is  as  the  mervorfeus  efficient  eaufe 
of  it.  , None  of  there,  is  any  in'mifc  part  of  the 
effett,  neither  as  the  matter,  nor  as  the  form 
thereof.  1 he  whitenefs  put  upon  the  wall,  hv 
all  the  three  efi.eien*?,  (acc  iWiijg  to  their  fe- 
veral  o.  -ations.)  is  the  formal  part  of  it  : and 
the  wall  itfelf,  is  th:  matter  or  material  part  of 
it.  Sc.  in  th  ej.il/fiji~  . n oi  a 'firmer.  ; other  is 
God  himfclf,  who  is  the  principal  efficient  of 
j unification  ; neither  is  faith,  which  is  me  in- 

flrumental 


C 339  ] 

ftrumental  efficient  of  it,  (for  God  is  faid  in 
fcripture  to  juflify  men,  by  or  through  it,  Rom. 
iii.  30.)  Neither  is  the  right eoufnefs  of  Chrifl, 
which  is  the  meritorious  efficient  caufe  of  it, 
either  matter  or  form,  or  any  conftituting  caufe 
of j unification  : but  only  rernijfion  of  fins,  or  abfo- 
lution  from  punifhment,  as  the  form  applied  to, 
or  put  upon  the  matter:  and  the  matter  or  fub- 
jedi  whereto  this  form  is  applied  by  all  the  three 
efficients  fpoken  of,  according  to  their  feveral 
manner  of  working,  is  the  perfon  of  the  believer. 
This  argument,  to  him  that  underflands  that  un- 
changeable law  of  the  four  kinds  of  caufes,  in 
relation  to  their  effedis,  is  good  meafure,  yea 
preffed  down,  and  heaped  up  and  running  over. 
To  fay  then  that  the  righteou  fnefs  of  Chrift,  is 
either  the  matter  or  form  of  juj/if cation,  and  yet 
grant  it  to  be  the  meritorious  caufe  of  jujiifi cation, 
is  (in  Calvin’s  phrafe)  to  yoke  lire  and  water  to- 

Seci.  VI.  Let  us  obferve  yet  another  demon- 
flration.  If  the  meritorious  caufe  of  our  jujlifca- 
tion  be  imputed  to  us,  (in  the  fenfe  controverted) 
then  the  effects  themfelves  of  this  caufe  may  be 
imputed  to  us  alfo : and  fo  we  may  be  faid  to 
have  merited  both  our  own  juf  if  cation  and falva- 
tion  : thus  we  are  in  the  midlf  of  Rome  inffead 
pf  Jerufalem.  For  if  I may  be  accounted  to  have 
wrought  that  righteoufnefs  which  is  meritorious 
of  my  juf  if  cation  : why  may  I not  be  conceived 
as  well  to  have  merited  my  jujlification  ? I know 
P 2 not 


[ 340  ] 

not  the  leaft  difference  between  meriting  and 
doing  that  which  is  meritorious.  Nay  farther,  if 
I may  be  conceived  to  have  wrought  that  riglite- 
oufnefs  in  Chrift,  whereby  I am  jujlijied  myfelf* 
I may  be  as  well  conceived  to  have  wrought  that 
righteoufnefs  alfo,  by  which  the  whole  world  is 
jujtifiecl.  For  I cannot  be  conceived  to  have 
wrought  any  other  righteoufnefs  in  Chriff,  than 
that  which  Chrift  himfelf  wrought : and  this,  we 
know,  is  the  very  fame  righteoufnefs  by  which 
the  world  is  jufified. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Three farther  reafons  agaift  this  imputation. 

Q ECT.  I.  Let  us  hear  the  voice  of  more  wit- 
^ neffes,  that  are  able  to  fpeak  to  the  point. 

If  the  adive  obedience  or  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
be  in  the  letter  of  it  imputed  to  me  in  my  jufifi- 
cation,  then  am  I reputed  before  God  to  have 
wrought  that  righteoufnefs  in  Chrift  : (for  to  have 
any  thing  imputed  to  a man  in  the  letter  of  it,  is 
to  be  reputed  the  doer  ofwhat  is  fo  imputed .) 

But  I am  not  reputed  by  God  to  have  wrought 
this  righteoufnefs  in  Chrift  : therefore  this  righ- 
teoufnefs  of  Chrift  is  not  imputed  to.  me  (in  thq 
letter  of  it.) 

' ' The 


[ m1  3 

- The  latter  propofition  I demonflrate  thus : if 
I be  reputed  before  God  to  have  wrought  righte- 
oufnefs  in  Chrift,  then  is  Chrill  in  his  bufferings 
reputed  before  God  to  have  finned  in  me.  For 
the  imputation  of  my  fin  to  Chrift,  and  of  Chrift’s 
righteoufnefs  unto  me,  have  the  fame  proportion 
the  one  to  the  other. 

But  that  Chrift  fhould  be  reputed  before  God 
to  have  finned  in  me,  is  an  affertion  fo  uncouth 
and  unchristian,  that  a Chriftian  had  need  to 
borrow  the  ears  of  a Pagan  to  hear  it  with  pati- 
ence. However,  the  untruth  of  it  is  thus  made 
manifeft : 

If  Chrift  be  reputed  before  God  to  have  fnned  in 
me,  he  mujl  be  reputed  to  have  had  a being  in 
me:  for  the  operation  of  a thing  follows  and 
depends  upon  the  being  of  it. 

But  what  being  could  Chrift  be  reputed  by 
God  to  have  had  in  me,  being  yet  an  unbe- 
liever? 

Se£t.  II.  Againfl  this  fuppofed  i?nputation,  I 
oppofe  this  confideration.  If  the  adtive  obedi- 
ence of  Chrift  be  imputed  to  me  in  my  jujlifica- 
tion,  then  is  the  paffive  imputed  alfo.  For  there 
can  be  no  fufficient  reafon  given,  why  the  one 
fhould  be  taken  and  the  other  left.  But  that  the 
death  or  fufferings  of  Chrift  are  not  in  the  letter 
of  them  imputed  to  me,  I thus  demonftrate. 

If  the  death  (ind fufferings  of  Chrift  be  imputed  to 

P 3 Vie, 


C 342  ] 

me , then  may  / accounted  or  reputed  to 
have  died  and  fufferedin  Chrifl. 

But  I cannot  he  reputed  to  have  died  or  fuffered 
in  Chrifl : therefore  the  death  and fujjcrings  of 
Chrifl  are  not  imputed  unto  me,  ( I mean  fill, 
in  the  letter  oj  them.) 

The  reafon  of  the  fequel  in  the  firfl  propofi- 
tion,  is  evident  from  the  former  argument.  To 
have  any  thing  imputed  to  a man  in  the  letter  of 
it,  and  to  be  reputed  as  the  doer  or  fufferer  of 
'tvhat  is  fo  imputed,  are  equivalent  exprefhons. 

The  reafon  of  the  fecond,  that  no  man  is  to  be 
conceived  to  have  buffered  in  Chrifl,  is  this,  be- 
caufe  in  Chrifl  we  are juflifed and  abfolved  from 
punifhment ; and  therefore  cannot  be  laid  to  have 
been  punifhed  in  him.  He  hath  made  us  freely 
accepted  in  his  Beloved,  Eph.  i.  6.  Therefore  he 
poured  not  out  his  wrath  upon  us  in  his  Beloved. 
And  by  his  flripes  we  are  healed,  (which  is  con- 
trary to  being  wounded  or  punifhed)  1 Pet.ii.  2q. 
And  to  fay  that  we  buffered,  or  were  punifhed  in 
Chrifl,  is  (in  effe£l)  to  unfay,  or  gamfay,  what 
the  gofpel  every  where  fpeaketh,  touching  our 
redemption  and  deliverance  from  punifhment  by 
Chrifl.  He  that  knoweth  how  to  reconcile  thefc 
two,  may  make  light  and  darknefs  friends  : that 
God  fhould  freely  forgive  us  our  fins,  and  vet 
punifh  us  for  them,  and  that  to  the  full,  (which 
muft  be  faid  by  thofe  that  will  fa)-,  we  were 
punifhed  in  Chrifl.)  If  Chrifl  were  punifhed  for 

us, 


[ 343  ] 

us,  or  in'our  (lead,  (which  is  the  fcripture  lan- 
guage, 2 Cor.  v.  21.  who  made  him  fin  for  ns,) 
doubtlefs  we  ourfelves,  can  in  no  fenfe  be  faid  to 
be  punifhed,  or  to  have  buffered  in  him. 

One  reafon  more. 

Se£t.  III.  If  the  righteonfiefs  of  Chriji  fin  the 
fenfe  Jo  oft  expreffed ) be  imputed  to  us,  then  are 
zve jujlifed  ( at  leaji  in  part ) by  the  ceremonial  law. 
This  confluence  cannot  be  denied:  becaufe  part  of 
that  righteoufnefs  which  Chriji  wrought,  food  in 
obedience  to  the  ceremonial  law  : he  was  ciri  umcifed, 
kept  the  paffover,  &c.  Therefore,  if  the  I'lghteouf- 
nej's  oj Chrif  be  imputed  to  us  in  the  letter  of  it,  that 
part  of  his  righteoufnefs,  which  flood  in  obedience 
cer emoniaJ , muf  be  imputed alfo. 

If  it  be  replied,  there  is  no  neceflity  that  any 
part  of  his  righleoufnefs  ceremonial  fhould  be  im- 
puted, becaufe  his  moral  righteonfiefs  is  fufficient, 

I anfwer : 

Firft,  There  is  no  warrant  in  fcripture  thus  to 
rend  and  tear  in  pieces  the  one  half  from  the 
other,  that  which  was  one  entire  and  compleat 
righteoufnefs  in  Chrift  ; and  to  take  which  part 
we  pleafe  to  ourfelves,  and  leave  the  other. 

Secondly,  If  that  part  only  of  the  righleoufnefs 
of  Chrift,  which  flood  in  his  obedience  to  the 
moral  law,  be  imputed  to  us  for  righteoufnefs, 
then  will  there  not  be  found  the  fame  way  of 
juf  if  cation  for  the  whole  body  of  Chrift  : but 
P 4 the 


[ 344  ] 

the  believing  Jews  before  C brill's  death  tnufl  be 
jollified  with  one  kind  of  righuoujnefs,  and  the 
’Gentiles  with  another.  For  the  Jews  before  the 
death  of  Chrifl,  had  aneceffitv  of  both  pans  of 
this  righteoufnefs  to  be  imputed  to  them  in  their 
j unification,  (fuppofmg  their  jv.fifiu.ti on  had 
flood  in  fuch  an  imputation J as  well  ceremonial 
as  moral.  But  that  the  Jews  fhould  be  juflified 
with  one  kind  of  righteoufnefs  and  the  Gentiles 
with  another,  there  is  no  colour  of  reafon  to 
.maintain. 

Thirdly  (and  laflly,)  That  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrifl,  which  is  called  moral,  if  feparated  from 
the  other  part  which  is  ceremonial,  was  not  a 
complete  righteoufnefs  in  him  : becaufe  it  became 
him  to  fulfil  all  righteoufnefs , as  well  ceremonial 
as  moral,  Matt.  iii.  lg.  So  then,  if  men  were 
juflified  only  by  the  moral  right eoufi&fs  of  Chrifl 
imputed,  it  would  follow,  that  we  are  juflified 
before  God  with  an  incomplete  righteoufnefs.. 
Therefore  if  the  ceremonial  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrifl,  be  not  (in  the  letter,  of  it)  imputed  to  us 
.for  righteoufnefs,  in  our  juf  if  cation,  neither  can 
his  moral  righteoufnefs. 


CHAP. 


[ 345  ] 


C HAP.-  XIV. 

Three  farther  demonji  rations. 

O ECT,  I.  If  the  rightcou fnef  of  Chrijl  in  the 
letter  of  it, he  imputed  for  righteoujncfs  to  us 
in  our  jujlifi cation,  then  are  our  fns  imputed 
to  Chrif  after  the  fame  vianner,  viz . In  the 
letter  of  them,  in  his  death  or  condemnation. 
This  confequence  is  blamdefs:  becaufe  there  is 
the  fame  reafon  of  the  imputation  of  our  Jins  to 
Chrijl,  that  there  is  of  the  imputation  of  his 
righteoufnefs  to  us.- 


But  that  our  fms  are  not  imputed  to  Chrift  in 
the  letter  of  them,  I thus  demonflrate.  . ■ 

If  the  fms  of  men  he  imputed  to  Chrift,  in  ,the 
letter  of  them,  then  God  looks  upon  him  in  his 
lu  Springs  as  one  that  truly  and  really  had  finned 
again  him.  - - f , 


But  God  doth  not  look  upon  Chrijl  in  his  fujfer- 
ings  as  one  that  had  truly  and  really  finned' 
againjl  him.  Therefore  our  fns  are  not  im- 
puted to  him  after  any  fuch  manner  m his 
fujferings. 

The  truth  of  the  affumptioii  I thus  make  ma- 
rufeft : 

"-pv  ::  ■ 0 'it 


IT  3. 


[ 34^  ] 

If  God  looks  upon  Chrifi  in  his  death  as  cm 
that  had  truly  finned  againft  him , then  he 
looks  upon  him  as  one  having  defervtd  the 
death  he  fuffers.  The  reafon  of  the  confe- 
quence  is  apparent : becaufe  as  to  fin,  and 
to  defer  ve  death , are  exprejfions  of  the  fame 
importance : fo  to  look  upon  a man  as  a firmer, 
and  as  one  that  hath  defervtd  death,  are  the 
fame . 

But  that  God  doth  not  look  upon  Chrifi  in  his 
fuflerings,  as  one  that  had  defer-ved  the  things 
he  fuffers,  is  evident: 

Firff,  Becaufe  as  Chrifl  offered  himfelf  with- 
out fpot  unto  God,  fo  God  looked  upon  him  in 
that  his  offering.  Otherwife,  if  he  had  over- 
looked that  fpotleffnefs  of  his,  and  imputed  fin 
unto  him  infiead  thereof : what  had  this  been, 
but  to  have  put  darknefs  for  light  ? "Which  to  af- 
firm, of  God,  may  be  called  the  firff-'oorn  of  a 
blafphemous  ignorance. 

Se6l.  II.  Secondly,  If  God  looked  upon 
Chrifi:  as  having  deferved  death,  his  death  could 
not  have  been  accepted  as  fatisfa&ory  for  others. 
For,  as  he  that  hath  deferved  death,  cannot  by  his 
death  deferve  the  fparing  of  others  from  death, 
who  have  deferved  it  as  well  as  he  ; becaufe  fuch 
a man’s  death  only  anfwers  his  own  perfonal  . t 
demerit ; (as  he  that  oweth  a fum  of  money,  can- 
not by  the  pavment  thereof  difeharge  any  man  s _ 
debt,  but  his  own  :)  fo  neither  can  the  reputing’ 

of 


[ 347  ] 

of  any  man  to  have  deferved  death,  be  made 
confident  with  reputing  fuch  a man’s  death,  to 
be  expiatory,  or  fatisfaftory  for  others. 

Thirdly,  If  God  looked  upon  him  in  his  death 
as  deferving  to  die,  then  did  Chrid  fuffer  death, 
not  for  our  fins,  as  they  are  ours,  but  as  they 
were  his  (by  imputation .)  Whereas  the  fcrip- 
tures  every  where  teftify  of  his  buffering  death  for 
our  fins,  but  never  for  any  fin  of  his  own,  no 
more  by  imputation  than  by  inhefion. 

Let  this  reafon  alfo  be  taken  into  considera- 
tion. 

If  tlic  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  be,  in  the  letter  of 
it,  imputed  to  us  in  our  jnftijication,  then 
dolhGod  look  upon  us  as  zoorthy  of  that  jufti- 
fication. 

But  this  is  an  unclean  faying:  therefore  the 
former  is  unclean  alfo. 

The  confequence  in  the  former  propofition,  is 
like  mount  Sion,  and  cannot  be  moved.  For  if 
God  reputes  me  to  have  kept  the  law,  as  per- 
fectly as  Chrift  did,  he  mud  conceive  of  me,  as 
worthy  ol  my  / ijiificatwn . For  as  the  fulfilling 
of  the  law,  and  deferving  juftification,  are  the 
fame,  Rom.  iv.  q.  So  the  reputing  a man  to 
have  done  the  one,  is  the  reputing  him  to  hat  c 
deferved  the  other. 

Se£t.  III.  Let  us  hear  what  both  reafon  and 
religion  farther  fpeak  againd  this  imputation. 

P 6 1 If 


[ 34?  ] 

If, fitch  imputation  be  nccejjary  in  juflificaiicn. 
this „ nectjjity  rauft  be  either  in  reTptbl  oj  thi 
■u/iice  oj  God,  becaujt  oTieru  ft  hi  could  not 
be  juft  in  pronouncing  men  right  "us,  or  in 
rfpebtoj his  m rep.  or  for  the  ad  vancing  oj 
fame  other  attribute.  • - 

But  there  is  no  necejily  of  bringing  in  fuck  an 
imputation  in  icjpccl  o)  any  oj  theft.  There- 
fore it  is  brou fit  in  without  any  necejfity 
at  all. 

The  prOteFlors  of  it  themfelves  affigu  nootner 
necellity  of  it,  but  only  in  refpeft  of  Godsjuf- 
tice.  God,  they  fay,  cannot  otherwife  with  juf- 
tice  pronounce  a man  righteous,  according  to 
the  fh  icc  i ighteoufnefs  of  the  law.  I anfwer: 

Fi.it,  There  is  nothing  necefTary  to  be  done, 
either  by  God  himfelf,  or  bv  man,  about  the 
juftifi cation  of  a firmer,  by  way  of  fatisfaCtion  to 
the  juflice  of  God,  fince  that  one  offering  of 
Chrifl  upon  the  crofs : otherwife  there  muff  be 
found  fomewhat  defective  in  that  fatisfa£tion.  If 
the  juflice  of  God  be  fully  fatisfied  by  the  death 
of  Chrifl,  as  to  the  juftification  of  finners,  there 
remains  nothing  farther  necellary  to  be  done, 
either  by  God  or  by  man,  for  the  fatisfattion  of 
that  juflice.  Therefore,  if  God  impute  the 
rigkleoufntfs  of  Chrifl  to  men  in  this  cafe,  fome 
other  end  for  it  mull  be  fought  out,  not  any  fa- 
tisfa&ion  to  his  juflice.  The  infinite  value  of 
Ohrill’s  paffion  muff  not  be  abated  to  make  way 


1 M 9 J 

fur  an  imaginary  exaltation  of  his  active  rign  ,r- 
oi fiefs.  I he  neceffity  of  faith  to  juftif cation, 

(which  is  acknowledged  by  all,)  lieth  not  in  re- 
ference to  God's  juftice,  as  if  man  fatisfied  that, 
either  in  whole  or  in  part,  by  believing : but 
either  to  his  wildom,  or  the  counfel  of  his  will. 
He  judged  it  not  meet  to  fare  men  in  any  other 
way  bv  the  fatisfafction  of  Chrifl,  than  by  the 
way  of faith.  This  is  the  will  of  him  that  fat  me 
faith  our  Saviour,  John  vi.  40J  not  the  juftice 
of  him  that  fait  me,  that  every  man  which feeth  the 
Son,  and  believeth  in  him,  fiould  have  ever laf ting 
life.  If  there  were  nothing  to  hinder,  but  want 
of  fatisraftion  to  divine  juftice,  doubtlefs  the  whole 
world  would  be  faved. 

Seek  IV.  Secondly,  Whereas 'it  was  faid,  that 
God  cannot  confidently  with  his  juflice,  pronounce 
a man  righteous,  that  is  not  literally  and  properly 
fo.  I anfwer,  He  may  as  well  pronounce  that  man 
righteous,  that  wants  a literal  or  legal righteoufaefs 
(efpeciallv  fuppofinghehath  another  righteoufaefs, 
holding  am  proportion  thereto)  as  he  may  account 
. any  man's  uncircumcifion,  circumcifio  , Rom. 
ii.  26.  or  call  the  uncircumcifed  Gentiles,  the 
circumcifon,  Philip,  iii,  3.  Now  as  the  Holy 
Gnoft  fpake  as  truly  when  he  called  thofe  that 
believe,  though  uncircumcifed  in  th tffh,  the  cir- 
cumcifon, as  if  they  had  been  literally  circumcifed  : 
fo  may  God  with  as  much  righteoufnejs  and 
truth,  pronounce  a man  righteous,  that  is  not 
literally  fuch,  if  he  hath  any  cpralification  that 

any 


L 3 <5°  1 

any  way  holds  proportion  with  fuch  a righleouf 
tiefs  as  if  he  had  a perfect  legal  righteoujnefs. 
For,  it  is  fufficient  to  bear  out  the  juftice  and 
(ruth  of  God,  in  giving  either  the  name  or 
efiecm  of  a righteous  man  unto  him,  if  his  per- 
fon  be  tinder  any  fuch  relation  or  condition,  as 
bclongeth  to  a legal  + righteoufnefs,  Now  one 
elpecial  privilege  belonging  to  a perfect  legal 
righteoufnefs,  is  to  free  the  perfon  in  whom  it  is 
found,  from  death  and  condemnation  : Do  this 
end  thou  /halt  live:  but  he  the:  hath  his  fins  for- 
given, is  partaker  with  him  in  the  fulnefs  of  this 
privilege ; and  may  therefore  with  truth  and 
propriety,  in  this  refpect,  be  either  called  or  ac- 
counted righteous. 

Thirdly,  Forgivenefs  of  fins,  is  a true  and 
compleat  righteoujnefs,  in  the  kind,  though  it  be 
not  a conformity  with  the  moral  law.  Remifiion 
of  fins,  is  a paffive  righteoujnefs , as  abfolute  and 
perfect  in  its  kind,  as  any  active  righteoufnefs , 
which  confifts  in  an  entire  observation  of  fome 
law.  And  for  him  that  hath  once  finned,  or 
ever  failed  in  the  observation  of  the  law,  there  is 
no  other  righteoufnefs,  whereof  he  is  capable, 
but  only  this  pafjive  righteoujnefs  of  forgivenefs: 
which,  for  all  other  purpofes.  is  as  effeftual  to 
him  that  is  inverted  with  it,  as  the  active  rrghte - 
oufnefs,  except  only  for  glorying  in  the  flefh; 

wl  ;ch 

+ Idem  Junt,  htger:  renjfwntm  peccatorum,  et  efejvflum.  £ rj.nxs 
Cat.  part.  2 Qtt.  56.  Set.  1.  idem  futil juj&JfaAto  <( rcmUfio  fcccutc- 
rum , Hid.  60. StS.  3. 


[ 35 1 ] 

which  is  altogether  inconfiftent  with  it.  So  that 
God,  when  he  hath  forgiven  any  man  his  fins, 
may  with  juftiu  and  truth , pronounce  him  a 
righteous  man,  though  he  be  as  far  from  the  le- 
gal rigbteoufnefs  as  the  eaft  is  from. the  weft. 


Four  reafons  more. 

QEC  T.  I.  That  which  being  dene  in  our  per- 
^ Jons , could  not  have  been  our jujhji cation,  nor 
any  part  of  it,  cannot  be  made  our  j unification  % 
nor  any  part  of  it,  by  imputation  from  another. 

The  right  eoufnejs  of  the  law,  had  it  been  wrought 
by  our  [elves,  in  our  own  perjbns,  could  not 
have  been  our  juftifi cation,  nor  any  part  of 
it. 

Therefore,  this  righUoufnefs  of  Chrift  cannot  be 
made  our  juftification,  nor  any  part  of  it,  by 
imputation  from  him. 

As  to  the  former  propofition  ; if  a perfdnal 
fulfilling  of  the  law,  could  have  been  no  juft  if  ca- 
tion or  part  of  ujlification  to  us,  certainly  neitner 
could  an  imputative  fulfilling  of  it.  The  impu- 
tation of  a thing  from  another  cannot  add  any 
virtue  to  it,  above  a perfonal  working  ; yea  the 
nature  and  intent  of  imputation  (in  the  fenfe  we 


now 


i 352  ] 

now  fpeak  of  it)  is  only  to  fupply  the  defeft  of 
perfonal  performance. 

For  the  latter;  that  the  righUoufnefs  of  the 
law  which  was  performed  by  Chrift  could  not 
have  been  our  juftification  either  in  whole,  or 
in  part,  in  cafe  it  had  been  performed  by  our- 
felves,  is  evident,  becaufe  man  being  once  fallen 
by  finning  againft  the  law,  and  made  obnoxious- 
to  condemnation,  can  never  be  recovered  by  ten 
thoufand  obfervations  of  this  law.  The  law  was 
able  to  have  given  life,  had  it  always  been  fulfil- 
led : but  to  him  that  had  once  failed  in  the  ob- 
fervation  of  it,  though  he  had  been  able  to  have 
kept  it  ten  times  afterward,  it  had  no  power  at 
all  to  give  either  life  or  jii/hf cation.  The  guilt 
of  that  fin  wherein  he  had  once  finned,  could 
never  have  been  purged  by  any  law-righteoufnefs : 
No  a-flive obedience  whatfoever,  would  ever  have 
been  an  atonement  for  him.  Without /heading 
of  blood , there  is  no  remiffwn  of  fins,  Heb.  i.x. 
2 2. 

Let  me  join  another  argument  of  the  fame 
lineage. 

Se£L  II.  That  which  men  are  not  bound  by  any 
law  of  God  to  do  in  their  own  perfons,  jor  their 
juf  ifeatian , cannot  be  imputed  from  another  to 
any  fuch  end. 

Tut  men  are  not  bound  by  any  law  of  God  to  obferve 
the  moral  law  for  their jufxf cation.  Therefore. 
...  the 


C 353  j 

the.  objervationoj  it  cannot ■ be  imputed  unto  them 

from  any  other,  for  any  fitch  end. 

The  reafon  oi  the  former  proportion  is  ; be- 
caufe  imputation  in  the  fenfe  it  is  taken  by  our 
adverfaries,  muft  be  ordained  by  God  to  fupply 
perfonal  defedts.  But  where  there  is  no  law  given 
to  men  to  obey,  there  can  be  no  perfonal  defe£l: 
it  is  no  fin  or  defeft  in  any  man,  not  to  obey, 
where  he  hath  no  command  : and  confequent- 
ly  there  is  no  place  nor  occafion  for  any  imputa- 
tion'to  fupply  it. 

For  the.  latter,  there  is  both  fubftance  and  ap* 
pearance  enough  of  truth  in  it,  to  privilege  it 
from  being  difputed.  It  is  evident  from  the  w&ole 
.current  of  feripture,  that  man  fince  the  fall  had 
not  the  law  of  works,  or  the  obfe  rvation  of  the 
moral  law,  impofed  upon  him  for  his  jufifica- 
tion  before  God,  but  the  law  of  faith  only.  The 
moral  law,  as  it  hath  received  a new  eltabhfhment 
from  Chrift  bindeth  the  confcience  under  the 
gofpel  to  . the  obfervation  thereof  by  way  of  duty 
and  thankfulnefs  to  God  : but  never  fince  the 
fall,  did  it  bind  any  man  to  the  pradlice  of  it,  for 
his  jujlification.  And  therefore  where  it  is  faid, 
Rom.  ii.  13.  That  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  not 
jiifl  before  God,  but  the  doers  of  the  law  fiall  be 
jufified : the  meaning  is  not,  that  God  exadfs 
the  ftridt  obferving  the  law  for  their  juftif  cation  : 
but  that  God  will  juftify,  and  fave  only  fuch, 
as  out  of  a fmcere  faith  towards  him  by  Chrift, 

addrefs 


[ 354  J 

addrefs  themfelves  to  ferve  andpleafe  him  in  a 
u'ay  of  obedience  to  his  laws.  Therefore  the 
doing  of  the  law  is  mentioned  not  as  the 
means  or  meritorious  caufe  of  juflifi cation,  but 
either  as  a condition,  without  which  juflification 
is  not  to  he  expected  : or  as  an  outward  fign  of 
the  perfons,  that  are  jollified  hy  faith. 

Sect.  III.  If  God  requires  only  Jaith  of  men  to 
their  juftif cation,  then  he  imputes  this  faith  to 
them  thereunto.  But  God  requires  only  faith 
to  juflification.  Ergo. 

The  confequence  in  the  firft  propofition,  is 
blamelefs  : becaufe  to  impute  unto  jujhfi cation, 
and  to  accept  unto  juflification,  are  differing  in 
found,  but  not  at  all  in  fignification.  Now  if  God 
required  faith  of  men,  and  only  faith  to  their 
jiiJ/if cation,  and  did  not  accept  it  the  reunto  he 
would  make  a covenant  with  men,  and  refufe  to 
hand  to  it  when  he  had  done. 

If  it  be  replied  : that  though  God  requires 
only  faith  of  men  to  their  jujlification,  yet  he 
requires  fomewhat  more,  at  the  hand  of  another 
thereunto  ; therefore  what  he  imputes  to  men 
for  their  juflification  is  not  what  he  requiers  of 
themfelves,  but  what  he  requires  of  another  for 
them. 

I anfwer  : if  it  were  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl 
and  not  faith , that  God  imputes  for  righteoufnefs 
to  men  in  their  juf  if  cation,  then  may  this  right- 

eoujnefs 


[ 355  ] 

eoufnefs  be  imputed  for  tills  end,  before,  vea  and 
without  the  faith  oi  any- man.  For  it- is  certain, 
the  faith  of  nnn  adds  no  virtue  or  value  to  the 
righteoufnejs  of  Chrifl ; therefore  if  thisbe  that 
whichGod  imputcth  for  righteoufhefs  in  juf  if  cation, 
it  may  be  imputed  as  well  without  faith , as 
with  it  : and  fo  men  might  be  juf  fed  without 
behevin&. 

O 

Sell.  IV.  Neither  will  it  help,  to  fay,  that 
imputation  followeth  the  will’ and  pleafure  of  God, 
and  therefore  the  righteoufnejs  of  Chrjfl  is  not 
imputed  to  any  but  to  him  that bheveth,  becaufe 
the  will  and  pleafure  of  God  is,  not  to  impute  it 
upon  any  other  terms.  For 

To  this  Ianfwer  ; if  the  will  and  pleafure  of 
God  be  not  to  impute  the  righleou fiefs  of  Chriil, 
but  upon  the  condition  of faith:  then  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  this  rigii/eoiifnef'  is  not  imputed  to  jufli- 
fi cation  to  any  man  ; becaufe  the  condition  of 
faith  mufl  neceffaiily  intervene.  So  that  if  this 
righteoufhefs  of  Chrifl  were  imputed  to  men,  yet 
it  mufl  be  only  towards  juflif  cation,  not  unto  it  : 
for  by  their  own  affirmation,  it  is  faith,  that  hath 
the  molt  immediate  connexion  therewith. 

Secondly,  if  God  fufpends  the  imputation  of 
Cln id’s  no kteou fiefs  upon  the  performance  of 
of  the  condition  of  faith  ; then  faith  doth  not 
take  hold  of  the  righleou  fiefs  r/Chrifl  imputed, 
but  comes  firfl,  and  the  imputation  followeth  after. 
Which  x.  is  contrary  to  the  cxprefs  judgment 
of  the  moll  learned  of  their  own  party:  who  af- 
firm 


[ 356  } 

firm  this  imputation  of  Chrift’s  righteoufnefs  by 
God,  to  precede  faith  or  the  act  of  believing 
in  men.  Secondly,  if  faith  firft  takes  hold  of 
the  right eoufnefs  of  Chrift,  before  it  be  imputed, 
and  then  the  aft  of  God’s  imputation  fupervene 
it,  and  the  believer  be  not  juftified,  ’till  this  aft  of 
God’s  imputation  pafs  upon  him  : then  a man 
may  have  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  upon  him 
by  faith,  and  yet  not  be  juftified.  For,  if  the  will 
of  God  be,  not  to  impute  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Chrift  to  juf  if  cation,  but  upon  the  condition  of 
faith  performed,  and  this  condition  is  performed 
by  laying  hold  on  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  (not 
yet  imputed)  by  faith  ; it  evidently  follows,  that  a 
man  may  lay  hold  on  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift 
by  faith,  and  yet  want  that  which  is  eftentially 
requifite  to  his  j uff  if  cation,  viz.  God’s  imputation 
of  this  righteoufnefs  to  him,  which  (as  that  opini- 
on teacheth)  followeth  the  apprehenfion  thereof 
by  faith,  and  is  not  antecedent  to  it. 

Seft.  V.  Yet  once  more. 

That  which  was  imputed  to  Abraham  for  righte- 
oufnefs in  his  juftiftcation,  is  imputed  to  other 
believers  alfo. 

But  the  faith  of  Abraham  was  imputed  to  him  for 
righteoufnefs,  &c.  Ergo. 

That  both  thefe  propofitions  (as  they  are  here) 
are  the  genuine  doftrine  of  the  apoftle  Paul, 
and  that  over  and  over,  in  the  fourth  chapter  to 

the 


» 


C 357  J 


the  Romans,  has  been,  abundantly  proved.  So 
that,  I conceive,  here  needeth  no  addition. 


CHAP.  XV. 

The  lajl  reafon  againjl  the  imputation  of  Chrijl's 
righteoufnefs. 

C E C T.  I.  If  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  be 
^ not  imputable,  ( in  the  letter  of  it )from  one 
perfon  to  another , then  cannot  the  righteouf- ' 
nefs  of  Chrijl  be  fo  imputed  to  any  ?nan. 

But  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  is  not  imputa- 
ble from  one  perfon  to  another : 

Therefore  the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrift  is  not 
imputable  to  any  man  in  his  jullification. 

This  argument  was  mentioned  before,  chap. 
8.  built  upon,  Gal.  iii.  12.  The  reafon  of  this 
non-imputabilitv,  of  the  law-righteoufnefs,  we 
find  exprelfed  in  the  plain  words  of  the  law  lt- 
felf : a.\d  ttoihaa.i;-  avid  dvSfuvroi;,  IfcEToa  in  avloi$. 
i.  e.  The  very  man  that  hath  done  them,  fall  live 
by  them  [and  no  other. J 

Se£L  II.  But  it  will  be  objedled, 

If  the  tranfgreffion  of  the  law  be  imputable  from 

one 


[ 358  ] 

one  perfon  to  another,  then  may  the  righte. 
oufnefs  of  the  law  be  imputed. 

But  that  the  tranfgreffon  of  the  law  is  imputa- 
ble jrom  one  per [on  to  another , is  evident : be- 
cauft  the  Jin  of  Adam  in  eating  the  forbidden 
fruit,  is  imputed  to  his  pojlenty. 

To  the  former  propofition  I anfwer:  the  im- 
putablencfsof  the  tranfgreflion  of  the  law,  were 
it  oranted,  is  no  demonflration  of  the  like  im- 

t> 

putablene.fs  of  the  righteoufief,  or  obedience 
performed  unto  it. 

For  firfl,  in  the  tenor  of  the  law,  there  is  no 
fuch  emphatical  reftraint  of  the  guilt  or  pnnilh- 
merit  due  to  the  tranfgreflion  of  it,  to  the  p«  r- 
fon  of  the  tranfgreffor,  as  there  is  of  the  reward 
pronnled  to  the  obfervation  ol  it,  to  the  perfon 
ol  the  obferver;  as  we  heard  in  Gal.  iii.  12. 

b •Vjciricra.c  ccula  ayb^-TTo',  rile  very  man  that  hath 
done  them,  fiall  live  by  them.  It  is  no  where 
found  on  the  other  hand:  bind  b iracaQkc  ajx 
cziOfc, m?,  the  very  man  that  tranlgrefleth  them, 
fliall  d ie  for  his  tranfgreflion.  As  if  God  in  giv- 
ing the  law,  had  left  hinifeli  a libertv  to  derive 
the  guilt  and  punifhmcnt  due  to  the  tranfgreflion 
of  it.  as  far  as  ho  pleafed  : but  had  no  intent  to 
extend  the  reward  promifed  to  the  fulfilling  it, 
beyond  the  perfon  of  the  fulfiller. 

Seft.  III.  Secondly,  wheieas  it  mavbe  afked, 
what  fhould  make  fuch  a difference,  between  the 

obedience 


r 359  ] 

obedience  of  the  law,  and  the  tranfgreffion  of  it, 
that  the  former  fhould  not  be  as  imputable  as  the 
fatter  ? I arifwer : fin  or  difobedience  to  a law 
is  ever  greater,  in  way  of  demerit,  than  obedi- 
ence to  a law  is,  in  deferving  a reward.  One 
that  takes  a purfe,  or  murders  a man  on  the  high- 
way,, is  more  deferving  of  punifhment,  than  he 
is  of  reward,  that  buffers  men  to  travel  peacea- 
bly. And  though  he  that  reiufeth  to  pay  a debt 
where  it  is  due,  may  defervedly  be  calf  into  pri- 
fon  : yet  it  doth  not  follow,  that  he  who  payeth 
at  his  day,  deferves,  to  be  exalted  to  a throne. 
So  might  Adam:  by  his  tranfgrelli  m merit  death 
and  condemnation  to  himfelf  and  pofteritv  : and 
yet  not  have  merited  life  and  falvation  to  both, 
by  his  obedience.  The  reafon  is  evident : be- 
caufe  if  he  had  obeyed  the  law,  he  had  only 
done  what  was  his  duty  to  do.  And  the  greater 
debtor  Adam  was  to  God,  the  more  and  greater 
engagements  were  upon  him,  to  make  good 
that  obedience  which  God  required  o(  him : 
the  lefs  meritorious  had  this  obedience  been,  in 
cafe  Adam  had  performed  it : and  the  more  de- 
meritorious alfo  was  his  difobedience.  There- 
fore that  confequetice, 

If  the  Uanfgrejjion  of  the  law  be  imputable , then 
is  the  obedience  imputable  alfo,  is  fo  far  from  he- 
me folid,  that  the  imputablehefs  . of  the  tranf- 
greffion of  it,  rather  overthroweth  the  imputa- 
blenefs  of  the  obedience  of  it,  than  eftablifheth 
it.  For  the  more  imputable,  that  is,  pum finable, 

the 


[ 36o  ] 

the  tranfgreffion  of  it  is,  the  lefs  imputable,  that 
is,  rewardable,  is  the  obedience  of  it. 

Notwithstanding,  becaufe  the  imputation  of 
Adam's  fin  to  his  pofterity,  is  frequently  pro- 
duced to  prove  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righle- 
oufnefs ; I {hall  lay  down  with  as  much  plainnefs 
as  I can,  in  what  fenfe  the  fcriptures  counte- 
nance that  imputation.  The  fcriptures  own  no 
other  imputation  of  Adam’s  fin  to  his  pofterity, 
than  of  Chrift’s  righteoufnefs  to  thofe  that  be- 
lieve : the  righteoujnefs  of  Chrift,  is  imputed , or 
given  to  thofe  that  believe,  not  in  the  letter  of  it, 
but  in  bleftings,  privileges  and  benefits,  pur- 
chafed  of  God  by  the  merit  of  it.  So  the  fifi  of 
Adam  is  imputed  to  his  pofterity,  not  in  the  let- 
ter of  it,  (which  is  the  imputation  commonly 
argued,)  but  in  the  demerit  of  it,  i.  e.  in  the 
curfe  or  puni fitment  due  to  it.  Therefore  as 
concerning  this  imputation  of  Adam’s  fin,  I an- 
fwer, 

Firft,  the  fcripture  no  were  affirms,  either 
the  imputation  of  Adam's 'fin  to  his  pofterity,  or 
of  the  righteoujnefs  of  Chrift  to  thofe  that  be- 
lieve : neither  is  fuch  a manner  of  fpeaking  any- 
ways agreeable  to  the  language  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  For  in  the  fcriptures,  wherefoever  the 
term  imputing  is  ufed,  it  is  only  fpoken  of  fome- 
thing  of  the  fame  perfons,  to  whom  the  imputa- 
tion is  faid  to  be  made,  and  never  to  my  remem- 
brance,) to,  or  of  any  other  thing  of  anothers.  So 
Rom.  iv.  3.  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was 

imputed 


[ S61  ] 

imputed  to  him  for  right  edifnfs,  i.  e.  hisownbe- 
living  was  imputed  to  him,  not  another  man’s. 
So  verfe  r).  but  to  him  that  worketh  not  but  believ- 
eth,  }a±  faith  is  imputed  to  him  for  righteoufnefs. 
-So  Pfal.  cvi.  30,  31.  Pkmeas food  up. and  executed 
judgment,  and  that  (aft  of  his)  was  imputed  to 
him for  righteoufnefs.  i.  e.  received  a teftimony 
from  God  of  being  a righteous  aft.  So  again, 
2 Cor,.v.  19.  not  imputing  their  trefpaffes,  (their 
own  trefpaffes)  unto  them. 

Seft.  IV.  Secondly, when  athingisfaid  fnnply 
to  be  imputed  as  fin,  folly,  and  do  righteoufnefs, 
the  phrafe  is  not  to  be  taken  concerning 
the  bare  afts  of  the  things,  as  if  (for  example,) 
•to  impute  fin  to  a man,  fignilied  this,  to  repute  the 
man,  to  have  committed  a finful  aft,  or,  as  if 
to  impute  folly,  were  fimply  to  charge  a man  to 
have  done  foolifhly  ; but  when  it  is  applied  to 
things  that  are  evil,  and  attributed  toperfons  that 
have  power  over  thofe,  to  whom  the  imputation 
is  made,  it  fignifieth,  the  charging  the  guilt  of 
what  is  imputed,  upon  the  head  of  the  perfon 
to  whom  the  imputation  is  made,  with  an  intent 
of  inflifting  fome  condign  punifhment  upon 
him.  So  that  to  impute  fin  (in  feripture  phrafe) 
is  to  charge  the  guilt  of  fin  upon  a man  with 
a purpofe  to  pumfii  him  for  it.  Thus  Rom,  v. 
13.  Sin  is  [aid  not  to  be  imputed,  while  there  is 
no  law.  The  meaning  cannot  be,  that  the  aft 
which  a man  doth,  whether  there  he  a law  or  no 
law,  fhould  not  be  imputed  to  him.  The  law 
Vol.  XXII.  Q doth 


[ 36*  H 

doth  not  mate  any  aft  to  be  imputed  to  a mart, 
•which  might  not  as  well  have  been  imputed  with- 
out it.  But  the  meaning  is,  that  there  is  no  pu- 
nilhment  infliftedfor  anything  done  but  only  by 
virtue  of  the  law  prohibiting.  In  which  refpeft 
the  law  is  faid  to  be  thejlrength  of  fin,  becaufe  it 
gives  a condemning-  power  againft  the  doer,  to 
that  which  otherwife  would  have  had  none, 
i Cor.  xv.  56.  So  2 Sam.  xix.  19.  When  Ski- 
mei  prayeth  David  not  to  impute  zviekednefs  unto 
him,  his  meaning  is  not,  to  defire  David  not  to 
think  he  had  done  wickedly  (for  himfelf  con- 
feffeth  this  in  the  very  next  words,)  but  not  to 
in'flift  the  punifhment  which  that  wickednefs 
deferved.  So  when  David  himfelf  pronounceth 
the  man  bleffed,  to  whom  the  Lord imputeth  not fn , 
his  meaning  is  not,  that  there  is  any  man,  whom 
the  Lord  would  not  repute  to  have  committed 
thofe  afts  of  fin  which  he  has  committed  : but  j 
that  fuch  are  bleffed,  on  whom  God  will  not 
charge  the  demerit  of  their  fins  in  the  punifh-  ) 
merit  due  to  them.  So  yet  again,  (to  forbear 
farther  citations)  2 Cor.  v.  19,  when  God  is  faid,  i 
not  to  impute  their  /ins  unto  men,  the  meaning  is  fl 
not,  that  God  fhould  not  repute  men  to  have  a 
committed  fuch  and  fuch  fins  againfl  him  : but  ' 
that  he  freely  difcharged  them  from  the  punifh- 
ment due  to  them.  By  all  which  teftimonies, 
concerning  the  conftant  ufe  of  the  term  imputing 
it  is  evident,  that  propofition,  that  the  tranfgref 


C 363  ] 

fion  of  the  law  is  imputable from  one  perfon  to  mo*, 
ther , hath  no  foundation  in  fcripture. 

Se£L  V.  And  therefore  thirdly  (and  laftly)  to 
come  home  to  the  imputation  of  Adam’s  fn  to  his 
poferity,  I anfwer, 

Firft,  that  either  to  fay  that  the  rigkteovfnefs 
of  Chrift  is  imputed  to  his  pofterity  (of  believers) 
or  the  fin  of  Adam  to  his,  are  both  expreffions 
unknown  to  the  Holy  Ghoft  in  the  fcriptures. 
There  is  neither  word,  nor  fyllable,  nor  tittle  of 
any  fuch  thing  to  be  found  there.  But  that  the 
faith  of  him  that  believeth , is  imputed  for  r.ightc- 
oufnefs,  are  words  which  the  Holy  Ghoft  ufeth. 

But  fecondly,  becaufe  I would  make  no  ex- 
ception againft  words,  farther  than  neceffit'y  en- 
forceth,  I grant,  there  are  expreffions  in  fcrip- 
ture concerning  both  the  communication  of 
Adam’s  fin  with  his  pofterity,  and  the  righteouf 
nefs  of  Chrift  with  thofe  that  believe,  that  will 
fairly  enough  bear  the  term  of  imputation,  if  it 
be  rightly  underftood,  and  according  to  the  ufe 
of  it  in  fcripture  upon  other  occafions.  But  as 
it  is  commonly  underftood  by  many,  it  occafions 
much  error. 

Se£l.  VI.  Concerning  Adam’s  fin  or  difobe- 
dience,  many  are  faid  to  be  made  fnners  by  it. 
Rom.  v.  19.  And  fo  by  the  obedience  of  Chrift, 
it  is  faid  (in  the  fame  place)  that  many  fiall  be 
made  righteous.  Now  if  when  men  fay,  Adam’s 
fin  is  imputed  to  all  unto  condemnation,  their 
meaning  be  the  fame  with  the  Holy  Ghoft’s, 
O 2 when 


[ 3«4  ] 

■when  he  faith,  that  by  the  difob  edience  of  cue, 
many  were  made  {inner s,  there  is  no  harm  done : 
but  it  is  evident  by  what  many  fpeak,-  that  the 
Holy  Ghoft  and  they  are  not  of  one  mind, 
touching  the  imputation  or  communication  of 
Adam’s  fin  with  his  pofferity,  but  that  they  dif- 
fer as  much  in  meaning,  as  in  words.  If  when 
they  fay,  Adam’s  fin  is  imputed  to  all  unto  con- 
demnation,, their  meaning  be  this,  that  the  guilt 
of  Adam’s  fin  is  charged  upon  his  whole  pofle- 
rity,  or  that: the  punifhment  of  Adam's  bn,  re- 
dounded from  his  perfon  to  his  whole  pofferity, 
r.  main  part  of  which  punifhment  lieth  in  that 
original  defilement  wherein  they  are  all  conceiv- 
ed and  born,  and  whereby  they  are  made  truly 
finners  before  God : if  this  be  the  meaning  of  the 
term,  imputation , when  applied  to  Adam  s fin, 
let  it  pafs.  But  if  the  meaning  be,  that  finful 
aft  wherein  Adam  tranfgrefled  when  he  ate  the 
forbidden  fruit,  is  in  the  letter  of  it,  imputed  to 
his  pofferity,  fo  that  by  this  imputation  all  his 
pofieriry  are  made  formally  finners:  this  is  an 
imputation , which  the  feripture  will  never  juf- 
tify. 

Seft.  VII.  The  equity  of  Crod  involving 
Adam’s  pofferity,  in  the  punifhment  due  to  his 
firfl  fin,  feemeth  to  be  founded  upon  two 
things:  firfl,  the  finfulnefs  of  the  fin  ; fecondlv, 
the  fpecial  relation  that  his  pofferity  had  to  his 
perfon. 

Firfl,  for  the  fulnefs  of  the  finfulnefs  of  it. 

It 


/ 


L*  3 6o  1 

It  is  almoft  inconceivable  what  aggravations  it  is 
capable  of,  ii  all  its  circumftances  were  confl- 
dered:  but  thefe  I do  not  now  purpofe  to  in- 
lift  upon. 

Se£I.  VIII.  Only  I defire  to  mention  one, 
which  is  obvi-cus.  The  fin  of  Adam  hath  this 
peculiar  finfulnefs  in  it.  The  wicked  angels 
were  intrufted  but  with  their  own  portions,  and 
therefore  when  they  finned,  they  finned  to  them- 
felves,  they  finned  away  only  their  perfonal 
bleflednefs.  But  Adam  had  a deeper  engage- 
ment upon  him  : he  had  the  eftates  oi  all  his  pof- 
t'erity  put  into  his  hand  ; and  knew,  that  if  he 
finned  he  Ihould  draw  thoufands,  thoufands  of 
fouls  after  him  into  the  fame  perdition : and 
thofe  fuch,  the  things  ofwdrofe  peace  and  welfare 
the  law  of  nature  itfelf  obliged  him  to  provide  for, 
with  more  care  and  tendernefs,  than  of  all  other 
creatures  whatfoever  : beins[  thofe  that  were  to 
he  his  own  children,  even  jlejli  of  his  jleJJi,  and 
bone  of  his  bone.  If  it  be  a fore  brand  upon  Je- 
roboam, that  he  made  Ifrael fin  : and  yet  this  was 
no  other  making  to  fin,  than  what  might  have 
been  refilled  bv  thofe  that  were  drawn  to  fin  by 
him  : then  muft  it  be  a far  forer  charge  upon 
Adam,  who  made  not  Ifrael  only,  but  the  whole 
world  to  fin  : and  that  in  a way.  again!!  which 
there  was  not  the  leaf!  power  in  the  world  to  malte. 
any  refiftance  or  oppofition. 

Now  the  exceeding  finfulnefs  of  this  fin  of 
Adam  being  granted,  it  cannot  be  unequal  in 

Q 3 God, 


[ 366  ] 

God,  to  inflift  an  anfwerable  punifliment  upon 
it. 

Seft.  IX.  Confider  we  fecondly,  the  peculiar 
relation  of  the  pofteritv  of  Adam  to  his  perfon. 
His  pollerity  was  fo  nearly  and  intirely  his,  when 
the  fin  was  committed,  and  the  judgment  firft 
poured  out  upon  it,  that  they  were  in  his  per- 
fon, and  as  it  were  a part  of  it.  The  time  was, 
when  all  men  were  but  one  Adam,  as  Agufline 
expreffeth  it : t Adam  erat  nos  omnes.  i.  e.  Adam 
was  us  all.  And  again,  Omnes  eramus  Me  units 
Adam.  i.  e.  W e were  all  that  one.  Adam.  And 
the  whole  generation  of  mankind,  is  but  AJam, 
or  Adam’s  perfon  expounded  at  large;  and  may 
with  as  good  propriety  be  called  Adam,  as  the 
nation  of  the  Jews  is  often  times  in  feripture 
called  Jacob.  It  being  then  granted,  firfi,  that 
the  fin  of  Adam  was  exceedingly  finful : it  can- 
not be  thought  unequal,  that  his  pofteritv  fhould 
be  arrefted  alfo,  and  taken  into  communion  with 
his  perfon  in  the  punifhment  inflifted  ; if  we 
confider  the  peculiar  nearnefs  and  relation  be- 
tween his  perfon  and  his  pofterity. 

Seft.  X.  Thefe  things  then  confulered,  it  is 
evident,  that  the  imputation  of  Adam’s  fin,  or 
rather  of  the  aft  of  Adam's  fin,  (for  otherwife  it 
is  nothing  to  the  purpofe)  to  his  pofterity,  is  net 
the  ground  of  the  punifliment  that  is  fallen  upon 
his  pofterity  for  it ; (neither  is  there  the  leafl 
tittle  in  the  feriptures  founding  that  way)  but 

chiefly 


+ Auguftine  Dt  Ptccai.  Merit,  cl  Remijf, 


[ 367  ] 

chiefly  that  fpecial  communion  they  had  with 
him.  in  his  nature,  (having  then  their  feveral  be- 
ings in  his  loins)  and  confequc-ntly  in  his  fin  ; 
in  whom  all  have  finned . Therefore  the  ground 
of  that  punifhment  or  condemnation  which  is 
come  upon  all  men,  is  not  .the  imputation  of 
Adam's  fin,  but  if  any  imputation  be  in  this 
cafe,  it  is  of  every  man’s  own  . fin  in  Adarrr;  for 
it  was  not  Adam  alone  that  finned,  but  all  f lined 
in  him. 

Sett.  XI.  The  fum  is. this:  i.  That  the  im- 
putablenefs  of  the  tran fgrejfon  of  the  law  (if  it 
were  granted) from  one  perfon  to  another , doth  not 
evince  the  imputability  of  the  obedience  of  the  law. 
2.  1 hat  in  fcripture,  there  is  nothing  / 'aid  to  be 
imputed  to  any.  man  but  that  which  was  his  before 
the  imputation.  3.  That  to  impute,  doth  never 
fgnify  the  bare  af cubing  any  aft good  or  bad  to  any 
man:  but  a dealing  by  the  perfon  to  whom  the  im- 
putation is  made,  according  to  the  merit  or  demerit 
officii  an  aft.  4.  That  therefore,  neither  the  aft 
of  any  mans  obedience,  nor  dif obedience,  can  either 
in  fcripture  language, or  propriety  ojfpeech , befaid 
to  be  imputed  to  any  other  than  to  the  perfuns  tkem- 
Jelves,  obeying  and  difobeying.  g.  That  the  fcrip- 
t nres  are  altogether  file nt  concerning  the  imputation 
of  Adam's  fn  to  his  pcflerity.  6.  That  reafon 
itfdf  demonfrates  anyfuch  imputation  to  be  nofuffi- 
cient  ground,  why  God  in  a way  of  equity  might  in- 
volve Adam’s  poflerity  with  his  perfon,  in  the 
puniflment  due  to  his  fin.  7.  And  laftly,  That 

there 


[ 368  ] 

there  are  other  grounds  more  agreeable  to  reafon 
and  to  the  principles  oj  equity,  fo  that  there  is  not 
the  leajl  necejjity  to  admit  the  imputation  of  Adams 
Jin  in  the  fenfe  priffed  by  our  aAver Juries. 

The  conclufion  refulting  from  thefe  particu- 
lars is,  that  the  imputation  (f  Adam's  Jm  to  his 
poflenty , is  no  better  argument  to  prove  the  impu- 
tation of  Chrijds  right eoujnefs  to  believers , than 
the  imputation  oj Chrijp s nghteoufneJ's>  is  to  prove, 
the  imputation  of  Adam’s  fin  : and  that  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  (in  the  fenfe  urged  and 
oppofed)  have  any  footing  either  in  reafon  or 
religion . 


The  End  of  the  Twenty-Second  Volume* 


THE 


CONTENTS 


Of  the  T wenty-S econd  Volume. 


Page 

Free  thoughts  on  theprejent jlate  cf public  affairs  g 
Thoughts  upon  liberty  — — 38 

Thoughts  concerning  the  origin  of  power  — 

Some  remarks  on  Mr.  HillT  review  of  all  the 

detinues  taught  by  Mr.  John  Wefiey  72 
Extratl  of  Mr.  Baxter  h aphorifms  of  juftifi- 

cation  — — *42 

Atreatifeon  jufifeation  ; extr  aided  from  Mr. 

John  Goodft’in.  — 1Q^ 


' ■ ' i 4 ■ 


r 


g,  • V. 


. 


Date  Due 


FEB  8 '05 

Demco  293-5 


