a 


at 


oe 


i 


‘ er \ 


ig Y 
iS Hi i 


orthe ~ 


pirit 


5 Five Addresses 


Ws : on. A. IRONSIDE. 
‘ Author of “Notes on Proverbs: " “Notes” on the Minor Prophets;”’ 


R¢ “Praying in the Holy Spirit; “The Four Hundred Silent Years;” 
a “Lectures on Daniel;” MLectures' on the Revelation,” etc., etc. 


7. LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, BIBLE TRUTH DEPOT, 
: 1 EAST 13th STREET _ 
_NEW YORK — 


Paper, 20 cts.; cloth, pod 15 cts. 


XN OIONOS 


TENAOTEN 


Wu 


x = 


rey 


{ = “A 7 i 
ee aah a I eS CSE IE POE APES DID IODA SOT ET DEY SET AST EEE 


"? 


Nie: 


OXNVENIr 


= 


Sivextvetvert 


TAN TOX 


it aNti 


7a 


IOS 


: 730 Tuleute ¢ 


MINNEAPOLIS, MINN.: 
_ Jj. H. FLEMING, Bible Truth Depot, 


DETROIT, MICH.: 
CENTRAL BIBLE BOOK & TRACT CO. 
703 Fine Arts Building. (55 W. Adame St.) 


ST. LOUIS, MO.: 
FAITHFUL WORDS PUBLISHING CO. 
2933 Park Avenue 


BOSTON, MASS.: 
NEW ENGLAND BOOK & TRACT COo., 
213 Nottingham Bldg., 25 Huntington Ave. 


TORONTO, CANADA: 
HOME FRIEND OFFICE : Sous 
418 Church Street ewe 


LONDON, W., ENGLAND: 
WILLIAM BLATCHLEY 
27 Lancefield Street 


é CHRISTCHURCH, NEW. ZEALAND: 
tp G. W. PLIMSOLL 
84 Manchester Street 


SYDNEY, N.S. W., AUSTRALIA: 


BIBLE, BOOK & TRACT DEPOT, ; 
182 Elizabeth Street. . 


The Holy Spirits Mission — 
to the World _ 


WILL ask you to turn to-night to the 16th 
chapter of the Gospel of John—7th to 11th 
verses. 


“Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you 
that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not 
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him unto you. 
And when He is come, He will reprove the world of sin, and 
of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they be- 
lieve not on Me; of righteousness, because I go to my Father, 
and ye see Me no more; of judgment because the prince of 
this world is judged.” 


We have here succinctly depicted for us by our 
Lord Himself the special mission of the Holy Spirit 
to a lost world. Observe that the Spirit’s presence 
on earth during the present dispensation is declared 
’ by Christ to be more important than His remaining 
here. He says, “It is expedient for you that I go 
away.” We might naturally have thought that it 
would have been far better if He, the divine Man, 
could have remained in this scene, going about teach- 
ing and instructing men, making known to them the 
love of God, and declaring the righteousness that 
_ men are responsible to render in response to that 
love. But in this we would be wrong, for our Lord 
Jesus did not come to this world simply as a Teacher. 
He did not come merely to be the great Exemplar. 
He does not save men by His life before the cross; 
He saves by His death. 


2 The Mission of the Holy Spirit. 


Our Saviour came into this world to die. He was 
made a little lower than the angels with a view to 
the suffering of death. He made this very clear 
when He said to Nicodemus, ‘“‘As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of 
Man be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” Else- 
where He declared He came “‘to give His life a ran- 
som for many.” And yet death had no claim on Him. 
We are told that, “Sin when it is finished bringeth 
forth death,” but He was the absolutely sinless One. 

He was therefore not naturally subject to death. 
Had He so elected He might have lived on as the 
Prince of Life—the deathless One. In one sense it 
was as great a miracle for Him to die as to be raised 
from the dead. He says, “No man taketh my life 
from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power 
to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. 
This commandment have I received from my Fa- 
ther.” And so it was expedient that He should go 
away; and He must go by the way of the cross— 
there to give His life a ransom for many. 

But even apart from this, it was expedient that 
He should go away that the Comforter might come. 
If He had remained on earth as He was before 
His death and resurrection, He must necessarily 
have been localized. As man He could not have been 
in more than one place at one time. When Lazarus 
lay so ill in Bethany, and the sorrowing sisters 
yearned for Christ’s presence, He was away in the 
north of the land. They sent a message to Him say- 
ing, “He whom Thou lovest is sick.” But days 
elapsed ere Jesus reached Bethany, and before He 
arrived Lazarus had died. Thus, if He had remained 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World 3 


on earth He could not have been in Palestine and in 
America at the same time. He might have gone 
from place to place all through the years, but mil- 
lions never would have seen His face nor heard His 
voice. Therefore it was expedient that He should 
go away, that He should return to that heaven from 
whence He came. Upon His ascension to the right 
hand of the Father He sent down the Holy Spirit, 
another divine Person, one of the Eternal Trinity, to 
carry on the work that Christ began. And because 
the Holy Spirit never became incarnate, never took 
a human body, He can be in every place at one time. 

Notice that this does not in the slightest degree 
dim the truth of His personality. Our Lord in 
speaking of Him uses the masculine pronoun. He 
constantly refers to “Him” as a divine Person, who 
as a living Person could do the things that Jesus said 
He would do. Now what was His special mission to 
be? Jesus says, “When He is come He will reprove 
the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judg- 
ment.” This is the purpose for which He came into 
the world. 

This word here rendered “reprove” is variously 
translated. he rec {ag given in the margin of our 
Authorized Version :° “convince,” and in other trans- 
ations “coiivie.* is used. It is the special mission 
of the Holy “p?rit to convict, convince, or to reprove 
the world o* sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. 

I think that many, when they use the word “con- 
vict,” have in their minds the producing of a deep 
emotional experience, intense sorrow and anguish 
because of sin. In fact, I believe this is the way it 
is generally used. A man attends a gospel meeting, 
and as his sins are brought before him, he is moved 


4 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


to tears of penitence, and at last to confession and a 
complete breakdown before God. The sorrow accom- 
panying this experience is generally spoken of as 
“conviction,” and some people are troubled because ~ 
they have never passed through just such an experi- 
ence as this; and they even question the reality of 
their conversion to God, although trusting Christ, 
because they have not known a period of poignant 
grief and anguish because of sin. 

Far be it from me to make light of such an ex- 
perience. Yea, I would be thankful indeed to see peo- 
ple break down and weep bitterly over their neglect 
of Christ and their cold-hearted indifference to the 
gospel, and over their selfishness and wickedness. 
But there may be grief and tears without the con- 
viction of which our Lord speaks here, On the other 
hand this conviction may be thoroughly genuine 
where no tear is shed, and where little real anguish 
of spirit is known. All are not constituted alike, 
nor do all express their exercises in the same way. 
It would be a mistake therefore to limit conviction 
to an emotional breakdown. 

The word is really a legal term. It has to do with 
the presentation of evidence that conveys with it the 
proof of wrong-doing. The Spirit of God comes to 
bring to bear upon the minds and consciences of men 
the great wrong they are doing to God by sinning 
against Him. Now when this wrong is brought home 
to a man’s conscience and he is really convinced of 
the evil of his way, he will be affected largely ac- 
cording to his disposition, or make-up, aS we say. 
Some men are exceedingly sensitive and easily moved 
to tears. Others are calm, cool, logical, and while 
perhaps even more deeply convinced than their emo- 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World 5 


- tional brethren, do not manifest it in the same way. 
God speaks to the spirit—to man’s intelligence; He 
does not address Himself merely to his heart, his 
soul, his emotional nature. Sentimentality as such 
has no real place in New Testament evangelism. 

In many quarters various kinds of efforts are made 
to move people to tears and to arouse the emotions 
through the use perhaps of music, sentimental solos 
and pathetic stories, and when people break down 
because of such tactics and make a religious con- 
fession they are registered as converts. But one 
might secure exactly the same results by having 
them witness a pathetic moving picture or attend 
a worldly concert where sentimental songs were 
beautifully rendered. 

What is intended here is that the judgment of the 
man should be convinced; and so God says, “‘Come 
now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: 
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white 
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall 
be as wool.” Now, if God is going to reason with 
men in a matter of this kind, He must of necessity 
show them what provision He has made to bring 
about this great end. His word elsewhere is, “I speak 
as unto wise men, judge ye what I say.” And the 
f.oly Spirit’s special work is to bring the word of 
tie living God to bear upon the minds and con- 
<ziences of men to convince them of sin, of right- 
eousness, and of judgment. 

An important point is, Of what sins does the Holy 
Spirit seek to convict men? Arewe tounderstand that 
He came from heaven to convict them of the injustice 
of over-reaching their neighbors; of trespassing up- 
on the rights of others; or of the sinfulness of living 


6 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


immorally, in an unclean, vile manner; or of the 
wickedness of transgressing against the well-being 
of society and violating human law? Is it of these 
sins that the Spirit of God came to convict men? 
Undoubtedly He will deepen the realization of the 
exceeding sinfulness of every sin; but primarily His 
work has not to do with matters of this kind. Every 
man’s natural conscience convicts him of such sins 
as I have mentioned. Men may pretend to excuse 
acts like these, but they know in their own hearts 
that they are doing wrong when they commit them. 
And in addition to conscience, man has the “fiery 
law” given at Sinai with its stern, “Thou shalt,” and 
“Thou shalt not.” This law, which is holy, just and 
good, makes sin exceedingly sinful, and thus con- 
victs the wrong-doer of his wickedness in violating 
its precepts. 

What then is the sin that the Holy Spirit princi- 
pally brings before the mind of men? Our Lord tells 
us, “Of sin, because they believe not on Me.” This 
is the one great damning sin—the one sin which, if 
unrepented of, shuts the door of heaven in a man’s 
face. Listen, my friend, your sins and iniquities, 
however great, or how many they may have been, do 
not of themselves shut heaven’s door to you. And 
for this reason; when Christ gave Himself a ransom 
on Calvary’s tree, “Jehovah laid on Him the iniquity 
of us all.” There He made a full and complete satis- 
faction to the righteous claims of the throne of God © 
—made a perfect propitiation to Divine Justice for 
all the sins of which men could possibly be guilty. 
Christ thereby becomes an available propitiation for 
the whole world. And if you are ever shut away 
from the presence of God it will not be because you 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World Tq 


came into this world a sinner, nor will it be because 
Adam sinned and you inherited certain evil tenden- 
cies. It will be, not only because you have your- 
self transgressed, or been guilty of grave offences 
against the laws of God and man, but because, though 
- God had provided a way of salvation for you, you 
deliberately turned away from it and refused the 
Saviour who died that you might live. 

Hear His own words in regard to this as recorded 
in the 8d chapter of John’s Gospel, verses 17 and 18: 


“For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the 
world; but that the world through Him might be saved. He 
that believeth in Him is not condemned; but he that believ- 
eth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed 
in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” 


This then is the condemnation: God has provided 
a ransom, but men, alas! refuse His mercy, and 
thus go down to eternal woe —“loving darkness 
rather than light, because their deeds are evil.” In 
thus refusing Christ they must in the final day of 
judgment give an account to God each for his own 
individual sins. They shall be judged “every man 
according to his works.” On the other hand if they 
believe in the Saviour whom God has provided, their 
sins are put away, and they can look forward with 
perfect confidence to the day when God will judge 
the world in righteousness, knowing that their judg- 
ment is already passed, for Christ has answered for 
them. 

The work of the Holy Spirit, then, is primarily to 
show men the enormity of their sin in rejecting the 
Lord Jesus Christ. A man may be guilty of break- 
ing every commandment in the decalogue, but if he 


8 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


comes to God in repentance and puts his trust in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, he will find that all his sins have 
been covered by the atoning work of the Cross, and 
he may be saved for eternity by simple faith in the 
One who died for his offences and lives again for 
his justification. He thus becomes a new creature 
in Christ Jesus, because born of God, and created 
unto good works, as the natural result of the new 
life communicated to him. 

On the other hand the man’s life may be outwardly 
respectable; he may be rated as a good, moral citi- 
zen; he may refuse to stoop to things despicable, dis- 
honorable, or unclean, yet he cannot escape the fact 
that he has sinned over and over again, and is there- 
fore unfit for the presence of God. But He, against 
whom he has sinned, has provided a Saviour for him, 
and if he lives and dies rejecting that Saviour then 
there is no forgiveness, either in this world or in 
that which is to come. The worst sin that any man 
or woman can be guilty of is to reject the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

A young woman came up to me at the close of an 
address some time ago and said, “I do not like the 
way you put things. You made me feel very uncom- 
fortable to-night. I have never knowingly done a 
wicked thing. I am respected by all my friends. 
No one can say a word against my character. The 
only thing that you yourself could object to is that 
I do not belong to any church, or care anything about 
Jesus Christ; and yet you class me with people who 
are living wickedly.” I said, “Suppose you came 
and told me something like this: ‘I have always been 
good and respectable. Nobody can say anything 
against me, except that, though I have the best 


The Holy Sypirit’s Mission to the World 9 


mother in the world, I do not care anything about 
her. I am utterly indifferent to her.’ What would 
you expect me to think of you?’ Oh!” she exclaimed, 
“T could not be a good girl and not love my mother!” 
“Well,” I replied, “I told you to-night of One who 
has loved you with a love such as no earthly mother 
ever knew; One who for your sake gave His life to 
ransom you from a danger which your finite mind 
cannot realize, and who now asks your trust and 
confidence, and you boldly say you care nothing 
about Him! What do you suppose God thinks of such 
indifference to His Son?” She hung her head and 
said, “I never thought of it like that.” And I had 
the joy a few nights later of seeing her humbly 
confess the Lord Jesus Christ as her own Saviour. 

But after all, where is the ideal character I have 
sketched? Where is the man who has never done 
anything vile or unclean? Who would dare say he 
has never stooped to aught that is debasing or dis- 
honorable? Moody used to say, ‘‘Character is what 
a man is in the dark.” My friend, if the record of 
all you have said or thought or done in the dark 
were suddenly flashed upon this wall, how long would 
you sit here facing it? Remember, sins of the mind 
are as evil in the sight of God as sins of the flesh. 
And as to all men He has declared, “There is none 
righteous, NO, NOT ONE. There is none that doeth 
good. ..they have all gone out of the way, they have 
all together become unprofitable” (Rom. 3: 10, 12). 

But it is for sinners such as these that Jesus died. 
How fearful the guilt then of the one who rejects 
Him, or neglects Him, and rushes headlong to the 
doom that sin deserves! 

And so, my hearer, the great question that the 


10 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


Spirit of God would now bring home to you is this: 
What relationship do you bear to Him who died on 
the cross?’ We read in the Word, “If any man love 
not our Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema, 
Maranatha.” These two untranslated words (one 
from the Hebrew and the other from the Syriac) are 
evidently put into the text by the Spirit of God to 
challenge attention and inquiry. The first means 
“devoted to judgment,” and the other means, ‘‘The 
Lord cometh.” If you persist in refusing to trust 
the Saviour, you must be devoted to judgment at the 
coming of the Lord. 

In the second place we read that the Holy Spirit 
has come to convict of righteousness. Here we have 
something that is perhaps a little more difficult to 
make clear. When a man realizes his sins, naturally 
the next thing of which he thinks is, “How can my 
sins be put away, and I obtain a rightousness in 
which I can stand without fear in the presence of 
a holy God?” This is what is made plain in the gos- 
pel. “Therein is the righteousness of God revealed.” 
It was sin that brought Christ to the cross; but hav- 
ing made full atonement there, having satisfied every 
righteous claim of the throne of God, righteousness 
itself demands that He who thus died shall be raised 
from the dead, and by resurrection vindicated of 
every charge. And so He, the righteous One, having 
suffered once for all for sins upon the cross, has been 
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, tri- 
umphant over death, and in righteousness has been 
seated as Man at God’s right hand in heaven. “Of 
righteousness, because I go to my Father and ye see 
Me no more.” My sin put Christ, the Son of God, 
on the cross, but God’s righteousness raised Him 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World 11 


from the dead and placed Him, the risen Man, beside 
the Father in heaven. I have no righteousness in 
myself, but believing in Jesus as my Saviour, the 
Spirit of God points me to that exalted Man on the 
throne of the Universe, and says to me, as it were, 
“On the cross it was your sin He bore; on the Throne 
He is your righteousness.” He who knew no sin 
was made sin-offering for us, “that we might be 
made the righteousness of God in Him.” 

In my judgment, the finest experience hymn in 
the English language is“Jehovah Tsidkenu.” It tells 
of God’s dealings with Robert Murray McCheyne— 
one of the most spiritual Scotch preachers of the last 
century. ‘Though he died a comparatively young 
man he left a name that is to-day held in reverence 
in thousands of Scotch homes because of his devotion 
to Christ. He was a well-brought up and carefully 
trained youth, whose outward life was without 
blame; in every way respectable, conscientious and 
well-informed; he knew his Bible, said his prayers, 
went to church, and was well-satisfied with his own 
righteousness, forgetting that Scripture has declared, 
“All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags” in God’s 
sight. 

While he was away at schoo! a message came tell- 
ing him of the sudden death of a very godly elder 
brother. He went home to the funeral, and upon 
reaching the house of mourning asked to be per- 
mitted to go alone into the room where lay the body 
of his dearly loved brother. As he stood there gazing 
upon the still, silent form he asked himself the 
question, “If it were I, where would my soul be?” 
The answer to his own question honestly given was, 
“Lost forever.” There and then he broke down, 


12 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


gave up all pretension to a righteousness of his own, 
and found in Christ risen and glorified that right- 
eousness which he celebrates in this little hymn. It 
is perhaps hardly necessary to say that ‘Jehovah 
Tsidkenu”’ means, ‘‘The Lord our Righteousness.” 
This is how he tells the story: 


“T once was a stranger to grace and to God; 
I knew not my danger, I felt not my load; 
Though friends spoke in rapture of Christ on the tree, 
‘Jehovah Tsidkenw’ was nothing to me. 


“T oft read with pleasure, to soothe or engage, 
Isaiah’s wild measure or John’s simple page; 
But e’en when they pictured the blood-sprinkled tree, 
‘Jehovah Tsidkenu’ seemed nothing to me. 


“Like tears from the daughters of Zion that roll, 
I wept when the waters went over His soul; 
Yet thought not that my sins had nailed to the tree 
‘Jehovah Tsidkenu’—’twas nothing to me. 


‘When free grace awoke me by light from on high, 
Then legal fears shook me—I trembled to die; 
No refuge, no safety, in self could I see: 

‘Jehovah Tsidkenu’ my Saviour must be. 


“My terrors all vanished before that sweet name; 
My guilty fears banished, with boldness I came 
To drink at the fountain, life-giving and free: 
‘Jehovah Tsidkenw’ is all things to me.” 


Have you learned this lesson? Have you, through 
the Spirit’s teaching, seen that you have no right- 
eousness of your own ?—that all your best deeds are 
stained with the corruption of your own heart? Has 
the Spirit of God then directed your eyes to that 
risen glorified Man at the Father’s right hand? Do 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World 18 


you realize that He could not be there if He had not 
completely settled the sin question to God’s satis- 
faction? He made Himself responsible for our sins 
on the cross, and He could not be in heaven to-night 
if He had not put them all away forever! But, 
blessed be His name, there He sits in highest glory, 
enthroned above all created intelligences, and He is 
Himself the righteousness of all who put their trust 
in Him. This is the righteousness which is of God 
through faith in Christ Jesus. It is of this that Paul 
speaks when he cries, “That I might be found in 
Him, not having my own righteousness which is of 
the law, but the righteousness which is of God by 
faith in Christ Jesus.” 

Now, what about practical righteousness as you 
go through this world? There is no power for it 
like heart-occupation with the risen Christ. Behold- 
ing Him changes us into the same image, from glory 
to glory. As He fills the soul’s vision we live to please 
Him. For He who is my righteousness is also my 
life from the moment I believe in Him; and this life 

will be manifested in holy living. I do not go back 
to the law’s demands for practical righteousness, for 
that law is “‘the strength of sin,”’ but Christ risen is 
the strength of holiness; and as I learn to know Him 
where He now is, I grow in His likeness from day to 
day. It is the Holy Spirit’s constant aim to occupy 
me with Christ there, that I may walk in the Spirit 
and not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. 

But now there is something more. The Holy 
Spirit eonvicts not only of sin and of righteousness, 
but of judgment. People often misquote, because 
they misunderstand, this verse. They say, “Of judg- 
ment to come.” But that is not it. That expression 


14 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


is used by Paul as he reasoned with Felix of right- 
eousness, of temperance, and of judgment to come; | 
and Felix trembled, as well he might. That is very 
proper in its place, but here the point is, that the 
Holy Spirit convinces of present judgment, for it 
says, ‘‘Because the prince of this world is judged.” 
The world judged Christ as unfit to live, and cried, 
‘‘Away with Him, crucify Him.” But by so doing it 
has condemned itself. The prince of this world did 
his utmost to circumvent God Himself by stirring up 
his dupes to demand that Christ be hanged on a tree. 
It was there that the Seed of the woman had His 
heel bruised by the serpent; but there the serpent’s 
head was bruised, for by His death Christ made 
void Satan’s power, and “delivered those who for 
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bond- 
age.” 
“His be the Victor’s name, 
Who fought the fight alone! 
Triumphant saints no honor claim— 
His conquest was their own. 


“By weakness and defeat 
He won the meed and crown; 
Trod all our foes beneath His feet 
By being trodden down. 


“Bless, bless, the Conqueror slain— 
Slain in His victory. 

He lived, He died; He lives again, 

For thee, His Church, for thee!” 


And so now that God has vindicated Christ, He 
has declared the whole world to be under judgment. 
This judgment is not yet executed, but it may soon 
be. It shall be when He is revealed from heaven in 


—_ 


The Holy Spirit’s Mission to the World 15 


flaming fire. Meantime the blessed gospel of the 
grace of God is sent into all the world, and when 
men receive it in faith they are brought out from 
under judgment, having passed from death unto life, 
and from the power of Satan unto God. 

The man of faith sees the whole world with all 
its pleasures and follies as a judged scene. He learns 
to look at it all as Lot looked at Sodom of old—a 
scene exposed to the wrath of God, though not yet 
executed; and faith enables him to say with Paul, 
“God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world is cruci- 
fied unto me and I unto the world.” 

It is blessed to see that we have not only found 
life through believing in Christ, but faith takes in 
the fact that we have died with Him to the world 
that crucified Him, and so we are no longer of the 
world, though in it, even as He is not of the world. 

A young man in the ardor of his first love said to 
an aged brother one day, “I am glad to tell you I 
have accepted life through Christ.” “That is very 
good,” replied the other; “now I trust you will also 
accept death with Him.” This was a new thought 
to the young convert, but as the blessedness of iden- 
tification with Christ in His rejection was opened 
up to him, he cried, as the tears filled his eyes, “‘Yes, 
I see it now; His death was mine, and I have died 
with Him to all the pleasures and follies of earth; 
and now I am to live for Him alone in this scene.” 
May the Lord grant that all our hearts may enter 
into this, for His name’s sake! 


"The Witness of the Spirit 


with me this evening, and to carefully note 
the context in each instance. 

These are the texts: first; Heb. 10: 15; “The Holy 
Ghost also is a witness TO us.” 2nd, 1 John 5: 10; 
‘He that believeth on the Son of God hath the wit- 
ness IN himself.” 8rd, Rom. 8:16; “The Spirit it- 
self beareth witness WITH our spirit, that we are 
the children of God.” 

I am very desirous to be used of God this evening 
to lead some bewildered soul out of confusion and 
perplexity of mind into the blessedness of settled 
peace with God. I am persuaded that there are few 
subjects on which Christians, generally, are so be- 
wildered as the teaching of Scripture concerning the 
witness of the Holy Spirit. Many think of it as an 
emotional experience, a happy feeling, a spiritual 
exhilaration, an. ecstatic state of mind, or a vision 
of some kind, to do for them what in their estimation 
the word of God alone cannot do, namely, give them 
a knowledge of acceptance in Christ. But all of 
these are wrong, and while some such subjective 
experiences may result from and follow the witness, 
none of these, nor all of them together, constitute 
that witness. : | 

In order to introduce my subject in a practical 
way, let me fell you a true story. Some years ago 
I was frequently invited to a certain western city to 
hold gospel meetings, and on each occasion I was 


I HAVE three texts which I desire you to read 


The Witness of the Spirit 17 


entertained by a dear, godly family, of which the 
husband and wife were both earnest and happy 
Christians, though both saved only a few years be- 
fore. It was always a joy to meet them, and to share 
with them in the precious things of Christ. 

But the last time I was at their home I was only in 
the house a few minutes when I saw that something 
was wrong. The wife was no longer the joyous be- 
liever she had been. Her face was gloomy and down- 
cast. She was plainly worried and anxious, and 
naturally her trouble was reflected in the face of her 
husband. The next morning, after he had gone down 
to business, she asked me if I would bring my Bible 
to the living-room and go into a question that was 
greatly exercising her; which I was, of course, glad 
to do. She looked nervous and distressed, and for a 
few moments did not speak. Her very fingers 
twitched, as a nervous person’s often do. Then she 
suddenly blurted out the question with intense vehe- 
mence, ““Have you the witness of the Spirit?” Iwas 
surprised, but replied calmly, “That is easily an- 
swered. J have had the witness for many years. 
Otherwise I would not dare preach to others as I 
do.” “Well,” she said sadly, ‘I haven’t, and I never 
realized it till recently. I have lost all my joy and 
I am afraid I am not saved, for I have never received 
the witness.” 

“This is very remarkable,” I said, “for I have 
heard you say many times you trusted Christ and 
rested on His word, and I have noticed how happy 
you were. How did you come to your present state 
of mind?” 

She then related an incident that had happened 
but a few weeks before. A peddler had come to her 


18 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


door, offering some kind of household ware, which 
she however did not need. But just as he was leav- 
ing she offered him a gospel tract. Upon noticing 
its title he exclaimed, “Oh, a tract! Thank you. 
Let me give you one of mine,” and he handed her a 
paper on some so-called Pentecostal experience, add- 
ing, as she accepted it, “Have you the witness of the 
Spirit, sister?’ She was confused by the question 
and hesitated ; then said, “I am not sure that I under- 
stand you. I know I am saved through the testi- 
mony of the Word of God. What do you mean by 
the witness?” 

“Do you mean to tell me you are a Christian and 
you do not understand about the witness?” he said. 
“You are deceiving yourself. If you had the wit- 
ness you would know it, and if you haven’t it you 
have never been converted.” 

He spoke so positively that she became greatly 
troubled, and she asked, “Well, what do you mean 
by the witness? How did you get it?’ Then he 
related a very stirring experience. According to 
his testimony he had been a professing Christian and 
a church-member for many years, but with no assur- 
ance of salvation. Recently he had attended some 
very wonderful meetings conducted by a Spirit-filled 
woman who wrought marvelous healings, and had 
much to say of the witness and of the baptism of 
the Spirit. He became convinced that what he lacked 
was “the witness;” so he went forward, fell on his 
knees with a throng of seekers at the close of the 
preaching, and prayed earnestly for the missing 
thing. He did not obtain it at the meeting, but late 
at night, on returning home, he was so agitated he 
went out to his barn, and there spent several hours 


The Witness of the Spirit 19 


crying out to God for the witness. “Suddenly,” he 
declared, “I got it.” 

“What did you get?” she gently inquired. “TI got 
the witness. It came like a ball of fire through the 
roof, and hit me in the breast and burned like fire. 
It burned out all the doubts and all the sin from my 
heart, and I knew then it was the Spirit, witnessing 
that I was a child of God. I have not had any desire 
for sin since, nor any sinful thought. Did you ever 
have anything like that?” 

“No,” she said, “I never have.” ‘Well,’ said he, 
“You must not think you are a Christian, then. What 
you need to do is to seek the witness, and don’t stop 
till you receive it.” 

She had been unhappy ever since, she said, and 
filled with doubt and uncertainty; and though she 
had prayed for “‘the witness” she did not get it. Then 
turning her anxious eyes on me, she exclaimed, ‘‘Did 
you have anything like that when you received the 
witness ?” 

“No, thank God, I did not!’ 

“Thankful you did not! What did you get then?’ 

“(Pll tell you; I received something much better 
than that. If a ball of fire had hit me I never could 
have been certain whether it came from God or 
whether it came from Satan. But I have a witness 

that is unmistakable, and I will gladly tell you about 
it. But which do you want first? Do you want the 
witness to you, or the witness in you, or the witness 
with you.” 

“Why,” she exclaimed, “I did not know there were 
three of them. Which comes first?” 

“A very good question,” I said, “and we will seek 
the answer in the word of God.” I then turned 


20 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


her to the 10th chapter of Hebrews, and put before 
her what I now want to bring to your attention. 
You will perhaps remember the theme of this pre- 
cious portion of the Bible. Having first established 
Christ’s superiority over angels, prophets and lead- 
ers of the old dispensation, the apostle then shows the 
transcendent character of the new covenant of grace, 
and of the one sacrifice of the cross as compared with 
the by-gone covenant and the many sacrifices of the 
old dispensation. He points out that those offerings 
could never perfect the conscience of the person who 
brought them, because it is impossible that the Ba 
of animals should cancel sin. : 


“Not all the blood of beasts 
On Jewish altars slain, 
Could give the guilty conscience peace, 
Or wash away its stain.” 


In those sacrifices offered year after year contin- 
ually, there was but a remembrance,a calling to mind 
again and again, of sins from year to year. They 
could not purge the conscience, as David says in Ps. 
51: “Thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I give it 

..Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.” 

All that the legal sacrifices could do was to bring 
the sin to mind. That is, when an Israelite brought — 
his offering he thereby confessed that he had sinned, © 
that his sin was an offence against the divine law, | 
and required propitiation. All these sacrifices but — 
pointed to Him that was to come—to Christ. 

Suppose you are in debt. Your creditor right- — 
fully demands payment, but you are unable to settle. 
The best you can do is to give your note for the 


The Witness of the Spirit 21 


amount. But does a note pay the debt? No; but 
the note is a calling to mind of the debt. If the note 
is renewed from year to year, the debt is uncancelled. 
It is a “remembrance again,” an acknowledgment 
made every time you give a new note. So with the 
sacrifices of old. But the face of the note constantly 
increases, owing to the unpaid interest, and the debt 
becomes larger all the time. 

Now, suppose a wealthy friend endorses the note 
for you. He pledges himself to pay, if you cannot. 
Ah, that changes the whole thing. When the note 
becomes due, your creditor collects from him, and 
you are free. 

My friends, Jesus did that very thing. He said, 
“Lo, I come (in the volume of the Book it is written 
of Me) to do thy will, O God.” By that He said, “I 
will be responsible. I will endorse all those notes. 
I agree to pay.” And He did! On Calvary’s cross 
He settled in full for every one who believes in Him. 
Old Testament believers looked forward to His com- 
ing. We look back to His cross. But all alike are 
“justified freely through His grace by the redemp- 
tion that is in Christ Jesus.” He settled the sin 
question. He did the will of God, and we read, “By 
the which will we are sanctified through the offering 
of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.” Thus every 
charge is cleared away; all iniquity is purged; for, 
“By one offering He hath perfected forever them 
that are sanctified.” Now observe, it is of this 
blessed fact that the Holy Spirit witnesses. 

Of this offering of Christ to cancel the debt of our 
sins we read thus: “‘Whereof the Holy Ghost is a wit- 
ness to us,’”’ and the apostle quotes from the proph- 
et Jeremiah this new covenant, with its grand cul- 


22 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


mination, “Their sins and iniquities will I remember 
no more.” This is the Spirit’s witness. It was He 
who caused Jeremiah to thus testify. The Scrip- 
tures are His testimony. He therein witnesses to us; 
we receive His witness, and thus have the assurance 
that our sins are gone, our conscience is purged, and 
our souls are free. Who would exchange God’s sure 
witness for a vision, a dream, or an emotional ex- 
perience? 

And, observe, you do not need to pray and plead 
with God to give you this blessed witness. It is there 
in the Word for you to believe. 

I am glad to tell you the lady with whose story I 
began, saw the truth of it, and she exclaimed, “Why, 
then I have had the witness for some years! How 
foolish 1 was to doubt.” 

I want to tell you of another case, sadder than this 
one. I was asked to call on a nearly distracted young 
mother who had the notion that she had committed 
the “unpardonable sin.” If I diagnosed her case 
correctly, she was really a believer; but some cloud 
had come in between her soul and God, and she had 
fallen into darkness. Unconfessed sin will often pro- 
duce this effect. I probed her to find out if this were 
the case. She said she had sinned, but had confessed 
all to God. Only, she could not get her joy back. 
Though she had prayed for six weeks the Lord would 
not answer, and she felt He had cast her off because 
she had no faith. She did not believe in Him, and 
He would not hear her cry. 

I tried to help her by turning to many scriptures, 
but she could not seem to fix her attention on any of 
them, and I began to feel it was a case for a phy- 
sician rather than a preacher. Finally, I felt utterly 


The Witness of the Spirit 28 


cast down myself, for I could not seem to do any- 
thing for her. Then I cried to God. My heart said, 
“Lord, what more shall I say to this woman?” Quick 
as a flash I thought of a new line of approach. I 
said, ‘“You tell me you don’t believe in Jesus, and so 
He won’t hear you, though you have been praying 
to Him for six weeks for help?’ She assented and 
added, “I want to believe, but I can’t. I don’t know 
how to get faith. I am afraid I have committed the 
unpardonable sin.” 

“Well,” I suggested, “if He has given you up, why 
don’t you try someone else?” 

‘““Why, who else is there to try ?” she asked. 

“Why not try the blessed Virgin Mary for a while 
at least? I have a Roman Catholic friend who says 
he never goes to Christ direct, but always to His 
blessed mother; hers is a tender woman’s heart, and 
he asks her to plead for him, for no one has so much 
influence with a son as his mother.” 

The lady was aghast! I knew she thought my 
words sacrilegious, but I wanted to rouse her, and I 
succeeded. ‘‘Why do you tell me to pray to the 
Virgin Mary?’ she sternly interposed. “She is only a 
woman. I cannot go to her. A human being can 
not save me.” 

“Ah! I see you feel the need of superhuman help. 
Then why not try the Archangel Michael? He is the 
great prince that stands for Daniel’s people. He is 
a very powerful being, and is the one who is going 
to drive Satan out of the heavenly places. You 
might pray to him for at least a week, and see if he 
will not help you.” 

She sprang to her feet with indignation, exclaim- 
ing, “I don’t understand you at all. I don’t believe 


24 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


in the Virgin Mary or in the Archangel Michael. 
They cannot save me. I would not pray to them.” 

“But,” I added, “you don’t believe in Jesus either.” 
Before I could finish she cut in, “Why, of course I 
believe in Him! What a foolI have been! There is 
no one else in all the universe I would think of going 
to but to Him. Oh, I see it now, I thought I had no 
faith, but I know I have, for I trust in Jesus only.” 

Together we dropped on our knees, and as the tears 
rolled down her cheeks she thanked Him for dying 
for her, and told Him she trusted Him alone. It was 
easy, then, to give her some precious portions of the 
Word to clear away her remaining difficulties. She 
received them in all simplicity, as the Spirit’s blessed 
witness. 

But I must now turn to the consideration of the 
second phase of my theme. Scarcely had the one of 
whom I told you first, seen the truth of the witness 
to us, when she looked up inquiringly and asked, 
“But is there not a passage that says the Lord will 
put the witness in us?” For reply I turned her to . 
1 John, chap. 5. This is another very wonderful por- 
tion, and again the great theme is the work of Christ. 
“It is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the © 
Spirit is truth.” And to what does He bear witness? 
To the person and work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
“This is He that came by water and blood, even Jesus 
Christ: not by water only, but by water and blood.” 

John was standing by the cross when the soldier 
pierced the Saviour’s side. “He that saw it bare 
witness,” he says. And it is he who recorded the 
striking fact that blood and water gushed forth. 
Years had gone since that memorable day, but the 
blood and the water had ever been associated in the 


The Witness of the Spirit 25 


apostle’s mind: blood for judicial, and water for 
moral cleansing. Now as he writes his epistle of 
light and love, he proclaims the power of the blood 
to cleanse from all sin before God, and the applica- 
tion of the water of the Word to cleanse from all de- 
filement day by day. And of this, he tells us, the 
Holy Spirit bears witness, 

It is important to observe that there are three 
words, “witness,” “record,” “testimony,” used in our 
Authorized Version in this fifth chapter, which are 
but various renderings of one Greek word. Read the 
entire passage using the word “witness” in each in- 
stance. How plain it becomes. God by the Spirit 
has borne witness to the atoning work of His Son. 
Then He tells us in verse 9 that if we receive the wit- 
ness of men, the witness of God is greater. Now, we 
do receive the witness of men. We believe what 
men tell us concerning things we have no means of 
proving, or searching out for ourselves. How much 
more should we receive and rest upon the witness of 
Him who cannot lie. 

Some object that, as it is written, “All men have 
not faith.” But it is sin persisted in that makes it 
impossible for men to believe God. ‘Faith cometh 
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” That 
is why we are told, “By grace ye are saved, through 
faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of 
God.” There must be divine testimony before there 
can be faith. And if God has sent His Word to you, 
you are responsible to believe it. Nay, you sin 
against light, and insult God to His face if you do 
not believe. The witness of God is that which He 
has witnessed by His Spirit in the Word concerning 
His Son. 


26 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


“He that believeth on the Son of God hath the 
witness in himself. He that believeth not God hath 
made Him a liar because he believeth not the wit- 
ness that God gave of His Son.” Now, look at this, 
and weigh it well. You either have the witness in 
yourself that God has given concerning His Son, or 
you are making Him a liar! Fearful alternative, 
yet terribly true! 

A Sunday-school teacher once asked her class of 
boys, “Is there any thing God cannot do?” All, save 
one, responded, ‘‘No, God can do everything.” She 
agreed to this, and was proceeding with the lesson 
when one lad exclaimed, “But, teacher, I know two 
things God cannot do!” “Oh, no,” she sweetly an- 
swered, “God is all powerful. There is nothing He 
cannot do.” | 

“But,” the boy persisted, “I know two things He 
cannot do.” 

“Well, what do you think God cannot do?” she 
asked. Confidently came the answer, “God cannot 
lie, and He cannot see my sins since they are covered 
by the blood of Jesus.” | 

Sometimes people say after listening to a gospel 
address, ‘I will try to believe.” Try to believe whom? 
Do you dare to talk of trying to believe God? What 
sinful impudence! What downright impertinence! 
He who cannot lie gives you His witness concerning 
His Son, and you tell Him you will try to believe! 
You either do believe Him, or you do not; and if you 
do not believe you make Him a liar. You treat His 
testimony as though it were unworthy of credence. 
“This is the witness, that God hath given to us eter- 
nal life, and this life is in His Son.” If you believe 
the message, you have eternal life, and you have the 


The Witness of the Spirit 27 


witness within, for God’s testimony is written in 
your heart. 

It is this engrafted word, received by faith, that 
produces the new birth. We are “born again, not 
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word 
of God, which liveth and endureth forever. ..and 
this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto 
you.” To believe the gospel is not simply to give 
mental assent to the facts recorded in the four Gos- 
pels, but it is to trust your soul to.the Christ of 
whom they speak. 

I cannot put my sin away, but the Spirit’s witness 
tells me that “Jehovah laid on Christ Jesus the ini- 
quity of us all.” I see myself included, and I rest 
upon that word. Thus I have the witness in myself. 
Who would exchange this unimpeachable witness 
for a vision of “a fiery ball,” or even of angels de- 
scending from heaven to assure him of salvation? 
Could I trust the word of an angel more than the 
word of the living God? And how could I be sure 
that the angel was not Satan himself transformed as 
an angel of light to deceive me? But the word of 
God can never mislead. It is a witness that cannot 
fail. I believe it, and I have it in my heart. 


But now I ask you to consider our third text. We 
turn to Romans, eighth chapter—that high table- 
land of truth—where I learn that there is no con- 
demnation to those who are in Christ Jesus, and no 
separation from the love of Christ that met us in 
our need and will never surrender to destruction the 
one that has fled to Him for refuge. 

In this chapter I am taught three marvelous truths; 
I am in Christ Jesus; the Holy Spirit dwells in me; 


28 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


and God is for me. Thrice-blessed am I since all 
these are true. 

The Holy Spirit, a divine Person, eternally one 
with the Father and the Son, comes to dwell in the 
believer. By Him I am sealed unto the day of re- 
demption. He claims me for Christ, and by Him 
I enter into communion with God. Apart from 
His indwelling I am not a member of Christ—“If 
anyone have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 
His.” But, having received Him by faith, He now 
abides within me. He is the anointing, and by Him 
I am led into the knowledge of the word of God. He 
opens up the treasures of divine truth. He takes up 
the things of Christ and shows them unto me. “He 
beareth witness with our spirits that we are the 
children of God.” But how? Is it by producing 
happy feelings, or ecstatic experiences? Again, No! 

Look at what follows: “And if children then heirs; 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ.” Now, 
how do I get this knowledge? By the Spirit’s wit- — 
ness. But how, or where? Once more we come 
back to the same truth we have seen before—by 
believing the word of God. I might fancy that my 
happy feelings witnessed that I was a child of God; 
but will happy feelings tell me I am an “heir of 
God, and a joint-heir with Christ?” No. It is only 
the word of God that can make these blessed facts 
known to my spirit. The Holy Spirit who indwells. 
the believer opens the Word to my spirit, and thus 
I am made to understand my present relationship to 
the Lord, and my high destiny. I learn that I, who 
once was an alien and an outcast, am now, through 
infinite grace, a child of God and joint-heir with 
Christ, for He says, ‘‘All things are yours, and ye are 


The Witness of the Spirit 29 


Christ’s, and Christ is God’s.”” Blessed witness this, 
filling my soul with exultant gladness and giving me 
songs in the night. 

By the Spirit I cry, “Abba, Father.” The indwell- 
ing Spirit produces within me a sense of filial re- 
sponsibility and privilege. Once I was afraid of 
God, now I love Him and delight to be in His pres- 
ence. I say with David, “It is good for me to draw 
near unto God.” And I know what David could not 
know in a past dispensation—that God is my Father 
and I am His child. But it is the Word that the 
Spirit uses to lead me into this blessedness. And 
the better I understand the Word, the more I will 
enjoy communion with my Father in the Spirit’s 
power. For by the Spirit I am able to look in God’s 
face and cry, “Abba, Father,’”’ knowing I have been 
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, and born 
of the Word and the Spirit. 

I have used the first person singular in these clos- 
ing words. May you, my hearers, each be able to do 
the same, thus rejoicing in the witness of the Spirit! 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 


“Now He which establisheth us with you in (or into) 
Christ, and hath anointed us, is God, who hath also sealed 
us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts” (2 
Corrs is 2122); 


tions of the Holy Spirit succinctly epitomized 
in a striking way. ‘There are four distinct 
phases of His work in and for the believer. 

First, establishment into Christ, which includes 
sanctification by the Spirit, new birth by the Spirit, 
and the baptism of the Spirit. 

Second, our anointing by the same Spirit, with 
which all His gifts are linked. 

Third, the sealing by the Spirit, insuring our full 
conformity to Christ in the day of the redemption 
of the body. 

And fourth, the earnest of the Spirit, which ne- 
cessarily involves the thought of the firstfruits and 
the filling of the Spirit. 

Let us look at each subject in the order given. 

Establishment into Christ is more than individual 
salvation, though it involves that, for the greater 
includes the less. The apostle says, ‘““He who esta- 
blisheth us with you into Christ,” which suggests 
the truth of the unity of the body, and so links with 
1 Cor. 12: 12,13: “For as the body is one, and hath 
many members, and all the members of that one 
body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ. 
For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, 
...and have been all made to drink into one Spirit,” 


ig these two verses we have the various opera- 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer: 31 


This is the great dispensational work of the Holy 
Spirit, the express purpose for which He was given. 
But ere He could form the body, there must be in- 
lividuals separated from the world and born from 
above, and it was the work of the Spirit to bring this 
about. He it is who sanctifies by using the Word of 
God to awaken the sinner; and by that same Word, 
oelieved, He produces the new birth. Born of water 
and of the Spirit is really born of the Word, which 
has become living in the soul by the direct operation 
of the Spirit, thus completely changing the ways. 
[t is the “washing of regeneration and renewing of 
the Holy Spirit.’ Peter writes, ‘“Being born again, 
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the 
word of God... and this is the word which by the 
gospel is preached unto you.” James tells us, “Of His 
own will begat He us by the word of truth.” And 
our Lord says, “It is the Spirit that quickeneth ; the 
flesh profiteth nothing.” 

The Holy Spirit sanctifies by exercising the soul 
of the unsaved one—brooding over him while still in 
the darkness, then the light shines in and the man 
lives unto God, as the Word is believed. 

This was true in all dispensations. Men ever 
needed a second birth to bring them into the family 
of God. “The flesh profiteth nothing ;” it could never 
be made acceptable to God. A new nature was a 
necessity, and this the Holy Spirit produced, acting 
in power, before He came at Pentecost to dwell in us, 
and abide with us here in our Lord’s absence. 

_ But on that memorable day He did a new work. 
He took up one hundred and twenty units (all born 
of God), and He baptized them into one body, thus 
forming the Church of the new dispensation. By 


32 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


this act He established them into the Christ, making 
them one body with their glorified Head, and link- 
ing them one with another in a union as close as 
members in the human body. The baptism of the 
Spirit is therefore collective,and,as I have remarked, 
dispensational. It is not something to be sought or 
prayed for, nor yet tarried for, since the body has 
already been formed. 

In the four Gospels and the first chapter of Acts, 
the baptism of the Spirit was yet future. In the 2d 
chapter of Acts the promise is fulfilled. In 1 Cor. 
12: 13 we have the only reference to the Spirit’s bap- 
tism after the 11th of Acts. It is a doctrinal state- 
ment to be believed, not an exhortation to seek after 
an experience. | 

Four times, as related in the Acts, special super- 
natural manifestations accompanied the reception of 
the Spirit, as various companies were incorporated 
into the assembly. In chapter 2 all were Jews; in 
chapter 8 the same blessing falls upon regenerated 
Samaritans, adding them to the body of Christ. In 
chapter 10 the nucleus of Gentiles is baptized into the 
same body. And in chapter 19 a remnant of John’s 
disciples are brought in. There is a special mir- 
aculous endowment in each instance to confirm the 
souls of the saints, and to make known the truth that 
all distinctions are done away in Christ, and there is 
but “one body and one Spirit, even as we are called 
in one hope of our calling.” 

What grace on God’s part to give this four-fole 
testimony in the beginning! But what folly fo 
Christians now to expect a duplication of these ini- 
tiatory manifestations. The body is formed; all be 
lievers have their part in it. And as any are sane. 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 33 


tified and born of the Spirit, they receive Him as 
the indwelling Guest, and are thus brought into the 
good of the Spirit’s baptism. | 

If some scriptures seem to indicate that the bap- 
tism of the Spirit is a blessing to be received gubse- 
quent to conversion, it is well to examine them care- 
fully, noting the context, and asking, “Was this 
spoken before or after Pentecost?”—for the differ- 
ence is immense; as a new dispensation began when 
the Holy Spirit descended to dwell in the believer. 

Let me mention several such passages and seek 
to help you to place them. Jesus said, “If ye then, 
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your 
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father 
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him” (Luke 
11:13). Many take this as their authority for seek- 
ing the gift of the Spirit by prayer. But this was 
spoken by our Saviour before the cross. The Father 
gave the Spirit at Pentecost; He does not now wait 
for us to ask Him to do go again; for the wondrous 
gift once given abides in the Church and indwells 
every believer, having baptized all into one body, 
as we have seen. 

What of the words, “He hath been with you, He 
shall be in you”? Does it not imply that some are 
only born of the Spirit, and others indwelt? When 
did Jesus so speak? Before or after Pentecost? 
You say, “Before.” Correct! And He there con- 
trasts the two dispensations. The Spirit was with 
believers before the cross, He is in them now. “If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 
His” (Rom. 8:9). 

But did not our Lord command His disciples to 
tarry till endued with power from on high? He 


34 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


did, and He particularly indicated where they were 
to tarry—‘“in Jerusalem.” No other place would do. 
For there the Spirit came, even as the Son came to 
Bethlehem. 

A gentleman said to me recently,“I have just come 
from a great tarrying meeting. Hundreds have been 
tarrying for many days at San José, California, wait- 
ing for the Holy Ghost.” I asked, “What authority 
did you have for that?” He replied, “Why, Jesus 
said, ‘Tarry in Jerusalem until ye be endued with 
power from on high.’ ” 

“Well, my friend,” I inquired; ‘are you not con- 
founding locations and time? You are over ten 
thousand miles too far away, and over eighteen hun- 
dred years too late.’”’” Observe: If some of the dis- 
ciples had “tarried” at Nazareth, and some at Beth- 
lehem, and others at Bethany, would the Holy Spirit 
have fallen on them on that Pentecostal morning? 
Surely not! The command was, “Tarry at Jeru- 
salem,” and as they waited there, like a rushing, 
mighty wind He came, sent from the Father and the 
Son to form the body of Christ, and to endue with 
power the waiting disciples that they might bear tes- 
timony to the risen Christ. Thus He established 
them into the Christ—making them members of His 
body. 

But let me not be misunderstood. I am not in- 
sinuating that it is a vain thing for any believer or 
any company of believers to wait on God for power 
to overcome the enemy and sound out the evangel. 
It is always well to be thus before Him. “They that 
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength.” 


This is true in all dispensations. But we wait, not | 
for Him to send the Spirit, for He is already here, — 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 35 


and by His baptism we have all been joined to the 
body. We need, however, to wait on God to show 
us any hindrance in our lives that may be restrain- 
ing His working in us to will and to do of His good 
pleasure. As we judge ourselves, and learn from 
our past failures to walk humbly and in self-distrust, 
we make room for the Holy Spirit to fill us with di- 
vine power, and to use us for the glory of God and 
the blessing of a needy world. 

But to tarry for the baptism of the Spirit is an evi- 
dence of utter ignorance of God’s dispensational 
ways. Remember, the only place where the baptism 
is definitely mentioned in all the epistolary portions 
of the New Testament is this one verse, namely, 
1 Cor. 12:18; and here it is distinctly spoken of as 
a past event, into the good of which we all have been 
brought. 

Trusting I have been able to make this important 
point clear, I pass on to the second phase of the 
Spirit’s work—the anointing. 

It may help us here to inquire: Who were anointed 
in Old Testament times? You who are familiar with 
your Bibles will at once reply, “Prophets, priests, 
and kings were anointed with oil to induct them into 
their offices.” And some will remember that the 
cleansed leper was anointed first by blood and then 
with oil, just as the priests were. 

The leper is the type of ourselves, unclean by sin, 
cleansed by blood, and anointed with the Spirit of 
God. We are anointed as “kings and priests unto 
God” (Rev. 1:6). : 

Our Lord was anointed without blood. He was 
the sinless One who needed no sacrifice for Himself, 
So we read, “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with 


36 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about do- 
ing good and healing all that were oppressed of the 
devil, for God was with Him” (Acts 10:38). This 
anointing took place immediately following His bap- 
tism in the Jordan when He presented Himself with- 
out spot to be our Saviour. On the cross He offered 
up Himself. This is to be distinguished from His 
offering Himself, or pledging Himself, to fulfil all 
righteousness on our behalf. As He came up out of 
the water the Holy Spirit descended like a dove, and 
it abode on Him, and the Father’s voice was heard 
declaring, “This is my beloved Son in whom I have 
found my delight.” Thus He was anointed—pointed 
out as the predicted Prophet, Priest, and King. 

He was the Prophet on earth, sealing His testi- 
mony with His blood. He is the Priest in heaven, 
ever living to make intercession for us. He is com- 
ing again to reign as the universal King. 

Now in a very precious sense we share this three- 
fold ministry. Anointed by the Spirit at our con- 
version to God, having been cleansed by the blood of 
Christ, we are empowered to speak for God on earth 
as His prophet-messengers. We are made priests, 
holy and royal, to enter into the holiest as purged 
worshipers, and to show forth His praises in the 
world. And we are to reign with Him as kings in 
the day of His power. 

But is this true of all believers, or only of a 
favored few? Surely, of all, as a careful study of 
1 John 2: 12-29 will make plain. In verse 12 the 
apostle addresses all believers as “children” whose 
sins are forgiven. The word “little” is better omitted. 


The term used has reference neither to size or age, 


simply children—those born into the family. 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 37 


In verse 13 he divides the children into three 
classes. There are, in the family of God, “fathers,” 
“young men,” and “babes.” Here the term used is 
properly translated “little children.” To these three 
classes he then addresses himself, giving to each a 
Separate message. It is to the babes he says, in 
_ verse 20, “Ye have an unction (or, anointing) from 

the Holy One, and ye know all things.” And again, 

in verse 27, while still addressing the youngest and 
feeblest of saints he writes, “But the anointing which 
ye have received of Him abideth in you, and ye need 
not that any man teach you, but as the same anoint- 
ing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is 
no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide 
in Him.” 
The anointing then is the portion of the babe in 
Christ; how much more of the young men and fa- 
thers. All Christians are anointed. In fact, this is 
involved in the very name divinely given them. 
Christ means the “anointed.” Christians are anoint- 
.ed ones, by the Spirit linked with their glorified 
Head. 
By the anointing our understanding is opened that 
We may understand the Scriptures and be kept from 
Satanic perversions of the truth. It is to the unre- 
generate in Laodicea that the Lord says, “Anoint 
thine eyes with eye-salve that thou mayest see.” This 
was their great need, as natural men, unable to 
comprehend spiritual things. . 

What real believers need is to learn to depend 
on the Holy Spirit, and thus profit by the anointing 
which abides in them. He delights to glorify Christ, 
and if there be but subjection of heart to Him, and 
a willing mind to be guided aright, He will preserve 


38 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


the simplest from error and lead them into all truth. 

I was in Los Angeles some years ago, and one 
evening was listening to a well-known “Russellite” 
setting forth his God-dishonoring teaching with 
great liberty of speech and a most dogmatic assur- 
ance of manner. Standing in the crowd was a 
plainly dressed colored man, humble in appearance 
and probably unlettered, who seemed to me to be 
listening with great interest. Fearing he would be 
deceived by the specious sophistries of the Restitu- 
tionist I remained, with the intention of trying to 
help him after the address was finished. But I found 
I was not needed, for he had better help than I could 
give. As the speaker concluded his harangue, a man 
stepped over to the colored brother, slapped him 
familiarly on the back and exclaimed, “‘Well, George, 
what do you think of that?” “That sure was some 
talk,” replied the negro; ‘‘Dunno when I’se heard so 
smart a man befo.’ ”—‘He certainly knocked the 
bottom out of all your old Baptist doctrines, didn’t 
he? He showed the churches are all wrong that be- 
lieve in the Trinity and the Deity of Christ, and all 
that stuff.’—‘“Yes, sah, he just tore up by the roots 
all I’se been believin’ fo’ yeahs.” ‘‘Well, I suppose 
you'll join his crowd now?” “No, sah, NO! ah ain’t 
gwine to do that. Couldn’t answer him, sah, but a 
voice in ma’ soul’s sayin’ ‘lies, lies, lies,’ all the time 
he was talkin’—ain’t gwine to believe a word of it. 
No, sah—not a word.” I was delighted to see how 
the anointing had enabled him to withstand this as- 
sault of the devil. The Spirit dwells within us for 
that very purpose. 

All the gifts are linked with the dnotnbinn We 
read in 1 Cor. 12, ‘There are diversities of gifts, but 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 39 


the same Spirit.” He imparts some gift to each 
member of the body to be exercised in subjection to 
the risen Lord. All have not the same gift; and 
while we are told to “covet earnestly the best gifts,” 
we are not promised any particular gift that we 
might admire and long for. He divideth “to every 
man severally as He will,” that each may profit 
thereby, and for the edification of the whole body. 

Nor are the spectacular gifts, such as healing, 
tongues, miracles, the most important. The great- 
est of all is prophecy—that is the ability so to pre- 
sent the truth of God that men will be stirred up, 
blessed, and comforted thereby. No other gift com- 
pares with this in value. But all must be exercised 
in “the love of the Spirit.” 

The third thing I would notice is the sealing of the 
Spirit. This is another term that is used in con- 
nection with our Lord Jesus Christ. In John 6: 27 
He says Himself, “Labor not for the meat which 
perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto 
everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give 
unto you, for Him hath God the Father sealed.” 
This is the chapter in which He speaks of Himself 
as the “Bread of God,” “the Living Bread,” and “the 
True Bread from heaven.” This life-giving Bread 
came forth and was presented to men that they 
might eat and live forever, as sealed by the Father. 
Here we see how the anointing and the sealing take 
place at one and the same time. For the anointing 
really was the sealing. It was the Father owning 
Him as His well-beloved One, and declaring His 
delight in Him. 

I heard a very homely illustration recently that 
I cannot forbear passing on. How common a thing 


40 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


is it to-day to find bread offered for sale with the 
maker’s name, or some trade-name, either put upon 
it by a stamp or literally baked into it. The bread is 
sealed with the name of the baker. He practically 
says, ‘‘This bread is good. I put my name upon it, 
for I stand back of it in every particular.” So has 
God the Father sealed the Bread from heaven. He 
acknowledged and approved His blessed Son in 
everything, for in the fullest sense Jesus could say, 
“IT and my Father are one.” Think of it! I and 
my Father! If He were less than Divine what ter- 
rible pretension, what effrontery that would have 
been! Every saved one would reverse the order 
and say, My Father and I. But He is the Eternal 
Son become flesh, and one with the Father. 

But now we pass on to consider the sealing of the 
believer; for the same Spirit who sealed the Sa- 
viour seals all who are saved by Him. The first 
passage that demands our attention is Eph. 1:13: 
“In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the 
Word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom 
also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that 
Holy Spirit of promise.” 

In the Revised Version it is even aneer “Tn 
whom, having also believed, ye were sealed.” How 
soul-assuring is this! Sealing is not a question of 
experience. It is a precious fact to be accepted on 
the authority of the Word of God. When you be- 
lieved the gospel, dear saved one, you were sealed by - 
the Spirit. God the Father put His stamp upon you, 
so to speak. He did this by giving you the Spirit to 
dwell in you—He who dwells in us is the seal. 

The same epistle says, in chapter 4: 30, “Grieve 
not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 41 


unto the day of redemption.’ You cannot grieve an 
influence. You may grieve a person, and He is a 
divine Person by whom you have been sealed. 

Does it say, “Sealed as long as you are faithful?” 
No, indeed, for if so,who could be sure of it from one 
day to another? Does it say, ‘‘Lest you grieve Him 
away ?’’ No, not that either, for He is come to abide 
with andin us. “By whom ye are sealed till the day 
of redemption”—that is the day of Christ’s return, 
when the redemption of our body will take place. 
Till that blessed consummation He never leaves the 
believer, neither in life nor in death. 

I love to think of Him keeping guard over the very 
bedies of those who sleep in Jesus. The holy dead 
are not alone. ‘Precious in the sight of the Lord is 
the death of His saints.” He never loses sight of 
one of them, and when the Lord returns He will 
quicken them unto resurrection-life, and escort them 
to the meeting-place in the air. 

But we must not overlook the admonition, “Grieve 
not the Holy Spirit.” How may we grieve Him? 
By disobeying the Word. By indulging in any of the 
things forbidden in the immediate context. False- 
hood of the lips, dishonest practices, corrupt speech, 
bitterness, anger, clamor, railing and malice — all 
these grieve Him and hinder His ministry of grace 
in the life. To walk in the Spirit is to walk as before 
God, in lowliness and meekness, in purity and self- 

judgment, obeying the written Word, and thus doing 

His will from the heart. He who so walks does not 
grieve this holy, heavenly Guest, who has sealed us 
until the day of our triumph over death, when our 
descending Lord shall change the bodies of our hu- 
miliation, making them like the body of His glory. 


42 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


But we must now consider for a little what is sug- 
gested by and involved in the term, ‘‘the earnest of 
the Spirit.” Eph. 1:13 speaks of our sealing, as we 
have seen; and the 14th verse speaks of the earnest. 
We read, “‘Which is the earnest of our inheritance, 
until the redemption of the purchased possession, 
unto the praise of his glory.” 

Until this glorious event, of which we spoke a few 
moments ago, takes place, namely, the redemption of 
the body, the indwelling Spirit enables us to enjoy a 
little of what will be our portion forever. He minis- 
ters Christ to our souls. He opens up the Word to 
us. We worship by the Spirit; we pray in the 
Spirit; we enjoy the fellowship, the communion of 
the Spirit; “the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given unto us.” 
So we have even now, as we tread the sands of the 
wilderness, ‘‘the firstfruits of the Spirit.” We taste 
here the precious fruit of the land. This is the 
Christian’s Eshcol cluster. He gives us now to en- 
joy in measure what shall be our portion forever. 

How important then the exhortation in Eph. 5: 
18, “Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but 
be filled with the Spirit.” God would have us enter 
into His fulness, He would have us entirely under 
His control—filled with the Spirit day by day. 

Notice, we are never exhorted to seek the baptism 
of the Spirit; nor told to be anointed with the Spirit; 
neither are we commanded to be sealed with the 
Spirit. These are blessed facts, true of every be- 
liever. But the word is, “Be filled with the Spirit.” 
It is a command that we are not at liberty to ignore. 
How shall we obey it? Can we be filled at will? 
Do we obtain this fulness by prayer? Is it a bless- 


The Holy Spirit and the Believer 43 


ing that comes once for all? Or may we need to 
seek it again and again? 

We cannot be filled by deciding to claim it by faith. 
Neither are we filled by praying for it; and once 
filled there is no guarantee that we will be in the 
same blessed state to-morrow. We are only filled 
with the Spirit as we yield ourselves to God and walk 
in obedience to His word. By comparing Col. 3:16 
with Eph. 5:18 we will see that the same results 
follow; if the Word of Christ dwells in us richly, it 
is being filled with the Spirit. What then is the legi- 
timate inference? Surely, that a Word-filled Chris- 
tian is a Spirit-filled Christian. I do not mean that 
one who has a mental knowledge of the Word is nec- 
essarily Spirit-filled; but when the Word is hidden 
in the heart and controls the ways, then the Spirit 
of God fills and energizes, as He cannot do when we 
ignore the written Word. 

People pray for more of the Spirit, but the Spirit 
is not a liquid, or an element. Heis a Person. He 
wants to get more of you. When you let Him take 
charge of you, you will be filled with the Spirit. 

But this is so big a subject, I must devote another 
address to it; so, for the present, I would just leave 
this thought with you:—He will fill every room in 
your being to which you give Him the key. If He 
does not fill you it is because you are reserving some 
part for yourself. Do not simply give Him the best 
room. He is downright exclusive. He would have 
all for the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom He 
delights to exalt. Can you say, “None of self, but 
all of Thee?’ Then you will be filled indeed. 


Three Words that Transform 


Human Lives 
(Read Romans, chapter 6.) 


LADY said to me recently, “I have read a 
A number of books on ‘Deliverance,’ but I am 

still all at sea. They discuss abstract 
theological questions as to whether the conflict in 
Romans 7 is between the two natures or whether 
the man there is trying to find holiness by keeping 
the law, and similar subjects; but, some way, my 
mind cannot follow all this abstruse reasoning. I 
want to be filled with the Spirit. I long for deliver- 
ance from the power of sin in the flesh. Can you 
not tell me, in a simple way, how it may be ob- 
tained ?” 

Because I believe there are many Christians in the 
~gsame state of mind as this lady, I want to try to 
show the way to a life in the fulness of the Spirit, 
in language as simple as possible, and as free from 
theological terms as I can. 

I wish to fix your minds on three words which, 
rightly apprehended, will I know transform human 
lives. They have transformed thousands, and will 
transform yours if you lay hold of them in earnest. 

They are all found in the 6th chapter of Romans. 
I would ask you carefully to read the entire passage, 
then fix your mind on the first of these important 
terms. It is the word ‘‘Reckon,” and you will find 
it in verse 11, ‘‘Likewise reckon ye yourselves to be 
dead (or literally, to have died) indeed unto sin, but 
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.” 

“Likewise’—like what? Consider carefully what 


Three Words that Transform Human Lives 45 


has gone before. In order to do so, it is absolutely 
necessary to have some conception of the great 
truths unfolded in this wonderful gospel-epistle. 

Roughly speaking, the first two and a half chap- 
ters show us the need of the gospel. Man’s desper- 
ate and irretrievable condition, so far as his own 
power is concerned, constitutes that need. Upon 
the proven guilt and helplessness of men of every 
kind and degree, God reveals His wondrous plan 
whereby He can save the vilest as well as the best 
(all on the same principle of His free grace) on the 
ground of the work of redemption accomplished by 
Christ Jesus on the cross. By faith in the One who 
there settled the sin-question to God’s satisfaction, 
the sinner is justified freely and fully. This is un- 
folded in the second part of chapter three, and in 
chapter four, and the first part of chapter five— 
8:20 to 5:11. 

But beginning with verse 12 of this 5th chapter a 
new theme is introduced. What does God do with 
the sin inherent in the very nature of man when He 
forgives the sinner? Is this to be subdued by pain- 
ful penances, or eliminated by an act of divine 
power? Or is the carnal nature changed by a slow 
process of sanctification, so that eventually the be- 
liever is freed entirely from it? 

The answer is the declaration of another line of 
truth altogether. When Christ died He made atone- 
ment not only for what I have done, but His death 
has ended my life or existence as a natural man—a 
child of Adam. He, the holy One, bore my sins, and 
died in my place. God dealt with Him in my stead. 
Now I am accepted in Him, the risen One, who, as 
exalted in glory, is the Head of a new race to which 


46 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


each saved one belongs. “In that He died, He died 
unto sin once; in that He liveth, He liveth unto God.” 
i obtain deliverance from the controlling power of 
sin to which He died, when in simple faith I reckon 
His death to be mine. 

Just as He died to that sin which God so hated, I, 
likewise, am called upon to reckon myself to be dead 
* indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in Him. His 
death was mine; and He is my life. Faith exclaims 
with Paul, “I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless 
I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life 
that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith of the Son 
of God, who loved me and gave Himself for me.” 

I am not called upon to improve myself—to gra- 
dually improve the old nature; but I am to reckon 
that I have died to its power and authority; and Iam 
to recognize that my real life now is that of the risen 
Christ, which is to be manifested in me. 

This is what Christian baptism rightly signifies. 
“We are buried with Him by baptism unto death.” 
In that act I confessed that I—the old, selfish, world- 
ly, sinful man—came to an end in the death of Christ. 
Now that Christ liveth in me, as my life, He is the 
power for me to walk in newness of* life. 

Let me show how this works out practically. In 
a town of the middle-west a young woman whom we 
will call Lulu M., was for several years the acknowl- 
edged belle of the somewhat limited society of the 
place. She was talented, beautiful, and vivacious to 
a marked degree. None more graceful in the dance 
than she; few could equal her in musical ability ; and, 
withal, she had that mysterious something about 
her, which we call personality, that attracted to her 
the young people of both sexes. 


Three Words that Transform Human Lives 47 


Her little world was at her feet, and she loved it 
intensely, and was loved by it devotedly. If she ever 
thought of God and eternity it was in a careless, 
well-bred sort of way, as recognizing that a certain 
amount of religion was required by modern culture, 
but that was all. At twenty she was living the life 
of a young woman whose hopes are all centered in 
this scene, with no real interest in the things of 
Christ. 
| There came to the little city two earnest servants 

of God, one a faithful gospel preacher, the other a 
gifted singer, expert in dealing personally with 
needy souls. For several weeks they conducted evan- 
gelistic meetings, and a number were turned from 
the power of Satan unto God, some of Lulu’s asso- 
ciates among them. She was invited to the services, 
but laughingly said she was afraid to go for fear of 
becoming converted and losing all the joys of life. 

But on the last evening she yielded to a friend’s 
entreaty and went, determined not to yield an inch. 
But the power of God was in the preaching, and the 
Holy Spirit convicted her of the fearful sin of re- 
jecting Christ, and she bowed before God in agony 

of soul, confessing her guilt. That night she was 
- saved, and a few nights later was baptized publicly, 
to the consternation and indignation of the circle 
in which she had moved for so long. In vain they 
tried to woo her back to a world that she now saw 
to be utterly false, and which she confessed had 
never really satisfied. Drinking at the fountain of 
living water, she no longer thirsted for the broken 
cisterns of earth. When her 21st birthday drew near, 
her old friends said, “Now is the time to play our 
trump card. We must have her back.”” They planned 


48 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


a@ surprise party for her, and early that summer 
evening they gathered on the lawn outside her home. 
She was first apprized of their presence as they sang 
a song she had once loved well. Opening the door 
she greeted them happily, and, touched by their kind- 
ness, welcomed them cordially. They had brought. 
baskets of refreshments, and under the trees they 
ate and drank together. Then the leader, a talented 
and vivacious young man said, ‘‘Now, Lulu, you are 
coming with us to the theatre. We have bought up 
all the boxes in your honor, and we will all enjoy the 
play together.” 

She hesitated not one moment. “Oh, my friends, 
you do not understand—I never go to anything like 
that now. I could not enjoy it.” ‘‘Why,” they de- 
clared, “‘you’ve often gone and always enjoyed these 
things in the past. You are getting morbid. Come 
along, and see how happy you will be.” 

Firmly she answered, “I cannot take Christ with 
me there. You know I buried the girl who used 
to love those things. Now it is not the old self, but 
Christ who lives in me.” 

Do you see the point? She reckoned herself to 


have died to the world and its pleasures, so they no 


longer had dominion over her. And the same prin- 
ciple applies to every form of temptation. Selfish- 
ness and worldliness of every description lose their 
power over the soul when you reckon yourself to 
have died with Christ. 

But now look at the next word. ‘Yield yourselves 
unto God, as those that are alive from the dead.” 

This is very definite, and I am persuaded it is 
right here that many fail. They do not yield them- 
selves to God; so they never get more than a doc- 


Three Words that Transform Human Lives 49 


trinal deliverance. They understand the theory, but 
there is no power in the life. To yield is to sur- 
render; or in the language of Rom. 12: 1, to “present 
your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God—~your intelligent service.” In fact, the original 
word is the same in both scriptures. 

Now you do not yield to God by accepting a doc- 
trine. But it is a conscious act of the will. It in- 
volves a real surrender of yourself, a subjection of 
your will to the will of God. And this costs some- 
thing. It means the crossing of mere natural de- 
sires, and the submission of your whole being to the 


Lord Jesus Christ. To yield to Him is to deny your- 


self, to take up your cross and follow the rejected 
One. 

People talk of following Jesus, and sing glibly of 
following where He leads. But what is really meant 
by that? What do you mean when you speak of 
following Him? Do you mean to follow Him into 
His heaven? When He said, “Follow Me,” it meant 
to follow Him in a world of sin and sorrow, a scene 
of rejection and reproach; that thus following, His 
disciples might become fishers of men, ere they 
should share His joy by and by. 

A lady was speaking one day of the blessedness of 
fellowship with God, when a somewhat lukewarm 
Christian present exclaimed, “I would give the world 
to have your experience!” “That is exactly what it 
cost,” she quietly replied. It is impossible to live a 


- victorious life and yet cling to the world, or to any 


form of known sin. 
Self-judgment. is involved in our first word, 
“Reckon.” Until this takes place you cannot enter 


_ into the meaning of the second one, “Yield.” Itisa 


50 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


solemn moment in the soul’s history when one de- 
finitely recognizes the claims of the risen Lord, and 
cries from the heart, 


“Take my life, and let it be 
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 


“Take my hands, and let them move 
At the impulse of Thy love. 


“Take my feet, and let them be 
Swift and beautiful for Thee. 


“Take my voice, and let me sing 
Always, only, for my King, 

“Take my moments and my days, 
Let them flow in ceaseless praise. 


“Take my intellect, and use 
Every_power as Thou shalt choose. 


“Take my will, and make it Thine; 
It shall be no longer mine. 

“Take my heart; it is Thine own; 
It shall be Thy royal throne. 


“Take myself, and I will be 
Ever, only, all for Thee.” 


Miss Havergal has expanded for us this word, 
“Yielded,” in this beautiful hymn. Oh to be able, 
not alone to sing it, but ever to mean it! And this 
must be, if we would know practical deliverance. 

But, alas, how we naturally shrink from such a 
surrender of ourselves in order that the will of God 
may be supreme in our lives! Vainly fancying we 
will be happier doing our own will than doing His— 
who loves us beyond any earthly friend—we tem- 
porize, or even refuse to submit to that which would 


Three Words that Transform Human Lives 51 


mean the entrance into a life of gladness such as we 
have never hitherto experienced. Be assured no 
sacrifice for Christ will leave a regret in the day of 
manifestation. Rather, we would then give worlds, 
did we possess them, if we could have the opportun- 
ity again to live for Him in a scene like this. 
When Cleaver, a devoted missionary to the Egyp- 
tian Mohammedans, was dying—for the work of 
Christ—cut down in the midst of his days, he wrote; 


‘“When I am dying how glad I shall be 
That the lamp of my life has been blazed out for Thee. 
I shall not regret whatever I gave, 
‘Money or time, one sinner to save, 
I shall not mind that the road has been rough, 
That Thy dear feet led the way is enough. 
When I am dying how glad I shall be 
That the lamp of my life has been blazed out for Thee.” 


What half-hearted Christian ever exulted like this 
over days spent for self, and moments and money 
wasted on things that are of no lasting profit? 
[have recently come across another beautiful little 
_ poem that expresses in @ way mere prose cannot, 
the blessedness of a surrendered, a wholly-yielded 
life. ! 
“Oh the peace of full surrender! 
All my joy to do His will! 
Mine to trust His faithful promise; 
His the promise to fulfil. 


Oh the glory and the rapture 
Thus to dwell with Christ the Lord; 
New delight and wisdom gaining 
From the study of His Word. 


52 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


Pleasure’s songs no more entice me, 
Nor the bugle note of Fame; 
Sweeter far the holy music 
Of my dear Redeemer’s name. 


Oh the glory and the rapture— 
Earthly burdens pass away! 
Stormy winter turns to summer; 
Lonely darkness into day.” 


But we must now consider a third word, and that 
is the word, “Obey.” “He to whom ye yield your- 
selves servants to obey, his servants ye are, whether 
of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteous- 
ness.” We were once the servants of sin, living in 
obedience to our fleshly lusts, led by the devil captive 
at his will. Saved by grace, having died with Christ, 
risen in Him, yielded to Him, we are now called to a 
life of obedience. 

But if I am to obey God how shall I know when 
He speaks ?—-He has spoken in His Word. He still 
speaks by His Spirit. And the Word and the Spirit 
agree. He who would live in practical deliverance 
from the power of sin must, therefore, feed upon the 
Word of God. John Bunyan said of the Bible, ‘‘This 
Book will keep you from sin, or sin will keep you 
from this Book.” And this witness is true. 

The believer needs the Word for food. It provides 
spiritual sustenance. As you feed upon it you grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Reading it in dependence on the illumina- 
tion of the indwelling Holy Spirit, who inspired the 
writing of it, you learn the will of God. Obeying 
it as revealed, you become filled with the Spirit. 

Be assured, dear troubled and often-defeated one, 
there is no other way to obtain this much desired 


Three Words that Transform Human Lives 53 


blessing. It is not an emotional experience obtained 
once for all and never needing to be repeated. It is 
not ‘‘a second work of grace,” as some well-meaning 
but, I am persuaded, misguided people put it. It is 
the legitimate result of obedience to the written 
Word. As you learn the mind of God and walk in 
it, you are walking in the Spirit. And it is written, 
“Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts 
of the flesh.” 

It is impossible to be filled with the Spirit if con- 
sciously grieving Him. The ungrieved Spirit de- 
lights to take of the things of Christ and show them 
to us. As He thus occupies our hearts with the 
Lord Himself we are filled indeed. David said, ‘“‘The 
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my 
cup.” Therefore he could say, “My cup runneth 
over.”’ So will it be with the believer who walks in 
self-judgment and obedience before God, which 
leaves the Holy Spirit free to do that in which He 
 delights—to form Christ in us. 

But if the Spirit is grieved, He must occupy us 
with our sins and our failures, until we are again 
brought to the place where we judge ourselves and 
confess our sins. Then He is once more free to 
direct our gaze to Christ, and to empower us to walk 
as He walked. 

Let no one think I am teaching a veiled form of 
perfectionism in the flesh. It is the very opposite 
of that. There is no short cut to holiness. But I 
dare to affirm that a surrendered life will result in 
the manifestation of the fulness of the Spirit, thus 
controlling the heart for Christ, and out of the heart 
are the issues of life. 

Now I leave these three words with you: reckon; 


54 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


yield; obey. You will find in them the secret that 
will transform your life from one of almost constant 
defeat to one of habitual victory through the indwell- 
ing Spirit of the risen Christ. 

And if, like the defiled Nazarite, you break down 
through unwatchfulness, and become defiled by the 
dead, the only way back to Nazarite separation is to 
“Repent, and do the first works.” Go back to the 
point of departure. Judge yourself in the light of 
the cross of Christ, and own that you sinned in using 
that which belonged to Christ (both by purchase and 
your personal surrender) for the gratification of 
self. Learning from the past to be more watchful 
and prayerful in the future, go on in lowliness to 
walk softly before Him in loving obedience, undis- 
mayed by the evidence that the flesh is still within: 
and as you walk in the Spirit, you will both know 
deliverance from carnal lusts, and be to the praise 
of His glory even in this scene of testing. 

But let me add a word of warning. Do not be- 
come occupied with your experience, your joy, your 
growth in grace. Do not talk of yourself or your 
victories. But rejoice ever in Christ Jesus, having 
no confidence in the flesh, according as it is written, 
“My soul shall make her boast in the Lord.” And 
again, “He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.” — 


“Be Thou the Object bright and fair, 
To fill and satisfy the heart: 
My hope to meet Thee in the air, 
And nevermore from Thee to part; 
That I may undistracted be, 
To follow, serve, and wait for Thee.” 


The Gifts of the Spirit 


two great “gift-chapters” of the Bible, there are 

two verses on which I would like to focus your 
attention. In verse 7 we read, “The manifestation 
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal;’’ 
and verse 11 tells us,“‘All these worketh that one and 
the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally 
as He will.” 

From these scriptures we learn three things of 
great importance in connection with the exercise of 
spiritual gifts. 

First, Gifts are given, not for some individual’s 
happiness, but to be used for the edification of others. 

Second, The gifts are only of value as exercised in 
the energy of the Spirit who gave them. 

Third, The Spirit is absolutely sovereign in His 
bestowal of gifts. He divides “as He will,” not 
according to our desires, however fervent. 

These three principles, if but rightly understood, 
would deliver from much of the misapprehension as 
to the nature of spiritual gifts that exists to-day, 
and would also save from the attempt to use the 
gifts, even if possessed, in the energy of the flesh. 

In 1 Corinthians, chap. 12, we have a list of the 
gifts given at the beginning. In Ephesians 4 we have 
a much more restricted list, but there we learn that 
they are gifts to abide in the Church to the end. 
There is no promise that all of those enumerated in 
1 Cor. 12 will remain in the Church in all ages, but 


ie the 12th chapter of 1 Corinthians, one of the 


56 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


there is a definite promise that those mentioned in 
Ephesians 4 will remain. On the other hand there 
is no definite statement that some of the early gifts 
will be withdrawn, but Scripture itself is witness 
that many of them began to disappear even in apos- 
tolic days, and history proves they have seldom, if 
ever, been manifested since. 

Gifts of healing were in frequent evidence at the 
beginning of the dispensation. But it seems that 
Paul himself seldom exercised this gift in his later 
years. Witness the well-known fact that three of his 
friends, whom he loved sincerely, were sick, and he 
wrought no miracle to relieve them, so far as we 
have any record. Trophimus was left sick at Mile- 
tum; Timothy was exhorted to use a well-known 
remedy for a dyspeptic trouble; Epaphroditus was 
sick nigh unto death for a long period, and the aged 
apostle’s heart was greatly concerned about him. 
But God had mercy on him, raising him up at last, 
not miraculously, but when the disease had run its 
course. Paul could at one time shake off a viper into 
the fire, but could not remove his “thorn in the 
flesh;”’ instead, he was given grace to endure it. 

The gift of tongues was given to many when the 
gospel was first sent to all nations. Babel’s con- 
fusion was overcome, so to speak, when the twelve, 
empowered by the Spirit, preached in languages 
they had never learned. But in all the centuries 
since, Christian missionaries have had to learn by 
close application, and generally painstaking study, 
the strange tongues of the peoples to whom they 
would give the message of the Cross. As long as it 
was profitable to give such sign-gifts (signs not to 
them that believed, but to those who believed not), 


The Gifts of the Spirit 57 


the Spirit gave them unstintedly, but they were grad- 
ually withdrawn as the need for them passed away. 

The gifts are never cited as the proofs of the bap- 
tism of the Spirit—though the gift of tongues, on at 
least two occasions, accompanied it, namely, at Pen- 
tecost and in the house of Cornelius. It was but 
natural that, as the dispensation was being ushered 
in, there should be some such marked evidences of 
the reception of the Spirit. To ask for, or expect 
them now, would be but unbelief, and would only 
show that such an one had not apprehended the 
spiritual character of the Church in the present age. 

Even in the wonderful days immediately follow- 
ing Pentecost, all did not possess the same gifts. 
“The manifestation of the Spirit was given to every 
man to profit withal.” Each received the gift he 
could best use for his special work and for the good 
of all—the preaching of the gospel to the lost and 
the building up of the body, the Church. 

So it is to-day. The gifts abiding in the Church 
are not nearly so many in number as at the begin- 
ning, but they are all given for profit and edification ; 
none are for show, nor to attest the fact of the 
Spirit’s indwelling, nor yet for the happiness of the 
recipient. All are not evangelists; all cannot preach. 
All do not possess the ability to shepherd the flock 
of God; but all have some measure of gift to be 
exercised for the blessing of the rest. 

In Romans 12: 3-8 we have a passage that is inti- 
_ mately linked with the one in Ephesians. No mir- 
acle-working is mentioned there, because the whole 
Church, at all times, is in view; but each is seen 
to have some gift, differing according to the grace 
given unto him. And all the gifts, even the use of 


58 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


wealth, are to be exercised in subjection to the risen 
Lord. Edification is always in view. 

And this is what 1 Cor. 12:11 implies. The gifts 
are only of value as used in the energy of the Spirit. 
Men may have gifts of exhortation, of prophecy, of 
teaching, and may use them largely to attract atten- 
tion to themselves, and make a name among their fel- 
lows. This is to prostitute the gift to a purpose for 
which it was never intended. And there is a very real 
danger here, to which every specially-gifted person 
is exposed. We all naturally love admiration, we are 
inclined to court the approbation of our associates. 
Like Ishmael, we are easily decoyed into living “‘in 
the presence of our brethren” instead of in the pres- 
ence of God. Therefore the need ever to remind 
ourselves that we have nothing that we have not 
received, and if received, why should we glory as 
though it were something of our own? 

The God-sent preacher will desire only to preach 
in the energy of the Holy Spirit. The devoted 
teacher will yearn to speak ever as the oracles of — 
God, controlled and directed by the Spirit who gave — 
the gift, and who alone is competent to cause that it — 
be used aright. And it is so with all other gifts. — 
None are given for the purpose of adding to the 
self-importance, or increasing the happiness of the 
recipient. All are to be used as the Spirit directs. — 

In the third place—note it well—the Spirit is 
sovereign in His gifts. He divides severally as He 
will. It is true we are told to “covet earnestly the 
best gifts”; and the gift of prophecy—that is, ability 
of speaking to edification, to exhortation and comfort — 
—is rated as the best of all; but there is no promise 
that any gift can be had because of earnest desire— 


The Gifts of the Spirit 5S 


it is as “He will.” Still, as the Corinthians were 
exhorted to “desire earnestly the best gifts,” we may 
rightly pray that gifts may be bestowed on others. 
But we cannot demand this. There are gifts that 
some of us will never have. There are gifts some of 
us are not fit to exercise. The Spirit gives, as the 
divine Omniscience deems best. 

These considerations ought to show how foolish 
and how unscriptural a thing it is to endeavor to 
claim certain miraculous gifts, such as those of 
tongues, interpretations, healings, as though they 
were peculiar marks of divine favor. Paul flouted 
all such pretentious folly when he said, “I had 
rather speak five words with my understanding that 
with my voice I might teach others also, than ten 
thousand words in an unknown tongue.” 

There are many deluded people, connected with 
certain emotional cults in Christendom, who would 
rather speak five words in some strange tongue, 
that they might be thrilled by the novelty of the 
thing, than speak ten thousand words in their own 
mother-tongue, and thereby instruct others. 

And note again: Though I have used the expres- 
sion, “Unknown tongues” in quoting the apostle’s 
words, it is well to remember there are no unknown 
tongues in view in the scriptural account of the gift 
- of tongues. The word “unknown”’ is in italics in our 
- English Bibles, and only mars the sense. They were 
actual tongues known to the people to whom the 
Spirit enabled them to speak. If any can do this 
to-day, and are able to preach the gospel in lan- 
guages they have never learned, by all means let 
them use their gift in subjection to the glorified Head 
of the Church. Who would forbid such to speak 


60 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


with tongues? Dying millions are waiting while 
earnest missionaries study strange dialects and diffi- 
cult languages ere they can tell out God’s evangel so 
as to be understood. But who goes to such with the 
gift of tongues to-day, and makes known the riches 
of grace in a language never learned either in schools 
or by personal contact with foreign people? 

But if it be clearly evident that miraculous sign- 
gifts, having served their purpose, have for cen- 
turies been conspicuously absent, and are certainly 
withdrawn, there is all the more reason why each 
believer should seek to use whatever gift the Spirit 
of God has given for mutual edification. | 

The gifts are all viewed in Ephesians as having 
been given by the risen and ascended Christ: “When 
He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, 
and gave gifts unto men.” Even the gifts of apostles 
and prophets are viewed in the same light. For 
though Christ chose the twelve during His earthly 
ministry, it was after they were endued with the 
Spirit, “shed forth’ from the glorified Lord, that 
they took their official place. 

And He alone calls and qualifies evangelists, pas- 
tors and teachers, who carry on the work which the 
apostles and prophets of the new dispensation be- 
gan. We have their ministry still in their writings. 
The Gospels of the apostles Matthew and John, 
John’s Epistles and the Revelation are with us to- 
day. Mark and Luke were prophets, and we have 
their ministry also. So with the ministries of Paul, 
of James, of Peter, and of Jude—apostles all, who 
thus abide with us. 

It is the business of the evangelist to preach the 
gospel they have preserved for us. It is the work of 


The Gifts of the Spirit 61 


the pastor and the teacher to apply and expound the 
instruction they have left on record for our learning. 
_And to do this aright, earnest application is re- 
quired; what care to be approved unto God as un- 
ashamed workmen, marking out in straight lines 
the Word of truth! And this can only be as the will 
is yielded to God, and the instrument learns to do and 
teach as guided by the Spirit. 

To be really edifying, all ministry must be in the 
power of the Holy Spirit. Gift, of itself, does not 
necessarily evidence spirituality. It is clear that 
the Corinthians were using the gifts for self-grati- 
fication, vain-gloriously, rather than solely for the 
honor of the one Lord from whom they came. It is 
- only as one realizes his responsibility to minister as 
unto the Lord, of the ability that God gives, that he 
is in the path of safety. Gift perverted to exalt self 
must bring serious results in its train. 

We have examples of this in those of whom Paul 
writes so sorrowfully to the Philippians; who 
preached Christ of contention, not sincerely, but 
supposing to add affliction to the bonds he was en- 
during for the truth’s sake. While he could rejoice 
_ that Christ was preached, whatever the motives or 
_ the state of soul of those doing the preaching, yet it 
would be a solemn thing indeed for them who thus 
misused the gifts bestowed upon them. 

Nor is mere natural brilliancy or ability to be con- 
founded with a divinely-bestowed gift. If there be, 
for instance, ability of speech and readiness of utter- 
ance, these alone do not constitute a man a preacher. 
If there be aptness in didactic instruction, this is 
not in itself to be confounded with the gift of the 
teacher. It is the divine unction that makes the 


62 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


ready speaker a true gospel preacher, or the thought- 
ful exponent of deeper truths a real teacher. The 
tongue like as of fire, though now unseen, rests still 
upon the head of the God-anointed servants to the 
Church. 

How important then that he who would minister 
in holy things, be often alone in the presence of God 
that he may hear a voice speaking in his inmost soul 
from off the mercy-seat, and so go forth to speak in 
very truth as the oracle of God! Mark, it is not only 
in accordance with the oracles of God —the Holy 
Scriptures—but the servant himself is to speak as 
voicing the mind of God for the moment. Of Haggai 
we read, “Then spake Haggai, the Lord’s messen- 
ger, in the Lord’s message.” 

No matter how frequently a preacher may speak 
from some one particular text, or a teacher instruct 
in regard to some one particular line of truth, it is 
necessary on each occasion to stand before men only 
after one has secretly bowed before God, even if 
circumstances prevent retiring to some private place 
for this holy purpose. Only as the servant realizes 
his utter weakness and his constant dependence will 
he preach or teach or exhort in the power of the 
Holy Spirit. Paul could say, “I was with you in 
weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.” 
Here was no mere self-assurance, as of one so accus- 
tomed to expounding divine mysteries that he needed 
no secret preparation of heart. But standing be- 
fore men after having bowed before God he could 
say, “When I am weak, then am I strong’—the 
power of the Spirit enabling him for ministry. 

One more consideration before closing. It is a 
word to saints regarding their responsibility toward 


The Gifts of the Spirit 63 


those who, in a very special sense, are recognized as 
gifts to the Church. Be careful how you treat those 
thus given to you; for, remember, they are the risen 
Christ’s love-gifts to His people. Whether Paul or 
Apollos or Cephas, all are yours, and to be cherished 
as such. Do not spoil them by flattery. Do not put 
the gift in place of the Giver. Do not be occupied 
with their eloquence or natural ability. This is to 
magnify the servant instead of the message he 
brings. , 

A gentleman is reported to have heard on conse- 
ecutive Lord’s days two great London preachers— 
Dr. Joseph Parker and Charles H. Spurgeon. En- 
thusiastically he remarked, when telling of them 
afterwards, “Dr. Parker is a great preacher; but 
Mr. Spurgeon has a great Saviour!” Ah, that is it. 
Magnify the One of whom the voice speaks. Do not 
_ become occupied with the voice itself. “Speak not,” 
said Carey, “of Dr. Carey, but of Dr. Carey’s Sa- 
_viour !”—and so would every true-hearted servant of 
God desire of those who hear him. ‘He must in- 
crease, but I must decrease,” cried the divinely- 
appointed forerunner. 

On the other hand, remember that to belittle the 
messenger and to carpingly criticize the servant is, 
indirectly, to insult the Master who has sent him. 
He has said, ““He that heareth you heareth Me, and 
He that receiveth you receiveth Me.” If this be but 
kept in mind how it would put the clamp on much 
unkind fault-finding, when saints discern, or fancy 
they discern, in certain servants characteristics that 
may not be in accord with the highest cultural or 
spiritual standards. All the work that God has com- 
mitted to men has been accomplished through imper- 


64 The Mission of the Holy Spirit 


fect instrumentalities. He has had only one perfect. 
Servant in this scene, and He was scorned, derided, 
and crucified. All other servants come short in some- 
thing, and most in many things. Nevertheless, God 
graciously deigns to use them; He is very jealous of 
them and notes every slight put upon them, while He 
rewards all who receive them for His name’s sake, 
who said, “Go ye, and disciple all nations. ..teach- 
ing them,...and lo, IJ am with you.” 


963018 


BY: ‘H. os _IRON SIDE _ fan 
SCRIPTURE EXPOSITIONS | ae 


te Notes on the Book of Proverbs. Cloth ia Scere BO 56 oo " 
Notes on the Book of Ezra. Paper, 20. : Br ees se 


Notes on the Book of Nehemiah. Paper, 25c.; cloth,.. 7 
Notes on the Book of Esther. Paper, 30c.: = CLOUNGyons 7. 


‘Notes on Philippians. Paper, 20c.; cloth,.......2.... 73 
Notes on Jeremiah and Lamentations. Cloth,.......-1.00 
Notes on the Minor Prophets. Cloth,.............-.ed, 50 fs 
Lectures on Daniel the Prophet—with chart, 


: Paper, 600.3 cloths... ssa ees ses su eeee tas ce Bre nes 2 | 
: Lectures on Revelation. Simple & Practical, with chart. yy 
PABEr. THC. COUN ead sels socio be cele oem ue es pM 0 


« : Exposition of the Epistle of Jude, "Paper, OU Ga ewer ee 
“| MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS 


x : A Life Laid Down. Memoir of Fannie M. Arthur. 


oe ‘On So-called Divine Healing......eseccreeeeeeeses 02 


Tilus’d: | Paper: 30c.; cloths... 0505. s comes ne oa LB a 
The Four Hundred Silent Years. Paper, 30c.; cloth, 75 
The Only Two Religions, and Other Gospel Papers. pes 


“” Paper, 20c.; Cloth,...--ecescece cress ees ‘sie's saree ke (ern 
The Mysteries of God. ‘Paper, 25c.; cloth,........... 79 | 
- - Sailing with Paul. Paper, 1oc.; ‘cloth, cu yee bake oe Oe cea 
_ Holiness; the False and the True. Cloth vil a ee 
Abridged edition. Paper,.....-...-++eceeses Ais DA a 
‘The Midnight Cry! Paper,....--..021--cessseeeress fis Bae 
Letters to a Roman Catholic Priest............. heey BLiwe 
Baptism: What Saith the Scripture? Peee. SOGyoens o1o 


Apostolic Faith Missions & the So-called 2nd Pantecost isha a 
Teaching of “Plymouth Brethren.” Is it Scriptural?.. 05° 


The Mormon’s Mistake... 0.0.0. .seees ree cetaeenre -- O83. 
Setting the Stage for the last Act of the “Great et 

World-Drama, “The Times of the Gentiles”..... 10 re 
‘Who will be Saved i in the Coming Period of J stu po” 03 


i Hebrew’ Ss Search we the Blood of Atonement. 40¢.; per 100 
I’m in for a Good Time..... HOSES PNB Et Pid o 
Too Bad for Heaven and Too Wood for Hell... ee se 
The Right Priest for a Death-Bed........... ” oa 
The Only Two Religions ......+.+...+<+. $1.00 per 100 — 
The Dying Gambler........+-000+se+0ter-- TS re ae 
“For Your Sakes 2... cece ec lee cs ceceeeae as ney 
Ny Béter Death; What? vic ccc deeedcasan wen end Liat 
‘The Tramp who Became a Deacon.......... $2.00 per 100 
Hebrew’s earch for the Blood of Atonement—in Bettas 
Be 60 cts. per jaan. 


; bOI) 


Princeton Theological Seminary-Speer Libra’ 


Be ee ee Sa ie "ate 
ny ne ‘ft ue 


det hated RE! 
He eR) | 
a mF a a ae rf ) r Ea ‘ 


ST aonneee ane 
mer seg on se SED, 


we se 
a Seen ne 


water 


ees 


oes 


i 
pieciatoue) 
m3 


eeeee 


