NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  07956048  2        n/i    \    ft-ru 
r  J  1  t-    Jt-#«;I     1  i^P^    WITH 


OLY  SPIRIT 


R.  A,    T  O  R  R  E  ¥ 


(9^^<p 


J^W  •  G  •  Jchnston  : 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH 

THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 


How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ. 

BY  R.  A.  TORREY 

Superintendent  of  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody^s  Bible  rmtitute, 

Chicago. 

i6mo        -        Cloth       -       Price  7sc. 

"Exceedingly  practical."— New  York  Observeb 

"An  orderly,  condensed,  inspiring  manual  for  Ohristian 
Wckers.  A  magnificent  text-book  on  the  use  of  the 
Bible."— The  Golden  Rule,  Boston 

"A  plain,  simple,  forcible  treatise,  judicious  and  practi- 
cal, which  all  Christians  will  do  well  to  study  prayerfully.'' 
—The  Oongregationalist,  Boston. 

"It  is  a  work  which  many  a  pastor  will  be  glad  to  put  into 
the  hands  of  the  lay  helpers  of  his  church,  especially  of 
the  members  of  the  Young  People's  Society  of  Ohristian 
Endeavor."— The  Outlook. 

"Will  be  found  most  valuable  to  Ohristian  workers  of  all 
names."— The  Standard,  Chicago. 

"Brimful  of  wise  and  helpful  euggestions "— Web- 
iiEYAN  Methodist. 

"The  experience  of  one  who  has  had  success  must  be 
helpful  to  others."— Christian  Inquirer,  New  York. 

"The  line  of  action  suggested  is  one  that  has  been  fol- 
lowed with  success,  and  is  recommended  by  experience." 
—Watchman.  Boston. 

BY  THE  SAriB  AUTHOR 

Vest  Pocket  Companion  for  Christian 
Workers.  32mo.,  leather,  net  25c. 
The  author's  position  and  experience  give  him 
eminent  fitness  for  the  preparation  of  this  work, 
which  presents  the  best  texts— printed  in  full  and 
clsssified— for  nse  in  personal  work.  The  best  texts 
for  the  careless  and  indififerent;  for  those  who  wish 
to  know  how  to  be  saved;  who  have  difficulties;  who 
entertain  false  hopes;  who  lack  assurance;  for  back- 
sliders: for  sceptics;  for  those  who  wish  to  postpone 
a  decision;  for  Roman  Catholics;  for  Jews;  for  spir- 
itualists ;  for  Christians  who  need  help. 

Ten  Reasons  Why  I  Believe  the  Bible 
is  the  Word  of  God.  i6mo.,  paper,  15c. 

"It  gives  in  clear  and  comprehensive  style  a  cogent  ar- 
gument for  the  complete  inspiration  and  absolute  author- 
ity of  the  Bible.  Because  of  its  terseness  and  freedom 
from  technical  expressions  it  will  form  a  useful  compen- 
dium of  information  for  Christian  Workers."— Mes- 
siah's Herald. 


THE  BAPTISM  WITH  ^'\ 

THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 


-; 


-4-/ 


BY 

R.  A.  TORREY. 

Author  of  "How  to  Bring  Men  to  Christ,^'  "  Vest  Pocket 
Companion,"  etc.,  etc. 


"Wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father." — Acts  i:  4. 

"Ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the   Holy  Spirit  not  many  days 
hence." — Acts  1:5. 

"Ye  shall  receive  power  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is.^otr-e,  upon, 
you." — Acts  1:6.  J  •■-'-!,      ',    ...   . 

"For  to  you  is  the  promise,  and  to  your  childrenj  aii(i„tp  iUl  ',' 
that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  I,ord  thy  God  shall  call  unto 
him."— Acts  11:  36  R.  V. 


FLEMING  H.  REVEIvL  COMPANY, 
New  York.  Chicago.  Toronto. 


^"BUC  LIBRARY 

lime 


ASTOFt 
T/LD£^. 


FO 


Copyrighted  1895,  By  FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


I  c      I  t  «.    C 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  was  a  great  turning  point  in  my  minist^^ 
when,  after  much  thought  and  study  and  medi 
tation,  I  became  satisfied  that  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  an  experience  for  to-day  and 
for  me,  and  set  myself  about  obtaining  it.  Such 
blessing  came  to  me  personally,  that  I  began  giv- 
ing Bible  readings  on  the  subject,  and  with 
increasing  frequency  as  the  years  have  passed. 
God  in  his  wondrous  grace  has  so  greatly  blessed 
these  readings,  and  so  many  have  asked  for  them 
in  printed  form,  convenient  for  circulation  among 
their  friends,  that  I  have  decided  to  write  them 
out  in  full  for  publication.  It  is  an  occasion  of 
great  joy  that  so  many  and  such  excellent  books 
on  the  person  and  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  have 
appeared  of  late.  I  wish  to  call  especial  attention 
to  two  of  these:  ''Through  the  Eternal  Spirit,^' 
by  James  Elder  Gumming  and  "The  Spirit  oi 
Christ,"  by  Andrew'Murray. 

In  the  following  pages  I  speak  uniformly  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  in  the  quotations  from  the  Bible  . 
retain  the  less  desirable  phraseology  there  used 
—"The  Holy  Ghost"— except  in  those  instances 
where  the  translators  themselves  varied  their 
usage.  Probably  most  of  the  readers  of  this  book 


I  I 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

already  know  that  "the  Holy  Spirit"  and  ''the 
Holy  Ghost"  are  simply  two  different  translations 
of  precisely  the  same  Greek  words.  It  seems  very 
unfortunate,  and  almost  unaccountable,  that  the 
English  revisors  did  not  follow  the  suggestion 
of  the  AmericanCommittee  and  for  ''Holy  Ghost" 
adopt  uniformly   the  rendering  "Holy  Spirit." 


•     c  «■•  t>  r        ^ 


CONTENTS. 


Pagej. 
Introduction 3 

CHAPTER  I. 
The  Baptism  with  the  H01.Y  Spirit:  what 

IT  IS  AND  WHAT  IT  DOES 7 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Necessity  and  Possibii^ity  op  the 
Baptism  with  the  Hoi.y  Spirit ,..  19 

CHAPTER  III. 

How  the  Baptism  with  the  H01.Y  Spirit 
CAN  BE  Obtained 29 

CHAPTER  IV. 
"Fresh  Baptisms  with  the  Holy  Spirit," 

OR     THE     REFILI^ING     WITH     THE     Hoi,Y 

Spirit , 52 

CHAPTER  V. 
How  Spirituai,  Power  is  Lost 55 


CHAPTER  I. 

Tun  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOI.Y  SPIRIT  :    WHAT 
IT  IS  AND  WHAT  IT  DOES. 

While  a  great  deal  is  said  in  these  days  con- 
cerning the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  to 
be  feared  that  there  are  many  who  talk  about  it 
and  pray  for  it,  who  have  no  clear  and  definite  idea 
of  what  it  is.  But  the  Bible,  if  carefully  studied, 
will  give  us  a  view  of  this  wondrous  blessing 
that  is  perfectly  clear  and  remarkably  definite. 

I.  We  find  first  of  all  that  ^kere  are  a  number 
of  designations  in  the  Bible  for  this  one  experience. 
In  Acts  i:  5,  Jesus  said,  ''Ye  shall  be  baptised 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence y  In 
Acts  ii:  4.  when  this  promise  was  fulfilled,  we 
read  ''they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost:' 
In  Acts  i:4.  the  same  experience  is  spoken 
of  as  ''the promise  of  the  Father,''  and  in  I^uke 
xxiv:  49  as  "the  promise  of  my  Father' '  and 
"endued  with  power  from  on  high  y  By  a  com- 
parison of  Acts  x:   44,  45,   47  with  Acts  xi:  15, 


lO       THK   BAPTISM  WITH  THE)  HOI<Y  SPIRIT 

1 6,  we  find  that  the  expressions  'Hhe  Holy  Spirit 
fell  on  them' '  and  *  Hhe  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost' '  and 
'^received  the  Holy  Ghost''  are  all  equivalent  to 
^'baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost. ' ' 

2.  We  find  in  the  next  place  that  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  definite  experience  of 
which  one  may  know  whether  he  has  received  it  or 
not.  This  is  evident  fi-om  our  Saviour's  com- 
mand to  the  Apostles:  "Tarry  ye  in  the  city,until 
ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high."  (lyUke 
xxiv:49.)  If  this  enduement  with  power  or  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  were  not  an  experience  so 
definite  that  one  could  know  whether  he  had 
received  it  or  not,  how  could  they  tell  when  those 
commanded  days  of  tarrying  were  at  an  end? 
The  same  thing  is  clear  from  Paul's  very  definite 
question  to  the  disciples  at  Ephesus.  "Did  ye 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost  when  ye  believed?"  (Acts 
xix:2,  R.  V.)  Paul  evidently  expected  a  definite 
"yes"  or  a  definite  "no"  for  an  answer.  Unless  the 
experience  were  definite  and  of  such  a  character 
that  one  could  know  whether  he  had  received  it 
or  not,  how  could  these  disciples  answer  Paul's 
question  ?  In  point  of  fact  they  knew  they  had 
not  ' '  received' '  or  been  *  'baptised  with ' '  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  a  short  time  afterward  they 
knew  they  had  "received"  or  been  "baptised 
with"  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Acts  xix:  6.)  Ask  many 
a  man  to-day  who  prays  that  he  may  be  baptised 


BAPTISM  WITH  THE)  HOI.Y  SPIRIT  1 1 

with  the  Holy  Ghost:  ''Well,  my  brother,  did 
you  get  what  you  asked,  were  you  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Ghost, ' '  and  he  would  be  dumb-founded. 
He  did  not  expect  anything  so  definite  that  he 
could  answer  positively  to  a  question  like  that, 
"yes"  or  ''no."  But  we  find  in  the  Bible 
nothing  of  that  vagueness  and  indefiniteness 
which  we  find  in  much  of  our  modern  prayer  and 
speech  regarding  this  subject.  The  Bible  is  a 
very  definite  book.  It  is  very  definite  about  sal- 
vation :  so  definite  that  a  man  who  knows  his 
Bible  can  say  positively  "yes"  or  "no  "  to  the 
question  "are  you  saved."  It  is  equally  definite 
about  "the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost:"  so 
that  a  man  who  knows  his  Bible  can  say  positively, 
' '  yes, "  or  "  no, ' '  to  the  question,  '  'have  you  been 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  may  be 
those  who  are  saved  who  do  not  know  it,  because 
they  do  not  understand  their  Bibles,  but  it  is  their 
privilege  to  know  it.  So  there  may  be  those  who 
have  been  Baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  do 
not  know  the  Bible  name  for  what  has  come  to 
them,  but  it  is  their  privilege  to  know. 

3.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  separate  ajid  distinct  from 
His  rege7ierati7ig  work.  To  be  regenerated  by  - 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  one  thing,  to  be  baptised  With 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  something  different,  some 
thing   further.     This  is  evident   from  Acts  i:  5. 


12  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOI^Y  SPIRIT 

There  Jesus  said:  "Ye  shall  be  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  not  majiy  days  hence.''  They 
were  not  then  as  yet  "baptised  with  the  Holy 
Ghost."  But  they  were  a/r^<^^  regenerated.  Jesus 
Himself  had  already  pronounced  them  so.  In 
Jno.  xv:  3,  he  had  said  to  the  same  men,  "Now 
areyeclean  through  the  Word."  (Comp.  Jas.  i: 
1 8;  I  Pet.  i:  23)  and  in  Jno.  xiii:  10:  "Ye  are 
clean,  but  not  all,"  excepting  by  the  "but  not 
air '  the  one  unregenerate  man  in  the  Apostolic 
company,  Judas  Iscariot,  from  the  statement  "Ye 
are  clean."  (See  Jno.  xiii:  11.)  The  Apostles, 
excepting  Judas  Iscariot,  were  then  already 
regenerate  men,  but  they  were  not  yet  "baptised 
with  the  Holy  Ghost."  From  this  it  is  evident 
that  regeneration  is  one  thing,  and  that  the  bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  something  differ- 
ent, something  ftirther.  One  can  be  regener- 
ated and  still  not  yet  be  baptised  with  the  Holy« 
Ghost.  The  same  thing  is  evident  from  Acts 
viii:  12-16.  Here  we  find  a  company  of  believers 
who  had  been  baptised.  Surely  in  this  company 
of  baptised  believers  there  were  some  regenerate 
men.  But  the  record  informs  us  that  when 
Peter  and  John  came  down  they  *  'prayed  for 
them  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy  Ghost: 
(for  as  yet  he  was  fallen  upon  none  of  them).  ^'  It  is 
clear  then  that  one  may  be  a  believer,  may  be  a 
regenerate  man,  and  yet  not  have  the  Baptism 


\ 


BAPTISM  WITH  THK  HOIvY  SPIRIT  13 

with  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  other  words,  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  something  distinct 
from  and  beyond  His  regenerating  work.  Not 
every  regenerate  man  has  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  though  as  we  shall  see  later,  every 
regenerate  man  may  have  this  Baptism.  If  a 
man  has  experienced  the  regenerating  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  he  is  a  saved  man,  but  he  is  not 
-£tted  for  service  until  in  addition  to  this  he  has 
received  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

4.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  always 
connected  with  testimony  and  service.  I^ook  care- 
fully at  every  passage  in  which  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  mentioned  and  you  will 
see  it  is  connected  with  and  is  for  the  purpose  of 
testimony  and  service.  (For  example,  Acts  i:  5, 
8;  ii:  4;  iv:  31,  33.)  This  will  come  out  very 
clearly  when  we  come  to  consider  what  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  does.  The  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  for  the  purpose  of 
cleansing  from  sin,  but  for  the  purpose  of  empow>. 
ering  for  service.  There  is  a  line  of  teaching, 
put  forward  by  a  very  earnest  but  mistaken  body 
of  people,  that  has  brought  the  whole  doctrine 
of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  into  disre- 
pute. It  runs  this  way:  First  proposition:  there 
is  a  further  experience  (or  second  blessing)  after 
regeneration,  namely,  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.    This  proposition  is  true  and  can  be  easily 


14  BAPTISM  WITH  THB  HOLY  SPIRIT 

proven  from  the  Bible.  Second  proposition: 
this  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  can  be  instan- 
teously  received.  This  proposition  is  also  true 
and  can  be  easily  proven  from  the  Bible.  Third 
proposition:  this  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  the  eradication  of  the  sinful  nature.  This 
proposition  is  untrue.  Not  a  line  of  Scripture 
can  be  adduced  to  show  that  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  eradication  of  the  sinful 
nature.  The  conclusion  drawn  from  these  three 
propositions,  two  true  and  one  false,  is  neces- 
sarily false.  The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  not  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing  from  sin,  but 
for  the  purpose  of  empowering  for  service.  It  is 
indeed  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  cleanse 
from  sin.  Further  than  this  there  is  a  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  where  the  believer  is  strength- 
ened with  might  in  the  inner  man:  that  Christ 
may  dwell  in  his  heart  by  faith. . .  that  he  might  be 
filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God.  (Eph.  iii:  16-19 
R.V.)  There  is  a  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
such  a  character  that  the  believer  is  * '  made 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death,"  (Rom. 
viii:  2)  and  through  the  Spirit  does  ''mortify 
(put  to  death)  the  deeds  of  the  body."  (Rom. 
viii:  13.)  It  is  our  privilege  to  so  walk  daily 
and  hourly  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  that  the 
carnal  nature  is  kept  in  the  place  of  death. 
But  this  is  not  the  Baptism  with  the  Spirit,  neither 


BAPTISM  WITH  TH:^  HOIvY  SPIRIT  15 

is  it  the  eradication  of  the  sinful  nature.  It  is  not 
something  done  once  for  all,  it  is  something 
that  must  be  momentarily  maintained.  *'  Walk 
in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of 
the  flesh."  (Gal.  v:  i6.)  While  insisting  that 
the  Baptism  with  the  Spirit  is  primarily,  for  the 
purpose  of  empowering  for  service,  it  should  be 
added  that  the  Baptism  is  accompanied  by  a  great 
moral  uplift.  (See  Acts ii:  44-46;  iv:  31-35.)  This 
is  necessarily  so,  from  the  steps  one  must  take  to 
obtain   this  blessing. 

5.  We  will  get  a  still  clearer  and  fuller  view 
of  what  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  it 
we  will  notice  what  this  Baptism  does.  This  is 
stated  concisely  in  Acts  i:  8.  ''Ye  shall 
receive  power  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come 
upon  you;  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses,"  etc. 
The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  imparts 
' 'power,' ^  power  for  service.  This  power  will  not- 
manifest  itself  in  precisely  the  same  way  in 
each  individual.  This  is  brought  out  very  clearly 
in  I  Cor.  xii:4-i3,  R.V.  "Now  there  are  diver- 
sities of  gifts  but  the  same  spirit.  For  to  one  is 
given,  through  the  Spirit,  the  word  of  wisdom;  and 
to  another  the  word  of  knowledge,  according  to 
the  same  spirit,  to  another  faith,  in  the  same 
spirit;  and  to  another  gifts  of  healings,  in  the  one 
spirit;  to  another  diverse  kinds  of  tongues;  but 
all  these  worketh  the  one  and  the  same  spirit, 


l6  BAPTISM  WITH  THK  HOLY  SPIRIT 

dividing  to  each  one  severally  even  as  He  will." 
In  my  early  study  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  I  noticed  that  in  many  instances  those  who 
were  so  baptised  '  'spoke  with  tongues, ' '  and  the 
question  came  often  into  my  mind,  if  one  is  bap- 
tised with  the  Holy  Spirit  will  he  not  speak  with 
tongues.  But  I  saw  no  one  so  speaking  and  I 
often  wondered,  is  there  any  one  to-day  who  act- 
ually is  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This 
twelfth  chapter  of  ist  Corinthians  cleared  me  up 
on  that,  especially  when  I  found  Paul  asking  of 
those  who  had  been  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  *'Do  all  speak  with  tongues  ?"  (i  Cor. 
xii:30.)  But  I  fell  into  another  error,  namely, 
that  any  one  who  received  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  would  receive  power  as  an  evangelist, 
or  as  a  preacher  of  the  Word.  This  is  equally  con- 
trary to  the  teaching  of  the  chapter,  that  '  'ther^ 
are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  one  Spirit, ' '  There 
are  three  evils  arising  from  the  mistake  just  men- 
tioned. First,  disappointment.  Many  will  seek 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  expecting 
power  as  an  evangelist,  but  God  has  not  called 
them  to  that  work  and  the  power  that  comes  from 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  manifests  itself 
in  another  way  in  them;  many  cases  of  bitter  dis- 
appointment and  almost  despair  have  arisen  from 
this  cause.  The  second  evil  is  graver  than  the 
first,  presumption,    A  man  whom  God  has  not 


BAPTISM  WITH  TH^  HOI,Y  SPIRIT  1 7 

called  to  the  work  of  an  evangelist  or  minister 
rushes  into  it  because  he  has  received,  or  thinks 
he   has   received,    tlie   Baptism  with   the    Holy 
Spirit.     Many  a  man  has  said,  '  'All  a  man  needs, 
to  succeed  as  a  preacher  is  the  Baptism  with  th( 
Holy  Spirit."     This  is  not  true:  he  needs  a  call 
to  that  specific  work,  and  he  needs  the  study  of  ^ 
the  Word  of  God  that  will  prepare  him  for  the 
work.  The  third  evil  is  still  greater,  indifference. 
There  are  many  who  know  they  are  not  called  to 
the  work  of  preaching.  For  example,  a  mother  with 
alargefamily  of  children  knows  this.  If  then,  they 
think  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  sim- 
ply imparts  power  to  preach,  it  is  a  matter  of  no 
personal  concern  to  them;  but  when  we  come  to 
see  the  truth  that,  while  the  Baptism  with  the 
Spirit  imparts   power,    the   way   in  which   that 
power  will  be  manifested,  depends  upon  the  work 
to  which  God  has  called  us,  and  that  no  efficient 
work  can  be  done  without  it,  then  the  mother  will 
see  that  she  equally  with  the  preacher  needs  this 
Baptism— needs  it  for  that  most  important  and 
hallowed  of  all  work,  to  bring  up  her  children 
''in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  I,ord."    I 
have  recently  met  a  very  happy  mother.     A  few 
months   ago  she  heard  of  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy   Spirit,  sought  it  and   received  it.      "Oh," 
she  joyfully  exclaimed  as  she  told  me  the  story, 
"Since  I  received  it,  I  have  been  able  to  get  into 


l8  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

the  hearts  of  my  children  which  I  was  never  able 

to  do  before." 

It  is   the    Holy    Spirit  Himself  who  decides 

how  the  power  will  manifest  itself  in  any  given 
case;  "the  spirit  dividing  to  each  one  severally 
as  He^iW  (i  Cor.  xii:  ii  R.  V.)  We  have 
a  right  "to  desire  earnestly  the  greater  gifts." 
(i  Cor.  xii:3i.)>  t)Ut  the  Holy  Spiritis  sovereign, 
and  He,  not  we,  must  determine  in  the  final 
issue.  It  is  not  for  us  then  to  select  some  gift 
and  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  impart  the  self- 
chosen  gift;  it  is  not  for  us  to  select  some  field  of 
service  and  then  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
impart  to  us  power  in  that  field  which  we,  and  not 
He,  have  chosen.  It  is  rather  for  us  to  recognize 
the  divinity  and  sovereignty  of  the  Spirit,  and 
put  ourselves  unreservedly  at  His  disposal;  for 
Him  to  select  the  gift  that  "He  will"  and  impart  to 
us  that  gift,  for  Him  to  select  for  us  the  field  that 
"He  will"  and  impart  to  us  the  power  that  will 
qualify  us  for  the  field  He  has  chosen.  I  once 
knew  a  child  of  God,  who,  hearing  of  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  power  that  resulted 
from  it,  gave  up  at  a  great  sacrifice,  the  secular 
work  in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  entered  upon 
the  work  of  an  evangelist.  But  the  expected 
power  in  that  line  did  not  follow.  The  man  fell 
into  great  doubt  and  darkness  until  he  was  led  to 
see  that  the  Holy  Spirit  divideth  **to   each  one 


BAPTISM  WITH  THK  HOI,Y  SPIRIT  19 

severally,  even  as  He  will."  Then,  giving  up 
selecting  his  own  field  and  gifts,  he  put  himself 
at  the  Holy  Spirit's  disposal  for  Him  to  choose. 
In  the  final  outcome  the  Holy  Spirit  did  impart 
to  this  man  power  as  an  evangelist  and  a 
preacher  of  the  Word.  We  must  then  surrender 
ourselves  absolutely  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work- 
as  He  will. 

But,    while   the  power  that  the  Baptism  with 
the   Holy  Spirit  brings,  manifests  itself  in  differ- 
ent   ways    in  different  individuals,    there   will 
always   be  power.     Just   as  surely  as  a  man  is 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit  there  will  be  new 
power,   a  power  not  his  own,  "the  power  of  the 
Highest!"     Religious     biography    abounds     in 
instances  of  men  who  have  worked  along  as  best 
they  could  until  one  day   they  were  led  to  see 
there  was  such  an  experience  as  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  to  seek  it  and  obtain  it;  from 
that  hour  there   came  into   their   service  a  new 
power    that    utterly    transformed  its  character. 
Finney,   Brainerd  and  Moody  are  cases  in  point. 
But  cases  of  this  character  are  not  confined  to  a 
few  exceptional  men,  they  are  becoming  common. 
The  writer  has  personally  met  and  corresponded 
with  hundreds  during  the  past  twelve  months, 
who  could  testify  to  the  new  power  that  God  had 
granted  them  through  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.     These    hundreds    of  men   and  women 


20  BAPTISM   WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

were  in  all  branches  of  Christian  service.  Many 
of  them  were  ministers  of  the  gospel,  others 
mission  workers,  others  Y.  M.  C.  A.  secretaries, 
others  Sunday-school  teachers,  others  personal 
workers,  others  fathers  and  mothers.  Nothing 
could  exceed  the  clearness,  confidence  and  joy- 
fulness  of  many  of  these  testimonies.  What  we 
have  in  promise  in  the  words  of  Christ  many  have, 
<;;^nd  all  may  have,  in  glad  experience:  '  *  Ye  shall 
receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come 
upon  you." 

To  sum  up  the  contents  of  this  chapter:  The, 
Baptism  with  the  Hol}^  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  ot 
God  coming  upon  the  believer,  taking  possession 
of  his  faculties,  imparting  to  him  gifts  not  natur- 
ally his  own,  but  which  qualify  him  for  the  ser- 
vice to  which  God  has  called  him. 


CHAPTKR  II. 

the:  nkce:ssity  and  possibiuty  of  the  bap- 
tism   WITH  THK  HOLY  SPIRIT. 

Shortly    before   Christ  was   received   up  into 
heaven,    having  committed  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel   to  his  disciples,    He  laid  upon  them  this 
ver}^  solemn  charge  concerning  the  beginning  of 
the  great  work  He  had  committed  to  their  hands: 
"Behold,  I   send  forth  the  promise  of  my  father 
upon   you;    but  tarry  ye  in  the  city,    until  ye  be 
clothed  with  powerfrom  on  high."  (I,ukexxiv:49 
R.  V.)  There  is  no  doubt  as  to  what  Jesus  meant 
by  the   "promise  of  my  Father"  for  which  they 
were  to  wait  before  beginning  the  ministry  which 
He  had  intrusted  to  them;  for  in  Actsi:  4,  5,  we 
read  that  Jesus  ''charged  them  not  to  depart  from 
Jerusalem,    but  to    wait  for    the  promise  of  the 
Father r  which,  said  he,  ''Ye  heard  from  me:  for 
John  indeed  baptised  with  water:  but  ye  shall  be 
baptised  with    the    Holy   Ghost  not   many  days 
hence."     "The  promise  of  the  Father,"  through 
which  the  enduement  of  power  was  to  come,  was 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.     (Comp.  Acts 
i:  8).   Christ  then   strictly  charged  his  disciples 


22  NKCHSSITY  OF  THE  BAPTISM 

not  to  presume  to  undertake  the  work  to  which 
He  had  called  them  until  they  had  received  as 
the  necessary  and  all-essential   preparation   for 
that  work,    the  Baptism   with  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  men  to  whom  Jesus  said  this,  seemed  to  have 
already   received  very  thorough  preparation    for 
the  work  in  hand.     They  had  been  to  school  to 
Christ  Himself  for  more  than  three  years.     They 
had  heard  from   His  own  lips  the  great  truths 
that  they  were  to  proclaim  to  the  world.     They 
had  been  eye  witnesses  of  His  miracles,  of  His 
death  and  of  His  resurrection  and  were  about  to 
be  eye-witnesses   of  His   ascension.     The  work 
before  them   was  simply  to  go  forth  to  proclaim 
what  their  own  eyes   had  seen   and  what  their 
own  ears  had  heard  from  the  lips  of  Christ  Him- 
self.    Were    they    not    fully  prepared   for  this 
work?     It    would  seem  so  to  us.     But   Christ 
said,  "No.     You  are  so  utterly  unprepared   you 
must  not  stir  a  step  yet.    There  is  a  further  prep- 
aration,  so  all-essential  to  effective  service,  you 
must   abide  at  Jerusalem  until   you   receive   it. 
This  further  preparation  is  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.     When   you   receive  that — and  not 
until  then — you   will   be  prepared   to   begin  the 
work  to  which  I  have   called   you."     If  Christ 
did    not   permit    these  men   who   had  received 
so     rare     and     unparalleled     a     schooling     for 
the  work  to  which   He  had  so  definitely  and 


NKCKSSITY  OF  THK  BAPTISM  23 

clearly  called  them  to  undertake  this  work  with- 
out receiving  in  addition  to  that  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  what  is  it  for  us  to  undertake 
the  work  to  which  He  has  called  us  until  we 
have  received,  in  addition  to  any  amount  of 
schooling  we  may  have  had  for  the  work,  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit?  Is  it  not  most 
daring  presumption? 

But  this  is  not  all.  In  Acts  x:  38,  we  read 
*'how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power:  who  went 
about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that 
were  oppressed  of  the  devil."  When  we  look 
into  the  gospels  for  an  explanation  of  these 
wordSjWe  finditin  Luke  iii:  21,  22;  iv:  i,  14,  15, 
18,  21.  We  find  that  at  the  Baptism  of  Jesus  at 
Jordan,  as  He  prayed,  the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon 
Him.  Then,  ''full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  He  has 
the  temptation  experience.  Then,  'Hn  the  power 
of  the  Spirit, ' '  He  begins  his  ministry,  and  pro- 
claims Himself  ''ariointed  to  preach"  because 
'Hhe  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Him."  In  other, 
words,  Jesus  the  Christ,  never  entered  upon  the  \ 
ministr}^  for  which  He  came  into  this  world  until 
He  w^as  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  Jesus 
Christ,  who  had  been  supernaturally  conceived 
through  the  Holy  Spirit's  power,  who  was  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  who  was  divine,  very 
God  of  very  God,  and  yet  truly  man,  if  such  an 


24  NKCKSSITY  OF  THE)  BAPTISM 

one, '  'leaving  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow 
in  His  steps, ' '  did  not  venture  upon  the  ministry 
for  which  the  Father  had  sent  Him  until  thus  bap- 
tised with  the  Holy  Ghost,  what  is  it  for  us  to 
dare  to  do  it?  If,  in  the  light  of  these  recorded 
facts,  we  dare  to  do  it,  it  seems  like  an  offence 
going  beyond  presumption.  Doubtless  it  has 
been  done  in  ignorance  by  many,  but  can  we  plead 
ignorance  any  longer?  The  Baptis7}i  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  an  absolutely  necessary  preparation 
for  elective  service  for  Christ  along  every  li?ie  of 
service.  We  may  have  a  very  clear  call  to  service, 
as  clear  it  may  be  as  the  Apostles  had,  but  the 
charge  is  laid  upon  us,  as  upon  them,  that  before 
we  begin  that  service  we  must  "tarry  until  ye  be 
clothed  with  power  from  on  high."  This  endue- 
ment  with  power  is  through  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  There  are  certainly  few  greater 
mistakes  that  we  are  making  to-day,  than  that 
of  setting  men  to  teach  Sunday-school  classes, 
and  do  personal  work,  and  even  to  preach  the 
gospel,  simply  because  they  have  been  converted 
and  received  a  certain  amount  of  education — per- 
haps including  a  college  and  seminary  course — 
but  have  not  as  yet  been  baptised  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Any  man  who  is  in  Christian  work,  who 
has  not  received  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  ought  to  stop  his  work  right  where  he  is, 
and  not  go  on  with  it  until  he  has  been  '  'clothed 


/ 


NKCKSSITY  OF  THK  BAPTISM  25 

with  power  from  on  high."  But  what  will  our 
work  do  while  we  are  waiting?  What  did  the 
world  do  those  ten  days  while  the  early  disciples 
were  waiting?  They  alone  knew  the  saving 
truth,  yet,  in  obedience  to  the  I^ord's  command, 
they  were  silent.  The  world  was  no  loser. 
When  the  power  came  thej^  accomplished  more 
in  one  day  than  they  would  have  accomplished  in 
years,  if  they  had  gone  on  in  presumptuous  disobe- 
dience to  Christ's  charge;  so  will  we  after  we 
have  received  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
accomplish  more  in  one  day  than  we  ever  would 
in  years  without  His  power.  Days  spent  in 
waiting,  if  it  were  necessary,  would  be  well  spent, 
but  we  shall  see  further  on  that  there  is  no  need 
that  we  spend  days  in  waiting.  It  may  be  said  that 
the  Apostles  had  gone  out  on  missionary  tours 
during  Christ's  lifetime  before  they  were  baptised 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  true,  but  that 
was  before  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  and  before 
the  charge,  ''tarry  until  ye  be  clothed  with  power 
from  on  high"  was  given.  After  that  it  would 
have  been  disobedience  and  presumption  to  have 
gone  forth  without  this  enduement,  and  we  are 
living  to-day  after  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been 
given  and  after  the  charge  to  "tarry  until  clothed' ' 
has  been  given. 

We  come  now  to  the  question  of  the  Possibility 
of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.     Is  the  Bap- 


25  NKCKSSITY  OF  THK  BAPTISM 

tism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  for  us?  This  is  a 
question  that  has  a  most  plain  and  explict  answer 
in  the  Word  of  God.  In  Actsii:39,  R.  V.,  we  read: 
"For  to  you  is  the  promise,  and  to  your  children, 
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the 
Lord  our  God  shall  call  unto  him, ' '  What  is  '  'the 
promise"  of  this  passage?  Turning  back  to  the 
fourth  and  fifth  verses  of  the  preceding  chapter  we 
read:  'Wait  ior  the  promise  oi  the  Father,  which 
saith  he,  ye  have  heard  of  me.  For  John  truly 
baptised  with  water;  but  ye  shall  be  baptised  with 
the  Holy  6^^^5/not  many  days  hence."  Again  in  the 
thirty- third  verse  of  the  second  chapter  we  read: 
"Having  received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.''  It  would  seem  to  be  perfectly 
clear  that  "the  promise' '  of  the  thirty-ninth  verse 
must  be  the  same  as  '  'the  promise' '  of  the  thirty- 
third  verse,  and  '  'the  promise' '  of  the  fourth  and 
fifth  verses  of  the  preceding  chapter;  i.  e.  the'prom- 
ise  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  con- 
clusion is  rendered  absolutely  certain  by  the  con- 
text: '  'Repent  and  be  baptised  every  one  of  you  in 
thename  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  your 
sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
For  to  you  is  the  promise, ' '  etc.  The  promise 
then  of  this  verse  is  the  promise  of  the  gift  or 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Comp.  Acts 
x:  45  with  Acts  xi:  15,  16.)  Who  is  this  gift 
for?  *  'To  you, ' '  says  Peter  to  the  Jews  whom  he 


NKCKSSITY  01^  THK  BAPTMSM  27 

was  immediately  addressing.     Then  looking  over 
their  heads  to  the  next    generation,   ''And  to 
your  children."      Then   looking   down  all   the 
coming  ages  of  the  Church's  history  to  Gentile  as 
well  as  Jew,  "And  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as 
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  unto  him." 
The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  for  every  / 
child  of  God  in  every  age  of  the  Church's  history.  I 
If  it  is  not  ours  in  experimental  possession,  it  is 
because  we  have  not  taken  (the  exact  force  of  the 
word  "receive"  in  verse  38  is  take)  what  God  has 
provided  for  us  in  our  exalted  Saviour.  (Acts  ii:  33; 
Jno.  vii:  38,  39.)     A  minister  of  the  Gospel  once 
.  came  to  me  after  a  lecture  on  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  said:   "The  church  to  which 
I  belong,  teaches  that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  for   the  Apostolic   age   alone."      "It 
matters  not,"  was  replied,  "what  the   church   to 
which  you  belong   or   the   church   to  which   I 
belong  teaches.    What  says  the  Word  of  God?" 
Acts  ii:  39  was  read:  "To  you  is  the  promise,  and 
to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even 
as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  unto  him. ' ' 
''Has  he  called  you?"  I  asked.  "Yes,  he  certainly 
has."     "Is  the  promise  for  you?"      "Yes,  it  is." 
And  it  was.     And  it  is  for  every  child  of  God  who 
reads  these  pages.     What  a  thrilling  thought  it  is 
that  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  endue- 
ment  with  power  from  on  high  is  for  us,  is  for 


28  NECESSITY  OP  THE  BAPTISM 

ME  individually.  But  that  unspeakably  joyous 
thought  has  its  solemn  side.  If  I  may  be  baptised 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  I  must  be.  If  I  am  baptised 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  then  will  souls  be  saved 
through  my  instrumentality  who  are  not  so 
saved  if  I  am  not  so  baptised.  If  then  I  am  not 
willing  to  pay  the  price  of  this  Baptism,  and 
therefore  am  not  so  baptised,  I  am  responsible 
before  God  for  all  the  souls  that  might  have  been 
saved  but  were  not  saved  through  me  because  I  was 
not  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  oftentimes 
tremble  for  my  brethren  in  Christian  work  and 
myself.  Not  because  we  are  teaching  deadly  error 
to  men;  some  are  guilty  of  even  that,  but  I  do 
not  refer  to  that  now.  Not  that  we  are  not  teach- 
ing the  full  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  It  must  be 
confessed  that  there  are  many  who  do  not  teach 
positive  error  who  do  not  preach  a  full  gospel, but 
I  do  not  refer  to  that.  I  tremble  for  those  who  are 
preaching  the  truth,  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  the 
Gospel  in  its  simplicity,  in  its  purity,  in  its  fullness, 
but  preaching  it  "in  persuasive  words  of  wisdom' ' 
and  not  "in  demonstration  of  the  spirit  and  of 
power"  (i  Cor.  ii:  4  R.  V.),  preaching  it  in  the 
energy  of  the  flesh  and  not  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  There  is  nothing  more  deadly  than 
the  gospel  without  the  Spirit's  power.  "The  letter 
killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life."  It  is  awfully 
solemn  business  preaching  the  gospel  either  irom 


NKCE^SSITY  OF  "tim  BAPTISM  29 

the  pulpit  or  in  more  quiet  ways.  It  means  death 
or  life  to  those  who  hear,  and  whether  it  means 
death  or  life,  depends  very  largely  on  whether  we 
preach  it  without  or  with  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  vSpirit.  We  must  be  baptis\2d  with  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

It  is  sometimes  arg-ued  that  "the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit"  was  for  the  purpose  of  imparting  miracle- 
working  power  and  for  the  Apostolic  age  alone.  In 
favor  of  this  position  it  is  asserted  that  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  was  followed  quite  uniformly  by 
miracles.     The  untenableness  of  this  position  is  seen:" 

(1)  By  the  fact,  that  Christ  Himself  asserted  that  the 
purpose  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  was  to 
impart  power  for  witnessing — not  especially  power 
to    work  miracles.     (Acts  i:   5,  8;  Luke  xxiv:  48,  49.) 

(2)  By  the  fact,  that  Paul  distinctly  taught  that  there 
were  diversities  of  gifts,  and  that  '  'workings  of  mir- 
acles" was  only  one  of  the  manifold  manifestations  of 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.     (1  Cor,  xii:  4,  8-10.) 

(3)  By  the  fact,  that  Peter  distinctly  asserts  that  "the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  "the  promise,"  is  for  all 
believers  in  all  generations  (Acts  ii:  38,  39),  and  it  is 
evident  from  a  comparison  of  Acts  ii:  39  vv^ith  Luke 
xxiv:  49;  Acts  i:  4,  5;  ii,  33,  and  of  Acts  ii:  38  with  Acts 
x:  45  and  Acts  xi:  15,  16,  that  each  of  these  two  express- 
ions, "the  promise,"  and  "the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
refers  to  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  we 
take  miracles  in  a  broad  sense  of  all  results  wrought 
by  supernatural  power,  then  it  is  true  that  each  one 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit  does  receive  miracle- 
working  power;  for  each  one  so  baptised  does  receive  a 


30  NI^CKSSITY  OF  THE   BAPTISM. 

power  not  naturally  his  own  supernatural  power,  God's 
own  power.  The  result  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  was  most  noticeable  and  essential  was  con- 
vincing, convicting  and  converting  power.  (Acts  ii: 
4,  37,  41.  Acts  iv:  8-13.  Acts  iv:  31,  33.  Acts  ix:  17,  20- 
23.)  There  seem  to  have  been  no  displays  of  miracle- 
working  power  immediately  following  Paul's  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  even  though  he  became  so  singu- 
larly gifted  in  this  direction  at  a  later  day — it  was 
power  to  witness  for  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God  that  he 
received  in  immediate  connection  with  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit. 


CHAPTER  III. 

HOW  THK  BAPTISM  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT   CAN 
BK   OBTAINED. 

We  have  now  come  to  a  place  where  there  is  a 
deep  sense  that  we  must  be  baptised  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  practical  question  confronts 
us;  how  can  we  obtain  this  baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  which  we  so  sorely  need.  This 
question  also  the  Word  of  God  answers  very 
plainly  and  very  explicitly.  There  is  pointed  out 
in  the  Bible  a  path,  consisting  of  seven  simple 
steps,  which  any  one  who  will  can  take,  and 
whoever  takes  these  seven  steps  will,  with  abso- 
lute certainty,  enter  into  this  blessing.  This 
statement  may  seem  very  positive,  but  the  Word 
of  God  is  equally  positive  regarding  the  outcome 
of  taking  these  steps  which  it  points  out.  All 
seven  steps  are  stated  or  implied  in  Acts.  ii:38: 
*  'Repent  ye,  and  be  baptised  every  one  of  you  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  your 
sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  The  first  three  steps  are  brought  out 
with  especial  definiteness  and  distinctness  in  this 
verse.     The  others  which  are  clearly  implied  in 


32  HOW  BAPTISM   MAY   B^   OBTAINKD 

the  verse   are   brought   out  more  explicitly   by- 
other  passages  to  which  we  shall  refer  later. 

1.  The  first  two  steps  are  found  in  the  word 
"repent."  What  does  "repent"  mean  ?  Cha?ige 
your  viind;  change  your  mind  about  what? 
About  God,  about  Christ,  about  sin.  As  to 
what  the  change  of  mind  is  about  in  any  given 
case  must  be  determined  by  the  context.  Here 
the  first  and  most  prominent  thought  is  a  change 
of  mind  about  Christ.  Peter  has  just  brought 
against  his  hearers  the  awful  charge  that  they 
had  crucified  Him  whom  God  had  made  both 
Lord  and  Christ.  "Pricked  in  their  heart"  by 
this  charge,  carried  home  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  his  hearers  had  cried  out,  "Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do?"  "Repent,"  Peter 
answered.  Change  your  mind  about  Christ. 
Change  from  a  Christ-hating  and  Christ-crucify- 
ing attitude  of  mind  to  a  Christ-accepting  atti- 
tude of  mind.  Accept  Jesus  as  Christ  and  Lord. 
This  the7i  is  the  first  step  toward  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit:  Accept  Jesus  as  Christ  and" 
Lord, 

2.  The  second  step  is  also  found  in  the  word 
*  'repent. ' '  While  the  change  of  mind  about  Jesus 
is  the  first  and  prominent  thought,  there  must  also 
be  a  change  of  mind  about  sin.  A  change  of  mind 
from  a  sin-loving  or  sin-indulging  attitude  of 
mind  to  a  sin-hating  and  sin-renouncing  attitude 


HOW  BAPTISM   MAY  BK  0BTAIN:^D  33 

of  mind.     This  is  the  second  step;  renounce  sirff 
all  sin,  every  sin.     Here  we  come  upon  one  of 
the  commonest  obstacles  to  receiving  the  Holy 
Spirit— 6'?>2.    Something  is  held  on  to  that  in  our 
inmost  hearts  we  mere  or  less  definitely  feel  to 
be  not  pleasing  to  God.     If  we  are  to  receive  the 
Holy  Spirit,  there  must  be  very  honest  and  very 
thorough  heart  searching.   We  cannot  do  satisfac- 
tory searching  ourselves,  God  must  do  it.     If  we 
wish  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  we  should  go 
alone  with  God  and  ask  Him  to  search  us  thor- 
oughly   and  bring  to  light  anything  that   dis- 
pleases  Him.     (Ps.  cxxxix:  23,  24.)     Then  we 
should    wait    for    him    to    do    it.      When    the 
displeasing  thing  is  revealed  it   should  be  put 
away  at  once.     If,  after  patient  and  honest  wait- 
ing, nothing    is    brought     to    light,    we    may 
conclude  there  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  the  way, 
and  proceed  to  the  further  steps.     But  we  should 
not  conclude  this  too  hurriedly.     The  sin  that 
hinders    the   blessing  may   be    something   that 
appears   very  small  and  insignificant  in    itself. 
Mr.  Finney  tells  of  a  young  woman  who  was  in 
deep    concern  regarding  the  Baptism  with    the 
Holy  Spirit.     Night  after  night  she  agonized  in 
prayer,   but  the  desired  blessing  did  not  come. 
One  night  as  she  was  in  prayer  there  came  up 
before  her  some  matter  of  head  adornment  that 
had  often  troubled  her  before;  putting  her  hand 


34  HOW  BAPTISM   MAY   BE   OBTAINED 

to  her  head,  she  took  the  pins  out  and  threw  them 
away  and  immediately  the  blessing  came.  This 
was  a  small  matter  in  itself,  a  matter  that  would 
not  have  appeared  to  many  as  sin,  but  yet  a  mat- 
ter of  controversy  between  this  woman  and  God, 
and  when  this  was  settled  the  blessing  came. 
''Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin"  (Rom.  xiv: 
23),  and  it  matters  not  how  little  the  thing  may 
be,  if  there  are  questions  regarding  it,  it  must  be 
put  away  if  we  are  to  have  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  second  step  theft  toward  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  put  away 
every  sin. 

3.  The  third  step  is  found  in  this  same  verse: 
*  ^Be  baptised  in  the  7iame  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the 
remission  of  your  sins. ' '     It  was  immediately  after 
His  baptism  that  the  Holy  Spirit    descended 
upon  Jesus.  (L,uke  iii:2i,  22.)     In  His  baptism, 
Jesus,  though  Himself  sinless,  humbled  Himself 
to  take  the  sinner's  place,  and  then  God  highly 
exalted  Him  by  the  giving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
by  the  audible  testimony,    *  'Thou  art  my  beloved 
son;  in  thee  I  am  well  pleased."     So  we  must 
y  humble  ourselves  to  make  open  confession  of  our 
sin    and  renunciation  of  it  and   acceptance   of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  God's  appointed  way,  by  Baptism. 
The  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  for  the 
one  who  secretly  takes  his  place  as  a  sinner  and 
believer  in  Christ,  but  for  the  one  who  does  so 


HOW  BAPTISM   MAY   BE)   OBTAINED  35 

Openly.  Of  course,  the  Baptism  with  the 
f  Holy  Spirit  may  precede  water  baptism  as  in  the 
case  of  the  household  of  Cornelius.  (Acts  x:  47.) 
But  this  was  evidently  an  exceptional  case  and 
^  water  baptism  immediately  followed.  I  have 
little  doubt  that  there  have  been  those,  among 
Christians  who  did  not  believe  in  or  practice 
water  baptism — as  for  example  "the  Friends"  or 
"Quakers" — who  have  had  and  given  evidence 
of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the 
passage  before  us  certainly  presents  the  normal 
order. 

4.  The  fourth  step  is  clearly  implied  in  the 
verse  we  have  been  studying,  (Acts  ii:  38),  but  it 
is  brought  out  more  explicitly  in  Acts  v:  32: 
"The  Holy  Ghost,  whom  God  hath  given  to 
them  that  ob^y  Hivi.' '  The  fourth  step  is  obedience'f 
What  does  obedience  mean?  It  does  not  mean 
merely  doing  some  of  the  things,  or  many  of  the 
things,  or  most  of  the  things,  that  God  bids  us 
do.  It  means  total  surrender  to  the  will  of  God. 
Obedience  is  an  attitude  of  the  will  lying  back  of 
specific  acts  of  obedience.  '  It  means  that  I  come 
to  God  and  say:  "Heavenly  Father,  here  I  am 
and  all  I  have.  Thou  hast  bought  me  with  a 
price  and  I  acknowledge  thine  absolute  owner- 
ship. Take  me  and  all  I  have,  and  do  with  me 
whatsoever  thou  wilt.  Send  me  where  thou  wilt, 
use  me  as  thou  wilt.     I  surrender  myself  and  all 


36  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY  BE  OBTAINED 

I  possess  absolutely,  unconditionally,  for  ever,  to 
thy  control  and  use."  It  was  when  the  burnt 
offering,  whole,  no  part  held  back,  was  laid  upon 
the  altar  that  "there  came  forth  fire  from  before 
the  Lord"  and  accepted  the  gift  (Lev.  ix:  24),  and 
it  is  when  we  bring  ourselves  a  whole  burnt  offer- 
ing to  the  Lord,  and  lay  ourselves  thus  upon  the 
altar,  that  the  fire  comes  and  God  thus  accepts  the 
gift.  Here  we  touch  upon  the  hindrance  to  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  many  lives: 
there  is  not  total  surrender,  the  will  is  not  laid 
down,  the  heart  does  not  cry,  "Lord,  where  thou 
wilt,  what  thou  wilt,  as  thou  wilt."  One  man 
desires  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  that  he 
may  preach  or  work  with  power  in  Boston,  when 
God  wishes  him  in  Bombay.  Another,  that  he 
may  preach  to  popular  audiences,  when  God 
wishes  him  to  plod  among  the  poor.  A  young 
woman  at  a  convention  expressed  a  stroig  desire 
that  some  one  would  speak  on  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  The  address  went  home  with 
power  to  her  heart.  She  had  been  for  some  time  in 
deep-  travail  of  soul  when  I  asked  her  what  it 
was  that  she  desired.  "Oh,"  she  cried,  I  "cannot 
go  back  to  Baltimore  until  I  am  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Spirit. ' '  "Is  your  will  laid  down?' '  *  *I 
don't  know."  "You  wish  to  go  back  to  Baltimore 
to  be  a  Christian  worker?"  "Yes."  ^' Are  you 
willing  to  go  back  to  Baltimore  and  be  a  servant 


HOW  BAPTISM   MAY   BK   OBTAINKD  37 

girl  if  that  is  where  God  wishes  you?"  *'No,  I 
am  not."  "Well,  you  will  never  get  the  Baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  until  you  are.  Will  you 
la}^  your  will  down?"  "I  can't"  "Are  you 
willing  God  should  lay  it  down  for  you?  "  "Yes." 
"Well,  then,  ask  Him  to  do  it."  The  head  was 
bowed  in  brief  but  earnest  prayer.  "Did  God 
hear  that  prayer?"  "He  must  have,  it  was 
according  to  His  will;  He  did."  "Now  ask  Him 
for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  Again 
the  head  was  bowled  and  the  brief,  earnest  prayer 
ascended  to  God.  There  was  a  brief  silence  and 
the  agony  was  over,  the  blessing  had  come — 
when  the  will  was  surrendered.  There  are  many 
who  hold  back  from  this  total  surrender  because 
they  fear  God's  will.  They  are  afraid  God's  will 
may  be  something  dreadful.  Remember  who 
God  is.  He  is  our  Father.  Never  an  earthly 
father  had  so  loving  and  tender  a  will  regarding 
his  children  as  He  has  toward  us.  "No  good 
thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly."  (Ps.  Ixxxiv:  11).  "He  that  spared 
not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all, 
how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things?"  There  is  nothing  to  be  feared  in  God's 
will.  God' swill  will  always  prove  in  the  final  out- 
come the  best  and  sweetest  thing  in  all  God's  uni- 
verse. 

5.  The  fifth  step  is  found  in  I^uke  xi:  13.     "If 


38  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BK   OBTAINKD 

ye,  being  evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  him?"  The  asking  of  this  verse  is  the 
asking  that  springs  from  real  and  intense  desire. 
This  is  brought  out  by  the  context:  '*Ask,  and 
it  shall  be  given  you;  seek  and  ye  shall  find; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  Note 
also  the  parable  of  the  importunate  friend  that 
immediately  precedes.  Evidently  the  asking  that 
Christ  has  in  mind  is  not  the  asking  of  a  passing 
and  half-hearted  whim,  but  the  asking  of  intense 
desire.  There  is  a  very  suggestive  passage  in 
Isaiah,  the  forty-fourth  chapter  and  third  verse: 
"I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty.  .  .  I 
will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  th}^  seed."  What  does 
it  mean  to  be  thirsty?  When  one  is  thirsty  there 
is  but  one  cry:  "Water!  water!  water!"  Every 
pore  in  the  body  seems  to  have  a  voice  and  cry 
out  "water."  So  when  our  hearts  have  one  cry, 
"the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  then  it  is  that  God  pours  floods  upon 
the  dry  ground,  pours  His  Spirit  upon  us.  This 
then  is  the  fifth  step — intense  desire  for  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  what  a  pitch  of 
longing  the  early  disciples  had  been  brought 
by  the  tenth  day  of  their  eager  waiting, and  their 
thirsty  souls  wereiilled  that  day  when  "Pentecost 
was  fully  come."     As  long  as  one  thinks  he  can 


HOW    BAPTISM    MAY   BH   OBTAINKD  39 

get  along  somehow  without  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  long  as  he  casts  about  for 
something  in  the  way  of  education  or  cunningly 
concocted  methods  of  work,  he  is  not  going  to 
received  it.  There  are  many  ministers  who  are 
missing  the  fullness  of  power  God  has  for  them, 
simply  because  they  are  not  willing  to  admit  the 
lack  there  has  been  all  these  years  in  their  minis- 
try. It  is  indeed  a  humiliating  thing  to  confess, 
but  that  humiliating  confession  would  be  the 
precursor  of  a  marvellous  blessing.  But  there 
are  not  a  few,  who, in  their  unwillingness  to  make 
this  wholesome  confession,  are  casting  about  for 
some  ingenious  device  of  exegesis  to  get  around 
the  plain  and  simple  meaning  of  God's  Word, 
and  thus  they  are  cheating  themselves  of  the  full- 
ness of  the  Spirit's  power  that  God  is  so  eager  to 
bestow  upon  them;  and,  furthermore,  they  are 
imperilling  the  eternal  interests  of  the  souls  that 
are  dependent  upon  their  ministrations,  that 
might  be  won  for  Christ,  if  they  had  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  they  might  have.  But 
there  are  others  whom  God  in  His  grace  has 
brought  to  see  that  there  was  a  something  their 
ministry  lacked,  and  this  something  nothing  less 
than  that  all-essential  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  without  which  one  is  utterly  unqualified 
for  acceptable  and  effective  service,  and  they  have 
humbly  and  frankly   confessed  their  lack,  some- 


40  HOW  BAPTISM  MAY  BK  OBTAINED 

times  they  have  been  led  to  the  God-taught 
resolution  that  they  would  not  go  on  in  their  work 
until  this  lack  was  supplied,  they  have  waited  in 
eager  longing  upon  God  the  Father  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  His  promise,  and  the  result  has  been  a 
transformed  ministry  for  which  many  have  risen 
to  bless  God. 

It  is  not  enough  that  the  desire  for  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  be  intense;  it  must  also 
have  the  right  motive.  There  is  a  desire  for 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  that  is  purely 
selfish.  There  is  many  a  one  who  has  an  intense 
desire  for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
simply  that  he  may  be  a  great  preacher,  or  great 
personal  worker,  or  renowned  in  some  way  as  a 
Christian.  It  is  simply  his  own  gain  or  glory 
that  he  is  seeking.  After  all  it  is  not  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  he  seeks,  but  his  own  honor  and  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  simply  as  a  means 
to  that  end.  One  of  the  subtlest  and  most  dan- 
gerous snares  into  which  Satan  leads  us,  is  that, 
where  we  are  seeking  the  Holy  Spirit,  this  most 
solemn  of  all  gifts,  for  our  own  ends.  The  desire 
for  the  Holy  Spirit  must  not  be  in  order  to  make 
that  sublime  and  divine  Person  the  servant  of 
our  low  ends,  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  It  must 
arise  from  a  recognition  that  God  and  Christ  are 
being  dishonored  bj^  my  powerless  ministry  and 
by  the  sin  of  the  people  about  me,  against  which 


HOW  BAPTISM  MAY  BK  OBTAINE^D  4I 

I  now  have  no  power,  and  that  He  will  be 
honored,  if  I  have  the  Baptism  with  the  Spirit  of 
God.  One  of  the  most  solemn  passages  in  the 
New  Testament  bears  upon  this  point.  (Acts  viii: 
18-24,  R-  V.)  "When  Simon  saw  that  through 
the  laying  on  of  the  Apostles'  hands  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  given,  he  offered  them  money,  saying, 
Give  me  also  this  power,  that  on  whom.soever  I 
lay  my  hands,  he  may  receive  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Here  was  a  strong  desire  on  Simon's  part,  but  it 
was  entirely  unhallowed  and  selfish,  and  Peter's 
terrific  answer  is  worthy  of  note  and  meditation. 
Is  there  not  many  a  one  to-day  who,  with  equally 
unhallowed  and  selfish  purpose  desires  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit?  Bach  one  who  is 
desiring  and  seeking  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  would  do  well  to  ask  himself  why  he 
desires  it.  If  you  find  that  it  is  merely  for  your 
own  gratification  or  glory,  then  ask  God  to  for- 
give you  the  thought  of  your  heart,  and  to  enable 
you  to  see  how  you  need  it  for  His  glory  and  to 
desire  it  to  that  end. 

6.  The  sixth  step  is  in  this  same  verse.  (I^uke 
xi:  13.)  "If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to 
give  good  gifts  unto  yo\xx  children,  how  much 
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit    to  them  that  ask  Him."      The  sixth    step 

to  ask.  Definite  asking  for  a  definite  blessing. 
When  Christ   has  been  accepted  as  Saviour  and 


ff 


42  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BK   OBTAINKD 

Master,  and  confessed  as  such,  when  sin  has  been 
put  away,  when  there  has  been  the  definite,  total 
surrender  of  the  will,  when  there  is  real  and  holy- 
desire,  then  comes  the  simple  act  of  asking  God 
for  this  definite  blessing.  It  is  given  in  answer 
to  earnest,  definite,  specific,  believing  prayer.  It 
has  been  earnestly  contended  by  some  that  we 
should  not  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  reason 
this  out  in  this  way:  "The  Holy  Spirit  was  given 
to  the  Church  at  Pentecost,  as  an  abiding  gift." 
This  is  true,  but  what  was  given  to  the  Church 
each  believer  must  appropriate  for  himself.  It 
{  has  been  well  said  on  this  point,  that  God  has 
already  given  Christ  to  the  world,  (Jno.  iii:  16), 
but  that  each  individual  must  appropriate  Him 
by  a  personal  act  to  get  the  personal  advantage  ot 
Ithe  gift,  and  so  must  each  individual  personally 
appropriate  God's  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  get 
the  personal  advantage  of  it.  But  it  is  argued 
still  further  that  each  believer  has  the  Holy 
Spirit.  This  is  also  true  in  a  sense.  "If  any  man 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His." 
(Rom.  viii:  9.)  But  as  we  have  already  seen,  it  is 
quite  possible  to  have  something,  yes  much,  ot 
the  Spirit's  presence  and  work  in  the  heart  and 
yet  come  short  of  that  special  fullness  and  work 
known  in  the  Bible  as  the  Baptism  or  Filling  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  In  answer  to  all  specious 
reasonings   on   this   subject   we  put  the   simple 


HOW  BAPTISM  MAY  BK  OBTAINED  43 

statement  of  Christ:  "How  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  Him."  At  a  convention  at  which  the 
author  was  announced  to  speak  on  this  subject,  a 
brother  said  to  him:  "I  see  you  are  to  speak  on 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit. "  "Yes."  "It 
is  the  most  important  subject  on  the  programme; 
now  be  sure  and  tell  them  not  to  pray  for  the 
Holy  Spirit."  "I  shall  certainly  not  tell  them 
that;  for  Jesus  said,  'How  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  Him."  '  "Oh,  but  that  was  before  Pente- 
cost." "How  about  Acts  iv:  31?  was  that  before 
Pentecost  or  after?"  "After  it,  of  course." 
'iWell,  read  it."  It  was  read:  "When  they  had 
prayed,  the  place  was  shaken  where  they  were 
assembled  together,  and  they  were  all  filled  with 
the  Holy  Ghost. ' '  '  'How  about  the  eighth  chap- 
ter of  Acts?  Was  that  before  Pentecost  or  after  ?" 
"After,  of  course."  "Well,  read  the  fourteenth 
to  the  sixteenth  verses."  The  verses  were  read: 
"Peter  and  John,  when  they  were  come  down, 
prayed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost;  for  as  yet  He  was  falle7i  upon  none  of  them, 
and  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost."  Against  all 
inferences  is  this  clear  teaching  of  the  Word  by 
precept  and  example,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
given  in  answer  to  prayer.  It  was  so  at  Pente- 
cost; it  has  been  so  since.     Those  whom  I  have 


44  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BE   OBTAINED 

met  who  give  most  evidence  of  the  Spirit's  pres- 
ence and  power  in  their  life  and  work  believe  in 
praying  for  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  has  been  the 
author's  unspeakable  privilege  to  pray  with  many 
ministers  and  Christian  workers  for  this  great 
blessing,  and  afterward  to  learn  from  them  or 
from  others  of  the  new  power  that  has  come  into 
their  service,  none  other  than  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

7.  The  seventh  and  last  step  is  found  in  Mark 
xi:  24.  "What  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye 
i^x2iy ,  believe  that  ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have 
them."  God's  most  positive  and  unqualified 
promises  must  be  appropriated  by  faith.  In  Jas. 
i:  5,  we  read:  "If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let 
him  ask  of  God  that  giveth  to  all  members  liber- 
all}^,  and  upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given 
him."  Now,  that  is  certainly  positive  and 
unqualified  enough,  but  listen  to  what  the  writer 
says  next:  "But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing 
waverifig,  for  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of 
the  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed.  For 
let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  any- 
thing of  the  I,ord."  There  must  then  be  faith 
in  order  to  make  our  own  the  most  positive  and 
unqualified  promises  of  God,  such  as  that  in 
Luke  xi:  13,  and  Acts  ii:  38,  39.  Here  then  we 
discover  the  cause  of  failure  in  many  cases  to 
enter  into  the  blessing  of  the  Baptism  with  the 


HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BK  OBTAINED  45 

Holy  Spirit.  The  failure  is  because  the  last  step 
^is  not  taken — the  simple  step  of  faith.  They  do 
not  believe,  they  do  not  confidently  expect,  and 
we  have  another  instance  of  how  men  *  'Entered 
not  in  because  of  unbelief"  (Heb.  iv:  6.)  There 
are  many,  very  many,  who  are  kept  out  of  this 
land  of  milk  and  honey  just  by  this  unbelief  It 
should  be  added  that  there  is  a  faith  that  goes 
beyond  expectation,  a  faith  that  just  puts  out  its 
hand  and  takes  what  it  asks.  This  is  brought 
out  very  clearly  by  the  R.  V.  of  Mark  xi:  24. 
"All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  and  ask  for, 
believe  that  ye  have  received  them  and  ye  shall 
have  them."  I  remember  how  greatly  I  was 
perplexed  by  this  rendering  of  the  R.  V.  when  I 
first  noticed  it.  On  examining  the  Greek  of  the 
passage  I  saw  that  the  R.  V.  was  correct, 
but  what  did  it  mean?  It  seemed  like  a 
singular  confusion  of  the  tenses.  '  'Believe  that 
ye  have  (already)  received  them,  and  ye  shall 
have  them."  This  seeming  enigma  was  solved 
long  after,  while  studjdng  the  First  Epistle  of 
John.  I  read  in  the  fifth  chapter,  fourteenth  and 
fifteenth  verses:  "This  is  'the  boldness  which 
we  have  toward  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything 
according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us:  and  if  we 
know  that  he  heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we 
know  that  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we 
have  asked  of  him."  (R.  V.)  When  I  ask  anything 


46  HOW  BAPTISM  MAY  BE  OBTAINED 

of  God  the  first  thing  to  find  out  is,  is  this  peti- 
tion according  to  his  will?  When  that  is  settled, 
when  I  find  it  is  according  to  His  will  when,  for 
example,  the  thing  asked  is  definitely  promised 
in  His  word — then  I  know  the  prayer  is  heard, 
and  I  know  further, '  'I  have  the  petition  which  I 
have  asked  of  him.  "I  know  it  because  He  plainly 
says  so,  and  w^hat  I  have  thus  appropriated  on 
simple,  childlike  faith  in  His  naked  Word  "I 
shall  have' '  in  actual  experience.  When  one  who 
has  a  clear  title  to  a  piece  of  property  deeds  it  to 
me  it  is  mine  as  soon  as  the  deed  is  properly 
executed  and  recorded,  though  it  may  be  some 
time  before  I  enter  into  the  experimental  enjoy- 
ment of  it.  I  have  it  in  the  one  sense  as  soon  as 
the  deed  is  recorded.  I  shall  have  it  in  the  other 
sense  later.  In  like  manner,  as  soon  as  we, 
having  met  the  conditions  of  prevailing  prayer, 
put  up  to  God  a  petition  for  '  'anything  according 
to  his  will,"  it  is  our  privilege  to  know  that  the 
prayer  is  heard,  and  that  the  thing  which  we 
have  asked  of  Him  is  ours.  Now  apply  this  to 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  have  met 
the  conditions  of  obtaining  this  blessing  already 
mentioned.  I  simply,  definitely,  ask  God,  the 
Father,  for  the  Baptism  with  the  HolySpirit.  Then 
I  stop  and  say  was  that  prayer  '  'according  to  his 
will?"  Yes,  Luke  xi:  13  says  so.  "If  ye  then 
being  evil,  know  how   to  give   good  gifts  unto 


HOW   BAPTISM    MAY   B:^   OBTAINED  47 

your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  him?"  Acts  ii:  38,  39  says:  "Repent 
ye,  and  be  baptised  every  one  of  you  in  the  name 
of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  j^our  sins; 
and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
For  to  you  is  the  promise,  and  to  your  children, 
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the 
I^ord  our  God  shall  call  unto  him."  (R.  V.)  It 
is  clear  that  the  prayer  for  the  Baptism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  "according  to  His  will,"  for  it  is 
definitely  and  plainly  promised.  I  know  then 
that  the  prayer  is  heard  and  that  I  have  the  petition 
which  I  have  asked  of  hi77i.  (i  Jno.  v:  14,  15  R. 
V.)^hatis,  I  have  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit.  I  have  then  the  right  to  arise  from  my 
knees  and  say,  on  the  all-sufficient  authority  of 
God's  Word,  "I  have  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  and  afterwards  I  shall  have  in  experi- 
mental enjoyment  what  I  have  appropriated  by 
simple  faith;  for  God  has  said  and  He  cannot  lie, 
'  'All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  and  ask  for,  believe 
that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall  have 
them.''  Any  reader  of  this  book  may  at  this 
point  lay  it  down,  and,  if  Christ  has  been  accepted 
as  Saviour  and  Lord,  and  openly  confessed  as 
such  in  God's  way,  and  if  sin  has  been  searched 
out  and  put  away,  and  if  there  has  been  total 
surrender  of  the  will  and  of  self  to  God,  and  if 


48  HOW   BAPTISM    MAY   BK   OBTAINED 

there  is  a  true  desire  for  God's  glory  to  be 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit — if  these  conditions 
have  been  met,  you  may  get  down  just  now 
before  God,  and  ask  him  to  baptise  you  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  3'ou  can  then  say,  when  the 
pra3'er  has  gone  up,  "That  prayer  was  heard,  I 
have  what  I  have  asked,  I  have  the  baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,''^  and  3^ou  have  a  right  to  get  up 
and  go  out  to  your  work,  assured  that  in  that 
work  you  will  have  the  Holy  Spirit's  power. 
But  some  one  will  ask,  "Must  I  not  know  that  I 
havs  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  before  I 
begin  the  work?"  Certainl}^  but  how  shall  we 
know?  I  know  of  no  better  way  of  knowdng  any- 
thing than  by  God's  Word.  I  would  believe  God's 
word  before  my  feelings  any  da}'.  How  do  we 
deal  with  an  inquirer  who  has  accepted  Christ, 
but  who  lacks  assurance  that  he  has  eternal  life? 
We  do  not  ask  him  to  look  at  his  feelings,  but  we 
take  him  to  some  such  passage  as  Jno.  iii,  36.  We 
tell  him  to  read  it  and  he  reads:  "He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life." 
"Who  says  that?"  we  ask.  "God  says  it."  "Is 
it  true?"  "Oh,  certainly  it  is  true;  God  says  it." 
"Who  does  God  say  has  everlasting  life?"  "He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son."  "Do  you  believe  on 
the  Son?"  "Yes."  "What  have  you  then?" 
"O,  I  don't  know,  I  don't  teel  yet  that  I  have 
eternal  life, ' '     *  'But  what  does  God  say?' '     '  'He 


HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BE)   OBTAINE^D  49 

that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life." 
"Are  you  going  to  believe  God  or  your  feelings?" 
We  hold  the  inquirer  right  there  until  on  the  sim- 
ple, naked  word  of  God,  feeling  or  no  feeling,  he 
says,  '  'I  know  I  have  eternal  life  because  God 
says  so,"  and  afterward  the  feeling  comes.  Deal 
with  yourself  in  this  matter  of  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  just  as  you  deal  with  an  inquirer 
in  the  matter  of  assurance.  Be  sure  you  have 
met  the  co7iditions,  and  then  simply  ask,  claim,  act. 
But  some  one  will  say,  "Will  it  be  just  as  it  was 
before,  won't  there  be  any  manifestation?"  Most 
assuredly  there  will  be  some  manifestation.  *  'To 
each  one  is  given  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit 
to  profit  wn thai."  (i  Cor.  xii:  7,  R.  V.)  But  w^hat 
will  the  character  of  the  manifestation  be  and 
where  shall  we  see  it?  It  is  at  this  point  that 
many  make  a  mistake.  They  have,  perhaps, 
read  the  life  of  Mr.  Finney  or  of  Jonathan 
Edwards,  and  recall  how  great  waves  of  electric 
emotion  swept  over  these  men  until  they  were 
obliged  to  ask  God  to  withdraw  His  hand  lest 
they  die  from  the  ecstacy.  Or  they  have  gone  to 
some  meeting,  and  heard  testimonies  to  similar 
experiences,  and  they  expect  something  like  this. 
Now  I  do  not  deny  the  reality  of  such  experi- 
ences. I  cannot.  The  testimony  of  such  men 
as  Finney  and  Edwards  is  to  be  believed.  There 
is  a  stronger  reason  why  I  cannot  deny  them. 


50  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   BK   OBTAINED 

But  while  admitting  the  reality  of  these  experi- 
ences, I  would  ask,  where  is  there  a  single  line  of 
the    New    Testament    that    describes  any  such 
experience  in  connection   with  the  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit?    Every  manifestation  of  the  Bap- 
tism with  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  New  Testament 
was  in  new  power  in  service.     lyook,  for  example, 
at  I  Cor.  xii,  where  this  subject  it  is  treated  in  the 
most  thorough  way,  and  note  the  character  of  the 
manifestations  mentioned.     It  is  quite  probable 
that  the    Apostles    had    similar  experiences  to 
those  of  Finney  and  Edwards  and  others,  but,  if 
they  had,  the  Holy  Spirit  kept  them  from  record- 
ing them.     It  is  well  He  did,  for  if  they  had  told 
of  such  things  we  would  have  looked  for  these 
things   rather  than   the   more   important  mani- 
festation of  power  in  service. 

But  another  question  will  be  asked:  "Did  not 
the  Apostles  wait  ten  days  and  may  we  not  have 
to  wait?"  The  Apostles  were  kept  waiting  ten 
days,  but  the  reason  is  given  in  Acts  ii:  i.  "When 
the  Day  ofPentecost  was  now  come"  (literally  was 
being  fulfilled,  R.  V.)  In  the  eternal  purposes  and 
plans  of  God  and  in  the  Old  Testament  types  the 
Day  of  Pentecost  was  set  as  the  time  for  the  giving 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  could  not  be 
given  until  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  fulfilled  to 
come,  but  we  read  of  no  waiting  after  Pentecost, 
in  Acts,  iv:  31,  there  was   no  waiting.   ^'When 


HOW    BAPTISM    MAY    BK    OBTAINED  51 

they  had  prayed  the  place  was  shaken  where  they 
were  assembled  together,  and  they  were  all  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  Acts  viii,  there  was 
110  waiting.  When  Peter  and  John  came  down 
to  Samaria  and  found  that  none  of  the  young  con- 
verts had  been  baptised  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
they  "pra3^ed  for  them,  that  they  might  receive 
the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  they  did  then  and  there. 
(Acts  viii:  15,  17).  Paul  of  Tarsus  was  not 
obliged  to  wait  in  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  Acts. 
Ananias  came  in  and  told  him  of  this  wondrous 
gift,  and  baptised  him,  and  laid  his  hands  upon 
him,  and  "'straightway  in  the  synagogue  he  pro- 
claimed Jesus,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God."  (Acts 
ix:  17,  20).  There  was  no  waiting  in  Acts  x. 
Before  Peter  had  fairly  got  through  his  sermon 
the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  came.  (Acts  x: 
44-46;  Comp.  chap,  xi,  15,  16.)  In  the  nineteenth 
chapter  of  the  Acts  there  was  no  waiting.  As 
soon  as  Paul  had  declared  to  the  Ephesian  dis- 
ciples the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  condi- 
tions were  met,  the  blessing  followed.  (Acts  xix: 
1-6.)  Men  only  have  to  wait  when  they  do  not 
meet  the  conditions,  when  Christ  is  not  fully 
accepted,  or  sin  is  not  put  away,  or  there  is  not 
total  surrender,  or  true  desire,  or  definite  prayer, 
or  simple  faith,  just  taking  upon  the  naked 
Word.  The  absence  of  some  of  these  things 
keeps  many  waiting  for  more  than  ten  days  some- 


52  HOW   BAPTISM   MAY   B:^   OBTAINED 

times.  But  there  is  no  need  that  any  reader  of 
this  book  wait  ten  hours.  You  can  have  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit  just  now,  if  you 
will.  A  young  man  once  came  to  me  in  great 
earnestness  about  this  matter.  "I  heard  of  the 
Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  he  said,  "some 
time  ago  and  have  been  seeking  it,  but  have  not 
received  it."  "Is  your  will  laid  down?"  "I 
am  afraid  that  is  the  trouble."  "Will  you  lay 
it  down?"  "I  am  afraid  I  cannot."  "Are  you 
willing  God  should  lay  it  down  for  you?" 
"Yes."  "Ask  Him  to."  We  knelt  in  prayer, 
and  he  asked  God  to  lay  down  his  will  for  him. 
"Did  God  hear  that  prayer  ?"  "He  must  have, 
it  was  according  to  His  will."  "Is  your  will 
laid  down?"  "It  must  be."  "Then  ask  God 
for  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit."  He  did 
this.  "Was  that  prayer  according  to  His  will  ?" 
"Yes."  "Was  it  heard?"  "It  must  have 
been."  "Have  you  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  ?"  ''I  don't  feel  it."  "That  is  not  what 
I  asked  you;  read  those  verses  again."  The 
Bible  lay  open  at  i  Jno.  v:  14,  15  before  him  and 
he  read:  "This  is  the  confidence  we  have  in  him, 
that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will, 
He  heareth  us."  "Wait  a  moment;  was  that 
prayer  according  to  His  will?"  "It  certainly 
was."  "Was  it  heard?"  "It  was."  "Read 
on."     "And  if  we  know  that  he  hear  us  whatso- 


HOW   BAPTISM   MAY  BB  OBTAINED  53 

ever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions 
that  we  desired  of  Him."  "Know  what?" 
"That  we  have  the  petitions  we  desired  of  Him." 
"What  was  the  petition  ?"  "The  Baptism  with 
the  Holy  Spirit."  "Have  you  it  ?"  "I  don't 
feel  it,  but  God  saj^s  so,  and  I  must  have."  A 
few  days  later  I  met  him  again  and  asked  if  he 
really  had  received  what  he  took  on  simple  faith. 
With  a  happy  look  in  his  face  he  answered, '  'Yes. " 
I  lost  sight  of  him  for  perhaps  two  years,  and 
then  found  him  preparing  for  the  ministry,  and 
already  preaching  and  God  was  honoring  his 
preaching  with  souls  saved,  and  a  little  later  used 
him  witn  others  as  a  means  of  great  blessing  to 
the  theological  seminary  where  he  was  studying. 
He  had  also  decided  to  serve  Christ  in  the  foreign 
field.  What  he  claimed  on  simple  faith  and 
received,  any  reader  of  this  book  can  claim  and 
receive  in  the  same  way. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

"FRESH   BAPTISMS   WITH   THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  "OR 
THE   REFILI^ING   WITH   THE   HOLY   SPIRIT. 

In  the  second  chapter   of  the  Acts  of  the  Apos- 
tles, fourth  verse,  we  read:  "They  were  all  filled 
with  the   Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to  speak,"  etc. 
This  was  the  fulfillment  of  Acts  1:5.      "Ye  shall 
be  baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days 
hence."     One   of  those  mentioned   by  name  as 
being    "filled  with   the   Holy    Ghost,"  (Acts  ii: 
4),    or  "baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Acts  i: 
5),  at  this  time  was  Peter.     Turning  over  to  the 
fourth  chapter,  the  eighth  verse,  we  read:    "Then 
Peter,  filled  with   the    Holy    Ghost,  said   unto 
them, ' '  etc.     Here  Peter  experienced  a  new  filling 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.     Again,  in  the  thirty-first 
verse  of  this  same  chapter,  we  read:  "When  they 
had  prayed  the  place  was   shaken   where   they 
were  assembled  together;  and  they  were  all  filled 
with  the  Holy   Ghost. ' '     Peter  is  named  as  one 
of  this  company  (verses  19  and   23),  so   we   see 
that  Peter  here  experienced  a  third  filling  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.     It  is  evident  that  it  is  not  suf- 
ficient that  one  be  once  "baptised  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,"     As  new  emergencies  of  service  arise, 


FRESH   BAPTISMS  55 

there  must  be  new  fillings  with  the  Spirit.  The 
failure  to  realize  this  has  led  to  most  sad  and  seri- 
ous results  in  many  a  man's  service.  He  has 
been  baptised  at  some  period  in  his  life  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  strives  to  get  through  his 
whole  future  life  in  the  power  of  this  past  exper- 
ience. It  is  largely  for  this  reason  that  we  see  so 
many  men  who  once  unquestionably  worked 
in  the  Holy  Spirit's  power,  who  give  little  evi- 
dence of  the  possession  of  that  power  to-day. 
For  each  new  service  that  is  to  be  conducted, 
for  each  new  soul  that  is  to  be  dealt  with,  for 
each  new  service  for  Christ  that  is  to  be  per- 
formed, for  each  new  day  and  each  new  emergency 
of  Christian  life  and  service,  we  should  definitely 
seek  a  new  filling  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  do  not 
deny  that  there  is  an  "anointing  that  abideth," 
(i  Jno.  ii:  27),  nor  the  permanency  of  the  gifts 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  bestows;  I  simply  assert 
with  clear  and  abundant  Scripture  proof,  to  say 
nothing  of  proof  from  experience  .  and  observa- 
tion; that  this  gift  must  not  be  * 'neglected.'* 
(i  Tim.  iv:  14),  but  rather  ''kindled  anew"  or 
"stirred  into  aflame"  (2  Tim.  i:  6  R.V.  marg.); 
and  that  repeated  fillings  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
are  necessary  to  continuance  and  increase  of 
power.  Now  arises  the  question,  ought  these 
new /illings  with  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  called 
'  fresh  baptis7ns  with  the  Holy  Spirit?' '     While, 


56  FRESH   BAPTISMS 

on  the  one  hand,  it  must  be  admitted  that  in 
Acts  ii:  4,  the  expression  "/?//^^  with  the  Holy 
Ghost"  is  used  to  describe  the  experience  prom- 
ised in  Acts  i:  5,  in  the  words,  "Ye  shall  be 
baptised  with  the  Holy  Ghost, ' '  and  that  therefore 
the  two  expressions  are  to  this  extent  synono- 
mous;  on  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  noticed, 
that  the  expression,  ''Baptised  with  the  Holy 
Spirit"  is  nowhere  used  in  the  Bible  of  any 
experience  but  the  first,  and  that,  furthermore, 
the  word  "baptised"  of  itself  suggests  an  initial 
or  initatory  experience.  While,  therefore,  we 
stand  for  the  truth  that  those  who  speak  of 
"fresh  baptisms  with  the  Hol}^  Spirit"  are  aim- 
ing at,  it  would  seem  wisest  to  follow  the  uniform 
Bible  usage  and  speak  of  the  experiences  that 
succeed  the  first,  as  being  '^//^^with  the  Holy 
Spirit,"  and  not  as  being  "baptised  with  the  Holy 
Spirit." 


CHAPTER  V. 

HOW  SPIRITUAI,   POWER   IS   I.OST. 

Any  discussion  of  the  Baptism  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  the  power  which  results  from  it,  would  be 
incomplete  if  attention  were  not  called  to  the 
fact  that  spiritual  power  may  be  lost. 

One  of  the  strangest  and  saddest  stories  of  the 
Old  Testament  history  is  that  of  Samson.  It  is 
also  one  of  the  most  instructive.  He  was  by  far 
the  most  remarkable  man  of  his  day.  The  grand- 
est opportunities  were  open  to  him,  but  after 
striking  temporary  victories,  his  life  ended  in 
tragic  failure,  all  through  his  own  inexcusable 
folly.  Time  and  again  it  is  said  of  him  that 
'  'the  Spirit  of  the  I^ord  came  mightily  upon  him, ' ' 
and  in  the  power  of  that  Spirit  he  wrought  to  the 
astonishment  of  his  people  and  the  discomfiture 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord;  but  in  Judges  xvi:  19, 
20,  we  see  him  deserted  of  the  Lord,  though 
unconscious  of  it,  his  strength  gone  from  him  and 
he  about  to  be  taken  into  wretched  captivity,  the 
sport  of  the  godless,  and  to  die  with  the  enemies 
of  the  Lord  a  violent  and  dishonored  death. 

Unfortunately  Samson  is  not  the  only  man  in 
Christian  history,  who,  having  once  known  the 


58  HOW  SPIRITUAL  POWER  IS  LOST 

power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  has  afterward  been 
shorn  of  this  power  and  laid  aside.  There  have 
been  many  Samsons,  and  I  presume  there  will  be 
many  more — men  whom  God  has  once  used  and 
has  afterward  been  forced  to  lay  aside.  One  ot 
the  saddest  sights  on  earth  is  such  a  man.  I^et 
us  consider  when  it  is  the  Lord  departs  from  a 
man  or  withdraws  His  power  from  him,  or  in 
other  words,   "How  power  is  lost." 

I .  First  of  all  God  withdraws  His  power  from 
me7i  when  they  go  back  tipon  their  separation  to 
Him.  This  was  the  precise  case  with  Samson 
himself.  (Judges  xvi:  19.  Comp.  Num.  vi:  2,  5). 
His  uncut  hair  was  the  outward  sign  of  his  Naza- 
ite  vow  by  which  "he  separated  himself  unto  the 
Lord. ' '  The  shearing  of  his  hair  was  the  sur- 
render of  his  separation.  His  separation  given 
up  he  was  shorn  of  his  power.  It  is  at  this  same 
point  that  many  a  man  to-day  is  shorn  of  his 
power.  There  was  a  day  when  he  separated  him- 
self unto  God.  He  turned  his  back  utterly  upon 
the  world  and  its  ambitions,  its  spirit,  its  pur- 
poses; he  set  himself  apart  to  God  as  holy  unto 
Him,  to  be  His,  for  God  to  take  him  and  use  him 
and  do  with  him  what  He  would.  God  has 
honored  his  separation.  He  has  anointed  him  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  power.  He  has  been  used 
of  God.  But  Delilah  has  come  to  him.  The 
world  has  captured  his  heart  again.     He  has  lis- 


HOW  SPIRlTUAIv  POWE^R  IS  LOST  59 

tened  to  the  world's  siren  voice  and  allowed  her 
to  shear  him  of  the  sign  of  separation.  He  is  no 
longer  a  man  separated,  or  wholly  consecrated, 
to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  leaves  him.  Are  there 
not  such  persons  among  those  who  read  this? 
Men  and  women  the  Lord  once  used,  but  He 
does  not  use  you  now.  You  may  still  be  out- 
wardly in  Christian  work,  but  there  is  not  the 
old  time  liberty  and  power  in  it,  and  this  is  the 
reason — you  have  been  untrue  to  your  separation, 
to  your  consecration  to  God;  you  are  listening  to 
Delilah,  to  the  voice  of  the  harlot,  to  the  world 
and  its  allurements.  Would  you  get  the  old 
power  back  again?  There  is  but  one  thing  to  do. 
Let  your  hair  grow  again  as  Samson  did.  Renew 
your  consecration  to  God. 

2.  Power  is  lost  through  the  incomi7ig  of  sin.     It 

was  so  with  Saul,  the  son  of  Kish.  The  Spirit  of 
God  came  upon  Saul  and  he  wrought  a  great 
victory  for  God.  (i  Samuel  xi:  6,  ff).  He 
brought  the  people  of  God  forward  to  a  place  of 
triumph  over  their  enemies,  who  had  held  them 
under  for  years.  But  Saul  disobeyed  God  in  two 
distinct  instances  (i  Samuel  xiii:  13,  14;  xv:  3, 
9-1 1,  23),  and  the  Lord  withdrew  His  favor  and 
His  power,  and  Saul's  life  ended  in  utter. defeat 
and  ruin.  This  is  the  history  of  many  men 
whom  God  has  once  used.  Sin  has  crept  in. 
They  have  done  that  which  God  has  told  them 


74423 


\J 


6o  HOW  SPIRITUAI,  POWKR  IS  I.OST 

not  to  do,  or  they  have  refused  to  do  that  which 
God  bade  them  do,  and  the  power  of  God  has 
been  withdrawn.  The  one  who  has  known  God's 
power  in  service  and  would  continue  to  know  it, 
must  walk  very  softly  before  Him.  He  must  be 
listening  constantly  to  hear  what  God  bids  him 
do  or  not  do.  He  must  respond  promptly  to  the 
slightest  whisper  of  God.  It  would  seem  as 
if  any  one  who  had  once  known  God's  power 
would  rather  die  than  lose  it.  But  it  is  lost 
through  the  incoming  of  sin.  Are  there  those 
among  the  readers  of  this  book  who  are  passing 
through  this  dreadful  experience  of  the  loss  of 
God's  power?  Ask  yourself  if  this  be  the  reason; 
has  sin  crept  in  somewhere?  Are  you  doing 
something,  some  little  thing,  perhaps,  that  God 
tells  you  not  to  do?  Are  3^ou  leaving  undone 
something  God  bids  you  do?  Set  this  matter 
right  with  God  and  the  old  power  will  comeback. 
David  was  guilty  of  an  awful  sin, but  when  that  sin 
was  confessed  and  put  away,  he  came  to  know 
again  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  (Ps.  xxxii:  1-5; 
li:  11-13). 

If  we  would  continuously  know  the  power  of 
God  we  should  go  often  alone  with  Him,  at  the 
close  of  each  day  at  least,  and  ask  Him  to  show 
us  if  any  sin,  anything  displeasing  in  His  sight, 
has  crept  in  that  day,  and  if  He  shows  us  that 
there  has,  we  should  confess  it  and  put  it  away 


HOW  SPIRITUAI.   POWE:r   IS   I^OST  6l 

then  and  there. 

3.  Power  is  lost  again  through  self-indulgence. 
The  one  who  would  have  God's  power  must  lead 
,#  life  of  self-denial.  There  are  many  things  which 
are  not  sinful  in  the  ordinary  understanding  of 
the  word  sin,  but  which  hinder  spirituality  and 
rob  men  of  power.  I  do  not  believe  that  any  man 
can  lead  a  luxurious  life,  over-indulge  his 
natural  appetites,  indulge  extensively  in  dainties, 
and  enjo}^  the  fullness  of  God's  power.  The 
gratification  of  the  flesh  and  the  fullness  of  the 
Spirit  do  not  go  hand  in  hand.  '  'The  flCvSh  lusteth 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the 
flesh:  and  these  two  are  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other."  (Gal  v:  17.)  Paul  wrote,  "I  keep  under 
my  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection."  (i  Cor. 
ix:  27,  seeR.  V.  Greek.     Note  also   Kph.  v:  18.) 

.We  live  in  a  day  when  the  temptation  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  the  flesh  is  very  great.  I^uxuries  are 
common.  Piety  and  prosperity  not  seldom  go 
hand  in  hand,  and  in  many  a  case  the  prosperity 
that  piety  and  power  have  brought  has  been  the 
ruin  of  the  man  to  whom  it  has  come.  Not  a  few 
ministers  of  power  have  become  popular  and  in 
demand.  With  the  increasing  popularity  has 
come  an  increase  of  pay  and  of  the  comforts  of 
life.  Luxurious  living  has  come  in,  and  the 
power  of  the  Spirit  has  gone  out.  It  would  not 
be  difficult  to    cite  specific  instances  of  this  sad 


62  HOW  SPIRITUAI,  POWER  IS  I.OS1> 

truth.  If  we  would  know  the  continuance  of  the 
Spirit's  power,  we  need  to  be  on  guard -to  lead 
lives  of  simplicity,  free  from  indulgence  and  sur- 
feiting, ever  ready  to  *  'endure  hardness,  as  a 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  (2.  Tim.  ii:  3.) 
I  frankly  confess  I  am  afraid  of  luxury; — not  as 
afraid  of  it  as  I  am  of  sin,  but  it  comes  next  as  an 
object  of  dread.  It  is  a  very  subtle  but  a  very 
potent  enemy  of  power.  There  are  devils  to-day 
that  "go  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting." 

4.  Power  is  lost  through  greed  for  money.  It 
was  through  this  that  a  member  of  the  original 
apostolic  company,  the  twelve  whom  Jesus  Him- 
self chose  to  be  with  Him,  fell.  The  love  of 
money,  the  love  of  accumulation,  got  into  the 
heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  and  proved  his  ruin.  '  'The 
love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  kinds  of  evil,"  (i 
Tim.  vi:  10,  R.  V.)  but  one  of  the  greatest  evils 
of  which  it  is  the  root  is  that  of  the  loss  of  spirit- 
ual power.  How  many  a  man  there  is  to-day 
who  once  knew  what  spiritual  power  was,  but 
money  began  to  come.  He  soon  felt  its  strange 
fascination.  The  love  for  accumulation,  covetous- 
ness,  the  love  for  more,  little  by  little  took  pos- 
session of  him.  He  has  accumulated  his  money 
honestly;  but  it  has  absorbed  him,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  shut  out,  and  his  power  has 
departed.  Men  who  would  have  power,  need 
to  have  the  words  of  Christ,   "Take  heed  and 


HOW  SPIRITUAI,   POWEJR   IS   I<OST  63 

beware  of  covetousness, ' '  writ  large  and  graved 
deep  upon  their  hearts.  One  does  not  need  to  be 
rich  to  be  covetous.  A  very  poor  man  may  be 
very  much  absorbed  in  the  desire  for  wealth — 
just  as  much  so  as  any  greedy  millionaire. 

5.  Power  is  lost  through  pride.  This  is  the 
subtlest  and  most  dangerous  of  all  the  enemies  of 
power.  I  am  not  sure  but  that  more  men  lose 
their  power  at  this  point,  than  at  any  of  those 
mentioned  thus  far.  There  is  many  a  man  who 
has  not  consciously  gone  back  upon  his  conse- 
cration, he  has  not  let  sin,  in  the  sense  of  conscious 
doing  ot  that  which  God  forbade  or  con- 
scious refusal  to  do  that  which  God  commanded, 
creep  into  his  life,  he  has  not  given  way 
to  self-indulgence,  he  has  utterly,  persistently 
and  consistently  refused  the  allurements  of  money 
accumulation,  but  still  he  has  failed,  pride  has 
co?ne  in.  He  has  become  puffed  up  because  of 
the  very  fact  that  God  has  given  him  power  and 
used  him,  puffed  up,  it  may  be,  over  the  con- 
sistency and  simplicity  and  devotion  of  his  life, 
and  God  has  been  forced  to  set  him  aside.  God 
cannot  use  a  proud  man  (i  Pet.  v:5.)  "God 
resisteth  the  proud  and  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble."  The  man  who  is  puffed  up  with 
pride,  self  esteem,  cannot  be  filled  up  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Paul  saw  this  danger  for  him- 
self.    God  saw  it  for  him,  and  "lest  he  be  exalted 


64  HOW  SPIRITUAIv  POWKR   IS   I.OST 

above  measure,  through  the  abundance  of  the 
revelations,  there  was  given  to  (  him)  a  thorn  in 
the  flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  (him), 
lest  (he)  should  be  exalted  above  measure."  (  2 
Cor.  xii:/).  How  many  men  has  failed  here! 
They  have  sought  God's  power,  sought  it  in 
God's  way,  it  has  come.  Men  have  testified  of 
the  blessing  received  through  their  Word,  and 
pride  has  entered  and  been  indulged,  and  all  is 
lost.  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men,  and  yet  he 
failed  at  this  very  point.  "  Must  we  fetch  you 
water  out  of  this  rock?  ' '  he  cried,  and  then  and 
there  God  laid  him  aside  (Num.  xx:io-i2).  If 
God  is  using  us  at  all,  let  us  get  down  very  low 
before  Him.  The  more  he  uses  us  the  lower  let 
us  get.  May  God  keep  his  own  words  ringing 
in  our  ears:  "  Be  clothed  with  humility,  for  God 
resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble."     (i  Pet.  v:5.) 

6.  Power  is  lost  through  7ieglect  of  prayer.  It  is 
in  prayer  especially  that  we  are  charged  with  the 
energy  of  God.  It  is  the  man  who  is  much  in 
prayer  into  whom  God's  power  flows  mightily. 
John  I^ivingston  spent  a  night  with  some  Christ- 
ians in  conference  and  prayer.  The  next  day, 
June  2ist,  1630,  he  so  preached  at  the  Kirk  of 
Shotts,  that  the  Spirit  fell  upon  his  hearers  in 
such  a  way  that  five  hundred  could  either  date 
their  conversion  or  some  remarkable  confirmation 


HOW  SPIRITUAI,   POWE^R   IS   I^OST  65 

from  that  day  forward.  This  is  but  one  instance 
among  thousands  to  show  how  power  is  given  in 
prayer.  Virtue  or  power  is  constantly  going 
from  us,  as  from  Christ  (Mark  v:3o),  in  service 
and  blessing;  and  if  power  would  be  maintained, 
it  must  be  constantly  renewed  in  prayer.  When 
electricity  is  given  off  from  a  charged  body  it 
must  be  recharged.  So  must  we  be  recharged 
with  the  Divine  energy,  and  this  is  effected  by 
coming  into  contact  with  God  in  prayer.  Many 
a  man  whom  God  has  used  has  become  lax  in  his 
habits  of  prayer,  and  the  Lord  departs  from  him 
and  his  power  is  gone.  Are  there  not  some  of 
us  who  have  not  to-day  the  power  we  once  had, 
and  simply  because  we  do  not  spend  the  time  on 
our  faces  before  God  that  we  once  did? 

7.  Power  is  lost  through  neglect  of  the  Word. 
God's  power  comes  through  prayer,  it  comes  also 
through  the  Word  (Ps.  i:  2,  3;  Josh.  i:8).  Many 
have  known  the  power  that  comes  through  the 
regular,  thoughtful,  prayerful,  protracted  medi- 
tation upon  the  Word,  but  business  and  perhaps 
Christian  duties  have  multiplied,  other  studies 
have  come  in,  the  Word  has  been  in  a  measure 
crowded  out,  and  power  has  gone.  We  must 
meditate  daily,  prayerfully,  profoundly  upon  the 
Word  if  we  are  to  maintain  power.  Many  a  man 
has  run  dry  through  its  neglect. 

I  think  the  seven  points  mentioned  give  the 


66  HOW  SPIRITUAI,  POWSR  IS  I.OST 

principal  ways  in  which  spiritual  power  is  lost.  I 
think  of  no  others.  If  there  is  one  dread  that 
comes  to  me  more  frequently  than  any  other,  it  is 
that  of  losing  the  power  of  God.  Oh,  the  agony 
of  having  known  God's  power,  of  having  been 
used  of  Him,  and  then  of  having  that  power 
withdrawn,  to  be  laid  aside  as  far  as  any  real 
usefulness  is  concerned.  Men  may  still  praise 
you,  but  God  can't  use  you.  To  see  a  perishing 
world  around  you  and  to  know  there  is  no  power 
in  your  words  to  save.  Would  not  to  die  be 
better  than  that  ?  I  have  little  fear  of  losing 
eternal  life.  Every  believer  in  Christ  has  that 
already.  I  am  in  the  hand  of  Jesus  Christ  and 
in  the  hand  of  God  the  Father  and  no  one  can 
pluck  me  out  of  their  hand,  (John  x:  28-30),  but 
I  see  so  many  men  from  whom  God  has  departed, 
men  once  eminently  used  of  God,  I  walk  with 
fear  and  trembling,  and  cry  unto  Him  daily  to 
keep  me  from  the  things  that  would  make  the 
withdrawal  of  his  power  necessary.  But  what 
those  things  are  I  think  he  has  made  plain  to 
me,  and  I  have  tried  in  the  words  here  written  to 
make  them  plain  to  both  you  and  myself.  To 
sum  them  up  they  are  these:  the  surrender  of  our 
separation,  sin,  self-indulgence,  greed  for  money, 
pride,  the  neglect  of  prayer,  and  the  neglect  of 
the  Word.  Shall  we  not,  by  God's  grace,  from 
this  time  be  on  our  guard  against  these  things, 


HOW  SPIRI'TUAI,  POW^R  IS  I.OST  ^1 

and  thus  make  sure  of  the  continuance  of  God's 
power  in  our  life  and  service  until  that  glad  day 
comes  when  we  can  say  with  Paul:  "I  have 
fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I 
have  kept  the  faith;  henceforth  there  is  laid  up 
for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord, 
the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day, " 
(2  Tim.  iv:  7,  8,)  or  better  yet  with  Jesus,  *'I 
have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth,  having  accom- 
plished the  work  which  thou  hast  given  me  to 
do.*'  (Jno.  xvii:  4,  R.  V.) 


FINIS. 


Rev.  Frederick  B.  Meyer,  B.  A. 

*'  Few  books  of  recent  years  are  better  adapted  to  instruct  and 
help  Christians  than  those  of  this  author.  He  is  a  man  '  mighty 
in  the  Scriptures.''  " — D.  L.  Moody. 


Old  Testament  Heroes.     lamo,  cloth,  each $i.oo 

Joshua  and  the  Land  of  Promise. 
Moses,  the  Servant  of  God. 
Joseph:   Beloved— Hated— Exalted. 
Israel:  A  Prince  with  God. 
Abraham ;  or,  The  Obedience  of  Faith. 
Elijah  and  the  Secret  of  His  Power. 

"  Such  studies  as  these  may  serve  as  models  to  those  who  are 
grappling  with  the  problem  of  a  Sunday-night  preaching  ser- 
vice. These  sermons  are  of  exceptional  excellence."— 77^^ 
Golden  Rule. 

The  Christian  Life  Series,      i8mo,  cloth,  each  50c.; 

white  cloth,  each 60 

Key  Words  of  the  laner  Life. 

The  Future  Teases  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm. 

Christian  Living. 

"  The  Christian  Life  series  of  books  by  F.  B.  Meyer  are  well 
adapted  to  inspire  the  purpose  of  holy  living."— 77^^  Central 
Presby  ter  ia  n . 

The  Expository  Series.     i2mo,  cloth,  each i.oo 

The  Way  Into  the  Holiest.     An  Exposition  of  the  Epistle  to 

the  Hebrews. 
The  Life  and  Light  of  Men.    Expositions  in  John's  Gospel. 
Tried  by  Fire.    Expositions  of  First  Epistle  of  Peter. 

"These  expositions  have  the  character  of  all  Mr.  Meyer's 
writings.  They  combine  devout  insight  into  the  rich  resources 
of  the  Word  of  God,  with  skill  in  adapting  it  to  the  scriptural 
needs  of  his  readers."— 3"^^  S.  S.  Times. 

envelope  Series  of  Boolclets.     Packets  Nos.  i  and  2, 
each  containing  12  Tracts,  assorted net,     .20 

Choice  Extracts  from  the  Writings  of  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer. 
Compiled  by  Rev.  B.  Fay  Mills.     24mo,  paper,  each  5c  ; 

"^^^  dozen net,     .35 

Larger  edition,  i6mo,  paper 15 


Charles  H.  Spurgeon. 

3%e  best  of  the  literary  remains  of  England^a  great  preaehfr. 


My  Sermon  Notes.  A  Selection  from  Outlines  of  Dis- 
courses delivered  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  4  vols. 
i2mo,  cloth,  each  $1.00  ;  the  set,  boxed $4.00 

Vol.  1.  Genesis  to  Proverbs. 

Vol.  2.  Ecclesiastes  to  Malachl. 

Vol.  3.  Matthew  to  Acts. 

Vol.  4.  Romans  to  Revelation. 

Feathers  for  Arrows ;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and 

Teachers.      1 2mo,  cloth i .00 

"  The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects.  The  metaphors 
are  always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths 
that  they  illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustrations 
we  do  not  know." — The  Freeman. 

Spurgeon's    Qems.      Being   Brilliant  Passages  from  His 

Discourses.      i2mo,  cloth i.oo 

A  series  of  earnest  thoughts  and  graphic  pictures,  all  of 
them  revealing  the  true  greatness  of  the  preacher's  conceptions, 
his  individuality  and  strength.  Gems  of  great  brilliancy,  which 
will  make  a  permanent  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader. 

The  Golden  Alphabet.     Being  a  Devotional  Commentary 

on  CXIX.     Psalm.     i2mo,  cloth i  .00 

Gleanings  Among  the  Sheaves.     i8mo,  cloth,  gilt 

top 60 

All   of   Grace.      For   those   seeking    salvation.      i6mo, 

cloth 50 

According  to  Promise;  or.  The  Lord's  Method  of  Deal- 
ing with  His  Chosen  People.     i6mo,  cloth. 50 

Twelve  Christmas  Sermons.     8vo,  cloth •     .50 

Twelve  New  Year  Sermons.     8vo,  cloth 50 

Twelve    Sermons    on     the     Resurrection.       Svo, 

cloth 50 

Twelve  Striking  Sermons.    Svo,  cloth 50 

7Ve/ve  Soul  Winning  Sermons.     Svo,  cloth. . .     .50 

Charles  H.  Spurgeon.     Second  Edition.     By  Rev.  J.  J. 

Ellis,  a  graduate  of  the  Pastor's  College.   i2mo,  cloth,  i.oo 

Charles  H.  Spurgeon.     His  Life  and  Ministry.     By  Jesse 

Page.     Illustrated.     .  2 mo,  cloth 75 


Rev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson,  D.  D. 

"/n  the  front  rank  of  agitators  for  Foreign  Missions." 

—The  Christian  Advocate  (N.  Y.) 
"One  of  the  foremost  living  hornilists." — The  Golden  Rulb. 


Many  Infallible  Proofs:  The  Evidences  of  Christianity. 

Revised  Edition.      i2mo,  paper,  net,  35c.;  cloth.  .  .$1.00 

"  Only  a  man  of  wide  and  of  broad  sympathies,  and  one  who 
had  himself  come  up  out  of  a  conflict  with  doubts,  could  have  so 
completely  covered  the  whole  battle-field  of  unbelief,  meeting 
the  doubter  at  every  point  with  a  candor  that  captivates,  and  a 
logic  that  conquers." — The  Morning  Star. 

Life-'Power;  or,  Character  Culture  and  Conduct.  Words 
of  counsel  for  young  men.     {In press.) 

A  Modern  Miracle;  or,  Seven  Years  in  Sierra  Leone. 
The  Life  of  William  A.  B.  Johnson.     {In press.) 

In  Full  Armor;  or,  the  Disciple  Equipped  for  Conflict 
with  the  Devil.     i2mo,  paper .25 

The  Bible  in  Private  and  Public.       i2mo,  paper 25 

The  Crisis  of  Missions;  or,  the  Voice  out  of  the 
Cloud.     i6mo,  paper,  35c-. ;  cloth,  gilt  top 1.25 

Tbe  Greatest  Work  in  the  World:  The  Evangeliza- 
tion of  all  Peoples  in  the  Present  Century.  i2mo, 
leatherette,  gilt  top,  35c. ;  paper 15 

"  No  one  can  read  this  production  without  being  thrilled 
through  his  whole  being.  We  doubt  not  but  that  it  will  prove  a 
mighty  inspiration  to  many  a  Christian  worker,  and  give  a  nevv 
impetus  to  missionary  work."—  T/ie  Christian  at  Work. 

The  Dove  in  the  Heart;  or,  the  Perfect  Peace  of  God. 
1 2mo,  embossed  paper 20 

The  Hand  on  the  Plow;  or.  Some  Secrets  of  Service. 
1  amo,  embossed  paper 20 

Hope:  The  Last  Thing  in  the  World.      i6mo.     Popular 

ellum  Series 20 

Cheaper  Edition,  loc. ;  per  dozen net,  i  .00 


Rev.  James  Stalker,  D.  D. 


"  Dr.  Stalker  is  strong  in  every  essential.  No  inferior  work  can 
be  charged  against  him.  Volume  after  volume  have  placed  hit 
claims  as  an  author  on  a  high  plane." 

—The  Presbyterian  Review. 


The  Life  of  Jesus  Christ.     i2mo,  cloth $  .60 

"  Everyone  needs  a  brief,  comprehensive,  but  attractive  Life 
of  Christ,  that  may  be  almost  committed  to  memory,  so  that 
whatever  is  read  thereafter  may  find  its  fitting  place  in  our 
Lord's  history.  For  this  purpose  I  know  of  none  equal  to 
'Stalker's  Life  of  Christ.'  It  is  powerfully  and  charmingly 
written." — F.  N.  Peloubet. 

''A  remarkably  lucid,  accurate,  and  suggestive  analysis  of 
the  Christ  Life.  We  value  it  as  a  rare  manual  for  the  study  of 
the  Divine  man.  Dr.  Stalker  possesses  the  gift  of  literary 
etching.  He  takes  his  pencil  and,  with  a  few  lines,  he  puts  a 
lifelike  and  realistic  picture  upon  his  canvas." — The  Christian 
Weekly. 

Tlie  Life  of  St.  PauL     ismo,  cloth 60 

"  Bristling  with  information.  As  an  outline  of  Paul's  life  it 
cannot  be  surpassed." — The  Christian  Inquirer  {N.  Y.) 

Men  and  Morals.  Addresses.  121T10,  cloth,  gilt 
top 7S 

Contents  .—Conscience ;  Christ  and  the  Wants  of  Humanity; 
The  Religion  of  To-Day  ;  The  Evidences  of  Religion  ;  Public 
Spirit ;  Temptation  ;  The  Four  Men  ;  Youth  and  Age. 

"  Pleasant  as  well  as  profitable  reading,  and  is  just  the  thing 
to  put  in  the  hands  of  a  young  man.  .  .  .  Admirable  models 
of  sermonizing." — The  Christian  Intelligencer. 

The  Four  Men.  An  Address  delivered  to  the  Students  at 
Yale  University.  \6mo.  Popular  Vellum  Series.  .  .  .20 
Cheaper  edition,  loc. ;    per  dozen neC.  i.oo 

I.  The  Man  the  World  Sees.  2.  The  Man  Seen  by  the  Per- 
son Who  Knows  Him  Best.  3.  The  Man  Seen  by  Himself. 
4.  The  Man  Whom  God  Sees. 

"  A  better  address  to  young  persons  there  could  hardly  be, 
and  it  could  hardly  have  been  more  effective  in  personal  delivery 
than  it  is  in  print.    — The  Independent. 

Temptation.     A  Talk  to  Young  Men.      i6mo.      Popular 

Vellum  Series 20 

Cheaper  edition,  10c. ;    per  dozen net,  i.oo 

"  An  earnest  plea  for  closer  relations  with  Christ  to  mrk« 
•ne  strong  to  resist  evil." — The  Baptist. 


THE  NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
REFERENCE  DEPARTMENT 


This  book  is  under  no  circumstances  to  be 
taken  from  the  Building 


/ilr^ 

\ 

•'.  ''.I'.' 


