Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


'3-Ge.  so .  5 


HARVARD  COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


Onv  txoA 


NOTE  OF  INTRODUCTION, 


OR 


EPISTLE  GENERAL  TO  MY  READERS. 


British  Christians, 

In  presenting  the  information  and  the  thoughts  contained  in 
this   volume,  my  object  is  to  awaken  interest  in  Central 
America  as  a  field  for  Missionary  enterprise,  and  also  to 
restore  to  practical  action,  and  add  greater  efficiency  to  the 
more  than  electric  thread  of  Christian  sympathy  and  fellow- 
sUip,  long  imperfectly  uniting  the  Church  in  British  Hon- 
duras and  the  Churches  of  Great  Britain;  but  which  late 
events  have  attenuated,  injured,  and  rendered  inoperative  in 
some  important  respects. 

In  pursuing  these  ends,  I  am  simply  executing  a  trust 
conmiitted  to  me  by  the  Baptist  Church  at  Belize.* 

By  employing  the  press  as  a  means  of  reaching  the  minds 
ukI  hearts  of  British  Christians,  I  have  hoped  to  overcome 
•^ome  of  the  obstacles  which  prejudice,  the  divided  state  of 
the  Churches,  and  other  imholy  influences  have  hitherto 
presented  to  my  [lersonal  appeals;  imd  also,  l>eing  about 

*  See  pp.  441  and  454. 


A   i9ty.So,5 


nUfUD  MlUSf  IIBWMT 

/  7. 

4  ^  '  6C? 


London: 

Printed  by  Stkwast  8i  Moirat, 

Old  Bailey. 


NOTE  OF  INTRODUCTION, 


TSTLE    GENERAL   TO    MY    READERS. 


V  British  Christians, 
Is  presenting  tJio  information  and  the  thonghts  contained  in 
'Ilia  volume,  my  object  u  to  awaken  interest  in  Central 
America  as  a  field  for  Missiouiur  eal«rpriae,  and  also  to 
natore  to  practical  action,  and  add  greater  efficiency  to  the 
mors  than  electric  thread  of  Chriatian  symyiathy  and  lelbw- 
-lUip,  long  imperfectly  uniting  the  Church  in  BritUh  Hon- 
i'lrw  and  the  Churches  of  Great  Britain;  Imt  which  late 
i-vents  have  attenuated,  injured,  and  t^Jidered  inoperative  in 
M>m8  important  respect;. 

In  pursuing  these  ends,  I  am  simply  executing  a  trust 
( umitiitt^d  to  me  hy  the  Baptist  Church  at  Belize,* 

By  employing  the  prose  as  a  means  of  reaching  the  miuii^ 
jid  beextd  of  British  Oiriatians,  I  have  hoped  to  overcome 
iiDL'  of  the  obatuclea  which  prejudice,  the  divided  state  of 
■  he  Obui'cboe,  and  otlier  uulioly  influences  have  hithci'tii 
■aied   to  my   i^er^nal  up[>ealB;  and  also,  licin^  about 


^^■weaied  to  i 


IT  MOTE  OF   IMTBODUOTION. 

flhortlj  to  return  to  Central  America,  I  have  designed  to 
leave  to  the  Churches  and  to  my  brethren,  a  permanent  me- 
morial of  the  labours  and  sufferings  of  their  fellow  disciples 
in  British  Honduras,  and  of  the  spiritual  destitution  of  a 
country,  and  a  class  of  countries  hitherto  greatly  overlooked. 

The  fact  that  so  liitle  is  generally  known  of  the  Central 
States  of  the  new  continent,  or  indeed  of  any  of  the  vast 
countries  comprised  in  what  is  termed  Spanish  America,  has 
led  me  to  dwell  more  than  I  had  designed  upon  the  his- 
torical, political,  and  moral  characteristics  of  those  Repub- 
lics, well  convinced  that  some  measure  of  familiarity  with 
these  subjects  was  necessary  to  a  correct  appreciation  of  their 
wants  and  of  their  claims  upon  us,  and  under  the  impression 
that  in  describing  one  portion  of  the  late  Spanish  Colonies, 
I  was  in  fact  giving  the  portraiture,  in  their  most  important 
features,  of  all  those  rich  and  extensive  countries  which,  for 
the  last  three  centuries  and  a  half,  have  been  the  imdisturbed 
seat  of  papal  domination. 

The  manner  in  which  I  was  gradually  led,  under  adverse 
circumstances,  to  undertake  this,  to  me,  novel  task,  and 
the  manifestly  providential  supply  of  the  necessary  materials 
to  complete  it,  though  documents  which  had  for  years  been 
accumulating  were  unavoidably  left  behind  me  on  my  vio- 
lent deportation  from  Guatemala,  have,  with  other  circum- 
stances, fully  satisfied  my  own  mind  that  the  good  hand  of 
God  has  been  with  me  in  its  execution  as  it  was  in  former 
undertakiogs ;  and  this  conviction  greatly  encourages  me 
to  hope  that  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  and  the 
glory  of  my  Lord  and  Savioiu*  will  be  in  some  measure  pro- 
moted by  it. 


NOTE   OF   INTRODUCTION.  T 

In  recording  facts,  both  in  the  history  of  the  country  and 
of  the  mia^on,  I  have  endeavoured  to  be  faithfuL  Wherein 
these  facts  do  not  redound  to  the  honour  of  some  of  the 
parties  concerned,  I  yet  trust  that  their  exposure  will  tend 
to  diminish  rather  than  to  increase  existing  evils,  as  light 
and  ventilation  alone  are  favourable  to  moral  as  well  as 
physical  cures,  and  I  claim  full  credit  for  the  sorrow  and 
anguish  of  heart  which  such  revelations  ought  to  occasion 
to  a  man,  an  Anglo-Saxon,  and  a  Christian. 

The  authorities  which  I  have  made  use  of,  will  generally 
be  found  cited  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  I  further  gratefully 
acknowledge  the  kind  assistance  which  has  been  afiPorded 
me  by  several  disinterested  friends,  and  also  the  permission 
courteously  granted  me  by  the  heirs  of  the  late  Robert 
Glasgow  Dunlop,  Esq.,  to  use  his  recently  published  book 
of  travels  in  Central  America,  in  compiling  the  historical 
sketch  from  the  declaration  of  Independence  downwards. 

*^  Finally,  Brethren,  Pray  for  us,  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord  may  have  free  course  and  be  glorified,  as  it  is  with 


vou." 


Yoiu"  fellow  servant  in  the  Gospel, 

FREDERICK  CROWE, 
Messenger  of  the  Chiu*ch  at  Belize. 


64,  Nicholas  Street,  Hoxton^ 
September  16,  1850. 


ERRATA. 


i'mign  n.  Unt.  \9  ..,  fnr  ague  rmd  ttgKrt. 

M    ..    IS  .../prllaUenuOltfwrfHaBeaEnUef. 

7i    M    11  .../br  pdaeermiptaee. 
MA    H    ilO  ...ybf  ooaptaioMnaii 
I.MI    ..    HI)  ...furottinikmrmdi 
m    M    HO  .../«r8uigrerM^8ugic 
Ui    H     ]}  .../0r  repuaifldfwrfrepcatei. 
IWI  ImI  lltM ...  Jhr  her  ipoUi  na^  tbdr  ipoik. 
.liJ  lliifl  SI  ...  for  futUflMiieH  rmd  fiitlifalf 
'Ml  ImI  lino  bat  ono  ...  for  bodiied  r«Mf  i 
Jm  line  8ft  ...  for  htmrmdlm. 


*  t '  Any  fiftiAU  llml  iimy  nrtio  ftrom  the  Mde  of  thie  work  will  be  derated  to  MiaiiMiiiij 


I  ^wtMuuu  dllMiN,  riiiMiKiinn'a,  8u;.,  fur  the  Native  MiukNifl  will  be  Idndly  leccited  Hii 
lntmHuUti  liy  Umi  TiMHtrMi  of  tlin  llnnilurM  MiMion  Fund:  Tif.  lleenrB.  W.  NunoB,  of 
tliUntu  liiU,  Hurrry,  W  lltiwrncii,  of  No.  7  Catherine-ooDrt^  Trinitj-iqaiR^  Tdwer-UIl; 
mill  Jam**  Oi.iviiii«  Nti  «1  N»wlUKt<m-ciiiueway,  Southwariu 

ItiuM  mimI  |Mirii«<lM  tttr  Miiipniriit  to  llcli&c  may  be  forwarded  to  Ifr.CH.  Uackctt, 
l.'ii»iif«M  lMfM«4i  niid  (^MiiitiiimNl  AKeiit,  No.  H  SnvHKC-gardena,  London;  addrctnd  to  Mr. 
Ai.»4AiiifM  llKMiikhauN,  UcUftc,  llunilttTM,  for  the  Native 


CONTENTS. 


PART  I. 

CENTRAL    AMERICA. 

SECTION  I. 

PHYSICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH. 

CHAPTER  L 

THB  couhtbt  obneraixt. 

Exteat— Oinnt»— SeuoD*— Moutain*— ElflTBted  Plaint—Yolcanoet— Biren  tnd  Likes 
— >'«tw»l  ProdBCtkNu— AniDMl  Gnatkn— Qcnenl  niytical  Adrmataget.  Page  I 

CHAPTER  n. 

LOCAI«   PABTICULAB8. 


?0BtkHi,  Diriuaiia,  and  Boondariea— Hie  Vhre  States,  Ttarritoriea,  Sec— Guatemala  : 
lu  Loealitjr,  Foundatian,  Calamitiea  and  80111—1116  New  Oapital,  Phm,  Tho  "  Plaza," 
llooaes,  Foantaini,  Stzeeta  and  Stxeet  PaiaenaciB,  **  MeuDes,"  PnbUc  Bnfldings. 
Mniueipal  Amngemeiita,  Hie  Enrirona,  Pron^nades,  and  General  Aspect — 8ea  Ports. — 
RvLizx:  The  Harbour.  Uie  Tovn,  Supply  of  ProTiskna,  Trade,  ke.      .       .       ,       13 

CHAPTER   IIL 


Xviaber  of  Inhabitants— Pure  and  Mixed  BafOea— The  Qjaach€  Tribes}  their  Habita, 
Character,  DveDinn,  Sec— TIm  Ladinos  and  other  Baces  The  Mayas— The  Caribe— 
The  Waaknas— Hie  wOd  Tribes— languages  and  Diafect»--Beligioii,  Government,  and 
Coaunoee— Imperfect  Means  of  Internal  Communication— Chums  of  the  People       89 


SECTION  n. 
HISTORICAL  AND  POLITICAL  SKETCH. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

DI8COTSBT. 

linovcrf  of  the  OentiBeBi— The  Lending  of  Cortte  and  Conquest  of  Modoo-^Origin  of 
the  AnorigiBal  Barce    Idolattry,  and  Mode  of  Saeriildng  Human  Victims— WealA  and 


t  of  the  Indians— Bcmains  of  Cities,  TemDies,  «c.---Surmiaes  rcspectiuK  them 
->Dr.  Bandinot's  Hieory-^Ophir  in  America— The  Bemnant  that  Bemains— Traditions 
— <)yiich6  I>jmasty  aaa  Wars,  Ancient  Cities,  ke. ;  Utatlan,  Xelahuh,  Patinamit, 
Miaqac,  Copaa- Lavs   and  Govenunent— Opposite  Character  of  the  Aztecs  and 

67 


Vlll  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER    V. 

SUBJUGATION. 

TTie  Instnunent  and  the  Resolre  —  Mantezuma'i  Messaee  to  the  King  of  Quiche  — 
Divinen  Consulted— Appdntment  of  Ahrarado'i  Expeoition— Tecum  Umani's  Army 
and  Defences— Progress  of  the  Invaders— Xelahuh  Entered— Treacherv  at  Utatlan— 
Final  Defeat  of  the  Quiches— Submission  of  the  Kachiquel  Monarch — Conquest  of  the 
Sutugils  and  other  Tnbcs— Cort^  in  Honduras— Rerdt  of  the  Quich6s  and  Karhiqnels 
—  Second  Subjugation  —  Foundation  of  the  Capital  —  Expeditions  against  Uznantan, 
C<^n,  and  Estete's  Invasion— Ahrarado  Governor Fage  83 

CHAPTER  VI. 

PBOPAGANDA. 

Sanctified  Gunpowder— PodmA  ifu»toM— Bartholemev  Las  Casas— Vera  Paz — Tolo 
ga^  or  the  Mosquito  vhore— Honduras — Massacre  of  Priests  and  Escort— Legend 
of  Taguzgalra— Murder  of  Three  Friars- 'Precious  Relics'— College  de  Propaganda 
fide— Costa  Bica— Expeditions  to  the  Chds,  Mopans  and  Lacandons— Total  Failure. 

98 

CHAPTER   VK. 

mPBPBHDENCE. 

1820  to  1830. 

Colonial  Policy  of  Old  Spain— The  Inqniaitioii— Monastie  Estates— Oppression  of  the 
Indians— Progress  of  Mind  —  Dedaiaticm  of  Indqiendence— Reforms— Iturbide — 
Federal  Consatution — ^Enlightened  Measures  Fair  Prospects— First  Commotions- 
Slavery  Abolished— Further  Reforms— Political  Elements  —  Schools  Established  — 
Barriers  to  Propess  The '  Serviles'— The  'Liberals*— Sacerdotal  Influence— Prelatical 
Ambition  the  Cause  of  Civil  Wars— Aroe  First  President — Arrest  of  Barmndia>- 
Murder  of  Fknres  —  Aydnena  and  the  Serviles  in  Pomrer  —  Further  Commotions  — 
Geuenl  Morazan  —  Restoration  (tf  the  Liberals  —  Acts  of  Congress  —  Expatriation  of 
tiie  Ardibishop  and  Heads  of  Houses — Abolition  of  Monasteries—  uorrection  of 
Eoclenastical  Abuses— Religious  Freedom 11& 

CHAPTER   Vm. 

TACTIONS. 

1830  TO  1840. 

Temporary  Peace— Renewed  Civil  Wars— Continned  Refonnt— Federal  Government  re- 
moved to  San  Salvador— Abolition  of  Saints'  Days—Prqgects  of  Cdonization— Effects  of 
enlightened  Legislation- Dntneas  of  the  People  to  admit  al  Reforms— The  Cholera— 
Insmrection  of  the  Mita  Indians— Raftiel  Carrera— Servile  Influenee  Reascendant— The 
State  of  Los  AHos  formed— Wars  of  Morasan  and  Carrera— Carrera  made  Governor  of 
Mita-rlXssolutioa  ol  the  Federation— The  Serviles  Return  to  Power^~Morazan's  Last 
Entry  and  Retreat  firam  Guatemala— His  Flight 1S8 

CHAPTER   IX. 

DEMAOOOUS8. 

1840  TO  18^0. 

Pdicy  pursued  bv  Carrera— The  Covenant  of  Chinandega— Return  and  Fall  of  Morasan— 
Unanimity  in  the  ConncQ  of  State— A  New  Archbishop  Elected— Ecclesiastical  Exten- 
sion—MThtur  Despotism  general — Civil  Wax«—F(tfoea  Louis  and  Levies— Don  Sontos 
Guardiolar— llie  Coq;uimbo  Faction— Siege  of  Leon— Clumges  in  Guatemala— Insur- 
rtctioDs  of  Troops— Canera  President— Monte  Rosa  Wmr  between  Salvador  and 
Honduras— Excommunications— Mutual  Slaughter — Peace  C(mchided — The  Jesuits 
— UniverBity  Reform — The  Author's  Extranussion — Obsequies  €f  Archbishop^  and 
Coospracy-ModilledConditionof  afEiirs  in  some  of  the  States— Future  Prospecta  140 


eONTKNTS. 

COAPTER    X. 


.     .  .,11  Centnl 

— Mnl  Sorai*  lod  Rbotbt  of  SaiUa—ACtiKlD  « .    "  .    "    ... 

-   *~-"    -  ' '~^"~W'in>cs-'C]iaiuta'  lodCoiidlUiBi  or  Iki  FInt  Retlksn  hi 
BnrUkj't  Codl— Bsi  of  Oa  Rnt  Setllnuiito-TMUjr  u  ' 


KiuMtiOM  at  the  UHqulo 


■Hm  B^ll  •(  Surtrtiplll-BrtiMI 
nnait «(  tbi  Bijnua— VklU  gT  9/ 
Wnn  If  BaUu  in  1743— locitn 


CHAPTER    XI. 


..  .  .       /— tfceTrmPMrlol-EipinmcI.iiiiilii— BcBi*  Merrliaiita— Tfcelt 

1MB  -  totEiBal  OsisnuiHiit  Hud  UtickmncDt— -Eaiuciniliaii— Bhtiifa  [w  Frn- 
i4— ArttniT  Bolr— PnJlrrtormU  mod  RclaUmi  wilb  Iho  MOMiUlo  Shore— Sir 
V  Kanmfvr,  CuKnae  of  Pinua^CfiniMluB*  of  the  Wiikni  Kinn—CiLpUiH 
aaaat  Mhwod— IlliUrlcal  DiU  «<■  Om  Bsid  VuBil;  -  Bciinn  of  Bn>»n  in  IMI 
T  <n>B  Cfdaael  Qmijuu— Aftiiii  of  [hi  Stnn— BJocbide  of  Uie  Kirir  Su 

•'—"-'- 1—  H_.u_K_  -B— •MU-Tbe  Pun  a  Bm  Jiuw  t«t«i  ud 

I  and  Ike  CniM  fiUlu— AAHHtwn  of 

..  _    ,«f  UioSwln— ConfbaBraUoa— PtbMmI 

-NecoeLitiiitu  helirnn  thg  Vtaiti  !>tila  mil  Gteat  BriUin— Nainl 
'—of  IlieEBglitk  NUiDm-fteapitulUiiiiiudEitiiiilotCUuu— 


SECTION  m. 

MORAL  AND  HELIGIOUS  SKETCH. 

CHAPTER  XIL 

if  ■  IbN^miitn  Biui— PopcTj  vwfol  ia  iHtnjai  Ihe  NUlve  Idolitr^r— 
-iiiUiiinmMienlenuf  Papery  -  Ui  CuBudliidiui  3dii»l>-l 


QiicM  IWtn-'ne  wild  lulnng-SI  IVln.  iti  Hiilurj 
Cxpeihtiaa,  10W— Wirhdnwil  of  Ttoopt— 'Prwnt  cou- 


-n4Tuemtgeot—ntCimft—'\.  ... 

.  rfUAjr — We^ejn  tf EMioB — Nuire  I^ugimge.  Chuncter^ 
lifiHtMiiK— Ueum  vonhip^The  !<iiUu— FExiaJe  eiuumi 
Im— lau«lc»lloB— Tniinon  of  the  giej-eyed  mui-Mr 

CHAPTER    Xm. 

'limit,  ftim-  !■(  Tlii...-r.i  —  liiliiui  I'mjiorlioiu  o(  Riifts— Biie  and  Stpamtion of  llic 

UAiiux-i--  <,L'iiiinlHar>lGlaiiiD-/i^<l>Iil|>.iu>pnuluid 

cr-t.ii-:s  <  'ma  of  PoBenr— AdtuUnou  ^eam  fnUio 

li-^.Ku-t    ..  .i.r'l;rfudKnamuiJe>~1W£I«Ii— InlMel 

r-4r.<i3iiii  '  CUntchof  Oaiiiii-Aisfrifilwi,  lunniiiBliu 

lv3ii-liiL'.  '  '   .11  of  tli«  VnFer-fod— "  La  OnuioB'—Rinna  a 
L.n.-Owpiu  Cliriali-Nighl  SMne— Periodical 


CONTESTS. 

CHAPTER   n. 


Ik*  Omrtt—iit. 


1840  TO  1845. 

w  of  Ur.  GcargF  Un  i 
tan  of  Mr.  (f  H   II 

f  Ibc  Senptuna— i;  ■■ 


hs  Cliiufli 

CHAPTER    lU. 


w  tr9t  itcpf  —He  to 


1— Pmjtrii  unit  hppi* 

....  .. _.  ..jD— Hii  mpprirCBn— 

a  t^  CtioKb  —  Itr.  HeDddTHm't  /orbrajimcti — ll«  ukt  tLe  inppnrl  oT  Ihfl 
~  Mndm  tua  (ulgBUioii  if  leTiutd— Dclii  at  Icllin  by  the  Scvnliiy 
r.  BcndtiHB'i  miiuEiaa  unpl^— Tbi  mutlliiEnce  nxcitnl   U 

I— AbbIt  br  Lh«  hm  of  Die  Million  prcmiKi—Mr.  kinrjon't 
H.oSoioii-r'- '  "-'■ f- ■ —    ■^•'  — 


■iSoaetT-Hr.  I 


— Cbun  of  dithoatalj — t 
r.  HeoMnoD  molTa  to 


._        ....,     Ur-  Kiurioa'B  dijiBi— PrnvDoiUoni— AbnliimliaD  to  IheFiw 

•ftH  Ur.  llmdnMiD  lad  tbeCliarth— PnniiUdliTaPimrn  Atvmn— PartliM 

-  ~>— latonplian  u  Itiailaa  mrk— TiM  Cbonb  mgcl*  frtqurntlj— Baolnlloiil 

t  Sitin  TBuhers— Ur,  Kudemin  nmul  Av  H<iB-JuriD(— A«uanw— DiMml- 


■(  Ik* 

UnMllirClniKk- 

iMIii  [»  IWI  EDriaml— E< 
Ite  ptea  a(  Wmhip  bj  tti< 
■i>iii     Ml    Hnnliiniio'i  it\ 


:iulim  of  the  MltrioD-honH  bj  Ur,  Hndm 
ChnrcIi-^DliuimiiiHlMiincaiif  (bs  Inhnbi 


CHAPTER    IV. 


-Cundacl  of  the  Cbuteb— Hu  8oei«w 

__.nb  molniU  msiin  •mnls-Hr. 

„  in  liU—BnoliBtlcK-'Md  of  Lieut.  C ud  Ur. 

■  -t|invia  Uh  |ul— Hr.  HimdaWB  iMonuta  BtUio— 

.  iitm— Hr,  KiBidon'I  ■inrioiiuT  mnUng— H(£rg  SodxtJ 
■nhuc  swaCing-^iKiwit  of  BiDtber  Wamer  he  TOMbM — 
i  .-.r-.-ir.cim  \",~f-  k: — Mr  KiagdM't  tdnJDiitrmtioii  of  the  Sodetj*!  ititia— Trial 
ii  ;:»4«-t'<:.jLiu[i  lu  iLc  L'.^ilativD  iaembly— A  pencAitlitE  ict  puM — ttadAceitfiil 
■wUur— sir)ncuiu  \n  thc  Cboceh— PtUtioD  In  til*  SupnrlBiBiIiiit— Projsct  Of  ■  lU*. 
tKM  Ui  EovUurl— Tlniely  DmnUBTi  Frcndi  9diooi»r-~A  Cbnrch  (bnanl  U  nlletliK 
— jvanoiu  fur  jimcbiri;  Ilie  Goapel— DiKnulaiuirlUi  the  Uuutnte— Mr.  Bendmaa 


1M«-Gnrr  tt  t 
L>ta  daj— Eiobi 


In  lOik  nliif  JB  EngliDi 


<  of  the  lut 


xu  coirrBNTS. 

CHAPTER   V. 

XJOJEFd — THB   CHURCH  HBLPXIK 

1847-1848. 

Positkni  of  the  Church— Tlie  Deputation  arriTes  in  England— Hintatements  of  I 
Committee  —  Captain  TlKnnaf*t  correction  of  them — Mr.  Henderson's  settlemeat 
accounts  with  the  Society— RHectioo  of  his  demands  and  the  reasons  given — F^ooral 
reply  from  Earl  Grev  —The  Arst  Carif  Gospel  printed  —  The  Bacup  Grant— Gifta  aa 
help  afforded— InteUii^ce  from  Belixe;  Mr.  Braddick  fined  ana  distrained— 111 
Braddick'i  Letter— The  Church  preserred— Mr.  Crowe's  reception  in  France  PaU 
Meeting  in  London  to  hear  the  Deputation— Mr.  Henderson  sails,  and  leares  M 
Crowe  m  England— Mr.  Henderson's  arrival  in  Belize— The  persecuting  "Act"  ea 
celled— Portions  of  Missiim  Property  sold  —  Mr.  Buttfleld's  recall  —  5k;cond  Meeti 
in  support  of  the  Native  Mistions  and  Report— Civil  benefit  arising  out  of  Religiff 
Freedom— Amount  paid  br  Mr.  Braddick  in  Fines  restored— Temporary  accommodatii 
hr  Worship  — Mr.  ICingdon's  Meeting  closed — Sale  of  the  Mission  Premises  for 
Lunatic  Asylum— Nature  of  the  transaction— Mr.  Henderson's  Protest— The  Chuv 
address  the  Committee  on  the  Sale— The  Committee's  reply—  Public  opinion  of  the  traa 
formation— Mr.  Henderson's  continued  labours  and  success— Tilletton  blessed— "fl 
Committee  in  London  invite  Mr.  Henderson's  friends  to  hear  Letters  read— TM 
resolution  of  the  16th  of  December—  Their  charge  as  to  incorrect  statenients  not  ta 
tained— BMolution  of  the  Strict  Baptist  Convention  recommending  the  ChunA 
Appeal— The  Committee  acknowledge  one  mis-statement— Motion  at  Members'  Meeti 
to  restore  iaOl.  to  the  Churcn  -The  C<tmmittee's  Resolutions  of  the  26th  of  Mat,  m 
disposal  of  Property  —  Mr. Crowe's  efforts  delayed  —His  Visit  to  Sussex  and  Kent 
Manner  of  applying  — The  Com'uittee  issue  "Belize"— Its  contents — Publiab* 
Statements  and  Advertisement — Obstructions  to  Mr.  Crowe's  appeal  —  Report 
Joumeyi  to  the  west  and  north  of  England,  and  into  Scotland  — Further  effurta  fi 
terrupted  -Progreti  at  Belize— Yncatecan  refkigeea— Prosperity  of  the  Stations. 

Page  4 

CHAPTER   VL 

BXTEN8I0H. — THB  CHURCH   TUKIVING. 

1848—1850. 

Retroapect  and  prospect — Renewal  of  jwnaltiea  for  non-juring- Mrs.  Persle's  caaa 
AAnnatinn  Bill,  and  petiiioua— Mr.  &ingdon's  third  station  formed  and  abandoned 
Beplv  to  the  Society  on  the  disposal  of  property— Straitness  of  means— Public  moo 
votea  for  Education- Mr.  Henderson's  refuaai  to  take  it— Renewed  threats-  Broth 
Braddick  imprisoned— Correapondence  with  the  Committee— Third  Public  Meeting  i 
support  of  Native  Missions,  ■«  I  Report— Tilletton— Backlandin^ — Sibun— Northa 
RiTcr — Projected  stations  -Traiu  itiona— Mr.  Kingdon's  fourth  station  at  Bacalar  uodf 
taken— Government  interference  renewed  in  favour  of  non-jurors— liocal  measure 
relief  thrown  out — Mr.  Kingdon's  fli^t  Arom  Bacalar— MSS.  of  translations  restored 
Brother  Michael  forms  a  new  station  among  the  Carifs— Station  at  Ruatan  formed  1 
Brother  Warner— Providential  leadings— Arrangemenu  concerning  propertv— A  new  1 

g'ven  in  Belize— Projected  Library— A  Meeting-house  determined  upon— Death  of  Mi 
enderson- Schools  in  Behze— Mr.  Kingdon's  fifth  station— Progress  of  out-stations 
Opinion  of  Missionary  Societies— Funds— Fourth  Public  Meeting  for  Native  Missioa 
and  Report— ^tate  of  ont-statjons-  Mr.  Kingdon's  recall— Re-opening  of  "  Preyen 
houae"  at  Freetown— Details -Teachers  in  training— Donations  on  the  spot— Mi 
Willats— Sunday  Schools— Societv's  claims— Results  of  the  Mission- Moral  improv< 
meat— Sammnding  darkness- The  Church's  confidence  and  request— Ebenezer.     4! 


PART  m. 

Thb  Biblb  nr  6uatemai«a. 

Indoding  the  Author's  Account  of  Himself,  and  a  Narrative  of  the  leadings  of  Divi 
Providence  in  his  Conversion,  and  durins  Five  Years'  Residence  and  Labours  in  t 
State  of  Outemala,  sospended  by  his  riolent  Extmnisshm  Cram  its  Capital  in  An 
1646    [ .       ^ 


ftS 


G 


O 


r 


T C 


9& 


"' — 


THE   GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMEBICA. 


PART  I. 
CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

SECTION  I. 
PHYSICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH. 

CHAPTER  L 

THE   COUNTBT   GENEBALLT. 

SitCBt— CUmate— SeasoDS—Moontaint— Elerated  Plains— -YolcanoM— Riven  and  Lakef 
— ^Natural  Prodnctions— Animal  Creation— General  Physical  Adrantages. 

**  He  earth  is  Jehovah's,  and  thefuUess  thereof,*'— "2%.  xxir.  L 

Cetteajl  America  comprehends  all  the  territory  lying  between 
Mexico  on  the  north,  and  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  or  Panama  on 
the  south.  Its  entire  length  is  a  thousand  miles,  and  its  breadth 
Taries  from  upwards  of  one  hundred  miles  to  three  hundred; 
giving  an  area  of  200,000  square  miles,  or  more  than  twice  the 
extent  of  Great  Britain. 

Lying  on  the  same  parallel  as  Jamaica,  or  even  nearer  to  the 
equator,  and  almost  insular  as  to  any  influence  of  the  continent 
cm  its  temperature,  the  climate  of  the  coasts  and  lowlands  is  hot 
tnd  humid.  That  of  the  interior  varies  with  the  altitude,  and  is 
generally  mild,  equable,  and  salubrious.  The  two  seasons,  aptly 
designated  the  "wet"  and  "the  dry,"  are  well  defined.  They  may  be 
aid  equally  to  divide  the  year,  though  they  vary  considerably  in 
Afferent  districts.  The  rains,  everywhere  copious,  are  more 
continual  in  some  parts,  and  the  drought  is  more  severe  in  others, 
but  the  dry  season  is  nowhere  uninterrupted  by  refreshing  showers, 
and  the  wet  is  everywhere  relieved  by  an  interval  of  dry  weather, 
irhich  perceptibly  separates  "the  former"  from  "the  latter  rain." 

In  the  highlands  of  the  interior,  the  seasons  are  singularly 
uvular.  The  dry  weather  commences  about  the  dose  of  October, 
and  terminates  on  the  12th  or  13th  of  May,  rarely  varying  even  a 
iiew  hours.    It  is  most  frequently  on  the  12th  that  "  the  windo\v's 


V 


2  THE   GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

of  heayen  are  opened.**  The  sky  is  then  suddenly  obscured  with 
thick  clouds^  vhich  bvrst  simuhaneoasly*  oftea  aecon^)aiued 
urith  thunder,  and  sometimes  with  hail.  This  is  confined  to  the 
afternoon,  and  returns  on  the  following  days,  or  perhaps  for 
successive  weeks,  at  the  same  hour,  or  a  little  later.  During  the 
whole  of  the  wet  season,  which  is  by  far  the  most  agreeable,  the 
forenoon  is  almost  invariably  cloudless,  and  the  atmosphere  clear, 
elastic,  and  balmy.  The  rains  are  oflen  confined  to  the  evening  and 
night,  or  to  the  night  hours  only.  During  the  dry  season,  the 
mornings  and  evenings  are  oflen  so  cool  and  bracing  as  to  pre- 
dispose to  active  exercise,  though  fires  are  never  resorted  to. 
Through  the  day  the  sky  is  seldom  obscured,  and  light  clouds 
only  are  to  be  seen  sweeping  rapidly  along  the  plains  during  the 
short  twilight  that  ushers  in  the  equinoctial  day,  thence  they  riae 
and  hang  in  clusters  round  the  tops  of  the  mountains  till  the  sua 
has  gathered  strength  to  dispel  them :  in  the  evening  they  return 
to  attend  its  setting,  and  add  inimitable  beauty  to  the  gorgeoua 
scene.  At  all  seasons  the  entire  disc  of  the  moon  is  distinctly 
visible  through  all  its  phases,  but  now  it  shines  vrith  sock 
uninterrupted  clearness  as  entirely  to  supersede,  when  above 
the  horizon,  the  necessity  of  artificially  lighting  the  streets ;  and 
even  in  the  absence  of  the  ruler  of  the  night,  the  brilliancy 
of  the  stars  dispels  all  gloom.  In  some  districts  on  the  eastent 
coasts,  through  local  influences,  it  rains  more  or  less  all  the  year ; 
which,  however,  adapts  them  for  the  growth  of  certain  vegetable  pro- 
ductions ;  while  the  districts  where  the  dry  weather  lasts  the  longest 
are  alone  suitable  for  the  cultivation  of  others.  On  the  more  elevated 
plains,  such  as  those  of  Quesaltenango  in  the  department  of  Los  Altos, 
*^the  heat  is  never  so  great  as  during  the  summer  months  in 
England"  *  and  though  snow  is  »ud  sometimes  to  fall  in  December 
and  January,  it  immediately  dissolves,  and  the  thermometer  never 
descends  so  low  as  the  freezing  point. 

Not  far  from  the  Western  or  Pacific  coast,  the  country  is  traversed 
firom  north-west  to  south-east  by  a  continuous  cordillera  or  ua-^ 
broken  chain  of  mountains  (unbroken  at  least  as  fiir  as  the  Lake  oT 
Nicaragua),  which  are  covered  with  diversified  vegetation.  This 
forms  a  kind  of  connecting  chain  between  the  Rocky  Mountains 
of  the  north,  and  the  Andes  of  the  South  American  continent* 

*  Dimlop't  Cental  Americt,  p.  85& 


SoRie  or  the  Inftie^  mmmits  arc  17,000  feet  high.  Frequent 
•punorofftdarrooitlie"  Sierra  Madre".— the mnm  ridge — intersect 
the  plains  it  right  angles,  and  nnmetimes  extend  Co  thr  aea-shorc. 

At  Tttrioiu  d^rees  of  ehration  along  (he  sides  and  on  the  nim- 
mits  of  the  mountain-i  are  mimeroat  phteanx  or  tabk  Inndx,  like 
m  manT  natural  tcmben,  some  of  tbecn  of  great  extent,  and  all 
dciigliiruUT  temperate  and  luxuriantly  fertile.  Like  the  plain  of 
DnnmKin.  tliey  art  generally  encircled  by  higher  tnountains  or 
hilh>.  These  reporw  cupccially  wera  to  invite  the  residence  of 
man,  and  to  aw«t  the  ciillnre  of  his  hand.  They  constitute  * 
diiiir^iRhing  bntiirc  of  this  uid  some  neighbouring  eountrica. 
But  no  one  of  tho*  countries,  and  prolwbly  no  part  of  the  earth, 
presents  a  greater  diversity  of  level  on  a  auriace  of  equal  extent 
than  docs  CentnJ  America;  consequently,  no  coimtry  possesses 
■aeh  turiety  of  climate,  or  oSera  snch  &c3itic!i  of  adnptstinm  to 
all  kinds  of  prodactioas  atnl  to  all  constitutions  of  men,  from  the 
Miii-biirni  infaahitaot  of  a  tropical  plain,  to  the  hardy  mountaineer 
ititired  tii  perpetital  snows. 

Movt  of  the  htehcst  peaks  and  isolated  mountnins  are  volcanoes. 
The  rwJn  me  of  granite,  gneiss,  and  basalt;  but  Tolcanic  formji- 
tMMta  and  cjectioii^  jiredominste.  Not  Ids  than  thirty  volcanic 
«e(rt«  m  Mud  to  be  stiTI  in  activity.  The  trace^i  of  remote  as 
wit  aa  of  recent  earthquakes  are  ctearly  discernible  in  the  fiiutures 
mi  tSTtiKs  that  everj'where  nbonnd.  Extinct  cmters,  rent  rock^, 
bda  of  lava,  scnrieE,  vitrified,  charred,  and  pnmiec  stones,  to)^tlier 
with  hr4  and  ffllphiirous  springs,  all  mark  it  us  the  most  volcanic 
H^iM  Immrn.  Indeed,  shocks  of  earthqunke,  generally  al^ht, 
M*  perwNBnlly  ivtt  at  the  opening  and  close  of  the  wet  season. 

IVon  rtr  eloud-cnpped  "sicrm"  and  volcanic  cone,  descend 
CBpimaB  tfieoms  and  impetnons  torrentff.  The»e,  meeting  im  llie 
yhfais  below.  eTpand  into  niajcstic  hike',  nleeping  in  plueid  stillness, 
owllod  by  the  hills;  or,  swelled  to  noble  rivers,  they  leap  the 
which  fiiam  with  nwful  grandeur,  and  wind- 
1  nature's  solemn  pomp,  canopied  with  lofty 
t,  nntit  they  M\  into  the  oceans,  which  on  either  band 
N«it  (D  receive  them. 

A  gkace  at  the  map  vrill  show  how  nnmerous  are  the  rivers, 
wA,  tiioiieb  sluirt  from  the  narrowness  of  the  continent,  they  are 
of  no  iiui,;iiiCcaut  diuicnt'iaiu.    The  largest  is  the  Usumasinta,  or 


4  THE   GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

Paition  River,  which  both  disembogues  into  the  Golf  of  Mexico, 
and  communicates  with  the  Laguna  of  Terminos.  When  least,  it 
is  about  the  size  of  the  Elbe  or  the  Garonne  in  Europe,  or  the 
Hudson  of  the  United  States.  But  it  is  the  riches  and  convenienfle, 
not  the  size,  of  these  fertilizing  streams  which  constitute  their  real 
importance,  while  their  beauties,  at  all  seasons,  are  equalled  bj 
lew  other  rivers,  and  are  probably  surpassed  by  none. 

The  Rio  Dulce  (true  to  its  name,  sweet  or  fresh  water  river)  unita 
the  Ray  of  Honduras  with  the  lake  or  ^^  Golfo  Dulce.'"   Its  bold  and 
graceftiUy  wooded  cliffs,  its  Golfete  or  lesser  lake,  studded  with 
islands,  and  its  stately  waters,  if  accessible  to  European  touiislsi 
would  doubtless  draw  as  many  lovers  of  the  picturesque  as  the  Rhine 
or  the  Lake  of  Geneva.    The  dark  and  bitter  waters  of  the  Hondo, 
or  deep  river,  constitute  the  northern  boundary  of  the  present 
British  territory.    The  banks  of  the  Belize,  or  '*  Old  River,""  are  the 
most  populous  of  any,  and  have  already  yielded  vast  treasmet 
to  Europe,  in  the  timber  of  the  "  Cauba,""  or  mahogany-tree.    The 
Montagua  and  the  Polochic,  vie  with  each  other  as  affording 
facilities  for  a  better  communication  with  the  interior.    The  BladL 
River,  or  Rio  Tinto,  in  the  Poyais  territory,  was  the  scene  of  the 
drama  which  proved  fatal  to  so  many  of  our  adventurous  countrymot 
under  the  direction  of  Gregor  Mac  Gregor,  the  self-styled  Cadqoe 
of  Poyais,  who  too  hastily,  alas !  attempted  to  plant  an  empire  OB 
its  banks.    The  San  Juan  del  Norte,  besides  its  size,  is  notable  oB 
account  of  the  long-standing  project  for  making  it  the  channel  of 
passage  between  the  two  oceans,  when  the  necessary  canal  shall 
have  been  opened.    It  has  also  been  the  scene  of  more  than  one 
disastrous  exploit  of  our  navy ;  and  even  Nelson,  in  his  younger 
days  (in  1779),  essayed  his  budding  powers  of  destruction  upon  its 
forts.  On  the  Atlantic,  the  Rio  Paz  (river  of  peace),  which  separates, 
the  states  of  Guatemala  and  Salvador,  has  often  belied  its  name|< 
being  reddened  with  the  blood  shed  in  civil  war.    The  deep  and 
rapid  Lempa  is  the  largest  on  the  western  shore;  taken  at  its 
lowest  ebb,  it  exceeds  140  yards  in  breadth.*    All  the  rivers  are 
crossed  by  bars  of  sand  at  their  mouths,  formed  by  their  depoeitF, 
or  thrown  up  by  the  conflict  of  the  breakers  with  the  stream. 
These  are  atw  present  a  serious  obstacle  to  their  navigation,  as  they 

*  "  Ilistory  of  the  Kingdom  of  Guatemala,  by  Don  Domingo  Jnarrot  (1811),  tmukted 
by  J.  Baily,  lieutCDUit  K.N.    London :  18S23."   p.  81. 


prevent  anj-  bnt  Kniill  craft,  or  flal-liottoraed  vessels,  from  entering 
tlie  fine  liarboure  fomiKd  by  their  cittuikrieii.  But  it  is  probable 
tLot  they  may  all  be  ao  removed  or  liccpencd  by  moles  Eind  ivith 
dredging-Dmehincs,  as  to  make  these  ports  available,  and  greatly 
Etciliuic  inland  communication. 

The  mysterious  Lake  of  Atitlan,  in  the  state  of  Guatcni.Tla, 
covers  avpaee  of  more  than  250  square  miles;  it  is  pronounced  un- 
fftthomnble,  u  a  line  300  fathoms  does  not  reach  the  bottom.  It  is 
fikirrouoded  by  dark  and  precipitous  rocks,  which  encircle  it  like 
walls ;  and,  though  it  receives  many  rivers,  no  outlet  has  yet  been 
discovered  for  ita  dark  and  benumbing  waters,*  in  which  only  small 
lish  like  tittlebrats,  and  crabs  arc  (bund,  but  both  in  exceeding 
abundance.  El  Golfo  Dolce,  or  the  lake  of  YEabal,  is  about  lifty 
niilcB  in  circuit.  It  is  the  port  of  Guatemala  on  the  Atlantic,  with 
which  it  communicates  by  the  beautiful  river  of  the  same  name 
already  alluded  to.  Like  the  lake  of  Genessaret,  it  is  subject  to 
riulcat  agitations,  becau^  occupying  a  similar  {Kisition  among  moun* 
btins.  The  small  lake  of  Amatitlan,  notwithstanding  its  hot  springs 
and  bnckiah  waters,  furnishes  abundance  of  moharras,  a  delicate 
fish,  about  one  foot  in  length,  together  with  pepcscas  and  pescnditos 

I  iitiall  fVy),  for  the  eousumptioa  of  the  capital,  from  which  it  is 
.!:~lHnt  about  twenty  miles.     It  abounds   also  in  wild  fowl,  and 

II  a  bvourite  resort  of  the  'Giiatemaltecos' — the  natives  of  iho 
capital.  There  arc,  besides  tbcse,  several  other  lagoons  of  con- 
sidtrablc  size,  inierost,  and  beauty. 

The  lake  of  Kicamgua,  whose  surplus  waters  descend  t«  the 
Atlantic  by  the  Rio  .Son  Juan  del  Norte,  is  an  inland  sea,  larger 
than  the  iilnnd  of  ilaniaica,  being  ISO  mileH  long  from  east  to  west, 
and  nearly  lUO  broad  from  north  toHiuth,  and  ISO  Siianish  leagues 
in  arcuinfcrence.  It  is  ten  futhnms  deep  in  many  places,  and  bos 
ii  w  ■Iiolluws.  It  coRlnins  o  small  archipelago,  and  on  one  fertile 
jiiil  po|iiilou<i  island  called  Unielq«  there  is  n  bellowing  Vesuvius. 
rt.is  lak«  is  alto  connected  with  that  called  Managua,  itself  no 
lujiounlerablc  Ixniy  of  water.  The  shores  of  these  mogniftcent 
viateR,  which  arc  likely  to  afford  important  facilities  for  drawing 


ftlR   04NIPRL   Uf   CBVTBAI* 


hi^Uvt  w«i»M'  iif  I  111*  ninat  dkUnt  poiiitB  of  Ae 

fmtmitk^  Ii'««}|Hv,  Mill  M  RftlubriouiMthejare 
tM4ii|#  wMiMi  nw\  ilrr. 

llii-iM«i|.  I  vi*iyMr|M'n'  imiliAc,  ii  nihinilly 

^Miii  ly  III  iiIhiiIh,  Iiihii  \\w  minutest  fnogostoi 

i/l  I  111   liiii.H«      Ammig  iliciie  mrt  manj  of  tbe 

IM'M-mimJ  III  I  III.  liiHliiiiiHi**  «ik1  botanici 

1 1  iiilili  II  iImwii  Mfl  inHHiiifiii  wiH'dp.     The 

mmIi  ill  iim.  |HtiMi'%Hl  «littik«,  wlicrcthe  jftgnarandtiiei 

ItiMj  mill  itii    itnH   III   AiiM>ri«'A,— prowl 

Itifiiiliii  ilti.  iiiiilfi  liiM-li,  tlii<  prickly  Iniflh,  iIm 

ll'k    hliiiMi*  Hitmi',   ilir   itiiMH^rul   and  direnified 

iiiiiiiiw,  wmIi  nil  iMili'iiiw  III'  ||i|{intic  trtsm,  tbeir 

unili  t    ilii    mi||aIi|  III    tmniHiliriil  plants,  whose 

MHMiiitii  iMi)r  iiliM|H'  tliMl  iknvy  ptinld  imagine  and 

I  l<i  mIiiiIi  pi  I  mi  I  Iw 'III  Ilia  M«uH>iiililii^«,  and  compact 

liiitt,  I*.  Iiiiiiiiil  iii||i>iliii|  liy  a  rliiiic  net-work  of 

iHiiiliiiii  'liijiiiiHi'  (ill  iii<  ili>),  ittui  ilk*  tenacious  tendrils  of  JBj 

III  uiiiiilli.i  iiii«>|iiii|ii  pUiiiM.    Kmni  tliis  thick  jungle,  the  anai's  ngi 

mi  I  *i  liiiliiil      rill  imili  iiiMNiot  still  life,  \'ar}'ing  from  150  toiM 

ill  I  III  ilipili,   In  iiii|HiMliiihU>  lo  man,  cxc^  as  by  meaiia  of  ■■ 

tiiiliiiii. '  III  lii:\«ii  In  liiiiiM>ll  A  inirk  which  immediatdy  closes oftff 

hint,  mill  t«  |M:iri:piiiili*  mil)  111  the  Mfi^acious  bushman.    The  daflf 

ft:*liaiiiiiiMi»  111   i)ii>  IiiihIi  aiv  Iwtu'Uil  cvon  to  the  sturdy  natiitt 

v^liiini   ilii:  ii-i-i'iiilv -iiirtiU>  i'lnirnim\  in  consequence  of  the  nfi^ 

ili:i:iiiii|Hiiiiuoii  ill'  u>Kiaiililt'  Hialicr,  liH)  frequently  prores  &tal  to 

the  lu'H  1)  •Mftilinl  ICiii'tiiHiiu.     Kurthor  up,  the  open  pine  ridge  pn- 

suuib  i'luiiU'iii  uf  Mr  trt*f«  iiilorH|K«nii*tl  with  c^Uhaali  and  aloes,  or 

lii^L-iiaiiiid  hy  oocaMimml  thickctH  and  long  vistas,  snrpassiBg  * 

btaiit)  I  lie:  must  ciu|uiiaii'  |iark  inwiicry.    Here  the  anteWpes  vmmt 

aiid  uiaiicruuii  Ikentii  uf  lialf  wild  cattle  browse.    The  more  lo^ 

plaint  arv  fivqueutly  savannalis,  affording  rich  pasturage,  at  timet 

gently  wtiudi«d  with  trees  of  softer  foliage,  resembling  the  woods rf 

Kuruiie ;  or  with  gnarled  oaks  covered  with  Spanish  moss,  wfaidii 

at  uiiee  useful  and  elegant,  is  here  a  necessary  protection  from  the 

kcemie>M  of  the  mountain  air.    It  hangs  from  the  branches  in  white 

llake«,  which  wave  and  glitter  in  the  sun,  and  resemble  the  hoaiy 

beard  uf  boine  Druidic  sage. 

*  A  fboit  Uade  wvrp^uBtt  u  on,  sad  aBed  "  Msdtatt^**  a  Greek  word  far  fighter. 


TBS  cocujimr  oenerallv.  7 

L  productiona  of  Central  America  arc  variud,  rich, 
;  inexhaustible.  The  forciita,  whether  on  pliin  or 
,  abmiiui  with  vdiutile  timlnfr,  imoiig  which  the 
I  logwood  tracs,  the  only  kiucU  nt  [ircHcat  nmrkut- 
flUci  »re  the  almost  exdMJve  object  of  the  trudcr'a  Bttcntion. 
Other  woods  of  alJ  gnias,  &tted  for  dbc  or  oruamctit,  vduuble 
fruin,  ■{■oeK,  and  mediciiiBl  plants,  arc  nifivri'd  tu  flourish  and 
4ocay  nBBobeed  uxnind  them-  The  cfdan  grun  tu  a  {initligioua 
aac,aadwitfa  other  trees  spread  their  span  or  protriidirifj  ruats 
br  annHui,  ot\cn  reaching  twenty  or  tliirly  feet  i'roin  the  tnink, 
whidi  is  IhKii  1^0  to  300  feet  high.  The  Cdbn,  or  wild  coCUm 
ticc,  ii  MTJBul  by  lume.  The  trunk  of  thia  elegant,  as  well  as 
gHOt  vegEtaUe,  vwclb  in  a  few  yean  so  as  to  require  ten  or  Iwclvc 
Mca  (o  onbnce  it  with  their  arms.  It  produces  a  downy  Eulniance 
Uc  ailk.  whence  it  dedves  iLi  oamc,  which  is  used  to  Hufl'  pillows ; 
■id  Uk  svod,  tboogh  ligbter  ood  more  i«rii>hBblc  than  deal,  is 
«An  oarred  into  httge  barges,  or  i'imguas,  by  ihc  natives,  oa 
to— t  of  the  taciiity  witb  which  it  is  worked.  The  UunyDcan, 
a  aDtt  itf  iron-uwid.  is  evnudered  indestructibhi.  Tin:  Cacao, 
tmproperty  called  eoooa  (the  chocolate  tree)  is  indigenous,  and 
Aonriibea  only  under  the  shadow  of  larger  trees  called  "Madre 
de  Cacaa.***  The  Sarsapanlla  and  V'snilln  vines  both  grow  wild 
m  tbe  binlt,  and  ibed  their  delicious  fragrance  around.  The 
Pngo  yioU*  the  dmg  called  dragon's  blood.     What  has  beat 

Ei^ly  called  Balsam  of  Peru  is  found  exclusively  in  Central 
.  The  Py  ma  Chrisli,  or  castor-oil  plant,  the  Caouttliouc, 
(the  Indian-rubber  or  elastic-gum  tree),  the  Guaco,  coo- 
in  antidote  to  the  bite  of  the  worst  snakes,  as  well  as  a  cure 
Ibr  hydrophobia,  and  many  other  plants  fi'om  which  valuable 
extracts  are  or  might  be  made,  grow  wild  and  in  great  nbundaDce. 
Nor  is  tlie  necessary  aliment  of  man  either  scarce  or  of  dtHicuIt 
prialuctuMt.  &Ui2c,  or  Indian  com,  rice,  and  Frcjoli-,  a  nutritious 
fciod  of  pdbc  which  is  very  much  used,  yield,  with  scarcely  any 
enturatiaA.  thnoe,  and  often  four  crops  a  yenr,  and  that  wilh  fire 
haadtnl  faU.  or  even  grtBt«r  increase,  each  bart-esL  These  are, 
fnr  the  wHivoi,  the  nton  tieixsstxy  fruit.s  of  the  earth,  but  not 
the  mly  itsfile  food.  The  Flnntiun — mlxitantial  or  luscious,  as 
■I  ■  tttem  gr«eB  or  npe— the  gdatinims  Casaada   or  Tnca,  the 


^^1  alMorb  al 

^^1  producCit 

^^ft         of  wmltti 


8  Tits  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL   AMKXlCi. 

fiuinaceous  ysm,  and  other  alimentary  roou,  are  in  general  iiie^ 
with  very  many  vegetables  peculiar  to  tbe  tropics ;  and  the  bread-f 
ftnit  and  bread-nut  trees,  though  but  lately  introduced,  b 
tt)  thn\'e.  Bat  besides  tbe»e,  the  temperate  regions  yield  oil,  o 
nearly  all,  those  productions  which  are  raised  in  Europe. 
and  barky  are  cultivated  sometimes  by  the  side  of  tbe  »ugar-cane,  01 
the  elevated  plains ;  and  the  markets  of  the  larger  towns  are  si 
plied  rt  once  with  the  productiom  of  torrid  and  of  temperate  climcii 
flo  that,  at  all  Mtaioiui,  the  green  pea,  the  cauliflower,  and  cm-lettao 
are  sold  along  with  the  AvocatO'pear,  sweet  potato,  okro,  ci 
or  chillies,  and  many  other  productions  of  opposite  climates,  Ira 
delicate,  perhaps,  but  more  common  and  useful.  Of  edible  fruitfl 
tboK  niOEtt  cummun  arc  the  banana,  pine-apple,  onmge,  i 
lemon,  linie,  shaddock,  forbidden  fruit,  water-melon,  musk-meloo 
tapotc,  mango,  guavn,  fig,  tamarind,  pomegninntc,  gmnndilla  (I'cu 
of  the  passion  flower),  sea-grape,  papia,  mamtnie,  Ktor  on 
ftpplei,  and  cocoa,  ca«hcw,  and  ground  nnta.  There  b 
be  in  all  "  more  than  forty  genera,"  including,  prulmbly,  tliM 
introduced  from  Europe,  such  as  the  apple,  pear,  quince,  chcrrj, 
&c.,  wliich,  though  they  are  found  to  thrive,  arc  little  appreciated 
anil  none  of  any  sort  con  be  catd  to  b«  cultivated  with  caiv. 
Botnc  remark  applies,  though  with  frequent  exoejition*,  to  gordea 
flowcni,  wliicb  are  still  more  varied.  Indeed  the  words  a|>plied  b 
Goldsniilli  to  Italy  are  even  more  applicable  to  Central  Americai 

•■VnaUnr trui'tin  aiWmai  i^iBn  uc  Imad, 


VlHl*T«r  mrt*  mIhIo  tht  nonkcn  iky, 
WUk  letjM  Uta.  Uu(  blMum  bul  Wdis: 
ThFu,  htn  iLiMpnrUB;,  own  itie  klndTVl  mHI. 
Nor  uk  Imnriaiin  r»m  the  plulrr'i  M\, 
Wliijt  lEa-boni  sila  their  nelid  vJiip  Rpmnil, 
Td  wiDBo*  fra^nnd  Rdujd  Uia  unntui  LuiL'\ 

Abundant  materials  for  exchange  with  other  nations  arc  afford 
in  cotton,  coffee,  sugar-cane,  arrow-root,  ginger,  tobacco,  and  evi 
(ilk-worms,  though  but  lately  imported ;  but  especially  in  "  ani 
(indigo)  and  "  grana"  (cochineal),  which,  because  most  lucratii 
absorb  almost  all  tbe  atleatian  of  tlic  planter.  Other  markelat 
producCionsarenotwantin)-!  but  both  known  and  unknown  eoun 
of  wealth  decay  in  the  furcBls,  or  lie  hid  beneath  the  soil. 


ii 


The  predous  metals,  together  with  quicksilver,  copper,  lead,  iron, 
tnJc,  litbixge,  sml  ni(i«t  other  minerals  that  arc  of  use,  oiily  await 
die  labour  aiiil  itigL-nuity  of  num  to  extract  tbem  from  the  bowels 
of  the  eartii,  anil  convert  them  into  objects  of  convenience  and 
licauty ;  and  smrns  of  coal,  ochre,  gypsum,  sal-ammoniac,  and  wells 
of  iia|ihthii,  are  also  ready  to  yield  their  valuable  stores.  Jasper, 
opal,  and  other  precious  stones  ore  aiso  found,  and  pearl  fisheries 
have  long  exiited  upon  the  coasts.  In  (jne,  there  is  no  lack  of 
unythmg  tliat  nature  can  bestow  to  sustain,  to  satisfy,  and  to  delight. 
Su  abuncliuit  are  the  necesiuuica  of  life  that  none  need  want  them : 
so  piufuse  arc  the  bounties  of  nature  that  they  are  suffered  to  decay 
i]irough  iKgiect.  The  peach  tree  and  the  rose  run  wild  on  the 
borders  of  the  online  grove,  whose  flowers  and  fruits  are  alike 
Hinultaneous  and  perennial ;  and  the  pine-apple,  the  mango,  and 
the  wnter-melnn  are  preferred  to  the  almond,  the  olive,  and  the 
grape.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  soil,  that  the  exuberance  of  that 
wealth  which  rots  ujion  its  lurfecu  in  the  less  populous  ports  of 
Central  America,  would  amply  clothe  and  satlnfy  with  bread 
thousands  of  the  sous  of  waul  who  fill  oor  streets  and  unions, 
diipclLug  tliat  squalid  wrvtchedneas  wliich  penury  and  destitution 

ive  produced,  and  mitigating  some  of  the  woes  wliicb  embitter 
lut  of  BO  many  of  our  fellow-countrymen.  It  may  be  that  the 
not  far  distant  when  many  such  will  seek  these  fruitful 
and,  under  wite  direction,  not  only  benefit  themselves,  but, 
irhilc  redeeming  fertile  valleys  and  plains  from  desolation,  greatljr 
hlen  the  timid  natives  with  higher  arts  of  life,  and  with  the  example 
of  morals  purified  by  the  oacrcd  influence  of  evangelical  truth. 

Hor  is  the  animal  creation  less  multiform  and  proUfic,  though 

« less  gigsnuc  scale.  Earth,  air,  and  water  literally  team  with 
and  greatly  extend  the  resources  of  man.  The  mountain's 
and  the  river's  bed  are  alike  trodden  by  the  Danta,  or  Tnpir — 
the  American  elephant — which,  though  small,  is  both  strong  and 
fierce-  The  punia,  the  leopard,  the  panther,  and  the  tiger-cat, 
with  others  of  their  kind,  arc  destructive  to  cattle  and  to  the 
DumciDBs  droves  of  warrce,  or  wild  boars,  and  herds  of  lallow 
doer,  but  not  to  man,  JJaboons  and  monkeys  colonize  the 
symmore,  or  wild  lig  trce^  on  the  borders  of  the  streams.  These 
hark  in  chorus  at  the  dawn  of  day,  and  warn  the  boatman  of 
appnacbing  rain.    Innumerable  quadrupeds,  some  of  them  siill 


10  THE  OOBFSL  Dl  CSHTKAL  AMSBICA. 


anbittWA  to  tlw  nitanlirt,  aoiattte  tiK  wsBfeei,  «ad  ficj  ^ 

«tber;  among  them,  tbe  Gifaoet,  or  Tcpeaqnte,  whUk 

•  hvge  guinea  pig,  is  tbe  laoi*  citeeMed  fcr  find.    The 

and  tiie  iMtiaa  nbbk,  i^yeh  are  pkntif al,  ako  aaioe 

The  Armadilla,  aoBiewhat  xaie,  is  pecuiiariy  <Mioate. 

annif  mrbieli  m  nae,  appearaaoe,  and  habita,  aeeaH  to  be  aho«l  Ae 

Bwdhun  between  tbe  cat  and  the  kangaroo^  is  more  deaUucUieti 

<kunestie  fowls  than  even  tbe  fox ;  and  sbtba, 

and  squiireh,  are  plentiful,  whilst  snakes,  serpents, 

tsrantoks,  with  other  reptiles,  infest  the  thidiut,  or  lie 

in  holes  and  among  dead  kayes  and  ratten  wood. 

The  ftathered  tribes,  firom  tbe  wild  tozkej,  gorfpeoosnod 
beyond  tbe  peaoodc,  to  the  minute  and  flittering 
though  for  tbe  most  part  wanting  song,  are  decked  in 
hues,  and  not  a  flew  of  them  are  as  good  for  food  aa  they  sis 
pleamnt  to  the  eye.  Tbe  Quesal,  one  of  the  most  beanlifoi  fi 
birds,  is  found  only  in  tbe  province  of  Qmemdiemtmgm,^ 
therefore  peouliar  to  Centrsl  America.  The  red  and  Use 
Aj  in  pairs  at  giddy  heights  across  the  streams,  and  rend  tiKnr 
with  their  screams.  Flocks  of  parrots  and  parroqnets  in  damsiW 
fosst  devour  the  ovfr^zvpe  fruit,  or  ^Msil  the  planter*s  com.  Ihe 
ringdove  s  note  re-edioes  through  tkw  wood ;  the  Whip  puyi>  nfli 
Co^di-oo,  Chul-pil-dioc,  Who-you,  and  Top-mkchic,  startle  \f 
their  strange  cries  the  unaccustomed  ear.  The  Qrupendab,  tf 
jellow-tail,  auqtends  her  flask-like  nests  by  hundreds  finat  tbe 
brandies  of  one  giant  treCr  near  which  the  Toucan  (bill-bisQi 
unconscious  of  bis  glories,  sits  demure.  Tbe  stealthy 
with  his  gnn  pursaes  tbe  stately  Ourrassoa  and  the  sober 
Jaige  birds  and  afibrding  goodly  fore — but  he  has  carefidly  ti 
secrete  the  bones  of  tbe  former,  -v^iidi,  if  eaten,  most  prarve  fori 
to  bis  dog.  The  eagle,  the  hawk,  and  tbe  Turkey  bnsmid,  iT 
Sopeloto  (a  species  of  vulture — tbe  unpaid  aeavenger  of  all  tiB 
land),  soar  aloft,  and  sail  in  airy  circles  till  tbey  aoent  their  pti^t 
and  ^¥C  place  only  to  the  aight-owl  and  the  bat 

The  streams,  too,  and  the  foesh  and  brackish  bkes,  abovd 
wkh  atrsnge  yet  not  unfaeqswtty  most  graceful  forma.  Tbe 
pandcromt  alligator  stretches  hk  lasy  length  apon  some  pioUradim 
frank  wluch  tbe  floods  have  borne  down,  and  the  am^ubiani 

•O^ttssiwiSriscfi 


S    CatTKTRT    GENERALLY 


igoano,  Ihe  ^MTgeA  of  tbe  Saurian  or  Litard  tribe,  basks  in  the  mn 
m  avcriuoging  bougbi.  Tlie  finny  tnytisda  leap  to  ciicb  the 
^lorlire  diis,  >ik1  are  acarcely  thinned  by  the  many  destroyers 
abo  firy  upuo  tbeni.  Tiicse  ore  storks,  flaiBJngi>es,  while  and 
bUck  curlenni,  pelicans,  «poun bills,  king-fiibcrg,  and  flock*  of  docks 
xnd  teal,  whi^  flying  to  uul  Iro,  aectn  to  darkoi  tbe  surface  of  the 

The  "-"-'-■«  mod  the  Hecatec,  the  river  timle,  hie  to  tbe 
nad-lmk.  and  depoail  there  tbe  dainty  store  of  eggs  which  uion, 
or  BOBH!  lem  mbttc  foe.  directed  by  the  ruffled  surface,  may  rifie 
Mtoo.  Hie  Jfanaulec,  or  huge  sea-cow,  fiouoden  io  the  lagoons 
and  hayL  Tbe  Utem  and  the  Uawktball  Turtle,  the  latter  of 
which  jridd*  the  tortoise  ahell,  feed  along  tbe  shores,  or,  with  the 
Snappo*.  Baraeoata,  and  Jew-fisb,  frequent  the  bars  tiad  mouths 
of  ^i^  en*  and  the  reef,  which,  like  a  uibniarine  parterre,  is  decked 
with  corals  and  sea-fans,  coDcb-sbclls,  soil  sponge,  and  grassy 
med*  of  foniw  and  bocs  annuinbcred. 

More  afauadant  and  fbnnidahle  iban  all,  the  tiny  insect  cco- 
•linilEB  one  of  the  iacnnvenienccs  of  lile,  particularly  in  undearol 
landi^  tiM  temperate  regions  alone  being  exempt  from  tbtdr 
■imoysnee.  Tbe  nunqtiito,  doeclj  reeembliDg  the  English  sum- 
Mer  giML  m  the  most  prevalent  and  hurtful,  inflaroing  the  ikin, 
■ad  pmdiag  to  pa*pelu^  motion  in  order  to  escape  its  stings. 
Ssod-flics.  BodMB,  sod  Cautharidc»,  called  Tavano  or  Doctor  fly,  bU 
inflfat  woundi  more  or  lets  scvctv  and  fn-quently  repeated.  The 
Ctna^o,  called  Jigger  or  N^ua,  the  Waree-tic  and  the  Beef-worm 
ftilfii  «paa  the  body  or  nestle  beneath  the  skiu.  Tbe  woodlousc 
or  wUte  ant  iTcrmites),  the  red  or-  fire  ant,  the  Wee-wee,  tlie 
Wairiae-Mna  or  Marching-anny  and  the  Sompopc,  are  justly 
ICrUc,  and  roanv  other  kinds  raon;  diminutive  and  less  eflcc- 
taalir  anncd.  ate  tranblesome  to  all,  and  become  a  spedal  scourge 
tD  the  tuKleanly. 

Hoc  there  are  not  wanting  jjiaccts  of  a  mare  agreeable  kind. 
Tbe  bene;  of  tbe  eonunoo,  aiid  of  tlie  slinglew  bee,  flows  ttm 
the  naMnU  hire  in  the  trunks  and  branchea  of  troea,  aod  fcme- 
•  -or  «E  BuHnMt*  (Qtl  Iw-IUli— »>o«h  eioo«li«KlT  wril  »iivmroi  itid  a™— tire 
in— I  a  afteii  BWfhi  cJ  Kt-t^  poujjik  wcifl^t.  aad  the  tMittrr  ol  tn  hiuxlntL    Tka 


12  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

times  intoxicates  the  woodcatter  who  freely  indulges  in  the  lusciona 
draught.  Butterflies  of  great  size  and  beauty  sport  among  the 
tropical  plants :  locusts  and  a  kind  of  grasshopper,  which  unites 
in  perfection  the  seven  prismatic  colours,  luxuriate  on  the  sup»^ 
abundant  vegetation.  The  Chicharra,  a  beetle  not  so  large  as  a 
cockchafer,  spins  round  the  branches  of  the  trees,  and  by  the 
motion  of  its  wings  produces  a  deafening  sound  which  fills  the  air 
and  is  heard  at  the  distance  of  hundreds  of  yards.  Several  varieties 
of  the  fire-fly  illuminate  the  bushes,  and  flit  through  the  air  when 
the  curtains  of  the  night  close  in. 

In  short,  this  country,  though  not  without  its  inconveniences, 
most  of  which  recede  before  the  culture  of  the  soil  and  increase  of  popu- 
lation, is  inferior  to  none  in  natural  advantages,  and  in  the  variety 
and  wealth  of  its  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  productions. 

*'  But  though  with  lavish  kindness, 
The  gifts  of  God  are  strewn  " 

upon  this  theatre  of  His  goodness,  it  has  hitherto  been  unblessed 
by  the  appropriation  of  its  resources  to  the  uses  of  true  piety 
or  devotion,  nor  even,  to  any  extent,  to  the  purposes  of  that 
civilization  which,  while  it  refines,  cannot  really  improve  society. 
Hitherto,  man  has  entailed  only  a  curse  upon  its  soil,  and  polluted 
its  balmy  atmosphere :  hitherto,  all  its  wealth  has  been  abused 
and  consumed  upon  his  lusts  and  pleasures,  and  the  Creator 
remains  unacknowledged  and  unhonoured  in  its  consecration  to 
him.  It  waits,  with  other  lands,  to  have  *^  holiness  to  the  Lord** 
inscribed  upon  it.  And  though,  as  a  part  of  Christ's  promised 
possession,  its  subjugation  to  Him  must  finally  be  accomplished,  it 
depends  instrumentally  on  the  introduction  of  the  Bible  and  the 
living  preacher,  whether  it  becomes  an  important  outpost  of  the 
Christian  camp,  as  affording  the  means  of  achieving  other  triumphs, 
and  of  lifting  up  its  testimony  like  a  beacon  to  other  lands,  or 
whether  it  must  continue  for  some  time  to  come  one  of  the  strongs 
holds  of  the  empire  of  darkness.  Nor  is  this  the  least  inviting 
field  to  which  the  servants  of  God  are  directed  by  His  providence. 
The  European  missionary,  or  pious  emigrant,  whilst  pursuing  the 
holiest  objects,  might  indeed  sicken  on  its  shores,  but  he  would 
also  find  upon  its  temperate  plains  a  climate  more  genial  and 
salubrious  than  that  he  has  left,  and  the  reward  of  honest  industry, 
if  less  refined,  might  be  more  easily  procured,  without  excessive 
toil  or  heart-corroding  care. 


LOCAL  PARTICCLABS. 


cnAPTEtt  xr. 


SUtei.  Temlorin,  b!.— GVAnHUA  ^ 

J.  rnuiuliuou.  CaluBiliei  uid  ftuin— Tlir  New  Cspilal,  Flan.  TLe  "  Fku," 

t  Pmengm,   "Maoiir*."  Public  BoUdingi. 

Pli(ip«JAffnfaiuiir^llje£iiTiRuu^  FnnncnBiln.  ui]  GcoenlAjpcct — Sea  Ptni». — 

"  I  llBbgoT,  the  TgvD,  Enppif  gt  Fceriiwai.  Tnuk.  Ik. 

St  *mt  wait  nnufl,  i\i  Umi  4ju1  itunii  if."— Joih.  iviiL  i. 

SiTu«TK»  in  the  torrid  tone,  between  8°  and  18°  north  lot.,  and  80° 
ucd  90°  we!t  loii^-'  (^trul  America  at  once  separatea  tile  Arlantic 
from  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  unite*  the  conliaenU  of  North  and 
South  America — a  position  as  important  commercial!;,  as  it  is 
geographical)/  remarkable  and  unique. 

It  inclades  the  tivc  independent  Ktates  of  Guatemala,  Salvador, 
Hondims,  Xicaragua,  and  Costa  Kica :  aud  also  Britieb  Honduras 
and  the  Mosqnilo  Shore.  Il  is  bounded  ou  the  north  b;  Mexico ; 
on  the  west  and  souUi  by  the  Pacific ;  and  on  the  east  by  the  Corib- 
\kmi  Sea  otul  tlie  Bay  of  Honduras. 

Tbe  proTinccs  now  on  it«  nortfacmmost  frontier  once  fonned 

fart  of  Ccntnl  America.    During  the  dvil  wars  that  followed  upon 

ibr  Ucclaralion  of  Independence,  Chiapas,  an  extensive  territory-, 

Qniitil  itfelf  to  Mexico ;  and  Soconusco,  a  fertile  country  bonier' 

ing   on  the  Pacific,  with  palpable   inconsistency,  was  arbitrarily 

lamtied  to  that  republic  at  the  very  time  that  the  Mexicans  were 

i«arily  coDipIaining  of  injustice  done  to  them  by  the  incorporBtion 

tH-^  7nu  with  the  Cniied  SUtes  of  North  America.     Between 

^HQJIiipu  and  Tabasco,  the  next  province  on  the  Mexican  side,  there 

HlfeArtc  %  lutiind  boundary,  consisting  of  a  chain  of  mountains  pas- 

^^lUe  only  by  one  narrow  defile,  through  which  the  communication 

Utwdcn  the  cities  of  Mexico  and  Guatemala  is  kept  up.    Ciudad 


14  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CBRTRAL  AMBMJCA. 

Be&I^  the  capital  of  Chiapas,  which  lies  on  this  line  of  'hud,  ii  id 
inland  town  of  magnitude  and  importance,  but  on  aooonnt  of  it* 
position,  seldom  visited  and  but  little  known. 

The  five  States  of  Central  America  nearly  correspond,  at  the 
present  time,  with  the  *^  Intendencias"  as  they  existed  under  Spa* 
nish  Colonial  rule.  Their  boundaries  are  pretty  deaiiy  defined 
and  vary  but  little.  They  are  subdivided  into  Provinoea,  Deput- 
ments,  and  Districts— the  latter  applying  to  the  less  peopled  though 
often  extensive  tracts,  covered  with  almost  unintermpted  shade. 

The  state  of  Guatemala  is  by  far  the  most  extensive  of  the  five. 
It  includes  a  considerable  and  populous  highland  district  to  the 
north,  called  ^  Los  Altos  de  Quesaltenango,**  and  to  the  CMtwvd, 
vast  territories,  such  as  those  of  Vera  Paz  and  £1  Peten,  wlaA  are  bat 
thinly  inhabited.  Altogether,  it  occupies  full  one-tliizd  of  the  whik 
country.  It  has  also  the  largest  pcqpnlation,  and  fiur  snipati  te 
other  states  in  importance.  Its  growing  trade  is  even  now  eoosi- 
derable.  It  is  principally  carried  on  with  the  English.  The 
export,  which  is  cochineal,  amounted  in  1846  to  9,097  "sarroii^' 
bales  of  150  lbs.  each,  vahied  at  211,804/.  l^  9(f 

The  state  oi  Salvador  is  situated  on  the  western  coaat.  Bi 
mate  is  hot,  but  more  healthy  than  that  of  the  easlemi 
haps  because  the  land  is  bettter  cleared  and  coltivatedL  The 
product  of  this  state  is  indigo,  whidi  used  to  be  extensvely  colli- 
vated  and  at  one  time  rivalled,  in  the  number  of  seroont  capettei^ 
the  cochineal  of  Guatemala.  But  so  much  has  it  dimanibed^  thii 
in  1846  the  number  of  bales  exported  did  not  exceed  1,506^  m 
value  about  10,000/.  The  city  of  San  Salvador,  its  capital,  ii  oalf 
a  few  miles  distant  from  the  Pacific  Ocean.  Its  oorameree  slili  aor* 
passes  that  of  most  towns  in  Central  America.  And  ifti  pftl»»»ffl 
influence,  taking  as  it  does  the  lead  in  all  Ubetal  movenienta»  m 
considerable.  During  a  certain  period  it  was  the  seat  of  the  Federal 
Government,  and,  like  Washington,  it  had  at  that  time  a 
territory  around  the  city,  distinguished  as  the  Federal 

The  state  of  Honduras  takes  its  name  from  the  Bay  of  Hamkarmf^ 
signifying  deptkty  which  forms  its  northernmost  boundary.  The 
first  navigators  so  denominated  it,  becaaae  they  with  difficulty  ob» 
tained  any  soundings  in  it.  The  snr&oe  of  the  groond  is  in  ths 
atite  even  moce  generally  uneven  than  elsewhere.     Its  pi^pn]»* 

•  Dnlop*!  Cttitnl  AaMric%  p.  80B. 


lEo  a  nuty  in  cotnpwwou  wkh  the  two  fanner  (tales;  mj, 
htc  OuibinalB,  it  srill  coniprii>ea  vast  districts  of  virgin  tbrcils, 
iartiilit  pmpled  by  iriU  laduuu.  The  climate,  lilie  that  of  the 
utVi-  mujcs,  is  xBiied,  beisg  generally  lemperuti;  in  llie  interior, 
•  bKh  a  nDtBble  for  in  mtoe*,  aod  hot  near  the  coasts  wtiich 
..-lad  with  rivers,  rinm  the  bwiks  o€  which  much  muhuf^uiy  and 
Mi^^iUl*  an  taken.  Coamyagta.  the  capital,  m  itlill  a  city  of 
aook  ki'ifrniifT-.  ibot^gfa  nud  la  tHiTc  been  much  niore  m  fomicrty. 
Tim  Mk  poMMHS  tw»  Ma-port  ttmns,  I'miiUo  and  Omok,  which 
m«  Mi*t  ■•  aufilM7  uul  eomnwrcisi  dcputa  of  Spain,  but  they 
■(  ••*  Um  into  eoHnmatJTe  (ieciqr. 

ntcfOtcof  Xicongtm  b  escecdtngly  fertile,  and  generally  sain - 
InNM.  But.  notwithstnndxtig  it  posse««9  suvcnl  advantsnes  ovn 
HnDtfaiW,  it  is  bat  liule  more  popaioiu.  This  may  partly  be 
t-"nH'  for  by  the  abteste  ol'  tny  bailing  branch  of  indiutry, 
«Mtv  MONdnafalc  actiTity  in  ito  eomtncrcf,  but  still  more  hy  ita 
tafuM  arii  sws.  la  a  hind  mirpaasingly  fok.inii^  thb  state  i» 
^  ijiiiiNiilly  m.  The  very  rnads  in  some  parW  tiotiiid  hollow 
Tioirt  ifae  hoofc  of  the  mule*  or  huiwa.  Leon,  the  eapilal,  and 
GfkOHla  are  bige  citieti,  and  once  enjoyed  great  wealth  and  eom- 
merdaJ  proiTitTitT,  but,  like  all  chief  Iomtib  in  Central  Aanerica, 
tbev  hiT*  inffiered  much  fhim  crime  and  consequent  internal  dta- 
nrgani«iliiw.  as  well  an  from  civil  wan,  political  conunotions,  and 
11^  all  TheM  citk*.  fkin  the  highest  rank  in  repute  and  infla- 
ntt.  are  now  minced  to  lirtle  better  than  heaps  of  ruins,  scantily 
■■^"-frtf.  and,  whero  bert,  affording  abandant  evidence  of  both 
oriier  and  Hore  recent  devaBtntioos.  Leon,  on  the  lukc  of  Msna- 
^ai  ulhii  ealled  the  lake  of  l.eon,  ia  said  to  have  contained  at 
oac  tin*  33.000  people.  It  is  now  reduced  to  less  than  half  that 
Iinnb«r.  Grauada  may  still  have  u bunt  13.000  inhabimnt!'.  It  is 
baotifally  staated  oa  the  burden  of  the  lake  uf  Niearagna, 
ilmdy  rdeiTcd  to  in  the  previons  chapter.  Tlie  tuwa  of  Nica- 
Ttffi^  alxral  thirty-"tx  mile*  wuth-easC  of  Granndu.  though  inferior 
in  riit  and  importance,  gives  it*  name  lo  the  state  and  the  lake. 
Like  Gmnada,  tt  ia  ail«riotageoualy  nituated  on  its  bonks  not  Gir 
&nin  Uu  p<^niIottii  island  of  Ontctepe,  whish  is  in  iLe  lake  and 
WIMIP  an  active  Toleanii.  Great  intemt  at  preient  attaches  to 
Iks  (tite  and  it*  water*;  in  connwtiDn  with  the  lung  formed  and 
'.fi.rn  talked  of  project  of  cunnecting  the  two  ocearm  at  thb  puint. 


IB  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AWKElTi. 


whicli  in  now  about  to  be  put  to  the  test  of  experiment,  if  Mt 
AOtunlly  to  In:  realized. 

Tlut  (Vntrsl  American  state  whicb  at  present  enjori  the  gmM 
meanurd  of  tran(|uil1ity  and  political  prosperity  is  Cortm  Biea.  lb 
iMtlntiHl  iMMition  on  tbe  narrower  part  of  the  Isthiinia,  mknig 
roniniunimtion  with  the  other  states  difficult,  has  preserved  it  in  i 
grrnt  UHMiNim*  (Vimi  luurticipating  in  the  wars  that  hare  desubttd  | 
Ibci  rt'it  uf  the  country  :  a  circumstance  which,  ooojointly  widi  t 
givat  aciHnniion  of  commercial  vigour,  arising  out  of  the  sacnM 
iniltlvntioii  of  colTiHS  ban  given  it  of  late  an  impulse  unknoini  to 
\\\v  NUtor  HtiitoH.  Mori'  than  70,000  quintals  (cwt.)  of  coffee,  wocdi 
irvru  dollnm  ami  a  half  the  quintal  in  the  country  (making  a  told 
of  IUV(HKV,)t  in  now  annually  exported.  While  other  laige  ciliei 
wt^iv  il(H*aylng,  Snn  «)ohC%  its  new  capital,  has  risen  into  impoftanoe 
with  hi  a  vory  H^w  years.  It  already  numbers  upwards  of  20,000 
InhnliitniitH,  fnrtagt),  the  former  capital,  and  two  other  towns  of 
sonio  nmgnitudo  (lloridia  and  Al^uda),  occupy  with  the  moden 
mpitnl  iin  oxtoiiHivo  tablo-Und  stretching  almost  across  the  Irth* 
inu«.  Tlu^No  towns,  togi'thor  with  two  or  three  small  ports  on  etdi 
iNvnn,  inrludo  ahnoitt  the  entire  population  of  this  compact  and 
thriving  Htrtte. 

Il«*iiiileii  the  ehlef  cities  and  towns  referred  to  elsewhere,  there 
an*  ill  the  four  other  states  many  towns  and  large  viUages  oontun* 
Ing  fVtun  ten  to  tU)een  thousand  inhabitants.    The  city  of  Qneaal- 
tenango,  the  enl)exera,  or  head  of  the  department  of  Los  Altos, 
has  probably  not  fewer  than  20«000.    Amatitlan,  Chiqnimula,  and 
Saliiniii,  in  (luntenmlu;  San  Miguel  and  Sonsonate  in  Salvador; 
and   'IVgiicigaliw   in  Honduras,  are  all  second-rate  towns,  anJ. 
numlKT  from  1. '1,000  to  20,000  souls.    There  are  also  some  oT 
cxclasively  Indian  |)opulation  which  range  al)out  ten  thousands 
('.olmn,  one  of  the  largest  as  well  as  the  most  remote,  contains  fbIL 
rifOOO  Indians.    Their  townships  are  sometimes  considerably  re-^ 
moved  fVom  each  other,  but  are  mostly  within  the  compass  of  m^ 
moderate  day's  journey,  i.  e.,  from  thirty  to  forty  miles. 

The  British  possessions  in  Central  America  have  at  difference 
periods  been  considerably  enlarged  merely  by  laying  claim  to  mor^ 
remote  boundaries.    But  lately  they  extended  from  the  Rio  Hond(> 
on  the  North,  to  the  Sarstoon  River,  a  distance  of  nearly  250  nulep 
southward,  reaching  almost  to  the  extremity  of  the  Bay  of  Honduras. 


IX>CAL  PARTICCLARS.  17 

At  preseut  they  are  declared  to  reach  jet  a  little  further  south, 
TUL,  to  the  Coocdee,  a  amall  rifer  near  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Duloe. 
Theweitem  limit,  and,  indeed,  all  the  others,  except  the  ocean, 
feem  to  depend  T&ry  mndi  upon  the  discretion  of  the  occupants, 
who  up  to  the  present  time  have  penetrated  as  far  back  as  they 
hare  found  it  ooavenient  for  themselves.  The  entire  territory,  as 
daimrdi  may  include  &om  thirty  to  forty  thousand  square 


To  tUi  mnst  be  added  a  number  of  islets,  or  kays,  as  they  are 
called,  aoattered  in  small  archipelagoes  along  the  various  reefs  that 
Ifoe  Biost  of  the  British  coast,  and  the  large  and  beautiful  island 
of  JEtaatan  (pronounced  Rattan),  which,  together  with  Utilla  and 
Jh'^^r^,  lies  off  the  southern  shore  of  the  bay. 

Hie  Mosquito  Shore,  or  the  territory  peopled  by  the  Waikna 
TnHiftTm,  embraces  about  four  hundred  miles  of  sea-coast,  and 
stretches  firam  the  neighbourhood  of  the  port  of  TruxiUo,  in  the 
ibKte  of  Hoadoias,  first  eastward  and  then  southward  to  the  vici  - 
nity  of  San  Joan  de  Nicaragua,  the  AUantic  port  of  the  state  of 
Nieangaa.  Its  exact  limits  are  even  less  definable  than  those  of 
British  Hondaras;  and  at  the  ^-esent  time  there  are  disputes 
pending  between  our  own  government  on  the  part,  or  in  the  name 
«f  the  Moiqaito  king^  and  the  authorities  of  the  bordering  states 
at  each  extremity. 

The  city  of  Guatemala,  which  has  given  its  name  to  the  whole 
coontry,  may  be  considered  on  many  accounts  the  capital  of  Central 
America.  It  was  first  finmded  in  1524  by  the  conquerer  Don 
Pedro  de  Alvando.  The  locality  then  chosen  for  its  site  was  a 
magnifieent  valky  elevated  from  five  to  six  thousand  feet  above  the 
level  of  tiie  sea,  lying  between  two  majestic  volcanoes  which  rise  at 
least  10,000  feet  above  the  valley,  and  may  well  be  ranked  among  the 
gruidest  objects  in  the  physical  world.  The  one  called  '  £1  Yolcan  de 
Aqua,*  or  the  tenter  volcano,  is  an  almost  perfect  cone,  of  propor- 
tions at  once  vast  and  symmetricaL  It  is  covered  with  verdant  forests 
nearij  to  its  sommit.  The  other  called  '  £1  Yolcan  de  Fuego,*  or 
the  /rv  volcano,  consists  of  several  irregular  peaks,  some  of  them 
covered  with  ashes  and  lava.  From  one  of  these  a  light  column  of 
smoke  is  invariably  seen  to  ascend  into  the  pure  heavens  above. 

Hie  valley  l3ring  between  the  bases  of  these  gigantic  volcanoes 
h  flanked  by  lesser  but  bold  ranges  of  mountains.     To  its  un- 


18  THE  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA* 

rivalled  scenery  it  superadds  a  mild  temperatore,  a  serene  skyv 
luxuriant  and  unfading  v^etation,  and  abounding  streams,  some  of 
them  chalybeate,  some  very  cold,  some  tepid,  and  others  qmte 
TTarm,  constituting  a  whole  so  unusually  beautiful  and  agreetUe 
as  almost  to  realize  a  dream  of  earthly  paradise. 

What  wonder  that  the  Spanish  warriors,  after  the  fatigues  of  pro- 
tracted campaigns  and  recent  sanguinary  conflicts,  while  resting  on 
the  banks  of  the  Rio  Pensativo  (the  pensive  stream),  should  gut 
upon  its  varied  beauties,  framed  as  it  were  in  the  encircling  and 
overhanging  mountains,  with  an  ecstacy  of  delight  and  romantie 
exultation !  AVhat  marvel  that  they  should  overlook  the  sleeping 
dangers  of  the  vicinity  in  consideration  of  its  numerous  advantages, 
and  ultimately  resolve  to  found  in  this  alluring  valley  the  capital 
of  the  new  empire  which  their  arms  had  given  to  the  proud  and 
mighty  Charles  the  Fiflh  ! 

As  usual  with  these  adventurers,  a  church  was  the  first  thing 
built.  With  characteristic  ostentation,  before  there  was  popolaftioD 
enough  to  constitute  a  moderate  village,  civil,  municipal,  and  eede- 
siastical  authorities  were  pompously  inaugurated.  Ro3ral  iMmoan 
and  privileges  were  soon  after  added  by  grant  of  the  Enqwnir, 
and  the  city  of  ^^ Santiago  de  los  Cahalleros  de  Guatemala^* 
gradually  became  one  of  the  handsomest  and  most  important  ctties 
of  the  New  World. 

For  a  long  time  the  capital  city  continued  to  occupy  its  command- 
ing position,  but,  in  the  midst  of  outward  advantages,  it  was  foil 
of  oppression,  superstition,  and  licentiousness,  and  as  a  cmmt- 
quence,  was  repeatedly  and  terribly  scourged.  In  1526  an  insor- 
rection  of  the  Kachiquel  Indians,  provoked  by  the  exactions  of  an 
exorbitant  covctousness,  was  most  disastrous  to  the  foreign  inhabi- 
tants,  and  resulted  in  a  second  sanguinary  subjugation  of  the 
Indians.  On  the  11th  of  September  1541,  after  violent  and  pro- 
tracted rains,  the  city  was  laid  waste  by  the  sudden  fall  of  an  immyiTiH> 
body  of  water  issuing  from  the  crater  of  the  extinct  volcano :  ever 
since,  from  this  circumstance,  known  as  the  tcater  volcano.  What 
had  been  a  lake  suspended  ten  or  twelve  thousand  feet  above  the 

*  t.  e.  Saint  James  of  the  Knights  of  Gvatemala.  The  deri^-ation  of  the  name  finiti  imIi 
is  varionsly  giren ;  the  more  common  is  firom  the  Qaich6  word  Qnantemali,  sipiif jing  m 
decayed  log  of  wood ;  but  the  more  likely  origin  would  appear  to  be  firom  Jiutemal,  one  oC 
the  three  sons  of  Acxopil,  the  founder  of  the  Quich£  monarchy,  who  left  to  tiwf  Ml 
fint-hom  son  the  kingdom  of  the  Kachiqueks,  or  Guatemala. 


tOCAL   PiUTlCULABS.  10 

rity.  bumling  its  Iwrricts,  impetuoualy  diuhed  from  llie  sum- 
mit, carrying  along  wtb  it  trees,  atones,  and  huge  fmgments  of 
rcxik*.  uid  Eireeptng  awaj  hou^e^  diurchcs,  convents,  aud  even 
mbole  streets,  with  the  awful  accompaniment  of  violent  shocks  of 
inrthquiike,  and  tenilic  subterraneous  noises.  Many  of  the 
gaJly  inhabitants  were  buried  under  the  ruins,  and  among  others 
who  lost  ihar  lives  was  the  female  governor,  the  relict  of  the 
founder  Alvarado. 

Aifcr  thi*  event,  the  city  was  rebuilt  about  three  miles  fiitther 
froai  tlie  «liQ  volcano,  and  consequently  just  ao  much  nearer  tu  the 
active  one.  Here  new  calamities  fallowed  each  other  with  fear- 
ful rapidity  and  continuity.  The  smallpoi  and  other  epidemiu 
KoiitgB  decimated  the  population.  Violent  and  repeated  nliocks  of 
ttrlliquakc  overthr-ew  the  bouses,  and  especially  the  public  build- 
ing crushing  the  inhabitants  beneath  tbem.  No  less  timn  tea 
wveral  epochs  are  enumerated  in  the  history  of  the  well  nigh 
intnuncrable  cortbipinkcs  with  which  this  devoted  city  has  been 
^■Eiled.  0)  marking  only  the  most  nofofife  shocks  and  ilevnstations. 
The  niia  wrought  on  these  occasions  defies  description.  Ashes 
and  Bmokc  iiom  the  vulcano  have  at  times  obscured  the  atmosphere, 
M  aa  Id  mmke  lights  necessary  at  noon-day,  or  worse  still,  the  cntlcr 
bcs  romited  Ibrlli  terrific  flames  day  and  night  for  weeks  or  even 
monthfl  together.  The  very  crests  of  the  mountains  were  torn  off, 
■Dil  deep  chasms  rent  in  the  surface  of  llie  plains.  Fierce  lioiLs,  as 
the  hblnrinn  calls  them,  issuing  from  the  jungle  on  the  mountaiu 
side,  oiOFc  than  once  preyed  greedily  upon  the  people,  as  well  as 
oa  their  tattle ;  and  pestilence,  tornadoes,  earthquakes  (but  never 
fiutnne).  visited  them  again  and  agnin  till  the  year  1773,  when  the 
min  at  the  city  wax  consummated  hy  a  series  of  vibrations  and 
mulalafians  vf  the  earth  that  left  but  little  standing  erect,  and  that 
little  imponbly  injured.  Thus  manifestly  was  the  hand  of  God 
MretdMil  out  agaijtst  this  city.  Whether  it  was  most  on  account 
of  il*  rapeiltltioiis  (tr  of  it*  oppressions  and  crimes,  we  have  no 
tvidcoec  hy  which  to  determine;  but  the  appalling  facts  them- 
■clr«*  ]ilainty  indicate   »  moral   object   as  well  as  a  physical 

At  the  time  oF  the  ruin,  there  were,  besides  other  public  buildings^ 
■A  las  than  thirty-eightecclcsia.'tical  edifices,  sixteen  of  which  were 
I,  and  the  valley  coolaiucd  thirty  thriving 


20  THE  O08PBL  IS  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Tillages  drmmig  thdr  support  from  tbe  cipital,  whidi  thej  sop- 
plied  with  Tarious  provisioiiR,  waxes  fmita,  and  flowen. 

This  awful  catastrophe  was  ioAkjmed  by  a  dimkni  aaong  lift 
suryiving  inhabitaats,  maay  of  whom  thought  it  desirable  to  re* 
move  the  ctty  onoe  more,  rather  than  to  rebuild  it,  whibt  otheni 
ioth  to  ahaudoii  **  tbe  delightful  dime,  the  fertile  soil,  the  excel- 
lent water,  and  a  thousand  other  advantages  which  they  et^oyei^ 
urged  the  exposedness  of  all  parts  of  the  country  to  tike  wilaimtif% 
and  dwelt  upon  tbe  greater  fiuality  of  rebuilding  the  mins.  But 
the  fears  of  the  former  agreeing  well  with  the  interests  of  the  more 
influential,  who  had  eligible  lands  to  recommend,  uitimatdy  pre* 
▼ailed,  and  the  authorities  set  the  examjde  by  removing  to  the  little 
Tillage  of  La  Hermita,  about  thirty  miles  from  the  mined  oty  ia 
a  south-easterly  direction.  The  royal  assent  to  this  traasfier  waa 
granted  in  1775,  and  with  it  a  munificent  provision  permitting 
the  appropriation  of  the  whole  revenue  arising  firom  tbe  eus- 
touM  for  ten  years  to  the  execution  of  the  new  plana  and 
erections. 

In  1777  tbe  inhalxtants  of  the  ruined  city  were  required  by  pro- 
damation  to  abandon  it  within  a  year.  This  was  never  fully  ae- 
eomplisbed;  for  m  1795,  when,  according  to  tbe  official  oensos,  the 
population  i3iC  the  new  cai»tal  amounted  to  24,434,  there  were  sdB 
several  thousands  of  people  remaining  among  the  ruins.  It  has 
since  assumed  the  standing  of  a  considerable  town — the  chief,  or 
cabezera  of  the  department  of  Zacatepeques.  It  is  known  by  ihe 
name  of  La  Antigua  (or  the  Andcnt)  Guatemala,  and  now  eontaiai 
t  least  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  thousand  souls. 

Guatemala  la  Nueva,  or  the  neuf  dty,  the  present  capitd,  is 
vtuated  in  14''  46'  north  lat,  and  91°  46'  west  long.,  on  one  of  ^ 
elevated  plateaux  of  the  main  Cordillera,  known  as  '  Los  Llanos  de 
las  Vacas,*  or  the  valley  of  ^  Harmita.*  This  plain  is  surrounded 
by  bold  ranges  of  mountains,  among  which  stand  prominent  the  two 
Tolcanoes  of  the  Antigua,  *de  Angua,'  and  'de  Fuego,*  and  a 
third  called  *E1  Vokan  de  Pacaya,'  which  is  scarcely  if  at  all 
inferior  to  them.  The  phun  is  about  5,000  feet  above  the  lerd  rf 
the  Fea,  and  is  fifteen  miles  wide  and  eighteen  broad.  The  dimale, 
though  eonsidered  inferior  to  that  of  La  Antigua,  is  mild  and  salu- 
brious.   **The  thermometer  rardy  rises  f^wre  70°,  and  atill  more 

•  linmM,  p.  16S. 


I  LOCAL    PAIITICULABS.  21 

rare];  ckscmdB  below  G4°"*  The  number  of  inLsbiUats— who  ore 
ducfij"  Lsdiuofi,  the  mixed  or  Jileatizo  ruce,  and  pure  Crcolc- 
SpMikrds,  ibe  unmiieil  deMendaiits  or  Spanish  Colomits,  is  esti- 
nwtcd  at  tfairty'six  or  even  Tanj  thousand,  and  in  imjiortancc, 
wemltb,  utd  beantf ,  it  is  secoiul,  in  Sptuiish  America,  aalj  to  die 
cky  of  Uexin  OtdC 

£rected  at  onoe,  and  according  to  a  regular  plan,  the  citj,  with 
the  exception  uT  a  long  straggling  'Barriu,'  or  suburb,  t'orma  a 
a|iiaje,  meauiring  about  [wo  mUes  on  e-ich  i-ide.  Ic  is  subdivided 
into  blocks  of  houses  called  '  JltinzaDafl,'  ISO  or  300  j'ards  square, 
b^  rtrught  streeti,  li  jards  vnde,  iDtersecling  each  other  at  right 
angles-  OemioiMl  openings  or  public  squares  are  formed  bj  the 
onusuoD  of  the  block,  of  buildings.  Some  of  these  are  adorned 
■miOt  public  fpuntaina,  and  are  planted  with  trees.  The  '  PLizi 
■■a^vor,*  or  chief  market-place,  which  Is  in  the  centre  of  the  city,  is 
four  tines  tbe  aae  of  the  others.  ArcinQd  it  are  located  some  of 
tbc  {iriscipal  buildings  aud  most  of  the  offices  of  Government. 
Tbe  catbolnl,  uxh-epiitcopal  palace,  and  a  college  of  'Seices* 
or  cboraten,  ocuupiei  the  eniit  angle  ;  on  the  west  is  the  '  Palado 
Xaciniwl.'  tlK  '  Polacio  de  Jtuticia,'  and  a  military  biirracks ;  on 
the  ttortit  ia  the  '  Cabildo,'  or  towu-hall,  tbe  gaol,  and  other  huild- 
iagB.  Tb«  MWth  ta  occupied  bj  the  patrimonial  residence  or  palace 
■<  tbc  Uarquis  irf' Aycnena — the  onlj  lemaining  remnant  of  titled 
BaUn^  ia  tbe  country.  !tlost  of  these  buildings  are  spacioiia,  and, 
tbangli  low  and  massive,  are  in  good  taste  and  have  an  imposing 
The  cathedra],  whi«h  t«  itill  incomplete,  is  decidedly 
A  handsome  and  nmforiu  colonnade  runs  round  three 
■4c*  of  tUa iqiacious  quadrangle,  and  the  northern  gaikry  in  jiar- 
tkkkr  coMaiaa  the  beat  shops,  and  is  thronged  with  traders  of  all 
^Mkb.  Tbe  vast  area  of  the  square  is  paved  throughout ;  a  por- 
tion of  it  H  encumbered  with  rows  of  permanent  booths  let  out  to 
iliihli.  wkieb  produoe  a  considerable  revenue  to  the  luunicipalit; ; 
bM  l«r  tbia  adiantage  they  would  long  since  have  been  removed, 
n  tbejr  OR  nwighUj,  and  mar  the  nnifortnity  of  tbe  !wene. 
detnotaig  mneh  Irom  the  imposint^  effect  of  this  part  of  ibe 
atj.  Tkc  narkct  groops,  gathered  under  the  shade  of  gigsiitic 
■td  picttmsqne  mnbrellaa,  covered  with  painted  canvass,  rather 
Biplave  tbc  place,  which,  though  grand,  looks  bore  without  th<.it>. 
In  tbc  centre  Manb  a  stone  fountain,  curioUBly  carved,  over  which 


22  THE   GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

the  blue  and  white  flag  of  the  republic  waves  on  all  ecclesiastical 
high  days  and  national  festivals. 

Behind  the  cathedral,  the  back  of  which  is  more  lofty  than  the 
front,  is  another  smaller  square,  called  '£1  Sagrario,*  which  is 
amply  sufficient  to  hold  the  market — and  where  it  is  held  when  the 
Plaza  Mayor  is  occupied  by  troops— in  the  midst  of  this,  which  k 
not  yet  fully  x>aved,  or  even  levelled,  stands  a  rough  looking  square 
erection,  contuning  the  clock  and  bells  of  the  cathedral,  which  is 
itself  still  unprovided  with  a  belfry,  though  surmounted  by  a 
handsome  dome. 

The  houses,  with  few  exceptions,  are  confined  to  the  ground  floor, 
and  are  generally  built  of  stone  and  clay  mingled  together.  The 
walls  are  six  or  even  eight  feet  in  thickness,  on  account  of  the  fre- 
quent shocks  of  earthquake.  Two,  three,  or  four  rows  of  spacious 
and  lofly  rooms  built  round  a  court,  and  cloistered  inwardly  with 
a  flat- roofed  galleiy,  called  ^Azotea,*  supported  upon  rows  of 
pilasters,  form  the  bulk  of  their  dwellings,  which  are  evidently 
Moorish  in  their  plan  and  arrangements.  A  ponderous  portico  or 
*  Saguan,*  with  folding  gates,  is  the  only  entrance  into  the  first 
'Patio,'  or  yard,  formed  by  the  rows  of  rooms.  This  genermlfy 
contains  a  running  fountain  and  a  neat  tank  of  water,  and  is  often 
tastefully  adorned  with  flowers,  among  which  the  rose,  so  seldom 
seen  in  tropical  climates,  holds  a  prominent  place.  The  inner 
courts,  to  the  number  of  two,  three,  or  even  four,  are  surrounded 
by  the  secondary  rooms  and  outhouses,  among  which  is  the  kitchen, 
the  only  part  of  a  house  needing  a  chimney.  Beyond  these  aie 
spacious  stables,  poultry-yards,  and  small  orchards,  where  the  fig, 
the  orange,  and  the  peach-tree  grow  side  by  side,  or  are  intertwined 
with  the  tendrils  of  the  passion  flower,  which  mingles  its  delicioiiB 
fruits  (the  Granadilla)  with  theirs,  or  hangs  it  upon  the  wilk. 
These  vast  premises  fill  up  the  space  enclosed  by  the  '  Mati«mfL^* 
which,  in  the  case  of  the  highest  class,  is  entirely  taken  up  by  tuo 
or  three  such  mansions.  The  appearance  of  the  dwellings  from  tlK 
street  is  sombre.  The  surface  of  the  long  white  walls  is  broken  bj 
few  windows,  and  these  are  surrounded  by  a  heavy  iron  baloonyt 
the  bars  of  which  are  secured  above  in  the  form  of  a  cage,  so  m 
entirely  to  preclude  ingress  or  egress ;  the  whole  presenting  modi 
the  appearance  of  a  convent,  or  the  antiquated  dwelling  of 
wealthy  proprietor,  in  a  district  infested  by  banditti. 


.    I-ARTICDLAIIS. 


Evote  booses,  squares,  and  fountains  are  all  aliundaatly  supplied 
pure  and  exceedinglj'  cool  waler.  It  ia  conveyed  to  the  city  by 
'cU  constructed  aqueducts,  which  carry  it  over  long  mogL-s  of 
mrdiN,  »ad  through  tunucb,  a  distance  of  sis  or  eight  milca.  Several 
Mitcnuve  nod  commodioua  public  tanks  adorn  the  city,  and  afford 
facilities  for  "ashing  clothes;  bcesccommodation  being  provided  for 
>corua  of  wtuherwomen,  who  stood  to  work  in  conveuient  stone 
niches,  sheltered  from  the  suu  and  rain,  llie  water  is  conveyed 
from  the  twelve  principal  reservoirs  in  the  city  to  different  points, 
in  earl henimre  t\ih&,  which  but  ill8U|iiily  the  place  of  metal  pipts, 
•s  llu-y  are  yay  brittle,  und  nn  earthquake  makes  sad  ravages 
among  them.  The  use  of  them  is  the  mure  extraordinary'  because 
metallic  ores  at  all  kinds  are  so  plentiful,  ood  the  water-rates  are 
an  abundant  source  uf  revenue  to  the  municijiality.  The  water 
which  condnnally  overflows  from  the  public  and  private  tanks, 
dcnn^e*  the  sewere,  and  in  many  of  the  less  frequented  thorough- 
fans  it  b  suffered  to  run  down  an  open  cfaannel  in  the  centre  of 
the  street,  which  slopes  in  (hat  direction,  in  the  sume  manner  as 
Diuy  hUI  be  seen  in  many  continental  towns.  Sut,  instead  of  a 
filthy  kennel,  it  ia  here  a  clear  and  rapid  stream,  in  which  the 
".Sanatc,"(a  hind  of  blackbird)  sportsond  laves  its  glossy  fcatbcra. 
The  grainy  edges  of  these  dvic  brooks,  while  they  phiinly  indicate 
neglect,  as  well  as  the  occasional  bridges  that  cross  them,  add 
much  to  the  picturesque  appearance  of  ihc  town,  and  detract  coa- 
lidersbly  from  the  roonotony  of  the  straight  and  quiet  streets. 

Vthiclcs  are  by  no  means  conuiion,  or  these  ojien  channels  would 
lie  lem  tolerable.  An  old  family  coach  drawn  by  lour  mules,  now 
and  Uiim  rumbles  heavily  over  the  rather  rough  but  regular  pave- 
mcntii,  and  shakes  the  ground.  These  are,  in  form  and  oriuiment, 
such  «■  an  seen  in  [uinlings  of  the  fourteenth  century,  or,  with 
loB  carving  and  folding,  somewhat  like  the  state  equipage  of  ihe 
Lord  Uayor  of  London.  The  few  carts  used  are  roughly  made 
oitli  laaauvc  wooden  wheels,  and  not  unfrcquently  drawn  by  oxen, 
yalcd  lofctber  by  the  horns.  A  light  phaeton  or  chaise,  imported 
ttxna  Enropc,  msy  occasioDolly  be  seen ;  but  all  wheeled  vehicles 
*iT  oai>fiiicd  to  the  streets  of  the  capital  and  the  roods  in  its  imme- 
date  vicinity,  as  the  roads  elsewhere,  and  the  nature  of  the  country, 
will  not  odmil  of  their  use. 
Droves  of  mules  and  comjioiucs  of  muscular  IndLiiis  beariug  lu 


9A  THE  GOdFBL   IN  CBMT&AL  AMERICA* 


■ndfiro,  upon  their  baeks,  burdens,  coosiBling  of  ■aww  cf  mrhiawJ, 
bftlei  of  Manchester  goods,  cases  of  Frmch  silks,  4c.  fte.  te, 
throng  the  principal  thoroughfiu-es.  The  ibot  pasMBgei 
of  Indians,  native  kboorers,  and  artinns,  in  ^ghi  and 
tnme — native  gentlemen,  or  *  Caballeros,*  habited  m  the  best 
European  style—students  and  derks,  wrapped  in  Spanish 
on  the  hottest  as  on  the  coldest  daj — Do&as  and  Scfionv^ 
heads  covered  with  costly  shawls,  or  with  silken  hoods  and 
mantillas* — women  of  the  middle  and  lower  class,  in  wtfimf  httk 
graceful  and  stately,  though  of  the  gayest  eoloors ;  thor  black  hair 
often  braided  with  the  brightest  and  richest  silken  ribboBs;  th^ 
also  wear  no  other  covering  to  the  head  thanmantiDas  of  a  hm  cs* 
pcn»ive  but  by  no  means  a  less  becoming  deseripdoii — and,  kMtty, 
Indian  women  in  their  working  garb,  or  in  their  grolesqvc  gahi  coa- 
tumc,  described  elsewhere.  Sometimes  may  be  seen  the  Ua^  caasodk 
and  long  shovel-hat  of  the  ^ Padre*  (priests);  the  red  and  hhoe 
dresses  of  the  *  Seices'  (priests  in  embryo) ;  the  hal»t  of  the  IXk 
minican  or  Franciscan  monks,  and  some  few  orders  of  nuna; 
frequently  the  grey  and  brown  dresses  of  the  ^Tercena^ 
'  Terceras/  the  brotherhoods  and  sisterhoods  of  Ae  ikird  ordtr,* 
and  occasionally  even  the  monkish  beard,  girdle,  and  bare-fal  of 
the  mendicant  Capuchin  friar. 

The  city  of  Guatemala  has  no  hotels,  hot  omtaina  sereral 
tensive  ^^Mczones**  for  the  acetxnmodation  of  travelling 
and  dealers.  These  are  more  like  eastern  caravansaries  thsi  inBi^ 
and  much  more  attention  is  paid  to  the  wants  of  the  hofici  and 
mules  than  to  the  convenience  of  travellers.  It  is  opCLonal  to  vm 
as  a  lodging  the  rooms  provided  apparently  for  the  stowagje  of 
goods,  of  which  there  are  long  ranges  opening  upon  a  coveied  gpl* 
lay,  encumbered  like  a  faji  vrith  traders  and  their  waxea;  bat 
these  rooms  are  dark  and  nnfumii^ed.  The  hospitafifcy  of  tkft 
natives,  however,  makes  th»  vrant  bat  little  felt. 

The  ecdeflsastical  bnildings  consist  of  the  parish  churdKB, 
vents,  nnnneries,  chapels,  and  seminaries,  and  are  by  fior  the 
prominent  and  extensive.  They  number  Irom  thirty  to  tetjr,  if 
not  more.  Some  of  the  churches  are  spacious,  richly  endoirei^ 
and  sumptuously  adorned,  others  are  injured  by  earthquakes^ 
one  or  two  are  already  in  ruins. 

■e  Mljr  wool  «»itft  Mft  wilk.  Mi  Hit  it  a  cwten  of : 


LOCAC   P*HTKDI 


deius,  KccntiatCK  and  lioctors.     The  ediScu   a  wtll 
Ac  object,  is  in  good  Uste,  and  even  approaches  to 
gnndcar.     It  contaiiiB  also  the  Halt  of  the  Senate. 

Bamloi  the  public  cdiSces  already  cQuincraied,  the  cmtom- 
hooK.  the  '  ionioilado,  or  omrt  of  commerce,  iiid  tbe  mint,  are 
hfgtr  and  handwnie  bmldingf;  the  two  latter  arc  near  the  great 
•qnuv.  Tbe  public  biwqjital,  nhicb  was  fomterly  one  of  the 
}»rgi!t«  CMiTcnbi,  it  well  attended  by  a  medical  staff,  composed  of 
talented  pnctitioners  and  iludenta.  It  bag  at  different  times 
received  impravetncDts  of  a  modem  and  liberal  character,  90  as  la 
be  a  very  efcditabtc  and  useful  institution.  The  cemetery  vrbicb 
0  altadied  to  the  biiEpitat,  is  worthy  ol'  any  Earopean  town.  It 
covers  a  vast  area,  aod  is  well  luidotil,  the  nliole  being  larrounded 
by  a  h^h  mU,  itself  foil  of  tiicbes,  into  which  thousands  of 
mfiini  mtrf  be  iotnxhiced ;  these,  after  a  certnJu  term,  are  emptied, 
•nd  the  nsmstcd  rcmainG  are  transterred  to  a  larger  compftrtinent, 
m  ballmi  v^uxre  column,  which  intersects  the  nail  at  rejjular  di»- 
tsnecs,  and  ■  surmounted  by  an  um,  itself  the  depotilory  of  some 
more  tsvotired  dost.  Tbe  centre  space  and  various  adjacent  yards 
SIC  ainwiy  more  or  lets  filled  with  handsome  tombstones  and 
Btophagi.  There  is  a  spot  eet  apart  for  tbe  interment  of  each 
n  an  not  pBfnsts ;  it  already  hns  a  fevr  oecupnnts.  Tbe  revenne  of 
thn  yboe  ia  cooidderable,  and  has  been  Ubcrally  laid  out  in  im- 
prwyciimrta.  In  addition  to  these  objects  of  mteiest,  there  are 
»aate  of  •  dificient  character  which  claim  a  rncDtion  among  pnblic 

•A-  Fort,  lately  erected,  stands  on  a  prominent  point, 
f  BxM  of  the  city.  There  are  varioua  enensive  bar- 
fj  store'bauses,  and  prisons,  a  npaeions  ampbithentne 
t%am  de  Torms,'  or  the  bttlUring.  and  a  theatre  and 
t  low  uid  mean  appeanuice  of  which  are  in  keeping 
«itb  the  demorafizing  eflects  they  produce. 

Tlw  centnl  niecls,  aix)  indeed  al  1  except  the  '  barrios,' or  suburbs, 
we  wdi  bghted  with  tallow,in  rather  bandwme  tamps.  The  cnndla 
a*«  fMilkalarly  well  mode,  and  arc  calculated  to  burn  only  till  the 
bmu-  when  ibe  tnoon  lises  b  all  that  splendour  and  nn interrupted 
hrillMKjr  which  here  make  ber  a  trustworthy  heucoa,  and  the 
g  gnaidiaa  of  tbe  n^hi.  This  part  of  the  town  ia  also 
■  Kmaet  till  dawn,  by  a  body  of  watcbmcn  callird 


26  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CEZiTRAL   AMERICA. 

Serenos,*  who  call  the  hours  and  the  state  of  the  weather. 
These  are  hoth  modem  improyements,  and  greatly  conduce  to  the 
safety  of  the  inhabitants  and  the  quiet  of  the  dty.  They  are 
under  the  direction  of  the  Municipality,  who,  as  it  has  been  seen, 
also  regulate  the  supply  of  water,  for  which,  as  for  the  *  Alum- 
brado*  (lighting)  and  the  Serenos,  they  levy  a  rate  which  is  cheer- 
fully paid  by  the  citizens.  This  corporation  also  regulates  the 
distribution  among  the  bakers  of  the  wbeaten  flour  brought  into 
the  dty  from  Quesaltenango  and  other  places  where  wheat  is  pro- 
duced, which  are  each  bound  to  supply  at  least  a  certain  quantity 
for  the  consumption  of  the  capitaL  This  is  deposited  at  a  kind  of 
'^  Halle  aux^bls,"  called  ^  La  Lombriga,*  and  the  regularity  and 
order  of  this  department  of  the  duties  of  the  corporation  is  both 
curious  and  creditable  to  it. 

The  city  is  almost  entirely  surrounded  by  natural  ravines,  deep 
and  irregular,  their  sides  slightly  wooded,  and  at  the  bottom,  some 
hundred  feet  below  the  plain,  the  waters  of  the  ndghbouring 
springs  are  united  into  one  bed,  which  for  want  of  larger  streams, 
are  dignified  with  the  name  of  rivers.  Upon  some  of  these 
there  are  bathing-houses,  with  convenient  pools  and  shelter.  The 
approaches  to  the  dty  are  by  five  roads,  most  of  tbem  descending 
and  reascending  the  sides  of  these  ravines,  which  are  well  paved 
where  that  is  the  case.  There  are  also  some  well-constructed 
though  small  bridges,  and  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  miles 
from  the  ^  Plaza,*  there  is  a/Guarda,*  or  gate  upon  each  road» 
which  serves  for  collecting  tbe  customs  or  duties  on  imports.  In 
various  parts  of  the  plain,  which  is  little  cultivated  and  affordt 
good  pasturage  only  during  the  rainy  season,  are  large  '  Hacien- 
das,* or  cattle  estates,  with  plantations  attached,  and  several  growing 
villages  are  scattered  upon  its  surface.  Two  or  three  of  these  are 
becoming  populous  and  important,  being  resorted  to  by  the 
'  Guatemaltecos,*  for  bathing  and  recreation.  Aiixco,  an  ancient 
Indian  town  of  dght  or  ten  thousand  inhabitants,  occupies  a  p(ro- 
minent  place  on  the  side  of  a  steep  hill,  and  immediatdy  acyoinii^ 
the  capital  on  its  northern  suburb  is  a  flourishing  Indian  village 
called  ^  Jocotenango,*  where  most  of  the  Indian  labourers  dwell  in 
neat  and  even  handsome  houses  amidst  gardens  of  Jocotes  or  plum 
trees, — hence  the  name.  Between  the  last-named  village  and  the 
city  is  a  public  promenade,  consisting  of  a  wide  and  good  road  and 


LOCAI,  PARTICDLARS,  27 

EDoea  of  trees,  supplied  with  seats  of  solid  masonry.  To  lliia  place 
^dlizctja  resort,  esiicciallj  on  certain  giTcn  ikys.  Thcru  is  a  slill 
c  faahbitablc  vrulk  at  the  Houtbeni  extremity  of  the  eilv,  near 
I  mad  to  the  Aoligiia ;  it  is  laid  out  in  iiniilar  style,  within 
'Hoftke  Tulcanos:  a  portion  of  the  '  Llano'  or  plain,  and  a  long 
e  ol'  arckci  forming  part  of  the  aqueduct.  Here  promenadera 
1  cqaeitriiuia  doily  assemble,  nnd  the  military  bands  exercise 
'ir  ikill,  which  is  far  above  mediocrity. 

n  IroQi  the  descent  of  the  niiiuntoiQS  over  nhich  the  rood 
n  the  Atlantic  passes,  or  from  some  of  the  more  approxiranle 
liill^,  Gaulcmala  presents  a  grand  and  imposing  aspect.  Lying 
aa  the  bosom  of  the  gently-undulating  plnb,  bounded  by  a  bold 
Dntliiic  of  mountains,  including  the  three  volcanoes  towering  abore 

Krtst,  and  piercing  the  clouds ;  its  domes  and  cupolas,  its  flat- 
id  edifiea  tmd  white  houses  with  red  tiled-roofs,  synimetrically 
igtd  Mul  lined  with  '  Axoteas'  or  terraces,  ihe  whole  inter- 
led  with  orange,  jocote,  and  other  trees,  glittering  in  tho  bright 
rays  of  a  tropical  nun  shining  through  an  atmosphere  of  purest 
tmiHparvney,  are  calculated  forcibly  to  strike  the  senses  and  delight 
the  ffye. 
^^EDiui  Aunre  especially  predominates,  and  could  hardly  escape  the 
^^^h  otMOTtDt;  it  is  the  prodigious  number,  extent,  nnd  lordly 
^^^buter  of  Uie  churches  and  convents,  The  rest  of  the  city 
ou^t  eoaily  be  mistaken  for  their  dependencies,  and  Indeed,  wide 
ipTcad  OS  it  i^  it  ap|>earG  scarcely  to  Dlford  scope  enough  for  the 
printcnll  and  monkish  enterprise  of  these  hungry  '  exploiteurs' 
of  the  pHiple,  and  farmers  of  souls.  But  it  may  also  be  said,  with 
ivspNl  lo  these  convents,  that  "  Noph  is  desolate,  without  an  inha- 
biunL"  Their  palaces  are  indeed  forsaken  so  far  as  the  builders  are 
concerned,  for  a  mere  remnant  non  dwells  In  the  few  convents  still 
nwd  by  them,  and  the  Government  of  the  dty,  already  beginning 
to  pa«  Into  the  hands  of  its  legitimate  rulers,  it  is  gradually  re- 
lonung  its  proper  rank  and  dignity  with  respect  to  these  edifices, 
maldng  them  subservient  to  public  utility  ns  well  as  to  its  adoniment. 
The  port  nearest  to  tlie  capital  on  the  Pacilic,  is  that  of  Tstapo, 
Kimtrlimci  called  the  port  of  Guatemala,  though  it  is  scventy- 
thne  miles  from  it.  It  is  said  to  be  capable  of  improvements 
wliicli  have  been  long  in  contemplation,  but  is  actually  little  better 
than  n  rONilaleML     A  few  X'rench  ships  and  others  that  double 


S8  'TUE  gospel   in  CEZITRAL  MMSRICX. 


Gape  Horn  visit  it  yetrly.  Tlie  prindpal  natife  port  k  Tabil  ob 
the  Lake  of  Dulce.  It  eommuiiicstes  wkh  the  Athntic  hjtheBio 
Duke,  already  mentioiied  as  falliog  into  the  Bajof  Haaduw. 
This  port  b  216  miles  from  Guatemala,  a  distaiiee  whidb  ^pnfwtM  bo 
gnall  obntacle  to  the  inerease  of  the  trade  of  the  capitaL  Yariial 
would  be  in  erery  respect  a  fine  harbour,  and  aa  a  sea^port  caaly 
aeeessiblc,  hot  for  the  bar  at  the  mooth  of  the  Dnlee,  upm.  wfakk 
there  are  only  eight  or  ten  feet  of  water  at  the  yery  moat,  Avi  per- 
mitting only  small  vessels,  or  such  as  are  eonstmeled  fiir  the 
oxprvM  purpose  to  enter  the  river  and  lake.  At  the  bar  ef  the 
Dulce  iH  a  Carib  settlement  called  Liviiqiston,  in  hoBoar  of  the 
difltinguiihcd  United  States  legislator,  whose  code  was  adoptad  by 
the  Republic  in  1834.  It  is  about  forty  miles  diataat  firona  Tfld»], 
and  inroniiscs  to  be  an  important  place.  At  the  *  Angoskara,*  er 
that  narrow  part  where  the  Lake  of  Yzabal,  as  it  is  often  caDed, 
and  the  *  Golfete,*  or  the  lesser  lake  unite  their  waters,  are  the 
niins  of  an  old  and  isolated  Spanish  fort  called  the  £1  CaatillB  de 
San  Felipe,  where  convicts  from  the  interior  are  kepi  in  chaioa 
and  at  liard  labour.  Through  the  lake  and  port  of  Tabal  the 
great  bulk  of  the  trade  of  the  state  of  Guatemala  passes.  From  il 
is  tlie  only  direct  road  to  the  capital,  being  the  point  where  the 
*  Mico  road*  terminates,  or  rather,  it  might  be  said,  where  it 
aa  the  Mico  mountain,  from  which  thb  road  takea  ita 
because  it  long  otfered  the  most  formidable  difficulty  aa  to 
b  situated  on  the  southern  shore  of  the  lake.  On  thia 
hundreds  of  mules  have  perished  annually,  and  even  some  nraleteeiB 
and  travellers,  by  reason  of  the  ruggedness  of  the  way,  which  haa 
only  lateljrbeen  rendered  passable  with  a  moderate  degree  of  saletf  . 

The  little  town  of  Yabal,  which  lies  between  the  Mieo  monnlaiB 
and  the  lake,  is  stretched  along  the  shore  of  a  semieircnkur  haj.  It 
ooonsts  of  a  custom-house  establishment,  a  garrison,  a  few  rtwnnih- 
flkm  houses,  and  five  or  six  hundred  Ladino^  Sambo^  and  Indian 
fiunilics.  The  English  and  native  schooners  that  lieqiienl  the 
port  keep  up  a  constant  though  irregular  comnmnkatioa  wjA 
Bdiie.  Some  of  them  nul  to  and  from  the  Havannah,  and 
French,  Belgian,  and  Spanirii  vessels  occasionally  vkit  it. 

The  remaining  portaof  Central  America  are  numerous,  and  some 
dt  them  eaceHent.  Commfncing  on  the  Western  Coast,  in  Ae 
irtateof  Salvador,  we  have  Aoyantk,  near  the  town  of  Sonaonalv, 


h    PAKTlCPLAfla.  29 

and  clow  to  the  active  volcano  of  Taaico,  irhicfa  serves  as  a  natuiml 
lighthouse  and  a  magnificent  beacon.  'La  Liliertiid,'  and  'La 
[Tiiiiin,'  which  is  the  best  io  that  state,  is  the  port  nearest  to  the 
dly  of  San  Salvador,  being  only  thirtj-sx  miles  distant  Honduras 
htm  one  Rnall  port  on  thb  coast,  called  *  San  Lorenso,'  which,  like 
La  Unioo,  b  in  the  spacious  baj  uf  Conchagna.  On  the  same  sldev 
in  Nicaragoa,  is,  *  fieatejo,*  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  very  highest 
lenos  M  r^nda  natund  capabilities,  safety,  and  convenimoe. 
'  Saa  J  nan  dd  Snr,'  in  the  Gulf  of  'Popogayo'  h,  like  Realcjo,  one 
of  the  pointi  to  which  it  is  proposed  to  bring  the  canal  from  the 
lalie.  CoKa  Rica  he?  the  Galfof  Nicoyaontbe  Padtic,  ssd  the  port 
or  Uatioa  on  the  Atlantic-  Further  north,  on  the  ea.'^tcm  shore,  ia 
San  Joan  dd  Norte,  or  Ski  Juan  de  Nicaragua  as  it  is  geDeraUf 
called ;  it  ii  the  only  port  of  that  state  on  this  side,  and  coosequeiilly 
the  enirepot  nf  its  commerce.  It  is  aloated  on  tbc  river  by  which 
it  is  propoMd  to  unite  the  two  oceans,  about  dxty  miles  from  its 
principal  montlt.  Tlits  important  point  has  very  lately  1x;en  taken 
mof  by  the  British  in  the  name  of  the  Moxquito  king,  and 
le  of  "  Grey  town.'"  Blewfield's  Isf^oon,  in  the 
oho  tertilory,  is  about  uxty  miles  further  north  from  the 
moatb  of  the  San  Ji»n  del  Norte.  There  are  a  few  English 
■Mllcn  hero,  HMMlly  Creoles  from  Jamaica  and  the  Caymans.  This 
pbee  WiH  the  residenee  of  the  late  Briti^  Consul -General  on  *  Tie 
Skirr,'  who  Joat  hi>  life  in  an  attack  upon  a  native  fort  in  the  river 
San  Jtmn.  Oa  the  Mtutb  side  of  the  Bayof  Uondnras  arcTraxiUo 
and  Onao,  ports  of  the  state  of  Honduras  already  alluded  to.  At 
Uw  edionty  of  the  hay,  and  but  a  tew  miles  from  the  mouth  of 
tlw  Slo  Dnlccts  the  beautiful  harbour  of  Santo  Thomis,ane  of  the 
belt  ta  ibt  wiwld  lor  safety  and  convenience,  and  said  to  be  capable  of 
■ftnMlg  RKhonge  for  the  entire  British  nnvy.  It  is  now  the  utc 
of  an  (An  to  eolonizc  on  the  part  of  a  Belgian  Company,  favoured 
hy  ibdr  fovcmment,  and  vessels  are  banning  to  resort  tn  it. 

But  of  «1l  these  the  port  of  Belize  is  decidedly  the  most  fre- 
qnenied.  As  the  principnl  mart  of  trade,  as  the  chief  settlement  of 
Itntnfa  Ifondnras,  and  as  the  scat  of  the  fust  nuaiion  station,  it 

Ildiae  ikrivcB  its  name  from  a  Scotch  buocaueer,  who  Gnt  used 
the  harbour  u  a  hidiiig-placc  nearly  a  century  ugo.  and  strange 
it  tnaj  appcRr,  the  wurd  Belize  is  a  corruption  of  Wallace,  the 
Bune  of  tM%  fnebootcr,  which  hy  English  writeta  w* 


3 


30  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Wallis,  and  by  the  Spanish  Yalis,  and  then  Balis,  which  was  finally 
modified  by  the  English  to  Belize  (pronounced  Beleeze).  The 
town  contains  a  mixed  population  amounting  to  8,000  souls.*  It  is 
built  of  wood,  upon  a  low  flat  shore,  which  is  covered  with 
mangrove  bushes.  This  kind  of  coast  extends  many  miles  to  the 
northward  and  to  the  southward,  and  a  veiy  distant  view  of  the 
Coxcomb  Hills  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Manantee  Lagoon  is  the 
only  high  ground  to  be  seen.  Inland  are  extensive  swamps  ovn^ 
spread  with  thick  jungle.  The  air,  which  would  otherwise  be  in- 
supportably  hot,!  is  daily  tempered  by  vigorous  sea-breezes ;  but 
the  land-vrind  frequently  comes  down  during  the  night  charged 
with  miasma  from  the  marshes.  It  is  consequently  insalubrious. 
Intermittent  fevers  and  agues  being  the  prevailing  disorders,  the 
first  more  especially  during  the  height  of  dry  weather,  and  the 
latter  during  the  rainy  season.  The  inhabitants  are  supplied  with 
fresh  water  only  from  the  clouds.  The  rain  that  falls  upon  the 
roofs  of  the  houses  is  collected  in  brick  and  iron  tanks,  or  by  the 
poor  in  pipes  and  casks,  and  is  often  exhausted  during  the  diy  sea^ 
son,  when  fresh  water  must  be  brought  from  a  distance  up  the 
river  or  along  the  shores  at  a  great  expense  of  labour.  Such  a 
locality  would  never  have  been  selected  for  the  habitations  of  men 
— ^much  less  for  such  a  settlement,  but  for  the  facilities  for  trade 
offered  by  the  harbour,  and  the  fact  that  the  banks  of  the  river  at 
whose  mouth  it  is  situated  were,  and  still  are,  uncommonly  prolific 
in  the  valuable  woods,  the  cutting  and  shipping  of  which  constitutes 
the  chief  employment  of  the  settlers. 

Thus  the  votaries  of  manmion,  regardless  of  all  convenience,  are 
willing  to  risk  life  itself  in  the  pursuit  of  the  means  of  supporting 
it.  And  shall  the  servants  of  God  hesitate  to  follow  them  with  the 
tidings  of  salvation  ?  Or  shall  they  refuse  to  imitate  their  daring 
and  self-denial  in  the  service  of  Christ  ?  And  when  enabled  to 
do  60,  should  they  think  that  a  great  sacrifice  which  is  so  readily 
made  by  multitudes  of  men  ^^  wise  in  their  generation,**  for  objects 
so  far  inferior  to  theirs  ? 

The  natural  disadvantages  of  the  place,  though  considerable,  are 
contended  with  and  in  a  measure  overcome.  The  ground  upoo 
which  the  town  is  built,  with  the  exception  of  a  narrow  sand* 

*  Otborne'i  Weat  India  Guide,  page  834. 

t  The  average  heat  hu  been  atated  at  84®  Fahrenheit  It  is  much  oftener  abore  thsD 
behm  that  degree. 


.    P  Aim  CU  LARS. 


31 


t,  is  •Hodf,  or  ortificiaJly  filled  up,  chiefly  with  the  hHllnst  of 
trnding  to  the  port.  All  the  wharfs  are  redeemed  from  the 
re  of  the  oceiui.  by  a  kidul  kind  of  annexation,  being  first 
■taked  in,  utd  theo  filled  up  with  niud,  sand,  shells,  coral  rock,  and 
tnitbngany  chipo,  i.  e.  the  waste  that  occurs  in  squaring  the  wood 
for  •.hiiimcnt.  A  -iinatl  island  in  the  midat  of  the  harbour,  just 
opposite  the  moath  of  the  river,  was  entirely  made  by  deposits  of 
ballast,  ashy  law rc<]uired,  consisting  of  gravel  from  the  bottoms  of 
Brilisb  riven.  Il  is  dignified  with  the  name  of  St.  George's  Fort, 
Under  (he  (hade  of  a  grove  of  coconaut  trees,  whose  tall  beads  bow 
oefliUy  to  the  almost  eontinuol  «ea-breczea,  it  contains  a  few 
ictions.  in  whieh  a  handful  of  European  artilleiynien  arc 
Without  wnlLi  or  embrasures,  the  open  pebbly  shores 
barttficial  ialel  bristle  with  carronades  and  long  pieces  of  artil- 
Ti  which  look  aa  threatening  towards  those  they  are  intended  to 
■  towards  supposed  enemies,  who  see  them,  if  at  all,  far 
a  fraquently,  and  have  greater  facililiea  for  keeping  out  of  their 
dvadly  mnge.  This  is  in  truth  the  spot  of  all  others  to  which  a 
Brilith  daltn  eonid  most  easily  be  advanced,  as  it  is  undeniably 
Britinh  *oi1,  ud  begirt,  too,  with  that  element  which,  like  Neptune 
of  aid,  she  claims  as  her  exclusive  empire. 

The  town  itself  presents  a  most  pleasing  aspect  from  the  harbour, 

nutwlihittanding  the  flatness  of  the  land.    The  wooden  houfes, 

specially  tb<we  in  the  front  street  which  face  the  sea.  are  handsome, 

vpnciuus,  and  cominadiotis ;  standing  apart  from  each  other,  mo«t 

ii!'  ihrm  surrounded  with  neat  venmdalis,  and  thus  at  once  well 

I  i.-iililalcd  and  shaded,  they  have  an  tar  of  elegance  and  adnpla- 

■■-'>n  t»  tlieclimat«,  which  is  particularly  pleasing.     The  shingled 

ti'f<  of  the  bouses  further  back,  the  spire,  and  the  eignal-slalfs 

''-npciwd  with  tamarind  and  other  thiit-trces,  above  which  tho 

I    riiannt  and  the  cabbage  palm*  raise  their  stately  stems,  fill  up  a 

.'i  ^prct  that  would  charm  others  besides  the  wearied  voyager  and 

,.   'orprised  slningcr.     On  both  banks  of  the  river  the   houses 

iHtt-nd  along  thon:  for  upwards  of  two  miles  tiU  lost  to  sight 

g  the  mangrove  bushes.  A  light  and  well-constructed  wooden 

ge,  ^i{^tly  arched,  spans  the  river's  month,  and  affords  an  aity 

t  (far  groups  of  coloured  people,  whose  snow-while  clothes, 

JIM  the  Woontilr  Cobliiipv  nr  l>T  'I":  !'p*'''>'nl, 
nlcA  a  t  vc^lBblc.  It  i>  njuloubtpillf  Ihp  mint 
ii  jailly  diaUifiuiLol  by  Ih 


82  THE  G08PKL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Inroad  brimmed  straw  hats  or  kerchiefed  hemk  of  gandaert  eokmiii 
cootrut  rtrongly  with  their  sable  cotnplexioii.  Here  they  remt  in 
eonsiderable  numbers,  and,  as  they  sit  upon  or  leao  over  the  stoat 
balustrade,  and  watch  the  fshipping  in  the  cotA  of  the  day,  the  fleet 
of  gallant  merchantmen,  *■  drogas,*  (coasting  Tessds,)  ^  bungaji,* 
(native  barges,)  ^creaus,*  (pleasure  boats,)  and  'dorees,*  or  canoe% 
they  enjoy  what  appears  to  them  an  imposing  and  livdy  aeene.  The 
unaccustomed  eye  of  the  European  would  more  readily  be  aircsted 
by  the  large  rafts  of  mahogany  in  logs,  and  piles  of  the  purple  log- 
wood floating  upon  the  light  trunks  of  the  mountain  cabbage — 
then  called  bark-logs ;  or  perhaps  it  would  be  attracted  bj  a  wdl- 
manned  ^  pit-pan,*  shooting  under  the  bridge,  or  the  pietoreaqve  ap- 
pearance of  some  Spanish-Indian  fishermen  retumii^  to  dispose  of 
their  finny  spoil,  while  the  expectant  purchasers  hasten  to  meet  the 
loaded  doree^  and  contend  vrith  ncHsy  volubility  for  a  larger  thAre  of 
the  living  prize  in  exchange  for  their  silver  coin,*  while  others  less 
prompt  are  disappointed  of  the  meal  of  the  day,  often  decadent  oa 
this  somewhat  precarious  supply. 

At  both  ends  of  the  bridge  stand  the  market-houses.  The  one 
on  the  river*s  bank  at  the  southern  extremity,  in  an  inregokr  open 
space,  is  a  light  and  handsome  iron  structure,  lately  erected  at  nuidi 
cost,  in  which  vegetables  and  fruits  are  vended.  The  other,  ob  the 
north  side,  is  a  heavy  wooden  house,  half  overhaqgiag  the  river, 
which  serves  for  the  shambles.  On  its  floor  the  huge  greea  taitle 
flounders  heavily  all  night,  being  left  there  upon  its  back  urtfl 
it  is  killed  in  the  morning. 

The  court-house  and  thegaol  are  large  but  awkward  boiUipgi,  the 
latter  having  been  enlaiged  since  it  was  first  erected.  Itissarmoanted 
by  a  neat  belvidere  or  look-out  bouse,  from  which  the  iqpproach 
of  vessels  is  signaliaed,  and  the  arrival  of  the  European  padwt 
announced  by  a  white  signal  flag,  always  hailed  with  joy.  Both  the 
court-house  and  the  gaol  are  near  the  bridge.  AninoonsideraUeopeR 
space  or  green  lies  between  them.  Here  large  sums  of  money  hflit 
already  been  spent  in  fruitless,  because  misdirected,  efi^xts  to  aokaR 
artesian  well,  which,  if  it  be  ever  effected,  must  prove  aa  incakR- 
lable  advantage  to  the  community.  Several  executioiis  have  takcR 
place  on  this  spot.    The  Government  House  or  Saperintendentll 


*  nwnuIlaiiBReBflnlQM;  it  it  caQed  a  ^flppMee*  by  Om 
IMio  B«A' 19  tks  SpuMxd^  ud  ia  value  it  «val  to 


^^1  THE   TOWN   OP   SKLIZE.  33 

residence,  is  a  fine  mansion  at  the  southcm  cxtretnitj  of  the  town, 

Eurrouodcd  b>-  grounds  taslefuliy  \aiil  out,  and  planted  with  cucoa- 

nut  trees,  Ininboo,  &c.     Near  to  it  ig  the  Episcopal  parish  church, 

a  brick  liaildiag  with  a  irooden  apLre,  occupying  the  centre  of  a 

Equare,  on  one  ude  of  which  is  a  long  range  of  ordnance  stores,  and 

on  anotber  tdde  a  etili  larger  building  used  for  the  &ce  Bchooh 

^^jttintiected  wiUi  the   establishmeat.     This  c:itremity  of  the  town 

^^BVtuns  some  handsome  dwellings,  and  is  by  aceonimodution  some- 

^Vtnes  designated  the  West  End.    The  burial-ground,  called  '  Yar- 

'  1>oroaj;h.'   and  the  parade  ground  lie  back,  westward  of  this 

iKjtiare,  and  beyond  them,  over  a  canal  bridge,  is  the  small  aub* 

urban  village  called  Queen  Charlotte's,  nhich  is  peopled  chiefly  by 

discharged  African  soldiers. 

The  main  business  thoronghfare,  called  the  back  street,  extends 
from  the  parish  church  to  the  bridge,  running  parallel  with 
the  ffont  street;  it  is  about  a  mile  long,  crooked,  narrow,  irre- 
gular, and  crowded.  Besides  the  Weslcyan  chapel,  this  street  in- 
eludes  some  large  stores  and  a  few  handsome  houses.  Further 
bock  from  the  shore  is  £boe  Town,  consisting  of  numerous  yards, 
flanked  with  long  rows  of  what  are  called  negro  houses,  being  am- 
ply aqurate  rooms  under  one  long  roof,  which  tised  to  be  appro- 
priated to  shiva,  and  now  accommodate  the  poorer  labourers. 
Behind  this  is  n  neighbourhood  of  small  streets  npon  lota,  but  par- 
tially  filled  up,  snd  aptly  enough  designated  o^'er  pond. 

The  northern,  though  the  araallcr  division  of  the  town,  is  increas- 
ing fkr  mon;  rapidly  than  the  south  side.    Several  hundred  house;, 
^^iieSj  tho«c  of  the  better  class  of  poor,  have  been  built  there  wilh- 
^^Blfcc  W  few  years,  and  more  are  being  built.     The  streets  are 
^^^Bn  tern  regular,  but  the  yards  are  more  spacious,  and  are  shaded 
^^^^M  gtCBtcr  number  of  fruit  trees.     On  this  Nde  there  is  a  second 
EpiscopDiion  place  of  worship— an  iron  house,  but  just  put  up.  Tlie 
Raptiii  Jli<sion  premides  occupied,  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  one 
of  llic  tivM  <slubrious  poaitions,  bordering  on  tbe  sea.     Thu  builJ- 
ini;i  wcri'  commodioui  and  neat,  and  the  waterside,  famished  with 
a  long  uiiarf  for  baptizing,  was  planted  with  cocoa-nut  tiecs,  and 
Lcpt  ill  ttcclletrt  order;  a  fine  garden  was  also  Htlache<l;  but  tliis 
proprrty  hn^  lately  been  sold,  and  is  now  a  lunatic  arrlum.    The 
imblic  lunptlal  ia  hut  a  little  further  along   ibis  shore,  and  tlte 
~  It  and  the  old  frcc-mwoDB' lodge  arealittle  beyond  that. 


84  THE  GOSPEL   Ilf  CBNTBAL   AMERICA. 

Aloogthe  point  of  bnd  to  which  the  eotst  mm  in  this  direction 
—towards  the  more  northerly  and  now  wider  month  of  the  nrer 
Belize — called  The  Hani-over,*  at  a  distance  of  shoot  two  miles 
firom  the  bridge,  is  a  row  of  r^ular  and  commodious  buildings  of 
rather  imposing  aspect.  They  compose  the  Freetown  Bameks,  pro- 
▼iding  accommodation  for  a  full  regiment,  with  officers*  qnarten, 
storehouses,  powder-magazine,  military  hospital,  &c.  &c.  The  Free- 
town Barracks  are  surrounded  by  a  ditch  and  a  hedge  of  prickly 
pear,  the  Opuntia-Silvestre ;  a  kind  of  cactus,  by  the  Spaniards 
called  Tunas.  Behind  these  barracks  there  is  a  larger  Tillage,  inha- 
bited, like  Queen  Charlotte's,  by  discharged  pensioners  from  the 
coloured  regiments.  The  houses,  many  of  which  are  mde  huts, 
stand  upon  a  swamp,  which  is  not  clear  from  mangrore  bushes.  This 
straggling  village  extends  to  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  tenmnates 
in  the  slaughter-house.  At  this  point  the  only  road  in  British 
Honduras  deserving  the  name  commences,  and  taking  a  sweep  of 
about  three  miles  through  the  bush,  it  joins  the  barracks, 
what  is  called  the  Circular  Road,  to  which  equestrians  of 
resort  when  they  ynsh  to  leave  the  streets  of  the  town. 
.  Considering  the  size  and  population  of  Belize  (8,000X  the 
of  activity  and  bustle  is  remarkable.  The  wharfs,  at  certain  i 
are  covered  with  logs  of  mahogany,  which  numbers  of  mnaciilar 
labourers  are  beating  off,  or  squaring  with  long  and  with  brotd ; 
At  such  times  they  present  a  lively  scene.  Cheerfulness 
lizes  the  workmen.  Groups  of  black  children,  scantily  dad^  when 
clad  at  all,  may  be  seen  bearing  away  the  larger  chips  or  fiagmenti^ 
in  trays  and  bowls  upon  their  heads,  to  be  used  as  fuel  at  hcnne.  The 
streets,  especially  near  the  bridge,  are  pretty  constantly  thronged 
with  a  medley  of  passengers  of  many  different  races,  among  wlddi 
may  be  recognised  various  tribes  of  Africans,  the  Carib,  the  Mat-> 
quitoman,  and  the  Spanish  Indian,  as  well  as  the  Enropean  «Dd 
the  Belize  Creole,  as  they  style  themselves.  The  latter  «ie 
people  of  all  shades  of  colour  and  admixture  of  race,  bnt  bora  in 
British  Honduras.  New  buildings  are  in  progress  of  erection  in 
many  parts  of  the  town.    In  the  enlargement  of  old  honses,  there 

*  A  few  jean  afo  the  mer  had  no  outlet  here,  but  its  banks  a^roadiing  rtrj  near  the 
■capcoost,  the  natives  used  to  kaul  over  their  dorees  and  ])itpans  from  the  riTer  to  the  sea 
m  order  to  shorten  the  distance.  By  this  means  a  channel  was  opened,  which,  the 
cntaffging,  k  now  the  widest  outlet  of  the  waters  of  the  hter  Belite. 


lADB  AND  STORES, 


Mie  tnodca  of  proceeding  that  must  astonish  those  anaccQstomed  to 
noodra  dwellings.  When,  according  to  Geli^  fashion,  a  moderatc- 
nicd.  or  toactimea  even  a  large  bouse,  is  to  be  elvvatcd  a  Blory 
higher,  thb  is  dcme  b_v  fusing  it,  mmetimes  inmates  and  al),  and 
liuiJding  th«  new  portion  undemealh.  By  meww  of  jack-screws  nnd 
rope«  and  laclde,  larpe  booses  are  alio  dragjted  seTcrat  hundred  yarUa 
aloiig  the  utrwte,  or  moved  from  one  side  to  the  other.  Tbb  is  pnc- 
ticalilc,  booiuethey  are  Bubstantiallj'  framed,  and  thej  frequently 
rest  apon  tog  ends  of  mahogaDT,  or  more  commonly  on  alight  brick 
fouiulations.  Shipbnilding  U  alw  practised  to  a  small  extent,  and 
carpenters  and  ebipwriglits  are  by  tar  the  most  numerous  class 
of  artisans,  and  are  well  rcmnnemled.  Much  btuinew  is  done  in 
the  iitot*«,  IB  the  shops  arc  generally  called.  The  contents  of 
thcMare  hetcn^eoeous  in  their  character,  all  sorts  of  wares,  provi- 
nona,  and  eomtnodities  being  iutcrmiitg-led.  At  the  same  counter  are 
rctaOcd  habcrdasheiy,  hardware,  perfiimery,  crockery  ware,  station- 
cry,  iiroviaions,  moist  as  well  as  dry,  hon.iebold  fiimiture,  sea-stores, 
drugs,  St,  4c.,  fa.  They  are  generally  spacions  and  orderly,  but 
make  lilUc  or  no  onlward  show.  The  wholcxvle  stores  are,  how- 
ever, chieDr,  Ifaongfa  not  allc^Iher,  confined  to  dry  good*.  There 
atr  from  twenty  to  tlitrty  liocnwil  grog  shops,  where  rum  is  tbe 
chief  article  of  wle.  It  is  at  the  close  of  the  year,  usually  called 
the  Cliristiitaa,  (bat  most  activity  prevails;  at  that  period  the 
inahogaay  goiiKS  nre  diobandcd,  their  term  of  agreement  expiring, 
ud  tbc  Isboairra  fl<Kk  to  Deliie  from  all  quarters,  to  s]«nd  their 
esnanga.  After  a  few  weeks'  rest  or  dissipation,  titcy  contract  new 
^^JapvmeaU — hiring  tbcmsclvcs  for  another  season's  work.  Many 
^^^B  *ie  tlien  used  liy  the  etnplnycr  to  get  the  ndeituate  number  of 
^^^HbMe  buida,  advancing  money  nnd  goods  nltnost  ad  Hhitiim  to 
^^^^li  ■•  wilt  sign  an  igrecment,  which  not  seldom  rusiills  in  the 
■BM  iwliridual  pledging  himself  to  cerve  two  or  even  more 
mailer  I.  ami  being  lodged  in  gaol  for  the  nfltenee. 

The  opporliintly  of  the  senson  Im  seiied  to  enlitrt  nil  classes  in  the 
loeU  niBtia,  which  is  lumed  out  at  no  other  lime,  and  has  (o  be 
drilbd  and  paraded  in  a  few  short  weeks  enough  to  satisfy  the  fears  of 
id  the  vanity  of  others  for  the  whole  twclremontli.  All  claa.<«s 
a  take  |mrt  in  this  military  recreation,  which  to  aome 
proTdi  B  loilMine  and  vexations  impost,  and  to  others  the  occasion 
of  |M»»,  penslticf,  and  pcraecution,  on  account  of  their  or 


86  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

objection  to  take  part  in  it.  It  was  institated  to  oTerawe  alike 
a  slaTe  population  at  home,  and  a  dreaded  invader  from  abroad. 

During  the  height  of  dry  weather,  i.  e.,  from  Jane  to  Angnst, 
Belize  is  forsaken  of  a  great  part  of  its  inhabitants.  The  ezeeasiTe 
beat,  the  want  of  water,  and  the  scarcity  of  proTisions,  drive  those 
who  can  conveniently  leave,  to  their  distant  plantations,  up  the 
various  rivers  and  along  the  sea-coasts,  where  they  can  more  easily 
procure  necessaries,  and  enjoy  a  field  or  forest  life.  Some  of  the 
Kays,  or  wooded  islets  on  the  reefs  are  resorted  to  by  tbe  more 
wealthy  as  watering  places,  for  change  of  air,  or  to  feed  upon 
shellfish,  &c.  Among  these  St  Gcorge*s  Kay  is  the  most  finequented. 
It  has  several  conmiodious  and  elegant  houses  belonging  to  the 
wealthy  in  Belize,  and  is  within  a  few  hours*  sail  of  the  settlement 
During  the  remainder  of  the  year,  copious  rains  temper  the  beat, 
and  often  deluge  the  streets  of  Belize,  laying  a  vast  majority  of  the 
lots,  wharfs,  and  even  streets  under  water.  For  none  of  these 
are  many  inches  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  a  slight  elevation 
in  the  tide,  the  rise  of  which  is  scarcely,  if  at  all,  perceptible  on 
ordinary  occasions,  now  and  then  produces  the  same  effect 

Being  dependent  on  the  mahogany  trade,  the  energies  of  tbe  scanty 
population  of  Belize  are  almost  entirely  absorbed  in  catting  and 
shipping  that  commodity.  As  a  consequence,  labour  b  high  in  pro- 
portion as  the  mahogany  trade  is  remunerative,  and  the  cultivaticni 
of  the  soil,  when  attended  to  at  all,  is  regarded  as  an  inferior  ob* 
ject.  On  this  account  provisions  of  all  kinds  are  scarce  and  b^ 
priced.  To  such  an  extent  is  labour  absorbed  by  this  the  stapte 
trade,  that  the  best  and  most  durable  kinds  of  wood  are  passed  by  in 
the  same  forest  whence  the  mahogany  is  cut  out  at  great  pains  and 
at  an  enormous  expense,  or  are  only  used  for  the  construction  of 
the  truck,  and  to  supply  axe  handles  wherewith  to  hew  and  trans* 
port  that  more  marketable  timber.  The  bulk  of  the  wood  used  in 
building  at  Belize  is  imported  from  the  United  States,  and  that  in 
no  inconsiderable  quantities.  It  is,  of  course,  of  very  inferior 
quality  and  durability ;  but  the  expense  of  felling,  transporting, 
and  sawing  up  the  native  wood  would  be  far  greater  than  tbe  prke 
of  the  American  light-pine  timber,  including  the  freight,  &c.,  and* 
what  has  perhaps  a  still  greater  influence,  it  would  divert  labour 
and  attention  from  the  existing  channel  of  the  more  lucrative 
and  brisk  mahogany  trade.    The  cfiects  of  this  artificial  state  of 


^F  ficpFLY  OF  raoTisioNs.  37 

thiogB in  the  precarious  riling  nnd  fallingof  the  all -engrosaing  trade, 

may  be  readily  imagined.     The  price  of  [iliour,  though  Hucluating, 

^^Juiiduly  TtUHul,  and  o|)portuiiiIy  or  will  is  wanting  to  direct  it  eour- 

^^Bliailly  to  the  pursuit  of  more  n&turol  and  more  permanent  objecu. 

^^^HOr  tbe  supply  of  the  gangs  of  mahogany  cutters,  and  in  a  great 

^^BtMUre  kIm  lor  conaumption  in  Belize,  provLsiona  of  all  kinds  are 

tnported  from  the  United  States  nnd  from  l^urope.     Flour,  salt- 

tueau.  dried  ficb,  all  kinds  of  preserved  viandu,  and  even  vegetables 

and  flmits,  arc  constantly  imported  ;  und  yet  the  supply  is  bsrcly 

equal  to  the  demand,  and  the  community  freiiueiitly  suUer  from 

the  scarcity,  or  even  absolute  want,  of  certain  articles  of  general 

ate,  which  then  tx^come  exorbitantly  dear,  and  the  traders  amas] 

considerable  wealtli,  attcn  in  a  very  short  space  of  time,  at  tb: 

cxpeme,  added  to  tbc  inconvenience,  of  the  consumer. 

An    an  evidence  of  this,  American  Hour   imported   from    the 

United  States,  which  generally  ranges  in  value  from  71  to  9  dollora 

per  barrel,   in   September   1H49,  was   selling  at   20  dollars,  and 

though  (o  oeential  un  article,  it  has  been  known  to  exceed  that  price. 

Salt.hutt«r  woa  at  the  same  time  selling  at  3i.  sterling  per  pound, 

being  mare  than  doublu  tbc  usual  price.     At  a  time  when  com- 

l^|d|or  was  panicukrly  needed,  it  rose  to  the  value  of  its  weight  in 

^^■lU,  bang  sold  for  a  doubloon  (one  ounce  of  gold,  sixteen  dollars, 

H|bS(.6>.  Srf.)  per  ounce.   These  ore  but  ei:amples  of  what  frequently 

occuii  iu  the  entire  round  of  imported  ntcessaries.     At  ordinary 

times    Iriiih-pork   and  salC-btref,   whether  American  or  English, 

varum  in  price  from  13  to  20  dollars  per  barrel.   I'ilot-brcnd  ranges 

from  41  10  7  dollars  per  barrel.    Kice,  which  is  aleo  imported, 

Tajia  from  SI  (o  (il  dollars  per  cwl.,  and  maize,  which  is  rained  in 

Ihc  oonntry  or  in  Yucatan,  sells  for  21  to  4  dollars  per  barrel.' 

The  matt  cnarket  is  eupplied  chiefly  with  green  turtle ;  which  it 
consuknd  coarse  food  by  the  Euroj^ans.  The  cattle  slaughtered 
an;  tfanc  which  are  do  longer  aerviceable  in  the  mahogaiiy  works. 
Daring  a  short  season,  before  tbcy  are  brought  to  market,  these  worn- 
ont  iteen  ar«  professedly  put  out  to  fallen :  but  the  process  is  by  no 
Tocaiu  generally  successful,  and  ibe  beef  is  not  of  tbe  first  quality, 
(iaoieia  not  plentiful  atBelizc,  though  it  abounds  in  the  surrounding 
ftmatxy,  and  even  plautams,  yams,  moize,  and  other  cereals  and 
vrgetablea  are  supplied  ia  insu  t&cient  quantities.  Fish  and  fruit  only 
anr  pfttty  regularly  and  abundantly  supplied.   The  cost  of  living  in 

*  M»e  "  Price  ComnU." 


88  THE  OOSPBL  Ur  CENTRAL  AllERICA. 

general  is  exceedingly  high ;  most  articks  of  constant  eoasomptiaii 
and  household  use  are  imported  and  sold  at  an  exorbitant  price, 
competition  being  to  a  certain  extent  precluded  by  a  kind  of  memo- 
poly  of  freights ;  several  hundred  per  cent,  profit  is  not  considered 
extortionary.  And  the  same  goods  which  are  purchased  wholesale 
at  Belize  by  the  Spanish  American  merchant,  are  retailed  at  Guate- 
mala, where  an  active  competition  exists,  often  at  about  the  same, 
and  sometimes  under  the  same  r^ail  price  at  which  they  are  sold 
in  Belize ;  and  this  notwithstanding  the  freights  to  Yzabal,  the  difiE- 
cult  land  carriage  thence  to  the  capital,  which  occupies  a  fortnight 
in  the  transport  by  mules,*^  and  20  per  cent,  ad  valorem  import 
duty,  besides  other  charges  which  are  by  no  means  light. 

Notwithstanding  these  drawbacks,  Belize  is  a  thrivii^  town. 
Within  the  last  twenty  years,  it  has  more  than  doubled  its  popula- 
tion.! Trade  has  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  greater  number  of 
persons.  The  abohtion  of  slavery  has  enabled  many  to  follow  the 
occupation  of  their  choice,  and  the  result  is  that  not  a  few  prefer 
the  planters*  to  the  mahogany  cutters*  life,  and  choose  an  indepen- 
dent rather  than  a  subservient  condition.  Other  influences,  to  which 
we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  more  particularly,  have  combined 
in  their  measure  to  counteract  the  evils  alluded  to. 

Finally,  though  *'  the  Bay,**  as  it  is  familiarly  called,  is  goierally 
spoken  of  disparagingly  by  non-residents  and  passing  visitors,  and, 
to  t4:ll  the  whole  truth,  few  would  choose  it  as  a  permanent  place 
of  abode  whose  interest  and  pursuits  did  not  require  it ;  yet  the 
beauty  of  the  climate,  and  the  fiicility  of  earning  an  honest  livdi- 
hood — or  what  is  still  more  tempting  to  some — the  n^ndtfy  with 
which  wealth  is  frequently  amassed,  are  such  as  to  secure  to  it  a 
constant  influx  of  settlers,  and  when  moral,  political,  and  phyncal 
reforms  shall  have  advanced  somewhat  further,  even  at  their  pre- 
sent pace,  British  Honduras,  in  accordance  with  the  motto^  **  Sob 
umbra  floreo,**  inscribed  upon  its  coat  of  arms,  will  doubUesB 
become  a  happy  as  well  as  a  thriving  colony. 


♦  A  mercantile  visitor  sayi,  in  1825 :— "  The  cturiafe  of  gooda  from  BeHxe  to 

eosU  about  £30  sterling  per  ton."— Memoir  </  Jmaut  WiUon,  p.  ISA  Thk  m  lathcr 
under  than  mer-stated. 

t  Twenty  years  ago  (in  1830),  18,000  Urn*  of  shipinng,  employing  nearly  1,000  seancB 
annually,  visited  Belize.  In  1840,  it  smrpasaed  20,000,  **  vith  imports  amoaating  to  nesily 
half  a  million  steiliag  of  British  manufactures,  phicing  it,  among  the  western  ri^A»y»\ 
second  only  to  Jamaica  in  the  importance  of  its  commerce."— /*e/t/ta»,^oai  tke  TrtffitUtiwf 
dt$eiMff  pf  BriStk  Bmdurai  to  tk«  British  Parliament;  Belize,  Hondurme,  Smd  Jimtt, 
1841,    In  1847  the  amount  of  shippiDg  was  about  27,000  tons. 


lUK   r&OFLE. 


CHAPTEK   IIL 


ft  at  ItkiUUM*— PtiT*  and  Idiicd  Bus*— The  Qi 
la.  I>wdUim>.  Itc.— Uic  Lmuiiui  nnd  cUmr  &un 

■  l^iUI  TntjFfr— LdD^ua^i-i  anil  liiolctli — E-rlLgiuii, 


Tribe*  1  Uudr  Bulrit^ 


V  popuUtion  of  Coitiml  AmcricB  is  estimated  at  from  tn-o 
i  two  uid  a  hitlT  niillioDs.     It  ia  distributed,  as  nearly  aa  caji  be 
ianl,  M  IblluvtB : — 

Hiu  «tUe  of  GualeuslB 1,000,000 

Sttli-ador      330,000 

llondurss    250,000 

liicftnigUA 300,VOO 

Costa  Kica        «6,000 

[  Britisb  Honduras  sod  IbIbdiI),  say    25,000 

\  UiMquito  Shore,  perhaps    100,000 

k  Uocanquetoj  Iiidiaa  Tribes  nut  Imovni. 

o  Humboldt,  this  country,  together  with  tlie  southern 

■  ttt  Uenco,  i»  decidedly  the  niost  populous  of  ujy  in  SpMiiisb 

Itr.  Junes  Thomtan,  Ute  tTUTelUiig  agent  of  the  Uritiiih 

B  FonigB  Bible  Socitty,  and  lung  &  resident  in  South  Amcrini, 

t  on  tbese  countries  in  "i^vangebeal  Christeudom"  for  1047, 

s  Um  population,  a»  compnred  with  the  territory,  in  mott 

c  republics,  at  tteo,  thrte^  oijvur  pcnwm  to  one  square  mile; 

tbM  ot  ibc  whole  of  Mexico  at  JiiCj  and  tlmt  of  soutbern  Mexico 

«nd  (iRRtnnala,  or  Centnl  Ajiieriai,  at  /i/ltm  to  a  square  mile. 

In  Kngland,  we  number  about  two  hutulrcd. 

Tbie  ncea   which  nialcu  up  tbc  pupulation  are  the  aburijjinal 
ladko,  bitberta  supposed  to  be  ol'  Maogalian  origia^  the  Aiikan, 


40  THE  008PEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA, 

the  European,  and  their  yarions  combinations,  the  less  complicated 
of  which  are  distinguished  as  follows  :•— 

Ladinos,  a  term  signifying  gallant  men,  and  applied  to  this 
class  of  Afeziizos  only  in  Central  America.  They  are  the  deaoen* 
dants  of  the  European  and  the  Indian. 

Mulattos,  here  understood  to  designate  the  ofl&pring  of  the 
AfHcan  and  the  European,  and 

Sambo*,  by  which  the  issue  of  the  Indian  and  the  African  are 
meant. 

Their  respective  proportions  are— of  Indians  three-fifUis  of  the 
whole,  of  Ladinos  one-fourth,  of  Europeans  and  pure  Creoles  one- 
fortieth,  of  Africans  one-fiftieth,  of  Mulattos  one-eighty-third,  and 
of  Sambos  one-hundredth  part. 

The  Indian  tribes  inhabiting  the  interior  and  the  shores  of  the 
Pacific,  irrespective  of  those  peopling  the  eastern  coast,  are  said  to 
be  upwards  of  thirty.  These  are  frequently  spoken  of  as  separate 
nations.  Among  them  the  Quiche,  Kachiquel,  and  Sutugil  are  con- 
sidered the  chief  Others  are  distinguished  by  the  names  of  Mam« 
Pocomam,  Pipil  or  Nahuate,  Fopuluca,  Sinca,  Mexican,  Chorti, 
Alaguilac,  Caichi,  Paconchi,  Ijil,  Zotzil,  Tzendal,  Chapaneea,  Zoque, 
Cojoh,  Chanabal,  Choi,  Uzpanteca,  Lenca,  Aguacateca,  and  Qnec- 
chi.  On  the  eastern  coast,  Yucatan  is  peopled  by  the  Mayas ;  the 
Mosquito  Shore  by  the  Waiknas  or  Mosquitomen,  and  both  *the 
Shore*  and  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  are  settled  by  the  Cariba  or 
Karifunes  scattered  at  intervals  along  the  sea-coast.  The  Jicaques^ 
Lacandones,  Acalas,  Mopans,  Poyais,  and  various  others,  remain 
still  in  a  wild  and  unsubdued  state  in  the  fastnesses  of  the  moon- 
tains,  and  the  more  remote  vallies  and  plains. 

The  aborigines  of  Central  America  must  not  be  confounded  with 
the  energetic  and  haughty  red  men  of  the  north.  If  it  be  so 
that  they  originally  sprang  from  a  common  stock,  a  tropical  muk 
and  other  local  influences  have  effected  so  great  a  change  in  com* 
plexion  and  character  that  they  are  now  as  dissimilar  as  they  could  be 
if  they  inhabited  different  continents.  But  it  will  be  seen  that  there 
are  actually  in  Central  America,  races  as  diverse,  physiologically, 
as  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be.  Those  tribes  (by  far  the  most 
numerous)  who  people  the  interior  and  the  western  coasts,  and 
who  have  a  general  resemblance  to  each  other,  are  of  a  bri^t 
copper  colour.     Their  stature  is  short ;  their  limbs  well  proper* 


uie  gciit 

Batted.   ' 
I      .^ly  his 


THE    INGIAMS.  41 

tianeil.  niter  fleshy,  and  very  muscuJar;  thdr  hair  black,  Btraight, 
and  of  B  course  leiture,  wiih  Utile  or  no  beard.  In  Ibrni  of 
CDimteaancc  and  prominence  of  the  check -boncj,  they  resemble 
Asiatics;  but  their  features  »re  generally  more  diatinctly  marked. 
Tlie  nose,  which  19  mure  iirominent,  is  also  BOmelimes  aqullim',  and 
the  general  expression  more  inlelligent  and  pleasing.  Their  gait 
"  'dnuites  somewfaat  of  the  d^adation  to  whicli  they  Imve  long  heea 
faAjcctcd,  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  often  graceful  and  sometimes  dig- 
,  They  are  peculiar  for  small,  handsome  feet,  with  a  remark- 
■iMj  high  instep,  which  adds  much  to  their  power  in  walking. 
Their  costlitntion  is  delicate  and  susceptible,  but  their  bodily 
difcoKi  and  infinnitie«  are  naturally  few. 

Their  diet  is  exceedingly  sliupte.  They  live  chiefly  on  maize  and 

'frqoles,'  a  kind  of  bean,  or  '  Arlco-rougo,'  already  mentioned, 

and  they  seldom  tasic  animal  food,  though  game  is  so  abundant  and 

aceenible.     Of  the  maize  a  paste  is  prepared,  which  is  made  inia 

thin  cake«  as  reqtiired,  and  warmed  upon  a  'comal' — an  earthen  or 

iron  griddle.     These  cakes  are  called  'tortillas,'  and  when  eaten 

by  the  Indiws  ore  dipped  in  a  strong  infusion  of  red  peppers,  called 

'chili.'    The  fr^olcs  are  simply  boiled,  and  by  them  but  seldom 

1  in  laid,  though  they  ore  then  most  savoury.     Seven  ears  of 

11  corn,  a  tea-cupful  of  this  pulse,  arid  a  few  chilies,  are  the 

iSy  rations  of  a  lalmurer.    As  a  general  beverage  they  use  only 

'water,  but  make  cooling  drinks  of  cacao  and  spices.    Ardent  spirits 

they  tue  only  with  tile  express  design  of  producing  intoxication. 

Coanc  rum  made  by  the  mixed  races  is  consumed  by  the  Indians, 

^^ImI  very  much  more  'Chiclia,"  the  liquor  from  which  rum  is  dis- 

^^ipBil— an  unsightly  ntixturc  of  coarse  brown  sugar  and  water  in  a 

^^^H|c  uf  fennentation.     Where  these  are  not  easily  procured,  they 

^^^H  mmnfocturc  small  quantities  of  '  Pulque.'    This  is  a  strong 

ipnituoua  liquor  procured  from  the  Maguay  (the  Agave  Americana), 

i|uite  clear  and  transparent,  but  in  taste  and  smell  most  harsh,  rank, 

and  repulsive.   Like  all  beverages  of  this  class,  it  becomes  tolerable 

Oaly  by  degrees,  and,  when  habit  has  vitiated  the  senses  and  created 

«  for  the  unnatural  stimulant,  it  is  then  sought  to  satisfy  this 

ivfaig.    This  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  use,  or  rather  the  abuse, 

~  fi  the  Indians  make  of  these  nauseousdrnughts,  which  annually 

y  hundreds  or  perhaps  thousands  of  them.    They  are  very 

It  iaetniatcd,  aud  with  difficulty  recover  from  iu  effects. 


'chili.' 
■iUeil  in 
^^Plffian  c 
^^VSy  rat 


43  THE  GOSPEL  CT  OOFOLAL   AMKRfCA, 

.  ThediCMof  thelndiaiisisgenenUjaiiqifeaiidligk^ 
of  loo^e  drmwen  tad  a  shirt,  ofVen  woni  o^erallv  likea  faloitteor  ] 
smock-firoek.  The  material  of  which  both  are  made  m  geatsMj 
an  uabkacbed  cotton  web,  called  manta  crnda,  or  dae  it  m  white 
calico.  To  these  are  superadded,  when  in  fall  diem»  pantaioont 
andabimidedTest,Dot  openinfiroiit,bat  pat  onoiver  thehead.  In 
the  highkods  and  cooler  regions,  coarse  wooflen  doth,  of  notaTe 
manufiictare,  is  much  used.  This  is  generally  str^ed  or  cheqncred, 
somewhit  like  Scotch  tartans.  A  hurge  wooUoi  wr^iper  is  ipeae- 
rally  worn,  baring  a  hole  in  the  middle  throagfa  whidi  the  head 
is  passed.  It  is  not  altogether  unlike  a  blanket,  thoa|^  doaer 
woven,  and  coloured,  figured,  and  fringed  according  to  natiTe 
taste.  They  are  carried  by  all  classes  when  on  horseback,  e^eoially 
by  travellers,  as  a  protection  from  rain.  The  three  diffiennt 
qualities  are  known,  as  '  mangas,*  ^serapas,*  or  ^poochoa,*  aooord- 
ing  to  their  style,  and  they  cost  from  four  dollan  to  a  doablooOy 
or  an  ounce  of  gold.  When  worn  round  the  person  by  a  native, 
they  are  not  inelegant,  but  somewhat  resemble  the  Scotdi  h^- 
land  scarf.  The  dress  of  the  Indian  women,  when  at  work,  is 
generally  light.  A  thick  cloth  is  often  bound  tightly  roond  their 
persons  from  the  waist  downwards,  so  that  it  would  hinder  them 
from  walking,  but  that  it  is  left  unfastened  bdow.  This  is  aa  un- 
graceful as  it  is  indelicate;  but  when  they  are  full  dressed  they 
appear  as  much  overloaded  with  garments  as  they  were  deficient 
before.  The  most  striking  feature  of  their  dress  is  thdr  thick  and 
ample  cotton  skirts,  with  bodies  covered  all  over  with  embroideiy, 
in  which  glaring  colours  predominate,  chiefly  blue  and  red  (oochineal 
and  indigo).  Their  coarse,  black  hair  is  plaited  with  red  worsted  in 
two  long  and  hea\'y  tresses,  and  hangs  do^-n  nearly,  if  not  quite,  to 
their  heels,  or  is  twisted  round  the  head  like  a  turban.  The  whok 
constitutes  a  grotesque  rather  than  a  graceful  costume,  though  some* 
what  picturesque.  In  some  of  the  more  remote  parts,  the  Indiuis 
still  wear  round  their  loins  only  a  narrow  piece  of  doth  called 
^Maztlate.* 

In  disposition,  their  leading  characteristics  are  docility  and 
timidity.  When  aroused,  however,  they  are  fierce,  cruel,  and 
implacable.  Generally  industrious,  though  not  aspiring,  they  oUcm 
amass  wealth,  and  are  not  insensible  to  the  charms  of  official 
authority  among  their  fellows.   In  their  dealings  they  are  ahzewd» 


TllE  IKDlAtt'S, 


RKincst,  and  Ibcir  word  may  geDerally  be  relied  on. 
tion  has  taught  Uicm  a.  criugbg  acrrilitj'  and  low 
_  _  _     tmb\y  I'ordgn  to  tlicir  origiual  thsjacter.  Aodtliougti 

cxttcniclj  tnpentitioiu  ind  $e<Ute  e\ea  iii  iLdr  mirtli,  they  »k  bj 
no  moaiu  gloainy,  nor  arc  tfacy  wanting  iu  D&tuial  capabilities. 
Indccii.  tiacif  utreme  teachableness,  and,  in  spite  of  aumerous  indi- 
TidnaleaKiaf  rtnpid  brutality,  theif  generally  high  ai^redatiou  of 
tlw  art  of  nMliBg,  and  olhtj  arts  which  ihey  possets  or  cumestly 
diadre,  Ugctha'whh  an  evident  thirst  tbrinlbrmatiun, seems  lo  pro- 
nuK  much  tor  their  future  moral  and  intellectual  cultiue.  Thouj^h, 
nalmlljr  eoough,  distnutful  of  the  Spaniard  and  bis  descendant*, 
their  coufidcuce  is  yet  to  be  won  by  kindness  and  fidchty,  and  once 
fiLned.theirattachmeatappeiitstobebotbstrongandeiLduiing.  In 
goicc  distrkla  they  are  far  more  industrious  aud  well-disposed  than 
in  otbers,  where  the  seeds  of  dcmoralixatiiiii  h&v  c  fructified  and  re- 
jiroddceil  themselves  under  the  baui^u  1  shade  of  superstition,  fostered 
by  the  hand  of  ibreigu  opprcssoTB,  thcmtielvcs  more  favoured  and 
lieUer  taogltt.  In  all  parts  they  are  but  the  too  ready  slaves  of 
their  cnni  bad  propensitiis  and  pnasions,  and  the  too  easy  tools  of 
design h^  and  Belfish  lutn. 

Aa  alrewly  noticed,  the  ori^al  tribes,  hitherto  preferring  to  lire 
by  ti>c■IMelve^  have  many  towns  and  villages  cidusircly  their 
ovnt.  OflCB  (ubjccled  to  indignilies  and  of'preseion  when  residing 
in  the  lowru  of  the  Ladinos,  tliey  lia\e  fometinice  been  known  to 
Pttaliala  on  sclilaiy  individuals  who  have  come  to  reside  among 
tiiOB,  Uid  in  certain  remote  [mrts  they  have  not  spared  eveu  the 
|iricrt,  wfaan,  in  gencriJ,  they  vencrnte.  But  this  vindictive 
leclii^  doe*  not  appear  to  be  either  utrong  or  universal,  as  a  pniof 
nf  which,  Mmc  few  Lviino  families  ore  gcncrsUy  found  residing  in 
ilw  midal  of  them  even  in  remote  villages. 

'J!be  township*  of  the  Indians  arc  mostly  Kattcrt'd  and  irregular. 
31»«y  iiequeotJy  occupy  a  whole  valley  or  plain,  or  he  slragnling 
fiirinile*  ahing  the  roadside,  concen  led  front  view  among  bushcsund 
bvii  trte*.  Th«r  houses  consitit  of  a  ground  floor,  witli  a  lott  at 
tbc  kmmL  They  are  plainly  butli  of  wuuden  posts  and  radvrs,  the 
MJGi  atockaded  with  cancsi,  and  piuslcrol  ovu"  with  rud  clay,  or  tbcy 
arc  nnde  of  Adaab,  a.  large  kind  of  *un-bumt  brick.  They  are 
BMaiiy  r«ofud  with  bright  red  titcs.  In  which  atae  tbc  eaves  pnyixt 
Iu  mat  the  walla,  and  form  a  kind  of  piaziu,  or  gallery,  which  give) 


44  THE  GOSPEL  121  CEKTHAL  AMERICA. 

them  a  pctoresque  appearance.  The  *Rancho*  is  a  mere  tem* 
porazy  shed  thatched  with  pahn  or  other  leayes,  and  is  used  alike 
by  Ladinos  and  Tndiann.  Some  of  their  larger  towns  aasome  more 
regolarity,  and  follow  the  general  plan  introdnoed  by  the  Spaniards, 
viz.,  straight  streets  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles,  leaying 
regular  square  blocks  of  houses.  The  market-place  or  plaxa  is  in 
the  centre,  around  which  are  the  church,  ^cabildo,*  and  other  pabUe 
buildings.  Their  cattle  generally  stray  at  laige  in  the  forests  and 
pine  ridges,  or  eyen  in  the  roads  and  streets,  and  on  this  aoooont  the 
plantations  of  the  Indians  are  mostly  at  some  distance  firom  their 
houses,  or  across  a  stream  or  some  other  natural  barrier,  which  sayes 
them  the  trouble  of  building  walls  or  making  fences. 

When  not  engaged  in  cultiyating  the  soil,  which  occnpies  but 
a  small  proportion  of  their  time,  the  Indians  make  frequent 
journeys,  carrying  their  wares  and  fruits  to  distant  maricets  or 
£urs,  travelling  in  companies,  and  marching  in  file :  or  they  go  in 
search  of  some  of  the  more  yaluable  productions  of  the  forest. 
Inured  to  bearing  burdens,  they  carry  loads  weighing  four  or  fiye 
arrobas  (one  cwt.  or  one  cwt.  and  a  quarter),  a  distance  of  from  twenty 
to  thirty  miles  for  several  successive  days,  with  ease  and  rapidity. 
Some  few  simple  manufactures  are  still  retained  among  them. 
The  women  spin  with  the  hand  the  cotton  grown  in  their  own 
fields,  and  weave  webs,  which,  if  coarse,  are  also  more  durable  than 
those  imported.  The  red  pottery  of  the  Indians  is  still  unsurpassed, 
as  well  as  their  mats,  baskets,  &c  Ropes  are  made  of  silk  gra». 
The  fibres  of  the  agave  are  also  twisted  into  the  thread  with  which 
they  sew,  and  into  twine,  which  in  its  turn  is  worked  into  ham- 
mocks, saddle-bags,  &c.  &c.  Various  other  articles  of  use  and 
ornament  are  manufactured  by  them. 

The  Ladinos  are  swarthy,  and  in  this  respect  vary  from  each  other 
only  in  degree.  Though  not  above  the  medium  stature,  yet  as  oom< 
pared  with  the  Indians,  they  appear  tall,  and  less  muscular ;  they  are^ 
nevertheless,  athletic,  and  have  far  more  activity  and  phyaicid 
energy.  The  more  favourable  circumstances  of  their  lot  have  also 
given  them  the  advantage  in  freedom  of  thought  and  manners,  at 
well  as  in  information  and  enterprise.  But  their  passions  are  even  less 
under  control,  and  they  are  no  less  superstitious  and  cruel,  though 
somewhat  more  refined  in  the  manner  of  its  expression.  There  is  a 
dash  of  sober  remanoe  about  the  Ladinos,  which  they  appear  to  hafe 


THE  LADINOS.  45 

iulierited  from  their  Spanish  nnccstors.  This  sIictts  itself  in  their 
gait  and  raanners— in  their  Iotc  of  pocfry  and  gong^in  their  gal 
luitiyMulcourtcsj'.anditniDy  be  observed  tn  pervade  all  their  tastes. 
Lttmeulsbly  deficient  in  common  honesty  and  conscientiousness,  in 
ansctiity  and  hospitality,  the  I.odinos  are  more  free  and  sincere  than 
the  Indiana.  Btit  the  warmth  and  extrnvn^nce  of  their  profes^ons 
and  proteatatioiM,*  when  compared  with  the  almost  total  want  of 
principto  in  their  actions,  makes  them  ap]icar  deceitful  even  when 
the  impulse  is  genuine  and  unfeigned.  Their  intellectual  facu!ti«r, 
if  not  snperior  to  those  of  the  Indian,  are  at  least  better  cultivated, 
do  not  appear  to  be  Inferior  to  the  best,  though  the  want  of 
moral  coarage  and  energy  of  mind  which  conscious  rectitude 
give,  makes  them  appear  superficial,  vawUating,  and 
loul  perseverance. 
At  present  tbe  Ladinos  are  the  dominant  class.  Theirs  are  the 
and  chief  towns.  Thctr  houses,  in  general  like  those  of  the 
Opital,  though  of  less  extent,  are  for  the  most  part  constructed  of 
unhewn  stone  mingled  with  clay  and  well  plastered  into  walls  four 
or  five  feet  in  Uiickness,  whicb,  oa  they  have  fen  doon  and  win- 
dows, prodoce  a  cooler  temperature  within,  and  secure  the  building 
from  injury  b  ordinary  shocks  of  earthquake.  The  rooms  are 
sjiscions  and  lol^y,  the  raflcrs  above  often  being  neatly  or  e^*en 
daliorMcIy  wraoght.  The  scanty  fumiliirc  is  old  fashioned  and 
massve,  and  though  the  internal  arrangements  have  a  hare  appear- 
Viev,  when  compored  with  the  homes  of  Europe,  they  arc  suitable 
10  ibc  diDuite  and  to  the  habits  of  the  people.  There  is  also  some- 
thing pleasing  in  their  simplicity. 

■'  TtaiduC  or  (hopi,  are  generally  kept  by  this  class.  Here  also 
are  fbttnd  all  descriptions  of  wares,  which  is  the  case  even  in  the 
wbolf  wit  merchants'  stores.  But  there  are  besides  a  kind  of  grocers 
or  geacnl  dealers  in  provisions,  and  a  few  others  in  the  towns 
wbtdi  arc  exclusive.  Among  these  are  wax-candle  and  rocket- 
inftkcr*,«bn  supply  the  churches.  Bread  tniule  of  wheiiien  flour  is 
in  such  E9ittll  qnantib'es,  that  profcssiannl  Imkei^  are  to  be 
Mily  in  the  laigcr  towns.     Butchers  arc  even  more  nneom- 


Vb: 


46  THE  GOSPBL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

non,  and  meat  is  frequently  cut  into  long  thin  stripe  winch  are 
nlted  and  hnng  np  in  the  snn  to  dry.  This  is  called  *tasi^*  and 
is  sold  hj  the  yard.  It  may  he  kept  a  long  time,  and  traTeQers 
soon  become  familiar  with  it. 

The  Malattoes  and  Samhos  are  of  coarse  generally  darker  than 
other  of  the  former,  and  may  be  known  by  their  profuse  coiiy  and 
silken  locks.  Thdr  limited  numbers  prevent  either  from  assaming 
the  appearance  of  a  separate  class,  and  they  both  fraternise  most 
readily^  with  the  Ladinos,  with  whom  their  drcumstaooes  more 
nearly  agree,  nor  do  they  appear  to  be  in  any  respect  inferior  to 
them.  Physically,  the  comparison  is  to  the  adTsntage  of  the 
African  admixture,  and  if  more  vindictiTe  and  passionate  in  dispo- 
sition, they  are  also  more  industrious  and  honest  in  their  dealings. 
It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  they  are  chiefly  the  descendants  of  the 
slaTes  formerly  owned  by  the  Monks  and  Jesuits,  who  are  to  a  great 
extent  the  progenitors  (/)  of  the  Mulattoes,  a  &ct  clearly  traceable 
in  those  districts  where  the  conyents  were  situated,  and  where  alone 
these  castes  now  abound. 

So  much  for  a  professed  celibacy,  and  the  paternal  chmncter  of 
monastic  institutions. 

The  Africans  whose  limited  numbers  make  them  unimportant 
as  a  class,  are  chiefly  the  unmixed  descendants  of  slaves,  or  tbey  are 
Maroon  negroes  who  have  sought  and  found  protection  in  this  free 
land.    They  are  for  the  most  part  located  upon  the  coasts. 

The  Europeans  are  very  little  more  numerous  than  the  A<w;^«^ 
but  their  influence  is  considerable,  and  the  accession  to  their  ranks 
of  the  Creoles,  properly  so  called,  who  claim  an  unmixed  European 
origin,  greatly  increases  that  influence.  To  this  dass  beloi^  most 
of  the  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  and  priests.  From  it  are  chosen 
many  of  the  rulers  and  officials,  and  the  largest  fortnnes  and 
estates  are  in  their  hands. 

To  the  Metizo  dass,  which  indudes  Ladinos,  Mulattos  and  San^ios, 
most  of  the  artisans  and  operatives  belong.  They  also  constitute  a 
large  jMrtion  of  the  labourers  and  cultivators  employed  m  the 
*  Nopals* — the  fields  of  cactus  on  which  the  cochineal  insect  is 
nourished;  the  * Trapiches'— sugar  estates;  and  the  ^Milpas,* — 
fields  of  maize,  as  well  as  the  indigo  works,  coffee  plantations,  &c 

The  Maya  or  Yucatecan  Indians  occupy  the  peninsula  whidi 
forms  the  north-easterly  limit  of  this  part  of  the  continent.    It  has 


me  HAiA  iNDii>-3.  47 

been  biUierto  nnited  to  tbe  Mexican  republic,  though  sercntl 
times  already  separated  from  it,  and  declared  Sovereign  and  lad«- 
[■endcnu  The  entire  population  amoimU  to  about  300,000,  and  is 
of  the  Mine  g«nenl  ciiaracCcr  as  that  of  the  interior.  The  Indians, 
who  an:  of  like  chantcter,  greatly  predontinating.  The  Ladinos  of 
Yucaun  an  also  much  the  same  as  thoiie  alreadj  described,  or  pcr- 
hapi  they  ha*E  more  alfinity  to  the  Mexican  character.  The 
akooBt  insulsT  position  of  the  Yucntecan  people  hns,  however,  sepa- 
nted  than  trtna  the  other  tribes,  and  their  greater  contact  with 
strangtn  ha*  apparently  fostered  a  holder  spirit  in  these  iDdiana 
ihsu  b  oommon  with  the  rest.  Late  events  have  called  their  loTe  of 
indept-iujeocc  into  action,  and  they  are  even  now  esemplifying  it 
in  a  deadly  warfim;  waged  against  tht  Ladinoa  and  while  popula- 
tkm  who  have  tutherto  borne  sway.  This  contest  has  already 
lasted  abore  two  years  (I81JO),  and  though  volunteers  from  the 
United  States,  probably  the  retiiTCof  their  late  MexiranBrmy.have 
united  with  the  Ladinos  to  ud  in  the  snbjagation  of  the  Indians, 
th^  coDtinne  nnsobdued,  and  at  the  present  moment  the  British 
xnthorrties  in  Honduras  are  said  to  be  ahont  to  intervene  for  the 
pacilicalioB  of  the  peninsnla,  on  condition  that  a  portion  of  their 
terrrtOT^  be  ceded  to  them:  this  is,  that  part  of  it  which  ii  nttMtcd 
an  the  nonfaim  boundary  of  that  which  the  British  already 
oKHpy. 

Until  the  war  broke  out,  the  Maya  Indians  were  given  to  agri- 

enllMn  and  In  finhing.     They  alnt  traded  by  means  of  "bongos," 

ImB>  OUBie    barges,  or  (orating   proas,   in   maize,   ponltry,   and 

(ibcinlletc  or  logwood,  from  the   Bay  of  Compechy  to  Belize,  to 

EM  patta  of  tbc  coast,  and  even  to  the  Havanna  and  other 
of  Cnb^  Their  land  is  generally  low  and  flat,  and  conse- 
I7  hot;  but  it  is  eslecmed  fertile  and  salabrious.  Merida,  the 
ttfiitnl,  is  a  fine  city.  The  ports  are,  Sisul  on  thu  north,  which 
it  ihcport  of  lIcri<lB;  Campccfac  to  the  westward;  and  Bncalar  to 
Die  cMtwud.  Tbc  latter,  though  nt  present  the  least  important, 
if  il  ifatmld  fall  to  the  EngUsh,  »s  njipears  [«<«ible,  may  ultiiaalely 
buconie  aqtnU,  if  not  superior,  to  the  rest. 

Aloag  the  ahorm  of  the  Bay  of  Houdiins  tbc  Mosquito  coast, 
*nd  eren  the  Spunlsh  main  as  fur  as  the  months  of  the  Orinoco,  if 
Dot  bcyaod  tbcm.  are  many  sniall  and  luratlcred  settlctueuts  of  a 
black  and  woolly  nix,  totally  dissimilar  from  those  we  have  alrcwly 


I 


^  TBB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMEBICA. 

endeavoured  to  describe.  A  race  athletic  and  well  fnoportioiied 
*^active  and  energetic— cheerful  and  highly  excitable.  Their 
features  bear  but  little  resemblance  to  the  African,  with  whom  at 
first  sight  they  appear  to  assimilate  in  colour  and  in  the  texture  of 
their  hair.  The  existence  of  a  race  so  different  from  all  others  on  the 
American  continent  naturally  calls  for  an  inquiry  as  to  their  or^;in, 
&c.,  and  gives  rise  to  never-ending  speculations,  which,  when  the 
point  shall  be  satisfactorily  settled,  may  be  found  to  run  counter  to 
many  a  favourite  theory,  and  perbapsalso  to  not  afew  long-cheriahed 
prejudices.  May  not  the  same  causes  which,  in  the  lapse  of  ages, 
produced  the  woolly  hur  and  black  complexion  in  the  same  lati- 
tudes on  the  opposite  continent,  have  superinduced  them  here? 
But,  admitting  this,  there  remain  difficulties  which  it  would  he 
presumption  even  in  the  learned  to  attempt  to  solve,  with  no  more 
light  than  that  which  is  now  possessed  on  the  past  history  of  the  new 
world.  And  here  we  are  forcibly  reminded  of  the  profound  igno- 
rance in  which  we  still  remain,  after  so  many  years  of  reseuch, 
with  respect  to  the  history  of  several  important  branches  of  the 
human  family  ;  an  ignorance  which  must  hare  been  still  greater, 
and  which  would  have  extended  to  the  whole  race,  leaving  1^  past 
in  impenetrable  gloom,  but  for  the  revelations  and  records  of  the 
sacred  scriptures. 

The  scattered  remnant  of  which  we  are  speaking  are  the  descen- 
dants of  the  warlike  aborigines,  first  found  in  possession  of  the 
Caribbean  Islands.  They  may  still  be  traced  to  belong  to  different 
tribes  of  that  once  great  nation,  and  are  called  Caribs  or  Karifnnes, 
and  among  themselves,  Cherubs,  Carrina,  or  Callinago. 

Hunted  down  by  the  European  colonists  as  if  they  had  been 
wild  beasts,  they  concealed  themselves  in  their  native  forests,  and 
for  a  long  time  offered  the  most  determined  resistance,  in  which 
they  displayed  great  valour  and  fortitude. 

They  were,  however,  at  length  completely  subjugated,  and  dispos* 
sessed  of  any  portion  of  their  native  Archipelago,  but  not  until  thef 
had  been  nearly  extirpated.  From  the  island  of  St.  Vincent,  where  to 
the  last  they  remained  in  greater  numbers  than  elsewhere,  they  were 
finally  expelled  by  the  English  in  1796,  after  long  and  sanguinary 
conflicts.  Thence  the  residue  were  conveyed  in  British  men-of-war, 
and  abandoned  on  the  then  desert  island  of  Ruatan  in  the  bay  of 
Honduras,  whence  they  soon  found  their  way  to  the  acyaccnt  shores. 


_  ** 

Deeds  auch  u  this  arc  general  \j  kept  out  orour  sight,  or  uc  elurred 
ni  er  by  our  ami  liistoriaiis,  bul  ibcj-  are  among  llie  realities  which 
■re  producing  ifaeir  unfaillDg  efl'vcts  upon  lu  and  iipou  othen, 
lln'j-  go  to  make  ap  the  whole  of  our  natioiiul  cliaracler,  as  it 
before  the  ivorld,  and  that  God  who  rult's  the  nutiom  ia 


lOMd  llM.-y  go  I. 
^btrs  befor. 


Some  ilicnuuide  of  tlic  CariU  race  stil]  Tcmain  in  the  t«j  of 
ConilunM>,  Uving  in  small  villages,  mpporbd  by  iheir  plHiilatiuna, 
ti^D^ilc.  Thejare  rapidly  increasing  in  numliers.  Nownoluiigvr 
niolcdci^  tiiey  hold  fricnilly  intercourse  viitli  ihuir  itcighbours, 
wbellier  Indian  orKumpeaa;  and.  though  vain  and  conceited  of 
ibcir  physical  anpcriority,  they  arc  nutshlc  for  a  chccrliil  but  light 
character,  and  for  sutwrior  ititclligetice  and  ndroitne<(S.  Soino  of 
ihdr  ItiMry-liuadcd  men,  who  uppear  to  linve  uttaiiicd  a  great  aire 
(prulialily  to  mure  tliuu  a  huiidred  years),  are  »«id  lo  have  taken 
[lait  in  cnunita.!  feasts  in  their  more  youthlul  days.  At  present  the 
(jiribii  Uec  poKcably  under  a  kind  uf  mngitteriitl  uutliority,  which 
tlicy  rcipcet,  aud  with  which  Ihey  ihcraNJves  have  invested  certain 
elders  whom  they  all  "  captains."  They  siill  retain  sume  of  tbcir 
iialiunal  tnulitiuu  and  cu!>toins,  among  which  jio'y  gamy  is  protni- 
ncnt.  It  if  ftequeutly  indulged  lo  the  extent  of  four  or  6ve  wives, 
or  even  more.  A  scpanUv  house,  and  a  cleannce  for  a  planTatiou, 
ii  provided  by  the  liualiaud  for  each  wife.  They  arc  then  left  to 
cultivate  Uie  i^und  with  their  own  hiuida,  and  support  themselves 
atiil  iiuat  Ikmilics.  IVIeanwhile,  the  lordly  husl>aod  divide*  his  attcn- 
Itoo  bet*«>a>  hia  favourite  wives,  his  light  labours,  and  other  more 
KiBgtnial  putsuilSi  tuch  as  sbnoting  gome  in  the  foresU,  nr  more 
Illy  In  bis  cedar  or  nialingany  'doree,'  which  be  ha^  hewn 
tat  iimt^  miking  tish  ujmii  the  r>ef.  Iliis  he  does  with 
dnUcrit}'  liy  means  uf  a  liarpoon  ;  ihcy  not  uncnmnionly 
the  day,  the  burden  anil  the  heal  of  which  their  wivis  and 
bear  at  the  plantation,  in  »wii  giig  in  their  hninniocks  ia 
[cat  rcpoac,  or  in  noisy  merriment,  drinking,  dancing,  and 
to  all  of  witicli  they  ate  niuch  nildicted,  and  in  whkU 
fWrollEnsipcod  whole nightauwdl  ss  <tay^.  Uuringsouic  mcinths 
sf  tbe  }w  they  nut  uufrequvntly  leave  iheir  honiei  and  hire  tfaeni- 
iclve*  Id  tbv  tnerehant  or  the  nialwigaiiy  culler,  by  whom  tliey  ore 
Kiaeli  might  nAer,  aa  they  inAke  active  and  clicerfu]  scrvanU,  and 
are  onjm  skiUol  in  the  us*  of  the  paddle  tod  tJie  aie. 


60  THE  GOSPEL   IK  CEXTRAL   AMERICA. 

Tlie  Mofqaito  men,  or  Waikna  Indians  inhalntii^  tbe  Mos- 
quito ihorc,  arc  evidently  another  distinct  race;  differing  both 
from  the  tn\)cn  of  the  interior,  and  from  the  Carib  just  described. 
In  stature  they  are  tall  and  bony,  rather  than  muscular;  their  onn- 
plexion  ih  dark,  but  of  an  ashy  black,  and  not  at  all  like  the 
liftmiy  hue  of  the  Carib,  nor  yet  clear  and  bright  like  that  of  the 
Quiche?  races.  Their  dishevelled  hair  is  black  and  curly.  It 
g<*tK*nilly  stands  erect  several  inches,  and  increases  their  apparent 
helf(ht,  or  hangs  in  profuse  and  effeminate  ringlets.  Their  features 
and  cxprc*S!<tioii  arc  forbidding  and  indicative  of  strong  animal 
pANsioTiM,  and  the  tout  ensemble  is  by  no  means  prepossessing.  Their 
nunilK'ni  can  only  be  matter  of  conjecture  at  present.  Their 
hflbttfi,  wliich  arc  little  known,  are  unsettled — almost  UHnadic 
They  have  no  permanent  towns  or  villages,  but  shift  their  settle- 
ments with  fVcquency.  Tlicy  live  chiefly  by  fishing,  and  attend 
but  little  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil. 

Dexterous  in  the  management  of  their  small  canoes,  they  some- 
times viHit  the  distant  British  settlements,  and  are  employed  in  the 
mtihogimy  works,  in  which  they  are  inferior  to  most  other  labourers. 
Thc\v  nourish  a  fixed  and  implacable  hatred  to  the  Ladinos  and  to 
the  Indians  who  speak  Spanish.  These  they  designate  "little 
breeches,"  from  the  short  loose  drawers  commonly  worn  by  those 
living  in  the  hot  rcglonR;  and  they  seldom  let  slip  an  opportunity 
of  assassinating  one  of  them,  if  it  can  be  done  by  stealth.  They  have 
as  decided  a  favour  to  the  English,  by  whom  this  feeling  has  been 
carefully  cultivatctl,  and  with  whom  their  chief  trade  ai^  relation- 
■hip  exists.  From  Jamaica  and  from  the  United  States,  as  well  as 
occasionally  from  Belize,  small  vessels  periodically  visit  the  shore, 
and  exchange  rum,  knives,  fire-arms,  powder  and  shot,  coarse  eottoo 
webs,  &c.  &c.  &c.,  for  considerable  quantities  of  tortoisesheU,  of 
which  the  Waikna  Indian  despoils  the  hawksbill  turtle  that  fie- 
quents  *  the  Shore.' 

Mixed  and  varied  as  the  inhabitants  of  Central  America  most 
appear  to  be  to  the  reader,  no  part  of  it,  and  perhaps  no  place  of  the 
size  anywhere,  presents  so  great  a  medley  as  Belize,  where  are  to  be 
found  representatives  of  each  of  the  races,  pure  and  mixed,  alneafy 
described,  and  almost  of  each  tribe  already  mentioned,  together 
with  Congoes,  Nangoes,  Mongolas,  Ashantees,  Eboes,  and  other 
African  tribes.  Among  the  Belize  Creoles  are  included  every  ahadeof 


DIALCICTS.  fil 

co1<mr  and  admixture :  the  Mnlatto  and  the  Sambo,  as  understood 
in  the  West  Indies,  nnd  all  the  other  degrees,  mch  ns  Quadrooo, 
3tostc«,  &c.  &c.  &e.  There  ire  also  Creolefi  from  Jamaica  and  the 
BcfaAiniu,  as  well  aa  rrom  the  French,  Spanish,  Duteh,  and  Dnnish 
Ish-aAa,  N«w  Eng-Ianders,  South  Americans,  and  a  great  varicly  of 
EnropeanB — smong  which  the  Scotch  and  English  predominate — 
besides  ndvcntunrs  from  almost  every  port  of  the  world,  and  some 
lew  Jews. 

OTthe  bidiiui  tribes  who  are  still  in  a  wild  slnte,  little  is  known. 

^Hj  are  soraetiroes  met  with  in  the  forests  armed  with  bow  and 

wr,  and  partially  chul  with  a  fibrous  bark  beaten  till  it  is  soft  as 

h-limtlKT.    On  snch  occasions,  they  dart  off  into  the  thick  ithadca 

e  an  affrighted  antelope — sometimes  previously  discharging  n 

Mied  arrow  at  the  object  of  their  terror.     Whoa  their  villages 

«  been  visited,  they  have  been  aoon  aftcrabandoncd.and  the  'Ji- 

ta  they  are  generally  called,  arc  known  to  have  dcvaslnted 

c  plantatians,  and  cren  to  have  kilted  those  lelt  in  charge ; 

but  mch  events  are  exceedingly  rare,  and  are  related  aa  such  by 

the  natives,  with  much  exaggeration  and  many  incredible  details. 

^*ot  only  each  of  the  different  races  named,  but  every  one  of  the 
tribc4  mcnlioned  al  the  beginning  of  tiik  chapter,  twenty-cii^bt  in 
number,  epeaks  a  dialect  peculiar  to  itself,  and  generally  called  by 
the  saniV  name,  the  repetition  of  which  the  indulgent  reader  will  no 
dunbt  readily  excuse.  Some  nf  these  langungFs  are  said  to  bear  so 
rlrcnif  an  affinity  to  others  of  them,  that  the  natives  to  whom  they 
nro  vcnucnlar  ean  make  themselves  mutually  understood ;  and 
''  it  W  ntppnvd  that  the  QuichJ:,  like  the  Sanscrit  in  Hindostan,  will 
d  to  be  the  parent  of  several  if  not  of  them  all.  They  ara 
|f  diffictilt  acquisition,  and  to  English  ears  of  uncouth  sound.  In 
«  uf  thnu,  the  enunciation  of  the  same  word  with  more  or  leu 
•  a  a^  to  eonvcy  a  different  and  sometimes  an  opposite  signi- 

\biae  Tarioiu  dialects  iiecm  to  present  a  barrier  to  miiuionaty 

e  ia  the  lieh!,  and  doubtless  they  constitute  a  difficulty; 

ibcmgil,   wiien  rightly    viewed,    tlinl    unti  every   other   obstacle 

•bould  enlf  (timnlatc  to  raore  strcnunus  exertion.   But  the  dialect 

~    b  if  fpaken  generally,  which  v  more  or  less  understood  by  al), 

A  whkli  tt  excluiivdy  the  mother  tongue  of  a  large  daas,  is  the 

itiftil  language  of  Cistilc ;  a  language  ea^  of  acqnireraent 

b2 


J 


62  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

because  of  its  precision,  correctness,  and  uniformity  of  structure ; 
a  language  at  once  rich,  sonorous,  energetic,  and  soft ;  a  language 
in  which  the  sacred  scriptures  of  truth  recover  some  of  that 
original  force  and  beauty,  which  is  lost  by  their  translation  into  the 
less  perfect  idioms  of  the  north ;  and  the  language  which  Charle- 
magne, when  characterizing  the  dialects  of  Europe,  described  as  the 
most  suitable  of  all  wherewith  to  address  the  Deity:  probably 
because  of  its  simple  dignity  and  solemn  grandeur. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  observe  here,  that  the  Spanish 
language  is  the  only  one  which,  like  our  own,  is  spoken  in  ereiy 
part  of  the  habitable  globe ;  so  that  it  can  be  said  of  it  with  truth 
that  the  sun  never  sets  upon  those  nations  who  use  it.  But  while 
there  is  this  resemblance,  the  author  of  the  *^  Annals  of  the  British 
Bible"  notices  a  contrast  as  striking  as  the  similarity  which  exists 
between  the  circumstances  of  both,  viz.,  that  whereas  the  Enghjtk 
Bible  is  read,  not  ^^from  the  rising  to  the  setting  sun**  merely, 
but  all  round  the  globe,  and  that  ceaselessly  for  at  least  forty-eight 
hours  during  every  week,  the  Spanish  Bible  has  scarcdy  yet  be- 
gun to  be  read  in  any  country.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  passes  away, 
and  sun  after  sun  dawns  and  sets  upon  the  millions  who  use  the 
Spanish  tongue,  and  the  accents  of  adoration  and  of  praise  which 
it  is  so  well  adapted  to  express  are  either  offered  to  images  of  the 
Virgin  and  of  Saints,  or  the  lips  of  those  who  should  offer  them  are 
sealed  in  silence,  or  are  opened  but  to  blaspheme  that  Chriattanity 
of  which  they  have  seen  only  the  most  horrible  and  diaCozted 
effigy. 

While  the  Spanish  is  the  mother  tongue  of  the  Ladinoa,  and  is 
used  throughout  Central  America,  the  English  and  Creole-RngliA 
languages  are  spoken  in  British  Honduras. 

As  the  religion  professed  will  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  fatme 
chapters,  it  will  be  sufficient  at  present  to  say,  that  the  aaftiTes 
generally  are  Roman  Catholics ;  that  those  under  British  rale  aze, 
nominally  at  least,  Protestants ;  that  the  Caribs  have  no  tangible 
profession ;  that  the  Waikna  or  Mosquito  men  have  not  so  much  as 
n  name  in  their  language  by  which  to  designate  a  suiH:eme  Beipg; 
and  that  the  unoonquered  tribes  are  probably  still  gross  idolaton. 

The  form  of  government  in  the  Central  States  is  repnblieaii, 
fifter  the  model  of  the  United  States  of  North  America,  and  catf 
aequently&VQiirableintheqHrity  and  even  in  the  ktter^  of  the  law 


>    COMMERCE. 


^^^fc  rel^Hxu  libertj.    This  is  due  to  the  prevalence  of  ideas  and 

^^B^ncipltsi  politicalty  itntagonistic  to  Koiuanism,  whicli  otanM  long 
■UMnlun  politicai  laMndeocy  under  repiiblicau  forma,  any  mone  tttsu 
it  am  momlly  eo-ciist  witb  the  apirit  of  demacrncy.  But  hitheita 
the  power  and  inHaenee  of  (be  priesthood  has  proved  sufficient  to 

^^^untcnet  the  free  aptnttiona  of  these  wise  and  good  principles  of 

^^■■HVemiuent  which,  lor  ail  practical  ends,  have  remained  almost  a 

^^■Md  letter  on  the  statute-book. 

^^V  The  Dorlliernniost  shore  of  the  bay  of  HoDdnrsB,  together  with 
the  island  of  Rtiatan  on  its  southern  coast,  are  claimed  Iiy  the 
Briliih  and  ruled  coloniafly  as  a  dependency  of  Jamaica.  Tlic 
JdoMjuito  lution  has  uever  been  subjugated,  niid,  though  once  »o 
fierce  and  warlike,  they  have  for  years  been  pleased  to  admit  the 
exercise  of  British  influence,  which  now  w«iini«  the  character  of  a 
Protectorate.  Their  chieS  or  kinjja  are  crowned  at  Jamaica  or  at 
ileilcei  tlu-  charge  of  educating  the  prciient  king  and  his  predeua*- 

^^hc  WM  uiulcnaken  by  our  govcmmcnl,  and  the  expense  of  ruling 

^^^■B  Sbiire  atul  of  muinlaining  royally  thurc  has  t>ccn  and  is,  ut  least 

^HlRJy,  borne  by  tlie  British  nutiua. 

^^"  Tbe  wmimerca  of  Central  America,  as  already  mcutiuned,  is  con- 
tklcmblc  Mid  mcTcasing,  tboagh  on  the  decline  in  some  of  the  cities 
atnl  stales.  In  1825,  it  was  estimated  t>y  Mr.  Tbompao)),  an  envoy 
of  the  Briliah  Government,  at  3,304,0001.,  and  is  now  probably  near 
6,000,000/.  It  is  carried  ou  chicHy  with  England,  tbrough  the 
port  of  Belue.*  There  is  also  some  trade  with  the  United  Stales, 
FnoR^ tipain, Belgium,  and  South  America.   Atraflicot'iinunbw- 

^^^fi  or  cootralMnd.  character  is  jnirsui'd,  to  a  pretty  cuiuiideirable 

^^■■ent,   with  Southern  Mexico;   by  which   the   eustouu  of  that 

^^HuiU7  an  defrauded. 

^^bAI  iMtmut  the  exports  are  mnlin^ani/,  eocbiHeal,  indif;a,  lo^u-oni/, 
bnmMte,  pnrple  (irom  the  umrcx^,  hide*,  eofee,  cocoa,  pimento, 
chinpa  pepfKr,  tobacco,  haTsainiftUn,  vaiiillu,  ocliiote,  balsams,  copal, 
iiiiilii.  alinKigo,  gums,  oila,  sulphur,  saltpetre,  tal-ammuiuac,  si]«ga- 
amB,  lac,  Wrpendne,  tar,  ami  other  resinous  substauoes,  amber, 
tortounh^l,  pearls,  mother  of  {learl,  gold  and  silver  (both  in  bullion 
sad  in  tptde),  cocoa-nuts,  ginger,  tamarinds,  preserves,   &c.  &c. 


64  THB  GOSPEL  IX  CENTRAL   AMERICA  • 

In  exchange  for  these,  large  quantities  of  manufactured  goods,  in 
abnost  every  variety,  are  imported. 

The  means  of  transit  by  land  are  very  imperfect,  the  roads  being 
for  the  most  part  mere  bridle  paths  or  mountain  tracks,  not  always 
easily  traceable.  The  laborious  task  of  keeping  them  open,  which 
requires  to  be  constantly  repeated,  owing  to  the  encroachments  of 
the  forest,  is  not  everywhere  equally  well  attended  to,  and  they  are 
cut  up  during  the  wet  season  by  the  copious  rains  which  form  im* 
petuous  torrents,  and  by  the  hoofs  of  the  large  droves  of  mules  that 
traverse  them  continually. 

Mules,  which  are  bred  in  great  numbers  for  the  transport  of 
merchandize,  and  Indian  bearers,  are  the  usual  means  of  con- 
veyance. Very  frequently  navigable  streams  afford  facilities  for 
water  communication,  but  these  are  used  at  present  for  the  trans- 
port of  little  else  besides  very  heavy  and  unwieldy  packages,  such 
as  machinery  for  sugar  mills  or  mines,  &c  These  are  transported 
in  clumsy  flat-bottomed  river  boats,  called  ^piraguas.*  In  the 
state  of  Costa  Rica,  comparatively  good  roads  have  lately  been  con- 
structed for  facilitating  the  conveyance  to  its  ports  of  the  cofiee 
now  so  abundantly  produced  there.  This  has  become  practi- 
cable by  means  of  carts  or  rude  wagons  drawn  by  oxen.  The 
Mico  road  before  referred  to,  is  the  principal  channel  of  the  trade 
of  the  capital,  and  consequently  of  the  interior.  The  condition  of 
this  road  has  been  for  years  a  heavy  drawback  upon  commerce 
and  postal  communications  with  other  countries.  And,  though  for 
the  last  ten  or  twelve  years  great  sums  of  money  have  been  ex- 
pended on  its  improvement,  it  still  presents  considerable  difficulties 
from  want  of  bridges,  causeways,  &c.,  but  probably  most  of  all  from 
want  of  spirited  management,  and  of  able  engineers  to  direct  the 
works.  It  is  now,  however,  vastly  improved,  and  may  be  considered 
the  best,  of  any  great  length,  in  Guatemala.  It  is  from  280  to  300 
miles  long. 

The  difficulties  and  precarious  character  of  internal  oommunict* 
tion  (which  is  even  now  improving,  and  for  the  further  improTe- 
ment  of  which  there  are  many  plans  projected)  cannot  be  expected 
long  to  interpose  a  barrier  to  the  progress  of  civilization,  where  the 
requisite  materials  for  constructing  roads  and  bridges  so  abound, 
and  where  the  means  of  remunerating  labour  may  be  dug  out  of 
the  very  mountain  side,  which  is  itself  the  grand  imj ediment.    At 


INTERNAL  COMMUNICATION.  55 

present  much  time  is  consomed  in  toilsome  though  adyenturous 

trarelling.      Partly  to  obviate  the  difficulties  hence  arising  to 

the  tnuie  of  the  country,  large  fairs  are  periodically  held  at  certain 

places  for  the  sale  of  all  kinds  of  produce  and  merchandise.   Several 

thoiaand  people  attend  the  more  important  of  these.    Some  come 

from  distances  amounting  to  hundreds  of  miles  overland,  and  even 

ftom  Mexico,  as  well  as  from  Chili  and  Peru.  The  more  important 

of  these  ikirs  are  held  at  San  Miguel,  in  the  state  of  Salvador, 

which  has  three  such  fairs  annually.    At  the  one  best  attended, 

wbkh  is  held  on  the  21st  of  November,  as  much  as  a  million  ot 

doUara  in  value  used  to  be  put  into  circulation.    Kow  the  amount 

B  much  less,  and  is  even  estimated  at  no  more  than  100,000  at  the 

three  £am,     Esquipulas,  in  the  state  of  Guatemala,  is  another 

gnmd  point  of  assembly,  at  vrhich  as  many  as  60,000  persons  have 

been  known  to  congregate.     But  here  superstition  unites  with 

the  love  of  gain  to  draw  so  many  together;   the  festival  of  a 

notorious  image,  to  which  we  shall  have  occasion  again  to  refer, 

being  kept  at  the  same  time. 

The  shores,  rivers,  and  lagoons,  especially  those  of  British 
Honduras,  are  navigated  by  the  mahogany-cutter,  the  sars-digger, 
the  turtler,  the  fisherman  and  the  hunter,  and  occasionally  also 
the  missionary,  in  dorees  or  light  canoes  hewn  out  of  the 
trunk  of  a  single  mahogany  or  cedar  tree.  One  class  of  boats, 
called  *  pit-pans,*  are  peculiar  to  British  Honduras  :  they  arc 
fifteen  to  twenty-five  yards  long,  by  four  or  five  feet 
in  the  centre,  tapering  gradually  towards  the  ends,  which 
are  perhaps  from  eighteen  to  twenty  inches  wide.  The  centre 
m  occupied  by  a  neatly  fitted  awning  of  mahogany,  supported 
on  pilasters  of  the  same  material,  and  shaded  with  curtains. 
Here  the  traveller  reclines  at  ease,  and  is  propelled  with  great 
tpeed  by  Indian  or  African  labourers,  who  sit  in  pairs  before 
amd  behind  him,  often  stripped  to  the  waist,  and  plying  vigorously 
a  short  mahogany  paddle,  heedless  of  the  exposure  of  their  brawny 
and  shining  shoulders  to  thevertical  rays  of  the  sun,  and  keeping 
time  to  a  wild  Carif  chant  or  monotonous  African  dirge,  to  which 
words  adapted  to  the  drcumstances  of  the  passing  moment  are 
fi^eqoently  sung  impromptu.  When  the  traveller  happens  to  be 
a  missionary,  and  the  paddlers  native  converts,  willingly  propelling 
the  light  crafl,  some  of  the  more  cheerful  songs  of  Zion  are  substi- 


56  THE   GOSPEL   IK   CENTRAL   AMXUCA. 


iiii  f^wii.i'i  nr-i 


toted  for  these,  and  awake  the  sylvan  echoes  to  the 
strain. 

The  Central  States,  as  the  most  thickly-peofded  portion  of 
Spanish  America,  and  occupying  so  peculiar  a  position  anKmg 
these  deeply  interesting  hut  hitherto  neglected  ooantries,  have  a 
strong  claim  upon  Christians  of  the  present  day.  It  is  hoped  that 
this  will  he  made  apparent  to  the  reader,  and  also  that  this  daim 
applies  to  none  more  forcibly  than  to  the  Britisk  Chri$iian.  If  to 
what  has  been  said  concerning  the  influential  position  and  probable 
future  destiny  of  this  country,  be  added  the  fiict  that  God  has  so 
ordered  events  by  his  providence,  that  his  gospel  has  been  first 
preached  in  the  midst  of  the  densest  populations,  and  that,  under 
such  circumstances,  he  has  honoured  it  with  signal  success,  it  will 
weigh  with  those  interested  in  the  spread  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
in  directing  their  attention  towards  a  field  which,  in  this  respect  as 
in  many  others,  God  has  pointed  out  to  them.  K  what  is  here  said 
concerning  the  people,  should  have  excited  little  sympathy  oo  their 
behalf,  it  is  hoped  that  due  weight  will  be  given  to  their  moral 
and  religious  destitution,  which  will  be  the  theme  of  future  chapters. 

That  they  are  meUj  constitutes  their  chief  claim  upon  our  love ; 
that  they  have  not  the  gospel,  makes  every  one  "  thdr  debtor**  who 
has  it ;  that  they  are  in  any  way  accessible  to  us,  is  the  strangest 
reai^on  for  our  attempting  an  imn^ediate  discharge  of  the  solemn 
obligation  ;  and  that  they  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge,  is 
the  awful  reality  best  calculated  to  fix  a  holy  purpose,  and  to  steady 
a  trembling  hand  in  its  execution.  Nor  are  warrants,  commands, 
and  promises  wanting  to  encourage  the  heart.  "  Say  not  ye,  There 
are  yet  four  months,  and  then  coraeth  harvest  P  Behold,  I  say  unto 
you.  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  on  the  fields,  for  they  are  white 
already  to  harvest.**    Nor  will  our  obligations  cease  until 

"  One  song  employs  all  oations»  snd  all  cry, 
'  Worthy  the  Lamb,  for  he  waa  slain  for  us  ;* 
The  dwellers  in  the  vales,  and  on  the  rocks, 
Shont  to  each  other,  and  the  mountain  t(^ 
From  distant  mountains  catch  the  flying  joy; 
Till,  nation  after  nation  taught  the  strain, 
£arth  rdls  the  raptnnms  hoeanna  round.** 


tmcovEur  of  tue 


CONTIRE.NT.  57 


SECTION  II. 

mSXORICAL  ASD  POLITICAL  SKETCH. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

DISCOVEET. 

I— ne  Uadioe  of  Coiic*  knd  CiuiUBt  nl  M 

□t  Uu(l«  of  SiifiiJItfing  Hmiuib  VicU' 

uarCiUn,  Tcmplii.  Icr. — SnnuisnmpcTUug  Uil'a 

S  Tbfflij— Ophjr  In  A.ni*T)™— Tbp  UFiuniuit  Oml  Hi^mnlru — TrniLUnia 

I    t^H«)  and    Wwik    ASDIiil   CiUia.   Bic.i    VUUU.   Iiiiltluti.   P■ll■lllllIl^ 

\  Coyn    Ijin   uul  GanraDicnl — Oppuule  QinnulEr  at  Ihd  Aitcm  And 

<  GaJ  lUljaigiti  m  tkl  «Wt,"— F>.  liiiL  11, 

c  IliHlary  of  ihe  Conquest  of  Mexico,  state* 
d  of  Cozumel,  in  the  Bay  of  Ilondurasi,  ivas  llie  firrt 
ie  \tj  Coliuubua,  afler  leaving  Jamaim  and  Cuba,  in  search 
uf  the  new  world  (in  lOOfl).  The  euntiguoua  ahore  of  Yocalan 
'Kaa,  cofttcqucDtlf ,  ibe  tint  port  of  the  continent  which  hi«  eyes 
beheld.  From  Cokiuiic]  we  are  informed  that  he  crossed  over  to 
Tnuillo,  on  the  opporitc  side  of  the  buy,  and,  being  in  search  of 
a  Ktvtcni  pWMgc,  coasted  liondums  (then  and  afterwords  called 
X  Las  Uibuenuj,  the  Kloscinito  Shore,  and  Costa  Rica, 
]  b«  nnclied  Vcragua,  on  the  Isthmus  of  Darieti.  Here  he 
lulled  tti*  crews  iu  that  iiiaatia.le  and  ungovernable  thirst  lor 
d  wldch  cursed  and  stnltiiied  the  enterprise*  of  the  periotl,  and 
ll  entailed  so  \gcetA  an  amount  of  guilt  and  misery,  and,  in  the 
I,  even  of  sqiulkl  postrly,  upon  proud  and  magnificent  Spain. 
Aouthcr  historian*  tajs,  Ibat  Bartholomew  Columbus  arrived  oa 
t  «f  Honduras  in  the  year  J502,  and,  iauding  at  Point 
B  Ae  ITlIi  day  of  August,  took  possesion  of  the  country 
*  Banttr-lkx.  i.  lik.  (,  up.  t> 


58  TUB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AJfERICA. 

in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Castile ;  by  which  it  appears  that  the 
state  of  Honduras  was  the  part  of  all  the  North  American  conti- 
nent where  the  Spaniards  first  landed,  though  the  territory  of 
that  state  remained  unexplored  until  twenty  years  after  its  dis- 
coyery. 

In  1522,  Gil  Gonzales  Davila  explored  the  coasts  of  Central 
America  on  the  Pacific  side,  in  pursuit  of  a  channel  of  communica- 
tion between  the  two  oceans,  when  he  discqy^ered  and  named  the 
Gulf  of  Fonseca,  and  the  territories  of  the  Caciques,  Nicaragua,  and 
Nicoya,  which  still  retain  the  names  of  those  chiefs. 

It  was  in  Yucatan — discovered  by  Dias  de  Solis  y  Finzon,  in 
1508  —  that  Ueman  Cortes  and  his  warlike  companions  first 
effected  a  landing  (in  1519).  Actuated  by  the  lust  of  conquest 
and  military  glory,  as  well  as  by  covetousness,  they  commenced 
the  work  of  destruction  by  the  taking  of  Tabasco.*  Be-embarking 
here,  after  having  obtained  much  information  from  the  Indians, 
and  some  remarkable  helps  for  the  furtherance  of  their  enterprise, 
especially  one  in  the  person  of  an  Indian  female,  who  henceforth 
accompanied  Cortes,  and  was  essentially  useful  to  him  as  an  inter- 
preter, they  proceeded  to  the  neighbourhood  of  San  Juan  de  Ullua, 
in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  Near  their  landing-place,  Cortes  afterwards 
founded  the  town  and  port  of  Vera  Cruz.  From  this  point  he 
spread  his  conquests  westward,  until  he  took  the  imperial  city  of 
Hexico,  and  placed  its  unhappy  monarch,  Montezuma,  in  chains. 

Chivalrous  and  extraordinary  as  the  records  of  these  exploits  now 
appear,  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  credence  which  cannot  be  re* 
fused  them ;  indeed,  such  of  the  facts  as  are  incontestible  are  those 
which  at  first  sight  appear  to  be  the  least  credible.  Nor  can  we  sup- 
pose that  the  highest  colouring  which  a  fervid  imagination  could  im- 
part to  events  in  themselves  so  surpassingly  wonderfid  would  equal, 
much  less  surpass,  the  vivid  reality.  All  that  can  now  be  said  is,  that 
the  more  pleasing  and  the  less  dishonourable  features  are  dwelt 
upon— often  to  the  exclusion  of  the  most  harrowing  and  disgraoefal 
^-and  that  the  whole  is  written  in  the  false  glare,  and  under  the 
partial  light,  of  depraved  and  defective  views  of  human  gloxj^ 
anoral  rectitude,  and  religious  truth. 

*  A  chief  Indian  town,  rum  the  capital  of  the  Mexican  province  of  Tabasco  in  the  Baj 
of  Caapeche.  It  was  firom  this  coontry  that  Sir  Francis  Drake  first  intiodnoed  potato« 
and  tolMMOo  into  Snrope  in  1587.   Tho  name  toboeoo  ia  probah]y  a  oonruption  of  ftlMoa. 


tANDIKO  OF  CORT£S.  CO 

I   Tbc  success  of  Cortes,  whicb  at  first  sight  uppeors  so  marvellous 

nt  lo  Mtuuiid  the  reader,  will,  un  closer  cuaBideratiun,  reduce 

a  oaly  another  illustration  of  ihe  tinth  that  kiiuwleJge  is 

Ii  WHS  uot  IhccrucifiJt,  the  Virgin  Mary,  or  Santiago  de  Com- 

tclU,  or  Dtiy  other  aniut  in  liie  culeudur,  tliat  diove  dm  Indians 

!   UiOD,   and  crowned   the   Spania^d   with   almost  coii!.Uint 

iclolj :   but  it   was  the  grnipaicder,   Ibc  well-ttmpcrcd  Tulcdo 

Eulci^  anil  the  niUKtU-s  and  sinews  ot*  the  good  Arab  Etecds  wliidi 

bc-y  bad  iiii|Jorted,  together  with  the  cSccts  of  these  novelties 

:e  miiiUB  ul  the  IntliaiiB,  who  never  bad  till  thui  beheld  a 

■liiti;  eoiupleziaii.     Jt  is  not  snrprieiiig  that  a  company  of  mounted 

Qligbts  in  armour,  acconipuuecl  by  a  body,  though  but  a  small 

K,  of  wcU-trained  iniiuitiy,  by  the  imposing  though  clumsy  ui'd- 

ttice  of  the  period,  oiid  by  all  that  could  give  ielat  lo  thdr  ap- 

>t  omitting  the  pomp  of  a  sacerdotal  train,  should  strike 

bh  KHC  and  amazement  uatiree  who  esw  them  diseuibark  from 

Ups  which  tliey  supposed  to  be  monsters  ol'the  det;p,  cudiicd  with 

lb  ajid  voluntary  motion, 

it  not  rather  natural  that  when  they,  who  knew  Dot  the  use  of 

kIdI^  and  bad  never  seen  a  quadruped  larger  than  a  tapir,  behuld 

ftciu  lonuie  their  cat  airy,  use  their  arquebutses  and  croHS-bi-ws, 

r  iwords  and  spcnrs,  tbeir  batllc-oxea  uud  poniards,  and  ctpe- 

idly  wbcn  they  beard  the  rour  ol*  their  lirc-aiuia  and  artillery, 

d  wittieiKd  tbu  ctiects  which  these  produced  u&r  oS;  is  it  not 

titer  ruttnnl  that  they  should  bu  turrilied  and  impressed  with  the 

tnperbumau  power  wielded  by  their  mysterious  visilurv, 

A  that  tbty  should  conclude  them  iuviucible  and  immortal  uulil 

id  experience  proved  that  they  were  not  ?  * 

y  Weil  (lid  their  leader  know  how  to  make  the  most  of  the  prestige 

h  accompanied  Ibeir  fir^t  amval.    Great  uuit  have  been  the 

don  produced  in  (be  heart  of  the  empire,  and  iu  the  minds 

a  aud  bis  court,  when  they  first  received,  by  the  band 

eni' — their   swill   cuurien  from  the   coast,  the 

ings  upon  cuttoD  whicb  represented  the  "cbildren  of  the  nun," 

d  tbc  mighty  engines  by  which  they  burled  "the  thunder,"  and 


H  vf  uiypohiig  Hit  filler  uJ  tlw  buns  to  Ifc  naa  Huimnt. 


60  THE   O06PBL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

■lew  a  distant  foe ;  and  deep  indeed  most  hare  been  the  groiwing 
gloom  as  tidings  after  tidings  reached  them  of  thdr  oa¥raRl  march, 
and  of  the  sacoessive  overthrow  of  erery  opposing  foree,  howeyer 
great,  as  if  by  magic,  till  at  last  they  stood  npon  the  borders  of  the 
lake  that  surrounded  Mexico,  the  beautiful  bat  diyinely  doomed, 
because  guilty,  capital  of  the  Axtecs. 

No  exploit  of  Cortes,  no  conception  of  his  master-mind,  surpasses 
in  determined  boldness  the  order  for  the  destruction  of  the  fleet 
which  had  conveyed  his  expedition  to  those  shores.  That  one  act, 
probably,  more  than  any  other,  decided  the  success  of  his  hasaidons 
and  difficult  enterprise — an  enterprise  which  involved  the  destinies 
of  nations,  and,  by  its  results,  affected  the  whole  world.  By  the 
conflagration  of  the  ten  galleons  which  composed  that  fleet,  he  at 
once  cut  off  the  possibility  of  a  retreat,  secured  the  combined  ener- 
gies of  less  daring  associates,  and,  humanly  speaking,  revealed  to 
succeeding  generations  the  moral  cause  of  his  success.  He  did 
more.  Ue  gave  an  example  of  faith  and  hope  in  merely  earthly 
things,  which,  if  it  be  not  emulated,  and  as  far  surpassed  by  the 
true  soldier  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  as  that  which  is  spiritual  trans- 
cends that  which  is  carnal,  must  remain  a  standing  rejutraf  upon 
his  supineness  and  unbelief, — an  example  which,  unless  profesnng 
Protestants  imitate,  will  make  it  more  tolerable  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment for  a  Cortes  and  a  Pizarro  than  for  them. 

The  Indian  tribes  which  fell  before  this  little  band  of  desperate 
adventurers  comprised  many  nations,  great  and  mighty,  and  not 
untrained  to  ¥rar ;  that  art  for  which  the  least  benignant  are  the 
best  prepared.  The  accounts  we  have  of  their  wealth,  their  refine- 
ment, and  their  numbers,  as  given  by  Spanish  historians,  are  ae 
glowing  and  surprising  as  to  appear  fabulous.  But  while  there  is 
abundant  evidence  to  substantiate  the  leading  facts,  there  is  abo 
enough  of  mystery  to  excite  the  most  profound  interest,  and  to 
afford  scope  for  endless  theories  and  suppositions. 

How  and  when  this  continent  was  first  peofded,  and  where  tlw 
inhabitants  learned  the  arts  and  sciences  of  which  thej  had  a 
knowledge,  and  which  it  is  evident  they  possessed  even  in  giealcr 
perfection  long  before  the  period  of  its  discovery,  were  ques- 
tions then ;  and  now,  after  the  lapse  of  three  centuries  and  a  faali^ 
they  still  remain  questions  to  which  no  satis&ctory  answer  can  be 
returned. 


COSaCEST    { 


CI 


Even  ibongh  it  had  Dot  been  plainly  declared  in  the  Sacml 
Scriptirres,  that  *'  God  made  of  one  blood  all  nntioQs  of  men  for  to 
dwi-ll  on  all  llie  face  of  Iho  cartli,"  yet  would  tlierc  be  snfficii^nt 
in'ounds  In  altribute  to  these  ra«s  a  fommon  origin  with  those  of 
till'  old  *-(irld.  The  traditions  preserred  by  them,  thau)(b  in  a 
^^•Mncwliat  distorted  form,  of  ihe  f1oo<l,  the  building  of  Galicl,  and 
^^HtsucccaUng  cventa.  would  nlonc  xuffice  fur  this  |iurpo!ie. 
^^^V"  Nu£>se  de  la  Ve^a,  bishop  of  Chiaps,  in  the  )irelBCC  to  hi* 
^^Hfecvaan  C<nulitutii>n,"  as  reported  by  Don  Domingo  Junrnis— iin 
Mclrsia*<tic,  historian,  anil  native  of  Guatemala — "  nates  that  he 
nut  nilh  certain  calendars  in  the  lan^age  of  the  Indians  of  his 
(iiocnn;,  in  wliicb  mention  wa«  made  of  twenty  lords  or  heads  of 
tiunilita  fmm  vhom  it  appean  this  people  derive  their  oripn. 
Thuir  names  were  Nioua  or  Moi,  Ygh,  Yotan,  Ghanan,  Ahaifh, 
Tox,  Moxic,  I-orohnt,  Mo'o  or  Mulu,  Eiab,  Bat*.  Evob,  Ikcn, 
Hix,  Tnquin,  Chi^iin,  Cliic,  Chinnx.  Cahogh,  and  Aghual.  Of  all 
thcoc  niagiutcs,  Votan  ■ecms  to  have  been  the  most  celebrated  per* 
aonngc  a>  a  tcpnnUe  wurk  k  demoted  to  bis  peculiar  history.  In 
tbii  be  is  Bud  to  liarc  ncsn  the  great  wait  (by  which  the  tower  of 
Balwl  'n  meant)  that  was  built  by  order  of  his  grendliither  Noe, 
thim  the  cartii  to  the  sky ;  and  that,  at  thia  place,  to  every  people 
a  dillercDt  langua^  was  given.  It  further  says  that  Votan  waa 
tiic  tint  person  whom  God  sent  to  this  country  to  divide  the  lands, 
i  apportion  tfaem  among  the  iDdians."  * 

~rbtrc  *re,  however,  in  addition  to  such  as  ihia,  oti'cr  pmfcued 

•  triMlhy  of  investigatioD,  vrhich  npjiear  to  be  borne  out 

«  and  memorials  o(  ]iabt  dyna.tti(s—  by  lists  Ktltl 

t  mighty  wmqiierora  and  kings  who  ruled  fur  suc- 

— evidence*  wliich,  to  say  the  least,  give  an  lir  of 

tntiqutty  Ihcy  claim. 

ra  abmiginal  nation*  of  America,  however  much  they 

I   Ihv«  diflcred  from  eadi  other  in  ibcir  objects  and  luodc  of 

ihtp.    were  all  of  them  ^jofe  idolaters.      And  their  idiiintry, 

•  Ibat  of  the  Cannanites  of  old,  as  regards  the  greater  number, 

K  ct  the  iDost  unnatural,  cruel,  and  Dbominnblt'  kind.     Human 

Bsionally,  nay  frequently,  oHercd  up  to  their  idolft. 

on  record  of  their  having  immolated  as  many  m  a 

n  a  single  occasion  to  their  sanguinary 


62  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

gods.  Like  the  Canaanites,  too,  they  habitually  offered  up  their 
children  in  sacrifice.  Their  manner  of  proceeding  on  such  occasions 
has  been  left  on  record.  Within  the  precincts  of  a  immptaous 
edifice  the  trembling  victim  was  led  forth  and  bonnd  to  a  block  of 
stone,  upon  the  surface  of  which  were  groves  to  cany  off  the 
blood  ;*  the  ofliciating  priest  then  proceeded  deliberately  to  open 
the  breast  with  a  sharp  instrument  of  stone  or  shell,  and  introduc- 
ing his  hand  into  the  writhing  body,  seized  hold  of  the  heart, 
violently  drew  it  forth,  and  presented  it,  while  yet  warm  and 
quivering  with  vitality,  to  the  cold  dead  image  which  they  chose 
thus  to  honour.  So  frequent  were  these  oblations  that  their  tem- 
ples were  usually  garnished  with  festx)ons  composed  of  dried  human 
hearts.  Deeds  such  as  these  are  alone  sufficient  to  account  for 
the  providence  which  permitted  the  subjugation  of  the  Aboriginal 
Americans  by  the  Spaniards,  notwithstanding  the  superstition  and 
cruelty  of  the  latter;  who  were  little,  if  at  all,  inferior  in  these  respects 
to  the  former,  and  their  rapacious  coveteousness  was  certainly  un- 
equalled in  its  disastrous  effects  by  any,  or  perhaps  by  all,  the 
iniquities  of  the  Indians.  But,  while  God  in  his  providence  used 
the  unprincipled  and  licentious  Cortes  for  the  furtherance  of  hb 
own  great  purposes,  the  ambition  of  the  instrument  was  not  a  whit 
the  less  criminal.  Nor  was  his  professed  concern  for  the  converwM 
of  the  natives,  and  the  pious  horror  which  he  manifested  at  their 
human  sacrifices,  any  less  hypocritical,  while  by  his  own  hand  and 
that  of  his  soldiers  he  was  hewing  down  hecatombs  of  human 
victims  in  honour  of  other  idols,  and  especially  to  his  own  personal 
avarice  and  lust  of  power.  But  neither  have  these  deeds  been  un- 
visited  by  the  righteous  retribution  of  God. 

It  is  asserted  by  Robertson  in  his  History  of  America,  that  the 
Spaniards  destroyed  about  16,000,000  of  natives  in  their  wars  on  this 
continent;  this  amazing  number  of  human  victims  is  more  than  equal 
to  the  entire  population  of  Spanish  America  as  estimated  by  Hum- 
boldt, and  Cortes  and  Pizzaro  may  be  regarded  as  the  executi<men 
who  officiated  at  the  commission  of  this  appalling  national  crime. 

Difficult  as  it  may  now  be  unreservedly  to  credit  the  details  re* 
corded  of  the  Aztec  empire,  and  of  the  power  and  glory  of  the  Mexi- 
can, Cholulan,  and  other  nations,  we  are  constrained  to  yield  to  the 
force  of  that  evidence  which  is  afforded  in  our  own  day  by  actual 
•  Many  inch  itone  altars  remain  among  tlie  vettiges  of  their  former  dties,  ke. 


PAST    GRAKDErn.  (l3 

reniftTiM  of  cities  and  mtmuracnta.  A  kind  of  evidence  which  leaves 
no  rooiD  to  doubt  ihitt  at  one  lime,  a  great  people,  possessing  the 
lUKuvledgeof  man;  arts,  and  arrived  at  a  high  degree  of  refinement, 
iMbited  these  regions.    At  CbaJhnacan  or  Falenque,  at  Tnlha  or 
nirigna,  at  Copan,  Utatlan,  and  Fatinamit  in  the  Central  states 
It  Uimol  in  Yucatan,  and  at  Cholula,  OfambaiPaxaca,  Mitlan,and 
n  different  parts  of  southern  SIcxico,  these  witnesses  are 
■own  to  exist.     Someof  the  later  discoverieacomprise  the  remains 
a  eOTering  a  space  eqnai  In  culcnt  to  that  occupied  by  Rome  or 
iris  eitied  which  wcreadomcd  with  rast  temples  and  pnlaces  built 
upon  massive  pyramids  of  several  hundred  feet  clerntion,  planned 
sceonling  to  scientific  rule,  aud  abounding  with   sculptures   and 
myntcrious  inscriptions,  exeeuted  with   artistic   gkill.      Here   the 
plntned  warrior,  the  courtier,  and  the  courtesan  are  strikingly 
portrayed.     The  speaking  stone,  carved,  as  we  suppose,  without 
iron,  ia  encircled,  as  If  in  mockery  of  our  curiosity,  with  a  frame- 
k  of  cfasiacters  which  reveal  what  the  world  is  so  anxious  to 
1,  tnit  which  remain  as  Aumh  as  the  handwriting  on  the  wall 
e  court.     Among  other  figures  may  be  distin- 
{  to  afford  some  clue  tn  the  desolation  around,  those 
portly  priest*  in  sacerdolal  robes — which  are  not  to  be  mistaken, 
b  trending  upon  the  6gure  of  a  recumbent  man,  and  in  the  net  of 
r  presenting  an  inrant  to  the  grim  idol  in  the  centre. 
e  bright  hnca  which  coloured  the  stucco  and  lias-reliefs  are  not 
fc  entirely  faded,  though  surrounded  by  the  damp  ilmoaphere  of 
'ml  jangle,  but  the  large  trunks  and  roots  of  trees,  prolmbly 
hgrowtb  of  centuries,  protrude  between  the  stones  and  heaps  of 
I,  eovering  with  Ihcir  dark  rank  verdnre,  as  with  a  pall, 
e  BKmldering  tombs  of  human  grandeur  which  silently  pro- 
a  stillness  more  Impressive  than  the  trumpet's  loudert 
I,  the  holiness  and  justice  of  Jchovab. 
.    Some  of  the  ruins  above  mentioned,  and  others  of  like  character, 
9  porticnlarly  described  by  Mr.  Stephens,  the  North  American 
rrllsr,  aod  drswiugs  of  them  arc  given  with  the  account  of  Ids 
»  (0  those  places.     His  works  on  this  subject  awakened  much 
It  only  a  few  yean  ago.    He  and  others  have  ventured  many 
0  their  founders,  and  in  the  fervent  vnah  which  in 
tiih  in^ancc  was  probably  father  to  the  thought,  he  dares  to  sug- 
gest the  pcanbility  of  a  solullon  of  all  doubts  by  the  yet  future 


64  THE  G08PBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMBEICA. 

diiooveiy  of  some  such  city  in  the  inmoet  reoeaeesof  the  momitaiiM^ 
not  MS  these,  in  desolate  rains,  but  in  all  the  actiTity  of  life,  peopled 
with  men  soch  as  those  stones  depict,  and  where  the  sage  and  pro- 
phet of  bis  tribe,  able  to  decipher  the  semi-hieroglyphic,  yet  pre- 
senres  the  lore  of  bygone  days.  There  is  little,  except  in  a  poetical 
hnagination,  upon  which  to  rest  such  a  supposition.  What  cities 
did  exist  at  the  time  of  the  conquest  were  but  too  soon,  alas  I  made 
the  scene  of  Spaobh  carnage,  cupidity,  and  oppression.  Yet  it  is 
remarkable  that  there  should  be  no  evidence  that  die  ccmqnered 
nations  knew  anything  of  the  (M-igin,  history,  or  even  of  the  exis- 
tence of  these  ruins,  and  scarcely  less  so  that  they  should  only  now 
have  been  discovered  by  tbe  descendants  of  the  Spanish  inrader. 
Soch  is  the  intense  mystery  in  which  their  origin  is  still  shrouded. 

Among  the  various  theories  which  have  been  propomided  by  the 
learned  respecting  the  American  aborigines,  there  is  one  which 
deserves  more  than  passing  notice,  not  because  anything  like  a 
conclusive  amount  of  evidence  can  be  adduced  in  support  of  it, 
but  on  account  of  the  degree  of  verisimilitude  which  appears  to 
attach  to  it  on  several  important  points,  and  especially  becanae  ci 
its  agreement  with  the  professed  traditions  of  the  Quiche  Indians, 
handed  down  from  the  time  immediately  following  their  subjuga- 
tion. It  was  first  put  forth  some  forty  years  since  by  Dr.  Randiwit 
of  New  Jersey,  in  a  book  entitled  ''  The  Star  in  the  West*"  In 
this  work  he  endeavours  to  prove  that  the  miitwig  tribes  of  Isrmd 
must  be  sought  for  among  the  Indians  of  America.  Though  little 
credited  at  the  time,  later  discoveries  have  devdoped  much  that  it 
confirmatory  of  this  hypothesis,  and  nothing,  we  bdieve,  to  die- 
prove  it. 

Its  brief  outline  is  as  follows : — The  nine  and  a  half  tribes  of 
Israel  who  were  led  captive  from  Samaria,  721  years  before  the 
commencement  of  the  present  era,  are  spoken  of  in  one  of  the 
apocryphal  books,*  where  it  is  said  that  "  Salamanaer  carried  tbcm 
over  the  waters."  They  are  also  there  described  as  havii^  removed 
to  '^  a  further  countiy,  where  never  mankind  dwelt,**  and  wbeie^ 
^no  longer  surrounded  by  the  multitude  of  the  heathen,  thqr 
might  hope  to  keep  their  statutes,  which  they  never  kepi  in 
their  own  land.**  As  they  journeyed  eastward  some  remained 
and  settled  in  Turkey  and  China,  where  after  2,500  years  they  en 

•S£sdrj%ziu40. 


DB,  baudinot's  tukory.  65 


Tlie  m^n  bodj,  however,  are  suppCKied  to  bare 

I'lts  from  Kaxtem  Asia,  the  more  robust  to  have 

■nainifd  in  Norlb  America,  whilst  the  more  cultivated  nought  the 

btttlitm  c!imc».     In  Mexico,  Central  Aujcriwi,  and  Peru,  they 

o  hare  unexpectedly  found  their  old  eneinies  tbe  Phteni- 

tOR,  nho  had  dixcovcrcd  the  countrj-  SOO  years  before,  and  had 

mh  Polcnque,  with  its  pyramids  like  ihoGe  of  Egypt,  and  the 

I'  tMher  ciUe*  alreaiiy  referred  lo,  which  it  is  asserted  were  eridcntly 

It  by  those  who  erected  Tyre,  Babylon,  and  Carthage. 

This  hypothesis  is  raid  to  have  gained  the  credence  of  many 

n  and  literati,  among  whom  is  William  rcnii,  who  bad  a 

acquaintance  with  certain  of  the  Indian  tribes.    It  is 

nirtcd  by  some  resemblance  of  tbe  Indians  to  the  Jews,  even 

T  the  lapse  of  -2,000  years,  and  though  now  divided  into  more 

n  300  nation*,  all  of  them  still  notable  for  their  euperior  intel- 

ime  affinity  is  aim  imced  between  the  reUgious  rites  of 

g  and  those  of  the  ancient  Jews,  as,  for  instance,  in  the 

K  of  temples,  nitars,  sacrifices,  priests,  &C.,  and  even  some  vcstigel 

ffdrcuracinan,  which  is  said  to  have  been  only  lately  tUscontinued 

piong  tliem.    There  is  also  some  similarity  in  customs  and  in  points 

,     lliese  evidences  are,  however,  precisely  the  points  which 

3  he  made  clear  before  a  full  assent  can  be  yielded  to  the 

lion*  drawn  from  them.    Not  the  least  singular,  and  appa- 

Intly  probable  conjecture  is  that  Ophir  or  Tanthish,  the  country 

f  wldch   Solomon's  fleets  traded,  and  the  gold  of  which  was 

n  even  as  early  as  the  days  of  Job,»  was  in  America,  and 

as  no  other  than  the  miidern  California  or  some  of  the 

oaets.     When  due  consideration  is  given  to  tbe  different 

a  which  mention  is  made  of  this  place  or  places,  as  well 

f  the  difficulties  which  commentators  have  Ibiind  in  fixing  their 

3  the  fact  that  they  were  proverbial  for  remoteness  so 

It  ships  of  Tirshish  is  a  name  applied  generally  lo  such  as  were 

(rteil   for   long   voynges :  1   when   it   is   remembered   that  the 

■  of  Solomon  returned  only  once  every  three  years;  when 

the  navigation  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  is  compared  with  the  route 

gcncnlly  supposed  to  have  been  pursued,  viz.,  by  the  Straits  of 

fiobelmandci  along  the  south-eastern  coasts  of  Africa,  to  the 


iLlfl,  uai,  l,li.Bi  EMtjtljtiTii.as. 


■ahSbta 


86  THE  QOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMBRICA. 

Sftfala  of  the  ancient  orientals ;  and  also,  when  the  articles  traded 
in  are  taken  into  account,  viz^  gold,  silver,  ivoiy,  piecioiiB  rtooeSt 
algum  or  almog-trees,  apes,  and  peacocks,*  it  will  be  seen  that  the 
•fupposition  is  not  only  possible,  but  appears  probable  enough  to 
Awaken  cariosity  and  lead  to  investigation. 

Notwithstanding  the  ingenious  manner  in  which  Mr.  Bmoe,  the 
great  traveller,  accounts  for  the  long  delay  of  Solomon's  fleets  on 
the  common  hypothesis,  attributing  it  to  the  inflnenee  of  the  mon- 
soons; that  would  be  more  satisfactorily  explained  on  the  present 
supposition  by  the  voyage  across  the  Pacific,  allowing  for  the  im- 
perfect navigation  of  the  period,  and  time  for  rest  and  victualling 
at  various  intermediate  islands  of  Oceania :  though  the  greater  part 
of  this  voyage,  t.  e^  from  Califomia  to  China,  is  now  perfimoed 
within  six  weeks.  All  the  productions  named  in  connection  with 
Ophir  or  Tarshisb,  are  precisely  the  most  abundant  of  the  western 
eoast  of  America,  from  Califomia  to  Peru,  hard  woods  sach  as  are 
suitable  for  the  construction  of  musical  instrumental  or  for  the 
adornment  of  temple  and  palace,  among  which  are  mahogany, 
I»«cious  metals  and  stones,  monkeys,  and  birds  of  gorgeous  jdn- 
mage.  The  only  exception  is  trory,  which  we  must  suppose  was 
obtained  during  their  sojourn  at  the  ports  of  the  nearer  oontiDC&t 
of  India,  or  from  the  islands  of  the  Elastern  Archipelago. 

But,  be  the  origin  and  early  history  of  these  nations  what  they 
may,  the  interest  thence  to  be  derived,  and  the  romaDoe  d  Mr. 
Stephens*s  hopes,  or  the  novelty  of  Dr.  Baudinot*8  theoiy  should 
weigh  much  less  with  either  the  philanthropist  or  the  ChristiaB, 
than  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  a  remnant  of  the  deseeodaats 
of  these  able  architects,  or  it  may  be  of  the  warlike  devastatora  of 
those  cities,  still  remains  untaught  amidst  the  mountain  forests,  in 
total  estrangement,  not  only  from  God,  but  even  from  thai  fisUov- 
men.  Some  of  them  occasionally  perhaps  traverse,  bow  in  hand, 
the  wide-spread  vestiges  of  the  past  magnificenoe  of  thdr 
and  it  were  no  flight  of  fancy  to  think  of  them  gazing  with 
wonder  at  the  gods  of  their  fathers,  and  starting  at  the  shaking  of 
a  leaf,  lest  they  should  be  surprised  by  other  men  less  wild  and 
untutored  than  themselves. 

"  Oh,  that  such  a  reality  might  provoke  the  thoughta,  the  aa^ 
tions,  the  prayers,  the  missionary  zeal  and  enterprise  that  it  is 

lKiiigiix.S8,x.11,aii      Chnm.  TiiL  19,  is.  10^  SL 


^^1  ttiSTOKiCAL  REcoRns.  67 

cakulited  to  anakcn  t  Let  each  one  lay  it  to  tieart.  These  poor 
timid  creatures  are  gifted  wilb  powers  snd  capabilities  equal  to  our 
own  :  their  immortal  spirits  are  destined  to  contribute  to  the  glory 
of  God  in  lime  and  eternity.  Oh,  let  not  their  first  contact  with 
eicilized  man  be  the  touch  of  pollution,  the  withering  influence  of 
vi(«.  or  the  inul-dcslroying  error  of  a  l:l't]esa  creed !  Let  not  the 
disciple  of  the  campnisionnte  Jesus  stand  by  nnmoved,  and  suffer 
his  lirotlicr  to  pcrinh  lor  lock  of  that  knowledge  which  it  is  in  his 
power  lo  communicate,  nnil  which  he  is  charged  to  proclaim ! 
No.  lei  God  rather  be  honoured  in  the  obedience  of  his  people, 
wbo  arc  commanded  to  cTangeliEe.  and  in  the  speedy  convei^on  of 
tlieae  tribes  to  the  faith  of  His  Son ;  that  they  may  be  restored  lo 
Cnd,  to  aodety,  and  to  themselves,  who  have  lost  all  by  first 
bn»kiog  llim  in  whom  they  live,  and  move,  and  hnve  their 
being. 

The  hiatorical  matemls  relating  to  the  aborigines  of  Central 

,  y  Anttrio,  to  which  we  have  nccera,  consist,  chiefly,  of  such  native 

^^bnordi  aod  tntdiliooB  as  have  been  handed  down  to  us  by  their 

|^BkHM|i>Krvr^  the  Spanianls.      Some  of  these  Spanish- American 

'■    ^nhoTS   have  written   by   the  aid   of  those   Indians  who  early 

required  the  Spanish  langtinge,  ivnd  were  able  to  communicate 

hislorieol  fragments.     Utheis.   hav  ng   acqiiircil  a  knowledge  of 

&e  Indian  Ungna^es,  hare  been  enal  led  to  transmit  verbal  tradi- 

II  of  more  or  lea  importance-    The  greater  port  of  these  have 
I  Uoman  Cnlbnlic  ecelcsin sties.    Some  of  the  Caiques  (or  cbie&) 
Ifae  Pipit,  (Jpichf,  Kachiquel.  and  Focotnam  Indinns.  were 
^  Id  write  by  the  Spaniards  r-nd  co^n piled  histories  which  still 
1.     To  one  of  the  Sixinish  fu  ctlonaries,  among  other  things, 
pcintlDgs  lued  by  the  Indians  instead  of  books  or  records  of 
ir  lu«ory,  arc  said  to  bavK  been  explained.* 
ScTcnl  curious  MSS.  remain  to  this  day,  and  are  qnolcd  by 
■Mlive  liislnrians,  of  which  Kinie  are  written  on  the  paper  anciently 
Bade  by  the  Indians  fVoin  the  stems  of  the  Maguey  (nn  aloe). 

What  Iiaa  been  published  from  these  sources,  as  niight  Iw  sup- 
poatd,  is  much  more  ileficicnt  in  qualitj-  than  in  quantity,  and  the 
whole  would  probably  afford  hut  very  parlinl  data  upon  whtcli  to 
tarta  a  correct  apiiiion  of  their  past  condition,  Iti  the  absence  of 
an,  imwe  talisGiclory  material;,  we  arc  reiluced  to  the  necessity  of 

«r  (tf  Cuffiietuiiin^.    S«  Joami,  p.  ino. 


TJT 


68  THl  Q06PBL  m  CSKimAL  AMERICA. 


wYmt  we  cftn  of  tbeir  liktoiy  from  a  few  brief  notieet  of 
Ungi,  anil  their  pooip»  from  nof«  ample  details  of  their  wars— 
whioh  are  fiur  from  oonTcying  dear  idme  and  fh»i  some  par- 
Ueulari  coneeming  tbeir  cities;  but  little»  indeed,  about  tiie  social 
and  political  state  of  tbeir  inhabitants. 

From  some  of  these  sources,  we  are  inlbnned  that  the  Quiche  and 
Kaehi()ucl  kings,  whose  dominJomt  extended  OTer  a  great  portion  of 
Central  America,  were  descended  from  the  Tohec*  Indkns,  who, 
in  the  opinion  of  Juarros^  found  this  region  already  inhabited  bj 
people  of  diHerent  nations^  and  he  adds  that,  **  when  these  same 
Tttltccans  entered  into  the  kingdom  of  Mexico,  they  discovered 
IhattbeChichiniecashadpreviouslTgot  posseaskmofit.**  This  he 
Statctt  as  a  eonridion  of  his  own,  while  desirous  to  avoid  the  vexed 
question  of  the  original  populatkm  of  Ameiica,  and  he  supports 
this  view  by  referring  to  the  fact  of  the  great  diversity  of  languages, 
which,  he  si^  makes  "^the  opinion  in  fiivoor  of  a  comuHm  origin 
untenable/*  He  next  asserts,  that  *^it  appears  from  the  MSS.  of 
Don  Juan  Torres,  the  son,  and  Don  Juan  Maeario,  the  grsndson,  oi 
the  king  Chignaviucilut,  and  Don  Frandsco  Gomei,  the  first  Aludb 
Kichf^  $k4^  lAs  Tuiittm  trsrv  ^stmdtdfrmm  lAe  hmut  ofJtraei^ 
and  were  released  by  Moses  from  the  captivity  in  whidi  Pharaoh 
held  them*  Having  pawed  the  Red  Sea,  they  rerigned  themadves 
to  the  practice  of  idolatry,  and  persisted  thcidn  in  spite  of  the  ad- 
monitions of  Moses  ;  but  to  avc^  his  refMroofr,  or  frpin  the  fear  of 
his  indictiug  some  chastisement*  they  diose  to  separate  fWmi  him 
and  his  brethren,  and  to  retire  from  that  part  of  the  country  to  a 
place  which  they  called  the  seven  caverns ;  that  is,  from  theboiden 
of  the  Red  Sea  to  what  is  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Mexico^  where 
th«{y  founded  the  celebrated  city  of  Tula. 

*^The  chief  who  commanded  and  conducted  this  multitude  from 
una  continent  to  the  other,  was  Tuiuh,  the  slod:  from  which 
spraug^kefrmiliesof  thekingsofTnk  and  Quiche,  and  the  first 
mmiarch  ctf"  the  TnhecasL  The  second  was  Cspidiodi ;  the  third, 
Gsld-Ahus;  the  ibarth.  Ahpop;  and  the  fifth,  Kimaqpirh^  (or  te 
great  Quiche),  who  bdng  more  beloved  than  any  of  Ida  pR* 
deoemors,  was  directed  by  an  orade  to  leave  Tula  with  the  people, 


TRjJtrrio.fE^ 


vho  had  by  ttiii  time  raulLiplicd  greatly,  and  conduct  them  from 
the  kingdom  of  Mexico  to  that  of  Guatcninla. 

"  III  performing  this  joumej  they  expended  many  years,  suffered 

raordinary  hardships,  and  waodered  over  ild  immense  trnct  of 
iiilil  they  discovered  a  large  lake  (the  lake  of  Atitlan), 

i  rotoIvGd  to  fix  their  habitations  in  a  convenient  plan;  at  a 
j^OTt  distxnee  from  it,  which  they  called  Quiche,  in  conunemora- 

1  of  their  king  Niniaquich^,  who  died  during  their  peregrioa- 


I  Juarnia  lella  us  in  a  note   that   this  curiou 

1   by  Juan   de   Leon   Cardona,   who   was   ap]ioinIed   by 

e  Alvarado,  licutcaacit  of  the  Captain- General  over  the 

f  the  Quiches :  and  lie  add«,  "  Fuenles  a»rarei  us  that 

I  obtained  it  by  meana  of  Francisco  Vasquez,  the  liiflorian  of 

t  Order  of  Kt.  Francif."     If  this  document  can  be  cleared  Irom 

e  fuspieion  of  monkish  fiibrication,  it  would  go  far  to  establish 

Uciiry  of  Dr.  Bnudinot.     We  can,  howe\'cr,  conceive  of  tK> 

t  which  the  fabricator  could  have  in  view  to  induce  him  to 

nit  such  a  forgery. 

le  Mnic  writtr  adds  that  "the  MS.  of  Juan  Torres,  and 

itr  uf  Fnuiciaco  Garcia  Calel  Tzunipan  Xavila,  a  descendant 

1  tlie  kitij^  of  Quichi^,  uritlcn  in   1S44,  relates  that  Ikirleen 

a  tr/l  dm  old  eonfinent,  headed  by  an  tnamj  jirincipal/amiUiit,  of 

hich  hr   nameii  five  who  were  more  tllustiious  than  the  rest." 

^  Cspichoch  (one  of  these),  the  trunk  of  the  genealogical 

c  of  the  family  of  Nimaquichf,  all  the  royal  progeny  of  the 

s  of  this  kingdom  derive  their  origin,  and  thcK  princes  of 

d  roj-al  ore  called  Caciques.     Aa  the  princes,  or  hcadx  of 

,  were  very  nearly  related  to  each  other,  it  is  clear  tliat  the 

:■  of  Mexico  were  descendants  of  Bdehcbcan  (another  of 

),  a  rvlative  of  Capichoch,  the  original  stock  liom  whom 

lUchs  of  Quich£  sprang:  the  kings  of  both  countries  arc 

vfore  of  the  «ame  roce."'f 

\  Aciojitl,  the  aon  and  tucceasor  of  Nininquichf,  was  the  first 

rcb  who  reigned  in  Utatlan.     Under  him  the  kingdom  was 

y  extended,  and  rose  to  a  high  degree  of  uplendour.     When 

u  years,  he  divided  it  into  three  kingdoms;  namely,  the 

tuicb^,  ibc  Kachiquel,  and  the  Sutugil ;  the  6rst  he  retained  for 

JiungMi.  IG^).  t  Juirrai,  p.  1A(. 


70  THE  GOSPEL  JM  CEMTSLAXs  AMERICA. 

himielf^  the  second  he  gave  to  his  eldest  son  JiatCBil,  and  the  third 
to  his  youngest  son  Acziqnat.  By  this  dirisioD  Jintemal,  king  of 
the  Kachiqutls,  hecune  second  in  dignity  sf^er  Aczopil,  his  fitther. 
The  d^^ree  of  sovereignty  was  distinguished  by  the  throoe  itself; 
that  of  Utatkn  or  Quicb6,  which  was  the  first  in  rank,  was  plaeed 
under  four  canopies,  formed  of  feathere,  each  of  ditferent  eokmrs, 
and  of  different  sizes,  fixed  one  within  the  other ;  the  throne  of 
Kachiquel,  or  Guatenuda,  had  three  c.nopiea,  and  that  of  Atitan, 
or  Sutugil,  had  but  two. 

The  Toltec  emperors,  successors  of  Acxopil,  who  reigned  in. 
Utathm,  the  capital  of  Quiche,  whose  names  have  reached  posterity, 
were  seventeen.*  Thirteen  of  them,  from  Acxoinl  to  Kicab  lY., 
xeigned  prior  to  the  invasion  of  Mexico  by  Ck>rU^  Kicab  Tanab» 
the  fourteenth  of  the  line,  died  whilj  preparing  to  oppose  the 
threatened  invasion  of  his  dominions.  His  son  Tecum  Umam,  who 
occupied  the  throne  when  the  Spaniards  arrived,  offered  the  resist- 
ance to  their  progress  for  which  his  father  had  made  great  prepara- 
tions. He  himself  fell  in  battle  by  the  hand  of  Pedro  de  Alvarsdo^ 
the  leader  of  the  expedition,  who,  when  victorious,  placed  his  son 
Chignaviuoelut  on  the  throne  of  Utatlan;  but  soon  after  caused 
him  to  be  banged  because  be  suspected  him  of  treason.  Sequechol, 
his  successor,  and  the  last  of  the  Quiche  kings,  reigned  only  two 
years,  and  then,  after  an  unsuccessful  revolt,  remained  a  prisoner 
during  the  rest  of  his  life. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  these  Toltec  nations  were  happy, 
or  remained  at  peace  among  themselves  from  the  time  of  their  in- 
migration  to  this  country  until  its  invasion  by  the  Spaniards — wa 
are  rather  led  to  conclude  from  the  event,  that  all  this  while  tlia 
measure  of  their  iniquity  was  gradually  filling  up.  From  the  very 
first,  divisions  and  quarrels  arose,  and  wars  of  conquest  were 
waged  one  upon  another.  Acxiquat,  king  of  the  Sutugib,  fiiat 
invaded  the  territories  of  his  brother  Jhitemal,  even  daring  the 
lifetime  of  their  father.    Strong  fortresses  were  then  built, 

*  The  nunetoftlM  king!  axe  aafoUoir:— 

1  AexopO.  7  IqoflMluiu  IS  Kkab  lY. 

9  JhitemaL  8  Kkab  I.  U  Kioib  t^mib. 

S  Bmukfo.  9  CteiibnxadifiiB.  IS  Toeai 

4BaIamKklA  lOKioibIL  U  Cbkasni 


I  Balarn  Acaa.  11  Iximche.  17  Scquedral,  or 

6  Mwwatib.  ISKietbm.  SequeckiL 


QDICBE DTSASIV    J 


71 


armies  traineil,  and  sanguinar;  conflicts  wagt'd,  »hich  conlmued 
tiiraugfa  several  mccceding  generations. 

r  Jn  the  reign  of  Balam  Acan,  ttiu  Stb  king  of  the  line  of  Acxopil. 

gilebpO|i,  kiug  of  the  SulugiJa,  and  Iloacab,  bis  near  relative 

1  favourite,  aMucI«d  from  the  rojal  palace  at  Utatlan,  Ltcon- 

,  the  daughter,  and  Ecaelixpua,  the  neice  of  the  king  Uakm 

tt^rwardii  married  them.     This  olfence  bo  enniged  the 

fc  ^nnt,  that  he  tortured  and  slew  aevemi  of  hb  household,  and 

kjttHSi  waged  a  war  of  revenge  which  lasted  through  the  reigna  of 

kl  succeeding  mnuorchs,  both  of  Quicht:  and  Atilau,  or  with  a 

m  abott  intemls,  till  the  nrrivnl  of  the  Spaniards. 

I  de«iri1>ing  the  first  battle  thus  occaeioaed.  it  is  said,  "the 

rtile  fields  of  tluichfi  groaned  beneath  the  tread  of  80,000  veteiaa 

diun,  well-armed  and  provided  with  warUkc  stores;  that  dJvi- 

I  which  directed  its  march  towards  the  froniicra  of  Atitan, 

T  the  General  Muiicotah,  hod  iu  the  centre  squadron  Balam 

I  Iriniicir.  adorned  with  three  diadems,  and  other  regal  omA- 

(nts  carried  in  a  rich  chair  of  state,  splendidly  ornamented  with 

1.  emeraldi.  and  other  pri»:ious  atonies  upon  the  «houlders  of  the 

>tiic4  of  his  court."  ''    The  nrms  of  these  Indians  consisted  chicfljr 

riiiiF«ilei>,  poisoned  arrows,  aud  stones  hurled  by  means  of  shnga, 

p  well  a»  javelins  and  pikes  the  ends  of  which   were   liardi.-ncd 

■   fire,  and   a   kind   of   iword   or  instrument    of   woud   called 

eaiUM,'  into  which  pieces  of  n  5tone  called  "chay"  were  set 

!,  like  teeth,  to  consthute  the  cutting  edge,  which  did  grent 

They  hod  also  shields  covered  with  the  skin  of  the 

It  and  their  heads  were  frequently  guarded  bj  bnnches  of 

■then.     Their  conte^  were  such  that  in  one  battle  in  which 

ifctxm  of  Bolam  Acan*s  men  were  oppoKed  to  60,000  of  Zuttigileb- 

f\  eooiDMiided  bj  Doacab,  his  chief  general  and  accomplice  in 

carrying  off  the  princc»«es;   a   contest  so   desperate  and  bloody 

«HU(d,  "and  the  field  of  )>nttle  was  so  decjily  inundated  with 

blood,  that  not  a  blade  of  grass  cuuli!  be  seen."    In  this  cngngemeat 

BodOb  waa  slain. 

In  a  mbcijaeiit  buttle  little  less  bloody.  Bnlain  Acnn  mustered 
|;K>,000  men,  nnd  bi*  adversary,  90.000.  In  a  final  action,  in 
wbidi  BMhun  Acan  perished  in  his  turn,  it  is  as«^rted  tliat  not  lct« 
tlwa  14,000  Indians  were  left  deul  on  the  li<:ld.     These  wan  were 


72  Tm  GOSPEL  IN  CBNTKAL  AUMCA* 

perpetoaied  both  tmong  principals  and  MizOkri^ 
cnormoas  expenditure  of  lives,  and  prepared  the  way  for  their  easier 
eonqoest  bj  the  Spaniards,  not  onlj  by  reason  d  their  mntiial 
diTiaions  and  consequent  weakness,  but  even,  as  will  be  seen,  by 
inducing  Sinacan,  the  then  rdgning  king  of  the  Kachiquels,  to  sue 
ibr  peace,  and  enter  into  an  alliance  with  the  strangers,  in  the  hope 
of  recovering  by  their  means  the  possessions  which  had  been 
wrested  from  him  by  some  of  his  more  successful  neighboors. 

Some  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  their  cities,  and  of  the  state  and 
luxury  of  their  kings  and  nobles,  may  be  formed  by  consideripg 
the  descriptions  given  of  the  former,  and  of  the  larger  boildinga 
they  contained,  assisted  by  the  more  certain  evidence  of  their  actual 
remains. 

The  large  and  opulent  dty  of  Utatlan,  the  court  of  the  native  kings 
of  Quiche,  was  indubitably  the  most  sumptuous  discovered  by  the 
Spaniards  in  that  country.  Fuente^  before  quoted,  urent  to  Quiche 
for  the  express  purpose  of  collecting  information  and  viewing  the 
antiquities  that  remained.  He  describes  it  at  some  length.  It  must 
have  been  exceedingly  populous,  as  it  fumisbed  72,000  combatants 
wherewith  to  oppose  the  Spaniards.  It  was  so  strong  as  to  be 
decsned  impregnable,  being  surrounded  by  a  deep  ravine  that 
formed  a  natural  fosse,  leaving  only  two  very  narrow  roads  as  en- 
trances to  the  city,  which  were  protect^  by  two  forts,  called  by 
the  Spaniards  the  Reif^uardo  and  the  Atalaya.  These  were,  the 
one  four,  and  the  other  five  stories  high,  and  the  dimensions  of  the 
forst  were  188  paces  in  front,  with  a  depth  of  230.  The  deseriplioii 
of  the  grand  Alcazar,  or  palace  of  the  kings  of  Quiche  forcibly 
reminds  one  of  the  vivid  pictures  of  the  Alhambra  sketched  by  the 
glowing  pen  of  Washington  Irving.  It  certainly  surpasses  eveiy 
other  edifice  in  these  regions,  and  in  the  opinion  of  Torquanadsy  it 
eould  compete  in  opulence  with  the  residence  of  Montezuma  in 
Mexico,  or  with  that  in  Cuzoo  which  belonged  to  the  Incas  of  Peru. 

**  The  front  of  this  building  extended,  from  east  to  west,  376  geo- 
metrical paces,  and  in  depth  728 ;  it  was  constructed  of  stone  of 
different  colours ;  its  form  was  elegant,  and  altogether  most  m^ 
nificent.  There  were  six  principal  divisions;  the  first  contained 
lodgings  for  a  numerous  .troop  of  lancers,  archers,  and  other  well- 
disdplined  troops,  constituting  the  royal  body  guard;  the  second 
was  devoted  to  the  accommodation  of  the  princes  and  rtlatioos  of 


CITIES  OP   tJTATLAN, 


iKD   PATINAMIT. 


73 

e  king,  wlio  dwelt  in  il,  and  were  served  with  regal  splendour 

■  longM  thejr  remained  luunarried;  the  third  was  appropriated 

K  of  the  lung,  and  conlatned  distinct  suite  of  aparttnentj 

F  the  mornings,  evenings,  and  nights.     In  one  of  the  Baloom 

d  the  throne,  niider  four  canopies  of  plumage ;  the  a«ceut  to  it 

IB  by  ncvcrnl  steps ;  in  this  part  of  the  palace  were  the  treasury, 

c  tribanals  of  the  Judges,  the  aimouiy,  the  gardens,  avlarie*,  and 

^rica,  with  ull  llie  requisite  offices  attached  to  each  depart- 

The  fourth  and  fit\h  divinons  were  occupied  by  the  queens 

d  royal  concubines ;  they  were  necessarily  of  great  extent,  from 

wnnmber  of  apartments  requisite  for  the  accommodation 

o  many  females,  who  were  bII  maintained  in  a  style  of  sump- 

B  magnificence :  gardens  tor  their  recreation,  baths,  and  proper 

\,  thai  were  kejit  for  the  sole  purpose  of 

liibing  feathers,  with  which   hangings,   coverings,  and  other 

inUu'  ornamental   articles  ^ere  made.       Contiguous    to   this 

OD  wu   the   sixth  and  lust ;   this  was  the  residence  of  the 

B  daughters  and   other  females   of  the  blood  royal,   where 

y  were  educated,  and  attended  to  in  a  manner  suitable  to  their 

to  Ulntlan,  the  most  considerable  city  in  Quiche  was  Xctahufa, 
is  DOW  (^cMlicnaiigo.  "  The  name  of  tliis  place  conveys  a 
lm|itcte  idea  of  its  mkgiutude,  the  word  Xelahuh  meaning  '  under 
e  goTcrnment  of  ten,'  that  is,  it  was  governed  by  ten  principal 
us;  and,  according  to  the  audent  style  of  the  native  each 
D  pmided  over  his  respective  xiiiiiipil,  or  8,000  dwellings.  It, 
tivfiirCi  conuincd  80,000  houses,  and,  as  Fuentes  expresses  him- 
'  consequently  more  llian  300,000  inliabitants.'  It  was  so 
rongly  fortified  that  it  never  was  taken  by  the  enemies  of  the 
ing  of  (Juicbi^,  although  it  had  been  repeatedly  bcsi^ed.  The 
Spaniards  obtained  possession  of  it  bci^ause  the  inhabitants  were 
lerrtbed  by  the  liune  of  their  exploits ;  ihb  alarm  was  greatly  in* 
cRWed  by  the  defeat  of  a  body  of  24,000  Quesaltecos  that  had 
>KcBlpt«d  (o  arrest  their  progress ;  and,  in  consequence,  the  greater 
ymn  of  the  population  retired  to  their  ancient  tortrcsscs  in  the 
ndgbbounng  volcano  and  on  an  adjoining  mountain."  f 
^^^—  'Xbe  tUy  of  f atinamii  (or  tht  city),  in  the  kingdom  of  Kachiquel, 
^^^■pi  alao  called  Tecpan- Guatemala,  which,  according  to  Vuaquez, 

^^B  •  Ja«>M,p.B7-M.  WiuRot,p.S7fi. 


^iiM^IUoV  U«nant4LUiiitiaiHik»'*«iiaHBbKidaB«faii  it 
^Mfti  bikMiiMial  «4i'  tiaiL  Ijjii  limmrl  tein|p»  iw  hm—i 

^i^ttAvuiiH  1.  nuMh  «iviik>  U^   -k  luipA  ami  w;  itznof 

>iM|i«H  ^  >«iMv  LliMi  IHM  iJMltamK  tittfr  tnaiKii 

AH*«v*i  ^i%A  < Iml  ^tittwr  oM  tint  iiaUicnir  siiJMi  a£  cbft  vail  t£  the 
-iM|i%ik  <MiiM  'iM««i  i«i.Hiutiw  «ftM  hiMMrma  ia  ham 

\  >^H  \«j^^    v^  ^M«  ^iiM  H -iKiiiaiaaHQr  biiMaLd^ 

H^  A  ^»4Hs4  ^^twk  t  tK.  ■  ntM»>  vH  » -^miinmn^  gdbm».  tut  maut  f  il 
'iiW»  ««i%*^<rMM   M^Hi  ^v  HMMi  >unim|itLiihivjl^iiiviB(ainMi- 

:4Wm\iS   (  .    g%l    tilt«^  v<4Mailt»KN  ^^MMI^  I  ^(ttMlL  Qtlltnil  fcwtftg— M^  ; 
^^m*  t    aHA.  tK|l%  4A»II^  UK»r  '•IIMMillMK^  ^«i«tt 


FALENQUE  AND   CCII-AI 


75 


parent  •ttme,  of  a  BubsUnce  much  nioie  Taluablu  than  the  ehay .-  on 
tbesnrlKC  of  this  tablet  the  tiaXy  wateuppowd  to  gives  repreaen- 
tktiuu  or  tbc  fate  that  awaited  the  crinuiial ;  il'  the  decision  of  the 
judges  Vina  approved,  the  sentence  was  iiDniedintcly  inflicted ;  on 
till.-  cuntnuj,  if  nothing  appeared  on  the  stone,  tUc  nccu«ed  v/ta  set 
t  liberty;  tltis  oracle  wits  a\fO  consulted  in  the  ufTairs  of  ivur."* 
Plia  »Ub  it  now  the  top  of  the  grand  altar  in  ibc  Roman  Cntholie 
arch  of  TEcpsnguat«mala,  s  village  about  Gvu  luilcs  from  ita 


g  of  Cbinpai,  Juarros  «ays, — "  It  is  beyond  eontroversy 

It  thii  preTtnce  wis  inhabited  by  a  powerful  and  polished  people, 

with  the  Egyptians,  a«  the  snnii^ 

I   of  Chalhuucan  and  Tulha.   vestiges   of  which  yet 

'  the  towna  of  Polenquc  and  Ocosingo,  evidently  demon- 

In   the   tint,   Buaie   reiuwuing   buildings   are    objects   oi 

Oion,  and  aflbrd  sulficieiil  evidence  that  Chulbuocan  once 

)  tnagnilicence  the  most  celebrated  capitals  of  the  old 

lorld.     Stately  temples,  in  wbich  many  hieroglyphic*,  synibols, 

TJtca,  and  traces  of  Ikbuluus  mytliology  hare  misted  the  uRecta 

r  time,  portions  of  superb  palacu  xlill  remnin,  and  an  aqueduct 

lufficknt  dimcuEion*  for  a  man  to  wiilk  upright  in  yetewsla 

t^vious  however,  to  the  arrival  uf  the  Spaniards, 

lo  much  declined  from  ils  ancient  splendour,  that 

f  (band  Mitber  inhabited  city  nor  building  worthy  of  their 

<r  polity  of  the  inhabilBntt."t 

K  remuns,  and  others  before  referred  to,  there  arc  sonie 

«C  (owns.     Of  HMny  places  only  records  or  traditions  now 

.  Aniongthe  Indian  fortresses,  ihemostrenownedwerethose 

I  if  Umh  Porrucquio.  Socoleo,  Utpantlan,  Chslcilan,  and  several 

B^  of  wbiefa  there  are  few  and  uncertain  vestigvs.    ])ut  not  ihe 

I  the  wrecks  of  former  grandeur  an;  the  great 

uof  Coptn,  the  great  slone  hammock,  and  thceaveof  Tibulcft, 

a  ibe  valley  of  Copdn,  once  the  site  of  an  ojiulent  city, 

ibe  court  of  the  caciqnc  Cop&n-CrtlcL     "  Francisco  de  Puentes, 

ulio  wrow  the  chronicles  of  this  kingdom,  assures  us  that  in  hia 

liBie,  llwl  is,  in  the  year  1700,  [he  great  circus  of  CopAn,  still 

1  entire.     Thii  wh  a  circular  space  surrounded  by  Mone 

!•  ohonl  aix  yards  high,  and  Tury  wcU  eonstructcd ;  at  (he 

(  JuMTfH,  I'.  JUS. 


76  THS  GOBML  121  CSimiLli  AMBRICA. 

bMb  of  Uieae  pynmys  irere  tgucsi  boUi  male  and  female,  of 
Twy  exceUent  9culplure»  whidi  Uicn  retained  the  eolouTB  they  had 
heen  enamelled  with ;  and  what  was  not  leas  remaikable,  the  whole 
of  them  were  hahiled  in  the  Cutiliaa  costnme.  In  the  middle  of 
thia  area,  eleTated  ahore  a  l%ht  of  stcpa^  was  the  place  of  sacri- 
flee«  The  same  author  relales  thai,  at  a  short  diilance  from  the 
eirtua,  there  was  a  postal  coostmctcd  of  stone,  on  the  columns  of 
whkh  w«re  the  figurw  of  men,  likewise  represented  in  Spanish 
hahits,  hose,  rulf  round  the  neck,  9word,  cap^  and  short  doak.  On 
enlmi^  the  ^latewaj^  there  are  two  line  stone  pjramidsii  moderately 
lai|^  and  lofty,  troai  whkh  is  suspended  a  hammnrk  that  contains 
two  human  l^m,  one  of  ea^  sex,  dolhed  in  the  Indian  style. 
Astonishment  is  tordUr  exetted  on  riewing  this  structure,  hecanae^ 
large  as  it  is,  there  is  no  appenranee  of  the  component  parts  heing 
joined  together ;  and  ahhou^  entirely  of  stone,  and  c^  an  enor^ 
mous  weight,  it  may  be  put  in  motkn  by  the  sQglitest  impulse  of 
the  hand*  Not  fiur  firom  this  hammock  »  the  care  of  Tibuka; 
this  appears  like  a  temple  of  great  sik,  hollowed  out  of  the  base  of 
a  hill,  and  adonwd  with  columns,  haring  bases,  pcdeitili!,  capitals, 
and  crowns,  all  accurately  adjusted  aecordiqg  to  architectural 
principles ;  at  the  sides  are  numerous  windows,  freed  with  stone 
exquisitely  wrought.  All  these  circumstances,**  adds  Juama^ 
^  lead  to  a  belief  that  there  must  hare  been  some  inlerconrae 
between  the  inhabitants  of  the  oU  and  of  the  new  world  at  TCiy 
remote  perkMb.*** 

As  to  the  goTcmment  and  laws  of  the  Tndian%  Juama  s^i^— 
*^  CommenciQg  with  that  of  suecessaon  to  the  throne^  it  waa  or> 
dained  that  the  eldest  son  of  the  king  should  inherit  the  crown; 
upon  the  second  son  the  title  of  £l£<i  was  cosderred,  as  being  the 
next  heir  to  his  elder  brother ;  the  sons  of  the  ddest  son  leueitad 
the  title  of  Captain  senior,  and  those  of  the  second,  Ckplainjnmor. 
When  the  king  died,  his  eldest  son  assumed  the  sccptie,  and  the 
dect  became  the  immediate  inheritor;  the  Captain  sensor  aaecnded 
to  the  rank  of  elect,  the  C^>tatn  junior  to  thnt  of  Ckptun  senior, 
and  the  next  nearest  rektire  to  that  of  Captain  junior.  AdvuneNg 
thus  by  gradations  to  the  throne,  the  monarchs  began  their 
ail  mature  i^ge,  in  posse  wion  of  many  quaHficalinns,  and 
pcfience  both  in  civil  and  military  goTonmeni.    Bnl  if  anty 


H^  fil'lcni — GOVFlltNMUNT  AND   LAWS.  77 

of  ifacw  four  personages  was  found  to  lie  incapable  of  governing, 

be  reninined  in  big  first  rank  until  hia  death,  and  the  next  nearest 

IS  rais(:d  to  the  superior  dignity. 

"  The  snpremc  council  of  the  monarch  of  Quiche  was  composed 

^  twenty- fow  grnndees.  with  whom  the  king  deliberated  on  all 

I   and   military  aETairs.     These   counsellors  were   invested 

h  great  distinctions  and  many  privil^cs ;  they  carried  the  em- 

ft  {cror  on  ihtar  shoulders  in  his  chair  of  state  whenever  he  quitted 

LUi  pttlace,  but  they  were  severely  punishetl  if  they  committed  any 

The  odniinist ration  of  justice,  and  the  collection  of  the 

revenues,  were  under  their  charge. 

"  The  king  appointed  ten  lieutenants  in  the  principiil  towns  of 

■  em^re,  who  enjoyed  great  honours,  large  emoluments,  and 

iC  authority,  except  in  cases  that  concerned  the  rights  or 

^  of  the  ahan*,  (heads  of  nohle  lineage},  which  were  re- 

to  the  supreme  council.    If  these  deputies  neglected  their 

or  committed  offences,  they  were  speedily  removed,  and 

y  chastised ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  when  they  governed  with 

radcDce  and  impartiality,  without  giving  the  subject  cause   of 

mjiiaint,  they  were  retained   in  their   po^ts,   distinguished   by 

eater  honours,  and,  as  a  mark  of  respect  to  their  merits,  their 

a  frequently  succeeded  to  their  offices. 

"  These  lieutenants  of  the  king,  or  corrcgidors  of  districts,  had 

ncils,  to  which,  as  well  as  in  the  supreme  council, 

n  «iy  fauaincas  of  superior  moment  that  concerned  the  public 

a  debated,  the  chiefs  of  tlie  colputs  or  nobles  were  invoked 

■  tkctue  tbcir  opinions;  if  the  alTair  related  to  war,  the  nio»t  ex- 

d  commanders  were  consulted. 

ices  of  lieutenants  and  counsellors,  and  even  down  to 
N  dour-keepers  of  the  coancil,  none  hut  those  of  noble  race  were 
d  there  was  do  instance  of  any  person  being  appointed 
»  public  office,  high  or  low,  who  was  not  selected  from  the 
Nlity ;  for  which  reason,  great  anxiety  wus  felt  by  them  to  keep 
ty  of  their  lineage  unsullied.  To  ]ircserve  this  rank  un- 
n  blood,  it  was  decreed  by  the  law  that  if  any  cacique  OT 
should  marry  a  woman  who  was  not  of  noble  family,  he 
1  be  degraded  to  the  cat  of  mazegual,  or  plebeian,  OKsume 
e  of  bis  wife,  be  subject  to  all  the  duties  and  services 
d  upon  plebeiana,  and  his  estate:  be  seigucstrated  to  the  king. 


78  THE  GOePRL  IN  CKMTRAL  AMBBTCA. 

lesviog  him  only  a  soffidcncy  for  a  decent  iwinteiMmce  in  his 
i^iere  of  mazeguaL 

**  They  had  their  penal  kws  also ;  the  king  was  liable  to  be  tried, 
andf  if  convicted  of  extreme  cruelty  and  tyiannyy  was  deposed  by 
the  ahagnaes,  who  for  this  purpose  assembled  a  ooundl  with  great 
secrecy ;  the  next  in  succession  according  to  law  was  pkoed  on 
the  throne,  and  his  ejected  predecessor  punished  by  confiscation  of 
all  his  property,  and,  as  some  writers  affirm,  put  to  death  by 
decapitation. — (Torquemada,  part  iL  chap.  8).  If  a  queen  was 
guilty  of  adultery  with  a  noble  person,  both  she  and  the  aocom|dice 
were  strangled ;  but  if,  forgetting  her  dignity,  she  had  eriminal 
intercourse  with  a  commoner,  they  were  thrown  from  a  Teiy  high 
rock. 

'*  If  the  ahagnaes  impeded  the  collection  of  the  tributes,  or  were 
fomenters  of  any  conspiracy,  they  were  condemned  to  death,  and 
all  the  members  of  their  families  sold  as  slaves. 

**  Whoever  was  guilty  of  crimes  against  the  king  or  the  liberties 
of  the  country,  or  convicted  of  homicide,  was  punished  by  death, 
the  sequestration  of  pn^rty,  and  slavery  of  his  relations. 

'^  Robbers  were  sentenced  to  pay  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen, 
and  a  fine  besides ;  for  the  second  offence,  the  fine  was  doubled ; 
and  for  the  third,  they  were  punished  with  death,  unless  the  cal- 
pul  would  redeem  them ;  but  if  they  tran^ressed  a  fourth  time, 
they  were  thrown  from  a  rock. 
Rape  was  punished  by  death. 

Incendiaries  were  deemed  enemies  of  their  country ;  because, 
said  the  law,  fire  has  no  bounds,  and  by  setting  fire  to  one  house,  a 
whole  town  might  be  destroyed;  and  this  would  be  public  treason. 
Therefore  death  was  the  punishment  awarded  against  the  perpe- 
trator, and  his  family  was  banished  from  the  kingdom. 

**A  Simarron,  or  runaway  from  the  authority  of  his  master, 
paid  a  fine  to  his  calpul  of  a  certain  quantity  of  blankets ;  but  the 
second  offence  was  punished  by  death. 

**  The  stealing  of  things  sacred,  the  profanation  of  the  templef, 
and  contumacy  of  the  papas,  or  ministers  of  the  idols,  subjected  the 
offender  to  the  punishment  of  death,  and  all  his  family  were 
declared  infamous. 

*^They  had  a  law,  which  is  still  in  use,  that  whenever  a  young 
man  wished  to  marry,  he  was  bound  to  serve  the  parents  of  h»  in- 


u 


■  AHISTOCnATIP   SPIRIT.  79 

tended  wife  f^ir  a  certain  time,  and  make  them  ttJpnlnted  presents ; 
but  if  they  afterwards  rejected  his  proposals,  they  were  compelicil 
turn  llic  things  received,  and  serve  him  an  equal  number  of 

a  Bpile  of  the  admiration  which  our  historian  expresses  for  the 
idoin  iHsphijed  in  a  certain  portion  of  their  laws,  he  admits  that 
le  of  tbeni  are  not  so  very  reasonable,  while  others  arc  even 

tngnant  to  nature,  deserving  to  be  hranded  for  (heir  cnielty. 
B  the  last,  he  cite*  the  manner  of  bringing  an  offender  to 
Critil,  who  Id  no  caee  had  the  privilege  of  appeal.  "When  hronght 
licfore  tlie judge,  if  be  confessed  his  crime,  be  was  tmmediatclj  taken 
from  the  tribunal  to  undergo  ihc  punishment  awarded  by  the  law*; 
but  if  he  dented  the  charge,  he  was  cruelly  tortured — he  was 
itrippcd  naked,  suspended  l)y  the  thumbs,  and  in  that  situation 
severely  flogged,  and  then  tmoked  leith  chile." — (Torquemada,  pari 
ii.  lib.  13,  chap.  10.) 

Thewont  fenture  of  these  institntians  is,  however,  not  thecmelty 
of  their  penal  code,  kiarburous  as  that  must  appear  to  nil,  but 
rather  the  strongly  marked  aristocratic  spint  to  which  the  little 
wisdom  that  they  embody  is  made  sabservicnl,  and  which  must  have 
placed  them  as  a  people  in  the  position  of  mere  serfs  and  rnssals  of 
the  ahuos  or  nobility.  Kor  can  the  splendour  of  their  cities,  and 
the  magitifioence  of  their  courts,  atone  for  the  evils  that  domestic 
slavery  ujust  have  occasioned,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ravages  of  war 
and  the  slill  more  abominable  concomitants  of  ihcir  Uod-dis- 
hanouriiig  idolatry. 

The  last  trait  which  we  have  been  able  to  discover  is  one  whicli 
b  greatly  to  their  credit.  It  is  the  evident  importance  they 
d  to  the  instruction  of  the  Jf  ung,  aueh  as  it  was.  Uemains 
X  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  when  treating  of 
tiicir  prrMtit  condition.  The  strong  testimony  of  the  histiiriau  on 
thit  mihjcct  is.  that,  "  in  the  rare  and  cducntioo  of  ticir  children, 
tbcy  rrx^mblcd  the  Lacedcuiiininit;,  Spanans,  Cretans,  and  the 
annt  poliifanl  nations  of  the  world.  They  hnil  sdiooU  in  all  fbcir 
ptindpa]  towat,  both  for  bnyt;  and  girl« ;  the«e  were  uudvr  the 
tttpKriuf  codence  of  elderly  cxpcrieticcd  [iersonii."t 

It  n,  havrcvcr,  important  and  exceedingly  interesting,  ks  hear- 
ing upon  tile  auppoKd  Jciiish  ori^n  uf  the  IVItcc  or  Quiche 

*  Jium«r. into  M.  4  TfiTliicQiiiK  pnil  ti.  cLip.  S§. 


80  THB  Goanu.  nr  cbmtral  am  ebica. 

mtioiis  of  whom  we  have  been  spesking,  to  obserre  that,  after  a 
cuefbl  iiiTestigatioii  of  their  reoordB,  though  the  native  historians 
do  not  appear  to  have  noticed  it,  ii  does  not  appear  thai  human 
saertfiees  were  customary  among  them*  This  horrid  practioe  was 
almost,  if  not  entirely,  confined  to  the  Aztec  or  Mexican  nations ; 
and  where  it  did  exist  in  the  territories  now  comprised  in  Central 
America,  it  seems  to  have  heen  confined  to  those  tribes,  not  of  the 
Toltec  race,  who  had  come  from  the  countries  further  north.  Some 
of  these,  like  the  Pinnies,  who  were  settled  along  the  shores  of  the 
Pacific,  had  been  gradually  introduced  into  the  less  populous  lands 
imder  the  pretext  of  commerce,  with  a  view  to  prepare  the  way  for 
the  conquest  of  the  Toltec  nations  by  Autzol,  the  eighth  king  of 
Mexico,  who,  having  been  repulsed  in  more  overt  attempts  to  subdue 
them,  thus  endeavoured  to  accomplish  his  object  by  stratagem.*  In 
the  few  places  where  Juarros  speaks  of  human  sacrifices  having 
been  offered  to  the  idols  Camanelon  and  Edndanquen^  they  were 
evidently  perpetrated  in  districts  so  peopled^  and  by  other  Indians 
than  those  of  Toltec  origin. 

Juarros  again  unwittingly  furnishes  us  with  strong  presumptive 
evidence  that  human  sacrifices  were  not  generaUy  practised  in 
Central  America.  Writing  of  these  very  Fipil  Indians,  he  says, 
that,  on  account  of  their  vast  increase,  '^  the  Quiche  and  KacJiiquels 
began  to  fear  they  would  soon  become  formidable  enough  to  assume 
the  sovereignty  of  the  territory  they  inhabited,  and,  therefore, 
■ought  every  opportunity  of  oppressing  them.  The  FipUea,  on 
the  other  hand,  were  not  less  determined  to  preserve  their  newly 
acquired  possessions,  and  maintain  the  credit  of  their  anns;  aooord- 
ingly  they  resolved  (but  as  the  Pipil  MS^  fol.  2,  says,  not  without 
secret  advice)  to  establish  a  military  force  in  the  same  manner  as 
had  been  prescribed  by  Autzol.  It  happened,  however,  that  the 
chie&  of  these  troops,  who  held  the  supreme  authority  of  the  nsdoo, 
exerted  it  tyrannically  over  the  people,  by  exacting  excessive  tribotes, 
and  practising  enormous  extortions.  These  were  rendered  still  more 
galling  by  the  conduct  of  the  principal  cacique,  Cuaucmichin,  who 
attempted  to  introduce  the  practice  of  human  sacrifices,  according  to 
the  rites  of  the  Mexican  idolatry^  and  as  an  unequivocal  proof  of 
his  intention,  seized  some  men  who  were  held  in  high  estimation 
l>y  the  whole  community,  for  his  devoted  victims.  Exasperated  by 

*  Jiuunroi^  p.  8SS. 


ua  act  so  utrocioos,  the  people  suddenly  aUacked  the  residence  of 
Cuaucmiclun,  uid  in  their  tary  beat  him  to  death  with  clubs  and 

b  abo  worlfaf  or  notice  that  tbc  Aztecs  were  ever  the  most 
e  and  dctennincd  opponents  of  the  SpaDianlB,  aiul  that  the 
!,  who  were  of  a  mililer  or  tamer  character,  either  sought 
[r  nlliance,  or  eooner  submittul  lo  their  ewuj ;  and  wbca  sub- 
gated  CTiilured  ihc  yoke  far  more  patiently  than  those  Indians 
d  wlio  ynte  not  of  the  sc 

n  tiithccoii<[ueit  of  Mexico  this  ititTcrcnci-ot'diapositionmny 
IS  among  the  first  and  most  faithful  allies  of  the  Spa- 
Is  arenambercd  theniaewho  InhabitL'dTula.  from  which  Nimn- 
nigiBlcd  with   the   swarm   which   founded   the   QuichS 
This  is  ftilly  corrobomted  by  Juarro*,  whe;i  he  Buys,  that 
e  priucipal  Imlians,  who  came  with  the  Spanuirda  from  Mexico 
I  TloKkhi  (to  Guatemala),  persuaded  of  the  identity  of  their 
i!  tluit  of  the  people  of  this  country  (Central  America). 
1  ^icmgdccs  relations  and  friends   Ibrnied  more  intimate 
«  by  intermarriages  with  the  Clulcii^?,  and  gave  them  a 
r  the  iastmmeDt  by  which  tlicy  bod  received  from  tbc 
or,  Charles  the  Fiith,  the  honour  of  a  coit  of  amis,  for  the 
crriees  they  had  rendered  to  the  Sjianisb  army  in  the  con- 
f  New  Spain."! 
E  trbu  ynn  there  in  nil  or  anything  brought  under  our 
I  nway  t!ic  5Word  of  the  avenger.    AUs  !  nothing; 
tfon  S  captirity  nearly  as  long  na  that  which  the  children  of 
I  folTered  in  Egypt,  was  the  discipline  to  which  the  GoJ  of 
roTldence  saw  lit  to  sul^ect  them. 


•  Jimrem,  p.  is;. 


J 


98  TBB  006PBL  IN   CBNTBAL   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER    V. 


SCBJUGATIOM. 


"Jni  Oefwrik  kin^i^m  tUa  he  9tnm§  mm  •rMi,'*-Bu.  ii.  40. 

Hie  InttnuneBt  tad  the  Resolre— MoBteinma*t  Metnge  to  the  King  of  Qnich^  — 
IHvinrra  Consulted— Appointment  of  Alv«ndo*s  Expedition— Tecnm  Unuun*s  Anny 
ftnd  Defencet— Progms  of  the  Inr«den— XcUhuh  Entered— Treachery  at  Utalkn— 
Yinnl  Defoit  of  tho  Qnich^  -Snbminioa  of  the  Kn^iquel  Monarch— Caoqaest  of  the 
Sutugilt  and  othor  Tribes— Cort^  in  Uoadnraa— Rerolt  of  the  Qoicfa^  and  Kachiqnels 
—Second  Sul^ugatioa  —  FoundatioA  of  the  Capital  —  ExpcditJons  against  U^antai^ 
Copaa,  and  Estetc*s  Invasion- Ahrarado  Goremor. 

The  ancient  Iberian  or  Spanish  race,  tinged  with  Ishmaelitish 
blood,  vrere,  in  the  hand  of  God,  the  instmment  with  which  he 
scourged  the  sanguinaiy  idolaters  and  infanticides  of  Central  and 
8oathcm  America.  The  iron  yoke  was  not,  howerer,  imposed 
without  struggles  and  mighty  throes  on  the  part  of  the  op- 
pressed ;  nor  were  its  restraints  perpetuated  without  nnieimtting 
watchfulness  and  constantly  renewed  efforts  on  the  part  of  the 
oppressor. 

Scarcely  had  Cort^  established  this  yoke  of  supremacy  in  Mezioo» 
when  reports  reached  him  of  other  nations  &rther  south  upon 
whose  necks  it  might  be  fastened.  Forthwith  he  resdved  upon 
their  subjugation  also,  and  in  his  fourth  letter  to  his  soTCtdgn, 
Charles  the  Fifth,  he  informed  him  that  he  had  even  then  directed 
an  expedition  to  proceed  to  Guatemala,  for  which  he  aaaigned  the 
following  reasons : — **  I  hare  received  information  as  well  of  the 
great  ridies  of  that  country,  as  that  in  the  opinion  of  many  navi- 
gators there  exists  a  strait  leading  from  that  bay  [probably  the  Bay 
of  Honduras,  which  he  had  visited]  into  the  ojqpoeite  sea,  whidi  is 


ph  oowojticatobs. 


'Id  I  ant  desirous  of  mcet- 
utilitj  nhich   I  am  coa- 

ndvaDtagi;  of  your  Imperial 


t  thing  above  oil  othcn  i: 
yriib,  on  account  of  tlic  i 
Tinced  would  remit  from  i: 
M^csty." 

It  is  alreaitj  apparent  that  ihcrc  existed  some  dogree  of  affinity 
_betwEen  the  reigning  monarchs  of  Quich*  and  the  Eniptrora  of 
Tbat  there  was  al^o  a  good  underelanding  between  the 
e  Montezuma  and  Kicab-Tauiib,  the  eon  of  Kicab  IV, 
n  tilled  the  throne  of  Utatlaa,  appears  from  the  fact  that 
miezuma,  upon  hearing  of  the  proposed  expedition  directed 
i(  the  south  country,  though  himself  narrowly  watched,  con- 
"scnd  a  private  ambassador  to  Kicab-Tanub,  king  of 
3  inform  him  that  some  trhite  men  bod  arrived  in  his 
I,  and  made  war  upon  him  with  such  impetuosity  that  the 
bole  strength  of  hii  people  was  unable  to  resist  them ;  that  he 

0  himself  a  prisoner  surrounded  by  guards ;  and  hearing  It  was 
a  of  his  invaders  to  pass  on  to  the  kingdom  of  Quicli*:, 

1  subdue  it,  he  sent  notice  of  the  design  in  order  that  Kicab- 
muh  m^t  be  prepared  to  oppose  them."* 
Thin  extract  is  taken  from  tile  fourth  page  of  a  MS.  of  16  quarto 

folios,  which  was  preserved   by  tht!  Indians  of  the  village  of  San 

Andres  XecuL    The  same  manuscript  also  relates  (at  pages  5  and 

6),  "that  OS  soon  as  the  king  of  Quichf  received  this  intelligence, 

•  aent  fur  four  young  diviners,  whom  he  ordered  to  tell  him  what 

Mid  be  the  result  of  the  invasion.    These  persons  requested  time 

k'glTe  ihrir  answer,  and,  taking  their  bows,  they  discharged  some 

rock,  but  seeing  that  no  impression  was  left  upon 

Ei^  they  returned  very  BorrowfuUy,  and  told  the  king  that  there 

I  no  means  of  avoiding  the  disaster,  for  the  white  men  ivouid 

:«inly  conquer  them.     Kicab,  not  well  aalisScd  with  the  reply, 

t'  fbr  llle  priests,  and  desired  to  have  their  opinions  on   this 

tntfal  aobjcct ;  with  great  lamentations,  they  delivered  a  similar 

~e  of  disaster  to  their  monarch,  founding  their  conclusion 

B  tbc  ominous  circumstance  of  a  certain  stone  ickich  had  btat 

^htbglhar/orefalhm/raia  Egypt,  and  which  unuworMpptd 

t  B  C«rf,  having  suddenly  split  in  t>vo ;  an  incident  that  portended 

•  iDcritable  ruin  of  their  empire.''"    These  things  did  not  deter 

■  luBg  tnm  warlike  prepsrations  on  a  taigc  scale,  in  making 

•Juiir«,r.  100,107. 

«s 


\ 


84  THE   GOSPEL    IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

which,  he  expected  and  solicited  the  co-operation  of  the  other 
branches  of  the  Toltec  nations ;  but  in  this  he  was  disappointed, 
as  the  king  of  the  Sntugils  replied  most  contemptuously  to  his 
application,  saying,  that  his  people  could  defend  themselyes  un- 
assisted against  the  threatened  danger ;  and  Sinacan,  actuated  by 
displeasure  at  aome  assistance  which  the  king  of  Quiche  had  ren- 
dered to  his  enemies,  refused  the  alliance  and  openly  declared  himself 
a  friend  to  the  Teuks  (or  gods),  by  whose  means  he  hoped  to  be 
revenged.  Galled  at  this  treatment,  and  probably  terror-stricken, 
as  well  as  worn  out  with  fatigue,  arising  out  of  the  strenuous 
efforts  he  was  making  to  maintain  his  independence,  Kicab-Tanub 
sank  into  a  premature  grave.  His  son.  Tecum  Umam,  on  coming 
to  the  kingdom,  had  but  little  leisure  to  indulge  in  sorrow  for  the 
loss  of  his  deceased  parent,  as  the  tzamaheles,  or  couriers,  almost 
hourly  brought  him  advice  of  the  approach  of  the  Spaniards, 
and  called  his  attention  to  warlike  dispositions. 

The  officer  who  had  been  chosen  by  Cort^  to  head  this  expedi- 
tion was  Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado — one  who,  by  former  services, 
had  proved  himself  worthy  of  his  confidence,  and  well  qualified  for 
so  important  a  conunand.      K  the  Spaniards  had  by  this  time 
lost  some  of  the  prestige  \iihich  at  first  was  so  greatly  in  their 
favour,  they  had  also  acquired  no  small  experience  in  the  peculiar 
kind  of  warfare  by  which  they  had  so  successfully  overcome  the 
Aztec  nations ;  and  now  they  added  to  their  experience  and  un- 
doubted valour,  not  only  the  peculiar  advantage  and  novelty  of 
their  arms  and  tactics,  but  also  great  numbers  of  warlike  followers 
— Tlascalans,  Mexicans,  and  Cholutecans,  who  had  become  their 
allies,  or  rather  their  willing  tools.    These,  under  Spanish  officers, 
they  trained,  directed,  and  encouraged  by  their  own  example,  in  a 
manner  that  must  have  rendered  even  natives  more  terrible  to  the 
assailed  tribes  than  any  foes  they  had  ever  yet  encountered.    Bat, 
notwithstanding  all  these  advantages,  it  was  not  without  great 
cBfficulty  that  these  forces  were  enabled  to  advance  into  the  enemy'a 
country,  not  only  for  want  of  roads  and  bridges,  but  chiefly  on 
account  of  the  determined  resistance  offered  by  some  of  the  hostile 
nations  situated  on  their  line  of  march. 

The  district  of  Soconnsoo,  bordering  on  the  F^ficand  inhmbtted 
by  the  Pipil  Indians,  was  the  part  of  the  country  first  entered  (m 
1524),  but  it  does  not  appear  that  it  was  entirely  subdued  till  after 


TECUM   unam'k  All»y.  85 

the  conqiMct  of  tbe  Quiche  The  fierce  Indiatiii  of  Tonok  were, 
kowcver,  dcrotcd  in  their  nsuliitt?  np[iasltioo  lu  the  iDvading 
toy,  which  wbs  composed  nt  m<Mt  of  250  Spanish  intittitr)',  ISO 
/,  4,000  Mexican  tlUes,  and  a  few  small  pieces  of  ortillery. 
;  as  rapidly  over  this  district  as  the  jnngle,  the  uunieroua 
\a  aiid  rivers,  the  deep  rapines,  and  tlie  inlervening  chains  of 
iiounUiiis  which  they  had  topasR,  would  pcniut,tliey  directed 
r  march  upon  "  Xelahah  (or  QuesallenBugo).  the  largest,  best 
nOi!t  important  place  In  the  kingdom  uf  Quiche, 
^bich  had  at  that  time  within  its  walls  a  force  of  80,000  m^a  for 
li  defence." 

f  Tecum  tTuuun,  thongh  well  prepnreil,  through  the  proTJJcnce  of 
o  oppose  Tonalteul  (the  sun  of  God)  and  his  Tcolen, 
t  divinilies,  for  thus  did  the  Indians  designate  Alvurado  and  his 
so  affected  hy  tlie  Ihme  of  their  exploitn  that  his 
Bi[idenE«  b^ian  to  waver.  "  He  quitted  his  capital  to  meet  them 
lith  greit  pomp,  borne  in  his  litter  on  the  shoulders  of  the  princi- 
ll  men  in  hk  kingdoin,  preceded  by  tlic  muaic  of  intta,  comets, 
iBd  drums,  anil  70,000  men  comioandcd  by  bis  principal  general, 
Eol,  bis  UeulcnBat,  Ahmmanchc.  the  grand  shield -bearer,  Ahpo- 
,  nmny  other  officers  of  greut  dlgiiiiy,  nnd  a  great  number  of 
rnrlatita  bearing  pftrawis  and  fans  of  fenttiera  lor  the  use  of 
B  rvval  pcr«nn,  all  well  armed  and  prepared  lor  a  vigorous  re- 
'  ITiis  army,  followed  liy  nn  immense  number  of  Taniames 
19  of  burdens,  moveil  hut  ^luw!3•.  By  the  junction  of 
1  ehle&,  bringing  up  ttieir  lorces  from  eight  strong  towns 
d«fgbl«en  villages  within  their  jurisdiction,  it  was  soon  incn; 
tn  90,000  lighling  men.  "  He  conlJiiued  his  march  to  (juesalte- 
nango,  where  he  was  joined  by  ten  mort  chiefs  with  magnificent 
xias,  wdl  anned  and  supplied  with  provision));  displajing  all  the 

■  iosignia  of  their  rank,  and  attended  by  24,000  soldiei 
kf  ibc  atme  place  be  was  reinforced  by  46,000  more  combatant!!, 

d  with  plumes  of  different  colours,  and  provided  with  a: 

f  etery  description  i  the  chiefs  were  decorated  with  the  skim 

MS  ttgtrs,and  bears,  aadistinguislied  marks  of  their  bravery  i 

■rlikeproweffi:  thisnumerous^quadron  was  commanded  by  eleven 

«,  all  dcKcndanlt  of  the  renowned  Cftpiclioch.   Tecum  Umnm, 

nflli  all  these  reinforcement*,  now  maiBholled  33'i,000  warriors 

muler  hi*  bannera.    The  different  divisioiis  were  posted  on 


pheed  asUnt 
llKMttker.  ABl^iecMiitiyfa— Tnceahato 
"^Air  CBMU  ^ms  4iuiupipd  \^  t^  iqaadnms  of 

JDMBW  iicfifatified  towns ; 
n>ir:iWwr  ^«fir  -upvenlsiflittzy  Tiurhinri,  «r  Ball  portable 
tfftaDwmd  plBi^mindi,  tenig  fkaoed  mt  rollas, 
«Mnw«i^  jhm  f«r  place  to  jmadierli^snned  sen;  tiboe  were 
'^UM  Willi  ^mK  qawiritirf;  of  pikes.,  ainws,  Imoea,  aUddi,  dings, 
«i£  tQittM^  md  ■ngndod  ^  diosen  bodieit  of  active  aolfien.  who 
jwirtainQ  ^ic  Timnttimw;  to  the  diflcrent  SMaaut  af  Ae  araay.**^ 
3&ntwiiii9bnidnig  the  great  adrantagCB  whadk  the  %aBiaid8  pos- 
ite  enonDOQii  annj  m^xst  Inre  onartfntnd  a  ibnnidable 
;  snditappean  thvt  t^  vt m**ff^  i^naTt^y^.— 3  pwpt^ianflp 
«f  t^  invaden  were  called  into  action  ere  th^  ooaU  €%cicome  it. 
Bendes  the  cHIBmltiw  preaentad  by  the  natnre  of  dK  cammtiy^  the 
,  to  retard  their  pragreaa,  cat  manrdeep  tacuLhefc  in  the  way, 
artfoDj  oorered  them  orer.  llieae  at  £xst  «ooaBOBed  some 
loss,  and  ibroed  them  to  proceed  with  great  cantian,  «r  to  deviate 
ftvm  the  direct  line  of  march.  Further  on,  tlie  asHoled  placed  a 
fiVBt  nnmbcr  of  what  would  now  be  called  caltrops  m  the  way. 
B^  these  the  ieet  of  men  and  bosses  were  gnevosniywoKoded,  and 
■HHT  crfthesepomts  being  poisoned,  in  two  or  thigediyswcsianiied 
^eath  in  agonies  of  thint.  1^  means  of  ambnaoades  the  Indians 
also  harrassed  their  ywailanta,  who,  witct  taking  dK  ftaoag  place 
and  oK^leof  Xetnhil  or  SapotiUan  in  the  monaiaiss,  Im^shtno 
laii  than  tan  «r  twdre  actions  with  laige  bodiesof  Tconm  Umam^s 
Ibrcw  <fl<c  they  usacbed  Xehhnh. 

A^taiiiitihcmisBika,poisQDedan«wB,&c.,  wUii  were  ahowcnd 
liii  «i#M»iiihing  aihondanoc  by  their  opponeat^ 
%  irfuml  VMiami^  ywiec^ed  \y  «  kind  of  qniltod  jadDet  or  looae  coat, 
HWi^M  "i^*^  «<illMit  wlikili  they  wore.  Xlxir  hocaes  alao  were 
t^^s««yvV,  a^%Wl^i4(?s  w«ii>c  breastplates  and  helBaeta,idiich  snffi- 
inm^  nwstwuilfc  ^  tW  «ioiMi|ianitive  lanslhirai  of  their 


nVASIOK   ( 


«i-ic 


87 


)t  being  SI)  well  provideLl,  were  slain  ii 


But  tbcir  MexicBo  aMief,  a 
great  numbers. 

in  the  defile  of  the  river  Olintepcque,  the  most  ilmpcratc  and 
sdy  engagement  toolc  place.  "  Tbu  stream  was  reddened  witli 
ic  ouTUge  of  the  wreCcbod  Indiana,  atid  from  tbat  time  its  name 
changed  for  the  aigniticant  one  of  Xiquigel,  or  the  river  of 
)d.  The  enemy  retired,  but  soon  lunued  again  with  fresh 
ktroops,  and  reiii:wed  the  contest.  They  attacked  the  CaatiUana 
ftirith  mch  furious  desperation,  that  three  or  four  of  them  seised 
Mthe  tail  of  each  horse,  and  endeavoured,  by  main  force,  to  ovcr- 
w  both  it  and  the  rider.  This  was  one  of  the  severest  conflicta 
t  which  the  Spaniards  had  hitherto  been  engaged ;  iraiuense 
ftbodica  of  the  enemy  surrounded  and  pressed  upon  tliem  in  all 
frectians^  but  their  courage,  superior  to  every  danger,  rescued 
tJiem  from  this  perilous  situation;  they  pierced  the  solid  Miuudroni 
of  the  Quiches,  broke  them,  and  totally  routed  the  whole  nriny. 
An  immense  number  was  led  dead  upon  the  field ;  amongst  them 
were  the  generals  Ahsumanche*  and  Aliiiol,  the  latter  ot  whom 
was  the  king's  near  kinsman ;  also  the  royal  shield-hcarL-r  Abpucob, 

I  who  commanded  a  large  division  of  the  army." 
<  Thia  defeat  was  not  fiual.  It  was,  however,  so  serious  a  check 
A>t  for  aome  time  the  SpaniardH  remained  unmolested  in  their 
IIBrGh.  On  the  fourth  day  after  it  they  entered  the  city  of 
KeUUub,  and  found  it  deserted  of  its  jnhNbitauts.  These  weiG 
plbaequently  induced  to  return,  and  afterwards  remained  taithful 
Id  the  Spanisnlfl-  Finding  that  all  the  forces  of  the  aurrounding 
muntr;  were  collecting  to  make  another  attack  upon  thcni,  and 
that  the  advanced  body  of  the  Indians  coaibted  of  two  xiquipiltt, 
or  16,000  men.  the  Spaniards  quitted  the  city,  and  took  up  a 
favourable  potitioo  on  a  plain.  Here  the  Indians  met  them,  led 
«D  by  Tecum  Umam  himself,  who  thrice  furiously  attacked  Alva- 
ndo  in  peraon,  and  once  wounded  his  horse  so  severely  that  he  was 
obliged  to  dismount  and  procure  another.  At  length  Alvarado 
indicted  upon  the  king  a  wound  with  his  lance,  trom  which  he 
died  almost  immediately.  U|Hjn  this  event  the  infuriated  Indians 
mad*  a  desperate  onslaught ;  they  were,  however,  finally  repulsed 
Vy  the  cIoh:  column  of  their  better  disciplined  enemies,  and  they 
brake  away  in  the  most  precipitate  Hight,  leaving  the  Spaniards 
completely  masters  of  the  field. 

*Jiurm.p.3Sll. 


8B  TUB 


Tb^  JmdSamhamg  nam  coa» 
ynneed  of  tiuar  in&riorxtv  to  their  »— iTimtiK  n^  batde^  mat  reamrted 
tm  ML  met  id  4ag^4aid  tnEndurr.  hr  rtBrtfas^  Ae  cKfktl  cky, 
ClugUifcyiiroKhit^  die  am.  •£*  Xkoiil  ITidbbl  bii  faBOBBdod  to  the 
auyiiKug  aarihirity  rf  thu  kiry-gnL,  Br  d^a^vke  of  kbcovnsel- 
te^  he  sent  sl  mufligy  t»i  Jkl'vocad*  wA  s  ^■■■^rrrT  ffcaent  of 
fdLL  ivmc  tlir  peax  sni  tiic^TC'iiaBv  oflaiug  sofeonHiaD,  mud  in- 
Yifekgr  cfte  *j:ttauiiwn>  scnir  t&  as  iiiifiiirwiiin  m  Ae  capiuL 
Ahtarmhi  cieaviBi  the  'Hiiiftiaiin  wic&  cbecho^  mdL  igtiaiug  some 
lBi'iHlii(r  uictulg  Qof^^c-  ftatiE;.  iBHVBpKctuiii^!^  aeetpted  the  proflend 
ovic^fiicuiiL  The  icunxiCTiiicf  sninr  ibeauaifiei  otk  d^  fcHwing  day 
ftr  CtadiQL  mt  Ikacti  f^vm.  icrofiihr  mr^Miah^  it  ^hesr  socBtsBi  and 
wjpgiifinc  tiku  wag  a»  tjomimnOBL  *^Bur  aa  enien^thecitTf  and 
dtemtiuic  Che-  4cr«eniec&  f if  ^e  trfioK*  c&at  it  vs  w«fl  waDed,  and 
iMmiiuiifnif  ^^  *■  <&KO»rsTattf.  ftuv^^r  %ii£  irv9  apprandke  to  k—the 

iaitlk  *9€  wftarh.  vwnr  cifiranelHr  utfrvw — &&a£  thr  strccta  vere  but 
aiTlc^&TC IKneaAdk  aoii dke  iksncje^ ¥«nr bftr:  pi  iiFiing,  afeo»  that 
tft«K^  wKnr  nxBBftiar  whwti  mnr  «c&ift£Rn  at  tkr  phrf»  aad  Aat  the 
Im&iifi^  ^^iats«i£  ^rnnfi^r  £rti£iB£.  t&e  mWrs  bcf^  Id  ao^Kct 
«nw  ^asiciil^  Yhat  ap^neftemnifv  wvre  9«aa  coafinaed  by  the 
Ifffiinr  <«ir  <(^naaAKaiiaicui.  «W  ^^afiraai^  hceooae  fi^mllj)  aceom- 
faowU  dht  «niry  :  t&cK  fiuil  t&miivercii  t&at  tfee  Fcople  of  Utatian 
iHMfdM  tlbtfi  8ik:ite  tki)«rt  dbt  tewa  «ai  Cr.  a  aider  tD  destroy  the 
^^rawiic^  »iil  tlbifi  I«rc«-  %«iift»  (HIT  thes  Iit  cvaoealed  in  the 
M^s^itSMurvfir'  «^'«$^^  w^  wvctei  »  svma  as  t^ey  wv  the  lamea^  to 
Ml  frfiM  (V  ^9llacttt:^  «»  dey  «Bd}eaTa«rai  to  csea^  froaa  die 

Cf^m  t^'T»  vxifocTBiieSMt  AvypcvciMiMl  «a 

^•y^^  «VHiii!Vi(  ^  iW  iiBt«w%%Bie>wiAiirawi 
«ffiM  IfJb!^  w^ Wtt  aoii^  ;ft(pfiMcaate  «ir 

tl^  <M4  «^«^  y«viv«l^  lh««  nipr  aC 

uMia  uiMlriw  ikikJ  th*  SSiMiiiMin^  >BiM#  aaaailiri  BaHiitaBeaMiiT  m  all 


aPBMIfiSION   c 

a  by  great  numbers  of  hifuriBted  Indiann ;  but  they  were  de- 
ore.     "The  aitilkry  was  brought  ioto  nctioa,  antl 
It  drendful  havoc  in  the  enemy's  ranks,  who,  hoivever,  inain- 
ined  the  contest  nith  dcs|icnLlc  valour  for  b  short  time,  but  they 
n  thrown  into  confusioa  ;  the  leaden  irere  unable  lo  rally 
:  bonlcs  against  tlie  destructive  fin;  of  llic  guns,  and  they 
banduDcd   »    lietd    nlreiuly   covered   uitii  heaps  of  etaia ;  some 
t>  tlior  jilaccs  of  refuge,  and  others  threw  away  tbeir  arma  in 
dcen  of  sufamiseiou,  and  tnrrcudered  themselves  and  their  enciques 
to  the  generosity  of  their  Gon.iueroni,  who  by  this  victory  remained 
nndifpicted  masters  of  the  kingdom."* 

The  victors  now  ventured  to  re-enter  Ulatlan,  and  remained 
e  daring  an  entire  week,  examining  the  eity,  eiploring  the 
ling  country ,  and  completing  the  conqutst  by  reeeiving  the 
1  of  adjncciit  villagea.  In  this  interval  Alvnrado  also 
idvod  ambusadors  from  tiiiiacaii,|  king  of  Guatemala,  who 
a  present  of  gold,  tendered  the  submission  of  their 
.  oSercd  auxiliary  troop»i,  anil  gave  him  an  invitation  to 
r  capital.  Alvanulo  was  pleased  to  receive  tliem  graciously, 
d  accepting  their  submission  and  invitation,  he  requested  that 
uen  might  be  sent  him  to  «cn'c  as  guides,  and  to  clear  the 
iT  the  fiirthcr  advance  of  his  anny. 
^'WTitli  cwnsnmmnte  policy  the  lipanifh  commander  continued  the 
ikblancc  of  Quicb6  royalty  in  the  legitimate  heir  to  the  throne. 
Itfon  Alvsrado  lelt  Uiatlan,  Scqnechul,  the  next  in  succession  to 
lavinoelut,  was  proclaimed  king.  The  command  of  the  Ibrees 
.n  ifac  province  was  depntcd  to  Leon  Cardonn,  and  tiicre- 
rort  ul  2,1)00  KBchi<|Uel  Indians  having  arrived,  AlvnTado 
lain  body  of  liii  Ibrces  moved  un  to  Guatemala. 
■  nut  without  undi»sciiihled  lears  of  treachefy,  and  contc- 
it  precautions,  thai  the  Spaniards  advanced  into  the  territories, 
D  after  entered  the  capital  of  (heir  new  ally.  Sinacvn, 
-,  diqicllcd  these  feelinga,  and  while  feasting  Alvarailo  he 
d  lUllc  lUfficnlly  in  )«tsuading  him  at  once  to  direct  hia  arms 
I  tbe  third  diviuon  of  the  (Quiche  empire,  now  become  the 
U  ftep  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose  to  subdue 
whole  coantry.  This  was  the  kingdom  of  Sulu^l,  the  o^ital 
Mlich  wu  Atitlan ;  it  was  also  called  Atziquinixai,  which,  in 
"  Juraatip.  590,  1  ftuciKo  Vuqun  alli  lliid  kia^  ApoUotiiL 


f)f 


ty^></«MijUi   IN   G£:<TftJLL  AMERICA. 


^y^'„^^9Mh-  »*«»*»  "'^'^«  Eagle's  House,"  a  name,  sayj 
'     '     iurt^^mui^  un  the  prmctice  of  tbeir  kings,  who,  when 


^  ..  «^,uh4.'^«m^  ^VAM«,  a»  a  distiDguishing  deviee,  a  large  plume 
r'^^^>«^Lfijiu»itt  the  farm  of  an  eagle,"  but  which  more  pro- 
^L  ^  Kjyirt*-  'iM  :$«:ure  and  lofty  position  of  the  place,  among 
v,j_-^  v^Jbs  on  the  borders  of  the  lake  of  the  same 


/^^^»  \*^ti^  Qtt  conditions  of  immediate  submission  to  Spa* 

^    .^V  ^^*'*^  ^*^  tendered  and  three  times  rejected  by  the 

«    -^  >q4W4;ilS  who  felt  secure  in  their  mountain  fortresses  and 

,,«iK<v'M^'^*^  ^^^'*     lAmving  a  sufficient  garrison  for  the  pro- 

^_„^>-  o*  Ou^c^'UiuJa,  Alvarado  marched  against  them  with  a  force 

^ijm'ig.  ^'  -^   horse,   100  infantry,   and  2,000  Guatemalean 

'4f^^«M^  .«iiU»  tttf  v>u  the  occasion  previously  described,  he  success- 

^;k  .M^ii^Mimr  the  forces  sent  against  him,  took  their  rocky  fast- 

^xin^  ^'Hftf  Vttpital,  and  lake,  and  made  himself  master  of  this 

^iig;rt'^MH  illiM^     ^*  From  that  period  the  Sutugils  have  remained 

^iUmI  Mubjwty  of  the  Spaniards,  even  during  the  rebellion  of  the 

^^,ll«:k  amX  KachiqucH  which  took  place  two  years  al\erward&.*** 

^flum  UA  th<  counw  of  one  year  (1524),  did  the  Spaniards,  by  a 

^M^v4'  vxtttHMAliiuin'  exertions  and  successes,  complete  the  conquest 

^  Uiv  (h(\v  |>:iuci(vil  nations  of  these  realms.    They  had  still  to 

^nthJuv  A  v,\ui9JKlcniUe  number  of  the  subjects  of  Sinacan  who  did 

iH^  «^K'ui  m  hiy  act  of  voluntary  submission,  but  were  in  actual 

Mj^lii4H^  lycttiu^l  hiuu  in  which  they  had  been  supported  by  the 

^m^A  v^  V^UK'bo  ami  8:  tugil.    The  number  of  these  was  consi- 

^H^v  lus^rv't^M  by  his  alliance  with  the  Children  of  the  Sun,  and 

^iHjrjt  (hv(u  uv>iH*  ^ave  more  trouble  than  the  warlike  inhabitants 

^   ^hv   N(*Uvv   of  Zacate|>c(iuea.     These  Indians  were  the  first 

^  i^MiXMtv  ihv  luiUtary  luovtments  of  the  invaders,  forming  their 

l0iWM    ukt\k  ti^uadroii*  of    1,000  men  each,  and  attacking  and 

i^V^uiK  ^^^  yucvvotttion,  so  as  to  maintain  the  fight  without  soon 

il^uu^  th«  i-\)«utMitauts«    The  subsequent  reduction  of  the  strong 

lj[}^4iv«ci  s^'  Muvv  aW  pr\>ved  an  arduous  undertaking  even  to  the 

^VaIv^      Aih(  U^Milvtt  lhiftM^«  there  remained  still   nnconquered 

^M^AAs4\>ui  auU  rvmUute  tribes  of  Implies,  Mams,  and  others  who 

l|^UU-\(  \\w  IowUukU  and  \iianDer  ^*mUeys  bordering  on  either 


*  JMMt«%f^MlMiA4S. 


by  bit 


■  CONQUEST   OF    IIOMJUBAf.  91 

Wliile  the  contest  wai  still  pending  with  some  of  these  unsabdued 
and  fierce  Indians,  they  rctahated  upon  those  who  had  submitted  to 
the  SjMUiianlH,  hy  ni&kingii>rtiadau|>oii  them,  in  which  '■  they  carried 
off  many  of  the  women  and  cbiidrea  that  were  employed  in  look- 
ing sAer  tlieir  MilpRs  or  tielda  of  maize,  and  other  plantations,  and 
Mcrihced  the  hearts  of  the  latter  to  their  idold."  But,  uevertheless, 
thcw  and  mitny  other  Unmrdous  expeditions  were  tenniiioted  with 
the  success  wbich  almost  invsriably  attended  the  Spunisb  arms; 
■nd  in  October  ISiS  Alvarado,  think.rg  his  Isboun  at  an  end, 
resolved  to  return  to  Spun  to  ^ve  an  account  of  bis  conquests  to 
his  Imperial  master ;  and  he  took  a  formal  It^ve  of  the  Cabitdo  or 
manicipal  corpoialion  of  Guatemala  for  lhi.t  pur]  osc. 

In  the  mean  time,  lleman  Cortes,  t1  e  comma:  dcr-in-chicf,  bad 
tnken  teparate  measures  for  the  suljugition  of  that  part  of  the 
country  which  borders  on  the  Atlantic.  Christoval  de  Olid,  sent 
bj  him,  had  landed  and  founded  citici  on  the  shores  of  Guaimura, 
r  Honduras.  lint  being  informed  that  Olid  hail  rerolted,  Curtis 
)I  another  officer  nnnted  Las  C31M  to  mpeisede  him,  against 
«rbom  De  Olid  was  at  first  victorious,  but  associating  with  bim 
''Ktme  of  the  men  attadicd  to  bis  rival,  he  was  soon  after  mnrdered 
by  them,  and  Las  Casas,  obtaining  quiet  possession  of  authority, 
then  ftiunded  the  town  nnd  port  of  Tnixillo.  Cort^  receiving  no 
informalion  from  I.as  Cn.ia.'^,  and  probably  led  on  by  the  hope  of  dis- 
Dvering  tbc  much  desired  oceanic  chnnnel.  was  induced  to  under- 
lite  the  jnumey  overland  from  Slexico  by  the  lake  of  Itin or  Pcleu 
b  Honduras.  This  cnteq)riBc,  accomplished  in  1S25  at  the  greatest 
Hid  with  unwonted  fatigues,  is  really  more  astonishin;;  to 
c  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  country  than  even  all  tbc 
torics  gained  over  the  Indians.  During  his  slay  in  Honduras 
fl  founded  a  town  called  Natividad  at  Forto  Cabatlos,  which 
a  afterwards  abandoned.  He  apjiointed  another  governor,  and 
Elnrned  to  Mexico  afler  an  abm;nce  of  more  than  two  years. 
Pedro  de  Alvarado  being  informed  that  Cort^  was  in  the  pro- 
■X  of  Honduras,  felt  it  ncce>!Ba[y  to  suspend  his  own  purpose  of 
ivtnmtng  to  Europe,  and  at  once  repaired  thither  to  pay  his  respects 
to  his  aniierior  Captain- General.     He  set  out  early  in  1S26  with 

Ct,  and  while  prosecuting  his  Journey,  met,  at  Choluteca,  a 
of  officers  and  men  who  had  arrived  with  Cortes  at  Hon- 
;  were  now  on  thdr  rolum  10  Meiieo  through  the  Quiche 


O^.-  TUB  (HmPKL  CC  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

ujoiim^  Beijig  iBfiNrmed  by  them  thai  the  eommander-in-chief 
l^-rc-tiM^burked  at  Tntxillo  and  sailed  for  Mexico,  Alyarado  united 
biottdt'  with  theaft»  and  retumed  towards  Guatemala. 

Urcat  was  the  change  and  bitter  the  disappointment  which 
TMHiiitigd  him  as  he  retraced  his  steps.  All  the  territories  he  had  just 
pitgffrt  through,  and  m  which  as  governor  and  captain-general  he 
bad  so  very  lately  received  the  homage  of  the  people,  he  now 
leuDd  in  a  state  of  re))ellion  and  open  warfare.  This  change  had 
been  brought  about  during  his  absence  by  the  rapacious  covetous- 
of  his  brother  Gonzalo  Alvarado,  who  had  been  left  at  Gua- 
in  the  capacity  of  litutenant-govemor.  Anxious  to  enrich 
himself  in  a  short  time,  he  had  required  that  several  hundred 
^  Alabones,"  or  children,  should  be  employed  at  the  different  gold 
washings,  and  that  each  child  should  bring  him  90  grains  of  gold 
eveiy  day,  or,  as  Vasquez  relates,  that  *^  they  should  deliver  to 
him  daily  a  reed  as  thick  as  their  little  fingers  filled  with  grains  of 
gold,  under  the  penalty  of  being  detained  as  slaves  in  case  of  de- 
ficit.'*'* The  required  quantity  not  being  obtained,  some  severities 
were  resorted  to,  and  even  death  was  threatened  in  order  to  keep 
the  Indians  up  to  this  unreasonable  exaction,  which  naturally 
goaded  them  on  to  rebeL 

As  might  be  supposed,  the  king  of  the  Kachiquels  had  ere  this 
discovered  his  error  in  trusting  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Teulcs. 
By  this  time  he  was  exceedingly  dissatisfied  with  their  conduct 
towards  him.  When  he  made  terms  with  their  leader,  and  became 
a  vassal  to  the  crovm  of  Spain,  it  was  for  selfish  ends.  These  liad 
not  only  been  thwarted,  but  he  found  that  his  own  authority  in 
biB  kingdom  was  really  taken  from  him  by  his  new  masters,  nothing 
hat  the  merest  semblance  of  it  being  left.  Sinacan  was,  theretbre, 
prepared  to  shake  off  the  yoke  he  had  so  incautiously  imposed  upon 
himself  and  upon  his  people.  The  circumstances  above  related 
afforded  him  a  favourable  opportunity.  Finding  that  he  readily 
obtained  the  co-operation  of  other  caciques  who  were  as  dissatisfied 
as  himself,  he  proceeded  to  release  Seqaechul,  the  king  of  Quich^ 
who  had  been  a  prisoner  now  about  two  years.  The  latter  aent 
messengers  to  the  chiefs  of  Utatlan  and  others,  and  in  a  short  period 
the  two  kings  assembled  around  them  a  body  of  npwards  of  30^000 

*  Jvanot,  p.  its. 


I 


At  the  9UIIIC  time  "  one  of  tlidr  papas,  or  priests  of  their  idols, 
lumed  Fanaguali,  persuaded  llic  IndinuB  of  the  valley  of  Zocalcpe' 
quel,  who  bad  been  conquered  with  so  mucb  difficultj,  that  tbeir 
god  Canianeloa  had  a|ipearcd  to  him,  aud  was  much  enraged  that 
bb  fricDdJj  ifacatepcquei,  dislnuting  his  power  and  protection,  had 
surremlered  to  the  Teules  of  Castile,  who  came  for  no  other  purpcwe 
than  i«  Uk«  from  then  their  lands  and  liberties ;  be  eiborted  tbem 
to  take  tip  *rm;  cgain,  promising  to  awist  and  givi;  them  the 
\ietoiy."  So  far  and  wide  did  the  insurrection  now  spread,  that 
in  a  few  dajFS  almost  the  entire  provinces  of  Quicht  and  Kachiquel 
v<-rc  induced  to  revolt  againut  SjMuiish  authority;  and  tbose  Spa- 
Diardd  who  had  retaained  io  Guatemala  had  to  put  themselves  in 
a  pasture  of  defence. 

AJvarado,  who  had  bis  escort  most  opportunely  strengthened  by 
Ihe  troops  going  to  Mexico,  met  with  immediate  opposition,  by 
lAich  one  Spaniard  was  killed  and  three  were  wounded,  ^ever- 
be  advanced  by  hasty  marches  towards  Guotcmala.  At  the 
Safile  vf  Jalpatagua,  which  he  could  not  avoid,  be  was  encountered 
fey  a  nunurixnu  body  of  Indians,  and  Iheu  suffered  a  conuderable  loss 
tbe  detention  of  tbrec  days  ere  he  could  reconquer  the  ruck 
fortress  that  commanded  that  fotia.  tie  was  ngaiu  aiCackeil  on  the 
Uanos  (or  plains)  of  Canalea,  and  was  dcliveml  from  overpowering 
Dumbeisoaly  by  the  timely  succour  of  some  friendly  Indian  forces, 
nnder  the  Cacique  Cazhaulaii,*  whose  rebellious  subjects  formed 
tbe  bulk  of  the  assailants  on  this  occasion.  On  dcscendmg  a  height 
called  tbe  ridge  of  Las  Caoos,  there  iinppvncd  so  uunrt  a  shock  of  an 
earthquake,  that  the  soldiers  were  unable  to  keep  their  fect."f 

Aflcr  dispersing  another  force  led  on  by  Sequechul,  tliry  mode 
good  their  entry  into  Guatemala.  Tbe  Spanish  inhabitants  of  the 
e^Ht>l,  divided  into  three  bodies  under  as  many  leaden,  bad  taken 
field  and  resisted  four  atlncks  made  by  Siuacan  and  his  sup- 
two  under  Sequecbul,  and  it  required  all  their  aetivi^ 
mililary  akill  to  suppurt  tbemselves  against  tbe  Indiana.  Thdr 
Ibrec*  were  obliged  tn  remain  encamped  during  the  months  of  June, 
July,  and  Augtut,  suffering  great  inconi-cnience  from  tbe  Tioleat 
heut  and  heavy  rains. 

"tkf  IWibrBj  •ill  Anik/'  uhl  fiwc'tj  vl(K  "niher  a  (vaiphDlic  fpitbet.  nt  m  luiUne 
I  ttntl  Snr,  chi^.  ItV. 


94  m  «Q0SL  Dl  CC2CTRAL  AXERICA. 


JJirmdix  VMKdiiildT  ob  lus  arriTsl,  mat  embassies  to  Sinacan 
and  $ii{iiiictel^  <fcing  then  terms  of  peace.  These  they  refused, 
wiftbdrawuiir  to  tte  Tolcaso  of  Qnesaltemmgo,  where,  with  a  great 
Bumber  of  tlwir  principal  nobles  and  a  large  body  of  warriors, 
tbiy  tetificil  tbcmsdres  Tery  strongly.  Alvarado  also  despatched 
ant  oftrar  wmrd  Fortoeairera,  with  a  suitable  force  once  more  to 
i«d«w  tte  Indiutt  of  the  valley  of  Zacatepequez.  In  this  cxpedi- 
tKMBi  one  of  tlie  Tcnles  and  three  Tlascalans  were  made  prisoners, 
and  SMcrifieed  toge*her  to  the  idol  Camanielon.  When  victorious, 
tke  SpttDiaidi  retaliated  by  strangling  Panaguali,  the  principal 
ptkit  and  promoter  of  the  insurrection. 

Notwithstanding  the  unsiltisfactory  state  of  affairs,  Alvarado 
BOW  leh  it  necessary  to  go  to  Mexico,  and  thence  to  Spain,  in  order 
to  defend  himself  from  certain  attacks  that  had  been  made  upon  his 
diuacter.  He,  therefore,  appointed  Portocarrera  lieutenant-gover- 
wxTy  and  committed  to  him  the  reduction  of  the  two  revolted  kings. 
Tills  commander  having  returned  victorious  from  Zacatepequez 
called  a  council  of  war,  where  it  was  agreed  that  the  best  mode  of 
preventing  the  further  spread  of  the  insurrection  would  be  the 
captnro  of  the  persons  of  Sinacan  and  Sequechul. 

F6rtocarrera,  therefore,  leaving  a  deputy  in  the  capital,  set  out 
ibr  Qnesaltcnango  with  a  force  of  674  men,  of  which  nearly  one- 
half  were  Spaniards,  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  With  these  he 
attacked  the  precii.itous  rock  upon  which  the  two  kings  had  forti- 
fied themselves.  Afler  many  engagements  and  more  than  two 
months  siege,  it  was  carried  by  assault,  and  both  monarchs  being 
made  prisoners  were  afterwards  retained  in  confinement  for  fifteen 
yean.  Thus  was  the  insurrection  quelled,  and  the  final  subjugation 
of  the  three  nations  completed.  This  last  exploit  was  achieved  on 
the  22nd  November  1526,  a  day  still  observed  in  commemoration 
of  the  event  throughout  the  country. 

Though  the  Spaniards  had  for  some  time  inhabited  Guatemala, 
which  was  probably  an  Indian  city  occupying  the  site  now  called 
Afanolonga,  on  the  declivity  of  the  **  Volcan  de  Agua,**  it  was  not  till 
the  following  year,  1527,  that  the  Spanish  capital  was  formally 
founded  and  built.  In  less  than  fourteen  years  it  was  mined,  as 
related  in  a  previous  chapter,  by  the  falling  of  a  great  body  of 
¥rater  from  the  crater  of  the  volcano.  After  that  event,  while  the 
council  were  solemnly  deliberating  in  the  dilapidated  cathedral^  on 


^V  MINOR   EXPEDITIONS.  96 

the  rebuilding  or  removal  of  the  city,  several  shocks  of  esrtli(;iiake 
were  felt  in  quick  succession,  which  rather  summarily  put  a  slop  to 
husiness,  nn  accouuC  of  certain  appreheuaions  entertained  thai  the 
church  would  be  thrown  down,  and  cruah  the  people  assembled  in 
it.  In  1S41  the  city  was  rebuilt  on  the  spot  now  occupied  by  the 
"  Antigun,"  nt  old  cnjiilal,  which,  though  "  »  ttmt  of  flfly  years 
never  elapsed  without  its  sustaining  some  injuiy,"  retained  its  rank 
till  the  year  1776,  when  the  desolation  and  ruin  cauKd  by  repented 
and  mcecstive  earthquake!!,  especially  those  of  1773,  occasioned  its 
transfer  to  the  valley  of  Las  Vacan,  where  the  city  of  New  Guate- 
mala now  sUnds. 

In  the  year  1329,  an  expedition  was  undertaken  by  Caspar  do 
Aiiai,  Alcalde  of  Uuateniala,  for  the  purpose  of  subjugaling  the 
Indians  of  Uipontan,  inhabiting  a.  mountainous  district  on  the 
biirdcrtt  of  the  provinces  Tolonicapan  and  Vera  Pa?.  These 
mauntainecrs  were  a  fierce  and  warlike  race,  who  had  not  yet  been 
asnilcd,  tad  who  incessantly  excited  the  Quiches  to  revolt.  Afler 
a  campaign  of  six  months,  during  which  only  places  of  minor  im- 
portance were  taken,  Ariiu  returned  to  the  capital  on  private 
bntdnesB,  and  resigned  the  command.  I'edro  de  Olmos,  his  suc- 
ciswir,  rashly  attacked  the  stronghold  of  Uzpantou,  and  nulfered  a 
defeat.  "To  render  this  afikir  still  more  disa-strous,  many  of  the 
Indian  allies  were  made  prisoners,  and  sacrificed  by  those  of  TJii- 
poittan,  who  (without  previously  killing  them)  tore  out  their 
htart).  which  were  presented  aa  an  oRcring  to  the  idol  Ksbalnuqucn." 
This  waa  followed  by  a  retreat  and  temporary  abandonment  of  the 
nndertaking,  which  was  anemards  reeumed  by  one  Francisco  de 
CuU'llanos,  who  first  took  Ncboh,  and  at  length,  in  1330,  reduced 
Uxiuuitaii,  which  was  defended  hy  10,000  men  besides  auxiliaries 
from  without.  These  Indians,  when  subdued,  were  the  first  who 
were  openly  branded  and  kept  as  slaves  by  the  Spaniards.' 

Dnrin);  the  absence  of  Alvarado,  when  Orduiin  had  arrived  in 
GnatetnjiU  (in  IsSO)  as  provisional  governor,  and  had  thrown  the 
capital  into  disorder  by  his  oppressions  and  extraordinary  proceed- 
ing*, many  of  the  Indbns,  and  particularly  those  of  Chiquimula  and 
iht  dirtrictt  bordering  on  Honduras,  seired  the  opportunity  of  re- 
lieving tluanBelves  from  the  yoke  oi  the  Spaniards,  and  recovering 
lliistr  native  independence.    Another  war  ensued,  in  which  the 

*  JUITTW,  p.  IKK  u<l  47*. 


*JWf 


90  THE   QOSPBL  IN  CSSTSAL  AMERICA. 

Spaoish  army  OMrovly  evaped  bci^g  all  burned  together.  The}' 
bad  encampiiid  on  tbe  aedivily  of  a  bill,  bat  removed  about  night- 
&U  to  what  was  deemed  a  more  secure  position,  in  a  little  valley 
b^w.  ^  Tbe  troops  bad  not  been  in  this  new  situation  above  two 
bourst  when  tbe  wbole  company  was  alarmed  by  hearing  tremen- 
dous y^Us  and  tbey  shortly  saw  the  eminence  %vhcreon  they  had 
int  ettcamy^  «aT«kqpcd  in  flames.**  *  The  Cacique  Copan-Calcl, 
vilb  ;l^\<^ii]Mi>ii(amiMrR|  well  fortified  in  the  important  city  of  Copun, 
«MM«d  alike  buMelC  made  a  long  and  resolute  resistance,  and, 
yWm  b^aiciik  iviu^ed  to  another  town,  and  thence  to  the  mountains. 
IW  al  Wf^^tb  made  his  submission,  and  was  kindly  received  at 
Oifiai^  by  Ucmando  de  Chaves,  the  commander  of  that  expe- 


About  tbe  same  period,  Martin  Estete  made  an  inroad  upon  the 
|ffOvince  of  Salvador.  He  was  an  adventurer  connected  with 
IVdranas  Davilla,  who,  with  his  brother  Gonzales,  conquered 
Kkaragua  in  1523,  and  now  wished  to  extend  its  territories. 
Tbe  expeditions  in  this  the  southern  part  of  Central  America 
were  quite  separate  from  the  operations  we  have  been  following, 
and  nuy  in  some  respects  be  considered  as  nvaL  On  this  occasion 
Ibites  were  sent  from  Guatemala  against  Estete,  and  he  was  driven 
back  into  Nicaragua,  leaving  behind  him  his  own  men  and  2,000 
Indians,  whom  he  had  taken  prisoners.  The  deserted  Spanish 
soldiers  joined  the  victorious  forces,  and,  by  the  restoration  of  the 
Indian  prisoners  to  liberty,  a  fiivourablc  impression  was  produced 
upon  their  minds  towards  their  liberators,  which  was  taken  advan- 
tage of  to  spread  the  dominion  of  the  white  man  in  this  remote 
part  of  the  kingdom,  fiut  numbers  of  Indians  continued  inimical 
to  it,  and  conmiitted  frequent  acts  of  hostility,  severely  harrassing 
those  who  remained  friendly  to  the  Spaniards.  Expeditions  were, 
therefore,  sent  against  them  both  in  1533  and  in  1535 ;  but  of 
these  no  authentic  accounts  remain. 

"On  the  nth  of  April  (1530),  Pedro  de  Alvarado  arrived  (in 
Honduras)  with  a  conunission  as  Governor  and  Captain-General  of 
the  kingdom  of  Guatemala ;  he  came  from  Mexico  with  all  possible 
expedition,  having  heard  of  the  incursion  of  Martin  Estete,  and  on 
that  account  bringing  with  him  a  remfonsement  of  80  soldiers;  but 
on  reaching  the  capital  he  found  Estete  had  retreated,  and  with  the 

*  JMR<oi^p.8QM74. 


JDDOMEST   AKD   MERCY.  0? 


^BSO  of  bts  men  vho  were  then  in  the  city,  and  the  80  who  hnd  awnro- 
^■'pmied  him  from  Mexico,  he  founded  the  town  of  Oknchito,  in  n 
remote  part  of  Ilondurae,  under  the  onmiaud  of  bis  brother  Diego 
de  Alvaraxlo. 

On  reviewing  the  difficulties  overcome,  and  the  extent  of  country 
ijonquered  by  Pfilro  de  Alvarado,  JuarroR  remarlcs, — "  It  must,  in- 
a  striking  proof  of  extraordinary  perseverance  and 
;,  both  in  himself  and  bis  followers,  that  in  so  short  a  apace 
t  time  he  was  enabled  to  subjugate  so  vast  an  extent  of  territory, 
it  WM,  iy  *u«A  muitiludtH  of  warlike  natives  .-  for  al 
U  ptrirxt  the  population  exceeded  in  numeTieat  tlrength  its  present 

t,  uihie/i  would  be  ituigt^atit  in  tlie  comparinon." 
In  thus  far  tracing  the  leading  features  of  the  prowess  of  Alvn- 
Tfldo>  arms,  we  have  arrived  at  the  point  where  the  power  of  Spain 
was  fully  eatahlidhed  in  Ceotral  America,  and  where  the  three  Tollec 
kingdoms  of  Quiche,  Kachiquel,  and  Sutugil,  as  well  as  the  t«rri- 

^torieB  of  many  subordinate  caciques  and  predatory  tribea,  were 
ttigether  constiluled  a  colony  of  Sjinin,  under  the  title  of  the  "  King- 
idbn  or  Captain-Generalship  of  Guatemala,"  which,  wlule  nonu- 
Bally  subject  to  Mexico,  or  New  Spain,  was  still  teparnle  and 
distinct  from  it.  If,  in  following  thet«  military  exploits,  we  have, 
for  a  time,  lost  eight  of  the  so-called  religious  operations  of  the 
iavadcre,  it  was  only  that,  bdng  looked  at  separately  from  other 
matters,  their  character  might  be  more  clearly  perceived.  In  the 
cnnqne^t,  we  cannot  but  rect^ise  the  wrath  of  God  revealed  from 
heaTcn  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men ;  who, 
becauM:  Mis  eternal  power  and  godhead  are  clearly  seen  in,  and 
demonstrated  by,  the  things  that  are  made,  are  pronounced  "  with- 
out excusv,"  aiid  wpecinlly  w  for  the  high  crime  of  "  changing  the 
glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  mode  like  to  corrup- 

^ittAe  man."  And  we  adore  the  mercy,  though  mingled  with  territio 
judgments,  that  interposed  even  the  curse  of  such  a  conquest  to 
ivre  a  remnant  of  tbe^e  uations  from  that  dissolution  which  must 
liave  followed  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  their  ignorance  of 
God,  their  unthank fulness,  their  vain  imaginations,  their  foolish 
and  darkened  hearts,  and  all  the  catalogue  of  fearftil  and  unnatural 
ana  of  which  these  moral  evils  are  the  proliQc  and  never-failing 


1X0* 


98  TBB  QOttttb  UC  CBNTBAL  AMERICA. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


PROPAOANDA. 


9MCtifted  QwxpowdtT^Popiik  Musions—Baxihdkmew  Jam  Cans— Yen  Paz— Tolo- 
gtlpa,  or  the  If  osquito  Shore— Hondmw—lfaaaacre  of  Priests  and  Escort— Legend 
of  Tsgnxgalpa— Ifwder  <rf  Three  Friars— 'Predoos  Belies'— College  de  Propaganda 
fide--Costa  Bica— Expeditions  to  the  Chols,  Mqpans  and  Lacandons— Total  Failure. 

'*  JU  tk»g  thmt  Uke  the  tword  $katt  ptriik  wia  Iks  Mwni.''-Matth.  xxri  52. 

As  the  first  act  of  Cort^  and  his  followers,  when  they  set  foot 
upon  the  shores  of  Mexico,  was  an  act  of  prostrate  adoration  to  a 
crucifix  planted  in  the  sand,  so,  throughout  their  extensive  cam- 
paigns, the  unfailing  accompaniment  of  the  Spanish  camp  was  a 
Popish  priest,  and  a  tent  where  mass  was  said  or  sung.  In  con- 
sistency with  this,  the  very  first  building  erected  in  every  township 
that  they  founded  was  a  church,  generally  dedicated  to  the  Virgin 
Mary,  to  some  fiivourite  saint,  or  sometimes,  and  but  rarely,  to  one 
of  the  three  names  of  the  Trinity.  The  most  fertile  valleys,  and 
the  more  temperate  plains,  were  no  sooner  subdued  than  they  were 
infested  with  monastic  establishments ;  and  the  conquests,  so  fiercely 
achieved  by  the  sword  and  the  mysterious  fire-arms  of  the  pale 
warrior,  were  retained  in  the  more  tenacious  grasp,  and  consoli- 
dated by  the  subtler  influence,  of  the  crafty  ecclesiastic 

By  such  means,  under  pretence  of  spreading  the  doctrines  of 
the  Crucified,  the  already  degraded  idolater  was  flattered  and 
cigoled,  or  coerced  and  terrified,  into  the  adoption  of  forms  and 
fables  only  a  little  more  refined  and  cunningly  devised  than  those 
of  his  ancestors.  AJlured  by  the  pomp  of  outward  symbols,  or 
actuated  by  the  pride  of  a  '^  voluntary  humility"  and  devoteeism 
congenial  to  the  unregenerate  heart,  and  at  the  same  time  forcibly 
restrained  from  indulging  in  those  ruder  observances  which  long 


■  SANCTIFIED  GUKFOWDER.  99 

practice  bad  endear^ — bis  mind,  meanwhile,  boned  down  beneath 
the  weight  of  phjaicftl  and  moral  wrong — what  wonder  that  the 
dwpirited  idolater  sullenly  submitted  to  the  hated  imposition,  and 
that  the  change,  gradually  beconung  familiar,  wa«  permitted  Id 
UBume  the  inveternte  force  of  habit  1 

The  mjKtery  of  iniquity,  which  ftssiniilated  with  Druidisri  in 
Altrion  and  Gnul,  and  with  polytheism  at  Rome  — which  at  one 
period  raised  cruBodea  sgnin^t  Inlamism,  and  at  another  insinualed 
itself  into  the  heart  of  the  Celeatiol  Empire,  among  the  volaries 
of  Badd  and  Foh,— lost  none  of  its  characteriatic  flexibility 
and  adaptation  to  circunutaoces,  unong  the  natives  of  tropical 
America.  As  the  Jesuits  acted  in  Paraguay,  so  did  some  of 
ihe  same  IrntiTnity,  in  conjunction  with  Dominican,  Fnin- 
dMan,  and  Capuchin  monks  and  friars  in  Central  America, 
though  perhaps  with  less  uiiion,  and  therefore  with  less  decisive 
results.  The  Indian  galas  and  festivities,  their  amneements  and 
nide  instruments  of  music,  were  early  associated  with  the  pomp  of 
the  RoiDi.--h  Church,  and  continne  so  to  thu  day.  Nor  did  she  fail 
to  STail  hemelf  of  the  advantages  of  position  and  superior  know- 
e  which  her  sons  enjoyed.  If  she  could  afford  to  dispense 
rsrd  help  to  Teneration  and  abject  suhmiBsion  which 
•  armed  Teules  posseted  OTcr  the  natives,  she  was  not,  it  appears, 
gtolet  pass  the  opportunity  of  sharing  it  with  them.  No; 
to  appalling  effect  which  firc-amia  and  gunpowder  were  sure  to 
!  was  made  subserrient  to  the  ends  of  priestcrstl  and 
il  exaltation :  and  the  firing  of  guns  and  musketry,  in  con- 
1  with  sky-rockets  and  other  fireworks,  were  sevemlly 
introduced,  so  as  to  form  an  important  element  in  all  the  pro- 
cessions and  moel  grave  solemnities  of  "  La  Santa  Madre  Iglesia."* 
This  practice  is  siill  universal  in  Central  America ;  and,  as  we  arc 
informed,  in  Mexico  also ;  and,  indeed,  on  all  the  southern  continent. 
With  every  religious  festival,  and  on  each  recurrence  of  jubilee  or 
any  notable  laint's  day,  guns  and  muskets  arc  fired,  and  sky- 
rockets arc  let  olT  nt  all  hours  of  the  day,  in  great  numbers,  from 
the  roofs  of  cathedrals,  parish  churches,  and  convents ;  and  fre- 
quently a  grand  dLiplay  of  fireworks,  accompanied  with  religious 
,  cbaracteristicstly  doses  the  pageants  of  the  churoh-t 


id  Anwtffki  in  donaad  id  Cenln]  America,  in  rmso^qr] 


L_^ 


KW 


^«MU«yc«il,  the  efl^  of  which  is  now 

^  ,   ',^«.  !»,*»**  »>  '^  ciaiMOur  irfmaay  bells,  is  often  deafen- 

>*.    K^-^-^^       ^^  ^^  thoughtful  mind  it  must   be 

~  M,^ ,  ^-  ,-..rJ-W  1  t«>  the  weak  and  childish  it  is  exciting, 

^      ^^  -^  tlk;  Indian,  who  had  heard  noises  such  as 

>^ .     .«  ^    ;h.  ^i^u«^  ^>uk  the  field  of  battle,  on  the  day  when  his 

,    .^,\  ^^ft^ui^^'U,  ami  his  monarch,  his  cacique,  and,  it  may 

>^    ^    -N,*»VM  kittilrwi  were  slain — to  the  ignorant  Indian,  who 

^  ^,    vv  «^  iv^ta  without  knowing  the  cause  which  produced 

v-^    K  cthiKi  iuu*t  have  been  terrific  in  the  extreme.    No  wou- 

.^^    4^  h«  wa»  led  to  venerate,  as  superhiunan,  men  possessed  of 

^  /.t  iv^wi'l     No  wonder  that  he  was  led  to  extend  to  the  sable 

.^««.A«^  thv  teUing  of  awe  which  he  entertained  for  their  steel-clad 

WiOivu.    Aiul  who  will  marvel  that,  under  such  influences  as 

.  x^'»  be  became  a  ready,  if  not  a  willing,  convert  from  his  own 

^Mutry  to  that  of  the  Church  of  Rome  ? 

llic  miatnouary  monks  of  later  date  were  at  least  zealous  to 
lU'o^'lytize  the  Indians.  In  their  efforts  to  conquer  (conquUtar 
\sk  the  too  appropriate  term  which  they  themselves  employ  to 
UiMguate  their  labours),  some  of  them  gave  proof  of  enthusiastic 
dkinterettedness,  if  it  was  nothing  more.  One,  at  least,  of  their 
number  has  earned  for  himself  the  honourable  title  of  the  IndtarCit 
friendy  and  so  many  lovely  traits  are  presented  in  his  character  as 
to  lead  to  the  supposition  that  he  was  indeed  a  true  believer.  This 
was  Bartholomew  Las  Casas,  who  came,  with  others  of  his  order, 
to  settle  in  the  city  of  Guatemala,  in  the  year  1536.  lie  was  the 
Vicar  of  the  Dominican  convent  there,  and  afterwards  became  the 
Bishop  of  Chiapas,  in  which  character  he  is  better  known  to  the 

this  practice,  that  they  are  now  prepared  to  great  perfection  throughout  the  country :  and 
in  GuMtemala  the  places  where  they  are  wtM  are  about  aa  numerous  as  tobacconist-shops  are 
in  Suropoui  towns.  The  manufacture  of  gunpowder  was,  till  lately,  a  goremment  monopoly, 
which  yielded  a  considerable  rerenue.  "  The  ciq>tain  of  a  ship  lately  arrived  in  England  from 
the  Brazils,  says,—*  On  the  first  few  days  after  my  arriral  in  Pemambuco,  my  attention  was 
drawn  to  a  number  oi  sky-rockets,  which  were  frequently  discharged  by  day  as  wdl  as  by 
night  On  iBq[uiry,  I  found  that  they  were  fired  off  from  the  tops  of  certain  cathedrals  by 
the  priests,  and  that  prayers,  written  on  slips  of  paper,  were  attached  to  them ;  that  these 
prayers  were  addressed  to  partictdar  saints,  and  that  persons  who  wished  to  appeal  to 
their  faTOurite  saints  brought  these  papers  to  the  priests,  with  a  sum  of  money,  in  order 
that  they  might  be  sent  off  with  th^  greatest  poasible  ^eed  by  means  of  these  sky- 
rockeU.'"— CAru^iM  Tim«$,  90th  April  1^49.  The  idea  which  the  Brazilians  are  here 
t  lid  to  attach  to  this  practice  is  not  prevalent  in  the  Centnl  States  j  hot  the  facta  have 
led  us  to  cimchide  its  origin  to  be  aa  stated  abme. 


; TOLUGALPA. 


I  arid.  Some  yearn  before  this  he  hnd  written  a  trestiw.  entitled 
De  unico  vocatioois  modo,"  the  object  of  which  was  to  prove  that 
.je  preaching  of  the  Gospel  wtu  the  unl;  divioclv  instituted  means 
of  converting  uDbeltevere  to  tbe  Christian  faith,  and  that  the  use  of 
camal  weapons  uinat  always  prove  a  real  obstacle  to  theatlainnient 
of  that  end.  Sincerely  believing  his  own  hnmane  theory,  he 
preached  it  M  Guktemala  both  from  the  pulpit  and  in  private 
■wemblies,  and,  as  a  result,  was  generally  ridiculed,  and  tauntingly 
challenged  pcrsoaally  to  try  its  application.  To  this  challenge 
Las  Casos  at  once  aasented,  and  chose  to  begin  with  the  proWnce 
of  Tuailutliin,  which  the  Spaniania  had  called  Tierra  de  Guerni 
(the  land  of  war),  from  the  failure  of  three  attempts  which  had 
been  made  to  conquer  it.  Charles  V.  afterwards  named  it  Vera 
Paz  (true  peace),  onaccount  of  the  success  of  the  peaceful  measures 
taken  under  the  direetiun  of  Las  Casas. 

The  Dnmiaicsns  having  obtained  a  promise  that  tliey  should  not 
be  JnterTcred  with  for  live  years,  the  term  of  which  was  afterwards 
estendeil,  first  comjiotieil  some  hymns  in  the  Quiche  language, 
embracing  the  chief  points  of  sacred  history.  These  were  sung 
by  some  of  the  fiiendly  Indians  who  introduced  themselves  among 
the  others  in  the  chamcter  of  traders,  and  they  soon  came  to  the 
«anof  the  chief  cacique,  afterwards  called  Don  Junn.  Anxious  to 
know  more  of  things  so  interesting  and  so  uew,  the  cacique  was  in- 
duced to  send  for  one  of  the  holy  fathcr^  who  soon  persuaded  him 
lo  bum  his  idols.  In  1S37,  I>aa  Casus  bimsell^  and  another  monk, 
set  out  for  the  abode  of  the  Cacique  Don  Juan,  and  liaving  visited 
the  Bumiunding  country,  they  induced  many  of  the  natives,  who 
lived  in  scntlered  huts,  to  form  villages.  The  present  townships  of 
BAV-inal  And  Coban  were  then  ectablished,  and  subsequently,  that 
of  Ciyabon  and  others.  According  to  Juarros,  "  Las  Cnsas 
affirms,  in  his  '  Apulogctical  History '  (of  the  aborigines),  that  in 
no  pan  of  the  Indies  did  he  find  governments  better  ordered,  or 
ruled  by  better  laws,  than  those  he  met  with  in  this  district."  * 

But  in  order  to  the  general  application  of  the  enlightened  policy 
of  Las  Casia,  men  were  required  who  had  the  faith  and  the  benevo- 
lence that  distinguished  him.  Such  nicn  were  wanting;  and  as  a 
eonsaqnence,  his  good  example  remained  unfidlowed,  and,  like  a 

.  igtit  in  a  dark  pbce.  it  now  serves  only  the  better  to  erpose  the 

rlkilla  of  bis  contemporaries  and  si 

*  JuuroSpp. 


102  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CElfTEAL  AMERICA. 

As  a  sample  of  these  missions,  or  ratber  what  is  recorded  con- 
oeming  them,  we  take  the  following  from  Juarros,  generally 
quoting  his  ovm  words,  and  even  where  some  are  omitted  for  the 
sake  of  brevity,  always  preferring  to  use  the  expressions  of  the 
historian. 

The  missionaries  appear  to  have  early  directed  their  attention 
to  the  wilds  of  Honduras,  and  parts  of  the  Mosquito  Shore. 
The  province  of  Tologalpa,  as  it  was  called,  included  under  the 
general  appellations  of  Jicaques,  or  Indios  Bravos  (terms  indiscri- 
minately applied  by  the  Spaniards),  many  unsubdued  tribes,  and 
among  them  Moscos,  or  Mosquito  men,  Lacandona,  and  Poyais, 
well  known  for  their  indomitable  fierceness.  At  the  b^inning 
of  the  17th  century,  Estevan  Yerdalete  left  Guatemala,  at  the 
head  of  a  mission  consisting  of  twenty-eight  persons,  to  whom 
six  more  were  afterwards  added  at  Comayagua,  the  capital  of  Hon- 
duras. These  were  partly  priests  and  partly  warriors,  some  of  whom 
were  already  acquainted  with  the  country.  Penetrating  into  the 
mountain  district,  after  several  days  they  reached  some  hovels  of 
the  natives.  ^'  The  Indians  advanced  to  meet  them,  bringing  large 
quantities  of  flowers,  which  they  strewed  upon  the  ground,  or  threw 
upon  the  persons  of  the  party ;  they  were  attended  by  a  sort  of 
music,  to  which  they  danced,  and  showed  many  other  demonstrations 
of  excessive  joy.  There  were,  however,  some  among  them  painted 
black,  with  plumes  of  feathers  on  their  heads  and  lances  in  their 
hands,  apparently  more  inclined  for  war  than  a  peaceable  interview ; 
this  made  the  visitants  suspect  treachery. 

'*  The  zealous  missionaries  commenced  the  work  of  regeneration 
without  loss  of  time ;  a  large  cross  was  erected,  around  which  they 
assembled  as  many  Indians  as  they  could  collect,  and  explaining  to 
them,  as  well  as  dreumstanoes  would  permit,  some  of  the  sacred 
mysteries ;  made  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer. 
Yerdalete  declared  he  would  pass  the  remainder  of  his  life  among 
them,  if  necessary,  to  instruct  them  in  the  way  of  salvation.** 

A  church  and  huts  for  the  priests  were  now  erected— adults  were 
instructed — children  baptised — and  strenuous  efforts  made  to  obtain 
the  good  will  of  the  natives.  In  a  few  weeks,  '*  there  were  many 
whose  convenioQ  was  so  fiff  completed  that  they  received  baptism. 
The  season  of  Lent  mm  passed  in  giviDg  instroction  to  such  of  the 


I  aid 


MASSACRE  OP  PRIESTS    AKD    ESCORT.  103 

straggien  as  CMne  from  the  recesses  of  the  raounbtiiis ;  pTDcesejoni 
e  mide,  at  which  they  uaiated ;  Patsion-wwk  was  celebrated  i 
some,  who  were  thought  sLtficieiitlj  capable  of  understaading 
nature  of  the  rilei,  admitted  as  cominuDicauts;  others  att«Dded 
public  worship  with  every  appearance  of  sincere  devotion.  The 
catertioQs  of  the  nuoistera  wtre  coiupensated  by  130  converts,  be- 
the  baptism  of  many  children."*  Having  ascertained  that 
tlie  tribes  ill  this  district  were  very  numerous,  reports  were  tent  to 
GuatemaU,  and  more  assistants  requeeied.  Soon,  however,  the 
Indians  forsook  the  new  village,  and  reluming  at  night  set  lire  to 
it  and  the  church,  but  did  no  injury  to  the  pricsta,  who,  crucifix  in 
hand,  in  the  midst  of  the  confla^'ration,  threatened  tliem  with  the 
vengeance  of  God.  At  daybreak  the  Spaniards  Ibund  theniselveB 
■lone,  and  determined  upon  returning  to  Gnaleniala  to  give  an 
account  of  what  had  happened.  Here  they  were  received  with  jny. 
The  Governor  assigned  ihein  an  escort  oftwenty-five  soldlerF,  giving 
the  command  to  one,  Captain  Daia,  who  had  sliared  in  their  late 
dai^n.  In  less  than  tno  years'  time  from  their  first  dqiarture, 
tiiey  started  once  more,  and  early  in  161 1  again  reached  the  con- 
fines of  Tologalpa.  Here,  by  means  of  friendly  Indians,  they  drew 
Mine  others  from  their  retreat  in  the  mountains.  Such  of  these  as 
were  still  considered  Pagans  were  admitted  to  baptism  as  fast  oa 
they  Bfquired  the  requisite  instruction,  and  all  were  settled  in  small 

Dan,  finding  it  difficult  to  dissuade  the  priests  fVoni  going  in 
search  of  the  escaped  converts,  proposed  to  precede  them  with  his 
Idiers.  The  Indians,  at  first  friendly,  »oon  collected  in  force  and 
icked  him,  so  that  he  elf'eeled  his  retreat  with  difficulty  and 
lilli  some  loss.  The  hatred  to  the  Christians  was  not  apjieased  by 
lis  measure,  but  the  contrary  effect  was  produced,  as  one  of  the 
had  killed  an  Indian  who  stnicic  him.  Neverthelets, 
;hcy  sent  to  tell  the  fathers  they  were  very  sorry  for  the  past 
ites,  and  wished  to  he  made  Christians,  if  the  Spaniards  would 
into  the  mountains  to  them,  but  hoped  they  would  leave  thdr 
ind,  as  they  desired  to  avoid  war,  vrishcd  for  peace, 
become  good  friends."  f 
The  captain  once  more  restrained  the  ardour  of  the  priests,  and 
himielf  with  some  of  the  soldiers,  without  arms,  to  negociate 
■  laum.f.  Etv. SB).         4  Juim. p. let. 


i^-^ 


104  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

inth  tbem.  After  four  or  fire  days,  seven  canoes  descended  the 
river,  and  the  Indians  said  Daza  desired  the  ministers  wonld  come 
to  him ;  but  they  brought  no  letter.  Against  the  persuasion  of 
the  remaining  soldiers,  **  these  infatuated  men,  full  of  apostolic 
zeal,  and  sighing  for  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  replied,  that  no 
time  could  be  more  propitious  for  obtaining  what  they  so  much 
desired,  and  with  some  of  the  soldiers  entered  the  canoes  ;**  they 
went  far,  till  they  saw  the  ride  of  a  hill  covered  with  naked  Indians, 
painted  black,  with  helmets  of  feathers,  and  armed  with  lances. 
On  the  point  of  one  loog  lance  was  the  head  of  Daza,  and  upon 
others  the  hands  of  some  of  his  soldiers.  Verdalete,  landing  first, 
reproached  them  for  their  treachery,  rebuked  their  idolatry,  and 
threatened  them  with  the  vengeance  of  Heaven  for  their  murderous 
acts,  "These  upbraidings  infuriated  them  to  the  utmost;  they 
gave  a  rignal  by  sounding  a  sort  of  pipe,  and  immediately  fell  upon 
the  defenceless  priest,  inflicted  innumerable  wounds,  which  he,  like 
another  St.  Stephen,  received  upon  his  knees,  praying  for  his  mur- 
derers." They  then  killed  the  remainder  of  his  party  and  mutilated 
their  remains,  portions  of  which,  the  historian  says,  they  ate,  drink* 
ing  out  of  the  skulls,  &c.,  desecrating  the  vestments  and  dresses 
in  their  dances,  and  making  pendants  for  the  ears  and  nose  of  the 
chalices  and  other  utensils  of  the  altar,  with  many  more  excesses. 
He  adds — **at  least,  such  was  the  information  given  by  the  Indians 
to  a  missionary  who  in  after  times  visited  the  country.** 

^  For  many  years  the  Indians  of  Tologalpa  saw  nothing  more  of 
the  Christians ;  not  for  want  of  zealous  men  who  wished  to  continue 
their  exertions,  but  because  the  prelates  did  not  think  proper  to 
grant  permisrion.*' 

In  1774,  however,  a  young  man  named  Pedro  Lagares  entered 
npon  this  field,  where  he  laboured  five  years,  and  died  in  1779,  at 
New  Segovia.  He  made  incursions  into  the  mountains  and  brought 
to  the  villages  more  than  200  Indians,  who  came  to  confession,  be- 
rides  children,  as  appears  from  a  certificate  rigned  by  two  captains. 
Three  Franciscans  aftenvards  exerted  themselves  so  greatly,  that 
in  two  years  more  than  SOO  Indians  were  baptized.  ^  For  several 
years  rapid  progress  was  made  in  the  converaon  of  the  natives  of 
this  province,  fresh  assistance  being  occarionally  sent  from  Guate- 
mala. It  is,  however,  now  (1811)  more  than  half  a  century  since 
the  Frandscans  have  abandoned  the  province  of  Tologalpa  to  its 


ldoUtr7-  What  occonioDed  the  diicontiauation  of  this  work,  at 
■  tune  nheu  it  was  proceeding  under  fiivounible  circumstances, 
^tpears  not  to  be  Bccunit«lj'  known."* 

The  nolhern  coast  of  the  Mosquito  Shore,  which  waa  the  pro- 
vince of  Taguigalpa,  des<;ribed  by  Jiiarroa  as  "populous  in  ika 
txireme"  vaa  also  the  sctne  of  one  of  the  earliest  uiisaionB.  In 
1623,  Martinez,  an  Andalusian  friar,  and  Vaena,  a  lay  conipunion, 
laniled  at  Cape  Grades  it  Dios.  They  had  with  tliem  ouly  four 
Indian  interpreters  taken  from  the  island  of  ftuatan,  and  committed 
themseives  to  Providence  on  a  desert  shore,  and  in  a  country  iuha- 
iHted  by  barbarians — an  act  of  heToifm,  says  Jnarrof,  that  leaves 
ftr  behind  the  boasted  exploit  of  Cortes  in  ordering  the  destruction 
of  the  ships  in  which  he  arrived  at  Vera  Cruz.  "In  ihis  solitude 
they  passed  two  days:  on  the  morning  of  the  third  they  observed 
anumerous  body  of  the  natives,  both  male  and  female,  approaching; 
the  men  were  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  piece  of  cloth  before 
them  painted  red,  with  plumes  of  feathers  in  their  heads,  and 
lances  in  their  hands ;  the  women  were  also  painted  red,  liad  small 
aprons  before  them,  and  gartunds  of  flowers  on  their  beads ;  the 
_  last  person  of  this  company  was  a  venerable  old  man  with  long 
e  hair.  On  coming  up  to  the  miaiionariea  he  made  a  profound 
ince,  said,  in  a  langiutge  they  could  understand,  tbnt  they 
e  welcome,  and  asked  why  they  bod  so  long  delayed  coming,  to 
tbegre^t  risk  of  his  dying  before  tbcirarrival?  He  added,  that  he  had 
longexpected  them  with  Ihegrentest  anxiety,  and  came  to  render  his 
mrictx;  that  be  was  not  blamcable  for  not  having  come  bel'ore  now 
to  pay  his  respects,  because  he  had  understood  they  were  to  arrive  by 
luid,  and  had  placed  sentinels  on  the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains 
to  give  him  notice  of  their  approach.  Great,  indeed,  was  the 
Mtonishment  of  Martinez  and  his  companions  at  this  unexpected 
address;  and  asking  the  old  man  who  bad  given  him  infonnatiou  of 
their  intended  visit,  he  replied  (mirabtle  dietu.'}, — That  being 
one  day  at  work  in  his  plantation,  there  appeared  to  him  a  white 
child,  more  bcnuliful  than  anything  he  had  before  seen  or  could 
imagine ;  it  looked  at  him  with  great  tenderness,  and  said, — '  know 
thai  you  will  not  die  before  you  become  a  Christian  ;  there  will 

E here  some  white  men,  with  robes  of  the  colour  of  this  ground 
ng  to  tbdr  feet;  when  they  arrive,  receive  them  kindly,  and 
*  JuuTMip.SH. 


106  THB.  Q08FBL  IN  OBNTBAL  AXBRIOA* 

do  not  permit  any  one  to  anger  them,  for  they  are  ministers  of 
God,  who  has  grants  thee  this  signal  mark  of  His  mercy,  hecanse 
tbou  hast  done  well,  and  hast  supported  those  who  wanted  assis- 
tance !  *  **  The  historian  adds,  that  this  old  man,  even  m  hin  idolatry^ 
was  an  almsgiver  and  a  peace-maker*  Martinex  greatly  rejoiced, 
and  promised  to  be  a  good  pastor  to  the  old  man.  A  chnrch  and 
village  were  soon  constructed,  and  crosses  were  raised  in  divers 
places  by  the  side  of  the  paths.  The  old  man  was  baptized,  and 
many  of  the  Indians  followed  his  example  out  of  the  respect  they  bore 
him,  and  because  they  understood  these  were  the  fathers  long  since 
announced  to  them  by  the  god  of  the  mountains. 

In  three  months  time,  a  boat,  sent  by  the  curate  of  Tmxillo, 
brought  a  promised  supply  of  wine,  biscuit,  and  consecrated  bread 
for  the  service  of  the  altar.  The  crew  were  much  astonished  how 
much  had  been  done  for  Christianity  (?)  in  so  short  a  time.  During 
their  stay  the  old  Indian  died,  and  all  the  Spaniards  assisted  at  the 
Christian  rites  of  his  ftmeraL  Yaena  returned  with  the  boat,  and 
went  on  to  the  capital  to  give  the  provincial  a  narrative  of  what  had 
occurred,  and  requested  the  assistance  of  another  priest.  An  account 
of  the  rapid  progress  already  made  was  published  at  Guatemala, 
with  an  appeal  for  help.  Lopez,  a  Franciscan  and  fellow-countryman 
of  Martinez,  offered  to  go,  was  accepted,  and  returned  with  Yaena. 
On  his  arrival  he  was  exceedingly  surprised  to  find  how  much  had 
been  done :  in  less  than  a  year  more  than  700  adults,  besides  many 
children,  had  been  baptized,  and  no  less  than  seven  villages  had 
been  formed.  The  kind  attentions  of  the  missionaries  spread  their 
fame,  and  every  day  brought  whole  families  petitioning  to  be  par- 
ticipators in  them,  with  every  demonstration  of  sincere  conversion 
(at  least  such  as  satisfied  the  Papists)  ;  but  as  they  could  not  easily 
abandon  their  original  mode  of  living  in  wilds  and  forests,  they 
soon  capriciously  returned,  when  least  expected,  to  the  recesses  of 
the  mountains.  The  pastors,  much  discouraged,  had  their  attention 
directed  to  a  tribe  called  Guabas,  supposed  to  be  the  progeny  of 
some  shipwrecked  Spaniards  and  Indian  women.  '*  As  partaking 
of  the  blood  of  both  species,  and  being  in  part  Spaniards,  it  was 
supposed  they  would  be  more  constant  in  the  observance  of  Chris- 
tianity, if  they  could  be  brought  to  profess  it ;  and  this  determined 
them  to  undertake  their  conversion.**  A  frijn&te  opportunely 
arriving,  conveyed  them  to  Aoft^racas,  the  place  where  the  Guabas 


DS   FROPAGAKDA  FIDE. 


107 


^^M  were  tapiMsed  to  dwell.  Tbej  soon  foand  ibis  people,  and  were 
^^V  listened  to  b;  tbem  aud  many  other  natioDB,  who  bad  lieard  of 
^^^  tlieir  kindnev,  not  in  Bpiritual  malterg  only,  but  in  BtteodiDg  tbe 
people  insicknesi  and  curing  their  niBladira,'  they  thercrore  came  in 
troops  to  request  the  same  good  offices,  go  that  in  a  few  months  the 
three  fathers  bapti».-d  more  than  5,000  iudividualg,  making  with 
the  former  a  total  exceeding  6,000. 

"  lu  the  midst  of  lliia  plentiful  harvest,  these  three  indefstignble 
labourers  were  cut  off  by  the  Albutuinus,  a  ndghljouring  nation. 
Some  of  this  treacherous  and  savnge  tribe  Tisited  them  with  a  pre- 
tended desire  to  be  converted,  and  begged  they  would  accompany 
them  to  their  dwellings  to  teach  them.     But  while  the  migsionariea 
prepared  to  do  as  they  wirihed,  the  eagerness  of  the  savages  not 
permitting  them  to  wait,  they  came  in  force  to  the  Christian  village, 
*eiied  and  bound  the  fathen,  the  new  converts  being  too  weak  to 
defend  them  ;  they  were  then  dragged  through  the  diHerent  places 
where  they  had  preached,  and  severely  beaten  with  wooden  swords 
and  knives.      The  sulferers  attempted  to   reprove  tbem  fi 
cruelties  they  were  inflicting,  and  threatened  them  with  Divini 
^^^^{mnce  for  their  crimes;  hut  this  serving oniy  to  increase  their fiiry, 
^^Bllley  seized  Martinez  and  inipsled  him  on  a  lance,  cut  off  one  of  his 
^^Hfeands,  and  afterwards  broke    hia   legs   with  tlieir  dube,  in 
^^f  •seruciating  tonnents  of  which  be  expired.      The  two  others  were 
'  killed  by  wounds  of  lances  aud  knives,  their  legs  were  also  broken 

>od  their  heads  cut  off."* 

As  soon  as  tbe  Governor  of  Truxillo  beard  of  this  event,  he 

equipped  two  vessels  and  immediately  embarked  with  soldie: 

artillery  "  for  tbe  purpose  of  punishing  the  savages  for  the  atrocities 

they  had  committed,  and  recovering  tbe  remains  of  tbe  fathers. 

The  Indians  eluded  bis  intended  chastisement ;  but  he  recovered  the 

^^Kjbodles  of  the  victims  and  removed  them  to  Tmxillo,  where  they 

^^^pKic  buried  witb  great  pomp  on  tbe  16tb  January  1624.  A  contest 

^^KbUowed  between  the  parish  church  and  the  Franciscan  convent  at 

that  place,  for  the  bouour  of  the  deposit,  which  the  Governor 

•ettleil  by  sharing  the  mutilated  corpses  between  them.     In  1643, 

"  tbe  precious  relics"  were  removed  to  Guatemala,  "  where  prepa- 

C5  made  for  receiving  them  with  great  Roleranity ;  bat 
cial,   wishing   to  avoid   any   violent  demonstration  of 


108  THB  GOSPBL  Cf  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

popular  feeHng,  determined  they  should  be  admitted  without  any 
procession.  They  were  deposited  in  the  church  of  St.  Francis,  the 
Royal  Audienda,  Gabildos,  and  different  religious  orders  attending 
the  ceremony.  The  coffin  was  borne  by  the  most  distinguished 
persons  in  the  city,  and  the  funeral  service  performed  with  the 
greatest  solemnity. 

^  After  the  death  of  these  ministers,  all  further  attempts  to  con- 
vert these  Indians  were  suspended  for  some  years.**  They  were, 
however,  revived  in  1667  by  two  ecclesiastics,  to  whom  others 
were  afterwards  added,  and  in  eight  years  time  they  formed  seven 
small  villages,  in  which  was  settled  a  Christian  population  of  600 
souls,  four  years  later  the  number  was  1,073,  and  in  1690  the 
number  of  Indians  that  had  died  in  the  faith  (of  Popery)  exceeded 
6,000,  and  there  were  then  nine  villages  settled. 

In  1694,  some  members  of  the  college  of  missionaries,  De  Propa- 
ganda Fide,  of  the  city  of  Queretaro,  arrived  at  Guatemala,  and 
while  labouring  for  the  establishment  of  a  college  of  the  same  kind 
there,  several  of  them  engaged  in  missions  in  different  parts  of 
Central  America.  And  when  their  college  was  completed  in  1701, 
it  took  upon  itself  the  charge  of  the  civilization  of  Honduras,  and 
up  to  the  day  when  Juarros  wrote  (1811),  he  says, — they  had 
there  one  mission  in  which  there  were  never  less  than  two  persons 
employed.  The  Society  of  The  Name  of  Jesus*  (Nombre  de  Jesus) 
did  not  give  up  their  endeavours  in  Honduras  and  on  the  Mosquito 
Shore.  In  1740,  they  sent  one  Felix  Figeroa,  who  continued  in- 
structing the  converts  until  his  death.  **  There  is  preserved  in  the 
church  at  the  village  of  Santa  Buenaventura,  a  very  heavy  cross, 
which  this  exemplary  man  took  the  pains  to  carry  on  his  shoulders 
from  Guatemala  to  that  place,**  a  distance  of  more  than  400  miles 
of  most  uneven  country. 

Early  in  this  the  nineteenth  century,  an  ecclesiastic  of  Guatemala 
went  to  Madrid,  and  returned  with  a  mission  consisting  of  forty-six 
persons,  and  as  late  as  1810  the  supreme  council  of  the  Regency 
passed  an  edict  that  ministers  should  be  provided  for  those  missions, 
which,  however,  appear  to  have  been  abandoned  in  reality,  if  not 
officially,  at  the  present  day,  and  certainly  so  as  respects  the  Mos- 
quito Shore. 

*  Not  the  Jesuits,  bat  possibly  a  form  under  which  tome  of  that  body  contrived  to 
be  tolerated  in  Central  Ammiwi  when  the  Jetnita  wtn  *^*k**^  from  ^ain  and  all  its 
dominions. 


CONTBRSIONS  BY  ROYAL  MANDATE. 

The  prorince  now  ihe  slate  of  Costa  Rica  was  one  of  the  first 
nibdued  hj  the  Spaniards ;  ita  old  capital  Cnrtngo  having  been  in 
exititence  aa  early  ai  \S2i.  The  territory  of  TulamBOca  in  that stat« 
)■  said  to  contsin  twenty-aii  different  tribea  of  Indians,  besides  other 
neighbouring  nations.  It  waa  also  vitdled  by  the  luiinionaries.  In 
1660,  Uelchur  Lopez  and  Antonio  Margil  commenced  tlieir  labours 
kmong  Ihem,  and  ui  five  years  (according  to  the  chronicleti  of  the 
college  De  Propaganda  Fide,  lib.  v.  cbap.  1)  the  coiivcrsion  of 
more  than  40,000  bouIb  had  been  accomplished,  and  fourteen  vil- 
foauded.  At  the  beginning  of  the  last  ceoluiy,  several  mission- 
and  some  soldiers  who  were  employed  as  an  escort  of  tbe 
ioouiea,  were  cruelly  ased;  some  of  them  were  killed.  After 
murders  there  remained  only  one  village,  in  which  two  priests 
lesided;  and,  for  want  of  a  military  escort,  they  reoiained  for 
sereial  years  without  making  any  attempt  to  viut  the  natives  in  the 

Ijnountains.     The  Governor  was  solicited  to  grant  a  troop  of  thirty 
for  the  protection  of  the  fathers  ;  and,  after  waiting  long 
obtain  tbe  king's  pemiissioa   for  incurring  this  expense,  the 
irt  was  provided  in  1740,  when  several  more  ecclesiastics  re- 
this  work. 
That  portion  of  the  state  of  Guatemala  which  lies  north  of  tbe 
tfntal  and  beyond  the  limits  of  Vera  Paz  is  also  peopled  by  many 
of  the  Jicoqucs,  or  Xndios  Bravos,  amongst  which  tbe  Chols, 
Ldons,  and  Mopana  are  most  prominent.    Missions  were  undcr- 
ihese  people  in  1674,  by  a  Dominican  named  Delgado, 
■aeramjianicd  by  Gatlegos,  who  was  tbe  Provincial  of  that  order. 
They  penetrated  about  70  miles  beyond  Cajabon^the  most  re- 
mote village  in  Vera  Paz,  aud  assembled  some  Choi  Indians,  in 
They   next  penetrated  into  the   Sierras 
i&rtherto  tbe  north,  and  beyond  a  very  lofty  mountain  called  by 
natives,  "  The  God  of  tbe  Dills,"  they  entered  a  thickly  peopled 
itry,  where  they  were   well  received.     Two  years  later  the 
jonaries  revisited  them,  and  tbe  settlements  were  aug- 
2,346  persons  who  were  baptized,  besides  many  others  t 
bnt  in  1678,  for  what  reason  cannot  now  be  discovered,  the  Chob 
Ktumed  to  their  native  worship,  abandoned  the  villages,  blocked 
np  the  roads,  and  dis{icrsed  among  the  Rjountains. 

riiilip   II.   had,   in   IA{)4,   commanded  that    a    minute    detail 
W  all  circumstauces  regarding  the  native  inhabitants,  and  of  the 


^^^jnoui 

E 

mmi 

Tl 

■tnbesi 
Lacani 
fkVeni 
wcom] 
They 

two  ( 
^^&rtht 
^■jthen 

^■■vne 


110  TBS  CXMPEL  IN  CUfTRAL  AMERICA. 

best  means  of  reoonciling  them  to  the  Spanish  goyemment,  should 
be  transmitted  to  him.  ^  In  1676^  fresh  orders  were  sent  ont  from 
Spain  to  the  Governor,  the  bishop,  and  the  Alcalde  mayor  of  Vera 
Paz,  to  increase  their  endeavours  to  effect  the  conversion  of  the 
natives  of  this  district.***  It  was  not,  however,  till  eight  years 
after  this  order,  that  the  bishop  and  Governor  of  Guatemala  united 
their  efforts  to  obey  it.  They  were  assisted  by  the  monks  of  La 
Merced  (the  order  of  Mercy)  and  the  Dominicans.  Messengers 
were  sent  to  invite  the  Chols  to  celebrate  the  festival  of  Easter  at 
Cajabon.  These  envoys  were  beaten  with  dubs  and  dismissed  with- 
out a  reply,  which  put  an  end  to  this  expedition.  Augustin  Cano, 
the  Provincial  of  St.  Domingo,  penetrated  into  the  mountains,  and 
met  with  some  of  the  Chols,  whom  he  persuaded  to  return  and 
settle  again  in  the  village  of  St.  Luke,  where  he  also  established 
some  ministers;  this,  however,  was  insufficient  to  induce  the 
neophytes  to  remain  long  in  a  permanent  habitation ;  for  about 
the  end  of  the  year  1688,  they  once  more  burned  the  village,  and 
the  missionaries  who  resided  there  narrowly  escaped  with  their 
Hves." 

Diego  Rivas,  the  Provincial  of  La  Merced,  with  two  others  of 
his  order,  a  Bethlemite  friar,  the  Corregidor  (a  military  com- 
mander) of  Gueguetenango,  and  ten  Spaniards  penetrated  into  the 
mountains,  and,  after  several  da3rs  march,  met  with  some  of  the 
Lacandons,  who,  on  perceiving  them,  immediately  fled.  Rivas 
and  his  companions  supposed  them  to  be  spies,  and  fearing  that  if 
they  should  be  attacked  by  the  natives,  there  would  not  be  suffi- 
cient force  in  their  little  party  to  repel  the  assailants,  determined 
npon  a  retreat. 

In  1686,  the  king's  commands  for  the  conversion  of  this  nation 
were  repeated,  and  in  1692,  the  Council  of  the  Indies  transmitted 
a  despatch  ordering  the  conquest  of  the  Chols  and  the  Lacandons 
to  be  undertaken  simultaneously  from  the  provinces  of  Vera  Pas, 
Chiapa,  and  Gueguetenango.  Two  years  afterwards.  Barrios  the 
President  of  the  Royal  Audienda,  who  had  been  interdicted  from 
the  exercise  of  his  official  ftinctions,  having  been  restored,  b^;an  to 
prepare  for  a  fresh  attempt  at  the  instigation  of  the  missionaries 
Mdchor  Lopez  and  Antonio  Maigil,  who  had  laboured  in  Tala- 
manca.    *'  Contributions  were  demanded  firom  the  inhabitants  of 


CHOLB, 


)   LACAMDONS. 


ni 


^^^^^^^Hlto  defray  the  expenses  of  the  campntgn,  men  nere  raisud, 
^Hp^pHgtuid  amu  collected,  as  well  oa  everytbiiig  else  required 
tot  tfie  ierTice."    In  l6flB,  all  being  ready,  Barrios,  in  person,  took 
tbc  command — advancing   by   Chiapa.      "The  whole   force   was 
divided  into  nine  corapwiiea,  five  consisting  entirely  of  Spaniards 
and  four  of  Indians.    Several  ecclesiastica  attended  each  division." 
At  Ocoxingo  the  Govemiir  was  joined  by  troopB  from  Ciudad, 
Real,  and  Tabasco.     He  divided  his  forces  into  three  detacliments, 
ordering  them  to  enter  the  hilly  country'  on  the  last  day  of  Feb- 
ruary, by  the  different  routes  previously  determined  upon.     One 
of  the  detachment*  having  advanced  with  great  difficulty  ibrongh 
swamps  and  thickets,  and  over  broken  ground  the  whole  of  the 
monlh  of  March,  discovered,  on  the  first  of  April,  traces  of  naked 
feet,  which  following,  in  six  days  more,  they  cane  to  a  village  of 
the  Lacandons,    Ere  the  troops  could  enter  it,  the  inhabitants  bad 
fled.    It  vf33  found  to  consist  of  100  bouses,  two  niucb  larger  than 
^^■Bk  rest,  supposed  to  be  appropriated  lo  public  business,  and  one 
^^^■tger  still  that  was  a  plac«  of  worship.    Here  the  priests  took  itp 
^^BRir  abode,  burning  all  the  idols  they  could  find,  and  turning  the 
^^^rinctpal  room  into  a  chapel.     Scouts  were  sent  in  every  direction 
after  tbc  fugitives,  and  to  look  fur  the  governor  and  his  detach' 
meat.    In  the  latter  ol)ject  they  succeeded  on  the  19th  April,    lie 
wi*  conducted  with  his  troopa  to  the  village  which  they  called 
Dolores,  where  he  all  cr  wards  built  a  fort,  and  left  a  garrison  of  thirty 
Spanish  soldiers  and  fifteen  Indians.     Uost  of  the  troops  then 
relumed  to  Guatemala,  after  which,  some  of  the  Indiana  having 
been  taken,  induced  others  to  return  wilh  one  of  their  Caciijues, 
until  the  numbers  amounted  to  400,  moat  of  whom  were  baptized. 

The  third  detachment,  which  hod  taken  the  route  of  Vera  I'az, 
nwtwith  some  of  the  Chotd,  who  had  already  been  domiciliated, 
and  nude  arrangcnients  to  nettle  them  again ;  500  were  soon 
collect^.  These  gave  inforuialiou  of  the  Alopans,  a  Rtiree  and 
warlike  tribe,  spread  over  about  thirty  leagues  of  country',  among 
whom  neither  Spaniards  nor  missionaries  had  ever  yet  ventured. 
Fired  rather  than  discouraged  by  the  description  given  of  llies 
people,  the  soldiers  went  in  search  of  them,  clearing  their  way 
wilh  much  difficulty  over  precipices,  rocks,  and  ravines,  until  ihey 
came  tu  some  of  their  hovels.  The  number  of  families  of  which 
thu  nation  n-ai  composed  a  stated  at  10,000  or  12,000,  dwelling  in  a 


5» 


imT  iw|iiiii^i  boutj  and  great  fertility,  in  a  dimate  the 
j^neiealtle  of  aaj  diaft  liad  yet  been  discovered.  On  the  first 
ilH^  ^  tbe  SpaaiardB  the  natiyes  were  alarmed,  and  prepared  to 
MMt  tbem  sto8tfy>  but  the  judidoos  measures  of  the  missionaries 
and  the  prvdenee  of  the  commander  prevailed  to  open  a  friendly 
intereourse ;  and  both  caciques  and  people  became  willing  to  settle 
and  to  accept  adminkm  to  the  proffered  benefits  of  Christianity. 

Intelligenoe  of  this  success  was  sent  to  the  Governor  at  the 
village  of  Dolores,  and  a  plan  for  the  establishment  of  a  Spanish 
town  in  the  fine  locality  discovered,  was  submitted  to  him  and  to 
the  Royal  Audienda.  Here,  also,  a  fort  was  built  and  garrisoned 
ere  the  troops  returned  to  the  capital. 

Another  expedition,  under  Amezquita,  succeeded  this  in  1696, 
when  two  more  villages  were  discovered,  the  one  named  Peta,  con- 
taining 117  fiumlies,  and  Mop,  the  other,  105.  Subsequently  the 
Pagan  place  of  worship  at  Dolores  was  pulled  down  to  make 
room  for  a  church.  This  so  displeased  the  Indians  that  they  re- 
tired to  the  mountains.  The  missionaries  and  the  soldiers  of  the 
garrison,  however,  succeeded  in  persuading  them  to  come  back, 
and  that  in  greater  number ;  for,  in  pursuing  the  fugitives,  they 
found  four  more  small  villages.  An  ofiieer  named  Yelasco,  was 
so  imprudent  as  to  advance  with  his  company  as  fiu*  as  the  lake  of 
Itza,  the  Indian  inhabitants  of  whose  banks  were  numerous  and 
warlike.  Being  attacked  by  them,  he  was  killed ;  and  all  his  men, 
about  100,  shared  the  same  fiite.  ^'At  this  time  Don  Gabriel 
Sanchez  de  Berrospe  had  succeeded  to  the  Grovemment,  and  com- 
municated the  despatches  (firom  Amezquita),  as  soon  as  he  received 
them,  to  a  council  of  war,  at  which  the  bishop,  and  several  others 
assisted;**  when  it  was  decided  to  recall  the  troops,  suspend  the 
fortifications  then  in  progress,  and  to  abandon  Mopan  entirely, 
removing  as  many  of  the  Chols  as  they  could  induce  to  leave  their 
country  to  the  vaUey  of  Urran  in  Vera  Paz. 

So  entirely  have  these  expeditions  come  short  of  the  end  pro- 
poaed,  that  Juarros,  in  the  geographical  part  of  his  work,  says  that, 
by  the  navigation  of  the  Passion  river,  'Hhe  conversion  of  the 
Lacandons  might,  in  the  first  place,  be  accomplished ;  for  by  inter- 
course with  the  Christiana,  they  ¥ronld  become  domesticated,  and 
inclined  to  adopt  their  religion;  without  this  preparation,  their 
ieductu>n  will  be  a  matter  of  difficulty  :  fear  as  soon  as  they  are 


^^M  yiatei  in 
^^F  Ibeir  wivi 
^^^    remain  ui 


TOTAL  FAILURE. 


113 

visited  in  one  place,  to  avoid  further  importunity,  they  remove 
their  wives,  children,  canoes,  and  property  to  another,  wJiere  they 
remain  UDtil  they  are  again  BBsailed  with  soticttstions."' 

Thu8  docs  a  Roman  Catholic  ecclesiastic  of  the  present  century 
Ripply  a  rcconl  of  facts  miogled  with  fictions,  amply  euSlcicat  aa 
B  sample  of  Popish  propagandiem  in  Central  America. 

It  luu  been  seen  that  labours,  commenced  professedly  with  super- 
naluntl  toliens  for  good,  and  extraordinary  degrees  of  success,  have 
Buddeiily  come  to  destruction,  or  have  gradually  dwindled  away. 
That  some  individuals  laboured,  endured  fatigues,  suffered  priva- 
tiona,  Bod  at  last  fell  sacrificeit  to  the  work  in  which  they  weie 
engaged;  and  that  no  good  dfucts  followed  their  devotedncas,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  that  therereaulieda  greater  estrangement  of  those 
nations  who»e  civilization  and  conversion  to  Popery  waa  sought. 
Thai  by  the  help  of  armed  men  some  few  hundred?,  or  even  thou- 
sands, of  tiatives  have  at  times  been  induced  by  [he  missionary  priests 
to  settle  in  aggregate  communities,  and  have  received  the  name  and 
out¥rard  rites  of  Komanism ;  and  that  the  Indians  have  invariably 
•b&ndoned  those  villages  and  the  Christian  name,  and  quickly  re- 
turned to  their  unsettled  habits  and  their  idolatrous  practices.  Nay, 
more,  in  the  only  instance  where  worse  than  "  carnal  weapons" 
were  laid  aside,  at  the  suggestion  of  Las  Casas,  they  were,  in  his 
Absence,  again  resorted  to,  to  keep  the  converts  steadfast  to  their 
profesuoo,  and  to  reclaim  backsliders  from  the  faith. 

This  testimony  w  punfully  suggestive  both  of  the  actual  character 
of  past  efforts  bearing  the  name  of  Christian  missions,  and  of  the 
praent  wants  of  the  same  field.  Should  it  not  lead  us  to  the  contem- 
plation of  future  missionary  enterprises  to  these  tribes  F  If  under- 
taken from  higher  motives,  established  in  a  different  spirit,  defended 
with  entirely  other  weapons,  and  conducted  in  exclusive  dependence 
upon  the  power  and  sovereignty  of  God,  as  well  in  Lis  providence 
as  in  his  grace;  though  commenced  in  the  midst  of  opposition,  and 
anstained  under  discouragement,  such  efforts  must  ultimately  result 
in  blesBings  to  mankind,  and  will  for  ever  redound  to  the  glory  of 
God.  to  whom  belongeth  mercy  and  salvation. 

These  missions  were,  however,  the  work  of  only  a  few  of  the 
nore  enterprising  priests  and  monks,  carried  on,  so  to  speak,  with- 
out the  GonSnet  of  ihor  camp ;  and  though  they  have,  upon  their 
Juunt,  p.  ISO. 


^        more  eniei 
^L      out  the  GQi 


114 


THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 


own  showing,  entirely  fiuled  to  reclaim,  or  even  essentially  to 
benefit,  the  more  remote  and  fiercer  tribes,  there  are  others  of  a 
milder  character  over  whom  the  regular  clergy  have  exercised  an 
unrestrained  control  during  a  period  of  more  than  three  centuries. 
With  so  fair  a  field,  it  is  important  to  inquire  how  much  they  have 
benefited  them  by  their  pastoral  guidance  and  paternal  discipline, 
as  by  the  results  we  shall  be  enabled  to  judge  of  the  efiicacy  of 
Apostolic  succession  and  the  power  of  the  Keys.  We  are  at  least 
warranted  here  to  require  some  evidences  of  the  purifying,  elevat- 
ing, and  blessed  influences  of  religious  truth  on  the  mind,  and 
in  the  social  and  physical  condition  of  the  people ;  in  the  entire 
absence  of  these  fruits,  on  a  careful  examination,  we  shall  be  shut 
up  to  the  conclusion  that  ^'  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour,"  and  that 
the  priests  of  Rome  having  '^  compassed  sea  and  land  to  make  one 
proselyte** — ^he  is  found,  even  where  they  have  succeeded  best,  "  to 
be  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  themselves.** 


COLONIAL  POUCY   OF  EPMEI. 


CHAPTER    ¥n. 


nSBPBNDBIfCB. 


1820  to  1830. 

KfUadtl  ttUrj  of  Old  Sp^— Tbc  tuiiiultion— Ucnutle  Etlata— OppreHion  of  |]m 
—  Proffrat  ot  Mind  —  Dedanuoa  of  IndfiKnOunn!— Rctonni— Ituitlito— 
OinitiluliiHk— EiiUithtined  Mrunru— yUr  Prcnpen>— F^rit  Cummulrnni— 
Slam7  AboUdicd— Farther  Acfonii— FoliUal  Elemmli  —  Schmli  Eitililiihod — 
loPrngtHt— Thc'SoTTila'— Tlie'Libenli'— SucenioUil  InBonqm-FttUUcil 
Jtnbiiinn  Ibr  Ckiiu  of  CnQ  Won— Am  Fint  Prendcnt— An«t  of  narrBiidiii — 
UiiTdn  of  Fknn  — ATducTU  toil  Iho  Serrtla  In  Power  —  FtijtliiT  Cmnmntuu  — 
Gnenl  Hoiwu — Balnnluoof  Ihe  libcnli  — ActiorConifrai  — Eipitrinllnu  of 
the  AnUrinbop  and  H»dt  i>f  HonHv — AboliUtid  of  MonuUnea  —  ComcLioa  of 
y^-^— ***>*'^'  AbiMci    Kcligioui  FrHdoiu, 

■il  rjTife  £wi  ii,  IJm  u  Wrr^."-2  Cor.  Hi.  17- 

Tai  colonial  policy  of  old  Spain ,  like  that  of  all  governments 
which  have  ruled  their  dcpenilcnclM  solely  as  a  meiuu  of  aggran- 
dixittg '  the  mother  country,'  was  cburacterized  by  selfish  naiTownaa 
Kodignoreiit  despotism.  In  the  CMe  of  btr  trans- Atlantic  pomesaions 
ahe  supenidded  to  these  elEiuentsof  miarule  ajealoug  exclusivcness, 
which  was  carried  to  a  surprising  extreme.  To  the  world  at  lar^ 
all  important  and  authentic  informatioD  concerning  the  new 
countries  whs  denied,  and  a  secrecy  comparable  to  thai  of  the 
miser  with  respect  to  his  bidden  treasure  woa  assumed.  To  ita 
ooIouaI  fubjectH  and  adopted  cbildreo,  the  government  denied  all 
commutiication  with  any  part  of  the  civilized  world  except  Spain ; 
and  a  system  of  watchfulness,  equal  to  that  of  an  eastern  Sultan 
over  his  seraglio,  was  organized  and  strenuously  uiaiutnined,  in 
orrder,  if  possible,  to  shut  out  every  ray  of  political,  moral,  or 
•piritnal  light  which  might  threaten  to  penetrate  the  thick  dark- 
ncM  in  which  these  colonic*  were  ahiowded.     Foreigners  were 


116  THB  OOIPBL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

denied  acoen  to  the  Spanish  Americas ;  even  Castilians  were  not 
free  to  emigrate  thither,  except  under  severe  restriction  and  a  dose 
iorveillance.  The  few  ideas  conveyed  to  the  natives  respecting 
the  power  and  influence  of  Spain  over  the  rest  of  the  world  were 
fidse  and  excessive ;  and  the  spirit  of  hlind  higotry  so  carefidly 
fostered  at  home,  and  so  much  in  unison  with  the  institutions  of 
the  old  country,  was  freely  and  sedulously  introduced  into  New 
Spain.  This  was  embodied  in  the  persons  of  arrogant  nobles  and 
haughty  officials  and  favourites  of  the  court  of  Spain,  as  well  as  by 
the  fawning  priests  and  monks  who,  as  we  have  already  seen,  like 
birds  or  beasts  of  prey,  invariably  followed  the  track  of  blood,  in 
the  wake  of  her  desolating  armies. 

One  of  the  instruments  put  into  the  hands  of  these  priestly 
emissaries,  in  order  to  aid  the  purposes  of  the  court,  was  the  fearful 
agency  of  the  unholy  inquisition^— an  institution  which  stands 
charged  with  the  guilt  of  consuming  in  its  fires  no  less  than  five 
millions  of  men.*  A  power  so  unlimited  and  irresponsible  could  not 
fiiil  to  be  applied  to  the  private  objects  and  ends  of  the  individuals 
and  of  the  party  who  wielded  it.  This  abominable  tribunal  had  its 
usual  accompaniments  of  secret  dungeons,  &c.,  some  of  which  are 
itill  accessible  to  the  curious  in  the  city  of  Guatemala. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  monastic  establishments  were 
founded  at  an  early  period  in  all  the  most  inviting  localities  where 
Spanish  arms  had  prevailed.  Some  of  the  orders,  especially 
the  Dominicans  and  Frandscans,  had  many  subordinate  houses  in 
diflerent  provinces,  which  partook  more  of  the  character  of  large 
estates  than  of  monasticism.  Rearing  cattle,  manufiicturing  sugar, 
distilling  rum,  and  raising  other  articles  of  produce,  were,  at  least, 
among  the  chief  objects  of  attention.  These  *  Haciendas*  (works 
or  estates)  were  multiplied  to  such  an  extent  that,  though  the  two 
ordera  above  named  were  the  nnat  numeroua,  they  could  spare 
bat  very  few  of  the  firatemity  to  superintend  each  one.  G^reat 
numbers  of  African  slaves  were  imported  to  assist  the  Indian 
labourera  in  working  them,  and  their  revenues,  which  were  itttmsted 
to  the  care  of  the  provincial  or  head  of  the  ooovcnt  at  Gnateiala, 
were  princely  and  ample  in  the  extreme.  The  vast,  massive,  and 
oommodioiis  bwiklinga,  or  remaim  of  them,  vrhidi  are  freqiientlj 


ttSOi 


met  with,  sbunilantl;  testily  to  tlie  fonncr  wealth  nnd  industry 
of  lliew  cam  muni  tie)),  wliose  wi«doni  in  their  generation  cau  hardly 
tie  impeached.  Perbnpti  no  better  index  could  now  be  followed 
in  Bclccting  the  best  loealitiea  for  the  hnbitationa  o 
that  which  these  remains  supply.  This  being  a  [mint  in  which 
their  imtincts   eeem  to  have  directed  them  with  a  precision   bar- 

[    dcring  upon  the  marvellous. 

f  None  of  these  institutions  were  really  intended  to  benefit  the 
natives,  and  if  thcj  did  so  at  all,  it  waa  only  in  that  indirect  way 
in  which  the  worM  caliumties  are  often  made  userul. 

The  civil  and  militsrj'  functionaries  who  composed  the  Royal 
Audiencia,  by  which  the  Captain  Generaltjhip  wm  ruled,  do  not 
appear  to  have  sought  other  ends  than  did  the  prieata.  But  all 
united  their  inAnence  to  lower  still  further  the  already  ilebnsed 
Indian ;  and,  whether  they  intended  it  or  iiol,  they  employed,  with 
Satanic  sagacity,  precisely  the  means  best  adapted  to  compass 
the  complete  physical  and  moisl  degradation  of  that  unhappy 
people.  The  most  overbearing  and  relentless  tyranny  wns  the 
uiiivcnn]  rule  of  deportment  towards  the  now  defenceless  and  timid 
Indians.  Perhaps  a  cunscioumess  of  the  niperior  power  which 
the  Indians  possessed  in  numbers  over  their  oppressor^  made  the 
latter  more  cruel  and  regardless  of  the  waste  of  life,  which  un- 
doubledly  occurred  so  as  to  diminish  the  population  many  thousands, 
ukI  perhaps  some  millions,  in  this  the  most  populous  part  of  then* 
new  empire.  Among  other  things,  a  poll-tax  was  imposed  upon 
the  coontry,  from  which  the  Spsninrd  and  his  descendants  were 
exempted,  and  the  person,  the  |iroperly,  and  even  the  life  of  the 
BatiTes  were  entirely  at  the  disposal  of  the  latter,  who,  by  fines,  or 
by  len  specious  pretences,  often  despoiled  them  of  their  possc^aions 
and  reduced  thetn  to  shiTcry.  At  a  later  period,  when  horses  and 
mules  had  been  introduced,  and  had  multiplied  so  that  the  natives 
poeteaeed  them,  the  proud  conquerors  enacted  and  enforced  a  law 
mailing  it  crimina]  for  an  Indian  to  ride  upon  his  own  beast,  or  to 
be  aeen  mounted  under  any  circumstances  whatever.  And,  till 
within  a  very  few  years,  the  whipping  post  ('  la  picota")  and 
the  slocks  ('el  Kpo')  testified  in  every  market-place  to  the  cruel 
and  bmtaBiing  process  of  their  doily  oppression. 

Bat  notwithstanding  nil  her  vigilance,  the  efTorts  of  imperious 
Spun  to  exclude  Ctom  her  colonies  the  light  of  truth  and  the  influ- 


*J« 


118  THB  QOSnO.  IN  CKKTRAL  AXERICA. 

enoe  of  ciTiliaitioo  pioTed  abortive,  as  in  the  end  all  such  efforts 
must.  Theprogreasof  mind  cannot  be  stayed.  It  may  meet  with 
temporary  obstacles ;  bat,  like  the  stately  ooune  of  mighty  waters, 
it  will  soon  rise  above  their  level  and  overflow  them ;  or  the  pent-up 
tide,  gradually  accumulating,  will  burst  at  length,  destroy  the 
mightiest  barriers,  and  proudly  toss  upon  its  ruffled  surface  the 
shattered  fragments  of  that  which  constituted  the  impediment  to  its 
onward,  unrestrained  career. 

Some  among  the  apathetic  natives  of  Central  America,  and  those 
chiefly  the  descendants  of  the  Spanish  functionaries  and  emi- 
grants who  had  monopolized  every  office  of  trust  and  emolument, 
though  tardily,  at  length  caught  the  spirit  of  revolution  which  dis- 
tinguished the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century ;  and  they  were 
gradually  awakened  from  the  lethargic  state  in  which  Spanish 
cunning  and  the  riches  6f  their  soil  had  combined  to  retain  their 
minds.  The  example  of  Mexico  and  some  reports  of  similar  revo- 
lutions on  the  southern  continent  doubtless  helped  to  enkindle  a 
flame  where  the  stifled  sense  of  many  wrongs  had  long  fed  a 
smouldering  fire,  and  the  gradual  process  of  ignition  quickened  in 
activity  and  ardour  as  it  approached  a  climax. 

To  the  repeated  appeals  which  the  Spanish  monarch  made  to 
his  dependencies  for  financial  supplies,  the  Kingdom  of  Guatemala 
responded  at  first  freely  and  liberally;  but  the  only  return  it  ob- 
tained, with  an  ever  enlarging  appetite  for  such  indulgences,  was  the 
withdrawal  of  some  favours  previously  bestowed.  The  ^  Sociedad 
Economica  de  los  Amigos  del  Reyno.*** — an  institution  for  the 
promotion  of  literary,  scientific,  and  industrial  objects,  which  had 
been  incorporated  by  royal  charter  in  1795,  was  arbitrarily  dissolved 
by  a  decree  of  the  Council  of  the  Indies  at  Madrid  in  1799.  Thus 
was  base  ingratitude  added  to  manifest  weakness,  or,  at  least,  to 
acknowledged  poverty,  all  tending  to  disabuse  the  long-enthralled 
colonists  of  their  high  impressions  concerning  Spain. 

Soon  after  the  conmiencement  of  the  present  century,  the  fires  d 
rebellion  began  to  burst  forth  in  different  directions.  A  beacon 
was  lighted  at  the  then  flourishing  city  of  Leon  in  1815,  and  it  sent 
up  a  momentary  blaze  which,  though  soon  extinguished,  had  cast  its 
glare  upon  all  the  fifteen  provinces.  After  this  event  conspiracies  and 
secret  dubs  were  organised,  till  the  favourable  opportunity  arrived. 

•  ficonoBicid  Sociekj  of  Rknii  of  tke  KiBgdom. 


DECLARATIOH  OP  INDEPEMDKNCE. 


119 


E'^le  for  freedom  was  not  yet  quite  completed  in  Mexico 
liasttrie*  were  busily  at  work  in  Guatemala,  Atthisjunc- 
tnre  Gnvino  Goinza,  a  commissioner  deputed  by  the  Corte«,  arrived 
at  the  capilnl  from  Spain.  With  him  come  the  news  of  recent  politi- 
cal changes  in  the  peninmln,  and  of  the  efltublishnient  of  the  new 
eonstitatiun.  The  eicitement  now  liecanie  general,  the  wealthier 
liimilies  and  chief  eccleaftsticB  takinf;  the  initiative,  and  Gaioxa 
evideolty  co-operating  with  them.  Atler  preliminary  arrangemeuta. 
s  general  meetiag  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  and  provinces  was 
conrukcd  for  the  15th  September  1821,  at  the  palace  of  the  Audii^n- 
da,  where  the  independence  of  the  country  waa  proclaimed  amid 
the  acclamatiom  of  the  populace  asKmbled  in  the  plaza,  thus  effect- 
ing at  once  a  decisive  and  a  bloodleai  revolution. 

The  «ervanta  of  ITemando  Scptimo,  ill  prepared  for  such  a  con- 
tingency, made  no  attempt  to  maintain  bis  authority.     As  many  of 
them  OS  had  a  real  interest  in  the  country  were  soon  reconciled  to 
the  change.     Not  a  lew  took  part  in  the  new  government ;  and 
those  only  who  were  too  closely  united  with  royalty  to  endure  the 
separation,  reluraed  to  Spain,  or  withdrew  to  the  island  of  Cuba. 
^^ft      Tbe  aulboritiea  of  the  province  of  Nicar^ua  under  the  inQuence 
^^■if  its  bishop,  and  the  priest-ridden  city  of  Quesaltenango,  both 
^^Birithheld  their  adhenon,  and  at  an  early  period  declared  for  the 
^^^^lan  of  Iguala,  by  which  a  party  in  Mexico  had  proposed  that  the 
govemmenl  shoald  be  given  to  a  Spanish  prince  who  should  rule 
New  Spain  monarchically  but  independently  of  the  old  country. 
The  provisional  govcmmcnt  of  Giiatcmala  bad  convoked  a  gcne- 
^^tlln]  congnsa,  and  was  already  starting  in  the  career  of  reform,  and 
^^^mipidly  onloosing  the  bands  by  which  cimmerce  and  education  had 
^^Pfcecn  so  long  enthralled,  when  Iturbide,*  the  ephemeral  Emperor 
^^^Of  Meiico,  succeeded  in  checking  its  pr<)gress.  By  private  intrigues 
he  hod  raised  a  small  faction  among  the  nobles  of  Guatemala,  to 
the  support  of  which  he  now  sent  a  body  of  Mexican  troops ;  and 
for  the  first  time  «ince  the  conquest,  the  sword  of  civil  war  was 
tuwhesthcd  and  stained  with  blooil.    Some  engagements  took  place 
between  the  30th  November  1821  and  the  5th  January  1822,  when 
the  partisans  of  Iturbide  so  far  prevailed  i^inst  the  republicans, 
^t  tbe  supremacy  of  the  Mexican  government  was  proclaimed, 
ijulis  Iiortidi:. "  OnienliHlmii  of  Uh  Empin,  uid  Pmideut  of  Ux  Fia- 


^JM! 


ISO 

Agfumm,  iSbm  nty  At  ci^r  rf  Smu  Si.hnin  pokghA  mmi  ogered  a 
rsMhiie  baft  airtMiiih'  iMifectail  reMHMe%»  dM  k^penal  troope. 
GnMiiaaDd  S«i  Jo«:»  tic  ciyiuk  of  Kicui«m  aiid  Cocte  Rica, 
took  the  MM  poHtioB,  aMl  bang  les  MMOile  to  dM  i^ 
pbjaioii  fiKca»  were  enabled  to  penbl  ni  their  leftml  to  acknow- 
hO^  tbe  ptetcmkr.  AH  the  rat  of  tbe  eoontxy  now  actually 
inied  part  of  the  IfcTicaii  empire. 

Ihas  stale  of  things  was  but  transient  Itnrbide,  already  totter- 
ing to  hii  &llv  was  unable  to  maintiin  fofficient  forces  in  this 
distant  part  of  his  dominions,  where  his  friends  composed  but  a 
Teiy  small  minority.  Even  these  soon  forsook  him,  and  ^  Pronun- 
ciamioitos*  in  fayonr  of  independence  succeeded  each  other,  until 
DO  adherents  were  left  to  the  Mexican  cause  but  those  of  the  border 
proTince  of  Chiapas,  which  has  remained  a  part  of  Mexico  ever 


Thus  relieved,  the  five  Intendendas  of  Guatemala,  Salvador,  Hon- 
duras, Nicaragua,  and  Costa  Rica  agreed  together  ifi  1823  to  con- 
stitute a  Federal  Republic,  based  on  popular  representation;  each 
province  enjoying  a  separate  and  independent  state  organization 
for  its  own  internal  government.  It  was  proposed  to  frame  the 
federation  and  local  governments  much  aAer  the  form  of  the  United 
States  of  North  America ;  though,  as  will  be  seen,  that  model  was 
surpassed  in  some  important  respects. 

In  the  first  election  for  President,  General  Arce,  who  had  been 
a  bitter  enemy  to  Spanish  rule,  was  preferred,  by  a  rather  dubious 
election,  to  Don  Jos^  del  Valle,  a  man  of  deep  erudition  and  of 
democratic  tendencies. 

The  first  National  Constituent  Assembly  at  once  decreed  the  aboli- 
tion of  all  titles  and  privileges  of  nobility,  forbade  the  sale  of  Papal 
bulls  of  indulgence,  removed  every  hinderance  to  the  emigration  of 
■trangers,  gave  full  and  complete  guarantees  for  the  security  of 
the  property,  liberty,  and  lives  ci  foreign  residents,  awarded  them 
equal  privileges  in  every  respect  with  the  dtiaens  of  the  republic, 
and  both  set  aside  many  of  the  abuses  of  Spanish  government  and 
passed  a  great  number  of  wise  and  liberal  laws.  They  also  adopted  a 
national  flag  of  blue,  white,  and  blue,  placed  horizontally ;  and  for 
armorial  bearings  five  volcanoes  (one  for  each  state),  with  the  sun 
rismg  from  behind  them,  and  the  inscription  **Dio6,  Union,  Liber- 
tad**  (God,  Union,  Ubaty). 


ABOLITION   OF  SLAVERY.  121 

A  abort  season  of  general  pettce  and  of  much  promise  to  (he 
yonng  republic  succeeded.  But,  aa  early  as  the  commencement  of 
1824,  its  Iranquillity  was serioutily  disturbed  by  lactloua eommotiuus 
anbtng  the  iguoraot  populace  and  soldiery  in  the  cities  of  Lcod  and 
Gnuiadn.  Theae  disordere,  whetlier  or  not  occasioned  by  private 
Ambition,  resulted  in  rapid  change*  of  military  and  civil  governors, 
and  proved  to  be  only  the  beginning  of  troubles,  which  (as  already 
stated)  have  desolated  (he  hnhitaliouj  and  laid  the  glory  of  (hose 
cities  in  the  duat.  For  about  two  yean  aubscqucjit  to  this,  such 
(wmuiolioDB  frequently  prevailed  in  the  more  remote  ports  of  the 
republic,  bat  the  federal  government  and  most  of  the  stales  re- 
mained in  comparative  quiet,  and  made  great  strides  in  [nlitical 
and  commercial  prosperity. 

The  federal  constitution,  the  basea  of  which  were  published  on 
the  27tb  December  18-23,  was  not  decreed  till  the  22nd  November 
11^24.  But  before  that  delicate  task  was  accomplished,  the  na- 
tional asaerably  bod  continued  to  promulgate  liberal  measures. 
A  decree,  aboliiibing  slavery  at  once  and  absolutely,  and  pro- 
viding agiunst  its  re- introduction  at  any  time  or  to  any  part  of 
the  republic,  and  laying  heavy  peaalties  on  citizens  wlio  should 
engagte  in  the  slave-trade,  was  enacted  on  the  ITth  April  iS24,  so 
that  to  (be  Central  American  Bcpublic  belongs  the  honour  of  having 
led  the  van  among  thosegovemmenta  who  have  wiped  this  foul  blot 
from  their  national  escutcheons.*  In  this  act  of  justice  their  en- 
ligbteoed  statesmen  and  patriots  evinced  to  the  world  the  sincerity 
wbicb  animated  them  in  the  cause  of  freedom,  and  gave  a  noble 
of  the  absence  of  those  prejudices  and  sordid  motites  which 
di'graoc  more  highly  favoured  elates. 

To  tbii  deed  they  have  remained  faithful  even  in  (he  midst  of 
rolution.  An  lale  as  the  year  1^40,  a  claim  was 
mode  by  the  British  Dovemmenl  for  the  return  to  slavery  of  some 
Afrieani  who  had  restored  themselves  to  liberty  by  withdrawing 
from  British  Jlonduras,  and  settling  under  the  protection  of  the 


•  -  TliE  Mth  utie 

Ic  of  the 

Fidcnl  Omiht 

tioBprdmni 

nBH^nryoumftBintlielU. 

piil]l.^^uiJdHl>r« 

ihiiht 

■boliku 

ttttre  undm  tht  :&•»,  nor  be  > 

num  tin  tnBn  1 

.!•.« 

(OT.tijnrufjIhiin, !).,.«». 

OMiouair 

tttbc  world  u»l»lMll(«n 

<WniT;«<IMclU 

cutbiv 

0  Ibg  ftrther  m 

iix  or  tunn 

nfoMd  ]icimiuU7  conpniH- 

Ik...  •Itb.n^  .Bd. 

«M  pnmded  od  ottso 

d."— Ml.  YoBng  ADitenou'i  RipoM,  183V, 

^Mm 


122  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

repablic  That  claim  was  moved  by  the  British  Consul  General 
seconded  by  British  offioera,  both  military  and  naval,  who  were 
sent  to  Guatemala  to  demand  the  persons  of  these  poor  Africans, 
and  supported  by  the  presence  of  a  British  man-of*war  upon  their 
coasts.  But  though  the  government  of  the  republic  was  then  weak 
and  dismembered,  there  was  moral  rectitude  and  dignity  enough  in 
it  to  spurn  the  claim  of  a  government  to  which  on  other  matters 
they  have  long  been  accustomed  to  yield,  and  in  their  reply  they 
faithfully  declared  that  no  slaves  were  or  could  be  recognised 
within  their  territories,  the  inviolability  of  which  they  asserted, 
though  conscious  that  they  wanted  the  physical  power  to  maintain 
it  against  such  a  foe.  This  matter  went  no  farther,  perhaps  be- 
cause of  the  state  of  the  public  mind  in  Britain  on  the  subject  of 
slavery  at  the  time. 

Ere  the  new  government  was  well  seated,  and  before  the  State 
had  decreed  its  own  constitution,  it  had  entirely  removed  all  the 
old  restrictions  upon  foreign  commerce  and  international  inter- 
course imposed  by  Spain ;  in  making  the  Pope*8  bulls  contraband 
articles,  it  had  even  dared  with  imhallowed  hands  to  touch  and 
dry  up  what  had  for  ages  been  a  prolific  source  of  revenue  to  the 
church;  and  by  freeing  the  injured  slave,  it  had  despoiled  the 
monastic  orders  of  their  share, — and  it  was  the  lion*s  share, — of 
property  in  human  flesh  and  blood.  Such  a  government  was  not 
likely  to  stop  there.    Nor  did  it. 

The  National  Convention  and  the  first  Federal  Congress,  which 
met  on  the  6th  February  1825,  decreed  the  liberty  of  the  press — 
the  suppression  of  monopolies — trial  by  jury — a  habeas  corpus  act 
— and  other  essential  safeguards  to  the  liberties  of  the  people, 
which  followed  each  other  in  such  rapid  succession  that  it  would 
seem  as  if  the  sanguine  and  buoyant  heart  of  the  young  legislature 
had  glowed  with  delight  as  it  glanced  upon  all  that  was  best  and 
most  beautiful  in  the  constitutions  and  laws  of  older  states ;  and 
culling  with  a  vigorous,  liberal,  and  yet  a  discerning  hand,  it 
appeared  resolved  to  bind  them  together  in  one  glorious  wreath 
with  which  to  adorn  the  youthful  and  yet  unsullied  brow  of 
their  own  free-bom  state. 

The  constitution  of  the  state  of  Guatemala  was  decreed  on  the 
11th  of  October  1825,  that  of  Honduras  on  the  11th  of  December; 
both  had  been  preceded  in  this  work  by  Costa  Rica  on  the  2l8t 


POUTICAL  ELEMENTS. 


123 


P 

^^^Uanuaryof  tliesame  year.  Salvador  was  aa  usual  the  most  prompt, 
^^nMving  decreed  ben  un  the  12th  of  June  1824,  atid  Nicaragua, 
^^  tte  most  dilatory,  did  so  on  the  8th  April  1 826. 

But  alas!  the  patriots  bad  aeilhcr  within  nor  around  Iliem  the 
most  essential  elements  of  success.  Enamoured  of  liberty,  and 
sincere  believers  In  thetnitb,  and  tberefun'in  the  elhcacy,  of  their 

Pciple«  of  goremment,  they  knew  not  that  there  was  a  lack  of 
dple  in  themselves  to  keep  them  fiiithful  to  their  Rnt  love, 
to  fortify  them  against  the  snares  to  which  ibcir  possession  of 
power  and  their  very  success  exposed  them.  BeUcvets  in  jwlitica, 
but  inlidels  in  heart,  they  were  double-minded,  and  therefore  un- 
stable  in  their  scntitnents  and  conduct ;  the  very  literature  which 
had  been  largely  inslrumeutol  in  making  them  refonnem  bad  trans- 
formed them  from  blind  bigots  and  lealuts  of  Bonienism  int«  deists 
and  atheists  of  every  shade.  Tbe  writings  of  the  school  of  Vol- 
ture,  which  bad  {fcnetrated  to  this  secluded  comer  of  tbe  X'<i{)e*B 
usurped  dominions  in  spite  of  tbe  vigilance  of  the  Inquisition  und  the 
prohibitions  and  snntbemos  of  tbe  ex  purgatorial  index,  had  taught 
tbeto  to  reject  evil,  but  not  to  cbiiose  tbnt  which  is  good  ;  and  eon- 
■eqiiently  there  was  a  mixture  of  ttrengtb  and  weakness — a  combi- 
nation of  iron  with  clay,  of  which  they  were  utterly  unconscious. 
In  the  people  they  needed  to  fiudsnpixirters,  but  in  them  they  only 
fouud  gross  Ignorance,  unhappily  blended  with  tbe  eaiiie  want  of 

inciple  which  conetituted  their  own  weakncea. 

f  The  obHtaeles  which  the  ignorance  of  tbe  people  interposed  to 

2  working  of  a  system  in  which   the  popular  voice  bad  to  be 

)  largely  consulted  could  not  but  he  early  seen  and  felt.      A 

7  remedy  was  applied.     Lancnsterian  schools,  so  called,  were 

tablished  in  many  towns  and  villages.     But  though  tbe  [wople 

V  willing,  nay  anxious,  to  be  taught,  teachers  were  wanting,  and 

few  wbu  in  the  capital  were  intruated  with  the  direction  of  the 

xils,  had  only  a  Uuilted  and  theoretical  knowledge  of  any  method. 

Bevertheleis,  the  project  was  more  or  less  actively  uiidertskeo. 

;   very   barracks   were   converted   into  class-rooms;   and   tbe 

karelboted  Indian  soldiers  were  taught  tbe  rudiments  of  knowledge 

bj  their  officers,  who  occupied  the  place  of  teachers. 

But  there  were  other  barriers  perhaps  greater  still,  and  certainly 

e  difficult  to    remove  than  these,  namely,  tbe  positive 

d  active  opposition  of  priestcrad,  and  tbe  evil  influences  of  that 

n  of  deception,  utukr  the  feigned  name  of  religion,  which  had 


124  THB  CKMPBL  IN  GEMTBAL  AKBBICA. 

fiuled  to  sapply  the  principle  of  yirtne  in  the  heart,  and  had  so  long 
fostered  ignoranoe  with  all  its  concomitant  vices  and  immoralities 
among  the  people.  That  system,  which  is  itself  the  embodiment  of 
the  most  absolute  despotnm,  and  the  ready  handmaid  of  op- 
pression, had  introduced  elements  into  society  totally  incompatible 
with  the  line  of  policy  adopted  by  the  new  government,  and  as 
decidedly  inimical  to  the  institntions  now  so  ardently  desired  by  the 
more  enlightened  class  of  citizens.  The  priests,  and  those  who 
were  identified  with  them,  soon  felt  it  necessary  to  combine  for  the 
defence  of  their  *  Holy  Mother  f  and  they  were  enabled  to  make 
their  opposition  felt  long  before  it  was  safe  to  array  themselves  in 
open  hostility  to  public  opinion,  which,  like  a  mighty  surge,  was 
still  swelling  and  rolling  onwards  to  the  no  small  damage  of 
their  shrines  and  idols,  and  apparently  to  the  destruction  of  their 
craft,  ere  the  reflux  tide  of  popular  impulse  could  set  in. 

As  might  be  expected,  the  priests  drew  around  them  the  few 
self-styled  nobles  who  had  remained,  and  were  not  found  among  the 
truer  nobility  who  sought  the  people^s  weal.  These  consisted  of  a 
small  number  of  wealthy  families  of  Spanish  descent,  called 
••  Saugre  Azules,**  or  blue-bloods.  They  were  for  the  most  part 
intimately  connected  with  the  priests,  some  members  of  their  houses 
being  high  dignitaries  of  the  church.  Their  friends  or  supporters 
among  the  people  were  confined  to  the  most  grossly  ignorant  and 
fanatical,  by  no  means  a  small,  though  a  decreasing  class,  to  those 
most  closely  allied  to  the  priests  in  their  temporal  interests,  and  to 
the  more  attached  dependants  of  the  limited  aristocracy.  Together, 
they  constituted  a  formidable  political  party,  the  tendencies  of  which 
were  to  oppose  the  education  of  the  masses,  to  centralize  and  con- 
solidate an  unlimited  civil  power  in  the  hands  of  a  few  among  the 
wealthy,  and  to  build  up  ecclesiastical  domination  like  a  Babel  to  the 
very  skies.  The  acts  of  this  party  soon  earned  for  its  supporters 
the  unenviable  title  of  '  ServiM-^tL  name  as  generally  used  as 
that  of  *"  Liberates^*  or  Liberals,  by  which  the  friends  of  progress 
are  distinguished. 

The  liberal  party  included  some  few  who  had  been  distinguished 
men  under  the  monarchy,  the  greater  portion  of  the  legal  and 
medical  professions,  or,  in  other  words,  the  ^ite  of  the  university,  who 
had  preferred  those  studies  to  that  of  theology  or  canons,  not  so 
much  as  a  means  of  support,  as  because  they  are  almost  the  only 
careers  open  to  those  who  reject  the  ecclesiistical  vocation.    It  also 


I 


'BERTItES'  4KP  '  tlBEIHtES.'  125 

numbered  many  mercbsnU  and  landed  proprietors,  supported  by  a 
QDmeroua  body  composed  of  the  more  intelligent  artisans  and 
labourers.  Tbeir  leaden  were  men  of  very  decided  dcmocraticiil 
principlcti.  of  unqueetionnble  ability,  and,  considering  the  achool 
tli«y  were  brought  up  in  and  the  influeucM  that  Hurronnded  ibem, 
they  manilcsted  no  small  amount  of  true  patriotism  and  devoted- 
ness  to  their  convictioiia  j  thongh,  alaa!  in  too  many  instances, 
stained  with  renality,  and  even  with  deeds  of  oppreesion  and  of 
blood.  What  they  overthrew  and  what  they  accomplished  for  the 
state  is  honourable  alike  to  tbeir  talents  and  to  their  sentitnents ; 
and  though  the  limits  of  a  sketch  willscarcely  admit  of  the  dueappre- 
ciatioD  of  it,  a  cursory  view  of  their  achievements,  taking  into  con- 
rideratioD  the  circumstances  of  the  people  and  of  the  limes,  will  pro- 
bably excite  more  wonder,  and  certainly  merits  higher  praise,  than 
the  victories  of  Alvarado.  But  they  were  men,  and,  as  already 
noticed,  for  the  most  part  infidel  mm .-  their  minds  had  but  just  es- 
caped from  the  bondage  of  supers! il ion,  and  only  to  be  hurried  into 
the  labyrinth  of  infidelity,  and  become  a  prey  to  doubt ;  their 
light  was  limited  and  uirci-rtain ;  their  principles,  even  when  sontid, 
rented  upon  no  firm  foundation ;  they  were  not  always  faithful  to 
themselves  and  to  each  other ;  and  when  in  the  possession  of  power, 
it  was  abused  by  them  almost  as  much  as  by  their  opponents,  and  it 
waa  the  more  reprcbensihle  in  tbeir  case,  inasmuch  as  they  were 
rr/ormrri,  and  tramgrcssed  in  the  very  glare  of  tbeir  own  light. 

Had  the  'Liberales'  been  all  that  they  ought  or  might  have 
becD,  it  must  have  proved  a  laborious  and  a  hazardous  task  fn 
Tule  a  nation  where  the  seeds  of  anarchy,  and  only  such  seeds,  had 
Iwen  sown  for  centuries.  But  as  it  wds,  their  opponents  were  as 
qnick-sigbtcd  to  detect,  as  they  were  able  and  willing  to  make  the 
most  of,  their  mistakes  and  crimei,  as  well  as  to  take  advantage  of 
the  nnprepnred  state  of  the  people  generally  to  keep  pace  with 
tbeir  Itaders.  And  thus  the  tide  was  often  tamed,  and  progress 
and  reaction  successively  lasbcd  the  strand,  till  popular  fury,  sub- 
wding  from  sheer  exhaustion,  ceased  a  while,  but  only  to  gather 
■trcDgth  for  new  contests,  which  were  again  interrupted  by  short 
and  deceitful  calms. 

The  Bcerdotal  class  luScred  little  immediate  inconvenience  by 
tlie  sudden  diiaevcrtnent  of  the  late  colony  from  Spain.  It  wok. 
kowcTcr,  a  prcliniiuary  to  the  overthrow  uf  their  influence,  as  it 


it/l)  tIfK  OOtnSL  m  OBCTBAL  AXEUCA. 

AiMiwiuiJi^  bunt  tbe  Huod-girtiBi  wfaidi  hid  been  kept  dosed,  and 

iul  io<M>'  tta'  spirit  of  inquiry  and  xefoniL     The  piiests  and  monks 

4oUbtl««H  Ueludisd  tliemKlTai  with  the  hope,  that,  like  ^  the  strong 

mmu  aniMfd/*  the^r  would  atill  be  enshled  to  ^keep  their  goods  in 

IWMt/*  eveii  whiie  the  nation  oT  Europe,  and  eicpedally  France, 

wen;    demonatrating    to  the  ^Rrorld   the  more   than  Tulnerable 

character  of'  their  dains  and  oi^iecta.      But  '^a  stronger  than 

the]i'**  WBh  in  their  bahitatiOD :  and  CTcn  this  remote  part  of  the 

pop^sdom  felt  the  dioek  of  the  acnrdr  aanuiltg  it  was  receiving, 

till  tta  eabrt  fauofwait  was  vinlsBithr  oaomlsed  like  the  limbs  of  a 

giant  in  the  aevnie!:  of  appraaidnng  disohztion.     Xor  did  they 

caeaih.  kwal  inftictiaiic  fhm  inqinnennt  who  were  neither  scrupulous 

nor  QmikL  and  wiir>  wen:  onahUio  inflict  deep  wounds  from  which 

pnesth-  wthumec  faw  :nc^wr  T«t  icuweied,  and  which  appear  still 

fikely  Ti  T»wn  nwcrau 

IV  Sf^^nriiti^.  niahidnc  the  two  extremes  of  society,  tbe  most 

4i«^:  Oil  iwMC  ^niharooa,  linked  together  by  their  blind 

UK  juajwa*  -  ofie  eBdrriy  led  by  the  latter ;  among  whom 

i»t«^^tM^y  'ipnitaafi  Spaniards  and  scnne  few  men  of  ability,  though 

ir-  W^atfthmiar  they  were  Tery  far  inferior  to  the  Liberals.  They 

|u!«t  -^wt:vt;r,  proved  themaelves  to  be  thoroughly  imbued  with 

yw.  >^i4  of  their  order  and  the  genius  of  their  system.    They 

^«.^^«^  acted  upon  the  maxim  that  all  things  were  lawful  which 

t4>  them  expedient ;  and,  notwithstanding  their  apparent 

(h«y  too  had  their  divisions,  their  mutual  jealousies, 

^^  '(Mik^aa^ambations,  and  their  individual  immoralities,  which, 

'j|^{i4J»a'  >kiilh  their  common  rapacity,  were  favourable  to  their 

uu^ftfr  Y*"     Attd  in  general,  if  not  universally,  it  will  be  found 

^1^   u^  U%.v  l«>  their  intrigues  the  internal  disorders  of  the 

.^giiijl  ,MMJi  )K>hlK>U  UW^  in  each  of  the  several  states  composing  the 

•^mJ^  ;  4^  v^^  a  l^w  of  the  past  civil  wars  and  existing  animo- 

-QtHf^  b<4^svM  s«ai^  aiMl  MUe  are  also  attributable  to  their  influence 

.i«^  d^  s'hMiK  ^M  ^^  ^^  i^crmnal  ambition  and  seditious  conduct  of 

V  c^^;^  «k  ^)bOs^  a  WUng  ecclesiastic  contrived  to  excite  the 
«^V4Ai\\  NNi>  ^  V^s^^sW  HMTth^"  state  of  Salvador,  who  were  under  the 
\V<>lN««ifc>i^''4'^  JUVj^Mhw  \Mf  Guatemala,  so  as  to  induce  them  to  elect 
hiiN^  WJbKi^  1^  ^  ^lHk»  iMdedly  opposed  by  the  archbishop  of 
^jbi^:vrrS.~tflJiyir^"^^^  ^  ^  Pope.    In  the  fine  of  their  united 


KMtmDER   op  CERILIO   FLOREe.  157 

Dnnctation*,  the  radreDelgndoDcled  OS  bishop  of  San  Salvador  for 
oul  Tour  yean.  Out  of  tbia  circumstance  arose  serious  iliiipules 
ooiy  wan,  and  a  rankling  envy  between  the  two  states,  wblcb  baa 
never  yet  been  healed;  though  tbc  Liberals,  who  ore  Dumerieally 
Ihe  stronger  party  in  both  stoics,  earnestly  desire  to  unite  their 
vnerj^  lor  the  advancement  of  their  nntional  prosperity. 

Cueta  Rica  with  Nicaragua  soon  after  repeated  the  same  Epis- 
copal tcandal  that  Salvador  and  Guatemala  had  witnessed,  but  the 
results  were  far  less  disastrous. 

A  comiDon  resort  of  both  parties  when  reduced  to  extremities, 
has  been  prolific  of  evil  consequences.  It  is  that  of  allying  them- 
selves, by  bribery  or  otherwise,  with  the  most  successful  military 
commanders  who  were  willing  to  become  their  tools.  The  power 
thus  acquired  has  often  been  turned  by  the  mUitary  despot  against 
both  parties;  and  when  not  ao,  the  country  has  been  involved 
in  protracted  warfare,  and  its  real  interests  trodden  down.  The 
union  in  one  person  of  civil  and  military  offices  of  trust,  which 
may  lie  r^arded  as  a  consequence  of  thia  practice,  haa  also  been  a 
Iruitful  source  of  rioleoee  and  misrule. 

General  Arce,  the  first  president  of  the  republic,  having  noid 
himself  to  the  Seniles,  was  instrumental  iu  eSi^etiog  the  first  com- 
plete reactionary  movement,  five  years  after  the  independence  whs 
declared.  Under  the  pretext  of  hnving  secret  information  that  the 
itatc  authorities  of  Guatemala  were  plotting  rebellion  against  the 
Federal  Government,  he  arre.fted  the  citizen  Chief  of  the  State, 
Jo«£  Francisco   Barrundia,  one  of  the  most  able  and  active  re- 

^lb^nen,  while  discharging  his  functions  in  the  national  jialnce, 
and  then  proceeded  to  disarm  the  civic  militia.  To  these  acts 
no  resistance  was  opposed;  but  from  the  6th  of  September  1826, 
irhen  Barrundia'x  arrest  took  place,  must  be  dated  all  the  com- 
inotions  which  have  already  resulted  in  so  much  ruin,  and  which 
arc  not  yet  terminated.  During  the  following  month,  one  of  the 
worst  scenes  of  this  tragic  history  was  enacted  at  Queaultenongn, 
whither  the  Congress  and  the  liberal  members  of  government  had 

The  Vice-President,  the  citizen  Cerilio  Flores,  a  man  held  in 
general  esteem,  in  the  exercise  of  his  public  duties  levied  a  tax 
DpoQ  the  inhabitants  of  Quesalteoango,  iu  doing  which  he  did  not 
etcmpt  the  iunates  of  the  conventa,  of  which  there  were  several 


T.JMI 


128  THB  Q06PBL  IN  ORNTRAL  AMBRICA. 

m  that  dty.  With  no  other  proYOcation,  a  friar  ascended  the 
pulpit  on  a  market- day,  and  by  his  harangue  so  infuriated  the 
popukoe  against  Flores,  that  they  immediately  went  in  search  of 
him,  pursued  him  to  this  very  church,  to  which  he  fled  as  to  a 
sanctuary,  and  butchered  him  in  the  presence  of  the  friar,  be- 
spattering the  walls  of  the  edifice  with  his  blood  and  brains.  In 
this  deed  the  market-women  were  the  principal  actors,  but  the  men 
also  took  up  the  cause  of  the  monks,  and  vociferated  "Viva 
Guatemala,**  ''  Muera  el  Congreso,**  (Long  live  Guatemala,  Death 
to  the  Congress).  Several  other  members  of  the  government  were 
then  assassinated ;  and  the  rest,  mth  the  deputies  only  escaped  by 
a  flight,  which  left  the  state  of  Guatemala  without  either  legislature 
or  executive. 

Upon  this  revene,  the  Serviles  came  into  power.  Don  Mariano 
Aycinena,  one  of  the  blue-bloods,  was  installed  chief  of  the  state 
on  the  Ist  of  March  1827.  A  tribunal  for  summarily  disposing  of 
political  offenders  was  established  at  Guatemala,  and  sentences  of 
proscription  were  passed  against  the  dtixen  Dr.  Molina,  and  eight 
others  of  the  leaders  of  the  liberal  party.  General  Sachet,  who 
had  been  a  soldier  of  the  French  empire,  and  a  Colonel  Pierson,  a 
West  Indian  Creole,  were  also  proscribed.  The  latter  being  taken, 
was  shot  at  Guatemala  under  the  ¥rall  of  the  cemetery.  These 
were  the  first  victims  on  account  of  which  many  more  leading 
men  and  scions  of  the  most  respectable  fiunilies — the  ^lite  of  the 
land — belonging  to  both  parties,  have  since  been  massacred  in  cold 
blood,  sometimes  even  by  scores 

At  this  period  fresh  insurrections  convulsed  the  states  of 
Nicaragua  and  Honduras,  which  partly  resulted  from  the  change 
in  Guatemala.  Salvador  being  in  the  hands  of  the  Liberals,  re- 
fbsed  any  longer  to  acknowledge  Arce,  and  having  unsuccessfully 
invaded  Guatemala,  was,  in  its  turn,  attacked  by  him  with  2,000 
federal  troops,  which  were  completely  repulsed.  Other  battles 
were  afterwards  fought  with  various  results,  and  several  officers  on 
both  sides  rose  into  importance.  Among  these  was  General  Fran- 
cisco Morasan,  who  for  fifteen  years  was  the  military  leader  of  the 
^  Liberales,*'  and  at  times  thdr  only  support  In  person  hand- 
some, of  a  fiur  omiplezion,  in  manners  agreeable,  and  of  rather 
tnperior  powers  of  mind,  he  was  an  exception  to  the  generality  of 
the  soldier  tbkitthm  of  Central  America.    There  was  much  that 


UORAZAN. 


:29 


Kamialile  and  attractive  in  bia  disposition.  He  was  bom,  in 
9,  in  the  state  of  Hoaduraa.  Uis  father  was  u  French  creole 
of  the  West  IncUfs,  aud  to  this  fact  may,  perhaps,  be  attributed 
that  fire  and  energy  of  character  which  disIinguiBhed  hitu. 
nil  mother  was'ajady  of  Tegucigalpa,  and  hence  the  impetuosity  of 

this  dispoffltion   was   happily   temjiered   by   that   amenity   which 
iielongs  pailicularly  to  the  Ctiitntl  Americans,  by  whom  he  was 
ycry  generally  beloved. 
During  the  absence  of  General  Arce  on  one  of  the  warlike  e::ipe- 
diticms  which  resulted  from  the  universal  anarchy  now  prevalent 
in  the  five  fitatea,  the  citizen  Mariano  Bettntneno,  as  vice-president 
of  the  republic,  ytaa  lor  a  time  entrusted  with  the  reins  of  govem- 
ment:  an  the  fresident-General's  return  (in  1S28)  be  reAised  to  re- 
linquish the  power  he  held,  and  Arce  wna  unable  to  compel  him.  The 
dril  vrara  which  continued  to  rage,  and  became  even  more  general, 
^^iMw  assumed  features  of  cruelty  which  had  been  unknown  before. 
^^LQuarter  was  generally  refused,  and  prisoners  taken  on  both  tiides 
^^■■rere  indiKriminately  massacred,  sometimes  by  hundreds-      The 
^^Hrity  of  Sau  Salvador  was  reduced,  and  filled  with  federal  troops, 
which  the  insurgent  inhabitants  soon  after  made  prisoners,  urith 
their  leaders,     Ucncra)  Moraaan,  now  ibr  the  first  time  in  com- 
mand of  the  forces  of  Honduras,  also  defeated  the  troops  of  Guale- 
EJa  OD  the  hanks  of  the  Rio  Lenipa,  and  then  pursued  and  obliged 
em  to  lay  down  their  arms. 
The  federal  government  in  the  hands  of  the  servilcs  of  GosteRula. 
bg  incapable  of  contending  much  longer,  now  made  ovcrlum  of 
peace-    An  insurrection  against  the  same  party  lirokeout  in  Quesal- 
tenaogo,  and  their  first  short  day  of  power  was  evidently  passing 
SWity.    Nevertheless,   they   manifested   the  spirit   that  animated 
,  by  employing  the  eleventh  hour  in  trying  to  undo  some  of 
e  bat  legislative  measures  of  the  libcrelis,  and  iu  consignmg  to 
W  flames  all  prohibited  works,  or  those  contained  in  the  catalogue 
if  hooka  condemned  by  the  Pope. 

*  The  insurrection  against  iho  servilea,  which  had  been  qnclled  at 
tDCMltcnango,  soon  broke  out  again  in  the  Antigua,  or  tbe  old 
jiiuU,  where  tlic  liberals  hare  generally  been  in  great  strength 
d  activity.  Ilwssalsu  soon  put  down;  but  these  facts  encouraged 
Uunuan,  who  was  now  in  the  ascendant,  to  invade  Guatemala 
mih  2,000  men.    Ou  the  Stb  Feb.  \ii-29,  he  first  attacked  thi.' 


*.**« 


130  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AlfBRICA. 

eapital,  and  being  lepaked  Tvith  some  loss,  fell  back  upon  the 
Antigua^  where  he  was  joyously  receiyed — the  authorities  of  the 
plaee  making  their  escape  without  striking  a  blow.  From  this 
point  he  directed  his  arms  against  the  new  city,  generally  with 
mecess.  Concessions  were  tendered  to  him,  offering  that  the  pro- 
•eribed  liberals  should  be  recalkd,  and  the  govemment  shared 
with  them.  These  orertures  were  declined ;  and,  after  more  than 
two  months  of  petty  warfare,  Morazan  again  attacked  the  capital 
CQ  the  12th  April,  made  good  his  entrance,  finally  drove  out  those 
public  fonctionaries  that  he  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  im- 
prison, and  restored  the  authorities  who  had  been  deposed  and 
had  escaped  from  Quesaltenango  in  October  1826. 

The  scattered  liberals  now  returned  to  their  homes,  after  an 
exile  which  had  lasted  two  years  and  a  half,  during  which  some  of 
them  had  yisited  Europe  and  the  United  States  of  America,  and 
thus  enjoyed  opportunities  of  acquiring  practical  information, 
which  they  came  prepared  to  derote  to  their  beloved  country,  for 
whose  liberties  they  had  suffered  so  much.  Great  honours  were 
now  paid  to  Morazan,  and  general  satis&ction  prevailed ;  but  for  the 
ierviles  it  was  a  time  of  deep  waters,  and  the  billows  were  not  long 
in  passing  over  them,  and  more  especially  over  their  frail  and 
ndned  political  outworks. 

The  first  acts  of  the  restored  federal  congress,  senate^  and  state 
congress,  were  to  declare  all  the  laws  and  acts  of  the  serviles  null 
and  void ;  to  st%matize  the  late  government  as  an  unconstitutional 
usurpation,  and  to  reinstate  Barrundia,  who  had  been  arrested  as 
■president  of  the  state,  in  the  more  honourable  post  of  president  of 
thft  republic.  The  next  step  was  to  visit  upcm  their  opponents 
tlie  punishment  of  their  crimes,  or,  at  least,  to  put  it  out  of  their 
power  immediately  to  repeat  them.  This  was  in  part  prepared  by 
Morasan  himself,  with  all  the  seeresy  which  the  deed  required, 
and  waa  executed  by  virtue  of  his  military  authority.  On  the 
grounds  that  intrigues  against  the  newly-restored  government  had 
been  discovered,  the  archbishop,  Ramon  Casaus,  and  all  the  heads 
of  the  Dominicans,  Franciscans,  Bethlemites,  Capuchins,  Merce- 
darios,  and  otho:  orders  of  monkhood,  were  simultaneously  seized 
in  the  dead  of  the  night  of  the  10th  to  the  1 1th  July,  and  escorted 
hy  soldiers  to  the  port  of  Yzabal,  where  they  were  shipped  to 
ibe  Bmnmulbf  and  to  other  plaees*    The  xest  were  sammarily 


I 


ABOLITlO.f   or  HONASTERIBK.  191 

ordered  to  leaTc  the  countrj-.  Legal  proccediogi  were  instituted 
against  the  munlercra  of  Cerilio  Flore9  and  his  fellow-TictiniH. 
All  tbc  measures  atrcadj  decreed  by  tlie  liberals  were  again  Banc* 
tjooed  and  enforced,  and  the  nnfiai:ihed  work  of  reform  vmi 
vigorously  remnied. 

The  late  president  and  luinistcre  of  state  were  bIbo  banished 
vith  idl  thdr  officials,  bj  a  decree  of  the  federal  congress  of  the 
SSnd  August  1829.  They  ncre  made  debtors  to  the  amount  of 
■riary  they  had  received,  and  their  property  was  confiscated  to  pay 
|hc  cspeuscs  of  the  war.  This  kind  of  reprisals,  however  covered 
,'lrith  the  semblance  of  jnetice,  cannot  be  approved,  and  aa  it  hod 
provoked,  so  it  induced  equal  if  not  worse  deeds  of  retabation 
when  the  fallen  party  rose  again  on  the  ruins  of  its  opponent. 

Ecclesiastical  abuses  :iow  enjoyed  a  largir  share  of  the  attention 
of  the  Icgisiatnro  than  before,  though  other  matters  were  by  no 
Bwams  neglected.  Ere  the  month  of  J  uly  had  elapsed,  the  Congress 
t£  Guatemala  decreed  the  suppression  of  all  the  convents  for  males, 
■pprojiriating  the  bnildtngs,  estates,  and  revenues  to  the  purposes 
•fgovenimciit.  The  nunneries  were  thrown  open,  and  the  inmates 
informed  that  they  might  go  or  remain  at  thdr  own  option ;  but 
any  future  protbeiions  of  nuns  were  forbidden,  so  that  (heir  numbers 
could  not  be  recruited. 

The  Federal  Congress  on  the  7th  September  ratified  this  act, 
ind  declared  all  religious  orders  at  an  end  throughout  the  republic- 
Thc  sanction  of  the  people  was  euperadded,  and  it  yrtia  actually 
onried  into  effect  in  all  the  states. 

In  the  month  of  June  of  tlie  following  year,  the  assembly  of 
Onutemala  declared  the  archbishop  a  traitor,  confiscated  his  jiro- 
|mty,  and  hanislicd  him  fcr  ever  from  tbc  state    lie  continued 

raiidr  W  the  Havanna  till  his  death  in  IS4J. 

Among  other  suliscquent  niea.''UTes  the  Inquisition  was  abolished, 
acknowledged  children  of  prieuls  weru  permitted  to  inherit 
fathers'  property ;  even  the  celibacy  oF  the  clergy  was  legisla- 
tively set  aside  in  one  of  the  elntea  (Honduras).  The  appointment  of 
high  dignitaries  in  the  church,  being  declared  to  belong  to  the  nation, 
WIS  given  into  ihe  hands  of  tlio  president,  and  the  veiy  supremacy 
of  the  Pope  was  virtually  rcpenled,  by  alnw  subjecting  his  bulls  to 
the  approval  of  the  local  governments.  The  climai  appears  to  have 
been  reached  in  1S32,  when  the  elate  religion,  which  had  been 
x2 


132  THB  G06FBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

adopted  by  the  constitution  to  the  excluson  of  the  public  exercise 

of  any  other,  was  made  to  succumb  to  the  most  complete  religious 

liberty — ^  above  the  insulting  instalment  of  mere  toleration.    It 

WIS  proclaimed  by  a  decree  of  the  Federal  Congress,  and  accepted 

by  the  local  assemblies — a  decree  which  would  do  honour  to  any 

government  and  people;  but  which,  alas!  like  many  measures 

adopted  by  the  liberals,  was  rather  the  promulgation  of  a  principle 

than  the  enactment  of  a  law,  as  there  were  none  to  take  advantage 

of  its  provisions.  Of  course  all  these  acts  were  stifled,  and,  as  far  as 

they  could  be,  undone,  when,  ten  years  after,  the  serviles  returned 

again  to  power.    But  not  only  had  there  been  a  breach  made  upon 

the  customs  and  revenues  of  the  church,  and  a  salutary  impression 

produced  upon  the  public  mind,  which  the  priests  could  never 

obliterate ;  but,  inasmuch  as  most  of  these  statutes  emanated  from 

the  Federal  Congress,  and  were  severally  ratified  by  each  of  the 

state  legislatures,  they  became  the  law  of  the  republic  in  such  a 

manner  that  no  one  state  could  aftervrards  disannul  them,  and 

though,  since  the  dismemberment  of  the  Federation,  some  of  the 

local  assemblies  under  servile  influence,  have  endeavoured  to  repeal 

them,  they  still  remain,  properly  speaking,  the  law  of  the  land, 

and  will,  in  all  probability,  be  practically  restored  ere  long. 

But  of  what  avail  can  even  religious  freedom  (that  greatest  of 
national  blessings  and  privileges)  be  to  a  people  destitute  of  the 
Bible,  and  where  no  living  testimony  is  lifted  up  in  favour  of  the 
simple  truths  of  the  Grospel  ?  True,  alas !  but  if  they  have  so 
early  and  so  cheaply  held  out  to  them  that  which  it  has  cost  the 
aaints  of  past  generations,  in  our  own  and  other  lands,  so  much 
toil  and  endurance  to  obtain  for  their  successors,  in  but  an  im- 
perfect form,  does  it  not  constitute  a  powerful  appeal  to  those 
who  know  its  value,  to  do  what  in  them  lies  to  make  the  States  of 
Central  America  '*free  indeed?**  And  may  it  not  be  that  the 
tendered  blessmg  will  still  be  withheld  till  they  all  have  learned 
from  U8  in  some  measure  to  appreciate  the  boon  ? 


SHORT  LIVED  PKOSPERITY. 


CHAPTER    Vm. 


ir>»— ContLaucil  Bcronni— Fcdenl  Gomnaait  li 
of  3ninti*  Diji-Pnutrti  of  Culoniiition— EITmH  of 
enUfbtinied  Icpd>tian— DuIdfu  of  Ihc  People  to  ulmlc  of  R-^Camt—Tht  Chnkn^ 
bunncUonof  the  Ulta  Indiau—ItafKl  Cirnn— Senile  luBiunu  RiuceDduil— 111* 
SItle  uf  hot  AllM  foniial— Wbh  ei  Udiihii  nnd  Cane™— Cnmra  aaUr  Govcraut  at 
Utts— UinalBUDD  ol  the  VHlintlan— The  Semlix  Reinni  lo  Pmo— Uanun'i  Uit 
£dIi7  md  Bftmt  from  Outaiuila— Hit  Flight. 

-  n*  tffimun;  ifilrifi  ii  a  wim  mu  itIliA  ant  Hsffr."— Prar.  xrii.  14. 

Trb  year    1S30,  nhich  is  mcmOTsble  Tor  its  conviilxions  in   so 

many  European  states,  was  as  remarknble  Ibr  national  tranquillity 

_iD  Central  America.    The  state  of  Casta  Rica,  it  is  true,  disKvered 

•Elf  from  the  confederation,  and  remained  isolated  for  a  time, 

hit  tbia  was  done  without  violence,  and  early  in  tbe  following 

a  quietly  reunited  itself  to  the  republic.    For  the  space  of 

•o  yean,  conuderable  educational,  industrial,  legislative,  and  com- 

rcial  advances  were  made.  Two  new  univerMties  were  established 

y  government  in  the  cities  of  San  Salvador  and  Leon.    The  cul- 

ivatioii  of  cochineal  newly  introduced  into  Guatemala,  now  began 

I  to  be  extended,  and  prospered  greatly;  the  same  result  followed 

tiHtfa  r^ard  to  cotfee  in  Costa  Rica,  and  other  braucbcs  of  agriculture 

t  successfiilly  revived  elsewhere.     The  troops  of  Monizan 

were  employed  in  suppressing  bands  of  niountnin  robbers,  which 

had  multiplied  during  the  late  ci^-il  wars,  and  the  only  uolable 

breach  upon  pesce  and  good  order  was  the  seizure  of  the  Island  of 

^uat£D,  in  the  Brty  of  Honduras,  by  the  authorities  of  the  neigh- 

liDuriiig  British  settlement.    But  upon  compkitit  by  the  federal 

government,  the  act  of  the  Superintendent  of  Belize  was  theoretically 


rJS^ 


134  THE  O08FEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

disallowed  by  his  government,  thoufgh  it  has  since  been  practically 
repealed  in  precisely  the  same  quarter,  and  under  the  sanction  of 
the  same  power. 

The  period  just  referred  to  is  to  this  day  the  longest  and  most 
complete  calm  that  the  republic  has  enjoyed.  But  the  elements  of 
strife,  though  subdued,  were  silently  working,  and  soon  burst  forth 
again.  The  government  of  the  state  of  Salvador  decreed  that  the 
federal  compact  was  dissolve  on  the  7th  of  January  1832.  Gene- 
ral Morazan,  who  was  now  president  of  the  republic,  soon  afler 
marched  against  it,  and,  having  jnrevailed,  he  assumed  the  pre- 
sidency of  that  state  also,  imprisoned  the  former  authorities,  and 
put  his  own  creatures  in  their  places.  Many  conunotions  followed 
these  steps.  In  December,  Nicaragua  separated  itself;  Salvador 
did  so  again  in  February  1833,  Honduras  in  May,  Costa  Rica  in 
September,  leaving  Guatemala  to  8U{^rt  alone  the  burden  of 
\he  expexnes  of  the  federal  govermnent.  Proposals  were  then 
made  to  elect  a  new  federal  congress ;  and  when  the  terms  had 
been  with  difficulty  adjusted,  private  intrigues  or  public  disorders 
prevented  it  from  being  carried  into  effect,  a  result  which  has  at- 
tended similar  efforts  both  before  and  since. 

In  Nicaragua,  a  faction  calling  itself  the  Beform  Club  occasioned 
much  violence,  and  when  put  down  with  difficulty  and  great 
•laughter,  it  was  found  to  have  been  excited  by  secret  agents 
of  Spain;  some  prints  were  discovered  having  on  one  side  the 
portrait  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  and  on  the  other  a  priest  in  the 
attitude  of  preaching,  with  the  words  ''  God  save  Ferdinand  All., 
king  of  Spain  and  of  the  Indies.*'  Similar  plots  had  before  partially 
disturbed  some  other  districts  of  the  republic,  but  they  were  easily 
pat  do¥m,  and  gave  occasion  to  more  contempt  than  apprehension. 
This  was  the  last,  as  well  as  the  most  disastrous,  attempt  of  the 
kind. 

This  calamitous  epoch  was  also  the  be^^nning  of  the  wars  of 
races,  which  have  since  occasioned  many  fears  and  some  bitter 
animosities  and  feuds.  The  Indians,  who  bare  so  overwhelming  a 
proportion  to  the  Ladinos  and  the  whites,  have  very  often  assumed 
a  threatening  posture,  and  sometimes  they  have  actually  risen  in 
arms  to  demand  relief  from  certain  burdens,  or  to  exact  privileges 
and  large  sums  of  money,  holding  out  the  fearful  alternative  of 
a  war  of  extermination  and  indiscriminate  pillage  of  the  cities,  and 


LIUEUTY  Dr-CUEEP. 


eipeciftlly  of  the  capital.  Tile  iulcmperate  oatciy  Erat  rtiiscd  by 
ttie  priests,  &nd  now  become  genenU  ogaimt  Los  EstrangsroB 
I  {stntDgera),  raised  out  of  opposition  to  the  Liberal*  nnd  sgaiost  tbe 
bifliril^es  grauted  to  fbreigaen;,  capcciEily  that  of  religious  free- 
fiota,  doubclcst  bad  their  ^hare  of  inSueoce  in  pruvokiag  and 
r  OKoniagiiig  thcw  outrngiu;  tad  on  all  ainiilar  iknioustratiuua  of 
I  ftcl'tDg,  the  echo  of  that  outcry  is  still  beaid. 

Auastado  Aquino,  a  native  of  the  Lidiau  totru  of  Sautiago  JSa- 

\  munloo,  sneeeeded  in  establishing  an  aboriginal  gaveroiucnt  in  the 

X  of  Salvitdor  on  tbe  24tb  of  July  1832,  and  iras  proceediag  to 

r.aabduc  other  towns,  putting  to  death  fureiguers,  crcol«,  and  meati- 

But  he  wu  met  and  vauquiabcd  by  the  govemiucnt  troops 

to  an  attack  upon  San  Vicente,  wbere  he  himself  and  hu  followcra 

riahed.    A  general  huntiiig  down  of  the  Indians  nss  ordered 

■t^  way   of  retaliation,  Lot  bnppily  it  failed  in  the  cxcculioo — 

rfTobahly  because  their  superior  numbers  unuk  the  cxjieriment 

faamdous. 

Notwithstanding  these  and  other  lesser  calamities,  the  federal 

congress  coutinned  its  labours,  and  seems  duriii;;  this  year  to  have 

.  leacbed  the  pinnacle  of  its  le^slative  glory.   On  the  2ud  of  May  an 

»  already  referred  to  was  passed,  providing  for  the  entire  rdigbus 

edotn  of  bU  the  citixens  of  tbe  republic,  and  granting  the  right 

if  private  and  pabUc  proselytism  as  well  as  of  profeasiun.     On  the 

:  JTifj*!  ibe  etMs  l<»'idatuie  of  Guatemala  decreed  the  aboU- 

I  of  all  eccleaiasticol  tlth:%  irhich  nrcvlous  laws  had  already 

d  one-half.    Tbe  penal  code  of  Spain,  which  &3  a  wiinle  » in> 

h  edmirad  by  lawyers,  was  still  in  a  great  mcssuro  in  force,  and 

n  entirely  mpcrseded,  but  the  exceedingly  corrupt  fHaXt 

t  the  tnbnnals  of  the  country  made  it  the  more  urgent  that  thoy 

Imnld  be  tcformed.      The  citizen  Jose  Francisco  Barmndia,  tl» 

le  prendcitt.  who  bad  acquainted  himself  with  both  the  English 

A  the  lYench  laagnages,  with  his  own  hand  translated  the  coUcc- 

D  of  enlightened  laws  which,  in  the  United  States,  goes  by  tbo 

;  of  the  Livingston  code;  the  greater  part  of  which  were 

iseqocntly  adopted.    The  introduction  of  trial  by  jury  was  one 

ir  the  principal  aims  of  this  devotwl  patriot.      In  August  of  this 

IS  firet  estnhtishod  in  the  more  liberal  sUte  of  Salvador, 

■nd  then  by  Xicarngua  and  Gantcmala  in  1 835.    But  it  appean 

Bever  to  have  been  UDderttuod  by  the  bulk  of  the  people,  and 


136  THS  OOSPBL  IK  CBNTBAL  AKBBICAt 

therefore  encountered  great  difficulties,  snd  wu  it  lut  abandraied. 
In  the  aune  month,  the  federal  oongren  decreed  »  general  moum- 
ing  for  Jeremy  fientham,  in  which  they  appear  to  have  imitated  an 
act  of  the  French  Chamber  of  DepuUea  with  respect  to  Beifjamin 
Franklm. 

The  Dominican  cooTent  in  Gnatemala  vrta  trantfonned  into 
a  model  prison  like  tho«e  of  the  United  States,  and  what  had  been 
the  cellB  of  the  monks  were  altered  to  accommodate  criminals. 
Another  convent  waa  occn^ed  by  the  Laneaiterian  normal  school ; 
a  third  became  the  public  hosiHtal;  several  were  tamed  into 
militaiy  barracks,  and  others  remuned  without  use. 

The  seat  of  the  federal  goTemment,  after  ten  yean  permanence 
in  Guatemala,  was  removed  in  1834  to  the  state  of  Salvador,  firvt 
to  Sonsonate  one  of  its  ports,  and  then  to  San  Salvador  the 
ca^tal.  A  district  extending  ten  leagues  round  the  city  was  con- 
stituted a  federal  department.  The  advantages  of  this  change 
consisted  in  the  more  central  position  with  respect  to  the  other 
states,  and  the  comparative  weakness  of  the  servile  party  there. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  greater  inflnence  of  Goatemala  was  alie- 
nated, and  the  jealonsy  of  its  inhabitanta  aroused. 

A  constitution  drawn  up  on  the  basis  of  the  first  one  made  ten 
yean  before,  was  now  rgected  by  all  the  states  except  Costa  Btea. 
Violent  commotions  again  agitated  Nicaragua,  and  at  San  Salvador 
between  the  state  goTemmeut  and  the  federal  authorities  stiife 
aroee,  and  an  appeal  to  arms  decided  the  contest  in  fsvonr  of  the 
fedenl  tnups.  Frracriptions  followed,  and  that  state  ceased  to  have 
B  separate  government.  Even  the  quiet  state  of  Costa  Rica  was  now 
convulsed.  This  was  occasioned  by  the  priests,  who  were  enraged 
at  the  abolition  of  their  prerogative  of  taking  tithes.  The  govern- 
ment party,  however,  prevailed,  and  in  the  fullowing  year  the  same 
congress,  ramoltaneously  with  that  of  Guatemala,  suppressed  all  the 
fetes  and  saints'  days  of  tbe  Romish  ecclesiastical  calendar,  except 
Sundays  and  Gve  holidays  considered  tbe  most  sacred.  Under 
priestly  influence,  tbe  saints'  days  averaged  three  or  four  a  month, 
besides  Sundays,  and  sometunes  followed  each  other  for  several 
successive  days,  to  the  serious  interruption  of  indostry  and  public 
business.  In  a  fntnre  chapter,  the  reader  will  be  made  aware  of 
some  of  the  demoralising  and  murderous  effects  of  the  observance 
of  these  days  in  Central  America.    This  was,  however,  one  of  the. 


PROJECTED 


IbKosares  against  wbicb  the  eerviles  n-cre  enabled  to  Bvail  them- 
idvcs  of  popular  feeling,  so  as  to  direct  it  against  Ibe  liberaU, 
The  cry  of  heresy  and  profkiiity  had  long  been  raised  against  their 
acts,  bnt  it  ne\-er  told  so  effectually,  even  upon  the  most  fanalieni, 
as  when  their  own  pleasures,  or  rather  their  vices  sad  excesses, 
verc  interfered  with. 
Another  short  lull  of  rejwsc,  or  a  general  cessation  from  strife, 
B«curred  during  the  entire  year  1836.     But  it  was  only  the 

■  precursor  ofatarms  more  violent  than  any  that  had  yet  occurred. 
One  of  the  measures  by  which  the  liberals  thought  they  could 

ll)est  benefit  the  people  generally,  was  the  establishment  of  foreign 
Bolonies  in  the  lees  populous  but  fertile  and  salubrious  plains  with 

■  which  their  country  abounds.  By  this  means  they  expected  to 
KbtFoduee  many  arts  and  manufactures  which  would  draw  out  the 
■3Btent  riches  of  the  land.    They  anticipated  that  European  enler- 

e  and  capital  would  lend  new  energies  to  their  commerce,  and 
Etbey  hoped  that  intercourse  with  nations  whom  they  su]ip08ed  to 
e  Inr  before  them  in  refinement  and  morality  would  exercise  a 
F^ppy  influence  upon  their  new-bom  social  and  political  institutions. 
"With  such  views  as  these,  they  not  only  removed  all  impedimenta, 
bnt  held  out  every  possible  inducement  to  tlic  foreign  emigrant  to 
■hare  with  them  the  blessings  of  their  climate  nnil  soil.  Legislative 
m  this  subject  had  been  taken  even  by  the  national  con- 
tituent  tasembly,  and  decrees  on    colonization  were   passed    in 
131, 1834,  and  Is36.    Their  expectations  from  this  source  appear 
O  tiave  been  as  sanguine  as  their  earnestness  and  Nncerity  in  its 
n  were  great. 
English  enterprise  and  activity  were  first  in  the  field.  A  cliarter  of 
B-privilcges  conferring  "  unparalleled  advantages,"*  and  acconipauied 
^  wiih  a  grant  of  land  including  the  entire  department  of  Vera  I'nz, 
"a  tract  of  upwards  of  fourteen  millions  of  acres  of  virgin  soil, 
affording  every  variety  of  climate,"f  was  bestowed  upon  a  com- 
pany in  London,  first  formed  out  of,  or  at  least  originating  from,  the 
""  Kbria  of  the  Boyaisian  bubble.    AVith  the  comprehensive 
NThe  Eastern  Coast  uf  Central  America  Commercial  and  Agricul- 
1  Company,"  Bome  unprincipled  apeculaton,  with  whom  the 


BMct  ftlatamt  of  tin  ImpnUDl  GnmU  Conceded  to 
CMaumtratiHui  Ignmltunil Cuiufiuijf  bf  IbD bUtc 
Sutcsmt,  p.  1111. 


LC  £ul«ii  Cout  nr 


IliS  raK   ^MttKl  D?  CENTHAL    AMERICA. 


^4  di^iuy  :v»|McuUe  individiials  were  associated,  endca- 
vw«u«M.  'M  jun  Ji  |in>«ic  acoouut  the  well-meant  conceeeioDs  of  the 
v>»iiiMiiiiiii  ^v4L«£«BBKiil,  Ooe  of  the  conditions  to  he  fulfilled  in 
v4KM;r  (w  vasttR  4  WM  to  the  lands  was,  that  two  hundred  families 
%«&«  ^  «Ht  iwoMAi  upon  them  within  four  years,  and  in  ten  years, 
s  vh*  i<Ni  j>i  yAr^  iv.  of  G  rant).  In  order  to  be  able  to  dispose  of  these 
ImiMk  «MMt  iAz«e  hundred  individuals,  many  of  them  &om  among 
iIk  xwi  ndtwe  of  the  population  of  the  great  metropolis  of  England, 
wtM  MM  om  without  proper  preparations  and  knowledge  of  the 

r^  ID  pboea  near  the  coasts,  which,  from  excessive  heat  and 
must  of  neoevity  be  insalubrious.  AVhile  these 
were  suffering  and  wandering  or  d}dng  on  a  foreign 
tlie  directors  of  the  company  were  endeavouring  to  induce 
the  iMme  govermnent  to  sanction  their  proceedings  by  holding  out 
te  bope  of  spreading  British  influence  in  the  country,  sotting 
Anrnelves  forth  as  likely  "  to  sustain  for  England  all  that  she  has 
got  or  could  hope  to  get**  in  those  regions,  provoking  the  foreign 
■nuBter  to  jealous}',*  threatening  to  sell  their  charter  to  some  other 
gOfcmment,  and  advertismg  that  *'  the  Fo^-aisian  securities  held  by 
the  company  would  be  made  available  to  its  resources  when  cir- 
camatances  should  permiCf  Thus  did  the  company  make  mer- 
ciwndise  of  their  grant  and  of  the  people  whom  they  deluded  to 
cnigrate  for  such  ends.  But  nltimate  failure  attended  all  its  objects. 
Ib  their  turn  the  directors  were  deceived  where  they  had  rci)09ed 
wott  confidence,  and  after  the  waste  of  many  lives,  and  much 
Isboar  in  vain,  with  the  misappropriation  of  some  40,000/. — the 
loss  of  which  has  of  course  fallen  on  the  shareholders — ^the  charter 
was  forfeited  by  the  nonftilfilment  of  the  stipulated  conditions. 
The  only  tangible  result,  besides  dear-bought  experience,  now 
Bemains  in  favour  of  Central  America,  where  a  part  of  the  money 
wferred  to  was  spent  in  the  importation  and  erection  of  nn  iron 
soapension  bridge  over  the  river  Montagua,  thereby  removing  the 
greatest  obstacle  that  existed  in  the  transit  between  Vera  Taz  and 

•  *  Wc  Icani  from  our  corresx-onileuts  tliat  llic  lV.it cli  and  the  Amcricai.s  arc  striving,  and 
villi  erery  prospect  of  lurcess,  to  obtain  a  footing:  in  the  jiroviiipcs  refem  d  io.  By 
■ouu  of  the  compan}-  to  whieh  I  belong,  Gxcat  Britain  may  senire  a  position  far  nioru 
pramineat  than  auv  other  nation  cuu,  eJ^ccpt  by  the  foifciturc  or  alicnatiun  of  our  gruit, 
enr  attain  to."— Letter  of  Jeniuiuh  Barrett*  £sq.,  to  the  Right  Hon.  Lord  Pulmcratou, 
tke  88th  Oct.  18S5.    Brief  Statement,  p.  C7. 

t  ProapectuB  of  the  C<nnpany. 


I^GISLATTVE    LESSONS.  189 

(he  capital,  at  a  point  wbere  aumj  travellers  have  kist  their  lives 
and  much  cattle  has  ammully  peiiabed. 

Decrees  on  this  and  other  sutijccts,  such  as  the  opening  of  the 
of  Nicaragua,  the  improvement  of  ports,  treatica  uf  peaoe^ 
amity  witli  other  nations,  and  the  remodelling  or 
iniprovcineat  of  uaticiDal  univemtics,  societies  for  the  CDCoiuage- 
tnent  of  art)  aud  agricnhure,  ko,  &c^  fiUcd  np  the  interstkm  of 
legislative  labour  occurring  between  the  more  important  acts  of 
the  various  chambers,  and  though  much  of  all  this  bbour  tnaj 
now  appear  U>  have  been  fhiitless,  it  must  prove  beneficial  as  well 
M  honourable  to  the  nation,  because  by  so  doing  the  goverament 
has  traced,  os  upon  a  migbty  tablet,  lessons  of  solemn  import,  trliich, 
bat  only  its  own  citizens  of  future  generations  must  stand  and 
meditate  opon,  but  which  even  the  roost  enlightened  nations  of  the 
globe  may  now  peruse  with  advantageto  themselves.  Hot  can  the 
tnithflil  principles  which  they  have  recorded  there  reiuoiu  mac- 
^e.  Their  day  of  triumph  is  at  band.  Even  now  the  leaven  of 
tiiosc  prindplcs  is  difhiang  itself  in  the  public  miiid,  and  some 
fiiture  geocration  at  least  will  do  the  men  who  left  such  ihiits  the 
jnstice  to  adcnowledge,  that,  though  their  wisdom  was  imperfect 
tnd  liimted,  the  government  tbcy  composed  was  to  the  nation  not 
■a  a  pondcrons  weight  to  lower  its  dignity,  to  suppress  its  energies, 
nd  to  orciunscribe  its  action,  bat  with  all  its  imperfections,  and 
they  were  greet,  as  a  bright  morning  star  announcing  the  dawn  of 
nukual  prosperity— the  harbinger  of  future  day.  Xheir  chief 
error,  if  error  it  may  tie  called,  was  the  advanced  position  and  ibc 
nidd  GOnne  they  took— a  course  in  which  the  people  were  but  too 
unprepared  to  follow. 

AsanevideQceoI'lhis  the  bte  Mr.  Dunlop,*  a  recent  visitor,  from 
whose  historical  summary  many  of  the  above  dates  aud  facts  have 
been  taken,  relates,!  that  when  the  Lii-ingston  code  of  laws,  wliidi 
WM  adopted  in  1834,  was  first  put  into  execution  in  the  state  of 
Ginrteniala  three  years  aftem-ards,  "a  serious  disturbance  took 
place  in  the  town  of  San  Juan  Ostuncala,  the  people,  who  wore 
nearly  all  aborigines,  b^ag  provoked  at  being  called  to  work  at 
the  ooiwtniction  of  imsona,  and  excited  agunst  the  new  laws,  rosCi 

■  Katm  aimgiwr  Diuilnf ,  E»n,  »iilhiir  rf  "  I«viil»  in  Cr»ii»l  Amcrira."  tcndan,  tSI7> 
Hk  kwiof  UiJt  fffnUaUBb  m  l3b«  copjrrEEhl  of  tut  book,  havc^trj  LLititij  HinctiaDeJ  L^D 


140  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

€»  fltoMe,  to  attack  the  drcait  judges,  at  tbat  time  holding  their 
fint  court  of  justice  in  the  town.  The  judges  and  the  officers 
aeoompanjing  them  were  compelled  to  save  themselves  from  the 
popular  indignation  by  a  precipitate  flight.  The  magistrate  of  the 
district,  escorted  by  a  troop  of  dragoons,  proceeded  to  remonstrate 
with  the  Indians ;  but  he  had  no  sooner  begun  to  speak  than  they 
directed  against  him  a  shower  of  stones.  An  engagement  took  place 
between  the  mob  and  the  dragoons,  when  the  former  was  dispersed 
with  considerable  loss,  after  killing  twenty-four  of  the  dragoons. 
The  Indians  left  behind  them  an  idol  and  a  jar  filled  with  stones 
collected  from  the  bed  of  a  neighbouring  river.  It  appears  that 
they  had  been  made  to  believe  that  the  jar,  if  broken  at  the  moment 
of  the  attack,  would  throw  lightning  upon  the  enemy,  and,  by 
enchantment,  a  number  of  venomous  snakes  were  to  rush  out  from 
a  neighbouring  wood  and  bite  the  soldiers ;  an  event  which  was 
to  be  brought  about  by  the  assistance  of  the  old  gods  of  the  country, 
which,  though  nominally  discarded  by  the  Indians,  are  always  re- 
cmrcd  to  in  times  of  necessity,  as  the  Romish  superstition  is  by 
those  in  Europe  professing  a  purer  creed.  The  idol  was  a 
monstrous  figure  of  a  man  seated  cross-legged,  with  the  bead 
xedining  upon  the  back,  and  the  arms  encompassing  an  enormous 
belly,  hanging  down  from  the  throat,  being  doubtless  one  of  the 
old  idols  which  had  been  concealed  from  the  careful  search  of  the 
Inquisition.    The  figure  is  still  preserved  in  Guatemala.** 

Civil  commotions  were  renewed  in  Nicaragua  early  in  1837. 
This  state  has  been  so  constantly  and  so  violently  convulsed  as  to 
suggest  a  comparison  between  its  political  elements  and  its  physical 
•abstrata,  for  it  is  subject  to  more  frequent  and  terrible  shocks  of 
earthquake  than  are  felt  in  any  other  state — though  none  are  found 
wanting  in  this  respect — a  feature  which  is  not  removed  even  by 
tlie  many  active  volcanic  vents  which  are  distributed  over  its  sur- 
&oe.  And,  alas  I  how  much  more  calamitous  have  been  the  cor- 
rupt ebullitions  of  the  human  heart,  even  in  a  few  short  years,  than 
all  the  convulsions  of  nature  during  many  ages ! 

In  Guatemala,  also,  a  new  and  violent  crisis  had  arrived.  The 
cholera,  which  made  its  appearance  in  the  capital  in  the  month  of 
April  1837,  became  the  exciting  cause  of  the  turbulence  which  soon 
followed.  As  mortality  was  rapidly  spreading  through  all  parts  of 
the  republic,  the  government  at  once  took  measures  to  mitigate,  if 


I 


THE  MITA   l.\ECItnECTIOX.  141 

it  coold  not  itop,  the  niTages  of  the  feaiAil  pestilence.  Not 
only  all  the  medical  staff  in  Gunteniala,  but  most  of  the  young 
■tndents,  were  famished  iiiili  medicines  and  sent  to  those  places 
where  it  was  thought  their  presence  was  piost  urgently  rcij^uircd. 
The  poor  Indians.  wIjo  were  dying  in  gjeat  iinniben,  are  geiicraUy 
panic  stricken  when  the  least  eiiidemic  prevails.  Their  terror  was 
exoessiTc.  The  pricEts,  who  had  before  learned  to  improve 
such  opportnuilics,  were  ready  to  foment  their  fears,  and  to 
awaken  thdr  resentment  against  the  liberals,  by  insinuating  that 
they  had  poisoned  the  waters  with  a  view  to  destroy  the  Indians, 
jntcndii^  to  repcople  the  country  with  foreigners ;  and  as  a  proof 
of  this  they  pointed  to  the  colony  just  established  in  Vera  Paz.  The 
too-crcdalous  abori)^cs,  who  had  so  lately  been  excited  against  some 
of  the  reforms,  and  especially  Ihut  of  trial  by  jury,  needed  no  more 
to  rouse  them  to  rebellion.  Their  cry  wns  now  directed  against  tlic 
poisoners  and  the  foreign  rcsidcnU.  Many  of  the  doctors  had  to 
effect  their  escape  as  be.>I  they  could.  Some  were  seized  and  killed  i 
being  forced  to  swallow  the  wliule  contents  of  their  medicine  chests, 
or  water  was  poured  doim  tiicir  throats  till  they  died,  and  the 
resulls  were  conndercd  conclii^vc  evidence  of  their  guilt. 

This  insurrection  soon  became  general  in  the  district  of  Mita, 
where  an  attempt  was  made  to  difper^  a  great  assembly  of  Indians 
at  the  town  of  Santa  Rosa  on  the  9th  of  Jime.  The  Govemnient 
official  entrusted  with  the  teak  was  assailed,  and  the  dragoons 
who  accompanied  him  were  beaten  and  put  to  flight.  The  ring- 
kader  on  this  occasion  wan  IiBfael  Carrcra,  since,  and  possibly 
CTcQ  noWipreeident  of  the  slate  of  Guatemala.  lie  is  a  Xiadino,  in 
whom  the  Indian  admixture  greatly  predominates — a  niua  of  a 
bold  and  irascible  spirit,  whose  uncultivated  abilities,  united  with  the 
influence  of  circumstances,  huvc  raised  him  from  the  lowest  rank 
to  occDpy  the  chief  post  of  dif^iiy  in  the  stat*.  The  influence 
wbich  his  caste  and  character  gave  him  among  the  Indians  was 
■oon  greatly  increased  by  the  trickery  of  the  priests,  who  sur- 
rounded Carrcra  with  their  nilulatjon?,  and  instigated  him  to  further 
acts  of  seiiition.  They  succeeded  as  readily  in  peTEUading  tbe 
ladiatia  that  their  nnget  linfacl  was  a  messenger  sent  with  a 
lieavenly  commission  to  be  their  deliverer  from  the  liberals  and 
iignera.  as  they  had  done  in  ascribing  the  mortality  occaKoned 
■by  the  cholera  to  the  poisoning  of  the  rivers  and  springs.     To  ud 


^^_  iieaveniy  core 
^^^k^breignera,  as 
^^H^liy  the  cholert 


'ib^V  ^-i.T   w^>NrfU.   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

•K  <  <i\v  Hr  ^ito  JSchRnon,  tbcy  contriTcd,  in  the  presence  of  some 

'U«ii(t|k  ^•wNtf-A  ^l  have  a  letter  conveyed  to  their  prophet,  sas- 

fv««%ii.v  '*vBL*  tibc  roof  of  one  of  their  churchess  which  purported  to 

y^ttit  ''\Hxx  the  Virgin  Maiy,  and  authorized  him  to  act  as  the 

IfaiktA^r  v^f  tK»  re^'olt 

^^urtvra  9oan  organized  guerilla  bandsu  and  on  the  approach  of 
tlbrcv9  !>ont  against  him,  generally  retired  to  the  mountain  iast- 
lir»^?9«  vrith  which  he  was  well  acquainted,  and,  though  repeatedly 
ilefeatctl  hy  Morann  himself  and  other  commandem,  he  invariably 
dftcted  his  escape,  and  continued  to  extend  his  influence  and 
augment  the  mimber  of  his  followers. 

The  inhabitants  of  Mataquesqtuntla,  a  rather  largo  Indian  town 
fai  the  district  of  Alita,  had  long  enjo}Td  the  reputation  of  being 
mnuder? — a  kind  of  sedentary  banditti  whose  habitations  all 
frell-infbnned  travellers  tried  to  avoid,  and  when  this  was  not 
pncticabW  they  expected  to  be  robbed,  unless  well  armed  and 
meommonly  vigilant.  Near  this  place  the  government  troops 
a  strong  boily  of  the  insurgents,  and  slaughtered  a  great 
iber :  then,  entering  the  town,  they  committed  such  atrocities 
m  giX'Htly  incenseil  the  Indians,  who  were  driven  to  desperation, 
aadi  Sit  on  by  the  priests,  who  promised  salvation  to  all  who 
ikd  in  this  cause,  they  now  became  reckless  and  irreconcilable. 
TMr  nunilvrs  as  well  as  their  fuiy  continued  to  augment  the 
■Mwe  tbcv  were  attacked,  till  their  assailants  were  wearied  with 
ihe  intvnniimble  nature  of  the  conflict,  and  worn  out  by  the  diffi- 
culty of  following  thom  in  their  mountainous  retreats. 

'rhv  go\  ornincnt  of  ituatemala  had  for  the  last  two  yean  enjoyed 
fit»  !iicrvk\i<  of  the  citizen  Dr.  ^Inriano  Galvez  as  chief  of  the 
ilil^  uuo  i»f  the  most  talented  and  best  informed  of  the  lilieral 
iMHferM.  Ili^  i^roceeilingM  were  characterized  by  that  moderation 
umI  Ieiiit\  which  only  the  i\*isest  among  rulers  succeed  in  combin- 
mg  With  a  \  igorouiK  action  and  a  just  appreciation  of  the  respect 
diM  cu  the  law.  His  ^HTiiHl  of  oflice  is  also  memorable  for  im- 
pravciutfutii  ill  the  capital  and  throughout  the  state.  To  no  one  of 
tlw  now  tkllcn  otKi'ials  i«  there  a  more  general  testimony  of  respect 
iu  tlK'  iiiiiidN  III'  the  Ivtter  classes  of  people  of  every  rank,  and 
Goucvruing  luuio  of  the  alwontees  of  the  last  twelve  yean  are 
n^retH  ukorv  dtvp  and  fKniuent  than  those  which  are  expressed 
coaceruuig  IhiWvz. 


■niE  srxts  OP  lo3  altos. 


rTIie  serrUes  of  Gmtemala  were  now  eoneentrntin^  their  unmu- 
pended  energies  for  an  effort  to  refiumc  the  »8«ndan(.  Unef[«i- 
TtwJsigia  of  debility  became  appareat  in  the  ranks  of  the  liberals, 
■sd  that,  too,  in  high  pl«ces,  by  the  forced  rcaigndtion  of  Galnx 
and  hia  fHcnds,  and  the  appointment  of  professedly  moderate 
Mirilcs  (hot  real  bine-blooda)  to  be  ministers  of  state.  Tliii 
change  took  place  on  the  13th  November  1S37. 

During  this  year,  the  lust  of  its  efficient  action,  the  lilieral 
gDvermnent  had  conclnded  a  treaty  with  the  independent  Indian 

I  tribe  called  Mnncli6,  occupying  the  north-easterly  extremity  of 
Central  America.  In  it  these  Indiana  coa-wntHl  to  5nhject  them- 
tilTVS  to  the  laws  of  the  republic  in  sii  yeara  time.  Their  idolatry 
tod  cnatom  of  polygamy  were  not  to  be  interfered  with.  But  the 
biomph  of  the  serrile  party,  which  followed  after  a  violent 
ttmggle  of  more  than  two  years  duration,  has  prevented  any  results 
front  this  treaty,  which  has  been  forgotten  in  the  succeeding  tnr- 
Koil  and  dimirdcr. 

Insarreetiom,  not  of  Indian  origin,  but  directed  against  the  now 
■enii-servile  government  of  Guatemala,  became  general  in  1838. 

>ln  two  of  the  departmenls,"  martial  law  was  proclaimed.  The  old 
•apital  and  the  department  of  Saeatepeqtiee,  of  which  it  is  [he 
'Cahestera,'  separated  itself  from  the  state  and  adhered  to  the 
jbderal  government.  Tho^  of  Chiquimula  and  Vera  Paa  followed. 
On  the  26tb  of  Jannary,  one  of  the  batl.iliong  of  troops  in  Gaate- 
malB  rose' agninst  the  government,  demanding  the  restoration  of 
Galvei  and  his  miotslers.  In  the  extremity  to  which  these  move- 
ments rcdaccd  the  serviles,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  call  in  Rafael 
Carrcra  and  his  guerilla  bands  to  their  assi^ance,  and  on  the  30th 
of  the  ssme  month,  with  the  aid  of  some  troops  from  the  AnttgnS, 
they  invested  the  capital,  and  driving  out  the  garrison  phiccd  Don 
Pedro  Vclasqnez  nt  the  head  of  the  government. 

Many  of  the  lending  liberals  now  retired  from  Gnatemala  to 

Qnesaltenangu,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  federal  government  at 

n  Salvador,  they  succeeded  in  erecting  that  and  the  two  adjoining 

[nrlmeuts  of  Totonicapan  and  Solola  into  a  separate  and  siitth 


t  14  TIIK  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

firatr,  whicli  wiw  recognised  by  the  foilcration  as  the  state  of  Los 
Altn^i  or  the  Highlands. 

The  aAcendancy  of  the  sen-iloi»  was  more  and  more  confirmed  in 
til*  chief  rtate  of  the  reimblic.  Their  arrogance  and  their 
■snrrvre?  towards  the  liberals  grew  with  their  sense  of  security,  and 
3sar:j:  soon  hare  reached  a  greater  pitch  than  tlie^-  liad  ever  done 
uzjrt.  ltd  for  another  check  which  they  had  not  anticipated. 

•TmfTml  Moruan  who  still  retained  the  post  of  president  of  the 

Tqm'iiii.  ba^■inc  been  re-elected  after  filling  it  for   the  first  legal 

ISTSL  ni  iivrr  year^  spent  the  eirly  part  of  1  «38  in  a  campaign 

cr^-t«-*L  8^r<  Cirrera  and   the   Indians   of   Mita.      Tliongh 

t?s-.i:-3il'T  ^•irt,%rwus.  ho  was  utterly  unsuccessfnl  in  the  attainment 

f-:  it"  iTTinre-iir.:  end,  and  retireil  to  Guatemala  with  the  federal 

tr«%">i     7>zrr:c  th«  visit.  Morazan  so  far  effected  a  revolution, 

13^  V  :-\^v%vc  **.'.  the  otHcials  to  resign  their  oflScesiuto  his  hands, 

^-!  <  TV  -v-v-.'c  -ihoylvi  proceed  to  elect  a  new  house  of  represen- 

^ — -v  •■  *-''v>  -V  tusk  of  reorganizing  the  government  should 

^  :iT,— .-vRs'      V*ic  ivople  rose  in  support  of  ^lorazan,  and  were 

^  ■   i*k-Xv  ■«'th  the  resignation  of  the  blue-bloods,  and  the  pro- 

,„*4^  .  ,  "s"^  .'lection.     The  citizen  Mariano  Rivera  Paz,  a  mnde- 

»^    »V-^N  ^^^  iil>pointed  chief  of  the  state.    This  new  govern- 

^n^    -H   •>3U*icier  of  which  was  conciliator}',  prochiimed  a  general 

•T"*!^"    •.  I.I  jvliticil  otfeuces  conmiitted  since  the  day  of  indc- 

-i.  ^  ^^-n-^a  .»it>is  year (1838),  Francisco  Malespin,  a  military  cbief- 

»..    ..   .x>.nih:v  kMuir.icter,  provoked  a  revolt  in  Salvador,  which 

,„.>•.  -\  '/ix-^'iKV  of  MoRizan  to  quell  it.    The  opportunity  of 

.,»»»vK*  «^^  M.-iial  by  Carrera,  who  effectually  defeated  the 

^^^,  -vxyv  \i^  »n  Ciuatcmala.     Kmboldened  by  this  success,  he 

«,..H^^  „sM  :  V  c;ij>ital  with  his  hordes  of  ^lita  Indians.    They 

^    M.<  •••^  xuivcil  the  Antigua,  but  were  routed  near  Villa 

^^  ^  ,:.i,iJ;iI>tu[v  on  their  way  thence  to  the  capital  by  a 

^  v.^w  «Mi!MK'J  rjiiher.  and  Carrera  was  soon  af\er  found 
^.^  •iuinHu»j»'«  into  tlu*  state  of  Salvador,  exacting 
^^m».innin|<  vvvVvNC"*  iu  siuuc  of  its  larger  towns. 


.;\  » i!uiux:Hul  uwiu  who,  under  cover  of  a  cloud  resting 

«\  v,.."*»*'  *'•  l''^*  ^■•*^'^^'  ^""-l*  surprised  them  and  killed  great 
^t^,»  .iii.uuls  ajuong  the  otHcers  preventeil  this  ailvan- 


I 


DISSOLUTION  OF  TUE   FLDEBATION.  145 

So  tat  tnm  being  checked,  this  fiiclioD,  at  tbe  dose  of  1S3S,  ma 
in  a  sense  recognised  hj  thehighestnutlioritica,  and  the  power  of  ita 
atuef  made  Icgsl  and  extended  bj  a  treaty  v'lth  the  insurgents,  in 
virtue  of  which  they  consented  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  submit 
to  the  Govemment  it  is  true,  but  on  condition  of  their  impunity 
and  of  the  appointment  of  Carn.'ra  to  the  cuitunand  of  the  district 
of  Mito,  T!ib  convention,  which  was  ratified  by  Monuan  as 
president  of  the  republic,  is  a  proof  of  the  weakness  of  the 
Government,  who  thns  became  a  party  to  its  o^m  ruiD. 

The  Federal  Congress  closed  its  twelfth  session— which  proved 
to  be  its  Inst— on  the  2iAh  of  July.  One  of  its  latest  acts  would 
aeem  to  indicate  a  presentiment  of  its  end,  aa  it  empowered  the 
oereral  states  to  make  laws  (but  not  to  repeal  those  already  made) 
vithoat  its  consent.  In  October,  the  state  legislature  of  Guatemaln 
dhsolved  itself ;  the  gofemment  of  Nicaragua  declared  itself  eepa- 
ntcd  from  the  federation  in  May ;  Ilonduras  followed  on  thu  9th 
Kovember,  and  Costa  Rica  had  already  fallen  under  the  most  abso- 
lute militarf  despotism,  which  soon  after  became  general  in  all 
Ok  alAtcs.  The  entire  frame-work  of  nationality  was  now  rajndly 
breaking  up,  and  when,  on  tlie  1st  February  1839,  the  second 
kgnl  teiTn  of  Moruzan's  prcddeucy  expired,  the  federal  government 
ttay  be  considered  as  really  at  an  end,  though  it  was  nominally 
tontinued  for  some  time  lon^^r  in  the  states  of  Salvador,  Gualt- 
IbbIb,  and  Los  Altos,  where  its  authority  was  recogm'aed. 

NiouBguo,  liret  alone,  and  then  assisted  by  the  troops  of  Ilon- 
AnTBS,  repeatedly  invaded  Salvador  during  1 S39,  for  the  express  pnr- 
po«e  of  depoiutg  Iiforszan,  who  still  acted  as  president  though  he 
lud  not  been  re-elected  the  third  time.  In  this  war  the  bravery 
•nd  sbilitj  of  tbc  federal  leader  enabled  him  successfully  to 
aoEtain  for  some  time  a  most  unequal  contest,  but  he  was  at  length 
overcome  in  the  conaneneemenl  of  1S40. 

While  Morazan  was  thus  engaged,  Ra^)  Carrera  again  invaded 
the  city  of  Gnntcmala  with  five  thousand  armed  Indians  at  the  call 
of  the  servile  party,  who  by  hb  means  deposed  the  existing  uutho- 
iHies,  and  Teinstated  themselves  in  office.  Rivcm  Paz,  whoin  due 
coarse  had  been  superseded,  was  now  reinstated  as  gf  fe  (diief)  by 
die  serriles,  and  '20,000  dollars  were  paid  by  the  inhabitants  as  s 
Rtuom  from  the  horrors  of  pillage  by  the  Indian  hordes.  Carreni 
btmsclf  obtaioed  the  title  aud  rank  of  general,  and  returned  to  hia 


*.!*<« 


116  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTBAL   AMERICA. 

district  goyemment  with  enlarged  experience  of  his  own  power^ 
the  wealth  of  the  capital,  and  the  caresses  of  his  servile  friends. 

The  usual  work  of  proscription  and  of  undoing  what  the 
other  party  had  done,  was  once  more  accompanied  by  the  sum- 
mary execution  of  those  liberal  leaders  who  did  not  make  their 
escape  or  remain  concealed.  On  the  17th  April,  the  state  of 
Gruatemala  also  declared  the  federal  compact  dissolved,  and 
asserted  its  own  sovereignty  and  independence.  As  a  natural 
result  of  this  second  reaction,  priestly  influence  was  again  courted, 
and  an  attempt  made  to  renew  the  power  of  the  little  bom. 
Among  other  institutions  that  were  now  restored,  some  of  the 
suppressed  convents  for  males  were  included*  The  few  monks 
who  returned  were  clamorous  for  the  restoration  of  all  their 
confiscated  property,  and  the  priests  were  not  less  eager  to  return 
to  the  enjoyment  of  the  people's  tithes.  But  these  things  had 
become  impracticable,  and  they  must  even  take  what  little  they 
could  get,  and  bide  their  time  in  hopes  of  the  remainder. 

The  Indians  of  the  new  state  of  Los  Altos  had  become  discon- 
tented on  account  of  the  taxes  levied  for  the  support  of  govern- 
ment, and  the  complaints  of  their  priests  had  so  ill-disposed  them 
towards  their  liberal  rulers,  that  they  wanted  little  encouragement 
from  the  serviles  of  Guatemala  to  induce  them  to  rebel.  Upon 
the  first  risings  of  insurrection.  General  Carrera,  already  become 
the  commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  of  the  state,  defeated  the 
troops  of  the  government  of  Los  Altos,  who  were  seeking 
a  junction  with  Morazan  in  the  state  of  Salvador,  with  a  view 
to  attack  Guatemala.  A  party  of  Carrera's  Indians,  under  Monte 
Bosa,  treated  some  officers,  who  were  taken  prisoners,  in  a  most  brutal 
manner,  and  then  put  them  to  death.  Carrera  himself,  entering 
Qnesaltenango,  secured  the  person  of  the  president,  Guzman, 
and  a  considerable  number  of  officials,  who  were  also  cruelly 
murdered;  some  of  them  being  put  to  death  by  slow  torture. 
Geromino  Pais,  an  officer  of  Carrera*s,  was  chiefly  concerned  in 
these  butcheries,  which  can  never  be  forgotten  by  the  Hberals  and 
the  numerous  families  who  lost  talented  relatives,  full  of  promise 
to  their  country  and  to  themselves. 

From  this  time  Los  Altos  ceased  to  exist  as  a  separate  state, 
and  the  three  departments  of  which  it  was  composed  were  reunited 
to  Guatemala. 


I 


*■•  PWaai  OF  CBNEBAL  MORAZAX.  147 

After  this  event,  tbe  state  of  Salvtulor  remuned  the  only 
sdlieTcnC  to  tbe  libcio!  interest,  and  of  the  dow  nominal  fixlerol 
government  of  which  it  had  long  lieen  the  Etronghold. 

NotwitfaEtiuiding  his  recent  defeat,  and  the  dcEjiccate  prospects 
the  lilicml  port)-,  ItTurazitn  made  a  final  attack  upou  the 
Ifarch  1940.     Advancing  with  twelve  hundred  men 
upon  GuBtcnuln,  evidently  in  the  hope  that  its  inhabitants  would 
rise  and  assist  him,  on  the  ISlh  of  the  month  he  entered  the  city, 
and  took  posecssion  uf  the  Plaza  Mayor,  or  great  aquare.     Here  he 
aoon  found  himself  hemmed  in  by  a  hostof  Mitalndiansaodmonn- 
tuneer;,  bnt  remained  quietly  in  that  position  tilt  the  next  day  at 
I<a  Oiaeion,  the  hour  of  prayer,   or  sunset,  when   the   Indians 
Ufted  up  their  voices  to  chant  "Ave  Maria" — a  hymn  of  praise 
to  the  Virgin.    The  din  of  their  united  vociferations  was  such  as 
to  coavhice  the  federals  that  they  were  surrounded  by  over- 
whelming numbers,  and  Morazan  at  once  resolved  to  cut  bis  way 
through  them,  and  elfect  a  retreat.    This  he  succeeded  in  doing,  at 
ic  cost  of  nearly  half  his  men  and  officers  who  were  mercilessly 
lafiSBcred.    ameofthe  latter,  to  the  number  of  tnelve  or  Uneeo, 
escalading  the  walls  and  axuteas,  (iccretcd  themselves  in  the  patio 
the  British  Consulate,  which  was  then  near  the  Plaza,  and  over 
rhtch  the  British  ensign  waved.    While  there  they  wcreinsalety, 
It  CarreralMlnginadeawareof  the  fact,  Frederick  ChatSeld,  Esq,, 
British  Consul-General,  was  induced  to  deliver  them  ap  to  him 
condition  of  their  being  legally  tried;  but  they  were  nosooncrin 
hands  of  their  enemies  than  they  were  shot  in  the  street 
ithoiil  Either  process.    This  act,  as  might  he  espected,  did  not 
the  popularity  of  the  Britbh  Consul,  who  is  generally 
ipposcd  to  favonr  the  aristocratic  party.     Either  his  sympathies 
fgr  his  instructions— or,  it  may  be,  both  nt  once — brought  him 
closer  relation  with  the  servilcs,  uith  whom  he  was  ever  on 
a:  terms  than  with  the  liberals. 
MoRuan  with  the  remnant  of  his  men,  effected  a  retreat  upon 
Salvador,  where  his  want  of  sncccss  was  improved  by  his 
itmvs,  and  his  friends  being  immediately  put  down,  he  foand 
'If  shut  out  and  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  embarking  with  a 
idful  of  partisans  at  the  port  of  La  Libertad  on  board  a 
'e  schooner,  in  which  the  little  band  of  exiles,  the  forlorn  hope 
the  liberal  party,  arrived  safely  at  Valparaiso,  in  Chili. 
l2 


J 


148  THS  CKMNHEb  IN  CBNTRAIi  AlCfiaroA. 

HiuB,  again,  were  the  reformers  crushed  and  dispersed;  and 
thus,  after  sixteen  years*  duration,  was  the  federal  goyemment 
suppressed.  But  the  serviles,  who  douhtless  dreamt  of  resuming 
the  entire  goyemment  of  the  country,  were  also  doomed  to  suffer 
a  bitter  disappointment,  and  to  remain  for  years  at  least,  if  not  for 
eyer,  at  as  great  a  distance  from  the  object  of  their  desires  and 
earnest  efforts  as  they  had  been  while  the  liberals  ruled,  and  some- 
times perhaps  ereii  somewhat  more  remote  than  at  any  previous 

period* 

Mr.  Henry  Dunn,  who  visited  Guatemala  in  1827,*  when 
speaking  of  **  the  factious  struggles  of  opposing  parties**  of  which  he 
became  a  witness,  writes,  with  an  accuracy  almost  prophetic, — 
**  Happy  will  it  be  for  the  disputants  on  either  side,  if  these 
dissensiona  shall  have  subsided  before  a  third  party,  powerful 
enough  to  extirpate  both,  wash  out  their  diflerences  in  mingled 
blood.**  Military  despotism  has  now  proved  itself  that  third  party, 
and  it  is  sincerely  hoped  that  this  third  i^iaae  of  revolution  is 
also  Ikst  drawing  to  its  dose.  Happy  will  it  be  if  the  new  epoch  of 
their  lustory,  which  is  just  now  commendng,  should  be  characterized 
by  tiie  introduction  of  the  Gospel  of  Peace, — the  imbuing  of  the 
national  mind  with  those  principles  of  truth,  morality,  and  vital 
godffiness,  which  shall  qualify  the  Central  Americans  to  enjoy, 
together  with  higher  blessings,  those  of  national  peace  and  pros- 
perity, as  wen  as  Independence  and  Religious  Freedom. 


CHAPTER   IX. 

VEXAQOQVES. 


1840  TO  1830. 

•1  trr  CuTCn— IliB  Cuvcnnol  of  ChinuiLlcgit— Bitnn  ud  TUl  of  tfonniB— 

'  in  Ub  Cbucil  at  State— A.  New  Anhbuhnp  EkeWd— EielniUDail  Emm. 

L  rimi— UlUtaiT  Deipolina  gninil— Civil  Wan— Forced  Loom  and  heaa—Daa  SontM 

Cninilala— The  CoiuiDibo  Fution- Siege  of  Lwiu— Clumga  in  Guatcnalii— luur- 

nclioni  of   'rnnpt— ilbicn  Pmilcut— Monte    Ban— Wnr  bctireru  Salndur  ind 

BaDdiou— EumniiiuDilloiii— UuRal  Slaaghlrr- Fncc  Cosclailed— Itc  Ji«iiiU 


t 


-  nifiifm^lU  CtttBft  irrrriM  Jimlnien  or*  Itm."— ttittb.  n.  SS. 

ItAr«Ei.  Cakkbca,  late  the  ringleader  of  the  SGtk  insnircctioii,  nad 
Ae  wining  tool  of  the  priests  nowgonerolandcammBuiier-in-chier 
■tt  ttie  forcoa  of  the  stat«  of  Gtuttenula,  hniJ  by  this  time  leuned 
Bare  ftillj  to  ^iprecute  the  power  that  ivos  in  his  handa.  In  his 
new  poulinn  he  had  hecn  ennblcd  to  discover  (be  real  weakness  of 
hath  the  factioiu  which  had  lUvided  the  laod  daring  the  prcriuu.i 
period  of  twenty  ycsrs,  sud  so  small  yna  his  gratitude  for  the 
JaTfiais  he  hod  receiTcd,  and  so  great  wan  his  cnnaing  and  sell- 
cotifldence,  that  he  contrived  at  once  to  exercise  a  consderable  in- 
Aience  orer  hisbeQefactorit,andultiDiuitc1y  to  rcdnce  them,  ai  well 
|4i  their  fbef,  to  bia  snprcme  nnd  nrliitnry  control.  Though  k 
■BtRtored  tlut  he  now  first  began  to  leam  to  read  and  to  write,  his 
iptitudc  for  diplomacy  was  bo  great  as  to  enable  hJw 
ly  to  Bpiply  tile  Machisvelian  policy  of  dividing  bo  rule. 
ha  or  not  be  nndentood  the  tbeory  may  iailceil  be  deulited, 
did  lit  ptit  Tortli  !ii<i  Intent  abilities  than  he  adroitly 
hl>  cuffs  and  fnTour.i,  liLi  smiles  and  frowns,  between  saitoin 
both  the  contending  parties,  and  so  eScctnally  did  be  malte  them 


150  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

seire  as  a  mntual  check  upon  each  other,  that  for  several  years 
he  himself  contrived  to  maintain  a  precarious  balance  between  the 
two. 

On  his  return  from  Los  Altos,  where  he  overthrew  the  last  out- 
post of  the  liberals  of  the  north,  Carrcra  directed  his  course  south- 
ward to  Salvador,  under  the  pretext  of  pursuing  his  less  successful 
rival,  Morazan.  On  this  occasion  his  troops  committed  such  out- 
rages as  will  not  be  soon  forgotten,  and  which  did  not  tend  to  promote 
bis  personal  popularity  with  the  Salvadoroiios,  who  were  already 
little  disposed  to  &vour  his  patrons.  On  his  return  to  Guatemala, 
extraordinaiy  honours  were  decreed  to  him  by  the  congress  elected 
under  his  own  auspices.  But  when  the  serviles,  who  were  pro- 
ceeding rapidly  in  their  work  of  restoration  or  rather  of  retrogres- 
Bion,  eagerly  proposed  to  take  back  the  confiscated  property  of  the 
Church  from  those  who  had  lately  purchased  it  of  the  state,  with- 
out making  them  any  compensation  whatever,  they  were  met  with 
the  veto  of  the  general,  who  bluntly  declared  that  those  who 
wished  for  sacerdotal  wares  might  pay  for  them  themselves.  Nor 
was  this  the  only  check  which  the  priestly  party  received  at  his 
hands,  making  it  apparent,  even  to  the  most  sanguine  among  them, 
that  their  heavenly  messenger,  Rafael,  had  a  mission  to  fulfil 
to  which  they  could  not  now  grant  an  unqualified  approval. 
However,  they  could  still  afibrd  to  smile,  as  the  work  of  public 
instruction  was  again  suspended,  and  besides  this,  to  them,  vital 
p<nnt,  they  had  gained  some  others,  and  doubtless  they  still  hoped 
to  gain  more. 

The  serviles  were  now  in  possession  of  power,  even  in  Salvador, 
which  is  decidedly  the  most  liberal  of  all  the  states.  That  state,  too, 
had  been  proclaimed  **  Sovereign  and  Independent,"  and  thus  was 
extinguished  the  lost  spark  of  federalism.  But  the  regrets  of  the 
people  were  not  long  in  following  their  late  leader  Morazan,  in 
whom,  as  the  serviles  and  other  new  fiictions  strengthened,  their 
hopes  and  expectations  seemed  to  centre  with  redoubled  force. 
Their  representative  assembly,  elected  under  servile  influence,  was 
diMolyed  in  1841,  ^  la  Cromwell,  because  suspected  of  favouring 
the  schemes  which  were  already  afloat  in  order  to  compass  Mora- 
aii*8  return. 

Salvador,  Honduras,  and  Nicaragua  made  an  efibrt  to  reorganize 
a  federal  government  of  their  own  devising,  and  assembled  a 


I 


IIORAZAN's   RCTCnK  151 

oongrcEa  st  CbinandegB,  in  tbc  last  nnnied  gtnte,  on  tbe  ITtli  of 
Uarch  1842.  But  though  tliey  covenanted  a  union  among  thcm- 
Klrcs,  they  goon  found  it  opposed  by  Carrcra  in  Guatemak,  and 
by  Carrillo  io  Costa  Eica,  with  whoso  pcraonal  interests  the 
existence  of  n  fcileml  goTermoent  even  in  the  nL'ighbouring  states 
did  not  consist. 

Every  similar  attempt,  and  they  have  been  frequent  eoough 
to  evince  the  instinct  of  national  preservation,  has  been  effectually 
frustrated  fay  tbe  despotism  of  petty  chicAains  who  have  suecea* 
lively,  and  at  times  simultaneously,  swayed  ithe  central  states,  and 
•nbjectcd  the  whole  of  the  dismemtercd  republic  to  their  arbitrary 
Bod  desolatJDg  rule. 

Two  full  years  hod  not  elapsed  from  the  flight  of  General 
Moraxan,  when  he  re-appeared  in  February  1842,  accompanied  bj 
ft  choice  staff  of  officers  and  a  small  body  of  mercenary  troops. 
Of  the  two  vessels  that  transported  them,  one  was  named  the 
Coqumbo  .-  they  first  touched  at  the  port  of  La  Union,  but  finding 
the  liberals  in  Salvndor  not  prettand  for  immediate  action,  they 
itiously  withdrew  to  the  ftate  of  Costa  Rica,  and  landed  at  the 
port  of  Calderas,  Tlic  intelligence  of  Worazan'ri  return  soon 
gathered  a  considerable  force  around  him,  and  once  more  rallied 
the  scattered  partisans  of  federalism  under  tbe  banner  of  tbe 
Coqnimbo  faction,  as  it  was  eubscquenlly  called. 

The  returned  exile  and  outlaw  entered  San  Josi,  the  capital  of 
CoBta  Itics,  not  only  without  opposition,  but  with  manifest  tokens 
of  welcome.  The  nujority  in  this,  as  in  each  of  the  other  states, 
were  uixioug  fur  the  restoration  of  a  fcderul  gi>Tcrament,  as  their 
only  hope  of  order  and  tbcir  best  safeguard  ngainst  the  worst  of 
'  despotiim.  By  acclamation  of  the  people,  Monusan  was  api«inted 
provisional  governor,  and  one  of  his  Snt  acts  was  to  shield  Carrillo, 
■who  had  excited  the  detestation  of  the  liberals,  from  a  lammaiy 
execution,  and  to  provide  him  with  an  escort  to  conduct  him  safely 
out  of  tbe  state. 

Having  assembled  a  legblature,  all  the  acts  of  the  previoos 
government  were  nullified  in  due  course,  aod  especially  the  act  of 
secesdon  from  the  federation,  so  that  this  state  was  formally 
leunited  to  the  republic  of  Central  Ainericn,  which  had  ceased 

for  some  years,     llorawin  was  nest  legally  elected  gefe 
[thief),  ftnd  ample  mbsidies  to  enable  him  to  reconquer  the  other 


T 

T 

'         I 

J 


15S  TXIE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAJi   AMERICA. 

•overc^  and  inJopcndcnt  states,  and  to  re-establish  their  common 
Batiooality,  wore  freely  voted  by  the  assembly. 

The  tragedy  which  almost  immediately  followed  is  still  involved 
in  considerable  mystery  as  to  some  of  the  causes  which  brought  it 
•bout.  It  appears  more  than  probable  that  so  soon  as  Morazan*9 
Ktum  was  known  in  Guatemala,  secret  plots  and  intrigues  were 
lesortcd  to  by  his  enemies  there  in  order  to  compass  his  ruin,  even 
vhile  at  a  distance.  "Wliatever  their  plans  may  have  been,  they 
were  doubtless  facilitated  by  the  severe  exactions  and  imprudence  of 
tUe  general,  and  by  tbe  violence,  insubordination,  and  crime  of 
•  aubaltem  in  oiHoe.  But  these  thing:),  however  provoking  in 
thcmsch'cs,  would  hardly  suffice  to  account  alone  for  the  sudden 
dMU^  which  so  completely  crushed  the  rising  hopes  of  the  still 
powerful  though  vanquished  liberal  party.  Indeed,  it  is  credibly  re- 
ported that  rumours  of  some  such  event  as  that  which  really  tran- 
Wfited  were  afloat  at  Guatemala  long  before  the  intelligence  from 
Coata  Rica  could  possibly  have  arrived. 

A  levy  of  2,000  men,  and  a  forced  contribution  of  50,000  dollar?, 
wen  certainly  sufficient  to  moderate  the  enthusiasm  of  the  i)eo])le 
of  this  pacific  state  for  their  new  military  despot ;  and  when  these 
vcre  exacted  with  rigour,  and  women  and  children  were  made 
iMlBtagcs  for  the  appearance  of  their  fugitive  relatives,  it  is  no 
wonder  they  wore  incensed.  If  they  had  not  a  greater  dislike  to 
soldiering,  the  Costaricenses  were  certainly  less  inured  to  wars 
than  the  men  of  the  other  states,  and  even  Carrillo  had  never  re- 
quired such  scr\'icc8  at  their  hands.  At  this  critical  period,  Molina, 
cue  of  Morazan*s  young  officers,  who  belonged  to  a  much-respected 
and  highly-talented  family,  closely  identified  with  the  liberal  in- 
terests, forcibly  carried  away  a  young  lady  of  rank  from  her  father*a 
house,  for  which  he  was  put  uuder  arrest  by  his  superior  officer. 
Tlie  influence  young  Molina  possessed  enabled  him  to  excite  an 
insurrection  among  the  troops  and  put  to  death  his  commander. 
General  Eivas ;  but  he  was  himself  again  arrested,  tried  by  a  court- 
martial,  and  condemned  to  death,  at  the  port  of  Calderas.  The 
excitement  which  his  execution  occasioned,  induced  Morazan  to 
■end  thither  his  confidential  general,  Sachet,  with  nearly  all  his 
troops,  at  a  time  when  the  discontent  against  himself  ran  high. 

While  the  president  was  thus  left  improtected,  the  inhabitants  of 
tha  capital  and  of  the  two  towns  of  Heridias  and  Alhajuela  rose  in 


uosaz&n's  tragic  end.  153 

iiuurrectioQ  on  the  lltU  September  1842.  With  a  imall  hodj  of 
trooje,  iliffcirently  slateil  from  300  to  600,  Morazan  defended  him- 
ra  (lays  niiJ  njghta  Kgniust  5,000  nieD,  bdiI  then,  being 
nrcume,  out  bia  way  through  the  insurgcntu  and  fled  to  C&rtago, 
llcre,  not  abtuning  tbu  assistance  he  perhaps  hoped  for,  he  was 
rcn  prisoticT,  together  with  his  two  sona  nod  some  other  adherents,  , 
ll  brought  back  to  the  capita].      On  the  1  Hth  he  was  shot  nt  Safi 

with  lutother  leodiog  otScer  of  bis  paHj  named  Villaseiior. 

GeocrDi  CabaRSB,  a  favourite  officer,  as  aoon  aa  he  heard  of  the 

ptuFe  of  MoraxaD,  hastened  with  a  cboiien  band,  Ksolved  to  re- 

k  JBave  him  or  die  la  the  attempt,  but  he  wns  prevented  tilt  it  was  loo 

K  -iKe,  being  deceived  by  a  professed  (Hend  of  the  pregidcnt~gene»), 

who  assured  him  that  his  banishment  and  not  big  death  bad  be«i 

determined  upon.     This  man's  nmne  is  betd  in  genera)  eIL■crat)OT^ 

oiKcinily  by  thi.'  liberal  party,  by  whom  the  memory  of  MorazaD 

is  cherished  and  MUTOimded  with  a  halo  of  enthu^asm  nieh  as  is 

attitralty  conceded  to  partially  succeesfiil,  but  uUimately  unfor- 

■  Moale  heroia.   Kliguel  Saravio,  Morazau's  secretary,  who  is  a^Kikeii 
P'«f  U  ft  young  man  of  pramising  abilities  and  of  a  lovely  di^poaitioD, 

destroyed  himself  by  poiMwi,  nppnreDtly  in  despair  at  the  ruin  of 
lus  maat«r,  as  be  wu  himself  in  no  peraonal  danger.  The  wreck  of 
the  Co(|iilmbo  party,  alter  reiiiaiiung  on  the  coaiit  in  their  sbipA  a 
thon  time,  was  re«aved  and  befriended  hy  Molespin  in  Salvador. 
.  From  tlua  event,  which  was  the  la^t  and  j.'crhaps  the  miwt 
ilow  to  the  hopes  of  the  liberals,  may  be  dated  the 
■cbcckcd  sway  of  individual  rather  than  of  pnrty  dominaltOR. 
F^Obe  of  the  uee*  wbich  God  m  bis  providence  may  bring  out  of 

■  Ae  apparently  unpromising  state  of  thingg  wbich  followed,  is  tbc 
not  the  euttrc  destruction  of  those  strong  prejudices  and 

ikling  jcalou^ea  which  have  impeded  the  free  development  of 
B  priuctples  nmnnd  which  each  party  professedly  rallied,  Init 
i  too  oUcu  foi^tten,  and  even  violated  in  the  condicts 
^et  the  putiuins. 

In  Carta  Uieo,  the  destroj-crs  of  the  Coquimbo  taction  organized 
yet  another  government,  declaring  the  former  illegal,  and  that 
little  stale  soon  returned  to  its  accustomed  quiet.  One  more 
•easoD  of  eomparHtire  calm  followed  these  more  violent  couuna- 
lioEis  wltich  extended  to  the  five  dismembered  states,  and  lusted 
taitlwcndorisiS. 


154  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AKEBICA. 

The  supreme  executive  power  of  Guatemala  was  now  vested  in  a 
kind  of  council  of  state  composed  of  the  highest  functionaries,  among 
whom  were  moderate  liberals  and  ecclesiastical  dignitaries.  Mariano 
Rivera  Paz,  as  g^fe,  filled  the  presidential  chair ;  Don  Juan  Jos^, 
Marquis  of  Aycinena,  a  priest  of  great  influence,  learning,  and 
acquaintance  with  the  world  (of  which  he  had  seen  something  dur- 
ing long  years  of  exile),  as  one  of  the  ministers  of  state,  also  made 
part  of  the  council ;  the  conmiander-in-chief  r^ularly  attended 
the  sittings  of  this  board.    It  was  generally  understood  that  the 
opinions  of  Carrera  had  great  weight  in  thdr  deliberations,  but 
it  was  not  known  precisely  to  what  extent  till  the  migority  ven- 
tured to  differ  from  him.    On  the  first  and  only  occasion  of  the 
kind  that  ever  happened,  the  general  quietly  withdrew  for  a  short 
space,  and  then  returning  as  calmly  resimied  his  seat.     His  col- 
leagues, however,  soon  became  aware  that  the  government-house 
was  entirely  surrounded  with  soldiers,  and  that  cannon  were  so 
planted  as  to  conmiand  the  doors  of  the  room  they  occupied.    This 
had  the  desired  effect  of  entirely  removing  all  their  differences  and 
making  them  unanimous,  and  indeed  the  council  was  never  after 
known  to  swerve  from  the  even  tenor  of  its  way. 

Simultaneously  with  the  fall  of  the  liberal  party  and  the  rise  of 
military  despotism,  there  was  also  a  partial  restoration  of  the  papal 
ascendency.  As  soon  as  the  priests  were  in  a  position  to  do  so,  they 
had  taken  steps  in  order  to  induce  the  exiled  archbishop,  already 
decrepit  with  age,  to  return  to  his  vacant  see. 

This  was  the  more  anxiously  desired,  because,  since  his  banish- 
ment, it  had  been  impossible  for  graduates  to  obtain  ordination 
without  proceeding  to  Mexico,  to  the  Havanna,  or  to  some  still 
more  distant  place ;  involving  difficulties  and  expenses  which  few 
candidates  were  able  and  willing  to  encounter,  and  thus  the  increase 
of  priests  had  been  in  a  great  measure  prevented ;  their  ranks  being 
but  sparingly  recruited  by  expatriated  Carlists  from  Spain  and 
emigrants  from  other  countries. 

On  the  failure  of  these  negodations  with  the  archbishop,  the 
**Cabildo  Edesiastico**  (ecclesiastical  court)  of  Guatemala  had 
entered  into  an  arrangement  with  Rome  for  the  appointment  of  a 
"  Cuajutor^  (coadjutor),  who  should  enjoy  the  tide  of  archbishop 
with  the  addition  of  that  word,  and  be  empowered  to  perform  all 
the  duties  of  the  diocese.    For  this  dignity  there  were  of  course  a 


AS  ABcniEFiacopAii  coadjutor, 


165 


few  bomble  aspirants,  and  !(  was  even  whispered  tliiit  certain  well 

known  persona  had  plunged  deeply  into  intrigue  involving  no 

iDConaiilenilile  pecuniary  ^crilicc,  tn  order  to  obtain  tbe  mitre.   A 

I  fist  of  tbe  clergy,  with  particulars  of  the  quali6cationB  of  each,  was 

b  fbnv&rded  to  Rome,  where,  to  the  surprise  of  all,  and  to  the  special 

I  nortificotion  of  the  aspiring  few,  the  choice  fell  upon  an  aged  and 

DbMore  bnt  well  reputed  priest,  said  to  be  learned,  who  bad  pro- 

babij  never  thought  of  the  preferment.    Pnwcisco  Garcia  Fclaci, 

'  pamb  priett  of  tbe  Antigua,  a  doctor  of  divinity  and  a  reputed 

lilierat,  wm  nominated  by  the  Pope,  and  at  once  digniUed  with 

the  tiUe  of  "  Bishop  in  partibux"  bis  bishoprick  being  an  almost 

y  unknown  spot  in  the  wilils  of  Africa.    The  nomuiee  waa  unable 

k  persooBlly  to  undertake  tbe  voyage  to  Italy,  it  therefore  became 

L  iKcessary  tbat  some  one  should  proceed  to  Rome  to  be  made  the 

L  vehicle  of  communicating  the  Apostolical  succession  and  l)eaedio- 

\  tioD,  so  tbat  it  might  be  properly  tmnamittcd  to  him. 

Don  George  Viteri,  also  a  doctor  of  divinity,  and  though  a  native 

'  cf  San  Salvador,  a  graduate  at  tbe  university  of  Paris,  bod  for 

e  taken  a  leading  ]iart  in  pobtical  affairs,  as  well  in  Gua- 

I  in  his  native  place.    In  person  be  was  handsome,  portly, 

Band  coDsidembly  above  the  common  stature ;  in  mental  cndow- 

oeatB  somewhat  gifted ;  and  in  character  very  ambitions  and  un- 

inc)t>led-      His  ceoKless  intrigues  seem  to  bave  centered  aronnd 

■  the  interests  of  tlie  class  to  which  he  belongs ;  and,  though  not  tbe 
I  &voured  one  in  tJie  late  contest,  these  soon  led  to  his  own 
I' promotion  as  an  ecclesiastic. 

Soon  after  the  event  related  above,  as  occurring  in  the  supreme 

h  council  of  Goatcmala,  in  which  Viteri  was  one  of  those  who  had 

»  ventured  to  differ  with  tbe  commandcr-ui-chief,  he  found  it  con- 

'   venietit  to  leave  his  offidal  functions,  and  undertake  the  journey  to 

Boine  on  the  important  niiigioa  just  now  alluded  to. 

About  the  middle  of  tbe  year  1S44,  Viteri  relumed  from  Rom' 
the  bearer  of  i>apal  bulls,  which  were  received  at  the  capital  with 
theringiiig  of  bells  and  the  firing  of  cannon.    He  bad  himself  been 
made  bisbop  of  Salvador— a  see  now  created   for  the  purpose, 
though  objected  to  when  urged  by  the  people  and  the  Padre 

■  Delgado  only  a  few  years  before.    The  ceremony  of  the  consecra- 
e  archbishop  waa  solemniietl  in  the  usual  form,  and  with 

liderable  pomp,    which    was    heightened    liy  the  additional 


^^KDelgado  onl; 
^^^■km  of  tbe  a 
^^HDonaiderable 


*.3*l| 


156  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

**8aere,'*  at  the  same  time,  of  the  bishop  of  Comayagua  for  the  809 
of  Honduras.    Yiteri  officiated  as  the  Fqw*^  nniicio. 

This  event  was  followed  by  the  ordination  of  a  niunber  of  gra* 
dnates  of  all  ages»  who  had  been  waiting  for  orders ;  and*  perhaps^ 
nerer  before  was  there  such  a  show  of  activity  and  aj^parent  pro* 
mise  of  ecclesiastical  extension,  as  at  that  period  when  the  three 
bishops  were  assembled  at  Guatemala,  perambulating  the  sbreeta  in 
their  violet  robes  and  green  hats,  followed  by  a  cortege  of  aaUe 
qreophants.  Their  coBeecration  was  accompanied  by  proiesBieiia  of 
mms  at  diffierent  convents,  and  the  solemnization  with  great  pomp 
of  the  opening  of  La  Recoleccion — a  fine  edifice  whkh,  haviqg  been 
niiiied  by  an  earthquake,  was  now  rebuilt  as  the  temple  of  the 
UKmastery  of  the  ""  Becoletos.**  But,  under  all  these  showy  a^pear^ 
ances,  it  was  evident  that  the  priests  possessed  but  a  rerj  liimted 
share  of  mfluenoe,  if  any,  in  the  government  of  the  ateto ;  ite  the 
work  of  clerical  reconstruction  was  confined  to  thdr  individaaleffoKts^ 
and  did  not  extend  beyond  the  pale  of  the  eorpg  eceUnattiqme^ 

In  the  neighbouring  state  of  Salvador,  Francisco  Makq^ia,  who 
had  figured  in  an  insurrectioa  against  the  federal  govemmevt»  and 
in  the  intrigues  .of  the  Padre  Yiteri,  had  been  raised  to  the  duef 
military  command  by  Carrera,  after  the  flight  of  General  Moiaaii. 
He  had  risen  into  notice  through  deeds  of  violence,  and  with  a 
reptttation  stained  by  excessive  personal  crimes;  like  Carrera, 
from  being  the  mere  tool  of  factions^  he  had  acquired  a  love  of 
power,  and  soon  became  their  scourge ;  and  he  also  showed  no  par* 
ticular  predilections  for  the  party  who  had  served  him  as  a  "t^^'^g 
place  to  raise  himself  to  power.  Long  before  he  assumed  the  style 
and  title  of  president  of  the  sovereign  and  independent  state  of 
Salvador,  Malespin  moved  the  secret  springs  of  government. 

In  Honduras,  General  Ferrera,  who  had  already  been  g^fe  nnoe 
1841,  manifested  the  same  tendencies,  and  was  silently  preparing  to 
seize  the  unchecked  control  of  affairs  under  the  guise  of  the  presi- 
dency of  the  state. 

Nicaragua  in  its  distractions  had  actually  dected  a  Snpteme 
Director  whose  power  was  superseded  in  1843,  by  that  of  a  ^'  Gran 
Mariscal,**  or  Grand  Marshal,  in  the  person  of  General  Foaseca,  one 
in  every  respect  worthy  of  a  place  by  the  side  either  of  Malespin  or 
Ferrera,  to  whom  he  was  not  in&rior  in  immorality,  but  he  probaUy 
anrpaaBed  them  both  in  brutal  ignorance. 


EsnKAL,  157 

The  only  itate  wliich,  in  1843,  was  not  ruled  by  aculitHTy  despot 
was  CoEtK  Bic».  By  the  short  coavul!>ion  which  made  it  tbe  grave 
of  Ihe  Uberal  party,  aiid  dU'Dguished  for  a  time  at  lean  stl  Impel 
of  a  nationality  in  tbe  shaipt  of  a  federal  govcnmicnt,  it  KCiircd  its 
own  tnwqtiillity  and  gave  it«elf  to  that  industry  which  enabled  it 
to  be  the  first,  and,  till  lately,  the  oolyatate  which  paid  its  share  of 
the  loan*  contracted  in  Europe  under  the  ffderaiion,  and  also 
materially  to  improve  its  roads  and  ports. 

Tbe  [lomtion  of  aflairs  in  the  tour  principal  states  did  not  tren  them 
fi-om  dvU  war  and  mutual  aggression.  There  wa«  generally  one, 
if  not  more  than  one,  rival  officer  ready  toconlestthepalm  with  tbe 
poa^es80r  of  power,  and  one  or  llie  other  of  thcK  obtaining  connte- 
nance  or  kelp  IVom  the  govenunent  uf  a  riral  slate,  involved  them 
all  in  continual  broib. 

General  Arce,  who  bad  been  tbe  first  federal  presrident,  had  sunk 
to  a  snbordinate  rank  among  military  leaders  at  a  lime  when  the 
army  had  fallen  iiitu  general  disrepute,  and  was  ofGecred  by  the 
worst  class  of  adventurers.  He  undertook  to  invade  tbe  state  of 
Salvador  in  1844,  with  a  view  to  check  the  apparently  Utieral 
tendencies  of  Malespin,  and,  as  was  commonly  reported,  with 
arms  and  supplies  fiimished  by  Carrera.  lie  met  with  little 
sympathy  frcan  the  SalvodorefiOB,  and  being  defeated,  tlie  act  was 
disowned  by  tbe  Guatemala  govcrDment,  and  Arce  and  his  ano- 
ciutes  were  imprisoned. 

MaleqHD,  not  dcceii-ed  bythis  show  of  justice,  raised  an  army,  and 
entered  the  state  of  Guatemala,  but  crc  he  had  marched  a  fourth  of 
the  dtFiBiiee  towarda  the  capital,  an  insurrection  among  bis  own 
Iroopn  in  fiiToarof  General  CabnfiBS,  one  of  Maramo's  farourita 
officers,  averted  bis  attention  ivnd  excited  his  jealousy  so  mnch  thitt 
be  rrtnmed  and  disbanded  a  imrt  of  his  forces.  Carrera,  who  had 
collected  tbe  Mitu  hordes,  retaliated  by  an  inroad  Upon  Salvador, 
Imt  aniioiis  not  to  leave  bis  place  at  the  council  board  long  unoc- 
cupitd,  he  aoon  relumed  to  the  capital  without  any  great  nt- 
anltj. 

To  defray  the  expenses  of  this  and  wrailar  wars,  forced  contribu- 
tions were  now  habitnally  levied  in  the  eitia  and  larger  (owni. 
This  was  done  simply  by  making  a  list  of  the  more  wealthy  mer- 
chants and  proprietors,  and  nlliuug  to  each  name  a  figure  consiJePed 
to  be  piroportioiiate  to  their  supponedsubstance.  This  sum  was  col- 
lected ostensibly  as  a  loan,  by  fail  means  if  posaible,  but  if  tbe  party 


¥m 


158  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA* 

taxed  refused  to  pay  the  quota  assigned  him,  his  goods  or  cattle  to 
a  much  larger  amount  were  seized  and  sold,  or  they  were  used  for 
the  benefit  of  the  state.  And  in  some  cases  even  his  entire  estates 
were  disposed  of  for  a  fraction  of  their  actual  value. 

On  all  such  occasions — and  they  have  been  more  or  less  firequent 
nnce  the  independence — foreign  merchants  have  been  called  upon 
to  contribute  as  well  as  others :  but  all  foreigners,  and  especially 
Englishmen,  have  hitherto  ei\joyed  a  great  advantage  over  the 
natives,  inasmuch  as  they  have  been  enabled  to  recover  their  money 
by  the  aid  of  their  respective  consuls,  sometimes  backed  with  a 
blockading  squadron,  whilst  those  not  so  protected  have  suffered 
the  loss  of  both  principal  and  interest 

These  repeated  exactions  of  money  fell  heaviest  upon  the 
wealthy,  but  the  labourer  and  the  artisan  were  harassed  by  still 
more  frequent  levies  of  men.  They  were  constantly  exposed  to  be 
seized — even  in  the  midst  of  seed  time  or  harvest — and  to  be  hurried 
to  a  distant  and  harassing  campaign,  or  forced  to  spend  month  after 
month  within  the  pestilential  atmosphere  of  the  barracks.  The  na- 
tion was  impoverished— all  classes  of  the  people  were  burdened  and 
oppressed — in  the  public  mind  there  was  a  general  alarm  and 
feverish  excitement  produced  by  continual  changes,  which  were 
only  varied  by  the  horrible  outrages  each  army  or  commander 
was  pleased  to  commit ;  and  in  which  they  seemed  to  vie  with 
each  other  who  should  be  the  most  diabolical.  Some  of  these  out- 
rages are  of  such  a  character  as  absolutely  to  preclude  the  mention 
of  their  infamous  details.  Often  have  the  midnight  orgies  to  which 
the  celebration  of  a  victoiy  gave  occasion  surpassed  in  cruelty  and  in 
unnatural  excesses  even  the  horrors  of  the  battle-field,  and  long  will 
the  obscene  tale  continue  to  spread  its  contagion,  and  to  occasion 
dismay  in  the  minds  of  all  classes,  ages,  and  conditions  of  the  people. 

While  the  dispute  concerning  Arce*s  invasion  was  still  pending, 
Fonseca,  being  urged  by  Malcspin  to  assist  him  in  overthrowing 
Carrera,  soon  raised  a  force,  as  if  in  compliance  with  his  request,  but 
immediately  directed  it  against  Ferrera  in  Honduras.  He  was 
defeated  by  the  Hondurefios,  led  on  by  Don  Santos  Guardiola,  who 
now  first  began  to  make  his  name  a  terror,  before  which  the 
inhabitants  of  towns  and  villages  alike  learned  to  flee,  seeking 
shelter  from  his  fury  with  wild  beasts  and  venomous  reptiles,  crea- 
tures tame  and  beneficent  by  comparison  with  him.  This  man  may 
serve  as  a  type  of  the  worst  kind  of  military  commanders.    He  is 


^F  TUE    SIEGE    OF    LEON.  150 

describeil  bj  Mr.  Dunlop  as  a,  ilark-colouriKl  Mctizo,  stout  built,  and 
latbcr  corpulent,  bis  face  eicprcs^ng  hia  fiendish  temper ;  but  ttl-II 
likuil  by  iho  soliliera,  wbom  he  indulges  in  every  wny.  To  his 
habits  of  intoxication  may  be  oddt-d  every  species  of  vice  whi:;b  can 
lie  named  among  the  vicious  inhabitants  of  Central  America ;  and 
irequently  in  his  drunkcu  tits  he  orders  people  to  be  shot  who 
have  in  nothing  offended  him,  while  at  all  times  the  most  trilling 
cxtiression,  incautiously  uttered,  h  sufficient  to  cause  the  babbler  lo 
be  shot  without  mercy.  In  private  life,  he  is  as  brutal  as  can  uell 
lie  imagined.  In  all  the  towns  throngh  which  be  passes,  he  makes 
a  habic  of  calling  in  the  best  looking  women  he  can  see,  and  after 
subjecting  them  to  infamous  treatment,  be  drives  tbem  forth  with 

the  most  insumng  epithets Like  Slarins,  the  Romau 

leader,  hia  brutal  manocra  serve  to  terrify  the  enemy."* 

Ou  the  35th  August  1S44,  a  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded 
between  the  statea  of  Salvador  ami  Guatemala.  In  the  former 
state,  General  Cabanas,  who  bears  a  mild  character,  and  who  had 
refused  to  take  advantage  of  an  insurrection  in  Ilia  favour  among 
Malespin's  troops,  because  of  the  treachery  it  Involved  to  his  superior 
and  benefactor,  had  now  to  flee  from  before  the  fate  of  Malespin.and 
with  a  considerable  number  of  adherents  he  passed  ovcrtothe!>tate 
of  Nicaragua.  Here  ilie  Grand-Marshal  Fonseca  lent  himself  to  a, 
project  of  first  restoring  the  liberal  party  in  Nicaragua,  Salvador, 
and  Honduras,  and  then,  by  uniting  their  forces,  once  more  to 
overthrow  the  scn'ile  power  in  Guatemala,  its  stronghold.  Their 
ultimate  object  was  professedly  the  re-establishment  of  the  Federal 
Government.  Great  precautions  were  taken,  while  collecting  men 
and  means,  to  keep  their  movements  secret,  but  the  illegal  seizure 
of  a  vcuel  which  managed  to  escape  out  of  port,  and  carry  the 
inrorniatiun  to  Salvodur,  disconcerted  this  part  of  their  plan. 

Ferrera  and  Guardiola  readily,  united  with  Molespin  to  oppose 
Cobafios  and  Funseca.  Cabafias  made  the  first  inroad  upon 
Honduras  and  was  defeated,  but  shortly  af\er,  he  hi  his  turn 
defeated  a  much  larger  body  of  Houdurefios.  After  varioua 
iflicts,  with  the  usual  results  of  forced  loans  and  levies,  and  all 
e  other  accompaniments  of  ivor,  Molespin  and  Guardiola  with 
n  entered  Nicaragua,  and  laid  siege  to  Leon. 
LThis  beautiful  city,  which  at  one  time  threatened  to  rival  Guale.^ 
•  Dml..p,  i..ra; 


«IMI 


IttO  THE  G08FKL  CI  GEXTRAL  AMERICA. 

nnk,  mm  now  the  bst  rtroaghold  of  the  Coqiiimbo  ptrtj  \rhkh 
bad  nllied  rocmd  Cafaafias.  The  bcaeigcrg  were  not  nmneroos 
coongh  to  inrest  it  on  all  sides ;  bat  the  enemies  of  Fonseca  in  the 
adjacent  towns,  taking  adTantage  of  the  oyportiuritjr,  rebelled 
against  his  authority,  elected  another  leader,  and  nnitii^  with 
Malespin  and  Gnardi<^  swelled  the  besieging  army  to  double  its 
original  nnmbers.  The  besi^ed  made  the  most  desperate  defence 
erer  known  in  the  history  of  Central  American  wars,  and  tiie 
honorsof  this  siege  were  so  extreme  and  comfdicaled,  as  Ibrdbly  to 
recall  some  of  the  accoonts  given  by  Joeephus  in  his  Wan  of  the 
Jews. 

On  the  18th  December,  abont  800  of  the  besieged  made  a  sally 
and  were  surprised  and  dispersed  by  an  ambnshment,  which  pre- 
vented the  return  of  bat  few  of  them,  besides  their  offieezs,  to  Leon. 
At  the  dose  of  this  month  the  city  was  invested  on  all  sides,  and  the 
snfierings  of  the  inhabitants  from  within  began  to  exceed  the  cruelty 
of  their  enemies  without.  All  suspected  persons  were  murdered, 
by  order  of  the  grand-marshal,  very  many  houses  were  plundered, 
and  dead  bodies  lay  unburied  in  all  the  streets*  The  besieged 
troops,  reduced  to  extremity,  and  infuriated  by  many  evil  passions, 
now  began  to  sack  every  part  of  the  dty  which  they  oould  reach, 
shying  even  their  friends  with  unheard-of  cruelties,  and  committiDg 
the  worst  of  outrages  on  women  and  children.  These  deeds 
occasioned  Cal)a&is,  with  Morazan*s  two  sons  and  fifteen  others  of 
his  party,  to  abandon  the  tro<^  They  succeeded  in  effecting  their 
escape  on  the  23rd  of  JanusEry  1845. 

*'0n  the  following  day,  a  general  assault  was  made  by  Malespm 
and  Gnardiola,  who  placed  loaded  camion  bdiind  their  troops,  to 
be  fired  upon  them  in  case  they  turned  back,  and  the  two  generals 
and  most  of  the  troops  being  intoxicated  mshed  forward  with 
savage  fury.  The  barricades  were  desperately  defended  by  the 
Leonese  troops  for  some  time,  but  at  last  were  all  finally  forced, 
and  the  defenders  killed  or  driven  out,  after  which  the  vic- 
ton  made  a  general  massacre,  no  age  or  sex  being  spared,  and 
no  place  respected.  The  women,  who  had  taken  refoge  in  the 
churches,  were  first  violated  and  then  bayoneted  by  the  savage 
soldiery;  and  these  saeied  (f)  edifices  were  literally  filled  with 
mangled  bodieti  and  covered  with  blood.** 

Every  hcuse  but  one  was  nckedaod  completely  gutted.    Several 


B  STATE  TACTICS  IX  cnATEMALA.  Ifil 

«rere  razed  to  the  gromid ;  but  aa  lliis  required  great  Ubour,  the  walls 

being  six  or  more  feet  thick,  attempts  were  made  to  bum  the  teat ; 

ribcy  succeeded  but  partially,  ou  account  of  the  deCBched  poailion 

f  the  buitdings  and  the  little  wood  used  iit  their  construction. 

~  :  house  that  vias  spared  vaa  occupied  b/  au  £iigli«h  merchaut, 

e  partner  of  the  British  vice-coiiBul,  to  whom  Malespiu  gnintrf 

B  guard  of  protection.     In  it  the  Grand-Marshal  FouEcca  by  con- 

Beealed  for  two  days;  but  waa  finally  lakes  whilu  attempting  aa 

Incape,  and  immediately  put  to  death.    As  a  climax  to  the  desecra- 

ofthe  churches,  aa  many  as  three  or  four  priests  were  slain 

irithtn  tbem.     And  it  may  be  asked,  were  there  none  who  could 

ecognise  in  their  dying  groans  a  uote' of  retribution  ? 

Perhaps  the  reader  is  better  qualified  than  those  more  imme- 

liately  eoncerued  to  discern  in  these  secondary  circnmBtancei  a 

tngcr  pointuig  to  the  source  of  nil  the  horrors  described,  and  all 

e  woes,  still  more  terrible,  which  the  nation  has  endured,  and 

B  still  enduring,  from  the  most  baneful  of  all  curses,  that  of  a 

I  corrupted  form  of  godliness  without  the  power. 

In  Gaatcmalo,  scenes  of  riolencc,  though  in  a  different  furm  and 

istly  less  in  degree,  were  at  the  same  time  transpiring.    Tbesera- 

I  executive  council  hod  till  now  been  associated  with  the 

knposing  appearance  of  a  deliberative  legislature  composed  of  the  ■oi- 

tdiiant  representatives  of  the  jjcople.   It  consisted  of  am^ority  of  oer- 

s,alargemuiorityoriibcr>ls,andasprinklingof  nuiitarynien,at 

%li08e  head  was  Sotcro  Carreni,  the  brother  of  the  commander-in- 

B<Uef,  and  Corregidor  (chief  magistrate  or  prcfeet)af  the  Antigua — 

■  man  of  the  Guardiola  stamp,  without  his  reputed  valour.    Thij) 

I  aseembly  was,  of  course,  the  arena  where  the  remaining  animosities 

VsudjeoloDsies  of  factions  not  yet  extinct  were  manifested,  and  little 

is  effected  by  it  thou  to  keep  these  alive.    The  commauder-ia 

ehief  did  not  look  complacently  upon  its  labours,  notwithstanding 

the  power  of  the  veto  which  was  wielded  by  the  council  board  at 

which  he  sat. 

In  June  1844,  it  wns  commonly  reported  that  a  targe  quantity  of 
uimw,  amounting  to  40  or  iO  raulcH*  burden,  bad  ctiuidestinely  left 
Uie  "  ConiBndancia,"  the  general's  head- quarters,  during  the  night, 
■ccompanicd  by  officers  and  men,  closely  muffled.  Carrera  at 
tlie  ante  period  undertook  a  journey  to  visit  one  of  his  more 
G  estates.    Subsequently,  rumoura  were  afloat  that  the  Alila 


^■h». 


162  THE  008PEL   IK  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

liadiaiis  were  aagembling  in  flmu,  and  in  grett  nnmbeni  at  Finala, 
about  SIX  miles  from  the  capital,  in  a  sooth-easteriy  direetion. 
The  alarmed  inhabitants  immediately  sent  for  the  general,  who 
bdng  indiqx)9ed  in  the  highlands  could  not  come  so  soon  as  they 
wished.  Meantime,  the  Indian  hordes  increased  rapidly,  and 
assumed  a  threatening  attitude  towards  the  capital.  In  the  hour 
of  extremity  Garrera,  having  suddenly  reoovered,  arriyed  at  Guate- 
mala, and  led  out  the  garrison  to  attack  his  former  supporters.  A 
mock  conflict  of  some  hours  ensued,  in  which  two  of  Carrera*s  men 
were  actually  killed,  and  about  as  many  wounded.  The  officer 
who,  being  really  in  earnest,  had  caused  this  mortality  was,  how- 
ever, taken,  and  imprisoned  in  the  capital.  The  victors  very  con- 
descendingly entered  into  treaty  with  the  defeated  Indians,  who 
presented  a  list  of  demands,  among  which  the  most  prominent 
were  that  the  Legislative  Assembly  should  be  dissolved ;  that  no 
priest  should  in  future  be  allowed  to  fill  any  office  in  the  state,  and 
that  the  military  should  ei^oy  exemption  from  the  civil  tribunals, 
bdug  amenable  only  to  a  court-martiaL 

These  and  other  requests  were  thought  so  veiy  reasonable  by 
the  victorious  general,  that  they  were  printed,  circulated,  and  pre- 
sented for  adoption  to  the  Legislative  Assembly,  which  actually 
met,  and  pretended  to  discuss  them,  while  the  defeated  Indians 
were  a¥raiting  a  reply  within  two  leagues  of  their  august  repre- 
sentatives. At  the  second  meeting  of  the  Assembly,  held  with  this 
exalted  object  in  view,  some  few  liberal  members  feebly  lifted 
up  thdr  voices  against  the  proceeding,  but  all,  with  one  exception, 
eoncurred  in  signing  and  sealing  at  once  their  own  infiuny  and 
dissolution.  The  victors  having  generously  conceded  all  that  ike 
vanquished  required^  the  latter  were  next  marched  into  the  city,  to 
the  number  of  six  thousand  men,  and  reviewed  in  the  Plasa 
Mayor  by  Carrera. 

Strangely  inconsistent  as  it  may  appear,  the  commander-in- 
chief  had  now  the  friendship  and  assistance  of  a  priest,  whose 
significant  name  conveys  a  pretty  correct  idea  of  his  character. 
The  Padre  Lobos,  or  Father  Wolves^  is  a  well-kno¥m  guerilla 
leader,  (^  reputed  bravery,  and  a  revolutionary  partisan  of  the 
iberals  of  Salvador. 

When  the  Indians  had  retired  from  the  capital,  the  Assembly 
was  no  more.    The  Marq[ui8  of  Aydnena,  and  other  cleigymen. 


INSCRRECTIOKS.  163 

bad  reaigoed  thdr  se^'cnl  posbi.    The  soldiery,  like  the  prieats, 

were  priTileged  to  commit  crimes  with  more  than  cammon  im- 

r  pnnity;  and  in  this  military  phase  of  the  revolntioii   it   »eems 

Wfo  have  reached  the  culminating  point  of  full-orbed  despotism. 

■  Another  aEsembly  was  of  course  convoked,  though  the  deputies 
n  arriving  from  the  provinces,  and  much  longer 

■  'Mill  in  preparing  a  new  cooBtitution,  which,  after  it  had  been 
I  eompletcd  with  much  labour,  -was  rejected  by  the  executive,  and 
I  tile  delicate  proocsa  had  to  be  recommenced. 

During  this  year  (1844)  were  nianifested  the  firrit  tokens  of  dis- 

1  Kmtent  and  mutiny  among  the   troops  which  were   now   more 

I  jnimeroua  and  better  aimed,  and  in  some  respects  better  trained, 

f  than  tbey  bad  been,  though  they  were  certainly  not  less  SIthy 

[and  ill-dad,  nor  one  whit  more  orderly  and  moral  in  their  conduct. 

[cmte  Rosa,   one   of   Carrcnt'H   gciicml^   was   snrpriaed   in    the 

A  of  collecting  arma  and  ammunition,  and  preparing  an  inKurrec- 

on  at  an  eatate  withiti  a  few  miles  from  Gnateniala.    He  was 

iiprisoaed  in  the  capital.      On  the  20th   Sept.,   the   "  balallon 

[  permanente."   compoMDg   an  important  part   of  the   garrison   of 

iBlemnla,   rone   in   ret<ellion,   and   begun  to   pillage,   but  they 

f'Were  aoon  put  down,  and  some  of  the  ringleadera  shot. 

On  the  1st  of  January  1845,  Carrera  openly  assnmcd  the  govern- 
vnent  of  the  ctate  of  Guatemala,  by  taking  upon  himself  the  office 
Twid  title  of  President.  He  at»>  gradually  introduced  his  own 
f  ofliceR  and  &vourites  into  every  civil  post  of  trust  and  dignity ; 
I  not  fearing  to  oflend  both  tiie  libcroU  and  the  scrriles,  whom  he 
I  liad  alike  flattered  and  cooled. 

Another  revolt  among  the  troops,  which  soon  followed,  wore  a 
'  more  aerious  aspect,  and  was  calculated  to  moderate  the  confidenn: 
of  the  new  president.  Carreni  lind  left  the  city  on  the  30th  of 
January  for  the  shores  of  the  Pacific,  where  he  was  cultivating 
a  large  and  rich  estate:  in  the  dead  of  the  night  of  (he  third 
day  after  bis  departure  (the  1st  of  Feb.  1844),  some  officers,  who 
had  gained  over  a  part  of  the  garrison,  prt>cccdcd  to  the  gnol, 
Kiul,  forcing  open  its  doors,  liberated  Itlontc  Rosa,  and  with  him 
:  three  or  four  hundred  nialtfnclors  then  composing  the 
L  ^nin-gang,  all  of  them  of  the  most  desperate  class  of  murderers, 
;  they  immediately  amiwl,  and  then  proceeded  to  proclaim 
«■  order  of  thing'.     This  laction  had  al!  the  maleriel/e  of  wiir 


164  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CKKTRAL  AMERICA. 

in  its  hands ;  and  the  city,  capitalists,  mechanics,  and  labourers,  lay 
completely  at  its  mercy.  But  the  leading  citizens  had  little  confi* 
denoe  in  Monte  Bosa  and  his  friends,  and  anxious  as  all  parties 
were  to  rid  themsdves  of  the  yoke  of  Carrera,  under  which  they 
writhed,  and  on  account  of  which  they  burned  with  shame, 
none  were  found  who  were  willing  to  exchange  it  for  that  of  Monte 
Bosa  and  his  assassins;  so  that,  after  committing  some  trifling 
depredations,  chiefly  confined  to  the  residence  of  the  president- 
general,  and  exacting  5,000  dollars,  which  was  considered  a  very 
moderate  simi  as  a  ransom  from  the  horrors  of  a  general  pillage, 
they  retired  from  the  city,  upon  which  Sotero  Carrera  had  already 
marched  in  support  of  his  brother,  with  a  small  force  from  the 
Antigua. 

Monte  Bosa  and  his  followers  were  pursued  in  their  retreat 
towards  Mexico,  and  most  of  them  were  shot  or  drowned  at  the 
passage  of  a  riyer ;  he  himself  effected  his  escape.  Mr.  Dunlop 
attributes  this  insurrection  to  the  secret  intrigues  of  the  senrile 
leaders,  who,  he  says,  '^  in  the  most  cowardly  manner,  barricadoed 
their  houses,  and  waited  to  see  the  result,  before  declaring  for  either 
party."* 

The  president-general  returned  to  the  capital  after  these  erents, 
haying  been  taken  ill  at  his  estate,  as  the  same  writer  says,  from 
fright  on  receiying  the  disagreeable  intelligence.  He  imprisoned 
many  whom  he  suspected,  and  ordered  seyeral  to  be  shot,  but  on 
the  whole  manifested  a  far  more  conciliatory  disposition  than  was 
expected  towards  all  parties,  and,  at  this  time,  more  particularly 
towards  the  liberals.  Don  Benedicto  Mejia,  one  of  this  party, 
was,  howeyer,  arrested,  and  that,  too,  while  in  the  act  of  writing  a 
scurrilous  satire  upon  Carrera  himself,  in  which  he  alluded  to  one 
of  his  former  occupations,  yiz.,  that  of  a  pig-driyer,  and  to  other 
far  more  disreputable  things.  This  paper  was  produced  and  read  at 
his  trial,  and  so  exasperated  the  president  that  he  at  once,  and  in 
person,  inflicted  corporeal  chastisement  upon  the  offender  by  caffs 
and  kicks,  but  that  he  was  not  the  more  disposed  to  pardon  him 
after  this  infliction,  was  proyed  by  his  subsequent  imprisonment 
lasting  many  months.  * 

Bon  Juaquin  Duran,  a  lawyer  who  enjoys  a  high  reputation, 
and  was  considered  liberal  in  his  tendencies,  was  immediately 

*Dq]ilop,r.St6. 


'S  OTEHTHBOW    !S    SALVADOR.  lOo 

ilevtled  lo  the  rank  of  minister  of  stole,  now  become  somewhat 
I  that  of  prime  minisier  to  an  abaoliiie  wonnrch. 
f  Cencrol  Pais,  who  is  regarded  with  terror  where  he  does  not  excite 
I- abhorrence,  was  associated  with  him  as  nunislcr  of  HDBDce  ond 
I  ynr.  The  Dumber  of  public  functionaries  was  coouderablj  reduced, 
I  and  tlic  collecting  of  the  customs  or  import  duties,  which  is  almost 
I  the  only  important  eoutcc  of  revenue,  was  belter  regulated,  so  tlint 
I  m  gKBl  sLTing  vtaa  effected  to  the  public  purse,  enabling  tlie  state 
I  b)  satisfy  the  claims  of  some  of  the  foreign  merchants,  for  which 
I  their  consuls  had  now  become  unusually  clamorous. 

At  the  close  of  1844,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  year, 

|.Ae  remote  slate  of  Costa  Rica  presented  the  uncommon  spectacle  of 

a  pacific  coutest  between  four  political  leaders  for  the  privilege  of 

J  ruling,  and  Jose  Maria  Alfaro,  anxious  to  retire  from  office, 

Krith  difficulty  obtained  a.  successor.      Don  Rafael  Gollegos  was, 

'ever,  elected  gilfc  at  the  beginning  of  1S43,  and  continued  in 

« till  the  7th  June  184G,  when  a  bloodless  revolution,  in  which 

I  the  military  were  the  chief  actors,  restored  Jos6  Mima  Alfaro,  who 

I  rctirmcd  office  verj'  unwiUiuglj.  The  only  complaint  of  the  people 

o  have  been  the  inetiiciency  of  the  l^islaturc,  which  wiia 

ruitftil  ill  words  and  barren  in  deeds ;  and  their  professed  object 

IS  the  further  promotion  of  the  commercial  prosperity  of  which 

V  had  already  tasted  the  sweets.    Like  Issachor,  tbey  saw  that 

rt  w»  good  and  the  land  pleasant,  and  they  were  willing  to  bow 

«  shoulder  to  bear,  and  to  become  servants  unto  tribute. 

On  the  2nd  of  February  1845,  the  very  day  upon  which  tile 

i,  (action  found  itself  in  possession  of  Guatemala,  a 

evolutina  of  much  greater  importance  took  place  iu  San  Sal- 

,  General  Cabanas,  and  tliose  uho  had  escaped  with   him 

fftom  the  siege  of  Leon,  hastened  lo  Malcspin's  capital,  and  even 

while  be  and  Guardiola  were  unitedly  consummating  their  deeds  o!' 

lilood  and  rapine  upon  llic  unhappy  iuhabitanis  of  that  devoted 

dly,  the  Coquinibia  entered  San  Salvador  at  tlie  head  of  nearly 

t^/iOO  men,  who  hod  adhered  to  them  in  their  hasty  nureh,  and  were 
tathusiaatically  received  by  the  liberal  Salvadorefios.  The  Vice- 
president  Guimon,  who  had  frequently  been  urged  to  miurp  the 
government,  but  had  evinced  great  timidity,  consented  to  do  so  now 
that  he  was  wen  supported,  and  saw  Malcsiun  at  a  diitonce.  De 
was  nained  proviuouul  president,  and  all  classes  seemed  to  rqoice 


166  THX  «<MPBL  IN  CINTBAL  AMBRICA. 


in  the  change*  The  intdhgenoe  of  this  eTent  also  affscted  Maka- 
pin*t  tioops  to  that  extent  that  he  was  ahnost  entirely  deserted, 
and  the  new  goremon  of  Nicangua,  who  had  senred  themsdTes 
in  helping  the  heaegera  of  Leon,  now  thanked  and  diwnisBed  both 
Gfianliola  and  Makspin,  who,  aware  of  thar  weakness,  retired 
together  qniet]^  into  Honduras. 

Maksfiin,  ayailing  himself  of  the  friendship  of  Ferren  and 
6iiardiola,a6  wdU  as  of  the  wealth  he  had  amassed  while  in  power, 
made  deqpetate  stmg^es  to  reeorer  it.  He  first  entered  the  rebel- 
lious state  from  Hondnias  on  the  2iid  March,  with  a  mere  remnant 
of  the  amy  he  had  led  to  the  walls  of  Leon,  hoping  to  surprise  the 
new  goTcnmient  Cabafias  met  him  with  a  8uperi<Hr  force  at  Que- 
lapa  near  San  Mignd,  where  Goardida  was  victorious,  and  passing 
the  Rio  Lempa,  thej  had  another  but  undedsiTe  encounter,  at  San 
Yieente.  After  this  Cabafias,  being  stron^j  reinfocoed,  dioYe 
Guazdida  before  him  back  into  Honduras.  Guardiola,  neyerthe- 
less,  plundered  and  devastated  the  country  as  he  went. 

Kegoriations  were  now  attempted  between  the  belligeroit  states, 
by  which  it  became  apparent  that  Ferrera  was  resolyed  to  support 
Malespki  to  the  utmost,  and  they  consequently  juroTed  ineffeetuaL 
War  was  sgain  resmned.  Cabafias,  pretty  well  suj^ported  with 
though  but  scantily  sopjdied  with  money  or  proriaonsi, 
Honduras,  and  took  possession  of  Comayagua,  the  capital, 
on  the  8th  June  1845.  Here  he  ¥ras  left  by  his  own  gorcmment 
to  pay  and  victual  his  troops  ss  best  he  m%ht  This  can  only  be 
explained  by  a  determination  on  the  part  of  jealous  rivals  to  ruin 
Cabafias,  <Hr,  what  is  more  probable,  that  the  state  was  really  so 
reduced  by  its  previous  wars  with  Guatemala  and  Nicaragua  as 
to  be  totally  unable  to  raise  the  necessary  sui^hes.  Upon  his 
remonstrances  the  general  was  urged  to  support  himsdf  by 
pkmder;  but  having  exhausted  ^what  money  he  could  coUeci 
among  his  friends,  for  he  himself  was  too  honest  ever  to  be 
possessed  of  any,  the  troops  merefy  subsisted  by  what  was  sent 
them  in  charity  by  the  inhabitants  of  Honduras,  who  were  aston- 
ished at  the  moderation  of  their  leader  ;***  but  the  unpaid  tnofn 
&8t  deserted  and  relumed  to  their  homes.  So  that,  when  the 
i^proach  of  Gnardiola  was  announced,  the  dispirited  remnant 
itltased  to  encounter  Imn  and  fled,  the  greater  part  throwing  away 


viTEni.  1Q7 

kitbeii  antti.  CsbuiM  was  himsvlf  forced  to  flee  nilli  less  thui 
ft  fifty  imji — the  only  remiuuit  of  tlie  3,000  wbom  he  tiod  brought 
I  with  him.  Panued  to  Sau  Miguel,  where  be  was  still  unable 
I  to  uller  any  nsiitiiiice,  he  found  himself  obiigcd  to  abantlon  that 
I  town  to  tbe  tender  mercies  of  Guardiula,  who  completely  sacked 
I  it,  but  wanting  a  suthcieat  force  to  attack  the  capital,  tboagh 
I  tb»t  alM  formed  a  port  of  bla  [ikn,  be  waited  Bome  time  fol 
I  rnnforcemeDts  without  cro&sin);  the  Lempa.  Gcnend  Cabafias,  oa 
1  to  San  Salvador,  resigned  the  commaud  of  tbu  forces. 
1  Great  terror  girevuled  amoDg  the  inhahitaots  of  the  capital  in 
I  eOBsequence  of  this  Eti.'p,  aa  they  had  do  one  else  in  whom  to  con- 
k  fide  their  protcctioD. 

YiVT*!  tbe  new  Inshop  of  San  Salvador,  who  had  first  oseisted  tbe 

[>,  bad  aftciwania  9o  Berioosly  disagreed  with  him  that 

ttto  bi*  return  from  Romes  be  found  it  expedient  to  leave 

d  take  up  hia  residence  with  tbe  archbishop  at  Guate* 

On  the  occurrence  of  the  revolution  of  February,  be  had 

I  xetutned  to  San  Salvador,  and  now  united  with  tbe  friends  of  the 

I  late  Aloraian  tobclp  to  crush  his  former  ally.  In  punuance  of  this 

ftabject,  the  biibop  preached  up  a  crusade  against  tbe  Honduna 

trouj>^,  and  to  give  it  addilloiial  forw  he  publicly  excommuoicMed, 

h  bell,  book,  and  candle,  both  Ferrera  and  Malespin.    The  bull 

it  excommonication  tvas  also  printed  and  widely  circulated,  enjtuu- 

;  upon  all  to  tlee  from  the  spiritual  coutagion,  and  calling  upon 

e  phetts  to  refuse  the  sacraments  of  tbe  church  to  their  soldiers. 

Tbe  effect  of  the  bishop's  measure,  however  powerful  it  might 

at  a  previous  period,  was  now,  at  best,  of  doubtful 

bcommouly  reported  that  when  ibleapin  was  informed 

r.  he  ordered  a  piece  of  cannon  to  be  pointed  and  Grcd  in  the 

UioQ  of  Itonie,  and  when  rcmiodtd  of  the  futihty  of  such  a 

I,  and  the  greatnesa  of  tbe  distance,  be  rephed  that  its  cccleslaa- 

lI  artillery  was  quite  as  impotent  to  aScct  or  to  harm  him. 

:  people  of  the  capital  took  othur  measures  of  defence 
r  barricading  the  streets  and  preparing  arms  and  ammuni- 
:  tliey  were  already  di\'ided,  and  dixigreeing  among 
dvcs,  the  C'«[|uimbo9,  the  liishop  and  his  friends,  and  the 
it  Gutman's  supportcrB,  constituted  three  separate  factioiu ; 
:  first  atcnd  bigbest  in  public  opinion,  but  the  two  other*, 
peciully  the  bishop's  party,  excelled  in  intrigue,  and  even  the 


*1M! 


168  THB  GOSFEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

presence  of  the  enemy  could  not  prevent  them  from  hickering 
and  ahusing  each  other  in  the  most  violent  manner.* 

When  Guardiola  had  at  length  retired  into  Honduras,  not  having 
leoeived  the  reinforcements  he  expected,  n^otiations  were  again 
resumed,  which  Honduras  seemed  willing  to  prolong  in  order 
to  gain  time  to  raise  more  forces.  After  an  armistice  of  two 
months,  Guardiola  headed  another  army,  which  was  to  be  assisted 
by  a  naval  expedition,  consisting  of  two  merchant  vsssels,  which 
iMialespin  had  long  before  unjustifiably  seized  to  act  against  Nicara- 
gua, and  of  which  he  obstinately  persisted  in  retaining  possession. 
They  had  been  transferred  from  La  Union  to  San  Lorenzo,  the 
only  port  of  Honduras  on  the  Pacific.  But  Colonel  Carvallo,  who 
commanded  the  Salvador  forces,  having  tampered  with  Colonel 
Barras,  who  commanded  a  part  of  the  Honduras  troops,  suddenly 
fell  upon  them  in  a  valley  called  Obrajuela,  full  of  indigo  planta- 
tions, and  before  they  could  put  themselves  in  fighting  order, 
defeated  them  with  considerable  loss,  and  took  120  prisoners, 
whom  he  massacred  in  cold  blood.  Afterwards  marching  upon 
La  Union,  he  took  part  of  the  forces  employed  in  the  naval  ex- 
pedition prisoners,  though  the  greater  portion  were  enabled  to  get 
on  board  the  vesseb  in  time  to  escape. 

*' Guardiola,  however,  saved  himself,  with  the  greater  part  of 
his  troops ;  and  having  put  Barras  to  death,  and  received  secret 
information  that  Colonel  Carvallo  was  in  La  Union  with  about  250 
men,  silently  marched  thither  by  land,  with  a  somewhat  superior 
force,  and  unexpectedly  entering  the  place,  easily  overcame  all 
resistance.  Colonel  Carvallo  and  all  his  troops  were  immediately 
put  to  death,  and  every  nude  in  tbe  place,  except  a  few  who  were 
enabled  to  escape  to  the  neighbouring  woods,  were  put  to  the 
sword :  afterwards,  having  plundered  the  government  warehouse 
of  tbe  bonded  goods,  principally  belonging  to  the  San  Miguel 
merchants  (proceeding  to  the  fair),  and  ransacked  the  town,  he 
retired,  leaving  the  place  in  utter  desolation,  the  streets  and  houses 
being  full  of  dead  bodies,  and  no  person  left  even  to  bury  them. 
He  returned  without  opposition  to  Honduras.**! 

Again  were  negotiations  resumed,  but  in  the  midst  of  them  the 
people,  who  had  assembled  in  fancied  security  at  the  great  Novem- 
ber fiur  of  San  Miguel,  were  terrified  and  suddenly  dispersed  in  all 

•  Boakp,  p.  241.  t  Duolop,  p.  248. 


dircctiona  'nilh  tbdr  gooils,  by  the  annoiinccment  of  the  approach 
of  Uuardiola,  but  03  bacricodcs  were  throum  up,  and  a.  resolute 
posture  of  ilefenec  assumed  by  those  who  remained  alier  tbe  fint 
panic,  be  did  not  attempt  to  enter  the  town,  but  cunliaed  his 
depredations  to  its  vicinity.  At  length  all  i)artiai  being  equally 
wearied  and  impoverished  with  the  war,  peace  was  agreed  upon 
on  tbe  2Dth  December  1B45.  Malcspin  reEtored  one  of  ihe  vcasela 
he  bad  stolen,  bii  relatives  received  back  their  eonfisGated  property, 
prisoners  on  both  sides  were  released,  and  a  general  oblivion  of  all 
otTences  promised. 

In  Guatemala  the  president-general  had  been  giving  bo  much 
encouragement  to  the  hbcrals  that  they  were  led  to  suppose  be 
was  about  to  throw  himself  into  the  amis  of  their  party.  Don 
Juaquin  Duian,  at  the  end  of  three  months,  was  succeeded  in  hb 
olG<»:  as  miuistci'  of  foreign  affairs,  by  Don  Jos^  Antonio  A^mitia, 
a  moderate  Uberal  of  great  respectability.  A  most  decided  stood 
BOW  made  by  Carrera  against  the  united  ecclesiastical  and  aristo- 
cralic  influence  still  more  encouraged  these  hopes. 

Tbe  constituent  assembly  which  succeeded  the  one  dissolved  in 
18J4,  at  the  instance  of  the  Indians  assembled  at  Pinula,  had 
decreed  tbe  formation  of  a  smull  colony  in  the  beautiful  bay  of 
Santo  Tomas,  on  the  eastern  coast  of  Guatemala.  A  charter  bad 
been  granted  to  a  Belgian  Company,  vi'bo,  with  the  help  of  their 
own  government's  influence,  had  already  lavished  many  lives,  and 
a  conuderable  sum  of  money,  in  the  attempt  to  colonize,  with  but 
small  success.  The  same  legislature  now  decreed  the  foundation  of 
«  ooU(^e  of  Jesuits  at  Guatemala.  This  arose  out  of  the  former 
^■llRiQecl.  The  directors  of  the  colony,  dther  themselves  blinded  by 
^Bnpentition,  or,  what  is  more  probable,  being  willing  to  make  use 
J  af  ibe  fanaticisim  which  they  supposed  to  prevail  in  the  governments 
ajid  people  of  Central  America,  sent  out  with  their  first  colony 
a  portable  cbapel,  which  had  been  put  up  and  consecrated  in  the 
P«rk  at  Bmraels,  iu  presence  of  the  very  devout  queen  of  the 
Belgians.  Three  Jesuits  had  charge  of  this  sacred  bijou.  There 
were  also  sent  with  tbera  many  gifts  which  Solonion  says  "  the 
-wicked  tAkcth  out  of  tbe  boSom  to  pervert  the  ways  of  judgment."* 
To  the  cathednl  at  Guatemahk,  a  richly  adorned  tmiisal  (the  mass 
book)  tras  presented ;  to  Carrera,  a  heavy  piece  of  artillery  and 


170  THB  608PSL  IK  CENTRAL  AMBBICA* 

a  hftiWkianic  unifbrafiy  &&  &e;  to  the  notablei  of  the  dfitil 
mitable  doucenn  were  giYen,  aod  amoDg  the  ooaunon  peopk  a 
ffttA  mimber  of  pretty  pietmes  of  nints,  and  OhMtntbiM  of  pco- 
femtdlj  maxd  sohjects  weie  distdibuted. 

When  the  Padre  Walk,  the  director  <tf  the  three  impGrted  mem- 
ben  of  the  company  of  Jena,  and  himeelf  a  true  Jesuit,  Tisited 
Gsatenuda,  he  wis  so  comleoDsty  and  hospitably  receiyed  as  to  be 
led  to  return  again  alter  a  short  intenral,  when  he  sai^  mass 
in  one  of  the  numerous  churches.  Dnrii^  these  visits,  it  wae 
insinuated  to  some  of  the  influential  serviles  that  an  mtabtishment 
of  Jesuits  would  be  a  useful  auxiliary  to  them.  To  the  least 
infinrmed  moderates,  and  to  the  people,  it  was  represented  as  de- 
siiable  merely  on  the  scene  of  the  instruction  of  youth.  No  less 
than  thirteen  languages  would  be  taught  in  the  bsw  college, 
besides  other  branches  of  learning  and  sdenoe,  of  which  the 
a^al  wae  deficient,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of  the  umyeni^. 
This  waa  certainly  a  hi^ipy  deyiee,  as  no  bait  would  be  so  eagerly 
swallowed  by  the  unsuspecting  multitude  who  hunger  and  thirst 
far  instructioBy  and  it  could  not  possibty  have  succeeded  better. 
The  college  waa  decreed.  An  empty  convent  wae  awarded  fer  the 
purpose.  £xtensiTe  repairs  were  commenced.  A  rich  harfcst  of 
first  fruits  was  gathered  in  from  nobles  and  plebeians,  in  the  shi^ 
of  voluntary  subscriptions  for  the  college.  And  Budre  Walle 
embarked  for  Bome,  to  arrange  matters  with  the  general  of  the 
company,  no  doubt  in  very  good  spirits.  While  there,  he  wrote 
to  his  expectant  friends  in  Central  America,  reporting  progress, 
and  stating  that  he  had  been  paying  his  devotiODs  at  the  shrine  of 
sunt  Ignatius  de  Loyola. 

While  the  crafty  Jesuit  was  thus  employed,  and  during  his 
subsequent  journey  to  Belgium,  where  he  soon  after  embarked 
with  twelve  of  the  erudite  fraternity,  some  of  the  patriots  in 
Chmtemala,  better  aware  of  the  danger  that  threatened  their 
OQontry,  began  to  whisper  their  susincioiis  as  to  results  of  whsdi 
others  were  so  ■M>gnifii>  An  antique  document  published  in 
Spain,  at  a  time  when  efforts  were  made  to  revoke  the  sentcnee 
whieh  baniahpd  the  Jesuit  order  from  all  the  Spanish  domjninns, 
waa  reprinted  in  Guatemala.  It  was  followed  by  some  original 
csnys,  in  oneof  whsdi  the  carious  were  invited  to  visit  the  remains 
of  the  Jesuit's  college  in  the  Antigua,  where,  on  examination,  they 


would  find  a  si^rmmaais  pataage  now  in  ruins,  emmecling  that 
tdifier  iciiA  tehat  kad  beeH  the  nutivery  of  Santa  Trreta.  Tlie  «ui^ 
ject  begui  to  be  tgUated  with  conskierablc  aounaliau,  and,  aa  is 
usuil  ia  the  capitftl  od  all  simtlsr  occaaiuus,  it  was  the  absorbing 
topic  uf  conversation  nitli  every  class. 

At  this  junetore,  the  French  newDiiiapcn,  whiili  ore  read  by 
most  of  the  leading  mea  in  Guatcnrnla,  »cre  bringing  over,  by 
each  Eucceeding  mail,  fragments  of  Eugene  Sue's  work,  which  was 
then  first  appearing, — "Lc  Juif  Errant.""  The  \nisxgea  of  that 
eiitraordiuaiy  novel,  which  so  effectually  expose  the  policy  uod  ten- 
ilencies  of  the  Jesutta  were  read  to  the  prcHUeut-general,  who,  if  be 
had  vacillated  before,  now  became  decided,  and  oa  the  lUre  Walle 
and  his  troop  were  daily  expected,  he  «ent  a  peremptory  order  to  the 
ports  on  the  eastern  cuast  sot  to  suffci  one  of  them  to  land,  and  to 
intimnte  that  if  they  attempted  it,  it  would  be  at  the  peril  of  their 

I  Tboogb  the  legiaintive  decree  in  thrir  favour  wna  then  still 
K^uevoked,  yet  the  will  of  Carrera  proved  more  binding  than  tbe 
Plnr>  While  the  wnriks  were  endeavouring  to  rebut  the  cbargo 
■  krvoght  against  tbdr  new  allies,  and  polemics  rau  high  in  the 
capital,  tlie  cotl^jale  freight  arrived  at  Santo  Tomas  in  April 
IhiS,  and  was  met  by  Cairera's  mandate.  Tbe  Jesuits  were  too 
prudent  to  expose  thenuclvesi,  but  ibey  were  also  persevering 
enoDgh  to  wait  on  board  their  vessel,  and  forward  their  renion- 
slrkDCta  to  the  government.  This  endangered  tbe  peace  of  the 
cajutal  and  of  the  entire  Mate.  Humours  of  revolution  were  rife, 
and  gatberiogi  of  Indians  were  making  ready  to  mppress  them. 
lite  archbishop  coadjutor,  who  had  in  vain  memorialized  tbe 
government  for  the  removal  of  the  interdict,  {lublisbed  a  paitoral 
lelirr  to  the  clergy  and  people  in  the  month  of  May,  in  which  be 
lanunfaes  them  with  copies  ol'  bia  oHidal  correspondence  on  tbe 
snbjcct,  and  really  incites  tbem  to  rebellion.  In  one  part  of  hi* 
remunstruucei  with  the  government,  then  made  public,  the  arch- 
biabop  alludes  to  the  residence  iu  the  capital  of  a  Protestant 
■UHionaiy,  whom  the  government  bad  been  in  vain  solicited  to 
lAttisb,  at  the  very  time  that  they  were  tpuming  &Dm  their  ahora 
Ibcse  holy  Iklbers  of  the  Catholic  iaitb. 

Il  ia  diflicttlt  to  snimiae  bow  this  controversy  would  haveended, 

*  nx  ViniliTm;  Im.  in  >tiich  tbm  ii  much  docimeBUiT  cvUeoce  cmconing  lbs 


v*f^^ 


172  TllK  QOSF£L   Vi   OSNTB^L  AUSRICJU 

had  not  ouc  of  the  Jesuits  dkd  of  the  coast  ferer  on  board  ab^ 
This  seems  to  have  decided  the  rest  to  return  to  Europe.  Sshse- 
queutly  the  two  who  were  chapkins  to  the  Belgian  colony,  whidi 
continued  to  struggle  into  existence,  were  also  glad  to  leave 
their  charge.  They  embarked  amidst  the  howls  and  jeen  of  the 
ooloniBts,  who  assembled  on  the  beach  and  united  in  sitting  a 
chorus  equivalent  to 

**  Fare  thee  veil,  and  if  for  erer. 
Then  for  erer,  &re  tiiee  weU." 

Thus  did  God  in  his  providence  marvellously  use  the  arbitrazy 
power  of  one  man,  itself  the  offspring  of  priestly  intrigue,  to  protect 
this  suffering  country  from  a  fresh  influx  of  the  very  worst  element 
of  political,  social,  and  spiritual  disorder. 

These  circumstances  could  not  fail  to  encourage  the  liberals 
in  precisely  the  same  degree  that  they  must  have  chagrined  their 
opponents.  In  May  1845,  the  legislature  enacted  a  measure  got 
up  by  the  liberals  to  restore  the  liberty  of  the  press,  which  the  ser- 
viles  had  revoked  in  1841.  The  new  law  provided  that  a  jury  of 
ten  citizens  (not  ecclesiastics)  should  be  selected  by  lot  out  of  one 
hundred  nominated  by  the  munieipality  (not  the  ecclesiastical  court) 
of  which  a  majority  of  two-thirds  were  necessary  to  the  prohibi- 
tion of  any  publication.  As  a  result  of  the  confidence  thus 
inspired,  a  new  periodical  in  addition  to  the  ^^  Gaceta  Ofidal,**  a 
mere  bulletin  of  the  government,  was  ushered  into  existence  with 
the  title  of  ^^La  Aurora/*  It  occasionally,  though  timidly,  ventured 
to  broach  liberal  views  and  sentiments,  and  the  number  for  the 
12th  December  1 845  contained  an  article  entitled  "  The  Aristocracy 
of  Talent,**  a  translation  from  the  gifted  pen  of  the  Abb^  de  La- 
mennais,  the  truthful  principles  and  oriental  style  of  which  are  at 
once  striking  and  beautiful.  Some  malicious  person  had  the  mal" 
adresne  to  persuade  Carrera  that  this  article  was  a  personal  attack 
upon  him.  The  general  sent  for  the  responsible  editor,  violently 
abused  him,  and  threatened  to  kick  or  shoot  him  on  the  first  recur- 
rence of  a  similar  offence.  The  affirighted  editor,  not  knowing  how 
soon  the  most  innocent  renuirks  might  be  construed  into  a  satire, 
expressed  or  implied,  and  not  choosing  to  run  the  risk  so  pointedly 
alluded  to,  prudently  refrained  from  publishing  his  journal,  which 
was  then  scarcely  eighteen  months  old. 

In  the  month  of  Jolyi  I>on  Mariano  Padilla,  a  doctor  of  medi- 


carreha's  pnoGBESS,  173 

3  an  active  reformer  of  conwderable  utility,  being  bbso- 
jbted  with  Asmilia  in  tbe  government  as  one  of  tlj 9  ministers,  nnn 
nabled  to  tiling  before  the  legislature  a  plan  for  the  radical 
TO  of  the  university,  or,  in  other  words,  for  its  entire  reorgani- 
a  and  removal  from  undertheinfluence  of  the  priests,  who  hud 
tuttificd  its  efficiency  and  ruined  ita  funds.  This  project  ivh3 
tually  decreed  and  ratified  by  the  executive,  and  Dr.  Padilla 
I  jiublicly  serenaded  by  torch 'light  by  the  grateful  and  de- 
ighted  ttudents ;  but  such  was  still  the  tenacious  grnsp  of  the 
cerUotal  vampire,  that  the  legislative  and  the  executive,  backed  as 
e  by  public  opinion,  could  not  force  it  to  loose  ita  hold ; 
bid  it  Blitl  continue?  to  suck  the  corrupted  life's  blood  from  thLi,  in 

stiy  hands,  worse  than  useless  institution. 

'  lleRUwItilc,  the  president-general  continued  to  manifest  his  deter- 

1  to  sway  the  destinies  of  the  state,  and  even  if  he  had 

I  MTDe  of  the  ruder  features  of  his  administration,   his 

Civnte  character  had  developed  itself  in  no  comely  outlines.    Two 

ropts  la  asatsinate  him  had  been  made  before  he  assumed  the 

esidcney,  both  of  them  connected  with  the  species  of  immomlity 

»  which  he  is.  or  was,  most  addicted.     A  hlind  "Marimbero," 

F  plaj'cr  on  an  Indian  musicil  instrument,  bad  stabbed  him  in 

(renge  for  the  ruin  of  his  daughter,  for  which  he  was  killed  on 

s  spot  by  the  satellites  of  tlie  genera),  and  not  contented  with 

.  the   priest  Titeri,   who   was   then  a   civil  functionary,  was 

a  ordering  that  the  remains  of  the  Uarimbero  should  Ic 

isrtered  and  exposed  in  ditfercnt  parts  of  the  city.    On  a  snb- 

tqaent  occamon  Carrcra  was  withdrawing  at  a  late  hour  from  the 

rase  of  one  of  hia  acknowledged  concubines— of  whom,  though 

!  maintains  upwards  of  a  score— when  he  was  fired  a 

kIct  cover  of  the  darkness.    His  personal  property  had  rapidly 

bicreased,  and  his  favourites  of  course  shared  hb  opportunities  of 

sdniT  wealth  by  more  than  questionable  means.    In  the  expan- 

n  of  his  military  tastes  he  had  erected  a  fort  ostensibly  for  the 

protection  of  the  city,  which  from  its  position  appeared  better  cal- 

cnlatcd  for  its  destruction. 


One  of  the  last  civil  ofBees  ii 
ta  be  introdnecd  was  thus  filled, 
Pionicio  Gntica,  a  civilian,  was  1 
gidor  of  GuBlcmala,  to  nmke  rum 


to  which  a  military  man  had  yet 
on  the  38th  March  1S4C.  Don 
mioved  from  the  post  of  Corre- 
1  for  Don  Pedro  Velastjocz,  an  ill- 


174  THE  G08PBL  IN  CBHT&AL  AMERICA. 

iq^oled  Military  cwmniiHlfr.   The  Tory  tet  act  of  lliii  new  fane- 
tiooaiy  was  one  wfaidi  Ins  piedecewor  woald  not  baTe  willlngiy 
lent  himadf  to.   Tlie  sstbor  of  this  narimtm— the  person  who  wis 
refemd  to  by  the  ardibithop  in  his  eoiieapondenoe  eoneeming  the 
JesuitB,  as  lesUtug  in  the  capi^  in  the  eharaeter  of  a  Frotestaot 
misrionaiy — had,Bmoe  1842,  been  an  eyesore  to  the  clergy,  and  the 
object  of  fireqaent  molcBtation  from  the  local  anthorities  at  their 
instigation,  fint,  for  his  htboon  in  drcakting  the  sacred  Sciiptares 
in  the  Spanish  langnage,  and  ihea  more  especially  on  account  of  a 
school  where  the  Bible  was  freely  nsed,  and  which  he  had  been 
repeatedly  required  to  dose  by  the  interference  of  themnnicipaUty ; 
bat  it  had  been  as  often  re-opened,  and  he  was  now  supported  in  it 
by  a  considerable  number  of  citiaens,  and  among  them  by  not  a 
&w  of  the  more  infltiential.    At  the  period  when  Yiteri  had  just 
mrrived  finom  Rome,  and  was  at  Guatemala  with  the  archbishop  and 
the  bishop  <^  Comayagua,  these  three  prdates  had  nsed  their 
nnited  influence  with  Carrera  to  obtain  the  violent  expnlsion  of 
this  obnoxious  person.    They  had  intemperately  declaimed  against 
him  finom  the  pulj^t  and  by  means  of  the  press,  especially  the  for- 
mer on  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple  of  La  Becolec- 
don,  but  they  had  then  fiuled  as  well  with  Carrera  as  with  the 
people.    Now,  the  archbishop  baring  first  absented  himself  from 
the  capital  on  the  eye  of  the  so-called  religions  festivities  of  '^  La 
Semana  Santa*"  (the  holy  week),  had  written  to  the  supreme  go- 
yemment  declaring  his  determination  to  return  to  his  functions 
only  when  *'  £1  Protestante**  (the  Protestant)  should  have  left  the 
state.    Though  by  no  means  disposed  to  gratify  the  prelate  in  this 
particular,  the  president  preferred  to  do  so  rather  than  risk  the  con- 
sequences at  a  time  when  his  own  seat  was  growing  insecure ;  and 
Velasquez  was  his  tool  for  this  purpose.    On  this  occasion  the  su- 
preme court  of  justice,  by  awarding  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  to 
the  threatened  party,  actually  arrayed  itself  against  the  well-known 
determination  of  the  president,  and  the  enlevement  of  the  author  was 
compassed  only  by  trickery  and  ill^al  violence.    He  was  seized  on 
the  2nd  April  1846  by  an  armed  force,  escorted  to  the  coast,  and 
shipped  out  of  the  country.* 
The  celebration  of  the  season  called  Easter  by  Papists  and  those 

•  The  putiealan  of  this  event,  thoa  briefly  stated,  the  reader  will  find  more  piirtinilarly 
detailed  in  the  lliird  Part  (rf*  this  vork,  with  other  fMrta  relating  to  the  modc  raligoct. 


CABJIERA  S   ASSASSIN  ATI  OK   PLOTTED. 


175 


who  imiute  tbem.  tbongh  threatened  with  inlcmptkni,  ptused  off 
w  usual  luider  the  auguat  presidency  of  the  now-pacified  nrch- 

^h■dlop.  But  these  Mlenmities  were  immedintclj  followed  by  othen 
■f  k  tc^  conunoti  kind,  which  were  actually  miult.'  the  occauoii  of 
k  revoluliooary  plot. 
The  ArchUshoii  Proprielario  (proprietor)  died  itt  the  Havanna 
at  the  close  of  1S4S.  He  bad  provided  ia  hig  will  that  hta  rcmain<i 
should  lie  broBght  fo  Guatcmiila  and  laid  beside  thoae  of  the 
Modre  Teresa,  a  member  of  the  Aycincna  family,  who  had  been 
lady-abbe»  of  a  coDvent  there,  and  had  obtained  the  reputation  of 
great  Kuictity  :  she  cycd  professed  to  possess  miiBculouB  powers, 
nnd  bills  fair  to  be  canonized  when  the  necessary  time  shall  have 
ela)aed.  if  the  prophesied  destruction  of  Popery  do  not  forest&l 
her  honoon.  This  posthumous  display  of  sentimentality  on  the 
part  of  the  departed  prelate,  resuscitated  some  rather  acandalons 
reminiscences  in  the  minda  of  some  of  the  cotemporaries  of  the 
late  lady-abbes,  but  the  archbishop's  wishes  were  of  course  com- 
plied with,  and  his  obsequies  were  celebrated  in  the  month  of  Mity, 
with  all  the  pomp  and  drcuniKtance  of  his  oflice,  and  of  the  cere- 
niony-Ioviiig  church  which  he  and  the  tady-ahbefS  had  long 
adorned. 

niiile  the  neoetoary  preparations  were  making;,  it  is  said  that 
some  of  the  exasperated  and  unprincipled  yanng  men  of  the  ciq* 
ibrmcd  a  coospincy  to  assassinate  CarrcTB  in  the  cathedral  during  the 
Berrice.  General  Pus,  however,  having  received  some  intimation 
of  the  plot,  diseoncerted  it  at  the  moment  when  it  wb«  to  have  been 
eicnitcd.  by  ordering  the  troops,  present  for  the  pageant,  to  load 
for  the  usual  adutc  with  ball  carlridget.  The  guns  in  tlie  great 
square  were  also  shotted.  The  persons,  who  were  prejmTcd  for  the 
horrid  deed  with  loaded  pistols,  were  thus  intimidated,  and  suffered 
the  General  to  pasx  out  of  the  catbcdrnl  uiimolcKtcd.  Two  months 
sftcrwards  a  number  of  arrests  were  made  among  the  ranks  of  the 
liberals,  on  the  grcund  ©f  secret  iiirormation  respecting  this  piqt, 
which  was  never  fairly  anmvelled.  Some  were  banished,  others 
were  eoQBgned  to  the  siibtertatieoits  dungeons  of  the  newly -erected 
fort,  and,  as  ia  common  in  Central  America,  not  a  few  of  the 
suspected  remained  in  precarious  concealment. 

From  this  time  the  author  has  had  Utile  opportunity  of  knowing 
what  hot  tnuwpircd  in  the  Central  States,  except  as  vague  reports 


tJM 


176  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

and  uncertain  mmoun  have  occasionally  reached  him,  or  through 
the  medium  of  imperfect  fragments  which  have  appeared  in  the 
periodicals  of  the  day,  with  an  occasional  glance  at  the  internal 
disorganization  of  the  country  in  his  private  correspondence.  Fart 
of  the  latter  he  has  reason  to  believe  has  been  intercepted,  and  the 
remainder  is  the  less  explicit  and  circumstantial,  from  the  pru- 
dence and  timidity  which  a  knowledge  of  this  danger  is  calculated 
to  call  forth. 

Previous  to  the  author's  eztramission,  several  attempts  had  been 
made  to  reorganize  a  federation,  but  even  when  the  rulers  professed 
to  desire  it,  there  was  reason  to  doubt  their  sincerity.  A  congress, 
composed  of  two  representatives  from  each  state,  was  appointed  to 
consider  and  elaborate  a  project  of  this  kind,  which  should  have  met 
at  Sonsonate  on  the  15th  May  1846.  On  that  day,  says  Mr. 
Dunlop,  only  the  deputies  from  Salvador  and  Costa  Rica  were  at 
the  appointed  place,  those  of  Honduras  and  Nicaragua  arrived  a 
&w  days  afterwards,  but  the  deputies  from  Guatemala  did  not 
appear  till  the  middle  of  July,  when  one  of  those  from  Costa  Rica 
having  died,  the  other  refused  to  act  alone,  and  the  rest  separated 
without  even  discussing  the  subject. 

The  same  writer  informs  us  that  in  Salvador  a  new  president  had 
been  elected  in  the  person  of  Don  Eugenio  Aguilar,  a  medical  man 
of  respectability.  Against  him  and  the  liberals  of  that  state,  the 
intriguing  prelate  Yiteri  got  up  an  insurrection  on  the  11th  July, 
hoping  to  overturn  this  as  he  had  helped  to  subvert  the  two  pre- 
ceding governments.  His  partisans,  however,  marred  the  plot 
under  the  influence  of  intoxication,  by  acting  before  the  signal  was 
given,  and  the  faction  was  put  down,  with  the  slaughter  of 
about  thirty  persons.  The  proofs  that  the  bishop  was  at  the  head 
of  the  conspiracy  were  so  decisive  that  he  was  banished  from  the 
state. 

In  Honduras  the  reign  of  Ferrera  and  Guardiola  has  been  inter- 
rupted, if  not  superseded,  by  the  election  of  a  wealthy  and 
respectable  citizen  named  Gual,  to  the  presidency.  A  similar 
change  took  place  in  Nicaragua  in  December  1835,  by  the  electacm 
of  SeHor  Sandoval,  a  civilian.  These  three  states,  viz.,  Salvador, 
Honduras,  and  Nicaragua,  may  therefore  be  said  to  possess  popular 
governments  legally  elected,  which  is  not  the  case  in  the  other  two. 
The  latest  accounts  published  (March  1850)  indicate  the  reunion 


tATEST   IXTELLIGEKCE,  177 

if  the  three  stales  just  named  under  a  federal  ccmstitution,  probably 

btBed  on  tbe  covenant  of  Chinandega,  the  object  of  which  whs  fnu' 

I  tiated  by  the  influence  of  Carrcni  and  Carriilo  in  184-2.     In  the 

f  tkse  of  1847,  Caireni  pat  a  price  of  300  dollars  opon  the  head  of 

■  one  uf  his  enemies,  and,  horrible  to  relate,  a  hitman  bead  was 
I  Ktually  brought   to    him  by   an   Indian,  which   proved    to   be 

motber'a,  and  not  the  one  required,  bat  the  murderer  remained 
f  iritboul  puniihmcnt. 

:  liuic  the  president  Carrcra  continued,  tbongh  with 
I  Afficulty,  (o  bold  his  position  and  to  enrich  himself;  but  in  bo 
ing  be  gradually  alieoated  tbe  confidence  and  atlachmcnt  of  the 
Utidians.     lie   had   frequently  made   them    great   promiseti  from 
Wliicb  tbey  now  reaped  small  advantages,  and  in  their  defection  his 
3  involyed.    More  tboit  once  they  congr^jaled  as  he  bad 
luight  them  to  do,  and  threatened  to  sack  the  capital.  All  capable 
■iCf  canying  arms  Erom  eighteen  to  sixty  years  of  age  were  enrolled 
t  its  defence.     At  length  discontent  rencbed  its  climax,  nnd  in 
I  Apn1184S  tbe  In^nsactually  pillaged  the  general's  estate  of  Fa- 
il, nhieb  wa»  at  once  a  country  residence,  within  a  few  bonn? 
ide  of  tinatemala,  and  the  chief  depot  of  arms,  ammnniiion,  and 
nirntc  resoDrces.  stored  up  against  a  justly  dreaded  time  of  danger, 
enraged  Indianscmnniittedmaayoutrage*,  and  even  putaprice 
mtliebcad  of  Carrero,  who,  witli  a  few  adherents,  Oed  to  Mexico 
nng  at  Intit  by  nccenity  what  lie  bad  often  threatened  to  do 
titily,  tint  hod  not  tbe  lieciirion  to  I'tTect,    After  his  deimrturo 
c  liberals  returned  once  more  to  power,  but  their  rule  was  both 
and  agttaled.     Don  Juan  Antonio  Martinez,  a  wealthy  mer- 

■  idsnt,  wa*  named  provi^onal  gefe.     But  all  efforts  to  reorganise  a 
BVbcral  government  were  interrupted  by  repeated  ingnrrectionB  of 

tlic  Indian),  probably  instigated  by  tbe  serviles  and  priests.  In 
:.  I  «48.  an  immense  body  of  Montagnards,  under  the  guidance 
r  Serapin  Cruz,  surroanded  ihc  capital  and  demanded  100,000 
lara,  or  four  days'  piUagc.  Half  that  sum  was  given  to  them, 
Bt  they  remained  dissatisSeil,  and  the  greatest  terror  and  conatcr- 
ntia*!  prerailed. 

On  the  30lh  April  1849,  Carrera,  who  hiul  raised  mercenary 
troops  in  Mexico  with  the  spoil  he  hod  amassed  during  his  ascen- 
droey,  bad  n|pun  crossed  the  frontier,  and  was  at  Qiiesahenango 
ptrpttritig  to  march  u}ion  Guatemala,  the  inhabitants  of  which 


f.iMr 


178  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA* 

-were  in  a  dilemma  whether  or  not  to  oppose  his  return.  If  they 
quietly  received  him  they  had  reason  to  fear  the  resentment  of  the 
Indians,  who  had  required  his  death,  and  if  they  offered  resistance 
they  feared  that  he  would  revenge  himself  hy  giving  up  the  dty 
to  the  pillage  of  his  Mexican  soldiers. 

Letters  up  to  the  8th  of  November,  without  unravelling  the 
above,  describe  the  roads  as  insecure.  In  the  capital,  terror  reigned, 
the  serviles  being  again  in  authority.  The  liberals  were,  as  usual, 
scattered  in  exUe,  imprisoned,  or  shot.  The  Indians  had  actually 
entered  the  city  and  pillaged  a  part  of  it.  And  war  was  declared 
between  the  state  of  Guatemala  and  that  of  Salvador,  where  most 
of  the  escaped  liberals  had  taken  refuge. 

From  newspaper  reports  up  to  the  20th  of  November  1849,  it  is 
gathered  that  the  ex-President  Carrera  re-entered  the  city  of 
Guatemala  on  the  8th  August,  and  that  he  was  invested  with  full 
powers  for  the  pacification  of  the  country.  It  was  this  event  that 
had  once  more  occasioned  the  fall  of  the  liberal  party  who  were  in 
power  at  the  beginning  of  that  year,  and  the  restoration  of  the 
serviles.  The  legislative  assembly,  who  had  declared  Carrera  an 
outlaw,  and  had  proscribed  and  imprisoned  some  of  his  adherents, 
had  of  course  been  dissolved.  The  Montagnards,  including  the 
Mita  Indians,  so  long  the  supporters  of  Carrera,  were  determined 
in  their  hostility  to  him,  and  threatened  the  capital  continually. 
Several  of  their  chiefs  had  been  slain,  and  the  forces  of  the  State, 
aided  by  Mexican  auxiliaries,  appeared  likely  to  prevail  against 
them.  The  neighbouring  state  of  Salvador,  or  rather  parties  in  it, 
had  assisted  the  insurgent  Indians.  Commissioners  firom  the 
Government  of  that  State  had  twice  been  sent  to  Guatemala  to 
negotiate  peace,  but  as  they  sought  the  recognition  of  the  new 
federation,  their  proposals  were  rejected. 

Private  correspondence  to  the  24th  December  shows  that  all 
travellers  indiscriminately  were  in  danger  of  their  lives.  An 
Englishman,  and  some  companions,  the  bearers  of  a  sum  of  mone^, 
had  been  murdered  and  robbed  not  far  from  the  capital,  and  a 
courier  had  been  strung  up  to  a  tree.  Carrera  had  caused  the 
villsge  of  Palenda,  where  his  estate  was  pillaged  by  the  Indians, 
with  its  neighbouring  hamlets,  to  be  burned  to  the  ground.  His 
aoldiers  were  shooting  all  the  Indians  they  could  see,  and  the 
Indians  were  using  cruel  reprisals  on  the  soldiers  by  tearing  out 
their  tongues,  and  cutting  them  limb  from  limb  while  yet  alive. 


FDIUilG  PBOaPECTB. 


179 


^H|The  commencement  of  opcratJOQ!!  toopentbe  Sbip  Canal  between 
^Hpe  two  oceans  bj  a  company  latel;  formed  M  New  York,  has 
^^TJTOuglit  about  relations  between  the  goTemment  of  Nicart^n  anil 
that  of  the  United  States  of  North  America,  which  appear  Lkely  to 
result  in  good  to  the  Central  States,  as  well  as  to  the  world  at  large. 
The  United  States  goveniioent  has  guaranteed  in  an  unequivocal 
manner  tbe  neatralitj  of  tbia  important  enterprise,  and  stands 
pledged  before  the  world  to  keep  the  territories  of  Central  America 
free  from  foreign  encroachments.  It  Is  probable  that  tbe  federation 
now  formed  by  the  imion  of  the  states  of  Nicaragtm,  Salvador,  and 
Honduras  will  acquire  stability  iiy  this  connection,  and  that  the 
other  two  states  will,  sooner  or  later,  unite  with  Ihera  in  recognis- 
ing a  nntionol  government.  It  in  probable  that  tlie  torn  and 
ngitntcd  state  of  Guatemala  will  be  unwilling  to  exclude  iUelf  from 
participation  in  the  commercial  prosperity  which  the  completion  of 
tills  canal  must  confer  on  the  a^acent  states — an  event  which  mny 
now  be  looked  forward  to  as  likely  to  be  realized  in  the  course  of  a. 
few  yean.  It  ia  not  unlikely  that  the  Montagnard  insurgents  will 
prove  a  Konrge  to  their  former  leader  and  to  the  party  who  hare 
made  use  of  them  and  of  him.  It  seems  also  more  than  probable 
that  priestly  and  servile  power  arc  both  approaching  the  term  of 
their  existence,  as  chief  elements  in  the  body  politic.    And  it  is 

at  least  possible  that  another  and  a  better  epoch  in  tlie  hiator}'  of 

^^^^ntcal  America  is  about  to  commence. 

^^KlBut  until  other  elements  arc  introduced  into  the  public  mind, 
^Bpnc  is  little  warrant  to  eijiect  anything  more  than  a  change  in 
^^^ic  outward  manifestations  of  that  turbulence  and  disquietude 
wluch  reigns  within  tbe  hearts  of  the  people.  Should  the  new 
and  probably  modified  form  which  the  revolution  is  about  to 
assume  leave  any  room  for  efforts  to  evangelize,  and  afford  any 
means  whereby  to  leaven  these  convulsed  and  weakened  states  with 
tlic  ennobling  and  peaceful  truths  of  tbe  gositcl,  will  it  not  con- 
stitute the  loudest  coll  to  every  pious  heart  to  come  in  some  way  to 
their  assistance  ?  Ob,  that  the  second  half  of  tbe  present  century 
may  be  fraught  with  Heaven's  best  blessing  to  a  land  which,  during 
rh«  first  |>oriion  of  that  jxriod,  has  paid  so  dear  for  mere  political 
freedom— a  boon  which,  hy  the  training  of  previous  centuries,  it 
liaj  been  so  ill  prejian'd  lo  enjoy ! 


¥m 


180  THE  GOSFBb  IM  GBNTBAI.  AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   X. 

BRITISH    BNCKOACHMENTS. 
1600  TO  1800 

Natknud  Inflneiioe— Ita  abue  by  Spain— British  respamflnfity— Pintei  in  Centxal 
Amerin^Knt  Sdnre  and  Eecvrsy  of  Bnatan— Atteda  on  tlie  Bxf«r  Sn  Jnoi  de 
Nieangna.  1740  and  1780— WaUao»--Chancter  and  Conditioii  of  tke  Knt  Scttkn  iA 
the  Bay— TreatT  of  1763— Burnaby's  Code— RhIb  of  the  Fint  Settkraeate— Tnaty  aad 
Gonrentiaii  of  178S  and  1786^The  Right  of  Soreragnty— Ehracnatum  of  the  lloaqaito 
Shore  in  1787— Intenud  GoveraneBt  of  the  Bayneii— Visits  of  Spanish  Commlniooen 
— Fark-andpDoaghboy  War— Senne  of  Baataa  in  1743— Loeatian  of  Cnba  in  17M 
—Betaken  in  1797— The  Bight  of  Conquest  Claimed— Hnmblinc  and  Sthnnlatmf  Bf»- 
fleetionf. 

"  MgkUamMstauUtth  a  maiim  ;hUn»is*  reproach  to  amy  peopU/'^Tmr.  xir.  3A 

National  ascendancy,  like  perwxial  genius^  is  a  sacred  deposit, 
confided  to  responsible  agents  for  the  furtherance  of  God*s  beoefi- 
cent  purposes  towards  the  umversal  fiunily  of  mazi,  and  its  perrer- 
sioQ  to  selfish  ends  has  always  been  follovred  by  national  maiks  of 
the  Divine  displeasure. 

Spain  was  the  chosen  instrument  to  subdue  and  lay  prostrate  is 
the  dust  the  pride  of  many  American  nations,  and  cmdly  did  she 
abuse  the  power  with  whidi  she  was  entrusted.  That  natioii  has 
also  in  its  turn  been  checked  and  reduced  by  others,  among  whom 
most  of  its  extensive  dominions)  accumulated  wealth,  and  boasted 
glory,  have  been  distributed  as  the  hire  of  armies  and  reward  of 
services  against  her.  The  perdition  a£  numberless  souls  whose 
non  she  sealed,  the  slaughter  of  millions,  amounting  nearly  to 
the  depopulatum  of  a  eontmentr— the  reduction  to  bondage  of  the 
ronnant  which  her  sanguinary  fiiry  ^ared,  and.  the  perversion  of 
her  spoils  to  pamper  her  own  luxury  and  pride,  were  crimes  suffi- 


"  BRITISH   nCSPON'BIIin.ITT,  181 

cient  to  [auvokc  tiie  retributive  curse.  Thil  corse  aod  the  brftnil 
of  tbe  DppTCwor  arc  all  thst  now  cleave  to  Spsln.  Her  power  sod 
wealth  have  long  tiuce  left  her.  Bat  her  cum;  hat  been  eotailed 
■a  the  baneful  inheritaiioe  of  the  present  gcnerftttoii.  Thdr  fore- 
ftKher*,  who  were  aiipointed  by  the  all-vise  and  just  Creator  for 
the  correction  and  pTeserration  of  ofTending  races,  and  uot  for  their 
dcstructioti,  by  a  bithfiil  discharge  of  their  oonimision  nnd  trust, 
nuKht  have  earned  the  gratitade  uf  mankind,  and  their  posteritj 
would  now  have  reaped  tbe  greatest  advantage  in  multiplied  bless- 
ings both  at  home  and  from  those  Hho  would  have  been  beneBted. 
Kov  their  policy  li  the  execration  of  tbe  world,  now  it  is  by  thdr 
degnidatiuii  and  repmaclt  that  they  glorify  the  God  they  then 
■honoured,  and  t3Tant  Spain  is  made  a  warning  to  other  na- 
if wild  may  In;  cirvumstaneed  as  she  once  was. 
pOueof  ibe  jiowerg  to  which  a  share,  and  that  the  largest  share, of 
s  Spanish  influence  has  been  committed,  is  Great  Britain, 
lalion  among  tbe  nationti,  in  colonial  dominion,  in  the 
I  iM*ig;uian  of  tbe  great  deep,  in  prowess  of  arms,  extent  of  com- 
■'wercc.  prevalence  of  language,  and  even  in  nmral  and  religioua 
influence,  the  power  once  wielded  by  Greece  and  Rome,  as  well 
a*  that  once  poiseued  by  rho:nicia  and  the  Iberian  Peninsula, 
hat  been  committed  to  us. 

A>  o  nation  and  aa  British  subjects,  we  owe  to  the  world  the  oon- 

nlion  of  our  infiucnoe,  power,  wealth,  information,  knowledge 

In  and  sdcuces,  and  also  of  ourenapiple  to  the  promotion  of  its 

it  tcropural  iuteresls.     Among  [he  nalionfi,  as  among  men,  we 

d  be  8  pattern  of  truth  ant'  justice,  of  readiness  In  ^uceour 

HTsk  and  tbe  ojiprcsscd.  and  of  whatever  virtue  would  most 

e  tbe  good  of  all  mankind. 

in  the  character  of  our  religion  it  involved  the  greatest 
amount  uf  peraonal  responiubilily  towards  othcn.  Il«  God  in  a 
pceulkrnamicr  privileged  and  enriched  ua,  in  the  higheat  and  best 
■OtBc.  with  ifae  uninteimpted  poEtaesnon  for  many  centuries  of  Us 
own  hIcMcd  word  ?  Has  be  shed  the  light  of  his  Holy  Spirit  u|)OU  ita 
poga  and  upon  our  hearla,  and  does  he  not  hereby  commission  na 
in  a  agnal  manner  to  act  as  "  stewards  ol'  that  good  word  ?"  And 
don  be  nut  therein  reqnire  a  Cuthful  discharge  of  tbe  stewardship 
tfao*  oomniitted  to  as  by  endeavours  to  extend  the  boon  to  otbeis, 
e»en  to  all  our  fellow -men  ? 


«qMI 


182  THE  QQ8PEL  IK  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Doubtless,  if  we  haye  been  blessed  with  faitbtul  Paul,  we  are 
debtors,  like  him,  to  Greeks  and  to  barbarians — to  the  wise 
and  the  unwise :  and,  like  him,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  we  are  ^  not 
ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,**  which  is  now,  as  it  was  in  his 
time,  ^  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  be- 
lieveth/*  But  while  we  may  be  willing  to  admit  the  general  debt, 
how  little  of  it  have  we  paid/  Nay, — we  have  contracted  new 
obligations  to  the  same  creditor,  though  of  an  inferior  kind,  and 
we  have  added  an  accumulating  load  of  guilt  to  debts  which  have 
been  increased  every  year  by  the  material  wrongs,  injustice,  and 
oppression  which,  as  a  nation,  we  are  inflicting  upon  those  whom 
we  ought  rather  to  have  protected,  and  to  whom  we  ought  long 
since  to  have  carried  the  Gospel.  But,  alas !  our  desolating  armies 
and  navies,  and  the  vices  and  ungodly  example  of  our  countrymen, 
which  are  infinitely  more  contaminating  than  our  arms  are  de- 
structive, have  long  since  reached  and  subdued  countries  where  our 
missionaries  and  pious  emigrants  have  never  yet  penetrated,  or 
have  but  recently  conmienced  their  coimteracting  work  of  mercy. 

Let  these  reflections  serve  as  an  apology,  if  apology  be  required, 
for  narrating  briefly  the  encroachments  of  our  Government  upon 
the  territories  of  Central  America,  and  for  presenting  them  to  the 
reader  as  one  reason,  among  others,  for  undertaking  the  spiritual 
conquest  of  a  country  whose  real  welfare  we  might  yet  greatly 
promote,  if  our  willingness  did  but  equal  the  opportunities  and 
power  afforded  us. 

During  the  greater  part  of  the  three  hundred  years  which 
elapsed  from  the  discovery  of  America  to  the  oonunencement  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  British,  French,  and  Dutch  pirates,  and 
very  possibly  some  others  also,  frequented  the  eastern  shores  of 
Spanish  America,  allured  by  the  rich  cargoes  and  golden  freights 
of  the  Spanish  gaUeons  employed  in  transporting  the  spoil  of  Ame- 
rica to  Europe.  During  the  whole  of  that  period,  the  history  of 
those  shores  abundantly  testifies  to  the  ravages  of  these  maritime 
marauders.  Their  depredations  were  not  confined  to  the  watery  ele- 
ment: many  towns  far  into  the  interior  have  been  pillaged  at 
different  times  by  the  Corsair  crews,  and  many  more  upon  the 
coasts  and  navigable  waters  have  been  so  repeatedly  devastated, 
that  some  were  strongly  fortified  at  an  enormous  expense  to  pro- 
tect them  against  these  rovers ;   and  others  were  abandoned  on 


ENGLISH   PlllATE'.  IBS 

X  EUMOunt  even  as  early  as  1549. "  The  Isthmus  of  Punanw, 
!  provincea  of  Venigna,  and  Ouslu  KIca,  and  the  fertile  bor- 
I  dMs  of  the  Lakes  of  Nicaragua  and  Leon,  aa  well  aa  the 
its  of  the  Buy  of  Honduras,  and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  were, 
o  speak,  lAe  provinion  grauniU  of  the  freebootem  who  infested 
I  the  Caribbean  Sea,  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  the  Atlantic 
no.  Here  they  found  a  bind  of  relaxation  fi-om  their  severer 
I  toils  in  the  emy  prey  which  the  apathetic  natives  afforded 
I  them.  Their  plantations  and  stores  were  repeatedly  stripped  of 
I  tile  fruits  of  their  scrmly  labour,  and  of  the  more  abundant  gitis  of 

■  A  teeming  and  prolific  soil.    The  horrurs  of  tuch  periodical  vinita- 
as,  ami  their  elleets  npon  ihe  districts  subjected  to  theoi,  can 

tlDore  eadly  be  conceived  than  described. 

Tliu  intricacies  of  the   numerous    reefs,    islets,    lagoons,    and 
a  of  these  seas,  aftbfded  great  advantages  to  the  buccaneers, 

■  '«Iio  became  acquainted  with  channels  and  liiding-places   into 
\  *hich  none  dared  to  follow  them,  and  from  which  ihey  itealthily 
E  bued  upon  their  unsuspecting  prey.     Nay,  the  reef  itself  loo  oftea 
r  Mrved  them  as  a  huge  drag-net,  in  whose  fata)  meshes  the  insi- 
dious current  involved  many  a  gitUont  ship.     There,  among  its 
rerdanc  islets,  the  callous  and  iuaaliate  pirates  lay  concealed,  like 
the  relentless  spider  crouching  l*neuth  his  web. 

The  great  majority  of  these  freebooters  were  our  own  country- 
t  Malays  and  iiornese.     Their  vessels  were  of  British 
lild,  not  awkward  junks  and  open  prahus.      Nor  was  there  any 
ing   Bajah    ready  with    British    officers  nnd 
>  inSJet  a  terrible  chastisement  upon  them  hy  whoksalu 
fftntcheries,  as  in  (he  recent  case  of  the  Saribaa  Dyaks.    They  con- 
Inited  tJicir  mnnlerous  depredations  on  sea  and  land  unchecked 
;  by  the  risks  and  dangers  that  constitute  the  very  romance 
nnd  fiiocied  glorj-  of  their  lawless,  roving,  venturesome  career. 

There  are  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras  several  blanda,  concerning 
wbicb  we  are  iufunned  by  Juurros,  that  "  At  the  time  of  the  eon- 


k>eUi;<iltl.>. 


undfd  in  13U,  I 


■I  dinunUnl  uil  (lnuiilQniil  id  15W. 


UI  nub  it  (nu  the  in.  Tbc  dll«  of  LCOD  uid  Gnc 
acnllj  nltal  la  Uili  hi;  ma  the  AUioUc,  Ibnugb  to  imuili  nHrer  Id  i: 
m  of  vbieb  wen  lut^cct  M  0»  nne  taLunllin  btiia  the  hiuc  chisc,  ■ 


^fm 


184  THE  GOBPBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

quest  they  were  well  peopled;  but  the  hestilities  fmnmittfd 
agunst  than,  first  by  the  Spaniards  and  afterwards  by  pirates  who 
iaftsted  these  seas,  either  destroyed  or  drore  them  awi^,  aad  oaly 
Boatan,  Guanaja,  and  Utila  remained  inhabited.'**  These  three 
islands,  with  some  much  smaller,  lie  nearly  in  a  line  akxig  the 
southern  shores  of  the  bay.  Guanaja,  now  called  Bonaeca,  is  about  80 
miles  in  circum&rence :  Utila  is  considerably  less;  but  Ruatan, 
which  lies  between  them  both,  is  decidedly  the  most  important  island 
in  the  bay,  being  larger  than  some  of  the  cultivated  Antilles,  and  as 
salubrious,  fertile,  and  beautiful  as  any  in  those  seas.  These 
islands,  while  in  the  quiet  possession  of  the  Spaniards,  were  attacked 
by  an  English  pirate  in  1642.  The  Spanish  historian  adds  with 
characteristic  feeling  and  bigotry,  ^*  No  resistance  being  made  by 
the  Indians,  Roatan  and  Guanaja  were  taken  possession  of.  The 
oeeupation  of  these  spots  was  of  great  advantage  to  the  English, 
consequently  of  proportionate  injury  to  the  Spaniards :  for  from 
being  so  near  to  the  ports  of  the  main  land,  the  enemy  were 
enabled  to  make  attacks  upon  them  whenever  they  pleaaed;  or 
they  could  with  equal  facility,  intercept  the  commerce  between  this 
kingdom  (Guatemala)  and  Spain.  This  occupancy  was  also  ex- 
tremely pernicious  to  the  inhabitants  in  a  religious  sense,  ss  the 
heretics  could  not  fail  to  pervert  them  by  their  detestable  maiims.'f 
This  last  circumstance,  more  than  anything  else,  induced  Luis  de 
Canizares,  bishop  of  Comayagua,  and  Juan  de  Yenuoa,  keeper  of 
the  fort  of  San  Felipe  de  L^ra,  to  stimulate  the  president  to  regain 
possession  of  them. 

^  The  governors  of  Guatemala  and  the  Havannah,  and  the  pre* 
sident  of  the  audienda  of  St.  Domingo,  were  all  interested,  and 
joined  in  an  expedition  to  expel  the  heretics.  The  Governor  of  the 
Havannah  sent  four  ships  of  war,  well  equipped,  under  command 
of  the  Greneral  Francisco  de  Villalva  y  Toledo,  who  shaped  his 
eoorse  to  Roatan,  without  touching  at  any  of  the  anchorages,  in 
the  hope  of  surprising  the  English :  in  this  project  he  did  not  sue- 
ceed ;  for  although  he  arrived  with  his  squadron  in  the  harbour 
<^  Roatan  an  hour  before  daybreak,  he  was  unable  to  effect  a 

*  JiianxM*  p.  816. 

t  Tkit  BoBUh  priol,  Hub  histotitn  of  Hbett  own  misaifiiu  to  flie  Indfaai,  here  Mngrm 
t  tat  ihat  eren  finUt,  it  ProCettaat^  woe  Ukely  to  be  more  laceeMftil  in  jnftLpMmg, 
xeligioa  Uun  their  dogj  had  been  eren  with  aurecohmt  MiUtnee. 


EECOVEKY    I 


186 


■embarkfttioii  nnperoeiTed  hy  the  ientinels,  who  gave  on  slonn, 
■and  tile  trencbes  were  immedistely  nwuiedwiUi  a  rettpecUble  iorce. 
f  Tbe  Spaaurds  oUacktd,   and  a  brisk  action  va»  mainuincd  until 
r  da^'light  without  any  adrantage.     Tlie  General  then  atiserriug  a 
I  fart  gf  Ibc  cntrcDchnient  that  was  not  defended,  ke|it  hie  main 
I  Iwdy  in  its  position,  and  detached  an  officer,  with  thiity  men,  to 
I  attack  the  weak  part,  in  order  to  turn  the  enemy's  flank  :  the  atlesipt 
I  untueccasful ;  for  the  detachment,  in  advancing,  got  into  s 
[  iwaiii];i  that  was  tnipaisable.      ViUalva  still  continued  hi»  eflbrti 
I  ^aiiut  other  parts  of  the  works,  without  any  other  advantage  than 
I  UUiag  a  few  of  the  heaicged.    Nothing  dedsire  wa«  effected,  and 
Lu«uu«el,  having  expended  nil  his  oninmnitlon,  he  marched  his 
o  the  beach,  rc'eiubarked,  and  sailed  for  Santo  Tomas  de 
I  Culilla  til  obtain  a  fresh  supjily.     From  that  port  he  sent  to  the 
F  Captain' General  an  account  of  what  had  taken  place  at  the  inland. 
I  ^tuaio  de  Lttra  Mogrobejo,  then  governor,  oeaeiubled  a  council 
in  compliance  with  its  resolations,  denpatcbed,  on  the 
I  4th  of  March  Iti^  Captain  Elias  de  Bulaoa,  with  liOcen  barrel* 
f  if  powder,  and  ax  qointal»  of  b^ti,for  the  suffily  of  the  aqnadron. 
I  Ckptvin  Martin  de  Alvarado  y  Guzman  was  ordered  from  Guate- 
lysala,  with   fift^  soldiers,  and   Captain  Juan  Bautista  Chavarria, 
■irith   fifty  more,  from  the  province  of  Chiquimula ;  these,  when 
lilcd  to  the  squadron,  incre«£cd  its  force  to  450  men. 
"They  immediately  sailed  for  the  island;  and  as  the  General 
■  blew  how  well  the  first  harbour  he  had  entered  was  defended,  he 
I  thought  it  expedient  to  try  hisi  fortune  at  another  part   of  the 
I'ialand,  where  there  was  a  smaller  dne.     On  landing,   he  was  n- 
I  ^vcd  by  a  body  of  troops  who  made  an  obstinate  resistance  i  but 
I  Imving  efiected  a  breach  in  the  entrenchmeat  with  two  pieces  of 
hHitillery,  the  Spuiiards  Btonucd  it,  and  alter  a  delennincd  ooutcKt, 
■   Eogliib   were   defeated.     Subsequent    to    this    victory,   the 
s  luScrtd  a  great  deal  lielbrc  they  could  reitcb  the  town ; 
r  having  no  guides  they  missed  their  way,  and  wandered  about 
nina  days,  expuecd  to  the  violcnee  of  tbc  sun  by  day,  and  un- 
healthy vaiwurs  by  night ;    their  feet  were  lacerated  by  the  thams 
of  the  coyoK  and  they  were  tormented  by  innunwisble  swamw  of 
■noaquitoa,  tick*,  and  other  venomous  ttixecta  and  reptiles.      On 
rMching  tbc  town,  or  rather  the  village,  they  found  it  abandoned 
bj  Ibe  £ng1iib,  who  had  carried  all  property  and  proviaioas  oa 


*m 


186  THE  OOSPKL  Ur  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

boaid  their  ships,  and  left  the  island  entirely.  Yillalya  collected 
the  natires,  and  haying  humed  the  place,  returned  to  Santo 
Tomas,  in  the  neighhourhood  of  which  the  Indians  had  lands  giTcn 
to  them:  this  expedition  terminated  in  Augnst  1650.*** 

From  this  circumstantial  account  we  gather  that  the  English 
pirates  must  have  heen  in  considerable  numbers,  and  that  their 
Tkimty  was  for  many  reason,  as  distaste&l  to  the  Spuuatds 
as  it  must  have  been  injurious  to  the  poor  Indians,  who  were,  alas! 
in  little  danger  of  being  proselytized  by  them. 

British  encroachments  were  not,  however,  confined  to  piratical 
depredations  and  territorial  occupation  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras. 
In  1740,  the  first  covert  attempt  was  made  by  the  English  forcibly 
to  obtain  influence  over  certain  districts,  at  the  opposite  extremity 
of  Central  America.  British  settlements  had  been  fimned  on 
the  Mosquito  shore,t  whence  some  English  emissaries  conducted 
an  attack  upon  the  points  commanding  the  line 'of  country  where 
the  junction  of  the  two  oceans  was  thought  to  be  most  practicable. 
Even  at  this  early  period,  the  project  of  a  channel  by  the  river 
San  Juan  and  the  lake  of  Nicaragua,  had  been  conceived ;  and 
thus  early  and  deeply  was  it  appreciated  in  England,  but  the 
settlers  on  the  shore  having  failed  in  their  object,  the  attempt  was 
disavowed  by  the  British  Grovemment. 

A  more  overt  and  formidable  expedition  was,  however,  sent 
thither  in  1780,  this  was  "  a  squadron  composed  of  two  frigates, 
two  brigs  of  war,  and  a  line-of-battle  ship,  carrying  a  number  of 
flat  boats,  and  2000  men,  under  the  conunand  of  Colonel  J. 
Poison." 

^  On  the  28th  of  March,  the  flotilla  reached  the  port  of  Samt 
John  of  Nicaragua,  but  none  of  the  vessels  would  venture  to 
cross  the  bar,  except  the  corvette  Henchinhraek^  commanded  by 
the  afterwards  celebrated  Nelson,  who  ascended  the  river  lor 
many  leagues,  as  fiu:  as  the  island  of  Mico.  The  troops  were, 
however,  embarked  in  the  flat  boats,  and  ascended  the  river  with- 
out opposition  as  fiu:  as  the  fort  of  San  Carlos,  which  they  took 

*  Joanos,  pp.  319  to  SSI. 

i  See  p«ge  17.  Tliia  rut  txaet  of  oonntry  which  embxfteet  su»re  than  one  hundred 
^paniih  leagues  of  tca^coaat  (or  nearly  400  milei),  inclodea  the  tenitories  of  the  Fogrer 
and  the  Towkcasi  aa  well  aa  of  the  WaDma  tribes.  The  two  former,  thong^  nuare  anme- 
rooi  and  entorpiiaing,  are  txilMtfaiy  to  the  latter,  who  are  a  little  kn  harharooa  and 
■on  friendly  .to  the  Xni^ttih. 


TOE  FOUNDERS  OF  BELIZE. 


after  about  a  month'a  ^ege,  making  piisonen  the  garriiton  of 
IGO  men;  but,  in  the  mean  time,  the  Sparmh  govemmeat  hnd 
collected  Urge  forces  from  Son  Miguel  and  other  ]}arts.  Great 
difficulties  also  presented  themselves  to  the  British.  The  wet 
dh  set  in  with  its  sccompiinyiDg  sickoess,  and  the  Sambos 
(Wuikuu  or  Mosquilonien)  ol"  the  coast,  who  had  bceii  hired 
a  track  up  the  boats;  went  away,  so  that  the  Eoldiers  were  forced 
□  walk  to  the  water  and  mud  to  pull  (he  boats  forward,  from 
which  labour  they  suffered  exceedingly,  great  numbers  falling  sick 
and  dyingdaily.  Meanwhile,  reinlbrcements  having  been  received 
under  Captains  Campbell,  Dalrymple,  and  Lclth,  which  increased 
the  forcea  to  3,000  men,  the  exiiedilion  was  persevered  in ;  but  the 
anned  boat,  called  the  hord  Ctrmain  was  the  only  one  which 
reached  the  Lake  of  Nicaragua,  where  it  arrived  in  the  end  of 
ilsy.  The  increaat  of  sickness  among  the  troops,  to  so  alarming 
an  extent  that  not  a  fourth  part  were  fit  for  service,  prevented 
the  expedition  from  moving  forward  :  tbcy  remained,  however, 
till  the  commencement  of  November,  expecting  fresh  retnforce- 
iii<.nt»,  till  they  received  notice  that  those  had  disembarked  Bt 
t  ,Joiniiica,  typhus  fever  having  been  discovered  on  board  the 
F  tquadron,  so  that  it  was  judged  necessary  to  abandon  this  mis- 
inaged  attempt.  But  not  one-half  of  the  men  ever  left  the 
r  country,  the  remainder  having  died  of  tropical  fevers."  * 

Such  are  some  of  the  acts  of  the  British  nation  in  Central 
America,  truly  a  fit  accompaniment  to  the  [uratical  deeds  of 
its  subjects,  and  calculated,  with  them,  to  cause  the  very 
name  of  Britain  to  be  execrated  by  the  indiscriminatiDg  natives, 
and  yet  this  has  been  the  case  only  in  a  limited  degree. 

It  has  already  been  stated,  that  the  river  and  totvn  of  Belize 
were  originally  named  from  Wallace,  one  of  the  most  renowned 
I  buccaneers,  whose  name,  like  those  of  Morgan  and  Lorenzillo, 
long  a  terror  to  mariners  and  landsmen  for  hundreds  of 
R  niles  around.  The  saft^  and  well-caneealed  harbour  of  Belize  wu 
I' bis  retreat,  and  it  was  probably  under  his  auspices  that  the  Bay- 
1  (or  foreign  settlers  of  the  Bay  of  Honduras),  first  acquired 
Fihat  unenviable  notoriety  which  was  long  associated  with  the 
e,  even  by  the  slave-drivers  of  Jamaica  and  the  neighbouring 
ids.  It  is  sufficiently  evident  that  unprincipled  adventurers, 
*  <tiiiilcd  b}  Hr.  Doulup  fniu  i  puapMci  jmblntiFil  \a  Gsutciugli, 


«2MI 


188  THE  CKWFBI.  Df  CEirT&AL  AMBRICA. 

penoiM  of  dcippritf  fiMtone,  ootkwB,  «Dd  even  oondenmed  criai* 
aak,  were  among  the  eu^er  inhahftaBti. 

Aisuld  wad  very  gaarded  writer*  tmysreBpe^^ 
tainly  yna  long  after  it  had  beeome  a  pteoe  of  eooflderafale  ienrt» 
before  anything  like  the  cuBtoms  of  dviliced  life  were  known  to  it. 
But  it  will  scareely  be  expected  that  such  oodd  hare  been  known, 
or  at  least  assented  to,  by  a  description  of  persona,  of  whom,  perhaps, 
the  greater  munber  had  forfeited  all  pretensions  of  die  land  by  the 
inKgolarity  of  their  conduct  in  the  ooontries  they  had  left.  Those 
persons,  it  must  also  be  remembered,  were  of  Tsrioas  nalioBs,  and 
possibly  bore  little  resemblance  in  any  way  to  each  other,  bat  in 
the  desperate  state  of  their  fortunes.  And  it  may  be  very  well 
believed,  that  the  sole  motive  which  first  allured  their  steps  to  this 
coast,  would  be  found  in  the  temptation  it  then  offered  to  repair 
their  condition  by  plunder  and  rapine.  When,  however,  their 
atrocicies  had  grown  into  a  system,  and  had  become  solbroiidable  as 
to  engage  the  attention  of  other  quarters,  and  to  require  correction, 
they,  no  doubt,  finind  it  expedient  in  some  degree  to  relinquish 
them  for  habits  of  a  more  regular  and  less  lawless  kind.  Thus 
the  path  of  industry  was  opened ;  new  and  more  respectable  sonroes 
of  wealth  discovered,  which  have  led  to  consequences  highly  ad- 
vantageous to  commerce,  and  no  less  beneficial  to  the  state  that  has 
encouraged  and  protected  it,^ 

Beferring  to  their  condition  in  the  year  1765,  the  same  writer 
speaks  of  the  residents  as  ^  a  description  of  persons  who  had  before 
lived  without  respect  to  rules  of  any  kind ;  and  whose  irregularities, 
murders,  piracies,  and  atrocities  of  eveiy  sort,  were  oontinnally 
perpetrated  with  a  barbarous  indifference,  because  punishment  was 
unknown.    Such,  unquestionaUy,  was  the  stste  of  aodety  in  this 

remote  quarter."! 

B^ore  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  or  fully  one  hun- 
dred yean  ago,  the  British  settlements  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras 
and  on  the  Mosquito  shore  had  become  ''a  bone  of  contention 
between  the  courts  of  London  and  Madrid.*'  Many  of  the  rea- 
dents  had  turned  their  attention  from  piracy  and  lawless  acts,  to  the 
catting  of  dye-woods  and  valuaUe  timber,  which  then  abounded  to 

*Gqiteiii  HflBflcncm,  44a  Bagimeiat,  in  *'Aa  Aceoimt  of  the  Britiih  SettkmeBt off 


the  TCiyTtrge  ef  tlie  ahoresaudriver-bankswhich  they  frequented. 
Bepeated  attemfMs  were  made  W  the  Spaaiards  to  destroy  these 
iwste  of  annbincd  pinles,  trodcm,  emugglcn,  and  plantera,  and  to 
I  ^lod^  fnmi  their  eowts  lltosc  foreign  intruders  towards  whom 
1  fiinatical  hatred,  nationa]  envy,  and  characteristic  jealousy,  com- 
I  iMned  to  keep  alive  their  malice  and  hostility.  Against  such 
\  sttacks,  the  Eettlen  bad  to  defend  themselves  as  best  they  coald, 
I  with  the  occasoDal  anistaDce  uf  British  cntsiers. 


This  violent  state  of  things  continaed  till   1763,  when  a  treaty 

■ras  eoDclnded  between  Britain  and  Spain,*  the  seventeenth  article 

if  which  is  in  the  following  terms : — 

"  His  Britannic  JJaJesty  shall  cause  to  be  demolished  all  the 

VJbitificatioQS  which  his  subjects  have  erected  in  the  Bay  of  Hon- 

■  Amie,  and  other  places  in  the  territory  of  Spain,  in  that  part 

I  of  the  world,  four  months  after  the  ratification  of  the  present 

Itocaty;  and  his  Catholic  Majesty  shall  not  permit  his  BritAnnic 

1  Majesty'*  mlgects  in  (heir  work  to  be  disturbed  or  molested  nnder 

I  ay  pivtencc  whatsoever,  in  the  said  places,  in  their  wcupation 

I  vC  catling,   toadmg,   and   carrying  away  li^!:wood ;  and  lur  this 

l.purpose,  they  may  bvild  without  hindrance,  and  occupy  without 

temiptjon,  the  bouses  and  magazines  necessary  for  them  and  iheir 

nilies,  and  for  thm'  etfects :  and  his  Catholic  Majesty  assures  lo 

ttem.  by  this  article,  the  full  enjoyment  of  thone  ndvantagei  Hid 

■powers  on  the  Spanish  coasts  and  territories,  as  above  stipniated, 

'nmediately  after  the  ratification  of  tiie  present  treaty."     By  tlie 

I  icciprocal  article   (the  36th)   of  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  the  King 

I  at  Spain  fWtber  engngcd,   "That  iu  case  of  war,  notice  ihottlii 

I  be  given  to  the  respective  subjects  of  the  King  of  Great  Britain, 

I  Qmt  ni  montht  woald  be  gmnted  I  hem  to  remove  their  mereluin- 

L  dixe  and  eflbcts  without  molestation."  )- 

1  ttm«  at  least,  the  settlers  now  remuned  in  tranqtiil 
of  their   niubogany  and  logwood  works  under  the 
protection  of  the  crown  of  Spain,  and  the  settlements  now  first 
Q  appearance  of  r^ularity  and  order  to  which 


^m 


190  THE  QOSPRL    IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

they  had  been  straogen  before.  Two  yean  after  the  treaty 
above  quoted,  a  set  of  regulations — a  crude  digest  of  such  laws 
as  were  more  immediately  needed — ^was  drawn  up  for.  the  govern- 
ment of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Bay  of  Honduras  by  Sir  William 
Bumaby,  Knight,  the  commodore  of  the  British  squadron  at 
Jamaica.  It  extends  to  twelve  articles,  dated  the  9th  of  April 
1765,  and  was  signed  by  eighty-five  principal  inhabitants.  These 
laws  provide  for  the  popular  election,  by  a  migority  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, of  the  imposers  of  taxes,  and  also  of  justices  of  the  peace. 
Seven  of  the  latter,  assisted  by  a  jury  of  thirteen  housekeepers  simi- 
larly chosen,  constituted  a  court,  and  in  case  of  opposition  to  its 
decisions,  the  eighth  article  invests  the  officer  in  command  of  any 
ship-of-war  which  might  be  sent  thither  with. full  power  to  enforce 
its  sentences.  Profime  swearing,  theft,  and  harbouring  runaway 
sailors,  were  punishable  by  various  fines  made  payable  in  logwood. 
The  justices  were  empowered  to  legislate,  subject  to  the  approval 
of  the  people ;  and  where  the  law  was  silent,  the  eustaiM  of  the 
Bay  became  authority  and  were  to  be  acted  upon.  African  slaves 
had  already  been  imported,  and  the  cutting  of  timber  evidently 
occupied  the  chief  attention  of  the  people,  who  were  consequently 
scattered  along  the  coasts  and  up  the  various  rivers.  Key  Casina,* 
which  in  the  year  following  was  by  the  settlers  called  St.  George*s 
Key,  was  evidently  the  chief  resort,  the  residence  of  the  leading 
inhabitants ;  or,  at  least,  the  place  of  convocation  for  public  busi- 
ness and  the  principal  anchoring  place.  The  banks  of  the  Belize 
and  the  Rio  Hondo  were  the  most  frequented.  The  intercourse 
maintained  with  Jamaica,  and  the  almost  entire  absence  of  any  rela- 
tion with  the  Spaniards,  doubtless  fostered  a  spirit  of  security  in 
the  settlers  calculated  to  produce  oblivion  of  the  limited  and  preca- 
rious tenure  upon  which  they  held  their  position  and  means  of  sub- 
sistence.   But  they  were  soon  forcibly  reminded  of  both. 

From  whatever  motives  or  inducements  the  concessions  above 
alluded  to  were  made  to  the  British,  it  is  pretty  evident  that  it  was 
in  unison  neither  with  the  feelings  nor  the  policy  of  Spain  to  foster 
British  establishments  so  near  ^Hhe  secret  sources  of  her  own 
wealth.**  It  therefore  calls  forth  little  surprise,  that,  notwith- 
standing the  treaty  of  1763,  an  expedition  was  secretly  fitted  out, 

*  Properly  oOIed  hj  fht  Spmiardi.  Cayo  Cocina  or  Kitchen  Key.    It  is  about  tlute 
leagues  firam  Bdizf,  in  a  ]iorUi<easteriy  dirdctiofl. 


1  CfiNVESTlnN— 1783  ANB    1786. 


101 


1  a  sudden  attack  nuule  upon  the  settlements  id  tbe  Buy  of 
n  September  1TT9.  It  is  remarkable  tliatthistreacliery 
t  hare  been  contemplated  at  the  very  time  that  the  English 
;  Kcretly  preparing  their  disastrous  expedition  against  Stm 
Hjfnan  de  Nkftragiu.  It  does  not,  however,  appear  ia  the  accounts 
Bof  the  British  historians  that  anj-  otTence  had  been  given  to  Spuin 

■  during  the  sixteen  years  that  had  elapsed  ^ncc  the  treaty  was 
Vode  which  was  calculated  to  provoke  snch  au  act,  though  it  is  at 

t  po8«ible  that  a  cause  eiisted,  and  even  highly  probable  that 
Kthe  attack  was  grounded  on  some  pretext  of  the  kind. 

The  wood-cntterB  were  treated  with  great  and  unneceB«ary  seve- 

Having  been  surprised  and  easily  overpowered  by  superior 

mbcm,  their  property  was  materially  injured,  and  their  persons 

d  and  very  roughly  handled.     "Many  were  blindfolded  and 

tt  closely  in  irons,  and  nil  ofthem.  of  different  sexes  and  ages,  were 

wrched  from  their  homes  to  Merido,  the  capital  of  YncHtan,aner- 

Vvords  connlermarched  to  the   coast,  and  thence  shipped  to  the 

w'Havannuh,  where  they  were  held   in  captivity  until  July  1782, 

birlien  they  were  suffered  to  return  to  Jamaica."* 

,  The  liberated  settlers  made  repeated  applications  to  the  Britisli 

Dvemmcnt  for  some  indemnity  for  their  losses,  which  they  hoped 

rould  be  exacted  from  the  court  of  Spain.    Their  appeals  proved 

ifTectnal,  but  it  was  evident  that  the  British  government  was  de- 

to  relinquish  this  settlement  i   and  a  more  explicit 

eaty  concerning  its  occupation  was  accordingly  made  in  the  year 

S3. 

"Upon  the  termination  of  the  American  war,  a  treaty  of  peace 
n  Great  Britain  and  Siiain  wns  signed  at  Versaillca  on  the 
3rd  September  in  that  year.  The  sixth  article  of  that  treaty,  as 
trBn.*lated  by  Kertslet  (vol.  ii.  p.  237)  runs  thus:— 

"•The  intention  of  the  two  high  contracting  parties  being  to 
prevent,  is  much  as  possible,  all  causes  of  complaint  and  misunder- 
standing heretofore  occasioned  by  the  cutting  of  wood  for  dyeing, 

■  or  logwood,  and  several  English  settlements  having  been  formed, 
inder  that  pretence,  upon  the  Spanish  continent,  it  is  expressly 

1,  that  his  Britannic  Majesty's  subjects  shall  have  the  right  of 

Btting,  loading,  and  carrying  away  logwood,  in  the  district  lying 

rivers  Wallis  or  Belize,  and  Kio  Hondo,  taking  the 

>  Cg^Ulu  Uomlcnsn'i  Acccrani,  p.  A. 


Wl 


Its  THB  CKMmL  IN  CENTRAL  AJfXBIOA* 

civme  of  the  mkI  twi>  men  ^  mmllenibie  boiiateies,  m  m 

"^The  artick  goes  on  to  define  tlie  boondsries,  sod  tben  ptotcrfi 
l»  agree  ibil, — 

**  *  Tke  reflpeetrfe  conmisrioiKTs  snail  nz  upon  eonreninit  plaee9 
in  the  territoiy  abore  marked  out,  in  order  tliat  In  Britennie 
Migesty'a  sabjeda^  emplojed  in  tbe  felling  of  logwood^  nur^, 
witliont  iaitcrraption,  bnild  tbereon  bonaea  and  luagaiiuea  nt^ 
oenary  for  tbemaelvea)  tbeir  famiHea^  and  their  effeets ;  and  Ida 
Catholic  Majeaty  aiBitrea  to  them  the  enjoyment  of  aD  that  0 
expressed  in  the  present  article ;  provided  that  tkme  ttipmlationt 
should  not  he  eonndered  a»  derogating  in  any  wise  from  hu 
rights  of  sovereignty^  &c*' 

**  Additional  articles  were  added  three  years  later  hi  the  eon- 
mention  entered  into  on  the  14th  July  1786,  between  Great 
Britain  and  Spain  (Hertslet,  toI.  iL  p.  247),  finom  whidi  the 
following  are  quotations : — 

"'Article  2. — ^The  Catholic  king,  to  prove,  on  his  nde,  to 
the  king  of  Great  Britain,  the  sincerity  of  his  sentiments  of 
friendship  towards  his  Majesty  and  the  British  nation,  wffl  grant 
to  the  English  more  extensive  limits  than  those  speciied  in 
the  last  treaty  of  peace  (1783),  and  the  said  limits  of  the  lands 
added  by  the  present  convention  shall  in  ftitnie  be  onderstood 
in  the  manner  following: — ^The  English  line,  beginning  from 
the  sea,  shall  take  the  centre  of  tbe  river  Sibnn  or  Javon,  and 
ascend  up  to  tbe  source  of  the  said  river ;  from  thence  it  shall 
cross  in  a  straight  line  the  intermediate  land,  till  it  intersects 
the  river  Wallis ;  and  by  the  centre  of  the  said  river  the  fine 
shall  descend  to  the  point  where  it  will  meet  the  line  already 
settled  and  marked  out  by  the  commissaries  of  the  two  crowns 
in  1783 ;  which  Iknit,  following  the  continuation  of  the  said  line, 
sliaQ  be  observed  as  formerly  stipulated  by  the  defoiitive  treaty. 

*'  *  Article  3. — Although  no  other  advantages  have  hitherto  been 
in  quesdoB,  except  that  of  cutting  tiHMicf /or  dyeings  yet  his  Catholie 
Mi^esty,  as  a  greater  proof  of  his  disposition  to  oblige  the  king  of 
Great  Britain,  will  grant  to  the  EngUsh  the  liberty  of  cutting  all 
other  woods,  wkhmU  even  excepting  mahogany^  as  well  as  gathermg 
all  the  frvita  and  prodoce  of  the  earth,  purely  natural  and  mieal- 

>4. 


tivnted,  which  may,  besides  lieing  carried  away  in  their  nntnml 

state,  bccnnie  an  object  of  utilily  or  commerce,  whether  for  food  or 

for  manufacturet ;  but  it  is  exfiremly  agrttd,  that  this  gtipulation 

ii  never  W  6*  uied  n»  a  jrreleii  for  utahHuUing  in  that  eovntry 

any  piimtaliom  of  'ugar,  eoffie,  eoeoa,   or  other  like   articlea: 

or  onyftArie  er  manufacture  by  mtani  o/tnilU,  or  other  maekinti 

ahotaotver^  iinct  nil  landa  in  quoilion  being  ivditpulably  aekHom- 

led<ced  to  belong  of  right  la  the  Croon  of  Spain,  no  atttlemenln 

of  thnt  kind,  or  the  population  tchich  tcould  folloir,  can  be  alloiced. 

The  English  shall  be  allowed  to  transport  and  convey  all  such 

wond  and  other  produce  of  the  place,  in  its  natural  and  uncul' 

tivated  state,  down  the  rivera  to  the  sea,  bul  rcilhoul  ever  going 

ityond  the  limits  tckieh  are  prescribed  to  tliem  by  the  utipulalioni 

t  granted,   and  Ktlhmtl    thereby    taking  an   opparlvnilg  of 

nding  the  taid  rieera,  beyond  Ihrir  bounds,  into  the  countries 

onging  to  Spain.' " 

"  The  Hvenih  article  of  the  eame  treaty  again  provides  for  the 

^mlire  preitrtMiion  of  ikt  rights  of  the  Spanith  sovereignly  over  the 

1  tnhich  ia  granted  to  the  English  only  the  privilege  of 

king  use  of  the  aood  of  various  kinds ,-'  and  it  goes  on  to  Blipu- 

ie  English  'shall  not  meditate  any  more  extensive  set~ 

ents'  than  the  one  deiined."  * 

ii  sufficiently  plain,  from  these  extract;,  that  the  legitimate 

c  of  Brilbh  occnpation  in  Central  America  was  at  that  time 

■iHTcly  commerctal,  and  the  result  of  u  restricted  toleration  on 

le  p«t  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  who  was  gradously  plensed  to 

Int  certun  favours  to  his  royal  aUy  of  England,  which  be  was 

irticularly  aitnous   ehonld   be  rccogni)ied  as  snch.     But,  while 

[htly  eulai^g  the  limits,  and  eitending  the  privileges  of  the 

s  in  the  Bay  to  all  kinds  of  timber — privileges  which 

r  had  not  waited  for,  mahogany  having  been  cut  and  exported 

\  the  chief  staple  long  before  the  diplomatists  on   either  side 

"  [Wcd  it — the  Spanish  monarch  had  evidently  a  covert  design  to 

mtract  the  general  limits  of  the  British  settli^menta.     This  appears 

t  only  in  the  portion  quoted,  but  more  plainly  in  a  slipu- 

n  of  the  Inst  treaty,  requiring  England  to  evacuate  her  set- 

■  dements  on  Black  River  and  other  parts  of  the  Mosquito  Shore. 

As  B  nsalt  of  thui,  all  the  settlers  from  these  places,  with  their 

*  Brief  SulciiMul^  p.  D  la  V. 


'•^- •-.       ^  -  -. 


194  THB  GOSPEL  IK  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

IJMrp^l^^  slaves,  &C.  &&,  were  brought  to  Belize  bj  the  Bntidi 
goyenunent  in  the  year  1787.  Among  them  were  some  of  those 
who  had  been  deported  in  1779.  They  had  spent  nearly  three 
years  in  the  dongeons  of  the  Havannah,  and  when  libeimted 
had  preferred  the  localities  farther  south  to  a  retnm  to  Honduiaa, 
to  which  place,  however,  this  treaty  finally  restored  them  after 
the  lapse  of  five  years  more. 

Upon  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  in  1783,  Mi^r  Richard 
Hoare  acted  apparently  as  the  first  Superintendent  of  his  Britannic 
Majesty's  subjects  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras.  This  person  autho- 
ritatively assembled  the  inhabitants,  then  greatly  rednoed  in  num- 
bers, and  reorganized  them,  so  that  this  period  may  be  regarded 
as  the  foundation  or  establishment  of  the  present  flourishing 
settlement  of  Belize.  The  first  and  following  meetings  of  inha- 
bitants were  now  no  longer  convened  at  St.  George*s  Key,  but 
at  **  the  mouth  of  the  river  Belise.**  On  the  12th  of  June  1784, 
Miyor  Hoare  laid  before  eleven  principal  inhabitants,  documents 
which  had  passed  between  his  Excellency  the  Governor  of  Yucatan 
and  the  commissioners  appointed  on  the  part  of  his  Britannic 
Majesty  to  receive  the  lands  allotted  for  the  settlement,  and  to 
fosna  regulations  for  the  internal  peace  and  security  of  the  in- 
habitants and  their  property. 

This  meeting  passed  resolutions  adopting  ^'Bumahy's  code** 
(as  it  was  at  once  ostentatiously  and  familiarly  caUed),  and  ^  old 
regulations  and  customs  of  the  former  settlers ;  to  which  they 
added  the  appointment  of  five  magistrates  untU  a  new  ekctiop,  or 
till  ^government  should  think  proper  to  nominate  others  in  their 
stead.**  Providing  also,  that,  on  account  of  their  reduced  nnmben, 
one  magistrate  and  four  jurors  should  constitute  a  court  T^mbj 
restored  to  some  of  the  old  settlers  who  had  already  returned,  their 
property  and  privileges.  They  reg^ulated  money  matters,  fixed  die 
pcioe  of  mahogany  (now  first  officially  recognised),  and  appointed 
the  next  meeting  for  the  1st  of  October  following  at  the  Haulovcr^ 
which  had  been  one  of  the  fint  settlements,  where  an  old  fort  was 
dismantled  by  virtue  of  the  treaty  of  1763.  Though  the  inha- 
bitants were  specially  invited  to  sign  these  rescdutions,  only  twen^- 
one  names  are  found  appended  to  them,  including  tiie  twidf>e  by 
whom  th^  were  passed  under  the  presidency  of  Major  Hoare. 

Alier  two  years,  oa  the27th  June  1786,  another  general  meetiDg 


ETACDATIOX  OF  "THE   SHORE."  195 

of  the  inhabitants  was  hdd  at  Belise  river's  month,  when  Licut.- 
Colofiel  Edward  Marcus  Dcfipard  presided.  He  was  evidently  the 
^perinteiulent,  and  resided  at  the  Flaulover.  Twenty  persons  were 
n  present.  Their  labours  were  confined  to  judicial  amngemenls, 
lich  were  continued  (rem  time  to  time  by  a  committee  of  seven,  who 
Tegaiated  the  costomti  and  barliour  dues.  In  1787  the  meetings 
wercbeld  at  the  "Court  House,  Belise  Point,"  A  number  of  bws 
were  then  added,  and  the  town  of  Btdisc  was  planned,  regulated, 
and  enlarged. 

This  year  the  arrival  of  the  settlers  from  the  Mosquito  Shore  sd 
swelled  the  number  of  leading  inhabitants,  that  a  document  dal«d 
the  4th  of  August  is  signed  by  I  I'J  persons.  Among  its  provisions  is 
one,  making  the  possession  of  at  least  four  slaves  a  necessary  quali- 
fication for  the  holding  of  a,  mahogany  work,  from  which  privilege 
all  foreigners  were,  under  any  circumstances,  excladcd.  In  1791 
the  Alhcan  practices  of  Obeah  were  made  punishable  with  death, 
ciiiefty,  as  it  would  appear,  because  it  sometimes  occasioned  the  loss 
of  slaviB,  or,  in  some  indirect  nay,  facilitated  their  escape.  It  was 
(bund  neccdsary,  in  1T95,  to  pass  regulations  appointing  "aguard"" 
to  overawe  the  slaves  during  their  Christmas  holidays,  and  it  was 
Ibrbidden  to  seU  any  gunpowder  to  them,  firing  after  sunset  was 
also  probihiled,  and  the  Gomlieys  (or  negro  rennioos)  were  to  Iw 
o'clock.  The  guard  was  ordered  to  see  that  alt 
s  and  small  cntft  were  hauled  up  nnd  properly  secured,  the 
a,  rudders,  &c.  bi-ing  carefully  removed ;  precautions  indicative 
t  the  vioUmt  and  suspicious  state  of  eodety  produced  by  the 
X  of  slavery  in  its  bosom. 
I  During  (bis  the  eighteenth  century,  the  eastern  shores  of 
ntnl  America  bad  more  than  ones  been  devastated  by  that 
1  wourge~the  tropical  hurricane.  In  1787  the  most  Kvere 
Intaliun  of  this  kind  occurred.  Very  extensive  iigaty  was  done 
h  to  life  and  property  in  Ilcllze.  The  woodea  houses  of  the 
1  were  then  mostly  thatched  with  a  kind  of  palm  called  the 
bay-leaf,  from  its  frequent  use  here.  Most  of  them  were  destroyed, 
and  the  whole  coast  was  inundated  by  the  sea,  which  rose  to  ft 
height  not  known  before  or  since. 
^^v    From  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty  ol'  17S3,  the  setUemente  lud 

^^^K*  FnliBhly  tbc  nnclnu  Crm  Hlilcli,  In  iae  Ume,  t[niiK  Ika  "  Fmin  Rffnt'i  Refd 
^^^^Aim  MiUtU." 


-t-rf-MOai 


196  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

been  subjected  to  the  periodical  Tisits  of  Spanish  commiflBioiien, 
appointed  to  enforce  a  scrupulous  observance  of  the  stipulated  con- 
ditions.   They  required  that  no  defences  should  be  constructed ; 
that  the  limits  should  not  be  exceeded ;  and  that  no  cultivation  or 
manufactures  should  be  engaged  in  for  purposes  of  trade.    These 
visits  live  in  the  memory  of  some  of  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  Bay, 
who  still  retain  vivid  impressions  of  the  repeated  uprooting  and 
destruction  of  their  plantations  of  sugar-cane,  tobacco,  and  other 
produce.    There  was,  therefore,  little  danger  of  the  tenure  of  the 
lands  being  again  forgotten.    But  it  is  easy  to  believe  that  the 
Spaniards  would  not  view  with  complacency  the  evidently  flourish- 
ing establishments  which,  notwithstanding  their  jealous  severity, 
grew  like  the  timber  so  industriously  sought  in  the  forest,  and  were 
gradually  striking  deeper  roots  into  the  soil^and  spreading  vigour- 
ous  branches  in  every  direction.    As  in  the  former  case,  it  does 
not  now  appear  whether  or  not  any  provocation,  besides  this,  was 
given  to  the  Spaniards.  Perhaps  they  felt  that  the  presence  of  men- 
of-war,  and  it  may  be  other  military  tendencies,  were  contraiy  to 
the  spirit  of  the  treaty.    Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
Spanish  authorities  acted  with  a  degree  of  treachery  which  even 
the  lax  morality  of  the  votaries  of  Mars  would  scarcely  excuse  in 
a  friend,  and  which  it  invariably  condemns  in  an  enemy. 

The  Yucatecan  ports  of  Campeche  and  Bacalar  were  enlivened 
during  the  year  1798  by  the  equipment  of  a  small  flotilla  or  ex- 
pedition, secreUy  directed  against  the  rival  traders  in  the  Bay  of 
Honduras,  whose  British  energy,  while  it  had  created  the  market, 
bade  fair  to  overwhelm  the  sluggish  competition  of  the  wood- 
cutter in  the  Bay  of  Campeche.  Don  O'Niel,  a  field- 
marshal  in  the  Spanish  service,  was  entrusted  with  the  command. 
The  British  account  states  that  the  squadron  amounted  to  no  less 
than  fifteen  sail,  manned  with  nearly  three  thousand  men.  It 
appeared  off  St.  George*s  Key  in  the  month  of  September.  At  this 
place  all  the  settlers  who  could  bear  arms  assembled  themselves, 
together  with  their  slaves,  upon  whom  they  now  mainly  depended 
for  defence.  The  houses  on  the  island,  which  were  then  still 
numerous,  were  first  destroyed  by  fire  to  prevent  the  enemy 
availing  themselves  of  them,  and  a  desperate  resistance  was  offered, 
which  lasted  two  days.  During  this  time  the  success  of  the  settlers 
was  more  than  once  doubtful.    At  length,  on  the  evening  of  the 


TTIE   KiBK-iSD-DOUCn-BOY   WAH,  107 

1  day,  the  Spftnish  fleet  gave  op  the  euterprigc  and  retired, 
cc  that  time,  the  settlements  have  been  left  iii  undisturbed 

I  Tbc  ilavcf  on  this   occasion  luonifeated  much    courage    and 

klity.     Uanj  of  ihem  bad  Iwen  amied  only  with  loug  jislmcllo 

9,  the  ontaide  texture  of  which   is  exceedingly  lough,  and  is 

capable  of  taking  a  point,  if  Bharpcned  to  one  side,  almost  us  hard 

and  quite  as  mischierous  as  metal.    This  pabnetlo,  which  grows  in 

marshes,  and  is  thickly  covered  with  large  lonce-hke  prickles,  bears 

«  pleasant  fruit,  the  Spanish  name  of  which  ia  Coyol,  but  nhich  the 

■  Say-men  call  "  Pork -and-dough- boy n :"  and,  however  undignified 

't  may  sound  to  martial  earn,  the  circumstance  of  the  use  of  these 

[nitive  spears,  gave  to  this  engagement  the  somewhat  epicurean 

KHgnoinen  of  the  pork-and-dougli-boy  war,  by  which  name  alone  it 

mh  Kill  spoken  of  in  the  Bay." 

The  iuiportancc  attached  to  this  event  by  the  Britiiih  Govern- 
ment, as  well  as  the  means  of  defence  with  nhich  the  settlers  were 
Ibniid  provided,  though  taken  by  surprise,  appear  in  the  fallowing 
I  extract  of  a  letter  from  his  grace  tbc  Duke  of  Portland,  to  Lieut.- 
I  Ceneral  the  Earl  of  Balcarres,  dated  Whitehall,  8th  February  1799. 

"  Sir  LoaD, — I  tiiul  groat  pleasure  in  laying  before  his  Sliyesty, 

g  account  yon  transmitted  of  the  defeat  ol'  the  Spanish  flotilhi,  in 

jl  Mlack  upon  our  settlement  of  Honduras. 

C**  The  able  and  judicious  conduct  of  Lieutcaont-coloncl  Barrow, 

d  Captain  Moss  of  the  Merlin  sloop,  the  bravery  of  the  troops 

k  uuder  their  respective  conuiiands,   and  the   spirited 

I*  of  the  BCttlement  in  general,  on  this  occasion,  have  been 

ffmch  as  to  recdve  his  Majesty's  approbation,  which  your  lordship 

lit  hereby  directed  to  signify  through  Lieutenant-colonel  Barrow 

X  with  the  Just  sense  his  ^l^esty  entertains  of  their  gallant 

i  mcriloriotis  conduct. 

•'  A  true  eitmct."  (Signed)    Bai.c*b«eb,"-|- 

^  But  there  is  another  event  which,  as  it  trnnsiured  less  than 
two  years  before  the  date  of  tlic  Pork -and -dough -boy  war,  most 
be  centered  as  having  bad  at  least  a  share  of  iulluence  in 
jHtMlndng  tbc  sudden  attack  of  the  Spaniards. 

Uu>  luiBi:  Iruufoiiiu  it  luto  roit-aiiMuo-tBi- 
I  OiptaiB  IltBdtniMi'i  .^cdiimC,  y,  1, 


mm 


198  THB  008FEL  Df  ORNTRAL  AMERICA. 

The  khod  of  Euatan,  which  was  taken  firom  the  EnglHli 
pirates,  and  the  popuktion  of  which  had  been  lemoved  bj  the 
Spaniards  in  1650,  remained  in  a  desert  state  for  nearly  a  whole 
centnry.  In  17411,  the  English  took  poopcarion  of  it  again,  and 
fixrtified  it  with  materials  which  they  had  carried  off  from  the 
neighboaring  port  of  Tmxillo.  In  1780,  they  were  again  dislodged 
by  forces  sent  from  Guatemala  for  that  purpose;  but  oooe 
more  made  themselves  masters  of  the  island  in  1796,  when 
they  constituted  it  the  penal  settlement  of  the  mndi  iigured 
Caribs,  whom  their  cruel  rapacity  had  spared  in  St.  Yinoent 
and  the  other  Leeward  Islands.  Jnarros  states,  that  on  this  ooca- 
aon  two  thousand  Caribs  were  located  upon  Buatan,  and  that 
*'  as  soon  as  this  invasion  was  known  in  the  capital,  the  gOTemor 
ordered  the  intendant  of  Comayagua  to  send  Don  Jos^  Rossi 
y  Rubia  to  the  island,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  state  these 
negroes  were  in,  so  that,  from  his  information,  the  necessary 
arrangements  might  be  made  for  its  re-conquest.  On  the  17Ui 
of  May  1797,  Rossi,  with  twelve]  officers,  embarked  at  l^ruzillo 
on  board  a  little  vessel,  armed  with  four  small  guns  and 
twelve  muskets,  and  reached  the  harbour  of  Roatan  the  following 
day.***  They  found  the  Caribs  not  hostile  to  them,  and  after 
again  hoisting  the  Spanish  flag  with  the  customary  ceremonies, 
they  quietly  returned  to  Truxillo. 

After  the  defeat  of  the  Yucatecan  flotilla,  the  settlements  in 
the  Bay  continued  to  flourish,  and  the  periodical  visits  of  the 
commissioners  being  entirely  discontinued,  a  sort  of  tacit  concesBson 
on  the  part  of  the  Spaniards  seemed  to  sanction  the  idea  partially 
entertained,  and  since  often  pleaded  by  the  British  settlers,  th«t 
they  now  held  these  territories  by  right  of  conquest. 

Thus,  in  1799,  were  the  encroachments  of  nearly  two  oentnries 
brought  to  a  critical  point,  of  which  the  settlers  and  the  Home 
Government  were  equally  ready  to  take  advantage.  With  the 
opening  of  the  present  century,  we  may  date  a  new  era  in  the 
history  of  our  settlements  in  Central  America :  but  though,  from 
the  increase  of  l^t  and  intematbnal  good  understandii^  we 
might  expect  that  the  latter  period  would  be  characteriaed  by 
a  different  spirit  and  more  equitable  results,  yet  the  conlnory 
has  been  the  case;  and  in  the  £Eice  of  the  march  of  intdlect, 

*  Jnurot,  p.  Sil. 


BBPLBCnONB.  199 

it  the  close  of  a  thirty  jean'  peace,  tre  find  that  the  growing 

'le  for  conquest  or  anneiation— whether  by  the  actual  iwe  of 

ir  hythe  power  which  their  possesion  confers — hns  iacreased 

r-fuld  more  during  the  lost  fifty  yeais  thaii  to  the  previoiu  two 

llrandrcd. 

:t  without  onticipikling  what  remains  to  )>e  told,  there  is  CDOUgh 
e  present  chapter  to  moderate  auy  dispoaitinn  which  ought 
<  felt  to  indulge  the  pride  of  nationality.  From  the  facts 
corded,  we  must  conclude  that,  whatever  may  be  the  moml 
»dvant»ge«  we  have  enjoyed  over  the  Spanish  monarchy,  our 
'  uitii  differ  but  little  in  quality  from  iheira,  and  though,  in 
le  amoUDt,  our  national  criminality  may  at  lirst  sight  appear  Bmoll 
:  oompAriMD,  yet  our  very  odruitoges  must  conmderahly 
e  theta.  Oh  !  that  it  may  be  impressed  upon  every  heart, 
ctiofi  with  a  hiHtory  euch  as  this,  that  Great  Britain  han 
id  •  debt  of  national  obligation  which  only  her  aoas 
1  daughters  can  diKharge  by  fii?t  admitting  its  full  extent 
t  urgency,  and  then  offering  towards  its  liquidation  peisooal 
ilications  and  tntercesiions  at  a  throne  of  grace,  and  the 
ty  contiecradon  of  a  Banclificd  iuSucace  and  of  steadily  nia- 
ined  efforts  for  the  apirilual  regeneration  of  tribca  to  nhoni 
•  country  miwt  appear  in  the  cliuraclec  of  an  aggreMor. 
-  proximity  to  theni  has  been  the  fertile  source  of  vexations 
I  caloinilics.  Only  lately  Iibj  any  disjiosition  been  shewn  to 
i  them  as  brethren.  Only  lately  have  any  efforts  been 
□  the  part  of  a,  few  to  extend  to  them  some  of  oar 
t  hIcssingH  and  advantages.  But  though  our  reproach  be 
igly  apparent,  out  opportunities  of  removing  it  are  not  yet 
I  fhMn  us.  "The  riches  of  Uud's  goodness,  and  forbearanec 
;  tuffering,"  still  leeil  us  to  reptntanct,  and  it  rata  with 
o  bring  forth  its  appropriate  fruits. 


r»»  »  —  -     * .- 


900  TOE  GOfiPEL  III  CENTRAL  AKBRICA. 


CHAPTER   XI. 

BS1TI8H  0CCUFATI03(. 

1800  TO  1850. 

litiknua  BcspoBiibility— The  Troe  Patrioi— ExpandTe  LimitB— Bdise  McRhaBtt— Ilieir 
iBflnence— Intonud  Govenmicnt  and  Berdopment— Emandpttiaii— Brituh  Lav  Pko- 
daimed— Azbitruy  Kale — Protectorate  and  Relation!  with  the  Moaqnito  Shon^Sir 
Gregor  Ifa^regor,  Caciqoe  of  Poyaia— Coronations  of  the  Waikaa  Kinga — Captain 
Haidenon*8  Miaaion— Histofical  Date  on  the  Royal  Family— Seizure  of  Enten  ia  1841 
->0atnge  upon  Coknel  Qn^ano— Affairs  of  the  9iore— Blodcade  of  tke  River  Saa 
Joan  del  Nurte— Conanlar  Proceedings -Protesta— The  Port  of  San  Jun  taken  and 
eaDed  Grey  Town— Treaty  between  Nicaragua  and  the  United  Stetes— Annesation  of 
Tiger  Island— Blodcadea  and  Seinurea— Arming  of  the  Statea—Confederation  Pif  idwit 
Tsykar's  Menage— M^odatiooa  between  the  United  Statea  and  Great  BiitaiB— Naval 
Movcmenta— Character  of  the  English  Nation— Recapitulation  and  £ztcnt  of  Cliiiii 
Anglo-Saxon  Ascendancy. 

**  SkmU  I  Mot  tint  for  tke$9  tkimgt  T  udtk  Jeko9ak."^Jet,  x.  39. 

If,  because  nations  and  bodies  corporate  will  bave  no  eTistence  a» 
such  in  a  future  state,  the  recompense  of  their  doings  must  be 
meted  out  to  them  here,  it  follows  that  national  acts  of  ii\jiulioe 
and  oppression  are  the  exact  measure  of  national  calamities  and 
disgrace  to  be  experienced  by  the  nations  which  inflict  them,  and 
to  be  entailed  on  the  people  of  those  nations,  as  their  accursed  in- 
heritanoe,  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation ;  and  it  is  equally 
plain  that  every  individual  act  of  justice,  phihinthropy,  and  pie^, 
is  fraught  with  mercy  and  blessing  to  thousands,  by  averting  or 
mitigating  the  force  of  national  judgments:  it  follows  also,  that 
he  who  does  iniquity,  however  lofty  his  rank,  is  the  greatest  enemy 
to  his  countiy ;  and  that  the  pious  teacher  of  religion,  however 
lowly  his  condition,  is  the  truest  patriot  and  the  best  benefiictor  <tf^ 
ihture  generations. 
He  who  really  loves  Mb  coontiy  will  not  torn  away  bis  qre  firam 


the  exposure  of  evila  that  afflict  and  threaten  it.    Prepsrcil  himaelf 

to  share  the  burden  of  deserved  judgments,  he  a  not  only  willing 

to  know  the  worst,  but  he  is  even  anxious  to  acquaint  hiniself  with 

f  the  full  extent  of  woes  to  be  feared,  that  he  may  bear  his  share  of 

uunilialion  and  sorrow  before  God,  end  that  he  may  take  a  part 

u  the  most  suitable  meaus  both  to  avert  further  evils  and  to  secure 

L  the  greatest  amount  of  present  and  future  good.     This  is  the  object 

[  aimed  at  in  pursuing  the  narrative  of  our  dealings,  as  a  nation,  with 

ir  fellow-men  in  Central  Ajnericoi  and  it  is  hoped  that  the  reader 

>y  be  led  to  feel  Ihat  he  is  personally  interested  in  the  past  deeds 

[•  of  his  IcUow-countiymcu,  and  also  so  cloi«ly  idenUlied  with  their 

L,ywent  doings,  whether  good  or  evil,  that  both  he  and  his  posterity 

it  aEBoredly  be  partakers  in  the  results. 

s  been  seen  how,  in  the  hxe  of  Spanish  jealousy,  and  in 
^travention  of  express  treaties,  as  well  as  in  violation  of  the  priu- 
3  of  common  justice,  the  Brilish  secured  for  themselves,  during 
e  last  centuiy,  a  permanent  though  a  questionable  footing  on  the 
I  shores  of  the  Central  Continent.  Our  fellow-countrymen 
■od  our  Government  did  not  stop  here. 

TheUmitewbiebwerefirst  assigned  lo  the  wood-cuttcn  in  1783, 
were  distiuctly  pointed  out  as  reaching  coastwisG  from  the  Rio 
Uoodo  to  the  Belize  or  Old  river — an  extent  of  less  than  sixty 
miles.  The  treaty  of  1766  added  about  nine  milei  more  to 
{tbe  line  of  coast,  viz.,  as  far  south  as  the  mouth  of  the  Sibuu ;  and 
e  inland  boundary  was  as  clearly  defined.  Notwithstanding  this, 
II  the  timber  and  other  objects  of  pursuit  became  scarce  within  the 
igued  limiu,  ur  were  less  accessible  by  water,  one  river  after 
other  lo  the  southward  was  practically  token  possession  of  by 
S  selllcn,  and  when  thus  occupied,  whether  by  mahogany  and 
1  works,  or  by  plantations,  the  protection  of  the  British 
{  was  nut  only  extended  to  the  settlers,  but  its  dominion  was 
T  all  sudi  streams,  and  the  intervening  territories  were 
1  into  the  British  claim.  Though  the  claim  to  these 
nipied  lands  itss  not  at  once  ufficiolly  made  in  a  frank  and 
puuunble  maiuier,  the  result  was  a  growing  Colonial  empire,  the 
jguiised  limiiB  of  which,  in  November  1836,  we  gather  from  an 
tl  declaration  of  the  Colonial  Secretary  of  State,  in  which  they 
Ue  staled  to  extend  as  folloire : — "■  From  the  £io  Hondo  on  the 
Donb  to  the  river  S&rstoon  on  the  south,  and  oa  &r  wetit  ae  Gar* 


202  THB  008PBL  IN  CBMTaAL  AMERICA. 

bott's  fidls  oa  the  river  BdoR,  and  a  line  en  die  snae  -pmBA  fo 
flirike  on  the  rirer  Hondo  on  the  north  and  on  the  river  Santoon 
on  the  south,  the  British  Crown  elaims,  also,  the  waters,  ii 
and  keys,  Ijing  between  the  coast  above  defined,  and  the 
of  the  eaatemmost  pcmit  of  %hthouse  reef.*** 

Since  the  time  when  this  was  promulgated,  the  expansive  pro- 
pensities of  this  settlement  have  by  no  means  diminished,  and  it  is, 
perhaps,  difficult  to  predict  at  what  time  it  may  be  expected  to 
have  reached  its  foil  growth,  or  wherennto  its  dimensions  will  ulti* 
maiely  extend. 

No  new  treaty  respecting  Honduras  was  negotiated  ptefioos  to 
the  independence  of  Central  America.  The  old  treaties  were, 
indeed,  renewed  by  one  concluded  in  1814,  but  it  docs  not  appear 
that  this  in  any  way  altered  the  then  existing  state  of  thangSi  or  the 
position  in  which  the  contracting  parties  previously  stood  towards 
eadi  other.  The  veiy  opposite  inference  must  be  dnnm ;  for  by 
ami^y  renewing  previous  engagements,  all  ictea  of  an  altered  foot- 
mg  or  of  enlarged  claims  was  necessarily  disowned  in  an  <^dal 
manner  by  the  British  Government. 

Early  in  the  present  century,  the  inhabitants  of  Bdiae  added  to 
thdr  other  occupations  that  of  traders  in  general  merehanfiae.  It 
is  true  that  this  commerce  was  at  first  no  better  than  smng|^Bg, 
as  British  produce,  or  indeed  everything  not  Spanish,  was  contrm- 
band  in  the  American  colonies ;  but,  notwithstanding  Iqpsl  restiie- 
tioDs,  a  brisk  trade  epiang  up,  which,  after  the  independeDee, 
became  lawful,  though  the  merchants  in  the  interifK*  still  took 
advantage  of  the  fact  that  their  own  tariff  of  duties  was  math 
lower  than  that  of  Mexico,  to  smuggle  large  quantities  of  Britirii 
goods  through  their  territories  into  those  of  the  ne^boaring 
republic.  Foreign  manufactures  soon  superseded,  to  a  great  extcat, 
iht  mote  costly  industry  of  the  countiy,  and  the  Behxe  metdwto 
became  princes,  who  almost  entirely  absorbed  what  had  so  leqg 
been  the  exclusive  commerce  of  Spain.  So  that  this  once  piiaikay 
and  smuggling  settlement  now  exchanged  a  lawless  for  a  Ugitiinslf 
eommeroe,  and  soon  became  to  the  Independent  Coitral  Stales 
what  Cadis  had  been  to  them  as  colonies. 
Althoogfa,  on  the  whole,  there  is  but  little  contrast  in  the  noral 

*  Letter  tnm  Or  Geaqj^  Qnj  to  8.  Con,  Eeq.    Dovaint^tnet^  SSrd  of  Bbr.  18M. 
p.  SB. 


MEKCAKTILE  INFLUENCE. 


203 


■ftaence  exerted  by  llic  lival  emporiums,  upon  the  people  in  whose 
ftrketa  tbey  trafEclccd,  it  will  be  seeo  further  on  that  there  is,  in 
respect  at  least,  a  notable  eiceplion.  One  of  the  commercial 
sea  at  Belize  was  foremost  in  Becking  the  spiritual  enlighten- 
It  of  the  bcnightet)  inhftbitantB  of  the  interior.  Among  cheats 
r  Binoitighuii  nutskcts  nod  bayonets,  Sheffield  knives,  destined 
I  be  used  aa  poniards,  and  Manchester  dolls,  of  which  Virgin 
[arf  s  and  Saints,  or  a  kind  of  honaehold  gods,  are  rrequentlf 
e  i  there  began  to  be  introduced  caws  of  Spanish  Itiblcs  aud 
r  books,  calcubled  to  enlighten  the  mmple  sjid  to  countersct 
intellectual  poison  which  Spanish  and  French  tntdera  had 
ady  largely  imported  in  the  iulidel  literature  of  the  period, 
:s  of  which,  it  is  not  nnliJccIy,  travelled  side  by  side  with  othen 
g  this  their  only  eSectuol  ajitidote. 

g  the  vuions  Superintendents  (invariably  military  officers) 

tt  diflerent  times  were  sent  from  England  to  direct  the  affurs 

K  this  httle  community,  was  one  whose  term  of  office  was  ehanie- 

d  by  efforts  to  promote  the  moral  and  religious  well-being  of 

e  5ettlers.    Colonel  Arthur,  the  late  Sir  George  Arthur,  after- 

■fda  Governor  of  Vtin  Diemen's  Land,  and  »ncc  then  of  Canada, 

9  hia  Majesty's  Superintendent  in  Uiinduras  for  several  yean. 

ce  of  this  noble  and  Christian  man,  together  with  the 

ts  of  the  house  of  Angas  and  Co.  as  intnuncnts  in  the  hand  of 

must  be  attributed  the  origin  of  the  piety  and  evaagelicat 

it  which  now  exists  in  Ceolml  America. 

L£ut  though  private  inSuence  and  etibrt  now  b^an  to  be  exerted 

a  limited  extent  for  the  liest  interests  of  the  settlers,  it  does  not 

I  that  there  was  mach  mural  advancement  in  the  general  and 

Mblic  character  of  iheir  political  establish  men ta,   though   some 

lentf  were gndnally  introduced,  lo  1799,  the  legislature, 

a  then  first  called  "a  public  ueetbg,"  had  provided  that 

)  peisons  under  sentence  of  transjxirtatino  should  thereafter  be 

aduced  into  the  settlement.     In  1600  the  number  of  magis- 

a  be  elected   was  restored  to  (teven — one  of  thera   being 

a  polioe-IttBgiatratc,  and  matters  of  form  in  the  conduct  of  courts 

aad  inquests  were  r^ulnted.     Two  years  later  it  was  enacted  th«L 

DO  slaves,  except  nnc  nrip-ors,  might  be  imported,  under  a  penalty 

at  one  hundred  pounds.     The  fines  imposed  by  Bumahy's  code 

woe  made  payable  in  corroicy  instead  of  logwood,  and  the  daiw- 


_k^- 


204  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

empowering  the  officer  in  oommaiid  of  any  British  nuui*of-war  to 
execute  the  sentences  of  the  courts,  was  subsequently  repealed. 

The  sale  of  any  kind  of  arms  or  ammunition  to  a  Spaniard 
was  prohibited,  imder  the  penalty  of  500^^  or  twelve  months 
imprisonment  From  a  resolution  of  the  public  meeting  held  31st 
October  1803,  in  which  a  duty  was  imposed  on  the  importation  of 
wines  and  spirits,  and  a  licence  required  for  their  sale ;  it  appears 
that  there  were  separate  tribunals  for  the  oppressed  Africans, 
which  were  denominated  slave-courts.  On  the  23rd  of  December 
of  the  same  year,  a  meeting  of  magistrates  drew  up  a  document 
which  the  reader  will  find  equally  wanting  in  liberality  of  senti- 
ment and  in  grammatical  correctness.  It  records  a  resolution, 
^  That  from  and  afler  the  25th  of  this  present  month,  no  French 
emigrant  or  emigrants,  arriye  in  the  harbour  of  Belise ;  after  that 
day,  they  shall  not  be  admitted  to  land,  and  shall  be  immediately 
ordered  to  depart  this  settlement,  either  in  the  vessel  he  came  in,  or 
by  any  earlier  opportunity  that  may  offer ;  and  that  from  and  afier 
publication  of  this  resolve  in  the  Kingston  papers,  any  master  of 
a  vessel  presuming  to  bring  into  this  settlement  any  person  of  the 
within  description,  shall  be  subjected  to  a  fine  of  one  hundred 
pounds  for  each  person,  and  be  compelled  to  carry  them  away 
again  at  his  own  expense,**  &c  &c.  Mr.  Thompson  was  directed  to 
have  ^''the  spirit  of  this  law^  published  in  the  proper  newspapers. 

A  public  meeting,  held  29th  October  1805,  *^  resolved  that  nofinee 
person  of  colour  be  permitted  to  locate  a  logwood  work  on  the  English 
side  of  the  river,  unless  he  possesses,  in  his  own  right,  four  able  n^gro 
men  slaves,  under  the  penalty  of  100^**  And,  also,  that  no  slave  be 
permitted  **  to  hire  himself  to  himself  as  thereby  such  slave  being 
under  no  control  of  his  master,  becomes  subject  to  no  authority  but 
what  results  from  his  own  will,  which  naturally  tends  to  create 
insubordination,  thereby  diminishing  respect  to  his  proprietors,  and 
destroying  that  spirit  of  industry  which  so  strongly  conduces  to  good 
order,  regularity,  and  due  obedience,  under  the  penalty  of  500£.** 

The  same  public  meeting  wickedly  imposed  a  tax  of  26L  on  aU 
manumissions,  which  could  not  take  place  till  this  fine  was  paid; 
and  ungratefully  debarred  any  Spaniard  from  cutting  logwood,  or 
any  other  wood,  in  that  settlement.  In  1808  the  law  imposing  a 
fine  on  manumisHions  was  repealed,  due  provision  being  made  that 
infiim  slaves  should  not  become  a  burden  to  the  commnniQr. 


I  LAW  proclaim: 


COS 


I  The  pIsMB  most  frequented  in  the  Bny  at  this  period  were  Belize, 
.  George's  Key,  the  IlBiilovcr,  Convention  Town,  the  iMUiks  of 
tne  Old  River,  the  Sihun  (then  culled  Sherboon),  the  Northern 
River,  and  the  Rio  Hondo. 

PliysicaJlj  and  commercially,  there  has  been  n  gradual  develop- 
ment and  extension  in  the  settleroents  of  the  Bay,  which,  as  already 
■  .Unted,  was  accompanied  by  moral  improvement,  associated  nitli 
die  rise  and  progress  of  vital  reli^on  among  a  few. 
From  the  departure  of  Colonel  Arthur,  which  took  place  in 
1832,  seven  Superinteadents  came  out  from  England  in  succession, 
none  of  whom  followed  in  his  footsteps;  hut  some  of  llieir  number 
distinguished  themselves  by  active  opposition  and  virulent  enmity 
to  the  sacred  objects  he  promoted  and  loved. 

On  the  1st  of  August  1S40,  ihe  slaves  of  British  Hondura!) 
were  emancipated  by  an  act  of  the  inhabitants  assembled  in  public 
meeting,  and  in  conformity  with  official  instructions  sent  out  from 
Sugland-    The  Africans  and  their  descendants  who  were  freed  on 

Pftds  occasion  amounted  to  several  thousands,  and  formed  a  large, 
if  sot  the  largest,  proportion  of  the  entire  population.  Tlie  day  of 
fivedom  was  celebrated  without  disturbance,  and  this  act  was  soon 
alWrwards  declared  by  the  public  meeting  in  a  petition  to  parlia- 
ment "  to  have  been  flllended  by  the  bapjncst  rcsulta,  iniMmueh 

M  neilher  diminution  of  labour,  or  the  fruits  of  labour,  nor  increase 

f  crime  had  obtained  from  the  total  abolition  of  slavery  in  the 

I^Dliring  the  period  of  office  filled  by  Colonel,  now  General, 
inder  M'DonnId,  "  her  Majesty's  Suprintendeot  and  C«m- 
n-Chief  in  and  over  her  potnes/iionf  in  Hondurafi,"  &c. 
,  be  iBBiuda  "  prodnmalion"  dated  'ind  November  1840,  ^the 
pminblc  of  which  refers  to  the  inconvenience  and  imperfections  of 
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Bay,  which  deprived  the  seHlers  of 
the  benefit  of  the  wise  and  wholesome  laws  which  Britbh  subjects 
are  entitled  to  claim  as  llieir  birthright  within  Briliiih  ItmVnry, 
and  in  which  he  declares  and  ordains  that,  from  the  date  of  the 
raid  proclamation,  "the  law  of  England  is  and  shall  be  the  law  of 
this  settlement  or  colony  of  British  Honduras,"  and  provides  Ihnt 
L  local  castoms  and  laws  "which  are  repugnant  to  the  spirit 
t  the  l>w  of  England,  and  opposed  to  the  principles  of  equity 
A  jnaticc,  are  and  shall  be  nail  and  void." 


906  TOE  G08PEL  IK  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

In  hannony  with  thk  alteratiop,  the  Spperintendeiit  appomteil  an 
EzecntiTe  Coundl  to  aasist  him  in  the  administntion  of  the  affidn 
of  the  Settlement.  These  peraons  were  selected  hy  himself  from 
among  the  various  government  officers  of  state  and  church,  and 
received,  together  with  warrants  of  appointment  from  the  Governor 
of  Jamaica,  the  privilege  of  attaching  the  word  Honoorahle  to 
their  names.  CoL  McDonald  also  assomed  the  oontrcd  of  the 
finances  of  the  settlement,  the  administration  of  which  had  hefore 
rested  with  the  seven  popalarly  elected  magistratesi  whom  he  now 
abo  superseded,  reducing  the  number  to  four  appointed  by  himself, 
who  held  office  during  his  pleasure. 

Not  satisfied  with  the  constitutional  exercise  of  the  Yelo^  he  also 
exercised  the  right  of  legislating  in  his  own  person  by  means  of 
prodamatioDS,  in  one  of  which  he  assumed  the  power  ^  of  con- 
fining in  the  common  gaol  any  individual  acting  agahut  his 
authority,  or  obstructing  his  mandate ;  constituting  himself  at  once 
legislative  enactor,  the  magistrate  to  issue  the  warrant,  and  the 
ju^e  and  jniy  to  convict  and  sentence.*** 

To  these  usurpations  the  inhabitants  offisred  a  decided  resistanee, 
and  obtained  some  trifling  relaxation  of  the  despotic  sjrstem  adopted, 
by  petitioning  the  Government  and  Parliament  at  home.  They 
also  now  petitioned  that  the  right  of  sovereignty  over  the  terri- 
tories they  occupied  might  be  openly  assumed  by  the  British 
Government,  so  as  to  enable  them  to  possess  thdr  lands  without 
reservation  in  respect  to  Spain,  and  to  cultivate  and  impart 
their  produce  into  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  at  the  same  nfte  of 
duties  as  the  British  Colonies  in  the  West  Indies. 

Similar  petitions  for  the  colonization  of  the  settlements  had  beat 
presented  by  the  inhabitants  in  November  1833,  in  February 
1835,  and  in  March  1839.  To  none  of  them  has  there  been  any 
direct  reply. 

Another  step  was,  however,  taken  in  that  direction,  when  a 
Chief  Justice,  a  Queen*s  Advocate,  and  other  judicial  i^ipeodagei 
were  sent  out  in  1845. 

Though  the  British  Government  had  renounced  and  given  up 
all  its  territorial  claims  on  the  Mosquito  Shore,  dismantling  Hi 
forts  and  ranoving  its  sul^jects  during  1784,  an  interconrse  was 
coatmuaUy  maintained  with  the  Waikna  Indians  thnMg^  tiie 

•  11iepetiU(moC{leMbiie]fMliDg,5taia]IndilSIL 


THE    POYAIBIAN    BUBBLE. 


207 


I  of  Jaiiiaica  and  irom  the  Settlements  in  the  Bay.  The 
ihle  diipoaition  of  this  people  towmi^  tbe  Britialt, 
wliicti  had  been  saiuloualy  cultiviited  from  the  first,  was  not 
sufTered  W  Luigoub,  tbougb,  at  the  same  time,  their  hatred  to 
their  Spanish  neighbours  wa«  thereby  quickened  and  perpctoated. 
The  (IctenuuuttioD  to  keep  op  British  influence  on  this  important 
line  of  coast  was  manifested  hy  a  tdnd  of  patronage  extended  by 
our  govcnunent  ta  tbcse  rude  barbariaiu,  under  tlie  specious  pre- 
text of  Ptxtttelunt.  The  chiefs  and  nobles  nere  flattered  and 
bribed,  ideas  of  hereditaiy  monarcJiy  and  piimt^eniturc  fostered, 
if  they  were  not  actually  instilled  into  their  minde,  nnd  the  scioiu 
of  Mosquito  roj-nlly  were  eilucated  nnd  crowned  at  Kingston  or 
,  j^eliie.  Thdr  kings  were  pensioned  during  lilc,  and  provided  with 
pavale  Mcrettuy— a  kind  of  keeper— at  the  cost  of  the  Briliib 


A*  vae  of  tfac  earher  results  of  this  policj.  Sir  tiregor  Mocgregor 
ingiWiated  himself  with  the  Waikna  monarch,  and  mu  created 
Caciq.ue  of  Poyajs,  by  royal  deed  at  the  court  of  Cape  Gracias  i 
DioB  on  (be  29th  of  April  1820.  Upon  this  gmund  he  claimed 
an  ateolule  dominion  over  the  Poyer  district  situated  on  the 
extreme  west  coast  of  the  kingdom  of  Mosquitia,  and  including 
the  Rio  Tinto  or  Black  Bivcr,  w)ii:re  English  settlements  had 
belore  existed. 

Tlie  prttjwt  of  transporting  to  these  fertile  but  uncleared  wilds 
a  ready  niude  city,  or  at  least  of  ptunting  on  the  banks  of  the 
Black  Itiver  a  full-grown  community  without  any  roots,  was 
prohalily  only  a  part  of  a  more  comprehensive  btU  ill-conceived 
plan  ol  tutioiuil  aggression  and  encroachment.  The  very  first 
steps  m  its  cxecatinn  were  so  disastrous  and  suicidal  as  to  make 
the  "  Poysjs  bubble"  notorious,  and  for  a  time  proverbial.  !t  was 
the  ridicule,  where  it  was  not  the  grief,  of  all  who  knew  its  history. 
After  Ihlity  years  the  scattered  remnant  of  its  ciUcd  dupes  arc 
still  occasionally  met  with  in  the  Bay,  and  some  wrecks  of  its 
military  armament,  which  comprised  well  equipped  regiments 
of  cavalry  and  infantry.  it«  theatre  and  theatrical  company,  its 
b«uk  ud  iiapcr  currency,  ke-,  are  still  now  and  then  encounteral, 
and  afiord  materials  for  reflection  on  the  wickedness,  the  folly, 
aad  tbe  Just  miscnrri^e  of  ascbemc  in  which  everything  seems  ta 
hnc  faeeo  tliought  of  except  vfaat  aliould  conatitute  the  fun- 


908  THE  CKMPEL  HT  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

dimental  elements  of  all  such  enterprizes,  viz.  t  waritsy  object, 
toitable  time  and  place,  and  adequate  religions,  mond,  and  physieal 
materials. 

The  Baj-men  were  prompt  and  efficient  in  rescoing  manyof  tbe 
victims  of  this  iniquitous  scheme  from  the  actual  starvation  and 
unavoidable  disease  to  which  His  Highness  the  Cacique  had  merci- 
leasly  consigned  them.  The  most  helpless  were  removed  in  1823 
iW>m  the  forests  of  Black  River  to  Belize,  and  though  the  generosih 
of  this  act  has  been  called  in  question,  and  a  motive  of  rivaliy  attri- 
buted in  its  stead,  the  humane  attentions  and  hospitalitj  of  the 
Belizians  to  their  suffering  fellow-countrymen  are  justly  entitled 
to  a  meed  of  praise. 

Nor  is  this  the  only  national  disgrace  and  absurd  exposure 
whidi  has  resulted  from  the  British  protectorate  on  the  Mosquito 
Shore.  Several  writers  have  already  noticed  the  humiliating  scenes 
to  which  the  coronation  of  the  present  line  of  Waikna  monarchs 
has  given  occasion;  and  all  the  witnesses,  except  perhaps  some 
whose  sense  of  decorum  and  moral  rectitude  were  little  or  not  at 
all  superior  to  that  of  the  poor  deluded  Indians  themselves, 
concur  in  branding  these  ceremonies,  not  only  as  ridiculous  in  the 
extreme,  but  as  disgusting  exhibitions  of  human  degnulation, 
and  impious  profanations  of  the  name  of  God,  which  has  been 
wickedly  associated  with  them.  Indeed,  it  is  not  a  little  surprising 
that  government  officials, — civil,  military,  and  eodedastica], — 
laying  claim  to  reason  and  sensibility  (to  speak  of  no  loftier 
endowments)  could  at  any  time  be  found  willing  to  lend  them- 
selves to  mockeries  so  puerile,  and  to  deceptions  so  palpable  and 
gross.  But  some  such  have  ever  been  found  ready  to  take  a 
public  part  in  the  desecration  of  so-called  religious  forms,  and  in 
the  name  and  on  behalf  of  royalty,  to  place  in  the  least  imposing 
Ught  imaginable, 

'*The  low  ambition  uid  the  pride  oi  kings.** 

On  such  occasions,  British  men-of-war  have  been  employed  to 
eonvey  the  royal  person  and  the  naked  and  bare-footed  nobles 
composing  his  court  to  and  from  Jamaica,  or  British  Honduras. 
A  titled  colonial  bishop  has  been  in  requisition  to  consecrate  and 
anoint  with  holy  oil  the  semi-savage,  the  tool  of  govemmental 
schemes  of  natioDal  aggrandizement    The  variooa  native  loxd^ 


COROKATlOIi    (If    KING    ROBEUT. 


3W 


'■,  tdminls,  nnd  cnptuiiifi,  hwo  been  clad  for  the  oce«- 

i   gkf   nguDcntnls    wliich    they    wore    shirtlesiK   on   tbeir 

tawny  skins,  uid   so   caricatured   the   "nnft  raiment"   that  even 

f^e  pencil  of  a  Cruikshuilu  could  acarci'Iv  do  justice  to  their 

Utitudes  and  grioiacea  while  writhing  under  the  coiilinemcDt  of 

K'bnideU  coBta,  niiUtaiy  atocks.  tight  boots,  &c.  &c. 

The  coronstion  of  King  Robert  took  place  at  Belize  on.  the 

KSSrd  of  April  IS2S.    Noac  of  the  above  elements  were  tbeti 

iMtating,  except  that  the  part  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cunterbury 

B  perfornied  bj  the  chaplain  to  the  Settlement  in  the  room 

f  his  9iiperior,  whose  absence  was  more  than  atoned  for  by  other 

a  of  the  pageant.     On  this  ocnuion  it  was  deemed  necei- 

I   qunlify   the    Waikna    nobility   for    the    part    assigned 

ta — viz.   swearing  allegiance  to  their   king,   by  HrEt  placing 

I  within   the  pale  of  the   national   establishment.       Conae- 

ently  the  "  MinistrBtion  of  baptism  to  such  as  arc  of  riper 

I  ytan"  ww  irapenidded  to  the  "  Coronatioii  nervicc,"  and  the  poor 

Mvage*  having  anented  with  becombg  docility  to  all  they  were 

d  ca|Kihle  of  taking  an  oath,  and  their  ecclesas- 

tieal  disabilities  were  once  fur  all  removed.    Mr.  Ilcnry  Dunn 

informs  us,  upon  the  testimony  of  nn  eye-witness  of  this  iniqui- 

tous  imposture,  that  "  they  displayed  a  total  ignorance  of  the 

meaning  (!)  of  the  ceremony ;  and  when  asked  to  give  thtir 

^nuncs,  took  the  titles  of  Lord  Rodney,  Lord  Xclson,  or  some 

T  celebrated  ofKcer,  and  seemed  grievously  disappointed  when 

Plold  thej  could  only  be  haptixed  hy  simple  Chrtstiim  (?)  names:" 

,  that,  "after  this  solemn  mockery  had  been  con- 

dnded,   the  whole  assembly  adjourned  to  a  large  school-r 

h>  eat  the  coronation   dinner,  where  the   usual    healths   ^ 

[drunk,  and  these  poor  creatatGa  all  intoxicated  with  ram;  a 

nitable  conclusion  to  a  farce  as  blasphemous  and   wicked  as 

T  dii^raced  a  Christian  country ."(!)• 

•ulim  at  KiD(  Bsbm.  Uw  fblhnriiic  ucanM 

ug^  [a  lUte  at  the  HWI-boDH.  nil  lad 

■  esBiplMii  UHliiBisQhiKU  {  lh>7  vor  iiDviittiRdiaanl.iiflnaiUiif  nttOiiT 


SIO  THB  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Captain  HeDdenon,  an  officer  in  garrison  at  Belize,  whose 
work  has  heen  already  quoted^  was  honoured  with  a  special 
mission  to  the  shore  in  1804,  the  object  of  which,  by  his  own 
shewing,  was  to  oonyej  in  the  schooner  Muntras  *'a  yarietj 
of  presents  ordered  by  government  for  the  chiefs  of  the  Mos* 
quito  nation.**  He  does  not  say  of  what  they  consisted,  but 
he  distributed  them  at  a  settlement  in  Caratasca  lagoon  on 
the  9th  October,  where  General  Robinson  and  his  staff  came 
to  receive  them.  ^^The  general  as  well  as  most  of  his  atten- 
dants, who  were  numerous,  were  dressed  in  British  regimen- 
tals, with  epaulettes,  sword,  sash,  &c.**  The  little  information 
which  he  communicates  as  to  their  history  is  significant  and  sug- 
gestive. 

*^  The  late  king,  George,  was  murdered,  and  his  death  attributed 
to  the  designs  of  his  brother.  Prince  Stephen.  The  former 
was  unalterably  attached  to  the  English;  the  latter,  it  is  con* 
fidently  pronounced,  has  been  seduced  by  bribery*  to  very  oppo- 
site interests,  and  with  which  he  had  sedulously  attempted  to 
infect  his  countrymen.  The  schemes  of  Prince  Stephen,  how- 
ever, have  met  with  little  success ;  which  has  principally  arisen 
from  the  imremitted  and  active  vigilance  of  General  Robinson,  one 
of  the  next  persons  in  point  of  consequence  to  the  royal  family,  and 
who  contrives  to  preserve  a  kind  of  regency  until  the  son  and 

merchants  and  inhabituits  of  Belize.  On  reaching  the  ehurch,  the  band  atrod^  ap»  '  God 
save  the  King.'  On  entering,  ve  were  all  provided  with  pews.  The  gallery  had  bees 
reserved  for  ladies  admitted  by  ticket  or  invitation.  The  serviee  was  not  veiy  kng.  TIm 
aermonpreachedwasfirom,' By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice.*  TheaermoB 
ended,  the  priest  went  to  the  commnnion  table  and  read.  The  General  ttinding  on  the 
other  side  of  the  table,  the  King,  dressed  as  a  British  Hi^,  in  the  front,  theceremoiiy  of 
anointing  was  gone  through.  (Herelfr.  Dunn  informs  ns,  that  the  King  rqieatedly  throat 
his  hand  throogh  his  thidc  bushy  hair,  and,  applying  his  lingers  to  his  note,  in  this  «• 
inesatve  manner  indicated  his  delight  at  this  part  <tf  the  service.)  After  which  the  cravn 
was [daeed  onhis  head,  and,  on  a  preconcerted  signal  being  given  by  Migor  Baldwin,  a 
aalnte  was  fired  from  the  fort  Afterwards,  Lord  Nelson,  Lord  Bodney,  and  I  know  aot 
how  many  mcne  lords,  were  received  into  the  visible  dinrch  by  sprinkling— poor  creatm  I 
—the  minister  thanking  God  that  they  were  by  this  ordinance  rq^enerated  and  made  part 
of  the  body  of  Christ.  It  is  an  awfnl  concern  1  They  swnre  allegiance  totheir  dilcf;  aal, 
on  the  minister  pronouncing  him  king,  the  Mosquito  lords  shouted  out,  *God  save  Bag 
Bebcii.'  .  .  •  I  had  oome  CQBversation  with  the  King,  who  observed,  <  I  shall  want 
to  get  away  soon  to-ni|^t.'  I  inq[nired,'Why?'  '  Because  I  dont  want  to  get  dmk; 
ifldo^IshaUgetaiek.'  I  am  told  he  is  rather  fimd  of  doing  this  occarionaDy.  Heiia 
Jittto  man,  about  80  yean  of  age  I  should  si^poee.  He  wbs  educated  at  Jamaica." 
*  Ibewilt«^ovBai«iniwiitoaakefnMite. 


iASTV.  211 

heir  or  the  ktc  king  shall  become  of  age  to  take  upon  himself  the 
business  of  govemmcnt.  The  present  King  [1804 — probably  king 
lUibert,  who  nas  subset] ucntly  crowued  as  already  related]  is  but  a 
youth.  Dud  some  j-ears  ago  was  sent  to  Jamaica  to  be  educated  under 
the  diieetioQ  and  guidauce  of  the  govenior  of  that  island."* 

About  t«'elve  yeara  since,  or  pcrbaps  a  year  or  two  sooner, 
Frederick  Williwn,  a  ma  of  King  llobert,  reigned  on  the  Shore 
under  Ilritish  protection.  lie,  too,  hod  been  educated  and  crowned 
at  Jamaica,  and  was  an  Decagonal  visitor  at  Belize,  where  a  child  of 
his  was  the  plaything  of  the  family  and  vigitors  at  the  government 
Louse,  upon  the  piazcas  of  which  he  used  to  play  and  bask  in 
the  nut,  or  steep  in  the  shade  like  any  other  pet.  King  Frederick 
William  was  provided  with  an  English  secretary,  and  a  pension 
to  enable  him  to  siisCun  hit  dignity-  lie  died  from  the  con- 
suquences  of  habitual  inloiication  before  1B25,  in  the  early 
part  of  which  his  little  »on,  still  iv  boy,  was  crowned  king  by 
the  late  Bishop  Llpscotnbe,  who  caiue  frotn  Jamaica  to  Belize 
in  a  maD-oi'-war  for  that  purpose.  On  this  oecoeion,  a  simitar 
ceremony  to  the  one  nhich  occurred  twenty  years  before  look 
place,  followed  by  a  somewhat  similar  banquet  in  the  same 
»choolroom,  during  which  the  juvenile  king  was  engaged  in 
■he  yard  jieneath,  iu  tlio  more  congenial  diversion  of  graciously 
ing  hia  royal  top.f 

!  been  noticed  in  a  previous  chapter.J  that  one  violent 
1  of  the  island  of  Huatan  by  the  conimandct-in-chief  of 
*  C^IiiD  Bnlmon'i  Acrauiii.  p.  !!'iO. 

tTit  lULxruf  ii  Itaiu  ui  Auicrican  pnper.  ti  ig  ilaUel  Hull,  U.S.,  Srpt. S3. ISIB ' 
■^SUfftttlBiS^  ulu  umeil  M  1hi>  puit  Inm  nuiiilutui  lul  veck,  in  liii  nnul 
Bmi9,  icfiorUUMtLEkidBuiiitcrriCT'.  bsfofauiljng.KiUi  liii  Uajeitr  Urn  King  oC  Die 
|>ltMguIMe*.  HIi  U^ol;  v-ore  ■  iploidid  nckol-liU  •nil  t  nd  luh,  ud  tuit  icrj  lute 
...   -    ^^1  ^^^  (BklH  ;  but  I  ngrtt  to  UJ  L 

I.  111!  Uajnij,  slw  uanat  be  aunt 
Oil  iniU  cviuliUil  of  ■  Diii.c;«l  dm 
horn  VWd  u  ao intc^mUr.    Tlie  Kii^oC  Uic Mi>ei)uil< 


213  THE  G06PBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

the  garrifloii  at  Beliae  took  place  in  1890,  and  that  on  com- 
plaint of  the  federal  authorities  the  act  "wm  officially  dis- 
allowed by  our  government.  Notwithstanding  this,  it  was  onee 
more  taken  possession  of  in  1841  by  Ck>lonel  Alexander  Mae- 
Donald,  C^  then  her  Migesty's  Superintendent  in  British 
Honduras,  who  proceeded  thither  ¥rith  some  few  officers  and 
men  in  the  govemment  schooner,  a  small  yacht;  and  finding, 
as  they  expected,  only  a  few  inhabitants  under  the  care  of  a 
sergeant  and  four  or  five  Indian  soldiers  belonging  to  the  state 
of  Honduras,  they  hauled  down  the  flag  of  the  republic  ftom 
a  small  signal  stafi^,  and  hoisted  that  of  Great  Britain  in  its  stead. 
No  sooner  had  they  re-embarkcd,  than  they  had  the  mortifi- 
cation of  seeing  the  Union  Jack  replaced  by  the  blue  and 
white  stripes  of  Honduras,  for  which  it  had  just  before  been 
substituted,  and  retumiog  once  more  they  completed  the  inglorious 
revolution  by  taking  such  precautions  and  making  snch  threats 
as  they  thought  necessary.  Since  this  act  of  annexatirai,  the 
island  has  been  under  Britbh  control,  and  a  ccmsideralde  number 
of  settlers  have  been  located  upon  it. 

But  the  territorial  conquests  of  Ck>lonel  MacDonald,  a  veteran 
of  many  campaigns,  and  a  survivor  of  the  slaughter  of  Waterloo, 
did  not  stop  here ;  during  the  same  year,  he  proceeded  to  the 
port  of  San  Juan  del  Norte  on  the  Mosquito  ^Kxre  in  her  Ma- 
jesty's frigate  Tweedj  as  it  would  appear,  for  the  mere  purpose  of 
keeping  alive  the  British  daim ;  though  under  cover  of  a  pretext 
concerning  the  limits  of  the  Waikna  king's  territories.  On  this 
occasion,  the  British  hero  took  prisoner  Ck>lonel  Quijano,theNica- 
raguan  Comandante  of  the  port,  who  was  brought  away  in  the 
Tweedy  and  subjected  to  personal  indignities  ere  he  was  landed  at  a 
distance  from  his  official  residence.  ^  This  farce,"  said  ifr.  Dvb- 
lop,  ^  hardly  seemed  consistent  with  the  digni^  of  a  British  olBeer, 
Governor  of  a  Settlement.**  How  much  more  infiunous  nuut  it 
appear  to  the  reader  when  contrasted  with  the  moral  dignity  that 
should  attach  to  a  nation  circumstanced  as  Great  Britain  is,  and 
with  the  rectitude  that  diould  characterise  a  people  who  juitiy 
boast  the  pre-eminent  possession  of  the  word  of  God. 

After  this  event  the  Waikna  Protectorate,  in  the  name  of  wlneii 
the  outrage  on  Colonel  Quijano  was  committed,  assumed  a  more 
decided  aspect.    A  Board  of  CommisBioners  of  the  Mosquito  Shore 


consulah  diplomacy.  318 

wu  fonncd  at  Bclixe  hy  direction  of  the  home  gorermnent 
U  wiu  MmpuKil  of  A  selection  from  among  the  civil  and  eccle* 
siaitical  functionarieB  of  itatf,  snd  was  almost  idcntiatl  with  the 
Ilonouisble  Executive  CounciL  Thi^publicmoiiejnsuitllydeTOtedlo 
the  mainteiiuice  of  British  inflaence  on  the  Shore  woa  entrusted  to 
,   Jiieir  manageucnt,  but  this  organixation  was  of  very  short  duration. 
HAJBrilish  Agent  or  Resident  was  soon  after  establiehed  at  Blewlield'i, 
■kBetUcment  not  rixlj  miles  from  the  river  San  Joan,  a  nationul  flog 
-Affiiring  V017  little  from  the  Union  Jack  was  assigned  to  the  Mos- 
quitians,  a  dispute  for  extended  limits  at  each  end  of  their  ter- 
ritories wna  originated  hj  our  government   in   their   name,  and 
dubaequently  some  paltry  cngngemcnts  were  fuught  at  both  extre- 
mities of  the  shore. 

As  an  indirect  auxiliary  to  these  movcmerilsi  a  blockade  of 
tlie  river  San  Juan  del  Norte  was  instituted  under  a  pretext 
of  dubt,  the  state  of  Nicaragua  not  liaving  paid  its  share  of 
the  loan  contracted  in  Engkud  under  the  Federation*  which 
even  when  added  to  some  other  debts  due  to  British  subject* 
ronde  but  an  inconsderabtc  amount.  Patrick  Walker,  Esq., 
lotc  private  secretary  of  Colonel  MacDunald,  as  agent  of  the 
consul-general  of  her  Britannic  Majesty  on  the  Itlo^quilo  Shore, 
addruaed  a  discourteons  letter  to  the  authorities  of  the  stale  of 
Nicaragua,  dated  Irom  the  "Residence  or  the  Consul- General  of 
her  Britannic  Majesty,  Blewficlda,  Mosquito  Shore,  1st  of  Sept. 
1647,"  in  which  he  peremptorily  requires  the  hbcralion  of  a 
foreign  rt«ideat  who  was  imprisoned,  confessedly  noi  a  Brilith 
suijeet,  lie  says,  "By  adopting  extreme  mcasores  against  Mr. 
Bamel,  yon  have  drawn  upon  your  government  the  resent- 
ment of  one  of  the  most  powerful  nations  in  the  world;  a 
nation  the  moet  sensitive  in  regard  to  the  least  insult  offered 
to  its  sntijects,  for  which,  if  it  shall  appear  to  have  been  unjustly 
offered,  it  will  require  an  ample  indemnification."  He  adds  in 
caneluding,  "It  ia  proper  I  should  state  to  you,  as  you  can 
jicarcely  have  been  otherwise  informed  of  it,  ihat  Mr.  Clmtfieht, 
ktr  MujM^'t  CviLftil-General  in  Central  America,  hat  1 
instruclHini  to  pomt  out   to  the  steles  of  Central   Ami 

■  Thia  leu  ni  orijiniH]'  enotncMd  tiUi  Ifac  bam 
ud  CO.  ol  Lwidgti.  in  Uui  }IH  189S.    II  Ota  tanoBU 


:  b(  Bucla;. 


214  THE  O08PKL  IN  CENTRAL  AMEEICA. 

Itmils  ufhteh  the  BrUish  govemmeni  is  determined  to  maintain 
as  the  right  of  the  king  of  the  Mosquitoes^  and  that  those  Umiit* 
comprehend  the  San  Juan  river,^* 

To  this  declared  intention  of  occupying  their  only  Atlantic  port, 
the  government  of  the  state  replied  by  a  firm  and  well-grounded 
protest,  dated  Managua,  23rd  of  September  1847,  in  which  it  com- 
plains **  that  a  tribe,  with  no  recognised  form  of  government, 
¥rithout  civilization,  and  entirely  abandoned  to  savage    life,  is 
suddenly  made  use  of  by  enlightened  England  for  the  purpose 
of  planting  one  of  her  feet  upon  the  Atlantic  coast  of  the  state ;  or 
rather,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  possession  of  the  port  for  com- 
munication between  Europe,  America,  and  Asia,  and  other  im- 
portant countries,  at  the  point  where  the  grand  Oceanic  canal 
is  most  practicable;**  and  further,  that  this  had  been  done  '^  at  a 
time  when  Nicaragua  was  preparing  to  settle  her  liabilities  in  re- 
gard to  the  debt  due  in  Great  Britain.**    The  local  government  also 
lifted  up  its  voice  and  called  upon  the  other  states  to  support  the 
inviolability  of  its  territory.    Mr.  John  Foster,  British  Vice-Con- 
sol  in  Nicaragua  was  at  the  same  time  respectfully  addressed  in 
a  letter  which  expresses  a  doubt  concerning  the  execution  .of 
this  threat.    Principally  because  it  would  not  have  been  preceded 
by  those  formalities  which  nations  always  observe.     And  he  is 
reminded  that  by  the  loss  of  this  port,  and  consequently  of  the 
chief  revenue  of  the  state,  arising  from  the  duties  on  its  import 
and  export  trade,  ^  it  would  be  deprived  of  one  of  the  principal 
resources  upon  which  it  relies  to  pay  the  debt  due  in  Great 
Britain,  an  arrangement  for  which  was  then  under  negociation  with 
the  vice-consul.** 

In  the  protest  of  Nicaragua,  the  state  of  Salvador  heartily 
united,  declaring  its  cause  to  be  that  of  all  Central  America. 

The  encroachments  on  the  north-western  extremity  of  the  Shore 
drew  forth  also  a  protest  from  the  state  of  Honduras  against 
'  the  occupation  of  a  part  of  its  territory  on  the  northern  boundaiy, 
which  was  actually  occupied  by  British  troops  in  behalf  of  ^  the  ao- 
called  Mosquito  nation."  It  complains  that  ''the  commander  of 
the  sloop  of  war,  Alarmy  of  the  royal  navy  of  England,  has  taken 
poasesrion  of  that  portion  of  territory,  extending  to  the  river 
Roman;  having  afterwards  committed,  in  the  public  sqoaie  of 

*  Bmktmt  Okmnar,  Jan.  91^  1848. 


OP  TBB   trsITED  STiTEs.  915 

t.lt  pOMtiTie  hoslililj-,  and  aggniTated  ibe  state  by 

■  la  the  Mid  port,  with  the   object   of  compelling 

H  CotDmuiduit,  by  Toiciblc  ueaDs,  to  order  the  guard  situated  nt 

le  Konun  river,  to  eTacuntc  that  place  immediately,"  And  farther. 

It  theiuppoKd  right  of  the  Mosquito  chief  had  not  even  been 

.,  nor  bnd  any  official  remonstrsnces  been  made  before 

\g   to   Tiolence.       To  the   eoiemn    protegt   ngainst  this 

r  act  of  aggression,  is  added,  in  Ibc  came  of  the  entire 

I  a  general  protest "  that  the  confederation  of  Central  Amc- 

a  consiilcra  yalid  its  rights  to  all  the  territory  invaded,  or  thai 

be  invaded,  and  of  courw  an;  others  that  may  appertain  to  it, 

e  riglit9  of  nations,  and  by  treaties,  celebrated  betweeo  the 

larchs  of  Spain  and  Great  Britain,  or  other  fiawett."     To  this 

it  the  aignaliire  of  Don  Santos  Guardiola  ia  appended  m 

retiiknl  nfl/ie  »lnte.' 

c  diplomacy  of  Patrick  Walker,  Esq.,  notwiihstaniling  these 
istB.  was  soon  folloired  uii  by  an  attack  in  the  boats  of  a 
-of-war  upon  one  of  the  Nicaraguan  forts  in  the  river  San 
1  del  KoTte.  In  this  affray,  be  and  some  British  sailort 
lost  their  lives.  The  port  in  question  was,  however,  shortly  after- 
la  taken  by  a  British  squadron,  and  being  ever  since  forcibly 
IS  received  the  name  of  Grey-town,  doubtless  in  honour 
r  nhose  auspices  this  gallnnl  deed 
11  been  at  length  consummated. 
\  Long  before  this  decisive  step  on  our  part,  negociations  had 
I  pending  between  the  government  of  Nicaragua  and  a  com- 
n  the  United  States,  which  desired  to  undertake  the  opening 
ftnf  the  grsBd  Oceanic  canal.  Whatever  influence  this  circometance 
nay  hare  liad  on  British  movements,  it  is  notable  that  the 
*  concludon  of  a  mutual  agreement  between  the  contracting  parties 
was  simultaneous  with  the  occupation  of  Grey-town.  In  the 
prospect  flf  this  important  undertaking,  the  United  States' govem- 
ntent  appointed  Mr,  Squiers  their  consul  in  Central  America, 
and  concluded  a  treaty  with  Nicaragua,  by  which  it  guaranteed 
ita  tcrntnries  from  all  foreign  encroachment,  and  became  rcxponsible 
to  the  world  for  the  strict  neutrality  and  cosmopolite  ebaractcr 

C contemplated  channel  of  communication.    By  this  treaty 
ad  of  Tigte  (ur  Tiger)  was  ceded  to  the  United  Sutes. 
•  Umimi  Oturnr.  Feb.  i.  ISO). 


216  THB  OOBPEL  IS  OBNTRAL  AHBBICA. 

This  IB  one  of  nuuij  islets  in  the  spBCtoos  and  beantiAil  Gulf 
of  Fonsecai  or,  as  it  is  often  caUed,  the  bay  of  Conchagna,  on  the 
BMific  side  of  the  isthmns.  It  is  a  conical  rock,  covered  with  yer- 
dme,  and  little  if  at  all  inhabited.  Bat  its  eitaation  is  important, 
both  from  its  vidnitj  to  the  projected  works  and  the  easy  com- 
nranication  it  affords  with  the  three  states  of  Nicaragoa,  Salvador, 
and  Honduras,  whose  several  boondaries  meet  at  this  point. 

Soon  after  Mr.  Squiers  had  arrived,  and  simoltaneonsly  with  the 
ratification  of  this  treaty,  a  new  and  unexpected  act  of  British 
aggression  produced  considerable  excitement  in  all  the  Central 
American  States.  At  one  and  the  same  time  a  British  sqoadron, 
under  Commodore  Paynter,  in  the  war-steamer  Gorgom^  i^peared 
off  Bealejo,  and  the  British  consul-general,  Fredarick  Chatfield, 
Esq.,  arrived  at  the  gulf  from  Guatemala.  On  the  20th  g(  October 
1849,  these  two  employ^  made  a  descent  upon  Tiger  Island,  and 
imited  to  take  possession  of  it  in  the  name  of  Queen  Victoria, 
notwithstanding  it  had  just  been  ceded  to  the  government  of 
Washington*  This  new  act  of  British  sovereignty  was  duly 
wlemnimd  within  range  of  the  floating  batteries,  and  in  the 
fnaenee  of  a  military  force,  who  first  proceeded  to  disarm  the 
native  guard  of  four  soldiers  and  a  corporal.  The  repaUican 
banner  was  then  speedily  lowered,  and  the  British  flag  float- 
ing in  its  place  was  royally  saluted  with  twenty-one  gons.  After 
this  a  British  Superintendent  (of  its  jungle  and  its  reptile  in* 
habitants?)  was  appointed  by  Mr.  Chatfield,  and  the  deed  of 
annexation  was  complete. 

On  receipt  of  this  astounding  intelligence,  Mr.  Squiers  offidallj 
inibrmed  Mr.  Chatfield  of  the  fact  that  the  island  of  Tigre  had 
been  ceded  to  the  United  States,  and  that  he,  of  course,  expected 
that  its  evacuation  would  iomiediately  be  ordered.  Mr.  Chatfield*B 
reply  was  that  the  state  was  not  in  a  position  to  cede  any  part  of  its 
territories,  because,  in  the  first  place,  it  had  no  claim  even  to  n 
national  existence :  and,  secondly,  it  could  not  exercise  that  right  in 
the  pfesent  case,  because  he,  as  British  consul-general,  had  befove 
imimatfd  his  intention  of  placing  a  lien  on  the  island  in  qnestioii. 
After  fhrther  negociations,  Mr.  Qiatfidd  refused  to  evacuate  tke 
iikitid,  which  was  put  ins  state  of  defence,  but  he  engaged  to  refer 
tlM  foestion  to  his  own  govvnunent. 


jlNXEXATION,  SEIZURES,   BLOCKADES,   ETC. 


217 


Tbeae  diplomatic  amngenicotg  of  the  British  consul-general* 
were  speedily  followi-d  up  l^  tbc  seizure  of  ill  the  ialaiida  in  the 
golf  belonging  to  the  stales  of  UuidarBs  and  Salvador. 

To  the  Usl'iiaiiiedatatc.  Mr.  ChatGelil  forwarded  certain  peremp- 
tory demands,  at  the  Mme  time  requiring  pajmL-nt  of  thi^ir  share 
»f  the  national  debt  (amounting  la  39,000  doUan-  or  ■'ifiOOl.  «ter- 
hag),  to  which  be  eiacled  a  reply  within  twenty-four  hours,   Upou 
the  rejection  of  his  K()uirements  aa  unjust,  the  ports  of  Ac^autla 
id  La  Union  belonging  to  that  state,  together  with  its  eotirecoasts 
the  Gulf  of  Fonxcca  were  (trickly  blockaded. 
These  movements  on  the  Pacific  were  charocteristicnlly  supiiortcd 
IB  the  Atlantic  side  of  the  countr)'.  by  the  occupation  of  the  ports 
Truxillo  and  Omoo,  thereby  cloning  all  the  ports  of  the  state 
llooduru.    As  might  be  supposed,  tbc  alarmed  natives  flew  to 
BU,  aod  with  exaggerated  fears  prepared  to  oppose  the  annexation 
the  entire  country  to  the  other  Ifritish  poBsewions  in  Central 
America.     Nevertheless,  the  people  of  both  Btates  oltered  to  sub- 
all  the  cUinu  of  the  British  lo  commissioners,  and  pledged 
iselvea  to  abide  by  the  result.     This  peaccfol  overture  was 
lOltirely  disregarded!  upon  which  Don  Santos  Guardiola  issued  a 
etilc  [iroclamiuion,  and  soon  put  hiiuscif  at  the  head.of  s  con- 
Icralde  force  of  Uondureuot.     Cabauas  and  another  general  made 
nilar  preparations  in  Salvador.       'lliese  leaders,  however,  re- 
lined  in  a  waiting  though  a  threatening  posture. 
Under  the  pressure  of  these  circumstances,  the  states  of  Nica- 
ngut,  Salvador,   and  Honduras,  at  once  formed  a  confederation, 
:  themselves  Ii^thcr  in  a  manner  they  had  long  songht  in 
accomplish  after  the  fall  of  federalism  in  1839.    The  articles 
of  titis  compact  between  the  three  stales  were  ugned  early  iu  the 
noath  of  November  IS49,  and  the  speedy  inauguration  of  the  new 
eral  gttrenimeat  was  looked  forward  to  with  general  satisfaction 
1  even  with  enthusissiic  joy-    Guatemala  and  Cost*  Htoi  were 
be  invited  to  join  it,  but  it  was  feared  that  the  influence  of 
'Carreta  would  prove  an  obstacle  in  the  first,  and  the  second  was 
to  be  unfriendly  to  the  project.     It  wos,  however,  confi- 
dently hoped  tliat,  woner  or  later,  the  two  extremities  would  unite 
ritb  the  republic  of  the  centre,  which  had  adopted  the  irard 
Bcdinvtwr  (Kcvivcd)  for  its  tnnorial  motto. 

-  tlic  EngLili  atrfi  i'Affiim." 


218  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMBRICl* 

The  mild  and  dignified  but  finn  and  liberal  tone  of  Fxeaident 
Taylor's  late  message,  at  the  opening  of  the  congress  of  the  United 
States  in  January  1850,  concerning  the  tenure  of  the  grand  Ooeanic 
canal,  was  well  calculated  to  check  the  further  development  of 
British  schemes  in  Central  America,  and  to  satisfy  the  world  upon 
that  point.    Under  the  sanction  of  the  United  States  of  North 
America,  the  remotest  nations,  as  well  as  the  circumjacent  republics, 
are  assured  of  the  world-wide  freedom  of  that  important  passage. 
But  though  its  universality  and  independence  have  been  thus 
early  guaranteed,  the  effects  of  this  fair  and  noble  declaration  still 
remain  to  be  proved,  and,  perhaps,  to  be  contested.  Subsequently  to 
this  new  and  important  phase  of  the  proceedings,  declarations  have 
appeared  that  the  executive  of  Washington  and  the  calunet  of  St. 
James  are  both  resolved  amicably  to  arrange  this  interesting  matter. 
No  previous  resolution  could  be  more  auspicious  for  the  proper 
adjustment  of  the  difference,  as  each  is  thus  prepared  for  a  calm 
investigation  and  a  just  decision,  whilst  a  threat  of  defiance  must 
have  aroused  evil  passions,  and  would  have  blinded  the  vision  of  the 
national  arbiters.    Now,  the  only  apparent  danger  is,  that  the  two 
fiiendly  powers,  oblivious  of  the  general  interests  of  mankind, 
should  arrange  matters  for  their  own  convenience  and  advantage, 
and  sacrifice  the  claims  of  others  to  their  entente  cordiale.    But  if 
better  things  may  not  be  hoped  for  from  the  despoiler  of  Mexico 
and  the  father  of  annexation,  another  lesson  may  be  learned,  even 
ft  lesson  of  distrust  in  man ;  and  confidence  may  yet  be  exercised 
in  that  overruling  and  all  wise  Providence  which  invariably  brings 
good  out  of  our  unfaithfulness,  and  in  which  God  glorifies  himself^ 
by  unfailing  and  equable  retribution. 

Subsequent  to  the  visit  of  the  Alarm  on  the  coast  of  Honduras, 
Captain  Nolloth,  of  her  Majesty's  ship  Plumper^  formally  pre- 
sented a  claim,  amounting  to  111,061  dollars,  or  22,230^.,  to  the 
Comandante  of  Truxillo ;  and,  fiuling  payment,  took  possession  of 
the  town  and  fort  The  affrighted  inhalntants  having  raised  1,200 
dollars,  the  gallant  captain  left  with  the  spoil  for  Jamaica.  A 
proclamation  was  subsequently  issued  declaring  the  whole  ooMt  in 
ft  state  of  blockade,  and  warning  all  vessels  to  leave  it.  The  xt- 
appeaianoe  of  the  British  squadron  was  also  expected.* 
During  the  close  of  1849  and  the  opening  of  1850,  ooorideiaUe 

»  JVmv  r«nt  JKfMnfr.  Ai««i  said,  1660. 


op  1 


319 


movements  have  bten  observable  in  the  British  navy  Gtationed  nt 

Jftmnicaandinlhc  iiciglibooring  seas,  otidticreral  ships  of  irarhaTic 

been  ordered  to  tlie  Mosquito  Shore  and  to  the  Buy  of  HoDdurss. 

It  has  lieax  xeccnlly  announced  in  the  public  prints  tliat  the 

I  itate  of  Sftlvndor  lias  paid  its  quota  of  the  debt  claimed  by  ns,  and 

1  tbnt  tlie  blockade  of  i7»  ports  has  been  raised.    No  inlelligence  has, 

I.  boncver,  appeared  of  the  eTscuotioa  either  of  Grey-tonn  or  of  the 

f  islanda  in  the  Golf  of  Fonaecj. 

The  Hondur<i.i  IValehman,  published  at  BcHic  on  the  12th  3aa- 
1  wrylSjO,  repotts  a  rumour  "that  the  English  packet  was  detained 
f  tome  business  of  importftnce  as  connected  with  the 
Mosquito  territory.  Tt  is  said  tliut  ten  snil  of  the  line  have  been 
Bmdercd  down  to  San  Juan  de  Nicarafpia,  now  Grey-town.  ^That- 
■crer  grounds  licre  may  be  for  such  a  report,  it  is  certain  that  tJiia 
■  f'^infj  canal  question  is  assuming  a  most  serious  aspect.  The 
1  English  hare  gone  too  far  to  recede,  nod  the  .\mericans  appear 
I  detenuined  to  push  matters  to  extremities."  The  same  paper  con- 
a  truislation  of  a  violent  appeal  to  the  citizens  of  the  state  of 
[  Honduras  to  arm  in  defence  of  their  territories.  It  commences 
I  with  the  ugniGcant  word?,  "The  flag  of  that  rapncions  nation, 
I'Grcat  Britain,  is  waving  over  Tiger  Ldand ;  that  nation  of  Vandals, 
l^fhose  conduct  to  those  weaker  than  itself  is  notorious ;  its  iron 

folce  is  but  too  keenly  felt ! " 

In  order  to  judge  of  the  truth  or  fklschood  of  the  charge  of 
ty,  let  the  reader  briefly  review  the  facts  upon  which  it  is 
ed. 

With  no  other  claim  than  what  is  afforded  by  the  treaties  with 

I   Spain,  we  have  possessed  ourFclvcs  of  the  actual  sovereignly  of 

n  the  northern  shore  of  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  extending 

'  ever  abont  20,000  sqnare  miles,  or  12,800,000  acres,  exclusive  of 

talands  and  kejs. 

We  hxve  taken  and  retaken  the  important  island  of  Buatan  no 
](■  than  fire  times,  and  arc  nowciercisinglheright  of  sovereignty 
ever  ila  fertile  lands  which  extend  at  the  least  to  130  square  miles, 
or  9«,000  acres. 

By  virtue  of  a  late  treaty  with  one  of  the  contending  parties  in 
Yucatan,  and  on  the  score  of  aasLstance  nflbrded  for  the  pfidtlcatioii 
of  the  peninsula  during  the  war  of  races,  which  is  still  raging  there, 
wc  have  obtained  an  extension  of  limits  on  the  northern  bonndBry 


390  THS  CKMREL  IH  CENTmAK  AXBOCA. 


of  our  Genftrtl  Amerion  emjnre,  eitgmling  from  the  Bio  Sbode 
to  the  port  sad  town  of  Saltfnmm  de  BMdar,  tliw  indnding 
about  3,600  aqfinre  miks,  or  2,304,000  acres  of  siMitiniMil  ta> 
ntory. 

Altogether,  msking,  <hi  a  modente  calcnlstkm,  ftall  23,750 
sqpisie  miles,  or  15,200,000  acres^-which  is  nesriy,  if  not  quite, 
fimr  timei  the  extent  of  the  island  of  Jamsica. 

To  the  oecupatum  of  these  extensiTe  tracts  of  couatrj  mogt  be 
added  the  ffroiecUom  of  the  Mosquito  Shore,  over  whidi  our 
gOTemment  cicrciacB  as  much  ooDtnd  as  over  its  own  posseasions, 
though  in  a  somewhat  less  direct  manner,  or  nther,  bj  a  moce 
indirect  course.  In  additwn  to  400  miles  of  sea-eoast  fium  the 
Roman  river  to  the  San  Joan  del  Norte,  we  haie  ktdj  put  fivtfa 
a  claim,  in  the  name  of  the  Waikna  mooardi,  to  abool  100  miles 
more  of  sea-coast  to  the  southward  of  the  San  Juan,  eilwaliug 
thrwig>»  the  state  of  Costa  Rica  and  part  of  the  ptuviuee  of  Yen- 
gna,  as  &r  as  Chiriqui  Lagoon ;  thus  inrlndingsltqgetfaer  at  least 
37,000  square  miles,  or  23,680,000  acres  of  PBoncTostATK,  iaclud- 
ipg  the  occupation  of  Grej-town. 

Thus,  as  the  actual  result  up  to  the  present  time,  cxehisife  of 
sndi  smaller  items  as  Ruatan  and  Tigre  idaads,  ids  Aaus  •  sasi 
Uiml  of  60,600  septan  anfes,  «r  38,784,000  mere9,  mftr  tddck  we 
exercise  fuU  control,  bdng  nearly  a  third  of  all  Cential  Amerios, 
and  more  than  two-thirds  the  area  of  Great  Britain. 

Let  the  reader  nowdecide  whether  ornot  we  must  appear  to  tibe 
natives  in  the  light  of  "  a  n^acious  nation.**  To  them  it  aiatlas 
little  whether  our  encroaduaents  and  our  occupation  of  their 
eountry  be  defended  on  thepleaof  a  ^rightof  oonquestt^fcoaded 
ea  the  successful  defenoeof  St.  George's  Key  in  1796 ; 
we  are  unprincipled  and  shameifSB  enough  openfy  to  take 
tsge  of  drcumstanocs,  by  replying  to  the  remoastmnees  of  tin 
aeig^ibonring  republics,  that  our  treaties  were  msdr  with  Spaiu 
aad  not  with  them;  and  to  the  daims  of  ^lain,  that  tiMj  Iwve ■• 
further  dominion  oyer  these  territories  since  their  lifte 
became  independent. 

The  natives  cannot  but  consider  these  terzitariei  m  a  vat  of 
thdr  country,  which  ou|^  to  be  as  free  firani  the 
Biwpsau  monarchical  goinriifm  asdwyaicdwifw  ft: 
wi%|h  MMlt  with  them  whetiMT  we  graaadov 


ocn  A.-4QLO-SAXOK  luiriiiK.  221 

t  Rnatan  apoii  its  first  piitticnl  Eciznrc,  or  on  the  fact  that  some 
I  ttty  ywa  ngo  we  locuXed  upon  it  the  remnan't  of  a  nation  v>hic)i 
1 1Pe  lisd  well  nigh  cxterminateil  in  despoiling  them  of  their  native 
I  Ura.  The  Ci-ntnil  States,  u  well  as  tlic  British  Government,  kn01^- 
[  jtlu  be,  oommerdailT.thckey  totlie  navigation  of  theUayof  Hon- 
I  dnruB,  and  must  feel  it  iiiconrenienlly  noor  to  their  own  ahorM. 
{■irilik  in  the  hand«  of  a  power  90  nggnxsivu  and  so  much  their 
.  In  the  magnanimooE  protection  extended  over  the  Mos- 
■  fnito  Shore,  and  in  the  residence  of  Mr.  Coateii,  as  British  Com- 
mitaiooer  to  the  Woikna  Iting,  thej  can  discover  no  benevolence  or 
philanthropy.  If  thej  had  been  inclined  to  forget  the  former  attndcs 
made  npoa  the  river  San  Juan  del  Norte,  they  conld  not  now  be 
expected  la  view  with  placid  indifference  our  occupation  of  jta  beat 
port,  which  commands  the  line  of  oceanic  communication,  at  the 
very  time  that  this  grand  project  is  most  likely  to  be  realized. 

In  the  occupation  of  British  Honduras  and  Kuatan,  the  prolcc- 
lorale  of  the  Moaquito  Shore,  the  annexation  of  Tiger  Island,  the 
:t«Eure  of  the  porta  and  islets  in  the  Gulf  of  Foiiscro,  the  blockade 
of  the  Atlantic  and  Fadlic  coasts  of  Salvador  and  Honduras,  in 
the  bearing  of  BritiFh  officials,  and  in  the  tone  and  tenure  of  diplo- 
matic relations,  the  Central  Americans  can  perceive  little  beside^ 
"  La  loi  et  la  raison  du  plus  fort" — the  law  and  the  logic  of  the 
atronger  party — and  what  wonder  that,  writhing  under  the  grasji 

tthe  iron  hand  of  oppression,  tfaey  should  mutter  in  their  torlure, 
i«pacions  nation,"  "  Yandals  of  the  age  I'' 
The  benevolent  reader,  and  especially  the  one  in  whose  boson: 
t  flame  of  divine  love  has  been  enkindled,  will  feel  no  disposition 
TCKnt  th»  language.  And  though  he  night  wish  to  extenuate 
S  provoking  cause,  a  sense  of  justice  must  forbid  the  least  attempt 
its  defence. 

It  is  a  fact,  calling  for  deep  reflection,  that  "our  Anglo- 
Saxon  empire"  completed  its  millennium  in  the  month  of  October 
1849.  Dating  from  the  birth  of  Alfred  the  Great,  a  fair  land- 
mark in  liistorj-.  llie  Anglo-Saxon  race  has  already  enjoyed  an 
ascendancy  of  one  ihourand  years.  During  that  period  we  have 
spread  ourMlven  over  rast  tracts  of  coiralry,  and  have  formed 
1  tvery  part  of  tlie  habitnlile  gl"** !  "nd  at  the  begin- 
JBg  of  the  new  jieiiod,  more,  pcrhajis,  than  at  nny  previous  time. 
Ktiooa  connected  with  the  cbainGtcr  of  our  rule,  and  the  nature 


gr.;.:-?--.    l^a 


2S2 


■niE  GOSPEL  15  CENTKAL  AUXBICA. 


# 


of  our  respomdbilities,  have  been  agitated,  and  in  some  cases  forced 
upon  us.  Well  would  it  be  for  Britain  if  her  statesmen  could  now 
see  as  they  are  seen,  and  feel  as  for  themselyes  for  the  numeiaus 
tribes  and  nations  which  are  more  or  less  affected  by  their  policy,  or 
subjected  to  their  sway.  But  whatever  may  be  their  in&tuated 
blindness  and  indifference,  individual  Christians  will  be  found, 
who,  alive  to  our  true  interests  and  responsibilities,  as  the  disciples 
of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  will  endeavour,  by  prayer  and  action — 
by  prayerful  efforts  and  effectual  prayers— to  carry  the  cross  of 
Christ  wherever  the  Anglo-Saxon  Empire  has  extended,  and  far 
beyond  those  bounds.  It  is  upon  such  that  we  would  urge  the 
duty,  and  with  such  we  plead,  as  a  powerful  motive,  our  national 
sins  and  violence  to  others,  and  to  Central  America  in  particular. 


I 


^f  Foi 


!  QuaPEL  IS  i:unop£.  CSS 


SECTION  m. 

MORAL  AND  RELIGIOUS  SKETCH. 

CUAPTER  XIL 


I  U«wiloniiiu  nmn— Popery  mcrul  in  iMlroyiog  the  Siliie  Idolntrj— 
inr*  sf  Itaiiiiib  njtr>~Amaaat  ol  Brligioiu  Inilmcdin— PoilUn  nanlu 
n^unSiauf  Fopa^—Iju  Cuuvid  Iniliui  Sclnmli— iBiIkn  EiluatUun 
ind  FnmiiH  stlbe  t^ieU  IV>hj-ThD  Hill  IdiLiuu— jBI  Puam.tti  Hiitnr; 
— Onriuia  lUnil  to  llii-  Fudne-Aritmendi-i  EipeJiUou.  lOSa-ConiioHl  oT  feUai— 
Tlic  Indiuii  ilHadaii  11— Nnr  Eipolilian,  IWV— Wilbilnml  of  Tmipi— Praut  een- 
ditioD — CliinetnofMrPUnrnM— ntiauMnv—niCiin/i-'TlicliMTeBDf  RoDuiiiim 
— Rrlic*  of  «U1  nulomi— Poljgimj— Wolijnn  Mmioa— N«ne  I*ngiuge,  Clanctor, 
ud  VlUigc  ScfliEi— n>  l/ui(iii(mr>— DcQiun  nonlilp— ThtSnUu— Feniiloi-iliUni 
— AtiHaH  of  Bitim]  iirRtioo— Intsnatiiui— I^idiUwi  ot  Ihn  i[nj-B]ri>l  Dui'llr. 
PUliT— Wtol  we  bin  iloae. 

'jI  >if>M  afi^nrnl  (a  P»1  in  lli  nijlf ;  TlirH  ilaoJ  a  mattif -Vii»JmM."ScUxii.  D, 

Tboab  vraa  a  port  on  the  Hellespont,  aituatcd  on  one  tX  the  bead- 
landg  of  Asia  Minor,  and,  tbcrerore,  at  once  an  extremity  of  thtt 
Asiatic  Continent  and  one  of  the  nearest  jwinta  of  proirimity  to  the 
opposite  European  shore.  Tliricc  liaiJ  it  been  visited  by  Paul,  tlie 
:y,  and  hia  Uttle  comjiaiiy  of  fellow -labonrei^  previous  to 
'hen  the  vision  of  a  Macedonian  appeared  to  him 


Forbidden  at  tliat  time  to  preach  the  word  in  Asia,  "They 
iy«d  to  go  into  Bithynia,  but  ihe  Spirit  (who  directed  their  en- 
teipri*e)  luffernl  tbtiu  not.  And  tbey,  passing  by  Mj'sin,  cudil' 
damn  to  Xrooi." 

On  the  wharb  and  in  the  bazaars  of  this  busy  mart,  it  is  more 
than  probable  that  the  Evangelists  noticed  a  race  of  mendiflttngniih- 
■ble  aniODg  tbc  rest  by  their  foreign  aspect  and  divcnit;  of 


ZSJii^*--^:^^^^^^ 


2S4  THE  Q08PSL  IN  CENTEAL  AMERICA. 

language.  They  would  doubtless  see  and  hear  evidences  of  their 
d^;raded  and  immoral  condition,  and  learn  that  they  came  from 
the  countries  across  the  narrow  channel  that  here  separates  Europe 
from  Asia.  They  would  derive  but  little  consolation  from  glowing 
reports  of  the  prosperity  of  the  Roman  colony  of  Philippi,  or  from 
vivid  descriptions  of  the  refinement  and  magnificence  of  Thessalo- 
nica,  the  capital,  and  of  the  reputed  wealth  and  learning  of  their 
respective  inhabitants ;  knowing,  as  they  did,  that  "  the  gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God""  had  not  yet  penetrated  beyond  that  arm  of 
the  sea. 

It  may  be,  too,  that  they  obtained  information  of  many  distant 
nations  further  west  and  north ;  some  of  them  in  a  state  of  savage 
wildness  and  rude  barbarity.  It  is  not  impossible  that  some  son 
of  ancient  Britain,  perhaps  a  mariner  or  a  slave,  might  have  at- 
tracted their  gaze,  and  drawn  forth  their  compassion  for  the  Druid- 
ridden  worshippers  of  oaks  and  mistletoe. 

It  was  the  vision  of  ^aman^  that  beckoned  these  heralds  of 
salTation  into  Europe.  It  is  in  our  character  as  men  that  the  Word 
of  GrodcomestouB.  It  is  on  this  broad  footing  that  our  fellow  has  a 
daim  apaa  our  Christian  sympathy.  For  such,  for  all  such,  and 
only  for  such,  is  the  Gospel  specially  adapted.  *'  To  every  creature  ** 
of  this  fallen,  ignorant,  and  corrupted  race  we  are  commanded  to 
*'  preach  the  Gospel."  Those  among  men  who  are  privileged  ^  to 
be  called  the  sons  of  God,**  are  so  by  the  sovereign  gift  of  him  who 
humbled  himself  to  the  title  and  condition  of  *'  the  Son  of  man.** 
By  usmg  this  distinction,  he  in  nowise  renounced  his  claim  to  be 
the  Son  of  the  Most  ]£gh ;  and  while  a  divine  nature  is  conferred 
on  us  by  union  with  him,  our  condition  as  men  remains  indelible. 
Even  in  the  perfect  state  of  glory,  **  the  tabemade  of  God  it  with 
men  ;**  and  the  distinctive  i^pellation  of  saved  sinners  throngJiaQi 
eternity  will  be  **  the  redeemed  from  among  men.** 

If  the  man  of  Macedonia  represented  Europe,  then,  as  one  of  its 
most  necessitous  and  destitute  countries,  hs  represented  us. 

The  £uthful  band  of  primitive  missionaries  was  not  disobedient 
to  the  heavenly  vision.  The  gospel  was  preached  by  them  in 
Philippi,  Thessalonica,  Berea,  Athens,  and  Corinth.  ChnrdwB 
were  founded  in  all  those  cities,  and  "The  word  of  the  Lord 
pounded  oat,  not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia;  but  alao  in 
every  pUoe,  their  fiuth  to  God  was  spnad  abroad.**     SnfaK- 


EBE  OP   POPEIiY.  225 

lUentliT  the  laborious  Paul  extended  liU  missionnry  cuursions  to 
tbe  regions  beyond  tlicm. 

Whether  by  tlie  mouth  of  the  proto-mtssionnry  to  the  Gentiles 
[Umself  or  by  that  of  name  other  diiciplc,  whether  at  that  period 
rwhnt  later,  the  Gospel  did  nllimately  reach  the  shores  of 
Ubion  as  a  reaiilt  of  those  labours:  and  lie  who  directed  Vaul 
1  of  "  the  man,"  vas  not  unmindful  of  the  spiritDBl 
(tjtution  of  the  rude  barbarians  in  our  sea-girt  land- 
British  Christians!  are  we  not  debtors  to  the  nations  who 
V  stand  to  us  as  ^e  then  stood  to  those  more  highly  favoured  P 
if  Asiatic  Christians  had  disregarded  our  wants,  and 
KtniiDcd  their  compassions  from  us  ?  Those  to  nbom  the 
pel  has  proved  indeed  a  blessing  will  not,  cannot  turn  away 
a  lerioua  considertiCion  of  their  claims, 
k  The  clsims  of  the  people  of  Central  America  cannot  be  more 
rcibly  pleaded,  than  by  a  review  of  the  moral  aspect  which 
Dciety  in  that  country  presents  in  its  various  ramihcationa.  A 
eagiK  sketch  is  all  that  can  be  afforded  to  the  reader.  Yet 
t  is  hoped  tbst  the  image  presented  to  his  mind,  accompanied 
rmbrance  of  what  we  once  were  in  comparison  to 
r  are^  may  stimulate  and  quichen  into  action  every 
^nevolcnt  and  holy  purpose. 

I  Strwigely  and    graciously  does  the  God   of  heaven  control 

t  dcatimci  of  the  earth,  and  "  in  the  midst  of  wrath  remember 

I   been   seen   that   the  invasion  and  sul^iigatiou 

r  Cenlnl  America  by  Spain,   calamitous  as   it  was  and  guilty 

I  the  agent*   were,   proved   the   means   of  partial   good  to  the 

MM  that  remaiuii,  by  arresting  the    tide  of  natural    cor- 

nptiOQ,  and  forcing  it  into  another  chnimel.    Popery  had  done 

Itlle  or  nothing  to  humanize  the   cnicl  Spaniard,  yet   the  in- 

;   indirect   way    made  usefol- 

K^  is  no  nnwariaQtable  conjecture  that  the  Aslecs,  the  Tolteca, 

(be    other   Indian    trilies,    had    they    continued    in   their 

felatrous  practices,  would    at    this    day    have    presented    some 

r  those  obstacles  to  the  reception  of  the  Gospel  which,  like 

r  Hindoo  caste,  are  still  in  operation  among  most  heathen 

It   b  probable,    at    least,    that    their    attachment    to 

■upeniiTions   and    ritea    handed    down    from    their    forefathers 

would   have    been,    humimly  qpeaking,  difficult   to   oveiccoiie- 


226  THE   GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Sucb,  however,  is  not  now  the  case.  Popery  has  removed  this 
barrier.  Its  imposition  by  force  and  canning,  its  flexibility 
and  plastic  character  as  a  system  of  forms,  its  indulgence  to 
its  own  votaries,  and  its  severity  towards  others,  have  at  once 
insured  its  outward  profession,  and  prevented  it  from  taking  root 
in  the  affections  of  those  upon  whom  it  was  thrust.  The  t}nran- 
nical  oppressions  of  their  conquerors — the  sons  of  that  church — 
and  the  rapacity  and  shameless  immorality  of  their  teachers — 
its  faihers^hsid  no  small  influence  in  repressing  the  ardour  of 
the  native  proselytes.  But  the  Papists  fulfilled  their  mission 
of  destruction.  Before  their  pertinacious  zeal  almost  every 
vestige  of  the  Indian  idolatry  has  long  since  been  swept  away, 
and  but  few  traces  of  it  now  remain  even  in  the  minds  of 
those  who  remember  that  little  with  a  veneration  and  an  inte- 
rest which  they  never  can  attach  to  its  supplanter.  It  is  also 
owing  to  the  efforts  of  the  priests  that  polygamy  has  disappeared 
from  among  those  tribes  over  whom  they  have  borne  sway. 

It  is  conmionly  reported  of  some  of  the  Indians  who  inhabit 
the  more  remote  districts,  that  while  they  outwardly  conform 
to  Popish  rituals,  and  stand  in  awe  of  the  priest  and  his  myrmi- 
dons, they  still  meet  secretly  in  dark  glens  and  at  the  bottom 
of  deep  ravines,  to  perpetuate  the  idolatry  of  their  fathers; 
but  evidence  is  wanting  to  substantiate  the  fact. 

A  few  years  since  some  travellers  arrived  at  the  city  of  Mexico, 
who  obtained  leave  from  the  authorities  to  dislodge  from  their  places 
in  the  foundation  wall  of  the  cathedral,  some  car>'ed  stones  that  had 
once  been  the  objects  of  Indian  adoration.  They  were  carefully 
cleansed,  and  a  drawing  of  them  was  taken ;  after  which  they  were 
left  for  the  night  in  the  open  square.  On  the  following  morning 
they  were  found  adorned  with  garlands  of  flowers,  evidently  the 
result  of  a  reminiscence  of  full  three  centuries  in  the  minds  of  the 
Indians  of  that  city.  So  long  does  it  take  to  grind  idolatry 
out  of  the  human  heart,  even  by  the  violent  process  which 
Spanish  Papists  have  used.  But  this  affecting  example  is  but  as 
the  exception  that  proves  the  rule.  The  great  mass  of  Indians  who 
constitute  the  bulk  of  the  population  in  Central  America,  have  at 
present  not  even  a  faint  tradition  of  the  worship  of  their  ancestors. 

The  conformity  of  the  Indians  to  Popery,  for  the  most  part,  consists 
in  a  mere  physical  compliance  with  a  routine  of  outward  fomis, 


INDIAK   FORMALITY.  227 

in  wliicli  tlieir  minde  ore  jKifectl}'  vucaitl  and  uninformed.  True, 
they  Bcldom  pass,  nilhout  an  act  of  ontirard  veneration,  the  crosses 
'  and  images  which  are  erected  \>y  the  roadside  on  every  high  hill, 
■SBd  under  eveiy  greoi  Erec.  and  they  frequently  deposit  before 
MAem  a  nosegay  or  cbaplct  of  flowers  as  they  ttavcl  past,  but  they 
xrc  equally,  if  not  more  scrupulously,  attentive  to  a  somewhat 
opposite,  and  yet  very  similar,  custom.  Invariably,  on  passing  the 
"  Aguaa  Calient^"  (hot  springs)  with  which  moat  districts  abound, 
the  Indians  arc  sccuslonied  to  deposit  some  dry  fuel  on  the  bank, 
before  they  wade  through  tlie  sulphureous  and  steaming  current. 
II'  questioned  respecting  their  custom  of  binding  flowers  upon  an 
image  or  crucifix  they  might  he  at  a  loss  (o  give  a  reason,  but 
while  ofteriag  this  dry  stick  they  have  a  definite  object  in  their 
minds.  It  is  to  propitiate  the  Evil  Spirit,  that  they  in  their  intcu- 
tioii  fumiah  him  with  fuel  wherewith  to  keep  the  water  warm. 
And  though,  nhercver  the  footpath  crosses  such  streams,  the 
numerous  mounds  of  rotting  and  rotten  wood  attest  that  their 
dojirrcatorr  sacrifice  has  not  been  accepted,  yet  the  practice  is 
still  ri^irously  observed,  and  is  probably  accompanied  with  more 
fueling  tlian  the  adornment  of  an  image  of  which  they  know 
nothing  but  the  visible  form,  and,  it  nrny  he,  the  name. 

It  is  also  true  that  the  Indians  attend  ma^  in  those  pbccs  where 
they  have  a  resident  priest,  or  when,  on  some  saint's  day,  they  are 
favoured  with  a  sacerdotal  visitor.  But  here,  as  in  the  former 
caM,  no  act  of  the  mind  takes  place,  except  the  passive  one  of  its 
subjection.  Their  bodily  presence  for  a  few  short  minutes  is  all 
that  is  required.  It  may  be  that  their  natural  faculties  of  wonder 
and  vCDeratioD  are  in  action  while  thi^  follow  with  thnr  eyes  the 
gesimva  of  the  priest,  to  them  at  least  most  unmeaning;  and  while 
ibcir  cars  are  filled  with  sounds  which  convey  no  ideas ;  but  this 
is  probably  a  rare  occurrence,  and  no  particular  concern  b  mani- 
fested to  secure  even  such  a  result. 

It  is  granted  that  the  Indian  takes  an  active  part  in  the  proces- 
■ions  and  festivities  of  the  Apostate  Church,  but  this  part  is  pre- 
ci»ty  that  which  is  least  Bomibh  in  its  character,  and  is  in  itself 
to  flugruDlly  absurd,  even  in  outward  appearance,  as  to  occasion  a 
spectator  to  remark  that  it  ini^ht  fairly  be  mtslaktn  for  the  burlesque 
of  the  pageant — the  scoffer's  mockery  of  the  mort'  Bober  pomp. 
Their  drums  and  manmbas,  their  native  costumes  and  omuieuti^, 


L 


aa 


Mltat 


228  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

tbcir  grotesque  giants  and  other  ridiculous  figures,  are  tolerated  in 
the  processions  merely  to  please  them  because  they  have  not  yet 
reached  the  d^ree  of  culture  required  to  enjoy  more  refined  music 
and  imagery.  But  this  actiyity  on  the  part  of  the  Indian  is  not 
spontaneous.  Here  the  priests  shew  themselves  anxious  to  secure 
his  co-operation;  and  why?  but  because  to  the  celebration  of 
each  "  fiesta,'*  *  is  attached  the  payment  of  considerable  sums  of 
money  to  the  officiating  ecclesiastic,  who  in  one  day  sweeps  away 
the  gifts  that  the  natives  have  been  months,  or  probably  the  whole 
year,  in  collecting.  These  are  the  only  objects  for  which  the 
Indians  have  been  taught  to  associate.  A  sort  of  company  is 
usually  formed  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  and  disbursing  the 
finances  of  the  saint.  These  are  called  "  Cofradias,*'  a  name  which 
may  be  significant  of  confraternity ,  but  which  naturally  enough 
calls  up  the  idea  of  cofre^  a  strong  box. 

It  is  further  admitted  that  the  Indians  are  obedient  to  their 
priests  in  the  so-called  sacraments  of  the  Church.  Their  infants 
are  oiled,  salted,  sprinkled,  spit  upon,  and  named.  They  them- 
selves partake  of  the  consecrated  wafer,  go  to  confession,  are 
ecclesiastically  married  and  buried,  and  receive  extreme  unction, 
for  all  which  they  pay  exorbitantly,  and  most  of  which  give  occa- 
sion to  the  additional  evils  of  revellings  and  riot.  But  it  is  still 
maintained  that  the  chief  and  almost  exclusive  point  of  all  this 
is  the  subjection  of  the  mind  to  priestly  rule  and  the  subsidy  for 
priestly  maintenance.  The  poor  Indians  know  little  more  about 
these  matters  than  that  the  priest  requires  them  to  be  done;  and 
the  priest  is  generally  satisfied  with  their  confiding  docility,  though 
not  always  content  with  the  remuneration  he  extorts. 

The  repetition  by  rote  of  fragments  of  a  Spanish  catechism,  and 
of  a  few  Latin  ''oraciones,**  is  a  rare  acquirement  among  the 
Indians,  and  is  chiefly  confined  to  those  who  have  been  used  as 
subordinates  of  '*  La  Parroquia"  (the  parish),  such  as  El  Sacristan 
(the  beadle),  and  Los  Ministros  (the  ministers  or  helps),  and  a  few 
chorister  boys  who  may  have  been  taught  to  sing  responses ;  but 
even  these,  unless  more  than  commonly  intelligent,  do  not  rise 

*  F6te  daj— the  aniUTemiy  of  a  certain  saint,  when  honours  are  paid  to  his  or  her 
image,  whieh  is  carried  in  procession  and  feasted.  On  such  occasions,  the  Indians  and 
others  indn^  in  excesses  after  hearing  a  nuns,  for  which  thej  pay  mma  vaiTiDg  Croni 
ten  to  fifty  doUazt  to  the  priest. 


2i29 


I  above  the  eierciac  of  the  memory  and  the  voice  in  the  knowledge 
of  their  ndi^oo,  bd  that  the  luiiple  regions  uf  their  minda  and  thdr 
hearts  remain  vacant,  and  wait  to  be  occupied  by  some  other  guest, 
be  il  a  form  of  infidelity  or  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 

The  negative  evils  that  must  result  from  such  a  condition  of 

mind  raujt  be  left  to  the  appreciation  of  the  render;  the  ]iositive 

,  results  are  that  the  Indian,  given  up  to  his  animal  impulses  ami 
I  prupcnnties,  without  anj  other  restraint  than  those  which  his  igno- 
I  nnce  and  timidity  supply,  is  generally  at  once  vidons  and  lethargic, 
I  though,  when  aroused,  his  passions  become  Gcrce  and  ungovernable. 
VSrunketinesi,  hi£  most  prevailing  vice,  licentiousneas,  the  absence 
■of  natural  aJfection,  cruelly,  nvnricc,  and  deceit,  usurp  dominion  over 
is  better  dispositioiis,  and  keep  bim  in  a  state  of  fearful  debo^e- 
■iinent.  Yet  the  social  ties  are  not  entirely  dissolved,  though  the 
■CDJoyments  of  the  fanuly  circle  are  exchanged  for  moral  wretched- 
<s  and  physical  discomfort. 

The  virits  of  the  Padre  (father  or  priest)  to  the  Indian  village 
or  dwelling  do  nothing  to  remove  these  evils,  and  often  do  much 
increase  them  by  the  idleness  and  indulgence  conscqucot  u|)iiu 
i  presence,  or  upon  the  days  of  his  peculiar  dominion,    lie 
onmes  like  a  prince  well  mounted,  with  a  cavalcade  of  attcndmits, 
among  whom  are  not  uufrcqueotly  bis  concubines  and  bis  chil- 
dren.   Sometimes  be  is  carried  ill  a  hammock  or  iii  a  kind  of 
l,fittcr  by  relays  uf  Indiana  whom  be  commands,  and  jjcrhaps 
t,  but  whom  be  dues  not  think  of  remuaernting;  and  the 
■  OODipany  of  liis  servants  then  follow  or  precede  him  tu  the  Convcnto, 
rat   the   residence   of  the  psdre  is   invariably  styled.      Uis  cliief 
l<4>bject  in  visiting  his  parish,  which  often  includes  many  wide-apreud 
rillogea,  is  to  gather  up  his  dues,  to  exact  the  utmost  for  the 
~inimeroiis  and  hasly  ceremonies  which  be  performs,  and  to  sustain 
Ills  influence  and  that  of  his  class  by  alt  the  arts  of  which  he  ia 

One  of  the  most  diabolical  of  these  devices  allbrds  a  proof  that 
Popety,  like  every  ^stem  of  unbelief,  is  cruel,  and  that  among 
other  abonunations  it  is  not  wonting  in  human  victims.  When  any 
Indian,  supposed  to  be  in  a  dying  condition,  has  received  the  lust 
■acrunent,  that  of  extreme  unction,  and  he  afterwards  appears 
likely  to  recover,  the  attendants  are  directed  U)  withhold  from  him 
ail  care  and  Douriohment,  so  tbst  the  sou  of  the  cbudi  nu^ 


230  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  ABfERICA. 

not  desecrate  the  Holy  Anointing,  and  disappoint  the  priest.  If 
those  directions  are  not  followed,  or  if  reviving  nature  prove 
stronger  than  fanatical  cruelty,  the  relatives  are  then  taught  to 
hold  no  further  intercourse  with  the  convalescent  one,  whom  they 
ever  after  shun  and  stigmatize  as  a  *'  waster  of  oils/** 

Destitute  as  the  Indians  are  generally  of  any  kind  of  useful  in- 
struction derived  from  their  authorized  teachers,  there  is  one  notable 
exception  which  it  is  delightful  to  record.  Las  Casas,  before  men- 
tioned as  the  benevolent  Bishop  of  Chiapa,  the  true  friend  of  the 
Indians  and  the  peaceful  conqueror  of  Vera  Paz,  not  only  wrote  ex- 
tensively on  their  behalf,  but  himself  proceeded  to  Spain,  and  about 
the  year  1551  pleaded  their  cause  in  person  at  the  feet  of  the  fana- 
tical Dofia  Isabella,  the  Queen  of  Spain,  the  consort  of  Ferdinand, 
and  the  patroness  of  the  unholy  Inquisition.  He  was  so  fkr  suc- 
cessful as  to  obtain  some  relaxation  for  the  oppressed,  and  he  was 
authorized  on  his  return  to  establish  schools,  by  royal  charter, 
for  the  instruction  of  Indian  children.  In  them,  some  of  the 
Indians  learned  to  read  the  Spanish  language,  and  such  was 
the  value  they  attached  to  this  acquirement,  that  when  the 
schools  were  suffered  to  fall  into  decay,  they  themselves  taught 
their  children,  and  continued  the  practice  from  generation  to 
generation,  so  that  after  three  hundred  years,  certain  dis- 
tricts are  still  found,  and  especially  some  in  the  provinces  of  Los 
Altos — the  highlands — ^where  the  otherwise  rude  and  apparently 
untaught  Indians  are  able  to  read  fluently  in  the  Spanish  tongae.f 
This  is  a  fact  which  does  honour  to  the  Indians,  who  have  hitherto 
had  access  to  no  books  but  a  limited  supply  of  such  as  they  could 
procure  at  extortionary  prices  from  the  priests  and  venders  in 
the  larger  towns.  They  consisted  exclusively  of  catechisms, 
of  Popish  legends,  and  idolatrous  prayers  and  litanies  to  the 
Virgin  and  the  Saints.  It  is  also  a  fact  of  great  interest, 
when  viewed  in  connection  with  plans  for  their  further  improve- 
ment, as  it  not  only  shews  their  anxiety  and  ability  to  learn, 
but  it  enables  hundreds  and  perhaps  thousands,  to  acquaint 
themselves  with  the  written  word  of  God  in  a  language  into 

*  Gaitador  de  oleot. 

t  The  author  is  aware  that  trareDera  generally  have  reported  that  the  Indiana  eannoC 
read.  This  if  a  miitake  into  which  he,  like  others,  was  led  by  their  appearance,  until  he 
profred  iobn  of  thcn^  and  heazd  them  read  the  Scriptaiei  wideh  he  put  into  their  hands. 


TBAINISO  OF    INDIAN   VOUTH.  231 

I  t>bicli  it  U  already  translated,  aa  soon  as  it  shall  be  put  into 
tbeir  handi. 

The  care  of  the  Indians  for  itie  eilncation  of  their  children  ii  a 
trait  alrcadj  onliced  as  having  dialinguishtd  them  before  their  mib- 
jngalion,  utd  as  being  evidenced  by  ibe  numerous  and  extensive 
colleges  cxistingin  their  louma  and  cities.  What  tbe  bislorian  adds 
-with  respect  to  Indian  edu<:«tion  in  hia  own  times  is  equally  appli- 
cable now: — " Tbcir aeminnries,  indeed,  no  longer  cxiat;  but  the 
fatherH  take  great  care  of  the  education  of  their  sons.  The  women 
Buckle  their  children  until  tbey  have  completed  the  third  vear,  with- 
in instann:  being  known  of  trusting  them  to  the  care  of  another 

1  peiTon  :  the;  carry  them  slung  at  tbeir  backs;  and  wash,  grind 
com,  or  perform  any  other  labours,  with  ihem  in  this  situation : 

I  they  never  protect  them  from  the  incleraendes  of  the  weather, 

I  air,  sun,  cold,  or  water ;  they  seldom  have  any  other  cradle  than 
tbe  bare  ground,*  and,  at  the  best,  nothing  more  than  a  little 
hammock.  As  soon  as  they  begin  to  run  alone,  they  are  made 
to  carry  little  hiirdciw  proportioned  to  their  strength.  At  five 
or  sis  ycnrs  of  age,  they  are  taken  into  the  fields  to  cut  forage, 

»  which  they  call  sacal.  or  to  carry  home  little  bundles  of  wood. 
As  they  increase  in  years,  the  Ixiys  are  taught  by  their  father  to 
irant,  fish,  and  till  the  ground,  the  use  of  the  bow,  and  other 
nmilararts;  the  mothers  instruct  tbe  girls  from  their  tendereat  years 
to  grind  com,  procuring  ibr  them  small  rubbing-stones  suitable  to 
their  management,  and  in  the  other  employments  peculiar  In  their 
•ex,  nuh  aa  dressing  and  spinning  cotton  and  pita,f  and  lo  weave 
the  diSertnt  sort!  of  cloth.  They  are  accustomed  to  bathe  very 
fluently,  twice  or  even  three  times  a  day.  The  mothers  are 
extretnelysuaincious,and  will  not  sulTer  their  daughters  to  be  absent 
Etfua  them  scarcely  a  minute.     The  young  men  live  at  the  eipeiiK 

^nf  their  fathers ;  but  whatever  they  gain  by  labour  is  delivered 
into  the  parent's  hands.    In  this  manner  they  are  raainlaincd  until 
they  marry-"  { 
A  docription  of  tbe  condition  of  the  Indiau§  with  some  remarks 

*  Ttu7  ^enflnlt;  aprud  tot  tLem  t  mti  or  turned  ikiD  on  t]j«  cUj  floor  of  IbMr  tlDQIct 


232  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

apon  it,  also  from  the  pen  of  a  Popish  ecclesiastic,  written  on  the 
spot,  is  well  worthy  of  consideration. 

''There  is  a  great  difference  between  commnnities  (pueblos) 
of  pure  Indians  and  Ladinos.  A  pueblo  solely  of  Indians  is  very 
quiet,  when  ardent  spirits  and  Chicha  (fermented  liquor)  are  not 
introduced  among  them ;  for  intoxication  brings  about  great  dis- 
order, so  that  those  who  but  a  few  moments  before  were  ra- 
tional beings  become  ferocious.  A  pueblo  of  Ladinos  is  insolent 
and  impudent,  so  that  strong  measures  are  required  to  keep  them 
in  good  order.  Not  so  the  Indians ;  who  are  easily  restrained  by  a 
shout  from  the  Alcalde  (magistrate)  or  the  curate. 

''  But  there  is  another  difference  between  them ;  which  is,  that 
the  pueblos  of  Indians  are  regularly  occupied  in  working  the  lands 
to  obtain  wheat,  com,  cacao,  and  cotton,  which  are  all  fruits  not  to 
be  dispensed  with ;  and  that  they  carry  them  on  their  shoulders  to 
sell  them  in  the  pueblos  of  Ladinos ;  which  latter,  in  return  for  such 
noble  fruits,  give  them  in  exchange,  or  sell  to  them,  chicha  and 
aguardiente  (rum);  which  are  thepotr<2erand  halls  wbich  cause  such 
destruction  among  the  Indians,  leaving  not  even  the  innocent  child 
free  from  the  results.  This  is  the  only  recompense  which  the 
Indians  receive  for  the  sweat  of  their  brows;  and  this  is  the 
bread,  the  com,  and  the  clothes,  which  they  bring  back  to  their 
wives  and  daughters.  Does  it  appear  we  love  the  Indians,  and 
wish  for  their  conservation  and  augmentation  ?  In  reality,  there 
is  no  more  love  than  that  which  springs  from  our  own  interest 
Let  us  reverse  their  &te,  turn  it  upon  ourselves,  and  then  see 
whether  it  would  be  right  in  them  to  treat  us  in  the  same 
manner. — *We  ought  to  consider,*  says  a  learned  Englishman, 
speaking  of  the  Indians  of  Otaheite,  '  that  these  islanders  would 
be  very  fortunate  if,  whilst  they  acquire  our  knowledge,  they 
did  not  at  the  same  time  contract  our  vices,  of  which  they 
were  previously  ignorant.  At  this  price  the  favours  we  confer 
on  them  are  dear  indeed.*  These,**  continues  the  friar, ''  are  the 
sentiment  even  of  an  Englishman  in  favour  of  the  Indians; 
what,  therefore,  should  be  those  of  a  Spaniard?  Much  more 
compassionate  and  humane;  because  our  religion  and  our  laws 
have  no  other  end  than  the  love  of  Crod  and  our  neighbour.** 

However  much  we  may  pity  the  ignorance  and  bigotry  of 
the  monkish  writerihis  feelings  and  his  ol^ect  must  command 


I  INDIAN  rn.iRACTEn  anh  wants.  233 

our  respect.    If  such  ore  tbe  sentiments  of  one  so  circmnatftnctd, 

what  sbonld  be  those  of  the  eniiglitened  reader  of  the  New 

Tcstameat  who  is  taught  by  the  Spirit  that  "  lo?e  is  the  fulfilling 

h  of  the  law,"  and  that  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  ri(;lil- 

I  MueneM  to  eveiy  one  tliat  bclieveth ! " 

The  acknowledged  character  of  the  Indian  for  failhiiilnees  at 

I  a  mesMDgcr,  or  as  the  depository  of  a  vecret,  is  indicative  of 

1  the  possession  of  natural  firmness,  if  not  of  higher  qualities,  niitl 

f  this,  together  with  his  docility  and  desire  for  knowledge,  gives  grent 

I  fiora'uie  of  bis  future  intellectual  and  moral  elevation  wtieu  edu- 

I  cation  and  religious  principles  shall  be  supplied.  At  prctcnt,  [loUtical 

I'influences  are  tendiug  to  free  hini  from  the  yoke  of  priestly  domi- 

Baion.    The  dvil  oppression  of  centuries  hw  been  almost  tniirely 

1  removed.    The  Indian  is  admitted  to  the  privileges  of  citizenship 

I  Kid  of  Bclf-govemnicnt.     An  ioiportant  part  of  his  natural  dignity 

n  has  been  restored  to  him.     A  more  important  still,  in  the 

emancipation   of   his    mind    from    the   thraldom   of   Popcrj',   is 

probably  at  hand.     The  moat  desirable  and  paramount  blessing 

may  even  now  lie  placed  within  his  reach.     But,  of  course,  we 

L  cannot   expect   real   improvtnicut   to   take  place,  and  much   less 

Aat   Hpiritual   benefit   should   result  to   the   Indian,   unless    the 

Idequatc  and  appointed  meana  be  used  in  his  behalf.     Lbs  Casns, 

IS  be  was,  has  set  us  the  example.    Shall  we  be  slow 

a  emulate  bis  zeal  f    The  mind  of  our  fellow-nian  thirsts  for 

on,   his   immortal   soul   is   dead   in  trespasses   and   sins  I 

BjDure  we  withhold  the  water  of  life  from  the  one,  and  refuse  to  im> 

V  jlorc  the  Giver  of  life  to  impart  vitality  to  the  other  ? 

The  wandering  tribes,*  which  the  propagandist  monks  of  the 
I  post  century  in  vain  sought  to  settle,  also  alTord  a  field  for  mis- 
I'tioiiary  cflbrts.    The  heart  of  a  Braincrd  and  of  an  Elliott  might 

'  "  Tlw  hubwiniu,  BtmixcdaiBBt  IniUnni,  at  OiiiUuulii,  anlilie  Ihnu  ot  ^umlnii,  *lio 


.    Thoy  blwtyipunt 


ki  of  Iheii  diieTi  and  aoUtx.  tbe  liMc  Bdwi  low 
i  nOf e  trc  tlecomtcd  with  ringt  i  ihtj  airj  i  bor 
s  ^nlrtT  nug^Dllol  Onm  tlie  ihonMcr."— JUUIW, 


.% 


234  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

even  now  find  fnll  scope  for  its  sanctified  benevolence  amongst  tbem, 
in  fields  as  worthy  and  in  some  respects  far  less  forbidding  than 
those  to  which  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  directed  these  honoured 
pioneers  of  missionary  enterprise. 

Could  the  Christian  reader  contemplate,  as  the  secure  retreat  of 
wild  and  wandering  hordes,  an  extensive  and  bold  range  of  forest- 
clad  mountains  losing  themselves  in  the  distance,  and  peering  into 
the  light  and  sunny  clouds ;  could  he  daily  behold  through  the 
clear  air  their  unchanging  and  yet  diversified  outline,  and  fix 
his  eye  upon  their  ever-varying  shades,  the  darker  hollows  and 
the  bright  spots  where  a  naked  cliff  or  a  foaming  cascade  reflect 
the  glories  of  a  radiant  sun ;  could  he  watch  their  majestic  forms 
when  shrouded  in  heavy  thunder-clouds,  and  smitten  with  the 
forked  lightning — and  on  every  repeated  occasion  remember  that 
there,  beneath  the  thick  fohage,  and  in  the  threefold  gloom  of 
savage  ignorance  and  spiritual  death,  dwell  timid  men  who  shun 
the  society  of  their  fellows ;  could  he  live  amidst  the  moral  dark- 
ness of  the  already  settled  tribes,  and  witness  for  himself  the  baneful 
effects  of  popish  priestcraft  and  idolatry  upon  them ; — then  would 
he  feel  his  bowels  of  compassion  yearn  for  their  salvation ;  then  his 
pleadings  at  a  throne  of  grace  would  assume  the  character  of  the 
effectual  and  fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous,  which  availeth  much. 

But  there  are  Indians  who  live  in  closer  proximity  to  the  British 
settlements  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  and  who  therefore  seem  to  be 
more  accessible  to  us.  The  moral  condition  of  some  of  these  is  in 
many  respects  similar  to  that  already  spoken  of,  though  some  other 
tribes  on  the  coasts  have  marked  points  of  difference. 

Directly  to  the  west  of  Belize,  and  upwards  of  one  hundred 
miles  back  into  the  interior,  there  is  a  Spanish-  Indian  town  called 
El  Peten.  It  is  situated  on  an  island  in  the  midst  of  the  Lake  of 
Itza,  and  is  so  remote  from  any  other  town  as  to  be  more  like  a 
colony  than  a  part  of  the  State  of  Guatemala,  with  which  it  is 
politically  connected,  though  ecclesiastically  it  is  within  the  diocese 
of  the  bishop  of  Merida  in  Yucatan.  To  this  place  is  attached 
some  historical  interest,  and  though  a  digression  from  the  subject 
of  the  present  chapter,  as  very  little  else  is  known  concerning  its 
inhabitants,  an  outline  of  its  past  history,  abbreviated  from 
Juarros,*  may  be  desirable  here. 

•  Oar  Spuudi  hiftorian  aeknoirledget  haying  made  use  of  "The  History  of  the  Om- 
q[aeit  of  Itaa,"  bj  Don  Joan  da  QutiexTei  y  Sotomayor. 


KAULT   mSTOKT    nF   PETES. 


235 


"The  kingdom  of  Vucataa   (compmng  the  peninsula  tn  the 

d'W^t  of  British   Uonduras)  was  known  hy  the  name  of 

KUaya,  and  its  capital  waa  called  Mayapan.      It  waa  subject   lo 

I  •  single  chief,   but  after  paying  obvdicncc  to  one  niunarch  for  a 

■'great  number  of  years,  the  ])rinDip9l  caciquia  revolted,  and  each 

1'declared   himself   iadependent    lord   of   his    own   territory :    by 

I    Tebcllion  the   supreme   sovereign   waa   deprived   of  till   his 

^dominions,  with  llie  eiceplioD  of  the  province  of  Mani,  whither 

retired,  after  baviug  destroyed  the  large  city  of  Muyapen, 

It    the   year    14S0.       One   of  the    rebellious    cuciitnes    was 

I  Canek,   who  bended  the  revolt  in  the  province  of  Chichen  Itza, 

^lUsCant  alwiut  twenty  leagues  from  the  village  of  Tinhoo,  which  is 

It  present  called  Merida.     Canek,  not  considering  hiraielf  sufli- 

fantly  secure  in  this  situation,  retired  with  all  his  party  to  the 

!U><t  conc^led  and  itnpeiictrablc  parti  of  the  mountains :    he  also 

Madon  of  the  islands  in  the  Lake  of  Itsa,  and  fixed  his 

I  nsidcQce  in  Feten,  or  the  great  island."*      Here  the  people  under 

i  Canek  inerensed  so  rapidly,  that  according  to  the  computation  of 

■'Some  Franciscan  missionaries  who  went  there  more  than  a  century 

F  later,  the  five  islands  in  the  lake  alone  contained  Iroin  24,000  to 

S5,0D0  inhabitants,  and  the  Indians  who  dwelt  upon  its  bordi^rs,  in 

the  Tillages  around  it,  or  among  the  adjacent  mountains,  were 

reported  lo  be  almost  innumerable.     Diego  Delgado,  a  monk  of 

ttbiit  order,  lost  bis  Ufe  among  this  people.     One  of  the  objects  of 

|Sie  combined  mihtary  and  (lopitih  expeditions  to  the  ChoU,  Mopana, 

1  Lacanduns,  already  related,  was  the  ultimate  conquest  of  this 

populous  district,  and  the  zeal  of  the  Spanish  monarchs  in  coni- 

Mndingthe  eonvemian  of  the  Indians  appears  to  have  been  some- 

prlut  quickened  hy  the  hope  of  opening  a  road  from  Campeche  in 

"  e  Golf  of  Mexico  to  Guatemala,  through  this  interesting  terri- 

r,  by  which  the  establishment  of  an  overland  route  to  the  Pacific 

iDtemplatdl. 

.  This  project,  mooted  in  1692,  was  undertaken  by  Don  Martin 

e  Ursoay  Arizmendi,  the  Governor  of  Yucatan,     It  was  eom- 

ju  1693,   and  slowly  progressed  a  distance  of  eighty.«ix 

KSetgues,   accompanied   by   some   attempts   to  settle  the  so-called 

inverted  Indians.      In  the  following  year  negociations  w 

o  by  the  Governor  of  Guatemala,  with  Canek  the  king  of 
•  JoMTia,  p.  2ST. 


S36  THB  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

Itza  and  his  people,  under  the  pretence  of  a  desire  for  peace.  But 
Arizmendi,  during  the  same  year,  sent  forces  from  Campeche  to 
the  borders  of  the  Lake  of  Itza,  with  orders  to  construct  a  galliot 
of  forty-five  feet  keel  and  a  piragua  (or  barge)  of  smaller  dimen- 
sions. This  order  was  duly  executed  under  cover  of  an  entrench- 
ment. While  thus  engaged,  a  relative  of  Canek*s,  who  had  been 
his  ambassador  to  Merida,  was  inveigled  by  the  Spaniards,  and  pro- 
fessing to  become  a  Papist,  he  received  the  name  of  Martin  Can. 

Martin  Can  being  flattered,  became  communicative,  and  related 
how  the  Indians  of  Alain  (one  of  the  smaller  islands)  had  killed 
on  the  very  spot  where  the  Spanish  camp  then  was,  the  persons 
who  came  from  Yucatan,  and  in  the  Savannah,  those  from  Guate- 
mala, whom  they  had  surprised  while  asleep.  A  little  later  the 
camp  was  visited  by  Chamaxzulii,  the  cacique  of  Alain,  with  several 
other  principal  persons.  A  squadron  of  canoes  was  also  seen 
approaching,  that  of  the  chief  bearing  a  white  flag ;  in  these  boats 
came  Quincanek,  first  cousin  of  the  king  Canek,  accompanied  by 
Kitcan,  chief  of  another  party :  all  these  persons  were  feasted,  but 
though  they  came  as  messengers  of  peace,  declaring  that  they 
ardently  desired  the  friendship  of  the  Spaniards,  and  wished  to  be 
made  Christians,  yet  they  were  suspected,  or  it  was  judged  expe- 
dient to  declare  war  against  them,  and  enter  their  territories  with 
fire  and  sword,  on  the  pretext  of  punishing  their  deceit,  and 
avenging  the  death  of  the  Spaniards. 

"As  soon  as  the  vessels  were  equipped,  Arizmendi,  with  108 
Spanish  soldiers,  and  Juan  Pacheco,  the  ecclesiastical  vicar,  with 
his  deputy,  embarked,  leaving  the  camp  defended  by  127  soldiers 
and  many  auxiliary  Indians,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  two  wall 
pieces,  and  eight  falconets,  under  the  command  of  Juan  Francisco 
Cortes.  At  dawn  of  day,  the  galliot  was  under  sail  for  the  island  of 
Peten.**  The  Indians  now  attempted  a  defence;  the  lake  was 
almost  covered  with  canoes,  all  directing  their  course  towards  the 
vessels,  and  as  soon  as  they  came  within  reach,  a  plentiful  discharge 
of  arrows  took  place.  The  Spaniards  attributed  it  to  miraculous 
interposition  that  none  of  their  number  were  killed ;  only  two  of 
them  were  wounded.  They  returned  the  attack  of  the  Indians 
with  musketry,  and  landing,  drove  them  off  the  island,  greatly 
terrified  at  the  report  of  their  fire-arms.  Those  of  the  island,  as 
well  as  those  from  the  canoes,  leaped  into  the  water  in  inch 


tPAKtSH  CONQTJEST — DCPLICITT   AND  FArLPBE. 


237 


numbera,  that  from  Pcten  to  the  main  land  there  was  nothing  lo  be 
seen  bat  the  lieads  of  Indians,  endeavouring  to  rave  them!iclvcs  by 
Bwinunbig.  The  Spaniards  entered  the  great  town,  called  Tayasfil, 
which  they  found  de«rted,  and  hoisted  the  Spanish  eoloure  on  tlie 
higheM  point  in  the  island,  taking  possession  of  it  in  the  niune  of 
their  king.     This  nction  took  place  on  the  13tb  March  1G97. 

The  island  was  nuned  by  the  Papists  "  Nuestrs  Sefiura  dc  las 
Rcmedios  y  San  Pablo."  •  Juan  Pacheco,  the  vicar,  took  poases- 
sion  of  the  P^an  place  of  worship,  and  having  purged  it  with  holy 
water,  mass  was  celebrated  in  it  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled 
aoldiers.    "  So  great  was  the  number  of  idols  found  in  the  twenty- 

I  one  places  of  worship  thnt  were  in  the  island,  as  well  as  in  the 
private  houses,  that  the  general,  officers,  and  soldiers,  were  un- 
remittingly employed  iron)  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  Rvt 
in  the  afcemooD  in  destroying  them." 

The  (cw  Indinnn,  who,  with  the  aid  of  Martin  Can,  were  pre- 
vailed tipon  to  return,  were  made  use  of  in  the  conirtruction  of  the 
proposed  road.    Cluunnx^ulil,  the  cacique  of  Alain,  was  early  per- 
suaded to  submit  to  the  Spaniards,  and  in  his  turn  he  influenced 
e  king  Canek  and  the  chief  priest  Quincanek  to  come  back  to 

I  Petcn.     These  persons  were  first  treated  with  great  kmdness  till 

I  the  inhabitants  of  the  various  islands  had  snhmitted  themselves, 
tehm  crimes  were  clearly  proved  against  them,  and  they  were 
made  prisoners.  Arizmendi,  finding  himself  master  of  the  country, 
lined  from  Guatemala  the  necessary  funds  to  muntain  a  garri- 
son at  Petcn,  which  be  fortified,  A  tribe  called  the  Coboies,  who 
inhabited  twelve  villages  on  the  borders  of  the  lake,  with  their 
cacicine  and  sii  other  villages,  submitted  to  the  Spanish  yoke.  The 
chief  island  was  partiaUy  repeopled.     A  redonbt  had  been  built 

I  and  garrisoned,  and  the  king,  his  son,  and  his  cousin,  the  chief 

'  priest,  were  in  captivity  ;  when,  the  rainy  season  having  set  in, 

I  Arizmendi  returned  to  Campeche. 

Early  in  1 G9S,  Arizmendi  received  accounts  from  Pacheco,  the 
ricar  of  Iixa,  uf  the  conversion  of  Canck,  Ljuincaiick,  and  nmny 
others ;  who  had  received  the  "  sacrament"  of  baptism.  About  this 
period  the  road  was  completed  from  the  lake  to  Vera  Pu,  but  it 
tras  conaidercd  too  circuitous.     Another  and  shorter  mute  was 

r  therefore  attempted  to  the  village  of  San  Augustlii.    But  just  then 

•  Ooi  Udj  of  Corel  md  Sl  PbuL 


238  THB  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

the  Indians  suddenly  and  secretly  abandoned  the  island,  leaving 
only  the  three  prisoners  and  twelve  women  behind  them.  ^^  A  fe^ 
days  afterwards  they  came  back  again,  but  only  the  women  con- 
sented to  remain  in  it,  most  of  whom  became  converts.  On  the 
24th  of  January  of  this  year  (1698),  orders  were  again  received 
from  Spain  by  the  viceroy  of  Mexico,  the  Grovemor  of  Guatemala, 
and  the  Governor  of  Yucatan,  for  continuing  all  possible  efforts 
to  effect  the  conversion  of  the  natives;  and  that  they  were  to 
endeavour  to  settle  some  of  them,  by  families,  along  the  line  of 
the  new  road,  in  order  to  insure,  at  convenient  distances,  sufficient 
accommodation  for  travellers.*'  Arizmendi  also  received  royal 
praise,  honours,  and  promises. 

Thus  stimulated,  the  Spanish  conqueror  returned  to  Peten  in 
February  1699.  At  the  same  period  an  expedition  left  Guatemala 
for  Peten,  consisting  of  a  large  military  force  accompanied  by  eight 
missionaries,  several  armourers,  blacksmiths,  carpenters,  brick- 
layers, caulkers,  and  other  artisans,  many  Indian  labourers,  twenty- 
five  families  to  be  settled  on  such  lands  as  might  be  found  conve- 
nient, and  also  upwards  of  1,200  head  of  cattle  and  horses  for  the 
purpose  of  breeding. 

Arizmendi  went  out  with  pomp  to  meet  this  company,  and  soon 
after  held  a  council  of  war  which  fixed  the  locality  of  the  new 
town,  to  be  founded  by  royal  order,  placing  it  on  the  margin  of  the 
lake.  They  agreed  that  thirty  men  should  be  added  to  the  garri- 
son, because  there  still  remained  fifteen  nations  of  Indians  to  the 
eastward  of  Peten,  to  be  brought  under  subjection ;  that  the  new 
road  should  be  completed,  and  huts,  bridges,  and  canoes  built ;  and 
they  made  arrangements  for  the  cultivation  of  maize  wherewith  to 
supply  the  new  settlers.  Some  people  were  located  upon  the  Island 
of  Alain,  which  had  been  deserted,  and  others  were  sent  to  the 
territories  of  the  Coboxes.  Every  endeavour  was  used  to  bring  in 
the  Indians  who  had  retired  to  the  mountains,  or  to  persuade 
them,  if  possible,  to  return  to  their  villages ;  and  with  some  suc- 
cess. But  the  health  of  the  soldiers  soon  after  began  to  be  im- 
paired, and  a  subsequent  council  determined  to  withdraw  from  the 
territory  for  the  present.  The  various  companies  then  marched 
for  Guatemala,  taking  with  them  the  prisoners  Canek,  now  called 
after  his  conversion  Don  Jos^  Pablo  Canek,  his  son,  and  his 
cousin,  who  had,  as  it  was  presumed,  instigated  the  Indians  to  their 


PliEfiEKI   STATE    C 


130 


IKcGnt  Bight.  These  prisoners,  on  tbeir  arrival,  excited  much 
interest  among  the  inhabitants  of  Guatemala.  How  they  were 
finoIJy  disposed  of  is  not  known.  AriiODCiidi,  on  bis  part,  uitliilrt'w 
nith  lus  troopi  to  Yucatan,  the  government  of  wliicli  be  shortly 
afterwards  added  to  tbat  of  Itza. 

After  these  depaitures,  when  the  grand  object  of  the  rood  to  the 

I    Facific  appeals  to  have  been  finally  abandoned,  there  sllll   re- 

I   maincd  a  garrison,  under  Juan  Francisco  Cortes,  who  was  atfio 

I  governor    and  judge,    a   captain    of    the    gnlliotl,    a   surgeon, 

rcr,  carpenter,  and  other  mechanics,  the  ecclesiastical  vicar, 

e  other  priestH.     The  population  consisted,  beudes  these,  of 

fcuneen  families  of  Spaniards,   some  Indian  servants,   and   the 

a  labourers  employed  in  cultivating  lite  &{ilpas  (cum-tiulds). 

e  liistorian  adds,  thai  in  the  year  1759  there  were  in  the  dis- 

t  of  Peten  seven  villages,  hewdcs  the  chief  place,  which  were 

rved  by  five  curates.    Since  tbat  time  it  has  continued  to  lie  pra- 

d  with  rulers  from  Guatemala,  though  the  difficulty  of  cnm- 

lias  enabled  such  to  aet  very  much  like  independent 

Not  many  years  since  one  of  their  governors  was 

ested  hj  the  people,  and  entrusted  to  an  escort  to  convt-y  liiiii 

e  capital,  but  he  was  murdered  by  hb  guards  while  on  the 

El  Peten  has  also  served  Guatemala  during  colonial  rule  as 

X  of  banishment  for  a  certain  class  of  offenders.      At  present, 

;h  the  papulation  cannot  be  even  approximately  stated,  it  is 

tiabiled  by  Indians  and  some  few  Ladiiiaii.      The  town  of  Putui, 

'le  island  of  that  name,  though  not  extensive,  is  prosperous. 

1   oUtle  is  raised  in   the   savannahs   around   the   lake,   and 

icn  are  coutiouiOly  driven  thence  by  a  road  beyond  the 

h  limits,  and  along  the  banks  of  the  old  river  to  Belize,  nberc 

<f  arc  sold  to  the  mahogany  cutters.      The  Petencroa,  some  of 

n  ore  wenlthy,  carry  back  from  Belize  quantities  of  mauuliic' 

d  goods,  which  they  sell  at  Peten.    Most  of  their  conimuaica- 

e,  however,  with  the  interior  provinces  of  Yucatan. 

I  the   paucity  of  priests,   as   well   as   &um  (hiir  genoral 

IT,  it  is  pruUilile  that  the  inhabitants  of  Pelcu  and  iia 

heighbourhoud    arc    not  better  instructed  than  those  of  Vers 

her  parts  of  Guatemala.     Such  of  them  as  visit  Bdiise 

e  probably  a  rather  superior  class,  hut  evcu  they  do  not  pr«- 

t  any  one  feature  that  would  place  them  morally  above  tLuac 


240  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

already  described.  The  same  mildness  of  disposition,  the  same 
addictedness  to  intoxication  and  other  vices,  the  same  blind  sab- 
mission  to  popish  rites  and  forms,  are  all  apparent.  And  here, 
again,  there  is  offered  to  the  Christian  enterprise  of  Britain  a 
field  for  its  development,  which  is  wanting  in  nothing  that  could 
constitute  a  claim  to  our  Intimate  occupation,  and  the  proximity 
of  this  field  to  our  settlements  calls  loudly  to  us  to  make  at  least 
an  effort  for  its  evangelization. 

El  Peten  is  not  only  in  itself  an  interesting  field,  but  its  histoiy 
and  situation  combine  to  prove  it  an  important  outpost  for 
missionary  efforts.  The  Indian  tribes  who  fled  from  before  the 
Spaniards  have  since  been  driven  by  the  English  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  coast,*  and  have  retired  westward  to  the  mountain 
district  lying  between  Peten  and  the  banks  of  the  Usumasinta. 
From  Peten  it  is  probable  that  they  might  be  easily  reached. 

Parts  of  the  peninsula  of  Yucatan  are  equally  near  to  Belize, 
and  with  it  there  is  much  more  commerce  than  with  Peten.  The 
facility  of  access  by  water  is  also  greater,  and  its  population  of 
500,000  souls  at  once  invest  it  with  an  importance  vastly  superior. 
Its  political  connection  with  Mexico,  which  is  so  often  doubtful, 
does  not  separate  it  from  Central  America,  with  which  its  territorial 
con6guration  really  unites  it.  At  any  rate,  it  is  at  our  door 
or  we  are  upon  its  threshold,  and  its  noble  capital  Merida,  its  busy 
ports,  and  its  extensive  plains,  are  thronged  with  immortal  beings  to 
whom  we  are  indebted. 

The  moral  and  religious  condition  of  this  people,  as  far  as 
it  is  known,  differs  in  nothing  that  is  essential  from  that  of 
the  Indians  of  Guatemala,  and  the  picture  given  further  on 

*  Writmg  of  theie  fagitire  tribes.  Captain  Henderson  says  (p.  26).  '*  Not  many  yean 
p  ast,  numerous  tribes  of  hostile  Indians  often  left  their  recesses  in  the  woods  for  the  purpose 
of  plunder.  This  they  often  accomplished ;  and,  \f  ruUteoMX  were  offered^  not  xinfreqimtly 
committed  the  most  sanguinary  murders.  The  habitations  of  these  people  hare  nerer 
been  traced.  Their  dispositions  are  peculiarly  ferodous  (?),  and  they  are  always  armed 
with  bows  and  arrows  of  curious  workmanship.  The  latter  are  generally  thought  to  be 
poisoned.  They  are  without  clothing  of  any  kind,  and  wander  orer  an  immense  extent  o 
country  but  little  known.  The  Spaniards  hare  given  to  these  people  the  general  appella- 
tion of  Indios  brttvos.  The  Indians,  however,  of  this  part  of  America  possess  little  re- 
semblance to  the  tribes  oi  the  more  northern  parts  at  it,  having  neither  their  personal 
bravery  nor  characteristic  hardihood ;  and  the  dtrad  of  the  miiitary,  %»kom  U  kas  hcenfamnd 
tap^iUnt  frequemttf  to  detpateh  in  pnmit  ofthe$e  jigitives,  hat  lately  cpented  at  a  tery 
^tekml  ck€€k  to  tknr  ocetuioiua  titUt."  [t.  t.  lb  Britidi  Bondona.] 


H  THE  YFCATECOa— THE  0AHIP8,  241 

of  the  ttate  of  the  mixed  clasps  there,  will  probably  convey 
a  pretty  correct  rejirescnlatiun  of  the  wme  clastes  in  TuctttiLn. 

Revolutions  and  dislractions,  arising  from  similar  couecs  with 
those  of  Guatemala,  have  agitated  its  governments.  'Xhc  same 
coutest  of  principles  and  parties  still  convulses  all  the  late  colonies 
of  Spain.  But  here,  more  perhaps  than  anywhere  else  in  Spa- 
nish America,  the  inSucnce  of  the  Romish  priesthood  is  now 
feeble  and  decayed.  As  a  proof  of  this,  the  authorities  at 
Meridn,  the  capii4il,  entered  tuta  a  contract,  in  1S44,  vrith  Mr. 
James  Thomson,  the  travelling  agent  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society,  by  which  they  purchased  two  thouaand  New  Testa- 
ments in  the  Spanish  language,  for  the  use  of  their  public  schools. 
Lad  this  they  did  in  the  face  of  detennined  oppoiitioa  ou  the  part 
jC.thc  bishop  and  hia  clergy. 

^The  dvil  war  now  raging  in  Yucatan  between  the  Indian 
I  the  Iilextizo  taces,  and  our  participation  in  it  through  the 
thurttiM  at  Belize,  has  been  before  referred  to,  as  well 
•  the  addition  to  British  territories  which  was  to  have  resulted, 
le  among  other  matters  connected  with  the  move- 
mts  of  ourgovermncnt  ui  these  [larts,  tlie  full  results  of  which 
t  yet  be  predicted.  In  Novemlier  1849,  Colonel  Fancotirt, 
0  present  Superintendent  of  the  British  settlement,  paid  a  visit  to 
leBay  of  Ascension,  and,  while  professing  to  act  the  part  of  a  peace- 
deer,  the  BacaiareSos  were  furnished  with  English  muskets  where- 
li  to  carry  on  the  war.  The  precise  nature  or  object  of  his 
modon  there  has  not  yet  been  divulged.  But  the  general 
«r  pursued  is  enough  to  intimate  its  tendency. 
t  One  result  of  their  intestine  commotions  has  been,  that  several 
BOosanda  of  Indians  and  I.adinos  sought  refiige  within  the  British 
la  during  the  two  past  years,  and  that  hundreds  of  them  died 
fa  Beliw  of  dysentery,  and  of  the  fevers  peculiar  to  the  climate. 
■  The  CaiiC  or  Caribbean  Indian,  already  described,'  differs 
■entially  tnm  all  the  other  aboriginal  races,  and  has  little  in 
man  with  them,  even  in  a  moral  point  of  view,  except  in 
the  general  features  of  ignorance,  vice,  and  spiritual  desti- 
tution. One  great  distinguishing  point  in  the  condition  of 
the  Carif  is,  that  he  is  not  under  the  dominion  of  the  Popish 

LNot  that  na  a  people  tbcy  ore  entirely  free  from  tliui 


242  THB  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

influence;  many  of  them  live  within  Spanish  limits,  some  of 
them  are  settled  near  to  Spanish  towns,  and  such  is  their  wan- 
dering habit,  that  most  of  them  have  repeatedly  visited  and  resided 
more  or  less  time  at  settlements  so  situated.  Of  course,  the 
intimacy  resulting  from  such  close  proximity  has  produced  its  effects 
in  familiarizing  the  mind  of  the  Carif  with  the  outward  objects 
and  customs  of  Popery.  It  is  not  imusual  to  see  a  crucifix  and 
saintly  images  or  pictures  in  their  dwellings,  and  a  passing 
priest  will  even  be  permitted  to  christen  some  of  their  children. 
Nay,  a  crowd  of  Carif  women  led  by  one  or  two  female  Ladino 
devotees,  have  been  seen  joining  in  the  prostrate  adoration  of 
an  image  of  the  Virgin  in  one  of  their  own  Carif  villages,  and 
mingling  their  voices  in  the  idolatrous  chant — 

**  Ave  Maria,  Llena  de  Grada."  * 

Already  have  some  Romish  chapels  and  altars  been  erected 
among  them :  but  though  this  people  are  beginning  to  be  infected 
with  the  leaven  of  Romanism,  they  are  still  free  from  its  dominion. 
They  have  no  priests  resident  among  them.  They  are  not 
necessarily  subject  to  any  of  their  sacraments,  and  they  may 
yet  be  preserved  from  these  calamities,  but  probably  only  by 
the  faithlessness  of  those  who  are  at  present  the  depositories  of 
the  Word  of  God. 

The  greatest  outward  barrier  to  improvement  in  the  social 
condition  of  the  Carif  nation  is  the  prevalence  of  polygamy. 
This  is  one  of  their  ancient  customs  which  they  have  retained. 
Some  remnants  of  their  former  ceremonial  practices  are  traceable 
in  their  manner  of  proceeding  on  the  occasion  of  a  marriage.  Relics 
of  priestly  ornaments  or  insignia,  and  the  semblance  of  an  altar  and 
a  sacrifice,  are  still  preserved  among  their  household  furniture 
and  domestic  customs,  even  though  there  is  no  acknowledged 
representation  of  a  Deity.  There  is,  therefore,  in  their  case,  little 
or  nothing  to  overcome  of  the  character  of  educational  prejudice 
in  favour  of  any  system  of  error  and  deceit. 

A  direct  effort  for  the  instruction  of  this  people  has  been  sustained 
during  the  last  ten  years  by  Wesleyan  Methodist  missionaries ;  seve- 
ral of  whom  have  resided  more  or  less  time  among  them  at  Stann 
Creek,  one  of  their  principal  settlements  within  the  British  limits. 
A  school  taught  by  a  native  was  for  some  time  in  operation  there. 

*  InhitethM^  Mary^ftiUofgrtee. 


CARIF  LANODAOE  AND  CHARACTER. 


S43 


But  the  fruits  of  these   labours   have  been   [ess  abundant  and 
satislactor^  than  iiitg:bt  hnve  liecn  expected.    The  want  nf  greater 
mcvess  is,  at  least  in  part,  attributable  to  tbe  limited  period  of  refi- 
ll deuce  of  the  misnonaries  of  thia  connection,  which  either  prevents 
^.tbe  labourer  from  ever  becoming  well  acquunfed  with  his  field,  or 
8  him  toon  after  he  has  gained  the  experience  required  to 
nieces*  in  it.    As  a  result  of  this,  the  language  of  the  people, 
IF  acquired  at  all,  is  learned  imperfectlj',  and  the  term  of  four  years 
s  lo  the  station  one  who  needs  to  conunence  where  his 
edeivEsur  began,  and  not  where  he  left  off.    The  consequence  is, 
n  tlfort  has  been  made  to  teach  the  Carifa  and  their  children 
tt  what  is  to  them  a,  foreign  language,  with  which  many  of  them 
e  very  little  or  not  nt  all  acquainted,  and  wherein  they  wont  the 
k  perception,  the  ready  atterance,  the  correct  appreciation,  and 
»  strong  natural  attachment,  which  always  characteriTe  thu  use  of 
•  tnotber  tongue. 

The  Carifs,  from  theu*  intercourse  with  the  French  in  their 
native  islanda.  and  now  with  the  Spanish  and  the  English,  fre- 
quently possess  a  snuttering  of  all  these  languages,  or  of  their 
Creole  corruptions ;  bnt  while  their  travelled  and  more  intelligent 
men    con  make  a   bargain,   or  ssk  a  question  in  these  acquired 
idioms,  the  language  of  their  mothers  and  sisterB,  of  Ihnr  wives 
d  children,  of  their  own  childhood  and  homes,  in  short,  the  Ion- 
Uge  of  the  heart  and  the  affcctjons,  and  consequeDtly  that  of  reli- 
u  Ikr  as  it  can  be  already  known  to  them,  can  be  expressed 
n  thdr  native  dialect. 
}  There  ia  in   the  natural  disposition  of  the  Carif  a  buoyancy 
;   makes  him   both   fKvolous  and    cheerful,    active    as    wi'Il 
I  voluble,   and   at  once  versatile,   enthusiastic,  and  ddldent  in 
nis  intelligence,  though  considcnihle,  is  surpassed 
Y  hit  vanity,  and  his  thoughtlessness  and  want  of  plan  is  cuunicr- 
I  by  his  ability,  energy,  and  dexterous  eiecation  in  ail 
Is  of  physical  hibour.     The  [miwetb  of  his  mind  haye  bo  seldom 
tea  cultivated,  that  it  is  difficult  to  define  them.     But  where 
Kurastanccs  have  fiivourcd  their  development,  the  Carif  appears 
e  behind  no  other  race  in  mental  endowment, 
r  The  iutcrcourse  which  the  Carifs  have  long  maiiitained  with 
t  English  settlers  in  the  Buy,  has  hitherto  been  of  little  general 
eSl  to  them,  though  even  as  a  people  it  is  probable  that  ihey 


S44  THE  GOSPEL   IN    CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

have  gained  something  ;  individuals  who  have  lived  as  ser- 
vants with  merchants,  government  officials,  and  mechanics,  have 
in  some  cases  been  improved  and  instructed  in  a  way  which 
is  creditable  alike  to  the  teacher  and  to  the  taught.  At  the 
same  time,  the  Carifs  have  acquired  facilities  for  indulgence  in 
drinking,  which  is  also  their  most  apparent  failing,  and  with 
the  exception  of  the  effort  above  referred  to,  and  some  limited 
attempts  now  making  for  their  salvation  and  instruction  in  the 
Word  of  God,  this  tribe  is  also  still  "  perishing  for  lack  of  know- 
ledge." 

The  Carif  villages,  which  are  not  large,  but  pretty  numerous, 
generally  present  an  animated  and  picturesque  scene.  They  are 
invariably  located  by  the  sea-side,  and  are  composed  of  thatched 
but  well-constructed  cane-houses,  placed  with  little  regard  to  order 
on  the  border  of  the  forest,  and  frequently  straggling  a  considerable 
distance  along  shore.  The  beach  or  water-side  is  the  most  common 
resort  of  the  inhabitants.  Here  in  the  cool  of  the  day  may  be 
seen  a  few  athletic  boatmen,  repairing,  launching,  or  hauling- 
up  their  dorees  under  the  shade  of  the  cocoa-nut  trees,  as  they 
may  be  going  or  returning  from  a  fishing  expedition,  or  a  visit  to 
the  town  of  Belize.  Groups  of  tawny  women,  but  partially  clad, 
are  standing  up  to  their  ankles  in  the  water,  and  busily  engaged  in 
washing  clothes,  while  they  keep  up  a  shrill  and  incessant  clatter  of 
animated  discourse  with  each  other  or  with  the  more  distant  boat- 
men. Numbers  of  almost  amphibious  children  of  various  shades, 
scarcely  less  noisy  than  their  mothers,  are  playing  about  on  the 
shore  or  in  the  water  without  distinction,  most  of  them  in  a  perfect 
state  of  nudity,  and  those  about  ten  years  of  age  wearing  only 
a  light  garment  resembling  a  long  night-shirt.  Some  of  the  boys 
are  amusing  themselves  by  propelling  at  great  speed  a  small  pit- 
pan  proportioned  to  their  strength,  with  light  mahogany  paddles 
made  expressly  for  them  by  their  relatives  and  friends,  during 
leisure  time  in  the  mahogany  works.  One  more  daring  than  the 
rest  is  perhaps  standing  erect  upon  a  tiny  doree,  with  his  little  legs 
apart,  holding  a  slight  setting-pole  in  his  hands,  and  by  means 
of  it  pushing  his  miniature  skiff  in  the  very  face  of  the  advancing 
billow,  over  which  he  rides  triumphant  as  it  rolls  and  breaks  upon 
the  strand :  sometimes  he  is  ungracefully  upset  and  disappears,  hue 
only  to  dive  beneath  the  wave,  right  his  little  craft,  bale  it  out,  and 


THE   MOSqCIlO   I 


^^Hresume  bis  precarioua  position  upon  it,  to  repeat  the  feat  with 
^^P  better  success. 

^^^       Lively  M  Buch  a  scene  may  be,  there  isnolhiDginittosntiBfythe 
nuQd  of  the  reflective  and  benevolent,  much  lees  of  him  who  knows 
Bomelhing  of  the  value  of  the  soul  anil  the  preciousnesa  of  time, 
True,  there  are  no  indications  of  poverty  or  diseagc,  and  the 
,  appearance  of  the  inhabitants  is  in  unison  with  the  balmy  cliinnle 
ftvnd  the  prolific  soiL     But  those  apparently  joyoue  hearla  are  void 
^  virtue  aa  of  knowledge.    A  brutal  instinct  and  perverted  impuliica 
n  their  only  ^ides.     And  we  must  follow  them  into  the  domestic 
I  orcle,  and  stand  bvside  their  dying  bed,  in  order  rightly  to  apprc- 
(etate  the  deatilution  of  Cbcir  moral  condition. 

fiost  degraded  class  of  Indians  in  Central  America  are 
Flhose  composing  the  Mosquito  nation.*  Under  this  name  b  in- 
I  duded  the  Waikna,  the  Poyer,  and  the  Towkcas  tribea.  The  two 
■  ]ut,  though  more  numerous,  are  in  subjection  to  the  first,  to  wham 
1  they  pay  an  annual  tribute  consisting  of  a  certain  number  ot 
I  lieads  of  cattle,  and  they  are  even  more  barbarous  than  the 
I  Waiknas. 

r  having  been  completely  under  foreign  yoke,  the  Mos- 
kgoitomen,  in  common  with  the  other  wild  Indiana,  have  retained 
r  independence,  traditions,  and  customs.  Consequently,  poly- 
imy  prevails  to  a  great  extcot  among  them,  most  men  having  from 
o  lo  six  wives,  and  the  cbiefs  a  greater  number.  Bat  though  it 
ight  be  expected  that  aome  form  of  idol  worship  would  also 
lite  retUDcd  by  them,  they  are  among  the  rare  exception!)  which 
Bnvage  life  atforda  where  an  acknowledged  deity  is  entirely  wanting. 
I  JSot  even  a  name  for  God  iias  yet  been  found  in  their  language. 
KXhere  are,  however,  traces  of  demon  worship,  or  rather  of  efforts 
fto  placate  an  evil  spirit,  whom  they  call  fVutasha.  There  is,  con- 
nected with  this  belief,  an  appropriate  order  of  priesthood  or 
aorcerera.  The  Sukia,  a  kind  of  Fetish,  acts  both  the  conjuror 
and  the  doctor,  at  the  same  time  that  be  profe;«es  toderive  nil  power 
from  the  Evil  One,  hia  acknowledged  master.  Wulaaha  pro- 
feascdly  shares  in  the  reward  which  the  Sukiaa  obtain  for  their 
etircs  and  deceptions.  His  half  of  the  stipulated  price  is  euivted 
^^^  beforehand,  the  payment  of  the  other  half  depending  very  much 
^^^upon  the  Sukia'D  euccesa.      The  first  instalment  is,    however, 

^^H  •  S(«  f^e  50. 


S46  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

absolutely  necessary  to  the  undertaking,  so  that  the  Sukias  secure 
a  fee  whether  successful  or  not.  Their  remedies  consist  of  herbs 
which  'they  select,  probably  with  some  practical  knowledge  of 
their  virtues;  for  even  among  the  Waiknas  deception  is  not 
wholly  separated  from  science  and  truth.  The  first  application  is 
somewhat  homoeopathic,  the  herbs  being  merely  placed  under 
the  patient*s  pillow.  If  the  mere  odour  does  not  effect  a  cure,  the 
simples  are  then  put  into  a  bag  and  boiled,  and  a  draught  of  the 
decoction  is  next  administered.  Fomentations  of  the  diseased 
part  with  this  liquid  follow,  and  on  the  failure  of  all  these 
means,  a  plenti^  application  of  cold  water  douches,  somewhat 
after  the  manner  of  Russian  baths,*  is  the  last  resort.  K  still 
unrelieved,  the  complaint  is  declared  incurable.  The  demon 
priesthood  is  regarded  with  profound  veneration,  and  the  Sukias 
necessarily  possess  considerable  influence  with  the  rest  of  the 
people,  upon  whose  credulity  they  subsist. 

The  Mosquito  women,  who  are  considered  delicate  and  hand- 
some, though  their  lords  have  small  pretensions  to  any  distinction 
of  the  kind,  are  frequently  espoused  while  infants,  and  are  married 
at  the  early  age  of  ten  or  twelve  years.  When  about  to  give  birth  to 
their  children,  **  a  habitation  is  prepared  for  them  in  the  deepest 
recesses  of  the  woods,  to  which  they  retire  with  a  female  assis- 
tant, and  where  they  remain  secluded  from  every  eye  for  a  stated 
period.  This  past,  a  public  lustration  of  themselves  and  ofi&pring 
must  take  place  previous  to  their  being  again  admitted  to  the 
society  of  their  friends  and  relatives."t  Evidences  of  absence 
of  natural  affection  common  to  the  heathen  are  not  wanting  here. 
"  It  is  a  matter  understood  and  constantly  practised  among  the 
Mosquito  women,  that  if  a  child  be  bom  with  any  defect,  it  may 
not  live,  lest  the  defect  become  a  nick-name  or  a  bye-word  in 
their  fiunily.'*{  Any  person  who  is  supposed  to  be  dying,  either 
from  age  or  disease,  is  at  once  forsaken  by  all  those  relatives  and 
friends  whose  presence  might  tend  to  soothe  and  alleviate  the  last 
struggle.  They  are  left  to  die  alone,  imtended,  and  even  exposed  to 
be  devoured  by  wild  beasts,  reptiles,  and  vermin,  before  they  can 

*  The  Indians  of  the  interior  are  accutcHned  in  their  maladies,  first  to  proroke  a  pro- 
fuse perspiration  in  a  sort  oi  oren,  erected  at  the  side  of  a  stream,  and  then,  when  suffi- 
ciently baked,  thej  suddenly  rash  out  of  the  oven  and  immerse  themselves  in  the  cold  water. 

t  Oeiptain  Henderson's  Aeeonmt,  p.  244. 

t  SpMch  of  Mr.  Alexander  Henderssn,  London,  October  7«  1847. 


STKONfl  DKINK. 


247 


Kite  of  nant  or  of  disease.  Thus  the  unoAtural  parent  in 
tani  is  requited  by  the  child  he  has  brongbt  up,  aod  in  this 
WSJ  ure  the  ties  of  rcUtionship  and  the  calls  of  bumanity  alike 
dieregarded. 

With  the  Mosquito  men,  as  with  the  Indians  generally,  drunken- 
most  apparent  vice.  They  nrc  but  too  nell  supplied 
iritb  the  nieans  of  indalfring  in  tbis  fearful  propensity,  by  the 
■iEDglish  ond  North  American  traders  who  frequent  their  Goaat, 
KAnd  who  bart«r  rum,  &c.  &c.  for  tortoiseshell  and  other  articles. 
1  When,  however,  they  cannot  obtain  the  imported  spirits,  or  when 
■  Ihey  assemble  to  celetirate  a  natire  feast,  they  have  a  method 
rfprepariog  strong  drink,  which  is  peculiarly  their  own;  a  ciutom 
^hich  is  invested  with  all  that  veneration  which  attaches  to  anti- 
A  lai^  quantity  of  ripe  fruit,  consisting  of  pine-apples, 
canes,  bananas,  &c.  &c.  is  first  provided.  A  doree  or  canoe 
Kll  then  carefully  cleaned  ont.  A  selection  of  six  or  eight  women  is 
,  in  which  a  good  state  of  the  teeth  would  appear  to  be 
I  one  of  the  moat  necessary  conditions.  At  least  their  powers  of 
f-aastication  are  soon  put  to  the  test,  for  they  are  required  to  chew 
the  fruit,  and  then  empty  it  into  the  doree.  Their  saliva  being 
a  powerful  dissolvent,  an  active  fermentation  immediately  takes 
place,  and  before  they  have  well  done  masticating  the  Irait,  a  boatful 
of  itrongty  intoxicating  drink  b  ready  for  the  consumption  of  the 

Irty,  nor  does  the  revel  cease  till  the  boat  is  quite  empty,  and  the 
uor  all  cottiiamed. 
That  the  Mosquito  men  will  readily  take  Che  life  of  a  fellow- 
nture,  is  evinced  by  the  frequency  with  which  they  murder  the 
«nish  Indians  who  come  in  their  way,  and  the  little  account  tbey 
ic  of  the  deed.  They  are  also  known  to  be  given  to  crimes 
'erred  to  in  the  first  chapter  of  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 
From  these  few  details,  the  reader  may  be  enabled  to  form  some 
idea  of  the  character  and  condition  of  the  Mosquito  tribes.  Of  tlib 
people  our  Government  has  thought  proper  to  make  use  for 
political  and  selfish  ends,  without  making  the  least  effort  for  their 
moral  or  even  for  their  physical  improvement-  Among  tbeir  chiefs 
they  have  ibstributcd  commissioDS,  with  the  unifornu  belonging 
to  the  military  rank  conferred  upon  them;  and  besides  the  care 
taken  of  the  royal  fiimily  and  notables,  presents  have  annually 
been  distributed  among  them,  by  direction  from  the  higher  sntbo- 


248  THE  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Titles,  in  the  name  of  the  British  monarch,  and  at  the  expense  of  the 
British  people, — ^presents  consisting,  in  part,  of  spirits,  and  which,  in 
their  present  state,  could  only  inflame  their  vanity,  minister  to  their 
bad  passions,  and  facilitate  the  indulgence  of  their  vices.  These 
tribes  are  now  under  our  protection.  And  it  may  be  asked,  what 
is  the  real  benefit  which  they  or  we  derive  from  the  connection  ? 

Several  travellers  have  recorded  that  there  exists  among  the 
Mosquito  Indians  an  old  traditionary  prophecy  purporting  that 
their  deliverance  from  the  dark-complexioned  Spaniard  was  to  come 
from  *'  the  gray 'eyed  man."  Without  any  evidence  as  to  the  origin 
or  even  the  prevalence  of  such  a  tradition,  the  circumstances  of  the 
Mosquito  nation  make  it  at  least  suspicious  that  this  has  originated 
with  their  gray-eyed  protectors,  and  the  more  so  that  they  are  not, 
and  never  were,  under  the  dominion  of  the  dark-eyed  Castilian.^ 
By  one  writer,  this  tradition  is  referred  to  the  subdued  tribes  of  the 
interior,  to  whom  it  would  certainly  apply  with  more  propriety. 
But  be  this  as  it  may,  the  mysterious  influence  of  a  heathen  oracle 
can  add  little  of  real  interest,  and  less  of  obligation,  to  the  work  to 
which  as  Christians,  and  as  British  Christians,  we  are  specially  called, 
with  respect  to  our  degraded  prot^g^. 

The  only  English  missionary,  and  probably  the  only  missionary 
of  the  Gospel  of  any  nation  that  ever  yet  visited  the  Mosquito  Shore, 
was  Mr.  James  Pilley,  a  Wesleyan,  who,  between  the  years  1830 
and  1833,  endured  great  sufibrings  among  the  Waiknas,  and  changed 
his  residence  three  times.  It  is  frequently  related  of  this  worthy 
man,  that,  when  at  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios,  he  assembled  the  natives 
on  several  successive  occasions,  and  addressed  them  on  the 
best  themes  in  the  English  language.  Accustomed  to  pay  defe- 
rence to  the  gray-eyed  man,  they  sat  under  Mr.  Pilley*s  preaching 
with  exemplify  docility,  and  a  decorum  that  would  do  honour  to  a 
more  cultivated  audience.  At  length,  one  of  their  leaders  arose,  in 
the  midst  of  the  sermon,  and  addressed  the  preacher  in  the  name  of 
the  rest  in  broken  English ;  of  which  he  possessed  some  knowledge, 

*  We  woald  not  be  uuderttood  to  iniiiiiute  that  this  prophecy  has  had  anything  to  do 
with  the  new  name  reeentJy  giren  to  the  Port  of  San  Juan  de  Nican^^na  (t.  e.  Grey  Town) ; 
bnt  we  would  remind  those  who  are  disposed  to  attach  any  importance  to  the  prognostic, 
that  gray  eyes  are  common  to  the  entire  Anglo-Saxon  race,  and  that  the  fUfilment  may  be 
reserved  for  oar  trans-Atlantic  descendants,  who  are  even  now  taking  a  lirely  interest  in 
Central  AsMrica,  and  who  may  also  step  before  us  in  occupying  that  miisica  field,  nnka 
we  are  ftiiinA  fttthftiL 


■WESLKYAN    MISSION.  240 

thniigli  not  enough  to  enable  him  to  follow  the  thread  of  Mr. 
Fillvy'R  diacoime.  The  purport  of  this  characteristic  Waikna 
harangne  was,  that  they  hod  come  repeatedly  and  sat  patiently 
before  Mr.  Pilley,  nho  hod  all  the  talk  to  himself,  aod  he  hod 
never  yet  once  oiTered  them  uglassofgrog!  upon  which  the  indignant 
spokesman  walked  out  of  the  house,  fullowed  by  the  entire  native 
congregation.  Thus  terminated  Mr.  Pilley's  minion  at  thia  jilace. 
He  was  aflenvards  made  useful  at  Blewfielda  to  a  few  English 
Creoles  and  a  family  of  Poyesian  emigrants.  Thence  he  removed 
)  Bragman's  Bluff,  where  he  suffered  great  privations  with  bin 

It  will  be  seen  further  on,  that  a  missionary  aod  his  wife 
K  destined  lor  the  Mosquihi  Shore,  both  died  at  Belize  in  ISiiS. 
I  Also,  that  the  Waikna  language  has  now  been  reduced  to  writing, 

d  the  first  portion  of  the  New  Testament  translated.  It  rcmiuna 
l-with  us  to  decide  whether  or  not  our  efforts  for  this  benighted 
I  people  shall  slop  here.  It  remains  for  us  to  prove  to  all  the 
I  Indian  tribes  that  we  regard  them  aa  brethren,  as  fellow-immortals, 
I  md  as  indnded  in  the  commission  of  our  Lord  Jesns  Christ, 


"TbeKuig'irniiJiRiH  ii  iu  lbs  iutniuri  Bud.  wbca  on  Ihe  nul,  he  a  ttamU] 

ainlcd.   HiinibjHU  ■niiirunkfii.turliulcat.iliiuliillci]  n«.   Alter  uiauliKlUii 

.  ht  mcrocdt.  tbrj  UnTfi  IktcLj  lud  «  plot  to  dHpitefa  Iud 

Hfln.    It  u  eisBiiUT  rvfmii  bj  pcnom  vho  hue  bun  uiiuiiiUd  villi  lit  Hwimt 

[  9iDn  for  nubjr  Jr«A,  Itknl  Ibnc  ludiaui  liQ'e  degenenled  Diucb  <incc  the;  ftnt  Vnv^ 


ig  Uic  lodiud  in  tlio  wholfl  eo 


J 


S50  THR  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   Xra. 

THB     MIXED     CLASSES. 

Opposite  forms  of  Hypocrisy— Bdatire  Proportions  of  Baces— Rise  and  Sqnration  of  the 
Ladinos — ExdnsiTeness  of  the  Whites — General  Moral  Gloom— /ii/f<2^ft^,  its  spread  and 
prevalence — ^Its  Mission  in  the  Destruction  o(  Popery — ^Advantageous  Season  for  the 
Introduction  of  the  Gospel— Priestly  Unbelief  and  Enormities — ^Their  Effects — Infidel 
Conformity— Fanatical  Adherents  d  the  Church  of  Rome— SvpertlUUm,  its  remaining 
forms — ^Masses — Simultaneous  Adoration  of  the  Wafer-god — "La  Oradon "—Forms  of 
Speech— Public  Amusements— Processicms— Corpus  Christi— Night  Seene— Periodical 
and  occasional  Observances — ^Domestic  Ceremonies,  Christenings,  Confirmations,  Mar* 
riages,  Deaths,  and  Funerals— Domestic  Altars — **  Nadmientos" — "  Novenas,"  occasions 
for  mirth— More  sedate  Devotees— An  Anecdote— Morbid  Exdtement  —  "  Calvarios," 
or  Golgothas— The  Charnel-house  of  Taltio— Varieties  of  Images— Their  Effect*— The 
Remedy. 


*t 


Taig  ketd  and  beware  of  the  Ua»en  (if  the  Thmseee  and  of  the  Saddueees.''* — Matth.xvi.  6. 


HuBiAN  nature,  though  presented  under  an  infinite  variety  of 
forms,  is  in  every  one,  and  under  all  circumstances,  essentially  the 
same.  This  is  equally  true  of  society  as  it  is  of  individuals.  In 
every  region,  under  every  degree  of  culture  or  barbarism,  and 
during  every  epoch,  the  same  general  features  of  beauty  and 
deformity  have  been  developed  in  man.  It  is  especially  in  the 
spirit  and  tendency  of  assimilated  and  sympathizing  classes  that  the 
universal  features  of  society  may  be  traced. 

At  that  period,  when  the  remedial  element  was  first  practically 
introduced  into  the  world — when  Divine  life  and  perfection  were 
manifested  in  the  perscm  of  Christ,  and  truth  and  holiness  were 
permanently  planted  in  human  soil — ^the  social  body  to  which 
it  was  primarily  applied  was  rent  and  divided  by  two  opposing 
factions,  professing  antagonistic  systems  of  belief.  The  Pharisees 
and  the  Saddueees  of  the  Jewish  people  are  a  type  of  the  supersti- 
tious and  the  sceptical  classes  of  other  nations  and  of  other  times, 


BBLATITE  FROPORTiaitS  OP  RACES, 

fliich  Uke  them  hare  ariBen  out  of  perversions  and  abuses  of  the 

rath. 

So  opponte  and  appariiitlj'  different  are  the  spirit  and  tendencies 

Jf  of  these  two  wets,  that  many  are  ready  to  regard  them  as  having  no 

le  point  of  affinity  or  intact ;  and  bad  not  the  Saviour  himstflf 

^Onpled   them  together,   and   pointed   out   the   oneness    of   that 

a  that  ferments  in  both,  few  had  dared  to  assert  it. 

ThoK  who  pretend  to  believe  too  little,  and  those  vrho  profess  to 

o  much,  alike  amume  a  garb  that  belongs  not  to  tbeni. 

K  Both  are  connterfeiis  of  faith  and  virtue,  and  affect  a  name  to  cover 

I  inward  disaffection  to  the  truth.    The  spirit  of  hypocrisy  is  C(|ually 

Hdiip'ayetl  in  each  of  these  extreme  forms,  and  they  still  prove  their 

Entity  and  essential  oneness  by  invariably  joining  to  oppose  the 

Mpel,  as  their  Jewish  representatives  united  to  crucify  the  Lord 

If  Glory  when  they  could  unite  in  nothing  else. 

Hypocrisyi  under  the  twofold  forms  of  Popbh  bigotry  and 
EFoItairean  scepticinu,  will  be  found  to  have  leavened  Central 
''merican  «ocicty,  and    more    particularly  those    closBeii   of  it 

le  moral  condition  is  about  to  be  considered. 
[  In  addition  to  the  natural  consequences  and  moral  effect*  of 
y  become  matters  of  history,  society  in  Central  America 
11  been,  and  fitill  is,  necessarily  intliienced  by  the  miied  diaracter 
■the  materials  that  composeiL  Three-fifths  of  the  people  consist  of 
'e  Indians,  who  have  been  described  ns  only  now  about  beginning 
■  rise  above  their  late  phy^cal  oppression.  The  proportion  which 
:  Europeans  and  Africans  (the  only  two  remaning  unmixed 
es)  bear  together  to  the  whole  population,  is  scarcely  more 
e-twentieth.  Among  the  Meitizo  raees,  the  Ladinos  hare 
1  estimated  at  one-fourth,  while  the  Mulattoeti  and  Sambos 
l-ltnitedly  do  not  uniount  to  one-liftietb  part  So  that,  white  the 
Indians  and  the  Ludinos  comprise  nearly  seven -eighths,  and  the 
Europeans,  Africans,  Mulattoes,  and  Sambos  little  more  than  one- 
eighth  of  the  entire  population,  the  United  Mezlizos  of  every 
description,  together  with  the  Earopeans  and  Africans,  include 
only  two-fifths,  which  are  here  treated  of  together,  and  as  con- 
tradistiDguished  only  from  the  abori^nal  Indians. 

From  the  above  comparison,  it  is  apparent  that  whatever  may  have 
been  the  influence  of  the  white  man  over  his  red  and  black  fellows, 
HI  iDon  as  the  coloured  races,  whether  pure  or  mixed,  shall  have 


S62  THB  Q06PBL  IN  CENTRAL    AMERICA. 

become  possessed  of  the  superior  knowledge  which  has  hitherto  dis- 
tinguished only  him,  that  influence  must  cease  to  be  predominant. 
Should  the  tide  of  emigration  shortly  flow  from  the  north  to  the 
south,  as  it  may  be  expected  to  do,  the  whites  will  be  supported  by 
an  influx  of  numbers  for  some  time  to  come ;  though  it  is  evident 
that  the  new  world,  where  alone  the  several  races  of  mankind  are 
now  in  contact  with  each  other,  is  destined  to  be  the  field  where 
the  various  distinctions  of  the  human  family  will  first  be  fused 
and  amalgamated,  so  as  to  form  one  common  fraternity,  in 
which  diversity  of  caste  and  prejudices  of  colour  shall  be  alike 
unknown. 

Preponderating  numbers  in  favour  of  the  Indians  still  constitute 
them  the  substratum  of  society  in  Central  America,  and  were  it  not 
for  the  peculiar  position  which  the  white  man  holds,  all  besides, 
though  included  in  one  division,  could  establish  but  a  secondary  claim 
in  point  of  importance.  But  the  moral  degradation  of  the  Indian, 
rather  than  the  superiority  of  the  European  and  his  descendants, 
turns  the  scale,  and  the  palm  of  predominance  in  power  and  in- 
fluence must  still  be  awarded  to  the  latter.  These  mixed  classes 
are  at  present  the  most  accessible  to  missionary  efforts.  In  other 
respects,  it  is  questionable  whether  their  condition  offers  any  great 
advantages  over  that  of  the  Indians,  as  respects  the  reception  of  the 
truth.  Let  the  reader  himself  judge  of  the  peculiar  features  in 
which  they  differ. 

The  haughty  and  oppressive  bearing  of  the  ancient  Spaniards 
towards  the  Indians,  must  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  form  a 
correct  estimate  of  the  kind  of  education  and  standing  which  their 
mutual  children  enjoyed.  As  a  natural  consequence  of  this 
hauteur,  the  Ladinos  grew  up  more  Indian  than  European  in  their 
manners,  prejudices,  and  ideas.  Such  a  result  was  also  promoted 
by  the  supposed  difference  of  rank,  and  by  the  existence  of  peculiar 
circumstances  tending  to  separate  the  noble,  the  military,  or  the 
monkish  progenitor  and  his  half-Indian  ofispring.  Thus,  instead 
of  dravdng  together  the  two  races  by  their  mutual  connection, 
a  third  class  was  created,  upon  whom  the  unmixed  and  better 
educated  descendant  of  the  Spanish  Don  looked  down  with  a  feeling 
of  superiority ;  and  though  children  by  one  father,  and  sons  of  the 
same  soil,  there  was  little  of  real  S3rmpathy  existing  between  them. 
Ab  yean  rolled  oii,eTeii  the  ties  of  consaiiguimty  were  almost  en« 


i 


FORMATION  OP  CLASSES.  ^^^TBfl 

foelylMt  light  of,  and  ihe  division  of  the  children  of  the  Spaniar 
into  two  distinct  clawics  uas  gradually  confinned. 

This  unhappy  schism  in  the  body  politic  bos  prorcd  thescourg 
of  C«Dtral  Araerica  since  its  independence.  These  two  cIoiiBei 
ranged  under  the  political  batinera  of  the  servile  and  libcm 
parties,  have  wasted  their  mutual  energies  in  bitter  s»d  murderou 
hostilities,  and  unless  some  new  elcmctit  be  introduced  into  the  con 
of  society  there,  it  seenis  probable  that  the  two  eihaustei 
factions  will  ere  long  be  set  aaide  by  another  composed  of  tb 
ludittu  race,  over  whom  lioth  could  agree  to  tyrsnniie,  e^'en  wbil 
they  disagreed  in  most  other  respects. 

The  littdino  class,  exempt  from  the  grosser  kinds  of  oppreiviio 
practised  upon  the  Indian,  was  soon  distinguislied  by  a  siiperio 
energy  and  intelligence,  which  is  ever  the  parent  of  its  aw 
increase-  Fen',  if  any,  facilities  were  afforded  to  them  in  the  wa 
of  education.  They,  however,  shared  more  largely  than  th 
Indians  in  the  attentions  of  the  priests,  who,  accustomed  to  tic 
them  as  more  troublesome  and  difRcult  to  manage  than  the  formci 
were  Dot  tlie  lc«3  alive  to  the  attmctiona  wliich  their  greater  entei 
prise  and  consequent  influence  and  wealth  conferred  ui>on  then 
Stuch  of  the  knowledge  and  skill  in  mechanical  axtn  which  w« 
deijarting  from  the  Indians  was  caught  up  and  preserved  by  thci 
Ladino  descendants,  who,  vastly  ontnnmbering  their  Spanish  pro 
genttois,  soon  filled  the  towns,  or  occupied  a  place  in  Ihein  anali^v 
to  that  now  filled  by  the  middling  classes  in  European  citie 
Under  these  circumstances,  they  were  brought  into  closer  contat 
with  the  still  dominant  families  of  their  white  ancestors.  Ind. 
viduols  of  the  class  were  a<lmittcd  iuto  the  univerwtiea,aad  in  the 
progress  soon  raanifi'sted  the  extent  of  those  talents  with  whic 
God  had  liberally  endowed  them. 

On  the  other  band,  the  Sangre  Azules  (bine -bloods),  presumin 
upon  their  real  and  supposed  advantages  of  wealth,  rank,  an 
colour,  greatly  neglected  Ihe  superior  opportunities  lor  improvt 
ment  which  they  enjoyed,  and  contented  theni.<>elves  with  lordir 
it  over  the  iwng  Ladinoa,  and  oppressing  still  more  the  dowi 
trodden  and  dejected  Indians. 

To  Done  of  these  classes  were  the  moral  and  spiritual  conques 
of  the  rest  of  the  world  avnikble,  for  they  were  at  once  the  «ibjcc 
of  Spain  and  the  vassals  of  Rome.  But  the  day  of  political  freedo; 


S54  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

has  already  dawned  upon  them,  and  the  hour  of  religious  liberty 
cannot  be  remote. 

It  has  been  seen  how  the  independence  of  Central  America 
suddenly  admitted  some  of  that  light  which  colonial  policy  would 
have  excluded ;  and  that  with  it  came  a  flood  of  infidelity  for  the 
eager  reception  of  which  the  minds  of  all  who  were  not  dormant  had 
been  long  preparing.  The  more  intelligent  of  every  class  drank 
freely  into  the  new  ideas,  and  all  the  active  mind  of  the  nation  was 
more  or  less  affected  by  the  leayen  of  infidelity,  not  even  excepting 
that  of  the  priesthood  itself. 

Infidelity  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Popery  which  the  most 
extravagant  notions  of  socialism  and  communism  sustain  with  re- 
spect to  despotic  power.  And,  though  on  a  widely  different  scale, 
scepticism  is  to  revealed  religion  what  the  wildest  political  theories 
are  to  right  principles  of  government.  The  prevalence  of  either 
extreme  may  be  regarded,  not  only  as  a  presage  to  the  overthrow  of 
its  opposite,  but,  if  opportunities  be  duly  improved,  as  a  token  of 
the  triumph  of  that  truth  which  is  equally  opposed  to  both. 

The  rejection  of  all  religious  faith,  though  so  great  an  evil  in 
itself  when  let  loose  upon  a  thoroughly  priest-ridden  community, 
may,  by  the  overruling  providence  of  God,  prove  an  instrument  of 
good.  It  is  destructive  of  the  iron  power  with  which  it  mingles,  but 
with  which  it  cannot  combine,  and  the  most  subtilely-devised  system 
of  priestcraft  invariably  falls  before  it.  It  restores  to  a  natural 
action  the  dormant  powers  of  the  human  mind,  which  priestly 
manipulations  have  mesmerized,  and  over  which  pricstmen  love  to 
exercise  control,  by  calling  into  activity  only  the  passions  and  the 
Acuities  which  can  be  made  subservient  to  their  own  interests ; 
and  while  it  relieves  the  victims  of  fanaticism  from  the  spell 
with  which  they  were  bound,  it  breaks  up  the  prejudices  of  edu- 
cation, leads  to  thought  and  inquiry,  and  sometimes  it  has  been 
known  to  end  in  a  sincere  and  earnest  search  after  truth.  It  is 
true  that,  influenced  by  the  natural  depravity  of  his  heart,  man 
immediately  and  invariably  abuses  his  restored  faculties ;  but 
though  something  more  than  human  is  required  to  counteract  that 
depravity,  to  restore  the  equipoise  of  his  disordered  passions,  to 
sanctify  them,  and  to  bring  him  back  to  God,  yet  by  means  of 
infidelity  he  may  be  brought  back  to  the  normal  condition  of  his 
species,  to  a  state  that  admits  of  his  being  reasoned  with,  and  in 


THE    USE    0 


955 

which  the  voice  of  coDBcience  letames  its  suspended  functions. 
The  Goepel  of  Jesus  Christ  brought  home  to  the  heart  hj  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  can  alone  regenerate  the  soul,  aud  the 
operation  of  the  Diviuc  eoergy  thus  exercised  is  not  liDiitul  to  tny 
condition  of  the  minil ;  but,  humanly  speaking,  there  is  more  hope 
of  a  sceptic  tbnn  of  a  bigot.  The  oue  is  acc^hle  to  the  procin' 
luaiioQ  of  the  truth,  whilst  the  other  is  prepossessed  against  it, 
and  wiU  not  open  his  outward  ears,  much  less  bis  mind  and  heart, 
lo  il«  reception-  If  unbeUcvere  may  be  compared  to  stray  sheep 
pcrveraely  wandeiing  further  and  further  from  the  fold,  funalical 
MUilots  are  more  like  the  some  sheep  already  in  the  Jaws  of  the 
destroyer.  It  b  well  known  that  Papists,  having  delivered  up  their 
consciences  into  the  keeping  of  another,  who  may  be  a  wolf  in 
sheep's  clothing,  reduce  themselves  to  think  only  by  pro^y  in  the 
great  matters  of  their  solvation,  and  ore  "  like  the  deal'  adder  that 
Btoppeth  her  ew,  which  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  charmers, 
be  the  charmer  never  so  cunning."  The  change  firom  Popery,  or 
any  analogous  tysiem,  to  the  entire  n^ection  of  revealed  religion, 
is  one  which  believcra  in  Divine  Revelation  may  hail  with  satisfac- 
tion, if  they  be  but  prepared  to  take  advantage  of  it ;  for  on  advan- 
tage is  indubitably  afforded  to  the  friends  of  trutli.  It  is  a  bnttie 
in  which  tlie  fiiitbful  have  no  need  to  fight,  but  they  do  need  to 
"set  themselves,  and  stand  stilt  that  they  may  see  the  salvation  of 
Jehovah  with  them,"  for  if  found  in  such  a  posture  Jehovah  will 
be  with  them,  und  when  opposing  errors  shall  have  neutralised 
cncli  other,  effectual  doors  of  access  to  the  mind  will  be  opened, 
and,  with  the  spiritual  blcKing  from  on  high,  the  truth  will  be 
victorious,  the  human  heart  will  be  subdued,  and  their  faithftjlness 
will  be  rewarded  with  ample  and  enduring  sjwil. 

In  the  contest  that  has  actually  been  waged  during  more  than  n 
ijuarter  of  a  century  in  Central  America,  infidelity  has  demon- 
strated the  weoknes  of  Popery.  Ailei  being  the  instrument  uf 
destruction  |o  the  native  idolatry,  that  syitem  has  in  its  turn  been 
well  nigh  superseded  by  another,  charged  with  the  mission  of  its 
destruction— a  mission  now  rapidly  accomplishing  in  the  annihilation 
of  the  (aiUi  of  Rome.  And  inasmuch  as  inAdelity  directly  attacks 
the  moral  stnicture,  addressing  itself  to  the  mind,  and  leaving  the 

ward  forms  tv  crumble  in  neglect,  its  work,  though  in  itself  more 
t,  will  be  ior  more  fully  and  rapidly  accomplished  than  that 


256  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

which  Popery  undertook  by  first  destroying  the  idols  and  temples 
of  the  Indians,  and  then  forcing  upon  them,  at  the  point  of  the 
sword,  an  idolatry  somewhat  more  refined,  but  so  much  the  less 
adapted  to  their  rude  condition.  If  left  to  itself,  there  is  little  doubt 
that  scepticism  will  ultimately  destroy  the  foe  with  which  it  has 
grappled  in  Central  America,  at  least  as  efiectually  as  Popery  has 
overcome  the  native  superstitions  there.  But  though  the  minds  of 
the  people  must  be  emancipated  by  the  change,  that  emancipation 
can  be  viewed  only  as  a  state  of  transition,  for  man  cannot  live  vrith- 
out  some  form  of  religion,  and  human  society  requires  some  kind 
of  faith  as  surely  as  the  family  circle  supposes  a  bond  of  affection ; 
it  can,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  a  real  good,  only  as  the  oppor- 
tunity is  improved  for  the  substitution  of  a  system  that  will  build 
up  as  well  as  destroy — a  faith  that  will  prove  a  messenger  of  life  as 
well  as  an  angel  of  death — a  religion  that  will  produce  fruits  unto 
holiness,  even  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  which  are  love,  joy,  peace, 
&c  Unless  such  a  belief  be  substituted,  the  victory  of  infidelity 
over  Popery  will  prove  to  be  the  transition  only  from  one  state  of 
moral  wretchedness  and  spiritual  death  to  another,  and  will  leave 
the  unoccupied  minds  of  the  people  a  ready  prey  to  the  very 
next  cimningly-devised  system  of  falsehood  which  may  be  pre- 
sented to  them  by  the  arch  deceiver,  who,  returning  to  his 
former  abode,  will  find  it  swept  and  garnished  for  his  reception, 
and  re-entering  it  with  some  other  deceptions  more  ruinous  than 
the  former,  the  last  state  of  that  people  will  be  worse  than 
the  first. 

Of  the  fact  that  infidelity  has  spread  extensively  in  Central 
America,  and  particularly  so  in  the  very  classes  upon  which  Roman- 
ism used  to  have  the  strongest  hold,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  It  is 
proved  by  the  almost  universal  abandonment  of  the  outward  obser- 
vances of  Popery  by  the  better  educated  among  the  Ladbos,  andf 
in  spite  of  their  political  tendencies,  by  the  whites  and  the  pure 
Creoles  also,  when  such  omissions  do  not  entail  a  greater  sacrifice. 
With  the  exception  of  the  more  weak  among  the  women  and 
children,  scarcely  any  of  these  classes  are  now  to  be  seen  attending 
mass  and  confession,  and  other  requirements  are  generaUy  n^lected 
by  them.  The  number  of  infidel  works  imported,  and  displayed  in 
every  book-case,  are  constantly  found  in  the  hands  of  men,  women, 
and  children,  and  afiPord  another  evidence  of  the  &ct  that  infidelity 


INFIDEL  PIttESTS.  357 

prevail*.  So  strongly  are  the  minds  of  these  cluses  imbued 
vrith  (Instical  and  even  atheisticnl  notions,  that  it  becomes  appa- 
rent in  general  coDTenation,  and  is  unblashingi;  avowed  even 
by  mothera  in  the  presence  of  tlieir  children.  Nay,  some  of  the 
more  candid  aoiong  the  priests  openly  espouse  these  notions,  and 
yet  it  interfere!  not  with  their  utBces  in  the  church,  nor  in  the 
iMBt  impedes  the  discharge  cif  their  sacerdotal  functions.  One  of 
these,  B  native  of  the  country-,  well  knnwn  to  the  author,  has  Cre- 
quenlJj  discuised  such  subjects  with  him,  in  the  presence  of  others, 
and  has  even  ridiculed  the  pretended  authority  of  the  Pope, 
expo^  the  dogmas  and  practices  of  his  churcli,  and  rejoia-d  in  the 
tokens  of  impatieucc  manifested  by  the  people  uniler  its  intolenble 
burdens.* 

tNor  are  the  ecclesiastics  who  immigrate  from  other  countriea 
«lways  free  from  this  leaven.  The  author  once  presented  a 
Spaniab  Bible  to  a  priest  lately  from  Sj-'un,  on  his  arrival  at  the 
p)rt  of  Yzabal.  The  Fadre  expressed  himself  much  gratified  by 
Hbe  present,  declared  it  was  the  lint  Uiblc  he  hod  ever  seen  in  hti 
jBative  tongue  (it  is  very  douhtful  if  be  knew  any  other),  and  to 
testify  his  gmtilude,  he  drew  out  of  his  portmanteau  a  copy  of 
Voltaire's  Candida,  of  which  he  begged  the  author's  scceptanee. 
With  such  examples  before  them,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
the  people  are  not  afraid  to  read  infidel  books  though  strictly  pro- 
ibited,  and  that  they  readily  adopt  their  contents,  which  are  bo 
to  the  natural  corruption  and  depraved  tastes  of  the 
mctified  heart. 
The  sketch  already  given  of  the  political  acts  of  the  Liberal 
rty  in  Central  America,  is  of  itself  proof  sufficient  of  the  prevs- 
«  of  opinions  inimical  to  fanaticism,  and  doubtless  the  amount 
f  opposition  to  Fopery  implied  in  those  acts  must  have  increased 
luring  their  operation,  and  in  the  period  of  poUticol  reaction 
prbich  has  followed. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  insidious  lekven  of  unbelief  is 

*<iniGned  to  the  better  taught  classes,  though  it  is  certainly  matt 

prevalent  among  them.    Some  of  their  Ldeaa  would  of  neecMity 


r 


An  f  Wcrlj 

™.lBl1 

(d  at  Gmtmii 

l»l..rl.oSrf 

MhiKdlofflnhd 

m 

ciniiaHc 

htnulK.ui 

LhCWoriU 

dTB 

TIlB    BIB 

rdiUd  Utf 

utbat,  lui 

nbl.lt. 

tnim\  ■> 

Uhrtlo 

-Sm  hnw 

tl«  poor 

peoplo  IT 

bcgUimBg 

n<d,ul 

nftocM 

ponuiyoiin 

S88  THE  G08PSL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

qpfeid  to  ikt  more  intelligent  ftrtmnis  and  kbooren^  and  thoogli 
hm  cultiyated  and  infonned,  the  people  generally  are  pbeed  in  a 
poBtion  to  tee  and  feel,  eren  better  than  their  soperiors  in  learning, 
Hat  extortionary  and  licentious  character  of  the  priesthood  of  their 
mm  land.  Those  moet  gifted  with  commoii  sense  draw  their  con- 
cfasions  from  such  practical  premises  eren  more  unerringly  than 
the  others  eonld  do  ih>m  the  most  logical  arguments;  and  dis- 
•fiection  to  the  priests,  and  consequently  to  the  system  which  sap- 
parts  them,  has  spread  among  the  middling  dasses  and  even 
beyond  them,  though  there  is  much  less  of  positive,  S3rstematic,  or 
professed  infidelity  with  them.  The  chief  counteractiBg  elements 
IB  their  case  are  the  practical  corruptions,  excesses,  and  extor- 
turns  of  the  system  itself,  which  they  have  now  learned  to  distrust, 
and  will  soon  entirdy  repudiate. 

How  fiur  this  disaffection  extenda  can  be  known  only  by  a  long 
nridenee,  and  even  then  in  but  an  imperfect  nuuiner.  Of  its  cads- 
tcnee  there  is  no  want  of  evidence.  The  history  of  the  past,  the 
tastimony  of  those  who  have  lately  visited  the  eoaotry,  aad  events 
actoally  transpiring,  shew  that  Roman  CatholiciBm — ^whatever 
may  be  its  prospects  elsewhere — has  even  now  lost  its  hold  upon 
the  great  bulk  of  active  minds  in  this  part  of  Spanish  AaMfica. 
Bopery  is  here  fest  falling  before  the  light  of  that  dvilimticMi  and 
those  liberal  institutions  which  have  been  borrowed  firom  eountiies 
already  somewhat  leavened  with  Bible  morality  and  truth.  It  is 
andermined  by  its  own  supporters  and  votaries,  and  dw  feMe 
attacks  of  an  indiscriminating  scepticism  may  suffice  at  any  hoar 
to  oomplete  its  ruin.  The  first  blows  aimed  at  its  poUtieal  ezistCDce 
liave  been  given,  and  given  in  an  unequivocal  manner,  nckr  have 
ttcy  missed  their  aim.  The  subsequent  ancl  the  last  blows  will  be 
all  the  easier  to  inflict,  and  the  infliction  may  not  be  &r  distant. 
Shall  we  wait  till  the  ruin  of  <»ie  kind  of  errtSr  occurs,  befere  we 
endeavour  to  impart  the  truth  which  alone  can  calm  the  agitated 
mind  ?  Shall  we  stand  aloof  and  retoe  to  pour  in  the  wine  and 
ofl  of  the  Gospel  to  heal  its  wounds,  because  errors  are  weakeniBg' 
cadi  other,  and  a  more  decisive  crisis  may  result?  Or  shall  we  at 
once  use  the  influence  that  we  possess,  and  step  in  between  the 
dying  and  the  dead  to  stay  further  contagion,  and  apply  to  the 
extent  of  our  ability  the  means  of  God*s  appointed  mercy.  If  en- 
couragement is  needed  to  stir  up  the  disciple  of  the  com] 


ECCLESIAETICAL   M»RALS.  SS9 

I  Jesui  to  obey  bU  Lord  a  command  and  to  follow  in  his  footateps. 
It  encouragement  is  to  b«  fouad  iu  the  prepsrcdneai  of  oli  classes 
I  to  throw  off  their  alli;giaQce  to  the  Bpiritual  Babjloo,  and,  smtHig 
I  «tber  sfHems,  to  consider  the  cUimaofthc  Gospel  ofthe  Sod  of  G(m1> 
The  abamelen  Immoialitj  of  the  Kumish  clergy  has  been 
I  pointed  out  oa  a  chief  agent  ia  bringing  about  the  present 
X  of  tblcigs.  On  this  subject  a  simple  record  uf  daily  occur- 
ccs  would  revolt  every  sense  of  decency,  and  acarccly  obtaio 
Ibe  credence  of  the  English  reader.  Let  it  suffice  to  say, 
L  gEDeraily,  that  there  is  no  crime  in  the  blackest  catalogue  which 
I  the  Scriptures  afford  us,  and  no  known  extreme  eshibition  of 
I  Human  depravity,  of  which  the  clergy  in  Cenlial  America  do  not 
I  ifibrd  some  eiamplea ;  and  that  llie  habitual  conduct  they  poTSiic 
I  >— with  bat  few  exceptions— in  such  as  woidd  subject  them  to  the 
1  kaviest  penalues  of  the  criminal  laws  of  any  other  country.  They 
I  Ke  shielded  from  the  deserved  putii»hmentoflheir  crimes  in  Centnl 
I  Americ*  only  by  the  ezistenct;  of  the  "Fuera  Eclemastico,''  which 
confers  upon  tbem  llie  privilege  of  being  tried  by  the  Ecclesiasticd 
\  Court,  and  exempts  them  from  every  other  tribunal.  The  author 
baa  heard  it  openly  asserted  by  a  priest  in  tlie  capital,  that  there 
wasthen(in  1S46)  scarcely  a  angle  vicar,  curate,  or  priest  nfanykiad, 
in  oil  the  Archbishopric  of  Guatemala,  who  had  not  one  or  more 
nscs  of  a  criminal  nature  filed  against  bim  in  the  "  Cabildo  Ede- 

■  Mitico,"  and  not  a  fi;w  of  them  had  eight  or  t«n.  The  majority  of 
tltese  •ccusations  are  for  offences  of  a  libidmons  character;  rape, 
adultery,  and  unnatural  crimes  being  among  the  number.  Cases  of 
■eduction  and  of  refusal  to  support  illegitimate  oflipring  are  w 
common  as  to  be  thought  quite  venial.  But  these  relfgioia  I'unc- 
ttonaries  are  not  even  suspended  for  such  offences.  Many  of  them, 
with  Uttle  or  no  disguise,  retain  one  or  more  concubine^  olkn 

IUvingitogether  with  their  children,' in  the '  Co'  I'mto,' the  curate's 
SGsidcnce,gcnerat]yattacbedIo  the  church,  aitd  ioto  which  formerly 
Bo  woman  was  allowed  to  enter.  They  indtilge  to  excess  in  eating 
Bid  drinking;  they  gamble,  riot,  revel,  use  blasphemous,  profaae, 
*  "  Alnnt  MO.  >  Liv  wtt  puud  dcclonn;  that  Ike  illc^inulE  cbildKB  of  all  jiiiwni 
liMild  •utcecd  B  then  (UKu'i  prDpslgf.in  Uie  HBe  muiur  n  J  UU7  wen  l^DmUs-a 
law  wliieli  liniJl  ill  forcF.  Bjlhi:l«ir»o/Spuiii,iidopl&lljjCeiilr»iAiiicnr»,tlic»lio[eof 
*  io»o't  piopirtj  mmt  be  cqiuDj  dir.apa  sowBi  his  ttiailj,  ud  bt  on  Iwn  DothiBg  t> 
mr  Mket  pcnoa,  pmiiltd  he  bu  kgiCimile  diaOno.  Ttan  it  *(hU  ^mw  OU  mt- 
"*""V«  ••  ImUfmOBni^  u  IU  ebify,  Uuofli  lunMic  is  (nUbiM.'— Uvky^ 
Cntnl  Jonuin,  p  lei. 


280  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

And  lewd  language  ;  they  extort  exorbitant  fees,  exact  unjost  and 
exoeflriye  services,  and  grind  the  fiices  of  the'poor.  All  this  they 
may  do  with  impunity,  but  if  they  should  shew  the  least  symptom 
of  independence  of  action  with  respect  to  the  forms,  doctrines,  or 
authority  of  the  Church,  the  offence  is  followed  by  their  immediate 
suspension  and  speedy  punishment.  Some,  however,  as  it  has  been 
shown,  are  permitted  to  acknowledge  themselves  utterly  unbeliev- 
ing, and  are  tolerated  in  the  utmost  license  as  far  as  mere  words  go. 
In  such  cases  nothing  is  sacred,  and  little  care  is  taken  to  secure 
privacy,  but  not  a  jot  is  bated  of  the  most  complete  subjection  in 
point  of  action,  and  the  most  servile  submission  to  the  power  of 
**  the  Beast'*  is  scrupulously  enforced. 

In  the  sacerdotal  ranks  are  always  to  be  found  salient  spe- 
cimens of  the  different  forms  which  character  and  position  gire 
to  criminality.  There  may  be  seen  the  haughty  intriguing  pre- 
late and  his  equally  ambitious,  but  less  successful  rivals,  strik- 
ingly exemplifying  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness. 
lliere  are  also  to  be  found  ravening  wolves  sustaining  the  two- 
fold character  of  army  chaplains  and  guerilla  chieftains,  who  are 
not  even  carefhl  to  retain  the  clothing  of  the  sheep— the  Guar- 
diolas  and  the  Malespins  of  the  Church — ^there  are  not  wanting  in 
almost  infinite  variety,  the  tyrannical,  the  avaricious,  the  licentious, 
and  the  intemperate  curates,  dovm  to  that  poor  drivelling  sot  in 
rusty  cassock  and  long  shovel-hat,  become  lustrous  with  use,  who 
with  staggering  steps  daily  reels  from  door  to  door  through  the  streets 
of  the  capital,  craving  an  alms  wherewith  to  purchase  aguardiente 
(mm),  in  order  to  restore  him  from  the  horrors  which  the  alms  of 
the&ithful,  given  on  the  previous  day,  have  produced.  This  he  asks 
finr  the  sake  of  "  Maria  Santissima**  (most  holy  Mary),  and  in  the 
name  of  our  holy  mother  church !  Nor  is  the  injurious  pittance 
often  withheld,  though  given  probably  more  out  of  fear  than  love, 
or  even  the  interested  desire  to  acquire  merit. 

Who  can  wonder  that  both  the  untaught  artisan,  and  the  more 
polished  descendant  of  a  European  race,  have  learned  to  execrate  in 
their  hearts  the  system  that  daily  affords  them  such  spectacles  as 
these  ?  To  the  more  thoughtful  among  both  these  classes  it  has 
long  been  given  to  see  the  hideous  deformity  of  Popery,  which  be  it 
remembered,  like  its  teachers  and  rulers,  has  never  worn  the  mask 
in  this  remote  region  which  is  so  indispensable  in  more  refined 


THE  HYPOCBiey   OP  SCEPTICS.  S61 

dety,*  Prompted  by  a  naturnl  curiosity,  greatly  stimulated  hy  the 
authoritative  prohiiiitioD  of  the  Pope,  all  who  could  do  sa  have  pro* 
cured  precisely  tbo«e  books  irhich  most  openly  attack  the  Popedom 
— a  catalc^ue  of  which  is  conveniently  fumiahed  theni  by  the  Holy 
See  itaelf-t  They  have  familiarized  tbcaiselves  uith  the  works  of 
Valtaire,BouffieaD,Yo1tiey,  La  Place,  and  others  of  that  clasa.  They 
have  studied  tbdr  contents,  till  led  step  by  step,  with  variouB 
d^rces  of  progress,  they  have  passed  on  from  deism  to  atheism  and 
a  general  icepticism,  down  to  its  lust  earthly  stage  of  bitter  niisaD- 
thropy  and  gloomy  despair.  In  them  is  fuUy  verified  the  inspired 
description  given  in  Romans  i.  22,—"  Professmg  themselves  to  be 
ynaef  they  became  fools."  Nor  could  their  actual  condition  be 
described  tn  few  words  in  any  way  so  suitably  as  by  referring  the 
reader  to  the  remaining  part  of  that  bumilinting  chapter,  which 
is  espedally  applicable  to  the  clergy. 

It  is  a  characteristic  of  which  iafidelily  (lartakes  in  common 
with  other  systems  of  falsehood,  that  while  the  judgment 
is  afleded  and  the  tastes  are  influenced,  neither  are  decidedly 
changed.  It  is  a  distinguishing  feature  in  truth,  that  it  not 
only  discovers  error,  but  destroys  it.  Thus  liiith  in  falsehood 
is  often  inefficacious,  while  the  belief  of  the  truth  can  remove 
I  mountains.  The  true  believer  in  Christ  is  at  once  brought  under 
I  the  sway  of  Ills  principles;  but  the  advocate  of  a  false  system^ — 
■nd  especially  the  sceptic  or  the  professor  of  doubt — remains 
unchanged  by  his  opinions,  and  ollen  conforms  to  and  supports  the 
practices  that  he  professes  to  condemn,    This  is  the  case  to  some 

*  A  Spuiih  Somui  Citliolio  gtnUeOAB  ut  cdncalioD,  and  ■ooie  u^uiaUncc  irith 

Innpoui  KiQrtT,  mt  lent  te  OoitRiudii  Da  an  imptntint  miwian  Id  ihe  ;tu  IMS.    Be 

Uk  vilb  Ud  b  IMter  oF  ncummeiulilioii  frani  tLe  Rsinjdi  Biilup  in  Londou  lo  tlia 

f  Uebal  MclMiulial  rli^luria  d[  C«atm  Amenra,  mi  be  bnd  wiUi  blm  mthcnUailid 

'  '    lyrciiil  of  Poper;  in  Enijui].  1111]  ul  hido  uuatcni  minclia  Hivughl  Id 

u  of  GD^Uah,  or  pfihain  Ititb^  BobiLitj.    Before  paaiin^  the  tlimbnid  of 

,  liB  wmi^  ID  ail  eppeannce.  a  aiucen  uid  dmited  adliertDt  to  tlic  riilL  of 

I  kii  niten.    ILi  mloion  luleil  bun  llim  la  foiu  monllii.    Befure  Itatinj  iu  ihom. 

.  1  jm  Hill  ncTcc  har  Die  tike  in  dclcneo  tgilu.  I  Im  hm  imnisA."  H« 
BAt  ksowiuK  tliat  he  lued  >  Scnptunl  mel^Lgr,  "  Foper;  u  llie  hairt  U  lUi 
11  it  eonnpud.  Vata  tkij  bavc  it  muuveil,  tsd  a  new  one  iDbiUtuted,  Otat 
tor  ttan."  Tha  lertlnuRiT  u  the  nioie  veighi;  ILit  iJie  indiiidnil  jiitc  so 
tnlDi  hiuielf  (oaTeried. 

t  uf  prohitiUed  hoaLi  bud  pouosn  ordered  to  be  es|iiiii|od  by  "tlieCoQfttgt- 
ledek,"  bodiuJ  with  the  Pope'*  Hbetum,  hu  heeu  repfiutud  jil  auleiudi 
fnlajaatfd  tgiiut  the  DIble  M  late  nlM). 


!}88  THE  OOSPBL   IN   CBNTBAL  AMEBICA. 

Extent  with  the  infidels  of  Central  America.  They  are  frequeaiSy 
to  be  found  kndkig  their  coantenance  to  Pc^Mxy  under  the  spedoos 
miA  hjpocritieal  pretext,  that,  tbofugh  not  good  for  thean,  some 
80ft  of  belief  is  requisite  as  a  means  whereby  to  control  the  more 
Ignorant  classes  of  the  people.  In  this  kind  of  insineerity-  the 
nose  simple-minded,  who  have  rejected  the  chdms  of  Popery  firon 
detestation  of  the  condaet  of  its  priesthood,  participate  to  a  modi 
less  extent  Tet  they  also  frequently  conform  at  least  to  some  of 
its  outward  observmces,  because  wanting  in  that  firm  principle  and 
uncompromising  integrity  of  heart  whidi  only  a  lively  fiuth  in 
IHyine  truth — which  cannot  be  separated  from  the  love  of  it — will 
produce  in  the  naturally  flexible  and  unfaithful  heart  of  man. 

Apart  from  the  political  and  pecuniary  influence  which  adheres 
to  the  Church  as  a  sort  of  national  establishment,  iti  only  remaining 
prop  consists  of  a  still  large  though  rapidly  decreasing  daas  of 
blind  iMgots  and  fanatical  xealots,  whose  reason  for  this  subser- 
rieney — if  reason  may  be  once  named  in  conjunction  with  such — it 
would  be  difficult  indeed  to  define.  But  the  attempt  need  not  be 
made,  as  the  same  class  exists  in  every  society,  and  is  well  km>wn 
by  the  same  featdres  that  distinguish  it  here,  viz.,  eagerness  to 
voctforate  to  the  echo  any  and  every  cry  which  an  endangered 
craft  nmy  raise,  and  readiness  tumultuously  to  come  together  at 
every  call  of  evil,  though  the  greater  part  are  in  genetml  utterly 
Ignorant  of  the  cause,  and  it  would  often  be  difficult  to  assign  one. 
The  influence  of  the  mass  of  minds  buried  in  this  class  operates  for 
the  most  part  only  passively.  It  is  one  of  the  aoontain  diffi- 
culties in  the  way  of  evangelizing  the  people.  Evexy  individnal  in 
that  class  is,  however,  capable  of  being  transformed  into  an  active 
agent  for  that  evangelisation.  At  preanit,  under  the  directioii  and 
with  the  active  co-operation  c^  their  priests,  together  with  the 
anpineness  and  indifFerenoe  of  their  opponents,  they  keep  their 
native  country  in  a  state  of  political  turmoil  and  commotion; 
tiicy  sustain  the  delusioB  and  snare  of  Popeiy,  and  they  diahearten 
the  friends  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  who  have  so  often  been 
foiled  by  their  means. 

Thus,  while  the  upheavings  of  society,  and  many  s^nificant 
indications  upon  its  surface,  point  to  die  speedy  overthrow  of 
ibe  system  that  has  predcHninated  for  three  centuries — a  sys- 
tem  that  has  tynmiari,  nocatty  and  ipiritaally,  for  more  thaa 


^H      «ven  tbi 
YY       is  yet.  t 


LADINO  FORM  At  ITT — TUK  MASS. 


tbe  Sptuii^  monarebj  coiild  dn  in  n  pliysical  aense— there 
b  ;eti  to  the  snperticial  obwTver.  a  general  BubmibSton  and  con- 
fonnily  1o  the  Chnrch  of  Rome,  imd  a  dcrvile  deference  paid  to  ita 
clergy.  But  nhile  tbe  exhibitions  of  unity  and  agreement  are,  in 
some  {Mitknlar  instanceii,  siiipvlarly  general  and  constant,  yet  it  w 
Diaintained  that  they  ue  ea  onJy  in  outnard  furm  and  appearance. 
And  if  it  be  urged  that  Popery  aaka  no  niore, — it  is  replied,  tlwt 
under  these  appearaneen  are  actively  at  work  all  tbe  elements  of 
oppotution  l>efbre  alluded  to,  and  that  it  rc([uireg  only  some  politiukl 
«liange,  and  pcrhapa  but  nnc  more  vigorous  blow,  to  predpitate  the 
lofty  MalfoUing,  and  lay  it  level  with  the  ground. 
k  Perhaps  uii  country  still  prescrveti  on  the  iace  of  H)dety,  or 
ruiljer  on  tbe  outward  manuers  and  language  of  llie  people,  more 
ODmplelc  and  Evstemutie  forms  of  subjection  to  Popery,  the 
aniversality  of  Mhicb  in  some  measure  Gompensstes  for  tbe  very 
general  want  of  inward  re^^pect  which  is  felt  in  their  observance. 
Of  coune  these  are  conSncd  to  brief  and  easy  performances,  which 
imply  little  or  no  sacrifice — at  least  the  general  submission  is  con- 
fined to  such. 

Prom  four  o'clock  in  tbe  morning  till  noon  of  every  day,  masa 
N  said  or  sung  suceenively  at  did'crent  diurebcs  in  a  settled  roU- 
taun.  The  mcnt  kborious  clashes,  inferior  hoosebold  servaati,  and 
tlw  most  aiolous  devotees,  may  be  seen  at  that  early  hour  issuing 
fiom  their  lubitations,  devoutly  crosing  themselves,  or  rather 
their  mouths,  with  tbe  thumb  of  their  right  hand,  as  they  stepinto 
the  street.  Fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  spent  standing,  kneeling,  or 
squatting  down  upon  ibc  flag  pavement  of  tbe  church,  the  band 
dipped  in  the  stone  vessel  of  holy-water  near  the  door,  and  a  lew 
m  a  great  many  more  crossings,  according  to  tbe  tasic  of  each  one, 
eomplete  the  dcvoiioaai  preparation  for  the  duties  of  tlie  day.  Still, 
the  attendance  is  bnt  scanty.  It  is  mostly  composed  of  women  and 
children  1  and  the  gray  and  brown  habits  of  aged  profetsed  devotees, 
with  gigantic  scapulars  covering  their  breasts  and  han^ng  below 
their  waists,  generally  predominate.  As  the  day  advances,  the 
Hv&aa  and  Seiioritas,  in  tbcir  dark  coloured  "rollieras"  (silk 
dreaae*)  and  rich  kce  veils,  followed  by  their  waiting-maids, 
wearing  black  silk  niantilliB,  sacceed  tbe  formtr  occupants  of  tbe 
eold  pavement,  and  bow  and  count  their  beads  before  a  ^Ided 
shrine,  while  the  fnll-toned  organ  and  the  trained  cboristera  do 


26i  THB  GOfiFBL  IN  CKNTBAI^  AMKBICA. 

time  best  to  oonjoie  up  devotioiial  feelings  by  means  of  sweet  and 
soleiiin  somids.  A  few  young  men — students  or  derics — ^wrapped  in 
the  ample  folds  of  a  Spanish  cloak,  may  be  seen  standing  aloof^  but 
their  attention  is  more  fi^uently  engrossed  by  the  light  and 
graceful  forms  that  are  bending  bdfore  them,  than  by  the  motiims 
cf  the  priest  at  the  altar,  or  the  magnificent  ornaments  of  the 
place.  The  mass  which  is  attended  by  the  troops  with  the  mili- 
tny  band  is  the  most  finequented,  though  many  have  a  fftTOurite 
priest,  a  fiither  confessor,  or  one  who  gets  rapidly  through  the  cere* 
many,  to  whom  they  give  the  preference.  Hitherto,  but  few  of  the 
people  have  been  engaged.  Perhaps  not  more  than  one-tenth  of 
the  population  enter  the  thirty  churches  and  chapels  of  the  city 
of  Gruatemala,  from  early  matins  to  the  latest  mass. 

About  ten  in  the  morning,  when  high  mass  is  sung  at  the 
cathedral,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  capital  give  themselves  to  a 
nmultaneous  act  of  worship.  At  the  moment  when  the  priest 
at  the  altar  lifts  or  waves  the  **Hostia**  (the  consecrated  wafer 
called  god,  and  about  to  be  sacrificed  by  himX  the  persons 
present  in  the  body  of  the  edifice  prostrate  themselves  in  an  atti- 
tnde  of  adoration.  A  bell  then  tolls  to  announce  the  fiict  to  those 
outside.  As  soon  as  its  sound  strikes  upon  their  ears,  the  people 
in  the  streets  immediately  stop,  uncover  themselves,  and  turning 
towards  the  cathedral,  mutter  a  short  form  of  adoration  to  the 
wafer  god.  Every  vehicle  is  arrested  in  its  progress,  and  even  the 
ncHsy  muleteer  refrains  from  driving  and  cursing  his  mules,  to 
tmite  with  the  women  and  children  of  every  rank  who  are  already 
kneeling  on  the  pavements  around  him.  Persons  in  their  own 
houses,  buyers  and  sellers  in  the  merchants*  stores  in  the  market- 
place or  at  the  Mezon,  artizans  at  their  work,  and  statesmen  in 
their  cabinet,  all  suspend  their  occupation  for  a  moment,  and 
having  repeated  the  form,  or  appeared  to  do  so,  resume  their  avo- 
cations, or  take  up  the  thread  of  their  discourse,  with  that  unmoved 
indifference  which  shews  it  to  be  at  once  a  habitual  act  and  a  mere 
<mt¥rard  form.* 

*  Tbe  IbUofwing  if  an  extrut  from  the  joimul  of  an  £ii^iih  mere^ 

IBtt.— QOled  titti  forenoon  at  the  itora  of  Bennor .  Whflit  theTe,the  beU  of  the  cathedral 

diimed.  Then  ware  nx  or  aeven  penom  pitaent  beaidea  onnehrea;  they  all  dropped 
neat  denniUy  v^on  their  kneea,  in  whidi  poatoie  they  remained  two  or  three  minntaa; 
tat»  aa  an  efideaoe  that  tUa  ia  a  mere  merhankal  operation  a  aoit  of  antomaton  ofotai- 
Ite  in  whiA  the  mind  hai  no  shar»-0M  of  the  dedEi^  who  wai  iiMiC  at  the  deak  OK 


aUDLTANEOUS  TrORGHlF. 


This  ciutom  u  observed  in  every  town  and  village  niicre  maM 
ia  daily  odebraied  ;  and  vain  and  puerile  as  it  tnaj  appear  in  itself, 
it  is  a  constaoUj  recurring  memorial  of  llie  aobjection  of  tlie  people's 
minds.  It  is  a  practical  acknowledgmeut  of  a  fal%  and  a  material 
deity,  and,  as  such,  it  is  an  open,  an  impious,  and  a  daring  provo- 
cation ol'  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh. 

Nonconfonnity  to  this  custom  has  hitherto  been  considered 
dangerous.  The  foreigner  who  should  refuse  to  slaod  and  to 
temove  his  hat  at  least,  if  found  in  the  street,  must  by  bo  doing 
attract  attention,  aud  expose  himself  at  any  time  to  become  the 
Tietim  of  the  first  murderous  ^-illoiii  who  might  think  proper  to 
meut  the  insult,  Vet  it  has  been  braved,  and  aa  the  infliiencc  of 
tile  priesthood  declines,  and  the  number  of  Ibrcigners  to  whom  it 
'IKay  be  diatasleful  is  augmented,  the  imminence  of  this  risk  wilt,  of 
.CDune,  also  decrease. 

A  second  daily  act  of  nmultsneous  worship,  though  of  a  more 
domestic  and  less  universal  character,  takes  place  at  the  hour  of 
Rinaet,  therefore  called  "  La  Oracion,"  or  the  hour  of  prayer.  The 
Biore  elderly  women,  the  younger  children,  most  of  the  domestic* 
■t£  each  household,  and  wnietimea  some  of  the  men,  withdraw  to  an 
!|{wrtnic»t,  a  sort  of  inner  hall,  or  inferior  sitting  room,  in  which 
jfcere  are  one  or  more  crucifixes,  and  some  images  and  pictures  of 
4he  virgin  and  saints.  Before  one  of  thece,  which  occupies  a  Idod 
«f  altar,  are  arranged  bouquets  of  flowers,  and  a  lighted  candle  it 
keptbuming,  perhaps,  duringapart,  or  all  of  the  day,  but  more  par- 
ticularly at  this  hour.  The  domestic  group  stand  or  kneel  around 
Id  a  semicircle.  One  of  the  dames  generally  leads  off  by  rapidly 
lepeating  or  chanting  a  kind  of  litauy  to  which  the  rest  respond  at 
JnierToU,  using  vain  repetitions,  and  addressing  a  multitude  of 
mppoaed  intercessors  with  "  Ora  pro  nobis."  The  creed  and  other 
fimns  are  repeated.  The  virgin  is  again  and  again  saluted  and 
addresaed,  and  the  usual  number  of  empty  sounds  having  been 
Ottered,  the  family  salute  each  other  with  a  sonorous  'JJuenas 
Nochea'  (good-night),  the  children  approach  their  parents  and  any 
Cither  elderly  persona  present,  who  place  their  hands  ujion  the 


ttOatUM.  mi  nnUniwd  lili 


SB8  THB  QtmOBL  IN  CEMTRAL  AMERICA. 

orovn  of  their  heads  in  tc^oen  of  baiediction,  and  the  derotiooB  of 
the  day  are  oonelnded. 

So  prevalent  is  this  practice,  that  while  merely  paning  along  the 
sbreets  daring  the  short  tn^ncal  twilight,  the  mnrmor  of  united 
T«ees  is  heard  to  proceed  from  every  house,  and  the  hum  of  these 
misdirected  prayers  fills  the  whole  city. 

The  servant  who  first  brings  lighted  candles  into  the  room  occu- 
pied by  the  fiunily,  repeats  as  she  enters  with  them,  in  a  drawl- 
ii^  tone,  ^Bendito  y  alabado  sea  el  Santo  Sacramento  del  altar** 
(blessed  and  praised  be  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  altar),  to  which 
ike  inmates  are  supposed  to  make  a  characteristic  response — ^now, 
however,  generally  discontinued. 

Besides  these  daily  ohaervanoes,  there  are  others  less  frequent  or 
periodically  regular  in  their  occurrence,  but  no  less  fixed  and 
recognised  customs,  which  are  significant  only  of  the  remaining 
power  of  the  priests,  or  continue  as  mere  vestiges  of  th^  former 
i^Molute  and  unlimited  swi^. 

Many  modes  of  speech  which  universally  prevail  are  not  less 
striking,  and  also  demonstrate  that  the  outvnurd  forms  and  pro  -> 
fisHionof  Fopeiy  haveyet  tobesupi^anted.  The  name  of  God  is 
seldom  long  out  of  the  mouth  of  any  Central  American,  and  ia 
most  frequent  in  all  his  exclamations.  Among  multiplied  com- 
piiments  the  Divine  protection  and  blesong  is  often  invoked.  The 
name  of  ^''Jetut^  mostly  united  with  that  of  ^^Afariaj*'  has  become 
a  oommon  interjection,  and  is  constantly  reiterated.  When  any 
vexatious  drcumstanoe  occurs,  however  trivial,  it  is  usual  to  say 
^  Sea  por  Dios,**  which  is  equivalmt  to  let  it  be  for  Cktd't  sake, 
hot  really  meaning  no  more  than  it  ceumot  be  helped.  This  saying 
prohaUy  had  its  origin  in  the  idea  of  meritorious  endurance,  and 
VKd  to  he  a  sort  of  reminder  to  the  recording  angd  to  put  down 
the  passing  pai^  to  the  credit  side  of  thesufPerer^s  running  aocount. 
The  most  prevalent  fcum  of  thanks  is  **  Dios  se  lo  pague,*'  God 
repu^  yoM,  and  the  first  greeting  as  well  as  the  last  farewell  is  "k 
Bios,"  or  (I  commend  you)  to  God,  J£  an  engagement  is  made,  It 
is  invariably**  Si  Dios  quiere,'*GWtrt/lM^;  andif  abondisentefcd 
into,  there  is  always  a  verbal  proviso  expressed  by  the  words 
**  Fzimero  Dios,**  meaning  if  my  previous  duty  to  God  should  per- 
■nk.  **Dio8  8ofai«  toda,'*GotfoMrafl^isooeoftheni08t£reqnentl7 
repeated  proverbs,  where  proverbial  sayings  are-  by  no 


raoceasiosa  of  cobpdb  misTt. 

Plpariiigl]^  used.     In  ifaort,  though  their  custom  in  tbeK  reelects 

I  eoovej-s  a  piactknt  rebuke  to  many  who  really  love  aud  revere  the 

mcoftheMo^t  High,  yet  it  canDOt  be  qneBliooedthat  onnll  tbese, 

id  Ml  many  other  Dc<ssioiis  not  enumeralcd  here,  they  habitnally 

I  Ktd  carelcMly  break  the  third  oammanduient.      And,  as  might  be 

p^qieeted  bom.  sach,  we  fiai  the  exlrL-nic  of  snperglition  accom- 

1  faajriiig  tliii  jmrfkaeness,  Ibr,  at  other  timea,  ther  uie  the  m; 

tegaona  u  thougli  thcj  mpposed  them  to  poaiesi  vtrtoe 

I  k  tbeniMlvea,  «nd  nill  more  dishonour  the  racred  name  of  tbe 

\  Diviiiiiy,  by  employing  it  for  a  cbonn,  or  mnttcting  it  n  an  incan- 

MkuL. 

Strong  and  condusiTe  as  the  cvidenee  yielded  by  the»c  tacti 
Biu«t  be  as  to  the  real  condition  ol'tlie  pciple.  it  will  be  observed  that 
I  k  >9  far  more  decided  on  tbe  Korc  of  tmpietj  ami  formalism  than 
I  an  that  of  Popery ;  and  those  irho  have  observed  the  force  of  long 
LlMbit  upon  a  people,  xnd  know  the  unwillingness  with  which  Buch 
je  abandoned,  will  attach  no  uodue  weight  to  their  con- 
I  liniwd  prcralnux.  It  is  an  undeniable  lact  that  some  English 
I  CUaUnm  and  tonas  of  speech,  still  in  general  ate  and  acceptance, 
c  their  or^n  in  the  ancient  Popery  of  firilain,  and  date  furthci 
Khnck  tfiui  the  Kcforamtion  of  the  16lb  century. 

t  to  be  expected  that  these  observances,  any  more  than 
K  galaCi  processions,  and  imagery  of  the  sygteiD,  should  be  among 
K  tint  things  to  decay  or  to  be  thrown  aside.  On  tbe  contrary, 
Ivy  seem  likely  from  their  icry  nulurc  to  fall  among  its  latest 

TTie  pnbBc  diversaons  of  the  people  have  hitherto  been  confined 

I  to  the  fowt*  and  celebrations  of  the  Churcli ;  and  even  ihc  few 

lally  mtioiwl  festivities  have,  by  the  cunning  craftincm  of  tbe 

',  been  mixed  np  with  their  ceTcmcminls  and  closely  associated 

fWilb  the  Church  of  Rome. 

•  The  prindpol  annual  cccledastkal  feast  is  that  of  "Corpus 
~S>ri«tr  (the  body  of  Christ),  occurring  abonl  the  month  of  Jniwh 
ccasioR  a  profane  mimicr)-  of  the  death  and  resurrection 
f  our  Lord  ia  performed,  and  for  several  successive  days,  proces- 
«  md  pogcAots  take  place.  In  every  town  and  village  altan 
"ire  erected,  and  gaily  or  richly  adorned  with  images,  vases,  artlB- 
ci*l  floweni,  opd  looking-glasses,  at  the  coroersofthe  streets  and  of 
the  public  sqaares.    These  are  frequently  ewnnected  by  eorered  ways 


J 


268  THE  G08PBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

or  arched  bowers,  decorated  with  the  luxuriant  Terdnre  peculiar  to 
the  country.  The  chief  point  of  the  diversion  consists  in  a  contest 
for  the  supposed  body  of  our  Lord,  carried  on  between  Jews^ 
Moors,  and  Devils  (with  their  faces  blackened),  on  the  one  hand ; 
and  on  the  other  by  the  three  Marys,  the  twelve  Apostles,  and  a 
company  of  Angels,  who,  personified  by  living  persons  (often 
chorister  boys  in  appropriate  disguise),  or  represented  by  decorated 
images,  may  be  seen  flying  up  and  down  the  streets  in  hot  pursuit, 
fighting  vrith  each  other,  and  frolicking,  to  the  great  amusement 
of  the  spectators  and  to  the  special  delight  of  little  children.  All 
finally  unite  in  good  harmony,  and  march  with  the  priests, — sacred 
banners,  crucifixes,  wax  candles,  images  of  the  saints,  and  other 
paraphernalia,  succeeded  by  troops  with  a  military  band,  and 
followed  by  the  crowds  Thus  they  proceed  along  the  canopied 
path  from  altar  to  altar,  at  each  of  which  a  short  mass  is  sung. 
From  the  grated  balconies  of  every  house  are  hung  large  scarlet 
cloths,  and  pure  white  streamers  interspersed  with  the  national 
flag.  Within  the  capacious  windows  are  companies  of  wealthy 
citizens  and  their  fimiilies,  who  devoutly  kneel  as  the  procession 
approaches.  Others,  less  fiivourably  placed,  are  gathered  in  com- 
panies at  the  comers  of  the  intersecting  streets.  These  also  adore 
while  the  priestly  train  passes ;  and  ladies,  dressed  in  rich  velvets 
and  costly  laces,  are  not  the  last  to  lift  their  gowns  and  kneel  upon 
the  pavements  before  this  at  once  pompous  and  ridiculous  puppet- 
show.* 

*  "On  the  day  wt  apart  for  the  festintj,  the  ihopi  are  dosed  and  hnnneat  toipeBded. 
About  ten  o'dodc  the  proceaakm  eommenoet  from  the  cathedral.  A  troop  of  militaiy, 
mardiing  to  a  alow  tone,  lead  the  way ;  and  are  followed  by  six  of  the  finest  Indian  gidi 
that  can  be  procured,  bearing  hirge  wax  candles,  and  dressed  in  the  ancient  costumes  of 
their  tribes,  accompanied  by  the  great  drum,  carried  on  the  back  of  an  Indian,  and 
beaten  by  two  oUiers.  These  sre  succeeded  by  men  bearing  on  their  shoulders  wooden 
platforma,  on  which  are  placed  images  of  saints.  Other  representations  of  beatified 
eardinals  and  bishops  follow,  escorted  by  angels  with  qtreading  wings.  Then  sncoeeda  sb 
iwmeniie  statne  of  St.  Peter,  bearing  the  keys,  and  si^ported  by  angels  on  tauck  aide. 
Other  images  pass  forward  in  succession,  and  immediately  precede  the  Host,  whidi  is 
canied  under  a  splendid  eanopy,  and  accompanied  by  the  archluahop  and  the  dignified 
dogy.  The  Taiiona  orders  of  friars,  the  priests,  and  the  collegiate  stodents,  in  their  robes, 
foDoVi  and  fresh  images  of  saints  and  angeb,  with  a  new  troop  of  military,  bring  vf  the 
rear.  .  .  .  The  setting  out  and  return  to  the  cathedral  are  notified  by  frequent  dis- 
charges of  dcy-rockets."— Dunn's  Guatemala,  p.  114, 

The  cdossal  angds  are  dressed  up  in  satins,  Ice.,  after  a  most  tawdry  manner,  lo  ae 
greatly  to  resemble  baUet-daneon.   Tlus^vMf  werir  is  vnicvtakeB  by  ladies  <tf  rank,  i^ 


lIKLiaiOCS  AHDEEJIENIS — XmnT  BCCNC.  S60 

Similnr  cihiliitions  take  place,  with  sundry  variations  as  to  cir- 

I,  at  differeat  times,  but  occurring  frequently  during  the 

Unlike  the  former,  they  are  mostly  confined  to  one  or  two 

I  dayn,  as  hefore  intimaled,  and  all  hare  the  never- foiling  accompiini- 

r  Inent  of  sky-rockets  and  ringinp:  of  bells.     Sometimes  a  grand  dis- 

I  |day  of  fireworks  at  night  concludes  the  "fiesta."    The  appointed 

I  |ilace,  generally  a  large  square,  then  presents  much  the  appearance 

n  open  fair,  the  assembled  crowds  attracting  venderaof  refresh- 

I  inents,  &■.    There  arc  also  geucrally  a  few  booths  erected  at  the 

I  cspeusc  of  the  church,  and  decorated  with  a  very  primitive  imita- 

I  of  theatrical  scenery.    Around  these  the  waiting  crowda 

sembic  till  the  curtain  is  drawn,  and  presents  to  view  certain 

s  grotesquely  disguised  and  painted  or  masked  (generally, 

l&Dwevcr,  confined  to  a  man  and  a  woman),  who  immediately  com- 

e  repeating  in  nn  awkward  manner  a  dialogue,  probably  in- 

B'Actcd  by  A  native  priest,  in  which  the  merits  of  some  particular 

1  Mint  are  discussed  with  excessive  eulogy.     Sonietimea  this  is  done 

I  la  Terse  which  ia  not  always  above  mediocrity,  and  it  may  be  that 

I  notice  is  taken  of  some  posnng  political  evenL     These  exhibition.-) 

■vre  called  "Loan,"  from  loai;  to  praise,  or  "  Saineles,"  a  name  given 

D  aacred  dramas.    The  dialogue  ia  generally  soon  ended,  and  the 

|Bping  crowd— composed  of  thousands  of  tawny  Indians,  and  darker 

t  lighter  shaded  Ladlnos,  Sambos,  and  Mulattoes,  interspersed 

rtth  white  Diiiias  and  Dona— turn  to  the  more  lively  and  lesj 

s  display  of  artificial  fireworks.     Tlie  tawdry  procession. 

9    lof^   bannera,  &c.,   moves    slowly   amid    inuamerablc 

l^bta,  and  the  military  bands  lend  their  charms  to  a  scene  which  is 

I  Well  calculated  to  intoxicate  the  mind  and  to  deceive  an  ignorant 

ipulaee,  or  even  their  better  instructed  rulers  themselves.    But 

science  within  must  sometimes  speak  and  teatiiy 

t  all  this  is  vanity,  and  thot,  politically  and  religiously,  it  is 

iDcang  of  deception  and  a  badge  of  servitude.     The  very 

n  the  pure  firmament,  as  it  shines  placidly  and  clearly,  or 

:glea  upwards  amidst  the  snow-white  clouds,  enters  a  dignified 

rotnt  against  the  noisy  and  frivolous  scene  below.    On  such  occa- 

a,  the  great  Creator  leaves  not  Himself  without  a  witness ;  for, 

b  all  else  were  without  significance,  "  the  heavens  declare  the 

npcud  luge  mnu  »  elotbiuf  Ihe  noWtd  HmV,  it  il  be  liut  lo 
■i  UeH  dotlUile  idecIi  or  ksOTB  vhlle  l)ic  If  It  tnitt  b;  tUi 


^0  THE  Q06PEL  IN  CB2«TIIAL  AMBUCA. 

glory  of  Godv'*  And  thoogli  the  language  of  the  cekstial  bodies  is 
little  heeded,  ^'  their  words  go  out  to  the  end  of  the  workL»**  aid 
their  untiring  witness  cannot  be  perverted. 

There  is  also  a  profane  imitation  of  the  Sayioiir  riding  upoa  an 
as,  on  Palm  Sunday,  and  many  other  like  observances  of  days  and 
events.  But  besides  these  more  stated  occasions,  there  are  eon* 
stantly  recurring  jubilees  and  missions  at  diflEerent  parish  churches^ 
or  the  processions  of  nuns  at  some  of  the  convents,  and  other  ocea- 
iioiial  pretexts  for  ceremonies,  with  their  consequent  idleness  and 
diisipntiim.  Only  at  such  times,  and  on  certain  specified  Sundays,  is 
there  any  pr§aehing^  which  is  confined  to  one  place  at  a  time,  and 
generally  draws  together  some  of  the  wealthy  classes.  Hie  (nrators 
tax  themselves  to  produce  extravagant  panegyrics  and  eoane  admla- 
tion  of  the  particular  saint  whose  day  it  is,  and  they  tndj  dis* 
pense  unfounded  legends  of  the  wildest  character,  miied  up  with 
distorted  scripture  fiMts,  and  uncertain  traditions.  The  vaiism 
churches  take  it  in  turn  to  exhibit  the  consecrated  wafisr  upon  the 
high  altar  on  the  Sunday  afternoon,  which  being  duly  annouaeed  in 
the  almanacks,  as  well  as  by  the  clangour  of  many  bdls  and  the 
sharp  report  of  sky-rodcets,  is  the  occasion  of  an  evening  kw^ge» 
and  gives  an  q^portunity  of  meeting  acquaintances.  ItiscaBflMmto 
hear  persons  say,  **  Lei  us  go  and  visit  Nuesiro  Amif^  (owMsilerX 
meaning  the  wafer — and  having  bent  the  knee  before  the  altar, 
they  retire  outside  and  walk  about,  or  converse  with  otfaers  who 
have  done  likewise. 

The  missions,  which  are  preachings  of  the  monks  or  fiiiiiTirs  of 
the  Propaganda,  are  more  particularly  directed  to  the  gronly 
criminal,  and  the  theme  most  insisted  upon  is,  repentanee,  or  rather 
pmmnee.  The  result  sometimes  is,  that  a  crowd  of  profossing  pcni- 
tents  is  assembled,  whidi  firequently  includes  the  same  individm^ 
year  afier  year;  and  tiiey  are  marched  bare-footed  in  a  sort  of 
triumphal  processioa  led  by  their  teachers,  bearing  upon  their 
shoulders  heavy  wooden  crosses  or  large  stones,  with  which  they 
ascend  some  eminence,  and  otherwise  exhibit  their  meritoneaa 
contrition  and  powers  of  endurance. 

Domestic  occasions  for  reUgious  ceremonies  and  feasts  are  nek 
fow.  Christenings  are  made  the  occasion  of  much  display  andis- 
dulgence.  The  sponsors,  who  according  to  their  sex  are  called 
Padrmos  and  Matbcinas^  contract  a  «fignUy  kind  of  relationship^ 
which  is  considered  indissoluble,  and  stronger  than  coMangnnity 


271 

AoeoTilinglocajioa  law,  tlitfare  prcdaijcd  from  ever  inler- 
I  nanying.  They  are  therefore  allowed  the  (amilianty  of  nearreU- 
I  lioas,  uid  kiwaya  tlestgnate  each  other  Compadre  and  Comadrt. 
Thej  ira  really  considered  as  a  sort  of  guardian  to  the  child  they 
undertake  to  answer  for ;  but  in  a  temporal  sense.  If  the  child 
lean  orpfaatt,  tltcy  will  almost  univenaLly  tokeit  asthdrowiL 
If  wealthy,  tliey  are  expected  to  make  it  handsome  proents.  Any 
Mher  obligatioiu  are  purely  nomitial  or  iranginary. 

Conlirmation,  with  sin^lai  consistency,  is  here  conferred  or  prac- 
tised upon  ih/Vtr/i,  or  at  least  ttttle  children.    Indeed,  it  may  be  done 
e  aAer  the  christening  that  the  parents  think  fit  to  cany 
tbeiroflspring  to  the  bishop,  and  give  the  usual  fees  and  offerings — 
^   in  which  a  lat^e  wax  candle — ^more  or  lest  refined  and  ornamented, 
IKcording  to  the  rank  of  the  offerer — occupies  a  conspicuous  place. 
'   This  alone  is  a  coDsideroble  source  of  revenue  to  the  Cathedral,  as 
the  tame  candles,  when  accumuialcd,  are  again  sold  to  the  peruaa 
who  deal  in  them,  who  resell  them  and  purchase  them  back  agmn 
IroDi  theCbarch.so  as  to  suggest  the  iilca  of  a  [icrpctual  circulation 
of  uniguited  wax  caudles,  but  that  they  are  probably  at  last  lit,  and 
ft  least  partially  consumed  at  some  proceeaion  or  funeral.     Fiist- 
1,  marriages,  and  funerals,  are  here  attended  wilh  nearly 
I  the  saaw  religiaos  rites  and  obsenancea  as  in  otlier  Popish  countries. 
J   Cirni  marriage  has  indeed  been  instituted  by  law,  but  very  few 
I  Aave  had  the  moral  courage  to  avail  themselves  of  it,  as  it  is  gene- 
1  lally  hxdced  upon  with  an  evil  eye.    The  cases  that  liare  occurred 
I   vc  abnoit  exclusively   those   of  foreigner!,   mostly   Protestants 
I   — moviiig  in  the  higher  circles — who  have  married  notire  ladies. 
When  the  servile  govtrninent  has  been  in  power,  it  has  been 
I   impossibie  to  take  odvunuge  of  the  lilierai  provisioas  of  the  law, 
d  the  only  resource  of  persons  bo  circumstanced  has  been  to  con- 
I  'ftitct  marriage  under  the  auspices  of  some  other  country,  having  the 
I  ttranouy  performed  and  recorded  at  the  Consular  office  l>y  its  na- 
B'tional  nprcsentative.     Ureal  inconvenience  has  already  arisen,  for 
want  of  a  decided  and  permanent  rule  of  action  in  this  respect. 
Some  Dominul  ProtcsUnts  have  boen  known  to  profess  Bomanisai 
to  obviate  the  diflicultics;,  tome  in  the  lower  ranks  of  sobety  hate 
lived  in  the  entire  neglect  of  a  recognised  marriage,  olhen  of  mace 
principle  have  been  debarred  from  marrying  with  a  uatire^  and 
•omc  native  ladies  have  suifered  materially  for  tlwir  union  with 
woitby  forogners  who  refused  to  apo«tatise. 


27S  TEH  GOfiPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

The  cnstoniB  of  the  country  with  respect  to  the  burial  of  the 
dead  are  somewhat  singular.  In  most  parts,  except  the  largef 
cities  and  British  Honduras,  c<!ffins  are  dispensed  with,  and  tiie 
corpse  is  carried  upon  an  open  litter.  If  it  be  that  of  a  child,  the 
cort^  ft«qiTne«  the  appearance  of  merriment  and  rejoidog.  The 
body  is  decked  with  gay  clothing  and  adorned  with  flowers,  and  the 
company  in  their  best  attire  march  at  a  brisk  pace,  preceded  by 
violins  and  other  musical  instruments,  and  not  unfreqnently  by  a 
feu^de-joiej  so  as  to  resemble  a  Tillage  bridal  party  rather  than  a 
fbneral.  This  apparent  want  of  feeling  and  manifest  departure 
from  good  taste,  is  a  consequence  of  the  Romish  doctrine  of  baptis- 
mal regeneration,  and  is  defended  on  the  plea  that  the  departed  soul 
being  in  heaven,  there  is  more  cause  for  happiness  than  for  grief. 
It  is  one  of  those  methods  by  which  the  arch-deceiver  would 
drown  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  survivors  in  a  solemn  Provi* 
dence,  assisting  the  careless  to  put  away  all  serious  thoughts  of 
death  by  affording  them  an  opportunity  to  indulge  in  frivolities,  if 
not  in  dissipation. 

In  the  case  of  adult  persons,  if  a  priest  can  be  procured,  the 
Viaticum  is  sent  for  as  soon  as  danger  is  apparent;  an  altar  is  then 
quickly  erected  in  the  sick  chamber  and  dressed  with  images,  cruci- 
fix, lighted  candles,  and  flowerB,a  place  being  left  to  beoocupied  by 
the  ^  Costodia,**  the  vessel  (generally  of  gold,  and  richly  jewelled)  in 
which  the  consecrated  wafer  is  exhibited.  The  Padre  then  makes 
his  way  to  the  house,  bearing  this  idolized  object,  preceded  by  a 
bell,  and  accompanied  by  ministers  and  chorister  boys  with  lighted 
tapers  in  their  hands.  As  he  passes  along  the  streets,  various  signs 
of  adoration  are  paid  to  the  wafer  god. 

The  bed  of  the  dying  is  generally  surrounded  by  mistaken 
friends,  who,  without  regard  to  the  state  of  mind  or  even  to  the 
total  unconsciousness  of  the  expiring  one,  repeat  at  short  intervals 
aentences  in  which  the  names  of  the  Saviour  or  of  the  Virgin 
occur,  such  as  ^*  Jesus  te  ampara,**  ^*  Jesus  te  auxilie,'*  ^^  Maria  te 
fevoresca,"*  and  then,  as  they  suppose  the  spirit  to  be  taking  its 
flight,  reiterate  close  to  the  perhaps  unconscious  ear — "Jesus 
Jesus,  Jesus,*'  till  they  indicate  their  knowledge  that  the  struggle 
is  over,  by  a  loud  burst  of  wailing  and  protracted  shrieks  of  un- 
restrained and  boisterous  grief. 

*  JmoM  pomteet  thee^woB  help  thee— Mary  favour  thee. 


"  FU.NERALS  OF  TUB   WEALTHY. ALTAns.  273 

In  tbe  more  niral  districts,  sometliing  vctt  similar  to  an  Zrish 
mke  foUom,  when  the  wildest  demonstrations  of  mirth  and  Borrow 
[   hAernangied  with  the  potest  excesses  of  every  kind,  are  freely 
E  ndulgcd  in. 

Among  the  raore  refined  inhabitants  of  the  eapital,  there  is  one 

Biutom  accom^nnving  funerals  which  is  ivorthy  of  record.     When 

E  At  nnadonied  coffin,  coi'cred  with  black  velvet,  has  been  removed 

L  from  between  the  gigantic  tapers  which  cast  a  pnle  glare  upon  it  in 

f  tbc  ■amhre  apartment,  it  is  Ibllowed  by  a  long  train  of  friends  on 

I  ttot,  bearing  lights  tapers  in  their  hnndi  frnm  the  house  to  the 

£  tbnrcb,  and  ihenee  to  the  cemetery.     Many  join  the  cortege  while 

;  stand   without  the   church,   while   the  prieslt 

»luint  tbeir  rcijiiiem,  which,  if  the  family  is  able  to  pay  for  it,  may 

Wht  donu  by  the  Archbishop  himself,  whose  clumsy  carriage,  drawn 

Whj  four  white  male!<,  is  in  that  case  seen  standing  near  the  chnrcb. 

Extracting  a  group  of  childicn,   and  fixing   the   gaze   of  passing 

T  &idiau«.      When  the  corpse  has  been   deposited   in  its  niche  or 

L  Taiilt,  and  the  half  consumed  wai-tapcrs  have  been  carefully 

I  collected  by  the  thrifty  (acristan   (lieadle),    the  friends  return 

K^owly  and  in  groups  to  the  house  of  mourning,  where  the  chief 

r  has  remained,  and  is  now  awaiting  to  receive  ihera  in  a 

mn  or  hall  hung  with  black  cloth,  at  one  end  of  whidt  he 

n  his  right  and  lefl  by  two  near  kinsmen  or  special 

The  puesta  silently  sit  before  him  for  a  few  minutes  on 

■  ■ftta  which  are  plaoid  fbr  them  on  either  side  of  the  room,  and 

Eklviugtboa  manifested  their  participation  in  the  grief  of  the  family, 

I  titey  rise  one  td\er  another,  gently  press  the  hand  of  the  chief- 

B  mourner,  and,  if  they  are  intimate  friends,  they  perhaps  add  a  word 

)  of  condolence.    They  then  retire,  and  are  succeeded  by 

{•(hers  in  like  manner,  till  all  the  attendants  at  the  funeral  have 

Ana  cxpresBed  their  gympathy  with  the  bereaved. 

There  are  two   periods  of  the   popish   year,  via.,   £ester  and 

FChristmas,  when  the  houses  of  mno}'  of  all  classes  are  thrown  open 

to  the  public  for  the  display  of  domestic  altars.    These  Eire  erected 

in  one  of  the  larger  halU  of  the  spadous  nuRaions  of  the  rich,  or 

in  the  best  room  of  the  humbler  cottage;  of  the  poor.    They  are, 

of  coarse,  richly  and  jrorgeousiy,  if  not  tastefully  adorned,  often 

*t  ■  great  expense.     The  images  and  cnndlciticks  are  sometimes 

e  plate :  the  Ibrmer  arc  frequently  |>l«:ed  nnder  gltm 


274  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CESTRAL  AMERICA. 

globes  or  shades,  with  artificial  flowers  and  other  ornaments. 
The  whole  is  generally  richly  embossed  in  a  living  frame  of 
luxuriant  verdure,  where  the  exotic  (there  the  European)  and 
native  flowers  blend  their  sweets,  and  contrast  their  beauteous 
forms  and  tints.  Among  these  are  intertwined  garlands  and 
dusters  of  rich  fruits;  golden  oranges  strung  together;  june- 
apples,  pomegranates,  coyols,  and  both  the  flower  and  the  elegant 
and  luscious  fruit  of  the  graceful  granadilla  (the  passion  flower). 

When  the  supposed  natal  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  occasion, 
the  altar  assumes  a  somewhat  different  character,  and  takes  the 
name  of  a  "  Nacimiento,*"  or  birth.  The  images  then  introduced 
are  those  of  "the  Virgin  Mary"  and  "Saint  Joseph,''  and  not 
unfrequently  of  "our  Lord  Saint  Juaquin'*  and  "  our  Lady  Saint 
Ana,"  who,  as  the  accredited  grandfather  and  {grandmother  of  our 
Lord,  are  entitled  to  be  present  at  this  event.  The  centre  is  occu- 
pied by  the  image  of  a  babe,  to  which  the  other  personages,  and 
sometimes  the  Three  Eastern  Kings  (as  they  are  called),  are  paying 
adoration.  The  rest  of  the  altar,  which  sometimes  extends  many 
square  yards,  affords  scope  for  the  imagination  and  taste  of  the  de- 
signer, and  presents  every  variety  of  landscape — hill  and  dale,  water, 
forests,  flocks,  shepherds,  &c.  &c. ;  in  short,  anything  or  everything. 
Sometimes  a  huge  but  beautiful  model  of  the  well  laid  out  dty  of 
Gruatemala  has  been  introduced,  and  the  expense  of  this  pseudo- 
ecclesiastical  panorama  has  in  many  cases  run  up  to  hundreds  of 
dollars.  The  framework  of  leaves,  fruits,  and  flowers,  is  seldom 
omitted,  as  the  fruits  at  least  have  a  part  assigned  them  in  the 
closing  scene.  The  less  occupied  and  the  more  curious  at  such 
times  spend  whole  days  in  going  from  house  to  house  to  visit  "  Los 
Altares,'*  to  gaze  at  the  arrangements  and  criticise  the  taste  or  the 
want  of  it,  and  the  vrealth  or  the  tinselled  poverty  displayed,  perhaps, 
with  equal  vanity,  and  certainly  with  very  little  devotion. 

In  the  evening,  when  the  gaze  of  the  public  has  been  excluded, 
the  family,  mostly  the  female  part  of  it,  and  a  company  of 
privileged  friends  assemble  before  the  altar,  and  spend  about  twenty 
minutes  in  chanting  prayers  and  litanies  with  responses,  perhaps 
accompanied  by  a  young  Don  upon  his  guitar,  and  by  another,  or 
one  of  the  young  ladies,  at  the  pianoforte.  The  music  to  which 
they  sing  their  devotions  is  sometimes  that  of  quadrilles  or  opens* 
This  over,  they  rise  from  their  knees,  or  a  recumbent  posture,,  to 


^OVENAS." — AN   AKECDOTE.  275 

Bpcnil  Ihe  remaining  Lours  of  the  eveiuDg  in  youthfal  games- 
cards,  chesB,  forleiU,  music  and  dancing,  or  a  general  romp,  occupy 
them  till  it  is  time  to  retire.  In  these  "pasatierapoa"  (pastimes) 
some  fitvonrite  priest  or  monltish  visitor  not  uniretjiiently  takes  na 
active  part.  These  mingled  devotions  and  nmusementa  are  repeated 
for  iiiiin  successive  eveniogs,  and  from  this  circumstance  the  whole 
is  calli'd  a  "  Novena."  On  the  Inat  evening  a  greater  degree  of 
festivity  is  indulged  in :  wine,  liqueurs,  orgeat,  and  other  refresh- 
tncnta  are  provided,  and  the  alur  is  then  dismantled  of  its  garlands 
and  rows  and  dusters  of  fruit  which  are  religiously  consumed  by 
the  devotees. 

Novenas  like  these  are  more  or  less  ilreqnent  on  other  occasions 
in  professedly  devout  families,  especially  where  there  are  many 
young  ladies.  In  this  manner  do  they  try  iodissipatethee»fiMi  and 
remorse  which  novel  reading,  a  life  without  an  object,  and  a  heart 
without  God,  invariably  produce. 

KSome  who  cannot  be  taken,  or  are  already  cloyed  with  trifles 
B&eh  as  these,  or  being  of  n  naturally  sedate  or  melancholy  turn, 
make  an  effort  to  appease  the  voice  of  conscience,  and  to  sustain  a 
■elf-righteous  hope,  by  scrupulous  attention  to  the  requirements 
of  the  Church,  by  a  parsimonious  hoarding  of  merit,  and  by  an  eager 
poreuit  of  plenary  indulgences,  which  are  promised  to  those  who 
attend  certain  ceremonies,  inflict  certain  penances  upon  themselvCB, 
or  perform  certain  good  offices.  Not  a  few  have  been  ted  to  hope 
weU  of  their  condition,  because  of  the  morbid  excitement  of  their 
feelings,  produced  by  their  own  works  or  by  outward  and  sensible 
objects.  An  ciomplc  of  the  latter  description,  related  of  a  devout 
lady  in  Guatemala,  also  poiiiti)  out  one  of  the  dietingnishing  phases 
of  Central  American  popery.  In  all  the  metropolitan  palish 
churches  ttiere  arc  images  of  the  Saviour  upon  the  cross,  as  large 
as  lile,  which,  by  the  skill  of  the  sculptor,  and  with  the  aid  of  red 
[taint,  arc  nnrightly  objects,  calculated  to  excite  feelings  of  horror 
and  of  disgust.  To  one  of  these,  which  was  pre-eminently  hideous, 
would  this  lady  Irequently  rcpuir.  and  place  hei^elf  bel'orc  the 
image,  ga^g  upon  it,  for  a  shorter  or  a  longer  time,  till  snoh 
feelings  were  aroused,  when  she  would  rise  and  dc{i&rt,  satisfied 
with  herself  and  inwardly  complacent,  imagining  that,  because 
she  felt  thus,  slie  must  indeed  be  very  leli^ouB,  and  conscquer>il>' 
acceptable  to  God.    On  one  occadi^i  while  returning  borne  ' 


876  THB  008PSL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

sdf-wtiflfied  mood,  she  met  a  drove  of  onladoi  mules,  the  hack  of 
one  of  these  poor  ereatures  was  laid  open  hy  a  large,  hritated,  and 
flappmattng  sore,  produced  by  the  frietioii  of  its  burden,  by  no 
means  an  uncommon  sight  in  Gruatemala.  This  object  suddenly 
renewed,  in  the  most  lively  manner,  all  the  emotions  that  had  so 
lately  been  ezperieaoed  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  and  by  so  doing  at 
once  dispelled  the  pleasing  illusion  under  which  the  self-righteous 
devotee  had  long  nourided  her  false  confidence.  She  could  no 
longer  believe  that  to  be  a  meritorious  rel%ious  feeling,  which  was 
more  readily  excited  by  the  sufferings  of  a  brute  than  by  the  con- 
templation  of  the  image  of  the  crucified. 

This  anecdote  lays  bare  one  of  the  leading  snares  of  this  cun- 
ningly-devised system,  which  has  doubtless  proved  fiital  to  many. 
There  are,  in  ^e  adornments  of  every  popish  church,  as  well  as  in 
its  ceremonies,  some  things  calculated  to  excite  the  animal  or 
natural  feelings  independently  of  the  heart  and  mind,  or  which 
reach  the  mind,  if  at  all,  only  through  the  avenues  of  the  natural 
sensibflities.  The  religion  of  Heaven,  as  it  is  revealed  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  has  ^is  distinctive  character,  that  it  touches  the  feelings 
by  first  convincing  the  uadetstanding  and  enlisting  the  afiections 
of  the  heart,  and  never  appeals  to  the  mind  through  the  inferior 
channel  of  the  mere  animal  feelings.  That  cannot  be  otherwise 
Uian  spiritually  common  and  unclean  which  is  made  a  moral 
aUment,  without  first  undergoing  this  complicated  process  of  mental 
d%e8tion.  The  animals  which  were  denominated  dean  under  the 
Levitical  law  were  sudi  as  *^ chewed  the  cud**  and  ^* divided  the 
hoQif.**  The  spiritual  wonhipper  needs  to  beware  of  an  undean 
reception  of  his  nourishment,  at  the  same  time  that  he  takes  heed 
to  his  footprints  that  they  be  those  of  the  flock. 

No  one  can  glance,  however  cursorily,  at  the  images  and  paint- 
ings common  in  Central  America,  but  they  must  be  struck  with 
ihtir  horrifying  character.  Even  those  exposed  in  the  public 
thoroughfares  are  frequently  of  this  stamp.  Every  town  and 
village  has  a  church  or  chi^  somewhere  in  its  neighbourhood, 
generally  situated  upon  an  eminence,  which  is  called  ^  £1  Cal- 
vario**  (the  Calvaiy).  Here  the  most  hideous  images  are  kept, 
hiaspfaemoas  imitations  of  the  Saviour's  passion  are  occasionally 
petteBMdy  and  the  rerj  arcfaitectaral  adornments  of  the  building 
of  the  hatnimeatii  of  toitart  and  death  whadi  an  either 


TBK  CXLYAMJO  OF  TALTIC.  S77 

:iiUoned  iii  ihe  reconl  of  the  Savioor'jj  passioD,  or  have  been 
imogineil  by  some    gloomy  and  fauatical   iiupd.  fertile  only  in 

s,  iisclf  the  appropriate  nursling  of  the  system  it  support!. 

I  Thcae  CalTarios  certainly  have  tome  affinities  with  the  spot  once 

mgnoted  Golgotha,  or  the  "  place  of  a  skull,"  though  they  cau- 

'  IiDt  be  further  removed  tliau  they  are  from  the  hallowed  afsocia* 

tioiM  of  the  closing  scene  of  thi;  Ucdueiner's  sulTerings — that  scene 

whichrttcolsBt  once  the  consummation  ol' human  depravity  in  tlte 

perpetratloti  of  the  greatest  crime,  and  the  concentration  of  Divine 

^_  lore  in  the  beslownicnt  of  a  full  Qrce  pardon  upon  his  repentant 

^1' Murderers,  and  that,   too,  by  the  imputed    merits  of  him  who 

^HM^'"''-''!  'heir  gnilt  by  the  very  means  and  in  the  very  act  that 

^^hpBttituted  its  climax. 

^^M  Wanderiug  one  evening  in  the  outskirts  of  a  large  village  scat- 
^^Hetd  along  one  of  the  temperate  vnlleit  of  Vera  Vat,  the  author 
^■■"fcUowed  a  brood  and  well  kept  path  which  led  him  to  an  iucoa- 
siderable  hill,  around  which  the  road  wound  in  a  spiral  ronii.  On 
its  summit,  from  which  there  was  an  extensive  prospecl,  stood  a 
large  bamlike  building,  well  thatched  and  stockadoed.  After 
reriewing  the  Long  rowa  of  neat  Indian  bouses  composing  the 
straggling  townibip,  and  gating  at  the  vidley,  its  majestic  boun- 
dariei,  and  it*  serene  sky,  be  turned  to  ascertam  what  this  place 
might  be  upon  wbicb  much  care  had  evidently  been  bestowed. 
I'hc  door  of  the  building  wus  iiuperfecily  iast«ned,  with  a  elight 
push  it  was  partially  opened,  and  by  the  light  thus  admitted  he 
was  enabled  to  perceive  a  uumber  of  large  Grosses,  amouotiug  to  at 
least  a  soor^  reclining  against  the  sides  of  the  house.  Upon  each 
cross  was  a  wooden  figure  iniiierfcetly  sculptured,  and  as  large, 
if  Dot  larger,  than  the  human  form.  They  were  all  inexpressibly 
shocking  to  behold,  representing  the  distorted  stale  of  a  crudficd 
body,  and  abondantly  besmeared  with  red  paint.  A  bs^ty  glance 
into  this  chamel-housc  produced  a  thrill  of  horror.  This  mas  the 
Calvario  of  Tallic,  to  which  frequent  procesMons  from  the  pariah 
cburcli  are  made,  and  these  image*,  alas  I  arc  the  only  maiules* 
totiun  of  the  cro^  of  Christ  which  is  exhibited  to  the  unhappy 
inhabitants  of  that  beautiful  valley. 

But  such  things  are  not  confined  to  the  churches.  Unnatural, 
shocking,  and  ludicrous  imsgcE  ore  alien  met  with  in  the  housea  of 
the  feo^  especially  those  of  the  poorer  daisea.  Ihe  pamtuigB  and 


S78  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

caiTed  images  eyerywhere  encountered  are  sometimes  fine  speci- 
mens of  art,  but  they  are  fax  more  frequently  rude,  uncouth,  and 
ridiculous  objects.  Now  and  then,  as  already  hinted,  a  gaudily 
dressed  doll  of  European  manufacture,  precisely  such  as  the  chil- 
dren of  the  wealthy  play  with  in  England,  is  stuck  up  upon  an 
altar,  or  placed  under  a  glass  case,  and  having  received  one  of  the 
names  applied  to  the  deified  woman,  has  prayers  addressed  to  it, 
and  is  styled  the  most  Holy  Virgin,  the  Mother  of  God,  the  Saviour 
of  Sinners,  the  Patroness  of  the  Faithful,  and  receives  many  more 
such  blasphemous  and  extravagant  titles.  A  lighted  candle  gene- 
rally bums  before  it,  especially  in  times  of  tribulation  or  drought, 
or  when  something  has  been  lost,  in  the  hope  that  the  Yiigin  may 
cause  it  speedily  to  be  found.  So  that  these  dolls  and  images 
occupy  precisely  the  same  place  in  the  houses  and  minds  of  the 
Central  American  papists,  that  the  rice  idols  and  the  deformed 
images  of  Krishnu  and  the  thousands  of  other  idols  worshipped  in 
the  East,  occupy  in  the  minds  of  the  poor  Hindoos  or  of  the 
pagoda-loving  Birmans. 

Notwithstanding  this  variety,  the  horrible  is  still  found  to  pre- 
dominate in  the  popish  imagery  and  paintings  of  Central  America, 
and  together  with  other  things,  more  practical,  yet  to  be  related, 
prove  it  to  be  a  system  of  cruelty  which  seeks  to  cultivate  in  man 
the  basest  and  most  nudignant  of  his  earth-bom  passions.  And 
even  where  the  degree  of  refinement  may  be  supposed  to  place  the 
devotee  above  this  influence,  we  have  seen  that  it  is  calculated  to 
deceive  by  exciting  mere  natural  feelings,  and  producing  a  morbid 
sensibility  subversive  of  reason,  and  equally  destructive  to  the 
sooL 

Who  can  compute  the  amount  of  positive  evil  which  must  result 
from  familiarizing  the  eye  of  a  whole  people,  from  childhood  to  old 
age,  with  objects  such  as  these  ?  Who  can  estimate  the  no  less 
positive  as  well  as  negative  evils  caused  by  the  absence  in  these 
communities  of  the  simple-minded,  cheerful,  wise,  holy,  and  loving 
disciples  of  Christ,  who  bear  his  moral  image ;  his  only  represen- 
tatives and  authorized  witnesses?  Who  can  sum  up  all  the 
accursed  influences  which  flow  from  these  united  causes,  together 
with  all  the  other  baneful  efiects  of  popish  superstition,  infidel 
lieenoe,  and  uncorrected  natural  depravity  ? 

We  cannot  fully  appreciate  the  extent  of  the  moral  disease  of 


IBB  BKMEUr. 


srs 


which  we  recognise  the  Bjmptoms ;  but  we  do  know  of  a  remedy, 

d  it  is  in  our  power  to  apptj  it  at  once.    lu  what  has  already 

Vfu^ed  under  the  notice  of  the  reader,  there  ia  enough  toatir  up,  not 

■e  aJiimal  sensibilities  of  his  nature,  but,  if  rightly  viewed 

I  IDd  lelt,  to  awaken,  bo  that  they  ahal!  never  slumber  again,  the 

I  deeper  eympathiea  of  his  heart  and  the  nobler  energies  of  his  mind. 

I  If  his  Lowels  of  compassion  already  yearn  in  some  degree,  aa  the 

vionr's  pity  wept  over  a  world  lying  in  the  wicked  one,  let  him 

jw  encouragement  to  turn  his  well-grounded  feelings  into  prayers 

d  into  action,  trom  the  fact  that  the  mind  of  the  people  for  whom 

is  concerned  is  already  in  a  moml  condition  analogous  to  that 

;phich  the  Jewish  nation  manifested  when  their  Messiah  cante.    A 

n  which  the  finger  of  God  may  be  seen  clearly  pointing  to  it 

s  field  already  ripe  unto  the  Iwn-eat. 

Jesus  Christ  is  God's  Messiah  to  the  Indians,  the  Meztizos,  the 
(wrhiie  and  the  AfHcan  population  of  Central  America,  as  well  as  to 
le  Jews.  Thediseasefromwhichtheyaresuflering  is  the  same  that 
Blfflicted  that  more  highly  favoured  nation.  Their  minds  are  even 
a  transition  state,  and  must  once  more  rcndve  a  right  or  a 
KOng  impnljc.  It  rests  with  the  reader  to  decide  whether  or  not 
«  will  make  an  effort — an  effort  which  cannot  be  lost— to  deliver 
I  from  the  power  of  Satan,  to  win  them  to  God,  to  n 
Ttct  that  unholy  ferment  of  mind  and  evil  passions  which 
irings  from  conflicting  errors,  to  rescue  them  from  tbe  n 
juht,  and  from  gloomy  superstitions,  the  exact  counterpart  of 
e  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hypoeri^." 


380  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

GKNEBAL  ASPECT. 


Cradty  eonneetedwith  Enor— Its  prevalence  ami  cure— W««iti«i  wittfcdi— Tlie  people 
tUnt  for  it— Spuueh  leaxniny— A  point  of  Tbedosy— Pemale  IJicitieM  Literati— 
Phnuoy  Schoole— Anurant  and  manner  of  inatruction— Barbarity  of  Teachera— Statiatica 
of  Schoda  in  the  Ci^tal  a8S4)— Attempted  Eeform— Present  oonditiaB  and  effecta— 
Prerailing  deeire  for  Teaehera- Prospects  of  snccess— Ont-door  Edacatinw  Sabbath 
instnietioDa— The  BnU-ring— OiMl/y  ^P«p«fy— Effects  of  AbauJitirMi  AwasainnHnna 
— Jurenile  training  to  the  knife—Annnal  kkss  by  murder— Yendity  if  JydftiBi  "  Lanaa  " 
'—General  lieentionaneaa— Inefficacy  of  Popery  to  correct  it— Enoovafemanta  to  intro- 
duce the  Goapel— Danger  of  Konoonfonrmity — Nonneriea— The  MaBJac  Nnn^Miracle- 
TOldng  image  of  Esqupoka— Esrth  eating— PrevaleBoe  of  liadacaaaBd  Ufiaey— Ideaa 
of  Fkotcataatiam—Theatncala— Papal  Bulla  and  Indalgeneea  aft  adiaaont— Condosiaa. 

-TktitrtpUuts  qfik*  mwtk  €refiaioftk4kahUuti(m$cfenuUy.'''--Yvim  lz3mr.  SO. 

Ir  benignitj  is  tbe  most  appropriate  expression  of  ddight  in  that 
Bdng  who  is  light  and  love,  cruelty  must  be  the  form  of  worship 
and  the  badge  of  servitude  most  congenial  to  the  demooa  of  dark- 
ness. Who,  then,  can  wonder  at  the  fact  that  the  prednets  of  their 
peculiar  dominion  are  *^  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruel^  f  ** 

That  cruelty  was  a  distinguishing  characteristic  in  the  condition 
of  the  Indian  tribes  in  Central  America  before  its  sul^ugation,  is 
sufficiently  manifest  from  the  sanguinary  nature  of  their  idolatry, 
the  slavish  condition  of  their  teeming  millions,  and  the  haughty 
aristocratic  spirit  pervading  their  ruling  classes,  their  social  institu- 
tions, and  their  laws.  That  cruelty  marked  the  Spanish  conquest, 
rule,  and  policy  in  that  land,  few  will  gainsay.  That  the  history  of 
its  independence  from  a  foreign  yoke  has  largely  participated  in  the 
same  hideous  feature  of  moral  deformity  exemplified  in  the  conduct 
of  the  natives  towards  each  other,  is  but  too  apparent,  and,  together 
with  much  that  has  been  already  related  of  the  present  condition  of 
the  people,  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  Satan  reigns  with  undiminished 
power  in  Central  America.  But  it  is  only  on  viewing  as  a  whole  its 
aocial,  moral,  and  spiritual  condition  in  the  light  of  the  Bible,  that 
the  mind  can  be  prepared  to  admit  its  full  claim  to  the  melancholy 


EDCCATiOK. 


^  of  the 


1  of  one  among  tho  pre-cmincntl;  "  dark  [ilac 
f  wrth." 

In  the  f»cts  jret  to  be  brought  before  Ihe  reaier'i  notice  iu  tbia 

L  desing  chapter,  he  will  perceive  that  the  moral  gloom  sdll  brood- 

:r  that  hillierto  iiDclcared  field  of  missionary  enterprise:,  ia  &r 

r  deeper  than  the  abodes  which  cover  vast  portiona  of  its  vtr^a  soil ; 

"tat  the  cnielCy  of  man  towards  hia  fellow  is  there  found  to  surpaas 

I  that  of  the  nost  ferocious  beoats  of  pre;  or  of  the  most  deadly  rep* 

H  impcuetrahte  jungles;  while  the  spiritual  death  that  rdgna 

I  ii  inliDitely  deeper  and  more  horrifying  still.     The  only  nsHgnable 

«■  is,  that  the  powers  of  darkness  have  there  lield  undiaturbed 

ta  from  time  immemorial,  aa  if  in  an  impregnable  stronghold. 

t  the  reader  decide  whether  or  not  this  state  of  things  shall  con- 

inue,  or  rather,  whether  he  will  contribute  to  the  blessedness  that 

■Aall  be  realized,  when,  according  to  the  word  of  Jehovah,  "  tbcy 

it  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  his  holy  mountaiu," — whea  "  the 

Buuntains  and  the  hills  shaU  break  forth  into  singing,  and  all  thu 

I  faces  of  the  field  siwU  clap  their  hands  ;"^ — when,  "Inatead  of  the 

f  Biomaliall  come  up  the  fir-tree,  and  inatead  of  the  briar  shall  come 

p  the  myrtle  tree  :  and  it  shall  be  to  Jehovah  for  a  name,  foi  an 

r  mcrtaating  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off."* 

'  In  contemplating  aa  a  whole  the  various  races  and  clasflca  com- 
nng  Central  American  society,  the  education  of  youth  nnturoUy 
« itself  ta  a  primary  topic.  The  exemplary  attention  of  the 
it  Indians  to  this  iniporiant  branch  of  domestic  and  social  duty, 
arose  &om  a  high  appreciation  of  what  little  science  they 
Hiis  teature  still  characterizes  them  in  their  degnula- 
n,  aul  a  general  love  of  teaming  prevails  to  a  lorpriaing  extent 
loi^  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  the  community.  Tho  obatacles 
it  have  hitherto  existed  to  the  spread  of  useful  knowledge,  have 
been  chiefly  such  as  the  people  in  general  did  not  control,  and  their 
progren  in  these  matters  haa  been  retarded,  and  the  means  of  pro- 
motiiig  it  circumscribed,  by  thoee  who  ahould  have  stimulated  th« 
denre,  &cilitated  the  opportunity,  and  supplied  the  requisite  n 
liak.  Instead  of  promotbg  study  and  imjiortiDg  books,  the  Spa- 
atardi  did  all  they  could  do  to  confine  literary  advantages  to  the 
privileged  few,  aiid  the  Inquisition  was  ever  vigilant  to  prevent  the 
indoductioii  or  drcalatioo  of  any  scientific  works  whatever.  It  ia 
■>  lauh  It.  a,  U. 


m  Ma 


38S  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CEITTBAL  AMERICA. 

therefore  do  manrel  that  the  people  are  generally  ignorant,  notwith- 
standing the  estimation  in  which  they  hold  that  knowledge  which 
has  heen  withheld  from  them ;  and  when  the  reader  is  apprised  of 
the  quality  and  character  of  that  education  which  has  heen  put 
within  the  reach  of  only  a  few,  he  will  rather  wonder  that  any  por- 
tion of  the  people  ever  attained  to  what  they  are,  and  he  will  pro- 
hably  he  led  to  r^^ard  it  as  strong  corroborative  proof  of  the  ardour 
of  that  thirst  after  information  which  distinguishes  them. 

Under  the  Spanish  regime  the  education  of  the  most  highly 
&youred  was  confined  to  a  few  ill-selected  subjects,  in  which  they 
were  imperfectly  instructed  by  monks  and  firiars,  at  private  houses, 
in  their  own  cells,  or  under  the  auspices  of  the  more  ostentatious 
university  of  San  Carlos.  From  such  teachers,  the  sons  of  the  Spa- 
nish Dons,  who  were  probably  the  least  eager  to  be  taught,  received 
that  amount  of  tuition  which  would  entitle  them  to  the  degrees  of 
*^  Bachiller**  ^  Licendado,**  or  ^*  Doctor,**  in  philosophy,  in  laws,  in 
theology,  and  in  canons. 

The  only  professions  open  to  them  were  the  ecclesiastical,  the  legal, 
or  the  medical.  All  their  studies  were,  of  course,  more  or  less  tinged 
with  the  gloom  of  the  cloister,  and  infested  with  the  leaven  of  hy- 
pocrisy. The  great  majority  of  students  were  wholly  taken  up  with 
ecclesiastical  topics,  and  the  larger  proportion  of  the  time  of  all  was 
wasted  in  the  dark  mazes  of  mysticism.  There  was  at  times  a  class 
in  which  the  sacred  Scriptures  were  professedly  examined;  in  it  the 
Latin  text  was  read,  but  discussion  was,  of  course,  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, and  the  comments  of  the  learned  *^  Catedratico,*'  or  professor 
—mostly  a  friar  or  priest — ^must  be  received  without  examination. 
One  of  the  subtleties  of  the  canon  law,  discussed  in  this  university 
as  late  as  the  year  1844,  has  engaged  much  attention  in  the  Church 
of  Rome,  and  is  still  among  disputed  points,  though  involving  a 
practical  difficulty  likely  from  its  nature  to  be  of  frequent  recor- 
lenoe.  It  at  once  affords  a  specimen  of  the  disgusting  puerilities  to 
which  the  wise  of  this  world  vnU  condescend,  an  example  of  the  gro- 
velling tendency  of  so-called  theological  studies,  and  a  proof  of  the 
folly  which  is  involved  in  the  idolatry  of  the  wafer.  The  difficulty 
which  popes,  cardinals,  prelates,  and  councils,  have  been  unable  to 
solve,  and  which  is  therefore  set  before  the  student  as  an  open  matter 
for  his  pious  inquiry,  is  the  following: — ^When  the  consecrated 
wafer  has  been  administered  to  a  sick  or  dying  person,  in  the  sacra- 


FEMALE  TUITION.  So3 

I  nent  of  extreme  unclion,  and  the  stomach  of  the  patient  happens  to 
Tq)cct  the  deified  morsel,  what  is  to  be  done  nith  it  ?  Of  coune, 
their  God  must  not  be  profaned;  and  the  expedient  usual  in  the 
other  ea^es,  where  the  priest  himself  is  bound  to  swallow  the  holy 
thing,  is  not  palatable  in  this  inslance.  The  Church  in  itn  infalli- 
bility is  unable  to  provide  for  this  very  natural  contingency,  and 
,  thus,  to  any  mnc  mind,  the  folly,  the  wickedneas,  and  the  deceit  of 
the  whole  system  are  strikingly  exposed. 

withstanding  the  unpromiain;;  nature  of  their  studies,  there 

hare  sprung  up  from  among  the  privileged  classes,  many  men  of 

t  and  geneml  information,  sud  even  a  few  of  learning  and 

I  geniui^  whose  names  arc  known  to  Central  America,  though  not  to 

I  l^e  world.    Sonc  of  the  leading  statesmen  and  principal  aciora  In 

e  revolution,',  Ladinosas  wetlaspnre  ereoles,  weremenof  no 

I  Ordinaiy  ability  and  acquirements. 

The  female  branches  of  the  same  families  have  been  hitherto 
I  tlmost  enlirely  excluded  from  any  participation  in  the  knowledge 
of  letters.  Formerly  it  was  a  rarity  that  any  of  them  should  be 
I  initialed  even  in  the  art  of  reading,  but  writing  was  sj^stcmatically 
I  'denied  them,  to  prevent  its  abuse,  and  even  to  this  day  there  are 
I  not  wanting  in  Gnatemala  examples  of  the  eame  prudential  line  of 
I  policy,  and  specimens  of  antique  "  Clinpctoncs,"*  who  openly  admit 
d  defend  it,  on  the  plea  that  their  daughters  nru  thereby  pre* 
I  Tented  from  writing  biUetx-doui  to  favoured  admirers  and  nocliunal 
[  KTcnaden.  The  wife  and  daughters  of  the  wealthy  have  therefore 
[  been  shot  up  to  the  practical  study  of  domestic  economy,  cmbroi' 
J  dery,  making  artificial  flowers,  and  latterly,  playing  upon  the 
I  ^noforte,  an  instrument  which  is  already  found  in  the  house  of 
I  Almost  every  thriving  citixen  in  the  capital. 

Many  of  these  ladies,  and,  indeed,  some  of  their  more  favoured 
I  lords  and  brothers,  are  utteriy  unconscionsof  the  grammatical  rules 
I  of  their  own  beautiful  language ;  and  so  grossly  ignorant  are  they 
I  of  the  geography  of  the  earth,  that  the  more  learned  visitor  has 
I  olicn  been  astounded  by  questions  in  >vhich  Spain  was  confounded 
I  vith  all  Europe,  or  the  latter  regarded  as  a  province  of  the  former. 
■Capitals  and  countries,  with  the  names  of  which  they  are  nccesMrilj 
ar,  they  frequently  interchange  and  contuse,  and  the  relative 
dattncea  between  Central  America  and  other  lands,  the  configtin- 

*  A  looU  nute  tppliAd  la  Spmuh  {nunigruti. 


384  THB  GOSPBL  IK  CEKTRAL    AMERICA. 

tkm  of  tlieir  BiitiTe  eoiiBtrj,  of  the  Aniakan  eontine^ 
diftpe  of  die  earth  itsell^  are  often  utterly  ignored. 

Notkms  eqnallyTagae,  and  assertions  quite  as  erode,  are  unblmh- 
iagly  put  forth  on  historical  sahjects — sacred  as  wdl  as  profiuie. 
Ja  matters  of  taste  they  frequently  excel,  and  in  lineal  ^nwing; 
and  even  in  painting,  some  of  tiie  ladies  have  attained  to  considerable 
proficiency.*  The  want  of  intellectual  culture  does  not  prerent 
them  from  assuming  somewhat  refined  manners.  They  mostly 
hftTO  a  music  master,  and  are  not  wanting  either  in  yocal  or  in 
instrumental  powers.  They  dress  elegantly,  talk  politely,  smoke 
their  eiffaritof  graceMly,  and  it  may  be,  read  novels,  and  cultiyate 
romantic  notions,  during  a  great  part  of  the  day,  or  at  least  at  the 
hour  of  '^  La  Siesta.**    They  are  animated,  intelligent,  and  con- 

*  Cabrera,  a  natire  artist,  is  uniTersally  acknowledged  to  be  a  firstHnte  portrait  and 
miniature  painter.  There  are  other  masters  of  less  note,  and  also  some  able  scnlptors 
and  earrcrs  in  wood. 

f  The  habit  of  ■nolring,  thoagfa  universally  reeognised  and  designated  a  Tiea,  or  rather 
Ht  met  (El  Vicio)  prerails,  without  exception,  in  every  class  of  sode^,  and  is  practised 
ftom  diildhood  to  old  age.  The  use  of  porros  or  cigars,  is  mostly  confined  to  the  males, 
h«t  tiie  greater  number,  and  alMM/ all  the  females,  ^efer  the  c^«ri/io.  This  is  arade  <tf  a 
omU  qpantity  of  tobacco,  ent  rerj  small,  and  neatly  rolled  up  in  a  pieee  of  tarn,  the 
CQTelope  or  outside  husk  of  the  ear  of  Indian  com  (a  few  use  nnsiud  peper).  The 
nannfacture  of  the  dgarito  is  a  domestic  affair.  Mothers,  wives,  staters,  and  even  cousins, 
vhen  well  disposed,  make  tttm  with  their  own  hands,  and  supply  them  in  simE  bandies 
of  fifties  or  hnndreds  to  the  honoured  etmsumers.  Every  lady,  while  siltiBf  at  work, 
hna  by  her  side  a  painted  calabash  or  small  basket,  both  of  Indian  workmanah^,  contain- 
ing the  requisite  tobaroo  and  prepared  tusas,  which  she  roUs  up  with  dexterity  as  she 
needa  the  stamuhis  of  tiie  narcotie  weed.  Where  a  child  or  senrant  cannot  be  kept  con- 
fltently  employed  in  bringing  a  burning  pieee  of  chareoal  from  the  kitdion  as  often  as  it 
ii  needed,  a  brazia  of  silTer,  bronM,  or  earthenware,  as  the  case  may  bo,  is  kept  filled 
with  lire  embers,  and  placed  within  reach,  to  facilitate  the  operation.  When  going  abroad, 
the  ladies  are  careful  to  provide  themselves  with  a  sufficient  stock  of  dgahtos,  though  de- 
pendent upon  the  hospitality  of  their  frienda,  or  the  gallantry  of  the  other  sex,  fura  light. 
Xhqr  frequently  wear  a  golden  holder  ra^ended  roond  thcar  nodes,  in  order  to  aroid 
■cordiing,  and  thereby  Uadceniug  their  fingers,  and  the  better  to  economise  the  small 
ends.  The  gentlemen  are  always  provided  wiUi  afltnt,  steel,  and  cotton  match,  encased  in 
■her  and  chained  together,  wUdi  they  widd  with  peenhar  gtaee,  and  obtain  a  light  in 
aiemnrkaUy  qoiek  tinn.  Having  handed  round  their  cigar  case  to  every  lady  pioaettt» 
whether  seated  within  doors  or  standing  in  the  street,  they  next  ignite  one  dgaxiit^ 
which  is  also  handed  round,  that  each  one  may  take  a  light  from  it.  It  is  then  returned 
to  the  offerer,  who  devoutly  eonaomes  it  till  he  or  some  other  galknt  begins  the  pro- 
4M0  agoii  If  ndi  time  is,  at  eonrse,  wasted  in  theoe  nwnannes,  in  whi^  a  great  port 
•f  food  breeding  is  made  to  consist,  and  which  prodnoe  a  oingnlar  dtect  upon  the  unini- 
tiated observer.  It  is  oonddered  an  additional  accomplishment  in  the  ladies  when  thqr 
ate  tMe  to  force  the  smoke  throoi^  thdr  noetrOs  in  a  doiMe  eolnmn,  somewhat 
USng  the/cf  iTeBii  thwwA  ni^  hf  tlM  wMi^  oaly  it  ieia  aa  JBveae  direction. 


DSABTH  OP  TE&CBEBS.  S8S 

IS  of  ihdr  ignorance,  which,  tbough  it  iigeaeral,  iiofcoursenot 
About  exceptione.  One  Guttimuln  ladj'.  in  purticulnr,  is  highly 
tnlcd  for  litermry  tiLitcs  and  talents.  She  po!»>eG<ies  a  poctkal  and 
iriciil  genius,  aai  is  of  coiiise  regarded  as  a  great  prodigy. 
I  So  defective  ui  education  under  the  influeace  of  the  religious 
d  moral  atmosphere  of  the  cotuitr;;  is  not  calculated  to  preserve 
nntainted  thedelical«  bloom  of  that  modciitj  which  is  nalur&l  to  the 
fenule  sex.  Under  their  ciix-unistaneee,  it  is  indeed  wonderful  tha,t 
their  standard  of  morality  vt  not  lower  than  it  i»,  and  that  the 
unities  of  life,  and  the  duties  and  graces  of  social  relationships, 
!  not  more  generalty  and  flagrantly  violated  than  they  are. 
y  few  of  the  ladies  of  Central  America  have  enjoyed  the  Bome- 
tt  queationablc  advantages  of  nn  education  in  Spun  and  France; 
'  w  of  the  other  sei  have  travelled  to  Europe  or  the  United 
1  and  fewer  still  have  receired  tbdr  education  in  those  more 
iKoured  portions  of  the  globe. 

F  At  present,  the  only  accessible  cdocatioti  for  the  class  of  females 
poktm  of,  or,  indeed,  for  any  other,  is  that  which  is  iroparted  at 
e  different  convents  by  nuns,  who  are  as  untutored  as  the  {wrsons 
•Ireaily  described,  and  who  confine  their  instructions  to  their  dark 
snperwjtions,  together  with  household  occupations,  fine  needlework, 
tilicial  Howers,  and,  perhaps,  some  other  mniilar  branches 
tf  ihe^B  arlt.  which  they  cultivate,  and  in  which  ihej-  excel.  In 
s  unwary  young  women  are  often  induced  to  take  the 
rda  are  Mvrn  in  thdr  minds  which  result  in  this  dcplo- 
Ale  self-facrifice.  Now  and  then,  sronll  schools  for  girls  have  been 
Jopted  by  needy  jierKins,  sometimes  foreigners,  wbo  have  been 
fiiT  the  important  bisk  of  moral  tmining,  and  have 
It  a  high  price  ujxin  tbdr  labours ;  Init  such  instances  have  been 
K;  and  their  failure  cannot  be  attributed  to  indifference  or  evoa 
B  prejndice  on  tlie  part  of  the  natives.  No  want  is,  perhaps,  more 
dly  and  deeply  felt  than  that  of  suitable  finale  teachers  for 
la  of  eyery  class.  Amovi/  the  40,000  MabHantt  of  the  eapilnl, 
tgith  tile  atetpliims  abort  slafsd,  there  ii  not  a  single  f/cliooimittreis 
or  priBole/emalf  iKochar. 

SM  a  few  Centr&i  American  ladies,  as  wdl  as  gentlemen,  have 
•equirc-d  the  alulity  of  perusing  or  translating  French  books  with 
ewK.  This  arises  from  tlic  scarcity  of  accesaiblc  S[Mnish  literatute, 
and  is  facilitated  by  the  affinity  wbich  esiits  in  the  construcUom  of 


S86  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CBNTBAL   AMERICA. 

sentences,  and  between  many  of  the  words,  of  the  two  languages. 
It  is  mostly  the  resnlt  of  a  persevering  habit,  seldom  assisted  by 
any  rules,  or  even,  to  any  extent,  by  the  use  of  a  dictionary.  The 
consequence  is,  that  they  can  neither  speak  nor  understand  that 
language  when  spoken ;  nor,  indeed,  can  they  read  it  audibly. 

This  is,  unquestionably,  a  proof  of  their  intelligence  and  of  their 
desire  to  learn.  The  acquisition  of  languages— especially  the  French 
and  ihe  English — is  very  generally  coveted,  and  sacrifices  would 
be  made  to  this  end  if  teachers  could  be  procured. 

Some  few  lovers  of  books  have  given  themselves  wholly  to 
literary  pursuits ;  but  their  reading  has  been  mostly  confined  to 
their  private  libraries  and  a  musty  collection  connected  with  the 
University,  composed  of  monkish  MSS.,  ponderous  folios  on  juris- 
prudence, and  a  mass  of  works  on  ecclesiastical  subjects,  originally 
the  property  of  the  convents.  The  fruits  of  learned  industry  have 
not  yet  been  remarkable.  With  the  exception  of  Don  Jos^  del 
Valle,  and,  perhaps,  two  or  three  historians,  the  names  of  native 
literati  do  not  appear  likely  to  reach  far  beyond  their  own  country 
and  times. 

For  the  middling  classes  of  society — namely,  the  Meztizos  of 
every  kind — some  boys*  schools,  called  "Escuelas  de  primeras 
letras,***  have  been  in  existence  since  those  classes  came  into  being, 
or  rather,  since  they  became  numerous  enough  to  demand  that 
much  attention  at  the  hands  of  their  Spanish  progenitors.  And 
though  it  is  probable  that  very  little  of  the  past  character  of  those 
schools  could  now  be  ascertained  from  any  authentic  sources,  the 
want  will  scarcely  be  felt,  as  their  condition  at  the  present  day 
furnishes  abundant  internal  evidence  that  they  are  still  what  they 
ever  have  been — ^the  stereotyped  productions  of  a  dark  and  tyran- 
nical age,  calculated  to  create  a  distaste  for  learning,  or  a  positive 
hatred  of  instruction,  rather  than  to  cultivate  the  love  of  it. 

It  is  only  in  the  larger  cities  and  towns  of  Spanish  foundation 
that  such  schools  are  to  be  met  with.  Most  of  them  are  endowed 
and  are  controlled  by  the  municipalities,  which  have  generally  been 
more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  the  clergy.  They  are  inva- 
riably in  a  lamentable  state  of  corruption,  disorder,  and  neglect. 
The  conditions  of  the  endowment,  or  the  instructions  of  the  pa- 
trons, generally  limit  what  is  taught  to  £1  Catedsmo,  la  Doctrina 

*  SdioQliofilzitlettcrt— or  primary  lehocdf. 


ANTHinATED  PLABS   OF  INSTBUCTIOP.  287 

HtLc  catectiinu,  doctrine),  reading,  writing,  and  tbe  fiiitr  fint 
I  nles  of  arithraetic,  which  are  digiiilied  by  the  name  of  mathe* 
Beyond  these,  though  the  mwter  gbould  be  able  aod 
w  willing,  he  ii  not  permitted  to  go.  Their  methods  of  proceeding 
I  are  auch  as  muat  surprise  and  grieve  an  European  itlmoiit  as  much 
la  the  first  insight  into  a  more  eatight«ncd  system  astonishes  and 
I  deligblg  the  people  there. 

Their  children  do  not  begin  to  attend  school  till  they  are  eight 

I  at  ten  years  of  age,  sjid  it  being  conceived  that  they  can  learn  only 

ft.me  IhiTiff  at  a  time,  they  are   first  pDt  to  reading,  in  which  they 

V&ave  probably  already  made  some  progress  at  home.     Notwith- 

Kitanding  tbe  general  intalligeoce,  docibty,  and  aptitude  of  the 

1,  this  branch  alone  almost  always  drags  its  weary  length 

rough  a  period  of  several  years.     The  books  employed,  besides 

Elhe  gloomy  cborscler  of  their  contents,  are  in  bulli  sufficient  to 

courage  tbe  moat  enterprising  child.    They  are  four  or  five  in 

Kutimber,  consisting  of  heavy  volumes,  which  when  put  together 

e  tbe  aspect  of  an  antique  collection,  and  look  formidable 

nough  to  deter  many  well  taught  adults  from  undertaking  to 

I  through   thnr  dry  contents.     Tbcy  are  distinguished  and 

rdercd  as  follows :— first,  "  La  Cartilla,"  containing  tlie  alphabet, 

dlowed  Bt  once  by  forms  of  prayer  and  conimandnieots  of  the 

irch,  in  the  wording  of  which  there  b  no  attempt  at  gradation. 

t  book  alone  is  large  enough   for  all  the  purposes  of  a  first 

g  book.     The  second  is  "  EI  Catoa,"  the  third,  "  El  Catecis- 

"  and  the  fourlb,  "  El  Raraiilele."    All  these,  which  arc  much 

'  than  tbe  fir^  contain  theological  definitions,  digests  of 

spisb  doctrines,  creeds,  fabulous  li^ends,  and  devotional  formu- 

s  addressed  to  saints,  angels,  and  Virgin  Marys.     Through 

prery  one  of  these  each  unhappy  scholar  is  doomed  to  wade  Jhun 

o  end,  and  so  deep  is  their  aversion  to  the  task,  and  so 

A  is  the  triumph  felt  when  a  child  has  overcome  each  one  of 

e  obstacles  to  its  progress,  that  the  event  is  actually  celebrated 

1  tbe  family  as  an  occasion  for  [eai>ting.    Not  till  the  whole  of 

's  twice  tedious  process  is  terminated  is  anything  else  undertaken. 

&  excluaiveness  is  al^rwards  observed  while  the  boy  is 

IDght  to  read  all  kinds  of  handicriting,  which   also  occupies  a 

Uig  period,  and  for  whicii  rough  USS.,  old  lettet?,  law  jiapcr^  or 


388  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

other  documents,  often  in  crabbed  and  illegible  hands,  are  proeorod, 
and  ecnmed  over  till  some  fiunlity  in  the  habit  is  acquired. 

The  next  step  is  wrUingy  which  begins  vnth  **•  stiaigfat  strokes," 
*  pot-hooks,  and  hangers,**  whatever  may  be  the  age  of  the  boy, 
who  is  generally  twelve  or  thirteen  before  he  gets  to  this  stage,  and 
fiequently  six  months,  or  even  more,  are  ^pent  in  this  preparatory 
exercise,  daring  which  nothing  else  can  be  attempted,  except  it  be 
committing  to  memory  the  catechism  which  he  can  now  read. 
When  a  fiur  hand  has  been  attained,  the  first  rule  of  arithmetic 
is  commenced,  if  nothing  happens  to  remove  the  now  big  boy  from 
sdiool  before  he  has  advanced  thus  fiir. 

The  cruelty  of  most  of  the  professional  teachers  is  sudi,  that  few 
parents  will  trust  their  children  with  them,  and  still  fewer  children 
can  be  induced  to  attend  the  schools,  except  by  equal  cruelty  on  the 
part  of  their  parents.  The  tyrannical  bearing  of  the  masters  is  sys- 
tematic, and  is  expressed  by  a  maxim,  universally  admitted,  equiva- 
knt  to  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  tuition  (^  Laletra  por 
sangre  entra**).  Kor  is  this  barbarous  precept  a  dead  letter  in  their 
hands.  Their  practice  making  blood  and  bruises  the  invaiiaUe 
penalty  and  accompaniment  of  initiatioa  into  the  belles-lettres. 

Among  other  acts  of  crusty  practised  by  schoolmasten  in  Gua- 
temala, which  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  author  daring  his  resi- 
dence there,  was  the  following : — ^A  boy  about  nine  years  dd,  the 
m^timate  but  acknowledged  son  of  an  ex-president,  ^tf^'^^^g  what 
had  been  considered  the  best  school  in  the  capital,  on  one  occasion 
had  his  ears  boxed  so  continuously  and  with  such  violence  that  it 
caused  a  profuse  bleediz^  at  the  nose.  Upon  this,  the  savage 
pedagogue  diverted  himself  and  his  scholars  by  painting  a  mous- 
tache upon  the  child's  &oe  with  his  own  blood.  This  boy's  ddef 
oflbnoe  was  an  impediment  in  his  speech. 

One  consequence  of  this  kind  of  treatment,  which  is  but  too  gene- 
zal,  is,  that  the  boys  from  choice,  as  well  as  the  girls  from  necessity, 
are  frequently  taught  at  home  what  little  knowledge  they  ever  ac- 
quire. Not  imfrequently  the  task  of  teaching  them  to  read  is  de- 
puted to  the  nearest  barber,  or  to  some  poor  artisan,  in  whose  shop 
the  children  sit  the  livelong  day  upon  low  stools,  appearing  to  study 
their  books  hour  after  hour,  objects  worthy  of  ccnnmiseration.  The 
attention  of  passengers  in  the  streets  is  h^obl  attracted  by  the  hum 


EDCCATIOKAL  BTATI9TICS.  289 

If  Toices  proceeding  from  such  places  whilst  they  are  spelling  over 
r  repeating  their  monotonous  tasks. 
When  the  subject  of  education  for  the  first  time  occupied  the 
■  Krious  attention  of  the  local  government  during  the  predominance 
B:flC  the  liberal  party,  the  returns  required  by  the  President,  and 
e  by  the  Municipality  of  Guatemala,  shew  that,  in  1824,  the 
incipal  achool  patronized  by  St.  Joseph  Catazans  and  the 
tlunieipoli^  contained  one  hundred  and  eighty-seven  pupils. 
Inother,  under  the  auspices  of  St.  Casiano  and  the  Ecclesiastical 
'nirt,  had  sixty-eight.  Five  more  attached  to  the  convents  of 
'en,  Santo  Domingo,  San  Francisco,  La  Becolleccion,  and  La 
lerccd,  numbered  together  three  hundred  and  five.  In  three 
|KiTateestablisbments,tkerewereonehnndrcd  and  twelve.  Making 
(I'total  of  six  hundred  and  scventy'two  in  a  population  of  ahout 
16,000  souls. 
So  great  a  disproportion  of  numbers,  as  well  o^  the  preponderance 
r  priestly  influence  in  this  department,  was  lamented  over  by  the 
liGovermnent,  who  wrote  to  their  chargi  iraffairea  in  the  United 
I  procure  for  them  a  person  capable  of  mperintending 
tliools  of  mutual  instruction,  on  the  Lancastcrian  system,  which 
!  then  already  adopted  ia  Mexico.*  The  same  Government 
courogcd  those  who  were  qualitied  to  institnte  adult  classes,  and 
Aools  of  design,  and  for  the  study  of  chemistry,  botany,  mine- 
logy,  agriculture,  &c.,  were  opened.  But  the  person  so  much 
Kred  to  organize  and  direct  the  elementary  schools  was  not 
Bcured,  perhaps  from  the  difficulty  of  finding  one  at  once  qnnli- 
1,  willing,  and  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  Spanish  language. 
3  improved  plans,  as  already  stated,  were  essayed  by  the 
es  themselves,  and  a  normal  school  D[>cned  in  the  capital ;  but 
interrupted  by  the  revolutions  which  soon  followed  and 
c  continued  to  this  day. 
y  At  present  there  are  lewcr  schools  in  Guatemala,  and  fewer 
n  attending  them  than  the  official  returns  of  1 824  assigned 
to  them  then,  notwithstanding  that  some  impulse  was  given 
the  municipal  schools  fVom  1833  to  I83G  by  the  existence  of  the 
private  school  conducted  by  the  author  with  which  the  others  were 

C "•*'"■'"'"  anxious  to  vie.    The  chief  meiins  then  employed  were 
Tiaitation,  the  exercise  of  priestly  influence,  and  the  be- 
*  Sec  GicoU  del  GcibiEnw,  Km.  Xi  ud  SI. 


SBO  THB  ootPEL  nr  gsnt&al  America. 

ghmniqitofiewiidiinordertomcreMetheittendance.  Bnilitde 
or  nothing  was  doiie*to  improye  the  manner  of  teaching,  or  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  the  information  imparted. 

In  the  provincial  towns,  and  e?en  in  the  Indian  villages,  Lan- 
caiterian  sehoola  (so  called)  were  established  under  the  liberal 
Gofyemment,  though  they  had  no  suitable  teachers.  These  have 
since  been  abandoned,  and  the  &w  schools  that  remain  in  the  larger 
places  are  of  the  character  befeve  described.  In  them,  far  more 
pains  are  bestowed  to  drill  the  poor  children  into  religious  forms, 
to  make  them  kam  catechisms  and  repeat  popish  prayers,  than 
evoi  to  teach  them  to  read,  or  to  write. 

From  these  united  causes,  the  schools  of  Centnl  America  are 
worse  than  inefficient.  The  iiyury  done  to  the  flexible  minds  and 
tender  hearts  of  the  children  who  are  sulrjected  to  such  a  process 
must  be  great  indeed,  and  in  some  respects  irreparable.  The 
erndty  which  is  most  apparent  is  far  surpassed  by  that  which 
does  violence  to  the  moral  susoeptilnlities,  and  refuses  aliment  to 
the  soul.  The  sight  of  such  a  school  in  activity,  instead  of  being 
pleasing  and  full  of  promise,  is  one  of  the  most  melancholy  exhibi- 
tions which  the  country  affords,  at  least  to  one  at  all  alive  to  the 
importance  of  early  culture,  or  aware  of  the  progress  made  in  this 
department  during  the  last  half-centuiy.  So  long  as  blind  pre- 
judices are  instilled,  mysticism  cultivated,  and  the  memory  stored 
with  fables  and  corrupt  legends,  the  teachers  are  satisfied,  and  obtain 
the  complacent  smiles  of  the  priests.  It  is  firmn  these  nurseries 
that  society  receives  the  burden  of  a  self-confident  and  deeply  igno- 
rant class  of  citizens,  whose  minds  areprgudiced  and  whose  natural 
depravity  has  obtained  as  full  and  rapid  a  development  as  the  pupil*s 
powers  and  the  vitiated  system  could  xmitedly  produce.  And  this 
is  the  only  substitute  for  moral  and  intellectual  discipline,  and  the 
salutary  influences  of  preceptive  truth  and  of  a  pure  and  benevo- 
lent example.  This  evil  has  long  been,  and  is  now  intensely  fehby 
the  Central  Americans.  Let  it  be  reiterated  untQ  due  weight  is 
attached  to  the  assertion,  that  the  natives  of  all  dasses  thirst  for  in- 
struction. That  rulers  and  heads  of  families  are  anxious  to  have  the 
people  and  then:  children  taught,  and  that  nothing  is  wanting  to  the 
complete  gratification  of  this  their  praiseworthy  solicitude,  but  the 
qualified  teacher. 

Penons  able  to  undertake  the  education  of  youth,  or  to  teach 


M  OPENOCS  FOR  scnooLS.  291 

elcmenlaij  branches,  poBseasing  a  efficient  knowledge  of  the  Spa- 
nish tenguage — the  easien  to  acquire  of  all  modem  tongues — would 
find  their  hands  fullj  occupied  and  their  Uhotir  well  bestowed  and 
remunerated  in  any  of  the  populous  parts  of  Central  America,  and 
mure  ei^pecially  in  the  larger  towns,  or  in  the  capitals  of  tlic  vorioua 
States. 

,  6ncb  enterprises  at  present  imply  no  incanaiderable  amount  of 
:,  arising  from  the  remains  of  priestly  iullaeDce  and  popolai 
They  are,  of  course,  most  prarticahle  where  a  liberal 
or  and -ecclesiastical  goremment  is  already  established,  as  now  in 
the  state  of  Salvador,  and  possibly  in  Nicaragua,  and  Ilonduraa. 
If  mere  secular  edncation  were  the  object,  all  tbc  risks  and  most  of 
the  difficulties  would  be  removed  at  once,  as  no  open  oppowtioa 
would  he  likely  to  follow,  but,  on  the  coatrary,  very  much  encon- 
ragcmeut  would  be  held  out,  and  that  in  appearance  at  least,  even 
by  aristocrats  and  eccl  elastics.  But  the  danger  of  Biblical  teaching 
has  already  been  braved  in  Guatemala — the  stronghold  of  servility 
and  priestcraft — and  that  during  a  period  of  popish  and  aristocratic 
reaction,  nith  what  results  will  bu  seen  further  on.  In  1835,  wbik 
tbc  author's  scliool  was  in  activity,  it  was  visited  by  two  political 
Coouuissioners  from  the  state  of  Salvador.  One  of  them  invited 
the  author  to  accompany  bun  to  San  Salvador,  with  a  view  to  his 
removal  to  that  city,  offering  to  defray  all  hie  expenses.  This  offer 
«  declined.  On  the  return  of  the  CommisBionets  to  their  govem- 
t,  private  proposals  of  the  same  nature  were  renewed  with  the 
tion  of  the  ruling  authorities,  and  adding  the  guarantee  of  a 
;e  Kbool  and  a  public  building  to  keep  it  in ;  but  neither  could 
is  proiKieal  be  complied  with.  This  is  here  adduced  as  corroho- 
e  of  the  assertion  just  made,  and  as  a  proof  that  the  use  of  tbc 
i;  is  not  on  insuperable  impedimeut ;  and  it  may  be  added,  that 
bmitable  person  occupying  a  position  of  this  kind,  niigbt  reasonably 
cise  a  salutary  influence  on  the  education  of  the 
eople  of  an  extensive  district,  perhaps  upon  all  the  schools  within 
the  staler  or  even,  it  might  he,  over  those  of  the  entire  Uepuhlic. 

It  is  not,  however,  in  the  schools  that  the  people  'of  Central 
America  have  received  their  education — most  of  their  moral  train- 

Cza  derivied  directly  from  the  papistical  Sjianiard  and 
priest. 
s  without  Khools  and  literature,  without  a  Listoiy  or 


S92  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERTCA. 

Significant  monuments  of  the  past,  excluded  from  intercourse  with 
other  nations,  and  willingly  led  hy  their  self-constituted  guides, 
must  have  heen  confined  to  the  lessons  that  popery  teaches,  and 
could  not  but  receive  its  impress.  The  condition  of  such  a  people 
must  answer  to  the  spirit  of  Romanism  as  the  seal  to  the  signet. 

It  is  not  only  admitted,  but  even  strenuously  enforced  by  papists, 
that  images  are  the  hooks  of  the  people.  Before  the  practical  lessons 
which  they  have  learned  from  these  dumb  instructors  are  further 
noticed,  it  way  be  well  to  give  some  attention  to  another  order  of 
tuition,  which  may  very  properly  be  designated  Popish  Sunday 
Schools,  or  Satanic  training  institutions.  The  desecration  of  the 
Sabbath-day  is  a  well-known  feature  of  all  Roman  Catholic 
countries.  Its  leading  peculiarities  in  Central  America  consist 
chiefly  in  the  kind  of  public  amusements  which  the  popular  taste 
requires,  the  authorities  supply,  and  the  Church  patronizes. 

After  the  morning's  attendance  at  mass,  a  part  of  the  day  is 
spent  in  friendly  or  ceremonial  visits,  when  priests  and  people 
openly  indulge  in  small  talk,  cards,  wine,  songs,  accompanied  by 
the  guitar  or  the  piano;  and  any  other  amusements  reputed 
innocent.  The  siesta,  the  cigarito,  and  an  occasional  cup  of  cho- 
colate, help  to  kill  some  more  of  its  hours.  At  length  the  after- 
noon arrives,  and  in  the  capital  city,  the  military  band  is  heard 
traversing  the  streets  in  the  direction  of  a  large  octangular  amphi- 
theatre, enclosing  a  spacious  uncovered  arena.  Soon  the  citizens 
of  all  classes,  from  the  first  officers  of  state  and  municipal  func- 
tionaries, wearing  badges  of  office,  to  the  bare-footed  Indian 
labourer,  issue  from  their  houses ;  merchants,  professionals,  mili- 
tary men,  aristocrats,  and  artisans,  with  their  families  all  attired  in 
their  Sunday's  best,  mingle  in  the  streets,  and  flock  in  the  same 
direction.  The  graduated  seats  of  the  amphitheatre  are  soon 
filled  with  a  brilliant  company,  among  which  ladies  and  women 
of  every  rank  are  prominent.  Occasionally  the  sombre  garb  of 
some  gay  ecclesiastic  may  be  detected ;  perhaps  it  is  a  certain  well- 
known  Canonigo,  a  canon  who  is  quite  a  lady's  man — or  some 
other  dignitary,  who  has  both  the  spirit  and  the  power  to  brave 
public  prejudice,  but  who  by  his  willingness  to  conceal  himself 
behind  his  company,  manifests  that  he  feels  rather  out  of  place. 

Soon  the  approving  murmur  announces  that  the  first  bull  that 
is  about  to  be  baited  for  the  amusement  of  this  gay  concourse  has 


fiCSDiY   TRAINmO  TO   VICE,  293 

e'  its  appearance.     This  is  the  Tlaxa.  de  Tottos  (the  bull-ring), 

d  the  devout  citizens  are  met  to  gloat  their  eyca  upon  the  sulfcr- 

;8  of  poor  brutes  goaded  into  madacss  by  mea  more  brutal  and 

I  wage  than  the  fiercest  denizen  of  the  tavannab.    The  BBtami* 

L  fngenuitj  of  cruelty  b  tasked  to  devise  means  of  torturing  a 

^fKBture  that  unwillingly  defends  itself  from  assaults  from  which  it 

Utnot  flee.    Wounds  arc  inflicted,  fireworks  are  fastened  with  a 

)  upon  il9  flesh,  and  as  the  explosion  at  once  terrifies  and 

orcbes  the  poor  creature,  the  shouts  and  laughter  of  the  lookers- 

:  its  fury;  till,  perhaps,  bellowing  and  foaming,  it  plunges 

dlong  upon  the  nearest  of  its  fantastically -dressed  tormentors, 

I,  unable  to  escape  the  attack  with  sufficient  promptitude,  or 

.urn  it  off  with  the  usuul  dexterity,  is  tossed  into  the  air, 

V  the  height  of  several  yards,  and  falls  heavily  to  the  ground. 

'^  seriously  wounded  or  killed,  which  sometimes  happens, 

s  is  generally  placed  hors  tte  conibtii — for  that  day  at  least — so  as 

4  be  removed,  and  succeeded  by  others.     Upon  an  event  like  this, 

k  shout  of  pleasure  rings  through  the  arena,  and  many  a  fur  hand 

een  waving  a  white  kerchief,  as  it  were  to  encourage  the  bull, 

.0  has,  perhaps,  enlisted  some  syQi|«thy.    Should  the  entertain- 

it  pass  off  without  anything  of  this  kind  occurring,  the  general 

mplaint  would  be  that  •'  Los  Torres"  were  dull  and  insipid. 

1  several  bulls  have  been  Iraited  in  succession,  the  last  one 
It  is  brought  in  is  reserved,  as  a  peculiar  treat,  to  be  tormented 
jllxe  boys  who  volunteer  from  aiuong  the  iieople.  This  victim 
'p  tastened  to  a  stake,  but  it  has  happened  that  he  has  broken 
and  on  one  occasion  at  least,  the  mangled  corpse  of  her  dead 
hs  put  into  the  arms  of  a  distracted  mother  as  the  result  of 
is  J  uvenilc  sport — this  diaboUcal  training  I 
b  The  beat,  i.  c.  the  fiercest  bulls  ore  supphed  to  this  institution 
estate  belonging  to  the  nuns  of  the  convent  of  Santa 
:a;  and  those  auiuials  are  distinguished  by  tbc  name  of  the 
The  revenue  arising  from  the  bull-ring  is  charitably,  and 
■0  appropriately,  applied  to  the  support  of  the  public  hospital. 
^  The  reader  does  not  need  to  he  told  what  lessons  the  people 
n  from  exhibitions  such  as  these.  It  is  on  amusement ;  there* 
1  accordance  with  their  stnte  of  mind,  and  not  opposed  to 
their  religions  feelings,  llere  the  hearts  ol'  all  classes  and  ages 
are  hardened  and  inured  to  sights  of  blood  and  cruelty — nay. 


S94  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

thcj  are  led  to  delight  in  snch  scenes,  and  the  basest  propendties 
of  a  corrapt  nature  are  cnltiyated,  and  must  expand.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  from  the  bull-ring  the  more  dissipated  and  vidous 
Asort  to  the  cock-pit,  where  they  may  haye  spent  a  part  of  the 
morning,  or  that  they  disperse  to  the  different  Fulquerias  and 
Ghicherias,  low  drinking  shops,  in  the  barrios  or  suburbs,  or  that 
the  whole  night  is  spent  by  many  in  debauch,  followed  by  every 
species  of  crime  and  ruin :  some  of  the  worst  features  of  which  are 
referred  to  further  on. 

In  country  places,  where  bull-baiting  is  not  practicable,  cock- 
fighting  is  substituted,  or  rather,  the  latter  uniyersally  prevails ; 
because  while  less  expensive  it  both  gratifies  the  taste  for  cruelty, 
and  affords  an  opportunity  for  gaming. 

In  a  general  survey  of  the  moral  condition  of  Central  America, 
the  mental  eye  is  unavoidably  brought  into  continual  contact  with 
Romanism — ^its  putrescent  heart.  Its  influence  upon  the  abori- 
gines, whose  tribes  it  has  either  conquered  or  scared,  and  upon  the 
mixed  races  and  their  political  contentions ;  its  varied  manifesta- 
tions in  forms,  pomps,  gaieties,  austerities,  and  image  worship,  have 
an  been  imperfectly  glanced  at.  Some  of  its  more  palpable  fruits 
have  been  seen  in  the  accumulated  enormities  of  its  licentious 
priesthood.  The  exposure  of  the.  actual  state  of  the  few  schools 
wiUiering  beneath  its  shade,  and  the  fact  of  the  general  ignorance 
and  cruelty  of  a  people  so  long  and  so  completely  under  its  sway, 
were  not  needed  to  prove  that  knowledge  is  abhorrent  to  that 
sjslem  which  has  coined  for  itself  the  detestable  maxim  that 
*^%norance  is  the  mother  of  devotion.**  Central  America  in  its 
aetnal  state,  and  in  its  history,  is  an  unimpeachable  witness  that 
popery  is  the  prolific  mother  of  ignorance,  superstition,  and  crime; 
or,  in  other  words,  the  crater  from  which  moral  darkness,  cruelty, 
sod  death  are  continually  belched  forth  upon  all  within  its  reach. 
Hie  truth  of  this  will  be  most  clearly  perceived  both  in  the  amount 
and  in  the  species  of  criminality  that  prevafls. 

One  of  the  greatest  curses  that  Fbpery  entails  is,  doubtless,  the 
servile  bondage  to  which  it  reduces  the  nobler  powers  of  the 
mind.  Another  scarcely  inferior  injury  which  it  inflicts,  lies  in 
tile  false  libarty  which  it  pampers  in  the  unrenewed  mind^ — a 
Btarty  more  cruel  and  destructive,  perhaps,  than  even  its  bondage, 
aaci  certainly  more  manifestly  evil  in  its  fioentioos  and  cormpting 
effects. 


'.  OF   MCRDtlB. 


S95 

n  tic  devices 


tPR. 
The  sabtlety  of  the  deceiver  is  sdngalailj  appnreat  ii 
"which  be&ida  bis  popish  subjects  to  stifle  the  voice  of  consdcuce. 
and  in  a  measure  frees  them  from  its  wholesome  restraints.  The 
chief  agency  bj  which  this  end  is  accomplished  is  prieatly  absolu' 
tion,  with  its  scyiuicts,  confe«^on  and  penance.  The  belief  that  ain 
c&n  be  pardoned  while  the  love  of  it  is  retained,  or  that  it  amy  be 
atoned  for  by  the  anner  himself  who  indulges  in  it,  muHt  blunt  the 
point  of  every  scruple,  and  cannot  bnt  degenerate  into  the  practical 
toleration  of  eveiy  apecies  of  iniquity  and  vice.  It  is  subversive  of 
L  the  justice  of  God,  and  therefore  destructive  to  honesty  in  man. 
d  precisely  to  that  extent  to  which  it  prevails,  it  produce?  moral 
i  physical  death.  Its  fearful  utfects  are  legible  in  colossal  and 
d  characters  upon  the  fiuc  of  Central  American  society. 
'  The  general  prernlence  of  crime  in  Central  America,  while  it 
s  what  has  been  said  of  its  religion,  oflbrds  the  best 
ion  of  the  real  state  of  the  people,  and  supplies  superabandant 
IT  conmuseroting  it. 
Where  the  restraint*  of  public  opinion,  the  arm  of  the  law,  and 
c  voice  of  conscience  are  so  weak,  it  need  scarcely  be  swd  that 
s  luxuriates  in  profnse  variety,  and  that  its  deadly  fruits 
abound.  There  are,  however,  some  forms  of  criminality  which 
prevail  more  than  othem,  and  foremost  among  these  are  murders 
j,  which  arc  matters  of  daily  occurrence  in  Central 
They  are  so  frequent  as  to  escite  scarcely  any  attention, 
>  signs  of  feeling  whatever,  where  there  is  not  a  special 
a  the  parties  concerned.  Taught  by  the  example  of  the 
iard,  every  native  wears  in  his  belt  a  large  sharp-pointed 
fc — moat  frequently  of  British  manufacturc^-whicb  is  encased 
a  leathern  sheath,  more  or  Ins  ornamented.  Though  the  law 
M  a  penalty  upon  all  who  carry  deadly  weapons,  it  is  seldom 
;  and  the  practice  of  going  armed,  especially  at  night  or 
avelling,  is  universally  allowed.  Caballeros  (gentlemen) 
s  (sabres)  in  their  hands  under  their  cloaks,  and  frc- 
ently  pistult  in  their  pockets.  No  saddle  is  complete  without  ita 
Donaa  and  Seuons  sometimes  carry  their  jewelled  poi- 
I,  and  the  market  women  of  Son  Salvador  arc  famed  for 
aring  knives  like  the  men,  only  girded  in  their  garters,  the 
Bied  blade  or  the  sbenth  being  lodged  between  the  stocking  and 


296  THE  G08FEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

On  the  most  trivial  occasions,  and  at  the  least  provocationf  the 
knife  is  drawn  and  wielded  with  fearful  skill,  nor  does  it  often 
retam  to  its  sheath  until  it  has  drunk  the  vital  stream  of  one  of 
the  combatants.  Men  are  trained  from  their  very  infancy  to  the 
art  of  stabbing.  It  is  conunon  to  see  boys  of  all  ages  in  the  streets 
and  at  their  play  stabbing  at  each  other  vnith  their  extended  right- 
hand,  or  with  a  piece  of  wood  in  it,  and  warding  off  the  stabs  of 
their  playfellows,  vriith  their  hats  clenched  in  the  other  hand,  or  a 
garment  thrown  over  their  lefl  arm  in  imitation  of  the  men.  In- 
deed, this  sight  is  more  frequent  in  Central  America  than  it  now  is 
to  see  English  boys  sparring  with  their  fists.  In  the  case  of  Central 
American  children  their  contest  is  a  mere  diversion,  and  it  is  by  no 
means  common  to  see  them  fight.  Their  mild  disposition  is  doubtless 
one  reason  for  this,  and  when  quarrels  occur  they  generally  avoid 
each  other,  or  vent  their  malice  in  some  other  way. 

The  great  bulk  of  all  the  murders  that  take  place  are  confined  to 
the  lower  order  of  Ladinos  and  Indians,  mostly  such  as  are  or 
have  been  soldiers,  and  they  occur  almost  vriithout  exception  in 
the  brawls  and  quarrels  consequent  upon  their  carousals,  or  arising 
out  of  gambling  transactions,  or  jealous  intrigues. 

Such  scenes  occur,  especially  after  the  solemnities  of  the  church, 
on  Sunday  evenings,  and  during  the  idle  dias  de  dos  eruees,*  These 
periods  are  invariably  marked  by  revelries,  followed  by  midnight 
brawls,  and  the  day  after  each  fiesta  and  every  other  festival, 
not  omitting  the  Sabbath-day,  the  sun  rises  upon  the  corpses  of 
the  slain,  or  the  mangled  bodies  of  the  wounded.  In  the  dty  of 
Guatemala  alone,  every  such  occasion  furnishes  firom  four  to  eight 
cases  of  this  description.  The  bodies  are  conveyed  to  the  hospital 
to  be  claimed  or  dissected,  and  when  life  is  not  extinct,  to  receive 
the  attentions  of  the  surgeons,  who  have  so  much  practice  in 
this  line  as  to  ensure  more  than  ordinary  skill.  The  awful  and 
heartrending  consequences  of  these  facts  may  be  imagined, 
but  not  described.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  as  the  fiestas 
of  the  Church  are  more  than  half  as  many  as  the  Sundays, 
there  are  full  eighty  feast-days  and  Sundays  in  the  course  of 
one  year.    Taking  the  number  of  killed  at  Uie  average  of  six  for 

*  Days  of  two  crosses,  so  called  becsnse  thus  diatiiigiiished  in  the  ealendazs*  which 
dadsre  them  to  be  eq[iutD7  binding  with  the  Lord's  day,  for  hearing  mass  and 
fromworlL.   Thae  are  about  twenty  of  them  in  the  Tear,  besides  those  of  qb^( 


DESOLATISO   EFFECTS  OF  CRIME.  207 

each  fiesta^-wbich  a  not  too  much  if  tlie  luunlera  of  the  Vispera 
(the  Digfat  before,  nlicn  these  disorders  begin)  be  iiidiKlcd — the 
result  for  the  capital  alone  is  480  lives  Himuallj  sacrificed.  And 
there  is  probably  a  greater  number  of  wounded  who  recover.* 

In  addition  to  this  enormous  amount  of  idle  time,  eveij  town 
and  remote  villa^  has  its  [leculiar  days  in  honour  of  its  patron- 
saint,  and  even  then  all  the  opportunities  which  the  Church  for- 
nisbes  for  deeds  of  blood  have  not  been  enumerated.  It  mil, 
tbereforc,  appear  the  less  surprising,  though  not  a  whit  the  less 
horrifying,  ns  the  result  of  these  murders,  together  with  those 
jnore  isolated  cases  which  occur  on  ordinary  days,  and  the  numbers 
stain  in  dvil  wars  and  revolutions,  that  tlie  proportion  offtmalet  to 
mates  in  the  entire  population  of  the  five  States  is,  at  the  present 
day,  as/our  orjive  to  one.'  This  fact,  which  is  generally  acknow- 
ledged throughout  t}ie  country,  speaks  volumes  in  support  of  the 
views  berc  taken  of  popery.  It  speaks,  also,  to  the  mere  philan- 
tbrojust,  and  how  much  more  to  the  enlightened  Christian,  of 
duties  yet  to  be  performed  towards  this  jjcoplc.  Shall  we  continue 
to  supply  tliun  only  with  the  instruments  of  their  deadly  cruel^, 
and  not  make  an  effort  to  communicate  the  Gospel,  which  is  alone 
adequate  to  implant  the  fear  of  Him  whose  law  proclaims,  "  Tfaoo 
■halt  not  kill,"  &Qd  whose  Gospel  at  once  inculcates  the  love  of 
God  and  love  to  one  another  ? 

That  the  general  standard  of  morality  is  so  low,  and  that  the 
appreciation  of  the  enormity  of  murder,  in  particular,  is  so  defective, 
can  only  be  accounted  for  by  the  peculiar  genius  of  Central 
American  religion,  and  by  the  character  of  the  education  which  is 


•tu»j™.i.Di™dr,«oiid.ih<, 

oUcLdk  ™ltj  o«un :-■■  Jq]7  2i.  1936^Th(  flij 

cJ  9ati<iagD,  ml  nceorfinj  lo  Ilia  phr 

larolcCT  Dt  lie  Cilhoiiei,  -i  double  ctom  iUj.'m 

•loe  n(  particBlu  Buictitj.    ThuBcni 

KM  ire  obHTTcd  mate  tiraHj  tbin  the:s>li1nth  (t- 

■It    It  i.  ttpartrf  Uuil  then -m 

wu  »  (nnnlo.  uul  tlie  olijwt  ol  hH  n 

ugtsnce  ODO  of  Uie  Hm«  Ki.    Uc. lUtad 

t  aikcd  thu  pooi  aatare  >1i4t  luul  Induced  hm  to 

uwiBplali«id.^.<rnild»d.    81i 

■ud  tint  «.«  wroun  b«l  pm-oLtd  bw.    It  Wtt 

ni^rd  UiU  that  >u  na  ra»n  tm  it 

pn>inK  •  ldlir».CT«nn  el  life.    She  idded.  <ril)i 

Rmml  iDUi  llu  Itoif  ilali,  wbo  bare  received  iajuhn  froiu  Iclbil  va^mit  luiIowfiillT 
nwL  li  tlBled  to  unowit  XaVli;  tai  Ibii,  I  EUUJectiuT,  eicluiire  oT  IbirK  murdoreil  ont- 
>%bt.    lodiriduati  goiltj  of  tbii  lunl  hribouB  orimE  ftre  merely  |nuu>bei]  ^ly  it  ihofl  Em' 

ncnl.  One  fona  i>  aiil  to  M  gniitf  U  birge  wtae  bu  toniBiitUd  leieu  aiiuden. 
I   Then  hM  been  wMtiemiuilacauuiiiludte-al^ti  ■■'"va  in  ■  mit  of  ynguiiuT  >* 

W  bns  bMB  tha  BBliittBiula  ebjwl,  ■«■--  -«-t— mbni'i 

r.p.Ut. 


298  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMEBICA. 

cuned  on  both  in  its  schools  and  in  its  amusements — for  the  mild 
di^osition  of  the  people  is  decidedly  opposed  to  such  deeds. 

This  laadty  of  morals  and  prevalence  of  crime,  are  sustained  by 
the  venality  of  those  rulers  who  are  entrusted  with  the  detection 
and  the  punishment  of  ofienoea,  as  well  as  by  the  priests.  Either 
the  Alcalde  cnr  Juez  (Judge)  is  himself  comparatively  unimpressed 
with  its  heinousnesB  and  with  the  sanctity  of  the  law,  or,  intimi- 
dated by  threats,  he  is  afiraid  of  falling  by  the  knife  of  the  relatives 
or  accomplices  of  the  criminal :  in  many  cases,  his  hand  has  been 
weakened  by  receiving  a  bribe.  These  causes,  together  with  the 
inefficiency  of  the  police  force,  the  imperfect  state  of  the  prisons, 
and  the  fiicilities  which  the  country  and  the  people  afford  for  con- 
cealment, all  tend  to  deprive  human  justice  of  its  yietims,  and 
criminals  of  every  kind  are  at  large,  whilst  comparatively  trivial 
offisnces  only  are  adequately  pnniidied,  and  political  partizans  are 
mercilessly  shot. 

A  murderer  finequently  escapes  merely  by  absenting  himself  for 
some  time  from  the  scene  of  his  guilt.  If  taken,  and  not  suffered 
to  escape  from  prison,  his  severest  punishment  for  a  first  offence  is, 
p^haps,  two  or  three  years  of  hard  labour  in  the  chain-gang.  For  a 
repetition  of  the  crime,  it  may  be  banishment  to  one  of  the  penal- 
fortresses  ;  most  of  which  are  on  the  coasts,  and  within  the  deadly 
influence  of  uncleared  swamps  and  exceasive  heat.  If  they  out- 
live the  term  of  their  sentence,  or  have  not  liberated  themselves  by 
some  new  act  of  rebellion  and  blood,  they  return  to  sod^,  after 
a  few  years,  judicially  deansed,  but  only  to  perpetrate  fresh  enor- 
mities. Thus,  one  man  is  often  known  to  have  committed  several 
murders,  and  still  remains  at  liberty.  A  class  of  desperadoes,  dis- 
tiDgoished  by  the  name  of  ^mos,  and  composed  of  such  individuals, 
of  robbers,  and  of  the  most  abandoned  of  every  description,  infest 
the  country,  and  sometimes  they  form  themselves  into  bands,  and 
rob  and  murder  at  their  discretion-— extending  their  crimes  and 
terror  far  and  wide.  The  capital  and  other  large  towns  are  per- 
ambulated by  such  human  monsters  as  freely  as  London  is  vrith 
pickpockets  and  thieves— only  in  the  former  they  are  almost 
entirely  unwatched  by  police.  The  Serenos,  or  watchmen,  have 
oonaiderably  checked  their  midnight  depredations  in  the  capital ; 
Imt  their  daring  deeds  are  stiU  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants.  With. 
infiridnalB  among  the  lanas,  tiie  lust  of  blood  at  length  assumes 
the  character  of  a  passion  that  must  be  gratified  for  its  own  sake* 


THE  PASSION  roR  BLOon.  29B 

1  of  the  more  notorious—tbe  Jack  Sbepbcrds  and  Dick 
Turpins  of  their  clue — the  most  diabolical  deeds  are  related.  Not 
manj  yean  ago  one  of  them,  stsnding  at  nooc'day  with  another  in 
tbe  streets  of  Gnatemala,  upon  seeing  a  gentleman  approaching 
who  WM  wholly  dressed  in  while,  prefaced  his  wanton  atroci^  by 
esclaiming  to  hi»  companion,  "Would  you  like  to  see  how  pretty 
blood  looks  upon  white  gnrmentB?"  and  with  no  other  prorocative 
at  once  plunged  his  large  knife  into  tlie  body  of  the  unfortunate 
yirtim  and  made  his  escape.  Another,  when  arrested  for  the 
murder  of  one  female,  in  the  fame  wanton  nay  plunged  his  knif^ 
into  the  boaom  of  a  young-  girl  who  was  near  him,  and  when  asked 
the  reason,  said  he  did  it  lo  keep  hit  hand  in,  or  in  order  not  to 
lose  the  habit.  It  would  be  cnsy  to  multiply  instances  like  these. 
Let  it  suffice  to  ?tatc  that  a  public  esecution  of  such  criminals 
seldom  takes  place,  though  their  crimes  are  bo  fi^uent.  Only  two 
inuTderers  were  condemned  to  death,  and  shot  at  Guatemala,  from 
1633  to  1S36.  Each  of  them  hod  been  judiciallyconvictedof  more 
thkn  a  score  of  murders,  besides  others  that  were  not  proved.  Dur- 
ing the  same  period,  many  were  executed  for  political  offences. 
Capital  punishments  were  summarily  abolished  by  the  liberals, 
but  no  suitable  Bubstitate  ha.'!  been  carried  into  operation  since. 
From  such  data  an  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  Etatc  of  morals  In 
general,  and  it  is  only  necessary  to  add  that  all  sorts  of  licentious- 
ncas  ud  epoliation,  as  well  as  murder,  remain  eomparatiTely  or 
eatircly  unponished  (especially  in  times  of  civil  war),  through  the 
Tcnality  and  [mnllanimity  of  the  judicial  authorities,  as  well  as  for 
want  of  greater  stability  in  the  exeentive  power. 

These  are  some  of  the  consequences  of  nbsolntion;  Ibr  the  worst 
of  criminala  may,  at  any  time,  olitoin  it  from  tbe  priest  without 
danger  to  himself.  These  arc  the  fruits  which,  even  if  popery  bod 
done  nothing  to  prodnce  tliem,  it  has  been  unable  to  correct  or  to 
modify  by  all  its  agencies,  exercised  without  restraint  or  extraneous 
interference  during  the  space  of  three  hundred  and  forty-a'ght 
years.  Thus  it  is  palpable  that  "  the  salt  has  lont  its  sarour,"  and 
■*  henceforth  good  for  nothing,  bnl  lo  be  cast  forth  and 

,    trodden  under  foot  of  men." 

The  inset-urily  of  life  and  property,  and  other  evils  nece»arily 
implied,  whUe  they  arc  calculated  to  dmw  forth  feelings  of  com- 
pwMou  for  the  people,  are  also  of  a  somewhat  repulsive  nature, 

I  ud  the  nund  dwelling  on  the  more  isolated  cases  may  e: 


SOO  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

the  danger  attendant  upon  any  personal  effort  to  improve  sach  a 
condition,  and  is  apt  to  shrink  from  the  undertaking. 

Not  to  dwell  upon  any  reasons  founded  on  the  providenee  of  God, 
and  the  advantages,  in  point  of  security,  which  a  peaceful  and 
beneficent  person  possesses  over  others  under  such  circumstances, 
it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  mildness  of  disposition,  amenity  of 
manners,  and  a  general  respect  for  man  as  such,  are  among  the 
leading  traits  in  the  national  character  of  the  Central  American. 
It  is  particularly  worthy  of  notice,  that  what  may  be  called  the 
social  virtues  are  far  from  being  disregarded.  The  kindliest  feel- 
ings exist  and  are  cultivated  in  the  mutual  intercourse  of  members 
of  families  to  a  surprising  degree.  Hospitality  is  unbounded, 
especially  to  foreigners.  Instances  of  generosity  are  not  unfre- 
quent,  and  considerateness  and  liberality  towards  the  poor  are  very 
marked.  Often  docile  to  supineness,  or  polite  to  servility,  the 
Central  American  does  not  display  that  vindictive  pride,  haughty 
bearing,  and  bluntness  of  manners  observable  in  the  European- 
Spanish  immigrant.  In  these  respects,  as  well  as  others  before 
noticed,  there  is  much  to  encourage  every  attempt  for  their  im- 
provement, and  even  to  command  respect  in  the  midst  of  their 
degradation.  Considering  its  past  history  and  political  state,  it 
really  appears  a  marvel  that  society  is  not  more  generally  dis- 
organised and  corrupt  than  it  is,  and  it  must  be  r^;arded  as  a 
proof  of  the  general  mildness  of  character  which,  in  spite  of  adverse 
influences,  still  distinguishes  the  people.  Nay,  it  is  highly  probable 
that  the  disorders  which  prevail  to  so  awful  an  extent  in  Central 
America  would  be  fully  realized,  and,  it  may  be,  surpassed,  in 
more  favoured  communities,  if  placed  under  no  greater  restraints. 
Whatever  may  be  the  present  desolations,  future  prospects  are 
gloomy  only  so  long  as  the  appointed  means  of  r^^erating  the 
country  are  vrithhdd. 

Risks  must,  however,  be  encountered,  and  particularly  when 
the  ignorance  of  the  people  is  openly  assailed,  their  superstitions 
e^qpoeed,  and  their  crimes  denounced.  In  proportion  to  the  con- 
scientious determination  not  to  bow  to  their  idols  or  conform  to 
their  idolatrous  and  superstitious  customs,  the  danger  will  be 
mcreased ;  and  a  corresponding  amount  of  prudence  and  wisdom 
will  be  found  necessaiy  in  order  to  escape  the  occasion,  or  to  oot- 
lide  the  storm.  It  is  not,  however,  always  practieable  to  avmd 
coming  into  colliaon  with  thdr  prejudices.    A  cautious  pencm. 


^^^"  TUE  CRUELTY  OP   POPERV.  301 

t  conscious  of  scruples,  wili  not  tbrusl  himBelf  in  the  way  of  the 
publif  tionutge  paid  to  the  boat  and  to  images.  But,  as  these  ob- 
servnuces  are  so  frequent  and  general,  it  is  not  possible  to  aToId 
giving  oflencc.  One  cannot  walk  the  streets  without  passing  open 
chuTch  doors,  crosses,  paintings,  and  effigies  of  the  Virgin,  which 
are  set  up  at  the  corners  of  the  streets  and  in  the  market-places, 
and  to  all  of  which  the  natives  take  off  their  hat9.  Meeting  the 
host  and  processions  may  generally  be  avoided  iritb  a  little  core, 
as  they  may  be  heard  afar  off;  and  even  when  unexpectedly  met, 
ft  retreat  is  mostly  practicible,  and  is  preferable  to  provoking 
the  crowd  by  a  refusal  to  bend  the  knee.  But  when  disbelief 
in  their  dogmas  is  not  only  arowed,  but  is  consistently  main- 
tained,  and  cspcdally  when  their  superstitious  idolatries  and 
immoralities  are  faithfully  rebuked,  the  risk  of  as^assinatioa  Of 
insult  has  been  considered  imminent.  Formerly,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Vice-President  Flores,  it  was  enough  for  a  priest  or  a.  monk  to 
I  point  out  an  obnoxious  individual  to  the  populace,  and  hia 
Bssaasination  was  compassed ;  but  now  even  this  ha*  foiled  of  its 
effect,  and  all  the  dangers  alluded  to  hare  been  braved  with  impu- 
nity in  the  city  of  Guatemala  itself. 

Occasion  ally,  some  foreigners  have  imprudently  entered  the 

I    churches  or  gazed  at  the  processions  while  refuwng  to  conform  to 

.    the  customary  modes  of  worship,  and  insult  and  violence  have 

ensued     Latterly  sceptical  natives  of  the  better  educated  classes 

have  been  imphcatcd  in  similar  scenes. 

The  forms  under  which  the  cruelty  of  the  religion  of  Rome  is  dis- 
played in  Central  America  are  almost  innumerable.     The  difficulty 
'    lies  in  the  selection  of  examples.    The  evil  may  be  traced  to  its 
'    source  in  some  that  remain  to  be  glanced  at  even  more  directly 
'    than  in  those  already  referred  to. 

The  cruelty  of  Incarcerating  men  and  women — often  youths  of 
both  sexes — in  a  living  tomb,  under  the  guise  of  a  convent  or 
monastery,  is  more  readily  admitted  than  it  is  generally  appre- 
ciated,   tn  Guatemala,  where  these  institutions  have  been  nume- 
l  rous  and  powerful,  and  where  they  are  still  struggling  to  maintain 
f  their   influence,    especially    those    appropriated   to    nuns,    their 
f  injurious  effects  have  been  palpable  to  the  more  thoughtful  natives 
r  themselves,    llony  stories  illustnitive  of  their  cruelty  are  in  the 
[  mouths  both  of  the  inddet  and  of  the  devout.    And  on  hearing 


|>tliem  0 


:  canitot  but  picture  U 


f  mioy  moie  JKonu  w 


802  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CEXTUAL  AMERICA. 

cases  were  never  known  out  of  doors,  pining  in  the  seclusion  of  the 
cloister,  writhing  beneath  the  oppression  of  a  system  as  unnatural 
aa  it  is  delusive,  and  only  escaping  by  death  from  the  power  of 
human  cruelty,  to  find  the  hopes  that  were  built  upon  these  veiy 
aoffierings  and  sacrifices  groundless  and  irretrievable. 

It  is  still  no  rare  occurrence  for  an  heiress,  the  joy  of  a  parent's 
heart,  and  the  hope  of  a  family,  to  devote  herself  in  the  flower  of 
her  youth  to  this  life  without  an  object — ^this  death  without  a 
cause.  They  are,  of  course,  the  special  subjects  of  enticement  by 
those  who  are  interested  in  the  wealth  and  credit  of  the  various 
orders.  Such  are  the  fdse  appearances  that  these  houses  maintain 
before  the  world,  and  such  is  the  simplicity  of  their  dupes,  that 
they  have  no  difficulty  in  recruiting  their  numbers,  and  they  are 
even  able  to  exact  a  doia,  or  marriage  portion,  with  every  person, 
however  poor,  whom  they  receive.  The  prospect  they  hold  out  is 
that  of  a  life  of  quiet  and  security,  of  competence  and  respectability, 
of  supposed  sanctity  and  merit,  and  to  these  strong  inducements  are 
added  the  often  feigned  enthosiasm  of  the  older  nuns — ^the  decoy- 
ducks  of  the  convent—the  false  heroism  and  excitement  of  the 
dedication,  and  the  empty  but  brilliant  display  of  the  ceremonies 
attendant  upon  taking  the  veiL  These  and  other  allurements 
operate  upon  the  poor  as  well  as  upon  the  rich,  and  not  a  few 
obtain  admittance  after  having  sold  their  all,  and  begged  at  the 
doors  of  the  wealthy  in  order  to  make  up  the  required  premium — 
the  price  of  their  purchased  bondage. 

An  intelligent,  high-spirited,  and  naturally  cheerful  young 
woman,  probably  under  the  influence  of  some  such  motives,  or 
actuated  by  a  passing  disappointment,  which  over-indulgence  had 
ill  prepared  her  to  brook,  entered  one  of  these  professed  abodes  of 
peace.  The  exdtement  over,  the  novelty  worn  off,  she  b^an  to 
repent  her  rashness.  The  broken  ties  of  relationship,  the  love  of 
life,  the  want  of  change,  and  the  void  of  her  own  joyous  heart, 
soon  made  her  prison-house  intolerable.  Her  efforts  to  procure  the 
annulling  of  her  vows  proved  unavailing,  and  only  drew  down 
increased  severities  upon  her.  The  s^ock  proved  too  much 
— her  reason  was  dethroned.  From  a  raving  maniac  she  became 
a  senseless  idiot.  Thus  only  was  her  spirit  broken,  and  a  tame 
docility  succeeded.  The  rest  of  her  days  were  quietly  spent  in  the 
doisters.    But  how? 

From  the  elegant  basin  in  the  midst  of  the  patio  of  the  convent. 


TI1£   BIANtAC  ]> 


SOS 


I  lunB  the  dear  and  rapid  stream  of  its  constantly  uvcrSoning  iratcra 

I  The  chanoel  is  an  open  one,  anil  at  the  ead  of  the  yard  it  suddenly 
,  disappears  muler  the  maieiTC  maaont;  to  burst  forth  into  the 
sunny  street  without,  and  join  tlie  streams  that  issue  firom  other 
bouseB,  which,  together,  leave  the  stony  thuroughfnrcs  for  the  wiU 
lavine,  and  that  for  the  fuamiitg  torrent,  the  migbty  river,  and 

I  then  the  bouadlese  ocean.  Just  where  the  water,  in  the  beginning 
of  its  coiirw,  passes  through  the  founii&tioD  of  the  dead  convent- 
KbU,  the  maniac  mm,  now  a  poor  wreck  of  hmniinity,  still  clad 
in  her  monastic  garb — still  a  "  rciigiosa" — used  to  fuse  the  tedkius 
hours  day  after  day,  till  dutth  removed  her,  bending  over  the 
channel,  gazing  upon  tlie  water,  oceasionally  dropping  pieces  of 
r  or  other  fragments  iiito  the  pisyfiil  atream,  and  watchiitg 
them  as  they  ghded  onwards  and  disappeared.     If  disturbed  or 

'  quei^ioued,  with  a  melancholy  smile  and  an  almost  animated  tOM, 
ber  invariable  exclamation  vie,  "  Tlicy  are  free,  they  arc  free." 

Al\er  hearing  this  heart-rending  story,  related  by  a  native  lady, 
tcho  could  behold  the  loily  and  blank  walls  of  the  uumerouB 
DunnericB  of  the  capital,  or  from  aa  eminence  look  down  upon 
their  thickly  shaded  gardens,  without  a  sensation  of  gloom,  or  a 
thrill  of  compassion  f  Who  would  deny  that  they  are  living 
■epulchrea  "  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty  ?" 

The  want  of  fadlities  for  inland  communication  has  been  given 
■s  a  reason  why  there  arc  provincial  periodical  faii^  at  which 
thousands  assemble.*  Combined  with  their  businessia  the  warship 
of  the  patron  saints  of  the  place,  or  ratber  of  his  or  her  image, 
Bome  of  which  are  supposed  to  possess  healing  virtue.  One  of  the 
most  attractive  and  important  of  these  ccntivl  points  is  that  of  Esqui- 
{lulaa  in  the  proviuceofChiquimula,  a  frontier  town  of  the  States  of 
Guatemala  and  Uonduras.  At  this  place  there  is  an  image  of  the 
Crocifled,  whicli  enjoys  the  highest  reputation  of  any  in  the  cotm- 
try  for  performing  miracles,  and  is  called,  "  Our  Lord  of  Esqoi- 
pulas."  t  It  was  carved  in  ebouy  in  IJiSS  by  Quirio  Catafio,  an 
artist  of  great  repute.  To  this  diminutive  black  image  inlgrimages 
are  mode  often  IVom  great  dista:ices — its  fiunc  having  spread  even 
to  the  Mexican  States ;  and  on  the  ISth  Jinnnry  there  are  stiU 
from  ten  to  twenty  thousand  votaries  aascmbleil  at  its  shrine,  many 

I  of  whom  ore  maimed  or  sick,  and  ore  brougUL  witli  liio  hope  of 


804  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

beiDg  cured.  The  building  where  it  is  kept  is  considered  a 
sumptuous  one,  and  is  distinguished  as  **£!  Sanctuario,** — the 
sanctuary.  On  the  walls  of  this  edifice  are  coarse  representations 
of  the  miracles  that  have  professedly  been  wrought  there,  the 
number  of  which  is  increased  every  season.  It  is  richly  adorned 
with  the  gifts  of  the  Faithftd,  consisting  of  models  of  limbs,  &c.,  in 
the  precious  metals,  and  other  tokens  of  gratitude,  firom  those  who 
fitncy  they  have  received  benefits  from  the  image. 

During  the  entire  year,  but  especially  at  three  marked  periods, 
companies  of  pilgrims,  said  to  amount  together  to  100,000  persons, 
travel  on  foot  firom  all  parts  towards  this  wonder-working  piece  of 
ebony.  At  some  distance  from  the  Sanctuario,  there  is  a  rock  called 
the  daneing'Stonej^  upon  which  the  pilgrims  fancy  there  is  some 
advantage  in  capering  more  or  less  before  they  proceed  any  further . 
The  lying  wonders  of  the  place  have  been  exposed  by  several  tra- 
Tellers.t    One  of  the  results  of  the  worship  of  the  Esquipulas  idol 

*  La  Fiedni  de  Baflar. 

t  *'  The  fioUowing  acoonnt  of  one  of  the  pretended  miracles  wrought  by  the  image  was 
giren  me  by  Bon  Manuel  Zapata,  aa  tnutworthy  a  gentleman  aa  any  in  Central  America, 
and  well  known  to  all  peraona  who  hare  resided  in  the  State  of  Salvador.  Harii^  gone, 
with  others,  to  the  great  annual  fair,  held  on  one  of  the  saint's  festirals,  on  the  0th  Jan. 
1884^  and  having  got  into  the  body  of  the  choich  amidst  an  inmiense  crowd  of  people, 
after  he  had  waited  some  time,  and  seen  some  minor  miracles  of  rather  an  eqniTOcal 
character  perfmrmed,  he  saw  a  man  brought  in  who  appeared  to  be  a  most  wretched 
ol^ject,  his  legs  and  arms  bdng  twisted  upwards,  and  his  whole  body  distorted  in  a  most 
hwrible  manner.  He  was  placed  before  the  image,  and  exclaimed  in  a  hoUow  Toioe,— '*  I 
hare  come  upwards  of  a  hundred  leagues  to  see  our  Lord  of  Esquipulas,  and  will  never 
leave  till  he  has  cured  me."  This  he  repeated  several  times,  when  suddenly  he  gave  a 
■{Ming,  and  appeared  healed  in  a  moment ;  his  body  became  straight,  his  legs  and  arms 
resumed  their  former  [natural]  position,  and  he  stood  before  the  image  a  stout  hale  man. 
Upon  the  completion  of  this  wondeiftil  mirade,  the  musicians  in  attendance  struck  up  a 
dancing  tune ;  large  sums  of  money  were  coOected  for  the  saint  and  the  sulq'ect  of  the  mira- 
cle, and  the  painters  in  attendance  commenced  painting  copies  of  it  for  sale.  Bon  Manuel 
told  me,  that  though  he  had  before  had  stroi^  doubts  about  the  authenticity  of  the 
miracles,  and  everything  else  pertaining  to  priestcraft,  he  could  not  contradict  or  deny 
what  appeared,  without  doubt,  to  be  a  miraculous  cure.  The  next  morning  he  had  to 
leave  Esquipulas ;  and  in  the  suburbs  of  the  town  he  met  a  gentleman  mounted  on  a  very 
fine  mule,  with  handsome  Mexican  saddle  and  trappings.  Saluting  each  other  accord- 
ing to  the  custom  of  the  country,  they  entered  into  conversation.  The  stranger  told  hm 
that  he  had  been  present  at  the  disgraceful  hxee  of  the  preceding  day;  that  he  weU 
knew  the  man  on  whom  the  pretended  miracle  had  been  wrought;  that  he  was  a  noted 
robber  who  lived  near  the  river  Paz;  and  that  he  had  wished  to  apprehend  him  aa  a 
criminal  and  impostor,  but  that  the  priests  would  not  permit  it,  as  they  said  that  all  be 
had  done  was  for  the  glory  of  Ck>d ;  and  that  to  apprehend  him  would  injure  the  lame  of 
on  Lord  of  £iqnipulas."'-Bimkyp^  TnsftlM,  p.  846. 


KABTn-EATIHG.  305 

IS  not  hitherto  been  noticed.    Most  of  the  visitors  to  this  fair  ore 

ilaced  to  pnrchase,  as  a  kind  of  memorial  of  ihc  image,  some  small 

id  rude  medallioiiB  made  of  clay,  and  bfloiing  ita  impress  and  $uit- 

!e  inscriptions,  which  have  iKen  blessed  bjthe  curate  of  the  place. 

B  retaming  to  their  homes,  these  arc  pot  into  the  hands  of  their 

lildrea  as  something  sacred,  and,  strange  to  say,  are  frequently 

a  by  them.    The  consequence  is,  that  an  extraordinary  but  in- 

rablc  propensity  of  eating  earth  a  provoked,  which  gradually  aa- 

M  the  chamcterof  a  habit,  and  is  continued  till  it  produces  death. 

oon  to  see  children,  and  e\ea  adults  ofa  bloated 

ince,  their  bellies  much  siroilen,  and  their  complexion  ofa 

w  or  nshey  hue,  who  are  the  victims  of  this  depravity.    The 

natural  appetite  thus  created  is  often  fed  by  picking  plaster  irom 

le  walls  of  the  bouses,  and  devouring  articles  mode  of  pipe-clay, 

il  bricks,  or  even  crockery- irare.    In  time,  dj-sentery  and  other 

i  thus  produced,  which  hurry  the  victims  of  super- 

f  lUtion  to   on  untimely  grave.       Cases  of  this  kind   are   by  no 

They  occur  among  the  wealthy  as  well  as  among 

■^  poor.    The  superstitious  origin  to  which  this  calamity  is  here 

■ceil,  was  supplied  to  the  author  by  a.  native  Indy  who  had  lost  a 

e  from  this  cause.    A  specimen  of  the  Eaquipulas  earth,  by 

IS  of  which  their  idolatry  is  turned  into  a  physical  as  well  as 

nnoml  curse,  was  at  the  same  time  given  to  hint.    The  appella- 

"Come  tierra,"  or  earlh-ealer,  is  among  the  popular  forms  of 

le  which  children  address  to  each  other. 

The  &et  that  madness  and  idiocy  prevail  to  a  mrprising  extent, 

is  one  that  nmst  strike  every  foreign  resident,  and  which  naturally  ' 

leads  to  an  inquiry  into  the  cause.    In  the  ci^  of  Guatemala,  the 

unusually  large  number  of  such  cases  is  palpable  to  the  least 

The  wealthy  are  the  most  subject  to  these  calamities. 

eely  a  year  pawes  but  some  of  the  most  notable  residents,  mer- 

mts  and  others,  are  visited  with  temporary  and  often  with  con- 

med  detBDgement.    As  there  are  no  ainrlums  or  madhouses  they 

t  kept  at  home,  and  together  with  idiots  are  constantly 

mlcred.     There  is  scarcely  a  family  of  note,  but  hav 

liliating  eihibition  and  the  painful  burden  of  one  or 

h  objecN  in  their  own  houses.     Some  of  the  ninat  pitiable 

glaive  ewes  have  come  under  the  author's  own  notice,  the  inde- 

«  eharaclcr  of  which  precludes  the  publication  of  their  eicken- 


<  the  1 

nde-  fl 

ken-  ■ 


306  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

ing  details.  More  than  once  he  has  been  led  to  doubt  whether  the 
disorganized  mass  of  mortality  before  him  were  indeed  the  halntir 
tion  of  a  human  soul.  The  vestiges  of  mind— even  of  a  mind  in 
ruins — ^were  to  him  undisoemible ;  and  animal  functions,  without 
either  intelligence  or  instinct,  were  all  that  could  be  traced.  There 
is  little  doubt  but  that  most  cases  of  madness  or  idiocy,  could  their 
causes  be  discovered,  would  be  found  to  originate  in  immorality, 
or  the  want  of  that  stability  and  peace  which  only  true  religion 
can  yield  to  the  mind.  It  ib  not  denied  that  some  cases,  and 
perhaps  all  of  them,  may  be  attributed  to  physical  causes.  But  who 
will  venture  to  decide  how  much  these  have  been  affected  by  moral 
and  religious  influences  ?  The  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the 
author,  on  seeing  the  luxury  and  irreligion  that  frequently  surround 
the  pitiable  objects  referred  to,  has  been  that  the  Creator  thus  mani- 
festly marks  with  His  disapprobation  the  denial  of  Himself  and  the 
abuse  of  Hb  bounties,  and  at  once  lays  a  withering  hand  upon 
the  pride,  the  natural  affections,  and  the  temporal  eigoyments  of 
creatures  who  systematically  turn  His  glory  into  shame.  Whatever 
objections  may  be  taken  to  this  view,  none  who  believe  the  Bible 
will  doubt  that  when  Central  America  is  Christianized  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  term,  these  domestic  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure 
will  give  place  to  social  blessings.  '^For  godliness  is  profitable 
unto  all  things,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,**  as 
well  as  **  of  that  which  is  to  come.** 

Suicide  is  little  known  in  Central  America.  In  1825,  a  Spanish 
gentleman  who  had  fled  from  Spain  on  the  fall  of  the  constitutional 
^party  there,  and  who  was  disappointed  both  in  his  political  and  com- 
mercial interests  in  Guatemala,  laid  violent  hands  upon  himself. 
When  the  fact  became  known,  a  crowd  assembled  round  the  door 
of  his  house,  where,  under  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  the  ezda- 
mation  of  a  native  Caballero  to  another  was,  "  Hombre !  es  una  oosa 
horrorosa — es  hecho  de  un  Protestante.**  Sir,  it  is  a  horrid  eate-^ 
it  is  a  deed  worthy  of  a  Protestant. 

Notwithstanding  the  proximity  of  British  Honduras,  the  impres- 
son  hitherto  entertained  of  a  Protestant,  which  is,  of  course,  de- 
rived from  their  religious  teachers,  is  of  the  most  extravagant  and 
ridiculous  character.  A  Jew,  in  the  minds  of  the  ignorant  people,  is 
something  akin  to  a  demon,  if  not  even  more  to  be  feared;  anda  Pro- 
testant is  something  lower  and  more  dangerous  than  a  Jew.  BodHy 
deformity,  as  well  as  moral  delmquency,  has  been  attributed  to 


KOIIONS  OP   FBOTESTASTISM.  307 

Aem,  and  serious  doubts  were  once  entertjuned  whether  or  not 

■  ProUstant  could  cat  salt.     They  have  also  been  represented  as 

ying  only  for  short  periods,  aft«r  the  example  of  their  worthy 

fbundcr,  King  Henry  VIII.    Since  1823,  when  a  greater  number 

I  strangers  visited  Guatemala  than  had  ever  been  seen  there 

Bbefbre,  the  number  of  foreigners  has  greatly  increased,  and,  aa  a 

ult,  very  mucli  ignorant  prejudice  on  tliis  subject  has  been 

^nmovcd.    The  general  deportment  of  Anglo-Saxon  visitors,  or 

Bsidents,  has  not,  however,  been  such  as  greatly  to  raise  the  respect 

f  the  inhabitants  for  the  Protestantism  wliich  they  profess,  how- 

ir  much  they  may  have  corrected  their  more  absurd  notions. 

Some  of  the  usages  of  what  is  called  refined  society  are  gradually 

bang  introduced  into  Guatemala — among  these  it  has  been  at- 

mpt«d  to  cultivate  a  taste  for  theatricals.    The  liberal  Government 

U  their  zeal  to  edacateihc  people,  were  led  to  favour  this  pretended 

IB  of  popular  instruction.    During  their  administration,  a  play 

died  '■  La  Inquisicion  por  dentro,"  A  Peep  into  the  Inquisition, 

s  frcijuentlj  performed.     Its  object  was  to  expose  the  spirit  and 

Is  of  Romish  priests,  and  it  was  one  of  the  phenomena  of  the 

period  that  such  an  exposure  should  be  even  practicable.     Since 

then,  other  efforts  to  establish  the  stage  have  been  made  with  lower 

aims;  but  though  the  managers  have  as  usual  pandered  to  the 

^^ritinted  tastes  of  the  public,  and  thereby  renounced  theur  professed 

^^aiission  of  utility,  yet  they  have  not  succeeded  in  fomenting  the  love 

^^Bftuch  amusements  sufficiently  to  make  it  profitable  to  themselves. 

^^B-  Among  the  tokens  that  all  dosses  are  freeing  themselves  from  the 

^^■kdlucnce  of  Homauism  without  such  aid,  axe  the  following  :—Ia 

^^^Brnttemala,  Papal  bulls  of  indulgence,  which  used  to  be  as  much 

^HIlRlDcd  as  an  accredited  paper  currency  is  in  other  countries,  ore  now 

^^hnwle  available  by  tlie  Tienderos,  or  shopkeepers,  as  waste  paper  to 

enfold  the  value  of  a  qunrtillo*  of  chocolate,  or  a  mediof  of  man- 

tcquilla.^    In  Son  Salvador,  the  now  ejqiatriatcd  Bishop  Viieri 

offered  first  iicentij  and  thcn/orfy  dai/s  of  plenary  indulgeikcc,  to  be 

deducted  fVom  the  period  of  pui^atorial  sufferings  allcr  death,  to  all 

who  should  aid  in  removing  an  un^htly  mound  of  earth  which 

disgraced  one  of  the  squares  of  that  dty,  and  took  from  the  imposing 


Herlisg.    Cnffa  coiu  ii  Doirlifn  cc 
t  Batfi  Ril,  or  tvoiiituUUoa. 


e  of  lilTCT,  TtLiu  three  )u]f[]anf 
I  Fmb  butter. 


908  THE  GOBPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

eflbet  of  its  cathedraL  Bat  the  mound  of  earth  remained,  and 
though  the  number  of  days  was  again  doubled,  the  bishop's  dndbs 
upon  the  infernal  bank,  or  rather  upon  public  credulity  and  private 
remorse,  were  openly  dishonoured. 

These  &cts,  together  with  what  may  be  gathered  firom  preyious 
chapters,  will  suffice  to  show  the  degree  of  influence  which  Popery 
has  oyer  the  popular  mind.  Of  its  fruits  the  reader  has  had  speci- 
mens which  win  enable  him  to  pronounce  the  tree  good  or  evil, 
if  he  can  &tinguish  between  a  bramble  and  a  vine.  Should  he 
have  tasted  for  himself  of  the  sweet  grapes  of  Eshcol,  he  can  also 
compare  the  spiritual  and  mental  condition  of  indiyidnals  in  Central 
America  with  his  own  goodly  heritage. 

The  mere  moralist  should  weep  while  he  contrasts  the  state  of 
society  described  with  that  of  more  &youred  nations.  The  loyer 
of  mankind  must  feel  some  interest  in  a  people  so  much  wronged 
and  oppressed,  now  just  rising  to  a  knowledge  of  the  rights  and 
Eberties  which  haye  been  so  long  denied  them.  The  British 
patriot,  with  feelings  of  shame  for  the  past,  may  nourish  generous 
desires  to  repair  the  injuries  which  his  countrymen  haye  inflicted, 
and  may  yet  hope  to  make  the  influence  of  his  beloyed  nation- 
ality a  blessing  instead  of  a  curse.  The  An^o-Saxon  Christian,  in 
whom  all  these  impulses  unite  with  the  sanctifying  and  constrain- 
ing influence  of  loye  to  Christ,  cannot  but  glow  with  the  conflicting 
emotions ;  and  with  quickened  aseal  for  the  kingdom  of  Heayen,  he 
win  carry  them,  whfle  yet  warm,  to  the  mercy-seat  where  they 
win  mingle  with  the  incense  of  his  prayers,  and  enter  into  the  ears 
of  Jehoyah,  the  God  of  Sabaoth. 

Should  this  happy  result  not  be  obtained — should  the  informa- 
tion here  giyen  come  short  of  its  object — God  in  His  proyidenoe  may 
perhaps  employ  other  instrumentality  to  arouse  the  energies  of  His 
people,  and  to  direct  theirjeflbrts  to  the  yast  Spanish-American 
fields  which  daim  to  be  occupied,  some  of  which  are  already  white 
unto  the  haryest. 

While  attention  has  been  Erected  to  one  part  of  a  Continent,  it 
has  been  under  the  strong  impression  that  the  general  outline  on  aH 
essential  points  is  applicable  to  the  spiritual,  moral,  social,  political, 
andeyen  to  some  extent  to  the  physical  condition  of  all  Spanish  and 
Portuguese  America ;  that  is,  firom  California  and  the  northern- 
most  limits  of  New  Spain  to  the  Tierra  dd  Fnego. 
With  the  exception  of  some  yery  limited  efibrts  in  British 


THE  CLAIM   OF  A  COKIISEUT.  309 

a  and  in  Qriluh  Hondunu,  our  nuBsionaries  have  not  yet  vea- 
BT«(I  to  enter  upon  any  part  of  this  e:(tensive  and  important  field.* 
i  Spanish  and  Portuguese  porta  and  maritime  cities  in  either 
ti,  the  Indian  tribes  inhabiting  the  Pamiias  and  the  Cordillera  of 
or,  have  tiecn  regarded  as  inaccesiSLblc  to  our  efforts.   And 
(tCherefore?     Is  it  because  they  are  under  the  iutolenut  oppression 
'  t  the  Fupal  npostacy  ?    Would  such  a  reason  have  excluded  the  first 
'nionaries  of  the  Cross?    Let  the  reader  decide.    Is  it  that  the 
l^arit  tuffers  u*  not,  or  that  the  Providence  of  God  has  closed  these 
's  upon  ua  ?     Before  we  con  plead  this  we  must  have  supplicated 
r  ilie  Divine  direction  and  been  denied.    We  must  have  "  essayed  to 
I  ff^'  tlutber,  and  been  directed  othemise.    If  not,  these  excuses  are 
t  less  than  no  avail.    Is  it  that  wc  have  spent  all  our  ener^cs 
where,  and  have  not  room  for  another  effort,  no,  nor  even  a. 
ti  of  sympathy  for  these  new  fields  ?    Let  conscience  answer  I 
Perhaps,  tn  the  cose  of  the  reader,  the  wants  of  these  people  were 
Knevcr  before  pressed  upon  his  attention.    This  is  now  no  longerthe 
Oh !  that  the  claim  of  a  eontinent  to  be  made  partakers  of  the 
d — tbe  cry  of  millions  of  Papsts  and  of  heathenish  Indian 
'  tribes — the  special  wants  of  Central  America  and  its  more  acon^ble 
inhabitants,  may  reach  tbe  Christian's  heart,  and  produce  its  legiti- 
mate resolt. 

The  cruelties  which  priests  and  peopJe  practise  and  suffer,  bring 
V  onr  ears  tlie  cry  "  Come  over  and  help  os,"  Their  ignoraoce, 
^r  very  dqiravity,  and  their  thirst  afler  knowledge  repeat  the 
^mg  petition.  It  is  vehenictitly  reiterated  by  the  madness  th«t 
embitters  their  spirits,  and  dcq)ly  re-echoed  in  tbe  inward  groans 
of  every  sufienng  heart.  Would  that  ibe  inspired  appeal,  together 
with  the  Saviour's  authoritative  commission,  might  ring  in  the  eore 
^^of  e^ery  supine  Chrislian  till  they  arouse  him  to  action  I  Oh! 
^^Ubat  tlie  impression  might  follow  each  one,  while  enjoying  the 
^^Kletnogs  of  his  country,  the  sweets  of  home,  and  the  privileges  of 
^^Bbe  sanctuary,  until  softeDed  to  sympathy  by  the  appeal,  and  im- 
^^Byelicd  to  obedience  by  ihe  command,  be  shall  devote  himself  body, 
^^■Dnl,  aad  spirit  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  blessed  duty,  that  in 
^^■be  time  he  may  reap  the  eternal  reward. 


Thee 
^^Utoour  i 
^^■heirve 

^^ntouchmj 


Mr  ilut  nmti  tatmki  tBvtt  ut  pndiralile. 


810  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   XV. 

LATEST  IKTELUGENCE. 

1850. 

The  Grand  Oceanic  Canal— Sir  H.  L.  Bolwer'a  Treaty— His  new  Policy  and  letter  to  Mr. 
Chatfield— Temporary  mode  of  branait — ^The  Panama  Railroad — Isthmus  of  Tehoan- 
tepee — Railroad  through  Mexico— Growing  interest  in  Central  America— The  Yncatecan 
War— Treaty  between  Engkmd  and  the  State  of  Guatemala— Santo  Tomas  constituted 
the  chief  port — Insurrection  in  Honduras — Remains  of  the  late  British  Policy — 
Prospects  of  the  Republic. —Importance  of  the  Canal  of  Kicaragoa— Reasona  for 
occnpying  the  field— A  commencement  made  at  Belize. 

**  But  cam  y«  not  discern  the  signs  of  the  times  T'- Matth.  xtL  3. 

While  the  foregoing  sheets  have  been  passing  through  the  press, 
important  political  intelligence  from  Central  America  has  reached 
Europe. 

The  topic  of  most  absorbing  and  general  interest  is  the  project  of 
opening  the  ship-canal  between  the  two  oceans — its  apparent  pros- 
pects, and  the  light  in  which  it  is  viewed  by  the  various  powers 
concerned.  A  new  and  a  happy  turn  has  been  given  to  the  entire 
question,  and  to  all  the  conflicting  interests  involved,  by  the  con- 
clusion of  the  treaty  between  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States, 
negotiated  on  the  19th  of  April  1850,  by  Sir  H.  L.  Bulwer  and 
Mr.  Clayton,  and  ratified  by  the  United  States  Congress  on  the 
27th  of  May.  By  this  agreement,  the  principles  laid  down  in  the 
late  President's  message*  concerning  the  Nicaragua  canal  are  to  be 
fully  carried  out 

The  treaty  which  has  been  published  is  of  a  strictly  just  and 
becoming  character.     By  it  both  powers  give  up  for  ever  all 

*  **!  hare  directed  thefiegodation  of  a  treaty  with  Nicaragua,  pledging  both  gofvvap 
menti  to  protect  those  who  shall  engage  in  and  perfect  the  work.  All  other  naliaH  m 
invited  by  the  State  of  Nicaragua  to  enter  into  the  same  treaty-stipulations  withlier;  lad 
the  benefits  to  be  derired  by  each  from  such  an  arrangement  will  be  the  porotectioB  of 
tUi  great  inter-oceanic  communication  against  any  power  which  mig^t  aedc  to  obrtnwt 
fl^  or  to  monopolize  its  adrantages.  AH  States  entering  into  sndi  a  treily  wiO  flpjoj  flM 
T^it  of  passi^  throng  the  canal  on  the  payment  of  the  anne  toOi. 

'The  work,  if  constructed  under  theae  guarantees,  will  beeone  n  bend  of  pitfis  I 
of  1  contention  and  ftiife,  between  the  nationi  of  the  earth,  flhoold  tttgiMl^i 


TnEATY   CONCERNING  THE   IKTEB-OCEANIC  CANAL-      311 

"occupy,  or  colonize,  or  nsaumc,  or  exercise  any  tiominion 

r  Nicaragua,  Costa  Rica,  the  Mosquito  coast,  or  any  part  of 

entral  America,"  &e.    TLe  plea  of  a  Protectorate  h  also  distinctly 

enounced,  and  provisions  are  nitide  to  preserve  the  neutrality  of 

e  cannl  itself,  its  ncighbourinf;  porta,  and  all  ships,  within  a  given 

ftdiatance  of  its  termini.    The  protection  of  the  Company*  engaged 

ph  the  work,  and  other  minor  points,  are  also  stipidated. 

The  American  newspapers  speak  of  this  treaty  as  "  a  triumph  of 
ense  and  magnanimity— an  era  in  diplomatic  transactions — 
s  establishing  new  and  broad  principles  of  international 

"The  spectacle  of  the  two  great  Anglo-Saion  nations  of  the 
jOld  and  New  World,  respectively  uniting  to  secure  the  opening  of 
I  new  and  most  ndvrtntsgeous  highway  to  the  commerce  of  the 
orld,  by  making  it  general  for  the  benefit  of  a/l  tiatlotiK,  is  one  we 
my  justly  be  proud  of,  and  is  an  honour  to  the  nineteenth  century  .f" 
The  principles  of  this  national  compact  are  declared  also  to  ei- 
1  all  other  pikisages  that  may  be  made  across  any  part  of 
entral  America.      A  flimilar  treaty  has  already  been  concluded 

n  the  govcnunents  of  the  United  States  and  of  France. 

So  unexpected  a  conclusion,  upon  principles  so  new,  in  official 

drcl^,  seems  to  have  token  the  diplomatic  agents  on  the  spot  some- 

Vliat  by  BurpriK,  and  to  faave  disconcerted  tlidr  little  plans  of 

liUonal  tt^randisement.  This  has  been  exposed  by  the  professedly 

leidental  publication  of  a  private  and  confidential  letter  &om  Sir 

L  L.  Bulwer  to  Mr.  ChalfieUi,  dated  Washington,  Feb.  26.    Tho 

ir  of  this  apparently  frank  but  really  astute  communication  is 

o  check  our  agent  Ironi  carrying  out  the  aggressive  spirit  hitherto 

sued  by  bis  Government,  to  acquaint  him  with  the  new  policy 


Itmtttry  tlmu^  whidi  Iba  aaai  Buy  tn 

an;  foreisD  power.    No  ludi  povcr  ihouU 

'.  hernftcr  U>  exerciM  »  canUiiUios  an  ioDacttco 

Dbiliiact  *  blj^vi;  nhich  oagkt  lo  be  dtdiated  la 


ihe  Iilhniaoftcliuutcpccuul  Ftuuui.  m  tl»  wnrlbj' of 
-PrtuJinl  I.  IVvXr-f  Mi—ti,  VtlUBpoa,  B(x.  1,  Hit. 
^tbelUulKuill'uiScCiHnlCai  t. 


S12  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CEin'RAL  AMBRICA. 

wAapted,  and  to  break  the  force  of  any  disappamtment  it  wiiftl 
occasion,  by  casting  greater  blame  on  Mr.  Squiers,  the  AmeriBBn 
eharge  d*<^airesj  who  is  distinctly  said  to  be  dkapproved  of  by  ids 
own  Government.  There  is  in  it  a  declaration  that  we  ^will  not 
pennit  the  Nicaragnans,  whom  we  have  expelled  therefrom,  to  be 
again  masters  of  the  San  Juan.*'  Some  expressions  attribntiqg 
weakness  to  the  present  Umted  States  Groyemment  would  lead  to 
a  doubt  whether  it  was  ever  intended  to  see  the  light  of  publicity. 
It  may  have  been  put  forth  to  relieve  the  Grovemmaits  of  both 
eountries  from  the  by-play  of  their  respective  agents ;  but  whether 
intentional  or  not,  its  publication  is  a  real  exposure,  whidi  pcovcs 
that  the  advance  made  by  the  treaty  is  a  triumph  of  justice,  only 
ascribable  to  the  growing  integrity  of  the  age,  which  has  happily 
wrought  a  most  important  change  of  policy  in  the  parties  more 
immediately  concerned  in  negociating  this  treaty. 

The  present  extraordinary  flow  of  emigration  to  Califomia  has 
given  an  impetus  to  everything  connected  with  the  transit  of  the 
isthmus,  and  is  likely  to  produce  great  results  in  a  marvellously 
short  space  of  time. 

**  The  Company  by  whom  the  canal  contract  has  been  obtained 
from  the  Government  of  Nicaragua  were,  by  the  last  accounts, 
taking  active  steps  for  the  immediate  establishment  of  the  route 
through  that  country,  by  the  temporary  means  of  steamboats  and 
eoaches.  An  order  is  said  to  have  been  given  for  a  light  draught 
steamer  and  bsige  capable  of  carrying  together  500  passengers,  for 
the  navigation  of  the  San  Juan,  and  post-coaches  are  contemplated 
for  the  short  distance  Pess  than  sixteen  miles]  at  the  other  end  of 
Hie  fine,  between  the  lakes  and  the  Pacific***  Two  months*  hence 
the  Company  expect  to  convey  passengers  over  land,  via  the  lake 
and  the  river,  about  220  geographical  or  250  statute  miles,  in  less 
than  twenty-four  hours,  uid  firom  New  York  to  San  Frandsoo  in 
not  more  than  three  weeks.  Beckoning  upon  an  average  of  2,000 
passengers  per  month,  which  is  leas  than  half  the  number  now 
crossing  the  Isthmus  at  Chagres,  and  fixing  the  chaxge  finom  (key 
Town  to  San  Juan  of  the  south,  at  forty  dollars,  the  company 
expect  to  dear  at  the  least  a  million  of  dollars,  or  about  200,000^ 
annually  for  this  item  only,  "  and  as  the  saving  effected  by  the 
ehoioe  of  this  line  is  too  palpable  to  admit  of  competition  in  any 
other  part  of  the  Isthmiis^  and  they  possen  a  monopoly  as  £u:  as 

*  lU  Timu,  May  9;  ISM. 


I  R0I7T£S   AT   PANAMA   AXD  T£IltIAM£PEL'.  SI3 

Kicaragoa  is  cuiici;riiiKl,  there  is  apparently  no  reason  to  distnut  ia 
aixy  important  degree  these  lavounble  coaclnsiona."*  It  u  ereu 
sntidpaltxl  by  the  Buoguine  umLertakers  that  the  canal  may  be 
completed  ia  1851. 

This  project  hea  been  preferred  as  the  roost  pnwticable  and 
desinblc  by  Jeremy  Bentham,  Michel  Chevaiier,  aud  othcrsi,  and 
.  its  superiority  over  all  its  rivals  may  now  be  regarded  ae  a  settled 
1  pnnt. 

I  The  construction  of  a  ship  canal  over  the  narrower  part  of  the 
Isthmas  from  Chagres  to  Fanama,  within  the  territories  of  New 
Gnuada,  was  a  lavonrite  project  of  the  younger  Pitt,  and  was 
BDpported  by  Mondcur  Guizot  during  his  adminiftrstion  in  1843. 
The  distance  straight  acrosg  the  Isthmus  at  this  point,  according 
to  a  survey  ordered  by  General  lialivar  previous  to  1630,  was 
■tated  at  twenty-nine  gcogrnphical,  or  thirty-four  statute  miles. 
This  project,  the  cost  of  which  has  been  estimated  as  high  as  eight 
millions  sterling,  if  not  abandoned,  has  for  the  present  given  place 
to  the  easier  undertaking  of  a  railroad,  which  is  now  actually  being 
made,  and  is  proceeding  as  rapidly  as  North  Americsn  energy  can 
dnve  it,  in  the  face  of  the  natural  obstacles  and  in  spite  of  the 
insalubrity  of  the  climate,  a  disadvautage  to  which  the  Nicaisguan 
line  will  probably  be  tound  much  lees  exposed.  Mote  than  forty- 
eight  thousand  persons,  en  route  for  San  Francisco,  passed  over  the 
I  lithmus  at  this  point  during  the  year  1S4!),  notwithstanding  the 
I  ^fficultiea  of  the  transit  by  the  river  Chngrcs,  and  the  swumpy  and 
F  broken  road  through  the  jungle  to  Panama,  which  is  patted  with 
difficulty  even  upon  the  sure-footed  mole. 

At  the  Isthmus  of  Tchuantepec,  which  is  divided  between  the 
Mexican  Stales  of  Oajaca  and  Vera  Cruz,  a  road  and  even  a 
I  have  also  been  projected,  by  which  to  connect  the  river 
■"CoatcacoalcoB  with  some  small  and  swampy  lagoons  on  the  Pacific 
Here  the  entire  width  from  the  Golf  of  Mexico  to  the 
I'focific  it  ncftrly  140  statute  miles,  and  the  cost  of  a  water 
n  calculated  upon  that  of  the  Calcdouiun  canal,  wliich 
n  model,  is  estimated  by  the  projector  at  2,400,000^. 
ft^he  Mexicim  Govenuneut  by  a.  decree  of  the  2nd  Slarch  1H49, 
o  Don  Jos^  de  Garay  the  exclusive  privilege  of  executing 
b  work  with  the  right  of  tolls  for  fifty  years,  and  the  proprietor- 
iahip  of  all  the  unoccupied  territories  extending  over  more  than 


814  THB  QOSPBL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

thirty  miles  on  either  nde  of  the  line  of  oommonication.  The 
Mexican  legislature  also  provided  that  the  transit  should  be  open 
to  all  nations,  and  that  the  entire  passage  should  be  considered 
neutral  territory.  A  survey  was  made  between  the  years  1842 
and  1843  by  a  scientific  commission  appointed  by  the  projector 
and  under  the  direction  of  Don  Gaetano  Moro,  an  account  of 
which  was  published  in  London  in  June  1844.* 

General  Almonte  and  other  parties  in  Mexico  lately  petitioned 
the  Mexican  congress  to  give  them  a  charter  of  incorporation  to 
enable  them  to  connect  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  with  the  Pacific  Ocean 
by  means  of  a  railroad  to  commence  at  Vera  Cruz,  to  be  carried 
thence  to  the  capital  in  fifteen  years,  and  on  to  the  Pacific  in  ten 
years  more,  f  To  which  the  Mexican  senate  have  already 
responded  by  a  decree  for  its  construction.  I 

Thus  it  appears  that  no  less  than  four  lines  of  communication 
between  the  two  oceans  have  been  projected,  and  two  of  them,  at 
least,  are  actually  in  process  of  formation* 

These  projects  have  already  excited  some  degree  of  interest  on 
behalf  of  Central  America,  and  it  can  scarcely  be  questioned  that 
that  interest  will  ere  long  be  greatly  increased.  The  political  and 
moral  condition  of  the  country  already  rises  in  importance,  in  the 
eyes  of  the  statesman,  the  merchant,  and  the  worldling ;  revolutions 
of  states,  which  for  years  have  been  inquired  into  only  on  *change, 
and  which  were  seldom  noticed  by  the  periodical  press,  now 
occupy  their  earnest  attention.  The  Christian  has  higher  and 
more  powerful  motives  to  induce  him  to  consider  the  position  and 
the  wants  of  its  inhabitants ;  nor  can  it  be  anticipated  that  his 
knowledge  and  feelings  will  produce  less  results  than  the  enter- 
prise of  the  gold-seeker. 

In  April  last,  the  war  of  races  in  Yucatan,  which  had  ceased  for  a 
time,  and  which,  it  was  hoped,  had  terminated,  was  recommenced  by 
the  Indians,  who  were  apparently  determined  to  carry  it  on  with  re- 
newed activity.  Benando  Pec,  one  of  the  native  leaders,  addressed 
a  letter  to  the  Honduras  fVatehman,  dated  from  Cacao,  14th  Marchf 
1850,  and  published  in  that  paper  on  the  1 1th  of  May,  in  which  he 
speaks  of  a  meeting  he  had  with  the  Superintendent  of  Bdiae  on 
Uie  23rd  of  the  previous  November  at  the  port  of  hnnenmmt 
where,  by  treaties,  he  was  led  to  expect  British  interventioft  t^ 


^SnrrejofUielfltlimQiofTehiunitepee.   London,  AdDenntt  k  Oiv  Itt&i 


procure  a  Teconciliation  with  the  Government,  and  a  suspension  of 
hostilities  for  four  months.  The  British  mediator  had  then  pro- 
mised to  send  a  schooner,  in  three  neeke,  to  convey  the  Indian 
chief  where  he  might  ratify  the  said  transaction  uith  the  Goyern- 
ment  commissioners.  Benancio  Pec  hod  ordered  a  ceesatiau  of 
hostilities  on  the  part  of  the  Indians,  and  wailed,  with  a  number  of 
officers,  at  the  appointed  place  for  the  schooner.  About  a  month 
af^er  the  time  lixed,  while  he  was  yet  at  the  port,  where  no 
schooner  had  arrived,  the  Government  troops  attacked  liis  faeod- 
•  qnarters,  committed  many  excesses,  killiog  women,  han^ng  chil- 
t  dren,  and  pillaging  the  property  of  the  chief  to  the  value  of  tram 
■Ifen  to  eleven  thousand  dollan.  He  closes  his  simple  but  touching 
protest  by  saying,  "  All  this  I  have  made  known  to  the  said 
Superintendent  upwards  of  two  motilhs  [ago],  and  until  now  I 
have  received  no  answer.  Thus  I  suppose  that  he  came  merely 
with  the  intention  of  imposing  on  me;  for  this  reason  I  haw 
addressed  yon  this  letter,  in  order  to  make  it  known."  Thus  it  is 
plain  that  British  interference  and  the  supply  of  BritLah  muskets 
and  gunpowder  Irom  Belize  have  not  brought  about  the  pacifica- 
tion of  the  Peninsula. 

The  commerce  of  British  IIonduraB  liad  sulFercil  extensively 
from  the  late  agitations  m  the  States  situated  to  the  south,  as  well 
as  in  the  country  to  the  north  of  it. 

On  the  20th  February  18J!l,  Mr.  Chatficld,  on  the  part  of  Great 
Britain,  negotiated  a  treaty  of  peace,  commerce,  and  navigation, 
with  Don  Jos^  Maria  Rodriguei  on  the  port  of  the  Slate  of 
Guatemala,  then  under  the  Presidency  of  General  Mariano 
Paredes.'  This  treaty  declares  the  mutual  friendship  of  the 
two  governments,  fines  the  bounds  of  tlieir  trade,  customs,  and 
tonnage  duties,  &c.,  stipulates  for  the  freedom,  security,  and  equal 
rights  of  their  respective  peoples,  exemjits  them  from  forced  loans 
or  milituy  services,  regulates  the  standing  of  diplomatic  agents,  the 
inheritance  of  property,  kc,  and  provides  that  timely  notice  be 
given  to  residents  in  case  of  war. 

The  I3lh  article,  after  defining  the  civil  liberty  to  lie  eiyoyed 
respectively  hy  the  citiiens  of  the  republic,  or  the  aiibjects  of 
the  monartliy  in  each  other's  dominions,  adds,  that  "they  shall 

'  A  mUiUiri  romnnBdH -^  "  ~  -' f' wod  Kpule.    Tbil  »u  bdoreUic 


S16  THE  GOSPEL  IS  CENTRAL  AMERlCAm 

not  be  disturbed,  molested,  or  disquieted  in  any  way  oa  aeoomfc  of 
their  religious  creed,  nor  in  the  proper  exercise  of  their  rdigioa  m 
thdr  own  houses,  or  in  places  of  warship  destined  for  that  pnipoae, 
ooofaGrmably  to  the  system  of  toleration  estahliahed  in  the  teni» 
tories,  dominions,  and  establishments  of  the  two  above  mntmrti^ 
parties,  inasmuch  as  they  respect  the  religion  of  the  nation  in 
which  they  reside,  as  also  the  constitution,  laws,  and  cnstona 
established.**  This  is  followed  by  a  proYioiHi  that  each  shall  be  at 
liberty  to  bury  thdr  dead  in  their  own  cemeteries  which  th^  ^all 
have  permisBion  fireely  to  establish. 

By  a  subsequent  decree  of  the  Grovernment  of  Gnatemala,  the 
port  of  Santo  Tomas  is  constituted  the  only  port  of  deposit  and 
CDstoms  of  that  State  &om  the  15th  of  April  ISSO.  The  rerenue 
officials  were  to  be  removed  to  that  ^aoe  from  Yaibal,  on  the  Lake 
ofDuloe,  which  has  hitherto  been  the  port  of  deposit.  Saato  Tomas 
la  one  of  the  finest  harbours  on  the  continent  of  Amenca,  and  for 
several  years  has  been  settled  by  Belgian  enugraats.  Future 
settlers  at  this  port  are  declared  free  from  all  general  oontnbutioiis, 
direct  and  indirect,  and  from  all  duties  on  articles  of  peraonal  con- 
sumption  for  ten  years.* 

There  has  been  no  intimation  hitherto  of  the  actual  evacuation  of 
Grey-town  or  of  Tiger  Island ;  but,  of  course,  this  inteU^genoe  may 
be  shortly  expected.  In  the  state  of  Honduras,  an  iosnrvection, 
arising  out  of  the  seizure  of  Tiger  Island,  and  headed  by  Gnardiola, 
has  been  successfully  quelled.  Its  leader,  who  fled  to  San  Salva- 
dor, has  been  banished,  and  others  were  imprisoned  and  shot.  There 
are  notices  of  troubles  in  the  other  states,  and  that  General  Canom, 
late  president  and  militaiy  ruler  of  the  state  of  Gruatemala^  has  lost 
his  life  in  a  guerilla  engagement 

Every  successive  mail  brings  intelligence  of  a  diplomatic  waifiue 
still  carried  on  by  Yioe- Admiral  Fhipps  Hornby  on  the  Pacific 
coast,  with  the  various  Bepublican  States,  in  which  the  menacing 
and  insulting  tone  hitherto  adopted  by  British  agents  is  responded 
to  by  a  calm  and  dignified  moral  attitude  on  the  weaker  side^ 
whidi  does  great  hmiour  to  the  rulers  of  the  Central  States.  Their 
zespectfril  and  firm  replies  are  fully  corroborative  of  the  statements 
before  made  as  to  their  general  liberality  of  sentiment  and  ahili^ 
as  statesmen.  It  is  probable  that  all  the  bluster  so  freely  indulged 
in  on  the  Yioe- AdnuraTs  part  will  be  entirely  liaown  sway,  as  he 

*  Tk4  TiM€9,  April  8,3310. 


QROWIXO  IMPORTANCE  OF  CENTBAt    AMERICA. 


317 


1  be  made  acquainted  with  the  altered  palicj  of  onr 

with  respect  to  these  conntrica. 

The  Kttlemettt  of  the  Niconguan  treat  j  ia  of  great  promise,  as  it 

ecla  the  future  ])ca«;  and  prosperity  of  the  long  dLemembered 

EBtral  Americai)  republic.    The  treaty  of  peace  between  Great 

n  asd  Gnatem&Ia  is  also  encouraging-.    The  announced  death 

tf  Cairen,  the  late  restorer  of  servile  and  sacerdotal  power,  is  another 

It  which  would  appear  to  fadlitate  tbc  establiabment  of  order 

d  good  government,  and  the  much  desired  reunion  of  the  five 

Es  aoder  one  federal  head.   The  cessation  of  diplomatic  intrigues 

^liich  may  be  expected  to  follow  upon  the  acknowledged  neutrality 

f  all  the  roads  or  ennala  which  may  be  opened  across  Central 

is  of  itself  fraught  with  advantages  and  hope. 
■  The  interest  which  now  attaches  to  Central  America  on  account 
t  these  contemplated  lines  of  cotnmnnicntion,  is  of  the  deepest 
The  importance  of  its  influence  on  the  whole  world  cannot 
r  estimated.  It  is,  as  yet,  for  from  being  duly  appreciated 
V  generally  nnderstood.  "Not  since  the  discovery  of  America  has 
By  event  occurred  of  equal  commercial  importance  with  the  con- 
ructiuu  of  the  Niomgnan  ship  canal."*  It  will  not  only  shorten 
e  posage  of  vcbbcIs  bound  from  Europe  and  the  Atlantic  porta  of 
niericB  to  the  shores  of  the  Facijicabout  one-half,  but  it  will  bring 
I,  China,  Australia,  all  Eastern  Asia  and  Oceania  within  the 
mpasB  of  a  three  or  four  months  voyage  from  the  western  porta  of 
■  Surope,  and  will  draw  closer  together  all  the  most  remote  r^ons 
ir  globe.  Nor  arc  the  benclita  resulting  fW)m  increased  inter- 
]  «oiirse  and  proximity  the  only  advantages  which  may  be  hoped  for. 
I  The  safety  of  life  and  proper^  will  be  exceedingly  increased — the 
1  hardships  of  thonsands  of  our  mariners  will  be  lessened  loan  incsl- 
enlahlc  extents-hut,  ahovc  all,  the  ihcilitica  for  benefiting  our 
lellowr-ercatures  and  evangeliang  the  whole  earth,  will  be  greatly 
multiplied.  With  their  increRse,  our  responsibilities  will  be  nng- 
mented.  The  triumphs  of  science,  art,  and  human  industry  arc 
designed  to  fhrtbcr  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Heaven. 
Even  now  we  may  avail  onrselves  of  them,  and  soon  they  will  all 
be  laid  at  the  feet  of  Ucnven's  Anointed  King. 

t£re  long  Central  America  must  become  the  great  inter-oceanic 
rtal^dhe  entrepot  of  the  world—the  storehouse  of  nations— the 
•  Ifne  r«-i  Trilimt,  ipri)  SO,  !3srJ. 


318  THE    GOSPEL   IK  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

grand  terminus  of  commerce — and  the  way-honse  of  the  busy  multi- 
tudes who  shall  perambulate  the  earth  at  that  rapidly  approaching 
period,  when  "many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be 
increased.** 

The  labours  of  a  few  short  years,  dating  firom  the  absorbing  and 
exciting  present — a  period  fraught  with  the  most  intense  interest 
and  responsibility  to  every  individual  who  lives — may  tell  upon 
future  generations  to  an  extent  which  we  are  little  able  to  realize, 
but  which  we  may  be  the  means  of  effecting  nevertheless.  The 
influx  of  Anglo-Saxons  to  the  various  works  about  to  be  accom- 
plished will  be  considerable.  The  amount  of  emigration  that  will 
probably  follow  to  Central  America  and  to  the  shores  of  the  Pacific 
is  incalculable.  A  little  influence  exercised  betimes  upon  those  of 
our  fellow-countrymen  who  will  thus  become  the  founders  of  cities 
and  of  nations,  may,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  produce  a  rich  harvest 
of  future  good.  A  speedy  occupation  of  the  regions  to  which  they 
are  hastening,  and  of  the  minds  of  the  aborigines  and  natives  who 
thinly  people  them,  may,  with  the  same  blessing,  prevent  much 
injury,  which  they  must  otherwise  receive  from  their  unsanctified 
visitors.  The  pre-occupation  of  the  soil  with  the  gospel  of  peace 
cannot  but  be  followed  with  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  approbation, 
and  with  incalculable  blessings  to  the  native,  to  the  immigrant,  and 
to  future  generations. 

That  God,  who  is  Lord  of  the  great  harvest  of  human  souls 
which  he  is  preparing  for  himself  has  in  hb  Providence  scattered 
a  few  of  the  vitalizing  seeds  of  EGs  kingdom  upon  the  shores  of 
this  important  country.  At  Belize,  in  British  Honduras,  a  native 
church  has  been  raised  up.  From  this  central  nursery  some 
amount  of  active  native  agency  has  already  been  thrust  forth  into 
the  fields  around  it,  and  more  of  its  pious  vigour  is  preparing  to 
follow.  To  the  Christian  reader  this  fact  cannot  but  be  matter  of 
deep  interest ;  if  of  Anglo-Saxon  race,  that  interest  must  be  much 
increased.  If  the  vast  territories  of  Spanish  America,  and  the  wide- 
spread dominion  of  the  man  of  sin  over  its  population,  are  of  any 
importance  in  his  view,  the  beginning  which  God  has  already 
made  by  raising  up  for  himself  a  native  church  anxious  to  benefit 
their  fellow«men  in  those  bemghted  r^ons,  will  certainly  fix  his 
attention,  arouse  his  sympathies,  and,  it  is  hoped,  will  call  forth  hk 
cheerfU  aid  for  their  encouragement  and  sapport 


PnOTIDENCE  AND   REVELATION. 


PART     II. 

THE  GOSPEL  IN  BRITISH  HOKDUR.iS. 


ic  Frrnidaiix  axi  BrnttUina—Tiie  Sword  i  hinduBBDc  to  Um  Gmpel  — BeUu  il 
a  tnUmy  uhI  t  fmitt  d'epfnt  for  fuithor  eDterphic— Iti  former  mor«]  atitc  ^ 
r^,  GflicnJ  DeoonlkKtioa,  Ignomucr,  Creole  Widu  acil  Ftmcml  Cuttom* — 
f  HEdiiDonj  of  the  Meun.  Aspu— Thili  Itelt^iK  EfforU— Colonel  Aitbur  ud  Ihr 
rftiradiof  Uu  Qoqwl— Good  RenlU  of  their  tAbmirf— Mr.  Boutne.  the  Ant  Uiimaa- 
It*  coDfcTTiid  h;  the  Iiodh  of  Angu  i.  Cn,— Hie  HiiiioD  IIooh  hiilt— tho 
I  Motqnjio  Uinlaii— Dntb  of  Mr.  ud  Hn.  Flemiag  — B.  }.  Andm.  Eiq.— lb. 
I  IniiciD.  hit  death— Ur*.  Bonrne'i  School— Ur.  Boomo'i  laboun,  hii  fBll — Effjiti  of 
^Ikpt.  Whiltk  ud  othtm— Anirit  of  Mr.  Aluuidcr  Beoderun— rriliDiimiiT  Lnhoiin 
Lndlnl  SoOMU— AChurdifoiiiied— CongnptHinuidSehaali-ThBChDbin— Incraue 
eal  of  the  Qiafth— Opponl^dEi  at  Ibe  Uunelu— Children  of  the  gemHA  it  IJh 
icl  School— The  Bluli  CorporBl—The  wBul  of  help— The  A.uthor'i  couveniiiD— 
(.  HtBTj  Fhilpol  (cut  mil— Hi>  laboiirt  uid  Dmlh— The  Daj  of  EmMdimlion- 
non'e  illneti — EpiHopal  IndeeDce  exerted— Roftiuli  to  UkeHn  Oath — TtiiU 
I  tu  Uurdo^-ComuiitBient  of  Bnlher  Hence— Eipoism  of  the  Trial- %>leiiiiitlc 
r  HilitUT  DiMDlnteneu— SUtu;  of  the  Soiaieim— Mfliim  Li»  ud  FODDltio— GeneisI 
POidec  fcon  Lard  BlU— Death  of  Ur.  W.  Whetbcnll— Ur.  Headcnon'i  health  end 


*  li}iHi,i-tg  iif  Ihi  Oaipcl  ofJcru  Chill,  Itu  Sm  tf  C»f."— Mark  i.  1. 

I  llie  piovidentiDl  govemnient  of  our  worlil  evil  is  wt  agaiiut 
1,  and  the  powers  ol'  darlcncsg  are  neutralized  and  held  in  sbey- 
.  Tlie  elements  ol  dcstruclioD  ore,  however,  abroad,  and  though, 

f  the  exercise  of  Diviue  control,  mankind  is  preserved  in  a  pro- 

ktionaiy  state,  it  is  not  possible  that  out  of  it  alone  anj  positive 
d  can  ever  remit. 
^  Heavenly  fhiita  bare,  however,  at  all  times  been  produced  in  the 
ivpled  soil  of  human  depravity  through  the  separate  introduc- 
i  of  positive  good  in  the  form  of  a  Divine  Eevelation— that 
d  seed  of  the  kingdom,  nhich  is  at  once  tbe  outwsi 

itioD  of  troth  and  holinew,  and  the  Jtu 


9S0  THE  CKMSFEL  IN  CBNTBAL  AMERICA. 

implant  a  Divine  principle  of  new  life  in  the  inner  man,  giving 
spiritual  perception,  enjoyment,  and  power  to  individual  minds. 

It  is  the  glory  of  the  Gospel  that  it  overcomes  evU  with  good.  It 
transforms  the  depraved,  ignorant,  cruel,  and  rebellious  creature, 
and  altogether  subdues,  melts,  raises,  and  ennobles  him  by  the 
Divine  influence  of  love,  which,  assimilating  everything  to  itself  with 
an  irresistible  power,  is  appointed,  not  only  to  people  heaven  with 
redeemed  souls,  but  to  restore  guilty  man  to  innocence,  and  a  pol- 
luted world  to  purity  and  happiness,  such  as  will  approach  to,  if  it 
may  not  equal,  the  bliss  of  the  terrestrial  paradise  of  God. 

In  the  Divine  economy,  all  political,  scientific,  and  commercial 
developments  are  made  subordinate  to  the  interests  of  the  Kingdom 
of  Heaven,  to  the  promotion  of  which  they  already  contribute  in 
proportion  to  the  faithfulness  of  the  disciples  of  Christ,  God*s 
chosen  instruments,  in  turning  them  to  the  real  because  the  eternal 
advantage  of  mankind.  Not  that  the  Christian  may  rejoice  in 
ii\justioe,  or  think  that  he  can  really  profit  by  that  ^^  human 
wrath**  which  has  broken  down  some  apparent  barriers  to  the 
evangelization  of  a  country,  such,  for  instance,  as  China  or  Mexico. 
Every  Christian  must  condemn  all  deeds  of  blood,  and  ought  to 
wash  his  hands  of  any  participation  in  them.  He  knows,  or  shoold 
know,  that  these  very  circumstances  are  calculated  to  operate 
against  his  success.  But  while  protesting  against  human  oppres- 
sion, the  mandate  of  his  heavenly  King  makes  it  incumbent  upon 
him  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature — to  the  oppressed  as 
wen  as  to  the  oppressor.  He  may,  therefore,  or,  rather,  he  must 
avail  himself  of  such  openings  as  the  ruthless  hand  of  violence  may 
have  made,  although  his  conquests  are  those  of  love  and  peace.  He 
knows  that  it  is  not  under  such  auspices  that  the  Gospel  is  most 
likely  to  be  received,  and  he  feels  that  it  would  bring  little  credit  to 
the  King  of  kings,  if,  as  Bjb  servants,  engaged  in  His  spiritual 
fine,  he  should  imitate  those  Bomish  priests  who  followed  the 
of  the  Spanish  annies,  and  acted  in  alliance  with  them.  No.  Tke 
soldier  of  Christ  is  superior  alike  to  outward  discouragements  or  to 
apparent  but  false  helps.  He  knows  no  animosities,  no  ji  iiliniiwa, 
BO  compromise  with  eviL  Impelled  by  love,  he  says  to  every  one 
who  perpetrates  a  wrong,  ^Wherefore  smitest  thou  thy  Mkmf^ 
Andif  the  providenoe  of  God  permits,  he  addresses  himsdf  to  Irii 
Botional  or  personal  fbe  in  ^  character  of  a  ftiend  and  ao  a 
«Dger  of  peace. 


^  C0!«DITlOS   OP  "the  bay. 


3S1 


bile  British  colonies,  settlements,  and  military  staiions  appear 
',  in  iorae  respects,  n  peculiar  claim  upon  the  attention  of  the 
s  of  Christ  not  only  as  fields  ofniiasionary  labour,  but  as  out- 
la  of  the  Christian  camp,  ihey  ought  not  wholly  to  absorb  otten- 
;  and  their  occupation  cannot  in  the  least  detract  from  the 
:her  obligation  laid  upon  uh  to  carry  the  gospel  into  the  regions 
'ond  them. 

this  twofold  aspect  that  the  eiistencc  of  such  a  corn- 
that  of  British  IIonduraB,  on  the  horders  of  the  central 
itincnt,  is  interesting  and  important  to  the  churches.    That  God 
there  collected  a  people  for  His  name,  and  is  already  using  them 
P  the  work  of  His  kingdom,  i«  besides  indicative  of  His  purposes 
)f  mercy  to  that  community,  and  to  the  people  upon  whose  coasts 
dwell.     To  the  faithful  disciple  of  the  Son  of  God,  thar  past 
issitndes,  their  condition  and  prospects,  cannot  he  matters  of 
ifference. 

lately,  "the  Bay"  was  proverbial  for  licemiousneaj,  dig- 

lesty,  and  ercry  kind  of  excess.     Unlike  the  Pilgrim  FatherB, 

formed   the   northern  seltlcmeiits  about  the   same   period, 

founders  of  Belize  entailrf  no    blessings  upon  their  pos- 

V.    With  the  Tiolence  and  .ipoliation  in  which  they  indulged, 

■  succe.'Kon  inherited  their  irapiely  and  immoral  customs. 

ing  the  worst  legacies  thus  received  was  the  curee  of  alavety, 

all  its  accompiHiying  nborainations.     The  only  circnmatanccg 

ich  modified  some  of  its  grossest  features,  os  to  the  corporal 

inflicted  by  the  woodcutters  of  the  Bay  upon  their  stolen 

iperty,  were  the  facilities  which  there  esisted  for  the  slaves* 

ipe  beyond  British  limits,*  and  the  reliisal  of  the  RcpubUcas 

101D-,  wrillen  bj  Gtoijo  nj'fc,  En).,  >  liallJag  moiluul' 
waa  m  fiellui,  dUcd  u  New  Hirer.  Uh  it  MurOi  193S,  hs 
T  ill  OBO^,  jnu  uo  aiTire  (if  vwr  k  ieterrtd)  ire  dup  but 
■^  to  Qtt  BpaDurdfl  i  in  ttct,  we  htra  Jml  (4  put  ttp  wttli 


MltpSomjITil  Iheii 


1  nin  in  tMi  leLtlemtiDl,  far  muf  jtart,  but  dene  much  mmc  Ibin  f*j  h 
."  ftuHui  on.  he  M)-» :  •■  Now,  if  Iht  Sptoknli  uf  Ibiae  New  Rrpuhlici  u 
T7  moCiTnofphniaiEhFopjin  diipouEuiii^  peopte  (vha  ntr  id  pnifouud  ptxii 
B)  nf  Utir fnffrly.  ud  it  the  Britiih  Ocrisnment  do  BOt  wiih  In  upw  tl 
s  of  Uu  Mgn  ralinHoB  in  a  bmlllt  nj,  nrtlji  two  incli  ptniu  <<u  putioi 
Matti)  bj  niMirH  jnirtl;  phOiutlinipie,  wirali  not  hiiiuu,  u  ■>  cimip«u<i«i  1 

.    taiathit  nHk  a*  aUt  BMtlRiienI  would  W 


802  TBM  OO0PEL  IN  CBNT&AL  ▲MERIC^ 

Govenunent  te  restom  to  bondage  theee  who  had  fled  for  refiige  to 
ka  Free  lastittttioBB.  It  k  probable  that  nothing  but  this  prevented 
the  fall  exhibitjon  of  the  craehies  commonly  practifled  by  the  Weit 
Indian  planter ;  nor  were  thece  wanting  examplea  «f  wrongs  and 
of  tortoies  inflicted,  that  could  vie  with  these  endnied  by  the  in* 
jnred  n^roes  in  any  other  place.  Once  inured  to  the  crime  «f 
man-stealing,  and  alive  to  the  supposed  advantage  of  growing  lioh 
on  the  labour  of  others,  the  British  settlers  in  the  Bay  were  not 
particular  to  a  shade  what  might  be  the  cdloiir  or  the  race  <^  their 
Tidnns.  They  soon  learned  to  set  as  high  a  value  upon  the  blood 
and  sinews  of  the  Red  Aborigines  or  Wild  Indians  whom  they  could 
kidm^  as  upon  those  of  the  darker  skinned  race  of  Ham,  falsely 
alleged  to  have  been  accursed,  only  to  give  the  pretext  of  a  Divine 
fluctimi  to  human  cupidity  and  wrong.*  Thus  were  ^lanish 
Indians  and  traders  encouraged  to  entrap  the  Indim  Bravosj  and 
to  sell  them  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Bay. 

To  the  demoralizing  effects  of  slavery  must  be  added  those 
rewlting  from  the  presence  of  an  idle  military  force.  Kot  only 
wme  the  people  of  the  Bay  sulject  to  the  contaminating  influenoe 
which  the  men-of-war  sailors  and  officers  oocasionally 


upon  them,  during  their  protracted  sojourns  in  the  harbour  of 
Belize,  but  a  r^^ularly  organized  garrison  was  maintained,  and 
military  debauchery  was  superadded  to  the  other  baneful  elementa 
which  polluted  their  moral  atmosphere.  The  garrison  <if  Beli» 
has  hitherto  consisted  of  two  or  three  companies  of  the  West  India 
regiments  (generally  the  2nd),  which  are  composed  of  AfViiran 
sdldiers  officered  by  white  men ;  and  a  small  number  of  Emopem 
artillerymen  occupying  St.  Georges  Fort.  Some  of  the  conse- 
qnenoes  of  the  presence  of  this  body  of  men  will  be  referred  to 
llBrther  on. 

Forty  years  ago  there  was  not  a  place  of  wordnp  in  all  'fSbit 
British  territoiy,  though  it  had  been  previously  flnequented  by 
ftssed  Protestants  for  about  a  century  and  a  haH    At  iSist 
and  for  some  time  afterwards,  the  Sabbath-day  could  not  be  tt- 


eoit  them  taait  than  WOfiOOU  each  Gorenuneut,  thej  lecaring  the  tiaie  «f 
f%$  lost  lofroprUtonwonUlefrmit  tu  utgnes  hen  ^  Ute  amng9i  wwrfy  HOOt    Arf  J 
m§mt  moH  part  woM  agrm  to  it.   It  would  be  themeani  of  eettiiif  itIugetraMMBD 
tD4000people;  bat  I  am  afreid  the  Giatemaliun  are  timing  «t  MBsOiag  ate.** 
*  Cmnmt  not  Bmi,  mi  iceiiiwd.   t9ee  Gen.  is.  SS,  85. 


PBOFAXITV — IMUOBALtTV — iohorahce:.  823 

tingowlied  from  the  other  Aayt  of  tlie  vreok  by  nnjr  ontward  tokeni 
of  respect,  Uiongli,  pcrh&ps,  it  might  be  bj  visibly  incKiMed  diin- 
inttoD.  The  market  -vtsh  in  full  activity,  the  Mores  were  OB- 
doeed,  the  wharfs  and  barcadeers  vete  covered  with  labauKii 
beRting  ofi'aiid  squaring  the  mabogaoy,  ur  cluppiog  logwood  ;  tlie 
slii]i)iiDg  in  the  harbour,  which  had  prob»bl}'  never  yet  dispUjed 
X  Ikthcl  flag,  were  loading  or  diBcharging  their  cargoes.  The  grog' 
■hopt  were  fiUed  with  Miilai^  and  negroes ;  and  the  govemment 
diaptkin,  after  readiDg  the  Anglican  liturgy  in  the  court-house  to  a 
ir  less  sedate  hearers,  might  be  seen  deliberately  soper- 
inteeding  bis  own  oegroes  at  work  by  the  waturside.  In  short, 
,  intoxication,  profanity,  and  the  lust  of  gain  openlj 
trinmphed  over  decoruin  as  well  as  rcligioD. 

The  looiCDtiM  of  murals  then  cottunon  to  the  West  Indies  was, 
perhnpe,  surpassed  in  the  Buy.  Marriage  was  the  exception,  and 
cancubitiage  the  rule,  iu  all  ranks  eftlie  community.'  Merchants, 
plaoumen,  clerks,  mechanics,  and  eveu  the  chaplain,  ojicnly  out' 
tBged  the  laws  of  God  and  man  in  this  respect,  and  pubUdy 
acknowledged  and  gloried  iu  the  violation;  and  to  the  infamy  of 
slavery  be  it  recorded  that  up  to  a  much  later  date,  "jH'o/iertj/  was 
Itcjit  abont  the  premises  of  the  slave-owner  for  the  |iurpoK  of 
I   teveding  and  laisiug  stock!  !"t 

Hospitality,  or  rather  conviviality,  WBd  unbounded-  Every 
vdeboard  iu  the  homes  of  the  privileged  clan  was  fimushed  witli 
large  decanlerv  of  spirit;,  and  every  one  belonging  to  that  dan  felt 
at  liberty  to  help  themselveti  unasked.  To  the  present  d^, 
though  thii  &Mdom  has  liappily  disuppenred,  excess  of  driokjog 
jnevails  to  a  very  great  extent,  notwitbitauding  that  the  progrcas 
Ofthedmolard  and  of  the  habitual  dram-drinker  is  awliilly  rspid 
I  in  such  ft  climate,  and  iu  the  face  of  continually  recurring 
Samples  of  its  thtal  conscijuenoea. 

The  igmiranee  and  supenttition  which  reigned  undisturbed  in  the 
minds  tif  the  people,  whether  bond  or  free,  must  in  a  great  measure 
be  Icfl  for  the  reailer's  own  imagination  to  portray.  Of  coune 
there  were  no  achools;  no  books  of  any  kind  were  accessible  to 
any  but  the  few  whose  time  and  attention  were  absorbed  by  tbeir 
stahogony  and  logwood  works,  the  managemeut  of  their  slaves,  or 


824  THE   GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

the  sale  of  their  merchandise.  They  were  too  eagerly  bent  on 
aeqniring  wealth,  to  cultiyate  even  their  own  intellects  or  those  of 
their  illegitimate  children;  and  when  the  appetite  for  accumu- 
lation was  satisfied,  they  left  the  country  to  spend  their  gains  else- 
where. By  &r  the  greater  number  of  the  people  being  slaves  and 
Africans,  even  their  masters  and  mistresses  were  somewhat  in- 
fected by  the  delusions,  and  drawn  into  the  crimes  of  Obeahism.* 
The  Belize  creole,  whatever  his  parentage,  was  left  a  prey  to  every 
temptation,  and  his  mind  was  occupied  only  with  vague  super- 
stitions learned  from  heathenish  Africans,  dissolute  Europeans, 
papistical  Spaniards,  and  other  Creoles  from  the  West  India 
Islands,  equally  ignorant  and  depraved  with  himself.  The  inter- 
vals of  labour  were  devoted  to  noisy  merriment,  and,  as  is  the 
case  with  the  Ladinos  of  the  interior,  even  frmerals  afforded  them 
opportunities  for  revelry. 

If  a  slave-owner  died,  all  his  dependants  and  friends  came 
together  to  be  feasted ;  and  the  wife  or  mistress  and  her  children 
prepared  the  house  and  provided  provisions  and  plenty  of  ardent 
spirits.  The  corpse,  dressed  in  its  best  clothes,  was  laid  upon  a 
bed  and  waked  during  the  whole  night.  Cards,  dice,  back-gam- 
mon, with  strong  drink  and  spiced  wine,  helped  to  beguile  its 
watches,  during  which  the  loud  laugh,  and  the  profane  oath  were 
unrestrained.  In  the  negro  3rard  below,  *^  the  sheck'ka*'  and  the 
dram  **  proclaimed  the  sport,  the  song,  the  dance,  and  various 
dreem.'*  f  Sometimes  a  tent  was  erected,  where  rum,  coffee,  and 
ginger-tea  were  dispensed  to  all  who  chose  to  come  and  make 
free.  After  a  night  thus  spent,  the  corpse  was  carried  in  the 
morning  to  the  churchyard,  the  coffin  being  borne  by  labourers, 
who  in  their  progress  used  to  run  up  and  down  the  streets  and 
lanes  with  their  burden,  knocking  at  some  door  or  doors,  perhaps 
visiting  some  of  the  friends  of  the  deceased,  professing  to  be  im- 
pelled by  him,  or  to  be  contending  with  the  spirit  who  opposed 
the  interment  of  the  body.  At  length  some  well  known  friend 
came  forward,  speaking  soothingly  to  the  dead,  and  calling  him 
Brother,  urged  him  to  go  home,  and  promised  him  rest  and 
blessing.    They  then  moved  all  together  towards  the  grave,  and 

*  MiM  CUuriMa  Panlow,  a  proprietiress  of  land,  houses,  and  slaves,  who  died  abont  184I» 
is  to  this  day  popularly  regarded  as  having  been  possessed  of  sapematoral  powers ;  and 
whether  by  the  practices  of  Obeah,  or  by  other  means,  she  is  believed  to  have  ezexdted 
control  over  the  lives  of  several  of  her  nnmeroiia  snitors  and  enemies. 

t  The  differeat  Afiicu  natumi  and  Creoles,  each  in  potiei^— Creole  rhymes. 


X  GOOD  BXASIPLE.  88a 

RhIic  Bhcck'kii'a  jingle,  the  voice  of  «ong,  and  latterly,  the  fnneral 
I  «ervice  of  the  Established  Church  were  mingled  together  iu  the 
I  donng  scene. 

Id  ail  the  particulars  enumerated,  and  in  many  other  Itsa 

I  palpiihle  e^ils,  o  grtat  change  hwi  taken  place  in  tiie  tone  and 

manners  of  society  at  Bolizc.      Tliis  change,  which  will  be  furtlivr 

ftlluded  to,  is  Attributable  onlj  to  the  direct  and  indirect  influeno; 

cf  the  Gospel,  as  it  has  been  introduced  by  individuals  mure  or 

1   lest  imbued  with  its  principles. 

In  the  years  1802  and  1S03,  the  Measrs.  Angas,  pom  merchants 
k  of  Newcastle,  already  traded  to  Belize.  The  testimony  of  their 
I  gaptuns  as  to  its  condition  tbeu  ie,  that  there  was  probably  not  a 
I  more  wicked  place  under  heaveu.  During  one  of  hia  visitj,  Capt. 
I  W.  U.  Angas  was  obliged  to  perform  the  liurial-service  over  the 
I  grave  of  one  of  his  deceased  seamen,  because  the  clergyman  was 
I   drunk,  and  could  not  do  his  duty. 

During  the  Superintendence  of  Colonel  John  Nugent  Smith,  the 
first  epibcopal  place  of  worship  was  erected  (in  1812),  and  Mr. 
John  Armstrong,  the  first  evangelical  clergyman,  arrived  in  the 
)  Settlement  during  the  same  year. 

uinot  be  denied  that  the  mercantUe  influence  of  our  coun- 
I'trymen,  as  well  as  that  ofour  public  functionaries,  soldiers,  sailors, 
nigiants,  is,  in  the  aggregate,  anything  but  promotive  of  the 
8  of  the  people  where  Providence  may  have  cast  them, 
ce,  and  a.  privilege  to  record,  any  eiceptiona 
to  the  general  rule. 

The  house  of  Angus  and  Co.   blended  with  their  mercantile 

objects  the  more  elevated  and  enduring  interests  of  the  Kingdom  of 

Beavcn.    They  were  not  only  miiidi'ul  of  the  moral  destitution  of 

I   the  inhohitttnts  of  Central  America,  but  they  took  great  pains  to 

I  i&fonn  themselves  of  its  details  and  peculiar  features;  and  by  the 

I  Smployment  of  godly  commanders  in  their  ships,  and  pious  agents 

tnd  derlts  in  their  stores;  by  the  introduction  of  good  boolu,  and 

fay  their  general  readiness  to  help  forward  every  good  work,  they 

consecrated  thnr  influence  to  God,  and  became  a  bles^g  to  the 

country.    Interested  themselves  iu  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  in 

I'  4his  dark  land,  they  made  it  their  business  to  enlist  the  symputhies 

m^sf  otlicrs;  and  in  1(J20  they  colled  the  attention  of  several  of  the 

llhen  existing  uiissionary  socLelics  to  Uritish  Hondoros  and  the 


826  THE  Gospsii  nr  central  America. 

Moquito  Shofi^  m  suitible  fields  ftr  thear  beoeroleiil  eflbrti,  tf 
iim  mane  time  ofFezing  a  free  paasige  in  tiieir  traders,  and  leeal 
countenance  and  assistance  to  any  missionaTies  or  teadiexs  wko 
iBightbesent 

Colonel  George  Arthnr*  at  that  time  Snpermtendent  of  Uie 
Settlement,  ma  decidedly  interested  in  its  m(»al  and  religioua  im- 
provtment,  in  wliiefa  he  was  seconded  hy  Captain  Brown  Willis,  Idb 
Mcretaxy ,  and  Mr.  John  Armstrong,  his  diaplain :  their  nnited  efforts 
were  supported  by  the  disinterested  labours  of  the  Saperinten* 
ikntTa  esteemed  lad^,  and  two  other  English  kdies,  Mrs.  Bennett 
wai  Mrs.  Hyie,  the  wives  of  two  of  the  leading  mer^aarts  m  the 
flaee.  Tbsse  three  **^ief  women"  did  something  for  the  moral 
devatioB  of  the  negroea,  whilst  they  endeaTOured  to  ammonite  the 
ebas  in  whieh  they  themselyes  moved;  and  together  with  the 
geBtkmen  before  named,  the  pioas  captains  and  agents  of  the 
house  of  Angas  and  Co.,  Mr.  Henry  Moore,  the  ckureh  school- 
aasler,  and  one  or  two  private  individuals,  they  weie  the  only 
fctsoDs  who  made  a  decided  profession  of  godliness  in  this  most 
ismipt  eommunityr 

During  this  period  the  first  assault  upon  the  impiety  and 
igncfance  of  the  Settlers  was  made.  Some  efforts  to  elevate  the 
mmds  of  the  poorer  dasses  were  at  least  partially  sauxaML  The 
ft«e  school  was  first  opened,  and  there  were  some  few  admits  and 
ddldren,  who  were  benefited  by  the  instructions  giveii,  and  others 
who  gave  evidence  of  saving  fiuth. 

Bobert,  king  of  the  Mosquito  nation,  having  frequently  ex* 
piessed  himself  fiwouraMe  to  the  residence  of  teaehen  among 
Mb  subjects,  appHeations  were  made  by  Mr.  Armstrong  to  die 
dtoreh  MMonary  Society,  and  by  6.  F.  Angaa,  Esq.,  of  Ae 
loose  of  Angas  and  Co.,  to  the  WeAeym  Methodist,  and  to  the 
Tkp6KM  Missionary  Societies,  to  send  some  of  their  agents  to  tboR 
AoRs.  Am  a  remit  of  these  sppetia  the  Baptist  Missiewsty 
Society  determined  to  send  a  nnassonaiy  to  Britidi  Hundma^ 
The  communication  kept  up  between  BeKse  and  ^be  interior,  m* 
daced  the  committee  of  that  society  to  speak  of  dieir  ptopussd 
tetioB  there,  as  one  of  ^  peculiar  importanee,"  and  as  **  pv&- 
iSBliii^  a  post  firam  whidi  at  no  very  tfstant  period  the  fight  of 
mvine  tnith  lu^ght  probaUy  he  dispersed  thioagh  these  distant 


COUMENCSMENT  C 


'    TH8   MISSION. 


I  ngioiu.'  In  Mxepting  the  liberal  teudur  of  ft  free  punge,  cnada 
[■  hj  the  Mean;  AagBs,  ihey  «<ld,  tfamt  they  feel  it  to  be  "  their 
J  A^tj  to  embrace  it;"  sod  conseqaentlT,  in  Uarch  1823,  Mr. 
JoHC|)h  Bourne,  of  Brwlford  Academy,  was  designated  at  New 
1  Court  chapel,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  and  with  Mrs.  Bourne  sailed 
I  for  Ilwidoras  in  the  course  of  the  following  moDtb.* 

Id  the  mootli  of  June  183^,  Mr.  and   Mrs.  BooTue  arriTed 

It  Bclixe,  and  on  the  3rd  of  December  of  the  same  year  tbe  latter 

3  remored  by  the  hand  of  death.f 

Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  Mr.   Bourne,   Colonel  Arthnr,  and 

I   vitb  him   almost  all   the   persons   compuglng  the  Utile  band  of 

I  icligiously  disposed  and  influential  recidenis  before-named,  finally 

I  kit  the  Settlement.      General  Pye  then  became  Superintendent 

11  the   I5th  January  1N3^,  when  General  Codd  arrived  to  sue- 

1  him.     The  former,  with  some  of  the  niagistratea.  who  had  not 

I  iiynipnthised  in  the  evangehcal  labours  of  Colonel  Arthur  aud  his 

]   frienda;,  united  in  active  measures  to  oppose  Mr.  Bimme  and  tbe 

I  agents  of  tbe  boose  of  Angus,  who  wtre  altiioet  the  only  friends 

I   of  religion  then  remaining.     Mr.  John  Armstrong  was  succeeded 

.  Matthew  Newport   as  chaplain.     From  thut  time   Dis- 

I  aenlers  ceased   to    receive    any   encoursgemetit    from    those    in 

Lsxthority.  or  any  (»-operation  from  the  Eotablisbed  Church. 

The  agents  of  the  house  of  Angas  and  Co.,  asNSted  by  only  one 

uiore  pious  persons,  continued  their  support  and  active  exer- 

n  bvoor  of  the  Goepel.     Besides  the  other  and  far  greater 

»  conferred  by  that  linn,  they  devoted  the  sum  of  30f.  annu- 

Latly  from  their  house  at  Belize,  for  the  promotion  of  the  mission 

In  England  the  influence  of  the  boose  was  also  exerted 

IT  the  cause,  and  tor  (he  general  welfare  and  real  prosperity  of  the 

Mtkment.     G.  F.  Angas,  Esq.,  assisted  by  Cobnd  Arthurofter  his 

o  England,  was  instrumental  in  getting  an  aet  of  Parlia- 

li'Ment  paiaed  for  the  libeivtion  of  the  aboriginal  staves  who  were 

kept  in  unlawful  bondage  in  British  Honduras.     In  the  year  1824 

le  200  or  300  Indians  were  set  Iree  as  the  remit  of  these  effort*, 

,  BubseqiKntly,  during  Colonel  MacDonald's  Superintendenoe, 


'  KiHksWT  UmU"  (M  Xaj  ISU. 


828  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

the  like  justice  was  extended  to  some  who  were  held  in  the  same 
condition  hy  British  subjects  on  the  Mosquito  Shore.  What* 
ever  odium  the  oppressor  and  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel  may  have 
heaped  upon  the  instruments  of  these  benefits,  there  are  already 
those  in  Belize  who  honour  their  faithfulness,  and  give  glory  to> 
God  for  the  happy  results. 

In  the  spring  of  1824  Mr.  Bourne,  who  had  already  met  with 
strenuous  opposition,  visited  the  southern  ports  of  Omoa  and 
Yzabal.  On  his  return  to  Belize  he  superintended  the  erection  of 
a  meeting-house  and  missionary  residence  there,  towards  which 
the  committee  thought  it  probable  that  considerable  aid  would  be 
furnished  on  the  spot.  Belize  having  been  selected  as  the  central 
or  chief  station  of  the  sodety^s  operations,  a  second  station,  in 
connection  with  it,  was  projected  on  the  Mosquito  Shore. 

On  Mr.  Deakin,  of  Birmingham,  presenting  the  society  with 
150/.  towards  the  Mosquito  mission,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fleming,  and 
an  in&nt  child,  sailed  on  the  12th  May  in  the  Oeeon,  Captain 
Whittle,  in  the  employ  of  Messrs.  Angas  and  Co.,  and  arrived  at 
Belize  after  a  passage  of  seven  weeks,  intending  to  proceed  to 
"  the  Shore." 

Mr.  John  Fleming  had  been  an  itinerant  preacher  in  Wilt- 
shire, and  was  set  apart  for  Central  America  at  Mr.  Upton*8 
meeting-house.  Church-street,  Blackfriars.  From  Belize  he  wrote 
an  interesting  letter  to  Mr.  Dyer,  the  secretary  of  the  society, 
dated  the  9th  August  1824,  which  appeared  in  the  Missionary 
Merald  of  the  following  November.  In  it  he  gives  an  affecting 
account  of  the  state  of  the  people  in  British  Honduras,  describes 
an  interview  with  some  of  the  Mosquito  Indians,  and  relates  his 
first  impressions.  But,  alas!  two  short  months  only  were  per- 
mitted to  elapse  before  he  fell  a  victim  to  the  climate.  He  died  on 
the  13th  of  September,  after  an  illness  of  five  days  only ;  in  four 
days  more  his  widow  was  also  numbered  with  the  dead,  and  their 
infant  child  followed  her  soon  after.* 

Early  in  the  next  year  (1825)  R.  J.  Andrew,  Esq.,  arrived 
at  Belize  as  the  partner  and  representative  of  the  house  of  Angas 
and  Co.  Soon  afterwards  Mr.  Bourne  completed  the  mission- 
house  and  residence,  the  plan  of  which  he  had  ably  designed,  and 

*  **  Baptist  yiAgazine,**  1824,  pp.  S2C.  366, 2C9. 498, 544.    Annual  Bcporta  of  the  B^itist 
Hissionary  Sodetj  for  1834^  pp.  26.  SO,  and  1825,  p.  SO;  and  priraie  Joomals  and  lettcn. 


TOE   DAT   OF  SMALL  IHINOS.  32& 

oiDg  a  carpenter  by  trade,  he  also  diligently  directed  and  assisted 
:tioii.  The  building  was  &t  once  coduucmIjous,  handsome, 
B«Bd  well  situated  by  the  Ka-shore  ou  the  north  side  of  Bdixe. 
TOn  the  13di  of  April,  Mr.  Andrew  i^tates  that  the  church,  then 
yily  tbrmed,  consisted  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  fatls  and  two  black 
ftmen,  and  that  on  the  previous  Sabbath  their  niunber  at  the 
I  Jjoid's  table  was  swelled  to  "  seven,  by  tlte  addition  of  Captain 
I  Whittle,  Kir.  Wilson,  and  himself."  During  the  same  month  the 
I  eutire  congregation  was  about  twenty  pereous.  In  a  letter  from 
I  iti.  Bourne  himself,  dated  the  24th  of  that  month,  he  rays, 
>  "  Last  ordiuance-d&j  we  hod  twelve  in  number,  including  whites, 
Ljilacks,  and  browns." 

On  the  1st  of  May,  "the  ordinance  of  believers'  baptism  was 

1  Bdmiuistered  fur  the  first  time  in  Belize,  to  Eleanor  Leaver  and 

■  another  woman  of  colour.     Tiiey  were  immersed  near  the  chapel, 

II  the  sea,  in  the  presence  of  but  few  spectators."     During  this 

I  month  irtr.  Andrew  and  Mr.  Wilson  went  to  Guatemala  on  the 

a  of  their  house.    Tbey  were  absent  about  four  months, 

I  during  which   they  collected   interesting   infonnntjun  coiiccmiog 

moral  slate  of  the  interior,  and  by  tlicir  conduct  and  con- 

i  versation  probably  bore  ibc  tirst  living  testimony  to  the  Gospel 

f  which  had  ever  penetrated  into  that  daric  laud. 

Mr.  James  Wilaon,  in  writing  from  Belize  to  a  lady  in  England, 

DO  the  6tb  September  18-2S,  complains  of  the  want  of  outward 

P.privUeges,  and  snys  "  This  place,  in  a  moral  and  religious  point 

is  troly  a  dry  and  barren  land my  soul  has  been 

I  fimished  for  want  of  spiritual  food — fur  lack  of  those  means  of 
■igrace  which  I  enjoyed  in  such  rich  plenty  in  dear  Scotland." 
ftiVith  a  /ew  more  well-disposed  young  men  Mr.  Wilson  asristed 
O  conduct  prayer-meetings  at  the  houses  of  the  poor  black  people, 
d  a  small  Sunday'scbool  at  Freetown.  lie  died  at  Belize  in  the 
I  peace  of  the  Gospel,  on  the  24th  ofKoverabcr  of  tlie  same  year.* 
The  loi^est  number  of  communicants  ever  reported  by  Mr. 
Bourne  to  the  society  was  twcuty-one,  in  a  letter  of  the  7th  of 
Jnnc  laSlj,  In  the  following  year  he  visited  New  York,  and 
formed  a  second  matrimonial  comiection,  by  which  the  miwon 

E  decidedly  benefited,  as  Aire.  Bourne  laboured  among  the 
ured  women,  meeting  witli  tJicm  lor  prayer.    She  alto  con- 
*  Soe  "UciBiutofluiic)  WdKo.    lowlin,  UM." 


990  THB  MMBPEL  IN   CEKTBAL  AXSEICA. 


8fho«i,  in  which  sone  joong  \aMes  letcifql  goeA  sk- 
yMth  woe  sabeeqwatly  cirfiUBed.  Tke  Bmaha-  of 
kor  sehofers  was  horn,  twentj-fiTe  k>  thirty,  and  not  heing  of  tiie 
pooler  ettm  tiiey  pio^ad  a  soaree  of  eonndeiabte-  emolionenl.^ 

Id  a  letter,  dated  the  90th  July  >830v  Mr.  Bcmme  refers  to  tke 
great  changes  that  had  taken  plaoe  in  the  state  of  Goateaiafai. 
Be  sajs,  '^  Soie  tioie  since  thirty  ecdefliastics,  inehiding  the 
ardiftishop,  were  escorted  by  a  guaard  of  soldiers  fiom  the  capbal 
to>  a  seaport  near  ns  (Tabal)>  from  wfaesce  ^bey  w&n  broof^ 
ksre^  and  afterwarda  takes  to  the  Hayaniia.  Twdve  of  tkeai 
mked  to  be  permitted  to  see  the  interiM*  of  the  chapd.  Numbers 
of  others  besides  left  the  country  through  fright  and  eaae  kere^ 
One  aged  man,  a  ¥iear,  came  all  tbe  way  by  land  (through  Peten) 
io  this  pbtte,  aaddied  the  following  night.'' 

Boxing  the  year  1831  there  was  a  scarti^  of  prorisioBs  in 
BaMae.  Wheaten  flower  rose  to  from  SI,  to  ML  per  barrel,  and 
«dt  hotter  was  sdd  at  two  dollars  (or  8«.  4d)  per  poand.  In  tht 
teSkmrng  year  the  Settlement  was  desolated  by  a  kanicane,  whkk 
did  mneh  damage  to  property,  and  produced  a  fssainew 

I'rom  1800  to  the  dose  of  1834,  Mr.  Bourne  paid  oeeaaioBal 
yfkika  to  Mullin's  Birer,  Stann  Creek,  and  other  maaXt  settle- 
ments along  shore.  He  also  ascended  some  of  the  xivns^  and 
pleached  at  certain  mahogany  works^  In  the  sDckiy\  report 
many  earnest  desires  are  expressed,  that  ^'these  fine  and  eztea- 
«¥€  coontrka,  so  long  tibe  seat  of  Papery  in  its  lowest  and  most 
diffrtided  forms,  might  be  blessed  with  the  diffusion  of  that  sacred 
light  which  shall  guide  them  in  the  road  to  happiness  and  Giod.** 
There  is,  howerar,  no  record  of  any  material  progress  in  misMan 
woric  during  this  period.  When  Mr.  Bonme  had  been  twelve  yeais 
and  a  half  in  Britsh  Hondmas,  some  on&yourable  reports  con- 
caning  him  induced  the  committee  to  remote  Inm  to  tkcir  statkm 
in  die  Bahama  Islands,  where  he  continaed  in  connection  wiA 
their  other  missionanes  for  a  short  tune.  In  the  soeic^s  r^ort 
Ibr  the  year  1837  (p.  29),  the  conmiUee  say,  *^  We  deeply  regret 
Io  add  that  a  subsequent  letter  states^  that  charges  had 
BMde  against  Mr.  Boome,  seriously  implieatinf^  his  moral 
lor.  loTestigatxm  was  immediatdy  made,  and  as  there  appuned 
too  mneh  reason  to  bdicTe  they  were  troe,  it  was  notiied  thai 

•  "  B^tlrt  Mi«MiMk*  188l»  p.  4Mf  nSfl^  pw  SlOt  mA  MMl  p.  SS7. 


BPVeBTB  OP  OCPT.  WATTLE  AlTD  OTHBRB. 


331 


I  Bourne's  commtion  xiiih  tbe  society  bad  ccaied,  and  be  has  snoe 
t  lift  the  eoloaj."  * 

Subseqnetitly  Mr.  Bonrne  returned  to  British  HoodorM,  and  fiasd 
I  kv  reddenee  there-  lie  soon  after  fully  juttilied  the  committee  in 
I  the  steps  they  had  taken,  by  living  in  open  immorulity.  He  aiaa 
T  laid  claim  (in  1840)  tff  the  gronnd  upon  which  the  mission-houso 
I  wu  buitt,  and  tried  to  enforce  it  by  law.  It  was  then  nmde 
I  l^iparent  by  his  own  correspond cnce  with  the  aecretary,  that 
1  kc  had  purchased  the  lot  with  the  society's  money,  thongfa  the 
i  HI  of  sale  was  in  Ai>  uim  name.  Soon  after  the  trial  the  Super- 
f  bteadeat   seeing    h'lii    on   the  parade-ground  during  a   review, 

■  pnbliEly  spurned  him  fconi  the  ptiee,  and  he  remainn  to  thie  day 
■  hiighted  monument  of  the  withering  power  of  sin,  and  a  gloomy 

W  teacon  to  all  unstable  professors. 

DunTig  this  period  the  Bethel  flag  was  occamonally  seen  float- 
Ihg  in  the  haibonr,  and  the  elTorts  of  Captain  Whittle,  and  of 
I  Others  in  the  same  employ,  to  benefit  their  fellow-creatures,  were 

■  ^M  conflned  to  Eeamen.  They  frequently  preticbed  iunong  the 
I  fiolouxcd  people,  and  their  visits  were  refreshing  to  the  few  whose 
I  learts  were  set  upon  "  the  consolation  of  laraeL"    A  Wesleyaa 

was  also  eMahti^ed  at  Belize.  The  education  of  the 
K~4bildRo  of  the  poor  was,  however,  still  negleeled,  and  there  was 
(Bttle  tit  no  change  in  the  general  aspect  of  sodetj.  The  pious 
vc  agents  of  the  boose  of  Angas  and  Co.  bad  died  or  leCl 
I  flie  Settlement,  and  their  pLiccs  were  supplied  by  others  lew 
I  deroted  to  the  Gospel.  For  screral  years  the  prospecls  of  the 
were  dreary  in  the  e«remc,t  though  the  readiness  of 
B  people  to  be  taught  seeincd  to  call  more  loudly  than  ever 
r  tbe  efforta  of  the  faithtid.  It  was  in  this  pontion  that  Mr. 
Uezander  Henderson  found  the  mission  interest  when  he  arrired 
t  Belin  with  bis  wife  and  firat  child,  on  tbe  20Ui  of  Novem- 
IT  1894.1 


iibii-Hirtarr  of  llic  Dnpltit  Mitnan,"  ni.  iL  p.  3^. 
r  lb.  Bouw'i  an  ni  "  ondiftiDpilitHii]  bt 
BbiU-  taJalf  IMS,  p.  lOS.  an.  ~ l^c hMorr of 


332  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Mr.  Henderson  who  had  left  a  little  church,  which  ¥n»  the 
fimit  of  his  own  labours,  at  Hemyock  in  Deyonshire,  was  at  that 
tune  in  the  full  vigour  of  manhood.  To  a  lively  piety,  simple 
and-  comprehensive  views  of  Scripture  truth,  and  unflinching  in- 

dealer,  and  a  respected  elder  of  that  parialL  He  was  educated  chieflj  at  the  parodiial 
■chool,  and  was  an  adranoed  scholar.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  apprentieed  to  a 
mtraerTman,  in  which  capacity  he  afterwards  spent  two  years  at  Edinbnrf h.  WW* 
twenty  years  of  age  he  went  to  reside  at  Anstruther  (in  the  house  in  which  Dr.  Chal- 
mers was  bom),  where  he  followed  the  occupation  of  a  clothier.  In  Norember  1884^ 
he  resumed  his  former  bnsineis,  and  went  to  London  as  a  gardener.  Sent  to  fVanee  by  a 
metropoUtan  house  he  resided  at  Rouen  in  Normandy,  as  a  pn^Migator  of  young  hoi-hooM 
plants  for  a  nursery  establishment.  Here  he  remained  as  fintman  from  Beoember 
1825  to  July  1839.  During  the  interval  he  was  sent  to  London  to  supply  the  trade  witii 
zoies,  which  at  that  time  were  eztensirely  imported  frtna  those  nursery-grounds.  All 
this  while  Mr.  Henderson  was  destitute  of  the  Dinne  life,  or  light  in  his  sooL  It  wai 
at  Rouen,  in  a  land  of  papal  darkness,  that  he  was  first  enlightened.  The  dcaeaatkm 
ci  the  Sabbath  which  prevailed  there  being  distasteful  to  him,  he  made  an  effort  to 
assemble  the  few  professing  Protestants  for  the  purpose  of  worship  Into  their  little 
anembly  the  providence  of  God  directed  a  Mr.  Page,  who  spoke  to  them  of  a  Sarioor, 
and  seemed  as  an  angel  sent  of  God.  Mr.  Henderson's  mind  was  made  the  sui^jeet  of 
conviction,  and  the  instrument  of  his  awakening  kindly  remained  with  him  for  serczal 
veeks,  till  his  doubts  and  fears  being  chased  away,  he  obtained  peace  by  believiiic 
in  Jesus. 

On  retoming  to  England  he  spent  six  months  in  preparing  himself  to  the  dntiea  of 
a  teacher  at  the  Borough-road  SchooL  Having  afterwards  settled  in  Deroodure  aa  a 
■ehoolmaster,  he  was  encouraged  by  some  persons  of  wealth  and  inflniwne  eannected 
with  the  Established  Church.  Here  his  mind  was  more  fully  opened  to  receive  the 
truths  of  the  Scriptures.  Writing  to  his  friends  in  Scotland  he  8ay%  **  I  tiwt  I  have 
not  only  learned  theoretically,  but  experienoed  truly  and  happily,  thii  religion  is  a 
thing  of  Heaven's  gift,  and  not  acquired  by  education,  inherited  from  parenta,  nor  yet 
to  be  taken  up  when  we  chooae." 

About  two  years  after  his  return  to  England  his  attention  was  directed  to  Uie  aob- 
ject  of  believers'  baptism.  He  studied  the  Scriptures  on  this  point,  together  with  Mr- 
W.  Barnes,  now  pastor  at  Trowbridge,  in  Wiltshire.  Both  of  them  came  to  the  e(Mi> 
dntion  ttiat  they  ought  to  foUow  Christ  by  a  public  profession  in  this  ordinaiioe^  and 
they  were  immersed  together  at  the  Baptirt  chapel  at  Prescott^  in  March  at  kfeU, 
18S2.  By  this  act  Mr.  Henderson  forfeited  the  countenance  of  his  influential  patnos; 
but  his  labours  had  already  commended  themselves  to  the  poor  people  of  the  letiitd 
tillage  of  Hemyock,  and  he  retained  his  sdiolars,  thouf^  under  drcnmstancfs  of 
poverty  and  opposition.  Nevertheless,  a  little  church  sprang  up  under  his  seriptoral 
instructions.  In  March  18SS,  he  was  married  to  Mary  Anne  LoveU,  of  Tanntcm.  A 
daughter  bom  to  them  while  th^  were  yet  in  England  was  named  Page,  after  hk 
spiritual  father.  A  pariah  apprentice  afflicted  with  partial  blindness,  whom  he  fcnad 
breaking  stones  on  the  road,  was  prevailed  upon  to  become  one  of  his  schohurs.  Sobee- 
quently  this  young  man  was  converted,  and  made  so  much  progress  that  some  timB 
after  Mr.  Henderson's  departure  he  was  chosen  pastor  of  the  little  flock,  and  contined 
in  that  oflSce  many  years  with  credit,  until  he  exchanged  it  for  another  similar  charge. 

Animated  with  zeal  for  Christ,  and  a  love  to  perishing  souls,  Mr.  Henderson  deCer^ 
mined  to  give  himself  to.  the  work  of  foreign  misaioni.    Having  offered  himsdC  be  was 


EAULY  LiBorns. 


333 


;iity,  be  united  independence  and  originality  of  thought,  and 
enterprise  and  perseverance  common  tn  his  countrymen. 
■  III  tlie  condition  of  the  mission  cliurch,  na  nel!  a9  in  the 
ubruken  field  around  it,  there  was  ample  bcojjc  fur  nil  the  energy 
V^f  mind  wliich  the  newly-arrived  missionary  could  liring  to  bear 
u  it.  <)n  looking  back  to  this  period,  Mr.  Henderson  says 
,  he  found  the  mission  "  a  wreck,"  Such  was  the  want  of 
lences  of  piety  in  those  who  were  accounted  members,  so  great 
B  their  ignorance,  and  such  were  the  irregularities  in  their 
Fnode  of  proceeding  as  a  church,  that  Mr.  Henderson,  whom  they 
e  prepared  to  receive  as  their  pastor,  felt  it  his  duty  to  re- 
\  Oannce  the  connection,  and  to  prepare  to  lay  anew  the  foundation 
v'flf  the  spiritual  house. 

Among  other  changes  which  had  crept  into  the  church  since  its 
r  fttmation,  was  that  of  a  professed  willingness  to  admit  the  un- 
r  tftptizcd  to  the  Ix>rd'3  table. 

~  ~ '.  Henderson  commenced  his  labours  by  preaching  the  Gos- 

I  pel  and  expounding  the  Scriptures.    In  doing  this  he  addressed 

[  ^mseif  to  all ;  but  more  particularly  to  the  most  degraded  clsssea 

f  the  people.    Afiican  slaves,  soldiers,  and  discharged  penaionen, 

tl  largely  in  his  attentions  and  solicitude.   The  two  suburban 

1   of   Freetown  and   Queen   Charlotte's   were   frequently 

(JccBsionally  he  ascended  the  Belize  river,  and  preached 

lie  labourers  upon  its  banks.    He  also  immediately  opened 

ols  on  the  mission  premises,  himself  taking  cfaai^  of  the 

t  boys  and  girls,  and  Mit.  Henderson  leaching  the  infanta. 

n  theae  schools  no  kind  of  catechism  was  used,  and  though  the 

ons  were  decidedly  hibUcal  and  religious,  the  particular 

no  one  aect  were  inculcated  there.     By  such  efiorts  the 

I   of   the    people   was  arresteiJ,  their  conlideoce   was  in 

koy  instances  gained,  and  God  was  soon  pleased  to  influence  the 

}  learts  of  a  few  by  his  all-subduing  grace.* 


b;  lh>  Btftiri  Uu 

■kuuiT  Sod 

ty.  Hid  lulFJ  t«  Bollie  w 

b  hi>  w<fts  ud 

he  CM  d»t-.  DO 

tlieStdoIOc 

Ub.^  mi. 

lie  aided,  Ilml  aImsI  Urn  time 

he  vu  ID  Anitrnthc 

ndcnoD  Md  bis 

tl.cb>d<ai«Frc 

Mica  on  hii  mind  tl»t  >t  lomi!  por»d  of 

biilifeheinaU 

f».dm.  iJU.imjh  he  could 

wu  la 

™U.Hl,  hi. 

not  Id  lb 

wgckibMfllkd 

Tbu  llnl  Mnoi 

by  »  lenuea  1  e  kcuil  in 

1..  Edinlnr^. 

Bq.W  U^uiae, 

■ms,[^i 

■OaiVn. 

S84  THE  CKMFEL  Bff  CENTRAL  AMMBSCA. 

Mc  Edward  Adams,  a  native  of  tiie  atate  of  Ohio,  m  Niaiii 
America,  by  prafeaaoii  an  Independent  and  by  (raic  a  nai'fkiy 
had  hitdy  oome  to  settle  at  Beliae.  After  some  iatonoonne  iiith 
Ifr.  Henderson,  he  felt  it  his  duty  to  foUoir  die  Lord  in  tibt 
oidinaiDce  of  baptism.  He  and  hk  wife  were  among  the  first  vfaa 
ipere  baptised  by  Mr.  Henderson  in  Honduras. 

Fmding  that  they  were  of  one  heart  and  mind  in  ihiB|^ 
pertaining  to  Christ's  kingdom,  Mr.  Henderson  and  Mr.  idaiw 
delibeiatdy  and  pn^nerfnlly  oonstitated  themselyea  a  dinreh  «f 
Christ,  having  a  special  regard  to  the  promise  of  the  TSiag  «f 
2Sion  recorded  in  Mattiiew  xviii.  18  to  20 ;  upon  which  thegr  aotodv 
looking  for  the  guidanoe  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  membefv  tageAer 
of  the  visible  body  of  Christ  These  two  discSpka  ^bem.  vaitod  to 
xeoetve  the  first  applicant  for  church  fellowrii^  upon  a  pnrfsssion 
«f  his  fidtiL  Those  three  then  received  the  next,  and  tiiej 
soon  blessed  with  greater  increase.  In  all  matCefi  of 
church  government,  discipline,  or  order,  the  Bible,  and  tlie  Bible 
alone,  was  regarded  as  the  all  sufficient  role  and  anthanfy.  lio 
human  creed  or  oode  whatever  was  recogmsed  by  Ifae  efaafeh, 
whidi  regarded  the  power  committed  to  it  as  purely  eaeuutiye^  and 
not  legislative.  In  the  application  of  the  Divine  Jaw,  ^bm  dbnrdtk 
aoug^t  and  expected  the  guidanoe  of  the  Holy  %irit,  ihe€oBiferteLy 
as  promised  to  the  church  in  its  collective  capacity. 

No  candidate  for  the  ordinance  of  baptism  was  fjiiftailo  apply 
to  the  church  in  the  first  instance;  but  after  tfaatosdinanoe  had 
fiilfilled  upon  the  personal  responsibility  nf  the  parties 
ing  and  receiving  it,  they  were  directed  to  apply  fi>r  adnnssioBi  to  liie 
household  of  God,  when  every  member  of  that  fiunily  ivas  cmr 
fldered  as  participating  in  the  act  of  reception,  and  caaaBqjtOKtif 
ID  the  privileges,  duties,  and  xesponsibilitaes  implied. 

The  church  having  been  fi)cmed  upon  the  principte  of  lys 
ment*  tbey  felt  it  their  dutyto  ^endeavour  to  keep  the  umtgr-cf 
the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace;**  and  being  ''one  body**  they 
desired  to  eschew  divisumA,  and  to  obey  tiie  apostolical  ii^unctioii  to 
^  be  perfecUy  joined  together  in  the  same  jund  and  in  the 
judgment.**t    As  -tiie  Scriptures  gave  them  neither  warraut 
example  (except  such  as  should  be  reprobated)  of  a  church 


*''If  two  of  you  ihall  m^tm  on  carCh  m  toadiing  uiTthiBg fbat  tkjAall  ^:,Ik.* 
— lUtth.zTiii.19. 
tlCor.LlO.  * 


[^kber  in  beut  or  in  Appearance,  tliey  adopted  from  tlie  £rst  the 

■  .niptnral  praccice  of  tcnoinating  their  deliberadons  and  taldiig 

t   a   bodj   only,   by  tbe   nnu'iiWiu   coiiocnt   of  all  tbe 

I   Bcmbcis.     No  church  buaJnoQ  of  any  kind  lias,  therefore,  ever 

I  kven  put  to  the  rote,  nor  any  diviaiua  takeu  od  any  one  occasion, 

fisce  its  fomutiou  in  lH35.* 

A  few  of  the  members  of  tiie  church  formed  by  Mr.  Btmme 

I  lAcrmnls  muted  themselves  to  the  new  church.      Some  triio 

I  «ffered  themselves  were  rejected,  and  otberB  never  applied  for 

idniisaioii, 

£ight  mctntlui  ailer  his  arrival,  Mr.  Henderson,  (vriting  to  the 

I  Oomndttee  (on  the  15th  of  June  1 SSS),  stated  that  the  congreg»- 

1  WIS  already  more  than  doubled,  and  the  Sabbath  school, 

|<1lhich  nhen  he  came  might  conaiet  of  seven   or  eight  scholais, 

)  upwaida  of  a   hundred.      There   nere   then   three 

•  far  baptism.     In  thu  infant  school,  con^sting  alreadj 

1  seventy  cfaildrea.  Mix.  Henderson  was  in  foturc  to 

I  by  Mis  Margaret  Stuith,  a  Wcsleyan  sister,  one  of 

n  of  the  Po)'caian  emigration,  who  had  been  converted 

s  inttmmenlality.     This  aid  had  become  the  men 

ji  Mis.  Uendereon's  family  had  now  incicosed,  uid  ber 

Ith  began  to  lie  affected  by  the  climate.     Thirty  bo^s  alreadf 

V-atlended  the  day-school,   while  more  than  fifty  apprenticca,   no 

Ijongei  slaves  in  name,  were  taught  gratintuniiy  in  ao  evening 

|.«ehool  opened  expressly  for  them.     In  tbb  adult  school,  many  ot 

e  freed  negroes  qualified  themselves  to  receive  the  grant  of  a  New 

L  XesCainent  and  psalter,  made  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bitite 

I  Gociely  to  al!  appivntieed  labourers  who  should  he  able  to  read  k. 

In  another  letter  of  the  1st  of  August  of  tbe  same  year,  two 

Lkundred  day  scholars  ate  reported.      The  congregation,  though 

roving,  wae  not  overflowing ;  but  tbe  expodtioo  of  the  Wovd  of 

^£ed  waa  attracting  attention,  and  especially  that  of  the  yonng  men.! 

Early  in  1836,  Mr.  Henderson  vished  the  Yncatecan   port  of 

L  iSacalar,  and  dktribQled  some  Spanish  Bihlcs  and  tracts,  whidi 

V  were  gladly  recdrcd.    The  Sode^-'s  report  for  that  year  teatifiea 


886  THE   GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

that  '*  Mr.  Henderson  had  been  most  diligently  engaged  in  pabliik- 
ing  the  Word  of  Life,  and  in  efforts  to  promote  the  cause  of 
education.  The  state  of  the  church  had  required  much  paticBt 
and  judicious  attention  to  Grospel  discipline ;  a  few  had  been  added* 
and  the  spirit  of  concern  for  the  eternal  welfiire  of  those  around 
them  began  to  prevail  among  the  members.  Mr.  Henderson  had 
made  repeated  excursions  into  the  interior  [of  British  Honduras, 
by  the  river  Belize] :  he  was  heard  with  grateful  attention  m 
various  places,  where  he  proclaimed  the  GospeL*** 

Belize  was  now  visited  by  the  cholera,  and  numbers  were  swept 
away  by  it,  but  in  many  cases  it  produced  a  salutary  effect.  Mr. 
Henderson  writes  concerning  it, — '*  I  do  hope  that  the  visitation  has 
been  blessed  to  the  souls  of  many.  Our  place  of  wonhip  is  now 
b^;inning  to  be  too  strait  for  us/'  It  produced,  however,  an 
opposite  effect  upon  the  schools,  for  in  consequence  of  the  removal 
of  many  families  to  the  keys  and  rivers,  the  attendance  suffered 
considerable  diminution.  Seven  or  eight  of  the  scholars  died, 
some  of  whom  gave  a  pleasing  testimony  to  the  blessed  effects  of 
the  instructions  they  had  received.  From  this  time  the  ordinance 
of  baptism  was  administered  about  once  a  month,  or  oftener,  to 
numbers  varying  from  two  to  ten.  Another  wooden  building  was 
erected  by  the  ride  of  the  meeting-house,  for  the  acoommodatioa 
of  the  schools,  at  a  considerable  expense  to  the  Society.f 

A  letter  from  Mr.  Henderson  to  the  Society,  of  the  6th  of  July 
1837,  is  said  to  contain  "gratifying  evidence  of  his  success  in  tbe 
very  necessary  work  of  education,  and  of  the  zeal  evinced  by  the 
church  under  his  care  (now  consisting  of  forty-one  members)  to 
help  in  raising  funds  for  the  suj^rt  of  the  misrion.  From  these 
local  resources,  nearly  200L  were  frimished  towards  the  expenses 
of  the  station  in  the  eleven  months  preceding.**  |  On  the  occasion 
of  a  virit  which  Mr.  Henderson  received  from  a  Central  American 
gentleman,  who  was  derirous  of  having  his  son  educated,  the 
committee  say,  *'  It  would  be  of  incalculable  importance  to  intro- 
duce truly  Christian  and  competent  teachers  into  the  vast  provinces 
of  what  was  Spanish  America ;  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  ere  long 
something  will  be  done  to  accomplish  this.**§  The  Society's 
leport  for  this  year)  states  that,    "  the  misrion  at  Belize  has 

*  See  BqMort  for  18S6,  p.  26.  1 8ee'*BaptiatMegizme,"1887,p.lS8. 

^**BeptiftMHuii»,"1887,p.S16.  flUd.  I  B^artforl887,^S9. 


™  LAUOtRS    IX    THE    CA.RBI30N.  337 

been  &Tonred  with  eonaidcrable  prosperitj :  the  congregation 
continues  to  increase,  aad  several  additions  have  been  made  to 
the  chnreh;  while  a  growing  concern  for  the  well'are  of  their 
ignoniiit  ndg'hbouri  proi-es  that  the  memberH  are  advancing  in 
the  knowledge  and  spirit  of  the  Gospel." 

The  African  loldiers  uompcHing  the  garrison,  and  their  families, 
located  at  Freetown  barracks,  were  frequently  visited  by  Mr. 
Heoderaoo,  and  God  had  been  graciously  pleased  so  to  blen  hii 
labours  there  that  several  of  both  *exea  had  become  members  of 
the  church.  On  one  occasion,  the  pastor  went  to  the  tnanied 
men's  qaaners  to  converse  with  a  aiI^k  stster,  who  was  a  aoldier's 
wife.  While  engaged  in  prayer,  a  dashing  young  officer  intruded 
upon  him,  ordered  him  to  desist,  and  to  leave  the  barracks  forth* 
with.  Finding  that  he  was  utterly  dianegarded,  he  went  off  in 
eearch  of  salGcicnt  physical  force  to  drag  the  recnsant  from  his 
knees  and  expel  him  with  violence ;  but  ere  he  returned  Mr. 
Henderson  had  ended  his  visit  and  retired.  A  report  of  this 
outrage  was  forwarded  through  the  Society  lo  the  Eot?c  Guards 
and  some  months  after  the  missionary  received  an  unexpected  visit 
from  the  L'ommander -in -Chief,  then  Colonel  McDonald,  who  hod 
been  directed  by  order  of  the  Duke  of  Wellin^'ton  to  inform  Mr. 
Henderson  in  person  that  he  was  at  full  liberty  to  visit  the 
barracks,  and  to  distribnte  tracts  and  instruct  the  people,  as  he 
had  been  wcmt  to  do. 

The  Mhools,  which  were  conducted  on  the  British  aystem,  so  far 
eclipsed  any  other  attempts  that  were  made  in  the  Settlement,  that 
Mi.  Hcndcnon  was  soon  after  otGcially  appointed  schoolmaster  to 
the  regiment,  with  a  sergeant's  pay.  Consequently,  some  thirty 
or  forty  black  children  were  daily  driven  from  the  barmcki  to 
the  mission  school,  a  distance  of  about  two  miles,  by  an  AfHcan 
corporal  carrying  a  long  while  wand  in  his  hand.  Among  this 
noisy  btmd  were  about  a  doxen  recruits.  These  were  AiHcan  boys 
who  had  bnt  just  iieen  rescued  by  British  cruisers  from  slavers 
during  the  middle  passage,  or  on  the  coasts  of  Cuba.  They  hod 
been  enlisted  professedly  as  colunleeri,  and  were,  of  course,  bound 
to  the  service  for  a  period  of  twenty  or  thirty  yenrs.  At  first  they 
could  not  speak  even  the  Creole  English,  but  they  were  fine  steady 
yoQths.  and  their  progrew  was  so  rapid,  and  their  improvement  so 
narked,  oj  to  elicit  the  unqualified  appTOtwtion  of  the  superior 


338  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

ofiEicers,  who  sent  their  writing  books  to  head-qnarten  as  spedmeiis 
of  what  raw  African  boys  might  be  taught  to  do. 

The  black  corporal  who  acted  as  shepherd  to  this  sable  flock 
was  in  the  habit  of  leaving  his  charge  at  the  schoolhoose  door, 
and  spending  the  time  till  school  was  ended  at  a  ^g9>g-8h(^** 
whence  he  would  return  to  fetch  them,  by  no  means  improved  by 
his  pastime.  Mr.  Henderson  made  several  unsuccessful  attempts 
to  persuade  him  to  remain  with  the  children  and  share  in  their 
instructions,  which  he  needed  as  much  as  any  of  his  charge.  He 
was  at  length  prevailed  upon  to  do  so,  and  took  his  seat  at  the 
head  of  a  form  entirely  occupied  by  the  African  recmits,  dressed 
in  their  white  military  jackets. 

Though  the  advanced  age  and  intellectual  obtnseDess  of  the 
corporal  made  the  acquisition  of  the  alphabet  a  work  of  great 
labour  and  much  time,  the  kind  attention  which  be  received,  and 
the  sober  pleasure  of  acquiring  knowledge,  induced  him  to  persevere 
and  to  abandon  his  former  habits.  Besides  the  more  mechanical 
processes  of  reading  and  writing,  he  was  taught,  together  with  the 
children,  many  Scripture  facts  and  evangelical  doctrines.  And, 
though  to  all  appearance  as  unpromising  a  scholar  as  ooold  have 
been  selected,  his  profiting  after  many  months  became  a^iarent  to 
all.  Subsequently,  the  corporal  joined  a  class  of  inquirers  to  whom 
Hr.  Henderson  devoted  some  evening  hours,  and  oontinued  to 
attend  it  for  years.  At  length  he  made  a  public  oonfesnon  of  god- 
liness, became  a  member  of  the  church,  and  has  walked  in  the  ways 
of  the  Lord  ever  since.  He  has  now  obtained  his  dischaige  fhHn  the 
army  with  a  pension  for  long  service,  and  is  a  regular  attendant  at 
the  public  worship  of  the  church. 

About  this  period  the  increased  labours  of  the  station  i^ypeared 
to  demand  an  augmented  agency,  and  Mr.  Henderson  laid  the 
matter  before  the  Committee,  in  a  letter  dated  September  the  6th 
1837.  In  it  he  states  that  there  were  upwards  of  200  8ch<^an 
present  daily.  The  services  of  a  second  female  teacher  had  abo 
been  engaged.  She  was  a  sister  of  colour,  who  generously  lenouneed 
her  small  pittance  for  the  benefit  of  the  mission,  though  at  ^be 
same  time  supporting  herself  and  child  by  washing  clothes  and 
baking  bread.  Ten  persons  had  been  immersed  on  the  Loid's 
day  previous.  In  a  subsequent  letter  he  adds,  that  on  the  Ist  of 
October,  six  more  followed  their  Lord  in  that  ordinanoe. 


JIB.  PHILPOTS 

tlieinwa?  an  European  youth  of  nineteen,  vfbo  hml  been  asaisting  in 
the  Ethool  fur  a  few  weeks.  "At  that  time,"  says  Mr.  IleQileraon, 
"  his  infidel  Tiewa  and  hostility  to  godliness  made  me  rather 
pleased  when  he  fonnd  another  employ.  Soon  afler  T  found  Iiim 
combating  his  compaiuoua  with  tlic  very  weapons  which,  but 
a  little  befoTe,  I  had  used  against  liiui.  As  they  could  not  silence 
him,  he  was  compelled  to  bear  the  epithets  'cracked,'  'fool,'  &c- 
Ht  has  become  even  'more  foolish  in  their  eyes'  by  baptism.* 
Thus  you  will  perceive  our  number  is  iucrea^ng,  although  we  do 
not  make  this  ordinance  synonyitious  with  membctahip.  The  con- 
gregation is  aim  improTtng,  still  there  is  room,  but  this  cannot  b: 
the  case  much  longer." 

To  these  extnicta  the  committee  add  an  announceoient  that  Mr. 
Henry  Philpot,  a'  member  of  the  church  at  Canterbury,  under  the 
care  of  Mr.  W.  Matthews,  was  about  leaving  for  Belize  to  assist 
"their  inde&tigsble  Mend,  Mr.  Henderson,  in  the  varied  and  im- 
portant labours  in  progress  at  the  station."  On  this  occasion  the 
ilessrs.  Angas  and  Co.  acted  with  their  usnal  liberality  ivith  regard 
to  the  passage.  Mr.  Philpot  arrired  at  Belize  on  the  30th  of  April 
1S38,  and  "was  received  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Henderson  with  most 
aflectionate  cordiality ."t 

On  Mr.  Fliilpot'a  arrival,  Mr.  Adams,  now  become  a  deacon  of 
the  church,  and  a  house-builder  in  an  extensive  way,  opened,  as  a 
preaching  station,  hia  spacious  residence,  situaled  at  the  south  end 
ot'tlie  town,  nearly  the  opposite  estremity  to  that  where  the  n 
premises  ate  situated.  Here,  after  the  oi>ening,  Mr.  Philpot 
preached  regularly  oa  the  Sabbath  afternoon  for  some  weeks.  He 
also  as^'etcd  in  the  schools,  for  which  he  had  been  tr^ned  at 
the  Borough  Road  Institution.  By  his  gentle  and  aoassuming 
hearing  he  noon  endeared  himself  to  many,  and  his  services,  which 
were  thought  to  be  much  needed,  were  geiieroUy  acceptable.  But 
the  hopes  raised  by  his  arrival  were  soon,  alast  to  be  turned  into 

^fc  The  seeds  of  a  pulmonary  complaint  which  Mr,  PhiIi)ot  had 
^■ought  with  him  from  England,  instead  of  disappearing,  as  had 

^^^Tbe  DulliDr.  who  ti  bin  lUaJiiI  lo,  tubl  irriied  in  thi  SclIlemisBt  cincu  mouUii 
^tom  Willi  ■  hoilr  «(  eiuipMU,  » 

roihulinl  (or  Uie  pnJedBl  idUimiciil  ia  Veti  Pu,  til^ini  Iwr 


.   »»in 


1137. 


"  BifitKt  UxulDc,"  ISIS,  lip.  N,  US ,  Bsint  (or  lags,  p.  10. 


840  THE  GOSPEL    IN  CENTRAL   ▲MERICA* 

been  Haadlj  hoped,  were  stimulated  into  more  rapid  acticm  by  te 
fierronn  of  a  tropical  climate  at  the  most  trying  season  of  the 
year ;  and  in  four  months  after  his  arriyal,  on  the  7th  of  September, 
his  departore  to  a  better  world  took  place.  He  was  interred  on 
the  same  day  in  the  presence  of  a  numeroos  and  deeply  afieeted 
company.  The  spot  chosen  for  his  grave  was  on  the  ndssion  pre- 
mises, close  under  one  of  the  school-room  wiodows,  where  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  meet  for  prayer  with  a  brother,  who  had 
hoped  to  find  and  to  retain  in  him  a  confidential  Christian  friend. 
He  was  the  first  in  Belize  who  was  interred  according  to  the  newly 
conceded  rights  of  Dissenters  (respecting  births,  deaths,  and  mar- 
riages). A  plain  but  neat  piece  of  masonry  was  erected  over  his 
grave  by  an  English  workman  at  his  own  charge. 

Thus  did  the  undivided  labours  of  the  staticm,  together  with  the 
pastoral  care  of  a  church  of  about  sixty  members,  moe  more  de- 
volve upon  Mr.  Henderson,  '*  whose  own  health,**  say  the  com- 
mittee, "  has  been  impaired  of  late,  and  who  is  very  importonate 
that  help  should  be  sent  him  without  delay.*** 

Only  a  short  time  before  this  afflictive  stroke,  the  little  oommu- 
nity  of  Belize  was  variously  agitated  by  that  ever  memorable 
event— the  emancipation  of  the  much-injured  staves  on  the  Ist 
of  August  1838.  While  the  ungodly  negroes  were  odtebrsting  the 
day  in  riotous  mirth — though  without  violence — and  the  late  slave- 
holder was  probably  solacing  himself  with  thoughts  of  esa^Miisa- 
^loii,  the  mission  chnrth  had  its  method  of  noticing  this  important 
victory  of  right  over  might,  and  of  principle  over  eovetoaBDesi. 
The  liberated  Christians  desired  to  recognise  the  hand  <^  their  €rod  in 
their  deliverance.  *^  At  the  quiet  hour  of  midnight,**  writes  Ifr. 
Henderson,  *'  the  wide  folding  doors  of  our  place  of  worshy  sent 
^uth  their  bhue  of  illumination,  and,  as  the  last  partieleB  were 
dropping  from  8lavery*s  glass,  the  victims  of  ii\]U8tice  soii^t  the 
house  of  God,  to  render  praise,  and  to  spend  the  first  boor  of 
freedom  in  His  worship.  Oh,  it  was  a  solemn  season !  A  Hide 
before  twelve  I  went  down  and  found  the  place  full,  almost  all 
blacks,  and  the  greater  proportion  must  have  been  slaves.  I  kid 
my  watch  on  the  table,  sitting  down  silently  till  twelve,  when  I 
xoee  telling  them  that  slavery  was  no  more  with  them.  Ttai  we 
all  idl  on  our  knees,  and  afterwards  rose  to  sing.  Oh,  wimt  hearlj 

•  "  Bi^liit  Kagume."  1839,  p.  SS  i  Bapoct  fiv  ira^  K  Si. 


A   DXItK  CLOCD.  3*1 

ingi  A  member,  lately  a  slare,  prayed.  Again  we  «sng. 
Another  meinber  prayed ;  ngain  we  sang,  and  closed  aboat  one. 
All  seemed  seriously  cheerful,  and  gladneaa  dwell  on  every  eounte- 

Iii  the  afternoon  of  that  auapicioua  day,  tbc  scbokrewere  regaled 
with  tea  and  cake  by  the  liberated  AiHcans,  who  aloae  were  per- 
mitted to  contribute  to  tbc  expense.  More  than  200  children 
were  assembled,  feasted,  and  suitably  addressed.  In  the  evening 
there  was  a  meeting  for  worsliip,  which  was  namerouBly  attended. 
Mr.  Hendenon  preached  an  appropriate  aention,  and  atlemards 
entertiuned  the  teachers  and  some  of  the  friends  of  the  missioD 
at  his  own  house. 

More  than  a.  twelvemonth  elapsed  afler  Mr.  Fhilpot's  demise, 
before  intelligence  of  further  help  from  England  was  Teceived  at 
Belize,  and  the  apparent  need  of  it  was  becoming  every  montb 
more  pressing.  Mr.  Crowe,  the  young  infidel  whose  baptism  wal 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Heuleraon,  as  occarring  in  1637,  had  eince  then 
resided  on  the  mission  premises,  and  was  d^ly  engaged  in  the 
schools,  at  once  learning  and  aeststiiig  to  teach  the  children.  Mr, 
Henderson's  health  now  suffered  very  serioudy  from  the  nmonnt 
of  labour  which  devolved  upon  htm,  and  though  he  was  enabled 
to  continue  his  daily  duties  in  the  schools  and  hli  regular  ministra- 
tions, with  ktUe  interruption,  it  was,  ss  he  wrote  to  the  committee, 
"■  not  without  aUrming  symptoms  of  disease  and  bodily  suffering." 
"  1  feel  happy,"  mid  he,  "  in  being  able  to  go  thus  far,  from  a  con- 
tcioagnesR  that  wy  deitr  friends  at  home  arc  employing  themselves 
to  afford  me  respite  speedily ;  the  cause  of  the  Redeemer  and  of 
immortal  souls  is  worth  enduring  not  a  little  for. 

"  It  hiw  lieen  my  custom  for  the  last  six  weeks  [a  custom  whieb 
he  continued  for  several  months  in  succession]  to  apply  a  blister  to 
my  chest  the  day  after  preaching,  to  cool  the  burning  inward  pain 
which  is  caused  by  the  exertion  of  public  speaking.  By  the  close 
of  the  week  I  am  again  healed,  both  outwardly  and  iuYrardly.  I 
long  for  the  arrival  of  ■  dear  minislcring  brother  to  relieve  me  a 
little.  My  luedkal  friend  cautions  me,  and  all  but  insists  on  my 
desisting  altf^cther  from  labour  and  caertion.  I  wish  to  be  fiith- 
ful  according  to  the  spirit  of  the  valedictory  address  delivered  at 
Uackoey,  on  my  designation,  by  Dr.  Newmsn.  I  hope  I  am 
*  *■  Baptist  Miiniac"  fa  1631,  p.  83. 


342  THE   GOSPEL    IN   CENTRAL    AMERICA. 

actuated  by  no  unworthy  motive,  as  if  regardless  of  any  just  reason 
for  ceasing  from  my  labours.  The  Lord  is  consulted,  I  trust,  with 
a  sincere  desire  to  know  his  will."* 

This  painful  state  of  things  ^vas  protracted,  and  was  not  the  only 
dark  cloud  which  appeared  to  haug  over  the  mission  at  that 
period. 

While  God  was  pleased  to  make  his  word  in  the  mouth  of  his 
servant  efficacious  to  the  conversion  of  many  among  the  poor, 
weak,  ignorant,  and  despised  people ;  Mr.  Henderson^s  preaching 
and  style  of  life  found  little  acceptance  with  the  wealthy  and  in- 
fluential in  the  Settlement.  Many  of  the  white  population  attended 
his  ministry  for  a  time,  and  especially  the  new  comers  from  Scotland, 
who  generally  preferred  the  simplicity  of  the  outward  forms  used 
in  the  Baptist  place  of  worship ;  but  very  few  of  this  class  became 
permanent  hearers,  either  on  account  of  Mr.  Henderson*s  fsdthful 
preaching,  which  they  could  not  brook,  or  because  they  were  soon 
drawn  aside  by  the  dissoluteness  and  profanity  prevalent  at  Belize. 
Mr.  Henderson  had  few  friends  among  them,  nor  did  he  deem  it 
his  duty  to  cultivate  an  intimacy  except  where  he  was  sought  for 
the  sake  of  his  religious  principles  and  beneficent  objects. 

The  established  clergyman  and  his  supporters,  jealous  of  the 
spread  of  Baptist  principles,  now  nuide  a  strenuous  effort  to  coun- 
teract their  operation.  The  free  school,  which  is  connected  >vith 
the  Establishment  and  the  public  treasury,  was  entirely  remodelled, 
and  put  upon  the  best  possible  footing,  so  that  it  might  compete 
with  Mr.  Henderson*s,  which  it  had  not  yet  been  able  to  do.  As 
a  consequence,  the  garrison  children,  and  all  those  whose  parents 
could  be  influenced,  were  transferred  to  it.  Some  of  the  barrack 
children  frequently  evaded  the  new  arrangement,  and  returned  to 
their  old  quarters.  The  parents  of  those  who  insisted  on  keeping 
them  with  the  teacher  of  their  choice,  were  deprived  of  the  rations 
which  had  been  allowed  them  for  those  children.  Many  times  ere 
this  had  the  military  brethren  been  denied  the  right  of  attending 
their  own  worship,  and  had  been  forced  to  march  with  a  noisy 
hand  to  the  Episcopal  church.  Sometimes  they  had  been  design- 
edly put  upon  duty  on  the  Lord*s  day  to  prevent  them  from  going 
anywhere.  But  now  their  liberty  was  even  more  restricted  than 
befbre,  and  they  were  subjected  to  greater  severities.   The  vistts  of 

•  "  B^tut  Magazine  "  Ibr  1889,  p.  616. 


anpFEBixos  I 


I    NON-JDRING. 


e  iiiiBsianary  to  tbe  public  bot^ilal  and  to  tbe  jnil  were  objected 
0-  and  interfered  with  by  the  official  chaplain,  and  it  was  made 
t  in  many  yrayi  that  tbc  Baptists  and  tbeir  miiiister  trere 
wed  with  disaOectioQ  by  the  magistrate  na  well  as  by  the  clergy- 
1,  who  were  evidently  leagued  against  tbem. 

usly  to  this,  some  ca.sea  bad  occurred  irherein  members  of 
I  Ibe  church  had  declined  to  be  sworn  in  tlie  Courts  of  the  Settlc- 
Tbey  had,  however,  never  refused  to  give  their  evidence  or 
tifaaervc  upon  juries  and  inquests,  and  were  willing  to  suffer  the  pe- 
L.liBlties  attached  to  perjury  if  found  guilty  of  giving  false  evidence. 
■t^ieir  scruples  were  purely  conscientious,  and  arose  from  taking  lite- 
lily  the  words,  "  Swear  not  at  all."*    Fur  this  scruple  some  had 
ready  suttered  penalties  and  loss,  and  on  account  of  it  muiy  were 
d  under  legal  disabilities,  the  consequences  of  which  in  some  cases 
lonnted  to  being  outlawed.   This  faithfulness  to  their  convictions, 
ih  ought  to  have  commanded  tbc  admiration  and  respect  of  all, 
■ay  have  exdtcd  the  angrj-  paesions  of  proud  and  unscrupulous 
1,  and  thus  have  contributed  to  the  groHTng  ill-feeling  towards 
«  Baptists. 

cose  in  particular  which  now  occurred,  served  to  draw  atten- 

}  this  point.    It  was  that  of  a  beloved  brother,  Samuel 

btlbtw  Dovies,  a  Sergeant-major  of  the  gnrrison,  who,  though 

|l  African,  had  by  hli  good  conduct,  intelligence,  and  somewhat 

'  ir  education  risen  to  a  rank  seldom  filled  by  any  but  a  white 

He  was  called  upon  as  a  witness  in  a  trial  for  murder,  the 

Is  of  which  are  briefly  these.— A  practice,  calling  for  the  severest 

robalion,  has  hitherto  prevailed  in  tbe  garrison  of  Belize,  and  it 

ievcd  is  also  Eanctioned  at  Jamaica,  in  the  Bahamas,  and  else- 

1  the  West  Indies.    It  is  that  of  permitting  a  number  of 

!  women  to  pasis  the  night  in  the  barracks,   from  which 

r  are  driven,  like  a  herd  of  swine,  before  daybreak  in  tho 

On  the  occasion  in  question,  an  African  private  of  tbe 

d  West  India  Regiment,  in  a  fit  of  jealous  revenge,  discharged 

;  into  one  of  the  beds  and  killed  the  unhappy  woman, 

cad  of  his  rival.     Brother  Davies  being  Serjeant- m^j or  of  tbe 

iy,  and  the  person  entrusted  with  the  care  of  that  dormitoTy, 

IS  required  to  give  evidence  upon  cith.  The  oath  he  respectfully 

declined.     All  efTorts  to  intimidate  or  persuade  him  having  proved 

•  Miltli,  >.  33.  ud  JuuciT.  U. 


844  THB  eOBESL  IN  OBMTBAL  AMWBICA. 


froitkH,  lie  wtt  sent  from  the  oonrt^home  to  Ae  civil  jmL*  A 
pQDHhiiient  far  mofe  •evere  than  aoy  that  had  yet  beoi  inflintol 
Hie  preaidiiig  judge,  who  was  alao  the  Sapemtcndent,  and  the 
Oommander-in-Chief  (Cokmd  Aleiouider  McDonald),  aoon  after* 
wards  transferred  the  prisoner  to  the  imlitarf  power— •  prooeeding 
of  at  least  doabtftil  legality— and  retained  him  nnder  anest  in  the 
dark-hole.  He  was  then  tried  by  a  ooaitHnartialf  and  aemciMai 
to  a  month*s  oonfinemeat  in  the  barracks.  After  being  limited  far 
some  days  to  his  own  quarters,  he  was  permitted  to  be  at  Imrgt 
within  the  limits  assigned  to  the  garrison.  To  the  sophistries,  «»- 
tmties,  and  threats  of  his  superior  officers  he  was  ahke  Jnamsihie 
The  least  penalty  which  they  had  held  up  to  lus  mind  wm  d^radki- 
tion  to  the  ranks.  But  by  Grod*s  sustaining  grace  he  wm  enabled 
to  retain  his  integrity,  and  risk  all  for  a  good  coasaeBBie.  When 
nminded  by  a  seU-oonceited  officer  that  he  had  not  the  knowledge 
to  eonstitnte  him  a  critic  of  the  sacred  text,  not  baring  been  bred  att 
college  as  he  had  been,  he  meekly  replied,  that  posttbly  his  nnse 
learned  adviser  had  never  asked  of  God  that  wisdom  whidi  eometh 
from  above,  or  humbly  and  diligently  sought  for  the  knowledge  ef 
His  ways.  Not  only  was  he  gradually  restored  to  his  usnai 
before  the  term  of  bis  unjust  sentence  expired,  but  he  was 
xeinstated  in  his  office,  no  other  so  capable  or  tmstwocthy  bemg 
fimnd  to  fin  it. 

Brother  Davies  has  for  some  years  been  a  respected  deacon  of 
the  churdi ;  his  wife  also  has  long  been  a  member.  Having  ob-> 
lained  his  discharge  iiom  the  army,  they  now  together  oooi^ 
n  post  of  great  nseftilness  and  trust  as  keeper  and  none  nt 
liie  pubhc  ho^taL 

This  trial,  while  it  manifiested  the  fiuthfulness  of  a  weak  end 


*  In  this  trial.  Sergeant  Danes,  and  five  other  Afiican  aoldien,  woe  btons^t  fo 
Vj  tiie  defenee.  *'Hoir  he  was  disposed  of  we  hare  seen,  and  the  other  five  were  rt^^eetod 
they  had  not  been  haptised!    Whether  thej  were  beKeren  fai  the  Bftle  lai  fti 
naetiani  vaa  n  auttar  of  no 


'▲  lew  ealaa  words  of  ftlth  and  pnqper, 
▲  Itw  ha%iit  dnps  of  ho^  4ew.' 
hadnotwToni^ 

'A  wonder  theiv^ 


Aai  «^  looMr  Obb  it  dwrid  ha  wqffoiad  Oi*  these  whiptted  eonld  ten  the 
pnsoner,  eren  if  innocent,  mJnM  be  hH^*^— JKw  rmkBtomritr,  Angui  1S»  184S. 


PENALTIES  FOK  imR-RBBUTAKOS. 

anleBTDed  nun,  and  demonstnted  the  power  of  Cfaristian  prio- 

^^  dple,  served  to  eicmplify  the  absurdity,  ibtility,  and  danger  of 

■ifbrcing  judicial  swearing  by  coercive  meaanrea ;  and  also  to  expose 

dcmonlixing  tendency  and  existing  cormptions  of  Ibe  mUitarj 

cm  ■■  it  is.    Some  ol'  the  grosacr  evils  arimng  out  of  it  bave 

long  been  lelt  by  the  inhubitunts  of  lielize.     Purmerly  the  slayea, 

id  now  tiic  aervaiita  of  suuie,  mid  of  coutbc  the  sislera  and  ihc 

lughters  of  othciK,  arc  seduced  by  the  soldiers,  and  debauched  after 

is  proroiacuous  and  wholesale  manner;  eo  that  a  numerous  claxa  of 

tte  most  reckless  und  abandoned  is  formed  and  fostered  in  the  bosna 

ilf  Uie  community.     Who  can  set  a  timit  to  the  injuries  which  are 

indicted  I     Unly  a  few  of  the  soldiera  arc  permitted  to  many, 

when  they  desire  it.     In  many  respects  their  condition  ia 

better  than  that  uf  the  pjantatiou  slave.*     It  loudly  calls  fbr 

Mdres,  and  should  that  call  Iki]  to  be  heeded,  its  cry  to  God, 

^rhich  has  already  entered  into  llis  cars,  cannot  &il  to  produce  k 

Vcrtaio  and  a  jnst  retribution. 

The  local  militia,  already  referred  to,t  also  contributed  iu  ite 

easure  to  increase  the  ill-fecUng  indulged  in  towards  the  Baptists. 

t  the  close  of  the  year,  and  during  the  fiist  two  weeks  in  Janoaiy, 

iC  iohahilauta  of  Brttiah  Unndurns  are  required  by  law  to  "  tttm 

It,"  to  disguise  themselTCS  as  soldiers,  and  to  relieve  the  r^ular 

sops  of  tlie  duty  of  mounting  guard  at  Go vermnent- house,  and 

the  jail.     As  to  the  Lawfulness  of  this  duty  to  a  follower  of  the 

Kince  of  Feauc,  some   of  the  cliurch   had  serious  doubts.      A 

'loember  uf  the  Society  of  Friends  had  already  suffered  some  in- 

lilxa  at  the   hands   of  tlic   pscudo-mililary   far   refu^ng  to 

itify   himself   witli    this    annual   demonstration.       A   yotmg 

iter,  being  fully  convinced  in  bis  own  laind  that  the  step, 

;h  enjoined  by  law,  was  in  itself  improper,  re&nined  &oai 


S4A  THE  GOSPEL  IS  CENTRAL  JlMEBICA. 

enrolliiig  himself  in  the  artillery,  or  white  corps.  He  was  dragged 
firom  his  home  by  an  escort,  and  confronted  with  Colonel  Frank, 
of  that  division,  who  first  fined  him  in  thirty  dollars  for  refusing 
to  enrol,  and  then  placed  his  name  on  the  muster-roll  without  his 
consent.  Being  still  unwilling  to  bear  arms,  he  was,  on  a  sub- 
sequent occasion,  dragged  to  the  guard-room  at  the  court-house, 
placed  imder  arrest,  and  after  spending  two  nights  and  three 
days  in  that  situation,  he  was  publicly  reprimanded,  coarsely 
abused,  and  threatened  with  increased  severities  by  the  Colonel 
commanding.  Determined  never  to  take  the  life  of  a  fellow- 
creature  under  any  circumstances,  he  refused  either  to  learn  how 
to  handle  a  musket,  or  in  any  way  to  appear  as  if  he  were  willing 
to  break  the  sixth  commandment,  as  he  felt  he  would,  by  taking  the 
life  of  a  fellow-creature  even  in  self-defence  The  private  entreaties 
of  the  Colonel  to  induce  him  to  consent  to  be  drilled  for  a  short  time, 
accompanied  with  a  promise  that  he  would  then  be  released,  having 
failed  to  alter  his  conscientious  determination,  he  was  committed  to 
the  common  jail.  The  efforts  of  Mr.  Henderson,  who  applied  to 
the  Superintendent  on  his  behalf  soon  obtained  his  release  and 
Aiture  exemption  from  such  service,  on  the  ground  that  he  was 
employed  as  a  teacher  in  the  mission  schools.  This  exemption 
was  disputed  by  the  militia  Colonel,  but  as  the  Superintendent's 
signature  had  been  given,  and  was  tenaciously  held,  he  was  never 
again  required  to  perform  militia  duty.  Other  membeis  of  the 
church  suffered  repeated  fines,  and  several  were  afterwards  im- 
prisoned for  their  non-payment. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  grant  relief  to 
the  brethren  belonging  to  the  regular  troops*  from  some  of  the 
4Kverities  and  annoyances  to  which  they  had  been  subjected. 
This  was  by  means  of  a  general  order  issued  by  Lord  Hill,  July 
10th,  1839,  purporting  that  Dissenters  should  not  be  compelled 

*  The  mindf  of  the  pastor  and  some  of  the  brethren  were  exercised  ooncemiiig  the^tpft- 
lent  meonsisteDcy  of  sanctioniiig  tome  members,  who  were  cnriluuis,  in  refusing  to  bear 
arms,  and  yet  retaining  serenJ  regular  stddiers  in  the  chnrdi;  bat  they  were  satisfied  by 
1  Cor.  yii.  30,  31.  The  military  brethren  were,  in  general,  if  not  oniTersally.  anxioos  to 
**  be  firee."  In  the  mean  time  they  were  taught  to  keep  all  God's  commandments,  aad 
that  at  the  saeriflee  of  their  own  lires,  should  they  be  called  to  it  They  cannot,  bow- 
<arer,  always  obtain  a  discharge  when  they  apply  for  it,  eren  though  willing  to  renoonoe 
aU  hfopea  of  a  penakm. 


DEATH   OF  »n.    v.  WBATBKBALL.  3^ 

1^  attend  the  Ang]ic.in  Churcli,  but  should  be  at  liberlj  to  go  to 
}  their  own  places  of  worBbip.* 

While  the  church  and  Mr.  Hendersoa  were  thus  exercised  by 
cmtward  guflering,  snolher  dijapp ointment  of  their  hopes  greatly 
(  humbled  them  before  God,  and  nnick  them  with  a  tnomentacy 
Ag^n  the  commiltcc  in  England  made  choice  of  a 
\  aoissionflry  for  their  alnlion  at  Belize,  in  the  pci'son  of  Mr.  W. 
I  'Wcsthernll,  a  young  member  oF  the  fhurcb  at  Bury  St.  Edmundg, 
I  DBder  the  care  of  Blr.  Cornelius  Elveyn.  He  had  been  residing 
Halstend,  pursuing  his  studies  under  the  direction  of  Mr. 
I  Clements,  mid  there  he  was  designated  on  the  25th  of  June  1839. 
I  Be  embarked  lit  Gravesend  with  a  young  bride  oo  the  39tb  of  the 
ic  moiitb. 

t  vma  with  unusual  delight  that  the  church  at  Belize  recdved 

I  Qk  intelligence,  and  looked  forward  in  hope  of  the  speedy  arrival 

I  of  Mr.  and  Mrs-  Weathcrall.     But  this  second  attempt  to  sup[>ly 

I  Ur.  Henderson  with  a  coadjutor  was  destined  to  fail  even  more 

I  tonally  than  the  first.   The  Favourite,  Capt.  Bleukinsop,  in  wbich 

ft  4hey  sailed,  arrived  at  IVinidad  on  the  8th  of  August,  for  there  the 

t'tiljp  nas  In  unload  a  part  of  her  btirdcn.     Ueoce,  Mr.  WeatheraU 

|'4rrote  to  the  secretary,  at  once  commencing  and  closing  hia  corre- 

pondcnce  as  a  missionary ;  and  aa  they  were  detained  nearly  a 

month,  the  young  couple  resided  on  shore.     Mr.  WeatheraU 

cached  fVcqucntly,  and  nttcndcd  three  tnissionnry  meetings,  bc- 

»  engaging  in  other  active  exertions,  in  which  be  exposed  him- 

0  the  rays  of  the  vertical  sun,  which  is  then  moat  powerful, 

B'tutd  especially  injurious  to  those  not  yet  acclimated.     He  began  to 

e  affected  with  violent  headaches  during  the  laat  week  of  their 

n  the  island,  and  the  day  aAcr  tbinr  re-embarkation  he  was 

d  with  brain  fever.     On  the  tenth  day,  during  a  paroxysiDi  of 

lelirium,  bdng  left  alone  in  the  cabin  for  a  ebort  time,  he  plunged 

B'ftDm  the  open  window  into  the  sea.    The  steward,  perceiving  hia 

*■  Intention,  rushed  forward  only  in  time  to  seise  hold  of  his  shirt, 

pert  of  which  remained  in  his  hand.    The  alarm  wa.s  instantly 

g7ren.    The  ship  lay-to,  and  a  boat  woa  lowered  so  rapidly,  that 

t  about  three  rainntcB,  as  the  captain  affirmed,  his  body  v 


eked  up.    The  usual  n 


9  proved  ineflcctual  for  his  recoveiy. 


I  ^irit  had  fled.    At  midnight,  to  spare  tho  6cUi)£S  of  lUB 


S18  THB  OOSFSL  IN  CENTRAL  AJOOUCA* 

joolhfiil  pirtner,  his  lentuDs  were  consigned  to  the  watoy  deepv 
until  ^  the  sea  shall  give  up  its  dead.*' 

Only  eight  days  after  this  sad  event,  the  Fmoowrke  reached 
Belise.  Never  will  that  day  be  forgotten  by  maqy  of  IlieiiieBibcBi 
flf  the  church,  and  more  especially  by  those  composing  the  inaSkj 
eirele  at  the  mission-honse.  It  was  on  the  17th  of  August  18S8^ 
that  the  anziously-expected  vessel  was  signalized.  The  brethzcDt 
on  the  tip-toe  of  expectation,  were  watching  for  the  first  glimpse 
of  their  expected  brother  and  sister,  ready  to  hail  them  with  joy, 
as  labourers  in  the  Lord,  when  the  gloomy  tidings  reached  thenit 
and  overwhelmed  them  with  grie£  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hendenon 
went  on  board  to  receive  the  youtiiful  widow,  and  many  were 
the  tears  and  sobs  with  which  she  was  greeted  by  the  distresaed 
members,  and  sorrowfiil,  indeed,  were  the  embnoes  that  ^  re- 
ceived from  her  more  matronly  coloured  sistexiL  Constemation 
wjngled  with  submiaBbn  in  the  hearts  of  the  brethren  on  re- 
viewing the  mysterions  dealings  of  their  God,  whose  way  is  m 
thedee^ 

Mrs.  Weatherall  remained  nine  months  in  Mr.  Henderaooji 
ftmily,  waiting  for  a  lemale  companion  with  whom  to  recros  tiK 
Atlantic  At  times  the  assisted  Mrs.  Henderson  in  the  ia&ot 
school,  and  was  otherwise  useful,  till  she  sailed  for  New  Ymk,  on 
her  way  home,  on  the  ISth  of  May  following. 

After  referring  to  Mr.  Westherall's  mysterions  removal,  the 
Ckammttee  say  that  "it  is  their  anxious  desire  to  send  nnmfi 
other  brother  to  this  important  post  with  the  least  poadUe 
deky."* 

After  this  new  trial,  Mr.  Hendenon  writes,  on  the  SI2Bd  of 
November  1839,  **  My  own  health  is  yet  precarioos.  I  hare  been 
cnahlftd  to  go  on  without  interruption  in  the  puhlie  means  sinoe 
I  last  wrote,  though  with  increased  bodily  suffering,  and  quile 
opposed  to  the  opinion  of  medical  advisers.  ...  I  thankfully 
reeeive  the  measure  of  strength  given,  and  pot  it  fiirth  agaiB,  in 
His  name,  &om  day  to  day,  endeavouring  to  prepare  my  Buad, 
ahonld  it  be  the  Divine  will,  £ar  the  worst,  though  still  chaeaad 
irith  the  hope  that,  asfler  a  season's  rest,  after  the  coming  of  a 
r,  I  shall  be  permitted  again  to  kboor  for  Christ,  widi 


« Bee  •'BiVtiftMtgaiiBe^"  ism,  Fp.«)0ud4«0 i  ibid.  1810^  pp.4S  ABd4»«; 
Bcpoctforl8«0^p.8S. 


THB  VOICE  OF   FBOVmSNCE.  3*1/ 

itred  zesl."  He  states  that  six  persons  bad  recently  been 
to  tbe  ordinance  of  baptism,  that  others  were  applying, 
d  adds,  "  The  congregation  id  steady ;  with  us  it  is  chiefly  to  the 
I  poor  that  the  Gospel  is  preacheti.  We  propose,  as  soon  as  conve* 
I  Dknt  nfter  the  arrival  of  n  missionHry,  to  attempt  the  formation  of 
I  an  Aiuuliory  Hiasionaiy  Society.  Mr.  Crone  is  in  the  school,  ajid 
I  lias  been  of  nse  to  nie,  when  indisposed,  to  read  a  Bermon,  and  BO 
I  keep  tbe  congrcptiou  together ;  be  has  just  recovered  from  a  severe 
\  Mlock  of  fever,  the  first  aickness  he  has  had  since  be  came  to  the 
L  ODuntiy-" 

Thus,  in  the  face  of  many  difficulties,  in  the  midst  of  spiritual 
I  Infirmities,  bodily  diseoae,  and  with  some  persecution  and  evil 
1  Veport,  God  was  gnciously  pleased  to  bless  and  prosper  Mr. 
I  Henderson's  labours,  though  Me  manifestly  frowned  upon  the 
I  Society's  efforts  to  supply  him  with  fell  aw -labourers  from  Eng- 

hnd,  for  which  Mr.  Henderson  was  so  anxious  and  importunate. 
1   Deeply  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  station,  he  longed  to 

■ee  iCa  efficiency  increased ;  and  finding  his  own  hands  full  and  his 
I  Krength  inadequate  to  greater  enterprise  and  extension,  he  looked 
I  Sbr  foreign  aid,  when  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  had  deigned  that 
1  native  agency  should  here  be  employed  to  carry  on  the  work  of 
I  Up  kiDgdom. 


350  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRA.L   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   n. 

NATIYB  AGEMCT — THE  CHUBCH  NUBSBD. 

1840  TO  1845. 

Prayer-meetmgs— Sister  Elizabeth— Biver  Excnxnons— The  Boom— Baktt^  Bank— B«ha- 
both  Station— Convenioii  of  Mr.  George  Braddick— Mr.  Crowe  let  apait  as  an  Erange- 
list— Aniral  and  depaitnre  of  Mr.  C.  H.  Hoaken  and  funily— The  dteppointment  to 
the  Chorch— Mr.  Hendezaon  begins  to  learn  the  Canf  langnage-^CoBvcnkm  of  William 
Michael— Translation  of  the  Scriptures— Brother  Michael  trained  fiu  a  Teacher— Coa- 
Tersion  of  John  Warner— His  training— Soldiers  added  to  the  Churdi— Death  of  Jabex 
Henderson— Impororement  of  the  Society's  property — ^Prayer  made  by  the  Chnrdi  fur 
the  conversion  of  the  Scholars— Several  Teachers  in  training— Jabilee  oSenngs— Study 
of  the  Waikna  language  commenced- Brother  Warner's  progress— His  imprisooiMnty 
marriage,  and  first  station — General  progress  of  the  mission— Visit  of  a  CathnKr  Priest 
—Station  at  Tilletton  formed— Circnhttion  of  the  Scriptores— Hondnns  AnOiary 
Bible  Society— Mr.  James  Thompson's  visit— A  Missionary  Printer  sent  ovt— INsa(ree- 
ments  between  him  and  Mr.  Henderson — Mr.  Kingdon's  appointment — BrotiiBr 
Warner's  sufferings  and  labours — His  house  burned  down  and  second  impriaounent— 
Visit  of  Bishop  lipsoombe  to  Belize— Mr.  Henderson's  first  iminrisonment- His  seeosd 
commitment,  for  refusing  to  swear— Position  of  the  Church. 

"  Tie  same  commt  thou  tofaitkfid  me»t  who  mJuM  he  able  to  teach  others  a2io."— 8  liss.  iL  3. 

Among  the  means  which  Mr.  Henderson  had  employed  and  encour- 
aged since  he  had  first  come  to  Belize,  prayer-meetings  had  ooea- 
pied  a  prominent  place.  The  monthly  concerted  prayer  fbr  a 
blessing  on  missionary  efforts  throughout  the  world,  had  been 
regularly  held  at  the  meeting-house  on  the  evening  of  the  first 
Honday  of  every  month.  Extracts  were  then  generally  read  from 
printed  reports,  and  thus  the  minds  of  the  congregation  were  fiuni- 
liarised,  and  the  church  was  interested  in  various  fields  of  miSBioii- 
aiy  labour,  for  which  they  united  their  fervent  prayers  to  God. 

For  some  time,  there  was  an  early  prayer  meeting  at  the  pablic 
place  of  worship  every  Sabbath  morning,  and  it  was  given  up  only 
when,  for  convenience  and  less  publicity,  it  was  divided  into  sevenl 


HE    KATIVE    SliaSIONARV    PRAY ER-JIEET INC.  361 

etinge,  one  for  each  locality  in  Ibe  private  houses  of  the  brethren 

a  become  able  to  conduct  them  among  themselvea.     These  social 

r.tneelings  have  coutinaed  ever  since,  and  have  proved  a  blesied 

preparation  for  the  more  [lublic  cngn^meuts  of  that  sacred  Aay. 

A  prayer-ineetiug  was  opened  at  the  liouu  of  Mr.  Adams,  as  soon 

^■Uthe  church  was  formed,  trherc  several  of  the  brethren  first  learned 

n  open  their  lips  to  Gcd  as  the  organ  of  an  OKembly.     Ere  long  a 

id  of  emulation  was  mamfested  by  many  to  hit vc  prayer- meetings 

n  their  own  houses  on  certain  set  nights.    Nothiug  but  tlie  wont 

r  of  persons  able  to  conduct  thcni  prevented  them  from  being  much 

,  tnorc  common  than  they  were ;  and  when  any  brother  who  could 

^  lead  was  found  able  and  willing  to  devote  bis  time  to  it,  there  was 

night  in  the  week  but  he  would  be  thus  engaged. 

Tore  native  brethren  were  raised  up  to  lead  these  little  assem- 

in  which  the  Scriptures  are  read  and  hymns  sung,  Mr.  Hcnder- 

n  himself  frequently  conducted  them.    The  rude  and  narrow  cot- 

I  Isges  of  llie  married  soldiers  and  of  aged  pen^oners  have  ever  since 

I  ficijuently  resounded  with  the  voiceof  social  prayeraodpraise.  The 

L  no  l(3S  gifted  waters  are  here  encouraged  to  engage  in  prayer  as 

I  us  the  brethren,  and  they  arc  accustomed  to  do  so,  to  the 

inifcst  profit  uf  all. 

•  At  the  period  of  cmaudintiou  (in  August  1838),  the  church 

mtemplating  the  formation  of  an  auxiliary  to  the  so-called 

ent  society,  but  deterroiiiinl  first  to  seek  direction  and  blessing 

t  special  prayer.    The  evening  of  the  third  Monday  of  every 

with  was  appointed   for  the   native  misiionarif  prayer-meeting, 

which  was  hold  at  the  meeting-house.    At  that  meeting,  which  is 

11  continued,  the  wants  of  the  people  around  were  spread  before 

c  mercy-scat,  and  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  was  supplicated  to 

nd  to  send  forth  Irom  anioag  tliemselvcs  labourers  for 

bitish  Ilondnna  and  the  circumjacent  countries    This  step  was 

rridently  mode  tlie  means  of  preparing  the  hearts  of  the  people  to 

ceive  more  abundant  tokens  of  God's  blesang  upon  themselves, 

>c  tokens  soon  followed,  and,  though  mingled  with  tribulalioDs, 

■Sbcy  were  not  the  less  direct  and  striking  an&wcrs  to  their  e&rneat 

d  believing  prayers. 

■  Writing  to  the  society  on  the  13th  March  1840,  Mr,  Hendereon 

remarks,  "  We  liavc  much  to  admire  and  to  Iw  ihaiikfltl  for  in  tlic 

Divine  Providence  towards  ns.    The  ciiurch  has  nothing  in  It 


868  THB  G06PBL  IN   CENTRAL  AMEBIGA. 


remarkable ;  we  have  some  awakemngB  amongrt 

to  answer  the  question  whether  the  Lord  be 

Fiety  is  by  no  means  of  a  shining  kind,  neldier  are  we  witfaonl 

cause  for  discipline  here ;  yet  it  is  gratifying  to  observe  tbe  gcatniBC 

fruits  of  the  Spirit  where  Satan  lately  rdgned. 

*^  One  of  our  aged  female  members  [a  black  sister  named  Efin- 
beth]  is  in  the  frequent  habit  of  sitting  in  the  yeary  midst  of  the 
Biaiket  with  a  basket  of  tracts,  Scriptures,  andnseM  bodts  to  sdL 
Ifind  more  access  to  the  Spaniards  [Central  Americans]  by  her  than 
by  all  cither  means.  Her  patience  in  the  midst  of  mudi  soom  ii 
often  admirable ;  and  some  of  the  more  refl^pectable  who  know  her 
are  in  the  habit  of  casting  a  five-penny  piece  (our  smaUeBt  current 
coin)  into  her  basket  on  passing,  as  they  know  she  has  no  profit 
by  her  sales,  and  she  is  not  above  accepting  it.** 

The  visits  which  Mr.  Henderson  occasionally  made  to  the  banks 
of  the  river  Belize,  would  have  been  more  frepent  had  his  hands 
been  kss  occupied  inministering  to  the  church,  eondncting  the  day* 
adiools  and  other  important  duties  in  Belize,  or  even  bad  his  health 
been  more  robust.  Nevertheless,  the  good  seed  sown  among  the 
labourers  at  the  nearer  plantations,  or  bank*^  began  to  spring 
up.  In  this  department  of  labour,  he  had  suffered  a  dinappnint- 
ment  at  the  largest  and  most  accessible  village  called  Boncll^s 
Bank,  or  the  Boom.  When  led  to  hope  that  he  was  aboat  to  rmp 
the  first-fruits  of  those  efforts  by  the  formation  of  a  little  efanrdi 
there,  the  Wesleyan  missionaries,  with  a  wide  fi^  beftm  them, 
diose  to  tread  close  upon  his  heels,  and  obtaining  some  mflnenoe 
over  a  few  of  the  leading  people,  they  at  once  erected  a  plaee  of 
worship,  from  which  thdr  Baptist  brother  was  virtually  ezduded. 
Upon  this  turn  of  afiairs,  Mr.  Henderson  directed  his  attf  tiwi 
more  particularly  to  a  smaller  place  called  Bakers*  Bank, 
miles  further  up  the  stream,  where  "  there  was  room***  still 
anoally  calling  at  the  Boom  as  he  passed.  Geoige  TiUett,  £s^ 
a  Belize  creole,  and  the  propriietor  of  Bakers*,  used  to  assemble  hii 
fiunily  and  the  persons  in  his  employ  to  hear  the  word  pieadied, 
and  always  gave  a  cordial  reception  and  a  ready  attentioii  to  the 
missionary  himself.  After  a  few  such  visits,  Mr.  Tillett  propoaed 
that  a  building  should  be  erected  for  the  meetings,  for  which 
pmrpose  he  generously  gave  ''an  ample  space  of  groimd,  the  firame 
of  a  house,  SO  feet  by  20,  with  a  roo^  and  kindly  afoded  ereiy 


BEHOBOTH  STATION,    BAKEr'b   DANK,  363 

whle  fwality."  The  people  also  Joined  their  Bmaller  conlribu- 
"  Another  ftieml  gave  four  glara  n-indows ;  a.  (bird,  500  feet 
t  bonrds  and  50  lbs.  weight  of  nails,  and  others,  who  could  give 
Otfaing  else,  freely  contributed  their  kbonr,  so  that  soon  a  ne«t 
.mctiire,  covered  with  Bay  thatch,  wbs  erected  on  a  high 
taral  embankment  of  the  river.  On  sccoant  of  the  tacit  strife 
irltich  had  driven  him  to  this  more  remote  station,  and  to  ngnaliEe 
fte  eola^^gement nhich  God  had  granted  him  at  this  place,  "for 
Pwhich  they  Btrove  not,"  Sir.  IlenderMn  called  it  Rchoboth.*  It 
has,  indeed,  already  proved  a  wellof  living  wnlcrs,  and  at  the  hours 
of  meeting  on  the  Lord's  day,  when  a  small  bell  summonses  the 
people  together,  it  is  now  usual  to  see  them  setting  out  in  their  boats 
from  the  opjmsite  bank,  the  whole  surface  of  the  stream  being 
soon  dotted  with  dorccs  and  pitpans  full  of  people  and  their  chil- 
dren, who  have  come  from  above  and  from  below  the  bend  of 
the  river  at  which  Rehoboth  is  seen.  All  gradually  ascend  the 
sloping  bonk,  to  mingle  in  the  unadorned  bonse  with  the  inbabitanls 
of  Baker's  and  the  pine  ridge,  and  to  hear  the  Word  of  God  from  the 
lips  of  a  native  teacher,  or  the  foreign  miasionaiy. 

The  opem'ug  of  this  building  on  the  1st  July  1840,  iras  for 

several  reasons  a  joyfU]  occasion  to  many  present,  and  the  memory 

of  it  is  embalmed  with  pleasurable  recollections.     Though  at  that 

^^  time  a  balance  of  about  lOOi  currency  remained  on  the  erection,  it 

^^UltB  subsequently  all  cleared  off  by  the  church  and  the  friends  on 

^^^he  spot,  and  the  only  charge  it  occasioned  to  the  society  by  its 

^iMertion,  WM  s  fee  of  ten  shitlingB  for  legally  placing  Mr.  Tillett's 

^^HRUit  on  the  records  of  the  Settlement,  in  the  society's  name.f 

^^K  A  circumstance  attended  the  building  of  Rchoboth  which  is 

^HnDTiby  of  record.    The  carpenter  employed  in  its  erection  was  the 

^H-Wigodly  husband  of  a  dear  disciple,  who  had  suffered  gruatly  on 

account  of  his  confiTmed  habits  of  intoxication.     More  than  once  he 

had  been  fonnd  lying  in  ditches  and  about  the  streets  of  Bclixe  in  a 

state  of  brutal  insensibility,  and  though  be  could  earn  high  wages 

t  his  trade,  his  wife  and  numerous  family  frequently  felt  the 

faich  of  poverty,  in  addition  to  the  disgrace  which  his  conduct 


i  lie  irmOTtd  liiini  Uienci 

.  (nd  digged  (ncrthcir  mil  mil  FDrllul  Ihcj'nnniial : 

llcJ  thtD.ni»"f  .IRth 

botl,  (iD.TgiD-ili.1  i..Il«mi:   uid  be  nid.  for  mnr 

\,uhm:,i,wom!«t<a.i 

a  « thiU  be  fniilTttl  in  Iho  Iind."-C»1L  uri.  Si. 

864  THE  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

bronglit  upon  them.  It  was  but  a  few  months  befiNre»  thai  he 
had  passed  a  night  in  confinement  m  the  militia  guaid-Toom  toge* 
ther  with  the  brother  who  refused  to  be  trained,  bat  Corporal 
Braddick  was  under  arrest^  not  for  any  coascientiouB  acmple,  \mi 
fixr  drunkenness  and  for  deserting  his  post,  lor  which  hewaadepmed 
i^his  stripes.  Even  in  a  place  where  intoxication  ia,  ahw!  so eom- 
mon,  this  man  was  known  by  the  name  of  ^'dronken  Braddiek.*' 
It  was  chiefly  out  of  consideration  for  his  wife  and  fiunily  that  Mr. 
Henderson  had  ^nployed  him. 

At  Baker*s  the  intemperate  carpenter  eoold  noi  freelj  obtain 
the  liquor  which  was  destroying  him,  and  he  had  to  spend  many 
a  long  night  with  only  one  of  his  children  in  the  lonely  house 
which  he  was  erecting.  In  the  hours  of  calm  leflection  which 
were  thus  forced  upon  him,  the  vrrongs,  the  example,  and  the 
admonitions  of  his  wife  were  yividly  brought  hoose  to  his  nund, 
and  in  answer  to  her  prayers,  these  thoughts  prodieed  so  deep  an 
impression,  that  after  the  opening  of  Behoboth  mfftii^,  he  retnmed 
to  Belize,  seeking  the  salTation  of  his  soul.  Jesus  aa  the  sbmei's  sub- 
stitute ;  Christ  as  the  great  aUming  sacrifice  fn:  sin ;  Jesos  Christ 
as  the  procuring  cause  and  medium  of  God's  fivFoar  and  eternal 
life,  was  trusted  in  and  receiyed  by  him  as  his  only  hope.  Hewasan 
altered  man.  Not  only  did  he  at  once  forsake  his  iarmet  cooTBes, 
hut  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  ptople  of  God,  and  to  the  work  of 
the  kingdom,  and  gradually  learned  to  exemplify  the  Tcrf  Tirtues 
and  duties  most  directly  op^oate  to  his  former  vices  and  disoidexaL 
He  also  experienced  the  contrast  between  the  perfect  freedom  of  the 
service  of  Christ  and  the  cruel  bondage  of  Satan's  ahiTerp',  and  he 
became  a  monument  to  others  of  the  power  of  the  Gospdl,  of  the 
soercy  and  goodness  of  Grod,  and  even  of  the  temporal  advan- 
tages of  a  holy  life.  After  ten  years  of  sober  industry,  lir.  Oeorge 
Braddick  has  become  a  useful  and  a  much  respected  memberoC  the 
community ;  his  large  family  has  been  brought  up  with  credit  to 
himself  and  his  wife,  and  with  comf<Mt  and  blessing  to  thdr  ^il- 
dren.  His  business  has  prospered  and  extended,  so  that  he  has 
taken  a  place  among  the  very  first  master  carpenters  and  house- 
builders,  and  executes  the  most  extensive  public  and  private  con-* 
tracts,  and  the  crasy  old  house  in  which  he  himself  resided  has 
given  place  to  a  substantial  and  conmiodious  dwelling. 

In  the  church,  Brother  Braddick  has  been  a  I'O^'Pftfffrf  and  an  ae- 


retnembet.  LoDgbeforeGodgrantedhun  the  temporal  prosperity 
rich  he  Doi*  enjoys,  he  was  elected  a  deacoa ;  hsving  b««n  Grat 
f  proved"  and  "  fotiud  blameless"  aa  to  the  requitiiie  qualificatkiiis 
or  that  office;  bdag"grave,  not  double-tongued,  not  given  lo  much 
i,  D04  greedy  of  lilthj  lucre,  and  holding  the  mystery  of  the 
a  pure  eouacience."  In  Ms  ohq  honw,  at  the  garrison,  and 
rwbere,  he  baa  for  years  conducted  social  meetiiiga  for  prayer. 
d  it  will  be  seen  further  on,  that  he  shared  largely  and  cheerfully 
i  BuScriogB  which  the  cbarcb  was  called  to  pass  throngh ;  being 
■prisoned,  fined,  and  reproached  for  a  good  consdcnce ;  and  when 
«  church  Has  \e(t  without  a  ministering  brother  in  the  fiirnaceof 
I,  God  was  pleased  to  use  this  dear  brotbET  as  an  instrument 
^  edify  and  to  strengthen  the  much-tried  members.  Before  the 
pirld  and  hi  the  household  of  God,  this  brand  plucked  from  the 
miog  enjoys  the  good  report  and  commands  the  love  or  the  re- 
^t  of  fHcnds  and  foes  in  a  degree  surpassed  by  no  oTke  in  the 
munity.  Hit  gentle  department,  boncat  industry,  cbeerfnl 
intemttdnesB,  but  above  all,  his  prayerful  and  sub- 
d  spirit,  redound  to  the  honour  of  God,  and  to  ibe  glory  of  hia 
'  "g«ee. 

In  the  couiK  of  1840,  her  Majesty's  Superiutendent  presented 
the  Baptists  trith  a  pece  of  ground  at  Freetown,  "  for  a  possession 
af  a  burial-place."  A  similar  provision  was  also  made  for  the 
eyans  at  Queen  Charlotte's. 

le  ehdjch  at  Belize  now,  for  the  lii^t  time,  set  ^<art  one  of  its 
bcrs  lo  do  the  work  of  an  evai^list.  Many  reMona  concurred 
it  dcurablc  that  a  station  out  of  Belbic  should  be  found  for 
ther  Crowe,  whose  bodily  health  had  long  been  broken.  The 
on  scbcme,  which  had  brought  hbi  to  the  cooutry  raorc 
ir  yeaiB  belbre,  was  now  renewed  in  on  attempt  to  form  an 
■glish  settlement  within  the  State  of  Guatemala,  on  the  banks  of 
t  Boca  Nueva,  a  mountain  torrent  tributary  to  the  Folochic, 
e  department  of  Vera  I^-  The  agent  of  the  Company 
d  BcUxc,  and  had  some  interconr»e  with  Ur.  Crowe.  While 
e  be  received  inti'Uigciice  from  Abbottsville,  the  newly-formed 
louy,  that  a  German  Lutheran  minister,  who  had  come  out 
1  the  settlers  as  chaplain,  liad  abandoned  his  charge.  Mr. 
ras  applied  to,  and  an  arrangemenl  concluded,  accord- 
AA3 


856  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   A^IERICA. 

ing  to  which  Mr.  Crowe  was  suhsequently  appointed  as  school- 
master to  the  Company.  Preparatory  to  his  departore,  the  chnrch 
met  on  the  1st  of  Jan.  1841,  and,  having  reoeived  from  Brother 
Crowe  a  statement  of  his  views  and  motives — of  what  he  was 
anxious  to  teach,  and  of  the  ends  he  had  in  view — the  church 
gave  him  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  in  the  work  of  an  Evangelist, 
and  prayerfolly  commended  him  to  God.  One  of  the  deacons,  Brother 
Cain — a  man  of  colour,  a  discharged  sergeant  in  the  British  service, 
and,  by  birth,  a  French  Creole  of  La  Martinique — added  an  earnest 
exhortation  to  the  impressive  address  of  his  pastor  and  spiritual 
fiither.  The  brethren  then  severally  ratified  their  united  act  by  a 
hearty  pressure  of  the  hand  (the  form  of  salutation  prevalent  fa 
the  church).  Many  tokens  of  brotherly  love  were  interchanged, 
and  in  a  few  days  he  embarked  to  visit  the  scene  of  his  future 
labours,  previous  to  removing  his  wife,  and  fixing  his  abode  there. 
This  providential  opening  was  regarded  with  the  more  interest  by 
the  church,  as  it  promised  to  afford  access  to  the  interior  of  the 
Spanish  provinces  which,  under  other  circimistances,  must  be  diffi- 
cult, if  not  impracticable. 

A  third  unsuccessful  effort  was  made  at  the  commencement  of 
this  year  to  supply  the  Society*s  station  at  Belize  with  labourers 
from  England.  On  the  22nd  of  January  1841,  Mr.  C.  H.  Hosken, 
who  had  been  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  Clonmel,  Ireland, 
together  with  Mrs.  Hosken,  and  their  infant  child,  embarked  in 
the  William  Henry  Angas,  Captain  David  Thomas,  for  Belize, 
where  they  arrived  on  the  20th  of  March.  The  Society's  Report 
expresses  the  satisfaction  of  the  cx>mmittee  in  this  arrangement, 
in  the  following  terms :  ''  The  station  at  Belize  has  at  length  been 
supplied  with  a  second  missionary.  ....  This  reinforcement 
has  become  the  more  necessary,  not  only  from  the  bodily  weakness 
of  our  esteemed  brother,  Mr.  Henderson,  but  from  the  growing 
enlargement  of  the  mission  itself.  Successive  additions  have  been 
made  to  the  church,  which  now  comprises  more  than  100  memben» 
and  from  it  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  beginning  to  sound  Ibrthi  ii 
the  regions  roimd  about.* 

Mr.  Ho8ken*s  coming  was  hailed  by  the  chanli 
and  his  ministry  was  attractive  to  the  people  flu 
climate  somewhat  affected  his  own  and  his  v 
as  they  landed,  and  the  charscteristtes  i 


n 


A  TimtD  PAILCRB   ntOM   HOME.  357 

t  Mr.  Hofiken's  eipectstiona.  lie  removed  bu  family  to 
f  2Tew  Vork,  kaving  Belize  in  June,  tbat  ig,  about  three  moutfas 
T  sfUr  their  arrival,  notnithstandiDg  the  remouitraitces  of  Mr. 
Y  BendersoD,  aod  the  earoNt  entreaties  of  the  brethren,  who  went 
a  compoiues  to  inquire  his  reasons,  and  to  uac  tlieii  influence  to 
r  ntttin  him  among  tbcm.  The  Comnutlec  say,  concerning  this 
I  step,  "they  had  both  been  ill,  and  Mr.  Hoskcn  considered  il  to  be 
r  duty  tu  remove  to  a  climate  more  coDgenial  with  their  con- 
[  Btitutions."* 

This  third  disappointment  tvns  keenly  felt  by  the  church  and 
I  Itbouren  at  IIoDdiiras;  and  at  tlie  time,  the  scries  of  ajiptireatty 
i  dispensations,  which  did  not  stop  here,  was  profoundly 
B'JI^sterious  and  humbling.  God,  in  His  providence,  hua  aince 
a  that  a  part  of  Uis  desi|^,  in  thus  proving  His  people,  wai 
f  fitat  they  might  learn  to  lean  more  entirely  upon  inHnite  suffi- 
I  ciency  and  less  upon  an  arm  of  tlesb.  By  continuing  to  them  as 
I  ft  church  the  tokens  of  Uis  presenca,  and  granting  an  encouraging 
[.  measure  of  prosperity  in  other  more  vital  matters,  and,  especially, 
I  |>y  rabiiig  up  from  among  tbemaelvea,  in  answer  to  their  prayers, 
^Jmmble  but  faithful  instrumentg  whereby  to  carry  ou  the  tvork  of 
WpM  kingdom,  God  hia  spoken  encouragement  and  hope  to  their 
inner  to  which  they  ore  not  now  insenuble. 
Previous  to  this  event,  additions  hud  been  mode  to  the  church 
Bwhich  were  not  at  the  time  thought  worth;  of  special  notice,  hut 
■vhich  llie  subsequent  development  of  God's  designs  have  shewn 
le  of  the  utmost  interest  in  the  hbtorj-  of  the  mission  church. 
y  did  not  promise  mudi,  but  thej  yielded  more,  whilst  those 
s  whieh  had  long  fixed  the  attention  of  the  church,  and  were 
Gcted  to  increase  ihnc  strengtii  and  outward  prosperity,  in- 
iably  ended,  as  will  Itc  seen,  in  disappointment,  or  were  followed 
y  coDscqiiences  even  more  buniiliating. 

le  evangelization  of  the  neighbouring  Indian  tribes  had  long 

1   a  place  in   the   thouiihis  and   near  the   heart  of  the  lone 

liisioaary.    The  desirL-  to  devote  more  of  his  time  aud  energies 

i^  tbeni  was  tnu.'  of  the  caiues  of  his  earnest  solicitude  to  obtain  a 

01uw>bbaurer.    AiWr  Ibc  third  denial  from  God,  Mi.  Henderson 

t  Itk  duty  ta  commcnM  a  misMon  to  these  tribes,  unaided ; 

1  be  mlfcrtd  not  hi*  Lcdil/  tnakniw,  nor  the  burdens  iilrcady 

fiTkOH  K  tl,•Ml•BwMllUp>ciM,-lMl.|>^lEl.t7J;. 


868  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMEBICA. 

had  npon  him  in  the  church,  the  schools,  and  in  his  increased  and 
increasing  fSunily,  to  deter  him  finom  the  attempt. 

What  efforts  had  heen  made  by  the  Wesleyan  misnonaries  among 
the  Carift  and  on  the  Mosquito  Shore  had  fiuled  to  produce  anj 
permanent  results.  One  reason  evidently  lay  in  the  fiict  that  the 
English  language  had  heen  employed  as  the  medium  of  communi- 
cation. The  acquisition  of  the  native  dialects,  therefixre,  a^^ieared 
to  Mr.  Henderson  to  he  an  indi^)ensable  preliminary.  The  Carib- 
bean Indians,  as  the  most  immediately  accessible,  seemed  to  claim 
his  first  efforts,  and  he  resolved  to  acquaint  himself  with  their 
language.  Books  to  assist  his  purpose,  there  were  none,  not  even 
a  manuscript,  or  a  single  written  sentence  of  any  kind,  could  be 
obtained:  and  as  for  a  suitable  teacher,  the  idea  was  Utopian. 
Hie  difficulties  of  the  enterprise  were,  therefore,  by  no  means 
smalL  Mr.  Henderson^s  first  device  was  to  lay  hold  of  every  Carif 
who  came  within  his  reach,  and  to  glean  what  he  could  from  him. 
He  then  discovered  that  their  duiness  in  such  matters,  added  to 
his  own  utter  ignorance,  the  contradictory  accounts  they  gave,  and 
the  impatience  they  manifested  imder  the  number  and  variety  of 
his  questions,  were  such  as  to  amount  to  an  insuperable  obstacle. 
Just  as  this  impression  was  fiistening  itself  upon  his  mind,  the  hand 
of  God  appeared,  leading  him  on,  and  saying,  in  an  unequivocal 
manner,  **  Be  strong  and  of  good  courage,  and  do  it;  ftar  not,  nor 
be  dismayed.** 

A  Carif  labourer,  already  past  the  meridian  of  life,  had  ^  hired 
himself  as  a  waiting  boy  **  to  the  master  of  the  free  sduxd  at  Belize, 
having  left  his  wife,  according  to  the  native  custom,  to  provide  for 
herself  and  children,  as  best  she  might,  by  cultivating  her  planta- 
tion. In  this  situatimi,  without  any  assignable  cause,  unless  it  were 
the  immediate  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  his  heart,  he  was 
disquieted,  and  had  an  indistinct  idea  that  it  was  on  account  of  sin. 
In  his  perplexity  he  implied  to  his  master,  who  recommended  aome 
attention  to  his  outward  conduct,  going  to  church,  and  diverting 
his  thoughts  from  the  subject.  These  remedies  he  tried,  but  his 
trouble  only  increased.  On  repeating  his  applications  to  his  master, 
he  was  told  that  he  was  probably  going  mad,  and  had  better  try  to 
forget  it,  and  indulge  in  a  little  strong  drink.  From  this  anare  he 
was  mercifiilly  kept,  and,  beginning  to  understand  the  nature  of 
his  wants  somewhat  better,  he  wandered  from  the  Epiaoopal  to  the 


CONTEASION   I 


WILLI  AH   HICHAEL, 


I'^eskyta  pUoe  of  worship,  bnt  still  found  no  rest.    One  week- 

llight,  during  the  year  1840,  Mr.  Henilereon  was  expounding  tha 

■cniiturcs,  as  he  is  wont  to  do,  endeavouring  to  adapt  his  ecplana- 

tuna  to  the  humblest  capacity.     lie  was  pointing  sinners  to  "  the 

b  t>f  God,  which  t«kcth  away  the  nu  of  the  world,"  when 

JBilly  (aa  the  Carif  serv&nt  was  called)  strolled  in  in  a  diecoiiBolatS 

Bood.     Hia  attention  was  at  once  irrestcd,  hb  mind  enlightened, 

his  heart  rehcved  by  the   Gospel   message.     It  was  indeed 

glad  tidings  of  great  joy"  la  this  siti'rtricken  wanderer.    From 

became  a  joyful  believer,  and  aoon  after  made  K 

ipnblic  profession  of  the  name  of  Christ.     Utterly  ancnltivated,  as 

i^ell  as  uncwtrolled,  the  intellectual  faculties  of  William  Mkliael 

be  developed,  and  the  proroise,  iu  this  respect,  seemed 

k^  than  the  hopes  whicli  were  eDgendered  by  the  simplio^ 

bis  character  and  the  cheerfulness  d'  bis  natural  disposi^on. 

iving  been  received  into  the  church,  and  being  encouraged  by 

BIt.  Henderson,  Brother  William  seemed  disposed  to  give  himself 

to  atudy.     lie,  tfaereibre,  lefl  hb  former  master,  and  came  to  tlie 

school. 

Among  the  fint  duties  which  claimed  the  attention  of  tbe  new 
convert  was  that  of  "  setting  hia  house  in  order."  He  felt,  a»  tfao 
Scriptures  teach,  that  he  was  bound  to  provide  for  bis  own  famfly, 
and  that  he  ought  to  cherish  and  to  protect  the  wife  of  hia  boram, 
■nd  not  to  leave  her  to  bear  the  undivided  burden  of  her  own  and 
their  children'!!  support  Happily,  he  had  hut  one  wife.  He  soon 
brought  her  and  bee  chililrcn  from  tlie  Carif  village  to  Belize,  in- 
Stalled  them  in  a  modeat  dwelling,  aud  allotted  to  his  partner  the 
household  cares,  hiniKlf  engaging  to  supply  her  maintenance.  In 
this  step  God  blefscd  the  faithfulness  of  his  servant.  After  attend* 
ing  the  instructions  of  the  church,  she  also  was  converted,  baptised, 
became  a  happy  and  contented  member  of  tiic  household  of 
Their  children  attended  the  mission- schools,  and  were  omonfj 
«t  intelligent  and  lively  echolan.  Thus  was  an  entire  lamily 
liTDugiit  under  the  influence  of  tbe  Gospel ;  and  its  bend,  as  the 
first-fruits  of  hia  nation,  was  placed  under  training  to  be  the 
mslTument  of  convoying  the  Gosjiel  to  his  fellow -countrymen, 
this  all. 
The  intelligent  reader  will  already  have  percdved  that  in  this 
nvrt  God  graciously  raised  up,  just  when  most  needed,  aa  in- 


^Mod. 


360  THB  GO0PEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

Btmment  to  enable  Mr.  Henderson  to  carry  out  his  purpose  of 
learning  the  Carif  tongae. 

Brother  Michael  was  no  sooner  called  than  he  had  work  to  do,  as 
well  as  lessons  to  leam.  At  the  same  time  that  he  humbly  took 
his  seat  beside  his  own  children  on  the  forms  of  the  school,  and 
b^gan  to  leam  his  A,  B,  C,  he  was  in  his  turn  the  best  and  only 
substitute  that  could  be  had  for  a  learned  pundit  in  the  missionary's 
study,  where  he  sat  at  stated  hours  teaching  Mr.  Henderson,  enrich- 
ing his  vocabulary,  familiarizing  his  ear  with  the  sounds  and  into- 
nations, and  directing  him  how  to  articulate  the  words,  of  the  rich 
and  harmonious  Carif  or  Calinago.  After  some  preparation,  Mr. 
Henderson  undertook  the  important  work  of  translating  the 
Scriptures  into  that  idiom  with  the  assistance  of  William  Michael — 
well  convinced  that  this  must  be  the  foundation  of  any  permanent 
missionary  labours.  The  Carif  language  has  now  not  only  been 
reduced  to  writing,  and  in  a  measure  to  rule,  but  after  the  labour 
of  years  in  translating,  correcting,  and  revising,  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew  has  been  printed  in  it,  as  the  result  of  these  unimposing 
eflfbrts. 

The  progress  of  Brother  William  in  his  English  studies,  which 
were  perseveringly  pursued  in  order  to  fit  him  to  become  a  teacher, 
was  very  slow.  It  was,  perhaps,  retarded  by  the  imperioos  neces- 
sity of  occasionally  labouring  with  his  own  hands  in  order  to  sup- 
port his  family — ^his  allowance  as  a  pundit  being  very  small.  But 
whether  paddling  or  sailing  his  doree,  learning  to  spell  and  to  write 
cm  a  form  in  the  school,  filling  his  professor's  chair  in  Mr.  Hender- 
son's study,  or  beating  off  logs  of  mahogany  on  the  whar&,  he 
ever  appeared  cheerful  and  contented,  and  spoke  with  anticipated 
dehght  and  ardent  desire  of  the  time  when,  as  he  frequently  ex- 
pressed it,  he  should  be  sent  to  teach  "  My  own  nation."* 

The  Lord  was  graciously  pleased  to  send  another  labourer  into 
His  harvest  during  the  year  1841,  in  a  manner  that  bears  the 
Btamp  of  His  own  sovereign  hand,  and  brings  glory  to  His  grace. 

An  aged  fisherman,  &miliarly  called  Charlie  Adams,  originally 
from  Scotland,  was,  and  probably  still  is,  the  sole  inhabitant  of 
one  of  the  keys  or  wooded  islets  on  Tumeff  Reef,  where  he  then 
pursued  his  calling  and  reared  swine.     Occasionally  he  visited 

*  Tlib  phriM  he  wo  often  repeated  Uut  it  ii  identified  witb  the  Ban  in  the  mindi  ef 
llNiewhoknoirhini. 


CONTGRBION  OF  JOHN  WARNER. 


Belize  to  sell  turtle  oud  other  proceeds  of  his  indiutr}-,  and  to 
purchase  necessary  storea.  Hailug  received  favours  fruin  Mr.  Hcn- 
derEOB,  hb  leUow-countrynmn,  be  would  at  such  ti 
missioii'houK,  and  have  a  Ikmiliar  crack  with  the  niissioniuy. 
One  evening  on  which  he  hod  procured  some  bouka.  tmeta,  &c>, 
and  was  about  piuhiag  oU'  ftom  the  misaiim  wharf  to  retnru  to  his 
island  domain,  Mr,  Hendersoa  piTccived  eumethiug  moving  at  the 
bottom  of  his  boat.  On  inquiring;,  he  was  informed  that  it  was  a 
sick  English  sailor  upon  whom  the  fieherman,  like  a  good  Samari- 
taa,  liad  taken  compassion,  and  intended  to  try  the  effects  of  aca  tur 
and  a  change  of  diet.  There  lay,  indeed,  a  poor  emaciated  crea> 
ture,  who  was  paying  the  natural  penalty  of  that  reckless  life  which 
EO  many  of  our  seamen  indulge  in,  and  which  is  so  rapidly  followed 
by  debility,  disease,  and  death  on  the  shores  of  tropical  countries. 
This  sailor  aflerwards  told  Mr.  Ilenderson,  that  when  Mr.  Hender- 
son drew  near  and  beheld  hiui  in  that  phght,  he  was  ashamed  to 
look  up  and  meet  his  gaze.  The  iniiistonary,  who  was  accustomed 
tu  see  many  such  in  his  visits  to  the  public  hoEpttal,  spoke  a  few 
words  of  seriousness  and  kindness  to  the  homeless  outcast,  ere  the 
sail  wus  spread  and  the  little  skilf  was  walled  away. 

l^llle  did  Mr.  Ucnderson  then  suppose  that  this  was  his  first 
introduction  to  a  fcUow-belpcr  in  the  Goi-pcl,  whom  God  hod  sent 
to  his  prayers,  and  whom  He  designed  to  honour  and  to 
1  instrument  in  the  conversion  of  many  precious  souls  I 
Old  Charlie's  benevolence  was  not  without  its  reward.  John 
^arner,  the  sick  Bailor,  soon  showed  symptoms  of  recovery  under 
Ids  care ;  and  alter  a  little  time  was  able  to  do  a  torn  of  work  about 
the  key,  if  it  was  only  to  oj^n  and  break  the  shells  of  the  cocoa- 
nuts  in  order  to  feed  the  tishernian's  pigs,  with  their  mly  contents. 
During  his  convalescence,  the  afflicted  mariner  found  amusement  in 
reading  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  which  Mr.  Henderson  had  lent  to 
his  weather-beaten  host.  He  read  it  again  and  again  till  be  found 
profit  ua  well  as  pleasure  in  the  exercise,  and  by  the  Divine  bless- 
ing on  this  simple  means,  he  was  awakened  to  see  his  real  state  as  a 
stuner  before  God.  This  led  him  to  read  old  CiiarUe's  Bible  too, 
where  be  found  tlie  only  way  of  salvation  fully  set  forth,  but 
though  he  was  enabled  partiuUy  to  discern  it,  and  found  a  measure 
of  peace  by  couung  to  Gud  iu  Christ,  who  is  "  the  way,  the  truth, 
aod  the  life,"  yet  the  scales  of  unbelief  had  not  yet  entirely  lallen 


982  THX  OOSFEL  IN  C3EHTRAL  AXBBICA. 

firom  his  eyea,  and  liUt  hetrt  mm  not  yet  ealabliriied  in  the  tnitt* 
When  quite  recovered  he  went  to  the  ishnd  of  Rnatan,  and 
Baintained  himsdf  for  a  short  time  by  woridng  a  plantation.  Ik 
me  about  a  year  kter  than  the  oonyerBbn  of  William  Michaelt 
and  some  months  after  his  first  interview  vrith  the  mtsnaiiaiy,  that 
John  Warner  returned  to  Belize  and  visited  Mr.  Hendenoo, 
anxious  to  be  further  instructed  in  the  way  of  life.  This  second 
meeting  took  place  in  Mr.  Henderson's  study,  in  the  presence  of 
the  author,  and  it  was  not  a  little  affecting.  John  Warner  had  evi- 
dently been  taught  by  the  Sfnrit,  and  had  forsaken  his  fi>rmer  sinful 
courses,  but  inwardly  he  wanted  a  more  complete  reliance  upon  the 
merits  of  his  Saviour,  and  outwardly  he  required  that  boldness 
and  decision  which  a  public  professicm  imparts  to  the  conduct.  On 
these  points  he  was  affectionately  directed,  and  as  othen  had  done 
before  him,  the  white  sailor  soon  took  his  place  in  the  sdiod  among 
the  oc^oured  children,  as  he  was  anxious  to  learn  all  he  could,  and 
Mr.  Henderson  was  as  willing  to  assist  him.  He  had  already 
passed  the  age  of  five  and  thirty,  and  yet  needed  to  hepn  at  sooe 
of  the  first  rudiments  of  an  ordinary  education.  But  though  his 
diffidence  was  great,  his  earnestness  and  perBCverance  overcame 
every  other  obstacle,  and  lus  {Hrogress  in  learning  was  enoonrsg- 
ing,  while  his  advances  in  Divine  things  were  rapid.  £re  long, 
being  established  in  the  faith,  he  was  baptized  with  odiois  and 
added  to  the  church.  He  also  supported  himself  by  occaacmal 
labour,  sometimes  about  the  mission  premises,  whUe  he  oontimied 
to  pursue  his  studies.  Though  he  scarcely  dared  to  hope  that  he 
ever  should  attain  to  it,  he  was  encouraged  to  submit  to  a  oonsse 
entraining  with  a  view  to  fixture  usefulness  as  a  teacher. 

Mr.  Henderson's  health,  tiiough  not  entirely  re-established,  ma 
aow  improving,  and  the  various  branches  of  mission  woric  had 
gradually  advanced,  and  were  severally  crowned  with  an  encourag- 
ing degree  of  success.  On  the  27th  of  July  1841,  he  made  the 
following  communication  to  the  society: — ^ On  the  27th  of  Junei 
we  Ixqitized  eleven  persons,  seven  of  whom  were  soldiers ;  firom 
this  department  the  church  has  now  considerable  numbers.  We 
hare  lately  nominated  one  of  them,  Matthew  Davies,  to  the  offlke 
of  deacon,  together  with  George  Braddids,  a  native  of  one  of  the 
Bahama  Islands,  and  a  white  man,  so  that  we  have  now  four 
deacons,  two  black  and  *two  white  men.**    It  was  anticipated  that 


IMPKOTEHBKT  C 


THE  60CIE1T8  PROPERTY. 


^^^k  3ad  W«t  India  Bcg^cient,  in  n-hich  we  hitd  "about  thirty 
^^^cmben,"  wculd  exchange  with  the  3rd,  then  at  Sieim  l.«one.  In 
the  proflpecl  of  this  event,  it  was  proposed  that  these  membera 
should  be  ad-rised  to  fonn  themselves  into  a  church,  under  the 
pastoral  charge  of  Brother  Davie?,  "  who,"  >Ir,  IleDderMin  says, 
"though  not  remarfcable  for  ministerial  gifts,  adorns  his  Christian 
profesMon  by  great  discretion  and  judgment,  and  has,  by  his  pm- 
dtiat  and  nprigbt  conduct,  already  gained  the  confidence  of  the 
brethren  of  the  garrison."  This  event  was  not,  however,  realiied, 
and  some  companies  only  were  suhse<iuenl1y  removed  to  Jamaica, 
to  the  Bahamas  and  eleiwhere.  Some  of  the  brethren  who  were 
thus  neparated,  afterwards  obtained  a  discharge  at  those  places,  and 
returned  to  Belize,  whither  they  were  drawn  chiefly  by  their  at- 
tachment to  the  church,  and  a  «rong  afleetion  for  their  brethren. 

Mr.  Henderson,    whose    family  cooBirted    of   four  charmii^ 

children,  now  imffered  the  lora  of  one  of  them,  a  most  engaging 

and  amiable  child.     On  this  subject  he  writes  :  "We  have  been 

called  to  cndiiie  a  trial,  the  nature  aiid  severity  of  which  is  only 

known  to  parents,  and  to  such  parents  aa  set  a  due  value  upon  the 

goals  of  (heir  offspring.     Tcalcrdny  the  spirit  left  the  mortal  part 

of  our  dear  boy,  Jabei.   Sis  years  ago  he  was  tram,  when  wc  were 

both  laid  up  with  a  severe  fever:  his  departure  makeA  him  ngMii 

'  %  son   of  sorrow,'   though  he  gave  evidence  sufficient  for  the 

^L^Mrrowing  pareuti  to  hope  that  he  has  obtained  mercy  of  God  to 

^^ndieve  in  an  Ahnigbty  Saviour."    His  remwns  were  deposited  by 

^^Tfce  side  of  Mr.  IJ.  Philpot,  on  the   mission  premises  where  a 

amall  gross  mound  still  marks  the  spot,  by  the  side  of  (he  plain 

stone  monument  of  the  young  missionary." 

The  society's  lot,  which  was  well  situated,  spacious,  and  open  to 

the  sca-brecw,  lind  by  this  time  been  so  improved  Iiy  the  care  and 

the  labour  of  Mr.  HendcriKin's  own  hands,  that  it  was  confessedly 

"  the  most  inviting  of  any  in  the  town."     On  his  arrival,  by  far 

the  gmtler  part  of  it  was  under  water,  and  what  was  now  a  large 

^<)pcn  green,  planted  with  rows  ofgraeeftil  eocoa-nut  palms,  already 

^^Birice  as  tall  as  he  who  planted  them,  had  been  a  muddy  strand 

^PKovered  with  but  a  few  inches  of  salt  water.      Mr.  Henderson  had 

■'"Wdaded  the  sea  by  means  of  an  cmbankmBit  lined  with  glowing; 

eoDcb  sbella,  aucb  as  are  placed  on  many  a  mantel-pioce,  and  are 

*  ■Suplbl  MiEuine"  (n  !UI, 


nd  1 

ad  I 

J 


864  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA* 

highly  ornamental  there.  Of  these  shells,  hiethren  and  others  had 
brought  hundreds  from  the  reef  in  their  hoats,  heing  encouraged  to 
do  so.  This  space  was  now  well  filled  in  with  soil ;  and  if  any  part 
of  Belize  deserves  the  term  it  had  become  terra  Jirma.  Here  the 
school  children  were  accustomed  to  frolic  during  their  recreations. 
Many  availed  themselves  of  the  mission  wharf  as  a  convenient 
landing-place;  and  when  a  baptizing  occurred,  as  it  was  always 
administered  in  the  sea,  this  space  afibrded  standing  room  to 
crowds  of  spectators,  who  came  to  witness  what  at  first  was  a 
strange  sight,  and  one  which,  when  grown  familiar,  was  only  the 
more  impressive.  Nor  was  the  mixed  multitude  that  assembled 
there  on  such  occasions,  crowding  the  steps  and  the  verandahs  of 
the  meeting-house  and  the  missionary's  residence  above  it,  without 
its  effect,  when  viewed  from  the  water,  where  others  were  looking 
on  in  their  dorees  and  pitpans,  and  where  a  heavy  bungay  full  of  asto- 
nished Spanish  fishermen  might  sometimes  be  seen  among  the  rest. 
That  part  of  the  ground  nearest  the  street,  which  had  been 
a  fetid  swamp  covered  with  rank  grass  and  low  bushes,  was  now 
idso  filled  up,  and  transformed  by  Mr.  Henderson's  own  labour 
into  decidedly  the  best  cultivated  garden  in  British  Honduras, 
where  some  experiments  in  growing  cotton  and  mulbeny  trees, 
and  in  breeding  cochineal  had  already  been  made,  which  promised 
to  be  of  importance  to  the  well-being  of  the  Settlement  All  this 
had  not  been  accomplished  without  considerable  expense  as  well  as 
painstaking,  in  a  place  where  the  natural  difficultJes  were  so 
great,  and  labour  so  dear.  But  it  was  so  managed  by  Mr. 
Henderson  that  the  sale  of  the  surplus  produce  of  the  garden 
itself  covered  the  outlay.  The  garden  also  provided  occasional 
employment  for  William  Michael,  John  Warner,  and  others, 
while  they  were  under  training  in  the  schooL  It  remunerated  a 
poor  Creole  widowed  sister,  who  sold  the  rare  vegetables  which  Mr. 
Henderson  raised,  in  the  market ;  and  afler  some  years,  her  little 
savings  from  this  source  enabled  her  to  erect  a  small  wooden 
house,  or  rather  a  neat  little  box,  which  constitutes  the  only  place 
she  has  in  which  to  lay  her  blanched  and  woolly  head.  In  time, 
the  clear  profits  of  the  garden  paid  the  expense  of  surrounding  it  on 
two  sides  with  a  dwarf  wall  surmounted  by  a  mahogany  fence, 
economically  put  up  by  a  brother,  thus  protecting  the  garden  firom 
the  incursions  of  the  neighboors*  goato,  improving  the  appeaianoe 


PHAYER  FOB  THE  VOCNG. 


365 

I  lot,  and  coowderably  enhancing 


tconrcnienee  of  the  i 
value  of  the  whole  property,* 
jJaring  this  year  Mr.  Adams  presented  the  mission  with  on 
additional  lot  of  ground  not  far  from  the  origiuol  one,  in  pros- 
pect of  the  arrirtil  of  another  missionary  aad  his  family,  who 
might  require  a  separate  residence.  Mr.  Henderson  also  made  an 
advantageous  purchase  of  the  adjoining  lot,  which  was  m  a  ne- 
glected and  therefore  in  ATDorshy  condition.  It  had  long  been  occu- 
pied by  a  rich  Campcchano,  a  well-known  Spanish  Indian  fisherman, 
named  Salines,  who  was  at  once  a  sort  of  Nabol.  and  the  chief  sup- 

■JOiter  of  the  papists  in  Belize,  who  at  certain  seasons  came  together 
fa  small  numbers  to  worship  his  idols,  and  remained  to  indulge  in 
(scesses.  It  was  an  advantage,  even  physically,  to  purity  this 
nnclean  nest.  The  house  was  repaired,  pmnted,  and  moved  nearer  to 
the  sea  and  to  the  schools.  Part  of  the  ground  was  advantageously 
sold  to  the  public  to  form  a  street  and  a  much  needed  landing- 
place  at  Mr.  Henderson's  suggestion,  which  was  a  public  i>cncfit; 
part  was  added  to  the  garden,  and  the  rert  was  being  gradually 
tilled  up  and  improved. 
Toward  the  dose  of  1S40,  Mr.  Henderson,  feeling  that  hia 
i  the  schools  had  not  yet  been  blessed  to  the  chief  object 
r  which  they  had  been  opened,  brought  the  matter  before  the 
h  for  its  consideration ;  aod  special  prayer  for  the  conver^on 
mtt  thr  ifotmg  was  resorted  to  and  persevered  in.  Almost  as  soon  aa 
I  lliia  resolution  was  taken,  some  of  the  foreiuost  scholars,  and  othen 
m  irbo  had  already  left  the  school,  were  found  among  the  mquirrrg, 
!  shortly  ancrwards  baptized  and  added  to  the  church. 
■  Several  of  them  appeared  to  iU.  Henderson  to  give  promise  that 
Bftey  would  in  their  turn  become  teachers ;  and  he  prevailed  upon 
1  to  the  school  with  a  view  to  being  trained.  Among 
r  young  persons  thus  enlisted  was  Joseph  Kelly,  the  son  of 
ran  parents,  who  weK  members  of  the  church,  and  a  young 
nof  colour,  who  became  a  second  teacher  in  the  infant  school, 
rgaret  Smith,  who  had  profited  under  Mr.  Henderson's 
,  had  now  a  school  of  her  own  connected  with  the 
n  body.  Thus  were  the  schools  of  the  Settlement  already 
1  and  improred  in  tlieir  character  by  ?klr.  Henderson's 
catjonal  labours. 

nof  Iho  prvmiics  nill  bofOiud  m  Ilie  "UinlcauiF^Ilcnld*'  (m  May  1813.  uut 


866  THB  GOSPEL  Dl  CENTKAL  AXEBICA. 

Writing  to  the  society,  on  tbe  10th  of  Jamuury  1842»  Mr.  Hen- 
derson says,  **  The  feature  of  tb^  Belixe  mMMon^  whieh  we  think 
most  denotes  its  progress,  is  that  of  haying  four  yom^  men, 
members  of  the  chnrch,  in  a  coarse  of  tzaining  for  aativc 
teachers.  One  of  them,  at  least,  we  eipect  to  settle  at  Bakei^s 
(Behoboth  station)  next  week. 

^  We  have  had  at  the  dose  of  httt  year  some  trying  wn*k  to  do^ 
in  cutting  off  some  (^  the  members  for  loose  walking :  five  were  so 
dealt  with  at  our  last  chmxh  meeting.  I  tnist  those  that  rcmaiB 
will  be  more  healthy  lor  this  excision.*'  * 

The  Baptist  Missionary  Society^s  Report  for  1842  f  annoimees 
that  forty-four  had  been  baptized  during  the  year;  the  number 
then  in  communion  being  132. 

On  tbe  4th  of  June  Mr.  Henderson  wrote:  *We  have  this 
year  erected  a  small  house,  25  feet  by  18,  on  the  borial-^roiind  at 
Freetown,  at  an  expoue  of  75L  Jamaica  curreocj,  te  greater  part 
of  which  has  been  paid  for,  and  that  exdusiTd^  by  the  membcra 
of  the  church.  It  was  considered  as  a  kind  of  jibike  offering 
though  since  the  receipt  of  your  printed  circular  we  shall  comply 
with  that  too.  The  first  week  in  July  is  appointed  lo  receive  gifts 
from  the  chureh.**  The  Report  adds:  *"  The  result  of  tins  effort  ii 
the  sum  of  601^  whidi  the  committee  have  received  as  the  jubilee 
offering  of  their  brethren  at  Belize.*'  | 

In  this  building,  prayer-meetings  and  a  Sunday-sAool  were 
f^ened  for  the  penakmers  and  others  inhabiting  Freetown,  whose 
own  cottages  were  incoounodious,  though  they  had  long  been  used 
fSnr  the  former  of  these  objects. 

Mr.  Henderson,  now  much  improved  in  health,  and  greatly 
oiooaraged  by  his  success  in  the  acquisition  of  the  Carif  language^ 
in  which  he  was  progressing,  was  labouring  in  the  translatioiis  as 
much  as  his  other  engagements  would  permit  Thouf^  already  over- 
burdened, he  yet  felt  it  his  duty  to  undertake  to  learn  the  Mosquito 
dialect  also.  Here,  again,  he  could  have  no  aaristanoe  from  books, 
but  must  himself  reduce  the  language  to  writing  and  to  grammatical 
rule.  He  was^  however,  enabled  at  different  times,  and  for  broken 
periods,  to  procure  the  ssastance  of  some  English  and  Frendi 
peraons  who  had  long  reskled  on  the  Shore,  for  purposes  of 
traffic,  who  therefore  had  some  practical  acquaintance  with  the 
•"BqiWMigiiiim»fariatf»».Sia>         tPatB^QL         t  B^ort  te  1848^  p.  ii. 


DKSECRATIOX  OF   OOOD  FfilDAT.  367 

PVwkiUL  laDguoge,  but  liu  progrera  waa  alow  and  nnsatislactoiy  to 

sttentioa  was  more   particularly  directed   to  that 

Bople  dnring  1843,  by  the  visit  to  Belize  of  a  Mr.  Howell,  a 

f  coloured  native  of  British  North  America,  who  had  Iod^;  resided  at 

}  JBlewiictdi,  where   he    professed  to  hare  exercised    a  religiona 

I  tefiueoee.    The  object  of  hia  visit  was  to  obtain  the  release  of 

n  and  other  slaves  who  were  kept  iu  bondnge  on  the 

Miiuito  Shore,  and  at  Com  Island.     Some  tit  these  slures  were 

sely   related    to    their   pretended   owners.      He  was   wnrmly 

iroeetly  supported,  and  liberally  mpplied  with  books. 

On  his  retttro  he  wits  to  have  acted  in  connection 

h  the  society,  ttirongh  iii.  Ueodersou,  who  had  obtained  a  gift 

t  land  for  the  mission  at  Blewticlds,  from  a  merchant  at  BcUk; 

it  by  his  subsequent  coodiiGt,  ere  be  again  reached  the  Shore,  he 

'  unworthy  of  the  contidence  placed  in  him. 

I   The  progTGK  of  Brother  Witmer  in  preparing  for  useiiilnesa 

I  been  gradual  bat  very  encoumging.    He  conducted  pniyer- 

eetings  among  the  natives,  visited  the  tJiipping  in  the  harbour, 

d  the  hospital,  with  »  view  to  the  benefit  ol'  seamen,  and  he  had, 

long  olhecs,  been  called  to  suffer  for  a  good  conscience.    For 

afusing  to  serve  in  the  militia,  he  was  more  than  once  seriously 

vksted  and  fined.     At  one  period,  when  the  fines  imposed  upon 

r  alienee  had  not  yet  been  cdlcd  for,  he  was  saddcnlj 

d  under  the  following  circumstances; — The  last-day  by 

■d  AB(;lican9  called  Uood-Friday  baring  deterred  most 

f  the  children  from  attcading  the  school,  Brother  Warner  was 

Improving  the  time  by  painting  the  out^e  of  the  mission-hoiiBe, 

for  which  purpose  he  had  rigged  a  sort  of  Kaffoldiog,  and,  seated 

upon  it,  waa  industriuosly  plying  his  brush.     From  this  exalted 

n  he  could  overlook  tlie  adjacent  yard  and  mansion,  which 

W  the  residence  of  a  respected  magistrate,  sometimes  a  church- 

1,  and  also  at  that  lime  the  Colonel  conunauding  the  mihlia 

The  sight  of  our  brother  thus  engaged  in  making  dissent 

c  resjieGtable  somewhat  disturbed  the  Episcopalian  pr«judica 

S  tlie  worthy  neiglibour,  who  at  once  sent  for  the  provost- marshal 

1  t«[nired  hint  to  do  liU  ilvty  with  the  daring  nonconliinuiiit. 

Bbt   being   prepared  to  meet   a  suuicwbat  heavy  fine,  Hiother 

Warner  was  lodged  in  gaol  in  a  cell  appropriated  to  criminsja. 

Uc  was  Boou  offer  released  by  the  cKuts  of  his  brethren,  who  paid 


888  THE  QOBPEL  IN  CBNTRAL  AMERICA. 

the  nozioiis  impoet  The  unbiassed  reader  will  have  no  difficulty 
in  deciding  whether  the  dissenter  or  the  churchman  meet  hanomed 
the  day. 

Brother  Warner  now  united  himself  in  marriage  to  the  sister 
already  mentioned  as  labouring  disinterestedly  in  the  infant  school, 
and  shortly  afterwards  they  were  sent  to  occupy  a  new  station  far 
up  on  the  Belize  Riyer,  at  a  place  called  Spanish  Creek.  Wanting 
confidence  in  himself  Brother  Warner  subsequently  returned  to 
Belize,  and  resumed  his  studies  and  labours  under  Mr.  Henderson's 
direction  for  some  few  months. 

After  removing  to  Vera  Paz,  Mr.  Crowe  also  visited  Belize 
several  times.  He  was  still  suffering  from  the  effects  of  climate, 
but  had  made  some  progress  in  acquiring  the  Spanish  language. 
The  new  colony  was  fiu*  from  being  established.  The  European 
settlers  gave  him  little  encouragement,  but  the  Ladinos  and 
Indians  received  his  instructions  gladly,  and  he  had  several  of 
their  children  in  his  little  school.  Two  hundred  Spanish  Bibles, 
besides  tracts,  &c.,  had  been  circulated  among  them,  and  in  the 
neighbouring  towns,  during  that  year. 

Mr.  Henderson,  writing  in  1843,  eays: — "  My  heavenly  Father 
is  favouring  us  with  bodily  health — the  mission  work  engages  us 
fully ;  indeed,  it  has  arrived  at  that  pitch  that  I  cannot  attend  to 
all  even  within  the  Belize  station,  much  less  without.  It  has 
become  quite  requisite  to  have  liberty  to  travel,  to  visit  the  out- 
stations,  and,  as  occasion  favours,  to  extend  them ;  but  being  alone, 
I  am  fixed  at  Belize.  Shall  I  remind  you  that  this  is  not  an 
insular  but  a  continental  station,  and  therefore  capable  of  vast 
extension.  I  should  like  to  answer  a  few  questions  from  the 
committee  relative  to  this  field  of  missionary  enterprise.  I  am 
persuaded  I  should  not  be  long  afterwards  without  help.  One 
missionary  on  the  border  of  a  country  inhabited  by  millions! 
Enough  light  to  show  their  darkness,  but  totally  insufficient  to 
aid  them.  Hear,  consider,  help,  my  dear  brethren.  Let  us  dare 
difficulties ;  collect  the  scattered  and  peeled  people.  After  Jamaica, 
nothing  short  of  the  continent  ought  to  satisfy  us.* 

The  Report  for  that  year  saj^  "  The  labours  of  Mr.  Hender- 
son at  Belize  are  carried  on  under  circumstances  of  considerable 
encouragement.    The  station  has  become  a  place  of  much  im- 

•  "  Baptlft  Magume"  for  1848,  p.  S74. 


A  CALAJimr   AVEIiTED.  389 


le  in  tlie  estimation  of  the  natire  Indmn  popnktton,  many 

wbom  are  nader  ntisrioDUA'  inetructioa  in  different  parts  of  the 

tt  and  in  the  interior-    Aided  by  seven  tcachen  and  preachers, 

B  Gospel  is  preached  with  more  or  leas  regularity  at  four  im- 

ant  places,  at  each  of  which  schools  have  been  commenced  for 

Hlhe  training  of  children." 

After  the  defection  of  the  harmck  children,  the  infant  Kbool 

d  still  109  on  the  books,  and  the  Dritisb  or  jnvenile  school  87, 

le  schools  at  Rehoboth  and  at  S|HUiish  Creek  numbered  about  20 

■9  each.    In  all  239.    Tlie  Gospel  of  Matthew  was  already 

nplcied  in  the  Cnrif  language,  though  needing  reviaion.* 

f  Reports  of  the  persecutions  endured  by  the  fliithrul  brethren  in 

jnmark  huving  beeo  read  and  prayed  over  at  the  monthly  con- 

I  meeting,  the  church  was  much  caacemed  for  them,  and 

temitned  to  send  the  sum  of  sixty  dollars  (12/.  sterling),  to  help 

I  de&ay  their  fiuea,  witb  a  letter  of  fraternal  encoaragement 

d  to  Bnnhcr  Oncken  of  Hamburg. 

i  The  departure  of  mme  of  the  brethren  connected  with  the 

son,  nfakh  bad  been  expected  in  1841,  took  place  tliis  year. 

fi  few  were  removed  to  Sierra  Leone,  and  others  to  Barbadoes. 

I  memberi  were  thui  drained  o%  leaving  the  church 

E«itb  the  late  additions  at  the  same  number  us  in  lSi2,  viz.  132 

'  The  Settlement  beinj;  visited  by  an  Irish  priest,  an  effort  was 
I  made  to   establish   a  Popish   place  of  worship.     The  number  of 
J  BjMniards   and   Spanish   ladiuis  in    lleli:ie   was  even  then  eon- 
■liiderable,  and  is  now  much  greater.     Their  only  attempts  at  public 
I'irrarchip  had  hitherto  been  conlined  to  such  as  have  already  boes 
I  as  practised   in   the  house  of  the  68henn3D  Salines, 
id  whose   household   images    they   bowed   down.      Rat   though 
Spanish  priests  had  oflen  visited  them,  they  never  before  made 
so  derided  an  attempt  to  nse  the  religions  hberty  which  they  may 
enjoy  in  the  BrMsh  Settlement.    A  temporary  chapel  was  fitted 
□p  and  mass  regularly  said.     Mr.  Hcndenon  paid  hospitable  atten- 
tions to  Mr.  Lee  the  new  comer.f    At  the  same  time  both  he 

•  Htpon  for  IMS,  p.  S(i. 

*  'hra  Dt-  VHeri,  iftenmrJi  Bhliop  oT  San  Sulnidor.  jiniMd  Ihraagh  Ediie,  Mr. 
TlfWlflnon  tboDiM  it  nothii;  hnt  kuiilncai  b>  otia  him  tlu  Ha  o(  taa  Kbool-rvaq  t» 
Dim  Ibi  Homu  Cathulict  ui  i  il  mu  [wlilrlv  declined. 


370  THE  GOSPEL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

and  the  members  were  serioiisly  impresBed  with  the  calamity 
which  threatened  the  community,  and  made  it  a  sabject  of  special 
and  solemn  prayer.  The  priest  very  soon  finally  left  British 
Honduras. 

On  the  11th  of  Augost  1843,  Mr.  Henderson  wrote,  ^  A  Bo- 
man  Catholic  priest  has  a  second  time  been  sent  from  Jamaica 
to  settle  at  Belize;  but  not  meeting  with  sufficient  encourage- 
ment has  left  for  Tnudllo,  where  he  waits  for  instructions,  and 
may  yet  return  here.  Perverse  as  they  are,  Catholics,  being  un- 
supported by  the  secular  arm,  are  not  the  objects  of  dread  that 
the  Established  missionaries  would  be.  When  I  think  of  the 
hostility  of  the  Establishment  to  missionary  operations,  all  others 
are  lost  sight  of  in  this  place.  Yet  an  evil  permitted  must  result 
in  ultimate  glory  to  the  Most  B[igh. 

*'  My  schools  prosper  and  are  very  attnctiye,  so  that  I  am 
much  engaged.  The  native  teachers  in  coone  of  tuition,  namely, 
Brethren  Warner,  Woods,  and  Michael,  give  me  much  pleasure 
both  in  their  attainments  in  school,  and  their  consistent  walk  out 
of  doors.  Still,  they  rather  add  to  my  engagements  than  relieve 
me ;  but  I  hope  shortly  to  be  able  to  leave  the  school  more  in 
one  of  their  hands,  that  I  may  devote  more  time  to  the  Carif.  Aa 
to  the  Mosquito  language,  I  see  no  way  at  present  of  attaining  a 
knowledge  of  it  without  a  residence  amongst  those  who  speak  it, 
say  for  a  year  at  least.  This  I  can  only  talk  of  until  you  send 
me  a  coadjutor."  ♦ 

Writing  again  on  the  9th  of  May  1844,  Mr.  Henderson  speaks 
of  the  need  of  a  printing  press,  in  order  to  carry  out  the  work 
already  accomplished  in  translations;  and  he  leaves  it  to  the 
committee  to  send  out  a  printer  or  not,  if  they  should  deter- 
mine that  the  work  requiring  to  be  done  would  justify  them 
in  sending  such  a  person.  He  said  that  a  neat  house  to  dwell  in 
and  a  hearty  welcome  awaited  him.  An  entire  printing  establish- 
ment was  soon  after  offered  for  sale  at  Belize,  and  it  was  bought 
for  the  society.  Mr.  Henderson  also  mentions  that  John  Warner 
bad  not  long  before  been  removed  from  Spanish  Creek  and 
stationed  at  Crooked-Tree,  a  place  which  he  had  just  returned 
from  visiting,  and  which  he  describes  as  a  collection  of  about 
twenty  houses  belonging  to  mahogany   and  logwood   cutters, 

•  ''BaptiitMagui]ie''farI84S,p.0Oi. 


CROOKED  TBEE,   0«  TILLETTON, 

situated  an  aa  ialond  is  the  miilst  of  a  beautiful  lake  colled 
Northeni  Lagooa.  It  is  open  to  the  B«a-!>reeie,  and  was  cviilenily 
the  site  of  au  ancieat  Indian  settlement.  It  is  about  fifty  milea 
north-west  of  Belke,  surrounded  by  extensive  pidns  of  oik:ii  pine 
ridge,  and  is  reached  by  ascending  the  river  BvUxe,  which  has 
some  falls  rather  dangerous  to  pass,  and  then  paddling  np  a 
tributary  stream  called  Black  Creek.  At  that  time  it  was  the 
residence  of  William  Tlllett,  Esq.,  whose  family  alone  consisted 
of  ftHeca  children,  besides  numerous  depeudants.  This  gentleman, 
brother  to  the  generous  friend  of  Baker's,  was  also  an  extensive 
proprietor  of  land,  and  favoured  Che  formation  of  a  station  ou 
his  property.  As  was  commonly  the  case  in  his  excursionB,  Mr. 
Hendeiwn  was  on  this  occasion  requested  to  marry  several  couple. 
This  is  often  the  first  outward  step  towards  a  profession  of  re- 
ligion, the  parties  irequcntly  making  a  tardy  reparation  for  tlidr 
neglect  in  this  mutter,  sometimes  in  the  presence  of  tbdr  chil- 
dren. Being  requested  to  lay  down  a  plan  for  the  future  town 
and  to  give  it  a  name,  he  did  so, — calling  it  Tillettoa.  He  says — 
"  At  TiUetton  two  of  our  members  already  have  their  residence, 
two  more  have  houses  in  which  they  occasionally  reside,  and  four 
from  Spanish  Creek  about  ten  miles  off  [where  Brother  Warner's 
labours  had  already  been  blessed]  speak  of  removing  thither. 
Two  lamilies,  the  elder  branches  of  which  had  been  seriously  im- 
pressed under  the  means  of  grace  at  Baker's,  have  lately  token 
up  their  residencG  at  Tilletton.  Things,  therefore,  carry  a  pios- 
:t  of  cburch  order  being  established  amongst  them. 
"  That  I  might  know  what  progress  the  children  had  made  in 
B  school  during  the  period  it  bod  been  open,  I  released  Brother 
e  day,  and  took  charge  of  it  luyeelf.  I  found  it 
_  couraging ;  all  were  beginners,  bat  some  gave  promise  of  abUity. 
The  number  present,  about  thirty  boys  and  girls.  It  is  kept  in 
the  mectiug-house.  This  is  of  such  materials  as  the  place  affords, 
and,  trith  the  ei.ceplJon  of  windows  and  jalousies  [a  large  Vene- 
tian blind  put  in  the  place  of  a  window],  was  erected  at  the 
expense  of  the  people.  It  ia  capable  of  holding  about  100  persons, 
and  was  well  filled  during  my  stay.  It  b  not  expected  to  be 
large  enough  long.  The  spirit  of  hearing  ia  good,  and  being  opui 
^^^BKttlers  the  place  ia  expected  to  increase."* 

^^V  *  "GsplitlUigumE'TaT  lStl,]i.l.U. 


»TI 
^^^coui 


873  'thb  gospel  in  ckrtral  ambrica. 

Behoboth,  tlie  station  at  Bakei't,  which  had  beoi  irr^rnlarij  tnp- 
pliedydiortly  after  this  leoeired  an  additional  impulse  by  the  appoint- 
Bwnt  of  Brother  Joseph  Kelly  to  labour  there.  This  interesting 
yoong  man  had  given  much  satisfiustion  while  under  training; 
at  the  same  time  that  others  who  had  started  with  him  drew  hack. 
Though  still  very  young,  he  was  able  to  teadi  a  little  school  and 
to  conduct  worship,  but  was  not  then  required  to  administer  the 
ovdinanees.  His  labours  were  acceptable,  and  he  endeared  himself 
to  the  people. 

One  of  the  matters  to  which  Mr.  Henderson  had  all  along 
given  much  attention,  and  to  which  he  ever  attached  great 
importance,  was  the  circulation  of  the  written  Word  of  God.  On 
his  arriral  in  Beliae,  he  had  inquired  what  Scriptures  there  were 
in  the  Settlementi  and  learned  that  there  had  been  a  small  stock ; 
but  that  the  whole  of  it  had  been  ^ven  to  the  Wesleyan  mis- 
siooary.  Hoping  that  this  might  suffice  for  bodi,  he  applied  to 
that  gentleman,  when  he  discovered  that  this  whole  stock  amounted 
to  eleven  copies,  which  were  all  needed.  He  at  once  wrote  to  the 
^itish  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  and  received  200  copies. 
Shortly  afterwards  Mr.  Henderson  discovered  in  a  merchant's 
store  a  case  of  Spanish  Scriptures,  open  and  exposed  to  the  de- 
structive attacks  of  cockroaches,  &c.  On  searching  &rther,  a 
second,  a  third,  and  several  more,  were  successively  found,  amount^ 
ing  altogether  to  seven  cases,  the  exiBtence  of  which  had  been 
utterly  unknown  to  Baptist,  Wesleyan,  or  Episcopal  unmsters. 
This  was  esteemed  a  priae.  The  warehouse  rent,  amounting  to 
SL  stg.,  was  cheerfully  paid,  and  eSoTts  were  at  once  put  Ibith  to 
circulate  them.  A  small  number  of  copies  was  put  into  the  hands 
of  travellers  and  visitors.  Some  doaens  were  deposited  at  the 
stores  most  visited  by  Spaniards,  and  were  often  introdneed  into 
tbdr  cases  of  merchandise,  even  when  unsolicited  by  thonselves,  by 
whidi  means  they  reached  Truxillo,  Esquipulas,  Zacapa,  Guate* 
mala.  Sisal,  Merida,  and  other  surrounding  piaoes.  Spanish  tracts 
and  religions  publications  were  soon  after  added  in  great  nnmben, 
and  from  this  good  seed  a  harvest  of  the  best  fruits  was  con- 
fidently expected.* 

With  a  view  to  promote  these  objects,  Mr.  Henderson  enlisted 
the  co-operation  of  his  feUow-missionaries,  and  some  of  the  motho- 
•  Hr.  HoaflaoB'f  speech,  Loadim,  Oetober  7»  1817. 


^.    betwi 


THE  MOKDDRAa  ACXILIAHT  BIBLE  BOCIETr.  373 

and  mcich&Bts  of  Belize,  in  the  formation  uf  an  Auxiliftrf 
Society.  A  Branch  Bible  Society  had  liiul  an  epLemcrol 
existence,  and  was  at  least  talked  of  during  the  residcoCG  of  K-  J- 
Andrew,  Esq. ;  but  neither  records  oar  cvideocea  of  its  luefulnesa 
aic  knoini  to  the  author,  though  it  ma;  be  that  the  cases  above 
Kterrcd  to  wwe  a  vestige  of  its  exiatence.  la  1836  a  commit- 
IM  WBi  formed,  with  the  name  of  "  The  Honduras  Auxiliaij 
Kble  Societj."  It  received  a  [MLtrun  in  the  Superinteadent,  a 
piesidcnt  in  W.  H.  Coffin,  Esq.  (a  uutgiitrate),  and  other  honuurs. 
Associations  among  the  young  were  organized  and  eucuuraijed, 
and  the  Settlemuut  was  canvassed  with  a  view  to  supply  every 
bouse  with  a  Bible,  by  which  that  object  was  partially  attained; 
and  the  donations  of  some  whose  zeal  far  the  Bible  niis  more 
than  questionable  were  also  elicited.  Bui  soon  Mr.  Hcndeison 
feuud  thai  his  labours  \a  Bible  circulation  were  tranuuelled  rather 
than  aided  by  this  organization,  out  of  which  there  resulted 
contention.  Jealousy,  and  ili-fceling.  The  commitlec  meetings 
were  especially  txuitful  in  uiortitications  tu  himself.  The  majority 
of  the  mcmbersof  the  conunitlee  were  Churchmen,  Weslcyans, 
and  persons  making  no  decided  rehjpous  profeaion.  He  soon 
found  himself  reduced  (o  leave  the  entire  management  of  its 
affairs  to  them,  contenting  himself  with  doing  an  overwhelming 
proportion  of  the  sales  and  distributions,  as  the  printed  Reports 
abundantly  testify.  But  even  thus  he  was  nut  permitted  to 
proceed  unmolested.  His  bouse  was  the  depot  for  the  socrvd 
Scriptures ;  but  these  hooks  were  at  one  time  wrested  from  him 
by  bis  eoUtaguei,  and  hy  means  of  a  threat  from  the  Superinten- 
dent, were  oil  but  violently  token  out  of  bis  hands,  and  carted 
from  the  Baptist  mL'saiim-bouw  to  the  rectory. 

ilr.  ilendeison  could  not  attbrd  to  turn  aside  from  his  great  work 
to  contend  about  trides.  lie,  therefore,  soon  procured  other  supplies 
of  Scriptures  from  the  parent  society,  and  from  kindred  institutions 
io  the  United  States.  For  more  than  twelve  years,  ou  an  average 
between  500  and  GOO  copies  of  the  Spanish  Scriptures  have  an- 
lly  passed  through  his  hands,  by  far  the  greater  proportion  of 

ich  have  been  paid  for  at  their  full  value.  Ultimately,  the 
stock  of  Bibles  in  the  hands  of  tlie  languishing  auxiliary  wag 
restored  to  the  custody  of  Mr.  Uendeivon,  and  rapidly  melted 


374  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

awaj  under  his  management.    Some  experience  at  least  was  gained 
by  tiiese  events. 

A  considerable  number  of  Spanish  Scriptures  were  distributed 
in  the  interior  through  the  agency  of  Mr.  Crowe,  who,  on  the 
ftilure  of  the  colony  at  Abbottsrille,  had  travelled  for  this  express 
object  in  the  state  of  Guatemala,  by  direction  from  the  auxiliary  at 
Belize.  Being  opposed  through  the  influence  of  the  priests,  he 
had  repaired  to  the  capital,  and  applied  to  the  supreme  authori- 
ties of  the  Republic  to  remove  the  obstructions  that  had  been 
placed  in  his  way.  Though  led  to  hope  for  success,  his  claims 
were  ultimately  met  by  the  publication  of  an  ecclesiastical  edict 
against  the  reading  of  the  Bible,  as  the  reader  will  find  more  fully 
related  further  on.  The  report  of  this  disappointment,  which 
seemed  to  close  that  field  to  Bible  circulation,  induced  the  com- 
mittee of  the  auxiliaiy  to  suspend  their  agency  there. 

The  arrival  at  Belize  of  Mr.  James  Thomson,  travelling  agent 
of  the  parent  society,  which  took  place  in  June  1844,  had  for  its 
object  the  revival  of  the  auxiliary,  and  the  extension  of  its 
labours.  A  public  meeting  was  held  on  the  14th  of  that  month, 
at  the  Baptist  Meeting-house,  when  Mr.  Thomson  gave  an  address, 
and  more  than  20/.  was  collected.  As  much  more  was  afterwards 
given  by  the  various  merchants  upon  whom  the  agent  called,  in 
company  with  Mr.  Henderson.  By  the  Report  for  1844,  during 
which  the  circulation  exceeded  that  of  any  previous  year,  1,177 
copies  were  disposed  of,  612  were  Spanish,  557  English,  and  eight 
were  Latin,  French,  Catalonian,  Swedish,  and  Portuguese.  The 
amount  received  for  sales  by  Mr.  Henderson  was  more  than  seven 
times  all  the  rest  of  the  sales  put  together.*  The  sum  total  raised 
was  upwards  of  lOOL  sterling. 

Mr.  Thomson,^  who  had  intended  to  proceed  to  Guatemala, 

•  «  Sales  by  Mr.  Staatoa £4  18  4 

„    by  Mr.  Weddall   1  15  0 

„    hj  Mr.  AixDttnmg  S  13  9 

„    by  Mr.  A.  Hendexicm 7S  11  ^"—Bighik  R^qri. 

t  Tbisgentlanm  bad  tqioiinied  in  the  city  of  Mexico  from  1837  to  1880,  and  bad  istzo- 

dnced  and  paiiiaDy  ctrcolated  8,000  Scriptnret  there,  till  an  edict  was  published  agakist 

tbem,  and  he  was  induced  to  leare.    In  1S43  be  bad  returned  to  Mexioo^  and  fonnd  that 

during  bis  absence  three  editioos  of  the  Bible  bad  been  printed  by  the  bodcseUers  thcR  oa 

•aeeonntorthadeiBaDdfiirit.    A  nar  Spanish  translation,  with  notes  (Bomish,  of  eooae). 


A  MISSrOXAKV  PRINTEIl  SENT   OUT.  375 

tttving  wen  the  edict  and  the  reports  sent  thence,  deternuncd  to 
L  directly  to  Europe,  but  recommended  the  auxiliary  to 
■  tontinue  to  avail  themselves  of  Mr.  Crowe's  agency  for  another 
■"year.  A  quantity  of  scriptures,  chiefly  Spanish,  left  by  Mr. 
1  at  Belize,  swelled  the  stock  at  the  depot  to  more  thaa 
■AOOO  copies. 

Again,  this  year  fifteen  members  are  reported  na  drafted  off  in 
■MRnpaaies  from  the  garrison  at  Belize,  to  the  coast  of  Africa  and 
0  the  West  Indies.  Eleven  were  cut  off  hy  the  discipline  of  the 
ifaurcb.  Eighteen  were  received,  of  whom  eight  only  were 
baptized  daring  the  year.  The  total  number  of  memhers  was 
'ercfore  131.  The  children  in  four  day  scliools  amounted  to 
B87,  being  110  more  scholars  than  were  repurtcd  the  previous 

itj  the  close  of  1S44,  the  committee  being  once  more  prepared 
s  respond  to  Mr.  Henderson's  frequent  appeals  •  for  more  latxiur- 
I,  made  the  following  announcement  :t — "  Mr-  Henderson,  our 
■laborious  missionary  at  this  station  (Belize,  Honduras),  having 
'ished  for  a  coUeagne,  and  especially  one  practically  ac- 
ainled  ivith  the  art  of  printing,  is  about,  we  hope,  to  see  the 
it  of  his  desire.  Mr.  J.  P-  Buttficld  was  set  apart  for  thii 
mrpose  on  the  23rd  of  September,  at  the  Baptist  chnpel,  Box- 
,  Herts.  The  serrices  were  conducted  by  Air.  Fraser,  of 
mbeth,  Mr.  Gould,  of  Dnnslable,  and  Mr.  Gutch,  who  had 
een  Mr.  Buttfleld's  pastor,  Mis.  Bnttfield  is  grand- daughter  of 
r.  Carey,  being  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Jonathan  Carey,  late  of 
They  sailed  on  the  13th  of  Kovember,  in  the  Echo, 
'hpt.  De  Quettville." 
In  a  letter  dated  the  20th  of  Janiuiry,  Mr.  Buttfield  nnnoimces 
I  arrival  at  Honduras,  in  the  following  terms;  —  "After  a 
sant  jiasBOge  of  nearly  seven  weoks  from  the  Downs,  my  dear 
!.  Buttfield,  with  myself,  landed  safely  at  Belize,  on  Tuesday, 
:.  31, 1S44. 

■)  hmi  pnputd  tnit  pnliliibed,  ax  Ihc  u]H!iik  of  100,000  ddl1iin,b3>  Uib  e 
hh*»IIii<lntBib1epniiUdin9innii1iAiiitrieL  Msn Ihiiii id (r|aa] ini 
||lli*stlianroTcnioiii.    Ur.  Thamcm  Lid  attcniplid  lo  irprint  thdi 

"m  TeMuienl.  nlliwt  (If  nnIa.  to  iiUpt  II  fn  MliofiLi  snd  populu  mdtni 


979  THE  G06PBL  IN  CSNTSAL  AMSBICi 


^  On  arriTiiig  at  Beliie  we  were  weloomed  by  Mr.  HendefsoB, 
who  came  down  to  the  landing-plaoe  to  meet  ns.  On  entering  the 
mnrion-hoose  we  were  greeted  by  Mn.  Hendenon  and  serezml  of 
the  natives.  The  next  day  aeveral  of  the  native  memben  wd- 
eomed  ns  in  a  very  wann  manner.** 

Mr.  Buttfield*8  arrival,  which  like  the  former  promisea  of  help 
had  been  anticipated  with  joyful  hope,  like  them  proved  a  bitter 
disappointment,  and  the  introdaction  of  a  new  phase  in  the  history 
of  the  misBion.*      He  was  a  young  man  of  little  education  and  of 
less  experience ;  and  whether  or  not  bis  mind  had  been  biassed 
before  leaving  England,  it  soon  became  evident  that  he  was  not 
dkposed  to  work  harmonioudy  with  Mr.  Henderson,  i(  indeed,  he 
were  much  disposed  to  work  at  all ;  and  that  he  was  in  no 
respect  the  person  required  to  forward  the  interests  of  the  statioo  «t 
Beliae.    Three  weeks  after  their  arrival,  and  whUe  good  harmony 
yet  prevailed,  neither  of  them  having  referred  to  the  aobject,  Mr. 
Henderson  ventured  to  suggest  that  they  should  nnite  themselvca 
to  the  church ;  when  it  was  distinctly  stated  by  Mr.  Bnttfield  that 
he  could  not  conscientiously  become  a  member  of  a  church  holding 
strict  commnnicm,  but  that  it  was  his  intention  to  continne  his 
connection  with  the  church  at  Bozmoor,  which  he  had  unfor- 
tunately left  in  England.    He  was  therefore  willing  to  be  only  an 
occasional  communicant  with  the  mission  church.      Mr.  Hen- 
derson utterly  dis^proved  of  this  determination,  and  thought  that 
if  application  for  communion  without  membership  were  made  to 
the  church,  it  would  probably  be  met  by  the  objection,  that,  aa 
Mr.  Buttfield  had  eome  to  reside  permanently  among  them  in  the 
character  of  a  missionary,  they  would  expect  him  to  become  one  of 
themselves.    The  distinction  between  communion  and  member- 
diip  IB  one  which  the  church  do  not  recognise,  as  th^  do  not  find 


*  Tbe  iingTeemeBts  wUch  wwa  originated  with  Mr.  Battftdd,  as  wJU  be  Men, 
further  dereloped  by  additional  agency,  and  by  subsequent  events,  till  they  became  of 
tufflcient  importance  to  draw  from  the  society  a  pamphlet  entitled  *' Belize,  ordered  by 
the  CoMsittee  of  the  Baptist  Missiaury  Society,  at  their  meeting,  held  June  U,  1818^ 
«obepnntedfiirpiiniteciiaiktaon,3^MoQcgate-etreet,184a.''  To  which  a  reply  anwaM< 
entitled  "Hondnras:  a  Beoovd  of  Eacts^  and  reply  to  a  pamphlet  entitled  'Bdixe^'  ke. 
Itc,  by  William  Nortoa,  of  Egham,  Surrey,  and  Frederick  Crowe,  of  Guateasala.— fisr 
yiivifte  cireoktioii.  LondoB:  Printed  and  sold  by  Stewart  and  Muimy.  Old  Bailey,  IMS.** 
Other  partiealars  were  published  ikom  time  to  time  in  the  **  PrimitiTe  Ghveh  Megaaiai^'* 
a  ad  te  the  «  MiiiioBiiy  HcnVi"  in  wfakh  ere  maniy  detaiU  not  entered  into  hoe. 


m  in  the  New  Testament.  Tbe  Captains  employed  by  the  hocue  of 
IS  and  Co.,  when  metnbera  of  Baptist  churches  in  Eugland, 
e  regarded  aa  members  while  sojourtiing  ut  Belize,  and  have 
a  accustomed  to  take  loroe  part  in  the  Lusiness  uf  the  cbiircb, 

I  well  aa  to  ait  at  the  Lord'a  table  \vhea  occasionaUy  iircscnt. 
After  tfaii  paioM  difference,  other  diaagreemeots  IbUowed  aa  to 
the  part  which  Mr.  Bnttficld  should  take  in  tlie  business  of  the 
station.  Mr.  Heudcnon  thought  it  desirable  that  he  should  take 
charge  of  the  school  fbi  a,  time,  and  thus  release  him  whilst  the 
tianslatkins  recdred  a  last  revision  before  going  to  press.  To  tliia 
Mr.  Butttield  objected,  on  the  grouada  that  he  had  come  out  10 
print,  and  not  to  keep  school.  AVhcn  he  at  len^h  consented,  Mr. 
Heudenoa  diseorercd  that  be  was  utterly  unqualiSed  fur  the 
task;  some  of  tbe  boys  being  tar  before  him  in  writing,  arithmetic, 
and  other  branches ;  and  that  he  both  wanted  appUcatiou,  and  a 
disiposition  to  qualify  hiniself  as  others  had  done,  under  2klr. 
Henderson'*  direction.  The  latter  he  positively  refused,  though 
admitting  his  ignorance,  because  he  would  not  owe  his  improve- 
ment to  Mr.  Uendeiwm.  Having  had  the  boys'  schoob  under 
his  care  for  two  or  three  mouths,  the  atleudance  of  the  moit 
advanced  scbolaii  was  rapidly  tailing  off,  and  Mr.  Henderson  felt 
bound  to  Tcsuiue  it,  to  prevent  further  decrease. 

Ad  effort  was  then  made  by  Mr.  Henderson  to  procure  for  Mr. 
fiuttfield  occupation  more  congenial  to  his  tastes.  A  contract  to 
print  a  local  uewspaper  offering  at  the  time,  Mr.  Henderson 
thought  that  the  proceeds  would  alleviate  the  pecuniary  burden  on 
the  society  occasioned  by  the  accession  of  the  new  mimiiin  family, 
and  that  time  might  be  gained  foi  a  better  understanding  to  take 
place.  Mr.  Buttfield,  still  dissatisfied,  required  a  Journeymaii  to 
do  the  work,  as  be  had  come  to  direct  the  printing  establishment. 
In  this  also  he  was  induJged ;  but  Mr.  Uendcreon  felt  it  his  duljr 
to  acquaint  the  committee  with  the  opinion  he  bad  fonued  of  Mr. 
Buttfield,  six  months  after  his  arrival,  stating  that  be  considered 
him  unqualified  for  the  work,  and  essentially  delieient  in  mia- 
sionarj  spirit.  Before  sending  this  letter,  be  was  careful  to  furnish 
Mr.  Buttfield  with  a  copy  of  it. 

Krc  this,  it  hod  become  manifest  that  harmonious  c 
was  impracticable.  Now,  the  dilfercncca  aasumed  a  sti 
dded  form.    Mr.  Buttfield,  withuat  conunllnicating  them  to  Mr. 


878  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

HendenoiifSent  long  and  bitter  complaints,  detractions,  and  aUuiden 
concerning  him  to  the  committee,  in  which,  among  other  things^ 
he  allnded  to  "  his  exehmve  syHem^^  unquestionably  with  re£sr- 
ence  to  communion.  He  also  busied  himself  with  tale-bearing 
among  the  members,  by  many  of  whom  his  complaints  were 
firankly  taken  up  and  sifted  in  the  presence  of  both  parties,  which 
always  resulted  in  his  being  seriously  reasoned  with  and  kindly 
rebuked.  A  few,  ho¥Feyer,  who  were  already  disaffected  finom  other 
causes,  among  whom  were  some  cast  off  members,  gave  him  secret 
encouragement.  Mr.  Henderson  having  failed  in  several  efforts  to 
induce  Mr.  Buttfield  to  put  aside  all  their  differences,  and  to 
fidl  to  work  with  a  good  will,  feeling  that  his  good  report  was 
assailed,  requested  the  church  to  take  up  the  matter,  and  to  satisfy 
every  member  of  the  merits  of  the  case :  no  one  would  move  in 
it,  because  all  were  satisfied  that  Mr.  Henderson  was  not  to  blame ; 
bat  after  having  waited  six  months  without  an  application  for 
membership  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.,  the  church,  notwithstanding 
they  felt  that  they  had  no  right  to  interfere  with  Mr.  Butt- 
field,  as  he  had  reftised  to  become  a  member,  kindly  appointed 
brethren  to  wait  upon  him  (one  of  whom  was  Mr.  Bruldick) 
and  sisters  to  wait  upon  Mrs.  Buttfield,  as  the  messengers 
of  the  church,  to  inquire  what  were  their  reasons  for  refraining 
from  uniting  themselves  in  fellowship  with  the  church.  Mr. 
Buttfield's  reasons,  as  reported  by  the  messengers,  and  recorded  in 
the  church  book,  were,  That  before  quitting  England  he  bad  been 
cautioned  not  to  take  such  a  step  hastily ;  also,  that  on  acooont  of 
the  cruel  and  abusive  treatment  which  they  had  received  at 
Mr.  Henderson's  hands,  they  could  not  join  the  church  until 
they  had  received  an  answer  to  letters  sent  to  England^  and 
especially  to  the  church  at  Boxmoor;  or  till  another  wSamaoMrj^ 
of  whose  coming  there  had  been  notice,  should  arrive  at 
Belize. 

''As  to  cruelty  and  abuse,  the  only  way  in  which  the  pastor 
confessed  himself  guilty  was  in  reproaching  Mr.  Buttfield  with 
selecting  the  interests  of  the  society,  by  abstaining  from  the 
proper  labour  of  the  station,  in  whidi  ^fr.  Buttfield  had  at  last 
consented  to  take  a  more  liberal  share  hencefoiward.''  * 

Here  the  chnreh  felt  compelled  to  leave  the  matter,  with  the 

•  ChncMMMk,  86th  JnlylStf. 


conviction  that  Mr.  Battfield  ivag  acting  wrong;  but  as  theij  bad 
no  conlrol,  that  he  must  be  dealt  with  from  home. 

So  far  from  fulfilling  ttie  eogngcment  to  labour  more  devotedly, 
Air.  ButtSeld  continued  discontented.  Mr.  Henderson's  doctrinid 
Tiem  did  not  meet  bis  approbation ;  the  doctrine  of  predestiimtion 
being  made  too  promiseut  to  suit  bia  taste.  The  small  houae 
allotted  to  him  on  the  mission  premises  was  not  found  good 
enough,  and  he  removed  with  the  printing- priSB,  &c,  &c.  to  a 
large  house  at  some  distance.  On  the  plea  that  Mr.  Henderson's 
prcachbg  was  pergonal,  he  and  Mrs.  Buttlield  absented  themselves 
for  several  weeks  from  the  public  worship  of  the  church,  prefer- 
ring to  attend  occasionally  at  the  Wesleyin  chapel.  Matters  hod 
conic  to  a  painful  eitrcme ;  and  the  eipccted  arrival  of  another 
muisionary,  or,  failing  that,  the  decision  of  the  committee  at  home, 
was  looked  forward  to  by  all  parties. 

It  was  Bt  the  recommendation  of  his  brother  missionaries  in 
Jamaica,  that  the  committee  in  England  mode  arrangcmi'nts  to 
send  Mr.  Kingdon  to  Belize.  He  had  laboured  tliirteen  years  in 
that  island,  and  preparatory  to  his  removal  to  Itoudunis  he  visited 
England  with  Mrs,  Kingdon  for  some  months. 

Their  deparinrc  is  thns  announced:  "Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kingdon, 
Inte  of  Jamaica,  sailed  for  Honduras  in  the  Mnhcaij,  from  South- 
ampton, on  the  18tb  of  Aupust.  Mr.  Kingdon  will  be  united  with 
Mr.  Henderson  at  Belize,  in  the  work  which  openings  for  use- 
fulness at  that  station  demand."  On  the  t  Sth  of  September,  Mr. 
Kingdon  wrote  from  Jamaica,  announcing  his  safe  arrivnl  there; 
and  he  finally  ivached  Belize  with  Mrs.  Kingdon  and  a  niece,  in 
the  month  of  November.  They  took  up  thrir  abode  for  the 
first  fortnight  in  Mr,  IlcudcrBon's  family,  and  were  most  cordially 
received  by  all.' 

The  Report  for  1 S45,  published  in  June,  speaks  of  Mr.  Kingdon 
BS  if  he  were  already  on  the  spot,  though  he  did  not  arrive  at 
Belize  till  near  the  cild  of  that  year.  It  states  that  Mr.  Henderson 
had  suffered  great  disappointment  in  the  fact  that  several  of  the 
native  teachere  under  training  had  proved  themselves  unworthy 
of  his  confidence,  or  unsuitable  for  their  work.  Two  of  them,  how- 
ever, continued  to  labour,  aod  proved  faithful  to  their  trust.  These 
were  John  Wsmei  and  William  Mchael.     Mr.  Crowe  is  tlao 

*  S«  "  Uiuianu;  Hinld"  f«  ScpleBil>cr  l&lt. 


380  THK  Q06PEL  IN  CKNTRAL  AMKBICA* 

mentioned  as  engaged  at  Guatemala  in  teaching  and  preachmi^ 
with  encouraging  socoesB. 

Five  penoos  only  had  been  added  to  the  churdi  that  jear. 
From  yarious  causes,  fourteen  had  been  removed,  leaying  the 
total  number  reduced  to  122.  The  committee  say, — ^  In  conneciMm 
with  this  station,  recoit  communications  from  the  South  American 
continent,  forwarded  through  a  friend  of  our  miasbn,  give  the 
committee  reason  to  beliere  that  the  proridence  of  God  is  pre- 
paring the  way  for  more  general  missionary  operations  in  that 
country ;  and  the  committee  trust  that  the  rec^it  establishment  of 
a  mission-press  at  Belize,  and  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Bnttfield  and  Mr. 
Kingdon,  will  enable  our  brethren  to  enter  upon  any  field  which 
may  be  made  aocessiUe  to  them. 

^In  the  important  work  of  biblical  translation,  Mr.  Henderson 
continues  to  make  some  progress,  though  much  interrupted  by  bis 
Tarious  other  labours.  He  is  proceeding  with  the  Gospel  in  Carif 
and  Mosquito,  and  it  is  hoped  will  be  enabled,  by  the  arrival  of 
Mr.  Bnttfield  and  Mr.  Kingdcm,  to  make  more  rapid  progress,  and, 
ere  long,  to  give  the  word  of  life  in  their  own  tongue  to  these 
Indian  tribes."  *  A  grammar  of  the  Mosquito  language  had  by  this 
time  been  prepared  by  Mr.  Henderson,  and  ¥ras  sent  to  the  United 
States  to  be  printed. 

Af\er  Mr.  Henderson's  visit  to  Tilletton,  Broths  Warner  con- 
tinued his  efibrts  there  in  the  midst  of  much  discouragement  and 
mental  and  bodily  suffering.  Having  become  a  marked  man  in 
the  militia,  his  removal  from  Belize  did  not  save  him  from 
vexations.  He  was  fined  every  year  for  absence,  and  exposed  to 
be  hunted  by  the  Provost-Marshal,  and  to  be  taken  to  jail  when- 
ever he  came  to  see  hb  brethren  at  Belize.  On  the  spot  where  he 
laboured  he  was  at  first  heard  gladly ;  but  the  people  soon  took 
offence  at  his  faithful  rebukes;  and  some  who  had  fitvoored  his 
coming  amongst  them  now  strove  hard  to  drive  him  from  the 
pUoe. 

Besides  suffering  from  ill  health,  our  brother  and  hb  rising  family 
had  to  contend  w^  pover^.  His  allowance  from  the  society  was 
inadequate  to  their  wants,  and  his  time  being  taken  up  in  the 
work  of  the  misnon,  added  to  his  bodily  weakness,  he  could  not 
a  plantation  of  his  own.    While  the  people  were  ikiemdly 

•B0forttel81i»9LtfL 


TRIALS  OP  MB.    WAllXER   AT  TILLETTON. 

( iiMonvetiience  was  little  felt,  as  they  made  him  n  Kbaier  of  the 
MndaiMM  with  which  the  soil  tewnrded  their  oirn  iBbour.  But 
,  erett  the  pittance  which  had  been  given  IiiiQ  for  teaching 
i  ibdr  children  was  aficn  withheld ;  and  though  boih  himself  and 
[  tk  wife  were  indnstrious  and  frugal,  their  wants  were  but  scantily 
«oi)i>li«l.  Mr.  W.  miett  permitted  Brother  Warner  to  cot 
plantains  for  hit  own  use  in  n  remote  plantation ;  but  in  order  to 
get  at  this  csoellent  substitute  for  broad,  he  had  to  traverse  the 
lake  and  an  extcnsire  Hwamp  for  a  considerable  distunce,  ivading 
through  the  water,  his  clothes  and  skin  lacerated  with  culling 
f^ass,  his  face  and  haais  stung  by  mosquitoes,  &c.,  and  in  ilmiger 
of  putting  his  foot  upon  the  scaly  back  of  an  alligator  at  every  step 
he  took.  He  had  of  course  to  return  by  the  same  way  with  a 
load  of  plantains  npon  hii  back.  Iliese  lalmrious  expeditions  were 
generally  followed  by  a  fit  of  fever  and  ague,  which  interfered 
with  hii  more  important  labours  in  teaching ;  yet  the  converted 
!3J1or  was  enabled  to  hold  on  his  way. 

On  one  occasion,  whQc  retoming  across  the  morasn  with  a 
bunrb  of  plantains  upon  his  back,  he  perceived  the  horizon 
lighted  up  in  the  direction  of  Tillctton,  and  suspecting  a  con- 
flagmlion,  he  throw  down  his  burden  and  ran  home.  It  was  his 
own  hoose  that  was  constiming;  the  rafters  and  the  thatched  roof 
were  one  pyramid  of  flame,  but  his  fcmily  were  safe.  Hecame  jast 
in  time  to  force  open  the  back  door,  and  was  enabled  to  draw 
out  his  old  railor's  chest,  npon  which  lay  his  Bibie  and  "  Cruden's 
ConeordiBoe,*'  just  as  he  had  laid  them  hy  afler  using  tbecn  that 
morning.  This  was  all  he  saved.  The  clothing  of  the  family, 
their  entire  stock  of  provisions,  their  little  treosnres  and  their 
toys,  all  were  consumed.  Row  it  happened  could  not  be  dis- 
covered. It  may  have  been  the  work  of  an  enemy ;  but  however 
that  might  be,  God  was  praised  for  their  deliverance  fkim  danger. 
The  family  were  lodged  in  the  little  meeting-house,  which  was 
also  the  school-room ;  and  Brother  Warner  getting  a  passage  down 
the  river,  started  for  Beliie  with  the  report,  and  in  the  hope  of 
olrtaining  supplier.  When  modestly  telling  bis  tale  to  the  brethren 
there,  he  nianifesteil  so  mnch  genuine  satisfaction  at  the  circnni- 
Gtancc  of  hiideur  old  Bible  and  his  useful  Concordance  being  pre- 
■ervod  to  him,  that  it  aeemed  tar  (o  overbalance  all  ibc  grief  which 
other  loawa  might  have  occasioned,  and  one  might  have  supposed 


382  THE  GOBPBL   IN  CENTRAL  AMBBICA. 

that  a  blessing  rather  than  a  calamity  had  befallen  him.*  During 
this  visit,  and  while  hastily  getting  together  some  provisions,  with 
the  assistance  of  Mr.  Henderson  and  the  brethren,  that  he  might 
letnm  to  relieve  his  family  without  delay,  the  Provost-Marshal 
heard  of  his  arrival,  and  committed  him  once  more  to  the  common 
jail.  Here  he  was  quickly  visited  by  some  of  the  brethren,  who 
found  him  seated  upon  the  floor  of  a  narrow  cell,  nothing  daunted ; 
but  confident  in  the  overruling  providence  of  God,  and  in  the 
tender  mercies  of  Wm  who  has  declared  that  "o^  things  shall 
work  together  for  good  to  those  who  love  and  fear  Him.*^ 

Again  the  brethren  released  the  prisoner  of  peace  and  the  valiant 
soldier  of  the  cross  from  confinement,  by  paying  the  fines  imposed. 
He  immediately  returned,  full  of  gratitude,  to  his  station,  carrying 
with  him  a  better  library  than  he  had  ever  possessed  before.  Another 
place  of  worship,  larger  and  better  than  the  fiist,  was  erected  at 
Tilletton,  and  the  former  one  became  the  teacher*8  dweUing-house. 
The  expense  of  this  second  erection  was  again  borne  by  the  friends 
of  the  object  and  the  church  at  Belize,  with  the  exception  of  a 
balance  of  39/.  which  was  supplied  out  of  the  funds  of  the  Society. 
Matters  at  Tilletton  seemed  to  be  improved  by  this  trial;  but 
Brother  Warner,  who  abated  nothing  of  his  faithfulness,  had  much 
to  contend  with  in  the  enmity  of  the  natural  heart  and  the  outward 
opposition  of  sinners  to  the  word  of  truth  and  the  life  of  holiness. 
But  his  God  preserved,  sustained,  and  made  use  of  him,  and  at  the 
worst  times  he  was  not  left  without  encouragement  and  hope. 

Mr.  Henderson  continued  to  visit  at  intervals,  though  less  fre- 
quently, by  reason  of  his  many  engagements,  the  banks  of  the  Old 
Biver.  Marriages  and  some  baptisms  generally  occurred  during 
these  journeys,  but  additions  to  the  church  at  Belize  had  grown  less 
frequent,  and  the  missionary's  mind  was  necessarily  diverted,  and  his 
heart  wounded,  by  the  sad  contentions  which  had  followed  on  Mr. 
Buttfield*s  arrival,  instead  of  the  relief  and  additional  vigour  which 
he  had  anticipated.  The  opposition  of  the  avowed  enemies  of  the 
Grospel,  which  had  never  entirely  slumbered,  was  now  revived 
with  increased  vigour.  But  that  was  to  be  expected  as  the  result 
of  Christian  faithfulness,  and  it  was  much  easier  to  bear. 

*  Had  he  lost  hia  ''Conoordance,"  he  might  hare  remained  without  one  for  naay 
montha,  or  even  yean ;  for,  besides  the  expenae,  the  difficulty  of  proeonng  one  fkoaa 
Snxope  or  the  United  States  was  ctmtiderable,  and  the  pirofpeet  remote. 


IMPRISONMENT  OF  MR.   HENDERSON. 


EChriitopher  Lipscomb,  the  firet  bishop  of  JamaicB,  under  whose 
^iastical  control  the  civil  power  ha^  placed  tbe  cure  ol'  souU  in 
Britjeh  Honduras,  non*,  for  tbe  Kconil  time,  came  to  the  Settlement, 
in  a  man-of-war,  and  a  great  number  of  pereons,  of  all  clasps  and 
characteTE,  were  by  him  solemnly  coolinned  (alas,  how  many  of 
thcni  iR  their  n'nx  /).  Hi.  Henderaon  felt  called  upon  to  expose  the 
anti -christian  character  of  this  Anglican  rite,  and  the  entire  ab- 
sence of  any  scriptural  foundation  for  it,  aud  he  faithfully 
icamed  bis  hearers  of  the  delusive  snare.  This  offence  against 
"  Bpiritosl  wickedness  in  high  places"  was  neither  forgotten  nor 
forgiven.  What  Mr.  Henderson  did  say  was  misrepresented  and 
exaggerated.  Soon  afterwards,  Mr.  Adams  lost  a  Utile  daughter, 
and  wns  anxious  that  she  should  be  interred  on  the  mission  lot,  by 
the  side  of  Jabez  Henderson,  to  whom  the  child  had  been  attached. 
Penmsdon  having  been  obtained  of  the  mi^iatratcs  on  previous 
occasions,  Mr.  Henderson  bad  no  objection  to  offer,  but  charged 
the  bereaved  parent  to  see  that  the  legal  authorisation  was  ob< 
tainc'd.  This  Mr.  Adams  omitted  tu  do,  and  after  the  child  was 
buried,  Mr.  Henderson  was  summoned  to  appear  before  a  Sum- 
mary Court  for  the  neglect,  was  reminded  by  one  of  tbc  sitting 
magistrates  of  hia  denunciations  of  established  errors  and  abases, 
and,  by  virtue  of  a  law  made  expressly  to  meet  certnia  cases  under 
the  appreiiticesliip  system,  and  conferring  the  (wwec — abused  in 
this  case — upon  the  stipendiary  ma^strale,  Mr.  Henderson  was 
coniniilted  to  jail.  A  lew  days  found  bim  again  at  liberty  and  at 
work,  but  the  animowty  of  opposers  was  not  satisfied  with  this 
effort  to  &sten  disgrace  upon  the  benefactor  of  the  community — 
a  disgrace  which  even  at  the  time  recoiled  upon  themselves. 

Penalties  for  non-juring  bod  been  repeatedly  inflicted  upon 
members  of  the  church,  most  of  whom  held  that  any  form  of 
oath  is  contrary  to  tbe  spirit  and  the  letter  of  tbe  Gospel  dispen- 
sation. All  who  held  this  view  were  exposed  to  suff*er  injuries 
in  their  persons  and  properties,  because  it  was  known  that  th^ 
could  not  take  the  law,  nor  legally  attest  an  account.  But  this 
v/as  not  deemed  sufficient  proof  of  their  Binccrity,  a:id  additional 
burdens  and  severe  penalties  were  designedly  laid  upon  them. 

Tbere  soon  arose,  indirectly,  out  of  the  contract  to  print  the 
newspaper,  which  Mr.  Henderson  was  indoccd  to  take  op  in  order 
to  find  occupation  for  Mr.  Bnttlicld,  another  opportunity  for  the 


384  THB  QOOPKL  DT  CENTRAL  AMBRJCA. 

iiiilietion  of  serenties  upon  liim.  A  diaige  of  libdl  againt  liie 
editors  of  that  paper  was  tried  in  the  Grand  Court  of  the  Settle 
ment,  and  tbongli  Mr.  Henderson  bad  no  other  connection  intli  M^ 
hot  that  it  was  printed  at  the  mission  press,  and  thoi||^  the 
parties  who  dragged  him  into  Court  wdl  knew  that  his  evidenee 
woold  tell  against  them,  if  he  should  he  permitted  to  give  it,  he 
was  subpcenaed  as  a  witness,  and  sent  to  jail  for  declining  to  aweai; 
The  chief  instigator  and  executor  <^  this  wanton  mischief  was  % 
dashing  yoong  Irish  Lieutenant  of  Artillery,  at  that  time  the  pii- 
vate  secretary  of  the  Superintendent,  and  the  Captain  of  the  Fort. 
Lieut.  C,  whoever  may  have  been  his  aiders  and  abettors,  was 
doubtless  animated  by  a  private  feeling  of  revenge ;  for  he  had  but 
a  short  time  before  been  sternly  reproved  by  Mr.  Henderson  for 
the  8educti<m  of  the  daughter  of  one  of  the  membex^  and  a  scholar 
in  the  Mission  SchooL  An  undue  countenance  gifen  to  this  asn 
had  also  occasioned  the  exclusion  of  the  mother  firom  the  church, 
which  had  added  to  its  public  exposure. 

The  feeling  of  sympathy  with  Mr.  Henderson  was  so  strong  and 
so  general  on  this  occasion,  and  the  doors  and  precincts  of  the  jafl 
were  so  beset  by  visitors  and  people  desirous  to  see  him  throq^ 
the  bars,  that  after  four  days  the  authorities  thought  pioper  to 
release  him,  though  the  term  of  his  sentence  had  not  yet  eiqpired. 
Still,  the  determination  to  continue  to  molest  was  made  manifest 
by  Mr.  Henderson^s  name  being  now  placed  on  the  venire  (the  list 
of  jurors),  for  the  first  time  after  a  residence  of  twdve  years.    By 
this  means  he  would  be  exposed  to  serve  once  a  month,  and  his 
presence  would  be  required  at  every  Court,  where  it  was  wdl 
known  that  he  could  be  of  no  use  whatever  while  the  law  eon- 
ceming  oaths  remains  as  it  is.    In  the  mean  time,  his  sdiolars, 
amounting  to  more  than  tw6  hundred,  would  be  deprived  of  his 
instructions,  and  left  to  run  about  the  streets.    Somewhat  to  cloak 
the  design  of  this  step,  which  no  one  doubted  to  be  aimed  at  Mr. 
Henderson  personally,  or,  rather,  at  the  principles  which  he  fiuth* 
fully  maintained,  the  names  of  the  other  dtgtentmg  minista^  in  the 
Settlement  were  also  added  to  the  venire  list.    In  the  month  of 
April,  1846,  both  Mr.  Henderson  and  Mr.  Braddick  were  fined  for 
absence  from  Court,  and  the  assaults  in  this  quarter  became 
systematic 
During  the  five  years,  some  of  the  leading  events  of  which  have 


POSITION   OF  THE  CHUIICH.  385 

been  briefly  narrated  in  this  cbnpter,  God  was  pleoGcd  to  bles-i  the 
church  at  Belize,  so  that  the  number  of  its  members  was  about 
doubled ;  loKny  of  these  additions  were  as  reninrkable  and  in- 
taresIiDg  as  tho«c  which  have  been  noticed.  But  neither  numbera 
nor  isolated  cases  arc  safiicicnt  to  conrej  an  adcqunte  idea  of  the 
real  progress  of  the  church — of  its  influence  upon  the  community 
— of  the  moral  and  iatellcetual  as  well  as  spiritaal  development  of 
its  members,  whose  previous  di^radation  must  he  fully  compre- 
heoded  before  the  eirtent  of  its  growth  can  be  realized.  By  means 
of  native  teachers  and  out-stations,  the  church  had  spread  forth 
visible  branches.  It  had  also  citendcd  its  unseen  roots,  and  the 
occasional  rough  and  chilling  blasts  of  persecution  which  bad 
swept  over  it  had  made  them  strike  deeper,  so  that  the  young 
pknt,  now  no  longer  a  sapling,  was  prepared  for  the  ruder  tempest 
which  was  manifestly  gathering  around  it.  The  pruning  knife  had 
been  freely  used  upon  its  tmnted  twigs.  Some  of  its  buds  of  promise 
had  been  blighted,  some  of  its  blossoms  had  fallen  off  without  being 
succeeded  by  anything  more  enduring.  But  its  first  fruits  had 
ripened  under  the  smiles  of  heaven's  King,  and  had  been  gently 
gathered  by  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  who  had  created  and  pre* 
served  them,  into  His  eternal  garner  above.  Some  of  its  vigorous 
shoots  had  been  cut  off  and  transplanted  to  the  iar  distant  shores  of 
Africa,  and  on  the  nearer  islands  of  the  Western  Archipelago ;  and 
here,  in  an  nnlKendly  soil,  it  yet  remained  a  goodly  tree— a  plant 
of  God's  own  right  hand  planting,  still  giving  evidence  of  life  and 
promise  of  fruitfulnesi.  And  that  which  invests  it  with  peculiar 
interest  over  and  above  all  other  circumstances,  is,  that  it  is  pro- 
bably destined  to  become  the  seed-plant  of  the  tree  of  life,  upon 
the  border  of  a  continent  now  covered  with  briars  and  thorns. 


386  THE  GOSPEL  IN   CEKTRAJL  AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   m. 

PISEUPnON — THE  CHUECH  WSASED. 

1845-1846. 

INvcnitj  of  feeling  towards  Mr.  Headerton— Threats— Hia  biiidai»-Pn|eeU  and  hopes 
of  BeUef— Jfr.  Kingdom,  his  first  steps— He  forms  a  new  statfca— Hii  nipporten— 
Gaodnet  to  the  Chvrch—Mr.  Henderson's  forbearanee— He  aAs  the  aopport  of  the 
Gonmittee,  and  tenders  his  resignation  if  refnaed— Delay  of  letters  bj  the  Secretary 
— Slandert  —  Mr.  Henderson's  resignation  accepted— The  intdligeBce  recdTed  at 
Bdiie— Mr.  Croire's  arriral  from  Gnatemala- (Thnrch  Meetings— The  Church  reqoest 
tteir  Faator  to  remain— Ap^  for  the  nse  of  the  Mission  pwiiiM  Mr.  Kingdon^ 
cfiwta  to  benidi  Mr.  Hendenon— Charge  of  dishonesty— Opca  lupUue— The  pee* 
miaes  revised  to  the  Chnrch— Mr.  Henderson  resolves  to  remain— The  Cborcfa's 

.  Letter  to  the  Society— Mr.  Kingdon's  claims— Provocations— i^KcsJapn  to  the  law 
to  eject  Mr.  Henderson  and  the  Cbnrch- Prerented  hy  a  Power  of  AttODMy— P^niber 
daima— Intermption  to  Misaion  work— The  Chnrch  meets  fteqpwily— Bceuliilimii 
of  the  Natire  Teaehers— Mr.  Henderson  fined  for  Non-juring— Aceovita—DiiBcal- 
ties  of  the  Chnrch— Pnrchase  of  a  boose  for  ito  nse— Mx.  HcBdersoo'k  naaoBS  for 
wishing  to  visit  England- Evacuation  of  the  Mission-honse  by  Mr.  Hendenon,  and 
the  plaee  of  Worship  by  the  Chnreh— Spontaneous  aisiitanee  of  tte  inhahitaBls  of 
Belize— Mr.  Hendenon's  departure  for  New  York— Scfaods  opeaed  in  the  ChncA's 
own  house— Mr.  Crowe  imprisoned— Protest  and  AppeaL 

"  I  know  tig  warit,  tmd  tk$  labour,  mtd  tkgpoHaui,"  Ibo^— Ser.  fi.  SL 

At  the  period  at  which  this  narrative  has  arriyed,  the  labours  of 
Mr.  Henderson  had  endeared  him  to  many.  The  members  of 
the  church,  who  were  almost  all  his  spiritual  children,  and  in 
whose  instruction  in  the  Word  of  God  he  had  toiled  aasidnonslj, 
placed  a  high  value  on  his  ministrations.  The  scholars,  many  of 
whom  had  grown  up  under  his  eye,  were  singularly  attached  to 
him,  and  the  poorer  classes  of  the  community  had  learned  to 
regard  him  as  their  friend  in  temporal  matters,  even  when  they 
Zi^ected  his  instructions  and  withstood  his  reprooft.     TCyiffwi*^ 


MB.   UEN'DERSOK  S   BUBDEKB.  387 

inileeil,  were  not  wanting,  as  has  been  shown;  and  if  his  faithftil 
exhibitions  of  truth  and  hoUness  were  not  alooc  eufficieot  to 
create  them,  the  love  which  the  poor  and  igoorant  people  bore  to 

Never  before  had  the  etuaitf  of  the  proud  and  unscrupuloiia 
poesesgors  of  power  manifested  itaelf  eo  violently  towards  liim  aa 
it  did  at  this  period.  Not  contented  with  having  twice  imprisoned 
him,  in  which  they  were  nsally  foiled,  they  now  laid  a  {tcrmanent 
snare  to  entrap  him  in  matters  pertaining  to  the  law  of  his  God. 
lie  had  been  made  a  juryman  in  tpHe  of  his  scruples,  and  rumours 
were  afloat  that  greater  severities  were  in  store  for  him.  In  the 
very  next  penalty  which  tbc  Courts  held  over  his  head,  it  was 
eaid  that  bard  labour  on  the  public  works  would  be  coapled 
with  imprisonment,  a  threat  which  iuvolved  nothing  leas  than 
hia  martyrdom.  For  had  he  been  subjected  to  such  a  punish- 
ment, those  who  know  its  nature  and  the  character  of  the  climate, 
would  not  hesitate  to  conclude  that  his  speedy  death  must  iollow 
as  a  mere  physical  result,  and  nicb  would  assuredly  regard  his 
escape  with  hfe  as  something  approaching  to  a  miracle.*  The 
efi'cct  that  such  treatment  would  have  hod  upon  his  mind  can  only 
be  conjectured. 

To  the  uncertainty  and  danger  of  his  position  in  this  respect, 
must  be  added  a  precarious  state  of  health,  tbc  result  of  over- 
wrought energies  in  a  climate  uncongenial  to  Europeans ;  the 
care  of  a  church  of  about  130  members,  many  of  whom  were 
exposed  to  suffer  with  him ;  the  uoalleviated  burdens  and  respon- 
sibility of  a  misrion,  including  the  direction  of  a  toi^  establish- 
ment in  £elize,  out-stations,  schools,  translations,  and  the  training 
of  several  teachers ;  the  vexations  which  Mr.  DuttSeld  was  still 
uccutoning  him ;  and  the  anxieties  of  a  family  only  too  much  olive 
to  the  critical  nature  of  his  position,  and  to  the  iiyurious  threats 
which  had  been  uttered  agunst  him.  What  wonder  that  Mr,  Hen- 
derson again  looked  forward  with  hope  and  great  expectations  to 
the  arrival  of  a  brother  missionary,  and  that  he  bod  entertained  the 

lie  ue  often  mide  to  wnA  is 
Lttlic  km,  wlufft,  Blc^  inth  Iho  Blimj  depouti  whjcli  thof  di^or  *cwi; 
hnbjr  limn.    In  tliu  ocrapalbon  Itioy  have  to  lUiid  fur  lioun.  with  I 


I 


388  THB  GOSPEL  IX  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

thought  of  availing  himself  of  the  presence  of  such  a  coadjutor  to 
lecruit  his  strength  by  a  visit  to  his  native  land,  where  he  might 
expect  to  obtain  some  relief  at  least  from  his  threatened  dangers. 
But  other  trials,  greater  than  all  those  vrhich  had  preceded,  were 
yet  in  store  for  him.  The  assault  of  the  enemy  was  now  to  be 
pressed  closer  both  firom  within  and  from  without,  and  the  church, 
as  well  as  the  missionary,  were  to  be  simultaneously  assailed. 

It  has  been  seen  how  little  alleviation  of  his  burdens  the  coming 
of  a  young  brother  firom  England  had  brought  with  it  The 
arrival  of  an  elderly  missionary,  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Kingdon, 
far  firom  realising  the  pleasing  anticipations  it  had  given  rise  to^ 
only  tended  to  widen  the  breach  that  existed.  It  soon  brought 
about  a  violent  disruption  of  the  mission  in  British  Honduras  from 
the  society  in  England,  and  ultimately  occasioned  the  abandonment 
of  Central  America  as  a  field  of  labour  by  that  sodety,  leaving  the 
church  there  to  struggle  unaided  by  any  human  power  against  its 
accumulated  difficulties. 

During  the  first  fortnight  which  Mr.  Elingdon  spent  under  Mr. 
Henders6n*s  roof,  and  in  dose  intimacy  with  his  fimuly,  though 
outward  harmony  was  maintained,  Mr.  Kingdon  appears  to  have 
observed  much  that  was  opposed  to  his  own  spirit  and  tastes.  Like 
Mr.  Buttfield,  with  whom  he  sympathized  in  many  respects,  he 
was  not  anxious  permanently  to  unite  himself  with  the  church. 
He  also  refused  to  labour  in  the  school,  and  took  an  early  oppor- 
tunity of  informing  Mr.  Henderson  that  he  wished  to  open  a 
separate  station  in  Belize,  instead  of  strengrthening  the  one  which 
was  thought  to  need  his  services  so  much ;  thus  at  once  nullifying 
one  professed  object  of  his  coming,  which  was  to  help  Mr.  Hen* 
derson  and  to  afford  him  rdief  and  liberty,  either  to  travel  or  to 
translate.  Instead  of  acting  the  part  of  a  peace-maker,  and  en- 
deavouring to  convince  Mr.  Buttfield  of  the  faults  which  his  inex- 
perience had  permitted  him  to  fall  into,  he  at  once,  and  without 
hearing  Mr.  Henderson*s  explanations,  took  the  part  of  that  young 
man  (with  whom  he  was  agreed  on  the  communion  question,)  agunrt 
the  judgment  of  the  entire  church,  as  well  as  of  its  pastor,  and 
that,  too,  at  a  time  when  it  was  thought  that  their  united  con- 
duct was  'beginning  to  produce  a  salutary  effect  upon  Mr.  Butt- 
field's  mind.  The  first  open  manifestation  of  ill-feeling  which  took 
place  between  Mr.  Kingdon  and  Mr.  Henderson  was  an  offence 


N  S  SEP2BATE  STATION.  389 

Ttiiich  the  former  took  nt  the  public  ministrations  of  the  hitter.  On 
a  week-day  eTeuiog,  after  hcariog  Mr.  Hendereon  preach  from  the 
Isl  John  u.  3,  4,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kuigdou  hastened  up-Btairs,  shut 
theniKlvcs  up  in  their  room,  and,  finailj,  quitted  the  house  the 
next  morning  (the  Uth  December),  without  seeing  Mr.  Hender- 
son or  seeking  for  any  explanation.  Under  these  inauepidouH 
circumstances,  urangcmcnts  irerc  rapidly  made  by  Mr.  Etngdon 
to  open  his  own  station  the  very  next  Lord's  day,  without  at  uU 
communicating  with  the  church  on  the  subject.  With  Mr-  Uutt- 
fietd  and  bis  evil -advisers,  there  was  all  the  cordiality  of  a  warm 
feliow-fecling. 

Anxious  not  to  increase  the  difficulties  of  his  position,  and 
probably  stilt  hoping  for  a  better  understanding,  or  looking  for 
ihe  Divine  interpontion  in  Providence,  i^Ir.  Ucudcrson  consented 
to  sanction  by  his  presence  the  opening  of  the  new  station  as  a. 
place  for  preaching,  which  took  place  on  the  second  Lord's  day 
after  Mr.  Kiiigdou's  arrival,  though  it  was  contrary  lo  his 
wishes  and  subversive  of  bis  plans.  The  place  selected  was  a 
private  house,  with  a  spacious  store,  facing  the  harbour,  and  at  the- 
most  genteel  end  of  the  town,  being  near  the  Government  Uouse 
aud  the  lt«ctory,* 


•  S.ra,r  utlKU  fr. 

in  I  letter  adrliciiol  ij  Hr.  Kiugdon 

[mm  BalJu  on  Ibe  lit  Apnl 

ndatulfift 

erll,eoi«uu,io(tJiBr.o, 

tiDB)  tn  Mr.  Crmr.  wboio  bg 

■nppwd  |g  be  tiU  liboDTtug  no 

(celUHi-mUiwlucb 

kllcr  Ihil  hui  ciir  puHd 

bclwraillioi.    Un 

mg  lUliil  olut  lie  biul  bard  ol  Itr 

CrowrtUbqim.hegiTau, 

inDtsltfoni 

Jamaici<9]]eliEe,<iiid» 

1, "  But  befim  comidg  wi  [lo. 

IlouJiiniilwewcU 

w  monUu ;  uid  urfiinE 

our  •hod.  .ia  Mr.  mm  Mn.  H. 

«l™mf«.forU.gbL 

isving  bBAl  <inoiisb  of  Mr. 

ll.'(CIUUlHa,IliUl 

Uldtbccon 

aixUt,  Oax  vilhaf  u  1  ihould  ba  to  wock  oiUi  Ur.  U. 

pnsicbjng  taiiaa  of  u)'  o 

am^^Mxttabt 

hiaillbn 

n  wen  ruim  ben  for  ■  u. 

a>ndB.pti.lau.e.»Hlbeit 

tiiia  u«»d  lu  Ihit  Uun  ni. 

So  I  opened  o  iwra,  «  bj  13  teel.  bere  ID  VmnMUwI, 

vbse  Hi.  llulu  liTcd,  UDil  ve  b 

■•e  now  1  cbuMb  et  eigbl 

u(!mbi!r>,wiU..raL«uble 

congtc£.tini.  (or  llie 

line.  Kt%.  b 

.  hu  a  i^ood  Snuilnf  .kIido],  In  irhicb  Ifrf .  Botlleid  ii  of 

tlie  grntm  MTTice 

Ur.DuUl 

Mliu>  opened  >>UUen. 

Mullu.'.Bi™w.p(DdLii 

Sni.,tn-.i,aims 

EDDd*T  .ftcnu™  I  ipcBd  portkni  ol 

u  iudu>K  tbi  SpoDiih  Serip- 

turn  HI  Ihe  bpuiudi  in  Uinr  jtnli."    (A  '"^  wrelidui 

wU.  .Ro  Uml.  Uie  Spuidi 

ladi.1.3  c<mhl  lul 

oauiUBd  > 

bit  Mt.  luDgdon  read  la  Ibcm.  on  uconnl  or  bit  igao- 

900.  THB  Q08PBL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

One  of  the  most  inflnential  female  partnaiis  of  MesBTB.  Khigdon 
and  Battfidd— influential  because  a  Mulatto  lady  of  wealth — ^was 
tlie  wife  of  a  leading  merchant  and  magistrate,  who  at  times  had 
been  himself  the  patron  of  religion,  and  at  others,  the  persecntor 
of  its  professors.  She  had  been  excluded  from  the  church,  and 
had  manifested  an  arrogant  spirit  towards  her  darker  coloured 
brethren.  Together  with  a  few  more  of  the  discontented,  she  gave 
her  countenance  to  the  new  station.  It  was  not,  however,  till 
after  he  had  consented  to  preach  at  the  opening  that  Mr.  Hen- 
derson discovered  the  object  to  be  the  formation  of  a  new  and 
separate  church  upon  open  communion  principles.  This  was 
attempted  by  the  junction  of  the  families  of  Messrs.  Kingdon  and 
Bnttfield  with  the  lady  above  referred  to,  and  two  or  three  more 
excluded  members  of  the  church,  which  was  neither  informed  of 
the  intention,  nor  inquired  of  concerning  the  reasons  which  led  to 
the  expulsion  of  those  who  had  before  been  connected  with  it. 

Mr.  Adams,  long  a  deacon,  who  had  been  one  of  the  pillars  of 
the  church  during  its  earlier  history,  and  who  was  then,  in  a  worldly 
sense,  the  most  influential  person  in  it,  having  also  united  himself 
to  the  new  body  without  withdrawing  or  giving  notice  to  the 
church  to  which  he  belonged,  was  consequentiy  cut  off  fi>r  non- 
attendance.  Thus  had  a  church,  almost  exclusively  composed  of 
coloured  people,  been  obliged  in  faithfulness  to  cut  off  some  of 
their  most  prominent  and  wealthy  members,  whose  worldly  influ- 
ence and  countenance  were  at  once  given  to  the  cause  whidi 
aspired  to  become  the  more  popular,  and  which  had  relaxed  the 
wholesome  discipline  of  the  household  of  God. 

The  fact  that  Mr.  Kingdon  had  formed  a  church  upon  difR*rent 
principles  from  the  first  church,  was  faithfully  stated  by  Mr.  Hen- 
derson to  the  people  of  his  charge ;  but  no  intimation  of  it  was  given 
to  them  by  Mr.  Elingdon  or  his  friends.  An  opportunity  to  join 
the  hew  communion  was  afforded  to  any  who  might  wish  to  do  so, 
by  the  tender  of  their  dismission.  Two  members  availed  them- 
selves of  it ;  the  one,  a  young  man  already  in  Mr.  Kingdon*s  anpky 
as  door-keeper,  &c.,  in  his  new  place  of  meeting,  and  the  other,  an 
infirm  sister,  who  found  it  more  convenient  to  attend  Mr.  Eing- 
don's  place,  on  account  of  distance,  but  who  soon  after  forsook  'A 
and  returned. 

Mr.  Henderson  acted  with  forbearance  towards  Mr.  Kiogdon 


HENDERSONS  BESICXATIOX  TENDERED. 

and  llr.  Battficid,  whose  united  infiiience  was  Becretly  eierted 
against  himself  and  the  chnrch;  but  he  did  Dot  hceitnle  streuu- 
ouaiy  and  openly  to  oppose  the  step  they  had  talcen  as  loop  os  he 
iindcrstxM>d  its  nature,  and  was  Tully  coDriuced  that  it  must  proTS 
aubveraive  of  the  real  icterests  of  the  nusslon,  destructive  of  the 
growing  influence  of  dissent,  and,  above  all,  that  it  must  teud  to 
counteract  and  letard  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  and  its  prin- 
ciptea;  he  deliberately  addressed  the  committee  in  London  on  the 
subject,  on  the  I8tU  Peccrober  1845,  expressing  htg  viewB  of  the 
conduct  of  the  other  missionaries,  though  avoiding  any  allusion  to 
the  connaunioa  controversy,  knowing  that  it  is  professedly  a 
ntutrat  point  with  the  socie^,  and  quite  convinced  that  his  case 
was  strong  enough  in  the  mete  facts  of  it  He  also  freely  expressed 
his  fuelings  in  decided  but  temperate  language,  and  called  upon  the 
society  to  support  him,  and  to  remove  Kir.  Biittficld,  or  if  they 
could  not  do  so,  to  accept  his  restgnation,  and  enable  him  to 
remote  with  his  family  to  New  York.  To  this  step  he  felt  im- 
pelled by  a  Kosc  of  duty.  He  did  not  think  it  required  of  him 
that  he  should  stand  by  and  suffer  the  destruction  of  his  hitherto 
succcsiful  labours  to  be  perpetrated  with  his  tacit  consent.  He 
would  not  allow  that  ruin  which  he  foresaw,  to  take  place  under  bb 
own  band ;  and  from  his  intercourse  with  the  new  comers,  as  well 
as  Irom  the  want  of  any  adequate  expressions  of  sympathy  on  the 
part  of  the  society  at  home  in  bis  sufferings  and  those  of  the  church, 
but  especially  by  their  suppression  of  the  facts  nud  the  absence  of 
any  measures  token  for  their  reUcf,  which  he  bad  noticed  for  some 
years  and  more  particularly  now  that  those  suflerings  had  greatly 
increased,  he  did  not  feel  entire  confidence  in  the  cordiality  of  the 
committee  towards  himself.  He  was  now  at  least  willing  to  prove 
their  confidence  in  him,  quite  satislied  that  ijj  under  the  circum- 
stances, the  committee  could  Kuppart  Air.  Ituttiieid's  conduct,  and 
preler  the  plans  of  the  new  comers  to  bis  own,  be  would  not 
really  be  a  loser  by  dissolfing  his  connection  i^ith  the  Midetfi 
however  painful  that  step  might  be. 

The  letter  which  Mr.  Henderson  hod  written  to  the  wciely,  after 
full  six  months'  trial,  reporting  thc^unStncfs  and  unwillingneos  of 
Mr.  Buttficld  to  asBist  in  the  work  of  the  station,  was  dated  the 
19th  of  July  1H4S,  and  yet  it  was  not  luid  before  the  committee  till 
the  letter  just  referred  to  arrived  un  the  10th  of  Februaiy  164G. 
This  unoeoesaary  delay  of  ux  monthii  had  been  occa^oaed  by  the 


802  THE  GOSPEL  TH  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

secretary,  who  withheld  fixnn  the  committee  that  letter,  and  othen 
fkom  Mr.  Buttfield,  in  which  he  hitterlj  compLained  of  Mr.  Hiai- 
denon,  till  he,  the  secretary,  had  written  to  them  both,  requeatiiig 
them  to  withdraw  their  mutual  chai^ges,  and  to  make  up  their  nn- 
aeemly  differences.  Mr.  Henderson,  who  did  not  regard  the  chaiges 
which  he  felt  bound  to  prefer  as  matters  of  personal  difference, 
diaapproyed  of  this  delay,  and  could  not  accede  to  the  remonatranoeB 
of  the  secretary ;  but  felt  that  the  judgment  and  anthori^  of  the 
committee  ought  to  have  been  brought  to  bear  at  once  upon  a 
question  of  so  much  importance.  He  still  wished  his  letter  to  be 
laid  before  the  committee,  in  whom  he  placed  much  omfidenoe, 
and  felt  that  a  compromise,  or  a  request  to  hush  up  the  matter, 
was  not  doing  justice  to  the  case,  or  to  himself. 

When,  therefore,  these  letters  were  at  last  laid  befixre  the  com- 
mittee, they  consisted  of  a  Toluminous  correspondence,^  extending 
over  full  six  months,  and  including  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kingdon, 
the  first  and  only  one  he  had  written  to  the  society,  about  a 
month  after  his  arrival  at  Belize.  In  this  single  epistle,  the  aged 
missionary  far  outstripped  all  Mr.  Buttfield*s  more  lengthy  and 
numerous  efforts  at  detraction.  Mr.  Elingdon  distorted  and  mis- 
represented Mr.  Henderson's  proceedings  in  the  church ;  he  re- 
iterated the  exaggerated  reports  to  which  his  faithfulnew  had 
given  rise ;  by  relating  a  pretended  rumour,  he  artfully  imputed 
dishonesty  to  him;  he  charged  him  with  extravagance,  angry 
passions,  and  wrongs  towards  Mr.  Buttfield ;  he  basely  insinuated 
crime  and  denounced  imaginary  disorders  in  Ins  £uniiy ;  he  even 
maliciously  prognosticated  future  abominations  which  had  no  other 
foundation  than  his  own  thoughts — thoughts  at  which  decency 
itself  is  revolted,  and  in  which  even  the  morality  of  Mr.  Hen- 
derson's little  children  is  implicated.  From  beginning  to  end, 
this  letter  breathed  a  spirit  of  malevolence  but  seldom  sor- 
passed,  never,  perhaps,  equalled  in  the  annals  of  missionary  cor- 
respondence. All  the  united  misrepresentations  and  slanders  of  tlw 
new  comers  were  unsupported  by  evidence,  and  rested  upon  their 
bare  assertion.  Nevertheless,  the  committee,  at  that  one  sitting, 
without  informing  Mr.  Henderson  of  the  charges  brought  against 
him,  and  without  referring  to  the  church  or  any  other  parties, 
decided  against  Mr.  Henderson,  accepted  his  resignation,  and  in- 

•  An  onOiike  of  fheae  letten,  and  of  the  etidflaee  Idd  before  the  coaniittlee  on  this  o»> 
ceikiii,  vill  be  foosd  in  **Hoiidiuns*'— the  reply  to  the  Society*!  printed  defence. 


THE  COUUITTEEd   DECIBION    I 


i   AT  LELIZE. 


S9S 


fltnicKd  th^  Mcretarj  to  direct  Mr.  Kingdoa  to  take  charge  of 
all  their  property,  and  to  act  for  them  in  closing  Mr.  Ilenderson'e 
accouula.  Ihus  did  the  commitlcc  without  a.  sulficient  cause  vir* 
taally  cennire  a  fUthful  brother  whom  they  bnd  long  tried,  and  in 
whom  th^  had  found  a  laborious  and  Bucceasful  agent,  and  at  the 
some  linic  countenanced  and  upheld  his  calumQiatora  and  detractors, 
who  had  also  been  tried  and  bad  given  worse  than  no  proofs  of 
their  efficiencj. 

The  decision  of  the  committee,  for  which  all  parties  were  ansioualy 
waiting,  readied  Belize  late  on  tbe  evening  of  the  13th  of  April. 
jUr.  Henderson's  first  thought  was  of  his  departure,  to  begin  life 
anew  in  another  field.  Already  the  mournful  inlelljgenue  that 
their  beloved  minister  was  going  to  leave  them  began  to  spread 
among  the  members,  and  was  felt  as  a  climax  to  the  trials  and 
vexations  which  tbe  church  had  been  called  to  endure. 

With  tbe  dawn  of  the  following  day,  a  small  coasting  schooner 
came  to  its  moorings  in  the  harbour,  and  landed  an  exiled  brother, 
who  was  brought  back  just  in  time  to  share  in  the  anxieties  and 
duties  of  this  eventful  criaia.  Mr.  Crowe,  whose  success  In  Guate- 
miUa  bad  all  along  excited  the  virulent  opposition  of  the  Popish 
clergy,  bad  been  seized  in  the  midst  of  bis  labours,  escorted  to  the 
coast,  and,  without  being  consulted  in  the  matter,  was  sent  to 
BcUie.  Long  had  he  languished  in  tbe  total  deprivation  of  Ctuia- 
tjan  fellowship,  while  surrounded  only  by  unbelievers  during 
nearly  five  yean.  And  sad,  indeed,  was  his  first  meeting  with  one 
of  the  raembeis  (Siiiter  Braddick),  who  uumcdiately  burst  into 
tears,  and  informed  him  that  Mr.  Henderson  was  going  to  leave  the 
£)cttlenient. 

During  that  day  tlie  members  fiocked  to  the  mi^ion-house  in 
small  companies  to  ascertain  the  truth,  and  that  evening  the 
church  came  together  iu  much  consternation  at  Brother  Braddick'a 
house  for  consultation  and  for  prayer,  when  a  more  regular  chuxcb 
meeting  was  appointed  for  the  next  evening,  the  pastor  being  re- 
quested kindly  to  absent  himself  from  it. 

On  the  following  morning  Air.  Henderson,  accompanied  by  Mr. 
Crowe,  called  upon  Mr.  Kiiigdoa  lo  arrange  preliminaries  concern- 
ing the  settlement  of  accounts,  and  tlic  transfer  of  the  socie^'i 
property.  Mr.  Henderson,  determined,  if  possible,  not  to  revive 
any  post  grievance,  and,  anxious  for  a  peaceful  termination  of  theii 


394  THS  OOfiPBL  IN  CBMTRAL  AMERIOA. 

mataal  intereoiine,  sttted  that  he  would  gire  up  the 
house  by  the  Ist  of  June,  that  he  would  be  guided  by  Mr.  Xing- 
dQ&*8  decidon  in  all  matters  affecting  material  interests,  and  onljr 
requested  to  be  allowed  to  retain  his  manuscript  translations  till  he 
diould  have  time  to  transcribe  them,  to  which  Mr.  Kingdon  gvre 
his  unqualified  sssenL  On  the  following  day,  the  titles  of  misBian 
property,  accounts,  &c,  were  duly  handed  over  to  Mr.  Kingdon. 
Mr.  Henderson  was  afterwards  informed  that,  on  the  morning  of 
the  14th  (that  is,  as  soon  as  possible  afier  getting  his  letters),  Mr. 
Kingdon  had  been  at  the  pains  to  visit  the  various  merchanta^ 
stores  with  which  Mr.  Henderson  had  accounts,  infivning  them  of 
the  transfer  of  the  agency  of  the  society,  and  lequestiiig  eopies  of 
Mr.  Henderson's  accounts  to  date,  a  request  which,  in  one  case,  was 
zeftised  with  a  well-merited  rebuff. 

The  church,  at  its  meeting  on  the  evening  of  the  16th,  with  one 
accord,  resolved  to  send  a  deputation  to  their  ptstor,  inviting  him  to 
oootinue  with  them,  and  undertaking  to  do  their  utmost  for  hia 
support  Mr.  Henderscm,  much  affected  by  this  decided  and  un- 
expected step  on  the  part  of  the  church,  and  by  the  demonstratiaiis 
of  Christian  principle,  sorrow,  and  personal  attachment  to  himaelf 
on  the  part  of  the  people,  took  a  week  to  pray  over  and  consider 
of  the  matter.  The  church  continued  to  meet  for  several  evenings 
at  Mr.  Braddick*s  for  prayer  and  consultation  till  they  should 
receive  the  decision  of  their  pastor.  On  the  17th,  the  deaoooa 
addressed  Mr.  Kingdon  on  behalf  of  the  church,  by  whom  they  had 
been  directed  to  do  so,  informing  him  of  the  step  they  had  taken 
with  respect  to  their  pastor,  and  requesting  to  be  allowed  to  con- 
tinue in  the  use  of  the  mission  premises  till  they  could  hear  fium 
the  Society,  and  offering  to  pay  a  reasonable  rent  should  it  be  re- 
quired. This  they  were  emboldened  to  do,  because  they  inMigSmwi 
that  the  place  of  worship  was  originally  erected  for  their  aeoom- 
modation,  and  they  well  knew  that  they  had  contributed  to  the 
ftmds  of  the  Society ;  and  also,  because  Mr.  Kingdon  had  lately 
rented  a  large  house  for  twelve  months,  and  fitted  it  up  at  some  ex- 
pense for  a  separate  place  of  meeting— the  abandonment  of  iHiich 
must  occasion  great  loss  to  the  Society,  and  break  off  his  own 
phms. 

On  the  same  day,  Mr.  Kingdon  took  the  trouble  to  go  on  boaid 
s  vessel  in  the  harbour,  which  was  about  to  sail  for  Kew  Yovk,  to 


ATTeHPI  TO   DAKISK 


HENDUISON. 


makesirangemeDtsfora  passage  for  Mr.  Henderson  and  his  family, 
&iid  then  wailed  upon  him  at  the  mission-houEe.  in  conipanj  willi 
Captain  Thomas,  the  pious  commander  of  one  of  Messrs.  Aagaa'a 
vessels,  Mr.  Crowe  being  aim  present. 

Sunng  this  visit,  Kir.  Kingdon  first  endeavoured  to  pei^oade 
Mr.  Heuderson  to  avail  himself  of  the  sailing  of  the  vessel  he 
had  vimted,  insisting  upon  it  verj  strenuously-  This  Mr.  Hen- 
derson declined,  as  the  time  was  too  short,  and  they  bad  already 
agreed  upon  a  day  to  which  he  preferred  to  adhere.  Evidently 
chagrined  at  his  failure,  Mr.  Kingdou  theu  endeavoured  to  dis- 
suade Mr.  Henderson  from  acceding  to  the  proposal  of  the  churck 
to  remam  with  thetn,  holding  up  to  liim  the  failure  of  a  native 
pastorin  Jamaica,  who.  under  somewhat  similar  circumstances,  had 
been  unable  to  support  himself,  or  to  bear  up  against  advene  in- 
fluences.* Upon  this  point  Mr.  Henderson  said  he  had  yet  to 
make  up  ha  mind.  Mr.  Kingdon  next  took  on  aggressive  tone,  and 
drawing  from  hia  pocket  one  of  Mr.  Henderson's  accounts,  he  ob- 
jected to  the  magnitude  of  two  or  three  items,  on  the  ground  that  the 
good.*,  in  his  opinion,  could  not  have  been  consumed  in  the  family, 
and,  without  waiting  for  an  explanation,  he  proceeded  to  accuse 
Mr.  Henderson  of  foreseeing  the  iLcceptance  of  his  resignation,  and 
having  dishonestly  laid  in  an  extravagant  supply  to  provide  for  the 
future,  and  added,  that  he  had  heard  it  said  that  Mr.  Henderson 
had  "  well  feathered  his  nesl."  For  repeating  this  slander  and  (or 
his  innilting  imputation,  Mr.  Kingdon  was  at  once  sternly  rebuked 
by  those  present.  The  quantity  of  coffee,  sugar,  and  flour  to  which 
Air.  Kingdon  objected,  had  been  in  port  supplied  to  Mr.  Warner 
ajid  others,  on  account  of  their  salaries,  from  the  society.  Every 
item  was  fairly  accounted  for,  Mr.  Kingdon  had  already  made 
nmilar  remarks  to  several  individuals,  and  that  in  no  reMrvcd 
maimer ;  thus  aspersing  Mr.  Henderson,  whose  fwr  fame  had  never 
before  been  thus  ruthlessly  assailed  even  hy  his  enemies. 

From  this  time  Mr.  Kingdon  commenced  a  series  of  petty  annoy- 
ances and  bitter  complaints  against  Mr.  Henderson,  which  entirety 
precluded  the  possibility  of  a  peaceful  settlement  of  their  affairs.  He 
at  once  stated  that  the  allowance  which  the  society  had  granted  for 
the  support  of  Itlr.  Henderson  and  his  family,  till  they  left  Belize, 
would  cease  on  the  day  that  the  vessel  Mx.  Kingdon  bad  choaen 
■  Ttiii  «M  Ui.  Vtulfiivni.  ■  ithct  Bipliii.  imcE  ■  iaia  it  Ur.  Oii|)iloii'i  dupe)  fa 


806  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

should  leave  the  port,  and  told  Mr.  Henderson  that  when  he  did 
leave  he  would  reqmre  from  hun  a  written  promise  that  he  would 
not  return  to  the  Settlement,  which  must  he  given  hefore  he  paid 
into  his  hands  the  sum  which  the  society  had  voted  for  his  support 
while  he  should  he  determining  upon  lus  future  course.  Greatly 
moved  hy  these  speeches,  Mr.  Henderson  requested  him  to  return 
to  him  his  accounts.  He  felt  that  Mr.  Elingdon  was  not  worthy  to 
be  trusted  with  them,  and  resolved  to  settle  his  pecuniary  matters 
with  the  committee  direct,  without  other  intervention.  Upon 
which  Mr.  Kingdon  positively  refused  to  pay  the  debts  which  Mr. 
Henderson  had  incurred  in  the  Settlement  as  the  society's  agent, 
and  an  unlovely  exhibition  to  the  world,  with  other  most  painful 
consequences,  were  the  immediate  results. 

Captain  Thomas  had  accompanied  Mr.  Kingdon  as  a  friend,  and 
his  mind  had  been  somewhat  prejudiced  against  Mr.  Henderson, 
but  alter  this  interview  he  utterly  disapproved  of  Mr.  Kingdon's 
proceedings,  and  strengthened  Mr.  Henderson's  hands.  On  the 
following  day,  Mr.  Kingdon  wrote  a  discourteous  letter  to  the 
deacons,  not  only  refusing  the  church  the  continued  use  of  their 
place  of  worship  till  they  heard  from  the  Society,  but  taking  the 
liberty  to  intimate  his  displeasure  at  their  proposal  to  retain  their 
pastor,  whom  he  described  as  willing  to  "  wrest  both  the  school 
and  the  church  from  connection  with  the  Society** — a  step  which  in 
his  opinion  would  be  viewed  by  them  (the  Society)  ^no  otherwise 
than  as  full  of  selfishness  and  treachery  as  well  as  ingratitude.'* 
He  also  warns  the  church,  making  them  answerable  fbr  **  the  great 
distress**  in  which  Mr.  Henderson  and  his  fiunily  might  be  involved. 
He  repeats  his  former  threats  to  Mr.  Henderson,  in  case  he  remains, 
and  concludes  by  requiring  that  the  premises,  including  the  place 
of  meeting,  should  be  given  up  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  on  the  27th 
or  28th  of  April  instead  of  the  1st  of  June  as  he  had  first  agreed. 
Thus  did  Mr.  Kingdon,  by  means  of  the  power  with  which  the 
committee  had  invested  him,  attempt  to  separate  the  church  and 
their  pastor,  and  even  to  exile  the  latter  for  ever  from  the  field  of 
his  successful  labours. 

Mr.  Henderson,  afrer  a  week's  consideration,  returned  a  favour- 
able answer  to  the  church's  proposals,  agreeing  to  cast  in  his  lot 
with  them,  though  threatened  in  so  many  quarters,  being  convinced 
that  it  was  his  duty  not  to  abandon  the  church  in  its  extremity, 
nor  to  sacrifice  the  real  interests  of  the  Saviour*s  kingdom  and  the 


3  CaUBCn  S   LETTEn    TO   THE  SOCIETY. 


397 

n  feelings 


^Kjl^Tfttion  of  the  pcrisbiag  souls  around,  either  tu 
Ai  the  private  ends  of  any  other  person. 

The  church  immediately  took  measures  to  provide  for  the  sup- 
port of  Iheir  puslor,  by  the  "free-will  offerings"  of  the  members, 
who  agreed  to  put  by,  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  as  the  Lord 
had  prospered  them,  for  this  object,  and  the  deacons  were  autho- 
rized to  receive  the  sums  that  should  be  brought  to  them. 

By  the  very  earliest  opportunity  the  church  for  the  fir^  time 
direcUy  addressed  the  committee  in  the  following  terms : — 


"  The  First  Bnptiat  Church  in  ]3(-li«c'  to  the  brethren  composing 
the  Committee  of  the  Baptist  Slissionary  Society. — Greeting, 
5"  Grace  be  to  yon  and  pence  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Clirist.' 


I 

^&  llbresaid  church,  and  in  the  nnme  of  all  our  brethren,  now  address 
yon,  impressed  with  the  importance  and  delicacy  of  the  duty,  on 
the  subject  of  the  separation  of  our  beloved  pastor  and  brother, 
Alexander  Henderson,  &om  your  SocicEy,  at  which  we  are  hath 
surprised  and  pained. 

"The  brethren  in  a  meeting  held  on  Friday,  the  17th  inst.,  haTe 
with  one  accord  directed  us  to  lay  before  you  the  foUowing  parti- 

"That  your  late  agent,  Alexander  Henderson,  after  twelve 
years'  experience  and  intimacy  with  him,  has  had  and  still  has 
our  full  confidence,  as  well  in  the  chamcter  of  a.  Christian  man 
as  in  the  ofRce  of  pastor,  or  as  a  xealous  and  active  missionary 
labourer.  We  also  coincide  with  hini  in  views  of  doctrtoc.  church 
government,  discipline,  &c. ;  and  have  no  wish  to  lose  his  labours 
among  us,  nor  to  exchange  tliem  for  those. of  any  other. 

"  We  have  hitherto  seen  and  rejoiced  in  the  success  of  bis  efforts 
in  and  out  of  the  church,  never  perhaps  more  abundantly  so  than 
nt  the  present  time ;  and  therefore  are  much  concerned  at  the 
prospect  of  his  labours  among  ua  being  at  all  interrupted.  We  do 
not  mean  by  this  that  we  think  our  pastor  faultless,  or  that  God 
cannot  carry  on  his  work  by  other  hands :  but  we  expresaly  dccbre 
that,  on  the  whole,  we  approve  of  bis  conduct  and 
fee!  that,  in  the  midst  of  much  imperfection,  which 
deplore,  the  Lord  has  blessed  our  connection  with  him  hitherto: 


898  THE  OO0PBL  IN  CBNTIIiLL  AXBRICA. 

■ad  we  are  not  at  all  emnrineed  that  we  are  called  of  God  to  ae- 
rate from  him.  And  further,  that^  whilst  we  are  awaze  that  some 
have  xepreaented  to  yon  what  they  consider  to  he  the  finiltj  part 
of  hia  character,  we  esteem  and  love  him  for  what  we  Ukt  to 
be  the  image  of  our  fidthfhl  and  condescending  Sayionr  reflected  in 
him.  ^ 

^  After  the  little  knowledge  which  we  haye  personally  had  of 
the  Brethren  Buttfidd  and  ^ngdcm,  and  of  their  yiews  of  church 
govemment  (which  are  open  communion),  we  do  not  feel  that  we 
oonld  accept  of  either  of  them  as  our  pastor;  and  though  we  haye 
no  wish  nor  authority  to  prevent  them  from  gathering  a  church  or 
churches  on  these  principles,  we  cannot  view  with  indifference  any 
attempt  on  their  part  to  deprive  us  of  our  pastor,  nor  willingly 
expose  ourselves  to  the  temptations  which  might  accompany  such 
s  loss,  while  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  prevent  it  hy  the  use  of 
lawful  means. 

'^  As  a  church,  and  individually,  we  are  deeply  sennble  of  the 
&yottrB  which,  under  God,  we  have  received  from  the  hrethren  in 
England  hy  your  instrumentality.  We  trust  we  shall  always  feel 
grateful  for  the  same  (though  we  fear  being  represented  as  fbr^ 
getfal  of  them),  we  therefore  thank  you  for  the  sacrifices  which  you 
have  made  for  us,  believing  that  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  and  the 
salvation  of  souls  have  been  your  objects,  and  that  you '  Seek  us, 
not  ours.*  We  gladly  acknowledge  our  large  debt  of  love,  and  that 
we  owe  you  even  our  own  selves  besides. 

**  We  hope  then,  beloved  brethren, '  as  it  has  seemed  good  to  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  to  us*  to  retain  our  much  loved  pastor  among  us, 
supplying  his  wants  at  our  own  charge  and  on  our  own  reqKm- 
aibility,  as  fitf  as  the  Lord  shall  enable  us,  that  yon  will  admit  oar 
light  to  do  so,  which  we  found  on  Matt  zvL  19,  and  zviiL  18 ;  and 
that  you  will  be  pleased  to  view  our  separatiim  fixnn  yon  in  the  same 
light  as  that  of  the  churches  in  Jamaica,  and  to  stand  towards  us, 
as  regards  the  mission  premises  and  fiiture  help,  as  you  lately  stood 
with  regard  to  them. 

**  As  our  dear  pastor  intends,  should  the  Lord  permit  it,  still  to 
devote  a  considerable  proportion  of  his  time  to  nussionaiy  work, 
vis.,  schools,  translations,  evangelizing  the  surrounding  oonntiy, 
&c;  as  he  will  in  all  probability  continue  his  useful  correspoiidenoe 
the  native  agents  whom  the  Lord  has  raised  up,  and  with  the 


MR.   KlKGDON'e   CUIMS.  390 

Bible,  Tract,  onii  other  societies ;  and  as  we  trust  his  influence  will 
rather  be  increased  by  the  feeling  which  lutecventshavcstirred  up, 
we  think  it  oor  duty  to  express  our  rcadiuesi  to  receive  from  you 
whntever  Christian  sympathy  and  advice  you  may  feel  disposed  to 
afford  u«,  which  we  will  regard  as  the  fruits  of  love,  and  esteem 
and  rejoice  in  accordingly. 

"  Uaviiig,  as  to  nicana,  been  so  long  fostered  by  the  care  of  your 
generous  Society,  we  feel  our  unpreporedncs^  to  take  the  Rest  steps 
alone,  and  therefore  apphed  to  your  present  agent  here  (Mr. 
Kingdon)  for  the  use,  at  least  for  a  time,  of  our  accustomed  place  of 
wonhip,  school-house,  and  mission  dwelling-bouse.  (We  subjoia 
copies  of  our  letter  to  him  (No.  l)and  his  answers  (Nos.  2  and  3). 
Our  present  necessity  has  made  us  sensible  of  out  fault  with  respect 
to  the  past,  in  not  doing  more  in  this  way  to  alleviate  your  burdens. 
But  though  we  should  still  doubt  our  ability  to  continue  the  work 
unhelped,  our  duty  being  plain,  we  cannot  but  confide  in  God,  and 

~  ~  it  we  Endeavour  to  do  our  utmost,  wc  would  humbly  leave  the 

r,  "  The  brethren  salute  you  in  Christ,  and  desire  your  prayers  to 
n  our  behalf,  hoping  to  receive  a  loving  answer  from  you  as 
\a  convenienL — Teace  be  with  you.' 
"  In  behalf  of  the  church, 

(Signed)  Geobob  Bsaddick,        >  _ 

Si.MOSLMATT.DAVXBS.i^*"'™"*- 


"  BelUe,  2U(  Jpiil,  1846. 

"  P.S. — We  have  sent  a  copy  of  this  to  Mr.  Kingdon." 

L  Mr.  Kingdon  being  tully  apprised  of  Iklr.  Hendetvin's  determt- 
o  renuun  with  the  church,  proceeded  to  the  mission-house, 
Bompanied  by  Mr.  Buttlield,  on  the  26th  of  April.  The  object  of 
ras  professedly  to  take  on  inventory  of  the  ftimitnrc  and 
[Qperty  in  the  house.  Mr.  Kingdon  also  now  denred  that  the 
ript  translations  should  be  given  up  to  him  without  delay, 
hough  he  bad  before  allowed  that  they  might  be  copied.  He  do- 
ided  that  the  stock  of  bibles,  tracts,  &c,  which  Mr.  Uendersoo 
id  for  various  societies  with  which  he  corresponded  should 
ip  to  him,  and  he  even  inquired  for  the  church  books. 
U  these  unreaaonable  claims  Mr.  Heudersou  disallowed ;  and  con- 


400  THE  GOfiPBL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

oeroing  the  last,  he  b^^ged  to  refer  Mr.  Kingdonto  the  chuich^idio 
only  could  dispoee  of  its  records. 

Among  other  declarations  authoritatiyely  made  by  Mr.  Kingdoo 
on  this  occasion,  was  that  no  household  fhmitnre  or  bedding  iHul- 
ever  that  had  at  any  time  been  purchased  with  the  Society's  money, 
should  be  considered  as  Mr.  Henderson's  property,  by  which  rate 
Mr.  Henderson  said  that  Mr.  Eongdon  could  also  claim  the  very 
shirt  upon  his  back.* 

In  bringing  Mr.  Buttfield  with  him  on  this  occasion,  Mr.  King- 
don  transgressed  an  express  understanding  which  he  and  Mr.  Hen- 
derson had  mutually  agreed  upon,  that  all  their  business  transac- 
tions were  to  be  decided  between  themselves  alone.  After  what  had 
happened,  his  choice  of  a  witness,  if  one  were  required,  was  certainly 
not  a  happy  one,  but  he  posttiyely  refused  to  accede  to  Mr.  Hen- 
derson's request  that  his  friend  should  withdraw.  Many  circum- 
stances unite  to  show  that  this  step  was  in  every  respect  calculated 
to  try  Mr.  Henderson  to  the  utmost ;  and  if  he  had  any  feelings,  to 
sting  them  to  the  quick. 

Assailed  in  this  unmanly  manner,  alas!  by  two  brethren  who  were  to 


*  When  Mr.  Hendetton  left  England  as  the  Society*!  misaionary,  he  Hett  that  be  went 
ont  ai  '*a brother  to  carry  ont  the  purpoae  of  brethren"  and  aa  a  aerrantof  the Loid 
—not  of  the  Society.  He  had  no  fixed  aalaiy,  bnt  waa  left  at  Uberty  to  diav  on  the 
Society*!  funds  as  he  mi^t  require  for  the  mission-work  or  for  Ids  own  ueccMitiea. 
What  little  fomitnre  he  had  in  England  he  sold,  and  absorbed  the  proceeds  in  his  ootfit. 
When  he  sncceeded  Hr.  Bonnie  at  Belize,  the  latter  had  eonaidentble  peraonal  property 
accumnlated  from  his  tarings  and  the  proceeds  of  Mrs.  Bourne's  sdiool.  Mndiofitwms 
removed  by  Mr.  Bonme  to  New  York,  and  was  there  soon  after  consnmed  in  the  great  fire 
which  occurred  at  that  time.  The  rest  was  pnt  up  to  auction,  thov^  Mr.  Boorae  was 
(mly  removing  to  another  station  of  the  Society's.  Mr.  Henderson  pnrebased  aone,  b«fc 
the  nussion-house  remained  scantily  furnished  dnring  the  whde  of  his  residence.  AU  he 
erer  laid  out,  eren  to  pordiase  the  shirt  on  his  back,  was  the  Society's  money,  bnt  the  whole 
of  his  labour,  the  proceeds  of  his  school,  garden,  and  even  the  profits  on  sales  of  medidne 
and  stationery,  whidi  were  not  inctmsiderable,  bnt  which  the  wants  of  the  peo|de  had 
led  him  to  make,  were  all  considered  aa  the  Society's  property.  Not  having  had  a  a^ante 
purse  to  call  his  own  for  twelve  years,  Mr.  Henderson  must  now,  aoooiding  to  Mr.  King- 
don's  hard  rule,  leave  the  Society,  stripped  of  all  necesaaries,  and  without  the  least  pro- 
vision for  his  fkmily.  This  was  actnallyput  in  force,  and  was  eonflrmed  bythe  eommittae, 
and  that  because  he  had  determined  to  remain  with  his  peraecnted  llock,  and  not  to 
abandon  the  interests  entrusted  to  him  from  above  as  one  who  cared  not  for  them.  The 
injustice  of  such  a  proceeding  was  the  more  keenly  felt,  as  Mr.  Henderson  had  unra- 
aerredly  bestowed  the  energia  of  some  of  the  best  years  of  his  life  in  advancing  the  in 
terests  of  the  Society.  Its  property  had  been  materiaDy  benefitted  by  his  care  and  aasi- 
dnity,  and  he  was  aent  empty  away  by  the  committee,  at  a  time  when  he  had  to  b^in  to 
nake  provision  for  hif  own  honw,  and  to  supply  his  large  family  with  every  booaebold 
necessary. 


MR.  KIXGDONfi  APPEAL  TO  THE  CIVIL  POWER. 


401 


have  alleriated  his  burdens,  Mr.  Henderson  sent  for  a.  friend  (o  be  a 
witncm  on  hia  behalf,  and  bore  tbeir  foul  imputiKions  and  Ouitlees 
wtimgling  for  above  two  long  houm,  during  which  be  repeatedly 
entreated  them  to  break  off  so  unprofitable  an  interview,  and  to 
cease  tbeir  prorocations.  They,  hoffever,  coolly  and  deliberately 
persisted  in  nying  the  most  offensive  things,  till  Jlr,  Hendei^n's 
feelings  ovenacw  him.  He  rose  from  his  seat,  wrung  his  bands  like 
one  distracted,  and  quickly  left  the  room,  but  retHroing  almost 
immediately,  he  addressed  them  angrily  as  "  cruel  wretches,"  and 
Mr.  Eingdon  as  a  "brutal  man,"  and  peremptorily  ordered  them 
to  leave  the  honse.  At  this  tbey  both  laughed,  as  though  they  hod 
gained  their  object,  and  retiring,  went  directly  from  the  miscion- 
housc  to  the  police  magistrate,  laid  n  complaint  against  Mr.  Hen- 
demon,  and  sought  advice  how  to  eject  him  and  the  church  from 
the  mission-house  by  force  oflaw. 

After  this  parting,  Mr.  Henderwjn  remained  greatly  humbled  at 
the  exhibition  of  his  own  weakness,  bnt  more  than  ever  convinced 
that  these  brethren,  if  brethren  they  may  be  called,  were  animated 
by  no  benevolent  feelings  towards  himself.  He  waa,  of  course, 
ignorant  oftbemaliciousslandersandmiitrepreseDtations  which  they 
bntl  addressed  to  the  committee  in  London,  and  he  did  not  yet  know 
to  what  lengths  they  were  prepared  to  go,  in  order,  if  possible,  pub- 
licly to  disgrace  him  and  drive  him  from  the  place.  An  exa^eralcd 
report  of  Mr.  Henderson's  violence,  in  which  they  greatly  ti 
was  soon  ipread  abroad,  and  a  handbill  was  directly  after  ifsued  from 
the  nitssion-pres;,  and  circulated  in  the  town,  declaring  that  Mr. 
Kingdon  bad  not  claimed  the  shirt  upon  Sir.  Henderson's  back.' 

Matters  bad  now  become  ofBdally  public  through  Mr.  King' 
don's  appeal  to  the  civil  power,  and  there  was  eveiy  appearance 
that  litigation  would  lead  to  violence  and  to  greater  wrong  in  the 
state  of  feeling  which  existed  against  Mr.  Henderson.  Well 
convinced  hunself  of  the  injustice  done  him,  and  persuaded  that 
the  committee  at  home  had.  been  mieled,  and  that  they  would  Dot 
sanction  the  steps  which  tbeir  agents  were  now  taking.  Mr.  H«ai- 
dersan,  in  order  to  arrest  the  progicn  of  legul  proceedings,  aTaileil 
himself  of  a  power  of  atlomey  which  had  been  sent  to  him  by  the 


402  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA* 

Sodety  some  jean  before,  to  enable  him  to  zesiflt  Mr.  BoameV 
claim  upon  the  nuasion  lot.  By  merely  recording  that  power,  hia 
end  was  effectually  answered.  No  ejectment  could  take  place  tQl 
another  power  of  attorney  should  be  procured ;  time  was  afforded 
&r  an  appeal  to  the  conmiittee  itself,*  and  Mr.  Kingdon  was  forced 
to  be  satisfied  with  less  violent  means.  Mr.  Henderson  fSelt  him- 
self quite  free,  in  honour,  to  act  upon  the  first  arrangement  which 
they  had  mutually  agreed  to,  and  having  protected  himself  against 
violence,  he  again  assumed  a  passive  position.  An  ample  and 
humble  apology  was  made  by  him  for  his  rudeness  in  orderipg 
them  to  leave  his  house,  and  more  pacific  negoa'aiioni  on  the  part 
of  Mr.  Elingdon  were  soon  renewed. 

■  All  the  unfair  claims  which  Mr.  Kingdon  had  already  set  up 
were  by  him  strenuously  maintained.  He  further  took  occasion  to 
dispute  the  right  of  Mr.  W.  Tillett  to  present  Mr.  Henderson  with 
a  pitpan  for  his  river  excursions ;  and  that  of  a  aster,  who  had 
given  a  small  house  and  lot  to  the  church  of  which  she  was,  still  a 
living  member,  though  both  the  donors  asserted  that  their  gifts 
were  not  made  to  the  Society.  The  houses  at  the  out-stations  at 
Baker's  and  at  Tilletton,  erected  by  the  people,  and  occupied  by 
the  native  teachers,  Mr.  Kingdon  persisted  in  claiming  from  Mr. 
Henderson,  who  had  delivered  up  all  title-deeds,  and  who  was 
neither  the  occupier  nor  the  holder  of  the  property.  The  very 
buiying-ground,  which  had  been  given  for  the  use  of  the 
denomination,  was  taken  into  Mr.  Kingdons  safe  keeping,  and 
though  granted  by  the  representative  of  the  Crown  to  the 
Baptists,  and  not  to  the  Society,  who  could  have  little  expecta- 
tion of  ever  needing  a  place  of  sepulture  in  Belize,  Mr.  Kingdon 
claimed  the  key,  and  shut  up  the  "  Prayers'-house'*  which  the 
people  had  built  upon  it,  thus  precluding  the  continuance  of  the 
Sunday-school,  and  driving  the  people*s  meetings  back  to  the 
inconvenient  cottages  of  the  locality. 
Besides  all  this,  Mr.  Kingdon  still  persisted  in  refusing  to  dis- 

•  nuragh  the  Committee  upon  the  whole  hare  ratified  all  that  Hr.  Kingdon  d^;  bj 
granting  Mr.  Henderson'i  allowance  for  nipport  up  to  the  lit  of  June,  they  TirtMUy  dis- 
allowed  Hr.  Kingdon*s  effort  to  ^ect  him  by  force,  and  therefore  approved  practically  of  ha 
resistance  to  it ;  though  they  hare  since  endeavomed  to  throw  blame  upon  Mr.  Hendenon 
for  amQing  himself  of  the  power  of  attorney,  the  only  known  means  which  he  could  employ, 
beeaose  he  was  no  longer  their  agent  The  tmagiBacj,  and  Hr.  Kingdon'i  6uthkH&e«» 
•■tiified  Hr.  Hendenon  an  this  pdnt 


"  DIGMPIED   BEARL\C   OF   THE  CnCBCC,  403 

charge  Mr.  UendcwoQ'a  accomitd  for  supplies  with  the  vnrious  mer- 
chaats  which  he  did  not  any  lon^r  dispute,  and  which  the  com- 
mittee had  directed  him  to  p«y ;  be  refiued  to  admit  Mr.  Hen- 
derson's right  to  dispose  of  a  reninattt  of  stationery  and  drugs,  the 
cost  of  which  to  the  Society  had  been  repaid  over  and  over  again 
hy  the  profits  on  soles ;  and  he  declined  to  receive  the  first 
edition  of  Mr.  Henderson's  "Mosqnito  Gnunmar,"  which  bad 
been  printed  at  New  York,  and  had  only  now  arrived,  bevaoae 
sccompiuiied  hy  the  risk  of  a  trifling  expense,  at  the  same  time  that 
ho  claimed  every  scrap  of  the  MS.  labours  of  the  translator. 
I. 'A  sharp  correspondence  upon  these  and  other  petty  claims, 
B^noily  unreasonable,  was  industriously  mainLVined  hy  Mr.  King- 
don  during  the  interval  between  bis  appeal  to  Ciesar  and  the 
evacuation  of  the  premises  by  the  church  and  pastor  on  the  1st  of 
June.  In  the  mean  time,  the  schools  hod  been  dismissed,  ood 
much  of  the  active  missionary  operation  of  the  station  was  inter- 
rupted, if  not  entirely  suspended. 

The  church,  though  deeply  alTected  by  all  that  was  transpiring, 
maintained  a  dignified  and  tranquil  position  in  the  midst  of  tbe 
storm.  The  only  departures  from  its  usual  couree  wi^rc  the 
greater  frequency  of  meetings  for  prayer  and  for  the  transaction 
of  business;  and  the  weekly  celebration  of  the  ordinance  of  the 
Lord's  supper,  which  had  previously  been  brought  before  the 
atteniion  of  the  church  as  a  scriptural  practice  demanding  its  con- 
sideration and  adoption.  It  was  resorted  lo  at  this  crisis,  on 
account  of  the  want  which  was  felt  of  close  and  frequent  com- 
munion with  God  and  with  each  other-  Subsequently,  the  former 
practice  of  monthly  commimion  was  restored,  bccsuse  the  mind  of 
the  church  had  not  been  dclinitcly  taken  on  the  question,  and  the 
events  which  followed,  nud  in  a  great  measure  suspended  the 
ministry  of  the  word,  also  interrupted  any  progress  that  might 
have  been  made  in  matters  requiring  deliberation,  and  affecting  the 
permanent  practice  of  tlic  church. 

The  native  teachers  who  were  assembled  in  Belize  on  the  4th  of 
May  met  together  in  the  sciiool-room  (where  they  then  frequently 
united  in  devotional  exercises),  and  after  prayer,  they  solemnly 
agreed  to  four  resolutions,  hy  which  they  eipresBed,  I.  Their 
opinion  that  the  resolnlion  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  ac- 
cepting Mi.  Henderson's  resignation  was  hasty,  and  aroie  from 

D1I2 


404  THB  008PBL  DC  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

loiiie  serioos  misimderetandiog  of  the  trae  state  and  interests  of  tlw 
nuasion  there ;  IL  Their  cordial  concurrence  in  the  resolution  of 
the  church  to  retain  and  support  their  pastor;  TIT^  Their  undi- 
minished  confidence  in  Mr.  Henderson  as  their  pastor  and  pte- 
ceptor,  and  their  determination  to  co-operate  with  him;  and, 
lY.  Their  purpose  to  unite  all  their  efiforts,  each  in  his  sphere,  in 
all  kinds  of  missionary  operations,  relying  upon  the  prayerful 
consideration,  sympathy,  and  encouragement  of  thdr  Christian 
hrethren  in  more  favoured  lands.  These  resolutions  were  signed 
at  once  hy  John  Warner,  of  Tilletton,  Francis  Curran,  assistant 
teacher  at  Belize,  "William  Michael,  Carif  teacher,  and  Fredezick 
Crowe,  of  Guatemala.  Joseph  Kelly,  of  Baker^s,  who  was  not 
present,  afterwards  added  his  signature,  and  Mr.  Henderson  also 
pledged  himself  to  union  with  the  little  hand  of  teiehers  in  their 
common  work. 

On  the  same  day,  Mr.  Henderson  being  obliged  to  attend  Court 
as  a  juror,  Mr.  Crowe  accompanied  him.  His  name  being  called,  he 
tookhi8seat,andwaschbeenforemanofthejury.  The  detk  of  Courts 
came  next  to  administer  the  form  of  oath.  The  foreman  declined 
it  He  was  called  to  the  bar,  and  after  consultation,  a  magistrate 
said,  "  The  Court  fine  you  5/.  for  refusing  to  be  sworn.'*  Mr.  Hen- 
derson drew  out  a  doubloon,  paid  the  money,  recdved  the  change, 
and  without  remark  left  the  court-room  with  Mr.  Crowe,  rqjoidng 
that  he  was  counted  worthy  to  pay  for  his  principles.  0^  that 
day,  Mr.  Crowe's  name  "was  added  to  the  venire,  though  not  a  fixed 
resident,  but  a  mere  refugee,  and  not  possessed  of  any  property  in 
the  Settlement,  which  is  the  legal  qualification.  1^  remonstranees 
made  in  the  proper  quarter  were  inefiectual  to  obtain  the  remoyal 
of  his  name.  The  animus  that  placed  it  there  was  hat  too 
apparent. 

As  Mr.  Ejngdon  persisted  in  refusing  to  pay  the  debts  whidi  Mr. 
Henderson  had  contracted  on  behalf  of  the  Society,  Mr.  Henderson 
himself  offered  to  discharge  one  of  them  by  drawing  a  hill  upon 
the  treasurer,  as  he  had  been  accustomed  to  do,  and  which  he 
could  not  believe  they  would  dishonour  under  the  drcmnstaneeL 
This  drew  from  Mr.  Eingdon  a  public  notice  by  advertisement  in 
"  The  Honduras  Observer;*  dated  the  16ih  of  May,  statmg  that  Mr. 
Henderson  had  no  power  or  authority  to  act  for  the  Society,  or  to 
draw  hills  in  their  name ;  another  step  which  was  calculated  to 


PRoaPBCnvE  DIFFICOLTIEa.  405 

bkat  Mr.  Henderson's  rqiutation,   had   it  not   been   too   finnly 
estalillshed  to  be  shaken  by  Mr.  Kingdon's  hand. 

After  this  injurioua  notice,  one  of  the  merchants  concerned,  the 

ftgeot  of  the  house  of  Angas,  I!cvan  iind  Co.  accepted  Mr.  Uen- 

(lerson's  bill  on  the'.Sociely  in  liquiilution  of  his  account.    This  bill 

IS  dJelionoured  by  the  commitiee  in  London ;  but  being  referred 

'    to  arbitratioD,  five  of  the  leading  merdianls  in  Belize  decided  the 

[  {ncstiou,  B«  a  mere  matter  of  business,  against  the  Society,  who 

I  ultimately  paid  this  bill  and  ihelr  other  debts.*    Thua  it  wai  made 

1  ^parent  that  a  Society  of  religioua  men,  seeking  a  benevolent 

t^ect,  were  blind  to  the  mere  equity  of  a  transaction  in  which 

Ben  of  the  world  found  uo  difficulty  in  awarding  a  just  dectBOn. 

iFos  this  the  result  of  personal  prejudice,  or  ia  it  that  "  the  chil- 

K-'iren  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children 

]  af  li^hl?" 

The  church  wa*  now  well  aware  that  no  concessions  were  to  be 

[  npcctcd  from  Mr.  Eingdon,  who  had  so  bitterly  manifested  his 

I  disapproval  of  the  exercise  of  its  right  to  prefer  Mr.  Henderson  to 

f  llim,  or  another  stranger,  and  to  being  left  without  a  piutor  at  all. 

:e  members  also  understood  that  as  a  church  they  would  nut  be 

Slowed  to  use  their  place  of  worship  after  the  1st  of  June,  when 

ingdon  and  his  fHcnds  were  to  take  posKssion  of  it.    They, 

kercfore,  sought  to  provide  aa  best  they  might  for  their  future 

in  this  respect,  and  also  to  procure  n  shelter  for  Mr.  Hen- 

I  and  his  fiuiiily.    This,  in  their  position,  wai  no  small 

Iffifficully.    They  consisted  almost  entirely  of  the  very  poorest  of 

'^  e  people.     Some  of  the  few  wealthier  members  had  been  eJ- 

Eudcd,  and  were  supporting  Mr.  Kiagdoa's  cause.     Tlieir  scanty 

<  were  just  then  being  drained  to  pay  their  own  and  thdr 

I  repeated  fines  for  non-juring,  which   were    growing 

creasingly  bordensome,   and  they   had   undertaken   to  support 

I  pastor.    The  out-stations  and  native  teachers,  too,  by  thdr 

to  the  church,  were  more  than  likely  to  need  its  sup- 

,  if  they  were  still  to  be  contiaticd  tn  operation.    How  all 

9  should  be  done  was  a  problem  which  the  church  could  not 

re.  Still,  the  path  of  duty  was  clear.    It  could  not  be  the  will 

t  God  that  llis  people  should  give  up  their  principles,  and  they 

lir,  «ud  fUirr  pccunliry  maltcn,  v^  be  fiiuid  more  fnllj  cipluiw]  ia 
'  ilic  scfij  luUii  SocieljIiliHKn, 


406  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

were  prepared  to  give  up  ercrTthiog  else  for  them.  Tlieir  woik, 
too,  was  not  to  be  abandoned.  €rod  had  given  them  some  saeoesB, 
and  now  added  the  will  and  the  men  to  push  that  saoceas  still 
further,  though  they  were  for  the  moment  placed  under  a  doad  of 
perplexing  trials  and  difficulties.  The  Lord  now  united  their  heaifs 
in  this  purpose  as  the  heart  of  one  man,  and  if  they  were  bat 
faithful  to  use  the  means  and  opportunities  set  before  them,  they 
felt  fully  assured  that  He  would  not  withhold  the  pecuniary 
assistance  that  they  might  need.  He  in  whose  hands  are  the 
hearts  of  all  men,  could  move  the  committee  in  London  to  respect 
the  opinion  of  the  church,  to  accede  to  their  just  and  reason- 
able request,  and  prevent  the  Society  from  abandoning  the  work 
they  had  so  long  fostered ;  or  if  this  were  not  His  will,  He  couid 
raise  up  other  instrumentality,  through  which  to  help  them. 
Already  the  church  began  to  foresee  that  it  would  perhaps  be 
more  desirable  to  receive  help  directly  from  kindred  churches 
themselves,  than  to  obtain  it  through  the  intermediate  agency  of 
a  managing  committee  so  very  far  oif,  so  little  oonnderate  of  the 
Church,  and  so  really  ignorant  of  their  true  state  and  wants. 

The  resolution  once  prayerfully  come  to.  Divine  Providence 
was  not  slow  in  opening  a  way,  and  facilitating  the  poipose  of 
the  church.  An  old  wooden  structure,  of  moderate  as  and  in 
pretty  good  condition,  was  for  sale.  The  agent  of  the  property, 
who  was  a  friend  of  Mr.  Hender8on*s,  and  well  disposed  towards 
the  church,  offered  advantageous  terms.*  It  must  prove  strait 
for  only  one  of  the  purposes  required ;  for  both  together,  it  would  be 
very  inconvenient.  Its  situation,  however,  was  favourable,  though 
it  wanted  a  ^'  waterside,"  where  the  baptisms  could  take  place,  and 
the  ground  was  low  and  swampy.  In  point  of  appearance,  and  as 
contrasted  with  the  mission  property,  it  was  like  an  ordinary  meet- 
ing-house compared  with  a  cathedral.  But  there  was  evidently  the 
hand  of  God  facilitating  its  acquisition  when  no  other  so  suitable 
offered,  and  arrangements  were  made  for  its  purchase  by  the  church, 
who  also  made  an  effort  to  raise  the  necessary  sum  for  the  first 
instalment. 

Mr.  Henderson,  who  had  escaped  with  a  fine  at  the  two  last 
Courts,  was  still  led  to  believe  that  future  penalties  would  in  his 

*  Vis.  SOOJL  Jamaica  cmreiicy  (or  l&OZ.  iterlicg)  one-third  of  «  hich  was  to  be  cut,  and 
tile  other  two-thirdt  irere  made  payable  at  coBTenic&t  isterrals. 


THB   IffT  OF  JITNE    1845.  407 

case  at  least  be  more  serioaB,  aa  there  wss  much  personal  enmity 
expressed  towards  bimsclf.  His  mind  bad  been  harassed  bj  the 
conduct  of  the  Society  and  that  of  their  agents  on  the  spot.  And 
though  the  comniittce  bad  previously  discouraged  the  idea  of  his 
paying  a  visit  to  Bngland,  and  were  evidently  not  auxious  for 
an  inlerview  with  him,  he  had  bcraoie  more  and  more  desirous 
to  meet  them,  and  wax  still  persuaded  that  a  better  understand- 
ing would  be  the  mult.  He,  tht-reforc,  meditated  a  voyage  to 
Europe  in  order  to  compass  this  end,  and  also  to  obtain  relief  from 
the  Home  Government  for  all  recusants  in  the  matter  of  onth- 
lakiag,  the  penaJties  of  which  were  not  only  pushed  to  an  undue 
extreme,  but  under  cover  of  law  the  Courts  of  the  Settlemcat  were 
prostitated  to  the  basest  of  purposes,  being  made  the  vehicles  of 
private  pique  and  animosity,  aud  the  tools  of  the  Episcopal  party 
in  order  to  crush  dissent  and  drive  its  boldest  champion  from  the 
field.  His  beoltb,  hb  spirits,  his  wounded  feelings,  all  seemed 
to  demaud  change  and  repose,  and  the  intemiption  which  his 
labours  had  sustuned,  the  transition  which  the  church  was  under- 
going, and  the  private  interests  of  his  family,  united  to  favour 
the  design.  Here,  again,  me»ns  were  wanting.  Mr.  Kingdun  bad 
withheld  the  fair  provision  which  the  committee  had  made  for 
such  a  time,  and  a  voluntary  but  perpetual  exile  from  the  scene 
of  his  labours,  was  the  only  condition  upon  which  he  would  fulfil 
this  act  of  justice  to  one  whose  services  were  no  longer  desired, 
and  before  he  would  obey  the  committee's  express  instructions. " 

At  length  the  1st  of  June  arrived.  On  the  previous  day, 
which  was  the  Sabbath,  the  ordinance  of  baptism  bad  been  ad- 
ministered for  the  last  time  in  the  convenient  place  so  long  used 
for  that  puri>08e,  aud  on  that  Monday  morning.  Brother  Joseph 
Kelly,  of  Baker's,  was  united  in  marriage  to  a  young  idster  of 
colour,  which  was  the  last  act  Mr.  Henderson  performed  in  the 
old  place  of  meeting.  During  that  day  he  removed  his  fnntily 
from  the  mission  premises,  where  he  hud  spent  so  many  laborious, 
happy,  nnd  sorrowful  hours.  The  place  of  worship,  the  schools, 
liis  study,  his  garden,  and  his  child's  grave,  were  all  unwillingly 
left  for  the  church's  newly-acquired  property.    The  house  had 

Dinlllci  uiict:»crl  Uili  urt  of  ditolii^iFniT  unlbf  pvt  ot  Id.  Kingdon,  lij 
<  fTuI  to  Mr.  Hcnduwia  (he  dun  thtj  tiod  rnKd  foi  hit  ne,  Hi  the  lap- 
,  tie  wcoU  moon  wiUi  liii  CubUi  It  Ihc  Uuiled  SUtt*. 


408  THE  GO0P£L  IH  CEXTRAL  AMERICA. 

been  ilightly  repaired.  The  partitioiis  in  tbe  hmtt  ■tacy 
all  taken  down  so  as  to  Inake  one  large  room,  which  was  fandkf 
anfficient  to  hold  the  usual  nmnber  of  members,  without  nay  cos- 
gregation.  The  upper  story  was  inconTeniently  amall  te  sa 
laige  a  fiunily.  A  small  negro  house  that  stood  in  the  jaid  bad 
been  put  in  order  for  the  infimt-school,  and  the  larger  adiool  wv 
to  occupy  the  same  place  that  was  appropriated  for  meetiiig^ 
The  members  who  were  able  to  do  so,  broughtof  their  own  fiir* 
niture  for  the  use  of  their  pastor  and  his  children,  to  whom  Mr. 
Kingdon,  on  behalf  of  the  Society,  still  reused  eren  a  bed  to  lie 
on.  Some  of  the  ladies  of  Mr.  Henderson^s  oongngatiott,  not 
connected  with  the  church,  haTing  noticed  Mr.  Kingdoofa  jjgqrous 
exactions  in  these  respects,  went  of  their  own  aooocd  fion  iioBae 
to  house,  to  collect  firom  the  merchants  and  mam  wealthy  in- 
habitants, with  a  view  to  supply  what  was  moit  iminedittely 
wanted  by  the  family.  As  the  result  of  this  kind  andspaiitaiieoiii 
effort,  those  ladies  placed  in  Mr.  Henderson's  handa,  on  the  dsy 
of  his  removing,  Uxe  sum  of  235  dollars  {or  AIL  ateiiii^),  out 
of  which  he  at  once  generously  invested  200  in  the  dmchli 
recent  purchase,  for  the  first  instalment  of  which  they  bed  then 
to  raise  only  100  doUars  more. 

Painful  as  must  have  been  the  sense  of  injustice  done  him  by 
those  who  should  have  been  his  firiends,  the  unexpected  demoa- 
atrations  of  kindness,  liberality,  and  sympathy  which  Ifr*  Header- 
son  and  his  fiunily  received  on  this  occasion,  from  the  peoffle  of 
Belize,  must  have  been  most  grateful  to  their  feelings.  On  the  mmt 
day,  ere  Mr.  Henderson  had  well  left  the  Society^s  roo^  Mr.  Kh^* 
doo,  with  indecent  haste,  but  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  eagemesB 
which  he  had  all  along  manifested  to  become  the  controller  of  the 
mission  property,  entered  the  house  and  received  it  with  ita  entire 
furniture,  books,  stationery,  &c.  &c  One  of  his  first  acta  wm  to 
drive  from  the  mission  tank  some  of  the  schoolboys^  who  were 
drawing  a  last  pail  of  water  for  Mr.  Henderson's  nee.  Thus 
making  the  expelled  fimiily  feel,  as  early  as  possible,  one  of  tbe 
physical  inconveniences  to  which  they  would  hencefinrth  be  aob- 
jeded— their  new  house  being  unprovided  vrith  that  very  ficntisi 
convenience.  But  that  act  only  drew  forth  another  tokoi  of  good 
fteling.  A  wealthy  neighbour,  and  a  friend  of  Mr.  Kingdon's,  who 
had  a  large  tank  attached  to  his  dwelling,  immediatdy  aeni  a 


mesMge  to  Mr.  Henderson  that  he  should  be  happy  to  supply  his 
wonts  in  this  respect. 

On  the  same  day  Air-  Crowe  had  been  obliged  to  attend  the 
SammaTy  Court.  On  the  list  of  jurors  being  read,  he  repeated  hia 
objections  to  serve,  not  being  a  duly  qualiiied  rcsideuL  Ue  was 
told  by  tlie  titting  magistralc  that  lie  luijjht  appeal  to  the  Grand 
Court,  but  be  muet  nerve  in  tbc  mean  time.  It  viaa  so  ordered 
that  bis  name  was  not  drawn  out  of  the  urn  on  that  ilay,  and  he 
remained  at  liberty,  but  with  an  intimation  from  the  Provost- 
Uanhal  that,  ioatfad  of  being  struck  out,  his  name  should  now  be 
placed  on  the  list  of  grand  jurors  also. 

On  the  day  after  the  removal  of  his  family,  Mr.  Uendenon  had 
arranged  to  take  bis  departure  fur  New  York,  trusting  to  Provi- 
dence to  supply  him  when  there  with  the  means  oi'  continuing  his 
voyage  to  En^and,  and  leaving  his  wife  and  children  under  the 
care  of  the  brethren  and  friends.  Up  to  the  last  moment  of  his 
embarkation,  there  were  ominous  appearances  which  seemed  >0 
indicate  that  his  departure  would  be  prevented.  On  the  evening  of 
the  1st,  being  tlie  first  Mowiay  of  the  month,  the  church  came 
together  in  their  tncn  place.  The  prayers  of  the  brethren  were 
more  tlian  usually  fervent.  Mr.  Henderson's  parting  address  was 
deeply  afiectiug.  A.  letter  which  had  been  prepared  to  give  to  Mr. 
Henderson,  addrecscd  to  the  churches  in  the  United  Stales  and  in 
Buglaud,  11'as  read  and  adopted,  and  a  collection  was  made  towards 
his  travelling  expenses,  in  the  midst  of  their  poverty  the  church 
nod  pastor  could  confidently  look  Ibrward,  and  even  anticipate  the 
time  when,  through  the  hberollty  of  their  better  circumstanced 
fellow- disciples,  they  should  be  restored  to  the  more  commodious 
place  they  had  left,  c)r  be  enabled  to  erect  one  as  convenient,  and  so 
give  up  the  entire  house  they  now  tilled  to  their  pastor  for  his 
private  residence.  Abundance  of  fruits,  v^etables,  fowls,  and  other 
live-stock  were  sent  in  from  all  quarters  for  Mr.  Henderson's  use 
during  bis  passage,  and  the  moving  demonstrations  of  aflection 
towards  him,  which  were  at  once  sorrowful  and  pleasing,  constituted 
an  eloquent  refutation  of  ail  the  slanders  of  his  enemies. 

Early  the  next  morning  (the  2nd),  Mr.  Henderson  was  to  cm- 
bark.  BeJbre  he  could  do  m,  one  of  the  unsettled  accounts,  which 
Mr.  Kingdon  refused  to  pay,  was  sent  in.  A  friendly  messenger 
then  came  to  inform  Mr.  Henderson  that  Mr.  Kingdon  would  be 


410  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMEBICA. 

willing  to  pay  it,  and  lemoye  this  obstacle  to  his  departure,  if  Mr, 
Henderson  would  give  up  the  power  of  attorney  which  he  held^  imto  hi$ 
(Mr.  K.'i)  hands.  Mr.  Henderson  declined  doing  so,  but  the  kmd 
friend  who  had  consented  to  bear  this  message,  generously  ofleredto 
become  answerable  for  the  account  Mr.  Henderson  now  prepared 
to  leave,  and  was  about  giving  a  parting  embrace  to  his  family; 
when  the  Provost-Marshal  rode  up.  He  had  come  to  collect  a  fine 
for  absence  from  Ck>urt,  which  Mr.  Henderson  paid.  This  unex- 
pected demand  left  his  little  stock  of  cash  almost  exhausted.  Two 
of  the  brethren  then  accompanied  him  on  board,  and  having  prayed 
with  him  in  the  narrow  cabin,  returned  to  the  bereaved  and  afflicted 
members  and  friends,  some  of  whom  were  following  the  ship  with 
an  eye-glass,  and  observed  him  standing  on  the  deck  and  waving 
his  hand  in  token  of  farewell. 

On  the  following  LordVday  (the  7th),  the  coi^jv^atioii  first 
met  in  the  new  place  of  worship,  and  though  Mr.  Henderaon  was 
absent  it  was  inconveniently  filled.  While  but  a  few  hundred 
yards  off — ^within  sight  and  almost  within  hearing — the  deserted 
meeting-house  was  for  the  first  time  occupied  by  Mr.  Kingdon  and 
his  little  company,  where  the  contrast  was  as  great  with  respect  to 
numbers  as  in  point  of  accommodation.  The  next  day  the  seihoda 
were  opened  by  Mr.  Crowe,  Mr.  Henderson's  eldest  daughter,  under 
her  mother's  direction,  having  charge  of  the  infant  department. 
The  number  of  children  who  attended  was  more  than  equal  to 
their  conveniences  or  to  the  strength  of  the  teachers. 

This  state  of  things  continued  nearly  to  the  end  of  the  month 
without  interruption.  At  the  mission-house,  a  young  man,  not 
a  professor  of  religion,  was  appointed  schoolmaster  with  a  good 
salary :  Mr.  Kingdon  and  Mr.  Buttfield  not  having  yet  overcome 
their  antipathy  to  school-keeping.  Efforts  were  made  by  those 
gentlemen  and  their  wives  to  increase  both  their  congr^;ation  and 
their  school  by  domiciliary  visitation,  which  was  attended  with  bat 
small  success. 

The  excitement  occanoned  by  late  events  had  scarcely  yet  sub- 
sided when  the  Grand  C!ourt  opened  its  sessions  on  the  29th  of  June. 
Mr.  Crowe  was  obliged  to  leave  his  school  and  be  in  attendance. 
When  the  list  of  jurors  was  read,  he  stepped  up  and  ^lAimAH 
exemption,  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  a  qualified  resident.  Ba 
objection  was  overruled  by  the  Courts  which  was  presided  over  by 


IMPniSONUENT  OF   UR.  CROWE.  411 

Chief-Justico  Robert  Temple,  assisted  bj  George  Nicholson,  Esq., 
andDr.Jolin  Young,aprofe8sianalgeiitleiiionorcolour.  Aftersome 
hours,  a  BecoDd  jury  being  called,  Mr.  Crowe's  name  nos  drown. 
lie  took  his  seat  in  the  jury-box,  but  when  the  book  was  preBented 
to  be  kiseed,  he  objected,  and  was  called  to  the  bar.  The  judge, 
then  addresring  him,  said,  "Tou  object  to  swear?"  He  replied 
in  the  affinnative.  "  What  denomination  of  Christians  do  jou 
beiongto?"  Answer:  "  To  the  Baptist."  The  judge,  turuing  to 
the  Clerk  of  Courts,  said,  "You  hear,  put  that  down;"  and  then 
added,  to  the  recitsact,  "On  what  grounds  do  you  object?" 
Answer :  "  I  believe  it  to  bo  forbidden  in  scripture."  A  long  cou- 
Hultation,  in  a  whisper,  followed,  but  the  words  "  They  will  refuse 
to  give  evidence  on  any  ense,"  were  audible.  The  judge  again 
addressed  Mr,  Crowe  :  "  Are  you  aware  that  the  law  ia,  that  you 
must  Bwew  or  be  punished  P"  Answer :  "  I  ain  ready  to  bear  any 
punishment  mlher  than  do  what  I  believe  to  be  contrary  to  the 
commands  of  God."  The  judge;  "Is  your  mind  made  upi'" 
Answer:  "C«rlwiily."  The  judge  then  made  a  speech  of  soine 
length,  addressed  to  Mr.  Crowe,  saying,  in  substaucc,  that  he 
deemed  it  quite  useless  to  argue  with  a  person  of  his  sort:  it 
would  be  a  waste  of  words,  and  both  nnprotitable  and  out  ot 
place:  that  non-juring  was  a  growing  evil  which  was  spreading 
rapidlyomong  the  common  people,  of  which  Mr.  Crowe  and  others 
like  him  were  the  cause,  and  it  must  now  be  put  a  stop  to.  He 
imputed  unworthy  motives  to  Sir.  Crowe,  charging  him  with 
coming  there  to  make  a  public  display  of  himself,  and  ad^ng, 
"  The  sentence  of  the  court  is,  that  you  are  condemned  to  pay  a 
fine  of  tnenty  pounds,  and  to  be  confined  for  the  space  of  one 
calendar  month  in  the  common  jail."  Air.  Crowe  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  answer  as  to  the  evil  imputations  which  had  been  made 
respecting  his  motives,  but  this  was  rudely  refused,  when  he  bowed 
in  submission,  and,  being  taken  into  custody,  was  at  once  removed 
from  the  Court-house  to  the  jail. 

By  this  event,  Mr.  Henderson's  school  was  broken  up,  and  the 
congregation  deprived  of  Mr.  Crowe's  services.  The  church,  too, 
was  again  wounded  in  one  of  its  members,  and  was  made  to  feel 
more  deeply  the  enmity  of  the  world  and  its  own  cxposedness  as  a 
flock  having  no  shepherd.  But  the  penalty  imposed  on  integrity 
was  cheerfully  borne,  and,  at  the  expiration  of  the  first  month's 


413  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTBAL  AMERICA* 

imprisoiinieiit,  the  sufferer  refased  to  permit  his  brethren  to  mile 
an  effort  to  pay  his  fine  and  obtain  his  release,  which  thcj  raj 
kindly  offered  to  do,  well  knowing  their  poverty,  the  many  har- 
dens of  this  kind  which  they  had  lately  borne,  and  the  heavy 
xesponsibilities  which  were  then  pressing  upon  them.  He  was 
also  persuaded  that  the  same  penalty,  or,  perhaps,  a  heavier  ooe^ 
would  be  imposed  again  at  the  first  opportunity.  He  was  per- 
fectly satisfied  of  the  illegality  as  well  as  the  injustice  of  the 
sentence  of  the  Court.  He  was  willing  to  let  the  enemies  of  the 
Gospel  expend  their  malevolence  upon  him,  if  such  were  the  Loitf  t 
will.  He  felt  somewhat  curious  to  observe  how  fiir  their  bKiid 
animosities  would  carry  them.  At  the  same  time,  he  confided 
only  in  an  omnipotent  arm  for  his  support  and  defence,  and 
esteemed  it  an  honour  to  be  called  to  make  the  inconsiderable 
aacrifice  of  his  liberty  in  defence  of  the  smallest  portim  of  tmth. 

In  this  case  there  was  not  only  evidence  of  Uie  eiisting  Hi-win 
towards  the  Baptists,  by  requiring  the  services  of  a  perton  who 
was. known  to  object  to  take  an  oath — that  person  at  the  time 
engaged  in  partially  supplying  the  vacancy  caused  by  Mr*  Hen- 
derson's absence ;  but  there  was  a  poative  infractioii  of  the  law 
of  the  Settlement  concerning  the  qualifications  of  jurors,  zequinng 
that  they  should  be  housekeepers,  and  either  poesessed  or  in 
receipt  of  a  certain  amount  of  proper^.*  There  was  a  irrp*^— * 
impropriety  in  calling  the  disability  of  the  sufferer  a  ^  Contempt  of 
Court ;  **  and  more  especially,  in  the  injurious  imputation  of  un- 
worthy motives  by  the  Chief- Justice ;  for  Mr.  Crowe  well  knew 
that  if  he  had  chosen  to  disregard  the  authority  of  the  Court,  he 
could,  by  absenting  himself^  have  incurred  only  a  comparatively  small 
fine,  as  many  other  jurors  systematically  da  But,  in  his  estima- 
tion, that  would  have  been  an  infringement  of  another  precept  of 
the  Word  of  Grod  which  enjoins  obedience  to  magistrates  and  sub- 
mission to  "  the  powers  that  be,"  which  he  felt  equally  boond  in 

*  Tluft  ii  distmcUy  stated  in  TarSou  lawi  and  acta  of  Public  Meetinga,  paaaed  in  Bdi» 
both  before  and  linoe  this  oom]nitment.^See  "BnniabT's  Code,"  Art.  7,  p.  IS ;  Beso* 
httioD  of  Public  Meeting,  June  S5, 1799,  p.  71.  and  an  Act  of  the  Public  Meeting,  Maith 
8^  1847.)  The  panel  ci  jnron^  or  Tenire,  by  which  so  mndi  mt«»ii«jif  ^f^  joq^  |q  fj^  ^g^ 
•dentioiia  non-jnrists  in  Belise^  was  declared  illegal  bj  the  Grand  Coort,  in  ita  ntting  of 
February  96, 1847.  Besides  which,  Mr.  Crowe  was  actoally  exempted  fion  aerving  as  a 
jnror.  Ids  legal  dfsqnatiflcatMm  being  folly  admitted  by  the  Somnuury  Gaazt»  April  7, 1847, 
iltw  hsring  been  hnprisoaed  dnzing  IM  dayi^  and  fined  SOL  ennrency. 


FROTESI   AND  APPEAL. 


413 


act  of  enbmission, 
scruple  which 


conscience  to  obey.    His  presence  there  was  aj 

and  of  respect  to  the  Court,  and  the  c 

tic  entertained,  even  if  a  mistaken  one, 

temptuons.    The  sentence  of  the  Court  wa 

twofold  penalty  which  it  imposed,  besides  being  wanting  in  that 

charity  which   "  Ihinkelh  no  evil,"  and  in  the  common  courtesy 

which  is  due  even  to  a  criminal. 

ilr.  Crowe  protested  agunst  th  is  sentence,  and  declared  his  inten- 
tion to  appeal  to  a  higher  authority,  by  a  written  document  which 
was  sent  into  the  Court,  before  the  session  closed,  through  the  goremor 
of  the  jail.  Daring  the  first  month,  being  prostrated  by  fever,  one 
of  his  judges  attended  him  aa  the  public  doctor,  and  he  was  soon 
mercifully  restored  to  health.  At  the  eipiration  of  the  term  of 
imprieonment  specified  in  the  sentence,  the  line  being  claimed,  Mr, 
Crowe  declared  his  utter  inability  to  pay  it,  and  pointed  out  that 
his  conlinement  must  preclude  the  hope  of  his  ever  being  able 
to  do  so,  as  it  presented  him  from  following  his  lawful  calling. 
He  was  then  detained  as  a  debtor  to  the  public  till  it  ebould  be 
paid,  the  jail  fees  and  chargex  daily  increasing  the  debt,  thus 
really  tranrforming  the  penalty  into  mprisanmtnl  /or  lift.  As 
soon  as  the  Superintendent  of  the  Settlement,  who  wa*  absent,  re- 
turned from  Jamaica,  on  the  1 8  th  of  September.  Mr.  Crowe,  who  bad 
then  been  confined  nearly  three  months,  addressed  a  petition  to  his 
Excellency,  putting  himself  under  his  protection,  as  the  represen- 
tative of  the  Crown,  and  claiming  the  benefit  of  the  Habeas  Corpus 
Act ;  to  which  he  received  a  reply,  on  the  39tb,  that  bis  Excellency 
was  of  opmion  that  "  there  was  uo  room  for  the  interference  of  the 
Executive  in  the  case." 


414  THE   GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

TRIBULATION. — THE  CHTRCH  EXERCISED. 

1846—1847. 

Union  of  Uie  Church— 3£r.  Hendenon^s  difficoltiea  in  New  York — ^His  icnfaiiiaK  to  vitli- 
draw  from  Belize  for  a  time,  and  reasons  for  it— Conduct  of  the  Ouuth  Tbc  Society 
refuses  the  requests  of  the  Chnrdi— The  Church  resolres  to  remifai  irpswite — Mr. 
Crowe's  treatment  and  company  in  jail— Retrihntion^Tnal  of  Lieut  C—  ud  Mr. 

S .  — ^Its  consequences— Uproar  in  the  jail — Mr.  Henderson  retsnis  to  Bdixe — 

Mission-work  resumed^Mr.  Crowe's  liberation — ^A  second  place  of  wunldp  ope— d 
Open-air  preaching  and  Baptism — Mr.  Kingdon's  missionary  meeting — Msttve  Society 
formed  by  the  Church— Public  meeting— Success  of  Brother  Warner  at  Tglrftim 
Encouraging  prospecta— Mr.  Kingdon's  administratiou  of  the  Sodety'a  ititinn    TWal 
of  Boss— Petition  to  the  Legislatire  Assembly— A  persecuting  act  pined— Hi  deeeSfiil 
working— Steps  taken  by  the  Church— Petition  to  the  Superintendent — n^|Mtefa  ICs- 
■ion  to  England— Timdy  anriral  of  a  Ereneh  Schooner— A  Church  fonned  sftTQlettasi 
—Summons  for  preaching  the  Gospel — Discussions  with  the  Magistnte— Mr.  Hi.ndmiai 
and  Mr.  Crowe  appointed  to  seek  relief  in  England— The  Churdi*a  Letter  lent  wttk 
them— Grief  at  parting— Testimonial  to  Mr.  Henderson— Engagcmetfto  of  fht  kek 
Lord's  day— Embarkation  and  parting  scene — Sailing  of  the  Beputatioa. 

"  BeMd,  ike  devil  tkaU  cast  some  of  you  into  prisoH.**-'Vief.  iL  10. 

The  church,  which  had  been  charged  with  being  influenced  by  Mr. 
Henderson  and  Mr.  Crowe  in  choosing  the  course  it  had  adopted, 
was  so  situated  now  as  to  preclude  even  the  possibility  of  sacli  an 
influence  being  felt,  Mr.  Henderson  being  absent,  and  Mr.  Crowe 
in  confinement.  But  the  brethren  continued  to  meet  together 
to  break  bread  and  to  edify  one  another^  and  Brother  Braddick,  in 
the  absence  of  any  one  better  qualified,  overcame  his  natural  difll* 
dence,  and  in  a  simple  manner  expounded  the  word  of  God  to  the 
congregation  which  continued  to  attend,  and  heard  him  gladly  and  to 
profit.  The  absence  of  its  recognised  servants  (ministers)  did  not 
deter  the  family  from  its  regular  meals,  and  all  the  essential  bnsi- 


A   EIFTLVa   TIME.  415 

nesa  of  the  church  was  uninlerrupleJ.  But  a  further  trial  of  the  faith 
and  patience  of  the  Baintai  and  a  stronger  proof  of  thetr  inde- 
pendence of  action  and  of  the  soundness  of  their  principles,  waa 
appointed  them. 

Mr.  Heodereon'fl  reception  by  the  churcheaat  New  York  waa  not 
sucli  as  be  or  the  church  at  Belize  had  anticipated.  An  application 
to  the  committee  in  London  to  asu9t  bim  to  accomplish  his  purpose 
of  meeting  them,  was  rejected  by  a  resolution  stating  that  they  bad 
accepted  bis  former  proposal,  and  must  adhere  to  their  decision  i 
and  consequently  he  rem^ed  in  poverty,  perplexity,  nnil  ill-health 
in  that  city.  In  addition  to  his  other  mental  sulleriiigs,  he  was 
now  haraned  with  doubts  as  to  the  cour^  the  Lord  would  have 
bim  take.  lie  questioned  whether  bis  UEcfuluess  in  Belize  were 
not  blighted ;  he  feared  that  his  presence  there  drew  down  addi- 
tional suSeringB  on  the  church;  aud  knowing  their  poverty,  and 
suspecting  that  their  affection  for  him  ought  have  blinded  their  judg- 
ment, he  was  at  least  willing  to  give  them  an  opportunity  to  rccon- 
Eider  their  nep  without  the  impulse  and  encitement  which  events 
and  feelings  might  have  imparted.  He  therefore  resolved  to  leave 
them  for  a  time,  and  wrote  to  hia  family  tojoin  bim  at  New  York. 
He  wrote  also  to  Mr.  Braddick  and  to  Mr.  Crowe,  informing  them 
of  this  determination.  In  his  letter  to  the  latter,  which  is  dated 
New  York,  26[h  June,  he  says : — "  As  you  will  see  Brother  Brad- 
dick's  letter,  and  know  from  it  the  resolution  I  have  come  to  re- 
lative to  my  future  proceedings,  it  is  uoueccssary  to  repeat  what  I 
have  there  stated  as  to  my  determination  to  remain  in  this  country  for 
a  time  at  least.  If  afterwards  the  way  to  return  shall  be  opened,  I 
shall  return  to  the  work— a  work  compared  with  which  every  other 
ajipenrs  insignificant."  As  reasons  for  this  decision,  he  mentions  the 
nlleviation  of  t)ie  burdens  of  the  church  in  pecuniary  nuitters;  the 
hope  that  the  persecuting  authorities  would  relent ;  the  desire  to 
give  the  Society's  chosen  agents  full  scope  for  their  plans;  "and 
lastly,"  he  adds,  "the  shock  my  mind  has  sustained  from  the 
unchristian  behaviour  of  Mr.  Kingdon  and  Air.  Buttfield,  is  such 
that  I  cannot  overcome  it.  Uh,  brutal  man!  cruel  wretches! 
That  moment  when  these  words  were  uttered  was  an  era  in  my  life, 
jDUch  more  so  in  my  Christian  profession.    What  fresh  trials  the 

Esiay  sec  meet  to  try  me  with  on  this  side  clemily,  it  is  not  for 
I  know.    I  pray  that  I  may  be  kept  trom  nich  excess  of  feeling 


^k 


416  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AKEBICA. 


as  then  tried  me.**  After  nquestiog  Mr.  Crowe  to  assiat  his  flndf 
to  depart,  he  adds,  "  But  the  church,  oh,  the  church,  the  ehorchl 
my  heloved  hrethren  and  sisters  in  the  Lord,  they  are  my  gnrft 
I  did  not  thmk  I  had  hid  them  farewell  when  I  left  Beliae.  lis 
hand  of  the  Lord  has  gone  out  against  me,  and  they,  the  sheep,  nM 
have  they  done  ?  Arm  of  the  Lord  awake,  awake  on  their  behalf  I 
To  you,  my  dear  brother,  under  the  great  shepherd,  I  must  eon- 
mend  them  for  a  season.    Feed  the  flock  of  Christ 

"  The  simple  fiict  of  my  standing  unconnected  with  the  Loodoo 
Society  closes  up  all  sympathy  for  us.  A  complete  aristoera^ 
of  feeling  exists.  Union,  union,  union !  For  what  f  Not  to  build 
up  truth,  but  party  views.  Not  to  defend  the  oppressed,  but  to 
shut  out  the  oppressed  from  aid.  Not  to  support  the  weak,  but  to 
uphold  the  strong.  Exceptions  there  are,  but  the  role  is  as  mboye 
stated.  As  yet,  I  have  resolved  on  nothing,  but  to  briagasy  fiunily 
here.  There  is  ample  opportunity  for  exertion  OD  bdnlf  of  troth 
and  holiness.** 

When  these  letters  resched  Belize  on  the  27th  of  July,  they  onoe 
more  overwhelmed  the  minds  of  all  Mr.  Henderson's  fiiends  wiA 
grief  and  consternation.  His  resolution  was  generally  disappreyed 
of,  and  probably  more  decidedly  so  where  he  was  most  bdofed  and 
respected.  The  church,  not  having  been  directly  addrcascd,  resolved 
to  await  a  communication  from  their  pastor,  which  was  pramsedin 
one  of  his  letters.  The  grief  of  the  members  was  as  genenl  asit 
was  profound,  and  it  was  not  unmingled  with  disapprobation  of  the 
step  proposed.  Sevenl  persons  wrote  to  Mr.  Henderaoo,  atron^ 
dissuading  him  from  his  purpose,  and  urging  his  retoni.  Mra 
Henderson,  being  far  advanced  in  pr^nancy,  determined  not  to  go 
till  after  her  confinement,  and  wrote  also  expresnng  her  wish  ftr 
his  return. 

On  the  Ist  of  August,  Mr.  Henderson  wrote  again  to  Ifir. 
Crowe,  of  whose  rituation  he  had  then  heard,  and  said,  **  Yoa  hare 
had  the  many  sad  communications  long  ere  this  of  my  changed 
plans.  My  spirits  are  so  broken  with  the  perseeutioos  of  the 
authorities  towards  myself  and  my  dear  brethren,  the  neglect  of 
the  Society,  and  the  malice  and  injury  experienced,  thai  I  tit 
I  wanted  rest  My  health  is  poorly  indeed,  and  nmst  leeuvcr 
a  little.**  He  states  that  an  interest  was  b^;inning  to  be  Mt  by 
brethren  in  New  York,  and  a  letter  to  the  Superintendent  <^Brithh 


THE  MIBSION   PRBMtSEa   REFUSED. 


HondiirMonlhesubicct  of  the  persecutinn!!,  was  being  ngried  by  the 
leading  Baptist  ministcra  In  thai  city.  He  had  vrritten  strongly  on 
themhjecl  to  the  committee  in  London,  adding  "my  pknsareTCiy 
much  deranged  at  the  present  time.  I  cannot  make  up  my  mind  to 
remain  in  this  country  but  for  a  time.  How  long  I  know  not- 
Having  written  for  my  family,  I  have  noticed  this  to  the  Society, 
and  wail  with  much  anxiety  their  reply, 

"OiTers  have  been  made  me  here,  but  I  Cftnnot  settle  my  mind, 
neither  do  I  Grtd  myself  in  possession  of  strength  of  Imdy  to 
undergo  the  labour  of  [ircachtng.  I  began  to  regain  strength  and 
cslmness,  until  the  report  of  your  situation  reached  me,  since  which 
I  have  had  all  my  anxieties  wakened  up  afresh.  And  again  I  say, 
Oh,  Lord,  how  long  ? 

"  I  quite  approve  of  yonr  resolution  to  remain  where  yon  arc,  I 
have  reported  this  to  the  Society,  and  asked  them  bow  they  will  like 
to  see  the  fact  recorded  that  we  die  in  a  jail— while,  'I  was  in  prison, 
and  ye  visited  me  not.' 

■>  The  steady  conduct  of  the  dear  brethren  is  just  like  them. 
The  Lord  reward  and  keep  them.  1  must  again  eipress  my  admi- 
ration of  dear  Brother  Braddick.  It  is  a  seaaon  of  trial,  of  severe 
trial  indeed.  I  have  told  the  Society,  in  case  my  family  do  not 
come,  'I  have  no  prospect  but  to  return  to  a  jail,  and  if  I  die.  here 
am  I.'  We  shall  see  the  answer.  I  have  told  them  also,  that  if 
they  will  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  protect  the  chnrch 
against  oiu-  enemies,  that  I  am  prepared  to  return  and  be  as  before, 
unless  in  salary.  This  you  need  not  publish  but  with  prudence." 
He  then  addi  rauiy  affectionate  salutations,  words  of  encouragement, 
and  prayer  for  various  individuals. 

Again  the  chnrch,  which  met  frequently  during  this  period, 
deliberated  as  to  the  course  to  be  purauei!,  and  though  it  was  pro- 
posed to  send  funds  to  Mr.  Henderson  and  request  him  to  go  on  to 
London,  as  he  originally  designed,  the  church  still  resolved  to  wut 
mi  a  direct  communication  should  be  received  from  him. 

On  the  12th  of  August  the  church  received  the  committee's  reply* 
to  their  application  (given  at  page  397).  By  it  all  the  hopes  that 
hod  been  entertained  of  kindness  or  of  help  from  that  quarter  were 
blighted.     At  the  time  it  was  leceired,  it  was  considered  by  the 


or  IhiilctUriigiienb^UM  CoumlttM  m  "BdUl,"  j.  (,  nd 


M 


418  THB  GOSPEL  IN   CBNTBAI*  AMEIUCA* 

kiding  membenas  a  mere  bwiiieaB-like  letter,  both  cold  and  alii( 
and  concealing  under  a  fonn  of  dvilitya  latent  bittemes  baiderti 
be  borne  than  open  abuse.  It  seemed  to  set  forth  the  prcaumptMa 
of  the  church  in  asking  for  the  nuasion  premiaea ;  it  rej&iced  thit 
the  members  were  willing  and  able  to  support  their  o(wn  pastor* 
which  it  declared  to  be  the  New  Testament  plan ;  but  it  decided]^ 
stated  that  the  committee  could  not  take  any  step  that  would  haic 
the  effect  of  inducing  Mr.  Henderson  to  remaiu  at  Beiiae ;  thst 
there  appeared  no  hope  of  his  living  peaceably  with  ih&ir  brethiCBy 
and  it  improperly  expressed  an  opinion  that  his  remainipg  would 
not  be  to  the  advantage  of  the  churdi  itself,  eoneemin;g  whidi  the 
hope  was  intimated  that  at  some  future  time  it  wvwld  retom  to  a 
connection  with  the  Society  and  its  agents,  and  so  cnjoj  the  privi- 
l^;es  now  denied  it;  and  concludes  with  a  Godspeed,  which 
grated  sadly  upon  the  good  sense  and  feelings  of  tiK  ehmch. 

The  church  met  again  oo  the  15th  of  Augost.  IVj  had  now 
no  hopes  of  help  from  the  Society,  and  it  seemed  pnbable  that  Mr. 
Henderson  would  not  return ;  but  the  utmost  unanimity  of  feeling 
prevailed  among  the  members,  who,  under  these  pecdfiar  drcmB- 
stanees,  confirmed  all  that  they  had  before  determiiMd  1900,  by 
deciding  to  remain  a  separate  church ;  and  that,  under  no  cirenm- 
stanoes,  would  they  unite  themselves  to  Mr.  Eingdon  and  his  durcfa, 
.though  strenuous  efforts  were  then  making  to  induce  them  to  do  so^ 
and  every  possible  influence  was  exerted  over  individmib  to  draw 
them  away,  which  had  well  nigh  succeeded  in  one  or  two  caaei. 
Among  other  reasons  given  during  their  deliberationa  m  sapport  cf 
this  decision,  was  the  constitution  of  that  church,  in  yAudk  penom 
were  admitted  to  the  Lord*s  table  who  had  been  put  oat  of  their  own 
communion  for  faults,  to  all  appearance,  still  unrqiented  ot.  Also 
that  several  points  of  principle  which  the  church  held  dear  aa  paiti 
of  divine  truth  must  be  abandoned,  among  which  was  nonrjuring,  and 
thestand  already  made  in  its  defence.  When  the  diflifultirp  of  the 
church,  which  were  now  being/eft,are  duly  oonsideied,  and  the  afpa- 
rent  advantages  of  joining  Mr.  Kingdon  are  taken  into  aooovnt,  tliB 
alone  demonstrates  that  the  members  acted  from  an  enUghtened  prin- 
ciple, and  with  entire  freedom  hi  what  they  had  before  done,  and  aav 
ddiberately  ratified.  The  meetings  of  the  congregation  oontinaed  to 
be  attended  as  well  as  the  place  would  allow,  and  there  were  abundant 
tokens  of  the  Lord's  presence  with  Ids  people.  The  first  of  Sq^ 
tember  was  set  apart  by  the  church  as  a  day  for  humiliation  and 


uR.  csowe'b  jail  ibbatmbkt  and  amociates.     41ff 

prayer,  on  account  of  tlic  persecution  and  peculiar  trials  of  the 
cburcli,  and  that  a  blessing  might  acconipanjr  tliera.  to  tbe  aeoibcM 
and  to  the  world.    It  was  a  solemn  occanion. 

Mr.  Crowe's  confinement,  liiough  accompanied  with  rigour  aa 
the  part  of  the  authorities,  was  not  without  many  alleviations.  If 
hia  limits  were  narrow,  and  the  conduct  of  otGciala  harsh,  there 
were  many  houra  through  the  day  when  liii  brethren  and  friends 
were  permitted  lo  eee  him.  At  lirat,  the  number  of  visitors  wai 
inconveniently  great,  so  that,  to  avoid  magisterial  interference,  tbe 
members  were  restrained  from  coming.  The  usual  jail  allowance 
was  served  out  for  his  use,  but  his  I'rIcnJa  were  emulous  to  supgily 
his  wants,  and  he  often  had  a  threefold  meal  to  shore  among  his 
fclloW'prii^Duers.  One  dear  sister,  who  was  long  an  induslrioua 
slave,  but  now  a  trustworthy  servant,  regularly  sent  him  three 
meal*  a  day  mouth  after  mouth  till  he  wai  liberated,  at  her 
own  expense,  and  was  jealous  of  any  interference.  This  excessive 
liberality  was  vainly  remonstrated  against,  sod  though  its  accep- 
tance was  made  tbe  subject  of  reproach  by  those  who  could  neither 
appreciate  the  motives  nor  the  feelings  of  either  the  donor  or  the 
recipient,  it  was  doobclen  well  accepted  of  ITim  who  will  reward 
eren  a  cup  of  cold  water  when  g^vcn  to  a  disciple  in  his  name.  At 
Sr«t  the  priKiner  was  freed  firom  the  restraint  of  his  debtor's  room, 
from  six  in  the  morning  till  six  in  tbe  evening.  But  the  latter 
hour  HUB  afterwards  changed  to  four,  and  before  his  liberation  he 
was  closely  shut  up  during  most  of  tbe  day,  and  his  usual  visitors 
were  excluded.  80  graciously  wax  his  mind  supported  daring  the 
whole  period,  that  his  cheerfulness  tiever  left  him,  and  as  severities 
increaseil  his  inward  comforts  sJid  contentment  augmented  in  more 
than  an  eqtial  proportion.  Many  of  his  houn  were  spent  in  study 
and  in  prayer  for  the  much-tried  church,  and  for  its  misguided 


As  there  was  then  no  mad-house  in  tlie  Settlement,  some  of  Mr. 
Crowe'a  componioits  were  of  tliis  character.  Peter  Pot,  an  African, 
who  was  chained  to  a  ring  in  the  flour,  and  who  sometimes  spent 
tbe  whole  or  a  part  of  the  night  in  shaLing  his  chain,  and  humming 
tnonotonous  African  airs,  was  an  occupant  of  the  cell  immediately 
benculli  liim-  And,  as  the  flooring  was  aomewhat  decoyed,  he  waa 
Iierceptihle  by  more  than  one  of  tlie  sen»M.  Thomas,  an  idiot  boy, 
WOE  confined  in  a  ceil  under  his  grated  window,  and  might  be  heard 


'430  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AlffERICA. 

at  all  hours  dramming  upon  the  door,  or  upon  the  tinned  platter 
in  which  his  food  was  given  him.  The  rest  of  the  inmates  were 
such  as  may  be  imagined  to  occupy  a  colonial  house  of  oorreetiaD, 
in  a  community  so  degraded  and  so  mixed. 

The  jailer's  wife  was  a  member  of  the  church,  and  often  availed 
herself  of  Mr.  Crowe*s  services  in  conducting  fiunily  worship,  or  in 
teaching  her  children,  and  until  the  period  of  her  husband's  removii 
from  office,  she  did  all  in  her  power  to  soften  his  confinement,  and 
attended  him  like  a  mother  during  his  sickness.  He  also  frequently 
enjoyed  opportunities  of  conversing  with  his  fellow-prisoners  an 
the  best  themes,  and  of  reading  the  Scriptures  to  them,  espedaUy 
to  some  Ladinos  and  Spanish-Indians,  who  had  never  heard  the 
gospel  before. 

Several  events  transpired  during  Mr.  Crowe's  imprisonment, 
which  greatly  excited  the  inhabitants  of  the  Bay,  and  in  which 
some  have  perceived  the  finger  of  God  in  righteous  but  terriUe 
retribution.  Lieutenant  C,  already  spoken  of  as  the  willing  cause 
of  Mr.  Henderson's  imprisonment,  and,  therefore,  the  ringleader  in 
the  recent  persecutions  against  the  Baptists,  was  committed  to  the 
jail  on  a  chaige  of  murder,  on  the  2nd  of  August,  and  ooeupied  a 
room  opposite  to  the  non-jurist,  who  was  in  a  measure  thrown  into 
his  company.    The  circumstances  of  the  case  were  briefly  these : — 

Lieutenant  C and  Mr.  S ,  the  Clerk  of  the  Conrts,  had  been 

dining  together  at  the  house  of  an  acquaintance.  On  their  retiring 
late  at  night,  **  their  table'*  having  been  made  *'  a  snare**  to  than, 
they  first  beat  a  poor  woman  whom  they  met  in  the  street,  and 
then  had  an  affiray  with  some  Spanish-Indian  fishermen  who  were 
asleep  in  their  boat,  waiting  for  the  hour  of  their  toiL  In  this 
encounter  one  of  the  Spaniards  was  severely  beaten  about  the  head 
with  a  setting  pole,  and  the  white  gentlemen  having  called  in  the 
aid  of  the  police,  he  was  removed  to  the  black-hole,  where  he  wm 
shut  up  with  another  tiU  the  dawn  of  the  next  day.  On  re-open- 
ing their  cell  the  one  who  had  been  injured  was  found  in  a  ^^riog 
condition,  and  on  being  removed  to  the  hospital  shortly  after  ex- 
pired. During  the  inquest  a  black  brother,  who  was  an  attendant 
at  the  hospital,  was  sent  to  jail  for  refusing  to  swear.  The  verdiet 
criminated  Lieutenant  C.  only,  &nd  though  high  bail  was  ofiered, 
he  was  imprisoned,  to  the  great  oonstemation  of  civil  as  wdl  as 
military  officials,  and  indeed  of  all  that  privileged  daas  of  whieh  be 
was  conndered  an  ornament,  nunben  of  whom  flocked  to  the  jail  to 


RETRIBUTION.  451 

condole  with  biin.    Afler  three  days,  Licutcaant  C.  was  bailed  in 
the  Huin  of  20,000/.,  and  set  at  liberty. 

Almost  immediately  after  this,  u  deliberate  murder  was  com- 
mitted by  James  Uurae,  a  creole  of  Belize,  who  shot  a  Spaniard*  in 
a  drunken  quarrel,  and  wa«  at  once  impiiaoDed  in  a  criminal  cell. 
This  circumstance  greally  exasperated  the  Spaniards  generally,  aa 
their  countrymen  had  been  victims  in  both  cases,  and  they 
threatened  to  bum  down  the  Settlement  because  the  white  Lien- 
tenant  was  at  liberty.  Ou  the  other  hand,  the  Creoles  were  not 
unobservant  of  the  diiferent  mode  of  treating  the  man  of  colour, 
and  were  jealously  watchful  of  tlie  result  in  both  trials.  That  of 
James  Hume  was  quickly  brought  to  an  issue,  and  he  was  publicly 
executed  before  the  jail  on  the  29lh  of  October.  The  otiier  gentle- 
men had  two  trials,  and  were  acquitted  at  last  on  the  4tb  of 
December.  The  Lieutenant  being  immediately  ordered  to  Jamaica 
by  his  nulitary  superiors,  intelligence  was  shortly  after  received  in 
Belize  that,  in  company  with  another  oCBcer,  Lieutenant  C.  bad 
bceu  precipitated  over  the  edge  of  a  steep  cliO',  by  the  breaking  of  a 
hand-rail ;  that  his  companion  foiling  upon  him  had  escaped  with 
little  hurt,  bat  Liealenant  C.  was  much  injured,  his  face  disfigured, 
and  in  case  of  recoTery,  which  was  considered  doubtful,  be  would 
be  mutilated  for  life.  Thus,  in  this  instance,  was  the  Divine  sen- 
tence, "  Ue  who  shcddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be 
shed,"  literally  fulfilled  in  Providence — a  sentence,  the  e:xecutian 
of  which  God  has  reserved  to  himselfif  though  it  is  often  pleaded 
le  fur  the  legalized  manslaughter  of  capital  puni«hmi 

The  other  party  concerned  in  this  trial,  IVlr.  S.,  proceeded  to 
England  withthccxpressdcsignof  ruining  the  judge  who  tried  hira. 
A  letter  said  to  be  from  the  Chief- Justice,  couched  in  disrespectful 
terms,  and  describing  the  juron  at  Belize  as  unworthy  of  confi- 
dence, fell  into  his  hands,  was  eommunicated  to  the  parties  com- 
plained  of,  and  was  published  in  Belize.  This  was  followed  by  the 
refusal  on  the  part  of  a  great  number  of  jurors  to  serve  while  the 
Chief-Justice  should  be  on  the  bench,  and  resulted  ii 
mitment  of  refractory  jurors  early  in  1S46  inconsiderable  numbert. 


422  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 


indndmg  many  leading  inhalntantB,  and  such  oommiftmcBli  €f 
juron  for  **  Contempt  of  Conrt**  beeame  more  fieqnent  thn 
the  imprisonment  of  non-jurors  had  ever  been.  The  cx-jailer, 
^ho  had  abown  nnneoenary  sererity  to  the  Baptists,  mntm§ 
whom  he  was  once  numbered,  was  now  bimaelf  a  prisoner.  Aa 
editor  of  a  local  paper,  who  had  personally  injured  Mr.  Cnmt 
during  his  confinement,  now  occupied  the  veiy  room  which  had 
been  his,  and  sabsequently  the  magistrate  already  spoken  of  as  a 
persecutor  on  sereral  occasions  connected  with  the  militia,  was 
himself  subjected  to  a  long  imprisonment  on  the  plea  of  ^  Ccmtempt 
of  Court,"  but  as  most  of  his  fellow-settlers  beliere,  only  for 
opposing  injnstioe.  All  these  and  other  erents  arose  out  of  the 
trial  of  Lieutenant  C,  the  ringleader  of  the  persecntion  against 
the  Baptists. 

The  determined  enmity  to  godliness  of  Mr.  8.  the  Clerk  of 
Courts,  and  of  lieutenant  C,  was  frequently  mam^BSted  during 
their  confinement  in  jail  from  the  12th  of  Oetoter,  when  a  true 
hill  was  found  against  them  both,  to  the  4th  of  December,  when 
they  were  acquitted ;  and  more  especially  in  their  Intter  animontj 
to  Mr.  Crowe  their  fellow-prisoner.  *One  Lord*s-day  momiog 
(the  8th  of  December)  the  jailer's  family  being  at  wwship  in  Mr. 
Crowe*s  room,  Mr.  S.  strove  to  interrupt  them,  first  by  groaning 
and  then  by  drumming  perseveringly  upon  the  wooden  partition 
which  separated  the  two  rooms.  The  next  day  be  senk  out  and 
purchased  a  violin,  and  Lieutenant  C.  procured  a  dram,  in  order  to 
drown  the  psalm*  ringing  in  future,  or  to  accompany  Mr.  Crowe  st 
his  devotions.  The  first  night  after  they  had  procured  these  iutru- 
ments,  when  all  the  prisoners  had  been  locked  up  acoording  to  ens- 
tom,  they  began  by  responding  to  each  other  in  disoordaiit  aoundi, 
which  were  gradually  increased  till  a  kind  of  phieniy  aeeoMd 
to  possess  them,  which  in  the  case  of  Mr.  S.  was  anitip^ 
without  intermission  till  after  four  in  the  morning.  He  evidendj 
eontinued  to  scrape  his  fiddle,  without  the  least  regard  to  ooneond 
or  harmony,  till  his  arm  ached  so  that  he  could  do  so  ao  longer, 
when  he  diversified  the  entertainmeni  by  howling  and  baridng 
through  the  iron  bars  of  his  window,  tiU  all  the  dogs  in  the 
vicinity  were  roused  to  emulatiim.  His  shoots  and  vodfentioai 
in  calling  fire,  &c,  spread  alarm,  and  drew  forth  the  repnoft 
of  the  neighbours,  who  called  to  him  to  desist    The  Jailaft  it- 


still   and   let   the  prisonera  sleep   woa 
e  entertained  that  his  reason  wm  orer- 


quest  thnt  he  would 
d)9reg!trded,  and  lean 
thrown. 

The  neil  day  tlie  town  wm  filled  with  the  report,  which 
reached  the  Saperintendent'a  cars,  nod  an  inTesli^iion  by  ihe 
magistrates  was  ordered,  which  gave  occasion  to  high  words  and 
to  exciting  scenes.  An  unsuccessrul  effon  was  made  to  Tasten  the 
blame  upon  Mr.  Crowe.  All  were  laid  under  severer  restrictioni, 
and  the  jailer  was  shortly  afterwards  removed  fVom  hit  situa- 
tion. These  changes,  and  the  Ticinity  of  Mesra.  S.  and  C. 
greatly  aggmvatcd  the  burden  of  Mr.  Crowe's  confinement.  At 
one  time  he  yiaa  led  to  expect  that  still  greater  severities  would 
be  resorted  la,  in  order  to  subdue  his  tacit  rematancc  Hard 
labour  on  the  public  works  had  been  spoken  ot  and  also  his 
bani^tiraent  from  the  Settlement,  which  seemed  highly  probftble 
to  many.  No  eigns  of  relenting  appeared  on  the  part  of  his 
oppresBors;  and  while  sympathy  and  many  indul^^encea  wen 
freely  granted  to  hi«  gentlemanly  compnuionis  an  opposite  feeling 
and  practice  w«re  unequtvoeolly  displayed  towards  hiro. 

While  these  minor  erentt  were  transpiring,  Mr.  Henderson  re- 
turned to  Belize  on  Lord'i-day  evening  the  llth  of  October,  andwu 
most  joyfully  recetred  l^'  the  church.  During  bis  absence  of  four 
months  and  a  half  not  one  of  tbe  members  had  forsaken  its  com- 
munion. Some  persons  bod  lieeu  added  to  it,  and  the  only  event 
of  importance,  besides  their  persecutions,  which  had  occauoned 
sorrow  to  the  chnrch,  had  been  the  pastor's  resolntion  to  withdraw 
fiom  Beliie,  thoagh  only  for  a  season.  A  sixth  child  hsil  been 
bom  to  him,  and  if  tbe  world,  tbe  Baptist  Missionary  Society, 
and  outward  things  generally,  still  frowned  upon  tbe  little  Bock 
and  upon  his  personal  interests,  it  was  evident  tbat  the  Great 
Shepherd  of  the  sbccp  had  not  withdrawn  His  countenance  from 
them,  and  that  a  patient  perseverance  in  well-doing  would  ulti- 
mately secure  the  triompb  of  the  Redeemer's  cause.  lie  now 
came  determined  to  pursue  the  work  in  which  the  Lord  had  k 
evidently  bleved  him,  and  to  leave  with  Him  that  which  he  hdd 
dearest  upon  earth,  next  to  that  work,  namely,  bis  reputation  aa  a 
man  and  a  Christian,  which  had  been  assailed  in  so  unprincipled  a 
manner  by  those  who  ihould  have  been  his  Tel  tow- helpers  and  hu 
frisidB.     Hit  safi^,  and  support,  were  left  also  with  God.    tht 


421  THE  GOSPEL  Df  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

oonduet  of  the  church  had  entirely  removed  his  doahts  and  ten 
respecting  them,  and  had  proved  to  opponents  as  well  as  to  fiiendi 
that  they  were  not  swayed  by  the  will  of  any  znan,  nor  erai 
influenced  by  a  mere  personal  attachment. 

Mr.  Henderson's  school  and  translations  were  immediatidy 
resumed,  and,  as  far  as  practicable,  he  returned  to  his  uaoal  rou- 
tine of  missionary  labour.  The  congr^;ations  were  now  such  as 
the  building  could  not  hold,  every  portion  of  it  was  inconvenient^ 
crowded,  and  numbers  stood  round  the  doors  and  under  the  win- 
dows on  the  shady  side  of  the  house  listening  to  the  word,  many 
of  the  members  choosing  a  place  outside,  in  order  to  make  room 
for  others. 

At  the  public  auction  of  a  wreck  which  took  place  at  this  time, 
the  ship's  bell  was  bidden  for  by  Mr.  Braddick,  who,  finding  that 
it  ran  higher  than  he  had  expected,  ceased  biddiqg.  He,  however, 
stated  to  one  who  stood  near,  that  it  was  for  Mr.  Henderson's 
school  that  he  had  desired  to  purchase  it.  On  hearing  this  the 
assembled  merchants  and  traders  bought  in  the  bell  for  Mr. 
Henderson,  and  agreed  to  pay  for  it  among  them;  but  two  of 
the  number  insisted  upon  sharing  that  privily  to  the  ezclnsion 
of  the  rest.  A  token  of  83rmpathy  and  respect  firom  this  dasB  of 
persons  so  publicly  given,  and  at  such  a  time,  was  not  a  little 
cheering  to  the  persecuted  Baptists. 

Mr.  Crowe  having  been  again  indisposed  in  his  oonfiaement, 
which  had  become  much  more  rigorous,  the  concern  of  the 
brethren  on  his  account  was  greatly  increased.  Letters  had  more 
than  once  been  addressed  to  the  judges,  explaining  his  inability  to 
pay  the  fine  imposed,  and  requesting  that  he  might  be  set  at 
liberty,  but  with  no  effect  One  person,  not  connected  with  the 
church,  who  had  offered  the  Chief- Justice  the  half  of  the  amount 
of  the  fine,  had  also  failed.  The  church  met  on  the  3rd  of 
December,  and  appointed  the  hour  of  noon  of  every  day  for  con- 
certed prayer  on  behalf  of  their  suffering  brother.  At  noon,  on  the 
following  day  (the  4th),  Mr.  George  Tillett,  of  Baker's,  not  then  a 
member,  who  was  himself  suffering  from  fever,  rose  from  his  bed, 
where  he  had  been  contrasting  his  own  comforts  with  the  inoonve- 
niences  of  a  prison-house,  and  vrithout  informing  any  one  of  his  par- 
pose,  went  out  before  it  was  thought  prudent  for  him  to  do  ao^  and 
obtained  an  order  to  see  the  prisoner,  who  was  sot  then  so  tmtj 


)M    JAIL.  426 

accessible  u  he  had  been  before.  He  kindly  proposed  lo  Mr.  Crowe 
to  iMiy  his  fine,  and  hbcrate  him  at  ooce.  The  prisoner,  though 
graletuJ  for  the  favour,  strongly  objected,  regarding  it  ai  a  premium 
to  [be  oppressor,  and  fwling  most  unwilling  to  be  released  in  that 
manner  alter  having  suffered  so  long,  well  knowing  that  his  perse- 
cutors were  already  annoua  to  get  rid  of  him,  and  were  only  puailed 
how  to  eflcct  it  without  humbling  tbemselves.  Mr.  Tillcti,  notvritb- 
Gtantling  these  remonstrances,  went  and  generously  paid  the  fine ; 
the  jail'fees  were  not  exacted  i  but  the  magistrate,  on  seeing  the 
gold,  expressed  his  surprise  at  Mr.  Tillett's  generosity  towards 
"that  fellow,"  adding,  "for  my  part,  I  would  let  him  lie  and  rot 
in  the  jail  before  I  would  pay  i'ur  him.''  One  hour  after  the  first 
appointed  season  of  united  prayer  on  his  behalf,  the  prisoner  was 
set  I'lee.  The  same  day,  Lieut.  C.  and  Mr.  S.,  who  bad  long  been 
hii  tormentors  in  the  jail,  were  also  set  at  liberty ;  on  event  which 
was  celebrated  by  sky-rockets  tired  from  the  fori,  and  a  carousing 
among  their  friends. 

The  church,  at  its  meeting  on  the  Tth  December,  united  in  an 
act  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  this  speedy  answer  to  their  prayers, 
which  was  expressed  by  the  Brethren  Broddick  and  David  Thomaa, 
captain  of  the  ff.  Jt.  Angas,  who  was  again  in  Belize.  At  this 
meeling  it  was  agreed  to  prepare  petitions  for  the  relief  of  non- 
jurors, both  to  the  Public  Meeting  ol*  the  Settlement,  and  to  the 
British  ParLiament,  and  also  to  Ibrword  statements  of  the  facta  far 
publication  in  England. 

Mr,  G.  Tillett  now  generously  offered  his  house  in  Bdixe  for  the 
use  of  the  church,  the  people  being  exceedingly  inconvenienced  for 
want  of  rooin.  It  was  then  arranged  that  the  congregation  should 
be  divided,  Mr.  Henderson  and  iAi.  Crowe  alternately  minislcring 
in  the  two  places.  The  school,  which  suffered  from  the  same 
cause,  was  also  relieved  in  January  following  by  the  removal  of 
the  younger  children  to  Mr.  Tiliett's  house,  under  Mr.  Crowe's 

This  place,  which  was  conveniently  utuated  on  the  border  of  the 
liver,  at  the  western  extremity  of  the  town,  was  opened  on  the 
1 3th  of  December,  when  Mr.  Henderson  and  Capt.  Thomas 
addressed  a  large  audience  crowded  in  two  rooms,  and  round  the 
doots  and  windows.  On  the  following  day,  Mr.  Uenderson 
received  letters  from  the  Society,  in  which  they  still  pctusted  ia 


496  TBB  ooiPBL  nr  gbntkal  amxmiol, 

ofibiDg  him  a  prcmiiim  to  leave  the  ^aee,  hut  refined  te  do 
him  justiee  otherwise. 

On  the  oocasion  of  the  holidays,  which  hring  together  in  Bd&R 
a  great  part  of  the  pc^mktion  of  Briti^  Hondoras,  fndiidiBg 
the  disbuided  mahogany  gangs,  thus  filling  the  town  with  idlers, 
Mr.  Henderson  and  Mr.  Crowe  preached  repeatedly  in  the 
market-plaee;*  the  latter  to  the  Spanish  labourers,  who  as- 
sembled in  considerable  numbers  to  hear  him,  and  were  moat  esger 
to  receive  the  Spanish  tracts  which  were  distributed.  At  the 
same  period  an  application  was  made  to  Mr.  Kingdon  to  permit 
Mr.  Henderson  to  use  the  mission- wharf  for  a  baptism,  which  being 
refhsed,  the  ordinance  was  administered  in  the  Bdiae  river  at 
"^  Mr.  Tillett's  water-side.**  This  change  oi  place  gave  it  much 
more  publicity,  and  brought  it  under  the  notice  of  numy  who  had 
never  witnessed  such  a  scene  before.  The  neighbouring  houses, 
wharft,  and  the  bridge,  were  crowded  with  spectators.  There 
were  four  candidates ;  one  of  them  was  Mr.  Aknmder  Kerr,  a 
Belize  Creole,  who  had  been  converted  through  the  instrumentality 
of  Brother  Warner,  of  Tilletton.  He  was  a  hunter  of  deer  or 
antelopes  in  the  pine  ridges  of  the  old  river,  and  excelled  in  making 
mocassins,  a  kind  of  buckskin  boots,  from  their  hides,  which  he 
prepared  with  his  own  hands.  He  had,  in  hb  yonth,  eigojed  the 
advantage  of  some  education  at  the  free-school,  and  seemed  likely, 
both  by  natural  gifts  and  a  sanctified  disposition,  to  be  ten  instrument 
of  usefulness  in  evangelizing  the  country.  He  waa  then  in  the 
full  vigour  of  manhood,  and  at  once  a  husband  and  a  fisfcher.  The 
eyes  of  his  brethren  were  upon  him  firom  that  time,  aa  one  whom 
God  had  caUed  to  teach  others;  nor  has  their  expectation  been 
disappointed.  Another  of  the  candidates  on  this  interesting  oe- 
casbn  was  an  elderly  lady,  one  of  the  oldest  living  inhabitaBfts  of 
the  Bay,  who  had  been  Uie  mistress  of  the  first  Epiaoopal  diap- 
lain  to  the  Settlement  In  an  impressive  address  at  the  water- 
side, Mr.  Henderson  referred,  in  stem  and  fiuthful  oondenmatioB, 
to  the  persecutions  which  were  being  inflicted  upon  the  Baptists 
whom  God  was  pleased  to  honour  with  inereasei  notwithatanfing 
the  hatred  of  men. 


*  Ob  a  preriom  oetarioii  of  the  Moae  kind,  Mr.  Crowe  WM  addradof  a  crawA 
itepa  of  a  aMTckaat'i  ataa^  who  waa  Idmelf  ai  an  o^B  wiaAov  aboee. 
oflker  of  tha  arifitta  iMttif  ky,  tha  MnlMMi  (wIk>  «m  daa  a  n^{Mme> 
Ub,— "I  aaj,  80  and  80^  eaat  job  fond  aa  oobm  draauun  to  drawn  tkia  aoiaaf 


■  NATIVE    HISeiONARlE-    OPERATJOHS.  43? 

On  the  folloffing  crening,  the  2Sth  of  December,  a  mtggion«r]r 
iDcetiDg  was  beld  at  the  Baptist  cbapel,  ander  the  auspices  at  Mr. 
Kingdon.  Mr.  Headeraon  was  nnt  invited  to  take  a  part,  but  the 
meeting  wa«  spoDtaoeously  announced  by  bim;  he  also  attended 
it,  together  tiith  a  number  of  the  membcrg  of  the  (iist  churdi,  who 
appeared  to  I'orm  the  bulk  al'tbe  asdembly. 

The  uative  teachers  who  had  bnuded  together  by  their  resoln- 
tioiiH  on  the  4lh  of  May,  feeling  that  they  hod  something  of  ft 
missionary  character  of  inlere«  and  importoncc  to  report,  were 
dL>siroiis  also  to  hold  a  public  meeting  at  this  seasoa  Application 
was  made  to  Mr.  Kingdon  for  the  use  of  the  Baptist  chapel  for  this 
purpose,  but  it  was  t«fused.  A  similar  application  was  kixully 
responded  to  by  the  Wesleyan  misraoimiy,  and  the  matter  was 
then  laid  before  the  choich.  At  a  bumoen  meeting,  held  on  the 
3rd  of  JaRoary  1S47,  it  was  recognised  that  the  church  is  in  itself  a 
uiisuonary  society;  sevetk  brethren  were  therefore  appointed  by  the 
church,  with  the  GBsistanee  of  tbe  pastor  and  any  of  the  native 
teachen  who  might  be  present  in  Belize,  to  conduct  buuness  con- 
nected with  eTangelioog.  It  was  particularly  specified  that  this 
working  committee  should  always  be  under  the  absolute  control  of 
the  church,  and  accountable  only  to  it,  not  hiving  power  to  add  to 
its  Dumbeta,  and  no  provtnon  was  made  for  any  changes;  bnt  aa 
future  necessities  might  require  them,  and  a*  the  church  should  tee 
tit.  Upon  these  brethren  was  devolved  the  care  of  providing  and 
administeriag  tbe  funds  neceaory  for  tbe  support  of  the  native 
teachers  and  the  out-stations,  and  they  were  authotised  to  prqiare 
for  an  annual  meeting,  to  which  Christian  friends  and  the  public 
should  be  invited,  and  where  contributions  would  be  received  for 
the  church's  miasionaty  objects;  but  it  was  specified  that  no  control 
whatever  should  be  given  to  the  meeting  in  the  management  of 
"  The  Honduras  Baptist  Missionaiy  Society,"  which  wu,  in  reality. 
only  an  integral  branch  of  tbe  church's  operations. 

In  tlic  first  public  meeting,  which  was  held  on  the  4th  of 
January,  all  the  ministers— Episcopal,  Weslevan,  and  BaptiH — in 
the  Settlement  were  invited  to  take  a  part ;  but  not  one  of  them 
all  attended.  Ur.  Kingdon  and  Mr.  Uutlficld  first  accepted,  and 
aftcrHards  declined  tbe  church's  invitation.  The  printed  notices 
were  ifsoed  in  the  name  of  the  church,  and  respectlully  invited  it> 
friends  to  eouuteoance,  by  their  presence  and  contributions,  its 


428  TBx  GospsL  nr  central  America. 

efforts  to  extend  religions  knowledge  in  the  yicinity.  The  meeting 
was  nnmerously  attended,  some  interest  was  excited  in  the  good 
work  undertaken  by  the  chnrch,  and  a  much  larger  coUectian 
than  had  been  made  at  any  of  the  three  preceding  public  meet- 
ings which  had  just  been  held,  testified  to  the  zeal  of  the  peofU 
towards  a  cause  upon  which  the  influential  and  the  wealthy  were 
more  disposed  to  frown  than  to  smile.  On  the  same  day,  Mr. 
Crowe  attended  the  Court,  and  the  lot  drawn  from  the  am  decided 
whether  he  should  return  to  jail  or  attend  the  meeting  in  &yoar 
of  the  latter  alternative,  as  he  was  not  required  to  serve  on  a  jury 
for  that  day. 

A  new  station  on  the  island  of  Ruatan  had  already  been  under- 
taken by  the  church  before  Mr.  Henderson  had  left  for  New  York ; 
and,  in  the  midst  of  its  poverty  and  perplexity,  it  was  supplied  for 
a  time  by  Brother  Curran,  an  English  mariner,  who  had  been  pre- 
viously assisting  Mr.  Henderson  in  the  schools  in  Bdiie,  and  supply- 
ing, for  a  short  time,  the  station  at  Baker*s. 

At  Tilletton,  Brother  Wamer*s  trials  and  diaoonragements  had 
been  followed  by  a  season  of  abundant  blessing.  The  little  meetings 
began  to  be  well  attended.  The  faithfulness  of  the  preacher,  which 
had  drawn  down  so  much  hatred  and  opposition  before,  now  seemed 
to  melt  the  hearts  of  his  hearers,  and  the  falling  tear  and  the  sup- 
pressed sigh  betokened  the  deep  feeling  that  accompanied  his  simple 
exhibition  of  the  Gospel  of  salvation.  A  good  work  was  evidently 
progressing,  and  already  several  hardened  sinners  were  oonverted 
to  God.  The  church  now  determined  to  give  their  fullest  sanrtJon 
to  the  labours  of  Brother  Warner,  and  on  the  8th  of  Februaxy, 
during  a  visit  which  he  paid  to  Belize,  he  was  publicly  set  apart  as 
an  evangelist.  Upon  this  occasion,  the  joy  of  the  brethren  was 
great,  and  their  hopes  of  a  Divine  enlargement,  in  the  churches  spe- 
cial work  of  extending  the  Giospel,  were  quickened  and  upheld. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  interruptions  which  had  arisen  firam  the 
church's  rejection,  from  the  denial  of  further  assistance  by  the  So- 
ciety, and  from  outward  persecutions,  the  prospects  of  the  native 
church  were  most  encouraging,  especially  when  the  blessing  of  the 
Lord  upon  its  labours  and  sufferings  are  considered.  There  wasi 
however,  mingled,  with  some  &ith  and  confidence,  a  painful  degree 
Off  uncertainty  in  the  minds  of  many  of  the  members,  arising  from 
the  threatening  posture  of  the  authorities,  and  the  scarcity  q€  peea* 


stH.  kinqdon's  hanaoement  op  the  station.      4Sfl 

niaTy  remuTces;  and  it  was  contemplated,  as  a  pouible  result  of 
thew  ttnited  causes,but  especially  of  the  first,  that  st  least  a  portion 
or  tbc  incmbera  would  be  forced  to  emigrate,  and  would  pcrFiaps  re- 
move in  a  body,  and  form  a  small  colony  beyond  tbc  British  limits. 

The  sessions  of  Court,  at  the  beginning  of  each  monib,  were 
regularlj  looked  forward  to  as  epochs,  full  of  important  results  to 
the  struggling  cause.  Each  one  brought  with  it  an  amount  of 
fines,  and  often  the  imprisonment  of  one  or  more  members,  and 
every  ioquest  that  was  held  was  a  cause  of  alarm  to  those  who 
entertained  scruples  to  be  sworn.  In  the  mean  time,  the  schools 
were  mpidly  increasing,  and  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  in  two 
congregations  at  Belize,  and  at  the  out-stations,  was  attended  witb 
manifest  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  and  approbation. 

With  Mr.  Kingdon  and  Mr.  Buttfield  etforts  had  been  made  to 
bring  about  n  better  feeling,  as  the  extent  of  their  misrepresenta- 
tions to  the  committee  in  England  was  still  unknown  in  Belize. 
From  these  attempts,  it  became  more  apparent  that  the  minds 
of  those  genlleraeii  were  fully  set  in  them  to  frOHii  upon  Mr. 
Henderson  and  his  friends,  whom  they  represented  as  having 
Tabbed  the  Society  of  the  church  and  of  the  scholars.  They  were 
wholly  unsuccessful  in  rusing  a  congregation  or  exciting  an  in- 
terest in  their  own  labours,  but  continued  quietly  to  enjoy  the 
possession  of  the  mission  premises,  the  printing  establishment,  and 
the  favour  and  support  of  the  Society  at  home.  A  desolate  still- 
ness seemed  to  reign  OTer  the  once  active  and  bustling  mission,  the 
garden  was  already  covered  with  weeds  and  bushes  seveml  feet  in 
height,  and  the  only  visible  improvement  was  the  more  elegnot 
furniture  and  style  of  the  mission  dwelling' house,  ami  the  classic 
stillness  and  contemplative  gloom  of  the  missionary's  study  and  its 
approaches. 

One  of  the  excluded  members,  who  had  joined  Mr.  Kingdon's 
communion,  now  foraook  it,  acknowledged  her  fault,  and  was 
restored  to  her  place  in  the  church.  Another,  who  had  been  dis- 
misicd  from  a  mission  chnrch  in  the  Bahamas  to  Mr,  Kingdon, 
afterwards  wishing  to  unite  with  the  native  church,  was  refused  a 
dismissal  to  it,  and,  after  sending  a  deputation  to  Mr.  Kingdon  to 
inquire  his  reasons  for  this  refusal,  which  were  not  deemed  suffi- 
cient, ibe  church  received  her  on  her  own  profession.  Thus  was 
the  lilile  communication  which  the  church  had  with  Mr.  Eingdoii 
__of  a  painful  and  unsatisfactory  charaeter. 


480  THE  OOBPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AKERICA. 

Bnmoiui  of  eontiiraed  penecatxms,  and  the  ftpproach  of  t&e 
February  Grand  Court,  prepared  the  brethren  for  a  new  criib. 
On  the  first  day  of  its  aeaakm  (the  22nd),  the  reiterated  objeetioD 
of  a  want  of  the  legal  qnalification  in  Mr.  Crowe's  case,  was  met 
this  time  by  the  dedaration  of  the  Court  that  he  could  be  exempted 
only  if  he  had  taken'*  the  oaM  of  allegianee."  The  trial  of  an  aged 
pensioner  named  Ross,  for  rape,  on  the  next  day,  gave  occasion  far 
the  conmiitment  of  Mrs.  Morgan,  a  member  of  the  church,  who 
was  the  jnincipal  witness  for  the  defence,  which  was  conducted 
by  Mr.  Crowe.*  In  this  trial  the  most  intelligent  and  credible, 
as  well  as  best-informed  witness  was  prevented  from  giving  her 
evidence  by  the  interposition  of  the  oath.  Mr.  Crowe,  finding  the 
Court  would  not  receive  her  testimony  on  affirmation,  and  that 
she  entertained  this  conscientious  scruple,  which  he  did  not  know 
till  then,  endeavoured  to  relieve  her  by  not  insisting  mpon  her  tes^ 
timony  being  taken,  though  he  thought  it  important  to  the  accused. 
The  judge,  however,  insisted  that  she  should  swear  or  go  to  jail,  to 
which  the  wcnrthy  woman  rq>lied,  with  a  courtesy,  and  said,^  What 
you  please,  massa,*^  meaning  any  punishment  that  yoa  may  please 
to  inflict.  This  poor  sister,  the  industrious  mother  and  the  only 
supportof  six  children,  was  sent  to  jail  for  a  week,  and  Roaswas  sen- 
tenced to  three  years'  imprisonment  and  three  months^  hard  labour 
in  each  year,  whereas,  if  Mrs.  Morgan's  evidence  had  been  taken, 
he  might  have  been  acquitted. 

During  this  trial,  the  Chief- Justice  thought  it  worth  while  to 
interrupt  the  jHroeeedings,  in  order  to  lecture  Mr.  Crowe  on  the 
supposed  inconsistency  of  his  non-juring  principles ;  but  lie  would 
allow  of  no  reply.  The  local  paper  also  made  conunents  upon 
the  same  theme.  But  while  compelled  by  &  sense  of  duty  to  act  as 
he  did,  Mr.  Crowe  felt  no  responsibility  arising  out  of  tl%  yytftiffi* 
of  oaths  by  the  Court,  or  the  inflictiott  of  unneceasary  severities 
upon  Mrs.  Morgan.    The  obligation  to  defiend  a  man  who  eould 


*  Leg«l  aanftanee  wu  at  Uui  tine  reftued  to  the  ■fieued  is  ■!!  cues,  tad 
no  accredited  adToeate  in  the  Settlement.  ProfeanomJ  skill  was  emplojod  only 
ih»  aeraaed  by  tlie  Attorney'geaeral,  wbo  kad  reeenCfy  aixiTcd ;  eooaeqneathr,  aart 
was  at  Isbcrtj  to  plead,  and,  in  tkia  eaae,  a  poor  AMcaa,  who  waa  tlranglit  to  bo 
woold  luiTe  been  withont  aaifitanrr  had  not  Mr.  Crove  fohiateered  hia  aenrirco.  Jm  te 
trial  of  lieot.  C.  and  ICr.  S^  already  referred  to,  thia  nle  was  aet  aaide.  and  a  kwyir  wm 
Beat  for  to  Jamaiea  eaEprenly  to  plead  their  canoe.  There  io  Bova  ptofeHioBal  { 
i«i«Bg  iB  Bdin,  who  ii  aUnred  to  pkid  is  evtn  CMS. 


I'ETITIOS   TO  TOE  LCOIBLATIVE   ASSEMBLY.  431 

not  cpettk  for  tiimself,  wis  not,  in  bis  op'nion,  weakened  b;  the 
bnd  sUte  of  the  law  of  evidence,  uor  by  Lis  own  critical  position- 
On  a.  subsergueiit  trial,  during  the  same  daj,  Mr  Crone'i  name 
WIS  drawn  as  a  jaror,  bnt  the  Allnrney-gencni],  bj  the  exercise  of 
hiB  prerogative,  kindly  exempted  him  from  serving,  on  the  ground 
that  he  had  already  endured  much  fatigue  in  the  trial  of  Ross. 
Thus  again  wm  he  prcrented  from  retnrning  to  confinement  in  the 
jail,  which  he  fully  expected  would  take  place  that  day.  Mr. 
Henderson,  Mr.  Braddick,  and  other  brethren  were  lined.  Antony 
Potts,  one  of  the  coloured  brethren,  having  the  choice  left  him  of 
a  fine  of  OL  or  ten  days'  hard  labour,  preferred  the  former. 

The  following  petition  from  the  church  had  been  prepared  for 
the  (o-callcd  Pubh'c  Meeting,  which  was  held  at  Belize  on  the  lit 
of  March. 

I'o  Ikt  Honourable,  the  Membrrt  of  the  Leffiilative  Asttmbl^. 
The  Petition  of  Ai-kxander  He:ii)SB»0N,  and  others. 

"  HdJMLT  SttEWSTH  : 

"  That  the  undersigned,  on  behalf  of  the  _firtl  Saplt'tl  cliureli, 
BeUze,  beg  leave  to  lay  before  thii  linnoutable  Assembly  of  their 
fellow- settlers  a  brief  statement  of  the  sufiferingx  that  they  have 
of  late  years,  from  time  to  time,  endured  ;  as  well  as  re*pectftilly 
to  call  your  candid  attention  to  the  civil  dinbilttics  under  which 
they  actually  lie  by  reason  of  their  adherence  to  their  religious 
belief  in  the  matter  of  oalh-laking.  And  further,  submissively 
to  sue  for  that  relief  at  your  bands,  to  which,  as  orderly  and  fsilh- 
fiil  subjects,  they  consider  themselves  entitled. 

"  It  is  tbcir  conscientious  conviction  that  the  scriptural  in- 
junction to  '  swear  not  at  all '  is  binding  upon  them,  as  s  Divine 
precept,  without  any  limitation  whatsoever.  In  consequence  of 
this  their  belief,  they  have  been  under  the  painful  necessity  to 
decline  being  fwom  when  it  has  been  urged  upon  them,  though 
at  the  tame  time  they  have  shown  themselves  ready  cheerfully 
to  perform  their  duty,  and  feithfully  give  evidence  as  by  law 
required  of  them,  under  an  atRrmation,  willing  to  subject  them- 
selves to  the  full  penalty  attached  to  perjury,  should  they  ai 
be  found  guilty  of  wilfully  perverting  the  end*  of  truth  a 


482  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CRNTRAL  AMERICA* 

Tor  tfais  caufle  alone  they  have  since  the  3rear  1888  pad 
into  the  public  treasury  of  this  Settlement,  finiu  amonntb]^  to- 
gether to  78/.  I3«.  Ad,  corrency.* 

^  Several  of  their  number,  though  otherwise  nnobnozioiis  to 
the  penal  laws  of  the  land,  have  suffered  repeated  vmprUonmmii 
in  the  common  gaol,  to  the  imminent  jeopardy  of  their  bodily 
health,  the  prejudice  of  their  unsullied  reputation,  the  injury  of 
their  temporal  concerns,  the  suspension  of  their  lawful  callings, 
and  the  scandal  of  the  whole  community. 

**  One  of  the  latest  examples  of  this  kind  was  in  the  persoQ 
of  a  recognised  preacher  and  schoolmaster,  whose  confinement  was 
protracted  over  a  period  of  one  hundred  and  fifty-eight  days,  be- 
cause of  his  inability  to  pay  a  fine  of  20/.,  which  was  added  to 
the  sentence  of  imprisonment;  and  it  might  have  been  inde- 
finitely prolonged,  and  his  labours  still  further  suspended,  but 
for  the  disinterested  generosity  of  an  individntl.  A  poor  and 
Tery  worthy  woman,  the  mother  of  six  unprotected  diildren,  lies 
at  the  present  moment  incarcerated  in  our  jail  for  simply  de- 
clining to  be  sworn,  though  otherwise  willing  to  gire  her  evidence, 
which  the  Court  declared  itself  not  at  liberty  to  reoetre  unless 
upon  oath, — a  testimony  the  want  of  which  is  thought  to  have 
materially  affected  the  sentence  of  the  unhappy  man  in  whose 
defence  she  appeared. 

'*  It  is  not  the  least  injury  under  which  your  petitioners 
groan,  that  they  are  by  the  Courts  accounted  of  as  coii#icaiacioii<, 
and  their  names  recorded  as  disobedient  to  magistratea,  and  as 
guilty  of  the  crime  of  *  Contempt  of  Court.*  They  consider  it 
their  duty  and  privilege  to  '  submit  themselves  to  every  ordinance 
of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake,*  and  are  as  solicitous  to  comply  with 
this  precept  of  their  Divine  Master,  as  that  one  which  fiirbids 
the  use  of  any  kind  of  imprecation.  They  only  decline  daii^ 
so  when  human  legislation  is  unhappily  at  variance  with  what  is 
r^arded  by  them  to  be  both  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  the  com- 
mand of  Christ  Nor  do  they  then  actively  resist  the  powers; 
but  are  ever  ready  passively  and  without  a  murmor  to  bear  the 
penalties  by  law  appointed.    And  even  when  these  have  been 

*  47<.  4t.  U.  sterliBg.  In  tins  lom  tlie  fin«  for  abwaee  are  aoi  8«**«4ffi  otiNr 
faewry  flBM  were  nibMqiiently  added  to  tlieae,  and  aome  bad  been  paid  before ;  bat  tiie 
pecniiiaiy  knaea  to  the  meflBboi^  ariiiBg  froon  legal  dJaaMHtiei^  w«rt  yfKjmoA  ^t^ttt. 


PETITION    1 


i   LECISLATITB   AESCMBLV. 


488 


mitapplicd  or  exceeded,  they  have  bnd  rccoarsc  to  none  other  tluit 
lawful  nieam  in  order  to  have  their  wrongs  redrcased. 

"  It  is  an  undeniable  truth,  last  growing  into  uuirersal  acMpt- 
once,  that  none  nhould  suffer  merely  for  their  opinions.  It  ii  atill 
mare  glarin);iy  manifest,  ihal  mallrrt  of  raligioaa  leorakip  tmd 
eotuctenlioiit  leruplt  nhaulii  be  enlirtly  fne,  undnrtfar  above  t!ie 
Juriidielion  a/  any  tartkiij  tribunal.  Nor  can  this  honourablu 
Asenbly  need  to  be  reminded  that  it  is  totally  abhorrent  to 
every  principle  of  justice,  and  every  feeling  of  humanity,  that 
honest  n;en  should  he  coerced  into  a  breiich  of  the  Uiio  of  God,  oa 
they  do  delibemtcly  understand  it,  or  that  any  ahould  be  bribed 
basely  to  violate  their  deep'Seated  convictioDS  of  what  is  right, 
at  once  forrcjtjng  their  consisU^ncy  and  self-respect.  Nay,  is  it 
not  deplorable  that  the  only  alternative  left  them  should  be 
that  of  Bp|iearing  as  criminals  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  and  of 
fulling  under  the  senteucfi  of  their  rulers  in  common  with  felons 
and  maletacton  ?  Your  petitioners  desire  in  all  things  to  give  an 
cxamplu  of  suhmisMve  and  cheerful  obedience  to  'the  povrers 
t)iat  be,'  both  in  the  sight  of  God  and  in  the  eight  of  men ; 
but  seeing  that  they  cannot  faithfully  serve  two  masters,  they 
conlidcutiy  appeal  to  you  to  decide  fur  them,  whom  they  ought  to 

"  Besides  the  lieforc-namcd  aggravateil  mfferings  in  their  per- 
sons, and  unmerited  itigma  on  their  characters,  your  petitiouere, 
and  all  who  coincide  with  them  in  their  views,  are  hereby  placed 
aithoul  thi  pale  of  the  laie.  It  is  known  that  the  Courts  are 
open  (inly  to  arraign  them,  and  are  virtually  closed  to  t 
by  reason  of  which  the  unprincipled,  the  malicious,  and  the  evil- 
inclincd,  ever  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  unprotected,  are 
tempted  to  make  them  the  victims  of  their  insolence,  their  slan- 
ders, and  their  rapacity.  And  whilst  the  innocent  are  thus  op* 
pressed,  and  the  guilty  triumph  in  impunity,  great  and  growii^ 
injuries  are  iniiicted  upon  society  at  lai^.  Tbc  wholesojne  re- 
8traiDt9  of  tile  law  are  weakened,  the  peace  of  families  is  dia- 
turbci),  the  rights  of  privutu  judgment  and  religious  freedom 
arc  invaded,  aad  the  best  ends  of  governincut  are  subverted  by 
the  law. 

"^Should  these  grievances  remain  unredressed,  many  virtUOlis, 
intclligc[it,  and  highly  u«eful  iobabiiaata  may  be  driven  to  KCk 


4S4  THE  G08PBL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA* 

refiige  in  other  lands,  and  our  Settlement  be  at  once 
of  their  indostiy  and  moral  influence.  The  page  of  history  wiD 
have  to  record  of  our  riidng  community  that,  in  this,  the  age  of 
comparative  light  and  liberty,  the  exploded  poller  of  the  daite 
ages  was  still  acted  upon  by  you;  and  that  our  less  fiiToared 
neighbours,  the  infant  and  still  struggling  States  of  Caitnl 
America,  in  whose  territories  we  are  as  it  were  embosomed— 
although  hitherto  unfreed  from  the  influence  of  the  see  of  Rome, 
had  in  this  particular,  from  the  dawn  of  their  independence, 
provided  for  the  relief  of  their  conscientious  dtixens,  *  whilst 
her  Britannic  Majesty's  loyal  and  peaceful  subjects  were  en- 
during sufferings  such  as  these  without  obtaining  relief.  This 
wise  and  just  provision,  honourable  alike  to  their  smtiments  and 
feelings,  whilst  it  exalts  them,  casts  no  small  reproach  on  our 
professed  civilization,  enlightened  polity,  and  lefixrmed  religion. 
And  how  much  more  strikingly  apparent  must  the  contrast  be- 
come should  a  British  legislative  body  refuse  to  Englishmen 
the  same  undeniable  right  when  (as  is  now  the  case)  it  is  distinctly 
claimed  at  their  hands. 

^^  The  honourable  members  of  this  House  are  donbtlesB  aware 
of  the  partial  relief  afforded  to  Quakers,  Moravians,  and  Sepeim' 
tists,  who  object  to  be  sworn  on  precisely  the  same  groonds  as 
your  petitioners.  When  the  Bill  favouring  the  last^4nentioned 
denomination  was  debated  in  Parliament,  thepropriety  of  asiore 
general  measure  was  strongly  urged.  At  present  a  Bill  having 
this  object  is  before  the  British  Legislature,  if  it  has  not  already 
passed  into  a  law.  Like  them  then,  and  for  the  reasons  here  stated, 

'^  Your  petitioners  humbly  sue  for  immediate  and  complete  re- 
lief at  the  hands  of  this  honourable  Assembly,  and  respectfully 
daim  to  be  freed  from  their  vexatious  disabilities  and  soflfenngi, 
by  the  enactment  of  a  law  of  this  Settlement,  providing  thai 
a  simple  affirmation  be  substituted  in  lieu  of  an  oath,  on  idl  and 
every  occasion,  to  each  and  every  one  who  shall  declare  that  he^ 
she,  or  they,  has  or  have  conscientious  objections  to  be  sworn; 


*  On  pretenting  a  petitaoii  to  the  Supreme  Coort  in  Goatenula,  to  wbkh  it  it 
nuuy  to  attadi  a  form  of  oath,  theaathor  found  that  legtl  prorition  had  been  made  in  tke 
national  code  for  inch  icmplea  at  he  entertained,  and  that  he  needed  cmly  to  aflna  tmi 
■tate  hia  olyection  to  iwear,  citing  the  article  in  qoeation.  Sodi  a  caae  bad  ponrihlj 
never  ocenrred  before  in  that  eoontry ;  bat  thia  aitide  waa  eopied,  with  otker  agafii^ 
eaed  lawayfron  the  liriBirtoa  Code. 


(   BBtlGlors   FREEDOM.  436 

wtich  person  or  persona  shall  li«  liable  to  the  fiiU  penalties  attached 
to  the  breach  of  the  law,  aa  heretofore  oljserved,  in  any  and  every 
case  of  falsehood  and  disobedience.  And  thia  jour  petitioners 
confidently  ask,  emboldened  by  the  conyiction  that  the  honourable 
members  of  the  Legidative  Assembly  are  not  ignorant  of  the  facts 
staled,  and  arc  further  personally  acquainted  with  the  character  of 
the  parties  aggrieved,  and  your  petitioners,  &c.  &<;.  &c. 

(Signed)  Alkiandkr  Hendbesob,  Paslor. 

.  Gbosge  Bbiddick,       >  J. 

^m  SaMDCL  M.  DaVIBS,       i 

H  Selite,  Hondurat,  2nd  of  March  ISiJ. 

This  document  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  member  of  the 
Public  Meeting,  who  had  promised  to  present  it,  but  during  the 
first  sitting,  he  returned  the  petition  to  Mr.  Henderson,  stating 
that  he  could  not  do  so,  becau.tc  it  was  in  direct  opposition  to  an 
"Act"  whicUthe  Superintendent  had  sent  down  to  the  Assembly  for 
thdr  approvaL  This  was  the  first  intimation  given  of  a  formal 
legislative  act,  legalising  further  persecutions  against  the  suffering 
Bnptists.  Nor  could  its  precise  nature  be  ascertained  even  then. 
Bumours  of  some  undefined  impending  danger  had  been  rife;  bat  the 
parties  concerned,  who  had  even  hoped  for  relief  frvm  this  Assem- 
bly, were  now  taken  by  surprise. 

At  the  second  sitting  of  the  legislative  meeting,  the  measure 
An  Act  for  declaring  and  defining  the  Laws  respecting 
Itecnters,  approved  March  8th  I84T,"*  which  had  been  prepared 
by  the  Superintendent  in  Council,t  was  passed  with  indecent  haste, 
and  all  apparent  servility.  It  was  read  three  times  during  the  same 
sitting  without  any  discussion.  One  of  the  members  with  difficulty 
obtained  that  the  petition  of  the  church  should  be  read  even  once, 
hut  no  action  was  taken  upon  it. 

The  "  Act,"  which  contains  sixteen  articles,  first  provides  that 
all  dissenting  ministers  who  shall  have  taken  the  amoral  onlln  of 
aUegianec  aiul  tupremaey,  and  subscribed  a  Protestant  dccUralion, 
sbiUl  be  entitled  to  all  the  exemptions,  benefits,  privileges,  and 
advantages  granted  to  Protestant  dissenting  ministers  and  tesehen, 

ft  Ttm  Ht>,  UUUiiw  Nnpoil,  Runi  Dean,  ind  Ihe  Chief  Juilice,  witb  ■□me  uun 
Baflojlt,  ttm  cgmpoKd  thi  IlanannblB  CdudcI], 


486  THB  ooapBL  ur  CEH  TBAL  AUEMSCJu 


liy  the  lairs  of  EncpbiML  li  next  fmhibifti  the  meeti^  of 
than  twenty  Froteetant  disaenteii  nnleaa  in  m  Ueenaed  plaae.  The 
ilfth  article,  which  it  the  most  effectiTeb  imposes  a  fine  not  canesi- 
mg  lOLt  npon  every  peison  preaching  or  traching  in  a  lieessed 
place,  who  shall  have  refiised  to  take  the  oaths  befi>re  the  polioe 
magistrate,  and  to  procore  a  certificate  as  a  qualification  for  tfasR 
religious  duties.  Anjf  ProUtUaU  persun  was  anthoriaed  to  enfivee 
this  process  upon  any  preacher  or  teacher,  and  consequently  to 
require  an  exhibition  of  the  certificate.  No  meeting  was  to  be  hdd 
in  any  place  with  the  doors  fastened.  Special  care  was  taken  that 
the  Church  of  England  and  its  ministers  should  not  in  any  way  be 
included  in  its  provisions;  and  Quakers,  MoravianSy  and  Sepa- 
ratists were  also  exempted  from  its  action,  and  privik^ged  to  meet, 
preach,  or  teadi  without  license  or  certificate.  Due  profisioo  was 
made  for  levying  the  fines  attached  to  each  offence  by  dastreas 
warnoit,  and  for  substituting  three  months*  imprisonmeat  where  no 
sufficient  distress  whereby  to  levy  the  penalty  eonld  be  made. 

By  this  imqnitoos  law  all  dissenters  from  the  EatabUshed 
Church,  except  Quakers,  Moravians,  S^Muwtists,  Bspisli,  Mohaase- 
dans,  or  heathens,  were  required  to  admit,  to  a  certaia  exteni^  the 
intervention  of  tibe  civil  power  in  their  rdigioaB  intatsts  and 
church  polity — an  interftrence  to  which  some  of  the  diwnling 
ministers,  connected  with  the  native  church,  had  aa  abwg  an 
objection  as  they  could  possibly  entertain  to  the  oaths  thcattebres, 
which  were  here  so  evidently  put  forward  as  a  stumblin|^blodL  to 
those  who  were  known  to  object  to  theoL  Thoo^  aooMwhait 
cloaked  under  the  pretence  of  securing  good  ofder  and  legal  pio- 
tection  to  religious  assemblies  of  dissenters,  the  jKnctieal  action  of 
this  law  must  be  to  stop  the  mouths  of  Mr.  Henderson  and  bis 
associates,  both  from  preachiog  and  from  teaching ;  or,  aboold  thgr 
persist  in  doing  so,  to  strip  them  gradually  <^  any  property  thcj 
might  have,  and  then  imprison  them  dnring  three  noothi^  firar 
times  eveiy  year  till  they  died.  The  only  other  akemaiive  left 
them  was  their  Tolnntary  exile,  and  for  the  chnrch  to  aoeept  Mr. 
Kingdon  as  their  pastor.  Ko  dissenting  ministcn  but  tke  mb- 
jurists  were  affected,  cither  in  evil  or  in  good,  by  thia  meesnie;  ^ 
object  of  which  was  evidently  to  crush  the  rising  native  chnrefa,  which, 
though  it  had  survived  the  Society's  displeasure  and  the  tjmumjof 
the  Courts,  still  appeared  weak  and  niuiblc  to  withsteai  an 


PASStTB  KESIBTAHCE. 


437 


d«Ue  an  iMsnlt  emansting  from  the  very  seat  of  local  power  and 
■ntiiorily,  and  coming  as  it  did  before  the  nouods  at  previoui 
encounters  were  beaied.  Sucfa  at  IcMt  was  tlie  design  of  the  Evil 
One,  from  whom  all  pcnccutions  and  iajutlicc  emanate,  whatever 
ma;  he  the  pretext*,  nod  boweicr  planaible  the  ielf-deceplion  of 
the  instruments  he  uset  in  the  aecumplishmcDt  of  his  ends. 

This  revival  uul  adoption,  in  a  modilied  form,  of  an  old  U« 
promulgoled  in  the  days  of  Ilcnrj  VLU.,  in  order  to  crush  dis- 
senters from  the  Infaiit  Establislinieot,  wu  rcgnnlcdby  the  churcli 
OB  a  direct  ioTviiDn  uf  relij^bua  liberty,  and  an  intrusion  npoD 
private  rights.  On  the  evening  of  the  Snd,  the  day  the  Act  was 
passed,  the  church  assembled  to  deliberate  and  to  pray.  Beveral 
af  the  coloured  brethren  addressed  the  church  in  a  strain  uf  nn- 
fiinching  fortitude  and  contidence  in  God.  Deep  filing  pre- 
vailed,  and  it  was  a  aeasou  of  mutual  confidence  and  hope,  as  well 
as  of  sorrow. 

The  anthoritiea  (with  whom  Mr.  Kingdon  was  upon  the  most 
&iendly  teruis,  iat^rcbonging  visits  and  dinner  parties,  at  the  very 
time  that  tliia  law  was  preparing,  and  after  it  had  passed)  had 
BOW  the  imprenion  thut,  by  the  rejection  uf  the  Society,  the  native 
l'<4biirch  hod  ceased  to  be  connected  with  (he  denomination,  and  was 
B<ttereforc  not  entitled  lo  ihut  consideration  which  it  had  enjoyed. 
-Theyexprcned  themselves  determined  to  put  down  this  little  body, 
and  should  the  new  law  prove  insufficient,  tliat  they  would  enact 
another  more  stringent.  None  of  the  dissenten  in  the  Settlement 
chose  to  identily  themselves  with  the  injored  party,  and  but  few, 
even  of  the  more  liberal  public  men  or  merchants,  perceived  the 

t)riolstion  of  principle  and  constitutional  rights  which  was  in- 
ivolved.  There  was,  tbcrcfore,  no  local  inSucnce  to  oppoM  to  this 
Mt  of  aggression  nve  the  passive  endurance  and  nncom promising 
integrity  of  the  assailed  church.  The  legislature  bad  set  up  a 
Moluch  iu  the  form  of  laiv,  in  whoae  name  they  exacted  ditobe- 
dicnce  to  a  divine  precept,  submianon  to  a  foreign  power  in  what  is 
the  peculiar  prerogative  and  dominion  of  Christ,  and  the  vioUtioa 
of  imtividnal  ootucientious  convictiotis.  The  church  eried  to  God, 
and  by  their  conduct  replied  tu  their  oppretsors  "  Our  God  whom 
wc  aerve  is  able  to  deliver  us ;  and  Ue  wiU  deliver  us  out  of  thine 
hand,  O  king." 

On  Lord's  day,  the  7tb  [of  Maich,  two  additionftl  dcaoana  were 


4SB  THB  OOOPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

chosen  and  tppointed  by  the  church,  in  the  penonsof  bie^liiai 
James  Kelly  and  James  York.  The  members  were  also  diyided 
into  tens,  one  who  coold  read  being  appointed  to  each  compaay, 
four  of  whom  were  sisters..  The  object. of  this  measure  mm  that 
if  the  r^pilar  worship  should  be  violently  interrupted,  they  mi||^ 
then  meet  in  separate  houses  within  the  conditions  of  the  new  law. 
The  minds  of  the  brethren  were  farther  prepared  for  the  coming 
trial,  and  the  church  united  to  seek  the  Lord  in  earnest  dependent 
supplications  that  they  might  be  able  to  continue  in  the  narrow  path 
of  duty,  as  if  no  such  threats  had  been  used. 

The  church's  house  was  properly  licensed  for  public  worship,  no 
obstacle  being  put  in  the  way.  Several  of  the  houses  of  the 
members  whose  little  prayer-meetings  might  otherwise  have  been 
stopped  were  also  licensed.  The  meetings  at  Mr.  TQlett's  hoose 
were  discontinued.  A  memorial  was  addressed  by  the  church  to 
her  Majest/s  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Colonies,  signed  by  the 
pastor  and  other  ministers,  stating  that  the  church's  petition  to  the 
public  meeting  had  been  met  by  a  measure  bearing  witb  still 
greater  severity  upon  the  church.  And  on  the  29th  of  March,  a 
deputation,  consisting  of  seven  coloured  brethren, — viz.,  William 
Michael,  James  Kelly,  Lenon  White,  Edward  Hyde,  William 
Kief,  Edward  Thurton,  and  Samuel  M.  Davies, — all  respectable 
householders, — waited  upon  her  Majesty's  Superintendent  with  a 
petition,  praying  for  relief  finom  the  oppressive  action  of  the  new 
law,  or  that  its  operation  should  be  suspended  till  the  pleasure  of 
her  Migesty's  Government  should  be  known;  an  appeal  to  the 
proper  authorities  having  been  forwarded  through  His  Ezodlen^. 
No  hopes  were  held  out  to  them  of  relief;  and  one  of  the  brethren, 
an  African,  and  once  a  slave,  witnessed  a  good  oonfesBum,  and  ad* 
ministered  a  faithful  but  respectful  reproof  to  the  Superintendent 
in  the  name  of  the  rest 

During  this  month,  the  meetings,  which  were  eontmned  as 
usual,  were  visited  by  policemen,  who  counted  the  munber  of 
persons  present,  and  on  the  next  day  became  infinrmers  against  the 
preacher,  who  was  summoned  to  appear  before  the  police  magis- 
trate and  fined,  the  amount  at  first  being  trifling,  but  gradnaDy 
increased.  Even  the  smaller  prayer-meetings  were  thua  visitod; 
and  Mr.  Henderson,  Mr.  Braddick,  Mr.  Crowe,  and  others,  wtn 
serioasly  called  in  questum  concermng  the  good  woric  ctf  praidbfag 


A  BBOOIID  HATITE  CHDRCB  PORUBD. 

and  leftching  contrary  to  liw,  for  which  they  were   laie/tUly 
punished. 

The  method  of  anooyatiee  now  adopted  was  evidently  leM 
violent  in  its  imroedintc  execution,  but  it  mm  ealculnted  bj  a  gra- 
dually increa^g  pressure  lo  bear  with  tenfold  eflVct  upon  the 
edifice  which  it  had  been  resolved  should  be  razed  to  the  ground, 
and  its  very  foundation  eradicated  from  the  soil.  The  lever 
emplojed  was  the  police  nwgietrale ;  the  fulcrum  was  the  law ;  but 
the  obnoiioua  objects  were  living  Biouea  of  the  heavenly  temple, 
built  upon  Christ  the  Rock ;  and  Ibe  best  laid  plana,  sustained  by 
the  most  determined  and  deliberate  execution,  could  prevail  nothing. 

On  calm  consideration  it  was  evident  to  the  church  that  their 
pastor,  after  being  stripped  of  the  few  necessariea  which  his  family 
enjoyed,  would  be  agnin  imprisoned,  and  that  neither  juilice  nor 
mervy  were  to  be  expected  from  those  who  were  appointed  as  the 
s  of  God  to  them  for  good,  but  who,  by  becoming  the 
ts of  oppnstdoD,  had  made  themBelvcs  "a  terror"  to  goad 
tBorks,  and  not  to  tht  evil.  It  had,  therefore,  become  a  conscientious 
duty  to  resist  them,  who,  nnder  other  circumsttuiccs.  it  urould  have 
been  a  pleasing  duty  to  obey.  But  there  was  another  course  open 
lo  the  church,  and  Divine  Providence  evidently  pointed  to  it.  The 
oppressive  rulers  of  the  Settlement  were  themselves  "  men  under 
authority,"  and  an  appeal  lo  Cicsar,  though  difficult  and  costly, 
was  by  no  means  unlawlVil.  Again  it  was  proposed  to  send  Mr. 
Henderson  to  Europe  to  seek  relief  from  the  Britiah  Government. 

At  the  very  time  that  the  iniquitous  Act  was  being  passed.  La 
Cazamanee,  Capt.  Falcou,  a  French  schooner  from  Bordeaux,  pro- 
videntially entered  the  harbour  toundcrgoshght  repair?.  Mr.  Crowe 
had  some  intercourse  with  the  cnptatn,  who  had  brought  him  letters 
from  his  relatives  there,  though  not  expected  to  touch  at  Belije; 
and  a  more  favourable  arrangement  for  a  passage  to  Europe  waa 
offered  than  could  be  expected  in  the  regular  traders. 

Matters  at  Tilletton  bad  progressed  so  lavourably  that  Mr.  Ileii- 
dcraon's  presence  there  had  long  been  desired ;  now  that  gome  other 
permanent  interruption  to  his  labours  was  expected,  he  determined 
to  visit  the  place  once  more.  Me  left  Belize  nn  the  30th  of  March, 
and  returned  on  the  3rd  of  April.  During  the  interval  he  n 
several,  baptized  a  goodly  number,  and  united  with  the  b 
at  Tilletton,  who  now  numbered  more  than  twelve,  in  fon 


440  THB  OOHPSL  m  CBMTRAL  AXBBIOJU 

•efittttlt  cbiireli,  frieodly,  bot  quite  independent  of  the  dmckil 
Belize.  They  attended  to  the  ordinance  of  the  Loid'a-sni^Nry  mk 
all  eoneorred  in  choosing  Brother  Warner  to  be  dwirpaalor.  IAm 
wm  the  once  poor  outcast  nilor  exalted  lo  the  higfaeBt  poit  if 
leaponnbility  and  honour  in  the  Choich  of  Chriit,  after  fasfiif 
bem  made  the  joyful  fiither  of  many  vpiritnal  children. 

The  members  of  both  churches  were  reodved  by  eacii,  and  te 
duties  of  nratnal  watcfafblnenivere  considered  biadnigoii  them, 
at  the  same  time  that  there  was  no  interference  with  the  ficedasi 
nd  internal  disdplhie  of  either.  This  was  the  first  sister  eoas- 
mnnity,  the  formation  of  which  the  much-tried  chavdh  in  Bdiae 
haikd  with  peculiar  pleasure. 

During  Mr.  Henderson^s  absence  the  usual  meetiqgwas  attended 
bjtwo  police  officers,  who  had  become  almost 
The  next  day  Mr.  Crowe  receiyed  the  following 

**  Bbitibm  HomoiTBAS,  to  wit : 

<'  To  Fredseick  Cbowb,  of  Belize, 
*^  Whereas  complaint  and  information  have  been  made  before  me, 
William  Maskall,  Esquire,  her  Majesty  s  Justice  of  the  Peace  Tot 
the  Settlement  of  British  Honduras  aforesaid,  diat  yon  hate  been 
preaching  or  teaching  in  a  chapel  or  house,  ntuated  on  the  north 
nde  of  the  town  of  Belize,  aforesaid,  occupied  by  Alexander  Hen- 
derson. The  said  house  or  chapel  being  duly  certified  in  the 
Becord  Office ;  but  the  oaths  and  declaration  required  to  be  taken 
by  you  have  not  been  complied  with  according  to  law. 

''  These  are,  therefore,  to  require  you  to  appear  peraonally  bdbre 
me  on  the  third  day  of  April,  instant,  at  the  hour  of  eleren  o*Gkxk 
in  the  forenoon,  to  answer  the  said  complaint  and  infi)rmatioiis  vid 
further  to  do  and  receive  what  to  the  law  shall  appertain. 
^^  Herein  fail  you  not. 
^  (jiyen  under  my  hand  and  seal,  at  the  Polioe  Court  b 
Belize,  this  first  day  of  April,  Anno  Domini,  one  thoosand 
eight  hundred  and  forty-seven. 

(Signed)  Wm.  Maskaix,  P.  M.* 

This  docomtnt  cost  the  possessor  one  dollar.  He  was  Bsritad  Is 
•wear,  but  having  dedined  was  admonished  to  repeat  the  eflbBSt 
no  more.  This  he  would  not  promise  to  do,  bat  poimed  Mt  tha 
of  sach  dvil  inleriereMe  with  tho  intcvMl  anaHBcaMMi  if 


A   DKPrTATION   APPOJMTED.  441 

the  Cburcb,  which  is  the  special  prerogative  of  uni  Lord  Jtnii 
Cbriil,  and  entirely  without  aad  bi-yand  the  jnritdictiou  of  any 
earthly  nia^trate.  The  law  was  read  and  explsiocd  to  him,  bciog 
interpreted  as  extending  even  to  the  tuitioQ  of  chijdicn  In  the 
regular  schooU,  and  the  penalty  was  carefully  pointed  out,  accom- 
panied by  a  threat  that  it  would  cert^nly  be  enforced,  and 
inipritonment  substituted  in  case  of  poverty. 

The  disciuaians  which  frequently  took  place  in  the  Police  Court* 
had  now  aasumed  a  calm  and  olten  a  petsuaiiye  tone  on  the  part  of 
the  magistrate ;  but  the  fines  had  already  reached  their  utmost  limit, 
viz.,  thirty  dollars  or  Gi.  sterling  for  every  meeUng,  and  they  were 
kept  np  at  the  Bsme  point  with  evident  dctennioatioQ. 

In  Mr.  Crowe's  caie,  the  very  next  summons  must  restore  him  to  his 
quartets  in  the  jail,  as  there  was  "no  sufficient  distress  whereby  to 
levy  the  penally."  On  the  5th  of  April  he  bad  again  to  appear  in 
Court.  The  panel  of  jurors  was  then  being  reformed.  His  oflen- 
rcpeated  ptea  of  the  want  of  the  legal  qualificntion,  together  with 
his  well  known  objection  to  swear,  were  now  listenud  to  with  can- 
dour :  surprise  vr«s  expressed  at  the  smallness  of  his  income,  and  a 
promise  was  made  that  it  sliould  be  considered.  Uis  name  wu 
alWwards  struck  off  the  venire  i  thus  tardily  admitting  the  in- 
justice and  illegality  of  the  pains  and  penalti<;s  which  had  hitherto 
been  inflicted  upon  him  for  this  cause. 

The  desirableness  of  tbc  departure  of  botli  Mr.  Hendcrton  and 
Crowe  became  every  day  more  manifest :  neither  of  tbem 
lid  long  continue  out  of  prison,  and  the  diflicuity  of  obtaining 
legal  relief  would  then  be  much  increased. 

At  a  church  meeting  held  on  the  7th  of  April,  it  was  resolved  Ut 
send  both  Mr.  Henderson  and  !^lr,  Crowe  as  a  deputation  to 
l^nglund,  with  a  view  to  obtain  relief  from  the  persecutions  then 
raging,  and  to  ask  thai  help  from  British  CbrisUACts  which  the 
Society  had  refUsed  to  continue,  and  of  which  the  church  already 
felt  the  need  and  foresaw  the  absolute  necessity  of  obtaining  in 
order  to  continue  without  hindranci;  the  important  work  which  it 
had  undertaken.  The  I'oUowiiig  letter  was  then  adopted  by  the 
iChurcb  with  a  special  view  to  the  churches  of  the  same  foitti  and 
order  a*  itadfin  Great  Uritsin. 


njiBf  to  Uic  mipilnli,  vUhoat  n 


443  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

«<The  Fint  Baptut  Church,  Belize,  Hondnns,  to  all  the  SHOti 
in  Christ  Jenu,  with  their  Bishops  and  Deaeons,  to  whom  tUi 
may  come,  greeting : — 

^  *•  Grace  he  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  Grod  our  Faiber,  and 
from  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ' 

"  It  has  pleased  Grod,  dear  brethren,  in  His  infinite  mercy  and 
love,  to  send  the  Gospel  of  His  dear  Son  to  this  remote  portion  of 
the  world,  and  to  choose  a  people  for  His  name  fix»n  among  the 
Tsrious  tribes  settled  here,  under  the  dominion  of  the  crown  of 
Grreat  Britain.  Upwards  of  twelve  years  ago,  our  Lord  pot  it  into 
the  hearts  of  His  people  in  England,  to  send  us  a  teacher  of  the 
truth.  By  the  divine  blessing  on  his  labours,  we  aie  now  more 
than  one  hundred  and  thirty,  who  by  a  public  prafeasioa  have 
joined  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  and  to  each  other  in  Bb  name. 

"  For  several  years  past,  we  have  been  caUed  to  testify  to  the 
truth  by  suffering,  on  account  of  various  points  of  duty;  but 
chiefly  for  declining  to  be  sworn  in  the  Courts  of  this  Settlement 
(on  the  authority  of  the  New  Testament  precepts,  Matt.  y.  33,  and 
James  y.  12),  we  have  yearly  endured  in  a  progressiye  meaaore^ 
fines  and  imprisonments,  besides  other  less  direct  iiguries,  to  a  cgb- 
siderable  extent. 

"  But  at  length  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel  have  been  emboldened 
to  assail  us  openly  in  the  liberty  of  the  public  worship  of  Grod,  and 
have  craftily  framed  and  enacted  a  law,  by  which  it  becomes  cri- 
minal for  us  to  assemble  ourselves  together  to  exhort  one  another 
in  obedience  to  the  divine  injunctions,  Heb.  x.  25 ;  and  2  Tim. 
iv.  2,  and  according  to  our  conscience,  laying  upon  na,  in  our 
religious  character,  certain  restrictions  to  which  our  subjection  to 
the  Head  of  the  Church  forbids  us  to  conform. 

^  In  consequence  of  our  persisting  in  obeying  God  rather  than 
man,  our  meetings  have  become  subject  to  the  visits  of  police 
agents;  and  our  ministering  brethren,  besides  some  who  have  con- 
ducted social  worship  in  their  0¥m  houses,  have  been  sumnxmed  to 
appear  before  a  magistrate,  first  threatened  and  then  fined,  fo 
preaching  and  teaching  contrary  to  this  law. 

"  Under  these  circumstances,  it  has  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  to  us,  to  send  unto  you  our  beloved  pastor,  Alexander 
Henderson,  who  is  a  fiuthful  and  tried  minister,  and  the  honoured 


PABTINO   ENOAUEMEKTS. 


443 


i,  whofle  crown  and  joy  ai 
ilo  you,  thst  ye  receive  t 


r  brother  Frederick  Cro 

n  foithfiil.     That  they. 


iiurtrument  of  God'a  grace  among  u 
in  the  Lord.  Him  we  commead  ui 
the  Lord. 

"  And  we  h«vc  sent  with  hin- 
a  servant  of  this  church,  whom  v 

who  have  themaelves  sutFcred  and  laboured  abundantly,  and 
whose  uaeftilueas  ia  now  interrupted,  may  state  [o  you,  by  word  of 
mouth,  our  pontion  and  wanta ;  to  the  end  (hat  we  may  be  helped 
by  your  prayers  and  countenauce,  and  that  you,  brethren,  may 
assist  tbem  in  wbatwever  businesa  they  have  need  of  you. 

"  If,  when  our  itate  shall  be  made  known  to  you,  dear  brethren, 
you  should  feel  that  we  have  any  clntni  upon  your  synipathy,  and 
that  it  is  in  your  power  to  help  us  to  obtain  from  men  that  liberty 
to  honour  God  in  Ilia  own  institutious,  which  is  our  right,  and  i*  bo 
dear  to  every  Christian  bosom ;  or  that,  by  pecuniary  help,  you 
can  alleviate  the  burden  which  is  thus  put  upon  us,  and  enable  us 
more  elfcctuaUy  to  carry  out  our  plans  for  the  spiritual  beueSt  of 
those  around  us;  and  that  by  your  prayers  and  fellowship  our 
spirits  may  be  refreshed,  it  will  both  draw  closer  the  bond  of  our 
union,  and  increase  the  debt  of  love  and  gratitude,  already  larger 
than  our  capacity,  which  we  owe  to  the  churches  of  Great  Britain, 
and  will,  we  trust,  cause  through  us  thanksgiving  to  God. 

" '  Brethren,  the  grace  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your 
spirit.    Amen." 

"  On  behalf  of  the  church, 

"(Signed,)      GBoaoa  Bhaddice. 

SiMUEi.  Matthew  Davibb,   [ 
Jakes  Keij.t, 
James  Yobk, 
as  with  conmderabic  grief  and  heaviness  of  heart  that  the 
church  determined  to  remain  several  months  without  a  recognized 
miniEter,   to   deprive  itself  of   the  councils  and   instructions  of 
their  beloved  pastor  at  such  a  time,  and  to  break  up  two  scbooh, 
each  numbering  lOO  scholars.    But  the  duty  was  plainly  perceived, 
and  hopes  were  entcrtainal  that  important  results  might  follovr 
thij;  step  which  would  ultimately  be  promotive  of  the  kingdom  of 
.      Christ  in  Central  America,  and  which  would  redound  to  the  glor; 

^H    Among  the  merchants  and  wealthier  residents,  a  few  whose  te^ 


k 


Deaconi.' 


444  THB  QonwL  nr  csanRXh  ambsica. 

tiliioBy  wm  most  TilsaUe— though  M»e  of  them  had 
fiiends  to  the  Gospel,  (Bgned  a  letter  cxprcMYe  of  their 
and  coDfidenoe  in  Mr.  Henderson,*  and  some  oontribatioiii 
made  towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  his  yoyage.  This  «si» 
however,  chiefly  borne  bj  the  membcn,  who  snnfilied  iheir  pMtsr 
so  abundantly  with  fruits,  vegetables,  Hve-stodc,  and  other  pro- 
visions  tbtt  it  was  aoeepted  bj  the  ship,  in  lien  of  board  daring  ^ 

On  the  last  Lord*s-day  previoos  to  the  ssiling  of  the  deplitiaa 
(the  11th  of  April),  wldle  imprisonment  was  still  hmging  ofcr 
their  heads  and  their  departure  was  yet  nnoertain,  another  hsp- 
tizing  took  place  at  *«Mr.  Tillett*8  water-ride."  The  number  ef 
spectators  was  now  even  greater  than  before,  and  no  little  emociaii 
of  different  kinds  was  oocarioned  by  the  eritieal  position  in  which 
the  native  church  stood  before  the  public  With  aone  the  hold- 
ness  of  the  act  was  matter  of  surprise  or  of  diaagwhation ;  with 
others  it  was  a  feeling  of  sympathy  and  admiration^  lor  the  steady 
maintenance  of  princiide,  the  display  of  unshalrcii  oonftdenoe  m 
God,  and  the  example  of  patient  perseverance  *^in  wdU  doing.* 
Mr.  Henderson,  on  this  interesting  occasion,  gave  vent  to  a  bust 
of  feeling,  awakened  by  the  peculiar  circumstanoes  of  the  dmich, 
which  melted  many  of  his  audience  into  tears.  On  thai  dsj,  the 
meetings  were  hdd  as  usual,  the  ordinance  of  the  8n|n>ci  was 
attended  to,  and  both  Mr.  Henderson  and  Mr.  Crowe  pnaehed, 
but  the  policemen  refrained  from  making  their  usoal  visiL  Still 
it  was  anticipated  that  notice  would  be  taken  by  the  jmlioe  magis- 
trate of  that  day*s  happy  engagements. 

On  the  following  evening,  after  the  native  nuasionary  prayer- 
meeting,  the  church  remained  for  business  connected  with  the 
pastor's  departure.  One  of  the  deacons  then  qncationed  JB^other 
Henderson  as  to  what  he  would  do  in  case  he  should  £ul  in  hii 
object  Brother  Henderson  replied,  that  he  had  little  ftar  of  not 
succeeding,  but  that  he  would  certainly  return  and  widSer  with 
them  under  any  dreumstances.  Several  of  the  breduen  had  a 
word  of  exhortation  or  of  advice.  Arrangements  were  naade  that 
the  churdi  should  continue  to  meet,  and  Brother  Crowe  f  ■^imffsw** 
his  gratitude  for  the  supply  of  all  hia  wants,  and  for  the 


Eat  ttdi  ttftoMBW,  Mt «  HsnteMb"  y. «. 


GAlLIXr.  OF   TBB  DEPCTATIOII.  44fi 

favours  he  had  received  since  he  returned  among  them,  and  espe- 
cially for  the  Rj-mpathy  and  support  which  had  been  extended  to 
him  while  in  priaoit. 

The  dny  of  Mr.  Henderson's  and  Mr.  Crowe's  embarkation  for 
Europe  was  the  I4lh  of  April,  the  "anniversary  of  the  day  when 
the  church  first  heard  of  the  dismissal  of  their  pastor  from  hii 
connection  with  the  Society,  and  on  which  Mr.  Crowe  had  arrived 
from  Guatemala.  Agauii  one  of  tlie  last  payments  Mr.  Henderson 
made  was  a  line  of  ten  dollars  for  absence  from  Court.  When 
about  to  step  into  the  ship's  boat,  the  pastor  found  himself  sur- 
rounded with  a  considerable  crowd  of  members  and  friendB,  who 
made  a  circle  round  him  on  the  public  wharf,  and  aniled  in  sing- 
JIK  the  hymn  commcQciiig- — 

■1  "Ctme,  Cliriiliin  bnlliren,  en  we  put." 

While  thus  engaged,  the  crowd  was  considerably  auginented  and 
'  Ae  demonstntion  of  feeling  spread  rapidly :  many  friends,  some 
indilTcrent  parties,  and  a  few  ofthe  enemies  of  the  Gospel  looked  on 
with  anrptiae.  Whilst  the  pastor  was  lifting  up  his  hands  in  prayer, 
the  two  policemen,  who  had  been  employed  as  informers,  nere  noticed 
to  approach,  and  to  unite  themselves  with  the  throng.  Not  a  fen 
were  alarmed  by  thctr  presence,  and  still  feared  that  >u  urest  and 
imprisonment  would  frustrate  the  departure  of  the  deputation. 
But  when  the  prayer  was  ended,  and  the  friends  shook  hands  with 
thi;ir  minister,  the  policemen  requested  to  be  pemiitted  to  do  the 
aame,  and  exprcsKd  their  shame  and  regret  at  the  kind  of  duty 
which  they  had  been  set  to  do  by  their  superiors  in  office.  A  few 
friends  accompanied  the  temporary  exiles  on  board  Ln  Cazamanee, 
which  saluted  the  totin  with  seven  guns  ere  it  left  the  harbour,* 
and  was  followed  by  many  weeping  eyes,  and  many  a  sorrowful 
besrt,  that  Euch  a  separation  and  apparent  interruption  to  the  good 
ihould  be  occasioned  by  the  enmity  of  man  to  bis  God. 


446  THE  GOSFBL  IN   CENTRAL  AMERICA* 


CHAPTER   V. 

XBLIEF— THB     CHUBCH    HBIiPBI>. 

1847—1848. 


Podtion  of  the  Church—The  Sepntation  amrei  in  England— MiaitateMMito  ot  flw 
Committee — Obtain  Thomas*!  correction  ol  them— Mr.  Hendenoa'a  acttleaent  d. 
acooonta  with  the  Society— Rejection  of  hit  demands  and  tlM  reaioaa  gifCB — Fknmnbte 
reply  from  Earl  Grey  —The  first  Carif  Gospel  printed —The  Bao^  Gnat— ^fts  and 
help  afforded- Intelligence  from  Belize ;  Mr.  Braddick  fined  tad  dirtnlaed — ^Xra. 
Braddiek**  Letter— The  Church  presenred— Mr.  Crowe's  xeeeptteBlkaBce— PubKe 
Meeting  in  London  to  hear  the  Deputation— Mr.  Hendenon  aSik  and  leacrea  Mr. 
Crowe  in  England — Mr.  Henderson's  arrival  in  Belize— The  pcneealing  "Aet**  caa- 
cdled— Fiorti(ms  of  Miaaian  Property  sold  — Mr.  Buttfidd's  zeeaU— Second  Mcetiag 
m  support  of  the  Natire  Miaaions  and  Beport— Ciril  bmefit  arisnif  oat  d  Bciigis« 
Freedoni— Amount  paid  hy  Mr.  Braddick  in  Fines  restored— Teo^nmy  afwiwiatii 
for  Worship— Mr.  Kingdon's  Meeting  closed— Sale  of  the  Misami  PftnaiMa  for  a 
Lunatic  Asylum— Nature  of  the  transaction— Mr.  Henderson's  Pkotest— Tke  Onrdi 
addreaa  the  CommittiBe  on  the  Sale— The  Committee'a  reply— Public  Ofpiaign  of  t 
formation— Mr.  Henderaon'a  continued  labours  and  auoeeaa— TSDetton 
Committee  in  Londim  invite  Mr.  Henderson's  friends  to  hear  Letteia 
icaohition  of  the  16th  of  December—  Their  charge  aa  to  incon«et 
tained— Bea<dutian  of  the  Strict  Baptut  Convention  reeomiMndiBf  iht  ChncM 
Appeal— llie  Committee  acknowledge  one  miS'Statemeni— Motion  at  Memhcn*  Meatiig 
to  restore  S602.  to  the  Church— The  Committee's  Besdhitions  of  the  Sflth  of  May,  ni 
disposal  of  Property— Mr. Crowe's  eiforts  delayed  —His  Visit  to  Smaez  and  Kent- 
Manner  of  applying— The  Committee  issue  '^BeUse"— Ita  oontenta — PnhifaM 
Statements  and  AdvcartiBement- Obstructians  to  Mr.  Crawe'a'^peal- Bcport  if 
Joumeya  to  the  west  and  north  of  England,  and  into  Scotland— Tortliar  iflwli  in* 
tenrupted— Progress  at  Bdiie— Tucatecan  rcftigces    Prosperity  of  the  ^n^rima 

l-Jckmk  qfEbtU  U  «iM  nr;  tkt  Qod  cfJaeoh  it  oar  rtfiV'.''— PMlm  zM.  U. 

Bt  the  departoie  of  Mr.  Hendenon  and  Mr.  Crowe  fbr  Europe^ 
the  natiye  charch  was  once  more  thrown  upon  its  own  reaomccf 
under  God,  at  a  time  when  there  was  little  in  outward  drcmB- 
stanoes  to  encourage  the  members,  and  when  even  its  rftvytinfff^ 
existence  as  a  body  must  hare  appeared  doubtfiil  to  the  eye  of 
sense.  The  persecuting  authorities  had,  for  a  time  at  least,  gained 
their  point|  which  eridently  was  to  diiye  the  non-juiing  dissent* 


THE  DEPUTATION  IK  ENGLAND.  447 

ing  minuleri  from  tlie  place,  ir,  indeed,  tbey  bad  eotcred  into 
the  feelings  of  Mr.  Kingdon  and  bis  tiupportere — a  supposition 
which  the  intimacy  maintained  between  them  fully  sanctions — 
tbey  might  now  hope  that  the  native  church  would  not  be  tena- 
doiu  of  their  connection  with  a  miin  upon  whom  bo  much  obloquy 
luid  been  caet,  and  who  was  so  obnoxious  to  the  more  influential, 
that  it  waa  thought  worth  tbeir  wbilc  eyeo  to  enact  lawa  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  being  rid  of  him.  Not  a  few  enemies  were  on  the 
ali:rt  to  lake  odvanloge  of  any  circumstance  that  might  favour 
their  designs ;  but  the  despised  church,  iitill  fearless  and  hopeful, 
loukud  not  at  the  difficulties  that  encompaiscd  its  path,  but  was 
enabled  to  move  onwards  under  the  banner  of  divine  love,  con- 
fidently interchanging,  in  the  midst  of  accumulated  sorrows,  the 
ancient  Israehtish  watchword  "  Jehovah  of  Hosts  is  with  us,  the 
God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge." 

La  Catamanee  entered  the  port  of  Havre  dc  Grace  in  Nor- 
mandy, after  a  favourable  voyage,  on  the  IGth  of  June,  1847. 
JVIr.  Henderson  immediately  proceeded  to  London  by  steam,  and 
Mr,  Crowe  visited  the  soutb  of  France,  where  his  parents  were 
residing,  whom  he  had  not  seeu  smce  he  had  left  them  at  the  age 
of  fifieen. 

Captain  David  Thomas,  who  had  sailed  for  England  some 
months  before  the  deputation,  had  already  made  public  some  of 
the  leading  facts  connected  with  the  separation  of  the  church 
and  Mr.  Henderson  from  the  Missionary  Society,  and  the  per- 
secutions of  the  Baptists  at  Belize,  though  the  narrative  which 
Mr.  Henderson  had  forwarded  long  before  had  failed  to  obtain 
publicity.  No  information  had  been  published  by  the  Society. 
Tbey  had  mode  a  gross  misstatement  in  their  Annual  Report  for 
1847,  to  the  eHect  that  two  native  teachers  adhered  to  Sir.  Eing- 
don,  and  that  the  committee  had  been  "constrained  by  various 
painful  considerations  to  dissolve  tbcir  connection  with  Mr.  Hcu> 
detson,"  whom  they  say  tbey  bad  been  willing  to  aid  to  remove 
to  the  United  States;  but  that  "  he  then  resolved  to  remain  at 
Belize,  and  hai  broken  up  and  divided  the  ekureli,"  These  erro- 
neous representations  were  faithfully  contradicted  by  Captain 
Thomas;*  but  no  correction  of  tbem  had  as  yet  emaaated lh)iD 

tcontuuttec  which  gave  them  currency. 
•  Set  -*  FiiBiUic  Chatb  Mtpiia;"  lut  IMT,  p.  IW.  ^^^^^H 


448         THS  OOSPBL  DT  CENTRAL  AMSSICA. 

"Mr,  Hendenon  arrived  in  London  on  the  ITth  of  Ji 
st  onoe  informed  the  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  hie 
objects.  He  also  took  early  meaaoret  to  bring  the  acta  ef  ^ 
anthoridea  in  British  Hondnraa  before  the  attention  of  €lofcnr 
ment,  by  addressing  the  Colonial  Secretary  on  the  35th  of  M§» 
The  petition  of  the  chnrch  was  also  forwarded,  together  viA 
testimonies  from  John  Hodge,  £8q.,  of  Meanm.  Hyde,  Ha^ 
and  Ca,  G.  F.  Angas,  £sq^  of  Messrs.  Angaa,  Bevaa  and  Osw 
and  William  Yaughan,  Esq.,  of  Vanghan  and  SheLdon,  all  Icaffim 
merchants  connected  with  Beliae.  Some  dday  waa  oeeaaioBsi 
at  Downing-street  on  account  of  the  memorial  fisrwaided  f  li  i  iw^^t 
the  Superintendent  of  the  Settlement  not  having  ~ jet  anived,  bat 
a  prompt  attention  was  promised  to  Mr.  Henderaoa'a  ^ppficatioii. 

In  his  first  intercourse  with  the  committee,  Mir.  JBendefBoa 
expressed  a  desire  for  a  £ur  adjustment  of  inrmwii,  ia  wluck 
he  begged  to  be  allowed  a  moderate  supply  of  friTf^mr  for  t 
house  in  lieu  of  the  cancelled  provision  which  had  been  made 
for  his  remoyal.  2.  That  the  committee  shoald  anfipoit  the 
appeal  made  to  Goremment  for  the  relief  of  the  Daptaata  Ikam  da 
attack  made  upon  their  religious  liberty  in  Hoodmaa.  3^  Hat 
instructions  should  be  sent  to  the  Society's  agents  at  Belia^ 
mg  them  to  cease  from  all  unfriendly  steps  towaida  Aa 
church.  4.  That  should  the  committee  withdraw  thdr 
the  mission-premiseB  should  be  transferred  to  tlie  dnnh  il 
Belize,  in  whose  name  Mr.  Henderson  offered  the  Soeiely  dtt  kdf 
of  the  estimated  value  of  the  whole  property,  yia.  60CML  d. 
they  would  state  how  they  expected  him  to  act  while  m 
and,  as  a  matter  of  eofume,  ths^  all  due  justice  alioidd  te  dMil 
his  injured  reputation.  To  these  requests  the  conmuCleo 
an  early  reply. 

Subsequently,  Mr.  Henderson  had  some  interriewa  nidi  At 
secretary,  and  met  the  conmuttee  on  the  6th  of  Jaly,  irfbeaa 
final  settlement  of  accounts  took  place  between  fhni  9i  Mt 
Henderson's  surprise  all  his  just  and  moderate  daiaBa  wm 
disaUowed,  and  almost  all  those  made  by  Mr.  Sji^^diHi  wm 
rigorously  enforoedi  The  whole  of  hia  latereourse  wdtii  the  enh 
mittee  was  to  him  most  nneatisfactory,  aa  were  alaa  Aa 
msisted  on  in  winding  up  his  aooonnta,  and  to  wkieb  fe 
it  necessary  to  agrees  IB  Oder  to  obtain  a  eettlemanl  at  aB.    Bi 


LETTER   FROM   THE  COLONIAL  BECBETABY.  449 

bad  to  pay  a  small  balance  (Sis.},  and  nas  charged  with  62'.  Gs.  Sd., 
tfac  residue  of  a  sum  which  bod  been  advanced  to  Mr.  Croire 
in  1843  and  1844  to  enable  him  to  carry  on  missionary  operations 
in  Vera  Faz,  when  the  salary  due  to  him  by  the  Colonisation 
Company  wni    withheld  through  the  embairassment  of  tbeir 


Aa  a  reason  why  the  committee  would  comply  with  none  of 
his  propositions,  the  secretary  told  Mr.  Hcndet^on  that  they  had 
lost  all  confidence  in  him.  Expressing  himself  as  at  a  loss  to  fix 
upon  anjiUing  in  his  conduct  by  which  he  had  forfeited  their 
confidence,  the  secretary  replied,  that  they  had  no  confidence 
that  the  church  at  Belize  would  stand ;  they  had  no  confidence 
that  Mr.  Henderson  would  be  snpported  in  Englaiid,  and  they  bad 
BO  confidence  that  be  would  live  I 

In  little  more  than  a  month  after  this  settlement  with  the  com- 
mittee, Mr.  Hcndersoa  received  the  following  answer  from  the 
Colonial  Secretary : — 

'*  Dovming -street,  14tkAugU4l  184T. 

"  Sra,— I  am  directed  by  Earl  Grey  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  communication  of  tbe  22nd  ult.,  enclosing  a  statement 
of  divers  cases  in  which  fines  and  imprisonment  bad  been  Buffered 
by  persons,  in  tbe  firitisb  Settlements  in  the  Bay  of  Uondurna,  on 
the  ground  of  their  refusal  to  take  oaths,  or  on  the  ground  of 
their  having  violated  the  provisions  of  a  proceeding  of  tbe  Publio 
Meeting  of  Honduras,  called  *  An  Act  for  declaring  and  dc- 
fining  the  laws  respecting  Dissenters.'  I  bavc  now  also  received 
from  Governor  Sir  Charles  Greyf  tbe  Memorial  presented  to 
Colonel  Fancourt  on  the  29lh  of  March  last  against  this  Act,  and 
tie  Memorial  addressed  to  me  by  yourself  and  others  at  Belize  on 
the  2()th  of  Marcii  last. 

**  Lord  Grey,  not  having  received  from  tbe  local  authoiitiea 
any  report  on  tbe  particulars  of  the  cases  stated  in  your  com- 
BUinicatioa  of  tbe  22nd  ult,,  is  not  enabled  at  present  to  express 
any  opimon  npon  tbem ;  but  he  bas  no  hesitation  in  assuring 
you,  that  her  Miyesty's  Govenunent  would  strongly  disapprove 
the  exaction  of  any  penalties  from  persons  refitsing  to  take  oaths 
from  bona  fide  religious  scruples,  and  without  any  desire  to  defeat 
the  ends  of  justice.  And  with  regard  to  the  proceeding  called 
f  Bonner  •tJiB*i«a 


dfift  Xn  «CMVBL  III  GnnCRAL 


*  4*  Act  fbr  dielinQg  md  definuK'i 

ten/  thc7  oonndar  it  tneipfidicnt  Hmt  waj  pevon  ahaM,  te 

Cilkd  i^QQ  to  tike  oetiur  voder  it;  iiHllier  )f^pB^y*» 

aoiinlliiaetlieir  iBflnenoewiih  thelocel 

But  his  lordrii^  denies  me  to  lemiDd  yoii»  ■■&  theee  on 

behalf  you  apply,  that,  in  choosing  these  Settlements  ftr 

piece  a£  abodes  they  plsoethemselTes  in  a  atiialiQii  ia  wbidi  1^ 

rjgjits  mnst  be  nnvraidably  subject  to  more  vneeadnBlj 

tlie  tontoial  pesKSMM  of  the  Crtmn. 

^IksfethehDnoortobe,  Sir,  your  obedieni 
MXhi A.  Hrnxusos."  "* 


Th V  was  God  grackxisly  leased  to  giant  to  the  fwyme  of 
suffering  people  in  Belize  the  most  coraj^tefee 
olijeet  of  the  depatation,  and  that  the  most  pranm^flttfie  tiuA,  if 
net  the  most  in^ortant  Very  gratefblly  is  the 
tion  of  the  British  Goyemment  also  acknowledged  m  te 
relief  aflbided  to  the  snflfeiersfiom  this  local  act  of  oppgcssion  ina 
dfataat  dependmey.  It  was  just;  it  was  nobly  doneik  And  il  has 
eanwd  ibe  wann  gratitude  of  the  loyal  sul^eets 
ooold  appieeiate  the  full  extent  of  the  benefiiction*  ff 
ncBS  be  indeed  the  strength  of  a  people,  acts  fik» 
establish  the  British  throne  more  than  its  oflaDt  tenflUb 
and  better  than  the  most  gallant  nayies  it  has  ew  eqnyfiUL 

Li  a  Tisit  whidi  Mr.  Henderson  paid  to  SootlHid»  and* 
dorii^  most  of  his  short  stay  in  "Kngfand,  he  was  taailj 
in  reriai^  and  transeribmg  his  transUitiop  of  the  CoipiJ  if 
Mitthew  in  the  Calif  hu^ioage.  The  chnrdi  at  Edbsbuj^ 
the  pastcMTal  charge  of  Mr.  Christopher  Andenon» 
undertook  to  bear  the  expense,  and  thus  obtained  the  heaont  if 
pniting  this  dist  portion  of  the  Sacred  Seriptuea  in  » Inpgnqgi 
never  before  redooed  to  writing. 

The  diurch  at  Bacnp,  in  Lancashire^  of  irbkh  Mf.  T. 
is  pastor,  reiolved  to  eontribnte  the  annual  som  of  fifteen 
towards  the  sn]^ort  of  Broths  Warner,  who  ihns  brmaaie  in  pai 
their  misnonary,  and  was  requested  to  conraBpond  directly  wilh 
that  church.  Some  boxes  of  useful  articles  ftr  sale^  ami  ftir  lh» 
nse  of  the  misrinn,  were  generously  beste^wed  hy  mriooB'  flHndv 
and  about  fifiy  paanda  were  contributed  tosnok  te  eaqpenne  ef 
the  depntatiQa. 


MR.  braddick's  Fines  and  distraikt.  451 


Mr.  Willkm  Norton,  of  Eghimi,  Sarr^  (then  of  Dilston),  at 
thftt  time  editor  of  thi!  "  Prirailire  Church  Magazine,"  very  kindly 
and  earnestly  advocated  the  esmae  of  the  Hondnm  minion  and 
the  church  at  Belize,  m  which  he  nrw  seconded  by  several  respected 
mmisters  and  brethren,  and  especially  by  Mr.  W.  Barnes,  of  Trow- 
bridge, and  the  brethren  connected  with  the  Strict  Baptist  Con- 
vention (now  the  Strict  Baptist  Sodely).  This  body  pased  c* 
Tcsolatioa  on  the  28th  of  September,  expressive  of  its  vrilliugnea# 
to  be  the  vehicle  of  transnutting  fands  to  the  church  at  Belize.' 
Three  Baptist  mimsters,  of  their  own  nceord,  took  np  the  subject 
by  writing  to  the  committee  of  the  Baptist  Misuonary  Society. 

While  in  London,  Mr.  Henderaon  received  intelligence  front 
Belize,  to  the  effect  that  the  brethren,  who  "  continued  gtedfastly 
m  the  apoBtles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread, 
and  in  prayers,"  had  been  continually  watched  and  denounced  by 
the  police,  and  that  llr.  Braddick  had  been  six  times  summoned 
for  condoctiug  worship,  and  as  repeatedly  fined.  At  length  he 
found  himself  unprepared  to  pay  one  of  these  impositions,  and 
legal  proceedings  were  being  token  against  him  preparatory  to  a 
distraint  for  the  sum  of  8/.  12.f.,  for  which  goods  would  probably 
be  seized  of  twice  or  three  time!)  that  value- 
Subsequently,  Mr.  Crowe  received  a  letter  from  Mrs,  Braddick, 
ID  the  following  tenna: — 

"^  Belize,  191ft  ^une  1947. 
"Dkai  Bbotbeb  Cbowe,— I  take  this  opportunity  of  writing 
tbeae  linca  to  you,  hoping  they  might  find  yon  in  the  «uoe  «tate  of 
health  M  they  kave  me  at  present.  * 

"  Dear  Mother,  the  some  thing  that  Mr.  Braddick  and  I  were 
bkmigg  you  about,  we  find  it  now  our  duty  to  do.  Not  very 
lc»g  atWr  you  went,  Mr.  Braddick  vrns  called  up  by  Mr.  Maskall, 
and  had  to  pay  Rve  dollarB.  lie  then  threatened  him  that  ho 
would  come  upon  him  if  he  did  not  mibmlt  to  the  law,  bnt  we  still 
kept  on  ae  usual.  They  brought  him  up  again  fbr  the  Wednesday 
Bq;ht  meeting,  aad  he  paid  tea  pounds  fine.  They  had  then  a 
long  argument,  in  which  Mr.  B.  told  him  [the  magistrate]  that 
they  would  not  stop  from  keeping  meeting.  They  never  used  to 
trouble  us  before  on  Sundays;  but  after  that,  they  watched. Ut^ 
momii^  and  ereiung,  on  the  Sabbath  and  OD  WedncadajB. 

*■  AAer  that,  they  broioght  him  up  for  a  Wednesday  ereniiig 


463  THB  O08PBL  IN  CEMTBAL  AMXBICA. 

meetJDgt  Mid  condemned  him  to  pay  ten  poondi.  He  icfiMlfo 
psy.  The  pdioe  then  came  ynth  s  distresB  warrant.  Mr.  &  im 
not  at  home.  I  was  stttmg  down  sewing.  Mub  Jennett  waa  wA. 
me.  They  came  in.  They  asked  no  questiomBy  bat  told  me  fid 
they  brooght  a  distress  warrant  They  then  b^gaa  to  mark  fk 
Qaeen*s  mark  [here  follows  an  imitation  of  the  official  cypbet]  m 
ererything  in  the  house ;  the  hed  and  bedding:  they  took  cfsj 
chair:  the  hall  and  the  two  outside  rooms  were  cleared  vmj; 
only  the  middle  room  was  left— they  did  not  go  into  that. 

''Blessed  be  his  name.  I  feel,  dear  Brother,  that  the  Lori^ 
promises  are  sure.  He  has  promised  to  be  near  m  the  day  of 
tronble,  for  He  was  with  me  that  day.  He  has  said  that  we  mnt 
not  think  evil  in  our  thoughts  against  our  enemies.  Iiemembend 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  must  be  a  willing  saeriiee.  After  they 
had  marked  all  the  things,  I  asked  them  what  tii^  weie  going  to 
da  They  told  me  they  were  going  to  fetch  a  cait  to  take  them 
away.  I  told  them  they  must  let  me  send  and  eall  Mr.  B. 
When  Mr.  B.  came,  both  of  us  were  of  one  mind.  Weircrewflfiag 
to  part  with  everything,  so  that  we  only  could  win  Qirist.  I  tit 
so  at  the  time  that  J.  was  obliged  to  dbed  tears  to  see  how  th^ 
wished  to  hinder  us  from  telling  the  truth  to  others;  that  giiefed 
me  more  than  all  that  they  took  out  of  the  boose ;  beeanse  st  the 
time  I  felt  that  nothing  was  mine,  and  I  remembered  Job.  The 
finest  costs,  and  charges,  altogether  amounted  to  one  hnndved 
and  eight  dollars. 

"At  the  time  Mr.B.  paid  the  five  doUars,  the  poliee  b^ged  Ub 
hard  to  take  back  their  half  [as  informers]  knowing  that  it  vn 
not  right  for  them  to  keep  it  I  forgot  to  menticm  befine^  Ihit 
whilst  the  police  were  taking  out  the  things,  Mr.  B.  soi^  a  hysBi 
and  praised  God,  and  the  house  was  full  of  people.  Hie  pofioe 
called  to  the  cartmen  to  stop  their  noise  [which  was  inteuapUpg 
the  hymn  of  praise  from  the  assembly  within].  That  day  we 
&lt,  I  and  my  dear  partner,  that  the  Lord  was  near  to  vs.  The 
more  the  world  tried  to  quench  our  grace,  it  still  bnmed  hottff 
and  higher  towards  that  Saviour  who  gave  His  life  for  os.  Wkl 
is  it  in  this  world  that  we  should  think  too  mnch  to  mt  fcr 
Him? 

"  The  church  is  still  going  on  as  usual,  only  Mr.  B.  don*t  stsad 
at  the  desk  now.    The  i^pointed  memben  read  ftom  their  seatii 


TBB  CHCItCB  FIt£5ERVED.l  453 

Mrs.  HendcrsoD  commenced  first.  They  have  Dot  troubled  us 
since  the  6th  of  June.  On  the  day  Mrs.  Henderson  wag  reading, 
the  police  tried  to  see  who  it  was.  AU  the  membeta  that  can  do 
80,  read.    One  reada  every  Sunday. 

'■  We  still  feel  that  the  Lord  is  present  with  ns,  for  He  is  mer- 
ciful to  me  and  Mr.  B. ;  for  the  more  we  give  to  the  Lord  we 
receive  doublefold:  and  when  our  neighbours  were  fretting  and 
crying  for^na  we  felt  rtyoiced.  We  conld  say  nothing  to  them.  Seve- 
ral Wesleynns  and  Church  of  England  members  were  here ;  we 
begged  ol'  them  to  read  the  scriptures,  to  see  which  religion  fulfils' 
the  scripture.  We  trust  that  those  in  authority,  through  the 
mercy  of  the  Lord,  have  let  us  alone  for  a  season,  for  they  hear 
so  ranch  of  the  scripture  spoken  to  them  that  they  cannot  but  see 
that  we  are  in  the  right." 

After  deiAiling  some  more  private  matters,  she  signs  herself, 
"  Your  affectionate  sister  in  Christ, 

"  Samh  Bbaddick. 

"P. S.— I  forgot  to  mention  that  Mr.  Warner  came  down  oo 
Thursday,  and  on  Wednesday  be  preached,  and  was  brought  up, 
and  paid  a  dollar  for  the  si 


The  eloquence  of  this  aaterly  epiatle  needs  none  of  the  adom- 
menis  of  art,  or  the  polish  of  refinement.  It  is  the  eloquence  of 
feeling,  and  her  unvarnished  tale  exemplifies  that  uncompromising 
principle  and  grace  combined  which  can  alone  enable  any  one  thus 
"to  lake  joyfiilly  the  spoiUng  of  their  goods." 

From  this  time  the  brethren  continued  to  meet  together  with 
little  interruption  till  the  intelligence  of  their  success  with  Govern- 
ment arrived.  And  thus  were  the  cburelt  again  graciously  carried 
through  a  period  of  peculiar  trial  and  diSiculty.  It  should  not  be 
forgotten  that  whilst  they  continuLd  at  all  hazards  to  resist  the  un- 
righteous encroachments  of  an  iniquitous  law,  there  was  an  almost 
empty  place  of  worship  within  a  few  hundred  paces  of  t' 
to  which  two  agents  of  the  Society  would  gladly  have  hailed  their 
return,  and  where  they  would  have  been  comparatively  without 
pecuniary  burdens,  and  entirely  shielded  fi-om  the  operation  of  the 
j4el  that  had  driven  their  pastor  away.  The  oaiy  obstacle  that 
debarred  theiu  from  these  advantages  was  the  sacrifice  of  principles 
wbicb  they  held  dear  as  a  church,  and  which  they  were  fully  a 


tf4  THB  9MFBL  IH  CKHTBAL  AMBMlCAu, 


Tineed  tii^  imt  ghre  n^  togetlier  widi 

tiMj  ntaned  to  die  8oeiel/f  agents.  Thegmoe^rf'God 

dent  fixr  them.    To  ]£m  be  «I1  the  pniae. 

Mr.  Crowe  met  Mr.  Hendenon  in  Loodon  ca  the  Ui  of  OcMBi 
PoriDg  hif  Yiat  to  BovdeMix,  he  had  the  h>|fWf  ■■  to  laftas  Mi 
agied  moUier  and  a  osier  in  the  Gironde,  whoae  waelen  had  p^ 
hahly  not  been  put  to  such  a  nse  for  nuay  oentuiies  hdbn.  Ha 
act  was  the  fixBt  of  the  kind  that  had  dtawn  the  aHilMsfa 
■nail  Fcotestant  eyangeJicad  caogteg^itkm  in  tiiat  cily  tp  m  yactJai 
TThilMtinn  nf  nrwTliiiiii  imliiisiMi  in  ifi  iHimifi¥ri  ■■■|iiiiilj  Ml 
C^we  had  been  kindly  received  by  Tarions  eongrqgaliaBi  of  Rcndk 
Frotestants  in  Faiis,  and  at  several  other  plaoeai  mmd  atoined  sn 
important  grant  of  French  and  Spanish  hooka  'Qnm  the  Book 
Sode^  of  Toulouse,  through  the  Messrs.  Gonrtoia  of  that  phee. 

Flepaatoij  to  Mr.  Henderson's  return  to  Bdine^  apahlic  neet- 
ing  was  held  at  Trini^-atreet  Ch^[«l,  Soothwark,  on  the  eveuBg 
of  the  7th  of  October,  when  Mr.  Henderson  and  Mr.  Crowe  gave 
aome  important  details  reipecting  the  country  and  fSbtt 
Mr.  HendcrsQii's  apeedi,  which  occupied  more  than  tspo 
a  half  in  the  delivery,  was  listened  to  with  intense  mtoweat 
tokens  of  deep  feeling.  Brethren  Ward,  of  Stratfofd,  W.  Kortos, 
James  Oliver,  of  Feckham,  Joseph  Bothery,  £•  R. 
Benjamin  Lems  took  part  in  the  proceedings  Hie 
adopted  by  the  meetii^  expressed  the  oonvietkMi  of  the 
present,  that  it  was  a  duty  to  help  the  stn^li^g  rani 
duras ;  through  Mr.  Hendierson  they  also  oonvey«d  the 
-of  their  sympathy  to  the  church  and  sofferera  there ;  and  thg^  We 
Jum  an  tfcctionate  fiurewell,  in  the  project  of  hia  speedy 
to  the  labours  of  the  fidd,  to  the  enooaragement  of  the 
diurch,  and  to  the  bosom  of  his  fiunily.* 

Mr.  HenderMU  embarked  for  Beliae  on  the  letk  of  the  wtm 
month,  accompanied  by  some  of  his  fonner  sebolan  froaa  Bgmf 
ock,  in  Devonshire,  who  chose  to  emigrate  with  him;  leavn^Mr. 
Crowe  in  England,  to  endeavour  to  cany  oat  the  third  oigeflk  d 
the  deputation,  which  had  become  absolutely  neoeasaiy  thiamb 
the  entire  foilure  of  the  second,  that  is,  the  obtaina^  of  the  «e 
of  the  meetii^-honse,  Sx^  fiom  the  conunittee.  Mr.  Crowe  wwi  to 

•  8M«ftdnpa(t«rttii1f««teriBfkB«¥riirfHfcCtaMk 
4Sai«  vMdi  alM  swWm  Me. 


MR.    HKIOIBRSONa 

■eek  directlj-,  froin  Cbriatian  churcbea  and  frienda  in  BriUin.  tbe 
•ssiatsnce  needed  towards  the  erection  of  a  new  place  of  worship 
at  belize,  and  for  the  mainteauice  of  tbe  o«it-stations  and  general 
misnouary  opcrstions  of  the  now  self-snpponiiig  native  church ; 
in  ahort,  that  sympathy  and  tiad  which  was  refused  them  by  Ae 
£aptin  Minioiuuy  Socie^. 

Tbe  first  intelligence  received  ia  England  of  Mr.  Hendenoa's 
Beliie  was  by  a  letter,  dated  the  1 1  th  of  December  1847. 

it  be  Mys,  "  By  tbe  good  band  of  my  God  npon  us  all,  I  reached 
fieliie  on  tbe  9tb  instant,  in  good  health,  and  found  all  wdl. 

"  My  arriral  was  anticipated  by  the  brethren.  A  boat  was  oat  to 
meet  tbe  ship,  but  tniased  lu  in  tbe  dark,  it  being  nine  o'clock  p.m. 
ere  we  got  into  port.  On  reaching  my  home,  the  house  wu  re- 
sounding with  the  Toice  of  praise :  al>out  one  hundred  were  aieem- 
bled  together  to  give  ds  welcome.  As  in  departing  so  in  returning, 
prayer  and  praise  were  the  accompaniment.  And,  surely,  if  the 
Lord  had  not  helped  in  onr  past  struggle,  rain  had  been  the  help 
of  mao.  Tbra«fbr«,  praise,  all  praise  is  due  to  His  name.  I  truat 
we  ahaU  never  folget  Hia  loying- kindness. 

"  The  eoemy  has  been  subdued  for  the  present  The  Act  (now 
notorious)  hns  been  publicly  amiounced  ns  disallowed  by  the 
Honte  Government ;  consequently,  it  ia  null  and  void. 

"  Air.  Kingdon  baa  sold  a  second  portion  of  the  mission  ^t)UDd.* 
The  press  baa  also  been  mid,  and  the  public  hare  Iwoght  it.  Mr. 
ButtHeld  is  idling  off  bis  furniture,  and  his  passage  is  alicadf 
taken  for  Knghuid  by  a  vessel  loading  in  the  harbour.  Thus  eo^ 
ius  career  as  a  misaiouaiy  to  Beli>e."t  He  left  Beliie  in  December 
1847,  having  resided  there  three  full  years. 

Soon  after  Mr.  Henderson's  return,  tbe  second  pnbtie  weeHaf 
in  support  of  the  native  missions  coaneGt«d  with  the  church  «m 
held,  on  the  4tb  of  Janoaiy,  in  the  Baptist  chapel,  which  was  this 
time  lent  for  the  occasion,  and  though  spacious  it  did  not  afford  ait- 
ting  rooiu  for  all.  Mr.  Henderson,  as  secretary,  gave  an  acoonnt  of 
the  pcxigreaa  made  since  the  first  meeting,  "  The  cxpeudituie  had 
esoeeded  the  income  by  34  dollars,  5  reals;  but  IS  dollars  had 


466  HBM  CKMDPBL  ZN  CBNTBAL  AIUBIOA. 

Ixea  leodved  from  the  chmch  «t  Bicop^  TiiwcMliirey  fat  At 
year  eiifliiiiigt  bo  that  at  the  doee  of  the  year  40  dollars  1  real  io> 
mained  in  hand.  The  enm  total  receiYed  was  818  doUan  S  ntk 
(or  432. 14f .)«  out  of  which  two  out-stetioDB  had  been  wat^taiaeL 
Dnrsng  the  year  the  dear  increase  of  membas  w«b  thirteen 
making  s  total  of  151,  exclndye  of  the  ehnrch  at  Tillettoii,  wliidi 
numbered  thirteen  members.  Again,  not  one  member  bad  left 
the  ehnrch  to  unite  with  Mr.  Kingdon,  though  two  moTO  of  iii 
excluded  members  had  been  recdyed  by  him.  On  the  2nd  cf 
January  Mr.  Henderson  had  baptized  seven  persons.  Mr.  WiDisai 
TOlett,  of  Tilletton,  who  had  been  a  supporter  of  the  caase,  had 
zesdlyed  to  be  baptized  on  that  occasion;  but  aometldiiig  had 
prevented  him.  He  was  present  at  the  ordinance,  and  was  there 
aeized  with  fever  which  in  four  days  terminated  in  death.  Mis. 
3!illett  had  been  baptized,  and  joined  the  church  dniiqg  Mr.  Hen* 
derBon*s  absence.  The  church  at  Ulletton  was  peaoefiil  and  prat* 
perous ;  both  the  congregation  and  school  had  tended  material^ 
to  promote  the  industry,  comfort,  and  social  hapj^ness,  aa  wdl  ai 
the  spiritual  good  of  the  settlers.  The  formatioa  of  otber  out* 
stations  was  contemplated. 

In  a  letter  written  at  that  period,  Mr.  Henderson  sayi^  **  When 
on  the  platform  at  our  anuiversary,  I  remembered  with  giati- 
tnde  the  parting  meeting  at  Trinity  chapel,  and  related  to  tin 
assembly  the  manner  in  which  I  had  been  sent  away  by 
finends  in  England;  telling  them  that  I  accepted  their 
on  that  occasion  as  an  expression  of  their  welcomii^  me  back 
to  Belize.  I  have  not  yet  been  brought  into  eontaet  with  the 
authorities ;  to  be  let  done  is  all  I  ask.  One  of  oar  **'^f?imiv 
Brother  Kelly  at  Baker*s,  has  been  exempted  this  year  Aobl 
militia-daty,  simply  reporting  himself  a  teacher. 

^  I  have  not  yet  recommenced  translations :  but  ere  a  week  I 
expect  to  have  this  work  and  my  day  school  in  Ml  operation. 

**  Mr.  Braddick . . .  has  been  advised  to  petition  the  same  pob- 
lic  meeting  that  passed  the  law  under  which  he  suffered,  Ibr  the 
amount  of  his  losses  to  be  restored.  It  is  worthy  of  observataoa^ 
that  our  resistance,  on  religious  grounds,  to  the  usorpatioos  if 
the  authorities  in  this  place,  has  been  attended  with  benefit  to 
its  civil  interests,  and  to  the  very  Meeting  which  was  nsed  to 
oppreM  us.    ft  has  been  the  pra^ioe  of  the  8iipeiintendeal»  te 


f 


BALE  OF   THE  UUSION   PREUISES.  iS7 

naay  yean,  and  contrary  to  the  old  method  of  conducting  public 
bosmcss,  to  embody  in  a  kind  of  mesEage  Irom  himeeil',  the  only 
business  that  vaa  to  be  transacted  by  the  meeting ;  whereas,  for> 
merly,  any  member  desirous  of  briogiog  bunoen  betbre  it,  gave 
aotice  of  motion,  say  three  weeks  prior  to  sBsembling.  Thia 
custom  is,  I  understand,  required  to  be  restored,  and  is  again  in 
practice  this  year,  showing  bow  dependent  civil  liberty  is  upon 
religious  freedom.    The  one  cannot  stand  long  withont  the  other." 

In  answer  to  the  petition  of  Mr.  George  Bntddicli,  the  Public 
Meeting  directed  that  the  sum  of  a»l.  \2s.  Hd.  should  be  refunded 
to  him  by  a  unanimtnu  vote  of  the  House.  Thus  restoring  to 
him  [he  amount  of  his  fines  and  costs ;  but  not  the  real  valoe 
of  bis  property,  which  was  sold  by  auction  to  pay  them. 

The  mcetiugs  of  tbc  native  brethren  continued  to  be  so  well 
attended  al\er  Mr.  Henderson's  return,  notwithstanding  the  poor 
accommodation  which  theii  house  afforded,  that  forms  were  placed 
ODtaide  of  the  bouse,  and  a  large  soil  was  spread  to  shade  the  por- 
[  >ti(m  of  the  congregation  who  were  thus  out  of  doors  from  tbe 
'  vertical  rays  of  the  sun,  or  in  some  measure  to  shelter  them  from 
the  copious  tropical  showers  to  uhicb  they  were  eiposed  dnring 
worship. 

Less  than  three  months  after  Mr.  Henderson's  return  to  BeliK, 
Mi.  Kingdon  closed  his  place  of  worship  for  want  of  a  congn^tion.*  * 
Subsequently,  n^ociatious  were  entered  into  between  him  and  the 
Fancourt  Dispensary  (a  creature  and  favourite  project  of  the 
Superiutcndent's)  fur  the  sale  of  tbe  entire  miauon- house  and  pro* 
perty  to  that  institution.  The  ostensible  object  of  this  sale  was  tbc 
trausformalion  of  the  meeting- bouse  into  a  lunatic  osjlum.  Mr. 
Kingdon  hud  had  inatructioos  Irom  the  committee  in  England  to 
•ell  the  property  if  he  could  find  a  purchaser,  but  was  directed,  in 
■ndh  case  (vi&,  alter  having  found  a  purchaser),  to  make  a  tender 
of  it  to  the  native  church,  giving  them  the  preference,  on  tlit  tamt 
term*  (i.  e.  tbe  highest  price  that  could  be  obtained)  :  thni 
entirely  putting  aside  the  church's  claim  to  the  use  of  the  property, 
as  having  been  devoted  to  the  accommodation  of  the  Baptist  Chureb 
by  the  past  acts  of  the  Society,  and  also  disregarding  the  request 

Bmbm  of  Iho  mued.c(>iiuiiQiu 


1M  XnOOiRLIH 


cflhr  vwdft  in  tht  nne  <if  die  clticfc  \i^  Ifr* 
nifle  a  Kiii^hBid,  tt  be  ifflcwped  to  lae  the  jin'iiiwi  if 
Iqr  tlK  8oae^*i  ageate,  or  to  paidiMe  then  at  bidf  tbeir 
The  Jiiimfaiif  Qlierif  of  the  mh  «f  Fetmuy 

itf  Bxitiih  CSuiBliHi^  md  of  epntribiiloni  to  tibe  Soeiety'o  ftnbai 
the^ot  He fltetai  thst the  chmdi  WW aot  sble to pi^ tke «■ 
nqiuiedv  TIE.,  1,M0^  iledD^  ind  c&tm  iab>  Boae  dfide  to  i^ 
Ike  hgiHtioe  done  by  tiie  Society  to  the  dnmh  m  Mo  mIo^  fiaDj 
layiog  daim,  on  behalf  of  the  €h1I^d^  to  aftk  ftapmliunof^ 
prooeeds  as  ooBpared  widi  Uie  oontrihatioBs  of  the 
if  theaOe  dbooU  be  effecfeed  m  violation  of  the 
afanding  of  oootrBnton.  To  this  pnitert  Mr.  ffinginn  icpfied  ii 
knah  tana,  rhaiyng  Mr.  Hendemn  with  inqpeitiBBBt  anriifinj^ 
and  iagcatitadei  n  a  aobaeqiient  nniBber  of  liie  aHaeaHMi^  OliiBr 
letten  fiiUowod  OQ  both  adea  ^  bnttfaetnmaBOtianMoaMlniBd 
by  the  aale  of  the  whole  property  to  Colonel  IteooHt  ftr  MML 
At  the  tune,  it  was  deeawd  pntebk  that  the  md  ol^eBt  of  «e 
waa  for  the  ntemnon  of  ^e  Anglican  Gbnrak 
il  and  Mr.  Kingdon  faisuell^  in  bis  poblie 
the  sabject,  says,  that  for  aught  he  kfwwsj  "  the  Goepel  may  yet  be 
pnadied  in  die  diapd,  by  just  as  pionsi  ataluui^  nnd  wfid  a 
"  ininiitfff  (of  another  dmominalion  indeed) 
been  blessed  with,**  phdniy  manifrwting  his  own 
jn%;fat  be  the  uUisaate  xoult  of  the  transfer. 

The  chnch  had  addresMd  the  ^^'-^^l*^  on  tto  1^0  of  lie 
ptcuises  on  the  Ml  of  EdiniaTy,  sbitmg  their  inahiii^to 
on  the  tenna  proposed;  tiieir  ei^iectation  thattiieiMaoC  the 
Off  wofship  would  hsfo  been  secmod  to  theai  wllhiint  dnuEigef 
tiiat  they  ^M?"flmcff*d  tiie  sale  as  an  onwananlable  TiahitiMi  nf  ^ 
iMa  due  to  thenaelTea  as  a  auaBion  dras^  and  imoanciinhle 
thepiindplesoftevevealedwillafGod.  Thrf.thfBiirinii, 
decline  the  propo6itk)n  of  the  oonuaittee^  and  beg  Ihem  to 
«der  the  st^  they  were  aboot  to  take,  bi  a  ■nbafanafc  kMar  H 
the  ffiBiiniUiw  (dated  Msicfa  11th  1848),  the  chonsh  add  Ifat 
te  aeoet  irbUti  Hr.  Sji^^  had  kept,  aa  to  te  jmHkm  nil 
whom  he  was  in  treaty  for  the  sale,  had  transpired,  ami  knd  ooaa> 

i»lUjl8Mtp.l«.   8oealn"HoBdnn«,"F.87,toiihkk1ki 


PERTKKSIOH  OP  DSNOMTNA^TIOKU.  PBOFERTY.  tSO 

noned  "  a  srot  ontciy  among  those  nho  bRd  been  aiding  and  coD- 
tributing  to  the  keeping  up  of  the  ciui%."  That  a  fricDd  had 
offered  to  lend  a  sum  of  money  to  the  church  in  orfer  to  pre'ent 
the  transfer,  and  they  were,  therefore,  enabled  to  offitr  7fiO/.  for 
the  whole  propwty.  The  reply  of  the  committee  to  these  letten 
(dated  J!ay  30th  1 M48)  gtatts,  that  it  waa  now  too  late,  Mr.  King- 
don  hsviiig  hail  instructions  to  feQ  to  the  best  advantage,  if  the 
church  reliued  to  equal  it.  It  also  rdoses  to  grant  the  chnieh 
any  proportion  of  the  proceeds,  bat  the  cominittee  add  tbeir 
willLngncfs  to  refund  any  sonis  that  may  have  been  contributed  by 
the  church  towards  the  building,  which  was  finished  about  twdn 
ycac^  before  the  church  hod  a  being.*  An  effort  it  also  made  to 
justify  the  sale,  on  tlie  grounds  of  the  past  expense  of  thcnufraon 
at  liclize — the  committee  saying,  "We  tHnk  it  nnjust  to  the 
Sooety,  and  to  the  heathen,  that  all  these  cxpensea  should  &U  on 
our  ordinary  fundi,"  forgetful  that  there  were  both  heathen  and 
brethren  in  Hondaraa,  and  that  the  church  had  proposed  to  earrj 
on  the  misaioii  without  Aulher  expense  to  the  Sodety. 

The  public  voice  and  the  local  press  at  lieliie  both  united  in 
condemning  ttie  pcrreraicn  of  the  properly  to  snch  a  purpoic,  and 
tljRl,  too,  while  the  native  church  and  a  large  congregation  were 
miflu-ing  great  inconvenience  for  want  of  their  place  of  worship. 
The  tntnsfonnation  was,  however,  soon  effected ;  the  benches  and 
fittings  up,  which  were  of  the  roost  simple  description,  were  re- 
moved, and  were  kindly  given  by  the  purchaser  to  the  native 
church.  In  their  places  cells  were  eobstiCuled  to  accommodate 
three  or  four  madmen  and  idiots,  who  had  already  been  cloK 
companions  with  the  Baptists  during  confinement  in  the  jaiL 

Writing  on  the  Utb  of  March  1S48,  Ur.  Uendeison  c 
of  the  lengthy  correspondence  occasioned  by  the  reply  to  the  drcn- 
latcd  charges  igainst  him,  and  the  kind  inquiries  of  bis  Irienila, 
which  proved  a  burden  to  him  in  the  midst  of  his  already  exccnire 
occupations.  He  speaks  of  it  as  a  sacrifice  of  feeling  as  well  as  ai 
time  in  these  temis,— "  Ever  since  the  exciting  times  of  late  outrages 


tt  \ht  GoBmiHs^  » 

-!««.- pp.  «.7,»-H-^™."^U0.    A 

.a^cUn„^lkcat. 

■t™  of  tk=  boildmgbj  0. 7.  Algu.  £.»,  Ui™«li 

ilUlinHUKIIburf 

QTid  b)  tbil  gaiiUmaa  m  Ot  ulirc  clmnli,  U 

460  THB  O08FBL  Df  OBRTBAL  UmiOA. 

upon  me,  I  find  that  my  nenrons  system  has  been  iieUe^  so  ftift 
ai^  peneyering  mental  ezercue  proYokes  ftter,  and  no 
degree  of  suffering.** 

He  also  adds, — ^"  Last  LoTd*8-day,  the  ^th,  nz  persons  were  b 
mersed,  one  a  oonyert  from  Backlanding,  near  Tilletton,  tbat 
her  awakening  to  the  exhortations  of  Brother  Warner.  AnoAfT 
appears  to  have  had  her  attention  to  Diyine  things  forced  upon  hs 
hf  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Eingdon  and  his  friends  to  get  aoongr^gatios; 
for  although  she  ooold  not  with  them,  she  did  with  na^  hear  tibe 
word  that  ftstened  conviction  of  sin  upon  her  soiiL  *  Miniatfr/ 
BBid  she  to  me  at  the  time  of  her  inquiries  for  baptism,  *  I  may  mf 
I  live  upon  my  Saviour,  for  I  have  for  two  weeks  past  lisd  no  desiie 
for  food.  My  thoughts  are  sometimes  so  happy  that  I  foel  as  if  I 
oonid  hug  him  in  my  arms,  and  again  my  mind,  I  cammt  tdl  lur«v 
is  filled  with  such  bad  thoughts.*  On  one  oceasioD  abe  fidntod 
under  the  exciting  power  of  the  word.  I  suppose  dhe  bad  been 
ftsting.'*  After  naming  the  candidates,  he  adds, — **  Hie  bume  ones 
walked  in  with  their  staves  or  supported  by  the  brethxen. 

^Mr.  Warner  has  sent  his  first  epistle  to  the  chnrcii  «t  Baeop. 
Tllletton  is  in  'great  joy.*  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  on  tbe  raj 
ground  about  them.  Their  plantations  flourish.  To  me  dds  is 
matter  of  comfort,  as  they  used  to  have  them  at  a  great  dislBBBe 
off;  now  they  axe  round  their  very  houses.  This  gives  -ptaam  sf 
future  stalulity  to  the  place  as  a  township.** 

After  the  sale  of  the  premises,  it  was  expected  that  Mr.  EingdoB, 
who  disbanded  his  few  followers  on  the  13th  of  March,  wotald  be 
lecaUed  as  well  as  Mr.  Buttfield.  Such  was  not,  however,  tbe 
Notwithstanding  the  committee's  declaration  that  they  **■ 
from  BeUzej^*  he  remained  there  still  for  [many  montbs  without 
a  preaching  station  of  his  own,  occasionally  supplying  the  Weslqfni 
pulpit  and  attending  and  communing,  together  with  his  lady  wad  a 
fow  of  his  former  flock,  at  the  Episcopal  Church,  establisbed  fay 
Act  of  Parliament.  In  May  1848,  Mr.  Kingdon  left  Betise  for  tbe 
New  River,  a  few  miles  to  the  north,  with  the  object  of  fotjuing 
for  himself  another  station,  being  still  supported  by  the  BaptiiC 
Missionary  Society.  This  place  was  then  the  refuge  of  a  nmdxr 
of  fugitives  from  Yucatan,  where  the  war  of  races  was  at  its  beq^ 
He  was  still  learning  the  aboriginal  language  of  that  interestb^ 
people,  and  preparing  to  translate  the  Scriptaxes  for  tbcir 


SLANDEROUS  lettehs  used. 


4G1 


A  moDth  bad  not  elapsed  sfler  tfae  Bsiling  of  Mr.  Ilenderaon 
from  London,  when  the  committee  at  Moorgate- street  passed  the 
T»olutlou*  to  sell  the  mission -chapel,  dwelling  and  schooi-house 
in  Belize,  which  was  carried  into  effect  hy  ]V1r.  Kingdon,  aa  already 
related.  The  next  decisive  measure  which  the]'  took,  ia  conneeliou 
vrith  the  intercBls  of  tlic  church  at  Belize,  was  embodied  in  a  reso- 
lulion  of  the  committee,  dated  tlie  25th  of  November  1847,  inviting 
varioosbretbrcntothe  mission -house  to  hear  readings  from  certain 
Letters  relating  to  Mr.  Henderson,  who  the  committee  alleged  had 
been  recommended  hy  these  brethren  to  the  support  and  sympathy 
of  the  churches  on  various  incorrect  statemeHln.  The  truth  of  this 
allegation  the  cominittce  tailed  to  pniye  in  any  of  its  parts,  but  by 
this  step  t  they  gave  currcDcy  and  seemed  to  give  their  sanction  to 
the  siondera  which  Mr.  Kingdon  and  Mr,  Buttfield  had  written 
against  Mr.  Hendenon,  slanders  which  they  had  not  examined,  nor 
had  they  even  informed  Mr.  Henderson  that  they  had  ever  been 
mode,  though  he  bad  so  recently  met  tbem  face  to  face.  Dutwhenhe 
was  once  more  tbousands  of  miles  off,  they  brought  before  the  minds 
of  the  few  friends  who  bad  received  him  kindly,  statementa  and 
instnuatioDS  which  actually  produced  feelings  of  loathing  and 
horror  in  the  minds  of  those  who  listened  to  them,  and  drew  from 
one  of  the  hearers  the  strong  protestation,  that  he  would  as  soon 
leatc  his  reputation  in  the  keeping  of  Satan  himself,  as  in  the  bonds 
of  the  writer  of  such  nbomlnable  charges.} 

After  this  (on  the  I6tb  of  December),  Ihc  committee  passed  a 

lesolvtion,  which  they  published  iu  the  Mjesionary  Herald  of  the 

following  month,  making  it  appear  that  Mr.  Henderson  in  his 

I  Aiewell  letter  had  misstated  facts,  which  c 


Eonllaf  uardiD^ly  look  place  it  IKo  mil 
3retlirtDbaiD^nqiiiicdlop1ed^Uicmte]T 
sd.  SelertiDiii  flom  tbo  CDnupoiuleim 
Hi  tn  lull  compuiu  of  the  nme  fran 


in  BeliiD,  where  they  rntut  hm  bdcn 


if  "  HondiuBa.'' 
on  Ih<  IDIh  of  SHenbo ; 
■y.  Oity  doliiiod  lo  bear  the 
■ward!  am  friraldy  ton- 
un.    Su  "  Handiiraa.''  pp. 


46S  THK 


te  be  eomety  Ific:  BtmSkimm  ha^ng 
MB^m^iAi^  abft  cmamtJbK  bmpkyikt^l^ 
oi  h»ad£*     In  this  xcaolirtioQ  Ike 

tiMil  Mr.  TTffii»innn  idezicd  to  the  SCoct 

of  l^clnBchmft.icMQQwl7]twiBaiBl  off  BgrllM  Society 

occnan  to  tey^tbeir  knowledge  of  tke  fiMi  tkiit  tke 

Steiet  till  after  Ifir*  Hmdenwn^s  connection  ivx^  tkon  kad 

Me^  Buttfirid  hMl^  hawerci;  pointedly  allviei  to  it, 

pknbedofMr.  HanfaBM's  •"  cxdnEfe  syrteB/' 

vai  ksfixe  tkeiB»  wkcn  Aey  decided  agaiMl  Mr.  HtBdmoB  (i 

tike  Ittk  Eeb.  1846>    fi^  ikii  deaaal  of  a 

ooDHBittBt  woe  tke  fint  to  bnngvj^tiie, 

tian  of  ComawiTMony  and  thoB  called  fortk  a  letter  ftoat  Mir>C>ww^ 

m  wlueh  Utt  fidkming  pawtnga  ooeoxs : — 
«« Tke  aBRUBptioa  tkat  the  wocds  quoted  miii  —iXMiliiinln1j 

ta  the  i|acfllMa  of  Caannanion,  is  gratoitow  wm  Urn  fKt  af  iSm 

committee;  bntr as  thqr  have  thns  made  tluB 

fxr  n^  part^ftd  itn^dntjT  to  asMzt  my  ten 

I  knaar  to  he  aha  bcotiber  Hendenon's  hdiel^ 

Tafraiacd  from  pahlidUag  it^— yk.,  that  the 

ckise  CommsBDiQft  f  csy  malenalfy  aflbctcd  lbs 

brother  QendexsoiK  wtd,  of  tiie  church  of  wUch 

tile  Society,  thon^  it  muf  not  have  been 

the  groond  of  difference  in  the 

oivTioos  reasoosJ* 
On  the  2l8t  of  JaDMiy,  the  secretary  of  the  Society 

to  Mr.  Henderson's  iriendb  an  official  statoMBiof ' 

tfait  had  been  pahfidud,  suM  by  the  Baptbt 

to  be  incorreei;   but  which  were  found  to  be  quite  fi«e  ftauL 

error,  except  in.  cue  minor  point    Th^  were  ^'"t'tiiiuJ  af  m 

haring  been  the  ground  of  the  remirnncndatJon  already  notksed  m 

passed  by  the  Strict  Bi^^tist  Cony  ention  on  Sept.  28»  1847,  akfaoiq^ 
the  detect  that  resointioa  shewed  that  k  was  paaed  bafiit^te 
statements  complained  of  were  madcf 

The  correspondeneef  between  the  oonumttee  of  the  BaptktM^ 
abnaiy  Society  and  the  Strict  Baptist  GanyaatiaB  hanria^  doni 


t  See  "Hondnn^**  lip,  48^  61, 84»  ad  86. 


DISFOHAL   OP   rBOFSRTT.  463 


without  produciag  any  imct  teaily  aScctiog  lb«  chiracter  of  Mr. 
BeDderson  or  of  the  church  at  Belize,  nod  the  innsligatioD  (whick 
had  lusted  mare  than  six  mouths)  to  which  it  give  riEiehivrii^IcmH 
sated  favouialily  to  the  native  church  in  British  Uaodnm  ladtB 
its  pastor,  the  committee  of  the  Strict  Baptist  Couveutioa  pHMd  ■ 
resolution  on  the  2Sth  of  March,  rectmuneDding  the  appeal  at  that 
church  to  the  sympathy  of  the  British  churchesuidChristiMi&  TUb 
rcsolutioa  vaa  confirmed  by  another,  to  the  same  effect,  poased  at 
Ibe  "iTum]  mtxting  of  that  body  on  the  S6th  of  April  fbQowii^. 

Being  repeatedly  nrged,  anil  having  several  times  promised  ti> 
contradict  the  misstatement  issued  ia  the  Society's  report  for  18-17, — 
tliat  Mr.  Henderson  hod  broken  up  and  divided  the  church, — the 
CtHiimittce  (after  letting  the  iigurioua  report  spread  uncontradicted 
during  nine  monthi)  at  length  aeknonledged  it  to  be  incorrect, 
"all"  the  members  having  gone  '^wilh  him."*  Tbi*  tardy  and 
partial  reparation  was  made  without  any  apology  or  expression  of 
regret,  and  did  not  ^tpear,  aa  it  ihoold  have  done  in  bimeaa  to  the 
injured  party,  m  the  SodeCy's  report  for  the  following  year. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  members  of  the  Baptist  MiiEianary  Society, 
held  at  Moorgatc-street,  on  the  32lh  of  April  IS48,  it  una  pnpoaei 
by  one  of  the  members,  "  that  HSOL  of  the  purchsse-mouej  of  the 
pra]it;rty  recently  aoldutBidize  be  presented  to  the  cbDrch,as  a  testt- 
nmny  of  good-will,  from  this  Society."  The  secretary  then  open^ 
stated  Ibat  Mr.  Bendeison  had  not  the  confidence  of  the  committee, 
uul  that  while  the  chnrch  was  connected  with  him,  the  committee 
did  not  feel  it  right  to  appropriate  lo  it  any  of  the  Society's  money. 
The  proposal  waa  rejected,  t 

The  committee,  at  a  meeting  held  on  the  26th  of  May  1848i 
reaohcd,  "  That  they  (the  church)  be  infijrmed  that  the  committee 
have  already  given  up  all  claim  to  the  bouse  in  Dean-street,  Beiiie,^ 
and  that  they  will  be  very  willing  to  allow  the  chnrch  tooccupy  at 
a  nominal  rt^ntal,  from  year  to  year,  the  lotof  groundatFree-tuwti 
(the  Baptist  buriai-gromid)  with  the  house  creeled  upon  tt  ;§  tha 


)  Ihi  tud  ma  ■  plat  bom  Od  CoHBuc  Id 
ol  MM.  lU.  S.t  Mriof  kf  Iba  friuib  « Ita  > 


484  THB  QOflOnSL  IN  OEZfTBAL   AMMfclCA* 

lot  of  ground  at  Baker's,  with  the  honae  erected  there  at  ttev 
penae  of  the  Society  and  of  the  church  ;*  the  lot  of  groand  ni  II* 
lettoD,  with  the  hooae  erected  there  at  the  cxpenee  of  the  8ock| 
and  of  the  church  ff  and  the  lot  of  ground  at  tiie  MiMfiil 
Shore.**}  They  also  resolved,  ""That  the  lamps  and  fandftmmi 
the  school  and  chapel,  amonnting  in  value  to  aboat  5<ML,be  hayri 
over  to  the  church  at  Belize  for  their  use.**  § 

Upon  the  property  here  specified,  the  churdi  and  ftiends  lal 
expended  2422. 14#.  6<2.  exclusive  of  one  building  and  in  evoy  am 
the  value  of  the  land ;  whilst  the  sum  total  tlmt  had  been  addel 
from  the  Society's  fhnds  upon  all  the  said  pioperljf  waa  S9L  Ida 
But  small  as  the  worth  of  this  property  is  in  compaxinB  with  tbit 
which  was  sold,  still  the  use  of  it,  granted  to  the  natife  diardi  k 
the  proposal  of  a  nominal  rental,  implied  coantenaaee  of  tbat 
diurch,  and  the  confidence  of  the  Society  in  it,  and  ia  Mir.  Hen- 
derson, its  pastor,  as  fully  as  the  use  of  the  laigif  amonnt  of 
property  which  they  denied  them  on  his  account  eodd  poniblf 
have  done.  The  letter  that  conveyed  these  rcMdntiona  to  iSk 
church  (dated  30th  May  1846)  closes  with  the  wotda,  «*  We  «fl 
€ur  property,  because  we  cannot  with  confidence,  or  in  jnatiee^  givt 
it  to  any  one  in  Belixe;**  immediately  adding  the  Aportofied 
benediction,  **6xBce,  mercy,  and  peace,**  and  the  eonmutlee% 
prayer  that  the  church  might  be  faithful  to  Hw  jinncyrfto,  at 
Baptists  and  as  Christians,  even  unto  deaih!^\ 

Mr.  Crowe  had  remained  in  England  for  the  cxpiUM  poxpoKSf 


*  Hie  lot  wai  tlie  gift  of  Geogrge  ISUBtt^  Eiq.,  to  the  ndiaflB  at  Belin;. 
CKpeaded  WL  intlie  enetioB^  and  the  Society  pail  tea  shiOiiigi  ftar  »«»iwrlii^  the  i 
huid. 

tThelotherewaighrenb7WiIIiaiBTinett,£iq.,totheiBiiiioBaiBciise.    ite 
alone  bora  the  ezpeoae  of  tiie  first  enctioiL.   Towards  the  eeeond  haa«,  hadlt  lAv 
Itae  (p.  888X  the  Society  paid  892^  and  the  friends  on  the  qwt  aa  uptH,  if  aot  al 
BQBi;  so  that  npon  this  house  alone,  and  the  one  at  Baker's,  the  membcn  and ; 
pended  lS7f.  staling,  exdoshre  of  the  first  house,  and  oontribntiont  fai  Ubovr. : 

t  The  grant  of  John  Hodge,  Esq.,  to  the  mission  at  Bdise. 

§  These  ICr.  Kingdon  had  been  instnictcd no!  to  sdL  lliqrirwe  Mid. 
frith  the  Indlding.  Colonel  Faneoort,  the  porthaser,  aftcnrards  piitintul  Uuia  lm  IN 
nathre  chnrdi  as  his  own  gift.  For  these  resointians,  see"  IfissionatjHenld*' ftar  la^ 
1846kp.l0i.  If  the  reader  win  rtoonsider  the  reeohitioBawillMinft  the  opIa^teiyMliV 
hewiUpereeire  the  impwinn  thqrare  falmhtted  to  eoBreyof  tts  Pttlalj'i  KhW^ 
tovaide  thenalifeefaorofa. 

I  8ee**Bdis^''pp.6.7ial8o«HflBdnraa,''pp.M^90^nam. 


THE  society's  pih[>bi.et  "  bjxize."  445 

ninog  an  interest  in  the  xaBmraauj  work  of  the  church  at  Beliae, 
and  to  endeavour  to  obtain  help  towards  building  a  place  of 
tronbip  for  its  use  inttead  of  the  one  tmw  turned  into  a  lunstic 
.  aqrlum.  He  had  lud  the  facts  before  a  few  miniaten:  and  cob- 
(regations  ia  London  and  its  vicinitj,  and  was  preparing  to  carrsr 
•Bt  hk  appeal  more  extensively,  when  interrupted  by  tbe  steps 
taken  by  tbe  Baptist  Miaaionaiy  Society  to  diaconrage  Ihe  few 
friends  tJiiit  God  had  rused  up  to  this  strnggling  can«e. 

Wlu^  the  reconuoHidation  of  the  Strict  Baptist  Convention,  and 
that  of  a  considerable  number  of  respected  ministen  of  the  Go^fvl 
and  infiucDtial  peraons,  had  been  obtained.  Mr.  Crowe  ootmncnced 
journejinR,  6rst  ioW  Sussex  and  Kent.  From  the  6th  to  tbe  27th 
of  July  he  travelled  orcr  620  milea.  He  visited  twenty-foiff 
Baptist  cbuTchei ;  fourteen  of  the  nnmber  bvourably  cntertaioed. 
hii  appeal;  ten  tniiusters  refused  to  git^  him  an  opportunity  of 
nuLking  lite  facts  public ;  two  of  the  number  only  promising  to 
inquire  further  into  the  merits  of  the  case.  The  nun  tf 
361.  11. V.  1 U.  was  then  collected  at  an  expense  of  d/.  9>.  Sjif. 

In  this  firet  effort  tSi.  Crowe  addreNed  himself  to  the  chnrcha 
in  their  united  capacity,  according  to  the  letter  of  his  instructiota, 
as  the  messenger  of  the  chnrch  at  Belize.  It  was  not  nlways  that 
lie  could  obtain  aoccn  to  them  in  this  maoner.  When  he  did  bo, 
he  contented  himself  with  reading  the  church's  letter,  of  which  be 
wms  the  bearer,  and  giving  as  much  information  as  tbe  opportunity 
aflbrdfd  him  would  aUow  ;  always  expressing  his  readiness  ts 
bear  to  the  chnrdi  at  Belize  tie  reply  of  the  chorch  he  might  be 
tuldiesaing.  At  liret  he  was  induced  by  some  Mends  to  make 
personal  opjilicatians ;  he,  hofwever,  soon  felt  the  indelicacy  of  tlin 
node  of  appeal,  especially  where  it  has  been  so  mndi  abused,  snl 
not  being  the  method  pointed  out  to  him  by  the  church ;  he  pre- 
ferred to  make  no  direct  applications  for  pecuniary  help,  either 
pcreoniUly  or  congregatioually,  sjid  was  content  that  tbe  fiieta 
ehonld  speak  for  thenwdves,  leaving  it  to  the  cborchei,  or  to  indi- 
Tidual^  deliberately  to  consider  whnl  it  might  be  in  their  power 
to  do  for  their  suffering  and  labouring  lellow-disciples  at  a 
iljstsncc. 

Srarcely  had  these  feeble  efforts  been  commenced,  when  the 
committee  resolved  to  iime  a  pamphlet  of  sixteen  pages,  entitled  _ 
"  Belize.    Ordered  by  the  Committee  of  the  Baptist  Htniomry  f 


466  THB  GOSFEL  DC  CENTRAL  AMBBIOA* 

Sodeiy  at  their  meeting  held  Jnne  15tli,  1848.    To  be  prinicdfir 
private  drculatioiL    33,  Moorgate-street** 

This  document  commences  with  a  view  of  the  importaDfie  if 
Belize  as  a  mission  station,  and  of  the  Sode^s  hopes  rtmemmg 
it,  completely  at  yariance  with  and  contradictory  to  that  imiftraJy 
maintained  in  the  published  reports  daring  the  ^nieTioiis  tweatf* 
five  years.  It  represents  the  cause  of  disagreement  between  Ae 
missionaries  at  Belixe  as  mere  personal  qoanels.  It  quotes  a  poi^ 
tion  of  Mr.  Eingdon*s  letter,  which  grossly  miacprcgenla  Hr.  Hb- 
derson*8  conduct  as  a  minister  of  the  Gospel.  It  gma  impcdhet 
copies  of  some  of  the  Sodety^s  letters  to  the  church ;  never  in  mt 
instance  giving  any  of  the  church's  letters  to  the  eommittee,  ai 
thus  affording  but  tk  partial  view  of  the  correspondence.  Its  stite* 
ments  of  fiicts  are  also  defective,  partial,  and  inconect  Out  of 
twenty-four  professed  quotations  of  Mr.  Hendenon*!  woids  ai 
proof  that  misstatements  were  made  by  him,  more  than  half  uc 
positively  misquoted,  and  others  are  misrepresented  so  as  to  look 
like  inaccuracies,*  although  what  Mr.  Henderson  says  k  IitenDf 
correct,  and  in  spirit  strictly  true.  It  indirectly  caats  blaoK  apoa 
Mr.  Henderson  in  matters  of  account,  though  no  open  and 
charge  is  prefened  against  him.  It  positively  asserts  laon 
one  thing,  as  matter  of  fiict,  which  the  ooounittee  have  ftiled 
to  sustain,  whOe  the  contrary  has  been  sufficiently  proved  in  the 
reply  to  those  statements.  It  fidls  to  account  diieefly  hi 
the  abandonment  of  that  stat]on,t  but  justifies  the  ale  of  Ae 
property,  ''for  fear  that  after  all  the  committee  mi^  be 
constrained  ultimately,  because  they  held  the  premises,  to  ii 
great  expense  in  repairing  them,  and  even  to  occupy  a 
which,  but  for  the  property,  they  would  probably  have  ie&> 

*  In  erne  case,  by  the  iniertioiii  of  wordi  not  naed  by  Ifr.  Hendcnon,  htk  omM  m 
tiioa^  they  were  hie,  he  it  made  to  appear  to  apoh)gise  tor  what  he  n^Djwim  MMI«. 
8ee'*Belixe,"pagel2,linel8toU;  alao^'*HondarM,''p.lS8.  In  vwtha tmmUkn- 
pitaentcd  ai  a^ing  with  reipect  to  pomtds  what  he  only  aaaoted  ff  jitwcw  aadft^  toi 
for  no  other  pmpoae  than  to  prove  him  wanting  in  trnthftilBcn,  See  *  yiffw^»  m  k 
line  41;  and  *' Honduras,'*  p.  187.  ^^ 

f  It  may,  howerer,  be  inferred  from  "Behze,"  the  "MiaiioBaiy  HenU,*  mt  Ac 
"Baptist  Magaxine,'*  that  the  committee  were  diasatisiSed  with  the  amoiuit  at  eMeH A 

this  station,  though  that  iocceaa  was  fully  eqnal  (in  comparison  with  the  amooBl  flf  Mocy) 
to  any  of  the  Society's  stations,  and  superior  to  ni^  a  few;  alsq,  th^t  ft  ^/^^  ^  ^gt 

measnre  of  flnandal  retrenchment.     Bee  "Baptist  liagasine^**  tat  Jnlv  181&  viv 
XditorialxeBariEis  the  editor  being  at  the  tine  a  veaher  of  the  oQuadtteo. 


jIPPEAL  to  the   DRITiaH  CHUI1CHK9. 


467 


qnuhed  long  ago;"  and  it  dosea  by  raying  that  the  committee, 
wbo  "moke  these  cuplanationa  with  mucli  regret"  dad  do  not 
piib/iah  but  only  print  them  /or  private  circulation,  "are  deterred 
from  doing  more,  by  sn  unwillingness  to  expose  what  they 
would  have  preferred  entirely  to  eoneeal."  In  abort,  this  docu- 
ment, in  which  there  are  few  direct  charges,  contains  not  a 
paragraph,  and  scarcely  a  hne,  but  conveys  some  impression  nn- 
lavoiuublc  to  Mr.  Henderson  and  the  church  he  is  connected 
ivith,  all  calling  for  correction,  and  fully  capable  of  a  satisfactory 
elucidation;  and  no  part  of  it  demands  an  antidote  more  im- 
pcrionaly  than  the  venomous  sting  in  the  last  paragraph,  which 
insinuates  that  other  worse  charges  are  only  kept  back  from  the 
committee's  unwillingness  to  expose  them. 

The  printing  of  "  Belize,"  was  followed  up  by  a  statement 
jmblialieil  in  the  "  Missionary  Herald"  for  July  1848,  p.  103,  repre* 
tenting  the  station  at  Belize  as  unimportant  in  itself,  and  as  having 
foiled  to  realize  the  hope  of  carrying  the  Gospel  into  the  interior, 
accounUng  for  its  abandonment  as  a  station  of  the  Society  by  the 
dissensions  of  the  missionaries ;  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Henderson  in 
returning  from  the  United  States,  and  the  conviction  that  the 
same  funds  might  be  better  employed  elsewhere.  Minutes  of 
resolutions  respecting  the  disposal  of  the  property  were  also  pub- 
lished, and  a  notice  to  the  subscribers  that  further  information  on 
the  subject  could  be  obtained  by  application  at  Moorgate- street, 
(itiicr  personally  or  by  letter.  A  notice  of  the  same  kind  was 
also  forwarded  from  the  committee  for  insertion  in  the  "  Primitive 
Church  Magarine"  of  that  montli,  addressed  to  "  their  friends":' 
thus  calling  public  attention  to  that  which  they  had  printed  for 
private  circulation. 

To  the  published  statements,  Mr.  Crowe  addressed  a  reply  &oin 
Bacup,  in  Lancashire,  on  the  20ih  of  September,  which  was 
refused  insertion  in  the  "  Baptist  Magazine,"  but  afterwards  ap- 
peared in  the  '■  Primitive  Church  Magaane"  for  December  IBJ8, 
p.  380. 

By  the  publication  of  the  Society's  statanents  reflecting  upon 
Mr.  Henderson,  by  the  pricate  circulatioa  of  "  Beliie,"  and  by  lew 
tangible  (because  not  printed)  misrepresentations  concerning  the 
Honduras  mission,  Mr.  Crowe  found  his  appeal  to  the  churches 

•  See  ngadunt,  p.  tl. 


488  TBM  CKMPEL  IXf  CBNTEAL  AMEBXCA^ 

in  Eqgkndy  greatly  impeded.  Dnriiig  tiie  six  weda 
between  the  5th  of  Angnst  and  the  13th  of  Sqptember,  be  tB- 
▼elled  over  600  nules  in  the  west  of  Eqgland.  Kleven  cbnnhB 
in  Wikskire  and  Somenetshire  fiiYonrahly  reoerred  bim;  wniik 
H^plkatian  ma  Tweeted  hy  e^ht  paatan; — 27L  17s.  SftL  mi 
contiibated  to  the  miarion,  upon  which  tiie 
5L  lU.  2d. 

In  his  third  jonmeyv  Mr.  Crowe  was  directed  into 
where  he  was  cordially  reodved  by  the  chnrch  at  Bacap^  mi 
others  in  its  ne^ghhonihood.    He  then  visited  twdre  of  Ibe  pdi- 
dpal  towns  of  Sootland,  where  his  reception  waa  gaxnU^  wna 
and  nMwt  ho^»itable,  and  especially  so  at  Edinboq^    Donig 
this  tour,  which  occupied  fonr  months  and  a  half  (ftam  tfae  IGtk 
f£  September  to  the  2nd  of  Febmaiy  1849),  be  trafcDed  2,071 
miles.    In  Lancashire  he  applied  to  seventeen  dmebeii  and  w«s 
ngected  by  the  ministen  of  three  out  of  that  nnadnc    In  Scot- 
land his  apfdieation  was  &voarably  entertained  brf  twenfty-OK 
chnrches :  139iL  16s.  2|d!.  was  contributed,  the  tcaeftlliqg  wai 
other  expenses  being  21iL  18#.  9\d.    Altogether,  Mx.  Canrt  ta- 
velled  during  eight  months  3,191  miles,  of  whidi  he  neooaipfiifaBi 
^10  on  foot    He  iqpplied  to  eighty-foor  churcbea,  cot  dtiAkk 
be  was  denied  access  to  twenty-three.    He  deEveied  abait  cm 
hundred  lecturei^  and  preached  nearly  half  aa  often.    The  sbb 
total  collected  was  2062. 5«.  7idL,  upon  which  the  r  i^mis  woe 
S2^19«.2dL,  bcKfes  which,  the  friends  of  the  nsHn  mA^ 
ieversl  boxes  of  nsefid  artides,  and  contributed 
mnnb^  of  books  fiir  the  ose  of  the  native  teadien.    A 
press  was  also  parchased  by  the  friends  in  Kdinbmg^  aided  If 
others,  for  Mr.  Crowe's  use  at  Guatemala. 
.  In  his  appeal^  Ifr.  Crowe  was  increaaingly  oonefiBd  to 
it  apparent,  that,  whik  be  was  sent  to  obtain  idief  and 
niaiy  iswstance,  ibc  chnrch  st  Beliae  had  a  kftier  object 
their  own  aocomaudation,  or  even  the  recafit  of  finds  It 
enable  them  to  spread  the  Gospel  around  them,  well  aumvluad 
that  the  mere  ministering  of  our  mbstanee,  however  libenlly,  ii 
nn^  alone  adeonate  ta  that  creat  end :  and  that  co  onesniMi  «Uib 
should  be  thus  limited  is  not  worthy  of  the  namc^  «Dd  vranid  Mft 
beaooq^ofGod.    By  eschewing  the  dianeter  of  son  MiBBBiift 
religions  mendicant,  it  may  be  that  a  imaller  sum  waa  eoDedei; 


OBSTACLES  TO   FDBTIIEB  APPEALS.  460 

but  it  vnts  in  the  Unt  place  ^ven  and  received  with  more  parity 
of  mind  and  feeling,  and  it  is  confidently  expected  that  the  motlre 
and  the  accompanying  prayers  will  seciuc  a  more  abtindant  bitt- 
ing irnm  on  high. 

Gratifying  aud  encoaraging  as  this  measure  of  success  iraa  in 
itselt;  and  especially  in  the  amount  of  interest  manifested,  the  sym- 
pttthy  shenn,  and  the  prayers  ofiered,  it  was  yet  bat  a  partial  relief 
to  the  church  in  British  Honduras,  and  would  not  alone  warrant 
the  conuneucemcnt  of  the  much  wanted  building  for  worahip  itt 
Belize.  Further  efforts  <^  the  same  kind  were,  if  not  entirely  pre- 
cluded, at  least  very  tuoch  Umited  and  obstructed  by  the  efforla 
of  the  Society  at  Moor^tc-street,  to  shake  Christian  confideuce  in 
the  church  and  pastor  at  Beliie.  This  was  done  by  means  of  their 
punphlet,  which  was  sent  by  post  to  influential  parties  whercriei 
Mr.  Crowe  was,  and  by  travelUtig  agents,  who,  in  one  case  at  least, 
were  scut  all  the  wny  into  Scotland  lo  coDDtcract  his  inccesi.  Mr. 
Crowe  then  rtsoWed  to  sospeod  farther  efforts  of  this  kind  till  a 
fnll  and  complete  reply  should  be  prtatcd  to  the  charges  brought 
against  Mr.  Ilendcison  and  his  flock  :  and  he  rctamed  (o  London 
fur  that  purpose,  well  convinced  that  this  was  the  path  of  daty, 
:Lod  that  he  conld  not  hope  to  cany  out  the  mission  encrusted 
to  him  by  the  church,  especially  in  the  manner  in  which  he 
had  felt  it  his  duty  to  proceed,  until  thb  task  should  be  accom- 
pliaheil. 

While  these  effort  were  being  mode  in  England  in  bTOur  of 
Central  America,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  grant  blessing  and  en- 
largieniait,  as  well  as  a  season  of  peace  to  the  native  church.  The 
war  in  Yucatan  had  filled  Belize  vrith  Lodiuo  and  Spanish -Indian 
lefbfeca,  to  the  number  of  some  thoosands  j  and  the  brethren 
were  not  alack  to  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  of  evan- 
gelixiug,  and  distribuUng  the  Scriptures  and  tracts  among  thaa. 
Concerning  this  people,  Mr.  Henderson  writes :  "  1(  would  be 
atying  too  much  to  state,  that  they  have  been  driven  out ;  for  the 
yery  mild  treatment  of  the  long-oppressed  natives  was  such  that 
the  rdngees  were  at  liberty  to  carry  with  them  all  their  goods, 
only  houses  and  landed  property  were  iett  behind.  Indeed,  a  more 
mild  transGer  of  authority  ia  perhaps  not  on  record,  than  that  will 
have  been  which  chronicles  the  resumption  of  native  rule  in  the 
Peninsula  of  Yucatan,  after  a  Sponisb  docniaation  of  three  hundred 


470  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CBNTBAL  AMMSOCA^ 

yetn.  One  only  fear  exists,  and  it  is  this— it  appesis  thii  it 
Spanish  race  have  applied  to  the  United  States  for 
i^gainst  the  extirpating  oatrage  [represented  as  soehj  of  the 
and  some  think  that  they  will  he  patronized  hy  that  tenita^^ 
loying  power.  The  native  population  have  also  asked  for  BbIbA 
protectiont  if  not  incorporation.  At  all  eventSy  a  wery  fiiesl^ 
spirit  is  manifested  towards  Englishmen,  so  that  a  great  door  if 
entrance  is  opened  to  us  for  missionary  exertion  among  theoL* 

It  haaheen  seen  that  interference  on  the  part  of  hoth  the  partiei 
above  mentioned  has  produced  a  prolongation  of  this  wai&re ;  Hbm 
impeding  the  natural  course  of  events,  and  that,  too^  liy  means  d 
Anglo-Saxon  agency  at  the  very  time  that  both  Biifam  and  the 
United  States  were  ringing  with  execrations  on  the  ^»f*^^  sup- 
pressors of  Hungarian  independence.  ThnSy  wiiile  thonsaiids  of 
Anglo-Saxon  hearts  were  throbbing  with  a  aoUe  sympathy  tot 
the  Hungarian  people,  the  constitutional  govemBCBts  of  these  two 
potent  nations  were  each  taking  part  in  suppraHoig  the  equaD/ 
natural  and  defensible  efforts  of  the  Maya  TndJsns  to  iMttmWitfi  a 
government  of  their  own,  or  to  rid  themselves  of  the  oppteaiTC 
domination  of  a  fiivoured  class. 

In  the  earnestness  of  their  zeal  to  evangelise  this  people 
the  brethren  regretted  the  absence  of  one  of  their  nmnber,  who 
might  have  aided  in  their  good  work,  but  who  was  A'^ymwl  js 
England  by  the  impediments  that  were  thrown  in  his  wvf,  \if 
the  necessily  of  justifying  the  church  and  its  mnch-calunmHtai 
pastor,  and  in  order  to  secure  the  means  which  were  mpani 
to  carry  out  their  pUns,  and  enable  them  to  contunie  thoK 
effints* 

At  Belise,  all  the  different  departments  of  lalxmr  were  pro- 
secuted with  uninterrupted  vigour.  Mr.  Henderson's  school  wm, 
fiom  necessity,  more  limited  and  select,  as  there  was  not  looMtD 
accommodate  all  the  former  scholars  or  all  those  who  desind  t0 
he  admitted.  Miss  Cornelia  Lockward  and  Miss  Fisge  Hendems 
were  engaged  as  teachers  in  the  in&nt  and  evening  adult  schook 
The  influential  parties  who  had  been  excluded  from  the  chm^ 
and  had  supported  Mr.  Eingdon  were  now  again  hesrere  with  tiie 
native  congregation.  And  the  strife  which  had  lasted  npwai^  of 
fimr  years,  and  which  had  produced  so  many  important  lesnlls,  hsd 
now  eessed  hi  Behae.   At  Tillettoo,  Brother  Wanier*s  snoeesi  coo* 


BUmiNOB  ATTEKD  THB  HIB8I0N.  471 

linucd  unabated.  In  April  1S48,  be  baptized  as  many  as  twdre 
converts  on  one  iKcasion,  and  among  the  number  one  Joa^  Sac,  a. 
Mnya  Indian,  tbe  first-ftuiU  unto  God  of  that  people,  and  a  man 
who  gave  promise  of  future  usefulness  ss  a  native  translator  and 
teacher.  Already,  long  before  he  made  an  open  profcasion  of  the 
name  of  Christ,  be  had  been  marked  and  persecuted  by  the  priests 
of  Pelen,  where  he  then  resided,  for  reading  to  his  neighbours 
the  Spaoish  Bible  which  he  had  procured  at  Belize.  Brother 
Joseph  Kelly,  of  Rchoboth,  was  also  made  useful  in  the  con- 
version of  souls,  and  was  authorised  by  the  church  to  adminiirter 
both  ordinances,  though,  as  no  church  was  as  yet  formed  there, 
the  "breaking  of  bread"  was  limited  to  themembers  of  thechnrcbea 
at  llelizc  and  at  Tilletton,  resident  at  Baker's.  Other  features 
of  a  work  of  grace  around  those  places,  such  as  a  great  desire  to 
hearlhc  Gospel,  had  also  manifested  tberoselves. 

On  the  first  Christian  Sabbath  in  the  month  of  May,  Brother 
Joseph  KcUj,  for  the  first  time  administered  the  ordinance  of 
Believers'  Baptism  at  Rehoboth  Station,  Baker's  Bank.  Four 
individuals  were  then  immersed  by  the  young  native  evangelist, 
on  a  prufession  of  their  repentance  towards  God  and  their  lliith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  bed  of  the  river  serving  them  for  a 
haptisterj',  and  the  vault  of  heaven  instead  of  a  gothic  roof  or 
pompous  cupola. 

A  long  and  intensely-hot  dry  season  occasioned  a  scarcity  of 
water  and  much  sufTering  at  Belize.  Mr.  Henderson's  fknuly  were 
supplied  by  a  kind  neighhour,  which  he  records  aa  "a  spedal 
mercy."  The  mission  tank,  which  had  often,  under  such  circum- 
stances, relieved  the  wants  of  others,  was  then  in  the  hands  of 
Btrangers.  But  the  Father  of  Mercies  was  not  unmindful  of  their 
wants,  and  under  every  new  token  of  His  care,  they  could  joy* 
fully  eicfaini,  "  Jehovah  of  Hosts  is  with  as,  the  God  of  Jacob 
is  our  refuge." 


472 


CHAPTER  YL 


BfltN^tot  and  inipeefc-BwBiial  of  yiilHw  ftar  aop-Jnriif   Mw.  Poile's 
j^flnutiBuBaU  and  patittaB»— Mr.  Kii^ioiA  thM  iteiioB  Acnad  and  abndoiied— 
layiytatte8aairtjflBtteJfc|iuaJaf  ijiiylj    Wiritaiw  of  wnana    Pablfc  moiuj 

BiadiakiiiniiliWii  riiiBi|iiiiMiiii  withttn  ri—iillw  Tlird  PnMic  Meeting  in 
aupport  of  Hatfra  Wmkma,  aad  ligflrt— TglattflB~Bafklan(iH»f--8ih«a— Kortl^^ 
lifp— fiwjaeted  ilajhwi  Tiairfiliiaii  Wi  ¥liiai1nainrwtTiitit1niiitTTirilHTniidni 
talyi  floniiamt  iatlaifeKBda  anMrcd  ia  fnraor  of  noB-Jamfr— Local 
Mikf  ttnowa  Qgfc— Mg.  Ijagaaa'!  aiyht  ftom  Bacalar-MSS.  d  tranilatinBi 
BroUin  Michad  lonns  a  new  aUtion  among  the  CariCi— Station  at  Boatan  formed  by 
Bnytfaer  Wenier— PMiidential  leadinia—Arnmgementa  ooncerning  property— A  new-  M 
fpnm  in  Bdiie— Fkqfeetad  Libraiy— A  MeetingbhooM  detcnnined  i^od— Death  of  Mnu 
Hendeiaon--8diodU  in  Beliie--Mr.  KinfdOB'a  fifth  8tKtian--PMgreaa  ol  • 
Opinion  of  Minionary  Societies— Fonda— Fourth  Pabhc  Meeting  for  Natire 
and  Bep<ni— State  of  ont-etatitma— Mr.  Kingdon*i  recall— Be-opening  of  "Pnyen*- 
hoaae*  at  Freeto«m— IMaihi— Taa^era  in  training— Donatkma  on  tiie  apet^-Mra. 
WiUat»-Soiday  flchoeh  Soefety'a  daimt-Baanlta  of  the  Mimion— Monl  inpnt*. 
BKnt— Sonoonding  dnrhmaa    Thfi  Chorch'a  wmfldwafa  and  ieq;BeBt— Ebeneier. 


■■  ITf XoU,  /  Aeff  Mf  If^lrv  11m  M  9W  iver,  ciu{  110  am  CM  ii«<  t/ *--BeT.  iiL  & 

Iir  the  timely  zdief  and  tawatance  which  God  ms  pleased  U> 
gnat  to  his  afflicted  people  in  British  Honduiae,  there  was  enoii^ 
that  wag  FhmdentiBl  to  signalize  His  hand,  and  enough  that  was 
gracious  and  hountiM  to  call  forth  the  adoring  gratitude  and  the 
confiding  faith  of  the  church.  At  the  same  time  it  was  not  the 
Lord's  will  that  outward  ease  and  security  should  succeed  the  late 
uncertainty  and  suffering.  There  was  enough  of  difficulty  and 
danger  left  to  call  forth  active  energy  and  watchfid  care.  There 
was  as  much  power  and  ill-will  remaining  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemies  of  the  truth  as  would  make  them  distrusted.  There  was  a 
scarcity  of  means  to  cany  on  the  work  that  would  be  oondudye  to 


C0IUB4UKKCBS  ( 


A   BAD  LAW. 


473 


dcpeitdeiKe  opoa  Divine  suppon  and  direction.  And  wtdle  a. 
veriev  of  the  pttat  yielded  encour^eraent  fiic  tbe  present,  tbe 
ftilure  prospect  *tm  full  i>f  hope,  and  affiirded  tbundsnt  oppor- 
touity  for  exertioDa  nnder  drciiniatBiici^  the  most  lavoarable  to 
tile  development  of  the  inwuxl  and  outward  reaowcei  of  the 
little  natiTe  band. 

Though  a  Bmall  company,  and  helpless  ia  themselTes,  and  though 
wearied  with  a  long  and  recent  conflict,  they  had  already  tasted  of 
Tictory.  They  perceired  that  "  an  open  door"  waa  indeed  set  before 
tbem,  and  being  graciouaiy  gastaiued  by  an  unseen  Hand,  a«  well  is 
animated  by  tbe  retrospect  and  prD«peet,  they  followed  up  their 
advantage  in  the  true  spirit  of  moral  conquerors,  ''faint  yet 
puraning." 

It  was  for  the  ultimate  establishment  of  the  truth,  and  the 
speedier  confusion  of  bad  legiBlalion,  as  well  on  for  their  owti 
immediate  good,  that  some  renewal  of  their  sufferings  ibr  comcien- 
tioiu  Don-jniing  was  at  this  time  permitted. 

Positive  and  forcible  as  was  the  declaratioQ  of  the  Colonial 
Minister  of  State,  "  that  her  Itlajesty'a  Government  would  strong^ 
disapprove  the  exaction  of  any  penalties  from  penoiia  refusing  to 
take  oaCbs  frotn  boitaJUe  religious  scruples,  and  without  anydesre 
to  defeat  the  ends  of  justice,"  Beli;^  could  produce  a  Rout-hearted 
eoraner  able  to  set  it  ande,  and  as  willing  to  violate  the  conscieitoe 
of  a  suffering  woman  as  he  waa  himself  unscrupnlous  of  the  breneh 
of  that  Divine  law  which  enjoins  upon  coroners,  as  well  at  upon 
other  subjectt,  nbmieaioa  to  "  the  powers  that  be." 

iVItB.  Penk,  a  sister  of  colour,  was  afflicted  in  the  person  of  her 
eldest  son,  a  boy  of  fourteen,  who  was  an  idiot,  and  subject  to 
fit:}.  Uaving  lost  sight  of  him  for  but  a  short  time,  her  maternal 
solicitude  was  aiuused,  and  on  going  to  seek  hiin,  she  found  him 
indeed,  but  lying  on  his  face  in  a  few  inches  depth  of  water, 
and  quite  dead.  It  was  on  Ihe  2ad  of  June  that  an  inquest  sat 
Bpon  tbe  remains  of  her  child.  Required  to  give  her  evidence, 
she  bad  no  motive  ibr  withholding  it,  but  she  believed  ilwt 
her  Saviour  had  especially  enjoined  it  upon  her, 
at  alL"  The  ctH^ncr  chose  to  uae  with  Kverity  the  power 
which  be  poMcned,  to  attempt  to  coerce  the  conscience  of  thit 
good  Viunuiu  IB  the  hour  of  her  afflicttcm,  and  thi 
plify  in  the  ntoM  striking  m«iini;r  the  error  and  inefficiency  of  the 


474  THS  GOflPKL  JX  CEOnSLAL  AKBBIOA. 


bw  that  placed  such  a  power  in  hu  hands.     He  ad[jo«inied  Ae 
inqueflt  for  fonr  dajs — had  the  weeping  mother  toim  from  tlie  fe> 
mains  of  her  boy,  which  were  scarcely  yet  cold,  and  ^■^^'"■■^H 
to  prison,  to  spend  the  interval  with   felons  and    piualituiMb 
in  the  vain  hope  that  by  that  time  her  mind  would  be 
A  delicate  infimt,  three  months  old,  was  incarcerated  in  the 
of  its  sorrowing  mother*     On  the  second  day  it  began  to  droop^ 
Her  husband,  Joseph  Persle,  an  industrious  labourer,  was  Magd 
to  remit  his  toil  for  their  support,  and  to  attend  upon  his  wife 
and  sick  child  in  the  prison.    On  the  5th  Mrs.  Persle  was  bmu^ 
back  into  the  presence  of  the  coroner,  who,  finding  ber  intcgri^ 
unshaken,  sent  her  back  to  gaol,  for  three  days  more,  imlesi  she 
could  pay  a  fine  of  three  dollars  (probably  as  much  aa  a  fbll  week's 
zemuneratum  of  her  husband's  labour,  in  addition  to  the  fiwr 
days  they  had  already  lost).    As  a  proof  of  her  wiDingBaB  to 
suffer  while  she  could  neither  be  persuaded  nor  fiseed  to  do  wrongs 
she  preferred  the  confinement,  although  more  than  one  pensa 
offered  to  pay  the  fine  on  her  behalf.    Before  the  wedc  was  ended, 
ber  baby  died  in  the  prison,  and  was  buried  beside  her  dder 
The  bereayed  mother  was  only  liberated  when  the  tenn  of  ber  i 
tence  expired.    Albeit  that  one  point  of  law  was  ffatiflficd  hj  this 
penally,  the  ends  of  justice  were  frustrated,  and  the  interests  if  tiie 
community  sacrificed  to  it,  for  Mrs.  Persle's  eyidenoe  waa  not  taken ; 
and   besides  the  accumulated  injury  done  to  one  fiuml^,  ihe 
migesty  of  law,  in  whose  name  these  enormities  were  peipetnted, 
suffered  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  it  must  and  wdll  ff**""* 
to  suffer  tiU  the  law  that  occasioned  those  wrongs  be  repealed. 

Her  Majesty's  Superintendent,  the  same  who  had  been  instmeted 
by  the  Home  Goyemment  to  cancel  the  act  enforcing  the  oaths  cC 
allegiance,  &C.,  upon  Dissenting  ministers,  was  appealed  to  by  Hn 
Henderson,  on  behalf  of  Mrs.  Persle,  but  he  <^«yii«^  to  iDter- 
iere.  A  memorial,  founded  on  her  case,  was  forwarded  to  Eid 
Grey,  and  the  fiicts  were  published  in  the  NoncomfonmH  and 
some  other  periodicals.  Seyeral  petitions  for  the  rdief  of  non- 
jurists  and  the  total  abolition  of  oaths  were  also  got  np,^  and  pfe- 
sented  to  Parliament  in  support  of  the  Affirmation  Bill,  by  Mr. 
P^  Wood  and  other  members.  Seyeral  Biqitiat  chnidbes  in 
Scotland  also  forwarded  petitions  on  the  same  subject* 

*»  8m  «P]ciBittf»  Onodi  ICaguiBe'' Ik  ScptcHkcr  1848^  p.  sea. 


CONFORMITY-.  475 

Bj  reason  of  tbe  amonnl  of  eniferiDg  which  the  church  at 
Belize  hid  endured  on  this  Bccount,  the  brethren  there  are  perhaps 
liable  to  attach  an  undue  importance  to  it,  which  is  equally  true  of 
any  point  of  principle  for  which  our  forefathers  have  contended, 
the  fruits  of  wliich  wc  reap  with  a  degree  of  calmncaa  which  wag 
probably  unknown  to  them.  But  there  is  perhaps  some  foundation 
for  the  impression  which  the  sufferers  in  BriliBh  Honduras  have 
received  oa  to  the  general  apathy  and  iguorance  of  Britbh  Christians 
on  this  subject,  DOtnithstanduig  all  the  sufferings  of  the  iaithfiil 
member;  of  the  Sodety  of  Friends  and  others  who  have  carried 
out  both  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  New  IcEtament  injunctioa 
to  "blesB  and  curse  not."* 

In  a  letter  dated  from  Belize  on  the  13th  of  July  li 
Heodenou  says — "Sinci:  my  last  nothing  has  transpired  of  special 
intenet  in  tbe  station,  except  that  wc  progress.  At  Tillctton, 
Brother  Warner  has  had  another  baptism.  The  church  ther^ 
which  commenced  last  year  with  thirteen  members,  now  numbera 
twenty-nine.  I  expect  to  Tisit  both  that  place  and  Bakers'  in  the 
approaching  month,  where  as  many  as  eight  couple  wait  to  be 
joined  in  matrimonial  bonds  in  their  neighbourhoods. 

"  Mr.  Kingdon  has  settled  himself  at  the  mouth  of  the  Bio  Hondo 
on  the  English  side,  'among  a  people  amounting,'  he  says,  'to 
four  or  five  hundred,  chiefly  Spanish  retiigeea,'  They  are  de- 
lighted to  hear  that  he  will  keep  sehool,  as  they  hope  thereby  to 
acquire  a  readier  knowledge  of  the  English  language.'' 

At  this  place  Mr.  Kiugdon  assumed  tbe  office  of  civil  magistrate 
by  appointment  from  the  authorities  at  Belize,  being  the  only  one 


•  Hie  "  ifflnnalkin  Dill,"  »hii 
gi^tnic,  iDtcnded  to  gnnt  rclif^l 
Umwn  ant,  clikAy,  prrli 


rmi,  hiu  bcca  rcpolsiUi  bcfoR  the  Le- 
I  oTijertcn  to  on  ddU>.  hia  been  bi  oFteit 
Dt  noft  exteuaitrlT  nfiported  by  tbe  firitiih  pabUe, 


LD  lubject  hu  bcca  »  oftm  **  ilukcued  hy  wordj  ■! 
vudnm,"  tbgae  wbo  uc  ilooblful  u  (o  tbn  pnnical  dnt;  is  Ibeir  a*n  cue,  cm  icuccl) 
be  10  on  Lhe  propriety  of  sfFording  icUef  (onicb  uuofDHyconTuiGediDtbeiTqnvbri ' 
To  Ifopenifonnitt*  tbft  cau  hu  Abolber  ud  k  raj  rinple  «apect,  wblcb  li  OAlj  lo  OTTJ 
out  muuleall;  Uia  upanlloD  of  Uio  vnbmiiuoa  cine  lo  the  civil  migiitale  from  tba 
Dbcdieneo  vhicb  it  due  to  Chnit  ilone  u  king  in  Bit  Ungddni.  An  oolb,  u  u  ad  ^ 
vwiAip,  if  Blbnrvd  U  all.  ihatild  otourbUy  be  fne,  ■pDutaneoiu.  uid  TolimUry,  '~ 
■t  the  bidding  of  tbt  lav  ii,  then,  to  gtie  to  Cmv  Ibit  wbicb  ii  flod'i,  ~ 
wen  well  iniUd  to  th«  nilioiul  rellgioB  of  tbe  lein.  ud  Itie  gtrnta  of  tba  liw,  vhi4k  ba 
biatf  ibii  cantt,  but  tbey  can  in  no  <rij  ba  ndajitid  Is  Uu  In  ot  Vbert;  and  ll/^  n 

Ha;  at  cjta  libel]'  Mas  to  he  fonnd  iDanmnient  in  om  lira  fnllly  u 

tlon,  ud  tlitreflai  ibboncnt  lo  the  (pint  of  Hia  igc 


47ft  THE  GOSPEL  JX  fMJTBIfi   AMmHOA, 


in  iliit  diBtnet     TUs  offickl  ^igaitj  of  Aeir  wgatt 
djMpjMroTcd  €f  liy  the  cnmralttee  of  the  Sotktjm 

On  leaying  Bdiie^  Mr.  Kingikm  took  no  ikp  to 
bhnrdb  the  nee  of  tfaeboildiBg  ot  Eieetewn^  nUA  he 
to  the  people  there,  becsoe  daimed  faj  him  ftr  the  Soiirtj,  «1 
vfaieh  he  had  &iled  to  make  anj  use  of  himiflf.  Nor  kai  Itt 
■ade  any  arrangementi  as  to  the  hurial-gniinidt  in  oidar  that  tte 
dead  might  be  buried  daring  hii  ahwniy.  The  hey  o£  Iba  pii 
vaa  ttill  in  his  keeping.  Happily,  he  had  wigeied  the  ftiMe  tafiA 
into  decay,  though  he  had  Krapahnialy  exacted  a  dellv 
interment  &r  the  expieflB  porpoee  of  keeping  it  m  goed 
that  the  Baptists,  for  whose  oonyenienoe  tha  gvomd  had  faeee  pv^ 

Tided,  were  able  to  enter  it  to  buy  their  dead  fay  the  hFBMh  thniqgh 
which  the  cattle  and  swine  had  free  ingress  and 
with  them.    Considerable  inconTenienee  had  ako 
Kingdon*s  daim  upon  the  property  at  THIetlcML 
of  the  generona  donor  ef  the  land.^ 

The  native  chnrch,  in  reply  to  the  commitftee'a 
26th  of  May,  now  infixnned  the  Society  that  they  dediaBd  to 
any  clatm,  onthegroandofparticnlarcontrihntiOBatowianlatliepa^ 
ehase  and  erection  of  the  property  lately  sold  by  the  conmittBe;  tilt 
the  fonns  and  fittings  of  the  late  meeting^honae  had  been  aoU  with 
It  by  Mr.  Kingdon,  and  were  afterwards  proscntadtotheclMoAly 
Colonel  Fancourt  the  pnrchaser ;  that  the  sirter  who  had  gif  m  fl» 
house  in  Dean-«treet  **  greatly  disapproyed  of  the  ■•'imipt  wUdk 
had  been  made  to  wxert  it  from  the  dnueh  ;**  that  thcj  did  aot 
feel  the  force  of  the  resaans  given  by  the  coanailtBe  fur  tha  sale  of 
the  premises ;  that  they  declined  the  use  of  the  gronnd  on  the 
Mosquito  Shore  as  **  unayailsble  at  present  for  any  miaKNHiy 
purposes  ;**  and  as  to  the  piece  of  land  at  South  Stann  Ciedmar* 
chased  from  Messrs.  Hyde,  Hodge,  and  Co.,  at  the  nominal  priee 
of  one  dollar,  for  the  fbnnation  of  a  Carif  Tillage  there,  the  ehinch 
regretted  that  the  coinmitt.fe  had  remitted  it  into  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Hodge  without  first  advising  with  them  ontheanbjeet.'t'  The 
church  also  declined  to  hire  of  the  committee,  even  at  a  wm««Ml 
rental,  the  ont-statkma  at  Free-town,  Bakers*,  and  TilL.*^^yn^  Qg^  tKf 


tniigiMftvMfttaBetnrtBiaitBthadtank^lfcJtkaHD^teiktvsir 

ateteB,  foi^idi  it  WM  origiiialllj  sir«. . 


FBOvnuKr  VTBArre— A  en  are. 


477 

grodKl  ihat  the  oonunittec  had  no  jnst  leason  for  requiring  it,  nor 
for  Sandii^  •ny  longer  between  the  people  and  their  free  use  of 
the  property.  The  church  concluded  their  reply  by  cxpresnng 
regret  th«t,  hcfore  dedding  upon  differences  which  had  occurred 
between  the  nuasionaries,  nnd  which  had  "  never  extended  to  the 
chorcfa."  it  should  not  have  occurred  to  tbe  committee  to  appeal  to 
tlieiti,  "  conTinccd  that  in  «iich  an  appeal  lay  the  legitiiiiBtc  hope 
of  a  peaceful  settlement  of  all  dilficulttes." 

In  addition  to  the  inconTenicncc  arising  to  tbe  native  church 
out  of  the  Society's  claimfi  upon  the  out-statJous,  and  the  grief 
which  was  occaaioned  them  by  the  cvH  and  unfounded  reports  to 
which  the  committee  in  London  bad  given  currency,  the  church 
now  felt  the  want  of  that  pecuniary  assistance  which  they  had 
hoped  would  by  that  time  have  been  extended  to  them  by  empa- 
thizing brethren  in  Britain.  Inroad  of  receiving  this,  llr.  Crowe, 
the  church's  messenger,  had  been  in  England  many  monlhs,  and 
was  only  then  begimxiag  to  meet  some  response  to  iu  appeal.  One 
result  was,  that  Mr.  Henderson  was  himself  greatly  straitened  for 
means,  having  waived  his  prior  claim  on  tbe  cburcb  in  favour  of 
the  II at ivc  teachers,  rather  than  thcirlaboun  should  be  interrupted, 
and  iu  tbe  hope  that  the  desired  help  would  soon  1>c  aObrdcd. 
Since  hig  visit  to  Europe,  Mr.  Henderson  had  been  materially 
assisted  in  this  respect  by  family  connections  in  England,  who  bad 
enabled  bini  to  enter  upon  a  little  traffic  in  general  nerchandiie, 
io  which  his  &milj  attended.  Unle»  this  timely  and  providential 
help  had  been  afforded,  all  Mr.  Eingdon's  worst  prognostics  as  to 
the  penury  and  distress  of  his  family  might  have  been  realized,  for 
at  this  time  the  utmost  efforts  of  tbe  church  for  their  pastor, 
after  upholding  the  native  teachers,  amounted  to  little  more  than 
50/,  per  annum.  About  an  equal  sum  was  received  by  Mr,  Hen- 
derson as  the  proceeds  of  bis  school.  Already  he  had  made  another 
garden  ^th  his  own  hands,  which  supplied  Tcgetahles  for  sale, 
and,  together  with  tbe  little  store,  barely  sufficed  to  mnntiun  him 
and  hia  family  in  a  place  where  every  ncceswrr  of  bfe  i»  so  dear. 

Just  at  thia  time  the  local  legislnture  voted  money  for  eduott- 
tional  purposes  in  the  Settlement,  ovrr  and  above  the  nsnal  pnwi- 
non  made  tbrthe  Episcopal  free  school.  It  was  proposed  to  divide  it 
between  tbe  Wesleyan  and  the  Baptist  doiomtiiatiaDB.  BtsthjeBty'i 
Superintendent  addressed  Mr.  Heodetsou  on  Ibe  sulfjert,  itata^ 


178  THB  O06FEL  IN  CENTRAL  jOfBRICA. 

that  it  was  dewgned^fortheropport  or  mumihUKy  of  lydditiflMl 
schools  that  may  be  established  in  connectiofi  trith  ai^  '^'■■"■flin 
denomination  of  Christians,*'  and  zeqaestinghim  to  onlmiit  the  plai 
which  he  might  propose  to  adopt  in  the  apfdicatkm  of  this  gnnL 
The  following  is  a  copy  of  Mr.  Hendenon's  rqply,  which  s^ 
peared,  with  the  offidal  correspondence  on  the  sulvjecty  in  the  lood 
pti^ger  of  the  period : — * 

^  To  his  Excellency,  Colonel  St.  John  C.  FAHcomtT,  her  Mijesiyii 
Superintendent,  &c. 

^  Sib, — ^I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yoar 
Excellency's  letters  of  the  27th  and  28th  instant,  infiamung  me 
that  one  hundred  pounds  currency  have  been  placed  at  yoor  Exed- 
lency*s  disposal,  by  the  Public  Meeting,  for  schools  in  fnfMFM<ii#»n« 
with  dissenting  congregations,  and  requesting  from  me  a  plan  for 
its  application  to  the  Baptist  denomination. 

'^  In  reply,  I  beg  leave  to  say  that  I  have  advised  with  the 
Baptist  church  and  friends  of  Uie  denomination,  who  all  agree 
with  myself  in  expressing  our  disapprobation  of  the  gnnt  of  the 
Public  Meeting,  indeed,  of  any  grant  out  of  the  public 
for  either  educational  or  religious  purposes,  oonsideni^ 
objects  to  be  altogether  out  of  the  proper  sphere  of  its 
and  that  the  dvil  authorities  ought  at  all  times  to  leave 
religious  denomination  to  provide  for  the  support  of  its  own  in- 
stitutions. 

'*  The  consistent  maintenance  of  these  sentiments  your  Eaod- 
lency  will  readily  perceive  to  be  at  variance  with  the  ^*nrf«»fwi 
from  me  of  any  plan  for  the  appropriation  of  the  grant  in 
And  I  have  the  honour  to  be  your  Excellency's  obliged 

"At.kxanpsb  HmnosssoN.*' 

Thus  was  avoided  another  legislative  snare  which  was  set  ftr 
the  feet  of  the  nonconformists  of  British  Honduras.  The  Wet* 
leyan  missionaries,  though  in  the  end  also  preserved  firom  ftHwy 
into  ity  did  not  use  the  same  caution.  They  acc^ted  the  pnrfTewd 
bait,  but  afterwards  found  so  much  vexatious  inquiiy,  tiouble,  and 
delay  connected  with  the  receipt  of  the  money,  that  they  gave  it 
up  in  disgust,  and  were  thus  at  that  time  prevented  from  pervert* 
ing  to  denominational  purposes  the  peopIe*s  oontribati<ms  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  state. 

*  "HoDchtiig  ObMnrer,**  Tth  October  1848. 


479 

■Writing  to  Mr.  Crowe  concerning  funds,  on  the  1 2th  of  October, 
]Ur.  Henderson  eaya — "  Looking  at  ;our  progress,  it  appears  qd- 
likely  timt  you  will  realize  in  England  200^  sterling,  which 
would  be  but  a  poor  drop  in  the  bucket  for  our  wants  in  Belize. 
But  looking  at  God'a  word  and  grace,  I  see  the  fountains  of  the 
great  deep  broken  up  to  pour  out  upon  us  the  overflowing  flood. 
Had  our  movements  been  ordinary,  or  even  our  sntfertogs  and 
position,  I  should  have  looked  no  further  than  to  ordinary  re- 
Bcourccs.  Bnt  all  being  of  another  character,  I  expect  after  ordi- 
nal; to  see  extTBordiaai;  means  made  to  aid  our  caose. 

"  O,  lit  k  tinmg,  a  )utiii;  rajtb, 
tt>  entdil  wbtC  tbc  HuIct  sulhl" 

On  the  8th  of  October  six  persons,  out  of  eleven  who  had  ofiered 
themselves,  were  baptized.  Mr.  Henderson  adds, — "  The  church 
is  peaceful,  and  not  a  little  encouraged  to  find  dear  brethren  in 
England  remembering  them  in  affectionate  prayer.  May  the  Lord 
of  mercy  and  grace  return  the  blessings  sought  for  us  a  thousand- 
fold into  their  own  bosoms." 

The  coroner  who  had  incarcerated  Mrs.  Persle,  never  had 
snolhcr  opportunity  afibrded  him  of  puisuing  the  same  line  of 
policy.  Uc  was  removed  Ironi  office  by  order  from  the  Home 
tiovernmeut,  and  the  appointment  was  restored  to  the  person  who 
held  it  before,  and  who  used  his  discretionary  power  so  as  to 
diminish  rather  than  aggravate  the  evils  of  an  unequal  and  objec* 
tionahle  law.  The  Chief-Justice,  however,  was  understood  to  be 
threateoing  a  repetitioo  of  former  excesses  in  non-juring  a 
lag  that  £arl  Grey,  who  was  in  England,  was  not  himself  British 
law,  and  that  he  (Ihc  judge)  was  in  Uondurax,  where  no  abale- 
nient  of  severity  must  be  expected  from  him  towards  those  who 
feared  an  oath,  until  the  British  Parliament  were  pleased  to  alter 
"the  letter  of  the  law."  Mr.  Braddick's  name  was  once  more 
placed  upon  the  venire  for  the  ensuing  Grand  Court;  hut  be  and 
the  brethren  were  enabled  to  fear  no  evil. 

It  had  been  proposed  to  add  six  or  seven  feet  to  the  place  of 
meeting,  with  a  sort  of  shed  roof  instead  of  the  sail ; 
was  deferred  till  btelligcnce  should  be  received  of  Brother  Crowe's 
fiinher  success.  Dysentery  hod  been  introduced  into  the  Settle- 
ment by  the  fleeing  Yucatecos,  and  all  Mr.  Henderson's  fomily  had 
been  affected  by  it.    Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kiogdon,  who  had  been  Tinted 


480  TBS  ooanB.  nr 


,fey  Ifr.  and  Mb.  Hcwkiw  dariiig  Iheamkmpm,  lad 
mad  ipoe  rendk^  at  St  Ge(»i^*fl  Key.    lir.  Wlmglkam  htd 
■dllier  etBgiiq;ation  iior  fidd  of  iiKfaloei^ 
WM  loocBsiUe  to  Inm. 

Ott  the  16&  of  November,  Mr.  HeBdenoB  wmlc^ — ^  ii  iqr 
iMk,  I  iioCioed  tlut  Brotiier  Bnddick  elood  ezpond  toMftr^B 
i»rtheoii]iqiieitMm.  Aeoordm|^,  on  Moodoj,  October  the  JHk 
U48,  he  attended  tiie  Gmd  CWt,  over  whkfa  JUge  T^ifk 
fraadei,  aad  aMiwered  to  his  mane  as  a  jarar,  whiA  we  ahmyi 
do,  feeling  it  t9  be  ovr  duty  to  *  dbej  augiitntei^*  aa  fir  aa  o»- 
edenoe  permitsy  and  onl j  whea  they  xeqviie  of  ua  thai  which  oar 
subjection  to  a  supetior  Lord  fbrtnds  ns  to  gire,  do  we  infiinn  thai 
that  we  arast  obey  God  rather  tiian  man.  Brother  BkaddiEk,  ota- 
tnuy  to  the  adyioe  of  mai^  pfofessed  firienii,  attended  Ae  Gaorty 
ansfiered  to  his  aame^  and  took  his  aeat  aaMBg  tiie  jaaaaL  Whea 
the  Bible  WH  preseatod,  he  stated  his  6bjtdMmm^  mht^mi 
daut  hetoe.  He  waa  then  satgected  to  aa 
jndge,  as  to  whether  he  were  a  Quaker,  a 
aad  having  said  that  he  beknged  to  none  of  these 
next  asked  if  he  had  not,  on  ooming  into  oaart,  ea^pootad  to  he: 
quired  to  take  an  oalh  ?  He  replied  that  he  had.  Did  lie 
any  fiiFoor  to  be  shewn  him,  and  ftr  what  Tnaaunf  Braltor 
Biaddick  awwered  tlMit  he  did,  and  ftr  the 
had  been  reeeived  finaoi  the  Colonial  Offiee,  thsi  her 
disapproTe  of  any  one  svfiering  in  one  af  ad^gioaa 
takh^  an  oath,  when  diere  was  no  intontionof 
foaes  of  jnstiee.  He  wasneit  asked  if  he  had 
one  ainoe  leoeiving  the  citation,  eoooenu^g  the  dnty 
WithaBBByhessid;  and  bei^g  reqaesled  to 


Tfais  was  not  Aeoiyact  the  jndge  had  in  Tieir  ^aa  every 
eeived,  and  aa  I  was  told  by  an  eye^witnem).  At  lanli 
Braddick  was  directly  asked,  hare  yon  oQBfcnad  with  tihi 
Hendenon  oa  the  aid^eet  He  replied  that  he  had.  And  wS 
yn  stato  the  nifare  of  the  osnwiwslwiii  yonhad  withtWit  penil 
Mir.  Bzaddiek,  detonamedas  he  was  to  he  auhminii^  fidt  1M 
there  were  hasits  beyond  whk^  he  conld  nat  pass  in  lepljii^ti 
Bstfi I i^ainrif a  Aeeoidii^y,  he  iqpfied  tiMt  k  dil  nrt 
he  was  eilled  i^n  to  icpoat  what  te  ntnae  «f  Ae  aan> 


t 


coBnESPOSDE^•CE  concehking  property.  481 

n  betnceo  us  nas.  This  the  judge  did  not  further  liuiBt 
on.  He  was  then  told  that  be  tvas  sentenced  to  a  week's  confioe- 
nicnt  in  jail,  for  refusing  to  take  an  oath.  He  was  accordingly 
conveyed  thither,  and  remained  in  prison  till  about  the  same  hour 
on  Monday,  November  6tL,  when  he  was  released." 

While  Mr.  Braddick  was  awaiting  the  jailor's  arrival  to  take  him 
to  prison,  in  an  ante-room  of  the  court-house,  his  name  was  again 
included  in  the  number  of  jurors  who  were  cited  to  attend  another 
sitting  of  the  Grand  Court  on  the  13th  of  the  foUowing  month,  i.f. 
in  a.  fortnight  after  the  Hb-j  of  Ills  inquisitorial  examination,  so  that 
when  Mr.  Henderson  wrote,  he  had  suffered  one  penalty,  and  his 
recommitment  for  a  longer  term,  jierhaps  accompanied  with  a  fine, 
was  anticipated.  Another  case  occurred  about  this  tiine,  in  which 
It  poor  defenceless  woman  was  robbed  before  her  face,  and  only 
esca[»cd  being  beiself  punished  for  accusing  the  tbicf,  because  he 
hod  no  evidence  to  prove  that  9he  had  charged  him  with  the 
robber;.  She  could  not  availheraelf  of  thelawfor  her  protection, 
tihe  even  feared  imprisonment  as  the  consequence  of  being  drugged 
before  a  in^iatrate  who  might  require  her  to  swear ;  but  the  im- 
padent  thief  had  well  nigh  made  use  of  the  magistrate  to  inflict 
a  greater  wrong  upon  her,  and  this  only  because  British  law  will 
not  admit  the  c\-idence  of  an  honest,  consdentious  person  who 
fears  an  oath,  though  it  wiU  take  and  will  act  upon  the  unhal- 
lowed imprecationB  of  a  profane  swearer. 

The  committee  in  I/ondon  once  more  addressed  the  church  at 
Belize  on  the  6th  of  October  1648.  In  this  letter  they  spoke  of 
the  burial-ground,  at  length  admitting  themselves  to  be  only  trustees 
of  the  property;  and  they  expressed  their  willingness  to  give  it  op, 
if  the  consent  of  the  authorities  could  be  obtained  to  the  transfer. 

The  stations  at  Baker's  and  Tilletton  they  still  persisted  in 
offering  to  the  church  at  a  nominal  rental,  or  else  required  that 
sol.  should  be  given  as  an  offset  to  the  donations  of  British 
Christians  through  the  Society,  expended  on  the  property  at 
those  stations.  The  total  amount  of  which,  it  has  been  si 
39/.  10*.  If  this  were  still  refused,  the  committee  said,  "wt  shall 
regard  the  negodation  as  at  an  end,  and  conclude  that  you  make 
other  arrangements  more  convenient  and  economical." 

An  extract  from  this  letter,  respecting  the  burial-ground,  waf 
forwarded  to  the  Superintendent,  who  repUed  that,  "should  the 


482  THB  OOBFBL  Ilf   CEIfTRJJ.  AXKRieA. 


origmal  gnuol  eontain  anj  Qoremot  zeqoiiiBg^  the  fwrnmi  of  tihe 
Grown  to  the  transfer  0(»item[ilated  by  you,  that  onnafat  irfll  not 
be  withheld.  If  it  does  not  contain  saeh  coTeaaBty  the  €Mim^  of 
the  Crown  will  be  nnneeessarj* 

Again  the  church  replied  to  the  Societj  oa  the  11th  of  Jkc^ 
requesting  the  transfer  to  be  made  with  as  little  delay  as  possihie. 
Respecting  the  nonunal  rental^  the  committee  are  referred  to  the 
ehiu«h*8  former  refosal  dated  on  the  lOthofAngas!.  and  aa  tote 
proposal  to  relnnd  50^  to  the  committee  in  Loadoo,  the  chardi 
mify  they  "cannot  entertain  the  qaestion  as  at  all  proper;"  M 
*^jegKrd  the  withdrawment  of  any  funds  whidi  had  been  appro- 
priated to  the  cause  of  God  in  British  HoadvnK%  as  a  alcp  tobe 
deprecated  and  without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  Sockty  * 
Xhe  diurch,  therefore^  informed  the  committee,  that  ikm  hrtthtea 
have  decided  to  occupy  the  stations  nntil  required  to  gne  then  vp^ 
trusting  ^that  the  committee  vrill  see  the  duty  of  eeaaii^  to  ixMl 
upon  any  measure  that  might  hare  a  tendency  to  crqiple  a  canst 
which  has  had  moth  to  straggle  against  hitherto^  and  thad  thcj 
will  rather  fed  it  to  be  a  priyil^ge  to  do  their  Tory  ntmoit  to  pnh 
mote  a  work  that  had  in  it  peculiarities  of  no  comaAon  inleiest"* 

To  this  oommnnieation  the  committee  replied  oa  the  l€di  ol 
April  1849,  by  directing  their  secretary  ^  to  expreaa  their  wiffiif- 
ness  that  the  use  of  the  ground,  &e.  at  Freetown*  ahould  be  giten 
to  the  church."  Conoemixig  the  property  at  Baker*8  and  at  T^ 
ktton  they  8ay,-***To  give  you  premises  on  whidi  a  nrnadcTdik 
som  has  been  spent  by  us,  and  so  enable  you  to  ^'"ipMs  ef  ^aa 
to*morrow,  would  be  ndther  consistent  with  the  iatdesto  ef  ev 
denomination,  nor  with  our  duty  to  the  Society,**  and  th^  igne 
to  kare  this  property  in  the  hands  of  the  church,  ogjij  en  eoo- 
dition  that  the  church  **  admit  that  they  belong  iegailj  to  ^ 
Society.*'  The  church  fdt  that  this  property,  aa  v^  aa  Ast 
which  had  already  been  alienated,  ought,  indeed,  to  have  beea 
secured  iW>m  the  possibility  of  abuse  or  sequestratieii*  hy  ben^  pal 
In  trust  for  the  use  for  which  it  was  oviginally  designed^ 

The  committee  ftirthar  required  that  the  (^nrch  shcmkl  teadiy 
eipress  its  wish  fer  the  transfer  of  the  borial-gioiiad,  after  te 
consent  of  the  local  authorities  had  been  tnasmitted  to  Fi^lwd, 
time  still  longer  protracting  this  matter^  though  the  eh«rdi  woe 


TniKD  XATITE  PCBLIC  MEETINQ 


483 


1  the  mean  time,  tbe  bmlding  iras  unused,  and 
ia  Bach  s  climate  it  miist  of  neccsnty  be  rapidly  decaying. 
Tlie  church,  in  refJy,  requested  that  the  bnml-groiuid  might 
be  conveyed  to  Mr.  Braddlck  and  Mr.  Henderson,  for  the  use  of 
the  liaptiats  rending  in  and  near  Belize. 

On  the  llth  of  Jonosry  1849,  Mr.  Henderson  wrote, — "We 
nail  to  sec  the  result  of  Brother  Crowe's  appeal  to  the  churches, 
ere  tbe  church  here  determines  its  procedure,  respecting  the  build- 
ing of  a  hoose  of  wotahip.  For  myself,  I  see  no  mcana  of  securing 
such  an  ol^ect  from  foods  raised  on  the  spot.  They  are  wholly 
engrossed  in  procuring  support  for  the  brethren  trho  are  eng^^ 
in  teaching  the  things  relating  to  the  Kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  if  I 
should  have  do  better  accommodation  for  preaching,  to  the  day  of 
my  final  address  to  the  children  of  men,  J  do  not  feel  at  liber^  to 
build  a  hoose  for  God,  until  He  has  shewn  how  Uis  own  laws  shall 
all  be  hononred  in  its  erection. 

"  Yesterday  wtw  the  anniversary  meeting  of  the  Honduras 
Baptist  Missionary  Society,  which  was  held  at  the  \\'e9leyan 
Chapel.  On  such  an  occason  we  feel  the  want  of  a.  cnpocions 
place,  and  the  prahalHlity  of  the  Baptists  not  again  having  such 
a  oni.-  of  their  own  was  saddening  to  my  mind,  last  night  in  par- 
ticular. I  know  whom  we  serve,  and  Uis  promise  to  supply  all 
onr  need.  I  know,  also,  that  the  cause  of  the  Redeemer  and  of 
bouLh  suffers  much  more  from  having  certain  places  of  worship, 
than  ever  it  has  done  &om  the  absolute  want  of  them,  or  of  accom- 
modatton  in  them.  Indeed,  judging  from  what  is  said  in  the  New 
Testament,  it  t*  a  matter  of  perfect  iudifierence,  and  one  not  calling 
for  any  special  notice  whatever.  It  tiuglit  even  be  said  respecting 
it,  that  what  is  'highly  esteemed  among  men,  is  abominatioii  iathe 
sight  of  God."  " 

The  sitm  total  of  expenses  in  the  missionary  branch  of  the 
chimdi's  Dperatiooa  for  the  year,  was  66/.  9».  sterling.  In  ihc  in- 
come of  this  department  there  was  a  deficiency  of  10'.  Os.  3iJ. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  year,  there  were  151  members  in 
the  church  at  Beliie.  EThere  had  been  three  restored,  twenty-nine 
received  by  profeBion,  ten  excluded,  four  dismimed  to  other 
churcbes,  and  fonr  bad  fallen  oalccp  iu  Jesus.  The  clear  increase 
tns  therefore  Iborteen,  making  a  total  of  165  memben. 


484  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

To  the  church  at  TOletton,  eighteen  had  heen  added  dnring  the 
year,  and  their  total  numher  had  increased  to  ihir^^thiee. 

At  hoth  places  fifty^one  baptisms  had  taken  iilace»  a  greater 
number  than  during  any  previous  year  since  the  commencenicBi 
of  the  mission,  and  198  members  were  in  communion. 

Connected  with  the  various  stations,  there  were  four  day-aeboob 
and  five  sabbath-schools. 

At  Belize,  besides  the  preaching  of  Mr.  Henderwrn  and  the 
worship  of  the  church,  four  weekly  subordinate  trtatiopa  were 
maintained,  and  occasional  preaching  in  Carif  by  Brother  WilliaB 
Michael. 

At  Tilletton,  besides  its  own  worship,  the  church  had  already 
supplied  one  subordinate  station,  at  a  place  called  Barklandfiy,  in 
its  immediate  neighbourhood.  This  place  is  somewhat  popoloos 
and  important,  as  the  point  at  which  the  waters  of  Ae  Old  and 
the  New  Rivers  approach  so  near  to  each  other  as  to  haveftdfitated  a 
line  of  communication  between  them,  and  given  rise  to  the  name. 
Brother  Alexander  Kerr,  who  had  been  acting  as  an  ervangdiat  thoc^ 
was  now  appointed  to  succeed  Brother  Warner  «§  pastor,  the 
latter  removing  to  another  station,  partly  on  account  of  oonsideriUe 
bodily  suffering,  and  partly  because  of  differences  with  inlhipiitiil 
parties  on  the  spot,  which  had  arisen  out  of  Mr.  EaDgdon*8  inter- 
ference in  claiming  the  property  on  behalf  of  the  Society.  Brother 
Kerr  had  undertaken  to  supply  both  stations. 

On  the  river  Sibun,  about  twenty  miles  from  the  bar,  a  place  of 
worship,  23  feet  by  16,  had  been  erected  during  the  year  by  the 
brethren  living  near.  A  Sabbath-school  had  been  focmed,  and 
both  were  supplied  by  Edward  Thurton,  a  Creole  brother,  long 
a  member  of  the  church.  He  is  a  carpenter  by  trade,  and  havii^ 
a  plantation  on  the  banks  of  this  river,  where  he  often  reaidea,  the 
station  was  formed  by  his  spontaneous  efforts,  sustained  by  the 
seal  of  other  native  brethren,  without  any  expense  to  the  chunk 

At  Northern  River  regular  worship  had  been  mftinf^^n^  ijj  f}^ 
Brethren  James  Goff  and  James  York.  The  first  is  a  stordf  nt* 
hogany  cutter,  the  father  of  a  large  fimiily.  Mr.  Henderson  hdl 
himself  taught  him  his  letters,  and  writes  concerning  him,  thil 
*^  he  b^ins  to  be  an  acceptable,  zealous  teacher.**  The 
named  is  a  deacon  of  the  church.    A  house  of  worship 


I 


LEOAL   PSItSPXDTOIia   AGAIN  CHECKED. 


talked  of  for  tliis  place,  about  twelve  miles  from  Belize,  and  tlic 
ground  to  build  upon  had  beea  offered  by  the  residents. 

It  was  proposed  that  Brother  William  iUcbacl  sliould  now 
undertake  a  Btation  at  Stann  Creek,  as  a  teacher  to  "hia  own 
nation,"'  and  it  waa  intended  to  send  Brother  Warner,  who  was 
Buffering  greatly,  to  Ruatan,  to  labour  there,  aa  soon  es  he  should 
be  sufficiently  recovered.  This  rtalion,  undertaken  in  1R46,  had 
rerauned  unsupplied  for  want  of  a  teacher  and  the  means  of  support. 

Mr.  Henderson's  further  labours  ia  translating  the  Scriptures, 
had  been  circumscribed  both  by  the  pressure  of  other  duties  and 
for  tbe  want  of  funds.  In  the  prospect  of  losing  the  assistance  of 
his  faithful  pundit,  he  was  then  about  to  take  his  lost  lessons  from 
him,  in  the  preparation  of  the  school-books  which  were  necessary 
to  this  enterprise.  These  enlarged  cfibrts  were  nudertaken  in  the 
confidence  that  God  would  raise  up  the  neeeasary  help  to  the 
church,  and  in  the  anticipation  that  that  help  would  come  from- 
Bympathizing  brethren  in  Britain. 

At  this  period  Mr.  Kingdon  had  returned  to  Belize.  lie  had' 
had  some  unhappy  differences  with  the  Wesleyan  mis^onarics,  on. 
Mcount  of  an  evil  report  which  he  raised  or  took  up  against  one 
of  their  most  Tcepected  members.  He  had  no  congregation  or 
■cfaool,  but  was  throwing  in  all  the  weight  of  his  influence  in 
ikvour  of  the  established  sect,  by  attending  its  worship,  lie  made 
nse  of  "  Belize,"  the  committee's  itrivate  pamphlet,  and  tried  to  in- 
duce other  ministers  in  the  Settlement  to  diacountenance  Mr. 
Henderson  on  the  ground  of  its  (then)  unanswered  allegations. 
He  waa  about  visiting  Bacalar  with  fifty  Spanish  bibles  tor  dis- 
tribution. Remarking  on  the  expense  of  this  agency,  Mr-  Hen* 
derson  says, — "  Half  the  money  Mr.  ICingdoa  has  spent  since  he 
lefl  tbe  miaion  premises  would  have  furuished  my  house,  and 
rubbed  out  that  blot  npon  the  conduct  of  tbe  mission  committee, 
of  sending  a  missionary,  after  twelve  3-eara  of  approved  labour,  to 
a  strange  home  without  one  room's  furniture." 

Representatioiis  which  had  been  made  at  home  on  the  case  of 
2klrs.  Persic,  drew  from  tbe  Colonial-office  an  assurance  that  met- 
Borts  were  again  being  taken  to  prevent  tbe  infliction  of  imprison- 
ment and  fines  on  conscientious  non-jurors  in  British  Honduras ; 
the  Governor  of  Jamaica  having  received  instructions  ou  the  sub- 
ject.   An  efl'ort  was  alio  made  to  introduce  a  clause  into  the  Affir- 


486  TBB  GOSPEL  IN  CEKTBAL  AMERICA. 

iiistion  Bill  then  before  Parliament,  eirtenfiiiy  its  operation  to  IIk 
colonies.  It  was  at  the  same  time  soggeBted  tint  a  mfmiff 
affording  the  desired  relief  might  widi  propriety  be  paswd  hj  the 
loedi  Assembly  at  Belize,  which  was  sBid  to  poaseBBnioie  of  tlwde- 
jBocrafical  element,  and  a  greater  d^;ree  of  power  than  way  odxr 
colonial  kgislatnre. 

On  this  sabject,  Mr.  Henderson  wrote  (m  the  10th  of  Fdnaiy 
1849,  stating  that  a  draft  of  an  act  for  the  relief  of  non-jioan 
had  been  sent  to  the  Public  Meeting  with  the  leoommendatiQnQf 
the  Saperintendent,  in  compliance  with  a  request  from  Sir  Cihariei 
Grey,  Governor  of  Jamaica,  and  at  the  suggestion  of  the  Gokn 
nial  office.  In  this  Assembly,  there  were  then  fbond  only  five 
persons  to  support  it,  and  the  measure  was  thrown  cot.  Mr. 
Henderson  still  hoped  that  it  might  pass  at  a  futnie  "■•f^Ji^,  but 
adds, — ^  It  is,  however,  more  than  probable  that  theexn^le  of  the 
Imperial  Parliament  in  giving  some  general  meaanre  will  be  the 
precursor  of  our  reliefl  The  col(»ies  look  much  to  the  OMthcr- 
coontiy  for  ezamide,  and  are  even  tardy  in  toUambig  whst 
is  good.  Can  it  be  wondered  at,  when  we  conaader  cf  wliat  mate- 
rials society  is  there  composed  P  The  slave-holding  spirit,  althoiB^ 
humbled,  is  not  destroyed.  I  have  thought  how  profaahle  it  ii, 
when  church  establishments  have  been  got  rid  of  at  boine»  that  the 
party  will  nestle  down  on  colonial  ground,  unless  we  have  aaoot- 
and-out  minister  at  head-quarters  to  search  out  their  Inrking-pbces, 
and  chase  them  off.** 

Mr.  Eingdon  had  already  removed  from  Bacalar.  Ifr.  Hcndo^ 
son  says,  "  he  had  every  fiidlity  afforded  him  by  the  ^**iliil  iiiti 
§x  prosecuting  misaonary  work,  but  he  becsme  alarmed  at  nporti 
concerning  an  attack  firom  the  Spaniards,  and  left.**  Onee  moieiB 
British  territory,  Mr.  Kingdon  manifested  no  disposition  to  letan 
to  Bacalar,  but  as  he  said  the  committee  did  not  require  him  to  qait 
Belize,  he  was  looking  out  for  a  spot  where  to  locate  hiwi^if  ^^qb 
the  banks  of  the  Old  Biver. 

The  manuscript  translations  whidi  the  Society  had  leqaiied 
Mr.  Henderson  to  give  up  to  them,  they  again  restoied  to  Mb 
(and  in  his  hands  alone  they  could  be  useful),  by  n  leaolntioa 
passed  on  the  20th  of  March.  They  were  shortly  ^ter  i^*it  bsdL 
to  Belise,  where  they  arrived  ssfely,  having  traveled  13^000  r^^ 
to  DO  purpose. 


FIRST   CAillF   STATION, 


4S7 


In  Febnury  1849,  Broth«r  Mich«el  left  Belite  to  conunence 
a  niisaioii  at  Stnnn  Creek  for  the  benefit  of  the  Cariis.  T^bs  church, 
in  uudcrtaking  this  station,  felt  that,  though  thcjhadnot  the  mcani 
to  support  their  Carif  brother,  us  God  liad  provided  the  labourer, 
which  was  the  greater  gift,  they  ought  to  exercise  faith  that  He 
would  also  provide  for  his  austenanct;,  which  was  the  lesKr.  The; 
bad  coasequentlj  to  proct.'ed  uu  a  very  small  scale,  and  instead  of 
foniiing  a  new  aettlemcnt  at  Southern  Stann  Creek,  where 
laud  hut!  been  givcm  for  that  purpose,  Uiey  were  reduced  to  locate 
Broihet  William  at  the  Tillage  already  formed,  for  which  purpose 
they  bought  a  small  native  built  house,  aaid  directed  him  to  cut 
tad  clear  a  plantation  lor  his  own  support,  as  bis  people  usually  do 
for  their  vrivei  to  cultivate.  He  suuu  aller  removed  his  tjunily  to 
the  Carif  Scltlement.  Concerning  this,  Mr.  ilend(:rgaiiwritG9, — 
**  It  i»  possilile  that  this  very  way  of  conunencing  is  the  best.  With  ua 
it  ia  Dot  choice,  but  of  necessity.  Let  the  Lord  therefore  have  all 
the  praiae  when  mccem  appears."  Thus  was  this  Christianiaed 
Carif  bmily  placed  in  tbemidst  of  a  community  of  their  hcatlieoisb 
fellow-counti7men,a  living  exhibition  of  the  cross  of  Chriit  and  of 
the  doctrines  and  precepts  of  the  Gospel,  and  provided  with  the 
books  and  knowledge  requisite  to  commuuicate  to  them  in  theif 
own  tongue  the  wonderful  works  of  God. 

Speaking  of  William  Alicliael'a  departure,  Mr.  IleudcrsDn  says, — 
"  Our  brother  is  very  sanguine,  but  I  fear  he  does  not  sec  enough 
of  the  trying  nature  of  the  undertaking.  Let  him  be  followed  by 
heartfelt  prayer  from  the  righteous — this  will  avail  much.  Same 
separate  fund  must  be  found  for  tliis  station,  or  there  must  be  a 
considiTahle  augmentation  of  the  mission  funds.  1  fed  we  roust 
trust  Ibr  this,  and  take  the  step  in  the  mean  time." 

The  station  at  Tilletton,  which  had  been  fruitful  and  promising, 
was  now  virtually  forsnkea.  The  heirs  of  Mr.  VV.  Tilktl.  much 
displeaicd  at  the  movements  of  the  Society  ivith  tespeet  to  the 
property  there,  and  the  prosiicct  of  its  alieuation,  bad  erected 
another  place  of  meeting  at  their  own  expense  at  liacklandii^, 
where  they  rajoyed  the  ministry  of  Brother  Alexander  Kerr,  who 
was  one  of  themselfes,  not  only  by  birth,  but  also  by  family  coa- 
ncction,  his  wife  being  one  of  the  late  Mr.  Tillett's  daughters.  He 
mi  also  able  and  willing  to  give  his  time  and  services  to  the  church 
without  remmieration ;  and  after  Brother  Wuucr'a  removal,  the 


488  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  iJIERICA. 

church  was  transferred  fjrom  TUletton  to  "Racklanding  where 
Brother  Kerr  was  appomted  to  the  pastoral  oflKoe»  and  has  minklia- 
turns  were  found  acceptable. 

Brother  Warner  and  his  family  were  detained  aeyenl  monllis  ia 
Belize.    During  the  year,  he  was  twice  brou^t  nigh  unto  dead 
by  sickness,  but  being  graciously  restored,  he  left  Belise  for  Raalu 
on  the  1st  of  May,  to  prepare  a  place  for  his  wife  and  fimr  chil- 
dren.   On  the  14th,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Henderson,  informing  fain 
that  he  had  met  with  an  encouraging  reception  from  the  aettkn^ 
and  pointing  out  two  spots  which  then  presented  thcmirlves  ai 
available  for  the  station  .  The  one  was  a  bare  lot  of  gnmnd  which 
would  cost  10/.,  and  required  building  upon ;  the  other  indoded  a 
small  dwelling-house  and  kitchen  (which  is  always  a  aepaiale  out- 
house), and  had  a  plantation  attached.    On  this  pirapeity  there 
were  also  one  hundred  cocoa-nut  palms  in  full  beann^  «id  the 
price  was  250  dollars,  or  501.  sterling,  the  one-half  payiUe  at  once 
and  the  other  half  in  twelve  months*  time.    The  church  at  first 
sight  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  sanction  so  great  an  outlay  as  the 
second  lot  required ;  but  Mr.  Henderson  si^ — **  The  Loid  had  it 
all  prepared.    Mr.  Elwin  [a  magistrate  on  the  ishuid]  euat  to 
Belize,  who  owed  me  some  thirty  dollars.    He  wanted  a  eooaider* 
able  supply  of  goods,  such  as  I  had.    He  then  exphmed  ham 
sensible  he  was  of  some  former  kindnesses  received,  and  that  he 
had  now  an  opportunity  of  returning  them,  should  we  reaolfe  upon 
a  purchase  of  the  lot  m  question  (the  second).     Bjs  phm,  or 
rather  the  plan  that  God  had  put  into  his  heart,  removed  the 
difficulties.    I  saw  how  I  could  pay  the  first  instalment,  125  dol- 
laxB ;  and  that  being  so  remarkably  providential,  I  ftlt  I  cooU 
trust  to  being  also  provided  with  the  means  when  the  second  heooae 
due  a  year  hence.    In  short,  I  made  the  purchase ;  and  withgoodi 
out  of  the  store  and  about  thirty  dollars  I  paid  the  amn  requirei, 
so  that  Brother  Warner  is  now  prepared  to  take  hia  fiunily,  and 
has  a  house  and  provisions  out  of  the  plantation  awaiting  them.* 
Brother  Warner  consequently  received  as  good  an  outfit  as  the  dr- 
enmstances  of  the  church  could  afford,  and  removed  his  fiunilf 
from  Belize  on  the  18th  of  August,  with  a  cheerful  hope  of  jwipctw- 
In  four  days  they  arrived  safely  at  the  new  station. 

The  property  at  this  place,  though  held  by  Mr.  Henderson,  whs 
had  become  the  purchaser,  was  designed  solely  far  the  use  of  the 


PROJECTED   LHUlARr.  480 

mUsion,  and  to  be  put  is  trust  for  it,  as  loon  as  the  debt  ahoiild  be 
paid.  Brother  Warner's  support  was  derived  in  part  from  the 
church  at  Bacup  in  Lancashire,  and  it  vw  hoped  thut  with  bis 
plantation  he  would  require  little  help  from  the  church  at  Beliix. 
It  was  also  niggcated,  in  cousideration  of  his  Tisiog  family,  that  he 
should  groduallj  acquire  a  share  in  the  proprictorahip  of  the  pro- 
perty, which  be  would  be  improving. 

It  was  expected  that  the  settlers  on  the  island  would  themselves, 
with  perhaps  a  little  asaistance,  provide  the  necessary  place  of 
meeting,  and  great  hopes  were  entertained  of  a  blessing  upon  this 
work,  in  facilitating  which  ihe  hand  of  God  in  Frovidence  was 
manifest,  a  circunutance  affording  more  real  comfort  lo  the  minds 
of  tile  brethren  than  the  possession  of  ample  funds  withont  it 
could  possibly  have  done. 

George  Tillett,  Esq.,  of  Baker's,  this  year  presented  the  church 
with  a  piece  of  land,  situated, on  the  Barrack -road,  Belize,  upon 
-which  it  was  proposed  to  erect  the  new  mecting-honse,  when  the 
necessary  means  should  be  obtained.  Tlie  value  of  this  gift  was 
estimated  at  130  dollars,  or  24'.  sterling.  Towards  the  purchase 
of  the  house  still  occupied  conjointly  by  the  church  and  Mr.  Hen- 
derson's family,  only  120/.  sterling  had  as  yet  been  paid,  the  half 
of  which  was  Mr.  Henderson's  own  contribution,  as  already  staled.* 
The  debt  due  upon  Jt,  with  the  interest,  was  then  \i5l.  sterling. 
The  churdi  having  come  far  short  io  their  efforts  to  support  their 
pastor, — partly  by  reason  of  their  poverty,  partly  because  of  the 
outlay  occasioned  to  support  the  out-stations, — now  freely  gave  up 
to  him  the  whole  and  sole  right  over  this  property.  He  also  toolc 
upon  himself  the  responsibility  of  the  debt,  as  he  says,  "to  be  pro- 
Tided  for  as  I  can,  or  sell  the  property.  This  alternative  ~ 
not  to  be  forced  to  i  I  confide  in  the  kmd  providence  of  God  to 
enable  me  to  clear  it." 

The  native  teachers  and  the  reading  members  of  the  church  in 
Belize  have  hitherto  felt  the  want  of  a  freer  access  to  religious  and 
useful  books,  with  which  they  have  been  but  scantily  supplied 
Ihiough  Mr.  Henderson.  Now  that  the  desire  to  read  was  in- 
creasing, the  difiiculty  of  obtaining  books  bad  also  become  greater. 
Encouraged  by  Mr.  Crowe's  partial  success  m  obtainuig  donations 
of  books  for  tlie  use  of  the  native  teachers,  Mr.  Henderson  now 


480  THE  008PBL  IK  CBNTBAL  AMBRICA. 


]^uiDed  a  lifanury  ezpresBly  for  their  nae^  to  be 

own  fbiids,  and  placed  exchuiTelj  under  Uidr  own 

Thus  a  general  depot  of  standard  worka  would  be  piovided,  to 

which  the  church  might  haye  aooeiB,  and  in  wbich  emch  SMBbs 

should  haye  equal  pn^^rietoTBhip.    Xtwasthoo^^thataxoamiff 

this  purpose  might  be  induded^in  the  projected  baildiiy. 

In  England,  Mr.  Norton  and  Mr.  Crowe  were  engaged  in  ca- 
deavouring  to  counteract,  through  the  presB,  the  unfinroonble  ioi- 
pressions  concerning  Mr.  Henderson  and  the  church  whidi  hai 
cmanatffd  from  Mooigate-streeL  In  September  IS49,  they  pnUsi 
a  statement  of  Acts  and  a  full  reply  to  all  the  Sode^a  chaigei 
—whether  published  or  privately  circulated;  wbetho'  pnatodL 
rumoured,  or  only  implied— under  the  title  of  **  Hoodnzaa.*  ia 
doing  this  they  sought  to  dear  Mr.  Henderson  and  die  Chnreh 
at  Belize  of  what  blame  was  undeservedly  csst  iqpon  ttMBSt  and 
also  to  enable  the  Church's  messenger  to  continue  to  prosuntt  Us 
mission  to  the  British  churches.  The  protracted  stay  of  Mr.  Cxoet 
was  the  more  &lt  and  regretted  that  Mr.  Hendenoni^  atrci^^th  wss 
scaiody  equal  to  his  burdens,  and  seversl  fields  axound  eppeand 
to  be  open  for  his  labours,  though  a  return  to  GuafteBala  wss 
evidently  not  yet  pncticsble.  On  this  subject  Mr.  Hendciaon  ay^ 
— '^The  delay  of  your  return  I  regret,  but  am  wiling  to  wait  the 
movements  of  Divine  Providence.  Certainly  your  xcmeiBiqg  ii 
England  after  my  departure  was  of  the  wisdom  and  goodiKSi  of 
our  heavenly  FaUier.  When  you  are  no  longer  needed  theie,  yoa 
will  return.  May  you  have  grace  to  discover  this,  and  act  aoootd- 
ingly." 

Referring  to  late  events,  he  says, — "^  1  fear  the  leaKMM  to  be 
learned  from  all,  wiU  not  be  sufficiently  i^ppreciated  and  approvsl 
With  respect  to  myself  I  know  not  if  I  shall  ever  leeover  tiie 
shock,  or  even  long  remain  to  improve  them.  I  am  now  lestii^a 
week,  my  exhausted  faculties  claimigg indulgence.  IhavegoSisto 
a  sort  of  nervous  irritability  that  prevents  sleep;  this  haa  snooeeded 

the  cessation  of  inward  fever  with  which  I  had  80  long  been  afflictsi 
So  it  is  on  earth ;  we  change  trials,  but  cannot  esa^tbem  cntiidf. 
Thankful,  then,  for  remaining  strength  and  enei^,  let  im  ptf 
them  forth  willingly  while  it  is  called  to-day,  the  nigki  eomtthJ* 

In  August,  Mr.  Henderson  wrote,  that,  Fkovidenoe  fitToozi^gtihe 
purchase  of  building  materials,  a  contract  had  been  entered  into  bj 


DEATH  OP  MRS.   TICNDERSON.  491 

Mr.  Braddick,  with  a  view  lo  the  erection  of  the  projected  nweting- 
hooso.  Some  contributioos  from  wealthy  inhabitants  hid  been 
added  to  the  gift  of  land,  and,  tocher  with  the  sum  collected  in 
England  and  ScoUnnd.a  cammencement  had  been  determined  upon. 

Another  M.'vere  trial  v-aa  now  appointed  to  the  mission  lamily ; 
for  some  months  they  had  been  visited  by  dckocss.  In  a  letter  to 
a  relative,  doted  from  Beliis  on  the  ^Ist  of  October,  Mr.  Hender- 
son conveys  t!ie  iorrowful  intelligence  of  the  death  of  his  beloved 
wife  Mary  Anne  She  was  removed,  after  a  fortnight's  illoeaa  from 
intermittent  fevtf,  to  attacks  of  which,  iike  most  EoropeoiiB  on  the 
coast,  9be  had  been  oneti  subjected.  Writing  on  the  day  of  her 
departure,  Mr,  Ilenderaon  says, — "  This  morning,  at  four  o'clock, 
she  breathed  her  last — breathing  ber  soul,  I  trust,  into  the  hands  of 
her  graciouB  Saviour.  Her  end  was  peace — no  ecstacies  and  no 
fears.  Her  mind,  being  stayed  on  Divine  mercy  and  all^sulBciency, 
met  the  conflict  of  conscious  unwortfainess,  joined  with  growing 
weakness,  which,  though  like  fiery  darts  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy, 
were  quenched  in  the  faith  of  Jesus,  never  befon:  bo  precious  as 
then,  as  she  expicieed  herself  to  me." 

Mr.  IlenderBon's  feelings  on  this  occa»on,  he  docs  not  himself 
attempt  to  express;  he  says,  however, — ">Vhen  my  dear  Ixqr 
(Jabez)  was  removed  from  our  sight,  I  hod  one  left  to  slay  my 
grief^  altlioiigh  a  fcllovr-mourner.  Now,  it  is  not  so  i  I  am  left  to 
weep  alone,  and  to  feel  the  world's  emptiness."  Further  on,  he 
adds, — "  She  will  be  buried  in  the  IlaptLit  burial-ground,  Free- 
town, lielite;  not,  however,  by  the  aide  of  ber  boy,  as  I  could  have 
wished,  for  that  was  on  the  late  mision  premises,  which  oi 
sold."  His  allusions  to  the  grief  of  his  children  are  most  affecting, 
aad  be  adds, — "  My  family  circle  is  now  broken,  and,  however 
much  we  take  care  of  a  broken  vessel,  we  do  not  commonly  set  our 
aSeetioDs  npon  it.  May  I  be  found  more  devoted  to  tb 
the  Lord,  who  condescends  to  employ  me  in  bis  work." 

Mrs.  Henderson  had  resided  full  ftftecn  years  at  Belize,  and  had 
t  here  discharged  the  important  and  oflen  arduous  duties  of  a  labo- 
rious misaionary's  wife,  in  whose  toils  and  sufierings  she  bore  her 
part.  Their  participated  triak  were  of  no  ordinary  character ;  and 
amongst  them,  the  stinging  sense  of  wrongs  inflicted  by  those  who 
ahoiild  have  been  foremost  to  cheer  the  hearts  of  the  voluntaiy 
exiles  was  not  the  least  keenly  felt  by  the  departed  one.    Her 


49S  THB  GOSPEL  IN   CEICTRAL  AXEBICA. 

sufiTexings,  even  those  occasioiied  byihe  material  ineoarcnienee 
privatioiis  of  her  fiunily,  which  followed  upon  their 
the  misdon-house,  were  all  vrisely  and  giacioiuly  oidered  hj  Wm 
who  is  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy.  Bat  this  trnHh  m  ealcnlaSeili 
yield  hut  small  comfort  to  those  who  participated  in  inftcting  die 
wrong,  while  confronted  with  the  stem  reality  of  her  mental  «d 
physical  sufferings,  or  the  prohahility  of  her  hartened  end. 

Soon  after  her  arrival  in  Belize,  Mrs.  Hendenon  wm  m  tis 
full  enjoyment  of  her  yet  unimpaired  European  Tigoor,  and  m 
the  prime  of  life.  She  was  then  actively  devoting  her  atraigth  li 
the  cause  in  which  she  had  emharked  with  her  devoted  ^iw^rH, 
and  toiled  daily  in  a  flourishing  in&nt-school,  in  whidi  one  «f 
the  scholars  was  frequently  set  to  rock  the  cradle  of  her  fum 
bahe,  that  its  mother  might  he  free  to  attend  to  the  mental  aad 
moral  training  of,  perhaps,  100  children  of  her  ignonuit  aad 
dissolute  neighbours.  Ten  years  later  her  brow  was  fonoiid, 
and  her  pallid  cheek  was  wet  with  tears  shed  in  the  praqiett 
of  a  long  separation  which  the  violence  of  prond  and  wi^ed 
men,  and  it  may  be,  too,  the  unfidthfulness  of  brethren  had  oecs- 
sioned.  Between  the  period  when  the  author  fiiat  hdidd  her 
engaged  in  her  cheerful  labours,  and  that  when  she  aCood  ipsa 
the  deck  of  the  La  Cazamanee,  the  ship  which  was  shoot  to  eoa- 
vey  her  husband  far  away  to  the  land  of  her  fiuhers,  to  seek  re- 
lief from  the  dangers  to  which  he  had  long  been  eiqposed,  maaj 
were  the  mental  pangs,  heart  throbs,  and  ph3nBical  mliffiiy, 
which  she  had  endured  in  connection  with  her  own  and  her  }» 
band*s  labours,  her  separation  from  the  home  of  her  youth,  md 
the  rigours  of  the  climate  I 

During  Mr.  Henderson's  absence  in  Europe,  on  one  nrmiai. 
when  the  emissaries  of  oppression  intruded  themselves  npon  die 
peaceful  assembly  of  the  church,  in  search  of  a  victim  whom  ikef 
might  denounce  and  bring  to  punishment  for  unlawfhlly  teadh 
ing  and  preaching  the  truth  of  God,  Sister  Henderson  was  fbuai 
sitting  in  her  place  among  her  sable  brethren,  and  *«VW  lar 
turn  to  read  a  portion  of  the  Word  of  Life.  Thus  were  the 
persecutors  baffled  in  their  design  by  the  sex  of  the 
gaged,  for  though  far  gone  in  the  way  of  q 
on  by  enmity,  and  blinded  by  pride,  they  had  not  yet 
that  pitch  of  shamelessness  which  would  qualify  them  to  *»*t 


MB.  kIjNGDon  s  fifth  axd  last  stxtiox.  493 

imprison  a  counltyivoman  for  such  an  offence,  tiolwiihstunding 
they  hitd  approached  pretty  near  it,  as  maaifested  in  the  cosea  a( 
Mrs.  Pcrsle  and  Airs.  Moi^;ao. 

Mrs.  Hendenon  shared  the  trials  of  the  pastor  and  of  the 
ehurch,  and  with  tbcm  was  enabled  to  outride  many  ?tonns :  she 
was  not,  however,  permitted  to  see  with  earthly  \ision  the  realiza- 
tion of  the  hopes  whieh  have  been  and  are  yet  entertained  by  the 
people  aiTiong  whom  she  suffered  and  laboured;  hut  a  better 
[tortion  13  hen.  Her  tempestuous  life  is,  we  hope,  suceeeded  by 
the  perfect  calm,  complete  security,  and  unspeakable  enjoyment  of 
the  haven  of  eternal  rest. 

With  the  additional  burden  of  the  undivided  care  of  his  family, 
Air.  Ilenilcrsan  endeavoured  to  ossuati!  bis  grief  in  the  work  upon 
which  his  heart  had  been  so  long  set,  and  with  which  his  haudi 
were  more  than  ever  filled.  His  school  continued  to  flourish; 
even  on  its  reduced  scale  it  still  numbered  about  seventy  scholars 
present,  and  it  was  regarded  by  that  part  of  the  communis 
who  could  not  appreciate  its  best,  its  religious  infiuence,  as  a 
public  benefit  to  the  Settlement.  Some  young  persons  were 
attending  it  in  order  to  qualify  ihemeclves  for  teaching.  Mr. 
Henderson  says, — "  We  need  an  infant  school  very  mucb.  This  we 
have  no  lit  pcr^n  to  undertake.  Such  as  might  be  inclined  to 
come  to  our  help  must  hare  their  souls  imbued  with  love  (o 
Christ,  and  consequently  love  to  souls." 

Again,  in  another  letter  he  says, — "  In  my  garden  of  vegetables 
I  find  much  recreation.  You  would  be  pleased  to  see  how  it  b 
improved.  Filled  up  with  sea-soit  bock  to  the  swamp,  and  we 
are  getting  river-soil  to  cover  it.  N'carly  the  one-half  has  been 
done.  My  garden  of  intellectuals  flourishes  also.  I  have  no 
doubt  you  will  be  pleased  with  both  when  you  sec  them." 

Before  the  close  of  1H49,  Mr.  Kingdonbad  purchased  a  piece  of 
plantalion  land  on  the  hanks  of  the  Old  River,  upon  which  he 
built  himself  n  house,  ami  thus  founded  his  liiUi  missionary 
statiuii,  since  hb  arrival  four  years  before.  The  spot  chosen  was 
about  twenty  miles  from  Belize,  in  a  very  thinly-peopled  neigh- 
bourhood, where  bis  studies  and  labours  m  translating  Maya 
would  be  but  little  interrupted  by  any  openings  lor  laore  active 
Ubours,  though  they  might  be  by  the  visits  of  excursionists 
and  plcosure-scekas  tip  the  river.    An  effort  was,  hoivercr,  made 


■■iriM 


4S4  TBB  G08PBL   IN   CENTRAL 

to  coUeet  the  scalleTed  people  iheic^  md  lome  hatf-donA  M- 
dren  were  fonned  into  a  school,  and  reeewed  imtnictioii  damg 
one  hour  in  the  day.  The  meetingB  for  wonii^  wcve  am  tk 
aamc  reduced  scale.  The  Society's  Beport  inr  that  jear  xaomk 
334/.  llf.  lOd  expended  on  this  their  only  atedon  m  Gcaftnl 
America,  and  that  for  1850the  sum  of  408£.  11#.  KM.  bestowal 
upon  the  same  work ;  whUe  the  entire  som  reported  since  the 
disniptum  as  demoted  to  this  object,  ap  to  Mardb  30th»  18i0^  is. 
3,1922.  df.  4d.  Little  more  than  one-fiMirth  of  thia  mam 
have  erected  the  oommodioos  meeting-honae  needed  Ibr  the  chaick 
at  Belize. 

Further  up  the  samerirer,  at  Behoboth  station,  Brotbcr  Jascyk 
Kelly  was  reported  by  Mr.  Hendenon  as  goin^  on  **'  Ttrj  wA 
He  is  steady,  and  the  people  reelect  him  mcwh.**  On  tise  lit  d 
April  he  had  baptised  four  more  converts  at  Bakci'a.  Aftv  Av 
he  was  visited  with  serious  bodily  affliction,  but  iraa  gndaaly 
xestored.  Still  further  up  the  stream,  at  a  plaoe  called  Daik> 
run,  about  a  wcek*s  paddle  firom  Belise,  there  ia  a 
of  perhaps  500  persons  residing  on  the  borders  of  what 
British  limita.  These  people  were  so  anxious  to  obtain  the 
sidence  of  a  teacher  among  them,  that  they  drew  up  a 
signed  by  104  heads  of  fiunilies,  requesting  Mr.  Henderaoai  to  i 
them  a  religious  instructor,  proposing  to  meet  all 
and  they  even  offered  to  impose  a  Jine  of  lOt.  osi  aU 
dants  at  Sabbath  worship.  *"  Poor  things  I  **  adds  Mr. 
^  do  they  not  need  instruction? ** 

Brother  Alexander  Kerr  was  experiencing  some  of  the 
ties  of  the  pastoral  office.  The  church  at  Backlandini^  was  ^Kridel 
and  unhappy,  the  influence  of  the  world  having  been  anflbaili 
assume  the  ascendancy  over  the  minds  of  some  of  tbe  «M»^irrn 

"*  From  Sibun,**  Mr.  HoiderBon  says,  *"  a  kind  of  fint-ftwlisf 
Brother  Thurton  s  labours  has  appeared  in  the  penost  of  m 
African  man  who  came  to  me  last  week,  expresaing  lww>fW  m 
such  a  way  as  to  give  good  evidence  of  a  wofk  of  grace  in  Ui 
aouL  He  has  been  accepted  for  baptism.**  He  haa  smoc 
a  member. 

The  thoughtful  reader,  who  has  followed  the    late 
church  in  idl  the  painful  providence  through  wbaeh  God  wm 
pfcaaed  to  eondnct  it,  will  not  be  surpcised  to  leacn  tlait  ti» 


OPIKION    DP    MIBSIOKARV    SOCIETIES.  495 

brethren  in  British  Hotkduras  hod  little  confidence  left  in  mere 
Society  and  Committee  ouuMgement ;  but  tlie  practical  lessons 
which  they  were  lo  plainly  siut  so  forcibly  taught  had  led  them 
jiet  a  step  further.  Haring  aeea  and  felt  the  abuse  that  yets 
made  of  delegated  power,  and  that  even  the  churches  of  Christ 
were  actually  made  to  Euccumb  to  it,  they  arrived  at  the  con- 
dusioQ  that  churches  and  not  societies  were  entruatcd  with  the 
ertiD^llzatioDof  theunbelievii^,  and  that  the  sooner  the  churches 
resumed  their  own  proper  work  the  more  blessing  would  accrue 
to  themselves,  and  the  greater  success  would  attend  their  labours. 
In  short,  they  became  convinced  that  to  substitute  any  organi- 
2aCion  or  iustniraentality  of  human  device  for  that  which  has  been 
Divinely  instituted  is  unscriptural,  presumptuous,  unbelieving, 
and  must  prove,  to  a  corresponding  extent,  vain  and  injurious. 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Crowe,  about  the  same  time,  Mr. 
Bendcrson  says, — "  If  Baptists  would  for^o  their  cherished  predi- 
lections, and  supersede  the  Society  by  a  more  Bcriptond  mode 
of  conducting  missions  to  the  heathen,  how  honourable  would  it 
be  1  How  9uccc»j'ul  must  we  not  expert  them  hereafter  to  prove! 
Baptist  missions  to  the  West  Indies  taken  up  by  churches  in 
different  parts  of  Britain,  say  one  to  Autiguo,  one  to  St-  Vincent, 
one  to  Barbadoes,  &c.,  striving  together,  yet  in  separate  and  in- 
dependent action,  and  receiving  intelligence  every  fortnight  from 
their  misdouarics !  Uovt  enlivening  would  such  a  state  of  things 
be!  Look  at  poor  crippled  Jamaica,  afler  all  that  has  been  done 
for  her,  without  a  angle  neighbouring  isle  to  which  she  lias  sent  a 
missioiiaty  (so  &c  as  I  know  of)- 

"  Like  John  in  vision,  who  must  be  taken  iulo  the  wildemen 
to  see  aright  the  position  of  the  church,  so  I  find  that  out  of  coa- 
nection  with  Alinionaiy  Societies,  better  than  in  it,  can  be  dis- 
cerned the  true  character  of  modem  minions.  Do  brother,  in 
your  vbittng  of  the  churches,  press  upon  their  ntiention  that  no 
healthy  and  successful  action  can  be  looked  for  in  misidoas,  until 
they  return  to  the  New  Testament  model.  The  movements  and 
funds  entirely  under  the  control  of  tha  ekureli." 

In  a  letter  dated  ItthDec  l!U9,  juat  after  he  had  read  the  re- 
ply lo  " Belize,''  entitled  "Honduras,''  Mr.  Hendenon  says,— 
"  WTiat  a  dociuueat,  dear  brother,  is  '  ilondurais'  to  lodge  in  the 
Beliu  Baptist  Library.    It  is  abnntlantly  to  my  satislkctiaik    I 


496  THE  G08PEL  IN  CENTRAL    kUWRlCA, 

fltOl  find  myself  in  pooession  of  forther  fiicts  that  would  bsregivB 
lustre  to  the  truth,  but  fear  the  work  is  alread j  liiger  than  viB 
be  good  for  its  faithful  perusal.'*  Of  the  Baptist  :MQMioiiai7  Socie^ 
he  says, — ''  It  is  of  no  use  arguing  that  thero  tare  good  things  init 
It  stands  on  no  denominational  foundation.  Sixty  yean  bade  it 
had  no  existence ;  it  is  of  itself  a  perfect  anomaly.  As  Baptists  «e 
cannot  fulfil  our  trust  to  Christ  without  missionii,  bat  by  this 
poly  of  missions  by  the  Society,  they  are  secuhoiBcd  and 
verted.  Does  not  the  history  of  the  Society  in  both  Eait  mL 
West  Indies  show  this  ?  Besides  when  the  Society  waa  oii^^BaDf 
constituted,  did  the  men  most  responsible  for  its  character  speak  of 
it  as  embracing  their  views  on  the  mode  of  condncting  ToSmamf 
I  believe  not ;  but  only  as  a  substitute  until  the  church  ahocdd  wdc 
up  to  the  true  mode  of  conducting  them.  As  Baptiata  we  woe 
honoured  to  lead  in  what  was  at  the  time  better  than  lorraf 
heathen  nations  in  their  ignorance.  How  mighty  the  impulse  kt 
the  present  state  of  things  say.  It  may  be  given  to  us  again  to  ksd. 
Vast  progress,  during  the  last  fifty  years,  has  been  made  in  pRpsi^ 
ing  the  minds  of  Christians  to  act  on  principles  New 
The  time  has  come  for  the  church  to  put  its  shoulder  to  the 

''*'  luthis  matter  the  New  Testament  plainly  teaches  that: 
shall  spring  from  and  be  directed  by  a  church  or  chnrdieB ;  and  I 
maintain  that  we  have  lost  much  in  our  success  abroad  firom  over- 
looking this.  Instead  of  Christians  casting  their  contributions  iais 
a  general  fund,  let  one  church,  or  if  it  be  too  small,  let  two  er 
three  churches  resolve  upon  a  mission  to  a  continent,  a  oonntiy,  or 
an  island,  and  sending  such  a  brother  or  brethren  aa  the  Lori 
shall  furnish  from  amongst  themselves,  foUow  them  with  pntfo; 
and  correspond  directly  with  them  in  their  chosen  field  of  kbooi^ 
Would  not  the  Lord  provide  men  and  money,  and  bleaa  the  pro- 
ceeding? Unquestionably  he  would.  He  has  done  so.  Let  that 
be  multiplied  in  the  West  and  in  the  East,  emulating  each  other  is 
holy  efforts,  and  soon  the  churches  at  home  would  come  oat  is 
force — the  force  of  faith  and  love  for  missions.  On  the  pRseat 
system  they  never  will,  I  am  persuaded;  but,  soured  and  dii* 
appointed,  will  contribute  reluctantly  and  parsimoniously.  I  kvf 
to  see  this  state  of  things. 

**Only  let  ♦ ♦ Baptist  church  first  pray  over  anl 

oonader  well  the  subject,  and  see  if  a  brother  does  not  aj 


FODIITH   KATIVB  PCBLIC   JIEETISC  ASt>   BEPOIIT.       497 

quickiy,  *  Here  am  I,  send  me."  Let  it  be  for  eiampU  to 
BitrbMloea  he  u  to  be  sent ;  far  notuithstandiiig  all  tho  talk  of 
West  Indian  missions,  a  tenth  of  the  places  hnvc  not  yet  been  iup- 
plieil.  Let  the  brotbcr  start,  carrying  with  him  a  flill  underetaad- 
ing  of  hia  position  with  the  church ;  both  of  them  strong  in  the 
failli  of  a  divine  worlt.  His  passage,  his  outfit,  his  location  in  the 
island,  would  all  drop  into  order,  and  soon  we  should  sec  bow  the 
Lord  would  work.  Let  hitn  be  cautioned  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
the  poor,— to  begin  with  them  I  mean.  Among  the  miglakes  of 
the  Sodety,  the  rich  have  too  much  shared  tbeir  care.  So  far  as 
I  hare  seen,  the  efforts  of  the  Society's  Mi<«ionaFiBa  have  bcea 
directed  more  to  Europeans, — the  class  of  masters,  than  to  the 
bulk  of  the  population.  Let  bim  be  instructed  to  find  employ- 
ment, if  possible,  during  the  week,  at  least  for  a  time,  uatil  a  con- 
gregation on  the  spot  relieve  him  from  labour. 

"  iiegin,  begin  1  We  are  in  danger,  even  in  the  West  Indies,  of 
sinking.  WhyP  The  key  note  has  been  struck  too  high.  High 
iL'ipiralioos  of  aca),  instead  of  the  holy,  humble  actings  of  a  chas- 
tened faith.  But  I  remember,  a  word  is  enough  to  the  wise.  I 
ought  not  to  dwell  so  long  on  what  abler  pens  will  deal  with.  Id 
short,  let  the  churches  have  their  own  missions,  and  control  their 
own  funds." 

At  It  meeting  of  the  brethren,  entrusted  by  the  church  witti 
the  manngement  of  their  mission  fund,  held  on  January  Sth,  1850, 
present.  Brethren  York,  Davies.  Braddick,  Kerr,  Cain,  and  Hen- 
derson ; — Brother  Henderson  having  reported  that  he  had  re- 
ceived &om  England,  through  the  trustees  of  the  Honduras  fund, 
GOl.  in  goods  and  100^.  in  ca'<h,  it  was  resolved,  that  Brother 
Henderson  should  write  and  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the 
above-named  sum  of  15W.,  and  that  the  thanks  of  the  church 
be  offered  to  friends  in  England  who  have  contributed,  and  to 
Brc-thren  William  Bowser,  William  Norton,  and  James  Oliver, 
who  have  kindly  undertaken  the  management  of  this  fiind. 

The  fourth  public  meeting  in  support  of  the  native  missioiu 
was  held  in  the  Wesleyau  chapel  on  the  9th  of  January.  The 
eitpenditurc  for  the  year  was  114?.  the  income  only  52/.,  leavings 
deficit  of  62(. ;  but  this  was  an  improvement  upon  the  previous 
year,  especially  as  a  strenuous  effort  was  made  among  the  mem- 
bers niter  the  accounts  were  closed.     On  this  point  Mr.  HenderMD 


498  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMEIUOJU 

atys,-— '*  Last  year  we  reached  little  over  150  doUan  firmn  all  soonBi 
in  this  country  for  this  fund,  this  year  we  have  laiaed  about  3S0 
dollars ;  so  that  had  we  not  extended  oar  operatiQns  oar  tank 
would  have  heen  in  excess.  But  I  helieve,  dear  brother,  it  ii 
in  this  way  that  the  Lord  intends  we  should  act  in  his  cai»; 
walking  hy  fiutb,  convinced  of  duty  to  act,  next  acting  &ith  oa 
the  Divine  faithfulness.  It  will,  indeed,  he  nuxt  gratifying  to 
US  to  keep  funds  received  from  England  entirel j  for  the  buildiBg 
this  year." 

The  Report  stated,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  there  kai 
been  184  members ;  six  had  been  excluded ;  six  belonging  to  tke 
Second  West  Lidia  Raiment  had  been  dismissed,  their  rofee- 
tive  companies  having  been  ordered  away  from  Beliae ;  fiior  bad 
died,  making  a  reduction  of  sixteen.  On  the  other  haadL  three 
had  been  restored,  and  twenty  received  by  profeadony  makii^  the 
increase  twenty-three,  and  a  clear  addition  of  seven  to  thechnrchit 
Belize,  which  now  numbered  191  members.  There  had  been 
baptized  at  Baker's,  four ;  at  Belize,  five :  in  all  nine  peraona. 

At  a  subsequent  church  meeting,  it  was  agreed  that,  aa  BNikcr 
Thurton  had  given  so  much  satisfaction  to  the  church  in  Ae 
management  of  the  station  at  Sibun  for  two  years,  he  riumld  be 
X^aced  on  the  same  footing  as  Brother  Kelly  at  Baker'a ;  tfaatiiy 
to  administer  the  supper  to  members  of  the  chorch  rending 
as  well  as  baptism,  when  satisfied  with  the  profesBion  of  < 

Concerning  this  period,  Mr.  Henderson  says,  **  All  the 
have  been  present  with  us  this  season,  except  Brother  Warner  aii 
Brother  Crowe.  On  occasion  of  the  general  miasionary  pmc^ 
meeting  on  the  1st  of  the  month,  when  a  numeroosly  attoided  aii 
a  joy-inspiring  meeting  took  place,  after  the  usual  coarse  of  pi^ 
oeeding,  it  was  proposed  and  carried  at  once  into  effect,  that  t 
brother,  in  the  name  of  all,  offer  special  prayer  for  Brother  CioiR^ 
and  the  cause  that  detains  him  in  £ngland. 

^^  At  our  missionary  committee  meeting,  last  evening  (lOCh  ef 
January)  when  all  the  brethren  were  again  present,  the  baabea 
of  the  past  year  was  gone  into,  and  that  of  the  present  one  bete 
ns,  with  the  fiicts  connected  with  the  cause  in  this  eonntiy  wUek 
brought  us  together.  I  felt  it  good  to  be  there,  and  as  all 
to  act  as  men,  free  and  full  of  the  work,  I  thought  how 
better  this  is  than  dependence  on  a  Society  could  have  been  at  te 


Btuoe  time.  All  have  led  this  maraiag,  to  be  at  their  stations 
before  the  Sabbath,  carrying  settled  accounts  and  advances  for  the 
ensuing  year.  When  this  letter  19  ofT,  at  six  p.u.,  I  flhall  be  alunc 
again,  and  have  breathing  time  aa  it  ncre :  I  do  fi.-cl  the  absence  of 
one.    But  peace  I  I  shall  go  to  her." 

Captain  Thomas  had  been  with  the  brethren  at  this  interesting 
Beason,  and  was  at  once  rejoiced  in  hia  own  soul,  and  very  helpful 
to  them.  Mr.  Kingdon  was  still  at  his  plantation  up  the  river,  and 
there  vrerc  rumours  that  he  expected  his  recall,  lie  hod  taken  part 
in  none  of  the  public  meetings  of  the  season. 

At  the  mote  remote  and  rec«;ntly  formed  station  at  Stann  Creek, 
Brother  Michael  had  made  a  plantation,  and  continued  cliccrl'ul, 
laliouring  incessantly.  The  enterprise  was  felt  to  be  great  for  him, 
and  the  period  critical,  as  it  would  put  all  his  energy  and  perse- 
verance to  the  teat.  Mr.  Jlenderson  says,  that  the  people  there 
"  prize  the  privilege  of  hearing  about  religion  in  Ihet'r  oiiti  Imu/itaar, 
which  b  an  entirely  new  feature  in  their  teaching.  The  Sponiords 
taught  them  in  Latin  or  in  Spanish,  the  We«1eyuis  in  English. 
They  are  attentive,  and  our  brother  has  scarcely  room  for  all  who 

The  station  lately  resumed  on  the  island  of  Ruatan  whs  evi- 
dently blessed  under  Brother  Warner's  manageracnt,  who  was 
much  gratified  by  the  reception  given  him  there.  Mr.  Ilendersoii 
wrot*;  concerning  it  on  the  1 1th  of  July,  "  At  Ruatan  a  favourable 
movement  has  begun.  One  of  the  AVesleyan  leaders  has  given  in 
his  ticket,  and  has  «ought  baptism  at  the  hands  of  Brother  Warner." 
On  the  22nd  of  April,  he  adds,  "  We  had  a  visit  from  Brotlier 
Warner  lately  from  Ruatan.  Uc  came  to  sec  his  annual  EiccouutR 
mntle  up,  and  to  take  with  him  supplies.  He  seems  to  luive  his 
hands  and  heart  full,  and  good  prospecia  of  success.  I  expect  to 
hear  of  a  baptism  this  month,  as  several  have  offered.  Indeed, 
there  is  quite  a  stir  amongst  the  Wesleyau*  there,  who  decljre 
that  never  before  bad  the  truth  been  set  before  them.  Mr.  Webster, 
Methodist  Superintendent,  has  written  to  Brother  Warner,  hkming 
hiui  for  preaching  Baptist  doctrines." 

From  occasional  notices  published  ii 
it  would  appear  thai  the  British  claim 
again  abandoned,  and  the  official  ci 
cat  of  Belize  once  more  withdraw 


I  the  Ili)udura»  IValelimin 
upon  this  island  has  l>':en 
the  SupcrintL-ud- 
One  immediate  result  has 


600  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CE2CTRAL  AMSRICA. 

been,  that  the  setUen  encouraged  to  ooenpy  the  kbuid,  who 
amount  to  about  2,000,  have  found  themselTeB  without  the 
of  securing  order ;  lawless  acts  have  since  been  frequent,  both  tboe 
and  at  Bonacca,  and  there  haye  been  sereral  hostile  ^i^Hnrtw* 
between  the  residents  and  the  Spaniards,  firam  the  main  bmd,  it  ii 
presumed* 

Early  in  1850  a  public  meeting  of  the  inhabitants  wai 
at  which  Lieutenant  Commanding  Jolly,  of  her  MiyealT's 
Bermuda^  stated,  *'  I  am  directed  by  his  Excellency  the  CaOTcnor 
of  Jamaica,  to  inform  you  that  you  are  to  go  on  and  enact  yoor 
own  local  regulations.  Do  the  best  you  can  for  yoomelves—iio 
interference  will  be  allowed  with  your  form  of  govemment,  aad 
the  protection  of  the  British  flag  will  be  afforded  to  all  the  Kttlen 
without  distinction  of  any  kind.*'  * 

In  a  recent  appeal,  the  courts  at  Belize  have  declared  tint  thej 
have  no  jurisdiction  over  the  island.  All  the  magiitntai  and 
functionaries  elected  by  the  settlers  there,  are  ^  obliged  to  take  the 
oath  of  allegiance  to  die  British  crown.**  The  tendency  of  sock  t 
state  of  things  must  be  apparent  to  alL  The  iignstioe  (^mdi  pro- 
ceedings is  equally  so.  The  final  result  must  be  left  for  tiae  to 
develope ;  meanwhile,  all  must  be  gainers,  and  none  can  i^omtij 
be  losers  by  the  success  of  the  station  there. 

Brother  Joseph  Kelly  of  Rehoboth,  was  much  enoooiaged  fay  the 
harmony  of  the  brethren  residing  at  Baker*s  bank.  On  the  17tk  ef 
March,  Mr.  Henderson  says  he  had  ^^  baptised  six  bdievea  ia  Ike 
|H:esenoe  of,  I  suppose,  a  huger  congregation  than  ever  virrrn^ 
there  on  any  previous  occasion.  Captain  Thomas  pveached  Ike 
baptizing  sermon.  He  had  to  go  up  the  river  some  ei^it  orla 
miles  for  water  to  supply  lus  ship.  He  went  a  eoi^le  of  difsp 
before,  taking  with  him  Brother  Braddick,  and  some  membencf 
his  fiunily,  so  that  Baker's  had  a  high  day.  All  seemed  to  eiyc^'ili 
and  I  trust  souls  were  benefited.** 

During  the  first  week  in  April,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kii^;don  finllf 
left  Belize  in  the  MeMtrdis  for  New  York,  being  recalled  by  Ike 
Baptist  Missionary  Society,  which  has  now  determined  ledU^li 
abandon  Central  America  as  a  field  for  Missionaiy  labour,  dkr 
its  occupation  during  twenty-eight  years.  The  honae^  &c^  at  llr. 
Kingdon's  fifth  station  was  disposed  of  to  CoL  Faneoort  for  110/, 
to  make  a  ooontry  residence  o^  thereby  showing,  that  in  sootf 

*  n<mdwmi  Waiekmm,  May  ISth  186a 


THE  FIELD   FINALLY   ABiXDO.VED   BV  THE  SOCIETY.    501 

respects  the  localily  via  not  ill  chosen.  Mr.  Hcnileraon  heard  of 
their  intended  departure  from  Belize  on  Saturday,  March  the  30ih, 
"  and  yesterday,''  he  says,  {.  e.  SuniJay,  "  a  little  before  morning 
worship,  it  occurred  to  my  mind  that  Mr.  Eingdou,  notwithstanding 
all,  mi^'ht  have  a  desire  to  oddrisi  the  brethren  before  hia  depart- 
ure. I  felt  that  in  his  cireumslanccs  I  should.  Accordingly,  I 
addrcsed  a  haaty  note,  which  Air.  Adams  carried  to  him,  sayiog, 
"  Dear  Sir,— If  you  felt  yooi  mind  at  hberty  to  preach  to  us  this 
evening,  the  pulpit  will  be  at  your  service."  IliB  reply  was, 
'Dear  Sir, — For  reasons  too  numerous  to  mention,  I  must  decline 
your  invitation  to  preach  for  you  this  creniag, — I  am,  dear  Sir, 
yours  f^thfully,  John  KingdoD.'  "  Thus  closed  the  misaioQ  of  one 
whose  arrival  at  Belize  had  been  looked  forward  to  with  fond 
hope!,  and  was  hailed  with  joyful  gratitude,  accompanied  by  per- 
haps too  great  expectation. 

It  was  considered  not  a  little  remarkable  by  some  of  the  more 
reflective  inhabitants  of  Belixe,  that  just  before  Kir.  Kingdon's  Una! 
departure,  the  fiuictionariea  of  the  Establisbment  and  the  Superin- 
tendent had  serious  diBBgreements,  which  resulted  in  the  sailing  of 
the  clergymen  who  were  in  the  Settlement  for  Jamaica  to  obtain 
redress— somewhat  u  the  non-juring  dissenters  had  been  compelled 
to  do  three  years  before.  The  salaries  of  these  public  servants  had 
been  stopped,  and  they  sought  the  interference  of  their  diocesan. 
"  Thus,"  as  one  has  expresed  it,  "  has  the  pit  which  was  dug  for 
the  Baptists  been  the  one  into  which  the  very  diggers  themselves 
have  fallen.  How  wonderiiiir'  So  much  had  matters  now 
changed  that  Mr.  Henderson  wrote  on  the  4th  of  Jonuoiy  IS5Q, — 
"  The  Superintendent  called  quite  friendly  two  days  ago,  and  in- 
spected my  garden.  He  spoke  of  a  remctly  for  the  law  of  marriage 
by  diraeuters  within  the  Settlement,  &c,  bo  healing  all  former 
animosities.    What  does  not  time  and  the  God  of  time  effect" 

Some  months  previona  to  bis  departure  Mr.  Kingdon  had  been 
apphed  to  for  the  key  of  the  bouse  at  Freetown,  which  the  Society 
bad  declared  its  willingness  to  give  up  to  the  church,  but  he  had 
declined  to  return  it  to  the  people  imtil  directed  by  the  Society  to 
do  so.  Now,  the  property  was  restored  to  those  who  had  built  the 
"  prayers'  bouse''  with  the  expectation  of  using  it  theroielTea.*  Hr. 


503  THB  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

Hendenon  says — ^*  hast  Thursday,  the  house  on  the  buiiil-gniasl 
was  re-opened,  and  was  devoted  afi-esh  to  the  dmne  serrioe. 
Friends  were  as  numerous  as  we  had  aocommodatian  for,  and  t 
very  cheering  meeting  it  was.  I  could  not  help  nntiwwg  in  mj 
address,  first,  the  divine  testimony  which  had  been  given  to  tk 
authority  of  a  christian  church.  An  attempt  had  been  made  to 
overthrow  it,  but  the  church  remains  whilst  the  men  muI  mimB- 
ary  Society  are  cast  out  of  the  country.  Secondly,  the  ^rioe 
approbation  of  exercising  ourselves  in  the  fiiith  that  right  pnnqpla 
will  finally  overcome.  Here  we  were  put  in  poaseaaon  of  a  bootf 
paid  for  by  the  very  parties  then  within  it,  but  which  nnder  eertsn 
pretences  had  been  taken  from  us  and  kept  from  ns  for  nearly  four 
years;  and  without  sacrificing  one  Christian  principle,  we  lad 
quietly  waited  imtil  it  was  restored  to  us.  No  app^Ja  to  eoorts^ 
no  expensive  counsel,  no  application  of  l^al  coercion.  We  only 
needed  to  see  a  capacious  place  of  worship  erected  at  B^k  to 
find  ourselves  as  well  accommodated  as  whilst  nnder  the  Society. 

'^This  we  hope  soon  to  see  effected,**  adds  Mr.  HentesoPt 
**  although  the  progress  of  Brother  Crowe,  in  proeoring  taoA  ia 
England,  is  not  great.  Ours  is  not  a  popular  cause.  Wdl,  let  it 
be  so,  we  do  not  need  agreatdeal,  and  we  would  prefer  to  beoa^ 
giving  side  rather  than  the  receiving.  I  hope  we  shall  have  oir 
new  place  finished  before  the  anniversary  meeting,  for  the  MedM>- 
dists  have  given  us  plainly  to  understand  that  after  the  <i*wy  of 
Brother  Warner  in  taking  away  their  members,  they  ooold  not  any 
longer  assist  us  in  such  ways  again.** 

In  the  same  letter  Mr.  Henderson  says — **!  don*t  know  tiiat  I 
have  informed  you  of  a  Government  School  Bill  having  passed  the 
Public  Meeting  of  the  Settlement.  The  measure  was  broogfat  t» 
me  before  it  was  presented  to  the  Meeting  to  know  if  I  wooM 
accept  of  its  provisions,  to  which  I  gave  an  unqualified  ncndve. 
One  thousand  pounds  sterling  for  one  3rear  have  been  gnuitBd.* 
The  bill  is  most  liberal,  permitting  any  minister,  Catholie  or  Ti> 
testant,  to  recommend  a  school  of  fifty  children.  The  rent  of  the 
school-room  is  paid,  a  salary  to  the  teacher,  stadoneiy  provided  ftr 
the  use  of  the  school,  and  even  annual  prises,  without  inierfeiin 
with  the  religious  sentiments  taught.  Is  it  not  remarkable  ?  Soc^ 
liberality  is  not  taught  from  the  pulpits  of  the  Establiahment 

1847.  readied  to  neariy  2fiOOL 


BESOLTE  TO   DCILD LOCAL   AID. 

Our  principles  advance,  tliougli  tliey  ore  cot  yet  wholly  under- 
stood. The  authorities  do  not  know  tliat  tnoDey,  however  needftil 
in  conducting  our  operations,  is  not  all  that  is  vniitcd,  nor  even 
the  chief  thing.  Men  are  more  difficult  to  be  procured  than  money 
— men  worthy  of  the  confidence  ol'  the  church,  and  of  the  money 
that  may  be  expended. 

"  In  a  familiar  interview  I  had  with  our  Soperintendenf,  I  made 
bold  to  propose  a  purchase  of  part  of  the  old  mission  lot ;  I  was 
not  succcs9f\il,  but  I  obtained  leave  to  fence  up  that  part  where  the 
graves  of  my  child,  that  of  Blr.  Adams',  and  of  Mr.  Philpot,  are, 
%TitJi  permission  to  visit  them  when  we  choose. 

"  My  liitle  daughter,  Blchatibel,  has  been  brought,  the  last 
week,  to  the  very  portals  of  death  by  dysentery,  but,  blessed  be  the 
Father  of  mercies  who  has  not  added  to  ray  sorrow,  she  is  reviving 
apace.  One  of  the  black  sisters,  Eliza  Muaro  [the  same  who 
ministered  to  Mr.  Crowe's  wants  while  in  prison],  took  the  place 
of  the  departed,  and  night  and  day  watched  over  her  without 
reward,  save  that  which  He  gives  who  knows  how  to  recompense 
into  the  bosom  of  the  liberal  their  generous  sncrifices  for  his  name. 
My  own  health  is  good,  and  all  proceeds  as  usual. 

"  I  am  training  one  female  member  with  a  view  to  her  becoming 
a  teacher.  A  male  raember  exhibits  some  signs  of  fitness— be  also 
has  been  encouraged  to  devote  some  of  his  time  to  improvenient  in 
the  school.  His  name  is  John  Bcnnct,  but  he  has  a  family  to  provide 
for,  and  knows  not  how  ta  spare  time  from  Ihem." 

The  erection  of  the  much  needed  place  of  meeting  in  Bclixe 
having  been  resolved  on,  an  effort  was  there  made  to  obtain  the 
voluntary  gifts  of  those  inhabitants  who  were  well  disposed  towards 
the  object.  Her  Majesty's  Superintendent,  Colonel  Fancourt.  was 
pleased  to  present  the  church  with  ten  guineas  for  the  building, 
and  Chief- Justice  Temple  added  five  more.  Se^-eral  leading 
magi.'ttratcs  and  merchants  also  subscribed :  so  that,  with  the 
estimated  value  of  the  land,  743  dollars  (or  148/.  12».  Gd.  eterling), 
had  )>een  contributed  on  the  23nd  of  April  last  by  residents  of 
Belize,  not  members  of  the  church.  The  estimated  cost  of  a  large 
wooden  building,  for  which  plans  were  kindly  drawn  by  able 
architects  in  Edinburgh  and  in  Glasgow,  ia  GOO/,  sterling,  of  which 
more  than  one  half  was  thus  already  raised  by  the  united  contri- 
liutions  of  Christian  churches  and  friends  in  England,  and  the  gifts 


604  THB  G06FEL  IN  CENTRAL 

of  fiiendfl  on  the  8pot«  In  consequence  of  this  racoeHy  the  cnpeft- 
ten  were  expected  to  begin  the  erection  under  the  directkn  d 
Brother  Braddick,  at  the  ktest  in  May. 

In  the  contributions  above  enumerated  it  wfll  be  seen  that  tk 
fiuthfukiefls  of  the  native  brethren  had  not  toided  to  aiiik  th#wi  ji 
the  eyes  of  the  public,  who  had  been  spectatOTB,  nor  even  in  tk 
estimation  of  some  who  had  been  actors  in  the  late  trhd  of  thdr 
fittth.  The  local  press,  which  at  the  time  was  strenncnialy  advoert- 
hig  the  cause  of  the  established  sect,  also  came  fbmnxd  ipoB- 
taneously  to  advocate  that  of  the  ejected  Ri^tist  chmcfa  in  t 
leading  article,  which  appeared  in  the  Hcnduras  ff^aiekmmm  of  the 
6th  of  April  1850,  firom  which  the  following  are  ^KtrmctB : — 

**  It  is  well  known  that,  in  consequence  of  scnne  janbmfpy  dif- 
flsrenoes,  which,  if  we  wished,  do  not  come  within  our  ygwiaot  to 
eiq;dain,  the  premises  formerly  occopied  by,  and  belongiiy  to^  the 
Biytist  Missionary  Society  were  disposed  of^  and  are  apfrnftisled 
as  a  Limatie  Asylum  to  the  use  of  a  few  unfortonate  idbli,  ante 
the  eaphonions  name  of  the  ^  Fanoourt  Dispensary.*  Snioe  thsl 
pariod  the  principal  portion  of  the  members  of  that  Society  hsic 
been  meeting  in  a  boose  in  Eve-street— too  small  for  the  prnpsH^ 
faiconvenient,  and  incapable  of  aecommodatiqg,  not  on^  psCiBi 
desiroiis  of  attending  Divine  vrorship  there,  but  even  the  imiiilan 
thesBselves.  Under  these  drcumstanoes,  and  fedh^  the  nA 
neoesnty  of  cnlaiging  their  premises,  or  procuring  othen 
soitable,  they  have  come  to  the  determinatioa  of  erecting  a 
tailding  on  a  lot  in  Onar-lane,  given  to  them  by  Mr.  Geoige 
TiUett  for  that  purpose.  liVithoui  entering  into  their  paitieidBr 
tenets*  we  reaUy  bdieve  that  their  undertaking  will  pivve  a  giwk 
benefit  to  the  Settlement.  Experience  has  taught  as  the  iHe  asi 
advantages  to  be  derived  from  the  proper  support  of  the  tbHit^ 
conducted  by  the  pastor  of  that  Society— the  -«  Alexander  Hei- 
derson— this  alone,  we  think,  will  be  a  sufficient  indneenent  to 
procure  the  asriistance  necessary  to  enabls  them  to  «««npletc  te 

work. The  members  of  that  Society,  thoag^ 

generally  poor,  have  struggled  on,  and  maintained  their  dm^ 
independent ;  and,  from  their  general  peaoeftd  andqniet  behaviooi; 
they  deserve  some  encouragement. .** 

At  this  time,  Mr.  Henderson  reports  the  death  of  three  of  tibe 
seholarB  who  had  grown  up  in  his  school— kmic  of  them  was  iii» 


INFANT  AXD   SDNDAY   SCHOOLS.  SOB 

Comelia  Locknurd,  who  had  been  keeping  the  iniaiit  school  for 
some  time  during  1843.  Speaking  of  her,  he  Miys,  "The  tuncnl 
Kene  on  the  Sabbath  ivas  peculiarly  solciuu.  She  had  joined  the 
church,  had  given  averytouching  account  of  her  hope  luid  view*  of 
Divine  truth,  [this  i»  almost  invariably  done  before  the  awembled 
church]  and  twice  she  was  with  ub  at  the  table  of  the  Lord."  The 
wont  of  a  suitable  teacher  in  tJiis  department  was  greatly  felt  and 
would  be  still  more  aa  when  conveuient  accocnmodation  would  be 
provided  in  the  new  meeting-bouse.  Before  this  event  took  place, 
Mrs.  Wiliats,  a  widowed  sister  axid  member  of  a  Baptist  church  at 
Greenwich,  spontaneously  offered  Iierself  for  this  field,  and  is  now 
under  training  at  the  Home  and  Colonial  Institutioo,  Graj-'e- Inn- 
road,  expecting  to  leave  England  for  Beliie  before  the  end  of  the 
year,  to  labour  there  as  an  infant-school  teacher. 

Mr.  liendcrson  also  rejMirts  that  Miss  Anne  Braddick,  the 
daughter  of  the  deacon,  once  an  infaut  Bctiolar  of  Mrs.  Henderson 
and  now  ■  member  of  the  church,  together  with  Miss  Page  Uen* 
dersoD,  his  own  daughter,  had  "  volunteered  to  re-oiK-n  the  Sab- 
balh-Bcbool  (dosed  for  four  years  by  the  Society's  clttini)>  in  the 
prayers' -house  at  Freetown.  They  have  kept  school  there  three 
Sabbaths  with  about  30  children. 

Sabbath-schools  have  been  in  operation  under  Mr.  Henderson's 
eye,  ever  since  his  labours  in  the  Settlement  had  a  beginning.  The 
peculiarity  whicb  generally  distinguishes  them  is  that  a  great  pro- 
portion of  the  scholars  are  adults,  and  often  aged  persons,  and  it  is 
not  uncommon  to  see  the  children  who  attend  the  day-schools 
teaching  the  grey-headed  "uncles"'  sud  "aunties"  to  say  their 
letters  or  to  spell. 

From  the  facts  recorded  in  this  chapter,  it  will  be  seen  that 
the  Ixindon  Baptist  Aliesioaary  Society  have  entirely  abandoned 
misaonary  efforts  in  Central  America.  They,  however,  continue 
to  by  claim  to  certain  lands  and  tenements  at  two  of  the  out-sta- 
Uons  on  the  Old  River.  The  church  at  Belize  and  the  church  at 
Backlanding  (formerly  of  Ulletton),  ore  cqaally  agreed  not  in  any 
way  to  recognise  these  claims.  Tillctton,  where  the  properly  js 
situated  upon  whicb  the  Society  spent  39f.,  is  now  abandoned  as  a 
station,  meet  of  the  people  having  removed  as  a  result  of  the 
Society's  interference.  Consequenrly,  that  property  is  not  nou 
even   u«erf  by  the  native  church,  nor  indeed  by  any  one  else. 


606  TOE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AUMMMCJL, 

The  property  at  Baker's,  upon  which  the  Sodety  expended  tn 
shillings,  is  still  used  by  the  parties  there  who  gSTe  the  land,  ui 
erected  the  building.  The  Society's  tenadous  claim,  though  &• 
allowed  by  the  occupiers,  will  probably  have  the  effect  of  indneiii 
them  ultimately  to  build  another  house  on  other  Uuid,  and  to  giic 
up  that  one  now  occupied  like  the  one  at  Tillettoii,  to  rottenDBi 
and  to  the  Society. 

Among  the  results  of  Mr.  Henderson's  and  the  chinches  labooB 
during  fourteen  years  are  the  following : — 

1.  At  Belize — the  central  station. — ^A  communion  of  strict  Bip- 
tist  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  now  consisting  of  sbost 
two  hundred  in  full  fellowship,  sustaining,  by  means  of  Mr.  Hea* 
derson  and  occasional  helps,  two  or  three  preaching  statiooiy  t 
day-school  of  seventy  children,  an  adult  evening  school,  sod  two 
Sunday-schools. 

2.  At  Backlanding,  on  the  New  River. — ^A  jntnllar  ooanaaunQii 
of  more  than  thirty  members,  occupying,  by  Brother  Ken:,  two 
preaching  stations,  and  sustaining  a  Sunday-school,  without  aoj 
salaried  agency  whatever. 

3.  At  Behoboth,  Baker*s  bank.— A  preaching  station,  where  the 
ordinances  are  administered  to  the  members  of  the  chnrdies  it 
Belize  and  Backlanding  by  a  native  teacher  (Brother  Joseph  Kefif  X 
who  also  teaches  a  day-school,  and  an  adult  Sonday-echooL  Bat 
it  seems  probable  that  a  third  native  church  will  soon  be  forned. 

4.  At  Sibun,  to  the  southward  of  Belize. — A  pw^M^l^*ngfltatwnts^ 
Simday-school  sustained  without  expense  to  the  chnrdi  bydK 
efforts  of  Brother  Edward  Thurton,  a  Creole  of  Belise^  assisted  hj 
the  brethren  who  live  on  the  banks  of  that  river. 

5.  At  Northern  River,  northward  of  Bdiae-^-A  proacUif 
station  sustained  without  expense  to  the  church  by  the  BrethRB 
James  Gough  and  James  York,  where  the  erection  of  a  home  fir 
worship  is  contemplated  by  the  friends  desirous  of  using  it. 

6.  At  the  Carif  Settlement  at  Stann  Creek,  brother  WiOisB 
Michael  has  recently  commenced  preaching  and  teaching  in  the 
vernacular  language  of  his  tribe,  and  is  already  encouraged  hj 
their  attendance. 

7.  On  the  island  of  Buatan,  Brother  John  Warner  has  wt«A>  a 
happy  and  a  promising  commencement  in  preaching  the  Go^d, 
and  teaching  a  day  school  and  a  Sunday-school,  and  oonvertilttve 
already  been  made. 


OF  THE   MISSION.  607 

8.  At  GuatcTDflla,  in  the  interior,  the  station  lately  occupied  by 
Brother  Frederick  Crovre,  has  remained  without  a  labourer,  and 
the  jKilitical  state  of  the  country  bashitbertoplaeedsbarrier  ia  the 
way  of  liis  return. 

Ill  addition  to  these  eight  stations,  there  arc  others  already 
coutctn plated,  and  native  teachers  are  still  being  raised  up  to 
supply  them. 

The  first  books  ever  written  in  the  Carif  and  in  the  Wailcna  lan- 
guages have  been  printed  as  the  results  of  Mr.  Henderson's  labours 
in  tmnslaling,  and  be  has  al.io  now  undcrtokea  the  Maya,  so  that 
the  Scriptures  in  their  nsother  tongue,  may  be  extended  to  that 
people  also. 

During  twelve  out  of  the  fifteen  years,  the  average  number  of 
scholars  attending  the  day  schools  under  Mr.  Henderson's  direction 
was  two  hundred.  The  indirect  effect  of  his  schools  has  Iwen 
considerably  to  improve  tlie  character  of  education  generally, 
and  to  increase  the  number  of  schools  in  the  Settlement. 

The  moral  influence  resulting  from  Mi,  HenOcrsoii's  labours 
and  llje  presence  of  the  church  in  a  community  so  corrupt,  and  so 
far  removed  from  the  better  influences  of  more  rcSned  society, 
cannot  tic  expressed  either  in  figures  or  in  words ;  and  as  others 
partiei[tated  in  those  labours,  it  would  be  invidious  to  attempt 
to  say  how  much  of  the  good  done  is  attributable  to  any  one  maa 
or  denomination,  but  the  fact  that  a  great  improvement  has  taken 
place  will  be  denied  by  nunc. 

The  religious  element  bos  been  much  increased ;  the  moral  tone 
of  society,  in  all  its  ranks,  from  the  lowest  upwards,  has  been 
greatly  purified,  extended  and  elevated.  Information  has  been 
diffused;  and  even  physical  beuefits  have  resulted  in  increased 
industry,  cleanliness,  order,  and  consequent  health  fulness. 

Sut  it  is  particularly  in  the  paints  which  were  alluded  to  at  the 
beginning  of  this  history  that  a  change  may  be  recognised  in  the 
Bay.  The  superstitious  practices  there  recorded,  though  ci 
within  the  memory  of  not  a  few  still  living  ivitncsseg,  have  no 
appeared;  and  the  unblushing  inunoralities  there  alluded  ti 
hide  their  heads  abashed,  and  timorously  crouch  and  retin;  into  the 
darkness  that  befiti  ihem. 

Tlje  custom  of  silling  up  all  night  and  waking  Ibe  dead,  is  still 
indeed  continued ;  but  on  sudi  occasions,  the  eolcmn  hymn  bu 


508  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAXt   AlfXRICA. 


sapeneded  the  umiatiiral  memment  tbafe  ynm  ihea.  pnmkd, 
and  outward  deoomm  and  serionsneas  take  the  plMe  ftnaedf 
occupied  by  lewd  revelry  and  intempente  mdiilgeiioe.  Caa* 
cubinage,  before  so  general,  is  now  the  exoeptiofi  to  the  nk^  wd 
lawful  marriage  is  deemed  essential  to  reapectability,  aa  wdl  lA 
the  merchant  and  his  clerks,  as  with  the  artuaa  and  the  hboaict 
Numbers  of  the -adult  population  can  read,  and  some  Talne  if  te> 
ginning  to  be  attached  to  education,  while  moat  of  the  rinf 
generation  attend  school,  and  bibles  and  useful  books  are  ia  Ae 
houses  and  in  the  hands  of  all  classes  of  the  people.  "Dk  foj 
dress  and  deportment  of  the  coloured  people  has  so  much  iBi|iufd 
within  the  last  few  years,  as  forcibly  to  strike  the  attentkncf  aay 
one  who  might  return  after  a  long  absence,  and  there  k  actaof 
the  natiyes,  chiefly  composed  of  those  who  make  some  x^pov 
profession,  who  would  probably  not  suffer  by  comparison  with  mf 
dasi  of  Creoles  and  coloured  people  in  the  most  &voimdof  dK 
West  India  islands.  In  no  place  on  the  contiiient»  or  m  the  neig^ 
boniing  Archipelago,  ia  there  less  of  the  abonunahle  pnjaiSetd 
colour  than  at  Beliae,  and  as  a  consequence,  the  natmnal  d^iait^ 
intelligenoe,  and  good  feelings  of  that  much  uynred  ckai^  haves 
more  iayourable  and  complete  development,  and  the  inlseBBetf 
religious  light  and  moral  principle  is  so  much  the  leaa  *""|>iAJ  ii 
its  progress. 

But  kt  it  not  be  supposed  that  the  work  of  the  miMinnigir 
accomplished  in  British  Honduras.  For  though  the  gsapd  hm 
been  snocessfully  planted,  and  has  hegaa  to  ahed  fivth  its  lKS^ 
fieent  influences,  even  where  its  power  is  not  felt,  yet  aie  thoe 
msny  monster  evils  still  preying  upon  the  vitals  of  Society  iken, 
and  spreading  around  them  contagion  and  death.  AwM^y  |j^ 
drunkenness,  UcentkmsDesB,  dishonest,  violence^  and  other  ate  l» 
which  depraved  mankind  is  subject,  still  have  too  prMM»iMfi^i  a 
place.  But  the  deeper  sealed  evils  of  avarice,  pnde^  pnAuityt 
and  all  the  other  forma  of  human  selfishness,  remam  eon^antifd^ 
untouched,  except  in  individual  cases,  and  the  chief  sm  of  maa— 
his  most  daring  and  malignant  insult  to  the  Deify — mtlwISil^ 
atill  asserts  its  cruel  empire  over  the  minds  and  aools  of  ^K^jiwt  the 
entire  population,  and  over  all,  a//  the  vast  regiona  aioimd ! 

Belize  and  its  dependendea  are  the  only  points  upoti  thkm- 
mense  continent,  within  thousands  of  miles  in  dpcsy  4inff;^MM, 


il  op  TUli  CUtlRCH.  609 

where  the  Gospel  of  Salvalion  is  proclHimed.  The  believers  there 
coDstitulc  a  smnll  speck — the  only  star  of  light  upon  a.  map  of 
thick  moral  darknc^  extending  over  the  minds  of  inilliong  of 
men,  and  that  star  is  placed  on  the  border  of  a  country  which  ia 
precisely  the  centre  of  the  denKst  popnktioii  in  Spanish  America, 
a  designation  extending  over  a  tract  of  land  which  incladcs  fall 
one-sixth  part  of  the  habitable  surface  of  the  globe;  and  it  is  the 
Lord  of  missions,  the  great  projector  and  the  sole  manager  of  the 
triumphs  of  his  own  kingdom,  who  has  placed  them  there. 

The  native  church  in  British  Uonduras  burns  to  be  the  instru- 
ment of  spreading  to  othcra  on  that  continent  the  blessed  truth, 
which  it  has  received  in  deposit  io  dispense  as  a  responsible  steward. 
Tbut  church  has  given  proof  of  its  disinterested  and  benevolent 
purpose — of  its  integrity  and  zeal— of  its  efficiency  for  the  work 
entrusted  to  it,  and  God  has  given  tokens  of  his  willingness  to 
use  them.  Even  while  they  are  waiting  for  the  succour  and 
assistance,  which  they  need  and  ask  at  the  hands  of  their  Sritish 
fellow  Christians,  they  are  going  forward  with  their  appointed 
task,  and  they  know  in  whom  they  have  trusted.  "  The  Lord  of 
the  Harveat"  has  given  them  hearts  to  feel  for  perishing  sinners ; 
He  has  not  denied  them  the  gifts  by  which  those  feelings  may  be 
expressed;  and  having  thus  granted  them  the  greater  blessings, 
tlicy  arc  unhesitatingly  and  fearlessly  conlident  that  he  will  also 
bestow  the  Icssl  Having  sought  "/Ini  the  Kingdom  of  God  and 
His  righteouamess,"  they  knote  that  all  other  things  needful  shall 
be  added  unto  them. 

The  bare  gifts  of  British  churches  and  of  Dritish  Christians  are 
not,  however,  that  which  the  church  at  Belize  covets.  Those  gifts 
they  have  long  received,  and  they  have  never  been  unmindful  of 
the  favour,  nor  would  they  now,  in  the  least  degree,  detract  from 
the  debt  of  gratitude  and  love  which  they  have  tbiu  incurred ; 
but  with  such  gifts  alone  they  could  not  rest  satisfied,  and  it  bos 
long  been  one  of  their  griefs  that  they  were  so  much  conKned  to 
the  reception  of  pecuniary  help,  so  limited  in  the  amount  of 
interconiw  which  they  would  willingly  have  had  with  their 
generous  benclactors,  and  so  undistinguished  in  the  general 
prayers  of  the  faithful  for  the  cause  in  which  they  arc  engaged. 

They  now  ask  for  the  heart  sympathy,  the  du^t  countenance, 
the  special  and  drcumstantial  prayers  adapted  to  their  peculiar 


610  THE  GOSPEL  IX  CENTRAL 

wants,  at  the  hands  of  those  who  feel  that  they  mce  i<i^wt«fifj  vi& 
the  spread  of  Christ*s  kingdom.  The  lahoarera  mmoog  them  wH 
like  Joshua  and  the  fighting  men  of  Israel,  hare  gone  £arth  ti 
engage  with  the  enemies  of  God,  fighting  hand  to  hand  apon  tk 
plain,  desire  to  feel  that  British  hrethren,  who  are  exalted  ts 
heaven  in  privileges,  are,  like  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Hot,  upon  tk 
mount,  lifting  up  holy  hands  in  prayer — in  special  prayer  fiir  tkm 
and  for  their  success. 

They  are  confident  that  the  hattle  is  the  Lord^s,  and  they  kno« 
that  while  he  chooses  his  own  instrumentality,  and  directs  it  hin- 
self,  he  will  he  ''  enquired  of  for  these  things.**  They  have  beooBK 
increasedly  impressed  with  the  importance  of  their  task,  the  extait 
of  their  field,  and  the  magnitude  of  the  difficulties  that  it 
to  them.  They  are  somewhat  sensible  of  their  own 
and  imperfection,  and  they  therefore  desire  to  have  their  ftitk  in- 
creased, their  hearts  cheered,  and  their  hands  strengthened  in  tlui 
good  work,  by  the  direct  expression  of  Christian  fellowship  in  tbdr 
labours  and  sufferings,  and  of  sympathy  in  their  trials  »n^  sonon 
as  well  as  in  their  triumphs  and  their  joys. 

If  in  this  manner  the  hands  which  hang  down  are  lifted  v^ad 
the  feeble  knees  are  strengthened,  those  who  contended,  and  tbose 
who  beheld  them  a&r  off  and  influenced  their  victory,  will  ^  Itft 
rejoice  together,  and  like  Israel  of  old,  after  the  defoit  of  AnaiB; 
both  will  unite  to  erect  an  altar  to  God's  praise,  and  both  vill  re- 
cognise the  solemn  and  inspiriting  truth  that  JehoTah  ii  ok 
banner.* 

In  recording  some  of  the  dealings  of  the  Liord  with  them  ut 
church,  the  brethren  in  British  Honduras  desire  to  g;ive  iiiinwfli 
to  their  gratitude  to  God,  who  has  led  them  hitherto.  Aty^  wUk 
they  adoringly  recognise  his  faithfulness  and  his  tender 
towards  them,  they  would  lie  low  in  the  dust  of  self 
most  unworthy  in  themselves  to  be,  in  the  humblest  way,  emplofsd 
in  the  great  and  holy  work  of  propagating  the  gospel  in  Geoti^ 
America. 

*  "  And  Motes  boilt  an  altar,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jeborah-masi,''  (mmM,  ^ 
is,  The  LORD  my  banner.)    Exodna  zrii.  15. 


POPISH  COU.XTRIES   CNASSAILED. 


PART     III. 
TuE   QlBLG   : 


EXTBAuiasian  from 


Jrjl«if  I;i<  C>«  i^scHt/Mm 


Ix  the  minil«  of  the  pcnons  who  yteie  instrumeiital  in  fint  esta- 
blishing the  mission  in  liritish  lloiidurm,  there  were  ulterior 
ebjects  of  probable  attainment,  to  which  cherished  hopea  b 
times  uapircil.  Prominent  among  these  were  the  evangdijation 
of  the  Mas[|uito  Shore  and  of  the  Spanish  provinces  of  the  i» 
Tlic  first  appeared  to  human  sight  the  easier  undertaking,  and 
e&rly  efforts  were  made  to  establish  n  mission  station  among  the 
Waiknas,  with  the  concurraicc  of  their  king.  It  hns  bceit  seen 
how  signally  such  eiforts  have  failed  hitherto,  and  how  myste- 
riously the  Providence  of  God  removed  tlie  labourerfl  who  had 
devoted  themselves  to  tliat.  field  in  1824.  The  second  ho]ie,  re- 
presented by  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  as  the  grand  ob- 
jcct  for  which  their  Etatioa  at  Belize  nas  so  Ion 
under  so  much  discouragement,  *  was  apparently  of  more  difGcnlt 
attainment;  for  the  Central  American  States,  in  commou  with  all 
the  late  Spanish  colonies,  have  too  often  been  regarded  as  entirely 
beyond  the  reach  of  any  direct  nusuonary  effort ;  aa  tbgugb  thoy 
■  Ste  "  Beliie,"  p,  i. 


_k^i 


513  THB  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

were  hermetically  sealed  by  the  powers  of  darkneaa,  or  as  if  the^ 
had  really  been  excluded  firom  the  commisBion  of  our  Loid,  ni 
formed  no  part  of  his  patrimonial  heritage,  or  were  not  destined  to 
be  incorporated  among  the  possessions  of  his  crown. 

The  reader  who  has  perused  the  preyious  sketch  of  inteiKiK 
convulsions  with  which  the  Central  States  have  been  exeroxd 
since  their  independence,  will  be  prepared  to  attribate  the  abseaee 
of  any  direct  missionary  efforts  there,  to  the  sapineness  of  the  &- 
dples  of  our  Lord,  rather  than  to  any  real  barriers  whidi  ib 
intolerant  superstition  had  placed  in  their  way.  There  woe  not 
found  any  bold  enough  to  face  the  Popish  apostacy,  and  to  brare 
the  terrors  of  its  hierarchy,  its  inquisition,  and  its  abase  of  tke 
dvil  power ;  and,  therefore,  when  a  iayourable  season  fiir  the 
labours  of  a  missionaiy  presented  itself  under  the  triumphs  of  ^ 
liberal  party,  and  with  the  protection  of  a  law  of  religiooa  fireedoD, 
there  was  no  one  prepared  to  avail  himself  of  them,  aadvUle 
hundreds  of  devoted  men  of  God  went  forth  boldly  to 
Idolatry,  Mahometaniam,  and  Infidelity,  in  the  pecnUu* 
where  they  most  prevail,  none,  none  were  fonnd  intr^nd  eno^ 
to  attempt  a  breach  upon  any  of  the  strongholds  of  the  man  of  an! 

The  Lord  of  the  vineyard,  who  has  hitherto  granted  an 
raging  measure  of  success  wherever  fiuthM  efforts  have  been  i 
tained  in  the  name  of  his  holy  Child  Jesus,  might  nnder 
circumstances  have  permitted  the  enemy  with  wlumi  His  peofk 
refused  to  grapple,  to  grow  in  power  and  in  audacity,  and  when 
not  positively  overcome,  and  subjected  to  tribute.  He  va^ 
justly  have  permitted  them  to  be  a  thorn  in  their  sides.  Howftr 
this  has  been  the  case  let  the  reader  decide.  It  is  worthy  of  ov 
particular  notice,  that  within  a  very  few  years  the  Lord  hm 
himself  thrust  forth  labourers  into  this  part  of  His  harvest,  and  iR 
have  heard  of  stirring  movements  in  popish  Madeira,  Malta,  Tu- 
cany,  and  even  Rome  itself;  and  more  is,  without  doubt,  b0V 
doing  by  unobserved  labourers  in  many  Roman  Catholic  kadi^ 
the  results  of  which  will  probably  soon  burst  forth  into  the  sane 
blase  of  persecution  which  has  so  lately  distinguished  iSbm 
places,  and  made  the  sufferers  known.  This  invariable  resoh  d 
such  labours  cannot  surely  be  pleaded  as  a  reason  why  they  shooU 
not  be  undertaken ;  for  where  has  the  Gospd  ever  been  soeeot- 
fully  planted,  without  being  watered  with  the  tears,  if  not  in& 


BinTB,   FARENTAOE,    AND   EDUCATION.  613 

the  blood,  which  the  iron  hand  of  persecution  has  caused  (o  be 

Signal  and  numcrons  have  been  the  providential  inteqxwi- 
tiorin  in  which  the  hand  of  God  is  traceable  in  the  ainail  begia- 
uin;^  wliich  He  has  already  made  in  intn>ducing  the  Bible,  and  the 
truth  of  the  Bible,  into  the  Romish  and  once  priest-ridden  state 
of  Guatemala.  That  which  a  weak  faith  and  a  criminal  ignorance 
prcvcnied  us  from  boldly  undertaking,  God  has  graciously  led 
us  into  step  by  step,  His  own  hand  conducting,  His  shield  jirotecl- 
ing.  Ilia  grace  auatainiag,  and  His  power  establishing  the  work  of 
our  hauils.  at  the  same  tioie  that  lie  closed  doors  which  appeared 
to  lie  open  before  us.  He  who  knows  onr  finilty  and  the  faint- 
ness  of  our  hearts  has  thereby  spoken  encouragement  for  future 
effort^  at  the  some  time  that  He  indicates  the  line  of  action  to 
such  us  would  be  doing,  and  secures  to  Himself  the  whole  glory  as 
the  projector,  the  executor,  and  proprietor  of  the  great  and  holy 
undertaking. 

Tlie  writer  of  these  pages  being  now  nloul  to  record  some  of 
the  ways  by  which  the  Lord  has  led  liiu  in  the  good  work  in 
which  he  is  honoured  to  be  engaged,  is  desirous  of  directing  nttcn- 
liun  to  the  special  providences  which  he  has  experienced  in  that 
way,  to  the  end  that  God  may  be  glorified,  and,  if  it  nmy  he,  tbatT 
synipefhy  and  earnest  prayers  may  lie  enlisted  in  favour  of  that 
particular  branch  of  the  Centrnl  American  Missions,  and  of  him 
who,  though  utterly  unworthy  in  himself,  has  been  chosen  of  God 
from  liiti  mother's  womb  to  be  an  instrnment  in  beginning  it,  and 
now  of  bringing  it,  together  with  other  more  important  labours, 
before  the  attention  of  the  reader.  In  order  to  assist  this  design, 
some  notice  of  his  preparatory  career  may  perhaps  be  patiently 
borne  with. 

The  ancient  and  once  bustling,  but  now  gloomy  and  alvt-aya 
priest-ridden  town  of  Brages,  the  ca[iital  of  I'lcmisli  Flanders^ 
was  the  place  of  my  birtb,  which  occurred  in  1819.  My  parenta 
were  among  the  first  English  emigrants  who  flocked  acrns  the 
channel,  and  ijireod  themselves  over  the  whole  continent  of  Eu- 
rojic  immcdiatelyon  the  cstabtiahment  of  that  peace  which  followed 
the  captivity  of  the  French  Emperor.  Though  domiciliated  iu  a 
foreign  land,  my  parents  never  renounced  their  nationality,  nor 
even  lost  much  of  their  British  pr^udicei,  and  being  then  amoag 


614  THB  GOSPEL  Df  CBKTRAL 

that  numeroiiu  dass  who  do  not  think  ftr  thcniMlvcs  m 
of  religion,  they  claimed  an  interest  in  the  profened  ProCestaalaB 
of  their  ancestors,  and  a  name  to  live  in  iht  sect  establiriMd  \ij 
cml  law  in  their  native  land.  As  a  result,  tlieir  nmnenNis  ddbtei^ 
who  though  horn  abroad  were  still  British  snbiects,  were  Imn^ip 
imder  the  idea  that  they  were  Episcopalians  by  birth  and  edHs- 
tion,  though  even  that  scanty  amount  of  tuition  and  aofaEtf 
which  is  imparted  under  similar  circumstances  at  home,  was  coi- 
nderably  decimated  and  relaxed  through  the  influenoeB  to  wtiA 
the  family  was  subjected  in  a  decidedly  Popish  country. 

At  the  age  of  eleten  years,  immediately  after  the  BevoliitioDflf 
1830,  which  very  much  unsettled  my  father's  plana,  mi^  fiaOf 
caused  the  removal  of  the  family,  then  living  at  Bmaada^  hcjoad 
the  French  frontiers,  I  was  brought  to  England  and  p«t  Id  a 
boarding-school  at  Greenwich,  where  I  remained  with  a  yoa^ 
brother  for  two  years.  This  ''  Establishment  **  was  dineled  by 
a  Wesleyan  local  preacher ;  but  little  or  no  efforts  wet 
impart  religious  truths  to  the  scholars,  and  with  the 
of  the  excitement  of  some  natural  feelings,  under  the 
appeals  to  which  I  sometimes  listened  at  the  Methodist 
house,  and  the  enthusiasm  awakened  by  attending  a 
meeting,  I  received  no  impressions  of  a  religions  kind,  ^  vm 
surprisingly  little  benefitted  even  in  what  might  now  be 
secular  education.  This,  with  some  veiy  partial  and 
instructions  at  a  variety  of  Belgian  schools  which  I  had  piwioMf 
attended,  constituted  all  the  scholastic  advantages  whtr^  wf 
fiither*s  depressed  means  could  afford  me.  The  two  foDosiif 
years  were  spent  at  home  under  a  variety  of  eircnuMtanoei^  tfi 
in  different  parts  of  France. 

Never  trained  to  a  proper  subjection,  and  often  left  eatiid|f  t> 
my  own  guidance,  the  result  was  the  rapid  derekmowBt  d 
natural  depravity,  in  a  waywardness  of  di^Kwition,  which,  josnedti 
a  want  of  application,  unfitted  me  for  industrious  or  nadbl  pv* 
suits.  This  state  of  mind  my  former  education  had  done  milVf 
to  correct ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  much  to  cnltiTate.  A  fie- 
quent  attendance  on  theatrical  amusements,  and  the  sodetr^ 
light-minded  persons,  had  fostered  a  taste  which  was  now  fbiaaSei 
by  an  unrestrained  indulgence  in  light  reading,  in  whidi  wM 
days  and  weeks  were  consumed.    The  ideas  that  woe  r^^^^ 


BAKI.T  WAITDEIlIltU«. 


S15 


and  tlie  feelings  which  were  cultivated  ■□  the  rapid  perusal  of  » 
nholc  circulating  libriuj,  consistiDg  of  English  ooveb  and  ro- 
mance?, were  little  calculated  to  til  a  youth  of  fiflecn  for  the  toils 
and  difficulties  of  this  lift; — how  much  less  to  prepare  his  soul 
for  the  love  and  service  of  his  God,  and  the  solemn  realities  of  the 

The  legitimate  fruits  which  must  spring  fromauch  culture  were 
□ot  tardy,  but  soon  attained  a  premature  ripeness.  The  &lse  no- 
tions which  I  had  formed  of  the  world,  and  especially  of  myself, 
led  mu  to  regard  it  as  a  theatre  upon  which  I  might  at  will  act  a 
part  that  would  be  flattering  to  my  vanity,  and  I  determined  to 
make  my  own  fortunes,  and  to  leave  home  in  search  of  adventures, 
change,  and  earthly  happiness. 

The  wishes  of  my  parents  iu  a  matter  of  so  much  importance 
had  none  of  that  weight  which  they  must  have  had  in  any  well- 
ordered  mind,  and  their  remunstrances  or  their  authority  were 
unaiile  to  restrain  my  ungovcmcd  will.  It  was  in  a  sweet 
secluded  cottage  •  on  the  banks  of  the  Loire,  very  near  the  toivn  of 
Tours  in  Touraine,  that  I  tore  myself  from  the  parental  emhrate, 
and  undertook  on  foot  a  journey  of  nearly  three  hundred  miles,  in 
order  to  reach  the  port  of  Bordeaux,  anxious  to  embark  and 
participate  in  the  yiciasltudea  of  a  sailor's  life,  such  as  Captain 
Marryatt,  and  other  writers  of  naval  fiction  had  depicted  it  to  my 
imagination. 

Three  years  of  bodily  hardship,  mental  degradation,  and  inward 
wretchedness,  succeeded  this  resh  and  wicked  step,  durbg  which 
many  changesDudadventureswere  indeed  experienced,  hut  of  such  a 
character  as  to  go  far  to  correct  the  false  notions  of  life  which 
previous  training  bad  engendered.  I  soon  exchanged  the  hard- 
ahips  and  wanton  cruelties  which  accompanied  my  initiation  Into 
the  duties  of  a  cabin  boy,  for  the  pollutions  of  the  barrack -room, 
and  the  degradation  of  low-lived  associatet  in  the  Britisli  Auiiliaiy 
Legion,  then  intermeddling  iu  armtd  contentions  for  the  Spanish 
crown.  From  this  I  was  early  delivered  by  the  generosity  of  a  su- 
perior officer,  in  whom  God  raised  up  u  friend  to  snatch  me  from 


616  THE  GOSPEL   IS  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 

further  exposure  to  the  moral  and  physieal  dangen  of  the  mili- 
tary career.  I  also  successively  obtained  and  loot  a  -wmnetjd 
situations  in  England. 

Before  enlisting  and  leaving  for  Spain,  I  had  been  empk^ci 
in  a  circulating  library,  at  one  of  the  fashionable  waterii^  pl^ 
and  was  dismissed  in  a  fortnight,  because  I  conld  not  lesist  the 
temptation  to  read  the  books  which  my  employer  liiid  forhiddcB 
me  to  do.     On  my  return  from  Spain  I  entered  the  ern^ 
of  a  famous  London  publisher,  and  travelled  through  semal 
large  provincial  towns  soliciting  orders  for  ornamental  woria 
issued  x)eriodicaUy.    At  Oxford,  where  I  had  some  sooeeas  and 
considerable  intercourse  with  the  students  and  profeaBOfi  in  all  the 
colleges,  I  conceived  an  ardent  desire  to  make  np  in  some  wav  fir 
the  deficiencies  of  my  education.     At  Nottingham,  «*i»»i^«^ 
by  this  object,  I  succeeded  in  obtaining  admittance  into  a  iaige 
boarding  school,  as  a  kind  of  assistant  teacher  and  French  w^^*, 
and  gladly  renounced  my  itinerating  life.    I  had  bat  just  t™»  to 
become  sensible  of  the  drudgery  of  my  new  position,  when  I  wm 
attacked  by  the  smallpox,  to  the  great  alarm  of  my  employer, 
who  succeeded  in  keeping  the  fact  a  secret,  and  sent  me  up  ts 
London  as  soon  as  I  was  sufficiently  recovered.    fiei«  I  retiuad 
to  my  undesired  connection  with  Paternoster  Row,  as  the  ooly 
available  means  of  subsistence,  which  was  afterwards  in^alirif 
followed  at  intervals,  leaving  me  exposed  to  all  the  snaRs  of  tke 
capital,  and  under  no  restraints  but  those  imposed  by  ncoemif; 
for,  alas !  my  carnal  mind,  instead  of  being  fortified  against  soch  da- 
gers,  had  only  been  prepared  to  fall  an  easy  prey;  and  dkhoocBtj 
and  licentiousness  were  soon  added  to  profanity  and  diasipatioo. 

Still,  the  providence  of  God  watched  over  my  erring  stepsi  aodiat 
remarkable  manner  prevented  my  forming  a  perman^it  rrmwHiw 
with  a  French  theatrical  company,  which  was  about  ly^i^wi^  i 
from  London  to  Strasburg.  It  was  through  an  aoqnaiiitsBee 
formed  in  these  circles  that  I  became  aware  of  the  g^k^f^^y  of 
**  The  Eastern  Coast  of  Central  America  Commercial  and  Acrieol- 
tural  Company.**  Being  asked  to  serve  as  interpreter  for  a  yomc 
Frenchman,  who  was  desirous  to  emigrate  to  Vem  F^  I  at  osee 
conceived  the  design  of  accompanying  him,  thoionghly  i;  if|J 
with  the  unhappy  and  precarious  life  I  was  leadings  and  not  a  lA 
allured  by  the  grand  descriptiona  of  American  loeneiy  M>d 


EHIGKAHON  TO   T£Bi 


which  I  had  read  in  the  works  of  Fenimore  Cooper,  and  othcra  of 
bisclus. 

The  few  obstacles  in  the  way  were  aoon  overcome,  and  in  July 
1630  I  embarked  with  my  French  friend,  on  board  the  brig  Srt- 
tannia,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Dulce,  destined  to  New  Liverpool, 
a  spot  on  the  banks  of  the  Cajabon,  one  of  the  tributary  streanis  to 
the  Polochic  Two  ehip-loads  of  emigrants  had  preceded  us  by  a 
few  montlis,  with  the  project  of  forming  a  new  colony,  and  in 
order  to  secure  to  the  Cumpany  a  very  extensive  grant  of  land, 
and  a  most  advantageous  charter,  offered  them  by  the  le^slalurc 
of  the  Stale  of  Guatemala,  in  accordance  with  the  decrees  of  the 
Federal  Government. 

There  were  nearly  a  hundred  peisoos  huddled  together  in  the 
narrow  hold  and  steerage  of  this  emigrant  ship.  Among  them  all 
there  woa  probably  not  one  who  was  really  adapted  for  the  enter- 
pri<^e,  ami  small  indeed  was  the  aggregate  amount  of  respectability 
which  the  entire  band  conferred  upon  it.  There  was,  however,  as 
rich  a  variety  of  race,  language,  and  occupation,  as  could  well  bs- 
collectud  within  the  same  limits.  Above  a  score  were  Israelites, 
and  with  the  exception  of  an  equal  numberofKfetropolitan  tailors^, 
this  was  by  far  the  largest  number  which  could  be  classed  together 
by  any  tie  less  common  than  that  of  humanity.  Among  the  rest 
there  were  some  Irish  labourers  with  their  n-ives,  a  German  organ- 
grinder  with  a  musical  family,  including  some  girls  who  were 
dexterous  playet»  on  the  tambourine,  and  several  inexperienced 
youths,  who  preferred  adventures  afar  otT  to  honest  industry  at 
home.  And  yet  the  board  of  Directors  who  proposed  to  consti- 
tute a  new  society,  and  to  lay  the  fouodations  of  a  prosperous  state 
with  these  escreacenoes  of  a  dense  and  corrupt  population  (ther 
very  element*  which  society  already  constituted  naturally  threw 
off)  were  not  deficient  in  intelligence  in  other  matters.  Whal 
wonder  that  their  schemes  and  their  criminal  speculations  were 
brought  to  nought,  and  involved  the  niiu  of  those  capitalists  who 
confided  in  their  wisdom  and  in  the  credit  of  their  names.  Not  a 
little  misery  aud  wrong  was  also  entailed  upon  the  more  immediate 
victims  of  this  delusion. 

Among  the  incidents  whicli  diversified  the  passage  out,  the  most 
prominent  were : — Imniediately  on  starting,  the  prevalence  of  tho 
tmallpoz  on  board,  of  which  there  were  Kventecn  cases  at  one 


aT.i.r^ 


618  THX  008PBL   nv   CSNTBAL   AMBXICA. 


time.  Bat  though  there  was  no  proper  mculiqil 
cases  only  resulted  in  death.  Several  regolar  pagilistic 
took  place,  and  hrawls  vrere  oonseqnent  upon  the  dsBtrilwilisarf 
zations  of  ardent  spirits.  The  feast  of  tmmpeCs  was  odebnteA  ii 
the  captain's  calnn  hy  the  Hebrews.  An  attempt  st  snicideia 
made  by  a  wretched  young  girl,  but  was  repented  of  belbze  ki 
hold  of  the  ship's  side  had  been  loosened.  The  water,  iitiA 
became  scarce  before  we  left  the  English  Chmnnel,  was  in  a  fa* 
trescent  state,  through  the  unwholesome  conditioii  of  the  CMka 
A  popular  demonstration,  headed  by  a  yiolent  Inshwonan,  iv 
got  up  in  order  to  compel  the  captain  to  water  at  Madenrm,  ita 
that  island  was  in  sight ;  but  it  was  sucoessfoUy  resisted.  Wki 
in  the  warmer  latitudes,  for  want  of  prt^^  precantioiiSy  fil&  ai 
yermin  literally  took  possession  of  the  ship,  so  that  the  havM 
mariners  declined  to  sleep  below.  Open  immorality  was  pnctiai 
in  the  cabin,  and  the  captain  was  intoxicated  during  nwst  of  ^ 
voyage ;  so  that  the  emigrants  and  crew  owed  the  preservatioaff 
their  lives,  under  God,  entirely  to  the  sobrie^  of  the  first  msle^ 

After  a  passage  of  ten  weeks,  the  Britannia  cast  wanAtar  off  ^ 
Carif  settlement  of  Livingston  at  the  bar  of  the  Rio  I>iike.  lis 
preparations  had  been  made  for  the  disembarkation  of  the  chh 
grants,  who  were  now  left  on  board  for  a  fi»tiiight,  whie  the 
captain  ascended  the  river  in  search  of  the  Company^  agent 
During  his  absence,  some  of  the  victims  who  had  pxecedeft  oir 
arrival  found  their  way  down  to  Livingston,  in  the  hope  of  gsttaf 
a  passage  home.  They  were  partially  clad,  emaciated,  »^  osnad 
with  sores.  On  coming  on  board  the  ship,  they  related  that  m 
proper  accommodation  and  provision  had  been  made  fix*  Aea 
before  their  arrival;  that  their  sufferings  from  want*  diraalc^  3 
treatment,  and  ^ phiga,***  had  been  great;  and  that  New  liveipial 
consisted  only  of  a  few  thatched  huts  in  the  heart  of  an  ilBpe■^ 
trable  forest,  to  reach  which  from  the  river,  they  had  heen  coi^ 
peUed  to  scramble  over  a  morass.  Much  leas  than  t>ii^  msdd 
have  sufficed  to  dishearten  the  hopeftd  compai^  on  hoard  ^ 
Britannia^  whose  expectations  had  been  raised  to  the  highest  pild 
by  glowing  descriptions  of  the  really  beautiftd  comitiy  which  thy 
were  intended  to  people.  All  the  wealth  said  productions  of  ^ 
five  States,  the  salubrity  of  the  temperate  plains,  »«d  die  u^ 

*  lioiqiriton  tad  oClMr  1 


UUTINV   OF   TUU   EMIGRANTS.  B19 

advantagea  of  the  hot  regions  anil  of  the  table  lands,  had  in  their 
minds  been  concentmted  and  aseociatcd  with  New  Liverpool  and 
tbe  valle;  of  the  Folochic.  The  eOi'ct  of  this  sudden  reaction  upon 
their  minds  may  be  imagined. 

iln.  MucMinnis,  the  heroine  of  funner  commotion^  and  a 
person  of  some  influence  anions;  the  rest  hy  reason  of  her  com- 
manding manner  and  her  violent  and  profane  tongue,  now  raised 
the  Toice  of  wailing,  and,  with  deep  and  horrid  imprecations; 
lamented  her  folly,  and  vowed  that  none  of  her  family  should 
proceed  another  step.  Her  resolution  was  re-echoed  in  lower 
tones,  but  with  equal  dctemiinntion,  by  all  on  board,  and  the  sailota 
were  not  slow  to  sympathize  with  the  exiled  dupes  of  the  Company 
in  London.  Very  soon  the  Hre-arnis  in  the  cabin  were  seized  hy 
the  men,  under  the  direction  of  Mrs.  MacMinnia ;  and  the  return 
of  [be  commander  was  awaited  with  a  dogged  determination. 

When  tile  captain  at  length  came,  be  was  acconpuuied  by  th* 
agent,  in  expectation  of  removing  the  colonists  to  their  destined 
home.  They  were  both  suftired  to  come  on  board,  and  to  go 
down  into  the  cabin,  when  the  arms  were  openly  a^umed,  and 
they  learned  to  their  surprise  that  they  were  constituted  prisoners 
there.  A  violent  scene  and  noisy  recriminalious  ensued,  in  whidt 
Mr^  MacMinnis  ably  performed  her  part.  The  ship  was  thence- 
forth well  watched  and  guarded,  and  the  prisoners  were  kept  below 
during  that  night. 

In  the  prevbus  interval.  Providence  had  supplied  the  mntineera 
with  a  black  pilot,  who,  being  in  another  ship  loading  mahogany 
at  the  «iunc  place,  and  bearing  of  our  poution,  informed  us  of  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  British  settlements,  of  which  all  on  bosrd 
appeared  utterly  Ignorant,  and  kindly  volunteered  his  services  to 
take  us  to  Bcliw.  No  boat  was  suffered  to  approach  the  Britannia, 
and,  thus  provided,  tbe  Bochur  was  wdghed  the  next  morning  at 
dawn,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  she  was  riding  in  smooth  water  in 
the  harbour  of  Belize.  A  deputation  sent  to  the  magistrates  soon 
returned  to  inform  tbe  rest  that  they  might  land  on  sufferance  i 
and  the  ship,  which  bad  been  reduced  to  its  last  biscuit,  though 
intended  to  provision  New  Liverpool  for  several  months,  was  soon 
abaudoned  of  its  passengers,  and  ^ven  up  to  tbe  vermin  and  the 

At  Beliie  nil  tbe  emigrants  found  employment;  and  hid  thejr 


520  THE  GOSPEL   IN   OEKTBAL  AICSBXCA* 

been  indnstrions,  they  might  haye  done  welL  Many  of  ihm, 
however,  fell  early  victims  to  their  own  intempenmoe  and  ^ 
effects  of  climate  conjoined.  Most  of  the  H^irewBy  and 
others,  wandered  to  the  United  States  and  into  the 
Country.  Ten  years  after  their  memorable  arnval,  aearedj  i 
vestige  of  them  remained  in  British  Hondnras. 

Among  the  rest,  I  also  found  employment  as  soon  as  I  landei 
My  first  situation  was  as  a  clerk  in  a  wealthy  merchant's  staie. 
Thence  I  was  sent,  after  a  few  months,  into  the  forests  on  ^ 
banks  of  the  river  UUua  in  the  State  of  Honduras,  with  a  mm 
gang  of  mahogany  cutters,  and  I  returned  to  Belize  eariy  in  18S7. 
I  then  became  an  assistant  to  a  printer  in  a  small  office,  where  the 
local  newspaper  was  printed. 

A  few /months  only^  elapsed  before  the  printer,  who  was  ahs 
editor,  fell  a  victim  to  his  intemperate  habits.  He  first  lost  hs 
reason,  and  then  died  miserably  in  the  jail.  At  this  jmictait,  I 
found  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  another  employer,  j^  purwuDg 
my  inquiries,  I  was  advised  to  make  application  to  Mr.  Hendefsosi 
the  Baptist  Missionary,  who,  though  he  had  been  bat  two  ytaa  is 
the  Settlement,  was  already  known  as  the  willing  fiiend  of  tk 
needy.  At  the  same  time  I  was  particularly  warned  to  be  as  s^ 
guard  against  his  religious  opinions,  which  were  represeolBd  as 
extravagant  and  strange. 

I  found  Mr.  Henderson  actively  engaged  in  the  labours  of  hii 
school.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  same  building,  I  saw  Mr&  Hea- 
derson  and  another  teacher,  surrounded  by  a  goodly  number  of 
coloured  infants.  I  was  kindly  received,  and  admitted  to  thdr 
family  board.  My  circumstances  were  considerately  inquired  imsi 
My  tale  of  past  vicissitudes  was  heard  with  sympi^y,  and  I  sis 
encouraged  to  come  and  take  up  my  abode  with  them,  andti 
endeavour  to  be  useful  in  the  school  till  I  should  find  some  otlxr 
occupation. 

The  toil  of  teaching,  and  the  restraints  of  Mr.  fiendenoD*s 
house,  united  with  my  own  unfitness  for  such  a  position,  soos 
made  it  appear  irksome  to  my  mind.  What  little  thought  I  hd 
ever  entertained  about  religious  matters,  had  been  influenced,  os 
the  one  hand,  by  the  lifeless  formalities  and  self-righteous  ob- 
servances which  I  had  been  imperfectly  taught  at  home;  aodoa 
the  other,  by  that  professedly  philosophic  infidelity  which  I  hd 


either  gleaned  from  irreligious  books,  or  imbibed  in  the  society  of 
Freuch  sceptics.  During  my  wanderings,  I  had  tried  entirely  to 
reject  the  uuthority  of  the  Bible,  in  trhicb  there  tfob  bo  much  that 
appeared  to  me  obscure  and  even  unreasonable.  White  in  this 
dclenniimliop,  I  one  day  look  up  one  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  T&Iea 
of  the  Crusaders.  From  a  foot-uotc,  I  learned  that  the  powerful 
description  there  given  of  tbc  Dead  Sea,  and  of  the  sterility  and 
gloomy  nature  of  the  surrouniiing  country,  was  a  faithful  por- 
traiture of  that  desolate  district.  The  conviction  that  the  Bible 
account  of  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  tbc  plain  muet  be  true 
flashed  across  my  tuind  with  irresistible  force,  and  was  alone 
enough  to  overthrow  the  plausible  objections  which  my  unbeliev- 
ing heart  bad  raised,  or  my  vain  miod  had  taken  hold  of.  I  still 
professed  to  disbelieve  tlie  Scriptures;  but  in  reality  I  could  not. 
In  my  more  sutierstitious  muods,  I  would  even  read  with  fancied 
pleasure  ibe  eonorous  liturgical  compositions  of  the  Book  of  Com- 
mon  Prayer,  and  1  invariably  thought  the  better  of  myself^  and 
was  the  more  persuaded  of  the  inherent  goodness  of  my  heart  in 
Epite  of  the  occasional  admonitions  of  conscience,  by  the  aid  of  its 
authorized  formularies  of  contrition,  and  in  the  very  face  of  its 
general  confessions  of  sins.  Except  what  little  I  bud  imperfectly 
heard  wliilc  at  school  at  Greenwich,  my  mind  had  never  till  now 
been  brought  into  contact  with  the  truth  of  the  gospel  in  any 
fonn.  The  only  person  whom  t  can  remember  as  ever  having 
made  a  direct  efi'ort  to  bring  the  theme  before  my  attention,  was 
a  miniature  portrait-painter  living  in  the  Strand,  upon  whom  I 
called  in  the  course  of  business.  This  stranger  faithfully  reproved 
me  for  a  prolknc  word,  and  drew  mc  into  a  conversation,  from 
whiI^b  I  received  the  vivid  impression  that  he  considered  himself 
in  a  saved  state,  and  looked  upon  mc  as  under  condemnation. 
This  I  then  felt  disposed  to  resent  as  impudent  presumption. 
Perhaps  this  good  man's  prayer  hod  followed  me  till  now. 

While  engaged  with  Mr.  liendcraon,  I  attended  the  worship  of 
the  church,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  in  a  thoroughly  dissenting 
congregation.'  Mr.  Henderson's  sermons  only  arrested  my  atten- 
tion when  he  was  a  little  louder  and  more  animated  than  nsusl; 
but  his  expositions  of  tbc  sacred  Scriptures  fixed  niy  wandering 
mind,  and  created  surprise  and  admiration  of  the  Word,  In  our 
more  private  communications,  I  was  not  less  astonished  to  find  how 


B23  THB  GOeFSL  IN  CBIfTRAL  AMEaOOJL. 


tmStj  he  turned  all  the  diffieoltiei,  wppoied 
fiuicied  ftbsurditiet,  which  I  pomted  out  la  the  Bifalei  mio 
tnorths,  impreflBiTe  eiaunplea,  and  nyingB  and  doingi  ewery 
worthy  of  the  great  God  of  creation.  Thuawatinymoatib 
and  a  oonvietion  of  my  own  ignorance  moat  imwillin^y  hnd 
npon  me.  But  with  all  this  my  heart  waa  little  alfectod,  caecft 
that  Mr.  Hender80Q*8  influence,  and  the  reatramtB  of  bia  aodi^ 
became  increasingly  intolerable. 

To  cKKpe  from  this,  I  sooght  other  oompany  moie  coi^eDidli 
my  deprayed  tastes,  and  the  tavern,  the  bilfiard-iooiBy  and  Ifci 
lentimental  song,  occupied  some  of  my  evenings^  mud 
irregnlarity  of  hoors.  For  this  Mr.  Henderson  lepiwed  me^ 
more  than  once  spoke  to  me  serionsly  and  affecticMuitdj 
the  state  of  my  heart.  On  one  such  occasion,  when  I  lelind  fiat 
his  study  to  my  bed-room,  I  was  so  much  affiected  that  I  ML  mpam 
my  knees,  and  though  I  then  knew  that  I  oonld  not  pngTi  I  wfft 
Still  I  was  not  sorry  when  Mr.  Henderson  soon  alter 
that  our  eonnecti<m  must  cease,  especially  as  an  openiqg 
fbr  me  to  enter  into  businesB  in  a  retail  provision  atoire, 
enmstanoes  that  promised  to  leave  me  more  than  ever 
a  French  vridow  lady  havingproposed  to  supply  the 

Though  he  had  felt  it  necessary  to  dismiss  me^  Mr.  Tleialfi— 
still  continued  to  notice  his  almost  hopeless  prot^^,  and  wbea  my 
■lore  was  opened,  he  fi^uently  visited  it,  purchased  aitides  te 
household  use,  and  sometimes  brought  me  a  hock  to  read,  aa  I  bii 
many  vacant  hours  behind  the  counter. 

The  impressions  which  I  had  received  whilst  with  Mr.  Hcadg 
son,  instead  of  wearing  off  now  that  I  had  embailced  m  boaDOii 
returned  ever  and  anon ;  and  the  more  I  strove  against  them,  tk 
greater  was  their  force.  I  now  knew  that  there  waa  a  way  d 
holiness,  and  I  felt  that  I  ought  to  walk  in  it.  My  first  eflbft  il 
reformation  was  an  outward  one  connected  with  the  obaervaneeef 
the  Sabbath.  In  oommon  with  other  retail  atorea*  ne  ha^  beei 
ased  to  sell  during  a  part  of  the  Sunday.  I  repsesented  tiie  ia* 
proprieQr  of  this  to  my  partner,  and  we  were  agreed;  thoogfa  wA 
soDie  sacrifice,  to  keep  the  store  shut  during  the  whole  of  the  ^• 
This  did  not,  however,  answer  the  end  of  quietiag  nay  m^m^w^^  m 
I  qwnt  the  day  in  listless  idleness,  or  in  trifling  imnaiiiMnHii  wSlk 
Hgbt-ninded  Mid  gi^  companions  like  njadfl 


CONTER6I0N   ASD 

After  the  convictioii  of  the  truth  of  the  Scriptnrea,  came  gradually 
the  kooM-leilge  that  I  was  hoiieleasly  eomipt  by  nature,  as  well  aa  a 
noner  by  praclioe.  At  the  same  time,  though  faiutly.  same  of  the 
leading  points  of  the  plan  of  salvation  through  a  substitutioiial 
atonement  lor  sin,  and  the  imputed  rightcouanesof  a  representatire 
and  a  Saviour,  who  was  at  once  human  and  divmc,  ncrc  revealed  to 
my  benighted  heart,  which  was  both  humbled  and  rejoiced  at  the 
view,  and  fell  prostrate  ill  adoration  before  God,  This  process 
was,  however,  so  gndual  that  no  great  transition  was  perceptible 
to  mjEcIf,  and  it  was  so  intimately  cormected  with  action,  that  it  is 
only  by  on  effort  of  the  mind  that  I  can,  at  this  distance  of  time, 
distinguish  the  inward  impulse  from  circumstances  that  fixed  a  de- 
cision which  had  for  some  time  floaied  indefinitely  in  my  mind. 

In  the  midst  of  business,  one  Saturday  evening,  a  black  woman,* 
who  was  once  a  slave,  and  who  had  been  a  servant  lo  my  partner, 
came  into  our  store  to  buy,  and  joyfully  informed  her  former  mis- 
tress that  she  was  going  to  be  baptized  on  the  following  morning. 
Without  appearing  to  notice  what  was  said,  the  example  of  this 
poor  woman,  who  had  enjoyed  so  few  opportunities,  si 
the  heart.  I  then  felt,  if  I  was 
too,  ought  to  follow  my  Lord  ii 
be  scriptural),  and  thus  at  one 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  cast  ii 

So  strong  was  this  impulse  that,  without  eipresaing  it,  Ifelt  ■  wish 
to  be  Included  among  those  who  were  to  be  Immersed  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  had  there  been  sufficient  time.  I  soon  after  opCDcd 
my  mind  to  Mr.  Henderson,  who  was  surprised  at  the  application, 
as  he  had  given  up  hope  respecting  me.  But,  being  satisfied  with 
my  profession  of  repentance  and  faith,  he  admitted  me  lo  that 
ordinance  on  the  1st  of  October  1837,  together  with  live  others, 
all  coloured  people.  On  that  solemn  occafion,  some  of  the  com- 
panions of  my  dissipated  hours  stood  among  the  spectators,  and, 
on  coming  up  out  of  the  water,  as  I  passed  before  them,  the 
contemptuous  sneer  which  I  observed  upon  their  couDtenaocea, 
awakened  in  my  bosom  a  glow  of  love  towards  that  Savionr  who 
was  despised  for  me.  From  that  moment  I  was  enabled  cheerfully 
to  give  up  their  society,  except  as  I  might  convince  them  also  of 
the  error  uf  their  ways. 
■  EUii  Uun,  tta  nan  d<u 


of  it  before,  that  I, 
this  ordinance  (which  I  knew  to 
make  an  open  profession  of  the 
my  lot  with  Uia  despised  people. 


---      -*• 


524  THE  GOaPEL  IN  CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

It  was  not  till  after  this  act  of  aahmwrion  had  been  perfbwd 
that  I  was  permitted  greatly  to  i^joiee  in  the  Ixvd.  My  lint 
waking  thooghtf  and  my  constant  joy  was,  that  nay  ami  wUk   I 

H 


were  many  were  forgiven  me.  The  same  week  I  mm  added 
the  church.  Many  of  the  brethren,  with  whom  I  waa  yet  »- 
acquainted,  came  to  my  store  to  congratulate  me  on  the  erot 
Among  them  were  some  aged  African  penaioiien,  who  iifcuuDtri 
their  conversion  to  me.  Finding  that  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  hid 
led  them\ppeared  very  different  from  my  own  experience,  I,  in  aij 
Ignorance,  was  led  to  doubt,  for  a  moment,  the  reality  of  the  oev 
eareer  which  I  had  embraced.  This  was  but  a  momentaiy  foaiei 
I  was  soon  taught  that  my  fiuth  rested  upon  a  firmer  fmny'**'^ 
than  similarity  of  experience,  and  my  hope  xeviyed.  Kor  am  I 
conscious  of  ever  having  been  permitted  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the 
Gospel,  and  my  own  interest  in  it,  from  that  time  to  this :  ao^  not 
even  for  a  moment  In  endeavouring  to  do  the  will  of  God  in  the  I 
midst  of  inward  depravity  and  outward  failures,  I  have  sinee  beea 
gradually  confirmed  in  the  knowledge  of  His  waya  and  in  mj  in> 
ward  confidence  and  hope.  With  adoring  gratitude,  I  deare  t» 
record  it  to  the  honour  of  God's  grace. 

My  business,  which  must  have  proved  a  barrier  to  any  '^H"'— ^ 
active  service  in  the  Grospel,  to  which  I  now  felt  a  de^ie  to  ffn 
m3rsel^  also  implied  a  connivance  at  certain  irregular  |iiacliBB| 
such  as  purchasing  smuggled  goods,  or  the  aaorifioe  of  profifi  t» 
such  an  extent  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  compete  waeoemhOj 
with  others.  I,  therefore,  came  to  the  resolutioa,  together  with 
my  partner,  who  had  now  become  my  wife,  to  give  up  the  sCoR^ 
and  remove  to  the  mission  premises.  I  laboured  daily  with  Mr. 
Henderson  in  the  schools,  endeavouring  to  improve  myaelt  and 
make  up,  with  his  kind  assistance,  for  very  great  deficiencks  in  b^ 
own  education,  as  well  as  in  many  other  respects.  The  inatractiM 
of  the  young,  which  had  before  been  so  irksome  a  taak,  now  be* 
came  a  real  pleasure,  and  the  society  of  Mr.  Henderaon  and  the 
brethren  was  esteemed  a  privilege  of  which  I  really  ftlt  mjsdf 
unworthy. 

Thus  I  continued  spending  my  days  in  the  school,  vaj  A^niiy 
in  the  prayer-meetings  of  the  brethren,  and  often  portiona  of  thi 
night  in  efforts  to  study,  which  were  mostly  futile,  on  aoeooat  flf 
the  cxhanstion  resulting  from  the  dimate  and  the  toifai  of  the  di7- 
The  inward  wretchedness  to  which  I  had  before  been  a  pnyiB 


FIRST  LABOURS  AS   A   TI!ACnER.  OSO 

ts  of  reflection,  I  never  felt  again;  and  though  not  freed 
from  temptatio(JS  and  griefs,  I  had  now  a  certain  prospect  for 
eternity,  hdcI  an  object  vrortli  living,  toiling,  and  suffering  for  in 
anccrtain  and  narrow  bounded  time. 

During  my  previous  wanderings,  I  had  entirely  neglected  to 
wriie  to  my  sorrowing  parents,  for  whom  I  entertained  a  tender 
affection,  at  the  same  time  that  I  thns  requited  their  indulgent  care 
with  unnatural  neglect.  One  reason  of  this  was  that  when  I  had  fre- 
quently sat  down  to  vrrite,  I  could  neither  give  a  facouiahlc  report 
of  my  drcumstances,  nor  indite  a  tolerable  epistle.  Soon  after  my 
oonversion,  this  loag-neglected  duty  vaa  performed,  and  I  sought 
the  forgiveness  of  my  parents  for  past  acta  of  disobedience  and 
fblly-  The  first  replies,  which  I  received  with  indescribable  joy, 
conveyed  the  happy  intelligence  of  the  cnnveraion  to  God  of  a 
beloved  sister;  the  next  letters  announced  that  my  mother  also  bad 
become  a  new  creature.  My  heart  was  then  filled  \cith  gratitude, 
and  my  mouth  with  a  joyful  song  of  praise. 

The  even  tenor  of  my  new  life,  bo  different  from  my  fonner 
vagsricB,  was  interrupted  after  the  first  year  by  bodily  sickness, 
and  after  that  by  a  temporary  separation  from  Mr.  Henderson, 
during  which  t  kept  a  small  school  of  my  own  for  several  months, 
but  from  which  I  returned  during  1840  to  my  former  position. 
At  the  close  of  that  year,  the  efforts  of  the  Emigration  Company  in 
London  to  fulfil  the  conditions  of  their  charter  were  renewed  under 
otlier  management,  as  already  related,  p.  355.  Some  eighty  settlers 
hod  liccn  located  at  Abbottsville,  on  the  Boca  Xuevo,  somewhat 
furtjier  up  the  valleyof  the  Polocbic  than  New  Liverpool,  und  the 
agent  of  the  Company  came  to  Belize.  Anxious  to  remove  to 
some  out-ilation,  and  watchful  for  any  opening  in  the  direction  of 
wiiat  is  termed  in  Belize  the  Spanish  country,  I  called  upon  this 
person,  as  an  old  emigrant,  and  learned  that  they  had  a  chaplain, 
-who  iras  also  the  schoolmaster.  Inimediately  aiUr  this  interview 
the  agent  received  information  that  the  person  referred  to  had  left 
for  the  capital,  forsaking  his  post,  and  having  conferred  with  Mr. 
Henderson,  he  offered  me  the  appointment.  IVith  the  under- 
atonding  that  I  should  be  the  Company's  schoolmaster,  and  that  any 
efi'orls  of  a  religious  character  among  tbe  colonists  or  the  natives 
were  to  be  purely  voluntary,  and  upon  my  own  responsibility ,  I 
agreed  to  accorapany  him  to  AbbottsriUe,  that  I  mi  jht  see  the  pluci 


6S6  THB  QOfiPEL  DC  GBIITKAL 

Before  leaying  Belixey  the  saiiGtkm  of  theclnuciiy  to i^idb  lU 
occasioDally  ministered,  was  solemnly  given  to  my  pgofiuiBiI  eftii 
<m  the  Ist  of  January  1841,  and  in  a  few  dmjB  I  csibaiiDeik 
the  Company's  steamer  Fera  Fax,  for  TalMl^  on  the  Gdf  tf 
Dulce. 

Being  well  received  hy  the  colonists  at  Abbottsrille^  ini  sitkfiBi 
with  the  prospects  of  the  new  settlement,  which,  thoogh  frr  fiva 
being  wisely  planned,  was  many  degrees  better  than  NewLiveipsil 
had  been,  I  removed  my  wife  thither,  and  occupied  a  neat  boaiiiBl 
cottage,  constmcted  in  London,  and  perdied  upon  thee^tfi 
precipice  overhanging  a  considerable  plain  hot  newlj  deand,  wd 
still  strewed  with  hnge  trunks  of  unbomt  trees  lying  bciami  dc 
high  and  massy  stamps  from  which  they  had  been  cot.    Mf 
latticed  verandah  ccmunanded  a  view  of  the  Boca  Kneva,  a  ii|ad 
mountain  stream,  and  of  gigantic  virgin  foreat  tirta  ryt— ^"g 
along  a  wide  valley,  and  spreading  their  continnons  mantle  «f  mk 
verdure  over  the  very  summits  of  the  bold  and  hdkj  m^  d 
mountains  which  bounded  the  scene  to  the  north  »^  to  the  soadi, 
at  once  setting  limits  to  the  sweep  of  the  mighty  'P#>U^|iip^  ^^  f. 
ing  to  the  eye  to  terminate  only  where  the  broad  *w^»^»^  was  kaoai 
to  commence.    Those  sylvan  recesses,  inaocesnble  to  the  te  of 
civilized  man,  are  still  the  retreat  of  the  Indioa  Bvavca,  cr  aiU 
aboriginal  tribes;  and  through  the  midst  of  that  valky  wy^ 
traced  the  winding  line  of  loftier  vegetation  which  "*«'^  ikt 
banks  of  the  majestic  river  in  its  course  towaids  the  lake  d 
Tzabal — a  river  destined,  as  the  projectora  of  the  CSolooy  kaSiJ 
hoped,  to  be  the  high  road  of  commerce  between  the  Ci#0 
coast  and  the  capital,  and  which  had  already  been  navigated  ty 
the  Company's  smaller  steamer,  the  light  and  graeefbl  M^ 
Mquito, 

Wonderful  and  adorable  is  the  providenee  of  God  which  kit 
wandering  outcast  to  traverse  the  Atlantic,  and  first  A^npiiy  |a 
destination,  and  then  his  heart  and  objects,  now  bcon^t  fc^  ^ 
means  of  the  same  unchastened  enterprise  with  whidi  he  had  k* 
fore  madly  connected  himself,  into  a  field  of  Dsefalneaa  which,  aafe 
other  circumstances,  God's  people  would  not  have  daied  to  attcHft- 
The  charter  of  the  Company  secured  the  fblleat  xduknia  Utr? 
to  the  colonists,  Spanish  as  well  as  English.  Rihlcp  eonld  bafis^f 
inlroduoed  without  inqoiaitQrial  fxamination  or 


JIISSIONABY   KFFOHTS  AT  ABBOTTS V I LLE.  637 

but  ail  thb  ma  onljr  introductory,  and  to  myself  proved  a  prepara- 
tory school  botb  of  endurance  and  for  more  extended  labours 

The  colonJstB  wbo  composed  the  bulk  of  ibe  little  community  at 
Boca  NnevB  were  very  little,  if  anytbiog,  Buperior,  in  a  moral 
point  of  view,  to  those  ■who  had  mutinied  on  board  the  Britannia, 
Among  them  were  German  labourers,  English  artizana,  French 
roui-s,  and  a  mixed  luedley  of  Irish  soldiery,  Portuguese  peasants, 
and  Belize  settlers.  Besides  these,  there  n'erc  a  few  Ladino 
families,  one  of  them  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  place,  the 
rest  hud  been  attracted  by  the  free  expenditure  of  tbe  Company's 
funds ;  and  sometimes  there  were  employed  as  labourers,  as  many 
as  a  hundred  or  more  Indians  from  Cajabon  and  from  Tierra 
Calientc  {hoi  lands,  a  re^on  to  tlie  north  and  west  of  Abbottsville). 
Among  all  these,  the  grossest  immoralities  prevailed,  and  the 
most  profane  language  was  common.  A  very  few  addresses  on 
tbeir  spiritual  concerns  sufficed  to  scatter  the  little  congregation 
which  WHS  first  brought  together  under  official  ioflucDce,  and 
indirectly  "by  authority."  Tbe  very  parties  who  were  thus 
willing  to  uphold  an  appearance  of  religion  were  themselves 
llngmntly  outraging  the  laws  of  God,  and  were  soon  among  the 
bitterest  enemies  and  opposers  of  the  truth.  The  Company's  school 
WU.4  scarcely  better  attended  than  the  meetings,  and  amidst  roucb 
scorn  and  malice,  which  often  took  an  active  form  of  expreasion, 
accompanied  with  considerable  bodily  Bufi'ering,  I  was  enabled  to 
continue  labouring  iu  this  oarrow  sphere,  and  earnestly  pursuing 
my  etudies  in  comparative  seclusion. 

The  almost  entire  failure  of  the  means  used  in  favour  of  the 
European  colonists  led  me  to  direct  my  atlention  more  particularly 
to  the  natives  and  to  their  children,  without,  however,  ceasing  my 
efforts  for  the  former.  I  hod  commenced  learning  the  Spanish 
language  ;  and  long  before  I  could  venture  to  speak  it  myself  I 
obtained  some  Spanish  scholars,  and  profited  greatly  by  thdr 
reading  in  the  New  Testament,  in  which  I  exercised  tliem  con- 
tinually. In  a  few  mouths  I  was  enabled  to  read  the  Spanish 
Scriptures  to  ibelr  parents  in  their  own  cottages,  and  before  the 
expiration  of  two  years  I  ventured  to  read  the  Bible  publicly  in 
the  cabildo  to  the  Spaniards,  and  gradually  added  some  words  of 

The  liUle  colony,  which  wh  paralysed  for  want  of  indoitry,  ami 


628  TBB  O06PEL  IN  CENTRAL   AJfKRICA. 

undennined  by  many  kinds  of  wickednesBi  was  nevtnl 
Yuked  by  intestine  commotions,  and  was  the  theatre  of  moie  thv 
one  deed  of  blood.  Many  of  tbe  natives  who  were  attneled  to  it 
were  of  sucb  a  description  that  other  towns  and  villages  were  beB^ 
fited  by  their  absence ;  and  not  a  few  had  been  outlawed  by  thdr 
local  magistrates,  who  possess  the  power  to  banish  tnmhlesoBe 
▼agrants,  without  regard  to  the  mischief  they  may  do  iJaewfaege. 
By  the  third  year  many  of  the  colonists  had  wandered  away,  aai 
were  scattered  abroad.  The  Company's  ftinds  also  b^an  to  62, 
and  there  was  littie  prospect  of  their  falfilling  the  terms  tiicy  bid 
agreed  to,  thongh  the  time  specified  in  their  charter  had  been  pro- 
longed more  than  once. 

Anzions  to  improve  the  opportunity  for  Sdiptare  diatribnlioB, 
the  Auxiliary  Bible  Society  at  Belize  had  kept  me  well  sappfied 
with  Spanish  Bibles  and  New  Testaments,  in  additioQ  to  a  con- 
siderable stock  which  had  been  granted  to  the  late  chaplaia  fbf  te 
use  of  the  colonists.  Many  of  these  I  found  means  of  dreobliiig^ 
and  supplied  visitors  from  the  interior,  who  often  became  pn^ 
chasers,  and  even  took  with  them  a  dozen  or  so  of  copies  ai  t 
deposit  for  sale  in  their  places  of  residence.  I  thus  obtained  sevoil 
correspondents ;  and,  to  my  surprise,  there  were  no  leas  than  tkne 
Bomish  priests  among  them  who  had  purchased  copies  lor  dirtn* 
bution,  and  were  aiding  me  in  this  good  woiic.  Subsequently,  ^ 
Auxiliary  Society  paid  my  travelling  expenses  into  some  of  ^ 
neighbouring  towns,  and  helped  me  to  the  purchase  of  a  hone  fir 
this  purpose.  In  two  or  three  cases  I  was  enabled  to  introdnoe  iSk 
New  Testament  as  a  class  book  into  the  native  schools ;  and  la  ose 
instance  some  attention  had  been  drawn  towards  the  Scriptmo  bf 
the  violent  oppontion  of  the  F^tdre  Bojas,  a  priest  at  Sakma,  vhs 
finding  the  books  in  the  hands  of  the  children  in  that  town,  greallf 
stormed,  and  declared  he  would  send  one  of  them  to  the  Aranw; 
the  head  of  the  ecclesiastical  court.  By  the  spontaneous  inkf^ 
ference  of  the  Corregidor,  the  chief  magistrate,  he  was,  howiiu^ 
forced  to  restore  the  copy  which  he  had  illegally  abstnctodftsB 
the  school ;  and  that  fhnctionary  himself  took  charge  of  the  boolik 
which  he  afterwards  distributed  amongst  his  private  fHends^ 

Though  quite  deprived  of  religious  communion  with 
subjected  to  many  trials  arising  out  of  the  character  and 
my  neighboim,  who  thought  it  strange  i^litQakim(tj01^ 


na  Dot  Icn  without  aolue  in  this  mor^ 
wilderness.  The  deeply -sbailed  receses  of  "  the  bush,"  as  the 
English  Creoles  term  the  forest,  aud  the  wild  b&nks  of  the  Boca 
Nneva,  afforded  retreats  where  I  might  enjoy  ray  own  reflectiong, 
and  hold  swe«t  communiou  with  my  Giod.  These  litvourite 
haunts  at  times  re-echoed  with  grateful  praises  and  earnest 
prayers  for  the  poor  Indians,  the  Ladinos,  and  my  fellow-coloiiists, 
where  only  the  bush  fowl,  and  other  inhabitants  of  the  Jungle, 
were  alartled  by  my  voice. 

lu  the  visible  fruits  of  my  labours  among  the  people,  I  had 
sm^ll  encouragement;  yet  even  in  this  respect  I  was  not  entirely 
destitute,  as  the  following  case  will  show: — 

Juaoa  Mendia  was  a  girl  of  only  twelve  years  of  age,  but  of  full 
stature  and  womanly  development.  She  was  of  almost  umuiied 
Indian  descent,  and  her  countenance — notwithstanding  her  dark 
copper- coloured  oompiejrioa — was  singularly  pleasing.  Her  pro* 
fuse  block  curly  locks  were  usually  intertrcsscd  with  bright  rib- 
bons, afler  the  manner  of  her  class,  whose  whole  costume  is  gene* 
rally  becoming  and  gracefiil,  and  in  her  case  appeared  to  peculiar 
advantage.  There  was  a  wild  decision  mingled  with  a  cheerful 
animation  in  the  glance  of  her  eye,  which  indicated  superiority  of 
natural  parts,  in  addition  to  more  than  oidinary  personal  attrac- 
tions. But  Juana  had  been  trained  up  in  ignorance  and  vice. 
Her  mother  and  sisters  were  loose  characters.  Her  step-fatbex 
was  a  drunkard  and  a  murderer ;  *  and,  even  at  that  early  age, 
report  indicated  that  Juona  was  soon  likely  to  outstrip  them  all  in 
wickedness. 

One  night  after  reading  to  my  wife  rather  longer  than  ordinary, 
I  had  closed  the  book  and  noticed  that  the  hour  was  unusually 
late.  Our  door  had  long  been  carefully  shut,  for  we  bad  more 
than  once  seen  the  footprints  of  the  prowling  panther  and  its  cubi 
very  near  the  threshold.  Our  house,  being  the  last  in  the  colony, 
■was  upon  the  very  borders  of  the  clearance.    About  retiring  to 


680  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CElfTRAL   AMKRICA. 

rest,  we  were  startled  by  a  loud  rapping  at  the  door.  It  was  tk 
well-known  voice  of  the  Sefior  Alcalde,  who  mnswered  to  my  in- 
quiry ;  and  the  bolts  being  speedily  drawn,  be  entered,  leading  is, 
or  almost  dragging  by  her  arm,  Juana  Mendia.  They  were  fol- 
lowed by  a  crowd  of  well-known  pale  and  sable  fiioes,  all  mide 
equally  lustrous  in  the  glare  of  the  pitch-pine  tordiligbt.  One  d 
the  ministros  (assistants)  of  the  magistrate  held  in  his  anni  t 
heavy  log  of  wood,  with  a  chain  and  shackle  appended,  whidi  I 
recognised  as  a  clog  such  as  I  had  seen  criminala,  who  were  sofierBd 
to  be  at  large,  dragging  at  their  ankles.  The  reason  of  this  mh 
timely  visit  was  soon  explained.  A  brawl  had  taken  plaee,  and  m 
account  of  Juana,  knives  had  been  unsheathed,  and  foul  wmk  was 
likely  to  result.  The  Se£or  Alcalde  had  interfered,  and  as  thegiri 
was  under  age,  in  virtue  of  his  official  prerogative,  he  ieit  ft  bis 
duty  to  place  her  depositada  (in  deposit)  with  any  citiKn  house- 
holder who  would  be  answerable  for  her  good  condnct  K  no  one 
willing  should  be  found,  the  other  altematiye  was,  that  the  ck^ 
should  be  chained  to  her  leg,  and  she  emplo}^  to  sweep  the  streets— 
if  indeed  the  rugged  road  between  the  thatched  oottiges  inhabited 
by  the  colonists  might  be  dignified  by  that  name.  In  a  riunt  con- 
ference with  my  wife,  carried  on  in  a  language  which  the  hf' 
standers  could  not  understand,  I  found  that  she  was  unwilfing  to 
receive  her.  I  briefly  urged,  that  by  consenting  for  the  tim^  nih 
chief  might  be  prevented,  an  opportunity  would  be  afibrded  ftr 
angry  passions  to  subside ;  and  might  not  the  hand  of  the  Lord  be 
in  it  for  the  good  of  this  poor  young  creature  ?  To  this  leasooiBp 
which  she  afterwards  recalled,  she  yielded.  Juana,  in  a  pazoxjv 
of  violence,  and  stamping  with  her  foot,  exdaimed,  ^  IViugiaae 
la  cadena.  No  me  quedo  aqui.'*  (Put  the  chain  on  me.  I  v^ 
not  remain  here.)  The  Alcalde  and  his  attendants,  however,  wi^ 
drew.  Her  passion  was  shortly  succeeded  by  tears;  and,  bda^ 
somewhat  calmed,  a  mosquito-net  was  hung  up  m  the  haD  fir 
her  use,  and  each  agitated  bosom  was  soon  soothed  m  sle^ 

The  following  morning,  on  reflecting,  we  felt  tl)at  w»>h^midg>' 
taken  a  delicate  charge,  and  a  task  of  some  difficulty,  and  I  soogkt 
the  Lord's  direction  in  prayer  respecting  it.  By  the  law  of  the  Isii 
we  would  be  entitled  to  Juana*s  services  without  remoneniNif 
but,  as  we  were  in  want  of  a  servant,  she  was  kindly  and  toiff 
told,  that  if  she  would  alter  her  conduct^  and 


THE  FIRST  FRUITS   OF  VliRA   PAZ.  SSI 

the  duties  assigned  bcr,  she  should  liave  full  wages ;  but  that  tbc 
very  first  return  to  her  former  life  would  be  followed  by  her  instant 
dismissal,  let  the  consequences  be  what  they  might. 

At  the  hour  when  I  rang  the  school  bell,  her  younger  brother 
and  sister,  together  with  three  or  four  German,  LadJno,  and  Indian 
children,  came  as  usual  to  be  taught.  At  the  reading  lesson, 
JuanuH-as  called,  and  stood  U]i  with  the  rest  in  the  little  class. 
She  could  read  fluently,  having  heen  taught  at  home  when  much 
younger;  hut  she  had  never  read  in  the  scriptures  before,  nor 
had  she  ever  had  her  lessons  explained  to  her.  A  New  Teitament 
was  given  to  her,  and  the  same  niualwr  of  verses  to  be  repeated  by 
heart  on  the  next  day,  were  required, — a  little  reward  book  being 
ofl'ored  to  her  as  to  the  rest,  should  she  learn  more  than  the  as- 
sigucd  task.  That  day  Juana  performed  her  household  work  so 
as  to  please  her  mislresa,  and  a  word  of  advice  and  encouragement 
to  continue  to  do  well  was  becomingly  received.  For  days  her 
Etcady  industry  vas  sustained  and  even  increased,  and  though  Tuona 
frequently  wept  over  her  work,  at  other  times  ihe  was  cbeerf\]I, 
her  New  Testament  was  oflen  open  by  her  ude  in  the  kitchen,  or 
when  sewing  at  the  feet  of  her  mistress,  and  her  memory  being 
good,  she  could  soon  repeat  several  chapters. 

Some  weeks  rolled  on,  and  .lusna  was  still  assiduous  at  her 
tajtk,  whether  in  the  house  or  in  the  little  school.  When  she  went 
daily  for  water  to  the  purest  neighbouring  stream,  she  filled  her 
titiRJa  (a  large  earthen  jar)  poised  it  ujion  her  head,  and  came 
directly  home,  or  if  she  turned  aside,  it  was  to  salute  her  relatives, 
and  quickly  return.  The  ndghbours  began  to  wonder,  and  spoke 
to  each  other  on  her  altered  mien  and  behaviour,  and  her  mother 
came  to  thank  us,  and  to  express  her  delight  and  astonish mcnt  at 
the  marvellous  improvement  which  she  observed. 

In  the  class,  her  attention  and  replies  were  no  le»  pleasing  to 
her  t«u:her.  She  longed,  she  said,  to  beone  of  the  lambs  bnroe  on 
the  shoulders  of  the  great  Shepherd  into  the  heavenly  fold,  and 
depressed  her  willingness  to  be  led  to  Him.  One  day  that  my  own 
bodily  sufferings  had  brought  the  subject  of  death  vividly  before 
my  mind,  I  made  it  the  theme  of  the  lesson.  "Which  of  us  who 
aie  here,"  enquired  I,  "is  likely  to  be  the  first  victim  ^''  Juoiuat 
once  pointed  out  her  brother,  who  was  a  spare  and  deliei'* 
Though  iiRpresKd  with  the  idea  tbat  it  was  liltely  to  ' 


633  THB  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AaiBRICA. 


xeminded  her  that  her  robost  health  wm  no  ^edge  of  lifie»  mdtlil 
it  was  as  likely  to  be  her.  The  erent  proved  that  this  wamingim 
prophetic 

Antonio  de  la  Cruz,  a  yonth  of  scaree  nineteen,  was  the  ddei 
ion  of  a  respectable  Ladino  widow.  He  was  employed  in  the  ore 
of  cattle,  and  was  already  a  good  hand  at  flinging  the  Lba* 
'Willing  to  improye  himself,  with  a  few  othersy  he  attended  sh 
adult  evening  class,  to  learn  to  write,  and  to  read  in  the  Bible. 
Since  Juana  had  been  ¥rith  us,  Antonio  had  seldom  nuBed  )m 
evening  lesson.  One  afternoon  her  mistress  directed  Jnasa  U 
proceed  into  the  borders  of  the  forest,  to  gather  wild  pot  herta 
8heso(m  returned  in  a  state  of  excitement.  Antosiiohad  IbBowed, 
and  would  have  detained  her,  but  she  had  fled  from  bin.  Dis- 
appointed and  enraged,  the  wicked  youth  spread  a  ibid  v^sit  in 
the  village,  which  soon  reached  Jnana*s  ears,  and  canaed  he  the 
most  p<Hgnant  griet  Assured  of  the  young  niaa*s  giult,  a  een- 
plaint  was  immediately  laid  with  the  Alcalde,  and  to  avoid  dk 
penalty  of  his  malicious  slander,  Antonio  absented  himaelf  tnm 
his  home.  Notwithstanding  every  effort  to  soothe  her,  thii  b^ 
Juana  wept  herself  to  sleep,  and  was  agitated  in  her  sbiBho> 
The  next  morning  she  awoke  with  a  burning  fever,  the  seeosd  iff 
she  was  delirious,  the  third  she  was  a  corpse. 

A  few  hours  previous  to  her  departure  the  deliriiun  left  her,  ssi 
a  precious  opportunity  was  afforded  for  converoatioa.  **  Jans,* 
said  I,  **  You  will  soon  die,  are  you  ready  to  meet  God  ?**  *Iaii 
Tery  wicked  sinner,**  she  replied  with  evident  emotion,  **  Doyn 
think  God  can  pardon  you?**  '*  I  fear  I  am  too  widced,*  w»  kr 
reply.  I  then  spoke  of  the  Saviour,  of  whom  I  had  often  tfAm 
to  her  before,  and  drew  from  her  some  expressians  of  hopeni 
resignation.  She  could  forgive  Antonio  more  eaaily  than  she  cnli 
believe  her  own  offences  blotted  out ;  but  she  did  assent  to  the  d^ 
daration  of  the  Saviour*s  love  and  substitution  for  her,  and  vkoi 
her  shortening  breath  precluded  a  reply,  a  smile  of  placU  J9 

*  Tliis  ia  %  rtrj  long  thong,  cot  out  a(  an  entire  nw  kide^  »^  ««o  tmHid  wi 
greoMd,  M  M  to  beoone  mooth  and  pliable.   Of  tUa  a  nooee  in  sMiie  «l  oae  cai  ^ 

otlMT  extremity  being  ainde  ftai  to  tlie  tail  of  Uie  kone,  the  rider.  vkoM  V^faBHi  i  ** 
catch  half  wild  cattle  in  the  Sairannaha  or  the  pine-ridge.  Ofvcxt^Den  the  ■  u«""r  s' 
Bimbly  throwi  the  Laxo  oTcr  ita  home.  The  well  trained  hone  nloaceipra^aitlii 
lege  the  better  to  aoatain  the  abode,  and  the  eaptued  animal  is  tiMa  dritiB  h^bm  ^ 
rider  bj  a  good  fiMtoMd  to  •  long  ataek. 


FUNERAL   ADDRESS   IS   "niK  BrsB. 

playod  upon  het  Muntcnance,  and  was  airesleil  there  by  death's 
cold  teal.  Her  teacher,  wheo  he  perceived  that  he  could  do  do 
more,  retired  Irom  the  side  of  her  couch,  giving  place  to  her  rela- 
tives Mid  some  snpentitiotia  friend*,  who  mattered  their  Chniiian 
inaiDtations  iu  ber  closed  ears,  and  then  removed  her  atifTened 
corpse  to  be  vmkcd  with  frantic  noises  uud  gestures. 

On  reSecting  upon  this  affecting  event,  I  concluded  that  Jaanft 
had  been  removed  from  the  evil  to  come.  The  change  in  her 
behaviour  had  been  complete.  The  cause  of  her  death  proved  the 
susceptibility  of  her  mind  to  a  charge,  lo  which  bnt  a  little  before 
she  would  have  been  quite  callous.  The  expres^onsofher  lips,  and 
ofbcrta£tloaks,thougbfceblcinthem9clvcs,appearedenough  to  war- 
rant the  conclusion,  that  JuanaMendia  was  the  first  fruits  unto  God 
of  my  feeble  labours,  on  behalf  of  the  natives  of  Central  America. 

During  that  night,  the  deluded  people  assembled  in  a  wretched 
hovel,  and  consumed  a  large  (Quantity  of  native  rum.  Under  its 
iujluencc  they  shouted,  wept,  laughed,  and  prayed  allemateiy. 
One  of  the  old  women  who  had  been  most  active  in  repeating  the 
death  charms,  now  severely  burned  her  naked  feet  by  leaping  upon 
a  pile  of  blazing  fuel,  which  others  were  content  to  leap  over,  for 
which  purpose  it  had  apparently  been  kindled  on  the  clay  floor  of 
the  house  :  and  thus  they  continued  till  the  dawn  of  the  u 
sdous  morning. 

There  being  no  priest  at  hand,  I  was  requested  by  the  parents  of 
the  deceased  to  officiate  at  the  funeral,  and  1  consented  to  address 
tbem  at  the  grave.  With  unassuming  decomm,  a  numerous  ti 
accompanied  the  rude  coffin  into  the  forest  shade.  The  Campo 
Stiuto  (holy  field),  to  which  the  natives  were  pleased  to  apply  the 
name  usually  given  to  their  cemeteries,  though  it  bad  no  claim  to 
the  distunction  of  consecrated  ground,  had  been  cleared  two  years 
before,  when  the  colony  was  first  formed ;  hut  it  was  now  grown 
over  with  busby  underwood,  and  even  shaded  with  young  trees, 
that  eidoded  the  sun's  rays  far  above  our  heads.  Here,  where 
Ibe  foot  of  man  bad  but  lately  trodden — a  soil  from  which  the 
Jaguar  and  the  Couguar  were  not  eicluded,  s  few  of  England's 
exiles — coniicts  of  penury  and  vice^-lay  mouldering  beneath  the 
soil.  Here,  around  the  open  grave  of  Juana,  the  attendants  scattered 
•nd  half-couce&led  from  each  other  by  the  teeming  vegetation,  was  t 
penoilledlo  preach  the  Gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  lo  a  larger  Spanish 


634  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CE2«TaAL   AUBBIOA* 

congregation  thmn  I  had  yet  addressed ;  some  of  whom  had  nevir 
heard  the  Gospel  before,  and  may  possibly  never  hear  it  ^us 
though  they  should  be  spared  to  old  age.  Not  a  stooe  maiks  tk 
spot  in  the  now  forsaken  district  where  the  remains  of  Jnana  Ifada 
were  deposited.  The  cross  of  wood  which  her  parents  erected  ■ 
decayed  ere  this.  The  vestiges  of  a  former  deaianoe  will  soon  be 
undiscemible.  Already  the  ground  is  trodden  by  the  fierce  T^iz; 
and  traversed  by  large  droves  of  waree.  The  coarse  shrill  shiiek  of 
the  gaudy  macaw,  or  the  deep  melancholy  tones  of  the  riDgdofre^i 
note,  are  uninterrupted  by  the  sound  of  the  woodman*8  axe  or  the 
thunder  of  the  falling  tree.  But  the  circumstances  of  Juaza's 
death  are  as  indestructible  as  memory,  and  it  is  fondly  hoped  thst 
the  last  day  will  reveal  that  her  conversion  was  as  red  m  the 
truth  of  the  Gospel  itself^  which,  to  all  appearance^  vat  the 
instrument  employed  to  produce  it. 

When  the  colonists  had  almost  all  left  Abbottsville,  and  it  became 
apparent  that  the  Company  would  fail  to  fulfil  the  <v>fi^^it^ft«»<  d 
their  charter,  the  neighbouring  priests,  who  had  heard  with  un- 
easiness some  reports  of  my  limited  efforts  among  the  people  nnk- 
ing  the  Spanish  language,  began  to  take  steps  to  interrupt  t***— ^ 
The  curate  of  Tamaju,  who,  though  the  nearest  of  them,  leaded  it 
a  distance  of  nearly  two  days*  journey,  chose  to  consida-  the  fv^ 
saken  colony  within  the  limits  of  his  parish,  and  therefore  took  the 
initiative  by  writing  to  the  Frovisor  at  Guatemala,  giving  a  mit 
of  the  heretical  and  disorderly  doings  of  **  £1  Fadxe 
(the  Protestant  Father).  Soon  after,  the  Alcaldes  of  the 
places  in  the  district  were  instructed  to  prevent  all  ScimciR 
reading,  either  publicly  in  the  Cabildo,  where  I  had  for  scnne  tine 
preached  in  the  Spanish  language  every  Lord's-day,  or  privitelf 
from  house  to  house;  so  that  I  was  reduced  to  the  wnm—'tif  rf 
confining  my  teaching  to  my  own  dwelling.  Even  hare  tJidr 
vigilance  followed  the  few  people  who  desired  to  hear  the  Wcsi 
and  Juana*s  mother  and  others  were  threatened  and  persecuted  tor 
attending  my  instructions.  Rumours  of  worse  measuies  vilk 
respect  to  myself  were  also  repeatedly  brought  to  my  esn,  vd  I 
could  not  hope  much  longer  to  hold  my  ground. 

Such  was  the  posture  of  affiiirs  in  August  1843,  when  I  xeeeM 
intimation  from  Mr.  Henderson  at  Belize,  that  he  had  praeetadt 
station  for  me  on  the  Mosquito  Shore,  and  zeoommeadedi  iff 


THE  PAIR   AT  SALAMA.  SS6 

leaving  Vera  Paz.  Mr.  Henderson,  who  reported  me  to  the  Society 
as  occupying  a  sub-statioo  in  connection  with  the  mission  churcli, 
bad  assisted  me  from  the  funds  of  the  Society,  when  the  Company's 
resources  had  failed  to  supply  my  salary  as  schoolmaster.  Without 
this  iissiatHQce  I  must  have  suffered  want,  and  perhajM  would  have 
been  compelled  to  leave.  I  was  not,  however,  anxious  to  form  ft 
permanent  pecuniary  connection  with  the  Society,  preferring  to 
support  myself  by  teaching,  with  the  help  of  a  phintation,  should 
that  be  required.  I  had  conceived  the  hope  that  the  Lord  would 
direct  me  t«  some  place  in  the  interior,  where  I  might  labour  for 
His  kingdom  in  this  manner,  and  where  my  knowledge  of  the 
Spanish  language  would  be  available.  And  should  1  be  compelled 
to  leave,  1  was  particuhirly  aniione  not  to  take  out  of  the  country 
a  goodly  number  of  Spanish  Scriptures  and  tracts  which  had  been 
introduced  under  the  auspicies  of  the  Company,  and  still  remained  in 
my  hands.  Having  already  met  with  eucouragemcnt  in  previous 
journeys,  I  now  conceived  the  project  of  attending  the  grand  fair 
held  at  Salama,  the  Cabacera  of  Vera  Paz,  on  the  2Dth  of  Septem- 
ber, in  order  to  dispose  of  them  to  the  multitudes  assembled  there> 
The  Auxiliary  Committee  approved  of  the  proposal,  and  forwarded 
another  box  of  books  to  increase  my  stock. 

Four  days  before  the  fair  I  left  Abbottsvillc,  accompanied  by 
four  Indian  l«arers,  each  laden  with  more  than  a  hundml  weight 
of  books,  myself  mounted  upon  a  hired  mule,  my  own  horse  having 
been  stolen.  Alter  the  usual  vicissitudes  of  the  mountain  path,  we 
arrived  on  the  fifth  day  at  Salama.  The  fair  tras  in  full  activity, 
&Iy  first  step  was  to  visit  the  Se&or  Corregidor,  and  inform  him 
of  my  presence  and  object.  I  bad  already  presented  him  with  a, 
handsomely  bound  Bible,  containing  the  Vulgate  text  and  Spanish 
translation.  He  was  pleased  to  receive  me  kindly,  though  not 
without  a  smile  at  the  nature  of  my  bunncss.  He  was  a  milituy 
man  of  intelligence,  a  partizan  of  the  liberals,  and  a  personal  IHend 
of  General  Carrera.  I  now  returned  to  the  house  of  Don  .Sinforoso 
Chacon,  a  friend  who  had  long  had  a  deposit  of  Scriptures  in  his 
store,  and  where  1  had  left  my  boxes.  This  person  took  me  into 
the  midst  of  the  throng,  and  introduced  me  to  Don  Jacinto  Maw- 
riegOR,  a  wealthy  relative,  who  at  once  supplied  mc  with  a  suitable 
stand  in  a  street  of  low  uniform  shops,  so  placed  as  to  cut  off  a 
portion  of  the  Flaza,  or  market-place,  upon  which  the  doors  opened 


586  THE  Q08PBL  Uf   CENnULL  AMEBICA* 

at  the  back,  thus  pliciiig  me  in  the  Terj  oentie  of  tke  fUr,  ftr 
which  he  afterwards  refused  any  lemonenitioii.  In  a  toj  shat 
time  I  was  garnishing  the  empty  shelves  with  ^M^  Tcstamenli,  ail 
many  Spanish  puBlications  of  the  Eeligkms  Tract  Society,  andtkai 
standing  behind  my  counter,  which  separated  me  from  Uie  stren^ 
and  calling  the  attention  of  the  numerous  paasers  by  to  ny  vi- 
known  wares.*  I  had  been  careful  to  fix  the  price  as  low  as  pQ^ 
nble,  barely  covering  the  original  cost  of  the  Scriptorea^  so  ai  li 
place  them  within  reach  of  the  poorest.  A  stall  exdnsifdy  d 
books  of  any  kind  was  a  novelty  in  the  country,  and  thoo^  tk^ 
eonld  see  nothing  eke  in  mine,  I  was  frequently  aaked  ftr  aitida 
of  merchandize  and  warlike  weapons,  to  which  I  invaiiably  lepU 
by  presenting  the  Bible,  as  the  best  possession  and  the  beat 

On  the  first  day,  little  was  done  besides  exdting^ 
and  conversing  upon  religious  tofacs  with  a  lew.  The 
day  the  sales  commenced,  and  the  comparative  cheapnesi  if  ^ 
New  Testament,  added  to  the  desire  which  eziats  Sor  books,  sosa 
gave  an  activity  to  the  business  which  gladdened  n^  heart.  Abmb| 
the  purchasers  were  some  uncouth  looking  Indians  firom  Itm  Ako( 
—the  Highland  districts  about  Quesaltenango^ — <»lri^l|ff^  Ib 
woollen  stuffs  of  their  own  manufacture.  Doabting'  if 
read,  I  put  them  to  the  proof,  and  thus  obtahied  ooacnlar 
atration  of  the  remaining  fruits  of  those  schools,  which 
bUshed  by  Las  Casas  just  three  centuries  ago.  The  third  dij  At 
fiiir  began  to  be  filled  with  persons  with  books  and  trada  In  tkor 
hands,  and  the  neighbouring  Curates,  who  had  some  knowkd^if 
my  former  efforts,  and  who  were  drawn  together  by  the  oecM% 
passed  and  repassed  before  the  shop,  eyeing  it  —iraT^y^  when  th^ 
were  not  taken  up  with  their  masses  and  proeeaaioiia. 

I  had  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  conversations  whidi  hi 
been  held  were  reported  to  them,  if  the  partiea  were  n^  expraafy 
lent  for  the  purpose.  At  the  same  time,  the  Curate  of  the 
laid  a  ocmiplaint  with  the  Corregidor,  that  I  was  onalatiag 
tieal  books,  which  are  prohibited  by  the  Pope,  and  xeqnestiBf  Is 

•  DvziBf  the  fair  a  fihock;  <tf  eartbqvke  occanred.    My  ittefttim 
xmitA  by  a  abaip  rattliBg  among  the  tiles  orer  aiy  bead,  aad  wtthoii 
Beti  of  the  caaae,  I  aoon  foond  Biy>elf  standing  with  my  nrigbboma  im  the 
■txeet.    How  I  got  over  the  counter  was  a  matter  of  sabseqnent  ■pTnln*frB. 
hmimg  passed  oS,  we  retvaed  to  oar  own  bnsinen  somewhat  ioqpnaHd  vith 


SCKIPTOBE  SALES  INTEBErPTED.  537 

interference.  Tbe  magietxatc  hsd  littk  favour  towards  the  priesU, 
but  being  pressed,  and  perhaps  fearing  tbeir  inducnct:,  he  at  length 
sent  his  secretary  to  request  me,  bm  a  personal  favour,  to  put  up  tbe 
front  shutlerg  of  my  shop,  and  continue  my  sales  with  less  publicity. 
Aware  of  the  critical  nature  of  the  circumstances,  and  glad  to  be 
peiTnitted  to  continue  my  sales  at  aU,  I  complied  with  this  request,  ' 
though  not  a  little  chagrined  at  tbo  inteiruption,  but  well  assured 
that  tbia  was  the  path  of  duty.  It  was  easy  for  mc  to  aak  those 
who  came  to  tbe  front  to  pass  round  to  the  back  door,  which 
opened  upon  the  plaza,  and  I  soon  fouud  that  the  dealers  with 
wboDi  I  thus  came  into  ctoscr  contact,  bought  up  the  books  by  (he 
dozen,  with  a  view  of  rcrtailiiig  tbem  again  at  three  or  lour  timet 
the  price  which  tbey  paid  me  for  tbem.  Thus  the  books  would 
be  scattered  far  and  wide,  where  I  could  not  expect  to  convey  them, 
and  it  may  be,  that  Eome  would  be  taken  to  other  fiiira,  to  be  lold 
iu  a  more  private  manner  by  the  natives  themselves. 

On  the  Sunday,  which  was  the  great  day  of  the  fair,  I  refused  to 
sell  St  all,  and  contented  myself  with  reading  to  those  who  were 
willing  to  hear,  and  giving  away  a  few  tract*.  This  I  did  for  the 
soke  of  example.  Tbe  sales  of  Klonday  were  about  double  those 
of  any  previous  day.  The  priests,  who  were  on  the  qui  Dire,  and 
watched  mc  closely,  continued  to  assail  the  Corregidor  with  com- 
plaints, that  I  was  still  sowing  my  tares  among  their  wheat,  and  to 
oblige  them,  he  again  sent  bia  secretaiy  to  say,  that  I  must  now 
cease  selling  alti^ether.  To  this  I  replied,  that  I  was  anxious  to 
oblige  the  SeSor  Corregidor,  as  I  had  shown;  but  if  be  wished  mc 
to  understand  this  as  an  official  order,  he  mtjst  please  to  send  it  to 
me  in  writing  and  in  due  form,  which  if  he  did,  I  should  certainly 
lay  my  complaint  before  the  Supreme  Government  at  tbe  capital, 
as  I  was  not  aware  that  I  bad  transgressed  any  law  of  the  land; 
but  claimed  a  right  to  sell  my  wares,  as  well  aa  any  other  vender 
at  the  fair.  This  reply  gave  mc  a  little  more  time,  as  tbe  written 
order  was  not  forthcoming  till  late  on  the  following  day,  when  tbe 
fair  was  fast  drawing  to  a  close. 

Had  I  been  left  alone,  it  is  not  unlikely,  after  disposing  of  the 

rest  of  my  books,  that  I  should  have  returned  to  Belize,  and, 

perhaps,   have   abandoned  Guatemala   altogether.     As  it  was,  I 

now  felt  it  my  duty  to  carry  out  my  threat,  and  prove  whether 

I  <r  not  the  civil  poweis  would  consent  to  please  the  priests  by  bin- 


638  THE  GOSPEL  Uf  CENTRAL  AMKRICA. 

deruig  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures.  I  therefiaare  packed  ip 
the  remainder  of  my  stock,  which  had  been  rednoed  to  about  0B^ 
third,  and  after  receiving  the  written  order,  nempakmdj  refiaei 
to  sell  a  single  copy,  though  earnestly  solicited  to  do  so,  wilk 
promises  of  secresy.  I  was  not,  however,  forbidden  to  give  t^ 
away.  Having  written  to  Mr.  Henderson  and  to  my  wile,  tk 
next  morning  early  I  mounted  my  mule  and  left  Salama  for  ^ 
capital,  taking  with  me  a  few  books  as  samples,  and  eno^  of 
tracts  and  pocket  New  Testaments  to  famish  my  holsters  widL  I 
had  now  no  guides,  and  I  had  never  yet  travelled  this  itiad,  nor,  I 
suppose,  any  other  European  before  me  in  the  same  kndy  ani 
unarmed  manner,  and  certainly  not  on  any  missmi  of  the  mat 
description.  It  is  usual  for  travellers  to  have  one  servant  it  kuft, 
and  that  both  servants  and  master  should  be  iprell  supplied  with 
blunderbusses,  pistols,  sabres,  poignards,  and  sometimes  lemhii^ 
many-barrelled  fire-arms :  nor  do  they  then  feel  aecoie,  bat  en- 
deavour to  associate  themselves  with  other  partiesL  Not  hsrii^ 
contemplated  so  long  a  journey,  I  should  have  been  without^ 
means  of  accompUshing  it  but  for  the  proceeds  of  the  ^1*«  at  the 
fair ;  nor  did  I  know  whither  this  step  would  lead  me :  bat  oj 
mind  was  clear  as  to  the  duty,  and  I  felt  I  could  tmst  aD  cfe  to 
Him  who  had  guided  my  steps  thither.  After  four  moicdvfs 
of  hard  riding,  more  than  one  kind  and  hospitable  entertaiMeBt 
by  the  way,  and  sometimes  using  my  saddle  for  a  pilloWy  I  anivti 
at  Guatemala. 

Not  knowing  who  was  worthy,  and  having  no  letten  of  xeeo»> 
mendation  to  any  one  in  the  city,  I  took  up  my  poaada  (reitag 
place)  at  the  Mezon  de  Cordova,  among  itinerant  tiaden  mi 
market  people.  My  first  visit  was  to  the  British  Consul-GcBerA 
Mr.  Chatfield,  who  received  me  courteously,  and  pgw»Mwd  a 
attend  to  the  business  which  had  brought  me  to  the  capital,  xeeo»> 
mending  me  to  leave  it  entirely  in  his  hands.  I  also  aaw  soae  d 
the  functionaries  of  State,  and  presented  copies  of  my  books  to  Dfls 
Mariano  Rivera  Paz,  who  was  then  G€fe  Pdlitioo»  or  chief  noaiAf 
of  state,  and  associated  in  the  government  Mith  the  Maiqaa  d 
Aydnena,  a  Servile  and  a  priest.  Having  done  thisi  I  awaited  tk 
result  of  the  Consul's  remonstrances.  In  the  mean  t^nCj  I  made  i^ 
my  business  to  form  acquaintances  in  the  capital,  and  to  makenf 
object  generally  known  especially  to  public  and  inliwfnt^*!  aet 


APPEAL   AT  arATEMALA.  639 

who  might  aid  its  attainment,  nonie  of  whom  were  in  power,  and 
gave  nie  ranch  encouragenient.  Providence  directed  me  to  a 
suitable  lodging  in  the  bouse  of  Don  Antonio  Boldez,  a  native 
nieruhnnt  of  credit,  and  of  decidedly  liberal  opinions.  My  Tcligioui 
principles  irere  very  frequently  the  subject  of  conversation;  and 
my  arrival  in  Guatemala  eoou  produced  a  more  than  ordinary 
sensation  in  a  place  where  every  foreign  reudent  is  well  known, 
and  every  victor  ie  a  marked  object  of  attention.  Among  other 
places  to  which  the  obliging  civility  of  the  natives  introduced  me, 
waa  the  university  of  San  Carlos,  where  I  one  day  found  myself 
seated  among  the  students  of  a  theological  class,  listening  to  com* 
mcDtsontheLntintextofthe  Vulgate,  made  by  alearned  Dominican 
filar,  dressed  in  while  fiannel  robes ;  and  shortly  afterwards,  stand- 
ing in  tlje  cloisters  of  that  building  wilb  a  group  of  the  same  stu- 
dents round  me,  freely  discussing  the  doctrines  which  we  had  heard. 
The  correspondence  which  the  British  Consul  and  the  authorilim 
had  commenced  on  the  subject  of  the  free  sale  of  the  Scriptures, 
was  exceedingly  tedious,  and  assumed  a  controversial  character 
which  promised  little  results.  From  my  intercourse  with  Mr. 
CliatJicld,  I  gathered  that  he  would  be  glad  if  I  would  leave  the 
capital  and  permit  him  to  manage  the  business  at  his  leisure.  On 
the  other  bond,  the  authorities  led  me  to  lidieve  that  if  1  would  lake 
the  matter  into  ray  own  hands  they  would  sjieedily  grunt  me  the 
liberty  that  I  sought,  and  of  which  I  began  to  think  of  availing 
myself  very  extensively.  My  judgment  inclined  me  to  adopt  the 
latter  proposal;  and  a  petition  was  presented,  in  which,  at  the 
suggestion  of  the  person  who  drew  it  up,  I  stated  mj'self  lo  be  s 
native  of  Belgium  (a  fact  which,  though  it  may  aiipear  contradic- 
tory, doca  not  really  affect  my  rights  as  a  British  subject,  upon 
which  the  interference  of  the  British  Consul  was  grounded).  By 
this  petition,  the  question  came  before  the  Government  divested  of 
any  national  or  personal  inHuence,  and  rested  upon  its  own  in- 
trinsic merits,  to  which  the  persons  at  the  bead  of  alfaiis  had 
promised  to  do  justice.  Instead  of  this,  however,  being  rid  of  the 
Consul's  somewhat  weighty  importunity,  they  put  me  off  from 
time  to  lime,  no  doubt  thinkmg  lo  eihausi  my  patience,  and  thus 
rid  themselves  of  the  disagreeable  necce^ty  of  a  decision  either 
for  or  against — the  common  dilemma  of  all  neutral  parties  and 
mixed  administrations. 


540  TDE  GOfiPEL  nr  cent&al  amxrica. 

Time  was  rolling  on,  resonrceB  were  Kmitfd,  and  the 
of  friendB  as  well  as  of  foes  was  exhanaled,  still  I  fdt  it  mj 
duty  to  persevere  in  attendance  at  the  offioea  of  Govenuucnt,  ud 
always  returned  precisely  when  they  told  me  with  "ptonkkg 
punctuality,  so  as  at  length  actually  to  wear  out  the  €Etam 
eourteousness  of  the  high  officials.  Finding  that  I  would  fane 
a  decision,  they  turned  over  the  hooks  that  I  had  htuaght  to 
the  Ecclesiastical  Cabildo  for  examination,  and  a  farther  ddi^ 
oeeurred.  I  still  pursued  my  sjrstem  of  priTate  agitation,  mi 
took  the  liherty  to  address  letters  to  the  ProyisQir,  the  heal  d 
the  court  entrusted  with  the  examination  of  the  booka,  in  order  if 
possible  to  accelerate  their  speed.  It  was  some  wi^M»t^  ere  ik/j 
had  read  through  the  Bible,  and  about  forty — eome  of  them  Tob- 
minous,  but  the  greater  part  brief— -publieati<ms  of  the  Britidi  ad 
Foreign  Tract  Society,  an  exercise  which  they  eoold  aeandtf  pcr- 
fimn  without  denying  some  measure  of  peracmal  adTanti^ 

At  length  their  report  was  handed  in,  and  tlie  SnpraM  G*> 
Temment  was  graciously  pleased  to  forward  to  me  a  dirrTf"*** 
by  which  I  was  authorised  freely  to  sell  or  cireolate  /oar  d 
the  smaller  tracts,  the  titles  of  which  were  upecified,  ad 
strange  to  say  one  of  the  number  was  a  reeamumettdoHom  t»  mi 
the  Scriptures  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  by  Dr.  Villa  Knef^  ako 
makes  use  of  the  writings  of  the  Fathers  by  nmneniM  fa»* 
tations  to  enforce  this  anti-popish  duty.  No  part  of  the  SmrI 
Scriptures  were,  however,  included  in  the  pemuaaioQ^  and  la- 
mediately  afterwards  that  point  was  decided  in  aa  eedenirtial 
tense  by  the  promulgation  of  an  edict,  prohibitii^  the  icadiBf « 
even  the  possession  of  Bibles,  said  to  be  ^^^fitnt,  intexpohldL 
and  falsified*  This  edict,  which  is  volrnninom,  *  g*Mr»*M^  hin 
extracts  from  Papal  Bulls  regulating  the  reading  of  the  J^tAf^  vd 
placing  the  liberty  to  do  so  under  the  control  of  a  Father  GkadeMf* 
It  requires  all  who  have  any  of  the  Scriptures  or  *^y*^  boda 
introduced  from  England  to  give  them  up  to  their 
pain  of  excommunication,  and  attaches  the  same  pe&ahy. 


*  It  if  to  be  reg^reited  that  by  reuoa  of  hit  nddoi  apolrio^  wUA 
tnm  bmgJBg  awaj  any  of  hia  papers,  the  author  ia  olkU(ed  to  AipmJ 
only  in  describing  thia  instnime&t,  and  oUier  doemnenti  and  cwhU  ivliilfic  is  Ifeis^ 
in  Owatrmala.    Una  reaaoK  alao  pndndea  eiartWada  as  to  < 


PUBLICATION  OF  THE  EDICT.  541 

to  tbe  sixth  remoTC,  to  any  one  indulging  in  conversation  on  re- 
ligious topics  with  the  Protestant  heretic  who  had  circulated 
them.  *  Odc  passage  of  the  edict  was  of  a  character  to  excite  the 
ignorant  fanaticinn  of  Popish  devotees  Co  an  act  of  public  violeDce, 
or  private  assasaiuatioa.  It  expressed  ia  grandiloquent  terms  that 
Socraus  was  immolated  at  Athena  for  depreciating  false  goda ; 
but  here  is  an  individual,  ssj-e  the  edict,  who  licruplcs  not  openly 
to  insult  tbe  God  of  heaveu  and  earth,  and  pnblic  jealousy  is  not 
awakened. f  To  this  document,  which  was  ordered  to  be  read 
from  the  pulpit  of  evei;  iJ&riib  church  throughout  the  diocese 
after  the  celebration  of  the  next  high  mass,  was  appended  a  cata- 
logue of  books  prohibited  by  the  Church,  thus  placing  the  Word 
of  God  in  jnxta-pogition  with  the  histories  of  tbe  Popes  and  other 
contaminating  writings  of  infidels  and  obscene  jesters. 

On  the  first  Sabbath  upon  which  ibis  edict  was  publicly  read 
at  Guatemala,  I  was  as  usual  spending  tbe  time  in  the  retirement 
of  my  room,  when  I  received  a  visit  trom  two  intelligent  young 
lawyers,  with  whom  I  bad  a  slight  acquaintance.  I  was  snr- 
prifed  at  this  mterruption,  m  it  was  generally  known  that  on  this 
tbe  great  visiting  day  I  received  no  visitora  but  such  as  came 
to  converse  on  religions  subjects ;  accordingly  these  gentlemen 
began  by  introducing  a  religious  topic  themselves,  and  led  mc  on 
to  express  my  opinion  on  the  favourite  dogmas  of  the  Komish 
church,  which  I  was  accustomed  to  do  with  all  freedom.  When 
we  bad  talked  for  about  half  an  hour  they  rose  to  leave  t  and 
hcgging  to  be  excused  for  tbe  intrusion,  they  stated  that  tbey  had 
come  itirect  from  the  Cathedral  where  they  had  just  heard  the 
edict  read,  and  they  hoped  I  would  pardon  their  anxiety  to  be  the 
very  lirit  to  incur  the  penalty  of  excommunication-major,  which 
they  were  now  about  to  spread  far  and  wide.  Such  was  not, 
however,  tbe  effect  produced  upon  all  minds.  Some  of  the  Beatas 
and  Terccras  now  began  to  cross  themselves  when  they  paraed  me 
in  the  streets,  and  many  thought  my  life  in  jeopardy.  Some  of 
the  parties  at  Salama  and  other  places  who  had  Scriptures  and 
good  books  gave  them  npto  their  priests.    Others,  however,  and 


K  diipierli  el  ulo  putiUn  f" 


642  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRiX  AKXRICA. 

these  were  the  most  intelligent,  imwifdiatriy  sooght  to  obUincopia, 
and  not  a  few  Bibles  and  Testaments  which  had  lain  neglected 
in  merchants'  stores  and  upon  book-shelTeit  itere  now  duslei 
handled,  and  attentively  read.  Indeed,  the  proclamation  of  tk 
edict  was  the  first  notice  that  hundreds  had  ever  yet  had  of  tk 
existence  of  the  Bible,  and  it  was  probably  the  very  best  mode 
of  general  advertisement  which  could  possibly  have  been  derixd 
or  adopted.  Chagrined  as  I  had  felt,  I  was  enabled  to  Ttjmt 
on  observing  and  reflecting  upon  its  practical  opentiony  as  ooe 
of  the  greatest  difficulties,  viz.,  to  arouse  the  minds  of  the  people  tt> 
the  importance  of  the  book,  was  in  a  great  measure  accmed. 

With  the  present  Archbishop,  who  was  then  only  newly  nooi- 
nated  to  the  See,  I  had  had  more  than  one  interview  about  tbe 
object  of  my  solicitude.  To  him  I  now  addreaaed  a  somevfaat 
lengthy  remonstrance  in  reply  to  the  edict,  in  which  amoi^  other 
things  I  complained  of  the  parallel  in  which  X  was  diadfiii- 
tageously  plac^  with  the  illustrious  Socratesi,  which  I  took  tk 
liberty  of  interpreting,  together  with  the  intelligent  natives  tbcs- 
selves,  as  an  incentive  to  tumult  and  crime. 

Some  of  the  students,  who  had  induced  me  to  attend  tkir 
theological  classes  several  times,  had  themselves  sought  cooftr- 
ences  with  me  at  my  lodgings,  until  the  professors  and  nkn  ^ 
the  University  heard  of  it,  and  it  was  strictly  forbidden.  SdH  I 
had  occasional  opportunities  of  conversing  with  them,  and  sobs 
were  aflemv-ards  supplied  with  Spanish  Bibles,  only  a  few  hsviig 
access  to  ponderous  Latin  editions  with  voluminous  notes. 

Many  applications  being  made  for  the  Scriptures  before  the  eSd 
was  published,  I  had  sent  to  Salama  for  some  of  those  which  W 
remained  after  the  flEur.  AVhen  the  box  arrived,  an  embaigo  «• 
laid  upon  it  at  the  custom-house  by  order  of  the  ProviBor;  ui 
though  this  was  an  ill^;al  exercise  of  priestly  influence,  I  oonld  vd 
obtain  possession  of  the  books.* 

One  Lord's-day  morning,  my  privacy  was  again  invaded  bf  > 
visit  from  a  well-dressed  gentleman,  with  a  huge  planish  dosk  A 
and  bearing  a  silver-headed  cane.  He  politely  informed  me  tkt 
he  was  a  public  officer,  and  had  been  entrusted  with  the  psin^ 
duty  of  communicating  to  me  an  order  from  the  authorities,  wUi 

*  Mr.  Cliatileld  procured  the  rettitiitum  of  this  box,  whack  yrm  ^-H  I9  hue  ^ 
dflttroyed,  in  1847,  after  the  tnthor'i  ezpnbioii  from  the  State. 


PERPLEKixrES.  543 

he  pat  into  my  liands.  It  was  u  brief  and  peremptory  document, 
rei[uiring  me  to  leave  the  city  aod  the  Stale  witbiu  three  days, 
without  Bsugning  a  cause,  ou  the  pretext  of  the  well-being  nf  the 
pubUc,  and  ugncd  by  the  Corregidor  of  Guatemala.  1  replied  by 
writing  at  the  foot  of  the  order,  that,  until  I  waa  convicted  of 
soiuu  infraction  of  the  laws,  I  could  not  think  of  obeying-  such  a 
mandate.  I  as  politely  returned  it  to  him,  and,  according  to  the 
usual  rc<]uirementti  of  civihiy,  accompanied  him  to  the  atreet-door, 
fully  admitting  his  numerous  apologies.  This  man  was  a  Tenientc 
de  I'oUcia,  or  lieutenant  of  police,  Buch  as  ore  employed  in  ar- 
resting criminals  of  all  descriptions.  He  was  accompanied  by  two 
Corchttes,  a  lower  gradeof  police,  who  cany  drawn  sworda  in  their 
hands,  and  whom  he  had  very  considerately  left  outside  the  door 
of  the  houfc.  The  amiable  family  with  whom  I  was  residing  were 
much  alarmed,  and  the  neiglibours  were  drawn  in  to  inquire  the 
cause,  and  to  express  their  condolence  by  the  unusual  sight  of  the 
emissaries  of  justice  at  the  gate  of  so  peaceable  a  residence.  I 
determined  lo  remain  quiet,  if  no  violence  should  be  attempted, 
til!  the  following  morning,  when  I  presented  myself  before  the 
chief  authorities,  who  professed  to  have  no  knowledge  of  the 
matttT.  Mr.  Cliatfield,  also,  being  duly  informed,  addressed  them 
on  the  subject,  and  it  was  found  that  the  order  had  emanated  from 
a  subordinate  quarter,  not  qualified  to  issue  it,  and  the  matter  fell 
to  the  ground. 

Jii  reporting  progress  to  the  Auxiliaty  at  Belize.  I  bad  led  the 
friends  there  to  jjarticipale  in  my  own  sanguine  hopes  of  success 
with  the  fiOTernmcitt.  1  had  also  in  process  of  time  sent  tbcm  a 
copy  of  the  edict,  and  of  the  permission  lo  sell  four  of  the  tracts. 
This  wag  of  course  a  sad  disappointment  to  them,  as  it  seemed  to 
preclude  all  hopes  of  further  direct  efforts  for  Scripture  circulation 
t[i  that  State.  The  Committee  of  the  Aiuriliary  bad  paid  me  the 
full  amount  of  my  allowance  at  the  rate  of  SOl.  a  year  and  my 
travelling  expense.  They  now  resolved  upon  suspending  their 
agency  in  the  interior,  and  mode  no  provision  for  my  return.  Mr. 
Henderson,  who  had  kindly  continued  to  supply  my  wife  with  the 
means  of  snbaisteDce  at  Abboltsville  during  my  long  absence,  now 
wrote,  urging  my  speedy  return  to  Belize.  But,  however  willing 
1  might  have  been  to  comply  with  this  advice,  the  rae.'vns  were 
wanting ;  and  that  line  of  action  I  appeared  by  the  eg 


S44  THB  QOBPBL  Df  CXmUX    AlfmifCA. 


alMolutely  preduded  from  chooong,  UKmgb  tlie  dHBrnltiw  bete 
me  were  great  whichever  way  I  tamed. 

Daring  nioe  monthi^  residenee,  while  the  iinwtnal  lUuggle  lA 
priestly  influence  was  gcnng  on,  I  had  become  somewliat  eeqaiiBlri 
with  Uie  capital,  and  had  already  a  laige  circle  of  eoiaaiiilMBB 
there,  among  whom  I  might  hope  to  ezerdae  a  aalutaij  iiifliMwr 
My  project  of  supporting  myself  by  teaching  iraa  not  lost  i^^ 
eC,  and  there  seemed  a  possibUity  of  doing  so  here.  Some  peeHsi 
were  desiroos  that  I  should  remain,  and  promised  me  their  ^iUlni 
to  teach ;  and  though  I  had  thought  a  retired  spot  more  sdlabk^ 
I  had  found  practically  that  I  could  ccmtend  with  the  enemiei  d 
the  truth  more  effectuaUy  in  their  own  lair  than  at  a  ^«tmi>i^»  fytt 
the  cajMtaL  Much  practice  in  the  Spanish  language  had  gifcaae 
greater  fiidlity  in  it  And,  besides  all  this,  my  health,  lAiA  fir 
fiye  years  had  been  yery  precarioos,  and  lately  aff^^ifnl  to  ibatfeei 
a  speedy  dissolution,  when  I  resided  on  the  low  lands  nesr  the 
eoBst,  had  wonderfuUy  improyed  at  Guatemala,  ao  tlvt  I  hid 
ceased  to  expectorate  blood,  and  had  reooyered  anne  of  my  taw 
physical  energy.  In  short,  I  began  seriondy  to  fntfrty"*  At 
thoughtof  at  least  attempting  to  settle  mysdf  at  Gnatenmla  Bsl 
how  to  get  my  wife  there  I  knew  not;  and  when  I  mealiarf 
the  matter  by  letter  to  Mr.  Henderson,  to  iHiom  I  lookei  wf  m 
to  a  father,  he  utterly  discouraged  what  he  oonaidered  the  nh 
attempt 

In  my  perplexity,  I  opened  my  mind  fredy  to  my  kind  harti 
Don  Antonio,  to  whom  I  owed  a  small  sum  Ibr  board,  which  wm 
one  of  the  most  pressing  sources  of  my  tronble.  Aa  sooa  ai  I 
named  the  project  of  fixing  my  residence  in  the  <'^T"tml^  he  atsae 
proposed  that  I  should  repay  him  in  the  toition  of  hk  chOdia^ 
and  was  quite  willing  that  I  should  go  and  fetch  my  wife.  Hi 
get  to  her  would  take  me  fhll  eight  days'  jonmey  with  a  giii 
beast,  and,  without  money,  that  was  no  small  diffieohj;  bsiti 
bring  a  timid  female  who  could  not  ride  oyer  the  iwmntaiBi  mA 
a  distance  appeared  an  Herculean  undertaking,  eren  with 
ahandant  funds.  My  du^,  howeyer,  was  now  rlcar.  I 
mined  to  go  and  fetdi  her,  and  consequently  aent  to  the  IMicm 
or  gracing  estate,  for  the  mule  which  had  brought  me  to  Gvi^ 
mala,  the  hire  of  which  had  been  unayoidably  ■*^'^«*nwilatiiy  M 
a  climax  to  my  difficulties,  when  the  poor  animal  mm  broi^it 


TIUKLV   AlO,  AKD  RBTDRN   TO    TSRA   PAZ.  SJiT 

vas  in  such  a.  plight  that  it  became  a  doubtful  question  whether 
it  cuuld  eudure  the  journej  home  wiihout  »  rider.  It  had  evi- 
dently heea  left  to  graze  upon  the  roots  of  what  had  been  green 
grass  duriug  the  wet  season  ;  but  the  apnt  where  it  uiice  grew  had 
loug  been  converted  into  a  scorched  plain  of  icd  clay  and  pebbles,  by 
ihe  complete  dry  season  of  the  table  land.  So  pitiable  was  the 
aspect  of  the  poor  creoturc,  that  my  boat  scouted  the  idea  of 
my  leading  it  by  the  bridle ;  and  it  vm  erident  that  he  would 
have  felt  his  dignity  lowered  by  being  found  in  its  company,  even 
for  a  moment.  It  was  no  use  to  thiuk  of  feeding  it  well  and 
awaiting  llie  slow  process  of  its  recovery.  I  had  made  np  my 
mind ;  delay  could  only  increase  my  troubles ;  I  resolved  lo  exe- 
cute the  journey  on  foot ;  and  if  the  mule  died  I  would  see  the 
]asl  of  her.  Ciieered  by  the  bare  prospect,  however  remote,  of 
reaching  home,  I  put  the  saddle  npon  the  poor  brute,  which  of 
itself  seemed  an  act  of  cruelly,  and  with  more  than  usual  good 
spirits  prepared  to  start.  Sly  host,  who  was  watching  me,  came 
into  the  patio,  and  begged  that  I  would  put  off  my  departure,  i 
re  [iresented  how  useless  such  a  delay  would  be,  and  continued  my 
little  preparations.  Again  he  cunie  to  me,  entreating  that  I  would 
defer  it  at  least  one  day,  and  finding  I  waa  still  determined,  he 
generously  engaged  to  provide  me  with  a  beast  for  the  journey. 
Through  hia  kindness,  1  was  enabled  to  start  the  next  morniiig. 
well  mounted  on  a  horse  of  my  own,  and  with  a  sum  of  fifty 
dollars  in  my  wallet  towards  the  expenses  of  our  removal  from 
the  colony  to  the  capital.  The  debilitated  mule  was  made  fust  to 
the  t«l  of  the  horse  1  rode,  and  both  were  entirely  dependent  upon 
my  attention  and  care. 

Tbos,  aidwl  and  encouraged,  I  retraced  my  steps  through  Vera 
I'az,  in  May  I B44.  At  Salania  the  former  curate  had  been  replaced 
by  another,  who  had  politely  invited  me  at  any  time  to  mate  lu» 
convenlo  my  posada.  This  invilation,  to  his  evident  iurprise,  1 
now  accepted ;  and  as  it  happened  to  be  a  vigil,  or  fast,  I  freely 
pAitook  of  his  mess  of  pulse,  over  which  we  seriously  discussed  our 
doctrinal  difierences,  and  I  spent  a  night  under  his  roof.  The  next 
day  1  resumed  ray  joumc-y  towards  Abbotlsville,  where  I  arrived 
safely  -with  the  mule,  ajid  found  the  street  ovei^rown  with  bushes 
inller  than  myself,  and  the  frail  bouses  rapidly  &lling  upon  tha 
oowi  and  iwitiB  wltich  hid  uktn  poawMiian  ot  mart  of  tbam.   Uy 


6iS  THE  GOSPEL   IE   OSIfTRAL   AHBBICJU 

only  bnsmess  was  to  prepare  for  our  departiune.  Ikbe  nigfat  bete 
we  took  our  final  leave  of  the  deserted  colonj,  our  own  IdtdHi 
fell  with  a  heavy  crash,  and  the  pretty  £ii^ish  cottage  in  whkk 
we  had  spent  three  years  was  soon  as  desolate  as  the  rest.  The  far 
natives  who  then  remained  have  since  died  or  lefl  the  place,  a  wfl-  / 
demess  more  dreary  £ir  than  before  the  crimiBal  and  tragic  scto0 
of  the  English  colony  were  enacted  there. 

The  difficulties  of  this  journey,  which  I  was  so  piovideBtiillj 
assisted  to  undertake,  were  still  considerable.     The  rainy  seuoa 
had  set  in.    My  wife,  who  was  too  timid  to  ride,  was  earned  hj 
Indians  in  a  large  arm  chair,  which  1  had  carefully  covered  witb 
matting ;  (me  of  the  bearers,  staff  in  hand,  sustatiiing  the  vkok 
weight  by  a  strap  passing  over  his  forehead,  while  another,  lodf 
to  release  or  assist  him,  trotted  by  his  side.     The  horse  whicii  had 
been  stolen  from  me,  I  recovered  in  good  condition  while  oi  the 
way,  and  it  served  for  a  female  attendant  who  waited  upon  mj 
wife.    Twelve  Indians  were  laden  with  my  household  stiiC  ^<^^ 
we  had  no  way  of  disposing  of  at  the  colony  for  want  of  porchaaeoi 
The  covered  chair,  which  I  closely  followed  at  a  walking  ]aa, 
generally  led  the  van,  the  rest  followed  in  a  long  line,  and  thai  «e 
wended  our  way  along  the  rugged  mountain  path,  over  cnf  sad 
precipice,  crossing  plains,  passing  over  high  mountains,  and  tko^^ 
rich  valle3rs ;  sometimes  following  the  bed  or  the  maigin  of  a  locky 
torrent,  completely  shaded  by  a  variety  of  tall  trees,  far  uauf 
hours,  ever  and  anon  fording  small  streams,  and  now  and  tks 
passing  rivers  which  were  barely  fordable,  and  were  well  filrsW 
by  the  roar  of  the  water,  and  the  trembling  steps  of  the  maK^ 
Indian  bearer,  to  excite  the  utmost  terror  and  alarm  in  the  madti 
the  European  female  he  was  carrying.    All  the  first  part  d  ik 
road,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  lay  through  the  deepest  forest 
and  consisted  of  a  narrow  winding  foot-path  bnt  lately 
scarcely  cleared  from  encumbrances  and  protruding  hfanehei^  oi 
frequently  invaded  by  the  luxuriant  underwood  which  was  xafii^ 
closing  in  on  every  side.    Small  clear  streams  and  nvnletaisii^ 
sected  the  path  almost  eveiy  three  or  four  hundred  yaids,  or  oAeitf* 
constantly  wetting  the  feet  of  the  Indians  and  Uie  hones.  'Of 
sounds  most  commonly  heard  were  the  screams  and  nates  of  tk 
wild  bush  birds,  and  the  deafening  hum  of  the  chichana.* 

•  To  tUi  Itttto  li«t  B«7  iueci  m^  be  tmad  tti  orisib  «|  Iha 


BEUOTXL — THE  DAHUOCE  BRIDGE.  S^ 

At  the  pus  called  La  Hamaca,  the  hammoch  we  crosed  tlie 
foaming  and  deep  Polochic  on  a  bejneo,  or  tJe-tie  bridge,  cou- 
Mrncted  by  the  native*  entirely  of  those  creeping  Tineo,  or  natural 
ropes,  nbich  abound  in  the  jungle.  It  ia  auspended  from  tree  to 
treu  about  thirty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  river  when  most  s  uollen 
by  the  rains.  The  breadth  of  the  stream  at  this  place  is  perhaps 
BJity  or  seventy  yards.  At  erery  step  we  took,  it  shook  beneath 
us  as  we  crept  slowly  and  cautiously  along,  our  feet  fiupporlcd  by 
two  or  three  of  the  larger  bcjucos  lashed  together  with  others  of 
the  Uiickness  of  tnine,  each  hand  holding  a  angle  one  on  dtlier  tide 
in.'iteud  of  banisters.  The  space  between  these  three  main  lines 
vras  slightly  interlaced  with  small  tie-tie,  which  united  the  whole 
in  one,  and  formed  the  hammock  bridge.  The  wild  aceneiy  of  this 
romantic  spot  is  in  perfect  unison  with  the  primitive  charBCter  and 
singularly  wild  appearance  of  the  Indian  device,  from  which  il 


Its  Ui 


The  fool  of  the  sleep  mountain,  which  we  had  just  slowly  de- 
scended by  a  lig-iBg  road,  approaches  to  within  a  few  score  paces 
uf  the  grassy  margin  of  the  river,  which  rolls  rapidly  and  roajes- 
tically  past  a  high  overhanging  rock  on  the  opposite  bank.  In  its 
fiiRures,  between  the  masses  of  stone,  some  noble  trees  find  sus> 
tenanec  for  iheir  roots.  It  is  to  two  of  these  that  the  hammock 
bridge  is  made  fast  by  many  clumsy  turns  of  the  tie-tie  rope,  the 
rude  descent  from  which,  on  that  aide,  winds  round  the  rock  by  a 
narrow  ledge,  and  is  even  more  perilous  than  the  frail  bridge  itselH 
Aa  soon  as  the  water  has  laved  the  foot  of  the  massy  cliil^  which 
here  confines  the  stream,  it  spreads  itself,  and  speedily  dividing, 
furms  several  verdant  islels,  upon  which  the  cattle  are  oHen  curried 
by  the  impetuous  current,  in  their  ioetfcctual  attempts  to  swim 
Bcroffi  the  stream.  Here  the  open  prospect  expands  over  the  wooded 
Talley  of  the  Polochic.  Before  we  reached  La  Uamaca,  the  road 
bad  gradually  been  improving.  Oa  leaving  this  spot,  where  ever; 
traveller  necessarily  pauses,  and  all  the  labour  of  loading,  har- 
nessing, and  starting  b  at  once  renewed  and  doubled,  we  entered 
a  shaded,  though  wide  and  somewhat  better  road,  lined  with  green 
grass,  a  proof  of  its  having  been  long  and  repeatedly  cleared,  and 
Booii  we  pulsed  some  of  the  numerous  sheds  which  shelter  the  cm- 
cifii  and  images  of  the  virgin,  all  indicative  that  we  had  entered  a 
marc  popolonu  district  than  that  we  had  left,    while   trapiches 


648  THE  GOSPEL   HI  CENTRAL   AMEMlCXm 

(sugar- mills) — milpas  (cotton-fields)^ and  frejolaTS  (fields  of  fn- 
joles,  or  polfie)  were  alao  more  abundant  and  extenaiTe,  and  tk 
mountain  side  was  more  firequently  diyersified  with  patchst  d 
cultivation,  contrasted  by  the  deeper  and  conttouoiis  forest  greea. 

At  the  Indian  villages  at  which  we  stopped,  we  had  ampk 
opportunities  of  noticing  the  superstition  and  intempennoe  whkk 
characterize  the  Indians,  and  also  of  witnessing  somethii^,  ani 
hearing  more  of  the  extortions  and  immoralities  of  the  resident 
curates.  Part  of  our  road  now  lay  oyer  an  eztenaiye  pine-ridge. 
which  covered  the  mountains  as  far  as  the  eye  ooald  reach,  dnricg 
more  than  one  of  our  short  day*s  journeys. 

Some  months  before,  when  I  had  traversed  this  beantifal  distrid, 
which  is  comprised  in  one  vast  cattle  estate,  larger  than  wmdj 
an  English  county,  the  rich  pasturage  between  the  dnsten  of 
trees  was  of  a  bright  yellow  hue,  by  reason  of  the  dry  westher. 
This  contrasted  singularly  with  the  dark  green,  which  t!be 
straight  and  gigantic  pines  put  on  at  that  season.  At  one  k^ 
summit  over  which  the  road  passes,  these  pine-dad  moontaim 
are  seen  to  encircle,  by  several  bold  ridges,  the  extensive  phiai 
of  Salama,  and  behind  them  other  hills  succeed  each  other  in 
soil  undulations,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach.  They  then  Te- 
senibled  heaps  of  gold  dust,  thickly  studded  with  emmldsL  Ttis 
was  soon  after  blackened  and  scorched  by  the  fire  which  dean  the 
ground  for  a  new  crop  of  tender  grass,  and  nature  gorgeoodj 
illuminates  the  landscape,  presenting  a  night  scene  of  singnhr 
beauty.  The  always  green,  because  well  watered  plyin,  itseff 
dotted  with  extensive  hadendas,  or  farms,  is  oocnpied  v^^  tk 
centre  by  the  tovm,  with  its  white-washed  bnildings  and  id 
tiled  roofs  glistening  in  the  sun.  The  whole  is  ever  moie  fib 
a  fairy  scene  than  a  reality,  and  had  then  fixed  my  niirr''*'*^ 
and  delighted  gaze  for  a  longer  period  than  it  emer  before  dsck 
upon  a  way-side  prospect  On  the  present  occasion,  the  yarios 
shades  of  livdy  green,  if  less  striking,  were  eyen  more  bentifili 
and  the  fresh  cool  air  of  the  mountain  was  «fhni^T^^|j,g  n,^  bndi( 
even  at  noon-day.  After  descending  from  this  smnnut  into  the  bs 
plains  below,  we  encountered  a  violent  thunder-storm,  mjsiUMisn' 
by  a  high  wind  and  torrents  of  rain,  through  which  we  had  i> 
travel  for  several  hours. 

The  consequence  was,  that  my  vriSd  was  laid  up  with  ici«t 
indispoBition  at  Salamai  and  we  were  detAied  tbm  6r  wnai 


'  ItE-rN-TRANCE   INTO   THE  CAPITAL   WITH    niBLCB,   &C.  649 

weeks.  When  ehe  hid  quite  recovered,  we  ilsrted  agaia,  and 
were  amongst  the  first  to  paaa  over  the  Bio  Grande  de  Montagiia 
(formerly  the  greatest  dtfHcuItj  on  the  road*},  od  bd  iron  sus- 
pension bridge,  imported  bj  the  English  compaay,  and  which  had 
just  ihtn  betn  completed. 

As  I  afterwards  learned,  we  were  passed  on  the  road,  on  ihe 
fi:^t  morning  saoa  nl'ter  leaving  Salania,  by  a  Government  mes- 
senger, who  wiia  tlie  bearer  of  an  orJer  to  the  Curregidor  of  Vera 
Pai,  lo  snffer  me  to  proceed  no  fnrther  in  the  direction  of  the 
capita),  but  to  send  loe  back  whence  I  came.  This  danger  v.t» 
providentially  escaped  by  oar  starling  when  we  did ;  and  »'as  ao 
doubt  the  result  of  a  step  which  I  bad  taken  before  leariug  the 
cftpilal,  informing  the  municipaiity  of  my  intention  to  open  a  wlii«[, 
a  formality  required  bylaw.  The  fact  of  my  detention  at  Solania  had 
probably  reached  the  capital;  but  the  influence  of  the  prieili  was  once 
rnore  baffled  in  their  unconstitutional  attempts  to  thwart  my  plans. 

Among  my  baggage  was  now  mcluded  the  remnant  of  Scriptures 
which  had  remained  st  Salania,  my  own  books,  and  a  quantity  of 
5chool  molcrials,  which  were  essential  to  mj  undertaking.  Ttiese 
were  the  subject  of  painful  solicitude,  arising  out  of  the  fear  that 
I  might  lie  entirely  deprived  of  them,  which  greatly  increaM'd  aq 
I  approached  Ihe  cspitaL  Some  friends  whom  I  cousullcil  had 
advised  me  (o  smuggle  them  into  the  eily  through  tlie  mvinea, 
which  there  were  men  ready  to  do  for  a  trifling  considerntion. 
This,  of  coarse,  I  rejected,  and  preferred  trusting  to  the  good  pro- 
ridence  of  God.  Whea  at  length  we  arrived  near  Ihe  Guardn  del 
Golfo,  at  once  the  outer  gnie  of  the  dty  and  the  station  of  the 
cuitom^house,  I  rode  on  before,  and  baldly  presented  my  keys  lo 
the  officer  in  charge,  requesting  him  to  examine  what  he  pk«<cd, 
and  to  let  me  pass  without  sending  the  baggage  to  the  Aduana,  as 
I  had  nothing  that  wns  chargeable  with  duties.  On  the  lieatvr* 
coming  up,  the  guarda  fixed  at  once  upon  a  box  which  contained 
nolhing  but  Scriptures,  probably  because  it  had  more  the  appear- 
ance of  a  case  of  imported  goods.  I  now  feared  the  worst,  and 
with  a  trembling  hand  helped  to  force  open  the  lid.    The  guarda 

*  Alltiiirlue.nhen  (In  lira  vu  iwaUen  b;  the  ninl,  Ihin  hul  fur  mau;  \nn 
bnB  aBlj  *  KWTob,  i,  K  ■  long  ubk  itrelfbed  ktuh  Ik  cira.  U>  vbltli  ■  kiul  nT  ml 
in  •  wu  bulci  lupEtMlr^  uil  Ihe  Innlltn  ■art  pnlJid  ■crun.  one  b;  iniii.  bj  nnna 
nf  nipn  ud  piillin.    ThE  UiUr  of  Uic  Uihop  ViUri  Ual  iir  life  ■!  UUt  yli 


550  THB  GOSPEL  IN  CCITRAL  AMSSICA* 

took  out  a  New  Testament,  and,  as  he  opened  it,  infinred,  **W]mI 
book  is  this  ?""  On  being  told,  he  added,  '^ la  it  the  aame  bosk 
that  was  seized  at  the  custom-honae  some  time  ainee  f^  I  r^&i 
that  it  was.  *'  And  wherefore  was  it  seiaed  ?**  inquired  he.  **b 
it  a  bad  book ?**  I  then  told  him  briefly  that  it  was  the  bcstflf 
books,  and  that  it  was  the  enmitj  of  the  eomipt  heart  of  nan  tkit 
caused  it  to  be  spoken  against ;  adding  some  worda  about  the 
anxietj  of  certain  interested  parties  to  keep  the  book  of  God  oat  of 
the  hands  of  the  people.  Seeing  that  he  was  reading  some  ps0- 
ages,  I  begged  him  to  accept  of  the  copy  which  he  h^  ia  In 
hand,  that  he  might  satisfy  himself  of  its  charmcter,  and  handed 
another  to  his  son,  who  was  standing  by  ns,  that  he  might  kan  t9 
read  in  it.  The  good  man  looked  at  me,  and  tnmed  over  the  lei^cs 
of  the  book,  seeming  to  hesitate ;  meanwhile  I  lifted  op  my  besit 
to  God.  At  length  he  muttered  something  about  the  pcietls,  wbo 
will  not  teach  the  people  themseWes,  and  will  anfier  no  one  dse  to 
do  so ;  and,  rising  firom  kneeling  upon  one  knee  by  the  lide  of 
the  box,  which  was  open  in  the  midst  of  the  road,  be  diiectcd  ne 
to  take  them  in  and  pass  on,  thna  taking  the  responsibilily  apoa 
himself,  and  dispensing  with  any  further  ezaminatieo  of  my  cffeda 
Half  an  hour  later,  the  guarda  received  a  written  order  fitaa  tbt 
authorities  to  suffer  no  goods  of  mine  to  peas  in  without  scndag 
them  to  the  custom-house.  This  I  afkrwarda  learned,  tiie  had  of 
an  Indian  who  had  lagged  behind  the  rest  having  tiina  ^li<^  iafeo 
their  hands.  It  consiated,  in  part,  of  culinary  vtenatb,  legate' 
with  a  small  box  of  my  private  books,  which,  thongh  not  So^ 
tures,  I  had  some  trouble  to  get  through  the  Aduuuu. 

When  I  had  thus  happfly  passed  the  city-gate,  my  heart  fflU 
with  gratitude  to  God,  and  in  the  pleasurable  anticipadaa  of 
meeting  my  kind  benefactor  Don  Antonio  Baldca,  whom  I  U 
parted  from  about  four  months  before,  what  waa  my  anrpriae  sad 
disappointment  to  find  his  house  entirely  closed  and  imooGBpiri. 
Leaving  my  wife  in  the  street  before  the  door  with  the  Th^Kmm,  I 
hastened  to  the  house  of  a  relative  of  I>oo  AntOBio*ia  to  inqmie  Ai 
cause,  and  to  my  grief  I  learned  that  he  had  hastily  laniavcd  kii 
family  into  the  State  of  Salvador  on  account  of  political  mattok 
I  now  felt  that  I  waa  akme  in  this  dty,  complete^  dtiitilulr  of 
means,  having  had  to  dispose  of  some  of  our  goods  by  the  waf  ia 
order  to  accomphsh  the  journey,  and  uncertain  of  earthly  frkirl^ 
though  there  waa  no  doubt  aa  to  enemica.    lly  yaSt  and  «»  Mtfi 


eEcoND  ohdeu  to  qdit  the  btate. 


property  were  at  that  moment  in  the  street  without  shehcr,  and 
we  knew  not  wliieh  way  to  turn.  Divine  Providence,  however, 
a^D  appeared  fur  us.  Don  Jliwi  Ajitooio  Mirtiiies,  the  uncle  of 
my  foniier  host,  who  gave  me  the  sad  intelligence,  also  put  into 
my  bands  the  key  of  his  nephew's  empty  bouse,  and  bid  nie  ute  it 
freely.  On  leaving  bin  to  relieve  my  wife  ftnd  discharge  tlie 
Indiaiu.  I  was  follgwed  by  the  servanla  of  this  worthy  merehiint 
with  refreshmeata;  and  a  renewal  of  former  eivilittes  and  atten* 
tions  from  many  of  the  ualivea  comnicnced.  Tboiigb  we  rtaoained 
about  a  month  in  tbiscommodious  dwellingnorenl  wasreeeixed  far 
it,  aod  I  WBsfuitlier  helped  to  tfae  lue  of  some  neceieuy  fiiminiTe. 

One  of  my  fiiet  steps  sfter  our  uriraJ  wai  to  proceed  to  the 
fMMt'office  and  inquire  if  I  had  any  letters.  To  my  Mirprise  and 
Joy  I  fouml  one  from  the  Secrelaiy  of  the  Honduras  Auxiliary 
Bible  Society,  ouiouncing  that,  on  the  recommendation  of  Mr. 
James  Thomsuo,  the  sgenl  of  the  Parent  Society,  the  commillee 
bad  reappointed  me  to  act  for  them  for  ancrthcr  year,  and  eon- 
•equenlly  enclosed  a  draA  far  my  eipeDses.  Thus,  in  an  un- 
expected manner,  was  1  enabled  to  set  about  the  eiecution  of  ray 
.plans  deliberately  and  with  sufficient  means,  which  the  absence  of 
my  tried  friend  had  made  apparently  doublflil.  Thus  also  waa 
my  farih  m  God's  providential  care  streiigtbeoed,  and  I  was 
taught  that  He  who  at  will  dries  up  one  gtream  is  Himself  tlio 
fountain  of  every  blesnng,  and  can  open  vp  many  springs  even  ia 
a  dry  and  thirsty  land. 

We  bad  not  been  three  days  in  New  GaatemalB  when  I  re- 
ceived anatber  order  to  qalt  tbe  State.  This  time  it  emonaled 
from  the  chief  Minister,  and  allowed  me  only  three  days  to  get  out 
of  the  territories  of  the  Itt^ublic,  a  (cut  which  it  would  t)c  found 
difScuIt  to  ueconijitish  without  wme  epplieation  of  lucomolive 
power  not  yet  introduced  into  tbe  eountiy.  Again  I  deciarwi  my 
detsrmination  to  go  only  when  they  should  send  nie,  and  I  once 
more  waited  upon  the  authorities  to  remonstrate  and  protest ;  [ 
also  obtained  the  private  intervention  of  the  British  Consul,  wbo 
chose  to  deny  my  nationality,  and  declined  to  act  officially.  Other 
influential  {ricitds  also  moved  in  my  favour.  Desirous  as  they  were 
to  frighten  and  if  possible  to  get  rid  of  me,  in  order  to  please  ibe 
ccdcsiutical  authorities,  it  was  not  thought  worth  while  at  that 
Cime  to  employ  violence  to  compsa  tbe  end,  and  Mgaia  the  mattor 
ftjJl  lo  the  ffroumL 


553  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL    AMERICA.* 

Knowing  that  I  had  introdnced  a  qnantitj  of  Bibles,  and  tiat  i 
did  not  feel  myself  bound  by  the  eoclesiaadcal  edict,  the  M 
authorities  sent  me  an  order,  requiring  that  I  should  neitber  idl 
nor  give  away  any  copies  whatever  of  the  Spaniali  Scriptures  At 
this  I  was  much  grieved  and  perplexed,  as  I  felt  that  I  ought  tt 
obey  the  magistrates,  and  yet  when  I  was  applied  to  for  the  Wori 
of  Grod  I  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  refuse  to  supply  it,  having  tlie 
books  in  my  own  possession.  These  applications  were  now  req 
frequent,  and  from  persons  who  seemed  anzioos  to  read  the  boob 
that  they  might  judge  for  themselves.  It  occurred  to  me,  bow* 
ever,  that  whereas  they  had  strictly  forbidden  me  to  sell  or  givt 
away,  I  was  not  bound  not  to  lend  my  own  Bible  to  any  one  thtt 
I  might  wish  to  accommodate.  I  therefore  became  the  poithaser 
of  a  certain  number  of  volumes,  which  I  placed  to  my  own  debiti 
and  carefully  wrote  my  name  in  each  copy,  so  that*  when  any  oat 
applied,  I  lent  them  a  Bible,  and  took  note  of  the  circamstniai 
thus  retaining  a  control  over  the  book,  either  to  resume  it,  to  sell,  or 
to  give  it  away,  when  I  should  be  more  at  liberty.  This  quite  re* 
lievcd  my  mind,  and  met  the  difficulty  for  the  time. 

It  is  a  notable  circumstance  that  I  did  not  need  to  cuntiaue  ths 
practice  many  months,  before  I  was  entirely  relieved,  and  the  fe 
circulation  of  the  Bible  became  legal  in  all  the  country,  in  ^vteoT 
the  edict.  This  was  secured  by  the  promulgation  of  a  law  poascd 
in  May  1845,*  by  the  influence  of  the  liberals,  who  had  no  thou^ 
of  the  Bible  at  the  time,  but  merely  sought  to  protect  the  liberty 
of  the  press  against  the  censorship  of  the  deigy.  No  book  wai 
thereaf^r  legally  prohibited  till  a  jury  of  ten  ekizens^  chosen  bf 
lot,  should  decide  against  it  by  a  minority  of  two-thirds.  After 
this,  I  received  further  supplies  of  Scriptures  in  small  quantities 
and  regularly  supplied  the  demand. 

My  first  object,  after  our  arrival,  was  to  establish  a  schooL 
Some  of  my  advisers  recommended  a  select  class  of  scholais,  but  to 
this  I  was  averse,  feeling  that  the  poor  people  had  the  greater 
need,  and  therefore  the  first  claim.  In  my  search  lor  a  snitibk 
house,  I  fixed  upon  one  situated  in  the  barrios.  The  neigfabosi^ 
hood,  though  poor,  was  rather  more  free  from  Chicherias  ♦^■"  the 
other  suburbs,  and  children  seemed  to  abound.  The  house  itw^ 
being  far  superior  to  those  around  it,  was  known  hy  the  ^r**^  d 
Gasa  de  Folanco,  haying  been  built  by  a  proprietor  »^  hniU^dr 

•  See  p.  17L  J 


A   BIDLE   SCHOOL  OPENED.  563 

llittt  name  for  his  own  residence.  Since  his  clestb,  no  one  would 
hire  it  because  of  the  danger  and  ill  repute  of  the  barrios  ■□  gene- 
ral. The  large  ball  nbich  I  made  my  Bcbool-rootn  bad,  faowcver, 
been  generallj  lued  for  revelrica  and  debauch,  and  more  than  one 
murder  bad  been  committed  within  it  For  these  reasons  the  rent 
was  unnsuallj  low,  and  I  judged  it  most  suitable  for  my  object- 
Having  removed,  we  were  careful  not  to  go  out  or  open  our  doora 
after  dark ;  frequently,  while  thus  shut  in,  we  could  hear  the 
footsteps  of  those  whose  feet  are  swift  to  ahed  blood,  and  on  one 
occasion,  our  family  worship  was  interrupted  by  the  clash  of  knirea 
close  by  our  grated  windows.  Breathless  we  Ibtened  to  the  scuffle, 
and  soon  heard  a  heavy  fall  upon  the  pavement,  then  a  gcoao,  and 
then  a  lumolt  of  voices.  Through  the  partially  opened  sbulter, 
we  could  also  see  Che  glare  of  lights  carried  by  those  who  came  to 
remove  the  fmitten  one  to  the  hospital  of  San  Juan  dc  Dioa.* 
The  horrid  consciouBntsa  that  such  dtcds  were  constantly  occurring 
around  us  was  unavoidable. 

At  first  I  made  it  my  business  to  viiit  all  my  neighbours,  and  to 
solicit  the  attendance  of  their  children  at  schooL  They  consisted 
of  Ladinos,  and  the  majority  were  poor  animus,  who  received  me 
most  coorieously,  and  as  I  bad  fixed  the  school  charges  very  law, 
I  soon  assembled  three  or  four  boys,  though  with  some  difficulty, 
as  my  objects  were  not  yet  understood.  The**  seedlbgs  I  en- 
deavoured to  foster  and  improve  with  the  utmost  lusiduily,  fully 
expijciiijg  that  they  would  in  lime  produce  the  effect  I  desired 
upon  the  neighbourhood,  and  so  HU  my  schoolroom-  Of  course 
the  New  Testament  was  imioediately  put  into  the  hands  of  such  as 
could  read  a  little.  In  the  meantime  I  cultivatedthe acquaintance 
of  the  people,  and  spent  a  part  of  each  Lord's  day  in  reading  the 
Scriptures  to  them  in  their  own  cottages.  On  such  occasions,  Iwu 
iuvariably  received  with  courteous  deference,  and  was  alwaya 
thanked  for  what  they  were  pleaded  to  deem  an  act  of  condescen- 
sion. Frequently  the  guitar  and  dice,  as  well  as  light  and  profane 
jesting,  gave  place,  and  seemed  to  be  cheerfully  put  aside  for  the 
wonis  of  truth  and  soberness,  indited  by  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
love.  At  times,  two  or  three  females  sat  with  decorous  attention 
and  nuperstitioiu  awe,  to  hear  the  story  of  Calvary,  as  they  had 
never  heard  it  before.  One  family  was  that  of  an  aged  carpenter, 
a  Tercero,  or  professor  of  tlie  third  order,  himself  weariag  a  bolf 

*  SmiaX  JohD  o[  Qod. 


554  THB  GOSPEL  III  CENTRUi   AMJKBIClu 

monkish  grej  habit,  and  a  large  seapiilar  haqging  OTer  hk  fannt* 
Another  was  an  industrious  weaver,  who  seemed  to  hail  wj  Twk 
with  delight,  and  readily  stopped  his  old  fimhioncd  andcfam^ 
loom,  to  hear  and  couTerse.  None  of  them  s{^>eared  to  aeei 
much  prompting  to  lead  them  to  contrast  what  they  heard  fhm 
the  Bible,  and  what  they  had  been  taught  by  their  priesli,  aai 
some  needed  to  be  restrained  rather  than  stimulated  in  their 
strong  condemnation  of  the  insatiate  rapacity  and  licentious  hsbia 
of  their  clergy.  Freedom  of  thought  and  of  speech  was  erideml^ 
the  order  of  the  day  with  the  men.  The  women,  with  less  sppo* 
sition  to  error,  seemed  most  seriously  attentive  to  the  troth. 

Five  months  were  suffered  to  elapse  in  this  manner,  daring 
which  my  school  increased  to  nearly  a  score  of  boys,  who  vere 
making  some  progress.  Their  parents  were  astonished  and  de- 
lighted, not  only  at  the  fact  that  they  wne  advancing  in  sevcnl 
branches  of  study  at  the  same  time,  but  more  stiU,  that  they  were 
decidedly  attached  to  their  school,  and  would  even  sacrifice  that 
breakfast  rather  than  be  too  late.  Some  of  the  merchaal  ch9^ 
and  two  or  three  of  the  political  leaders  of  the  fiberal  party,  tlMMg^ 
displeased  at  the  locality  I  had  chosen,  also  sent  me  their  sosi 
But  even  thus,  the  proceeds  of  the  school  scarcely  covered  its  ex- 
penses, and  as  some  of  the  parents  could  not'afford  to  pay  anytkisg; 
an  extreme  straitness,  never  extending  to  absolute  want,  wis  the 
result.  I  was  enabled  partly  to  make  up  for  the  deficieoeycl 
resources,  and  at  the  same  time  considerably  to  extend  wsj  is- 
fluence,  by  devoting  some  hours  in  the  morning,  and  the  iatcnsl 
between  schools,  to  private  lessons  in  the  English  and  fVenek  ha* 
guages,  at  the  houses  of  some  of  the  wealthier  natlvcsL  An  mAj 
class  of  students  from  the  University  was  also  formed  Ibr  the  itaif 
of  the  French ;  an  evening  class  was  precluded  by  the  ili^frr 
common  to  the  barrios.  On  the  whole,  my  prospects  i^ipeandtt 
be  rapidly  improving. 

General  Carrera  had  now  openly  assumed  the  presidency  of  ^ 


*  lUs  man,  though  itronglj  attached  to  his  prqndieea,  and  ta  tke  «i»«tit 
with  which  he  was  oonnected,  yet  heard  the  Word  ^adlj,  and  aooa  ap^t  m 
reading,  and  hearing  the  Scripturea  read  hy  hia  grandchildnni.  aayadnlaEa.  Btiri 
daring  my  reaidenoe  in  Ouatemala,  and  thoi^  he  knfc  himnalf  to  Um  Init  to  Ihi  «■» 
moniea  of  the  cfaorch  which  churned  him  here  on  earth,  I  coBMlvod  Um  koM  caMai>C 
him,  that  he  had  been imitod  to  the  SaTioar  by  ftiUi,  tttioa|^  Uit  kaovhtte  d^ 


ACTIVE   OProSITION   OP  THE   PRIESTS.  5u5 

,  and  military  despotism  was  everywhere  in  the  ascendant. 

Anxioiia  to  bring  the  Scriptures  before  his  attention,  and  if  possible 
lo  sL'Curc  for  theni  a  favourable  reception,  1  had  sent  him  a  selec- 
tion of  BiblM  in  four  languages,  together  with  some  other  good 
books,  in  acknowledgment  of  which  I  received  a  polite  letter  of 
thanks,  signed  by  the  General  himself;  for  by  this  time  he  bad 
leartied  to  write  htsname.  Oneofhis  lavonrite  officers,  an  English 
Creole  of  Jamaica,  aiterwords  informed  me,  that  the  President' 
General  set  a  great  value  on  the  books,  and  sometimes  employed 
him  to  read  llie  Scriptures.  He  hod  also  frequently  expressed  his 
approbation  of  what  he  heard,  remarking  that  he  would  be  glad  if 
the  clergy  would  practise  and  teach  snch  doctrines  as  those. 

Let  not  the  readir,  however,  suppose  that  I  had  for  a  moment 
escaped  the  close  observation  of  the  priesthood.  From  the  time  that 
my  little  company  of  boys  commenced  to  assume  the  appearance  of 
a  school,  the  curates  had  carefully  and  perseveriogly  visiled  the 
neighbourhood,  and  warned,  exhorted,  threatened,  entreated,  and 
bribed  the  parents  of  my  poorer  scholars,  in  order  to  prevent  their 
attendance.  In  one  or  two  cases  they  previuled — in  others  they 
were  met  by  rebufTs  which  must  have  been  very  humiliating.  One 
imrent,  himself  a  sculptor  of  some  repute,  and  therefore  an  image- 
maker  for  their  idolatrons  worship,  asked  the  padre  who  visited 
him,  if  be  would  undertake  to  leach  the  children  himself,  and  told 
him  (hat  be  felt  tbnt  this  foreigner  was  conferring  a  great  favour 
uiionlhem.  In  general,  these  measures  failed  of  their  object ;  but 
tbey  probably  had  the  effect  of  preventing  a  more  rapid  increase  of 
the  school.  Foiled  on  this  point,  the  pulpits,  which  had  never  been 
silent  since  the  promulgation  of  the  edict,  began  to  resound  more 
frequently  with  tirades  against  Protestantism,  and  with  dcnuo* 
eiations  of  excommunication  upon  all  its  aiders  and  abettors,  bnt 
especially  upon  the  parents  of  the  childnn  who  frequented  my 
school.  The  three  prelates  who  were  then  assembled  in  the 
capital,  endeavouring  to  revive  sacerdotal*  power,  joined  their  in- 
fluence with  the  Government  to  obtain  my  expulsion  from  the 
State.  It  was  even  reported  that  they  had  unitedly  waited  upon 
the  President,  some  time  before  he  had  received  the  gift  of  Bibles, 
ttc^  and  entreated  him  with  humiliatiDg  earnestness  to  consent  to 
my  bsniibment.  Bnt,  strange  to  relate,  they  had  entirely  fiuled. 
•  See  pp.  US,  lit. 


&56  THE  GOSPEL   IK  CENTRAL   ▲IfSRICA* 

While  they  were  still  together  in  the  capital,  a  conne  of  tern 
sennons  was  preached  at  the  opening  of  the  temple  of  La  Ro^ 
leccion.  In  more  than  one  of  these  sennons,  which  attracted  pai 
crowds  of  all  classes  of  the  people,  the  heretical  schocd  wis  tk 
subject  of  warm  declamation,  and  the  Bishop  Viteri  faithfully  wanA 
the  unwary  inhabitants  of  Guatemala  against  ^  Protestantiai. 
which  was  lying  in  ambush,  and  ready  to  pounce  upon  their  imtf- 
cent  children."  The  press,  too,  was  made  availahle  for  the  mm 
purpose ;  and  La  Aurora,  a  semi-liberal  paper  which  had  ja^ 
been  started,  became  the  vehicle  of  priestly  bitterness  and  b»- 
representation.  Rumours  of  more  decided  steps  than  these  vere 
constantly  brought  to  my  ears ;  but  I  was  enabled  to  continue  tbe 
quiet  labours  which  filled  my  hands  and  my  heart  without  ho^ 
materially  turned  aside,  until  the  SOth  of  January  1845. 

A  month  ailer  Carrera  had  been  ceremonially  installed  into  tbe 
presidential  chair,  he  lefl  the  capital  for  his  estate  on  the  Vwak 
Coast  Late  in  the  evening  of  that  day,  I  received  a  sommoastB 
present  myself  immediately  before  the  Municipality.  Phmpdr 
obeying,  I  found  this  body  assembled,  and  afterwards  learned  tbtf 
they  had  been  summoned,  at  an  unprecedented  hoar,  to  attend  tt 
extraordinary  sitting  as  soon  as  the  President  had  left  the  d(j* 
It  was  then  notified  to  me  that  1  was  required  instantly  to  doc 
my  school,  and  ordered  to  quit  tbe  capital  within  three  daj%  I 
requested  that  a  copy  of  this  order  might  be  given  me  in  writii^ 
that  1  might  take  the  proper  steps  to  have  it  revoked.  Tins  mi 
promised,  and  I  retired.  I  afterwards  learned  that  one  of  tk 
members  of  this  corporation  had  recorded  his  vote  against  ^ 
unconstitutional  proceedings,  and  afterwards  resigned  his  seal  9 
it,  because  of  their  willingness  to  become  the  tools  of  the  dogf  * 
this  afifair. 

On  the  following  morning,  at  an  early  hour,  I  received  the  v^ 
of  Don  Manuel  Dardon,  a  young  lawyer  of  recognised  takBtn^ 
decidedly  hberal  opinions,  who  came  on  horseback  to  infona  wtt 
that  the  municipality  had  appointed  a  commission  to  vint  i^ 
house  during  that  day,  for  the  purpose  of  seiidng  my  books  iri 
papers.  He  generously  offered  to  become  the  depository  of  wbi* 
ever  I  might  wish  to  place  in  his  custody,  gave  me  the  beneit' 
his  l^al  advice,  and  offered  any  further  assistance  that  I  w^^ 
require.    As  to  my  books  and  papers,  I  contented  nyadf  ^ 


BDER   TO  QtilT,   AND   APPEAL. 


557 


tarning  niy  school-rnom  key  upon  them,  uid  putting  it  into  my 
pocket.  I  then  left  the  house,  and  with  the  aaiistance  of  this  kbd 
friend,  prepared  a  petition  Ut  the  Supreme  Court  of  Justice,  claim- 
ing the  wiit  of  habeas  eorpui,  and  placing  mjself  under  its  protee- 

The  minds  of  the  citizeuB,  which  had  already  been  repeatedly, 
if  not  continuously  agitated  on  my  account,  were  now  nnusuaHy 
alive  to  the  Btruggle,  and  intent  upon  the  issue.  The  law  of 
hubeaa  eorpua,  though  long  oa  the  statute  book,  had  never  yet 
been  put  into  force,  no  one  ever  having  claimed  it.  If  the  writ 
had  been  granted  on  this  occasion,  there  were  not  a  few  persona 
nificring  for  political  offences  who  were  ready  to  avail  themselves 
of  the  precedent.  On  the  day  after  the  presentation  of  the  pe- 
tition, when  I  was  to  be  heard,  the  court  was  attended  hy  an 
unusual  number  uf  pcrsDm>,  mostly  officials  and  young  «tudc:ita. 
Dun  Wanuel  Dardon,  who  acted  as  my  lawyer,  wan  first  heard  iu 
support  of  the  petition,  and  ably  sustained  the  legal  points  of  the 
case.  I  followed  in  my  own  defence,  and  replied  to  aevetal  alle- 
gations with  which  the  municipality  had  Aimi»hed  the  court.  To 
the  charge  that  I  had  illegally  and  surreptitiously  introduced  my* 
■elf  into  the  country,  without  complying  with  the  laws  respecting 
the  establishment  of  foreigner,  I  was  enabled  to  reply,  that  having 
entered  the  coimtry  as  a  eolaniat,  under  the  provisions  of  the 
charter  given  to  the  English  Company,  I  was  exempted  frara  tbo^ 
regulations,  and  was  further  entitled  to  all  the  rights  and  privi- 
leges of  a  natural-born  citizen ;  and  that  my  conduct  since  I  hod 
lel\  the  Colony  had  been  open  and  public.  I  hod  complied  with 
all  the  reqiiirementa  of  the  law  in  the  opening  of  my  school,  and 
claimed  a  right  quietly  to  continue  it  as  a  means  of  subsistence. 
To  the  charge  that  I  was  "  a  Protestant  missiouaiy,"  I  pleaded 
guilty,  and  gloried  in  the  fact,  claiming  a  right  t 
character  also,  and  explaining  that  in  the  school  I  had  tatight  no 
dogmas  but  such  as  are  contained  in  the  Bible. 

The  order  of  the  municipality,  of  which  I  could  not  obtain  a 
copy,  though  it  hod  been  promised,  occasioned  some  technical 
difGcuIlies,  and  when  it  was  handed  in  to  the  court,  it  hod  oiiaumed 
*  tnodified  form,  leaving  me  the  alternative  of  a  formal  trial  if  1 
would  not  go,  and  thus  redudng  it  to  a  mere  threat  of  illegal 
Tiolence. 


658  TRB  Q06PRL  Uf  CBMTRAX.   AMTnilBI^ 


On  the  third  dmy  we  returned  to  hear  the  decinaii  of  the  cont; 
and  long  before  the  doors  were  c^wned  puties  were  to  he  m 
impatiently  waiting  before  them.  When  the  hour  mrrired,  n 
were  ushered  into  the  coart*>room,  and  a  paper  couched  in  aboait 
terms,  was  read,  in  which  I  was  stigraatixed  ms  gnilQr  of  ftbehoid, 
declared  to  be  a  disturber  of  the  public  peace,  with  many  other  iih 
words ;  and  refused  the  writ  for  my  protection. 

The  time  assigned  by  the  Municipali^  had  expired,  and  mMfl 
were  afloat  that  violence  was  intended  towards  me.  I  retired  ti 
the  house  of  my  generous  lawyer,  where  I  fonnd  myself  wbT' 
rounded  by  a  numerous  company  of  respectable  citiaenB.  Soae 
of  the  younger  men  were  under  much  excitement,  and  all  ipob 
indignantly  of  the  decision  of  the  court.  While  there,  a  uMUtaffS 
came  from  my  house  to  inform  me  that  a  Teniente  de  Polieia  and  tm 
corchetes  had  been  there  to  inquire  for  me ;  and  my  wifo  eanKidf 
entreated  me  by  no  means  to  return  home.  After  defibeFsboa, 
the  friends  present  advised  me,  as  a  last  resort,  to  make  aaotfarr 
application  to  the  British-Consul  General,  who  was  then  resiaa^ 
at  the  Antigua,  a  distance  of  thirty  miles.  A  good  mule,  radf 
caparisoned,  stood  in  the  yard.  The  owner  ofiered  me  the  ur  d 
it ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  more  I  was  mounted  and  riding  over  ^ 
grassy  plain  in  the  direction  of  the  two  volcanoes. 

It  was  near  midnight  ere  I  reached  the  door  of  the  h<Nise  wUek 
Mr.  Chatfield  was  occupying  in  the  once  magnificent  but  so* 
ruined  city  of  old  Guatemala,  and  his  English  good  nature  vif 
somewhat  put  to  the  test  by  being  knocked  up  on  snch  aa  enaai 
I  was,  however,  hospitably  received,  though  told  that  I  hd 
brought  all  this  trouble  upon  mysdf  by  disturbing  the  prejadieB 
of  the  people,  and  making  use  of  the  Bible  in  my  fifh^}^^  forwfaiek 
they  were  not  yet  prepared,  and  without  which  mj  tflaciiiif 
would  have  met  with  support  instead  of  oj^oaition.  In  eonel^ 
sion,  I  must  now  extricate  myself  the  best  way  I  could;  ad 
though  I  claimed  to  be  a  British  subject,  British  proteetkn  sbooii 
not  be  extended  to  me  till  I  could  show  documentaty  evidcnoc  dit 
I  was.  With  this  food  for  reflection  I  retired  to  bed.  Hie  skfi 
that  I  had  taken  during  the  last  three  dajrs  had  all  fidled.  I  aai» 
however,  little  disappointed,  as  I  had  no  great  <vw*<^y>tipft  i^  ^ 
justice  of  my  fellow-men ;  and  had  used  the  meana  becaiae  eor 
vinoed  that  such  was  my  duty.    I  felt  prepared  lor  the  mot  1 


AN   IMTHKT4L  OP  STSPESSE  AWD  DIPnCTTLTT.        B63 

kacn  that  even  this  agitaCian  iraa  Borring  the  cause  I  bad  at  heart, 
and  that  by  actively  waiting  upon  the  Lord  I  \fat)  warranted  to 
expect  his  bleioing. 

Early  the  nej(t  momtng  I  was  aroused  bj  drunu  beating  to 
arms.  On  inquiring  the  cantc,  I  learned  that  while  I  had  been 
riding  oTcr  the  plun  during  the  ttill  night,  an  in-iurrcction  had 
broken  out  io  the  capital.  The  absence  of  the  PrEsident,  of  which 
advantage  had  been  taken  to  molest  me,  had  also  been  abused  by 
some  dLiconlented  military.  The  priMoers,  and  Monte  Rosa  among 
them,  had  been  set  free,  and  armed  ;  an  attempt  was  bciti^  made 
at  revolution ;  •  and  Sotero  Carrern,  the  Corrigidor  of  the  An- 
tigua, <xas  now  mustering  troops  to  lead  them  against  the  insur- 
gents. Tliis  iutelligence,  which  struck  terror  to  the  hearts  of 
most  i>eop!e,  brooght  security  to  me,  and  proved  the  instrument  of 
my  deliverance. 

That  day  I  remained  with  the  CoqbuI,  and  was  kindly  and 
courteously  entertained.  The  next  day,  hearing  that  the  road 
had  liccorae  payable,  though  occupied  by  troops,  I  remounted  my 
friend's  mule,  and  re-entered  the  terror-stricken  CDpilnl  by  making 
a  dolour.  All  was  safe  and  quiet  at  home  The  Moote  Rosa 
faction  was  soon  put  down,  a  change  of  nunistry  was  made,  and 
it  was  some  weeks  ere  tranquiilily  was  completely  restored.  Mean- 
while the  persecuting  anthoritics  had  ceased  to  occupy  themselves 
about  me;  but  my  school  having  been  dosed  by  n  municipal 
order,  it  remained  so,  and  I  took  early  mca.«nrc9  to  procure  its 
rcoiictung.  To  tiiis  end  I  frequently  waited  npaa  Don  Juaquin 
Duran,  the  new  minister,  and  urged  the  injustice  of  depriving  me 
of  my  nieanti  of  subsistence.  When  I  pleaded  that  1  ought  to  be 
lawfully  tried  if  1  had  offended  agLiinrt  the  laws,  he  acceded,  and 
promised  tliat  a  formal  trial  should  t^e  place.  By  the  assistance 
of  my  friends,  who  were  now  somewhat  increased  in  numbers 
and  eamestnesa,  t)ie  evidence  of  my  neighbours  and  of  the  parents 
of  my  scholars  wus  taken,  both  as  to  my  character  and  the  nature 
of  my  instmctiona.  They  cheerfully  underwent  several  exami- 
nations before  the  Jnez  de  Primera  Instancia,  which  were  favour 
able  to  both,  and  in  the  event  of  a  regular  trial  a  strong  defence 
was  already  prepared.  It  seemed,  however,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Bibles,  that  they  were  resolved  to  weary  me  by  delays. 


660  THB  QOSPBL   Df   GBNTBAI.   AMBBXCA. 

During  this  interval,  which  lasted  three  monthsy  I  had  aafk 
employment  for  my  time  in  giving  private  leascma,  whidi  va 
much  more  remunerative  than  my  school  had  heen.  Bat  m 
mind  was  depressed  by  the  suspension  of  my  own  plans,  and  1 
longed  to  reopen  my  little  school,  to  which  I  felt  atronglj  at- 
tached. Many  things  now  combined  to  diacourage  any  iuitlMf 
attempts  in  Guatemala.  My  efforts  were  cramped  in  many  re- 
spects ;  I  was  not  yet  free  to  sell  the  Scriptures.  Instead  of  making 
a  living,  I  found  myself  involved  in  unavoidable  debta.  Mr.  Hca- 
derson,  who  had  heard  of  my  difficulties,  and  who,  with  tbe 
brethren  at  Belize,  had  all  along  discouraged  my  attempte,  now  re- 
newed his  efforts  to  persuade  me  to  give  it  np^  and  offered  tesqit- 
ing  inducements  if  I  would  return  to  Belize.  Christian  fidknr* 
ship  or  sympathy  I  had  long  wanted ;  human  protection  I  hti 
none.  My  greatest  trial  was  that  I  felt  quite  alone  in  my  mik, 
being  cut  off  from  connection  with  other  Christiana,  efcn  Ij 
correspondence  or  the  receipt  of  intelligence.  It  waa  now  indai- 
triously  rumoured  that  1  was  a  spy  of  the  English  Goveniimti 
and  what  step  my  enemies  might  take  next  waa  quite  unoertiiB. 
while  it  was  evident  that  friends  and  foes  considered  my  hfefli 
jeopardy  every  hour.  On  the  other  hand,  there  waa  nodif 
obliging  me  to  abandon  my  undertaking.  The  circle  erf*  niy  in- 
fluence had  considerably  extended.  My  presence  alone  was  a  tes- 
timony in  favour  of  the  Gospel.  The  Scripturea  were  aCiIl  bcflf 
circulated  and  read  to  the  people.  My  very  poverty,  and  tk 
refusal  of  the  (Consul  to  aid  me,  told  in  my  favour,  and  etkfSwiSj 
counteracted  the  mischievous  slander  that  my  objecta  were  sa- 
tional  and  political.  Had  I  been  sustained  by  foreign  fondi^ « 
protected  by  the  Consul,  it  is  probable  that  thia  device  wooU  han 
been  enough  to  accomplish  what  the  direct  inflaenoe  of  the  dsff 
had  failed  to  do.  Thus  my  insignificance  waa  my  protectiQii,  sai 
the  power  of  God  was  made  manifest  in  the  weakness  of  ^w  «r- 
vant.  There  was  yet  a  hope  that  some  change  would  &voiirtki 
reopening  of  my  school,  if  I  had  patience  to  wait  for  it.  Upoi 
these  reasons  I  determined  to  remain,  and  being  rcfuaed  j^^ 
at  the  hands  of  human  tribunals,  I  made  my  appeal  to  the  heavidlf 
throne,  nor  was  my  confidence  vain. 

Scarcely  had  I  settled  my  mind,  and  declined  Mr.  HendoioBV 
kind  proposals,  when,  on  the  Srd  of  April,  I  was  aent  Ibr  lif  M 


SCBOOl.  OPENED   U7«IIER  NATPTE  PATRONAGE.  561 

Ttlia  SolniiD,  n  native  gentlemaa,  the  proprietor  of  a  distUlery, 
and  a  well-known  partitan  of  the  libenU.  He  had  heard  of  my 
cSbrts  in  teaching,  and  propo!«dtbat  I  should  devote  some  hours 
«¥ery  day  to  the  tuition  of  three  of  his  children  t»  Aw  ottn  hoitae. 
I  should  be  kft  entirely  free  to  carry  out  my  own  plans,  and  to 
associate  with  hia  children  any  others  that  I  cauld  procure;  three 
or  four  were  already  pledged  to  join  them.  All  the  reiponaibility 
would  be  /mVv  I  diDuld  net  only  as  his  servant ;  and  should  any 
one  interfere  with  me  I  had  but  to  refer  thetn  to  him. 

Although  somewhat  duliioua  of  the  proinaal  beoaiuc  of  several 
apparent  ineonveniunccs,  1  saw  tliat  it  met  the  emergency,  and  was 
an  answer  to  my  prayen;  I  therefore  felt  it  my  duty  to  accept  it, 
Wld  dosed  with  him  at  once.  I  commenced  by  devoting  five  hours 
every  day  to  six  or  eight  scholars  of  a  higher  class,  and  gradually 
added  olheia.  My  former  commodious  school-room  was  ex- 
changed for  the  dilapidated  cloister  of  what  had  been  a  convent, 
but  was  then  a  distillery  of  mm.  On  one  side  it  was  unsheltered 
from  the  weather,  and  we  were  exposed  to  constant  interruptions 
by  kbourers  or  persons  frequenting  the  place,  besides  being  con- 
tinually surrounded  by  the  nauseous  elNuvia  as  well  u  the  moral 
contatnination  of  the  noxious  spirit.  Nevertheless  we  snoa  began 
to  take  delight  in  our  daily  tasks,  and  the  tittle  band  in  a  few 
weeks  had  Mlaiiied  to  about  my  former  number,  which  had  never 
\>eeii  above  a  score.  To  do  them  justioe  I  had  then  to  bestow 
more  time  and  tu  remove  from  the  house  of  Poianco  to  one  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  monastic  distillery.  About  the  same  time  Mr. 
Slee,  a  wealthy  niercbaut,  tlie  Consul  for  Prussia  and  the  Hanse 
7owng,  also  eugaged  a  portion  of  my  time  for  the  tuilioo  of  hia 
little  daughtera  in  bis  own  bouse,  permitting  me  to  associate 
fithers  with  them,  and  freeing  me  from  all  responaibilitj-  as  in  the 
fikrmer  case.  Thus  a  sniall  class  of  six  or  eight  girls  was  added 
to  the  boys'  school  established  by  Don  F^lis  Solano,  I  now 
onoe  more  found  myself  employed  as  I  had  wished,  and  was 
^;reutly  encouraged.  Not  a  lew  persons  who  came  to  tlie  dis- 
tillery on  business  stood  and  listened  to  my  lisions;  and  Don  F^lis 
himself,  who  was  no  believer  in  revealed  religion,  increased  in  his 
respect  for  the  Book  of  God.  Eveniug  as  well  as  morniog  clftssei 
for  the  study  of  Knglish  and  French  were  also  established, 
and  Trere  Kttaukd  hy  more  ttuu  twelve  studeuls  of  the  Unt- 


J562  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CENTRAL   AMSKICA. 

yendty,  with  most  of  whom  a  pleasing  interconne  was  wfinfanul 
More  than  twelve  hours  a  day  were  occupied  in  tuition^  in  wbieh 
the  Bible  and  religious  conversation  were  more  or  less  piomimt 
Once  more  my  object  appeared  to  he  gained,  though  I  was  new 
long  without  bearing  that  1  had  been  dragged  into  the  pQlpits» 
and  that  some  great  trouble  was  in  store  for  me. 

For  the  space  of  four  months  I  was  permitted  to  proceed  tkas 
without    molestation,    during    which    seyeral    important   eTenft 
occurred.     The  decree  freeing  the  press  from  ecclesiastical 
sure,  and  making  the  sale  of  the  Scriptures  lawful,  was 
The  threatened  invasion  of  the  Jesuits,  which  had  caused  giooenr 
forebodings,  was  prevented,  as  before  related  (page  171),  and  the 
clergy  were  not  a  little  humbled  in  the  result.     L^al  proceeding 
had  at  length  been  instituted  against  me  by  the  Munidpalitr  in  t 
secret  manner,  and  the  neighbourhood  where  I  had   before  re- 
sided was  canvassed  in  vain  for  evidence  against  me.     The  aph 
diente^  legal  forms  and  process,  had  been  passed  in  due  conne 
to  the  Juez  de  Priraera  Instanda,  and  had  produced  so  mndi  ^ 
gust  in  the  mind  of  that  functionary  that  he  was  unwiUiig  to 
proceed  with  it,  though  urged  to  do  so.    More  than  one  of  the 
favourite  officers  of  Carrera's  staff  were  pleased  to  send  me  tbor 
children  to  teach,  and  it  was  pubhcly  rumoured  that  the  PresideDl- 
General  had  determined  to  place  his  eldest  legitimate  son  wtk 
me.    He  was  afterwards  removed  from  a  native  bocuxUng-sckoI 
for  that  purpose ;  but  the  priests  having  gained  his  mother's  m 
the  act  was  never  consummated. 

On  the  16th  of  July  184^,  the  first  attempt  at  Ti<^ent  inia' 
ference  with  Sefior  Solano's  school  was  made  by  the  Mnnicipilitf^ 
A  deputation,  accompanied  by  armed  men,  visited  the  preom 
and  found  the  boys  reading  the  New  Testament.  They  signifiei 
to  me  that  I  must  close  this  school  also,  and  obey  the  fonner  urdff 
of  the  Municipality  to  leave  the  State  within  three  days.  I  hegp^ 
to  refer  them  to  Don  Felis.  With  him  they  had  some  disocBoa 
He  permitted  them  to  examine  the  hoys.  One  of  the  aksUB 
put  several  questions,  the  two  first  being,  *^  Who  is  the  Hedi 
the  Church  ?**  ^  Who  was  the  First  Apostle  r*  to  neitbcr  d 
which  he  could  get  a  reply,  as  they  were  among  the  points  iM 
had  not  been  brought  before  the  attention  of  the  childnn.  V7 
employer  at  length  lost  patience  with  ihoK  fbnolioiiariei;  trii 


OFPOBITION  TO   DON   FELIS  BOLAKO'fl  SCHOOL.  5G3 

ihcm  with  wannth  that  he  would  teach  hie  children  to  he  Mb.- 
hometam  if  he  choae.  anil  would  do  m  he  pleased  la  liia  own 
house.  Upon  which  they  departed,  Hltle  »iitiiified  with  their  i  uil, 
and  the  school  continued  unioternipteil. 

These  proceedings  of  Itie  lliuiicipality  were  followed  up  with 
zcbI  on  their  part  ;  but  though  thej  were  dctcmiined  to  close  the 
?cliool.  and  even  to  arrest  Don  FiWa  Solano,  to  whom  they  were 
politically  ttdveree,  they  alone  appeared  to  lend  themselves  willlDgty 
to  the  schemes  of  the  archbishop  and  his  friends.  The  Corrcgidor, 
the  head  of  ihe  coqraration,  and  brother  to  the  one  at  Saluna,  was 
not  with  them  in  thia  matter,  but  was  disposed  to  do  justice,  and 
to  Mnd  his  children  to  be  taught  hy  me.  The  Minister  of  Stale, 
now  Don  Jos^  Antonio  Azmitia,  slso  regarded  their  proceedings  aa 
unlawful,  as  well  sa  unreasonable ;  and  after  another  suniniuiis  to 
appear  before  the  Municipality,  which  1  obeyed,  and  some  uioro 
trouble  and  anxiety,  it  appeared  that  they  would  fail  in  tliis  effort 
for  want  of  support  on  the  part  of  the  aupretnc  authoritiei,  ihougU 
they  continued  on  the  offenrave,  and  were  preparing  docunioiils, 
fcQ;  for  publication.  Another  mode  of  effecting  iheir  object  was 
then  resorted  to  by  the  priests.  Greater  activity  than  usual  was 
fjiven  to  the  slanders  which  had  long  l)ecn  circulated  against  ua. 
Wc  were  misrepresented  as  teaching  infldelity,  atheism,  and  im- 
morality to  the  children.  The  circumstance  that  a  valuable  cos- 
todin  containing  the  idolized  wafer  had  been  stolen  from  the  very 
altar  of  one  of  the  churches,  was  attributed  to  the  Frotettaot  doc- 
trines which  were  being  introduced,  and  was  made  use  of  to  stir 
u|>  the  angry  passions  of  the  more  fanatical  among  the  people. 
I  (lie  of  the  priests  esj>ecially,  who  had  long  bccD  famed  fur  tlic 
"  armth  and  energy  of  his  harangues  against  "  El  Proteslante," 
HOW  wrought  up  the  populace  of  his  barrio-parish  *  by  his 
rabid  eloquence  to  such  a  pitch  of  excitement,  that  it  was  leared 
the  mob  would  come  and  speedily  accomplish  the  ruin  of  our 
mooaftic  scboot-bouse,  which  time  and  earthquakes  had  hitherto 

Shortly  after  the  last  interference,  when  public  excitement  was 
once  more  at  its  height,  and  another  storm  appeared  to  be  thivateu- 
ing,  1  felt  that  in  order  to  stand  our  ground  »ome  step  must  be 
taken  to  counteract  it,  and,  if  possible,  to  avail  oumlves  of  the 

*  I<  Cudeluii.  tbi  Urfcil  nbntb,  ud  nfiBlid  llii  wen) «[  (0. 


5S4  TBE   GOSPEL   IN  CENTHAt   ASIBtttCA. 

adTBDtigM  whicL  our  foiled  enemies  bad  now  giren  ns.  T  |]kA> 
fora  pmptwd  to  Don  F^lis  that  we  ihonM  have  am  exhiliitiM  <f 
Ibe  Mboolf  u  the  beat  reply  to  the  DiitrepresctilatiojM  roaaniet 
it.  The  itep  was  a  bold  one,  bat  lh«  exigancio  of  the  esse  wcwd 
to  raqidrB  it ;  and  printed  iiiTilations  to  attend  (be  examinntioB  rf 
tbe  children  were  sent  to  all  the  principal  parjoBs  of  all  pmia 
faicltidfaig  the  uutliorities  themeelves. 

Chi  ncrfpt  of  n  courleoua  invitation  which  I  sddrestd  lo  iW 
MnnicipBlS^  at  a  bodf,  a  strenuous  efTort  jtma  Biade  oo  iheirfVt 
to  forbid  Ibe  meeting  prtrposed ;  but  tbe  Corridor,  being  fr 
posed  to  &vour  it,  settled  the  contenlioa  which  had  Brian,tf 
appobtting  a  deputation,  consistiDg  of  two  Alcaldes,  a  FiMat,U^ 
(he  Secretary,  t»  nttend,  preside,  and  report  on  tlie  imaiiiii 
Several  of  the  chief  fund ionarie«  bad  promieed  lo  be  prcwM;  nl 
this  pcrfM  al»o  appeared  to  ba  gained. 

It  WM  OD  the  ntomii^  following  the  tweaty  •fourth  aiwwwfiy 
of  tbe  6m.j  df  independence,  the  itith  of  Sept«mber  1845,  ibit  ite 
public  aasembled  in  my  own  house,  to  see  and  hear  for  tbetmeirs 
what  I  had  tangbt  the  children.  The  sak  was  hni^  rouad 
with  mapa,  &c^  and  adorned  with  Scripture  texts  in  largs  leiinv 
which  I  bad  cut  ont  froin  English  plMards,  and  put  into  SpwiBb. 
Some  of  mj  lesson  boards  had  been  prepaml  after  tbe  sam 
manner,  others  were  snpptied  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Sdxiol 
Society,  being  portions  of  the  New  Testament  in  Spanish.  Two 
desks  at  one  eiid  of  the  room  were  occirpied  by  eigbt«ai  tN>js,iIi 
natives  of  the  coantry  with  one  ejiception.  An  easy  cbair  n* 
placed  in  the  centre  with  a  table  before  it,  rastaining  globo,  * 
bell,  and  a  basket 'full  of  Scriptures  and  English  toys  dcsigBcd  ftr 
Tewards.  The  rest  was  occupied  by  chaica,  which  were  soon  ill 
filled  by  a  highly  respectable  audience,  composed  of  b^ds  tt 
bmiOesj  merchants,  lawyers,  several  public  men,  and  a  feir  la^es- 

At  the  time  appointed  the  house  was  already  fnl),  and  tbe  »■ 
Kinbly  TBI  ansioualy  awaiting  the  depirtation.  When  lb«y  catne, 
they  were  accompaaied  by  a  guard,  consisting  of  foar  cordietc^ 
with  drawn  swords,  who  renraiiied  outside.  Having  met  them  il 
tbe  sagnan— the  gate-\ray— I  banded  them  to  the  leat  of  honott. 
Wbile  laying  before  tbe  chief  Alcalde  the  progirunmc  oT  oar  pio> 
eeedhigs,  to  the  general  consternation,  he  declared  that  he  had  not 
(omt  to  pTtside,  but  to  prevent  this  f'am  I  nation  &om  lakiK 


{Akce.  He  tiiea  rsse,  and  mode  a  speccii  addressed  directly  to  me, 
and  only  indirectly  to  the  aadiunce.  To  neither  was  he  very 
Courieou9t  lie  described  me  as  a  contumaciona  and  rebelliuut 
perauQi  already  repeatedly  outlawed.  lie  read  a  law  jilacing  pub- 
Jie  aatruct>t»i  under  the  inspection  of  tbe  Mumi:i polity,  and  de- 
clared that  ihey  would  not  Bn&r  me  to  breed  a  nest  of  vipeix  in 
Ibe  bosom  of  seiuety.  I  replied  that  I  had  done  all  that  the  law 
lequired  ju  the  case  af  private  echooli,  that  I  was  not  unwillinf; 
to  be  tried,  and  I  inquired  upon  what  authority  be  ievaded  a 
private  resiileQce,  and  iuterfered  with  a  private  scboal  uid  ao 
orderly  private  mcetiug  «uch  as  that  wu.  He  replied  tiiat  he  had 
no  account  to  render  to  me  on  that  poiaL  Several  of  the  audience 
now  took  ap  the  question  in  succesaion,  and  ably  argued  it,  ad- 
dressing such  reasoniug  to  the  chief  Alcalde  ae  must  have  Kiidercd 
liis  Bott  seat  mther  uncomfortable  Ue  sat,  however,  BnUcnty, 
and  seeing  himself  opposed,  he  declared  his  intention  not  to  move 
till  the  audience  hud  diipersed.  They  on  their  part  also  kept  llieir 
eeata,  auJ  protested  that  Ihey  would  not  leave  the  house  till  the 
exaniitiatioa  hsd  taken  place. 

The  corcbetcs  at  the  door,  and  the  mmoui  of  the  proceedingi 
within,  rapidly  attracted  other  persons,  and  the  patio  and  the 
galleij  around  it  were  soon  filled  v/ith  citizens,  as  well  ai  the 
sala.  One  aged  and  respected  Udy,  the  mother  of  two  of  tlie 
scholars,  who  had  sotlered  much  Irom  the  priests  on  account  of 
their  connection  with  me,  was  with  difficulty  restr^ned  troui 
giving  vent  to  her  indignation,  is  a  burst  of  matental  eloquence 
and  Jecliog,  addressed  to  the  muuicipcd  depalation.  Consulting 
with  s  few  frieitds,  I  determined  to  see  the  Vice-President,  and 
claim  bis  interference.  In  this  object  I  failed,  and  tort,  muck 
time ;  but  learned  that  the  Alcalde  Primero  had  done  this  upon  hii 
<iwn  authority  osly,  tud  that  the  proper  1^^  resource  was  tu 
bring  an  ociion  against  him. 

On  rttitrning.  fatigued,  and  with  Uttk  hope,  I  found  everything 
»»  I  bad  Lett  it,  and  that  my  generous  advocate  and  others  bud 
respecl/ullj  addressed  the  chair  in  forcible  words:,  but  no  im- 
pression seemed  to  be  made  upon  it.  The  magistrate  hod  btcn 
temisded  of  the  responsibility  involved  in  this  act,  and  Don  f'ilia 
Solano  argued  tlw  right  of  parents  Co  choose  the  ediicxtion  of  their 
children,  as  some  did  by  sending  tbem  to  Proteatant  countries,  and 
is  the  pnaeDce  of  the  masten  of  the  two  leading  sdioaLi  ia  <]a» 


566  THB  008PEL   IN  CENTRAL  UfSRICA.        ' 

city,  he  challenged  any  school,  after  a  year's  teaching,  to  eoaipA 
with  this  one  after  four  months.  All  were  e^ger  to  hetf  «f  ■* 
success,  and  being  disappointed,  there  were  renewed  tokeas  d 
excitement^  and  a  determination  to  remain.  Some  said,  "  g»  ab,* 
^  take  no  notice  of  him,**  '*  turn  him  out,**  &c. ;  but  there  wv  goei 
sense  enough  to  restrain  these  ebullitions.  The  gentlemeB  praoi 
then  resolved  upon  sending  a  deputation  of  their  own  number  ti 
the  supreme  authorities,  to  complain  of  the  intermption  oocmoei 
by  the  Alcalde,  the  rest  awaiting  their  return.  Coosequentlr,  Dob 
Pedro  Yalensuela,  an  ex-president  of  the  State,  Don  Juan  DicgiOf 
a  judge,  and  Don  Ignado  Gromez,  a  talented  licentiate,  weie'sclecled, 
and  left  the  meeting  for  the  national  palace. 

The  poor  children  had  been  much  alarmed  by  aU  that  wv  pK- 
ing  around  them,  and  the  more  so  that  the  subordinates  of  ^ 
deputation  had.  taken  down  then*  names,  and  asked  them  quatw*' 
Many  of  the  gentlemen  present  had  called  ont  several  of  the  cU- 
dren  into  another  room,  and  had  been  examinii^  them  in  detd 
behind  the  back  of  the  Senor  Alcalde  Prknero,  mnch  to  tbor 
gratification  and  satisfaction.  Their  copy  books,  also,  had  bea 
handed  about,  and  much  interest  was  manifested  in  them.  Se- 
freshments  were  now  supplied,  and  the  company  gave  thenselfa^ 
to  smoking  puros  and  cigaritos,  and  to  quiet  conversatioB,  dnriBg 
which  the  municipal  deputation  might  very  well  have  takes  a  wf^ 

After  another  interval  of  about  an  hour,  during  which  the  i^ 
tendance  was  rather  increased,  the  deputation  from  the 
'returned  radiant  with  smiles,  accompanied  by  a  Government 
senger,  with  an  official  despatch  for  the  Senor  Alcalde 
The  stragglers  inunediately  sought  their  places.  The 
doon^ay  were  quite  filled.  All  eyes  were  fixed  npon  the  magktiiie^ 
countenance  while  he  opened  and  read  to  himself!  He  then 
and  said  that  the  Senor  Corregidor  ordered  that,  without 
to  the  past,  he  should  preside  over  the  examination  and  "»«W  kg 
report.  No  noisy  indications  of  a  low-minded  exultation  liolkiR' 
this  announcement,  though  the  audience  had  ielt  themsdw 
grossly  insulted  by  the  now  crest-fidlen  magistnite.  Seeii^  tfc^ 
he  rose  to  depart,  and  feeling  that  the  triumph  was  paiafidlf 
complete,  I  stepped  forward  and  entreated  him  to  lemam  and  sin 
ness  the  examination,  that  he  might  judge  for  himself;  andif  ke 
could  not  do  so  in  his  public  character,  suggesting  that  prr*^  ki 
might  feel  at  liberty  in  a  private  capacity*  -He»  kow«T«v  paliic^ 


.   BEBULTS   DP  THE  EXAUINATtoK.  h67 

declined,  iini],  with  hia  nssodntea  dad  the  umed  men,  left  the  teif- 
salislicd  caiupanj- 

A  proposal  to  adjourn,  aa  most  persoiiB  present  were  romewhiit 
wearied,  wns  met  by  general  cries  of  "  Now,  now."  Don  Jiinn 
Dieguez,  an  esteejued  friend,  and  one  of  tlie  successful  deputalioo, 
t4)ok  the  chair,  and  three  additional  houra  were  tpent  in  rapidly 
going  through  the  classes  in  Scripture  reading,  grammar,  geo^ 
graph}',  mental  acithmetic,  &c.  &c  After  what  Las  Uxa  said 
conceruing  the  state  of  education  in  the  country,  it  will  not  be 
matter  of  eurprise  to  the  render  that  the  parties  present,  nhoae 
beat  feelinga  had  been  powerfully  called  forth,  were  pleved,  and 
Bomcwhat  enthusiastic  iu  their  adtuiration  of  the  methods  pursued, 
of  the  cheerluineas  of  the  scholars,  and  of  the  eameatuesa  and 
good  feeling  which  pervaded  their  operations.  The  masters  of 
the  other  schools  assisted  in  distributing  the  rewards;  and  after 
full  six  hours  of  uouaual  excitement,  I  viaa  left  to  reflect  upon  the 
probable  consequences  of  the  events  of  that  day.  Before  sepa- 
rating, it  had  been  agreed  upon  that  petitions  ahould  be  presented 
to  the  Executive  Government,  to  be  printed  and  circulated  as  a 
corrective  to  the  current  disc  reports,  and  the  pcraoM  of  most 
indnence  who  bad  been  present  alterwards  drew  up  tealimooiAls,  in 
which  they  expressed  their  approbation  of  what  wns  taught  in  the 
school.  These  docuuienls  were  sent  in  to  the  authorities,  together 
with  the  petitions. 

For  some  time  after  the  examination  I  received  namerous  con- 
gratulatory I'isits,   from   the    impression  made  it  appeared   that 
the  end  sought  was  answered,  and  by  the  turn  which  the  oppo- 
sition gave  to  affaira,  the  success  of  ibb  device  was  &r 
plete  than  the  most  sanguine  had  ventured  to  hope. 

The  two   printed    petitions  were   confined   exclusively  to   the 
pueats  of  the  fcholars.    They  repreaented  the  school  na  a  oa- 
tional  benefit,  and  claimed  full  liberty  for  it.    fioth  were  signed 
among  others,  by  a  priest,  whose   illegitimate  sou  was  one  of 
the  scholars.    On  being  reproved  by  the  Archbishop  for  this 
scandalous  incongruity,  the  curate  answered  his  preUte 
ner  that  savoured  more  of  BilUugsgnte  slang  than  of  halg  onleri 
but  no  further  notice  was  taken  of  the  oCTencc. 
.    The  school  childrtn  were  soon  atlet  treated  to 
m  Seld-day,  when  they  spent  several  hours  iu  pelting  each  other 


568  TBE  O06PKL   IN  CENTBA^L   jfcXKRICiU. 

with  oranges  at  the  andest  estate  of  Aoeytnno,  aad  wtn  npU 
with  a  rural  repast  and  abundance  of  helotes — greem  matte  m  At 
ear  boiled  or  roasted,  which  is  then  Teiy  sweeC 

As  before,  in  the  case  of  the  drcoktion  of  the  Soiyiuiw,  tb 

law  of  the  liberty  of  the  press  had  been  timefy  and  serrieeable,  m 

now  in  the  control  which  the  Municipality  damifid  over  my  sdboo^ 

the  Lord  was  j4eased  most  opportunely  to  interpose  mnotiierkv, 

which  entirely  deprived  that  corporation  of  any  legt^  pretext  ht 

continuing  their  attars  upon  the  school,  and  reliered  me  fisB 

their  restraints.    Shortly  after  the  examination^  the  law  of  Uv- 

Tersity  Keibrm,*  projected  by  Dr.  Fkdilla>  one  of  my  wanaol 

supporters,  was  passed  by  the  legislature  and  appnyved  by  tks 

executive.    One  clause  of  that  law,  which  was  tfaM  time  iatrs- 

duced  with  a  special  regard  to  my  case,  committed  the  svtbI* 

lance  of  all  primary  schools  exclusively  to  tlie  Univovty,  tte 

taking  it  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Municipality,  who  had  so  gjntAj 

abused  it.    The  reforms  intended  to  be  efiecled  by  this  law  woe 

not  carried  out,  for  the  reasons  before  stated  ;  bnt  it  enabled  at 

to  resume  my  school  in  my  own  house  and  upon  my  own  Twspmr 

sibility,  though  no  more  direct  answer  to  the  petitiona  presoilii 

had  been  obtained  from  those  in  power. 

Some  of  my  feUow-countiymen  who  had  been  present  at  tiie 
examination  took  a  report  of  it  to  Beliae,  and  shortly  allennidf 
the  countenance  and  sympathy  oi  my  brethren  there  wot 
restored  to  me,  and  was  hailed  on  my  part  with  heartf4^  joy  sai 
satisfaction.  In  this  drcumstanee,  and  in  the  receipt  «f  ktW 
from  some  dear  Christians  in  England,  who  had  proRridenlBl^ 
heard  of  my  position,  I  distinctly  saw  the  finger  of  God  in  amair 
to  my  prayers,  and  was  greatly  encouraged  and  lefireabed. 

On  resuming  the  school,  the  distilleiy  was  exchanged  fiir  tbe 
sala  in  which  the  examination  had  taken  place ;  and  when  tkt 
excitement  produced  by  that  erest,  and  the  dreulntioii  of  the 
printed  defence  of  the  schoc^  had  ^tirdy  siMded,  the  number  if 
scholars  began  slowly  to  inerease  in  despite  of  the  eedenrtMd 
penalties  which  were  associated  with  its  coontenaiMe,  sad  in  tb 
face  of  continued  though  leas  operatiTe  hoalililies  cm  tiie  |«tif 
the  priests. 
At  the  ekasoftheyear  1845lhadanattendttD6Q  of  tltixtyte}^^ 


Ktoa 


AN   ADCLT   BIBLE  CLASS  FORMED.  6C9 

of  bIx  little  girls,  and  sixlcco  ituileots  of  languages  to  teacli 
I  daily.  M;  Lord's  day  visits  to  the  cottages  of  the  poor  had  become 
more  difficult  since  my  change  of  neighbourhood;  but  several  young 
I  men  had  begun  to  frequent  my  house  on  the  Sabbath  and  through 
the  iveek,  for  the  purpose  of  reading  and  examining  the  Scriptures 
together.  One  of  thc«e,  who  slao  attended  the  school,  aspired  to 
become  a  teacher,  and  was  anxious  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the 
mode^  of  instruction  adopted.  Anotlier  lesa  aspiring,  but  more 
promising,  also  attended  the  school  as  ot^en  as  his  labour  as  a 
blacksmith  would  permit  him  to  do  so,  with  a  view  to  improve 
himself.  At  home  he  was  teaching  hi."  wife  and  two  apprentices  to 
read  in  the  New  Testament,  and  his  love  to  the  truth  seemed  to 
grow,  and  often  cheered  my  heart.  Two  persons  who  Ibllnwed 
this  Bible  class  were  poor  students,  already  passed  the  meridian 
of  life,  who  had  been  decided  infidels  and  of  a  misanthropic  turn 
of  mind.  They  both  of  them  expressed  themselves  as  having 
received  an  increase  of  happiness  and  usefulness  by  what  the  Bilile 
bad  taught  theoi,  and  they  appeared  to  be  earnest  inquirers  after 
truth.  Alone,  or  with  some  of  these,  I  sometimes  viuted  the 
suburbs  or  the  remote  villages  on  the  plain,  distHbnting  tiactSi 
and  reading  the  Scriptures. 

Meanwhile  the  enemies  of  the  truth  were  not  slumbering. 
The  Jtlunicipality  of  that  year,  before  giving  place  to  the  new 
one  which  took  office  on  the  1st  of  January  1S46,  published 
a  somewhat  lengthy  pamphlet,  with  copies  of  letters  from  the 
Archiiiahop  and  other  documents,  to  justify  their  now  unpopular 
proceedings  against  the  schools,  and  consequently  to  criminate 
me.  They  also  instituted  a  suit  at  law  both  against  me  and 
against  the  Corrcgidor  who  had  ordered  the  exannnatiim  to 
proceed ;  but  this  wns  suffered  to  drop  by  their  successors. 
The  statements  of  this  pamphlet,  though  apjiarentty  muderBte, 
were  untruthful ;  but  yet  I  felt  that  it  was  a  real  benefit  to  my 
cause.  It  was  abusive  enough  to  show  the  animus  of  the  au- 
thors i  and  while  it  substantiated  no  serious  charge,  it  made  pro- 
minent several  doctrinal  and  other  points,  such  for  instance  as 
my  ut<«r  r^ectioo  of  ecclesiastical  authority,*  which  I  was  par- 

*  Oni  at  the  Hnoui  Fhii^a  brDu^l  apiut  the  Mliaal  «■  ihst  i)w  abHitmi  "nn 

tanchi  b]  fa,j  nidunt  hiiuif  liilicr  cracili,  imife,  m  fiftm«  bdun  IhBB,    Iba 

^^(bMl  WH  thraji  upaid  iiLh  the  rcullni  of  Ihs  SciptBit*  u4  fnrOt 


670  TBB  GOSPEL  Ut  CBNTftAL  AKBRieA* 

ticnlarly  anzioiis  sbould  be  distinctly  nnderatood^  but  which  vooU 
have  come  with  less  grace  directly  from  myself  or  my  fnends:! 
was  therefore  very  thankful  for  its  appearance. 

At  the  election  of  their  successors,  which  occurred  in  Deeembert 
there  was  an  unusual  contest  between  the  Serviles  and  the  Libenlii 
which  appeared  to  turn  veiy  much  upon  the  school  question,  id^ 
the  side  parties  were  known  to  have  taken  in  the  late  eTiTP'y^^^- 
For  the  first  time,  printed  lists  of  the  nominees  of  each  party  vm 
used,  and  the  priest  who  ¥ras  so  active  against  Protestantisni,  nd 
who  was  said  to  have  threatened  the  Government  with  an  insorree- 
tion  of  his  parish,  if  I  were  tolerated  in  the  country,  sent  up  nmii- 
bers  of  ignorant  Indians  to  vote  on  the  Servile  side,  so  thst  tbe 
Liberals  were  unexpectedly  defeated,  and  several  of  my  moflt 
active  opponents  were  re-elected. 

A  petition  against  my  school  was  also  handed  about  hj  the 
priests,  and  ¥ras  reported  to  have  obtained  800  signatures,  while  t 
learned  memorial  was  addressed  to  the  archbishop,  and  is  depooted 
in  the  archives  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Court,  describing  the  crioiei 
and  enormities  of  which  the  Anabaptists  were  accural  in  Go^ 
many  in  the  days  of  the  Lutheran  Reformation.  With  thex 
fanatical  and  wild  enthusiasts  I  was  classed,  and  the  danger  of  the 
revival  of  their  extravagances  was  pointed  out.  The  pious  writer 
very  cautiously  refrained  from  signing  the  document^  because  (« 
was  stated  in  a  note)  he  was  unwilling  that  his  name  abooU 
appear  in  company  with  such  blasphemous  and  damnable  heien 

A  plot  for  my  assassination  was  discovered  and  revealed  to  mt 
about  this  time  by  one  of  the  scholars  of  the  English  dass.  h 
had  been  conceived  by  some  youthful  choristers  in  a  seminary,  bat 
was  stayed  while  yet  maturing  by  the  instrumentality  of  this  yoog 
friend. 

It  was  related  to  me  that  one  poor  woman  had  accused  hendf 
to  her  father  confessor — a  bare-footed,  long-bearded,  and  n>pe- 
begirdled  Capuchin  friar — of  the  sin  of  having  conveiBed  with  ae 
on  religious  subjects,  at  which  the  holy  indignation  of  the  fi«r 
knew  no  bounds.  After  a  paroxysm  of  righteous  wrmth,  he  de- 
clared that  he  could  not  grant  her  absolution  for  an  ofloce  <tf 
such  magnitude.  He  promised,  however,  to  throw  himself  at  ^ 
<ieet  of  the  archbishop  on  her  behalf;  but  he  could  not  ensue  Ms 
fuccess.    No  doubt  a  proportionate  penance  ynm  <y«m5.tffd  beftrt 


DtFFIOITLTV  TO   GET  A   HOtSE.  671 

ibsolutiOQ  wm  granted  to  this  offender.  A  lady  or  distinclioa  was 
Teporttd  to  have  said  that  «he  woidd  gladly  iiiibruc  bcr  f(;mmiiic 
hands  in  tlie  heart's  blood  of  the  Protestaut  heretic. 

Early  in  1846,  a  new  niclhud  of  annoyance  was  adopted  by  the 
priests  towards  me.  Tbey  succeed;rd  in  influencing  the  landlady 
of  the  houx  which  I  occupied  to  give  nic  warning  to  quit.  Sbe 
waa  a  widow,  and  one  of  her  sona  was  entitled  to  the  revenue  of  a 
stall  in  the  cathedra!,  of  which  they  threatened  to  deprive  him  if 
I  continued  in  her  house.  Our  servants  and  tradespeople  were 
also  tampered  with,  and  their  minds  wrought  apon  by  the  fears  of 
combined  spiritual  penalties  and  temporal  incoDveniences.  The 
increase  of  my  school,  and  the  prospect  of  some  boarders,  would 
sonn  have  led  me  to  seek  a  larger  dwelling.  As  soon  as  1  obtained 
one  at  a  rental  oti$l.  sterling  per  annum,  which  was  not  done  with- 
out dilficully,  the  proprietors  were  also  in  tuni  assailed ;  and  Ibc 
visits  of  an  indnential  priest,  who  had  long  been  intimate  with  the 
family,  were  diacontinued.  In  three  months  more  I  was  forced  to 
give  up  this  house  also,  and  found  the  utmost  difficulty  in  pro- 
curing another,  as  all  those  that  might  have  been  avail.ible  were 
under  Servile  and  priestly  influence.  The  parents  of  the  children, 
who  hod  failed  tn  find  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  sponiani;oualy 
offered  to  increase  the  pay  of  the  scholars,  and  thus  enable  me  to 
take  a  spacious  mansion,  the  rent  of  which  was  lOOt.  sterling  per 
annum.  But  even  that  one  could  not  be  procured  for  the  object. 
A  forcible  ejectment  was  threatened,  and  the  blockade  appeared 
ci>mplefe.  At  length,  only  a  day  or  two  before  I  waa  bound  to 
give  up  the  house  I  occupied,  an  nrrangcment  was  concluded,  by 
which  a  Fiench  cabinet-maker  obligingly  jrielded  tu  me  ■  bouse 
which  was  under  the  control  of  Mr.  Savage,  the  Uuited  Slat«a 
Consul,  he  himself  taking  another  for  which  I  had  iu  vaia  oflcred 
■  higher  rent. 

Before  this  change  of  premises  was  cfTecIed,  the  widow  of  an 
officer  who  liad  been  shot  in  the  late  civil  wara  brought  me  her 
Bun  to  board  and  edacale.  Manuel  waa  a  Gat  high-spiritcJ  lad  of 
about  fourteen,  but  had  been  so  little  restramed  that  his  temper 
liud  become  indomitable,  and  I  was  warned  by  some  of  my  frleoda 
on  no  account  to  receive  him  among;  my  scholars,  as  be  had  been 
the  round  of  all  the  schools  in  the  capital,  and  was  given  up  m 
incorrigible  in  each.    I  did  not,  however,  (eel  at  liberty  to  reject 


-mJt- 


673  THE  GOSPEL   IN  CBMTRAL   AMBMJCXm 

him ;  bnt  having  had  full  and  unconditioiial  oocitrol  giTcn  me  by 
his  only  parent,  I  sought  prayerfiiUy  for  the  wiadom  and  discretioB 
which  the  case  required. 

A  few  days  after  his  introduction  to  the  school  he  was  gnihy 
of  robbing  a  neighbouring  garden  of  some  finiit,  in  which  he 
drew  away  others.  The  otiTence  was  duly  tried  by  a  jury  of 
the  scholars,  and  according  to  rule,  after  full  confessioii,  re- 
stitution, and  apology,  the  penalty  in  his  case  was  remitted, 
because  it  was  bis  first  offence.  Shortly  after,  in  a  parox- 
ysm of  anger,  he  threw  down  one  of  the  lesser  children,  and 
having  kicked  him  cruelly,  he  opened  the  gate  and  ran  hoiBe, 
using  foul  and  abusive  hmguage  against  me ;  upon  which  a  priest, 
who  lived  nearly  opposite,  put  his  head  out  of  his  window  and 
said,  *'  This  comes  of  Protestant  teaching.*^  I  iznnoediately  sent  a 
message  to  his  mother  to  acquaint  her  with  the  £Kt.  Wtth  sooe 
difficulty  he  was  brought  back  and  shut  up  till  the  next  momin^ 
I  then  visited  him  in  his  room,  and  spoke  seriously  but  kindly  to 
him,  informing  him  that  he  would  be  tried  as  usual  during  the 
play  hour  at  noon.  1  told  him  to  select  his  advocate,  whom  I 
sent  to  consult  with  him  upon  their  defence.  Several  fiiends 
having  requested  to  be  informed  when  we  had  a  trial,  I  now  sent 
them  notice,  convinced  that  the  publicity  would  in  this  case  add  to 
the  effect  sought  to  be  produced.  Don  Jos6  Barundia,  the  ex- 
president  of  the  state,  and  translator  of  the  national  code,  who  hsd 
laboured  to  introduce  trial  by  jury  into  the  country,  was  among 
the  persons  present  Rather  more  formalities  than  usual  were 
adopted.  The  case  against  the  offender  was  fully  proved  in  iQ 
its  points.  In  his  defence  his  advocate,  without  any  prompting 
pleaded  a  previous  provocation,  and  called  witnesses  to  establidi 
the  fact;  in  other  respects  his  guilt  was  admitted.  I  then  ad- 
dressed the  culprit,  and  dwelt  upon  the  character  of  the  sin  agtioit 
God ;  the  injury  done  to  the  school  in  general,  and  to  the  sdfocr 
in  particular ;  and  also  the  probable  consequences  to  himsdf^  si 
likely  to  lead  to  murder,  if  such  angry  passions  were  oootinoed  to 
be  indulged.  Manuel,  though  a  resolute  boy,  was  now  mdtad  to 
tears.  I  insisted  particularly  that  his  reformation  was  the  sole 
of  his  punishment;  and  he  made  an  open  acknowledgment  of 
fault.  I  then  pronounced  sentence ;  condemning  him,  firsts  to  ftf^ 
ftit  his  plaj-hoor,  which  he  had  so  greatly  abused,  for  two  w«^i 


•cnoot,  mscjpLSVE. 


KtonAly,  for  breaking  bounds,  that  he  should  not  be  permitted  to 
go  home  on  Sundayatill  I  ehonld  consent  to  it  once  more ;  thinily, 
for  using  bad  laDguage,  he  should  learn  I17  heart  certnin  pnteagcs 
in  the  Proverbs,  which  I  had  marked  ;  and,  lastly,  for  bis  personal 
offence  towards  me,  1  freely  forgate  him. 

The  impression  produced  upon  him  and  upon  all  the  Bchool  was 
aaliitary ;  and  bis  conduct  was  at  once  changed.  When  the  Sun- 
day  came,  however,  he  was  impatient  at  being  refused  pemiiaiiou 
to  go  home ;  he  committed  a  elight  offence,  and  under  the  terror 
of  bting  again  locked  up  (which  I  thus  found  had  been  too  severe  a 
measure)  he  once  more  absconded.  On  Monday  morning,  when  be 
bad  retnmed,  1  informed  his  school- fellows  of  ibe  fact  with  much 
grief;  and  it  nas  nnanimously  agreed  that  he  ihonld  be  Knt  to 
Coventry  by  the  whole  scbool  till  I  thonld  relieve  him,  T!iiB 
measure  I  ever  after  kept  in  reierve  as  my  severest  or  capital 
punishment,  all  corporal  inflictions  having  long  before  been  re- 
jected by  a  unanitnons  vote  of  the  whole  school. 

The  struggle  with  Manuel  now  continued  for  soine  days.  All 
shunned  his  society;  and  even  the  monitor  of  his  clan  would  not 
queslioD  him  till  I  had  ^ven  him  leave  to  do  so.  At  meals  he 
received  bis  plate  full  as  usual,  and  was  bidden  to  go  and  eat  it 
alone  in  the  school-room.  It  ofVeu  remained  untouched.  Firm- 
ness and  kindnen  were,  as  much  as  passible,  conciliated  in  my 
manner  towards  him.  On  (he  third  day  he  gave  signs  of  relenting, 
and  asked  for  paper  to  write  a  penitent  letter  to  his  mother.  1  at 
once  met  bini,  and  be  was  gradually  restored  to  bis  place  iu  the 
school  and  in  my  confidence.  Never  of^er  this  did  Manuel  give 
me  any  serious  trouble.  He  was  soon  cheerful  and  happy  ;  hia 
mother's  heart  was  greatly  rqoiced ;  and  some  months  after  this 
liis  fellow -scholars  elected  him  one  of  the  monitors  empowered 
to  keep  order.  The  success  of  these  measures,  and  the  gmtittide  of 
his  mother,  were  largely  instrumental  in  npelliog  the  evil  reporia 
that  were  still  abroad,  and  in  increasing  the  popularity  of  the 
school  1  which,  four  months  after  the  dBminaliou,  had  doubled  the 
number  of  scholars. 

Two  months  later,  there  was  an  attendance  of  sixty  boys,  •ercral 
of  whom  were  boarders,  besides  about  twenty  students  of  languages 
formed  into  classes,  coodueted  aecording  to    the  BobejtMuiian 


574  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CENTRAL    AMBRICiA* 

method,*  which  was  found  most  efficient^  and  gave  greti  adit 
faction.  Some  of  these  young  men  assured  me,  that  the  pleMunftet 
hour  they  spent  was  in  our  cbiss,  and  they  frequently  separated 
with  enthusiastic  exclamations  of  ''  Viva  Robertson** — Iod^  fife 
Robertson.  The  class  of  little  girls  was  continued,  though  it  did 
not  increase,  and  little  time  could  be  devoted  to  them.  It  con- 
stituted my  only  hour  of  relaxation,  being  now  employed  t^'^r*'"^ 
with  scarcely  any  interruption,  for  fourteen  hours  every  day. 

Each  scholar  that  could  read,  and  there  were  few  exoeptkoa, 
daily  took  home  bis  New  Testament,  and  committed  some  Tem 
to  memory.  Sometimes  the  lesson  was  not  learned,  and  the  reason 
not  unfrequently  was,  that  some  member  of  the  family  had  bea 
reading  the  book  all  the  time.  Such  a  reason,  of  course,  gsve 
me  the  greatest  pleasure.  Santiago,  a  little  boy,  referred  to  at 
page  288,  as  the  victim  of  pedagogic  barbarity,  one  day  retained 
to  school  without  his  New  Testament.  On  inquiry,  he  told  me,  that 
after  leaving  school  the  day  before,  he  had  entered  the  convent  of 
Santa  Teresa,  to  visit  two  of  bis  aunts,  who  were  nuns,  as  he  was 
accustomed  to  do.  One  of  them,  seeing  the  book  under  his  ana, 
had  looked  at  it,  and  noticing  the  subject,  requested  him  to  knd 
it  to  her.  I  readily  supplied  Santiago  with  another,  and  Isd  bin 
return  in  a  few  days,  and  ask  if  she  had  read  it.  When  I  inquired 
again,  he  had  been,  but  could  not  get  it  back  because  his  aunts  still 
wished  to  retain  it,  and  all  the  nuns  in  the  convent  wanted  to  lead 
it  too.  I  permitted  him  to  lend  them  another  copy,  and  circma- 
stances  afUrwards  prevented  my  making  any  further  inquiries  oa 
the  subject. 

Not  unfrequently  my  scholars  reported  that  they  were  ^^Hid 
bad  names,  and  beaten  and  even  stoned  by  other  boys  in  tbe 
street.  One  of  them  was  chased  by  a  priest,  who  wanted  to  tab 
away  his  New  Testament,  but  the  little  fellow  sacoessfully  eraded 
the  pursuit.  The  archbishop  refused  confirmation  to  some  cbil* 
dren,  because  they  attended  my  school.  One  young  student  im 
refused  the  certificate  of  efficiency  to  which  he  was  entitled,  becanK 

*  A  course  of  lessoiu  by  Mr.  Bobeitton  himKlf,  wu  providentially  braoclit  t»  19 
handi  when  these  classes  were  about  commencing,  and  was  of  the  gKatcst  tcmee.  Om 
elaat  of  abont  eight  or  ten  promising  students,  after  foUowing  Uie  ocmne  lor  six  bn^ 
wore  enabled  to  read,  translate,  and  conduct  most  of  the  eonrcmUioii  of  the  j^nn  m  (^ 
English  language,  lo  that  Kmie  EngUih  retideata  who  heard  timi  rac  imff^  » 
tonished.  J-»'«w 


INCREASE  AMI  PK03PERITT. 


673 


liis  brothera  were  my  scholars.  These  annoyances  tnd  wrongt 
were  alreiily  producing  their  effects  upon  tlie  public  uund,  and 
their  continuiince  and  probable  iucreose  bid  liur  to  fbnu  an  anti- 
Roniish  pnrty  of  a  new  description. 

During  the  season  euperedtioiuly  called  Lent,  tennonixing  it 
more  Ircquciit  than  at  any  other  time.  This  year,  I  seemed  to 
enjoy  even  an  increased  share  of  attention  from  the  preucheni, 
who  spoke,  if  possible,  with  greater  virulence  than  before.  Some 
represented  me  as  a  mean,  poor,  and  ignorant  person;  others,  on  the 
contrary,  as  a  very  learned  and  cunning  deceiver,  insidiously  spread- 
ing by  word,  hook,  and  deed,  the  most  dangerous  poisons.  Que 
of  them  ctmriely  pointed  me  out  by  name  to  his  audience,  and 
having  exposed  und  earieatured  my  views  on  the  sacrament,  of  the 
altar,  the  warship  of  the  virpn,  S:c.  he  tamed  to  the  "Divloe 
Maje«ty  Sacramenled,"  as  they  are  pleaaed  to  terra  the  wafer  which 
vrns  before  him,  and  to  the  iiiisges  around,  and  humbly  craved  their 
forgiveness,  for  even  menlioaing  such  disrespectful  caluuinies  ill 
their  presence,  and  within  their  hearing.  ^Vhile  the  people  nere 
dispersing  after  this  discourse,  a  report  that  1  had  been  assassinated 
n-as  circnlmed  amongst  tbein,  the  horrid  details  of  wliicli  were 
soon  brought  to  my  ears,  followed  by  numerous  visitom,  who  camo 
to  assure  themselves  of  the  truth.  Another  plot  to  effect  tliis  end 
was  said  to  have  been  formed  among  the  military  shortly  nHer. 

Efforts  which  I  had  long  made  to  get  some  of  the  pure  Indian 
boys  into  the  fckuol,  had  at  length  been  crowned  wilb  sudx-aB,  and 
the  three  first  had  been  admitted.  Every  week  was  swelling  the 
number  of  children,  which  had  now  reached  to  eighty,  making  more 
than  one  hundred  pupils  in  all.  Among  them  were  the  sons  of  th« 
funclionnry  who  hwl  sent  me  the  first  order  to  quit  the  State.  My 
detjirc  was  to  establish  a  class  of  the  Quiche  language,  and  to 
acquire  it  myself,  with  a  view  to  translating  the  Scriptures.  I  still 
tnadc  a  practice  of  reading  to  my  poor  neighbours,  and  some  fen 
ladies  of  the  higher  class  bad  beard  the  gospel,  and  had  awakened 
liiely  hopes  respecting  them-  The  Bible  class  had  increased,  and 
still  gave  me  uiuch  encouragement.  In  this  little  band,  I  taw  the 
nucleus  of  the  future  church,  and  I  foresaw  the  time  at  not  fiu- 
didlant,  when  we  should  have  to  contend  for  the  riglit  of  the  public 
worship  of  the  God  of  the  Bible,  as  had  been  done  for  the  circu- 
lation of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  csiablisbmeni  of  the  school.    Tbif 


676  THE  Q08PEL  IK  CBMTBAL  AMERICA. 


straggle  appeared  to  me  likdy  to  prove  more  mtcnae  tban  anj  tkt 
had  preceded,  as  the  spiritual  w(M«hip  of  the  Father,  the  Sao,  ni 
the  Holy  Spirit,  must  prove  most  ofkaAve  to  the  matcrid  ui 
carnal  worshippers  of  Maiy,  the  crucifix,  and  the  wafer.  Jhan^ 
all  seemed  to  be  prosperous  and  promiaiiig  at  present,  my  dief 
anxiety  for  the  future  was  centred  upon  this  point,  and  I  had  Issf 
panted  for  the  time,  when  in  a  more  open  "*y^niT  I  might  pnack 
Christ  crucified)  and  hope  for  hearers  from  amoi^  the  peofk 
When  my  thoughts  had  been  exercised  on  this  subject,  I  had  ahnji 
felt  that  any  attempt  of  the  kind  would  be  wanting  in  dine- 
tion,  as  I  could  not  expect  to  gain  a  hearing,  and  if  I  etc^ 
bodily  injury,  I  was  assured  that  my  further  efforts  would  be  pdi 
a  stop  to.  I  felt  also  that  I  was  preaching  the  gospel  ereiy  dij, 
and  probably  in  the  only  manner  in  which  it  ooold  then  te 
effectually  done.  But  I  daily  prayed  for,  and  confidently  e^^ectedi 
a  fiivourable  change  in  this  respect. 

In  temporal  matters,  also,  it  had  pleased  the  Lord  to  prober 
me.  My  income  from  teaching,  though  my  charges  were  ooa- 
sidered  very  low,  had  already  reached  the  rate  of  2O0L  stertqg 
per  annum,  which  was  considerably  more  than  our  expenses,  tad 
there  were  tokens  of  still  greater  enlargement  and  pro^;re8L  Mf 
heart  was  filled  with  gratitude,  I  adored  that  pxovideBoe  iHaek 
had  so  evidently  guided  and  sustained  me,  and  wtxideied  wha^ 
unto  this  thing  would  ultimately  grow. 

In  the  midst  of  prosperity  and  enlai^ped  plans  for  the  fiBttmc^ 
and  when  I  had  just  decided  upon  a  second  examination  of  tb 
school,  I  was  once  more  overtaken  by  an  order  to  quit  the  Stale, 
which  was  accompanied  by  circumstances  of  a  more  weighty  c^ 
racter  than  any  of  the  previous  mandates  had  been. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  third  day  of  the  week  preceding  theosi 
called  La  Semana  Santa— the  holy  week— when  I  had  just  madi 
cheering  arrangements  for  the  reception  of  more  boardeia^  and  tk 
opening  of  a  new  and  larger  daas  of  students  of  lgngl%>|^  j  ^m 
summoned  to  appear  before  the  Senor  CorregidQr,  Don  Fein 
Velasquez,  who  had  that  day  superseded  the  one  who  so  lal/if 
befHended  me,  and  who  was  now  disgraced.  I  found  him  aksc 
in  his  bureau,  as  the  usual  hour  of  business  was  past.  Heroo^ii^ 
and  yerbaUy  intimated^  that  I  was  ordered  to  leaTe  the  ot^iti 
within  twenty-four  hoozsi  and  the  Stirte  within  aiz  daya»  Vo 


FOtRTH   ORDER   TO  QCIT.  577 

reason  whatever  was  asaigned,  and  when  I  expostulated,  and  nrged 
that  this  was  nut  a  legal  order,  but  a  threat  of  violence,  he  grew 
angr;,  and  said  that  as  a  foreigDcr  I  had  no  right  to  object,  and  if 
I  did  not  obey  it,  that  en  escort  would  be  employed  to  convey  me 
out  of  the  country.  A  written  copy  of  the  order  was  promised,  if 
called  for  tbc  next  morning.  No  legal  steps  could  be  taken  that 
day.  My  icaltercd  scholars  had  already  spread  tlie  report  that  I 
wvs  arrested,  and  mnch  excitement  prevailed  among  their  parents 
fend  other  friends,  who  held  meetings  to  deliberate  and  prepare 
petiiioDS  on  tbe  subject  that  evening,  and  at  an  early  hour  the 
next  morning.  With  my  faithful  advocate  and  other  allies,  who 
were  disposed  to  assist,  we  had  agreed  that,  as  before,  no  known 
means  of  relief  were  to  be  omitted,  though  we  had  less  hopes  of 
tuccess  than  on  former  occasions,  as  the  order  must  have  been 
given  with  the  knowledge  and  auaclion  of  the  President- General. 
Another  application  for  the  habea*  corpus  vra?  resolved  upon. 

That  evening  I  had  an  interview  with  the  Minister  of  State, 
who  informed  me  that  the  order  was  the  result  of  a  letter  which 
bad  juNt  been  received  by  the  Government  from  the  Archbishop, 
who  was  oD  a  visitation  of  tiis  diocese,  and  bad  reached  Vera  Pai. 
The  number  of  Scriptures  which  he  had  found  disseminated  there 
had  greatly  enraged  him.  Some  copies  he  had  caused  to  be 
publicly  burned,  and  he  had  determined  not  to  return  to  the 
capital  while  the  Protestant  heretic  continued  to  be  tolerated  in 
the  State.  His  letter  to  that  effect  had  obliged  the  Government 
to  take  this  step,  as  tbe  absence  of  the  Archbishop  durii\g  tbe 
solemnities  of  the  coming  week  would  be  sure  to  create  a  dis- 
turbance, and  this  being  the  cause  my  person  would  be  in  danger. 
1  warmly  protested  against  justice  being  sacrificed  to  expediency. 
The  Minister  heard  me  patiently,  and  expressed  personal  sym- 
pathy, but  it  waa  plain,  that  the  matter  had  been  deliberately 
determined  upon,  and  that  tbe  real  motive  was  a  fear  that  ad- 
vantage might  be  taken  of  tbe  circumstance  hy  pohtical  mal* 
contents,  who  were  then  nnmeraus,  to  transfer  tbe  reins  of 
Government  into  other  hands.  The  nsual  solemnities  of  tbe 
Kaster  week  were  this  year  to  be  heightened  by  the  obeeqniea  of 
tbe  late  ^ocesan,  who  bad  expired  in  banishment  at  the  Havannab, 
And  whose  remains  were  on  their  way  to  the  capital.  The  aasem* 
blage  of  >  GOQGOune  of  people  was  alone  a  eatue  of  anxiety.    The 


578  THE  GOSPEL  IN  CESTRAIs   AMSRICA. 

Archbishop's  designed  absence  would  afford  them  a  specioai  pretext 
The  influence  of  the  priests  needed  rather  to  be  conciliated,  ui 
therefore  my  expulsion  from  the  State  had  been  resolTed  upon.  1 
also  learned  that  at  the  time  the  order  was  discussed  it  had  beet 
proposed  to  allow  me  only  one  hours  notice  to  prepare ;  but  it  vm 
decided  that  twenty-four  hours  was  short  enough,  thus  exem- 
plifying that  *'  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  croeL** 

After  learning  the  cause,  I  waited  upon  Mr.  Chatfield,  and  apia 
claimed  his  protection  as  a  British  subject.  Once  moxe  he  de- 
clined to  interfere ;  and  being  reminded  that  the  consequences  of 
his  refusal  would  rest  with  himself,  he  became  angry,  and  nukh 
ordered  me  to  leave  the  Consulate.  The  next  morning  early  I 
addressed  to  him  a  respectful  protest,  making  him  answerable  fiv 
any  violence  that  might  be  used  towards  me. 

Late  in  the  evening  it  was  arranged  by  my  supporters  tint 
several  officers  and  favourites  of  Greneral  Carrera*s  should  for- 
round  him  in  the  morning  at  his  lev^e,  to  intieat  for  the  sike 
of  their  own  children  that  I  might  be  permitted  to  renudn. 

That  night,  as  I  rode  homewards  at  a  late  hour  through  the 
quiet  and  star-lighted  streets,  I  reflected  on  the  probable  issue  of  the 
morrow.  I  almost  anticipated  a  new  triumph,  though  appear^ 
ances  were  so  adverse.  Looking  at  the  worst  that  could  b^ypen 
I  saw  nothing  which  I  could  not,  by  God's  grace,  cheerfully  ssb- 
mit  to.  Should  it  be  so  ordered,  a  short  absence  might  tenx 
the  cause  more  effectually  than  my  presence.  I  felt  assured  tbl 
a  political  change  would  ensure  my  speedy  return,  and  I  gxcsdt 
preferred  a  violent  expulsion  to  an  ignoble  flight.  In  short,  1 
felt  that  I  could  not  choose  for  myself,  and  would  not  if  I 
could.  But  I  was  then  enabled  entirely  to  commit  myself^  aj 
wife,  and  the  objects  I  was  striving  for,  to  Him  whose  I  am  sai 
whom  I  serve. 

At  an  early  hour  the  next  morning  I  met  some  <^  the  fiioft 
who  were  using  means  for  my  deliverance.  I  then  proceeded  In  the 
President's  house,  and  remained  in  an  ante-room  while  the 
demonstration  in  my  favour  was  made.  The  Presidfiil  wt 
fased  to  listen  to  their  intreatics,  and  being  presnd  he. 
and  brutally  declared  that  the  first  man  who  should  d^ue  f 
a  word  in  my  favour  should  be  dragged  thnia|^  jh 
(art's  tail,  or  instantly  shot    An  intrepid  wmmi^  i 


SFCCCaSPUL   APPEAL.  679 

three  of  my  schalara,  then  stepped  forward  and  eloquently  pleaded 
tlie  cause  of  tbc  scbool,  tlie  chUdreu,  and  the  country.  The  Gene- 
ral listened  to  her  with  pfitient  attention,  but  he  would  yield 
Dothiog;  only  if  I  would  ask  for  it,  and  promise  to  go,  a  little 
more  time  would  be  allowed  me  to  priiwrc  Tbi«  I  absolutely 
refused  to  do,  feeling  that  I  should  be  making  myself  a  party 
to  ihcir  injustice,  and  placing  a  barrier  in  the  way  of  my  return 
when  any  future  cliunge  should  favour  It.  Finding  me  resolved, 
my  (ntnds  urged  rac  to  leave  the  house  lest  the  tyrant  should 
«ee  my  face,  and  I  hastily  rode  home.  Here  I  found  my  school- 
room well-nigh  filled  with  persons  who  had  come  to  condole  with 
us,  and  who  were  endeavouring  to  calm  the  now  hysterical  excite- 
ment of  my  wife.  On  hearing  what  had  passed  all  with  one 
accord  intreated  me  for  the  sake  of  my  wife  and  uiy  own  safety  * 
to  accede  to  the  olTer  of  the  PresldeDt.  Tbis  I  fl'lt  was  the  bardt-st 
trial  of  my  faith  ;  hut  being  fully  convinced  tlmt  I  ought  not 
to  lacriGce  the  future  to  the  present,  and  my  principles  to  my 
fillings,  I  tore  myself  from  them,  and  proceeded  to  the  residence 
of  my  kind  friend  the  lawyer,  where  another  petition  was  prepared. 
On  presenting  ourselves  at  the  tribunal,  and  soliciting  an  an- 
dience  we  were  shortly  admitted,  and  the  petition  was  read  in 
open  court.  We  were  then  directed  to  withdraw  till  the  decision 
of  the  judges  should  be  made  known.  On  thus  repeating  an 
appeal  which  a  little  more  than  two  years  before  bad  been  re- 
jected with  insult  and  invective,  ill  befitting  a  supreme  court 
of  justice,  Uttlc  hope  of  success  had  been  indulged,  more  especially 
as  the  seven  magistrates  who  composed  the  court  were  with  one 
exception  the  same  men  who  had  decided  against  mc  in  February 
ISH.  Though  the  urgency  of  the  cuse  wai  apparent,  we  were 
long  kept  waitiug  in  the  yard  of  the  palace  of  juatice.  It  waa 
already  rumoured  that  an  escort  bad  been  appoLoled  to  take  me 
away,  and  the  time  allowed  me  was  fast  ebbing.  I,  therefore, 
ileterioined  upon  being  tnken  in  the  court  of  the  palace,  as  thnt 
would  be  n  violaliou  of  the  very  sanctuary  of  justice,  and  would 
spare  my  wife  (be  additional  pain  of  a  parting  under  such 
drcuinsbuiccs. 


fiSO  THE  GOSPEL  IK  CENTKJLC.   AUKKICAm 

Groups  of  friends  and  canons  penoM  were  drawn  togeHtfr  ii 
the  patio  of  the  pahu^io.  Among  them  a  oompanj  of  pure  Inias 
men  and  women^  whose  children  were  my  scholars^  were  obscrrri 
patiently  waiting  for  several  hotnrs  near  fbe  gate,  that  they  mfi^ 
know  the  issue  (  and  they  were  pointed  to  by  otlxerar  as  a  agna- 
ficant  token  of  the  interest  which  all  elasaea  of  tlie  commimity  nov 
shared  in  the  continuance  of  my  school. 

While  waiting  thus,  a  message  was  sent  to  me  bj  M.  CkqaeCr 
the  Belgian  Consul,  inviting  me  to  make  his  house  my  refuge.  1 
requested  the  messenger  to  return,  and,  with  grateful  acknowkd^ 
ments,  to  inquire  whether  he  could  receive  me  as  a  BritM  nhjed: 
for  in  that  case,  if  the  protection  of  the  court  were  extended  to  me, 
I  would  gladly  avail  myself  of  kis  kind  offer.  If  the  kabetu  €orp0 
were  again  refased,  I  had  determined  net  to  do  anything  to  sTisd 
the  execution  of  what  would  then  be  a  Ugalmd  act  of  the 
supreme  powers. 

The  dock  of  the  pakce  indicated  that  my  tweaty-loBr  heoif 
had  expired  ;  and  there  was  no  answer  from  the  Comt.  Shortly 
afterwards  the  folding'^oors  were  thrown  opes,  and,  to  the  gRSl 
surprise  of  all,  and  the  joy  of  not  a  few,  it  was  annoitnoed  that  tbe 
Court  had  granted  the  petition,  taking  me  under  its  legal  pnK 
tection,  and  calling  upon  the  Se^  Corregidor  to  appear  befixe  it 
at  eleven  o'clock,  ▲.!!.,  on  the  following  day,  to  show  cause  for  the 
threatened  violence,  of  which  he  had  made  kamfffflf  the  vduder 
This  dedsion  was  the  more  surprising,  that  it  must  have  keca 
known  to  the  judges  that  the  order  had  emanated,  indirectly,  fiton 
the  President-General,  and  was  the  condition  of  the  Archb«hopV 
return.  On  calm  reflection,  my  own  surprise  remains  t»  this 
ment  undiminished ;  and  I  cannot  but  regard  it  as  a  special 
position  of  the  providence  of  God,  who  thus  turned  tbe  heaitt 
even  of  those  who  had  been  my  enemies,  to  do  nae  jnstioe  in  tint 
instance,  and  even  made  them  witnesses  for  me;  thus,  alao^  gnn>9 
to  my  subsequent  expulsion  the  character  of  a  TicdatioB  of  the 
highest  Intimate  authority  in  the  land,  as  well  as  a  hwach  of  their 
constitution  and  laws. 

Having  received  a  favourable  soswer  fironi  IL  Cloq«el,  whs 
was  willing  to  receive  me  as  a  British  subject,  my  own  eonol 
having  dedined  to  protect  me ;  and  finding  myadf  favasrablf 
dicnmstanced  in  a  legd  point  of  view,  I  detenniiied  to  ahicli 


TIOLENT  SEIZtnE.  581 

•elf  as  mnch  as  poeMbk  from  any  violence  whicli  might  be  at- 
templcd.  1  there  ore  gratefully  shook  bands  with  my  friends,  aud 
nxle  oft' to  the  ficlgian  Coasalate. 

That  otVernooD  M.  Qoquet,  who  kindly  interested  himself  in  my 
bchalii  had  an  interview  with  the  Minister  of  State,  and  wiu  meiircd 
that  the  nmtter  would  now  be  legally  proceeded  with.  An  order 
bearing  the  official  stamp  was  also  seat  to  me  from  the  Corregidor, 
of  which  the  following  is  a  translatioa: — 
"  Don  FenEHico  Cbowe. 

"  In  order  to  carry  into  execution  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  {(( 
atOo  d«  exIUbieitm)  which  the  Supreme  Court  of  Justice  has  awarded 
this  day  in  your  favour,  it  ia  necessary  that  to-morrow  morning  at 
ten  o'clock,  you  should  present  yourself  at  Uie  office  (lUapaehd)  at 
my  charge. 

(Signed)  "  VELisQDEz." 

"GualemiJa,  1st  April  1846." 

Though  not  yet  out  of  my  difficulties,  I  not*  once  more  triumphed 
inwardly,  in  the  anticipation  of  another  deliverance,  and  com- 
municated my  hope  to  some  friendly  viators,  who  cause  to  me  at 
the  Consiifs.  I  even  thought  that  1  could  percfive  how  much  tlic 
cause  of  truth  must  gain  by  such  a  triumph. 

Raving  slept  under  the  ConsuTs  hospitable  roof,  1  arose  curly, 
■Dlending  to  go  home  and  tranquillize  my  much  agitated  wife,  before 
I  obeyed  the  above  order.  It  waa  before  six  in  the  morning  that  I 
mued  forth  from  the  Consurs  gate  with  tbis  intent  I  had  not, 
however,  taken  six  paces  in  the  street,  when  I  heard  a  sudden  rush 
and  clanking  of  armit.  I  stood  still,  hoping  that  the  soldiers  might 
[JOSS  me  in  pursuit  of  some  other ;  biH  in  a  moment  I  ww  sur- 
rounded, and  others  were  seen  running  towards  nic  from  all  direc- 
tions. The  officer  on  horseback  with  a  drawn  sword,  issued  (roin 
a  gateway  ujiposite,  and  riding  up  to  me  with  menacing  attitude 
Knd  nalbft,  threatened  to  cut  me  down  if  I  offered  any  resistance 
ITie  soldiers,  amounting  to  forty  or  fifty  uien,  then  formed  ia 
regular  order,  and  I  was  marched  to  the  head  quarters  of  tlie 
Ocnerrtl.  To  the  question  where  they  were  leading  me  I  obtaincil 
no  reply,  and  I  entertained  doubts  whether  ihey  might  not  have 
order?  to  conduct  me  under  the  wall  of  the  cemctci}',  and  shoot 
me  summarily,  as  I  knew  had  Uw  often  been  done  with  pcraooi  ob- 
ttoxtoiu  lo  those  in  power. 


582  THE  GOSPEL  IN  ClNTRAl.' AM RRICA* 

I  afterwards  learned  that  this  eaaapukj  of  raffianl j  aoidien  M 
lain  concealed  all  night,  entirely  surromidiii^  the  block  of  boofli 
of  which  the  Belgian  Consulate  is  one.  So  well  was  this  eigcitrf, 
that  no  person  at  the  Consults  or  in  the  hause  opposite  kocv  of 
the  fact,  though  several  passed  in  and  oat  until  late  in  the  eves- 
ing.  The  ability  thus  dis})layed  is  accounted  for  by  the  freqaait 
practice  which  the  s^oldiery  have  in  taking  criminals  and  potipoi 
offenders. 

At  the  Commandancia  I  found  two  companies  drawn  ont  bdare 
the  gate,  and  an  escort  waiting  in  the  patio.  I  was  not  kept  kvi^ 
in  suspense.  The  escort  was  marched  into  the  middle  of  the  street, 
and  1  was  called  out  of  the  guard-room,  where  I  had  been  left,  to 
be  delivered  over  in  due  form.  At  this  moment  the  Corregidor 
appeared,  with  several  other  officers,  and  the  street  was  litenDj 
full  of  military  men.  Before  joining  the  escort,  I  stood  in  the 
gateway,  and  with  as  much  firmness  as  I  conld  command,  tboc^ 
not  without  a  tremor  of  voice,  I  protested  against  the  prooeediiig 
as  a  violation  of  the  constitution,  and  guarantees  towards  foreigoen, 
and  especially  of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Jnsdoe  givei 
the  day  before.  I  called  upon  all  present  to  witness  that  I  yidded 
only  to  violence.  The  Corregidor  then  addressed  me»  saying,  tbst 
if  I  wished  to  be  well  treated  I  must  hold  my  peace.  Orders  were 
given  to  the  escort  to  avoid  the  principal  streets;  and  baving 
stepped  in  between  two  file  of  men,  a  seijeant  and  »  corponl,  I 
was  marched  off  on  foot,  no  horse  having  been  provided  for  me, 
though  the  journey  from  the  capital  to  the  Port  of  Yzabal  b  more 
than  200  miles.  At  a  window  of  Carrera's  residence,  which  wv 
next  door  to  the  Comandancia,  I  observed  the  IVesident-Geiienl 
closely  scrutinizing  me  as  I  passed* 

The  circumstance  of  my  being  led  through  the  bttrrios,  to  avisi 
the  excitement  which  the  escort  would  have  produced  even  at  tint 
early  hour,  in  the  more- frequented  streets,  was  overruled  for  good. 
One  of  my  scholars,  whose  house  we  passed^  having  caught  sight 
of  me,  ran  to  tell  my  wife  and  my  friends,  who  then  considered  me 
in  safety.  The  parents  of  one  of  the  scholars  immediately  sent  a 
horse  after  me  by  the  same  messenger,  who  overtook  the  esont 
near  the  Guarda  del  Golfo.  This  boy  was  one  of  the  eUcat 
scholars,  and  though  bat  recently  admitted  to  the  ■^rhool^  he  et- 


ALLBVIATINS  CinCCHSTANCES.  683 

pressed  a  desire  to  accomptmy  me,  and  wtu  much  grieved  wlien  it 

I  had  noticed  ihat  my  guards  were  of  ihc  Tery  worst  dcMription 
of  Ladino  sol diera— dirty,  half-clad,  and  bare-footed.  Tla-y  had 
scarcely  yet  recovered  from  the  fumea  of  the  prexious  nighl'i  de- 
bauch ;  and  their  manners  were  brutal  and  insolent.  Ou  mount- 
ing my  horse,  which  tiiey  scrutiuired  with  bitter  irony,  I  wag  told 
to  give  the  reinn  to  one  of  the  men.  I  remarked  that  I  had  no 
intention  of  attempting  an  ccape ;  and  the  hoarge  laugh  and  wg- 
nificant  look  which  accompanied  their  assurance  that  they  would 
aend  leaden  raewcngers  after  me  if  I  did,  were  quite  sufficient  to 
convince  me  that  I  had  better  be  silent.  By  the  prompt  kindne» 
«f  the  friend  ttho  sent  me  a  horHu,  I  was  spared  the  additional 
muring  which  a  forced  march  for  ten  dnys,  over  rugged  moun- 
tain paths,  ajid  under  a  broiling  sun,  must  have  occasioned. 
Having  reached  the  summit  of  the  first  heights,  from  which  ihc 
city  and  plain  are  viiiible,  we  paused  for  a  neol ;  and  I  sent  back 
the  lioy  who  had  bronght  me  the  horse  with  a  pencilled  note  of 
advice  and  encouragement  to  my  wile,  expressing  the  hope  I 
entertained  of  my  speedy  return. 

Having  resumed  our  way  in  silence,  tbe  soldier  who  held  the 
reins  of  my  horse  found  it  very  irksome  to  carry  his  knapsack  at 
the  Bsme  time,  and  he  entreated  his  comrades  in  vain  to  relieve 
him  of  it.  1  then  told  him  to  give  It  to  me,  and  made  it  fast  be* 
bind  niu  npon  my  pillon.  This  little  act  produced  an  almost  magic 
effect  upon  the-ie  untutored  and  vicious  men.  From  that  lime 
they  gradually  become  more  friendly,  and  at  once  mude  me  a 
shsnir  of  the  fruit  they  bought.  Though  they  were  tyrannical 
and  violent  to  othera,  they  subsequently  behaved  with  uniform 
respect  and  considcrsteness  to  me,  and  appeared  to  be  moved  at 
the  display  of  affection  towards  me  which  they  observed  in  (he 
boy  who  had  just  left  us,  and  in  the  followii^g  events. 

I'rescntly  we  he.-ird  a  horse  at  full  gallop  behind  us,  and  we 
were  soon  overtaken  by  the  friend  who  had  sent  mc  the  "  mon- 
tura"  1  was  upon.  He  ciprcwed  hia  aympatliy  with  me,  and  bis 
sharac  that  the  Government  of  his  country  should  have  lent  itself 
to  such  a  deed.  "  What  will  the  Monarchisti  think  of  our  Uc< 
publics"  was  bis  remark,  as  if  be  thought  that  the  eyes  of  all  the 
woild  were  npon  them,  "  when  they  heu  of  a  deed  like  this  f "- 


684  THE  GOSPEL   IK  CENTRAL    AMERICA. 

Seeing  that  I  had  no  manga  or  pondio,  he  generaoaljr  plaeedMi 
own  before  me,  on  the  halbarda— a  deacriptioii  of  saddle,  and  wiihei 
me  a  kind  farewell,  saying  that  others  were  behind  him. 

Two  more  caballeros  soon  came  up  with  the  escort,  whidi  i« 
wending  its  way  through  narrow  defiles  and  wild  glens.  One  if 
these,  an  intelligent  Ladino,  had  lately  joined  the  adult  Bible  duL 
He  assured  me  that  the  grief  of  the  parents  of  my  scholan «« 
profound  ;  and  that  the  tears  of  the  aged  and  of  children  were  beiig 
mingled  together  on  my  account.  The  road,  he  said,  was  foil  d 
my  scholars,  many  of  whom  had  started  with  the  hope  of  offf- 
tdcing  me ;  but  he  had  bid  them  turn  hack,  as  they  were  sol 
likely  to  come  up  with  us.  He  rode  by  my  side  for  sevcni 
leagues,  and,  to  my  surprise  and  joy,  he  administered  real  oooifaft 
to  me  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  saying,  *'  Blessed  are  thej  wks 
are  persecuted  for  righteousness*  sake.**  He  also  entreated  me  to 
teach  the  soldiers  as  I  went  the  same  things  that  I  had  taught  kia 
out  of  the  Bible ;  and  to  them  he  distributed  segars,  telling  thai 
that  it  was  for  doing  good  and  teaching  the  people,  and  not  ftr 
any  crime  that  I  was  a  prisoner.  Before  he  left  me,  he  gare  ne 
the  contents  of  his  purse,  and  some  provisions  which  he  bad  hafldlr 
purchased,  and  bade  me  an  affectionate  farewell.  These  tokemcf 
kindness,  and  of  the  goodness  of  my  God,  were  more  ezcitio^tt 
my  feelings  than  even  the  previous  events  had  been.  Aoothtf 
messenger  brought  me  a  change  of  garments,  and  the  asBurmce 
that  my  wift*s  excitement  was  much  soothed  by  the  sympathy  msni- 
fested  by  our  numerous  friends,  who  had  filled  the  house  and  wcyl 
with  her. 

Having  toiled  on  till  the  short  twilight,  we  descended  a  sleep 
mountain,  and  took  up  our  quarters  for  the  night  at  a  phoe 
called  £1  Pucnte,  thirty  miles  from  Guatemala.  Beneath  a  auD 
low  shed,  in  an  open  part  of  the  village,  and  near  the  bank  of  tk 
river,  a  hammock  was  slung  for  my  accommodation,  the  arms  woe 
stacked,  and  the  tired  escort  lay  scattered  upon  mata  and  skins  on  tk 
ground  around  me.  Confident  as  I  felt  that  my  absence  from  Goite- 
mala  would  be  but  short — a  few  months  at  most, — ^yet  the  shock 
was  severely  felt,  and  the  conflicting  emotions  and  feelings  of  tbt 
day  had  exhausted  my  strength.  1  sat  with  my  head,  which  ached 
violently,  resting  upon  my  hands,  for  the  first  time  silently  sufiensg 
copious  tears  to  flow,  when  to  my  surprise  I  was  hailed  by  Maoid 


ESCORTED   TO   YZABAL.  683 

ind  Santiago,  iwo  of  toy  little  icholan  berore  meniioned,  wbo  had 
Walked  the  whute  of  the  day  without  refreshment,  merely  that  ihey 
might  bid  me  adieu,  having  refused  to  turn  back  nith  the  rest. 
The;  had  also  been  orertaken  b;  an  Indian  mesKnger,  $cnt  to  me 
with  letters,  and  who  waa  the  bearer  of  a  sum  of  twenty  dollars, 
which  my  scholars  of  the  English  clan  had  collccled  among  tbem- 
eelvea,  lo  assiit  me  on  the  road.  This  I  was  careful  to  conceal  from 
my  guards,  and  beingnowquiteoTcrcomelsurik  to  rust,  baring  fint 
procured  Bonie  supper  for  the  boys,  who  wmn  ote  themselves  to 
tlcep,  lying  upon  the  hard  ground  under  my  hammock.  Long  before 
the  grey  light  of  the  morning,  we  were  preparing  to  start  again,  that 
we  might  rest  during  the  noou-day  heat.  The  children  returned 
unwillingly  with  llie  Indian  messenger,  and  the  dawn  OTertook  us 
already  far  on  the  road. 

In  sii  days  we  reached  Gualan,  on  the  river  Montagua.  When 
we  had  approached  a  town  or  village,  the  escort  washed  ihcir  feet 
in  some  strenm,  and  fixed  their  bayonets.  The  gazing  inhabitanti 
would  probably  soon  hear  the  cause  of  my  being  a  prisoner,  and 
thus  again  I  was  made  a  silent  witness  for  the  fiible,  and  for  the 
God  of  the  Bible  in  a  godless  land.  Ooe  of  the  days  thus  spent 
was  the  Sabbath,  and  1  thought  of  the  privileges  which  sainla 
enjoy,  in  those  countries  where  they  aaaemblc  together  for  worship 
and  communion.  While  reflecting  thus,  we  traversed  the  plaxa 
of  a  small  town,  in  which  a  crowd  of  people  were  assembled.  As 
we  pasaed  near  them,  1  looked  over  their  heads  lo  sec  what  they 
were  intent  upon,  and  I  beheld  two  fighting  cocks,  one  of  them 
writhing  in  the  agonies  of  a  mortal  wound.  This  was  their  holy 
convocation,  and  1  felt  that  if  highly  favoured  Christians  could  but 
witness  the  scene,  they  would  be  quickened  in  their  prayers  for  this 
people.  I^ng  ere  this,  1  had  gained  the  full  confidence  of  my 
guards,  and  repeatedly  spoke  to  them  on  religious  subjects,  as  well 
■a  occasionally  to  the  people  where  we  stopped,  to  whom  I  some- 
times read  the  Scriptures.  Some  of  the  escort  were  ML'zicaiis, 
They  told  me  that  they  had  been  selected  out  of  the  ranks  for 
thb  duty,  on  account  of  their  high  stature,  by  which  I  andcrstood 
that  the  most  fierce>lookingmen  in  the  company  had  been  picked  out. 
One  of  them  was  severely  beaten  by  the  seijeant  for  lagging  behind, 
having  trodden  upon  some  thorns,  and  wounded  his  fool.  Soon  after 
they  were  engaged  arotmd  my  hone,  plottiiig  the  ■Mtannation  of 


586  THE  GOSPEL   IN   CENTRAL   AMERICA. 

the  Serjeant,  who  was  himself  a  little  behind.     From  this  purpose  I 
was  enabled  to  deter  them  by  persuasion  and  reasoning    At  Gailsa, 
which   my  horse    was  scaroely  able    to    reach,    another  escot 
was  appointed  to  conduct  me  to  Yzabal.      To  save  t'ny  tad 
fatigue,  I  procured  a  boat  to  convey  us  to  Lios  Eucuentns,  aod 
thence  rode  through  the  bush  on  a  hired  horse,    reaching  Y21- 
bal  on  the  same  day.      Here  I  was  kindly  treated  by  the  Co- 
mandante  of  the  port,  and  in  a  few  days  was  put  on  board  a  nadre 
schooner  for  Belize,  with  orders  that  I  should  not  be  permittdi 
to  land  till  we  arrived  there.    Thus,  without  being  constilted,  vss 
I  brought  to  the  very  place  that  I  would  have  selected  bad  I 
been  left  free  to  choose,  and  that  too  just  in  time  to  take  mv  pan 
with  the  pastor  and  the  brethren  in  the  events  before  related,  m 
resulting  from  the  separation  of  Mr.  Henderson  from  the  Bapdsi 
Missionary  Society. 

The  first  letters  that  I  received  from  my  wife  were  filled  with 
expressions  of  gratitude  that  I  had  been  removed  from  f^rou'er 
dangers.  It  was  reported  that  a  plan  had  been  settled  fbr  117 
assassination  during  the  holy  week,  and  that  the  priests  onlr  it- 
gretted  that  I  had  escaped  it  The  obsequies  of  the  Archhisbap 
had  been  accompanied  by  a  plot  to  murder  the  President,  aad 
many  of  my  supporters  and  friends,  and  elder  |>apils,  bei^ 
accused  as  conspirators  were  cast  into  dungeons,  banished,  or  shoL 
It  was  thought  that  it  would  have  been  easy  for  my  enonies  t» 
implicate  me  also  had  I  been  in  Guatemela. 

The  blacksmith  before  mentioned,  as  following  the  Bible  class  ^ 
witnessed  a  good  confession  before  many  witnesses  on  the  day  d 
my  seizure.  When  my  school-room  was  again  filled  with  visiton 
come  to  express  their  condolence,  he  boldly  avowed  his  apuonl 
of  my  instructions,  and  said,  **  They  have  taken  away  my  t^Kber, 
but  they  cannot  take  away  what  he  has  taught  me.**  The  young 
man  who  had  been  in  training  had  made  an  effort  with  a  portioB 
of  the  scholars  to  perpetuate  the  school ;  but  he  had  been  in- 
terfered with  by  the  authorities,  and  had  fled,  fearing  for  his  life. 

Several  of  the  older  scholars  continued  to  oonrespond  with  mt 
while  I  remained  in  Belize^  and  two  of  them  who  came  to  the 
Settlement  visited  me  during  my  confinement  in  the  jaiL 

The  political  state  of  the  ooontiy,  as  already  shewn,  hm 
hitherto  been  such  as  to  pnKlvde  the  poflnfaility  of  my  RtVBt 


587 

i  interval  of  power  which  the  liberals  enjoyed  since  my  de- 
parture was  BO  abort  that  it  conuot  be  regretted  that  I  woe  duC 
then  at  hand  to  avail  rayself  uf  it. 

Several  efTorts  were  made  to  remove  my  wife,  also,  to  Belize ; 
but  they  have  proved  entirely  abortive,  ou  account  of  the  physical 
difficulties  in  the  way,  added  to  her  timidity  and  unprutectcd  etatc, 
ftnd  the  scarcity  of  means.  The  same  God  -who  watched  over  tne 
eoDtinued  graciouBly  to  nuse  up  friends  to  her  among  the  natives 
&nd  help  has  repeatedly  been  sent  to  her  by  the  Church  at  fiehze. 
Nevertheless,  her  sufferings  have  been  great  and  protracted  ;  but 
there  appears  reason  to  hope  that  they  have  not  been  unaccom- 
panied by  an  inward  blessing  from  on  high,  to  which  she  was 
Lcfore  a  stranger. 

Protracted  as  the  period  of  my  absence  bos  unavoidably  been, 
and  uncertain  as  political  events  and  the  liiture  gi^uerally  must 
appear,  it  is  still  my  fixed  purpose,  with  the  Divine  assistance,  la 
reinrn  to  Guatemala,  and  to  resume  my  labours  there,  so  soon  oa 
that  door  shall  be  again  opened  in  Providence.  The  presence  there 
of  my  wife,  which  must  have  tended  to  keep  alive  the  remembrance 
of  my  efforts  among  its  inhabitants,  in  the  midst  of  their  late  con- 
vulsions ;  the  desire  of  my  heart,  which  has  strongly  entwined  itself 
around  the  people  and  the  country ;  the  conviction  of  my  mind, 
that  this  is  a  field  in  which  I  may  hope  to  he  most  aucce^isful ;  and 
my  confidence,  that  it  was  God  who  conducted  niy  steps  thither, 
and  who,  in  His  own  lime,  also  suspended  my  work  there,  all 
unite  to  induce  me  to  believe  that  it  is  there,  in  the  Sj>anisb  States 
of  Central  America  that  I  am  called  to  labour,  should  it  be  the  will 
of  my  Heavenly  Father  to  continue  to  employ  me  in  the  spread  of 
His  kingdom. 

The  accomplishment  of  the  special  mission  with  which  I  have 
been  charged  by  the  Church  at  Belize  has,  through  adverse  in- 
fiuencea,  demanded  niy  continuance  in  Great  Britain.  It  has  now, 
also,  called  forth  this  volujne,  as  a  means  of  spreading  and  jxr- 
petuating  infonuation  concerning  a  mission  field  and  mii-sionary 
effort*  hitherto  but  little  known,  and  which  have  a  well-grounded 
claim  upon  the  attention  of  the  disciples  of  Christ.  Siiould 
that  end  be  even  partially  secured,  it  will  be  with  renewed  con- 
fidence in  the  God  of  providence  and  grace  that  I  shall  hasten 


688 


THB  006PEL  IN  CSNTRAL   AMEBICA* 


back  to  give  a  joyM  aoooant  of  my  stewaidaliip  to  tl 
whose  meflBenger  I  am,  and  to  resome  mj  eflbrta  to 
—  by  active  labours  in  the  field  —  Thb  Gospbl  m 
Ambeica. 


THS  BNO. 


loidiMt  JMatod  bj  BrmwAXt  tad  MmuuT,  Old  Baikj. 


fT 


BOOKS   PUBLISHED 


CHARLES  GILPIN, 


BISHOPSGATE  STREET  WITHOCT, 


AGENTS   FOR   9 

IDAM  &  CHARLES  BLACK,  Edikbubgh. 

AGENT   TOa    IRELANO: 

J.  B.  CILPIN,  DrBLix. 


Charles  Oilpin*s  List  of  Sooksy 


GENERAL    KLAPKA'S   NEW   WORK   ON   THB 

HUNGARIAN  WAR, 

With  Portraits  qf  Kouuih  and  General  Klapka,  amd  a  Map  ^ 

Austrian  Empire. 

MEMOIRS  OF  THE  WAR  OF  INDEPENDENCE 

HUNGARY.  By  General  Exapka,  late  Seoetai] 
War  to  the  Hungarian  (Commonwealth,  and  CommuK 
of  the  Fortress  of  Komom.     2  vols,  post  8vo,  price  2 

"  This  is  one  of  the  most  extraordinaiy  narradre 
great  and  extraordinary  military  eyents  that  has  < 
appeared." — Liverpool  Mercury. 

"It  is  a  hook  that  is  to  he  perused  with  deep  i 
rest,  as  emanating  from  the  pen  of  a  distingins 
actor  in  the  memorahle  and  dreadfiil  conflict  he 
scribes." — United  Service  JoumaL 

**  It  is  a  valuable  addition  to  historical  literature, 
describes  a  period  ennobling,  from  the  gallant  exert 
of  the  people,  and  degrading,  from  the  miscondn 
the  chiefs." — Illustrated  London  News. 

*'  The  doings  and  darings  of  the  writer  have  won 
him  a  world-wide  reputation,  and  his  narrative  iril 
read  with  interest  by  all  who  can  sympathize  widk 
sufferings  of  a  high-spirited,  a  generous,  and  a  n 
people." — Athenaum. 

"The  second  volume  of  General  Klapka's  i 
more  than  bears  out  the  promise  of  the  first 
defence  of  Komom;  the  brilliant  attack,  and 
defeat  of  the  Austrians,  at  Atsh ;  the  despair  d 
army  at  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  Gorgey,  at 
moment  when  they  were  about  to  march  into  Ansi 
the  infamous  means  used  to  induce  Klapka  to  oedi 
fortress  unconditionally ;  the  horrid  motive  (^  i 
to  execute  the  prisoners  on  the  anniversaty  of  Lt6 
death)  which  led  Haynau  ultimately  to  accede  ti 
demands  of  the  Komom  garrison  ;  and  the  fi««l 
faithless  disregard  of  that  treaty ;  all  these  inck 
are  brought  before  the  reader,  with  a  truth  and  i 
which  could  only  have  been  imparted  to  them 
principal  actor  in  the  scenes  described." — j 


S,  BUhopsgate  Street  Without. 


hZZINl.  BoTolty  and  Republicanism  in  Italy;  illus- 
trating the  late  importaat  aod  deeply  intereating  events 
in  Itftly,  and  coQtaiaiiig  Mazziui'a  Uratioa  on  the  Death 
of  the  Brothers  Bandiera  ;  Letter  to  M.  de  Tocqueville 
and  M.  de  Falloux,  &c.,  &c.  By  Joseph  Mazzini. 
Foolscap  8vo,  cloth,  price 

D  MORCANWC.  Kecotlections  and  Anecdotes  of 
EDWARD  WILLIAMS,  the  Bard  of  Glamorgan.  With 
B  copious  Appendix.  By  Eluab  Wauno.  Post  Sto, 
cloth,  price  6s. 

IE  LAW  OF  KINDNESS :    Six  Chapters. 

I.  TheLawofKindness— Introductory.— 11.  The  Law 
of  Kindness  in  the  Family. — III.  The  Law  of  Kindness 
■q  the  ScbooL— IV.  The  Law  of  Kiudness  in  the  Church. 
—V.  The  Law  of  Kindness  in  the  Commonwealth. — 
^I.  The  Law  of  Kindness  to  other  Nations  and  the 
Heathen.  Bv  the  Rev.  Thomas  Pynk.  Foolscap  8?o. 
'  cloth,  2s.  6d.' 

"  We  shall  rejoice  to  hear   that   it   is  extensively 
circulated." — Standard  of  Freedom. 

;i>OPULAR    MEMOIR    OF  WILLIAM    PENN, 

Proprietor  and  Governor  of  Pennsylvania;  under  whose 
wise  administration  the  Principles  of  Peace  were  toain- 
tained  in  practice.  By  Jacob  Post.  Foolscap  8vo, 
,  price  Is. 

"  Such  a  work,  indeed,  was  much  wanted  at  the 

present  time.     The  dastardly  attack  by  Macaulay  on 

the  well-established  fame  of  this  great  man  has  induced 

the  desire  in  many  minds  to  know  something  of  t' 

real   character  of  the   Pennsylvanian    Legislator.'' 

Briluh  Friend, 

t  COSPEL  IN  CENTRAL  AMERICA;  coutaini  ^ 

a  Sketch  of  the  Country — Physical  and  Geogmpliical — 

Hiiilorical  and  Political — Moral  and  Religious.   A  Uistory 

of  tlie  Baptist  Mission  in  British  Uonduraa,  and  of  the 

introduction   o(  tlie   Bible  into   the   Spanish  Americv 

Rt^public  of  Guatemala.     By  Freobbick  Cbowe.    Crom 

8vo,  cloth,  price  7s-  6J. 


Charles  GUpMs  Liu  of  Books, 


LIFE  OF  A  VAGRANT;  or,  the  Tesdmooy  d 
Outcast  to  the  Value  of  the  GospeL  To  whidi  if  ad 
a  Brief  and  Original  Account  of  Andkibs  Stoptlu, 
African  Witness.  New  Edition.  Foolscap  8td,  d 
price  Is. 

"  When  we  tell  our  readers  that  we  believe  then 
few  among  them  who,  if  circumstances  permit^  will 
be  compelled  to  finish  it  at  a  single  sitting,  tber 
require  no  further  proof  of  the  interest  we  fek  in  iL' 
Christian  Witness. 

**  It  is  worthy  of  all  confidence." — Nats&MiT^ 
Chronicle. 

ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.  The  Treatise  of  Albei 
Magnus.  [1193 — 1289,]  De  Adhttrendo  Deo,  of. 
hering  to  God.  A  Translation  from  the  Latin.  16: 
doth,  price  Is. 

An  exquisite  gem. 

HISTORICAL  SKETCHES  AND  PERSONi 
RECOLLECTIONS  OF  MANCHESTER.  Inteo 
to  illustrate  the  Progress  of  Liberal  Opinion  from  1791 
1832.     By  Archibald  Pkenticb.     Post  8to,  price  6s 

THE  PASTOR'S  WIFE.  A  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Shew 
of  Surrey  Chapel.  By  her  Husband.  With  a  Portr 
Seventh  Thousand,  foolscap  8vo,  price  58. 

''This  constitutes  one  of  the  most  tender,  besati 
instructive,  and  edifying  narratives  that  for  a  longti 
has  come  under  our  notice.  •  *  •  We  antiajMite 
it  a  very  extended  popularity  and  nsefnlness  «« 

the  mothers   and  daughters  of  England." CWi 

Witness^  January,  1849. 

"This  volume  deserves  a  large  circalatioii,  nd 
feel  it  a  pleasure  to  commend  its  perusal  to  the  mil 
classes  of  our  readers,  especially  to  those  who*  • 
may  enable  them  to  tread  in  Mrs.  Sherman's  atm' 
Nonconformist,  January  24th,  1849. 


.%  BUhopsgate  Street  Without. 


>H-CE-CA-CAH-BOWH.  Recollections  of  a  Forest 
Life  ;  or,  the  Life  and  Travels  of  Gboroe  Copwat,  Chief 
of  the  Ojibway  Nation.     Foolscap  8vo,  price 

"  The  simple  and  effective  narrative  of  the  hardships, 
trials,  and  present  labours  of  tbe  writer,  vriU  be  found 
full  of  interest  to  the  maay  well-wishers  of  the  Indian 
tribes." 

IE    OJIBWAY    NATION.      The  Traditional   History, 

Legends,  Wars,  nud  Progress  of  Ealighleoed  Education 

of  the  Ojibway  Nation  of  the  North  American  Indians. 

By  the  Indian  Cbief,  KAu-GB-GA-GAn-Bowii.or  Geokob 

CoFWiY.     Foolscap  8vo,  cloth,  price 

I  "The  above  work  is  full  of  interest,  and  written  in 

the  figurative  style  of  speech-making,    so  celebrated 

,      aoiong  the  North  American  Indians,  by  a  man  who 

has  observed  the  progress  of  hie  nation,  whiclt  is  full  of 

natural  and  poetic  feeling." 

MNS  AND  MEDITATIONS.    ByA.  L.W.    Foolscap 
8vo,  stiff  fancy  cover,  gilt  edges,  price  Is.     Tbe  i 
done  up  in  silk,  price  2s.  6d.     Second  Edition. 
"There  are  briers  besetting  every  path. 
That  call  for  patient  care  ; 
There  is  a  cross  in  every  lot, 
.  And  an  earnest  need  for  prayer  ; 

But  a  lowly  heart  that  leans  on  Thee 
la  happy  anywhere." 
"Clear,  devout." — Chri»lian  Witneu. 
"The  sentiments  are,  without  exception,  evangelical, 
and  the  diction  chaste." — Standard  of  Fretdom. 

IE  PEASANTRY   OF  ENGLAND.     An   Appeal    on 
behalf  of  the  Working  Classes  ;  in  which  the  causes  which 
have  led  to  tlioir  present  impoverished  and  degraded  a 
ditiou,  and  liie  means  by  which  it  may  best  he  permi 
nently   improved,  are   clearly  pointed  out.     By  G.  ~ 
pEftRv.     12mo,  cloth,  price  4s. 


6  Ckarles  Gi^'s  liH^Bookg, 


Ghwfeobeig  ill 


**  The  inquirers  after  health,  the  philanthrofust,  a 

the  medical  practitioner  will  do  well  to  read  Mr.  Gil> 

hook,  for  which  we  thank  him,  and  which  we  beg  t< 

sincerely  to  recommend  to  carefid  perusal." — Ifma 

formist,  September  18,  1849. 

''We  strongly  recommend  its  perosal." — Lima\ 
Chronicle, 

SAND  AND  CANVASS.  A  Narrative  of  AdTentnns 
Egypt,  with  a  sojonm  among  the  Artists  in  Rone,  i 
With  Illustrations.  By  Samuel  Bbvan.  8to,  dtf 
price  12s. 

"  The  random  high  spirits  of  this  book  gire  « 
to  the  sand,  and  colour  to  the  canvass." — Atkenam 

"  The  truth  is  never  disguised,  but  things  are  nM 
tioned  with  an  air  of  sincenty  that  is  irresistible.  1 
never  recollect  to  have  opened  a  book  which  posBea 
this  charm  in  anything  approaching  to  the  samedegn 
It  captivates  and  excites,  giving  reality  and  interest 
every  incident  that  is  introduced." — dooming  PoU. 


CAPTAIN  SWORD  AND  CAPTAIN  PEN A  Fw 

By  Leigh  Hunt.  The  third  Edition,  with  a  new  Prefix 
Remarks  on  War,  and  Notes  detailing  the  Horroni 
which  the  Poem  is  founded.  Foolscap  8vo,  cloth,  g 
edges,  price  3s.  6d. 

**  Probably  in  no  work  of  one  hundred  pages  « 
there  ever  amassed  so  much  of  horror.  *  ♦  »  ^ 
admire  its  brilliancy  and  are  amazed  at  its  force."* 
Morning  Chronicle. 

"  Mr.  Leigh  Hunt's  Poem  and  Notes,  together  «i 
the  excellent  Prefaces,  are  eminently  calculated  to  £A 
a  more  rational  and  Christian  spirit  among  all  danei 
readers.  We  recommend  them  to  every  father  d 
family  and  guardian  of  youth." — Morning  jidveriita 


5,  BUhoptgate  Stmt  Witktmi. 


IE  DEMERARA  MARTYR.     Memoirs  of  the  Rev. 

John  Smith,  MissiniiarT  to  Dtmurara.    Bj  EoniN  Anobl 
WALLBHincE.    Witli  a  Pretiicp  by  the  Rev.  W.  G.  13*rbett. 

"  There  will  one  day  be  a  resurrection  of  names  and 
repntatbos,  as  ccTtninly  as  of  bodies." — JoA*  Milton. 

"  The  book  is  a  wortliv  monumeat  to  the  distinguished 
Martyr  whose  history  forma  ils  leading  subject.  *  *  • 
A  valuable  cotitribuLion  to  the  cause  of  freedom,  hu- 
manity, and  justice  in  Domerara." — Patriot. 

"  We  have  peniaed  this  vrork  with  mixed  feelings  of 
pain  and  admiration ;  paia,  arising  from  tJie  sense  of 
vroRg  and  misery  inflicted  on  a  good  man  ;  admiration, 
that  the  author  has  so  fully  redeemed  his  friend  and 
brother  minister  from  calumnies  and  misrepresentations 
ofSatanic  malice  and  wickedness." — Standard  of  Free- 
dom, August  30,  1848. 

flE  ISLAND  OF  CUBA:  its  Kesourees,  Progrc^ss.  and 
Prospects,  considered  especially  in  relation  to  the  influence 
of  its  prosperity  on  the  interests  of  the  British  West  India 
Colonies.  By'R.  R.  Madden,  M.R.l.A.  I2rao,  doth, 
price  3s.  Cd. 

"This  Utile  Tolume  contains  a  large  amount  of  valu- 
able information,  intimately  connected  with  the  progress 
of  society  and  happiness  of  man." — 0/irittian  Timet. 

"  Wc  recommend  the  book  lo  the  perusal  of  all  who 
are  interested  in  the  great  work  of  negro  «moncipation." 
— Standard  of  Freedom. 

"As  supplying  ihc  latest  information  concerning 
Cuba,  Mr.  Kladden's  book  is  extremely  Tsluable." — 
EconomUt. 

"Wc  cordially  recommend  tlie  voluuic." — Jnli- 
Slavery  Sepurter. 

'ILLIAM  PENN  AND  T.  B.  MACAULAY ;  being 
Brie  I' Observations  on  theCharges  made  in  Mr.  Macaulay's 
"  History  of  En)i;land,"  against  the  character  of  William 
Penn.     By  W,  E.  Fuksteh.     8vo,  sewed,  price  If 


8  Charles  Gilpin* s  List  of  Books^ 


THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  A   WORKING  MAI 

By  "One  who  has  whistled  at  thb  Plough.**    ft 
8vo,  price  7s. 

This  work  cod  tains  the  "Barrack  Life  of  a  Dragoon; 
what  the  author  did  to  save  Britain  from  a  Ref^tioi 
his  Court  Martial  and  Punishment  at  Birmingham ;  tl 
Conspiracy  of  the  Secret  Committee  of  the  Trade  Unia 
in  London  to  "Assassinate  the  Cabinet  Ministers, n 
Capture  the  Palace.  Royal  Family,  and  Bank  of  England; 
how  planned,  and  how  prevented. 

"  Here  is  a  genuine,  fresh,  and  thoroughly  true  bool 
something  really  worth  reading  and  rememberiog/'- 
Manchester  Examiner. 

"The  well-known  author  of  this  work,  irfio  h 
attracted  much  public  attention,  and  has  acquired 
well  merited  reputation,  has  done  the  public  a  gre 
service  by  publishing  his  autobiography." — Eamom 
*'  This  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  works  whii 
has  come  under  our  notice  for  a  long  time.  It  is  ti 
genuine  record  of  the  inner  and  outer  life  of  a  gCDim 
working  man.  *  *  *  There  are  few  writings  ia  « 
language,  which,  for  power  of  graphic  desciiptioi 
surpass  the  letters  by  him  under  the  signature  of '  Oi 
who  has  Whistled  at  the  Plough  ;*  and  in  his  aoti 
biography  we  find  the  same  facility  of  description,  kc 
— Leeds  Times. 

READINGS  FOR  RAILWAYS;  or  Anecdotes  and otb 
Short  Stories,  Beflections,  Maxims,  Characteristics,  ft 
sages  of  Wit,  Humour,  and  Poetry,  &c. ;  together  vii 
Points  of  Information  on  Matters  of  General  latere 
collected  in  the  course  of  his  own  reading.  By  Lek 
Hunt.     Boyal  ISmo,  price  Is. 

"  Leigh  Hunt's  name  would  beautify  any  pTodactk) 
even  trivial  in  itself,  with  the  glory  of  his  early  fan 
The  book  will  prove  a  valuable  antidote  to  raibr 
weariness  to  whomsoever  will  take  it  in  hand,  as  1 
railvniy  companion." — Morning  Chronicle. 

*^*  The  second  volume  is  now  ready.     Edited  by  J» 
Stme. 


JUVENILe  DEPRAVITY.  The  Priie  Esssy  on  JuTenile 
Depravitj.  By  the  Rev.  H.  WoRSLtr,  A.M.,  Easton 
Rectory,  Suffolk.  To  this  Essay  on  Juvenile  Depravity, 
as  connected  with  the  causes  and  practices  of  Intempe- 
rance, and  the  efiectual  barrier  opposed  by  them  to 
Education,  the  above  Prize  or£lOO  was  anarded  by  the 
Adjudicators,  Dr.  Harris,  of  Cheshunt ;  the  Rev.  James 
Sherman,  Surrey  Chapel ;  and  Dr.  Vaughan,  of  Harrow. 
Post  8vo,  price  5b. 

"'Vi'e  earnestly  commend  this  very  able  Essay  to  the 
early  attention  of  those  whose  philanthropy  leads  tbem 
to  seek  a  remedy  for  the  fearful  amount  of  juvenile 
depravity  which  now  gangrenes  society,  and  will  prove 
fatal  if  not  checked  and  removed.  The  author  admi- 
rably uses  bis  statistics,  and  shows  an  intimate  know- 
ledge of  human  nature,  in  its  multifarious  circum- 
stances."— Christian  Examiner,  April,  1849. 

"  It  is  impossible  to  read  many  sentences  of  this 
volume  without  perceiving  that  you  are  in  the  company 
of  D  Christian  philanthropist — a  man  who  is  bent,  as 
far  as  in  him  lies,  on  the  removal  of  a  great  national 
evil ;  and  who  has  sufficient  patience  and  courage  to 
investigate  the  lourccs  of  that  evil,  to  examine  with 
candour  the  Tarious  remedies  proposed  for  its  removal, 
and  to  point  out  with  honesty  that  which  be  hcUeves  to 
be  the  only  appropriate  and  effectual  remedy." — Tee- 
_  total  Timet,  April,  1849. 

^k  "  Mr.   Woraley's    is,    unquestionably,   a  very  able 

^K      treatise."— i'afrio/,  April,  1S49. 

TnE  RHYMING  CAME;  a  Historietio.  IGmo,  sewed, 
price  6d. 

This  little  book  is  designed  as  a  winter-evening  recrea- 
tion for  young  persons.  Its  object  is,  that  of  calling  up 
their  ideas  into  ready  exercise,  and  habitaating  the  mind 
to  a  prompt  and  accurate  description  of  objects,  as  well 
as  s  more  subtle  delineation  of  thoughts  and  feelings ; 
and  it  has  particularly  in  view  the  monition  that,  even  in 
their  recreations,  they  may  remember  "  I'utile,"  as  well 
as  "  Tagrtoble." 


10  Charles  Gilpin  s  List  of  Books^ 


JUVENILE  DEPRAVITY.    An  Inqairj  into  the  Km 

and  Causes  of  JuTenile  DepraTity.  Dedicated,  by  itpet 
permission,  to  the  Right  Hon.  the  £ui  of  riayl?*!^  ] 
Thomas  Bbggs,  late  Secretary  of  the  Health  of  Towi 
Association^  and  author  of  "  Lectures  on  the  Mo 
Eleration  of  the  People." — 8vo,  price  5s. 

'^  Few  men  were  better  qualified  to  deal  with  sud 
case  than  Mr.  Beggs,  whose  lot  it  has  heen  largelj 
be  mixed  up  with  the  working  classes,  and  who'l 
made  their  characters,  habits,  and  circamstances,  t 
subject  of  his  special  study.  He  is,  moreorer,  a  m 
of  strong  penetrating  intellect,  and  possesses,  in  a  hi 
degree,  whateTer  is  needful  to  constitute  a  student 
human  nature.  Let  all  read  Afr.  Beggs's  toIiu 
A  heart  brought  very  largely  into  sympathy  with  t 
subject  could  scarcely  read  a  chapter  of  it  without  tei: 
Its  revelations  are  those  of  the  darkest  chambers 
spiritual  death  and  moral  desolation.  The  work  li 
our  cordial  commendation.  It  is  one  of  the  class 
books  which  cannot  be  too  widely  circulated." — Briti 
Banner^  August  25,  1849. 

''  Mr.  B^gs  writes  with  all  the  confidence  which 
practical  knowledge  of  the  subject  has  given  him.  ti 
it  is  impossible  to  peruse  the  pages  of  his  work  vit 
out  obtaining  a  fearful  insight  into  the  extent  of  t 
moral  depravity  of  the  lower  orders  of  society.  In  t 
paths  of  vice,  in  which  his  reverend  competitor  fears 
tread,  there  Mr.  Beggs  boldly  steps  forward,  ti 
denounces,  while  he  exposes,  those  gigantic  and  app: 
ling  evils,  which  must  be  brought  to  light  before  th 
can  be  effectually  grappled  with  and  OTeroomc"- 
Journal  of  Public  Health,  July,  1849. 

"Whether  we  regard  the  graphic  picture  of  t! 
actual  condition  of  the  neglected  classes^  or  the  impc 
tant  collection  of  original  and  selected  statiatics  whii 
this  volume  contains,  we  must  pronounce  it  to  be  one 
the  most  trustworthy  expositions  of  our  social  ^a*^  li 
evils  which  has  yet  been  produced." — IVmtk  Aekt 
July,  1849. 


5,  BUhop^ate  Street  Without. 


THE  ROMISH  CHURCH.     The  Doctrines  of  the  Romish 

Church,  as  exhibited  in  the  Notes  of  the  Dod.iy  Bible : 
arran!K(l  uniler  separate  hends.      By  Samuel  CAi-i'Bfi. 


P 


8vo,  [iri 

"  Mr.  CD[)per's  book  may  be  rognrdcd  as  a  mono- 
ment  of  diligence,  of  fnimcss,  and  of  Christian  heiicvo- 
lenec ;  and  it  will  find  its  nay,  wc  doubt  not,  into  the 
librarv  of  every  man  nho  wishes  to  he  informed  on 
what  must,  after  all,  be  one  of  the  great  controversies, 
if  not  the  greatest  conlroversy,  of  the  times  upon  which 
the  Church  of  Chiist  is  entering." — The  Patriot. 

'■Theworkis  not  only  prepared  with  perfect  iutegrity, 
bat  is  carious  and  worthy  of  place  in  oil  libraries,  and 
especially  of  ministers  who  may  have  occasion  to  deul 
with  these  matters  in  pursuance  of  their  duties." — 
Standard  of  Freedom. 

■•  It  IS  a  most  vnlunble  contribntion  to  the  aids  and 

jj  appliances  of    that  spedes  of    religious  controversy 

J^H^    which  contends /or  truth  and  not /or  victory,  and  uses 

^^H    the  weapons  of  reason  and  charity,  not  of  acrimonious 

^^K    debate  and  reviling." — Morning  Pott. 

^r        "  This  is  a  valuable  publication  of  the  Notes  of  the 

t^  quarto  edition  of  the    Douay  Bible,  claisilicd  under 

various  heads,  so  as  to  ufTord   an    easy    and    rendy 

reference  on  the  leading   points    of   doctrine.      The 

notes  are  taken  from  the  editions  of  1633,  1635,  and 

1816,  and  are  tbc  result  of  many  years'  labours;  and 

the  book  brings  into  one's  reach  an  important  (loriion 

of  controversial  matter,  nbich  may  be  used  with  effect 

in  our  antagonism  with  the  errors  of  the  Church  of 

Home." — Dublin  Christian  Examiner. 

PORTRAITS  IN  MINIATURE;  or.  Sketches  of  Character 
in  Verse.  By  Henrietta  J.  Fbt,  Author  of  tile 
"Ilymns  of  the  Keformation,"  &c.  Illustrated  with 
Eight  Engravings,  Svo,  price  lOt.  6d. 

This  little  volume  holds  many  a  name  dear  to  the 
beat  interests  of  society,  like  those  of  Elizabeth  Fry, 
J.  J.  Goraey,  W.  ^'ilberrorce,  Uviniii  More,  Bishop 
Heber,  &c. 


12  Charles  GUpin's  List  of  B0akM^ 


HFTY    DAYS    ON    BOARD  A   SLAVE   VE8SD. 

By  the  Bev.  Pascob  Grenfell  Hili^  M.A.,  Chapbi 
or  H.M.S.  Cleopatra.  Demj  12mo»  cloth  ktteid 
price  Is.  6d. 

"This  curioas  and  saccinct  narratiTe  g^Tes  tl 
experience  of  a  short  voyage  on  board  one  of  the  slii 
ships.  We  shall  be  rejoiced,  if  the  puhlicitj  grm  1 
this  little  but  intelligent  work  by  our  means,  asast  i 
drawing  the  attention  of  the  influential  classes  to  ti 
subject." — Blackwood 9  Magazine, 

*'  We  hope  this  little  work  will  have  a  iride  dreoli 
tion.  We  can  conceive  nothing  so  likeljr  to  do  goc 
to  the  righteous  cause  it  is  intended  to  promote."- 
Hxaminer, 

A  VOYAGE  TO  THE  SLAVE  COASTS  OF  WET 

AND  EAST  AFRICA.  By  the  Rev.  Pascob  Gaism 
Hill,  ILN.,  Author  of  "  Fifbr  Days  on  Board  a  Slii 
Vessel."     12mo,  cloth  lettered!^  price  is^ 

*'  This  brief  but  interesting  narrative  proceeds  fioi 
one  who  has  witnessed  the  horrors  of  the  Slav€4ndi 
as  carried  on  in  various  parts  of  the  globe.  *  ^  * 
The  unpretending  style  m  which  the  narrative  is  viil 
ten,  and  the  stamp  of  truth  which  it  carries  with  il 
induce  us  to  recommend  it  to  an  extensiye  pemsaL"- 
Standard  of  Freedom. 

CARDS  OF  CHARACTER:  a  Biographical  Game.   I 
a  neat  case,  price  5s. 

**  This  Game,  which  is  prepared  by  a  young  ]w« 
contains  much  amusement  and  instruction.  It  consi* 
of  brief  sketches  of  the  lives  and  characters  of  aboi 
seventy  of  the  principal  persons  of  the  past  age,  aa 
questions  corresponding  in  number  with  the  Canii 
The  Game  is  well  arranged,  and  very  simple." 


5,  Bishopsgate  Street  iVifkout. 


HE  CAMPANER  THAL:  or.  Discourses  on  the 
Immortality  of  the  Soul.  By  Je*n  Paul  Fs.  Ricbtkb. 
Trnuslated  from  the  Germnn  by  Jlliettk  B&iiGR. 
Foolscap  8vo,  price  2s.  6J. 

"— ^  Report,  we  regret  to  sny,  ia  nil  that  we  know 
of  the  'Campaner  Thai,'  one  of  Richtcr'a  beloved 
topics,  or  rather  the  life  of  his  whole  philosophy, 
glimpses  of  which  look  forth  on  us  from  almost  every 
one  of  his  writings.  He  died  while  engaged,  under 
recent  and  almost  total  bliudness,  in  enlarging  and 
remodelhng  this  *Campauer  Thai.'  The  undnished. 
manuscript  was  borne  upon  his  coffin  to  the  burial 
vault;  and  Klopstock's  hymn,  'Auferstehen  wirst  du!' 
'Thou  ahalt  arise,  my  soul,'  can  seldom  have  been 
sung  with  more  appropriate  application  tlian  over  the 
grave  of  Jean  Paul," — Carlylet  MiiceUamet. 

HE  FRIENDLY  AND  FEEJEE  ISLANDS;  A  Mis- 
sionacy  "^'iwt  to  various  Stations  in  the  South  Seas,  in 
the  year  1847-  By  the  Rev.  Walteb  Lakrt.  With  an 
Appendix,  containing  notices  of  the  political  constitution, 

iiopulation,  productions,  manners,  customs,  and  mytlio- 
ogy  of  the  people,  aud  of  the  state  of  religion  among 
tbem.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Elijah  Hoole.  l'2mo, 
cloth,  price  4s.  6d. 

"  Some  of  its  details  of  Cannibalism  and  Feejeeism 
are  very  terrible  ;  and  that  such  anthropophagi  should 
have  been  recovered  to  a  common  human  nature  with 
ourselves,  and  to  the  higher  hopes  of  the  Christian 
life,  is  a  testimony  to  revelation  which  the  sceptic  may 
well  ponder." — NancouformUt. 

"  That  portion  of  the  narrative  relating  to  the  Feejee 
Islands  is  especially  worthy  of  perusal,  displaying  as  it 
does  the  frightful  characteristics  of  a  society  in  which 
habitual  and  ferocious  cannibalism  maintained  its 
ground,  and  its  gradual  transition  to  a  more  hopeful 
and  satisfactory  condition,  in  which  the  '  influence  of 
the  press'  is  already  becoming  a  power  for  good." — 
MwTiing  Advertiaer. 


14  Ckarleg  Gi^'s  Lift  cfJBoait, 


A   KISS   FOR   A   BLOW.     A  CoQeetioii  of  Storin 
Children,  showing  them  how  to  prevent  QiumnelliBg. 
H.  C.  Wright.     Twenty-sixth  Thoiunuicl,  i8iBOy  prio 

''Of  this  little  book  it  is  impossible  to  spok 
highly — it  is  the  reflex  of  the  spirit  of  childhood, 
of  tenderness,  pity,  and  lore:  quick  to  resent,  i 
equally  quick  to  forgive.  We  wish  that  all  child 
could  imbibe  its  spirit,  then  indeed  would  the  wo 
be  happier  and  better." — Mary  Howiit. 

"  This  volume,  of  which  it  were  to  be  wished  ti 
every  family  in  the  country  had  a  copy,  has  \n 
reprinted  in  London,  by  Charles  Gilpin ;  it  is  ao  im 
luable  little  book." — Chambers**  7}ract9. 

8KYRACK ;  A  Faiiy  Tale.    With  Six  Illustrations,    h 
8vo,  doth  extra,  price  2s.  6d. 

"  It  is  simply  the  story  of  an  old  oak ;  but  it  cuii 
you  away  to  the  forest,  and  refreshes  you  widi  i 
dewy,  sunny,  solitary  life.  The  spirit  of  the  book 
pure  as  the  breezes  of  the  fbrest  themselves.  All  ti 
imagery,  and  the  whole  tone  of  the  story  are  of  tb 
kind  which  you  wish  to  pervade  the  mind  of  jo 
children.  In  a  word,  we  have  rarely  enjoyed  a  nic 
delicious  hour,  or  have  been  more  thoroughly  wnpt 
sweet,  silent,  dewy,  and  balmy  forest  entrancemfl 
than  during  the  perusal  of  Skyrack."— i9#aiu2ari 
Freedom, 

DYMOND'S   ESSAYS  ON  THE   PRINCIPLES  ( 

MOBALITY,  and  on  the  Private  and  Political  Bights  a 
Obligations  of  Mankind.  Royal  8vo^  paper  cover,  pr 
3s.  6d.     Neat  embossed  cloth,  4s.  6d. 

The  high  standard  of  morality  to  which  these  1 
says  aim  at  directing  the  attention  of  mankind,  jitf 
entitle  them  to  the  extensive  circulation  whidi  they  la 
obtained  in  three  previous  editions ;  and  the  prea 
cheap  and  popular  form  in  which  they  now  appe 
having  reached  a  sale  of  nearly  seven  thousand  in  t«c 
months,  is  an  unequivocal  proof  of  public  apfnobtti 


>,  Bishopsi/ate  Street  WitkotiL 


ARKS   FROM  THE  ANVIL.      Bj  Eliud   Buhrii^ 
12mo,  sewed.     The  Thirteenth  ThonsMid,  prii 

indeed  of  singular  brilliancy. "4 

"  They  deserve  to  be  Btereotyped,  and  to  form  part 
of  the  standard  literntore  of  the  age."— JTen/wA  tnde- 
pendmt. 

"  We  say  to  nil,  read  it,  imbibe  its  spirit,  and  leani, 
like  the  writer,  to  work  for  and  with  God,  towards  the 
regeneration  of  your  race." — NBttingham  Rniev. 

"  Header,  if  you  have  not  read  the  '  Sparks  from 
AdtU,"  do  so  at  ouee."— The  Echo. 


VOICE   FROM   THE   FORCE.     By  Elirv  Buaan 
with  a  Portrait.     Being  a  Seqocl  to  "  Sparks  from  the 
Anril."     Seventh  Thousand.     12mo,  sewed,  price  Is. 

"  In  every  line  coined  Ironi  the  reflecting  mind  of  the 
BlackBinitb  of  MassschusetR,  there  is  &  hi^h  philosophy 
and  philanthropy  genuine  and  pure.  His  aympathies 
are  unirersiil,  his  nKpirntions  are  for  the  happiness  of  all, 
and  hia  writings  are  nervous,  terse,  nad  rigorous." — 
London  Tetegraph. 

"The  influence  of  the  small  work  before  us  must  be 
for  good,  and  we  wish  it  every  sucixss.     The  various 
essays  it  eontdins  are  writlen  with  natural  eloquen 
and   contain  ninny  just  aad  original  sentiments." 
SaitlUh  Presa. 

IE  PASTOR'S    LEGACY  ;  or.  Devotional  Prngments 
From  the  German  of  Lavater.     By  Uekaibtta  J.  " 
ISmo,  silk,  price  2s.  (id. 


14 


^  An  edition  may  be  obtaiaed  with  the  German  apf 
to  the  work,  bound  np  in  the  same  manner,  for  3b. 


16  Charles  CHlpkCsLiMt  of  BoohB, 


THE  PHCENIX  LIBRARY. 

The  following  Series  of  Original  and  RepriDted  Woil[a»  bei 
on  the  Renovation  and  Progress  of  Society  in  Bc& 
Morality^  and  Science,  is  now  in  coarse  of  pablicationy  pn 
uniformljy  price  28.  6d  each  Tolume : 

UTOPIA;  OR,  THE   HAPPY   REPUBLIC.    AF 

sophical  Romance.    By  Sir  Thomas  Moeb. 

LETTERS  ON  EARLY  EDUCATION.   By  Pbstalo 

With  a  Memoir  of  Pestalozzi. 

EFFECTS  OF  CIVILIZATION  ON  THE  PEOP 

IN  EUROPEAN  STATES.     By  Charles  Hali,  if 

THE    CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH.     By  Jc 

MiNTER  Morgan.     To  which  is  added.  An  Inquibt 
SPECTING  Priyatb  Propbrtt^  from  a  Periodical  of  18 

LETTERS  TO  A  CLERGYMAN,  on  Institoti 
for  Ameliorating  the  Condition  of  Uie  People,  diii 
from  Paris,  in  the  Autumn  of  1 845 .     By  the  same  Antli 

A  TOUR  THROUGH  SWITZERLAND  AND  ITAL 

in  the  years  1846-47.     By  the  same  Author. 

COLLOQUIES    ON    RELIGION    AND    REUCIO 

EDUCATION.     By  the  same  Author. 

TRACTS-     By  the  same  Author. 

THE  REVOLT  OF  THE  BEES.    By  the  same  Antl 

THE    ADVENTURES    OF    8IGNOR    GAUDENI 

DI  LUCCA.    Attributed  to  Bishop  Bsekslet. 

ESSAY   ON   ST.   PAUL.     By  Hannah  More.     2? 
Uniform  with  the  above,  price  3s,  6d. 

EXTRACTS    FOR    SCHOOLS    AND    FAMIU 

in  aid  of  Moral  and  Religious  Training. 


5.  Bithopsgate  Street  Without. 


HE  PRIZE  ESSAY,  ON  THE   USE  AND  ABUSE 

of  Alcoholic  Liquors  in  Health  and  Diseaac.  liy  W.  B. 
Cabpenteti,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Dedicated  by  permission  to 
H.  R.  H.  Prince  Albert.  A  Prize  of  One  Hundred 
Guineas  haffiiig  been  offered  for  the  best  Essay  on  the 
aboTe  subject,  that  gum  h&s  just  been  awarded  to  Dr. 
Carpenter,  by  the  Adjudicators,  Dr.  John  Fobdej,  Dr. 
G.  L.  RouPELL,  and  Dr.  W.  A.  Guv.  Post  8ro,  price 
5b. 

"  Vt'e  have  now  to  congratulate  the  donor  and  the 
public  on  having  obtained  an  Kssny  from  one  of  the 
most  eminent  physiologists." — Noucon/itrmitl. 

"  It  must  he  no  small  source  of  grHtificatioii  to  tliem 
(the  Teetotallers)  that  the  impoctunt  pubhcation  to 
which  we  have  been  calling  the  attention  of  our  readers 
(the  above  Essay)  should  find  its  way  to  the  royal 
palace;  and  that  the  enlightened  Prince,  so  distinguished 
for  his  eaniestneas  in  promoting  the  best  interests  of 
his  adopted  country,  should  sanction  the  dedication  of 
the  work  to  himself,  and  thus  confer  an  honour  alike 
descned  by  the  author  and  his  cause." — Bristol 
Mercury. 

lOCERSON'S  POEMS.  The  Poetical  Works  of  John 
Bolton  Roorhson,  author  of  "Rhjuie,  Romance,  and 
Revery,"  ire. 

"  His  sterUng  talents  are  alike  a  credit  to  himself 
and  the  land  of  his  birth,  and  we  doubt  not  will  shortly 
win  for  him  a  foremost  rank  among  English  Poets." — 
County  Herald. 

lYMNS  OF  THE  REFORMATION.  Bv  LvTuca  and 
others.  From  the  German.  To  which  is  added  his  Life, 
from  the  original  Latin  of  Melancthon,  by  the  Author  of 
"The  Pastor's  Legacy."  l8mo,  cloth,  price  2>.6d.i  aiid 
neatly  bound  in  silk,  price  '^s.  fid. 

'HE  ART  OF  MEMORY.  The  new  Mnemonic  Chart 
and  Guide  to  the  Art  of  Memory,  By  W.  Day.  Neallv 
Iltnstrated  with  upwards  of  200  WoodcuU,  Ac.  Clot£, 
price  28.  6d. 


18  Charles  GUphCs  IaH  cf  Boola, 


NARRATIVE     OF    WILLIAM     W.      BROWN, 

American  SlaTe.  Written  by  Himaelf.  The  Two. 
Thousand.    Foolscap  8to»  price  Is.  6d. 

"  We  would  that  a  copy  of  this  book  could  be  pli 
in  every  school  library  m  Massachusetts.  We  \ 
and  belieye  that  it  will  be  widely  circulated.'* — Bo 
Whig. 

**  It  is  an  interesting  narrative,  and  should  be  i 
by  every  person  in  the  country.     We  commend  i 
the  public,  and  venture  the  assertion,  that  no  one 
takes  it  up  and  reads  a  chapter,  will  lay  it  down  c 
he  has  finished  it." — New  Bedford  BuUeiuu 

"We  have  read  Mr.  Brown's  NarratiTe,  and  fb 
it  a  thrilling  tale." — Lawrence  Courier. 

AN  ENCYCLOPAEDIA  OF  FACTS,   ANECDOTI 

Arguments,  and  Illustrations  from  History,  Philoso] 
and  Christianity,  in  support  of  the  Principles  of  Pa 
nent  and  Universal  Peace.  By  Edwin  Paxton  H< 
Author  of"  Fragments  of  Thought  and  Composition," 
18mo,  sewed,  price  Is.  6d. 

A  SELECTION  OF  SCRIPTURAL   POETRY. 

LovELL  Squire.  Third  Edition,  containing  many  Oris 
Hymns  not  hitherto  published.  18mo,  cloth,  price  2s. 
The  same  to  be  had  nicely  bound  in  silk,  with  gilt  cd 
4s. 

POETICAL    SKETCHES    OF    SCRIPTURE    CF 

RACTERS— Abraham  to  Job.  By  Martha  Ybaed; 
Sewed,  price  6d. 

A  SELECTION  FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  JO 

SYDNEY    TAYLOR,    A.M.,    Barrister-at-Law.    1 

cloth,  price  12s. 

"  On  this  rock  we  stand — on  the  adamantine  baa 
Christian  principle  we  would  build  the  whole  fabh 
legislation  which  regards  the  public  morals.^' (p.  2 

**  The  volume  before  us  is  a  noble  tesUmonr  to 
worth  of  the  deceased  writer." — Torkehin 


5,  Bishopsgate  Street  Without. 


f""U.IAM  ALLEN:  hia  Life  and  Comspcmdeiice.    3  vols. 
8to,  price  243. 
"  The  holiest  and  loreliest  of  frienda."— i>r.  Campbell. 


E  WELLS  OF  SCRIPTURE.   By  Hbhbietta  J.  Fst. 
Crown  8vo,  cloth,  price  28, 

"This  litlle  work  is  un pretending  in  its  character; 
but,  dwelling  )is  it  does  un  themes  ol'  halloncd  interest, 
irad  it  to  our  readers." 


HREE  LECTURES  ON  THE  MORAL  ELEVATION 

OF  THE  PEOPLE.     By  Tuomas  Begqs.     Price  Is. 

"  The  working  classes  ought  to  read  them,  that  they 
may  learn  how  much  power  resides  la  themselves ;  the 
middle  classes  should  read  them,  and  learn  that  wealth 
confers  increased  responsibility  on  its  possessor ;  and 
even  our  nobles  should  read  them,  that  they  nmy  learn 
that  the  downfnl  oi  false,  and  the  reign  of  true  nobility 
arc  alike  at  hand." — Nottingham  Seview, 

"  The  Lectures  arc  full  of  large  and  comprehensive 
views  of  man,  and  the  writer  aims  in  every  respect  to 
promote  his  moral  elevation." — Vntverte. 

DEFENSIVE  WAR  PROVED  TO  BE  A  DENIAL  OF 

CHRISTIANITY  AND  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 
OF  GOD.  With  ILustrative  Facts  and  Anecdotes.  By 
Hekkv  C.  Wbight.     l^mo,  clotli,  price  2s. 

THE  BOY'S   OWN  BOOK.     Intended   as  a  Present  for 

Childrvn  on  leaving  School.    1 8mo,  stiff  covers,  price  6d, 

THE  YOUNC  SERVANTS  BOOK.  Intended  as  a  Pre- 
sent for  Girts  on  first  going  to  Service.  IStno,  stiff  covers, 
price  4d. 

AN  INTERESTING  MEMOIR  OF  THREE  BRO- 
THERS, (G.,  L.,  and  S.  Peirson.)  who  died  of  Consump- 
tion.    18mo,  sewed,  price  4d. 


20  CharUt  GUpin's  Lut  ofBooht, 


WATERLOO  SERIES.    In  8mn  Nnmher^  sewed,  |i 
6d.  complete,  in  a  printed  wrapper.    Edited  bj  Xi 

BURKITT. 

No.  1.  Voice  from  Waterloo.— The  SilTer  Tankard. 

No.  2.  Hannibal;  or,  the  Story  of  a  Wasted  lifli 

The  Bower  on  the  Hill. 

No.  3.  The  Story  of  the  Beautiful  Book. 

No.  4.  The  Story  of  Oherlm. 

No.  5.  The  Man  that  Killed  his  Neighbours. 

No.  6.  Soldiers  and  Citizens. 

No.  7.  Story  of  Frank. 

THE  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  TEACHER.   Designed  to 

in  elevating  and  perfecting  the  Sabbath  School  Sysl 

By  the  Rev.  I.  Todd.     1 2mo,  doth,  price  2s.  6d. 

"  Every  Sabbath  School  Teacher  should  regard  i 

a  privilege  to  purchase  and  carefblly  read  the  wotL 

FhUadelphie  Observer. 


CLEANINGS  FOR   CHILDREN;  or^  Easy  Stories  c 

folly  selected  for  Young  Children.   ISmo,  sewed,  price 

THE  FUCITIVE  BLACKSMITH;  or.  Events  in 
History  of  Dr.  Pennington,  Pastor  of  a  Presbvte 
Church,  New  York.  Foolscap  8vo,  sewed.  The  Efcr^ 
Thousand,  price  Is. 

"  This  entrancing  narrative  *  *  *  We  tmat 
thousands  of  our  readers  will  procure  the  toIi 
which  is  published  by  Mr.  Gilpin  at  a  mere  trii 
much  too  cheap  to  accomplish  the  purpose  for  wl 
in  part  or  mainly,  it  has  been  published— ^he  rai 
a  fund  to  remove  the  pecuniary  burdens  whidi } 
on  the  author's  flock.  Nothino  short  op  the 
OF  FiFTT  Thousand  or  Sixty  Thousand  Cc 
could  be  at  all  availing  for  this  obiect.  *  *  * 
very  cordially  recommend  him  and  his  narrative  tc 
kind  consideration  of  our  readers." — Christiam  Wit 

SPEECHES  OF  RICHARD  COBDEN,  ESQ.,  N 

on  Peace,  Financial  Reform,  Colonial  Reform,  and  < 
subjects,  delivered  during  1849.  Foolscap  8to,  3s 
cloth ;  28.  6d.  sewed. 


5,  Bithopsffate  Street  ^Vithotit. 


iTHI 


t 


IE  NORWEGIAN  SAILOR.     A  Skek-h  of  the  Life  of 
George  Nobcob.      Written  by  himself.     With  an  liltro- 

(Iwclon-  \otp  hy  Dr.  Baffles.     Fifth  edition,  with  an 
account  of  his  death.     FooUcap  8to,  cloth,  price  Js. 

"  He  (6.  Noscoe)  was  really  a  remarkable  man.     I 
■Kould  cnrncstly  recommend  it  to  every  sailor." — Dr. 


A  GUIDE  TO  TRUE  PEACE;  or,  a  Itlethod  of  attaining 
to  Inward  and  Spiritual  Prayer.  Compiled  chiefly  from 
the  writings  of  Fenelon,  Ladt  Guiom,  and  Michael 
MoLiNOs.     32nio,  cloth,  price  la. 

HINTS   ON  CULTIVATING  THE  CHRISTIAN 

TEMPER.     By  tiie  lUv.  H.  A.  Boahdman,  D.D.     Re- 
printed from  the  American  edition,  32ino,  cloth,  price 

6d. 

GALLIC  GLEANINGS.  A  Series  of  Letters,  descriptive 
of  Two  Excursions  to  the  French  Metropolis  and  the 
ParisianPence  ConRrees,  184'J,  Addressed  to  a  Friend  in 
London.     By  A.  Nicholson.     ISmo,  cloth,  price  2b.  6d. 

CLEANINGS  FROM  PIOUS  AUTHORS.  Comprisiag 
the  Wheatahcaf,  Fruits  and  Flowers,  Garden  nnd 
Shrubbery.  \Viih  a  brief  notice  of  the  former  pub- 
lications of  these  volumes.  By  Jaues  Montoomert. 
A  new  edition.     Foolscap  8vo,  price  3s. 

HOW  LITTLE   HENRY  OF  EtCHENFELS   CAME 

TO  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD.     16mo,  price  Is. 

It  JB  interesting  to  observe,  ibat  the  translation  of 

tliis  little  book  (from  the  German)  is  the  eifort  of 

young  persona,  who  have  willingly  sacrificed  some  hours 

of  recreal'.^u  to  aid  the  cause  of  humBiiity. 

THE  VOYAGE  COMPANION;  a  Parting  Gift  to 
Female  Emigrants.  By  the  Author  of  "  A  Word  on 
behalf  of  a  Slave,"  &c.,  &c.     Foolscap  Svo,  price  6d. 


22  Charl^  GUpbCs  list  afBookg, 


PEACE  CONGRESS^    Beport  of  tlie  Proceedings  of 
Second  General  Peace  Congress^  held  in  Puis  on  : 
22nd,  23rd,  and  24th  of  Aogost,  1849.     Compibd  fit 
authentic  documents.     8to,  cloth,  price  28. 6d. 

ELECTORAL  DISTRICTS;  or,  the  Apporiicmmeot 
the  Representation  of  the  Country  on  the  Basis  of 
Population ;  being  an  Inquiry  into  the  working  of  t 
Beform  Bill,  and  into  the  merits  of  the  Representati 
Scheme  by  which  it  is  proposed  to  supersede  it.  J 
Alexander  Mackay.     Sto,  sewed^  Is. 

POLITICAL  EQUITY;  or,  a  Fair  £qualixati<m  of  t] 
National  Burdens,  comprised  in  some  intennin^ed  ti 
scattered  thoughts,  suggesting  an  anti-destitutioo  pofir 
a  graduated  system  of  taxation  on  real  property  ai 
income,  &c.  By  Theophilus  Williams.  8to,  sewe 
price  2s. 

ECCLESIASTICAL  COURTS.  The  History  and  Fdv 
of  the  Ecclesiastical  Courts.  By  Edward  Mcscct 
Pp.  48.     Price  6d. 

REMINISCENCES  OF  POLAND;  her  Berolutioiis ai 

her  Rights.    A  brief  sketch  of  the  Causes  of  the  Rctq] 
tions,  ^om  1839  to  the  incorporation  of  Craoow  witht 
Austrian  Empire;    with  a  short   local    descri^ion 
Cracow.      By  Isidore  Litinsky,    a    Polish    Bdiag 
Foolscap  8vo,  cloth,  2s.;  sewed,  Is.  6d. 

PARABLES :  Translated  from  the  German  of  Krummacb 
Containing  the  Hyacinth ;  the  Persian,  the  Jew,  ami 
Christian;    Asaph  and  Heman;    life  and  Death; 
Mother's  Faith,  &c.     16mo,  sewed,  price  Is. 

THE  PEACE  READING  BOOK;  being  a  Series 
Selections  from  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  the  EarW  Chris 
Fathers,  and  Historians,  Philosophers  and  Poets,— 
wise  and  thoughtful  of  all  ages ;  condemnatory  of 
principles  and  practice  of  war,  and  inculcating  thou 
true  Christianity.  Edited  by  H.  G.  Adams.  IS 
doth,  price  2  s. 


IE  ACE  AND  ITS  ARCHITECTS;  Ten  Cbaptere  on 
the  People  and  the  Times,  By  Edwin  PiXToN  Hood. 
Fcap,  8vo,  price  5s. 

The  fignres  of  the  stntist  will  generally,  in  the  course 
of  the  work,  be  couTcyed  by  portraita  nnd  descriptions  of 
the  people  with  whom  we  live,  and  the  places  in  which 
we  live.  It  will  be  a  lucid  analysis  of  the  age  and  its 
virtues,  vices,  and  views.  Historical,  bathetic,  and 
Didactic  Delineations  of  the  Detelopment  of  Indii-idual, 
Domestic,  and  Social  Regeneration.  Written  especiaUy 
for  the  youthful  aspirant  to  a  life  of  intelhgent  labour  and 
usefulness. 

POPULAR  LIFE  OF  CEORCE  FOX,  the  First  of 

the  Quakers.  By  Josiah  Mahsb.  Svo,  cloth,  price  6s.  fid. 

Compiled  from  his  Journal  and  other  nutlieutic  sources, 

and  interspersed  with  remarks  on  the  imperfect  reforms' 

tion  of  the  Anglican  Church,  and  the  consequent  spread 

'    of  dissent. 

The  work  abounds  with  remarkable  incidents,  which 
portray  n  vivid  picture  of  the  escited  feelings  that  pre- 
dominnted  during  those  eventful  periods  of  our  history — 
the  Commonwealth  and  the  Restoration. 

,R.H.  PRINCE  ALBERT'S  PRIZE.  A  Plea  for  the 
Aight  ngainst  Might,  or  the  Temporal  Advantages  of  the 
Sabbath  to  the  labouring  Classes.  By  John  Coblet. 
Foolscap  8vo,  price  fid. 

ME  SOLDIER'S  DESTINY.  A  Tale  of  the  Times. 
The  Enlistment— Leaving  Home— The  Deserter— The 
Battle— The  Night  after  the  Battle— The  Return.  By 
Geobqb  Was-lee.     Foolscap  8vo,  price  Is. 

lEMOIRS  OF  PAUL  CUFFE,  a  Man  of  Colour,  compiled 
from  Authentic  Sources.  By  Wilson  AamsTEo.  18mo, 
cloth,  price  Is, 

The  exertions  of  this  truly  benevolent  individual 
entitle  him  to  the  esteem  of  the  world,  and  the  gmteful 
remembrance  of  latest  posterity. 


24  Charles  Gilpin  s  List  of  Books. 


PORTRAITS. 

ELIZABETH  FRY.  A  fuU-length  Portrait  of  Eliz 
Fry.  Engraved  by  Samuel  Cousins,  A.R.A.,  fr 
Picture  by  George  Richmond. 


£ 

s. 

Artists'  Proofs 

10 

10 

Proofs,  with  Autographs  . . 

7 

7 

Proofs,  with  Letters 

4 

4 

Prints        

2 

2 

ELIZABETH  FRY.    Engraved  on   Copper.    By  Bl 
From  a  Painting  by  Leslie. 

s.    d. 
Proofs         . .  . .  . .      15     0 

Prints         . .  . .        7     6 

THOMAS  CLARKSON.    A  very   Splendid   Portrai 
this  distinguished  Philanthropist. 

£    s.  d. 

India  Proofs,  First  Class  .10  0 

Second  Class      . .  . .      0  10  6 

Prints     , .  . .  . .      0     5  0 

WILLIAM  ALLEN.     Drawn  on    Stone.      ^y   Day 
Haqhe,  from  a  Painting  by  Dicksee. 

£  s.  d. 
India  Proofs,  First  Class  .110  0 
Second  Class  . .  . .  110 
Prints 0  10     6 

SAMUEL  CURNEY.    Drawn  on  Stone  by  Dicksee. 

s.    d. 

First  Class 10     0 

Prints  . .  . .  . .        5     0 

■"■■"-— -----^-— •—-—----—---——— —————— — ;r 


■  • .,    1..- ' " 


THE  BORROWER  WiU  BE  CH 
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IFTHIS  BOOH 
RETURNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON  OR 
BJ'.FORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED 
BELOW  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE 
NOTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE 
BORROWER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES. 


iiiiiiM 

3   2044   050   798   97 


