:BS4qi 

48 


I 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literature, 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

Royal  Octavo,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  hla 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  words,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
tn  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts."— Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
Writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  i.  I.   and   II.   Chronicles,  Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Genesis,  Vol.  a.  Ezra,   Nehemiah    and  Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 

Exodus.  Esther.  Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:   xxiii- 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.                                    lii. 

Deuteronomy.  The   Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i-  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth.  xxvi.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colsssiaks. 

8t.  Mask.  Thessalonians. 

8t.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,  Titos,  a»» 

St.  Lukb,   Vol,.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol,.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

(Jalatians.  and  Jude. 

Bphesians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 
Bend  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL    COMPANY 

NRV    YORK:   156  Fifth  Avenue  CHICAGO:  80  Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


APF 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


BY     / 

v 


Rtv.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


GALATIANS 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE   EPISTLE   TO  THE 
GALATIANS. 

Tb>  Galatian  People. — Ah  Alien  Baob.  When  St.  Paul  carried  the  gospel  into 
Galatia,  he  was  thrown  for  the  first  time  among  an  alien  people  differing  widely  in 
character  and  habits  from  the  surrounding  nations.  A  race,  whose  home  was  in 
the  far  west,  they  had  been  torn  from  their  parent  rock  by  some  great  social  con- 
vulsion, and  after  drifting  over  wide  tracts  of  country,  had  settled  down  at  length 
on  a  strange  soil  in  the  very  heart  of  Asia  Minor.    (Bishop  Lightfoot.) 

Thkxb  History. — The  Galatians,  in  the  strict  sense,  were  the  remains  of  a  body  of 
Gauls,  who,  after  being  repulsed  in  an  attaok  on  Delphi,  b.o.  279,  invaded  Asia 
Minor.  At  first  they  carried  all  before  them,  but  suffered  a  severe  defeat  from 
Attains  I.  king  of  Pergamus,  about  b.o.  230,  and  were  thus  confined  to  the  district 
which  afterwards  went  by  their  name.  Here  they  were  conquered  by  the  Romans 
under  the  Consul  Manlius  in  189,  but  allowed  to  retain  their  native  princes  until  the 
death  of  Amyntas  in  b.o.  25,  when  Galatia  was  formally  annexed  to  Borne.  Shortly 
before  the  death  of  Amyntas,  Galatia  had  been  enlarged  by  extensive  grants  of 
territory  in  the  south,  and  the  greater  part  of  this  enlarged  territory  went  to  form 
the  Roman  province.     (Professor  Sanday.) 

Their  Nationality. — It  is  oommonly  assumed  that  the  Galatians  were  Celts. 
Some,  however,  have  held  them  to  be  Germans.  The  arguments  are — (1)  Histori- 
o&L  All  ancient  writers  speak  of  the  Galatians  as  Celts ;  but  Jerome,  who  knew 
both  Gaul  and  Galatia  well,  says  that  their  language  was  similar  to  that  of  the 
Treveri  (modern  Treves).  It  is  maintained  that  the  Treveri  were  Germans.  They 
seem,  however,  to  have  been  originally  Celts,  but  Germanized  by  a  Frankish  inva- 
sion. (2)  Philological.  The  preponderance  of  evidence  here,  too,  is  in  favour  of 
the  Celtic  origin  of  the  Galatians.  Of  the  three  principal  tribes  into  which  the 
nation  was  divided,  the  Tectosages  and  Tolistobogii  had  counterparts  in  Gaul. 
The  Trocmi  are  uncertain.  The  terminations  of  Galatian  names  are  Celtic. . . .  We 
may  perhaps  suppose  that,  though  the  main  body  of  the  people  was  Celtic,  there 
were  some  few  Germans  mixed  up  with  them.    (Ibid.) 

Other  Elements  in  their  Population. — Attention  has  hitherto  been  directed  solely 
to  the  barbarian  settlers.  These,  however,  did  not  form  by  any  means  the  whole 
population  of  the  district.  The  Galatians,  whom  Manlius  subdued  by  the  arms  of 
Borne,  and  St.  Paul  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  were  a  very  mixed  race.  The  sub- 
stratum of  society  consisted  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  invaded  country, 
chiefly  Phrygians,  of  whose  language  not  much  is  known,  but  whose  strongly- 
marked  religious  system  has  a  prominent  place  in  ancient  history.  The  upper 
layer  was  composed  of  the  Gaulish  conquerors :  while  scattered  irregularly  through 
the  social  mass  were  Greek  settlers,  many  of  whom  doubtless  had  followed  the 
successors  of  Alexander  thither  and  were  already  in  the  country  when  the  Gauls 
took  possession  of  it     To  the  country  thus  peopled  the  Romans,  ignoring  the  old 


▼i  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  QALATIANS. 

Phrygian  population,  gave  the  name  of  Gallogrsoia.  At  the  time  when  Manlim 
invaded  it,  the  victorious  Gauls  had  not  amalgamated  with  their  Phrygian  subjects* 
and  the  Boman  consul  on  opening  his  campaign  was  met  by  a  troop  of  the  Phrygian 
priests  of  Cybele,  who,  clad  in  the  robes  of  their  order,  and  chanting  a  wild  strain  of 
prophecy,  declared  to  him  that  the  goddess  approved  of  the  war,  and  would  make 
him  master  of  the  country.  The  great  work  of  the  Boman  conquest  was  the  fusion 
of  the  dominant  with  the  conquered  race— the  result  chiefly,  it  would  appear,  of 
that  natural  process  by  which  all  minor  distinctions  are  levelled  in  the  presence  of 
a  superior  power.  From  this  time  forward  the  amalgamation  began,  and  it  was  not 
long  before  the  Gauls  adopted  even  the  religion  of  their  Phrygian  subjects.  But 
before  St.  Paul  visited  the  country,  two  new  elements  had  been  added  to  this 
already  heterogeneous  population.  The  establishment  of  the  province  must  have 
drawn  thither  a  considerable  number  of  Romans,  not  very  widely  spread  in  all 
probability,  but  gathered  about  the  centres  of  government,  either  holding  official 
positions  themselves,  or  connected  more  or  less  with  those  who  did.  ...  A  large 
influx  of  Jews  must  also  have  invaded  Galatia.  Antiochus  the  Great  had  settled 
two  thousand  Jewish  families  in  Lydia  and  Phrygia,  and  even  if  we  suppose  that 
these  settlements  did  not  extend  to  Galatia  properly  bo  called,  the  Jewish  colonists 
must  in  course  of  time  have  overflowed  into  a  neighbouring  country  which  possessed 
so  many  attractions  for  them.  Those  commercial  instincts,  which  achieved  a  wide 
renown  in  the  closely-allied  Phoenician  race,  and  which  in  the  Jews  themselves 
made  rapid  progress  during  the  palmy  days  of  their  national  life  under  Solomon, 
had  begun  to  develop  afresh.  The  innate  energy  of  the  race  sought  this  new  out- 
let, now  that  their  national  hopes  were  crushed,  and  their  political  existence  waa 
well  nigh  extinct.  The  country  of  Galatia  afforded  great  facilities  for  commercial 
enterprise.  With  fertile  plains  rich  in  agricultural  produce,  with  extensive  pasture 
for  flocks,  with  a  temperate  clime  and  copious  rivers,  it  abounded  in  all  those 
resources  out  of  which  a  commerce  is  created.  It  was  moreover  conveniently  situated 
for  mercantile  transactions,  being  traversed  by  a  great  highroad  between  the  East 
and  the  shores  of  the  iEgean,  along  which  caravans  were  constantly  passing,  and 
among  its  towns  it  numbered  not  a  few  which  are  mentioned  as  great  centres  c4 
commerce.  We  read  especially  of  a  considerable  traffic  in  cloth  goods,  but  whether 
these  were  of  home  or  foreign  manufacture  we  are  not  expressly  told. . .  .  Still,  with 
all  this  foreign  admixture,  it  was  the  Celtic  blood  which  gave  its  distinct  colour  to 
the  Galatian  character,  and  separated  them  by  so  broad  a  line  even  from  their  near 
neighbours.  The  tough  vitality  of  the  Celtic  character  maintained  itself  in  Alia 
comparatively  unimpaired  among  Phrygians  and  Greeks,  as  it  has  done  in  our  own 
islands  among  Saxons,  and  Danes,  and  Normans,  retaining  its  individuality  of  type 
after  the  lapse  of  ages  and  under  conditions  the  most  adverse.    {Bishop  Lightfoot.) 

Theib  Lahovaob.— A  very  striking  instance  of  the  permanence  of  Celtic  institutions 
is  the  retention  of  their  language  by  these  Gauls  of  Asia  Minor.  More  than  six 
eenturies  after  their  original  settlement  in  this  distant  land,  a  language  might  be 
heard  on  the  banks  of  the  Sangarius  and  the  Halys,  which  though  slightly  corrupted, 
was  the  same  in  all  essential  respects  with  that  Bpoken  in  the  district  watered 
by  the  Moselle  and  the  Rhine.  St.  Jerome,  who  had  himself  visited  both  the  Gaol 
of  the  West,  and  the  Gaul  of  Asia  Minor,  illustrates  the  relation  of  the  two  forms 
of  speech  by  the  connection  existing  between  the  language  of  the  Phoenicians  and 
their  African  colonies,  or  between  the  different  dialects  of  Latin.    (Ibid.) 

Thbib  Chabactxb. — The  Celtic  characteristics  are  not  unknown  to  us.  It  may  be 
sufficient  here  to  quote  one  early  and  one  recent  writer  on  this  eobjeot,  and  then  to 
note  how  far  their  remarks  find  any  illustration  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatiana. 
Caesar,  in  his  "  Bellum  Gallicum  "  (iv.  6),  speaks  of  the  "  infinnitaa  "  of  the  Gaols, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8.  yil 

*r  their  unsteadiness  of  purpose,  adding  that  "  they  are  very  changeable  in  their 
©ounsels  and  fond  of  novelties,"  and  hence  "  he  thought  that  nothing  should  be  en- 
trusted to  them."  Thierry,  in  his  "  Histoire  des  Gauloia,"  sums  up  as  follows  those 
characteristics  of  the  Gaulish  family,  which  in  his  opinion  differentiate  it  from 
other  sections  of  the  human  race  : — "  A  personal  courage  which  has  no  equal  in 
ancient  nations ;  a  frank,  impetuous  spirit,  open  to  every  impression,  eminently 
intelligent ;  but,  along  with  this,  an  extreme  fickleness,  no  constancy,  a  marked 
repugnance  to  the  ideas  of  discipline  and  order  so  strong  in  the  Germanic  races, 
mueh  ostentation,  in  short  a  perpetual  disunion,  the  fruit  of  excessive  vanity."  We 
find  all  the  features  of  this  picture  very  definitely  reflected  in  this  Epistle ;  in  the 
eager  welcome  which  they  gave  to  St.  Paul's  doctrine  at  the  first ;  in  their  enthu- 
siastic affection  towards  him  personally ;  in  their  readiness  "  so  soon  "  to  take  new 
impressions,  to  throw  off  the  apostolic  yoke  and  to  adopt "  another  gospel "  ;  in  their 
readiness  to  "  bite  and  devour "  one  another ;  in  the  warnings  given  by  St.  Paul 
against  vanity  and  self-conceit.  It  is  possible  also  that  in  the  strong  mention  of 
"drunkenness  and  revellings"  (v.  21),  there  is  an  implied  reference  to  the  fault  of 
intemperance,  which  is  said  by  Greek  and  Latin  writers  to  have  been  prevalent 
among  the  ancient  Gauls.  (Speaker's  Commentary.)  It  would  be  hard  to  abstain 
wholly  from  connecting  the  character  of  the  Galatians  with  the  style  and  subject 
of  the  Epistle.  Several  circumstances  suggest  such  a  connection  : — First,  the  tone 
of  the  apostle  seemingly  adapted  to  a  half-barbarous  people,  who  were  to  be 
intimidated  and  overpowered  rather  than  conciliated,  and  were  more  likely  to  listen 
if  he  asserted  than  if,  "  becoming  all  things  to  all  men,"  he  withdrew  his  claim. 
Secondly,  the  fickleness  of  their  conduct  towards  him,  who  first  "  received  him  as  an 
angel  of  God,"  and  then  affected  others  who  were  his  enemies,  instead  of  him. 
Thirdly,  the  definite  manner  in  which  the  question  between  Jew  and  Gentile  is 
reduced  to  the  single  point  of  circumcision ;  and  the  positiveness  with  which  it  is 
insisted  upon,  that  they  should  not  be  circumcised.  There  were  two  views  which 
might  have  been  maintained,  and  two  practices  certainly  seem  to  have  been  adopted 
by  the  apostle  himself.  "  The  Jewish  law  is  indifferent,  therefore  let  it  be  observed ; 
the  Jewish  law  is  not  indifferent,  therefore  let  it  not  be  observed."  But  to  a  rude 
and  ignorant  people  it  was  impossible  that  the  outward  sign  of  Judaism  could  be 
indifferent ;  the  badge  which  they  bore,  sealed  them  for  the  law,  and  not  for  Christ 
To  suppose  that  circumcision  oould  have  been  made  to  them  the  mere  symbol  of 
circumcision  of  the  heart,  or  could  be  understood  as  a  mere  counsel  of  expediency 
to  avoid  giving  offence  to  the  Jews,  would  be  as  unreasonable  as  to  suppose  that 
South  Sea  Islanders,  if  permitted  by  a  missionary  to  retain  the  use  of  idols,  would 
attain  by  means  of  them  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  (B.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Thbib  Religious  Tendencies. — The  Phrygian  religion,  adopted  by  the  Gauls, 
was  a  demonstrative  nature-worship,  both  sensuous  and  startling.  The  cultus  was 
orgiastic,  with  wild  music  and  dances  led  by  the  Corybantes — not  without  the  usual 
accompaniments  of  impurities  and  other  abominations,  though  it  might  have 
mystic  initiations  and  secret  teachings.  Ehea,  or  Cybele,  the  mother  of  the  gods, 
was  the  chief  object  of  adoration,  and  derived  a  surname  from  the  places  where  her 
service  was  established.  The  great  Mother  appears  on  the  coins  of  all  the  cities, 
and  many  coins  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  Wall  of  Hadrian  have  her  effigy.  At 
PeesinuB  her  image  was  supposed  to  have  fallen  from  heaven,  and  there  she  was 
called  Agdistes.  Though  the  statue  was  taken  to  Borne  during  the  war  with 
Hannibal,  the  city  retained  a  sacred  pre-eminence.  Strabo  says  that  her  priests 
were  a  sort  of  sovereigns  endowed  with  large  revenues,  and  that  the  Attalian  kings 
built  for  her  a  magnificent  temple.  The  Gauls  are  supposed  to  Lave  been 
accustomed  to  somewhat  similar  religious  ordinances  in  their  national  so-called 
Dnridism,    But  the  Druidical  system,  long  supposed  to  be  so  specially  characteristic 


viii        INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8. 

of  the  Celtio  races,  has  been  greatly  exaggerated  in  its  character  and  result*.  The 
well-known  description  in  Cesar  was  based  on  reports  which  he  harmonised  and 
compacted ;  and  the  value  of  those  reports  may  be  tested  by  others  which  follow  in 
the  same  book  as  to  the  existence  of  a  unicorn  in  the  Hercynian  Forest,  and  as  to 
another  animal  found  there  like  a  goat,  which  had  no  knee-joints,  and  which  was 
caught  by  sawing  through  the  tree  on  which  it  leaned  when  asleep,  for  it  could  not 
rise  when  it  had  been  thrown  down  (Bell.  Gall.  vi.  12-18,  25.)  The  statement  of 
Cesar,  based  on  mere  unsifted  rumour,  was  amplified  by  succeeding  writers,  some 
of  whom  only  altered  and  recast  it,  while  others  added  some  new  touches.  If  the 
Druids  held  the  high  and  mysterious  rank  assigned  to  them  in  popular  imagination, 

if  they  dispensed  laws,  taught  youth,  offered  sacrifices,  possessed  esoteric  science, 

and  held  great  conventions, — how  comes  it  that  they  never  appear  in  actual  history, 
but  are  only  seen  dimly  in  the  picturesque  descriptions  of  these  Greek  and  Roman 
authors,  not  one  of  whom  ever  saw  a  Druid  ?  ...  If  the  Druids  had  possessed  the 
authority  claimed  for  them,  how  is  it  that  we  never  find  them  in  flesh  and  blood 
confronting  the  first  Christian  missionaries  ?  The  early  Church  makes  no  mention 
of  them,  though  there  was  a  continuous  battle  with  heathenism  from  the  second 
century  to  the  age  of  Charlemagne.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  no  olassio  author 
occurs  the  term  Druid  as  a  masculine  noun  and  in  the  singular  number ;  and  the 
only  living  members  of  the  Druidical  caste  that  we  meet  with  are  women.  •  .  . 
These  Druidesses  appear  in  a  character  quite  on  a  level  with  that  of  a  Scottish 
spaewife.  .  .  .  The  Druids  were  probably  a  sacerdotal  caste  of  both  sexes, 
that  dealt  chiefly  in  divination.  Suetonius  says  that  Druidism,  condemned 
by  Augustus,  was  put  down  by  Claudius.  An  extirpation  so  easily  ac- 
complished argues  great  feebleness  of  power  and  numbers  on  the  part  of  the 
Druids.  ...  So  little  is  really  known  of  the  teaching  of  the  Druids,  that  all 
attempts  to  form  a  system  rest  on  a  very  precarious  foundation.  They  served  in 
some  idolatrous  worship,  and  they  taught  immortality  in  the  shape  of  transmigra- 
tion, though  they  seem  to  have  had  also  a  Flaith-innisor  Isle  of  the  Blessed.  Their 
system  might  find  some  parallel  in  the  Phrygian  worship,  and  be  absorbed  into  it. 
But  there  is  no  foundation  whatever  for  what  is  sometimes  surmised,  that  the  so-called 
Druidical  teaching  might  have  disposed  the  Galatians  to  that  immediate  reception 
of  the  truth  which  is  described  in  this  Epistle.  .  .  .  The  Phrygian  system  of 
religion  was  one  of  terror, — Paul's  was  one  of  confidence  and  love ;  dark,  dismal* 
and  bloody  had  been  the  rites  of  their  fathers, — the  new  economy  was  light,  joy, 
hope.  Perhaps  the  friendless,  solitary  stranger,  unhelped  by  any  outer  insignia, 
nervous  and  shattered,  yet  unearthly  in  his  zeal,  and  transported  beyond  himself  in 
floods  of  tenderness  and  bursts  of  yearning  eloquence  on  topics  which  had  never 
greeted  their  ears  or  entered  their  imagination,  might  suggest  one  of  the  olden 
sages  who  spoke  by  authority  of  the  gods,  and  before  whose  prophesying  their 
fathers  trembled  and  bowed.  But  apart  from  all  these  auxiliary  influences,  then 
was  the  grace  of  God  giving  power  to  the  word  in  numerous  instances ;  for  though 
with  so  many — perhaps  with  the  majority — the  early  impressions  were  so  soon 
effaced,  because  profound  and  lasting  convictions  had  not  been  wrought  within 
them,  yet  in  the  hearts  of  not  a  few  the  gospel  triumphed,  and  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  was  manifest  in  their  lives.  The  Christianity  planted  in  Galatia  held  its 
place,  in  spite  of  numerous  out-croppings  of  the  national  character,  and  in  spite 
of  the  cruelties  of  Diocletian,  and  the  bribes  and  tortures  of  Julian.  (John  Eadit, 
D.D.) 

Thx  Galatian  Chtjbcheb. — Tee  Abba  kmb raced.  The  name  Galatia  is  used  ia 
two  senses :  1.  Ethnographical,  for  the  district  lying  chiefly  between  the  riven 
Sangarius  and  Halys,  and  occupied  by  the  tribe  of  Galats  or  Galli ;  2.  Political, 
for  the  Roman  Province,  which  included  not  only  Galatia  proper,  but  also  Pbridia, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8. 


Isauria,  and  parts  of  Lyoaonia  and  Phrygia.  If  the  term  covers  the  wider  area, 
then  we  possess  (in  Acts  xiii.  14-xiv.  24)  a  full  and  detailed  account  of  the  found- 
ing of  the  Galatian  Churches ;  moreover,  the  favourite  disciple  and  most  constant 
companion  of  the  apostle,  Timothy,  was  on  this  showing  a  Galatian  (Acts  xvi.  1), 
and  through  him  St.  Paul's  communications  with  these  Churches  would  be  more  01 
less  close  to  the  end  of  his  life.  But  the  objections  to  this  view  are  too  serious  to 
admit  of  its  adoption.  We  must  Beach  for  the  Churches  of  Galatia  within  narrower 
limits.  In  the  absence  of  all  direct  testimony,  we  may  conjecture  that  it  was  at 
Ancyra,  now  the  capital  of  the  Boman  Province  as  formerly  of  the  Gaulish  settle- 
ment; at  Pessinus,  one  of  the  principal  commercial  towns  of  the  district;  at 
Tavium,  at  once  a  strong  fortress  and  a  great  emporium,  situated  at  the  point  of 
convergence  of  several  important  roads ;  perhaps  also  at  Juliopolis,  the  ancient 
Gordium,  formerly  the  capital  of  Phrygia,  almost  equidistant  from  the  three  seas, 
and  from  its  central  position  a  busy  mart ;  at  these,  or  some  of  these  places,  that 
St.  Paul  founded  the  earliest  "  Churches  of  Galatia."    (Various.) 

St.  Paul's  Visits. — Putting  aside  the  supposed — but,  as  it  appears untenable 

identification  of  the  Galatian  Churches  with  those  visited  upon  the  first  missionary 
journey,  we  shall  then  have  two  visits  prior  to  the  date  of  the  Epistle,  both  of  which 
are  dismissed  by  St.  Luke  in  few  words.  1.  First  visit,  a.d.  51  or  52.  Starting 
from  Antioch,  with  Silas,  after  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  St.  Paul  first  visited  the 
Churches  already  founded  in  Syria,  Cilioia,  and  Lycaonia.  At  Lystra  he  picked  up 
Timothy.  Then  he  passed  through  the  "  region  of  Phrygia  and  Galatia,"  t.«.,  the 
ambiguous  territory  on  the  borders  of  each  of  these  divisions.  Here  he  was  detained 
by  illness  (Gal.  iv.  14),  and  took  the  opportunity  to  preach  to  the  Galatians.  He  was 
eagerly  welcomed  by  them,  and  his  preaching  met  with  much  success  (Gal.  iv.  14, 16; 
▼.  7).  This  visit  cannot  have  lasted  very  long,  and  on  fully  recovering  his  health 
the  apostle  pursued  his  journey,  first  to  Mysia,  then  to  Troas,  whence  a  Divine 
intimation  determined  him  to  cross  over  into  Europe.  After  an  eventful  passage 
through  the  cities  of  Macedonia,  he  found  his  way  to  Athens  and  finally  to  Corinth, 
where  he  stayed  eighteen  months.  With  his  voyage  from  Cenohrese  to  Gesarea, 
his  visit  to  Jerusalem  and  return  to  Antioch,  the  second  missionary  journey  came 
to  an  end.  2.  Second  visit,  a.d.  54.  Again  starting  from  Antioch  on  the  third 
missionary  journey,  he  seems  to  have  made  straight  for  Galatia,  not  this  time  pass- 
ing through  Lycaonia.  He  now  "  went  over  into  the  country  of  Galatia  and  Phrygia 
in  order  (icadcgifc),  confirming  the  disciples  "  (Acts  xviii.  23).  It  would  seem  that 
already  he  found  some  cause  for  uneasiness,  and  had  occasion  to  administer  a 
warning  (Gal.  i.  9 ;  v.  21).  This  plain  speaking  apparently  gave  some  offence  (Gal. 
iv.  16),  and  on  his  departure  for  his  long  sojourn  of  three  years  at  Ephesus  the 
Judaising  party  in  Galatia  made  great  progress.  To  this  progress,  and  to  the  bad 
accounts  which  reached  the  apostle,  it  was  due  that  either  in  Ephesus,  or  perhaps 
more  probably  after  leaving  Ephesus  and  on  his  way  to  Greece,  he  thought  it 
necessary  to  write  to  them  this  Epistle.    (Profeuor  Sanday.) 

Rjbceptios  or  the  Gospel — Though  the  whole  spirit  of  Christianity  was  so  alien 
to  their  habits  of  thought,  we  may  well  imagine  how  the  fervour  of  the  apostle's 
manner  may  have  fired  their  religious  enthusiasm.  The  very  image  under  which 
he  describes  his  preaching,  brings  vividly  before  us  the  energy  and  force  with  which 
he  delivered  his  message.  He  placarded  Christ  crucified  before  their  eyes,  arresting 
the  gaze  of  the  spiritual  loiterer,  and  riveting  it  on  this  proclamation  of  his 
Sovereign.  If  we  picture  to  ourselves  the  apostle  as  he  appeared  before  the  Gala- 
tians, a  friendless  outcast,  writhing  under  the  tortures  of  a  painful  malady,  yet 
instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  by  turns  denouncing  and  entreating,  appealing 
io  the  agonies  of  a  crucified  Saviour,  perhaps  also,  as  at  Lystra,  enforcing  this 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALAT1ANS. 

■  — — — ' * 

appeal  by  some  striking  miracle,  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  to  conceive  how  the  fervid 
temperament  of  the  Gaul  might  have  been  aronsed,  while  yet  only  the  Burfaoe  of  his 
spiritual  consciousness  was  ruffled.  For  the  time,  indeed,  all  seemed  to  be  going 
on  well.  But  the  very  eagerness  with  which  they  had  embraced  the  gospel  was  in 
itself  a  dangerous  symptom.  A  material  so  easily  moulded  soon  loses  the  impres- 
sion it  has  taken.  .  .  .  Error  soon  found  in  Galatia  a  congenial  soil.  The  corruption 
took  the  direction  which  might  have  been  expected  from  the  religious  education  of 
the  people.  A  passionate  and  striking  ritualism  expressing  itself  in  bodily  mortifi- 
cations of  the  most  terrible  kind  had  been  supplanted  by  the  simple  spiritual 
teaching  of  the  gospel.  For  a  time  the  pure  morality  and  lofty  sanctions  of  the 
new  faith  appealed  not  in  vain  to  their  higher  instincts,  but  they  soon  began  to 
yearn  after  a  creed  which  suited  their  material  cravings  better,  and  was  more  allied 
to  the  system  they  had  abandoned.  This  end  they  attained  by  overlaying  the 
simplicity  of  the  gospel  with  Judaic  observances.  This  new  phase  of  their  religious 
life  is  ascribed  by  St.  Paul  himself  to  the  temper  which  their  old  heathen  education 
had  fostered.  It  was  a  return  to  "  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  "  which  they  had 
outgrown,  a  renewed  subjection  to  the  yoke  of  bondage  which  they  had  thrown  off 
in  Christ.  They  had  escaped  from  one  ritualistic  system,  only  to  bow  before 
another.  The  innate  failing  of  a  race  excessive  in  its  devotion  to  external  observ- 
ances, was  here  reasserting  itself.  To  cheok  these  errors,  which  were  already 
spreading  fast,  the  apostle  wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  (Bithop 
Lightfoot.) 

Effect  or  the  Epistle.— What  effect  the  remonstrance  had  can  only  be 
conjectured,  for  from  this  time  forward  the  Galatian  Church  may  be  said  to 
disappear  from  the  apostolic  history.  If  we  could  be  sure  that  the  mission  of 
Crescens,  mentioned  in  the  latest  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  refers  to  the  Asiatic  settle- 
ment, there  would  be  some  ground  for  assuming  that  the  apostle  maintained  a 
friendly  intercourse  with  his  Galatian  converts  to  the  close  of  his  life ;  but  it  is  at 
least  as  likely  that  the  mother  country  of  the  Gauls  is  there  meant  (2  Tim.  iv.  10). 
In  the  absence  of  all  information,  we  would  gladly  believe  that  here,  as  at  Corinth, 
the  apostle's  rebuke  was  successful,  that  his  authority  was  restored,  the  offenders 
were  denounced,  and  the  whole  Church,  overwhelmed  with  shame,  returned  to  its 
allegiance.  The  cases,  however,  are  not  parallel.  The  severity  of  tone  is  more 
sustained  in  this  instance,  the  personal  appeals  are  fewer,  the  remonstrances  more 
indignant  and  less  affectionate.  One  ray  of  hope,  indeed,  seems  to  break  through 
the  dark  cloud,  but  we  must  not  build  too  much  on  a  single  expression  of  confidence 
(Gal.  v.  10),  dictated  it  may  be  by  a  generous  and  politic  charity  which  "  believeth 
all  things."    (Ibid.) 

Later  Hebesies  of  the  Galatian  Chttbch. — It  is  not  idle,  as  it  might  seem  at 
first  sight,  to  follow  the  stream  of  history  beyond  the  horizon  of  the  apostolic  age. 
The  fragmentary  notices  of  its  subsequent  career  reflect  some  light  on  the  temper 
and  disposition  of  the  Galatian  Church  in  St.  Paul's  day.  To  catholic  writers  of  a 
later  date,  indeed,  the  failings  of  its  infancy  seemed  to  be  so  faithfully  reproduced 
in  its  mature  age,  that  they  invested  the  apostle's  rebuke  with  a  prophetic  import. 
Asia  Minor  was  the  nursery  of  heresy,  and  of  all  the  Asiatic  Churches  it  was 
nowhere  so  rife  as  in  Galatia.  The  Galatian  capital  was  the  stronghold  of  the 
Montanist  revival,  which  lingered  on  for  more  than  two  centuries,  splitting  into 
diverse  sects,  each  distinguished  by  some  fantastic  gesture  or  minute  ritual  observ- 
ance. Here,  too,  were  to  be  found  Ophites,  Manichasans,  sectarians  of  all  kinds. 
Hence,  during  the  great  controversies  of  the  fourth  century,  issued  two  saooessive 
bishops  who  disturbed  the  peace  of  the  Church — Marcellus  and  Basilius, — swerving 
or  seeming  to  swerve  from  the  catholic  truth  in  opposite  directions,  the  one  on  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8.  u 

aide  of  Sabellian,  the  other  of  Arian  error.  A  Christian  father  of  this  period 
denounces  "  the  folly  of  the  Galatians,  who  abound  in  many  impious  deno- 
minations." A  harsher  critic,  likewise  a  contemporary,  affirms  that  whole 
villages  in  Galatia  were  depopulated  by  the  Christians  in  their  intestine  quarrels. 
(Ibid.) 

Faithfulness  under  Persecution. — The  Galatian  Churches  furnished  their  quota 
to  the  army  of  martyrs  in  the  Diocletian  persecution,  and  the  oldest  existing  Church 
in  the  capital  still  bears  the  name  of  its  bishop,  Clement,  who  perished  during 
this  reign  of  terror.  The  struggle  over  and  peace  restored,  a  famous  council  was 
held  at  Anoyra,  a  court-martial  of  the  Church,  for  the  purpose  of  restoring 
discipline  and  pronouncing  upon  those  who  had  faltered  or  deserted  in  the  combat. 
When  the  oontest  was  renewed  under  Julian,  the  forces  of  paganism  were  con- 
centrated upon  Galatia,  as  a  key  to  the  heathen  position,  in  one  of  their  last 
desperate  struggles  to  retrieve  the  day.  The  once  popular  worship  of  the  mother 
of  the  gods,  which,  issuing  from  Pessinus,  had  spread  throughout  the  Greek  and 
Roman  world,  was  a  fit  rallying  point  for  the  broken  ranks  of  heathendom.  In 
this  part  of  the  field,  as  at  Antioch,  Julian  appeared  in  person.  He  stimulated  the 
zeal  of  the  heathen  worshippers  by  his  own  example,  visiting  the  ancient  shrine  of 
Cybele,  and  offering  costly  gifts  and  sacrifices  there.  He  distributed  special 
largesses  among  the  poor  who  attended  at  the  temples.  He  wrote  a  scolding  letter 
to  the  pontiff  of  Galatia,  rebuking  the  priests  for  their  careless  living,  and  promising 
aid  to  Pessinus  on  condition  that  they  took  more  pains  to  propitiate  the  goddess. 
The  Christians  met  these  measures  for  the  most  part  in  an  attitude  of  fierce 
defiance.  At  Ancyra  one  Basil,  a  presbyter  of  the  Church,  fearlessly  braving  the 
imperial  anger,  won  for  himself  a  martyr's  orown.  Going  about  from  place  to 
place,  he  denounced  all  participation  in  the  polluting  rites  of  heathen  sacrifice,  and 
warned  his  Christian  brethren  against  bartering  their  hopes  of  heaven  for  such 
transitory  honours  as  an  earthly  monarch  could  confer.  At  length  brought  before 
the  provincial  governor,  he  was  tortured,  condemned,  and  put  to  death.  At  Pessinus 
another  zealous  Christian,  entering  the  temple,  openly  insulted  the  mother  of  the 
gods,  and  tore  down  the  altar.  Summoned  before  Julian,  he  appeared  in  the  im- 
perial presence  with  an  air  of  triumph,  and  even  derided  the  remonstrances  which 
ihe  emperor  addressed  to  him.  This  attempt  to  galvanize  the  expiring  form  of 
heathen  devotion  in  Galatia  seems  to  have  borne  little  fruit.  With  the  emperor's 
departure  paganism  relapsed  into  its  former  torpor.  And  not  long  after  in  the 
presence  of  Jovian,  the  Christian  successor  of  the  apostate,  who  halted  at  Ancyra 
on  his  way  to  assume  the  imperial  purple,  the  Galatian  Churches  had  an  assurance 
of  the  final  triumph  of  the  truth.    (Ibid.) 

Time  and  Plage  of  Composition. — As  to  this  there  are  two  theories:  1.  That 
the  Epistle  was  written  from  Ephesus  during  the  apostle's  three  years  stay  there. 
This  is  grounded  chiefly  upon  the  phrase,  "  I  wonder  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed 
into  another  gospel"  (Gal.  i.  6.).  As,  however,  " soon "  is  a  relative  term,  and 
three  or  four  years  might  still  be  called  "  soon  "  for  a  complete  change  of  sentiment 
in  a  community,  this  argument  does  not  seem  to  be  a  very  strong  one.  2.  That  the 
Epistle  was  written  en  voyage  from  Macedonia  or  Greece  in  the  end  of  a.d.  57  or 
beginning  of  58.  The  main  ground  for  this  view  is  the  close  resemblance  between 
the  Epistle  and  that  to  the  Romans,  which  we  know  to  have  been  written  in  the 
early  spring  of  a.d.  58.  This  argument  seems  more  weighty.  (Professor  Sanday.) 
As  the  first  of  these  is  the  view  generally  received,  it  will  be  proper  to  state  more 
folly  the  arguments  of  Bishop  Lightfoot  in  favour  of  the  second.  1.  The  re- 
semblance to  2  Corinthians  and  Romans,  between  which  he  would  place  it ;  its 
affinity  in  tone  of  feeling  to  the  former,  and  in  thought  to  the  latter.   2.  This  ordet 


xii         INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIANS. 

best  accords  with  the  history  of  St.  Paul's  personal  sufferings  and  the  progress  of 
his  controversy  with  the  Judaisers,  as  shown  in  the  fulness  of  doctrinal  statement 
against  their  views.  3.  This  date  explains  one  or  two  allusions  more  satisfactorily : 
e.g.,  ch.  vi.  ver.  1,  against  severe  treatment,  the  evil  effects  of  which  he  may  have 
witnessed  at  Corinth ;  and,  in  same  chapter,  ver.  7,  "  Be  not  deceived,"  <fcc, 
referring  to  their  illiberality  in  response  to  the  "  orders  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia  " 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  1). 

Occasioh  or  the  Epistle. — False  teachers  in  Galatia: — On  his  second  visit  to 
Galatia  St.  Paul  found  that  false  teachers  were  at  work  amongst  the  Churches, 
and  had  succeeded  in  greatly  troubling  and  perplexing  them.  We  learn  from  chap, 
i.  6-9,  that  this  teaching  was  directly  subversive  of  the  gospel — opposed  to  the 
fundamental  truths  of  Christianity.  We  learn  from  other  passages  in  the  Epistle, 
that  these  men  denied  the  doctrine  of  justification  through  the  atoning  death  of 
Christ  and  faith  in  Him ;  and  taught  that  the  only  way  by  which  any  one,  whether 
Jew  or  Gentile,  could  obtain  life,  was  by  keeping  the  Law  of  Moses,  and  establishing 
his  own  righteousness.  Two  questions  at  once  present  themselves.  1.  How 
could  the  false  teachers  attempt  to  persuade  the  Jewish  believers  that  they  could 
obtain  life  by  keeping  the  Law  of  Moses,  when  that  Law  set  before  them  a  perfect 
standard  of  holiness,  and  required  a  perfect  obedience  to  all  its  precepts,  and  pro- 
vided no  real  atonement  for  sin?  It  may  be  replied,  that  the  false  teachers 
might  first  of  all  endeavour  to  explain  the  commandments  of  God,  so  as  to  make 
it  appear  possible  for  men  to  keep  them :  and,  in  the  next  place,  that  they  might 
qnote  passages  of  Scripture  which  appear  to  attach  a  really  atoning  efficacy  to  the 
sacrifices  of  the  Law — especially  those  which  were  offered  up  on  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement.  And  then  they  might  urge  the  fact  that  the  great  body  of  Jews — 
including  men  of  the  highest  repute  for  sanctity  and  learning — did  thus  explain 
these  commandments  and  sacrifices.  In  this  way  the  false  teachers  might  bring 
some  plausible  argument  in  favour  of  their  teaching,  and  endeavour  to  persuade 
the  Jewish  converts  that,  whilst  admiring  the  Lord  Jesus  as  an  example  of  all  that 
was  good  and  holy,  and  regarding  Him  as  the  future  Saviour  of  the  nation,  they 
were  to  seek  eternal  life  by  keeping  the  Law  of  Moses.  2.  How  could  the  false 
teachers  hope  to  persuade  the  Gentile  converts  that  they  could  obtain  life  by 
keeping  the  Law  of  Moses,  when  that  Law  was  given  exclusively  to  the  Jews  7  To 
this  it  may  be  replied  that  Gentiles  might  become  Jews  (so  as  to  share  in  certain 
religious  privileges  peculiar  to  the  Jews)  by  undergoing  circumcision  (Exod. 
xii.  48,  49  ;  Numb.  ix.  14).  .  .  .  Thus  the  false  teachers,  by  wholly  misrepresenting 
the  Law  of  Moses,  might  turn  it  into  a  sort  of  gospel,  by  which  Gentiles  as  well  as 
Jews  could  obtain  eternal  life.  (John  Venn, M. A.)  St.  Paul's  self-vindication : — Who 
these  Judaists  were,  whether  Jews  by  birth  or  proselytes,  is  not  known ;  they  may  have 
been  either.  Probably  what  had  happened  in  Galatia  was  only  a  repetition  of  what 
had  taken  place  in  Antioch,  as  St.  Paul  describes  it  in  chap.  ii.  There  were  myriads  of 
Jews  who  believed,  and  who  were  all  zealous  of  the  Law  (Acts  xxi.  20) ;  and  an  extreme 
faction  holding  such  opinions  were  the  inveterate  enemies  of  the  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles.  It  was  so  far  innocent  in  Judea  to  uphold  the  Mosaic  Law  and  its  obliga- 
tion on  Jewish  believers,  but  it  was  a  dangerous  innovation  to  enforce  its  observance 
on  Gentile  converts  as  essential  to  salvation.  For  the  Mosaic  Law  was  not  meant 
for  them ;  the  rite  of  circumcision  was  adapted  only  to  born  Jews  as  a  token  of 
Abrahamic  descent  and  of  inclusion  in  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  The  Gentile 
had  nothing  to  do  with  this  or  with  any  element  of  the  ceremonial  law,  for  he 
was  not  born  under  it ;  to  force  it  on  him  was  to  subject  him  to  foreign  servitude 
— to  an  intolerable  yoke.  Apart  from  the  relation  of  circumcision  to  a  Jew,  the 
persistent  attempt  to  enforce  it  as  in  any  way  essential  to  salvation  was  derogatory 
to  the  perfection  of  Christ's  work,  and  the  complete  deliverance  provided  by  it. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  QALATIANS.        xJii 

Legal  Pharisaism  was,  however,  brought  intoGalatia,  circumcision  was  insisted  on, 
and  special  seasons  were  observed.  To  upset  the  teaching  of  the  apostle,  the 
errorists  undermined  his  authority,  plainly  maintaining  that  as  he  was  not  one  of 
the  primary  Twelve,  he  could  on  that  account  be  invested  only  with  a  secondary  and 
subordinate  rank  and  authority ;  so  that  his  teaching  of  a  free  gospel,  unconditioned 
by  any  Mosaio  conformity,  might  be  set  aside.  The  false  teachers  seem  to  have 
tried  also  to  damage  the  apostle  by  representing  him  as  inconsistent  in  his  career, 
as  if  he  had  in  some  way  or  at  some  time  preached  circumcision ;  and  they  in- 
sinuated that  he  accommodated  his  message  to  the  prejudices  of  his  converts. 
Since  to  the  Jews  he  became  as  a  Jew,  there  might  be  found  in  his  history  not  a 
few  compliances  which  could  be  easily  magnified  into  elements  of  inconsistency 
with  his  present  preaching.  In  some  way,  perhaps  darker  and  more  malignant, 
they  laboured  to  turn  the  affections  of  the  Galatian  people  from  him,  and  to  a 
great  extent  they  succeeded.  We  learn  from  the  apostle's  self-vindication  what 
were  the  chief  errors  propagated  by  the  Judaists,  and  what  were  the  principal 
calumnies  directed  against  himself.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  The  object  of  the 
Epistle  is  accordingly  to  defend  the  apostle's  own  authority,  to  prove  the  validity 
and  independence  of  his  commission,  and  at  the  same  time  to  set  forth  again  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  and  of  spiritual  religion,  as  against  the  imposition 
of  the  Mosaio  Law  and  a  religion  of  externals.     (Professor  Sanday.) 

Character  and  Contents. — 1.  This  Epistle  is  especially  distinguished  among  St. 
Paul's  letters  by  its  unity  of  purpose.  The  Galatian  apostasy  in  its  double  aspect, 
as  a  denial  of  his  own  authority,  and  a  repudiation  of  the  doctrine  of  grace,  is  never 
lost  sight  of.  2.  Its  sustained  severity.  No  congratulations,  no  word  of  praise  here. 
The  argument  is  interrupted  every  now  and  then  by  an  outburst  of  indignant  re- 
monstrance. He  is  dealing  with  a  thoughtless,  half-barbarous  people.  They  have 
erred  like  children,  and  must  be  chastised  like  children.  Rebuke  may  prevail  where 
reason  will  be  powerless.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Analysis  •/  the  Epistle. — I.  Intro- 
ductory address.  1.  The  apostolic  salutation  (i.  1-5).  2.  The  Galatians'  defec- 
tion (i.  6-10).  II.  Personal  apologia:  an  autobiographical  retrospect.  The 
apostle's  teaching  derived  from  God  and  not  man,  as  proved  by  the  circumstances 
of — 1.  His  education  (i.  13,  14).  2.  His  conversion  (i.  15-17).  3.  His  intercourse 
with  the  other  apostles,  whether  at  (1)  his  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  (i.  18-24),  or  (2) 
his  later  visit  (ii.  1-10).  4.  His  conduct  in  the  controversy  with  Peter  at  Antioch 
(ii.  11-14).  The  subject  of  which  controversy  was  the  supersession  of  the  Law  by 
Christ  (ii.  15-21).  UI.  Dogmatic  apologia  :  Inferiority  of  Judaism,  or  legal 
Christianity,  to  the  doctrine  of  faith.  1.  The  Galatians  bewitched  into  retro- 
gression from  a  spiritual  system  into  a  carnal  system  (in.  1-5).  2.  Abraham  himself 
a  witness  to  the  efficacy  of  faith  (ill.  6-9).  8.  Faith  in  Christ  alone  removes  the 
curse  which  the  Law  entails  (iii.  10-14).  4.  The  validity  of  the  Promise  unaffected 
by  the  Law  (iii.  15-18).  5.  Special  pedagogic  function  of  the  Law,  which  must  needs 
give  way  to  the  larger  scope  of  Christianity  (iii.  19-29).  6.  The  Law  a  state  of 
tutelage  (iv.  1-7).  7.  Meanness  and  barrenness  of  mere  ritualism  (iv.  8-11).  8. 
The  past  zeal  of  the  Galatians  contrasted  with  their  present  coldness  (iv.  12-20).  9. 
The  allegory  of  Isaac  and  Ishmael  (iv.  21-31).  IT.  Hortatory  application  of  the 
foregoing.  1.  Christian  liberty  excludes  Judaism  (v.  1-6).  9.  The  Judaising  in- 
truders (v.  7-12).  8.  Liberty  not  licence,  but  love  (v.  13-15).  4.  The  works  of  the 
flesh  and  of  the  Spirit  (v.  16-26).  5.  The  duty  of  sympathy  (vi.  1-5).  6.  The  duty 
of  liberality  (vi.  6-10).  V.  Autograph  Conclusion.  1.  The  Judaisers'  motive 
(▼L  12, 18).  i.  The  apostle's  motive  (vi.  14, 15).  His  parting  benediction,  and 
•bin  to  be  freed  from  farther  annoyance  (vi  16-18).  (Professor  Sanday.)  Place 
tf  this  Epistle  in  modem  controversy : — The  armoury  of  this  Epistle  has  furnished 
their  keenest  weapons  to  the  combatants  in  the  two  greatest  controversies  which  m 


xiv         INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIAN8. 

modern  times  have  agitated  the  Christian  Church ;  the  one  a  struggle  for  liberty 
within  the  camp,  the  other  a  war  of  defence  against  assailants  from  without ;  the  one 
vitally  affecting  the  doctrine,  the  other  the  evidences  of  the  gospel.  1.  The  reforma- 
tion. When  Luther  commenced  his  attack  on  the  corruptions  of  the  mediaeval 
Church,  he  chose  this  Epistle  as  his  most  efficient  engine  in  overthrowing  the  mass 
of  error  which  time  had  piled  on  the  simple  foundations  of  the  gospel.  His  com- 
mentary on  the  Galatians  was  written  and  rewritten.  It  cost  him  more  labour,  and 
was  more  highly  esteemed  by  him,  than  any  of  his  works.  If  age  has  diminished 
its  value  as  an  aid  to  the  study  of  St.  Paul,  it  still  remains,  and  ever  will  remain,  a 
speaking  monument  of  the  mind  of  the  reformer,  and  the  principles  of  the  re- 
formation.  2.  Rationalism.  Onoe  again,  in  the  present  day,  this  Epistle  has  been 
thrust  into  prominence  by  those  who  deny  the  Divine  origin  of  the  gospel.  In  this 
later  controversy,  however,  it  is  no  longer  to  its  doctrinal  features,  but  to  its  historical 
notices,  that  attention  is  chiefly  directed.  "The  earliest  form  of  Christianity,"  it 
is  argued,  "  was  a  modified  Judaism.  The  distinctive  features  of  the  system  current 
under  this  name  were  added  by  St.  Paul.  There  was  an  irreooncileable  opposition 
between  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  Apostles  of  the  Jews,  a  personal  feud 
between  the  teachers  themselves,  and  a  direct  antagonism  between  their  doctrines. 
After  a  long  struggle  St.  Paul  prevailed,  and  Christianity — our  Christianity — was 
the  result."  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  affords  at  onoe  the  ground  for,  and  the 
refutation  of,  this  view.  It  affords  the  ground,  for  it  discovers  the  mutual  jealousy 
and  suspicions  of  the  Jew  and  Gentile  converts.  It  affords  the  refutation,  for  it 
shows  the  true  relations  existing  between  St.  Paul  and  the  Twelve.  It  presents,  not 
indeed  a  colourless  uniformity  of  feeling  and  opinion,  but  a  far  higher  and  more 
instructive  harmony,  the  general  agreement,  amidst  some  lesser  differences  and  some 
human  failings,  of  men  animated  by  the  same  Divine  Spirit,  and  working  together 
for  the  same  hallowed  purpose,  fit  inmates  of  that  Father's  house  in  which  are  many 
mansions.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Its  bearing  upon  modern  Christianity : — We  live 
in  a  drifting  age.  Very  few  vessels  remain  firm  at  their  moorings,  very  few  anchors 
hold  the  ground.  Opinions,  doctrines,  institutions,  which  were  onoe  thought  to 
rest  upon  an  immovable  foundation,  are  now  put  upon  their  defence,  if  not  discarded 
and  overthrown.  The  tendency  of  modern  thought  is  to  treat  all  questions  as  open 
ones,  and  to  regard  even  Christianity  itself  as  destitute  of  any  fixed  and  certain 
principles.  But  the  reign  of  dogma  has  not  passed  as  long  as  the  Word  of  God 
remains  unref  uted  ;  and,  in  the  dogmatic  teaching  of  Scripture,  this  Epistle  occupies 
a  leading  position.  It  deals  with  fundamental  truths ;  it  expounds  those  truths 
with  convincing  clearness ;  it  confirms  them  by  the  most  rigid  proofs.  It  describes 
in  no  ambiguous  terms  man's  state  by  nature,  as  a  sinner  doomed  to  perish,  con- 
demned by  that  Divine  Law  under  which  he  is  born,  subject  to  its  curse.  It 
describes  with  equal  clearness  the  redemption  which  has  been  wrought  out  by 
Christ,  the  means,  even  faith,  by  which  the  sinner  participates  in  that  redemption, 
and  the  blessed  results  which  follow  such  participation.  It  dwells  at  length  upon 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  renewing  the  corrupt  nature,  producing  heavenly 
fruit,  and  leading  the  regenerate  soul  onward  through  conflict  to  victory.  Men  may 
regard  these  doctrines  as  the  doctrines  of  a  sect,  or  treat  them  as  the  relies  of  a 
bigoted  and  narrow-minded  age ;  but  the  question  is  whether  they  are  or  are  not 
plainly  and  authoritatively  taught  in  Scripture  ?  And  if,  as  we  affirm,  they  are  so 
taught,  men  reject  them  at  their  peril ;  and,  in  refusing  to  accept  them,  the  so-called 
liberality  of  the  age  reveals  itself  as  more  ready  to  believe  the  lie  of  man  than  the 
truth  of  God.  The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  therefore  outs  sharply  into  much  of  the 
popular  Christianity  of  the  day,  exposing  and  condemning  it.  It  is  dogmatic,  in  an 
age  which  abhors  dogma;  exclusive,  in  an  age  which  would  include  all  beliefs 
within  the  ample  boundaries  of  truth  ;  it  condemns  human  nature  at  a  time  when 
men  are  seeking  to  extenuate  their  guilt  and  deny  their  responsibility ;  it  proclaim* 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  QALATIANS.         xf 

that  salvation  is  wholly  of  grace,  when  men  are  doubting  whether  they  need  grace 
at  all ;  it  insists  upon  the  necessity  of  the  Spirit's  work  within  the  soul,  when  men 
regard  the  bare  idea  of  suoh  an  influence  as  the  dream  of  the  enthusiast.  Nor  does 
the  Galatian  Epistle  encounter  only  the  broad  stream  of  popular  scepticism ;  it 
searches  out  various  byepaths  of  error  in  which  men  are  prone  to  wander.  It 
teaches  the  danger  of  ceremonialism ;  it  points  out  that  public  opinion  is  not  the 
test  of  truth ;  it  condemns  alike  the  legalism  which  trenches  upon  liberty,  and  the 
liberty  which  degenerates  into  licence.  It  deals  with  man  as  he  is,  and  points  out 
how  man  may  become  what  he  ought  to  be ;  it  shows  that  there  is  one  way,  and  one 
way  only,  by  which  this  end  may  be  reached ;  and,  brushing  aside  all  false  methods 
as  dangerous  impertinences,  it  raises  the  standard  of  the  cross  as  the  one  remedy 
for  the  disease  under  whioh  men  labour.  The  inference  I  draw  is  this :  that  thia 
Epistle  deserves  to  be  studied  reverentially,  honestly,  exhaustively,  by  all  profess- 
ing Christians.  The  truth  is  in  it ;  but  the  truth  only  yields  itself  to  those  who 
"  seek  her  as  silver,  and  search  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures."  Ignorance  of  Scripture 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  religious  error.  Amid  the  clash  of  contending  opinions 
there  is  one  infallible  source  of  truth ;  amid  the  claims  of  rival  teachers  there  is 
one  infallible  guide ;  the  Word  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  God  will  never  lead  us 
astray ;  and  the  fault  is  ours,  if,  with  these  blessed  agencies  within  our  reaoh,  we 
fail  to  build  our  house  upon  the  Bock,  and  remain  strangers  to  the  well-grounded 
hope  of  a  Scriptural  faith.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  The  Epistle  is  polemical, 
impetuous,  and  overpowering ;  and  yet  tender,  affectionate,  and  warning  in  tone. 
It  strikes  like  lightning  every  projecting  point  that  approaches  its  path,  and  yet, 
undelayed  by  these  zig-zag  deflections,  instantaneously  attains  the  goal.  Every 
verse  breathes  the  6pirit  of  the  great  and  free  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  His  earnest- 
ness  and  mildness,  his  severity  and  love,  his  vehemence  and  tenderness,  his  depth 
and  simplicity,  his  commanding  authority  and  sincere  humility,  are  here  vividly 
brought  before  us  in  fresh  and  bold  outline.    (Philip  Sehaff,  D.D.) 

Thb  Argument  or  thk  Epistlb. — St.  Paul  goes  about  to  establish  the  doctrine  of 
faith,  grace,  forgiveness  of  sins,  or  Christian  righteousness,  to  the  end  that  we 
may  have  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  difference  between  Christian  righteousness  and 
all  other  kinds.  For  there  are  many  kinds  of  righteousness.  1.  There  is  a  political 
or  civil  righteousness,  whioh  emperors,  princes  of  the  world,  philosophers,  and 
lawyers  deal  with.  2.  Ceremonial  righteousness,  whioh  the  traditions  of  men 
teach.  This  righteousness  parents  and  schoolmasters  may  teach  without  danger, 
because  they  do  not  attribute  to  it  any  power  to  satisfy  for  sin,  to  please  God,  or  to 
deserve  grace ;  but  they  teach  such  ceremonies  as  are  only  necessary  for  the  cor- 
rection of  manners,  and  certain  observations  concerning  this  life.  8.  The 
righteousness  of  the  Law,  or  of  the  Ten  Commandments,  which  Moses  teaches. 
This  do  we  also  teach,  after  the  doctrine  of  faith.  4.  The  righteousness  of  faith, 
or  Christian  righteousness.  This  we  must  carefully  distinguish  from  the  above- 
mentioned  ;  for  they  are  quite  contrary  to  this  righteousness,  both  because  they 
flow  out  of  the  laws  of  emperors,  the  traditions  of  the  pope,  and  the  commandments 
of  God,  and  also  because  they  consist  in  our  works,  and  may  be  wrought  of  us 
either  by  our  pure  natural  strength,  or  else  by  the  gift  of  God.  For  these  kinds  of 
righteousness  are  also  of  the  gift  of  God,  like  as  other  good  things  are  whioh  we 
enjoy.  But  this  most  excellent  righteousness  of  faith  is  neither  political  nor  cere- 
monial, nor  the  righteousness  of  God's  law,  nor  does  it  consist  in  works,  but  is 
clean  contrary — that  is  to  say,  a  mere  passive  righteousness,  as  the  others  above 
arc  active.  For  in  this  we  work  nothing,  we  render  nothing  unto  God,  but  only  wo 
receive  and  suffer  another  to  work  in  us — that  is  to  say,  God.  .  .  .  This  is  our 
divinity,  whereby  we  teach  how  to  put  a  difference  between  these  two  kinds  of 
righteousness,  active  and  passive,  to  the  end  that  manners  and  faith,  works  and 


xvi        INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OALATIANS. 

grace,  policy  and  religion,  should  not  be  confounded,  or  taken  the  one  for  the 
other.    Both  are  necessary ;  but  both  must  be  kept  within  their  bounds ;  Christian 
righteousness  appertained  to  the  new  man,  and  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
appertaineth  to  the  old  man,  which  is  born  of  flesh  and  blood.    Upon  this  old 
man,  as  upon  an  ass,  there  must  be  laid  a  burden  that  may  press  him  down,  and  ha 
must  not  enjoy  the  freedom  of  the  spirit  of  grace,  except  he  first  put  upon  him  the 
new  man  by  faith  in  Christ ;  then  may  he  enjoy  the  kingdom  and  inestimable  gift 
of  grace.    This  I  say,  to  the  end  that  no  man  should  think  we  reject  or  forbid  good 
works.    We  imagine,  as  it  were,  two  worlds,  the  one  heavenly  and  the  other  earthly. 
In  these  we  place  these  two  kinds  of  righteousness,  being  far  separate  the  one  from 
the  other.    The  righteousness  of  the  law  is  earthly,  and  hath  to  do  with  earthly 
things,  and  by  it  we  do  good  works.    But  as  the  earth  bringeth  not  forth  fruit 
except  first  it  be  watered  and  made  fruitful  from  above ;  even  so  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law,  in  doing  many  things  we  do  nothing,  and  in  fulfilling  of  the  law 
we  fulfil  it  not,  except  first,  without  any  merit  or  work  of  ours,   we  be  made 
righteous  by  the  Christian  righteousness,  which  nothing   appeioaineth  to    the 
righteousness  of  the  law,  or  to  the  earthly  and  active  righteousness.    But  this 
righteousness  is  heavenly,  which  (as  is  said)  we  have  not  of  ourselves,  but  receive 
it  from  hearren ;  which  we  work  not,  but  which  by  graoe  is  wrought  in  us,  and 
apprehended  by   faith;  whereby  we  mount  up  above   all  laws  and  works.  .  . 
Why,  do  we  then  nothing?  do  we  work  nothing  for  the  obtaining  of  this  righteous 
ness  ?    Nothing  at  all.    This  is  perfect  righteousness,  "  to  do  nothing,  to  hear 
nothing,  to  know  nothing  of  the  law,  or  of  works  " ;  but  to  know  and  believe  this 
only,  that  Christ  is  gone  to  the  Father,  and  is  not  now  seen ;  that  He  sitteth  in 
heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  His  Father,  not  as  judge,  but  made  unto  us,  of  God, 
wisdom,  righteousness,  holiness,  and  redemption;  briefly,  that  He  is  our  High 
Priest  intreating  for  us,  and  reigning  over  us  and  in  us  by  graoe.    In  this  heavenly 
righteousness  sin  can  have  no  place,  for  there  is  no  law ;  and  where  no  law  is,  there 
can  be  no  transgression.    Seeing,  then,  that  sin  hath  here  no  place,  there  can  be 
no  anguish  of  conscience,  no  fear,  no  heaviness.    But  if  there  be  any  fear  or  grief 
of  conscience,  it  is  a  token  that  this  righteousness  is  withdrawn,  that  grace  is 
hidden,  and  that  Christ  is  darkened  and  out  of  sight.    But  where  Christ  is  truly 
seen  indeed,  there  must  needs  be  full  and  perfect  joy  in  the  Lord,  with  peace  of 
conscience,  which  most  certainly  thus  thinketh:  "Although  I  am  a  sinner  by  the 
law,  and  under  condemnation  of  the  law,  yet  I  despair  not,  yet  I  die  not,  because 
Christ  liveth,  who  is  both  my  righteousness  and  my  everlasting  life.    In  that 
righteousness  and  life  I  have  no  sin,  no  fear,  no  sting  of  conscience,  no  care  of 
death.    I  am  indeed  a  sinner,  as  touching  this  present  life  and  the  righteousness 
thereof,  as  the  child  of  Adam ;  where  the  law  aoouseth  me,  death  reigneth  over  ma, 
and  at  length  would  devour  me.    But  I  have  another  righteousness  and  life  above 
this  life,  which  is  Christ  the  son  of  God,  who  knoweth  no  sin  nor  death,  but  is 
righteousness  and  life  eternal :  by  whom  this  my  body,  being  dead  and  brought 
into  dust,  shall  be  raised  up  again,  and  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  the  law  and 
sin,  and  shall  be  sanctified  together  with  the  spirit."  .  .  .  Let  us  then  diligently 
learn  to  judge  between  these  two  kinds  of  righteousness,  that  we  may  know  how  far 
we  ought  to  obey  the  law.    The  law  in  a  Christian  ought  to  have  dominion  only 
over  the  flesh.    If  it  shall  presume  to  oreep  into  thy  conscience,  and  there  seek  to 
reign,  see  thou  play  the  cunning  logician,  and  make  the  tree  division.     (Martin 
Luther.) 

Genuineness  or  thb  Eustlx. — No  one  has  doubted  the  genuineness  of  this 
Epistle.  The  evidence  in  its  favour  is— 1.  External.  This,  though  not  very 
extensive,  is  perhaps  as  great  as  in  the  circumstances  we  could  expeot  it  to  be. 
(a)  Allusions  and  indireot  citation s  are  found  in  the  writings  of  the  Apostolio  Fathers, 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  QALATIANS.        xrB 

Clement,  Ignatius,  and  Polycarp.  (b)  It  is  included  in  all  the  known  canons  of 
Scripture  proceeding  from  the  Catholic  Church  in  the  second  century,  and  is  con- 
tained in  the  Syriao  and  old  Latin  versions  completed,  apparently,  early  in  that 
century,  (c)  Its  influence  can  be  detected  in  the  writings  of  various  second  century 
Apologists,  Heretical  writers,  and  Adversaries,  (d)  Owing  to  the  nature  of  the 
earliest  Christian  writings,  the  above  testimony  has  been  for  the  most  part  indirect. 
As  soon  as  a  strictly  theological  literature  sprang  up  in  the  Churoh — i.e.,  towards 
the  close  of  the  second  century — we  find  the  Epistle  at  once  quoted  distinctly  and 
by  name.  2.  Internal,  (a)  The  allusions  to  the  history.  No  forger,  either  with  or 
without  the  Act3  before  him,  would  have  given  such  an  account  of  the  relation  of 
St.  Paul  to  the  other  apostles  as  we  here  find.  There  was  no  period  in  the  later 
history  of  the  Church  in  which  such  a  state  of  things  could  naturally  have  been 
conceived.  Least  of  all  could  the  dispute  at  Antioch,  so  agreeable  to  the  character 
of  the  two  apostles,  yet  so  unlike  the  first  thoughts  of  a  later  age  respecting  the 
earliest  Christian  Church,  have  been  the  invention  of  the  second  century.  It  is  a 
real  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Epistle,  that  Origen  as  well  as  Jerome  and 
Chrysostom,  can  only  account  for  so  remarkable  a  passage  of  history,  by  resolving  it 
into  a  collusion  between  the  apostles,  (b)  The  character  of  St.  Paul.  No  forger 
ever  made  an  imitation  in  which  were  so  many  secret  threads  of  similarity,  which 
bore  such  a  stamp  of  originality,  or  in  which  the  character,  the  passion,  the  mode 
of  thought  and  reasoning,  were  so  naturally  represented.  The  apostle's  mental 
characteristics  are  indelibly  impressed  on  the  letter.  In  a  doctrinal  discussion  or  a 
practical  dissertation,  in  a  familiar  correspondence  on  common  things,  or  in  any 
composition  which  does  not  stir  up  feeling  or  invoke  personal  vindication,  one  may 
write  without  betraying  much  individualism ;  but  when  the  soul  is  perturbed,  and 
emotions  of  surprise,  anger,  and  sorrow  are  felt  singly  or  in  complex  unity,  the 
writer  portrays  himself  in  his  letter,  for  he  writes  as  for  the  moment  he  feels,  what 
comes  into  his  mind  is  committed  to  paper  freshly  and  at  once,  without  being  toned 
down  or  weakened  by  his  hovering  over  a  choice  of  words.  The  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  is  of  this  nature.  It  is  the  apostle  self-portrayed ;  and  who  can  mistake 
the  resemblance  ?  The  workings  of  his  soul  are  quite  visible  in  their  strength  and 
succession ;  each  idea  is  seen  as  it  is  originated  by  what  goes  before  it,  and  as  it 
suggests  what  comes  after  it  in  the  throbbings  of  his  wounded  soul ;  the  argument 
and  the  expostulation  are  linked  together  in  abrupt  rapidity,  anger  is  tempered  by 
love,  and  sorrow  by  hope ;  and  the  whole  is  lighted  up  by  an  earnestness  which  the 
crisis  had  deepened  into  a  holy  jealousy,  and  the  interests  at  stake  had  intensified 
into  the  agony  ef  a  second  spiritual  birth.  The  error  which  involved  such  peril, 
and  carried  with  it  such  fascination,  was  one  natural  in  the  circumstances ;  and 
glimpses  of  its  origin,  spread,  and  power  are  given  ns  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
Who  that  knows  how  Paul,  with  his  profound  convictions,  must  have  stood  toward 
such  false  doctrine,  will  for  a  moment  hesitate  to  recognize  him  as  he  writes  in 
alarmed  sympathy  to  his  Galatian  converts,  who  had  for  a  season  promised  bo  well, 
but  had  been  seduced  by  plausible  reactionists — the  enemies  of  his  apostolie 
prerogative,  and  the  snbverters  of  that  free  and  fall  gospel,  in  proclaiming  and  de- 
fending which  ke  spent  his  life  f    (Various.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR. 

GALATIANS. 

CHAPTER  L 

Veu.  1,  Paul,  an  apostle,  not  of  men. — The  inscription: — According  to  the  custom 
of  the  age,  the  apostle  begins  with  a  short  description  of  himself  and  his  correa- 
pondents,  connected  with  a  wish  for  their  happiness.  Paul  was  above  the  affecta- 
tion of  singularity.  In  the  form  of  his  Epistles,  he  follows  the  ordinary  custom  of 
his  country  and  age  ;  and  he  thus  teaches  us  that  a  Christian  ought  not  to  be 
unnecessarily  singular.  By  readily  complying  with  innocent  customs,  we  are  the 
more  likely,  when  we  conscientiously  abstain  from  what  we  account  sinful  customs* 
to  impress  the  minds  of  those  around  us  that  we  have  some  other  and  better  reason 
for  our  conduct  than  whim  or  humour.  Tet  the  apostle  contrives  to  give,  even  to 
the  inscription  of  his  letter,  a  decidedly  Christian  character ;  and  shows  ns  that, 
though  we  should  not  make  an  ostentations  display  of  our  Christianity,  yet,  if  we 
are  truly  religious,  our  religion  will  give  a  colour  to  the  whole  of  our  conduct :  even 
what  may  seem  most  remote  from  direct  religious  employment  will  be  tinged  by  it* 
The  manner  in  which  the  apostle  manages  the  inscription  of  this  and  his  other 
letters,  is  a  fine  illustration  of  his  own  injunction,  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  in  word  or 
deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father 
by  Him  "  (Col.  iii.  17).  He  shows  his  Christianity  even  in  the  mode  of  addressing 
his  letters.  (John  Brown,  D.D.)  The  opening  salutation: — The  two  threads 
which  run  through  this  Epistle — the  defence  of  the  apostle's  own  authority,  and  the 
maintenance  of  the  doctrine  of  grace — are  knotted  together  in  the  opening  saluta- 
tion. By  expanding  his  official  title  into  statement  of  his  direct  commission  from 
God  (verse  1),  St.  Paul  meets  the  personal  attack  of  his  opponents ;  by  dwelling  on 
the  work  of  redemption  in  connection  with  the  name  of  Christ  (verse  4),  he  protests 
against  their  doctrinal  errors.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  high  significance  of  ths 
apostolate: — 1.  For  the  founding  ;  2.  For  the  continuance  of  the  Christian  Church, 
which  must  perpetually  rest  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostolic  doctrine.  (J.  P. 
Lange,  D.D.)  Divine  vocation: — 1.  To  have  the  Divine  vocation  is  in  all 
circumstances  necessary.  2.  To  be  certain  of  its  possession  is  often  important* 
8.  To  appeal  to  it  may  often  be  right  and  proper.  How  independent  of  men,  and 
at  the  same  time  how  dependent  on  God,  the  minister  of  the  gospel  is,  and  knows 
himself  to  be  I  Even  so  the  Christian  generally  is  what  he  is,  not  from  men, 
although  through  men,  for  neither  natural  descent  nor  outward  fellowship  makes 
him  such — but  through  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Father.  (Ibid.)  Christian  sense 
of  personal  worth : — 1.  Its  justification.  2.  Its  limits.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  Christ 
supreme: — All  through  Jesus  Christ!  1.  Humbling  truth;  for  then  nothing  is 
through  us.  2.  Exalting  truth ;  all  is  through  no  less  an  one  than  Christ,  and 
thereby  through  the  highest  of  all,  viz.,  God.  (Ibid.)  God  the  Instructor  of  the 
Church : — In  the  church  we  ought  to  listen  to  God  alone,  and  to  Jesus  Christ  whom 
He  has  appointed  to  be  our  teacher.  Whoever  assumes  a  right  to  instruct  us,  must 
speak  in  the  name  of  God  or  of  Christ.  (Calvin.)  Extraordinary  gifts  associated 
with  extraordinary  vocation : — Behold  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  St.  Paul  above 
the  rest  of  the  apostles.  They  were  called  by  Christ  in  the  day  of  His  humiliation, 
but  he  was  called  by  Christ  when  sitting  at  His  Father's  right  hand  in  heaven.  As 
his  call  was  thus  very  extraordinary,  so  his  gifts  were  answerable  to  his  call.     (Wc 

1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

Burkitt.)  The  apostle's  attitude  : — The  appearance  of  the  apostle  against  the 
Galatians.  1.  In  the  full  dignity  of  his  office ;  at  the  same  time,  however,  asso- 
ciating the  brethren  •with  himself.  2.  With  the  full  love  of  his  heart,  at  the 
same  time  conceding  nothing  of  the  truth.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Certainty 
of  Divine  calling  : — What  means  Paul  by  this  boasting  ?  I  answer  :  This 
commonplace  serves  to  this  end,  that  every  minister  of  God's  Word  should  be 
sure  of  his  calling,  that  before  God  and  man  he  may  with  a  bold  conscience  glory 
therein,  that  he  preaches  the  gospel  as  one  that  is  called  and  sent :  even  as  the 
ambassador  of  a  king  glories  and  vaunts  in  this,  that  he  comes  not  as  a  private 
person,  but  as  the  king's  ambassador ;  and  because  of  this  dignity — that  he  is  the 
king's  ambassador — he  is  honoured  and  set  in  the  highest  place ;  which  honour 
should  not  be  given  him  if  he  came  as  a  private  person.  Wherefore,  let  the 
preacher  of  the  gospel  be  certain  that  his  calling  is  from  God.  (Luther.)  The 
name  and  office  of  an  apostle : — The  word  dnoaroXog  in  the  first  instance  is  an 
adjective  signifying  "  despatched  "  or  "  sent  forth."  Applied  to  a  person,  it  denotes 
more  than  oyytXoc.  The  "  apostle  "  is  not  only  the  messenger,  but  the  delegate  of 
the  person  who  sends  him.  He  is  entrusted  with  a  mission,  has  powers  conferred 
upon  him.  .  .  .  With  the  later  Jews,  the  word  was  in  common  use.  It  was  the 
title  borne  by  those  who  were  despatched  from  the  mother  city  by  the  rulers  of  the 
race  on  any  foreign  mission,  especially  such  as  were  charged  with  collecting  the 
tribute  paid  to  the  temple  service.  After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the 
"  apostles  "  formed  a  sort  of  council  about  the  Jewish  patriarch,  assisting  him  in 
his  deliberations  at  home,  and  executing  his  orders  abroad.  Thus  in  designating 
His  immediate  and  most  favoured  disciples  "  apostles,"  our  Lord  was  not  intro- 
ducing a  new  term,  but  adopting  one,  which  from  its  current  usage  would  suggest 
to  His  hearers  the  idea  of  a  highly  responsible  mission.  At  the  first  institution  of 
the  office,  the  apostles  were  twelve  in  number,  but  in  the  New  Testament  there  is 
no  hint  that  the  number  was  intended  to  be  limited  to  twelve — any  more  than  there 
is  that  the  number  of  deacons  was  intended  to  remain  seven.  The  Twelve  were 
primarily  the  Apostles  of  the  Circumcision,  the  representatives  of  the  twelve  tribes. 
The  extension  of  the  Church  to  the  Gentiles  might  be  accompanied  by  an  extension 
of  the  apostolate.  ...  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not  find  the  term  apostle 
restricted  to  the  Twelve  with  only  the  exception  of  St.  Paul.  St.  Paul  himself 
seems  in  one  passage  to  distinguish  between  "  the  Twelve  "  and  "  all  the  apostles," 
as  if  the  latter  were  the  more  comprehensive  term  (1  Cor.  xv.  5,  7).  It  appears 
both  there  and  in  other  places  (Gal.  i.  19 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  5)  that  James  the  Lord's  brother 
is  styled  an  apostle.  On  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  another  passage  (Bom. 
xvi.  7),  Andronious  and  Junias,  two  Christians  otherwise  unknown  to  us,  are  called 
distinguished  members  of  the  apostolate,  language  which  indirectly  implies  a  very 
considerable  extension  of  the  term.  In  1  Thess.  ii.  6,  again,  where  in  reference  to 
his  visit  to  Thessalonioa,  he  speaks  of  the  disinterested  labours  of  himself  and  his 
colleagues,  adding,  "  though  we  might  have  been  burdensome  to  you,  being  apostles 
of  Christ,"  it  is  probable  that  under  this  term  he  includes  Sylvanus,  who  had 
laboured  with  him  in  Thessalonica,  and  whose  name  appears  in  the  superscrip- 
tion of  the  letter.  The  apostleship  of  Barnabas,  at  any  rate,  is  beyond  question. 
St.  Luke  records  his  consecration  to  the  office  as  taking  place  at  the  same  time 
with,  and  in  the  same  manner  as,  St.  Paul's  (Acts  xiii.  2, 3).  In  his  account  of  their 
missionary  labours  again,  he  names  them  together  as  "  apostles,"  even  mentioning 
Barnabas  first  (Acts  xiv.  4,  14).  St.  Paul  himself  also  in  two  different  Epistles 
holds  similar  language  (Gal.  ii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  5).  If,  therefore,  St.  Paul  has  held  a 
larger  place  than  Barnabas,  in  the  gratitude  and  veneration  of  the  Church  of  all  ages, 
this  is  due  not  to  any  superiority  of  rank  or  office,  but  to  the  ascendency  of  his  per- 
sonal gifts,  a  more  intense  energy  and  self-devotion,  wider  and  deeper  sympathies, 
a  firmer  intellectual  grasp,  a  larger  measure  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  It  may  be 
added  also,  that  only  by  such  an  extension  of  the  office  could  any  footing  be  found  for 
the  pretensions  of  the  false  apostles  (2  Cor.  xi.  13 ;  Bev.  ii.  2).  Had  the  number 
been  definitely  restricted,  the  claims  of  these  interlopers  would  have  been  self-con- 
demned. But  if  the  term  is  so  extended,  can  we  determine  the  limit  to  its 
extension  ?  This  will  depend  on  the  answer  given  to  such  questions  as  these : — 
What  was  the  nature  of  the  call  ?  What  were  the  necessary  qualifications  for  the 
office  ?  What  were  the  duties  attached  to  it  ?  The  facts  gathered  from  the  New 
Testament  are  insufficient  to  supply  a  decisive  answer  to  these  questions ;  but  they 
enable  us  to  draw  roughly  the  line  by  which  the  apostolate  was  bounded.  JL  The 
rank  of  an  apostle.    The  first  order  in  the  Church  (1  Cor.  xii.  28, 29 ;  Eph.  iv.  11). 


OHA».  I.]  GALATIANS. 


3.  Tests  of  apostleship.  (1)  Having  seen  Christ  after  His  resurrection  (Luke  xxiv. 
48 ;  Acts  i.  8,  21,  22).  This  knowledge  was  supplied  to  St.  Paul  miraculously. 
(2)  Possessing  the  powers  of  an  apostle  (1  Cor.  ix.  1,  2 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  1,  2).  These 
"  signs  "  our  modern  conceptions  would  lead  us  to  separate  into  two  classes.  The  one 
of  these  includes  moral  and  spiritual  gifts — patience,  self-denial,  effective  preaching ; 
the  other  comprises  such  powers  as  we  call  supernatural.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.) 
Necessity  of  a  Divine  call: — Wert  thou  wiser  than  Solomon  and  Daniel,  yet  until 
thou  art  called,  flee  the  sacred  ministry,  as  thou  would'st  hell  and  the  devil ;  then 
wilt  thou  not  spill  the  Word  of  God  to  no  purpose.  If  God  needs  thee,  He  will 
know  how  to  call  thee.     (Luther.)  St.   Paul's    call    to    the    apostleship. — 

There  is  something  very  grand  in  the  conversion  of  a  man  who  has  been  so  fierce 
an  enemy  as  St.  Paul  was ;  it  makes  us  feel  that  the  gospel  is  indeed  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation:  for  no  other  power  would  be  equal  to  the  task  of  taming  so 
fierce  a  spirit,  and  yet  of  losing  none  of  its  power,  but  turning  it  to  edification 
instead  of  destruction.  I.  Why  was  St.  Paul  called  to  be  an  apostle?  St. 
Paul  asserts  his  apostleship :  for  the  reason  that  his  call  and  commission  were 
made  after  the  ascension  of  our  Lord,  and  after  the  number  of  the  apostles  would 
appear  to  have  been  completed.  Jadas  proved  unworthy  of  his  sacred  trust.  _  The 
twelve  felt  that  their  body  was  incomplete.  St.  Peter  urged  the  selection  of 
another ;  Matthias  was  chosen.  I  venture  to  say  that  St.  Peter  was  wrong  in  this 
instance.  The  assembled  disciples  had  no  power  to  elect  such  an  apostle ;  and 
Matthias  was  not  in  the  full  sense  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  he  was 
chosen,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet  poured  out ;  the  eleven  were  not  yet  endued 
with  power  from  on  high  for  the  discharge  of  their  sacred  office.  St.  Peter  might 
therefore  be  wrong  in  this  instance,  however  unintentionally  he  might  have  erred. 
It  did  not  belong  to  any  human  assembly  to  choose  those  who  could  only  be  chosen 
by  Christ  Himself.  The  peculiar  characteristic  of  the  apostolate  was  that  each  one 
was  personally  called  by  Christ  Himself ;  this  was  their  authority  and  glory.  The 
body  of  the  disciples  had  not  this  power ;  therefore  Matthias  was  not  duly  called  to 
the  apostleship.  Nothing  is  afterwards  heard  of  him  in  the  sacred  writings.  If  it 
is  objected  that  we  hear  little  of  the  other  apostles  after  this  date,  we  have  at  any 
rate  heard  of  them  before,  and  have  known  that  they  were  called  by  Christ.  Hence 
St.  Paul  was  the  new  twelfth  apostle ;  and  was  not  called  of  men  as  was  Matthias. 
Nobly  has  he  filled  the  trust  betrayed  by  the  Traitor.  The  dignity  and  sanctity  of 
the  pastoral  office :  when  the  Blessed  Trinity  ordain  and  commission  the  minister, 
he  will  go  forth  with  power ;  but  if  only  of  man  little  more  will  be  heard  of  him. 
II.  The  manner  in  which  he  was  called  and  instructed.  Though  the  voice  of 
Jesus  addressed  him,  this  was  not  the  means  used  for  directing  his  soul  to  peace. 
God  sent  a  man  to  instruct  him.  To  us  men  is  committed  the  word  of  grace.  To 
"the  Man  Christ  Jesus"  was  committed  the  glorious  ministry  of  the  gospel.  (A.  J. 
J.  Cacliemaille.)  Apostolic  salutation  and  vindication  of  apostolic  teaching: — L 
This  salutation  embraces  a  vindication  of  apostolio  authority.  The  Church 
sometimes  fails  to  understand  and  estimate  the  honour  which  Christ  bestows  upon 
His  chosen  servants.  II.  This  salutation  embraces  a  defence  of  apostolic  doc- 
trine. "Who  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  this 
present  evil  world,  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Father."  a  1.  Christ's  work 
was  voluntary.  "  He  gave  Himself."  2.  Christ's  work  was  vicarious.  "  He  gave 
Himself  for  our  sins."  S.  Christ's  work  was  redemptive.  "That  He  might  deliver 
us  from  this  present  evil  world."  The  idea  here  expressed  is  that  of  resouing  from 
danger.  4.  Christ's  redemptive  work  is  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  the  Father. 
There  is  no  separation,  much  less  antagonism,  between  the  will  of  the  Father  and 
of  the  Son  in  saving.  6.  Christ's  redemptive  work  secures  the  highest  praise  of 
God.    "  To  Him  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever."    HI.  This  salutation  embraces  a 

PROFOUND   DESIRE   FOB  THE   BESTOWAL  OF  HIGHEST     BLESSINGS.       "Grace   be  to    VOU, 

and  peace  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  greetings 
men  offer  each  other  are  determined  by  the  views  they  entertain  of  life.  They  wish 
each  other  health,  long  life,  success,  enjoyment.  But  Christians  acknowledge 
another  and  a  higher  life.  "  These  two  words  comprehend  whatever  belongs  to 
Christianity.  Grace  releaseth  sin,  and  peace  makes  the  conscience  quiet." — Lutlier. 
This  desire  for  the  highest  welfare  of  the  Galatians  was  the  harmonious  out-flow 
of  the  unselfish  love  of  Paul  and  his  fellow-labourers.  "  And  all  the  brethren 
which  are,"  Ac.  Lessons :  1.  It  is  sometimes  necessary  for  God's  servants  to 
defend  their  office  and  teaching.  2.  We  leam  the  Spirit  we  should  cherish  toward 
men.     We  can  desire  for  others  no  greater   blessings  than  grace  and  peace. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  fc 


(Richard  Nicholls.)  The  divinity  of  the  gospel : — 1.  Its  ministers  are  divinely 
commissioned.  2.  Its  blessings  are  divinely  secured.  3.  Its  end  ia  the  Divine 
glory.  (J.  Lyth.)  Paul  an  apostle : — Observe — I.  That  as  Paul  puts  his  call  to 
the  apostleship  in  the  forefront  of  the  Epistle,  so  evebt  minister  must  have  a  oood 
and  lawful  call.  II.  That  as  Paul  says,  "  Not  of  man,"  &c,  so  eveby 
lawful  call  is  fbom  God.  1.  God  only  can  call.  2.  The  Church  can  only  con- 
cent and  approve.    III.  That  as  Paul  proclaims  his  call,  so  the  call  of  eveby 

MINISTER  MUST  BE   MANIFEST  TO   HIS  CONSCIENCE  AND    HIS    HEABER8.       Ministers — 1. 

Are  God's  ambassadors.  2.  Need  divine  help.  3.  Require  human  obedience.  IT. 
That  Paul  indicates  three  kinds  of  call.  1.  Human  and  not  Divine — false 
teachers.  2.  Divine  though  human — ordinary  ministers.  3.  Wholly  Divine — apostles. 
V.  That  as  the  property  of  an  apostle  is  to  be  called  immediately  by  Christ,  it  follows 
that  the  apostolic  office  ceased  with  those  who  filled  it.  (W.  Perkins.) 
Paul's  insistance  on  his  apostleship : — Who  was  Paul  ?  Had  he  sat  at  the  feet  of  the 
Master?  Had  he  even  seen  Christ,  or  received  his  commission  direot  from  Him  ? 
These  questions  were  asked  often  and  openly,  as  we  gather  from  Paul's  eager- 
ness in  all  his  Epistles  to  reply  to  them.  More  than  once  he  goes  thoroughly  into 
the  matter  (1  Cor.  ix.;  2  Cor.  xi.;  Eph.  iii.  7;  1  Thess.  ii.  4;  1  Tim.  i;  Titus  i. 
38),  and  the  superscriptions  and  subscription  of  his  letters  show  how  he  felt  the 
need  of  thus  vindicating  himself  from  false  imputations.  (E.  _  Rettss,  BJL.) 
Genuine  and  spurious  apostles : — The  true  apostle  is  like  the  tree  which  grows^  out 
of  the  soil  and  brings  forth  out  of  its  own  inherent  vitality  living  fruit  and  foliage. 
The  false  apostle  resembles  the  artificial  tree  which  is  stuck  in  the  soil,  and  can 
only  bear  such  painted  leaves  and  fruit  as  are  affixed  by  the  hand  of  man.  Hence 
the  anxiety  of  Paul  to  show  that  man  had  nothing  to  do  with  making  him  an 
apostle.  Tlie  true  apostolical  succession : — Though  you  have  a  straight  line  of 
apostolical  ancestors,  if  your  work  is  poor,  you  are  not  in  the  line  of  the  succession ; 
and  if  your  Church  does  not  make  full-grown  men,  it  is  not.  I  do  not  oare  about 
the  pedigree  of  my  grapes  if  my  vineyard  bears  better  fruit  than  yours.  You  may 
say  that  yours  came  from  those  which  Noah  planted — but  "  by  their  fruits  shall  ye 
know  them."  And  the  tests  of  all  churches,  doctrines,  usages,  governments,  is 
this  :  What  are  their  effects  on  the  generations  of  men.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
apostles  defined : — It  was  essential  to  their  office  that — 1.  They  should  have  leen 
the  Lord,  and  been  ear  and  eye-witnesses  of  what  they  testified  to  the  world.  ^  S. 
They  must  have  been  immediately  called  and  chosen  to  that  office  by  Christ  Him- 
self. 3.  Infallible  inspiration  was  also  essentially  necessary  to  that  office.  4. 
Another  qualification  was  the  power  of  working  miracles.  5.  To  these  qualifica- 
tions may  be  added  the  universality  of  their  commission.  (J.  McLean.)  Christ 
the  fountain  of  gospel  teaching  : — See  what  a  plenty  of  wisdom  is  in  Christ,  who  is 
the  great  doctor  of  His  Church,  and  gives  saving  knowledge  to  all  His  people.  The 
body  of  the  sun  must  be  needs  full  of  brightness  that  enlightens  the  whole  world. 
Christ  is  the  great  luminary ;  in  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  knowledge.  We 
are  apt  to  admire  the  learning  of  Aristotle  and  Plato.  Alas  1  what  is  this  poor 
spark  of  light  to  that  which  is  in  Christ  from  whose  infinite  wisdom  both  men 
and  angels  light  their  lamp.    (T.  Watson.) 

Ver.  2.  And  all  the  brethren  which  are  with  me,  unto  the  churches  of  Galatla. 

Church  unity : — Our  religion  is  not  designed  to  terminate  upon  ourselves,  but  to 

benefit  those  with  whom  we  associate.  As  the  touched  needle  has  the  power  to 
impart  something  of  its  own  magnetic  virtue  to  kindred  substances  brought  into 
contact  with  it,  so  true  grace  is  always  communicative,  and  delights  to  diffuse  the 
moral  impressions  which  it  has  received.  The  early  Churches  set  a  noble  pattern, 
in  this  respect,  to  the  men  of  succeeding  times.  I.  Their  unity  of  sentiment  in 
the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christian  faith.  Paul  blends  the  testimony  of  his 
brethren  in  the  ministry  with  his  own  ("  all  the  brethren  ")  to  show  that  he  stood 
not  alone  in  his  views  of  Christian  doctrine ;  and  they  delight  to  bear  their  con- 
current attestation  in  favour  of  the  truths  he  proclaimed,  and  against  the  errors  he 
condemned.  II.  Theib  unity  of  affection.  "  All  the  brethren  that  are  with  me, 
to  the  Churches  of  Galatia."  Amidst  some  discrepancy  of  opinion,  there  was  much 
love  at  heart,  which  yet  did  not  prevent  their  bearing  a  faithful  and  energetic  pro- 
test  against  the  dangeious  views  newly  entertained  by  their  Galatian  friends,  upon 
the  subject  of  the  incorporation  of  the  Jewish  rites  with  the  Christian  faith.  The 
truth  of  grace  in  others  should  be  the  most  powerful  loadstone  to  attract  oat 
regards  towards  them.    For  one  man  to  love  another,  chiefly  because  he  is  of  hia 


our.  I. J  GALATIANS. 


own  opinion  and  party,  is  little  better  than  a  refined  species  of  selfishness,  as  ha 
does  but  embrace  his  own  shadow  which  he  sees  falling  npon  his  brother's 
breast.  III.  Mark  also  their  unity  in  prayer,  for  spiritual  blessings  to  descend 
npon  those  to  whom  they  wrote  — "  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace,  from  God 
the  Father  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (The  Evangelist.)  A  word  to  pastors 
and  people : — I.  To  pastobs.  1.  Don't  lord  it  over  your  people  :  they  are 
"brethren."  2.  Take  them  into  your  confidence:  not  to  confirm  your  authority, 
but  because  they  have  an  interest  in  your  work.  3.  Secure  their  sympathy :  it 
will  be  your  solace  when  you  are  dealing  with  crafty  Judaizers.  4.  Carry  them 
with  you.  You  will  need  them  (1)  in  bodily  affliction ;  (2)  in  exceptional  difficulties. 
II.  To  people.  1.  Your  pastor  is  not  your  slave  but  your  "  brother  "  :  love  and 
esteem  him.  2.  He  is  the  servant  of  Christ  and  the  Church,  and  you  are  his  fellow- 
servants  :  give  him  sympathy  and  co-operafion.  3.  He  is  your  leader :  follow  him ; 
let  him  speak  not  only  in  his  own  name  but  yours,  because  (1)  you  have  common 
interests,  (2)  these  interests  can  only  be  preserved  by  unanimity  (Phil.  i.  27). 
There  is  no  relationship  like  'that  founded  on  the  sanctity  of  religion.  Between 
yon  and  me  that  sanctity  exists.  I  stood  by  your  side  when  you  awoke  in  the 
dark  valley  of  conviction  and  owned  yourselves  lost.  I  led  you  by  the  hand  out  of 
the  darkness.  By  your  side  I  have  prayed,  and  my  tears  have  mingled  with  yours. 
I  have  bathed  you  in  the  crystal  waters  of  a  holy  baptism ;  and  when  you  sang 
the  song  of  the  ransomed  captive  it  filled  my  heart  with  a  joy  as  great  as  your  own. 
Love  beginning  in  such  scenes  and  drawn  from  so  sacred  a  fountain  is  not  commer- 
cial, is  not  fluctuating.  Amid  severe  toils  and  not  a  few  anxieties  it  is  a  crown  of 
rejoicing  to  a  pastor.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Churches  of  Galatia : — I.  Their 
locality.  Probably  the  seats  of  the  most  ancient  bishoprics.  1.  Ancyra,  the 
capital.  2.  Pessinus,  the  great  emporium.  3.  Tavium,  the  junction  of  many 
roads.  4.  Juliopolis,  in '  the  centre  of  the  land.  Note  Paul's  sagacity  in  choosing 
such  serviceable  centres.  II.  Their  members.  1.  The  native  Gaulo-Phrygians — 
an  impulsive,|inquisitive,  imaginative,  and  superstitious  race;  worshippers  of  Cybele, 
whose  cult  involved  wild  ceremonial  and  horrible  mutilations.  2.  Jews  and  pro- 
selytes. 3.  Boman  colonists.  III.  Their  planting.  1.  During  second  missionary 
tour  (Acts  xvi.  6).  2.  Under  afflictive  circumstances  (chap.  iv.  13).  3.  With  warm 
enthusiasm  (chap.  iv.  15).  Rapid  growth,  rapid  decadence.  IV.  Their  character. 
1.  Their  natural  imaginativeness  and  impulsiveness  moulded  by  grace.  2.  Many 
churches,  but  one  Church.  3.  True  churches,  though  in  error.  V.  Their  early 
history.  1.  Confirmed  during  third  missionary  tour  (Acts  xviii.  23).  2.  Corrupted 
by  Judaizers.  3.  Bebuked  and  perhaps  reclaimed  by  Paul  (2  Tim.  iv.  10). 
4.  Strongholds  of  heresy  during  second  and  third  centuries.  5.  Purged  by  the 
Diocletian  persecution.    6.  Triumphant  over  Julian.        Wluit  it  a  church  t 

A  band  of  faithful  men 
Met  for  God's  worship  in  some  humble  room, 
Or  screened  from  foes  by  midnight's  starlit  gloom, 

On  hillside  or  lone  glen 
To  hear  the  counsels  of  God's  Holy  Word 
Pledged  to  each  other  and  their  common  Lord* 

These,  few  as  they  may  be, 
Compose  a  Church,  such  as  in  pristine  ages 
Defied  the  tyrant's  steel,  the  bigot's  rage. 

For,  when  but  two  or  three, 
Whate'er  the  place,  in  faith's  communion  meet, 
There,  with  Christ  present,  is  a  Church  complete. 

Th*  QalaHan  people : — When  the  vast  tide  of  Aryan  migration  began  to  set  to  the 
westward  the  Celtic  family  was  among  the  earliest  to  stream  away.  They  gradually 
occupied  a  great  part  of  the  centre  and  west  of  Europe,  and  their  various  tribes 
were  swept  hither  and  thither  by  various  currents.  One  of  their  Brennuses,  four 
centuries  B.C.,  inflicted  on  Borne  its  deepest  humiliation.  Another,  111  years  later, 
ravaged  Northern  Greece,  and  when  its  hordes  were  driven  back  at  Delphi  they 
found  another  body  under  Leonnorius  and  Lutarius,  and  established  themselves  in 
the  northers  regions  of  Asia  Minor.  But  their  exactions  soon  roused  an  opposi- 
tion which  led  to  their  confinement  to  the  central  region.  Here  we  find  them  in 
three  tribes :  the  Tolistobogii,  with  their  capital  Pessinus ;  the  Tectosages,  with 
their  capital  Anoyra ;  the  Trocmi,  with  their  capital  Tavium.   These  tribes  were,  in 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha?.  t. 

b.o.  65,  united  tinder  Deiotarus,  tetrarch  of  the  Tolistobogii.  The  Romans  had 
conquered  them  in  b.o.  189,  but  had  left  them  nominally  independent;  and  in 
b.o.  36  Mark  Antony  made  Amyntas  king.  On  his  death,  b.o.  25,  Galatia  wae 
joined  to  Lycaonia  and  part  of  Pisidia,  and  made  a  Roman  province.  This  was  itf 
political  condition  when  Paul  entered  Pessinus.  (F.  W.  Farrar.)  Note— I.  The 
brotherhood  of  Christians ;  IL  Their  united  action ;  IIL  Their  interest  in  distant 
churches.     (J.  Lyth.) 

Ver.  3.  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace. — St.  Paul's  salutation : — Here  is  the  saluta- 
tion, wherein  he  wishes  them  God's  gracious  favour  and  goodwill,  whereby  He  it 
well-pleased  with  the  elect,  in  and  for  Christ  (Rom.  iii.  24),  and  peace ;  ».«.— 1. 
Peace  of  conscience,  and  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1).  2.  Peace  with  the  creatures,  as 
with  the  angels  (Col.  i.  20) ;  with  the  godly  (Isa.  xi.  9) ;  with  ourselves,  all  within 
us  being  conformed  to  the  rule  of  the  renewed  mind  (Rom.  viii.  1) ;  and  in  some 
respects  with  our  enemies  (Prov.  xvi.  7) ;  and  with  the  beasts  of  the  field  (Hos.  ii 
18).  3.  Prosperity  and  good  success  (Psa.  cxxii.  7).  All  which  he  seeks  from  God 
the  Father  as  the  fountain  of  grace,  and  from  Jesus  Christ  as  the  conduit  or 
pipe  to  convey  grace  from  the  Father  unto  us  (John  i.  16).  (James  Fergusson.) 
The  manner  of  obtaining  grace  and  peace : — 1.  God's  gracious  favour  and  goodwill 
is  to.be  sought  by  us  in  the  first  place,  whether  for  ourselves  (Psa.  iv.  6)  or  others. 
All  things  are  mercy  to  the  man  who  has  obtained  that  mercy.  2.  Peace  also  is 
to  be  sought — after  grace,  not  before  it.  Peace  without  grace  is  no  peace  (Isa.  lvii. 
21).  3.  Grace  and  peace  are  such  as  we  cannot  acquire  unto  ourselves  by  our  own 
industry  or  pains :  they  come  from  God,  are  to  be  sought  from  Him,  and  His 
blessing  is  more  to  be  depended  upon  for  attaining  of  anything  which  comes  under 
the  compass  of  grace  and  peace,  than  our  own  wisdom,  industry,  or  diligence. 
4.  Whatever  favour  we  seek  from  God,  we  are  to  seek  it  also  from  Jesus  Christ  as 
mediator ;  for  He  has  purchased  it  (Eph.  i.  7).  He  is  appointed  Lord  of  His  own 
purchase,  and  there  is  no  coming  to,  or  meeting  with,  the  Father  but  in  Him  (John 
xiv.  6).  5.  They  to  whom  grace  and  peace  belong,  are  such  as  acknowledge  Jesus 
for  their  Lord  to  command  and  rule  them,  and  do  yield  subjection  to  Him  in  their 
heart  and  life.  (Ibid.)  Grace  and  peace : — Grace  releases  sin,  and  peace  makes 
the  conscience  quiet.  The  two  friends  that  torment  us  are  sin  and  conscience. 
But  Christ  has  vanquished  these  two  monsters,  and  trodden  them  under  foot,  both 
in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come.  This  the  world  does  not  know,  and  there- 
fore it  can  teaoh  no  certainty  of  the  overcoming  of  sin,  conscience,  and  death. 
Only  Christians  have  this  kind  of  doctrine,  and  are  exercised  and  armed  with  it, 
to  get  victory  against  sin,  despair,  and  everlasting  death.  And  it  is  a  kind  of  doc- 
trine, neither  proceeding  of  freewill,  nor  invented  by  the  reason  or  wisdom  of  man, 
but  given  from  above.  Moreover,  these  two  words,  grace  and  peace,  do  contain  in 
them  the  whole  sum  of  Christianity.  Grace  contains  the  remission  of  sins ;  peace, 
a  quiet  and  joyful  conscience.  But  peace  of  conscience  can  never  be  had,  unless 
sin  be  first  forgiven.  But  sin  is  not  forgiven  for  the  fulfilling  of  the  law :  for  no 
man  is  able  to  satisfy  the  law.  But  the  law  rather  shows  sin,  accuses  and  terrifies 
the  conscience,  declares  the  wrath  of  God,  and  drives  to  desperation.  Much  less  is 
sin  taken  away  by  the  works  and  inventions  of  men,  as  wicked  worshippings, 
strange  religions,  vows,  and  pilgrimages.  Finally,  there  is  no  work  that  can  take 
away  sin,  but  sin  is  rather  increased  by  works.  For  the  justiciaries  and  merit- 
mongers,  the  more  they  labour  and  sweat  to  bring  themselves  out  of  sin,  the  deeper 
they  are  plunged  therein.  For  there  is  no  means  to  take  away  sin,  but  grace  alone. 
Therefore  Paul,  in  all  the  greetings  of  his  Epistle,  sets  grace  and  peace  against  sin 
and  an  evil  conscience.  (Luther^  Heavenly  blessings  alone  avail: — The  apostle 
fitly  distinguishes  this  grace  and  peace  from  all  other  kinds  of  grace  and  peace 
whatsoever.  He  wishes  to  the  Galatians  grace  and  peace,  not  from  the  emperor  or 
kings  and  princes,  for  those  do  commonly  persecute  the  godly,  and  rise  up  against 
the  Lord  and  Christ ;  but  from  God  our  Father :  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  he 
wished  them  a  heavenly  peace.  The  peace  of  the  world  grants  nothing  but  the 
peace  of  our  goods  and  bodies.  So  the  grace  or  favour  of  the  world  gives  ps  leave 
to  enjoy  our  goods,  and  casts  us  not  out  of  our  possessions.  But  in  affliction,  and 
in  the  hour  of  death,  the  grace  and  favour  of  the  world  cannot  help  us ;  they  can 
not  deliver  us  from  affliction,  despair,  and  death.  But  when  the  grace  and  peaee 
of  God  are  in  the  heart,  then  is  man  strong,  so  that  he  can  neither  be  cast  down 
with  adversity,  nor  puffed  up  with  prosperity,  but  walketh  on  plainly,  and  keepetb 
the  highway.    For  he  taketh  heart  and  courage  in  the  victory  of  Christ's  death ; 


.  i.]  GALATIANS. 


and  the  confidence  thereof  beginneth  to  reign  in  his  conscience  over  sin  and  death ; 
because,  through  Him,  he  hath  assured  forgiveness  of  his  sins :  which,  after  he  has 
once  obtained,  his  conscience  is  at  rest,  and  by  the  word  of  grace  is  comforted. 
(Ibid.)  Paul's  customary  greeting: — A  Greek  and  Hebrew  salutation,  expressing 
the  apostle's  best  wish.  I.  Grace.  A  Greek  thought  Christianized.  Takes  the 
conception  of  beauty  of  form,  gesture,  tone,  into  the  spiritual  realm.  As  here 
used  —  1.  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  attitude  of  God  in  Christ  towards  men. 
The  Divine  pity,  gentleness,  favour ;  the  bearing  of  a  condescending,  forgiving, 
loving  God.  2.  It  is  to  be  possessed  as  the  spirit  of  a  Christian.  "  Grace  of  life." 
Moral  beauty.  The  indwelling  in  Christian  character  of  all  that  the  Greeks  con- 
ceived in  their  "Three  Graces."  II.  Peace.  May  include  —  1.  Freedom  from 
persecution — a  great  desideratum.  2.  Absence  of  internal  dissention — main  pur- 
pose of  this  letter.  3.  Inward  calm  and  quiet  confidence  in  God — ideal  peace.. 
The  wish  of  Paul  the  gift  of  Jesus.  (U.  R.  Thomas.)  I.  The  eternal  love  of 
God  as  it  sends  the  Eedeemer  for  man's  salvation  is  grace.  H.  The  fruit  of  grace 
flowing  from  God  through  Christ  is  peace.  1.  Sometimes  mercy  is  the  channel 
through  which  grace  becomes  peace  when  the  invocation  is  addressed  to  an 
individual  (1  Tim.  i.  16  cf.  ver.  2).  2.  For  the  Church  it  is  enough  that  grace 
in  heaven  has  peace  as  its  counterpart  on  earth.  It  is  (1)  reconciliation  with 
God  ;  (2)  the  tviuquil  harmony  of  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul ;  (3)  the  fellowship  of 
brotherly  love ;  (4)  victory  in  the  conflict  with  evil ;  (5)  the  earnest  of  everlasting 
rest.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  I.  A  formula.  The  heathen  commenced  their  letters 
with  "  Health  1 "  The  apostle  wished  his  readers  something  higher  than  health 
or  happiness,  so  he  commences  "Grace  and  peace."  II.  A  benediction.  But 
how  in  the  case  of  those  who  rejected  grace,  or,  by  unbelief,  forfeited  peace?  In 
the  same  way  as  the  minister  declares  absolution,  which  is  lost  if  a  man  rejects  it. 
He  has  done  what  he  could  to  show  that  in  Christ  there  is  full  absolution  for  the 
sinner  if  he  will  take  it.  (F.  W.  Robertson).  Peace  from  God  : — The  child 
frightened  in  his  play  runs  to  seek  his  mother.  She  takes  him  upon  her  lap,  and 
presses  his  head  to  her  bosom ;  and,  with  tenderest  words  of  love,  she  looks  down 
upon  him,  and  smoothes  his  hair,  and  kisses  his  cheek,  and  wipes  away  his  tears. 
And  then,  in  a  low  and  gentle  voice,  she  Bings  some  sweet  descant,  some  lullaby  of 
love;  and  the  fear  fades  out  from  his  face,  and  a  smile  of  satisfaction  plays 
over  it,  and  at  length  his  eyes  close,  and  he  sleeps  in  the  deep  depths  and  delights 
of  peace.  God  Almighty  is  the  mother,  and  the  soul  is  the  tired  child;  and 
He  folds  it  in  His  arms  and  dispels  its  fear,  and  lulls  it  to  repose,  saying, 
"Sleep,  my  darling,  sleep  1  It  is  I  who  watch  thee."  "He  giveth  His  beloved 
sleep."  The  mother's  arms  encircle  but  one;  but  God  clasps  every  yearning  soul 
to  His  bosom,  and  gives  to  it  the  peace  which  passe th  understanding,  beyond  the 
reach  of  care  or  storm.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Peace  through  Christ : — The  tree  of 
peace  strikes  its  roots  into  the  crevices  of  the  everlasting  rock.  It  grows  securely 
from  that  rock,  and  casts  out  its  cool  shadow  in  the  sunshine,  and  makes  sweet 
music  in  the  storm ;  and  is  to  the  believer  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  and  fruit 
of  refreshment  in  a  weary  and  parched  land.  (Dr.  Cumming.)  Peace  expe- 
rienced : — I  have  read  that  a  soldier,  dying  in  the  Crimea,  requested  to  have  the 
passage  read  to  him,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  &c.  When  it  was  done,  he  said, 
"  I  have  that  peace.  I  am  going  to  that  Saviour.  God  is  with  me :  I  want  no 
more,"  and  expired.  Tlie  pastor's  prayer :  —  I.  The  blessings  desired — their 
nature — connexion,  grace  may  exist  without  peace,  but  not  peace  without  grace ; 
yet  peace  flows  from  grace.  II.  Their  source — God  the  Father  is  the  fountain  of 
all  grace— Christ  is  the  medium  of  communication.  IH.  Their  supply — free — 
sufficient  for  all — constant — inexhaustible.    (J.  Lyth). 

Ver.  4,  5.  Who  gave  Himself  for  our  sins. — Christ's  giving  Himself  to  death : — 1. 
Its  oocasion :  our  sins.  2.  Its  purpose :  our  deliverance  therefrom.  Or — 1.  The 
strongest  testimony  against  us.  2.  The  mightiest  consolation  for  us.  (J.  P. 
Lange,  D.D.)  The  atonement : — 1.  Its  great  effect :  to  deliver  us  from  this  evil 
world.  2.  Whence  it  has  this  effect:  as  being  a  satisfying  and  bearing,  and 
thereby  a  taking  away  of  the  Divine  wrath.  3.  In  whom  it  is  thus  effectual :  only 
in  those  who  are  His  in  faith.  (Ibid.)  The  appropriation  of  Christ's  merits : — 
1.  Every  one  needs  it  on  account  of  his  sins.  2.  The  sinner  needs  it  precisely  as 
sinner.  (Ibid.)  The  Christian's  surrender : — If  Christ  has  for  our  sakes  given 
His  all,  ah  1  should  not  we  surrender  ourselves,  with  all  that  in  us  is,  to  Him  ? 
Man  1  keep  thyself  from  sin,  on  account  of  which  Christ  hath  endured  so  much, 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

lest  thou  thyself  bring  to  nought  for  Him  this  great  work  foi  which  He  came. 
(Starke.)  The  Christian's  treatment  of  this  world  : — The  character  of  this  world 
is  evil :  1.  Therefore  the  Christian  in  this  world  longs  for  the  world  to  come. 
2.  He  must,  however,  be  delivered  from  this  present  world,  in  order  to  enter  the 
world  to  come.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Redemption  through  Christ  rests  upon  the 
will  of  God : — 1.  This  is  a  rich  consolation  against  all  doubts.  2.  At  the  same 
time  it  conveys  an  earnest  admonition ;  for,  wnoever  lightly  esteems  the  redemp- 
tion accomplished  through  Christ,  eins  thereby  against  the  will  of  God  Himself. 
(Ibid.)  The  power  of  the  Cross  : — Christ  by  His  death  introduced  a  new  power 
into  the  world :  a  power  by  means  of  which  man  is  rescued  from  the  tyranny  of 
sin,  the  captive  is  set  free.  I.  The  redemptive  act  of  Christ.  1.  It  was 
voluntary.  He  "  gave  Himself."  No  opposition  of  will  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  God's  mercy  is  just,  and  His  justice  is  merciful.  2.  It  was  vicarious. 
He  gave  Himself  "  for  our  sins."  His  life  was  sacrificed  in  place  of  ours.  Suffer- 
ing was  endured  by  Him  which  must  otherwise  have  fallen  upon  us.  II.  The 
design  op  Christ  in  thus  giving  Himself  for  our  sins.  To  deliver  us  from  this 
present  evil  world."     To  free  us  from  the  condemnation  and  from  the  power  of  sin. 

I.  The  Cross  of  Christ  declares  to  man  the  will  of  a  righteous  and  loving  Father. 
It  is  at  once  a  witness  to  His  righteousness,  and  a  pledge  of  His  mercy.  2.  The 
Cross  reveals  sin  put  away  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  3.  The  Cross  reveals  to 
man  the  love  of  Christ.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Particular  application  of 
Christ's  merits  : — Mark  diligently  the  word  "  our,"  for  therein  lies  all  the  virtue, 
viz.,  that  all  which  is  said  concerning  us  in  Holy  Scriptures,  in  such  passages  as 
••  for  me,"  "  for  us,"  ■■  for  our  sin,"  and  the  like,  we  should  know  how  to  take  well 
in  mind,  and  apply  particularly  to  ourselves,  and  hold  fast  thereto  by  faith.  (Luther. ) 
Our  Father's  redemptive  purposes : — I.  The  will  op  God  concerning  us.  1.  Dis- 
tinguish between  the  desire  of  a  (1)  king  concerning  his  subjects — to  suppress  their 
rebellion ;  (2)  a  master  concerning  his  servants — to  enforce  their  obedience ;  (3)  a 
father  concerning  his  children — to  win  their  liberty,  rectitude,  and  love.  2.  So  our 
heavenly  Father  desires  to  win  us  from  the  bondage  of  sin  to  Himself.  (1)  He 
only  can  estimate  this  bondage  aright.    (2)  His  purpose  is  to  deliver  as  from  it. 

II.  The  gracious  way  in  which  oub  Father  works  out  His  will.  1.  Jesus  is 
the  liberator.  2.  He  has  gained  the  liberating  power.  3.  He  uses  this  power  in 
His  self-sacrifice.  4.  He  liberates  by  (1)  training  our  trustful  love ;  (2)  gaining 
entrance  into  our  lives.  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  grand  in  Christianity ; — I.  In  its 
history.  The  grand  fact  of  Christianity,  its  corner  stone,  the  key-note  of  all  its 
melodies,  is  "Who  gave  Himself"  (1  Tim.  ii.  6;  Titus  ii.  14;  Gal.  ii.  20).  1. 
The  greatest  gift  of  love.  2.  The  model  gift  of  love.  Self-sacrifice  should  be  (1) 
systematic ;  (2)  spiritual.  II.  In  its  purpose.  "  World,"  not  nature,  but  the  carnal, 
selfish,  and  devilish  alwv.  Christ  came  to  deliver  us  from  sin.  1.  Its  guilt.  2. 
Its  pollution.  3.  Its  dominion.  HI.  In  its  spring.  The  "  will  of  God  " — 1. 
Originated  the  mission  of  Christ.  2.  Met  with  the  hearty  concurrence  of  Christ 
(Heb.  x.  7-9).  IV.  In  its  issue  (ver.  5).  1.  This  doxology  is  usual  after  the 
mention  of  God's  wonderful  love  (Rom.  xi.  6;  Eph.  iii.  21;  1  Tim.  i.  17).  2. 
The  great  end  of  redemption  is  (1)  the  right,  (2)  the  unceasing  worship  of  the 
infinite  Father.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  present  evil  world : — This  is  not  the 
beautiful  universe,  not  humanity  with  its  burden  of  sorrows  and  capacities  for 
greatness ;  but  the  spirit  of  the  age  as  far  as  it  is  a  thing  apart  from  God.  It  is 
not  a  thing  of  yesterday :  it  is  a  tradition  of  many  ages  and  civilizations,  to  which 
each  generation  adds  something  of  force,  refinement,  intellectual  or  social  power, 
and  the  world  is  protean  in  its  capacity  for  taking  new  forms.  Sometimes  it  is 
gross  idol  worship ;  sometimes  military  empire ;  sometimes  a  cynical  school  of 
philosophy ;  sometimes  the  indifference  of  a  blase  society.  The  Church  conquered 
it  in  the  form  of  the  old  pagan  empire ;  but  the  world  had  a  terrible  revenge  when 
it  could  point  to  such  Popes  as  Julius  II.,  Alexander  VI.,  or  Leo  X.,  and  to  such 
courts  as  those  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  Charles  II.  It  had  thrown  itself  at  the 
heart  of  the  Church,  and  now  between  it  and  Christendom  there  is  no  hard  and  fast 
line  of  demarcation.  The  world  is  within  the  sanctuary,  within  the  heart,  as  well 
as  without,  and  sweeps  around  each  soul  like  a  torrent  of  hot  air,  and  makes  itself 
felt  at  every  pore  of  the  moral  system.  It  penetrates  like  a  subtle  atmosphere  in 
Christendom,  while  in  heathendom  it  is  organized  into  various  systems ;  but  it  u  the 
same  thing  at  bottom.  It  is  the  essential  spirit  of  corrupt  human  life,  taking  no 
serious  account  of  God,  either  forgetting  Him  altogether  or  putting  something  in 
His  place,  or  striking  a  balance  between  His  claims  and  those  of  His  antagonists ; 


chap,  i.]  GALATIANS. 


and  thus  it  is  at  enmity  with  God,  and  thus  Christ  came  to  deliver  us  from  it,  and 
thus  the  first  duty  of  His  servants  is  to  free  themselves  from  its  power.  (Canon 
Liddon.)  PauVs  gospel : — A  great  statesman  has  no  policy ;  he  accepts  a  few 
leading  principles,  his  wisdom  being  to  show  how  these  principles  apply  to  the 
various  occasions  of  human  life.  And,  similarly,  the  leading  rules  of  St.  Paul's 
gospel  were  a  few  inductions,  the  application  of  which  is  universal.  These  are  the 
redemption  of  man  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  the  four  facts  of  which  are  of 
enormous  extent  and  are  exhibited  under  a  multitude  of  phases, — redemption,  the 
nature  of  man,  sacrifice,  the  nature  of  Christ.  Can  any  conception  be  more  vast  ? 
Can  any  interest  be  more  absorbing  ?  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Redemption  by  the  life 
of  Christ : — We  are  familiar  with  the  expression  that  Christ  gave  His  life  for  man, 
and  I  would  not  take  away  anything  from  the  meaning  and  magnitude  of  the  act  of 
dying.  But  I  should  be  glad  to  give  more  emphasis  to  the  facts  that  Christ  gave 
His  life  as  much  while  He  was  living  as  when  He  was  dying,  and  that  to  give  life 
may  mean  either  to  use  it  or  lay  it  down.  He  gave  Himself — in  dying  indeed,  but 
also  in  living.  All  His  life  was  a  giving.  Although  comprehensively  viewed  it  was 
a  single  gift,  yet  it  was  also  a  continuous  gift,  developing  in  every  direction,  and 
for  the  redemption  of  lost  souls.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Redemption  by  tlie  substitu- 
tionary death  of  Christ : — In  one  of  the  back  courts  of  Paris  a  fire  broke  out  in  the 
dead  of  night.  The  houses  were  built  so  that  the  higher  stories  overhung  the 
foundation.  A  father,  who  was  sleeping  with  his  children  in  the  top  garret,  was 
suddenly  awakened  by  the  flames  and  smoke.  The  man  sprang  out  of  bed  and 
vaulted  to  the  window  of  the  opposite  house.  Then  placing  his  feet  firmly  against 
the  window  sill,  he  launched  his  body  forward  and  grasped  the  window  of  the  burn- 
ing house,  and  shouting  to  his  eldest  boy  he  said,  "Now,  my  boy,  make  haste; 
crawl  over  my  body."  This  was  done.  The  seoond  and  third  followed.  The  fourth, 
a  little  fellow,  would  only  do  so  after  much  persuasion :  but  as  he  was  passing  on  he 
heard  his  father  say,  "  Quick  I  quick!  quick  1  I  cannot  hold  out  much  longer,"  and 
M  the  voices  of  friends  were  heard  announcing  his  safety,  the  hold  of  the  strong 
man  relaxed,  and  with  a  heavy  crash  fell  a  lifeless  corpse  into  the  court  below. 
So  Jesus  in  His  own  sacred  body  provides  a  bridge  whereby  we  may  cross  the  chasm 
between  us  and  God.  The  way  home  is  through  the  rent  veil,  the  crucified  flesh,  of 
our  Immanuel.  (W.  H.  M.  H.  Ait  ken.)  Love's  delight : — Love  delights  in  the 
contemplation  of  the  glory  of  its  object,  in  the  recollection  of  benefits  enjoyed, 
and  in  every  fit  opportunity  of  renewing  the  mention  of  the  one  beloved  name. 
Oar  Lord  is  here  presented:  I.  As  the  oeeatest  or  all  Benefactors.  Christ 
"  gave."  II.  As  actually  conferring  the  host  precious  and  costly  donation — 
"  He  gave  Himself."  In  creation  Christ  gave  the  creatures  to  man ;  in  redemption 
He  gave  Himself.  HI.  As  contemplating,  in  the  gift,  the  highest  moral  object — 
"  For  our  sins."  IV.  As  securing  the  highest  revenue  of  glory  to  the  Divine 
character  and  administration.  It  was  "  according  to  the  will  of  God,"  the  love  of 
the  Father  being  the  originating  cause  of  salvation :  "  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever," 
— a  devout  ascription  in  which  all  the  redeemed  family,  and  all  assembled  worlds, 
will  unite.  But  these  topics  are  not  more  impressive  in  themselves  than  they  are 
applicable  to  the  scope  and  bearing  of  the  apostle's  argument,  which  was  designed 
to  convict  the  Galatians,  and  especially  the  Hebrew  converts  among  them,  of 
criminal  folly  in  undervaluing  the  truth  and  grace  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  For 
ir  Christ,  whom  they  owned  as  Messiah,  gave  Himself  for  them,  then  were  they 
guilty  of  the  deepest  ingratitude  in  deserting  the  standard  of  such  a  benefactor.  If 
Christ  came  to  rescue  them  from  sin,  and  from  the  rigid  discipline  of  the  legal 
ceremonies,  and  from  the  servitude  of  "  this  present  evil  world,"  then  how  ineffably 
absurd  was  it  to  go  back  again  to  the  hard  bondage  whence  they  had  been 
delivered  !  If  this  new  and  wonderful  economy  had  been  introduced  "  according 
to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Father,"  then  how  inconsistent  and  unfilial  a  line  of 
conduct  must  it  be,  for  adopted  sons  thus  to  oppose  the  Divine  designs.  (The 
Evangelist.)  Who  gave  Himself: — I.  The  gift  conferred — "  He  gave  Himself ." 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Look  at  the  relation  He  sustains  to  God.  Compared 
with  Christ  all  the  angels  are  infinitely  less,  than  to  you  is  the  minutest  mote  that 
floats  in  the  sunbeam.  2.  Though  God  He  is  also  man — "  The  man  Christ  Jesus." 
3.  Although  God,  and  although  man,  remember  He  was  also  incarnate  God!;  God 
and  man  in  one  Person.  4.  While  He  lived  on  earth  He  was  emphatically  the  Holy 
One.  This  was  the  Being  who  gave  Himself.  II.  The  porpose  fob  which  He 
gave  Himself — "  For  our  sins."  This  assertion  throws  light  upon  the  doctrine  ol 
atonement.     That  doctrine  is  based  upon  two  incontrovertable  positions    first,  thai 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  %. 

God  is  a  perfect  Governor;  second,  that  man  is  a  rebel  against  God's  perfect 
government.  How  shall  the  Governor,  without  departing  from  the  inherent 
perfection  of  His  administration  for  good,  admit  the  rebel  man  to  His  favonr? 
Jesus  gave  Himself  to  this  end.  (A.  B.  Jack.)  Jesus  Himself  the  redemptive 
gift : — For  three  and  thirty  years  He  bore  the  penalty  of  6in,  an  endurance  which 
was  consummated  when  He  suffered  for  us  on  Calvary.  And  if  you  say  His 
sufferings  were  temporary,  and  ours  should  have  been  eternal,  I  pray  you  to 
remember  that  His  Godhead — and  there  is  the  power  of  His  divinity,  without 
which  I  believe  no  atonement  could  be  made — that  His  Godhead  gave  these  services 
and  sufferings  a  value  in  the  eye  of  justice  far  greater  than  all  the  services  and  all 
the  sufferings  of  all  God's  creatures.  And  it  is  easy  to  understand  this.  Just  as 
the  death  of  the  Prince  Eoyal  of  England,  the  heir  apparent  to  the  British  throne, 
the  oldest  son  of  Victoria,  would  mce  honour  the  law  of  England,  were  he  to  die 
to-morrow  on  the  scaffold,  than  the  deaths  of  all  the  felons  imprisoned  in  her 
jails — and  you  can  fancy  such  a  thing ;  it  needs  fancy,  for  it  was  never  shown  on 
earth,  the  court  and  the  country  mourning,  the  palace  plunged  in  grief,  every 
cottage  pale  with  astonishment,  the  news  of  it  travelling  on  the  wings  of  lightning 
from  city  to  city,  and  travelling  on  the  wings  of  the  wind  across  the  wave,  a  mighty 
multitude  assembled,  women  weeping,  and  men's  hearts  beating,  every  eye  in  that 
sea  of  heads  suffused  with  tears,  while  he  who  was  born  for  a  palace,  born  for  a 
throne,  steps  forth  from  the  prison  to  the  gallows,  to  die  in  the  room  of  the  guilty 
— I  say,  brethren,  just  as  the  death  of  that  Prince  would  more  honour  the  law  of 
England  than  the  death  of  ten  hundred  victims  drawn  from  the  lowest  and  vilest 
haunts  of  society,  so  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  hath  honoured  the  law  of  God,  and 
now  in  virtue  of  what  Christ  did,  and  in  virtue  of  what  Christ  suffered,  God  stands 
forth  by  the  cross,  not  only  just,  but  the  justifier  of  every  one  who  belie veth  in 
Jesus.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  giving  Himself  for  our  sins : — A  friend  of  mine  who,  in  the 
days  of  slavery,  was  accustomed  to  visit  an  old  coloured  man  in  his  cabin,  to  read 
the  Bible  to  him,  and  to  converse  with  him  about  good  things,  mentioned  a  little 
circumstance  to  me,  which  can  best  be  told  in  his  own  words.  "Upon  such 
occasions,  I  would  sometimes  request  him  to  say  what  part  of  the  Bible  I  should 
read ;  but  this  he  would  never  willingly  do.  *  Any  part,  master,  for  it's  all  good.' 
His  reason  for  this  unwillingness  he  never  gave.  I  divined,  however,  that  he 
thought  it  irreverent  to  give  a  preference  to  any  portion  of  the  message,  the  whole 
of  which  was  from  God  Himself.  After  coaxing  him  in  vain,  I  would  say,  *  Well, 
if  you  can't  tell  me  what  you  would  like  to  hear,  I  may  as  well  go  back  to  the 
house.'  Then  would  come  the  ready  answer,  and  unvarying :  •  If  it  pleases  yon,  sir, 
I'd  rather  hear  about  the  Bufferings  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.'  From 
the  moment  the  reading  began,  his  whole  being  and  consciousness  seemed  to  be 
absorbed  by  it ;  and  though  no  articulate  word  escaped  him,  the  groans  and  sighs 
that  accompanied  the  reading  throughout,  giving  emphasis  and  expression  to  the 
words  as  they  fell  from  my  lips,  bespoke  unutterable  fellowship  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus.  Never  before  had  I  begun  to  enter  into  the  unfathomable  depths  of  that 
amazing  tragedy  as  I  then  did.  Never  before  or  since  have  I  heard  anything  from 
the  pulpit  that  approached  this  in  force  and  clearness  of  exposition.  Such  was 
the  effect  upon  each  of  us  that  I  was  compelled  to  pause  at  intervals  to  recover  a 
sufficient  degree  of  oomposure  to  admit  of  my  proceeding.  There  was  preaching 
indeed ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  was  the  Preacher ;  preaching  to  my  dear  old 
friend  through  me,  and  to  me  through  him,  and  to  both  of  us  through  the  written 
Word."  (J.  H.  Norton.)  Deliverance  through  sacrifice : — On  the  10th  of  June, 
1770,  the  town  of  Port-au-Prince,  in  Hayti,  was  utterly  overthrown  by  a  dreadful 
earthquake.  From  one  of  the  fallen  houses  the  inmates  had  fled,  except  a  negro 
woman,  the  nurse  of  her  master's  infant  child.  She  would  not  desert  her  charge, 
though  the  walls  were  even  then  giving  way.  Bushing  to  its  bed-side,  she  stretched 
forth  her  arms  to  enfold  it.  The  building  rocked  to  its  foundation ;  the  roof  fell  in. 
Did  it  crush  the  hapless  pair  T  The  heavy  fragments  fell  indeed  upon  the  woman 
but  the  infant  escaped  unharmed :  for  its  noble  protectress  extended  her  bended 
form  across  the  body,  and,  at  the  sacrifice  of  her  own  life,  preserved  her  charge 
from  destruction.  Christ  gave  Himself  up  for  us  : — When  the  Birkenhead, 
with  five  hundred  soldiers  on  board,  was  sinking,  the  soldiers  were  drawn  up 
in  their  ranks  on  the  deck  of  the  ship  while  the  women  and  children  were  quietly 
put  into  one  of  the  boats.  Every  one  of  them  did  as  he  was  directed,  and  there 
was  not  a  murmur  or  a  cry  among  them  till  the  vessel  made  her  final  plunge. 
Even  to,  silently  and  uncomplainingly,  did  Christ  "  give  Himself  up  "  (Rev.  Yer. j 


chap.  I.]  GALATIANS-  11 

for  oar  salvation.  (R.  Brewin.)  What  shall  we  do  then  for  Christ : — Did  Simon 
start  from  his  couch,  deeming  it  beneath  his  Master's  dignity  to  stoop  to  a  menial 
office,  and  wash  his  servant's  feet  ?  And  can  we  contemplate  the  Son  of  God,  not 
stooping  to  wash  us  with  water,  but  dying  to  wash  us  with  His  own  precious  blood, 
without  these  wordB  bursting  from  our  lips,  "  Lord,  what  is  man  that  Thou  art 
mindful  of  him  f  "  Nay  rather,  should  not,  and  shall  not  this  be  our  language, 
That  Thon  hast  done  for  me,  what  shall  I  do  for  Thee?  What?  but  fondly 
embrace  Thee  with  all  my  affections,  love  Thee  with  all  my  heart,  serve  Thee  with 
all  my  powers,  and,  denying  myself,  but  never  Thee,  say,  "  What  shall  I  render  to 
the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits  ?  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  pay  my  vows  to 
the  Lord,  now  in  the  presence  of  all  His  people."  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Here  is — I.  A 
great  fact.  II.  A  glorious  purpose.  III.  An  adequate  power.  IV.  A  grand  con- 
summation. (J.Lyth.)  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is: — I.  Voluntary.  II.  Vicarious. 
III.  Worthy.  IV.  Divinely  appointed.  V.  Efficient.  (Ibid.)  An  evil  world : — 
I.  The  principal  fact  of  the  gospel  is,  that  Jesus  Christ  "  gave  Himself  for  our 
sins."  1.  "For  our  sins  " — there  was  the  occasion  for  this  act.  Did  you  ever  re- 
flect, my  brethren,  on  the  peculiar  nature  of  this  property,  which  is  here  said  to 
belong  to  us — "  our  sins  "  ?  They  are  the  only  thing  which  we  can  truly  call  our 
own.  Everything  else  that  we  possess,  is  given — nay,  it  is  but  lent  to  us ;  it  came, 
in  many  instances,  without  our  seeking,  and  we  must  quickly  part  with  it  again. 
But  "  our  sins  "  are  our  own.  The  possession  of  them  is  of  our  own  making  and 
acquiring.  We  may,  indeed,  have  had  partners,  prompters,  assistants — each  of 
whom  has  thereby  added  to  his  own  accumulation  of  this  property.  But  our  share 
remains  undiminished — there  is  none  to  divide  it  with  us,  And,  what  is  worse,  it 
is  a  property  which,  when  once  acquired,  cannot  be  alienated  or  put  away.  Need  I 
say,  that  it  is  a  most  worthless,  most  injurious,  nay,  ruinous  possession?  There  is 
indeed  good  reason  for  all  this  anxiety :  for  our  sins  both  deprive  us  of  many  present 
blessings,  and  entail  upon  us  many  future  woes.  2.  Our  text,  my  brethren,  while 
it  names  the  great  fact  of  the  gospel,  answers  this  difficult  question.  Christ  "gave 
Himself  for  our  sins  " — and  that  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  leave  the  fatal  property 
just  what  it  was,  hateful,  and  condemned  by  God  and  man,  while  its  owner  is  set 
free  from  its  curse.  "  Take  Me,"  He  exclaimed,  "  instead  of  those  sins."  True, 
they  are  still  "  our  sins,"  and  we  must  be  humbled  for  them,  and  repent  of  them  ; 
bat,  by  faith  casting  them  afresh  on  the  atoning  Saviour,  we  shall  find  that  they 
can  no  more  interrupt  our  intercourse  with  God  as  a  friend,  than  if  they  had  never 
been  committed.  II.  Its  intended  effect.  Christ  gave  Himself  for  our  sins, 
"  that  He  might  deliver  as  from  this  present  evil  world."  1.  "  This  present  world  " 
is  "  evil,"  because  it  is  a  rebellious  world.  It  has  apostatized  from  the  service  of  its 
true  and  rightful  Master — of  Him  who  made  it.  2.  "  This  present  world "  is 
••evil,"  because  it  is  a  corrupting  world.  When  sinners  have  been  reclaimed  from 
it,  they  are  still  liable  to  be  "again  entangled  therein  and  overcome."  3.  "  This 
present  world,"  is  "  evil,"  for  it  is  a  doomed  world.  It  bears  upon  every  part  of  it 
the  sentence  of  condemnation.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Christ  delivering  believers 
from  this  present  evil  world : — Let  us  now  look  at  this  rescue  or  deliverance  as  the 
principal  subject  of  thought  in  the  verse  of  our  text.  The  world  spoken  of  is  the 
present  world ;  it  is  called  evil,  and  so,  if  this  word  evil  has  any  force,  the  deliver- 
ance is  a  moral  and  spiritual  deliverance.  A  commentator  of  great  name  translates, 
instead  of  the  present  world,  the  impending  world  or  age — that  is,  the  age  of 
apostasy  and  of  the  second  coming  of  Christ  as  a  Judge.  But  this  is  unnecessary 
and  improbable.     The  word  rendered  present  is  the  same  which  occurs  in  the 

Sassage,  "  Things  present  and  things  to  come ; "  it  is  used  by  the  grammarians  to 
enote  the  present  tense  as  contrasted  with  the  future ;  and  it  is  a  truly  Christian 
idea,  that  escape  from  present  sin  and  present  corruption  was  offered  by  our  Lord 
in  His  gospel  and  made  possible  for  us  by  His  death.  But  what  is  meant  by  the 
world,  and  in  what  sense  is  it  an  evil  world  ?  There  are  two  words  used  in  the 
New  Testament  where  we  find  world  in  our  translation.  One  (koouoc)  makes  pro- 
minent the  order  or  system  of  things  as  it  exists  in  space,  the  other  (aiiav)  the  course 
or  flow  of  events  in  time.  The  two  words,  as  denoting  men,  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth  or  world,  in  their  present  condition  of  estrangement  from  God  as  to  their 
feelings,  habits,  character,  in  the  world  and  in  the  ages  of  time,  are  used  indis- 
criminately. In  one  or  two  instances  the  word  alJJv  is  made  to  signify  the  material 
creation ;  «:o<t/uoc,  just  as  our  word  world,  which  at  first  denoted  an  age  of  men,  has 
lome  steadily  to  have  the  signification  of  the  material  earth  or  universe.  We  see 
from  this  exposition  how  and  why  the  world  is  called  evil.    If  Christ  or  His  apostles 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  1LLV8TBAT0B.  [cMAt.  % 

have  taught  that  in  the  order  of  created  things  evil  is  inherent,  that  this  visible 
world  is  essentially  a  vile  and  corrupt  place,  owing  to  its  material  elements,  they 
would  have  given  sanction  to  the  Gnostic  doctrine  that  God,  the  supreme  and  the 
pure,  is  not  the  maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  but  that  some  other  being  made  them, 
who  is  essentially  imperfect.  Thus  Christian  morality  would  have  coincided  with 
that  ascetical  system  that  has  done  so  much  mischief  in  the  world,  by  teaching 
that  escape  from  evil  consists  in  extinction  of  desire,  in  abstinence  from  all  that 
gratifies  the  senses,  seclusion  from  society  and  absorption  in  contemplation  of  the 
Godhead.  In  this  way  we  should  have  had  a  Christianity  which  was  unfit  for  the 
mass  of  mankind,  and  which  had  the  seeds  of  death  in  itself.  Certainly,  this  was 
not  the  view  of  the  world  which  He  took  who  said,  "  I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  evil."  To 
the  follower  of  Christ,  then,  the  world,  as  continued  by  its  Great  Maker,  in  its 
structure,  its  sights  and  sounds,  its  influences  on  the  soul,  cannot  appear  to  be  evil. 
The  present  creation,  though  it  may  have  fallen,  with  man,  from  a  more  perfect 
beauty  that  once  belonged  to  it,  is  only  good,  just  as  it  was  at  the  first,  "  when  God 
saw  everything  that  He  had  made  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  The  sky  and 
clouds  are  good,  although  sometimes  monotonous  rain-clouds  cover  the  face  of  the 
heavens.  Nor  can  I  see  what  can  possibly  make  a  Christian  look  on  the  outer  world 
without  joy,  when,  besides  having  the  same  sources  of  pleasure  in  it  which  others 
find,  he  sees  a  God  and  a  Father  reflected  from  the  whole  universe.  It  has  been 
sometimes  said  that  the  great  seriousness  which  Christianity  throws  into  life,  the 
pressure  upon  the  Christian  mind  of  an  unseen  world  and  of  the  great  thoughts  of 
trial  and  of  duty,  ought  naturally  to  call  him  away  from  things  outward  and  visible. 
He  may  be  compared  to  the  soldier  just  before  battle.  What  leisure  has  he  for  the 
music  of  the  birds  and  the  sweet  forms  of  flowers,  when  victory  and  death  are  close 
at  hand  ?  Or  he  may  be  oompared  to  the  man  just  ready  to  embark  on  a  vessel, 
whose  thoughts  are  turned  away  from  the  beautiful  outline  of  the  eoast,  or  the 
floating  clouds,  and  fastened  on  the  great,  immeasurable  ocean.  And  so  it  is  said 
that  the  culture  springing  from  the  world  and  from  life,  the  refinement  of  the 
taste  and  sensibility  to  things  beautiful,  are  not  encouraged  by  Christianity.  Its 
influences  are  one-sidedly  moral :  it  is  imperfect,  when  alone,  as  a  discipline  for 
man.  Some  of  the  early  Christians  showed  this  defect ;  the  stricter  religionists 
since  have  shown  it.  They  have  looked  on  the  world  as  evil.  In  my  apprehension 
this  charge  has  no  true  foundation.  The  gospel  aims  to  cultivate  our  nature,  not 
to  turn  it  into  another  nature.  And  this  it  tries  to  effect  by  bringing  the  most 
inspiring,  elevating  motives  to  bear  on  our  life  and  character.  But,  setting  the 
differences  of  men  aside,  the  gospel  has  often  awakened  the  slumbering  seeds  of 
feeling,  the  love  of  beauty  or  power  of  thought  which  lay  dormant  before,  and  it 
puts  the  soul  in  the  best  position  to  receive  all  the  good,  all  the  softening  influences 
which  God  appointed  for  it  in  its  education  in  this  present  world.  How  unlike 
Christ's  gospel  is,  in  its  view  of  the  present  evil  world,  to  the  religions  which  have 
swayed  and  pressed  upon  the  souls  of  the  great  Hindoo  race.  To  them  the  world 
was  filled  with  illusions;  personal  existence  was  an  evil ;  the  soul  was  on  an  almost 
endless  transit  from  one  form  of  life  to  another ;  the  great  goal  afar  off  was  ab- 
sorption in  the  supreme  essence ;  and  self-torture  was  a  means  to  this  consum- 
mation. So  dreary  did  this  religion  of  Brahmin  ism  become,  that  the  atheism  and 
extinction  promised  by  Buddhism  became  a  positive  blessing.  This  present  evil 
world,  then,  is  such  as  man  has  made  it,  not  such  as  God  made  it.  The  very  essen- 
tial doctrine  of  Christianity  is,  that  God  made  His  revelation  and  sent  His  Son  to 
stem  and  abridge  this  evil.    Here  we  may  see  two  thoughts  in  the  text.    First,  it  is  * 

PRESENT  EVIL  WORLD  AS   CONTRASTED  WITH  A  FUTURE   AND  AN    UNSEEN   WORLD.      The 

presence  of  evil  in  a  visible  form,  in  a  society  of  men  whom  we  cannot  avoid  and  from 
good  whom  we  ought  not  to  withdraw,  if  we  would,  gives  to  it  its  principal  power.  The 
which  resists  this  evil,  on  the  other  hand,  is  spiritual  and  distant ;  there  is  a  con- 
flict between  forces  that  draw  their  power  from  unseen  realities  and  forces  that  have 
the  senses  and  our  temporal  state  and  human  opinion  on  their  side.  Let  us  next, 
for  a  moment,  look  at  the  nature  op  the  evil  op  the  world.  It  is,  first,  evil  mixed 
with  good,  founded  on  desires  and  principles  which,  but  for  sin  in  the  world,  would 
lead  only  to  good.  Hence,  it  is  insidious.  We  scarce  know^  what  exoess  is,  where 
we  must  stop,  how  far  we  may  venture.  We  have  for  all  this  no  exact  rules,  and 
can  have  none.  Herein  lies  a  great  part  of  our  danger,  that  the  judge  within  is 
blinded  and  misguided  by  the  evil  without,  so  that  the  decisions  in  the  court  of 
conscience  are  iniquitous.    Again,  there  is  an  unrighteous  sway,  even  a  terror,  over 


'.  I.]  GALATIANS.  13 

as,  wielded  by  the  evil  or  defective  opinions  of  society.  If  the  apostles  opposed  a 
false  religion,  they  who  wanted  just  that  kind  of  religion  which  appeases  the  con- 
science  and  suits  a  feeble  religious  sense,  became  their  enemies.  Or  it  may  be  that 
a  peculiarity  of  an  age  of  the  world  consists  in  a  decay  of  faith,  an  atmosphere  of 
doubt  which  seems  to  act  on  the  minds  of  men  without  their  being  conscious  of  it. 
In  the  light  of  Scripture  this  is,  indeed,  present  evil,  for  it  destroys  the  power  of 
motives  and  deadens  the  religious  nature.  I  will  speak  of  but  one  other  character- 
istic of  the  evil  that  may  be  in  the  world ;  it  is  the  accumulation  of  objects  to  gratify 
the  desires,  and  even  those  desires  which  may  be  called  voluptuous.  In  a  simple 
condition  of  society,  where  there  is  little  wealth  and  little  division  of  labour,  this  is 
not  the  predominant  evil.  Thus,  early  Borne — and  the  same  is  true  of  almost  all 
simple  societies — was  outwardly  virtuous,  reverential,  law-abiding,  for  some  gene- 
rations, only  to  fall  into  the  grossest  condition,  at  the  decline  of  the  Republic  and 
through  the  Empire,  when  all  the  vices  in  a  mingled  stream  seemed  to  be  over- 
flowing mankind.  The  apostle  saw  this  ;  he  saw  the  same  decay  of  good  habits  in 
the  Greek  countries  which  he  traversed  ;  he  might,  if  alive  now,  see  it  at  Paris ; 
be  might  see  the  inroads  of  thoroughly  worldly  enjoyment  among  us.  Society  ruins 
itself  in  such  a  decline,  and  needs  frightful  judgments,  wide-sweeping  changes,  to 
make  it  endurable.  All  this  enervating,  voluptuous  influence  must  act  on  every 
member  of  society,  unless  he  fights  against  it  and  forms  himself,  by  the  conflict, 
into  a  heroio  character.  All  this  philosophers  have  felt,  as  well  as  Christians.  There 
il  •  celebrated  passage  in  one  of  Plato's  works,  where  he  uses  language  something 
like  the  apostle's:  "Evil,"  says  Socrates  (in  Theaetetus,  176,  A.B.),  "can  never 
periBh ;  for  there  must  always  remain  something  which  is  antagonistic  to  good.  Of 
necessity  they  hover  around  this  mortal  sphere  and  the  earthly  nature,  having  no 
place  among  the  gods  in  heaven.  Wherefore,  also,  we  ought  to  fly  away  thither ; 
and  to  fly  thither  is  to  become  like  God,  as  far  as  this  is  possible ;  and  to  become 
like  Him  is  to  become  holy,  just,  and  wise."  Plato  saw  the  evil,  and  longed  for  a 
deliverance,  and  looked  to  wisdom  and  to  the  inspiration  of  moral  beauty  as  the 
best  means  which  he  could  offer.  We  look  on  him  as  one  of  the  noblest  of  men, 
but  we  have  a  better  guide — even  Him  who  said,  "  I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil." 
His  prayer  was  fulfilled.  God  has  rescued  many  from  the  power  of  darkness  and 
brought  them  into  the  kingdom  of  His  dear  Son.  This  rescue  was  accomplished 
by  Christ,  says  the  apostle,  in  His  giving  Himself  for  us.  The  first  step  is  the  offer 
of  forgiveness  of  sins,  which  is  procured,  according  to  the  uniform  testimony  of 
Scripture,  by  the  death  of  Christ.  Without  this  assurance  of  receiving  pardon  and 
help  the  sense  of  sin  would  be  a  paralysis  of  the  soul's  active  powers ;  and  there 
would  be,  after  a  few  fruitless  efforts,  a  despair  of  making  progress  toward  a  holy 
and  a  perfect  life.  Christ's  disclosure  of  the  evil  of  sin  would  then  have  been  only 
a  ministry  of  wrath  and  of  death.  Secondly,  the  soul  is  thus  opened  to  all  the 
genial  motives  which  must  act  upon  it  in  order  that  it  may  be  delivered  from  the 
aril  that  is  in  the  world.  Once  more,  the  evil  of  the  world  is,  to  a  considerable  ex- 
tent, an  excess  of  good.  Desire  may  not  be  bad  in  itself,  yet  a  large  amount  of  the 
corruption  in  the  world  comes  from  inordinate  desire.  Finally,  the  closing  words 
of  our  text  assure  us  that  all  this  which  we  have  considered  is  no  plan  for  the  im- 
provement of  mankind  as  merely  living  on  the  earth,  but  for  the  renewal  of  the 
world  and  as  an  ultimate  deliverance  of  men  from  sin,  through  Christ.  And 
Christ's  giving  of  Himself  for  our  sins,  and  His  purpose,  in  so  doing,  to  deliver 
us  from  the  present  evil  world,  took  place  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our 
Father.  We  do  not  owe  our  salvation  to  an  impulse,  a  temporary  movement  in 
the  mind  of  Christ,  or  to  circumstances  which  awoke  in  a  benevolent  heart  an 
opposition  to  the  hypocrisy  and  covetousness  of  His  day.  We  are  taught  by 
this  high  example,  that  a  life  thought  out  beforehand,  carried  through  to  the 
end  according  to  one  plan,  is  a  life  nearest  to  the  life  of  God.  (T.  D.  Woolsey.) 
To  whom  be  glory  for  ever. — Ascription  of  praise  to  God: — The  Hebrews  are 
wont  in  their  writings  to  intermingle  praise  and  giving  of  thanks.  This  custom 
the  apostles  themselves  observe.  Which  thing  may  be  very  often  seen  in  Paul. 
For  the  name  of  the  Lord  ought  to  be  had  in  great  reverence,  and  never  to  be 
named  without  praise  and  thanksgiving.  And  thus  to  do,  is  a  certain  kind  of 
worship  and  service  to  God.  So  in  worldly  matters,  when  we  mention  the  names 
of  kings  or  princes,  we  are  wont  to  do  it  with  some  comely  gesture,  reverenee,  and 
bowing  of  the  knee,  much  more  ought  we  when  we  speak  of  God,  and  to  name 
the  name  of  God  with  thankfulness  and  great  reverence.    [Luther.)         The  duty 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

of  ascribing  glory  to  God : — Here  is  the  close  of  the  salutation,  in  which,  by  holding 
forth  His  own  practice  for  an  example,  He  comprehends  the  duty  of  the  redeemed. 
They  are  to  ascribe  lasting  glory  and  praise  to  God  the  Father  for  His  goodwill  to 
this  work  of  our  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.  1.  As  God,  in  this  great  work  of 
our  redemption,  has  made  the  glory  of  almost  all  His  attributes,  especially  of  Hia 
justice,  mercy,  and  wisdom,  to  shine  forth,  so  it  is  the  duty  of  the  redeemed  to 
acknowledge  that  glory,  and  to  wish  that  it  may  be  set  forth  more  and  more  both 
in  ourselves  and  others.  2.  This  duty  can  never  be  sufficiently  discharged.  There 
is  required  the  leisure  of  eternity  to  ascribe  glory  to  God.  3.  The  glory  of  the 
Eedeemer,  and  of  God,  who  sent  His  son  to  do  that  work,  shall  be  the  long-lasting 
and  never-ending  song  of  the  redeemed.  4.  Our  praise  and  thanksgiving  must 
not  be  formal  or  verbal  only,  but  fervent  and  serious,  proceeding  from  the  most 
intimate  affection  of  the  heart.  (James  Fergusson.)  The  honour  which  i*  due  to 
God  for  the  redemption  in  Christ : — The  praise  of  God — 1.  A  fruit  of  the  redeemed 
state.  2.  A  proof  of  the  same.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D,D.)  The  praise  which  the 
redeemed  bring  to  God — (1)  begins  in  time ;  (2)  continues  into  eternity.  (Ibid.) 
Praise  will  go  on  for  ever: — Praise  is  the  only  part  of  duty  in  which  we  at 
present  engage,  which  is  lasting.  We  pray ;  but  there  shall  be  a  time  when  prayer 
shall  offer  its  last  litany :  we  believe ;  but  there  shall  be  a  time  when  faith  shall 
be  lost  in  sight :  we  hope,  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed ;  but  there  shall  be  a 
time  when  hope  lies  down  and  dies,  lost  in  the  splendour  of  the  fruition  that  God 
shall  reveal.  But  praise  goes  singing  into  heaven,  and  is  ready,  without  a  teacher, 
to  strike  the  harp  that  is  waiting  for  it,  to  transmit  along  the  echoes  of  eternity 
the  song  of  the  Lamb.  (W.  M.  Punshon.)  The  praise  of  God: — 1.  Its  nature. 
2.  Its  source.    8.  Its  duration.    4.  Its  diffusion.    (J.  Lyth.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from  Elm  that  called  you.— 
The  errors  of  the  good  and  the  follies  of  the  wise  are  painful  subjects  of  contem- 
plation, and  we  are  never  more  conscious  of  a  sensitive  and  distressing  recoil  than 
when  we  witness  the  disappointment  of  our  hopes  in  reference  to  those  who  had 
once  given  promise  of  attaining  to  distinguished  excellence.  Some,  however,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  are  comparative  strangers  to  any  vivid  apprehensions  of  this  kind. 
They  seem  to  be  always  on  the  watch  to  detect  the  canker  in  the  rose,  or  the  flaw 
in  the  gem,  and  love  the  fault  that  gives  them  an  equal  more  than  the  virtue  which 
makes  another  their  superior.  But  men  of  nobler  temper  always  delight  in  behold- 
ing the  development  of  exalted  worth ;  and  these,  far  from  laying  bare  with  an 
untrembling  hand  the  infirmities  and  defects  of  our  common  nature,  never  fail  to 
experience  a  corresponding  depression  and  regret  when  the  lustre  of  a  great  name 
is  tarnished,  and  especially  when  religion  itself  is  seen  to  suffer  from  the  incon- 
sistency of  its  professed  friends.  1.  The  eably  appeabance  of  ebbob  and  DECLEN- 
SION  AMONG    THE  CHURCHES    FOUNDED    BT    THE    APOSTLE.      "  So  SOOn  removed."      Our 

attention  also  is  particularly  arrested  by  the  prevalence  of  these  evils  in  the  very  out- 
set of  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church ;  and  not  in  the  province  of  Galatia  only,  but 
in  various  other  directions.  We  wonder  to  see  the  stream  corrupted  so  near  the 
fountain,  the  tares  springing  up  with  the  wheat  in  the  most  favoured  soils,  and  trie 
fine  gold  of  the  sanctuary  so  soon  becoming  dim.  To  the  Church  of  Thessaloniea, 
St.  Paul  writes,  in  one  of  the  earliest  of  his  Epistles,  "  The  mystery  of  iniquity 
doth  already  work."  St.  Peter  speaks  of  those  "  who  privily  bring  in  damnable 
heresies."  St.  Jude  refers  to  those  who  "  denied  the  Lord  that  bought  them,"  and 
adds  that  these  "  ungodly  men  crept  in  unawares,"  like  the  wolf  into  the  fold,  or 
the  muffled  traitor  into  the  palace  of  the  king,  implying  that  they  ought  by  all 
means  to  have  been  kept  out!    II.  The  insidious  manneb  in  which  thb  host 

DANGEROUS  COBBUFTIONS  ABE  OFTEN  INTRODUCED.   "  Ye  ABE  REMOVED  UNTO  ANOTHER 

gospel — which  is  not  another.  "  The  enemy  of  souls  is  never  more  dangerous 
than  when  he  assumes  the  aspect  of  an  angel  of  light ;  and  injury  is  more  fre- 
quently sustained  by  the  artful  intermixture  of  truth  with  error,  than  by  any 
temptation  to  renounce  Christianity  altogether.  We  are  rarely  invited  to  receive 
broad,  palpable,  unmixed  falsehood,  for  from  this  the  mind  might  naturally  recoil, 
as  we  should  shrink  from  taking,  with  our  eyes  open,  undiluted  poisons.  But  the 
great  deceiver  goes  more  skilfully  to  work,  and  incorporates  false  doctrines  with 
some  modification  of  the  true.  He  knows  how  to  wrap  up  his  most  deadly  poisons 
in  some  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life ;  as  he  quoted  Scripture  to  our  Lord  Himself,  and 
prefaced  his  fatal  temptation  to  Eve,  by  the  smooth  inquiry,  "Yea,  hath  God  said?" 
411  these  should  recollect  that  the  perversion  of  evangelical  truth  is  followed  by 


ota*.  I.]  GALATIANS.  15 

melancholy  consequences,  and  produces  nnhappiness  in  the  mind.  There  be  some 
that  trouble  you.  "  Gospel  perverters  are  soul-troublers."  Like  the  mystic  star 
of  the  Apocalypse,  which,  falling  on  the  waters,  turned  the  peaceful  element  into 
turbulence  and  blood,  their  course  may  be  traced  by  the  calamities  they  occasion. 

III.  The  awful  criminality  and  danger  of  perverting  thb  gospel  of  Christ. 
From  the  greatness  of  the  punishment  denounced  by  the  apostle,  we  learn  his  estimate 
of  the  aggravated  guilt  of  the  offence  he  condemns.  1.  The  great  Protestant  principle 
of  the  right  and  duty  of  private  judgment.  Though  St.  Paul  proves  his  apostle- 
ship,  and  demands  to  be  heard  as  the  servant  of  Christ,  he  is  far  from  claiming 
unlimited  authority  over  the  consciences  of  men,  but  makes  a  direct  appeal  to  their 
judgment.  If  they  were  not  to  receive,  even  from  him,  another  gospel,  of  course 
they  had  to  decide  what  was,  and  what  was  not,  another  gospel.  And  this  they 
had  the  means  of  doing.  2.  If  such  be  the  danger  of  perverting,  how  important  is 
it  that  we  should  receive  the  gospel  for  the  purpose  of  our  salvation.  To  reject  or 
pervert  robs  God  of  His  glory,  the  Church  of  its  comfort,  and  the  world  of  its 
Lope.  8.  The  intimate  connexion  between  the  purity  of  the  Christian  Church 
and  the  happiness  of  ita  individual  members.  God  reveals  this  religion,  not  only 
as  a  means  of  safety,  but  as  an  element  of  blessedness.  4.  We  may  well  rejoice 
in  the  perpetuity  of  religion  itself,  notwithstanding  all  the  attacks  of  its  foes,  and 
all  the  imperfection  of  ita  friends.  The  gospel  partakes  of  the  immortality  of  its 
author.  (The  Evangelist.)  The  wonder  of  a  faithful  apostle  at  the  defection  of 
faithless  converts: — I.  Thb  apostle  wondered  that  thet  should  have  turned 
from  God  and  thb  Saviour.  When  men  turn  to  God  expectations  are  fulfilled ; 
but  when  they  forsake  Him  astonishment  is  excited,  because  of  the  mystery  of 
iniquity  (Jer.  ii.  12, 13).  1.  To  the  Galatians  the  human  agency  was  the  ministry 
of  Paul.  S.  There  is  a  reference  to  the  Divine  power  in  the  call  of  God.  "  Him  that 
sailed  you  in  the  grace  of  Christ."     II.  Paul  wondered  that  thby  should  have 

CHANGED  SO  SUDDENLY.  III.  PAUL  MARVELLED  THAT  THET  SHOULD  RENOUNCE  THE 
TRUE  FOR  THB  FALSE,  THB  REAL  FOB  THB  UNREAL,  THB  GENUINE  FOB  THB  SHAM. 

IV.  Paul  wondered  that  thby  had  been  seduced  by  men  whose  chabacters 
ought  to  have  been  understood.  Lessons  :  1.  The  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus 
concerning  us  should  be  the  subject  of  our  constant  meditation.  2.  We  should 
beware  of  teaching  that  tends  to  withdraw  Christ  from  our  attention  and  confidence. 
8.  We  should  avoid  the  company  of  men  who,  under  the  pretence  of  doing  us 
good,  only  seek  to  weaken  our  faith  in  the  gospel.  (R.  Nicholls.)  Apostasy  is 
easy  : — It  is  possible  to  begin  in  the  Spirit,  and  to  end  in  the  flesh ;  it  is  possible 
to  be  seriously  hindered ;  it  is  possible  to  come  short  of  the  promise  of  the  grace  of 
God.  Clouds  sometimes  obscure  the  brightest  evening  and  the  sunniest  morning. 
A  alight  atmospheric  ohange  may  transform  an  Alpine  ascent  from  a  safe  excite- 
ment into  an  imminent  peril.  It  is  thus  in  the  natural  world ;  and  so  is  it  in  the 
realm  of  grace.  There  are  numberless  causes,  arising  from  the  circumstances  of 
external  things,  or  from  the  inbred  and  unsubdued  corruption  of  our  own 
traitorous  hearts,  which  may  endanger  the  constancy  of  the  Christian,  and  cause 
his  goodness  to  be  even  as  the  morning  oloud  and  as  the  early  dew,  goodly  and 
sparkling  in  promise,  but,  by  the  fierce  heat  of  the  sun,  very  speedily  exhaled. 
(W.  M.  Punshon.)  Fickle  Christians: — Luther  often,  in  his  books,  testified  that 
he  was  much  afraid  lest,  when  he  was  dead,  that  sound  doctrine  of  justification  by 
faith  alone  would  die  also.  It  proved  so  in  many  places  in  Germany.  Men  fell 
to  Popery  as  fast  as  leaves  fall  in  autumn.  The  word  here  rendered  "  removed  " 
signifieth  properly  "  transported  "  or  "transplanted."  "  He  alludes,"  saith  Jerome, "  to 
the  word  Galdi,  •  to  roll,'  as  if  he  should  say, '  You  are  Galatians,  that  is,  rolling  and 
changing  from  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  the  law  of  Moses.' "  (J.  Trapp.)  Different 
treatment  for  seducers  and  seduced : — Ye  see  here  how  Paul  nandleth  his  Galatians, 
which  were  fallen  away  and  aeduced  by  the  false  apostles.  He  doth  not  at  the 
first  set  upon  them  with  vehemence  and  rigorous  words,  but  after  a  very  fatherly 
sort,  not  only  patiently  bearing  their  fall,  but  also  in  a  manner  excusing  it. 
Furthermore,  he  ehoweth  towards  them  a  motherly  affection,  and  speaketh  them 
very  fair ;  and  yet  in  such  sort  that  he  reproveth  them  notwithstanding,  howbeit 
with  very  fit  words,  and  wisely  framed  to  the  purpose.  Contrariwise,  he  is  very 
hot  and  full  of  indignation  against  those  false  apostles,  their  seducers,  upon  wnom 
he  laysth  the  whole  fault ;  and  therefore  forthwith,  even  in  the  entrance  of  his 
Epistle,  he  bursteth  out  into  plain  thunderings  and  lightnings  against  them. 
.  .  .  So  parents,  when  their  child  is  hurt  with  the  biting  of  a  dog,  are  wont  to 
pursue  the  dog  only,  bnt  the  weeping  child  they  bemoan  and  speak  fair  onto  it, 


1«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

comforting  it  with  the  most  sweet  words.  (Luther.)  The  apostle's  demeanour : — 
1.  Towards  the  misled.  He  makes  a  complaint  and  charge,  but  through  it  all  the 
full  tones  of  compassion  and  love  are  heard.  2.  Towards  the  misleaders.  Un- 
sparingly stern,  even  to  denouncing  a  curse.  To  fall  away  from  the  gospel  is  bad, 
but  to  subvert  the  gospel  is  worse.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  The  earnestness  with 
which  St.  Paul  opposes  the  false  teachers : — The  apostle's  earnestness  is — 1.  Well- 
founded  ;  2.  Very  significant  for  us.  (1)  It  should  withhold  us  from  the  reception 
of  any  unevangelical  doctrine.  (2)  It  should  strengthen  us  in  the  certainty  that 
the  gospel  which  we  have  is  the  true  one.  (Ibid.)  Lapsed  Christians  : — In  the 
first  years  of  a  Church,  its  members  are  willing  to  endure  hardships,  and  to  make 
great  exertions ;  but,  when  once  it  is  prosperous,  they  desire  to  take  their  ease ;  as 
one  who  builds  a  ship  is  willing  to  work  all  the  way  from  keel  to  deck  until  she  is 
launched,  thenceforward  he  expects  the  ocean  to  buoy  him  up,  and  the  winds 
to  bear  him  on.  The  youth-time  of  Churches  produces  enterprise;  their  age, 
indolence.  But  even  this  might  be  borne,  did  not  these  dead  men  sit  in  the  door 
of  their  sepulchres,  crying  out  against  every  living  man  who  refuses  to  wear  the 
livery  of  death.  I  am  almost  tempted  to  think  that  if,  with  the  end  of  every 
pastorate,  the  Church  itself  were  disbanded  and  destroyed,  to  be  gathered  again  by 
the  succeeding  teacher,  we  should  thus  secure  an  immortality  of  youth.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Apostasy  from  the  truth : — 1.  How  far  apostasy  is  not  to  be  wondered 
at.  2.  How  far  it  is  to  be  wondered  at.  (•/.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Inconstancy  a 
common  fault : — An  apostatising  tendency,  or  inconstancy,  is  a  radical  fault  of  the 
human  heart.  1.  Sluggish  and  immovable,  where  it  is  of  moment  that  it  should 
move  and  apply  itself.  2.  So  moveable  and  unsteady,  where  it  should  abide  firm. 
(Djid.)  Apostasy  of  believers  : — 1.  The  apostasy  of  believers  is,  alas,  sometimes 
a  fact.  2.  From  what  does  it  proceed  r  8.  How  far  is  it  to  be  remedied  ?  (Ibid.) 
The  Galatian  revolt: — I.  The  Revolt.  Different  kinds  of  religious  revolt.  1. 
Particular :  dissent  from  some  principal  doctrines ;  the  ten  tribes ;  the  Roman 
Church.  2.  General :  renunciation  of  the  name  and  faith  of  Christ ;  Jews ; 
Mahommedans.  3.  Under  strong  pressure ;  when  men  compromise  the  faith  from 
fear  of  persecution.  4.  From  obstinacy ;  as  atheists.  The  Galatian  revolt  was 
of  the  first  and  third  class.  They  were  "carried  away"  from  the  doctrine  of 
"grace."  H.  The  time  it  occupied.  1.  A  brief  period.  2.  Showing  man's 
inconstancy  in  the  matter  of  religion  (Hosea  vi.  4 ;  John  v.  85).  8.  Pointing  a 
warning  to  the  most  privileged.  HI.  From  what  thet  eevolted.  1.  From 
Paul.  2.  From  the  grace  of  God.  IV.  To  what  they  revolted.  1.  To  false 
teachers.  2.  To  another  gospel  compounded  of  grace  and  law.  (1)  Men  are  dis- 
contented with  the  pure  gifts  of  God.  The  Jews,  beside  the  books  of  Moses,  most 
have  the  Cabbala ;  the  Papists,  beside  the  written  Word,  must  have  tradition ; 
hearers,  beside  the  simple  gospel,  must  have  the  skill  of  art  and  tongue.  (2)  The 
other  gospel  is  no  gospel  at  all.  There  is  only  one  way  of  salvation.  News  of 
another  way,  therefore,  is  bad  news.  V.  The  authoes  of  the  revolt.  1.  They 
are  troublers,  because  (1)  they  make  divisions;  (2)  disturb  consciences  at  rest 
in  Christ.  Here  is  the  touchstone  of  heresy.  Justification  by  works  is  an  unbear- 
able yoke  (Acts  xv.  10).  So  is  the  teaching  that  assurance  is  impossible  ;  so  is 
the  dogma  of  purgatory.  The  gospel,  on  the  contrary,  ends  trouble  and  brings 
peace  and  joy  (John  xv.  11 ;  Rom.  zv.  14).  2.  They  overthrow  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  They  did  not  contest  its  truth,  but,  by  adding  to  it,  they  turned  it  upside 
down.  ( W.  Perkins.)  A  group  of  marvels : — 1.  That  men  should  disbelieve  the 
true  and  believe  the  false.  2.  That  men  should  forsake  the  proved  and  follow 
the  speculative.  3.  That  men  should  refuse  the  possible  salvation  by  faith  in 
favour  of  earning  an  impossible  salvation  by  works.  4.  That  men  should  reject 
the  balm  for  a  wounded  conscience,  and  accept  what  can  only  trouble  the  con- 
science. 5.  That  men  should  turn  away  from  the  ambassador  of  the  gospel,  and 
attach  themselves  to  perverters  of  the  gospel.  Yet  these  marvels  are  to  be  wit- 
nessed every  day.  The  religious  instability  of  the  Galatian* : — It  was  the  too 
quick  springing  of  the  good  seed  on  poor  and  shallow  soil ;  the  sudden  flaming^  of 
fire  among  natures  as  light,  brittle,  and  inflammable  as  straw.  The  modification 
of  an  old  religion,  the  hearty  adoption  of  »  new,  the  combination  of  an  antique 
worship  with  one  recent  and  unlike,  had  already  been  illustrated  in  Galatian 
history.  As  Celts,  they  had  brought  with  them  their  old  Druidism ;  yet  they  had 
already  incorporated  with  this  the  wild  nature  worship  of  Cybele.  But  while  this 
Phrygian  cult  was  flourishing  at  Pessinus,  and  commanding  the  services  of  hosts 
of  mutilated  priests,  and  while  at  Tavium  the  main  object  of  worship  was  a  colossal 


chap.  I.]  GALATIANS.  11 

bronze  Zeus  of  the  Greek  type,  at  Ancyra  was  established  the  Roman  deification  ol 
the  Emperor  Augustus.  In  passing  through  these  capitals,  Paul  would  see  the 
epitome  of  their  history  and  character,  and  as  he  had  bitter  cause  to  learn,  the 
religious  views  of  the  Gauls  were  more  or  less  a  reflex  of  the  impressions  of  the 
moment,  and  their  favourite  sentiments  the  echo  of  the  language  used  by  the  laut 
3omer.  (F.  W.  Farrar.)  The  Judaizing  antagonists  of  St.  Paul: — They  asserted 
the  exclusive  authority  of  the  apostles  in  Judea  (2.  Cor.  xi.  5 ;  Gal.  ii.  6,  &c.),  a 
pretension  which  they  would  have  repudiated,  and  which  Paul  makes  bold  to  deny 
them  (com p.  1  Cor.  ix.  5).  They  claimed  themselves  further  to  be  the  only  true 
disciples  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  i.  12  ;  2  Cor.  x.  7),  and  in  His  name  imposed,  as  a  con- 
dition of  salvation,  circumcision  and  all  the  rites  of  the  law  (Gal.  ii.  3 ;  iii.  3  ;  iv. 
10,  11;  v.  2,  &c. ;  Eom.  xiv.,  1,  &c.  ;  Phil.  iii.  2;  Coloss.  ii.  21,  &o.),  and  they 
abruptly  broke  off  all  intercourse  with  uncircumcised  Christians  (Gal.  ii.  2),  whom 
Paul  had  welcomed,  and  the  other  apostles  recognized,  as  brethren.  Their  hatred 
to  Paul  was  not  at  all  appeased  by  his  heroic  sufferings  and  sublime  self-devotion. 
When  the  populace  of  Jerusalem  laid  homicidal  hands  upon  him,  not  one  of  the 
many  myriads  of  Christians  lifted  a  finger  in  his  defence.  Carried  to  Rome  during 
his  two  years'  anxious  imprisonment,  he  has  still  reason  to  complain  of  those  who 
preach  Christ  only  of  contention,  thinking  to  add  affliction  to  his  bonds.  (E.  Eeuss, 
D.D.)  The  real  question  at  issue  : — If  the  Judaizers  had  really  believed  in  the 
divinity  of  Jesus,  they  could  not  have  returned  to  systems  which  had  died  away 
before  the  glories  of  His  advent,  for  that  faith  would  have  proved  an  insurmountable 
barrier  to  reactionary  yearnings.  Their  attempt  to  re-introduce  circumcision  was  a 
reflection  on  Christ's  finished  work,  and  so,  ultimately,  on  the  dignity  of  His  person. 
They  knew  not,  or  heeded  not,  that  they  were  members  of  a  kingdom  in  which  cir- 
cumcision and  uncircumcision  were  insignificant  accidents,  and  in  which  the  new 
creation  of  the  soul  was  the  one  matter  of  vital  import.  Although  they  had  not 
denied  Christ  in  terms,  He  had  become  of  no  effect  unto  them.  They  had 
practically  rejected  the  plenary  efficacy  of  Christ's  grace,  and  had  implicitly  denied 
that  He  was  greater  than  Moses ;  and  in  opposing  them,  Paul  is  the  apostolio 
representative  of  the  cause  and  work  of  Athanasius.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  early 
Churches  not  pattern  Churches : — They  had  apostolic  teaching ;  but  beyond  that 
they  seem  to  have  been  in  no  respect  above,  and  in  many  respects  below,  the  level 
of  subsequent  ages.  If  we  may  judge  of  their  morality  by  the  exhortations  they 
received,  Corinth  and  Thessalonica  were  but  beginners  in  holiness.  If  we  may- 
judge  of  their  intelligence  by  the  errors  into  which  they  fell,  they  had  indeed  need 
that  one  should  teach  them  which  were  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God.. 
It  could  not  be  otherwise.  They  were  but  just  rescued  from  heathenism,  and  bore 
the  marks  of  their  former  bondage.  They  were  like  the  communities  fostered  by 
modern  missionaries.  The  same  infantile  simplicity,  partial  apprehensions  of 
truth,  danger  of  being  lead  astray  by  the  low  morality  of  their  kindred,  openness 
to  strange  heresy,  and  peril  of  blending  the  old  with  the  new  in  opinion  and 
practice,  beset  both.  The  history  of  the  first  theological  difference  in  the  early 
Churches  is  a  striking  confutation  of  the  dream  that  they  were  perfect,  and  a 
striking  illustration  of  the  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed  from  the  attempt,  so 
natural  to  us  all,  to  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
grace  of  Christ: — It  is  not  man  climbing  to  heaven  ;  it  is  God  putting  down  Hi 3 
hand  from  heaven  and  raising  him  up.  It  is  not  man  paying  God  for  heaven  ;  heaven 
is  God's  free  gift  to  man  through  Christ.  The  word  "  grace  "  is  inscribed  on  the 
temple  of  salvation  from  the  foundation  to  the  top-stone.  (Thomas  Jones.) 
Another  gospel : — We  hear  much  of  moving  with  the  age.  But  the  gospel  is  not 
to  be  changed  to  answer  the  opinions  of  any  age.  The  pulpit  is  to  lead  the  age, 
and  not  the  ago  the  pulpit.  Let  ministers,  then,  preach  the  gospel,  whether  men 
will  bear  or  forbear.  The  gospel,  in  all  its  glorious  doctrines,  pure  morality,  and 
sweet  promises,  is  the  one  power  to  save.  (Ibid.)  Rapid  declension : — Ha  is  the 
interjection  of  laughter ;  ah,  the  interjection  of  sorrow.  The  difference  betwixt 
them  is  but  small ;  the  transposition  of  what  is  no  substantial  letter,  but  a 
bare  aspirate.  How  quickly,  in  the  age  of  a  minute,  in  the  very  turning 
of  a  breath,  is  our  mirth  changed  into  mourning.  (Thos.  Fuller.)  Move- 
ment not  progress : — Rowland  Hill,  in  a  friend's  house,  6aw  a  child  on  a 
rocking-horse.  "  Dear  me,"  said  the  good  man,  "  how  wondrously  like 
some    Christians;    motion,    motion,    motion,     but    no    progress."  Covering 

tin    with  fair    names: — Here    we   may  learn    to   espy  the   crafty  sleights   and 
subtleties  of  the  devil.    No  heretic  cometh  under  the  title  of  errors  and  of  the 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota*.  i. 

devil,  neither  doth  the  devil  himself  c«me  as  a  devil  in  his  own  likeness,  but  when 
he  forceth  men  to  manifest  wickedness,  maketh  a  cloak  for  them  to  cover  that  sin 
which  they  commit  or  purpose  to  commit.  The  murderer,  in  his  rage,  seeth  not 
that  murder  is  so  great  and  horrible  a  sin  as  it  is  indeed,  for  that  he  hath  a  cloak 
to  cover  the  same.  Whoremongers,  thieves,  covetous  persons,  drunkards,  and  such 
other,  have  wherewith  to  flatter  themselves,  and  cover  their  sins.  So  the  devil  also 
cometh  out  disguised  and  counterfeit  in  all  his  works  and  devices.  In  spiritual 
matter,  where  Satan  cometh  forth  not  black,  but  white,  in  the  likeness  of  an  angel, 
or  of  God  Himself,  there  he  passeth  himself  with  most  crafty  dissimulation,  and 
wonderful  sleights,  and  is  wont  to  set  forth  to  sale  his  most  deadly  poison  for  the 
doctrine  of  grace,  for  the  Word  of  God,  for  the  gospel  of  Christ.  For  this  cause, 
Paul  calleth  the  doctrine  of  the  false  apostles,  Satan's  ministers,  a  "  gospel "  also, 
saying,  ••  unto  another  gospel ; "  but  in  derision,  as  though  he  would  say,  Ye 
Galatians  have  now  other  evangelists,  and  another  gospel;  my  gospel  is  now 
despised  of  you ;  it  is  now  no  more  in  estimation  among  you.  (Luther.)  A 
doctored  gospel : — In  "  Babbage's  Economy  of  Manufactures,"  we  are  told  that 
some  years  ago  a  mode  of  preparing  old  clover  and  trefoil  seeds,  by  a  process 
called  "  doctoring,"  became  so  prevalent  as  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  House 
of  Commons.  By  this  process  old  and  worthless  seed  was  rendered  in  appearance 
equal  to  the  best.  One  witness  tried  some  "  doctored  "  seed,  and  found  that  not 
above  one  grain  in  a  hundred  grew.  Is  it  not  to  be  feared  that  a  "  doctored  " 
gospel  is  becoming  very  common  among  us ;  and  if  so,  it  is  no  wonder  that  con- 
versions are  but  few.  Only  pure  truth  is  living  seed.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
dilettante  gospel: — The  dilettante  gospel  has  most  attractions,  of  course,  for 
people  of  a  literary  and  esthetic  turn  of  mind.  What  they  seek  in  the  sermons 
they  go  to  hear  is  not  religion,  but  (as  they  are  fond  of  styling  it)  "  the  poetry  and 
philosophy  of  religion."  They  would  be  the  last  to  suspect  that  such  a  hearing  of 
God's  word  is  superficial ;  but  superficial  it  certainly  is.  It  is  a  craving  for  an 
external  thing  which  brings  them  to  the  church  at  all.  They  give  to  the  accidental 
and  unessential  the  respect  which  should  only  be  accorded  to  the  message  of  God. 
And  the  hurt  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  in  yielding  to  such  cravings,  is  that  it 
dethrones  the  fact  tbat  God  is  speaking  through  the  gospel  to  human  souls.  Christ 
is  not  in  all  the  thoughts  of  such  hearers.  The  outward  construction  of  the  word, 
its  literary  or  artistic  features,  its  pathos,  simplicity,  or  force — these  are  canvassed 
and  accepted  or  refused ;  but  God's  message  and  meaning  under  all  is  left  standing 
without.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  overstate  the  evil  to  which  preaching  which 
panders  to  this  class  must  lead.  For  those  who  indulge  in  it,  the  Bible  inevitably 
dwindles  down  into  an  uninspired  book — at  best,  a  book  only  more  interesting  than 
other  books  that  could  be  named.  The  gospel  which  is  proclaimed  from  its  pages 
— the  blessed  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God — passes  utterly  out  of  view ;  and  hearers 
will  listen  to  what  is  presented  to  them  for  a  whole  lifetime,  and  yet  fail  to  receive 
one  right-hearted  impulse  towards  the  work  for  which  God  is  sustaining  a  Church 
in  the  world.  (A.  Macleod,  D.D.)  No  truce  with  heretics: — They  had,  in  fact, 
only  introduced  one  or  two  commandments,  circumcision  and  the  observance  of 
days,  but  he  says  that  the  gospel  was  perverted,  in  order  to  show  that  a  slight 
adulteration  vitiates  the  whole.  For  as  he  who  but  partially  pares  away  the  image 
on  a  royal  coin  renders  the  whole  spurious,  so  he  who  swerves  ever  so  little  from 
the  pure  faith  soon  proceeds  from  this  to  graver  errors,  and  becomes  entirely 
corrupted.  Let  those  who  charge  us  with  being  contentious  in  separating  from 
heretics,  and  say  that  there  is  no  real  difference  between  us  except  what  arises 
from  our  ambition,  hear  Paul's  assertion,  that  those  who  had  but  slightly 
innovated,  subverted  the  gospel.  Not  that  to  say  that  the  Son  of  God  is  a 
created  being  [as  the  Arians  did]  is  a  small  matter.  Enow  you  not  that  even  under 
the  elder  covenant,  a  man  who  gathered  sticks  on  the  Sabbath,  and  transgressed  a 
single  commandment,  and  that  not  a  great  one,  was  punished  with  death  ?  and 
that  Uzzah,  who  supported  the  ark,  when  on  the  point  of  being  overturned,  was 
struck  suddenly  dead,  because  he  had  intruded  upon  an  office  which  did  not 
pertain  to  him  ?  Wherefore  if  to  transgress  the  Sabbath,  and  to  touch  the  falling 
ark,  drew  down  the  wrath  of  God  so  signally  as  to  deprive  the  offender  of  even  a 
momentary  respite,  shall  he  who  corrupts  unutterably  awful  doctrines  find  excuse 
and  pardon  ?  Assuredly  not.  A  want  of  zeal  in  small  matters  is  the  cause  of  all 
our  calamities ;  because  slight  errors  escape  fitting  correction,  greater  ones  creep 
in.  As  in  the  body  a  neglect  of  wounds  generates  fever,  mortification,  and  death ; 
so  in  the  soul,  slight  evils  overlooked  open  the  door  to  graver  ones.    It  is  accounted 


..  i.]  GALATIANS.  18 


a  trivial  fault  that  one  man  should  neglect  fasting ;  that  another,  who  is  established 
in  the  pure  faith,  should  shrink  from  its  bold  profession,  and  be  led  by  cir- 
cumstances to  dissemble ;  that  a  third  should  be  irritated,  and  threaten  to  depart 
from  the  true  faith,  is  excused  on  the  plea  of  passion  and  resentment.  Thus  a 
thousand  similar  errors  are  daily  introduced  into  the  Church,  which  is  divided  into 
as  many  parties,  and  we  are  become  a  laughing-stock  to  Jews  and  Greeks.  But  if 
a  proper  rebuke  had  at  first  been  given  to  those  who  attempted  slight  perversions, 
and  a  deflection  from  the  Divine  oracles,  such  a  pestilence  would  not  have  been 
generated,  nor  such  a  storm  have  shaken  the  Church.  You  will  now  understand 
why  Paul  calls  circumcision  a  perversion  of  the  gospel.  There  are  many  of  us 
now  who  fast  on  the  same  day  as  the  Jews,  and  keep  the  Sabbaths  in  the  same 
manner ;  and  what  shall  I  call  our  tolerance  of  this,  noble  or  miserable  ?  Again, 
many  Gentile  customs  are  observed  by  some  among  us ;  omens,  auguries,  presages, 
distinctions  of  days,  a  curious  attention  to  the  circumstances  of  their  children's 
birth,  and,  as  soon  as  they  are  born,  tablets  with  impious  inscriptions  placed  upon 
their  unhappy  heads,  thereby  teaching  them  from  the  first  to  lay  aside  virtuous 
endeavours,  and  drawing  them  as  much  as  possible  under  the  false  domination  of 
fate.  But  if  Christ  profits  nothing  those  that  are  circumcised,  how  shall  faith 
hereafter  avail  to  the  salvation  of  those  who  have  introduced  such  corruptions  ? 
(Chrysostom.)  The  risks  of  revelation  not  such  as  to  invalidate  its  accuracy : — 
But  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  mind  of  man  being  brought  into  practical  working 
relations  with  external  certainty,  even  at  some  distance  in  time  and  place,  without 
claiming  infallibility  for  the  interpreter,  we  may  refer  to  familiar  facts,  on  a  much 
lower  plane,  for  a  decisive  illustration.  At  Greenwich  Observatory  there  is  an 
exact  and  absolutely  certain  knowledge  of  the  true  time  of  day.  This  certain 
knowledge  of  the  time  of  day  is  made  the  basis  of  the  safety  and  direction  of  the 
whole  internal  traffic  of  England,  and  of  the  direction  of  our  whole  navy,  and 
vast  commercial  marine,  on  every  sea.  In  the  one  case  the  time  is  transmitted 
from  the  infallible  clock  at  Greenwich  by  telegraph,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  to 
the  extremities  of  the  country,  and  all  the  railways  sufficiently  well  set  their  time 
by  that  standard.  In  the  other,  the  "  Nautical  Almanac,"  a  book-revelation,  not- 
withstanding all  the  risks  of  printing,  carries  the  results  of  the  infallible  science 
of  Greenwich  to  sea  in  every  craft  that  leaves  our  shores.  There  may  be  occasional 
and  infinitesimal  defects  in  the  transmission  of  the  time  to  London,  Edinburgh, 
and  Dublin.  There  may  be  occasional  errors  in  the  printing  of  the  "Nautical 
Almanac,"  and  occasionally  much  ignorance  and  obtuseness  in  captains  and 
lieutenants  in  taking  observations  of  the  sun  and  moon ;  whence  errors  in  the 
working  of  the  longitude  and  latitude,  and  awful  catastrophes  at  sea.  But  surely 
no  one  would  hence  argue  that  the  endeavour  to  enforce  the  infallible  rule  of 
Greenwich  time  upon  railways  and  ship-masters  was  an  interference  with  the 
liberties  of  modern  intelligence,  or  in  fact  an  endeavour  which  must  needs 
practically  fail,  through  the  fallibility,  or  bad  eyesight  or  arithmetic,  of  station- 
masters  and  captains.  No  one  would  thiuk  of  telling  each  such  functionary  that 
on  the  whole,  since  the  use  of  an  infallible  authority  would  involve  a  claim  to 
infallibility  in  the  nautical  observer,  it  was  best  for  every  one  to  make  of  the  facts 
of  nature  what  he  could,  and  to  guess  the  hour,  each  man  according  to  his  several 
ability.  And  if  any  of  these  people  set  up  for  rejectors  of  the  message  from 
Greenwich,  or  said  that  it  required  a  commentary  to  make  it  a  safe  guide,  they 
would  be  reckoned  somewhat  too  intelligent  for  their  situations.  Now  in  this 
parable  the  Greenwich  Observatory  corresponds  with  the  apostolic  certainty  in 
doctrinal  teaching.  There  may  be  some  risks  in  the  transmission  of  its  message. 
There  may  be  errors  in  the  attempt  to  interpret  a  book-revelation.  But  on  the 
whole  it  is  true  that  the  apostolic  certainty  is  effectually  present,  close  at  hand 
amongst  us,  and  may  be  most  correctly  apprehended,  no  doubt  in  different 
degrees,  by  those  who  most  simply  and  intelligently  desire  to  receive  its  directions 
The  difficulties  resemble  those  which  hinder  the  attainment  of  scientific  certainty 
in  nature.  There  are  some  risks  in  both  cases.  There  are  personal  equations,  as 
the  astronomers  say  of  each  observer's  eye,  to  be  eliminated ;  and  the  abstract 
difficulty  might  be  made  to  appear  enormous.  But  the  parallel  is  complete 
between  the  laws  of  sound  interpretation  of  nature  and  those  of  the  sound 
interpretation  of  recorded  revelation.  And  in  neither  case  is  it  safe  to  throw 
overboard  the  standard  of  certainty,  or  to  set  up  for  free  and  independent  in- 
vestigators simply  because  of  minor  risks  attending  the  effort  to  receive  the  Divine 
communications.     The  misfortune  is,  perhaps,  that  in  religion  there  are  so  many 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  1. 

more  persons  whose  worldly  interests,  or  intellectual  twist,  incline  them  not  to  se« 
what  the  apostles  wrote,  th«n  there  are  of  station-masters  and  captains  who  do 
not  desire  to  know  the  Greenwich  time.  (E.  White.)  The  unchangeable 
gospel: — I  take  it  that  the  gospel  cannot  be  a  changeable,  variable,  shifting 
gospel,  a  sort  of  slidmg-scale  gospel,  because — 1.  It  is  certain  that  man  baa 
not  changed.  Just  to-day  man  is  what  he  was  in  the  days  of  Christ  and  the 
apostles.  2.  I  think  nobody  would  have  the  hardihood  to  deny  it — that  truth  in 
the  very  essence  of  it  must  always  be  the  same.  A  fact,  though  it  happened  ten 
thousand  years  ago,  is  as  much  a  fact  as  if  it  happened  yesterday.  Truth  must  be 
always  the  same.  "But  there  is  a  great  advance  made,"  says  one.  How?  In 
the  principles  of  things — in  mathematical  science,  for  instance.  Certainly  there 
are  great  masters  of  mathematics,  and  great  advances  have  been  made,  but  upon 
the  principle  that  two  and  two  are  four,  and  twice  three  makes  six,  there  has  been 
no  advance.  A  proposal  for  a  new  multiplication  table  would  scarcely  be  enter- 
tained even  in  a  board  school.  No ;  these  fundamental  principles  stand  the  same, 
and  so  must  the  fundamental  truths  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  are  to  all 
good  men's  thinking  what  these  tables,  these  fixed  facts  in  mathematics,  are  in  all 
calculations.  Truth  must  be  the  same.  It  cannot  be  altered ;  it  is  impossible. 
8.  The  gospel  is  the  same,  because  it  was,  and  is,  sufficient  for  all  the  purposes 
tor  which  God  sent  it.  What  I  mean  is  this,  we  want  to  give  the  people  the 
gospel  more  by  itself.  There  is  a  good  story  told  of  Caesar  Malan.  I  should 
never  forget  my  vision  of  that  grave,  reverend  man,  whom  many  at  this  platform 
still  remember.  He  was  a  man  of  strong  idiosyncrasies,  and  of  somewhat  singular 
habits.  Going  once  from  Boulogne  to  Paris,  he  got  into  a  coach  ;  and  he  was  no 
sooner  seated,  than  he  began  reading  out  a  chapter  from  the  Bible.  A  Frenchman 
opposite  strongly  objected,  and  I  think  with  some  reason,  as  persons  in  public 
conveyances  should  remember  that  there  are  other  people  there.  Caesar  Malan, 
however,  did  not  think  of  that,  and  he  continued  to  read  the  chapter,  and  the 
Frenchman  continued  to  object.  He  said  he  did  not  believe  in  the  authority  of  the 
Bible,  and  that  it  was  offensive  to  him  to  hear  it  read.  At  last  Csesar  Malan's 
French  deacon  said,  "  I  think,  dear  pastor,  that  I  differ  from  you  about  your  doing 
this :  this  gentleman  does  not  believe  in  the  authority  of  the  book,  and  you  ought 
to  prove  to  him  its  authority  and  then  read  it."  Said  he,  "  If  I  was  going  out  to 
fight  and  I  had  my  sword,  and  I  met  somebody  on  the  other  side,  would  you  say, 
•First  prove  that  you  have  a  sword  before  you  fight?'  No;  I  will  prove  it  is  a 
sword."  So  he  went  on  reading.  He  and  his  deacon  supped  together,  and  the 
waiter  eame  in,  and  asked  whether  they  were  going  on  the  next  morning  in  the 
coach  to  Paris,  because,  he  said,  that  the  French  gentleman  who  had  ridden  with 
them  on  the  previous  day  was  anxious  to  ride  with  Mr.  Malan  again.  He  after- 
wards became  a  communicant  at  Caesar  Malan's  church,  and  was  one  of  his  best 
friends.  It  is  the  Word  of  God  that  does  it — not  our  talking  about  God's  Word ; 
it  is  the  Word  itself.  Quote  plenty  of  Scripture ;  put  plenty  of  Divine  words  in. 
It  is  God's  Word,  not  man's  comments  on  God's  Word,  that  saves  souls.  Further* 
more,  dear  friends,  we  want  no  improved  gospel,  because  there  is  nothing  that 
requires  that  the  gospel  should  be  amended.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  mixture  of 
truth  and  error  dangerous : — A  friend  of  mine  some  time  ago  bought  some  eoals ; 
and  as  is  natural  to  coals,  having  to  deal  with  the  earth,  being  earthy,  there  were 
some  slates  in  them,  and  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  the  slates  now  and  then 
exploded,  somewhat  to  damage  a  person's  eyes.  Therefore  he  said  to  the  coal 
merchant,  "  My  dear  sir,  the  next  lot  of  coals  you  sell  me,  would  you  mind  selling 
me  coals  ?  I  know,  of  course,  that  some  bits  of  slate  will  get  among  them,  and  I 
am  willing  to  take  a  fair  proportion ;  but  I  should  like  to  have  the  coals  by  them- 
selves and  the  slates  by  themselves."  That  is  precisely  what  I  would  have  done 
with  Holy  Scripture.  We  will  have  so  many  books  inspired — the  coals — and  so 
much  marked  off  ae  being  slates.  It  is  a  serious  thing  if  you  get  a  bit  of  slate  into 
your  common  teaching,  and  your  faith  and  daily  hfe ;  you  do  not  know  what 
damage  may  be  done  by  it.  (Ibid.)  Steadfast  in  the  truth : — There  is  a  story 
told  of  Waterloo,  that  a  certain  regiment  had  been  so  set  upon  by  the  French  that 
one  of  their  officers  wrote  to  the  Duke  and  said  they  would  be  cut  in  pieces  unless 
help  was  sent.  All  that  the  Duke  said  was  "  Stand  firm ! "  and  the  officer 
galloped  back  with  the  order.  Again  the  soldier  said :  "  It  is  all  np  with  us,  and 
we  shall  be  destroyed ;  there  are  very  few  of  us  left  even  now."  Again  the  officer 
went  to  the  Duke,  and  acain  his  order  was  *•  Stand  firm."  They  did  stand  firm 
and  left  their  bodies  on  the  place;  but  England  was  rid  of  the  despot.     Oh,  sirs, 


SHAP.  I.]  GALATIANS.  11 

the  order  to-day  is,  "  Be  ye  steadfast,  immoveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work 
of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  labour  i3  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 
(Ibid.)  The  work  of  deception : — I.  Is  easy.  II.  Proceeds  from  a  perversion  of 
the  truth.  III.  Cannot  escape  punishment.  IV.  Must  be  unsparingly  exposed 
and  condemned.  (J.  Lyth.)  The  instability  of  many  is: — I.  Matter  of  fact— 
tney  are  easily  swayed  by  false  opinions  and  drawn  away  from  God — through 
ignorance,  pride,  natural  tendency  to  error.  II.  Matter  of  surprise — we  expect 
better  things  of  those  who  have  received  the  truth,  because  it  is  its  own  witness- 
it  exposes  and  condemns  error.  III.  Matter  of  regret — it  is  to  grieve  God,  who 
has  called  them ;  to  forfeit  the  grace  of  Christ;  to  trust  in  another  gospel  which  is 
not  another.  (Ibid.)  Another  gospel : — I.  The  pretensions  of  error.  IL  The 
folly  of  them.  (Ibid.)  Observe — I.  There  is  but  one  gospel;  all  others  an 
delusions.  II.  The  gospel  may  be  perverted  by  adding  to,  or  taking  from  it; 
falsifying  its  meaning  and  application ;  converting  it  into  a  system  of  works  or  an 
occasion  of  licence.  III.  To  pervert  the  gospel  is  to  destroy  it ;  it  is  no  longer 
gospel — brings  no  salvation.  IV.  Such  perversion  brings  trouble — to  the  Church, 
to  the  individual.  (Ibid.)  The  perversion  of  the  gospel  is: — I.  Common.  IL 
Mischievous.  III.  Foolish,  because  wicked;  fatal.  (Ibid.)  Soul  troublers  :— 
Religious  errors  are  soul  troublers.  Like  the  mystic  star  of  the  Apocalypse,  which, 
falling  into  the  waters,  turned  the  peaceful  element  into  turbulence  and  blood,  they 
Etir  up  the  Church  into  distressing  agitations.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  gospel 
of  Christ: — What  is  meant  by  this?  (1)  The  gospel  which  speaks  of  Christ; 
(2)  the  gospel  which  was  delivered  by  Christ ;  or  ( 3)  the  gospel  that  belongs 
to  Christ?  (4)  Does  it  not  combine  all  these  meanings?  (Bishop  Lightfoot.) 
The  gospel  is  tha  Word  of  God :  Christ  is  the  Word  of  God.  He  is  the  Word 
containing  all  words.  Yon  need  not  go  to  a  theologian  to  learn  that  religion 
should  be  called  a  gospel :  go  into  the  streets ;  do  yon  not  see  in  wretched  faces 
that  a  gospel  is  wanted — good  news  from  God  ?  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Perverting  the 
gospel : — If,  at  the  tent  door,  the  Arab  offers  to  the  thirsty  passer-by  a  cup  of 
water,  clear,  cool,  and  sparkling  in  the  cnp,  but  in  which  he  has  cleverly  concealed 
a  painful  and  deadly  poison,  he  would  deserve  and  receive  the  anathema  of  all 
honest  men.  Much  more  terrible  shall  be  the  doom  of  him  who,  pretending 
friendship  with  the  souls  of  men,  and  offering  them  in  their  need,  instead  of  the 
pure  water  of  life  the  deadly  poison  of  false  doctrine,  shall  bring  down  upon  him- 
self the  righteous  and  unerring  anathema  of  God.    (22.  Brewin.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Bat  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel 
mnto  you. — St.  Paul's  protestation  against  seducers : — I.  The  miscabbiaqk  supposed — 
M  Though  we,  or  an  angel,"  &o.  1.  Not  persons  of  the  greatest  interest.  "Wa," 
who  have  this  relation  to  you  as  Pastors  and  Teachers ;  "we,"  whom  at  present  yon 
esteem ;  let  neither  our  relation  to  you,  nor  your  affection  to  us,  prevail  in  this 
particular.  Friends  are  no  friends  when  they  go  about  to  divide  us  from  the  great 
Friend  of  all.  "  We  " — for  our  number — "  Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to 
do  evil  "  ;  nor  to  think  evil.  In  which  good  counsel  of  the  apostle  take  notice  of 
his  sincerity  and  ingenuity  of  disposition,  in  that  he  would  not  have  so  much  as 
himself  to  be  taken  into  consideration  to  the  prejudice  or  disadvantage  of  the 
gospel.  2.  Not  persons  of  the  greatest  perfections — "  Or  an  angel  from  heaven." 
Three  kinds  of  perfection  are  here  expressed.  1.  The  perfection  of  parts  and 
understanding,  and  natural  abilities.  The  greatest  learning  is  not  to  be  heard  to 
the  disparagement  of  truth.  2.  The  perfection  of  grace  and  spiritual  endowments. 
The  greatest  holiness  is  not  to  be  made  a  patron  of  error.  Satan  takes  advantage 
of  reputed  goodness  to  wind  others  into  labyrinths  of  opinion  and  practice.  3. 
The  perfection  of  employment  or  manner  of  dispensation.  An  angel  from  heaven. 
The  highest  revelations  are  not  to  be  heard  against  Scripture.  And  for  these  cases 
in  which  some  indulgence  and  freedom  is  to  be  granted,  as  in  smaller  matters,  yet 
respect  is  to  be  had  to  the  principles  whereupon  this  is  granted.  1.  That  it  be  not 
out  of  an  indifferency  and  neutrality  in  religion.  2.  That  it  proceed  not  from 
corruption  and  carnal  policy.  "  Bear  with  me ;  let  alone  my  errors ;  I  will  pardon 
yours  " ;  which  people  cry  up  charity  in  such  matters  that  they  may  better  hide 
their  own  unsoundness.  In  this  passage  there  are  divers  gradations.  1.  That  the 
apostle  lays  this  grievous  and  heavy  censure  not  so  much  upon  the  opinion  simply 
considered,  or  privately  enjoyed,  but  upon  the  vent  and  communication  of  it  in 
preaching  (1  Tim.  vi.  3 ;  Tit.  i.  10,  11 ;  Matt.  v.  19).  2.  It  is  not  preaching  at 
large,  but  to  you  ;  there  is  an  emphasis  upon  his  hearers.    Of  all  false  teachers 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  t, 

there  are  none  like  seducers.  3.  There  is  an  emphasis  also  upon  the  doctrine. 
There  is  a  caution  against  false  doctrine ;  also  against  new  doctrine.    II.  Thb 

CAUTION     OB    DENUNCIATION     OF      PUNISHMENT     INFERRED     UPON     IT — "  Let     him     be 

accursed."  There  are  two  things  which  require  to  be  unfolded.  1.  The  apostle's 
authority.  2.  The  apostle's  charity.  This  does  not  give  allowance  to  others 
lightly  and  from  a  private  spirit  to  be  full  of  imprecations.  Observe  in  this 
emphasis  his  confidence  and  firm  persuasion  of  the  truth  which  he  had 
taught  and  delivered.  Preachers  have  need  to  be  well  assured  of  the  truth  of 
that  which  they  teach.  1.  Because  they  deal  in  matters  of  great  importance. 
They  speak  on  matters  of  life  and  death.  2.  There  are  many  more  whose 
judgments  do  depend  upon  it.  3.  For  the  better  enforcing  of  the  truth 
itself.  The  confidence  of  the  preacher  stirs  up  belief  in  the  hearer.  But 
sometimes  the  more  confident  are  the  most  ignorant.  It  is  not  a  confidence  of 
presumption  but  of  well-grounded  knowledge ;  not  of  fancy  but  of  assurance.  1. 
The  apostle's  zeal  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  There  is  great  earnestness  expressed 
in  this  simple  proposition  of  the  text.  2.  His  impartiality.  3.  His  constancy. 
"  As  we  said  before  "  (ver.  9).  How  far  this  was  not  the  same  in  the  ninth  verse  which 
he  said  in  the  eighth.  To  take  notice  of  the  difference,  how  far  it  was  not  the  same ; 
for  this  there  is  a  double  alteration,  the  one  in  the  expression  of  the  preacher,  and 
the  other  in  the  expression  of  the  doctrine :  for  the  preacher,  that  is  signified  in 
the  eighth  verse — "  We,  or  an  angel  from  heaven  ;  "  but  in  the  ninth  indefinitely— 
"  If  any  one."  Then  as  to  the  doctrine  :  in  the  eighth  verse  it  is  laid  down  under 
this  phrase — "  which  we  have  preached."  That  "  which  ye  have  received  "  is  mora 
than  "  what  we  have  preached."  1.  His  constancy  as  to  his  doctrine.  (1)  The  same 
for  matter.  (2)  The  same  as  to  the  quality  of  it.  2.  The  constancy  to  the  censure 
which  he  imposed.  This  threefold.  (1)  The  inflexibility  and  unvariableness 
of  the  gospel  and  doctrine  of  Christ.  (2)  The  duties  of  the  hearers  of  it.  Not  to 
receive  all  we  hear  without  consideration.  (3)  The  heresy  of  false  teachers.  (T. 
Horton,  D.D.)  Orthodoxy  relates  to  the  matter  of  preaching  more  than  to  the 
manner: — There  are  divers  improvements  and  modifications  of  the  same  truth, 
according  to  the  various  gifts  and  abilities  which  God  communicates  to  His 
servants,  some  in  one  kind,  and  some  in  another.  Ye  shall  have  some  kind  of 
persons  who  would  confine  all  kind  of  preachers  to  one  and  the  same  kind  of  way 
and  method  of  preaching.  This  is  a  business  which  is  not  to  be  expected,  neither 
does  the  apostle  urge  it  in  this  Scripture,  but  in  the  allowing  to  every  one  that  gift 
and  manner  of  preaching  which  is  most  agreeable  to  himself  (so  it  be  grave  and 
sober,  and  proper,  and  becoming  the  majesty  of  the  gospel),  he  does  limit  them 
only  for  matter  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Scripture ;  that  there  be  nothing  delivered 
but  what  does  consist  with  that,  and  which  either  directly  or  by  consequent 
is  to  be  found  in  it.  (Ibid.)  The  gospel  unchangeable: — First,  we  have  here 
set  before  us  the  inflexibility  and  unvariableness  of  the  gospel  and  doctrine  of 
Christ ;  that  it  is  a  thing  which  does  not  change  with  times,  or  persons,  or  con- 
ditions, but  is  still  one  and  the  same,  otherwise  the  apostle  could  not  have 
been  thus  absolute  and  peremptory  about  it.  What  was  religion  formerly,  is 
religion  still ;  and  what  is  now  religion,  was  religion  many  years  ago  in  the  genera- 
tions which  are  past,  and  will  be,  and  must  be  likewise  to  the  end  of  the  world.  We 
speak  now  in  regard  of  the  things  themselves  in  their  own  nature.  Indeed  men's 
opinions  alter  and  vary  about  them,  but  the  points  themselves  are  still  the  same : 
we  can  have  no  new  gospel,  nor  new  Jesus,  nor  new  Spirit  of  God,  as  the  apostle 
seems  to  imply  in  the  Scripture  before  alleged.  All  these  things  are  unalterable,  and 
inviolable,  and  indispensable ;  there's  no  changing,  nor  bartering  of  them.  Look 
as  the  principles  of  nature  are  immutable,  so  likewise  the  principles  of  grace.  That 
the  principles  of  nature  are  so  is  very  clear ;  reason  is  the  same  in  all  men,  and  in  all 
nations,  and  in  all  ages,  and  the  same  common  principles  of  it  are  scattered  and 
dispersed,  and  communicated  to  the  whole  world.  This  holds  also  (by  a  pro- 
portion) as  to  the  principles  of  religion  and  Christianity ;  though  so  many  have 
not  these  principles  in  them,  as  have  the  principles  of  nature :  yet  so  many  as 
have  them,  they  have  them  as  immutably  and  unchangeably,  one  as  the  other ; 
and  ye  may  as  soon  rase  out  these,  as  ye  may  rase  out  them.  The  ground  hereof 
is  this :  Because  these  things  are  laid  in  the  nature  of  God  Himself,  who  alters 
not ;  as  God  Himself  is  unchangeable,  so  is  His  truth  which  issues  and  proceeds 
from  Himself.  And  such  a  kind  of  thing  is  the  gospel,  it  is  an  extract  and 
emanation  from  God  ;  it  was  hid  in  Him,  and  it  does  spring  out,  and  flow  forth  from 
Him.     {Ibid.)        Tlie  receiver  of  false  doctrine  as  bad  as  t lie  preacher  of  it : — And 


chat.  I.]  GALATIANS.  23 

therefore  ye  may  again  take  notice  of  it,  that  it  is  not  only  said,  "  Besides  what 
we  have  preached,"  bat  "  What  ye  have  received."  The  receiver  is  as  bad  as  the 
thief  in  this  particular:  and  as  it  is  a  cursed  thing  to  scatter  error,  so  it  is  a? 
cursed  a  tiling  to  take  it  up,  and  carry  it  home,  and  keep  it  by  us,  or  nouns: 
it  with  us ;  which  therefore  we  should  now  all  be  persuaded  (in  the  fear  of  God ; 
to  avoid  and   shun  what  we  can.     (Ibid.)  The    danger   of  adding  to    the 

doctrine  of  tlie  gospel: — The  occasion  of  these  words.  The  Sadducees  urged  the 
necessity  of  circumcision,  and  keeping  the  law  of  Moses ;  thus  altering  the  term 
and  conditions  of  religion  they  made  it  quite  another  thing  from  what  our  Saviour 
intended.  I.  That  the  addition  of  anything  to  the  Christian  religion  as  necessary 
to  be  believed  or  practised  in  order  to  salvation,  is  a  perverting  of  the  gospel  o! 
Christ,  and  preaching  another  gospel.  II.  No  pretence  of  infallibility  is  sufficient 
to  authorize  and  warrant  the  addition  of  anything  to  the  Christian  doctrine,  as 
necessary  to  be  believed  or  practised,  in  order  to  salvation.  III.  Christians  may  judge 
and  discern  when  another  gospel  is  preached,  when  new  articles  of  faith,  or  points 
of  practice  not  enjoined  by  the  gospel,  are  imposed  upon  Christians.  IV.  I  proceed 
to  the  fourth  observation,  which  is  plainly  consequent  from  those  laid  down  before ; 
namely,  that  since  the  declaration  of  the  gospel,  and  the  confirmation  given  to  it, 
there  is  no  authority  in  the  Christian  Church  to  impose  upon  Christians  anything, 
as  of  necessity  to  salvation,  which  the  gospel  hath  not  made  so.  Y.  It  follows 
likewise  from  the  foregoing  observations,  that  there  is  no  visible  judge  (how  much 
soever  he  may  pretend  to  infallibility),  to  whose  determination  and  decision,  in 
matters  of  faith  and  practice  necessary  to  salvation,  Christians  are  bound  to 
submit,  without  examination,  whether  those  things  be  agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  gospel,  or  not.  VI.  and  last  observation  from  the  text;  that  whosoever 
teaoheth  anything,  as  of  necessity  to  salvation  to  be  believed  or  practised,  besides 
what  the  gospel  of  Christ  hath  made  necessary,  does  fall  under  the  anathema  here  in 
the  text ;  because  they  that  do  so,  do,  according  to  the  mind  of  St.  Paul,  pervert  tbe 
gospel  of  Christ,  and  preach  another  gospel.  (J.  Tillotson,  D.D.)  The  preaching 
of  a  false  gospel  a  great  evil: — I.  These  is  a  true  gospel.  1.  He  was  convinced  of 
the  truth  of  the  gospel,  because  it  had  been  made  known  to  him  by  Divine 
revelation.  2.  He  was  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  because  of  the 
change  if  had  wrought  in  him.  3.  He  was  assured  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  by  the  manifestations  of  its  power  in  others.  II.  There  is  a  false 
eosPEL.  1.  It  was  a  false  gospel  to  teach  that  there  was  any  other  plan  by 
which  a  sinner  could  be  justified  than  by  believing  upon  Jesus  Christ.  2. 
It  was  a  false  gospel  to  teach  that  believers  ought  to  obey  the  ceremonial  law. 
UL  The  publication  of  a  false  gospel  is  a  oreat  evil.  1.  The  publication 
of  a  false  gospel  is  ruinous  to  man.  2.  The  publication  of  a  false  gospel  is  dis- 
honouring to  God.  Lessons:  1.  Amid  the  various  methods  by  which  the  truth 
of  the  gospel  is  established,  there  is  some  one  in  particular  that  suits  the  condition 
of  every  man.  2.  On  the  part  of  those  who  labour  in  the  gospel,  there  should  be 
the  deepest  and  most  solemn  conviction  concerning  the  truth  they  declare.  3. 
Faith  in  the  true  gospel  is  essential  to  salvation ;  without  it,  the  soul  is  accursed. 
(Richard  Nicholls.)  False  teachers  cursed: — As  he  is  a  traitor  to  his  prince  who 
taketh  upon  him  to  coin  money  out  of  a  base  metal,  yea,  although  in  the  stamp 
he  putteth  for  a  show  the  image  of  the  prince,  so  he  that  shall  broach  any  doctrine 
that  cometh  not  from  God,  whatsoever  he  say  for  it,  or  whatsoever  gloss  he  set  on 
it,  he  is  a  traitor  unto  God,  yea,  in  truth,  a  cursed  traitor,  though  he  were  an 
angel  from  heaven.  (T.  Boston.)  False  teaching  ruinous  to  souls: — In  the  war 
on  the  Rhine,  in  1794,  the  French  got  possession  of  the  village  of  Bhinthal  by  a 
very  ourious  ruse  de  guerre  of  one  Joseph  Werck,  a  trumpeter.  This  village  was 
maintained  by  an  Austrian  party  of  six  hundred  hussars.  Two  companies  of  foot 
were  ordered  to  make  an  attaok  on  it  at  ten  o'clock  at  night.  The  Austrians  had 
been  apprised  of  the  intended  attack,  and  were  drawn  up  ready  to  charge  on  the 
assailing  party.  On  perceiving  this,  Werck  detached  himself  from  his  own  party, 
and  contrived,  by  favour  of  the  darkness,  to  slip  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy ; 
when,  taking  his  trumpet,  he  first  sounded  the  rally  in  the  Austrian  manner,  and, 
next  moment,  the  retreat.  Tbe  Austrians,  deceived  by  the  signal,  were  off  in  an 
instant  at  full  gallop ;  and  the  French  became  masters  of  the  village  without 
striking  a  blow.  (Percy.)  Fahe  teachers  useless : — A  Universalist  preached  to 
a  chance  audience,  and,  at  its  close,  offered  to  preach  again  at  a  future  day  $  when 
an  old  Friend  arose,  and  said,  "  If  thou  hast  told  the  truth  this  time,  we  do  not 
need  thee  any  mora ;  and,  if  thou  hast  told  us  a  lie,  we  do  not  want  thee  any 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  i, 

moie."  The  gospel  according  to  Paul: — To  exercise  candour  and  forbearance 
towards  those  who  differ  from  us,  is  a  Christian  duty.  Yet  there  are  bounds 
beyond  which  candour  is  indifference,  and  forbearance  treason.  In  things  non- 
essential various  opinions  may  be  tolerated ;  in  essentials  we  must  be  firm  and 
unwavering.  St.  Paul  sees  that  in  Galatia  the  very  foundations  of  Christianity  are 
shaking.  He  therefore  reasserts  with  great  force  the  gospel  he  had  preached 
there.  I.  What  was  the  gospel  Paul  preached  ?  The  great  doctrine  he  insisted 
on,  was  justification  by  faith  without  the  works  of  the  law.  Now  consider — 1. 
His  line  of  argument.  The  law  curses  and  condemns.  By  faith  alone  are  we 
j  ustified,  and  made  partakers  of  the  benefits  of  the  gospel.  The  prophets  preached 
this.  The  covenant  with  Abraham  was  one  of  promise.  2.  The  objections  he 
anticipates.  No  ground  for  saying  the  gospel  tends  to  licentiousness.  Works  are 
needful,  though  not  to  be  taken  into  account.  3.  The  perversions  of  which  he 
complains.  The  addition  of  legal  observance  to  performance  of  duties  enjoined 
by  the  gospel,  under  the  impression  that  thus  they  could  render  themselves  more 
acceptable  to  God.  This  was  mongrel — neither  law  nor  gospel ;  so  practically  a 
rejection  of  the  gospel.  H.  Why  did  Paul  manifest  such  zeal  in  maintaining 
this  gospel  ?  1.  To  maintain  the  purity  of  the  gospel,  the  fountain  of  life  to  the 
world.  2.  To  maintain  the  importance  of  the  gospel,  the  only  source  of  salvation. 
3.  To  maintain  the  sufficiency  of  the  gospel  to  justify  and  sanctify.  Application : 
If  this  gospel  be  true,  it  is  of  importance  (a)  to  be  received  by  you,  and  (b)  to  be 
diffused  by  you  over  the  world.  There  was  nothing  that  Paul  would  not  do  and 
suffer,  in  order  to  propagate  the  gospel  of  God.  Shall  not  we  emulate  his  zeal  T 
(Charles  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  one  gospel : — The  gospel  must  be  preached  in  its 

(1)  oneness;  (2)  fulness;  (3)  symmetry;  (4)  purity;  (5)  sufficiency.  (W.Cadman, 
M.A.)  Only  one  gospel: — Strong  words ;  to  many,  offensive  words.  The  doctrine 
of  "  only  one  gospel "  is  not  popular.  Men  are  impatient  of  dogma,  opposed  to 
all  exclusiveness  in  religion  ;  they  like  to  think  there  are  many  gospels,  many 
avenues  leading  to  salvation.  The  question,  however,  iB,  not  whether  the  doctrine 
of  **  only  one  gospel "  is  popular,  but  whether  it  is  true.  There  are  various 
considerations  which  serve  to  prove  its  truth.  I.  The  natube  and  condition  or 
man.  The  nature  of  man  is  one  varying  greatly  in  outward  form  and  expression, 
but  still  essentially  one.  And  as  his  nature  is  one,  so  is  the  moral  disease  under 
which  it  labours.  Sin,  although  manifold  in  its  modes  of  action,  is  essentially  one 
in  principle,  it  is  the  assertion  of  independence,  rebellion  against  God's  authority, 
the  setting  up  of  the  human  will  in  opposition  to  the  Divine ;  and  being  thus  one  and 
the  same  disease,  one  and  only  one  remedy  is  required  to  heal  it.  II.  The  natube 
and  character  of  God.  Oneness  His  essential  attribute,  and  we  should  expect  a 
manifestation  of  that  quality  in  any  scheme  for  the  salvation  of  man  emanating 
from  God.  III.  The  express  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God.  One,  and  only 
one,  plan  of  salvation  is  revealed  in  the  Bible  (Acts  iv.  12).  1.  The  terms  of  th>4 
one  salvation  are  broad,  in  that  they  propose  to  us  the  entire  Person  and  work  of 
Christ  as  the  basis  upon  which  we  may  build.  2.  They  are  narrow,  in  that  they 
rigorously  exclude  every  other  scheme  and  means  of  salvation.  It  is  really  a 
question  of  supremacy.  One  must  reign,  either  God  or  man.  In  claiming 
supremacy,  God  claims  His  right ;  man  must  submit,  or  perish.  (Emilius  Bayley, 
B.D.)  The  complete  gospel : — The  apostle  obviously  means  to  state,  not  only 
that  his  gospel  was  true,  but  complete — nothing  needed  to  be  added  to  it.  The 
Jewish  teachers  might  have  said :  We  do  not  contradict,  we  only  modify,  add  to, 
and  so  improve  the  gospel  as  preached  by  Paul.  The  grand  subject  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  the  way  in  which  a  sinner  may  be  restored  to  the  Divine  favour,  and 
obtain  the  pardon  of  his  sin  and  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  It  is  because  the 
gospel  of  Christ  contains  the  only  true  account  of  the  only  way  of  justification, 
and  that  a  way  exactly  suited  to  our  wretched  circumstances,  that  it  receives  its 
name  of  "gospel" — glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  "Another  gospel " means,  then,  a 
system  of  doctrine  teaching  a  way  of  obtaining  the  Divine  favour  different  from 
that  laid  down  in  Christ's  gospel.  The  leading  principles  of  Christ's  gospel  are 
two :  (a)  that  men  are  restored  to  the  Divine  favour  entirely  on  account  of  the 
doings  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  (b)  that  men  are  interested  in  these 
doings  and  sufferings  entirely  by  believing.  Every  plan  of  restoring  men  to  God's 
favour,  which  does  not  embrace  these  two  principles,  or  which  embraces  what  ia 
inconsistent  with  either  of  them,  is  another  gospel.  Every  plan,  for  example, 
which,  like  that  of  the  Judaising  teachers,  leads  men  to  depend  on  their  own 
obedience  to  any  law  to  any  extent,  in  any  degree,  either  as  the  ground  of  their. 


..  i.]  GALATIAN8.  25 

justification  or  the  means  of  their  justification,  is  another  gospel.  It  is  a  most 
momentous  consideration,  that  "the  avowed  atheist  does  not  more  effectually 
reject  the  record  of  God  concerning  His  Son,  than  the  nominal  Christian  who 
believes  something  else  than  this  under  the  name  of  a  gospel,  and  trusts  in  some 
other  Christ  than  this  Christ  under  the  name  of  a  Saviour."  (John  Brown,  D.D.) 
Religious  teaching  to  be  tested  by  the  Bible : — Too  much  to  blame  are  our  over- 
credulous  multitude,  who,  hand  over  head,  admit  and  receive  for  orthodox 
whatsoever  is  propounded  unto  them  by  their  teachers ;  and  think  this  a  sufficient 
warrant  for  any  point  they  hold.  Our  ministers  said  it,  or  such  a  preacher 
delivered  it  in  a  pulpit, — as  if  there  were  not  some  who  run  before  they  are  sent, 
and  publish  the  visions  of  their  own  brain,  prophesying  that  which  God  never 
spake.  In  matters  civil  we  are  more  cautious  and  wary ;  no  gold,  almost,  do  we 
take  before  we  have  tried  it  by  the  touch,  or  weighed  it  in  the  balance ;  and  what 
is  the  reason  ?  because  there  is  much  of  it  light  and  naught ;  yea,  hardly  we  will 
take  a  groat  without  bowing,  bending,  rubbing  it,  and  the  like,  being  therein 
oftentimes  over-curious ;  but  in  religious  matters,  which  concern  our  faith  and 
soul's  salvation,  we  are  over-careless,  albeit  we  are  forewarned  of  many  false 
prophets  that  are  gone  into  the  world,  and  therefore  willed  not  to  believe  every 
spirit,  but  to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God.  This  is  a  great  yet 
common  fault  among  us.  Were  he  an  angel  from  heaven  that  preaches  to  thee, 
yet  art  thou  bound  to  look  into  his  doctrine,  and  examine  it,  and  not  to  take  it 
upon  credit  without  he  bring  sufficient  proof  and  warrant  for  it.  Like  good 
Bereans,  see  you  search  the  Scriptures,  whether  these  things  be  so.  (N.  Rogers.) 
Preaching : — I.  It  seems  to  have  been  ordered  by  Divine  wisdom  that  the  gospel 
should,  as  much  as  possible,  avail  itself  of  the  ordinary  channels  of  com- 
munication AND    INFLUENCE    IN   SPREADING   THROUGH  THE   WORLD.      II.   THE  SECRET 

of  the  power  of  preaching  1.  It  conveys  far  better  than  any  other  vehicle  the 
affirmation  of  the  whole  man — his  whole  nature,  his  whole  experience — to  the 
matter  which  he  desires  to  communicate.  2.  It  brings  into  play  all  the  affinities, 
sympathies,  and  affections  of  the  being,  and  is  therefore  a  most  powerful  instru- 
ment in  arriving  at  the  truth.  3.  So  much  is  true  of  all  preaching.  But  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  there  is  a  source  of  special  power — the  principle  of 
representation — the  power  and  right  to  speak  to  men  in  the  name  of  God.  III. 
The  special  preaching:  of  the  apostolic  age.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.) 
Change  of  gospel : — King  James  II.  sat  for  his  portrait  to  Verelst,  the  great  flower 
painter.  So  completely  was  the  canvas  filled  with  elegant  garlands  of  flowers, 
that  the  king  himself  was  quite  hidden  out  of  sight.  May  we  not  in  preaching 
and  teaching  attract  so  much  attention  to  human  wisdom,  words  and  flowers,  that 
Christ  shall  take  quite  an  unimportant  part  in  our  instruction  ?  And  what  is  that 
but  bringing  in  a  different  gospel,  which  yet  is  not  another?  The  true  gospel : — 
I.  The  true  gospel  exists.  Paul  got  his  assurance  of  this — 1.  By  the  manner 
in  which  it  came  to  him.  (1)  Not  by  intuition,  learning,  or  traditions,  (2)  but  by 
direct  revelation  from  heaven  (Acts  xxvi.  14-27).  2.  By  its  revolutionary  influence 
over  him.  II.  The  true  gospel  is  pervertible.  It  was  perverted.  1.  In 
apostolic  times  (see  almost  all  the  Epistles),  which  exposes  the  folly  of  going 
to  antiquity  for  a  standard  in  theology  or  morals.  2.  In  modern  times, 
by  rationalism,  sectarianism,  and  intolerance.  III.  The  perversion  of  the 
true  gospel  is  a  treicendoos  evel  ;  greater  than  the  anathema  of  angels  or 
apostles.  Why?  Because — 1.  It  misrepresents  the  Divine  character.  2.  Neu- 
tralizes the  Divine  power  to  save.  Conclusion :  1.  A  lesson  to  preachers.  How 
great  their  responsibility.  2.  A  lesson  to  hearers.  "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear." 
(D.  Thomas.)  The  intolerance  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  nature  of  the  gospel 
shows  rr  to  be  uncompromising.  1.  It  is  founded  on  the  Divine  unity,  and  can 
never  make  a  truce  with  Polytheism,  Pantheism,  or  Materialism.  2.  It  displays 
the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  consequently  antagonizes  every  system  which  places 
salvation  in  any  other.  3.  It  is  revealed  by  one  Spirit  through  inspired  men,  and 
therefore  opposes  (1)  rationalism,  (2)  priestcraft.  II.  This  intolerance  is 
adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  human  mind.  L  The  heart  craves  for  one  all- 
sufficient  Redeemer.  2.  The  intellect,  for  an  infallible  revelation  of  Divine  love. 
3.  The  moral  nature,  for  an  authoritative  lawgiver  in  the  midst  of  the  tangled 
perplexities  of  life.  III.  This  intolerance  is  compatible  with  diversity  in  the 
manifestations  of  spiritual  life.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  An  angelic  evangel: — 
I.  Its  advantages  and  disadvantages.  1.  It  would  carry  a  weight  and  conviction 
which  no  human  ministry  can  impart.     2.  But  (1)  then  our  probation  would  be  at 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

an  end,  for  there  would  be  no  choice  between  believing  and  disbelieving.  (2)  We 
should  lose  the  equality  and  sympathy  between  preacher  and  hearer  based  on  a 
common  nature  and  experience.  II.  Its  criterion.  Supposing  such  to  be 
possible,  how  are  we  to  test  its  truth  ?  1.  Not  by  the  rank,  genius,  and  holiness  of 
the  preacher.  2.  But  by  comparing  it  with  revealed  truth.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  anathema : — The  most  dreaded  Jewish  punishment.  Three  degrees.  L  Nn>ot, 
Casting  out  of  the  synagogue  and  separation  from  society,  which  might  last  thirty 
days.  II.  Cherem.  The  sentence  of  devotion  to  death.  III.  Shammatha  or 
Mabanatha,  which  purported  that  the  criminal  had  nothing  to  expect  but  the  final 
infliction  of  the  Day  of  Judgment.  He  was  loaded  with  execrations,  excluded  from 
temple  and  synagogue,  his  goods  were  confiscated,  his  sons  debarred  from  circum- 
cision and  liis  daughters  from  marriage,  and  he  solemnly  remitted  to  the 
judgment  of  heaven.  This  was  the  curse  the  apostle  invoked  on  himself  or  any 
one  who  preached  another  gospel.  (D.  Thomas. )  The  old  gospel  and  the  new : — 
Plenty  of  people  come  to  a  mission  to  hear  a  new  gospel.  I  have  seen  the  old 
gospel  do  many  wonderful  things.  I  have  seen  it  transform  character.  I  have 
seen  it  raise  men  from  the  lowest  dregs  of  society  and  make  them  earnest  and 
useful  members  of  it  But  I  have  never  seen  a  new  gospel  do  anything  for  any 
man.  ( W.  II.  M.  H.  Aitken.)  Christ  the  preacher's  great  theme : — There  was  a 
shield  in  which  the  maker  wrought  his  name,  so  that  it  could  be  effaced  only  by 
the  destruction  of  his  work ;  and  so  should  the  name  of  our  glorious  Immanuel 
be  inwrought  through  the  texture  of  our  instructions,  that  their  very  consistency 
shall  be  dependent  on  the  diffusion  of  that  one  blessed  name  throughout  their 
length  and  breadth.  On  entering  the  cathedral-towns  of  England,  the  towers,  or 
the  spire,  of  the  mother-church,  or  minster,  are  seen  shooting  up  into  the  sky,  far 
above  all  the  other  buildings,  public  or  private,  secular  or  sacred  *,  and  so  let  Jesus, 
the  Church's  Lord,  King,  and  Saviour,  have  the  pre-eminence  above  the  whole 
city  of  topics  and  themes,  Divine  and  human,  which  may  be  meetly  grouped 
around  His  name;  He  casting  His  sanctifying  shadow  over  all.  {Evangelical 
Magazine:)  The  desert  of  traitors  :  — Benedict   Arnold   once  asked   a   loyal 

captain  what  the  Americans  would  do  with  him  if  they  caught  him.  He  replied, 
"I  believe  they  would  first  cut  off  your  lame  leg,  which  was  wounded  in  the 
cause  of  freedom  and  virtue  at  Quebec,  and  bury  it  with  the  honours 
fterwards  hang  the  remainder  of  your  body  on  a  gibbet."  (Foster.) 
The  anathema  y— What  did  the  apostle  mean  by  this  strong  asseveration?  They 
brds,  and  if  true  for  his  time,  are  true  for  ours  also.  What  could 
he  mean  but  this,  that  if  any  misunderstood  and  misrepresented  the  gospel — God's 
grandest  and  simplest  revelation  of  Himself — it  would  show  such  a  perverted 
mind,  heart,  and  conscience,  that  he  could  be  no  other  than  accursed.  He  might 
conceivably  be  an  angel  coming  from  the  undenied  splendours  of  heaven ;  and  if  he 
failed  to  see  God's  glory  in  Bethlehem,  or  could  not  feel  God's  love  at  Calvary,  or 
could  not  behold  Divine  hope  for  man  at  the  resurrection,  then,  though  his  mind 
was  angelic  in  its  powers,  it  would  be  darker  than  the  midnight  sky,  when  the 
clouds  return  after  the  rain.  Such  moral  gloom  has  fallen  on  many  men ;  such 
callousness  to  the  Cross ;  such  indifference  to  the  splendours  of  the  Ascension ; 
such  utter  scepticism  about  the  completeness  of  Christ's  work,  and  the  Divinity  of 
Christ's  person.  And  if  they  have  thus  wilfully  rejected  the  revelation  of  the  first 
century,  if  they  are  not  moved  by  love  to  a  living  Christ,  God  is  their  judge,  and 
the  gospel  itself  has  become  their  accuser.  In  such  a  case  this  inspired  sentence 
is  a  warning  sent  beforehand,  that  they  may,  shaking  off  their  delusion,  find  blessing 
and  life  for  evermore.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  A  curse  upon  him  who  preaches  a 
false  doctrine : — 1.  A  fearfully  earnest  utterance.  2.  Yet  pressingly  needful.  8. 
Instructive  for  all  who  are  wavering.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.L.)  The  curse  of  the 
apostle  against  the  false  apostles  : — I.  Whom  it  strikes.  1.  Necessarily  every  one, 
without  exception,  who  changes  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  into  mischief,  and  so  out 
of  good  prepares  for  himself  death.  2.  Those  also  who  have  deep  insight,  or  other 
high  qualifications  for  serving  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  yet  do  not  preach  it 
purely.  3.  Even  an  angel  himself,  if  he  could  preach  another  gospel.  H.  Wot 
must  it  be  uttered.  1.  He  who  preaches  the  gospel  must  have  a  will  to  serve, 
not  men,  but  God.  2.  Through  a  false  gospel  men  may  indeed  be  attracted,  but 
God  views  it  as  blasphemy.  3.  Therefore  he  is  placed  under  the  curse,  who  will 
serve  the  gospel,  and  yet  doing  so  as  a  man-pleaser,  is  found  an  unfruitful  servant 
of  Christ.  (Lisco. )  St.  Paul's  curse  on  teachers  of  false  doctrine  : — How  weak 
is  that  reason  which  would  argue  from  the  holmes**  of  a  teacher  to  the  truth  of 


OUT.  t»]  QALATIANS.  27 

what  is  taught.  It  must  never  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  doctrine  is  sound, 
because  the  preacher  seems  righteous.  There  are  certain  standards  to  which 
doctrines  must  be  referred,  and  by  their  agreement  with  these — not  by  the 
character  of  their  supporters — are  we  bound  to  decide  upon  their  truth  or  falseness. 
L  Hevelation  must  in  all  its  fabts  be  consistent  with  itself.  Fresh  dis- 
closures of  His  will  God  may  make  from  time  to  time,  but  they  must  always  be  in 
harmony  with  what  has  gone  before.  In  reading  the  Bible  we  always  look,  as  it 
were,  on  the  same  landscape ;  the  only  difference  being,  as  we  take  in  more  of  its 
statements,  that  more  and  more  of  the  mist  is  rolled  away  from  the  horizon,  so 
that  the  eye  can  include  a  broader  sweep  of  beauty.  The  later  writers  turn 
towards  us  a  larger  portion  of  the  illuminated  hemisphere  than  the  earlier ;  but  as 
the  mighty  globe  turns  majestically  on  its  axis,  we  feel  that  the  oceans  and  lands 
which  oome  successively  into  view,  are  but  constituent  parts  of  the  same  glorious 
world.  There  is  the  discovery  of  new  territories,  but  as  fast  as  discovered  the 
territories  combine  to  make  up  one  planet.  In  like  manner,  it  is  no  fresh  system 
of  religion,  which  is  made  known  to  succeeding  generations  of  men,  as  the  brief 
notices  given  to  patriarchs  expand  in  the  institutions  of  the  law,  under  the 
teachings  of  prophecy,  till  at  length  in  the  days  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  they 
burst  into  magnificence  and  fill  a  world  with  redemption.  From  beginning  to  end 
it  is  the  same  system — a  system  for  the  rescue  of  men  through  the  interference  of 
a  Surety ;  and  revelation  has  been  only  the  gradual  development  of  this  system — 
the  drawing  up  another  fold  of  the  veil  from  the  landscape,  the  adding  another 
■tripe  of  light  to  the  crescent ;  so  that  the  early  fathers  of  the  race,  and  ourselves, 
on  whom  have  fallen  the  ends  of  the  world,  look  on  the  same  arrangements  for 
human  deliverance,  though  to  them  there  was  nothing  but  a  cloudy  expanse, 
with  here  and  there  a  prominent  landmark,  while  to  us,  though  the  horizon  loses 
itself  in  the  far-off  eternity,  every  objeot  of  personal  interest  is  exhibited  in  beauty 
and  distinctness.    Nothing,  therefore,  is  to  be  believed,  which  contradicts  any 

Jortion  of  what  is  thus  revealed.    No  matter  what  other  credentials  a  teacher 
rings,  if  there  be  not  this  evidence  in  his  favour  his  doctrine  is  to  be  rejected. 

II.    HOW  ABB  MEN  TO  KNOW  THAT    PBOPOUNDED    DOCTRINES    ABE    NOT    ACCORDING    TO 

tbuth  7  Evidently  by  comparison.  1.  The  duty  of  determining  why  yon  believe. 
The  hope  of  believers  is  in  no  sense  a  baseless  or  indefinite  thing,  but  rests  upon 
grounds  capable  of  demonstration.  It  is  of  paramount  importance  that  yon  know 
thoroughly  the  claims  of  that  gospel  which  is  to  expel  every  other.  2.  The  duty 
of  examining  what  you  believe.  God  has  furnished  the  Christian  with  a  rule  by 
which  to  try  doctrines,  and  commanded  him  to  reject,  without  regard  to  the 
authority  of  the  teacher,  whatever  that  rule  determines  to  be  error.  3.  The  duty 
of  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  Scriptures.  What  can  be  the  worth  of  your 
decision,  if  you  know  but  little  of  the  criterion  t  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Let  him  be 
accursed. — The  sentence  on  false  teachers : — The  Greek  word  is  "  anathema,"  which 
properly  means  "a  person  or  thing  which  has  been  devoted  to  God ;  and  especially 
something  which  he  who  devoted  it  has  solemnly  pledged  himself  to  God  to 
destroy"  (Lev.  xxvii.  28,  29 ;  Num.  xxi.  2,  3 ;  John  vi.  16, 17,  21).  But  it  is  also 
used  without  any  reference  to  an  offerer  or  to  a  vow,  and  signifies  "  a  person  or 
thing  which  is  accursed  "  (Deut.  vii.  26).  What  did  St.  Paul  mean  by  the  expression, 
11  let  him  be  accursed,"  as  applied  to  the  false  teachers  7  He  cannot  mean  that  he 
would  have  them  wish  for  the  curse  of  God  to  come  down  on  them.  He  would 
rather  have  prayed  that  these  unhappy  men  might  be  converted  and  saved ;  as  he 
himself,  once  a  persecutor  and  blasphemer,  and  as  the  Galatians,  once  gross  and 
wicked  idolators,  had  been.  His  meaning  appears  to  be  simply  this,  "  let  him  be 
regarded  by  yon  as  one  accursed  of  God."  There  is  only  one  other  place  in  which 
we  find  this  expression  in  this  exact  form,  viz.,  1  Cor.  xvi.  22 — "  If  any  man  love 
not  the  Lord,  let  him  be  anathema,  maranatha."  Can  we  imagine  that  Paul 
wished  all  professing  Christians  who  did  not  love  the  Lord  to  be  accursed  ?  It  is 
impossible  to  suppose  such  a  thing.  He  can  only  mean,  surely,  that  if  any  one 
proved  that  he  had  no  real  love  for  Christ,  then — whatever  his  profession  and  his 
knowledge  and  his  gifts  might  be — the  Corinthians  were  to  regard  him  as  an  un- 
converted man,  and  therefore  as  one  who  had  no  personal  interest  in  the  salvation 
of  Christ,  but  was  still  under  the  curse  of  the  law.  And  if  this  be  his  meaning, 
then  there  will  be  nothing  in  it  but  what  will  be  in  perfeot  harmony  with  all 
Paul's  teaching  and  with  all  Paul's  love  for  souls.    (John  Venn,  MJL.) 

Yet.  10.    For  do  X  now  persuade  men,  or  God  ?  or  do  I  seek  to  please 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

I.  That  the  governing   principle   and  motive   op  the  religious  life,   ib  a 

PRACTICAL   CONCERN   NOT    FOR   THE    FAVOUR   OF   MAN,    BUT   FOR    THAT     OF    GOD.       "  Do  I 

now  persuade  men,  or  God?  or  do  I  seek  to  please  men?  for  if  I  yet  pleased 
men,  I  should  not  be  the  servant  of  Christ."  The  particle  "now"  seems  to  con- 
trast his  present  line  of  conduct  as  a  Christian  with  his  former  procedure  as  a 
Pharisee.  Here  we  perceive,  therefore,  the  high  standard  of  moral  action  which 
Christianity  enabled  St.  Paul  to  propose  to  himself.  His  object  was  "  not  to  please 
men,  but  God."  Conventional  utility  is  the  standard  of  the  world ;  and  to  please 
each  other,  so  far  as  mutual  interests  can  be  advanced  by  the  process,  has  been, 
time  out  of  mind,  the  highest  object  contemplated  in  the  codes  of  worldly  men. 
But  the  Christian  standard  is  far  higher ;  and  its  results  upon  society,  wherever  it 
is  acted  upon,  are  invaluable.  In  every  inquiry  as  to  practical  duty,  Christianity 
brings  the  idea  of  the  Supreme  Being  immediately  before  the  mind — the  great 
originator  of  human  obligations — the  infallible  arbiter  of  human  conduct — the 
final  judge  of  human  actions.  The  gospel  is  pre-eminently  the  religion  of  motives, 
and  takes  especial  cognizance  not  only  of  what  we  do,  but  why  we  do  it;  and 
teaches  us  to  inquire,  not  merely  into  the  correctness  of  the  action  itself,  but  into 
the  views  and  feelings  whence  it  originated.  In  asserting  his  own  freedom  from 
selfish  considerations,  St.  Paul  incidentally  taxes  the  false  apostles  with  being 
governed  by  these  debasing  characteristics,  their  motives  being  notoriously  too 
corrupt  to  bear  the  light.  A  supreme  concern  for  the  favour  and  friendship  of  God, 
as  it  is  the  governing  principle  of  the  religious  life,  has  always  distinguished  the 
favoured  servants  of  Christ.  It  was  this  principle  of  love  and  loyalty  to  heaven 
that  induced  Moses  to  relinquish  the  fleeting  honours  of  a  court,  and  to  set  at 
nought  ahke  the  treasures  of  Egypt  and  the  frown  of  kings ;  for  he  endured  as 
seeing  Him  who  is  invisible.  This  led  the  fathers  of  the  Reformation,  the  Wal- 
denses  of  the  Continent,  and  the  Puritans  of  a  succeeding  age,  to  endure  obloquy, 
persecution,  and  martyrdom  itself,  rather  than  surrender  the  claims  of  conscience, 
or  renounce  their  allegiance  to  the  King  of  kings.  And  as  the  same  causes  mast 
produce  the  same  effects,  this  principle  will  induce  us  to  take  a  decided  part  in  the 
contest  always  going  on.     II.  The  source  whence  all  true  knowledge  or  the 

GOSPEL   IS   TO  BE   DERIVED,   WHETHER   AS   A  MATTER  OF  DOCTRINE   OR  AS  A   MATTER  OF 

experience.  "  I  certify  to  you,  brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of 
me  was  not  after  man,  for  I  neither  received  it  of  man,  neither  was  I  taught  it,  bat 
by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  religion  we  profess  is  not  of  man,  bat  of 
God.  This  conviction  is  necessary.  1.  To  satisfy  our  reason  as  men.  2.  To 
relieve  our  fears  as  sinners.  3.  To  promote  our  usefulness  as  Christians.  Im- 
provement :  1.  A  broad  line  of  distinction  between  the  Christian  and  the  hypocrite. 
The  one  seeks  to  commend  himself  to  man,  the  other  to  God.  The  nominal 
Christian  may  say,  "  I  received  my  religion  as  an  heirloom  from  my  ancestors,"  or 
through  the  medium  of  educational  bias  and  conviction  ;  or  from  the  lip  of  some 
eloquent  expounder  of  evangelical  doctrine ;  but  the  genuine  disciple  may,  with 
unpresuming  eye,  look  upwards  and  say,  "  I  received  it '  not  of  man,  but  by  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.'"  Again.  It  teaches  us  to  distinguish  between  the 
varieties  of  character  which  obtain  within  the  precincts  of  the  Church  itself,  between 
Christian  and  Christian,  between  those  who  give  token  of  advanced  spirituality  and 
ripeness  for  heaven,  and  those  of  inferior  attainments  and  of  less  vigorous  piety. 
"  One  star  differeth  from  another  star  in  glory."  Some  attain  an  early  maturity, 
and  some  continue  "  children  in  understanding  "  to  a  late  period  in  life.  Some 
run  with  patience  the  race  set  before  them ;  others  halt  in  their  mid-way  course, 
and  long  to  unclasp  their  armour,  if  they  do  not  surrender  their  shield.  Some, 
like  the  children  of  Israel  at  Horeb,  are  satisfied  to  skirt  the  base  of  the  Mount ; 
whilst  others,  like  Moses,  ascend  its  summit,  converse  with  God  face  to  face,  and 
bear  about  them  much  of  the  brightness  and  blessedness  of  the  region  in  which 
they  had  found  their  happiness  and  their  home.  Some,  like  the  Galatians,  give 
ear  to  something  very  much  like  "  another  gospel ; "  others,  like  the  apostle,  amidst 
lamented  infirmities,  firmly  abide  by  "  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Finally, 
Our  subject  reads  an  impressive  lesson  to  the  ministers  of  religion.  "  They  must 
not,"  as  Perkins  judiciously  remarks,  "  content  themselves  with  that  teaching 
which  they  find  in  the  schools ;  but  they  must  learn  Christ  as  Paul  learned  Him. 
They  that  would  convert  others  must  be  effectually  converted.  John  mast  first  eat 
the  book,  and  then  prophesy."  (The  Evangelist.)  Men-pleasing  condemned'.— 
I.  The  humour  of  desiring  to  be  pleased,  and  the  danger  of  it.  A  parasite 
is  more  welcome  to  us  than  a  prophet.    He  is  our  apostle  who  will  bring  fftfifl8n 


CHAT,  ij  GALATIANS.  29 

and  beloved  arguments  to  persuade  us  to  that  to  which  we  have  persuaded  ourselves 
already,  and  further  our  motion  to  that  to  which  we  are  flying.  Men  would  rather  be 
cozened  with  a  pleasing  lie,  than  saved  with  a  frowning  and  threatening  truth.  The 
causes  from  which  this  desire  to  be  pleased  proceedeth,  and  its  bitter  effects.  1.  (1) 
And,  first,  it  hath  no  better  original  than  defect,  than  a  wilful  and  negligent  failing 
in  those  duties  to  which  nature  and  religion  have  obliged  us,  a  leanness  and  empti- 
ness of  the  soul,  which,  not  willing  to  fill  itself  with  righteousness,  fllleth  itself 
with  air,  with  false  counsels  and  false  attestations,  with  miserable  comforts.  "  It 
is  a  thing  soon  done,  and  requireth  no  labour  nor  study,  to  be  pleased."  We 
desire  it  as  sick  men  do  health,  as  prisoners  do  liberty,  as  men  on  the  rack  do  ease : 
for  a  troubled  spirit  is  an  ill  disease ;  not  to  have  our  will  is  the  worst  imprison- 
ment; and  to  "condemn  a  man's  self  in  that  which  he  alloweth  "  and  maketh  his 
choice  (Bom.  xiv.  22),  is  to  put  himself  upon  the  rack.  We  may  see  it  in  our 
civil  affairs  and  matters  of  lesser  alloy :  when  anything  lieth  upon  us  as  a  burden, 
how  willing  are  we  to  cast  it  off  1  When  we  are  poor,  we  dream  of  riches,  and 
make  up  •*  that  which  is  not "  with  that  which  may  be  (Pro v.  xxiii.  5).  When  we 
have  no  house  to  hide  our  heads,  we  build  a  palace  in  the  air.  We  are  unwilling 
to  suffer,  but  we  are  willing,  nay,  desirous,  to  be  eased.  And  so  it  falleth  out  in 
the  managing  of  our  spiritual  estate  :  we  do  as  the  apostle  exhorteth  (though  not  to 
this  end),  "cast  away  everything  that  presseth  down"  (Heb.  xii.  1) ;  but  so  cast  it 
away  as  to  leave  it  heavier  than  before ;  prefer  a  momentary  ease,  which  we  beg  or 
borrow  or  force  from  things  without  us,  before  that  peace  which  nothing  can  bring 
in  but  that  grief  and  serious  repentance  which  we  put  off  with  hands  and  words  as 
a  thing  irksome  and  unpleasing.  (2)  And  thus,  in  the  second  place,  proceedeth 
even  from  the  force  and  power  of  conscience  within  us,  which,  if  we  will  not 
hearken  to  it  as  a  friend,  will  turn  Fury,  and  pursue  and  lash  us ;  and  if  we  will 
not  obey  her  dictates,  will  make  us  feel  her  whip.  This  is  our  judge  and  our  execu- 
tioner. 2.  Let  us  now  see  the  danger  of  this  humour,  and  the  bitter  effects  it  doth 
produce.  (1)  And,  first,  this  desire  to  be  pleased  placeth  us  out  of  all  hope  of 
succour,  leaveth  us  like  an  army  besieged  when  the  enemy  hath  cut  off  all  relief. 
It  is  a  curse  itself,  and  carrieth  a  train  of  curses  with  it.  It  maketh  us  blind  to 
ourselves,  and  not  fit  to  make  use  of  other  men's  eyes.  (2)  For,  in  the  second 
place,  this  humour,  this  desire  to  be  pleased,  doth  not  make  up  our  defects,  but 
maketh  them  greater;  doth  not  make  vice  a  virtue, but  sin  more  sinful.  For  he  is  a 
villain  indeed  that  will  be  a  villain,  and  yet  be  thought  a  saint ;  such  a  one  as  God 
will  spew  out  of  His  mouth.  (3)  For,  in  the  third  place,  this  humour,  this  desire  to  be 
pleased,  doth  not  take  the  whip  from  conscience,  but  enrageth  her ;  layeth  her  asleep, 
to  awake  with  more  terror.  For  conscience  may  be  "  seared  "  indeed  (1  Tim.  iv.  2), 
bnt  cannot  be  abolished ;  may  sleep,  but  cannot  die,  but  is  as  immortal  as  the  soul 
itself.  Conscience  followeth  our  knowledge ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  chase  that  away, 
impossible  to  be  ignorant  of  that  which  I  cannot  but  know.  It  is  not  conscience  but 
our  lusts  that  make  the  music.  II.  We  proceed  now  to  lay  open  the  other  evil 
humour,  of  pleasing  men,  which  is  more  visible  and  eminent  in  the  text.  And 
indeed  to  desire  to  be  pleased  and  to  be  ready  to  please,  saith  Isidore  Pelusiot,  "  to 
flatter  and  to  be  flattered,"  bear  that  near  relation  the  one  to  the  other  that  wa 
never  meet  them  asunder.  It  is  the  devil's  net,  in  which  he  catcheth  two  at  once. 
If  there  be  an  itching  ear,  you  cannot  miss  but  you  shall  find  a  flattering  tongue. 
If  the  king  of  Sicily  delight  in  geometry,  the  whole  court  shall  swarm  with  mathe- 
maticians. If  Nero  be  lascivious,  his  palace  shall  be  turned  into  a  stew  or  brothel- 
house,  or  worse.  And,  first,  we  must  not  imagine  that  St.  Paul  doth  bring  in  here 
a  cynical  morosity  or  a  Nabal-like  churlishness ;  that  none  may  speak  to  us,  and  we 
speak  nothing  but  words ;  that  we  should  "make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  so  go  round 
about  the  city  "  (Psalm  lix.  6.  14) ;  that  we  should  be  as  thorns  in  our  brethren's 
sides,  ever  pricking  and  galling  them.  What,  then,  is  that  which  here  St.  Paul  con- 
demneth?  Look  into  the  text,  and  you  shall  see  Christ  and  men  as  it  were  two  opposite 
terms.  If  the  man  be  in  error,  I  must  not  please  him  in  his  error ;  for  Christ  is 
truth :  if  the  man  be  in  sin,  I  must  not  please  him ;  for  Christ  is  righteousness.  So 
when  men  stand  in  opposition  to  Christ,  when  men  will  neither  hear  His  voice  nor 
follow  Him  in  His  ways,  but  delight  themselves  in  their  own,  and  rest  and  please 
themselves  in  error  as  in  truth,  to  awake  them  out  of  this  pleasant  dream,  we  must 
trouble  them,  we  must  thunder  to  them,  we  must  disquiet  and  displease  them.  For  who 
would  give  an  opiate  pill  to  these  lethargies  ?  To  please  men,  then,  is  to  tell  a  sic): 
man  that  he  is  well;  a  weak  man,  that  he  is  strong;  an  erring  man,  that  he  ia 
orthodox ;  instead  of  purging  out  the  noxious  humour,  to  nourish  and  increase  it ; 


SO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \can.  t, 

to  smooth  and  strew  the  ways  of  error  with  roses,  that  men  may  walk  with  ease 
and  delight,  and  even  dance  to  their  destruction  ;  to  find  out  their  palate,  and  to 
fit  it ;  to  envenom  that  more  which  they  affect,  as  Agrippina  gave  Claudius  the 
emperor  poison  in  a  mushroom.    What  a  seditious  flatterer  is  in  a  commonwealth, 
that  a  false  apostle  is  in  the  Church.    They  are  as  loud  for  the  truth  as  the  best 
champions  she  hath ;  but  either  subtract  from  it,  or  add  to  it,  or  pervert  and  corrupt 
it,  that  so  the  truth  itself  may  help  to  usher  in  a  he.    When  the  truth  itself  doth 
not  please  us,  any  lie  will  please  us ;  but  then  it  must  carry  with  it  something  of 
the  truth.    For  instance :  to  acknowledge  Christ,  but  with  the  law,  is  a  dangerous 
mixture :  it  was  the  error  of  the  Galatians  here.    III.  Tou  see  now  what  it  is  to 
please  men,  and  from  whence  it  proceedeth,  from  whence  it  springeth,  even  from 
that  bitter  root,  the  root  of  all  evil,  the  love  of  the  world.    Let  us  now  behold  that 
huge  distance  and  inconsistency  which  is  between  these  two,  the  pleasing  of  men, 
and  the  service  of  Christ :  "If  I  yet  please  men,  I  am  not  the  servant  of  Christ." 
1.  And,  first,  we  cannot  do  both,  not  serve  men  and  Christ,  no  more  than  you  can 
draw  the  same  straight  line  to  two  points,  to  touch  them  both  (Matt.  vi.  21).    2. 
Secondly.    The  servant  must  have  his  eye  upon  his  master ;  and  as  he  seeth  him 
do,  must  do  likewise.     Power  cannot  flatter ;  and  mercy  is  so  intent  on  its  work 
that  it  thinketh  of  nothing  else.    To  work  wonders  to  please  men  were  the  greatest 
wonder  of  all.     Appplication :  1.  For  conclusion,  then:  Let  them  who  are  set 
apart  to  lead  others  in  the  way  of  truth  and  righteousness  take  heed.     2.  And 
let  them  who  are  taught,  remembering  that  they  "are  bought  with  a  price" 
(1  Cor.  vi.  20),  and  are  the  servants  of  Christ,  cleave  fast  to  Him,  and  not  be  driven 
from  Him  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,  not  judge  of  the  doctrine  by  the  person,  but 
of  the  person  by  His  doctrine.     3.  And  therefore,  in  the  last  place,  let  us  all,  both 
teachers  and  hearers,  purge  out  this  evil  humour  of  pleasing  and  being  pleased : 
and  "  let  us,"  as  the  apostle  exhorteth, "  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto  love 
and  to  good  works"  (Heb.  x.  24).    Let  us  "  speak  truth  every  one  to  his  neighbour; 
for  we  are  members  one  of  another"  (Eph.  iv.  25).     (A.  Faringdon.)        Applause 
of  conscience  best : — One  applause  of  conscience  is  worth  all  the  triumphs  in  the 
world.     (Ibid.)        Truth  better  than  flattery : — Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother  sin ; 
but  "  thou  shalt  rebuke  "  and  save  thy  brother  (Lev.  xix.  17).    Common  charity 
requireth  thus  much  at  thy  hand  :  and  to  make  question  of  it  is  as  if  thou  shouldst 
ask  with  Cain,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?"  (Gen.  iv.  9).    This  is  the  true  and 
surest  method  of  pleasing  one  another.    For  flattery,  like  the  bee,  carrieth  honey 
in  its  mouth,  but  hath  a  sting  in  its  tail ;  but  truth  is  sharp  and  bitter  at  first,  but 
at  last  more  pleasant  than  manna.    He  that  would  seal  up  thy  lips  for  the  truth 
which  thou  speakest,  will  at  last  kiss  those  lips,  and  bless  God  in  the  day  of  His 
visitation.    And  this  if  we  do,  we  shall  "please  one  another  to  edification  "  (Bom. 
xv.  2),  and  not  unto  ruin.    And  thus  all  shall  be  pleased;  the  Physician,  that  ho 
hath  his  intent,  and  the  patient  in  his  health :   the  strong  shall  be  pleased  in 
the  weak,  and  the  weak  in  the  strong ;  the  wise  in  the  ignorant,  and  the  ignorant 
in  the  wise :  and  Christ  shall  be  well  pleased  to  see  brethren  thus  walk  together  in 
unity,  strengthening  and  inciting  one  another  in  the  ways  of  righteousness ;  and 
when  we  have  thus  walked  hand-in-hand  together  to  our  journey's  end,  He  shall 
admit  us  into  His  presence,  where  there  "  is  fulness  of  joy  and  pleasures  for  ever* 
more  "  (Psalm  xvi.  11).     (Ibid.)  _     Sinners  not  to  be  flattered : — We  should  not 
mould  and  fit  our  best  part  to  their  worst,  our  reason  to  their  lust ;  nor  make  our 
fancy  the  elaboratory  to  work  out  such  essays  as  may  please  and  destroy  them.   Wo 
should  not  foment  the  anger  of  the  revenger  to  consume  him,  nor  help  the  covetous 
to  bury  himself  alive,  nor  the  ambitious  to  break  his  neck,  nor  the  schismatio  to 
rend  the  seamless  coat  of  Christ,  nor  the  seditious  to  swim  to  hell  in  a  river  of 
blood :  but  we  should  bind  the  revenger's  hands,  break  the  miser's  idols,  bring 
down  the  ambitious  to  the  dust,  make  up  those  rents  which  faction  hath  made, 
and  confine  the  seditious  to  his  own  sphere  and  place.    When  the  world  pleaseth 
ns,  we  are  as  willing  to  please  the  world,  and  we  make  it  our  stage,  and  act  our 
parts ;  we  call  ourselves  "  friends,"  and  are  but  parasites ;  we  call  ourselves  "  pro- 
phets," and  are  but  wizards  and  jugglers;  we  call  ourselves  "apostles,"  and  are 
seducers ;  we  call  ourselves  "  brethren,"  though  it  be  in  evil,  and,  like  Hippocrates' 
twins,  we  live  and  die  together.    We  flatter,  and  are  flattered ;  we  are  blind,  and 
leaders  of  the  blind,  and  fall  together  with  them  into  the  ditch.  (Ibid.)      Apostolic 
unpopularity: — The  gospel  is  unpopular  (1)  Because  of  its  holiness.     It  is  the 
expression  of  the  will  of  the  All-holy,  and  demands  submission  and  conformity  to 
that  will.    Issuing  from  the  fountain  of  purity,  it  calls  for  parity  in  every  part. 


cha*.  «.]  GALATIANS.  il 

Only  those  who  have  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts  can  appreciate  and 
welcome  it.  To  all  others  it  must  always  be  hateful.  (2)  Because  of  its  mysteri- 
ousness.  Christ  can  only  be  apprehended  by  those  who  receive  Him  in  faith ;  to 
others  He  is  an  enigma,  and  His  salvation  a  thing  beyond  understanding ;  and 
men  love  not  that  which  they  are  unable  to  comprehend.  Pride  of  intellect  pro- 
tests against  the  gospel's  admitted  mysteriousness.  (3)  Because  of  its  exclusiveness. 
It  claims  to  be  the  one  true  system,  and  that  all  others  are  false ;  a  claim  which 
makes  enemies  of  every  other  religion's  votaries,  and  of  those  who — caring  for  no 
religion  themselves — would  tolerate  all.  (4)  Because  of  its  freeness.  Men  would 
prefer  if  the  gospel  asked  for  something  at  their  hands,  recognized  that  there  was 
such  a  thing  as  human  merit.  A  free  gospel  deals  a  blow  to  their  self-conceit  and 
self-satisfaction.  (5)  Because  of  its  aggressiveness.  It  is  not  content  to  leave 
men  to  themselves;  and  they  resent  every  attempt  at  interference  with  them. 
The  gospel  offers  no  terms  of  compromise.  In  the  name  of  God  it  demands 
unconditional  submission.  It  aims  at  universal  conquest.  Hence  its  unpopularity 
with  the  world.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Christian  firmness: — I.  Christian 
firmness  is  not  self-willed  indiffeeence  to  human  opinion.  On  the  contrary, 
the  Christian  is  anxious  to  please  and  yield  to  others  wherever  his  own  interests 
alone  are  concerned.  Many  things  he  might  rightly  claim,  he  will  shrink  from 
pressing  ;  many  things  that  he  may  suffer,  he  will  quietly  submit  to,  rather  than 
irritate  the  minds  of  men  against  the  piety  that  he  professeB,  or  close  the  door 
against  the  future  possibility  of  being  the  instrument  of  their  conversion.  Self- 
renunciation  for  the  honour  of  God,  or  for  the  good  of  man,  ia  the  special  spirit  of 
•  Christian.  Nay,  more ;  he  will  spare  the  feelings  and  humours  of  men  when- 
ever he  lawfully  can,  doing  things  in  their  way  rather  than  his  own,  being  careful 
of  appearances  as  well  as  realities.  (Bom.  xii.  17, 18 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  21 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  7 ; 
<&c.)  II.  Nob  is  it  selfish  inattention  to  human  welfare.  Salvation  is  not  to 
be  achieved  in  isolated  effort,  but  is  wrought  out  in  the  very  nourishment  and 
growth  of  those  affections,  occupations,  and  energies,  which  our  duties  in  the  world 
produce.  There  cannot  be  a  genuine  desire  to  save  our  own  soul,  a  true  Christian 
spirit  of  personal  piety,  which  will  not,  from  its  very  nature,  expand  beyond  the 
confines  of  our  own  bosom,  and  overflow  in  copious  streams  towards  all  with  whom 
we  have  to  do.  III.  It  is  simply  paramount  obedience  to  Divine  authority. 
Pleasing  men  must  always  be  subordinate  to  pleasing  God.  Every  concession  must 
be  with  a  reservation  of  our  Master's  rights  and  privileges,  honour  and  authority  ; 
every  treaty  must  be  so,  for  it  is  only  good  as  it  may  be  acknowledged  and  ratified 
by  Him.  All  things  may  be  tried  for  Him ;  but  nothing  listened  to  against  Him. 
(Prebendary  Griffith.)  Right  and  wrong  men-pleasing: — We  are  not  to  please 
men,  be  they  never  so  many  or  great,  out  of  flatness  of  spirit,  so  as,  for  the  pleasing 
of  them,  either  go  to  neglect  any  part  of  our  duty  towards  God  and  Christ ;  or  (2) 
to  go  against  our  own  conscience,  by  doing  any  dishonest  or  unlawful  thing ;  or, 
(3)  to  do  them  harm  whom  we  would  please,  by  confirming  them  in  their  sins, 
humouring  them  in  their  peevishness,  or  but  even  cherishing  their  weakness ;  for 
weakness,  though  it  may  be  borne  with,  yet  it  must  not  be  cherished.  (4)  But 
then,  by  yielding  to  their  infirmities  for  a  time,  in  hope  to  win  them,  by  patiently 
expecting  their  conversion,  or  strengthening,  by  restoring  them  with  the  spirit  of 
meekness,  with  meekness  instructing  them  that  oppose  themselves,  should  we  seek 
to  please  all  men.  (Bishop  Christopher  Wordsworth.)  Two  earnest  questions: — 
1.  Which  seekest  thou  most — man's  favour,  or  God's  favour  ?  2.  Which  is  weightier 
— man's  favour,  or  God's  favour?  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  Ministerial  faithfulness 
and  discretion: — The  love  of  popularity  is  a  temptation  from  which  few  of  ns 
probably  are  free.  The  conscientious  minister  is  constantly  reminded  of  the  fact 
that  "  the  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare."  In  our  public  and  private  ministrations 
we  often  have  to  advocate  truths  which  are  uncongenial  and  unwelcome  to  many  of 
those  to  whom  we  minister.  A  clear,  decided,  pointed  application  of  God's  Word, 
must  be  unwelcome  to  the  worldly,  the  careless,  the  self-indulgent,  and  the  self- 
righteous.  But  we  are  naturally  reluctant  to  forfeit  the  good  opinion  of  others. 
Hence  the  temptation  to  modify,  if  not  to  hold  back,  offensive  truths  ;  to  present 
our  message,  not  in  its  naked  simplicity,  but  in  such  a  manner  as  shall  disarm 
opposition  ;  to  avoid  anything  like  close  dealing  with  the  conscience ;  to  busy  our- 
selves only  with  pointless  generalities ;  to  seek  rather  to  please  the  imagination  and 
gratify  the  taste,  than  to  awaken  conscience,  to  convince  of  sin,  and  to  urge  the 
surrender  of  heart  and  life  to  Christ.  It  is  easy  enough,  by  a  little  contrivance,  to 
make  our  gospel  popular.    It  is  possible  to  teach  truth,  and  nothing  but  truth,  and 


tf  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  k. 

yet  to  give  no  offence.  We  have  only  to  modify  our  statements,  or  to  generalise 
our  applications,  and  the  thing  is  done.  We  have  bat  to  omit  an  unpalatable 
truth,  or  so  to  state  it  as  that  none  need  apply  it  to  themselves,  and  no  objection  will 
be  raised.  Men  will  tolerate,  nay,  approve  of,  a  modified  system  of  evangelical 
truth,  to  whom  the  entire  presentment  of  such  truth  wonld  be  unacceptable.  Four 
times,  in  a  single  verse,  is  the  prophet  warned  against  this  temptation :  "And  thou, 
son  of  man,  be  not  afraid  of  them,  neither  be  afraid  of  their  worda ;  ...  be  not 
afraid  of  their  words,  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  looks  "  (Ezek.  ii.  6).  And  the 
Apostle  Paul  was  fully  conscious  of  the  danger  when  he  said,  "  I  have  not  shunned 
to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel  of  God  "  (Acts  xz.  27).  At  the  same  time,  we 
must  be  careful  that  our  unpopularity  springs  from  legitimate  causes :  from  the 
unreasonable  opposition  of  the  world  to  the  truth  of  God,  not  from  the  just  dislike 
of  men  to  offensive  peculiarities  or  positive  faults.  A  Christian  may  be  unpopular 
ueoause  he  is  vain,  conceited,  selfish,  ungenial,  narrow-minded,  dogmatic,  or  the 
like.  He  may  impute  his  unpopularity  to  his  religion ;  whereas  it  comes  rather 
from  his  want  of  religion  :  it  originates  not  in  the  doctrine  which  he  professes,  but 
in  his  failure  "  to  adorn"  that  doctrine  in  his  daily  life.  Want  of  tact,  again,  in 
Christians  often  provokes  opposition.  The  attempt  to  press  the  claims  of  religion 
upon  others  at  unseasonable  times,  the  employment  of  technical  religious  phraseo- 
logy, the  use  of  theological  words  and  expressions  not  commonly  heard  in  society, 
the  thrusting  of  religious  idiosyncrasies  upon  the  unwilling  and  unsympathizing,  are 
causes  which  frequently  operate  to  the  detriment  of  the  principles  which  we  have 
at  heart.  Christians  should  beware  of  mistaking  forwardness  for  fidelity,  and  an 
obtrusive  familiarity  with  sacred  things  for  the  honest  outfiowings  of  the  heart  full 
of  love  to  God  and  man.  Christian  prudence  is  as  needful,  as  worldly  compromise 
is  dangerous  and  wrong.  In  a  word,  we  must  not  court  unpopularity,  or  provoke  it 
needlessly,  or  think  that  it  never  arises  from  any  fault  of  our  own.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  must  not  dread  it,  lest  we  place  ourselves  among  those  who 
"  love  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God."  Ministers  must  ask,  not 
how  they  may  best  please  their  congregations,  but  how  they  may  save  souls ;  not 
how  they  may  stand  well  with  the  world,  but  how  they  may  best  serve  their  Master. 
(Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Men-pleasing  : — Theodorio,  an  Arian  king,  did  exceed- 
ingly  affect  a  certain  deacon,  although  orthodox.  The  deacon,  thinking  to  please 
him  better,  and  get  preferment,  became  an  Arian,  which,  when  the  king  understood 
he  changed  his  love  into  hatred,  and  caused  his  head  to  be  struck  from  his  shoulders. 
(Trapp.)  Pleasing  nun  or  serving  Christ: — A  railway-gate  keeper  who,  one  cold 
night  required  every  passenger  to  show  his  ticket  before  passing  through  to  the 
train,  and  was  rewarded  with  considerable  grumbling  and  protesting,,  was  told, 
"  You  are  a  very  unpopular  man  to-night."  "  I  only  care  to  be  popular  with  one 
man,"  was  the  reply,  "  and  that  is  the  superintendent."  He  might  have  pleased 
the  passengers,  disobeyed  orders,  and  lost  his  position.  He  was  too  wise  for  that ; 
his  business  was  to  please  one  man — the  man  who  hired  him,  gave  him  his  orders, 
and  rewarded  him  for  faithfulness,  and  who  would  discharge  him  for  disobedience. 
The  servant  of  Christ  has  many  opportunities  to  make  himself  unpopular.  There 
are  multitudes  who  would  be  glad  to  have  him  relax  the  strictness  of  his  rules.  If 
he  is  their  servant  they  demand  that  he  should  consult  their  wishes.  But  if  he 
serves  them,  he  cannot  serve  the  Lord.  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  He 
who  tries  to  be  popular  with  the  world,  will  lose  his  popularity  with  the  Lord.  He 
will  make  friends,  but  he  will  lose  the  one  Friend  who  is  above  all  others.  He  will 
win  plaudits,  but  he  will  not  hear  the  gracious  word,  "  Well  done  1 "  A  faithful 
servant : — Not  the  least  interesting  of  the  monuments  I  saw  amid  the  venerable 
ruins  of  Borne  was  one  which  held  within  its  broken  urn  some  half-burned  bones. 
They  were  the  ashes  of  one,  who,  as  appeared  from  the  inscription  on  the  tablet, 
had  belonged  to  Caesar's  household,  and  to  the  memory  of  whose  virtues  as  a  faith- 
ful, honest,  and  devoted  servant,  the  emperor  himself  had  ordered  that  marble  to  be 
raised.  (I*.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  A  ministerial  alternative : — I.  To  please  men  by — 
1.  Watering  down  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  until  they  mean  whatever  hearers 
like  to  make  them.  2.  Toning  down  the  precepts  of  the  gospel  until  they 
are  undiftinguishable  from  the  maxims  of  worldly  policy.  3.  Introducing 
secular  expedients  to  attract  audiences  over  whom  an  attenuated  gospel  has 
lost  its  power.  4.  Sinking  the  stern  preacher  of  righteousness  in  the  bland 
mover-about  in  society.  II.  To  sebve  Christ  by — 1.  The  proclamation  of 
unalterable  trust.  2.  The  insistance  of,  and  personal  conformity  to,  a  high 
moral  standard.      8.  The  disdain  of   mere  clap-trap  and  popular  arts.     4.  Tha 


CHAP.  I.]  GALATIANS.  33 

imitation  of  the  self-denying  example  of  the  Master.  The  one  may  please 
men ;  the  other  will  save  them.  Bondage  to  man  or  to  Christ : — I.  The  necessity  to 
please  men  represents  in  a  very  typical  manner  the  non-freedom  of  the  unre- 
deemed man.  This  is  a  real  slavery  because — 1.  It  disturbs  the  development  of  an 
independent  plan  of  life.  2.  It  is  a  part  of  the  bondage  of  sin.  3.  It  involves 
servitude  to  the  customs  and  fashions  of  the  world.  II.  Freedom  from  this  yoke 
is  only  gained  by  entering  the  service  of  Christ.  Just  as  the  servant  of  a  king  boasts 
of  his  office  as  the  highest  liberty,  so  can  we  when  we  serve  the  Lord  Christ.  III. 
Deliverance  from  the  fear  of  man  and  the  necessity  of  pleasing  him,  and  servitude 
to  Christ  and  pleasing  Him,  may  be  taken  as  a  general  description  of  Christian 
liberty.  In  conclusion — 1.  Has  the  desire  to  have  the  good  opinion  of  my  neigh- 
bours any  part  in  my  profession  of  religion  7  2.  Even  if  my  religious  service  is  not 
done  to  be  seen  of  men,  is  it  a  thing  of  form  or  principle  ?  3.  Have  I  courage  to 
dissent  from  the  usages  of  society  if  my  conscience  protests  ?  Do  I  always  set 
before  me, "  What  does  Christ  demand  ?  "  and  not,  "  What  will  men  say  ?  "  (Professor 
Robertson  Smith.)  The  servant  of  Christ : — I.  The  servant.  1.  He  realizes  the 
most  perfect  ideal  of  life.  Others  live  for  pleasure,  wealth,  fame ;  he  for  Christ. 
2.  He  has  the  best  Master.  3.  He  yields  to  the  most  valid  claims — property,  pro- 
tection, redemption.  He  has  the  strongest  warrants — reason,  conscience,  love. 
6.  He  is  promised  and  enjoys  the  noblest  reward — his  Master's  smile,  his  Sovereign's 
throne.  II.  His  service.  1.  It  is  dignified  in  its  sphere.  2.  Grand  in  its  motive — 
"pleasing  God."  3.  Splendid  in  its  instrument — the  gospel.  4.  Glorious  in  the 
freedom  of  its  consecration.  5.  Beneficent  in  the  uses  which  it  serves.  Per- 
suading God : — What  the  apostle  means  is  making  sure  that  God  is  with  him.  This 
can  only  be  done  by  taking  God's  way  as  ours,  and  not  by  hoping  to  get  Him  to 
take  ours  as  His.  This  much  Paul  says  in  vindication  of  his  severity,  whose  office 
was  that  of  a  persuader  of  men.  "  Nay,"  he  says,  "  the  question  is  not  of  gaining 
over  men,  but  of  standing  right  with  God,  and  that  even  at  the  expense  of  an  abso- 
lute breach  with  men.  At  such  a  time  as  this,  when  deceitful  men  are  striving  to 
undo  all  my  work  for  Christ,  so  far  from  being  called  to  conciliate  them,  were  I  to 
do  so  I  should  not  be  a  servant  of  Christ."  (Ibid.)  Man-pleasing  a  vice  in  a 
moral  reformer : — Watoh  the  author  of  a  first  poem  or  novel.  What  eagerness  to 
see  all  the  reviews;  what  anxiety  till  they  come  out;  what  manoeuvring  to  ascer- 
tain what  people  have  said !  And  how  many  persons  are  there  that,  even  after  their 
apprenticeship  in  literature  or  art  is  over,  can  honestly  affirm  that  the  feeling  has 
quite  left  them?  Raphael  must  have  liked  to  hear  his  pictures  praised:  nor  was 
the  approbation  of  the  publio  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  octogenarian  Goethe. 
But  though  the  artist  or  the  literateur  may  so  far  make  a  merit  of  popularity  it  is 
quite  different  with  the  moral  teacher  or  agent  in  great  social  changes.  Popularity 
may  happen  to  flow  toward  such  a  man,  but  it  should  not  be  treated  as  a  reward  or 
incentive,  but  rather  as  a  means  of  deciding  what  proportion  of  society  has  been 
moved  in  the  direction  of  his  own  spirit,  and  how  much  yet  remains  to  be  brought 
into  subjection.  In  oertain  cases,  indeed,  it  might  be  proper  to  lay  it  down  as  a 
maxim  that  he  cannot  honestly  or  efficiently  accomplish  his  office  without  exciting 
opposition  at  every  step  he  takes.  (North  British  Review.)  Men-pleasing— its 
danger : — The  wise  Phocion  was  so  sensible  how  dangerous  it  was  to  be  touched  with 
what  the  multitude  approved,  that  upon  a  general  acolamation  made  when  he  was 
making  an  oration  he  turned  to  an  intelligent  friend  and  asked  in  a  surprised  manner, 
•*  What  slip  have  I  made  ?  "  (Steele.)  Men-pleasing  the  source  of  unfaithful- 
sett  .-—The  soul  that  cannot  entirely  trust  God,  whether  man  be  pleased  or  dis- 
pleased, can  never  long  be  true  to  Him,  for  while  you  are  eyeing  men  you  are  losing 
God  and  stabbing  religion  at  the  very  heart.  (T.  Manton.)  Men-pleasing — its 
cure : — When  one  has  learned  to  seek  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God  only,  ha 
will  take  the  withholding  of  the  honour  that  oometh  by  man  very  lightly  indeed. 
(Geo.  Macdonald.)  The  alternative  to  men-pleasing : — Do  not  preach  so  much  to 
please  as  to  profit.  Choose  rather  to  discover  men's  sins  than  to  show  your  own 
eloquence.  That  is  the  best  looking-glass,  not  which  is  most  gilded  but  which 
shows  the  truest  face.  (T.  Watson.)  The  servant  of  Christ : — The  title  which 
the  apostle  gives  himself,  "  the  servant,  or  the  slave,  of  Christ,"  expresses,  we  may 
be  sure,  no  mere  acquiescence  in  some  current  fashion  of  Eastern  speech,  but  the 
aspect  of  his  life  and  conduct  which  he  desires  to  keep  before  himself  and  others. 
St,  Paul  belonged  to  two  worlds,  the  Jewish  and  the  Greek,  and  in  this  title  ha 
has  both  worlds  in  view.  In  the  language  of  the  Psalter,  and  of  the  Hebrew  pro- 
phots,  every  Israelite  is,  as  such,  a  servant  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  collective  people, 

3 


§4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA*.  X. 

viewed  in  its  separate  and  its  consecrated  life,  it  is  said,  "  Thou,  Israel,  art  My 
servant,  thou  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  called  thee  from 
the  chief  men  thereof,  and  said  unto  thee,  thou  art  My  servant,  I  have  chosen 
thee."  But  besides  this  general  and  ethical  meaning,  the  title  had  a  technical, 
official  force.  Any  man  who  was  marked  out  from  among  his  fellows  as  having  a 
special  work  to  do  for  the  Lord,  was  regarded  as  taken  into  the  service  of  the  in- 
visible King,  whose  livery  he  thus  wore  by  the  force  of  events,  and  by  his  acts,  and 
by  the  tenour  of  his  life,  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen.  In  this  sense,  too,  every 
member  of  the  prophetic  order  came  in  time  to  be  termed  a  *•  servant  of  the  Lord ; " 
and  the  title  reached  its  highest  significance  when,  in  the  later  group  of  Isaiah's 
writings,  it  was  used  of  the  King  Messiah,  whose  future  humiliation  and  glory  there 
mingled  indistinctly  with  the  nearer,  although  still  distant,  suffering  and  deliver- 
ance  of  the  martyred  people  in  Babylon.  When,  then,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude, 
writing  to  Churches  mainly  or  entirely  of  Jewish  origin,  styled  themselves  servants 
of  Jesus  Christ,  they  probably  understood  the  title,  chiefly  if  not  exclusively,  in  the 
traditional  and  narrower  Hebrew  sense.  But  when  St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Roman 
or  Philippian  Church,  calls  himself  a  servant  of  Christ,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose 
that  he  does  not  read  into  the  title  the  meaning  which  his  readers  would  naturally 
find  there.  In  these  Churches,  consisting  altogether  or  predominantly  of  converts 
from  heathendom,  the  phrase  would  rather  suggest  the  ordinary  slave  of  the  Greek- 
Roman  world,  than  an  inspired  or  distinguished  servant  of  the  Hebrew  theocracy. 
That  unseen,  that  immense  population  of  human  beings  which  worked,  which 
suffered  in  silence,  which  tilled  the  fields,  which  manned  the  fleets,  which  con- 
structed the  palaced  and  the  bridges  of  the  world,  which  supplied  to  those  who  had 
property  and  power  their  cooks,  their  carpenters,  their  painters,  their  astronomers, 
their  doctors,  their  poets,  their  copyists,  their  gladiators,  their  buffoons ;  which 
ministered  to  the  refinement,  intelligence,  luxury,  passions  of  the  wealthy ;  whioh  by 
its  ceaseless  and  almost  unnoticed  waste  of  unregarded  life  satisfied  the  require- 
ments, and  helped  to  fill  the  coffers  of  the  State.  The  slave  class  was  almost  the 
most  prominent,  as  it  was  certainly  the  most  mournful  feature  in  the  ancient 
society.  In  the  view  of  antiquity,  the  slave  was  but  an  animated  instrument,  a 
mere  body  which  chanced  to  be  endowed  with  certain  mental  capacities.  In  the 
eye  of  the  law,  the  slave  was  not  a  person :  he  was  classed  by  the  jurists  with  goods 
and  with  animals ;  he  was  sold,  he  was  bequeathed  by  will,  he  was  lent  to  a  friend, 
he  was  shut  up,  he  was  banished,  until  the  day  of  the  later  legislation  he  was 
killed — quite  at  the  discretion  of  his  owner.  And  St.  Paul  calls  himself  this — the 
slave  of  Jesus  Christ !  He  was  not  merely  a  servant  holding  an  honourable  post  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  he  might  relinquish  at  pleasure ;  he  was  consciously 
a  slave.  And  in  this  abandonment  of  all  human  liberty  at  the  feet  of  the  Redeemer 
— in  this  utter  surrender  of  the  right  to  his  intelligence,  his  affections,  the  employ- 
ment of  his  time  and  his  property,  his  movements  from  place  to  place,  except  as 
his  Master  might  command,  St.  Paul  found  the  true  dignity  and  happiness  of  his 
being  as  a  man.  He  belonged  to  Jesus  Christ  not  by  any  original  or  solitary  aot  of 
his  own,  but  because,  as  he  could  not  but  acknowledge,  Jesus  Christ  had  paid  for 
him,  had  bought  him  at  an  incalculable  cost,  out  of  slavery  which  was  misery  and 
degradation,  into  a  service  which  was  freedom  indeed.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Our 
duty  with  respect  to  public  opinion : — Public  opinion  is  that  common  stock  of  thought 
and  sentiment  which  is  created  by  human  society,  or  by  a  particular  section  of  it ; 
and  it  in  turn  keeps  its  authors  under  strict  control.  It  is  a  natural  product,  it  is  a 
deposit  which  cannot  but  result  from  human  intercourse.  No  sooner  do  men  asso- 
ciate with  one  another,  than  a  public  opinion  of  some  kind  comes  to  be.  And  as 
civilization  advances,  and  man  multiplies  the  channels  whereby  he  ascertains  and 
governs  the  thought  of  his  fellow-men,  public  opinion  grows  in  strength,  in  area, 
and  men  voluntarily,  or  rather  instinctively,  abandon  an  increasing  district  of  their 
understandings  and  conduct  to  its  undisputed  control.  It  varies  in  definitenesa 
and  in  exigency  with  the  number  of  human  beings  which  it  happens  to  represent. 
There  is  public  opinion  proper  to  each  village  and  town,  to  each  society  and  pro- 
fession, to  each  country,  to  each  civilization,  to  the  world  ;  but  between  the  most 
general  and  the  narrowest  forms  of  this  common  body  of  thought  and  sentiment, 
there  are  bands  and  joints  which  weld  the  whole  into  a  substantial  unit ;  and  in 
modern  times  public  opinion  has  taken  a  concrete  body  and  form,  such  as  two  cen- 
turies ago  was  undreamt  of.  It  lives,  it  works  in  the  daily  press.  In  the  press  we 
see  visibly  embodied  before  our  eyes  this  empire  of  opinion,  with  its  countless 
varieties  and   sub-divisions,  with  its  strong,  corporate,  and  substantial  unities. 


..  i.]  OALATIANS.  86 

And  so,  face  to  face  with  the  press,  every  man  who  hopes  to  keep  his  own  con- 
science in  moderately  good  order  knows  that  in  public  opinion  he  encounters  a 
force  with  which,  sooner  or  later,  on  a  large  scale  or  a  small,  before  the  world  or  in 
the  recesses  of  his  own  conscience,  he  must  of  necessity  reckon;  and  that,  whether 
he  bears  like  St.  Paul  a  commission  from  heaven,  or  endeavours  to  be  loyal  to  such 
truth  as  he  know3  of  chiefly  or  altogether  among  the  concerns  of  earth.  What  is 
the  duty  of  the  Christian  towards  this  ubiquitous,  this  penetrating  agency?  Is  he 
to  shut  himself  up  and  despise  it,  as  might  some  Stoic  of  the  earlier  Stoic  school  ? 
Assuredly  not.  St.  Paul  did  not  do  that.  He  was  respectful,  even  towards  heathen 
opinion.  .  .  .  Are  we,  then,  to  place  ourselves  trustfully  under  public  opinion,  to 
defer  to  and  obey  it,  at  least  in  a  Christian  country;  and  is  it  to  furnish  us  in  the 
last  resort  with  the  rule  of  conduct  and  criterion  of  moral,  even  religious,  truth  ? 
Again,  most  assuredly  not ;  for  it  is,  in  fact,  a  compromise  between  the  many 
elements  which  go  to  make  up  human  society ;  and  the  lower  and  selfish  elements 
of  thought  and  feeling  are  apt  upon  the  whole  to  preponderate.  Public  opinion  is 
too  wanting  in  patience,  in  penetration,  in  delicacy,  to  deal  successfully  with 
religious  questions.  It  cannot  be  right  to  cry  "  Hosanna "  now ;  to-morrow, 
"  Crucify  "  ;  to  applaud  in  Galilee  what  you  condemn  in  Jerusalem  ;  to  sanction  in 
this  generation  what  was  denounced  in  that ;  to  adore  what  you  have  burned,  to 
burn  what  you  have  adored  with  conspicuous  versatility,  merely  because  a  large 
body  of  human  beings — the  majority  of  them,  it  may  be,  quite  without  particular 
information  on  the  subject  in  hand — love  to  have  it  so.  To  attempt  to  please  men 
in  this  sense  is,  most  assuredly,  incompatible  with  the  service  of  Christ.  The 
Christian  has,  or  ought  to  have,  upon  his  heart  and  upon  his  conscience,  the  reve- 
lation of  truth  which  in  these  great  crises  of  life  sets  him  above  the  exigencies  of 
publio  opinion.  He  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  things,  but  he  himself  is  judged  of 
no  man.  He  will  not,  indeed,  break  with  it  lightly  or  wantonly ;  he  will  look  once 
and  again,  aye  and  a  third  time,  to  be  sure  that  he  is  not  himself  deceived,  if  not  in 
his  principle  yet  in  its  application.  But  when  this  point  is  once  clear,  he  will  reso- 
lutely go  forward.  (Ibid.)  Uncomfortable  preaching : — I  remember  one  of  my 
parishioners  telling  me  that  "  he  thought  a  person  should  not  go  to  church  to  be 
made  uncomfortable."  I  replied  that  I  thought  so  too ;  but  whether  it  should  b© 
the  sermon  or  the  man's  life  that  should  be  altered,  so  as  to  avoid  the  discomfort, 
must  depend  on  whether  the  doctrine  was  right  or  wrong.  (Archbishop  WImtely.} 
Reward  of  men-pleasing  : — One  Sunday  afternoon  a  well-known  minister,  fatigued 
after  his  labours  in  church,  retired  to  his  room  to  rest.  He  had  not  long  laia 
down,  before  he  fell  asleep  and  began  to  dream.  He  dreamed,  that  on  walking  into 
his  garden,  he  entered  a  bower  that  had  been  erected  in  it,  where  he  sat  down  to  read 
and  meditate.  While  thus  employed,  he  thought  he  heard  some  person  enter 
the  garden ;  and,  leaving  his  bower,  he  immediately  hastened  towards  the  spot 
whence  the  sound  seemed  to  come,  in  order  to  discover  who  it  was  that  had  entered. 
He  had  not  proceeded  far  before  he  discovered  a  particular  friend  of  his,  a  minister 
of  considerable  talents  and  popularity.  On  approaching  his  friend,  he  was  sur- 
prised to  find  on  his  countenance  a  gloom  which  it  had  not  been  wont  to  bear, 
indicating  violent  agitation  of  mind  which  seemed  to  arise  from  conscious  remorse. 
After  the  usual  salutations  had  passed,  his  friend  asked  the  relater  the  time  of  the 
day.  To  which  he  replied,  "  Twenty-five  minutes  after  four."  On  hearing  this  the 
stranger  said,  *'  It  is  only  one  hour  since  I  died,  and  now  " (here  his  counte- 
nance spoke  unutterable  horrors.)  "Why  so  troubled?"  inquired  the  dreaming 
minister.  "  It  is  not,"  said  he,  "  because  I  have  not  preached  the  gospel ;  nor  is  it 
beeause  I  have  not  been  rendered  useful,  for  I  have  now  many  seals  to  my  ministry 
that  can  bear  testimony  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  which  they  have  received 
from  my  lips ;  but  it  is  because  I  have  been  accumulating  to  myself  the  praise  of 
men,  more  than  the  honour  which  cometh  from  above ;  and,  verily,  I  have  my 
reward."  Having  thus  said,  he  disappeared,  and  was  seen  no  more.  The  minister 
•woke,  and  soon  learned  of  the  death  of  the  popular  preacher  at  the  precise  time 
indicated  in  the  dream.  Attempts  at  men-pleasing  not  always  successful: — Dr. 
Dodd's  besetting  sin  seems  to  have  been  an  excessive  anxiety  to  give  satisfaction  to 
all,  to  "  please  men  "  of  every  shade  of  opinion.  Having  to  preach  one  Sunday  at 
a  country  town,  where  were  two  different  meeting-houses,  the  one  Calvinistic  and 
theother  Arminian,  the  doctor  provided  himself  with  two  sermons  as  opposite  in 
their  doctrine  as  were  the  congregations  he  was  to  preach  to.  When  he  arrived  at 
the  place  he  mounted  the  Calvinistic  pulpit  in  the  morning,  gave  out  his  text,  and 
began  his  sermon ;  bnt  he  had  not  proceeded  far  when  he  perceived  that  he  hsA 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Iran,  t 

jmlled  out  the  wrong  sermon.  However,  it  was  now  too  late  to  repair  the  mischief, 
to  he  was  obliged  to  go  through  with  it,  much  to  his  own  discomfiture,  and  to  the  dis- 
satisfaction of  the  people.  Having  but  two  sermons  with  him,  and  knowing  that 
many  of  his  morning  hearers  would  follow  him  to  the  other  meeting  in  the  after- 
noon, he  was  under  the  necessity  of  preaching  his  Calvinistio  discourse  in  the 
Arminian  place  of  worship,  and  of  course  gave  as  much  discontent  to  his  second 
congregation  as  he  had  done  to  the  first.  The  doctor  mentioning  his  mistake 
shortly  afterwards  to  an  intimate  friend,  received  sorry  comfort  from  the  reply : 
"Never  mind,  sir;  you  only  happened  to  put  your  hand  into  the  wrong  pocket  I" 
Godless  ministers : — It  is  true  that  a  man  may  impart  light  to  others,  who  does  not 
himself  see  the  light.  It  is  true  that,  like  a  concave  speculum,  cut  from  a  block  of 
ice,  which  by  its  power  of  concentrating  the  rays  of  the  sun,  kindles  touchwood  or 
explodes  gunpowder,  a  preacher  may  set  others  on  fire,  when  his  own  heart  is  cold 
as  frost.  It  is  true  that  he  may  stand  like  a  lifeless  finger-post,  pointing  the  way 
on  a  road  where  he  neither  leads  nor  follows.    (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.    That  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of  me  Is  not  after  man. — 

The  inspiration  of  St.  Paul. •— ihe_greater_part  of  our  knowledge  must  alwaysrest 
on  the  authority  of  others.  No  single  man  is  able  to  ascertain  for  himself  the 
innumerable  facts,  in"~ali~the  various  fields  of  human  investigation,  out  of  which 
alone  a  personal  conviction  can  grow.  Nor  can  we  always  reason  out  the  conclu- 
sions that  we  accept  on  others'  testimony.  We  must  take  them  on  faith.  False 
teachers  in  Galatia  attempted  to  weaken  Paul's  authority  by  asserting  that  he, 
having  never  been  a  personal  disciple  of  Jesus,  and  not  therefore  included  in  the 
original  commission,  was  to  be  looked  on  as  no  more  than  a  self-appointed  pro- 
claimer  of  a  self-invented  doctrine,  or  as  the  agent  only  of  other  persons  who 
employed  his  zeal  and  talents  to  diffuse  their  error,  or  perhaps  as  the  ignorant 
perverter  of  the  truths  which  he  had  at  first  been  taught  by  the  apostles  at  Jeru- 
salem, and  from  which  he  had  gone  aside.  St.  Paul  here  refutes  these  accusations 
and  insinuations.  I.  His  principles  of  Christianity  were  mot  derived  from 
human  authority.  He  was  not  the  retailer  of  other  men's  notions,  and  proolaimer 
of  what  others  had  invented  for  him  and  enjoined  on  him.  He  had  not  been 
drilled  in  any  human  school,  and  then  sent  forth  to  talk — to  distribute  the  materials 
which  had  been  put  into  his  hands,  and  to  hawk  about  the  goods  which  others  had 
manufactured  for  him.  Far  higher  than  this  was  his  authority ;  far  deeper  his 
knowledge  and  convictions.  H.  Nob  through  human  instruction.  Not  merely 
conviction  arrived  at  by  self-study  of  others'  opinions.  IH.  But  from  Divinb 
disclosure.  God  unveiled  His  hidden  things  to  the  mental  vision  of  the  apostle. 
His  inspiration  is  a  revelation,  disclosure,  communication  from  God.  Therefore 
he  speaks  with  authority.      (Prebendary  Griffith.)  The  nature  of  revelation : — 

Bevelation  is  distinguished  from  ordinary  moral  and  spiritual  influences  by  its  sud- 
denness. It  shows  us  in  an  instant,  what,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would 
grow  up  gradually  and  insensibly.  In  the  individual  it  is  accompanied  by  a  sudden 
transition  from  darkness  to  light ;  in  the  world  at  large  it  is  an  anticipation  of 
moral  truth  and  of  the  course  of  human  experience.  Beducible  to  no  natural 
laws,  it  is  to  our  ordinary  moral  and  spiritual  nature  what  peculiar  cataleptio  con- 
ditions are  to  our  bodily  constitution.  It  seems  to  come  from  without,  and  is  not 
to  be  confounded  with  any  inward  emotion,  any  more  than  a  dream  or  the  sight  of 
a  painting.  As  compared  with  prophecy,  it  is  nearer  to  us,  representing  as  in  a 
picture  the  things  that  shall  shortly  come  to  pass,  and  yet  embracing  a  wider 
range ;  not,  like  the  prophets  of  old,  describing  the  fortunes  of  an  individual  nation, 
as  it  may  have  crossed  the  path  of  the  Jewish  people,  but  lifting  up  the  veil  from 
the  whole  invisible  world.  In  all  its  different  senses  it  retains  this  external, 
present,  immediate  character.  Whether  it  be  the  future  kingdom  of  Christ,  or  the 
fall  of  Jerusalem  or  of  Borne,  or  the  world  lying  in  wickedness,  that  is  described, 
all  is  displayed  immediately  before  us  as  on  some  mount  of  transfiguration — the 
figures  near  to  us,  and  the  colours  bright.       (B.  Jowett,  aI.A.)  The  gospel 

no  work  of  man : — 1.  As  a  word  of  doctrine,  it  did  not  spring  from  men,  nor  was  it 
taught  by  men,  but  by  Christ  Himself,  who  brought  it  Himself,  and  through  whom 
alone  His  people  have  it.  2.  As  a  word  of  comfort,  only  through  Him  can  we 
commit  ourselves  to  it.  3.  As  a  word  of  power,  in  which  there  should  be  no  change, 
from  which  no  departure.  (J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.)  A  solemn  avowal  concerning  the 
gospel : — I.  The  gospel  that  Paul  preached.  The  purport  of  his  ministry  and 
the  faith  he  proclaimed  are  given  in  Acts  xxvi.  22,  23.    H.  The  oof  pel  which 


.  i.]  OALATIANS.  91 

Paul  preached  was  not  of  ham.  1.  His  gospel  was  not  after  man.  It  did  not 
originate  with  man.  Human  schemes  of  salvation  have  ever  been  imperfect  in 
theory  and  worthless  in  practice.  2.  Paul's  gospel  was  not  communicated  by  man. 
"  I  neither  received  it  of  man. "  3.  The  gospel  which  Paul  preached  was  not  ex- 
plained to  him  by  man.     "  Neither  was  I  taught  it. "    III.  The  gospel  that  Paul 

PREACHED  WAS  REVEALED  TO  HIM.  IV.  PAUL'S  TESTIMONY  IN  RELATION  TO  THE 
GOSPEL  WAS  DELIVERED   WITH    GREAT    IMPRESSIVENESS  AND  SOLEMNITY.        "  I    declare 

unto  you,  brethren."  Lessons :  1.  Paul  and  the  other  apostles  preached  what  had 
been  revealed  to  them ;  there  cannot,  therefore,  be  in  the  true  sense,  any  successors 
to  the  apostles  now.  2.  The  gospel  being  a  revelation,  should  be  received  with 
reverent  trust.      {Richard  Nicholls.)         I  certify  you: — Observe — I.  That  men 

MAY  BE   CERTIFIED  THAT  THE  GOSPEL    IS    MOT    07    MAN   BUT    OF    GOD,     by  —  1.     The 

evidences  of  God's  Spirit  imprinted  on  and  expressed  in  it.  2.  The  testimony  of  its 
promulgators  who  were  neither  knaves  nor  fools.  3.  The  assurance  of  obedience 
and  experience  (John  vii.  17).  II.  That  Christ  is  the  great  Teacher  of  this 
gospel.  1.  He  is  the  Bevealer  of  the  will  of  the  Father  touching  the  redemption 
of  mankind  (John  i.  18 ;  viii.  26).  2.  He  calls  and  sends  the  preachers  of  this 
gospel  (John  xx.  21 ;  Eph.  iv.  11).  3.  He  gives  the  Spirit  who  illuminates  the 
mind  and  guides  into  all  truth.  III.  That  Christ  teaches  the  teachers  of  this 
gospel.  1.  By  immediate  revelation.  2.  By  ordinary  instruction  in  the  schools. 
IV.  That  those  who  are  teachers  must  be  first  taught,  and  must  then  teach 
what  they  have  learned  (2  Tim.  iii.  14).  (W.  Perkins.)  Preaching  the 
gospel: — To  preach  is  to  announce  by  heralding.  We  have  to  reiterate  as  new  and 
happy  tidings  in  the  ear  of  a  stranger  that  God's  kingdom  is  eome,  is  to  come,  and 
that  we  can  help  it  to  come.  I  ask  any  man,  if  this  be  true  and  not  romance,  is  it 
not  an  honour  to  proclaim  it,  although  it  be  with  us  as  with  Paul,  against  difficulties 
and  calumnies.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  The  inspiration  of  St.  Paul : — In  an  important 
sense  the  inspiration  of  St.  Paul  is  the  highest  in  Holy  Scripture ;  for  while  Moses 
laid  a  foundation,  and  prophets  brought  together  the  Divine  materials,  and  evange- 
lists built  up  the  walls  of  the  glorious  temple  of  God's  truth,  it  was  reserved  for 
Paul  to  complete  the  structure  and  bring  out  its  beauties  to  be  seen  of  the  whole 
earth.  There  are  magnificent  temples  in  Bible  lands  that  have  served  for  quarries 
for  the  structures  the  Turks  have  built  under  their  shadow.  Tet  even  in  ruin  their 
greatness  is  more  conspicuous  from  the  contrast.  So  the  ablest  theologians  have 
gone  to  Paul  for  the  choicest  stones  of  their  goodly  structures,  and  still  the  temple 
he  was  commissioned  to  complete  looks  down  on  them  all,  not  a  ruin  but  perfect  as 
at  the  first.  His  Epistles  form  the  crowning  glory  of  that  Word  of  God  that 
abideth  for  ever.  (M.  Laurie,  D.D.)  Certification  of  Divine  revelation : — Can  a 
revelation  be  certified?  The  answer  may  be  divided  into  three  parts.  1.  The 
method  of  the  revelation,  by  individual  men,  and  by  writings  handed  down  from 
age  to  age,  is  not  unreasonable.  2.  The  anterior  probability  of  such  a  revelation 
as  is  given  in  Scripture  is  undoubtedly  strong.  3.  The  test  of  time  being  applied 
to  the  revelation  actually  given,  sufficiently  approves  the  Divine  authority  which  is 
claimed  for  it.  (R.  A.  Redford.)  Divine  revelation  from  above: — I.  It  occupies 
a  higher  begiom  than  that  which  is  physical,  mental,  or  moral.  II.  It  comes 
down  upon  the  intellect,  not  out  of  it.  1.  It  is  sublimely  authoritative.  2.  By  the 
ride  of  it  the  most  advanced  knowledge  is  halting  and  immature.  HI.  Paul  in- 
sisted   0M    HIS    APOBTLESHXP    BECAUSE    THIS    REVELATION    WAS    COMMITTED    TO  HIM. 

(S.  Pearson,  31. A.)  It  is  an  historical  fact  that  human  nature  is  always  below 
revelation.  Great  discoveries  are  usually  the  product  of  preceding  ages  of  thought. 
One  mind  developes  the  idea;  but  it  is  the  fruitage  of  the  ages  ripened  in 
that  mind.  A  pearl  is  found;  but  the  location  has  been  indicated  by  previous 
researches.  But  revealed  religion  is  something  different  from  this.  It  is  separate 
from  and  superior  to  the  thought  of  the  age.  It  calls  the  wisdom  of  the  world 
foolishness,  and  introduces  a  new  standpoint  and  starting-point  around  which  it 
gathers  what  was  valuable  in  the  old,  and  destroys  the  remainder.  Hence  it  will 
always  be  found  true  that  a  struggle  is  necessary  to  bring  up  the  human  mind  and 
keep  it  np  to  the  level  of  revealed  religion,  and  that  revealed  religion  produces  the 
struggle.  Even  those  who  profess  to  be  its  friends  retrograde  as  soon  as  its  powei 
abates,  and  new  applications  of  that  power  have  to  be  made  to  bring  them  op  again. 
(/.  B,  Walker,  M.A.)  Revelation  by  Christ : — Revelation  seems  usually  to  b« 
ascribed  to  the  Son  of  God  in  consistency  with  His  character  as  the  Word,  the 
declarer  of  God's  will  who  has  manifested  God  in  the  flesh  (see  also  1  Cor.  xi.  23 ; 
Bar.  L  1,  v.  9).    Whereas  Inspiration  is  usually  connected  with  the  Holy  Spirit 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


[CHAT.   L. 


(2  Pet.  i.  21 ;  Acts  i.  16 ;  Eeb.  vii.  8).  Bat  Luke  ii.  26  is  an  exception  to  the  role. 
And,  doubtless  as  on  the  one  hand  it  is  from  the  Son  that  the  Spirit  proceeds,  being 
indeed  the  water  which  flows  out  of  the  rock  of  our  salvation  :  so,  on  the  other, 
no  revelation  can  be  made  without  the  Spirit  who  opens  the  inward  eye  to  what  ie 
outwardly  communicated.     (Dean  Goulburn.) 

Ver.  13.  For  ye  have  heard  of  my  conversation  In  time  past. — My  conversation 

in  time  past : — I.  An  humbling  and  painful  recollection.  We  should  study  the 
true  uses  of  the  past.  The  past  is  rightly  used  when  it — 1.  Deepens  our  sense  of 
"guilt.  2.  Illustrates  the  greatness  of  Divine  mercy.  3.  Inspires  us  with  courage  in 
relation  to  the  future.  II.  An  humbling  and  painful  recollection  believed  by  thb 
highest  consideration.  1.  Not  a  self-recovery  or  development,  (2)  but  the  inward 
revelation  of  Christ.  III.  An  humbling  and  painful  recollection  succeeded  by  a 
holt  and  sublime  vocation.  The  fact  that  God  calls  converted  sinners  to  preach 
His  gospel. — 1.  Puts  the  minister  into  moral  sympathy  with  his  hearers.  2.  Ex- 
emplifies the  power  of  God  to  execute  His  purposes.  3.  Stimulates  the  study  ol 
Divine  things.  Application :  The  text — 1.  Appeals  to  the  worst  of  men.  2.  Explains 
the  vehemence  and  urgency  of  an  earnest  ministry.  3.  Exalts  and  Illustrates  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Paul's  former  life: — I.  As  A  persecutor. 
Consider — 1.  The  wasting.  (1)  How  can  the  Church  be  wasted?  Not  in  its  in* 
ward  estate,  which  stands  in  election,  faith,  justification,  glory ;  but  in  respect  of 
men's  bodies,  public  assemblies,  religious  exercises.  (2)  Why  does  God  suffer  it  to 
be  wasted  ?  Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God.  Painful  operations  are  often 
needful  to  health.  2.  The  waster.  (1)  Sin,  when  it  takes  place,  gives  a  man  no 
rest  till  it  has  brought  him  to  a  height  of  wickedness.  (2)  Therefore  avoid  the 
beginning  of  evil.  II.  As  A  beligionist.  1.  He  profited  exceedingly.  Observe 
(1)  that  there  should  be  holy  emulation  in  religion,  (2)  but  modest  pretensions  at 
excellence.  2.  He  was  exceedingly  jealous  (1)  about  the  law  and  unwritten 
traditions,  (2)  bnt  not  according  to  knowledge.  IH.  Whence  learn— 1.  To  addict 
and  set  ourselves  earnestly  to  maintain  the  truth.  2.  To  be  angry  when  God  is 
dishonoured  and  His  Word  disobeyed.  3.  Not  to  give  liberty  to  the  best  of  our 
natural  affections,  as  zeal,  but  to  rule  them.  4.  To  estimate  unwritten  traditions  at 
their  proper  worth.  (W.  Perkins.)  Persecutor  and  minister: — A  minister  once 
preaching  a  charity  sermon  in  the  west  of  England,  began  as  follows:  "Many 
years  have  elapsed  since  I  was  within  these  walls.  On  that  occasion  there  came 
three  young  men  with  the  intention  not  only  of  scoffing  at  the  minister,  but  with 
stones  in  their  pockets  for  the  purpose  of  assaulting  him.  After  a  few  words  one 
of  them  said  with  an  oath, « Let  us  be  at  him  now ; '  but  the  second  replied, '  No ; 
Btop  till  we  hear  what  he  makes  of  this  point.'  The  minister  went  on,  when  the 
second  said,  *  We  have  heard  enough ;  now  throw.'  But  the  third  interfered,  re- 
marking, '  He  is  not  so  foolish  as  I  expected ;  let  us  hear  him  out.'  The  preacher 
concluded  without  having  been  interrupted.  Now  mark  me — of  these  three  young 
men  one  was  executed  for  forgery ;  the  second  lies  under  sentence  of  death  for 
murder ;  the  third,  through  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  now  addresses  you.  Listen 
to  him."  The  value  in  controversy  of  practical  experience  of  the  opposite  tide  .•— ■ 
Paul  knew  the  joints  in  his  opponents'  armour,  and  shows  at  the  outset  that  he 
knew  not  only  the  opinions  of  the  Judaisers,  but  the  spiritual  atmosphere  in  which 
they  had  been  educated.  Such  a  controversialist  the  enemy  cannot  afford  to  despise, 
for  the  battle  is  half  won  before  it  has  commenced.  It  is  often  very  annoying  to 
a  young  man  to  be  told  by  a  mature  Christian,  "  I  thought  as  sceptically  as  you  do, 
and  spoke  as  rashly,  believing  that  I  was  going  to  turn  the  orthodox  world  upside 
down ;  but  I  have  got  beyond  those  days,  and  am  now  a  wiser  man,  as  I  trust  you 
will  be."  Yet  this  is  frequently  the  only  way  of  meeting  the  case.  The  young  man 
retires  within  himself,  looks  at  rash  utterances  in  the  light  of  cool  reflection,  finds 
that  truth  and  novelty  are  not  synonymous,  and  is  at  least  silent,  which  is  a  great 
gain  to  himself  and  to  those  around  him.  (S.  Pearson,  M. A.)  Paul's  antecedents 
a  qualification  for  his  work : — It  has  often  happened  that  the  destroyer  of  a  creed 
or  system  has  been  bred  and  trained  in  the  bosom  of  the  system  which  he  was 
destined  to  shake  or  destroy.  Saky a  Mouni  had  been  brought  up  in  Brahminism ; 
Luther  had  taken  the  vows  of  an  Augustinian;  Pascal  had  been  trained  as  a 
Jesuit ;  Spinoza  was  a  Jew ;  Wesley  and  Whitefield  were  clergymen  of  the  Church 
of  England.  It  was  not  otherwise  with  St.  Paul.  The  victorious  enemy  of  heathen 
philosophy  and  worship  had  passed  his  boyhood  amid  the  heathen  surroundings  of 
a  philosophic  city.    The  deadly  antagonist  of  Judaic  exclusiveness  was  by  birth  a 


'1 


chat.  L]  GALAT1ANS.  39 

Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  The  dealer  of  the  death-wotmd  to  the  spirit  of  Pharisaism 
was  a  Pharisee,  a  son  of  Pharisees,  a  scholar  of  Gamaliel,  had  been  taught  according 
to  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law  of  his  fathers,  and  had  lived  "  after  the  most 
straightest  sect "  of  the  Jewish  service.  [F.  W.  Farrar.)  Early  persecution 
~bf  Christians ;— " Oh  ! "  said  Caesar,  "we  will  soon  root  np  this  Christianity. 
Off  with  their  heads ! "  The  different  governors  hastened  one  after  another 
of  the  disciples  to  death;  but,  the  more  they  persecuted  them,  the  more  they 
multiplied.  The  pro-consuls  had  orders  to  destroy  Christians;  the  mo^ 
they  hunted  them,  the  more  Christians  there  were,  until,  at  last,  men  presse 
to  the  judgment-seat,  and  asked  to  be  permitted  to  die  for  Christ.  They  invented 
torments;  they  dragged  saints  at  the  heels  of  wild  horses;  they  laid  ther 
upon  red-hot  gridirons ;  they  pulled  off  the  skin  from  their  flesh  piece  by  piece ;  they\ 
were  sawn  asunder ;  they  were  wrapped  up  in  skins,  and  daubed  with  pitch,  and  set ' 
in  Nero's  gardens  at  night  to  burn  ;  they  were  left  to  rot  in  dungeons ;  they  were 
made  a  spectacle  to  all  men  in  the  amphitheatre  ;  the  bears  hugged  them  to  death  ; 
the  lions  tore  them  to  pieces ;  the  wild  bulls  tossed  them  upon  their  horns : 
and  yet  Christianity  spread.  All  the  swords  of  the  legionaries  which  had  put  to 
rout  the  armies  of  all  nations,  and  had  overcome  the  invincible  Gaul  and 
the  savage  Briton,  could  not  withstand  the  feebleness  of  Christianity;  for  the 
weakness  of  God  is  mightier  than  men.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  two  part? 
of  St.  PauVt  life  :— TheW"are~qu£strons-whieh-it4s  mtere^ting_tojuggestr-even 
when  they  can  never  receive  a  perfect  and  satisfactory  answer.  One  of  these 
questions  may  be  asked  respecting  St.  Paul :  What  was  the  relation  in  which  his 
former  life  stood  to  the  great  fact  of  his  conversion?  He  himself,  in  looking 
back  upon  the  times  in  which  he  persecuted  the  Church  of  God,  thought  of  them 
chiefly  as  an  increasing  evidence  of  the  mercy  of  God,  which  was  afterwards  ex- 
tended to  him.  It  seemed  so  strange  to  have  been  what  he  had  been,  and  to  be 
what  he  was.  Nor  does  our  own  conception  of  him,  in  relation  to  his  former  self, 
commonly  reach  beyond  this  contrast  of  the  old  and  new  man ;  the  persecutor  and 
the  preacher  of  the  gospel ;  the  young  man  at  whose  feet  the  witnesses  against 
Stephen  laid  down  their  clothes ;  and  the  same  Paul  disputing  against  the  Grecians, 
full  of  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord,  on  whom  in  later  life  came  daily  the 
care  of  all  the  Churches.  Yet  we  cannot  but  admit  also  the  possibility,  or  rather 
the  probable  truth,  of  another  point  of  view.  If  there  were  any  among  the  con- 
temporaries of  St.  Paul  who  had  known  him  in  youth  and  in  age,  they  would  have 
seen  similarities  such  as  escape  us  in  the  character  of  the  apostle  at  different 
periods  of  his  life.  The  zealot  against  the  gospel  might  have  seemed  to  them 
transfigured  into  the  opponent  of  the  law ;  they  would  have  found  something  in 
common  in  the  Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees,  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  and 
the  man  who  had  a  vow  on  his  last  journey  to  Jerusalem.  And  when  they  heard 
the  narrative  of  his  conversion  from  his  own  lips,  they  might  have  remarked  that 
to  one  of  his  temperament  only  could  such  an  event  have  happened,  and  would 
have  noted  many  superficial  resemblances  which  showed  him  to  be  the  same  man, 
while  the  great  inward  change  which  had  overflowed  upon  the  world  was  hid  from 
their  eyes.  The  gifts  of  God  to  man  have  ever  some  reference  to  natural  dis- 
position. He  who  becomes  the  servant  of  God  does  not  thereby  cease  to  be  him- 
self. Often  the  transition  is  greater  in  appearance  than  in  reality,  from  its  very 
suddenness.  There  is  a  kind  of  rebellion  against  self  and  nature  and  God,  which, 
through  the  mercy  of  God  to  the  soul,  seems  almost  necessarily  to  lead  to  reaction. 
Persons  have  been  worse  than  their  fellow-men  in  outward  appearance,  and  yet 
there  was  within  them  the  spirit  of  a  child  waiting  to  return  home  to  their  father's 
house.  A  change  passes  over  them  which  we  may  figure  to  ourselves,  not  only  as 
the  new  man  taking  the  place  of  the  old,  but  as  the  inner  man  taking  the  place  of  the 
outer.  So  fearfully  and  wonderfully  are  we  made,  that  the  very  contrast  to  what 
we  are  has  often  an  inexpressible  power  over  us.  It  seems  sometimes  as  if  the  same 
religions  education  had  tended  to  contrary  results ;  in  one  case  to  a  devout  life,  in 
another  to  a  reaction  against  it ;  sometimes  to  one  form  of  faith,  at  other  times  to 
another.  ...  Perhaps  we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  in  concluding,  that  those  who 
have  undergone  great  religious  changes  have  been  of  a  fervid,  imaginative  oast  of 
mind ;  looking  for  more  in  this  world  than  it  was  capable  of  yielding ;  easily  touched 
by  the  remembrance  of  the  past,  or  inspired  by  some  ideal  of  the  future.  When 
with  this  has  been  combined  a  zeal  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men,  they  have 
become  the  heralds  and  champions  of  tbe  religious  movements  of  the  world.  The 
change  has  begun  within,  but  has  overflowed  without  them.    "  When  thou  art  eon- 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  U 

verted,  strengthen  thy  brethren,"  is  the  order  of  nature  and  of  grace.  In  secret 
they  brood  over  their  own  state ;  weary  and  profitless,  their  soul  fainteth  within 
them.  The  religion  they  profess  is  a  religion  not  of  life  to  them,  but  of  death; 
they  lose  their  interest  in  the  world,  and  are  out  off  from  the  communion  of  their 
fellow-men.  While  they  are  musing,  the  fire  kindles,  and  at  the  last — "  they  speak 
with  their  tongue."  Then  pours  forth  irrepressibly  the  pent-up  stream — "unto 
all  and  upon  all "  their  fellow-men ;  the  intense  flame  of  inward  enthusiasm  warms 
and  lights  up  the  world.  First,  they  are  the  evidence  to  others ;  then,  again,  others 
are  the  evidenee  to  them.  All  religious  leaders  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  single  type 
of  character ;  yet  in  all,  perhaps,  two  characteristics  may  be  observed ;  (1)  great 
self-reflection ;  (2)  intense  sympathy  with  other  men.  Such  men  have  generally 
appeared  at  favourable  conjunctures  of  circumstances,  when  the  old  was  about  to 
vanish  away,  and  the  new  to  appear.  The  world  has  yearned  towards  them,  and 
they  towards  the  world.  They  have  uttered  what  all  men  were  feeling ;  they  have 
interpreted  the  age  to  itself.  Often  such  men  have  been  brought  up  in  the  faith 
which  they  afterwards  oppose,  and  a  part  of  their  power  has  consisted  in  theii 
acquaintance  with  the  enemy.  They  see  other  men  like  themselves  formerly, 
wandering  out  of  the  way  in  the  idol's  temple,  amid  a  burdensome  ceremonial,  with 
prayers  and  sacrifices  unable  to  free  the  soul.  They  lead  them  by  the  way  themselves 
came  to  the  home  of  Christ.  .  .  .  Great  men  are  sometimes  said  to  possess  the  power 
of  command,  but  not  the  power  of  entering  into  the  feelings  of  others.  They  have  no 
fear  of  their  fellows,  but  neither  are  they  always  capable  of  immediately  impressing 
them  or  of  perceiving  the  impression  which  their  words  or  actions  make  upon 
them.  Often  they  live  in  a  kind  of  solitude  on  which  other  men  do  not  venture  to 
intrude ;  putting  forth  their  strength  on  particular  occasions,  careless  or  abstracted 
about  the  daily  concerns  of  life.  Such  was  not  the  greatness  of  St.  Paul;  not  only 
in  the  sense  in  which  he  says  that  "  he  could  do  all  things  through  Christ,"  but  in 
a  more  earthly  and  human  one  was  it  true,  that  his  strength  was  his  weakness,  and 
his  weakness  his  strength.  His  dependence  on  others  was  in  part,  also,  the  source  of 
his  influence  over  them.  His  natural  character  was  the  type  of  that  communion  of 
the  Spirit  which  he  preached ;  the  meanness  of  appearance  which  he  attributes  to 
himself,  the  image  of  that  contrast  which  the  gospel  presents  to  human  greatness. 
Glorying  and  humiliation,  life  and  death,  a  vision  of  angels  strengthening  him,  the 
"  thorn  in  the  flesh  "  rebuking  him,  the  greatest  tenderness  not  without  sternness, 
sorrows  above  measure,  consolations  above  measure,  are  some  of  the  contradictions 
which  were  reconciled  in  the  same  man.  The  centre  in  which  things  so  strange 
met  and  moved  was  the  Cross  of  Christ,  whose  marks  in  his  body  he  bore ;  what 
was  behind  of  whose  afflictions  he  rejoiced  to  fill  up.  Let  us  look  once  more,  a 
little  closer,  at  that  visage  marred  in  his  Master's  service.  A  poor  decrepit  being, 
afflicted,  perhaps,  with  palsy,  certainly  with  some  bodily  defect, — led  out  of  prison 
between  Eoman  soldiers,  probably  at  times  faltering  in  his  speech,  the  creature,  as 
he  seemed  to  spectators,  of  nervous  sensibility ;  yearning,  almost  with  a  sort  of  fond- 
ness, to  save  the  souls  of  those  whom  he  saw  around  him, — spoke  a  few  eloquent 
words  in  the  cause  of  Christian  truth,  at  which  kings  were  awed,  telling  the  tale 
of  his  own  conversion  with  such  simple  pathos,  that  after  ages  have  hardly  heard 
the  like.  (B.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Early  life  of  St.  Paul:— The  Apostle  Paul  was 
probably  born  in  the  later  years  of  Herod,  or  early  in  the  short  reign  of  Archelaus, 
when,  under  the  sway  of  the  emperor  Augustus,  the  .Roman  world  was  at  peace, 
and  when  the  wickedness  of  the  imperial  despotism  had  not  yet  fully  developed  itself. 
The  pirates  who  had  infested  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  had  been  sternly  sup- 
pressed. The  Jewish  people  were  still  enjoying  everywhere  ample  toleration  under 
the  Eoman  rule,  and  a  Jewish  family  like  St.  Paul's,  settled  at  Tarsus  in  Cilicia, 
would  have  been  in  sufficiently  comfortable  circumstances.  For  Tarsus  was  a  free 
city  of  the  Empire ;  that  is  to  say,  it  was  governed  by  its  own  magistrates,  and 
was  exempted  from  the  annoyance  of  a  Eoman  garrison ;  but  it  was  not  a  colony  like 
Philippi  in  Macedonia,  and  the  freedom  of  Rome,  which  St.  Paul  sayg  he  had  at 
his  birth,  would  probably  have  been  earned  by  some  services  rendered  by  his  father 
during  the  civil  wars  to  some  one  of  the  contending  parties  in  the  State.  It  is  at 
least  probable  from  the  expression,  •«  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,"  which  he  applies 
to  himself,  that  his  parents  were  originally  emigrants  from  Palestine.  We  know 
that  they  were  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  that  they  were  strict  members  of  the 
Pharisee  sect.^  Probably  his  father  was  engaged  in  the  Mediterranean  trade.  To 
his  pother,  it  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  there  is  not  one  reference  in  his 
writings.    He  had  a  sister  whose  son  lived  in  later  years  at  Jerusalem,  and  who 


OUT.  I.]  GALATIANS.  41 

would  have  been  his  playmate  at  Tarsus.  The  Talmud  says  that  a  father's  duty 
towards  his  boy  is  to  circumcise  him,  to  teach  him  the  law,  and  to  teach  him  a 
trade.  "We  know  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  that  the  first  of  these  precepts 
was  accurately  complied  with  on  the  eighth  day  after  the  child's  birth.  The  second 
would  probably  have  been  obeyed  by  sending  the  boy,  not  to  one  of  the  Greek 
schools  in  which  Tarsus  abounded,  but  to  a  Jewish  school  attached  to  one  of  the 
synagogues,  where,  after  the  age  of  five,  he  would  have  learnt  the  Hebrew  Scrip- 
tures,— at  ten  those  floating  maxims  of  the  great  Jewish  doctors  which  were  after- 
wards collected  in  the  Mishna,  so  as,  at  thirteen,  to  become  what  was  called  a 
"  Subject  of  the  Precept,"  after  a  ceremony  which  was  a  kind  of  shadow  of 
Christian  confirmation.  The  third  requirement  was  complied  with  by  setting  him 
to  make  tents  out  of  the  hair-cloth  supplied  by  the  goats  which  abounded  on  the 
slopes  of  the  neighbouring  mountains  of  the  Taurus,  and  which  was  a  chief 
article  in  the  trade  of  the  port — tents  which  to  this  day,  according  to  Beaufort, 
are  used  largely  by  the  peasantry  of  south-eastern  Asia  Minor  during  the  harvest- 
time.  At  or  soon  after  thirteen  the  little  Saul  would  have  been  sent  from  home, 
probably  in  a  trading  vessel  bound  from  the  port  of  Tarsus  for  Caesarea,  on  his  way 
to  Jerusalem.  Already,  as  a  boy,  the  Holy  City  must  have  possessed  for  him  an 
interest  surpassing  any  which  could  be  raised  by  any  other  place  on  earth. 
Every  great  festival  would  have  been  followed  by  the  return  of  one  or  more  of  his 
countrymen  to  Tarsus,  full  of  the  inspiration  of  the  sacred  sights,  full  of  the 
splendour  of  the  new  temple,  full  of  the  fame  and  learning  of  the  great  doctors 
of  the  law.  Especially  he  would  have  heard  much  of  the  two  rival  schools  of 
Hillel  and  Shammai,  of  which  the  former  exalted  tradition  above  the  letter  of  the 
law,  while  the  latter  preferred  the  law  to  tradition  when  they  clashed.  Of  these 
the  school  of  Hillel  was  much  the  more  influential,  and  when  St.  Paul  was  a  boy 
or  a  young  man  its  one  great  ornament  was  Gamaliel,  who  was  evidently  one  of 
those  men  whose  candour,  wisdom,  and  consistent  elevation  of  character  would 
have  secured  him  influence  in  any  society,  or  in  any  age  of  the  world.  It  was  at 
the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  he  was  brought  up ;  and  this  expression 
•«  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel  "  exactly  recalls  to  us  the  manner  in  which  the  Rabbinical 
Assemblies  of  the  Wise,  as  they  were  termed,  were  held.  The  teacher  sat  on  a  raised 
platform, — the  pupils  on  low  seats,  or  on  the  floor  beneath.  At  this  period  of  St. 
Paul's  life  we  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  region  of  conjecture ;  but  it  is,  upon 
the  whole,  scarcely  doubtful  that  he  would  have  returned  to  Tarsus  in  the  prime 
of  manhood,  before  he  reappeared  in  Jerusalem  as  a  member  of  the  synagogue 
which  was  connected  with,  or  maintained  by,  the  Jews  in  Cilicia.  This  visit  would 
have  completed  his  acquaintance  with  the  language,  and  to  a  certain  limited  extent 
with  the  literature,  of  Greece.  At  this  time  in  his  life,  too,  St.  Paul  would  probably 
have  become  familiar  with  that  large  section  of  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  whose 
centre  was  Alexandria,  who  in  everything  but  religion  were  nearly  Greeks,  whose 
religion  was  taking  more  and  more  of  the  Greek  dress  every  day.  .  .  .  This  educa- 
tion was  moulding  and  developing  a  character  which  may  be  described  by  one 
single  word — intensity.  There  was  much  besides.  There  was  sensitiveness  ;  there 
was  impetuosity ;  there  was  courage  ;  there  was  independence ;  but,  in  all  that  he 
did,  Paul  of  Tarsus,  before  his  conversion  as  well  as  after  it,  threw  his  whole 
energy,  whether  of  thought  or  resolution,  into  his  work.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Con- 
fession of  former  wrongdoing  : — A  man  may  make  his  past  sins  known  out  of  priie, 
but  also  out  of  humility.  Whoever  does  not  boast  himself  of  the  same,  but 
humbles  himself  therefore  before  God,  and  willingly  bears  the  shame  of  them 
before  men,  not  relying  upon  himself,  makes  a  good  confession,  but  one  not  needful 
to  be  uttered  before  every  man,  as  sometimes  it  would  bring  more  scandal  than 
benefit.    (Quesnel.) 

Ver.  14.  And  profited  In  the  Jews'  religion  above  many.— PauVt  prospects 
in  the  Jewish  religion: — He  might,  no  doubt,  have  been  the  head  of  the 
Pharisaio  faction  in  the  last  expiring  struggles  of  his  nation ;  he  might  have 
rallied  round  him  the  nobler  spirits  of  his  countrymen,  and  by  his  courage 
and  prudence  have  caused  Jerusalem  to  hold  out  a  few  months  or  years  more 
against  the  army  of  Titus.  Still  at  best  he  would  have  been  a  Maccabeus  or 
a  Gamaliel,  and  what  a  difference  to  the  whole  subsequent  fortunes  of  the  world 
between  a  Maccabeus  and  a  Paul,  between  the  Jewish  Babbi  and  the  Apostle  to  the 
Gentiles.  (Dean  Stanley.)  PauVs  zeal : — His  natural  faculties  were  by  his  con- 
version "not  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon " ;  the  glory  of  Divine  grace  was  showji 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA*.  t 

here  as always,  net  by  repressing  and  weakening  the  hnman  character,  bat  by  bring. 
ing  it  ont  for  the  first  time  in  its  full  vigour.  He  was  still  a  Jew ;  the  zeal  of  nil 
ancestral  tribe  (Gen.  xlix.  27),  which  had  caused  him  "  to  ravin  as  a  wolf  in  the 
morning  "  of  his  life,  still  glowed  in  his  veins  when  he  "  returned  in  the  evening  to 
divide  the  spoil "  of  the  mightier  enemy  whom  he  had  defeated  and  bound ;  and  in 
the  unwearied  energy  and  self-devotion,  no  less  than  the  peculiar  intensity  of 
natural  feeling,  which  mark  his  whole  life  and  writings,  we  discern  the  qualities 
which  the  Jewish  people  alone  of  all  the  nations  then  existing  on  the  earth  could 
have  furnished.  (Ibid.)  The  traditions  of  the  fathers : — There  are  two  large 
divisions  of  Babbinio  lore  which  may  be  classed  under  the  heads  of  Hagadoth, 
or  unrecorded  legends ;  and  Halachoth,  or  rules  and  precedents  in  explanation  of 
dubious  or  undefined  points  of  legal  observance.  It  is  natural  that  there  should  be 
but  few  traces  of  the  latter  in  the  writings  of  one  whose  express  object  was  to 
deliver  the  Gentiles  from  the  intolerable  burden  of  legal  Judaism.  But  though 
there  is  little  trace  of  them  he  tells  us  that  he  had  once  been  enthusiastic  in  their 
observance.  And  there  are  abundant  signs  that  with  the  Hagadoth  he  was  ex- 
tremely familiar — e.g.,  Jannesand  Jambres  (2  Tim.  iii.  8),  the  last  trumpet  (1  Cor.  xv. 
52),  the  giving  of  the  law  by  angels  (Gal.  iii.  19),  Satan  as  god  of  this  world  and 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  (Eph.  ii.  2),  celestial  and  infernal  hierarchies  (Eph. 
i.  21 ;  iii.  10  ;  vi.  12),  are  all  recurrent  in  Talmudio  writings.  1  Cor.  xi.  10  refers 
to  the  Babbinio  interpretation  of  Gen.  vi.  2,  which  avers  that  angels  fell  because 
oMherrguTIty  love  of  women.  The  following  rock  of  1  Cor.  x.  4  is  also  a  tradi- 
tion. (F.  W.  Farrar.)  False  zeal : — A  false  zeal  in  religion  is  always,  in  some 
respect  or  other,  a  misdirected  zeal,  or  a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge ;  a  zeal 
seeking  some  false  end,  or,  while  proposing  to  itself  a  good  end,  seeking  its  pro- 
motion in  some  unauthorized  way.  Jehu  had  a  good  zeal,  which  he  called  zeal  for 
the  Lord  of  Hosts.  His  fault  was  not  that  he  was  too  zealous,  but  that  his  seal 
was  really  directed  to  his  own  advancement.  The  Jews,  in  the  days  of  Christ,  had 
a  zeal  for  God ;  but  it  was  so  misdirected  as  to  fire  them  with  a  frenzy  to  destroy  the 
Son  of  God,  and  extinguish  the  Light  of  the  world.  There  are  countless  forms  of 
false  zeal  now  at  work ;  but,  in  all  cases,  they  sin  not  by  excess,  but  by  misdirection. 
Some  are  flaming  with  a  zeal  to  spread  some  of  the  corruption  of  Christianity,  and 
to  carry  men  away  from  its  great  and  cardinal  truths.  Some  are  equally  zealous  to 
build  np  a  sect  or  a  party  on  other  foundations  than  those  which  God  has  laid  in 
Zion ;  and  that  which  taints  their  zeal  is  the  purpose  to  which  they  employ  it,  and 
not  any  excessive  fervour  of  their  zeal  itself.  (Dr.  Bonar.)  Ministerial  teal : — 
The  most  remarkable  examples  of  zeal  are  found  in  the  records  of  the  early  itine- 
rant ministers.  Bichard  Nolley,  one  of  these,  came  upon  the  fresh  trail  of  an 
emigrant  in  the  wilderness,  and  followed  it  till  he  overtook  the  family.  When  the 
•migrant  saw  him, he  said,  "  What,  a  methodist  preacher!  I  quit  Virginia  to  be  out 
of  the  way  of  them ;  but  in  my  settlement  in  Georgia  I  thought  I  should  be  beyond 
their  reach.  There  they  were ;  and  they  got  my  wife  and  daughter  to  join  them. 
Then  I  come  here  to  Chocktaw  Corner,  find  a  piece  of  land,  feel  sure  that  I  shall 
have  some  peace  from  the  preachers ;  and  here  is  one  before  I  have  unloaded  my 
waggon  1 "  The  preacher  exhorted  him  to  make  his  peace  with  God,  that  he  might 
not  be  troubled  by  the  everywhere-present  methodist  preachers.  Remarkable 

teal : — During  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  Chaplain  Eastman  was  so  badly  injured  by 
a  fall  of  his  horse  as  to  be  compelled  to  lie  down  on  the  field  for  tb»  night.  As  he 
lay  in  the  darkness,  he  haard  a  voice  say,  "  Oh  my  God  1 "  and  thon&nt,  "  How  oan 
I  get  at  him  ?  "  Unable  to  walk,  he  started  to  roll  to  the  sufferer,  and  rolled  through 
blood,  among  the  dead  bodies,  till  he  came  to  the  dying  man,  to  whom  he  preached 
Christ.  This  service  done,  he  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  dying  officer,  to  whom  he 
had  to  be  carried  by  two  soldiers.  Thus  he  passed  the  long  night ;  the  soldiers 
carrying  him  from  one  dying  man  to  another,  to  whom  he  preached  Christ,  and 
with  whom  he  prayed,  while  compelled  to  lie  on  his  back  beside  them.  Sus- 
picious teal : — The  purity  of  that  zeal  for  religion  by  which  we  gain  worldly  wealth 
is  open  to  suspicion.  Well  fare  their  hearts  who  will  not  only  wear  out  their  shoes, 
bat  also  their  feet,  in  God's  service,  even  if  they  should  not  gain  a  shoe-latchet 
thereby.  True  zeal : — True  zeal  is  a  sweet,  heavenly,  and  gentle  flame,  which 

makes  as  active  for  God,  but  always  within  the  sphere  of  love.  It  never  calls  for 
"  fire  from  heaven,"  to  censure  those  who  differ  a  little  from  us  in  their  apprehen- 
sions. It  is  like  that  kind  of  lightning  which  melts  the  sword  within,  but  singes 
not  the  scabbard ;  it  strives  to  save  the  soul  without  hurting  the  body.  (R.  Cud- 
worth.)        Good  objects  not  to  be  unduly  esteemed: — Human  nature  is  prone  t« 


'.  I.]  GALATIANS.  43 

extremes,  sometimes  in  that  which  is  good.  St.  Paul  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to 
underrate  Judaism  in  order  to  justify  his  adherence  to  Christianity.  But  it  is  not  to 
undervalue  an  institution  to  place  it  in  its  true  light,  and  to  regard  it  according  to 
its  intrinsic  worth.  It  is  not  to  undervalue  a  stream,  to  say  of  it  that  it  is  not  the 
fountain,  nor  the  blossom  that  it  is  not  fruit,  nor  a  shadow  that  it  is  not  the  sub- 
stance, nor  a  taper  that  it  is  not  the  sun.  St.  Paul  knew  well  that  the  Jewish 
ceremonies  were  valuable  not  for  their  own  sake  merely,  but  as  so  many  moral 
conductors  to  Christ ;  and  that  that  end  being  accomplished,  their  virtue  ceased. 
And  he  was  not  the  man  to  tolerate  for  a  moment  the  egregious  absurdity  of  those 
who,  lor  sinister  purposes,  would  depose  Christ  from  his  high  supremacy,  and  sub- 
stitute the  ancient  ritual  of  Moses  for  the  atonement  of  the  cross,  and  go  back  to 
the  dim  twilight  of  the  law,  while  living  under  the  meridian  brightness  of  the  gospel 
day.  But  it  is  only  when  viewed  in  contrast  with  the  inherent  efficacy  of  the  better 
sacrifice,  the  better  covenant,  and  the  better  promises,  introduced  by  the  Son  of  God 
Himself,  that  he  ever  speaks  with  anything  like  disparagement  of  the  abrogated 
institutions  of  Judaism ;  which,  like  the  waning  orbs  of  night  when  the  sun  is  nigh, 
"  have  no  glory  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  exoelleth."    "  Ye  have  beabd  of  mt 

CONVERSATION  IN  TIMES  PAST  IN  THE  JEWS*  RELIGION  ;  BEING  MORE  EXCEEDINGLY  ZEA- 
LOUS or  ten  traditions  or  mt  FATHERS. ' '  The  general  instruction  to  be  derived  from 
this  reference  to  his  own  past  history,  and  to  the  errors  of  the  Galatian  people,  is, 
that  great  care  is  requisite  lest  objects,  good  in  themselves,  be  perverted  to  lead  the 
mind  away  from  Christ.  (The  Evangelist.)  Paul's  Jewish  life: — I.  The  reli- 
gion OF  PAUL  BEFORE  HIS    CONVERSION   WAS  DISTINGUISHED   BT   HATRED  AND  CRUELTY. 

"He  persecuted  the  Church  of  God  and  wasted  it."    H.  The  religion  of  paul 

BEFORE   HIS   CONVERSION  WAS   DISTINGUISHED  BY  GREAT   PROFICIENCY  IN  JEWISH  RITES 

and  ceremonies.  "  He  profited  in  the  Jews'  religion  above  many  his  equals  in  his 
own  nation."  IH.  Paul's  religion  before  his  conversion  was  distinguished  by 
zeal  fob  the  traditions  of  the  fathers.  "  Being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the 
traditions  of  my  fathers."  Lessons :  1.  Paul  exhibited  a  character  in  which  the  desire 
to  excel  was  ever  prominent.  His  persecution  was  above  measure,  his  proficiency  and 
zeal  in  the  Jewish  religion,  were  superior  to  his  contemporaries.  The  same  feature 
of  character  was  observed  in  Christian  work.  2.  Paul's  history  teaches  that  sin* 
eerity  is  no  proof  of  righteousness.  He  "  thought  that  he  ought  to  do  many  things 
contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  (R.  Nicholls.)  Sectarian  zeal: — I. 
Is  founded  on  the  human  in  religion;  II.  Is  bitter  and  persecuting  in  its  spirit;  III 
Indicates  not  true  religion  but  the  want  of  it.    (J.  Lyth.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  But  when  It  pleased  God  to  reveal  Els  Son  In  me.— Prermient 
grace: — Although  Paul  was  suddenly  converted,  yet  God  had  had  thoughts  of 
mercy  towards  him  from  his  very  birth.  God  did  not  begin  to  work  with  him 
when  he  was  on  the  road  to  Damascus.  That  was  not  the  first  occasion  on  which 
eyes  of  love  had  darted  upon  this  chief  of  sinners.  I.  The  purpose  or  God 
preceding  saving  grace,  as  it  may  clearly  be  seen  developing  itself  in 
human  histoby.  The  life  of  men  before  conversion  is  really  a  working  of  them  in 
the  clay.  You  may  perceive  God's  purpose  in  St.  Paul,  when  you  think  of  (1)  the 
singular  gifts  with  which  he  was  endowed ;  (2)  his  education ;  (3)  the  spiritual 
struggles  through  which  he  passed ;  (4)  the  singular  formation  of  his  mind.  Even 
as  a  sinner,  Paul  was  great.  A  man  full  of  energy  and  determination.  His  con- 
version only  lifted  him  into  a  higher  life,  but  left  him  unchanged  as  to  tempera- 
ment, nature,  and  force  of  character.  He  seems  to  have  been  constituted  naturally 
a  thorough-going,  thorough -hearted  man,  in  order  that  when  grace  did  come  to  him 
he  might  be  just  as  earnest,  dauntless,  fearless,  in  defence  of  the  right.  Such 
a  man  was  wanted  to  lead  the  vanguard  in  the  great  crusade  against  the  god  of  this 
world,  and  from  his  very  birth  God  was  fitting  him  for  this  position ;  before  he  was 
converted,  prevenient  grace  was  thus  engaged,  fashioning,  moulding,  and  preparing 
the  man,  in  order  that  by-and-by  there  might  be  put  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of 
life.  II.  Grace  preceding  calling  in  another  sense.  It  is  impossible  to  say, 
concerning  the  elect,  when  the  grace  of  God  begins  to  deal  with  them.  Yon  can 
tell  when  the  quickening  grace  comes,  but  not  when  the  grace  itself  comes.  1. 
Formative  grace.  This  is  to  be  born  of  Christian  parents,  in  a  Christian  country, 
and  nurtured  in  piety.  2.  Preventive  grace.  Saved  from  sins  that  others  fall  into. 
8.  Restraining  grace.  Debarred  by  circumstances  from  sins  to  which  we  are 
inclined.  4.  Preparatory  work  of  grace.  Before  casting  in  the  seed,  God  is 
pleased  to  give  to  some  (a)  an  attentive  ear.    Willingness  to  listen  to  the  Word 


i& 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [out.  a. 

when  it  is  brought  to  him ;  (b)  an  ingenuousness  of  heart ;  (c)  a  tender  conscience ; 
(d)  dissatisfaction  with  their  present  state.  Apples  of  Sodom,  at  one  time  fair  and 
sweet  to  their  taste,  God  turns  to  ashes  and  bitterness  in  their  moutb.  Thns  it 
was  with  Augustine,  wandering  wearily  hither  and  thitber  with  a  death-thirst  in 
his  soul,  that  no  fount  of  philosophy,  or  scholastic  argument,  or  heretical  teaching 
could  ever  assuage.  He  was  aware  of  his  unbappy  estate,  and  turned  his  eye  round 
the  circle  of  the  universe  looking  for  peace,  not  fully  conscious  of  what  he  wanted, 
though  feeling  an  aching  void  tbe  world  could  never  fill.  He  had  not  found  the 
centre,  fixed  and  steadfast,  around  which  all  else  revolved  in  ceaseless  change.  All 
this  appetite,  this  hunger  and  thirst,  is  not  of  the  devil,  or  of  the  human  heart 
alone,  but  of  God.  HI.  Paul's  actual  calling  by  Divine  grace.  All  pre- 
paratory work  of  which  we  have  spoken,  was  not  the  source  or  origin  of  the  vital 
godliness  which  afterwards  distinguished  him  ;  that  came  to  him  on  a  sudden.  In 
a  moment  be  saw  everything  in  a  different  light ;  and  from  a  foe  he  was  changed 
into  a  staunch  and  loyal  friend  of  Jesus.  He  was  not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly 
vision.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Providential  dealings  : — Some  of  the  good  fathers 
amongst  us  are  mourning  very  bitterly  just  now  over  their  sons.  Tour  children  do 
not  turn  out  as  you  wish  they  would ;  they  are  getting  sceptical,  some  of  them,  and 
they  are  also  falling  into  sin.  Well,  dear  friends,  it  is  yours  to  mourn ;  it  ia 
enough  to  make  you  weep  bitterly ;  but  let  me  whisper  a  word  into  your  ear.  Do 
not  sorrow  as  those  who  are  without  hope,  for  God  may  have  very  great  designs  to 
be  answered,  even  by  these  very  young  men  who  seem  to  be  running  so  altogether  in 
the  wrong  direction.  I  do  not  think  I  could  go  so  far  as  John  Bunyan  did,  when  he  said 
he  was  sure  God  would  have  some  eminent  saints  in  tbe  next  generation,  because  the 
young  men  in  his  day  were  such  gross  sinners,  that  he  thought  they  would  make 
fine  saints ;  and  when  the  Lord  came  and  saved  them  by  His  mercy,  they  would 
love  much  because  they  had  had  so  much  forgiven.  I  would  hardly  like  to  say  so 
much  as  that,  but  I  do  believe  that  sometimes  in  the  inscrutable  wisdom  of  God, 
when  some  of  those  who  have  been  sceptical  come  to  see  the  truth,  they  are  the 
very  best  men  that  could  possibly  be  found  to  do  battle  against  the  enemy.  Some 
uf  those  who  have  fallen  into  error,  after  having  passed  through  it,  and  happily 
come  up  from  its  deep  ditch,  are  just  the  men  to  stand  and  warn  others  against  it. 
I  cannot  conceive  that  Luther  would  ever  have  been  so  mighty  a  preacher  of  the 
faith,  if  he  had  not  himself  struggled  up  and  down  Pilate's  staircase  on  his  knees, 
when  trying  to  get  to  heaven  by  his  penances  and  his  good  works.  O  let  ns  have 
hope.  We  do  not  know  but  that  God  may  be  intending  yet  to  call  them  and  bless 
them.  Who  can  tell,  there  may  be  a  young  man  here  to-night  who  will  one  day  be 
the  herald  of  the  Cross  in  China,  in  Hindustan,  in  Africa,  and  in  the  islands  of  the 
sea?  Remember  John  Williams  wishing  to  keep  an  appointment  with  another 
young  man  who  committed  a  certain  sin.  He  wanted  to  know  what  time  it  was, 
and  so  just  stepped  into  Moorfields  Chapel ;  some  one  saw  him,  and  he  did  not  like 
to  go  out,  and  the  word  preached  by  Mr.  Timothy  East  fell  on  his  ears,  and  the 
young  sinner  was  made  a  saint ;  and  you  all  know  how  he  afterwards  perished  as  a 
martyr  on  the  shores  of  Erromanga.  (Ibid.)  Apostolic  credentials : — St.  Paul 
here  claims  to  be  an  apostle,  an  inspired  apostle,  one  qualified  to  speak  with 
authority,  and  to  teach  infallible  truth.  I.  A  Divine  communication  of  lioht 
and  knowledge  was  made  to  him.    He  had  been  blind,  now  he  saw.     II.  Ths 

SUBJECT     OF    THIS    DlVINE     COMMUNICATION     WAS     THE     LORD     JeSUS     CHRIST.      1.  In 

Christ  was  seen  the  glory  of  the  Divine  nature.  2.  In  Christ  was  seen  the  glory 
of  the  Divine  attributes.  As  the  wax  bears  the  perfect  image  of  the  seal,  so  were 
all  the  perfections  of  tbe  Divine  character  reflected  in  him.  3.  In  Christ  was  seen 
the  glory  of  the  Divine  purposes.  Redemption  is  the  masterpiece  of  Divine 
wisdom ;  in  redemption  Christ  is  the  central  figure.     III.  The   bphebe  in  which 

THIS  DlVINE   COMMUNICATION   HAD   PLACE   WAS   THE   SOUL  OF  THE  APOSTLE.      **  In  me." 

He  saw,  believed,  and  loved.  His  intellect  was  more  than  satisfied ;  his  heart  was  at 
peace.  Judaism  was  superseded,  and  like  a  dissolving  view,  passed  rapidly  away ; 
heathenism  was  seen  more  clearly  to  be  a  lie  and  an  imposture.  To  know  Christ, 
to  win  Christ,  to  preach  Christ,  to  love  Christ,  to  be  with  Christ,  was  all  he  desired. 
(Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Personal  conviction : — What  we  need  is  the  revelation 
of  Christ  within  us ;  not  tbe  communication  of  truths  yet  unrevealed,  as  wu 
necessary  in  tbe  case  of  tbe  founders  of  our  religion,  but  the  communication  of 
truths  already  made  known ;  tbe  removal  of  the  veil  from  our  hearts,  and  the 
giving  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  Each  of  ua  most  fot 
himself  discover  the  bid  treasure ;  whether  tbe  light  flashes  upon  as  in  an  instant*, 


'.  I.]  QALATIANS.  41 

as  with  the  woman  at  the  well  of  Jacob,  or  comes  to  us  as  the  result  of  long 
search  and  patient  inquiry,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  we  must  find 
the  Messiah,  we  must  hear  Him  ourselves,  and  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  Christ, 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  It  will  not  suffice,  in  this  day  at  least,  to  take  religion 
upon  trust,  to  accept  the  popular  faith,  just  because  it  is  popular.  Such  belief  will 
not  stand  in  the  day  of  trial ;  it  certainly  will  exercise  no  constraining  influence 
upon  our  hearts  and  lives.  Whether  for  our  peace  or  for  our  usefulness,  Christ 
must  live  within  us ;  the  reasonable  mind  must  apprehend  Him,  tbe  heart  must 
cleave  to  Him.  Thus  our  lives  will  tell  upon  the  world  around  us.  There  will  be 
a  living  power  within,  full  of  holy  joy,  and  peace,  and  comfort ;  whilst  a  living 
power  will  go  forth  from  us,  and  act  silently,  it  may  be,  but  effectually,  upon  the 
world  without.  (Ibid.)  God's  call  and  Paul's  reply  : — The  Christian  religion  i3 
emphatically  one.  It  may  differ  and  does  differ,  in  its  development ;  but  the 
foundation  must  be  belief  in  Deity — an  intelligent,  devout  recognition  of  the 
Almighty  in  His  varied  relationships  to  the  world.  Hence  a  perfect  belief  in  a 
perfect  Deity  means  this :  That  you  believe  in  and  regard  that  Deity  as  the 
Creator  and  Controller  of  the  universe ;  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;  as  the 
appliancer  of  the  redemptive  scheme — in  other  words,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost.  Unless  this  is  recognized,  there  can  be  no  true  Christianity.  I. 
Christian  life  is  identified  with  a  knowledge  op  Christ.  1.  To  know  Christ 
is  to  know  the  great  centre  to  which  all  other  doctrines  converge.  2.  Knowing 
Christ  as  a  Saviour,  you  realize  the  damnable  nature  of  sin.  II.  Chbist  is 
known  only  ab  He  is  Divinely  bevealed.  1.  Ordinary  means.  Bible  reading. 
Church  going.  Conversation.  Sunday  Schools,  &c.  2.  Extraordinary.  St.  Paul's 
conversion.  HI.  The  knowledge  of  Chbist  is  given  in  pursuance  or  a  Divine 
purpose.  IV.  Knowledge  of  Christ  is  preparatory  for  the  highest  useful- 
ness. (A.  F.  Barfield.)  Doctrine  of  predestination  ;-4-I  look  upon  this  earth  in 
which  I  live.  I  find  it  grasped  and  girded  by^GJodJs  all-embracing  laws,  as  of 
gravitation,  of  the  ebb  and  ilasL-of-4hV^ittes7"bi light,  of  the  procession  of  the) 
seasons — all  utterly  and  absolutely  beyond  my  control.  They  reach  above,  beneath,! 
around,  within  me;  I  cannot  touch  them.  There  they  are;  unalterable, 
unswerving,  necessitated — in  its  profoundest  sense,  predestinated.  And  what  is 
the  issue  of  obedience  to  these  laws  ?  Happiness,  in  the  measure  of  sue! 
obedience.  Is  that  no  revelation  of  the  character  of  the  God  of  the  universe.  Nc 
revelation  I  I  could  shut  my  Bible,  and  from  creation — from  the  meanest  flower 
that  blows,  up  to  the  stars  that  hang  like  lamps  before  the  great  white  throve — find 
infinite  proofs  that  my  God  is  also  my  Father.  Exactly  so,  I  cannot  tell  how  free 
will,  choice,  contingency,  accord  with  predestination,  election,  foreordinationj 
substitution.  I  do  not  feel  that  I  am  called  upon  to  do  so.  But  as  we  have  seen; 
our  own  consciousness  attests  the  former,  while  the  Word  of  God  recognizes  and 
addresses  them — recognizes  and  addresses  man  as  free  to  think,  feel,  will,  choose, 
reject.  Equally  does  the  Word  of  God  affirm  the  latter.  I  therefore  accept  them  \ 
also,  and  can  defer  knowing  how  the  All-wise  harmonizes  them,  until  He  pleases  to 
reveal  them  to  me.  Nay,  more,  I  have  deepest  belief  that  even  as  the  physical 
world  is  grasped  and  girded  by  its  great  laws,  so  must  the  other  and  grander  world 
of  mind  have  underneath  it,  like  the  granite  base  of  the  everlasting  hills,  above  it, 
like  the  dome  of  the  sky,  kindred  laws.  These  laws  I  recognize  and  accept  in  pre- 
destination, election,  foreordination,  substitution.  (A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  The 
threefold  revelation  of  Christ : — I.  To  him.  When  he  was  "  called  "  on  the  way 
io  Damascus,  and  so  to  every  one  who  becomes  His  servant  Christ  appears  to  arrest 
and  claim  him.  II.  In  him.  The  Lord  is  revealed  in  His  servant's  heart  as 
his  life  and  strength.  III.  Through  him.  The  new  life  of  Christ's  servant  is  a 
perpetual  (1)  reflection;  (2)  proclamation  of  His  Bedeemer.  (W.  B.  Pope,D.D.) 
Distinguishing  grace : — I.  Is  the  foundation  of  all  doctrinal  and  ethical  truth. 
H.  Tends  to  personal  edification,  deep  emotion,  and  dutiful  submission  to  the 
Divine  will.  HI.  Determines  the  tone  and  strength  of  oub  life.  IV.  Is  a 
means  to  consciousness  of  dibect  pebsonal  relationship  to  God.  (T.  Goadby.) 
The  personal  history  and  public  purpose  of  true  conversion : — I.  Its  pebsonal  history. 
1.  The  inner  revelation  of  Christ  to  the  soul,  which  is  something  more  than  His 
revelation  to  (11  the  senses,  (2)  the  understanding,  (3)  the  conscience.  2.  The  inner 
revelation  of  Christ  to  the  soul  through  God.  (1)  By  predetermination.  (2)  By 
sovereignty.  H.  Its  public  purpose.  1.  Not  his  own  good.  2.  But  to  preach, 
(1)  Paul  felt  the  duty  of  preaching  to  be  paramount.  (2)  He  employed  the  best 
means  for  its  effective  discharge.     (D.  Thomas.)        Minister*  are  separated  to  ihcit 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

men  work: — A  soldier  who  went  to  the  war  took  with  him  some  of  the  small 
Instruments  ol  his  craft — he  was  a  watchmaker  and  repairer — thinking  to  make 
some  extra  shillings  now  and  then  while  in  camp.  He  did  so.  He  found  plenty  of 
watohes  to  mend,  and  almost  forgot  that  he  was  a  soldier.  One  day,  when  ordered 
off  on  some  duty,  he  exclaimed,  "  Why,  how  can  I  go  ?  I've  got  ten  watches  to 
mend ! "  Some  ministers  are  so  absorbed  in  self-seeking  that  they  are  ready  to  say 
to  the  Master's  call,  "  I  pray  Thee  have  me  exoused+**  Tbey-are  nominally 
ministers  of  Christ,  but  really  only  watch-menders.  Mr.  Moody  says :— ^1  remember 
when  I  was  in  Chioago  before  the  fire,  I  was  on  some  ten  or  tweLve-cominitteaB. 
My  hands  were  full.  If  a  man  came  to  me  to  talk  about  his  soul  I  would  say,  "  I 
haven't  time ;  got  a  committee  to  attend  to."  But  now  I  have  turned  my  back  on 
everything — turned  my  attention  to  saving  souls,  and  God  has  blessed  me  and 
made  me  an  instrument  to  save  more  souls  during  the  last  four  or  five  years  than 
during  all  my  previous  life.  And  so  if  a  minister  will  devote  himself  to  this  un- 
divided work,  God  will  bless  him.  Take  that  motto  of  Paul's :  "  One  thing  I  do, 
forgetting  those  tbings  which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those  thing? 
which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus."  Divine  calling: — A  river  flowing  with  rapid  and  majestic 
eurrent  to  the  sea  would  defy  the  efforts  of  the  whole  world  to  turn  it  back  again 
to  its  souroe ;  yet,  by  the  returning  tide  it  is  not  only  arrested  in  its  course  but  driven 
Dp  again  with  great  rapidity  towards  its  fountain  head.  It  is  thus  that  a  sinner  is 
stopped  in  his  career  of  sin,  and  turned  towards  high  and  heavenly  things.  (G.  Simeon. ) 
The  inward  revelation  of  Christ : — Now,  there  is  nothing  mysterious  about  this. 
Have  we  not  all  felt  this  inward  revelation  of  Christ? — a  discovery  larger,  sweeter 
and  more  and  more  luminous,  of  this  nature  and  work,  which  enters  and  is  woven 
like  a  thread  of  gold  into  the  fabrio  of  thought  and  character.  The  disciples 
doubtless  had  a  conception  at  first  of  the  Saviour  as  a  general  benefactor  to  the 
race  and  His  teachings  as  generally  helpful  to  men,  but  after  their  characters  began 
to  mature  they  came  to  understand  the  personal,  individual  and  vital  relationship 
between  Him  and  them.  A  keen  sense  of  personal  sinfulness  must  precede  any 
vivid  conception  of  the  grace  of  Christ  as  shown  to  burdened  and  aspiring  souls. 
Again,  in  the  silent  government  of  the  soul's  activities  we  recognize  Christ  revealed 
in  as.  We  recognize  inward  impulsions  that  are  not  born  of  us,  but  of  a  resident 
and  daily  more  regnant  power  that  is  working  through  our  own  volitions.  In 
labour  and  worship,  in  acts  of  beneficence  and  in  all  the  service  of  life,  we  feel  the 
silent  government  of  the  indwelling  Master.  With  these  inward  revelations  and 
spiritual  intuitions  we  are  guided  in  duty.  Truth  is  verified  in  our  vision,  because 
it  is  illuminated  by  Him  who  is  the  light  of  the  world.  Christ  finds  a  home  in  our 
aff ectional  nature.  At  first  we  feel  that  we  ought  to  love  Christ  more  than  all  else — 
parents,  friends,  or  treasure ;  but  it  is  hard  to  do  this,  and  our  obedifenoe  is  apt  to 
be  mechanical  until  the  inward  grace  and  subtle  sense  of  the  indwelling  Helper 
comes  to  bo  recognized.  It  is  as  indefinable  a  sense  as  the  odour  of  the  lily  and 
rose  that  perfumes  our  dwelling,  yet  we  know  it  to  be  a  reality.  We  see  bane 
changed  to  blessing  and  a  spirit  of  nobleness  begotten  in  us,  so  that  we  come 
naturally,  that  is,  reasonably  and  by  the  tutelage  of  His  grace,  to  love  Him  better 
than  all  things  else.  This  love  toward  Christ  as  He  is  within  us  testifies  of  the 
Divine  indwelling,  and  it  is  a  love  which  He  will  crown  and  glorify.  In  the  joyful 
assurance  of  the  future  we  find  evidence  of  this  revelation  of  Christ  in  us.  He 
satisfies  and  gratifies  us  every  hour  by  these  revelations  to  us.  Men  of  the  world 
wonder  at  as.  They  call  our  confidence  credulity  and  superstition.  Nay,  it  is  the 
dictate  of  our  assurance  of  Christ  in  us.  The  text  illumines  other  utterances  of 
Paul.  The  life  he  lived  was  the  life  of  Christ  in  him  :  "  I,  yet  not  I."  Thus  was 
fulfilled  the  promise,  "We  will  make  our  abode  with  him.  We  see  from  this 
subject  how  progressive  Christian  experience  is.  One  may  say,  "  Would  that  I 
could  at  once  step  into  the  fulness  of  the  knowledge  of  God ! "  Do  you  expect  to 
step  at  once  into  the  fulness  of  earthly  knowledge  ?  Shall  not  this  more  august 
revelation  be  continuous  and  progressive  ?  Begin  now  in  obedience  to  Christ,  g» 
on  step  by  step  till  Christ's  life  is  enthroned  within  yon,  and  then  it  will  bt 
manifested  by  you.  We  have  here  a  suggestion  as  to  how  the  world  influences 
as  and  crowds  out  Christ.  Work  for  Christ  wears  a  new  significance  when 
the  fact  and  propulsive  power  of  this  indwelling  are  thus  revealed.  (B.  S.  Storrt* 
PmuVt  account  of  his  conversion  : — I.  Conversion  described.  Paul  writes  of  the 
•hangs  through  which  he  had  passed  in  brief  but  forcible  terms.  "It  pleased  God 
la  ureal  His  Son  in  me."    1.  The  change  in  Paul  was  a  spiritual  one.    2.  God's 


our.  I.J  GALATIANS.  11 

great  work  is  done  in  the  soul,  because  the  fountain  of  evil  is  there.  3.  Conversion 
ib  a  clear,  definite  recognition  of  Christ  as  the  Saviour.  He  was  revealed  in  Paul, 
so  that  he  had  no  doubt  of  His  Divinity  or  of  His  MesBiahship.  He  believed  Him 
to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  IT.  Conversion  explained.  1.  Conversion  is  an 
act  of  God's  grace.  It  pleased  God  to  reveal  His  Son  in  Paul.  2.  Conversion  is 
preceded  by  means  which  are  altogether  of  God's  arrangement.  Paul  here  refers 
to  plans,  remote  and  immediate,  and  both  are  of  God.  "  He  separated  him  from 
his  mother's  womb."  III.  Conversion  manifested.  1,  By  his  renouncing  that 
which  he  had  formerly  sought  after.  2.  His  voluntary  exile  and  solitude  was  a 
further  manifestation  of  his  conversion.  3.  His  conversion  was  manifest  by  his 
return  to  Damascus,  and  engaging  in  active  service.  Lessons  :  1.  The  methods 
by  which  men  are  brought  to  Christ  vary,  but  conversion  is  in  every  instance  the 
same,  the  revealing  of  the  Son  of  God  to  the  heart.  2.  All  who  have  been  renewed 
by  the  power  of  God,  manifest  in  themselves  the  reality  of  the  change.  Conversion 
is  regeneration  realized  in  the  heart  and  life.  (R.  NicholU.)  The  inward 
realization  by  St.  Paul  himself  of  the  gospel : — "It  pleased  God  to  reveal  His  Son 
in  me."  He  needed  not  to  go  to  the  traditions  of  the  life  of  our  Saviour.  Christ 
was  known  to  him  in  a  more  immediate  way.  He  found  in  his  own  heart  the 
living  oracle,  and  needed  not  to  travel  further.  One  of  his  remarkable  words  is 
this : — Say  not  in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven,  <feo.  But,  more 
closely,  what  was  this  process  ?  It  was  the  translation  of  the  historical  Christ  into 
the  present  Christ ;  of  the  Christ  according  to  the  flesh  into  the  Christ  of  spiritual 
consciousness.  What  is  translation  ?  It  is  (1)  the  extracting  a  thought  from  its 
visible,  or  representative  envelope,  and  then  (2)  it  is  the  recasting  of  this  thonght 
into  another  form  of  onr  own  intelligent  selection.  By  this  process,  faithfully 
carried  out,  you  make  the  thought  your  own.  You  bring  it  out  of  its  mere  external 
relation  to  the  mind  as  an  object,  and  you  make  it  a  part  of  your  mind,  as  subject. 
It  is  no  longer  now  something  that  you  contemplate  merely  with  the  mind's  eye, 
and  which  passes  from  memory  when  your  attention  is  withdrawn,  but  it  is  now 
bound  up  with  your  mind,  and  must  remain  a  part  of  your  conscious  being.  We 
are  always  performing  this  process  upon  some  matter  or  other.  In  this  way  the 
student  gathers  the  thought  of  a  foreign  author,  throws  it  out  again  into  the  best 
form  in  which  he  ean  recognize  it  in  his  own  language,  and  now  it  is  his  possession. 
The  artist  gazes  for  hours  at  a  picture  of  which  we  see  little  more  than  the  surface, 
and  throws  out  the  sense  of  it  on  the  canvas  of  his  brain,  or  in  visible  studies  of 
his  own.  The  friend  watches  the  face  of  his  friend,  quickly  seizes  the  thought  that 
is  playing  in  living  expression  on  his  brow  and  eye  and  mouth,  and  projects  the 
meaning  again  into  some  image  or  some  verbal  expression.  In  whatever  interests 
us  we  separate  the  form  from  the  contents  ;  we  grasp  these  contents,  we  pass  them 
through  our  mind  in  deep  reflection,  until  of  themselves  they  flow  into  a  new  shape, 
which  is  a  form  of  our  consciousness,  and  may  be  a  permanent  stamp  of  it.  So 
St.  Paul  gazed  at  the  cross  and  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  extracted  a  marvellous 
fund  of  Divine  meaning  from  them,  which  in  turn  he  threw  out  into  forms  of 
thought  which  are  bo  mighty  in  their  power  over  us  because  they  were  first  so 
mightily  realized  in  himself.  Thus  the  significance  of  the  cross,  translated  into 
his  own  consciousness,  became  a  personal  experience :  death  unto  sin,  because 
Christ  died ;  or,  a  revelation  of  Divine  love :  "  the  Son  of  God  who  loved  me." 
The  resurrection  in  like  manner,  "raised  up  together  with  Christ,"  "alive  unto 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  There  was  something  deeper  even  than  this 
process  of  translation  ;  there  was  an  identification  of  himself  with  Christ  (no  other 
word  will  hardly  express  this  deeper  process).  He  felt  that  he  waB  included  in 
Christ.  In  the  Sonship  of  Christ  he  saw  his  own  sonship  to  God  realized.  As  in 
Christ  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelt  in  a  human  body,  so  St.  Paul  realized  the  indwelling 
of  God  in  himself.  He  saw  a  contrast  of  weakness  with  power  in  the  crucifixion — 
he  realized  that  contrast  in  himself.  It  seems  no  strain  of  language  to  say  that  in 
the  consciousness  of  Paul,  Christ  was  inseparable  from  himself.  He  could  not 
abstract  the  ego,  as  metaphysicians  would  say,  from  a  non-ego.  He  could  not 
think  of  himself  without  thinking  of  Christ.  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,"  <tc. 
He  applies  the  same  mode  of  thought  to  his  converts  and  disciples.  (E.  Johnson, 
MJL.)  Christ  manifested  to  the  soul : — The  co-essential,  co-eternal  Son  of  God, 
was  revealed  in  the  Apostle  Paul.  Were  we  possessed  of  all  the  knowledge 
Adam  had  in  innocence,  or  which  Solomon  acquired  by  labour  and  industry, 
or  which  the  prophets  and  apostles  obtained  by  Divine  inspiration — yet,  without 
this  internal  revelation  of  Christ,  we  should  be  as  remote  from  happineM  as 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OUT.  i. 

the  devils  in  hell.      Now  observe — I.  How  ihe  revelation  or  Christ  IN  a  mar 

DIFFERS  FROM  THE  MERE  EXTERNAL  REVELATION   OF   CHRIST  TO  A  MAN.      1.    They  differ 

in  their  original  source  and  spring.  Both  proceed  from  God  ;  but  the  one  is  the 
fruit  of  His  general  favour,  the  other  of  His  special  grace.  2.  In  the  means  by 
which  they  are  wrought.  The  one,  by  outward  means  ;  the  other  by  the  internal 
agency  of  the  Divine  spirit.  Moral  suasion  and  human  instruction  may  reveal 
Christ  to  a  man  ;  but  it  is  the  peculiar  office  of  the  Spirit  to  reveal  Christ  in  us,  to 
take  of  His  things  and  show  them  to  us  so  convincingly  that  we  shall  have  no 
doubt  of  their  truth  and  reality.  3.  The  subject  of  this  knowledge  is  different,  as 
well  as  the  manner  of  conveyance.  The  external  revelation  of  Christ  affects  only 
the  head  ;  that  which  is  internal,  the  heart.  The  one  reaches  only  to  the  under- 
standing ;  the  other  influences  the  practical  judgment,  directs  the  will,  and  gives 
law  to  the  affections.  The  necessity  and  excellency  of  Christ,  in  all  His  characters 
and  offices,  is  now  so  clearly  discerned,  that  the  soul  goes  out  after  Him,  and  rests 
in  Him,  as  its  supreme  good  and  everlasting  portion.  4.  In  their  nature  and 
essential  properties.  The  one  dark  and  confused  ;  the  other  clear  and  distinct. 
The  one  is  seeing  things  in  our  own  light ;  the  other,  in  God's  light.  The 
one  is  distant,  and  therefore  undelightful  ;  the  other,  appropriative  and  satisfy- 
ing,— not  equally  so  in  every  saint,  but  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  in  all.  6.  in 
their  continuance.  The  revelation  of  Christ  to  a  man  may  be  lost,  eclipsed,  or 
destroyed  ;  but  the  revelation  of  the  text  is  permanent  and  abiding.  God  is  the 
Author  of  it,  and  His  gifts  are  without  repentance ;  the  Spirit  is  the  efficient  cause, 
and  He  never  wholly  withdraws  His  influence.  II.  The  necessity  and  excellence 
of  an  internal  bevelation  of  Christ.  1.  It  is  the  beginning  of  all  Christian  ex- 
perience, the  first  blessed  fruit  of  the  Spirit's  influence  on  a  sinner's  heart.  With- 
out it,  no  grace  here,  and  no  hope  of  salvation  hereafter.  The  meritorious  sufferings 
of  Christ  will  not  save  us  without  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  Him.  2.  The  founda- 
tion of  all  spiritual  comfort.  When  Christ  enters,  light,  peace,  glory  enter, 
applying  what  He  has  done,  bringing  home  to  us  what  He  has  purchased.  3.  The 
grand  spring  of  holiness  and  obedience.  The  more  we  know  of  Christ,  the  more 
we  shall  love  Him ;  and  the  more  we  love  Him,  the  more  conscientious,  universal,  and 
unwearied  will  be  our  obedience ;  subjection  a  delight  and  pleasure,  instead  of  a  task 
or  burden.  Knowledge  which  reaches  the  heart,  will  regulate  the  life  and  conversation. 
4.  This  revelation  is  especially  necessary  to  form  the  ministerial  character.  A  faithful 
minister  must  be  a  good  man,  as  well  as  bring  good  tidings.  5.  This  revelation  is 
connected  with  eternal  life,  and  a  certain  pledge  of,  as  well  as  necessary  preparation 
for,  a  future  state  of  happiness  and  glory.  If  ignorant  of  Christ,  we  cannot  beliere 
on  Him,  or  be  saved  by  Him.  Closing  inferences  :  (a)  No  wonder  so  many  men  of 
great  ability  are  enemies  to  the  gospel  and  its  doctrine  of  salvation.  God  has  never 
yet  revealed  His  Son  in  them,  (b)  How  should  we  pity  those  destitute  of  this 
revelation  1  Other  wants  may  be  afflicting  :  this  is  damning,  (c)  What  reason 
for  thankfulness  have  those  who  are  blessed  with  the  spiritual  saving  knowledge  of 
Christ.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Conversion  a  revelation  in  the  toul : — Conversion  is 
a  revelation,  i.e.,  not  a  discovery  of  something  new,  but  the  unveiling  of  what  has  been 
hidden.  No  explanation  for  such  a  change  as  followed  this  revelation,  save  in  the 
region  of  the  supernatural.  1.  This  revelation  was  to  St.  Paul  a  vindication  of 
Christ's  character.  St.  Paul  bad  thought  Jesus  an  impostor  ;  God  removes  the  veil 
from  his  heart,  and  he  sees  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the 
Divine  Father.  2.  It  was  a  revelation  to  him  of  his  own  position  He  not  only 
saw  who  Christ  was,  but  what  he  himself  had  been.  3.  A  revelation  of  the  Divine 
long-suffering.  When  the  light  of  that  day  of  mercy  dawned,  what  was  the 
message  ?  It  might  have  been  a  message  of  doom  ;  and  Paul  felt  that.  It  might 
have  been  a  voice  of  wrath,  proclaiming  wrath  for  his  countless  sins.  But  no  ;  the 
voice  comes  with  the  old  message  of  entreaty,  "  Why  perseoutest  thou  Me  ?  "  The 
voice  comes  with  the  Divine  pathos  and  the  Divine  hope  :  "  Saul,  Saul,  arise  and 
stand  upon  thy  feet,  for  I  have  appeared  to  thee  not  to  hurl  the  bolts  of  judgment, 
not  to  rebearse  the  catalogue  of  thy  transgressions,  not  to  ring  the  knell  of  thy 
doom,  but  to  announce  the  true  advent  of  thy  noblest  life,  to  make  thee  a  minister 
of  My  gospel,  to  send  thee  to  men."  What  wonder,  then;  that  Paul  counts  himself 
an  example  of  God's  long-suffering  ?  What  wonder  that  he  speaks  in  such  terms 
of  redeeming  love,  of  the  riches — the  unfathomed  and  unfathomable  riches — of 
grace  ?  4.  A  revelation  of  a  glorious  destiny.  No  higher  honour  than  to  preach 
Christ,  to  be  the  minister  of  reconciliation  to  thousands,  5.  This  revelation  was  all- 
inclusive.    In  this  Divine  light,  all  things  looked  Divine.    Henceforth,  Jesw 


chap,  i.]  GALATIANS.  49 

Christ  was  stamped  on  everything.  The  world  was  His  ;  life  was  His  ;  labour  was 
His  ;  love  was  His.  6.  This  revelation  was  ever  increasing.  The  horizon  widened. 
Every  hour  the  light  grew  clearer,  and  spread  to  wider  stretches.  Even  after  thirty 
years  acquaintance  with  Christ,  Paul  only  feels  there  is  so  much  to  be  known,  that 
what  he  does  know  is  as  nothing  to  what  he  has  yet  to  learn  (Phil.  iii.  8-14).  Is 
our  conversion  like  his  ?  (T.  W.  Handford.)  The  inner  revelation  of  Christ : — 
The  object  of  this  Divine  revelation  was  "  His  Son  " ;  not  the  truth  about  Him,  or 
His  work,  or  His  death,  or  His  glory,  but  Himself — Himself  including  all.  His 
person  is  the  sum  of  the  gospel.  This  revelation  may  have  been  in  some  sense 
■ubsequent  to  the  direct  call,  or  it  may  refer  also  to  the  appearance  of  the  Redeemer 
near  Damascus  qualifying  him  for  the  apostleship  (1  Cor.  ix.  1).  It  gave  him  full 
and  glowing  views  of  the  Redeemer's  person,  including  His  various  relations  to  God 
and  to  man, — such  views  as  fixed  the  apostle's  faith  upon  Him,  centred  his  love  in 
Him,  and  enabled  him  to  hold  Him  out  in  his  preaching  as  the  one  living  and 
glorified  Saviour.  It  was  by  no  process  of  reasoning  that  he  eame  to  such  con- 
elusions,  by  no  elaborate  and  sustained  series  of  demonstrations  that  he  wrought 
out  his  Christology.  God  revealed  His  Son  in  him,  Divine  light  was  flashed  in 
upon  him,  so  that  he  saw  what  he  had  not  seen  before,  fully,  suddenly,  and  by  a 
higher  than  intuitive  suggestion.  He  had  not  been  taught,  and  he  did  not  need  to 
be  taught  by  any  of  the  apostles.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  Revelation  unlike  reason- 
ing : — Revelation  is  opposed  to  knowledge  gained  by  prolonged  and  patient  thought. 
It  is  unlike  the  oommon  process  by  which  an  intellectual  conclusion  is  reached, 
the  inference  of  one  syllogism  forming  but  the  premiss  of  another,  till  by  a  series 
of  connected  links,  primary  or  abstract  truth  is  reached.    For  it  is  sudden  and 

Eerfect  illumination,  lifting  the  receptive  power  into  intensest  susceptibility,  and  so 
ghting  up  the  whole  theme  disclosed,  that  it  is  immediately  and  fully  apprehended 
in  its  evidence  and  reality.  We  know  not,  indeed,  what  the  process  is,  what  the 
waking  up  of  the  higher  intuition  is,  or  what  the  ecstasy  which  throws  into 
momentary  abeyance  all  the  lower  faculties.  It  may  resemble  that  new  sphere 
of  vision  in  which  genius  enjoys  gleams  of  unutterable  beauty,  or  that  "  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Spirit "  which  gives  the  truth  new  aspects  of  richness  and  grandeur  to 
the  sanctified  soul  in  some  mood  of  rapt  meditation.  But  still  it  is  different  and 
higher  far  both  in  matter  and  purpose.  It  was  God's  revelation  of  His  Son, — not 
glimpses  of  the  truth  about  Him,  but  Himself  ;  not  merely  summoning  His  atten- 
tion to  His  paramount  claims,  so  as  to  elicit  an  acknowledgment  of  them, — not 
simply  presenting  Him  to  his  intellectual  perception  to  be  studied  and  compre- 
hended,— nor  even  shrining  an  image  of  Him  in  his  heart  to  be  loved  and  cherished, 
•—but  His  Son  unveiled  in  living  reality  ;  and  in  him — in  his  inner  self,  not  in  any 
distinct  and  separate  realm  of  his  being — with  the  conscious  possession  of  all  this 
infallible  and  communicable  knowledge  which  was  given,  perhaps,  first  in  clear 
and  vivid  outline,  and  then  filled  in  surely  and  gradually.  (Ibid.)  Con* 
version  of  St.  Paul : — The  vision  which  St.  Paul  saw  on  the  way  to  Damascus, 
followed  him  through  his  whole  life.  There  was  one  image  which  hovered  over 
him,  one  thought  which  urged  him  onward,  one  spirit  which  he  breathed,  one  life 
which  he  lived — the  image,  the  thought,  the  spirit,  the  life  of  Christ.  In  the  ruder 
times  of  Christianity  we  have  heard  of  saints  whose  eyes  were  ever  fixed  on  the 
material  image  of  the  crucified  Redeemer,  who  bore  in  their  body  the  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  What  is  true  of  them  in  a  grosser  and  more  literal  sense,  is  true  of  St. 
Paul  figuratively  and  spiritually  :  he  felt  himself  and  all  other  Christiana  to  be 
crucified  with  Christ.  In  all  His  affliction  they  are  afflicted,  even  as  they  are  the 
partakers  of  His  glory,  dying  with  Him  in  sin  and  to  sin,  buried  in  baptism,  filling 
up  in  their  body  the  measure  of  His  suffering,  partaking  of  His  hidden  life  in  the 
grave,  that  with  Him  also  they  may  rise  again.  If  the  apostle  rejoices,  he  is  as  one 
risen  with  Christ ;  if  he  suffers,  he  is  crucified  with  Him  ;  if  at  one  and  the  same 
instant  he  suffers,  and  triumphs,  and  is  a  spectacle  to  the  world,  to  angels,  and  to 
men,  he  is  but  as  Christ  was,  Who  was  lifted  up  from  the  earth  that  he  might  draw 
all  men  after  Him.  He  is  as  one  stricken  to  the  earth,  at  the  same  time  that  he 
partakes  of  the  vision  of  the  Divine  glory.  It  is  this  thought  and  image  of  Christ, 
not  freedom  or  faith,  or  any  form  of  the  subjective  principle,  which  is  the  primary 
idea  of  the  gospel  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle.  Neither  is  it  the  belief  in  Christ  as  an 
object  without  him,  to  whom  he  is  to  transfer  all  his  sins,  but  the  ever-present 
consciousness  of  Christ  within  him,  Who  is  one  and  inseparable  from  him,  that  is 
the  support  and  anchor  of  his  soul.  .  .  .  As  it  is  to  the  apostle  more  than  any 
other  human  teacher  we  trace  back  the  great  doctrine  of  righteousness  by  faith,  so 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  I. 

to  this  event  in  his  life  we  must  refer  that  impression  of  Divine  truth,  which  opened 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  mankind  by  the  sight  of  Christ  Himself.  St.  Paul  wai 
the  human  medium  through  which  it  was  conveyed  ;    an  apostle  not  of  man, 
neither  by  man,  but  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  it  pleased  God  ta  reveal  His  Son.  As 
it  was  necessary  for  the  other  apostles  that  Christshould  go  away,  or  otherwise  the 
Comforter  would  not  come  unto  them,  so  also  it  was  in  a  certain  sense  a  pre- 
eminence that  he  possessed  over  them,  that  as  one  born  out  of  due  time  he  had  not 
known  Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  but  only  in  a  heavenly  and  spiritual  manner. 
(B.  Jowett,  M.A.)        Life  in  the  revelation  of  Christ : — A  man  often  passes  through 
many  stages  before  he  becomes  truly  converted  to  God.   When  he  is  first  awakened 
to  serious  impressions,  and  sees  the  folly  of  intently  pursuing  worldly  things,  to  the 
neglect  of  the  more  durable  riches,  he  resembles  a  boy  emerging  from  childhood, 
who  throws  aside  his  trifles  and  playthings  for  amusements  of  a  higher  and  more 
intellectual  kind.    He  now  sets  himself  with  all  diligence  to  working  out  his  own 
salvation  in  his  own  strength  ;  multiplies  his  religious  duties,  and  reforms  his  bad 
habits  ;  yet  all  this  while  he  is  like  one  who  has  been  employed  in  new  painting 
and  varnishing  a  wooden  statue — it  has  no  life  within.    But  when  the  Holy  Spirit 
influences  his  heart,  and  reveals  Christ  in  him,  he  is  in  the  state  of  one  who  has 
awakened  from  a  dream,  in  which  he  has  been  acting  a  fictitious  part,  to  live  and 
move  and  use  all  his  faculties  in  reality,  and  enter  on  the  great  business  of  life.  (H. 
O.  Salter.)     Readiness  for  service : — Brutus  visiting  Ligarius  found  him  ill,  and  said, 
•«  What !  sick, Ligarius  ?  "  "No,  Brutus,"  said  he ;  if  thou  hast  any  noble  enterprise 
in  hand  I  am  well."   So  should  the  believer  say  of  Christ ;  what  might  excuse  us  from 
other  labour  shall  never  prevent  our  engaging  in  His  service.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Personal  responsibility  as  entrusted  with  a  revelation: — "  To  reveal  His  Son  in  me," 
might  seem  to  imply  some  internal  revelation ;  doubtless  there  was,  but  St.  Paul 
more  immediately  referred  to  the  fact  that  God  intended  to  reveal  His  Son  to  man- 
kind by  and  through  him  ;  he  was  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  revelation ;  God  had 
revealed  Christ  to  him,  that  he  might  reveal  Him  to  others.    For  God  can  never 
make  a  revelation  of  His  Son  through  a  man,  until  He  has  first  made  the  revelation 
within  him ;  the  lamp  cannot  illuminate  until  the  light  has  been  lighted  within  it ; 
the  light  shines  without  because  it  shines  within ;  and  if  St.  Paul  could  speak  con- 
fidently of  God  having  been  pleased  to  call  him  by  His  grace,  and  to  reveal  Christ 
through  him  to  the  heathen,  it  was  because  he  could  speak  confidently  of  that 
revelation  of  Christ  to  his  own  soul,  which  had  so  thoroughly  converted  his  mind 
and  changed  the  purpose  of  his  life.    Let  us  leave  St.  Paul,  however,  for  a  few 
moments,  and  let  me  remind  you  how  that  God  has  from  the  beginning  revealed 
Himself  to  man,  and  that  the  spiritual  condition  of  man  before  God  has  depended 
upon  the  way  in  which  he  has  received  the  revelation.     To  be  able  to  receive  a 
revelation  from  God,  this  is  one  mark  of  humanity ;  and  to  be  able  to  reject  the 
revelation,  this  is  another.    Next  observe  that  the  whole  course  of  sacred  history, 
since  the  days  of  Adam,  has  been  a  history  of  revelations.    God  has  revealed, 
unveiled,  discovered  Himself  to  this  man  and  to  that,  in  order  that  he  to  whom 
God  has  been  revealed  may  reveal  Him  to  others ;  the  process  of  which  St.  Paul 
speaks  when  he  says,  "to  reveal  His  Son  in  me,"  is  the  very  process  whioh  has 
been  going  on  from  the  beginning.    Look  at  Noah.     Look  at  Abraham.     "  The 
Lord  had  said  unto  Abraham."     That  is  the  very  beginning  of  his  history.     Once 
more,  look  at  Moses.    You  see  precisely  the  same  characteristics  of  conduct.    He, 
too,  received  a  revelation  from  God ;  and  the  pressure  of  the  responsibility  which 
that  revelation  brought  with  it  is  made  all  the  more  conspicuous  by  the  fact  that 
Moses  shrank  from  it,  and  tried  to  evade  it.    We  wish  to  regard  ourselves  as  laid 
nnder  a  pressure  of  responsibility  by  the  fact  of  our  having  received  a  revelation 
from  God.     (The  Dean  of  Ely.)         The  duty  imposed  by  revelation: — Let  us  then 
take  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  our  hands,  or  press  them  to  our  hearts,  and  say,  Here 
is  the  record  of  the  way  in  which  God  has  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners 
spoken  to  our  fathers  by  the  prophets,  and  has  in  these  latter  days  spoken  to  as  by 
His  Son ;  and  having  done  this,  then  let  us  go  on  to  ask  ourselves  what  ought  to 
be  the  practical  consequences  of  having  such  a  possession  ?  It  is  a  common  saying 
in  these  days  that  property  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  privileges,  and  so  the 
possession  of  the  Word  of  God,  compared  with  which  all  other  possessions  most  be 
poor  and  trifling,  must  bring  with  it  very  great  duties :  what  are  they  ?    These,  at 
least ;  to  honour  it,  to  love  it,  to  strive  if  necessary,  or  even  to  die,  for  it ;  bat 
besides  these,  there  is  the  more  common  and  perhaps  the  more  important  duty,  of 
exhibiting  in  our  own  lives  the  ideal  which  Holy  Scripture  sets  before  as,  the  duty 


cmap.  I.]  GAL  ATI  AN  8.  81 

of  living  like  Christ,  and  becoming  (as  it  were)  a  living  practical  commentary  upon 
the  contents  of  God's  book.  This  is  jnst  the  difference  between  this  book  and 
others ;  other  books  you  may  read  and  forget,  this  you  must  not  forget ;  others  you 
may  have  on  your  shelves  and  not  read  unless  you  like,  this  you  must  read  if  you 
can ;  upon  others  you  may  pronounce  any  opinion  you  please,  but  this  must  govern 
your  opinions,  and  you  must  take  it  as  the  light  of  your  feet  and  the  lamp  to  your 
paths.  Yes,  this  is  the  way  in  which  you  must  treat  the  Scriptures,  not  only  for 
your  own  sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  others.  I  said  just  now  that  you  must  strive, 
if  necessary,  for  the  Holy  Scriptures,  bat  undoubtedly  the  most  effective  way  of 
defending  them  from  assaults,  and  making  men  honour  them,  is  to  act  them  out  in 
your  conduct,  and  let  Christ  be  revealed  to  men  in  your  lives.  St.  Paul  speaks  in 
the  text  of  Christ  being  revealed  in  him.  I  have  spoken  of  the  force  of  that  phrase  ; 
and  now,  finally,  I  would  ask  you  to  compare  it  with  a  similar  phrase  with  which 
the  apostle  closes  the  chapter  from  which  I  have  taken  my  text ;  he  says,  "  they 
glorified  God  in  me;"  they  saw  his  life,  they  saw  the  change  made  by  God's 
revelation,  and  they  glorified  God  in  him  when  they  saw  Christ  revealed  in  him  ; 
and  so,  Christian  brethren,  if  we  have  received  a  revelation  from  God,  and  if  a 
deep  responsibility  is  laid  upon  ua  by  the  reception  of  that  revelation,  then  the  best 
mode  of  discharging  our  responsibility  is  to  lead  a  holy  and  godly  life.  That  will 
show  forth  Christ.     (Ibid.)        St.  Paul's  call  to  the  apostolic  office : — I.  The 

SOURCE     WHENCE     HIS     RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS     WERE     DERIVED.        What     does   Paili 

mean  to  teach  us  when  he  says  that  he  was  called?  He  means  that  it  was 
not  he  who  first  came  to  the  Master,  but  that  having  been  called  to  Him,  he 
obeyed;  that  he  did  not  spontaneously  seek  and  find,  but  that  he  was  found 
when  he  was  wandering;  that  it  was  not  he  who  first  looked  up  to  the 
light,  but  the  light  which  sent  its  rays  upon  his  vision,  and  having  closed 
his  outward,  opened  his  inward  eyes.  U.  His  designation  to  the  apostolic 
office.  1.  That  this  commission  was  co-incident  with  his  conversion,  and  he  became 
a  successful  advocate  of  the  truth  he  once  opposed.  The  suddenness  of  his 
preparation  for  the  office  strikes  us  as  much  as  the  suddenness  of  his  call  to  it ;  and 
his  history  teaches  us  that  Christ  is  at  no  loss  for  instruments  in  the  advancement 
of  His  cause.  If  the  interests  of  religion  require  some  distinguished  champion,  He 
reverses  the  ordinary  laws  of  procedure,  and  goes  down  to  the  camp  of  the  enemy, 
and  fixing  His  eye  upon  the  hope  and  pride  of  all  their  hosts,  converts  him  from  a 
foe  into  a  friend,  and  presents  him  to  the  world  as  a  trophy  of  His  power,  and  a 
successful  herald  of  His  praise.  Christ  rules  "  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,"  and 
from  the  very  stones  that  threaten  to  impede  his  triumphal  march,  "  can  raise  up 
children  to  Abraham."  Luther  was  educated  as  a  monk  in  the  University  of 
Wirtembnrg,  and  was  so  eager  an  upholder  of  the  existing  system,  that  he  publicly 
defended,  in  a  thesis,  the  martyrdom  of  John  Huss.  He  was,  even  after  his  con- 
version, long  reluctant  to  throw  off  the  authority  of  the  Pope ;  yet  this  man  was  the 
instrument  of  the  emancipation  of  Europe,  and,  once  engaged,  as  Atterbury  has 
observed,  against  the  united  forces  of  the  papal  world,  stood  the  shock  with 
bravery  and  success.  "  I  was, "  says  Latimer,  "  as  obstinate  a  papist  as  any  in 
England,  and  when  made  Bachelor  of  Divinity,  my  whole  oration  went  against 
Philip  Melancthon  and  his  opinions."  Soame  Jenyns  was  for  many  years  a  deist, 
yet,  after  emerging  from  a  labyrinth  of  scepticism,  he  wrote  an  ingenious  work  on 
the  internal  evidences  of  the  Christian  religion,  the  success  of  which  gave  him 
much  joy  on  his  death-bed.  The  late  Mr.  Biddulph,  in  his  work  on  the  Liturgy, 
states  of  Gilbert  West,  and  his  friend  Lord  Lyttleton,  that  they  were  both  men  of 
acknowledged  talents,  and  had  imbibed  the  principles  of  infidelity  from  a  super- 
ficial view  of  the  Scriptures.  Fully  persuaded  that  the  system  was  an  imposture, 
they  were  determined  to  expose  the  cheat.  Mr.  West  chose  the  Resurrection  of 
Christ,  and  Lord  Lyttleton  the  Conversion  of  St.  Paul,  for  the  subject  of  hostile 
criticism.  Both  sat  down  to  their  respective  tasks,  full  of  prejudice  and  contempt 
for  Christianity,  but  the  result  of  their  separate  attempts  was  truly  extraordinary. 
They  were  both  converted  by  their  efforts  to  overthrow  the  truth,  and  came 
together,  not  as  they  anticipated,  to  exult  over  an  imposture  turned  to  ridicule,  but 
to  lament  their  own  folly,  and  felicitate  each  other  upon  their  joint  conviction  that 
the  Bible  was  the  Word  of  God.  And  their  inquiries  have  furnished  two  most 
valuable  treatises  in  favour  of  revelation :  one  entitled,  "  Observations  on  the 
Besurrection  of  Christ,"  and  the  other,  "  Observations  on  the  Conversion  oi  St. 
Paul."  "  This  also  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  coun- 
sel, and  excellent  in  working."    2.  That  the  decision  and  energy  he  displayed  in  the 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  u 

service  of  Christ  are  worthy  of  universal  imitation.  "Immediately  I  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood."  In  the  concerns  of  salvation  flesh  and  blood  are  very  bad 
counsellors.  Flesh  and  blood  would  have  kept  the  three  Hebrew  youths  from  the 
fiery  furnace;  Abraham  from  offering  the  child  of  promise,  &c.  (The  Evangelist). 
The  inward  revelation  of  Christ: — I.  The  sum  of  experience  in  conver- 
sion. II.  The  chief  essential  qualification  of  the  preach eb.  HI.  The 
great  religious  want   of   the   world.      (T.   Goadby.)  The  inner  revelation 

of  Christ: — Education  refines  and    elevates    but    does   not    save    and  sanctify 
the  soul ;  law  civilizes  but  cannot  change  the  heart  and  the  will ;  science  and 
philosophy  give  power  and  endless   resources   to  enlarge  the  faculties   of  the 
mind,  but  they  leave  the  problems  of  sin  and  pardon  unsolved.    The  revelation  of 
Christ  fills  the  soul  with  light,  and  life,  and  joy  ;  is  the  only  solution  of  the 
problems  of  our  moral  being ;  the  only  deliverer  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  ;  the 
only  pledge  of  everlasting  life,  and  indeed  the  beginning  of  a  Divine  edusation 
which  ennobles  and  saves,  and  the  dawn  of  a  heavenly  day  which  brings  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  peace.     (Ibid.)        Regeneration  is  the  calm  exercise  of 
omnipotent  power  like  that  which  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness: 
it  commands  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God  to  shine  on  the  soul  from  the  face  of 
God  internally  revealed.     (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)        Conversion  is  the  personal  inter- 
view of  each  conscience  with  God  the  Judge  of  all.    (W.  J.  Irons,  D.D.)        The 
conversion  of  St.  Paul  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  Christianity  : — He  was  not  separated 
from  the  events,  as  we  are,  by  centuries  of  time.    He  was  not  liable  to  be  blinded 
by  the  dazzling  glamour  of  a  victorious  Christendom.     He  had  mingled  daily  with 
men  who  had  watched  from  Bethlehem  to  Golgotha  the  life  of  the  Crucified.     He 
had  talked  with  the  priests  who  had  consigned  Him  to  the  cross ;  he  had  put  to 
death  the  followers  who  had  wept  beside  His  tomb.    He  had  to  face  the  horror  of  a 
Messiah  who  "  had  hung  upon  a  tree."     He  had  heard  again  and  again  the  proofs 
which  had  satisfied  an  Annas  and  a  Gamaliel  that  Jesus  was  a  deceiver.    The 
events  on  which  the  apostle  relied  as  proof  of  His  Divinity  had  taken  place  in  the 
full  blaze  of  contemporary  knowledge.    He  had  not  to  deal  with  the  uncertainties 
of  criticism  or  assaults  on  authenticity.    He  could  question  not  ancient  documents 
but  living  men.    He  had  thousands  of  means  close  at  hand  whereby  to  test  truths 
which  up  to  this  time  he  had  so  passionately  and  contemptuously  disbelieved.    In 
accepting  this  half-crushed  and  wholly  execrated  faith  he  had  everything  in  the 
world  to  lose — he  had  nothing  conceivable  to  gain ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of  all — over- 
whelmed by  a  conviction  which  he  felt  to  be  irresistible — Saul  the  Pharisee  became 
a  witness  of  the  resurrection,  a  preacher  of  the  Cross.     (F.  W.  Farrar.)        Preach 
Him  among  the  heathen.    PauVs  mission: — I.  His,  great  motive.     To  preach 
Christ.   II.  His  prompt  surrender.    1.  Personal.    2.  Decisive.    3.  Final.     (A.  F. 
Barfield.)        The  very  theory  of  Christianity,  not  merely  its  finest  enthusiasm,  is 
that  when  once  Christ  is  in  the  heart  the  whole  life  must  be  entirely  His.     (W.  B. 
Pope,  D.D.)        Paul  was  not  like  the  missionary  of  later  times,  whose  great  work 
is  accomplished  if  he  can  add  to  the  number  of  his  converts ;  he  was  this,  but  he 
was  much  more  than  this  ;  it  was  not  the  actual  conversions  themselves,  but  the 
principle  which  every  conversion  involved,  that  constitutes  the  enduring  interest  of 
that  life-long  struggle.     It  was  not  merely  that  be  reclaimed  from  Paganism  the 
Grecian  cities  of  Asia  Minor,  but  that  at  every  step  which  he  took  westward  he  tore 
up  the  prejudice  of  ages.    It  was  not  merely  that  he  cast  out  the  false  spirit  from 
the  damsel  at  Philippi,  but  that  here  religion  ceased  to  be  Asiatio  and  became 
European.    It  was  not  merely  that  at  Athens  he  converted  Dionysius  and  Damans, 
but  that  there  was  seen  a  Jew  standing  in  the  court  of  the  Areopagus,  and  appealing 
to  an  Athenian  audience  as  children  of  the  same  Father,  and  worshippers,  though 
nnconsciously,  of  the  same  God.  It  was  not  that  at  Borne  he  made  some  impression 
on  the  slaves  of  the  Imperial  palace,  but  that  a  descendant  of  Abraham  recognized 
in  that  corrupt  metropolis  a  field  for  his  exertions  as  sacred  as  the  courts  of  the 
Temple   at  Jerusalem.     (Dean  Stanley.)        The   work  of  a   missionary: — I.  Bt 
whom  sent.     II.  Whither  sent.     HI.  To  whom  sent.     IT.  Fob  what  sent.    A 
missionary's  work  is  not   that  of — 1.  Science.     2.  Politics.    8.  Civilization.    4. 
But  that  of   preaching  to  the  heathen.     V.  With  what  encouragement.    God'i 
command :  that  is  enough.    (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)      The  missionary  an  enthusiast : — 
Whom  shall  the  Lord  send?    The  passive  neutral?    The  respectable  indolent 
•elfistf    The  tame,  dull,  average  religionist?    The  mere  doctrinist,  whose  faiths, 
instead  of  being  alive  and  part  of  himself,  are  like  dry  botanical  preparations, 
classified  and  kept  in  a  book  ?    The  man  who  studies  how  little  he  can  give,  or  be, 


.  i.]  GALATIANS.  53 

or  do,  or  suffer  for  Christ,  and  yet  be  safe  ?  The  sluggard  who,  when  a  shadow 
shakes  or  a  leaf  rustles,  says,  "  a  lion  is  in  the  way"  ?  The  coward  who  makes 
his  profession  under  shelter,  and  creeps  along  with  slow  cautious  steps  ?  No !  all 
these  must  be  cleared  out  of  the  way.  Lord  Lansdowne  asked  Dr.  Price  the 
Unitarian  what  was  to  be  done  to  reform  the  profligate  people  of  Calne  ?  "  Send 
them  an  enthusiast,"  was  the  reply.  And  only  an  enthusiast  is  likely  to  be  a 
divinely  successful  missionary  to  the  heathen,  whether  at  home  or  abroad.  (C. 
Stanford,  D.D.)  Religious  impulses : — I.  God's  way  of  working  in  the  hearts  of 
His  people  is  to  start  and  quicken  religious  impulses.  1.  By  preaching.  2. 
Bible  study.  3.  Prayer.  4.  Eeligious  biography.  But  (5)  there  are  impulses  for 
which  we  cannot  account  at  all.  II.  God  carries  on  His  work  in  us  by  settling 
impulses  into  lite  principles.  This  is  sanctification.  The  leaping  mountain  spring 
that  bounds  from  rock  to  rock,  and  rushes  over  hindrances,  gathers  strength  and 
becomes  presently  the  noiseless  quiet  river  that  flows  smoothly  along,  breathing  out 
refreshment  as  it  flows,  and  singing  to  its  own  quieter  music  the  same  song  to  God. 
III.  Sin  checks  these  impulses  by  suggesting  delay  in  acting  them  out.  IV.  The 
Divine  origin  of  these  impulses  mat  be  tested  by  their  tendenoy  to — 1.  Devotion. 
2.  Work.  3.  Holiness.  4.  Beneficence.  V.  Such  impulses  mat  be  safelt  followed. 
VI.  Divine  impulses  abb  checked  bt  the  cool  calculations  or  selfishness. 
Application :  I.  Some  of  you  are  not  naturally  impulsive.  There  is  a  side  of  your 
nature  which  needs  cultivation.  2.  Some  of  you  are  naturally  very  impulsive.  Don't 
lay  violent  hands  upon  them,  but  strengthen  your  other  faculties.  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood. — Apostolic  independence : — It  is  difficult  for 
ta '  „  at  this  distance  of  time,  to  feel,  as  St.  Paul  did,  the  importance  of  his  apostolus 
independence.  That  the  point  was,  in  his  opinion,  a  vital  one,  is  evident  from  the 
fact  that  he  devotes  nearly  a  third  part  of  this  Epistle  to  the  proof  of  it.  It  was 
important  in  two  ways.  1.  If  it  could  be  shown  that  for  some  considerable  period 
after  his  conversion  the  apostle  held  little  or  no  intercourse  with  the  twelve,  that 
he  sought  not  their  teaching,  but  maintained  an  independent  course,  and  acted 
solely  upon  his  own  responsibility,  it  would  go  far  to  prove  that  he  occupied  no 
subordinate  position,  but  possessed  an  authority  which  was  equal  in  all  respects  to 
theirs.  2.  Whilst  if  it  could  be  further  shown  that,  although  deriving  no  instruc- 
tion from  the  twelve,  he  yet  taught  a  system  of  Divine  truth  which  was  recognized 
by  them  as  identical  with  their  own,  it  would  be  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  his 
position  that  he  had  received  his  gospel,  not  of  man,  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  For  these  reasons  St.  Paul  asserts  strongly,  and  argues  out  at  length,  the 
fact  of  his  independence.  (Emilius  Bay  ley,  B.D.)  Divine  teaching  for  all : — No 
man  must  rest  satisfied  with  merely  human  teaching.  In  its  proper  place  such 
teaching  is  most  valuable.  But  it  is  not  all  that  is  required.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  each  Christian  ought  to  be  able  to  say,  "  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and 
blood  " — "  I  felt  the  necessity  of  higher  teaching  than  that  of  man ;  I  knew  that 
there  were  endowments  which  flesh  and  blood  could  not  bestow  upon  me ;  I  sought 
them  directly  from  God."  There  is  doubtless  a  spirit  of  independence  which  is  a 
spirit  of  pride ;  but  there  is  an  independence  of  man  which  is  the  independence  of 
humility — an  independence  which  is  so  conscious  of  the  inadequacy  of  everything 
human  to  satisfy  the  longings  of  the  soul,  that  it  can  only  carry  its  great  need  to  a 
source  which  is  Divine.  (Ibid.)  The  duty  of  obedience: — Implicit  obedience  is 
oar  first  duty  to  God,  and  one  for  which  nothing  else  will  compensate.  If  a  lad  at 
school  is  bidden  to  cipher,  and  chooses  to  write  a  copy  instead,  the  goodness  of  the 
writing  will  not  save  him  from  censure.  We  must  obey,  whether  we  see  the  reason 
or  not ;  for  God  knows  best.  A  guide  through  an  unknown  country  must  be 
followed  without  demur.  A  captain,  in  coming  up  the  Humber  or  Southampton 
Water,  yields  complete  authority  to  the  pilot.  A  soldier  in  battle  must  fight  when 
and  where  he  is  ordered ;  when  the  conflict  is  over,  he  may  reflect  upon  and  perceive 
the  wisdom  of  his  commander  in  movements  that  at  the  time  of  their  execution 
were  perplexing.  The  farmer  must  obey  God's  natural  laws  of  the  seasons,  if  ha 
would  win  a  harvest ;  and  we  must  all  obey  God's  spiritual  laws  if  we  would  reap 
happiness  here  and  hereafter.  {Anon.)  Nature  of  obedience : — Obedience  is — 1. 
Active ;  not  only  avoiding  what  is  prohibited,  but  performing  what  is  commanded 
(Col.  ill.  8, 10).  2.  Personal ;  for  though  Christ  has  obeyed  the  law  for  us  as  a 
covenant  of  works,  yet  He  has  not  abrogated  it  as  a  rule  of  life  (Bom.  vii.  22 ;  iii.  tl). 
3.  Sincere  (Psa.  li.  6 ;  1  Tim.  i.  5).  4.  Affectionate ;  springing  from  love,  not  from 
terror  (1  John  v.  19,  ii.  5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14).  5.  Diligent ;  as  St.  Paul's  at  this  time. 
9.  Conspicuous  (Phil.  ii.  15;  Matt.  v.  16).     7.  Universal;  not  one  duty,  bat  all 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  £, 

must  be  performed.  8.  Perpetual;  at  all  times,  places,  occasions.  (C.  Buck.) 
Obligation  to  obedience : — We  are  bound  in  all  to  obey  God :  1.  From  the  relation 
in  which  we  stand  to  Him  as  His  creatures.  2.  From  the  law  He  has  revealed  to 
us  in  His  Word.  3.  From  the  blessings  of  His  providence  which  we  are  constantly 
receiving.  4.  From  His  love  and  goodness  in  the  grand  work  of  redemption. 
{Ibid.)  Advantages  of  obedience : — 1.  It  adorns  the  gospel  (Tit.  ii.  10).  2.  It 
evidences  grace  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  3.  It  rejoices  the  hearts  of  the  ministers  and  people 
of  God  (3  John  2;  2  Thess.  i.  19,  20).  4.  It  silences  gainsayers  (2  Pet.  i.  11,  12). 
5.  It  encourages  the  saints,  while  it  reproves  the  lukewarm  (Matt.  v.  16).  6.  It 
affords  peace  to  the  subjects  of  it  (Psa.  xxv.  12,  13 ;  Acts  xxiv.  16).  7.  It  power- 
fully recommends  religion,  as  that  which  is  both  delightful  and  practicable  (Col.  i. 
10).  8.  It  is  the  forerunner  and  evidence  of  eternal  glory  (Bom.  vi.  22 ;  Rev.  xxii. 
14).  (Ibid.)  Actual  obedience  is  the  practice  and  exercise  of  the  several  graces 
and  duties  of  Christianity.  (Ibid.)  Obedience  is  the  performance  of  the  com- 
mands of  a  superior.  (Ibid.)  Perfect  obedience  is  the  exact  conformity  of  our 
hearts  and  lives  to  the  law  of  God,  without  the  least  imperfection.  (Ibid.)  Virtual 
obedience  consists  in  a  belief  of  the  gospel,  of  the  holiness  and  equity  of  its  precepts, 
of  the  truth  of  its  promises,  and  a  true  repentance  of  all  our  sins.  (Ibid.) 
Thorough  obedience : — A  soul  sincerely  obedient  will  not  pick  and  choose  what 
commands  to  obey  and  what  to  reject,  as  hypocrites  do.  An  obedient  soul  is 
like  a  crystal  glass  with  a  light  in  the  midst,  which  shines  forth  through  every 
part  thereof.  A  man  sincerely  obedient  lays  such  a  charge  upon  his  whole 
man ;  as  Mary  the  mother  of  Christ  did  upon  all  the  servants  at  the  feast, 
"Whatsoever  He  saith  unto  you,  do  it."  Eyes,  ears,  hands,  heart,  lips,  legs, 
body,  and  soul,  do  you  all  seriously  and  affectionately  observe  whatever  Jesus 
Christ  says  unto  you,  and  do  it.  (T.  Brooks.)  Prompt  obedience: — A  story 
is  told  of  a  great  captain  who,  after  a  battle,  was  talking  over  the  events  of 
the  day  with  his  officers.  He  asked  them  who  had  done  the  best  that  day. 
Some  spoke  of  one  man  who  had  fought  very  bravely,  and  some  of  another. 
"No,"  he  said,  "you  are  all  mistaken.  The  best  man  in  the  field  to-day  was  a 
soldier  who  was  just  lifting  up  his  arm  to  strike  an  enemy,  but,  when  he  heard  the 
trumpet  sound  a  retreat,  checked  himself,  and  dropped  his  arm  without  striking  the 
blow.  That  perfect  and  ready  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  general  is  the  noblest 
thing  that  has  been  done  to-day."  Paul's  promptitude : — I.  There  was  no  pause, 
for  he  says  "  immediately."  II.  There  was  no  giving  oppobtonitt  for  ant  counteb 
influence.  He  "  conferred  not,"  <fec.  He  neither  took  counsel  with  himself  nor  with 
others.  HI.  It  is  as  though  he  felt  the  dangeb  of  a  moment's  delay  :  fearful  lest 
his  convictions  should  be  weakened  if  they  did  not  at  once  produce  great  energy  of 
eonduct.  (H .  Melvill,  B.D.)  Promptness  discriminated : — In  matters  of 
prudence  second  thoughts  are  best;  in  matters  of  conscience  first  thoughts 
are  the  best.  (Ibid.)  Promptness:  its  importance: — Act " immediately "  on 
your  impressions  of  what  is  right.  Stay  not  to  debate  when  conscience  has 
decided.  Turn  feelings  into  principles  by  forthwith  employing  them  in  practice. 
Do  as  Paul  did.  He  was  like  the  mariner  who,  if  he  can  get  a  glimpse  of  the  sun, 
seizes  an  observation  and  shifts  the  rudder.  Get  you  but  a  glance  of  God's  will, 
and  instantaneously  shape  your  course  by  it.  (Ibid.)  Promptness ;  the  danger  of 
a  want  of  it  in  religion : — You  felt  a  conviction  as  to  duty,  but  you  determined  to 
take  time  for  consideration,  and  the  conviction  cooled.  It  was  a  golden  moment, 
but  in  your  prudence — the  prudence  when  a  leak  is  found  out  in  the  ship  of  waiting 
till  to-morrow  before  trying  to  stop  it — you  determined  to  do  nothing  hastily,  but  to 
wait  and  see  whether  the  conviction  was  aught  else  but  a  transient  feeling.  Of 
course  it  proved  a  transient  feeling.  The  first  touches  of  God's  Spirit  are  meant 
to  be  transient  unless  attended  to.  The  Spirit  is  likened  to  the  wind,  and  the  soul 
is  breathed  upon  rather  than  struck.  It  is  your  business  to  prevent  the  impression 
being  transient.  If  you  would  keep  the  dew  on  the  grass  you  must  keep  the  sun 
from  it.  If  you  would  keep  the  impression  of  the  heart  you  must  keep  the  world 
from  the  heart.  But  because  you  have  paused  to  confer  with  flesh  and  blood,  you 
have  given  the  world  time  to  rally  its  forces,  and  therefore  by  the  next  day  the 
impression  is  gone,  and  you  have  perhaps  secretly  felt  pleased  that  second  thoughts 
were  so  different  from  the  first.  Second  thoughts  tie  men  to  the  world  where  first 
thoughts  would  have  devoted  them  to  God.  (Ibid.)  Promptness  :  its  blessed- 
ness : — Happy  he  who  has  learned  this  one  thing — to  do  the  plain  duty  of  the 
moment  quickly  and  cheerfully,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  whatever  may  be  the  con- 
sequences.   Non-conference  with  flesh  and  blood : — The  subject — L  Awakens  refleo- 


«ap.  i.]  OALATIANS.  Bi 

tion  as  to  the  sphere  and  limits  of  religious  organization.  II.  Enforces  the 
necessity  of  individual  culture  and  the  importance  of  individual  action.  III.  Sug- 
gests hopeful  anticipations  as  to  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  (T.  Goadby.) 
Individuality: — There  is  not  a  spider  hanging  on  the  King's  wall  bat  hath  its 
errand ;  there  is  not  a  nettle  that  groweth  in  the  corner  of  the  churchyard  but 
hath  its  purpose ;  there  is  not  a  single  insect  fluttering  in  the  breeze  but  accora- 
plisheth  some  Divine  decree ;  and  I  will  never  have  it  that  God  created  any  man, 
especially  any  Christian  man,  to  be  a  blank,  a  nothing.  He  made  you  for  an  end  ; 
find  out  what  that  end  is ;  find  out  your  niche  and  fill  it.  If  it  be  ever  so  little,  do 
something  in  this  great  battle  for  God  and  truth.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Conferring  with 
flesh  and  blood: — Invading  armies  always  endeavour  to  leave  their  ships  riding  in  a 
safe  and  sheltered  anchorage.  In  the  event  of  their  enterprise  proving  unsuccessful, 
they  thus  secure  the  means  of  retreat ;  and  to  provide  for  such  an  emergency  is 
regarded  as  a  good  stroke  of  generalship.  Wellington  fought  Waterloo  with  the 
Forest  of  Soigny  at  his  back ;  and  the  fleet  which  carried  our  soldiers  to  fight  the 
Russians  before  Sebastopol  waited  the  issue  in  the  Bay  of  Balaclava.  The  brave 
old  Romans,  whom  Caesar  led,  invaded  our  country  after  a  different  fashion.  The 
first  thing  they  did  on  disembarking,  was  to  burn  their  ships ;  doing  bo  in  sight  of 
thousands  who  were  bravely  mustering  on  the  heights  of  England,  to  defend  their 
homes,  their  wives  and  little  ones,  their  freedom  and  native  land.  Not  leaving  the 
enemy  to  cut  off  their  retreat,  they  cut  it  off  themselves.  Their  own  hands  put  the 
torch  to  the  fleet  which  had  brought  them  to  Britain,  and,  in  the  event  of  failure, 
would  have  carried  them  back  to  Italy.  With  the  glare  of  that  brave  conflagration 
on  their  eagles,  banners,  and  serried  ranks,  we  cannot  wonder  that,  with  such  sons 
to  fight  her  battles,  Borne  rose  from  a  petty  town  to  be  mistress  of  the  world.  Both 
her  destiny  and  their  determination  were  to  be  plainly  seen  in  the  blaze  of  their 
burning  ships.  Bringing  to  the  enterprise  such  an  indomitable  spirit  and  such 
decision  of  character,  unless  the  stars  of  heaven  fought  against  them  as  against 
Sisera,  how  could  they  fail  to  conquer  ?  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Ministers  must  preach 
Christ : — In  a  village  church  in  one  of  the  Tyrolese  valleys,  we  saw  upon  the  pulpit 
an  outstretched  arm,  carved  in  wood,  the  hand  of  which  held  forth  a  cross.  We 
noted  the  emblem  as  full  of  instruction  as  to  what  all  true  ministry  should  be,  and 
must  be — a  holding  forth  of  the  cross  of  Christ  to  the  multitude  as  the  only  trust  of 
sinners.  Jesus  Christ  must  be  set  forth  evidently  crucified  among  them.  Lord, 
make  this  the  aim  and  habit  of  all  our  ministers.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "  I  have 
had  to  interline  your  sermon  all  through  and  through  with  the  name  of  Christ," 
was  the  criticism  which  an  aged  parishioner  once  passed  upon  the  discourse  of  a 
young  pastor.  Said  the  lamented  M'Cheyne,  "  Some  speculate  on  doctrines  about 
the  gospel,  rather  than  preaoh  the  gospel  itself."  "  I  see  a  man  cannot  be  a  faithful 
minister,  until  he  preaches  Christ  for  Christ's  sake."  (Christian  Treasury.) 
Preachers  must  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood: — A  distinguished  general  said  to 
Lather,  as  he  was  about  to  enter  the  presence  of  the  judges  at  Worms,  "  Poor  monk, 
thou  art  now  going  to  make  a  nobler  stand  than  I  or  any  other  captains  have  ever 
made  in  the  bloodiest  of  our  battles.  But  if  thy  cause  is  just  and  thou  art  sure  of  it, 
go  forward  in  God's  name  and  fear  nothing.  God  will  not  forsake  thee."  As  the 
Earl  of  Morton  stood  looking  down  into  the  grave  of  John  Knox  he  said,  "  There 
lies  one  who  never  feared  the  face  of  man."  immediate  obedience y — As  when  a 
general  commands  his  army  to  march,  if,  then,  "the  -6oldiers_6houid  stand  upon 
terms,  and  refuse  to  go  except  they  have  better  clothes,  their  pay  in  hand,  or  the  like, 
and  then  they  will  march, — thiB  would  not  show  them  an  obedient,  disciplined  army ; 
but  if,  at  the  reading  of  their  orders,  they  presently  break  up  their  quarters,  and  set 
forth,  though  it  be  midnight  when  the  command  come,  and  they  without  money,  or 
clothes  on  their  backs,  leaving  the  whole  care  of  themselves  for  these  things  to  their 
general,  and  they  only  attend  how  they  may  best  fulfil  his  commands,— thesemay^ 
be  said  to  march  in  obedience.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  A  conference  to  be  avoided : — Being" 
taught  of  God,  he  did  not  consult  those  who  were  already  believers,  lest  he  should 
seem  to  have  received  his  religion  at  second-hand.  He  did  not  consult  his  relatives, 
who  would  have  advised  caution.  He  did  not  consult  his  own  interests,  which  all 
lay  in  the  opposite  direction.  These  he  counted  loss  for  Christ.  He  did  not 
consult  his  own  safety,  but  risked  life  itself  for  Jesus.  In  this  independent  course 
he  was  justified,  and  should  be  imitated.  I.  Faith  needs  no  warrant  but  the 
will  or  God.  1.  Good  men  in  all  ages  have  acted  upon  this  conviction.  Noah, 
Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  Samson,  David,  Elijah,  Daniel,  the  three  who  were  cast 
into  the  furnace,  &o.    S.  To  ask  more  is  virtually  to  renounce  the  Lord  as  our 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [our.  v 

Commander  and  Guide,  and  to  lift  man  into  his  place.  3.  To  hesitate  from  self- 
interest  is  openly  to  defy  the  Lord.  4.  To  submit  the  claims  of  duty  to  the  judg- 
ment of  the  flesh  is  diametrically  opposed  to  the  character  and  claims  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  gave  Himself  to  us,  and  expects  us  to  give  ourselves  to  Him  without 
question  or  reserve.  5.  To  delay  duty  until  we  have  held  such  consultation  almost 
always  ends  in  not  doing  the  right  thing  at  all.  Too  often  it  is  sought  after  that  an 
excuse  may  be  found  for  avoiding  an  unpleasant  duty.  U.  Thb  principle  has  a 
wide  range  or  application.  1.  To  known  duties.  In  service  we  are  not  to  consult 
personal  liking,  ease,  honour,  prospect  of  advancement,  or  remuneration.  2.  To 
needful  sacrifices.  We  had  better  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood ;  for  good  men 
may  be  self-indulgent,  and  so  consult  their  own  flesh.  3.  To  special  service.  We 
are  not  to  be  held  back  from  this  by — Considerations  of  personal  weakness ;  con- 
siderations of  want  of  visible  means ;  considerations  of  how  others  will  interpret 
our  actions.  4.  To  an  open  avowal  of  Christ.  We  must  not  be  deterred  from  it 
by — The  wishes  of  others,  who  think  themselves  involved  in  our  act ;  the  dread  of 
contempt  from  those  who  deride  godliness  ;  the  fear  of  not  holding  on,  and  of  thus 
disgracing  religion ;  reluctance  to  give  up  the  world,  and  a  secret  clinging  to  its 
ways.  This  is  a  very  perilous  vice.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."  HI.  Thb  principlb 
commends  itself  to  oca  best  judgment.  It  is  justified  by — 1.  The  judgment 
which  we  exercise  upon  others.  We  blame  them  if  they  have  no  mind  of  their  own. 
We  applaud  them  if  they  are  bravely  faithful.  2.  The  judgment  of  an  enlightened 
cience.  3.  The  judgment  of  a  dying  bed.  4.  The  judgment  of  an  eternal 
world.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  hard  le*$on: — But  this  is  a  hard  lesson  to  learn.  I 
read  some  time  ago  of  a  German  captain  who  found  this  out.  He  was  drilling  a 
company  of  volunteers.  The  parade  ground  was  a  field  by  the  seaside.  The  men 
were  going  through  their  exercises  very  nicely,  but  the  captain  thought  he  would 
give  them  a  lesson  about  obeying  orders.  They  were  marching  up  and  down  in  the 
line  of  the  water  at  some  distance  from  it.  He  concluded  to  give  them  an  order  to 
maroh  directly  towards  the  water  and  see  how  far  they  would  go.  The  men  are 
marching  along.  "  Halt,  company,"  says  the  captain.  In  a  moment  they  halt 
•'  Right  face  "  is  the  next  word,  and  instantly  they  wheel  round.  "  Forwart 
marten,"  is  then  the  order.  At  once  they  begin  to  march  directly  towards  the 
water :  on  they  go,  nearer  and  nearer  to  it.  Soon  they  reach  the  edge  of  the  water. 
Then  there  is  a  sudden  halt.  "  Vat  for  you  stop  ?  I  no  say,  Halt,"  cried  the 
captain.  "  Why,  oaptain,  here  is  the  water,"  said  one  of  the  men.  •*  Veil,  vot  of 
it,"  cried  he,  greatly  excited,  "  Vater  is  nothing;  fire  is  nothing;  everything  is 
nothing.  Ven  I  say,  Forwart  marten,  then  you  must  forwart  marten."  The 
captain  was  right ;  the  first  duty  of  a  soldier  is  to  learn  to  obey.  (Dr.  Richard 
Newton.)  What  God  calls  a  man  to  do  He  will  carry  him  through: — I  would 
undertake  to  govern  half-a-dozen  worlds  if  God  called  me  to  do  it ;  but  if  He  did 
not  call  me  to  do  it,  I  would  not  undertake  to  govern  half-a-dozen  sheep.  (Dr. 
Pay  ton.) 

Ver.  IT.  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them  which  were  apostles  before  me. 
— Aspects  of  the  new  life: — I.  Negative.  He  did  not  report  himself.  1.  The 
apostles  were  stiffly  conservative,  and  (1)  might  have  suspeoted  his  conversion; 
(2)  would  probably  have  questioned  his  Divine  commission ;  (3)  would  certainly 
have  repudiated  his  apostleship.  2.  Paul  wanted  nothing  of  them,  and  they  could 
'  e  him  nothing.  8.  He  wished  his  life  rather  than  his  lips  to  speak.  Let  others 
see  the  reality  of  your  conversion ;  they  will  then  need  no  verbal  proof  of  it. 
II.  Passive.  In  Arabia  Paul — 1.  Lived  a  life  of  quiet  meditation.  2.  Equipped 
himself  for  his  great  work.  8.  Calmly  waited  for  indications  from  God.  After 
conversion  (1)  don't  rush  into  office,  but  (2)  think,  read,  pray,  weigh  the  respon- 
sibility of  Christian  work,  fit  yourself  by  Divine  grace,  wait  till  God  says,  "Go." 
HI.  Active.  "  To  Damascus  "  (see  Acts  ix.  22).  1.  The  hour  had  struck,  and  the 
was  ready  for  it.  (1)  Paul  now  knew  not  only  what  to  say,  but  how  to  say  it 
and  defend  it.  (2)  The  seed  sown  at  conversion  had  produced  a  body  of  experience. 
2.  Once  at  it  he  grew  strong  in  the  work.  3.  He  was  rewarded  with  striking 
success.  IV.  Sujtkbjng  (Acts  ix.  23,  24).  1.  Persecution  tests  depth  of  convic- 
tion and  reality  of  work.  2.  Look  for  it,  but  don't  fear  it.  V.  Independence. 
Living  movements  do  not  come  of  committees,  they  come  of  individuals.  (J.  H. 
Ntwman,  D.D.)  Quiet  places: — Just  as  an  eagle,  which  has  been  drenched  and 
battered  by  some  fierce  storm,  will  alight  to  plume  its  ruffled  wings,  so,  when  a 
great  soul  has  "  passed  through  fire  and  through  water,"  it  needs  some  safe  and  quiet 


cm*,  i.]  GALATIANS.  57 

place  in  which  to  rest.  .  .  .  Like  almost  every  great  soul  in  ancient  or  modern 
times,  it  whom  has  been  entrusted  the  task  of  swaying  the  destinies  by  moulding 
the  convictions  of  mankind — like  Sakya  Mouni,  like  Mahomet  in  the  cave  of  Hira, 
like  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  in  his  sickness,  like  Luther  in  the  monastery  of  Erfurt, 
Paul  would  need  a  quiet  period  in  which  to  elevate  his  thoughts,  to  still  the  tumult 
of  his  emotions,  to  commune  in  secrecy  and  in  silence  with  his  own  soul.  (F.  TV. 
Farrar.)  The  significance  of  this  episode  for  us  : — In  the  busy  mart,  amid  life's 
dusky  lanes  and  accumulating  cares,  we  lose  and  forget  our  God.  Our  books  are 
too  much  with  us ;  friends  and  social  life  make  the  hours  busy  with  what  is  human ; 
and  the  claims  of  business  are  of  increasing  urgency.  We  must  find  for  ourselves  a 
desert  place,  where,  occasionally  for  prolonged  seasons,  and  daily  for  a  short 
season,  we  may  receive  the  Lord's  anointing.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Meditation  is 
the  life  of  the  soul ;  action  is  the  outcome  of  meditation,  honour  is  the  reward  of 
action.  So  meditate  that  thou  mayest  do  ;  so  do  that  thou  mayest  be  honoured  ; 
so  accept  honour  as  to  give  God  the  glory.  The  inner  life  of  St.  Paul ; — The 
world  and  the  Church  have  ever  shown  a  curiosity  as  to  the  inner  life  of  great  men, 
as  to  what  they  were,  not  when  the  eye  of  man  was  upon  them,  but  when  they 
were  alone — what  they  were  in  the  secret  recesses  of  their  hearts ;  and  this  curio- 
sity has  made  biographies  and  autobiographies,  and  private  journals  and  letters, 
very  popular.  It  has  led,  moreover,  to  the  publication  of  documents  which  were 
never  meant  for  the  public  eye,  and  which  had  better  have  remained  unperused. 
But  God  has  seen  fit  in  the  case  of  St.  Paul  to  gratify,  not  indeed  a  mere  morbid 
curiosity,  but  the  devout  desire  on  the  part  of  His  Church  to  know  something  of 
the  great  apostle's  secret  feelings  and  sternest  conflicts  for  its  own  edification  and 
for  His  own  glory.  (Canon  Miller.)  St.  Paul's  solitude: — His  main  object 
we  may  assume  to  have  been  to  seclude  himself  for  a  while  from  the  outer 
world,  to  commune  with  God  and  his  own  soul  in  stillness,  and  to  seek 
for  grace  for  his  future  labours.  It  was  a  pause  in  his  career,  which  he  might 
legitimately  crave  after ;  a  moment  of  calm  between  the  stormy  passions  of  his  past 
life,  and  the  tumultuous  scenes  which  lay  before  him;  a  half-hour  of  heavenly 
silence  in  which,  alone  with  God,  he  might  learn  more  perfectly  his  Master's  will, 
and  gather  strength  to  do  his  Master's  work.  We  may  follow  the  apostle  into 
Arabia,  and  safely  infer  that  his  retirement  was  made  use  of  for  the  following  pur- 
poses. 1.  Thought.  On  reviewing  his  past  life — his  former  antagonism  to  Christ, 
his  ignorance  and  self-will,  his  unbelief  and  active  enmity ;  and  the  forbearance, 
love,  and  mercy  of  God — what  food  for  reflection  had  St.  Paul  1  Thought  concern- 
ing God,  the  gospel  of  Christ,  the  soul,  sin,  death,  salvation,  life,  heaven,  is  essential 
to  salvation ;  there  can  be  no  real,  intelligent  living  unto  God  without  it.  2.  Self- 
abasement.  Bitter  mourning  for  sin.  The  manifestation  of  God's  love  deepens 
the  sense  of  ingratitude  and  unworthiness  in  the  truly  penitent.  3.  Prayer.  He 
who  is  most  fully  conscious  of  his  own  utter  helplessness,  will  cling  with  tightest 
grasp  to  the  only  Giver  of  all  good.  4.  Self-dedication.  The  life  given  to  God. 
(Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  St.  Paul's  sojourn  in  Arabia  : — 1.  Obscurity  of  the 
incident.  A  veil  of  thiok  darkness  hangs  over  St.  Paul's  visit  to  Arabia.  Of  the 
scenes  among  which  he  moved,  of  the  thoughts  and  occupations  which  engaged 
him  while  there,  of  all  the  circumstances  of  a  crisis  which  must  have  shaped  the 
whole  tenour  of  his  after  life,  absolutely  nothing  is  known.  "  Immediately,"  says 
St.  Paul,  "  I  went  away  into  Arabia."  The  historian  passes  over  the  incident 
without  a  mention.  It  is  a  mysterious  pause,  a  moment  of  suspense  in  the  apostle's 
history,  a  breathless  calm  which  ushers  in  the  tumultuous  storm  of  his  active 
missionary  life.  2.  The  place.  If  we  suppose  that  the  apostle  at  this  critical 
moment  betook  himself  to  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  the  scene  of  the  giving  of  the  law, 
then  his  visit  to  Arabia  becomes  full  of  meaning.  He  was  attracted  thither  by  a 
spirit  akin  to  that  which  formerly  had  driven  Elijah  to  the  same  region  (1  Kings 
xix.  8-18).  Standing  on  the  threshold  of  the  new  covenant,  he  was  anxious  to  look 
upon  the  birth-place  of  the  old  :  that  dwelling  for  a  while  in  seclusion  in  the  pre- 
sence of  "the  mount  that  burned  with  fire,"  he  might  ponder  over  the  transient 
glories  of  the  "ministration  of  death,"  and  apprehend  its  real  purpose  in  relation 
to  the  more  glorious  covenant  which  was  now  to  supplant  it.  Here,  surrounded 
by  the  children  of  the  desert,  the  descendants  of  Hagar  the  bondwoman,  he  read  the 
true  meaning  and  power  of  the  law.  In  the  rugged  and  barren  region  whence  it 
issued,  he  saw  a  fit  type  of  that  bleak  desolation,  which  it  created,  and  was  intended 
to  create,  in  the  soul  of  man.  In  the  midst  of  such  scenes  and  associations,  his 
spirit  was  attuned  to  harmony  with  his  Divine  mission,  and  fitted  to  receive  fresh 


W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [(MAT.  t. 

visions  and  revelations.  3.  Its  duration.  What  was  the  length  of  this  sojourn 
we  can  only  conjecture.  The  interval  between  his  conversion  and  his  first  visit  to 
Jerusalem,  St.  Paul  here  states  to  have  been  three  years.  The  notices  of  time  in 
the  narrative  of  the  Acts  are  vague,  but  not  contradictory  to  this  statement.  From 
Damascus,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  he  went  away  into  Arabia,  whence  he  returned  to 
Damascus.  St.  Luke  represents  him  as  preaching  actively  in  this  city  after  his  con- 
version, not  mentioning,  and  apparently  not  aware  of  any  interruption,  though  IMs 
narrative  is  not  inconsistent  with  such.  It  seems  probable,  then,  that  St.  Paul's 
visit  to  Arabia  took  place  early  in  this  period,  before  he  commenced  his  active 
labours.  "  Immediately,"  he  says,  "  instead  of  conferring  with  flesh  and  blood,  I 
went  into  Arabia."  The  silence  of  the  historian  is  best  accounted  for  on  the  sup- 
position that  the  sojourn  there  was  short ;  but  as  St.  Luke's  companionship  with 
the  apostle  commenced  at  a  much  later  date,  no  great  stress  must  be  laid  on  the 
omission.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  it  of  long  dura- 
tion. It  was  probably  brief — brief  enough  not  to  occupy  any  considerable  space  in 
the  apostle's  history,  and  yet  not  too  brief  to  serve  the  purpose  it  was  intended  to 
serve.  4.  Its  purpose.  Can  we  doubt  that  by  this  journey  he  sought  seclusion  from 
the  outer  world,  that  his  desire  was  to  commune  with  God  and  his  own  soul  amid 
these  hallowed  scenes,  and  thus  to  gather  strength  in  solitude  for  his  active 
labours  ?  His  own  language  implies  this — "  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood, 
but  departed  into  Arabia."  The  fathers  for  the  most  part  take  a  different  view  of 
this  incident.  They  imagine  the  apostle  hurrying  forth  into  the  wilds  of  Arabia, 
burning  to  impart  to  others  the  glad  tidings  which  had  so  suddenly  burst  upon 
himself.  "  See  how  fervent  was  his  soul,"  exclaims  Chrysostom ;  "  he  was  eager 
to  occupy  lands  yet  untilled ;  he  forthwith  attacked  a  barbarous  and  savage  people, 
choosing  a  life  of  conflict  and  much  toil."  This  comment  strikes  a  false  note.  Far 
different  at  such  a  crisis  must  have  been  the  spirit  of  him,  whose  life  henceforth 
was  at  least  as  conspicuous  for  patient  wisdom  and  large  sympathies  as  for  intense 
self-devotion.  He  retired  for  a  while,  we  may  suppose,  that,  "  separate  from  the 
world,  his  heart  might  deeply  take,  and  strongly  keep,  the  print  of  heaven."  And 
what  place  more  fit  for  this  retirement  than  that  holy  ground,  "  where  all  around, 
on  mountains,  sand,  and  sky,  God's  chariot  wheels  have  left  distinctest  trace." 
(Bishop  Lightfoot.)  St.  Paul's  seclusion  : — After  a  great  change  of  conviction, 
nature,  as  well  as  something  higher  than  nature,  tells  us  that  a  long  period  of 
retirement  and  silence  is  fitting,  if  not  necessary.  The  three  days  in  the  house  of 
Judas  were  not  enough  in  which  to  sound  the  heights  and  depths  of  newly  re- 
cognized truth,  or  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the  soul  which  was  to  own  and  to 
f  reclaim  it.  They  were  to  be  followed  by  three  years  passed  in  the  desert  of  Arabia, 
t  is,  indeed,  thought  that  this  retirement  was  dictated  by  a  wish  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  the  wandering  Bedouin  tribes,  or  to  the  settled  Arabs  at  Petrea.  And 
there  is  no  doubt  that  "  Arabia  "  among  the  ancients  was  a  very  wide  and  inclu- 
sive geographical  term.  It  might  have  included  Damascus  itself ;  it  might  have 
even  taken  in  regions  far  to  the  north,  extending  to  the  very  borders  of  Cilicia. 
But  these  are  less  usual  uses  of  the  word ;  nor  can  it  be  supposed  that  emphasis 
would  have  been  laid  on  this  retirement  if  all  that  had  been  meant  was  a  journey 
of  a  few  miles  into  the  desert  beyond  the  walls  of  Damascus.  Something  may  be 
said  for  a  retreat  to  Petra,  the  ancient  capital  of  Edom,  which  had  its  own  syna- 
gogue in  Jerusalem  ;  bnt  the  probabilities  are  that,  under  the  profound  and  awful 
inspirations  of  the  hour,  Paul  sought  to  tread  in  the  very  footsteps  of  Moses  and 
Elijah  at  the  base  of  Sinai.  The  spiritual  attractions  of  such  a  course  must  have 
been,  to  a  man  of  his  character  and  antecedents,  not  less  than  overwhelming.  There, 
where  the  Jewish  law  had  been  given,  he  was  led  to  ask  what  it  really  meant — what 
were  its  sanctions,  what  its  obligations,  what  the  limit  of  its  moral  capacity,  what 
the  criterion  of  its  weakness.  There  he  must  have  felt  the  inspiration  of  »  life  like 
Elijah's,  the  great  representative  of  a  persecuted  religions  minority,  the  preacher 
of  an  unpopular  truth  against  vulgar  but  intolerant  error.  Would  not  the  still 
small  voice  which  had  there  spoken  to  the  prophet — or  rather,  did  it  not — again  and 
again  speak  to  him  7  They  were  precious  years,  depend  upon  it,  for  a  man  whose 
later  life  was  to  be  passed,  wholly  passed,  in  action.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Value  of 
seclusion  : — The  value  of  such  retirement,  if  circumstances  admit  of  it  or  Buggest 
it,  before  entering  on  the  decisive  work  of  life,  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.  Many  a 
young  man,  whose  education  is  complete  (as  the  phrase  goes),  and  who  knows,  or 
thinks  that  he  knows,  what  to  do  for  himself  or  his  fellow-creatures,  is  often  pain- 
fully disappointed  whan  his  plans  for  immediate  action  suddenly  break  down,  and 


I.]  GALATIANS. 


he  has  to  remain  for  a  while  in  comparative  obscurity  and  inaction.  It  seems  to 
him  to  be  a  'oss  of  time,  with  little  or  nothing  to  redeem  the  disadvantage.  He  is 
wasting,  he  thinks,  his  best  years  in  idleness.  He  may,  of  course,  so  act  as  to 
make  that  phrase  justifiable.  It  need  not  be  so.  A  prudent,  no  less  than  a  reli- 
gious man,  will  thankfully,  if  he  can,  avail  himself  of  such  an  opportunity  for  con- 
solidating his  acquirements,  for  reviewing  the  bearing  of  his  governing  convictions, 
for  estimating  more  accurately  the  resources  at  his  disposal  for  extending  or  con- 
tracting his  plans,  at  least  for  reconsidering  them.  A  religious  man  will,  above 
all,  seize  such  an  opportunity  for  testing  and  strengthening  his  motives,  and  for  culti- 
vating an  increased  intimacy  with  those  means  and  sources  of  effective  strength 
which  he  will  need  so  much  hereafter.  (Ibid.)  Observe — I.  God  sometimes 
raises  up  and  qualifies  His  agents  without  human  intervention.  II.  Such  agents 
are  duly  qualified  and  may  be  tested  by  their  fruits.  HI.  As  a  rule,  they  have 
assigned  them  some  new  department  of  labour.  (J.  Lyth.)  Residence  in  Arabia : — 
The  point  thus  suggested  is  the  interval  between  the  choioe  of  a  profession  or 
calling  in  life  and  the  entrance  on  the  public  duties  of  that  profession  or  calling. 
L  The  first  point  relates  to  the  professions  ob  callings  which  may  be  properly 

REGARDED   AS   PRESENTING    THEMSELVES    TO    ONE   WHO   IS    ABOUT  TO   EMBARK   ON   LIFE. 

I.  The  first  thing  which  strikes  us  on  this  point  is  the  great  variety  of  things  to  be 
done  in  the  world,  during  any  one  generation ;  or  the  variety  of  the  fields  for 
exertion  and  employment.  2.  The  next  point,  under  this  head,  relates  to  the 
variety  of  endowments  among  men,  as  adapted  to  these  various  occupations — 
endowments  suoh  that  these  various  ends  are  in  fact  secured,  and  such  that  at  the 
same  time  they  are  secured  voluntarily,  or  so  that  men  enter  on  their  different  pur- 
suits not  by  force  or  compulsion,  but  of  preference  and  choice.  3.  A  third  remark 
under  this  head ;  the  ends  of  life  may  be  secured,  the  purposes  of  society  advanced, 
and  God  may  be  honoured,  in  any  one  of  these  occupations  and  employments. 

II.  In  the  next  place,  we  have  to  inquire  on  what  principles  should  such  a  pro- 
fession or  calling  be  chosen?  1.  The  first  is,  that  the  profession  or  calling 
should  be  selected  in  which  the  most  can  be  made  of  life  for  its  proper  purposes ; 
or,  in  which  life  can  be  turned  to  the  best  account.  Life,  though  transitory,  short, 
uncertain,  has  its  purpose.  2.  The  second  principle  which  I  mention  is,  that,  con- 
sequently, when  there  is  a  fitness  for  either  of  two  or  more  courses  of  life,  that 
should  be  chosen  which  under  the  circumstances  will  be  most  adapted  to 
secure  the  ends  of  life.  3.  A  third  rule  would  be  that  the  profession  or 
calling  should  be  chosen  which  will  be  best  adapted  to  develop  the  peculiar 
endowments  of  the  mind,  or  which  will  be  in  the  line  of  those  endowments. 
4.  A  fourth  thing  which  is  vital  to  any  just  views  of  life,  to  a  proper  choice  of 
a  profession,  is,  that  that  only  should  be  chosen  which  is  just  and  honourable; 
which  is  itself  right,  and  is  consistent  with  the  highest  standard  of  morality  ;  and 
which  can  be  pursued  in  all  its  ramifications,  and  always,  and  in  all  respects,  on 
the  principles  of  honesty,  truth,  justice,  and  fairness.  5.  A  fifth  principle  is  that 
that  course  should  be  chosen  in  which  there  are  the  fewest  temptations  to  evil.  6.  A 
sixth  principle  is,  that  a  young  man  should  choose  that  which  while  it  will  conduce 
to  his  own  individual  interest  and  to  the  purpose  of  his  life,  will,  at  the  same  time, 
promote  the  general  good  of  society,  and  contribute  to  the  advancement  of  the  race. 
7.  A  seventh  principle  may  be  added.  It  is,  that  that  calling  should  be  seleote 
which  will  not  interfere  with,  but  which  will  best  aid  the  preparation  for  anoth 
world.  III.  These  remarks  and  suggestions  will  enable  us,  in  the  third  place, 
answer  the  main  inquiry  with  which  we  started — In  what  way  shall  the  intebv> 

BETWEEN  THE  CHOOSING  07  A  PROFESSION  AND  THE  ENTRANCE   ON   ITS  ACTIVE  DUTIES  B 

employed  f    1.  The  first  is,  that  time  enough  should  be  taken  to  prepare  for  th 
profession  or  calling  which  has  been  selected.    2.  Secondly,  the  studies  shoul 
obviously  have  reference  to  the  future  calling.     3.  One  thought  only  remains.    It 
is,  that  the  preparation  for  that  profession  should  be — as  the  choice  of  the  profes- 
sion, and  the  profession  itself  should  be — subordinate  to  the  life  to  come — to  the 
preparation  for  eternity.    (4.  Barnes.) 

Ver.  18.  Then  after  three  yean  I  went  np  to  Jerusalem. — St.  Paul's  return  to 
Jerusalem: — He  returned  from  a  spiritual  as  Ezra  had  from  a  bodily  cap- 
tivity, and  to  his  renewed  mind  all  things  appeared  new.  What  an  emotion 
smote  his  heart  at  the  first  distant  view  of  the  Temple,  that  house  of  sacrifice, 
that  edifice  of  prophecy.  Its  sacrifices  had  been  realized ;  its  prophecies 
fulfil Wl      As  h«  approached  the  gates,  he  might  have  trodden  the  very  spot 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm».  % 

where  he  had  assisted  in  the  death  of  Stephen,  and  he  entered  them  perfectly 
content,  were  it  God's  will,  to  be  dragged  to  the  same  fate.  When  he  entered 
the  city,  what  deep  thoughts  were  suggested  by  the  haunts  of  his  youth,  and 
by  the  sight  of  those  spots  where  he  had  so  eagerly  sought  that  knowledge  whioh 
he  had  now  so  eagerly  abandoned.  What  an  intolerable  burden  he  had  cast  off. 
He  felt  as  a  glorified  spirit  may  be  supposed  to  feel  on  revisiting  the  scenes  of  its 
fleshly  sojourn.     (Archdeacon  Evans.)  The  abode  with  Peter: — The  fifteen  days 

were  doubtless  spent  in  conversation  about  the  mission  and  life  of  Christ ;  and  it 
seems  certain — though  St.  Paul  repudiates  the  presumption  that  he  derived  any  part 
of  his  authority,  or  of  the  exposition  which  he  gave  of  the  gospel,  from  any  person 
whatsoever — that  he  must  have  heard  during  this  fortnight  many  of  those  facts  of 
the  private  life  of  Christ,  which  were  so  well  known  to  the  chief  of  the  Twelve,  and 
many  of  those  discourses  which  Peter  so  clearly  remembered.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.) 
Christian  friendship: — I.  The  visit  to  Peteb.  1.  After  three  years' seclusion  Paul 
would  yearn  for  fellowship  with  such  a  heart  as  Peter's.  2.  The  visit  shows  us  that 
(1)  he  was  not  primarily  in  quest  of  knowledge,  nor  (2)  to  secure  an  ecclesiastical 
status.  3.  It  was  a  visit  of  pure  friendship.  II.  The  lessons  it  suggests.  That 
Christian  friendship  is — 1.  All-embracing.  It  includes  differences  of  rank,  gifts, 
culture,  temperament.  No  men  could  be  more  diverse  than  Peter  and  Paul,  and  yet 
neither  disparaged  or  envied  the  other.  II.  Equalizing.  Paul  could  now  meet  on 
equal  terms  the  most  distinguished  men  of  his  day :  Peter  the  premier  apostle, 
James  the  Lord's  brother.  "  One  is  your  Master,  &c."  III.  Hospitable.  Paul, 
once  a  dreaded  persecutor,  now  found  a  welcome  and  a  home  from  the  chief  of  the 
persecuted.  Peter  a  married  man.  Fraternal  intercourse  and  fellowship : — I. 
The  natube  op  Christian  fellowship.  1.  A  fellowship  in  Christ.  2.  A  fellowship 
of  love.  3.  A  fellowship  in  which  individual  interests  are  advanced  by  mutual 
help.  II.  The  advantages  of  Christian  fellowship.  1.  Their  fellowship  would  be 
profitable,  because  each  would  contribute  towards  a  clearer  apprehension  of  Christ  and 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  fellowship  would  be  profitable,  because  it 
would  assure  each  that  the  Christian  life  is  one  of  great  trial.  3.  The  fellowship 
would  be  profitable,  because  each  of  the  apostles  would  6ee  that  the  Christian  life  is  one 
of  certain  comfort.  III.  To  secure  Christian  fellowship  often  requires  personal 
sacrifice.  To  see  Peter  and  the  others,  Paul  undertook  a  considerable  journey,  and 
exposed  himself  on  the  one  hand  to  the  scorn  and  enmity  of  his  former  friends,  and 
on  the  other  to  the  coldness  and  suspicion  of  the  disciples  in  Jerusalem.  Lessons : 
1.  That  the  opportunities  for  Christian  fellowship  are  usually  brief ;  they  should 
therefore,  when  presented,  be  diligently  improved.  Paul  could  only  remain  fifteen 
days  at  Jerusalem :  the  persecutions  of  his  enemies  compelled  him  to  leave.  2. 
Such  opportunities  being  made  the  most  of,  lead  to  glorious  results  in  time  and 
eternity.  Who  can  tell  how  much  the  Christian  world  is  indebted  to  the  harmonious 
fellowship  of  Peter,  James,  and  Paul  at  Jerusalem  ?    (R.  Nicholls.) 

Ver.  19.  Save  James  the  Lord's  brother. — James  appears,  to  whatever  source  we 
may  turn  for  information,  as  the  one  authoritative  ruler,  the  one  undoubted  represen- 
tative of  the  Christian  society.  But  whatever  the  influence  he  exercised,  or  the 
authority  he  maintained,  it  was  due  not  to  his  apostleship,  but  to  those  relatione 
which  are  brought  before  us  by  the  epithets  affixed  to  his  name,  •*  James  the  brother 
of  our  Lord,"  "James  the  Just."  If  we  open  the  cotemporary  Christian  records  it 
is  to  his  decision  (Acts  xv.  13)  that  the  council  of  Jerusalem  bows ;  and  to  him,  tak- 
ing precedence  even  of  Cephas  and  John,  that  Paul  communicates  the  revelation 
that  had  been  entrusted  to  him  (Gal.  ii.  9).  If  we  turn  to  later  traditions  preserved 
in  Hegessipus,  or  in  the  Clementine  Recognitions  and  Homilies,  he  appears  before  uf 
as  the  one  mysterious  bulwark  of  the  chosen  people ;  invested  with  a  priestly  sanc- 
tity before  which  the  pontificate  of  Aaron  fades  into  insignificance — as  the  one  uni- 
versal bishop  of  the  Christian  Church.  If  we  look  to  the  impression  produced  on 
the  mind  of  the  Jewish  people,  we  find  that  he  alone  of  all  the  apostles  has  obtained 
a  place  in  their  national  records,  whether  in  the  simple  narrative  of  Josephus,  or  in 
the  wild  legends  of  the  Talmud.  He  was  emphatically  "  the  Just " ;  the  predictions 
of  the  "  Just  one  "  were  regarded  as  fulfilled  in  his  person ;  the  people  vied  with 
eaoh  other  to  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment ;  after  the  manner  of  Elijah  he  was  re- 
ported in  the  droughts  of  Palestine  to  have  called  down  rain ;  and  with  the  austere 
features,  linen  ephod,  bare  feet,  long  locks  and  unshorn  beard  of  the  Naiarite,  he 
was  believed  to  have  gathered  round  him  the  admiring  populace  to  ask :  "  What  is 
the  gate  of  salvation  ?  "  And  in  that  striking  scene,  when  at  the  close  of  a  long  life 


cha».  I.]  GALATIANS.  61 

be  is  described  as  standing  on  the  front  of  the  temple  and  bearing  witness  to  the 
coming  judgment  of  the  Son  of  man,  it  was  with  a  feeling  of  bitter  disappointment 
that  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  are  represented  as  rushing  upon  him  with  the  cry, 
*'  Woe,  Woe,  the  Just  one  also  is  deceived  " ;  and  in  his  cruel  death,  the  Jewish 
historian,  no  less  than  the  Christian  martyrologist,  saw  the  filling  up  of  the  cup  of 
guilt  which  was  to  hasten  on  the  final  catastrophe  of  the  apostate  nation.  His  chair 
was  preserved  as  a  relio  till  the  fourth  century,  and  the  pillar  which  marked  the 
6pot  where  he  fell  long  remained  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  under  the  precipice 
from  which  he  was  thrown.    (Dean  Stanley.) 

Ver.  20.  I  lie  not.— Truthfulness  ;  its  violation  .-—Untruthfulness  is  something 
more  than  direct  and  deliberate  misstatement,  e.g.,  by  the  practice  of  making 
excuses  for  faults  in  conduct  which  do  not  fairly  admit  of  them;  by  exaggera- 
tion, which  from  carelessness  or  vanity  overstates  the  case ;  by  equivocation, 
in  which  the  words  may  be  true,  but  the  impression  conveyed  false ;  by  dissimula- 
tion, which  by  silence  or  some  assumed  attitude  allows  a  false  impression  of  our 
position  to  go  abroad ;  by  the  breaking  of  promises,  whether  from  inability  to  fulfil 
a  promise  rashly  made,  or  from  neglect  to  fulfil  one  to  which  we  have  the  power  of 
giving  effect ;  and  by  falsehood  in  act,  such  as  is  exemplified  in  schools  in  "  copy- 
ing "  or  •'  prompting."  To  inspire  evena  moderate  love  of  this  virtue, itis  necessary 
to  set  the  highest  value  of  it  before  the  child ;  the  teacher  must  therefore  be  on  the 
alert  to  check  all  its  violations.  Truthfulness  excites  trust: — Talent  is  by  no 
means  rare  in  the  world  ;  nor  is  even  genius.  But  can  talent  be  trusted,  or  even 
genius  ?  Not  unless  based  on  truthfulness.  It  is  this  quality  more  than  any  other 
that  commands  the  esteem  and  respect,  and  secures  the  confidence  of  others.  Truth- 
fulness is  at  the  foundation  of  all  personal  excellence.  (S.  Smiles,  LL.D.)  The 
truth-teller — his  reward  and  work  : — Honour  to  the  truthful  man !  Hail  to  the  people 
with  whom  veracity  prevails  1  Joy  to  mankind,  when  this  daughter  of  lignt  wins 
the  victory  over  falsehood,  and  thrusts  her  back  to  that  kingdom  of  darkness  whence 
she  sprang.  (De  Wette.)  A  solemn  declaration  of  the  truth : — I.  Paul  ASSEVE- 
RATES THE  TRUTH  OF  DEFINITE  STATEMENTS.  II.  HlS  DECLARATION  OF  TRUTH  WAS 
COMPREHENSIVE.  IH.     HlS     TRUTHFULNESS     COMMENDED     ITSELF     TO     THE     JUDG- 

MENT of  men,  and  to  the  approval  of  God.  1.  Men  were  invited  to  witness  it. 
"Behold."  2.  God  was  the  witness  of  the  truth.  It  had  been  spoken,  and  acted 
in  His  sight.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do."  Lessons  :  1.  The  best  of  men  are  sometimes  suspected  of  wrong-doing, 
and  are  liable  to  misrepresentation.  2.  Every  Christian  man  should  speak  and  act 
as  in  the  presence  of  God.  3.  Very  solemn  avowals,  as  oaths,  ought  to  be  used  only 
under  constraint.  (R.  Nicholls .)  Perfect  truthfulness  necessary : — Concave 
mirrors  magnify  the  features  nearest  to  them  into  undue  and  monstrous  propor- 
tions ;  and  in  common  mirrors  that  are  ill  cast,  and  of  uneven  surface,  the  most 
beautiful  face  is  distorted  into  deformity.  So  there  are  many  minds  of  this  descrip- 
tion :  they  distort  or  magnify,  diminish  or  discolour,  almost  every  gospel  truth  which 
they  reflect.  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Galeazius,  a  gentleman  of  great  wealth,  who  suffered 
martyrdom  at  St.  Angelo  in  Italy,  being  much  entreated  by  his  friends  to  recant,  re- 
lied, "  Death  is  much  sweeter  to  me  with  the  testimony  of  truth  than  life  with  its 
least  denial."  Lying  scorned : — The  minister  of  the  seminary  at  Clermont,  France, 
having  been  siezed  at  Autun  by  the  populace,  the  mayor,  who  wished  to  save  him, 
advised  him  not  to  take  the  oath,  but  to  allow  him  to  tell  the  people  that  he  had  taken 
it.  "  I  would  myself  make  known  your  falsehood  to  the  people,"  replied  the  clergy- 
man :  "  it  is  not  permitted  me  to  ransom  my  life  by  a  lie.  The  God  who  prohibits 
my  taking  this  oath  will  not  allow  me  to  make  it  believed  that  I  have  taken  it." 
The  mayor  was  silent,  and  the  minister  was  martyred.    (Foster.) 

Ver.  21.  I  came  Into  the  regions  of  Syria  and  Cllida. — Christian  service : — I. 
Its  sphere.  1.  Among  strangers — «•  Syria."  2.  Friends — "Cilicia."  II.  Its 
nature.  1.  Not  (1)  the  propagation  of  philosophic  dogmas ;  (2)  the  prac- 
tice of  mere  philanthropy ;  (3)  the  gathering  of  a  personal  following.  2.  But 
preaching  the  faith  once  destroyed.  (1)  The  unconverted  destroy  the  faith  by 
opposition  or  neglect — "  He  that  is  not  for  Me,  &c."  (2)  It  is  the  duty  of  the  con- 
verted to  repair  the  injuries  they  have  inflicted  on  the  faith.  HI.  Its  fame. 
Strangers  hear  of  it.  I.  Not  trumpeted  by  self  or  interested  friends.  2.  Not  secured 
by  unworthy  arts.  3.  But  by  words  which,  like  light,  cannot  be  hid.  This  is  true 
popularity,  and  has  been  won  by  Carey,  Judson,  Hunt,  Moffat,  Ellis,  &c.    IV.  Its 


63  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«U».  l. 


result:  God's  glory.  1.  This  was  what  Paul  wished.  2.  His  apostleship  was  not 
of  man  but  of  God.  God,  therefore,  deserved  the  praise.  All  ministerial  and  Church 
gifts  from  Him,  therefore  to  Him   the    glory.  Apostolic    labour$:—I.  Thb 

WOBK    TO    WHICH    PaUIj    WAS    DEVOTED    WAS    PREACHING    THE    FAITH.      The    preaching 

of  the  faith  signified — 1.  The  declaration  of  the  whole  gospel.  He  had  been 
subdued  by  the  gospel,  and  what  he  had  felt  of  the  word  of  life  that  he  declared 
unto  others.  II.  Paul's  laboubs  webe  exebcised  in  different  places.  In  Da- 
mascus and  Jerusalem,  and  now  in  various  parts  of  Cilicia  as  well  as  Syria,  Paul 
preached  the  gospel.  His  message  was  the  same  in  substance  in  every  place,  be- 
cause  1.  All  men  needed  salvation ;  and,  2.  A  salvation  was  provided  for  all. 

IH.  Paul's  labours  webe  extensive  in  theib  influence.  Even  those  who  had 
not  seen  his  face  heard  of  him,  and  of  the  grace  of  God  which  was  manifested  by 
him.  Many  of  them  in  Judaea  who  once  dreaded  his  name  were  now  cheered  and 
blessed,  and  their  faith  was  strengthened  by  what  they  heard  of  him.  IV.  Paul's 
labours  exalted  the  globy  of  God.  "  It  is  of  God's  grace  when,  from  a  perse- 
cutor and  misleader,  a  man  becomes  a  true  teacher  and  confessor.  O  wonder  1  Is 
not  that  as  much  as  if  a  dead  man  were  raised  to  life  r  And  it  serves  to  the  praise 
of  the  Divine  confession  that  the  Lord  does  not  destroy  His  enemies,  but  wins  them 
over,  and  converts  them  to  His  service."  Lessons :  1.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ 
inspires  a  man  to  active  service.  His  love  constrains  every  believer  to  do  something 
in  His  cause.  2.  A  holy  and  zealous  life  is  a  confirmation  of  the  truth.  Hence 
Paul  introduced  the  text  as  an  argument  to  show  that  the  mission  entrusted  to  him 
was  of  God.     (Richard  Nicholls.) 

Ver.  22.  Which  were  In  Christ. — Relation  of  Churches  to  Chri$t : — I.  They  are 
founded  on  Christ  (Matt  xvi.  18;  1  Cor.  i.  2).  II.  They  are  built  by  Christ 
(Eph.  iv.  16).  III.  They  are  the  body  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  23,  iv.  12).  IV.  They 
are  bedeemed  through  Christ  (Acts  xx.  28  ;  Eph.  v.  25).  V.  They  are  consbcbated 
to  Christ  (Eph.  v.  26).  VI.  They  will  be  globified  in  Christ  (Eph.  v.  27).  We 
are  reminded  of  the  beautiful  symbol  of  the  prophet,  as  he  saw  in  the  Messianio 
age  flocks  of  doves,  varied  it  may  be  in  their  plumage,  speeding  with  fleet  wings 
to  the  windows  of  the  true  ark,  safe  in  Christ  "  from  the  windy  storm  and  tem- 
pest "  (Isa.  ix.  8) ;  or  the  still  more  apposite  figure  employed  by  the  Redeemer 
Himself  when  not  only  does  He  speak  of  the  individual  members  of  His  flock, 
calling  His  own  separate  sheep  by  name,  and  one  by  one  leading  them  ont ;  but 
also  refers  to  them  in  the  aggregate.  They  constitute,  though  with  divers  folds 
and  many  under-shepherds,  one  great  flock — reposing  in  green  pastures,  and  by 
"  the  waters  of  comfort "  under  Himself,  the  ohief  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls. 
(J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  But  they  had  heard. — True  fame: — True  glory  takes  root  and 
spreads !  All  false  pretences,  like  perishing  flowers,  fall  to  the  ground :  nor 
can  any  counterfeit  last  long.  (Cicero.)  The  widening  success  of  missionary 
toil : — The  immediate  influence  of  the  labours  of  a  missionary  will,  in  all  proba- 
bility, be  less  than  he  anticipates :  he  will  perhaps  go  down  to  the  grave  as  one 
disappointed  of  his  hope.  But,  like  Abraham,  he  must  against  hope  believe 
in  hope.  He  has  planted  a  seed,  which  will  push  itself  forth  on  all  sides. 
He  has  excited  a  spark,  which  will  raise  a  flame  through  a  kingdom.  The 
flame  once  excited  shall  spread  from  breast  to  breast,  from  family  to  family, 
from  village  to  village ;  in  time  from  kingdoms  to  empires,  and  at  length  from 
empires  to  continents.  But  the  flame  must  first  be  lighted  from  the  fire  that  burns 
on  the  altar  of  God.  How  will  the  faithful  missionary  rejoice  when  by  and  by  he 
shall  meet  not  a  straggling  individual  or  two  whom  he  has  turned  to  God,  but 
perhaps  a  nation  of  converts  to  whom  he  had  been  the  original  means  of  bringing 
salvation.  (Professor  Farish.)  Persecutor  and  preacher : — Paul  had  the  spirit  of 
his  ancestor,  who  sought  to  slay  the  Gibeonites  in  his  zeal  for  the  children  of 
Israel ;  and  when  he  was  converted,  he  retained  not  only  the  recollection  of 
Stephen's  death,  but  of  the  multiplied  murders  which  he  had  ordered  Of  en- 
couraged, when,  during  the  wild  anarchy  of  Caligula's  reign,  he  obtained  authority 
from  the  chief  priests  to  bind  and  slay.  His  resolution  and  strength  of  purpose 
were  the  traits  of  his  youth,  his  manhood,  and  his  age.  Thus  when  the  real  work 
of  Paul  was  understood  the  old  fear  of  him  vanished,  and  those  who  knew  of  him 
only  by  that  work  glorified  God  in  him.  Thus  early  in  his  career  was  the  blessing 
of  Jacob  fulfilled  in  the  greatest  of  the  desoendents  of  his  youngest  son — "Benjamin 


sou*,  l]  GALATIANS.  6& 

■hall  devour  in  the  morning  m  a  ravenous  wolf,  and  in  the  evening  give  nurture." 
(Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Conversion  reverses  men's  lives: — There  was  a  man,  while 
Messrs.  Moody  and  Sankey  were  in  London,  who  got  out  a  little  paper  called  "  The 
Moody  and  Sankey  Humbug."  He  used  to  have  it  to  sell  to  the  people  coming 
into  the  meeting.  After  he  had  sold  a  great  many  thousand  copies  of  that  num- 
ber, he  wanted  to  get  out  another  number ;  so  he  went  into  the  meeting  to  get 
something  to  put  into  the  paper ;  but  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present,  and  the 
arrow  of  conviction  went  down  deep  into  his  heart.  He  went  out,  not  to  write  a 
paper,  but  to  destroy  his  paper  that  he  had  written,  and  to  tell  what  the  Holy 
Ghost  had  done  for  him.  {Nye.)  The  scoffer  turned  preacher: — One  evening  a 
young  man  who  had  been  educated  for  a  barrister  was  seated  with  some  gay  com- 
panions in  a  London  tavern,  when  his  companions,  knowing  he  was  a  clever 
mimic,  requested  him  to  go  and  hear  Mr.  Wesley  preach,  and  then  come  and 
mimic  the  whole  affair  for  their  amusement.  He  went.  The  text,  "  Prepare  to 
meet  thy  God,"  frightened  him  like  a  bursting  shell,  and  conviction  deepened 
during  the  sermon.  On  his  return  to  his  friends  they  inquired,  "  Well,  have  you 
taken  him  off  ?  "  He  replied,  "  No,  gentlemen ;  but  he  has  taken  me  off."  He 
left  his  companions,  gave  his  heart  to  God,  and  became  one  of  Mr.  Wesley's 
most  useful  preachers.  Hard  to  forgive  self : — There  are  some  sins  which, 
even  if  forgiven  by  others,  cannot  easily  be  pardoned  by  the  penitent  mind.  Dr. 
Bates  tells  us  that  tbe  excellent  Richard  Baxter  cherished  such  self-condem- 
nation on  account  of  his  own  sinfulness,  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  saying, 
"I  can  more  easily  believe  that  God  will  forgive  me,  than  that  I  ean  forgive 
myself."  Sin  promises  much  in  the  outset,  but  dreadfully  disappoints  in  the 
issue.  "What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed?" 
On  the  other  hand,  it  becomes  an  irrefragable  argument  in  favour  of  an  early  de- 
votedness  to  the  religious  life,  that  whilst  it  bestows  infinite  blessings  hereafter, 
it  saves  from  incalculable  misery  here  ;  and  is  at  once  favourable  to  a  grateful 
retrospect  of  the  past,  and  a  happy  anticipation  of  the  future.  (The  Evangelist.) 
Observe— L  A  man's  character  goes  before  him.  II.  Greatly  influences  the  recep- 
tion he  meets  with.  III.  Should  be  diligently  taken  care  of.  (J.  Lyth.)  Paul— 
I.  The  persecutor — full  of  pride — false  zeal — bitterness— destroying  the  faith.  H. 
The  preacher — full  of  humility— devotedness — love — glorying  in  the  crucified 
Jesus.  (Ibid.)  The  conversion  of  St.  Paul: — As  Gentiles  by  birth,  we  have 
peculiar  interest  in  all  that  relates  to  St.  Paul,  not  only  in  his  conversion,  as  on 
this  day  commemorated  by  the  Church,  but  generally,  as  sinners,  we  may  often 
recur  to  this  conversion,  and  derive  from  it  instruction  and  encouragement.  If 
there  were  such  longsuffering  on  the  part  of  the  Bedeemer,  that  He  bore  with  a 
man  who  thirsted  for  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  in  place  of  visiting  him  with 
vengeance,  constrained  him  by  His  grace  to  accept  salvation  through  His  death ; 
who  can  ever  have  right  to  think  his  own  case  hopeless,  and  suppose  himself  beyond 
the  reach  of  forgiveness  1  Now,  we  know  of  St.  Paul  that  he  sinned  in  ignorance, 
and  that  whilst  persecuting  the  Church  of  God,  and  endeavouring  to  exterminate 
Christianity,  he  evidently  thought  that  he  was  doing  God  service.  He  had  been 
educated  in  the  strictest  forms  of  the  Jewish  religion ;  and  felt  a  zeal  for  the  law 
of  Moses,  whose  authority  he  thought  attacked  by  the  followers  of  Jesus  ;  and  he 
regarded  it  as  a  most  solemn  duty  to  strive  by  every  means  to  eradicate  the 
rising  superstition.  Hence,  it  becomes  a  grave  question  how  far  this  ignorance 
was  an  excuse  for  his  crime — how  far,  that  is,  it  can  be  taken  as  a  palliation  of 
doing  wrong  that  a  man  suppose  himself  doing  right.  We  certainly  cannot  admit 
that  St.  Paul  was  not  to  blame,  because  he  all  along  obeyed  the  dictates  of  his 
conscience.  It  is  clear  that  the  apostle  did  not  regard  himself  as,  on  this  account, 
innocent,  for  he  speaks  of  himself  in  the  days  of  his  unbelief,  in  terms  which 
strongly  mark  a  sense  of  the  guiltiness  of  his  conduct.  St.  Paul  was  answerable 
for  cherishing  such  a  blind  and  bigoted  attachment  to  the  law  as  prevented  hia 
admitting  the  pretensions  of  the  gospel.  He  was  answerable  for  that  misguided 
and  unosJculating  zeal  which  allowed  him  not  to  see  that  the  law  was  but  fulfilled, 
in  plaee  of  being  destroyed,  by  the  gospel.  He  was  answerable  for  the  rejection 
of  all  the  evidence  from  miracle  and  prophecy,  which  we  know  to  have  been  suf- 
ficient, and  by  which,  therefore,  he  ought  to  have  been  convinced.  We  think  it  of 
great  importance  that  men  should  rightly  understand  that  they  are  to  the  full 
aa  answerable  for  their  principles  as  for  their  practices — for  the  rule  of  conduct 
adopted  as  well  as  for  their  adherence  to  it  when  onoe  it  has  been  adopted.  For 
we  often  hear  of  men  acting  up  to  their  belief,  and  the  assertion  is  made  as  oon- 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  CHAP,  fc 

veying  the  opinion  that  a  man  is  responsible  for  his  conduct,  but  not  for  his  creed. 
And  what  is  done  in  ignorance  is  represented  as  necessarily  done  excusably  ;  and 
thus  the  simple  principle  is  overlooked,  that  there  may  be  a  sin  of  the  understand- 
ing as  well  as  a  sin  of  the  flesh,  and  that  it  may  be  just  as  easy  to  offend  by  closing 
the  mind  against  truth,  as  by  putting  forth  the  hand  to  do  wrong.  All  that  can 
be  said  is  just  this — If  a  man  sin  in  ignorance,  obeying  the  dictates  of  a  misin- 
formed conscience,  and  if  he  die  in  his  ignorance,  and  therefore  without  repentance, 
we  have  no  rigbt  to  think  he  will  be  pardoned  at  the  judgment,  unless  his  ignorance 
were  unavoidable,  so  that  it  could  not  have  been  removed  by  any  carefulness  of 
his  own.  St.  Paul  indeed  obtained  meroy,  but  the  form  which  mercy  took  was 
not  immediately  that  of  full  forgiveness,  but  that  of  greater  instruction,  so  that 
the  persecutor  might  retract  his  error  and  turn  his  zeal  to  the  right  channel.  Let 
us  now  consider  the  conversion  of  St.  Paul  as  furnishing  evidence  to  the  truth  of 
Christianity.  You  will  all  admit  that  the  change  which  had  been  made  in  Saul 
was  of  the  most  extraordinary  kind,  and  not  to  be  accounted  for  by  any  of  those 
sudden  transitions  which  one  sometimes  sees  in  unstable  and  vacillating  charac- 
ters. He  was  a  man  whose  whole  prejudices,  feelings,  and  interests  were  enlisted 
against  Christianity.  He  could  become  a  Christian  only  by  the  sacrifice  of  posi- 
tion, of  property,  and  perhaps  even  of  life.  He  must  have  thought  Christianity 
attested  by  supernatural  evidence,  whether  that  evidence  were  real,  or  whether  it 
was  the  product  of  his  own  excited  feelings.  And,  accordingly,  the  scriptural 
account  assigns  a  miraculous  manifestation  as  the  cause  of  Saul's  conversion.  The 
only  man  who  would  be  likely  to  imagine  a  miracle  on  the  side  of  Christianity 
would  be  a  man  pre-disposed  to  that  side — anxious  to  embrace  the  religion  if  he 
can  but  prove  it  true.  Such  a  man  might  possibly  take  that  for  miraculous  which 
was  only  natural,  and  be  persuaded  by  certain  sounds  that  he  was  holding  a  dia- 
logue, though  he  himself  were  the  only  speaker.  But  that  a  man  in  Saul's  circum- 
stances should  have  done  this — indeed,  it  seems  to  us  that  it  would  have  been  ft 
greater  miracle  than  that  which  is  said  to  have  overcome  the  apostle.  Besides,  how 
could  St.  Paul  have  been  altogether  deceived  ?  Perhaps  he  only  fancied  the  great 
light ;  perhaps  he  only  fancied  the  voice  ;  but  could  he  fancy  his  own  blindness  ? 
He  must  have  been  sure  that  he  could  not  see.  This  was  not  a  point  upon  which  he 
could  deceive  himself.  And  whence  came  the  blindness  t  If  yon  say  from  the 
great  light,  then  it  is  almost  saying  that  the  light  was  supernatural ;  and,  there- 
fore, there  was  miracle.  Or,  if  you  think  the  apostle  might  have  been  struck 
blind  by  a  common  flash  of  lightning,  what  shall  be  said  of  the  recovery  of  sight  T 
Is  this,  also,  natural  ?  You  may  think  it  was.  Observe  what  pains  are  taken  to 
prove  the  recovery  miraculous.  St.  Paul  sees,  in  a  vision,  a  man  named  Ananias 
coming  in  and  putting  his  hands  on  him  that  he  might  receive  his  sight.  A  cor- 
responding vision  is  granted  to  this  Ananias.  He  is  sent  to  visit  Paul,  and  lay  hit 
hands  on  him  that  his  blindness  may  be  removed.  And  how  came  the  two  visions 
to  tally  with  such  precision  ?  Ananias,  left  to  himself,  would  never  have  thought 
of  visiting  Paul.  The  disciple  would  not  have  put  himself  in  the  hands  of  the  per- 
secutor ;  and  so  indisposed  was  he  to  go,  that,  even  when  directed  by  Ood,  he 
remonstrated  on  the  danger.  We  are  sure,  therefore,  that  Ananias  really  thought 
he  saw  a  vision ;  and  we  may  be  equally  sure  that  St.  Paul  really  thought  he  saw  * 
vision.  But  then  men  may  easily  fanoy  visions,  and  little  dependence  is  to  be 
placed  on  dreams.  Admitted.  But  how  will  you  account  for  the  preoise  coinci- 
dence between  the  visions  ?  for  the  thorough  accuracy  with  which  they  fitted  into 
each  other  ?  Will  you  call  this  accident  ?  Yon  may  account  for  anything  by  such 
reasoning ;  but  candid  men  will  not  go  along  with  you  in  such  theories  as  these. 
Paul's  vision  by  itself  might  have  proved  nothing.  Ananias'  vision  by  itself  might 
have  proved  nothing.  But  when  the  two  are  precisely  coincident,  the  correspon- 
dence demands  authority  for  each.  It  is  too  surprising  to  be  referred  to  accident, 
and  if  not  to  accident,  it  must  be  referred  to  Divine  ordering ;  so  that  we  unhesitat- 
ingly maintain  the  circumstances  of  the  whole  transaction  to  have  been  such,  that 
Saul,  who  certainly  could  have  had  no  interest  in  deceiving  himself,  could  not  him- 
self have  been  deceived.  And,  this  being  established,  we  can  point  to  the  conversion 
of  this  apostle  as  irrefragable  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  The  brightness 
Mrhich  struck  down  Saul  of  Tarsus  lights  up  the  moral  firmament  of  every  after  genera- 
tion. The  voice  by  which  he  was  arrested  sends  its  echoes  to  the  remotest  lands  and 
the  remotest  times.  Yea,  even  those  "  unto  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come," 
have  derived  their  religion  through  the  preaching  of  Paul,  and  may  prove  it* 
divinity  by  his  conversion.    These,  my  brethren,  are  the  chief  points  of  view  undet 


obap.  i.]  GALATIAN8.  65 

which  it  is  most  interesting  and  instructive,  to  survey  that  great  event  which  the 
Church  this  day  commemorates.  It  may  indeed  moreover  be,  that  the  whole 
history  we  have  been  reviewing  is  typical,  for  it  has  been  assumed  by  many  learned 
men  that  St.  Paul  was  throughout  a  type  of  the  Jewish  nation — a  type  in  his 
opposition — a  type  in  his  conversion — a  type  in  his  preaching  Christianity.  You 
may  easily  trace  the  types  if  you  remember  that  the  Jews,  after  centuries  of  fierce 
and  unrelenting  hostility  to  Christianity,  had  been  banished  from  the  land  of  their 
fathers,  and  that  after  their  conversion  to  the  faith  of  Jesus,  they  became  preachers 
to  the  heathen,  and  carried  Christianity  to  the  earth's  remotest  families.  We 
rather  wish  to  guard  you  against  an  opinion,  which  has  been  often  entertained  and 
supported  by  suoh  instances  as  that  of  St.  Paul.  The  opinion  is  that  if  conversion 
be  genuine,  its  period  must  be  strongly  marked,  so  that  a  man  shall  be  able  to  fix 
the  precise  time  of  its  occurrence,  and  the  exact  process  by  which  it  was  wrought. 
Now  we  are  sure  that  a  rule  such  as  this  would  decide  against  the  genuineness  of 
the  religion  of  a  great  body  of  professing  Christians.  The  operations  of  God's 
Spirit  are  various.  To  profess  to  reduce  them  under  a  single  description  were  to 
betray  ignorance  of  their  nature  and  effect.  If  the  renovating  process  be  in  some 
eases  rapid  and  vehement,  in  others  it  is  gradual  and  silent,  and  is  not  to  be  dis- 
covered except  by  its  results.  One  man  may  be  converted  by  a  sudden  flash  from 
heaven,  and  another  through  successive  applications  of  the  common  means  of  grace. 
We  know  of  no  proof  of  conversion  except  the  fruits  by  which  it  will  be  followed. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  How  to  welcome  new  converts : — How  often,  too,  when  some  one 
who  has  been  prominently  connected  with  a  denomination  that  is  not  generally 
considered  evangelical  comes  out  and  declares  himself  for  that  which  is  counted 
orthodox,  he  is  met  with  freezing  suspicion,  and  kept  at  a  distance  by  the  picket- 
guard  that  is  always  peering  out  for  spies ;  or  if  some,  like  Barnabas,  should  put 
themselves  beside  him,  they  will  be  suspected  along  with  him,  and  draw  down  upon 
themselves  abundant  expostulation.  "  Wait,"  say  these  cautious  ones,  "  until  he 
has  been  duly  quarantined;  let  him  prove  his  steadfastness,  and  then  we  will 
receive  him  ;"  not  seeing  that  their  cold  reserve  is  just  the  thing  most  calculated  to 
send  him  back.  So,  again,  in  dealing  with  young  converts,  how  slow  some  are  to 
believe  in  the  thoroughness  and  genuineness  of  God's  own  work.  It  was  not  so 
with  Barnabas,  and  it  ought  not  to  be  so  with  us.  We  knew  a  good  Christian  lady 
who  went  to  her  pastor  for  the  addresses  of  those  who  were  received  from  time  to 
time  into  the  Church,  that  she  might  personally  call  upon  them,  and  congratulate 
them  on  the  stand  which  they  had  made.  There  was  a  deaconess  without  the 
name  ! — a  true  daughter  of  consolation  I  and  after  her  visits  the  friends  to  whom 
she  had  spoken  began  to  discover  that  there  was  more  in  Church  fellowship  than 
the  mere  sitting  down  together  at  the  communion-table.  If  there  were  more  like 
her  in  all  our  Churches,  these  spiritual  societies  would  become  more  like  "  house- 
holds of  the  faith,"  and  the  coming  in  of  each  new  member  would  create  a  joy  like 
that  which  hails  the  advent  of  anew-born  babe  into  every  rightly-constitutei  home. 
Where  are  ye,  oh  ye  Barnabases?  Look  around,  and  see  if  there  be  not  field 
enough  to-night  for  beginning  operations.    ( W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.    And  they  glorified  God  In  me. — God's  glory  in  the  soul : — I.  In  the  act 

or  conversion  God  is  glorified.  It  is  strange  how  many  misapplications  of  this 
word  "  conversion  "  prevail  in  the  world  and  the  Churches.  It  is  used  to  express 
the  change  from  one  civilization  to  another ;  the  Chinaman  is  converted  when  he 
becomes  an  American.  It  is  employed  to  tell  the  story  of  a  change  of  philosophical 
thought,  when  one  begins  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  spirits  after  having  all  his 
days  supposed  that  God  had  nothing  in  this  universe  like  unto  Himself,  but  all  wa? 
dead,  inert  matter.  It  is  introduced,  again,  as  the  explanation  of  a  person's  change 
of  ecclesiastical  relations.  One  passes  from  your  church  into  the  church  opposite 
to  yours,  and  he  is  "converted,"  according  to  the  usage  of  many.  He  has  changed 
the  mere  form  of  his  profession,  whilst  he  holds  to  the  same  great  essential  truths. 
Yet  not  one  nor  all  of  these  are  here  meant  by  the  words  in  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
It  tells  the  story  of  a  Divine  impulse  upon  our  affections,  to  turn  them  from  the 
things  they  have  loved  before  ;  upon  our  will,  to  entirely  change  the  purposes  and 
desires  which  have  prevailed  before ;  upon  our  life,  to  make  perfect  the  contrast  of 
that  it  had  been  theretofore.  It  is  the  impulse  of  God  upon  man,  turning  him 
away  from  the  things  that  tempt  him  further  from  God  unto  the  things  that 
attract  him  into  nearer  associations  and  relationship.  And  every  part  of  the  act 
of  conversion  is  Divine.    This  act  of  conversion  includes  several  facts.    1.  The 

5 


«•  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

sense  of  estrangement  from  God  is  its  first  feature.  Now  70a  will  admit  that  this 
is  not  a  common  experience  among  men.  God  produces  this  sense  of  estrange- 
ment. All  conversions  begin  here,  and  no  power  bat  that  which  is  Divine  can 
make  a  man  realize  that  great  truth.  2.  Instantly  the  desire  for  reconciliation 
springs  up  in  the  heart  of  him  whom  God  is  converting.  This  has  God  wrought. 
No  human  being  can  pump  up  such  a  desire  out  of  his  estranged  heart.  It  is  like 
the  spring  in  the  soil  which  God  feeds  from  the  clouds — it  would  run  dry  if  He  did 
not  give  the  early  and  the  latter  rain  and  the  morning  and  the  evening  dew.  3. 
Now  come3  the  determination  to  return.  It  may  have  occupied  only  minutes,  but 
what  a  journey  it  is  of  soul !  II.  But  I  want  to  speak,  secondly,  of  the  influence 
of  conversion.  This  is  the  glory  of  God.  Both  our  conscious  and  unconscious 
influence  as  converted  men  and  women  is  continually  crying,  "Let  God  be 
glorified."  1.  In  this  influence  of  a  converted  soul,  the  first  fact  is  the  withdrawal 
from  dishonouring  associations.  M  Conversion  to  God,"  says  one  of  the  old  seven- 
teenth century  divines,  "  begins  with  aversion  from  sin."  2.  A  second  fact  in  this 
influence  is  the  attachment  of  one's  self  to  God's  people.  "  Let  God  be  glorified," 
is  the  desire  and  the  expression  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  ministry  to  which  this 
influence  impels  him.  The  convert  seeks  his  brother  to  save  him.  III.  Now, 
lastly,  I  want  to  point  out  some  aspects  of  God's  glory  that  converted  lives  do 
testify.  God  does  it  all,  and  it  takes  all  that  there  is  in  God  to  do  it.  It  is  no 
light  work.  Wherever  you  see  a  converted  man,  brother,  there  has  been  an 
Omnipresent  God,  there  has  been  an  Omniscient  God,  tbere  has  been  the  exercise 
of  the  omnipotence  of  God.  Every  natural  perfection  of  God  is  engaged  in  the 
conversion  of  a  soul.  Now,  it  is  very  difficult  to  conceive  of  God  in  our  times  of 
thought,  still  less  in  our  times  of  devotion.  The  eye  is  made  for  taking  in  the 
things  of  beauty  in  this  world ;  the  reason  is  adapted  to  comprehend  principles- 
But  the  eye  cannot  look  at  the  full  meridian  sun,  and  the  reason  is  blinded  when 
it  searches  the  depths  of  God's  glory.  Yet,  when  He  manifests  Himself  in  the 
works  of  His  hands ;  when  He  brings  the  soul  out  of  darkness  into  light ;  when 
He  transforms  a  backsliding  infidel  into  a  true  and  accepted  and  faithful  child  of 
His ;  we  testify,  M  God  has  been  here."  The  Arab  was  asked  how  he  knew  that 
there  was  a  God ;  and  he  answered,  "  When  I  look  out  of  my  door  in  the  morning, 
how  do  I  know  it  was  a  man,  and  not  a  camel,  that  passed  my  tent  ?  "  We  know 
Him  from  the  marks  of  His  presence.  A  converted  soul  glorifies  all  the  natural 
perfections  of  God.  The  moral  attributes  are  equally  engaged  in  a  soul's  conver- 
sion. Justice,  mercy,  love,  fidelity,  holiness ;  all  these  are  rays  of  His  glory.  Take 
that  prism,  to-morrow,  and  let  the  sun  shine  through  it,  and  you  will  see  marvels. 
The  white,  pure  light  is  divided  into  many  colours.  Even  so  this  gospel  of  God's 
grace  analyzes  the  glory  of  God,  and  shows  how  justice  and  mercy  have  met 
together ;  how  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other.  At  Bethlehem  I 
see  God  condescending ;  in  Galilee  I  see  God  obeying ;  in  Gethsemane  I  see  God 
struggling  and  agonizing  ;  on  Golgotha  I  see  God  bowing  his  head  in  the  substitu- 
tion for  man's  sin.  What  glorious  rays  of  beauty !  But  when,  with  Peter  and 
James  and  John,  we  stand  on  Mount  Hermon  to  view  a  transfigured  Christ,  whose 
face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  we  behold  the  glory  of  God  in  marvellous  combination. 
Each  ray  may  be  contemplated  in  itself,  but  all  blend  in  the  glory  of  God  a  Saviour. 
All  that  each  event  of  life  testifies  is  there,  and  far,  far  more  than  the  mind  of  man 
can  ever  conceive.  But  then,  more  than  that,  the  covenant  relations  of  God  are 
glorified.  The  converted  man  finds  a  Father — meets  a  Saviour — is  welcomed  by  a 
Friend.  Now,  it  is  sometimes  the  experience  of  children  in  this  world,  who  never 
go  away  from  home,  that  they  find  their  parents  in  a  new  and  better  sense  than 
they  had  ever  met  them  before.  If  they  have  doubted  them,  if  they  have  been  dis- 
obedient to  them,  if  they  have  suspected  them,  and  if,  at  length,  the  dark  cloud 
between  child  and  parent  passes  away,  the  little  one  comes  with  new  confidence  to 
bury  his  head  in  his  father's  bosom,  or  on  his  mother's  neck,  to  say,  "  I  never 
knew  you  until  now ;  I  never  understood  you  till  now.  The  love  has  been  deep 
down  in  my  heart,  but  now  I  have  found  my  father,  I  know  the  one  with  whom  I 
have  so  long  been  living."  Even  so  is  it  here,  dear  friends.  The  converted  man 
finds  the  fatherhood  of  God,  who  has  been  his  father  in  Jesus  Christ,  ever  since 
he  was  born ;  realizes  the  Saviourhood  of  God,  who  bought  him  with  a  price  before 
his  first  returnings  were  ever  experienced ;  and  rests  in  the  friendship  of  God,  who 
is  his  abiding,  faithful  supporter  and  Btrength.  This  is  my  subject — the  glory  of 
God  in  the  conversion  of  a  soul.  Now,  dear  brother,  let  us  bring  it  down  to  one 
tingle  point.  Has  any  one  glorified  God  on  your  behalf  f  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)      God't 


chap.  I.]  GALATIANS.  67 

glory  incapable  of  addition : — The  God  whose  glory  is  in  the  heavens,  revealed  in 
the  history  of  earth,  and  declared  by  the  experience  of  every  sincere  and  trusting 
aoul,  has  perfections  impossible  of  addition  as  they  are  evasive  of  all  analysis. 
He  is  the  standard  of  holiness,  the  source  of  life,  the  saviour  from  wrong.  His 
glory  belongeth  unto  Him ;  He  will  not  give  it  to  another ;  yet  every  soul,  every 
fife,  every  home,  every  Church,  dwelling  in  the  brightness  of  the  beauty  of  God, 
declares,  extends,  exalts  His  glory.  Before  the  eye  and  in  the  ear  of  rational  crea- 
tures, theology  cannot  make  God  either  more  or  less  than  He  is.  The  panegyric 
does  not  add  one  virtue  to  the  person  about  whom  it  is  told ;  the  picture  that  is 
true  cannot  make  the  portrait  more  beautiful  than  the  face;  the  window,  trans- 
lucent, does  not  create,  but  lets  in,  the  light;  even  so  our  relation  to  God  in  His 
glory.  It  belongs  unto  us  to  declare — it  does  not  belong  unto  us  either  to  diminish 
or  increase  the  majesty  of  God.  All  our  consecration  cannot  add  one  ray,  all  our 
soorning  cannot  detract  aught  from  Him.  (Ibid.)  They  glorified  God  in  me : — 
I.  The  manifestation  op  God  in  man.  God  is  manifested — 1.  In  nature.  2.  But 
this  is  surpassed  by  His  manifestation  in  man.  (1)  Physically;  (2)  mentally;  (3) 
morally ;  and  because  this  latter  is  based  on  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ-^— 
(o)  in  the  New  Testament ;  (b)  in  the  believer ;  (c)  in  ministerial  gifts  and  fruit. 
H.  Thb  glorification  of  God  for  this  manifestation.  In  the  way  of — 1.  Grati- 
tude. 2.  Imitation.  3.  Trust  that  God  will  maintain  the  succession.  (J.  Stough~ 
ton,  D.D.)  He  does  not  say  they  marvelled  at  me,  they  praised  me,  they  were 
struck  with  admiration  of  me,  but  they  glorified  God  in  me.  (Ghrysostom.} 
They  praised  God,  and  took  courage  to  believe  the  more  in  the  mercy  of  God  for 
that  He  had  mercy  on  such  a  great  sinner  as  he.  •*  In  me."  They  wondered  that 
grace  should  be  so  rich  as  to  take  hold  of  such  a  wretch  as  I  was,  and  for  my  sake 
believed  in  Christ  the  more.  (Bunyan.)  Christ  glorified  in  PauVs  conversion : — 
I  am  sure  there  was  never  a  man  who  had  more  hurtful  thoughts  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  Jesus  Christ,  than  Paul  had,  for  he  could  not  endure  to  hear  of  His  name,  nor 
to  hear  of  any  that  professed  His  name,  but  persecuted  them  all  most  cruelly.  And 
yet  our  Lord,  He  did  no  more  but  speak  a  word  or  two  to  him,  and  with  these  same 
few  words  He  cast  him  off  his  high  horse,  whereupon  he  rode  so  triumphantly, 
and  lays  him  down  upon  his  back  and  under  his  feet,  to  make  him  say,  "  Lord, 
what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  That  is  a  cast  of  the  power  of  our  Lord's  right 
arm.  (S.  Rutlierford.)  Divine  grace  seen  in  the  life: — Can  I  see  the  dew  of-' 
heaven  as  it  falls  on  a  summer  evening  ?  I  cannot.  It  comes  down  softly  and 
gently,  noiselessly  and  imperceptibly.  But  when  I  go  forth  in  the  morning,  after 
a  cloudless  night,  and  see  every  leaf  sparkling  with  moisture,  and  feel  every  blade 
of  grass  damp  and  wet,  I  say  at  once,  "  There  has  been  a  dew."  Just  so  it  is  with 
the  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul.  (Bishop  Byle.)  Tliat  the  conversion  of  an 
immortal  soul  is  cause  of  great  joy  and  thanksgiving  to  the  God  of  grace : — I.  This 
will  appear  if  we  consider  the  nature  of  the  human  soul,  and  the  misery  from 
which  it  is  rescued.  II.  If  we  contemplate  the  felicity  to  which  a  saved  soul  ie 
exalted.  IH.  It  will  further  appear  if  we  consider  the  price  paid  for  the  salvation 
of  the  soul.  IV.  This  is  evinced  by  the  perfect  nature  of  salvation.  (The  Pulpit.) 
They  glorified  God  in— I.  The  subjection  of  the  persecutor.  H.  The  conversion  of 
the  sinner.  HI.  The  zeal  and  success  of  the  preacher.  IV.  The  dignity  of  his 
office.  (J.Lyth.)  God  glorified  in  Paul: — I.  In  his  conversion— a  persecutor 
and  a  Pharisee — yet  called  by  special  grace  (vers.  13-15).  II.  In  his  call  to  the 
ministry — Divinely  qualified  (ver.  16) — and  instructed  (vers.  11, 12, 17).  HI.  In  his 
labours — incessant — widely  distributed — unsupported  by  human  influence — yet 
abundant   to   the    glory  of  God.     (Ibid.)  God  glorified  in  Christians: — It 

should  ever  be  the  end  of  the  Christian  man,  not  only  to  promote  the  glory  of  God 
by  his  works,  but  to  illustrate  the  glory  of  God  in  his  character;  in  this,  as  in 
nothing  else,  are  the  goodness  and  power  of  God  Been  most  strikingly.  An 
architect  rears  a  building.  It  is  admired  for  its  beauty  in  detail,  and  its  grandeur 
as  a  whole ;  but  the  praise  belongs  not  to  the  building,  but  to  the  builder.  A  tutor 
takes  a  youth  under  his  care,  and  sends  him  forth  to  attain  eminence  and  distinc- 
tion in  the  early  struggles  and  in  the  highest  positions  of  life,  but  the  tutor  is 
glorified  in  the  pupil.  So  the  creation  is  the  result  of  the  Almighty  hand,  and  He 
is  glorified  in  it  Impressions  of  His  glory  are  left  upon  the  largest  and  upon  the 
least;  upon  the  stars  in  their  courses  discovered  to  the  telescope;  and  on  the 
minutest  speoimens  of  organized  life  which  the  microsoope  opens  to  our  startled 
eye.  And  shall  my  God  be  less  glorified  in  the  new  creation  than  He  is  in  the  old  r 
Shall  He  not  be  glorified  by  the  humblest  Christian,  just  as  He  was  glorified  by  the 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ol 

great  apostle  ?  All  stars  shine  by  His  will,  and  one  star  differs  from  another  star 
in  glory,  for  this  is  His  will ;  but  each  renders  to  Him  its  measure  of  praise.  God, 
who  is  glorified  in  Saul  of  Tarsus  pre-eminently,  muBt  be  glorified  in  each  of  us,  as 
Christians,  according  to  our  position  and  opportunity.  If  we  have  a  Christian's 
hope,  it  is  to  the  glory  of  His  name ;  if  we  have  a  Christian's  life,  it  is  to  the 
glory  of  His  cross ;  if  we  have  performed  a  duty,  it  is  to  the  glory  of  His  grace ; 
if  we  have  borne  a  trial,  it  is  to  the  glory  of  His  support;  if  we  have  overcome  a 
sinful  habit,  or  the  lust  which  led  to  it,  it  is  to  the  glory  of  His  power  which  gav» 
us  self-mastery.    (C.  J.  P.  Eyre,  MJL.) 


CHAPTEB    H. 

Ver.  I.  I  went  trp  to  Jerusalem.— The  journey  to  Jerusalem : — I.  Which  1    The 

third  (Acts  xv.  2),  the  first  being  that  of  the  previous  chapter  (Acts  ix.  261,  the 
second  that  of  Acts  xi.  30,  both  the  purpose  and  time  of  which  forbid  its  being 
confounded  with  them.  Both  Gal.  ii.  and  Acts  xv.  agree  in  time,  geography, 
persons,  intent,  and  subsequent  events.  II.  When  ?  Fourteen  years  after,  when 
by  experiences,  trials,  and  achievements,  Paul  had  earned  the  right  to  take  the 
position  he  had  assumed.  Let  young  Christians  learn  from  this  to  wait  until 
experience  and  service  give  them  the  right  to  assert  their  equality  with  their  elders. 
III.  What  foe  ?  To  fight  and  win  the  battle  of  Christian  liberty,  equality,  and 
fraternity.  IV.  With  whom?  Titus,  a  representative  of  the  cause  he  was 
fighting ;  Barnabas,  an  unexceptionable  witness  of  the  justice  of  his  cause.  The 
reason  of  the  visit : — Not  to  submit,  as  to  a  supreme  tribunal,  the  question  as 
to  whether  he  might  be  permitted  to  go  on  receiving  uncircumcised  Gentiles  into 
the  Church :  the  idea  of  a  human  hierarchy  to  regulate  the  faith  of  some  by  that 
of  others  was  altogether  alien  to  his  spirit.  The  fact  is  he  had  no  fear  whatever  of 
being  gainsaid  by  the  heads  of  the  mother  Church.  Had  it  been  otherwise  he 
would  certainly  not  have  taken  a  course  which  in  such  a  case  could  not  but  make 
the  rupture  open  and  the  evil  incurable.  The  event  proved  that  Paul  was  not 
mistaken  in  the  hope  that  his  colleagues  would  stand  by  him ;  and  by  their  timely 
help  Paul's  fear  was  removed  that  the  labour  he  had  spent  in  founding  a  truly 
universal  Church  might  be  loct  in  the  creation  of  two  rival  Churches.  (E.  Eeuss, 
D.D.)  Barnabas  and  Paul .- — Barnabas  may  be  said,  in  a  certain  sense,  to  have 
made  Paul  what  he  afterwards  became.  He  brought  him  out  of  obscurity.  He 
put  him  in  the  forefront,  though  he  must  have  been  well  aware  that  he  was  likely 
to  become  more  distinguished  and  powerful  than  himself.  This  is  that  peculiar 
mark  of  a  generous  disposition,  the  absence  of  anxiety  for  personal  credit,  the 
readiness  for  friendly  combination  in  useful  undertakings  without  any  selfish  end 
in  view.  There  are  some  men  who  have  no  heart  for  any  enterprise  unless  they 
can  have  the  first  place  in  it.  This  is  perhaps  a  prevalent  temptation  with  most 
energetic  characters.  But  this  habit  of  mind  is  not  according  to  Christ  (Matt. 
xx.  27),  and  Barnabas  is  a  good  example  to  show  us  how  such  temptation  can  be 
overcome.  (Dean  HowsonJ  A  memorable  journey : — I.  The  time  when  it  was 
■undertaken.  "Fourteen  years  after  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem."  H.  The  com- 
panions o?  his  journey.  Barnabas  was  appointed  to  go  to  Jerusalem  with  Paul, 
and  the  latter  took  with  him  Titus  also.  Christian  companionship  should  there- 
fore include — 1.  Unity  of  purpose  in  the  chief  aims  of  life.  There  may  be 
differences  as  to  inferior  things,  but  in  regard  to  the  highest  endeavours  of  the 
heart  and  life  there  should  be  unity.  2.  Christian  companionship  ought  to  be  the 
friendship  of  men  governed  by  the  same  spirit,  and  that  spirit  should  be  the  Spirit 
of  Christ.  3.  Christian  companionship  should  be  formed  with  a  view  to  mutual 
edification.  HI.  The  reason  foe  Paul's  joubney — "  And  I  went  up  by  revelation." 
In  Acts  xv.  there  is  given  the  history  of  the  events  which  apparently  led  to  this 
journey  being  undertaken.  Lesson :  In  the  life  of  every  good  man  there  an 
epochs  which  show  the  progress  of  God's  plan  in  reference  to  him.  (R.  Nieholls.) 
The  council  of  Jerusalem : — But  now,  finally,  we  are  confronted  with  the  question. 


chap,  ii.]  QALATIANS.  6f 

What  may  we  learn  from  this  whole  subject  that  may  be  of  service  in  oar  modern 
Church  life  ?  To  this  I  answer,  that  for  one  thing  we  are  taught  to  be  on  our 
guard  against  introducing  division  into  Churches  which  are  zealously  doing  God's 
work.  Never,  surely,  were  men  more  intent  on  carrying  forward  the  triumphs  of 
the  gospel  than  these  Christians  at  Antioch.  Yet  strangers  from  Jerusalem,  more 
anxious  about  a  matter  of  ritual  observance  than  for  spiritual  progress,  did 
not  hesitate  to  interrupt  their  activity  and  introduce  controversy  among  them 
by  raising  the  question  of  circumcision.  It  was  an  unjustifiable,  if  not  also 
a  malicious,  proceeding.  Missionary  work  was  for  the  time  suspended  ;  and  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  who  might  have  been  earnestly  labouring  in  some  new  field,  were 
sent  to  Jerusalem,  all  because  these  Judaizers  insisted  on  the  essential  importance 
of  that  which  was  really  indifferent.  But  how  often  have  similar  things  been  done 
in  our  existing  Churches  ?  A  foolish  question  has  been  started  by  some  one-ideaed 
enthusiast,  who  has  pertinaciously  kept  it  before  the  minds  of  the  brethren,  and 
those  who  should  have  presented  an  unbroken  phalanx  to  the  enemies  of  religion 
have  turned  their  weapons  against  each  other.  Let  us  set  our  faces  against  all  discus- 
sion upon  such  microscopic  matters  as  have  no  essential  importance.  The  progress  of 
the  Church  as  a  whole  is  infinitely  more  to  be  considered  than  the  airing  of  the  pet 
crotchet  of  any  individual,  or  even  the  advancement  of  that  which  we  may  reckon 
the  best  form  of  worship.  Nor  does  this  lesson  hold  only  in  the  intercourse 
between  members  of  the  same  Church  or  congregation.  It  is  of  force  also  in  the 
dealings  of  denominations  with  each  other.  Another  thing  which  we  ought  to 
learn  from  this  history  is,  that  our  Christian  liberty  should  be  regulated  by  love. 
We  may  have  a  right  to  do  many  things  which  yet,  in  present  circumstances,  and 
out  of  regard  to  our  brethren,  we  should  not  do.  Finally,  we  may  learn  from  this 
whole  narrative  to  be  very  zealous  for  the  free  grace  of  the  gospel.  Paul  would  not 
allow  that  anything  was  necessary  to  salvation  bat  faith  in  Christ.  (W.  21. 
Taylor.) 

Yer.  2.   And  I  went  np  by  revelation. — I  went  up  by  revelation: — T.  A  fact. 

1.  Paul  was  not  summoned  by  the  apostles,  who,  by  taking  no  action,  must  virtually 
have  endorsed  his  conduct.  2.  Paul  was  sent  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  (1)  He  was 
no  stranger  to  these  revelations  (Eph.  iii.  3).  (2)  He  had  them  at  every  crisis  in 
his  career — through  inner  promptings  and  prohibitions  (Acts  xvi.  6-7) ;  through 
dreams  and  visions  (Acts  xvi.  9-10 ;  xviii.  9 ;  xxii.  18-21 ;  xxvii.  23) ;  and  through 
inspired  men  (Acts  xiii.  2 ;  xxi.  11).  3.  Paul  was  sent  to  strengthen  his  inspired 
mission  by  securing  a  co-operation  of  the  apostles.  II.  The  explanation  of  a 
seeming  discrepancy.  Acts  xv.  2  describes  Paul  as  sent  by  the  Church.  But 
revelation  may  have — 1.  Governed  the  action  of  the  Church.  2.  Confirmed  the 
desire  of  the  Church.  3.  Occurred  concurrently  to  the  mind  of  Paul  and  the 
Church.  Paul  was  dismissed  from  Jerusalem  (Acts  ix.  35)  by  his  anxious 
brethren ;  but  not  without  urgent  directions  from  Christ  (Acts  xxii.  17,  21).  The 
historian  looks  at  these  events  from  the  outside,  the  autobiographer  from  within. 
Learn :  1.  Not  to  follow  the  wisest  counsels  until  Christ  has  spoken  (Pro v.  iii.  6). 
The  course  will  thus  be  (1)  clear;  (2)  safe;  (3)  successful.  2.  When  Christ 
has  spoken  obey  (1)  promptly;  (2)  courageously;  (3)  with  the  best  powers  of 
the  mind.  Paul's  consummate  tact  here  to  be  noted.  3.  Leave  the  responsibility 
with  the  great  Commissioner.  4.  Look  for  His  approbation  and  reward.  The 
private  conference : — I.  Its  members.  1.  Paul.  2.  Those  of  reputation ;  i.e.,  the 
supreme  court  of  appeal  in  the  opinion  of  his  adversaries.  In  disputes  appeal  to 
the  fountain-head,  otherwise  time  and  effort  are  wasted.  II.  Its  business.  To 
discuss  Paul's  gospel.    1.  Paul  professed  to  receive  it  by  revelation  from  Christ. 

2.  The  apostles  received  it  from  Christ's  lips.  3.  Both  were  found  to  be  in 
harmony.  We  have  scriptural  warrant  for  frank  explanations  in  religious  matters. 
III.  Its  purpose.  "Lest  I  should  run."  Paul  wanted  the  hearty  sympathy  of 
his  brethren,  and — 1.  Adopted  measures  calculated  to  secure  it.  (1)  Paid  them 
proper  deference,  (2)  but  relied  on  the  merits  of  his  cause.  2.  Because  if  he 
gained  the  leaders  he  would  secure  the  following.  3.  Because  a  schism 
between  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  Churches  was  imminent,  and  the  cause  of 
Catholicity  in  danger.  Learn:  1.  The  value  of  conciliatory  measures.  2.  The 
importance  of  tact  even  in  religion.  The  conciliatory  character  of  St.  Paul : — 
Ton  have  heard  the  fable  of  the  Traveller,  the  Wind,  and  the  Sun.  The  Traveller 
was  enveloped  in  a  thick  cloud.  The  Wind  and  Sun  contended  which  could  most 
easily  induce  him  to  lay  the  cloak  aside.    The  Wind  made  the  attempt  first ;  bat 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  Traveller  drew  his  cloak  more  closely  to  him.  The  Sun's  turn  came,  and  as 
the  warmth  of  his  rays  increased,  the  Traveller  gradually  relaxed  hiB  hold.  Each 
Btep  made  him  feel  that  the  cloak  was  more  and  more  a  burden  ;  he  laid  it  aside. 
The  Sun  had  succeeded  where  the  Wind  had  failed.  What  can  never  be  dona 
by  violent  attack  may  often  be  easily  accomplished  by  gentle  persuasion.  (Dean 
llowson. )  Paul's  tact  and  tolerance : — Such  men  as  St.  Paul,  who  ha^e  seen 
much  of  the  world,  and  made  human  nature  and  character  their  careful  study,  and 
who  know  how  much  is  due  to  education,  association,  habit,  are  inevitably  tolerant 
and  invariably  indifferent  to  mere  varieties  of  feeling  and  peculiarities  of  manner. 
When  men  of  St.  Paul's  intelligence  are  animated  by  a  desire  to  do  good,  they 
easily  accommodate  themselves  to  idiosyncrasies  of  race  and  disposition.  In 
a  word  they  possess  tact,  and  an  earnest,  conscientious,  self-denying,  active, 
generous  nature,  which  is  also  gifted  with  discretion,  and  wields  an  irresistible 
influence.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  they  who  live  in  a  little  world  of  their  own,  be 
they  apostles  or  ordinary  men,  contract  a  narrow  and  exclusive  temper,  set  great 
6tore  by  trifles,  are  conservative  and  tenacioua  on  minor  points,  insist  on  literal 
obedience,  are  passionately  fond  of  conformity,  are  jealous  for  the  letter,  are  slow 
to  understand  the  spirit.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  A  noble  example  : — I  made  it  a  rule 
that  I  would  not  let  a  day  pass  without  speaking  to  some  one  about  their  soul's 
salvation  ;  and  if  they  do  not  hear  the  gospel  from  the  lips  of  others,  there  will  be 
three  hundred  and  sixty-five  in  a  year  who  shall  hear  the  gospel  from  my  lips. 
There  are  five  thousand  Christians  here  to-night ;  cannot  they  say,  "  We  will  not 
let  a  day  pass  without  speaking  a  word  to  some  one  about  salvation."  (D.  L. 
Moody.)  Private  effort  neglected: — The  well-known  Eev.  Alex.  R.  0.  Dallas 
was  an  offioer  in  Wellington's  Peninsular  wars  before  he  became  a  clergyman,  and 
at  Cadiz,  in  Spain,  he  used  to  be  much  in  the  company  of  another  offioer  named 
Cumming,  who  was  always  considered  steady.  Their  meeting  again  in  their  old 
age  was  thus  described  by  Mr.  Dallas :  "  Many  years  after  it  had  pleased  God  to 
enlighten  my  mind,  and  to  impart  to  me  the  knowledge  of  His  salvation  in  Christ 
Jesus,  I  was  walking  in  the  Strand,  and  met  Cumming  near  Temple  Bar.  He  waa 
aged  and  limped,  having  suffered  from  a  paralytic  stroke ;  but  we  knew  each  other 
immediately.  I  gave  him  my  arm,  and  walked  back  with  him  nearly  to  Charing 
Cross.  My  great  anxiety  was  to  speak  to  him  of  Christ.  We  began  to  speak  about 
old  times,  and  especially  our  eventful  march  in  Spain  together.  At  length  I  came 
to  the  great  subject  that  was  upon  my  heart ;  he  listened  to  me  attentively,  and  at 
last  he  said,  •  My  dear  Dallas,  I  knew  all  that  long  before  I  knew  you,  and  many 
times  I  prayed  God  to  convert  you  when  you  were  in  the  world.  I  often  put 
Spanish  tracts  under  your  pillow.'  I  looked  at  him,"  Dallas  continues,  "  with 
great  surprise,  and  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  know  whether  to  be  grateful  to  him  for 
his  prayers  or  angry  with  him  for  his  silence  to  myself.  Why  did  he  not  tell  me 
of  Christ's  salvation,  if  he  knew  it  so  well?  What  a  lesson  is  this  for  those  who 
shrink  from  confessing  Christ  before  the  worldly  !  "  An  important  mission : — 
I.  The  communication  of  the  gospel  was  made  with  gbeat  faithfulness.  From 
the  account  given  in  the  Acts  it  is  evident  that  an  assembly  of  the  whole  Church 
was  called  together,  and  that  the  question  submitted  to  them  was,  whether  the 
keeping  of  the  law  was  necessary  to  justification  or  no.  Paul's  testimony  was 
unequivocal.  II.  This  communication  was  made  with  signal  pkudence.  Previous 
to,  or  independent  of,  Paul's  teaching  before  the  whole  assembly,  he  sought  out 
the  most  prominent  members  of  the  Church,  and  carefully  made  known  to  them 
what  God  had  done  by  him.  In  this  Paul  displayed  great  wisdom.  III.  In  this 
communication  Paul  was  most  anxious  that  the  gospel  should  triumph.  It  was 
not  of  himself  he  was  thinking  when  he  spoke  of  "running  in  vain."  Lessons: 
1.  Members  of  Churches  should  endeavour  to  promote  the  unity  of  the  whole 
body.  2.  Much  may  be  done  in  the  interests  of  peace  without  any  sacrifice  of 
principle.  Paul  declared  the  gospel  faithfully,  and  yet  he  disarmed  the  opposition 
of  many  of  his  antagonists.  (R.  Nicholls.)  How  to  succeed  in  questions  of  great 
delicacy  and  importance: — I.  Seek  Divine  direction.  H.  Proceed  cautiously. 
ILL  Secure  by  private  appeal  the  influence  of  the  wise  and  good.     (J.  Lyth.) 

Ver.  3.  But  neither  Titus,  who  was  with  me. — But  neither  Titus : — 1.  This 
incident  is  introduced  by  way  of  evidence,  not  by  way  of  apology.  2.  The  circum- 
oision  of  Titus  is  inconsistent  with  individual  expressions  in  the  passage.  3.  For 
such  a  concession,  both  the  time  and  the  person  were  most  inopportune.  St.  Paul 
is  here  indirectly  meeting  a  charge  brought  against  him  on  tl  a  ground  of  his  eir* 


chap,  n.]  QALATIANS.  71 

cumeision  of  Timothy.  I.  Not  even  Titus,  who  as  my  fellow-labourer  would  b« 
constantly  brought  in  contact  with  the  Jews,  and  therefore  might  well  have  adopted 
a  conciliatory  attitude.  II.  Not  even  Titus,  although  the  pressure  exerted  in  his 
case  was  great.  III.  Why  •  because  he  was  a  Greek ;  Timothy  was  a  Jew. 
(Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Soul  liberty: — Paul  circumcised  Timothy,  but  would  not 
allow  Titus  to  be,  to  show  that  Christianity  (1)  is  independent  of  ceremonies,  (2) 
can  exist  without  them.    Soul  liberty  is — L  Essentially  identified  with  Christ. 

II.  Is  OPPOSED  TO  A  RITUALISTIC  MINISTRY.  III.  Is  TO  BE  DEFENDED  WITH  UNCOM- 
PROMISING determination.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  gravity  of  the  crisis: — 
Judaism  was  the  cradle  of  Christianity,  and  very  nearly  became  its  grave.  (Paul  of 
Tarsus.)  Narrowness  and   breadth: — In  our  own  country  people  very  often 

attempt  to  coerce  the  minority  by  calumniating  its  objects,  and  one  of  the  com- 
monest words  used  for  this  purpose  is  the  term  un-English.  Now,  the  nationalist 
party  among  the  Jews  might  have  called  the  converts  un-Jewish.  Heated  by  a 
narrow  patriotism,  they  were  ready  to  join  the  cry  of  the  depraved  rabble  in  the 
heathen  cities,  and  stigmatise  the  Christian  as  the  enemy  of  the  human  race, 
because  his  sympathies  were  comprehensive.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  And  that  because  of  false  brethren. — False  brethren: — I.  The  Church 
of  God  when  at  its  best  has  wicked  men  and  hypocrites  in  it.  In  Adam's 
family  there  was  Cain ;  in  Christ's  family,  (Judas ;  in  the  earliest  Church,  false 
brethren.  The  sheep  may  be  sometimes  without  the  fold ;  the  wolves  therein.  A 
perfect  Church  is  an  impossible  dream.  II.  False  brethren  creep  into  the 
Church.  Christ  is  the  door  of  the  Church,  and  His  true  sheep  enter  by  Him — 
false  brethren  climb  in  another  way.  They  "  creep  in."  1.  Hence  they  maintain 
a  certain  resemblance  to  the  true.  2.  Hence  the  precise  origin  of  error  cannot  be 
detected.  The  time  when  the  ship  sinks  we  often  observe,  but  the  time  when  it 
first  drew  water  we  do  not.  (W.Perkins.)  Paul  and  the  false  brethren: — I.  A 
fierce  opposition  made  by  some  erroneous  Christians  against  a  great  apostle  and 
a  prime  authority  in  the  Church.  II.  The  cause  of  this  opposition ;  the  violent 
and  unreasonable  demands  made  to  him  to  confirm  the  practice  of  a  thing  as 
necessary  which  in  itself  was  not  so.  III.  The  methods  taken  in  this  opposition  : 
slandering  Paul's  doctrine,  and  detracting  from  his  authority  for  withstanding  their 
demands.  IV.  The  wholesome  method  of  the  apostle  :  not  to  give  place  in  the 
least.  V.  The  end  and  design  of  the  apostle  :  the  preservation  of  the  gospel 
in  truth  and  purity^  (R.  South,  D.D.)  The  conference  interrupted  by  false 
brethren : — The  interview  took  place,  hut  not  as  Paul  had  desired  and  expected.  He 
could  not  come  to  an  understanding  with  the  principal  personages  without  the 
interference  of  others,  whose  presence  could  have  been  well  dispensed  with,  and 
who  came  to  "  spy  out."  They  were  suspicious ;  some  plot  was  in  process ;  they 
must  be  on  their  guard  against  novelties,  and  prevent  any  resolution  being  carried 
by  which  the  Church  might  be  compromised.  The  debate  waxed  warm,  for  these 
intruders  made  peremptory  demands ;  the  contest  was  protracted,  for  Paul  hints 
that  he  had  to  withstand  long  and  steadily ;  he  boasts  that  he  did  not  yield  for  an 
instant,  which  proves  that  the  struggle  was  not  over  in  a  moment,  and  was  not 
confined  to  an  objection  modestly  made  and  easily  removed.  (E.  Beuss,  D.D.) 
Spying : — I.  Hypocrites  spy  into  the  persons  and  lives  of  men  that  they  may  find 
some  fault  to  disgrace  them  (Matt.  vii.  4).  II.  Sceptics  pry  into  the  Scriptures 
that  they  may  discover  discrepancies.  III.  Hearers  often  spy  out  sermon  and 
worship  that  they  may  find  something  to  cavil  at.  IV.  Enemies  spy  out  religion 
to  find  the  easiest  means  of  overthrowing  it.  Application  :  Devote  the  eye  of  your 
mind  to  a  better  nse.  1.  To  your  sins  (Lam.  iii.  40).  2.  To  your  spiritual  enemies. 
(W.  Perkins.)  Moral  Jesuits : — I.  Their  character.  False  brethren.  H.  Their 
methods.  1.  Surreptitious  invasion  of  privacy.  2.  Indefatigable  espionage.  HI. 
Their  objects.  1.  To  circumscribe  Christian  liberty.  2.  To  gain  spiritual  ascen- 
dency over  the  conscience.  8.  To  reduce  to  ritualistio  bondage.  False  brethren : — 
L  Their  character — they  have  the  name  and  the  form — but  not  the  spirit  of  Christ 
— the  spirit  of  liberty.  H.  Their  craft — they  creep  into  the  Church — by  the  wrong 
door — unawares,  because  disguised.  III.  Their  object — to  spy  out  what  they  oan 
— to  do  mischief.  (J.  Lyth.)  Liberty  in  Christ  Jesus : — Christianity  is  no  pro- 
vincialism, it  is  the  world's  highway.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  Christian  liberty : — 
Spiritual  liberty  consists  in  freedom  from  the  curse  of  the  moral  law ;  from  the 
servitude  of  the  ritual ;  from  the  love,  power,  and  guilt  of  sin ;  from  the  dominion 
of  Satan ;  from  the  corruption  of  the  world ;  from  the  fear  of  death  and  the  wrath 


TJ  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

to  come.  (C.  Buck.)  Liberty  in  Christ  Jesus  : — In  those  ill  times  when  there 
were  slaves  across  the  Atlantic,  a  lady  went  down  to  one  of  the  ships,  accompanied 
by  her  negro  servant.  The  lady  remarked  to  the  captain  that  if  she  were  to  go  to 
England  and  take  this  black  woman  with  her,  she  would  be  free  as  soon  as  she 
landed.  The  captain  replied,  "  Madam,  she  is  free  already.  The  moment  she  came 
on  board  a  British  vessel  she  was  free."  When  the  negro  woman  knew  this,  do 
you  think  she  went  on  shore  with  her  mistress  ?  By  no  means.  She  chose  to 
keep  her  liberty.  She  was  free  on  board  and  a  slave  on  land.  How  slight  the  change 
of  place ;  but  how  great  the  difference  involved ;  marvel  not  that  faith  involves  such 
great  things.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christian  liberty  : — I.  Our  liberty,  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus,  includes  our  freedom  from  the  exactions  and  impositions  of  men 
in  religion.  Now  observe,  we  say,  "  in  religion ;  "  because  we  do  not  here  refer  to 
civil  things.  No,  my  brethren,  where  religion  is  concerned,  Jesus  is  the  King  in 
Zion.  He  is  our  Lawgiver.  II.  We  observe,  "  Our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  includes  a  freedom  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  I  was  thinking,  in  my 
retirement  this  morning,  what  a  number  of  tyrants  does  every  sinner  serve  I  What 
a  tyrant  is  Satan !  What  a  tyrant  is  the  world ! — they  who  have  faith  indeed 
*•  overcome  the  world  " ;  but  all  others  are  overcome  by  it.  What  a  tyrant  is  sin ! 
"  He  that  committeth  sin,"  says  the  apostle,  "  is  the  servant  of  sin."  Is  he  free 
who  is  under  the  dominion  of  pride  and  revenge  and  envy  and  malice  ?  We  are 
npholden  by  His  free  Spirit,  and  we  can  say  with  David,  "  We  will  walk  at  liberty, 
for  we  seek  Thy  precepts."  HI.  We  said,  "  Our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus,' 
includes  a  freedom  from  the  condemnation  of  the  law.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth 
it  shall  die."  IV.  We  said,  "  Our  liberty,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,"  includes  a 
freedom  of  access  to  God.  He  is  the  greatest  and  the  best  of  Beings.  In  Hia 
presence  is  "  fulness  of  joy  " ;  at  His  right  hand  are  "  pleasures  for  evermore." 
V.  We  said,  "  Our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus,"  is  a  freedom  to  partake 
of  and  enjoy  the  good  things  of  nature  and  Providence.  We  have  thus  endeavoured 
to  exemplify  "  our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus."  How  shall  we  improve 
it  ?  The  improvement  will  include  four  admonitions.  1.  "  Stand  fast  in  the 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  you  free,  and  be  not  again  entangled  with  the 
yoke  of  bondage."  2.  Do  not  abuse  your  liberty.  There  is  nothing  too  good  to 
be  abused.  Beware  of  the  Antinomian  scheme — Oh,  he  is  freed  from  the  law ; 
therefore  he  has  nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  Paul  had  to  do  with  it.  Paul  said, 
"  I  delight  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  after  the  inward  man."  Though  he  turned  away 
from  it  as  a  covenant  of  works,  he  viewed  it  as  a  rule  of  life.  Remember,  your  liberty 
is  not  a  liberty  to  sin.  There  is  another  abuse  of  this  liberty,  that  is,  of  placing  all 
who  profess  Christianity  upon  the  same  level  in  society,  as  if,  because  we  are  all 
one  in  Christ  Jesus  (for  so  we  are),  that  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  master  and  the 
servant,  the  ruler  and  the  ruled,  were  all  the  same,  in  a  civil  condition.  God  Him* 
self  maintains  the  gradations  and  distinctions  of  life,  and  the  duties  and  obligations 
resulting  from  them ;  and  I  never  knew  any  violation  of  these  distinctions  but  it 
was  attended  with  injury,  not  only  with  regard  to  those  above,  but  even  to  those 
below  their  level.  3.  Improve  this  liberty.  In  one  sense  you  cannot ;  its  provisions 
surpass  all  expression  and  conception.  "Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared 
for  them  that  love  Him."  But  we  mean  we  should  make  use  of  it  and  improve  it. 
4.  Recommend  this  liberty  to  others  ;  only  see  that  you  exemplify  yourselves  what 
you  recommend,  otherwise  you  may  be  more  injurious  than  beneficial,  as  some  are 
by  their  talking  on  religious  subjects — otherwise  you  may  draw  forth  the  proverb, 
•*  Physician,  heal  thyself ; "  or  the  retort,  "  Thou  that  teaohest  another,  teachest 
thou  not  thyself  ?  "  ( W.  Jay.)  Courage  in  defence  of  Christian  liberty : — I.  Th» 
liberty  assailed.  It  was  a  liberty  in  Christ.  This  liberty  meant  being  exempt 
from  the  requirements  of  the  ceremonial  law.  II.  This  liberty  was  thbbatened 
by  false  brethren.  They  were  traitors.  HI.  This  attempt  upon  the  liberty 
of  the  Church  was  firmly  and  courageously  resisted.  1.  Paul  firmly  adhered 
to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  "  Truth  precise,  unaccommodating,  abandons  nothing 
that  belongs  to  itself,  admits  nothing  that  is  inconsistent  with  it." — Bengel.  8. 
The  refusal  to  submit  was  absolute.  He  would  not  give  way  by  subjection,  no,  not 
for  an  hour.  "  In  things  indifferent  we  may  well,  out  of  love,  yield  something  of 
our  liberty  to  the  good  of  the  weak.  But  where  men  would  press  these  upon  as  m 
necessary  to  salvation,  and  our  yielding  would  have  the  appearance  of  bringing  the 
truth  of  the  gospel  into  jeopardy,  we  should  never  yield." — Starke.  We  may 
renounce  our  liberty  for  love's  sake,  but  we  must  not  let  ourselves  be  cobbed  of  it 


.  n.]  GALATIANS.  71 

tor  the  truth  of  the  gospel's  sake.  We  must  eling  to  that  which  is  abiding.  "  The 
law  is  something  transient,  the  gospel  is  permanent."  Lessons :  1.  In  the  best 
state  of  the  Christian  Church,  false  brethren  may  creep  in.  2.  "False  brethren 
are  the  most  daugerous  enemies  to  liberty.  Weak  brethren  disturb  it;  false 
brethren  undermine  and  destroy  it."  8.  To  preserve  the  truth  should  be  the  first 
duty  of  Christians.  (R.  Nicholls.)  False  brethren  .-—A  Scotch  Churchman  was 
once  reproached  by  a  member  of  a  small  sect  with  the  blots  in  the  lives  of  many  of 
his  brethren  of  past  days.  He  answered,  "  When  your  chimney  has  smoked  as 
long  as  ours  there  will  be  some  soot  in  it."    (Anthony  Bathe.) 

Ver.  5.  To  whom  we  gave  place  by  subjection,  no,  not  for  an  hour. — The  truth 
in  the  Church : — I.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  is  essentially  embodied  in  the  doctrinal 
articles,  and  the  devotional  services,  of  the  Church  of  England.  Her  basis  is  the 
Word  of  God.  There  is  no  one  truth  contained  in  the  Bible  which  does  not 
appear  interwoven  in  her  services ;  and,  what  is  of  vast  importance,  those  truths 
are  every  one  of  them  brought  forward  throughout  her  ecclesiastical  year  with  a 
distinctness,  and  yet  with  a  beautiful  consistency  and  harmony,  according  to  the 
analogy  of  the  faith.  II.  The  reformers,  both  in  their  lives  and  by  their  deaths, 
evinced  a  deep  anxiety  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  by  means  of  a  scriptural 
Church,  might  continue  with  us.  III.  It  becomes  us  their  children,  blessed  with 
such  privileges,  to  be  alive  to  the  importance  of  maintaining  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  and  handing  it  down  unimpaired  to  posterity.  Gratitude  demands  this  at 
our  hands ;  the  mercy  of  God  in  the  bestowment  of  these  blessings,  and  the  salva- 
tion of  souls  which  is  so  closely  bound  up  in  them,  enforce  this  duty  upon  us.  If 
religion  be  anything,  it  is  everything.  And  surely,  if  men  be  anxious  and  perse- 
vering and  brave  in  securing  temporal  freedom  and  national  liberty,  oh !  shall  the 
Christian,  actuated  by  the  love  of  Christ,  the  most  constraining  principle,  be 
afraid,  or  unwilling,  or  indifferent,  to  perpetuate  the  truth  which  sets  free  the 
immortal  spirit,  and  obtain,  so  far  as  human  instrumentality  can,  the  blessings  of 
salvation  to  children  yet  unborn  ?  1.  If  we  would  effectually  promote  the  inte- 
rests of  Divine  truth,  we  must  take  care,  first  of  all,  that  we  ourselves  embrace 
it.  2.  And  then,  having  embraced  the  truth,  I  would  say,  "  Contend  earnestly  for 
the  truth  " — not  in  the  spirit  of  party,  not  in  the  pride  of  reason,  not  with  any 
secular  motives,  but  because  of  its  vitality  and  importance  to  the  present  and 
eternal  well-being  of  man.  And  as  the  truth  itself  is  but  a  modification  of  love, 
let  your  contention  be  in  the  spirit  of  love,  seeking  to  reclaim  those  who  are  in 
error,  in  meekness  and  affection.  3.  And  see  to  it,  that  it  is  "  the  truth  "  you  are 
contending  for.  In  essentials  let  not  false  charity  or  a  spurious  liberality  lead  you 
astray ;  there  ought  to  be,  there  can  be,  no  compromise  of  the  one  saving  truth. 
IV.  The  education  of  the  young  in  the  principles  of  Divine  truth,  as  embodied 
and  taught  in  the  formularies  of  the  Church,  must  commend  itself  as  a  means  at 
once  simple  and  efficient.  (Joseph  Hasle grave,  M.A.)  Paul's  fearless  indepen- 
dence : — No  characteristic  of  the  apostle  is  more  marked  than  this._  He  went  on 
his  way  unmoved  alike  by  prejudiced  and  narrow-minded  bigotry  within  the  Church, 
or  by  armed  and  persecuting  hostility  without.  Whether  he  is  confronted  with  the 
worse  than  heathen  libertinism  that  threatened  to  corrupt  the  Churches  of  Greece, 
or  by  the  half-converted  Pharisees  who  would  have  offered  up  the  universality  of 
the  gospel  to  the  prejudices  of  a  sect ;  whether  he  stands  before  a  Soman  officer  or 
before  an  infuriated  mob ;  whether  he  is  exposed  to  the  sneers  of  a  scoffer  like 
Agrippa,  or  the  sordid  venality  of  an  unjust  judge  like  Felix— in  all  circumstances 
and  under  every  temptation  to  make  concessions  to  the  prejudice  or  passions  of 
those  around  him,  Paul  maintained  an  undaunted  fearlessness  of  bearing,  and 
stands  forth  with  vigorous  self-reliance,  refusing  to  submit  to  the  control  of  others 
his  conviction  of  duty,  refusing  to  swerve  a  hairsbreadth  from  the  path  his  con- 
science marks  out  tor  him.  (Prof.  Robertson  Smith.)  The  reasons  and  conse- 
quences of  Paul's  resistance : — There  are  some  who  may  see  in  this  resolute  attitude 
the  inevitable  egotism  of  a  strong  will  and  a  clear  purpose  ;  but  it  iB  more  reason* 
able  to  discover  in  such  a  temper  an  unshaken  conviction  in  the  reality  of  his  mis- 
sion, and  a  distinct  persuasion  that  this  mission  was  to  be  fulfilled  in  one  way  only, 
and  by  those  specific  means  which  he  had  been  already  adopting.  And  to  us,  who 
•an  understand  the  effect  of  this  uncompromising  temper  npon  the  history  of 
Christianity,  it  is  manifest  that  the  apostle's  persistency  is  the  reason  why  Chris- 
tianity did  not  become  a  mere  Jewish  School,  which  might  have  had  a  faint  exist- 
ence in  the  Ana  of  tome  Talmud  or  Cabbala ;  or  would,  more  probably,  have  been 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  il 

completely  lost  in  the  general  havoc  of  the  Jewish  war.  As  it  is,  the  teaching  of  ths 
Pharisee  of  Tarsus  has  given  method  to  modern  civilization,  has  erected  Christianity 
into  a  social  system,  and  has  constituted  a  standard  by  which  the  Christian  system 
has  been  measured  and  reformed.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Prompt  opposition  to  error : — 
Some  years  ago  I  was  amused  with  the  sentiment  of  a  witty  fellow  who  said,  "  A 
lie  will  travel  from  Maine  to  Georgia  while  truth  is  putting  on  his  boots.  In  that 
case,"  he  added,  "  truth  should  not  stop  to  put  on  his  boots."  The  difficulty  lies 
in  allowing  the  lie  to  run  so  far  ahead ;  let  them  start  abreast,  and  truth  will  gain 
the  field.  It  may  be  distanced  at  the  first  heat,  but  on  the  long  run  it  is  sure  to 
secure  the  prize.  (Cangray.)  Strict  faithfulness : — The  other  day  I  received  a 
communication  from  a  lawyer,  who  says  that  a  very  large  owner  has  discovered 
that  a  very  small  piece  of  property  belongs  to  him,  and  not  to  the  small  proprietor 
in  whose  possession  it  has  for  a  very  long  time  remained.  The  matter  seemed  a 
trifling  one.  We  had  a  conference,  and  there  came  the  steward  with  the  lawyers, 
and  he  was  furnished  with  maps,  and  putting  on  his  spectacles,  examined  them  with 
great  care.  Why  ?  It  was  a  small  matter  to  him,  but  because  he  was  a  steward  he 
was  expected  to  be  faithful.  And  when  he  found  that  this  small  piece  of  ground 
belonged  to  his  lord  he  was  determined  to  have  it.  So  let  me  say — as  stewards  of 
the  gospel  of  God — never  give  up  one  verse,  one  doctrine,  one  word  of  the  truth  of 
God.  Let  us  be  faithful  to  that  committed  to  us,  it  is  not  ours  to  alter.  We  have 
but  to  declare  that  which  we  have  received.  (S.  Cook,  D.D.)  No  terms  with 
error : — During  the  Spartan  war  against  Xerxes,  the  Athenians  were  entreated  not 
to  abandon  their  natural  allies,  and  leave  Greece  to  be  enslaved.  Pointing  to  the 
sun,  Aristides  replied,  «*  While  that  sun  holds  his  course,  we  will  come  to  no  terms 
with  Xerxes.  For  you,  Spartans,  our  character  might  have  raised  us  above  your 
fears.  The  earth  contains  not  the  gold,  nor  does  the  sun  shine  upon  the  land  that 
could  move  our  purpose."  Even  with  such  unshaken  courage  and  faithfulness 
must  Christians  fight  against  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (R.  Brewin.) 
No  surrender : — To  authorize  generals,  or  other  officers,  to  lay  down  their  arms  in 
virtue  of  a  capitulation  .  .  .  affords  a  dangerous  latitude  (except  when  they  com- 
pose the  garrison  of  a  fortress).  It  is  destructive  of  all  military  character  in  a 
nation  to  open  such  a  door  to  the  cowardly,  the  weak,  or  even  the  misdirected 
brave.  Great  extremities  require  extraordinary  resolution.  The  more  obstinate 
the  resistance  of  an  army,  the  greater  the  chances  of  assistance  or  success.  How 
many  seeming  impossibilities  have  been  accomplished  by  men  whose  only  resource 
was  death  1  (Maxim  LXVII.)  In  the  campaign  of  1759  Frederick  directed 
General  Fink,  with  18,000  men,  upon  Maxen,  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  off  the 
Austrian  army  from  the  defiles  of  Bohemia.  Surrounded  by  twice  his  numbers, 
Fink  capitulated  after  a  sharp  action,  and  14,000  men  laid  down  their  arms.  This 
conduct  was  the  more  disgraceful,  because  General  Winch,  who  commanded 
the  cavalry,  cut  his  way  through  the  enemy.  The  whole  blame  of  the  surrender 
fell,  therefore,  upon  Fink,  who  was  afterwards  tried  by  a  court-martial,  and  sen- 
tenced to  be  cashiered  and  imprisoned  for  two  years. 

Ver.  6.  But  or  those  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat.— Authority  and  trust :— L 

A  MAN  WHO  HAS  TRUTH  ON  HIS  SIDE  CAM  BE  INDIFFERENT  TO  MERE  AUTHORITY.  Be- 
cause— 1.  Mere  authority  has  no  weight  with  the  Author  of  truth.  2.  The  man  of 
truth  can  gain  nothing  from  the  sanction  of  mere  authority.     II.  Authoritative 

DECISIONS  DERIVE  WHAT    VALUE    THEY   POSSESS    FROM    THE   TBUTH.      The  apostles  pK>- 

nounced  on  what  "  they  saw."  1.  That  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  and  the 
circumcision  was  committed  respectively  to  Paul  and  Peter.  2.  That  God  wrought 
equally  by  both.  3.  That  both  alike  had  Divine  grace  for  their  work.  Ood  no 
accepter  of  persons.  I.  Spiritual  excellence  and  not  the  accidents  of  external 
condition  alone  avails  with  God.  Take  some  illustrations.  1.  From  Scripture : 
the  choice  of  Abraham  and  Moses.  2.  From  providence.  (1)  Wealth  and  power 
are  administered  impartially.  (2)  Health  on  the  whole  is  equally  shared  by  rich 
and  poor.  (3)  Genius  is  confined  to  no  class.  (4)  So  with  the  blessings  of  happi- 
ness, life,  and  age.  3.  From  the  administration  of  redemption.  Wilberforce  in 
parliament,  Bunyan  in  his  cottage.  4.  From  the  day  of  judgment  and  its  results. 
II.  Why  God  has  no  respect  of  persons  except  in  relation  to  moral  goodness. 

1 .  Accidents  in  condition,  seemingly  great  to  us,  bear  no  such  relation  to  Him. 

2.  They  are  not  the  essential  and  true  elements  of  our  being.  IH.  Why  does  Gob 
supremely  value  spiritual  excellence  ?  1.  It  is  the  true  basis  of  worth  in  every 
intelligent  creature.     (1)  Angels ;  (2)  man  as  man.    2.  It  is  God's  own  spiritual 


chap,  n.]  QALATIAN8.  75 

reflection,  and  therefore  the  true  basis  of  friendship  with  Him.  (J.  Foster,  B.A.) 
Paul's  non-indebtedness  to  the  apostles : — Paul  wished  to  show  that  his  apostolate, 
both  in  its  origin  and  by  the  tenor  of  the  facts  which  preceded  this  visit,  was 
independent  of  the  Twelve,  and  derived  no  authority  from  Jerusalem.  He  could 
not  brook  rival,  still  less  superior,  in  the  work  that  was  before  him,  nor  submit  to 
any  control  whatsoever  on  the  part  of  any  man,  however  eminent  he  might  be. 
This  had  been  his  constant  determination  from  the  first  day  of  his  Christianity, 
and  he  was  not  likely  to  forego  it  after  so  many  years  of  missionary  labour,  and  in 
the  case  of  persons  who  owed  all  their  knowledge  of  the  gospel  to  him,  till  such 
time  as  these  meddling  emissaries  had  striven  to  misrepresent  him,  had  repudiated 
his  authority,  and  called  in  question  the  completeness  of  the  gospel  he  preached. 
(Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Usefulness  better  than  mere  capacity : — A  monstrous  vat,  cer- 
tainly, is  the  great  tun  of  Heidelberg.  It  might  hold  eight  hundred  hogsheads  of 
wine  at  the  least ;  but  what  is  the  use  of  such  wasted  capacity,  since,  for.  nearly  a 
hundred  years,  there  has  not  been  a  drop  of  liquor  in  it  1  Hollow  and  sounding, 
empty  and  void  and  waste  ;  vintages  come  and  go,  and  find  it  perishing  of  dry  rot. 
An  empty  cask  is  not  so  great  a  spectacle  after  all,  let  its  size  be  what  it  may, 
though  old  travellers  called  this  monster  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world.  What 
a  thousand  pities  it  is  that  many  men  of  genius  and  of  learning  are,  in  respect  of 
usefulness,  no  better  than  this  huge  but  empty  tun  of  Heidelberg  1  Very  capa- 
cious  are  their  minds,  but  very  unpractical.  Better  be  a  poor  household  kilderkin, 
and  give  forth  one's  little  freely,  than  exist  as  a  useless  prodigy,  capable  of  much 
and  available  for  nothing.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Having  a  right  estimate  of  one's- 
self: — A  great  deal  of  misery  would  be  prevented,  if  ministers  would  endeavour  to 
form  an  honest  estimate  of  their  qualifications,  and,  as  a  consequence,  seek 
appointments  for  which  they  are  specially  qualified.  If  one  might  teach  unplea- 
sant doctrines  through  the  medium  of  a  figure,  one  oan  imagine  how  inconvenient 
it  would  be  in  the  event  of  a  great  cathedral  clock  wearing  out,  for  a  neat  Geneva 
watch  to  put  itself  forward  as  a  candidate  for  the  vacancy.  The  Geneva  might 
be  a  beautiful  little  thing,  and  might  keep  the  most  exact  time,  and  might  be 
called  endearing  names  by  ladies  and  little  children ;  yet,  to  speak  the  language  of 
charity,  it  might  hardly  be  adapted  to  be  set  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the 
ground,  in  a  circular  vacancy  at  least  ten  feet  in  diameter.  In  such  a  case  its  very 
elevation  would  become  its  obscurity.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be 
quite  as  inconvenient  if  a  great  cathedral  clock,  weary  of  city  work,  should  ask 
to  be  carried  about  as  a  private  timekeeper.  There  is  a  moral  in  the  figure. 
That  moral  points  towards  the  law  of  proportion  and  adaptation.  One  can 
imagine  the  petted  Geneva  looking  up  from  a  lady's  hand,  and  calling  the 
cathedral  clock  a  great,  coarse  thing,  with  a  loud  and  vulgar  voice,  which 
indicated  the  most  offensive  presumption ;  and  we  can  imagine  the  cathedral 
clock  looking  down,  with  somewhat  of  disdain,  upon  the  little  timekeeping  toy. 
Oh,  that  some  sensible  chronometer  would  say  to  the  rivals,  "Cease  your 
contention ;  you  are  both  useful  in  your  places."  The  one  as  a  private  chaplain, 
the  other  as  a  city  orator,  may  tell  the  world  to  redeem  its  flying  time.  (Joseph 
Parker,  D.D.)  Seeming   Christian*   not  always  real  ones: — A  servant  girl 

once  said  she  should  not  have  known  her  mas'cer  and  mistress  were  religious 
had  she  not  heard  that  they  took  the  sacrament.  It  was  a  pity  they  took  it. 
If  a  man  rolled  on  a  bed  of  spices  you  would  soon  know  where  he  had  been, 
and  if  a  man  went  with  Jesus  he  must  be  perfumed  with  the  spirit  of  Jesus.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  God  accepteth  no  man's  person : — With  God  there  is  no  free  man 
but  His  servant,  though  in  the  galleys ;  no  slave  but  the  sinner,  though  in  a  palace ; 
none  noble  but  the  virtuous,  if  never  so  basely  descended ;  none  rich  but  he  that 
possesseth  God,  even  in  rags ;  none  wise  but  he  that  is  a  fool  to  himself  and  the 
world ;  none  happy  but  he  whom  the  world  pities.  Let  me  be  free,  noble,  rich, 
wise,  happy,  to  God.  (Bp.  Hall.)  God  accepteth  no  man's  person : — A  North- 
German  periodical  gives  the  following  story  as  told  by  a  Bible  colporteur :  "  In  one 
of  my  journeys  I  came  to  Varzin  while  the  Imperial  Chancellor  was  residing  there. 
After  I  had  done  a  long  day's  work,  I  went  to  the  inn.  I  was  there  asked  if  I 
would  go  to  evening  prayers  at  Bismarck's  house,  as  the  daughter  of  the  host 
was  going.  I  accepted  the  invitation,  and  when  I  got  there  I  found  myself  in  a 
spacious  and  very  suitable  room  which  had  been  built  for  the  purpose.  It  was  well 
filled  with  servants,  farm  labourers,  and  villagers,  some  of  whom,  having  seen  me 
before,  greeted  me  kindly.  Soon  afterwards  Prince  Bismarck  made  his  appearance, 
nodding  kindly  right  and  left  as  he  passed.    He  then  said—'  I  hear  we  have  a 


7tt  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obaf.  n. 

Bible-man  among  as,'  and  he  looked  me  straight  in  the  face  in  his  kindly  way. 
'  You  will  be  so  kind  as  to  conduct  service  for  as  this  evening.'    I  rose  up  and 

answered — *  It  would  be  displacing  your  highness  for  me  to '  when  the  prince 

interrupted  me  with,  'Ah,  my  good  man,  what  does  highness  signify?  Here  in 
God's  sight  we  are  all  poor  sinners ;  so  come  here  and  take  my  place  this  evening, 
and  conduct  the  service  for  as.'  So  of  course  I  accepted  his  invitation,  the  prince 
taking  his  place  amongst  the  audience ;  and  when  it  was  over  he  shook  me 
warmly  by  the  hand,  and  wished  me  God's  richest  blessing  on  my  way." 

Vers.  7,  8.  To  the  apostleshlp  of  the  circumcision. — The  results  of  the  con- 
ference : — Barnabas  must  have  been  struck  with  the  coincidence  between  his  own 
conduct  towards  the  newly-enfranchised  converts  at  Antioch  (Acts  si.  22-23)  and 
that  of  the  apostles  towards  the  delegates  of  these  converts.  I.  What  the  apostles 
saw — 1.  In  Paul  and  Barnabas  personally.  The  closest  scrutiny  of  speech,  de- 
portment, aim,  could  create  but  one  impression.  2.  In  their  work ;  the  conversion 
of  the  Gentles  and  the  uprising  of  so  many  Christian  Churches  could  be  due  only 
to  Divine  grace.  II.  What  they  felt.  1.  That  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision 
was  committed  to  Paul.  The  conclusion  was  irresistible.  2.  That  Paul  was  as 
worthy  of  his  commission  as  was  Peter.  III.  What  they  did.  1.  Gave  the  dele- 
gates the  right  hand  of  fellowship.  (1)  Spontaneously.  Paul  did  not  ask  for  it. 
(2)  Heartily.  (3)  Irrevocably.  2.  Assigned  to  Paul  and  Peter — (1)  the  spheres 
which  each  could  best  work ;  (2)  the  honours  to  which  each  was  entitled.    Learn : 

1.  That  God's  grace  when  experienced  should  be  employed  in  work  for  Him. 

2.  That  true  worth  is  determined  not  by  rank,  but  by  work.  3.  That  honest  work 
ultimately  confers  the  highest  rank.  4.  That  harmonious  and  effective  working 
is  best  promoted  by  a  division  of  labour.  The  gospel  commission: — L  Thb 
gospel  is  not  oubs  BUT  God's.  II.  The  gospel  is  committed  to  human  tbdst. 
1.  What  an  honour.  2.  What  a  responsibility.  HI.  Thb  ministeb's  duty  with 
reference  to  the  gospel  is — 1.  To  keep  it.  2.  To  maintain  the  truth  of  it.  3.  To 
apply  it  to  the  best  use.  IV.  Only  God  can  make  the  gospel  effective  (1  Cor. 
iii.  7).  V.  Thb  belie veb's  duty  is — 1.  To  hear  it  humbly.  2.  To  receive  it 
thankfully.  3.  To  obey  it  diligently.  4.  To  propagate  it  earnestly.  (W.  Perkins.) 
The  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision : — St.  Paul's  attitude  towards  circumcision.  The 
great  controversy  in  which  St.  Paul  was  engaged  within  the  Church  turned  upon 
the  question  whether  the  Jewish  observances,  and  circumcision  in  particular,  were 
necessary  for  Christians.  A  large  party  of  Christians  whose  centre  was  Jeru- 
salem, who  were  probably  influenced  by  the  current  opinions  in  the  school  of 
Shammai,  and  who  made  free  use  of  the  names  of  the  apostles  Peter,  James,  and 
John,  maintained  that  these  observances  were  necessary.  To  these  men  St.  Paul's 
work  appeared  to  be  radically  revolutionary ;  and  where  they  could  they  went  over 
the  ground  which  St.  Paul  had  evangelized.  They  insisted  that  if  the  Gentile 
converts  would  be  really  good  Christians,  they  too  must  be  circumcised.  St.  Paul 
maintained  that  while  if  a  man  happened  to  be  circumcised  it  did  him  no  sort  of 
harm,  to  insist  upon  circumcision  as  necessary  for  a  Christian  was  to  deny  funda- 
mental truth,  for  there  were  two  points  of  the  gravest  importance  which  really 
were  involved  in  this  apparent  trifle.  1.  Was  the  work  of  Christ,  as  the  Restorer 
of  man  to  a  state  of  righteousness  before  God,  complete  in  itself ;  or  was  it  merely 
a  supplement  to  the  Jewish  creed  ?  Was  the  system  of  the  Jewish  law,  after  all, 
able  to  make  men  righteous;  and,  if  it  was,  where  was  the  need  of  the  work  of 
Christ  ?  If  this  was  the  case,  moreover,  was  it  even  conceivable  that  Christ  was 
greater  than  Moses  and  the  prophets — greater  in  His  essential  nature?  The 
Judaising  theory  that  the  law  in  its  entirety  was  still  obligatory  meant,  at  bottom, 
that  Christ's  work  was  not  nearly  complete,  and  so  that  His  Person  was  really  only 
human.  2.  Was  Christianity  meant  to  be  the  religion  of  mankind,  or  only  of  a  small 
sub-division  of  the  Jewish  world?  Was  it  to  be  merely  national,  or  to  be  catholic  ? 
If  Christianity  was  serious  in  its  claim  to  be  the  true,  the  absolute  religion,  it  could 
not  but  also  claim  to  be  universal.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Diversity  of  gifts: — We 
discover  a  diversity  of  gifts  by  a  reference  to  Whitfield  and  Handel.  The  one  was 
in  eloquence  what  the  other  was  in  sacred  song ;  the  one  appealing,  through  the 
understanding,  to  the  heart  and  conscience,  calling  on  men  everywhere  to  repent 
and  turn  to  God ;  the  other  drawing  out,  and  bearing  upward,  as  a  sweet  incense 
before  the  altar  of  the  upper  sanctuary,  the  devout  aspirations  of  the  new-bora 
soul.  There  was  "  an  air,  a  soul,  a  movement,"  in  the  oratory  of  Whitfield  which 
created  indescribable  emotions  in  his  vast  assemblies.    Handel  equally  electrified 


chap,  n.]  QALATIANS.  77 

the  multitudes  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Hia  power  of  song,  while  he  performed  tne 
Messiah,  raised  them  to  their  feet ;  and  yet  greater  wonders  did  Whitfield  when 
preaching  the  Messiah  to  the  scores  of  thousands  in  Moorfield*.  (H.  Read.) 
Power  of  grace  in  saints .- — Longfellow  in  his  Hiawatha  sings  of — 

u  The  pleasant  watercourses, 
You  could  trace  them  through  the  valley, 
By  the  rushing  in  the  Spring-time, 
By  the  alders  in  the  Summer, 
By  the  white  fog  in  the  Autumn, 
By  the  black  line  in  the  Winter." 

Be  traceable  are  the  lives  of  really  gracious  men  and  women.  They  are  not 
solicitous  to  be  observed,  but  the  gracious  "  signs  following  "  are  sure  to  reveal 
them.    Like  their  Master  they  cannot  be  hid.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  And  when  James,  Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  be  pillars. — 
Ministers,  pillars : — I.  As  pounded  on  Chiust.  II.  As  supporting  believebs  by — 
1.  Sympathy.  2.  Prayer.  3.  Preaching.  III.  As  pbesenting  an  example  op 
stability.  IV.  As  ADOBNiNO  the  KDiPicE  of  the  Chubch.  John  and  Paul : — 
This  is  the  only  meeting  between  the  two  recorded  in  Scripture.  It  is, 
moreover,  the  last  notice  that  we  find  there  of  St.  John,  until  the  time  of  the 
Apocalypse.  For  both  these  reasons  the  mind  seizes  on  this  incident.  Like  other 
casual  Scriptural  notices  it  is  very  suggestive.  St.  John  had  been  silent  during  the 
discussion,  but  at  the  close  he  expressed  his  cordial  union  with  St.  Paul.  That 
onion  has  been  made  visible  to  all  the  ages  by  the  juxtaposition  of  their  Epistles  in 
the  same  sacred  volume.  They  stand  among  the  pillars  of  the  Holy  Temple  ;  and 
the  Church  of  God  is  thankful  to  learn  how  contemplation  may  be  united  with 
action,  and  faith  with  love  in  the  spiritual  life.  (Conybeare  and  Howson.)  The 
unity  of  apostolic  doctrine  : — It  might  seem  to  these  Galatians,  as  it  seems  to  some 
acute  critics  now,  that  several  gospels  were  being  preached.  But  Paul  shows  that 
this  could  not  be.  Of  course  Christian  truth  is  presented  in  different  phases  by  Paul, 
James,  Cephas,  and  John  respectively,  but  only  as  each  facet  of  a  diamond  differs 
from  the  rest,  each  displaying  its  own  brilliance,  reflecting  the  light  in  its  own  way, 
bat  all  belonging  to  one  jewel.  {S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  The  significance  of  the 
apostolic  decision : — Henceforward  the  Churoh  and  the  world  become  coextensive ; 
other  evils  may  hinder  the  diffusion  of  Christianity,  but  not  the  limits  of  a  local 
and  national  worship ;  other  restrictions  may  be  imposed  on  the  freedom  of  the 
human  race,  but  the  yoke  of  Judaism  never;  other  forms  may  be  assumed  by  the 
spirit  of  bigotry  and  superstition,  but  from  its  earlier  provinoe  it  is  utterly  expelled  ; 
the  most  exclusive  zealot  will  never  again  venture  to  confine  the  privileges  of  the 
true  religion  to  s  single  nation ;  the  most  ardent  admirer  of  ancient  usages  and 
external  forms  will  never  again  dare  to  insist  on  the  necessity  of  circumcision. 
(Dean  Stanley.)  The  division  of  apostolic  labour : — The  apostles  were  to  continue 
to  devote  themselves  to  evangelization  with  the  understanding  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas  should  go  to  the  Gentiles,  and  Peter  and  John  to  the  Jews.  This  arrange- 
ment, however,  was  not  made  on  geographical  considerations  (see  James  i.  1 ; 
1  Peter  i.  1 ;  Rev.  i.  9).  The  one  party  were  to  evangelize  the  Gentiles,  the  other 
the  Jews,  without  distinction  of  place  (see  ver.  11,  &o.).  (23.  Eeuss,  D.D.)  Not 
indeed  that  Paul  would  objeot  to  any  association  with  the  special  ministry  of  Peter 
—en  the  contrary,  he  frequently  addressed  the  Jews — but,  the  rule  was  a  general 
one,  and  in  effect  most  important,  because  it  was  a  formal  acknowledgment  of 
Paul's  mission,  and  of  its  total  independence.  Henceforth  the  two  Churches  were 
to  be  one  in  faith  and  mutual  goodwill,  but  different  in  their  ritual,  ceremonies,  and 
government.  The  Church  which  Peter  was  to  construct  was  national,  that  which 
was  put  under  Paul's  guidance  was  oecumenical.  The  story  that  Peter  ruled  the 
Church  of  Borne  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  is  of  course  contradicted  by  the  facts 
stated  in  this  Epistle,  and  is  plainly  a  baseless,  though  ancient,  fable,  which  has 
been  maintained  and  amplified  in  order  to  serve  particular  ends,  and  to  justify  eccle- 
siastical cffisarism.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Paul's  common-sense : — He  knew  that  the 
best  way  to  obviate  quarrels  was  to  recognize  differences.  He  was  well  aware  that 
men  may  work  for  a  common  purpose,  even  though  their  several  methods  of  pro- 
cedure may  be  so  various  as  to  seem  incongruous,  and  that,  provided  the  means 
be  just  and  honourable,  identity  of  end  is  a  sufficient  bond  of  unity.    The  wisdom 


7S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

of  the  statesman  consists  in  effecting  a  harmony  of  interests,  that  of  a  religion! 
reformer  in  enlisting  all  action  on  behalf  of  one  grand  purpose.  Both  wreck  their 
reputation  when  they  ally  themselves  to  party  cries  and  narrow  rules.  (Ibid.) 
Christian  unity  consistent  with  diversity: — Ours  is  not  a  unity  like  that  of  the 
waters  of  a  stagnant  pool,  over  which  the  purifying  breath  of  heaven  sweeps  in 
vain.  Ours  is  not  the  unity  of  darkness,  like  the  cloud-covered  midnight  sky,  where 
neither  moon  nor  star  appears.  Ours  is  not  the  unity  of  a  forced  conformity,  such 
as  is  found  in  polar  seas,  where  eternal  winter  has  locked  up  tbe  waves  ;  but  rather 
like  the  fountain  flowing  ever  fresh  and  free ;  like  the  rainbow  that  combines  the 
seven  prismatic  colours  into  one  glorious  arch  of  promise  ;  like  old  ocean's  unfettered 
flow  as  its  waves  rush  in  all  their  majesty  and  might,  distinct  as  the  billows,  but 
one  as  a  sea.  (S.  Weir.)  Four  pillars  of  the  Church : — These  four  pillars  of  the 
Church  stand  before  us  for  our  contemplation.  1.  For  example,  we  see  that  the 
widest  diversity  of  gifts  can  be  employed  to  advantage  in  winning  souls  to  Christ. 
It  would  hardly  be  possible  to  sketch  four  characters  differing  more  in  essential 
particulars  than  these  apostles.  Paul  was  the  theologian  of  the  early  Church. 
Peter  had  an  undeniable  headship  in  organization.  But  James  brought  his  cool 
temperament  into  service  in  decisions  involving  difficult  points  of  casuistry,  while 
John  was  of  all  the  best  calculated  to  labour  for  spiritual  eminence  in  the  converts. 
Now  when  results  are  before  us,  no  one  could  venture  to  pronounce  which  was  the 
most  useful  in  the  grand  work  Christ  gave  them  all  to  do.  Each  was  the  best  for 
his  own  work.  2.  So  this  Would  suggest  a  second  lesson :  failure  in  one  particular 
field  or  sphere  of  action  does  not  preclude  great  after-success  in  another  for  the 
same  man.  As  a  home  missionary  he  was  a  failure.  The  Lord  had  other  work 
for  him  to  do.  3.  Then  once  more :  we  might  learn  that  the  individualities  of 
personal  character  are  in  no  wise  destroyed  by  the  new  life  under  the  gospel.  Paul, 
after  his  conversion,  was  just  as  earnest  and  driving  as  before.  James  carried  his 
carefulness  as  a  Pharisee  into  his  demeanour  as  a  Christian.  Peter  left  his  boats 
and  tackle  to  become  a  skilful  fisher  of  men,  with  the  same  adroitness  and  patient 
business  absorption  put  into  his  fresh  profession.  So  John  was  affectionate  to 
Jesus'  mother,  because  he  had  grown  up  affectionate  to  his  own.  Naturalness  is 
one  of  the  best  evidences  of  grace,  for  it  excludes  assumption  and  hypocrisy.  No 
one  will  ever  succeed  in  making  himself  better  by  making  himself  over  into  another 
man's  likeness.  4.  In  the  fourth  place,  we  see  that  true  religion  in  the  heart  is  a 
powerful  helper  in  intellectual  advancement.  The  history  of  all  these  four  men 
affords  an  illustration  of  the  Scripture  text :  "  The  entrance  of  Thy  words  giveth 
light ;  it  giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple."  We  all  know  how  Simon  Peter 
was  reared.  How  is  it  possible  that  he  could  reach  literary  attainments  sufficient 
to  enable  him  to  write  two  such  Epistles  as  those  which  bear  his  name  ?  5.  Again,  we 
can  learn  from  these  men's  biographies  and  writings  that  the  very  best  Christian 
excellences  may  be,  unfortunately,  marred  by  personal  weaknesses.  For  every  one 
of  them  was  faulty  enough  to  make  some  notable  mistake,  which  has  been  handed 
down  to  us  in  the  imperishable  record.  Paul  quarrelled  sadly  with  Barnabas  abont 
Mark.  James  refused  to  welcome  Paul  at  Jerusalem.  6.  Just  a  suggestion  now, 
which  may  or  may  not  be  called  a  lesson.  Perhaps  the  ideal  Christian  might  be 
made  up  of  the  best  excellences  in  all.  Put  Paul's  orthodoxy  in  doctrine  alongside 
of  James's  morality  in  behaviour;  put  Peter's  activity  in  impulse  with  John's 
extensive  experience ;  join  all  these  into  one  man.  7.  Finally,  we  cannot  fail  to 
learn,  as  the  sweetest  and  best  lesson  of  all,  that  the  truest  Christians  are  those 
who  are  most  like  their  Leader,  and  most  loyal  to  Him  as  supreme.  (C.  S.  Robin- 
ton,  D.D.)  Pillars  in  the  Church: — Christians  are  frequently  called  "God's 
building,"  and  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  said  to  be  "  built  up  a  spiritual 
house  " :  and  as  some  occupy  more  important  places  in  this  spiritual  house  than 
others,  so  they  may  properly  be  called  pillars,  or  the  main  supports  of  the  building 
in  comparison  with  others.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  seem  to  be  pillars,  and  another 
to  be  really  such,  as  were  James,  Cephas,  and  John.  1.  Pillars  should  be  formed 
of  solid  materials.  In  modern  architecture,  it  is  too  common  to  decorate  the  front 
of  buildings,  with  what  seem  to  be  pillars,  and  are  not.  The  form  of  a  large  pillar 
is  often  built  up  with  broken  tiles,  cement,  and  stucco :  it  seems  to  bear  a  great 
pressure  of  responsibility,  which  is  deceptive,  like  the  whited  sepulchres  of  old,  for, 
in  fact,  the  burden  is  borne  by  some  modern  supports,  that  are  concealed  from  view. 
Now,  God's  building  does  not  need  the  help  of  such  pillars.  Those  who  would 
seem  to  be  pillars,  merely  for  show,  who  have  no  solidity,  and  can  bear  no  burden, 
had  better  take  a  more  humble  position.    These  imitation  pillars  are  good  foe 


„iB£t.  n.]  GALATIANS.  79 

nothing  but  show.  They  are  always  porous,  and  absorb  the  rain  ;  often  retain  the 
damp,  generate  dry  rot,  and  disgrace  what  they  were  intended  to  adorn.  2.  Pillars 
should  be  upright.  Pillars  that  incline  to  one  6ide  are  painful  to  look  at,  and 
dangerous  to  the  building.  When  the  pillars  in  the  church  lose  their  erect  position, 
the  whole  building  is  on  the  point  of  falling.  3.  Pillars  that  are  designed  for  use 
and  ornament  should  be  straight,  and  not  crooked.  A  bending  pillar  can  bear  but 
little  pressure,  and  is  very  offensive  to  the  eye.  Crooked  materials  can  be  used  to 
greater  advantage  in  almost  any  other  position  in  the  building.  4.  Pillars  should 
be  placed  under,  and  not  on  the  top  of  the  building.  They  should  bear  the  build- 
ing, and  not  compel  the  building  to  bear  them.  5.  Pillars  are  fixtures,  and  must 
always  be  found  in  the  same  position.  A  weathercock  at  the  top  of  the  edifice  may 
turn  with  the  wind,  but  a  pillar  that  supports  it  should  remain  unmoved  by  wind 
and  storm.  A  window  or  a  blind  may  be  adjusted  here  or  there,  to  the  season  or 
the  weather,  but  the  pillar  can  never  shift  its  position  without  danger  to  the  edifice 
of  which  it  forms  a  part.  6.  The  pillars  need  a  sure  foundation,  or  they  will  yield 
to  the  pressure  that  is  upon  them.  "  The  Kock  of  Ages  "is  recommended  as  their 
best  support.  Inferences :  1.  We  infer,  that  it  requires  at  least  ordinary  qualities 
of  Christian  character,  to  fit  a  man  to  be  a  pillar.  He  must  have  solidity,  upright- 
ness, humility,  steadfastness,  and  true  faith.  These  are  indispensable.  2.  Many, 
who  seem  to  be  pillars  in  these  days,  are  far  from  what  they  seem ;  they  show  a 
painted  surface  and  a  florid  capital,  but  they  are  of  little  use,  and  easily  marred 
and  broken.  3.  Many  whose  unassuming  dispositions  will  not  allow  them  to  be 
pillars,  have,  notwithstanding,  the  best  qualifications  for  it.  4.  Let  all  who  aspire 
to  be  pillars,  seek  to  combine  those  qualities  which  will  fit  them  for  the  station 
they  would  occupy,  and  the  burden  they  will  have  to  bear.  (Essex  Remembrancer.) 
The  apostle's  recognition  by  the  Church  in  Jerusalem : — I.  The  recognition  which 
Paul  received  from  the  Church  was  discerning.  1.  They  saw  that  to  him  was 
entrusted  the  gospel  which  was  to  be  preached  to  the  Oentiles.  The  gospel  of 
the  unciroumcision  was  committed  to  Paul.  The  gospel  is  a  Divine  deposit  or 
treasure.  2.  The  Church  saw  that  the  power  which  contributed  to  the  success  of 
the  one  apostle  was  effectual  also  in  the  other.  In  Paul  as  well  as  Peter  God  had 
wrought  effectually.  They  discerned  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  in  both  instances. 
3.  The  Church  recognized  the  religion  of  Paul  to  be  a  religion  of  love.  They  per- 
ceived the  grace  given  unto  him.  II.  The  recognition  Pacl  received  was  given 
in  spite  or  certain  differences  that  had  separated  him  from  the  Church  in 
Jeruselem  in  the  fast.  1.  Many  of  them  had  been  familiar  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  when  He  was  on  earth.  Paul  had  not.  Tet  they  now  saw  that  God  was  no 
respecter  of  persons,  "  but  in  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  Him  and  worketh 
righteousness,  is  accepted  of  Him."  2.  There  was  a  difference  between  them  in 
respect  to  gifts.  8.  There  was  also  a  difference  as  to  position.  Many  of  them  were 
of  acknowledged  reputation.  Paul  was  not  regarded  as  an  authority  in  the 
Churches  of  Judaa.  Yet  in  spite  of  these  differences  there  was  a  full  recognition 
of  his  apostolio  character  and  office.  III.  The  recognition  was  complete  and 
eeartt.  1.  There  was  no  reservation  as  to  its  extent.  They  admitted  the  whole 
truth  Paul  declared.  They  addressed  no  communication  to  him,  but  fully  embraced 
the  doctrines  he  enunciated.  2.  It  was  cordial.  They  gave  to  Paul  and  Barnabas 
the  right  hands  of  fellowship.  "  What  a  moment  must  that  have  been !  What  a 
blessed  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost ! "  IV.  In  receiving  this  recognition,  Paul 
was  anxious  to  manifest  his  high  estimate  of  their  brotherly  kindness.  They 
had  nothing  new  to  communicate  concerning  doctrine,  but  they  desired  him  to 
remember  the  poor,  and  this  request  he  gladly  complied  with.  He  here  shows  his 
fraternal  co-operation  with  the  other  apostles,  and  his  love  for  Jewish  Christians. 
He  could  not  comply  with  the  demands  of  the  false  brethren,'  but  it  was  from  no 
lack  of  charity.  Immediately  after  writing  this  Epistle,  he  made  a  tour,  gathering 
the  alms  of  the  Greek  Churches  for  the  saints  at  Jerusalem.  Lessons :  1.  Unity 
in  the  Christian  Church  has  its  foundation  in  Christ.  2.  Christian  unity  is  the 
product  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  Its  genuinenss  is  manifest  by  acts  of  beneficence. 
(R.  Nichollt.)  The  right  hands  of  fellowship. — St.  Paul  and  the  elder  apostlet  : — 
The  three  apostles  here  referred  to,  whatever  their  prepossessions,  yield  to  the  force 
of  Paul's  statements.  Peter  also  at  the  council  called  the  imposition  of  the  law 
on  Gentile  converts  an  intolerable  yoke,  for  the  Gentile  was  saved  by  the  same 
grace  as  the  Jew.  Peter  appealed  only  to  the  great  facts  which  had  met  him 
unexpectedly  in  his  own  experience ;  but  James,  in  the  old  theocratic  spirit,  con- 
nected the  outburst  of  Christianity  with  ancient  prophecy  as  its  fulfilment.    In  his 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  a. 

thought,  God  takes  out  of  the  Gentiles  a  people  for  His  name,  and  by  an  election 

as  real  as  when  He  separated  Israel  of  old  from  all  the  nations.    The  prophecy 

quoted  by  him  describes  the  rebuilding  of  the  tabernacle  of  David,  not  by  restoring 

his  throne  in  Jerusalem  over  Jews,  and  over  heathen  who,  as  a  test  of  their  loyalty, 

became  proselytes,  but  by  the  reconstitution  of  the  theocracy  in  a  more  spiritual 

form,  and  over  myriads  of  new  subjects — "  all  the  Gentiles  " — without  a  nint  of 

their  conformity  to  any  element  of  the  Mosaic  ritual.    This  expansion  of  the  old 

economy  had  been  foreseen ;  it  was  no  outgrowth  unexpected  or  unprovided  for. 

Believers  were  not  to  be  surprised  at  it,  or  to  grudge  that  their  national  supremacy 

should  disappear  amidst  the  Gentile  crowds,  who  in  doing  homage  to  David's  son, 

their  Messiah,  should  raise  "  the  tabernacle  of  David  "  to  a  grandeur  which  it  had 

never  attained,  and  could  never  attain  so  long  as  it  was  confined  to  the  territory  of 

Judaea.    The  Jewish  mind  must  have  been  impressed  by  this  reasoning  —  this 

application  of  their  own  oracles  to  the  present  crisis.     So  far  from  being  perplexed 

by  it,  they  ought  to  have  been  prepared  for  it ;  so  far  from  being  repelled  by  it, 

they    ought  to  have  anticipated    it,  prayed  for    it,  and  welcomed   its    faintest 

foregleams,  as  in  the  preaching  of  Philip  in  Samaria,  and  of  Peter  to  Cornelius. 

Paul  and  Barnabas,  in  addressing  the  multitude—"  the  Church,  the  apostles,  and 

elders  " — did  not  launch  into  a  discussion  of  the  general  question,  or  attempt  to 

demonstrate  abstract  principles.    First,  in  passing  through  Phcenice  and  Samaria, 

they  "  declared  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles ;  "  and  secondly,  at  the  convention, 

theirs  was  a  Bimple  tale  which  they  allowed  to  work  its  own  impression — they 

"  declared  what  miracles  and  wonders  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by 

them."    The  logic  of  their  facts  was  irresistible,  for  they  could  not  be  gainsaid. 

Let  their  audience  account  for  it  as  they  chose,  and  endeavour  to  square  it  with 

their  own  opinions  and  beliefs  as  best  they  might,  God  was  working  numerous  and 

undeniable  conversions  among  the  Gentiles  as  visibly  and  gloriously  as  among 

themselves.  The  haughty  exclusiveness  of  the  later  Judaism  made  it  impossible  for 

the  Church  to  extend  without  some  rupture  and  misunderstanding  of  this  nature. 

That  exclusiveness  was  nursed  by  many  associations.    For  them,  and  them  alone, 

was  the  temple  built,  the  hierarchy  consecrated,  and  the  victim  slain.    Their 

history  had  enshrined  the  legislation  of  Moses,  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,  the  throne 

of  David,  and  the  glory  of  Solomon.    The  manna  had  been  rained  upon  their 

fathers,  and  the  bright  Presence  had  led  them.     Waters  had  been  divided  and 

enemies  subdued.    Sinai  had  been  lighted  up,  and  had  trembled  under  the  majesty 

and  voice  of  Jehovah.    Their  land  was  hallowed  by  the  only  Churoh  of  God  on 

earth,  and  each  of  them  was  a  member  of  it  by  birth.  ^  His  one  temple  was  on 

Mount  Moriah,  and  they  gloried  in  the  pride  of  being  its  sole  possessors.    The 

archives  of  their  nation  were  at  the  same  time  the  records  of  their  faith.    Nothing 

was  so  opposed  to  their  daily  prepossessions  as  the  idea  of  a  universal  religion. 

Or  if  the  boundaries  of  the  covenanted  territory  were  to  be  widened,  Zion  was  still 

to  be  the  centre.    Foreign  peoples  were  to  have  no  separate  and  independent 

worship ;  all  nations  were  to  flow  to  the  "  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house,  established 

in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  exalted  above  the  hills."    It  is  impossible  for  as 

to  realize  the  intensity  of  Jewish  feeling  on  these  points,  as  it  was  ever  influencing 

Hebrew  believers  to  relapse  into  their  former  creed,  and  leading  others  into  the 

self-deceptive  and  pernicious  middle  course  of  Judaizers.    In  such  circumstances, 

the  work  of  St.  Paul  naturally  excited  uneasiness  and  suspicion  in  the  best  of  them, 

for  it  was  so  unlike  their  own  sphere  of  service.    But  the  elder  apostles  were  at 

this  period  brought  to  acquiesce  in  it,  and  they  virtually  sanctioned  it,  though  there 

might  not  be  entire  appreciation  of  it  in  all  its  extent  and  certain  consequences. 

There  is  no  ground,  therefore,  for  supposing  that  there  was  any  hostility  between 

Paul  and  these  elder  apostles,  or  any  decided  theological  difference,  as  many 

strenuously  contend  for.    They  all  held  the  same  cardinal  truths,  as  is  manifest 

from  the  Gospel  and  Epistles  of  John,  and  from  the  Epistles  of  Peter.    There  are 

varying  types  of  thought  arising  from  mental  peculiarity  and  spiritual  temperament 

— accidental  differences  showing  more  strongly  the  close  inner  unity.    Nor  is  the 

Epistle  of  James  in  conflict  with  the  Pauline  theology.    It  was  in  all  probability 

written  before  these  Judaistio  disputes  arose ;  for,  though  addressed  to  Jews,  ft 

makes  no  mention  of  them.    Its  object  among  other  things  was  to  prove  that  a 

justifying  faith  must  be  in  its  nature  a  sanctifying  faith ;  that  a  dead  faith  is  no 

faith,  and  is  without  all  power  to  save  ;  and  that  from  this  point  of  view  a  man  is 

justified  by  works— the  products  of  faith  being  identified  with  itself,  their   one 

living  source.    Nor  can  W3  say  that  there  were,  even  after  the  convention,  at 


chip,  n.]  6ALATIANS.  81 

misunderstandings  between  Paul  and  the  other  apostles.  While  they  were  at  one 
with  him  in  thought,  they  seem  not  to  have  had  the  same  freedom  to  act  out  their 
convictions.  There  was  no  opposition  on  any  points  of  vital  doctrine ;  bat  though 
they  held  that  his  success  justified  him,  they  did  not  feel  at  liberty,  or  had  not 
sufficient  intrepidity,  to  follow  his  example.  Though  their  earlier  exclusiveness 
was  broken,  their  nationality  still  remained — their  conservatism  had  become  an 
instinct — **  they  to  the  circumcision."  The  mere  separation  of  sphere  might  not  give 
rise  to  division,  but  tbese  pharisaio  Judaists,  who  were  not  so  enlightened  and 
considerate  as  their  leaders,  were  the  forefathers  of  that  Ebionitism  which  grew 
and  fought  so  soon  after  that  period,  having  its  extreme  antagonism  in  Marcion 
and  his  adherents.  How  the  other  apostles  who  had  left  Jerusalem  at  the  Herodiau 
persecution,  and  may  have  been  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  acted  as  to  these 
debated  matters,  we  know  not.  It  is  storied,  indeed,  that  John,  living  amidst  the 
Hellenic  population  of  Ephesus,  kept  the  paschal  feast  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
month,  in  accordance  with  the  Jewish  reckoning ;  and  that  he  wore  in  his  older 
years  one  special  badge  of  a  priest.  .  .  .  The  power  of  early  association,  which 
grows  with  one's  growth,  is  very  difficult  to  subdue ;  for  it  may  suddenly  reassert 
its  supremacy  at  some  unguarded  moment,  and  expose  inherent  weakness  and 
indecision.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  Grace  seen  in  God's  choice  of  workmen : — God 
would  build  for  Himself  a  palace  in  heaven  of  living  stones.  Where  did  He  get 
them  1  Did  He  go  to  the  quarries  of  Paros  ?  Hath  He  brought  forth  the  richest 
and  the  purest  marble  from  the  quarries  of  perfection  ?  No,  ye  saints :  look  to 
••  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were  digged,  and  to  the  rock  whence  ye  were  hewn !  '* 
Ye  were  full  of  sin :  bo  far  from  being  stones  that  were  white  with  purity,  ye  were 
black  with  defilement,  seemingly  utterly  unfit  to  be  stones  in  the  spiritual  temple, 
which  should  be  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Most  High.  Goldsmiths  make  exquisite 
forms  from  precious  material ;  they  fashion  the  bracelet  and  the  ring  from  gold : 
God  maketh  His  precious  things  out  of  base  material ;  and  from  the  black  pebbles 
of  the  defiling  brooks  he  hath  taken  up  stones,  which  He  hath  set  in  the  golden 
ring  of  His  immutable  love,  to  make  them  gems  to  sparkle  on  His  finger  for  ever. 
He  hath  not  selected  the  best,  but  apparently  the  worst  of  men  to  be  the  monuments 
of  His  grace ;  and,  when  He  would  have  a  choir  in  heaven,  He  sent  Mercy  to  earth 
to  find  out  the  dumb,  and  teach  them  to  sing.  (C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The  right 
hand  of  fellowship  : — I.  To  whom  should  we  give  it — to  all  who  hold  the  truth — to 
all  by  whom  God  is  pleased  to  work — to  all  in  whom  God  exhibits  His  grace.  II. 
How  must  we  give  it — not  by  forsaking  our  own  position  or  encouraging  them  tc 
leave  theirs — but  by  the  maintenance  of  brotherly  esteem  and  love,  by  provoking 
them  to  love  and  good  works.  (J.  Lyth.)  The  right  hand  of  fellowship  slwuld  be- 
given : — I.  To  all  to  whom  God  has  given  grace.  II.  By  the  pillars  of  the  Church, 
as  an  example  to  others.  III.  Heartily,  without  reserve.  (Ibid.)  Division  of 
labour  in  the  Church  is : — I.  Expedient — it  prevents  collision — economises  labour. 

II.  Advantageous — it  provokes  emulation — develops  effort — accomplishes  more. 
IH.  Necessary — there  is  room — and  need  for  all.  (Ibid.)  Pillars: — I.  Some 
seem  to  be  pillars  and  are  not.  II.  Some  are  pillars  and  do  not  seem  to  be.  III. 
Some  both  seem  to  be  and  are  really  such.  (Ibid.)  Unity  in  tfie  gospel : — I. 
One  gospel  yet  different  views.    II.  One  Master  yet  different  spheres  of"  labour. 

III.  One  Bource  of  power  yet  different  instrumentalities.  IV.  One  heart  yet 
different  modes  of  procedure.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  10.  That  we  should  remember  the  poor. — A  plea  for  the  poor  .-—Good  men 
do  not  always  think  alike.  When  they  differ,  it  is  commonly  from  ignorance  and 
a  want  of  mutual  explanation;  and  therefore  when  their  understandings  are 
informed,  as  their  hearts  were  right  before,  they  are  like  so  many  drops  of  water 
on  a  table — when  they  touch  they  run  into  one.  Besides,  while  differing  in  some 
things,  they  agree  in  others — and  these  by  far  the  most  important :  and  after  awhile 
are  generally  led  to  see  and  acknowledge  this.  Such  the  case  here.  A  difference 
among  the  brethren  in  Jerusalem  concerning  the  missions  of  Peter  and  Paul ;  but 
none  about  the  duty  of  remembering  the  poor.  On  that  all  agree.  I.  Who  are  to 
be  remembered?  The  poor.  Found  in  every  age  and  land.  1.  Distinguish 
between  the  vagrant  poor  and  the  resident  poor.  Vagrants  are  generally  the  least 
entitled  to  succour,  being  lazy,  and  not  disposed  to  work  when  the  opportunity  is 
offered  them.  The  resident  poor  have  these  claims ;  (1)  they  are  neighbours ;  (2) 
their  cases  can  be  searched  out,  and  impositions  detected ;  (3)  regarding  them  your 
bounty  is  known,  and  it  ought  to  be  known — not  to  extol  you,  but  to  honour  your 

6 


89  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*.  & 

religion,  recommend  the  gospel,  and  glorify  God.  2.  Distinguish  between  God's 
poor  and  the  devil's  poor.  In  helping  the  latter  while  they  continue  what  they  are, 
you  are  aiding  the  beer-house,  the  gin-shop,  licentiousness,  and  every  evil.  We 
should  try  to  save  them  from  their  suffering  by  saving  them  first  from  their  Bin. 
3.  Distinguish  between  the  strong  and  healthy  poor,  and  the  sick  and  disabled. 
The  latter  deserve  sympathy  and  help.    II.  Why  should  you  bemembeb  the  poob  ? 

1.  In  doing  so,  you  keep  the  best  company,  and  conform  to  the  noblest  examples. 

2.  You  are  bound  by  Divine  authority.     3.  The  poor  ar8  your  brethren.     4.  You 

are  under  great  obligations  to  the  poor.    You  are  more  dependent  on  them,  than 

they  on  you.    They  cultivate  your  lands,  manage  your  capital,  prepare  your  food, 

furnish  you  with  fuel ;  they  man  your  ships,  fill  your  armies,  fight  your  battles, 

&c,  &c.     5.  In  remembering  them  you  will  remember  yourselves.    By  God'a 

eternal  law,  doing  good  is  the  way  to  gain  good ;   giving  is  the  way  to  thrive 

(Psalm  xli.  1-3).    III.  How  are  we  to  bemembeb  the  poob  ?    1.  Compassion.    2. 

Readiness  to  relieve.    All  might  do  much  by  exercising  self-denial,  and  influencing 

others.     IV.  When  should  we  bemembeb  the   poob?     1.   When  you  die.     2. 

When  you  prosper.    3.  When  you  are  unthankful.    It  will  remind  you  of  how 

many  blessings  you  daily  receive,  and  so  stir  up  your  heart  to  praise.    4.  When  you 

are  peevish,  fretful,  discontented,  and  miserable.    Go,  then,  and  see  real  misery; 

and  consider  how  much  more  others  have  to  suffer  than  you ;  and  then  do  your  best 

to  relieve  that  suffering.    In  the  act  of  giving  consolation,  you  shall  receive  it.    5. 

When  you  fast.    Let  your  own  abstinence  for  your  soul's  health  benefit  the  bodies 

of  those  whose  life  is  a  perpetual  involuntary  fast  (Isaiah  lviii.  6-8).    6.  Every 

Lord's  Day  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2).      7.  Now.     Give  liberally  to  the  charity  work  in  aid  of 

which  your  alms  are  to-day  solicited.    If  the  Saviour  were  here  now  as  a  Man,  how 

would  He  give  ?    He  could  not  give  much.    He  would  then  give — what  many  here 

(and  the  best  givers  too,  perhaps)  will  give — coppers ;  not  from  want  of  inclination, 

but  from  want  of  ability.    He  was  a  poor  Man,  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head. 

But  suppose  He  was  possessed  of  the  fortunes  some  of  yon  possess,  what  would  He 

give  then  ?    Think  of  it,  and  go  and  do  likewise.     (William  Jay.)        The  duty  of 

remembering  the  poor: — Poverty  no  virtue;   wealth  no  sin.     Nor  yet  is  wealth 

morally  good,  poverty  morally  evil.    Virtue  is  a  plant  which  depends  not  on  the 

atmosphere  surrounding  it,  but  on  the  hand  that  waters  and  the  grace  that  sustains 

it.    Grace  must  be  sustained  by  Divine  power.  Yet,  as  a  fact,  God  has  been  pleased 

for  the  most  part  to  plant  His  grace  in  the  soil  of  poverty.    A  very  large  multitude 

of  His  family  are  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented,  and  are  kept  leaning  day  by  day 

upon  the  daily  provisions  of  God,  and  trusting  Him  from  meal  to  meal,  believing 

that  He  will  supply  their  wants  out  of  the  riches  of  His  fulness.    I.  The  fact, 

that  the  Lobd  has  a  poob  people.    A  word  from  Him,  and  they  might  all  be  rich. 

Yet  He  does  not  speak  that  word.    Why  ?    1.  To  teach  us  how  grateful  we  should 

be  for  all  the  comforts  He  bestows  on  many  of  us.     2.  To  display  His  sovereignty 

in  all  He  does.     3.  To  manifest  the  power  of  His  comforting  promises,  and  the 

supports  of  the  gospel.    The  master-works  of  God  are  those  that  stand  in  the 

midst  of  difficulties — when  all  things  oppose  them,  yet  maintain  their  stand ;  these 

are  His  all-glorious  works ;  and  so  His  best  children,  those  who  honour  Him  most, 

are  those  who  have  grace  to  sustain  them  amidst  the  heaviest  load  of  tribulations 

and  trials.    4.  To  plague  the  devil,  e.g.,  Job.     5.  To  give  us  some  living  glimpse 

of  Christ.    A  poor  saint  is  a  better  picture  of  Jesus  than  a  rich  one.    6.  To  give 

ns  opportunities  of  showing  our  love  to  Him.     Take  away  the  poor,  and  one 

channel  wherein  our  love  delights  to  flow  is  withdrawn  at  onee.    H.  The  duty, 

that  we  should  beuembeb  the  poob.     1.   In  prayers.     2.    In  conversation.    3. 

In  providing  for  their  necessities.     IV.  Why  we  should  remember  the  poor.    1. 

They  are  the  Lord's  brethren.    This  is  surely  reason  enough.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Remembrance  of  the  poor  recommended : — I.  Examine  the  nature  of  the  assebtion. 

No  need  to  describe  the  poor ;  they  describe  themselves.    You  daily  witness  the 

scantiness  and  poverty  of  their  apparel,  their  pale  and  emaciated  forms ;  you  hear 

their  piteous  plaints,  and  the  tale  of  their  complicated  woes.     But  we  should 

remember — 1.  The  work  of  the  poor.    (1)  It  is  irksome  and  laborious ;  (2)  often 

destructive  to  health ;  (3)  of  more  benefit  to  others  than  to  themselves.     2.  The 

deprivations  of  the  poor.    (1)  Scanty  means  of  instruction;  (2)  little  opportunity 

of  improving  their  minds ;  (3)  uncomfortable  homes ;  (4)  degrading  surroundings ; 

(5)  insufficient  clothing  and  food.    3.  Our  remembrance  of  the  poor  should  be 

founded  on  personal  observation.    4.  It  should  be  accompanied  by  relief.    The 

best  form  of  relief  is  employment.    H.  State  the  obligations  we  abb  undeb  t* 


chat,  n.]  0ALATIAN8.  83 

comply  with  it.  1.  The  dictates  of  humanity  require  it.  The  poor  are  our 
brethren.  2.  The  demands  of  duty  require  it.  The  laws  of  God  have  made  this 
imperative  upon  as  (Deut.  xv.  7-9 ;  Dan.  iv.  27 ;  Luke  vi.  35-38 ;  Matt.  vii.  12 ;  1 
John  iii.  17).  3.  The  rights  of  justice  require  it.  To  the  poor  we  owe  far  more 
than  to  rich  drones  who  merely  live  on  the  labours  of  others.  Who  erect  our 
houses?  Who  make  our  clothes?  Who  procure  our  food  ?  Do  not  the  poor  ? — 
therefore  remember  them.  4.  The  claims  of  interest  require  it.  God  remembers 
the  poor ;  is  it  not  our  interest  to  imitate  Him  ?  (Psa.  xli.  1,  2 ;  Frov.  iii.  9 :  xix. 
17;  Isa.  lxviii.  10,  11).  III.  Answer  objections.  1.  My  circumstances  are 
straitened,  I  have  nothing  to  spare.  What!  Nothing?  (1  Kings  xvii.  11,12; 
Luke  zzi.  2-4).  2.  Charity  must  begin  at  home.  True ;  but  it  should  not  end 
there.  3.  I  have  a  right  to  do  what  I  will  with  my  own.  But  what  is  your  own  ? 
Are  yon  not  a  steward  merely  of  God's  goods  ?  Will  He  not  call  you  to  account  ? 
4.  The  poor  do  not  deserve  to  be  remembered.  God  thinks  they  do ;  that  is 
enough.  What  if  He  dealt  with  as  according  to  our  deserts?  {Theological 
Sketch-book.)  Care  of  the  poor: — When  Fox,  the  author  of  the  "Book  of 
Martyrs,"  was  once  leaving  the  palace  of  Aylmer,  the  Bishop  of  London,  a 
company  of  poor  people  begged  him  to  relieve  their  wants  with  great  importunity. 
Fox,  having  no  money,  returned  to  the  bishop,  and  asked  the  loan  of  five  pounds, 
which  was  readily  granted.  He  immediately  distributed  it  among  the  poor  by  whom 
he  was  surrounded.  Some  months  after,  Aylmer  asked  Fox  for  the  money  he  had 
borrowed.  ••  I  have  laid  it  out  for  you,"  was  the  answer,  "  and  paid  it  where  you 
owed  it — to  the  poor  people  who  lay  at  your  gate."  Far  from  being  offended, 
Aylmer  thanked  Fox  for  thus  being  his  steward.  A  plea  for  the  poor: — Some  one 
was  expressing  surprise  to  Eveillon,  canon  and  archdeacon  of  Angers,  that  none 
of  his  rooms  were  carpeted.  He  answered :  ••  When  I  enter  my  house  in  the 
winter-time,  the  floors  do  not  tell  me  that  they  are  cold;  but  the  poor,  who 
are  shivering  at  my  gate,  tell  me  they  want  clothes."         Paul's  care  for  the 

Sor : — I.  Paul,  who  had  beggared  thk  Church,  is  now  beady  to  beo  fob  it. 
,  Paul  sets  us  an  example  of  care  fob  the  poob  (Bom.  xv.  25,  28).  He  gave 
more  than  good  words  and  wishes.  1.  The  charge  was  very  great  to  maintain  the 
altar  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  New  Testament  the  poor  come  in  place  of  the 
altar.    2.  Mercy  to  the  poor  is  a  condition  of  Divine  mercy.    III.  Paul  being 

WARNED  WAS  DILIGENT    TO  DO  THAT  OF  WHICH   HE  WAS  WARNED.      It   is  a  Common  fault 

to  hear  much  and  do  little.  (W.Perkins.)  True  beneficence :  its  thoughtfulness. — 
How  difficult  it  is  to  be  wisely  charitable;  to  do  good  without  multiplying  the 
sources  of  evil!  To  give  alms  is  nothing  unless  you  give  thought  also.  It  is 
written,  not  "blessed  is  he  that  feedeth  the  poor,"  but  "blessed  is  he  that 
eonsidereth  the  poor."  A  little  thought  and  a  little  kindness  are  often  worth  more 
than  a  deal  of  money.  (Ruskin.)  Beneficence :  its  reward. — During  the  retreat 
of  Alfred  the  Great  at  Athelney,  a  beggar  came  to  him  and  requested  alms ;  when 
his  queen  informed  him  that  they  had  only  one  small  loaf  left,  which  was  insufficient 
for  themselves  and  their  friends  who  had  gone  abroad  in  quest  of  food,  though  with 
little  hope  of  success,  "  Give  the  poor  Christian  one-half  of  the  loaf,"  said  the 
king ;  "  He  who  could  feed  five  thousand  men  with  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes 
can  certainly  make  that  half  of  the  loaf  euffioe  for  our  necessities."  The  poor  man 
was  relieved  accordingly,  and  this  noble  act  of  charity  was  soon  recompensed  by  a 
providential  store  of  fresh  provisions,  with  which  his  people  returned.  Remember 
the  poor. — I  was  very  much  pleased  with  the  conduct  of  a  brother  who  is  here 
present.  A  short  time  ago  there  stood  in  the  aisle  near  his  pew,  a  gentleman  and 
a  poor  fellow  in  a  smock  frock.  I  thought  to  myself  "  He  will  let  one  in,  I  know; 
I  wonder  which  it  will  be  ?  "  I  did  not  wait  long  before  out  he  came  and  in  went 
the  smock  frock.  He  thought  very  rightly  that  the  poor  man  was  the  most  tired, 
for  he  had  no  doubt  had  a  hard  week's  work,  and  probably  a  long  walk,  for  there 
are  not  many  smock  frocks  near  London.  I  say  again,  "  Bemember  the  poor." 
(<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Remember  the  orplians : — PuddiDgs  and  potatoes  form  impor- 
tant articles  of  diet,  and  I  shall  be  glad  if  farmers  will  remember  our  orphans  in 
seedtime  and  harvest.  Much  more  help  could  be  rendered  in  kind  if  doners  would 
only  think  of  it.  We  need  not  mention  things  which  an  orphanage  cannot 
consume ;  it  would  take  space  to  mention  things  we  could  not  use,  such  as  alcoholic 
liquors,  rattlesnakes,  gunpowder,  dynamite,  or  books  of  modern  theology.  (Ibid.) 
Christian  forwardness : — And  now,  when  the  standard  of  Christ  is  unfurled,  have 
Christians  become  cowardly  T  Are  there  none  among  them  who  can  step  forward 
and  say,  *•  Here  am  I :  send  me."    I  do  not  believe  there  is  such  a  cowardly  spirit 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

amcng  us.  But  there  is  what  is  generally  called  a  retiring  disposition.  I  am 
scarcely  able  to  make  nice  distinctions.  In  the  day  of  battle  if  the  commanding 
officer  found  one  of  his  men  in  the  rear  rank  on  account  of  his  modest  and  retiring 
disposition,  I  think  he  would  tingle  it  out  of  him  with  a  few  lashes  on  his  back. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  11, 12.  1  withstood  him  to  the  face.— Paul  and  Peter : — I.  Character  is  a 
growth.  The  most  zealous  is  not  always  the  most  steadfast.  Fires  slumber  within 
which  circumstances  may  fan  into  a  terrible  flame.  We  bring  our  evil  tendencies 
with  us  into  the  Kingdom  of  God  to  be  gradually  curbed,  restrained,  overcome  by 
higher  and  Divine  tendencies.  Let  every  man  keep  sentinel  over  himself  ;  let  him 
beware  of  old  sins ;  let  him  guard  his  soul  by  prayer  against  attacks  on  his  weak 
points  ;  let  him  cast  aside  every  weight  if  he  would  run  the  true  race,  whose  goal  is 
perfection.  II.  Fear  of  man  deteriorates  the  character.  How  many  barter  their 
birthright  for  the  world's  empty  applause  I  A  little  courage  would  save  them  a 
world  of  shame ;  a  decisive  step  or  a  bold  word  would  put  to  silence  their  adver- 
saries ;  but  they  dare  not  make  a  stand,  and  so  their  independence  is  lost  and  their 
character  lowered.  III.  Observe  the  influence  of  character  on  others.  Peter 
did  not  sin  alone.  The  other  Jews  dissembled,  and  even  Barnabas  was  led  away. 
So  it  is  always.  Evil  companionships  and  examples  corrupt  good  characters.  IV. 
Bear  in  mind  the  supreme  necessity  of  honesty.  The  truth  must  at  all  hazards 
be  defended,  faithfully,  courteously,  lovingly.  V.  Paul's  appeal  was  successful. 
Truth  always  prevails  in  the  end.  A  little  firmness  at  the  right  time,  and  in  the 
right  way,  may  save  a  brother's  soul.  VI.  This  was  no  mere  personal  dispute,  but 
involved  vital  issues.  The  antagonism  was  between  law  on  the  one  hand  and 
grace  on  the  other.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Paul  rebukes  Peter: — One  of  the  most 
remarkable  events  in  sacred  history.  Tradition  tells  us  St.  Paul  was  a  man  of 
small  stature,  bearing  the  marked  features  of  the  Jew,  yet  not  without  some  of  the 
finer  lines  indicative  of  Greek  thought.  His  head  bald,  his  beard  long  and  thin ;  a 
bright  gray  eye,  overhung  by  somewhat  contracted  eyebrows ;  whilst  a  cheerful  and 
winning  expression  of  countenance  invited  the  approach  and  inspired  the  confidence 
of  strangers.  St.  Peter  is  represented  as  a  man  of  larger  form  and  stronger  build, 
with  dark  eye,  pale  and  sallow  complexion,  and  short  hair  curled  black  and  thick 
round  his  temples.  At  the  meeting  here  mentioned  Judaism  and  Christianity  were 
brought  face  to  face.  In  vers.  14-16  we  have  the  case  of  Gospel  versus  Law.  I.  Tira 
conduct  of  St.  Peter  on  this  occasion  may  be  regarded  as — 1.  An  example  of  temp- 
tation arising  from  the  fear  of  man.  Peter  was  by  nature  timid  ;  prompt  to  act, 
yet  apt  to  vacillate ;  afraid  of  opposition.  2.  An  instance  of  an  apostle's  departure 
from  the  straight  path  of  gospel  truth,  and  of  the  ease  with  which  suoh  departure 
may  take  place.  No  divergence  from  God's  truth,  however  slight,  is  unimportant. 
We  never  know  what  (to  all  appearance)  the  slightest  error  may  result  in.  Our  only 
safety  lies  in  holding  fast  the  whole  truth.  3.  Not  inconsistent  with  his  integrity 
as  a  Christian,  or  with  his  inspiration  as  a  writer.  His  writings  were  under  the 
direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  nobly  redeemed  this  error  by  a  faithful  and  con- 
sistent after-life.  II.  The  conduct  of  St.  Paul  was — 1.  An  example  of  moral 
courage  in  administering  reproof.  No  easy  thing,  at  any  time,  to  rebuke  a  friend. 
It  is  painful  to  oppose  one  whom  we  love,  or  whose  good  opinion  we  value.  2.  A 
noble  vindication  of  gospel  truth.  (Emilius  Bay  ley,  B.D.)  Peter's  inconsistent 
conduct : — The  conduct  of  Peter  is  not  easy  to  understand.  Already,  at  the  council 
or  concordat  of  the  apostles,  he  had  agreed  to  impose  no  burdens  on  the  Gentile 
Christians ;  and,  at  a  much  earlier  period  in  the  history  of  the  apostles,  he  had  not 
only  been  charged  with  going  in  unto  men  uncircumcised  and  eating  with  them,  but 
had  taught  others  that  they  were  to  "  call  nothing  common  or  unclean."  And  now, 
not  of  his  own  free  will,  but  under  the  influence  of  certain  who  came  from  Jerusalem, 
from  a  fear  of  the  very  same  charge,  "  Thou  wentest  in  unto  men  uncircumcised 
and  eatest  with  them,"  he  held  back,  and  seemed  to  view  his  Christian  brethren 
with  the  feelings  with  which  he  would  have  regarded  men  who  sat  at  meat  in  an 
idol's  temple.  It  is  remarkable,  and  may  be  considered  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of 
the  history,  that  this  conduct,  however  unintelligible,  is  in  keeping  with  Peter's 
character.  We  recognize  in  it  the  lineaments  of  him  who  confessed  Christ  first,  and 
first  denied  Him  ;  who  began  by  refusing  that  Christ  should  wash  his  feet,  and  then 
said,  "  Not  my  feet  only,  but  my  hands  and  my  head ; "  who  cut  off  the  ear  of  the 
servant  of  the  high  priest  when  they  came  to  take  Jesus,  and  then  forsook  Him  and 
fled.    Boldness  and  timidity — first  boldness,  then  timidity — were  the  characteristics 


Oiur.  n.]  QALATIANS.  U 

of  his  nature.  It  was  natural  for  such  a  one,  though  no  longer  strictly  a  Jew  him- 
self, to  desire  that  others  should  conform  to  the  prejudices  of  Jews ;  such  conduct 
•greed  with  the  bent  of  his  own  mind,  though  he  formally  disowned  it.  There  is,  we 
may  observe,  in  many  men  a  sort  of  tenderness  to  what  they  onoe  were  themselves ; 
as  there  is  another  class  of  men  who  learn  a  lesson,  but  only  to  apply  it  under  given 
circumstances.  Something  of  this  kind  there  may  have  been  in  St.  Peter  ;  a  narrow- 
ness of  perception,  or  secret  sympathy  with  the  Judaizing  converts,  which  prevented 
his  seeing  the  wider  truth  which  presented  itself  to  St.  Paul.  At  any  rate,  his  was  a 
disposition  on  which  ancient  habits  and  feelings  were  ever  liable  to  return ;  whose 
heart  oould  scarcely  avoid  lingering  around  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  of  the 
law ;  on  whom  in  age  the  lessons  of  youth  were  too  prone  to  come  back,  "  carrying 
him  whither  he  would  not."  The  charge  which  St.  Paul  brings  against  him  was, 
inconsistency  with  himself;  he  was  half  a  Gentile,  and  wanted  to  make  the  Gentiles 
altogether  Jews.  (B.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Force  of  example: — What  a  constraining 
power  there  is  in  the  example  of  eminent  persons.  He  is  said  to  compel,  in  Scripture, 
not  only  who  doth  violently  force,  but  who,  being  of  authority,  doth  provoke  by  his 
example.  (Burkitt.)  The  errors  of  those  that  do  rule  become  rulers  of  error.  Men 
Bin  through  a  kind  of  authority,  through  the  sins  of  those  who  are  in  authority. 
(Ibid.)  Open  reproof  for  open  sin : — Such  as  sin  openly  must  be  reproved  openly. 
No  bands  of  friendship  must  keep  the  ministers  of  God  from  reproving  sin.  A  noto- 
rious fault  must  be  reproved  with  much  boldness  and  resolution.  If  such  as  are 
eminent  in  the  Church  fall,  they  fall  not  alone ;  many  fall  with  them.  (Ibid.) 
Protestant  popery : — How  many  rejoice  at  Paul's  defence  of  the  liberty  of  the  gospel 
against  Peter's  weakness,  who  themselves  will  not  receive  rebuke  as  Peter  did — nay, 
»re  very  popes  at  heart.  For  there  are  popes  in  pews  as  well  as  in  pulpits,  besides 
the  pope  who  openly  claims  to  be  such ;  Christian  liberty  suffers  from  them  all. 
[M,  B.  Riddle,  D.D. )  False  doctrine : — It  is  a  good  and  a  pleasant  thing  for  brethren 
to  dwell  together  in  unity.  But  in  a  world  like  this  such  enjoyment  cannot  be 
universal  or  permanent.  No  Christian  vigilance  can  prevent  differences  of  opinion. 
They  existed  even  among  the  apostles,  and  even  upon  fundamental  truths.  We  may 
learn  from  this  fact  a  twofold  lesson.  1.  When  differences  affect  only  the  circum- 
stantials of  religion,  however  interesting,  and  in  their  place  important,  those  matters 
which  are  in  themselves  of  human  origin  and  rest  on  human  authority  may  be,  the 
differences  respecting  them  are  calculated  to  teach  us  a  lesson  of  charity  (Bom.  xiv. 
5,  6).  2.  When  they  extend  to  the  fundamental  portions  of  revealed  truth,  they  are 
equally  calculated  to  teach  ns  a  lesson  of  fidelity  (Gal.  i.  8).  The  matter  to  which 
the  text  refers,  considered  in  itself,  might  have  been  enumerated  among  those  ques- 
tions whioh  teach  charity  ;  but,  considered  in  its  bearing  upon  the  gospel,  considered 
in  the  aspect  which  it  gave  to  the  gospel  among  the  Gentiles,  it  compromised  the 
freeness  of  the  gospel,  and  marred  the  simplicity  of  God's  message  in  Christ.  And 
therefore  St.  Paul  withstood  the  error  of  St.  Peter  "  to  the  face,  because  he  was  to 
be  blamed."  Barnabas  was  carried  away  also  with  the  dissimulation.  St.  Paul  was 
left  alone.  It  was  a  critical  moment  for  the  primitive  Church.  Who  can  estimate 
the  amount  of  the  disaster  that  would  have  followed  had  St.  Paul  fallen  as  St.  Peter 
fell?  Who  can  estimate  the  damage  which  would  have  been  sustained  bad  the 
gospel,  from  the  very  outset,  been  presented  in  a  corrupt  form  ?  How  could  we  now 
Have  traced  its  purity  had  St.  Paul  sunk  with  St.  Peter  ?  As  far  as  man  can  judge, 
the  world  would  then  never  have  had  the  gospel  in  its  simplicity  with  the  clear 
authority  of  Scriptural  truth.  But,  through  the  mercy  and  grace  of  God,  St.  Paul 
stood  fast.  (H.  McNeile,  D.D.)  Good  men  are  not  perfect  men : — A  gentleman  of 
the  Perfectionist  school  of  thought  called  to  see  an  old  Christian  of  his  neighbour- 
hood, and  began  enlarging  upon  that  interesting  topic  "  Can  you  point  to  a  single 
perfect  man  or  woman  in  the  Bible?"  inquired  the  aged  saint.  "Yes,"  readily 
answered  the  other;  "  turn  to  Luke  i.  6,  you  will  there  read  of  two — Elizabeth  and 
Zaoharias  walked  'in  all  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord,  blame- 
less.'"  "Then  you  consider  yourself  a  believer  like  Zacharias?"  "Certainly  I 
do,"  said  the  visitor.  "  Ah,"  replied  the  old  man,  "  I  thought  you  might  be ;  and 
we  read  a  few  verses  further  on  that  he  was  struck  dumb  for  his  unbelief."  (Nye.) 
Robert  HalVs  temper: — It  is  said  that  in  the  earlier  part  of  Bobert  Hall's  ministry, 
he  was  impetuous  and  sometimes  overbearing  in  argument ;  but  if  he  lost  his  temper 
he  was  deeply  humbled,  and  would  often  acknowledge  himself  to  blame.  On  one 
of  these  occasions,  when  a  discussion  had  become  warm,  and  he  had  evinced  unusual 
agitation,  he  suddenly  closed  the  debate,  quitted  his  seat,  and,  retiring  to  a  remote 
part  of  the  room,  was  overheard  to  ejaculate,  with  deep  feeling,  "  Lamb  of  God, 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckif.  & 

Lamb  of  God,  calm  my  perturbed  spirit ! "      The  fear  of  man  illustrated :— Bargo- 
meister  Gnericke  constructed  a  gigantic  barometer  with  a  tube  thirty  feet  in  height, 
part  of  which  projected  above  the  roof  of  his  house  at  Magdeburg.    The  index  wai 
the  figure  of  a  man,  who,  in  fair  weather,  was  seen  standing  full  size  above  the  roof ; 
but,  when  a  storm  was  brewing,  he  cautiously  withdrew  for  security  and  shelter. 
Antitype  of  religionists  and  politicians!    When  the  sun  shines  brightly,  and  the 
breezes  scarcely  breathe  across  the  landscape,  how  erect  and  bold  they  look  1     But 
let  the  clouds  gather,  and  the  thunders  mutter,  and  what  a  drawing-in  of  diminished 
heads  I     O  rare,  satirical  Burgomeister !  you  must  have  had  an  alderman's  expe- 
rience.     (Dr.  W.  F.  Warren.)    Brotherly  reproof: — I.  What  is  bbpboof.     1.  An  act 
of  charity  and  mercy,  not  of  pride  and  vain-glory  (2  Thess.  iii.  15 ;  James  iii.  1). 
2.  Using  fit  discourse,  not  chastisement,  and,  in  general,  from  God's  Word  (CoL  iii. 
16).     3.  Having  as  its  end  not  our  brother's  shame,  but  his  reclamation  from  sin 
to  duty  (Gal.  vi.  1).    II.  The  kind  of  reproof  it  is  our  duty  to  give.    1.  Authoritative. 
By  way  of  office  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).    2.  In  the  way  of  general  duty,  which  lieth  on  all 
men  (1  Thess.  v.  14).    III.  The  manner  in  which  to  discharge  this  duty.    1.  Faith- 
fully (Titus  i.  13).   2.  With  lenity  and  Christian  meekness  (Gal.  vi.  1).  3.  Prudently. 
Well  weighing  all  the  circumstances  of  person,  time,  place,  occasion,  provocation, 
that  all  things  may  be  proportioned  to  the  design  (Pro v.  xxv.  12).    IV.  The  Argu- 
ments which  enforce  this  duty.    1.  The  law  of  nature,  which  teaches  us  to  love  our 
neighbour.    2.  The  law  of  God  (Prov.  xxv.  8-10 ;  Matt,  xviii.  15 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  15, 
v.  14 ;  Jude  22,  23).     8.  Giving  reproof  is  commended  (Prov.  xxiv.  25 ;  James  Vi 
19,  20),  and  taking  reproof  (Prov.  xiii.  18,  xv.  31,  32 ;  Eccles.  vii.  5).   4.  The  main, 
tenance  of  society  and  the  improvements  of  human  relations  depend  upon  it.    V. 
When  and  to  what  this  duty  binds.     1.  Not  unless  the  fault  is  certainly  known  ; 
not,  therefore,  on  mere  suspicion  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5),  uncertain  hearsay  (Isa.xi.  3),  flying 
reports,  or  slander.    2.  Not  if  our  brother  has  repented.     8.  Not  if  a  good  result  is 
unlikely,  and  a  bad  result  probable  (Matt.  vii.  0).     In  conclusion :  1.  If  we_  are  to 
reprove  others,  let  us  take  care  that  we  are  blameless  (Matt.  vi.  8-5 ;  Bom.  iii.  21). 
2.  If  others  are  bound  to  reprove,  we  are  bound  to  take  reproof.    (T.  Manton.) 
The  end  of  St.  Peter's  error : — Though  St.  Paul's  narrative  stops  short  of  the  last 
scene  in  this  drama,  it  would  not  be  rash  to  conclude  that  it  ended  as  that 
other  had  ended,  that  the  revulsion  of  feeling  was  as  sudden  and  complete,  and 
that  again  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly,  having  denied  his  Lord  in  the  person 
of  these  Gentile  converts.     (Bishop  Lightfoot.)        Differences  among  the  apostles : — 
Nothing  can  be  more  false  and  delusive  than  to  imagine  that  the  first  teachers 
were  men  whose  harmony  of  opinion  and  action  was  complete,  who  had  neither 
debate,  difference,  or  quarrel.     They  were  not  unconscious  mouthpieces  of  a 
supernatural  inspiration,  automata  of  some  uncontrollable  enthusiasm,  unanimous 
machines,  but  men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  men  with  characters,  im- 
pulses, affections,  fears,  dislikes — men  human  in  the  mistakes  they  made  and  in  the 
truths  they  embraced  and  enunciated.    It  is  sheer  superstition  to  treat  them  as 
more  than  men,  as  other  than  men,  however  highly  we  may  esteem  them  and  their 
work.    If  we  make  them  unreal  and  transcendental  personages  we  do  them  a  great 
injustice,  and  ourselves  a  certain  mischief,  because  all  free  inquiry  into  their  motives 
and  feelings  is  suspected  as  a  challenge  of  their  authority,  and  every  other  form  of 
commentary  becomes  mere  verbiage  around  a  foregone  conclusion.     They  are  not 
stars  fixed  round  the  great  central  Light,  and  differing  only  in  glory  and  goodness 
from  Him  who  is  the  centre  of  their  system ;  but  they  have  what  light  they  possess 
from  reflection,  and  feel  themselves  immeasurably  distant  from  the  Power  which 
illumines  them.     (Pawl  of  Tarsus.)        The  dissension  a  witness  to  the  truth  of  th* 
Bible  : — The  Bible  is  of  great  worth  for  its  natural,  fresh,  and  honest  expressions  of 
human  thought  and  feeling.    The  faith,  hope,  love,  reverence,  wonder ;  the  doubts, 
sorrows,  fears,  temptations,  and  sins  of  the  writers  are  recorded  for  our  instruction, 
as  well  as  the  Divine  doctrine  they  teach.    In  this  spiritual  portrait  gallery  we  be- 
hold the  work  of  truthful  artists.     No  vanity,  no  pride,  no  desire  to  deceive,  pre- 
vented them  from  pourtraying  themselves  just  as  they  appeared.    We  value  the 
Scriptures  because  their  truths  make  ua  wise  unto  salvation ;  but  we  value  them  also 
as  a  record  of  what  the  good  and  wise  thought  and  felt  during  their  life-struggle  on 
this  earth.    The  Bible  is  not  only  a  revelation  of  God,  but  also  a  revelation  of  man 
— the  most  Divine  and  the  most  human  book  ever  written.  ( Thomas  Jones.)  Blemishes 
in  Christians : — There  are  MSS.  which  are  called  palimpsests— MSS.  written  over 
again.    The  original  inscription,  which  was  fair  and  full  of  Divine  wisdom,  has  been 
defaced,  and  in  its  place  may  now  be  seen  letters  and  words  and  sentences  in  contrast 


chap,  n.]  GALATIANS.  87 

to  what  was  contained  before.  And  so  the  character  of  men — these  great  men,  men 
born  of  the  Spirit — over  their  better  natures  you  may  see  scratched  in  ugly  scrawls, 
obvious  imperfections  and  failures.  But,  thank  God,  Divine  grace,  through  discipline 
of  various  kinds,  rubs  out  the  evil  and  brings  back  the  good,  and  causes  the  soul 
at  last  to  reveal  again  most  distinctly  what  had  been  only  dimmed  and  not 
destroyed,  even  as  there  has  been  discovered  a  method  by  which  the  palimp- 
sests can  be  made  to  exhibit  once  more  what  seemed  for  ever  spoiled.  (-/. 
Stovghton,  D.D.)  Truth-telling  :  an  act  of  friendship  : — There   cannot   be  a 

more  worthy  improvement  of  friendship  than  in  a  fervent  opposition  to  the 
sins  of  those  whom  we  love.      (Bishop  Hall.)  Tiie  truth-tellers'   reward  ; — 

Years  after  this  encounter  Peter  took  his  revenge.  Having  to  write  to  the 
Btrangers  scattered  through  "Galatia,"  who  through  a  celebrated  Epistle  knew 
of  his  humiliation,  what  does  he  do?  Vindicate  himself?  State  the  other 
6ide  f  No  ;  he  calls  his  reprover  a  brother  beloved,  and  testifies  that  iu 
all  his  Epistles  he  wrote  according  to  the  wisdom  given  him  of  God.  The 
weakness  and  dissimulation  of  Peter  : — The  act  of  which  he  was  guilty  was 
dissimulation ;  it  was  not  what  he  believed  to  be  right,  but  an  expediency  adopted 
in  a  moment  of  weakness.  It  is  described — I.  As  a  violation  of  his  convictions. 
He  had  commenced  upon  equal  t^rms  with  Gentile  believers,  and  he  had  done  this 
according  to  the  express  will  of  God  revealed  to  kirn  (Acts  x.  28).  These  c  onvio- 
tions  had  been  further  deepened  by  what  had  taken  place  in  Jerusalem  during 
Paul's  visit  to  that  city.  II.  This  dissimulation  was  prompted  by  a  vest  unworthy 
motive.  Peter  feared  them  which  were  of  the  circumcision.  Many  have  made 
shipwreck  of  faith  upon  this  same  rock.  How  often  have  men  been  ashamed  to 
confess  Christ,  or  to  acknowledge  their  connection  with  His  people  for  fear  of  man. 
HI.  This  dissimulation  was  an  evil  example,  soon  copied  by  others — "  And  the 
other  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him  ;  insomuch  that  Earnabas  also  was  carried 
away  with  their  dissimulation."  Peter's  sin  was  followed  by  the  sin  of  others. 
One  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  our  life  is  that  so  much  of  our  happiness  or  misery 
appears  to  depend  upon  others.  "  As  it  sometimes  happens  on  the  snow  slopes  of 
the  Alps,  that  one  man's  slip  will  involve  the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  all  his 
fellow-travellers,  so  is  it  with  us  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  life.  Peter  drags  Bar- 
nabas and  the  rest  of  the  Jews  with  him  ;  and  in  our  day  men  too  often  exercise  the 
same  fatal  spell  on  those  within  the  region  of  their  influence."  Lessons :  1. 
Honesty  of  belief,  purpose,  and  work  should  be  one  of  the  chief  laws  of  Christian 
life    This  should  apply  to  every  kind  of  secular  business,  and  to  religion. 

"  This  above  all ;  to  thine  own  self  be  true, 
And  it  must  follow,  as  the  night  the  day. 
Thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any  man." 

2.  Gofl  can  preserve  the  truth  by  the  few  as  well  as  by  the  many.  Whatever  may 
be  the  character  of  human  conduct,  God  does  not  allow  his  purpose  to  fail.  At 
Antioch  Paul  alone  was  faithful  (of  the  Jewish  believers),  but  the  truth  triumphed 
notwithstanding.  (Richard  Nicholls.)  A  fearless  spirit  in  rebuking  evil  strikes  us 
with  admiration : — When  Frederick  the  First,  the  half-mad  king  of  Prussia,  was  so 
enraged  against  his  son  that  he  announced  his  intention  of  condemning  him  to 
death,  even  though  the  Emperor  remonstrated,  in  his  fury  exclaiming — "  Then  I 
will  hold  my  own  court  on  him  at  Konigsberg,  which  is  outside  of  the  Empire, 
■where  no  one  can  control  me  I  "  But  a  fearless  courtier  spoke  out — "  Only  God, 
your  majesty,  will  be  over  you  there  to  call  you  to  task  for  shedding  your  son's 
blood  !  "     (Dr.   Hardman.)  The  two  contentions  : — Now,  before  we  go  farther, 

we  may  learn  the  following  lessons  from  this  personal  contention  between  Paul  and 
Peter:  In  the  first  place,  before  we  withstand  a  brother,  let  us  be  quite  sure  that 
he  is  to  be  blamed,  and  that  the  occasion  warrants  our  protest.  Paul  would  not 
have  cared  to  interfere  with  Peter  in  any  trivial  matter  ;  nor  would  he  have  felt 
constrained  to  move  in  the  case  but  for  the  handle  which  would  be  made  of  his 
peculiar  vacillation  just  at  that  time.  No  one  had  a  fuller  comprehension  of  what 
Christian  liberty  involved  than  had  Paul ;  and  no  one  wa*  more  jealous  of  its  in- 
fringement. If,  therefore,  he  had  not  seen  that  the  fundamental  principle  of  the 
gospel  was  at  stake,  he  would  not  have  said  a  word.  The  thing  which  Peter  had 
done  was  in  itself  indifferent ;  but  by  doing  it  just  then,  at  the  appearance  of  the 
Judaizers,  he  had  compromised  that  truth  which  was  dearer  to  Paul  than  friendship, 
or  even  than  life,  and  therefore  he  could  not  be  silent.    Now,  let  us  learn  from  this 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctur.  a. 

example  to  withstand  a  brother  only  when  we  are  thus  constrained  to  do  so  by  oaf 
allegiance  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  If  in  any  respect  we  cannot  approve  his  con- 
duct, while  yet  it  may  be  explained  in  perfect  harmony  with  his  loyalty  to  Christ, 
let  us  give  him  the  benefit  of  the  explanation,  and  be  silent.  But  if  his  procedure 
is  such  as  seriously  to  compromise  the  purity  of  the  Church  or  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  then  let  us  withstand  him.  Nothing  is  more  contemptible  than  to  be  always 
putting  ourselves  on  the  opposition  benches  ;  objecting  to  everything  that  is  pro- 
posed by  some  particular  brother,  and  going  to  a  church  meeting  with  the  motive 
of  the  Scotchman  for  appearing  in  the  debating  society — "  jist  to  contradio  a  wee." 
But  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  ought  to  be  dearer  to  a  Christian  than  "  the 
glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  which  is  committed  to  his  trust."  Again,  we 
may  learn  not  to  be  deterred  from  opposing  wrong  by  the  position  of  him  who  has 
committed  it.  Peter  was  an  apostle.  He  was,  in  fact,  one  of  the  greatest  pillars 
of  the  early  Church  ;  but  Paul  was  not  prevented  by  any  such  considerations  as 
these  from  protesting  against  his  injudicious  and  unseemly  vacillation.  On  the 
contrary,  the  very  prominence  of  Peter  made  it  all  the  more  important  that  his 
inconsistency  should  be  promptly  and  publicly  dealt  with.  Had  he  been  an  or- 
dinary member  of  the  Church,  moving  only  in  private  circles,  Paul  might  have  been 
disposed  to  pass  his  conduct  by  with  a  mild  remonstrance.  It  was  not,  therefore, 
because  he  loved  Peter  less,  but  because  he  loved  the  truth  more,  that  he  nttered 
this  glowing  and  uncompromising  admonition.  But  the  same  principles  hold  still ; 
error  or  evil  is  dangerous  in  any  man,  but  it  is  far  more  so  in  a  leader  of  the  people 
or  a  minister  of  the  gospel  than  in  others.  Great  eminence  may  command  our 
respect,  but  the  truth  is  before  all  things  else ;  and  nothing  whatever  should  be 
allowed  by  us  to  excuse  treason  to  that.  Once  more  we  may  learn  from  Paul's  con- 
duct here  that  when  we  withstand  a  brother,  it  should  be  to  his  face.  He  did  not 
go  hither  and  thither  among  the  elders,  speaking  against  Peter  and  complaining  of 
his  course,  while  at  the  same  time  he  kept  unbroken  silence  concerning  it  to  Peter 
himself.  Let  us  say  nothing  in  his  absence  that  we  would  not  utter  in  his  presence; 
and  if  we  have  not  the  courage  to  speak  to  him,  let  us  at  least  have  the  grace  to  be 
silent  about  him.  From  the  conduct  of  Peter  here,  however,  we  may  learn  the  no 
less  valuable  lesson  that  when  we  are  thus  withstood  we  should  take  it  meekly,  and, 
if  we  are  in  the  wrong,  should  frankly  own  our  error,  and  retrace  our  steps  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  We  cannot  doubt,  therefore,  that  he  accepted  Paul's  rebuke  in 
the  spirit  of  meekness.  Now  in  all  this  there  was  a  magnanimity  which  is  worthy 
of  all  praise.  So  far  as  appears,  he  did  not  become  excited,  and  exclaim  against 
Paul  for  presuming  to  think  that  he  could  be  wrong,  but  he  did  a  more  difficult  and 
a  more  manly  thing :  he  acknowledged  his  fault.  Now  here  was  a  great  triumph 
of  grace.  It  may  seem  a  paradox  to  say  it ;  but  there  are  few  things  which  test  a 
man's  real  Christianity  more  than  reproof  for  that  which  is  actually  blameworthy. 
It  is  comparatively  easy  to  guard  against  giving  offence ;  but  it  is  exceeding  hard  to 
keep  from  taking  offence  in  such  circumstances,  and  to  eay  with  the  Psalmist, 
"  Let  the  righteous  smite  me ;  it  shall  be  a  kindness :  and  let  him  reprove  me , 
it  shall  be  an  excellent  oil,  which  shall  not  break  my  head."  We  all  assent  to 
Solomon's  proverb,  "  Open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  love.  "  We  cry  oat  against 
the  modern  dogma  of  papal  infallibility,  but  we  have  all  too  much  belief  in  that  of 
our  own  infallibility ;  for  our  tempers  are  roused,  and  our  hearts  are  estranged  by  any 
exposure  of  our  error  or  inconsistency.  How  many  personal  alienations  and  eccle- 
siastical schisms  might  have  been  prevented,  if  there  had  been  on  the  one  side  the 
honest  frankness  of  Paul,  and  on  the  other  the  manly  meekness  of  Peter,  as  these 
come  out  in  this  transaction  1  If  I  had  my  choice,  I  would  rather  see  a  con- 
troversy spring  up  in  a  Church  about  some  great  central  doctrine  than  about 
some  question  of  paltry  detail  of  arrangement  or  of  pitiful  personality ;  for  there 
would  be  less  likelihood  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other  of  an  angry  and  acri- 
monious debate.  "Little  sticks  kindle  great  fires."  The  flame  that  would  die 
out  before  it  could  set  fire  to  a  log  will  easily  ignite  a  chip,  and  that  may  have 
strength  enough  to  kindle  a  faggot  that  will  at  length  set  the  log  in  a  blaze.  Take 
care,  therefore,  especially  in  little  things,  lest  temper  should  explode,  and  make  a 
painful  separation  between  vou  and  your  friend.    Admirably  has  the  poet  said : 

••  Alas !  how  light  a  cause  may  move 
Dissension  between  those  that  love." 

{W.M.  TaylortD.D.)        Grace  not  suddenly  destructive  of  the  old  nature : — Th« 


amir,  n.]  GALATIANS. 


grace  of  God,  which  raises  men's  hearts  by  degrees  into  conformity  with  the  Divine 
image,  does  not  suddenly  destroy  the  old  nature.  St.  Peter  is  still  the  same  impul- 
sive man  who  could  now  confess  the  Christ,  and  now,  when  troubles  came,  deny 
Him ;  who  could  follow  Him  bravely  into  danger,  yet  be  overcome  by  the  gossiping 
remark  of  a  girl  that  met  him  by  chance.  We  must  not  try  this  case  by  the  stan- 
dard of  Anglo-Saxon  consistency.  We  sometimes  perhaps  run  the  risk  of 
purchasing  too  dearly  the  favourite  virtue,  at  the  price  of  zeal  and  ardour.  We  are 
not  naturally  indulgent  towards  that  impulsive  nature  which  the  great  apostle, 
more  Jewish  in  this  than  the  Jews,  derived  from  his  race.  Anxious  to  please,  and 
to  be  in  sympathy  with  those  about  him,  he  rejoiced  at  first  in  the  Gentile  freedom, 
until  those  came  about  him  who  were  full  of  prejudice  for  their  venerable  law,  its 
severe  conditions  of  communion,  its  austere  separation.  Let  us  neither  praise  nor 
blame — let  us  only  say  grace  has  not  yet  wrought  her  perfect  work  in  this  apostle's 
heart.  Nor  has  the  other  great  apostle  yet  learned  all  that  the  school  of  grace  can 
teach  him.  Face  to  face,  before  the  whole  Church,  he  rebukes  and  humbles  a 
Brother  whom  Christ  had  honoured,  who  had  laboured  much,  and  turned  many 
from  darkness  to  light.  He  quotes  it  as  a  proof  of  his  independence  amongst  the 
apostles,  not  without  complacency.  All  this  is  consistent  with  this  bold  and  reso- 
lute nature,  which  marched  straight  to  its  objects,  and  refused  to  swerve  either  out 
of  respect  of  persons  or  out  of  fear.  His  steadfast  resolution,  that  Christ  should  be 
All  in  all,  oame  from  above  ;  his  manner  of  compassing  it  bears  clear  marks  of  his 
old  nature.  That  blessed  change  under  the  power  of  grace  can  be  perhaps  more 
fully  studied  in  St.  Paul's  career  than  anywhere  else  in  the  Church  history.  The 
strong,  loving,  fierce,  harsh  nature — you  see  the  faults  transformed  to  virtues,  the 
angles  rounded  off,  the  strong  will  made  obedient  to  the  bit  and  bridle  of  love ; 
and  yet  it  is  the  same  man  still.  You  recognize  the  old  features  of  the  portrait,  but 
it  is  transfigured  by  preternatural  light.  Again  we  will  not  praise  or  blame ;  we  will 
rather  recognize  the  power  of  the  mighty  Spirit  of  God  which  could  use  for  His 
purposes  the  timid  impulse  of  one  man  and  the  impatient  zeal  of  another,  for  build- 
ing up  the  house  of  God ;  and  at  the  same  time  could  take  in  hand  the  timid  and 
the  impatient  natures  alike,  and  giT«  courage  to  the  one  and  softening  to  the  other, 
thus  building  at  one  time  the  great  house  of  God  and  carving  delicately  each  living 
stone  of  which  the  house  is  compacted.  It  is  very  common  for  us  to  look  up  out  of 
our  welter  of  troubles,  our  sects,  and  schisms,  and  disputations,  and  to  see  far  back 
in  the  first  ages  nothing  but  peace ;  a  united  Church,  offering  its  harmonious,  uni- 
versal praise ;  a  well-drilled  army,  marching  in  obedience  to  a  single  will,  a  code  of 
faith  which  always,  everywhere,  all  the  faithful  heard,  and,  without  questioning, 
believed.  But,  as  the  student  draws  near,  the  object  grows  more  distinct,  the  mists 
disperse,  the  shadows  separate  and  fall  into  their  places ;  and  the  rose-flush  of  the 
dawn  ceases  to  conceal  the  true  colours  of  that  primaeval  region.  Then  we  come  to 
see  something  very  different  from  our  preconceptions,  and  learn — what  is  indeed 
gladness  to  learn — that  upon  the  whole,  in  the  old  time  as  in  the  new,  he  Holy 
Spirit  Bent  of  the  Lord  has  wrought  in  the  Church  in  the  same  manner.  He  was 
a  Spirit  of  light  and  life  and  comfort  to  the  souls  of  men ;  but  then,  as  now,  the 
men  were  enlightened,  not  transformed.  And  the  glory  of  God's  great  work  lay  in 
this — not  that  the  powers,  wishes,  and  passions  of  the  actors  were  petrified  into  a 
lifeless  uniformity,  and  the  superseding  life  from  heaven  took  their  place ;  but 
rather  that,  using  as  His  instruments  men  so  weak  and  perverse,  He  built  with 
them  the  Church  of  God.  To  me,  I  do  confess,  it  is  a  comfort  to  know  that  the 
Church  in  the  first  age  grew  by  the  same  principles  as  it  grows  by  in  the  nineteenth; 
that  the  very  divisions  amongst  us  have  their  counterparts  in  the  age  of  the  apostles, 
and  that  our  disputes,  like  them,  may  be  but  permitted  struggles  and  aberrations  of 
as  who  are  acting  out  God's  great  commands,  and  that  all  the  while  He  is  making 
perfect  the  circle  of  His  purpose  and  accomplishing  His  kingdom.  The  Church  has 
grown,  as  all  things  seem  to  grow,  by  the  life  within  her  striving  to  perfect  itself 
amidst  opposing  forces.  So  grows  the  acorn,  pushing  its  weak  shoot  through  hard 
ground,  and  its  strength  and  dignity  are  not  less  that  once  the  swinish  jaws  narrowly 
missed  devouring  the  heart,  and  the  swinish  foot  did  actually  trample  it  into  the 
day.  So  grew  the  liberties  of  the  English  people :  are  they  less  dear  to  us  because 
they  have  been  threatened,  and  at  times,  eclipsed  in  the  past  ?  So  grow  the  mind 
and  spirit  of  a  man,  passing  through  trials  and  efforts,  even  through  falls,  to  the 
ripeness  of  a  resolute,  tolerant,  patient,  helpful  age.  So  grew  the  Church  of  Christ; 
and  her  life  is  not  less  real,  lees  secure,  if  she  has  passed  sometimes  through  fears 
tad  fightings,  and  the  deep  waters  of  the  proud  have  seemed  to  go  even  over  net 


99  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ou 

life.  At  one  time  Athanasiushas  had  to  stand  against  a  world ;  at  another,  a  Hilde- 
brand  imperils  the  Church  by  making  it  the  supreme  kingdom  amongst  the  earthly 
kingdoms.  Worldly  motives  are  said  to  have  tainted  the  Keformation  of  religion 
in  this  country  :  and  it  is  true.  So  much  the  greater  is  our  reason  for  blessing  God : 
that  the  sweet  honeycomb  has  come  from  the  lion's  carcase ;  that  amidst  the  strife 
and  selfishness  of  kings,  and  the  ignorance  of  peoples,  the  truth  passed  safely.  So 
even  now  the  Church  is  growing,  and  God  dwelling  in  her  gives  the  increase.  We 
seem  in  deadly  peril.  There  is  unbelief  on  one  side,  and  on  the  other  that  deaden- 
ing system  which  would  hand  over  the  conscience  to  the  priest,  and  the  priest  to  a 
rnediseval  theology,  hostile  to  knowledge  and  incapable  of  change.  "  The  waves  of 
the  sea  are  mighty  and  rage  horribly,  but  yet  the  Lord  that  dwelleth  on  high  is 
mightier."  Yet  there  is  one  more  lesson  which  the  study  of  the  past  might  bring 
us.  By  the  vehemence  of  past  disputes — nay,  by  the  bitter  hatred  that  they  have 
brought  in,  one  might  think  that  men  had  lost  faith  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  keep  safe  the  ark  of  God  upon  the  stormy  waters.  To  "  withstand  to  the  face  " 
has  been  the  common  remedy  for  emergencies.  It  may  be  permitted  us  reverently 
to  doubt  whether  the  pulse  of  Divine  life  in  the  Church  has  been  hastened  by  one 
beat  by  the  violence  of  the  zealous,  who  have  thought  well  to  be  angry  for  the  cause 
of  God.  Through  strife,  but  not  by  strife,  the  Church  has  passed  upon  her  way. 
Struggle  and  conflict,  and  even  partial  failure,  should  not  convince  us  that  God 
has  left  us:  they  are  the  heritage  of  the  Church  from  the  beginning.  (Archbishop 
Thomson.)  Paul's  rebuke  of  Peter  was  — I.  Just — because  he  was  guilty  of 
dissimulation — misled  others — acted  in  opposition  to  the  spirit  and  doctrine  of 
Christ  (vers.  11-14).  H.  Fearless — without  respect  of  Peter's  age  and  position — 
without  fear  of  others ;  the  offence  was  public,  therefore  the  rebuke  was  adminis- 
tered before  all  (ver.  14) ;  otherwise  our  Lord's  rule  is  imperative  (Matt,  xviii. 
15-17).  III.  Pointed — "  thou,"  a  transgressor  of  thine  own  law— enlightened 
and  accepted  in  Christ  (vers.  14,  15).  IV.  Faithful — Paul  indicates  the  greatness 
of  the  offence  as  a  violation  of  Christian  uprightness  (ver.  14) — of  fidelity  to 
Christ,  inasmuch  as  it  was  a  practical  denial  of  Him  and  made  Him  the  minister 
of  sin  (vers.  17,  18) — of  Christian  doctrine  (vers.  19,  20) — of  God's  grace  (ver. 
21).  (J.Lyth.)  Peter  at  Antioch : — I.  His  fault — dissimulation — reprehensible  in 
any,  much  more  in  the  apostle  Peter  (Acts  x.  28).  II.  The  occasion  of  it — fear  of 
man — which  ensnares  even  the  best.  III.  The  effect  of  it — it  misled  others — even 
Barnabas.  IV.  Its  gravity — it  was  dishonest — unchristian.  V.  Its  reproof — dio- 
tated  by  love  to  Christ — manly  and  open.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  And  the  other  Jews  dissembled. — Barnabas  was  carried  away : — It  is 
not  difficult  to  trace  here  the  characteristic  temperament  of  Barnabas  on  its  weak 
side.  He  was  just  that  kind  of  disposition  which  makes  it  easy  to  become  a 
partisan,  to  flow  on  with  the  general  current,  to  take  the  complexion  of  surrounding 
opinion,  and  to  sanction  by  acquiescence  many  things  which  ought  to  be  resisted. 
It  is  not  pleasant  for  a  warm-hearted  and  generous  man  to  tell  his  neighbours  that 
they  are  all  wrong.  Where  there  is  ready  facility  for  giving  and  receiving  confidence, 
and  for  securing  co-operation,  there  must  also  be  the  danger  of  easy  yielding,  in 
order  to  please.  But  we  may  carry  tbis  trustful  and  inquiring  acquiescence  bo  far 
that  it  becomes  unfaithfulness ;  and  then  harm  results  instead  of  good.  The 
desire  to  make  everything  smooth  with  everybody  is  to  be  most  resolutely  resisted. 
If  our  end  is  to  save  souls  we  shall  often  find  resistance  a  duty ;  and  certainly  the 
tolerating  of  erroneous  human  admixtures  with  revealed  truth  is  not  the  way  to 
save  souls.  (Dean  Howson.)  The  influence  of  pernicious  example : — As  it  some- 
times happens  on  the  snow  slopes  of  the  Alps  that  one  man's  slip  will  involve  the 
overthrow  and  destruction  of  all  his  fellow-travellers,  so  it  is  in  the  spiritual  life. 
Peter  drags  Barnabas  and  the  rest  of  the  Jews  with  him ;  and  in  our  own  day  men  too 
often  exercise  the  same  fatal  spell  on  those  within  the  region  of  their  influence. 
IS.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Dissimulation :— This  is  hypocrisy — not  simply  for  a  man  to 
deceive  others,  knowing  all  the  while  that  he  is  deceiving  them,  but  to  deceive 
himself  and  others  at  the  same  time  ;  to  aim  at  their  praise  by  a  religious  profes- 
sion, without  perceiving  that  he  loves  their  praise  more  than  the  praise  of  God. 
(J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  The  hypoorite  sets  his  watch  not  by  the  sun,  ».«.,  the 
Bible,  but  by  the  town  clock ;  what  most  do  he  will  do.  (Gurnall.)  Influence  of 
unfaithful  leaders : — When  a  number  of  ships  are  moored,  or  anchored,  or  buoyed 
in  the  river,  all  have  an  interest  in  the  safety  of  each.  If  some  of  those  that  lie 
farther  seaward  break  off  from  their  moorings,  and  drift  up  with  wind  and  tide, 


chat,  a.]  OALATIANS.  91 

they  will  ran  foal  of  as  as  we  lie  secure  in  the  channel  farther  up.  The  drifting 
chips  may  sink,  but  they  will  drag  others  down.  (D.  Guthrie.)  Dissimulation 
is — I.  Sinful.  IL  Infectious.  III.  Totally  inconsistent  with  Christian  character. 
(J.  Lyth.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  But  when  I  saw  that  they  walked  not  uprightly. — Moral 
thuffiing : — I.  Its  natube.  1.  Literally — not  to  walk  on  straight  feet,  i.e.,  erect,  or 
straightforwardly.  2.  Morally.  (1)  Thinking  rightly  and  acting  wrongly.  (2) 
Orthodoxy  in  creed,  heterodoxy  in  conduct.  (3)  All  compromises  when  conscience 
is  concerned.  IL  Its  relation  to  the  gospkl.  It  is  •*  not  according  to  its  truth." 
1.  In  the  letter.  2.  In  the  spirit.  III.  Its  motives.  1.  Aversion  to  unpleasant- 
ness. 2.  Desire  to  be  agreeable  all  round.  3.  Hope  by  its  means  to  get  over  a 
temporary  difficulty.  IV.  Its  consequences.  1.  It  deceives  the  very  elect,  *•  even 
Barnabas."  2.  It  involves  others  in  deplorable  inconsistencies.  V.  Its  inex- 
cusableness  (vers.  15, 16).  1.  Knowledge  and  experience  are  against  it.  2. 
Spiritual  privileges  render  it  unnecessary.  3.  God's  Word  has  condemned  the  doing 
of  evil  that  good  may  come.  VI.  The  doty,  or  the  tbdth-loveb  with  reference 
to  it.  To  rebuke  it  in — 1.  The  most  eminent.  2.  The  most  esteemed.  Straight- 
forwardness has  been  denned  as  a  mixture  of  sincerity  and  simplicity,  and  is  well 
illustrated  by  an  anecdote  of  Bishop  Atterbury.  On  one  occasion  he  was  asked 
why  he  would  not  suffer  his  servants  to  deny  him  when  he  did  not  eare  to  see 
company.  "  It  is  not  a  lie  for  them  to  say  that  you  are  not  at  home,  for  it  deceives 
no  one;  every  one  knows  that  it  only  means  that  your  lordship  is  busy."  He 
replied,  "  If  it  is  (which  I  doubt)  consistent  with  sincerity,  yet  I  am  sure  it  is  not 
consistent  with  that  simplicity  which  becomes  a  bishop."  But  the  fine  nervous 
Saxon  word  aptly  explains  the  virtue  for  which  it  stands.  It  is  rectitude  in  motion, 
movement  in  a  right  direction  in  spite  of  all  inducements  to  swerve,  movement  on 
that  straight  line  which  in  morals  as  in  mathematics  is  the  shortest  distance 
between  two  points.  The  grave  question  at  issue: — There  was  no  question  of 
charity  here,  but  a  question  of  principle.  To  eat  with  the  Gentiles  was  either  right 
or  wrong.  In  the  light  of  the  gospel  it  was  right;  but  to  shilly-shally  on  the 
matter  and  to  let  it  depend  on  the  presence  or  absence  of  certain  people  was  clearly 
wrong.  It  was  monstrous  that  a  Gentile  convert  should  at  one  time  be  treated  as 
a  brother,  and  at  another  shunned  as  though  he  were  a  Pariah.  (F.  W.  Farrar.) 
Eating  with  the  Gentiles : — This  involved  concessions  of  the  nature  of  which  it  is 
almost  impossible  for  us  at  this  distance  to  conceive.  It  was  to  the  Jew  what  the 
breaking  of  caste  is  to  the  Hindoo,  as  startling,  in  some  respects,  as  though  in  our 
own  country  peers  and  working  men  were  found  to  be  working  daily  on  the  most 
friendly  terms.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Law  versus  gospel  .-—Many  have  the  gospel, 
but  not  the  troth  of  the  gospel.  So  Paul  saith  here,  that  Peter,  Barnabas,  and 
other  of  the  Jews,  had  the  gospel,  but  walked  not  uprightly  according  to  the  gospel. 
For,  albeit  they  preached  the  gospel,  yet,  through  their  dissimulation  (which  could 
not  stand  with  the  truth  of  the  gospel)  they  established  the  law ;  but  the  establishing 
of  the  law  is  the  abolishing  of  the  gospel.  Whoso  then  can  rightly  judge  between 
the  law  and  the  gospel,  let  him  thank  God,  and  know  that  he  is  a  right  divine. 
Mow  the  way  to  discern  the  one  from  the  other,  is  to  place  the  gospel  in  heaven, 
and  the  law  on  earth ;  to  call  the  righteousness  of  the  gospel  heavenly,  and  that  of 
the  law  earthly ;  and  to  put  as  great  difference  between  the  righteousness  of  the 
gospel  and  of  the  law  as  God  hath  made  between  heaven  and  earth,  light  and 
darkness,  day  and  night.  Wherefore,  if  the  question  be  concerning  the  matter  of 
faith  or  conscience,  let  us  utterly  exclude  the  law,  and  leave  it  on  the  earth ;  but, 
if  wo  have  to  do  with  works,  then  let  us  lighten  the  lantern  of  works  and  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  law.  Wherefore,  if  thy  conscience  be  terrified  with  the  sense 
and  feeling  of  sin,  think  thus  with  thyself :  Thou  art  now  remaining  upon  earth ; 
there  let  the  ass  labour  and  travail ;  there  let  him  serve  and  carry  the  burden  that 
is  laid  upon  him ;  that  is  to  say,  let  the  body  with  his  members  be  subject  to  the 
law.  But  when  thou  mountest  up  into  heaven,  then  leave  the  ass  with  his  burden 
on  the  earth ;  for  the  conscience  hath  nothing  to  do  with  the  law,  or  works,  or  with 
the  earthly  righteousness.  So  doth  the  ass  remain  in  the  valley,  but  the  conscience 
ascendeth  with  Isaac  into  the  mountain,  knowing  nothing  at  all  of  the  law  or  works 
thereof,  but  only  looking  to  the  remission  of  sins  and  pure  righteousness  offered  and 
freely  given  unto  us  in  Christ.  (Luther.)  Unswerving  integrity: — Bishop  Hooper 
was  condemned  to  be  burned  at  Gloucester,  in  Queen  Mary's  reign.  A  gentleman, 
with  the  view  of  inducing  him  to  recant,  said  to  him,  "  Life  is  sweet,  and  death  u 


99  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

bitter."  Hooper  replied,  "The  death  to  come  is  more  bitter,  and  the  life  to  come 
more  sweet.  I  am  come  hither  to  end  this  life,  and  suffer  death,  because  I  will  not 
gainsay  the  truth  I  have  here  formerly  taught  you."  When  brought  to  the  stake, 
a  box,  with  a  pardon  from  the  queen  in  it,  was  set  before  him.  The  determined 
martyr  cried  out,  "  If  you  love  my  soul,  away  with  it !  if  you  love  my  soul,  away 
with  it ! "  (Foster.)  Fidelity  : — A  man  gave  his  two  infant  children  in  charge 
of  a  negro  slave,  to  be  by  him  cared  for,  and  taken  to  a  distant  port.  The  ship 
was  wrecked,  and  had  to  be  abandoned.  The  boats  were  nearly  full.  The  slave 
had  his  choice  to  leave  the  children,  or  himself  be  left.  He  kissed  them ;  bade  the 
sailors  take  good  care  of  them,  and  tell  his  master  of  his  faithfulness  ;  and  soon 
went  bravely  down  with  the  foundering  ship.  (lb id.)  Swerving  from  the  truth : — 
1.  The  multitude  of  those  who  swerve  from  truth  should  not  make  truth  seem  less 
lovely  to  others,  or  damp  their  ardour  in  defending  it  against  error.  Though  truth 
should  be  deserted  by  all  except  one  only,  yet  is  it  worthy  to  be  owned,  stood  to,  and 
defended  by  that  one,  against  all  who  oppose  it.  2.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  professors 
to  walk  so,  both  in  the  matter  of  opinion  and  practice,  as  is  suitable  to,  and  well 
agreeing  with,  the  sincere  truth  of  God  held  out  in  the  gospel ;  holding  nothing 
which  is  even  indirectly  contrary  to  it,  and  practising  nothing  which  may  reflect 
upon  it.  When  they  halt,  or  walk  not  with  a  straight  foot  in  either  of  those,  they 
are  blameworthy.  3.  When  many  are  guilty  of  one  and  the  same  sin,  the  minister 
of  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  reprove  wisely  and  without  respect  of  persons ;  making  the 
weight  of  the  reproof  light  upon  them,  as  they  have  been  more  or  less  accessory  to 
the  sin.  4.  Though  private  sins,  which  have  not  broken  forth  to  a  public  scandal 
of  many,  are  to  be  rebuked  in  private  (Matt,  xviii.  15),  yet  publio  sins  are  to  receive 
public  rebukes,  that  hereby  the  publio  scandal  may  be  removed,  and  others  may  be 
scared  from  taking  encouragement  to  do  the  like  (1  Tim.  v.  20).  5.  Though  the 
binding  power  of  the  ceremonial  law  was  abrogated  at  Christ's  death,  and  the 
practice  thereof,  in  some  things  at  least,  left  as  a  thing  lawful  and  in  itself  indif- 
ferent unto  all  for  a  time  after  that,  yet  the  observance  thereof,  even  for  that  time, 
was  dispensed  with  more  for  the  Jews'  sake,  and  was  more  tolerable  in  them  who 
were  born  and  educated  under  the  binding  power  of  that  yoke,  than  in  the  Gentiles, 
to  whom  that  law  was  never  given,  and  so  were  to  observe  it,  or  any  part  of  it,  only 
in  case  of  scandalising  the  weak  Jews  by  their  neglect  of  it  (Bom.  ziv.  20,  21).  6. 
A  minister  must  not  take  liberty  of  practice  to  himself  in  things  which  he  condemns 
in  others.  7.  It  is  no  small  sin  for  superiors  to  bind  where  the  Lord  has  left  free, 
by  urging  upon  their  inferiors  the  observing  of  a  thing,  in  its  own  nature  indifferent, 
as  necessary ;  except  it  be  in  those  cases  wherein  the  Lord,  by  those  circumstancei 
which  accompany  it,  points  it  out  as  necessary ;  e.g.,  cases  of  scandal  (Acts  xv.  28, 
29),  and  contempt  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40).  8.  In  the  primitive  times  of  the  Christian 
Church,  the  people  of  God  did  wonderfully  subject  themselves  to  the  ministry  of 
the  Word  in  the  head  of  His  servants,  and  much  more  than  people  now  do ;  for  if 
the  actions  of  the  apostles  compelled  men  to  do  this  or  that,  as  Peter's  action  did 
compel  the  Gentiles,  what  then  did  their  doctrine  and  heavenly  exhortations  t 
(James  Fergusson.)        Inconsistency  reproved : — I.  That  the  gospel  supplies  th« 

BOLE  OP  LIFE.  H.  To  DEPART  FROM  THE  RULE  OP  GOSPEL  TRUTH  IS  TO  BECOME 
INCONSISTENT  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  III.  SUCH  INCONSISTENCY  CALLS  FOB  RE- 
PROOF. 1.  That  reproofs  are  sometimes  necessary.  An  earthly  life  is  ever  an 
imperfect  one,  and  the  best  men  may  in  unguarded  moments  fall  into  grievous 
errors.  2.  They  should  be  given  with  faithfulness,  yet  in  love.  No  ties  of  private 
friendship  should  prevent  sin  being  reproved,  and  where  the  sin  has  been  committed 
openly,  it  should  be  reproved  openly — Burkitt.  Yet  there  should  be  no  personal 
reproaches,  but  the  manifestations  of  brotherly  love.    (R.  Nicholls.) 

Ver.  16.  Knowing  that  a  man  Is  not  Justified  by  the  works  of  the  law. — 
Christian  doctrine  of  justification : — I.  Justification  is  properly  a  word  applicable 
TO  courts  op  justice,  but  is  used  in  a  similar  sense  in  common  conversation 
among  men.  An  illustration  will  show  its  nature.  A  man  is  charged,  e.g.,  with 
an  act  of  trespass  on  his  neighbour's  property.  Now  there  are  two  ways  which  he 
may  take  to  justify  himself,  or  to  meet  the  charge,  so  as  to  be  regarded  and  treated 
as  innocent.  He  may  either  (1)  deny  that  he  performed  the  act  charged  on  him, 
or  he  may  (2)  admit  that  the  deed  was  done,  and  set  up,  as  a  defence,  that  he  had 
a  right  to  do  it.  In  either  case,  if  the  point  be  made  out,  he  will  be  just,  or  inno- 
cent in  the  sight  of  the  law.  The  law  will  have  nothing  against  him,  and  he  will 
be  regarded  and  treated  in  the  premises  as  an  innocent  man  ;  or,  he  has  justified 


ckaf.  n.]  GAL  ATI  AN  S.  99 

himself  in  regard  to  the  charge  brought  against  him.  II.  Charges  or  a  veey  sebious 
n  atobe  abe  brouoht  against  man  by  his  Makeb.  It  is  not  a  charge  merely  affecting  the 
external  conduct,  nor  merely  affecting  the  heart ;  it  is  a  charge  of  entire  alienation 
from  God — a  charge,  in  short,  of  total  depravity  (see  especially  Rom.  i.,  ii.,  iii).  That 
this  charge  is  a  very  serious  one,  no  one  can  doubt ;  that  it  deeply  affects  the  human 
character  and  standing,  is  as  clear.  It  is  a  charge  brought  in  the  Bible ;  and  God  ap- 
peals, in  proof  of  it,  to  the  history  of  the  world,  to  every  man's  conscience,  and  to  the 
life  of  every  one  who  has  lived ;  and  on  these  facts,  and  on  His  own  power  in  search- 
ing the  hearts,  and  in  knowing  what  is  in  man,  He  rests  the  proof  of  the  charge. 
III.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  vindicate  himself  from  this  chabge.  He  can 
neither  show  that  the  things  charged  have  not  been  committed,  nor  that,  having 
been  committed,  he  had  a  right  to  do  them.  He  cannot  prove  that  God  is  not 
right  in  all  the  charges  He  has  made  against  him  in  His  Word ;  and  he  cannot 
prove  that  it  was  right  for  him  to  do  as  he  has  done.  The  charges  against  him  are 
facts  which  are  undeniable,  and  the  facts  are  such  as  cannot  be  vindicated.  Bat  if 
he  can  do  neither  of  these  things,  then  he  cannot  be  justified  by  the  law.  The  law 
will  not  acquit  him ;  it  holds  him  guilty ;  it  condemns  him.  No  argument  which 
he  can  use  will  show  that  he  is  right,  and  that  God  is  wrong.  No  works  that  he 
can  perform  will  be  any  compensation  for  what  he  has  already  done.  No  denial  of 
the  existence  of  the  facts  charged  will  alter  the  case ;  and  he  must  stand  condemned 
by  the  law  of  God.  In  the  legal  sense  he  cannot  be  justified ;  and  justification,  if 
it  can  exist  at  all,  must  be  in  a  mode  that  is  a  departure  from  the  regular  operation 
of  law,  and  in  a  mode  which  the  law  did  not  contemplate,  for  no  law  makes  any 
provision  for  the  pardon  of  those  who  violate  it.  It  must  be  by  some  system  which 
is  distinct  from  the  law,  and  in  which  man  may  be  justified  on  different  principles 
than  those  which  the  law  contemplates.     IV.  This  otheb  system  of  justification 

IS    THAT   WHICH   IS    BKVEALED  IN    THE    GOSPEL  BY  THE   FAITH  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS.       It 

does  not  consist  in  either  of  the  following  things :  1.  It  is  not  a  system  or  plan 
where  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  the  part  of  the  sinner  against  the  law,  or  against  God. 
He  did  not  come  to  show  that  the  sinner  was  right,  and  that  God  was  wrong. 
He  admitted  most  folly,  and  endeavoured  constantly  to  show,  that  God  was  right, 
and  that  the  sinner  was  wrong;  nor  can  an  instance  be  referred  to  where  the 
Saviour  took  the  part  of  the  sinner  against  God,  in  any  such  sense  that  He 
endeavoured  to  show  that  the  sinner  had  not  done  the  things  charged  on  him,  or 
that  he  had  a  right  to  do  them.  2.  It  is  not  that  we  either  are,  or  are  declared  to 
be,  innocent.  God  justifies  the  ungodly  (Bom.  iv.  5).  We  are  not  innocent ;  we 
never  have  been ;  we  never  shall  be ;  and  it  is  not  the  design  of  the  soheme  to 
declare  any  such  untruth  as  that  we  are  not  personally  undeserving.  It  will  be 
always  true  that  the  justified  sinner  has  no  claims  to  the  mercy  and  favour  of  God. 
8.  It  is  not  that  we  cease  to  be  undeserving  personally.  He  that  is  justified  by 
faith,  and  that  goes  to  heaven,  will  go  there  admitting  that  he  deserves  eternal 
death,  and  that  he  is  saved  wholly  by  favour,  and  not  by  desert.  4.  It  is  not  a 
declaration  on  the  part  of  God  that  we  have  wrought  ont  salvation,  or  that  we  have 
any  claim  for  what  the  Lord  Jesus  has  done.  Such  a  declaration  would  not  be 
true,  and  could  not  be  made.  5.  It  is  not  that  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
is  transferred  to  His  people.  Moral  character  cannot  be  transferred.  It  adheres  to 
the  moral  agent  as  much  as  colour  does  to  the  rays  of  light  which  cause  it.  It  is 
not  true  that  we  died  for  sin,  and  it  cannot  be  so  reckoned  or  imputed.  It  is  not 
true  that  we  have  any  merit,  or  any  claim,  and  it  cannot  be  so  reckoned  or  imputed. 
All  the  imputations  of  God  are  according  to  truth ;  and  He  will  always  reckon  us  to 
be  personally  undeserving  and  sinful.  But  if  justification  be  none  of  these  things, 
it  may  be  asked,  What  is  it  ?  It  is  the  declared  purpose  of  God  to  regard  and  treat 
those  sinners  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  if  they  had  not  sinned,  on 
the  ground  of  the  merits  of  the  Saviour.  (Albert  Barnei,  D.D.)  Justification  of 
tinners : — Justification  has  been  denned  to  be  "  an  act  of  God's  free  grace,  wherein 
He  pardoneth  all  our  sins,  and  accepteth  us  as  righteous  in  His  right ; "  or,  "  to 
declare  judicially  the  innocence  of  the  person  justified "  (see  Deut.  xxv.  1 ; 
1  Kings  viii.  82 ;  Matt.  xii.  87 ;  Bom.  viii.  33).  The  gist  of  St.  Paul's  argument 
with  St.  Peter  is  as  follows :  "  If  thou,  being  a  Jew,  livest,  as  thy  usual  habit,  as  a 
Gentile,  how  is  it  that  thou  art  compelling  the  Gentiles  to  adopt  Jewish  customs  as 
neoessary  to  salvation  ?  We  truly  are  by  nature  Jews,  and  not  sinners  from  among 
the  Gentiles;  we  are  not  only  not  Gentiles  but  not  even  proselytes ;  we  are  of  pure 
Jewish  descent,  and  so  enjoy  the  highest  spiritual  privileges ;  but  yet,  since  we 
know  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  nor  in  any  manner  except 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a. 

through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  in  order  that  w* 
may  be  justified  by  faith  in  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law ;  for  it  is  a 
certain  truth,  that  by  the  works  of  the  law  no  flesh  shall  be  justified."  Here  we 
have — i.  The  absolute  exclusion  of  works  fbom  the  office  of  justifying. 
1.  Heavy  charges  are  brought  against  man  by  his  Maker.  He  is  charged  (1)  with 
violating  the  law  of  God;  (2)  with  having  no  love  to  his  Maker;  (3)  with  possessing 
a  corrupt,  proud,  unbelieving  heart ;  (4)  with  being  alienated  from  God  by  wicked 
works.  2.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  vindicate  himself  from  these  charges.  (1) 
He  cannot  show  that  the  things  charged  have  not  been  committed ;  (2)  nor  that, 
having  been  committed,  he  had  a  right  to  do  them.  He  is  without  excuse.  IL 
The  office  of  justifying)  is  ascribed  to  faith  only.  1.  The  principal  cause  of 
our  justification  is  the  love  of  God  the  Father.  2.  The  meritorious  cause  ia  the 
active  and  passive  obedience,  the  perfect  righteousness  and  vicarious  death,  of  God 
the  Son.  3.  The  efficient  cause  is  the  operation  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  The 
instrumental  cause  is  faith  in  Christ.     (EmMus  Bayley,  B.D.)        The  nature  of 

justification : — 1.  Justification  is  not  the  Lord's  making  one  who  was  before  unjust 
to  be  just  by  works  of  habitual  and  inherent  righteousness  in  him.  This  is  to  con- 
found justification  with  sanctification.  But  it  is  a  judicial  action,  whereby  God 
absolves  the  sinner  from  death  and  wrath,  and  adjudges  him  to  life  eternal :  for 
the  word  expressing  this  grace  here,  is  a  judicial  word  taken  from  courts  of  justice, 
which  being  attributed  to  the  judge,  is  opposed  to  condemn  (Bom.  viii.  83,  34),  and 
so  signifies  to  absolve  and  give  sentence.  2.  The  ground  whereupon,  and  the 
cause  for  which  sinners  are  thus  justified  or  absolved  from  wrath,  and  adjudged  to 
life  eternal,  is  not  any  works  which  they  do  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  God,  whether 
ceremonial  or  moral ;  for  works  are  excluded,  and  faith  alone  established.  8.  The 
works  which  are  excluded  from  having  hand  in  justification,  are  not  only  those 
which  are  done  before  conversion,  but  also  which  follow  after,  and  flow  from  the 
working  of  God's  Spirit  in  us :  even  those  works  are  imperfect  (Isa.  lxiv.  6),  and  so 
cannot  make  us  completely  righteous ;  and  we  do  owe  them  to  God  in  the  mean- 
time (Luke  xvii.  10),  and  so  they  cannot  satisfy  Divine  justice  for  faults  in  time 
past.  They  are  the  work  of  God's  Spirit  in  us  (Phil.  ii.  13),  and  so  we  can  merit 
nothing  at  God's  hand  by  them :  for  He  excludes  the  works  of  the  law  in  general. 
4.  That,  through  virtue  whereof  we  are  thus  justified  and  absolved  by  God,  is  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  performed  by  Himself  while  He  was  here  on  earth, 
both  in  doing  what  we  should  have  done  (Matt.  ill.  15),  and  suffering  what  we 
ought  to  have  suffered  (Gal.  iii.  15) ;  which  righteousness  is  not  inherent  in  us,  bnt 
imputed  to  ns  (Bom.  v.  17) ;  as  the  Bum  of  money  paid  by  the  cautioner  stands 
good  in  law  for  the  debtor,  so  we  are  said  to  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  or 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  laying  hold  upon  His  righteousness,  which  is  imputed  to 
us,  and  by  which  alone  we  are  made  righteous.  5.  Though  faith  be  not  alone  in 
the  person  justified,  but  is  ever  accompanied  with  all  other  saving  graces,  yet  it  is 
the  only  grace  which  has  influence  in  our  justification.  6.  Faith  has  influence 
upon  our  justification,  not  as  it  is  a  work,  or  because  of  any  worth  which  is  in  itself 
more  than  in  any  other  grace,  but  only  as  it  lays  hold  on  Jesus  Christ,  and  gives 
us  a  right  to  His  righteousness,  through  the  merit  whereof  alone  we  are  justified. 
7.  This  way  of  justification  by  free  grace  accepting  of  us  for  the  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  not  because  of  our  own  worth,  is  common  to  all  who  ever  were, 
are,  or  shall  be  justified,  whether  good  or  bad.  8.  Before  man  be  justified  through 
virtue  of  this  imputed  righteousness,  he  must  first  be  convinced  of  his  own  utter 
inability  to  satisfy  Divine  justice,  and  so  to  be  justified  by  anything  he  himself  can 
do.  9.  He  must  be  convinced  also  of  the  value  of  Christ's  merits  to  satisfy  Divine 
justice.  10.  Being  thus  convinced,  he  must  by  faith  receive  and  rest  upon  Jesus 
Christ  and  that  most  perfect  righteousness  of  His,  by  making  his  soul  adhere  and 
cleave  to  the  word  of  promise,  wherein  Christ  is  offered  (Acts  ii.  39,  41),  whereupon 
follows  the  real  justification  and  absolution  of  him  who  so  does.    (James  Fergusson.) 

I  Self-righteousness  destroyed : — The  squirrel  in  his  wire  cage,  continually  in  motion 
but  making  no  progress,  reminds  me  of  my  own  self-righteous  efforts  after  salvation, 

I  but  the  little  creature  is  never  one-half  so  wearied  by  his  exertions  as  I  was  by 
mine.  The  poor  ohiffonier  in  Paris  trying  to  earn  a  living  by  picking  dirty  rags  out 
of  the  kennel,  succeeds  far  better  than  I  did  in  my  attempts  to  obtain  comfort  by 
my  own  works.  Dickens's  cab-horse,  which  was  only  able  to  stand  because  it  was 
never  taken  out  of  the  shafts,  was  strength  and  beauty  itself  compared  with  my 
starveling  hopes  propped  up  with  resolutions  and  regulations.  Wretches  eon- 
damned  to  the  galleys  of  the  old  French  kings,  whose  only  reward  for  incessant 


our.  n.]  GALA  TUNS.  95 

toils  was  the  lasb  of  the  keeper,  were  in  a  more  happy  plight  than  I  when  under 
legal  bondage.  Slavery  in  mines  where  the  sun  never  shines  must  be  preferable  to 
the  miseries  of  a  soul  goaded  by  an  awakened  conscience  to  seek  salvation  by  its 
own  merits.  Some  of  the  martyrs  were  shut  up  in  a  dungeon  called  Little-ease ; 
the  counterpart  of  that  prison-house  I  well  remember.  Iron  chains  are  painful 
enough,  but  what  is  the  pain  when  the  iron  enters  into  the  soul  ?  Tell  as  not  of 
the  writhings  of  the  wounded  and  dying  on  the  battle-field ;  some  of  us,  when  our 
heart  was  riddled  by  the  artillery  of  the  law,  would  have  counted  wounds  and  death  a 
happy  exchange.  O  blessed  Saviour,  how  blissful  was  the  hour  when  all  this  horrid 
midnight  of  the  soul  was  changed  into  the  day-dawn  of  pardoning  love  I  (C.  II. 
Spurgeon.)  On  justifying  righteousness  in  connection  with  true  faith: — I.  The 
doctbinb  of  justification.  1.  Guard  here  against  two  errors :  (1)  That  of  those 
who  conceive  of  justification  as  originating  with  the  creature  instead  of  the 
Creator ;  (2)  That  of  those  who  exclude  man,  not  only  from  meritorious  acting, 
but  from  all  concern  in  the  reception  of  the  boon.  2.  That  we  may  attach  distinct 
ideas  to  the  word,  "  justification,"  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  consider  it  in  reference 
to  the  attributes  and  revealed  will  of  the  Divine  Lawgiver.  8.  Justification  is 
vouchsafed  to  rebellious  men  on  precisely  the  same  ground  as  if  they  had  continued 
steadfast  and  immoveable  in  their  allegiance.  4.  Justification  includes  pardon  of 
sin,  whether  original  or  actual,  and  acceptance  as  righteous.  Both  are  due  to  the 
voluntary  substitution  of  the  Son  of  God  in  our  nature,  who,  by  active  obedience, 
fulfilled  the  law  to  the  uttermost ;  and  by  penal  Buffering  redeemed  us  from  its 
eurse.  II.  The  nature  of  the  faith  by.  which  we  abe  justified.  1.  Its  Divine 
origin.  Like  every  other  good  gift,  it  comes  from  above ;  is  implanted  in  the  soul 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  whose  omnipotent  agency  mankind  are  never  with- 
drawn from  a  vain  confidence  in  human  deservings.  2.  Its  appropriating  character. 
In  the  experience  of  the  true  believer,  faith  must  attach  itself  to  Christ  as  a 
Redeemer  sufficient  not  only  for  other  sinners,  but  all-sufficient  for  him ;  it  must 
lay  hold  on  His  doings  and  sufferings,  as  supplying  him  with  a  sure  ground  of  con- 
fidence. 8.  The  faith  which  is  connected  with  justification  is  inseparably  conjoined 
with  all  other  Christian  graces.  Grievous  mistakes  have  proceeded  in  consequence 
of  men  putting  asunder  things  which  God  has  joined  together  in  the  bonds  of 
sacred  union.  Thus,  faith  has  been  often  viewed  as  a  simple  aot  of  the  under- 
standing conversant  with  certain  doctrines,  whilst  its  relation  to  the  affections  of 
the  heart  and  the  virtues  of  character  has  been  greatly  overlooked.  III.  The 
evidences  which  Sobiptubb  fubnishes  of  a  justified  condition.  1.  Indications 
of  which  we  are  personally  oonsoious  (Acts  xxiv.  16 ;  1  Tim.  i.  6, 19 ;  1  Peter  iii. 
16,  &o).  2.  External  manifestations  which  our  temper,  oonverse,  and  ordinary 
transactions  supply  (Phil.  iv.  8).  (John  Smyth,  D.D.)  Justification  and  its 
method : — I.  The  natube  of  justification.  It  includes — 1.  The  pardon  of  sin 
(Acts  xiii.  88,  39 ;  Bom.  iv.  5,  8).  Thus  God  remits  the  penalties  of  sin.  "  Upon 
this  ground  of  a  moral  concurrence  in  the  mind  of  the  sinner  with  the  reasons  and 
intentions  of  the  Bedeemer's  sufferings,  God  is  graciously  willing  to  remit  the 
punishment  of  sin,  in  its  greatest  and  most  awful  inflictions,  those  which  are 
spiritual  and  eternal."  2.  The  enjoyment  of  the  favour  of  God.  God's  declaration 
of  pardon  is  not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power.  "  It  is  not  a  mere  judgment  in 
words,  bnt  is  also  a  judgment  in  deeds,  i.e.,  the  favour  of  God  to  any  one  shows 
itself  in  actual  blessing."  The  possession  of  this  blessing  secures  a  happiness  that 
is  pure,  perfect,  and  abiding.  But  to  guard  this  doctrine  from  abuse  it  is  necessary 
to  remember — 1.  That  it  does  not  mean  that  Christ  has  taken  the  part  of  the 
sinner  against  the  law  or  against  God.  None  ever  gave  such  honour  to  the  law  as 
Christ  did.  2.  Those  who  are  justified  are  not  thereby  declared  to  be  innocent. 
"  God  justifies  the  ungodly."  Sin  remains  the  same,  and  although  its  penalty  has 
been  remitted  by  an  act  of  grace,  the  pardoned  should  come  before  God  with  the 
most  profound  humiliation  (Ezek.  xvi.  62,  63).  8.  Justification  depends  upon 
personal  trust.  God  does  not  save  the  careless  or  the  unbelieving,  or  those  who 
cease  to  confide  in  Him.  II.  The  method  of  justification.  "  To  have  a  com- 
plete view  of  this  method  we  must  consider  the  originating,  the  meritorious,  and 
the  instrumental  cause  of  justification."  1.  The  originating  cause  is  the  love  of 
God  (John  iii.  16 ;  Titus  iii.  4,  5).  2.  The  meritorious  cause  is  the  death  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His  life  was  absolutely  holy.  In  Him  there  was  no  sin.  Yet 
He  suffered,  as  none  had  ever  suffered  before ;  but  He  suffered  for  the  guilty,  the 
just  for  the  unjust.  "  It  is  entirely  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  reason  and  justice 
that  the  perfect  righteousness  of  another  (if  such  could  be  found)  should  be  avail- 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

able,  under  a  constitution  of  Divine  mercy,  to  procure  the  pardon  and  acceptance 
as  righteous  of  sinful  beings,  who  are  otherwise  under  an  absolute  incapacity  of 
obtaining  these  blessings."  It  is  manifest  that  all  the  conditions  essential  to  a 
Redeemer  have  been  fulfilled  by  Christ  (Bom.  iii.  21,  26).  3.  The  instrumental 
cause  of  justification  is  faith.  "  We  are  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ."  The 
faith  which  justifies  has  been  defined  as  including  "  three  distinct  but  concurrent 
exertions  of  the  mind."  1.  The  assent  of  the  understanding  to  the  truth  of  the 
testimony  of  God  in  the  gospel.  2.  The  consent  of  the  will  and  affections  to  the 
plan  of  salvation ;  such  an  approbation  and  choice  of  it  as  imply  a  renunciation  of 
every  other  refuge,  and  a  steady  and  deoided  adherence  to  this.  3.  "  Actual  trust 
in  the  Saviour  and  personal  apprehension  of  His  merits."  Faith  that  justifies  is  a 
"sincere,  active,  affectionate  receiving  and  resting  upon  the  testimony  of  the 
Scriptures  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Divine  and  complete  Saviour." 
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  faith  is  not  a  meritorious  condition,  but  simply 
that  by  which  the  soul  embraces  Christ  and  enters  into  union  with  him.  Lessons : 
1.  Justification  cannot  be  attained  by  any  human  work.  The  most  highly- 
privileged  have  to  submit  to  be  saved  by  grace.  The  works  of  the  law  cannot 
justify.  If  obedience  to  moral  rule  cannot  merit  pardon,  how  much  less  can  ritual 
or  ceremony  7  2.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  only  way  of  salvation  of  which  the  gospel 
speaks ;  to  reject  Christ  therefore  must  leave  all  the  burden  of  sin  upon  the  indi- 
vidual conscience.  (R.  Nicholls.)  Definition  of  a  Christian : — We  make  this 
definition  of  a  Christian :  that  a  Christian  is  not  he  which  hath  no  sin,  but  he  to 
whom  God  imputeth  not  his  sin,  through  faith  in  Christ.  This  doctrine  bringeth 
great  consolation  to  poor  afflicted  consciences  in  serious  and  inward  terrors.  It  is 
not  without  good  cause,  therefore,  that  we  do  so  often  repeat  and  beat  into  your 
minds,  the  forgivenesB  of  sins  and  imputation  of  righteousness  for  Christ's  sake  : 
also  that  a  Christian  hath  nothing  to  do  with  the  law  and  sin,  especially  in  the 
time  of  temptation.  For  in  that  he  is  a  Christian,  he  is  above  the  law  and  sin. 
For  he  hath  Christ  the  Lord  of  the  law  present  and  enclosed  in  his  heart,  even 
as  a  ring  hath  a  jewel  or  precious  stone  enclosed  in  it.  Therefore,  when  the  law 
accuseth  and  sin  terrifieth  him,  he  looketh  upon  Christ,  and  when  he  hath  appre- 
hended TTim  by  faith,  he  hath  present  with  him  the  Conqueror  of  the  law,  sin, 
death,  and  the  devil ;  who  reigneth  and  ruleth  over  them,  so  that  they  cannot  hurt 
him.  Wherefore  a  Christian  man,  if  ye  define  him  rightly,  is  free  from  all  laws, 
and  is  not  subject  unto  any  creature,  either  within  or  without :  in  that  he  is  a 
Christian,  I  say,  and  not  in  that  he  is  a  man  or  a  woman  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  that 
he  hath  his  conscience  adorned  and  beautified  with  this  faith,  this  great  and 
inestimable  treasure,  this  unspeakable  gift  which  cannot  be  magnified  and  praised 
enough,  for  it  maketh  us  the  children  and  heirs  of  God.  And  by  this  means  a 
Christian  is  greater  than  the  whole  world  ;  for  he  hath  such  a  gift,  sueh  a  treasure 
in  his  heart,  that  although  it  seemeth  to  be  but  little,  yet  notwithstanding  the 
smaUness  thereof,  is  greater  than  heaven  and  earth,  because  Christ,  which  is  this 
gift,  is  greater.  (Luther.)  The  Christian's  righteousness  derived  from  Christ : — 
The  righteousness  wherein  we  must  be  found,  if  we  will  be  justified,  is  not  our 
own.  .  .  .  Christ  hath  merited  righteousness  for  as  many  as  are  found  in  Him.  In 
Him  God  findeth  us,  if  we  be  faithful ;  for  by  faith  we  are  incorporated  into  Him. 
Then,  although  in  ourselves  we  be  altogether  sinful  and  unrighteous,  yet  even  the 
man  who  in  himself  is  impious,  full  of  iniquity,  full  of  sin ;  him  being  found  in 
Christ  through  faith,  and  having  his  sin  in  hatred  through  repentance ;  him  God 
beholdeth  with  a  gracious  eye,  putting  away  his  sin  by  not  imputing  it,  taketh 
quite  away  the  punishment  due  thereunto  by  pardoning  it ;  and  accepteth  him  in 
Jesus  Christ,  as  perfectly  righteous,  as  if  he  had  fulfilled  all  that  is  commanded 
him  in  the  law :  shall  I  say  more  perfectly  righteous  than  if  himself  had  fulfilled 
the  whole  law !  I  must  take  heed  what  I  say :  but  the  apostle  saith,  "  God  made 
Him  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin  for  us  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  Him."  Such  we  are  in  the  sight  of  God  the  Father,  as  is  the  very  Son 
of  God  Himself.  Let  it  be  counted  folly,  or  frenzy,  or  fury,  or  whatsoever.  It  is 
our  wisdom,  and  our  comfort ;  we  care  for  no  knowledge  in  the  world  but  this,  that 
man  hath  sinned,  and  God  hath  suffered  ;  that  God  hath  made  Himself  the  sin  of 
men,  and  that  men  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God.  (Richard  Hooker.) 
Faith  alone  justifies : — Suppose  I  say,  "  A  tree  cannot  be  struck  without  thunder  " ; 
that  is  true :  for  there  is  never  destructive  lightning  without  thunder.  But  again, 
if  I  say,  "  The  tree  was  struck  by  lightning  without  thunder,  that  is  true  too,  if  I 
mean  that  the  lightning  alone  struck  it  without  the  thunder  striking  it.    Yet  read 


chip,  n.]  GALATIANS.  97 

the  two  assertions,  and  they  seem  contradictory.  So,  in  the  same  way,  St.  Paul 
says,  "  Faith  justifies  without  works  " ;  «*.<.,  faith  alone  is  that  whioh  justifies  as, 
not  works.  But  St.  James  says,  "  Not  a  faith  which  ia  without  works."  There 
will  be  works  with  faith,  as  there  is  thunder  with  lightning ;  but  just  as  it  fa  not 
the  thunder,  but  the  lightning  (the  lightning  without  the  thunder)  that  strike*  the 
tree :  so  it  is  not  the  works  which  justify.  Put  it  in  one  sentence :  Faith  alone 
justifies,  but  not  the  faith  which  is  alone.  Lightning  alone  strikes,  but  not  th« 
lightning  which  is  alone  without  thunder,  for  that  is  only  summer  lightning,  and 
harmless.  (F.  W,  Robertson,  M.A.)  Faith  unites  to  Chrint : — As  the  graft  is 
kept  in  union  with  the  stock  by  means  of  the  clay  whioh  has  been  applied  by  the 
gardener,  so  is  the  believer  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  which  is  the  gift  of  God. 
The  clay  cement  keeps  the  parts  together,  but  has  no  virtue  in  itself:  so 
faith  is  the  means  of  union  with  Christ;  it  shows  that  the  husbandman  has  been 
there.  When  the  clay  is  removed  in  an  ordinary  tree,  the  graft  is  found  united  to 
the  stock  ;  so,  when  faith  is  swallowed  up  in  sight,  then  the  perfect  union  of  Christ 
and  Hi3  people  is  seen.  (J.  H.  Balfour.)  Faith  an  instrument: — Faith  fa 
technically  called  the  instrumental  cause  of  our  justification.  It  fa  not  therefor* 
faith  that  justifies,  but  Christ:  faith  is  the  hand  that  grasps  Him.  The  trust  of 
some  is  in  a  strong  faith,  of  others  in  certain  frames  and  feelings ;  but  both  of  these 
err  in  their  mode  of  looking  at  salvation.  In  so  far  as  they  look  not  to  Christ,  in 
His  life  and  death,  as  the  one  only  Justifier,  they  will  surely  suffer  damage  to  their 
spiritual  life.  (J.  G.  Pilkington.)  Faith  a  venture: — Faith  fa  nothing  else  but 
the  soul's  venture.  It  ventures  to  Christ,  in  opposition  to  all  legal  terrors.  It 
ventures  on  Christ,  in  opposition  to  our  guiltiness.  It  ventures  for  Christ,  in  oppo- 
sition to  all  difficulties  and  discouragements.  (IF.  Bridge.)  Justification  bf 
faith : — Why  hath  Ood  appointed  the  eye  to  see,  and  not  the  ear  ?  Why  the  hand  to 
take  our  food,  rather  than  the  foot  ?  It  is  easily  answered :  Because  those  members 
have  a  particular  fitness  for  these  functions,  and  not  the  other.  Thus  faith  bath  a 
fitness  for  the  work  of  justification  peculiar  to  itself.  We  are  justified,  not  by 
giving  anything  to  God — what  we  do — but  by  receiving  from  God,  what  Chris* 
hath  done  for  us.  Now  faith  fa  the  only  receiving  grace,  and  therefore  only  fit  for 
this  office.  (IV.  Gurnall.)  How  faith  justifiet: — Some  make  works  their 
righteousness  ;  some  make  faith  their  righteousness ;  and  they  walk  in  this  faith, 
not  in  Christ  by  faith ;  but  it  fa  not  faith  that  saves  merely,  but  Christ  received  by 
faith.  As  it  is  not  the  laying  on  the  plaster  that  heals  the  sore,  but  the  plaster 
itself  that  is  laid  on ;  so  it  fa  not  our  faith,  or  receiving  of  Christ,  but  Christ 
received  by  faith,  that  saves  us.  It  fa  not  our  looking  to  the  brazen  serpent 
mystical,  but  the  mystical  brazen  serpent  looked  upon  by  faith — Christ  received  by 
faith— that  saves  ua.  (Erskine.)  The  justifying  power  of  faith  : — Faith  fa 
receiving  Christ  into  our  emptiness.  There  fa  Christ  like  the  conduit  in  the 
market-place.  Aa  the  water  flows  from  the  pipes,  so  does  grace  continually  flow 
from  Rim.  By  faith  I  bring  my  empty  pitcher  and  hold  it  where  the  water  flows, 
and  receive  of  ita  fulness  grace  for  grace.  It  fa  not  the  beauty  of  my  pitcher,  it  fa 
not  even  itu  cleanness  that  quenches  my  thirst :  it  fa  simply  holding  that  pitcher  to 
the  place  where  water  flows.  Even  so  I  am  but  the  vessel,  and  my  faith  is  the 
hand  which  presents  the  empty  vessel  to  the  flowing  stream.  Is  it  not  graoe,  and 
not  the  qualification  of  the  receiver  which  saves  the  soul  T  And  though  I  hold 
that  pitcher  with  a  trembling  hand,  and  much  of  that  whioh  I  seek  may  be  loat 
through  my  weakness,  yet  if  the  soul  be  but  held  to  the  fountain,  that  so  much  as 
a  single  drop  trickle  into  it,  my  soul  is  saved.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  No  safety  in 
our  works  : — In  the  twenty-eighth  year  of  the  Emperor  Tan  Kwang,  the  rise  of  the 
river  Yangtze  was  higher  than  it  had  been  for  a  hundred  years  or  more.  The  loss 
of  property  was  incalculable.  Old  Doctor  Tai,  who  well  remembers  the  occurrence, 
gave  me  the  account.  "Were  there  many  lives  lost?"  I  asked.  "Numbers," 
said  he.  "  It  was  something  like  obtaining  salvation  from  sin,"  he  continued. 
"  The  rich,  who  had  well-built  houses,  trusted  to  them,  and  went  to  the  upper 
story,  thinking  themselves  safe.  But  the  flood  increased.  The  foundations  gave 
away ;  and  the  house  to  which  they  trusted,  fell  and  buried  them  in  its  ruins,  or  in 
a  watery  grave.  But  the  poor,  knowing  that  their  mud-built  huts  could  not  stand 
the  rising  flood,  fled  in  time  to  the  neighbouring  hills ;  and  though  they  lost  all, 
yet  they  themselves  were  saved."  Faith  is  trusting  God  : — Some  time  ago  I 
remember  reading  of  an  incident  that  occurred  between  a  prince  in  a  foreign  land 
and  one  of  his  subjects.  This  man  for  rebellion  against  the  government  was 
going  to  be  executed.    He  was  taken  to  the  guillotine  block.     When  the  poor  fellow 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  O. 

reached  the  place  of  execution  he  was  trembling  with  fear.  The  prince  wal 
present  and  asked  him  if  be  wished  anything  before  judgment  was  carried  oat. 
The  culprit  replied  :  "A  glass  of  water."  It  was  brought  to  him,  but  he  was  so 
nervous  he  couldu't  drink  it.  "Do  not  fear,''  said  the  prince  to  him,  "judgment 
will  not  be  carried  out  till  you  drink  that  water,"  and  in  an  instant  the  glass  was 
dashed  to  the  ground  and  broken  into  a  thousand  pieces.  He  took  that  prince  at 
his  word.        Not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law  : — I.  The  means  or  justification 

HERE     BEJECTED.      II.    THE     MEANS     ACKNOWLEDGED    AND     EXHIBITED.        Faith 1.    In 

what.  2.  In  what  sense.  3.  To  what  extent.  Learn:  1.  That  guilt  does  not 
prevent  justification.  2.  No  circumstances  constitute  an  exception  to  the  mode  of 
justification.  3.  Justification  is  within  the  reach  of  all  who  can  believe.  (S. 
Martin.)  I.  Justification.  1.  It  includes — (1)  freedom  from  guilt ;  (2)  Divine 
acceptance.  2.  It  is  grounded  on  obedience  to  the  law — (1)  Personally  or  (2)  by 
substitute.  The  former  justifies  unfallen  angels,  the  latter  by  Christ  accepted 
justifies  the  sinner.  II.  The  instrument  of  justification — Faith.  (J.  G.  Jones.) 
The  causes  of  justification  : — I.  The  mebitobious  cause — Christ.  II.  The  instbu- 
mental  cause — Faith.  The  faith  of  Christ.  1.  The  faith  which  Christ  makes 
possible.  2.  The  faith  which  Christ  gives.  3.  The  faith  which  Christ  receives. 
4.  The  faith  through  which  Christ  comes.  5.  The  faith  by  which  Christ  works. 
6.  The  faith  which  Christ  will  crown.  The  works  of  the  law  here  (Rom.  iii.  20) 
and  elsewhere  are  undoubtedly  the  works  required  generally  by  the  law  of  the  old 
covenant — not  ceremonial  as  contradistinguished  from  moral,  nor  moral  as  contra- 
distinguished from  ceremonial — but  whatever  of  one  kind  and  another  it  imposed 
in  the  form  of  precept — the  law,  in  short,  as  a  rule  of  right  and  wrong  laid  in  its 
full  compass  on  the  consciences  of  men  ;  but  pre-eminently,  of  course,  the  law  of 
the  Ten  Commandments,  which  lay  at  the  heart  of  the  whole,  and  was  its  per* 
vading  root  and  spirit.  By  deeds  of  conformity  to  this  law  they  knew  that  they 
could  not  be  justified,  because  they  had  not  kept  it.  (Fairbairn.)  The  impossu 
bility  of  justification  by  the  work*  of  tin  law : — Because — I.  Man  is  flesh.  1. 
Depraved  by  natural  corruption.  2.  Obnoxious  by  actual  transgression.  H.  Hia 
best  obedience  is  necessarily  imperfect.  III.  All  he  does  ob  can  do  IB  a 
due  debt  owing  to  the  law.  1.  He  owes  all  possible  obedience  to  the  law  as  a 
creature.  2.  But  by  performing  his  obligation  as  a  creature  he  can  never  pay  his 
debts  as  a  transgressor.  IV.  Christ  alone  is  able  to  justify  him.  (J.  Vaughan.) 
The  law  abolished : — The  superiority  of  the  Judaic  ritual  over  the  heathen  arose 
from  its  being  the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.  But  it  had  now  fulfilled  its 
task,  and  ought  to  be  allowed  to  drop  away.  It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  the  calyx, 
but  for  the  sake  of  the  corolla  that  we  cultivate  the  flower,  and  the  calyx  may  drop 
away  when  the  flower  is  fully  blown.  To  cling  to  the  shadow  when  it  had  been 
superseded  by  the  substance  was  to  reverse  the  order  of  God.  (F.  W.  Farrar.)  In 
a  sermon  preached  at  York  Minster  shortly  after  the  death  of  the  late  Dean 
(Augustus  Duncombe)  Canon  Body  said :  "  A  few  days  before  his  departure  I  was 
by  his  bedside,  and  in  course  of  conversation  alluded  to  his  work  for  the  Church, 
and  the  brave  way  he  contended  for  the  faith.  He  stopped  me,  saying,  •  Say  nothing 
of  that.  When  you  are  where  I  am  now  you  will  see  nothing  will  bear  looking  at  of 
one's  own.  There  is  only  one  trust  then,  the  infinite  mercies  of  the  Saviour.'  I  said, 
'  True,  it  is  peace,  is  it  not,  with  you  now.'  He  replied, '  Perfect  peace,  thank  God, 
perfect  peace.'  "  Justification  impossible  by  the  law : — I.  All  men  have  sinned — 
are  consequently  under  the  sentence  of  the  law.  II.  The  office  of  the  law  is  not  to 
acquit  the  sinner — but  to  detect. — expose — and  condemn  his  sin.  III.  The  works  of  the 
law  only  avail  for  the  innocent — the  works  of  a  sinner  are  defective  in  principle  and 
extent— cannot  possibly  reverse  or  atone  for  the  past.  IV.  All  a  sinner  can  expect 
from  the  law  is  aggravated  punishment — his  sins  multiply — become  more  sinful 
by  the  rejection  of  Christ.  (J.  Lyth.)  The  end  and  design  of  the  Jewish  law: — 
We  may  proceed  to  observe  more  particularly  that  the  apostle,  designing  on  one 
hand  to  magnify  the  gospel  by  setting  forth  its  sufficiency  to  salvation,  and  on  the 
other  hand  to  demonstrate  the  insufficiency  and  unnecessariness  of  the  ceremonial 
observances  of  the  Jewish  law,  does  all  along  make  use  of  such  terms  to  express 
the  Christian  and  Jewish  religion  by,  as  may  best  serve  to  set  forth  the  excellency 
of  the  one,  and  diminish  the  opinion  which  men  had  taken  up  of  the  necessity  of 
the  other.  And,  1.  Because  the  first  and  most  fundamental  duty  of  the  gospel  is 
believing  in  God,  and  believing  that  most  perfect  revelation  of  His  will  which  He 
has  made  to  mankind  by  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the 
principal  part  of  that  re 'gion  which  the  Judaizing  Christians  so  earnestly 


«■!?.  u.)  GALATIANS.  99 

tended  for  was  an  anxious  observance  of  the  burdensome  rites  of  the  ceremonial 
law;  therefore  the  apostle  calls  the  Christian  religion  "faith,"  and  the  Jewish 
religion  "  the  law  "  (Rom.  iii.  28).  Do  we  then,  as  some  men  object,  by  our  preaching 
np  the  Christian  religion,  disannul  and  make  void  the  law  of  God  or  that  revelation 
of  His  will  which  He  made  to  the  Jews  ?  No,  we  are  so  far  from  that,  that  by  in- 
trodncing  Christianity  we  establish,  confirm,  and  perfect  the  moral  and  immutable 
part  of  the  law  much  more  effectually  than  the  Jewish  ceremonies  were  able  to  do. 
2.  Because  the  Christian  religion  teaches  us  to  expect  salvation  not  from  our  own 
merits,  but  from  the  grace  of  God,  that  is,  according  to  the  terms  of  that  new  and 
gracious  covenant  wherein  God  has  promised  to  accept  of  sincere  repentance  and 
amendment,  instead  of  perfect  unsinning  obedience  ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the 
Jews  depended  upon  their  exact  performance  of  the  works  of  the  law ;  therefore 
the  apostle  calls  the  Christian  religion  "grace,"  and  the  Jewish  he  styles  "  works  " 
(Rom.  xi.  5,  6).  3.  Because  the  duties  of  the  Christian  religion  are  almost  wholly 
moral  and  spiritual,  respecting  the  inward  disposition  of  the  heart  and  mind  ; 
whereas  on  the  contrary  the  ceremonies  of  the  Jewish  law  were  for  the  most  part 
external;  and  as  the  Apostle  to  the  Hebrews  styles  them,  carnal  ordinances, 
respecting  chiefly  the  outward  purification  of  the  body  ;  therefore  the  apostle  calls 
the  Christian  religion  "  spirit,"  and  the  Jewish  he  styles  "  flesh."  Thus  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans,  chap.  viii.  ver.  3,  4.  Thus  also  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  iii. 
8 ;  "  Are  ye  so  foolish  ?  having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the 
flesh  t  "  i.e.,  Are  ye  so  weak  as  to  think,  that  after  ye  have  embraced  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  ye  can  become  yet  more  perfect  by  observing  the  ceremonies  of  the  Jewish 
law.  First,  The  Jewish  religion  having  proved  insufficient  to  make  men  truly  holy, 
as  natural  religion  also  had  before  done,  there  was  therefore  a  necessity  of  setting 
np  another  institution  of  religion,  which  might  be  more  available  and  effectual  to 
that  end.  Now  the  setting  np  a  new  institution  of  religion,  necessarily  implying 
the  abolishing  of  the  old,  it  follows  that  Christianity  was  not  to  be  added  to 
Judaism,  but  that  Judaism  was  to  be  changed  into  Christianity,  i.e.,  that  the  Jewish 
religion  was  from  thenceforward  to  cease,  and  the  Christian  religion  to  succeed  in 
its  room.  This  argument  the  apostle  insists  upon  in  chaps,  i.,  ii.,  v.,  vi.,  and  vii.  to 
the  Romans,  and  in  chaps,  i.  and  iv.  to  the  Galatians.  The  Jewish  law  was  an 
institution  of  religion  adapted  by  God  in  great  condescension  to  the  weak  appre- 
hensions of  that  people ;  but  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  God  sent  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ  to  institute  a  more  perfect  form  of  religion,  after  the  settlement  of  which 
in  the  world  the  former  dispensation  was  to  cease.  And  that  it  must  needs  do  so,. 
is  evident  also  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself ;  for  as  after  remission  of  sin 
obtained  by  the  sufficient  sacrifice  of  Christ,  there  needed  no  more  legal  sacrifices 
to  be  offered  for  sin ;  so  in  all  other  its  ritual  parts,  the  first  covenant  was  in 
course  taken  away  by  establishing  the  second ;  there  being  necessarily  a  dis- 
annulling of  the  commandment  going  before,  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness 
thereof  (Heb.  vii.  18).  That,  Secondly,  The  sum  and  essence  of  all  religion  is 
obedience  to  the  moral  and  eternal  law  of  God.  Since  therefore  the  ceremonies 
of  the  Jewish  law  were  never  of  any  esteem  in  the  sight  of  God,  any  otherwise 
than  as  they  promoted  this  great  end,  and  prepared  men's  hearts  for  the  reception 
of  that  more  perfect  institution  of  religion,  wherein  God  was  to  be  worshipped  and 
obeyed  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  'tis  manifest  that  when  this  more  perfect  institution 
of  religion  waB  settled,  the  former  and  more  imperfect  one  was  to  cease.  This 
argument  the  apostle  insists  on  in  the  second  chapter  to  the  Romans,  and  in  the 
third  to  the  Galatians.  Thirdly,  The  religion  of  Abraham  was  acceptable  to  God, 
before  the  giving  of  the  law ;  the  Scripture  saying  expressly  that  the  gospel  was 
preached  before  unto  Abraham :  and  consequently  it  could  not  but  be  acceptable 
likewise,  after  the  abolishing  of  the  law.  Lastly,  That  by  the  posterity  of  Abraham, 
were  not  meant  strictly  those  who  descended  from  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh ; 
but  the  children  of  the  promise  (that  is,  as  many  as  are  of  the  faith  of  Abraham) 
shall  be  counted  for  the  seed.  That  the  true  religion  therefore,  and  the  service  of 
God,  was  not  to  be  confined  always  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  who  were  the  pos- 
terity of  Abraham  according  to  the  flesh ;  but  the  Gentiles  also,  which  believe,  have 
attained  to  righteousness,  even  the  righteousness  which  is  of  faith ;  that  is,  those 
of  all  nations  as  well  Gentiles  as  Jews,  who  embrace  the  gospel,  which  is  the  same 
with  the  religion  of  Abraham,  shall  be  justified  with  faithful  Abraham.  And  this 
argument  the  apostle  insists  upon  in  the  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  chapters  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  in  the  fourth  to  the  Galatians.  And  now  from  what 
has  been  said,  I  shall,  in  order  to  practice,  draw  two  or  three  useful  inferences;  and 


*UU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  a, 

so  conclude.    And,  1.  From  hence  i*  appears,  that  though  the  essence  of  religion 
be  eternally  and  immutably  the  same,  yet  the  form  and  institution  of  it  may  be 
and  often  has  been  changed.     The  essence  of  all  religion  is  obedience  to  that  moral 
and  eternal  law,  which  obliges  us  to  imitate  the  life  of  God  in  justice,  mercy,  and 
holiness,  that  is,  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world.     But 
though  religion  itself  be  thus  immutably  the  same,  yet  the  form  and  institution 
thereof  may  be  different.    When  natural  religion,  because  of  its  difficulty  and 
obscurity  in  the  present  corrupt  estate  of  human  nature,  proved  ineffectual  to  make 
men  truly  religious  ;  God  left  them  no  longer  to  the  guidance  of  their  reason  only, 
but  gave  them  first  the  Patriarchal  and  afterwards  the  Mosaic  dispensation ;  and 
when  this  also,  by  reason  of  its  being  burdened  with  so  many  ritual  observances, 
proved  ineffectual  to  the  same  great  end,  God  abolished  this  form  of  religion  also, 
and  instituted  the  Christian.    In  all  which  proceeding  there  is  no  reflection  at  all 
upon  the  immutable  nature  of  God  :  for  as  the  Divine  nature  is  in  the  truest  and 
highest  sense  unchangeable,  so  religion  itself  in  its  nature  and  essence  is  likewise 
unchangeable  ;  but  as  the  capacities,  the  prejudices,  and  the  circumstances  of  men 
are  different ;  so  the  institution  and  outward  form  of  that  religion,  which  in  its 
essence  is  always  the  same,  may  be  and  hath  been  changed  by  the  good  pleasure  of 
God.    2.  If  the  whole  and  only  design  of  St.  Paul,  in  these  Epistles  to  the  Romans 
and  Galatians,  be  to  prove  that  God  hath  indeed  made  this  change  of  the  insti- 
tution of  religion  from  the  Jewish  to  the  Christian,  and  to  vindicate  His  justice 
in  so  doing,  then  we  ought  never  so  to  understand  any  passages  in  these  Epistles, 
as   if  the  apostles  designed  to  magnify   one  Christian  virtue  in  opposition  to 
all  or  any  of  the  rest ;  but  only  that  he  would  set  forth  the  perfection  of  the 
virtues  of  the  Christian  religion  without  the  ceremonies  of  the  Jewish.     Thus  when 
he  tells  us  that  we  are  justified  by  faith  without  works,  we  must  by  no  means  in- 
terpret  it,  as  some  have  absurdly  done,  of  the  faith  of  the  Christian  religion  in  op- 
position to  the  works  of  the  Christian  religion ;  but  of  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  in 
opposition  to  the  external  works  of  the  Jewish  law.    But  as  to  the  works  of  the 
Christian  religion,  the  same  apostle  everywhere  urgeth  their  necessity ;  and  par- 
ticularly the  five  last  chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  are  a  most  earnest 
exhortation  to  be  fruitful  therein.    3.  From  hence  it  follows  that  there  is  no  con- 
tradiction between  St.  Paul  and  St.  James,  when  the  one  Bays  that  a    man  is 
justified  by  faith  without  works,  and  the  other  says  that  faith  without  works  cannot 
justify;  for  the  one  speaks  professedly  of  the  works  of  the  Jewish  religion,  and 
the  other  of  the  works  of  the  Christian.    Lastly,  If  St.  Paul  so  severely  treated 
the  Judaizing  Christians,  as  to  call  them  perverters  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and 
esteem  them  as  preachers  of  another  gospel ;  then  let  us  also  take  heed  lest  on  the 
authority  of  men  we  preach  or  obey  at  any  time  any  other  gospel  than  what  Christ 
and   His  apostles  preached  and  obeyed.     (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)        Justification: — 
I.  In  what  manner  justification  cannot  be  obtained.     "  We  are  justified  not  by 
the  works  of  the  law."    It  will  naturally  be  asked,  what  is  meant  by  "  the  law," 
as  spoken  of  here  by  the  apostle  ?    To  this  I  reply,  reference  is  no  doubt  here  made 
to  the  ceremonial  law,  and  hence  to  circumcision,  and  the  other  rites  and  cere- 
monies enjoined  by  that  ritual.  By  these  things,  however,  a  man  cannot  be  justified. 
Nor  can  the  moral  law,  as  embodied  in  the  Ten   Commandments,  do  so ;  for  the 
whole  tenor  of  the  Bible,  from  Genesis  to  Bevelation,  declares,  with  reference  to 
man  as  a  sinner,  **  We  are  justified  not  by  works  of  the  law."      As  given  to 
Adam,  when  a  perfect  creature,  the  moral  law  (comprised  in  one  brief  injunction, 
as  the  test  of  his  obedience)  was  ordained  unto  life,  and  was  calculated,  if  observed, 
to  perpetuate  life ;  but  as  given  to  us,  who  are  fallen  and  corrupt,  it  is  only  calcu- 
lated to  produce  death,  showing  us  our  guilt,  and  our  consequent  desert  of  death  as 
the  punishment  of  that  guilt.     Like  the  angel,  then,  with  the  flaming  sword 
at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  the  law  drives  ns  from  itself  that  we  may 
6eek   salvation  elsewhere.      And  whither  does  it  drive  us?    This  we  shall  see 
while  we    notice — II.    In  what   manneb  justification  can  be  obtained.     "We 
have    believed  in  Jesus   Christ."     1.  We  are   justified  by  believing   in    what 
Christ  did.    The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  obeyed 
the  law  perfectly  in  our  behalf.    But  we  are  justified  by  believing,  not  only  in  what 
Christ  did,  but  also — 2.  In  what  Christ  suffered.    Having  thus.in  accordance  with 
the  words  of  our  text,  stated  in  what  manner  we  cannot,  and  in  what  manner  yn 
can,  be  justified  before  God,  I  now  proceed  to  apply  the  subject,  in  the  way  of 
warning  and  of  consolation.      1.  Warning.    The  reason,  my  brethren,  why  St. 
Paul  was  so  earnest  upon  this  matter  was,  because  he  felt  that  the  eternal  salvation 


«HAP.  n.]  GALATIANS.  101 

of  multitudes  was  herein  involved.  I  ask,  if  you  are  conscious  that  you  ara 
sinners  against  God,  how  are  your  sins  to  be  forgiven  ?  You  reply,  that  "  you  hope 
your  good  moral  character  will  screen  your  secret  deficiencies."  But,  brethren, 
trust  not  in  such  a  spider's  web.  Such  a  confidence  will  assuredly  fail  you  when 
you  most  want  it.  You  cannot  have  a  debtor-and-creditor  account  with  God.  Per- 
haps you  are  saying,  "  God  is  merciful,  and  will  not  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is 
done  amiss."  God  is  merciful ;  but  you  must  remember  that  He  is  at  the  same 
time  just,  and  that  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  Do  you  say,  that "  you 
will  do  your  best,  and  leave  Christ  to  make  up  the  remainder  ?  "  In  that  case  you 
make  Christ  a  divided  Saviour.  If,  again,  you  would  plead  "  your  sincere  obedience," 
you  must  remember  that  God  is  a  perfect  God,  and  can  therefore  accept  nothing 
short  of  a  perfect  obedience.  No,  brethren ;  in  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  must  be 
our  confidence.  I  need  not,  however,  I  trust,  remind  those  of  you  who  profess  to 
esteem  Christ  as  all  your  salvation  and  all  your  desire,  that  although  you  hold  the 
truth,  there  is  danger,  if  you  watch  not,  of  holding  that  truth  in  unrighteousness. 
The  sun,  by  his  bright  beams,  not  only  expels  the  cold,  but  causes  heat  and  fruitful- 
ness  also.  So  is  it  in  the  justification  of  a  sinner.  There  is  not  only  the  pardon 
of  sin,  but  likewise  an  infusion  of  grace  and  holiness.  While,  therefore,  we  pro- 
fess that  we  are  justified,  not  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Christ, 
let  us  also  remember  to  go  on  "  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God.  The  sub- 
ject, however,  supplies  us  not  only  with  a  word  of  warning,  but  also  with  one  of — 
2.  Consolation.  Blessed  be  God,  "  the  doctrine  that  we  are  justified  by  faith  is," 
as  our  article  expresses  it,  "  not  only  a  most  wholesome  doctrine,  but  also  one  very 
full  of  comfort."  And,  brethren,  it  ought  to  be  a  source  of  the  highest  consolation 
to  you  to  remember  how  complete  is  this  gift.    (C.  Clayton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  But  If;  while  we  seek  to  be  Justified  by  Christ. — I.  The  blasphemy  of 
making  Christ  the  ministeb  of  sin.     II.  The  perfect  sufficiency  of  Cheist  fob 

THE   JUSTIFICATION    OF   HlS   PEOPLE.      III.    THE    IMPERTINENCE    OF    THE     DOCTRINE    OF 

justification  by  wobks  :  as — 1.  Impossible.  2.  Needless.  IV.  The  motive  that 
the  justified  have  to  live  righteously.  (W.  Perkins.)  Justification  by  Christ 
guarded : — I.  A  privilege.  1.  Christ  has  done  for  us  what  we  could  not  do  for 
ourselves.  (1)  Fulfilled  the  law;  (2)  borne  the  penalty  of  its  infractions ;  and  thus  (3) 
delivered  us  from  its  claims.  2.  He  has  secured  for  us  (1)  pardon,  (2)  acceptance, 
(3)  Divine  privileges.  H.  The  abuse  of  this  privilege.  1.  The  legalists  nullified  it, 
and  thus  became  sinners  by  (1)  sinfully  rejecting  the  only  means  of  salvation  ;  (2) 
seeking  justification  in  that  which  could  only  intensify  the  sense  of  sin.  The 
Antinomians  who  made  it  an  encouragement  to  sin.  III.  The  logical  conse- 
quences of  this  abuse.  1.  In  the  case  of  the  legalists  :  if  Christ  fails  to  remove  sin 
and  the  works  of  the  law  are  still  necessary,  then  Christ  ministers  to  sin  by 
delusive  offers  of  salvation.  2.  In  the  case  of  the  Antinomians :  if  justification  is 
only  an  incentive  to  presumption,  Christ  is  morally  chargeable  with  its  guilt.  IV. 
The  apostle's  horrob  at  this  conclusion.  1.  It  is  blasphemous.  2.  It  is  pre- 
posterous. (1)  Justification  in  Christ  is  complete  and  effectual.  (2)  It  is  the 
strongest  incentive  to  righteousness  (ver.  19).  Grace  and  Duty : — Griffiths  says 
that  travellers  in  Turkey  carry  with  them  lozenges  of  opium,  on  which  is  stamped 
M  mash  Allah,"  the  gift  of  God.  Too  many  sermons  are  just  such  lozenges.  Grace 
is  preached  but  duty  denied.  Divine  predestination  is  cried  up,  but  human  re- 
sponsibility is  rejected.  Such  teaching  ought  to  be  shunned  as  poisonous,  but 
those  who  by  reason  of  use  have  grown  accustomed  to  the  sedative,  condemn  all 
other  preaching,  and  cry  up  their  opium  lozenges  of  high  doctrine  as  the  truth,  the 
precious  gift  of  God.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  this  poppy-juice  doctrine  has  sent 
many  souls  to  sleep  who  will  wake  up  in  hell.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)  The  wickedness 
of  Christians  no  argument  against  Christianity  : — One  of  the  greatest  and  most 
plausible  objections  alleged  by  unbelievers  against  the  Divine  institution  of  the 
Christian  religion,  is  the  smallness  of  the  influence  it  may  seem  to  hav9  upon  the 
lives  and  manners  of  its  professors.  It  were  natural  to  expect,  if  God  conde- 
scended to  give  men  an  express  revealed  law,  and  to  send  so  extraordinary  a  person 
as  His  own  Son  to  promulgate  that  'law  upon  earth ;  it  were  natural  to  expect,  it 
should  have  some  very  visible  and  remarkable  effect  in  the  world,  answerable  to  the 
dignity  of  the  thing  itself,  and  worthy  of  its  great  Author.  Are  there  to  be  met 
withal,  in  the  lives  and  manners  of  Christians,  any  considerable  marks  or  distinguish- 
ing characters,  by  which  it  might  be  judged  that  they  are  really  under  the  influence 
and  peculiar  guidance  of  such  a  Divine  director  1    Is  there,  among  those  who  call 


lOf  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  & 

themselves  Christians,  less  of  profaneness  and  impiety  towards  God,  leas  of  fraud, 
injustice,  and  unrighteousness  toward  men,  than  among  the  professors  of  other  re- 
ligions ?  Is  there  not  too  plainly  the  same  boundless  ambition,  the  same  insatiable 
covetousness,  the  same  voluptuousness  and  debauchery  of  manners,  to  be  found 
among  them,  as  among  other  men  ?  Nay,  have  not  moreover  the  pretences  even  of 
religion  itself,  been  the  immediate  and  direct  occasion  of  the  bitterest  and  most 
implacable  animosities,  of  the  cruellest  and  most  bloody  wars,  of  the  most  barbarous 
and  inhumane  persecutions  ?  Have  not  the  greatest  vices  and  immoralities  of  all 
kinds  received  too  plain  An  encouragement  from  the  reliance  upon  a  power  of 
repeating  continually  certain  regular  and  periodical  absolutions :  and,  much  more, 
from  an  imagination  that  the  practices  of  a  vicious  life  may  be  compensated  before 
God  by  the  observance  of  certain  weak  and  ridiculous  ceremonies,  and  made 
amends  for  by  superstitious  commutations  ?  Lastly,  and  beyond  all  this,  hath  not 
even  the  grace  of  God,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  been  itself  too  frequently 
turned  into  wantonness  ?  I.  The  wickedness  of  the  lives  of  those  who  call  them- 
selves Christians  is  no  argument  at  all  against  the  truth  and  excellency  of  the 
Christian  religion  itself.  Natural  and  necessary  causes  always  and  necessarily 
produce  effects  proportional  to  their  natural  powers ;  so  that  from  the  degree  or 
quantity  of  the  effect,  may  always  certainly  be  judged  the  degree  of  power  and 
efficacy  in  the  cause.  But  in  moral  causes  the  case  is  necessarily  and  essentially 
otherwise.  In  these,  how  efficacious  soever  the  cause  be,  yet  the  effect  always  de- 
pends  on  the  will  of  the  person  upon  whom  the  effect  is  to  be  worked,  whether  the 
cause  shall  at  all  producedts  proper  effect  or  no.  For  as,  where  no  Law  is,  there  is 
no  transgression ;  so  on  the  other  side,  and  for  the  same  reason,  where  there  is  a 
law,  not  obeyed,  that  law  worketh  wrath ;  and  sin,  by  this  commandment,  becomes 
exceeding  sinful.  Were  therefore  the  effect  always  to  be  the  measure,  in  judging 
of  the  goodness  and  excellency  of  a  cause,  the  best  and  wisest  laws  would  often, 
upon  account  of  their  very  excellency,  be  the  worst.  And  the  same  may,  in  pro- 
portion, be  said  concerning  reason  itself,  even  the  absolute  and  necessary  reason  of 
things.  The  more  we  are  sensible  of  the  reasonableness  and  necessity  of  moral 
obligations,  the  worse  is  our  condition  if  we  act  unreasonably.  Yet  reason  is  of 
essential  excellency,  eternally  and  immutably;  being  the  necessary  result  of  the 
nature  and  truth  of  things :  and  the  commandments  of  God  who  cannot  err,  are 
always  holy  and  just  and  good  (Bom.  vii.  12).  If,  therefore,  it  be  no  objection 
against  the  excellency  of  reason  itself,  that  it  very  often  is  not  able  to  make  men 
act  reasonably,  and  no  diminution  to  the  Divine  commandments  in  general,  that 
they  frequently  not  only  fail  of  reforming  men's  manners,  but  even  on  the  contrary 
do  moreover  make  sin  to  become  the  more  exceedingly  sinful ;  then,  for  the  same 
reason,  neither  against  the  truth  and  excellency  of  Christianity  in  particular  can 
any  argument  be  drawn  from  the  wickedness  of  the  lives  of  those  who  profess 
themselves  Christians.  But — II.  Though  the  practice  of  any  wickedness  whatso- 
ever, affords  no  real  argument  against  Christianity  itself,  yet  it  is  always  matter 
of  very  great  and  just  reproach  to  the  professors  of  this  holy  religion,  as  being 
the  utmost  contradiction  and  the  highest  possible  inconsistency  with  their  pro- 
fession. Just  as  the  Jews  of  old,  who  perpetually  styled  themselves  the  people 
of  God,  and  yet  fell  into  the  vices  of  the  heathen  nations.  But  when  anything 
which  is  a  part  of  the  Christian  doctrine  is  itself  in  particular  made  a  direct 
ground  and  immediate  cause  of  wickedness,  the  case  then  is  infinitely  worse,  and 
the  reproach  unspeakably  greater.  When  the  gospel  is  not  only  rendered  ineffectual 
to  prevent  sin,  but  Christ  (as  the  apostle  in  the  text  expresses  it)  made  to  be  Him- 
self the  minister  of  sin  ;  this  is  what  St.  Jude  calls,  "  Turning  the  grace  of  God  into 
lasciviousness " ;  or,  in  St.  Peter's  language,  it  is,  by  means  of  the  very  "promise  of 
liberty,"  making  men  the  "  servants  of  corruption."  And  of  the  same  kind  are  those 
Christians  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  who,  upon  any  pretence  whatsoever,  set 
up  any  expedients,  of  whatever  sort  they  be,  either  in  point  of  doctrine  or  practice ; 
as  equivalents  to  be  accepted  of  God,  in  the  stead  of  virtue  and  true  goodness. 
III.  The  third  and  last  thing  I  proposed  to  show,  was,  that  from  what  has  been 
said,  there  arises  a  very  plain  and  easy  rule  by  which  we  may  judge  of  the 
malignity  and  dangerousness  of  any  error  in  matters  of  religion.  In  proportion  M 
the  error  tends  to  reconcile  any  vicious  practice  with  the  profession  of  religion,  or 
(as  the  text  expresses  it)  to  make  Christ  the  minister  of  sin,  in  the  same  proportion 
is  the  doctrine  pernicious,  and  the  teachers  of  it  justly  to  be  deemed  corrupt.  By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.  All  other  tests  may  possibly  be  deceitful.  Fair 
speeches,   great  learning   and  abilities,    fervent   zeal,  numbers,  authority,  strict 


emir,  n.]  GALATIANS.  I0» 

observance  of  ceremonies,  even  worldly  austerities,  and  the  appearances  of  the 
most  devotional  piety ;  all  these  may  possibly  accompany  a  very  false  and  very 
wicked  religion.  But  the  fruits  of  virtue  and  true  goodness,  these  are  marks  which 
admit  no  counterfeit.    (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 

Yet.  18.  For  if  I  build  again  tha  things  which  I  destroyed.— I.  Teachers  are  great 
offenders  when  good  doctrine  is  joined  to  bad  conversation.  Good  doctrine  destroys 
the  kingdom  of  darkness,  bad  doctrine  builds  it  up  again.  II.  Eulebs  are  trans- 
gressors when  good  counsel  which  beats  down  wickedness  goes  with  bad  example, 
which  sets  it  up  again.  III.  Pbofessobs  are  great  sinners  when  reformed  religion 
and  unreformed  life  are  connected,  for  unreformed  life  builds  again  that  which 
Christ  hath  destroyed.  (W.  Perkins.)  The  sinfulness  of  Judaistic  practices  : — 
In  repairing  to  Christ,  Peter  had  virtually  pulled  down  the  fabric  of  the  law  as  the 
ground  of  justification  (formally  did  so,  under  Divine  direction,  in  the  house  of 
Cornelius) ;  but  in  now  returning  to  its  observance  as  a  matter  of  principle,  he  was 
again  building  it  up,  and  in  this  he  proved  himself  to  be  a  transgressor :  but  how  ? 

1.  Such  vacillation,  playing  fast  and  loose  with  the  things  of  God,  was  a  serious  moral 
obliquity.  II.  In  the  retrogression  complained  of  there  was  involved  a  departure 
from  the  very  aim  of  the  law,  which  was  to  lead  men  to  Christ.  Peter,  therefore — 
III.  Defeated  the  intention  of  tbe  law,  and  acted  toward  it  the  part  of  a  trans- 
gressor. (Fairbairn).  Value  of  consistency : — In  one  of  the  older  States  resided 
an  infidel,  the  owner  of  a  saw-mill,  situated  by  tbe  side  of  a  highway,  over  which 
a  large  portion  of  a  Christian  congregation  passed  every  Sabbath  to  and  from  the 
church.  This  infidel,  having  no  regard  for  the  Sabbath,  was  as  busy,  and  his 
mill  was  as  noisy,  on  that  holy  day  as  any  other.  Before  long  it  was  observed, 
however,  that  a  certain  time  before  service  the  mill  would  stop,  remain  silent,  and 
appear  to  be  deserted  for  a  few  minutes ;  when  its  noise  and  clatter  would  recom- 
mence and  continue  till  about  the  close  of  the  service,  when  for  a  short  time  it 
again  ceased.  It  was  soon  noticed  that  one  of  the  deacons  of  the  church  passed 
the  mill  to  the  place  of  worship  during  the  silent  interval ;  and  so  punctual  was  he 
to  the  hour,  that  the  infidel  knew  just  when  to  stop  the  mill,  so  that  it  should  be 
silent  while  the  deacon  was  passing,  although  he  paid  no  regard  to  the  passing  of 
the  others.  On  being  asked  why  he  paid  this  mark  of  respect  to  the  deacon,  he 
replied,  "  The  deacon  professes  just  what  the  rest  of  you  do ;  but  he  lives,  also, 
such  a  life,  that  it  makes  me  feel  bad  here  (putting  his  hand  upon  his  heart)  to  run 
my  mill  while  he  is  passing."     (Elon  Foster.) 

Ver.  19.  For  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law. — Death  and  life : — I.  Those 
who  are  justified  are  qualified  fob  the  highest  sebvice — "  living  to  God."  II. 
Lmsa  to  God  is  dyino  to  sin.  1.  The  aim  of  crucifixion  was  the  death  of  the 
body.    2.  Its  means:  the  Cross.    3.  Tbe  death    painful    and    protracted.      So 

il)  the  aim  of  soul  crucifixion  is  the  death  of  sin  (Bom.  vi.  6).  (2)  Its  means :  the 
Jross  of  Christ  (Gal.  vi.  14).  (3)  The  death,  (a)  painful  (Matt.  v.  29),  (b)  pro- 
tracted  (Bom.  vii.  23).  As  Jesus  lived  to  God  by  dying  on  the  cross,  so  Christians 
live  to  God  by  dying  to  sin.  III.  The  power  by  which  the  Cross  of  Christ  is 
made  effbotdaIi  to  the  death  of  sin.  1.  By  faith.  2.  By  the  indwelling  of  Christ. 
8.  By  the  inspiration  of  Christ's  love.  (W.  Harris.)  Death  to  the  law: — I. 
What  it  means — freedom  from  its  dominion  in  respect  of — 1.  The  accusing  and 
condemning  sentence  (Bom.  viii.  1).  2.  Its  power  (Bom.  vii.  8).  3.  Its  rigour.  4. 
The  obligation  of  conscience  to  conform  to  its  ceremonies.  II.  The  instrument — 
the  law  itself.  1.  It  accuses,  terrifies,  condemns,  and  thus  urges  us  to  fly  Christ 
who  is  the  cause  of  onr  death  to  the  law.  2.  The  law  goes  before,  and  effects  an 
entrance  for  law-killing  grace.  III.  The  end — living  to  God  (Titus  ii.  12),  which 
may  be  urged  by  the  facts :  1.  That  through  Christ  we  belong  to  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  20) ; 

2.  That  the  purpose  of  our  justification  and  redemption  is  practical  godliness ;  3. 
That  heaven  hereafter  depends  on  godliness  here.  4.  That  this  is  the  supreme 
end  of  the  ministry.  {W.  Perkins.)  The  paralyzing  power  of  the  sense  of  being 
alive  to  the  law ; — Sir  Walter  Baleigh  to  find  a  gold  mine  at  Guiana  for  the  king, 
went  out  on  his  last  voyage  under  an  unremitted  sentence  of  death  that  had  been 
passed  upon  him  fifteen  years  before.  No  wonder  that  the  magnetic  consciousness  of 
a  sword  dangling  over  him  by  a  hair  should  benumb  his  brain,  distract  his  faculties, 
and  turn  his  enterprize  into  a  long  tangle  of  blunders  and  calamities.  Pity  the 
adventurer  who  goes  out  on  an  evangelistic  enterprize  under  the  unremitted 
sentence  of  the  law,  a  preacher  of  Christ  crucified  who  has  himself  to  be  crucified; 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP,  n, 

alive  to  the  law  and  dead  to  God.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Death  to  the  law  and  lift 
to  God  : — When  he  said  "I  died,"  lest  any  one  should  say,  "  How  then  dost  thoo 
live?"  he  subjoined  also  the  cause  of  his  life,  and  showed  indeed  that  the  law 
killed  him  when  living,  but  that,  Christ  taking  hold  of  him  when  dead, 
quickened  him  through  death ;  and  he  exhibits  a  double  wonder,  both  that  Christ 
had  recalled  the  dead  to  life,  and  through  death  had  imparted  life.  [Chrysostom.) 
Tlie  Christian  dead  to  the  law : — What  a  collection  of  paradoxes  might  be  made 
from  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  I.  Let  us  examine  the  state  in  which  the  apostle 
describes  himself  to  be — "  I  am  dead  to  the  law ;  "  but  what  can  he  mean  by 
this  ?  that  the  moral  law  of  God  has  no  longer  any  authority  over  him  ?  We  dare 
not  say  so.  That  moral  law  is  the  law  of  God's  universal  empire,  of  heaven  and 
earth,  and  of  all  the  worlds  that  are.  The  believer  continues  under  its 
dominion  as  long  as  he  is  a  creature.  He  must  escape  from  existence  before  he 
can  escape  from  the  law  of  God.  He  means  that  he  is  dead  to  the  law  as  a 
covenant  between  God  and  himself.  The  law  in  its  relation  to  as  is  more  than  a 
simple  authoritative  declaration  of  God's  will.  Besides  commands,  it  consists  of  a 
promise  and  a  threatening.  This  gives  it  the  character  of  a  covenant.  He  is  dead 
to  all  hope  from  the  law,  to  all  expectation  of  salvation  from  it ;  he  has  no  fear  of 
condemnation  from  it.  A  man  in  his  grave  is  free  from  every  relationship  of  his 
former  life ;  the  servant  is  free  from  his  master.  So  the  believer,  dead  to  the  legal 
covenant,  rests  from  it.  II.  The  means  whereby  the  apostle  has  been  brought 
into  the  state  he  DESCEiBES — "  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law."  This 
excludes  a  great  number  of  those  who  call  themselves  Christians ;  who  as  regards 
their  own  feelings  are  utterly  dead  to  it.  They  are  dead  to  the  law,  to  God,  to 
Christ,  to  everything  but  the  petty  affairs  of  this  life.  But  the  apostle's  deadness 
was  brought  about  by  the  law  itself.  The  extent  of  the  law  and  its  unbending 
denunciations  render  it  impossible  for  us  to  make  our  way  to  God  by  it.  It  pene- 
trates within  a  man ;  it  reaches  to  the  affections,  the  will,  the  thoughts,  the  whole 
mind  and  heart.  You  say  this  "  is  hard  and  unreasonable."  Holy  angels  do  not 
think  so  ;  they  live  under  this  law  in  happiness.  But  who,  with  a  law  like  thig 
before  him,  can  hope  for  salvation  from  it  ?  But  this  only  partially  accounts  for 
St.  Paul's  deadness  to  the  law.  It  explains  how  the  law  itself  robbed  him  of  all 
hope  from  it,  but  it  does  not  tell  us  how  he  was  saved  from  the  fear  of  it.  He  was 
crucified  with  Christ.  "  I  have  endured  in  the  Person  of  my  Bedeemer  the  curse  of 
the  law,  the  chastisement  of  my  sins  has  been  laid  upon  him ;  and  now  when  my 
faith  is  firm  I  no  more  fear  the  law  than  a  debtor  fears  the  bond  which  has  been 
cancelled."  III.  The  design  of  this  deadness  to  the  law  in  the  Christian's 
botjl — "  That  I  might  live  unto  God."  Naturally  we  know  nothing  of  such  a  life 
as  this.  Through  the  influence  of  education,  or  the  power  of  conscience,  there 
may  be  some  reference  in  our  lives  to  God ;  it  is  but  occasional  and  slight.  Self  is 
the  ruling  principle  of  our  lives.  This  living  to  God  dethrones  self  within  the 
soul.  The  origin  of  this  Divine  life  is  that  deadness  to  the  law,  which  I  began 
with  describing.  It  is  not  a  mere  accompaniment  of  the  deadness,  but  the  effect  of 
it ;  a  life  proceeding  out  of  that  death.  His  renunciation  of  his  self-righteousness  has 
gradually  brought  on  other  renunciations  of  self.  The  law  driving  him  to  Christ  has 
been  the  happy  means  of  driving  him  out  of  self  altogether.  It  has  brought  him 
into  the  sphere  of  the  gospel,  and  among  those  soul-stirring  feelings  connected 
with  it.  I  can  serve  my  God  now,  for  He  has  set  me  free  to  serve  Him.  I  ean 
obey  Him  now  and  with  delight,  for  He  has  brought  me  to  love  Him.  It  is  not  so 
much  I  who  live  this  heavenly  life ;  it  is  the  God  who  dwells  in  heaven,  who  in 
condescension  dwells  in  my  soul.  Learn :  1.  to  think  more,  in  the  first  instance,  of 
the  law ;  to  endeavour  more  to  understand  its  character,  and  to  be  brought  under  its 
power.  There  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  imagine  that  the  gospel  has 
destroyed  the  law;  the  gospel  is  indeed  based  on  it;  you  will  never  rightly 
estimate  the  gospel  till  you  have  rightly  understood  the  law,  as  a  cove- 
nant of  condemnation.  2.  Are  we  amongst  those  who  have  taken  refuge 
from  the  condemnation  of  the  law  in  the  blood  and  righteousness  of 
Christ?  Then  the  law  has  done  its  work  in  ns.  (C.  Bradley.)  The  law 
an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  salvation : — Suppose  a  man  anxious  to  pass  from  one 
country  to  another,  from  a  dangerous  and  wretched  country  to  a  safe  and  happy 
one.  Directly  in  his  road  stands  a  mountain  which,  it  would  appear,  he  mast  pass 
over,  and  which  he  at  first  imagines  he  can  without  much  difficulty  climb.  He 
tries,  but  scarcely  has  he  begun  to  breast  it,  when  a  precipice  stops  him.  He 
descends  and  tries  again  in  another  direction.    There  another  precipice  e 


our.  n.]  GALATIAN8.  10S 

other  obstacle  arrests  his  course ;  and  still  ever  as  he  begins  his  ascent,  he  is 
baffled,  and  the  little  way  he  contrives  to  mount  serves  only  to  show  him  more  and 
more  of  the  prodigious  height  of  the  mountain,  and  its  stern,  rugged,  impassable 
character.  At  last,  wearied  and  worn,  heart-sick  with  labour  and  disappointment. 
and  thoroughly  convinced  that  no  efforts  of  his  can  carry  him  over,  he  lies  down 
at  the  mountain's  foot  in  utter  despair ;  longing  still  to  be  on  the  other  side,  but 
making  not  another  movement  to  get  there.  Now  ask  him  as  he  lies  exhausted  on 
the  gronnd,  what  has  occasioned  his  torpor  and  despair,  he  will  say,  that  mountain 
itself ;  its  situation  between  him  and  the  land  of  his  desires,  and  its  inaccessible 
heights  and  magnitude.  So  stands  the  law  of  God  between  the  Christian  and  the 
land  he  longs  for.  At  first  he  thought  he  could  obey  it,  so  obey  it  as  to  find  his 
way  to  God  by  it,  and  he  made  the  effort,  made  perhaps  many  and  long-continued 
efforts,  but  the  result  of  them  all  has  been  disappointment  and  despair.  The  law 
itself  has  stripped  him  of  all  hope  of  getting  to  heaven  by  means  of  it.  He  is 
exactly  in  the  situation  of  that  traveller  by  the  mountain's  side,  whom  you  can  no 
longer  prevail  on  to  move.  "  Of  what  use  is  it?  "  he  says.  "  I  will  try  no  more. 
I  know  the  difficulty  of  the  work,  and  I  know  my  own  weakness  too  well."  Here 
lies  the  difficulty,  or  rather  the  impossibility  to  such  creatures  as  we  are,  of  making 
our  way  to  God  by  means  of  the  law,  here  in  these  two  things — the  extent  of  that 
law's  requirements,  and  the  unbending,  inexorable  character  of  its  denunciations. 
{Ibid.)  Dead  to  the  law: — 1.  They  are  dead  unto  the  law  in  the  matter 
of  justification,  as  it  holdeth  forth  the  condition  of  the  covenant  of  works ;  in  this 
respect  they  are  dead  unto  the  law  (Rom.  vii.  3,  6),  for,  by  obedience  to  the  law  in 
their  own  persons,  they  are  not  now  to  expect  justification  by  the  works  of  the  law. 
2.  They  are  dead  unto  the  curse  and  condemning  power  of  the  law,  whereby  it 
adjudgeth  all  that  transgresseth  it  unto  death,  and  the  wrath  of  God.  The  law 
threateneth  death  to  all  that  transgress  it,  and  bindeth  this  wrath  on  all  that  are 
alive  to  it,  and  not  yet  delivered  from  it.  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  oontinueth  not 
in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Hence  it  is,  that  he  that 
"  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,"  and  "  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him  "  (John 
iii.  18,  36).  For  there  is  now  no  "  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus  " 
(Bom.  viii.  1).  8.  They  are  dead  unto  the  law,  as  to  its  libels,  indictments,  and  accusa- 
tions, tending  to  bring  them  again  under  the  lash  or  curse  of  the  law,  and  sentence 
of  its  condemnation  ;  and  this  clearly  floweth  from  the  former ;  for  from  it  they 
are  delivered  from  the  sentence  of  death  in  the  law ;  they  are  delivered  from  all 
accusations  tending  thereunto  (Bom.  viii.  33).  4.  They  are  dead  to  the  law,  as  it 
exacteth  full  obedience,  under  pains  of  breach  of  the  covenant.  5.  They  are  dead 
nnto  the  law,  as  it  exacts  full  obedience  in  their  own  strength,  without  any  help 
from  another,  in  whole  or  in  part ;  for,  now,  help  for  them  is  laid  upon  one  who  is 
mighty  (Psa.  xxxix.  19),  and  God  worketh  all  their  works  in  them  (lsa.  xxvi. 
12),  and  worketh  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do  (Phil.  ii.  13),  so  that  in 
Christ  that  Btrengtheneth  them,  they  can  do  all  things  (PhiL  iv.  13),  and  in 
Christ  do  they  bring  forth  fruits  (John  xv.  5).  6.  They  are  dead  to  the  law, 
as  to  its  rigid  obedience  in  their  own  persons ;  for  the  law,  as  such,  doth  not  point 
out  a  contrary  way;  nor  doth  it  positively  admit  of  one,  though  it  doth  not 
positively  exclude  or  refuse  one.  Adam,  and  all  his  posterity,  were  bound  to 
personal  obedience ;  but  now  the  believer  is  freed  from  that  rigidity,  and  has  a 
cautioner,  with  whom  he  is  one  in  law,  to  fulfil  the  law,  and  answer  all  its 
demands ;  and,  by  his  obedience,  they  are  made  righteous,  and  attain  to  justifica- 
tion of  life  (Bom.  v.  15, 19),  so  that  they  "  are  complete  in  Him  "  (Cor.  ii.  10).  7. 
They  are  dead  unto  the  law,  as  to  its  rigid  exacting  full  and  actual  performance, 
not  regarding  any  sincerity  of  intention.  8.  They  are  dead  onto  the  law,  as  to  its 
enslaving  power,  keeping  the  soul  in  bondage  for  fear  of  the  onrse,  and  pressing 
obedience  on  the  unwilling,  with  arguments  only  taken  for  fear  of  the  curse ;  for, 
now,  though  all  fears  are  not  fully  removed,  yet  are  they  under  sweeter  and  milder 
motives  and  encouragements  to  obedience — the  love  of  Christ  now  constiaineth 
them  (2  Cor.  ▼.  14).  Thoughts  of  the  benefits  of  redemption  lay  on  strong  and 
sweet  ties,  and  oil  the  wheels  of  the  soul ;  so  that  obedience  now  is  sweet,  filial, 
and  kindly,  not  forced  and  constrained;  for  the  heart  is  willing,  and  the  soul 
delighteth  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  after  the  inner  man,  and  duties  now  flow  out 
more  natively.  9.  They  are  dead  to  the  law,  in  respect  of  its  being  the  strength  of 
•in,  M  the  apostle  terms  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  86),  so  that  they  are  now  more  free  from  sin 
than  formerly,  both  as  to  its  guilt  and  dominion ;  the  law  cannot  now  so  charge 
home  guilt  upon  them  as  formerly,  Christ  being  now  accepted  of  as  cautioner  (Matt. 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

xii.  18),  and  having  made  fall  satisfaction  for  the  sinner  of  his  own,  the  law  cannot 
require  double  payment,  or  payment  of  both  the  cautioner  and  principal  debtor ; 
and  therefore  the  believer  is  free  of  making  any  satisfaction  to  justice.  This  lets 
us  then  see  what  a  change  is  made  on  the  state  of  believers  from  what  it 
formerly  was.  1.  A  great  change,  from  being  alive  to  the  law  and  under  its  power, 
to  a  being  dead  unto  the  law.  2.  It  is  a  great  change,  and  no  imagined  but  a  real 
change,  having  real  effects,  though  it  be  a  relative  change;  and  this  believers 
experience  in  themselves.  3.  It  is  a  necessary  change,  for,  without  it,  no  life  nor 
salvation  is  obtained.  4.  It  is  an  honourable  change.  From  slavery  to  freedom 
(John  viii.  36).  5.  Therefore  it  is  a  most  desirable  change ;  for  every  one  would 
desire  to  be  free  of  a  heavy  yoke  of  slavery,  and  from  under  tyranny.  How  desir- 
able, then,  must  it  be  to  be  free  of  tbis  spiritual  yoke,  and  this  soul's  tyranny.  6. 
It  is  a  most  advantageous  and  profitable  change :  For  (1)  There  is  much  inward 
peace,  quietness,  and  serenity  of  soul  had  hereby ;  the  soul  is  now  freed  of  these 
tossings  and  perturbations  of  mind  that  it  was  obnoxious  unto  before,  by  being 
under  the  restless  and  continual  challenges  and  accusations  of  the  law,  mad 
dreadful  fear  following  thereupon ;  for  the  mouth  of  the  law  being  stopped,  the  man 
is  dead  thereunto.  (2)  This  change  yieldeth  much  joy  and  consolation  to  the  soul 
that  formerly  was  tossed  with  tempest,  and  had  no  comfort,  but  filled  with  heart- 
breaking sorrow  and  grief,  as  seeing  no  outgate,  but  living  in  the  fearful  expecta- 
tion of  the  terrible  sentence  of  the  law,  which  was  as  water  to  their  wine ;  but  this 
sorrow  is  now  abated,  by  this  freedom  from  the  law.  (3)  This  change  is 
accompanied  with  a  lively  hope,  which  keepeth  up  the  head,  while  before  the  poor 
soul  was  drowned  in  despair,  sinking  in  that  gulf,  crying  out,  undone  1  and  that  it 
was  cut  off  for  its  part,  and  so  refused  to  be  comforted !  But  it  is  not  so  now  when 
dead  unto  the  law.  (4)  It  addeth  courage  to  the  soul  that  was  before  heartless  for 
any  duty,  and  casten  down  with  despondency  of  spirit ;  for  now  the  law  is  removed 
out  of  the  way :  And  so,  (5)  It  emboldeneth  the  soul,  and  gives  it  confidence  in 
approaching  to  God.  (J.  Brown.)  That  I  might  live  unto  God : — I.  We  shall. 
show  what  rr  is  to  live  unto  God,  by  pointing  out  some  principal  heads  of,  or 
ingredients  in,  as  requisite  to  a  living  to  God.  1.  A  reconciliation  with  God. 
Enemies  cannot  please  one  another.  2.  A  new  principle  of  life.  A  dead  man,  as 
such,  cannot  live  to  God.  3.  A  hearty  complying  with  the  law  of  God  as  their  rule. 
4.  It  includeth  a  walking  by  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  5.  It  taketh  in  a 
holy  life  in  all  manner  of  conversation,  and  the  study  of  sanctification.  6.  It 
taketh  in  a  lively,  holy,  divine,  and  spiritual  manner  of  performing  oommanded 
duties.  7.  It  taketh  in  an  eying  of  God  and  His  glory,  with  singleness  of  heart 
in  what  they  are  doing.  8.  It  includeth  a  fixed,  stayed,  and  constant  walking  thus, 
not  by  fits  and  starts.  H.  That  such  as  are  alive  yet  unto  the  law  cannot 
thus  live  unto  God.  1.  They  are  yet  married  to  their  old  husband,  and  not 
brought  out  of  that  state  of  enmity  wherein  they  were  and  are  (Bom.  vii.  4).  2. 
They  have  no  principle  but  the  old  principle  of  nature,  helped  a  little  with  some 
education ;  for  they  are  growing  still  upon  the  old  stock  of  nature.  3.  They  are 
not  subject  unto  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be  (Bom.  viii.  7),  their  will, 
ease,  pleasure,  <ftc.,  is  all  their  care,  with  this  their  heart  complieth.  4.  Their 
guide  is  the  flesh ;  for  they  walk  after  the  flesh  (Bom.  viii.  4).  5.  Instead  of  holi- 
ness, they  are  yielding  themselves  servants  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,  and  sin 
is  reigning  in  them,  and  being  the  servants  of  sin,  they  are  free  from  righteousness 
(Bom.  vi.  13-20).  6.  All  the  service  they  do  is  in  the  oldness  of  the  letter  (Bom. 
vii.  6),  and  not  in  newness  of  the  Spirit ;  it  is  carnal,  vain,  and  selfish,  every  way 
corrupt.  7.  Their  ultimate  end  is  themselves ;  their  own  peace,  quiet,  ease,  profit, 
esteem,  to  get  a  name,  or  to  make  a  price  to  buy  heaven  to  themselves,  that  they 
may  have  whereof  to  boast.  8.  Their  constant  trade  of  life,  is  either  to  serve 
Satan,  by  following  vile  affections,  their  own  lusts  and  pleasures,  or  the  world ; 
and  thus  their  days  are  spent.  (Ibid.)  Living  unto  God : — "  That  which  tells," 
says  Professor  Henry  Drummond,  speaking  of  Mission  work,  "is  the  Shepherd's 
life,  his  daily  moving  in  and  out  amongst  the  people,  and  what  is  now  wanted  for 
Africa  is  a  great  many  white  men,  with  gentleness  and  kindness,  and  Christ-like- 
ness, to  simply  go  there  and  do  nothing  bat  live.  It  they  can  educate  the  people,  as 
much  the  better." 

I  Vers.  20,  21.  I  am  crucified  with  Christ. — The  believer**  riddle :— This  verse 
enunciates  three  striking  paradoxes  which  are  realised  in  the  experience  of  every 
Christian.    I.  The  judicial  paradox,  or  the  mystery  of  the  believer's  legal  standing, 


chap,  n.]  GALATIAN8.  107 

The  believer,  be  it  remembered,  is  a  dead  man  to  begin  with,  i.e.,  before  he  becomes 

•  believer.  In  his  natural  condition  he  is  an  unpardoned  transgressor,  and  there- 
fore in  the  law's  eye  as  good  as  dead.  He  is  already  taken,  charged,  tried,  con- 
victed, sentenced,  shut  up  to  the  just  judgment  of  wrath,  and  only  waiting  the  hour 
of  death  to  meet  its  execution.  But  now  in  Christ,  who  before  the  law  acted  as  his 
representative,  and  for  his  sake  became  obedient  unto  death,  he  is  executed  too. 
So  far  as  the  olaims  of  justice  are  concerned,  he  is  crucified  with  Christ,  i.e., 
Christ's  crucifixion  stands  for  his,  and  he  personally  is  free.  He  has  died,  and  yet 
he  lives  1  II.  The  spiritual  pakadox,  or  the  mystery  of  the  believer's  inner  life.  The 
moment  a  man  becomes  a  believer,  he  at  the  same  time  beoomes  the  subject  of  an 
inward  change,  by  which  his  old  corrupt  nature  of  sin  is  destroyed,  and  a  new  prin- 
ciple of  holy  life  is  implanted.  Christ  lives  in  him.  III.  The  practical  paradox, 
or  the  mystery  of  the  believer's  outer  walk.  While  living  in  the  body  and  in  the 
world  the  believer  is  not  under  the  dominion  of  either,  but  regulates  his  conduct 
and  conversation  by  principles  superior  to  both — by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 
Christ's  law  is  his  rule  of  life ;  Christ's  person  the  object  of  his  love.  Conclusion  : 
1.  The  text  examines  us  about  our  standing  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  Are  we  crucified 
with  Christ  or  not  ?  2.  The  character  of  our  inner  life.  Are  we  spiritual  men,  or 
sensuous  r  3.  Our  walk  and  conversation.  Are  we  walking  by  faith,  or  by  sight  ? 
(Anon.)  Christus  et  ego : — I.  The  personality.  op  the  Christian  religion.  This 
verse  swarms  with  I  and  me.  Christianity  brings  out  a  man's  individuality,  not 
making  him  selfish,  but  making  him  realize  his  own  separate  existence,  and  com- 
pelling him  to  meditate  on  his  own  sin,  his  own  salvation,  his  own  personal  doom 
unless  saved  by  grace.  1.  In  proportion  as  our  piety  is  definitely  in  the  first  person 
singular,  it  will  be  strong  and  vigorous.  2.  In  proportion  as  we  fully  realize  our 
personal  responsibility  to  God  shall  we  be  likely  to  discharge  it.  II.  The  inter- 
weaving OF  OUR  OWN  PROPER  PERSONALITY  WITH  THAT  OP  JESUS  CHRIST.      I  think  I  See 

two  trees  before  me.  They  are  distinct  plants  growing  side  by  side,  but  as  I  follow 
them  downward,  I  observe  that  the  roots  are  so  interlaced  and  intertwisted  that  no 
one  can  trace  the  separate  trees  and  allot  the  members  of  each  to  its  proper  whole. 
Such  are  Christ  and  the  believer.  1.  Dead  to  the  world  with  Christ.  2.  Alive  to 
God  in  Christ.  3.  The  link  between  Christ  and  the  believer — faith.  4.  A  union  of 
love.  5.  A  union  by  sacrifice.  III.  The  life  which  results  prom  this  blended 
personality.  1.  A  new  life.  2.  A  very  strange  life.  3.  A  true  life.  4.  A  life  of 
self-abnegation.  5.  A  life  of  one  idea.  6.  The  life  of  a  man.  7.  The  life  of  heaven. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Practical  faith : — Faith  is  not  a  pieoe  of  confectionery  to  be 
put  upon  drawing-room  tables,  or  a  garment  to  be  worn  on  Sundays;  it  is  a  working 
principle,  to  be  used  in  the  barn  and  in  the  field,  in  the  shop  and  on  the  exchange ; 
it  is  a  grace  for  the  housewife  and  the  servant ;  it  is  for  the  House  of  Commons 
and  for  the  poorest  workshop.  I  would  have  the  believing  cobbler  mend  shoes 
religiously,  and  the  tailor  make  garments  by  faith,  and  I  would  have  every  Christian 
buy  and  sell  by  faith.  Whatever  your  trade  may  be,  faith  is  to  be  taken  into  your 
daily  calling,  and  that  is  alone  the  true  living  faith  which  will  bear  the  practical 
test.  Tou  are  not  to  stop  at  the  shop  door  and  take  off  your  coat  and  say,  "  Fare- 
well to  Christianity  till  I  put  up  the  shutters  again."  That  is  hypocrisy ;  but  the 
genuine  life  of  the  Christian  is  the  life  which  we  live  in  the  flesh  by  faith  of  the 
Son  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  Christian's  life  of  faith : — Every  moment  the  life  of 
the  Christian  is  to  be  a  life  of  faith.  We  make  a  mistake  when  we  try  to  walk  by 
feeling  or  by  eight.  I  dreamed  the  other  night,  while  musing  upon  the  life  of  the 
believer,  that  I  was  passing  along  a  road  which  a  Divine  call  had  appointed  for  me. 
The  ordained  pathway  which  I  was  called  to  traverse  was  amid  thick  darkness, 
unmingled  with  a  ray  of  light.    As  I  stood  in  the  awful  gloom,  unable  to  perceive 

•  single  inch  before  me,  I  heard  a  voice  which  said,  "  Let  thy  feet  go  right  on. 
Fear  not,  but  advance  in  the  name  of  God."  So  on  I  went,  putting  down  foot 
after  foot  with  trembling.  After  a  little  while  the  path  through  the  darkness 
became  easy  and  smooth,  from  use  and  experience ;  just  then  I  perceived  that  the 
path  turned :  it  was  of  no  use  my  endeavouring  to  proceed  as  I  had  done  before ; 
the  way  was  tortuous,  and  the  road  was  rough  and  stony ;  but  I  remembered  what 
was  said,  that  I  was  to  advance  as  I  could,  and  so  on  I  went.  Then  there  came 
another  twist,  and  yet  another,  and  another,  and  another,  and  I  wondered  why,  till 
I  understood  that  if  ever  the  path  remained  long  the  same,  I  should  grow  accus- 
tomed to  it,  and  so  should  walk  by  feeling  ;  and  I  learned  that  the  whole  of  the 
way  would  constantly  be  such  as  to  compel  me  to  depend  upon  the  guiding  voice, 
and  exeieise  faith  in  the  Unseen  One  who  had  called  me.    On  a  sudden  it  appeared 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

to  me  as  though  there  was  nothing  beneath  my  foot  when  I  put  it  down,  yet  I 
thrust  it  out  into  the  darkness  in  confident  daring,  and  lo,  a  firm  step  was  reached, 
and  another,  and  another,  as  I  walked  down  a  staircase  which  descended  deep, 
down,  down,  down.     Onward  I  passed,  not  seeing  an  inch  before  me,  but  believing 
that  all  was  well,  although  I  could  hear  around  me  the  dash  of  falling  men  and 
women  who  had  walked  by  the  light  of  their  own  lanterns,  and  missed  their  foot- 
hold.   I  heard  the  cries  and  shrieks  of  men  as  they  fell  from  this  dreadful  stair- 
case  ;  but  I  was  commanded  to  go  right  on,  and  I  went  straight  on,  resolved  to  be 
obedient  even  if  the  way  should  descend  into  the  nethermost  hell.     By  and  by  the 
dreadful  ladder  was  ended,  and  I  found  a  solid  rock  beneath  my  feet,  and  I  walked 
straight  on  upon  a  paved  causeway,  with  a  balustrade  on  either  hand.     I  under- 
stood this  to  be  the  experience  which  I  had  gained,  which  now  could  guide  and 
help  me,  and  I  leaned  on  this  balustrade,  and  walked  on  right  confidently  till,  in  a 
moment,  my  causeway  ended  and  my  feet  sank  in  the  mire,  and  as  for  my  other 
comforts  I  groped  for  them,  but  they  were  gone,  for  still  I  was  to  know  that  I  must 
go  in  dependence  upon  my  unseen  Friend,  and  the  road  would  always  be  such  that 
no  experience  could  serve  me  instead  of  dependence  upon  God.    Forward  I  plunged 
through  mire  and  filth  and  suffocating  smoke,  and  a  smell  as  of  death-damp,  for 
it  was  the  way,  and  I  had  been  commanded  to  walk  therein.    Again  the  path- 
way changed,    though    all  was    midnight  still:    up    went   the   path,  and    np, 
and  up,  and  up,  with  nothing  upon  which  I  could  lean;   I  ascended  wearily 
innumerable  stairs,  not  one  of  which  I  could  see,  although  the  very  thought  of  their 
height  might  make  the  brain  to  reel.     On  a  sudden  my  pathway  burst  into  light, 
as  I  woke  from  my  reverie,  and  when  I  looked  down  upon  it,  I  saw  it  all  to  be  safe, 
bat  such  a  road  that,  if  I  had  seen  it,  I  never  could  have  trodden  it.    My  journey 
could  only  be  accomplished  in  childlike  confidence  upon  the  Lord.     (Ibid.)        The 
life  of  faith : — I.  Death  to  thb  law  is  the  condition  op  life  unto  God.    1.  The 
part  which  the  law  performs  in  bringing  about  this  death.    By  its  own  teaching 
the  law  proclaims  its  impotence,  forbids  our  reliance  on  it,  and  prepares  the  way 
for  Christ  who  delivers  from  its  bondage.    2.  The  connection  between  death  to  the 
law  and  life  unto  God.    Emancipation.    Abject  slavery  exchanged  for  filial  freedom. 
II.  Life  unto  God  is  a  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God.    It  introduces  the  believer 
to  (1)  a  new  power— even  the  power  of  a  Divine  life ;  (2)  a  new  motive — love.    The 
believer  works  no  longer  up  to  the  point  of  acceptance  with  God,  but  from  that  of 
sin  forgiven  and  acceptance  secured.     (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)        Freedom  from  the 
law  through  death : — "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ " — wondrous  words !     I  am  bo 
identified  with  Him  that  His  death  is  my  death.    When  He  was  crucified,  I  was 
crucified  with  Him.    I  am  so  much  one  with  Him  under  law  and  in  suffering  and 
death,  that  when  He  died  to  the  law  I  died  to  the  law.     Through  this  union  with 
Him  I  satisfied  the  law,  yielded  to  it  the  obedience  which  it  claimed,  suffered  it» 
curse,  died  to  it,  and  am  therefore  now  released  from  it — from  its  accusations  and  its 
penalty,  and  from  its  claims  on  me  to  obey  it  as  the  means  of  winning  eternal  life. 
By  means  of  law  He  died ;  it  took  Him  and  wrought  its  will  on  Him.    As  our 
Representative  in  whom  we  were  chosen  and  in  whom  we  suffered,  He  yielded 
Himself  to  the  law,  which  seized  Him  and  nailed  Him  to  the  cross.    When  that 
law  seized  Him,  it  seized  at  the  same  time  all  His  in  Him,  and  through  the  law 
they  suffered  and  died  to  it.     Thus  it  is  that  by  the  law  taking  action  upon  them 
as  sinners  they  died  to  the  law.      (John  Eadie,  D.D  )         Christ  the  source  of 
sanctity : — What  principle  can  tend  to  cherish  tenderness,   lowliness,  modesty, 
recolleotedness,  dignity,  quietness  in  speech  and  manner,  devotion  and  the  winning 
grace  of  a  pervading  charity,  so  effectually  as  the  abiding  consciousness  of  our 
Lord  dwelling  and  walking   in  one's  self   as  a  tabernacle   of  His  own  gracious 
election,  and  in  others  as  in  oneself  according  to  the  same  promise  ?    What  can 
so  sustain  the  soul  above  natural  desires,  in  a  higher  sphere  of  life,  in  an  ever- 
upward  advance  towards  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  Court,  as  the  instinctive  sense, 
rooted  and  grounded  in  the  soul's  life,  that  there  is  a  wedded  nnion  between  the 
soul  and  the  Lord  who  bought  it  with  His  own  blood,  and  now  Himself  within  it 
claims  it  for  His  own  7    What  gives  so  keen  a  remorse  at  the  hatefulness  and 
horror  of  sin,  as  a  conviction  of  its  desecrating  the  organs,  the  limbs,  the  faculties 
which  God  inhabits  and  uses  as  the  chosen  vessel  of  His  own  sanctity  ?    It  is  not 
what  he  himself  is  that  forms  the  joy  of  the  saint,  nor  the  failing  to  te  what  God 
had  willed  him  to  be,  that  constitutes  the  remorse  of  the  true  penitent ;  but  it  is  to 
the  one  the  consciousness  that  God  is  in  him,  and  he  in  God  ;  and  to  the  other  the 
loss  of  a  Presence  in  Whom  alone  is  peace,  and  out  of  Whom  is  utter  darkness.   Ta 


cba*.  n.]  GALATIAN8.  109 

realize  what  we  are,  or  what  we  fail  to  be,  we  mast  appreciate  what  His  abiding  in 
as  causes  as  to  be.    We  can  never  truly  look  at  ourselves  separate  from  Him.    Our 
power  is  His  power  in  as.    Our  efforts  are  the  putting  forth  of  His  strength.    Our 
Bin  is,  that  after  He  had  come  to  as,  we  resisted  Him.    (T.  T.  Carter,  M.A.) 
Christ  in  man : — Christ  liveth  in  the  flesh  still,  in  the  body  of  every  believer ;  not 
merely  Jesus  the  humbled  man,  bat  Jesus  the  Christ  of  God ;  Jesus,  who  by  the 
resurrection  was  declared  to  be  the  son  of  God  with  power,  and  proclaimed  to  angels 
and  men  as  both  Lord  and  Christ  1    Who  liveth  in  me  7    Yourself  1    Nay,  I  am 
dead ;  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I — Not  thee !    Ah, 
who  then  ?    "  Christ  liveth  in  me."    Yes,  the  mighty  God  liveth  in  thee,  believer. 
Not  thyself ;  not  thy  poor,  weak,  helpless  self ;  but  Christ  by  His  power,  the  power 
of  His  Spirit  liveth  in  thee.    Ah,  why  then  dost  thou  talk  about  impossibilities  ? 
Why  say,  "  I  cannot  do  this ;  I  cannot  do  that ;  I  cannot  attain  to  this  or  to  that ; 
I  cannot  overcome  this  or  that  enemy  "  r    Thou  speakest  foolishly,  if  thou  speakest 
thus :  and  if  thou  now  persistest  in  saying  so,  thou  wilt  speak  falsely,  aye,  and 
blasphemously  too :  for  not  thou,  bat  Christ  liveth  in  thee.    And  who  is  mighty 
as  He?    Is  Satan  too  many  for  Him  who  trampled  on  the  power  of  all  His  enemies, 
who  triumphed  over  them  openly,  and  who  led  captivity  captive  ?    Ah,  and  is  the 
flesh  too  powerful  for  Him  ?    Who  is  the  man  who  says,  "  I  mast  sin — I  must  sin ; 
while  I  continue  in  the  flesh  I  must  continue  to  sin  "  t    And  is  sin  too  great,  too 
powerful  for  Jesus,  for  Him  who,  when  in  the  flesh,  a  Man  of  sorrows,  encompassed 
with  infirmities,  beset  by  perils,  a  weak  man,  overcame  it,  and  remained  holy, 
harmless,  andefiled  f    Did  He,  when  thus  weak  through  the  flesh,  pot  sin  far  away 
from  before  His  face  r    And  shall  He  not,  now  that  He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high,  prevail  against  all  your  sins  ?    O  speak  not  so  lightly  of  Him 
and  of  His  power!     (Edward  Irving,   M.A.)         The  sinner's  Substitute: — The; 
Eternal  Being  gave  Himself  for  the  creature  which  His  hands  had  made.    He  gave 
Himself  to  poverty,  to  toil,  to  humiliation,  to  agony,  to  the  Cross.    He  gave  Him- 
self "  for  me,"  for  my  benefit ;  but  also  "  for  me,"  in  my  place.    This  substitution 
of  Christ  for  the  guilty  sinner  is  the  ground  of  the  satisfaction  which  Christ  has 
made  upon  the  cross  for  human  sin.    But  on  what  principle  did  the  Sinless  One 
thus  take  the  place  of  the  guilty  ?    Was  it,  so  to  speak,  an  arbitrary  arrangement, 
for  which  no  other  account  can  be  given  than  the  manifested  will  of  the  Father  t 
No ;  the  substitution  of  the  suffering  Christ  for  the  perishing  sinner  arose  directly 
out  of  the  terms  of  the  Incarnation.    The  human  nature  which  our  Lord  assumed 
was  none  other  than  the  very  nature  of  the  sinner,  only  without  its  sin.    The  Son 
of  God  took  on  TTim  human  nature,  not  a  human  personality.    He  becomes  the 
Redeemer  of  oar  several  persons,  because  He  is  already  the  Redeemer  of  this  our 
common  nature,  which  He  has  made  for  ever  His  own  (1  Cor.  zv.  20).    As  human 
nature  was  present  in  Adam,  when  by  his  representative  sin  he  ruined  his  posterity, 
so  was  human  nature  present  in  Christ  our  Lord,  when  by  His  voluntary  offering 
of  His  Sinless  Self,  He  "  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."    Christ  is 
thus  the  second  Head  of  our  race.    Our  nature  is  His  own.    He  carried  it  with 
Him  through  life  to  death.   He  made  it  do  and  bear  that  which  was  utterly  beyond 
its  native  strength.    His  Eternal  Person  gave  infinite  merit  to  its  acts  and  its  suf- 
ferings.    In  Him  it  died,  rose,  ascended,  and  was  perfeotly  well-pleasing  to  the 
All-Holy.     Thus  by  no  forced  or  artificial  transaction,  bat  in  virtue  of  His  existing 
representative  relation  to  the  human  family.  He  gave  Himself  to  be  a  ransom  for 
all.    (Canon  Liddon.)        Christ's  universal  love : — "  He  loved  me  and  gave  Himself 
for  me."    Each  sinner,  each  saint  around  His  cross  might  have  used  these  words 
of  the  apostle.    For  His  blessed  mother  and  St.  John ;  for  the  Roman  judge  and 
for  the  Roman  soldiers ;  for  the  chief  priest  and  for  the  Pharisee ;  for  the  vilest 
and  hardest  of  His  executioners,  and  for  the  thieves  who  hang  dying  beside  Him, 
oar  Lord  gave  Himself  to  death.    For  all  who  have  been  first  and  greatest,  for  all 
who  have  been  least  and  last  in  human  history,  for  all  whom  we  have  loved  or 
seen,  for  our  separate  souls,  He  gave  Himself.    True,  His  creatures  indeed  are  still 
free  to  accept  and  appropriate  or  to  refuse  His  gift.    But  no  lost  soul  shall  murmur 
hereafter  that  the  tender  loving-kindness  of  God  has  not  willed  to  save  it.    No 
saint  in  glory  shall  pretend  that  aught  in  him  has  been  accepted  and  crowned  save 
the  infinite  merit,  the  priceless  gifts  of  his  Redeemer.    The  dying  love  of  Jesus 
embraces  the  race,  and  yet  it  concentrates  itself  with  direct — as  it  seems  to  as — 
with  exclusive  intensity  upon  each  separate  soul.    He  dies  for  all,  and  yet  he  dies 
for  each ;  as  if  each  soul  were  the  solitary  object  of  His  incarnation  and  of  His 
death.    (Ibid.)       Horn  Christian  life  is  sustained :— A  Christian  life  is  the  living 


lit  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*,  a 

Christ  manifesting  Himself.  It  is  the  vital  power  putting  forth  leaves  and  fruits— 
the  vine  sending  out  its  strength  into  the  branches.  It  cannot  be  too  deeply 
impressed  upon  us  that  Christianity  is  a  profound  connection  of  the  soul  with 

Christ that  it  is  not  the  imitation  of  a  splendid  model,  but  the  indwelling  of  a 

living  Person — that  the  Christ  form  is  only  the  outward  development  of  the  Christ 
nature,  the  life  manifesting  itself  after  its  kind.     Tou  all  know  that  the  varioua 
forms  of  vegetable  creation  are  sustained  and  perfected  by  a  secret,  silent,  but 
resistless  power  which  we  call  life.    It  is  this  that  lifts  the  oak  in  the  forest  and 
spreads  its  mighty  branches  to  the  storm ;  and  this  that  carpets  the  earth  with 
verdure  and  decks  the  fields  with  teeming  flowers.     In  the  great  and  in  the  small, 
in  the  tree  and  in  the  herb,  in  the  pine  of  the  mountain  and  the  grasses  of  the  field, 
this  secret  but  resistless  principle  asserts  its  power.     Now,  thus  is  it  with  us  as 
Christian  men ;  our  Christianity  is  a  principle  of  life ;  we  are  not  imitations,  ws 
are  alive;   we  are  not  artificial  flowers,  we  are  flowers  growing  in  the  garden, 
branches  growing  in  the  vine.     (J.  W.  Boulding.)        Derived  life  : — Christ  is  our 
life.    How  His  life  is  made  to  be,  at  the  same  time,  our  own,  is  a  mystery  of  grace, 
of  which  you  have  seen  typeB  in  the  garden,  where  just  now  so  many  millions  of 
Uod's  thoughts  are  springing  and  growing  into  beautiful  expression.  Ton  once  grafted 
something  on  to  a  fruit  tree.    The  process,  though  delicate,  was  most  simple. 
You  only  had  to  be  careful  that  there  should  be  clean,  olear,  close  contact  between 
the  graft  and  the  tree.    The  smallest  shred  or  filament  of  wrapping  round  the  graft 
would  have  prevented  the  life  of  the  tree  from  flowing  into  it.  The  weak,  bleeding  graft 
was  fastened  on  to  the  strong  stem  just  as  it  was,  then  in  due  time  it  struck,  then 
gradually  the  tiny  slip  grew  into  the  flourishing  bough,  and  lately,  as  you  stood 
looking  at  that  miracle  of  tender  formation  and  soft  bright  flush,  you  almost 
fancied  it  was  conscious.     It  seemed  to  say,  "  I  live ;  nevertheless  not  I,  but  the 
tree  liveth  in  me ;  and  the  life  I  now  live  in  the  foliage,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  shaft 
of  the  tree.    I  trust  to  the  tree  only ;  every  moment  I  am  clinging  to  it,  and  with- 
out it  I  can  do  nothing."    {Chat.  Stanford,  DD.)        How  Christ  it  appropriated 
by  the  individual  toul: — My  conception  of  Christ  is  that  He  is  mine  :  not  mine  in 
any  sense  which  appropriates  Him  to  me  alone ;  but  mine  as  really  and  truly  as 
though  I  were  the  only  human  being  in  the  universe.    My  father  was  absolutely 
mine,  although  my  next  younger  brother  could  say  the  same  thing,  and  though 
every  brother  and  sister  could  say  the  same  thing.    I  had  the  whole  of  him,  and 
each  of  my  brothers  and  sisters  had  the  whole  of  him.    And  I  have  the  whole  of 
my  God.     The  God  of  all  the  heaven,  and  the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  and  of  time, 
and  of  physioal  law  and  its  sequence,  and  of  all  invisible  laws  and  their  sequences — 
He  is  my  God.    (H.  W.  Beecher.\        Man't  double  life : — We  all  live  in  the  midst 
of  two  worlds — a  material  world  and  a  spiritual  world.     The  material  world  is 
visible  to  all.     We  see  it,  and  deal  with  it,  every  moment.    The  spiritual  world  is 
visible  only  to  those  whose  eyes  have  been  supernaturally  opened  to  see  it.    Bnt 
the  one  is  as  real  and  as  great  a  fact  as  the  other.    They  both  are  close  to  us.    And 
every  man  is  a  centre  round  which  they  both  are  circulating.    1.  The  material 
world  is  the  world  of  our  senses.    The  spiritual  world  is  the  world  of  our  faith. 
We  come  into  the  first  at  our  natural  birth ;  we  enter  the  second  at  our  regenera- 
tion.    When  we  have  entered  it,  it  is  far  grander  than  the  other.    2-  The  material 
world  is  beautiful  and  pleasant,  but  it  bas  its  dark  shadows.    It  is  not  what  it  was 
once  made  to  be.    It  brings  its  sorrows,  disappointments,  and  regrets.    It  is  always 
passing  away.    And  soon,  very  soon,  it  will  be  but  as  the  shadow  of  a  dream  1   The 
spiritual  world  remains  unfallen.    It  is  hidden.    But  all  the  elements  of  oar 
immortality  are  there,  and  it  can  never  pass  away.    S.  In  the  material  world  are 
our  friendships,  ambitions,  businesses,  professions,  earthly  work,  bodily  pleasures. 
In  the  spiritual  world  are  the  ministrations  of  angels ;  the  operations  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  presence  of  Christ;  the  sweet  sense  of  pardon;  the  peace  and  love  and 
service  of  God ;  an  eternity  begun ;  heaven  always  in  sight ;  thoughts  that  satisfy; 
occupations  that  will  never  tire;  joys  that  cannot  fade.     To  the  man  who  lives  in 
the  spiritual  world,  the  material  world  is  becoming  small.    He  uses  it,  and  enjoys 
it ;  but  it  is  not  his  life.    It  is  his  servant,  whom  he  employs ;  not  his  master, 
whom  he  obeys.    And  of  that  great  spiritual  and  eternal  world,  which  is  about  us 
everywhere,  and  in  the  midst  of  which,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  we  are  all 
walking  every  step,  the  circumference  is  glory — the  key  which  opens  it  is  faith — and 
its  centre,  from  which  all  radiates  and  to  whioh  all  converges,  is  the  Son  of  God,  His 
person  and  His  work.  (JamesVaughan,M.A.)     LifeinChritt;— Life— the  higher  and 
truer  life  of  a  ">*" — resolves  itself  into  one  thing,  via.,  trust  in  Jesus.    Expand  thai 


oha».  n.]  GALATIANS.  Ill 

trast,  and  you  will  find  it  life — life  indeed — life  for  ever.  Consider  this  life.  The 
question  was,  How  can  a  sinner  live  at  all,  and  not  die  ?  seeing  God  has  said, 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  Bhall  die  ;  "  and  every  one  of  us  has  sinned?  Can  God 
falsify  His  own  word  ?  1.  When  Jesus  died  we  died.  We  died  in  Him.  So  we 
have  died,  and  our  death  is  passed.  We  can  live,  and  God  be  true.  2.  But  what 
makes  life?  Union  with  life.  Christ  is  life.  We  are  united  to  Christ,  as  a  member 
is  united  to  the  head.  And  as  the  member  lives  because  the  head  lives,  we  live  by 
and  in  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  That  is  life.  3.  Now  life  thus  possible,  and  thus 
made — what  is  it  t  Life  is  to  live  in  every  part  of  our  being — body,  intellect,  heart, 
soul.  Now  what  can  engage  the  whole  man  but  religion  ?  And  what  is  religion  ? 
The  indwelling  of  Christ  and  the  service  of  God.  4.  Then  of  that  life  what  is  the 
motive  power  ?  Love.  The  love  of  God.  Who  can  really  love  God  but  those  who 
are  forgiven,  and  who  therefore  can  feel,  "  God  is  my  Father  "  ?  And  who  can  say 
that  out  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  5.  And  of  that  life  what  is  the  root  ?  The  Exemplar, 
the  great  Exemplar — the  pattern  of  Christ.  6.  What  is  its  aim  and  focus?  To 
please  and  glorify  Him  to  whom  it  owes  itself.  7.  What  is  its  consummation  and 
rest  ?  The  presence,  and  the  image,  and  the  enjoyment,  and  the  perfect  service 
of  God  throughout  eternity.  (Ibid.)  The  secret  of  the  spiritual  life  : — The  secret 
of  this  life,  which  alone  is  life,  is  faith.  And  what  is  faith  ?  Trust.  And  what 
is  trust  ?  Taking  God  simply  at  His  word.  Now,  let  us  Bee  what  God  has  said 
concerning  this  life.  God  has  said — He  has  repeated  it  under  many  forms  and  by 
many  images — "  Believe  and  live."  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."  Now  you  must  take  that  without  any  deduction,  or  any 
qualification,  or  any  condition  whatsoever.  It  is  for  all  sinners — for  sinners  of 
every  dye — without  one  single  exception  1  The  promise  is  to  every  one  who  will 
accept  it.  Accept  what  ?  Accept  that  the  Son  of  God  (and  no  other  but  the  Son 
of  God  could  do  it,  for  no  other  would  be  an  equivalent)  the  Son  of  God  has,  by 
His  death,  paid  all  the  penalty  and  cancelled  all  your  debt  to  God ;  and  bo  the 
mandate  has  gone  forth  from  the  throne,  **  Live ! "  "  Deliver  him  from  going 
down  to  the  pit;  I  have  found  a  ransom."  That  done,  your  life  from  that  moment 
— if  you  have  faith  enough — may  be  a  life  without  any  fear.  Your  sins  forgiven 
are  sins  buried.  And  buried  Bins  have  no  resurrection.  They  fihall  "  never  be 
mentioned."  They  are  "  remembered  no  more."  (Ibid.)  Self-crucifixion  the 
source  of  life: — I.  That  self-crucifixion  is  the  source  of  life.  This  is  the 
reason  ;  there  is  an  old  life  which  must  utterly  perish,  that  by  its  death  and  out 
of  its  death  the  new  life  may  arise.  1.  The  death  of  the  old  life.  The  life  that 
must  be  crucified  before  the  Divine  life  can  rise  is  the  self -life  in  all  its  forms. 
Why  must  man's  self-life  die  ?  It  is  the  very  ground  and  root  of  all  sin.  The 
assertion  of  the  "  I  "  of  the  self  is  the  perpetual  tendency  of  the  flesh.  "  I  live  " 
is  the  watch-word  of  carnalism — there  is  no  sin  which  is  not  an  assertion  of  self 
as  the  principle  of  life.  Man  not  always  conscious  of  this,  blinded  to  it.  Thus 
the  sensualist  may  be  conscious  only  of  the  wild  cravings  of  desire,  but  by  yielding 
to  them  he  is  asserting  his  passion,  his  pleasure,  to  be  greater  than  the  law  of  God. 
The  old  self-life  must  die.  Before  the  Cross,  faith  and  love  are  self-crucifixion. 
Faith  renounces  self  and  destroys  the  old  life.  Love  goes  out  of  self  to  Christ. 
2.  The  awakening  of  the  new  life.  "  Nevertheless  I  live."  This  is  more  than 
being  constrained  by  any  new  emotional  motive  of  love ;  literally  Christ  was  in 
St.  Paul  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  best  understood  by  experience.  Yoo  know 
that  when  you  by  faith  died  with  Him  to  the  flesh  you  felt  the  impulse  of  a  life  not 
yours  possessing  you,  and  inbreathing  a  Divine  energy  and  a  heavenly  love.  Christ 
living  in  you  will  consecrate  all.  II.  Nature  of  thb  life  that  springs  from  ft. 
1.  Purity.  The  inspiration  of  the  indwelling  Christ  will  free  from  sensual  and  low 
temptation  ;  it  means  perfect  devotion  to  God.  2.  Peace.  Christ  in  us  calms  the 
troubled  spirit ;  becomes  the  fulness  of  emotion.  S.  Power.  If  the  self-life  is 
crucified  with  Christ,  and  Christ  is  dwelling  in  us,  we  have  His  power  to  overcome 
sin.  The  Cross-life  is  power,  kingship  over  self.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The 
presence,  of  Christ  in  the  soul : — Some  men  have  called  this  doctrine  of  the  real 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  soul  mystical  and  untrue.  I  only  know  that  if  it  be  so, 
the  Bible  is  mystical  and  untrue,  for  the  Saviour  and  His  apostles  assert  it  again 
and  again  in  words  which  cannot  be  explained  away.  They  speak  little  of  motives 
or  influences ;  they  speak  plainly  of  man  being  inspired  by  the  actual  eontaet  of 
God,  through  the  Eternal  Spirit.  It  only  seems  mystical  because  we  are  so  prone 
to  fancy  that  we  ean  explain  spiritual  processes  by  outer  motives  and  influences. 
But  what  are  the  motives,  what  are  the  influences,  which  change  a  man's  nature  ? 


Ill  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

They  are  only  the  words  by  which  we  feebly  express  the  great  mystery  of  the  real 
touch  of  God.  All  creation  seems  to  me  to  confirm  this  spiritual  truth.  We  are 
driven  to  believe  in  the  present  aotion  of  God  in  the  world.  We  speak  of  law,  but 
law  is  only  a  phrase  by  which  we  hide  our  ignorance.  What  we  call  law  is  the  act 
of  God.  The  seed  bursts  into  life  not  by  dead  laws,  but  the  Eternal  finger  touches 
it,  and  it  lives.  The  stars  burn,  not  by  dead  laws ;  God's  glory  smites  them,  and 
they  light  the  firmament.  The  earth  moves,  not  by  dead  laws ;  God's  arm  propels 
it,  and  it  rolls  on  its  destined  path  through  the  untravelled  infinity  of  space.  And 
if  the  eternal  power  of  the  present  God  thus  blooms  in  the  flower,  glows  in  the 
stars,  and  is  seen  in  the  majestic  march  of  worlds,  shall  we  not  much 
rather  believe  that  the  real  Spirit  of  the  living  Christ  is  in  actual  contact 
with  the  soul  when,  crucified  with  Him,  it  wakes  to  a  life  of  immortal 
beauty?  This,  then,  is  the  life  springing  from  self-crucifixion — Christ  in  the 
soul,  forming  it  into  a  new  oreatnre.  Until  the  old  life  has  perished  He  cannot 
live  there,  for  only  when  the  forces  of  the  carnal  nature  are  destroyed  can 
His  holy  presence  dwell  within.  I  cannot  describe  it,  but  you  may  know  it.  _  (Ibid.) 
The  Christian's  communion  with  the  death  and  life  of  Christ: — Peculiar  lan- 
guage. One  clause  seems  to  contradict  another.  Yet  no  real  contradiction ;  but 
strikingly  suitable  language  to  express  the  mysteries  of  faith  respecting  Christ's 
onion  with  His  people,  and  their  consequent  participation  of  the  benefits  of  His 
sufferings  and  death.  I.  Thb  believer's  crucifixion  with  Cueist,  ob  his  com- 
munion with  Him  in  His  death.  The  meaning  is :  "  The  ends  of  Christ's  cruci- 
fixion are  accomplished  in  me."  1.  Believers  are  crucified  with  Christ,  in  virtue  of 
their  legal  union  to  Him  as  their  Head  of  righteousness.  Christ  and  His  people  are 
as  one  body,  one  mass ;  He  the  Sanctifier,  and  they  the  sanctified,  are  all  one.  2. 
Beally  and  spiritually  crucified  with  Him,  through  union  to  Him  as  their  Head  of 
living  and  quickening  influence.  II.  The  belie vbb'b  life  in  Chbist,  ob  communion 
with  Him  in  His  lifb.  1.  He  is  invested  with  a  righteousness  commensurate  to  all 
the  demands  of  the  Divine  law.  3.  With  respect  to  his  sanctifioation  also,  it  may  be 
•aid  that  the  believer  lives — yet  not  he,  but  Christ  lives  in  Him.  8.  With  respect 
to  the  life  of  consolation  and  glory,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  not  the  believer  who 
lives,  but  Christ  lives  in  him.  HI.  Thb  influence  or  faith  in  maintaining  this 
life.  1.  Faith  as  the  means  of  oar  union  with  Christ,  is  necessary  to  oar  com- 
munion with  Him,  both  in  His  righteousness  and  His  grace.  9.  By  faith  our  com- 
munion  with  Christ  is  carried  on,  in  oar  receiving  of  all  His  benefits.  8.  Faith  is 
the  means  of  the  spiritual  life,  as  it  terminates  on  the  promises,  the  apprehension 
of  which  has  so  powerful  an  influence  both  on  our  peace  and  our  purity  (2  Cor.  vii. 
1 ;  Psa.  xzvii.  18,  14).  4.  Faith  is  the  means  of  the  spiritual  life,  as  by  bringing 
eternal  things  near,  it  counterbalances  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  the  world 
(1  John  v.  5 ;  Heb.  xi.).  6.  Faith  is  the  means  of  the  spiritual  life,  as  it  supplies 
from  its  contemplation  of  the  love  of  Christ  fresh  motives  to  obedience  and  patience 
(2  Cor.  v.  14).  6.  As  it  refers  to  the  authority  of  Christ's  law,  and  enables  the 
Christian  to  perceive  the  reasonableness  even  of  the  most  difficult  of  His  precepts,  as 
well  as  the  awful  responsibility  under  which  he  lies  to  Christ's  judgment  (2  Cor.  v. 
9-11 ;  Heb.  xi.  6).  7.  Faith,  by  making  the  Christian  habitually  conversant  with  spiri- 
tual objects  and  motives  of  conduct,  gives  a  spiritual  character  even  to  the  common 
actions  and  enjoyments  of  this  natural  life.  (M.  Willis.)  Crucified  with  Christ : — 
This  extremely  bold,  startling,  and  paradoxical  assertion  of  the  apostle,  is  a  meta- 
phorical, pictorial  statement  of  a  great  spiritual  truth,  about  all  really  Christian  life. 
Every  genuine  Christian,  who  is  really  united  to  Christ  by  living  faith,  has  been 
crucified  with  Christ ;  and  since  he  still  lives,  his  life  thereafter  is  the  life  of  Christ 
in  him.  I.  The  context  will  fubnish  us  with  the  fibst  bat  of  the  light  wb 
seek.  St.  Paul  is  combating  an  error  subversive  to  Christianity  itself,  viz.,  ritualism. 
He  declares  that  if  you  go  back  to  that — to  the  old  notion  that  by  deeds  you  can  be 
justified — you  are  going  back  again  to  law,  and  have  left  Christ  behind.    II.  What 

IS   THB   UNIVEBSAL  8PIBITUAL  TBUTH    BEPBESENTED    BT   THESE    IMAGES — *'  DEAD   WITH 

Chbist,"  **  Chbist  living  in  us  "  ?  If  you  have  really  gone  to  God  with  the  prayer 
and  hope  of  faith,  resting  on  the  propitiation  of  Christ,  you  have  died  to  sin.  It  is 
as  if  you  had  been  crucified  with  Christ.  It  may  be  that  your  Christian  history  con- 
tains  no  moment  of  mighty  conscious  change ;  that  your  change  took  place  by  slow 
and  imperceptible  degrees,  more  like  education  than  conversion.  In  that  case,  it 
would  not  be  likely  that  you  should  feel  this  great  truth  about  yourself  as  Paul  felt 
it.  Tour  death  to  sin  may  have  been  less  like  a  crucifixion,  a  sudden,  painful,  yev 
blissful,  inevitably  conscious  severance  from  it,  than  like  a  slow,  lingering,  almost 


OU».  H.]  GALATIANS.  113 

painless  process  ;  like  a  disease  whose  stages  of  advance  could  never  be  marked  by 
hours  or  days.  But  still  it  is  true  of  you  ;  if  you  be  hoping  in  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  you  have  been  crucified  with  Christ  to  that  huge  guilt  of  which  law, 
just  and  holy  law,  convicted  you  ;  and  having  thus  died  to  it,  you  have  no  more  to 
fear  from  it.  God  has  severed  it  and  you.  And  it  is  now  for  you  to  recognize  the 
grand  truth,  and  rejoice  in  it.  III.  This  crucifixion  has  respect  to  something 
else  than  the  previoub  guilt  or  debt  to  Divine  law.  Sin  is  not  merely  an  external 
thing;  an  ever-accumulating  mass  of  wrong  deeds  and  words,  of  omissions  and 
neglects.  All  these  are  the  results  of  what  we  are.  The  seat  of  sin  is  in  the  soul. 
Tha  working  of  the  evil  element  has  produced  evil  habits  and  tendencies.  These 
must  be  eradicated.  The  old  nature  has  to  be  mortified,  crucified ;  and  in  its  place 
Christ  is  to  reign.     (G.  W.  Conder.)  The  old  life  and  tlie  new : — Think  of  a 

man  who  is  living  to  himself,  without  any  thought  of  God,  or  any  earnest  endeavour 
to  serve  or  please  Him.  Living  to  gratify  only  his  own  tastes,  passions,  desires,  and 
none  else's.  Self-interest  his  law,  self-love  his  inspiration,  self-satisfaction  his  end 
and  aim,  self  his  god.  This  is  the  man.  Not  the  caricature  of  him — his  faithful 
portrait.  If  he  be  not  living  unto  God,  he  must  be  that ;  there  is  no  alternative. 
Look  well  at  him  as  such.  Scan  him  closely  for  an  instant  more,  a  man  whose 
whole  principle,  law,  motive,  aim,  end,  is  self.  And  now,  see  him  again,  emerging, 
as  it  were,  from  Christ's  sepulchre  with  Christ,  his  hand  in  his  Saviour's,  yielding 
to  the  loving  entreaty  of  the  Lord  to  come  hopefully  to  God ;  to  confess  his  sin,  and 
be  pardoned.  How  completely  altered  his  mien  1  How  relaxed  that  stiff  unbending 
erectness  which  formerly  marked  him !  How  softened  down  that  stern  unlovely 
expression  which  spoke  from  his  every  feature.  Surely  the  proud,  harsh,  unyielding 
spirit  of  self  must  have  been  outcast  from  him,  left  behind  him  in  the  grave  of  Christ. 
It  is  not  the  same  man.  God  1  God's  law  1  God's  favour  1  His  anger,  His  pardon, 
His  help  and  guidance,  that  used  to  be  nothing  to  him,  are  everything  to  him  now. 
If  he  could,  he  would  so  grave  that  law  in  him  as  that  its  force  could  never  depart 
from  him.  If  he  might,  he  would  stay  there  for  ever  gazing  on  God,  never  to  look 
at  anything  else,  lest  he  should  sin  again.  {Ibid.)  Christ  in  the  soul : — Hear  the 
testimony  of  one  who  has  experienced  this.  He  says  to  you,  "  You  know  my  former 
life.  It  was  I  who  lived  then.  It  was  my  ideas,  my  wishes,  my  passions,  my  tastes, 
which  moved  me  then.  But  it  is  not  so  now.  I  have  seen  Christ,  I  have  heard 
Him,  have  begun  to  love  Him,  and  He  is  to  me,  in  addition  to  being  my  glorious  and 
living  Friend  outside  me,  with  whom  I  can  converse  and  to  whom  I  can  pray,  also  a 
living  system  of  truths,  a  living  revelation  of  Divine  ideas.  Truth  has  laid  hold  of  me 
by  Him  ;  has  entered  into  me ;  has  won  my  approbation,  my  choice,  aye,  my  intense 
desire.  Eternity  touches  me  by  Him.  Law  attracts,  governs  me  through  Him. 
God  is  very  near  to  me  in  Him.  Man  is  more  beautiful  and  great  to  me  in  Him. 
He  is  the  portrait  of  what  I  may  be,  and  desire  to  be.  I  see  obstacles  overcome  in 
Him.  Hope  fills  me  from  Him.  Holiness  begins  to  suffuse  me  from  Him.  He  is 
all  in  all  to  me.  And  so  my  new  life  is  no  longer  that  self-prompted  thing  it  once 
was.  It  is,  though  still  my  life,  because  I  choose  and  love  it,  nevertheless  all  of  it 
derived,  drawn,  inspired  from  Christ.  *  I  live — nevertheless  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me.'  "  (Ibid.)  The  part  of  faith  in  the  new  life  : — And  now  you  will  see  what 
part  faith  plays  in  the  matter.  Obviously  it  is  the  connecting  link  betwixt  that  In- 
carnate Truth  and  my  inner  self.  Here  is  a  man  who  once  did  not  see,  and  therefore 
could  not  believe  it.  And  he  had  no  Divine  life  in  him — nothing  but  what  was 
perishable;  all  of  it,  its  joys,  hopes,  attainments — perishable.  But,  he  came  at 
last  to  see,  aye,  to  believe.  The  record,  the  saying,  the  preaching,  was  fact  in  his 
isteem.  And  immediately — as  the  fluid  flies  along  the  galvanic  wire  when  it  has 
contact — immediately,  by  the  contact  of  a  living  faith,  a  faith  of  the  heart,  the  in- 
fluence, the  vitalizing,  Divine  force  of  that  truth  begins  to  flood  his  being,  and  he 
begins  to  live  a  life  that  shall  never  die.  (Ibid.)  Faith  and  the  spiritual  life  : — 
1.  The  hature  of  faith.  1.  As  described  in  the  Bible.  2.  As  defined  by  theological 
writers.  8.  As  elucidated  by  familiar  illustrations.  II.  The  relation  of  faith  to 
the  spiritual  life.  1.  It  is  a  realizing  grace.  2.  It  is  a  strengthening  grace.  3. 
It  is  a  receiving  grace.  4.  It  is  a  uniting  grace.  (George  Brooks.)  The  spiritual 
life  : — The  apostle  had  said  before,  that  "we  are  justified  by  faith  alone,  and  not  by 
the  works  of  the  law;"  and  that  a  believer  was  crucified  with  Christ.  Now,  says 
he,  this  doctrine  that  I  have  preached  unto  you,  is  no  way  opposite  unto  our  spiri- 
tual life,  or  nnto  our  holiness  ;  yet,  now  I  live,  or  "  nevertheless  I  live."    I.  Eveht 

TRUE   BELIEVER,    EVERT   OODLT,  GRACIOUS   MAN,  IS  A  LIVING  MAN,  lives   a  Spiritual  life, 

Is  in  the  state  of  life  (John  vi.  40,  47,  48,  54,  65).     1.  What  is  this  spiritual  life? 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  B. 

(1)  It  is  a  supernatural  perfection  (Eph.  iv.  18).  (2)  It  rises  from  our  union  with 
Christ  by  the  Spirit.  (3)  It  is  that  supernatural  perfection  whereby  a  man  is  able 
to  act,  and  move,  and  work  towards  God  as  his  utmost  and  last  end.  2.  Whereby 
may  it  appear,  that  every  godly,  gracious  man,  is  thus  a  living  man,  made  partaker 
of  this  spiritual  life,  so  as  to  be  able  to  act,  and  move,  and  work  towards  God  as 
his  utmost  end  ?  (1)  Take  the  life  of  plants  and  herbs,  or  of  flowers;  and  what  is  the 
essential  property  of  tbe  vegetative  life?  It  is  to  grow.  So  with  saints;  they  grow 
in  grace  (Psa.  lxxxiv.  7  ;  Rom.  i.  27 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18).  (2)  What  is  the  essential 
property  of  the  sensitive  life,  of  the  life  of  beasts  and  birds  ?  To  be  sensible  of  good 
or  evil  suitable  to  it.  This  is  found  also  in  saints  (Rom.  vii.  23,  24).  (3)  What  is 
the  essential  property  of  the  life  of  reason  ?  To  understand,  to  know,  and  to  re- 
flect on  a  man's  own  actions.  This  distinguishes  a  man  from  a  beast.  Every 
godly,  gracious  man,  especially,  has  this  power.  So,  then,  take  the  argument  in  the 
whole,  and  it  lies  thus  :  If  a  godly,  gracious  man  have  all  the  essential  properties 
of  those  three  lives,  in  a  spiritual  way  and  manner,  then  certainly  he  is  in  the  state 
of  life,  and  doth  lead  a  spiritual  life.  3.  But  how  does  it  appear  that  others  are  not 
in  this  state  of  life  ?  (1)  He  that  believeth  not  is  spiritually  dead  (John  iii.  36 ;  v.  40). 
(a)  If  we  be  alive  indeed,  and  made  partakers  of  this  spiritual  life,  why  then  should 
we  not  live  at  a  higher  rate  than  the  world  do,  which  have  none  of  this  life?  (b)  If  we 
be  alive  indeed,  and  made  partakers  of  this  spiritual  life,  why  should  our  hearts  run 
after  the  things  of  the  world,  so  as  to  feed  on  them  as  our  meat,  to  be  satisfied  with 
them  ?  (c)  If  we  be  alive  indeed,  why  is  our  communion  and  fellowship  together  no 
more  living  ?  A  living  coal  warms.  II.  Oub  justification  by  faith  alone  is  no  enemy, 
but  A  beal  fbiend  to  oub  spiBiTUAL  life.  How  conies  this  to  pass  7  1.  The  more 
a  man  forsakes  any  good  thing  of  his  own  for  Christ,  the  more  Christ  is  engaged  to 
give  a  man  His  good  things.  There  is  no  losing  in  losing  for  Jesus  Christ.  2.  God 
never  causes  any  man  to  pass  under  any  relation,  without  giving  him  the  ability 
needed  for  its  duties.  3.  The  more  a  man  agrees  with  God  and  the  law,  the  more 
fit  he  is  to  walk  with  God  and  observe  the  law.  4.  Faith  establishes  a  man  in  the 
covenant  of  grace.  (W.  Bridges.)  Fellowship  with  the  Redeemer's  death : — This 
must  be  taken  in  connection  with  two  other  texts  in  this  crucifixion  Epistle,  viz., 
v.  24,  and  vi.  14.  The  three  together  exhibit — I.  The  obdeb.  H.  The  characteristics, 
III.  The  pebfection  of  personal  religion  as  fellowship  with  the  Redeemer's  death. 

1.  The  sinner,  condemned  by  the  law,  makes  the  sacrifice  of  the  great  Substitute  his 
own,  and  is,  therefore,  legally  released  from  its  penalty.  H.  The  flesh,  or  the  old 
man  remaining  in  the  pardoned  believer,  is  hanged  up,  and  delivered  to  death  in 
the  same  mystical  fellowship.  III.  The  saint  glorying  in  Christ  crucified  as  the 
ground  of  his  acceptance,  and  the  source  of  his  sanctification,  is  crucified  with  Him 
to  the  world  and  all  created  things  that  belong  not  to  the  new  creation.  Let  us  read 
these  words,  where  they  were  written,  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 
The  Christian's  crucifixion  with  Christ : — I.  Christ  cbucified.     1.  A  great  mystery. 

2.  The  way  to  glory.  (1)  For  Christ.  (2)  For  us.  3.  The  ground  of  our  highest 
glorying.  II.  Paul  cbucified.  1.  Sin  has  a  body  (Rom.  vii.  24 ;  Col.  iii.  5).  S. 
Sin  and  grace  cannot  co-exist  any  more  than  life  and  death.  8.  Kill  your  sins  or 
they  will  kill  you.  4.  And  this  not  only  in  the  matter  of  notorious  crimes,  bat  in 
the  whole  carriage  of  your  lives.  5.  Thus  to  be  a  Christian  is  a  serious  thing.  6. 
Afflict  not  so  much  your  bodies  as  your  souls.  III.  Paul  crucified  with  Christ 
1.  Many  are  crucified,  but  not  with  Christ.  (1)  The  covetous  and  ambitious  man 
with  the  world.  (2)  The  envious  man  by  his  own  thoughts :  Ahithophel's  cross. 
{3)  The  desperate  man  with  his  own  distrust :  Judas's  cross.  (4)  The  superstitious 
man.  (5)  The  felon  and  justly:  the  cross  of  the  two  malefactors.  2.  Paul  was 
crucified  with  Christ.  (1)  In  partnership.  Christ's  crucifixion  is  re-acted  in  us. 
(a)  In  His  agony,  when  we  are  afflicted  with  God's  displeasure  against  sin.  {b)  In  Hit 
Bcourging,  when  we  tame  our  flesh  with  holy  severity,  (c)  In  His  crowning  with 
thorns,  when  we  bear  reproaches  for  His  name,  {d)  In  His  affixion.when  all  our 
powers  are  fastened  to  his  royal  commandments,  (e)  In  His  transfixion,  when  our 
hearts  are  branded  with  Divine  love.  (2)  In  person,  (a)  As  in  the  first  Adam  all 
lived  and  then  died,  so  in  the  second  Adam  all  die  and  are  made  alive.  (6)  Our 
real  union  with  Christ  makes  His  Cross  and  Passion  ours,  (c)  Every  believer  may 
comfort  himself  that  having  died  with  Christ  he  Bhall  not  die  again.  (Bishop  Hall.) 
Life  in  Christ  :—L  Christ  dwelling  by  faith  in  the  heart  becomes  the  principle  of  a 
new  life.  II.  From  this  life,  as  an  inexhaustible  fountain,  the  believer  draws  to  the 
supply  of  his  wants  and  fruitfulness  in  well  doing.  III.  What  properly  distinguishes 
the  believer's  life  in  the  flesh  and  makes  it  what  it  is,  is  it*  being  kept  in  perpetual 


OUT.  n.]  GALATIANS.  115 

fellowship  with  Christ.  IV.  The  recognition  of  the  truth  that  as  dying  and  atoning 
Jesus  becomes  a  source  of  new  life  runs  out  into  appropriating  confidence.  (Prin- 
cipal Fairbairn.)  Death  and  life: — I.  Death  by  sin.  1.  Its  guilt  makes  us 
liable  to  condemnation.  2.  Its  filth,  which  makes  us  odious.  3.  Its  punishment, 
which  is  death  eternal.  II.  The  tree  op  lute  affords  the  antidote  to  sin.  1. 
The  life  of  justification.  The  righteousness  of  Christ,  cancelling  the  obligations  of 
the  law,  frees  us  from  the  first.  2.  The  life  of  sanctification,  which  is  Christ  in  us. 
8.  The  life  of  joy  and  cheerfulness,  which  makes  us  more  than  conquerors.  (T. 
Adams.)  Christian  enthusiasm; — I.  Christian  enthusiasm  is  possible   under 

great  natural  disadvantages.  II.  This  enthusiasm  must  BE  MAINTAINED  by  con- 
tinued faith  in  Christ.  III.  It  is  heightened  by  the  consciousness  of  the 
personal  love  of  Christ.  IV.  It  is  gloriously  aroused  by  thankfulness  to  Go© 
fob  His  unspeakable  gift.  V.  The  Christian  feels  free  to  serve  Christ  enthu- 
siastically because  Christ  has  borne  the  penalty  due  to  sin.  VI.  Christian 
enthusiasm,  so  far  from  crushing  individuality  and  independence,  emphasizes 
them.  VII.  It  overpowers  unhealthy  self-consciousness.  VIII.  The  source  of 
it  all  is  the  indwelling  Christ.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Paradoxes: — I.  Chris- 
tian EXISTENCE  IS  A  DEATH  AND  YET  A  LIFE.  II.  THE  BELIEVER  LIVES  AND  YET  HE 
DOES  NOT  LIVE.     III.    THE  BELIEVER'S  LIFE  IS  A  LIFE  IN  THE  FLESH,  BUT  NOtt  ACCORDING 

TO  the  LAWS  of  the  flesh.  (T.  Hamilton,  A.M.)  The  life  of  faith  may  be  con- 
sidered with  respect  to— I.  Its  object,  the  promises  of  the  new  covenant  as — 1.  Our 
justification.  2.  Sanctification.  3.  The  supplies  of  the  present  life.  4.  Ever- 
lasting blessedness.  II.  Its  trials,  or  the  evils  that  seem  to  infringe  the  comfort 
of  the  promises.  1.  Afflictions.  2.  Temptations.  III.  Its  effects,  as — 1.  Holy 
duties  and  exescises  of  grace.  2.  The  ordinances  by  which  it  is  fed  and  increased, 
as  the  Word,  prayer,  and  sacraments.  3.  The  duties  of  charity,  of  public  and 
private  relations,  as  honouring  God,  in  our  generation  and  callings.  (Ibid.)  The 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God : — So  called  because — I.  He  is  the  Revealer  of  it  (John  i.  17). 
H.  He  is  the  Author  of  it  (Heb.  xii.  2).  HI.  He  is  the  Object  of  it.  (T.  Adams.) 
An  idyll  of  the  Divine  life  : — I.  Its  personal  interest.  H.  The  burthen  of  it. 
HI.  Its  inspiring  power.  (A.  J.  Muir,  M.A.)  Paul's  estimate  of  the  religion  of 
Christ : — The  living  Person  in  whom  we  trust,  not  the  system  of  precepts  which 
we  follow,  or  of  dogmas  which  we  receive,  is  the  centre  of  the  Christian  society. 
The  name  by  which  religion  in  all  subsequent  times  has  been  known  is  not  an  out- 
ward "  ceremonial "  (9pi}OKua)  as  with  the  Greeks,  nor  an  outward  ••  restraint, " 
(religio)  as  among  the  Romans,  nor  an  outward  "  law  "  as  among  the  Jews  ;  it  is  by 
that  far  higher  and  deeper  title  which  it  first  received  from  the  mouth  of  St.  Paul, 
"the  faith."  (Dean  Stanley.)  Lent  and  Easter : — A  Lent  of  mortification — "I 
am  crucified  with  Christ."  An  Easter  of  resurrection — "I  live,  &c."  (Bishop 
Hall.)  Sharing  Christ's  Cross : — We  must  have  our  part  with  Christ  in  every  part 
of  His  Cross.  In  the  transverse,  by  the  ready  extension  of  our  hands  to  all  good 
works  of  piety,  justice,  and  charity ;  in  the  arrectary,  or  beam,  by  uninterrupted  per- 
severance in  good ;  in  the  head,  by  an  elevated  hope  and  looking  for  of  glory ;  in  the 
foot,  by  a  lively  and  firm  faith,  fastening  our  souls  upon  the  affiance  of  His  free 
grace  and  mercy.      And  thus  shall  we  be  crucified  with  Christ.      (Ibid.)  Cruci- 

fixion with  Christ : — The  phrase  carries  us  back  to  the  historical  scene.  There'-. 
Christ  was  crucified  with  two  thieves.  Jesus  was  crucified  with  us,  that  we 
might  be  crucified  with  Him.  He  entered  into  our  pain  that  we  might  enter  into 
His  peace.  He  shared  the  shame  of  the  thieves,  that  Paul  might  share  His  glory. 
This  double  truth  was  manifest  at  the  time  of  Christ's  suffering.  You  remember 
the  penitent  thief,  as  their  crosses  were  lifted  side  by  side,  he  saw  Christ  entering 
into  his  wretchedness.  Before  the  feeble  tortured  breath  had  left  the  body,  he  had* 
entered  intoChrist's  glory.  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  power  of  the  Cross : — 
The  other  night  a  friend  of  mine  witnessed  a  drunken  brawl.  There  was  a  man 
there  who  continued  in  the  brawl,  and  his  wife  came  out  of  the  crowd  and  said  :  "  I 
will  go  and  fetch  baby  to  him ;  that  will  bring  him  out  if  anything  will. "  Ah !  she 
was  a  philosopher,  though  she  did  not  know  it.  She  wanted  to  get  to  the  deepest 
part  of  the  man's  nature.  She  did  not  talk  of  policemen  and  prison;  she  wanted 
to  bring  the  innocent  one  before  him,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Will  you  make  a  thorny 
conch  for  this  little  one  to  lie  upon  ?  Will  you  forge  a  dagger  with  which  to  pier  ce 
this  little  one's  heart?  "  And  in  a  measure  she  came  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel; 
for  the  gospel  comes  to  make  us  hate  sin  by  showing  that  another  suffered  and  died 
for  it.  (<7.  Vince.)  Life  in  Christ  : — This  is  a  striking  point  of  union  between 
Paul  and  John ;  the  Pauline  form  of  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."        (W.  B. 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Pope,  D.D.)  As  the  mistletoe,  having  no  root  of  its  own,  both  grows  and  lives  in 
the  stock  of  the  oak,  so  the  apostle,  having  no  root  of  his  own,  did  live  and  grow  in 
Christ.  As  if  he  had  said,  "  I  live,  I  keep  a  noble  house,  am  given  to  hospitality, 
but  at  another's  cost,  not  at  mine  own.  I  am  beholden  to  Christ.  I  have  not  % 
farthing  of  mine  own.  He  carrieth  the  pack  for  me,  and  gives  out  to  me  according 
to  my  necessities."  (Suinnock.)  The  immortality  of  life  in  Christ: — The  sun 
might  say  every  morning  in  the  spring,  I  am  come  that  the  earth  may  have  life  and 
have  it  more  abundantly ;  I  am  come  that  the  fields  may  grow,  that  the  gardens 
and  vineyards  be  more  fruitful,  that  the  beauty  of  the  landscape  may  appear,  that 
tbe  dead  may  become  alive,  and  the  world  be  filled  with  joy.  And  the  sun  might 
add,  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life ;  I  raise  the  buried  flowers  and  herbs  from 
their  graves,  and  cause  them  to  live.  But  they  perish  in  the  autumn.  The  Chris- 
tian shall  never  perish ;  never  by  annihilation,  absorption,  or  eternal  misery. 
(Thomas  Jones.)  The  progressiveness  of  the  life  of  Christ : — Man  was  made  to 
grow.  To  stand  still  in  the  course  of  nature  is  to  die.  When  the  force  that 
raised  the  mountain  to  its  height  had  ceased,  that  moment  the  mountain  began 
to  sink  again ;  when  the  tree  stops  growing  it  begins  to  decay ;  when  the  human 
body  has  attained  its  perfection,  when  the  tide  of  growth  has  reached  its  highest 
mark,  it  begins  to  recede.  But  the  life  that  Christ  gives  means  everlasting 
progress  in  knowledge,  love,  usefulness,  and  bliss.  (Ibid.)  Paul's  flesh: — It  was 
hard  for  an  enthusiast  to  live  in  flesh  like  Paul's.  He  suffered  so  much  from 
his  eyes  that  the  rough  Galatians  felt  so  much  for  him  that  they  would  have  been 
willing  to  give  him  their  own.  He  suffered  so  much  from  his  hands,  that  when 
his  great  heart  was  full,  and  he  longed  to  dash  off  a  missionary  letter,  he  waa 
unable  to  hold  a  pen.  He  suffered  so  much  from  shattered  nerves,  that  his  first 
appearance  among  strangers  was  "in  weakness,  fear,  and  much  trembling."  Who 
can  always  be  calm  and  wise  and  bold,  have  a  commanding  presence,  and  secure  a 
fascinated  silence,  when  he  always  works  in  weakness,  when  pain  is  ever  crashing 
through  tbe  sensibilities,  when  tbe  smallest  frictional  touch  can  sting  the  life  to 
agony.  (Ibid.)  Strong  in  Christ: — Plant  the  tenderest  sapling  in  the  ground, 
and  all  the  elements  of  nature  shall  minister  to  its  wants.  It  shall  feed  upon  the 
fatness  of  the  earth,  its  leaves  shall  be  wet  with  dew,  it  shall  be  refreshed  with  the 
showers  of  spring,  and  the  warmth  of  summer  shall  cause  it  to  grow.  In  like 
manner  the  man  who  is  rooted  in  Christ,  united  to  Him  by  faith  and  love,  shall  be 
energized  and  made  strong  for  the  work  which  he  has  to  do.  (Thomas  Jones.) 
The  personal  love  and  gift  of  Christ : — All  that  Christ  did  and  suffered  He  did  for 
thee  as  thee ;  not  only  as  man,  but  as  that  particular  man,  which  bears  such  and 
such  a  name ;  and  rather  than  any  of  those  whom  He  loves  should  appear  naked 
before  His  Father,  and  so  discover  the  scars  and  deformities  of  their  sins,  Christ 
would  be  content  to  do  and  suffer  as  much  as  He  hath  done  for  any  one  particular 
man  yet.  But  beyond  infinite  there  is  no  degree ;  and  His  merit  was  infinite  be- 
cause both  an  infinite  Majesty  resided  in  His  person,  and  because  an  infinite 
Majesty  accepted  His  sacrifice  for  infinite.  (John  Donne,  D.  D.)  Life  in  the  flesh  : — 
When  Paul  and  his  companions  were  shipwrecked  at  Melita,  the  apostle  set  to  work 
like  other  people  to  gather  fuel  for  the  fire.  Even  so  you  and  I  must  take  our  turn 
at  the  wheel.  We  must  not  think  of  keeping  ourselves  aloof  from  our  fellow-men  as 
though  we  should  be  degraded  by  mingling  with  them.  We  are  men,  and  whatever 
men  may  lawfully  do  we  may  do ;  wherever  they  may  go  we  may  go.  Our  religion 
mal.es  us  neither  more  nor  less  than  human,  though  it  brings  us  into  the  family  of 
God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Luther's  motto : — Luther's  motto  was,  Vivit  Christus, 
Christ  liveth.  How  to  use  life  : — Two  friends  gathered  each  a  rose ;  the  one  was 
continually  smelling  at  it,  touching  its  leaves,  and  handling  it  as  if  he  could  not  hold 
it  too  fast ;  you  do  not  wonder  that  it  was  soon  withered.  The  other  took  his  rose, 
enjoyed  its  perfume  moderately,  carried  it  in  his  hand  for  a  while,  then  put  it  on  the 
table  in  water,  and  hours  after  it  was  almost  as  fresh  as  when  it  was  plucked  from 
the  bough.  We  may  dote  on  our  worldly  gear  until  God  becomes  jealous  of  it  and 
sends  a  blight  upon  it ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  may,  with  holy  moderateness,  use 
these  things  as  not  abusing  them,  and  get  from  them  the  utmost  good  they  are 
capable  of  conveying  to  us.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Great  love: — We  read  in  English 
history  of  the  rare  affection  of  Eleanor,  wife  of  Edward  I.  The  king  having  received 
a  wound  by  a  poisoned  dagger,  she  put  her  mouth  to  the  wound  to  suck  out  the 
poison,  venturing  her  own  life  to  preserve/her  husband's.  But  the  love  of  Christ  was 
greater  than  this.  (R.  B.)  Christ's  love  is  an  individual  love  : — The  great  trouble 
is  that  people  take  everything  in  general,  and  do  not  take  it  to  themselves.    Suppose 


CHAF.  n.J  GALATIANS.  lit 

ft  man  should  say  to  me  :  "  Moody,  there  was  a  man  in  Europe  who  died  last  week, 
and  left  five  million  dollars  to  a  certain  individual."  "  Well,"  I  say, "  I  don't  doubt 
that ;  it's  rather  a  common  thing  to  happen,"and  I  don't  think  anything  more  about 
it.  But  suppose  he  says :  "  But  he  left  the  money  to  you."  Then  I  pay  attention  ; 
I  say :  ••  To  me  ?  "  "  Yes,  he  left  it  to  you."  I  become  suddenly  interested.  I  want 
to  know  all  about  it.  So  we  are  apt  to  think  Christ  died  for  sinners  ;  He  died  for 
everybody,  and  for  nobody  in  particular.  But  when  the  truth  comes  to  me  that 
eternal  life  is  mine,  and  ail  the  glories  of  heaven  are  mine,  I  begin  to  be  interested. 
(Moody.)  The  substitute  : — A  negro  of  one  of  the  kingdoms  on  the  African  coast 
who  had  become  insolvent,  surrendered  himself  to  his  creditor,  who,  according 
to  the  custom  of  the  country,  sold  him  for  a  slave.  This  affected  his  son  so  much 
that  he  came  and  reproached  his  father  for  not  selling  his  children  to  pay  his 
debts ;  and,  after  much  entreaty,  he  prevailed  on  the  captain  to  accept  him,  and 
liberate  his  father.  The  son  was  put  in  chains,  and  on  the  point  of  sailing  to 
the  West  Indies,  when  the  circumstances  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  governor, 
he  sent  for  the  owner  of  the  slaves,  paid  the  money  that  he  had  given  for  the  old 
man,   and    restored  the  son  to  his  father.     (Biblical  Treasury.)  The  life  of 

faith: — I.  What  is  this  faith?  Faith  is  a  grace,  by  which  we  believe  God's 
Word  in  general,  and  in  a  special  manner  do  receive  Christ,  and  rest  upon 
Him  for  grace  here  and  glory  hereafter.  1.  There  is  assent.  2.  Consent.  3. 
Affiance.  Besting  on  Christ.  II.  How,  and  why,  abb  wb  said  to  live  by  faith  ? 
Distinct  graces  have  their  distinct  offices.  In  Scripture  language  we  are  said  to 
live  by  faith,  but  to  work  by  love.  There  must  be  life  before  operation.  Now  we 
are  said  to  live  by  faith — 1.  Because  it  is  the  grace  that  unites  us  to  Christ.  2. 
Because  all  other  graces  are  marshalled  and  ranked  under  the  conduct  of  faith. 
It  is  the  first  stone  in  the  spiritual  building,  to  which  all  the  rest  are  added. 
Without  faith,  virtue  would  languish,  our  command  over  our  passions  be  weak,  and 
the  back  of  patience  quite  broken,  and  our  care  of  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things 
very  small.  3.  Because  whatever  is  ascribed  to  faith,  redounds  to  the  honour  of 
Christ.  The  worth  lies  in  the  object,  as  the  ivy  receives  strength  from  the  oak 
round  which  it  winds.  Faith  does  all,  not  from  any  intrinsic  worth  and  force  in 
itself;  but  all  its  power  is  in  dependence  upon  Christ.  We  are  said  to  live  by 
faith,  as  we  are  said  to  be  fed  by  the  hand ;  it  is  the  instrument.  4.  Because  faith 
removes  obstructions,  and  opens  the  passages  of  grace,  that  it  may  run  more  freely. 
Expectation  is  the  opening  of  the  soul  (Psa.  lxxxi.  10).  III.  Observations  con- 
cbrnino  this  life.  1.  Life  must  be  extended,  not  only  to  spiritual  duties  and  acts 
of  immediate  worship,  but  to  all  the  actions  of  our  natural  and  temporal  life.  A 
true  believer  sleeps,  eats,  drinks,  in  faith.  Every  action  must  be  influenced  by 
religion,  looking  to  the  promises.  2.  We  never  act  nobly  in  anything,  till  we  live 
the  life  of  faith.  3.  We  never  live  comfortably,  till  we  live  by  faith.  4.  The  life 
of  faith  is  glory  begun.  First  we  live  by  faith,  and  then  by  sight  (2  Cor.  v. 
7).  Faith  now  serves  instead  of  sight  and  fruition  (Heb.  xi.  1).  (T.  Adams.) 
Humanity  in  union  with  God: — The  late  Bishop  Ewing,  writing  of  his  friend 
Thomas  Erskine,  said,  "  His  looks  and  life  are  better  than  a  thousand  homilies ; 
they  show  you  how  Divine  a  thing  humanity  is,  when  the  life  we  live  in  the 
flesh  is  that  of  conscious  union  with  God."  Real  religion : — Here  is  the  whole 
sum  of  St.  Paul's  experience,  the  heart  of  his  heart,  the  gem  out  of  which  his 
life  grew.  It  was  this  inward  conviction  that  made  him  what  he  was.  And 
this  is  the  one  thing  the  world  wants.  You  who  work  for  God,  keep  your  own 
consciousness  of  His  love  alive ;  if  that  gets  dim,  your  word  is  poverty-stricken 
and  empty.  I.  Hebe  is  seal  religion  :  the  inward  conviction  that  the  Son  of 
God  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  fob  me.  After  seeking  religion  for  thirty- nine 
years,  John  Wesley  stands  in  a  little  room  in  Aldersgate-street,  London,  reading 
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  and  Luther's  notes  on  it ;  and  as  he  reads  it,  he  says, 
"  I  felt  a  strange  warmth  at  my  heart,  and  a  blessed  persuasion  wrought  into  me, 
that  the  Son  of  God  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me  " ;  and  up  he  leapt,  mighty, 
resistless,  sweeping  through  this  land  like  the  flame  of  the  fire  of  God.  What  does 
it  avail  to  know  all  about  the  life  of  Christ,  if  thy  heart  has  not  got  hold  of  Him  ? 
1.  It  is  not  knowledge  that  saves.  A  man  in  the  desert  may  die  for  thirst,  and  yet 
he  may  know  all  about  water  and  its  properties.  2.  It  is  not  hope  that  saves. 
Yon  must  have  a  right  foundation  for  your  hope.  II.  There  abb  thbeb  steps  up 
to  this.  1.  Here  is  all  majesty — "  He ; "  and  utter  insignificance — "  me."  "He  " 
stands  over  "me,"  and  so  redeems  my  life  from  its  lowliness.  2.  Here  is  all 
foodness,  and  all  unworthiness.    He  draws  us  to  His  heart  and  tells  us  of  His  love. 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [  haf.  n. 

Claim  this  love,  rest  on  it,  exult  in  it.  3.  Love  alone  cannot  save.  "  He  "  most 
'*  give  Himself  for  me."  Here  is  the  condemned  prisoner  in  his  cell,  and  there 
beside  him  is  his  Friend,  who  loves  him ;  and  the  tears  are  flowing  down  His 
cheeks  as  He  says,  "  I  am  so  sorry  for  you."  But  that  doesn't  loosen  the  fetters 
and  open  the  prison  doors.  But  look !  that  Friend  is  gone,  and  the  door  is  shut, 
and  now  hark  I  Without  the  prison  walls  is  heard  the  shout,  "Crucify  Him." 
What  does  it  mean  ?  Now  steps  approach  the  door,  and  it  is  flung  open,  and  the 
chains  are  knocked  off.  "  Come  forth  ;  thou  art  free."  How  ?  Why  t  And  the 
man  is  told,  "  Why,  He  who  loved  thee  hath  given  Himself  for  thee,  and  hath 
satisfied  the  claims  of  the  law."  That  is  our  Friend,  Jesus  Christ.  Let  the  hand 
of  thy  faith  claim  Him  now.  (New  Outlines.)  Christ's  love  for  individual* : — 
When  the  Prince  of  Wales  went  over  to  Ireland  in  the  spring  of  1885,  he  went 
about  and  saw  with  his  own  eyes  how  poor  some  of  the  people  of  Dublin  were.  He 
went  down  to  the  places  where  they  lived,  and  into  their  houses,  and  spoke  to 
them,  and  was  as  kind  as  kind  could  be ;  and  they  were  glad  of  it.  For  a  real 
prince — the  son  of  a  great  queen,  and  a  prince  who  is  to  be  a  king  himself  one  day 
if  God  spares  him — for  him  to  go  down  to  the  poor  quarter  of  the  city  and  be 
interested  in  the  poor  people  there  and  be  friendly  with  them,  it  was  just  like 
sunshine !  And  that  is  just  what  it  is  like  when  a  boy  or  girl,  a  man  or  woman, 
can  say  these  words  truly,  •*  The  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me."  I  once  read  of  a  man  who  was  so  loving,  and  good,  and  kind,  that  it  was 
said  he  loved  everybody  in  the  "  London  Directory."  Now  the  "  London  Directory  " 
is  a  big,  big  book,  for  there  are  some  millions  of  names  and  addresses  there,  and 
my  name  is  there  too ;  and  when  I  heard  that  this  good  man  loved  everybody  whose 
name  was  in  that  directory,  I  supposed  that  he  loved  me  too  ;  but  I  confess  I  didn't 
mind  it  much,  for  I  didn't  think  he  could  love  my  very  self,  because  he  didn't  know 
me,  myself.  If  I  had  only  been  sure  that  when  he  saw  my  name  he  thought  about 
me  really,  as  any  friend  of  mine  would  have  done,  then  it  would  have  been  very 
different,  and  I  would  have  been  touched  by  his  kindness.  And  that  is  how  many 
people  think  when  they  say,  "  God  so  loved  the  world."  Of  course  they  know  He 
must  have  loved  them  too ;  but  then,  it  is  such  a  different  thing  to  be  loved  like 
one  in  a  crowd,  and  to  be  loved  your  very  own  self.  Yet  that  is  how  Jesus  loves  us. 
He  loves  us,  every  one ;  He  knows  us,  every  one ;  and  so  we  can  each  say  truly, 
*'  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  (J.  R.  Howatt.)  God's  love  specijut 
and  personal ; — The  presentation  of  this  thought  stirs  up  a  great  many  doubts  in 
those  who  have  been  exercised  thereby.  Men  think  that  Paul  probably  was  beloved, 
that  Peter  was  beloved,  and  that  many  others  were  beloved.  Men  look  around, 
and  think  that  their  mother  was  beloved,  and  that  others,  with  superior  natures 
and  symmetrical  parts,  and  full  of  moral  excellences,  were  beloved.  They  can  well 
conceive  how  those  who  draw  upon  their  amiable  feelings,  might  likewise  excite  in 
the  Divine  mind  personal  affection.  But  they  say,  "  When  men  love  single 
persons,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  love  all  persons.  And  God  loves  men, 
doubtless ;  but  does  He  love  every  one  ?"  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  is  the  compre- 
hensive answer  to  that  question.  God  loved  the  world,  and  the  whole  world.  And 
the  word,  "  world,"  for  its  definition  and  boundaries,  runs  through  all  time  and 
among  all  races.  It  included  in  it  all  individuals,  from  age  to  age.  Everywhere 
God  loved  "  the  whole  world."  "  Yes,"  men  say,  "  But  God  loves  men  after  He  has 
made  them  loveable."  But  the  apostle  says,  "  God  commendeth  His  love  toward 
us,  in  that  while  we  were  yet  Einners,  Christ  died  for  us."  Love,  which  death 
tested  but  could  not  measure,  was  shed  abroad  toward  each  man  and  the  whole 
world,  without  moral  conditions.  That  is  the  import  of  what  the  apostle  says. 
God's  disinterestedness  is  made  plain,  in  that  He  loves  each  man,  not  on  condition 
of  repentance,  but  whether  he  repents  or  not.  He  loves  men,  not  because  there  is 
that  in  them  which  has  a  tendency  to  excite  complacency,  but  though  they  are 
sinful.  He  loves  unlovely  men.  Yea,  men  that  we  could  not  love,  God  loves. 
And  His  love  is  not  generic.  It  is  not  a  part  of  the  governmental  benevolence.  It 
is  individualized  both  ways — in  the  heart  of  God,  and  in  the  heart  of  the  recipients. 
It  is  God's  nature  to  love  what  His  eye  looks  upon.  Every  human  being,  whether 
good  or  bad,  God  loves.  I  do  not  say  that  it  makes  no  difference  to  God  whether 
men  are  good,  or  whether  they  are  bad,  but  I  do  say  that  the  great  crowning  fact  of 
Divine  love  has  no  respect  of  character — that  it  precedes  character,  and  is  not 
founded  upon  it.  To  be  sure,  the  benefit  of  that  love  to  us  depends  very  largely 
npon  our  faith,  and  upon  our  repentance,  but  the  existence  of  the  Divine  personal 
love  does  not  depend  on  us  in  anywise.    It  is — if  I  may  apply  to  God  language 


-.  n.]  GALATIAN&  119 

which  belongs  to  men — the  constitutional  natnnr  of  God.  It  is  the  tendency  of 
His  attributes.  Love  is  the  test  of  Divinity.  It  cmies  with  it  a  great  many  other 
things.  It  carries  with  it  in  God  the  conception  of  purity,  and  of  uprightness,  and 
of  integrity  of  disposition,  and  of  justice,  and  ot  trwth.  It  carries  with  it,  also, 
the  full  idea  of  instrumentality — both  penalty  and  reward,  pleasure  and  pain.  And 
back  of  all  these,  as  the  root-ground  out  of  which  thay  spring,  as  the  source  from 
which  they  come,  as  the  animating  influence  which  runs  through  them  all,  is  love. 
And  that  love  is  personal  to  us.  It  is  Divine,  infinite ;  ond  yet  it  touches  each  one 
by  name  throughout  the  whole  realm.  1.  The  love  of  God  is  the  one  truth  which 
nature,  as  it  is  developed  by  matter  alone,  cannot  teach  us.  It  is  one  of  the  most 
profound  pieces  of  speculation,  how  there  can  be  a  moral  government,  and  yet  so 
much  suffering  and  power  of  evil  in  this  world.  The  world  h\s  been  the  stumbling. 
block  of  thoughtful  men  from  the  beginning.  2.  This  truth  of  the  Divine  love  ia 
the  one  truth  through  which  nature  looks,  beyond  all  others  in  our  apprehension, 
in  our  systems  of  theology,  and  in  our  preaching.  Though  m*Ti  speak  of  the  love 
of  God,  there  are  comparatively  few  who  have  that  crowning  knowledge  of  it  which 
indicates  that  it  is  genuine,  deep,  certain,  abiding.  We  think  that  if  we  fix  our- 
selves up  a  little,  God  will  perhaps  love  us.  A  man  is  in  deep  distress ,  and  there 
is  a  great  heart  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  he  is  told  that  if  he  will  go  and  tell  that 
great  heart  what  his  mistakes  have  been,  and  what  his  misfortunes!  are,  that  great 
heart  will  certainly  relieve  him.  And  instantly  he  begins  to  think  of  himself,  and 
to  fix  himself  to  go  to  that  great  heart,  covering  up  his  rags  the  besft  way  he  can, 
and  hiding  his  elbows  so  that  they  shall  not  be  seen,  and  putting  a  little  touch  on 
his  shoes  that  are  clouted  and  ruptured ;  and  then  goes  in.  But  do  you  suppose  it 
makes  any  difference  to  that  great  heart  to  whom  he  goes,  that  his  clothes  are  a 
little  less  dirty,  or  that  they  have  a  few  less  patches  on  them,  or  that  his  shoes  are 
a  little  less  soiled  or  torn  ?  It  is  the  man  behind  the  clothes  that  the  benevolent 
heart  thinks  of.  It  is  not  what  the  needy  man  is,  but  what  the  benefactor  is,  that 
determines  what  he  will  do.  Why  does  he  take  that  man  into  his  compassion,  and 
say  to  him,  "  Come  again?"  Does  he  do  it  because  of  what  he  sees  in  the  man  ? 
or  because  of  what  he  feels  in  himself  ?  Why  does  a  bird  sing  ?  because  be  thinks 
you  would  like  to  hear  him  ?  No  ;  but  because  there  is  that  in  him  which  tickles 
him  and  fires  him  till  he  has  to  sing.  He  sings  to  bring  joy  out  of  himself.  He 
sings  because  it  is  his  nature  to  sing.  A  music-box  does  not  play  because  you  say, 
"Do  play";  nor  because  you  say,  "It  is  exquisite  and  charming."  It  dc»es  not 
care  for  your  compliments  and  comments.  And  so  it  is  with  the  Divine  nature. 
That  is  the  way  God  is  made — if  I  may  use  human  language  in  application  to  the 
Divine  nature.  That  is  being  God.  And  yet  how  few  there  are  who  think  ol  God 
as  generously  as  He  thinks  of  them  I  We  have  attempted  to  build  a  theology 
which  shall  prevent  men  from  going  wrong.  But  God  Himself  never  prevented 
a  man's  going  wrong  ;  and  you  will  never  do  it.  What  we  want  in  that  directiois 
is  to  get  an  influential  conception  of  God;  and  our  theology  must  bring  God  out  ir» 
such  lines,  in  suoh  lineaments,  and  in  such  universal  attractiveness,  that  mer 
shall  follow  their  yearnings  and  drawings,  rather  than  their  cold  reasoning! 
and  intellections.  One  would  think  to  hear  theologians  reasoning  about  God  and 
the  methods  of  salvation,  and  the  motives  of  Divine  procedure,  that  He  was  » 
fourth-proof  lawyer  judge,  and  that  He  sat  surrounded  by  infinite  volumes  of 
statutes  and  laws,  running  back  to  eternity,  and  running  forward  to  eternity;  and 
that  in  every  case  of  mercy  He  said,  "  Let  Me  consider  first.  Does  it  agree  with 
the  statute?  "  When  a  poor  sinner  comes  to  Him,  undone,  wretched,  miserable, 
has  He  to  consult  His  books  to  see  whether  he  can  be  saved  so  as  not  to  injure  the 
law,  saying,  "  Let  us  examine  the  law,  to  see  if  it  will  do  to  save  him  "  ?  Oh  1 
away  with  this  pedantic  judge.  Such  a  judge  is  bad  enough  in  the  necessities  of  a 
weak  earthly  government,  and  is  infinitely  shameful  when  brought  to  the  centre  of 
the  universe,  and  deified.  There  I  behold  God,  flaming  with  love,  backward  and 
forward,  either  way,  filling  infinite  space  with  the  magnitude  and  blessedness 
of  His  love ;  and,  if  some  questioning  angel  asks,  "  How  shalt  Thou  save  and  keep 
the  law  ?  "  I  hear  Him  saying  in  reply,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have 
merey,  My  own  will,  My  own  impulse,  My  own  desire,  My  own  heart — that  shall 
guide  Me.  What  are  laws,  and  what  are  governments,  and  what  is  anything  com- 
pared with  a  sentient  Being  ?  I  am  law,  and  I  will  govern."  In  our  preaching  I 
think  we  fall  just  as  much  behind  as  we  do  in  our  personal  experience  and  our 
theology.  The  influence  of  Divine  love  has  not  been  the  real  central  working 
power  of  the  ministry.  It  is  that  which  melts  the  heart,  it  is  that  which  encourages 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  n. 

hope,  it  is  that  which  inspires  courage,  it  is  that  which  cleanses,  that  is  needed* 
Fear  does  bnt  very  little.  Fear  may  start  a  man  on  the  road  to  conversion ;  but 
fear  never  converted  a  man.  Truth  does  something.  It  shows  the  way,  it  opens  a 
man's  eyes  ;  bat  simple  truth,  mere  intellection,  never  converted  a  man.  No  man's 
heart  ever  grew  rich,  no  man's  heart  ever  had  a  God-touch  in  it,  until  he  had 
learned  to  see  God  as  one  whom  he  loves.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  supreme 
faith: — The  great  special  faith  is  that  by  which  a  soul,  beholding  Christ  who 
is  altogether  lovely  and  loving,  realizes  it,  or  takes  Him  home  to  itself,  and  says, 
•'  That  is  my  God.  He  loves  me.  He  gave  Himself  for  me."  Thh  is  the  supreme 
act  of  faith,  and  this  saves.  It  brings  the  mind  into  such  a  condition  that  it 
instantly  is  in  communication  with  God.  A  young  man  stands  in  a  telegraph 
office,  and  along  the  line  of  the  wires  is  the  passage  of  electricity ;  and  he  hears 
the  dumb  ticks  of  the  instrument ;  but  they  mean  nothing  to  him.  He  looks  on, 
as  a  child  would  look  on ;  but  still  these  various  ticks  signify  nothing  to  his  ear. 
But  by  and  by  the  operator  draws  out  from  under  the  needle-point  a  long  strip  of 
printed  paper ;  and  it  is  a  message  from  the  man's  father,  saying  to  him,  "  Come 
home."  Homesick  he  has  been,  and  longing  for  permission  to  go.  And  oh  1  in 
one  instant,  in  one  flash,  how  that  young  man's  feeling  is  changed !  A  moment 
ago,  as  he  looked  on  that  dumb  wire,  it  was  nothing  to  him ;  but  now  he  sees  it  as 
the  instrument  whose  ticks  have  written  that  message  from  his  father,  "  Come 
home."  (Ibid.)  Belief  in  God't  love : — I  know  very  little  about  God.  The  sum 
of  my  knowledge  is  this:  I  do  believe  in  the  Divine  Being.  My  soul  says, 
"  Certainly  there  is  a  God  " ;  and  it  eays  that  God  is  paternal ;  and  that  the  Divine 
government  is  a  family  government,  and  not  a  magisterial  nor  monarchical 
government ;  and  that  it  is  a  personal  government,  generated  in  love,  carried  out 
in  love,  and  to  be  consummated  in  love ;  and  that  behind  the  blackness,  the  tear,  the 
pang,  the  wrong  and  the  sin,  there  is  to  be  evolved  in  the  eternal  ages  the  triumph 
of  love.  For  everybody  ?  I  cannot  measure.  All  I  know  is  this :  if  there  be  one 
soul  tbat  at  last  comes  short  of  eternal  life,  it  will  be  because  that  soul  has  stood 
up  in  the  very  tropical  atmosphere  of  Divine  love,  and  that  love  has  poured  itself 
upon  that  soul  without  obstruction,  and  it  was  absolutely  immedicable  and 
unhealable.  Only  those  will  be  lost  whom  love  could  not  save;  and  if  you  are 
lost,  it  will  not  be  because  you  missed  a  narrow  switch,  and  just  did  not  come  out 
right ;  nor  because  you  run  off  the  track  by  being  moved  one-tenth  part  of  an  inch 
in  the  wrong  direction  ;  nor  because  you  made  mistakes  in  your  faith  ;  nor  because 
you  were  unfortunate ;  nor  because  you  did  not  do  this,  that,  or  the  other  thing 
which  the  churches  prescribe ;  nor  because  you  did  not  believe  this,  that,  or  the 
other  doctrine  held  by  the  churches.  You  will  never  be  God's  castaway  nntil 
rivers  of  infinite  love  have  been  poured  on  you.  And  then,  if  you  are  not  changed, 
ought  you  not  to  be  a  castaway  ?  What  those  steps  are,  or  how  they  are  to  be 
taken,  I  know  not.  Only  this  I  know :  love  is  a  fact ;  and  the  Divine  administra- 
tion of  love  is  a  truth ;  and  the  ages  are  God's.  And  I  have  more  faith  in  what 
Love  will  think  it  best  to  do,  than  in  what  theologians  think  it  is  best  to  do  ;  and  I 
believe  God  will  take  this  great  sinning,  sorrowing,  blood-shedding  world  up  into 
His  arms,  and  comfort  it  as  a  mother  comforts  her  sorrowing  children.  And  I 
believe  that  sighing  shall  flee  away,  that  God  will  wipe  all  tears  from  men's  eyes, 
and  that  all  the  sorrows  which  have  made  the  earth  wretched  in  days  gone  by,  He 
will,  in  His  own  way,  and  according  to  His  own  good  pleasure,  medicate ;  so  that  at 
last  the  universal  Father,  with  the  universal  household,  shall  sit  central  in  the 
universe,  God  over  all,  blessed  and  blessing  for  evermore.  (Ibid.)  Holy 
inclination  to  Christ : — We  must  give  our  understandings  to  know  God,  our  wills  to 
ehoose  God,  our  imaginations  to  think  upon  God,  our  memories  to  remember  God, 
our  affections  to  fear,  trust,  love,  and  rejoice  in  God,  our  ears  to  hear  God's  word, 
our  tongues  to  speak  God's  praise,  our  hands  to  work  for  God,  and  all  our  substance 
to  the  honour  of  God.  As  everything  moves  towards  its  proper  centre,  and  is  at  no 
rest  until  it  comes  to  that :  so  doth  the  sanctified  soul  incline  and  move  to  Christ, 
tbe  true  centre  of  the  soul,  and  resteth  not  until  it  comes  to  Christ,  and  has  the 
fruition  of  Christ.  There  is  in  a  gracious  soul  such  a  principle  of  grace,  such  a 
communication  of  Christ,  such  a  suitableness  between  the  soul  and  Christ,  suoh  m 
fervent  and  operative  love  towards  Christ,  such  a  vehement  longing  after  Christ, 
that  it  mightily  moves  to  Christ  as  the  rivers  to  the  sea ;  that  nothing  but  Christ 
can  answer  it,  quiet  and  content  it.  There  is  in  the  soul  such  a  blessed  residence, 
such  a  powerful  and  gracious  energy,  and  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  u 
the  wheels  in  Ezekiel's  vision  moved  wheresoever  the  living  creatures  mcred, 


orav.  n.]  QALATIANS.  121 

because  the  spirit  of  the  living  creatures  was  in  the  wheels:  so  the  soul  moves 
after  Christ,  because  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  in  the  soul ;  this  makes  it  pant  after 
Christ,  as  the  hart  after  the  water-brooks ;  this  makes  it  thirst  for  Christ,  as  the 
dry  ground  for  waters ;  this  makes  it  follow  hard  after  Christ,  as  the  child  with 
cries  and  tears  after  the  father  going  from  it.  The  soul  denies  all,  leaves  all, 
passes  through  all,  prostrates  itself  and  all  that  it  has  under  Christ,  that  it  may 
enjoy  Christ ;  it  hates  all  that  hinders  its  coming  to  Christ,  and  embraces  all  that 
may  further  its  communion  with  Christ.  (A.  Gross,  B.D.)  Care  to  see  Christ 
living  in  us : — As  Christ  lives  in  all  God's  children,  so  let  all  that  profess  Christ, 
and  call  God  Father,  see  and  discern  Christ  living  in  them.  This  is  the  crown  and 
comfort  of  a  Christian — to  have  Christ  living  in  him  ;  and  without  this  he  has  but 
the  naked  and  empty  name  of  a  Christian,  like  an  idol  that  has  the  name  of  a  man, 
and  is  no  man :  a  name  that  he  lives,  and  yet  is  dead.  Feel  Christ,  therefore, 
living  in  your  understanding,  by  prizing  the  knowledge  of  Christ  above  all  learning, 
by  determining  to  know  nothing  in  comparison  of  knowing  Christ  and  Him 
crucified,  by  learning  Christ  as  the  truth  is  in  Him,  being  filled  with  the  knowledge 
of  His  will  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding.  Feel  Christ  living  in  your 
will,  in  making  your  will  free  to  choose  and  embrace  Him  and  the  things  of  God, 
to  intend  and  will  Him  and  the  glory  of  God  above  everything,  making  His  will  the 
rule  of  your  will,  and  fashioning  and  framing  you  to  be  a  willing  people  in  and 
about  His  work  and  service.  Feel  Him  living  in  your  imaginations,  by  thinking 
upon  Him  with  more  frequency  and  delight  than  of  any  other  thing,  by  having 
more  high,  honourable,  and  sweet  apprehensions  of  Christ,  than  of  all  the  creatures. 
Feel  Christ  living  in  your  affections,  by  being  rooted  in  Christ  by  a  lively  faith,  as 
a  tree  in  the  earth ;  by  fearing  Christ  above  all  earthly  powers,  as  the  subject  his 
sovereign,  above  all  civil  rulers ;  by  loving  Him,  as  the  bride  the  bridegroom,  above 
all  other  persons ;  by  rejoicing  in  Him,  as  the  rich  man  in  his  jewel,  above  all  the 
residue  of  his  substance.  Feel  Him  living  in  your  members,  by  circumcising  and 
preparing  your  ears  to  hear  with  meekness  and  reverence,  by  returning  to  your 
tongues  a  pure  language,  that  your  speech  may  minister  grace  to  the  hearers,  by 
restraining  your  eyes  from  beholding  vanity,  by  disposing  your  hands  to  work  that 
which  is  good,  and  by  making  your  feet  swift  to  every  good  duty.  As  you  discern 
your  soul  living  in  your  human  body,  moving  all  the  members  to  human  services, 
so  discern  Christ  living  in  your  bodily  members,  disposing  and  framing  them  to 
religious  duties.  Feel  Christ  living  in  all  your  services,  as  the  chief  worker  of 
them,  and  enabler  of  you  to  do  them,  doing  all  in  His  name,  by  His  assistance,  and 
for  His  glory.  Feel  Christ  living  in  the  prayer  which  you  make,  praying  by  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  for  the  honour  of  Christ.  Feel  Christ 
living  in  the  Word  which  you  hear,  making  it  an  immortal  seed  to  regenerate  you, 
a  sacred  fire  to  purge  you,  a  heavenly  light  to  guide  you,  and  a  message  of  peace  to 
comfort  you.  Feel  Christ  living  in  the  sacrament  which  you  receive,  making  it  a 
celestial  manna  feeding  you ;  a  seal  of  righteousness,  assuring  you  of  your 
justification  ;  an  obligation  binding  you  to  new  obedience ;  and  a  pledge  of  God's 
unchangeable  love  towards  you.  All  holy  ordinances,  if  Christ  live  not  in  them, 
■how  not  Himself  powerful  by  them,  are  but  an  empty  shell  without  kernel,  and  a 
dry  breast  without  milk,  ministering  no  nourishment.  All  the  religious  duties  we 
perform,  if  Christ  live  not  in  them,  are  but  a  sacrifice  without  fire,  a  dead  carcase, 
of  no  esteem  with  God.  Our  affections,  if  Christ  live  not  in  us,  are  a  chariot 
without  wheels ;  they  sink  and  fall  into  the  earth,  they  cannot  incline  nor  move 
towards  the  Lord.  All  our  best  abilities,  if  Christ  live  not  in  them,  are  as  standing 
waters  without  a  living  spring ;  they  putrify,  and  rot,  and  prove  unprofitable.  If 
Christ  live  not  in  us,  our  understandings  are  blinded,  and  we  cannot  savingly  know 
God ;  our  will  is  enthralled,  and  we  cannot  intend  God ;  our  faith,  like  Jeroboam's 
arm,  is  withered,  and  we  cannot  lay  hold  upon  the  promise  of  God.  The  whole 
sufficiency  of  a  Christian  is  from  Christ's  living  in  him.  (Ibid.)  The  believer's 
life: — The  Christian  life  is  full  of  paradoxes.  The  crucified  lives;  and  yet  the  life 
is  peculiar.  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  I.  The  believer's  lot  is  unlixj 
what  it  used  to  BE.  1.  Once  it  was  a  weary  captivity  under  sin.  (1)  Then  it 
was  a  wretched  struggle  against  Satan.  (2)  Then  it  was  a  wild  complaint  against 
■elf.  S.  But  the  changed  life  grew  out  of  the  altered  ideas.  (1)  Christ  loved  me. 
That  was  the  dawn  of  hope.    (2)  Christ  for  me  1    That  became  the  plea  of  faith. 

2)  Christ  gave  Himself  1    That  was  found  to  be  the  secret  and  the  stimulant  of 
ve.    II.  The  believer's  life  is  still  human  life.     1.   It  has  the  sorrows  to 
which  flesh  is  heir.    2.  It  has  the  temptations  to  which  flesh  exposes.    8.  It  haa 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbaf.  n, 

the  duties  which  flesh  entails.  (TEL/The  believer's  life  is  by  faith  of  the  Sos 
or  God.  1.  Faith  in  His  prevailing  advocacy  at  the  Throne.  2.  Faith  in  His 
abiding  sympathy  in  the  world.  3.  Faith  in  His  directing  wisdom  on  the  soul.  4. 
Faith  in  His  sustaining  help  under  the  soul.  5.  Faith  in  His  eerta'n  return  for 
soul  and  body.  But  if  suoh  things  are,  then — (1)  Christian  life  must  be  conspicuous 
among  other  modes  of  living,  (a)  It  will  be  a  devoted  life.  (6)  It  will  be  an 
imitative  life,  (c)  It  will  be  an  appreciative  life,  (d)  It  will  be  aa  expectant  life. 
(2)  If  this  be  Christian  life,  is  it  mine  ?  (i)  There  ought  to  be  the  memory  of  it 
break,  with  the  world,  into  light  and  liberty,  (li)  There  ought  to  be  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  union,  (a)  The  heart  cleaving  to  Christ,  (b)  The  conscience  grasping 
the  pardon,  (c)  The  will  choosing  the  service,  (d)  The  soul  filled  with  the  peaoe. 
(iii)  There  will  be  acceptance  of  the  conditions  of  the  life,  (a)  Willing  to  wait. 
(b)  Determined  to  testify,  (c)  Prepared  to  follow,  (d)  Meaning  to  triumph.  («) 
Bound  to  love.  (The  CUrgyman's  Magazine.)  To  prove  that  faith  it  an  excellent 
way  of  living : — 1.  It  is  a  singular  way  of  living.  2.  It  is  a  substantial  way  of 
living ;  to  live  in  faith  is  to  live  indeed.  3.  It  is  a  noble  way  of  living.  4.  It  is  a 
most  sweet  and  comfortable  way  of  living ;  joy  and  peace  come  in  by  believing.  5. 
It  is  a  safe  way  of  living ;  like  a  bird  while  he  is  in  the  air  is  safe  from  snares. 
Use  1.  To  those  that  are  yet  strangers  to  this  way  of  living  by  faith,  pray  to  God 
to  bring  you  acquainted  with  it.  Many  do  live  by  sense,  walking  after  their  own 
hearts' lusts.  2.  To  those  that,  acquainted  with  it,  abound  in  it  more  and  more. 
It  is  but  a  little  while  that  we  are  to  live  by  faith,  then  we  come  to  vision  and 
fruition,  then  we  shall  see  Him  in  whom  we  have  believed ;  faith  and  prayer  shall 
be  no  more,  and  God  shall  be  all  in  all  to  eternity.  (Philip  Henry.)  "  I  live  ; 
yet  not  I :  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  " : — The  broad  leaf  of  the  garden  vegetable 
lifted  sunward,  is  fed  by  the  sun's  rays;  the  sun  so  grows  into  it  and  becomes 
part  of  it,  that  the  very  sunlight  could  be  chemically  extracted  from  it  in  the 
form  of  carbon,  and  it  would  hardly  be  unscientific  to  say,  "  It  lives,  yet  not  it, 
but  the  sun  liveth  in  it."  (Canon  Wilberforce.)  Crucifixion  with  Christ  and 
its  results : — I.  The  chief  event  and  oibcumstance  in  Paul's  histoby.  "  I  am 
(or  have  been)  crucified  with  Christ."  The  apostle's  reflections  upon  the  argu- 
ments already  given,  threw  him  back  upon  this  as  the  starting-point  in  his 
religious  experience.  In  the  contemplation  of  this  he  knew  what  had  led  to  the 
death  of  Christ,  as  far  as  that  event  was  determined  by  human  purpose.  Christ 
had  assailed  the  traditionalism  of  the  Jews — had  exposed  their  hypocrisy — had 
exalted  the  spiritual  law  above  the  ceremonial.  These  works  of  His,  combined 
with  His  lofty  and  sublime  claims  as  the  Son  of  God,  led  the  Jews  to  resolve  upon 
His  death.  This  was  the  truth  on  the  human  side.  On  the  Divine  side,  according 
to  the  revelation  made  to  St.  Paul,  Christ  suffers  for  our  sins — He  was  delivered 
for  our  offences.  But  He  not  only  dies  for  sins — He  died  to  sin :  "  In  that  He  died, 
He  died  unto  sin  once."  The  conflict  with  sin  ended  upon  the  cross.  The  risen 
Saviour  knew  no  temptation.  Now  Paul,  by  a  union  of  which  he  afterwards 
speaks,  felt  that  in  Christ's  death  he  also  died.  "  He  has  been  planted — in  the 
likeness  of  His  death."  Thus,  so  profound  was  his  fellowship  with  Christ — so 
intimate  was  that  bond  that  bound  him  to  the  Saviour — that  in  reference  to  the 
actual  sufferings  and  death  of  the  Redeemer,  he  could  say :  "  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ."  This  was  the  permanent  thought  in  Paul's  mind.  So  in  all  Christian  life 
of  the  same  type.  It  has  its  origin  in  what  the  world  regards  with  shame  and 
contempt.    Being  dead  with  Christ  is  one  of  the  first  principles  of  His  doctrine. 

H.    THD3  "  CRUCIFIXION  "  DETERMINED  PAUL'S   RELATION   TO   THE   LAW,  AND  ORIGINATED 

and  directed  A  new  life.  The  19th  verse  has  an  intimate  and  essential  connection 
with  the  first  clause  in  the  20th  verse.  Hence — 1.  His  relationship  to  the  law.  "  I 
through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law."  The  law,  whether  regarded  in  its  highest 
moral  character,  or  in  its  mere  ceremonial  requirements,  had  demanded  of  Paul  that 
which  he  could  never  render.  None  had  ever  tried  more  sincerely,  more  arduously, 
than  had  Paul.  But  at  the  end  of  all  there  was  the  most  apparent  failure.  The 
law  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Cross  had  shown  him  the  futility  of  his  efforts.  The 
law  became  his  schoolmaster  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  but  from  that  moment  he  had 
parted  company  with  it  as  the  means  of  justification.  The  law  by  itself,  whether 
moral  or  ceremonial,  had  no  further  attraction  for  him  ;  and  so  complete  was  the 
separation  between  him  and  it,  that  he  could  say,  that  being  crucified  with  Christ 
he  had  died  to  the  law.  His  most  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  law  had  shown 
him  that  salvation  could  never  be  obtained  through  it.  "  Through  law  he  died  to 
law  "     2.  This  crucifixion  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  life — "  Nevertheless  I  live.* 


chat,  n.]  QALATIANS,  121 

As  the  Saviour's  crucifixion  was  followed  by  His  entrance  into  a  new  and  higher 
life,  so  was  it  with  Paul.  He  had  been  buried  with  Christ,  but  he  had  also  been 
planted  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurrection.  This  life  was  Christ  in  him — "  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  3.  Paul  had,  through  crucifixion  with  Christ,  received  direction  in 
this  new  life.  It  was — 1.  A  life  unto  God  (verse  19).  Thus  was  it  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  Saviour — "In  that  He  liveth,  He  liveth  unto  God."  So  with 
the  believer.  He  has  died  unto  law  and  sin,  that  he  may  live  unto  God.  This  is 
the  end  and  aim  of  the  Christian  life — "  To  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God."  2. 
A  life  of  faith.  Faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  Not  belief  in  a  law  merely,  but  in  a 
Person,  and  that  Person  the  Divine  Kecieemer.  3.  A  life  in  which  love  and  self- 
sacrifice  are  ruling  principles.  Paul  distinctly  recognizes  the  oharacter  and  work  of 
the  Saviour — "  Wbo  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  These  principles  are 
reproduced  in,  and  are  continuous  with,  Christian  life.  The  surrender  of  Christ 
produces  in  His  people  a  similar  devotion,  and  the  love  of  Christ  creates  an  undying 
affection.  4.  A  life  in  which  there  is  no  condemnation.  This  is  the  meaning  of 
the  last  verse — "I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God,"  &o.  I  have  not  this 
condemnation,  but  the  assurance  that  in  me  the  death  of  Christ  has  Accomplished 
its  purpose.  Those  who  seek  righteousness  by  the  law  treat  with  disrespect  the 
provision  of  God,  for  if  they  could  obtain  justification  by  obedience  to  law,  then 
the  death  of  Christ  was  unnecessary.  But  the  Christian  believer  is  in  no  such 
condemnation.  He  has  received  the  grace  of  God,  not  that  he  may  continue  in  ein, 
but  be  separated  from  it,  not  that  he  may  defy  God,  but  serve  Him  in  holiness  and 
righteousness.  (R.  Nickolls.)  The  Cliristian  crucified  : — I.  What  is  it  to  be 
obocified  with  Chbist  ?  By  this  terrible  crucifixion  Christ  became  insensible  to 
surrounding  objects.  He  ceased  to  feel,  hear,  see,  He  died.  Though  the  Christian 
is  not  thus  literally  crucified  with  Christ,  he  is  so  spiritually.  Hence  he  becomes 
dead  to  the  law,  world,  and  to  sin  ;  dead  to  human  pride,  pleasures,  and  degraded 
passions.  Though  Christ  was  in  the  flesh,  He  did  not  live  the  life  of  the  flesh. 
His  visible  crucifixion  on  Calvary  was  only  a  sign  of  the  spiritual  crucifixion 
within.  II.  How  is  this  cbucifixion  effected?  1.  The  power.  The  spirit  of 
grace  in  the  heart  is  the  power  that  effects  it.  2.  The  instrument.  Faith  is  the 
hand  that  grasps  the  hammer,  drives  the  nails,  and  deals  a  deadly  blow  to  the  "  old 
man."  8.  The  manner.  This  act  of  spiritual  crucifying  is  most  thoroughly 
effected.  It  is  a  complete  work.  The  whole  man  is  crucified ;  the  will,  under- 
standing, affections,  desires,  delights.  Every  prayer,  tear  of  repentance,  tells  upon 
it.  III.  What  is  thb  natdbal  besult  of  this  cbucifixion  with  Chbist?  1. 
Freedom  from  the  law  (Bom.  vii.  1).  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are 
in  Christ  Jesus."  2.  Deliverance  from  sin.  3.  Fitness  for  usefulness.  It  was  by 
His  death  that  Christ  became  the  life  of  the  world.  4.  Possession  of  real  happiness. 
Nothing  is  so  destructive  to  our  true  happiness  as  the  "life  of  the  flesh."  (J. 
H.  Hughes.)  Nevertheless,  &o.  Inward  life  is — I.  Conscious — "  I  live."  II. 
Distinguished  from  natural  feeling — "yet  not  I."  IH.  Enjoyed  in  Christ — "Christ 
liveth  in  me."  IV.  Controls  the  life  in  the  flesh.  V.  Is  sustained  by  faith.  (J.  Lyth.) 
Faith  in  Christ  the  source  of  life: — The  faith  which  is  the  life  of  the  soul,  is  not 
mere  belief  of  the  existence  of  God,  and  of  those  great  moral  and  religious  truths 
which  are  the  foundation  of  all  religion.  Nor  does  the  faith  of  Christ,  spoken  of 
here,  mean  faith  in  that  unseen  world  which  Christ  has  revealed.  Nor  is  the  truth 
in  question  either  exhausted  or  accurately  stated  by  saying,  the  faith  which  has 
this  life-giving  power  has  the  whole  Word  of  God  for  its  object.  It  is,  indeed,  ad- 
mitted that  faith  has  respect  to  the  whole  revelation  of  God.  It  receives  all  His 
doctrines,  bows  to  all  His  commands,  trembles  at  His  threatenings,  and  rejoices  at 
His  promises.  This,  however,  is  not  the  faith  by  which  the  apostle  lived ;  or, 
rather,  it  is  not  those  acts  of  faith  which  have  the  truth  of  God  in  general  for 
their  object,  which  gives  life  to  the  soul.  The  doctrine  of  the  text  and  of  the  whole 
New  Testament  is,  that  the  soul  is  saved,  that  spiritual  life  is  obtained,  by  those 
aots  of  faith  which  have  Christ  for  their  object.  Other  things  in  the  Word  of  God 
we  may  not  know,  and,  therefore,  may  not  consciously  believe,  but  Christ  we  must 
know.  About  other  things  true  Christians  may  differ,  but  they  must  all  agree  as  to 
what  they  believe  concerning  Christ.  He  is,  in  such  a  sense,  the  object  of  faith,  that 
saving  faith  consists  in  receiving  and  resting  on  Him  alone  for  salvation,  as  He  is 
offered  to  us  in  the  gospel.  It  consists  in  receiving  Christ,  i.e.,  in  recognizing,  acknow- 
ledging, accepting,  and  appropriating  Him,  as  He  is  held  forth  to  us  in  the  Scripture. 
It  includes,  therefore,  a  resting  on  Him  alone  for  salvation,  i.e.,  for  justification, 
■•notification,  and  eternal  life  (Bom.  iii.  21-31 ;  Phil.  iii.  1-14 ;  1  John  v.  1,  &c). 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

The  whole  scheme  of  redemption  is  founded  on  this  troth.  Men  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins.  They  cannot  be  delivered  from  this  state  by  any  works  or 
efforts  of  their  own.  Neither  can  they  come  to  God  without  a  Mediator.  Christ  is 
the  only  medium  of  access ;  therefore  faith  in  Him  is  the  indispensable  condition 
of  salvation.  I.  We  most  believb  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  This  in- 
eludes  His  Divinity  and  Incarnation.  The  faith  which  has  power  to  give  life  has 
the  Incarnate  God  for  its  object.  It  contemplates  and  receives  that  historical 
person,  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  who  lived  in  Judaa,  who  died  on 
Calvary,  as  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  1.  Any  other  faith  than  this  is  unbelief. 
To  believe  in  Christ,  is  to  receive  Him  in  His  true  character.  But  to  regard  Him 
who  is  truly  God  as  a  mere  creature,  is  to  deny,  reject,  and  to  despise  Him.  It 
is  to  refuse  to  recognize  Him  in  the  very  character  in  which  He  is  presented  for 
our  acceptance.  2.  A  Saviour  less  than  Divine,  is  no  Saviour.  The  blood  of  no 
mere  man  is  an  adequate  atonement  for  the  justification  of  sinners.  The  assurance 
or  the  gift  of  eternal  life  is  mockery  from  any  other  lips  than  those  of  God.  It  is 
only  because  Jesus  is  the  Lord  of  glory,  the  Son  of  God,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
that  His  blood  cleanses  from  all  sin,  that  His  righteousness  is  infinite  in  value, 
sufficient  to  cover  the  greatest  guilt,  to  hide  the  greatest  deformity,  and  to  secure 
even  for  the  chief  of  sinners  admission  into  heaven.  3.  It  must  also  be  remembered 
that  it  is  to  the  spiritually  dead  that  God  is  declared  to  be  the  author  of  life.  But 
no  creature  is  life-giving.  It  is  only  He  who  has  life  in  Himself  that  is  able  to 
give  life  unto  others.  It  is  because  Christ  is  God ;  because  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  dwells  in  Him,  that  He  is  the  source  of  spiritual  life  to  us.  4.  Spiritual 
life,  moreover,  supposes  Divine  perfection  in  the  object  on  which  its  exercises 
terminate.  It  is  called  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  not  only  because  God  is  its 
source,  but  also  because  He  is  its  object.  The  exercises  in  which  that  life 
consists,  or  by  which  it  is  manifested,  must  terminate  on  infinite  excellence. 
The  fear,  the  admiration,  the  gratitude,  the  love,  the  submission,  the  devo- 
tion, which  belong  to  spiritual  life,  are  raised  to  the  height  of  religious  affec- 
tions only  by  the  infinitude  of  their  object.  II.  Wb  must  believe  that  Christ 
loves  us.  1.  We  must  not  exclude  ourselves  from  the  number  of  those  who 
are  the  objects  of  Christ's  love.  This  is  really  to  reject  Him  as  our  Saviour, 
•while  we  admit  He  may  be  the  Saviour  of  others.  A  very  common  form  of  unbe- 
lief ;  for  unbelief  it  is,  however  it  may  assume  the  specious  garb  of  humility.  God 
loves  His  enemies — the  ungodly,  the  polluted ;  and  by  loving  makes  them  lovely. 
Alas  !  Did  He  not  love  us  until  we  loved  Him,  we  should  perish  in  oar  sins. 
2.  We  must  appropriate  to  ourselves,  personally  and  individually,  the  general 
assurance  and  promise  of  the  love  of  Christ.  III.  We  must  believe  that  Christ 
gave  Himself  for  tjs,  t.e„  that  He  died  for  us.  This  again  includes  two  things— 
1.  Faith  in  His  vicarious  death  as  an  atonement  for  sin ;  and — 2.  Faith  in  His  death 
»8  a  propitiation  for  our  individual  or  personal  sins.  Conclusion :  If  such  be  the 
doctrine  of  the  text  and  of  the  Scriptures,  it  answers  two  most  important  questions. 
1.  It  tells  the  anxious  inquirer  definitely  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved.  His  simple 
duty  is  to  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God ;  that  He  loved  us,  and  died  for  us ; 
and  that  God  for  His  sake  is  reconciled  to  us.  Let  him  do  this,  and  he  will  find 
peace,  love,  joy,  wonder,  gratitude,  and  devotion  filling  his  heart  and  controlling  his 
life.  2.  It  tells  how  the  Divine  life  in  the  soul  of  the  believer  is  to  be  sustained  and 
invigorated.  The  clearer  the  views  we  can  attain  of  the  Divine  glory  of  the 
Redeemer,  the  deeper  our  sense  of  His  love,  and  the  stronger  our  assurance  that 
He  gave  Himself  for  us,  the  more  of  spiritual  life  shall  we  have ;  the  more  of  love, 
reverence,  and  zeal ;  the  more  humility,  peace,  and  joy ;  and  the  more  strength  to 
do  and  suffer  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  (Charles  Hodge,  D.D.)  Faith ; — True, 
justifying  faith  consists  in  three  things.  1.  Self-renunciation.  Repentance  and 
faith  are  both  humbling  graces ;  by  repentance  a  man  abhors  himself ;  by  faith  he 
goes  out  of  himself.  2.  Recumbency.  The  soul  casts  itself  upon  Jesus  Christ ; 
faith  rests  on  His  person.  The  promise  is  but  the  cabinet,  Christ  is  the  jewel  in 
it  which  faith  embraceth.  The  promise  is  but  the  dish,  Christ  is  the  food  in  it 
which  faith  feeds  on.  And  as  faith  rests  on  Christ's  person,  so  on  His  person 
under  this  notion,  as  He  was  crucified.  Faith  glories  in  the  Cross  of  Christ.  To 
consider  Christ  as  He  is  crowned  with  all  manner  of  excellences,  doth  rather  stir 
up  admiration  and  wonder ;  but  Christ  looked  upon  as  bleeding  and  dying,  1b  the 
proper  object  of  our  faith;  therefore  let  it  be  called  "faith  in  His  blood."  8. 
Appropriation,  or  the  applying  Christ  to  ourselves.  A  medicine,  though  it  be  ever 
to  sovereign,  yet  if  not  applied  to  the  wound,  will  do  no  good.    The  hand  receiving 


emit,  n.]  QALATIANS.  12» 

of  gold  is  enriched;  so  the  hand  of  faith  receiving  Christ's  golden  merits  with 
salvation,  enricheth  ns.  Wherein  lies  the  precionsness  of  faith  ?  1.  In  its  being 
the  chief  gospel  grace,  the  head  of  the  graoes ;  as  gold  among  the  metals,  so  is 
faith  among  the  graces.  Love  is  the  crowning  grace  in  heaven,  bnt  faith  is  the 
conquering  grace  upon  earth.  2.  In  its  having  influence  npon  all  the  graces,  and 
setting  them  a-work,  not  a  grace  stirs  till  faith  set  it  a-work.  Did  not  faith  feed 
the  lamp  with  oil,  it  would  soon  die.  Faith  sets  love  a-work,  "faith  which 
worketh  by  love  " ;  believing  the  mercy  and  merit  of  Christ  causeth  a  flame  of  love 
to  ascend.  Faith  sets  patience  a-work,  "  be  followers  of  them,  who  through  faith 
and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  Faith  believes  the  glorious  rewards  given  to 
suffering.  Thus  faith  is  the  master-wheel,  it  sets  all  the  other  graces  a-running. 
How  does  faith  justify?  1.  Faith  doth  not  justify,  as  it  is  a  work,  that  were  to 
make  a  Christ  of  our  faith ;  but  faith  justifies,  as  it  lays  hold  of  the  object,  viz., 
Christ's  merits.  Faith  doth  not  justify  as  it  exerciseth  grace.  It  cannot  be  denied, 
faith  doth  invigorate  all  the  graces,  it  puts  strength  and  liveliness  into  them,  but 
it  doth  not  justify  under  this  notion.  Faith  works  by  love,  but  it  doth  not  justify 
as  it  works  by  love,  but  as  it  applies  Christ's  merits.  Why  should  faith  save  and 
justify  more  than  any  other  grace?  1.  Because  of  God's  sanction.  He  hath 
appointed  this  grace  to  be  justifying :  and  He  doth  it,  because  faith  is  a  grace  that 
takes  a  man  off  himself,  and  gives  all  the  honour  to  Christ  and  free  grace ;  "  strong 
in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God."  The  king's  stamp  makes  the  coin  pass  for  current  • 
if  he  would  put  his  stamp  upon  leather  as  well  as  silver,  it  would  make  it  current ; 
so  God  having  put  His  sanction,  the  stamp  of  His  authority  and  institution  upon 
faith,  this  makes  it  to  be  justifying  and  saving.  2.  Because  faith  makes  us  one 
with  Christ.  It  is  the  espousing,  incorporating  grace,  it  gives  us  coalition  and 
union  with  Christ's  person:  other  graces  make  us  like  Christ,  faith  makes  us 
members  of  Christ.  Let  us  above  all  things  labour  for  faith.  "Above  all  taking 
the  shield  of  faith."  Faith  will  be  of  more  use  to  us  than  any  grace :  as  an  eye 
though  dim,  was  of  more  use  to  an  Israelite  than  all  the  other  members  of  his 
body  (not  a  strong  arm,  or  a  nimble  foot),  it  was  his  eye  looking  on  the  brazen 
serpent  that  cured  him.  It  is  not  knowledge,  though  angelical,  not  repentance, 
though  we  could  shed  rivers  of  tears,  could  justify  us  :  only  faith,  whereby  we  look 
on  Christ.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God ; "  and  if  we  do  not 
please  Him  by  believing,  He  will  not  please  us  in  saving  of  os.  Faith  is  the 
condition  of  the  covenant  of  grace ;  without  faith,  without  covenant :  and  without 
covenant,  without  hope.  Let  us  try  whether  we  have  faith.  There  is  something 
looks  like  faith,  and  is  not :  a  Bristol-stone  looks  like  a  diamond.  Some  plants 
have  the  same  leaf  with  others,  but  the  herbalist  can  distinguish  them  by  the  root, 
and  taste.  Something  may  look  like  true  faith,  but  it  may  be  distinguished  by  the 
fruits.  Well  then,  how  shall  we  know  it  is  a  true  faith  ?  By  the  noble  effeots  : 
1.  Faith  is  a  Christ-prizing  grace,  it  puts  a  high  valuation  upon  Him — "  to  you 
that  believe,  He  is  precious."  2.  Faith  is  a  refining  grace — "  the  mystery  of  faith 
in  a  pure  conscience."  Faith  is  in  the  soul  as  fire  among  metals  :  it  refines  and 
purifies.  Morality  may  wash  the  outside,  faith  washeth  the  inside — "having 
purified  their  hearts  by  faith."  Faith  makes  the  heart  a  sacristy  or  holy  of  holies. 
Faith  is  a  virgin. grace,  though  it  doth  not  take  away  the  life  of  sin,  yet  it  takes 
away  the  love  of  sin.  Examine  if  your  hearts  be  an  unclean  fountain,  sending 
out  mud  and  dirt,  pride,  envy ;  if  there  be  legions  of  lusts  in  thy  soul,  there  is  no 
faith.  Faith  is  a  heavenly  plant  which  will  not  grow  in  an  impure  soil.  S.  Faith 
is  an  obediential  grace — "  the  obedience  of  faith."  Faith  melts  our  will  into  God'e ; 
faith  runs  at  God's  call.  Faith  is  not  an  idle  grace ;  as  it  hath  an  eye  to  see 
Christ,  so  it  hath  a  hand  to  work  for  Him.  Faith  doth  not  only  believe  God's 
promise,  but  obeys  His  command.  And  the  true  obedience  of  faith  is  a  cheerful 
obedience;  God's  commands  do  not  seem  grievous.  4.  Faith  is  an  assimilating 
grace.  It  changeth  the  soul  into  the  image  of  the  object ;  it  makes  it  like  Christ. 
A  deformed  person  may  look  on  a  beautiful  object,  but  not  be  made  beautiful ;  but 
faith  looking  on  Christ  transforms  a  man,  and  turns  him  into  His  similitude. 
Looking  on  a  holy  Christ  causeth  sanctity  of  heart ;  looking  on  an  humble  Christ 
makes  the  soul  humble.  As  the  eamelion  is  changed  into  the  colour  of  that  which  it 
looks  upon ;  so  faith  looking  on  Christ  changeth  a  Christian  unto  the  similitude  of 
Christ  6.  By  the  growth  of  it ;  if  it  be  a  true  faith  it  grows ;  living  things  grow — 
"from  faith  to  faith."  How  may  we  judge  of  the  growth  of  faith?  Growth  of 
faith  is  judged — 1.  By  strength.  2.  By  doing  duties  in  a  more  spiritual  manner, 
with  fervency    When  an  apple  hath  done  growing  in  bigness,  it  grows  in  sweetness. 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  IL^ffSTRATOH.  [OUT.  a 

But  I  fear  I  have  no  faith  ?  We  must  distinguish  between  weakness  of  faith  and 
nullity ;  a  weak  faith  is  true.  A  weak  faith  may  be  fruitful.  Weakest  things 
multiply  most ;  the  vine  is  a  weak  plant,  but  it  is  fruitful.  Weak  Christians  may 
have  strong  affections.  Weak  faith  may  be  growing.  (T.  Watson.)  The  old  life 
and  the  new : — If  you  will  take  Jesus  Christ,  and  plant  Him  in  your  hearts,  everything 
will  eome  out  of  that.  That  tree  "  bears  twelve  n-anner  of  fruits,  and  yields  his  fruit 
every  month."  With  Christ  in  your  hearts  all  othar  fair  things  will  be  planted  there ; 
and  with  Him  in  your  heart,  aU  evil  things  which  you  may  already  have  planted 
there,  will  be  rooted  out.  Just  as  when  some  strong  exotic  is  carried  to  some  dis- 
tant land  and  there  takes  root,  it  exterminates  the  feebler  vegetation  of  the  place  to 
which  it  comes :  so  with  Christ  in  my  heart,  the  sins,  the  evil  habits,  the  passions, 
the  lusts,  and  all  other  foul  spawn  and  offspring,  will  die  and  disappear.  Take 
Him,  then,  dear  friend,  by  simple  faith,  for  your  Saviour.  He  will  plant  the  good 
seed  in  your  spirit,  and,  "  instead  of  the  briar  shall  come  up  the  myrtle."  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Life  by  Christ  alone  :— In  the  early  summer  of  1863  Archbishop 
Whately  delivered  his  last  charge,  and  soon  after  entered  on  the  painful  martyrdom 
that  only  terminated  with  his  death.  "  He  felt  as  if  red-hot  gimlets  were  being 
put  through  his  leg,"  and  the  pain  steadily  increased.  The  garden-chair ;  then 
the  change  from  room  to  room ;  then  the  books  that  he  read,  had  to  be  successively 
dropped.  He  felt  his  uselessness.  "  Have  you  ever  preached  a  sermon  on  the 
text, 4  Thy  will  be  done '  ?  "  he  said  to  a  friend  one  day ;  "  how  did  you  explain  it  ?  " 
When  he  replied,  "  Just  so,"  he  said,  "  that  is  the  meaning ; "  and  added,  in  a 
voice  choked  with  tears,  ,4but  it  is  hard — very  hard  sometimes — to  say  it."  Though 
he  restrained  every  word  of  impatience  while  the  agony  he  suffered  brought  streams 
of  perspiration  down  his  face,  he  would  often  pray  during  the  night,  "  0  my  God, 
grant  me  patience  1 "  If  he  was  betrayed  into  a  moment's  fretfulness  he  would 
immediately  beg  pardon.  Some  one  remarked  that  his  great  mind  was  supporting 
him.  "  No  1 "  he  emphatically  cried,  '•  it  is  not  that  which  supports  me.  It  is  trust 
in  Christ ;  the  life  I  live  is  by  Christ  alone."  Believers  are  dead  to  the  world : — Plutarch 
saith  of  Themistocles,  that  he  accounted  it  below  his  state  to  stoop  to  take  up  the 
spoils  (though  chains  of  gold)  which  the  enemy  had  scattered  in  the  way,  but  said 
to  one  of  his  followers,  "  Thou  mayest ;  for  thou  are  not  Themistocles."  It  is  for 
worldly  spirits,  it  is  below  the  state  of  heaven-born  spirits,  to  stoop  to  worldly 
things :  worldlings  may  1  they  are  not  Themistocles,  they  are  not  saints.  (Venning.) 
The  Christian  indeed : — I.  Let  us  attentively  observe  the  several  characters 
here  given  us  of  true  godliness,  and  see  whether  we  have  anything  like  them  in 
ourselves.  Says  Paul:  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ:  nevertheless  I  live;  yet  not 
I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  It  has  then  a  character  of  mystery,  of  wonder,  or 
(shall  I  say  ?)  paradox.  How  strange  is  it  to  see  "  a  bush  burning  with  fire  and 
nnconsumed  "  I  How  marvellous  is  it  to  find  that  tne  poor  only  are  rich,  the  siok 
only  are  well,  and  that  a  broken  heart  is  the  greatest  blessing  we  can  possess  1  How 
surprising  is  it  to  hear  persons  saying,  We  are  •*  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing  ; 
having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things  ;  as  dying,  and,  behold,  we  live  " — to 
hear  a  man  say,  "  I  am  crucified,"  though  he  has  the  use  of  all  his  limbs — crucified 
with  Christ,  though  Christ  had  been  crucified  on  Calvary  long  before — and  to  add, 
"  nevertheless  I  live  " — then  with  the  same  breath  to  check  himself,  and  deny  this 

•<  yet  not  I " — and  to  crown  the  whole,  "  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  though  he  was 

then  in  heaven  I  What  unintelligible  jargon  is  all  this  to  the  carnal  mind  1  It  has 
a  character  of  mortification — "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ."  The  grace  of  God 
has  to  pull  up,  as  well  as  sow ;  to  destroy,  as  well  as  build.  It  has  a  character  of 
life — "  Nevertheless  I  live."  And  life  brings  evidence  along  with  it  '« I  am  sus- 
ceptible of  spiritual  joys  and  sorrows.  I  live,  for  I  breathe  prayer  and  praise ;  I 
live,  for  I  feel  the  pulse  of  sacred  passions ;  I  live,  for  I  have  appetites,  and  do 
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness ;  I  live,  for  I  walk  and  I  work ;  and  though 
all  my  efforts  betray  weakness,  they  prove  life — I  live."  A  real  Christian  is  not  a 
picture — a  picture  may  accurately  resemble  an  original,  but  it  wants  life :  it  has 
eyes,  but  it  sees  not ;  lips,  but  it  speaks  not.  A  Christian  is  not  a  figure :  you  may 
take  materials  and  make  np  the  figure  of  a  man,  and  give  it  the  various  parts  of 
the  human  body,  and  even  make  them  move,  by  wires ;  but  a  Christian  is  not 
moved  in  religion  by  machinery,  but  life — nothing  is  forced  and  artificial.  It  has 
a  character  of  humility — "Yet  not  I."  This  is  the  unvarying  strain  of  the 
apostle.  "  Not  by  fleshly  wisdom,  but  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  have  our  conversa- 
tion in  the  world.  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Compare  with  this 
language  the  sentiments  of  the  Pagan  philosophers.    Take  one  as  a  specimen  of 


:  n.]  GALATIANS.  1J7 


the  rest.  Cicero  says,  "  We  are  justly  applauded  for  virtue,  and  in  virtue  we 
rightly  glory ;  which  would  not  be  the  case  if  we  had  virtue  as  the  gift  of  God,  and 
not  from  ourselves.  Did  any  person  ever  give  thanks  to  God  that  he  was  a  good 
man  ?  No,  but  we  thank  Him  that  we  are  rich,  that  we  are  honourable,  that  we 
are  in  health  and  safety."  Now  this  argues  not  only  the  most  dreadful  pride,  but 
the  grossest  ignorance,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  prove  that  goodness  is  much  less 
from  ourselves  than  anything  else.  The  material  creation  has  not  such  degrees  of 
dependence  upon  God  as  the  animal ;  the  animal  world  has  not  inch  degrees  of 
dependence  upon  God  as  the  rational ;  and  rational  beings  have  not  such  degrees  of 
dependence  upon  God  as  pure  and  holy  beings.  Finally,  it  has  a  Christian 
character — "  But  Christ  liveth  in  me."  This  life  is  indeed  formally  in  ma :  I  am 
the  subject  of  it,  but  not  the  agent.  It  is  not  self- derived,  nor  self-maintained ; 
but  it  oomes  from  Him,  and  is  so  perfectly  sustained  by  Him,  that  it  seems  better 
to  say,  not  "  I  live,"  but  *'  Christ  liveth  in  me."  He  has  a  sovereign  empire  of 
grace,  founded  in  His  death,  and  He  quickens  whom  He  will.  He  is  our  life — not 
only  as  He  procures  it  by  redemption,  but  also  as  He  produces  it  by  regeneration  ; 
and  He  liveth  in  us  as  the  sun  lives  in  the  garden,  by  His  influence  calling  forth 
fragrance  and  fruits ;  or  as  the  soul  lives  in  the  body,  actuating  every  limb,  and 
penetrating  every  particle  with  feeling.  H.  Let  us  consider  the  grand  influencing 
principle  of  this  religion — "  It  is  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  "  If  you  ask," 
says  the  Christian,  "  how  it  is  that  I  live  so  different  from  others,  and  so  different 
from  my  former  self,  here  is  the  secret."  To  explain  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
observe  that  the  communication  of  grace  from  Christ,  to  maintain  the  Divine  life, 
depends  on  union  with  Him,  and  that  of  this  union  faith  is  the  medium.  Let  me 
make  this  plain.  It  is  well  known  that  the  animal  spirits  and  nervous  juices  are 
derived  from  the  head  to  the  body ;  but  then  it  is  only  to  that  particular  body 
which  is  united  to  it.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  vine :  the  vine  conveys  a 
prolific  sap,  but  it  is  exclusively  to  its  own  branches.  It  matters  not  how  near 
you  place  the  branches  to  the  stock ;  if  they  are  not  in  it,  they  may  as  well  be  a 
thousand  miles  off :  they  cannot  be  enlivened  or  fructified  by  it.  "  The  branch 
cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine :  no  more  can  we  except  we 
abide  in  Him,  for  without  Him  we  can  do  nothing."  Now  He  is  the  head,  and  we 
are  the  members;  He  is  the  vine,  we  are  the  branches.  And  this  union  from  which 
this  influence  flows  is  accomplished  by  faith  only :  "  He  dwells  in  our  hearts  by 
faith."  If  faith  be  an  eye,  it  is  only  by  this  we  can  see  Him ;  if  faith  be  a  hand, 
it  is  only  by  this  we  can  lay  hold  of  Him.  III.  This  brings  us  to  notice  the  con- 
fidence, thb  appropriation,  which  this  religion  allows.  But  I  would  intimate, 
first,  that  genuine  religion  always  produces  a  concern  for  this  appropriation.  It 
will  not  suffer  a  man  to  rest  in  distant  speculations  and  loose  generalities,  but  will 
make  him  anxious  to  bring  things  home  to  himself,  and  to  know  how  they  affect 
him.  I  mean  also  to  intimate,  secondly,  that  a  Christian  may  attain  this  confi- 
dence, and  draw  this  conclusion.  Thirdly,  we  would  intimate  that  nothing  can 
exceed  the  blessedness  which  results  from  such  an  appropriation  of  the  Saviour  in 
His  love,  and  in  His  death.  (W.  Jay.)  The  Divine  life  in  the  toult  of  men  con- 
sidered : — St.  Paul  relates  his  own  case  in  the  text,  in  which  you  may  observe 
these  truths.  1.  That  believerB  are  endowed  with  spiritual  activity;  or,  that 
they  are  enabled  to  serve  God,  and  perform  good  works.  This  is  intimated 
by  two  expressions,  "lam  crucified,"  and  "I  live" ;  which,  though  they  seem  con- 
tradictory, do  really  mean  the  same  thing.  "I  live"  signifies  spiritual  activity;  a 
vigorous,  persevering  serving  of  God ;  a  living  unto  God  {as  it  is  explained  ver.  19, 
and  Bora.  vi.  11).  Such  a  principle  or  power  is  very  significantly  called  life,  to 
denote  its  intimacy  in  the  soul,  its  vivacity,  and  permanency.  2.  We  may  observe 
that  the  vital  principle  of  holiness  in  believers,  whereby  they  are  enabled  to 
serve  God,  is  communicated  to  them  through  Christ  only  as  a  Mediator.  This  is 
also  asserted  in  the  emphatical  epanorthosis,  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
m*  " ;  that  is,  spiritual  life  is  formally  in  me,  but  it  is  not  self-originated ;  it  does 
aot  result  from  my  natural  principles  (which  are  so  essential  to  me,  that  I  may 
represent  them  under  the  personal  pronoun  I),  but  was  first  implanted,  and  is  still 
supported  and  cherished,  by  the  power  and  graoe  of  God  through  Christ ;  and  it  is 
in  every  respect  bo  dependent  upon  Him,  and  His  influence  is  so  intimately  diffused 
through  my  soul,  that  I  may  say, "  Christ  liveth  in  me."  A  like  expression  is  used 
In  Col.  iii.  3,  4.  "Christ  is  our  life."  3.  We  may  take  notice  that  believers 
supplies  from  Christ  for  the  maintenance  and  nourishment  of  their  spiritual 
M  The  life  which  I  now  live  "  (or,  as  it  might  be  rendered  more  significantly, 


128  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [our.  a 

"  what  I  now  live  ")  "  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  Nothing  can 
be  more  profitable,  nothing  more  necessary,  than  right  notions  about  spiritual  life. 
I.  Wherein  spiritual  life  consists.  II.  When  it  it  communicated,  in.  Whether 
it  be  instantaneously  communicated,  or  gradually  acquired  by  repeated  acts.  IV. 
Who  are  the  subjects  of  it,  or  in  what  extent  is  it  communicated.  V.  In  what 
sense  is  it  communicated  and  supported  through  Christ  ?  VI.  How  faith  derives 
supplies  from  Him  for  its  support  and  nourishment.  I.  "  Wherein  does  spiritual 
life  consist?"  This  inquiry,  though  necessary  both  to  inform  your  minds  and  to 
repel  the  charge  of  unintelligibleness,  so  frequently  alleged  against  this  doctrine, 
:•  et  is  exceeding  difficult,  both  because  of  the  mysteriousness  of  the  thing  in  itself, 
and  because  of  the  blindness  of  the  minds  of  those  that  are  not  endowed  with  it. 
It  is  mysterious  in  itself,  as  every  kind  of  life  is.  The  effects  and  many  of  the 
properties  of  animal  life  are  plain,  but  what  animal  life  is  in  itself  is  an  inquiry  too 
sublime  for  the  most  philosophic  and  soaring  mind.  Now  spiritual  life  still 
approaches  nearer  to  the  life  of  the  Divine  Being,  that  boundless  ocean  of  incom- 
prehensible mysteries,  and  consequently  exceeds  our  capacity  more  than  any  other. 
But  besides,  such  is  the  blindness  of  unregenerate  souls,  that  they  cannot  receive 
or  know  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii  14),  and  therefore  what  is  know, 
able  by  enlightened  minds  concerning  spiritual  life,  cannot  be  apprehended  with 
suitable  clearness  by  them.  1.  It  supposes  a  living  spiritual  principle.  There  can 
be  no  life,  no  vital  actions,  without  a  vital  principle,  from  whence  they  flow ;  e.g., 
there  can  be  no  animal  life,  no  animal  sensations  and  motions,  without  a  principle 
of  animal  life.  Now  spiritual  life  must  suppose  a  principle  of  holiness.  A 
principle  of  life  of  any  kind  will  not  suffice ;  it  must  be  particularly  and  formally 
a  holy  principle;  for  life  and  all  its  operations  will  be  of  the  same  kind  with  the 
principle  from  which  they  proceed.  Now  a  holy  principle  is  something  distinct 
from  and  superadded  to  the  mere  natural  principle  of  reason.  To  illustrate  this 
matter,  let  us  suppose  a  man  deprived  of  the  faculty  of  memory,  and  yet  to  con- 
tinue rational  (as  he  might  in  a  low  degree) ;  according  to  this  supposition,  he  will 
be  always  incapable  of  an  act  of  memory,  however  strong  his  powers  of  perception, 
volition,  &o.,  may  be,  till  the  power  of  exercising  his  reason  in  that  particular  way 
which  is  called  remembering  be  conferred  upon  him.  So  let  a  sinner's  mere 
natural  powers  be  ever  so  much  refined  and  polished,  yet,  if  there  be  no  principle  of 
spiritual  life  distinct  from  them  infused,  he  will  be  everlastingly  incapable  of  living 
religion.  This  gracious  principle  is  called  the  seed  of  God  (1  John  iii.  9),  to 
intimate,  that  as  the  seed  of  vegetables  is  the  first  principle  of  the  plant,  and  of  its 
vegetative  life,  so  is  this  of  spiritual  life,  and  all  its  vital  acts.  2.  Spiritual  life 
implies  a  disposition  to  a  holy  operation,  an  inward  propensity,  a  spontaneous 
inclination  towards  holiness,  a  willing  that  which  is  good  (Rom.  vii.  18).  Every 
kind  of  life  has  some  peculiar  innate  tendencies,  sympathies,  and  antipathies :  so 
animal  life  implies  a  natural  inclination  to  food,  to  move  at  proper  seasons,  Ac. 
There  is  a  savour,  a  relish  for  Divine  things,  as  essential  to  spiritual  life  as  our 
natural  gusts  and  relishes  are  to  natural  life.  Hence  gracious  desires  are  often 
signified  in  Scripture  under  the  metaphors  of  hungering  and  thirsting ;  and  to  this 
St.  Peter  expressly  alludes,  "  As  newborn  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby"  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).  By  virtue  of  this  disposition, 
believers  set  their  affections  on  things  above  (Col.  iii.  2) ;  they  relish,  they  savour, 
they  affect  things  above.  8.  Spiritual  life  implies  a  power  of  holy  operation.  A 
heavenly  vigour,  a  Divine  activity  animates  the  whole  soul.  It  implies  more  than 
an  inefficacious  disposition,  a  dull,  lazy  velleity,  productive  of  nothing  but  languid 
wishes.  So  every  kind  of  life  implies  a  power  of  operation  suitable  to  its  nature. 
Animal  life  (e.g.)  has  not  only  an  innate  propensity,  but  also  a  natural  power  to 
move,  to  receive  and  digest  food,  <fco.  "  They  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  rent* 
their  strength"  (Isa.  xL  31) ;  that  is,  they  have  strength  given  them ;  renewed  and 
increased  by  repeated  acts,  in  the  progress  of  sanctification.  They  are  "strengthened 
with  might,  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man  "  (Eph.  iii.  16).  I  do  not  mean  that 
spiritual  life  is  always  sensible  and  equally  vigorous;  alas!  it  is  subject  to  many 
languishments  and  indispositions ;  but  I  mean  there  is  habitually  in  a  spiritual 
man  a  power,  an  ability  for  serving  God  wbieh,  when  all  pre-reqnisites  concur,  and 
hindrances  are  removed,  is  capable  of  putting  forth  acts  of  holiness,  and  which 
does  actually  exert  itself  frequently.  Again,  I  do  not  mean  an  independent 
power,  which  is  so  self-active  as  to  need  no  quickening  energy  from  the  Divine 
Spirit  to  bring  it  into  act,  but  a  power  capable  of  acting  under  the  animating 
influences  of  grace,  which,  as  to  their  reality,  are  common  to  all  believers,  though 


cm*  *'  GALATIANS.  129 


«ney  are  communicated  in  different  degrees  to  different  persons.    Before  wa  lose 
Bight  of  this  head,  let  us  improve  it  to  these  purposes :  Let  us  improve  it  as  a 
caution  against  this  common  mistake,  viz.,  that  our  mere  natural  powers,  under 
the  common  aids  of  Divine  grace,  polished  and  refined  by  the  institutions  of  the 
gospel,   are  a  sufficient  principle  of  hcliness,  without  the  addition  of  any  new 
principle.     You  see  a  principle  of   spiritual  life  is  supernatural ;  it  is  a  Divine, 
heaven-born  thing  ;  it  is  the  seed  of  God ;  a  plant  planted  by  our  heavenly  Father. 
But,  alas  t  how  many  content  themselves  with  a  self-begotten  holiness  I     Let  ub 
also  improve  what  has  been  said,  to  remove  another  equally  common  and  pernicious 
error,  namely,  that  gospel-holiness  consists  merely  in  a  series  of  acts  materially 
good.     Some  imagine  that  all  the  actions  they  do,  which  are  materially  lawful, 
and  a  part  of  religion,  have  just  so  much  ol  holiness  in  them ;  and  as  they  multiply 
such  actions,  their  sanctification  increases  in  their  imagination.    But,  alas!  do 
they  not  know  that  a  principle,  a  disposition,  a  power  of  holy  acting,  must  precede 
and  be  the  source  of  all  holy  acts  ?    That  a  new  heart  must  be  given  us,  and  a  new 
spirit  put  within  us,  before  we  can  "walk  in  God's  statutes  and  keep  His  judgments, 
and  do  them  ? "  (Ezek.  xxxvi.   26,  27.)    Further,  let  us  improve  our  account  of 
spiritual  life,  to  inform  us  of  a  very  considerable  difference  between  a  mere  moral 
and  spiritual  life ;  or  evangelical  holiness  and  morality.     Spiritual  life  is  of  a 
Divine  original ;  evangelical  holiness  flows  from  a  supernatural  principle ;  but  mere 
morality  is  natural ;  it  is  but  the  refinement  of  our  natural  principles,  under  the 
aids  of  common  grace,  in  the  use  of  proper  means ;  and  consequently  it  is  obtain- 
able by  unregenerate  men.    Again,  we  may  improve  what  has  been  said  to  convince 
as  that  a  life  of  formality,  listlessness,  and  inactivity  is  far  from  being  a  spiritual 
life.     We  proceed  to  inquire — II.  When  spiritual  life  is  communicated  ?    To  this 
the  Scriptures  direct  us  to  answer,  that  it  is  communicated  in  that  change  which  is 
generally  called  regeneration,  or  effectual  calling.     1.  If  spiritual  life  were  com- 
municated in  creation,  there  would  be  no  propriety  or  significancy  in  the  expres- 
sions used  to  denote  the  communication  of  it.     There  would  be  no  need  of  a  new, 
a  second  birth,  if  we  were  spiritually  alive  by  virtue  of  our  first  birth,     in. 
Whether  spiritual  life  be  instantaneously  communicated  ?     Or  whether  (as  some 
allege)  it  be  gradually  acquired  by  repeated  acts  ?     1.  It  is  a  contradiction  that  it 
should  be  originally  acquired  by  acting,  or  a  series  of  acts ;  for  that  supposes  that 
it  exists,  and  does  not  exist,  at  the  same  time :  as  it  acts,  it  exists ;  and  as  it  is 
acquired  by  acting,  it  does  not  exist.    It  will  perhaps  be  objected,  "  That  it  may  be 
acquired  by  the  repeated  acts  of  another  kind  of  life,  namely,  rational ;  or  the 
exercises  of  our  rational  powers  about  spiritual  objects."     But  this  may  be  answered 
from  what  was  observed  under  the  first  head,  namely,  that  a  principle  of  spiritual 
life  is  something  distinct  from  and  superadded  to  our  natural  powers.     Principles 
of  action  may  be  confirmed  and  rendered  more  prompt  to  act  by  frequent  exercise ; 
but  can  never  be  originally  obtained  that  way.      2.  The  terms  whereby  the  com- 
munication  of  spiritual  life  is  signified  as  begetting,  creating,  quickening,  or  rais- 
ing the  dead,  &c,  denote  an  instantaneous  communication.     3.  Spiritual  life  is 
represented  as  prior  to,  and  the  source  and  principle  of,  all  acts  of  evangelical 
holiness;  and  consequently  it  cannot  be  gradually  acquired  by  such  acts,  but  must 
be  implanted  previously  to  the  putting  forth  of  any  such  acts;  as  reason  is  not 
acquired  by  reasoning,  but  is  a  pre-requisite  and  principle  of  all  the  acts  of  reason. 
We  are  created  in  Christ  Jesus  to  make  us  capable  of  good  works  (Eph.  ii.  10). 
Hence  we  may  see  the  vanity  of  that  religion  which  is  gained  in  the  same  manner 
that  a  man  learns  a  trade,  or  an  uncultivated  mind  becomes  knowing  and  learned, 
namely,  by  the  repeated  exercises  of  our  natural  powers  in  use  of  proper  means, 
and  under  the  aids  of  common  providence.     We  have  seen   that  a  principle  of 
spiritual  life  is  not  a  good  act,  nor  a  series  of  good  acts,  nor  anything  acquirable 
by  them,  but  the  spring  and  origin  of  all  good  acts.    Let  us  then,  my  brethren,  trg^- 
whether  our  religion  will  stand  this  test.    Hence  also  we  may  learn  a  considerable 
difference  between  what  is  commonly  called  morality  and  gospel-holiness.    The 
one  is  obtained,  as  other  acquired  hahits  are,  by  frequent  and  continued  exercises ; 
the  other  proceeds  from  a  principle  divinely  implanted.    IV.  Our  inquiry  is,  Who 
are  the  subjects  of  spiritual  life  ?  or  in  what  extent  is  it  communicated  ?    V.  Our 
next  inquiry  is,  In  what  sense  is  spiritual  life  communicated  and  supported  through 
Christ  ?    To  explain  and  illustrate  this  point,  let  these  three  things  be  considered . 
1.  That  by  the  sin  of  our  first    parents   and   representatives,  our  principle  of 
spiritual  life  was  forfeited,  and  the  forfeiture  is  continued,  and  spiritual  death 
brought  on  us  by  our  personal  sin.    2.  The  Lord  Jesus,  by  His  sufferings,  mad« 

9 


ISO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cka*.  vu 

a  "complete  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice,"  and  thereby  redeemed  the  blessing 
forfeited ;  and  by  the  merit  of  His  obedience  purchased  Divine  influence  for  the 
extirpation  of  the  principles  of  spiritual  death  which  lurk  in  our  natures,  and  the 
implantation  of  holiness.  Hence  the  regeneration  and  sanctification,  as  well  as  the 
salvation  of  His  people,  are  ascribed  to  His  merits  and  death.  We  are  **  sanctified 
through  the  offering  up  of  the  body  of  Christ "  (Heb.  x.  10).  3.  Christ,  the  Pur- 
chaser,  is  appointed  also  "the  Communicator  of  spiritual  life"  to  His  people. 
"The  Son  quickeneth  whom  He  will"  (John  v.  21).  VI.  How  faith  derives 
supplies  from  Christ  for  the  support  and  nourishment  of  spiritual  life  ?  I  shall 
proceed  to  the  solution  of  this  by  the  following  gradation.  1.  The  communication 
of  grace  from  Christ  to  maintain  and  nourish  spiritual  life  in  His  people  is  a 
peculiar  and  distinguishing  communication.  2.  It  is  fit  and  necessary  there 
should  be  a  peculiar  union  between  Christ  and  His  people  as  the  foundation  of  this 
peculiar  influence.  8.  It  is  fit  that  that  grace  which  has  a  peculiar  concurrence  or 
instrumentality  in  the  uniting  of  the  soul  to  Christ,  and  in  continuing  of  that 
union,  should  also  have  a  peculiar  concurrence  or  instrumentality  in  deriving 
supplies  of  spiritual  strength  from  Him;  for  since  union  is  the  true  special 
ground  of  the  communication,  it  is  fit  that  that  which  is  the  peculiar  instrument 
of  this  union  should  also  be  the  peculiar  instrument  of  receiving,  or  vehicle  of 
communicating  vital  influences.  4.  Faith  has  a  "  peculiar  concurrence "  or 
"  instrumentality  in  the  first  union "  of  the  soul  to  Christ,  and  the  consequent 
continuation  of  the  union.  It  is  the  grand  ligament  whereby  they  are  indissolubly 
conjoined.  It  is  true  the  spiritual  man,  as  well  as  our  animal  bodies,  consists  of 
several  essential  parts.  Repentance,  love,  and  the  whole  system  of  evangelical  graces 
and  moral  virtues  are  as  necessary,  in  their  proper  respective  places,  as  faith.  But 
then  faith  has  a  peculiar  aptitude,  above  all  other  graces  and  virtues,  for  perform- 
ing the  part  we  now  appropriate  to  it.  So  heart,  lungs,  bowels,  <&c,  are  essential 
to  the  human  body,  as  well  as  nerves  and  arteries ;  but  the  nerves  are  the  peculiar 
vehicles  to  carry  the  vital  spirits  from  the  brain ;  and  the  arteries  are  the  only 
conveyancers  of  the  blood  from  the  heart,  through  many  labyrinths,  to  the  whole 
body.  Faith,  in  a  special  manner,  implies  those  things  in  its  very  nature  which 
reason  directs  us  to  look  upon  as  suitable  pre-requisites  or  concomitants  of  deriving 
vital  influence  from  Christ.  For  instance,  it  is  fit  that  all  that  receive  spiritual 
life  as  a  blessing  of  the  covenant  of  grace  should  submit  to  and  acquiesce  in  the 
terms  of  the  covenant.  Now  such  a  submission  and  acquiescence  is  faith.  For 
the  particular  improvement  of  this  head,  I  shall  make  these  three  remarks — (1) 
That  a  saving  faith  is  always  operative;  and  what  renders  it  so  is  its  constant 
dependence  on  Christ  for  quickening  grace.  It  is  designed  by  God,  and  has  a 
peculiar  aptitude  in  its  own  nature  to  derive  strength  for  all  acts  of  holiness  from 
Christ ;  and  He  will  not  deny  any  of  the  influences  it  naturally  craves.  So  far  is 
a  dependence  on  Him  from  leading  to  sloth  and  libertinism  as  some  slanderously 
surmise.  (2)  We  infer  that  "  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  3.  We 
observe  that  gospel  holiness  may  be  distinguished  from  all  counterfeits,  and  par- 
ticularly from  what  some  dignify  with  the  name  of  morality,  by  this  criterion,  that 
it  pre-supposes  a  special  union  with  Christ,  and  is  cherished  in  the  heart,  and 
exercised  in  practice,  by  virtue  of  the  quickening  influences  flowing  from  Him,  as 
the  head  of  His  Church,  and  received  by  faith  ;  whereas  mere  morality  does  not 
necessarily  suppose  such  a  union,  but  may  result  from  our  natural  powers,  under 
the  common  influences  of  Divine  Providence.  I  shall  conclude  with  a  short  general 
improvement  of  the  whole  subjeot  in  the  following  inferences — 1.  That  the  reason 
why  religion  is  so  burdensome  to  many  is  because  they  are  "  destitute  of  a  principle 
of  spiritual  life,"  and  the  "quickening  communications  of  Divine  grace."  Con- 
strained by  self-love,  they  drudge  and  toil  in  religious  duties,  and  cry,  "  What  a 
weariness  is  it  1 "  2.  Let  us  examine  ourselves  whether  the  evidence  of  spiritual 
life,  which  may  be  collected  from  what  has  been  said,  give  us  reason  to  con- 
clude that  we  are  possessed  of  it.  Do  we  feel,  or  have  we  felt,  a  supernatural 
principle  working  within  t  Is  our  religion  heaven-born  ?  or  is  it  natural  and 
self-sprung  ?  Do  we  derive  our  strength  for  obedience  from  Christ  by  faith  7  Is  He 
4 '  our  life  ?  "  Are  we  generally  crying,  "  Lord,  we  have  no  strength ;  but  our  eyes  are 
tmto  Thee?"  3.  Let  those  who  are  made  spiritually  alive  "acknowledge  and 
admire  the  distinguishing  grace  of  God,  and  act  as  it  becomes  their  character." 
(President  Davies.)  The  life  of  faith : — In  the  words  we  may  consider 
divers  things.  1.  That  there  ia  another  manner  of  life  than  the  ordinary  life 
af  nature.     2.  That  it  is  a  better  and  more  excellent  life  than  that  he  formerly 


©HA*,  n.]  GALATIANS.  131 

lived  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  Now,  since  I  have  seen  the  misery  of  my  former  natural 
estate,  and  the  excellency  of  a  spiritual  life  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  I  esteem 
my  former  life  to  have  been  wretched,  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  life,  compared 
with  that  which  I  live  now,  as  being  founded  in  a  better  root  than  the  "  first 
Adam."  3.  The  spring  of  this  life  is  the  Son  of  God.  God  is  life  naturally,  and 
we  have  life  no  otherwise  than  from  Him  who  quickeneth  all  things.  4.  The  con- 
veyance of  this  spiritual  life  is  by  faith.  Water  springs  not  without  a  conduit  to 
carry  and  spread  it.  The  sun  warms  not  without  beams,  and  the  liver  conveys  not 
blood  without  veins.  So  faith  is  that  vessel  which  conveys  this  spiritual  life,  that 
conduit  wherein  all  spiritual  graces  run,  for  the  framing  and  working  of  spiritual 
life,  conveying  all,  to  pitch  upon  those  excellencies  of  the  Son  of  God.  5.  The 
object  and  root  of  this  spiritual  life  is,  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  loving  Him,  and 
giving  himself  for  Him.  So  there  is  a  life  besides  the  natural  life,  and  the  root  of 
it  is  Christ,  who  is  our  life.  Life  is  the  best  thing  in  the  world,  most  esteemed  of 
us ;  as  the  devil  said  concerning  Job  (Job  ii.  4).  Life  is  the  foundation  of  all  com- 
forts ;  life  is  the  vigour  proceeding  from  soul  and  body.  So  the  spiritual  life  is 
nothing  else  but  that  excellent  vigour,  and  strong  connected  strength  of  the  soul 
and  body  renewed,  grounded  on  supernatural  reasons,  which  makes  it  follow  the 
directions  of  the  Word,  over-master  the  flesh,  and  so  by  degrees  be  transformed 
into  the  image  of  Christ,  consisting  in  holiness  and  righteousness.  The  first  point 
then  is,  that  there  is  a  better  life  than  a  natural  life,  because  there  is  somewhat  in 
a  man  which  aspires  and  looks  to  a  better  estate.  That  there  must  be  a  better  life, 
which  is  this  spiritual  life ;  for  this  life  which  we  live  in  the  flesh  is  a  thing  of 
nothing.  Our  little  life  we  live  here,  wherefore  is  it  ?  To  live  a  while,  to  eat  and 
drink  and  enjoy  our  pleasures,  and  then  fall  down  and  die  like  a  beast  ?  Oh  no, 
but  to  make  a  beginning  for  a  better  life.  If  this  life  be  such  a  blessing,  what  is 
then  that  most  excellent  spiritual  life  we  speak  of  ?  It  holds  out  beyond  all.  By 
this  spiritual  life,  when  one  is  most  sick,  you  shall  see  him  most  lively  and 
spiritual.  When  sense,  and  spirit,  and  sight,  and  all  fail,  yet  by  reasons  drawn 
from  spiritual  life  he  comforts  himself  in  Christ,  the  glory  to  come,  and  what  He 
hath  done  for  him.  When  the  body  is  weakest,  the  spirit  is  strongest.  A 
Christian^  furnished  with  this  spiritual  life  can  see  Christ  and  glory,  beyond 
all  the  things  of  this  life ;  he  can  look  backwards,  make  use  of  all  things  past,  see 
the  vanity  of  things  so  admired  of  others ;  he  can  taste  things  nature  doth  not 
relish ;  he  hath  strength  of  reasons  beyond  all  the  apprehensions  of  reason ;  he  is 
a  man  of  a  strong  working.  Therefore,  unless  we  will  be  dead  creatures,  labour  we 
must  for  a  spiritual  life,  for  there  is  another  death  which  follows  the  first  death. 
We  consider  not  here  of  life  so  high,  though  this  life  must  be  derived  from  Him 
principally.  It  is  so  naturally.  The  Son  is  the  fountain  of  life,  because  He  is 
God,  who  is  radically,  fundamentally,  and  essentially  life.  But  why  is  faith  the 
grace  to  convey  life  to  us?  (1)  Because  we  are  saved  now  out  of  ourselves  by 
another.  Therefore  that  grace  which  brings  us  to  this  great  good  must  lead  us  out 
of  ourselves.  (2)  Because  faith  gives  all  the  glory  to  the  party  on  whom  it  relies 
on  and  trusts,  as  Kom.  iii.  26.  Paul  shows  why  works  were  excluded.  Faith 
acknowledgeth  nothing  to  be  at  home ;  therefore  it  goes  to  another  to  fetch 
it,  which  else  it  would  not  do.  (3)  Because  we  must  be  brought  back  again  to 
God  by  a  contrary  way  than  that  we  were  lost  by;  for  the  same  way  we  could  never 
have  recovered.  So  we  fell  by  infidelity,  and  must  return  again  by  faith  in  the 
righteousness  of  another.  By  this  time  we  are  come  to  the  main  thing  intended, 
how  we  live  by  the  FAITH  of  the  Son  of  God.  1.  We  live  the  life  of  faith  in 
our  effectual  calling.  The  Spirit  works  it,  the  Spirit  is  God's  hand.  This  makes, 
that  our  eyes  are  bent  upwards  to  see  a  better  life,  to  see  a  calling,  to  live  holily 
and  righteously  in  all  things,  to  see  what  a  rich  means  is  provided  to  reconcile  God 
and  man,  to  satisfy  justice,  and  so  to  draw  us  in  a  new  way  aad  course  of  life,  to 
rely  on  God,  and  look  unto  Him  in  all  our  actions.  Then  the  grace  of  union  is 
given.  God's  Spirit  works  our  hearts  by  this  faith,  to  have  first  union,  and  then 
communion  with  God.  2.  We  live  the  life  of  faith  in  justification.  This 
is  a  life  of  sentence  that  the  soul  lives  by,  peace  being  spoken  unto  it  by  the  pardon 
of  sin ;  for  God  by  His  Spirit  doth  report  so  much  to  the  soul,  giving  us 
assurance  that  Christ  our  Surety  and  Peace-maker  is  raised  up  again.  Thia 
is  it  to  live  by  faith ;  every  day  to  sue  out  our  pardon ;  to  look  unto  our 
Advocate  and  Surety,  who  hath  paid  our  debts,  and  cancelled  that  obligation 
against  ns,  contrary  to  us,  as  the  apostle  speaks,  daily  to  wash  in  that  ever- 
running  fountain.      Now  let  us  see  how  it  may  be  known  that  we  live  the 


18f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

life  of  faith  in  justification.  Trial  1.  By  trying  how  it  comes  in  the  soul ;  as  Rom. 
vii.  4.  Trial  2.  Where  this  life  of  faith  is,  there  is  a  wonderful  high  valuing  and 
prizing  of  Christ,  His  righteousness,  merits,  obedience,  and  wisdom  of  God  in 
that  way  of  forgiveness  of  our  sins  by  this  God-man,  the  wonderful  mediator; 
as  Philip,  iii.  8.  Trial  3.  When  we  have  a  zeal  against  all  contrary  doctrine,  as 
St.  Paul  shows  to  the  Galatians,  who  would  have  joined  works  to  faith:  "Christ 
is  become  of  none  effect  unto  you :  whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  law,  you 
are  fallen  from  grace  "  (Gal.  v.  4).  Trial  4.  There  is  peace  and  joy  settled  in  the 
heart;  as  Rom.  v.  1,  2.  3.  Hence  springs  a  vigorous  life.  A  life  of  cheerful- 
ness ;  when  a  man  hath  his  pardon  sued  out,  then  comes  life  and  joy,  strength 
of  holy  actions  well  rooted  and  grounded.  Who  should  joy,  if  a  triumphant 
righteous  person  should  not?  4.  The  life  of  faith  in  sanctification.  Now 
being  brought  by  faith  to  live  in  justification,  we  must  of  necessity  also  liv6 
by  faith  in  sanctification.  There  be  two  parts  of  a  holy  life :  (1)  In  mortification, 
dying  to  sin ;  (2)  In  vivification,  living  to  righteousness.  Yet  further,  let  us  see 
some  trials  to  discern  whether  we  live  this  life  of  faith  in  sanctification.  Trial  1. 
If  it  be  thus  with  us,  there  will  be  a  putting  of  ourselves  upon  Christ's  government 
in  all  duties.  Faith  will  do  all  that  Christ  commands,  depending  upon  Him  for 
strength ;  and  who  so  depends  upon  Christ  for  strength  in  one  duty,  will  depend 
npon  Him  for  strength  in  another.  There  is  a  harmony  betwixt  the  soul  of 
a  Christian  and  the  command  of  obedience.  He  hearkens  to  the  precepts  of  duty, 
as  well  as  to  the  promises  of  forgiveness  of  sins.  Where  this  universal  obedience 
is  not,  here  is  not  the  life  of  faith  in  sanctification ;  for  faith  here  takes  not  excep- 
tion at  one  duty  more  than  another,  but  looks  for  all  the  strength  of  performance 
from  Christ,  who  for  this  cause  is  stored  with  all  fulness,  that  it  may  drop  down 
upon  all  His  members.  Trial  2.  Again,  there  will  be  a  wonderful  care  not  to  grieve 
the  Spirit,  in  such  a  one.  Trial  3.  There  will  be  courage  to  set  upon  any  duty,  to 
encounter  and  resist  any  sin ;  upon  this  ground,  as  he  should  say,  have  not  I  a 
storehouse  of  strength  to  go  to  ?  Is  not  He  full  of  grace  and  goodness  f  Trial  4. 
Again,  in  this  case,  all  is  lively  in  a  man.  As  we  see  a  lively  fountain,  the  water 
whereof  will  sparkle  and  leap,  so  there  will  be  living  joys,  speeches,  delights, 
exhortations,  sensible  of  good  and  evil.  Let  the  use  of  all  be  this,  Upon 
this  discovery  remember  to  go  to  Christ  for  succour,  and  labour  to  live  plentifully 
and  abundantly  in  Him  this  life  of  faith.  Two  things  are  opposite  to  this 
life  of  faith.  (1)  Despair.  (2)  Presumption;  for  this  know,  that  in  his  own 
strength  shall  no  man  be  strong.  (R.  Sibbes.)  The  life  of  faith : — In  the  last 
sermon  we  propounded  many  things  touching  the  life  of  faith,  how  it  lives  in 
effectual  calling,  in  justification  and  sanctification,  in  glorification,  and  in  the 
several  grand  passages  of  this  life,  one  of  which  remains  yet  to  be  unfolded,  as  the 
life  of  faith  in  glorification.  Quest.  1.  But  how?  Vision  is  for  glory  ;  what  hath 
faith  to  do  with  this,  which  is  of  things  unseen  ?  Ans.  1.  I  answer,  we  live  by 
iaith  in  glorification  thus,  because  faith  lays  hold  on  the  promise,  and  we  have  the 
promises  of  glory  set  down  in  the  Word,  and  with  the  promise  we  have  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  having  the  earnest  and  first-fruits,  God  will  surely  give  the 
harvest.  We  have  the  Spirit,  and  thence  faith  reasons,  God  will  make  good  His 
promise,  He  will  not  take  back  His  earnest.  Ans.  2.  Again,  faith  lives  by  the  life 
of  glorification  in  Christ  the  head.  There  is  but  one  life  of  Christ  and  His 
members,  and  one  Spirit,  one  with  Him  in  union  in  the  first  degree  of  life.  His 
glory  is  our  glory.  Ans.  3.  By  reason  of  the  nature  of  faith,  as  Heb.  xi.  1, 
which  is  to  make  things  absent  have  a  certain  being.  Thus  it  presents  glory  to  us, 
as  though  it  were  present,  and  we  in  some  sort  live  by  it.  How  to  know  whether 
or  not  we  live  the  life  of  faith  in  glorification.  This,  where  it  is  in  faith,  makes 
a  Christian  glorious,  puts  him  in  a  spirit  that  is  glorious  in  all  estates.  There  is 
no  grace  in  him,  but  it  is  set  a-fire  by  this  faith  of  glory  to  come.  When  faith 
looks  back  on  thinga,  it  hath  strength,  but  when  it  looks  on  glory,  all  graces  and 
virtues  are  set  a-work.  1.  Hope  is  set  on  work  by  faith,  and  keeps  the  soul,  as  an 
anchor,  stedfast  against  all  assaults.  2.  Hope  doth  stir  up  patience ;  for,  saith  the 
apostle,  "  What  we  hope  for,  we  wait  patiently  for  it."  3.  Again,  it  sets  courage 
and  magnanimity  a-work,  as  Heb.  xi.  What  made  all  the  patriarchs  so  stout  to 
hold  out  and  endure  so  many  miseries,  but  that  they  had  an  eye  to  the  glory 
to  come  ?  The  like  we  have  of  Moses,  who  forsook  Pharaoh's  court,  because  he 
saw  Him  who  is  invisible.  (Ibid.)  Salvation  applied: — Now,  to  come  to  the 
apostle's  particular  application,  which  he  expresseth  in  this  word  "  me : " 
M  Who  loved  me,  and  gave   Himself  for  me : "  wherein  these  points  offer  them* 


.  n.]  GALATIANS.  13S 

selves  to  our  consideration :  1.  That  Christ  loves  some  with  a  special,  super- 
abundant, and  peculiar  love ;  for  Christ,  when  He  suffered  upon  the  cross,  looked 
with  a  particular  eye  of  His  love  upon  all  that  should  believe  in  Him ;  as  now 
in  heaven  He  hath  carried  our  names  upon  His  breast  (Exodus  xxviii.  21,  30). 
The  Father  sees  the  Church  in  the  heart  and  breast  of  Christ.  2.  That  true 
faith  doth  answer  this  particular  love  and  gift  of  Christ,  by  applying  it  to 
itself.  True  faith  is  an  applying  faith.  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me."  The  nature  of  faith  is  to  make  generals  become  particulars.  We  must 
know  more  clearly,  tbat  there  is  a  particular  faith  required  of  us.  A  Christian 
ought  to  say,  "  Christ  loved  me."  And  for  the  sacraments,  what  kind  of  faith  doth 
baptism  seal,  when  water  is  sprinkled  upon  the  child  ?  Doth  it  seal  a  general 
washing  away  of  guilt  ?  No ;  but  a  particular  washing  away  of  the  guilt  and  filth 
of  the  sins  of  the  party  baptized.  Wherefore  are  the  sacraments  added  to  the 
Word,  but  to  strengthen  faith  in  particular?  Therefore  every  one  in  particular  is 
sprinkled,  to  show  the  particular  washing  of  our  souls  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 
What  is  the  reason  that  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  added  to  the  Word, 
but  that  every  one  may  be  persuaded  that  it  is  his  duty  to  cast  himself  upon 
Christ,  and  to  eat  Christ,  and  to  believe  his  own  particular  salvation?  It  over- 
throweth  the  main  end  of  the  sacraments  to  hold  a  confused  faith  in  general. 
Therefore  seeing  it  is  the  main  end  of  the  Word  and  ministry,  let  ns  labour  for 
this  particular  faith,  that  we  may  say  in  special,  "  Christ  loved  me,  and  gave 
Himself  for  me."  3.  That  assurance  doth  spring  from  this  particular  faith ;  so 
that  a  Christian  man  may  be  assured  of  the  love  of  Christ.  But  here  divers 
questions  and  cases  must  be  answered  and  explained  to  clear  the  point,  else 
our  speech  shall  not  be  answerable  to  the  experience  of  God's  people,  or  the 
truth  itself.  First,  we  must  know  that  there  is  a  double  act  of  faith  in  the 
believing  soul.  (1)  An  act  of  faith,  trusting  and  relying;  and  (2)  an  act  of 
assurance  upon  that  act  of  relying.  For  it  is  one  thing  to  believe  and  cast  myself 
upon  Christ  for  pardon  of  sins,  and  another  thing  upon  that  act  to  feel  assurance 
and  pardon.  The  one  looks  to  the  Word  more  principally ;  the  other  is  founded 
upon  experience,  together  with  the  Word.  We  ought  to  labour  for  both,  for 
affiance  and  consent  in  the  will,  to  cast  ourselves  upon  Christ  for  salvation; 
and  then  upon  believing  we  ought  to  find  and  feel  this  assurance.  But  here  a 
question  must  be  asked,  What  is  the  reason  that,  where  the  first  act  of  faith  is,  to 
cast  itself  upon  the  mercy  of  Christ  in  the  promises,  that  yet  there  is  not  the  sense 
of  pardon  and  reconciliation,  nor  that  full  persuasion:  why  is  this  many  times 
suspended?  Ans.  1.  I  answer,  many  causes  there  be  of  it.  To  name  some: 
(1)  First,  in  some  the  distemper  of  the  body  helps  the  distemper  of  the  soul ;  I 
mean  a  melancholy  temper,  which  is  a  constitution  subject  to  distrust,  fears,  and 
temptations.  As  some  tempers,  that  are  of  a  bold  spirit,  are  subject  to  presump- 
tion, the  devil  suiting  himself  to  their  temper ;  so  where  there  is  this  melancholy 
abounding,  which  is  prone  to  fear  and  distrust,  the  devil  mingling  his  suggestions 
with  their  constitution,  causes  that  those  tempers  are  inclined  to  fear,  where  there 
is  no  cause  of  fear.  (2)  And  also  it  is,  many  times,  from  a  judgment  not  rightly 
persuaded  :  as  when  they  think  they  have  no  faith,  because  they  have  it  not  in  so 
great  a  measure.  (3)  Also,  they  are  held  perhaps  without  this  persuasion  and 
assurance  of  the  pardon  of  their  sin,  because  perhaps  they  are  taken  up  with  other 
cares.  God  vouchsafes  not  this  sweet  heaven  upon  earth,  the  sense  of  His  love  in 
Christ  to  any,  but  it  is  sought  for  long,  and  valued  highly,  that  afterwards  we  may 
be  thankful  for  it.  (4)  Again,  Perhaps  they  are  negligent  in  holy  communion 
with  those  that  are  better  than  themselves ;  casting  themselves  into  dead  and  dark 
company  that  want  life,  who  bring  them  into  the  same  temper  with  themselves. 
Now  I  come  to  the  fourth  and  last  point,  indeed  the  chief  of  all,  that  this  par- 
ticular faith  in  obedience  to  Christ,  with  assurance  of  His  particular  love,  is  that 
which  carries  us  along  all  our  life  of  faith  unto  the  day  of  death.  "  I  live,"  saith 
he,  "  this  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God."  Why,  what  makes  him  to  do  so  ?  Oh, 
I  have  good  cause  to  love  Christ  and  to  depend  upon  Him.  Why  ?  "  He  hath 
loved  me,  and  given  Himself  for  me  ;  "  and  I  feel  so  much  to  my  soul's  comfort, 
therefore  I  will  wholly  depend  upon  Him,  in  life,  in  death,  and  for  ever.  Use  1. 
Now  for  the  uses  of  this,  seeing  that  the  persuasion  of  Christ's  love  to  us  in  special 
is  the  spring  of  all  holy  life,  this  serves,  in  the  first  place,  to  free  this  doctrine  of 
assurance  from  scandal.  Assurance  then  is  not  the  ground  of  presumption  or 
security.  These  spring  not  from  a  particular  faith ;  for  a  holy  life,  the  clean 
contrary,  springs  from  it.    None  oan  live  a  holy  life  but  by  a  particular  faith ;  and 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

whosoever  in  particular  doth  believe  the  forgiveness  of  his  own  sins,  will  live  • 
holy  life,  and  not  put  himself  into  former  bondage.     Use  2.  To  make  another  as* : 
if  particular  faith  and  assurance  be  the  ground  of  a  holy  life,  let  ub  labour  for  it 
by  all  means  ;  and  let  those  that  are  in  the  state  of  grace,  let  them  come  to  this 
fire  if  they  will  be  kindled :  if  they  find  themselves  dull  to  holy  duties,  let  them 
come  to  this  fire.     1.  Then  thou  hast  a  care  to  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God 
daily,  and  in  all  estates  and  conditions ;  and  where  this  faith  and  assurance  is,  it 
is  with  care  and  conscience  of   duty  always.     Herein  it  is  distinguished  from 
a  false  conceit.     Where  there  is  no  conscience  of  duty,  there  is  no  assurance 
of   particular  faith.    This  particular  hath  its  ground  from  the  general,  from 
the  Word  of  God.    2.  Again,  this  is  with  conflict.    You  may  know  particular 
application  where  it  is,-  to  be  good,  because  it  is  with  conflict  against  temptations. 
A  man  never  enjoys  his  own  assurance  of  Christ's  particular  love,  but  with  a 
great  deal  of  conflict.     There  are  two  grounds  that  faith  lays :    (1)  That  general 
truth,  that  whosoever  casts  himself    upon    Christ    shall    be   saved.       (2)  The 
particular  application  hereof — but  I  cast  myself  upon  Christ,  therefore  I  6hall 
be  saved.     This  particular  application,  which  is  the  work  of  faith,  is  mightily 
assaulted,  more  than  the  general.    The  devil  is  content  that  a  man  should 
believe  the  former,  but  he  troubles  us  in  the  application,  "  But  I  believe."    The 
devil  labours  by  all  means  to  hinder  application,  for  he  knows  that  particular 
faith  brings  Christ  home,  which  is  all  in  all.  But  false  Christians  go  on  in  a  smooth 
course,  are  not  thus  assaulted  from  day  to  day.     3.  Again,  a  man  may  know  his 
faith  to  be  true  by  his  willingness  to  search  himself,  and  to  be  searched  by 
others.     He    that    hath    a    true,  sound  faith,  and  particular    assurance  from 
thence,  is  willing  oftentimes  to  search  his  heart.     4.  Again,  this  particular  faith  it 
is  with  a  high  prizing  and  admiration  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  M  who  loved 
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."    It  is  a  sign  that  he  hath  no  interest  in  this 
love,  that  prizes  and  values  other  things  above  it.    If  one  had  any  assurance 
of    this,  he  would   value   it    above    all    other  things   in    the    world.     (Ibid.) 
The  offering  of  lave  : — Here  we  have  to  consider  Christ's  own  personal  undertaking. 
I.  Speaking  generally,  then,  and  following  the  guidance  of  our  text,  love  was  the 
principle  which  caused  that  offering  of  Himself  :  that  is  to  say,  it  was  the  cause  of 
His  Incarnation.    And  I  think,  my  brethren,  it  must  be  quite  intelligible  to  us 
that  love  could  be  the  only  possible  reason  for  such  a  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the 
Son  of  God.    We  in  our  little  world  can  hardly  appreciate  what  love  means  in  its 
true  sense  ;  much  less  the  meaning  of  the  sacrifice  which  springs  from  such  a  love. 
For  in  making  sacrifices  one  of  three  principles  must  be  the  ruling  motive  ;  it  must 
either  be  that  of  self-interest,  or  it  must  be  dictated  by  a  keen  sense  of  duty,  or  it 
must  be  the  outcome  of  a  disinterested  affection  :  and,  rarely  as  we  find  instances 
of  the  last  of  these  among  mankind,  there  are  instances  of  the  two  former  to  be 
met  with  over  and  over  again.  But  when  we  come  to  try  our  Lord's  conduct  by  any 
of  these  ;  when  we  try  His  self-imposed  humiliation  by  our  own  standard  of  sacri- 
fice ;  motives  of  self-interest  no  less  than  those  of  duty,  are  necessarily  put  out  of 
court  as  being  totally  inapplicable  to  Him,  and  love  is  forced  upon  us  as  the  only 
possible  solution  of  His  work  of  redemption.    II.  Now  it  is  this  very  self-evident 
fact  which  leads  us  to  speak,  first  of  all,  of  the  greatness  of  the  love  of  our  blessed 
Lord.     "  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."    Let  ns  see  at 
the  outset  the  obstacles  it  was  called  upon  to  surmount  from  its  very  entrance 
into  the  world.    And  was  there  nothing  to  repel  our  blessed  Lord  when  the  vision 
of  all  that  must  come  upon  Him  passed  before  His  eyes,  as  he  lay  in  the  bosom 
of  the  eternal  Father  ?    "  The  Lord  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the  children 
of  men  :  to  see  if  there  were  any  that  would  understand  and  seek  after  God. 
But  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  they  are  altogether  become  abominable  : 
there  is  also  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not  one."    And  yet  the  love  of  Jesus 
broke  through  this  opposing  barrier  also.    Consider  now  that  perseverance  and 
devotion  of  His  which  proved  so  wonderfully  superior  to  these  obstacles.     (R.  H. 
Giles,  M.d.)        Spiritual  life  : — This  spiritual  life  of  the  believer  may  be  ex- 
plained in  a  twofold  manner.    It  may  be  explained  as — I.  A  life  of  faith.    See — 
1.  Faith's  exercise.   Without  faith  there  is  no  real  religion  in  the  soul.^  The  men 
of  the  world  know  practically  what  faith  is.    They  have  faith  in  their  everyday 
transactions.     They  give  credit  to  each  other's  word  ;  and  conduct  their  business 
on  the  supposition  that  each  man  will  speak  truth  to,  and  not  deceive,  his  neighbour. 
The  husbandman,  in  faith,  throws  away  his  corn,  and  scatters  it  over  the  ground. 
The  man  of  unbelief  would  say — "  That  corn  is  lost ;  that  seed  will  die,  and  oomc 


out.  n.]  GALATIANS.  18* 

to  nothing."  But  the  husband  man  has  faith — faith  gathered  from  past  experience 
— that  that  corn-seed  will  not  be  lost ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  will  spring  up,  and 
become  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  and  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  ;  and  that  he 
will  in  due  season  reap,  it  may  be,  sixty  or  one-hundred-fold,  for  that  which  he  has 
sown.  So  is  it  in  spiritual  things.  The  children  of  God  live  by  faith.  All  your 
dealings,  brethren,  with  God,  are  carried  on  by  the  exercise  of  this  blessed  principle. 
You  deal  with  God  as  one  who  cannot  he.  You  take  Him  at  His  word.  For  now 
observe,  not  only  faith's  exercise,  but  also — 2.  Faith's  object.  To  a  saved  sinner, 
what  is  the  great  object  of  faith  t  Is  it  not  the  Divine  Saviour  ?  "  The  life  which 
I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  There  are  some  men 
who  call  themselves  Christians,  but  in  their  Christianity  there  is  no  Christ.  Ignoring 
the  very  existence  of  Christianity,  they  think  that  Lyceums,  Athenasums,  Institutes, 
and  similar  instrumentalities,  are  to  regenerate  our  country.  Everything  which 
stops  short  of  Christ  must  prove  a  failure.  Some  men  put  great  faith  in  mere  edu- 
cation. Other  men  err  in  another  direction.  They  put  their  faith  in  preachers, 
instead  of  in  Christ.  They  forget  that  the  only  use  of  preaching  is  to  point  to 
Christ.  And  how  is  your  faith  exercised  towards  Christ  ?  It  is  exercised  towards 
Christ  as  a  crucified  Saviour.  It  is  exercised  towards  Christ  as  your  atoning 
Priest,  as  your  all-sufficient  Surety,  as  your  almighty  Eedeemer.  But  then  you 
cannot  view  such  a  sacrifice  for  your  good  without  the  deepest  feeling. 
And,  therefore,  the  present  life  is  not  only  a  life  of  faith  ;  it  is  also — II.  A  life  or 
gratitude.  It  is  a  life  of  gratitude  to  Christ  for — 1.  His  unmerited  love.  My  dear 
brethren,  there  is  no  motive  to  obedience  so  powerful  as  the  motive  of  love — "Who 
loved  me."  And  how  has  this  love  been  shown  ?  In  the  most  costly  manner  it 
can.  And  this  is  our  next  point.  The  believer's  present  life  is  a  life  of  gratitude  to 
Christ  for — 2.  His  precious  redemption — "  Who  gave  Himself  for  me."  This  is  the 
strongest  possible  proof  which  Christ  could  have  given  of  His  wondrous  affection. 
"  Greater  love,"  He  Himself  tells  us,  *•  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  should 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  I  now  add  two  other  remarks,  by  way  of  appli- 
cation. We  see  hence — 1.  The  blessed  prospects  of  the  Christian  believer.  2.  The 
true  nature  of  spiritual  life.  "  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me 
and  "gave  Himself  for  me  ?  "  The  sun  in  the  heavens  gives  light,  it  is  supposed, 
at  least  to  nine  hundred  millions  of  people.  But  you  and  I  have  as  much  enjoy- 
ment of  that  sun  as  though  it  had  been  placed  in  the  firmament  for  our  use  alone. 
So  is  it  with  Christ.  Christ  died  for  all ;  but  we  should  see  that  Christ  died  for 
ns  in  particular,  and  we  should  look  to  Christ  as  dying  for  ourselves,  as  though  He 
died  for  ns,  and  for  no  one  else.  These  words,  however,  are  not  mine,  but  the 
words  of  a  Christian  prelate.  You  have  life,  spiritual  life,  the  secret  life  of  faith. 
This  is  well  described  by  Bishop  Keynolds — "  It  is  a  hidden  life.  The  best  of  it  is 
yet  unseen.  Though  the  cabinet  which  is  seen  be  rich,  yet  the  jewel  which  it  con- 
ceals is  much  richer.  This  life  is  hidden  with  Christ,  and  so  hidden  that  we  know 
not  where  it  is.  It  is  so  hidden,  that  no  enemy  can  touch  it.  It  is  hidden  in  God. 
It  is  life  in  the  fountain.  And  this  is  such  a  fountain  of  life  as  hath  in  it  fulness 
without  satiety,  purity  without  defilement,  perpetuity  without  decay,  and  all- 
sufficiency  without  defect.  This  life  is  hidden,  but  it  is  not  lost.  It  is  hidden  like 
seed  in  the  ground.  And  when  Christ  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  appear,  this 
life  of  ours  in  Him  will  spring  up  and  appear  glorious."  This  life,  this  hidden  life, 
brethren,  I  trust,  is  the  portion  of  the  greater  part  of  this  assembly — a  life  of  joy  on 
earth,  and  a  life  of  joy  and  glory  unutterable  in  the  heavens.  (G.  Clayton,  M.A.) 
The  spiritual  death  and  life  of  the  believer : — In  discoursing  on  this  subject,  I  shall 
direct  your  attention  to  the  leading  thoughts  ;  and  therefore  I  shall  endeavour  to 
show,  Firstly,  What  is  implied  in  being  crucified  with  Christ.  Secondly,  What  we 
are  to  understand  by  Christ  living  in  the  believer;  and  point  out  the  great 
influence  of  faith  in  the  Divine  life.  Or,  in  fewer  words,  show — How  the  believer 
dies,  and  how  he  lives.  I.  Expressions  similar  to  this,  of  being  crucified  with 
Christ,  are  more  than  once  used  in  the  writings  of  the  apostle.  No  one  will  be 
so  weak  as  to  imagine  that  Paul  was  a  sharer  with  Christ  in  the  merit  of  His 
sufferings.  Such  a  thought  would  be  horrid  and  blasphemous.  There  is  implied 
in  being  crucified  with  Christ — First,  a  refusing  obedience  to  the  ceremonial  law, 
as  being  no  longer  necessary  to  salvation.  Secondly,  there  is  implied  a  cheerfulness 
in  undergoing  all  that  scorn  and  contempt  with  which  a  firm  adherence  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross  was  attended.  Thirdly,  there  is  implied  in  this  expression, 
a  partaking  of  the  merits  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  being  dead  to  the  moral 
law,  in  the  manner  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse.    As  in  this  and  other  places, 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


the  ceremonial  law  is  to  be  understood,  so  the  moral  law  is  evidently  to  be  included 
In  the  fourth  place,  there  is  implied,  in  being  crucified  with  Christ,  an  experience 
of  the  efficacy  of  His  death.    This  is  no  doubt  an  important,  if  not  the  principal 
idea  in  the  words,  and  which  we  find  plainly  expressed  in  the  following  passages  : 
"  Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  Him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might 
be  destroyed,  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin.     And  they  that  are  Christ's 
have  crucified  the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts."  Thus  is  the  believer  crucified 
with  Christ ;   and  the  death  of  sin  in  him  resembles  a  crucifixion.      It  was  a 
painful,  shameful,  lingering,  and  accursed  death  ;  and  so  is  the  death  of  sin.    It  il 
painful.     The  first  entrance  upon  a  religious  course  is  difficult ;  and  the  more  bo, 
where  sin  has  long  had  the  dominion.     Conversion  is  a  strait  gate  through  which 
we  must  pass,  and  holiness  a  narrow  way,  in  which  we  must  walk  to  eternal  life. 
We  must  be  denied  to  ourselves  and  to   the  world;  difficulties  are  to  be  sur. 
mounted,  temptations  resisted,  injuries  forgiven,  arid  reproaches  endured.    This  is 
a  painful  work ;  often  like  to  be  overcome,  and  still  renewing  the  combat.     Again, 
it  is  shameful.    When  iniquities  prevail,  the  believer  is  covered  with  shame  and 
confusion  of  face.     This  may  rise  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  will  be  tempted  to  cease 
from  seeking  God.    Again,  the  death  of  sin  is  very  lingering.     It  is  dying  from  the 
moment  Christ  is  formed  in  the  soul,  till  glory  commences.     Moreover,  the  death 
of  the  cross  was  an  accursed  death ;  inflicted  on  none  but  those  guilty  of  the 
blackest  crimes ;  such  as  were  accursed  of  men,  and  held  to  be  accursed  of  God 
too.      From  these  considerations  we  may  see  the  propriety  and  force  of  this 
expression,  "  crucified  with  Christ,"  and  all  of  the  like  kind  in  Scripture.    In  the 
last  place,  there  is  implied  a  self-denied  temper  towards  this  present  world.    Every 
believer,  indeed,  ought  to  be  a  martyr  in  his  temper,  and  hang  so  loose  to  this 
world  and  its  enjoyments,  nay,  to  life  itself,  that  he  may  readily  part  with  all  to 
win  Christ.     These  things  are  implied  in  the  crucifixion  of  the  believer.     I  pro- 
ceed  now — II.  To  consider  his  life.   "  Christ  liveth  in  "  him ;  and  the  life  which  he 
now  lives  in  the  flesh,  is  "  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."    This  is  the  Divine  or 
spiritual  life  which  he  lives  in  consequence  of  sin  being  mortified,  and  the  heart 
renewed.     As  he  dies  to  sin,  so  he  rises  to  holiness.     The  manner  in  which  Christ 
lives  in  the  believer,  is  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  who  begins  and  carries  on  the  Divine 
life.     We  cannot  make  ourselves  alive  to  God.      The  great  instrument  of  this 
spiritual  life  is  faith.     By  this  they  are  united  to  the  Son  of  God;  depend  upon 
His  merits  for  pardon,  and  derive  influences  for  sanctification.    It  is  called  •«  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God,"  because  He  is  the  great  object  of  it,  and  because  it  is  of 
His  bestowing.     Perhaps  there  is  something  in  this  phrase  more  peculiar  to  the 
time  in  which  the  apostle  lived.     The  faith  of  the  Son  of  God;  that  is,  a  firm 
belief  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  who  was  crucified  on  Calvary,  was  the  true  and 
expected  Messiah ;  that  He  was  no  impostor,  but  really  the  Son  of  God ;  that  He 
rose  again  and  ascended  up  into  heaven ;  and  that  there  is  forgiveness  of  sins 
through  His  blood.    Faith  in  Christ,  as  being  the  Son  of  God,  is  that  by  which 
every  believer  lives.    Allow  me,  in  a  few  particulars,  to  point  out  its  influence. 
First,  faith  is  that  act  of  the  soul  which  receives  and  rests  upon  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  for  pardon  and  acceptance  with  God.     Secondly,  by  faith,  influences  are 
derived  for  the  mortification  of   sin  and  the  promotion  of  holiness.      "  He  that 
abideth  in  Me,"  saith  Christ,  "  and  I  in  him,  the  samebringeth  forth  much  fruit ;  for 
without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."    Once  more,  faith  influences  the  believer  to  live 
with  regard  to  another  world.     It  is  described  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  to  be 
"  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."    Let  ns  now 
turn  our  attention  to  some  improvement    of    this    subject.      First,  learn,  my 
brethren,    that  the  religion  of  Jesus  leads  to  strict  holiness  of  heart  and  life. 
Secondly,  this  subject  ought  to  be  faithfully  improved  for  the  trial  of  ourselves. 
(W.  Linn,  D.D.)         Who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me  : — In  the  Peninsular 
War  our  troops,  borne  back  by  the  superior  force  of   the  enemy,  had  on  one 
occasion  to  retreat,  and  hastened  to  place  a  river  between  them  and  the  foe.    The 
last  of  the  men  had  swum  the  stream.     The  bugles  were  sounded,  and  the  army 
was  about  to  march  over  the  high  ground,  when,  looking  across  to  the  opposite 
bank,  already  occupied  by  the  French  sharp-shooters,  they  saw  a  woman.     She 
wae  a  common  camp-follower.     She  had  lost  her  way  when  the  camp  was  breaking 
up,  and  had  been  accidentally  left  behind.     There  she  stood,  holding  out  her  arms 
in  apparent  dumb  entreaty,  for  her  voice  was  lost  in  the  roar  of  the  flood  and  the 
rattle  of  the  musketry.    What  was  to  be  done  ?    Who  would  venture  across  in  the 
faoe  of  the  enemy  for  a  common  camp-follower  ?     Suddenly  the  ranks  opened,  an4 


chap,  n.]  GALATIANS.  J37 

out  came  an  officer.  He  rode  his  horse  into  the  rushing  river,  one  man  riding 
back  to  charge  an  army.  Many  a  rifle  was  aimed  at  his  gallant  head  as  he 
itemmed  the  stream,  and  passed  over  amid  a  very  shower  of  bullets.  He  reached 
the  farther  shore,  swung  the  woman  before  him  on  the  saddle-bow,  turned  his 
horse's  head  again  to  the  river,  and  dashed  into  that  ride  of  death.  But  our 
enemies,  a  gallant  and  generous  nation,  saw  now  what  was  his  object — saw  that  he 
had  risked  his  life  to  save  a  woman.  Down  went  every  musket,  not  a  shot  was 
fired  at  him,  and  out  rang  the  cheers  of  the  enemy,  cheers  which  were  caught  up 
and  echoed  from  the  British  lines  as  he  passed  over  safely  with  that  Jiving  trophy 
of  his  noble  gallantry,  stamped  true  knight  of  God  by  the  manly  deed  that  for  one 
moment  had  united  hostile  armies  in  a  sense  of  their  common  brotherhood. 
(Ellice  Hopkins.)  The  expiatory  sacrifice  of  Christ : — I.  The  sufferings  of  Christ 
were  strictly  expiatobt.  He  suffered  not  as  an  example,  as  a  substitute.  II.  The 
love  op  Christ  which  caused  Him  thus  to  suffer.  There  was  no  other  reason  why 
our  Lord  should  suffer  but  that  He  loved  us.  It  was  not  necessary  to  the  perfection  of 
the  Divine  government ;  we  could  claim  no  such  atonement.  The  sufferings  furnish 
the  measure  of  that  love.  Among  our  fellow-beings  we  measure  the  greatness  of  an 
affection  by  that  which  it  consents  to  sacrifice.  III.  The  believer's  duty  and 
privilege  to  consider  himself  individually  as  the  object  of  that  Divine 
sacrifice,  and  of  that  Divine  love — "He  loved  me."  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.) 
Christ's  love  intense : — Its  intensity  is  beyond  all  knowledge.  He  feels  for  His 
people  an  affection — however  difficult  it  is  for  our  carnal  hearts  to  value  it — an 
affection  which  infinitely  surpasses  all  that  is  ever  seeD  among  the  sons  of  men. 
His  love,  for  its  condescension,  for  its  patience,  for  its  self-denial,  for  its  faithful- 
ness— stands  perfect  and  alone— unrivalled  by  any  affection  ever  witnessed  among 
men,  or  which  ever  can  be  in  heaven.  It  passes  all  power  of  thought,  in  time  or  in 
eternity,  to  estimate  it ;  it  passes  the  knowledge  of  men,  and  the  knowledge  of 
angels  too  ;  it  is  a  fathomless  ocean,  and  a  boundless ;  and  is  so  clear  that  we  may 
look  down  with  wonder  into  its  depths  ;  and  so  bright  that  we  may  gaze  with 
ever-increasing  admiration  on  its  splendour  and  glory.  With  what  feelings  of 
gratitude  to  that  Saviour,  then,  ought  we  to  say  that  "  He  loved  us,  and  gave 
Himself  for  us  1 "  (Ibid.)  The  secret  of  a  true  life  : — I.  Here  is  a  glorious 
lover.  The  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me.  I  believe  that  my 
life  is  controlled  and  consecrated  by  a  consciousness  that  somebody  loves  it.  The 
greater  the  person,  sometimes,  the  more  highly  prized  the  love ;  at  least,  the 
more  worthy  the  person,  the  greater  our  appreciation  of  the  love.  "Whose  love  is 
like  the  Deity,  an  omnipotent  love,  all  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it : 
an  omnipresent  love,  never  is  there  a  condition  of  life  in  which  it  does  not  prove 
itself;  an  omniscient  love,  reaching  down  to  the  unknown  wants  of  the  soul. 
This  love  fills  heaven  with  wonder.  H.  The  glorious  act  of  love.  It  has  its 
reason  in  itself,  not  for  the  perception  of  that  which  was  lovable  in  the  soul. 
Every  perfection  is  mingled  with  His  love  ;  it  is  connected  with  every  office  that 
Jesus  has  assumed ;  He  is  our  Prophet,  Priest,  King,  Shepherd,  Surety,  Physician. 
HI.  Who  is  the  loved  one  ?  "He  loved  me."  "Paul,  who  art  thou?  "  "A 
persecutor."  He  loved  angels,  inanimate  nature;  this  we  might  expect.  Only  the 
mouth  of  faith  can  syllable  these  words.  Pride,  unbelief,  keep  back  the  acknow- 
ledgment.   IV.  The  lovb  gift—"  Himself."    No  constraint.    (S.  H.  Tyng.) 

Ver.  21.  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God. — Salvation  ly  works  a  criminal 
doctrine  : — 1.  The  idea  of  salvation  by  the  merit  of  our  own  works  is  exceedingly 
insinuating.  When  it  gains  the  least  foothold,  it  soon  makes  great  advances. 
The  only  way  to  deal  with  it  is  to  stamp  it  out.  War  to  the  knife.  No  surrender. 
2.  This  error  is  exceedingly  plausible.  Said  to  encourage  virtue.  But  where  will 
you  find  a  devout  and  upright  man  who  glories  in  his  own  works?  3.  Self- 
righteousness  is  natural  to  our  fallen  humanity.  Hence  it  is  the  essence  of  all 
false  religions.  4.  This  erroneous  idea  arises  partly  from  ignorance :  (1)  of  the  law 
of  God ;  (2)  of  what  holiness  is ;  (3)  of  themselves.  5.  It  arises  also  from  pride. 
6.  And  from  unbelief.  7.  It  is  evidently  evil,  for  it  makes  light  of  sin.  8.  No 
comfort  in  it  for  the  fallen.  It  gives  to  the  elder  son  all  that  his  proud  heart  can 
claim,  but  for  the  prodigal  it  has  no  welcome.  What,  then,  is  to  become  of  the 
guilty?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Frustration  of  the  grace  of  God: — 1.  He  that  hopea 
to  be  saved  by  his  own  righteousness  rejects  the  grace  or  free  favour  of  God, 
regards  it  as  useless,  and  in  that  sense  frustrates  it.  If  we  can  keep  the  law  and 
•laim  to  bo  accepted  as  a  matter  of  debt,  it  is  plain  that  we  need  not  turn  suppli- 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

ants  and  crave  for  mercy.     Grace  is  a  superfluity  where  merit  can  be  proved' 

2.  He  makes  the  grace  of  God  to  be  at  least  a  secondary  thing.  Many  think  they 
are  to  merit  as  much  as  they  can,  and  that  God  will  make  up  for  the  rest  by  Hii 
grace.  Every  man  his  own  saviour,  and  Jesus  Christ  and  His  grace  make-weighti 
for  our  deficiences.  3.  He  who  trusts  in  himself,  his  feelings,  his  works,  his  prayers, 
or  in  anything  except  the  grace  of  God,  virtually  gives  up  trusting  in  the  grace  of 
God  altogether.  God  will  never  share  the  work  with  man's  merit.  You  must 
either  have  salvation  wholly  because  you  deserve  it,  or  wholly  because  God  gra- 
ciously bestows  it  though  you  do  not  deserve  it.  4.  This  doctrine  takes  off  the 
sinner  from  confidence  in  Christ.  So  long  as  a  man  can  maintain  any  hope  in 
himself,  he  will  never  look  to  the  Bedeemer.  6.  This  doctrine  robs  God  of  His 
glory.  If  man  can  6ave  himself,  then  the  glory  is  his  own,  not  God's.  What  an 
awful  crime,  then,  is  this  doctrine  of  salvation  by  human  merit.  It  is  a  Bin  so 
gross  that  even  the  heathen  cannot  commit  it.  They  have  never  heard  of  the 
grace  of  God,  and  therefore  they  cannot  put  a  slight  upon  it :  when  they  perish  it 
will  be  with  a  far  lighter  doom  than  those  who  have  been  told  that  God  is  gracious 
and  ready  to  pardon,  and  yet  turn  on  their  heel  and  wickedly  boast  of  innocence, 
and  pretend  to  be  clean  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  is  a  sin  which  devils  cannot  com- 
mit. With  all  the  obstinancy  of  their  rebellion,  they  can  never  reach  to  this. 
They  have  never  had  the  sweet  notes  of  free  grace  and  dying  love  ringing  in  their 
ears,  and  therefore  they  have  never  refused  the  heavenly  invitation.  What  has 
never  been  presented  to  their  acceptance  cannot  be  the  object  of  their  rejection.  (Ibid.) 

I.  TWO  GREAT  CRIMES  ARE  CONTAINED  IN  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS.      1.  The 

frustration  of  the  grace  of  God.  The  self-righteous  (1)  reject  it  as  baseless ;  (2) 
make  it  at  least  a  secondary  thing ;  (3)  virtually  give  up  trusting  in  it ;  (4)  re- 
nounce their  confidence  in  Christ ;  (5)  rob  God  of  His  glory.  2.  The  making  of 
Christ  to  be  dead  is  vain.  (1)  Christ's  finished  work  is  rendered  imperfect ;  (2) 
the  covenant  sealed  with  Christ's  death  is  rejected ;  (3)  each  person  in  the  Trinity 
is  sinned  against ;  (4)  fallen  man  is  sinned  against,  who  can  have  no  mercy  but 
through  Christ ;  (5)  the  saints  are  sinned  against,  who  have  no  hope  but  through 
Christ.  II.  The  two  crimes  are  committed  by  many  people.  By — 1.  Triflers  with 
the  gospel.  2.  The  senseless  as  to  guilt.  3.  The  despairing.  4.  Those  who 
have  misgivings  about  the  power  of  the  gospel.  5.  Apostates.  HI.  No  true 
believer  will  bb  ouilty  of  these  crimes.  (Ibid.)  Folly  of  human  righteous- 
ness: — How  can  a  man  trust  in  his  own  righteousness?  It  is  like  seeking 
shelter  under  one's  own  shadow.  We  may  stoop  to  the  very  ground ;  and 
the  lower  we  bend,  we  still  find  that  our  shadow  is  beneath  us.  But  if  a 
man  flee  to  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock,  or  of  a  widespreading  tree,  he  will 
find  abundant  shelter  from  the  rays  of  the  noonday  sun.  So  human  merits  are 
unavailing;  and  Christ  alone  can  save.  (Dr.  Medhurst.)  Rejection  of  God's 
grace  : — The  rejection  of  the  grace  of  God  may  take  place  (1)  by  a  denial  of  the 
perfect  satisfaction  of  Christ;  (2)  by  setting  alongside  of  it  our  own  merits,  worthi- 
ness and  righteousness,  as  popery  does  in  doctrine,  and  many  Protestants  do  in 
fact ;  (3)  by  abusing  this  grace  to  favour  presumption,  and  to  supersede  sanctifica- 
tion  ;  (4)  when  even  sincere  souls,  in  the  feeling  of  their  unworthiness,  are  much 
too  timorous  to  appropriate  grace  to  themselves,  and  think  they  must  first  have 
arrived  at  this  or  that  degree  of  holiness,  before  grace  can  avail  them  anything ; 
(5)  when  tempted  ones  from  a  lack  of  feeling  conclude  that  they  have  fallen  out  of 
grace  again.  (Starke.)  Righteousness  : — I.  The  insufficiency  of  the  law  to 
promote  righteousness.  1.  It  was  never  instituted  for  that  purpose.  (1)  It  is  a 
standard  of  righteousness,  (2)  and  therefore  a  constant  and  irritating  reminder  of 
unrighteousness,  and  (3)  has  no  moral  power.  2.  Men  have  never  found  righteous- 
ness by  the  law.  (1)  All  have  sinned  and  broken  it.  (2)  The  best  morality  falls 
below  its  requirements.  3.  On  the  assumption  of  its  sufficiency  (1)  God's  grace 
is  frustrated;  (2)  Christ  is  dead  in  vain.  II.  Hence  the  necessity  of  some  better 
provision  for  the  promotion  of  righteousness.  1.  Men  yearn  after  it.  2.  It  is 
God's  will  that  man  should  be  righteous  or  He  would  never  have  made  him  so. 

3.  Eighteousness  is  the  law  and  harmony  of  the  universe  which  sin  has  broken. 
IH.  God  has  made  this  provision  in  the  death  of  Christ.  1.  That  death  has 
atoned  for  sin,  and  when  accepted  by  faith  past  unrighteousness  is  remitted  and 
man  is  justified  (Rom.  hi.  25).  2.  By  that  death  the  Holy  Spirit  is  secured  who 
makes  man  actually  righteous,  and  gives  the  power  to  fulfil  all  righteousness. 
The  frustration  of  God's  grace: — If  people  can  make  themselves  good  by  doing 
what  is  called    their    duty,  then  the    incarnation,  the  crucifixion,  the    resur- 


otap.  n.j  GALATIANS.  139 

section,  and  the  ascension  of  Jesna  Christ  constitute  the  greatest  mistake 
that  ever  was  made  in  the  universe.  If  a  man  can  be  really  good,  can  make 
himself  all  that  God  can  possibly  desire  him  to  be,  of  his  own  motion  and 
will  and  by  the  resources  of  his  own  invention  and  energy,  then  the  media- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  was  a  great  and  generous  expenditure  of  pain  and 
life  and  sorrow,  and  an  expenditure  that  ended  in  nothing.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Divine  grace  does  not  dispense  with  conditions  but  with  merit : — While  in  the  case  of 
two  mutinous  seamen  who,  having  long  resisted  every  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
captain  to  reform  them,  have  at  last,  through  their  continued  intemperance,  fallen 
overboard,  one  grasps  the  rope  thrown  out  by  his  master's  mercy,  and  is  saved, 
while  the  other  rejects  it,  or  depends  on  his  own  efforts  and  is  drowned ;  has  the 
former  ground  to  boast  that  he  is  his  own  saviour  ?  There  was  assuredly  more 
mad  wilfulness  in  his  hardened  companion  who  refused  the  proffered  aid ;  but  the 
recilessness  of  the  latter  imparts  no  merit  to  the  former.  While  the  one  can 
ascribe  his  deliverence  to  nothing  in  himself  "moving"  his  captain  "  thereunto," 
but  solely  to  his  master's  compassion,  the  other  had  equal  mercy  shown  to  him, 
but  his  destruction  was  entirely  his  own  doing.  When  the  prodigal  returned  would 
his  sense  of  the  entire  freeness  of  his  father's  goodness  and  of  his  own  absolute 
demerit  have  been  at  all  diminished  by  learning  that  another  brother  who  had  run 
the  same  course  of  riot  as  himself  refused  to  cast  himself  into  those  arms  by  which 
he  himself  had  been  so  warmly  welcomed?  Would  the  greater  obduracy  and  in- 
fatuated perverseness  of  his  brother  extenuate,  in  the  pardoned  son's  eyes,  his  own 
guilt,  or  lead  him  less  to  ascribe  his  own  forgiveness  to  free  unmerited  grace? 
(Principal  Forbes.)  Morality  not  righteousness: — Let  the  law  stand  for  any 

attempt  at  duty  doing  with  a  view  to  self-salvation.  I  do  not  say  that  a  man  can- 
not wash  his  hands ;  I  am  not  here  to  reason  that  it  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to 
put  on  a  good  deal  of  external  decoration.  I  believe  that  it  is  quite  within  his 
power  to  say  to  some  of  his  appetites,  "  Now  you  shall  be  starved  for  six  months. 
I  will  touch  no  intoxicant  for  the  rest  of  my  life,  and  nevermore  go  into  any  associa- 
tions which  I  believe  to  be  corrupting,  and  will  do  my  best  to  conform  to  the  highest 
moral  standard.  What  more  can  you  expect  me  to  do  ?  "  Well,  what  have  you 
done  ?  Outside  work ;  you  have  washed  your  hands,  but  you  have  not  cleansed 
your  heart.  As  between  man  and  man  you  have  done  a  good  deal.  But  seeing 
that  the  question  is  not  primarily  between  man  and  man,  but  between  you  and  God, 
you  have  done  nothing  but  confound  righteousness  with  morality.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  moral  consolation  that  righteousness  is  not  of  the  law  but  through  Christ : — If 
Satan,  the  great  Judaizer  as  well  as  antinomian,  tempts  us  to  trust  in  our  own  en- 
deavours we  fly  to  the  cross.  If  conscience,  the  advocate  of  Sinai,  reminds  us  of 
our  multiplied  offences  and  failures  we  say,  "  Were  it  ten  thousand  times  worse 
there  can  be  no  condemnation."  Hardest  of  all,  if,  in  times  of  despondency  our 
innumerable  and  peculiar  sins,  not  against  the  law,  but  against  the  very  gospel 
that  saves  from  the  law,  are  pressed  upon  our  spirits,  we  can  still  take  refuge  in 
the  cross  and  think,  "  I  have  paid  my  own  debt  in  Him  who  died  not  only  to 
discharge  the  obligation  to  clerical  law,  but  also  to  expiate  offences  against  the 
gospel  itself,  who  atoned  for  sins  against  the  atonement,  and  suffered  on  the  cross 
for  dishonour  done  to  the  very  cross  on  which  He  suffered;"  and  tbere  is,  or  will 
be,  a  time  to  every  one  of  us,  when  amidst  the  thick  darkness  that  divides  time 
from  eternity,  we  shall  find  no  greater  consolation  than  this :  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ ;  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace  of  God ;  Christ  hath  not  died  for  me  in  vain. 
(W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Grace  is  a  free  gift ; — A  benevolent  rich  man  had  a  very 
poor  neighbour,  to  whom  he  sent  this  message :  "  I  wish  to  make  you  the  gift  of 
a  farm."  The  poor  man  was  pleased  with  the  idea  of  having  a  farm,  but  was  too 
proud  at  once  to  receive  it  as  a  gift.  So  he  thought  of  the  matter  much  and 
anxiously.  His  desire  to  have  a  home  of  his  own  was  daily  growing  stronger;  but 
his  pride  was  great.  At  length,  he  determined  to  visit  him  who  had  made  the 
offer.  But  a  strange  delusion  about  this  time  seized  him ;  for  he  imagined  that 
he  had  a  bag  of  gold.  So  he  came  with  his  bag,  and  said  to  the  rich  man,  "  I 
have  received  your  message,  and  have  come  to  see  you.  I  wish  to  own  the  farm ; 
but  I  wish  to  pay  for  it.  I  will  give  you  a  bag  of  gold  for  it. "  "  Let  us  see  your 
gold,"  said  the  owner  of  the  farm.  "Look  again :  I  do  not  think  it  is  even  silver." 
The  poor  man  looked,  tears  stood  in  his  eyes,  and  his  delusion  seemed  to  be  gone ; 
end  he  said,  "  Alas  I  I  am  undone :  it  is  not  even  copper ;  it  is  but  ashes.  How 
poor  I  am  1  I  wish  to  own  that  farm ;  but  I  have  nothing  to  pay.  Will  yon  give 
me  the  farm?  "    The  rich  man  replied,  "Yes:  that  was  my  first  and  only  offer. 


140  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

Will  yon  accept  it  on  such  terms?"  With  humility,  but  with  eagerness,  the  poor 
man  said,  "Yes :  and  a  thousand  blessings  on  you  for  your  kindness  !  "  (W.  S. 
Plumer,  D.D.)  Grace  must  not  be  frustrated  : — I  was  once  invited  out  to  tea  by  a  poor 
widow,  and  I  took  something  in  my  pocket.  But  I'll  never  do  it  again.  It  was 
two  cakes  ;  and,  when  I  brought  them  out  and  laid  them  on  the  table,  she  picked 
them  up  and  flung  them  out  into  the  street,  and  said,  "  I  asked  you  to  tea  ;  I  didn't 
ask  you  to  provide  tea  for  me."  And  so  with  Christ.  He  asks,  He  provides,  and 
He  wants  nothing  but  ourselves ;  and  if  we  take  aught  else  He'll  reject  it.  We  can 
only  sup  with  P»"i  when  we  come  as  we  are.  Who  will  accept  salvation?  Who'll 
say, 

*•  I  take  the  blessing  from  above, 
And  wonder  at  Thy  boundless  lova  "  ? 

(J.W.Ackrilk 


CHAPTER  ILL 
Ver.  1.  0  foolish  Galatlans,  who  hath  bewitched  yon?— A  foolish  Church: — I.  In 

its  ORIGIN.  II.  In  its  IDEA  OF  THE  SUSTAINING  ENERGY  OP  THE  CHURCH.  III.  In  its 
RETROGRESSION.      IV.    In  its  ESTIMATE  OF  THE  TRUE  POSITION   AND   REQUIREMENTS  OF 

humanity.  V.  In  having  left  its  first  love.  (D.  Allport.)  The  folly  of 
apostasy  : — The  backslider — I.  Barters  truth  for  falsehood.  II.  Ignores  the 
facts  of  consciousness  and  is  victimized  rt  fantastic  fictions.     III.  Abandons 

THE    SURE    MEANS    OF   SECURING  THE   SPIRIT   FOR  THE   CERTAIN   MEANS  OF  LOSING   HlM 

(ver.  2).  IV.  Abandons  A  good  beginning  for  the  sake  of  reaching  a  bad  conclu- 
sion (ver.  3).  V.  Yields  willingly  to  persuasion  what  could  not  be  extorted  bt 
persecution  (ver.  4).  VI.  Rejects  unquestionable  evidence  in  favour  of  baseless 
assumptions  (ver.  5).  Christ  evidently  crucified  : — I.  He  placarded  Christ 
crucified  before  their  eyes.  II.  He  arrested  the  gaze  of  the  spiritual 
loiterer.  III.  He  rtvetted  that  gaze  on  the  proclamation  of  his  sovereign. 
(Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  Oalatians  bewitched : — St.  Paul's  metaphor  is  derived 
from  the  popular  belief  in  the  power  of  the  evil  eye,  and  the  word  he  employs 
originally  referred  to  witchery  by  spells  and  incantations ;  but  as  it  occurs  in  actual 
use  it  denotes  the  blighting  influence  of  the  evil  eye.  This  belief  is  not  confined 
to  the  East  or  to  ancient  times,  but  is  common  in  some  countries  of  Europe  even 
now.  The  word  then  involves  two  ideas — (1)  The  baleful  influence  on  the  recipient. 
(2)  The  envious  spirit  of  the  agent.  (Ibid.)  Christ  evidently  set  forth : — Christ 
crucified  belongs  to  no  one  age  or  place.  In  this  matter  period  and  locality  are  not 
of  much  account.  Faith  bridges  over  intervening  land  and  seas,  and  leaps  across 
centuries  at  a  bound.  In  the  modern  period,  in  the  middle  ages,  in  the  primitive 
times,  faith  sees  and  experiences  over  again  what  apostles  saw  and  experienced. 
Faith  detaches  Christ  crucified  from  geography  and  chronology,  and  throws  Him 
on  Christian  consciousness  where,  independent  of  local  associations  and  mere 
sequences  of  time,  He  hangs,  as  it  were  for  all  time,  between  earth  and  heaven  as 
the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Christ 
crucified,  the  preacher's  theme: — It  hath  been  told  me  in  the  ear  and  whispered  into 
my  very  soul,  that  there  is  pardon  for  the  greatest  guilt  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ ;  that  His  precious  blood  shed  on  Calvary  is  able  to  cleanse  us  from  every 
sin  of  every  kind  ;  and  that  as  many  as  believe  in  Him  are  saved :  their  sins,  which 
are  many,  are  forgiven.  I  read  this  once ;  I  thought  it  through.  I  heard  this 
many  times  ;  I  thought  it  through.  But  on  a  day  I  looked  to  Him  that  did  hang 
upon  the  cross.  It  was  a  dark  day  for  my  spirit,  and  my  burden  was  exceeding 
heavy.  I  was  like  a  man  that  preferred  to  die  rather  than  to  live ;  and  would  have 
laid  violent  hands  upon  myself  to  end  my  misery,  but  that  the  dread  of  somethiug 
after  d°ath  did  haunt  me.  I  found  no  rest  nor  respite  ;  but  I  heard  one  say, "  Look 
unto  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  saved."  I  looked,  and  that  my  sins  were  there  and 
then  forgiven  me  I  do  know,  as  I  know  that  I  am  standing  here  and  speaking  to  you. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Power  of  Christ: — A  burglar,  not  long  ago,  rifled  an  unoccupied 
dwelling  by  the  seaside.  He  ransacked  the  rooms,  and  heaped  his  plunder  in  the 
parlour.    There  were  evidences  that  here  he  sat  down  to  rest.    On  a  bracket  in  th« 


CHA».  m.]  GALATIANS.  141 

comer  stood  a  marble  bnst  of  Guido's  "  Ecce  Homo  " — Christ  crowned  with  thorns. 
The  guilty  man  had  taken  it  in  his  hands  and  examined  it.  It  bore  the  marks  of 
his  fingers,  bat  he  replaced  it  with  its  face  turned  to  the  wall,  as  if  he  would  not 
have  even  the  sightless  eyes  of  the  marble  Saviour  look  upon  his  deeds  of  infamy. 
(Professor  Phelps.)  The  enchantment  of  error : — I.  The  enchantment  by  which 
they  had  bebn  deluded.  They  had  been  bewitched.  Their  eyes  had  been  dazzled 
by  mere  appearances.  II.  The  circumstances  undeb  which  the  enchantment 
had  been  practised.  The  apostle  significantly  points  out  the  fact  that  the 
Galatians  had  been  led  away  by  error,  even  when  before  their  eyes  Christ  crucified 
had  been  clearly  and  distinctly  set  forth.  The  cross  of  Christ  had  been  set  forth 
in  their  midst.  III.  The  practical  results  of  the  enchantment.  It  had  affected 
both  their  conduct  and  character.  1.  They  had  not  obeyed  the  truth.  This  was 
the  truth  as  it  was  in  Jesus.  At  first  they  yielded  to  the  claims  of  the  truth. 
Their  thoughts,  feelings,  actions,  were  governed  by  the  understanding  and  belief 
which  they  had  of  the  truth.  Now  they  had  departed  from  the  truth,  and 
relinquished  their  hold  of  its  doctrines.  2.  In  doing  this  they  had  displayed  the 
greatest  folly.  They  were  foolish  in  surrendering  what  they  did.  They  had  given 
op  a  Divine  appointment,  a  Divine  Redeemer,  and  peace  with  God.  They  had 
turned  away  from  the  fountain  of  living  waters.  Lessons  :  1.  The  preaching  of  the 
gospel  should  consist  in  holding  up  Christ  crucified  to  the  eyes  of  men.  2.  Those 
who  have  looked  to  Christ  should  still  be  on  their  guard  against  false  teachers.  (R. 
Nicholls.)  The  Lord's  Supper  a  picture  of  Christ  crucified : — I.  The  Person  depicted. 
IL  The  particular  aspect  in  which  Jesus  Christ  is  set  forth.  Not  the  Teacher, 
Maker,  but  as  crucified.  III.  The  feelings  with  which  Chribt  crucified  should 
be  contemplated.  There  are  pictures  of  martyrs  and  other  sufferers  which  cannot 
be  looked  upon  without  deep  feeling.  But  no  picture  can  stir  our  hearts  like  this. 
It  is  so  near — "Before  whose  eyes."  It  is  so  real — "  Evidently."  It  is  so  vital  to 
our  interests — "  Among  you."  It  is  so  transforming  and  elevating  in  its  character. 
Only  those  who  are  stupid,  senseless,  beguiled — who  are  "  bewitched  " — can  fail  to 
be  ennobled  and  benefited  by  its  holy  and  benign  influence.  This  picture  should  be 
contemplated  with — 1.  Deep  seriousness.  2.  Unfeigned  faith.  3.  Holy  aspiration. 
4.  Adoring  gratitude.  6.  Catholic  love  and  self-dedication.  (W.  Forsyth,  M.A.) 
The  folly  of  being  captivated  by  form,  &c,  after  the  experience  of  faith : — I.  It  con- 
tradicts our  clearest  convictions.  II.  Denies  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts. 
III.  Deteriorates  our  moral  nature.  IV.  Deprives  us  of  our  reasonable  hope.  V.  Attri- 
butes the  mightiest  operations  of  grace  to  an  insufficient  cause.  (J.  Lyth.)  The 
folly  of  forsaking  the  right  path  : — There  are  many  who  have  lost  their  way ;  some 
through  ignorance,  and  some  who  have  been  deceived  by  false  lights,  and  led  away 
by  untrustworthy  guides.  Many  are  the  stories  which  travellers  relate  of  the  perils 
of  leaving  the  right  path.  A  visitor,  recently  arrived  in  New  Zealand,  ascended  to 
the  top  of  a  mountain  overgrown  with  the  huge  ferns  of  that  country.  He  had 
climbed  up  by  a  winding  road  cut  through  the  bushwood,  and  was  advised  by  the 
rest  of  his  party  to  return  by  the  same  circuitous  route ;  but  he  was  tempted  to 
make  a  short  cut,  and  go  straight  down  the  side  of  the  mountain.  So  he  started, 
and  went  on  rapidly  for  a  while,  but  soon  he  found  that  the  ferns  of  New  Zealand 
were  far  taller  than  those  of  England.  They  rose  over  his  head.  They  shut  out 
light  and  air.  Beneath  their  palm-like  leaves  the  heat  was  suffocating,  and  soon 
he  panted  for  breath.  To  retrace  his  steps  was  impossible.  He  could  not  see  in 
any  direction,  but  tried  to  follow  the  rapid  slope  of  the  ground,  hoping  to  meet 
some  open  space.  But  his  progress  amongst  the  innumerable  tall  stems  of  the 
ferns  was  necessarily  slow.  The  ground  was  so  steep,  it  was  difficult  to  keep  on 
his  feet,  and  in  the  dim  green  twilight  he  felt  himself  getting  more  and  more 
exhausted  ;  and  when,  in  a  fainting  condition,  he  emerged  at  last  on  a  pathway,  he 
had  bitterly  regretted  his  folly  in  wandering  from  the  usual  road.  (Dr.  Hardman.) 
Paul's  lament: — I.  Christ  crucified  had  btcen  declared  to  the  Galatians. 
1.  Christ  as  the  Redeemer.  2.  Christ  as  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life. 
3.  The  whole  system  of  Christian  doctrine,  including  the  duties,  responsibilities, 
and  privileges  of  believers.  4.  Christ  crucified  had  been  received,  believed  in, 
loved  by  them.  II.  They  were  going  back.  1.  Back  to  the  slavery  of  the  cere- 
monial law.  2.  Back  to  the  world,  to  fleshly  lusts,  to  the  devil.  3.  Appeal  to 
backsliders,  reminding  them  of  former  peace  and  blessedness,  present  wretched- 
ness. III.  Who  hath  bewitched  you?  1.  Your  desires.  2.  Your  companions. 
3.  Your  prejudices.  4.  Your  procrastination.  5.  Your  unbelief.  6.  Your  want 
of  principle.     7-  Your  lack  of  childlike  love.     (A.  F.  Barfield.)      Men  bewitched : — ■ 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  nt 

I.  The  subtle  danger.  Epidemic  of  error.  People  calmly  tolerating  what 
shortly  before  they  would  have  indignantly  repudiated.  II.  The  only  presebva- 
tive — Christ  crucified.  1.  Set  forth  plainly.  2.  Bealized  vividly.  3.  Clung  t« 
simply  but  firmly.  III.  The  supreme  folly  of  ant  other  course.  If  you  say, 
"  We  see  what  the  gospel  can  do  in  the  way  of  reclaiming  sinners,  but  we  are  going 
to  try  something  else,"  you  will  be  fools.  I  am  always  ready  to  try  a  new  machine : 
we  will  try  the  electric  light  one  of  these  days,  instead  of  gas,  when  we  are  sure  of 
it ;  but  suppose  it  should  all  go  out  and  leave  us  in  the  dark  1  I  will  wait  till  the 
invention  has  been  tested.  So  it  may  happen  with  the  new  religious  lights  that 
men  bring  up,  which  are  like  dim  rushlights  compared  with  the  blazing  sun  of 
gospel  truth  ;  we  are  not  going  to  try  anything  new  to  the  risk  of  our  souls.  We 
will  keep  to  the  old,  old  gospel,  until  it  is  worn  out.  When  that  happens,  it  will 
be  time  to  think  of  something  fresh.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  evil  eye  and  the 
amulet : — Two  picturesque  metaphors  here.  "  Bewitched  "  refers  to  the  old  super- 
stition  that  still  lingers  in  many  dark  corners  of  England  itself — the  old 
superstition  of  the  "  evil  eye,"  according  to  which  some  persons  had  the  power  of 
hurting  and  even  slaying  with  a  glance.  The  spiritual  life  of  the  Galatian  churches 
seemed  to  Paul  as  if  it  had  been  sucked  out  of  them  by  the  baleful  glitter  of  some 
evil  eye.  "  Openly  set  forth  "  is  the  technical  expression  to  describe  all  public 
notices  and  proclamations ;  it  might  almost  be  rendered,  "  placarded  as  a  procla- 
mation." The  whole  verse  brings  before  us  the  mysterious  melancholy  fact  of  religious 
declension,  the  fascinations  which  produce  it,  and  seem  as  if  they  worked  by  some 
malign  magic,  and  the  one  charm  which  guards  against  their  power.  I.  Religious 
declension.  1.  The  Church  as  a  whole.  The  apostles  were  not  cold  in  their 
graves  when  grievous  wolves  began  to  enter  in  and  spoil  the  flock.  The  law  seems 
to  work  almost  inevitably  that  close  on  the  heels  of  every  period  of  earnestness 
and  quickened  life,  there  shall  follow  a  period  of  reaction  and  torpor.  However 
high  the  arrow  is  shot,  the  impulse  that  sped  it  on  its  way  heavenwards  soon  seems 
to  die,  and  gravitation  begins,  and  down  it  comes  again.  2.  The  individual. 
Moments  of  illumination  are  replaced  by  use  and  wont ;  we  get  into  our  old  ruts 
again,  and  quaff  once  more  the  opium  soporifics  which  have  lulled  us  to  sleep  so 
often  before.    How  strange,  how  sad,  that  this  should  be  so  universally  true. 

II.  The  fascinations  which  produce  religious  declension.  1.  External.  Worldly 
cares,  occupation,  treasures.  Many  men's  Christianity  trickles  out  without  their 
knowing  it.  They  are  too  busy  to  look  after  it,  or  even  to  notice  its  escape,  and  so, 
drop,  drop,  drop,  slow  and  unnoticed  through  the  leak,  it  slips  until  there  is  none 
left.  2.  But  the  real  cause  lies  within.  No  outward  temptation  has  any  power  to 
seduce,  unless  we  choose  to  allow  it.  If  I  had  not  combustibles  in  my  heart,  it 
would  do  me  no  harm  to  put  ever  so  fierce  a  light  to  it.  But  if  I  carry  about  a  keg 
of  gunpowder  within  me,  I  must  not  blame  the  match  if  there  comes  an  explosion. 
It  is  because  our  hearts  do  not  find  in  Jesus  Christ  all  that  they  crave,  that  we  are 
unfaithful  and  turn  away  from  Him  ;  and  it  is  because  our  hearts  are  foolish  and 
bad,  that  they  do  not  find  in  Him  all  that  they  crave.  If  we  were  as  we  should  be, 
there  would  not  be  a  desire  in  us  that  would  not  be  met  in  our  loving  Lord,  in  His 
sweetness  and  grace.  And  if  there  were  not  a  desire  in  us  tbat  was  not  met  in  our 
loving  Lord's  sweetness  and  grace,  then  all  these  temptations  might  play  upon  us 
innocuously;  we  should  walk  through  the  fire  and  not  be  harmed.  III.  Thb 
amulet.  Fix  your  eye,  not  on  the  glittering  eye  that  would  fascinate  you,  but  on 
the  counter  charm — Christ  crucified.  Hearts  and  minds  that  are  occupied  with 
Him  will  not  be  at  leisure  for  lower  and  grosser  tastes.  An  empty  vessel  let  down 
into  the  ocean  will  have  its  sides  bulged  in  far  more  quickly  than  one  that  is  filled. 
Fill  your  hearts,  and  keep  them  full,  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  they  will  be  able  to 
resist  the  pressure  of  temptation.  Try  to  see  placarded  on  every  common  thing 
the  crucified  Christ.  That  sight  will  take  the  brightness  out  of  many  a  false 
glitter,as  a  poor  candle  pales  before  the  electric  light,  or  as  the  sun  puts  even  it  to 
shame.  You  may  be  as  powerless  of  yourself  before  temptations,  as  a  humming- 
bird before  a  snake  ;  but  if  you  look  fixedly  to  Him,  neither  the  glittering  eye  of  the 
serpent  nor  the  forked  tongue  with  its  hiss  will  harm  or  frighten  you.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Spiritual  witchcraft : — To  •'  bewitch  "  here  involves  two  ideas. 
1.  A  pernicious  innuenoe  exercised  on  the  recipient.  2.  The  envious,  jealous 
spirit  of  the  agent.  (Emilius  Bay  ley,  B.D.)  The  fascination  of  the  crots : — A 
rebuke  for  apostasy.  St.  Paul  tells  the  Galatians  they  have  been  fascinated  aa 
with  the  power  which  the  Orientals  ascribe  to  the  "  evil  eye,"  notwithstanding  the 
dear  representation  of  the  wondrous  love  of  Christ's  death  set  forth  in  the  vivid 


SHi*.  m.]  GALATIANS.  143 

and  impressive  preaching  of  the  apostle,  as  in  a  picture      The  fascination  of  the 
cross  should  prevent  the  power  of  all  other  fascinations.     Of  many  it  may  be  asked, 
"Who  did  fascinate  you  ?  "    I.  The  fascinations  which  turn  us  from  obedience 
to  the  truth.      1.  Worldliness.      2.  Intellectualism.     3.  Novelty.    4.  Self-will. 
II.  The  fascination  of  the  cross  should  destroy  the  power  of  all  these.    The 
cross  should  teach  us — 1.  Self-denial  in  opposition  to  worldliness.    2.  Humility  as 
against  intellectual  pride.    3.  Steadfastness  in  place  of  love  of  novelty  in  doctrine. 
4.  Submission  of  our  will  to  God.     The  cross  may  exercise  a  magic  charm  over  us. 
Let  us  always  be  in  the  circle  of  its  influence.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.)    Paraphrase 
of  the  verse: — Christ's  death  in  vain?    O  ye  senseless  Gauls,  what  bewitchment  is 
this  ?     I  placarded  Christ  crucified  before  your  eyes.     You  suffered  them  to  wander 
from  this  gracious  proclamation  of  your  King.     They  rested  on  the  withering  eye 
of  the  sorcerer.     They  yielded  to  the  fascination  and  were  rivetted  there.    And  the 
life  of  your  souls  has  been  drained  out  of  you  by  that  envious  gaze.     (Bishop  Light- 
foot.)        The  Galatians' deflection : — I.  Consider  wherein  their  disobedience  to 
the  tbtjth  consisted.    II.  The  pabticulab  aggravation  with  which  their  deflec- 
tion was  attended.     III.  The  apostle's  bepboof.     Infereuces — 1.  How  great  is  the 
evil  and  danger  of  self-righteousness.     2.  "What  need  have  even  the  most  eminent 
Christians  to  watch  against  apostasy.  3.  What  cause  of  thankfulness  have  they  who 
are  kept  stedfast    in  the  truth.     (G.    Simeon,  31. A.)        Importance  of  preach- 
ing Christ  crucified : — In  any  circumstances  it  is  both  sinful  and  unwise  to  turn 
away  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  ;  it  bespeaks  us  blind  to  our  own  interest,  as 
well  as  regardless  of  tin  glory  of  God.  But  what  rendered  such  conduct  inexcusable 
in  the  Galatians,  was  the  degree  of  evidence  with  which  the  gospel  was  attended, 
and  the  abundance  of  evangelical  preaching  which  they  enjoyed.     I.  Endeavour 
to  ascertain  the  impost  of  the  teems  employed  in  the  text.  Not  merely  the  setting 
forth  of  Christ's  bodily  sufferings.    1.  Christ  is  set  forth  in  the  gospel  as  the  great 
propitiation,  by  which  God's  righteousness  might  appear  in  the  remission  of  sins 
(Bom.  iij.  25).    2.  Christ  is  set  forth  as  the  great  expression  of  Divine  love  to  a 
sinful  and  perishing  world  (John  hi.  16  ;  Bom.  v.  8).    3.  Christ  is  set  forth  in  the 
gospel  as  affording  the  strongest  proof  of    God's  displeasure  against  sin   (Bom. 
viii.  3 ;  Gal.  hi.  13).    4.  Christ  crucified  is  set  forth  as  the  only  foundation  of  a 
sinner's  hope  (John  i.  29,  iii.  14,  15).     5.  The  terms  in  the  text  further  denote,  the 
high  degree  of  evidence  which  attended  the  ministry  of  the  apostles,  especially 
among  the  Galatians.    II.  Consider  the  importance  of  setting  fobth  Chbist  in 
the  pbeachino  of  the  gospel.    It  is  a  principal  part  of  the  Work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  show  them  unto  us ;  it  should,  therefore, 
be  the  great  object  of  the  Christian  ministry  to  co-operate  with  this  design.     1.  To 
exhibit  Christ  crucified  will  tend  to  prove  the  hearts  of  men,  and  make  them 
manifest.     2.  It  is  the  only  way  of  giving  peace  to  souls  in  distress  for  sin.     When 
a  sinner  is  brought  under  the  terrors  of  the  law,  made  to  see  and  realize  his  guilt 
and  danger,  and  to  feel  his  need  of  a  Saviour,  he  is  apt  to  look  inward  for  some 
qualification  to  recommend  him  to  Christ ;  but  to  set  forth  a  crucified  Saviour  is  to 
point  him  to  the  only  refuge,  and  to  show  him  at  once  his  remedy.     All  his  help 
must  come  from  Calvary.     If  we  desire  a  more  spiritual  and  humble  frame  of 
mind,  no  means  are  so  effectual  to  its  production  as  the  contemplation  of  a  crucified 
Eedeemer.    3.  It  is  the  way  to  draw  forth  and  bring  into  exercise  all  the  Christian 
graces.     4.  The  preaching  of  Christ  crucified  is  that  which  leaves  all  unbelievers 
without  excuse.     It  will  be  impossible  for  those  to  plead  ignorance  of  the  way  of 
salvation,  before  whose  eyes  this  truth  has  been  evidently  set  forth.    If  they  perish 
it  will  not  be  for  lack  of  knowledge,  but  for  want  of  a  heart  to  attend  to  the  things 
which  belong  to  their  everlasting  peace.     (Theological  Sketch-Book.)        Beholding 
the  crucifixion  : — Jesus  Christ  was  certainly  not  crucified  in  Gala  tia.  Your  children 
can  tell  you  He  was  crucified  at  Golgotha,  without  the  gate  of  Jerusalem.    Nor  do 
I  suppose  that  many  Galatians  were  present  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time  of  the  cruci- 
fixion.   Yet  the  words  of  the  apostle  are  very  forcible — *'  Before  whose  eyes,"  &o. 
These  men  had   seen  the  Lord,  though  not  in  the  flesh.     They  had  seen  Him 
crucified,  and  they  were  crucified  with  Him.    Although  Christ  was  set  forth  cruci- 
fied only  in  representation,  in  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness,  yet  the  representa- 
tion was  indeed  a  reality  to  them.  They  believed  it ;  they  saw  it ;  they  felt  it.  They 
knew  its  truth  ;  they  felt  its  power ;  they  beheld  its  glory.  If  this  be  all,  some  of  yov 
say,  that  is  meant  by  the  words,  then  there  is  nothing  more  intended  than  may  be 
seen  and  felt  in  these  latter  times  and  in  this  our  land.     Just  so  I  mean  you  to 
understand  me.    There  is  nothing  in  this  vision  of  Jesus  Christ  "  evidently  set 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  m. 

forth  crucified  *  which  may  not  be  seen  in  our  day,  and  seen  by  you  as  the  life  of 
your  own  souls.     This  is  not  an  old  picture  of  the  crucifixion,  supended  in  the 
churches  of  Galatia  for  their  especial  benefit,  but  a  lively  representation,  having 
grace  and  power  unexhausted,  for  all  times  and  places,  wherever  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  is  to  be  found  a  company  of  sinners  looking  for  salvation.    But  our  text 
suggests  another  very  solemn  consideration.    These  Galatians,  "  before  whose  eyea 
Jesus  Christ  had   been  evidently  set  forth,   crucified  among  them,"  were  so  be- 
witched, notwithstanding  the  glorious  sight  which  they  beheld,  that  they  did  not 
obey  the  truth.     This  strange  infatuation  was  not  confined  to  the  old  times. 
I.  Explain  the  vision  or  Jesus  Christ  "  evidently  set  forth,  crucified  among  you," 
An  evident  setting  forth,  glorious  in  its  own  evidence,  and  mighty  in  its  own  power ; 
a  great  sight  which  fills  the  soul  of  men  beholding,  and  works  upon  the  springs  of 
life  and  activity  within  them.     It  is  Christ  brought  so  near  them  that  nothing 
seems  nearer,  everything  else  is  distant.     That  voice  of  prayer — prayer,  loving  and 
mighty  in  death,  sounds  so  near  that  its  tones  touch  their  hearts,  and  they  feel  it 
working  mightily  in  them  for  their  regeneration.    The  pitiful  compassion  of  the 
Saviour  is  so  near  that  He  seems  to  weep  with  them  and  feel  for  them,  as  though 
He  suffered  to  succour  them,  was  tempted  to  encourage  them  to  resist  the  tempter, 
and  fought  in  the  dreadful  conflict  that  they,  in  His  strength  and  spirit,  may  fight 
with  Him,  and  like  Him,  overcome  the  same  enemies.    The  shedding  of  His  blood 
is  so  near  them  that  it  seems  to  sprinkle  their  consciences,  and  allay  the  burning 
sense  of  guilt.    Penitence  sees  Christ  set  forth  crucified  where  impenitence  cannot 
discern  Him.    Looking  through  its  tears,  it  sees  the  great  sight,  and  instantly  feels 
the  healing  virtue  and  soothing  power  of  that  wonderful  death.    But,  then,  ye  must 
be  penitent,  ye  must  feel  your  sinfulness — that  is,  you  must  be  in  the  condition  to 
which  the  death  of  Christ  is  appropriate.    Men  naturally  overlook  things  inappro- 
priate to  them,  or  those  in  which  they  have  no  concern.     Thus  it  is  that  the 
penitent,  broken-hearted  sinner  sees  Christ  when  the  evangelist  sets  Him  forth 
crucified  for  sin.    Have  you  thus  seen  Christ  crucified  for  you  ?    You  saw  no 
miraculous  signs  as  the  Galatians  saw ;  but  there  are  personal  signs  of  the  Spirit 
in  changing  your  heart,  subduing  your  sins,  overcoming  temptations,  conquering 
the  world,   inspiring   bright   hopes,  exciting  fervent  prayers,  forming  Christian 
graces— all  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  not,  indeed,  miracles,  prophesyings,  tongues, 
interpretations,  gifts  of  healing  ;  but  better  fruits  in  the  maturity,  not  the  infancy, 
of  true  religion — love,  joy,    peace,   &c.     II.  Propose  a  solemn  and  affecting. 
inquiry.    Has  anything  bewitched  you  (and  if  anything,  what  ?)  "  that  ye  do  not," 
&c.    To  have  had  the  experience  of  a  present  Christ ;  to  have  seen  Him  crucified 
before  our  eyes ;  to  have  felt  and  handled  that  good  Word  of  life.    And  to  have 
experienced  all  these  things  in  vain  1    Those  who  have  experienced  these  things  in 
vain — who  can  they  be  t    The  man  who  sees  the  truth  and  does  not  obey  it  may 
well  be  regarded  as  bewitched,  under  the  spell  of  a  sorcerer,  choosing  what  he 
knows  is  death  and  refusing  what  he  knows  is  life.    What  is  the  spell  ?    The  pre- 
ceding thoughts  will  suggest  the  nature  of  the  sorcery.    How  did  we  bring  Christ 
before  the  eyes  of  the  sinner  ?    By  convincing  him  of  the  appropriateness  of  the 
Saviour  and  His  great  salvation.     And  this  was  appropriate  to  the  sense  of  guilt, — 
humble  penitence  beholds  Christ,  and  rejoices  in  His  presence.    Now  let  an  oppo- 
site feeling,  a  proud  feeling  of  self-righteousness  and  self-sufficiency,  take  possession 
of  the  heart,  and  the  vision  of  Christ  crucified  vanishes  as  a  dream  when  one 
awaketh.     Feeling  no  need  of  Christ  crucified,  the  soul  looks  no  longer  to  Him.    It 
has  found  other  hope,  and  applied  to  itself  a  false  peace.    It  has  healed  the  wound 
slightly,  and,  so  long  as  the  pain  is  relieved,  it  seeks  no  other  remedy.    Just  so  it 
was  with  the  Galatians :  they  listened  to  Jewish  teachers,  who  told  them  of  the 
ritual  of  Moses,  the  righteousness  of  the  Pharisees,  the  works  of  the  law,  by  the 
doing  of  which  they  might  be  saved.     And  so  they  were  beguiled  from  the  simpli- 
city of  Christ.    But  there  are  other  sorcerers  which  infest  the  Christian  Church, 
ana  beguile  many.     Whatever  renders  us  indisposed  to  receive  Christ,  to  love  Him, 
to  serve  Him,  blinds  us  to  the  glory  of  His  gospel,  and  so  removes  Him  further  from 
us.    There  is  the  infatuation  of  the  world,  with  its  gaieties  and  follies ;  and  sad 
infatuation  it  is  upon  some,  of  whom  better  things  might  have  been  expected. 
There  is  the  infatuation  of  avarice,  of  men  who  make  haste  to  be  rich,  who  will  be 
rich  at  all  costs  and  hazards,  until  they  destroy  their  own  peace  and  make  their 
past  experience  vanity,  and  past  profession  a  lie.     (R.  Halley,  D.D.)        The  tolly 
of  disobeying  the  truth: — I.  What  is  implied  in  Christ  being  evidently  sei 
before  us  crucified.     Christ  is  evidently  set  before  us  crucified — 1.  In  the  evan- 


chat,  m.]  GALATIANS.  x.*d 

gelical  histories  of  the  New  Testament.  The  whole  scenery  of  the  cross  is  there 
exhibited.  2.  In  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  The  cross  is  its  very  essence,  its 
snm  and  substance,  its  all  and  in  all.  We  must  know  nothing  else.  3.  In  the 
Holy  Communion.  There  we  set  forth  the  broken  Body,  the  shed  Blood. 
II.  What  is  implied  in  not  obeying  the  truth.  By  "  the  truth  "  we  may  under- 
stand either  Christ,  who  is  emphatically  the  Truth,  or  the  gospel,  which  is  the 
revelation  of  God's  truth.  We  shall  consider  the  latter  as  the  meaning  of  the  text. 
In  reference  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel — 1.  Some  reject  it  wholly.  Revelation  dis~ 
believed  and  despised.  2.  Many  reject  it  practically.  Do  not  obey  its  exhortations. 
Are  hearers  only.  Do  not  yield  themselves  to  God.  Still  live  in  unbelief  and  sin. 
3.  Others  reject  the  truth  partially.  Believe  general  truths — obey  general  com- 
mands— and  acknowledge  general  principles  ;  but  are  undecided,  compromising, 
and  half-hearted.  III.  The  folly  and  bewitchment  of  such  a  course  of  disobedi- 
ence. It  is  evidently  folly — 1.  As  it  is  the  rejection  of  true  light.  Darkness  ia 
fraught  with  present  evil,  and  tends  to  eternal  destruction.  2.  It  deprives  of  all 
the  solid  comforts  of  religion.  No  peace,  or  joy,  or  hope.  Desponding,  restless, 
miserable.  3.  It  exposes  to  the  severe  disapprobation  of  God.  4.  It  will  end  in 
everlasting  and  irremediable  ruin  (Heb.  iii.  2;  1  Peter  iv.  17,  18).  How  important, 
then,  that  the  question  of  the  apostle  be  duly  considered  ?  Who  hath  bewitched 
you  ?  1.  Have  men,  by  their  creeds  and  false  doctrines  ?  2.  Has  Satan,  by  his 
devices  f  3.  Has  the  world,  by  its  allurements  ?  Application :  1.  We  urge  the 
sinner  to  consider  his  ways — receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it — and  believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  shall  be  saved.  2.  We  expostulate  with  backsliders 
— and  Bay,  Why  will  ye  die?  Why  forsake  Christ?  Ob,  return.  3.  We  exhort  the 
believer  to  buy  the  truth — to  grow  in  truth — to  witness  to  the  truth — to  rejoice 
in  the  truth — and  stedfastly  to  hold  fast  the  truth  to  the  end.     (J.  Burns,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of 
faith? — The  hearing  of  faith: — I.  What  faith?  1.  A  historical  (James  ii.  19). 
2.  Dogmatical  (Acts  viii.  13,  23 ;  Luke  iv.  41).  3.  A  temporary  (Luke  viii.  13 ; 
John  v.  35).  4.  A  faith  of  miracles  (Luke  xvii.  6;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2).  5.  A  saving 
faith  (Rom.  x.  10 ;  Acts  xvi.  31 ;  1  Peter  ii.  6).  II.  What  is  meant  by  hearing  ? 
Hearing  the  Word  of  God — 1.  Read.  2.  Expounded.  3.  Preached.  III.  How  i» 
faith  wrought  by  the  Word?  Not  as  a  principal,  but  as  an  instrumental  cause. 
Thus — 1.  The  minister  commissioned  by  God  speaks  it  to  the  ears  sometimes  of 
God's  mercy  to  man,  sometimes  of  man's  duty  to  God  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  2.  The  ears 
of  the  hearer  take  in  what  is  spoken,  and  convey  it  to  the  understanding.  But 
that  cannot  receive  it  (1  Cor.  ii.  14) :  therefore — 3.  The  Spirit  goes  along  with  the 
Word,  and  enables  the  understanding  to  receive  it.  4.  And  also  inclines  the  will  to 
embrace  it  (Phil.  ii.  13  ;  Rom.  vii.  15;  Heb.  iv.  12).  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Direc- 
tions for  hearing : — I.  Before  hearing — 1.  Consider  what  thou  art  going  about 
2.  Set  all  worldly  thoughts  aside  (Neh.  xiii.  19,  20)  and  sins  (James  i.  21).  3.  If 
thou  would  have  God  pour  forth  His  blessing,  do  thou  pour  forth  thy  spirit  to  Him 
in  prayer  (Psa.  x.  17 ;  lxv.  2).  (1)  For  the  minister  (Rom.  xv.  30).  (2)  For  your- 
selves, that  God  would  put  in  with  the  Word  (Isa.  viii.  11).  4.  Come  with  an 
appetite.  5.  With  large  expectations.  6.  With  strong  resolutions  to  practise. 
II.  During  hearing.  Hear— 1.  Reverently.  2.  Diligently,  with  hearts  as  well  as 
ears.  3.  Meekly  (James  i.  21).  4.  With  faith  (Heb.  iv.  2).  5.  Apply  it  to  thyself 
(Job  v.  27).  6.  Renew  your  resolutions,  lifting  up  your  heart  in  prayer.  III.  After 
hearing.  1.  Meditate  (1  Tim.  iv.  15).  2.  Confer  with  others.  3.  Square  thy- 
self  according  to  it,  that  thy  life  may  be  the  commentary  (James  i.  22 ;  Matt. 
vii.  24,  25).  (Ibid.)  A  lesson  for  the  Church  .-—The  helmsman  may  work  the 
wheel  with  the  greatest  dexterity  and  earnestness,  but  unless  he  hears  and  obeys 
the  captain's  signal,  his  work  will  be  worthless,  and  the  ship  must  go  out  of  its 
course.  The  builder  may  accumulate  the  best  materials,  and  may  put  them  together 
with  industry  and  skill ;  but  what  if  he  be  so  busy  as  to  have  no  time  to  listen  to 
the  architect's  instructions?  His  labour  will  be  lost,  and  lost  in  proportion  to  his 
very  carefulness :  and  the  house  he  builds  will  be  thrown  upon  his  hands  as  not 
according  to  the  plan,  and  may  possibly  be  his  ruin.  A  child  to  whom  a  father  has 
promised  a  gift  may  earn  what  he  deems  an  equivalent,  and  may  offer  it  as  a  filial 
recompense ;  but  that  is  not  the  way  to  secure  it,  and  will  probably  lead  to  dis- 
appointment. And  so  men  may  work  in  what  moral  manner  they  like,  and  in 
what  moral  direction  they  like,  but  they  will  only  labour  in  vain  and  go  astray  unless 
they  hear  God's  voice,  and  obey  His  directions  respecting  the  Divine  gift  of  tba 

30 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m. 

Spirit.  "  If  ye  being  evil  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how 
much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  for 
Him  ?  "  The  Holy  Spirit  comes  through  the  believing  hearing  of  that  message.  Worka 
will  only  obstruct,  but  faith  will  open  an  entrance  for  the  Spirit.  And  we  have  learned 
this  as  individuals,  but  we  have  yet  to  learn  it  as  Churcbes.  How  many  revivals 
are  manufactured,  yet  how  few  Churches  are  revived,  but  on  the  contrary  made  more 
impotent  by  the  manufacture.  The  patching  of  organizations,  the  utilization  of 
special  agencies  may  be  hindrances  rather  than  helps.  The  Spirit  alone  quickeneth 
a  dead  Church,  and  He  is  to  be  had  not  by  special  services  as  such,  but  by  the  hear- 
ing of  faith.  "  Not  by  might  nor  by  power,"  &c.  "  I  will  pour  My  blessing  on  thy  seed, 
and  My  spirit  on  thy  offspring."  Hear  this,  ye  Churches,  and  your  souls  shall  liva 
The  mode  of  salvation : — A  great  delusion  is  upon  the  heart  of  man  as  to  his 
salvation.  His  ways  are  perverse.  He  does  not  love  the  law  of  God ;  nay,  his 
mind  is  opposed  to  it,  and  yet  he  Bets  up  to  be  its  advocate.  When  he  understands 
the  spirituality  and  severity  of  the  law,  he  reckons  it  to  be  a  sore  burden ;  and  yet, 
when  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  set  forth  as  the  gift  of  sovereign  grace,  and  he  is 
bidden  to  accept  it  by  an  act  of  faith,  he  professes  great  concern  about  the  law,  lest  it 
should  be  made  void  by  the  freeness  of  grace.  He  takes  the  broken  pieces  of  the 
two  tables  of  the  law,  and  hurls  them  at  the  cross.  He  will  resort  to  any  pretence  to 
oppose  the  way  of  salvation  appointed  by  God.  The  reason  is,  that  man  is  not 
only  poor,  but  proud ;  not  only  guilty,  but  conceited.  He  will  not  humble  himself  to 
be  saved  upon  terms  of  Divine  charity.  Rather  than  believe  God,  he  will  accept 
the  proud  falsehoods  of  his  own  heart,  which  delude  him  into  the  flattering  hope 
that  he  may  merit  eternal  life.  Against  this  error  the  text  opposes  itself.  St.  Paul 
points  out  to  the  Galatians  that  they  were  bound  to  admit,  each  one  for  himself, 
that  they  received  the  Holy  Spirit  by  faith,  and  by  no  other  means.  I.  An  argument 
of  experience  FOE  the  people  of  God.  1.  See  the  testimony  to  this  in  the  early 
history  of  the  Church  (Acts  i.-viii).  2.  In  your  own  experience,  (a)  Enlighten- 
ment. (6)  Peace,  (c)  Sanctification.  (d)  Communion  with  God.  (e)  Assurance. 
These  are  all  received  by  "  the  hearing  of  faith."  They  cannot  be  obtained  in  any 
other  way  but  that.  H.  An  argument  derived  from  observation  fob  the  use  of 
seekebs.  Honesty,  generosity,  righteousness — these  have  not  justified,  cannot 
justify.  Why  not  abandon  this  vain  method,  and  try  the  Lord's  appointed  way — 
"  the  hearing  of  faith  "  ?  1.  Personal  hearing.  Each  for  himself.  2.  Hearing  of 
the  gospel.  The  faith  that  saves  does  not  come  by  just  hearing  whatever  comes 
first;  it  only  comes  by  hearing  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  to  the  appointed  Saviour. 
3.  Attentive  hearing.  4.  The  hearing  of  faith.  Accepting  the  gospel  as  God's 
message,  and  depending  upon  it  fully  and  wholly.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
venture  of  faith  : — When  a  man  is  in  trouble  of  spirit,  faith  is  a  venture  to  him  ;  it 
appears  to  him  to  be  the  greatest  venture  possible.  He  that  saith,  "  This  gospel  which 
I  have  heard  is  true,  and  I  will  venture  my  soul  upon  the  truth  of  it,"  is  the  man 
who  has  given  to  the  gospel  "  the  hearing  of  faith."  Let  me  try  to  set  forth  faith 
yet  again :  This  bridge  is  strong  enough  to  carry  me  over  the  stream,  therefore 
I  am  going  over  the  stream  upon  it.  That  is  real  faith.  Faith  is  a  most  prac- 
tical principle  in  daily  life.  The  most  of  trade  hangs  on  trust.  When  a  man 
sows  wheat  he  has  to  scatter  it  into  the  furrows  and  lose  it,  and  he  does  so 
because  he  has  faith  that  God  will  send  a  harvest.  When  the  sailor  loses  sight  of 
the  shore,  he  has  to  sail  by  faith ;  believing  in  his  compass,  he  feels  safe,  though 
he  may  not  see  land  for  weeks.  Faith  is  the  hand  which  receives  what  God  presents 
to  us,  and  hence  it  is  a  simple,  childlike  thing.  When  a  child  has  an  apple 
offered  him,  he  may  know  nothing  about  the  orchard  in  which  the  apple  grew,  and 
nothing  of  the  mechanism  of  his  hand  and  arm,  but  it  is  quite  enough  for  him 
to  take  the  apple.  Faith  does  the  most  effectual  thing  when  it  takes  what  God 
gives.  All  the  rest  may  or  may  not  be.  Faith  is  the  main  thing.  When  God 
holds  out  to  me  salvation  by  Christ  Jesus,  I  need  not  ask  anything  further  about  it, 
but  just  take  it  to  myself  and  be  at  once  saved,  for  by  faith  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
received.  (Ibid.)  Faith  and  works : — I  heard  a  grumbler  say,  "  We  do  not  want 
this  doctrine.  What  we  want  is  more  morality  and  honesty."  You  remind  me 
of  a  poor  little  child.  His  father  planted  bulbs  to  come  up  in  the  spring,  and  make 
the  garden  gay  with  golden  flowers.  But  the  boy  said,  "  We  don't  want  bulbs;  we 
want  crocus  cups  and  daffodils."  The  child  forgot  that  flowers  never  grow  with- 
out roots.  Flowers  stuck  into  the  ground  without  roots  are  babes,  follies,  and  good 
works  without  faith  are  childish  vanities.  We  preach  faith  in  order  that  good 
works  may  follow,  and  they  do  follow.    {Ibid.) 


OBAP.  m.]  GALATIANS.  141 


Ver.  3.  Having  begun  In  the  Spirit. — I.  The  commencement  of  salvation  is  thb 
Holy  Spirit's  work.  Salvation  is  not  began  by — 1.  The  means  of  grace  alone. 
2.  The  minister  or  priest.  3.  Self-effort.  II.  What  the  Holt  Spirit  does  at 
the  beginning.  He — 1.  Regenerates  the  sonl.  2.  Teaches  the  soul  that  it  is  in- 
capable of  saving  itself.  3.  Gives  the  grace  of  faith,  and  applies  the  cleansing 
blood  of  Christ.  4.  Brings  all  precious  things  to  the  believer.  Apply — 1.  To  the 
sceptic  2.  To  the  self-righteous.  3.  To  the  morally  estimable.  (Ibid.)  A 
good  beginning  and  a  sad  ending : — I.  A  good  beginning.  1.  In  the  faith  given 
by  the  Spirit.  2.  In  the  enjoyment  of  the  Spirit  through  faith.  3.  In  the  ex- 
perience of  spiritual  privileges.  4.  In  the  use  of  spiritual  powers.  5.  In  the  dis- 
charge of  spiritual  duties.  6.  In  the  exercise  of  spiritual  hopes  of  perfection  and 
heaven.  II.  A  sad  ending.  Flesh  may  mean  either  (1)  the  beggarly  elements  of 
chapter  iv.  9,  or  (2)  the  works  of  the  flesh,  chapter  v.  19.  1.  The  works  of  the 
law  will  not  secure  perfect  holiness :  as  shown  in  the  case  of  Paul  and  Luther.  2. 
The  works  of  the  flesh  will  not  give  perfect  happiness,  as  shown  in  the  case  of 
Augustine  and  John  Newton.  3.  Because  both  alike  throw  away  the  means  by 
which  both  holiness  and  happiness  are  promoted  here  and  consummated  in  heaven. 
Learn :  1.  To  begin  as  you  intend  to  continue.  2.  To  continue  as  you  have  begun. 
Though  the  man  of  mean  estate,  whose  own  want  instructs  his  heart  to  commiserate 
others,  say  to  himself,  "  If  I  had  more  good,  I  would  do  more  good  " ;  yet  ex- 
perience juatifieth  the  point  that  many  have  changed  their  minds  with  their  means, 
and  the  state  of  their  purse  hath  forespoken  that  of  their  conscience.  So  they 
have  begun  in  "  the  charity  of  the  spirit,"  and  ended  in  the  "  cares  of  the 
flesh."       (2*.   Adams.)  Changeable   Christians : — There    are    impetuous  good 

people ;  fickle  good  people ;  unwise  good  people ;  let  us  say  it  out,  foolish  good 
people,  who  lack  wisdom,  and  do  not  know  they  lack  it.  A  certain  sober  judgment 
ought  to  mark  Christians.  They  should  be  like  the  needle  in  the  mariner's  com- 
pass, not  like  the  pendulum  which,  within  its  limited  range,  is  always  going  from 
one  extreme  to  another.  They  should  not  startle  people  with  paradoxes,  nor  banish 
all  confidence  in  them  by  the  wildness  with  which  they  unfold  their  ideas  to  minds 
quite  unprepared.  (Dr.  John  Hall.)  Love  of  cliange : — It  will  be  found  that 
they  are  the  weakest-minded  and  the  hardest-hearted  men  that  most  love  variety 
and  change;  for  the  weakest-minded  are  those  who  both  wonder  most  at  things 
new,  and  digest  worst  things  old ;  in  so  far  that  everything  they  have  lies  rusty,  and 
loses  lustre  from  want  of  use.  Neither  do  they  make  any  stir  among  their 
possessions,  nor  look  over  them  to  see  what  may  be  made  of  them,  nor  keep  any 
great  store,  nor  are  householders  with  storehouses  of  things  new  and  old ;  but  they 
catch  at  the  new-fashioned  garments,  and  let  the  moth  and  thief  look  after  the  rest ; 
and  the  hardest-hearted  men  are  those  that  least  feel  the  endearing  and  binding 
power  of  custom,  and  hold  on  by  no  cords  of  affection  to  any  shore,  but  drive  with 
the  waves  that  cast  up  mire  and  dirt.  (John  Rmkin.)  The  work  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  Church: — I.  The  Church  is  the  product  of  the  Holt  Ghost.  This  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  whole  of  this  text ;  it  is  the  cord  by  which  all  its  parts  are  bound 
together.  Throwing  the  minds  of  the  Galatians  back  upon  the  beginning  of  their 
religious  life,  whether  as  Churches,  or  as  individual  believers,  the  apostle  reminds 
them  that  then  they  received  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  began  in  the  Spirit.  This 
truth  admits  of  a  twofold  application.  First,  in  relation  to  the  Church  as  a  whole ; 
secondly,  in  relation  to  those  who  compose  its  members.  1.  The  Church  of  Christ 
had  no  existence  before  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given.  In  the  Old  Testament,  and  also 
in  the  New,  an  assembly  or  congregation  of  men  received  that  name  (Deut.  xviii.  16 ; 
Nehem.  v.  13 ;  Psa.  xxii.  22 ;  Acts  vii.  38,  and  xix.  32-40).  But  the  Church  of 
Christ,  which  is  His  body,  has  been  originated  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  ii.  38-41; 
1  Peter  i.  2)._  Before  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  during  His  ministry  on  the  earth, 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  in  the  world.  2.  Believers  enter  upon  the  new  life  through  the 
Holy  Spirit.  They  are  born  of  the  Spirit.  II.  All  the  attainments  of  the 
Church  are  reached  through  the  help  of  the  Spirit.  1.  That  the  Spirit 
dwells  in  His  people  that  they  may  make  progress  in  the  Divine  life.  Truth  relating 
to  salvation  is  revealed  by  Him  (1  Cor.  xi.  10).  Guidance  is  given  through  Him 
(viii.  14).  Liberty  (2  Cor.  hi.  18).  His  presence  is  the  earnest  of  the  future  in- 
heritance (Eph.  i.  13,  14).  2.  Through  the  Holy  Ghost  the  conditions  and  cir- 
cumstances of  this  present  life  are  made  subservient  to  spiritual  ends.  III.  The 
efficiency  and  power  of  the  Church  depend  upon  the  Spiriti  1.  It  is  possible 
for  Churches,  after  having  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  lose  His  gracious  presence 
and  power.     2.  The  most  fatal  means  to  this  end  is  renouncing  faith  in  Christ  as 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  m. 

the  all-sufficient  Saviour.  8.  Turning  from  Christ,  and  from  the  Spirit's  work,  ia 
conduct  most  foolish  in  its  commencement,  ami  most  disastrous  in  its  final  results. 
4.  Avoiding  the  errors  described  in  the  text,  all  Christians  should  seek  to  profit  by 
instruction  and  correction,  and  through  the  Spirit  to  become  thoroughly  furnished 
unto  all  good  works.    (R.  Nicholls.) 

Ver.  4.  Have  ye  suffered  bo  many  things  In  vain  ?  The  vanity  of  pott  Chrittian 
life  in  the  cane  of  apostasy : — Unless  you  continue  faithful  to  the  end,  all  your 
former  Christian  life  must  remain  without  the  recompense  God  longs  to  bestow. 
Your  struggles,  your  self-sacrifice,  will  all  be  unrewarded.  The  apostasy  of  the 
closing  days  of  your  life  would  render  worthless  the  fidelity  of  all  your  previous 
years.  You  have  done  so  well,  that  if  now  you  do  not  fail  you  will  have  an  abundant 
entrance  into  glory.  It  is  not  God's  will  that  any  who  have  suffered  with  Christ 
should  miss  the  honour  and  blessedness  of  reigning  with  Him.  (R.  W.  Dale,LL,D.) 
The  power  of  hopefulness : — It  is  worthy  of  consideration  on  the  part  of  all  who  are 
entrusted  with  the  moral  and  religious  care  of  others,  that  throughout  Holy  Scrip- 
ture there  is  the  union  of  kindly  loving  hopefulness  with  strong  and  even  stern 
rebuke.  If  in  despair  of  men  who  have  gone  grievously  wrong,  they  will  soon 
despair  of  themselves.  Those  who  have  been  most  successful  in  prevailing  others 
to  trust  in  Christ  have  commonly  had  an  ardent  and  unconquerable  persuasion 
that  they  should  succeed ;  the  eager  faith  of  their  own  hearts  has  passed  into  the 
hearts  of  those  with  whom  they  pleaded.  (Ibid.)  Use  of  adversity : — As  the 
skilful  pearl-seller  and  cunning  lapidary  doth  willingly  suffer  the  Indian  diamond 
or  adamant  to  be  heavily  smitten,  because  he  knoweth  well  the  hammer  and  anvil 
will  sooner  be  bruised  than  the  diamond  or  adamant  be  broken ;  so  our  most  wise 
God  suffereth  men  of  excellent  virtues,  of  unquenchable  love  and  charity,  and  in- 
vincible constancy,  to  fall  into  divers  temptations,  great  afflictions,  and  manifold 
miseries,  because  He  will  have  their  moral  grace  to  break  out  and  shine  before  men, 
that  they,  Reeing  the  constancy  of  His  saints,  may  glorify  God  which  is  in  heaven. 
(Caicdray.)  Backsliders  run  in  vain: — The  philosopher,  being  asked  in  his  old 
age  why  he  did  not  give  over  his  practice,  and  take  his  ease,  answered,  "  When  a 
man  is  to  run  a  race  of  forty  furlongs,  would  you  have  him  sit  down  at  the  nine-and- 
thirtieth,  and  so  lose  the  prize  ?  We  do  not  keep  a  good  fire  all  day,  and  let  it  go 
out  in  the  evening,  when  it  is  coldest ;  but  then  rather  lay  on  more  fuel,  that  we 
may  go  warm  to  bed."  He  that  slakes  the  heat  of  his  zeal  in  old  age  will  go  cold 
to  bed,  and  in  a  worse  case  to  his  grave.  Though  the  beginning  be  more  than  half, 
yet  the  end  is  more  than  all.     (Spencer.) 

Yer.  5.  He  therefore  that  minlstereth  to  you  the  Spirit,  and  worketh  miracles. — 

Moral  inspiration : — I.  Its  nathee.  The  supernatural  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
man.  1.  In  ordinary  Christians  :  regeneration  ;  Christian  energy :  moral  influence. 
2.  In  extraordinary  ministers,  as  apostles  and  prophets :  miracles ;  tongues ; 
prophecy.  The  latter  form  intermittent ;  the  former  permanent.  II.  Its  origin. 
Divine,  and  therefore  to  be  distinguished  from — 1.  The  intellectual  inspiration  of 
genius.  2.  The  emotional  inspiiation  of  rhapsody.  3.  The  evil  inspiration  of 
imposture.  On  the  lowpst  possible  hypothesis  the  inspiration  of  Shakespeare, 
Mohammed,  and  Simon  Magus  must  differ  not  only  in  degree  but  in  kind  from 
that  of  St.  Paul.  III.  Its  measure.  1.  Sufficient  for  (1)  the  age  in  which  it 
works  ;  (2)  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  given.  2.  According  to  the  capacity  of  the 
recipient.  IV.  The  means  of  its  enjoyment.  1.  Not  the  works  of  the  law.  The 
folly  of  this  supposition  may  be  seen  by  the  endeavour  to  work  for  the  inspiration 
of  the  poet ;  but  poets  are  born,  not  made.  So  are  apostles  and  Christians.  2.  By 
the  hearing  of  faith.  We  do  not  call  the  genius  a  deserving  man,  but  a  "  gifted  " 
man ;  so  is  the  apostle  in  working  miracles,  and  the  Christian  in  exerting  his 
influence  for  good.  Inspiration,  literary  and  moral : — The  great,  the  sublime,  is 
almost  always  something  involuntary  and  unforeseen.  The  higher  we  rise  in 
literaiy  creation,  the  more  it  seems  as  though  we  get  effaced,  and  no  longer  dispose 
of  ourselves.  The  mediocre  in  our  achievements  is  thoroughly  our  own.  We  feel 
this  by  our  fatigue,  our  exhaustion.  The  great  is  given  us.  We  write  under 
dictation  ;  we  do  not  know  the  source,  we  cannot  predict  the  arrival.  It  is  ours, 
and  yet  not  ours.  What  we  are,  then,  we  are  by  grace  ;  and  thus  all  poets  have 
spoken  of  their  inspiration,  of  a  God  in  us,  of  a  mens  divinior.  Remarkable  testi- 
mony, and  too  little  reflected  upon  1  Oh,  why  will  man,  who  in  his  artistic  life 
•0  readily  believes  in  grace  and  in  the  Spirit,  in   his  moral  life  believe  only  in 


ami*,  in.]  GALATIANS.  149 

himself?  Why  not  understand  this  confession  of  poets,  and  recognize  in  general 
that  man  is  not  the  source  but  the  channel  and  the  organ  of  all  that  rises  above 
the  habitual  level  of  his  life ;  that  he  is  then  only  a  medium  through  which  tbe 
Divine    alternately    appears    and    disappears.      (Vinet.)  Inspiration    to    be 

respected : — Let  us  respect  in  each  man,  whether  he  be  poet  or  no,  the  moment 
— so  well  named  that  of  inspiration — when  he  says  more  than  he  knows,  does 
more  than  he  can,  and  becomes  more  than  he  is ;  that  mysterious  moment  when 
he  ceases  to  comprehend  himself,  when  he  honours  himself  not  in  what  he  him- 
self is,  but  in  the  word  he  has  just  pronounced,  the  act  he  has  just  accom- 
Elished ;  when,  perhaps,  he  trembles  at  the  unforeseen  height  on  which  that  effort 
as  placed  him,  because  well  aware  that  his  own  strength  cannot  sustain  him 
there.  It  is  the  Titan  raising  himself  beneath  the  mountain  that  crushes  him, 
or  some  imprisoned  god  that  sighs  within  our  breast.     (Ibid.)  The  use  of 

miracles : — "  Miracles,"  says  Fuller,  "  are  the  swaddling-clothes  of  the  infant 
churches";  and,  we  may  add,  not  the  garments  of  the  full-grown.  They  were 
as  the  proclamation  that  the  king  was  mounting  his  throne;  who,  however,  is 
not  proclaimed  every  day,  but  only  at  his  accession.  When  he  sits  acknow- 
ledged on  his  throne,  the  proclamation  ceases.  They  were  as  the  bright  clouds 
which  gather  round  and  announce  the  sun  at  his  first  appearing:  his  midday 
Bplendcm ,  though  as  full,  and  fuller  indeed,  of  light  and  heat,  knows  not  those 
bright  heralds  and  harbingers  of  his  rising.  Or  they  may  be  likened  to  the 
framework  on  which  the  arch  is  rounded,  which  framework  is  taken  down  as 
soon  aa  that  is  completed.  (R.  C.  Trench.)  Miracles  of  to-day  : — Miracles  are  like 
candles  lit  np  nntil  the  sun  rises,  and  then  blown  out.  Therefore,  I  am  amused 
when  I  hear  sects  and  Churches  talk  about  having  evidence  of  Divine  authority, 
because  they  have  miracles.  Miracles  in  our  time  are  like  candles  in  the  street 
at  midday.  We  do  not  want  miraoles.  They  are  to  teach  men  how  to  find  out 
truths  themselves ;  and,  after  they  have  learned  this,  they  no  more  need  them 
than  a  well  man  needs  a  staff,  or  than  a  grown-up  child  needs  a  walking-stool. 
They  are  the  educating  expedients  of  the  early  periods  of  the  world.  As  such,  they 
are  divinely  wise.  After  they  have  served  their  purpose  as  such,  it  is  humanly  foolish 
for  persons  to  pretend  to  have  them.  There  is  no  teaching  in  Scripture  of  a  stated 
providence  of  miracles.  They  are  not  daily  helps.  They  do  not  even  belong  to  the 
mere  economic  relations  of  men.  In  secular  things,  God  helps  the  men  that  help 
themselves.     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  6.  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God. — The  faith  of  Abraham : — I.  A  simple, 
child-like  dependence  on  the  naeed  wobd  of  God.  II.  An  acceptance  of  and 
tbust  in  God's  promised  Savioub.  III.  A  renouncing  op  his  own  works  as 
meritorious.  IV.  A  faith  that  wrought  by  love,  making  him  the  friend  of  God. 
Y.  One  that  overcame  the  world,  leading  him  to  seek  a  better  country.     VI.  One 

that  EVINCED   ITS    REALITY   BY  A   SELF-DENYING    OBEDIENCE.       (T.  RobillSOU.)  I.    Its 

object.  1.  The  promise  of  a  seed,  and  consequently  of  a  Saviour.  2.  The  faith  of 
the  gospel  not  simply  Divine  promise  of  salvation,  but  the  specific  offer  of  a 
Saviour.  II.  Its  ground.  1.  Neither  reason  nor  sense.  2.  But  the  solemnly 
given,  clearly  stated,  perfectly  sufficient,  wholly  unsupported  Word  of  God.  3.  So 
the  Christian  rests  on  the  offer  of  Christ  (John  iii.  36).  III.  Its  acting.  1.  In- 
stantaneous. 2.  Full-hearted  (Bom.  iv.  21).  IV.  Its  effect.  It  was  counted  to 
him  for  righteousness.  1.  The  nature  of  justification.  Possessing  no  righteous- 
ness of  his  own,  Abraham  had  the  righteousness  of  another  (not  yet  revealed)  set  to 
his  account.  2.  The  time.  The  instant  a  soul  believes,  whether  he  is  cognisant  of 
it  or  not.  (T.  Whitelaw,  D.D.)  I.  It  was  faith  in  the  pebsonal  revealed, 
covenant  Jehovah ;  not  merely  in  a  word  or  sign,  or  in  a  prospeot.  II.  The  bond  of 
covenant.  Faith  on  the  one  side,  God  dealing  with  a  sinful  creature  as  righteous 
on  the  other.  The  elements  of  that  bond  are — 1.  Gracious  acceptance.  2.  Gracious 
revelation  3.  Gracious  reward  of  obedience.  (W.  Roberts,  M.A.)  In  Abraham 
the  attitude  of  trustfulness  was  most  marked.  By  faith  he  left  home  and  kindred, 
and  settled  in  a  strange  land ;  by  faith  he  acted  upon  God's  promise  of  a  race  and 
an  inheritance,  although  it  seemed  at  variance  with  all  human  experience ;  by  faith 
he  offered  up  his  only  son,  in  whom  alone  that  promise  could  be  fulfilled  (Acts  vii. 
2-5;  Bom.  iv.  16-22;  Heb.  xi.  8-12, 17-19).  Thus  this  one  word  "faith"  sums 
np  the  lesson  of  his  whole  life.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Abraham  justified  by  faith: — 
Powerful  as  is  the  effect  of  these  words  when  we  read  them  in  their  first 
untarnished  freshness,  they  gain  immensely  in  their  original  language,  to  which 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

neither  Greek  nor  German,  much  less  Latin  or  English,  can  furnish  any  full  equiva- 
lent. "  He  supported  himself,  he  built  himself  up,  he  reposed  as  a  child  in  his 
mother's  arms  "  (such  seems  to  be  the  force  of  the  Hebrew)  in  the  strength  of 
God,  in  God  whom  he  did  not  see,  more  than  in  the  giant  empires  of  earth,  and 
the  bright  lights  of  heaven,  or  the  charms  of  tribe  and  kindred,  which  were  always 
before  him.  It  was  counted  to  him  for  "  righteousness."  It  "was  counted  to  him," 
and  his  history  seals  and  ratines  the  result.  His  faith  transpires  not  in  any  out- 
ward profession,  but  precisely  in  that  which  far  more  nearly  concerns  him  and 
every  one  of  us,  in  his  prayers,  his  actions,  in  the  righteousness,  uprightness,  moral 
elevation  of  soul  and  spirit  which  sent  him  on  his  way  straightforward,  without  turning 
to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  (Dean  Stanley.)  He  was  justified  by  faith  when 
his  faith  was  mighty  in  effect,  when  he  trusted  in  God,  when  he  believed  the 
promises,  when  he  expected  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  when  he  was  strong  in  faith, 
when  he  gave  glory  to  God,  when,  against  hope,  he  believed  in  hope  ;  and  when  all 
this  passed  into  an  act  of  a  most  glorious  obedience,  even  denying  his  greatest 
desires,  contradicting  his  most  passionate  affections,  offering  to  God  the  best  thing 
he  had,  and  exposing  to  death  his  beloved  Isaac  at  the  command  of  God.  "  By  this 
faith  he  was  justified,"  saith  St.  Paul ;  "  by  these  works,"  saith  St.  James,  i.e.,  by 
this  faith  working  this  obedience.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  Marks  of  a  justifying 
faith: — He  that  hath  true  justifying  faith  believes  the  power  of  God  to  be  above 
the  power  of  nature ;  the  goodness  of  God  above  the  merit  and  disposition  of  our 
persons ;  the  bounty  of  God  above  the  excellency  of  our  works ;  the  truth  of  God 
above  the  contradiction  of  our  weak  arguings  and  fears ;  the  love  of  God  above  our 
cold  experience  and  ineffectual  reason ;  and  the  necessity  of  doing  good  works  above 
the  faint  excuses  and  ignorant  pretences  of  disputing  sinners ;  but  want  of  faith  makes 
ns  generally  wicked  as  we  are,  so  often  running  to  despair,  so  often  baffled  in  our 
resolutions  of  a  good  life  ;  but  he  whose  faith  makes  him  more  than  conqueror  over 
these  difficulties,  to  him  shall  Isaac  be  born  even  in  nil  old  age,  the  life  of  God 
shall  be  perfectly  wrought  in  him ;  and  by  this  faith,  bo  operative,  so  strong,  so 
lasting,  so  obedient,  he  shall  be  justified,  and  he  shall  be  saved.  (Ibid.)  Faith 
accounted  for  righteousness  : — We  call  a  child's  imitation  of  copper-plate  writing  a 
copy,  though  every  letter  betrays  a  fault,  and  the  whole  effort,  strictly  speaking, 
more  a  caricature  than  a  copy,  but  there  is  sincere  intention  in  it,  and  therefore  we 
account  it  a  copy.  In  imputing  faith  for  righteousness  God  acts  by  way  of  encourage- 
ment, and  uses  the  most  certain  means  by  bringing  us  to  righteousness  at  last. 
(E.  W.  Shalders,  M.A.)  Trusting  the  promises  : — Last  winter  a  man  crossed  the 
Mississippi  on  the  ice,  and,  fearing  it  was  too  thin,  began  to  crawl  on  his  hands  and 
knees  in  great  terror ;  but  when  he  gained  the  opposite  shore,  all  worn  out,  another 
man  drove  past  him  gaily,  sitting  upon  a  sled  loaded  with  pig-iron.  That  is  just 
the  way  most  Christians  go  up  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  trembling  at  every  step  lest 
the  promises  shall  break  under  their  feet,  when  really  they  are  secure  enough  for 
us  to  hold  our  heads  and  sing  with  confidence  as  we  march  to  the  better  land. 
Abraham  a  witness  to  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith: — I.  The  text  speaks  of 
a  gracious  blessing.  The  blessing  Abraham  received  was  that  his  faith  was 
accounted  to  him  for  righteousness.  This  is  another  term  for  justification.  For 
the  amplification  of  this  part  of  the  subject  see  Bom.  iv.  1-8.  Justification  is  a 
gracious  blessing,  for  it  includes — 1.  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  2.  M  The  being 
brought  into  the  right  relationship  with  Divine  law.  When  a  man  has 
broken  the  Divine  law,  he  is  not  justified — he  feels  himself  condemned  and 
excluded  from  the  Divine  favour.  Could  he  be  but  once  restored,  and  brought 
into  harmony  with  that  Divine  law,  he  would  be  justified."  3.  "The  being 
brought  into  a  state  of  potential  righteousness.  While  justification  is  not  to  be 
confounded  with  sanctification,  it  implies  that  sanctification  will  take  place  in  the 
processes  of  spiritual  recovery  through  which  we  shall  pass.  We  are  justified 
among  other  reasons  because  we  shall  be  sanctified."  How  precious,  then, 
is  this  blessing  1  H.  The  text  states  by  whom  this  blessing  is  enjoyed. 
"  They  which  are  of  faith."  This  means — 1.  Those  who  for  salvation  put  no  trust 
in  any  human  work.  They  have  no  confidence  in  the  fiesh,  in  hereditary  privileges, 
or  national  distinctions.  (The  Jews  trusted  in  the  fact  that  they  were  the  natural 
descendants  of  Abraham.)  2.  Those  who  through  faith  alone  seek  to  obtain  and 
retain  spiritual  life.  "  Those  who  are  not  working  that  they  may  obtain  the  favour 
of  God  as  a  meritorious  reward,  but  who  are  believing  that  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself ;  and  that  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. "    III.  The  apostle  introduces  a  witness  to  these  tbuths. 


chap,  m.]  GALATIAN8.  151 

To  those  who  boasted  that  Abraham  was  their  father,  and  who  yet  clung  to  the 
law  for  justification,  the  apostle  declares  that  Abraham  obtained  the  favour  of  God 
not  as  a  worker  but  as  a  believer.  1.  The  object  of  Abraham's  faith.  "He 
believed  God."  Bearing  in  mind  the  incidents  of  his  life,  this  is  abundantly  clear 
that  the  Being  in  whom  he  trusted  was  the  Almighty.  2.  The  subject  of  Abraham's 
faith.  3.  The  result  of  his  faith.  Lessons :  1.  There  is  no  righteousness  possible 
to  us  but  through  faith.  2.  The  inheritance  of  the  gospel  is  a  spiritual  inheritance. 
3.  The  Divine  promise  is  the  support  of  faith.    (R.  Nicholls.) 

Ver.  7.  They  which  are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of  Ahraham. — The 
children  of  Abraham : — By  grace  all  believers  are  such.  I.  By  imitation  :  in  that 
Abraham  is  set  forth  as  a  pattern  in  the  steps  of  whose  faith  believers  walk.  II.  By 
succession  :  in  that  they  succeed  him  in  the  same  blessing.  III.  By  a  kind  of 
spiritual  generation  :  in  that  Abraham  by  believing  the  promise  of  a  seed  did 
after  a  sort  beget  them  and  receive  them  as  his  children  (Rom.  ix.  8).  Here  then 
is  the  true  mark  of  a  child  of  Abraham :  to  be  of  his  faith.  1.  The  Jews  are  not 
his  children  though  descended  of  Isaac,  because  they  follow  not  the  faith  of 
Abraham.  2.  Nor  the  Papists,  in  spite  of  their  antiquity  and  numbers,  unless  they 
are  of  his  faith.  3.  Nor  the  mere  professors  of  that  faith  (Matt.  vii.  22).  To  be 
children  of  Abraham  we  must — (1)  Have  knowledge  of  the  promises  touching  the 
blessing  of  God  in  Christ.  (2)  Believe  the  power  and  truth  of  God  to  accomplish 
those  promises.  (3)  Faithfully  follow  God  in  all  things.  (W.  Perkins.)  The 
example  of faithful  Abraham : — I.  The  particulars  of  this  example.  In  his  faith 
in  God's  promise,  he  considered — 1.  The  terms  of  the  promise.  2.  The  attributes 
of  Him  who  made  it.  II.  The  duty  of  imitating  this  example.  1.  We  must,  like 
Abraham,  think  of — (1)  The  object.  (2)  The  promise.  (3)  The  promiser.  2.  Our 
faith,  like  his,  must  be — (1)  Simple.  (2)  Single.  III.  The  benefit  of  such  an 
example.  (T.  Dale,  M.A.)  Children  of  Abraham — Spiritual  kinship: — To  be 
the  children  of  a  person,  in  a  figurative  sense,  is  equivalent  to,  "  to  resemble  him, 
and  to  be  involved  in  his  fate,  good  or  bad."  The  idea  is,  similarity  both  in 
character  and  circumstances.  To  be  "  the  children  of  God,"  is  to  be  like  God ; 
and  also,  as  the  apostle  states  it  to  be,  "  heirs  of  God."  To  be  "  the  children  of 
Abraham,"  is  here  to  resemble  Abraham,  to  imitate  his  conduct,  and  to  share  in 
his  blessedness  (John  viii.  39  ;  1  John  ii.  29  ;  iii.  1,  8,  9).  It  is  as  if  the  apostle 
had  said,  "  These  Judaising  teachers  talk  mnch  of  the  glory  and  advantage  of  being 
children  of  Abraham,  and  insist  that  it  is  by  circumcision  that  men  attain  to  this 
dignity  and  happiness.  But  how  far  is  this  from  the  truth  1  Abraham's  highest 
distinction  was  that  he  was  a  justified  person,  a  friend  of  God ;  and  this  distinction 
he  attained  not  by  circumcision,  but  by  faith.  It  follows,  then,  that  they  who 
believe  like  Abraham,  and  are  like  Abraham  justified  through  believing,  they — they 
alone — are  his  true  spiritual  descendants.  Though  a  man  should  be  ««  a  Hebrew  of 
the  Hebrews,  circumcised  the  eighth  day,  and  touching  the  righteousness  that  is  in 
the  law,  blameless,"  if  he  is  not  a  believer,  he  is  not  spiritually  a  child  of  Abraham. 
And  if  a  man  be  but  a  believer,  be  he  Jew  or  Gentile,  he  is  spiritually  a  child  of 
Abraham.  And  this  fact,  that  all  who  believe,  whether  they  were  descendants  of 
Abraham  or  not,  were  to  be  made  partakers  of  his  blessedness,  was  distinctly 
enough  taught  in  the  ancient  oracles  given  to  Abraham.  (John  Brown,  D.D.) 
The  blessing  of  the  gospel : — All  the  weight  and  force  hereof  lies  in  the  words  "  with 
faithful  Abraham."  For  he  puts  a  plain  difference  between  Abraham  and 
Abraham ;  of  one  and  the  selfsame  person  making  two.  As  if  he  said :  There  is  a 
working  and  there  is  a  believing  Abraham.  With  the  working  Abraham  we  have 
nothing  to  do.  For  if  he  be  justified  by  works,  he  hath  to  rejoice,  but  not  with 
God.  Let  the  Jews  glory  as  much  as  they  will  of  that  begetting  Abraham,  which 
is  a  worker,  is  circumcised,  and  keepeth  the  law ;  but  we  glory  of  the  faithful 
Abraham,  of  whom  the  Scripture  saith,  that  he  received  the  blessing  of  righteous, 
ness  through  his  faith,  not  only  for  himself,  but  also  for  all  those  which  believe  as 
he  did  ;  and  so  the  world  was  promised  to  Abraham,  because  he  believed.  There- 
fore all  the  world  is  blessed ;  that  is  to  say,  receiveth  imputation  of  righteousness, 
if  it  believe  as  Abraham  did.  Wherefore  the  blessing  is  nothing  else  but  the 
promise  of  the  gospel.  And  that  all  nations  are  blessed,  is  as  much  as  to  say, 
that  all  nations  shall  hear  the  blessing;  that  is,  the  promise  of  God  shall  be 
preached  and  published  by  the  gospel  among  all  nations.  To  bless  signifieth 
nothing  else,  but  to  preach  and  teach  the  word  of  the  gospel,  to  confess  Christ, 
and  to  spread  abroad  the  knowledge  of  Him  among  all  the  Geotiles.    And  thii 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

is  the  priestly  office,  and  continual  sacrifice  of  the  Church  in  the  New  Testa. 
ment,  which  distributeth  this  blessing  by  preaching  and  by  ministering  of  the 
sacraments,  by  comforting  the  broken-hearted,  by  distributing  the  word  of  grace 
which  Abraham  had,  and  which  was  also  his  blessing  ;  which  when  he  believed,  he 
received  the  blessing.  So  we  also  believing  the  same  are  blessed.  (Luther.) 
Faith  obtains  salvation : — I  have  seen  shrubs  and  trees  grow  out  of  the  rooks,  and 
overhang  fearful  precipices,  roaring  cataracts,  and  deep  running  waters ;  but  they 
maintained  their  position,  and  threw  out  their  foliage  and  branches  as  much  as  if 
they  had  been  in  the  midst  of  a  dense  forest.  It  was  their  hold  of  the  rock  that 
made  them  secure,  and  the  influences  of  nature  that  sustained  their  life:  so 
believers  are  oftentimes  exposed  to  the  most  horrible  dangers  in  their  journey  to 
heaven ;  but,  so  long  as  they  are  "  rooted  and  grounded  "  in  the  Rock  of  Ages,  they 
are  perfectly  secure.  Their  hold  of  Him  is  their  guaranty ;  and  the  blessings  of  His 
grace  give  them  life,  and  sustain  them  in  life.  And  as  the  tree  must  die,  or  the 
rock  fall,  before  a  dissolution  could  be  effected  between  them,  so  either  the 
believer  must  lose  his  spiritual  life,  or  the  rock  must  crumble,  ere  their  union  can 
be  dissolved.    (J.  Bate.) 

Ver.  8.  And  the  Scripture  foreseeing  that  God  would  Justify  the  heathen 
through  faltn. — The  Scripture  foreseeing  : — I.  God  foresaw  that  He  would  justify 
the  heathen  through  faith.  H.  Foreseeing  this  issue,  God  announced  it  by  word  of 
mouth  to  Abraham.  III.  Moses  recorded  it  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  IV.  Paul 
justifies  this  use  of  Scripture  here,  and  in  Rom.  xv.  1-4,  and  1  Cor.  x.  1-11.  See 
also  1  Peter  i.  11,  12.  V.  We  mat  apply  it  to  the  New  Testament.  1.  The  Scrip- 
ture foresaw  and  provided  against  the  doctrine  of  the  supremacy  of  Peter,  which  ia 
the  foundation  of  the  Papal  claims  (Gal.  ii.  11,  &c. ;  Eph.  ii.  20 ;  1  Peter  v.  1-3).  2. 
Against  mariolatry  (Luke  viii.  21 ;  ix.  28).  (Dean  Gotdburn.)  The  foresight  of 
Scripture : — The  Old  Testament  is  endowed  with  foresight  of  the  New ;  the  New 
with  foresight  of  things  that  should  come  after  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  The 
Scripture  expresses  the  prescience  of  its  Divine  Author.  Nor  is  there  any  ground 
for  confining  this  prescience  to  great  events,  and  the  solemn  crises  of  ecclesiastical 
history.  God  foresaw  us,  with  the  circumstances  into  which  we  should  be  thrown, 
the  characters  which  we  should  exhibit,  the  temptations  to  which  we  should  be  sub- 
jected. Writing  in  the  spirit  of  foresight  we  may  well  conceive  then  that  He  has 
dropped  a  word  for  each  one  of  us  somewhere  in  His  book,  and  that  this  word  will 
rind  us  out,  and  come  home  to  us  if  we  study  it  under  the  light  of  prayer.  (Ibid.) 
The  gospel : — I.  Its  antiquity — preached  to  Abraham.  II.  Its  universality.  1.  In 
its  objects  :  heathen,  all  nations.  2.  In  its  terms  :  faith.  III.  The  slowness  but 
bureness  of  its  development  :  foreseeing.  IV.  Its  gratuitousness  :  justification. 
V.  Its  blessedness.  1.  Fellowship  in  Abraham's  privileges  on  earth.  2.  Fellowship 
with  Abraham  in  heaven.  The  universality  of  the  gospel.  Salvation  is  for  all  the 
sinful  family  of  man.  The  plan  is  vast,  immense,  worthy  of  God.  The  arms  of 
Divine  love  are  open  to  embrace  all.  All  nations  are  invited  to  the  life-giving 
waters  of  God's  grace.  Let  the  sons  of  wealth  come,  and  they  shall  be  welcome ;  let 
the  hardy  sons  of  toil  come,  and  they  shall  quench  their  thirst  ;  let  the  ignorant 
come,  and  they  shall  be  made  wise  unto  salvation  ;  let  the  young  come,  and  God  will 
be  their  guide  through  life ;  let  the  aged  come,  and  they  shall  find  peace  at  the 
eleventh  hour.  (Thomas  Jones.)  The  worst  are  justified  by  faith : — Mr.  Fleming, 
in  his  "  Fulfilling  of  the  Scriptures,"  relates  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  a  very  great 
sinner,  and  for  his  horrible  wickedness  was  put  to  death  in  the  town  of  Ayr.  This 
man  had  been  so  stupid  and  brutish  a  fellow,  that  all  who  knew  him  thought  him 
beyond  the  reach  of  all  ordinary  means  of  grace  ;  but  while  the  man  was  in  prison, 
the  Lord  wonderfully  wrought  on  his  heart,  and  in  such  a  measure  discovered  to  him 
his  sinfulness,  that  alter  much  serious  exercise  and  sore  wrestling,  a  most  kindly 
work  of  repentance  followed,  with  great  assurance  of  mercy,  insomuch,  that 
when  he  came  to  the  place  of  execution,  he  could  not  cease  crying  out  to  the 
people,  under  the  sense  of  pardon,  and  the  comforts  of  the  presence  and  favour  of 
God, — "  0,  He  is  a  great  forgiver !  He  is  a  great  forgiver  1 "  And  he  added  the 
following  words, — "  Now  hath  perfect  love  cast  out  fear.  I  know  God  hath  nothing 
to  lay  against  me,  for  Jesus  Christ  hath  paid  all ;  and  those  are  free  whom  the  Son 
makes  free."  The  gospel  is : — L  Old  as  Abraham :  the  promise  given  to  him  con- 
tained the  spirit  of  it — the  assurance  of  it — the  power  of  it,  for  he  was  justified  bf 
faith.  II.  Comprehensive  as  the  world :  it  includes  all  nations— off  era  them  the 
Mine  privileges — on  the  same  terms.   HI.  Unchangeable  as  God :  it  is  Hispurpoee* 


<SEAi.  tn.]  GALATIANS.  151 

foreseen  and  predicted — steadily  advancing  with  the  course  of  time — most  be  fully 
Accomplished  in  the  happiness  of  all  nations.     (J.  Lyth.) 

Ver.  9.  Are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham. — Aspects  of  faith: — I.  Faith  as  a 
possessor — "of  faith."     1.  Men  are  hardly  believers  in  the  fullest  sense  until  they 
have  been  mastered  and  subjugated  by  their  faith.     2.  History,  secular  and  sacred, 
is  full  of  examples  of  men  who  have  not  only  had  faith,  but  have  belonged  to  faith. 
The  true  believer — 1.  Acts  on  faith's  impulse  ;  2.  Follows  faith's  guidance  as  a  good 
servant  (i)  unquestionably ;  (2)  fully ;  (3)  cheerfully.    II.  Faith  as  a  possession — 
"  Faithful."   1.  There  is  a  partial  faith  (1)  of  the  intellect ;  (2)  of  the  affections ;  (3) 
of  the  will ;  (4)  of  the  life.     Of  these  one  may  act  without  the  other.    We  may  be- 
lieve in  Christ  (1)  historically ;  (2)  doctrinally ;  (3)  emotionally ;  (4)  ethically.    2. 
There  is  a  fulness  of  faith  which  embraces  all.     III.  Faith  as  a  bond  of  union, 
"Blessed  with  Abraham."     1.  This  bond  unites   all   classes,  Jew  and   Gentile. 
2.  Unites   all   ages.      3.  Unites  all  classes  and  ages  in  a  common  blessedness. 
Believers  are  saved : — I  recollect  the  lesson  which  I  learned  from  my  Sunday  school 
class.     Though  yet  a  youth,  I  was  teaching  the  gospel  to  boys,  and  I  said,  "  He 
that  believeth  and   is   baptized    shall  be  saved."     One  of  them  asked  somewhat 
earnestly,  "  Teacher,  are  you  saved  ?  "   I  answered,  "  I  hope  so."  As  if  he  had  been 
sent  to  push  the  matter  home  to  me  the  boy  replied,  "  Teacher,  don't  you  know  ?  " 
and  further  inquired,  "Teacher,  have  you  believed?  "    I  said,  "Yes."     "Have  you 
been  baptized  ?  "    I  said  "  Yes."     Well,  then,  he  argued,  "  You're  saved."    I  was 
happy  to  answer,  "  Yes,  I  am,"  but  I  had  hardly  dared  to  say  that  before.       (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        God's  people  blessed  in  faithful  Abraham: — I.  Observe,  then, in  the 
first  place — Abraham  is  declared  to  be  faithful  and  blessed.     Truly  he  may  well 
be  called  faithful  Abraham ;  for  though  there  are  some  evident  marks  of  want  of 
faith  in  Abraham,  yet  this  is  saying  no  more  of  him  than  of  anyone  of  God's  people. 
In  those  the  most  excellent — standing  forth  the  most  prominently  in  God's  Word — 
it  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  very  point  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  made  them 
peculiarly  excellent — gave  a   peculiar  beauty  in  their  character — you  will   find 
in  that  very  point  are  they  distinguished,  in  some  few  stages  of  their  journey,  for 
that  which  is  the  direct  opposite ;  and  if  that  teaches  us  no  more  than  this,  that 
Abraham  was  not  saved  for  his  faith's  sake — that  Job  was  not  saved  for  his  patience' 
sake — that  David  was  not  saved  for  his  courage'  sake — it  leads  us  to  this,  to  say 
that  by  grace  they  were  saved,  and  not  by  anything  wrought  in  them  or  done  by 
them.     When  we  look  at  the  character  of  this  eminent  servant  of  God,  truly  he  was 
distinguished  for  this  most  excellent  gift — the  faith  of  God's  elect.    But  observe: 
the  passage  also  asserts  that  faithful  Abraham  was  "  blessed."     Faithful  Abraham 
had  temporal  blessings.    That's  one  proof,  among  many,  why  I  cannot  think  that 
Abraham's  covenant  is  the  same  with  our  gospel  covenant.     There  was  the  act  of 
circumcision  that  entitled  him  to  a  blessing ;  and  there  was  the  promised  land — the 
temporal  good.     Surely  this  does  not  savour  of  the  unearthly  gospel.    The  gospel 
covenant  gives  no  promise  of  any  temporal  blessing,  except,  indeed,  in  this  way— 
*'  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  shall  be  added 
unto  you."  All  these  things  shall  be  thrown  in.  Ye  shall  find  riches  in  your  poverty, 
and  health  in  your  sickness.    Ye  shall  find  that  God,  who  worketh  by  contraries, 
shall  give  you  real  good  even  out  of  evil.    But  His  covenant  gives  no  assurance  of 
earthly  blessings,  though  the  covenant  of  Abraham  did ;  and  that's  one  reason, 
among  ten  thousand,   why  I  never  could  consider   it  the  same  with  the  gospel 
covenant.  But  besides  this,  Abraham  was  especially  blessed  in  spiritual  things.    He 
inherited  the  promise — the  great  promise.    He  inherited  the  promise  of  Isaac,  and 
saw  through  him  the  Messiah  that  was  to  be  out  off,  but  not  for  Himself.  II.  But  now 
observe,  secondly,  that  "  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with  him."    When  ic 
is  said  that  "  they  which  be  of  faith,"  we  are  not  to  understand  that  they  have  the 
same  measure  of  faith  as  Abraham.     My  dear  friends,  we  are  oftentimes  accused  of 
laying  too  great  stress  on  faith.    I  never  heard  a  believer  think  we  laid  too  much 
stress  upon  faith.     I  hear  of  those  who  talk  of  faith  as  a  blind  man  talks  of  colours, 
unable  to  describe  or  truly  to  understand  that  of  which  he  speaks.     I  have  heard 
them  saying  we  lay  too  much  stress  upon  faith ;  but  the  Apostle  Paul  wrote  two 
whole  Epistles  especially  on  this  subject ;  and  you  will  find,  throughout  the  whole 
of  the  Bomans,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Galatians,  how  great  and  how  con- 
tinued a  stress  he  lays  on  this  most  important  point ;  and  how  is  that  ?    He  know 
well  this  grand  subject  of  faith  sinks  everything  else.    As  faith  is  strong,  so  every 
thing  is  strong.    When  our  views  of  faith  rise,  so  our  views  of  God  rise ;  and  whoa 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

such  is  the  case,  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  flows  as  a  stream,  pervades  the  heart, 
and  worketh  by  love — subjecteth  the  will,  and  leadeth  a  man  upwards  to  his  salva- 
tion. All  the  blessings  are  received  by  faith.  They  are  as  much  received  by  faith 
as  I  receive  tbe  bread  I  eat.  That  bread  becomes  mine  as  I  eat  it,  it  becomes  mine 
by  appropriation,  as  it  were — it  becomes  my  own,  to  nutrify  and  sustain  me  ;  and 
so,  by  faith,  Christ  becomes  the  support  of  my  spiritual  frame.  I  now  come  to  that 
part  of  the  subject  which  opens  a  great  and  glorious  prospect :  "  they  are  blessed." 
They  who  have  Christ  are  blessed  ;  they  inherit  the  promise — the  great  promise — 
Christ — Jehovah — Jesus  the  Saviour.  They  have  Him  in  the  glory  of  His  person, 
the  perfection  of  His  work,  and  all  the  fulness  of  His  grace.  Oh  !  what  a  blessing 
has  that  man  who  has  Christ  for  his  portion.  Does  any  one  doubt  it  ?  They  are 
blessed  because  they  are  hastening  to  that  world  where  they  shall  be  superlatively 
blessed.  (J.H.Evans.)  Abraham;  or,  the  influence  of  faith : — Let  us  consider  : 
I.  Ths  character  of  his  faith.  Few  things  are  more  talked  about,  and  less  under- 
stood, than  this  subject  of  faith.  St.  James  teaches  us  in  his  second  chapter  and 
twenty-sixth  verse,  that  there  are  two  distinct  kinds  of  faith — that,  as  the  body  without 
the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also.  There  are  those  who  possess 
what  we  may  call  a  living  faith  amongst  the  heathen — a  faith  which  indeed  does  not 
come  down  from  the  living  Spirit — but  it  inspires  the  soul  of  the  Hindoo  mother  when 
she  is  constrained  to  cast  her  own  child  beneath  the  wheels  of  the  ponderous  machine 
which  carries  the  god  called  Juggernaut.  Is  it  not  so,  also,  where  the  Jew  really 
trusts  on  his  god — who,  however,  is  not  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob, 
but  one  of  his  own  creation?  Is  it  not  equally  so  with  the  Mahommedan,  who  will 
imbrue  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  those  who  deny  that  Mahomet  was  God's  prophet? 
Is  it  not  so  with  those  Roman  Catholics  who  believe  the  Virgin  Mary  to  be  more 
tender  and  compassionate  than  Christ,  who  came  into  the  world  and  suffered  death 
to  save  us?  They  exercise  a  living  faith,  but  its  object  is  such  as  to  render  it  never- 
theless short  of  salvation.  You  will  observe  that  the  right  object  of  faith  is  as 
essential  as  the  living  principle  of  faith.  Here  then  is  the  one  true  and  only  object 
by  which  faith  is  made  instrumental  in  saving  the  soul.  I  need  not  say  that  faith 
itself  never  saves  a  man — it  is  the  object  of  that  faith.  Faith  is  the  instrument — it 
is  not  the  life  which  is  brought  into  tbe  soul,  but  it  merely  opens  the  soul  to  receive 
that  life — it  leads  the  thirsty  soul  to  the  waters  of  life,  where  it  may  be  refreshed. 
Still,  it  may  be  asked,  how  can  this  be  true  as  regards  the  Old  Testament  Saints  ? 
The  text  teaches  us  to  take  Abraham  as  a  type  of  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament 
Saints,  and  that  Abraham  did  believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  for  you  will  find  in  verse  16 
— "  Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made.  He  saith  not,  ■  and  to 
seeds,'  as  of  many;  but,  as  of  one,  •  and  to  thy  seed' — which  is  Christ."  He  did 
believe.  As  you  read  in  the  first  lesson  of  this  evening's  service,  you  will  remember 
that  Abraham  said  unto  his  6on — '*  My  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  Lamb  for  a 
burnt-offering."  Now  this  Lamb  was  no  other  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom 
it  is  said — "He  was  the  Lamb  which  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
He  was  regarded  by  all  the  Old  Testament  Saints  as  a  Lamb  slain  for  them.  They 
looked  forward  to  the  sacrifice  which  was  to  be  made,  as  we  look  back  to  it  now  it 
has  been  made.  The  promise  made  to  Abraham  is  noticed  in  Gal.  iii.  8.  Now  this 
does  away  with  tbe  notion  that  any  faith  in  the  abstract  can  possibly  save.  I  know 
that  there  is  a  common  notion  amongst  men  in  these  latitudinarian  days,  by  which 
they  affirm  and  endeavour  to  maintain  that  it  matters  little  what  a  man's  faith  is, 
provided  it  be  sincere.  Now  you  will  observe  from  this  that  it  does  matter  altogether 
what  his  faith  is;  for  it  maybe  sincerely  placed  on  a  wrong  object.  We  come, 
therefore,  to  the  inevitable  conclusion,  that  unless  the  object  of  your  faith  be  one 
with  the  object  of  Abraham's  faith — i.e.,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  His  blessing  cannot 
be  yours.  H.  The  influence  of  his  faith.  They  that  be  of  faith  are  blessed 
with  faithful  Abraham  by  righteousness  imputed  to  their  souls.  Another  point  is, 
that  through  faith  Abraham  walked  with  God.  St.  James  tells  us  that  Abraham 
was  a  friend  of  God.  What  an  exalted  honour  and  privilege  is  this.  Can  there  be 
any  term  more  endearing  to  the  believing  soul  than  to  be  called  the  friend  of  God  ? 
And  yet  Jesus  says  to  His  people,  w  Ye  are  my  friends " !  Now,  dear  friends, 
those  who  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham.  They  have  the  same  bless- 
ing, and  tbey,  too,  are  the  friends  of  God.  How  do  they  prove  they  are  His  friends? 
They  follow  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  says,  "  My  sheep  hear  My 
voice,  and  they  follow  Me."  Through  faith  Abraham  was  supported  in  all  his  trials, 
and  protected  in  all  his  dangers ;  and  was  there  ever  a  friend  of  God  left  in  an  un- 
befriended  state  by  God?    No  1    Gen.  xv.  1 — "Fear  not,  I  am  thy  shield,  and  thy 


chap,  in.]  GALATIANS.  15S 

exceeding  great  reward."  He  is  a  shield  to  ward  off  and  protect.  But  not  only  was 
Abraham  blessed  :  he  was  made  a  blessing  to  others.  He  was  made  a  blessing  to 
all  the  families  of  the  earth  by  being  the  father  of  the  seed  to  whom  the  promises 
were  made.  He  was  also  a  blessing  by  his  bright  example  of  faith  and  holiness, 
and  all  who  follosv  his  example  shall  receive  his  blessing.  He  was  made  a  blessing 
toothers;  and,  dear  friends,  all  who  are  "of  faith"  are  "blessed  with  faithful 
Abraham "  by  being  made  a  blessing  to  others.  Suffer  me,  then,  to  ask  you, 
brethren,  whether  you  this  night  have  the  mark  of  the  blessing  of  Abraham?  Be- 
cause, if  you  have  not  this  mark,  you  have  not  his  faith,  and  consequently  are  not 
blessed  with  him  There  is  one  thought  more  before  we  leave  the  subject,  Abraham 
through  faith  realized  the  Lord  as  his  portion.  You  will  find  in  Gen.  xv.  1 :  "  I  am 
thy  shield  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward."  Dear  friends,  what  a  depth  there  is 
here  1  "  I  am  thy  exceeding  great  reward  !  "  This  is  what  we  are  all  seeking  for — 
a  recompense  for  our  labours,  toils,  and  anxieties.  But  here — "  All  them  that  be 
of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham  " — they  have  the  Lord  as  their  "  exceed- 
ing great  reward."  He  is  their  portion,  their  everlasting  inheritance — He  is  their 
all  in  all  in  this  world  1  But  here  is  a  blessing  which  reaches  not  only  to  the  end  of 
time,  but  to  all  eternity.  (G.  A.  Rogers,  M.A.)  The  blessing  in  Abraham  is  like  a 
ttream : — I.  Full — of  comfort  and  refreshment  for  guilty  man — of  promise  for  the 
world.  II.  Flowing — first  enjoyed  by  Abraham — it  flows  on  through  time.  III. 
Expansive — it  reaches  to  all  nations.  IV.  Free — for  every  one  that  believeth.  V. 
Inexhaustible — lor  its  source  is  Christ.     (J.  Lyth.) 

Ver.  10.  For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse. — The 
curse  and  its  removal: — I,  The  cdese  of  the  law  is  of  univeral  application. 
All  are  born  under  the  law,  and  are  bound  to  observe  it.  But  all  have  broken  it, 
and  their  guilt  remains.  There  is  no  question  of  mercy  here.  Law,  viewed  in 
itself,  knows  no  mercy.  It  pronounces  a  man  righteous  only  on  condition  of  perfect 
obedience.  The  chain  is  severed,  though  only  one  link  be  broken.  The  cable  which 
joins  two  continents  together,  fails  to  convey  the  electrio  current  if  but  a  single 
flaw  exist  in  it.  Every  other  part  may  be  perfect;  but  one  fault  mars  the  whole. 
So  with  law.  Thus  all  are  under  condemnation.  II.  The  spikit  of  the  law  is 
antagonistic  to  faith  The  starting-point  of  the  law  is  obedience.  III.  The 
curse  removed.  Christ  not  only  died  for  our  sins,  but  suffered  that  particular  kind 
of  death  with  which  the  law  had  specially  connected  the  infliction  of  the  curse,  and 
eo  became  a  curse  for  us.  1.  He  who  was  to  remove  the  curse  must  not  be  Himself 
liable  to  it.  The  Substitute  for  the  guilty  must  Himself  be  innocent.  2.  He  who 
was  to  be  the  Substitute  for  all,  must  have  the  common  nature  of  all.  3.  He  who 
was  to  do  more  than  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the  sins  of  all,  must  have  infinite 
merits  of  His  own,  in  order  that  the  scale  of  Divine  justice  may  preponderate  in 
their  favour.  4.  In  order  that  He  may  remove  the  curse  pronounced  in  the  law 
of  God  for  disobedience,  He  must  undergo  that  punishment  which  is  specially 
declared  in  that  law  to  be  the  curse  of  God.  6.  That  punishment  is  hanging  on  a 
tree  (Deut.  xxi.  23).  {Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  The  curse  realized: — The  curse 
that  men  have  in  this  life  is  as  nothing  compared  with  the  curse  that  is  to  come 
upon  them  hereafter.  In  a  few  short  years,  you  and  I  must  die.  Come,  friend,  I 
will  talk  to  you  personally  again — young  man,  we  shall  soon  grow  old,  or,  perhaps, 
we  shall  die  before  that  time,  and  we  shall  lie  upon  our  bed — the  last  bed  upon 
which  we  shall  ever^  sleep— we  shall  wake  from  our  last  slumber  to  hear  the  doleful 
tidings  that  there  is  no  hope ;  the  physician  will  feel  our  pulse,  and  solemnly 
assure  our  relatives  that  it  is  all  over  1  And  we  shall  lie  in  that  still  room,  where 
all  is  hushed  except  the  ticking  of  the  clock,  and  the  weeping  of  our  wife  and 
children :  and  we  must  die.  Oh,  how  solemn  will  be  that  hour  when  we  must 
struggle  with  that  enemy,  Death  I  The  death-rattle  is  in  our  throat— we  can  scarce 
articulate — we  try  to  speak ;  the  death-glaze  is  on  the  eye ;  Death  hath  put  his 
fingers  on  those  windows  of  the  body,  and  shut  out  the  light  for  ever;  the  hands 
well-nigh  refuse  to  lift  themselves,  and  there  we  are,  close  on  the  borders  of  the 
grave  I  Ah !  that  moment,  when  the  spirit  sees  its  destiny ;  that  moment,  of  all 
moments  the  most  solemn,  when  the  soul  looks  through  the  bars  of  its  cage,  upon 
the  world  to  come  I  No,  I  cannot  tell  you  how  the  spirit  feels,  if  it  be  an  ungodly 
spirit,  when  it  sees  a  fiery  throne  of  judgment,  and  hears  the  thunders  of 
Almighty  wrath,  while  there  is  but  a  moment  between  it  and  hell.  I  cannot  picture 
to  you  what  must  be  the  fright  which  men  will  feel,  when  they  realize  what  they 
often  heard  of.     It  is  a  fine  thing  for  you  to  laugh  to-night  I    But  when  you  art 


1W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP,  m. 

lying  on  your  deathbed,  you  will  not  laugh.    Now,  the  curtain  is  drawn,  you  cannot 
Bee  the  things  of  the  future,  it  is  a  very  fine  thing  to  be  merry.     When  God  has 
removed  that  curtain,  and  you  learn  the  solemn  reality,  you  will  not  find  it  in  your 
hearts  to  trifle.  ...  I  think  I  see  that  terrible  day.     The  bell  of  time  has  tolled 
the  last  day.     Now  comes  the  funeral  of   damned  souls.     Your  body  has  just 
started  up  from  the  grave,  you  unwind  your  cerements  and  look  up.     What  is  that 
I  see  ?    Oh  t  what  is  that  I  hear  ?    I  hear  one  dread,  tremendous  blast,  that  shakes 
the  pillars  of  heaven,  and  makes  the  firmament  reel  with  affright ;  the  trump  of 
the  archangel  shakes  creation's  utmost  bound.     You  look  and  wonder.     Suddenly 
a  voice  is  heard,  and  shrieks  from  some,  and  songs  from  others — He  oomes,  He 
comes,  He  comes — and  every  eye  must  see  Him.     There  He  is ;  the  throne  is  set 
upon  a  cloud,  which  is  white  as  alabaster.     There  He  sits.     'Tis  He,  the  Man  that 
died  on  Calvary — I  see  His  pierced  hands — but  ah,  how  changed  1     No  thorn-crown 
now.    He  stood  at  Pilate's  bar,  but  now  the  whole  earth  must  stand  at  His  bar. 
He  opens  the  book.     There  is  silence.  .  .  .  "  Come,  ye  blessed "  .  .  .  "Depart, ye 
cursed."    Oh,  escape,  before  it  is  too  late.     (C.  H.Spurgeon.)        Mercy  needed  by 
all : — Though  we  have  sinned  less  than  others,  we  cannot  be  saved  by  merit ;  even 
as,  thank  God,  though  we  have  sinned  more  than  others,  we  may  be  saved  by  mercy. 
How  idle  to  talk  of  other  men  being  greater  sinners  than  we  are — to  flatter  and 
deceive  ourselves  with  that  I     He  drowns  as  surely  who  has  his  head  beneath  one 
inch  of  water,  as  he  who,  with  a  millstone  hung  round  his  neck,  has  sunk  a  hundred 
fathoms  down.     Let  the  strain  of  the  tempest  come,  and  the  ship  that  has  one  bad 
link  in  her  cable,  as  certainly  goes  ashore  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks,  as 
another  that  has  twenty  bad.     It  is,  no  doubt,  by  repeated  strokes  of  the  wood- 
man's axe  that  the  oak,  bending  slowly  to  fate,  bows  its  proud  head  and  falls  to  the 
ground,  and  it  is  by  long  dropping  that  water  hollows  the  hardest  stone.    But  those 
who  speak  of  great  and  little,  of  few  or  many  sins,  seem  to  forget  that  man's  ruin 
was  the  work  of  one  moment,  and  of  one  sin.     The  weight  of  only  one  sin  sank 
this  great  world  into  perdition ;  and  now  all  of  us,  all  men,  lie  under  the  same 
sentence  of  condemnation.    Extinguishing  every  hope  of  salvation  through  works, 
and  sounding  as  ominous  of  evil  in  men's  ears,  as  the  cracking  of  ice  beneath  our 
feet,  or  the  roar  of  an  avalanche,  or  the  grating  of  a  keel  on  the  sunken  rock,  or  the 
hammer  that  wakens  the  felon  from  dreams  of  life  and  liberty,  that  sentence  is 
this :  '*  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law,  to  do  them."    Such  is  our  position;  and  instead  of  shutting  our  eyes  to 
it,  like  the  foolish  ostrich  that  hides  her  head  in  the  bush  when  the  hunters  are 
at  her  heels,  it  is  well  to  know  and  to  face  it.     {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)        Cursed  it 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things. — The  slightest  flaw  is  fatal : — Who  does 
not  see  that  the  tiniest  flaw  or  fracture  in  a  diamond  vitiates  the  whole  gem,  be  it 
&  very  Koh-i-noor — that  the  smallest  streak  or  stain  sets  aside  the  marble  blook 
of  Carrara  that  is  like  the  driven  snow — that  the  slightest  spot  or  speck  dims  to 
rejection  the  whole  polished  speculum — that  the  most  insignificant  leak  is  perilous  ? 
In  these  cases  it  will  not  arrest  the  verdict,  to  allege  the  fault  is  so  very  small. 
Actual  transactions  can  easily  be  quoted  which  establish  this.     Once  a  famous  ruby 
was  offered  to  this  country.     The  report  of  the  crown  jeweller  was  that  it  was  the 
finest  he  had  ever  seen  or  heard  of,  but  that  one  of  its  facets — one  of  the  "  little  " 
cuttings  of  the  face — was  slightly  fractured.    The  result  was,  that  almost  invisible 
flaw  reduced  its  value  by  thousands  of  pounds,  and  it  was  rejected  from  the  regalia 
of  England.    Again  :  when  Canova  was  about  to  commence  his  great  statue  of  the 
great  Napoleon,  his  keenly-observant  eye  detected  a  tiny  red  line  running  through 
the  upper  portion  of  the  splendid  block,  which  at  infinite  cost  had  been  fetched  from 
Paros,  and  he  refused  to  lay  a  chisel  on  it.     Once  more  :  in  the  story  of  the  early 
struggles  of  the  elder  Herschel,  while  he  was  working  out  the  problem  of  gigantic 
telescope  specula,  you  will  find  that  he  made  scores  upon  scores  ere  he  got  one  to 
satisfy  him.    A  scratch  like  the  slenderest  spider-cord  sufficed  to  place  among  the 
spoiled  what  bad  cost  him  long  weeks  of  toil  and  anxiety.     Again  :  in  the  leak  of  a 
ship,  the  measure  of  the  ship  to  resist  the  shock  of  wave  or  the  strain  of  wind,  is  not 
its  strongest  but  its  weakest  part.     The  tremendous  issues  contingent  on  attention  or 
non-attention  to  the  slightest  leak,  was  illustrated  in  a  recent  incident  in  the  late 
deplorable  civil  war  in  America.     One  of  the  Federal  war-ships  had  what  seemed  a 
merely  superficial  leakage,  and,  though  noticed,  it  was  not  thought  necessary  to 
countermand  the  order  that  she  should  take  part  in  an  approaching  conflict.    At 
the  crisis  of  the  encounter,  it  was  found  that  the  sea-water  had  got  oozing  into  the 
gunpowder  magazine,  and  rendered  nearly  the  whole  useless.     On  that  powdef 


chap,  m.]  GALATIANS.  W 

hang  victory  or  defeat.  The  '*  little  leak  "  went  uncared  for,  and  an  inferior  force 
won.  The  very  perfection  aimed  at,  you  will  observe,  necessitated  rejection  of 
gem,  and  marble  block,  and  speculum,  and  leaking  timber  Even  so,  were  Chris- 
tianity a  less  holy  thing — a  thiDg  that  could  abide  compromise — then  what  are 
called  "  small  sins  " — the  larger  and  grosser  being  acknowledged — might  be  passed 
over,  winked  at.  {A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  Look,  as  one  drop  of  ink  ooloureth  a 
whole  glass  of  water,  so  one  gross  sin,  one  shameful  action,  one  hour's  compliance 
with  anything  of  Antichrist,  will  colour  and  stain  all  the  great  things  that  ever  you 
have  suffered,  and  all  the  good  things  that  ever  you  have  performed  ;  it  will  stain 
and  colour  all  the  good  prayers  that  ever  you  have  made,  and  all  the  good  sermons 
that  ever  you  have  heard,  and  all  the  good  books  that  ever  you  have  read,  and  all 
the  good  words  that  ever  you  have  spoken,  and  all  the  good  works  that  ever  you  have 
done ;  and  therefore,  whatever  you  do,  keep  off  from  sin,  and  keep  off  from  all 
iinful  compliances,  as  you  would  keep  off  from  hell  itself.  (T.  Brooks.)  A  call 
to  the  unconverted : — We  shall — I.  Try  the  prisoner.  1.  One  pleads  "  not 
guilty."  Well,  have  you  continued  in  all  things?  Let  us  go  through  the  Ten 
Commandments.  Each  convicts  you.  2.  Another  says,  "  I  shall  not  plead  guilty, 
because,  although  I  have  not  continued  in  all  things,  I  have  done  the  best  I  could." 

3.  Another  pleads,  "  While  I  have  broken  the  law,  I  am  no  worse  than  others." 

4.  Another  cries,  "  I  have  striven  to  keep  the  law,  and  think  I  have  succeeded  a 
little."  5.  Another,  '*  There  are  many  things  I  have  not  done,  but  I  have  been 
virtuous."  But  all  are  guilty  because  none  have  continued  in  all  things.  II. 
Declare  the  sentence.  Sinner,  thou  art  cursed — 1.  Not  by  some  wizard.  2.  Not 
by  an  earthly  monarch.     3.  But  by  God  the  Father.     4.  This  curse  is  present. 

5.  In  some  cases  visible :  in  the  drunkard,  e.g.  6.  Universal.  7.  Eternal.  III. 
Proclaim  the  deliverer.  1.  Christ  has  borne  your  curse.  2.  This  substitution  is 
realized  by  penitence  and  faith.  3.  All  classes  of  sinners  may  be  freed  from  the 
curse  through  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  curse  of  the  law: — I.  Brings  home 
to  the  sinner  the  guilt  op  sin.  1.  He  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law  (1)  literally, 
(2)  spiritually.  2.  But  he  has  broken  the  whole  law  in  (1)  sins  of  omission,  (2)  sins 
of  commission.  II.  Places  the  sinner  under  the  wrath  op  God.  1.  God  has 
guarded  the  law  with  the  most  solemn  and  terrible  sanctions.  2.  The  condemnation 
of  the  sinner  is  present  as  well  as  future.  III.  It  reduces  the  sinner  to  despair. 
1.  To  perform  its  obligation.  2.  To  escape  its  penalties.  IV.  It  drives  the  sinner 
to  Christ  the  only  Saviour  who  has  borne  this  curse.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  I. 
Every  man  by  nature  is  under  this  curse  (Eph.  ii.  3).  II.  This  curse  abideth 
on  us  till  we  believe  in  Christ  (John  iii.  18,  36).  III.  Thkre  is  no  way  op 
escaping  this  curse  but  by  fleeing  to  christ  for  refuge  (heb.  vi.  18).  iv. 
Having  accepted  Christ,  the  life  of  faith  must  become  one  of  sincere  obedience 
(1  John  v.  3 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  V.  But  when  Christ  is  tendered  and  finally  refused, 
the  sentence  of  the  law  is  ratified  in  the  gospel,  the  court  of  mercy. 
(T.  Manton.)  The  claims  of  the  law : — I.  Practical  obedience :  not  hearing, 
knowing,  speaking  what  is  written,  but  doing.  II.  Personal  obedience — "every 
one."  Proxies,  sureties,  mediators,  are  excluded.  III.  Perfect  obedience — "all 
things,"  every  jot  and  tittle  as  well  as  weightier  matters.  IV.  Perpetual  obedience 
— past,  present,  future.  (Swinnock.)  No  salvation  by  works  : — The  voice  of  that 
cromlech  stone,  which  still  stands  on  our  moors,  the  centre  of  the  Druids'  grey, 
lonely,  mystic  circle,  and  on  whose  sloping  surface  I  have  traced  the  channel  which, 
when  human  victims  lay  bound  on  this  altar,  drained  off  the  blood  of  beautiful 
maiden,  or  grim  captive  of  the  fight — the  voice  of  those  tears  the  Indian  mother 
sheds,  as  she  plucks  the  sweet  babe  from  her  throbbing  bosom  to  fling  it  into  the 
Jumna  or  Ganges'  sacred  stream — the  voice  of  those  ruined  temples  which,  silent 
now,  once  resounded  with  the  groans  of  expiring  victims,  what  are  these,  again,  but 
an  imperfect  echo  of  the  words,  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done, 
but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us?  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Righteousness  by 
works : — I  read  lately  that  the  Emperor  of  Brazil  had  given  the  Queen  a  dress  made 
of  spiders'  webs ;  it  took  17,000  webs  to  make  it.  What  a  curiosity !  No  doubt 
the  Queen  would  keep  it  all  her  life.  Such  a  robe  is  the  righteousness  of  works 
without  Christ,  a  curiosity  indeed,  but  not  made  to  stand  the  storm  of  the  judgment 
day.  One  sin  ruinous  : — One  wheel  broken  in  the  machinery  will  render  the 
whole  inefficient ;  one  breakage  of  a  stave  in  the  ladder  may  make  it  unfit  for  safe 
and  full  use;  one  piece  of  rail  displaced  on  the  railway  may  result  in  fearful 
disaster :  one  inch  of  wire  out  out  of  the  telegraph  would  prevent  the  use  of  all  the 
Mit,  whatever  its  extent ;  one  failure  in  any  law  of  Nature  may  go  on  producing 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

other  failures  ad  infinitum.  So  the  transgression  of  but  one  law  of  God :  it  is 
ruinous  to  the  soul;  it  leads  on  to  innumerable  transgressions;  it  violates  the 
whole  code.  (J.  Bate.)  Cursed,  <£c: — The  penalty  of  the  law  is — I.  Severe — in 
character — authority — execution.  II.  Comprehensive — includes  every  sinner — 
every  sin.  III.  Inevitable — except  through  God's  mercy — for  none  is  guiltless, 
can  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  law  or  make  amends  for  the  past.  (/.  Lyth.)  The 
curse  : — I.  Its  import — it  includes  Divine  condemnation — moral  weakness — misery 
— death.  II.  Its  extent — it  reaches  all  men  because  all  have  sinned — are  incapable 
of  fulfilling  the  law — are  condemned  by  the  law.  IIL  Its  severity — the  law  permits 
no  escape — provides  no  justification — insists  upon  its  full  demands.  IV.  Its  relief 
— God  is  merciful — has  made  full  satisfaction — justifies  us  by  faith.  (Ibid.) 
Redemption  from  the  curse  of  the  law: — I.  The  fearful  condition  of  men  as 
transgressors — "  Under  the  curse."  1.  What  the  law  demands.  2.  The  reason- 
ableness  of  this  requirement.  Law  cannot  be  satisfied  with  partial  obedience.  3. 
The  doom  denounced  upon  all  who  do  not  comply  with  this  requirement.  (1)  It 
is  universal — "  Cursed  is  every  one,"  &o.  (2)  It  is  unspeakably  awful  in  its  nature. 
(3)  It  is  present  in  its  infliction.  (4)  It  is  irremediable  as  far  as  our  own  deeds  and 
deservings  are  concerned.  IL  The  blessedness  of  those  who  are  interested  in 
the  glorious  PROVISIONS  of  the  gospel — *'  Christ  hath  redeemed  us."  1.  The  person 
who  interposed  in  order  to  effect  our  redemption.  2.  From  what  He  redeems. 
3.  How  this  redemption  was  effected — "  Being  made  a  curse  for  us."  4.  The  blessed 
results  which  flow  from  His  redeeming  work.  (Expository  Outlines  of  Sermons.) 
Transgressors  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse : — The  law  consists  of  two  parts  :  a 
system  of  precepts,  and  the  sanction  and  enforcement  of  those  precepts  by  promisea 
and  threatenings.  According  to  the  first,  it  is  the  rule  of  our  obedience,  and  shows 
what  we  ought  to  render  unto  God.  According  to  the  second,  it  is  the  rule  of  Divine 
justice,  and  shows  what  God  will  render  unto  us.  I.  The  sanction  of  this  law  is 
twofold.  First :  A  promise  of  life  and  happiness  to  the  observers  of  it  (Bom.  x.  5 ; 
Gal.  iii.  12;  Ezek.  xx.  11).  Second  :  Threatenings  of  a  most  heavy  and  tremendous 
curse  against  all  that  transgress  it ;  a  curse  that  will  blast  and  wither  their  souls  for 
ever.  1.  What  the  apostle  means  by  those  who  are  "  of  the  works  of  the  law."  To 
be  of  the  works  of  the  law  signifies  no  other  than  to  expect  justification  and  eternal 
happiness  by  legal  works ;  to  depend  wholly  on  our  obedience  unto  and  observation 
of  the  law,  to  render  us  acceptable  to  God  and  worthy  of  eternal  life.  Those,  who 
thus  rely  on  a  legal  righteousness,  are  said  to  be  of  the  works  of  the  law ;  as  persons 
are  said  to  be  of  such  or  such  a  party,  because  they  stiffly  defend  the  cause  of  the 
law ;  and  stand  for  justification  by  the  observance  of  it,  in  opposition  to  the  grace 
of  the  gospel,  and  the  way  of  obtaining  justification  and  eternal  life  by  believing. 
2.  What  it  is  to  be  accursed.  So  that  the  true  and  proper  notion  of  a  curse  is  this : 
That  it  is  the  denunciation  or  execution  of  the  punishment  contained  in  the  law,  in 
order  to  the  satisfaction  of  Divine  justice  for  transgressing  the  precepts  of  it.  (1) 
Some,  therefore,  are  only  under  the  curse  denounced.  And  so  are  all  wicked  men, 
whose  state  is  prosperous  in  this  life,  though  they  flourish  in  wealth  and  honour, 
and  float  in  ease  and  pleasure ;  yet  are  they  liable  to  all  that  woe  and  wrath,  with 
which  the  threatenings  of  the  law  stand  charged  against  them.  (2)  Some  are  under 
the  curse  already  executed.  And  so  are  all  wicked  men,  on  whom  God  begins  to 
take  vengeance  and  exact  satisfaction  in  the  miseries  and  punishments  which  He 
inflicts  on  them  in  this  life.  II.  You  see,  then,  what  an  universal  curse  these  words 
denounce;  a  curse  that  sets  its  mouth  and  discharge th  its  thunder  against  all  the 
sinful  sons  of  Adam.  A  curse  it  is  which,  as  Zechariah  speaks  (chap.  v.  3),  ••  goeth 
forth  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth ;  "  and  will,  if  mercy  rebate  not  the  edge  of 
it,  out  off  on  every  side  all  those  that  stand  in  its  way ;  that  is,  all  that  are  sinners, 
and  all  are  so  ;  for  the  characters  which  the  apostle  doth  here  give  to  those  who  are 
under  the  curse  of  the  law  are  so  general  and  comprehensive,  that  no  man  living 
could  possibly  escape  if  God  should  judge  him  according  to  the  conditions  of  the 
covenant  of  works.  1.  It  is  said  that  every  one  is  accursed  that  doth  not  those 
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law.  And  this  is  a  curse_  that  cuts  off 
on  both  sides.  On  this  side  it  cuts  off  those  who  are  but  negatively  righteous,  who 
ground  all  their  hopes  for  heaven  and  happiness  upon  what  they  have  not  done ; 
and  put  into  the  inventory  of  their  virtues  that  they  have  not  been  vicious,  no  ex- 
tortioners, no  unjust  persons,  no  adulterers,  &c,  but,  alas  !  this  account  will  not 
pass  in  the  day  of  reckoning ;  the  law  requires  thee  not  only  to  forbear  the  gross 
acts  of  sin  but  to  perform  the  duties  of  obedience.  And  it  cuts  off  on  that  side  all 
those  who  have  done  contrary  to  what  is  written  in  the  law.     2.  Those,  also,  who 


chap,  m.]  GALATIANS.  153 

have  not  done  all  that  is  written  in  the  law  are  struck  with  this  anathema  or  curse. 
And  where  is  the  man  that  dares  lift  up  his  face  to  justify  himself  against  this 
sharge?  3.  But  suppose  that,  at  some  time  or  other,  thou  shouldst  have  performed 
•very  particular  duty ;  yet,  hast  thou  continued  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the 
law  to  do  them  ?  Hast  thou  spun  an  even  thread  of  obedience  ?  Are  there  no 
flaws,  no  breaks,  no  breaches  in  it  ?  Hast  thou  been  always  constant  in  the  highest 
fervour  of  thy  zeal  for  God  ?  Hast  thou  been  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of 
thy  life  ?  Have  thy  affections  never  languished  ;  thy  thoughts  never  turned  aside, 
so  much  as  to  glance  upon  vanity  ?  Didst  thou  never  drop  one  unsavoury  word,  nor 
do  any  one  action  which,  both  for  the  matter  and  manner  of  it,  was  not  perfectly 
agreeable  to  the  law  ?  III.  This  cubse  is  most  dreadful,  if  we  consider  that  it  is 
universal,  and  extends  itself  not  only  over  all  persons  but  unto  all  things.  Every- 
thing which  a  sinner  either  doth  or  hath  is  accursed  to  him.  1.  He  is  accursed  in 
all  his  temporal  enjoyments.  His  bread  is  kneaded  and  his  drink  mingled  with  a 
curse,  his  table  becomes  a  snare  to  him,  and  every  morsel  he  eats  is  dipped  in  the 
bitterness  of  God's  wrath  and  curse.  His  very  mercies  are  curses  unto  him  ;  as,  on 
the  contrary,  a  true  believer's  afflictions  are  blessings.  2.  He  is  accursed  in  all  his 
spiritual  enjoyments.  And,  oh,  what  a  sad  and  dreadful  curse  is  this  that  thou,  who 
eomest  to  hear  the  same  word  preached,  which  to  others  proves  the  savour  of  life 
unto  life  eternal,  to  thee,  through  the  corruption  and  wickedness  of  thine  own  heart, 
it  should  prove  the  savour  of  death  unto  death  eternal !  3.  If  all  the  favours  of 
God's  providence  and  all  the  dispensations  of  His  grace ;  then,  certainly,  much  mora 
are  all  their  chastisements  and  afflictions  turned  into  curses.  If  there  be  poison  in 
the  honey,  much  more  certainly  is  there  in  the  sting.  If  God  be  wroth  with  them 
when  He  shines,  much  more  when  He  frowns  upon  them.  4.  In  hell  they  shall  be 
cursed  to  purpose,  and  lie  for  ever  under  the  revenging  wrath  of  God.  Their  sen- 
tence iB,  "Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed"  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  Hell,  indeed,  is  the  general 
assembly  of  all  curses  and  plagues.  They  are  eternally  cursed  (1)  In  their  separa- 
tion from  the  sight  and  presence  of  God.  (2)  In  the  society  of  devils  and  damned 
spirits.  (3)  In  the  work  of  hell,  which  is  blaspheming  and  cursing.  (4)  In  the  pains 
and  torments  which  they  must  eternally  suffer.  IV.  Application.  1.  See  what  an  ac- 
cursed thing  sin  is  that  carries,  wrapped  up  in  its  bowels,  woe,  wrath,  and  eternal  death. 
2.  If  every  transgressor  of  the  law  be  accursed,  see,  then,  the  desperate  folly  of 
those  wretches  who  make  light  of  sin,  and  account  the  commission  of  it  a  matter  of 
email  or  no  concern  to  them.  3.  If  every  transgression  exposes  us  to  the  curse, 
beware,  then,  that  you  never  encourage  yourself  to  commit  any  sin  because  the  world 
accounts  it  but  small  and  little.  4.  See  here,  what  reason  we  have  to  bless  God  for 
Jesus  Christ,  who  has  delivered  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.) 
The  desert  of  sin: — Though  some  sins  are  greater  than  others,  yet  there  is  no  sin 
but  deserves  damnation.  Consider — 1.  The  party  condemned  by  the  law.  Every 
sinner.  Condemned  for  omissions  as  well  as  commissions.  2.  The  doom  pronounced. 
God's  wrath  and  curse.  I.  I  shall  show,  what  is  God's  wkath  and  cubse  which 
evert  sin  deserves.  1.  God's  wrath  is  no  passion  nor  is  there  any  perturbation  in 
God,  though  an  angry  God.  His  wrath  may  be  taken  up  in  these  two  things.  (1) 
God's  displeasure  against  the  sinner  (Psa.  v.  4,  5).  Sin  makes  the  soul  loathsome 
and  hateful  in  God's  sight,  kindles  a  holy  fire  in  His  heart  against  the  sinner  (Psa. 
xo.  11).  (2)  God's  dealing  with  sinners  as  His  enemies,  whom  He  is  incensed  against 
(Neh,  i.  2 ;  Isa.  i.  24).  The  wrath  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion  ;  what  then 
must  the  wrath  of  God  be,  an  enemy  whom  we  can  neither  fight  nor  flee  from, 
neither  outwit  nor  outbrave?  Of  this  wrath  it  is  said,  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  2.  His  curse  is  His  separating  one  to  evil  (Deut. 
xxix.  21).  It  is  a  devoting  the  sinner  to  destruction,  to  all  the  direful  effects  of  the 
Divine  wrath.  II.  I  shall  show,  what  is  God's  wrath  and  curse  in  this  lite  and 
that  which  is  to  come.  1.  In  this  life  they  comprehend  all  the  miseries  of  this  world 
which  one  meets  with  on  this  side  of  time,  miseries  on  the  body,  relations,  name, 
estate,  employment ;  miseries  on  ihe  soul,  as  blindness,  hardness,  vile  affections, 
horrors  of  conscience,  &c,  and,  finally,  death  in  the  separation  of  soul  and  body. 
Thus  they  make  a  flood  of  miseries  in  this  life.  2.  In  the  life  to  come  they  compre- 
hend eternal  death  and  damnation,  and  an  eternal  being  under  the  punishment  ol 
Iobs  and  sense  in  hell.  So  they  make  a  shoreless  sea  of  miseries  in  the  life  to  come. 
HI.  I  proceed  to  show,  that  there  is  no  sin  which  does  not  deserve  these,  bui 
that  every  sin  deserves  this  wrath  and  curse.  1.  The  wages  of  every  sin  is 
death  (Rom.  vi.  23).  2.  Every  sin  is  a  breach  of  the  law ;  and  be  who  breaks  it  in 
one  point  is  guilty  of  all  (Jam.  ii.  10).     The  commands  of  the  law  have  all  one 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in. 

Author,  whose  majesty  is  offended  by  whatsoever  breach.   The  law  requires  universal 
obedience.  3.  Christ  died  for  all  the  sins  of  all  His  elect  (1  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  1  John  i.  7). 
4.  The  least  sin  will  condemn  a  man  if  it  be  not  forgiven  (Matt.  v.  19) ;  even  idle 
words  (Matt.  xii.  36,  37).     IV.  I  come  to  show,  why  eveby  sin  deserves  so  much. 
The  reason  is,  it  is  a  kind  of  infinite  evil ;  and,  therefore,  since  the  punishment  i3 
deservedly  proportioned  to  the  offence,  it  deserves  infinite  punishment.     Sin  is  an 
infinite  evil  in  two  respects.    1.  In  respect  that  the  guilt  and  defilement  of  it  is 
never  taken  away,  bat  endures  for  ever,  unless  the  Lord  Himself  in  mercy  do  remove 
it.     2.  In  respect  it  wrongs  an  infinite  God.    The  creature,  being  finite,  is  not 
capable  of  punishment  infinite  in  value,  therefore  it  is  necessarily  infinite  in  dura- 
tion. There  is  a  manifold  wrong  to  God  in  the  least  sin.    (1)  It  wrongs  His  infinite 
sovereignty  (Jam.  ii.  10, 11).     (2)  It  wrongs  His  infinite  goodness  (Exod.  xx.  1,  if). 
(3)  It  wrongs  His  holiness  (Hab.  i.  13).    (4)  It  breaks  His  law,  the  eternal  rule  of 
righteousness  (1  John  iii.  4).     (T.  BotUm,  D.D.)        The  condition  of  men  under  the 
broken  covenant : — In  a  shipwreck,  when  the  ship  is  dashed  in  pieces  upon  a  rock, 
how  heavy  is  the  case  of  the  crew  among  the  raging  waves  ?    The  ship  can  no  more 
carry  them  to  the  harbour,  but,  failing  them,  leaves  them  to  the  mercy  of  the  waves. 
If  one  can  get  a  broken  plank  to  hold  by,  that  is  the  greatest  safety  there ;  but  thai 
doth  often  but  hold  in  their  miserable  lives  for  a  little,  till  the  passengers  are 
swallowed  up.     Such,  and  unspeakably  worse,  is  the  case  of  sinners  under  the 
broken  covenant  of  works,  which  leaves  them  under  the  curse,  as  we  see  in  the  text. 
In  which  we  have — 1.  The  covenant-state  of  some  of  mankind,  yea,  of  many  of 
them.     They  "  are  of  the  works  of  the  law ; "  it  is  the  same  thing  as  to  be  of  the 
law  of  works ;  that  is,  to  be  under  the  covenant  of  works.     2.  The  state  and  cast 
of  men  under  that  covenant ;  they  '*  are  under  the  curse."    The  covenant  is  broken, 
and  so  they  are  fallen  under  the  penalty.     As  the  blessing  or  promise,  which  they 
have  lost,  comprehends  all  good  for  time  and  eternity,  soul  and  body ;  so  the  curse 
comprehends  all  evil  on  soul  and  body  for  time  and  eternity.     3.  The  proof  and 
evidence  of  this  their  miserable  state  and  case.     I.  I  shall  evince  the  truth  of  this 
doctrine,  that  there  are  some,  yea,  many  of  mankind,  who  abb  still  under  the 
broken  covenant  of  WORKS.     This  will  clearly  appear,  if  ye  consider — 1.  That  there 
are  but  "  few  that  shall  be  saved  "  (Matt.  vii.  14).     Christ's  flock  is  but  a  very  little 
flock  (Luke  xii.  32).     The  truth  is,  all  men  by  nature  are  under  it,  and  so  are  born 
under  the  curse  (Eph.  ii.  3).    2.  The  Scripture  is  plain  on  this  head.      It  curseth 
and  condemneth  many  ;  Gal.  iii.  10,  "  Cursed  is  every  one,"  viz.,  who  is  under  the 
law ;  for  its  curse  cannot  reach  others,  there  being  "  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus"  (Bom.  viii.  1).   It  condemns  all  unbelievers;  John  iii.  18,  "He 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,"  viz.,  by  the  sentence  of  the  law  as  the 
covenant  of  works;  for  the  covenant  of  grace  condemns  no  man  (John  v.  45)  ;  said 
oar  Lord  to  the  Jews,  "  Do  not  think  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  the  Father :  there  is 
one  that  accuseth  you,  even  Moses,  in  whom  ye  trust."    Chap.  xii.  47,  "And  if  any 
man  hear  My  words  and  believe  not,  I  judge  him  not;  for  I  came  not  to  judge  the 
world  but  to  save  the  world."      3.  As  all  men  in  Adam  were  taken  into  the  cove- 
nant  of  works,  so  no  man  can  be  freed  from  the  obligation  of  it,  but  they  who  are 
discharged  from  it  by  God,  who  was  man's  party  in  it.     This  is  evident  from  the 
general  nature  of  contracts.    And  none  are  discharged  from  it  but  on  a  full  answer- 
ing of  all  it  could  demand  of  them  (Matt.  v.  18).     This  no  man  can  attain  unto  but 
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  whereby  the  soul  appropriates  and  applies  to  itself  Christ's 
obedience  and  satisfaction  offered  in  the  gospel ;  and  so,  pleading  these,  gets  up  the 
discharge ;  "  For  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  "  (Rom.  v.  1).    4.  Freedom  from  the  covenant  of  works  is  such  a  privi- 
lege as  requires  both  price  and  power,  each  of  them  infinite,  to  invest  a  sinner  with 
it.     6.  There  are  many  who  still  live  as  they  were  born ;  in  the  same  state  wherein 
their  father  Adam  left  them  when  he  broke  ;  who  were  never  to  this  day  in  any  d  ae 
concern  how  to  be  discharged  from  the  debt  he  left  upon  their  head,  or  of  the  bond 
of  the  covenant  of  works  which  in  him  they  entered  into.     6.  There  are  but  two 
covenants,  viz.,  of  works  and  grace  (Gal.  iv.  24),  as  there  never  were  but  two  ways 
of  life  and  salvation,  by  works  and  by  grace ;  and  but  two  federal  heads  of  mankind, 
the  first  and  second  Adam.     II.  Those  uhdeb  the  covenant  of  works  descrired. 
1.  Men  may  be  under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  yet  living  under  the  external  dis- 
pensation of  the  covenant  of  grace.      2.  Men  may  receive  the  seals  of  the  covenant 
of  grace,  and  yet  be  under  the  covenant  of  works.      3.  Men  may  be  convinced  in 
their  consciences  of  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  salvation  by  Adam's  covenant  of 
works,  and  yet  remain  under  it  still.   4.  Men,  upon  the  offer  of  the  covenant  of  grace 


©ha*,  m.]  OALATIANS.  161 

made  to  them,  may  aim  at  accepting  of  it,  and  so  enter  into  a  personal  covenant 
with  God,  and  yet  remain  under  the  covenant  of  works.  But  more  particularly  and 
directly — (1)  All  unregenerate  persons  are  under  the  covenant  of  works.  That  man 
or  woman  is  yet  a  branch  of  the  old  Adam,  growing  on  the  old  stock,  a  stranger  to 
the  new  covenant,  because  not  in  Christ,  the  head  of  the  covenant.  (2)  All  that 
have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwelling  in  them  are  under  the  covenant  of  works,  for 
•'  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His  "  (Rom.  viii.  9).  Gal. 
v.  8,  "  But  if  ye  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law."  It  is  one  of  the  first 
promises  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  the  giving  of  the  Spirit  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  27),  "A 
new  Spirit  will  I  put  within  you."  (3)  All  unbelievers  (John  iii.  18).  Whosoever  is 
destitute  of  saving  faith  is  under  the  covenant  of  works  ;  for  it  is  by  faith  that  one 
is  brought  within  the  bond  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  is  married  unto  Christ,  being 
dead  to  the  law.  (4)  All  unsanctified,  unholy  persons  (Rom.  vi.  14).  So  that  true 
holiness  is  an  infallible  mark  of  one  delivered  from  the  law ;  and  unholiness,  of  one 
that  is  yet  hard  and  fast  under  it  (Gal.  v.  18).  (5)  All  profane,  loose,  and  licentious 
men  are  under  the  covenant  of  works  (Rom.  vii.  5  and  viii.  2).  These  men  of  Belial 
are  under  that  heavy  yoke.  (6)  All  mere  moralists,  such  as  satisfy  themselves  with 
common  hone&ty  and  sobriety,  living  in  the  meantime  strangers  to  religious  exer- 
cises, and  without  a  form  of  godliness.  These  are  under  the  covenant  of  works,  as 
seeking  justification  and  acceptance  with  God  by  their  conformity  (such  as  it  is)  to 
the  letter  of  the  law  (Gal.  v.  4).  They  are  under  the  covenant  of  works  with  a 
witness,  having  betaken  themselves  to  their  shrerls  of  moral  honesty,  as  so  many 
broken  boards  of  that  split  ship.  (7)  All  formal  hypocrites  or  legal  professors,  these 
sons  and  daughters  of  the  bond-woman  (Gal.  iv.  24,  25).  These  are  they  who  have 
been  convinced,  but  never  were  converted ;  who  have  been  awakened  by  the  law, 
but  were  never  laid  to  rest  by  the  gospel ;  who  are  brought  to  duties,  but  have  never 
been  brought  out  of  them  to  Jesus  Christ;  who  pretend  to  be  married  to  Christ,  but 
were  never  yet  divorced  from  nor  dead  to  the  law ;  and  so  are  still  joined  to  the  first 
husband,  the  law,  as  a  covenant  of  works.  III.  The  effect  of  the  beoken  cove- 
nant of  works  upon  those  who  abe  dndeb  it.  1.  It  has  and  exercises  a  commanding 
power  over  them,  binding  them  to  its  obedience  with  the  strongest  bonds  and  ties 
of  authority.  (1)  It  commands  and  binds  to  perfect  obedience  under  pain  of  the 
curse.  (2)  It  commands,  without  any  promise  of  strength  at  all  to  perform.  2.  It 
has  a  debarring  power  over  those  under  it,  in  respect  of  the  promise.  It  bars  them 
from  life  or  salvation  so  long  as  they  are  under  its  dominion,  (1)  There  is  no  life 
to  the  sinner  without  complete  satisfaction  to  justice  for  the  wrong  he  has  done  to 
the  honour  of  God  and  His  law ;  Heb.  ix.  22,  for  "  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no 
remission."  (2)  There  is  no  life  and  salvation  without  perfect  obedience  to  its 
commands  for  the  time  to  come ;  Matt.  xix.  17,  "  If  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,"  says 
Christ  unto  the  young  man  in  the  gospel,  "  keep  the  commandments."  This  was 
the  condition  of  the  covenant ;  and  it  iB  not  enough  that  a  man  pay  the  penalty  of 
a  broken  covenant,  but  be  must  perform  the  condition  of  it  ere  he  can  plead  the 
benefit.  3.  A  cursing  and  condemning  power,  in  respect  of  the  threatening.  4.  An 
irritating  influence  upon  all  that  are  under  it,  so  that,  instead  of  making  them 
better,  it  makes  them  worse,  stirring  up  their  corruptions,  like  a  nest  of  ants,  being 
troubled  by  one's  touching  of  them  (Rom.  vii.  9,  10, 11).  Now  this  is  accidental  to 
the  law  as  the  covenant  of  works ;  for  it  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good ;  and  therefore 
can  never  bring  forth  sin  as  the  native  fruit  of  it.  But  it  is  owing  to  the  corruption 
of  men's  hearts,  impatient  of  restraint  (Rom.  vii.  12,  13),  forecited.  While  the  sun 
shines  warm  on  a  garden,  the  flowers  send  forth  a  pleasant  smell ;  but  while  it  shines 
so  on  the  dunghill,  it  smells  more  abominably  than  at  other  times.  So  it  is  here. 
There  are  two  things  here  to  be  considered  in  the  case  of  the  law.  (1)  It  lays  an 
awful  restraint  on  the  sinner  with  its  commands  and  threatenings  (Gal.  iii.  10). 
The  unrenewed  man  would  never  make  a  holy  life  his  choice ;  might  he  freely  follow 
his  own  inclination,  he  would  not  regard  what  is  good,  but  give  himself  a  liberty  in 
sinful  courses.  But  the  law  is  as  a  bridle  to  him  ;  it  crosses  and  contradicts  his 
sinful  inclinations.  It  is  to  him  as  the  bridle  and  spur  to  the  horse ;  as  the  master 
and  his  whip  to  the  slave.  So  that  the  sinner  can  never  cordially  like  it,  but  all  the 
obedience  it  gets  from  him  is  mercenary,  having  no  higher  springs  than  hope  of 
reward  and  fear  of  punishment.  (2)  In  the  meantime  it  has  no  power  to  subdue 
his  corruptions,  to  remove  his  rebellious  disposition,  to  reconcile  his  heart  to  holi- 
ness, or  to  strengthen  him  for  the  performance  of  duty ;  "  For  the  law  was  given  by 
Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ  "  (John  i.  17).  As  it  finds  the  man 
without  strength,  so  it  leaves  him,  though  it  never  oeases  to  exact  duty  of  him, 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

Though  no  straw  is  given  to  the  sinner  by  it,  yet  the  tale  ot  the  bricks  it  will  not 
Buffer  to  be  diminished.  IV.  I  now  proceed  to  show,  why  so  many  do  still  kemaui 
under  the  broken  covenant  op  works.  1.  It  is  natural  to  men,  being  made  with 
Adam,  and  us  in  his  loins ;  it  is  engrained  in  the  hearts  of  all  men  naturally.  "Tell 
me,"  says  the  apostle  (Gal.  ii.  21),  "ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not 
hear  the  law  ?  "  And  there  are  impressions  of  it  to  be  found  in  the  hearts  of  all 
among  the  ruins  of  the  fall.  We  have  a  cieai  proof  of  it — (1)  In  men  left  to  the 
swing  of  their  own  nature  ;  they  all  go  this  way  in  tbeir  dealing  with  God  for  life 
and  favour.  (2)  In  men  awakened  and  convinced,  and  in  moral  seriousness  seeking 
to  know  what  course  they  shall  take  to  be  saved,  and  plying  their  work  for  that 
end.  They  all  take  this  principle  for  granted,  That  it  is  by  doing  they  must  obtain 
life  and  salvation  (Matt.  xix.  16).  (3)  In  the  saints,  who  are  truly  married  to  Jesus 
Christ,  0  what  hankering  after  the  first  husband,  how  great  the  remaius  of  a  legal 
npirit,  how  hard  is  it  for  them  to  forget  their  father's  house!  (Psa.  xlv.  10).  2.  The 
way  of  that  covenant  is  most  agreeable  to  the  pride  of  man's  heart.  A  proud  heart 
will  rather  serve  itself  with  the  less,  than  stoop  to  live  upon  free  grace  (Eom.  x.  3). 
Man  must  be  broken,  bruised,  and  humbled,  and  laid  very  low,  before  he  will  em- 
brace the  covenant  of  grace.  While  a  broken  board  of  the  first  covenant  will  do 
men  any  service  they  will  hold  by  it  rather  than  come  to  Christ ;  like  men  who  will 
rather  live  in  a  cottage  of  their  own  than  in  another  man's  castle.  3.  It  is  most 
agreeable  to  man's  reason  in  its  corrupt  state.  If  one  should  have  asked  the  opinion 
of  the  philosophers  concerning  that  religion  which  taught  salvation  by  a  crucified 
Christ,  and  through  the  righteousness  of  another,  they  would  have  said  it  was  un- 
reasonable and  foolish,  and  that  the  only  way  to  true  happiness  was  the  way  of 
moral  virtue.  4.  Ignorance  and  insensibility  of  the  true  state  of  the  matter  as  it 
now  is.  There  is  a  thick  darkness  about  Mount  Sinai  through  the  whole  dominion 
of  the  law,  so  that  they  who  live  under  the  covenant  of  works  see  little  but  what 
they  see  by  the  lightniugs  now  and  then  flashing  out.  Hence  they  little  know  where 
they  are  nor  what  they  are.  (1)  They  do  not  understand  the  nature  of  that  cove- 
nant to  purpose  (Gal.  iv.  21).  (2)  They  are  not  duly  sensible  of  their  own  utter 
inability  for  that  way  of  salvation.  V.  Application  op  this  doctrine.  1.  For  in- 
formation. Hence  learn — (1)  That  some,  yea,  many  of  mankind,  are  under  tha 
curse,  bound  over  to  wrath.  (2)  See  here  whence  it  is  that  true  holiness  is  so  rare, 
and  wickedness  and  ungodliness  so  rife.  (3)  Here  ye  may  see  the  true  spring  of 
legalism  in  principles  as  well  as  in  practice.  (4)  See  whence  it  is  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  is  so  little  understood,  and  in  the  purity  of  it  is  looked  at  as  a  strange 
thing.  2.  For  exhortation.  Be  exhorted  then  seriously  and  impartially  to  try 
what  covenant  ye  are  under.  For  motives,  consider — (1)  It  is  in  the  region  of  tha 
law  that  we  all  draw  our  first  breath.  And  no  man  will  get  out  from  its  dominion 
in  a  morning  dream.  We  owe  it  to  our  second  birth,  whoever  of  us  are  brought  into 
the  covenant  of  grace ;  but  that  is  not  our  original  state.  (2)  Till  once  ye  Bee 
yourselves  under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  so  lost  and  ruined  with  the  burden  of 
that  broken  covenant  on  yon  ;  ye  may  hear  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  ye  will 
never  take  hold  of  it  in  good  earnest  (Gal.  ii.  6).  Here  lies  the  ruin  of  the  most 
part  who  hear  the  gospel ;  they  were  never  slain  by  the  law,  and  therefore  never 
quickened  by  the  gospel ;  they  never  find  the  working  of  the  deadly  poison  conveyed 
to  them  from  the  first  Adam,  and  therefore  they  see  no  beauty  in  the  second  Adam 
for  which  He  is  to  be  desired.  (3)  Your  salvation  or  ruin  turns  on  this  point. 
(4)  There  is  no  ease  for  a  poor  sinner  but  severity  and  rigour,  under  the  covenant 
of  works,  (b)  While  ye  are  under  that  covenant  ye  are  without  Christ  (Eph. 
ii.  12).  And  being  without  Christ,  ye  have  no  saving  interest  in  his  purchase. 
(6)  All  attempts  you  make  to  get  to  heaven  while  under  this  covenant  will  be 
vain.  The  children  of  that  covenant  are,  by  an  unalterable  statute  of  the 
court  of  heaven,  excluded  from  the  heavenly  inheritance;  so  that,  do  what  you 
will,  while  ye  abide  under  it  you  may  as  well  fall  a-ploughing  the  rocks,  and 
sowing  your  seed  in  the  sand  of  the  sea,  as  think  to  get  to  heaven  that  way.  (Ibid.) 
The  misery  of  those  under  the  broken  covenant : — I.  What  the  curse  is  which  men 
are  under.  1.  God's  curse.  2.  The  curse  of  the  law.  (1)  the  revenging  wrath 
of  God  is  in  it.  (2)  A  binding  over  of  the  sinner  unto  punishment  for  the  satis- 
faction  of  offended  justice.  (3)  A  separating  of  the  sinner  unto  destruction. 
II.  What  it  is  to  be  under  the  curse.  1.  Under  the  wrath  of  God.  2.  Bound  over 
to  revenging  justice.  3.  A  mark  for  the  arrows  of  vengeance.  III.  Confirmation 
ot  the  truth  of  this  doctrine.  1.  This  is  evident  from  plain  Scripture  testi- 
mony.    The  text  is  express.     2.  It  is  evident  from  the  consideration  of  the  jtutio* 


cha».  m.]  GALATIANS.  161 

of  God,  as  the  Sovereign  of  the  world.  Two  things  will  make  this  clear.  1.  Ths 
breaking  of  that  covenant,  whereof  all  under  it  are  guilty,  deserves  the  curse. 
They  broke  it  in  Adam,  and  they  are  breaking  it  every  day ;  and  so  they  deserve 
the  curse.  Now,  sin'B  deserving  of  the  curse  does  not  arise  from  the  threatening  of 
eternal  wrath  annexed  for  a  sanction  to  the  commands  in  the  law,  as  our  new 
divinity  would  have  it ;  that  is  framed  for  bringing  believers  under  the  curse  of  the 
law  too.  But  it  arises  from  sin's  contrariety  to  the  command  of  the  holy  law  ;  for 
it  is  manifest,  that  sin  does  not  therefore  deserve  a  curse,  because  a  curse  is 
threatened  against  it ;  but  because  it  deserves  a  curse,  therefore  a  curse  is  threa- 
tened. Now  look  at  sin  in  the  glass  of  the  holy  commandment,  and  you  will  see 
it  deserves  the  curse.  For  the  commandment  is — (1)  An  image  of  the  sovereign 
spotless  holiness  of  God — "  The  law  is  holy  "  (Bom.  vii.  12).  When  God  would 
let  out  the  beams  of  His  own  holiness  to  man,  He  gave  him  the  law  of  the  ten 
commandments,  as  a  transcript  of  it,  and  wrote  them  in  his  heart;  and  afterwards, 
the  writing  being  much  defaced,  He  wrote  them  to  him  in  His  Word.  So  the  com- 
mandment is  holy  without  spot,  as  God  is.  So  that  the  creature  rising  up  against 
the  commandment,  riseth  up  against  God.  (2)  It  is  an  image  of  His  righteousness 
and  equity,  whereby  He  does  justly  to  all :  "  Tha  commandment  is  just  "  (Bom. 
vii.  12).  The  commandment  is  all  right  in  every  part,  and  of  perpetual  equity — 
"  I  esteem  all  Thy  precepts  concerning  all  things  to  be  right"  (Psa.  cxix.  128). 
Look  to  it  as  it  prescribes  our  duty  to  God,  to  our  neighbour,  and  to  ourselves  (Tit. 
ii.  12).  It  is  of  spotless  and  perfect  righteousness,  as  that  God  is  whose  righteous 
nature  and  will  it  represents.  (3)  An  image  of  His  goodness — "  The  command- 
ment is  good  (Bom.  vii.  12).  It  is  all  lovely,  lovely  in  every  part ;  lovely  in  itself, 
and  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  are  capable  to  discern  truly  what  is  good,  and  whit 
evil — •'  0  how  I  love  Thy  law  !  "  (Psa.  cxix.  97).  Conformity  to  it  is  the  perfection 
of  the  creature,  and  its  true  happiness,  as  rendering  the  creature  like  unto  God 
(1  John  iii.  2).  Thus  the  breaking  of  the  covenant,  by  doing  contrary  to  the  holy 
commandment,  is  the  transgressing  of  the  holy,  just,  and  good  will  of  our  sove- 
reign Lord ;  a  defacing  of  and  doing  violence  to  His  image,  who  is  the  chief  good 
and  infinite  good.  Therefore  sin  is  the  chief  or  greatest  evil,  and  consequently 
deserves  the  curse.  2.  Since  it  deserves  the  curse,  the  justice  of  God,  which  gives 
everything  its  due,  ensures  the  curse  upon  it  (Gen.  xviii.  25  ;  2  Thess.  i.  6).  If  sin 
did  not  lay  the  sinner  under  the  curse,  how  would  the  rectoral  justice  of  God 
appear  ?  He  will  rain  a  terrible  storm  on  the  wicked,  not  because  He  delights  in 
the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  because  He  loves  righteousness  (Psa.  xi.  6,  7),  and  His 
righteousness  requires  it.  3.  It  appears  from  the  threatening  of  the  covenant — 
"In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die"  (Gen.  ii.  17).  And 
the  truth  of  God  requires  that  it  take  effect,  and  be  not  like  words  spoken  to  the 
wind.  4.  If  man  had  once  run  the  course  of  His  obedience,  being  come  to  the 
last  point  of  it,  he  behoved  to  have  been  justified  and  adjudged  to  eternal  life,  accord- 
ing to  the  tenor  of  the  covenant — "  The  man  which  doth  those  things  shall  live 
by  them  "  (Bom.  x.  5) ;  the  sentence  of  the  law  would  immediately  have  passed  in 
his  favour,  according  to  the  promise.  And  therefore  man,  having  once  broken  the 
covenant,  falls  under  the  curse,  and  is  adjudged  to  eternal  death ;  for  the  curse 
bears  the  same  relation  to  the  threatening  that  law-justification  bears  to  the  pro- 
mise. 5.  Christ's  being  made  a  curse  for  sinners  is  a  clear  evidence  of  sinners 
being  naturally  under  the  curse.  (laid.)  Marts  condition  under  the  curse  : — The 
most  terrible  scene  that  men  are  capable  of  beholding,  in  time  or  eternity;  Happy 
they  who  timely  behold  it,  so  as  to  be  thereby  stirred  up  to  flee  to  Christ.    I.  The 

CONDITION   OP  THE   NATURAL   MAN'S   SOUL   UNDER   THE   CURSE.      This  is  the  most  noble 

part  of  man.  In  the  moment  he  sinned,  his  soul  fell  under  the  curse.  And  so — 
1.  His  soul  was  separated  from  God,  in  favour  with  whom  its  life  lay.  2.  Hence, 
man's  soul-beauty  was  lost ;  death  seized  on  him  by  sin,  his  beauty  went  off.  A 
dead  corpse  is  an  awful  sight,  where  the  soul  is  gone.  But  thy  dead  soul,  from 
which  God  is  gone,  0  natural  man  !  is  a  more  awful  one.  Couldst  thou  see  thy 
inward  man,  as  well  as  thou  seest  the  outward,  thou  wouldst  see  a  soul  within  thee 
of  a  ghastly  countenance,  the  eyes  of  its  understanding  set,  its  speech  laid,  all  the 
spiritual  senses  now  locked  up,  no  pulse  of  kindly  affection  towards  God  beating 
any  more ;  but  the  soul  lying  speechless,  motionless,  cold  and  stiff  like  a  stone, 
under  the  curse.  3.  Hence  the  whole  soul  is  corrupted  in  all  the  faculties  thereof. 
As  the  soul  being  gone,  the  body  corrupts  ;  so  the  soul,  being  divested  of  its  original 
righteousness,  is  wholly  corrupted  and  defiled,  having  a  kind  of  verminating  life  in 
it — "  They  are  altogether  become  filthy  "  (Psa.  xiv.  3).     And  as  when  the  curpo  was 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  m. 

laid  on  the  earth,  the  very  nature  of  the  soil  was  altered ;  so  the  souls  of  men 
under  the  curse  are  quite  altered  from  their  original  holy  constitution.    This  ap- 
pears in  all  the  faculties  thereof.     (1)  Look  into  the  mind,  framed  at  first  to  be  the 
eye  of  the  soul ;  there  is  a  lamentable  alteration  upon  it  under  the  curse.    "  O  how 
is  the  fine  gold  become  dim  1 "     There  is  a  mist  upon  it,  whereby  it  is  become 
weak,  dull,  and  stupid  in  spiritual  things,  and  really  incapable  of  these  things. 
Darkness  has  sat  down  on  the  mind — "  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness  "  (Eph.  v.  8) ; 
and  there  spiritual  blindness  and  ignorance  reign,  not  to  be  removed  by  man's 
instruction,   or  any  power  less  than  what  can  take  off  the  curse.     This  cursed 
ground  is  fruitful  of  mistakes,  misapprehensions,  delusions,  monstrous  and  mis- 
shapen conceptions  in  Divine  things ;   doubtings,   distrust,   unbelief   of    Divine 
Revelation,  grow  there,  of  their  own  accord,  as  the  natural  product  of  the  cursed 
soil;  while  the  seed  of  the  word  of  the  kingdom  sown  there  does  perish,  and  faith 
cannot  spring  up  in  it,  for  such  is  the  soil  that  they  cannot  take  with  it.     (2)  Look 
into  the  will,  framed  to  have  the  command  in  the  soul,  and  it  is  in  wretched  plight. 
Its  uprightness  for  God  is  gone,  and  it  is  turned  away  backward  from  Him.    It  is 
not  only  under  an  inability  for  good,  but  having  lost  all  power  to  turn  itself  that 
way — "  We  were  without  strength  "  (Rom.  v.  6)  ;  "  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in 
you  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure  "  (Phil.  ii.  13) ;  bu*;  it  is  averse  to  it,  as 
the  untrained  bullock  is  to  the  yoke  (Psa.  lxxxi.  11).     (3)  Look  into  the  affections, 
framed  to  be  the  arms  and  feet  of  the  soul  for  good,  and  they  are  quite  wrong. 
Set  spiritual  objects  before  them  to  be  embraced,  then  they  are  powerless,  they  can- 
not embrace  them,  nor  grip  them  stedfastly ;  they  presently  grow  weary,  and  let  go 
any  hold  they  have  of  them ;  like  the  stony-ground  hearers,  who  because  they  had 
no  root  withered  away  (Matt.  xiii.  6).    But  as  for  carnal  objects,  agreeable  to  their 
lusts,  they  fly  upon  them,  they  clasp  and  twine  about  them  ;  they  hold  so  fast  a 
grip,  that  it  is  with  no  small  difficulty  they  can  be  got  to  let  go  their  hold.     Sum- 
mon them  to  duty,  they  are  flat,  there  is  no  raising  of  them,  they  cannot  stir;  but 
on  the  least  signal  given  them  by  temptation,  they  are  like  Saul's  hungry  soldiers, 
flying  on  the  spoil.     (4)  Look  into  the  conscience,  framed  to  be  in  the  soul  God's 
deputy  for  judgment,  His  spy,  and  watchman  over  His  creature ;  and  it  is  miser- 
ably corrupted — "Their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled"  (Tit.  i.  15).    It  is  quite 
unfitted  for  its  office.     It  is  fallen  under  a  sleepy  distemper,  sleeping  and  loving  to 
slumber.     (5)  Look  into  the  memory,  framed  to  be  the  storehouse  of  the  soul,  and 
the  symptoms  of  the  curse  appear  there  too.     Things  agreeable  to  the  corruption 
of  nature,  and  which  may  strengthen  the  same,  stick  fast  in  the  memory,  so  that 
often  one  cannot  get  them  forgotten,  though  they  would  fain  have  their  remem- 
brance razed.    But  spiritual  things  natively  fall  out  of  it,  and  are  soon  forgotten  ; 
the  memory,   like  a  leaking  vessel,  letting  them  slip.    4.  Man  being  in  these 
respects  spiritually  dead,  the  which  death  was  the  consequent  of  the  first  sin,  the 
curse  lies  on  him  as  a  gravestone,  and  the  penalty  binds  it  upon  him,  that  he  can- 
not recover.     So  he  is  in  some  sort,  by  the  curse,  buried  out  of  God's  sight.    5. 
Hence  that  corruption  of  the  soul  grows  more  and  more.    As  the  dead  corpse,  the 
longer  it  lies  in  the  grave,  it  rots  the  more,  till  devouring  death  has  perfected  its 
work  in  its  utter  ruin  ;  so  the  dead  soul  under  the  curse  grows  worse  and  worse  in  all 
the  faculties  thereof,  till  it  is  brought  to  the  utmost  pitch  of  sin  and  misery.    6. 
And  hence  the  corruption  of  nature  shoots  forth  itself  in  innumerable  particular 
lusts,  according  to  its  growth  (Mark  vii.  21,  22,  23).     But  this  is  not  all  the  misery 
of  the  soul  under  the  curse  ;  there  are  additional  plagues,  which  by  the  curse  they 
are  liable  to,  who  are  under  it.   These  soul-plagues  are  of  two  sorts — silent  strokes, 
and  tormenting  plagues.     1.  Silent  strokes,  which  make  their  way  into  the  soul 
with  no  noise ;  but  the  less  they  are  felt,  they  are  the  more  dangerous  ;  such  as — 
(1)   Judicial  blindness.      (2)  Strong  delusions.      (3)  Hardness  of  heart.      (4)  A 
reprobate  sense.      (5)  Vile  affection.      2.  Tormenting  plagues.      Many  are  the 
executioners  employed  against  the  soul  fallen  under  the  curse,  who  together  do 
pierce,  rack,  and  rend  it,  as  it  were,  in  pieces.     (1)  Discontent.     (2)  Wrath.     (3) 
Anxiety.     (4)  Sorrow  of  heart.     (5)  Fear  and  terror.     (6)  Despair.    H.  The  con- 
dition or  the  natural  man's  bodt  under  the  curse.  1.  It  is  liable  to  many  defects 
and  deformities  in  the  very  constitution  thereof.    Adam  and  Eve  were  at  their 
creation  not  only  sound  and  entire  in  their  souls,  but  in  their  bodies,  having 
nothing  unsightly  about  them.  But  0  how  often  now  is  there  seen  a  variation  from 
the  original  pattern,  in  the  very  formation  of  the  body  I      Some  are  born  deaf: 
dumb,  blind,  or  the  like.     Some  with  a  want  of  some  necessary  organ,  some  with 
srhat  is  superfluous.     Some  with  such  a  constitution  of  body  as  makes  them  idiots. 


giAP.  in.]  GALATIANS.  165 

the  organs  of  the  body  being  so  far  ont  of  case,  that  they  are  unfit  for  the  actions 
of  the  rational  life ;  and  the  soul  is  by  them  kept  in  a  mist  during  the  union  with 
that  body.  All  this  is  owing  to  sin  and  the  curse,  without  which  there  had  been 
no  such  things  in  the  body  of  man.  2.  As  the  temperature  of  the  body  was  by 
the  firat  sin  altered,  bo  as  it  disposed  to  sin  (Gen.  iii.  7),  so  by  the  curse  that  de- 
generate constitution  of  it  is  penally  bound  on,  by  which  it  comes  to  pass  that  it 
is  a  snare  to  the  soul  continually.  The  seeds  of  sin  are  in  it;  it  is  "sinful  flesh  " 
(Rom.  viii.  3),  "  a  vile  body  "  (Phil.  iii.  21),  and  these  seeds  are  never  removed 
while  the  curse  lies  on  it,  being  a  part  of  that  death  to  which  it  ia  bound  over  by 
the  curse.  3.  It  is  under  the  curse  a  vessel  of  dishonour.  By  its  original  make, 
it  was  a  vessel  of  honour,  appointed  to  honourable  uses,  and  was  so  used  by  the 
soul  before  sin  entered ;  and  every  member  had  its  particular  honourable  service, 
serving  the  soul  in  subordination  to  God.  But  now  it  is  brought  down  from  its 
honour,  and  its  "members  are  yielded  instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin  " 
(Bom.  vi.  13),  and  it  is  abused  to  the  vilest  purposes ;  and  it  is  never  restored  to  its 
honour  till,  the  curse  being  removed,  it  becomes  the  temple  of  God,  by  virtue  of 
the  purchase  of  it  made  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  4.  It  is  liable  to  many  mischiefs 
from  without,  tending  to  render  it  uneasy  for  the  time,  and  at  length  to  dissolve 
the  frame  of  it.  From  the  heavens  above  us,  the  air  about  us,  the  earth  under- 
neath us,  and  all  that  therein  is,  it  is  liable  to  hurt.  5.  There  is  a  seed-plot  of  much 
misery  within  it.  It  is  by  the  curse  become  a  weak  body,  and  so  liable  to  much  toil 
and  weariness,  fainting  and  languishing  under  the  weight  of  the  exercise  it  is  put  to 
(Gen.  iii.  19).  And  not  only  so,  but  it  hath  in  it  such  seeds  of  corruption,  tending 
to  its  dissolution,  as  spring  up  in  many  and  various  maladies,  which  often  prove  so 
heavy  that  they  make  life  itself  a  burden.  6.  In  all  these  respects  the  body  is  a 
clog  to  the  soul  in  point  of  duty,  often  hanging  like  a  dead  weight  upon  it,  un- 
fitting it  for,  and  hindering  it  from,  its  most  necessary  work.  The  sinful  soul  is  in 
itself  most  unfit  for  its  great  work,  in  this  state  of  trial,  by  reason  of  the  evil 
qualities  of  it  under  the  curse.  But  the  wretched  body  makes  it  more  so.  The 
care  of  the  body  doth  so  take  up  its  thoughts  with  most  men,  that,  caring  for  it, 
the  soul  is  lost.  Its  strength  and  vigour  is  a  snare  to  it,  and  its  weakness  and  un- 
«asiness  often  interrupt  or  quite  mar  the  exercises  wherein  the  soul  might  profitably 
be  employed.  But  it  may  be  objected,  That  by  this  account  of  the  condition  of 
those  under  the  curse,  the  case  of  natural  men  and  of  believers  in  Christ  is  alike ; 
since  it  is  evident,  that  not  onlv  these  bodily  miseries,  but  many  of  these  soul 
miseries,  are  common  to  both.  I  answer :  Though  it  seem  to  be  alike  in  the  eye 
of  beholders,  in  regard  these  miseries  are  materially  the  same  on  natural  men  and 
on  the  children  of  God ;  yet  really  there  is  a  vast  difference.  On  the  former  they 
are  truly  effects  of  the  curse ;  on  the  latter  they  are  indeed  effects  of  sin,  but  not 
of  the  eurse — "  For  Christ  hath  redeemed  them  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
made  a  eurse  for  them"  (Gal.  iii.  13).  (1)  The  stream  of  miseries  on  soul  or  body 
to  a  natural  man,  runs  in  the  channel  of  the  covenant  of  works  ;  but  to  a  believer, 
in  the  channel  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  (2)  There  is  revenging  wrath  in  the 
one,  but  fatherly  anger  only  in  the  other.  (3)  The  mi-eries  of  the  ungodly  in  tbia 
life  are  an  earnest  of  eternal  misery  in  hell ;  but  those  of  the  godly  are  medicines, 
to  keep  back  their  soul  from  death — "  When  we  are  judged,  we  are  chastened  of 
the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world"  (1  Cor.  xi.  32). 
III.  The  whole  man  is  under  the  cukse.  He  is  cursed — 1.  In  his  name  and 
reputation.  2.  In  his  employment  and  calling  in  the  world.  3.  In  his  worldly 
substance.  4.  In  his  relations.  5.  In  his  lot,  whether  afflicted  or  prosperous.  G. 
In  his  use  of  the  means  of  grace.  7.  In  his  person.  (1)  He  is  under  the 
power  of  Satan.  (2)  Being  under  the  curse,  he  is  continually  in  hazard  of  utter 
destruction,  of  having  the  copestone  put  on  his  misery,  and  being  set  beyond  all 
possibility  of  help.  If  his  eyes  were  opened  he  would  see  himself  every  moment  in 
danger  of  dropping  down  into  the  pit  of  hell  (Psa.  vii.  12).  (Ibid.)  Death  under 
the  curse  : — I.  The  natural  under  the  curse  must  not  only  die,  but  die  by 
virtue  of  the  curse.  Death  in  any  shape  has  a  terrible  aspect,  it  is  the  king  of 
terrors,  and  can  hardly  miss  to  make  the  creature  shrink,  being  a  destruction 
of  nature,  and  carrying  him  into  another  world  where  he  never  was  before,  and 
putting  him  into  a  quite  new  state,  which  he  has  had  no  prior  experience  of.  But 
death  to  the  natural  man  is  in  a  singular  manner  terrible  ;  it  is  death  of  the  worst 
kind.  Soul  and  body  joined  in  sin  against  God,  and  by  sin  the  man  was  separated 
from  God  ;  and  as  a  meet  reward  of  the  error,  the  companions  in  sin  are  separated 
by  the  eurse  at  length  ;  which  would  have  remained  eternally  in  a  happy  union 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m, 

had  not  sin  entered.  Now,  that  we  may  have  a  view  of  death  to  a  sinner  by  virtue 
of  the  curse,  consider — 1.  It  is  the  ruining  stroke  from  the  hand  of  an  absolute  God, 
proceeding  according  to  the  covenant  of  works  against  the  sinner  in  full  measure. 
2.  It  is  the  breaking  up  of  the  peace  betwixt  God  and  them  for  ever  :  it  is  God 
setting  His  seal  to  the  proclamation  of  an  everlasting  war  with  them  ;  after  which 
no  message  of  peace  is  to  go  betwixt  them  any  more  for  ever.  3.  It  puts  an  end  to 
all  their  comfort  of  whatsoever  nature  (Luke  xvi.  25).  4.  It  is  death  armed  with 
its  sting,  and  all  the  strength  it  has  from  sin,  and  a  holy  just  broken  law.  5.  It  is 
the  fearful  passage  out  of  this  world  into  everlasting  misery  (Luke  xvi.  22,  23).  It 
is  a  dark  valley  at  best ;  but  the  Lord  is  with  His  people  while  they  go  through  it 
(Psalm  xxiii.  4).  It  is  a  deep  water  at  best ;  but  where  the  curse  is  removed,  the 
Lord  Jesus  will  be  the  lifter  up  of  the  head,  that  the  passenger  shall  not  sink.  But 
who  can  conceive  the  horror  of  the  passage  the  sinner  under  the  curse  has,  upon 
whom  that  frightful  weight  lies  ?  It  leads  him  as  an  ox  to  the  slaughter  ;  it  opens 
like  a  trap-door  underneath  him,  by  which  he  falls  into  the  pit,  and  like  a  whirl- 
pool swallows  him  up  in  a  moment,  and  he  is  staked  down  in  an  unalterable  state 
of  unspeakable  misery.  II.  Afteb  death  he  still  remains  under  the  curse.  Then 
comes  the  full  execution  of  the  curse,  and  it  is  fixed  on  the  sinner  without  possi- 
bility of  deliverance.  1.  All  his  sins,  of  all  kinds,  in  all  the  periods  of  his  life,  from 
the  first  to  the  last  breathing  on  earth  are  upon  him.  The  curse  seals  them  up  as 
in  a  bag,  that  not  one  of  them  can  be  missing  (Hos.  xiii.  12).  2.  As  the  man's 
sins  were  multiplied,  so  the  curses  of  the  law  were  multiplied  upon  him  ;  for  it  is 
the  constant  voice  of  the  law,  upon  every  transgression  of  those  under  the  covenant 
of  works,  *'  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  "  (Gal.  iii.  10).  How  then  can  such  a  one  escape, 
while  innumerable  cords  of  death  are  upon  him,  before  a  just  Judge  with  their 
united  force  binding  him  over  to  destruction  ?  3.  There  is  no  removing  of  the 
curse  then  (Luke  xiii.  25).  The  time  of  trial  is  over,  and  judgment  is  to  be  passed 
according  to  what  was  done  in  the  flesh.  When  a  court  is  erected  within  a  sinner's 
own  breast  in  this  world,  and  conscience  convicts  him  as  a  transgressor  of  the  law, 
a  covenant  breaker,  and  therefore  pronounces  him  cursed  ;  there  is  a  Surety  for  the 
sinner  to  fly  to,  an  Advocate  into  whose  hands  he  may  commit  his  cause,  a 
Mediator  to  trust  in  and  roll  his  burden  on  by  faith.  But  before  that  tribunal  there 
is  none  for  the  sinner  who  comes  thither  under  the  curse.  4.  Wherefore  he  must 
there  inevitably  sink  under  the  weight  of  the  curse  for  ever  (Psalm  i.  5).  He  must 
fall  a  sacrifice  for  his  own  sin,  who  now  slights  the  only  atoning  sacrifice,  even 
Christ  our  passover  sacrificed  for  us.  IH.  The  soul  is  shut  up  in  hell,  by  virtue 
or  the  curse.  1.  Separate  souls  under  the  curse,  after  their  particular  judgment, 
are  lodged  in  the  place  of  the  damned.  2.  The  dregs  of  the  curse  shall  there  be 
wrung  out  to  them,  and  they  made  to  drink  them,  in  the  fearful  punishment  in- 
flicted upon  them  for  the  satisfaction  of  offended  justice,  for  all  their  sins,  original 
and  actual.  3.  They  are  sensible  of  their  lost  happiness  (Luke  xvi.  23).  They  see 
it  to  their  unspeakable  anguish.  And  how  must  it  pierce  the  wretched  soul,  to 
think  that  not  only  all  is  lost,  but  lost  without  possibility  of  recovery  ?  4.  Their 
consciences  are  then  awakened,  never  to  fall  asleep  any  more  for  ever.  They  will 
scorch  them  then  like  a  fire  that  cannot  be  quenched,  and  gnaw  them  like  a  worm 
that  never  dieth.  The  conscience  that  was  seared  till  it  was  past  feeling,  will  then 
be  fully  sensible.  The  evil  of  sin  will  then  be  clearly  seen,  because  felt  ;  the 
threatenings  of  the  holy  law  will  no  more  be  accounted  scarecrows,  nor  will  there  be 
any  such  fools  there  as  to  make  a  mock  of  sin.  5.  They  will  be  filled  with  torturing 
passions,  which  will  keep  the  soul  ever  on  the  rack.  Their  sinful  nature  remains 
with  them  under  the  curse,  and  they  will  sin  againBt  God  still,  as  well  as  they  did 
in  this  life  ;  but  with  this  difference,  that  whereas  they  had  pleasure  in  their  sins 
here,  they  shall  have  none  in  their  sins  there.  6.  In  this  state  they  must  continue 
till  the  last  day,  that  they  be  reunited  to  their  respective  bodies,  and  so  the  whole 
man  get  his  sentence  at  the  general  judgment,  adjudging  both  soul  and  body  to 
everlasting  fire.  IV.  The  sinner's  body  eoES  to  the  ddst.  1.  It  is  laid  up  there 
as  in  a  prison,  like  a  malefactor  in  a  dungeon,  to  be  kept  there  till  the  day  of  execu- 
tion. The  bodies  of  the  godly  go  to  the  grave  too,  but  it  is  a  place  of  rest  to  them, 
where  they  rest  as  in  their  bed,  till  the  joyful  morning  of  the  resurrection 
(Isa.  lvii.  2).  2.  Their  sin  and  guilt  remains  on  them  there,  and  that  without  further 
possibility  of  a  removal  (Job  xx.  11).  Sin  is  a  dangerous  companion  in  life  ;  one 
had  better  live  in  chains  of  iron,  than  in  chains  of  guilt ;  but  happy  they  with 
whom  sin  parts  when  soul  and  body  part  at  death.     That  is  the  lot  of  believers  in 


OBi*.  m.]  GALATIANS.  167 

Christ,  who  at  the  Bed  Sea  of  death  get  the  last  sight  of  it.  There  the  Lord  says 
to  the  dying  saint,  whether  he  hears  it  or  not,  as  Exod.  xiv.  13,  "  The  Egyptians 
whom  ye  have  seen  to-day  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more  for  ever."  But  the  man 
dying  under  the  curse,  all  his  sins  take  a  dead  gripe  of  him  never  to  be  let  go  ;  and 
when  he  lies  down  in  the  grave,  they  lie  down  with  him,  and  they  never  part.  3. 
All  the  ruin  brought  on  their  bodies  there,  is  done  by  virtue  of  the  curse  (Job  xxiv. 
19,  "  The  grave  consumes  those  which  have  sinned  ").  Death  makes  fearful  havoc 
where  it  comes  ;  not  only  doth  it  separate  the  soul  from  the  body  ;  but  separates 
the  several  parts  of  the  body  one  from  another,  until  it  reduce  the  whole  into  dust, 
not  to  bo  discerned  by  the  quickest  eye  from  common  dust.  Thus  it  fares  with  the 
bodies  of  the  godly  indeed,  as  well  as  the  bodies  of  the  wicked  ;  nevertheless  great 
is  the  difference, — the  curse  working  these  effects  in  the  bodies  of  the  latter,  but  not 
of  the  former, — stinged  death  in  the  one,  unstinged  death  in  the  other ;  so  all  these 
effects  in  the  one  are  pieces  of  revenging  wrath  for  the  satisfaction  of  justice  ;  in 
the  other  not  so,  but  like  the  melting  down  of  the  crazy  silver  vessel,  to  be  cast  into 
a  new  mould.  V.  The  wicked  shall  bise  again  under  the  curse.  1.  They  shall 
rise  again  out  of  their  graves  by  virtue  of  the  curse  (John  v.  29).  When  the  end  of 
time  is  come,  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  come 
forth,  godly  and  ungodly  ;  but  the  godly  shall  rise  by  virture  of  their  blessed  union 
with  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  11)  ;  the  ungodly  by  virtue  of  the  curse  of  the  broken 
covenant  on  them.  As  the  malefactor  is,  in  virtue  of  the  sentence  of  death  passed 
on  him,  shut  up  in  close  prison  till  the  time  of  execution  ;  and  in  virtue  of  the  same 
sentence  brought  out  of  prison  at  the  time  appointed  for  his  execution  ;  even  so  the 
unbeliever  is,  in  virtue  of  the  curse  of  the  law  adjudging  him  to  eternal  death  in 
hell,  laid  up  in  the  grave  till  the  last  day ;  and,  in  virtue  of  the  same  curse,  brought 
out  of  the  grave  at  that  day.  2.  All  their  sin  and  guilt  shall  rise  again  with  them  ; 
the  body  that  was  laid  in  the  grave,  a  vile  body  ;  a  foul  instrument  of  the  soul  in 
divers  lusts  ;  an  unclean  vessel,  stained,  polluted,  and  defiled,  with  divers  kinds  of 
filthy  impure  lusts  ;  shall  rise  again  with  all  its  impurities  cleaving  to  it  (Isa.  lxvi.  24, 
"  They  shall  be  an  abhoring  unto  all  flesh  ").  It  is  the  peculiar  privilege  of  believers 
to  have  their  "  vile  bodies  changed  "  (Phil.  iii.  21).  If  the  bodies  of  sinners  be  not 
cleansed  by  the  washing  with  that  pure  water  (Heb.x.  22),  viz.,  the  blood  and  Spirit 
of  Jesus  Christ ;  though  they  be  strained  in  never  so  minute  parts,  through  the 
earth  in  a  grave,  they  will  lose  nothing  of  their  vileness  and  pollution,  it  will  still 
cleave  to  every  part  of  their  dust,  and  appear  again  therewith  at  the  resurrection. 
3.  Their  appearance  will  be  frightful  and  horrible  beyond  expression,  when  they 
come  forth  of  their  graves  under  the  curse,  and  set  their  feet  on  the  earth  again. 
When,  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  dead  shall  all  arise  out  of  their  graves,  and 
the  wicked  are  cast  forth  as  abominable  branches,  what  a  fearful  awakening  will 
they  have  out  of  their  long  sleep  I  VI.  They  will  appear  before  Christ's  tribunal 
under  the  curse.  1.  In  virtue  of  the  curse  they  shall  be  set  on  the  left  hand 
(Matt.  xxv.  33).  No  honour  is  designed  for  them,  but  shame  and  everlasting  con- 
tempt. 2.  The  face  of  the  Judge  must  needs  be  terrible  to  them,  as  being  under 
the  curse  of  Him  who  sits  upon  the  throne  (Bev.  vi.  16,  17).  3.  To  clear  the  equity 
of  the  curse,  and  the  execution  thereof  upon  them,  their  "  works  shall  be  brought 
into  judgment  "  (Eccl.  xii.  14).  Their  whole  life  shall  be  searched  into,  and  laid  to 
the  rule  of  the  holy  law,  and  the  enormity  and  sinfulness  thereof  be  discovered. 
The  mask  will  then  be  entirely  taken  off  their  faces,  and  all  their  pretences  to  piety 
solemnly  rejected,  and  declared  to  have  been  but  hypocrisy.  Their  secret  wicked- 
ness, which  they  rejoiced  to  have  got  hid,  and  which  they  so  artfully  managed,  that 
there  was  no  discovering  of  it  while  they  might  have  confessed  and  found  mercy, 
enall  then  06  set  in  broad  daylight  before  God  and  the  world  when  there  is  no 
remedy.  Conscience  shall  then  be  no  more  blind  nor  dumb  ;  but  shall  witness 
against  them  and  for  God  ;  and  shall  never  be  silent  any  more.  4.  Their  doom 
shall  be  pronounced  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  A  final  sentence.  VII.  They  must  lie  for 
ever  under  the  weight  of  the  curse  in  hell.  1.  In  virtue  of  the  curse,  the  pit, 
having  received  them,  shall  close  its  mouth  on  them.  2.  The  curse  shall  then  be 
like  a  partition  wall  of  adamant,  to  separate  them  quite  from  God,  and  any  the  least 
comfortable  intercourse  with  Him  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  While  on  the  other  side  of  the 
wall  the  light  of  glory  shines,  more  bright  than  a  thousand  suns,  filling  the  saint  s 
with  joy  unspeakable.  3.  It  shall  hence  be  a  final  stop  to  all  sanctifying  influences 
towards  them.  While  they  are  in  this  world,  there  is  a  possibility  of  removing  the 
curse,  and  that  the  worst  of  men  may  be  made  holy  ;  but  when  there  is  a  total  and 
final  separation  from  God  in  hell,  surely  there  are  no  sanctifying  influences  there. 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m. 

The  corrupt  nature  they  carried  with  them  thither,  must  then  abide  with  them 
there  ;  and  tbey  must  needs  act  there,  since  their  being  is  eontinued  ;  and  a 
corrupt  nature  will  ever  act  corruptly,  while  it  acts  at  all  (Matt.  vii.  17).  4.  It  shall 
be  the  breath  tbat  shall  blow  the  fire  continually,  and  keep  it  burning,  for  their 
exquisite  torment  in  soul  and  body  (Isa.  xxx.  33).  5.  The  curse  shall  lengthen  out 
their  misery  to  all  eternity  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  Hence,  when  the  sinner  has  suffered 
millions  of  ages  in  hell,  the  curse  still  binds  him  down  to  suffer  more. 
VIII.  Practical  application.  1.  For  conviction.  (1)  Saints,  i.  Do  ye  suitably 
prize  and  esteem  your,  God,  Bedeemer,  and  Saviour  ?  Are  your  hearts 
suitably  affected  with  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  that  set  on  foot  your  deliver- 
ance, and  brought  it  about  ?  ii.  Do  ye  suitably  prize  the  naw  covenant,  the  second 
covenant  ?  Do  ye  pry  into  the  mystery  of  the  glorious  contrivance,  stand  and 
wonder  at  the  device  for  bringing  cursed  sinners  to  inherit  the  blessing  t  Would 
it  not  become  you  well  to  be  often  looking  into  it,  and  saying,  "  This  is 
all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire  ?  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5.)  iii.  Do  ye  walk  answer- 
ably  to  the  deliverance  from  this  curse  ?  O  look  to  the  curse  of  the  covenant 
of  works,  from  which  ye  are  delivered,  and  be  convinced  and  humbled  to  the  very 
dust.  (1)  That  ye  should  walk  so  nntenderly,  unwatchfully,  and  uncircumspectly, 
before  the  Lord  that  bought  you,  and  that  in  the  midst  of  cursed  children,  a  crooked 
and  perverse  generation.  (2)  That  ye  should  so  dote  upon  this  earth,  this  cursed 
earth,  that  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works  has  lain  upon  these  five 
thousand  years,  and  has  sucked  the  sap  out  of,  and  so  dried  up  by  this  time,  that  it 
is  near  to  taking  fire,  and  to  be  burnt  to  ashes,  by  virtue  of  the  curse  upon  it.  (3) 
That  ye  should  perform  duties  so  heartlessly,  coldly,  and  indifferently  ;  with  so 
little  faith,  love,  fervency,  humility,  zeal,  and  confidence.  O  look  to  the  curse  of 
the  broken  covenant,  with  the  effects  of  it  in  earth  and  hell,  that  ye  may  be  Btirred 
up  to  the  performance  of  duty  after  another  manner.  (4)  That  ye  should  bear  your 
troubles  and  trials  so  impatiently,  as  if  your  crosses  were  so  many  curses.  Look  to 
the  condition  of  those  under  the  curse  in  this  world,  and  you  will  see  your  heaviest 
cross  is  lighter  than  their  smallest  ones,  yea  your  adversity  is  better  than  their 
prosperity.  Look  how  Christ  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us,  and  you  will  see  the  poison  taken  out  of  the  cup,  and  the  pure  water 
of  affliction  presented  to  you  in  your  cup  to  pledge  Him  in  ;  and  why  not  drink  it, 
and  drink  it  thankfully  ?  iv.  Have  ye  due  thoughts  of  the  evil  of  sin  ?  Is  your 
horror  of  it  suitably  raised  ?  Eom.  xii.  9,  "  Abhor  that  which  is  evil,"  abhor  it  as 
hell,  so  the  word  may  bear.  If  you  duly  consider  the  curse,  it  may  fill  you  with 
shame  and  blushing  on  this  head.  5.  Are  ye  duly  affected  with  the  case  of  those 
who,  being  (1)  Strangers  to  Christ,  are  yet  under  the  curse?  Are  ye  at  due  pains  for 
their  recovery  and  deliverance  ?  How  natural  is  it  for  men,  who  with  difficulty 
have  escaped  the  greatest  danger,  to  be  affected  with  the  case  of  others  who  are  still 
in  the  same  danger,  in  hazard  of  perishing  ?  (2)  Sinners  ;  ye  who  are  under  the 
broken  covenant  of  works  still,  not  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  savingly  interested 
in  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  living  yet  in  your  natural  unregenerate  state,  ye  may 
hence  be  convinced — 1.  That  ye  are  under  the  curse.  2.  That,  being  under  the 
curse,  ye  are  in  a  very  miserable  condition.  3.  That  your  case  is  desperately  sin- 
ful, while  under  the  covenant  of  works.  (1)  The  guilt  of  your  sin  lies  on  you,  the 
guilt  of  eternal  wrath  ;  and  it  cannot  be  removed.  (2)  Sin  has  a  reigning  power 
over  you  ;  and  it  neither  is  nor  can  be  broken,  while  you  continue  under  tbat  cove- 
nant. 4.  That  while  ye  remain  under  that  covenant,  ye  remain  under  the  curse  ; 
and  there  is  no  deliverance  from  the  curse  without  deliverance  from  the  covenant. 
5.  That  there  is  no  salvation  for  you  under  that  covenant.  6.  That  there  is  an 
absolute  necessity  of  being  set  free  from  the  covenant  of  works,  of  being  brought 
into  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  savingly  interested  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  second 
Adam.  7.  That  your  help  must  come  wholly  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
you  can  contribute  nothing  by  your  own  working  for  your  own  relief  (Hos.  xiii.  9). 
2.  For  exhortation.  First,  Let  unbelievers,  who  are  still  under  this  covenant,  receive 
these  convictions,  and  be  warned,  excited,  and  exhorted  timely  to  sue  to  be  belivered 
from  under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  for  that  end  to  be  instated  in  the  covenant 
of  grace,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  curse  is  a  weight  which  you  will  never 
be  able  to  bear.  2.  It  is  a  growing  weight  ;  as  your  sins  grow,  the  curse  grows 
(Eom.  ii.  5).  3.  It  is  a  weight  that  may  be  now  removed  from  off  you  (2  Cor.  vi.  2), 
"  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time  ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  Those 
whom  this  weight  has  sunk  down  into  the  pit  already,  it  can  never  be  removed  from 
off  them  ;  but  ye  are  yet  within  the  reach  of  mercy,  the  Mediator  is  ready  to 


.  in.]  GALATIANS. 


take  the  yoke  off  your  jaws.  4.  If  the  weight  of  the  curse  be  not  removed  from  off 
you,  it  will  be  the  heavier  that  deliverance  from  it  was  in  your  power  (Matt.  xi.  21* 
5.  It  will  be  an  eternal  weight  (Matt.  xxv.  41),  "Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  int. 
everlasting  fire."  There  is  an  eternal  weight  of  glory  for  the  saints  in  the  promise  ; 
and  an  eternal  weight  of  wrath  for  sinners  in  the  curse,  which  they  shall  for  eve* 
lie  under,  and  never  get  clear  of.  Let  these  motives  then  excite  and  induce  you  to 
flee  from  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  unto  the  covenant  of  grace, 
where  Ufa  is  only  to  be  found.  Secondly,  believers  in  Christ,  delivered  from  this 
covenant — 1.  Be  thankful  for  your  deliverance,  as  a  deliverance  from  the  curse.  Let 
the  warmest  gratitude  glow  in  your  breasts  for  so  great  a  deliverance  ;  and  let  your 
soul,  and  all  that  is  within  you,  be  stirred  up  to  bless  your  glorious  Deliverer  for 
this  unspeakable  blessing.  2.  Walk  holily  and  fruitfully  in  good  works,  since  the 
bands  of  death  are  removed,  and  your  souls  are  healed.  Be  holy  in  all  manner  of 
life  and  conversation  ;  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour  in  all  things. 
Let  the  whole  tenor  of  your  lives  testify  that  you  are  not  under  the  curse,  but  that 
you  inherit  the  blessing  of  eternal  life,  by  living  to  the  praise  and  honour  of  Christ, 
who  hath  delivered  you  from  the  wrath  to  come.  3.  Turn  not  back  to  the  broken 
covenant  of  works  again,  in  legal  principles,  nor  in  legal  practices.  The  more  the 
temper  and  frame  of  your  spirit  lies  that  way,  the  more  unholy  will  ye  be  ;  and  the 
more  your  duties  savour  of  it,  the  less  savoury  will  they  be  unto  your  God.  It  is 
only  by  being  dead  to  the  law,  that  ye  will  live  unto  God.  (Ibid.)  Sinners  under 
the  curse  : — The  way  to  Christ  lies  through  the  sense  of  misery.  1.  The  attribute, 
••  cursed."  This  curse  is  the  penalty  of  God's  violated  law,  and  so  an  evil  of  punish- 
ment. This  evil  of  punishment  being  assigned  by  Divine  justice,  must  be  proportion- 
able to  the  evil  of  sin.  2.  There  is  the  subject  expressed  as  fully  and  pregnantly  as 
anything  in  Scripture.  Here  is  no  less  than  a  threefold  universality  ;  it  extends  to 
all  persons, times,  things.  (1)  It  is  extended  to  all  persons,  ever  one.  It  is  not  fome  j 
for  so,  many  might  escape.  It  is  not  many  ;  for  so,  some  might  escape.  It  is  not  the 
greatest  part  ;  for  so,  a  considerable  part  of  mankind  might  be  excepted.  It  is  not 
all ;  for  that  might  be  taken,  for  some  of  all  sorts  ;  for  so,  some  of  every  sort  might 
be  exempted.  But  it  is  every  one,  simply  and  absolutely  ;  universal,  without 
restriction,  without  exception  ;  every  one,  Jew  and  Gentile.  Adam  himself  not  ex- 
cepted ;  the  curse  seized  upon  the  root,  and  so  diffused  itself  into  every  one  of  the 
branches.  Nay,  the  second  Adam,  Christ  himself,  is  not  exempted ;  he  taking  upon 
him  our  sins,  came  under  our  curse.  Sin  and  the  curse  are  inseparable.  Where- 
ever  sin  is,  the  curse  will  be,  even  there  where  sin  is  but  by  imputation.  (2)  It  is 
extended  to  all  times.  "  That  continues  not."  It  is  not  enough  to  begin  well,  it  is 
not  enough  to  persist  long,  if  at  length  there  be  any  desisting  from  a  practical 
observance.  Wherever  there  is  a  breach,  the  curse  enters.  (3)  It  is  extended  to  all 
things.  I.  Premise  something  by  way  of  caution.  That  the  expressions  may  not 
be  mistaken  (when  I  say  "  the  least  sin  ")  observe  there  is  no  sin  absolutely  little. 
Every  sin  is  big  with  guilt  and  provocation.  If  we  speak  absolutely,  every 
sin  is  great ;  but  if  we  speak  comparatively,  some  sins  are  greater  than  others. 
Astronomy  teaches  us  that  the  earth,  compared  with  the  heavens,  is  of  no  sensible 
magnitude,  it  is  but  like  a  point ;  yet  considered  in  itself,  we  know  it  is  a  vast  body, 
of  a  huge  bulk.  Compare  an  idle  word  with  blasphemy,  it  will  seem  small  ;  or  a 
vain  thought  with  murder.  Ay,  but  consider  these  in  themselves,  and  they  are 
great  sins.  There  needs  no  other  proof  of  this  than  what  I  am  to  undertake  in  the 
next  place.  They  make  liable  to  eternal  death.  II.  Arguments.  1.  From 
general  testimonies  of  Scripture  (Bom.  i.  18;  vi.  23,  Ac).  2.  From  instances  in  some 
particular  sins  which  pass  for  small  in  the  world.  (1)  Omission  of  good  (see  Jer. 
x.  25  ;  Matt.  xxv.  30,  42,  43).  (2)  Secret  evils,  those  that  are  confined  to  the  hear;, 
and  break  not  out  into  visible  acts.  Men  are  apt  to  think  that  the  Lord  is  such  a 
one  as  themselves,  that  he  will  take  little  notice  of  those  things  which  men  cannot 
take  notice  of,  and  therefore  are  secure  if  no  pollutions  taint  their  lives,  whatever 
evils  lodge  secretly  in  their  hearts.  But  this  is  a  delusion  too  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  (3) 
Idle  words,  how  fearless  or  careless  soever  ye  are  of  tbem,  are  sufficient  to  bring  you 
under  the  curse  (Matt.  xii.  36,  37).  (4)  Vain  thoughts,  the  unaccountable  vagaries 
of  the  cogitative  faculty,  the  mere  impertinencies  of  the  mind,  are  of  no  less  con- 
cernment to  the  soul  than  everlasting  condemnation  (Acts  viii.  22).  Evil  thoughts, 
while  not  forsaken,  are  unpardonable,  they  are  such  as  infinite  mercy  will  not  par- 
don ;  and  what  then  remains  for  these  but  a  fearful  expectation  of  judgment  and 
fiery  indignation  ?  (5)  Motions  to  sin  without  consent.  Such  motions  as,  arising 
from  our  corrupt  natures,  are  suppressed,  stifled  in  the  birth,  these  expose  to  the  ours*. 


\70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

for  the  law  requires  a  conformity  to  itself,  both  in  qualities,  motions,  and  actions, 
hut  such  motions  to  sin  are  a  nonconformity  to  the  law,  therefore  sinful,  and  con  • 
Bequently  cursed  ;  for  the  penalty  annexed  to  the  law  is  due  to  every  violation  of  it 

3.  From  the  object  against  which  sin  is  directed.     The  least  sin  is  infinitely  eviL 

4.  From  the  continuance  of  that  law  which  at  first  made  eternal  death  the  penalty 
of  the  least  sin.  III.  Application.  1.  For  conviction.  (1)  To  sinners,  in  whose 
lives  tbe  characters  of  wickedness  are  so  large  and  visible,  as  he  that  runs  may 
read  them.  These  words  should  be  to  you  as  the  handwriting  on  the  wall  to  Bel- 
shazzar  (Dan.  v.  6).  (2)  To  formal  professors ;  those  who  think  their  condition 
good  because  they  are  not  so  bad  as  otbers ;  think  they  shall  escape  the  curse 
merely  because  they  have  escaped  the  visible  pollutions  of  the  world,  who  are  apt 
to  say  with  the  Pharisee  (Luke  xviii.  12),  "  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extortioners, 
unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  publican."  It  may  be  thou  dost  not  act  that 
wickedness  which  is  frequently  perpetrated  by  the  sons  of  Belial  amongst  ns.  Oh, 
but  let  thy  conscience  answer,  Dost  thou  not  omit  the  exercise  of  holiness  and 
mortification  ?  Dost  thou  not  omit,  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  duty  of  religion  and 
godliness  ?  2.  For  exhortation.  (1)  To  those  that  are  under  the  curse.  Make 
haste  for  deliverance.  "  The  Lord  has  laid  help  upon  One  that  is  mighty,"  upon 
Christ,  who  was  only  able,  who  was  only  willing,  to  bear  man's  curse,  who  is  both 
able  and  willing  to  deliver  sinners  from  it ;  but  then  you  mnst  come  to  Him  for 
deliverance,  in  a  way  honourable  to  Him,  prescribed  by  Him.  You  must  resign 
up  yourselves  wholly  unto  Christ,  as  your  King,  your  Redeemer.  (2)  To  those  that 
are  delivered  from  the  curse.  You  whom  Christ  has  redeemed  from  everlasting 
wrath,  you  whom  He  has  saved  from  going  down  into  the  pit,  yon  whom  He  has 
rescued  from  these  everlasting  burnings,  oh  praise,  admire,  adore,  rejoice  in  your 
Eedeemer.  How  will  they  draw  out  your  affections  to  Christ  1  (3)  To  all.  If  the 
least  sin  bring  under  the  curse,  then  look  upon  the  least  sin  as  a  cursed  evil.  Let 
your  apprehensions,  affections,  actings,  be  answerable.  Say  not  of  any  as  of  Zoar, 
"Is  it  not  a  little  one?"  &c.  Hate  the  least  sins  as  you  hate  that  which  is 
destructive,  that  which  will  destroy  the  whole  man.  But  to  enforce  this  more 
distinctly,  let  me  represent  to  you  the  heinousness  of  the  least  sins  in  some  par- 
ticulars. Nor  will  I  digress;  the  considerations  will  be  such  as  have  a  near 
affinity  with  the  truth,  and  such  as  do  tend  to  confirm  and  illustrate  it.  1.  There 
is  something  of  atheism  in  these  small  sins.  It  is  atheism  to  deny  there  is  a  God, 
to  deny  the  Lord  to  be  God.  Now,  these  less  sins  are  a  denial  of  God ;  if  not 
expressly,  yet  by  interpretation ;  if  not  directly,  yet  by  consequence ;  for  he  that 
denies  any  excellency  to  be  in  God  which  is  essential  to  Him,  denies  Him  to  be 
God.  2.  There  is  something  of  idolatry  in  these  small  sins.  But  now,  in  admitting 
these  small  sins,  we  prefer  other  things  before  God,  and  so  give  that  worship  to 
others  which  is  due  only  to  God.  3.  There  is  something  of  murder  in  admitting 
the  least  sin.  The  least  is  a  deadly  evil,  of  a  bloody  tendency,  as  to  the  life  of  the 
soul  (Ezek.  xviii.  20).  He  says  not,  "  that  sinneth  thus  and  thus,  that  sinneth  in 
this  or  that  degree,"  Ac.  (Rom.  vi.  21).  No  matter  how  small  the  seed  be,  the  fruit 
is  death.  The  least  is  a  deadly  evil,  and  that  should  be  enough  to  make  it  for- 
midable. A  spider  may  kill,  as  well  as  a  lion ;  a  needle  run  into  the  heart  or 
bowels  may  let  in  death,  as  well  as  a  rapier  or  cannon  bullet ;  a  small  breach 
neglected  may  let  in  the  enemy,  and  so  prove  as  destructive  as  if  all  the  walls  and 
fortifications  were  thrown  down.  Sin  is  compared  to  poison,  the  poison  of  asps 
(Psa.  cxl.  3),  and  the  venom  of  dragons  (Rom.  iii.  8 ;  Deut.  xxxii).  Now  a  drop  of  suoh 
strong  poison  may  kill  as  well  as  a  full  draught.  4.  The  least  sin  is  a  violation  of 
the  whole  law,  and  therefore  more  heinous,  of  more  dangerous  consequence,  than 
we  are  apt  to  imagine.  There  is  in  the  least  sin,  as  in  plants  (and  other  creatures) 
a  seminal  virtue,  whereby  it  multiplies  itself.  The  seed  at  first  is  a  small  incon- 
siderable thing,  but  let  it  lie  quietly  on  the  ground,  it  will  take  root,  grow  into  a 
bulky  stock,  and  diffuse  itself  into  a  variety  of  branches.  A  sinful  motion  (if  not 
stifled  in  the  conception)  will  procure  consent,  and  consent  will  bring  forth  into 
act ;  and  one  act  will  dispose  to  others,  till  custom  have  begot  a  habit,  and  a  habit 
will  dull  and  stupefy  the  conscience.  5.  The  least  part  of  the  law  is  more  valuable 
in  God's  account  than  heaven  and  earth ;  a  tittle  of  the  law  of  more  account  than 
the  whole  fabric  of  the  world.  He  had  rather  heaven  and  earth  should  perish, 
than  one  iota  of  the  law  (Matt.  v.  16).  First,  heaven  and  earth  shall  vanish,  rather 
than  the  least  letter,  one  bora,  rather  than  the  least  apex,  the  least  point,  one 
Xtpaia  of  the  law  shall  pass  away.  So  much  more  valuable  is  the  law,  etc.,  at 
He  seems  more  tender  of  the  least  point  of  this,  than  of  that  whole  fabric.    6.  Tbi 


chap,  m.]  GALATIANS.  171 

least  Bin  is  the  object  of  infinite  hatred.  The  Lord  infinitely  hates  the  least  sin  ; 
He  hates  it,  is  not  only  angry  for  it,  offended  with  it,  grieved  at  it,  bnt  He  hates 
it ;  He  hates  it  perfectly  ;  there  is  not  the  least  mixture  of  love,  liking,  or  approba- 
tion, nothing  but  pure  hatred.  7.  There  is  more  provocation  in  the  least  sin 
against  God,  than  in  the  greatest  injuries  against  men.  Let  all  the  injuries 
imaginable  be  put  together,  the  total  sum  of  them  will  not  amount  to  bo  much  as  a 
single  unit  against  God.  The  dignity  of  the  person  puts  an  accent  upon  the  injury. 
8.  The  least  sin  requires  infinite  satisfaction.  Such  an  injury  is  the  least  sin,  a? 
nothing  can  compensate  it,  but  that  which  is  of  infinite  value ;  this  is  grounded 
upon  the  former.  9.  The  least  sin  is  now  punished  in  hell  with  those  torments 
that  will  last  for  ever.  Hell  is  the  reward  of  the  least  sin,  not  only  in  respect  of 
its  demerit,  but  in  regard  of  the  event.  10.  The  least  sin  is  worse  than  the  greatest 
punishment.  3.  For  information.  (1)  See  here  an  impossibility  for  a  sinner  to  be 
justified  by  his  observance  of  the  law,  or  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  first  covenant. 
The  law  requires  to  justification  a  righteousness  exactly  perfect;  but  the  best 
righteousness  of  fallen  man  is  as  a  rag.  It  is  not  only  torn  and  ragged,'but  spotted 
and  defiled.  (2)  See  here  the  dangerous  error  of  those  who  make  account  to  be 
justified  and  saved  by  works  ;  by  their  conformity  to  the  law,  or  observance  of  it. 
The  apostle  is  express  (ver.  10).  An  imperfect  observance  of  the  law  leaves  the 
observer  under  the  curse,  but  all  observance  of  the  law  by  fallen  man  is  imperfect ; 
no  observance  of  all,  no  continuing  in  the  observance  of  all,  imperfection  in  both. 
(3)  See  here  the  necessity  of  Christ.  Get  lively  apprehensions  of  your  necessity  of 
Christ.  Walk  continually  under  the  sense  and  power  of  these  apprehensions, 
and  be  often  making  application  of  the  blood  and  mediation  of  Christ  to  your 
souls.  So  hath  the  Lord  ordered  the  way  to  salvation,  as  that  every  one 
should  see  a  necessity  of  Christ ;  a  continual  necessity  of  Him,  and  a  necessity 
of  Him  in  all  things.  And  it  is  evident  upon  this  account,  because  "  cursed 
is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  to  do  them."  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.) 
The  curse : — 1.  It  is  a  general  curse.  It  extends  itself  to  all  things.  Many  things 
may  reach  the  body  that  cannot  reach  the  soul.  2.  It  is  a  growing  curse.  Every 
sinner  is  treasuring  up  unto  himself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath.  3.  It  is  real 
wrath.  The  cursings  of  men  are  but  verbal  curses,  but  the  curse  that  is  due  for 
Bin  is  not  a  verbal  curse,  but  a  real  curse.  4.  It  is  a  righteous  curse.  We  know 
that  God  is  righteous  in  pouring  out  the  vials  of  His  wrath  upon  sinners.  5.  It  is 
an  unavoidable  curse.  None  can  run  away  from  it.  6.  It  is  an  intolerable  curse. 
As  there  is  no  avoiding  from  it,  so  there  is  no  abiding  of  it.  7.  It  is  an  effectual 
curse.  It  doth  its  business  where  it  comes ;  that  which  it  is  sent  to  do  it  doth 
always.    8.  It  is  eternal  wrath.     (Philip  Henry.) 

Ver.  11.  Bnt  that  no  man  Is  Justified  by  the  law  In  the  sight  of  God,  It  la 
evident. — Justification  not  by  the  law  but  by  faith  in  Christ: — I.  What  is  justifi- 
cation. 1.  To  be  justified  is  to  be  brought  into  a  right  relation  to  law.  2.  Justi- 
fication is  the  bringing  of  a  man  into  right  relations  with  all  law-loving  and 
law-keeping  beings.  3.  When  God  justifies  He  brings  us  into  a  condition  of 
potential   righteousness.      II.    Justification  is    impossible  through   the  law. 

1.  Not  ceremonial  but  moral  law.  2.  The  Bible  assumes  (1)  that  man  has 
broken  this  law,  and  (2)  that  no  amount  of  obedience  can  restore  him 
to  his  lost  dignity.  HI.  Justification  is  possible  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ.  1.  His  atonement  is  the  ground  of  it.  2.  Faith  in  that  atonement  the 
means.  (S.  Pearson,  M. A.)  The  just  shall  live  by  faith : — I.  Life  is  received 
by  the  faith  which  makes  A  man  just.  A  man  begins  to  live — 1.  By  a  full 
acquittal  from  condemnation  and  from  penal  death  as  soon  as  he  believes  in  Christ. 

2.  As  one  raised  out  of  spiritual  death.  3.  No  form  of  works,  or  knowledge,  or 
profession,  or  feeling,  can  prove  him  to  be  an  absolved  and  quickened  man ;  but 
faith  does  this.  II.  Life  is  sustained  by  the  faith  which  keeps  a  man  just. 
1.  He  who  is  forgiven  and  quickened  lives  ever  afterwards  as  he  began — by  faith. 
Neither  feelings,  devotion,  nor  acquirements  become  his  trust ;  he  still  looks  out  of 
himself  to  Jesus.  2.  He  lives  by  faith  as  to  all  the  forms  of  his  life.  (1)  As  a 
child  and  a  servant.  (2)  As  a  pilgrim  progressing  and  a  warrior  contending.  (3) 
As  a  pensioner  enjoying  and  a  heir  expecting.  3.  He  lives  by  faith  in  every  con- 
dition. (1)  In  joy  and  sorrow.  (2)  In  wealth  and  poverty.  (3)  In  strength  and 
weakness.  (4)  In  labouring  and  languishing.  (5)  In  life  and  death.  4.  He  Uvea 
best  when  faith  is  at  its  best,  even  though  in  other  respects  he  may  be  sorely  put 
to  it.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        I.  The  soul  is  the  life  of  the  body.    II,  Faith  is 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

m  tint  of  the  bottl.  III.  Chkist  is  the  life  of  faith.  (Flavel.)  Th4 
impossibility  of  a  legal  and  the  certainty  of  a  Christian  justification : — The  law  is 
like  a  noble  vessel  which  man  has  damaged  so  that  the  waters  flow  through  many 
a  leak.  As  the  waves  rise  higher  and  higher,  and  the  prospects  of  destruction 
become  more  stern,  and  every  effort  is  seen  to  be  but  wasted  strength,  these  words 
come  over  the  drowning  soul,  "  As  mauy  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under 
a  curse."  But  Christ  Jesus  has  come  on  to  the  sinking  vessel,  and,  engulfed  in  the 
waves,  has  taken  upon  Him  the  effect  of  our  folly  and  sin.  And  by  His  death  the 
curse  that  rested  upon  us  rests  on  Him.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Faith :  life : — Faith 
engrafts  ns  into  Christ ;  by  faith  we  are  inserted  into  the  vine;  but  the  plant  that 
is  engrafted,  must  also  be  fruitful,  or  else  it  shall  be  quite  cut  off  from  the  root,  and 
thrown  into  everlasting  burning.  And  this  is  the  full  plain  meaning  of  those  words 
so  often  used  for  the  magnification  of  faith,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith." 
(Jeremy  Taylor.)  Living  by  faith  requires  effort : — A  schoolmaster  teacheth  a 
boy  gratis,  but  the  youth  cannot  possibly  attain  to  learning  unlesB  he  be  indus- 
trious ;  but  it  doth  not  therefore  cease  to  be  free  on  the  teacher's  part  because  the 
learner's  pains  are  required.  (Arrowsmith.)  Life  by  faith: — Men  who  are  saved 
by  faith  become  just.  The  operation  of  faith  npon  the  human  heart  is  to  produce 
love,  and  through  love,  obedience,  which  is  only  another  name  for  morality  or 
holiness,  the  flower  of  the  new  nature.  The  Christian  man  should  aim  after  the 
highest  degree  of  spiritual  culture  and  heavenly  perfection ;  yet  his  salvation 
depends  not  on  his  attainments,  but  upon  his  faith  in  a  crucified  Bedeemer.  Faith 
is  the  fruitful  root,  the  inward  channel  of  sap,  the  great  life-grace  in  every  branch 
of  the  vine.  I.  In  the  purest  spiritual  sense  it  is  true  that  the  just  shall 
live  by  faith.  Great  saints  must  be  great  believers.  Little-faith  can  never  be  a 
matured  saint.  1.  The  nobility  of  the  inner  life  depends  upon  faith.  A  man 
whose  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  is  one  of  the  aristocrats  of  this  world.  In 
proportion  as  the  spiritual  life  is  developed,  the  man  grows  in  dignity.  2.  The 
energy  of  the  spiritual  life  depends  on  faith.  Wherever  the  spiritual  life  fairly 
pervades  a  man,  it  is  a  force  which  cannot  be  bound,  fettered,  or  kept  under :  a 
holy  fury,  a  sacred  fire  in  the  bones.  But  this  energy  can  only  be  exerted  under 
the  power  of  faith.  3.  Growth  in  the  spiritual  life  depends  upon  our  faith.  Faith 
enriches  the  soil  of  the  heart,  fills  our  treasuries  with  the  choicest  gold,  and  loads 
our  tables  with  the  daintiest  food  for  the  soul.  II.  Faith  is  operative  in  oub 
daily  life.  1.  It  sustains  the  just  man  under  all  his  trials,  difficulties,  sufferings, 
or  labours.  2.  It  has  an  effect  upon  the  dispensations  of  Divine  Providence. 
IH.  This  is  also  true  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church  as  a  wholb. 
1.  The  Church  lives  by  faith,  not  speculation.  2.  By  faith,  not  retiring  despondency. 
3.  By  faith,  not  "  the  proprieties."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Life  by  faith : — The 
Jews  in  the  Talmud  have  the  saying,  *'  The  whole  law  was  given  to  Moses  at  Sinai, 
in  six  hundred  and  thirteen  precepts."  David,  iu  the  fifteenth  Psalm,  brings  them 
all  within  the  compass  of  eleven.  Isaiah  brings  them  to  six  (Isa.  xxxiii.  15) ; 
Micah  to  three  (Mic.  vi.  8) ;  Isaiah,  again,  to  two  (Isa.  lvi.) ;  Habakknk  to  this  one, 
"  The  just  shall  live  by  faith  "  (Hab.  ii.  4).  (Lightfoot.)  Hopeful  endeavour 
the  beginning  of  faith: — See  the  spider  casting  out  her  film  to  the  gale,  she 
feels  persuaded  that  somewhere  or  other  it  will  adhere  and  form  the  com- 
mencement of  her  web.  She  commits  the  slender  filament  to  the  breeze,  believing 
that  there  is  a  place  provided  for  it  to  fix  itself.  In  this  fashion  should  we 
believingly  cast  forth  our  endeavours  in  this  life,  confident  that  God  will  find  a 
place  for  us.  He  who  bids  us  pray  and  work  will  aid  our  efforts  and  guide  us 
in  His  Providence  in  a  right  way.  Sit  not  still  in  despair,  0  son  of  toil,  but 
again  cast  out  the  floating  thread  of  hopeful  endeavour,  and  the  wind  of  love  will 
bear  it  to  its  resting  place.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Justification  by  the  law  impos- 
sible:— I.  The  requirements  of  the  law.  1.  Its  authority.  It  was  the  Word  ol 
God.  2.  In  reference  to  its  precepts,  perfect  obedience  was  required  (Dent, 
xxxiii.  2).  II.  The  penalty  which  the  failure  of  obedience  involved. 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not,"  &c.     III.  The  ruin  to  which  thosb 

ABE   EXPOSED  WHO  ABE    SEEKING    JUSTIFICATION    THROUGH    THE   WORKS    OF    THE   LAW. 

"  As  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse."  Lesson  :  The 
folly  of  those  who  are  seeking  justification  by  works.  To  expect  to  be  warmed 
by  the  keen  northern  blast,  or  to  have  our  thirst  quenched  by  a  draught  of  liquid 
firs,  were  not  more — were  not  so — incongruous.  This  were  merely  to  expect  that 
a  positive  appointment  of  God  should  be  altered,  which  is  not  in  the  nature  of 
things  impossible — which  in  particular  cases  has  actually  taken  place.    That  wer« 


our.  m.]  GALATIANS.  178 

to  expect  a  revolution  to  take  place  in  the  moral  nature  of  Him  «•  with  whom  there 
is  no  variableness  or  shadow  of  turning."  (R.  Nicholls.)  Justification  by  law 
inconsistent  with  Scripture: — I.  The  blessedness  of  the  righteous  is  obtained  by 
faith.  II.  In  contrast  to  faith,  the  law  gives  the  promise  of  life  only  to 
him  who  worketh.  The  law  says :  "  The  man  that  doeth  them  shall  live  in 
them. "  The  law  knows  nothing  of  faith ;  it  secures  blessings  only  for  those  who 
obey  its  precepts.  III.  Having  proved  that  the  blessedness  of  the  righteous 
IS  obtained  by  faith,  and  that  through  the  law  there  is  a  promise  for  the 

OBEDIENT   ONLY,    THE    CONCUSION   IS    OBVIOUS   THAT   NO     MAN    IS    JU8TIFED    BY    THE    LAW 

in  the  sight  of  God.  The  man  who  seeks  to  establish  his  own  righteousness 
may  "justify  himself"  in  his  own  estimation,  or  in  that  of  his  fellow-men,  but  he 
cannot  make  himself  acceptable  in  the  judgment  of  God.  In  the  lower  courts, 
where  partial  justice  is  administered,  he  may  succeed  in  obtaining  a  favourable 
verdict,  but,  entering  into  the  presence  of  God,  he  stands  condemned.     (Ibid.) 

Ver  12.  And  the  law  Is  not  of  faith. — The  law  and  the  gospel: — I.  They  differ 
in  the  work  of  our  justification.  1.  The  law  promiseth  life  to  him  that  performs 
perfect  obedience,  and  that  for  his  works.  2.  The  gospel  promiseth  life  to  him  that 
believes  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  3.  The  law  then  requires  doing,  the  gospel  believing. 
H.  They  agree  in  our  good  conversation.  1.  Faith  comes  first.  2.  Then  the  life 
of  faith.  3.  Then  the  evidence  of  the  love  of  faith  in  obedience.  Observe — 1. 
Salvation  was  the  unfulfilled  end  of  the  law,  and  so  it  is  now.  2.  Salvation  is  the 
accomplished  beginning  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  law  under  which  we  live  is  not  by 
obedience-salvation,  but  by  salvation -obedience.  (W.  Perkins.)  The  necessity  of 
Divine  law : — Under  whatever  relation  we  consider  God  to  stand  to  us  we  must  feel 
that  He  has  a  law  by  which  He  governs  us  all.  Is  He  a  King  ?  There  must  be 
royal  decrees.  Is  He  a  Master?  There  must  be  appointed  service.  Is  He  a 
Judge  ?  The  very  name  implies  a  tribunal.  Is  He  a  Eedeemer  f  The  redemption 
must  be  in  accoidance  with  the  principles  of  righteousness.  Is  He  a  Father? 
The  home  over  which  He  presides  must  be  a  scene  of  harmonious  action.  (S. 
Pearson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  Christ  bath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us. — Sin  and  redemption  : — I.  The  Divine  execration  of  bin.  1.  Under 
a  moral  government  a  righteous  governor  will,  yea,  must,  append  blessing  to  good 
and  cursing  to  evil.  2.  There  is  a  law  above  all  human  laws :  (1)  In  the  perfection 
of  its  nature  ;  (2)  the  extent  of  its  application ;  (3)  the  power  of  its  condemnation. 

3.  If  we  have  broken  this  law,  then  we  are  placed  under  a  curse.  H.  The  Divine 
redemption  of  the  sinner.  1.  Guilty  men  are  under  the  curse ;  a  guiltless  one 
comes  under  it  (1)  joyfully;  (2)  completely.  2.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then, 
represents  our  race,  and  for  us  has  become  a  curse.  (1)  He  was  of  such  dignity 
that  He  could  represent  it ;  (2)  His  act  was  spontaneous  ;  (3)  He  was  appointed  of 
the  Father ;  (4)  foreseeing  the  result  of  His  work  He  rejoiced  to  do  it  (Isa.  liii.  11 ; 
Heb.   xiii.  1,  2).     3.  By  bearing  the  curse  on  Himself  He  bore  it  off  from  us. 

4.  The  curse  being  thus  rolled  away,  the  way  is  prepared  for  the  coming  of 
the  blessing.  5.  The  blessing  comes  to  those  who  repent  and  believe.  (C. 
Clemance,  D.D.)  I.  The  curse  of  the  law  contained  all  that  was  dub  to  sin. 
II.  This  belonged  to  us.  III.  It  was  transferred  to  Christ.  His  hanging  on  a 
tree  was  the  sign  and  token  of  this  (Oeut.  xxi.  23  cf.  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).  IV.  This 
secures  for  all  believers  the  blessing  of  faithful  Abraham.  1.  An  interest  in 
Christ.  2.  Kighteousness.  3.  Acceptance  with  God.  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  The 
necessity  for  Christ's  bearing  our  curse: — The  sentence  or  curse  of  the  law  must 
not  fall  to  the  ground,  for  then  the  aid  of  God's  governing  the  world  could  not  be 
secured ;  His  law  would  seem  to  be  given  in  jest,  and  His  threatenings  would  be  in- 
terpreted to  be  a  vain  scarecrow,  and  the  sin  of  the  creature  would  not  seem  so 
odious  a  thing,  if  the  law  might  be  broken  and  there  were  no  more  ado  about  it; 
therefore  Christ  must  come  to  bear  this  curse.  (T.  Manton.)  Deliverance  from  the 
curse  through  Christ : — 1.  The  threatenings  of  the  law,  denouncing  a  curse  against 
thos?  who  yield  not  personal  obedience  to  it,  did  not  exclude  or  forbid  a  surety  to 
come  ir  the  sinner's  room,  and  to  undergo  the  curse  due  to  him.  2.  All  men  are 
by  nature  under  the  sentence  of  the  law's  curse,  whereby  in  God's  justice  they  are 
under  the  power  of  darkness  (Col.  i.  13),  slavery  and  bondage  to  sin  and  Satan 
(Eph.  ii.  2),  so  to  remain  until  they  be  cast  into  utter  darkness  (Jude  13),  except 
delivery  and  redemption  intervene.    3.  There  is  no  delivery  of  enslaved  man  from 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m. 

this  •woeful  bondage,  but  by  giving  satisfaction  and  by  paying  of  a  price  for  the 
wrong  done  to  Divine  justice,  either  by  himself,  or  by  some  surety  in  his  stead. 
Satisfaction  is  demanded  by  (1)  God's  fidelity  (Gen.  ii.  17) ;  (2)  His  righteous 
nature  (Psa.  xi.  6,  7) ;  (3)  the  inward  desert  of  sin  (Bom.  i.  32).  4.  It  is  not  in 
the  power  of  fallen  man  to  acquire  a  ransom  for  himself,  by  anything  he  can 
either  do  or  suffer.  5.  Jesus  Christ  has  undertaken  and  accomplished  this  great 
work.  6.  This  work  is  to  "  redeem."  Christ  buys  back  what  was  once  His  own, 
but  for  a  time  lost.  7.  It  is  a  real  redemption,  all  that  was  forfeited  being 
restored.  8.  The  price  paid  by  Christ,  in  order  to  our  redemption,  was  no  lesa 
than  His  undergoing  the  curse  due  to  us.  (James  Ferguson.)  Christ  made  a 
curse  for  us : — The  apostle  here  unveils  a  reason  why  men  are  not  saved  by  their 
personal  righteousness,  but  by  their  faith.  He  says  the  reason  is,  that  men  are 
not  saved  now  by  any  personal  merit,  but  their  salvation  lies  in  another,  viz.,  in 
Christ  Jesus,  the  ^Representative  Man,  who  alone  can  deliver  from  the  curse  of  the 
law ;  and  since  works  do  not  connect  us  with  Christ,  but  faith  is  the  uniting  bond, 
laiih  becomes  the  way  of  salvation.  Since  faith  is  the  hand  that  lays  hold  upon 
the  finished  work  of  Christ,  which  works  could  not  and  would  not  do,  for  works 
lead  us  to  boast  and  to  forget  Christ,  faith  becomes  the  true  and  only  way  of 
obtaining  justification  and  everlasting  life.  Let  us  try  to  understand  more  clearly 
the  nature  of  His  substitution,  and  of  the  suffering  which  it  entailed  upon  Him. 

I.  What  is  the  corse  or  the  law  here  intended  ?  1.  It  is  the  curse  of  God. 
God  who  made  the  law  has  appended  certain  penal  consequences  to  the  breaking  of 
it ;  and  the  man  who  violates  the  law  becomes  at  once  the  subject  of  the  wrath  of 
the  Lawgiver.  Hence  it  must  be  (1)  supremely  just ;  (2)  morally  unavoidable ; 
(3)  most  weighty.  2.  It  is  a  sign  of  displeasure.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day:  His  wrath  towards  sin  is  great.  3.  God's  curse  of  something  more 
than  a  threatening ;  He  comes  at  length  to  blows.  He  uses  warning  words  at  first, 
but  sooner  or  later  He  bares  his  sword  for  execution.    Cain.    Flood.     Sodom. 

II.  Who  abe  undeb  the  cdrse  ?  1.  The  Jewish  nation.  To  them  the  law  of  God 
was  very  peculiarly  given  beyond  all  others.  2.  All  nations.  The  law,  although 
not  given  to  all  from  Sinai,  has  been  written  by  the  finger  of  God  more  or 
less  legibly  upon  the  conscience  of  all  mankind.  3.  Those  who,  when  offered 
the  gospel,  prefer  to  remain  under  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  10).  All  that  the  law  of 
works  can  do  for  men  is  to  leave  them  still  accursed.  III.  How  was  Chbist  made 
a  cdkse  fob  us?  1.  By  substitution.  Christ  was  no  curse  in  Himself.  Of 
His  own  free  will  He  became  a  curse  for  us.  2.  All  the  sins  of  His  people 
were  actually  laid  upon  Him.  He  endured  both  (1)  the  penalty  ef  loss ;  and  (2) 
the  penalty  of  actual  suffering,  both  (a)  in  body  and  (b)  in  soul.  It  was  an 
anguish  never  to  be  measured,  an  agony  never  to  be  comprehended.  To  God 
only  were  His  griefs  fully  known.  Well  does  the  Greek  liturgy  put  in,  "  Thine 
unknown  sufferings,"  for  they  must  for  ever  remain  beyond  guess  of  human 
imagination.  Behold  Christ  bearing  the  curse  instead  of  His  people.  Here 
He  is  coming  under  the  load  of  their  sin,  and  God  does  not  spare  Him,  bat 
smites  Him  as  He  must  have  smitten  us,  lays  His  full  vengeance  on  Him,  launches 
all  His  thunderbolts  against  Him,  bids  the  curse  wreak  itself  upon  Him,  and  Christ 
suffers  all,  sustains  all.  IV.  The  blessed  consequences  of  Christ's  having  thus 
been  hade  a  curse  fob  us.  1.  We  are  redeemed  from  the  curse.  The  law  is 
silenced ;  it  can  demand  no  more.  The  quiver  of  wrath  is  exhausted.  2.  The 
blessing  of  God,  hitherto  arrested  by  the  curse,  is  now  made  most  freely  to  flow. 
A  great  rock  has  been  lifted  out  from  the  river-bed  of  God's  mercy,  and  the  living 
stream  comes  rippling,  rolling,  swelling  on  in  crystal  tides,  sweeping  before  it  all 
human  sin  and  sorrow,  and  making  the  thirsty  who  stoop  down  to  drink  at  it. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  nature  of  our  redemption: — Bedemption  being  deliverance 
by  means  of  the  substitution  of  a  ransom,  it  follows  that,  although  the  ransom 
can  only  be  paid  to  God,  and  to  Him  only  as  the  moral  governor  of  the  universe, 
we  may  still  be  said  to  be  redeemed  from  all  that  we  are  delivered  from  by  means 
of  the  ransom  paid  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Thus  we  are  said  to  be  redeemed 
from  (1)  our  vain  conversation  (1  Pet.  i.  18);  (2)  death  (Hos.  xii.  14);  (3)  the 
devil  (Col.  ii.  15) ;  (4)  all  iniquity  (Tit.  ii.  14) ;  (5)  the  curse  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii. 
13,  iv.  5).  It  is,  of  course,  not  meant  that  the  ransom  is  paid  to  the  devil,  or  to  sin, 
or  to  death,  or  to  the  law.  These  different  conceptions  are  not  inconsistent.  A 
captive  is  redeemed  by  a  price  paid  only  to  him  that  holds  him  in  bondage,  bat  by 
the  same  act  he  may  be  redeemed  from  labour,  from  disease,  from  death,  from  the 
persecution  of   his  fellow-captives,  and  from    a    slavish    disposition.     (Hodge.) 


OTAP.  IM.J  GALATIANS.  175 

The  two  curses : — Two  curses  pronounced  in  the  law  are  here  referred  to.  All 
mankind  was  liable  to  the  former  one.  How  was  it  to  be  removed  ?  1.  He  who 
was  to  remove  it  must  not  Himself  be  liable  to  it.  He  who  was  to  be  a  substitute 
for  tbe  guilty  must  Himself  be  innocent.  He  who  was  to  suffer  in  the  stead  of 
(he  disobedient  must  Himself  be  obedient  in  all  things.  2.  He  who  was  to  be  ene 
substitute  for  all  must  bave  the  common  nature  of  all.  He  must  not  take  the 
person  of  one  individual  man  (such  as  Abraham,  Moses,  Elias),  but  He  must  take 
tbe  nature  of  all,  and  sum  up  all  mankind  in  Himself.  3.  He  who  was  to  do  more 
than  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the  sins  of  all,  must  have  infinite  merits  of  His 
own,  in  order  that  the  scale  of  Divine  justice  may  preponderate  in  their  favour. 
And  nothing  that  is  not  Divine  is  infinite.  In  order,  therefore,  that  He  may  be 
able  to  suffer  for  sin,  He  must  be  human ;  and  in  order  that  He  may  be  able  to 
take  away  the  sins,  and  to  satisfy  God's  justice  for  them,  He  must  be  Divine. 
4.  In  order  that  He  may  remove  the  curse  pronounced  in  the  law  of  God  for 
disobedience,  He  must  undergo  that  punishment  which  is  especially  declared  in  the 
law  to  be  the  curse  of  God.  5.  That  punishment  is  hanging  on  a  tree  (Deut. 
xxi.  23).  6.  By  undergoing  this  curse  for  us,  Christ,  He  who  is  God  from  ever- 
lasting, and  who  became  Emmanuel,  God  with  us,  God  in  our  flesh,  uniting 
together  the  two  natures — the  Divine  and  the  human — in  His  one  person — Christ 
Jesus,  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  Thus,  having  accepted  the  curse, 
He  liberated  us  from  it.  {Bishop  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  Christ  stood  for  the 
"  every  one  who  continueth  not,"  by  becoming  the  "  very  one  "  who  hung  upon 
the  tree.  (M.  B.  Riddle,  D.D.)  The  satisfaction  of  Christ: — 1.  The  believer's 
discharge.  The  law  of  God  hath  three  parts,  commands,  promises,  and  threaten- 
ings  or  curses.  The  curse  of  the  law  is  its  condemning  sentence,  whereby  a  sinner 
is  bound  over  to  death,  even  the  death  of  soul  and  body.  The  chain,  by  which  it 
binds  him,  is  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  from  which  none  can  loose  the  soul  but  Christ. 
This  curse  of  the  law  is  the  most  dreadful  thing  imaginable ;  it  strikes  at  the  life 
of  a  sinner,  yea,  his  best  life,  the  eternal  life  of  the  soul ;  and  when  it  hath  con- 
demned, it  is  inexorable,  no  cries  nor  tears,  no  reformations  or  repentance,  can  loose 
the  guilty  sinner :  for  it  requires  for  its  reparation  that  whioh  no  mere  creature  can 
give,  even  an  infinite  satisfaction.  Now  from  this  curse  Christ  frees  the  believer ; 
that  is,  He  dissolves  the  obligation  to  punishment,  cancels  the  hand-writing,  looses 
all  the  bonds  and  chains  of  guilt,  so  that  the  curse  of  the  law  hath  nothing  to  do 
with  him  for  ever.  2.  We  have  here  the  way  and  manner  in  and  by  which 
this  is  done ;  and  that  is  by  a  full  price  paid  down,  and  that  price 
paid  in  the  room  of  the  sinner,  both  making  up  a  complete  and  full 
satisfaction.  He  pays  a  full  price,  every  way  adequate  and  proportionable 
to  the  wrong.  3.  The  nature  of  Christ's  satisfaction.  (1)  It  is  the  act  of 
God-man;  no  other  was  capable  of  giving  satisfaction  for  an  infinite  wrong 
done  to  God.  But  by  reason  of  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in  His  wonderful 
person,  He  could  do  it,  and  hath  done  it  for  us.  (2)  If  He  satisfy  God  for  us,  He 
must  present  Himself  before  God,  as  our  Surety,  in  our  stead,  as  well  as  for  our 
good ;  else  His  obedience  had  signified  nothing  to  us  :  To  this  end  He  was  made 
under  the  law  (Gal.  iv.  4),  comes  under  the  same  obligation  with  us,  and  that  as  a 
Surety,  for  so  He  is  called  (Heb.  vii.  22).  Indeed,  His  obedience  and  sufferings 
sould  be  exacted  from  Him  upon  no  other  account.  It  was  not  for  anything  He 
had  done  that  He  became  a  curse.  (3)  The  internal  moving  cause  of  Christ's 
satisfaction  for  us  was  His  obedience  to  God,  and  love  to  us.  That  it  was  an  act  of 
obedience  is  plain  from  Phil.  ii.  8,  *'  He  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross."  (4)  The  matter  of  Christ's  satisfaction  was  His  active  and 
passive  obedience  to  all  the  law  of  God  required.  (5)  The  effect  and  fruit  of  this 
His  satisfaction  is  our  freedom,  ransom,  or  deliverance  from  the  wrath  and  curse 
due  to  us  for  our  sins.  Such  was  the  dignity,  value,  and  completeness  of  Christ's 
satisfaction,  that  in  strict  justice  it  merited  our  redemption  and  full  deliverance  ; 
not  only  a  possibility  that  we  might  be  redeemed  and  pardoned,  but  a  right 
whereby  we  ought  to  be  so.  We  pass  on  to  state  some  objections,  and  to  answer 
them.  The  doctrine  of  Christ's  satisfaction  is  absurd,  for  Christ  (say  we)  is  God ; 
if  so,  then  God  satisfies  Himself,  than  which  what  can  be  more  absurd  to  imagine  ? 
I  answer,  God  cannot  properly  be  said  to  satisfy  Himself ;  for  that  would  be  the  same 
thing  as  to  pardon,  simply,  without  any  satisfaction.  But  there  is  a  twofold  con- 
sideration of  Christ ;  one  in  respect  of  His  essence  and  Divine  nature,  in  which 
sense  He  is  the  object  both  of  the  offence,  and  of  the  satisfaction  made  for  it. 
Another  in  respect  of  His  person  and  economy,  or  office;   in  which  sense  H* 


17»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  m* 

properly  satisfies  God,  being  in  respect  of  His  manhood  another,  and  inferior  to 
God  (John  xiv.  28).  The  blood  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  is  the  matter  of  the  satis- 
faction ;  the  Divine  nature  dignifies  it,  and  makes  it  of  infinite  value.  2.  If  Christ 
satisfied  by  paying  our  debt,  then  He  should  have  endured  eternal  torments ;  for  so 
we  should,  and  the  damned  shall.  We  must  distinguish  betwixt  what  is  essential, 
and  what  is  accidental  in  punishment.  The  primary  intent  of  the  law  is  repara- 
tion and  satisfaction ;  he  that  can  make  it  at  one  entire  payment  (as  Christ  could 
and  did)  ought  to  be  discharged.  He  that  cannot  (as  no  mere  creature  can)  ought 
to  lie  for  ever,  as  the  damned  do,  under  sufferings.  3.  If  God  will  be  satisfied  for 
our  sins  before  He  pardon  them,  how  then  is  pardon  an  act  of  grace  ?  Pardon 
could  not  be  an  act  of  pure  grace,  if  God  received  satisfaction  from  us ;  but  if  He 
pardon  us  upon  the  satisfaction  received  from  Christ,  though  it  be  of  debt  to  Him, 
it  is  of  grace  to  us :  for  it  was  grace  to  admit  a  surety  to  satisfy,  more  grace 
to  provide  Him,  and  most  of  all  to  apply  His  satisfaction  to  us,  by  uniting 
us  to  Christ,  as  He  hath  done.  4.  But  God  loved  us  before  Christ  died  for  us  ;  for 
it  was  the  love  of  God  to  the  world  that  moved  Him  to  give  His  only-begotten  Son. 
Could  God  love  us,  and  yet  not  be  reconciled  and  satisfied  ?  God's  complacential 
love  is  indeed  inconsistent  with  an  unreconciled  state :  He  is  reconciled  to  every 
one  He  so  loves.  But  His  benevolent  love,  consisting  in  His  purpose  of  good,  may 
be  before  actual  reconciliation  and  satisfaction.  5.  Temporal  death,  as  well 
as  eternal,  is  a  part  of  the  curse ;  if  Christ  have  fully  satisfied  by  bearing  the 
curse  for  us,  how  is  it  that  those  for  whom  He  bare  it  die  as  well  as  others  ?  As 
temporal  death  ii  a  penal  evil,  and  part  of  the  curse,  so  God  inflicts  it  not  upon 
believers  ;  but  they  must  die  for  other  ends,  viz.,  to  be  made  perfectly  happy  in  a 
more  full  and  immediate  enjoyment  of  God,  than  they  can  have  in  the  body ;  and 
bo  death  is  theirs  by  way  of  privilege  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  They  are  not  death's  by  way 
of  punishment.  The  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  afflictions  with  which  God,  for 
gracious  ends,  now  exercises  His  reconciled  ones.  Thus  much  may  suffice  to 
establish  this  great  truth.  We  proceed  to  make  the  following  inferences:  1.  It  the 
death  of  Christ  was  that  which  satisfied  God  for  all  the  sins  of  the  elect,  then 
certainly  there  is  an  infinite  evil  in  sin,  since  it  cannot  be  expiated,  but  by 
an  infinite  satisfaction.  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin,  and  there  are  but  few  souls  in 
the  world  that  are  duly  sensible  of,  and  affected  with  its  evil ;  but  oertainly,  if  God 
should  damn  thee  to  all  eternity,  thy  eternal  sufferings  could  not  satisfy  for  the 
evil  that  is  in  one  vain  thought.  2.  If  the  death  of  Christ  satisfied  God,  and 
thereby  redeemed  the  elect  from  the  curse,  then  the  redemption  of  souls  is  costly  ; 
souls  are  dear  things,  and  of  great  value  with  God.  3.  If  Christ's  death  satisfied 
God  for  our  sins,  how  unparalleled  is  the  love  of  Christ  to  poor  sinners  1  4.  If 
Christ,  by  dying,  hath  made  fall  satisfaction,  then  God  is  no  loser  in  pardoning  the 
greatest  of  sinners  that  believe  in  Jesus  ;  and  consequently  His  justice  can  be  no 
bar  to  their  justification  and  salvation.  He  is  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  (1  John 
i.  9).  What  an  argument  is  here  for  a  poor  believer  to  plead  with  God !  5.  If 
Christ  hath  made  such  a  full  satisfaction  as  you  have  heard,  how  much  is  it  the 
concernment  of  every  soul,  to  abandon  all  thoughts  of  satisfying  God  for  his  own 
sins,  and  betake  himself  to  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  ransomer,  by  faith,  that  in  that 
blood  they  may  be  pardoned  ?  It  would  grieve  one's  heart  to  see  how  many  poor 
creatures  are  drudging  and  tugging  at  a  task  of  repentance,  and  revenge  upon 
themselves,  and  reformation,  and  obedience,  to  satisfy  God  for  what  they  have  done 
against  Him :  And  alas  1  it  cannot  be,  they  do  but  lose  their  labour ;  could  they 
swelter  their  very  hearts  out,  weep  till  they  can  weep  no  more,  cry  till  their  throats 
be  parched,  alas,  they  can  never  recompense  God  for  one  vain  thought.  For  such 
is  the  severity  of  the  law,  that  when  it  is  once  offended,  it  will  never  be  made 
amends  again  by  all  that  we  can  do ;  it  will  not  discharge  the  sinner,  for  all  the 
sorrow  in  the  world.  (John  Flavel.)  Suffering,  redemption,  blessing  : — I.  The 
sufferings  of  Cheist.  He  was  made  a  curse.  Upon  Him  rested,  for  a  season,  the 
wrath  of  God.  1.  This  was  the  bitter  experience  of  His  life.  From  His  stand- 
point of  perfect  rectitude  and  purity,  He  saw  how  far  men  had  wandered  from 
God,  and  how  deeply  they  had  fallen  in  sin.  2.  This  was  the  agony  of  His  death. 
Man's  hatred  to  God  culminated  in  the  act  that  put  Christ  to  deatb.  3.  That 
Christ  endured  such  suffering,  being  made  a  curse,  was  evident  from  the  peculiar 
manner  of  His  death.  "As  it  is  written,  cursed  is  every  one  tbat  hangeth  on  a 
tree."  II.  Redemption  by  Christ.  "  He  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  III.  Blessing  thbouoh  Christ.  In  this  blessing 
is  included — 1.  Salvation  for  the  Gentiles.     "  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might 


chap.  Mi]  GALATIANS.  177 

come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ."  2.  Blessing  through  Christ  included 
the  "  promise  of  the  Spirit."  Lessons  :  1.  Christ  the  sufferer  must  be  Christ  the 
Redeemer.  2.  The  blessings  of  salvation  are  to  be  obtained  in  Christ  (iv  Xpiar<p)~ 
There  must  be  fellowship  with  Christ.  3.  Salvation  becomes  an  actual  and 
personal  blessing  through  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit.  (Richard  Nicholls.} 
Christ  made  a  curse  for  man  : — A  man  pays  a  ransom  for  slaves ;  but  Christ  took 
the  slave's  place.  A  doctor  gives  medicine  to  a  sick  man;  but  Christ  "took  the 
disease  on  Himself."  We  are  told  of  Sister  Dora  "  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of 
bringing  back  to  life  patients  who  had  sunk  into  the  first  stage  of  the  fatal 
collapse  which  often  precedes  death  from  small-pox,  by  actually  putting  her  mouth 
to  theirs,  and  breathing  into  them,  until  vitality  was  restored."  ("  Sister  Dora," 
by  M.  Lonsdale.)  St.  Vincent  de  Paul  was  at  one  time  almoner- general  to  the 
prison  ships  in  the  chief  harbours  of  France,  during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII. 
"  While  visiting  those  at  Marseilles,  he  was  so  much  struck  by  the  broken-down 
looks  and  exceeding  sorrowfulness  of  one  of  the  convicts,  that,  on  discovering  his 
sorrow  was  less  for  his  own  sake  than  for  the  misery  to  which  his  absence  must 
needs  reduce  his  wife  and  children,  St.  Vincent  absolutely  changed  places  with  the 
convict.  The  prisoner  went  free,  whilst  St.  Vincent  wore  a  convict's  chain,  did  a 
convict's  work,  lived  on  convict  fare,  and,  worst  of  all,  had  only  convict  society. 
He  was  soon  sought  out  and  released,  but  the  hurts  he  had  received  from  the 
pressure  of  the  chains  lasted  all  his  life.  .  .  .  After  this  St.  Vincent  worked  with 
infinitely  more  force  on  the  consciences  of  the  convicts  for  having  been  for 
a  time  one  of  themselves."  (From  Mist  Yonge's  "Book  of  Golden  Deeds.") 
Our  redemption  by  Christ : — This  curse  is  the  wretched  inheritance  of  all  the 
guilty  sons  of  Adam.  And  can  there  any,  in  this  forlorn  and  desperate  case,  inter- 
pose to  shelter  the  trembling  sinner  from  so  great,  so  deserved,  so  imminent  a 
destruction  ?  Is  there  any  way  of  escape,  any  door  of  hope  opened  ?  There  is  ;  for, 
behold  1  I  this  day  bring  unto  all  penitent  and  humble  souls  the  glad  tidings  of 
great  joy  ;  joy  which,  if  excess  of  fear  and  horror  have  not  altogether  stupefied  and 
made  us  insensible,  must  needs  fill  us  with  the  highest  raptures  of  triumph  and 
exultations.  A  Saviour,  a  Redeemer :  0  sweet  and  precious  names,  for  lost  and 
undone  sinners !  Names,  full  of  mercy,  full  of  life  1  Justice  is  answered ;  the  law 
is  satisfied ;  the  curse  removed  ;  and  we  restored  to  the  hopes  of  eternal  life  and 
salvation.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us,"  &c.  I.  Jesus  Chkist,  the  evek-blessei> 
God,  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  1.  What  it  is  to  be  made  a  curse.  Now  to  be 
accursed,  in  its  proper  notion,  signifies  to  be  devoted  to  miseries  and  punishments ; 
for  we  are  said  to  curse  another  when  we  devote  and,  so  far  as  in  us  lies,  appoint 
him  to  plagues  and  miseries.  And  God  is  said  to  curse  men  when  He  doth  devote 
and  appoint  them  to  punishments.  Men  curse  by  imprecation ;  but  God  curseth 
more  effectually  by  ordination  and  infliction.  But  yet,  notwithstanding,  every  one 
whom  God  afflicts  must  not  be  esteemed  as  cursed  by  Him.  Every  one,  therefore, 
that  is  afflicted  is  not  presently  accursed.  For  God  hath  two  ends  for  which  He 
brings  any  affliction  upon  us.  The  one  is  the  manifestation  of  His  holiness  ;  the 
other  is  the  satisfaction  of  His  justice.  And  accordingly  as  any  affliction  or 
Buffering  tends  to  the  promoting  of  these  ends,  so  it  may  be  said  to  be  a  curse  or 
not.  2.  How  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  God  blessed  for  ever,  could  be  made  a  curse  or 
become  accursed.  This,  at  the  first  glance  of  our  thoughts  upon  it,  seems  very 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  be  reconciled.  And  the  difficulty  is  increased,  partly 
because  the  true  faith  acknowledged  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  true  God, 
blessed  for  ever;  and  partly  because  the  apostle  tells  us,  "  That  no  man,  speaking 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  calleth  Jesus  accursed  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  3).  (1)  Then  certain  it 
is  that  Christ  is  essentially  blessed,  being  the  most  blessed  God,  co-equal  and  co- 
eternal  with  the  Father,  possessing  all  the  infinite  perfections  of  the  Deity,  invari- 
ably and  immeasurably.  Yea,  and  He  is  the  fountain  of  all  blessing,  whence  flow 
all  our  hopes  and  happiness.  But  although  He  is  for  ever  blessed  essentially,  yet, 
(2)  Mediatorily,  He  was  accursed  ;  and  that  because  the  economy  and  dispensation 
of  His  mediatory  office  required  that  He  should  be  subjected  unto  sufferings,  not 
only  as  they  were  simply  evil,  but  as  they  were  penal,  and  inflicted  on  Him  to  this 
very  end,  that  justice  might  be  repaired  and  satisfied.  (3)  But  the  curse  of  the 
law  being  only  due  unto  sin  and  guilt,  it  remains  yet  to  be  inquired  how  this  curse 
could  be  justly  inflicted  on  our  Saviour,  who  was  infinitely  pure  and  innocent; 
and  to  whom  the  Scripture  gives  this  testimony,  that  He  did  no  sin,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  His  mouth  (1  Pet.  ii.  22).  To  this  I  answer  :  That  sin  may  be  con- 
«idered  either  as  personal  or  imputed,    (a)  Christ  was  free  from  all  personal  gist, 

12 


178  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

whether  of  corruption  of  nature  or  transgression  of  life,  (b)  Yet  He  was  not  free 
from  all  imputed  sin  and  guilt.  The  sins  of  all  the  world  assembled  and  met 
together  upon  Him.  3.  Is  it  consistent  with  the  justice  of  God  to  punish  an 
innocent  person  for  the  sins  of  those  that  are  guilty  ?  To  this  I  answer :  (1)  In 
general,  that  it  is  not  unjust  for  God  to  punish  the  sins  of  one  person  upon 
another  who  hath  not  committed  them.  We  find  frequent  instances  of  this  in  the 
Scripture  (Exod.  xx.  5  ;  Lam.  v.  7;  Gen.  ix.  25  ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  1-14;  xxiv.  17).  (2) 
It  is  just  with  God  to  inflict  the  punishment  of  our  sins  upon  Christ,  though 
innocent.  And  there  are  two  things  upon  which  this  justice  and  equity  are 
founded — conjunction  and  consent.  [1]  There  is  a  near  conjunction  between 
Christ  and  us,  upon  which  account  it  is  no  injustice  to  punish  Him  in  our  stead. 
And  this  conjunction  is  twofold — either  natural  or  mystical.  1st.  There  is  a 
natural  conjunction  between  us,  as  Christ  is  truly  man,  and  hath  taken  upon  Him 
our  nature,  which  makes  a  cognation  and  alliance  between  us.  We  are  bone  of 
His  bone,  and  flesh  of  His  flesh.  It  was  therefore  necessary  that  Christ  should 
take  our  nature  upon  a  threefold  account.  (1st)  That  thereby  the  same  person, 
who  is  God,  might  become  passive,  and  a  fit  subject  to  receive  and  bear  the  wrath 
of  God  ;  for  had  He  not  been  man,  He  could  not  have  received  it ;  and  had  He  not 
been  God,  He  could  not  have  borne  it.  (2ndly)  That  satisfaction  might  be  made  to 
offended  justice  in  the  same  nature  which  transgressed ;  that  as  it  was  man  which 
6inned,  so  man  also  might  be  punished.  And  yet  farther,  (3rdly)  that  the  right  of 
redemption  might  be  in  Christ,  being  made  near  of  kin  unto  us,  by  His  taking  our 
flesh  and  our  nature.  For  we  find  in  the  law  that  the  person  who  was  next  of  kin 
was  to  redeem  to  himself  the  lands  of  his  relations,  when  they  were  fallen  to  decay, 
and  constrained  by  poverty  to  sell  them  (Lev.  xxv.  25 ;  Ruth  iii.  12 ;  and  iv.  4). 
Whereby  was  typified  unto  us  our  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ,  who,  having  a  body 
prepared  for  Him,  is  now  become  near  of  kin  unto  us,  and  is  not  ashamed  to  call 
us  brethren.  Now,  because  of  this  natural  conjunction,  the  transferring  the  punish- 
ment from  us,  who  are  guilty,  unto  Christ,  who  is  guiltless,  doth,  at  least  in  this 
respect,  answer  the  rules  and  measures  of  justice ;  that  although  the  same  person 
be  not  punished,  yet  the  same  nature  is.  But  this  is  not  all,  for — 2ndly.  There  is  a 
nearer  conjunction  between  Christ  and  us,  and  that  is  mystical,  whereby  we  are 
made  one  person  with  Him.  And  by  reason  of  this,  God,  in  punishing  Christ, 
punisheth  not  only  the  same  nature,  but  the  same  person.  For  there  is  such  an 
intimate  union  by  faith  between  Christ  and  a  believer,  that  they  make  up  but  one 
mystical  person.  [2]  As  Christ  is  thus  conjoined  to  us,  both  naturally  and  mystically, 
so  He  has  also  given  His  full  consent  to  stand  in  our  stead,  and  to  bear  our 
punishment.  4.  Did  Christ  bear  the  same  wrath  and  curse  which  were  due  to  us 
for  our  sins,  or  some  other  punishment  in  lieu  thereof?  For  answer  to  this,  we 
must  carefully  distinguish  between  the  substance  of  the  curse  and  the  adjuncts  and 
circumstances  of  it.  For  want  of  rightly  distinguishing  between  these,  too  many 
have  been  woefully  staggered  and  perverted  in  their  faith ;  and  have  been  induced 
to  believe  that  Christ  died  not  in  the  stead  of  any,  but  only  for  the  good  of  all,  as 
the  Socinians  blaspheme.  Now  certain  it  is  that  Christ  underwent  the  very  same 
punishment,  for  the  matter  and  substance  of  it,  which  was  due  to  us  by  the  curse 
and  threatening  of  the  law,  though  it  may  be  different  in  very  many  circumstances 
and  modifications,  according  to  the  divers  natures  of  the  subjects  on  whom  it  was 
to  be  inflicted.  For  the  substance  of  the  curse  and  punishment  threatened 
against  sinners  is  death.  "In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die." 
5.  For  whose  sake  was  Christ  thus  accursed  and  punished  ?  (1)  He  died  in  our 
place  and  stead  as  a  Eansom  for  us.  (2)  He  suffered  our  punishment  to  free  us 
from  it.     II.   Chbist  being  thus  made  a  cukse  fob  vs,  and  scffebino  all  thb 

WBATH  AND  PUNISHMENT  THAT  WA8  DUE  UNTO  US,  HATH  THEEEBY  BEDEEMED  US  FBOM 
THE    CUBSE   AND   CONDEMNATION    THEEATENED  IN    THE    LAW.        1.    Let   US  Consider  what 

redemption  is.  Redemption,  therefore,  may  be  taken  either  properly  or  improperly. 
An  improper  redemption  is  a  powerful  rescue  of  a  man  from  under  any  evil  or 
danger  in  which  he  is.  Thus  Jacob  makes  mention  of  the  angel  which  redeemed 
him  from  all  evil  (Gen.  xlviii.  16) ;  and  the  disciples  profess  that  they  hoped  that 
Jesus  had  been  He  who  should  have  redeemed  the  Israelites  from  under  the 
Roman  yoke  and  subjection,  Ac.  A  proper  redemption  is  by  paying  a  price  and 
ransom.  And  that  either  fully  equivalent:  thus  one  kinsman  was  to  redeem 
another  out  of  servitude  (Lev.  xxv.  49,  50) ;  or  else  what  is  given  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  another  may,  in  itself,  be  of  a  less  value,  but  yet  is  accepted  as  a  recom- 
pense and  satisfaction  :  thus  the  first-born  of  a  man  was  to  be  redeemed,  and  the 


.  m.]  GALAT1ANS.  179 

price  paid  down  for  him  no  more  than  five  shekels  (Numb,  xviii.  15,  16).  Now  the 
redemption  made  for  us  by  Christ  is  a  proper  redemption,  by  way  of  price ;  and 
that  price,  not  only  reckoned  valuable  by  acceptation,  but,  in  itself,' fully  equivalent 
to  the  purchase,  and  compensatory  to  Divine  justice.  2.  The  reasons  which 
moved  God  to  contrive  the  method  of  our  redemption  by  substituting  His  own  Son 
to  bear  the  punishment  of  our  offences.  (I)  God  substitutes  His  Son  to  undergo 
our  punishment  that  thereby  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  love  towards  us  might 
be  expressed  and  glorified.  (2)  In  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ,  God  manifests 
the  glory  both  of  His  justice  and  mercy,  and  with  infinite  wisdom  reconciles  them 
one  with  the  other.  (3)  By  this  means  also  God  most  effectually  expresses  His 
infinite  hatred  and  detestation  of  Bin.  For  it  is  expedient  that  God  should,  by 
some  notable  example,  show  the  world  how  provoking  a  thing  sin  is.  It  is  true  He 
hath  already  demonstrated  His  hate  against  it  by  ruthful  examples  upon  all  the 
creatures.  As  soon  as  ever  the  least  breath  of  this  contagion  seized  upon  them,  God 
turned  the  angels  out  of  heaven,  and  man  out  of  Paradise ;  He  subjected  the  whole  crea- 
tion unto  vanity,  that  nothing  but  fears,  care,  sorrow,  and  disappointment  reign  here 
below ;  and  under  these  woeful  effects  of  the  Divine  wrath  we  groan  and  sign  away  our 
days.  But  all  these  are  but  weak  instances  of  so  great  and  almighty  a  wrath ;  and  their 
capacity  is  so  narrow,  that  they  can  only  contain  some  few  drops  of  the  Divine 
indignation,  and  those,  likewise,  distilled  upon  them  by  degrees  and  succession. 
And,  therefore,  God  is  resolved  to  fit  a  vessel  large  enough,  a  subject  capable 
enough,  to  contain  the  immense  ocean  of  His  wrath  ;  and  because  this  cannot  be 
in  any  finite  and  limited  nature,  God  Himself  must  be  subject  to  the  wrath  of  God. 
(4)  God  so  severely  punisheth  His  Son  that  the  extremity  of  His  sufferings  might  be  a 
caution  to  us,  and  affect  us  with  a  holy  dread  and  fear  how  we  provoke  so  just  and 
bo  jealous  a  God.  For  if  His  own  Son,  dear  to  Him  as  His  own  essence,  could  not 
escape,  when  He  only  stood  in  the  place  of  sinners,  how  thinkest  thou,  0  wretch ! 
to  escape  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  if  thou  continuest  in  thy  sins  and  provo- 
cations f  3.  Who  the  persons  are  for  whom  Jesus  Christ  has  wrought  out  this 
great  redemption.  (1)  That  Christ  died  for  all  men,  with  an  absolute  intention  of 
bringing  all  and  every  one  of  them  into  a  state  of  salvability;  from  the  which 
they  were  excluded  by  their  guilt  and  God's  righteous  judgment,  and  that  He 
is  not  frustrated  in  this  His  intention,  but,  by  His  death,  hath  fully  effected  and 
accomplished  it.  (2)  The  second  argument  is  this :  The  covenant  of  grace  is  pro- 
pounded to  all  indefinitely  and  universally.  (Mark  xvi.  16)  "  Whosoever  beHeveth 
shall  be  saved."  And,  under  these  general  terms,  it  may  be  propounded  unto  all, 
even  the  most  desperate  and  forlorn  sinners  on  earth.  But  if  Christ  had  not  died 
for  all,  as  well  for  the  reprobate  as  the  elect,  this  tender  could  not  be  made  to  all, 
as  our  Saviour  commands  it  to  be  (v.  15),  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature."  (3)  It  must  needs  be  acknowledged  that  Christ  died  for 
all  men,  in  such  a  sense,  as  He  is  denied  to  have  died  for  the  fallen  angels ;  then 
His  death  was  not  only  a  sufficient,  but  an  intended,  ransom  for  all.  For  the 
death  of  Christ  had  sufficient  worth  and  value  in  it  to  have  redeemed  and  restored 
them,  being  an  infinite  price,  through  the  infinite  dignity  of  His  person.  (4)  All 
are  bound  to  the  great  duty  of  believing  in  Christ ;  therefore  He  died  for  all.  (5) 
All  men  in  the  world  are  obliged  to  return  gratitude  and  obedience  unto  Christ 
upon  the  account  and  consideration  of  His  death;  therefore  His  death  had  a 
respect  to  all  (See  1  Cor.  vL  20 ;  2  Cor.  v.  15).  (6)  Christ  challenges  unto  Himself 
supreme  authority  and  dominion  over  all  by  the  right  of  His  death  (Kom.  xiv.  9). 
But  if  Christ's  authority  over  all,  as  Mediator,  be  founded  on  His  death,  it  will 
follow  that,  as  His  authority  is  over  all,  so  His  death  was  for  all ;  otherwise  He 
must  exercise  His  jurisdiction  over  those  persons  over  whom  He  hath  no  right  nor 
title.  III.  Practical  inferences  and  corollaries.  1.  Be  exhorted  to  admire  and 
adore  the  infinite  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  towards  fallen  and  undone  mankind , 
in  that  He  was  pleased  to  substitute  Himself  in  our  stead,  and,  when  the  hand  of 
justice  was  lifted  up  against  us,  to  thrust  Himself  between  us  and  the  dread  effects 
of  the  Divine  wrath,  receiving  into  His  own  bosom  all  the  arrows  of  God's  quiver, 
every  one  of  them  dipped  in  the  poison  of  the  curse.  (1)  Consider  the  infinite 
glory  and  dignity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  Consider  our  infinite  vileness  and 
wretchedness.  (3)  The  infinite  love  of  Christ,  in  being  made  a  curse  for  us,  is 
mightily  glorified,  if  we  consider,  not  only  what  He  was,  and  who  we  are,  but  the 
several  bitter  and  direful  ingredients  that  compounded  the  curse  which  was  laid  upon 
Him.  2.  If  Christ  has  thus  borne  the  curse  for  us,  why  should  we  think  it  much 
to  bear  the  cross  for  Him  ?    3.  Here  is  abundant  satisfaction  made  to  the  justice 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  God  for  all  the  transgressions  of  true  believers.  They,  by  their  Surety, 
have  paid  to  the  full,  yea,  and  supererogated  in  His  sufferings.  For  God  could 
never  have  been  so  completely  satisfied  in  exacting  the  penalty  from  us  in  our  own 
persons  as  now  He  is  by  the  punishments  laid  upon  His  own  Son,  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ.  For  those  very  sufferings  of  thy  Saviour,  which  were  an  expiation  for  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world,  were  all  of  them  tendered  to  the  Father  as  an  expiation  for 
thine,  and  the  full  value  of  His  infinite  satisfaction  belongs  all  of  it  entirely  unto 
thee.  And,  therefore,  look  upon  thy  sins  as  horrid  and  heinous  as  thou  canst ;  yet, 
unless  thine  in  particular  have  been  more  than  the  sins  of  all  the  world,  unless 
thine  have  been  more  sinful  than  sin  itself  can  be,  know,  for  thy  comfort,  that  a 
full  atonement  is  made,  and  now  nothing  is  expected  from  thee  but  only  to  accept 
it,  and  to  walk  worthy  of  it.  (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.)  The  substitute  : — One  of  our 
boys  had  committed  an  offence  so  bad  that  Mr.  Gibb,  his  teacher,  though  rarely 
using  the  rod,  felt  it  necessary  to  make  an  example  of  him.  The  punishment  was 
to  be  publicly  inflicted,  "  that  others  might  fear."  But  when  the  culprit,  who  had 
only  been  a  few  days  in  our  school,  was  stripped,  he  was  such  a  living  skeleton, 
that  the  master  had  not  the  heart  to  beat  him.  At  his  wit's  end  what  to  do — for 
the  crime  must  be  punished — it  occurred  to  him  to  make  such  an  appeal  as,  to 
compare  small  things  to  great,  reminds  us  of  the  mystery  of  salvation,  and  the 
love  of  Him  who  "was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our 
iniquities,  and  by  whose  stripes  we  are  healed."  Turning  to  the  others,  "  It  goes," 
he  said,  "  against  my  heart  to  lay  a  hand  on  that  miserable  creature.  Will  any 
one  take  his  place,  and  be  punished  in  his  stead  ?  "  The  words  had  hardly  left 
his  lips  when,  with  tears  of  pity  brimming  in  his  eyes,  a  boy  stepped  bravely  out, 
pulled  his  jacket  off,  and  pushing  the  culprit  aside,  offered  his  own  back  and 
shoulders  to  the  rod.  A  ragged-school  boy,  he  was  a  hero  in  his  way,  presenting 
an  example  of  courage  and  kindness,  of  sympathy  and  unselfishness,  rare  in  schools 
— or  anywhere  else.     (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Christ  our  substitute  : — Damon,  a  Grecian 

philosopher,  is  remarkable  for  his  devotion  to  Pythias,  his  friend.     Pythias  having 
been  condemned  to  death,  he  obtained  leave  of  absence  to  go  home  and  settle  his 
affairs,  and  Damon  pledged  himself  to  endure  the  punishment  if  his  friend  did 
not  return.    Pythias  was  absent  at  the  time  for  the  execution,  but  Damon  was 
punctual,  and  ready  to  die  for  his  friend,  and  the  king  was  so  pleased  with  the 
friendship  of  Damon  that  he  pardoned  him.    (W.  Birch.)         Enduring  the  curse 
for  another : — "About  a  fortnight  ago  a  man  was  admitted  to  the  Bristol  Boyal 
Infirmary,  suffering  from  an  affection  of  the  throat,  supposed  to  be  diphtheria. 
The  operation  of  tracheotomy  was  performed  by  Mr.  W.  0.  Lysaght,  M.K.C.S., 
assistant  medical  officer  to  the  Infirmary;    but  the  tube  becoming  choked,  the 
last  chance  of  saving  the  man's  life  was  for  some  one  to  apply  his  lips  to  the 
tube  and  suck  the  moisture.     This  Mr.  Lysaght  did,  but  without  avail,  for  shortly 
afterwards  the  patient  died  of  suppressed  scarlatina.     Mr.  Lysaght  caught  the 
disease  in  its  worse  form,  and  died."     (From  "  The  Yorkshire  Post,"  Aug.  6,  1887.) 
Christ  made  a  curse: — I.  "Christ  made  a  curse."        First  of  all,  I  lay  down  this 
position  as  certain  (however  unlikely  it  might  have  seemed  to  us  beforehand),  that 
the  curse  which  the  apostle  speaks  of  is  the  curse  of  God.    True,  there  was  no  lack 
of  the  cursing  of  this  blessed  One,  in  a  secondary  sense  of  the  word,  from  other 
quarters, — no  lack  of  the  cursing  of  Him  by  men  and  devils,  in  the  sense  of  malign- 
ing, blaspheming — wishing,  calling  Him  accursed.    But  Paul  assuredly  does  not 
speak  of  anything  of  that  kind.   Besides  that  he  says  "made" — not  called,  or  wished, 
but  (yfvSfievog)  "  made  a  curse," — see  how  certain  it  is  from  the  entire  context  that 
it  is  the  curse  of  God  which  he  speaks  of,  and  which  he  says  Christ  was  made.    He 
had  begun  to  speak  of  this  curse  at  the  tenth  verse,  saying,  "  As  many  as  are  of  the 
works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  :  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  everyone  that  con- 
tinueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them.** 
Then  in  the  thirteenth  verse,  where  the  text  lies,  "  Christ,"  says  he,  "  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."    It  is  out  of  the 
question  to  imagine  the  sense  of  the  term  to  be  entirely  changed  in  this  seoond 
clause.    Beyond  all  doubt  the  meaning  is,  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse 
of  the  law,  having  borne  that  curse — been  made  the  curse  of  the  law  for  us.    And 
then,  as  it  is  God's  curse  which  the  apostle  says  Christ  was  made,  so  was  it  God 
Himself  who  made  Him  that  curse.     God  alone  can  bring  His  curse  on  any  man. 
And  you  may  only  further  notice  as  to  this,  that  the  word  "  made  "  here  is  the  same 
the  apostle  uses  in  the  fourth  verse  of  the  next  chapter,  "  When  the  fulness  of  the 
time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  Uw  •'— > 


(SKIP.  ra.J  GALATIANS.  181 

made  by  God,  of  coarse.  Oar  first  position  then  is,  that  it  is  the  corse  of  God 
which  the  apostle  says  Christ  was  made,  and  God  Himself  who  made  Him  that  curse 
II.  But,  secondly,  at  once  the  question  arises,  How  could  such  a  thing  ever  be  ? 
For  the  righteous  God  will  bring  His  curse  on  no  guiltless  one.  But  it  is  certain 
He  will  not  bring  His  curse  on  the  guiltless.  Wicked  men  may  curse  tbem — may 
wish,  or  call  them,  acoursed.  III.  But  now,  thirdly,  there  was  a  mysterious  manner, 
yet  most  real  and  true,  in  which  Christ  was  not  guiltless.  I  might  remind  you  of 
those  words  of  the  ransomed  Church  in  Isaiah,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ; 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  tbe  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the 
iniquity  of  us  all."  But  let  us  fix  our  attention  a  little  more  closely  on  those  words 
of  2  Cor.  v.  21,  "  God  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  as,  that  we  might  be  made  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  Him."  "  Made  Him  to  be  sin" — the  entire  expression  is, "  made 
Him  who  knew  no  sin  to  be  sin  for  us."  So  much  is  certain,  therefore,  negatively, 
that  the  apostle's  meaning  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  that  He  was  made  our  sin  in  the 
pollution,  or  stain,  or  turpitude  of  it,  either  in  nature  or  in  life.  For,  besides  the 
rightfulness  of  such  a  thing  to  be  even  imagined,  it  were  in  contradiction  to  the 
express  words,  "  He  hath  made  Him  who  knew  no  sin  to  be  sin  for  us."  So  that 
the  question  remains  just  as  before,  what  that  sin  was  which  was  transferred.  It 
could  not  be  the  pollution,  the  turpitude,  on  the  one  hand ;  it  was  not  the  suffering 
simply,  on  the  other.  But  there  was  a  great  intermediate  element  between  the 
turpitude  and  the  suffering ;  and  this  it  was  that  Christ  was  made  in  the  whole 
fearful  "reality  of  it — even  the  guilt  (the  reatus,  as  the  Latins  spoke) — the  just 
liability  in  law,  and  in  the  eye  of  the  lawgiver,  to  endure  the  suffering,  the  punish- 
ment, the  curse.  For  Christ,  by  an  altogether  peculiar  Divine  constitution — of 
infinite  grace  alike  on  the  Father's  part  and  on  His  own — had  become  the  Head  of 
His  body  the  Church, — taken  their  place  in  law — become  one  with  them  in  law  for 
aver.  Bead  again,  for  instance,  that  fourth  verse  of  the  following  chapter,  "  When 
the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made 
ander  the  law  " — under  the  law  ?  But  what  could  the  Son,  the  very  Lawgiver,  have 
to  do  with  subjection  to  the  law  ?  Nothing,  assuredly,  for  Himself — nothing  save 
as  a  public  Person,  Surety,  Representative.  And  now  turn  we  for  a  moment  to  the 
passage  cited  by  the  apostle  from  the  Pentateuch.  Let  no  one  be  startled  in  the 
reading  of  it.  It  is  the  twenty-first  of  Deuteronomy,  the  twenty-second  and  twenty- 
third  verses — "  If  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of  death,  and  he  be  to  be  put 
to  death,  and  thou  hang  him  on  a  tree ;  his  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon 
the  tree,  but  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that  day  (for  he  that  is  hanged  is 
accursed  of  God) ;  that  thy  land  be  not  defiled,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee 
for  an  inheritance."  IV.  Fourthly,  thus  have  we  the  wondrous  explanation  of  the 
whole  life  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  otherwise  were  an  inexplicable  enigma. 
Even  had  His  sufferings  proceeded  simply  from  the  hands  of  men  and  devils,  the 
mystery  would  not  have  been  removed,  since  neither  devils  nor  men  could  be  more 
than  instruments — voluntary  and  guilty,  yet  only  instruments — in  the  hand  of 
Jehovah  for  the  executing  of  His  designs.  But  the  fact,  unquestionably,  was  that 
the  principal  sufferings  of  this  Just  One  came  from  the  immediate  hand  of  the 
Father  himself.  It  is  impossible  to  read  the  Gospel  histories  without  perceiving 
that  by  far  His  deepest  agonies  were  those  which  He  endured  when  there  was  no 
hand  of  man  upon  Him  at  all,  or  when,  at  least,  He  himself  traces  the  suffering  to 
another  hand  altogether — saying,  for  example,  "  Now  is  My  soul  troubled ;  and  what 
shall  I  say  ?  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour  f  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this 
hour  "  — "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death  ;  tarry  ye  here  and  watch 
with  Me  " — "  Oh  My  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me  " — "  My 
God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  Ah  !  behold  the  explanation  of  all — 
of  the  travail  of  Messiah's  soul — of  an  agony  that  wrung  the  blood  from  every  pore 
of  His  sacred  body — of  what  He  himself  declared  to  be  His  own  Father's  desertion 
of  Him — see,  not  the  source  of  it  only,  but  the  soul  also  of  its  deepest  bitterness  and 
anguish,  in  these  words,  "made  sin,"  "made  a  curse," — not  accursed  simply,  but — as 
if  all  the  curses  due  to  a  world's  sin  had  been  made  to  meet  in  His  person — "  made 
a  curse,"  that  we  might  be  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  law  1    V.  Fifthly,  thbhk 

ARE  CERTAIN  GREAT  CENTRAL  THINGS  AMONG  THE  TYPES  07  THE  OliD  TESTAMENT  WHICH 
OAST  MUCH  LIGHT  OVER  THE  MYSTERIOUS  FACT  IN  OUR  TEXT,  AND,  IN  THEIR  TURN,  RECEIVE 

important  light  from  it.  Let  me  select  three — the  brazen  serpent,  the  burnt  offer- 
ing, and  the  sin  offering.  1.  The  brazen  serpent.  At  first  view-it  seems  very  strange 
that  the  chosen  type  of  the  blessed  Bedeemer  should  have  been  the  likeness  of  ft 
serpent, — that,  when  the  Israelites  were  dying  of  the  bite  of  serpents,  the  medium 


181  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  their  core  should  have  been  the  likeness  of  one,  "  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and 
set  it  upon  a  pole ;  and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  bitten,  when  he 
looketh  upon  it,  shall  live."  But  the  wonder  ceases,  or  rather  is  turned  into 
another  wonder  of  holy  admiration,  when  we  find  that  the  only  possible  way  of  our 
deliverance  from  sin,  was  the  Eedeemer's  taking  it,  in  its  whole  guilt  and  ourse  into 
His  own  person — being  made  sin  and  a  curse  for  us.  What  glorious  light  is  thus 
cast  on  the  words  of  Jesus,  '*  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even 
so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up ;  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  eternal  life  1 "  2.  The  burnt  offering.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  fire  of  all  the  burnt  offerings  of  the  law,  whether  it  came  down  immediately 
irom  heaven  to  consume  the  victim,  as  on  various  memorable  occasions,  or  was 
kindled  naturally,  was  the  emblem  of  the  Divine  holiness  and  justice,  consuming 
the  substitute  lamb  on  which  the  sin  had  been  laid — the  sacrifice  in  place  of  the 
sinner.  What  a  picture  of  Christ  made  a  curse,  enduring  the  fire  of  "  the  wrath  of 
God  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men  ! " 
What  a  picture  of  the  prophet's  "Awake,  O  sword,  against  My  shepherd,  and 
against  the  man  that  is  My  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ;  smite  the  shepherd !  " 
What  a  picture  of  Him  who  cried,  "  My  heart  is  like  wax  ;  it  is  melted  in  the  midst 
of  My  bowels.  My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd ;  and  My  tongue  cleaveth  to 
My  jaws ;  and  Thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust  of  death  I "  3.  The  sin- 
offering.  Let  these  words,  for  example,  be  carefully  observed  (Lev.  xvi.  27,  28), 
*'  The  bullock  for  the  sin  offering,  and  the  goat  for  the  sin-offering,  whose  blood  was 
brought  in  to  make  atonement  in  the  holy  place,  shall  one  carry  forth  without  the 
camp ;  and  they  shall  burn  in  the  fire  their  skin,  and  their  flesh,  and  their  dung. 
And  he  that  burnetii  them  shall  wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  and 
afterward  he  shall  come  into  the  camp."  That  is  to  say,  the  victim,  as  having  had 
the  whole  iniquities  transferred  to  it  by  the  laying  of  the  hand  upon  its  head,  had 
become  an  unclean  and  accursed  tbing,  and  so  behoved  to  be  carried  away  out  of 
God's  sight  without  the  camp,  and  consumed  in  the  fire.  This  is  what  our  apostle 
refers  to  in  those  words  in  Hebrews,  "  The  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  for 
sin  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary  by  the  high  priest,  are  burned  without  the  camp. 
Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  His  own  blood,  suffered 
without  the  gate."  As  if  to  say  that  when  God  appointed  the  sin-offerings  of  the 
law  to  be  carried  forth  outside  the  camp  as  unclean  and  accursed,  and  to  be  burned 
in  the  fire,  it  was  but  a  figure  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  laden  with  our  accursed  iniqui- 
ties, made  sin  and  a  curse,  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  dealt  with  as  the  vilest 
of  all — not  by  man  so  much  as  by  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel — because  the  Lord 
had,  with  His  own  most  free  consent,  made  to  meet  on  Him  the  iniquities  of  us  all. 
When  Jesus  was  led  forth  out  of  Jerusalem,  and  there  crucified  between  the  thieves, 
it  was  as  if  all  the  innumerable  multitudes  of  sinners  whom  He  represented  had  been 
in  that  hour  carried  out,  and  had  there  endured,  in  their  own  persons,  the  curse  of 
the  Divine  law  due  to  their  whole  ungodliness,  unrighteousness,  pride,  falsehood, 
vanity,  uncleannesa,  rebellion,  and  I  know  not  what  other  crimes  and  sins.  VI. 
But  thus  I  observe,  once  more,  that  we  do  not  get  at  the  full  explanation  of  the 
mysterious  fact  in  our  text  till  we  have  taken  into  view  the  wondrous  design  and 
issue  of  all,  as  set  forth  in  the  passage  thus — "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the 
curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us,  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might 
come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ ;  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of 
the  Spirit  through  faith."  And  now,  not  only  are  we  thus  delivered  from  the  law's 
terrible  sentence,  but — the  stone  which  lay  over  the  grave  of  our  corruption  once 
removed — the  way  is  open  for  the  Holy  Ghost's  descending  into  it  to  make  an  end 
of  our  corruption  too, — yea,  open  for  the  whole  blessing  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant, 
•'I  will  be  a  God  to  thee,"  coming  on  believers  everywhere,  of  the  Gentiles  and  of 
the  Jews  alike — from  which  blessing  the  apostle  singles  out  the  promise  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  being  the  centre  and  sum  of  it  all,  saying,  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  &c,  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the 
Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
through  faith."  Three  words  in  conclusion.  1.  The  apostle,  in  the  opening  chapter 
of  this  Epistle,  speaks  of  "  another  gospel,  which  is  not  another."  Very  rife  in 
our  day  is  another  gospel,  which  truly  is  not  another  gospel.  Substantially  it  is 
this,  that  God  never  has  had  a  quarrel  with  man,  but  only  man  a  quarrel  with  God, 
— that  God  never  has  been  angry  with  men,  but  men  only  jealous  of  Him  ;  and  that 
the  whole  design,  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world,  and  of  His  suffering  unto  death 
was  to  convince  men  of  this — who,  as  soon  as  they  are  persuaded  to  believe  it — to 


chap,  m.]  GALATIANS.  188 

believe  that  God  loves  them,  and  has  loved  them  always,  are  saved.  Another 
gospel  truly — which  in  fact  turns  the  whole  mission  and  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  into  an  unreality !  But  see  the  apostle's  gospel  in  verses  10,  13,  14,  of  this 
chapter.  Ver.  10,  God's  quarrel  with  guilty  men — "  As  many  as  are  of  the  works 
of  the  law  are  under  the  curse ;  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Then,  the 
wondrous  settlement  of  that  quarrel  (ver.  13),  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the 
curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  And  hence  the  settlement  of  our  vile 
quarrel  also  with  God  (ver.  14),  "  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the 
Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ ;  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
through  faith."  Now  at  length  a  conscience  purged,  and  righteously  purged,  from 
dead  works,  to  serve  the  living  God  I  Now  all  possible  motives,  of  love,  and  fear, 
and  gratitude,  and  hope,  and  joy,  unto  a  new  and  child-like  obedience  !  '*  0  Lord, 
truly  I  am  Thy  servant ;  I  am  Thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  Thine  handmaid  :  Thou 
has  loosed  my  bonds."  2.  Behold  here  the  very  soul  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which 
might  have  for  its  motto,  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
made  a  curse  for  us," — "  This  is  My  body  broken  for  you  :  this  cup  is  My  blood  of 
the  new  covenant,  shed  for  remission  of  the  sins  of  many."  Oh  for  a  profound  self- 
abasement,  and  fervent  love,  and  lively  faith,  in  the  observing  of  it  1  3.  Be  it  well 
known  to  all,  that  we  become  partakers  of  this  whole  redemption  by  faith  alone 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law.     (C.  J.  Brown,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through 
Jmus  Christ. — The  purpose  of  redemption : — I.  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham 
might  come  UPON  the  gentiles.  1.  Whence  comes  this  blessing?  From  the 
cursed  death  of  Christ.  2.  Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?  In  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  (1)  the 
storehouse  of  God's  blessing ;  (2)  the  dispenser  thereof  to  all  nations.  II.  That 
we  might  receive  the  promise  op  the  Spirit  through  paith.  1.  What  ia 
meant  by  the  promise  ?  (see  Isa.  xliv.  3 ;  Joel  ii.  28).  2.  For  what  end  do  we 
receive  the  Spirit  ?  (1)  For  illumination  (1  John  ii.  27 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  13).  (2)  Re- 
generation, whereby  the  image  of  God  is  restored  to  us  (John  iii.  5).  (3)  For  the 
government  of  our  counsels,  will,  affections,  actions  (Isa.  xi.  1 ;  Rom.  viii.  14). 
(4)  For  union  with  Christ  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  (5)  For  consolation  (Rom.  viii.  16). 
(6)  For  the  confirmation  of  our  faith  in  every  good  duty  (2  Cor.  i.  22).  (W. 
Perkins).  The  blessing  of  Abraham: — I.  The  receivers  of  God's  blessing  receive  it 
not  for  themselves  alone.  II.  One  is  most  blessed  in  being  made  a  blessing  to 
others.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  meek,  the  just,  the  pious,  the  devout  souls  are 
everywhere  and  in  all  ages  of  one  religion ;  and  when  death  hath  taken  off  the 
mask  they  know  one  another,  though  the  liveries  they  wear  here  make  them 
strangers.  (William  Penn.)  Perpetuated  blessings: — It  has  been  asked  why  the 
goodness  of  one  man  should  extend  to,  and  be  rewarded  in,  successive  generations, 
covering  the  remotest  ages  and  reaching  to  the  close  of  our  present  economy? 
But  is  it  not  a  fact  that  in  the  world  of  providence  the  very  same  thing  occurs  T 
Has  not,  e.g.,  such  a  character  as  Howard  left  a  mark  upon  the  world  that  cannot 
be  obliterated,  and  bequeathed  influences  that  live  long  after  he  has  gone  up 
higher  ?  Have  not  the  victories  of  Wellington,  secured  at  a  dread  price,  left  us 
years  of  prosperity  and  peace  ?  Do  not  millions  shine  in  the  light,  and  are  not 
thousands  of  hearts  warmed  by  the  fires,  that  were  kindled  by  Luther,  Ridley, 
Cranmer,  Knox,  Calvin,  and  others?  And  if  you  find  this  to  be  a  fact  in  the 
world,  you  should  not  object  to  its  being  declared  the  law  of  God's  administration 
of  the  world.  The  discovery  of  printing,  steam,  the  telegraph,  are  also  illustra- 
tions all  tending  to  show  that  beneficent  discoveries  made  by  fathers  break  in 
benedictions  upon  their  children.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  The  value  and  power  of 
faith : — Faith  is  the  only  sure  and  infallable  good,  the  solace  of  life,  the  fulfilment 
of  worthy  hopes,  barren  of  evil  and  fertile  in  good,  the  repudiation  of  the  powers 
of  evil,  the  confession  of  piety,  the  inheritance  of  happiness,  the  entire  amelioration 
of  the  soul  which  leans  for  support  on  Him  who  is  the  cause  of  all  things  and 
willeth  to  do  those  things  which  are  excellent.  In  the  possession  of  this  Abraham 
was  thrice  blessed  indeed.  (Philo.)  Blessing  through  Christ's  sufferings: — 
When  the  prairie  grass  catches  fire  and  the  wind  is  strong  and  the  flames  hasten 
onward  twenty  feet  high,  what  do  tbe  frontier  men  do  when  they  see  them  coming  ? 
Knowing  that  they  cannot  outrun  them — the  fleetest  horse  cannot  do  that — "  they 
just  take  a  match,"  says  Mr.  Moody,  "  and  light  the  grass  around  them,  and  let 
the  fire  sweep  it,  and  then  they  get  into  the  burnt  district  and  stand  safe.    They 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it* 

hear  the  flames  roar ;  they  see  death  coming  towards  them ;  but  they  do  not 
tremble,  because  the  fire  has  passed  over  the  place  where  they  are  and  there  is  no 
danger ;  there  is  nothing  for  the  fire  to  burn.  There  is  one  mountain  peak  that 
the  wrath  of  God  has  swept :  that  is  Mount  Calvary,  and  that  fire  spent  its  fury 
upon  the  bosom  of  the  Son  of  God.  Take  your  stand  here  by  the  Cross,  and  yon 
will  be  safe  for  time  and  for  eternity." 

Ver.  15.  Though  It  be  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet  If  It  be  confirmed,  no  man 
dlsannuUeth,  or  addeth  thereto. — Covenants  : — I.  It  is  allowable  to  use  human 
analogies  in  the  enfobcement  of  Divine  tbuth — "after  the  manner  of  men."  II.  The 
conditions  of  covenant-making  in  human  life.  1.  A  covenant  is  an  arrangement 
between  two  parties  for  mutual  benefit,  with  an  implied  character  of  permanence. 
2.  The  covenant  stands  in  all  the  integrity  of  its  provisions  without  either  party 
having  the  power  to  annul  it  or  add  fresh  clauses  to  it.     III.  What  is  tbue  of  a 

HUMAN    COVENANT     IS     ESSENTIALLY     INVOLVED     IN     THE     IDEA    OF   A   DlVINE    COVENANT. 

It  is  irreversible  and  irrevocable,  since  it  is  a  covenant  established  by  oath.  IV. 
The  Judaistio  theory  :  the  law  as  a  supplement  would  entirely  abrogate  ihb 
covenant.  (Professor  Crosskerry.)  The  whole  new  covenant  consists  in  these 
two  words — Christ  and  faith — Christ  bestowed  on  God's  part ;  faith  required  on 
ours — Christ  the  matter ;  faith  the  consideration  of  the  covenant.     (Hammond.) 

Yer.  16.  Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made. — The  great 
promise : — The  promise  was  twofold.  I.  A  loweb  ob  temporal  blessing.  II.  A 
higher  ob  spiritual  blessing.  III.  The  two  abe  intermingled.  The  spiritual 
could  not  have  come  without  the  temporal,  nor  the  temporal  without  the 
spiritual.       (Christian    Age.)  The    promise    was    fulfilled    in    the    benefits 

the  world  has  received  from — I.  The  industry,  wealth,  genius,  and  morality 
of  the  Jewish  people.  II.  The  Scriptures,  the  monotheism  and  religious 
spirit  of  the  Jews.  III.  The  Messiah  who  was  Abraham's  seed.  (Todd.) 
The  promises : — Some  of  the  promises  are  like  the  almond  tree — they  blossom 
hastily  in  the  very  earliest  spring ;  but  there  are  others  which  resemble  the 
mulberry  tree — they  are  very  slow  in  putting  forth  their  leaves.  Then  what  is  a 
man  to  do,  if  he  has  a  mulberry  tree  promise  which  is  late  in  blossoming  ?  Why, 
he  is  to  wait  till  it  does.  If  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for  it  till  it  come,  and  the 
appointed  time  will  surely  bring  it.  (Spurstow.)  Seed  and  seeds : — The  singular  form 
denotes  Christ's  individuality,  while  its  collective  force  suggests  the  representative 
character  of  His  human  nature.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  Paradisiacal  promise 
that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head  was  from  the  first 
understood  of  some  deliverer.  It  was  so  understood  when  Cain  was  named  as 
the  expected  restorer  (Gen.  iv.  1) ;  so  again  when  Noah  was  expected  to  be  one 
that  "  shall  comfort  us "  (Gen.  v.  29).  During  the  long  ages  that  followed, 
this  promise  must  have  been  the  stay  of  every  devout  and  God-fearing  soul. 
It  survived  the  terrible  judgment  of  the  flood;  it  passed  into  the  expectation 
of  the  better  part  of  every  nation.  It  was  surely  not  wanting  in  the  family 
of  Shem,  nor  in  the  race  of  Eber;  and  when  Abraham  was  called  to  be  the 
father  of  a  chosen  nation,  and  it  was  promised  that  in  his  seed  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,  he  must  have  undersood  by  it  that  the  long- 
expected  Redeemer,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  was  to  be  born  of  his  posterity. 
So  the  promise  was  understood  as  it  was  localized  successively  in  the  tribe  of 
Judah  and  in  the  family  of  David.  And  the  later  prophets  never  waver  in  the  idea 
that  it  was  to  be  accomplished  by  a  "  Person,"  whose  birthplace  at  Bethlehem  is 
distinctly  announced  by  Micah.  He  was  then  an  individual,  not  a  multitude.  To 
express  this  in  English  we  should  say ;  it  was  not  to  seeds  as  of  many ;  but  as 
of  One,  and  "  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ,"  without  any  reference  to  the 
intrinsio  etymological  value  of  the  singular  and  plural.  Similarly,  St.  Paul  uses 
these  words,  not  arguing  from  the  force  of  the  singular  in  the  promise,  but  from 
the  whole  idea  and  understanding  of  that  promise  which  he  simply  explains  by 
the  singular  and  plural  in  Greek.       (Professor  Gardiner.)  The  promises  are 

given  to  believers : — Where  is  thy  casket  of  promises  ?  Bring  it  out.  Open  the 
jar  of  jewels.  Pour  out  the  golden  ingot,  stamped  with  the  image  and  superscrip- 
tion of  heaven's  King.  Count  over  the  diamonds  that  flash  in  thy  hand  like  stars. 
Compute  the  worth  of  that  single  jewel,  "  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive ; "  or  that  other 
ruby,  "  All  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Bring 
forth  that  royal  Koh-i-noor,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved."     Then  remember 


oka*,  in.]  QALATIANS.  18* 

who  it  is  that  gave  them,  and  to  what  an  unworthy  sinner,  and  tell  ms  if  they  ara 
not  *'  exceeding  great  and  precious."  When  Caesar  once  gave  a  man  a  great 
reward,  he  exclaimed,  "  This  is  too  great  a  gift  for  me  to  receive." — "  But,"  3aid 
Caesar,  *'  it  is  not  too  great  a  gift  for  me  to  give."  So  the  smallest  promise  in  thy 
easket  is  too  much  for  thee  to  deserve :  yet  the  most  magnificent  promise  is  not 
too  great  for  the  King  of  kings  to  bestow.  God  scorns  to  act  meanly  and  stingily 
by  His  children  ;  and  how  must  He  scorn  us  often  when  we  put  Him  off  with  such 
contemptible  stinginess  of  deeds  or  donations  1  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  But  some 
may  object,  and  say,  Is  the  law  opposed  to  the  older  promise  t  Clearly  not ;  for  it 
is  powerless  to  do  that  which  the  Faith  alone  could  do,  give  life.  For  if  the  law 
could  have  given  spiritual  life  it  would  have  conferred  righteousness.  But  this 
the  law  does  not  pretend  to  do,  since  it  does  but  declare  all  to  be  under  sin,  that  th« 
promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given  to  them  that  believe.  In  the 
Epistle,  then,  for  this  day  the  apostle  shows : — 1.  That  the  faith  in  Christ,  the 
promise  made  by  God  to  Abraham  and  to  his  seed,  was  prior  to  the  law  of  Moses. 
2.  That  the  original  promise  made  to  Abraham  is  more  excellent  in  itself,  and 
attended  by  more  glorious  circumstances,  than  the  law  of  Moses.  3.  That  the 
completion,  the  perfection  of  the  law  itself  is  the  faith  in  Christ.  The  covenant 
made  by  God  with  Abraham  is  here  called  the  promises,  because  these  promises 
are  the  instruments,  as  it  were,  by  which  the  inheritance  is  conferred.  These 
are  promises,  for  the  pledge  of  future  possession  and  of  future  blessing  was  not 
made  once  only,  but  was  often  repeated  ;  neither  was  one  blessing  only  promised, 
— bat  many, — things  in  earth,  Canaan  in  its  fertility ;  things  in  heaven, 
peace,  and  rest,  and  abundant  joy.  All  the  good  things  of  God  were  comprised 
in  these  promises  to  Abraham  and  his  seed.  The  reasons  why  the  covenant  is 
spoken  of  as  promises  are: — 1.  Because  it  chiefly  consists  of  promises  of  God's 
gifts.  2.  Because  the  covenant  was  revealed  to  Abraham  in  promises  of  blessings 
to  be  afterwards    given.     (W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The  great  promise  : — The  best 

commentary  on  this  whole  passage  is  perhaps  to  be  found  in  St.  Paul's  own  words  : 
"  All  the  promises  of  God  in  Him  are  "yea,"  and  in  Him  "  amen,"  to  the  glory 
of  God  by  us."  Christ  is  the  foundation  and  the  accomplisher  of  every  good 
thing  that  God  has  decreed  for  man :  in  Him  alone  is  enjoyment  or  blessiDg 
to  be  obtained.  When  creation's  fair  beauty  was  marred  by  the  dark  shadow  of 
sin,  the  voice  of  prophecy  rang  forth  with  promise  of  future  deliverance ;  but  the 
promise  was,  in  reality,  a  promise  to  Christ.  Later  on,  when  one  race  was  singled 
out  for  special  notice  and  peculiar  privilege,  their  faith  was  sustained  by  a  great 
inspiring  promise ;  but  again,  that  promise  was  centred  in  Christ — "  In  thy 
seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  With  grammatical  and 
logical  accuracy,  the  apostle  proves  the  point  he  is  arguing.  He  shows  that  the 
true  explanation  of  the  singular  number  being  used  where  the  plural  might  have  been 
expected,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  God  was  speaking  of  one  collective  seed 
according  to  the  spirit.  The  Inheritor  of  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  was 
Christ :  not  Christ  as  an  individual  merely,  but  Christ  the  anointed  Head  and 
Representative  of  His  people — Christ  the  Elder  Brother  in  a  united  family — ■ 
Christ  and  all  who  are  incorporated  with  Him  in  that  spiritual  Body  which 
includes  Abraham  and  all  the  faithful  of  every  age  and  race.  "  For  ye  are  all 
one  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  if  ye  are  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed, 
heirs  according  to  promise."  Having  made  it  clear  that  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ,  believed  and  received,  puts  men  in  possession  of  the  inheritance  promised 
to  Abraham,  St.  Paul  goes  on  (in  ver.  17)  to  deal  with  the  question  that  naturally 
rises  to  the  mind  t  "  What  relation,  then,  does  the  law  of  Moses  bear  to  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham?"  To  this  he  replies,  that  whatever  the  law  does  it 
cannot  for  a  moment  be  supposed  to  abrogate  and  annul  the  promise  which 
existed  so  long  before  it :  it  was  not  a  codicil,  cancelling  or  limiting  the  promissory 
document  of  earlier  date.  Totally  distinct  and  separate  are  the  ideas  involved  in  law 
and  promise  respectively :  the  one  is  a  gift,  the  other  a  contract.  If  in  the  wise 
ordering  of  God's  providence  they  both  come  into  play,  there  mast  be  arranged 
for  each  its  proper  place  and  function — neither  trespassing  upon  the  domain  of 
the  other.  And  this  is  just  what  has  been  arranged.  The  Covenant  of  Promise 
and  the  law  of  Moses,  so  far  from  being  opposed  to  one  another,  are  parallel  lines 
which  gradually  converge  until  they  meet  in  Christ.  (J.  Henry  Burn,  B.D.)  EpistU 
for  the  thirteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity : — The  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  the  good.  1.  Establishment,  character  of  the  same  in  itself. 
{I)  It  is  truly  Divine,  inviolable.  (2)  It  had  reference,  as  to  its  contents,  to  all  mea 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  their  redemption  through  Christ.  2.  The  continuance  of  the  same  even  under 
the  law.  (1)  The  law  cannot  abrogate  the  covenant  of  grace.  (2)  On  the  other 
hand,  the  law  is  meant  as  a  dispensation  on  account  of  sin,  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  perfect  dispensation  of  the  covenant.  3.  The  perfecting  of  the  same  by 
Christianity.  (1)  Necessity  of  this  covenant  even  according  to  the  law.  (2)  The 
condition  of  the  same  is  faith  in  Christ.  (Heubner.)  Tlw  great  promise : — Hera 
we  are  carried  back  to  a  promise  made  to  Abraham  four  thousand  years  ago, 
which  is  declared  to  be  full  of  vital  importance  still.  This  shows  the  Bible  is  one 
book,  and  may  not  be  treated  as  a  collection  of  fragments  to  be  accepted  or  rejected 
at  pleasure.  The  passage  is  similar  to  many  in  St.  Paul's  writings.  In  his  view 
the  Old  Testament  is  full  of  half-fulfilled  expectations,  and  the  fact  that  they 
were  only  half-fulfilled  is  in  itself  a  prophecy  of  a  truer  and  more  perfect  fulfilment 
to  come.  He  sees  in  them  all  a  looking  forward  to  Christ,  who  came  to  fulfil  the 
law,  the  prophets,  the  types,  the  promises,  and  all  the  hitherto  unrealized  expecta- 
tions  of  men.  Taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  the  noun  used  to  particularise 
the  descendants  of  Abraham  is,  according  to  Hebrew  usage,  in  the  singular 
number,  he  shows  that  this  is  no  mere  verbal  accident,  but  that  as  a  matter  of 
fact  the  children  of  Abraham  are  all  summed  up  in  One  Man,  even  in  Christ,  and 
that  upon  Him  eame  spiritually  all  the  promises  which  had  generally  been 
supposed  to  apply  to  the  Jewish  nation  collectively.  Christ  is  the  nation  in  its 
highest  aspect,  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  its  noblest  end.  Since,  then,  Christiana 
are  in  Christ — part  of  Him — the  promise  is  theirs  also.  (1)  The  Promiser.  God. 
The  unchangeable ;  the  unerring ;  He  who  is  Love.  One  and  the  same  at  all  times 
and  to  all  people.  (2)  The  promise,  (a)  Inheritance  in  God's  chosen  country.  A 
type  of  the  better  country  we  are  now  seeking.  (6)  To  be  a  blessiDg  to  others. 
High  privilege.  The  gift  is  conferred  on  us,  in  order  that  we  may  hand  it  on. 
We  have  not  truly  received  Christ,  unless  we  are  seeking  to  minister  Him.  (3)  The 
conditions  of  the  promise.  We  must  be  in  Christ.  He  is  the  heir;  we  can  only 
share  in  His  inheritance,  by  becoming  one  with  Him.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.) 
The  promise  really  made  to  Christ ; — This  comment  of  St.  Paul  has  given  rise  to 
much  discussion.  It  has  been  urged  that  the  stress  of  the  argument  rests  on  a 
grammatical  error ;  that,  as  the  plural  of  the  word  here  rendered  tnripfia  is  only 
used  to  signify  "  grain  "  or  "  crops,"  the  sacred  writer  could  not  under  any  circum- 
stances have  said  "seeds  as  of  many."  The  answer  to  this  objection  is,  that  St. 
Paul  is  not  laying  stress  on  the  particular  word  used,  but  on  the  fact  that  a 
singular  noun  of  some  kind,  a  collective  term,  is  employed,  where  a  plural  (such  as 
ra  rUva,  or  ot  diroyovoi)  might  have  been  substituted.  Avoiding  the  technical 
terms  of  grammar,  he  could  not  express  his  meaning  more  simply  than  by  the 
opposition,  *«  not  to  thy  seeds,  but  to  thy  seed."  A  plural  substantive  would  be 
inconsistent  with  the  interpretation  given ;  the  singular  collective  noun,  if  it 
admits  of  plurality,  at  the  same  time  involves  the  idea  of  unity.  The  question 
therefore  is  no  longer  one  of  grammatical  accuracy,  but  of  theological  interpreta- 
tion. Is  this  a  legitimate  sense  to  assign  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  Doubtless  by 
the  seed  of  Abraham  was  meant  in  the  first  instance  the  Jewish  people,  as  by  the 
inheritance  was  meant  the  land  of  Canaan ;  but  in  accordance  with  the  analogy 
of  Old  Testament  types  and  symbols,  the  term  involves  two  secondary  meanings : 
(1)  With  a  true  spiritual  instinct,  though  the  conception  embodied  itself  at  times 
in  strangely  grotesque  and  artificial  forms ;  even  the  Rabbinical  writers  saw  that 
"the  Christ"  was  the  true  seed  of  Abraham.  In  Him  the  race  was  summed 
up,  as  it  were.  In  Him  it  fulfilled  its  purpose  and  became  a  blessing  to  the  whole 
earth.  Without  Him  its  separate  existence  as  a  peculiar  people  had  no  meaning. 
Thus  He  was  not  only  the  representative,  but  the  embodiment  of  the  race.  In 
this  way  the  people  of  Israel  is  the  type  of  Christ ;  and  in  the  New  Testament 
parallels  are  sought  in  the  career  of  the  one  to  the  life  of  the  other.  In  this 
sense  St.  Paul  uses  "the  seed  of  Abraham"  here.  But  (2)  according  to  the 
analogy  of  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  New,  the  spiritual  takes 
the  place  of  the  natural ;  the  Israel  after  the  flesh  becomes  the  Israel  after  the 
spirit ;  the  Jewish  nation  denotes  the  Christian  Church.  So  St.  Paul  interprets 
the  seed  of  Abraham  (Rom.  iv.  18 ;  ix.  7  ;  and  above,  ver.  7.  These  two  inter- 
pretations are  not  opposed  to  each  other;  they  are  not  independent  of  each 
other.  Without  Christ  the  Christian  people  have  no  existence.  He  is  the 
source  of  their  spiritual  life.  They  are  one  in  Him.  By  this  link  St.  Paul  at 
the  close  of  the  chapter  (vers.  28,  29)  connects  together  the  two  senses  of  the  "  seed 
of  Abraham,"  dwelling  once  more  on  the  unity  of  the  seed — "  ye  are  all  one  man 


OTA*,  m.]  GALATIANS.  187 

in  Christ ;  and  if  ye  are  part  of  Christ,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed  and  heiri 
according  to  promise."  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  difference  between  a  promise  and 
a  law : — A  promise  gives :  a  law  takes.  A  promise  bestows  something  on  others : 
a  law  demands  something  from  others.  Suppose  some  great  king  to  promise  vast 
riches  and  possessions  to  all  his  faithful  subjects.  And  suppose  that,  seeing  those  sub- 
jects to  be  proud  and  headstrong,  and  to  need  humbling  and  curbing,  the  same  king 
after  a  time  made  laws  which  he  ordered  them  to  obey.  Which  should  we  say  the 
subjects  owed  their  riches  and  possessions  to — the  king's  laws,  or  the  king's  promise? 
We  could  all  see  it  would  be  to  the  promise.  So  it  is  with  the  riches  and  possession 
which  we,  the  subjects  of  the  heavenly  King,  look  for.     (Bishop  Walsham  How.) 

Ver.  17.  And  this  I  say,  that  the  covenant,  that  was  confirmed  before  of  God  In 
Christ,  the  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  cannot  disannul. 
— God's  covenants  with  men : — A  covenant  is  an  agreement  or  contract,  in  which 
the  parties  to  it  solemnly  bind  themselves  to  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions. 
When  we  speak  of  a  covenant  as  entered  into  by  God,  we  understand  that  He,  who 
has  no  rule  of  action  but  His  own  will,  has  been  pleased  to  bind  Himself,  in  His 
dealings  with  men,  to  the  observance  of  certain  specified  conditions ;  whilst  those 
with  whom  the  covenant  is  made  are  bound  to  fulfil  the  obligations  imposed  upon 
them,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  the  promised  blessings,  and  incurring  the  attendant 
penalties.  1.  The  covenant  under  which  all  men  are  born  is  that  of  works ;  in 
other  words,  the  moral  law,  the  law  of  Adam's  nature,  written  in  his  heart,  and 
afterwards  republished  from  Mount  Sinai.  The  terms  of  this  covenant  are,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  mind,  and  soul,  and  strength, 
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  The  sanctions  by  which  it  is  enforced  are,  on  the 
one  hand,  "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live,"  and  on  the  other,  "  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them."  This  covenant  is  one  by  which  an  unf alien  being,  continuing  in  his 
obedience  to  it,  might  merit  life ;  but  to  creatures  such  as  we  are,  it  can  only  be  a 
dispensation  of  death.  Of  mercy  to  transgressors  it  knows  nothing.  It  is  law  for 
man,  as  God  made  man — perfect — and  to  man  in  that  condition,  and  in  that  only, 
is  it  a  law  that  can  give  life.  We  ask,  therefore,  is  there  any  other  covenant 
whereby  (letting  go  the  first,  and  laying  hold  on  this)  we  may  have  that  eternal 
life  which  we  have  forfeited  by  the  covenant  of  works  ?  2.  The  Scriptures  reveal 
to  us  the  covenant  of  grace,  so  called,  inasmuch  as  it  is  grace  which  especially  dis- 
tinguishes it  from  the  former  covenant  of  works.  The  terms  of  this  covenant  are 
contained  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ :  by  it  God  is  graciously  pleased  to  bind 
Himself  to  bestow  all  spiritual  blessings  upon  those  who  give  up  entirely  their  hope 
of  life  by  the  works  of  the  first  covenant,  and,  embracing  this,  plead  the  gracious 
provisions  of  it  as  the  ground  of  their  acceptance  with  God.  But  besides  these 
two  covenants,  which  form  the  groundwork  of  all  God's  dealings  with  men,  there  is 
a  third — that,  viz.,  which  was  entered  into  with  Israel  at  Sinai.  3.  The  Sinaitio 
Covenant  was  (1)  national,  as  made  only  with  one  people,  the  Jews  ;  (2)  temporary, 
as  designed  to  fulfil  certain  special  ends,  and  to  cease  when  those  ends  were 
accomplished ;  (3)  mixed,  as  partaking  in  part  of  the  covenant  of  works,  while 
containing  certain  provisions  which  had  in  them  an  echo,  and  something  more  than 
an  echo,  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  The  Abrahamic 
covenant : — I.  Thb  Abrahamic  covenant  viewed  in  itself  (Gen.  xiii.  15  ;  xvii.  7). 
The  prominent  feature  in  it  is  grace,  and  it  clearly  looks  forward  to  Christ.  Its 
chief  blessings  are — (1)  Divine  forgiveness ;  (2)  Divine  reward  ;  (3)  Divine  adoption ; 
(4)  Divine  illumination.  II.  The  Abrahamic  covenant  viewed  in  its  relation  to 
the  covenant  of  Sinai.  The  covenant  of  grace  was  announced  to  Abraham  in  the 
promise  made  to  him  and  his  seed,  Christ,  long  before  the  giving  of  the  covenant  of 
Sinai ;  its  conditions  were  fulfilled  by  Christ  during  the  Incarnation,  at  a  period 
long  subsequent  to  the  giving  of  that  covenant,  it  was  therefore  independent  of  and 
superior  to  it ;  it  was  designed  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole  human  race,  whereas 
the  Sinaitio  covenant  was  confined  to  a  single  nation,  was  limited  in  its  applica- 
tion, imperfect  in  its  provisions,  and,  as  far  as  the  Jews  were  concerned,  a  failure 
in  its  results.  We  may  conceive  of  the  covenant  of  grace  as  stretching  through 
time  like  some  vast  geological  formation,  having  its  beginning  in  the  ages  that  are 

East,  and  reaching  onward  to  the  ages  that  are  to  come.  As  such  formation, 
owever,  displays  itself  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  there  is  at  one  point  a 
depression,  a  sinking  of  its  outline,  and  that  depression  or  valley  is  filled  up  by  a 
formation  of  more  recent  growth,  an  overlying  stratum  which  conceals  the  elder 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hl 

formation  from  view,  but  does  not  destroy  it.  Such  older  formation  crops  up  on 
the  one  side,  and  on  the  other  of  the  later  one,  and  in  fact  underlies  it  in  all  its 
parts;  the  one  being  limited  and  partial  as  contrasted  with  the  other,  which  is 
comparatively  unlimited  and  universal.  Thus  the  covenant  of  grace  stretches 
through  the  entire  period  of  man's  history ;  but  at  one  point  in  its  course  it 
becomes  overlaid  by  a  covenant  of  recent  growth,  the  national  covenant  of  Sinai. 
But  the  older  covenant  is  neither  lost  nor  superseded ;  it  recedes  for  a  while  from 
view ;  it  gives  place  in  the  history  of  man  to  an  intermediate  covenant ;  but  it  does 
not  vanish  from  our  history.  It  had  shown  itself  in  Abrahamio  times  ;  it  was  to 
display  itself  yet  more  gloriously  at  the  coming  of  Christ ;  but  yet  even  during  the 
period  of  its  seeming  obscuration,  its  operation  was  not  suspended :  the  pious  Jew 
looked  through  his  own  covenant  to  the  covenant  of  grace — he  dug,  as  it  were, 
through  the  mixed  and  local  deposit  of  his  own  economy,  to  the  rook  beneath  him. 
(Ibid.)  The  everlasting  covenant: — I.    God  made  a  covenant  of    grace  with 

Abraham  long  before  the  law  was  given  on  Sinai.  II.  Abraham  was  not  present  on 
Sinai,  and  therefore  there  could  have  been  no  alteration  in  the  covenant  made  there 
by  bis  consent.  III.  Abraham's  consent  was  never  asked  as  to  any  alteration  in 
the  covenant,  without  which  the  covenant  could  not  have  been  set  aside.  IV.  The 
covenant  stands  firm,  seeing  that  it  was  made  to  Abraham's  seed  as  well  as  to 
Abraham  himself.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  supremacy  of  faith: — I.  To  be  the 

TRUE    SEED  OF   ABRAHAM   THE   GENTILES  ARE  TO  SEEK  JUSTIFICATION,    NOT  BY  THE   LAW 

but  by  faith.  II.  Faith  has  pbecedence  of  the  law,  and  consequently  is  not 
disannulled  by  it.    It  rests  on  promises  given  to  Abraham.     III.  The  purposes  op 

THE    LAW   ARE    8UBSERVIENT    TO   CONVICTION    ANT)    PBEPABATION    (V.    19),    and,  therefore, 

were  not  designed  to  disannul  it.  IV.  The  inferiority  of  the  law  is  marked  by 
its  being  in  the  hands  of  a  mediator,  and  not  personal,  as  was  the  promise  to 
Abraham.  V.  Nevertheless  faith  and  law  do  not  clash.  There  is  harmony 
between  the  Abrahamic  covenant  and  the  Mosaic  law.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.) 
The  immutability  of  the  covenant : — I.  Time  cannot  disannul  it :  neither  the  time 
before  the  law  nor  the  time  which  has  elapsed  since.  1.  Some  covenants  run  out 
in  the  course  of  time,  or  are  annulled  through  non-fulfilment  within  a  given  time, 
or  are  abrogated  in  the  very  fact  of  their  fulfilment.  2.  The  Christian  covenant  is 
independent  of  time.  (1)  No  time  was  specified.  (2)  In  a  sense  its  fulfilment  began 
at  once.  (3)  It  cannot  pass  away  till  the  last  of  Abraham's  seed  has  enjoyed  its 
provisions.  II.  The  unfaithfulness  of  one  of  the  contracting  parties  did  not 
disannul  it.  1.  During  the  four  hundred  and  thirty  years.  (1)  The  obliquities  of 
Jacob.  (2)  The  evil  conduct  of  his  sons.  (3)  The  religious  apathy  of  the  Egyptian 
eojourn.  (4)  The  perversities  of  the  wilderness  wandering.  2.  During  the  follow- 
ing  years  till  the  advent.  (1)  In  spite  of  Divine  revelation.  (2)  Notwithstanding 
repeated  chastisements,  Israel  grieviously  sinned ;  yet  the  covenant  was  not  with- 
drawn. III.  The  intermediary  dispensation  did  not  disannul  it.  1.  The  law 
itself  did  not.  (1)  It  was  intended  to  help  on  its  fulfilment.  (2)  It  was  one  part  of 
God's  remedial  plan  of  which  the  covenant  was  another  part.  2.  The  in- 
fraction of  the  law  did  not.  (1)  Sin  led  men  to  yearn  for  its  fulfilment. 
(2)  Where  sin  abounded  grace  did  much  more  abound.  III.  It  rests  on  the 
immutability  of  God.  1.  Of  His  wisdom.  He  saw  when  the  time  would 
be  ripe.  2.  Of  His  mercy :  He  knew  when  it  would  be  best  to  work  in  the 
interests  of  mankind.  The  covenant,  then,  was  not  disannulled  by  the 
law.  1.  Because  then  the  blessing  promised  by  the  covenant  would  not  have 
depended  upon  that  promise.  2.  Because  then  in  vain  is  any  mention  made  of 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  that  is,  of  Christ.  3.  Because  those  who  died  before  the 
law  was  given  on  Sinai,  amongst  others,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  would  have  no 
claim  to  partake  of  the  Divine  blessing,  no  share  in  the  promised  inheritance.  (W. 
Denton,  M.A.)  The  covenant  in  Christ : — I.  Its  nature — a  covenant  of  promise — 
of  mercy.  II.  Its  antiquity — older  than  the  law — old  as  the  first  promise.  III.  Its 
Immutability — confirmed  to  (ver.  16)  and  in  Christ— cannot  be  disannulled.  (J.  Lyth.) 

Ver.  18.  For  If  the  Inheritance  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise.— Law 
and  promise  : — 1.  The  law  was  restricted  and  conditional — "  added  because  of  trans- 
gression " :  the  promise  was  absolute  and  unconditional.  II.  The  law  was 
temporary  and  provisional — "  until  the  seed  should  come "  :  the  promise  was 
permanent  and  eternal.  IH.  The  law  was  communicated  indirectly — "  by  angels  " : 
the  promise  was  directly  given  by  God  (Heb.  ii.  2,  3).  IV.  The  law  was  received 
from  God  through  "  a  mediator  "  :  the  promise  was  received  by  Abraham  in  person 


cm*,  m.]  GALATIANS.  189 

(P.  J.  Oloag,  D.D.)  The  covenant  of  grace  is  called  "  the  promise,"  because  God 
hath  promised  both  the  reward  and  the  condition.  And  so — I.  It  differs  from  human 
covenants.  Among  men  each  party  undertaketh  for  and  looketh  after  his  own  part 
of  the  engagement ;  but  here  the  duties  required  of  us  are  undertaken  by  Him  that 
requireth  them.  No  man  filleth  his  neighbour's  hand  with  anything  to  pay  his  rent 
to  him,  or  enableth  him  to  do  what  he  hath  covenanted  to  do ;  but  God  filleth  our 
heart  with  a  stock  of  habitual  grace,  with  actual  influences  to  draw  forth  habits 
into  act  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  39,  40).  II.  It  differs  fkom  the 
covenant  of  works.  That  had  more  of  a  law  and  less  of  a  promise :  there  was  a 
promise  of  reward  to  the  obeyer  but  none  of  obedience.  There  man  was  to  keep  the 
covenant ;  here  the  covenant  keepeth  us  (Jer.  xxxii.  40).  God  undertaketh  for  both 
parties,  and  worketh  in  His  people  all  that  is  required  of  them.  (T.Manton.)  The 
inheritance  of  the  promises : — I.  The  promises  of  God  to  the  believer  an  inex- 
haustible mine  of  wealth.  Happy  is  it  for  him  if  he  knows  how  to  enrich 
himself  with  their  hidden  treasures.  II.  They  are  an  armoury  containing  all 
manner  of  offensive  and  defensive  weapons.  Blessed  is  he  who  has  learned  to 
enter  the  sacred  arsenal,  to  put  on  the  breastplate  and  the  helmet,  and  to  lay  hia 
hand  to  the  spear  and  the  sword.  III.  They  are  a  surgery,  in  which  the  believer 
will  find  all  manner  of  restoratives  and  blessed  elixirs ;  nor  lacks  there  an  oint- 
ment for  every  wound,  a  cordial  for  every  faintness,  a  remedy  for  every  disease. 
Blessed  is  he  who  is  well  skilled  in  heavenly  pharmacy,  and  knoweth  how  to  lay 
hold  on  the  healing  virtues  of  the  promises  of  God.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon. )  Life  a 
gift : — On  these  streets,  I  have  seen  the  poor  hanging  on  the  steps  of  the  rich,  and 
refusing  to  be  ordered  away ;  to  move  pity,  laying  bare  their  sores  ;  and  holding  out 
their  skinny  hands  to  implore  men's  charity.  But  whoever  saw  the  rich  following 
the  poor,  with  a  hand  filled  with  gold ;  pressing  money  on  their  acceptance ; 
stopping  them  ;  entreating,  beseeching,  imploring  them  to  take  it  ?  Yet  thus,  to 
the  amazement  both  of  angels  and  devils,  God  does  with  you,  in  offering  His  Son ; 
and  through  Him,  the  gift  of  eternal  life.  {Dr.  Guthrie.)  Salvation  all  of  grace: — 
Mr.  McLaren  and  Mr.  Gustart  were  ministers  of  the  Tolbooth  Church,  Edinburgh. 
When  Mr.  McLaren  was  dying,  Mr.  Gustart  paid  him  a  visit,  and  put  the  question 
to  him,  "  What  are  you  doing,  brother  ?  "  His  answer  was,  "  Doing  1  I'll  tell  you 
what  I  am  doing,  brother.  I  am  gathering  together  all  my  prayers,  all  my  sermons, 
all  my  good  deeds,  all  my  evil  deeds ;  and  I  am  going  to  throw  them  all  overboard, 
and  swim  to  glory  on  the  plank  of  free  grace."    (E.  Foster.) 

Ver.  19.  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law  7  It  was  added  because  of  tretgres- 
slons. — The  function  of  the  law : — Of  what  use,  then,  is  the  law,  if  (as  you  assert)  it  is 
not  simply  a  codicil  to — a  substitute  for — God's  promise  to  Abraham  ?  "  It  was  added." 
Not  being  a  part  of  the  original  scheme,  but  made  necessary  on  account  of  the 
hardness  of  men's  hearts,  it  came  in  as  a  sort  of  marginal  addition  or  parenthesis 
in  the  dealings  of  God  with  the  Jews.  The  moral  atmosphere  was  changed.  In 
circumstances  of  amity  the  promise  had  been  given,  God  speaking  to  Abraham 
aa  a  man  with  his  friend ;  in  circumstances  of  discord,  with  suitable  accompani- 
ment of  hailstones  and  coals  of  fire,  the  law  was  promulgated  and  enforced.  The 
function  of  the  law  was  to  assist  as  an  ally:  to  be  subsidiary  to  the  promise,  and 
help  towards  its  fulfilment.  This  it  did  by  revealing  men's  deeds  to  them  in  their 
true  light — showing  them  their  own  sinfulness  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  their  own 
inability  to  do  anything  towards  mending  matters— a  necessary  preliminary  to 
their  attainment  of  that  faith  which  would  lead  them  to  embrace  the  promise. 
The  law,  again,  was  merely  a  temporary  enactment ;  its  work  would  be  done  when 
He  should  appear  to  whom  the  promise  had  been  made.  Still  further :  the 
provisional  nature  of  the  law  may  be  perceived,  if  we  consider  the  manner  of  its 
promulgation.  "It  was  ordained  through  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator." 
Direct  had  been  God's  communication  with  Abraham  when  He  gave  the  promise ; 
but  at  the  giving  of  the  law  He  delivered  His  decrees  to  angels,  and  the  angels 
entrusted  them  to  a  second  intermediate  agent,  viz.,  Moses.  Now  the  existence  of 
a  mediator  (or  go-between)  implies  duality,  separation,  disunion;  whereas  a 
promise  is  a  simple  direct  transaction  requiring  no  such  intervention.  If  there 
had  not  been  discord,  at  the  time  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  a  mediator  would  have 
been  out  of  place ;  he  would  have  had  no  business  there  at  all.  There  was  discord 
at  that  time ;  and  for  that  reason  Moses  was  appointed  to  mediate.  But  this, 
instead  of  proving  that  the  law  is  antagonistic  to  the  promise,  proves  exactly  the 
contrary,  for — "  God  is  one."    If  the  law  had  been  intended  to  annul  the  promise, 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

it  would  necessarily  follow  that  God  had  changed  His  mind ;  His  dealings  with 
the  children  of  Israel  through  Moses  would  contradict  His  dealings  four  hundred 
and  thirty  years  before  with  Abraham.  Such  a  thought  cannot  for  a  moment  be 
tolerated.  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord ;  with  Him  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning.  He  is  ever  one  and  the  same;  and  the  eternal  principles 
upon  which  He  acts  can  never  alter.  However  different  and  opposed  to  one 
another  His  various  dispensations  towards  mankind  may  at  first  sight  appear,  a 
Becret  thread  of  harmony  runs  through  them  all.  His  unity  of  purpose  is 
expressed  from  first  to  last,  in  unity  of  plan.  He  will  justify  the  circumcision 
by  faith,  and  the  uncircumcision  by  the  same  faith — in  Jesus  Christ,  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  to  whom  the  promise  was  made.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  in  what  sort 
of  relation  the  law  stands  to  the  promise.  The  work  of  the  law  is  a  work  of  discipline. 
It  presents  to  view  the  sterner  side  of  the  Divine  character ;  it  shows  God  frowning 
at  sin,  and  holding  aloof  from  the  sinner ;  it  teaches  man  that  by  no  effort  of  his 
own  can  he  regain  that  communion  with  his  Maker  which  was  forfeited  at  the  fall. 
But  if  that  communion  is  not  regained,  man  is  lost — hopelessly  lost  for  ever.  Is 
there  no  other  means  of  recovering  the  forfeited  possession,  and  of  once  more 
enjoying  the  privilege  of  basking  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  countenance  ?  Tes, 
there  is;  and  surely  the  law  has  been  a  most  useful  and  valuable  institution,  if  it 
has  led  men  to  ask  that  question.  The  promise,  given  hundreds  of  years  before 
the  law,  still  remains  in  force.  Nothing  can  abrogate  it — seeing  that  God  is  one 
and  the  same  both  in  essence  and  in  will.  If  in  the  tune  of  Abraham  He  was 
willing  to  justify  by  faith,  He  is  willing  to  justify  by  faith  now,  and  He  will 
continue  in  the  same  mind  to  the  end  of  time  and  throughout  eternity.  Thus  is 
the  law  our  pedagogue,  taking  us  by  the  hand,  and  leading  us  back  over  rough 
and  devious  paths  to  that  earlier  promise  which  was  made  to  Christ  the  true  seed 
of  Abraham,  and,  in  Christ,  to  all  who  believe.  (J,  Henry  Burn,  B.D.)  The 
law : — I.  Its  puepose.  1.  To  reveal  sin.  2.  To  convict  of  sin.  3.  To  warn  respecting 
its  punishment.  Consequently  we  should  examine  ourselves  by  the  law.  (1}  When 
any  one  sin  is  forbidden,  all  sins  of  the  same  kind  are  forbidden.  (2)  A  nega- 
tive commandment  includes  the  affirmative.  (3)  Every  command  must  be 
understood  with  a  curse.  (4)  Look  particularly  to  the  first  commandment, 
which  forbids  the  first  motions  of  our  heart  against  God;  and  to  the  last, 
which  forbids  the  first  motions  of  our  heart  against  man.      II.  Its  duration. 

I.  Particularly :  till  Christ  should  come  in  the  case  of  the  Jews.  2.  Generally :  till 
God  has  revealed  His  Son  in  us,  before  which  the  law,  although  abrogated  as  a 
dispensation,  has  still  a  condemning  power.  III.  The  method  of  its  promulga- 
tion.   1.  Guilty  man  could  not  have  received  it  direct.    2.  It  was  therefore  given 

(1)  by  angels  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Psa.  lxviii.  17  ;  Acts  vii.  53).  (a)  They  were  atten- 
dants on  God  at  the  time  of  its  delivery.  (/3)  They  were  witnesses  and  approvers 
of  its  delivery,  (y)  Perhaps  its  commands  were  uttered  by  angels  (Heb.  ii.  2).  (2) 
By  the  instrumentality  of  Moses  (Deut.  v.  5).    3.  Learn  then  (1)  to  reverence  it, 

(2)  to  fear  to  break  it,  (3)  to  repent  of  breaking  it,  (4)  to  look  for  shame  and  eon. 
fusion  in  the  case  of  impenitence  in  the  presence  of  God  and  the  angels.  (W. 
Perkins.)  The  present  use  of  the  law  : — I.  To  the  unconverted.  1.  To  restrain 
and  limit  transgression.  2.  To  bring  to  light  transgressions.  3.  To  convince  of 
transgression.    4.  To  prepare  men  to  seek  and  receive  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ. 

II.  To  the  justified.  1.  It  is  a  rule  by  which  they  are  to  be  governed.  2.  It 
serves  to  warn  and  guard  them  against  the  commission  of  sin.  3.  To  make  them 
grateful  for  the  privileges  they  enjoy.  4.  To  keep  them  in  close  dependence 
on  Jesus.  In  conclusion  :  the  final  judgment  must  be  administered  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  the  law.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  I.  The  law  was  like  a 
torch  carried  into  the  dark  crevices  and  cellars  of  human  nature  that  it  might 
reveal  the  foul  shapes  that  lurked  there,  and  rouse  man  to  long  for  a  righteousness 
which  it  could  not  itself  confer.  II.  In  the  process  of  doing  this,  the  law  aggra- 
vated the  very  evil  it  brodght  to  light  :  the  presence  of  a  Divine  rule  which 
forbade  the  indulgence  of  human  passion  had  the  effect  of  irritating  those  passions 
into  new  self-asserting  activity  (Rom.  vii.  7).  In  the  absence  of  the  law,  the  sinful 
tendency  had  been  inert, "  but  when  the  commandment  came  sin  revived  and  I  died." 

III.  Not  that  the  law  was  answerable  for  this  result.  In  itself  it  was  holy, 
just,  and  good  ;  the  cause  lay  in  the  sinful  tendency  of  fallen  human  nature.  IT. 
So  the  law  inflicted  on  the  conscience  that  was  not  fatally  benumbed  an  over. 
whelming  conviction  that  righteousness  in  the  way  of  legal  obedience  was  a  thin* 
impossible  ;  and  was  very  far  from  furnishing  a  man  with  a  real  righteousness,  ef 


our.  m.]  GALATIANS.  191 

making  him  what  he  should  be,  correspondent  to  the  true  ideal.  V.  This  con- 
viction prepared  men  fob  a  righteousnebs  which  should  not  be  the  product  of 
human  efforts,  but  a  gift  from  heaven ;  a  righteousness  to  be  attained  by  the 
adhesion  of  faith  to  the  perfect  Moral  Being,  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  the  believer's  life 
becomes  incorporate  with  His,  and  man  becomes  such  as  he  should  be,  viz.,  "jus- 
tified by  faith."  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  revealing  power  of  the  law: — The  law 
acts  as  a  surgeon  does  when  he  takes  the  film  from  the  eye  of  the  blind.  (C.  II. 
Spurgeon.)  The  restraining  power  of  the  law : — A  steam-engine  at  work  in  a 
manufactory  is  so  quiet  and  gentle  that  a  child  might  put  it  back.  But  interpose 
a  bar  of  iron,  and  it  cuts  through  as  though  it  were  so  much  leather.  Introduce  a 
human  limb — it  whirls  round,  and  the  form  of  man  is  in  one  moment  a  bleeding, 
mangled,  shapeless  mass.  Now,  observe,  it  is  the  restraint  that  manifests  the 
unsuspected  power.  In  the  same  way  law  discovers  the  strength  of  evil  in  our 
hearts.  Not  till  a  man  has  felt  something  resisting  the  evil  does  he  know  its  force. 
(F.  W.  Robertson.)  Law : — I.  To  prepare  the  way  for  the  gospel.  II.  To 
constitute  a  period  of  probation.  III.  To  bring  us  to  Christ  (ver.  24).  IV*.  To 
guide  us  in  the  path  of  holiness.  V.  To  vindicate  the  justice  of  God  in  the 
punishment  of  sinners.  (J.  Lyth.)  Christ  our  Mediator : — As,  when  a  king 
is  angry  with  a  subject,  the  king's  son  marries  the  daughter  of  the  subject, 
and  brings  him  into  favour  with  the  king  again :  so,  when  God  the  Father 
was  angry  with  us,  Christ  married  Himself  to  our  nature,  and  now  mediates 
for  us  with  His  Father,  and  brings  us  to  be  friends  again;  and  now  God 
looks  upon  us  with  a  favourable  aspect.  As  Joab  pleaded  for  Absalom, 
and  brought  Him  to  King  David,  and  David  kissed  Him ;  so  doth  Jesus  Christ 
ingratiate  us  into  the  love  and  favour  of  God.  Therefore  He  may  well  be  called  a 
peacemaker,  having  taken  our  flesh  upon  Him,  and  so  made  peace  between  us  and 
His  angry  Father.  (T.  Watson.)  During  one  of  the  journeys  of  Queen  Victoria, 
a  little  boy  was  desirous  of  seeing  her.  He  determined  to  go  direct  to  the  castle 
where  she  was  residing,  and  ask  to  see  her.  He  was  stopped  at  the  gate  by  the 
sentry,  who  demanded  what  he  wanted.  "  I  want  to  see  the  queen,"  he  replied. 
The  soldier  laughed  at  the  boy,  and  with  the  butt-end  of  his  musket  pushed  him 
away,  and  told  him  to  be  off  immediately,  or  he  would  shoot  him.  The  boy  turned 
to  go  away,  and  gave  vent  to  his  grief  in  tears.  He  had  not  gone  far  when  he  was 
met  by  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  inquired  why  he  was  crying.  "  I  want  to  see  the 
queen,"  replied  the  boy,  "and  that  soldier  won't  let  me." — "Won't  he?"  said  the 
prince :  "then  come  along  with  me,  and  I'll  take  you  to  the  queen."  He  accord- 
ingly took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  towards  the  castle.  On  passing  the 
sentinel,  he,  as  usual,  presented  arms  to  the  prince  ;  and  the  boy  became  terrified, 
and  ran  away,  fearing  that  the  soldier  was  going  to  shoot  him.  The  prince  soon 
quieted  his  fears,  and  led  him  past  the  gates  into  the  presence  of  her  Majesty.  The 
queen  with  surprise,  inquired  of  her  son  whom  he  had  there ;  and,  upon  being 
informed  of  what  had  taken  place,  she  laughed  heartily,  spoke  kindly  to  her  little 
visitor,  and  to  his  great  delight  dismissed  him  with  a  piece  of  money.  As  the 
prince  presented  the  boy  to  the  queen,  so  Christ  presents  us  to  His  Father.  (Ibid.) 
The  use  of  the  law  is : — I.  Moral — it  was  brought  in  to  detect — expose — restrain — 
punish  transgression.  II.  Preparatory — it  prepared  the  way  for  the  gospel, 
developing  human  weakness — pointing  to  Christ  its  substance  and  antitype.  III. 
Divinely  ordained — by  angels  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2  ;  Heb.  ii.  2) — in  the  hand  of  a 
mediator,  Moses.  IV.  Temporary — because  mediatorial  (see  vers.  1 5-22,  also  Lisco, 
in  loco) — but  the  promise  is  everlasting,  for  God  is  one.  V.  Harmonious  with  the 
gospel — it  does  not  propose  to  communicate  righteousness  and  life — but  concludes 
all  under  sin.  VI.  Conducive  to  faith — by  convincing  men  cf  sin — excluding  all 
other  hope — shutting  them  up  to  the  faith  of  Christ — in  whom  the  promise  is  given. 
(J.  Lyth.)  The  nature  of  the  law: — I.  In  the  first  place,  I  will  endeavour  to 
define  what  is  meant  by  the  law  of  God  in  the  abstbact.  The  simple  sense 
of  the  term  law,  and  the  most  general  sense,  is  this — it  is  that  mode  by  which  an 
agent  proceeds.  The  mode  by  which  the  government  of  a  country  proceeds  to  rule 
its  subjects,  is  called  the  law  of  that  government.  The  term  will  be  found  to  have 
the  same  signification  when  applied  to  the  very  highest  class  of  objects — I  mean, 
the  government  of  God  :  the  constant  procedure  of  the  Divine  will,  with  respect  to 
any  object  in  any  part  of  His  dominions,  is  called  the  law  of  God,  in  respect  of 
that  particular  object.  While  we  are  upon  the  nature  of  the  law,  let  it  be  observed, 
that  these  modes  by  which  the  Divine  Being  governs  either  the  moral  or  the  natural 
world,  are  not  merely  arbitrary  regulations  imposed  upon  its  objects  solely  with  a 


191  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

design  to  exercise  His  authority ;  but,  that  they  are  the  necessary  perceptions  ot 
the  Divine  mind,  as  to  what  is  proper  or  benevolent,  in  regard  to  each  of  the  objects 
to  which  they  relate.  Whence  it  follows,  that  the  law  of  God,  in  relation  to  any 
class  of  beings  in  His  government  (but,  in  relation  to  man,  pre-eminently)  is  the 
result  of  infinite  wisdom  and  infinite  goodness,  the  Lawgiver  Himself  being 
infinitely  wise  and  good.  One  more  remark  may  be  added,  which  is,  that  the  law 
of  God,  being  the  transcript  of  His  own  benevolence  and  wisdom,  proposes  and 
accomplishes  the  best  possible  results ;  promotes  happiness  to  the  utmost  extent 
of  which  the  object  may  be  capable.  This  law  may  be  expressed  and  promulgated 
by  different  modes.  God  has  impressed  His  laws  upon  all  nature  below  man.  He 
did  not  render  the  obedience  of  man  a  matter  of  mechanical  certainty ;  but  the 
result  of  free  choice.  II.  This  leads  me,  secondly,  to  consider  the  modes  whebebt 
God  hath  promulgated  Hia  laws.  These  are  two.  He  wrote  the  law  originally 
upon  the  mind  of  Adam  in  the  garden  of  Eden ;  and  when  it  was  effaced  in  a  great 
measure  by  his  apostasy,  and  almost  obliterated  from  the  mind  of  man,  through 
the  love  of  sin,  he  republished  it  to  the  world  in  the  form  of  the  Decalogue  on 
Mount  Sinai.  III.  Thirdly,  to  remark  on  the  different  kinds  of  the  i.aw,  which 
we  must  distinguish  in  perusing  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Although  all  that  was 
republished  on  Sinai  to  the  Jews,  and  at  all  other  times,  goes  under  the  general 
term  of  the  law  of  God;  yet,  upon  close  inspection,  this  law  will  be  found  to 
consist  of  three  kinds,  which  are  clearly  distinct  from  one  another.  These  three  kinds 
of  law  are.  the  judicial  law,  or  the  state  law  of  the  Jews  ;  the  ceremonial  law,  that 
is  to  say,  that  law  which  prescribed  the  religious  rites  and  services  of  the  Jews  under 
the  Old  Testament  dispensation ;  and  the  moral  law,  which  prescribed  their  con- 
duct, and  our  conduct,  as  men.  It  has  been  inferred  that  the  moral  law  was 
intended  to  be  perpetual  from  the  very  mode  of  its  promulgation.  Let  not  this  be 
dismissed  as  trilling.  Everything  in  the  promulgation  of  the  law  was  the  effect 
of  premeditation  on  the  part  of  the  Divine  mind,  who  doeth  nothing  in  vain.  Every 
part  of  it  had  a  signification  attached  to  it.  The  judicial  part  of  the  law,  and  the 
ceremonial  part,  were  delivered  to  Moses  privately,  during  the  forty  daya  in 
which  he  was  on  the  Mount ;  but  the  moral  law  was  delivered  from  the  mouth  of 
God  Himself,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  assembled  camp.  The  ceremonial  part 
of  the  law  was  written  in  a  perishable  book ;  the  moral  part  of  the  law  was  written 
by  the  finger  of  God  upon  two  tables  of  stone,  the  emblem  of  perpetuity  ;  and  after- 
wards, when  the  first  tables  of  the  law  were  destroyed  by  the  zeal  of  Moses,  they 
were  restored  by  the  same  finger  upon  two  other  similar  tables.  Now,  we  must  be 
persuaded  that  every  particular  in  that  solemn  event  of  giving  the  law  was  the 
result  of  design  :  and  that  the  moral  part  of  the  law  was  intended  to  be  perpetual, 
seems  the  most  probable  meaning  of  the  distinction  made  in  the  mode  of  promul- 
gating the  ceremonial  and  the  moral  law.  But  we  have  conclusive  argument  to 
prove  the  universal  obligation  and  perpetuity  of  the  law.  That  it  is  intended  to  be 
universal  is  most  evident,  because  it  was  only  the  republication  of  the  law  which 
was  imprinted  on  the  mind  of  Adam  in  Eden,  and  which  was  effaced  from  his  mind 
by  his  disobedience.  But,  as  Adam  was  the  head  and  father  of  all,  and  as  all  that 
had  been  prescribed  to  him  first  was  intended  to  be  taught  to  all  his  posterity,  we 
infer  that  the  moral  law  was  intended  to  be  perpetual  and  universally  binding. 
Again,  it  is  one  great  requisition  of  the  gospel,  that  it  should  be  preached  to  every 
creature ;  and  that  its  object  should  be  to  testify  toward  Jews  and  Greeks,  repentance 
toward  God.  But,  if  repentance  be  required  of  every  creature,  it  follows  that  every 
creature  is  a  sinner.  Yet,  every  creature  cannot  be  a  sinner  by  disobedience  to  the 
judicial  law,  which  was  only  for  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  nor  by  disobedience  to 
the  ceremonial  law,  which  was  to  cease  at  Christ's  coming.  But,  by  the  dia- 
obedience  of  law,  mankind  became  sinners,  and  consequently,  the  iubject  of  the 
gospel  must  be  the  moral  law ;  therefore,  the  moral  law  is  universal.  The 
precepts  of  the  moral  law  have  all  of  them  respect  only  to  the  moral  character  of 
man,  properly  so  called.  They  relate  not  to  outward  observances — not  to  the  things 
which  go  into  a  man,  but  to  the  things  whioh  come  out  of  him,  namely,  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  hia  heart.  Our  Lord  said,  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come 
to  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets ;  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.  For 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise 
pass  from  the  law,  till  all  be  fulfilled."  This  could  not  be  the  judicial  law,  which 
was  to  cease  with  the  existence  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  It  could  not  mean  the 
ceremonial  law,  which  was  done  away  by  Christ.  Tbis  declaration  refers  to  the 
moral  law,  and  there  is  ample  reason  for  believing  that  his  assertion  should  be 
true.    {J.  F.  Denham,  M.A.)         Jesus  Christ  the  true  and  only  Mediator  Ueiwettt 


CHAP,  ni.]  GALATIANS.  198 

God  and  man  : — St.  Paul  commences  his  explanation  of  the  use  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
by  saying  that  "  it  was  added  because  of  transgressions."  It  was  added,  therefore 
was  not,  so  to  speak,  included  in  the  original  purpose  of  God — because  of  trans- 
gressions, not  that  tbe  law  made  transgression,  but  that  it  was  a  test  whereby 
transgression  might  be — 1.  Manifested  and  exposed;  2.  Avoided  and  corrected. 
Thus  we  find  the  use  of  the  law  to  have  consisted  in  being  a  witness  to  God  between 
the  patriarchal  and  the  Christian  dispensations.  It  was  meant  to  be  a  standard  of 
God's  righteousness,  and  thus  a  means  of  convincing  man  of  his  own  unrighteous, 
ness.  It  would  appear,  then,  that  the  one  great  object  the  apostle  bad  in  view  in 
this  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  was  to  show  the  temporary  character  of  the  law,  and 
that  it  only  filled  a  sphere  of  subordinate  usefulness  in  the  economy  of  the  Divine 
government ;  and  so,  by  lowering  their  ideas  of  its  dignity,  to  exalt  their  impres- 
sions of  the  higher  dignity  of  evangelical  truth,  and  of  the  greater  necessity 
of  faith  in  the  evangelical  promises.  And  this  object  we  find  wrought  out  in  the 
text,  wherein  he  shows  its  fleeting  character  in  the  assertion  that  it  was  only  added 
"  until  the  seed  should  come."  The  word  "  angels  "  is  capable  of  two  interpreta- 
tions. 1.  The  word  translated  "  angels,"  and  from  which  our  English  word  angel 
is  derived,  in  its  simple  sense  means  "  messengers."  It  does  not  mean  necessarily 
that  spiritual  and  (to  us)  invisible  messenger  which  we  call  an  angel,  but  may 
mean  any  one  entrusted  with  the  performance  of  another's  will,  or  the  execution  of 
a  commission.  Thus  we  may  take  the  law  in  its  fullest  sense,  comprehending  the 
moral  as  well  as  the  ritual  observances  enjoined  by  God,  and  revealed  by  Him  at 
various  times  through  patriarchs,  lawgivers,  prophets,  and  ready  scribes  (like 
Ezra) ;  and  suppose  these  to  have  been  the  "  messengers "  by  whom  it  was 
"  ordained,"  or  (more  literally)  "  set  in  order,"  until  the  time  of  the  Mediator 
arrived,  when  all  the  ordinances  alike  of  ceremonial  and  moral  law  were  realized  in 
Him,  even  Jesus  Christ,  who  fulfilled  all  righteousness.  2.  But  I  confess  that  this 
interpretation,  however  satisfactory  it  may  appear  in  itself  as  explanatory  of  the 
meaning  of  the  apostle's  words,  does  not  appear  to  me  to  elucidate  the  sense  of  the 
apostle  upon  the  point  in  question.  I  prefer,  therefore,  to  abide  by  the  second 
interpretation,  which,  while  it  narrows  its  signification,  applies  more  closely  and 
explains  more  satisfactorily  its  meaning.  St.  Paul,  you  will  bear  in  mind,  was 
still  dwelling  on  the  temporary  character  of  the  law.  This  was  the  key-note  of  the 
whole  chant  in  praise  of  the  superiority  of  faith.  He  appears,  therefore,  in  this 
expression  to  make  a  distinct  allusion  to  the  giving  of  the  law  to  Moses,  the 
mediator  between  God  and  His  people  Israel  after  the  patriarchal  times  had  ceased. 
I  conceive  hence  that  the  law  alluded  to  in  the  text  was  the  ceremonial  law. 
ordained,  or  set  in  order  by  angelic  ministers  and  conveyed  to  Moses  in  tbe  Mount, 
when  for  forty  days  he  was  permitted  to  commune  with  Jehovah,  and  entrusted  to 
his  hands  as  the  mediator  appointed  by  God  to  convey  His  will  to  His  chosen 
people  Israel.  Now,  if,  as  I  believe,  this  be  a  correct  explanation  of  the  meaning 
of  the  apostle,  we  shall  find,  on  carrying  out  the  idea  contained  therein,  that  it  has 
a  very  important  connection  with  the  following  portion  of  the  text,  "  Now  a 
mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one,  but  God  is  one."  This  connection  may  not  at 
first  appear  so  clear  as  I  hope  to  make  it ;  but,  if  I  understand  the  apostle's 
argument,  his  meaning  was  to  this  effect :  "  I  have  shown  you  the  real  use  of  the 
law,  have  explained  that  it  was  not  God's  original  covenant,  but  was  only  intended 
to  fill  up  a  gap,  as  it  were,  between  the  declaration  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  ante- 
cedent promise ;  that  during  that  gap  or  interval,  it  was  useful  in  convincing  of 
sin,  and  thus  leading  to  a  necessity  of  faith,  but  had  in  itself  no  justifying  power 
like  the  faith  already  illustrated  in  Abraham  when  he  believed  God  and  it  wa3 
imputed  to  him  for  righteousness.  Now,  I  have  a  still  farther  object  in  view :  I  wish 
to  prove  its  inferiority,  both  in  the  mode  of  its  revelation  and  in  the  person  of  its 
mediator."  He  wished,  I  say,  to  prove  the  inferiority  of  the  ritual  law.  First :  in 
the  mode  of  its  revelation.  The  law  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a 
mediator.  How  far  superior  then  must  have  been  that  promise  which  came  direct 
from  God  Himself.  The  law  was  calculated  to  depress  the  thoughts  to  earth  by  its 
carnal  rites  and  burthensome  observances.  How  far  superior,  then,  must  have 
been  that  promise  which  elevated  the  thoughts,  hopes,  affections  at  once  to  the 
throne  and  mercy  seat  of  God.  The  law  was  intended  only  to  have  a  typical  efficacy 
by  shadowing  forth  good  things  yet  to  come.  How  far  superior  then  in  their  ful- 
filment must  have  been  those  abiding  realities,  those  spiritual  substances  which 
were  thus  foreshadowed  Second:  In  the  person  of  its  Mediator.  The  mediator 
of  the  covenant  of  the  law  was  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  but  the  Mediator  of  the 

13 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  nu 

covenant  of  promise  was  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  we  may  duly  appreciate 
the  special,  the  specific  superiority,  in  this  character  of  the  latter  over  the  former, 
let  us  consider  what  was  the  office  of,  and  what  was  the  necessary  qualification 
for  a  mediator.  A  mediator  is  one  who  seeks  to  reconcile  differences  between  con- 
flicting persons.  In  order  to  do  this  successfully  between  man  and  man,  he  must 
be  utterly  unbiassed  by  the  prejudices  of  either,  while  he  must  feel  a  sympathy 
with  the  affections  of  both.  In  the  arrangement  of  human  differences  we  know  by 
experience  that  if  a  person  attempts  to  mediate  between  two,  while  all  his  sympa- 
thies are  enlisted  on  the  side  of  one,  his  office  is  sure  to  fail,  even  if  his  mediation 
be  not  rejected.  Therefore,  when  the  apostle  says,  "  A  mediator  is  not  a  mediator 
of  one,"  he  at  once  shows  the  inefficiency  of  Moses  for  his  office ;  because,  being 
only  man,  he  could  not  mediate  on  the  side  of  Deity.  He  could  convey  God's 
commands  to  His  people.  He  could  even  act  out  God's  will  in  his  own  person. 
But  not  being  a  partaker  A  to*  Oiwnj*»  ■'anire,  he  could  not  mediate  as  a  Divine 
participator  in  the  covenant,  tout  contrast  this  with  the  Mediator  of  the  covenant 
of  promise,  and  regard  His  immeasurable  superiority.  Behold  the  development  of 
the  mystery  contained  in  the  concluding  words  of  the  text,  "  But  God  is  one  1 "  But 
while  thus  congratulating  ourselves  upon  an  undeserved,  and  I  trust  richly  appreciated 
mercy,  it  is  necessary  heedfully  to  avoid  one  dangerous  error — viz. ,  not  to  degrade 
our  faith  into  a  mere  result  of  external  evidences.  The  mind  and  intellect  being 
convinced  will  not  always  influence  the  conduct,  will  certainly  fail  to  change  the 
heart,  and  cannot  of  itself  sanctify  the  will.  Holy  Scripture  tells  us  that  it  is  "  with 
the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."  (Bishop  Suffragan  of  Nottingham.) 
Law  contrasted  with  promise :—  1.  The  law  has  no  organic  relation  to  the  promise ; 
was  neither  a  new  form  of  it,  nor  a  codicil  to  it ;  did  not  spring  out  of  it,  but  was 
superadded  as  a  foreign  and  unallied  element.  2.  The  law  has  functional  connec- 
tion with  sin ;  the  promise  regards  an  inheritance.  3.  The  law  was  provisional 
and  temporary  only :  the  promise  has  no  limitation  of  time,  and  is  not  to  be  super- 
seded. 4.  The  law  was|given  by  a  species  of  double  intervention — the  instrumentality 
of  angels  and  the  mediation  of  Moses ;  the  promise  was  given  directly  and  im- 
mediately from  God's  own  lips,  no  one  stepping  in  between  its  Giver  and  its 
recipient — neither  angel  ordaining  it  nor  man  conveying  it.  5.  The  promise,  as 
resting  solely  on  God,  was  unconditioned,  and  therefore  permanent  and  unchanging; 
the  law,  interposed  between  two  parties,  and  specially  contingent  on  a  human 
element,  was  liable  to  suspension  or  abolition.  6.  This  law,  so  necessitated  by  sin,  bo 
transient,  so  connected  with  angelic  ordinance  and  human  handling,  was  an  institute 
later  also  by  far  in  its  imagination.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  Inferiority  of  the  law 
to  the  dispensation  of  grace :—  Had  the  law  then  no  purpose  ?  Yes ;  but  its  very 
purpose,  its  character  and  history,  betray  its  inferiority  to  the  dispensation  of  grace. 
1.  Instead  of  justifying,  it  condemns  ;  instead  of  giving  life,  it  kills ;  it  was  added 
to  reveal  and  multiply  transgressions.  2.  It  was  but  temporary ;  when  the  seed 
came  to  whom  the  promise  was  given,  it  was  annulled.  3.  It  did  not  come  direct 
from  God  to  man.  There  was  a  double  interposition,  a  twofold  mediation,  between 
the  giver  and  the  recipient.  There  were  the  angels,  who  administered  it  as  God's 
instruments ;  there  was  Moses  (or  the  high  priest)  who  delivered  it  to  man.  4.  As 
follows  from  the  idea  of  mediation,  it  was  of  the  nature  of  a  contract,  whereas  the 
promise,  proceeding  from  the  sole  fiat  of  God,  is  unconditional  and  unchangeable. 
(Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  uses  of  the  law  : — The  law  was  never  intended  to  be  the 
means  of  conveying  life.  Its  office  was  to  bring  home  to  men  the  necessity  of  seeking 
life  elsewhere.  It  was  subservient  and  preparatory  to  the  gospel.  The  general 
reason  for  which  it  was  given  was  "because  of  transgressions."  1.  To  restrain 
sin.  As  a  curb.  It  holds  men  in  check  wherever  it  is  known.  Without  some 
such  restraint  this  earth  would  soon  become  a  hell.  2.  To  reveal  sin  (Bom. 
vii.  7-9).  The  sediment  at  the  bottom  of  a  pool  is  there,  but  its  existence  does  not 
become  apparent  until  the  pool  is  stirred.  The  chamber  may  be  full  of  all  that  is 
unseemly  and  unsightly,  but  the  fact  is  not  known  so  long  as  darkness  prevails. 
So  the  law  lets  in  the  light  of  God's  truth  upon  man's  evil  heart.  3.  To  provoke 
ein  (Bom.  v.  20).  The  very  fact  that  fruit  is  forbidden  makes  it  to  be  more  desired. 
The  heart  chafes  at  restraint.  Just  as  a  barrier  thrown  across  a  stream  causes  it, 
however  smooth  and  quiet  before,  to  rage  and  fret  against  the  new  obstruction,  if 
perchance  it  may  sweep  it  away ;  bo  does  the  law,  with  its  demands,  warnings, 
threaten  in  gs,  stir  up  the  enmity  of  the  heart,  and  provoke  it  to  rebel  against  God. 
4.  To  condemn  sin.  The  law,  when  it  has  once  found  a  man,  holds  him  fast  in  its 
grip.    It  has  but  two  sentences — death  or  life.    It  reveals  to  man  his  own  helpless 


c»A*.  m.]  GALATIANS.  195 

misery,  and  leaves  him  in  it.  (Emilius  Bayley,B.D.)  The  purposes  the  law  was 
intended  to  serve : — Take  a  bird'? -eye  view  of  the  works  of  the  law  in  this  world. 
Lo,  I  see  the  law  given  upon  Mount  Sinai.  The  very  hill  doth  quake  with  fear. 
Lightnings  and  thunders  are  the  attendants  of  those  dreadful  syllables  which  make 
the  hearts  of  Israel  to  melt.  Sinai  seemeth  altogether  on  the  smoke.  The  Lord 
came  from  Paran,  and  the  Holy  One  from  Mount  Sinai ;  He  came  with  ten  thousand 
of  His  saints.  Out  of  His  mouth  went  a  fiei-y  law  for  them.  It  was  a  dread  law 
even  when  it  was  given  ;  and  since  then  from  that  Mount  of  Sinai  an  awful  lava  of 
vengeance  has  run  down,  to  deluge,  to  destroy,  to  burn,  and  to  consume  the  whole 
human  race,  if  it  had  not  been  that  Jesus  Christ  had  stemmed  its  awful  torrent, 
and  bidden  its  waves  of  fire  be  still.  Apart  from  Christ  and  His  gospel,  the  law  is 
nothing  but  the  condemning  voice  of  God  thundering  against  mankind.  So  it  is 
natural  to  ask  the  question  in  the  text;  and  the  answer  to  that  question  is — 1. 
To  manifest  to  man  his  guilt.  Asleep  on  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  God  sends  the 
law  as  a  messenger  to  open  men's  eyes  and  show  them  their  danger.  2.  To  slay  all 
hope  of  salvation  by  a  reformed  life.  Future  obedience  can  be  no  atonement  for 
past  guilt,  even  if  perfect  obedience  for  the  future  could  be  guaranteed,  which  is 
far  from  the  case.  3.  To  show  man  the  misery  which  will  fall  upon  him  through 
his  sin.  4.  To  show  the  value  of  a  Saviour.  As  foils  set  off  jewels,  and  dark  spots 
make  bright  tints  more  bright,  so  does  the  law  make  Christ  appear  the  fairer  and 
more  heavenly.  How  harsh  and  discordant  is  the  voice  of  the  law  with  its  cure  ; 
how  sweet  and  harmonious  that  of  Jesus,  saying,  "  Come  unto  Me."  5.  To  keep 
Christian  men  from  self-righteousness.  When  we  read  the  law  we  see  our  faults  as 
in  a  mirror.  If  we  would  be  saved,  we  must  come  with  nothing  of  our  own  to 
Christ.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Because  of  transgressions  : — Relation  of  the  laxo  to 
sin: — The  "transgressions"  on  account  of  which  the  law  was  added  refer,  I 
apprehend,  to  the  criminal  conduct  of  the  Israelites,  which  rendered  the  introduc- 
tion of  such  a  system  as  the  law  necessary  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  the  great 
object  of  the  covenant  about  Christ,  and  justification  by  faith  through  Him.  This 
arrangement  was  first  made  known  in  the  first  promise,  but  from  the  prevalence 
of  human  depravity  it  seems  to  have  been  in  the  course  of  ages  almost  entirely 
forgotten.  "  All  flesh  corrupted  its  way  on  the  earth."  The  deluge  swept  away 
the  whole  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  world  with  the  exception  of  one  family,  among 
whom  the  true  religion  was  preserved.  In  the  course  of  no  very  long  period,  the 
great  body  of  their  descendants,  the  inhabitants  of  the  new  world,  became  idolaters. 
To  prevent  the  utter  extinction  from  among  mankind  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and 
the  way  of  obtaining  His  favour,  Abraham  was  called,  and  a  plainer  revelation 
made  to  him  of  the  Divine  purposes  of  mercy,  and  his  decendants  by  Isaac  and 
Jacob  chosen  as  the  depositaries  of  this  revelation,  till  He  should  come  to  whom 
the  revelation  chiefly  referred.  In  consequence  of  the  descendants  of  Jacob  coming 
down  into  Egypt,  they  gradually  contracted  a  fondness  for  Egyptian  superstitions, 
and  were  fast  relapsing  into  a  state  of  idolatry,  which  must  soon  have  terminated  in 
their  being  lost  among  the  nations ;  and  the  revelation  with  which  they  were  entrusted 
being  first  corrupted  and  then  forgotten,  God  raised  up  Moses  as  their  deliverer, 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  and  placed  them  under  that  very  peculiar  order  of  things 
which  we  commonly  term  the  Mosaic  Law — an  order  of  things  admirably  adapted 
to  preserve  them  a  distinct  and  peculiar  people — and  by  doing  so,  to  preserve 
the  revelation  of  mercy  through  the  Messiah,  of  which  they  were  the  depositaries, 
and  to  prepare  abundant  and  satisfactory  stores  of  evidence  and  illustration  when 
the  great  Deliverer  appeared — evidence  that  He  was  indeed  the  Person  to  whom  the 
hopes  of  mankind  had  from  the  beginning  been  directed,  an  illustration  render- 
ing  in  some  measure  level  to  human  apprehension  what  otherwise  would  have  been 
unintelligible.  Every  person  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  depraved  human 
nature,  and  with  the  history  of  the  Jews  at  and  subsequent  to  their  deliverance 
from  Egypt,  will  see  that  their  "  transgressions  "  rendered  some  such  arrangement 
as  the  Mosaic  law  absolutely  necessary,  on  the  supposition  that  the  Messiah  was  not 
to  appear  for  a  course  of  ages,  and  that  the  revelation  of  salvation  through  Him 
was  to  be  preserved  in  the  world  by  means  of  the  Jewish  people.  We  are  not  so 
much,  if  at  all,  to  consider  the  Mosaic  law  as  a  punishment  for  the  transgressions 
of  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  We  are  rather  to  consider  it  as  the  means  which 
their  transgressions  rendered  necessary  in  order  to  secure  the  object  of  their  being 
chosen  to  be  God's  peculiar  people.  To  be  preserved  from  being  involved  in  the 
ignorance,  and  idolatry,  and  vice  in  which  the  surrounding  nations  were  sunk,  wag 
a  blessing,  at  whatever  expense  it  might  be  gained.    At  the  same  time,  had  it  not 


19*  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

been  for  the  transgressions  of  the  Israelites,  the  more  spiritual  and  less  burdensome 
order  of  things  under  which  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  were  placed  might  have 
been  continued,  and  the  law  as  a  distinct  order  of  things  never  have  existed  because 
never  needed.     (John  Brown,  D.D.)  The  law,  then,  was  given  for  these  two 

purposes  : — 1.  To  show  the  people  what  actions  were  sins,  that  they  might  not  fall 
into  them  without  knowledge  and  without  warning.  2.  To  restrain  them  from 
those  sins  against  the  law  of  nature  and  the  covenant  with  God,  through  fear  of 
the  punishment  which  should  follow,  and  thus  root  out  from  them  those  habits  of 
wickedness  which  they  had  contracted  in  Egypt.  In  both  these  respects  was  the 
necessity  of  a  mediator,  a  redeemer,  kept  before  the  eyes  of  the  people.  Their 
weakness  taught  them  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  who  should  strengthen  them ;  the 
sight  of  their  sinfulness  directed  them  to  a  Redeemer,  through  whom  they  should 
obtain  deliverance  from  present  sin  and  forgiveness  for  the  past.  For  the  law  is 
not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient,  for  the  ungodly 
and  for  sinners  ;  and  therefore,  since  the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  sin, 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  that  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jeeus 
Christ  might  be  given  to  them  that  believe.  The  inferiority  of  the  law  to  the 
covenant  of  promise  which  was  fulfilled  by  the  gospel  is  considered  in  these  par- 
ticulars. 1.  The  law  represses  outward  transgressions  through  the  fear  which  it 
excites ;  the  gospel  effects  an  inward  transformation  in  man  by  love.  2.  Instead 
of  justifying,  which  is  the  work  of  the  gospel,  the  law  condemns  ;  instead  of  giving 
life,  it  does  but  kill.  3.  The  law  was  temporary  ;  it  was  only  to  continue  until  the 
coming  of  the  seed.  4.  The  law  did  not  come  to  man  directly  from  the  mouth  of 
God  as  the  gospel  does,  but  by  the  intervention  of  angels.  Until  Christ  came,  man 
indeed  was  not  brought  face  to  face  with  God,  but  the  will  of  the  Father  was  re- 
vealed to  the  world  by  the  ministry  of  angels.  Only  in  these  last  days  hath  He 
spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son.  The  law  depended  for  its  fulfilment  on  the  observance 
of  its  conditions  by  the  two  contracting  parties,  whilst  the  promise  of  God  to 
Abraham  is  absolute.     (W.  Denton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  20.  Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one,  hut  God  is  one. — I.  The  kky 

to  the  apostle's  argument — "One."  1.  (ver.  16)  One  is  the  seed  of  Abraham,  to 
whom  the  promise  was  made.  "  In  thee  shall  all  the  nations  be  blessed  "  (ver.  8), 
was  the  proposition  with  which  St.  Paul  started  to  prove  (ver.  14)  that  the  blessing  of 
Abraham  was  to  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ.  2.  (vers.  28-29) 
The  conclusion  evidently  reverts  to  the  beginning,  "  Te  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus 
....  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  promise."  3.  In  ver.  20, 
therefore,  the  oneness  in  the  centre  must  refer  to  the  same  unity.  When,  in  the 
intermediate  argument,  designed  to  refute  the  plea  of  the  Jews  that  their  covenant 
was  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  to  Abraham,  St.  Paul  insists  on  the  non-unity  or 
want  of  oneness  connected  with  a  mediator,  the  presumption  is  strong  that  it  is  to 
the  Mosaic  covenant  and  its  mediator  that  he  is  denying  the  oneness  which  he 
claims  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  Christian  covenant  and  its  Mediator.  II.  The  steps  of 
the  argument.  1.  (ver.  16)  One  is  the  "seed  "  of  Abraham,  to  whom  the  "  bless- 
ing "  which  extends  to  "  all  nations  "  is  promised.  2.  (ver.  20.)  The  mediator  must 
be  a  "  mediator  of  one  "  (seed),  including  all  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  making  all  one ; 
and  "the  God  (of  both)  is  One."  3.  (vers.  28-29)  But  "  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ 
Jesus ;  and  therefore  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  III. 
The  conclusion  of  the  argument.  1.  Moses,  the  mediator  of  the  Jewish  covenant, 
is  not  such  a  "mediator  of  one"  (ver.  20),  uniting  all  into  one,  making  all  one  seed, 
one  body,  one  with  God,  one  with  each  other.  2.  But  Christ  is  exactly  such  a 
mediator.  (1)  He  is  the  one  seed  in  whom  all  find  their  unity.  (2)  In  Him  God  and 
man  are  made  one,  for  He  is  both  in  one  Person.  (3)  In  Him  all  men  and  all 
nations,  the  most  diverse,  have  become  one  (1  Cor.  xii.  13  ;  Eph.  i.  10).  8.  Christ, 
as  Mediator,  is  a  "Mediator  of  one"  in  the  fullest  sense  as  making  all  one. 
"  God,"  the  author  of  the  promise,  "  is  one  "  God  of  all,  Jews  and  Gentiles  (ver. 
20).  4.  "Te  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus"  (ver.  28),  being  all  "baptized  into 
Christ,"  having  "  put  on  Christ "  (ver.  27),  "  and  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  ye  be 
Abraham's  seed  and  heirs,"  <fec.  (ver.  29).  (Principal  Forbes.)  The  law  was 
ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator ;  but  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of 
one  person,  but  of  two — here,  in  the  case  under  consideration,  the  mediator  was 
Moses,  and  the  two  parties  between  whom  he  stood  were  God  and  the  Israelites. 
But  God  is  not  a  Mediator  between  two  parties :  He  is  one;  in  His  promise  God 
acts  alone  and  independently— here,  in  the  case  under  consideration,  in  the  giving 


m.]  GALATIANS.  197 

of  a  promise  to  Abraham  by  God,  there  was  no  mediator,  it  was  absolute  and  un- 
conditional, without  the  intervention  of  a  third  party.     The  covenant  which  God 
ma-ie  with  the  Israelites  at  Sinai  was  given  through   a  mediator,  viz. ,  Moses ; 
but  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  Abraham,  that  in  him  and  his  seed  all 
nations  should  be  blessed,  was  given  without  a  mediator.    The  one  was  conditional, 
and  by  law  or  contract ;  the  other  was  unconditional,  and  by  promise.  (P.  J.  Gloag, 
D.D.)        Mediation  and  God't  oneness : — Perhaps  no  passage  in  Scripture  has  re- 
ceived so  many  interpretations  as  this — more  than  two  hundred  and  hfty  at  least. 
Who  does  not  see  in  this  an  illustration  of  the  honour  done  to  the  Word  of  God  ? 
On  what  other  book  would  the  same  amount  of  time,  and  mental  labour,  and  literary 
attainment,  have  been  expended  for  the  illustration  of  an  occasional  remark  ?     The 
causes  of  the  diversity  of  sentiment  are  various.    Some  suppose  the  apostle  to  speak 
in  his  own  person;  others  consider  either  the  whole  verse,  or  at  any  rate  the  first, 
part  of  it,  as  the  words  of  an  objector.     Some  by  the  "  mediator  "  understand 
any  mediator;  others,  Moses;  others,  Christ.     Some  understand  "one"  as  a  sub- 
stantive; others  as  an  adjective  which  requires  a  substantive  to  be  supplied  to 
bring  out  the  sense,  and  that   substantive  they  have  supplied  very  variously  : 
some,  of  one  party ;  others,  of  one  seed  ;  others,  of  one  law ;  others,  of  one  race ; 
others,  of  one  thing,  &c.  Some  understand  the  assertion  "  is  not  of  one  "  of  the  person ; 
others,  of  the  condition,  others,  of  the  design  and  business  of  the  mediator.     Some 
consider  the  last  member  of  the  sentence,  "  God  is  one,"  as  philosophical  or  dog- 
matic ;  others  as  historical,  looking  to  the  times  of  Abraham,  or  of  the  giving  of  the 
law  at  Sinai.      Luther's  notion  is  quite  singular — "  God  offendeth  no  man,  and 
therefore  needeth  no  mediator ;  but  we  offend  God,  and  therefore  we  need  a  medi- 
ator."  The  mode  of  connecting  the  passage  has  also  given  origin  to  diversity  of  view 
respecting  its  meaning.    Now,  in  any  discussion  of  this  passage,  two  things  must 
be  kept  in  mind  :  1.  The  repetition  of  the  word  "  mediator  "  is  not  in  the  original. 
The  text  reads  literally  thus :  "  Now  a  " — or  the — "  mediator  is  not  of  one."  2.  The 
words  must  contain  in  them  some  statement  which  lays  a  foundation  for  the  con- 
clusion deduced  in  the  next  verse,  that  the  law  is  not  against  the  promises  of  God. 
However  plausible  in  other  respects  an  interpretation  may  be,  it  cannot  be  the  right 
one  if  it  does  not  bring  out  a  sense  which  justifies  the  apostle's  inference.     The  al- 
most innumerable  opinions  of  interpreters  may  be  reduced  to  two  classes — those  in 
which  the  words,  "  Now  a  mediator  is  not  of  one,"  are  understood  as  a  general  pro- 
position, true  of  all  mediators,  and  applied  by  the  apostle  in  the  course  of  hi3 
reasoning  to  the  subject  before  him  ;  and  those  in  which  they  are  considered  as  a 
particular  statement,  referring  exclusively  and  directly  to  the  mediator  spoken  of  in 
preceding  verse.     Those  who  are  agreed  in  thinking  the  words  are  a  general  pro- 
position, differ  widely  in  the  way  in  which  they  understand  it,  and  in  which  they 
make  it  bear  on  the  apostle's  argument.   One  class  consider  the  words  as  equivalent 
to—"  Now  a  mediator  does  not  belong  to  a  state  of  unity  or  agreement.    The  use  of 
a  mediator  seems  to  intimate  that  the  parties  between  whom  fie  mediates  are  not  at 
one."    This  mode  of  interpretation  labours  under  great  difficulties.     For,  first,  it  is 
not  true  that  the  use  of  a  mediator  necessarily  supposes  disagreement.     There  are 
causes  of  the  use  of  a  mediator  besides  this.    God  continues  to  deal  with  those  with 
whom  He  is  reconciled  through  a  mediator.    And  secondly,  it  breaks  the  connection 
between  the  two  clauses  of  the  verse,  which  obviously  is  very  intimate.     Another 
class  consider  the  words  as  equivalent  to — "  a  mediator  does  not  belong  exclusively 
to  one  party ;  a  mediator  belongs  to  both  parties ;  "  and  they  consider  the  apostle 
as  arguing  thus :  "  No  man  can  be  a  mediator  who  is  not  appointed  by  both  parties. 
There  were  two  parties  in  the  original  agreement — God  and  the  spiritual  seed  of 
Abraham.    Moses  was  indeed  appointed  by  God;  but  God  was  one  of  the  parties, 
bo  that  whatever  such  a  mediator  could  do  could  not  affect  the  interests  of  the  other 
party."     This  explanation  is  not  satisfactory,  because  in  the  appointment  of  the 
Great  Mediator  of  the  better  covenant,  God  alone  was  concerned.    A  third  class 
consider  the  words  as  equivalent  to — "a  mediator  is  not  peculiar  to  this  one  dispen- 
sation.   There  have  been  various  mediators,  but  there  is  but  one  God.   The  mediator 
may  be  changed,  but  God  continues  the  same."    But  the  words  do  not  naturally 
convey  this  meaning.     The  mediator  of  this  verse  is  evidently  the  same  as  the  medi- 
ator referred  to  in  the  preceding  verse.    The  question  still  remains,  then,  Who  is 
the  mediator  thus  referred  to  ?     Some  consider  the  mediator  by  whose  hands  the 
law  was  given,  as  Jesus  Christ.    But  Christ  is  nowhere  in  Scripture  called  the  medi- 
ator of  the  law  ;  and  surely  if  the  reference  had  been  to  Him,  the  language  in  versa 
19  would  not  have  been  "  a  mediator,"  but  "  the  mediator,"  if  not  the  expression 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  m 

elsewhere  used,  "the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men."  This  still  further 
narrows  the  field  of  discussion.  We  have  now  only — taking  for  granted  that  th« 
mediator  is  Moses — to  seek  for  a  meaning  which  the  words  of  the  apostle  will  bear, 
and  which  will  support  his  conclusion,  that  the  law  is  not,  cannot  be,  against  the 
promises  of  God.  If  the  first  part  of  the  verse  be  read  interrogatively,  and  if  the 
word  one  be  understood,  not  numerically,  but  morally,  as  signifying  uniform  and 
unchangeable,  always  self-consistent,  a  plain  meaning  may  be  deduced  from  the 
words,  in  harmony  with  the  context.  "  The  law  was  given  by  the  hands  of  Moses 
as  a  mediator.  But  was  he  not  the  mediator  of  Him  who  is  one  and  the  same  for 
ever  ?  Now  God,  who  appointed  Moses  mediator,  is  one  and  the  same — unchanged, 
unchangeable.  Can,  then,  the  law  be  against  the  promises  of  God  ?  "  (John 
Brown,  D.D.)  The  Mediator: — God  is  one.  He  alone  is  to  be  considered  in  thit 
transaction.  It  is  all  His  doing.  He  not  only  mediates  with  us,  but  also  for  us ; 
He  is  on  our  side  ;  He  takes  part  with  us.  It  is  His  single  hand  which  achieves  the 
issue ;  the  whole  depends  upon  Him,  and  is  consummated  by  Him.  I.  Thb 
parties  supposed.  God ;  man.  These  two  at  variance.  H.  Thb  mediatob.  One 
who  can  take  up  both  sides  of  the  case.  Necessary  that  he  should  reoeive  power 
and  deputation  from  both,  and  that  each  party  abide  by  his  determination.  In 
God's  stead,  and  yet  man's  substitute  and  surety.  Where  shall  such  an  one  be 
found  ?  HI.  God  provides  the  mediator.  He  acts  for  man,  as  well  as  for  Himself. 
1.  God  originates  the  plan.  2.  God  removes  every  obstruction.  3.  God  secures 
man's  co-operation.  4.  God  alone  is  to  be  adored.  (R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Ex- 
planation of  the  verse : — Some  two  or  three  hundred  interpretations  go  upon  the 
misconception  that  the  meaning  is :  "A  mediator  is  a  mediator,  not  of  one  party, 
but  of  two  parties,  and  God  is  one  of  those  two  parties."  This  is,  I  strongly  think, 
quite  erroneous.  The  structure  of  the  Greek  excludes  it.  The  word  "one" 
clearly  points  not  to  number,  but  to  quality ;  and  so  the  sense  will  be :  "  A  mediator 
has  nothing  to  do  with  what  is  one,  whatsoever  be  the  number  of  individuals  con- 
stituting that  unit,  but  God  is  pre-eminently  one — one  with  Himself,  as  in  essence, 
so  in  will  .  .  .  one  in  His  one  method  of  dealing  with  all."  (Canon  T.  8.  Evans, 
D.D. )  St.  Paul's  view  of  the  unity  of  God  ; — There  is  more  than  one  sense  in 
which  unity  may  be  understood.  It  may  mean  "  one  and  no  more,"  i.e.,  numerical 
unity ;  or,  one  and  the  same  to  all  and  always ;  or,  union  of  many  in  a  collective 
unit.  We  may  say,  there  is  one  king,  meaning  that  there  are  not  two  or  more ;  or, 
there  is  one  king,  meaning  that  all  have  the  same  king,  that  he  is  the  same  to  all 
his  subjects ;  and  we  may  say,  the  kingdom  is  one,  meaning  that  it  is  not  divided, 
that  it  is  a  collective  unit  in  the  monarchy.  It  is  therefore  important  to  observe  in 
what  sense  St.  Paul  uses  the  word  uq  when  in  any  passage  he  speaks  of  unity,  and 
especially  when  he  refers  to  the  unity  of  God.  Now  it  is  plainly  his  habit  to  use  the 
word  in  senses  other  than  numerical.  The  following  are  instances :  1  Cor.  iii.  8,  vi. 
16,  x.  17,  xii.  13 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  2  ;  Gal.  iii.  28 ;  Eph.  i.  10,  ii.  14, 15 ;  Phil.  i.  27.  And  so, 
when  St.  Paul  speaks  of  God  being  one,  it  is  certainly  not  usually,  if  it  is  ever,  in  the 
numerical  sense.  The  very  word  6eo£,  as  he  understands  it,  excludes  the  idea  of 
polytheism ;  and  against  polytheism,  as  implying  many  actual  gods,  he  is  nowhere 
concerned  to  argue.  .  .  .  Brought  up  in  Judaism,  he  had  imbibed,  as  it  were  with 
his  mother's  milk,  the  idea  of  one  God  only.  "  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  thy  God 
is  one  God,"  had  been  the  central  principle  of  his  religion  from  the  first,  and  ex- 
pressed a  self-evident  truth  which  to  his  mind  was  unassailable.  But  he  had  been 
taught  also  to  regard  the  One  God  as,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  the  God  of  Israel  only ; 
the  whole  Gentile  world  being  to  the  mind  of  the  Jew  outside  the  circle  of  special 
Divine  favour.  Yet,  as  his  mind  became  enlarged  through  familiarity  with  Gentile 
thought  and  literature,  and  through  his  own  musings  and  his  observation  of  the 
world,  we  may  believe  that  he  had  long  been  perplexed  by  the  limitation  which  his 
creed  seemed  to  imply  of  the  love  of  the  universal  Father.  His  mind  craved  a  con- 
ception of  God,  as  not  only  supreme,  but  as  one  in  His  own  nature,  one  and  the 
same  to  all,  comprehending  all  alike  in  the  embrace  of  His  own  essential  unity. 
Further,  it  appears  from  his  language  in  more  than  one  passage,  that  he  had  been 
perplexed  not  only  by  the  seeming  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  but  also  by 
the  discords  and  anomalies  apparent  at  present  in  creation  generally.  The  general 
"  puzzle  of  this  painful  earth  "  had  set  him  musing.  Such  comprehensive  languag* 
(as  that  in  Bom.  viii.  19-22)  cannot  surely  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  humanity 
alone.  It  seems  to  mean  that  everywhere  throughout  known  sentient  creation  there 
is  now  pain  and  evil,  discordant  with  the  idea  of  unity  in  God.  But  among  all  the 
apparent  discords  of  creation  those  within  himself  came  home  to  him  especially, 


chap,  m.]  GALATIANS.  19* 

because  personally  felt.  He  was  conscious  'of  a  "  law  of  God  "  within  him,  de- 
manding his  entire  allegiance  ;  but  he  was  conscious  also  of  another  "  law  in  his 
members  " — a  "  law  of  sin  and  death  " — warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind — such 
as  to  have  wrung  from  him  once  the  almost  despairing  cry,  "  0  wretched  man  that 
I  am,"  &c.  Such  inward  experience  clashed  with  his  conceived  ideal  of  "  One  God, 
the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  unto  Him."  And  further,  it  is  evident 
(as  is  especially  seen  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians)  that  even  beyond  this  mundane 
sphere  of  things  his  thoughts  extended.  His  religious  faith — confirmed  doubtless 
by  his  observation  of  the  mystery  of  spiritual  evil  among  men — told  him  also  of 
"  spiritual  things  of  wickednesses  in  the  heavenly  places,"  of  a  "  prince  of  the  power 
of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience ; "  and  such  dis- 
sonance in  the  heavenly  places  themselves  was  inconsistent  with  his  grand  ideal. 
For  God  was  to  his  mind  the  one  absolute  existence,  the  one  eternal  Being,  "  of 
whom  are  all  things:"  "the  Father  (ira.Tt)p)  of  whom  every  family  (irarpid)  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  is  named ; "  and  not  only  the  Father,  but  also  present  in  all 
creation  still.  .  .  .  'And  the  God  of  his  conscience  being  to  him  Love  and 
Bighteousness  as  well  as  Power  and  Life,  he  craved  in  all  creation  a  reflection  of  the 
whole  Divine  perfection — such  as,  in  the  present  state  of  things,  he  did  not  find. 
Such  grand  conceptions.we  conceive  to  have  had  possession  of  St.  Paul's  mind — after 
his  conversion  certainly,  as  is  evident  from  his  writings,  and  probably  long  before.  To 
a  mind  thus  prepared,  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  was  as  a  sudden  burst  of  light. 
It  did  not,  indeed,  show  him  the  original  source  or  purpose  of  existing  evil.  .  .  . 
But  the  new  light  from  heaven  showed  him  Beconciliation,  and  discords  resolved,  in 
the  fulness  of  time,  into  eternal  harmony.  ...  In  this  passage  the  apostle  has  been 
arguing  against  the  notion  that  the  Mosaic  law  had  either  fulfilled  or  abrogated  the 
promise  made  to  Abraham ;  and  the  thought  that  suggests  the  verse  before  us  is, 
that  in  the  giving  of  the  law  Moses  had  intervened  as  a  mediator.  In  reference 
to  this  fact  he  says :  "Now  a  mediator  is  not  of  one ;  but  God  is  one."  Viewed  in 
the  light  of  St.  Paul's  dominant  conception,  with  all  that  it  involves,  of  the  unity  of 
God,  the  following  interpretation  at  once  suggests  itself  to  the  mind  :  "  A  mediator 
is  not  of  one"  (i.e.,  "of  that  which  is  one" — whether  singly  or  collectively — media- 
tion has  no  place  where  there  is  unity);  "but  God  is  one"  (in  the  sense,  with 
all  that  follows  from  it,  ever  present  to  St.  Paul's  mind  when  he  says  etc  6 
Geoc)  :  therefore  (the  conclusion  follows,  though  not  expressed)  the  law,  with  its 
intervening  mediator,  did  not  manifest  God's  unity,  and  the  consequent  unity  of  all 
in  Him.  (J.  Barmby,  B.D.)  That  nothing  should  disturb  our  deep  and  settled 
repose  in  the  immutable  love  and  faithfulness  of  God.  That  the  most  rigid  enact- 
ments of  law  can  never  affect  the  promises  of  Divine  grace,  while  the  grace  revealed 
in  the  promises  mellows  and  modifies  the  rigour  of  law.  That  both  the  law  and 
the  promise  shut  us  up  to  one  only  ground  of  dependence  and  hope  of  eternal  life. 
That  Christianity,  with  its  personal  Saviour  and  remedial  scheme  of  mercy,  is  the 
only  revelation  suited  to  the  moral  and  undeniable  necessities  of  man's  fallen  nature. 
That  the  belief  and  reception  of  the  Christian  revelation  is  the  one  simple  condition 
of  endless  life  and  blessedness.  Such  we  deem  to  be  the  true  exegesis  of  this  con- 
fessedly difficult  text,  and  such  the  profound  truths  involved  in  its  interpretation. 
There  are  no  various  readings  to  perplex  us ;  there  is  no  necessity  for  taking  a  single 
word  out  of  its  ordinary  and  accepted  meaning ;  there  is  no  pretext  for  twisting  or 
wresting  the  apostle's  language,  nor  for  interfering  with  the  chain  of  his  argument. 
His  aim  is  to  bring  out  the  superiority  of  the  gospel  to  the  law :  and  this  he  does 
by  showing  that  whatever  methods  God  may  adopt  in  the  government  of  our  world, 
nothing  can  interfere  with  His  promise  of  grace,  since  that  promise  is  founded  on 
the  immutability  of  His  own  nature,  no  less  than  on  the  depth  and  the  exuberance 
of  His  own  love.  God  is  one,  immutably  and  for  ever  the  same ;  so  that  the  pro- 
mise which  was  given  four  hundred  years  before  the  law  remains  the  same  after 
the  law — as  rich  in  grace,  and  as  pregnant  with  life.  In  this  promise,  or  rather  in 
Him  to  whom  the  promise  refers,  we  can  confide  with  calm  and  joyous  repose, "  per- 
suaded that  neither  life  nor  death,  neither  angels,  nor  principalities,  &c."  {R.  Ferguson, 
LL.D. )  The  one  Mediator : — The  argument  is  based  on  the  fact  that  when  God 
blessed  Abraham,  He  used  a  singular  and  not  a  plural  word,  and  said,  not  "  seeds," 
but  "  Seed : "  •*  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made."  *«  The  Seed," 
therefore,  must  be  One  Individual.  And  who  could  that  single  Individual  be,  but 
Christ  only  ?  Therefore  all  the  promises  in  the  Old  Testament  are  to  Christ.  Not 
primarily,  nor  chiefly,  to  Isaac,  or  to  Jacob,  or  to  Judah,  or  to  any  other  earthly 
descendants ;  but  to  one,  to  Christ.    Stop  a  moment,  and  consider  what  that  asser- 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cwi».  m. 

ti on  involves.  All  the  promises  in  the  Old  Testament  are  to  Jesus  only.  Kay  more, 
all  the  promises  in  the  Bible  centre  in  Jesus.  They  pass  to  us  only  through  Him. 
How  often  have  we  taken  the  comfort  of  some  beautiful  promise  in  Deuteronomy  ; 
or  in  the  Psalms ;  or  the  Proverbs ;  or  in  Isaiah  ;  or  any  of  the  Prophets,  without 
thinking  of  this.  But  not  one  of  those  promises  was  originally  made  to  us.  They 
were  made  to  Christ.  How  then,  could  we  dare  to  appropriate  them,  or  even  to 
touch  them  ?  Where  do  we  find  a  right  or  a  title  to  any  one  of  them  ?  Only  by  a 
union  to  Him  to  whom  they  were  made.  You  must  have  a  part  in  Christ.  You 
must  be  "  in  Him  ;  "  a  member  in  His  mystical  body.  Thus  and  thus  only,  does 
any  promise  really  belong  to  you.  But  the  reasoning  goes  on.  If  all  the  blessing 
is  thus  secured  to  "  the  Seed,"  and  to  all  tbat  are  in  Him,  what  is  the  use  of  the 
law.  "  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?  "  "  The  law  "  is  not  "  covenant,"  it  was 
"  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  "  after  covenant.  The  law  does  not  give  us  the  pro- 
mises. "  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law  ?  "  Our  fallen  nature,  and  our  sins,  made 
it  necessary.  "  It  was  added  (after  the  covenant)  because  of  transgressions,"  to  pre- 
vent transgressions ;  to  punish  transgressions ;  but  not  to  give  pardon,  or  peaoe,  or 
salvation,  or  heaven.  It  was  a  beautiful  and  holy  law ;  and  if  any  law  could  have 
saved  a  man,  that  would  have  saved  him.  "  If  there  had  been  a  law  given  which 
could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  law."  But  no 
law  can  give  life.  But  now  let  us  consider  the  mode  of  the  giving  of  that  law 
which  St.  Paul  introduces  as  a  further  link  in  his  chain  of  argument.  "  It  wag 
ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator  "  (see  Deut.  xxxiii.  2).  It  is  clear, 
therefore,  that  in  some  way,  at  the  giving  of  the  law  on  mount  Sinai,  "angels" 
were  employed  for  the  ordering,  disposing,  and  arranging  the  solemnities  of  that 
awful  occasion.  St.  Paul  introduces  the  fact  to  enhance  the  glory  of  the  "  second  " 
and  better  "  covenant ";  he  goes  on  to  a  climax ;  the  first  covenant  was  very  glorious, 
"  it  was  ordained  by  angels  " ;  but  how  much  more  glorious  when  Christ  did  all  Him 
self,  in  His  own  Person,  by  His  own  act,  alone  1  Then  St.  Paul  passes — from  "  the 
angels,"  and  the  order  of  the  solemnities  on  mount  Sinai — to  "  the  mediator,"  Moses, 
who  was  employed  by  God  to  communicate  God's  will  to  man,  the  Creator's  law  to 
His  creatures.  "  It  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator."  And  at 
that  word  "  mediator  "  St  Paul  (as  is  his  custom),  breaks  off  to  the  thoughts  which 
that  word  "  mediator  "  suggested  to  his  mind.  "  A  mediator  I  " — what  is  it  ?  What 
does  that  word  involve  ?  And  so  we  come  to  the  text,  "  Now  a  mediator  is  not  a 
mediator  of  one  ;  but  God  is  one."  This  short  sentence  is  so  difficult  in  its  concise- 
ness, so  abstruse,  and  capable  of  so  many  meanings,  that  it  is  not  too  much  to  say 
that  it  has  more  interpretations  than  any  other  passage  in  the  Bible.  Amongst  all 
the  meanings,  however,  which  have  been  attached  to  it,  there  are  two  which  stand 
out  so  distinct,  and  are  far  superior  (as  far  as  I  can  judge)  to  all  the  rest,  that  the 
true  understanding  of  the  words  must  be,  I  think,  in  one  or  the  other,  or  in  both 
unitedly.  The  one  is  this.  "  Now  a  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one."  A  "  medi- 
ator  "  implies  that  there  are  two  parties  concerned.  There  cannot  be  mediators 
unless  there  are  two  between  whom  "  the  mediator  "  is  to  act.  And  the  two  must 
be,  more  or  less,  at  variance,  otherwise  there  would  be  no  need,  or  occasion,  for  the 
mediation.  Here,  then,  there  must  be  two.  Two  ?  God  is  one  of  the  two,  one  of 
those  two  between  whom  the  mediation  takes  place.  Then,  who  was  the  other  ? 
Man.  In  what  condition,  then,  must  man  be  ?  At  enmity  with  God  1  Else,  he 
would  not  need  a  mediation.  The  other  interpretation  is  this.  The  words  are  in- 
tended to  draw  a  contrast  between  the  law  and  the  gospel.  The  mediation  of  the 
law — which  was  conducted  by  Moses — was  of  the  nature  of  a  contract  between  two 
parties — God,  on  the  one  side,  man  on  the  other.  And  each  must  fulfil  his  part  in 
the  contract,  or  else  it  would  not  be  valid.  Therefore  the  contract  of  the  law,  ob- 
serve this !  leaves  the  issue  uncertain — for  it  depended,  on  one  side,  on  man's 
obedience,  which  was  an  exceedingly  doubtful  thing  ;  it  certainly  cannot  be  depended 
upon  I  But  just  the  contrary  to  that  is  the  contract  of  the  gospel.  In  that  contract 
God  is  all  in  all.  It  depends  on  the  will  and  power  of  God.  It  is  all,  from  begin- 
ning to  end,  His  work.  He  elects  the  soul :  He  makes  the  faith :  He  makes  the 
obedience :  He  makes  the  holiness ;  and  He  has  provided,  and  He  Himself  gives, 
and  is,  the  reward.  There  is  nothing  but  God  in  it.  So  the  unity  of  God  is  com- 
plete. There  is  nothing  but  God.  "God  is  one."  The  mediation  is  entirely 
different  from  the  mediation  of  the  law.  There,  the  parties  mediated,  were  two. 
Here,  all  are  one.  God  the  Author,  God  the  Finisher ;  only  God  on  either  side,  in 
His  electing  love,  in  the  sinner's  penitence,  in  the  sinner's  peace,  in  the  sinner's 
eternal  life.     It  is  all  God.    One ;  alone.    Of  these  two  explanations  I  myself  very 


OKAf.  ru.]  GALATIANS.  201 

much  prefer  the  first.  But  why  may  we  not  embrace  the  two,  reading  the  verse 
thus  ?  Man  is  separate  from  God.  The  fact  that  there  is  a  Mediator,  the  necessity 
of  a  Mediator,  proves  it.  We  are  all  at  variance  with  God.  A  controversy  between 
a  man  and  God  is,  on  reasonable  and  rational  principles,  hopeless.  I  am  one  and 
alone  in  my  deep,  sinful  degradation.  God  is  one  and  alone  in  the  solitude  of  His 
infinite  and  unapproachable  holiness.  There  is  not  the  vestige  of  a  hope  for  me 
unless  there  be  a  Mediator.  "But  God  is  one."  One,  up  in  heaven,  in  His  fore- 
ordaining love ;  one,  in  my  poor  heart,  working  there  in  His  grace  and  mercy ; 
one,  in  His  eternal  sovereignty ;  one,  in  His  power  and  will  to  make  me  all  He 
would  have  me  to  be  ;  one  to  plan,  one  to  execute,  His  grand  design.  One  to  begin, 
ana  one  to  perfect,  my  salvation.  One  to  save  me  and  glorify  Himself  by  my  ever- 
lasting happiness.  "  A  mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one  " — then  God  and  I  are 
at  enmity.  "But  God  is  one."  And,  in  His  unity,  I  and  God  are  one  for  ever. 
(Jame*  Vaughan,  M.A.)  A  mediator : — I.  His  office — to  act  between  two  parties 
— needed  betwixt  God  and  man.  II.  His  qualifications — friendly  relations  with 
both  parties — strict  justice  and  impartiality.  III.  His  functions — to  effect  recon- 
ciliation— by  bringing  both  together — on  a  common  ground.  IV.  His  authority — 
Divine,  for  God  is  one — consequently  there  is  but  one  mediator,  the  man  Christ 
Jesus — Moses  was  but  a  shadow  of  the  true.  (J.  Lyth.)  The  mediation  of  Christ : — 
I.  Effects  reconciliation  between  God  and  man.  II.  Is  the  realization  of  the  idea 
faintly  depicted  in  the  person  of  Moses — He  gives  the  law  of  the  Spirit — provides 
the  true  sacrifice — makes  everlasting  intercession.  III.  Is  based  upon  the  original 
promise  (v.  21) — God  is  one,  therefore  supreme — unchangeable — almighty  to  effect 
His  purpose  of  grace.     (Hid.) 

Yer.  21.  Is  the  lair,  then,  against  the  promises  of  God? — The  harmony  between 
the  law  and  the  gospel : — I.  Thb  gospel  gift  of  bighteodsness  is  not  made  op  none 
effect  by  the  law.  Abraham  was  justified  by  faith.  1.  Which  is  God's  old  cove- 
nant.     2.  Besting  on  God's  own  promises.     3.  And  still  endures.     II.  The  law  is 

NOT  MADE  OF  NONE  EFFECT  BY  THE  GOSPEL  GIFT  OF  BIGHTEOUSNESS.    The  law  is — 1.  For 

conviction.  2.  Discovers  need  for  righteousness.  3.  Leads  to  righteousness  by  lead- 
ing to  Christ.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.)  If  the  law  had  been  for  the  same  end  as  the 
gospel,  for  man  ruined  and  sinful  to  obtain  life  and  salvation  by  it  as  well  as  the 
gospel,  then  they  might  have  been  supposed  to  contradict  one  another ;  but  since 
they  are  given  for  different  purposes,  they  are  but  different  revelations  of  God  which 
are  happily  subordinate  one  to  another,  and  their  different  ends  and  designs  are  both 
obtained.     (I.  Watts,  D.D.)  The  harmony  of  revelation: — There  is  a  mighty 

growth  in  the  discovery  of  God's  nature  and  will,  but  never  a  point  at  which  we  are 
brought  to  a  pause  by  a  manifest  contradiction  of  one  part  with  another.  In  read- 
ing the  Bible  we  always  look  on  the  same  landscape,  the  only  difference  being  that 
as  we  take  in  more  of  its  statements,  more  and  more  of  the  mist  is  rolled  away 
from  the  horizon,  so  that  the  eye  can  behold  a  wider  sweep  of  its  beauty.  There  is 
a  vast  difference  between  the  New  Testament  and  the  Old,  but  it  is  the  difference 
between  two  parts  of  one  whole.  It  is  no  new  landscape  which  opens  on  our  gaze,  as 
the  town  and  the  forest  come  out  from  the  shadow,  and  fill  up  the  blanks  in  the  glorious 
panorama  ;  it  is  no  new  planet  which  comes  travelling  in  its  majesty,  as  the  cres- 
cent deepens  into  the  circle,  and  the  line  of  faint  light  gives  place  to  the  rich  globe 
of  silver;  and  it  is  no  fresh  religion  which  is  made  known  astbe  brief  notices  given 
to  patriarchs  expand  into  the  institutions  of  the  law,  under  the  teachings  of  pro- 
phecy, till  at  length  in  the  days  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  they  burst  into  magni- 
ficence, and  fill  a  world  with  redemption.  It  is  throughout  the  same  system,  and 
revelation  has  been  only  the  gradual  development  of  this  system — the  drawing  up  of 
another  fold  of  the  veil  from  the  landscape,  the  adding  of  another  stripe  of  light  to 
the  crescent ;  so  that  the  fathers  of  our  race,  and  ourselves,  look  on  the  same  ar- 
rangements for  human  deliverance,  though  to  them  there  was  nothing  but  cloudy 
expanse,  with  here  and  there  a  prominent  landmark,  whilst  to  us,  though  the  horizon 
loses  itself  in  the  far-off  eternity,  every  object  of  personal  interest  is  exhibited  in 
beauty  and  distinctness.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  importance  of  the  law : — Law,  as 
law,  can  do  nothing  but  enjoin  the  right,  and  then,  justify  on  perfect  obedience,  or 
condemn  on  proved  violation.  A  sinful  man,  hearing  the  law  and  nothing  else,  or 
hearing  it  more  distinctly,  and  with  more  corroborating  consciousness,  than  the  pro- 
vision for  relief  is  perceived  in  its  intention  or  experienced  in  fact,  can  only  despair 
and  die.  Strength  withers  with  the  extinction  of  hope ;  effort  is  vain  when  per- 
formance is  impossible  (see  Bom.  viii.  3, 4).    The  law  was  weak  beoause  corrupuoa 


20J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

was  strong ;  and  corruption  strong  because  the  sense  of  guilt  could  not  be  removed. 
In  proportion,  in  fact,  to  its  anxiety  to  realize  the  ideal  of  virtue,  and  its  spiritual 
insight  into  the  inefficacy  of  ritual  observances,  humanity,  while  under  the  law, 
was  disheartened  and  bewildered,  and  was  thus  made  to  long  for  deliverance  and 
life.  Sometimes  it  felt  goaded  and  exasperated,  and  became  desperate  and  reckless 
from  the  feeling  of  its  helplessness  (Rom.  vii.  5).  The  gospel  brings  hope  to  the 
despairing  and  life  to  the  dead,  by  its  ample  arrangements  for  both  pardon  and 
strength  ;  by  its  atoning  sacrifice  and  sanctifying  spirit.  Obedience  becomes  pos- 
sible because  it  may  be  of  another  sort,  and  is  to  be  presented  for  a  different  object. 
It  is  acceptable  to  God  as  the  result  of  what  He  has  done,  not  as  a  ground  of  what 
He  is  to  do.  The  impulses  and  instincts  of  the  Divine  nature  of  which  the  saved 
are  partakers,  make  duty  a  necessity,  labour  a  delight,  obedience  a  spontaneous 
service,  conformity  to  the  law  a  privilege  and  a  joy.  (T.  Binney,  D.D.)  The  law  use- 
ful:— No  doubt  the  law  restrains  us  ;  but  all  chains  are  not  fetters,  nor  are  all  wallg 
the  gloomy  precincts  of  a  gaol.  It  is  a  blessed  chain  by  which  the  ship,  now  buried 
in  the  trough,  and  now  rising  on  the  top  of  the  sea,  rides  at  anchor,  and  outlives  the 
storm.  The  condemned  would  give  worlds  to  break  his  chain,  but  the  sailor 
trembles  lest  his  should  snap ;  and  when  the  grey  morning  breaks  on  the  wild  lee 
shore,  all  strewn  with  wrecks  and  corpses,  he  blesses  God  for  the  good  iron  that  stood 
the  strain.  The  pale  captive  eyes  his  high  prison  wall,  to  curse  the  man  who  built 
it,  and  envies  the  little  bird  that,  perched  upon  its  summit,  sings  merrily,  and  flies 
away  on  wings  of  freedom ;  but  were  you  travelling  some  Alpine  pass,  where  the 
narrow  road,  cut  out  of  the  face  of  the  rock,  hung  over  a  frightful  gorge,  it  is  with 
other  eyes  you  would  look  on  the  wall  that  restrains  your  restive  steed  from  back- 
ing into  the  gulf  below.  Such  are  the  restraints  God's  law  imposes — no  other.  It 
is  a  fence  from  evil — nothing  else.  I  challenge  theworldto  pntits  finger  onany  one  of 
these  Ten  Commandments  which  is  not  meant  and  calculated  to  keep  us  from  harm- 
ing ourselves  or  hurting  others.  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  Contrasts  : — Up  to  this  point  the 
apostle  has  contrasted  the  promise  made  to  Abraham,  the  fulfilment  of  which  was  in 
the  gospel,  with  the  law  of  Moses  in  these  particulars  : — 1.  The  promise  was  made  first 
four  hundred  and  thirty  years  before  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Sinai,  and  that  which  is 
given  afterwards  cannot  weaken  the  older  covenant.  2.  The  covenant  of  promise 
was  one  of  blessing  to  mankind,  the  law  regarded  transgressions.  3.  The  promise 
is  absolute  and  without  limitation  of  time ;  the  blessing  will  be  for  ever,  the  law  is 
given  until  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  4.  The  promise  was  made  by  God  Himself, 
without  the  intervention  of  others.  The  law  was  ordained  by  the  ministry  of  angels. 
5.  The  promise  was  made  without  any  mediator,  the  law  was  given  to  the  people 
by  the  hands  of  Moses.  The  law  here  spoken  of  by  the  apostle  is  the  ceremonial 
law ;  not  that  of  the  Decalogue ;  not  the  moral  law,  which  was  reimposed,  but  not 
for  the  first  time  given  at  Sinai.     (W.  Denton,  M.A.j 

Vers.  22,  23.  But  the  Scripture  hath  concluded  all  tinder  sin. — A  charge  of 
sin : — I.  The  Scriptube  statement  op  man's  natukal  condition.  And  what  now 
do  you  expect  to  hear  ?  That  man,  though  fallen  and  frail,  has  nevertheless  many 
native  virtues  and  excellences  ?  that,  if  his  conduct  be  sometimes  amiss,  yet  bia 
heart  is  good?  These  are,  I  know,  the  vain  imaginations  which  multitudes 
indulge  : — but  they  receive  no  countenance  from  Holy  Scripture.  No — if  God's 
Word  is  to  decide,  you  will  find  that — 1.  The  Scripture  brings  against  man  a  charge 
of  sin.  As  preparatory  to  this,  the  Bible  fully  sets  forth  man's  duty :  sometimes 
dwelling  on  the  several  particulars  of  the  ten  commandments;  at  other  times,  com- 
prehensively demanding  " Love "  as  " the  fulfilling"  of  the  whole  law;  expanding 
this,  again,  into  the  two  branches  of  that  love — love  to  God,  love  to  man ;  or  point- 
ing to  still  more  special  duties,  arising  out  of  special  relations  and  situations  in 
life.  Furthermore,  we  are  told,  that  "  whoso  offendeth  in  one  point  is  guilty  of 
all " — he  has  broken  through  that  hedge  of  the  law,  which  should  have  kept  him 
from  all  sin.  After  laying  down  a  strict  principle  like  this,  it  ceases  to  be  surprising, 
that  the  Scripture  invariably  addresses  man  as  a  sinner.  For  man's  own  conscience 
must  tell  him  that  God's  perfect  law  has  not  been  kept.  2.  On  this  charge  the 
Scripture  shuts  man  up  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  "  hath  concluded  ") 
as  already  sentenced  and  condemned.  Man  is  not  merely  in  danger  of  this 
sentence ;  it  is  passed  on  him  already.  Living  in  this  world,  he  is  but  a  prisoner 
at  large.  God's  justice  has  got  firm  hold  of  him ;  and  wander  where  he  may,  and 
vaunt  as  he  likes,  the  day  of  execution  is  coming  nearer  and  nearer — and  he  cannot 
tscape.     3.  All  men,  without  a  single  exception,  come  under  this  charge.     All 


oiu*.  in.]  QALATIANS.  S63 

nations.  All  ranks.  All  ages.  4.  The  charge  is  incessantly  reiterated,  and 
pressed  again  and  again.  II.  The  design  with  which  this  statement  is  so 
babnestly  insisted  upon.  Why  do  the  Scriptures  thus  shut  up  all  men  under  the 
charge  of  sin.  St.  Paul  replies — "  that  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  may 
be  given  to  them  that  believe."  The  object  aimed  at,  in  the  Scripture  doctrine  of 
man's  sin,  was—  1.  To  show  the  reasonableness  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
alone.  Though  man  be  guilty,  condemned,  and  under  actual  sentence ;  yet  his 
condition,  so  long  as  life  endures,  is  not  hopeless.  There  is  in  the  same  Scripture 
a  promise — a  promise  of  salvation.  2.  To  compel  sinners  actually  to  accept  the 
promise  by  believing  in  Christ.  The  terrors  of  God  are  really  mercies ;  they  are 
the  wholesome  rod  by  which  the  lost  sheep  are  driven  back  to  that  gracious  fold, 
where  they  may  remain  safe,  under  the  care  of  the  good  shepherd,  Jesus  Christ. 
In  conclusion,  I  ask,  (1)  Are  you  not  sinners  ?  Methinks  there  should  be  no  doubt 
on  this  head.  (2)  Is  salvation  yet  given  to  you?  In  other  words,  have  you 
believed  in  Jesns  Christ  ?  (3)  What  will  ye  do  in  the  end — that  end  which  is 
shortly  approaching — death — judgment  ?  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  great  prison : — 
How  much  is  declared  in  these  few  words !  They  set  forth  the  whole  counsel  of 
God  with  regard  to  mankind.  They  show  us  what  man  is  by  nature,  and  what  he 
may  become  by  grace :  and  they  point  out  the  only  way  in  which  it  is  possible  for 
him  to  pass  from  one  of  these  states  to  the  other.  God,  speaking  to  man  through 
His  Holy  Scriptures,  hath  concluded  all  under  sin.  He  has,  so  to  say,  shut  up  all 
mankind  together  in  the  same  great  prisonhouse  of  sin.  How  has  He  done  this  ? 
When  a  conqueror  overruns  a  country,  he  will  sometimes  diive  the  inhabitants,  or 
at  least  a  large  part  of  them,  into  bondage  (e.g.,  Shalmaneser,  Nebuchadnezzar). 
Now  is  this  the  way  in  which  God  concluded  all  mankind  under  sin  ?  by  driving 
them  into  sin,  and  shutting  them  up  in  it  ?  God  forbid  !  Satan  does  indeed  draw 
and  drive  men  into  sin  :  this  is  the  accursed  work  of  his  restless  Sabbathless  life  : 
and  when  he  has  got  them  there,  he  binds  them  fast,  and  will  not  let  them  flee  from 
his  toils.  He  builds  a  high  wall  of  sin  all  round  them,  so  that  they  shall  not  look 
over  it  into  the  goodly  land  beyond :  and  here  he  shuts  them  all  up  together,  sinner 
with  sinner,  and  sinner  with  sinner,  a  never-ending  ghastly  multitude,  that  they 
may  encourage  and  pamper  each  other  in  wickedness,  and  that  no  example,  no 
voice  of  holiness,  may  ever  reach  and  startle  them.  This  is  the  way  in  which  Satan 
would  conclude  all  mankind  under  sin,  in  which  he  does  conclude  all  such  as  give 
themselves  up  to  him,  to  work  his  bidding.  But  God  never  drove,  never  drew  any 
man  into  sin.  Throughout  His  Scriptures  He  is  calling  to  us  to  come  out  from  the 
deadly  land,  from  the  loathsome  plague-breathing  dungeon  of  sin.  By  His  com- 
mandments, by  entreaties,  by  threats,  by  promises,  He  calls  us  to  come  out  from 
sin.  So  that,  when  the  Scripture  concludes,  or  shuts  up  all  men  together  under 
sin,  it  is  not  by  driving  them  into  sin,  but  for  the  sake  of  calling  them  out  from  it.  In 
order  however  that  men  should  come  forth  from  a  place,  in  order  that  they  should 
desire  to  come  forth,  it  is  necessary  they  should  know  that  they  are  there,  that  they 
should  know  too  what  sort  of  a  place  it  is,  how  dismal,  how  miserable,  how  terrible. 
How  unwilling  are  we  to  be  persuaded  that  the  prison  can  indeed  be  a  prison !  To 
ns  at  least,  we  feel  confident,  it  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  For  how  can  it  be  a  prison, 
we  say  to  ourselves,  when  there  are  no  bare  walls  to  be  seen  ?  when  the  walls  are 
all  glittering  with  precious  stones,  and  are  far  more  like  the  walls  of  a  palace? 
How  can  it  be  a  prison,  when  it  is  so  vast,  stretching  out  to  the  furthermost  parts 
of  the  earth,  and  all  mankind  are  walking  about  in  it  ?  Nay,  how  can  it  be  a 
prison,  when  all  the  people  in  it  are  doing  just  what  they  like,  are  following  the 
lusts  of  their  own  hearts,  are  drinking  and  rioting  and  thieving  and  lying,  without 
any  fear  of  law,  without  any  regard  for  truth,  without  any  restraint  to  check  them  ? 
And  what  is  there  to  keep  them  from  going  out  whenever  they  please  ?  There  are 
no  bars,  no  locks,  no  chains,  no  jailor.  For  this  is  the  craft  and  subtilty  of  the 
evil  one, — that  he  makes  us  fancy  we  are  free,  when  we  are  in  prison :  he  makes  us 
fancy  that  we  are  at  liberty,  when  we  are  in  bondage :  he  makes  us  fancy  that  we 
are  our  own  masters,  when  we  are  his  slaves :  he  blinds  and  cheats  and  stupefies 
as,  until  we  deem  we  are  doing  our  own  will,  and  pursuing  our  own  pleasure,  when 
in  fact  we  are  drudging  in  his  toils,  and  rushing  into  the  jaws  of  destruction  before 
his  lashing  scourge.  Therefore,  in  order  tbat  our  eyes  might  be  open  to  the  misery 
of  our  condition,  that  we  might  see  our  danger  before  it  was  too  late,  God  was 
mercifully  pleased  to  give  us  His  Scriptures,  wherein  He  declares  in  the  ears  of  all 
mankind,  that  one  and  all  are  concluded  under  sin ;  that,  however  its  appearance 
may  deceive  as,  sin  is  not  a  palace  but  a  prison,  that  in  that  prison  we  are  all  shut 


204  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [cha».  m. 

up,  »nd  that  no  earthly  power  can  deliver  ns  out  of  it.  Gcd,  by  the  voice  of  His 
Scripture,  hath  concluded  all  under  sin.  Now  suppose  that  you  were  to  be  carried 
before  an  earthly  court  of  justice,  and  that  one  sweeping  accusation  were  to  be 
brought  against  you ;  suppose  that  you  were  to  be  found  guilty  to  the  full  extent  of 
that  accusation,  and  that  the  very  excuses  you  set  up  were  the  complete  proof  of 
your  guilt, — what  would  follow?  The  judge  would  straightway  pass  sentence  upon 
you ;  and  you  would  all  be  condemned  to  suffer  punishment,  according  to  the 
measure  of  your  offence.  Such  would  be  the  course  of  things,  if  you  were  taken 
before  an  earthly  court  of  justice.  The  verdict  is  followed  by  the  sentence;  and 
they  who  are  found  guilty  are  condemned.  And  must  we  not  expect  that  the  course 
of  things  should  be  the  very  same,  when  we  are  carried  before  a  heavenly  court  of 
justice?  Surely  they  who  are  found  utterly  guilty,  whose  own  mouth  declares 
their  guilt,  must  likewise  be  condemned.  And  yet  St.  Paul  assures  us  that  God  has 
concluded  all  u»der  sin,  not  in  order  that  He  may  stretch  forth  His  arm,  and  take 
vengeance  on  His  enemies,  and  sweep  them  away  from  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  but  in 
order  that  the  promise  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be  given  to  those  who  believe. 
This  has  ever  been  the  one  great  end  of  all  God's  ordinances,  both  at  first  in  the 
creation,  and  ever  since  in  the  government  of  the  world.  His  purpose  was  from 
the  beginning  to  pour  out  all  the  blessings  which  infinite  wisdom  could  conceive, 
and  infinite  power  could  bring  to  pass,  upon  His  creatures.  But  why  waB  it  neces- 
sary that  all  should  be  concluded  by  the  Scriptures  under  sin  ?  Would  it  not  have 
been  enough  to  set  the  promise  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  before  men,  without  saying 
anything  about  the  sins  by  which  they  were  bound?  No,  my  brethren,  it  would  not 
have  been  enough.  Jesus  Christ  came  as  a  Deliverer :  and  who  will  welcome  and 
rejoice  in  a  deliverer,  unless  he  knows  that  there  is  something  from  which  he  needs 
to  be  delivered,  unless  he  feels  that  he  is  in  a  wretched  galling  bondage,  and  that 
he  cannot  of  himself  burst  his  chains,  that  he  cannot  throw  off  his  yoke  ?  But 
when  a  man's  eyes  are  opened  to  see  the  prison  in  which  he  is  shut  up,  to  see  and 
feel  the  chains  which  are  fast  bound  round  his  soul,  and  have  eaten  into  it, — when 
he  has  learnt  to  see  and  to  know  that  the  pleasures,  whatever  they  may  be,  of  sin 
are  only,  like  the  fleshpots  of  Egypt,  intoxicating  drugs,  given  to  him  to  deprive 
him  of  all  sense  of  his  captivity, — then  will  he  long  for  a  deliverer,  and  rejoice  on 
hearing  of  his  approach,  and  hail  him  when  he  comes  into  view,  and  follow  him 
whithersoever  he  may  lead.     (J.  C.  Hare,  M.A.)  The  reasonableness  of  faith  : — 

Let  us  try  to  realize  what  would  have  been  Paul's  line  of  argument  with  modern 
schools  who  construct  their  own  methods  of  self  salvation.  I.  The  school  of  natural 
bxligion  holds  that  men  are  bound  to  obedience.  But  this  law  has  been  and  is 
constantly  violated.  What  now?  Is  God  to  perpetually  interpose  with  an  act  of 
oblivion?  If  so,  what  becomes  of  his  admitted  moral  government?  The  very 
foundations  of  natural  religion  are  destroyed  by  such  a  supposition.  Then  the 
only  alternative  is  the  gospel  system  of  mediation  by  means  of  which  sin  may  be 
forgiven  and  God  justified.  H.  The  school  of  classical  morality  aims  at  the 
exaltation  of  the  individual  by  a  species  of  moral  accomplishment.  But  where  has 
the  ideal  been  realized  outside  of  Christianity?  If  sincere,  therefore,  this  school 
must  be  grievously  disappointed  as  they  are  brought  face  to  face  with  universal 
proof 8  of  f;hV. Scripture  doctrine  of  man's  depravity,  and  so  they  are  "shut  up" 
to  the  only  means  of  its  removal,  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  through  faith. 
III.  The  school  of  fine  feeling  and  poetic  sentiment  worships  what  is  beautiful 
in  human  character.  But  look  at  the  state  of  the  world.  That  beauty  is  wanting, 
and  so  they  are  shut  up  to  the  operation  of  that  Spirit  who  alone  can  produce  what 
is  pure,  lovely,  and  of  good  report.  {Dr.  Chalmers.)  The  reasonablfnesn  of  the 
gospel : — The  gospel  is  a  reasonable  scheme,  on  the  principle  that  whatever  other 
way  is  divised  is  found  on  trial  to  be  deficient :  so  that  man  is  shut  up  to  the  gospel 
as  his  only  resource.  In  demonstrating  this  Paul  introduces  the  law  as  a  successful 
general  which  outmanoeuvres  man  in  his  every  attempt  at  escape,  and  so  compels 
nim  to  await  the  throwing  open  of  God's  method  of  deliverance.    I.  We  must 

ASSUME   IN   MAN   THE    WORKINGS   OF   SPIRITUAL   SOLICITUDE  AND  ANXIETY.        The  Crying 

sin  of  the  day  is  apathy,  and  many  men  are  shut  up  in  the  prison  of  their  own 
moral  listlessness.  But,  presuming  an  awakened  state,  we  must  examine  the 
avenues  through  which  he  tries  to  enter  heaven,  and  the  tactics  of  the  law  in  inter- 
cepting him.  II.  Repentance  is  one  of  these  avenues :  but  in  his  attempt  to  escape 
by  it  man  is  outgeneralled  by  the  law,  which  refuses  to  admit  the  efficacy  of  sorrow 
and  amendment,  crying,  •'  do  this  and  live,"  "fail  to  do  so  and  die."  III.  Forced 
back  from  this  outlet,  men  endeavour  to  take  refuge  in  the  supposed  mercy  o»  Goo. 


chip,  m.]  GALATIANS.  205 

Bat  the  law  comes  forward  and  dislodges  them  by  showing  that  God  has  left  no 
ground  for  the  hope  of  unconditional  forgiveness.  IV.  Thus  men  are  shut  up  by  the 
*aw  to  the  need  op  A  surett.  It  proves  to  the  sinner — 1.  That  his  curse  must  be 
endured.  2.  That  it  has  been  endured  by  Christ  the  only  Saviour.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  great  jail,  and  how  to  get  out  of  it : — We  preach,  at  God's  command,  the  way 
of  salvation  by  mercy,  not  by  merit;  by  faith,  not  by  works :  by  grace,  not  by  the 
efforts  of  men.  I.  A  crowded  prison.  All  are  shut  up  under  sin.  1.  The  jailer — 
Scripture,  (a)  A  lawful  authority,  for  it  is  not  the  word  of  man,  but  of  the  Spirit 
of  God.  (b)  A  powerful  authority,  for  it  has  the  strength  of  the  Almighty  to 
support  it.  2.  The  prisoners— all.  (a)  Heathen  (Rom.  i.  18-21).  (b)  The  out- 
wardly moral,  (c)  The  sincerely  religious.  3.  The  prison.  No  escape  from  ven- 
geance of  broken  law.  One  offence  enough  to  keep  a  sinner  bound  for  ever  in 
misery  and  degradation.  II.  A  glorious  deliverance.  Jesus  opens  the  prison 
door,  and  all  who  will  may  go  free.  1.  This  deliverance  by  Jesus  is  complete.  A 
slave  before,  a  child  now ;  no  longer  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.  Guiding 
principle  formerly  was,  "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live  " ;  it  now  is,  *'  I  am  saved, 
and  so  I  love  to  serve  my  God."  The  man  now  does  not  work  for  wages,  and 
expect  to  win  a  reward  by  merit ;  he  is  a  saved  man,  and  he  has  all  he  needs ;  for 
Christ  is  his,  and  Christ  is  all.  2.  This  deliverance  comes  to  men  by  promise.  No 
bargain — the  free  gift  of  God's  sovereign  good-will.  3.  Th«  promised  deliverance  is 
not  made  to  works,  but  only  to  faith.  4.  The  faith  necessary  for  appropriating  the 
promised  deliverance,  is  faith  in  Christ.  Not  faith  in  yourself,  or  in  a  priest,  or  in 
sacraments,  or  in  a  set  of  doctrines ;  but  you  must  believe  that  Christ  the  Son  of 
God  came  on  earth  and  became  a  man,  took  your  sins  upon  His  shoulders,  bore 
them  up  to  the  tree,  and  suffered  what  was  due  for  your  sins  in  His  own  person  on 
the  cross ;  and  you  must  trust  yourself  with  Him,  with  Him  fully,  with  Him  alone, 
and  with  all  your  heart :  and  if  you  do  so,  the  promise  will  be  fulfilled  to  you.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  true  principle  of  salvation,  and  the  importance  of  acting  upon 
it : — In  every  work  which  we  undertake,  it  is  most  important  that  we  should  act 
upon  right  principles  ;  for  if  we  are  misled  upon  essential  points,  our  efforts  will  be 
wasted,  since  success  cannot  possibly  be  the  result.  A  man  may  study  the  stars  as 
long  as  he  pleases,  but  he  certainly  will  not  come  to  right  conclusions  if  he  calcu- 
lates tbeir  courses  upon  the  theory  that  they  daily  revolve  round  the  earth  as  a 
centre.  The  alchymists  were  earnest  even  to  enthusiasm,  but  the  object  of  their 
pursuit  was  unattainable,  and  the  theories  which  guided  their  investigations  were 
absurd,  and  therefore  they  exhibited  a  sorrowful  spectacle  of  perseverance  mis- 
applied, and  labour  thrown  away.  In  mechanics  the  most  ingenious  contriver 
must  fail  if  he  forgets  the  law  of  gravitation.  You  must  proceed  upon  right  prin- 
ciples, or  disappointment  awaits  you.  Now,  the  greatest  matter  of  concern  for  any 
one  of  us  is  the  eternal  salvation  of  our  soul.  We  need  to  be  saved,  and,  according 
to  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  there  is  but  one  way  of  salvation ;  but  that  way  does  not 
happen  to  be  in  favour  among  the  sons  of  men.  The  great  popular  principle, 
popular  all  over  the  world,  no  matter  whether  the  people  happen  to  be  Protestant 
or  Catholic,  Parsee  or  Mahomedan,  Brahminist  or  Buddhist,  is  self-salvation — they 
would  reach  eternal  life  by  merit.  There  are  differences  about  what  is  done,  but 
the  great  universal  principle  of  unregenerate  man  is  that  he  is,  somehow  or  other, 
to  save  himself.  This  is  his  principle;  and  the  further  he  goes  in  it,  the  less 
likely  is  he  to  be  saved.  (Ibid.)  Suitability  of  the  Divine  plan  of  salvation  to 
man's  necessities : — Objections  are  continually  raised  to  the  Divine  plan  of  salvation. 
The  world's  plan  of  salvation  is,  "  Do" ;  the  Bible  says,  "  It  is  all  done;  accept  it 
as  a  free  gift."  The  gospel  way  of  salvation  is,  Christ  has  saved  His  people,  and  as 
many  as  trust  in  Him  are  His  people,  and  are  saved.  Just  think  for  a  minute,  is 
not  this  way  of  salvation  the  only  one  which  would  be  suited  to  all  sorts  and 
conditions  of  men  ?  Dear  sir,  you  yourself  may  be  a  man  of  excellent  disposition, 
and  of  admirable  habits ;  I  will  suppose  that  the  salvation  to  be  preached  by  us 
was  exactly  such  as  would  be  suitable  to  such  a  person  as  you  believe  yourself  to  be, 
but  would  not  this  be  a  very  unfortunate  thing  for  many  others?  Are  there  not 
living  within  your  observation  many  persons  who  are  far  below  you  in  aeral 
character?  Do  you  not  know  of  whole  swarms  of  your  fellow-creatures  whose 
outward  life  is  utterly  defiled?  Some  of  these  are  conscious  of  their  degradation, 
and  would  fain  rise  out  of  it :  would  you  have  them  left  to  despair  ?  A  way  of 
salvation  suited  to  the  righteous  it  is  clear  would  not  suit  them :  are  they  to  be 
overlooked  ?  Would  you  have  salvation  put  up  to  an  examination  like  a  place  in 
the  Civil  Service,  and  only  those  allowed  to  pass  who  are  as  good  as  you  are  t    Arc 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

all  beneath  your  level  to  perish  ?    I  feel  sure  yon  love  your  fellow-men  enough  to 
say,  "  No ;  let  the  plan  of  salvation  be  such  as  to  save  the  most  reprobate  of  men." 
Then  I  ask  you,  what  plan  could  there  be  but  this  one,  that  God  freely  forgives  for 
Christ's  sake  even  the  greatest  offenders,  if  they  turn  to  Him  and  put  their  trust  in 
His  dear  Son  ?     (Ibid.)        God  must  be  accepted  on  His  own  terms : — A  ship's  crew 
mutinied  against  their  commander,  who  was  the  king's  eon  ;  and  not  only  refused 
to  obey  him,  but  threw  him  overboard  with  the  intention  of  depriving  him  of  life. 
Feeling  their  condition  desperate,  they  commenced  pirates,  and  while  disorder  and 
every  evil  work  prevailed  among  themselves,  they  carried  terror  and  misery  over 
the  ocean  and  into  all  the  surrounding  coasts.    The  prince,  contrary  to  all  proba- 
bility,  reached  the  shore  in  safety,  and  on  arriving  at  his  father's  palace,  instead 
of  urging  the  punishment  of  those  who  meant  to  murder  him,  employed  all  his 
influence,  and  with  success,  to  induce  his  justly-offended  parent  to  lay  aside  all 
thoughts  of  vengeance,  and  even  to  despatch  immediately  heralds  of  mercy  offering 
%  free  pardon  to  them  if  they  would  but  acknowledge  the  prince  as  their  saviour 
and  ruler,  and  submit  to  be  guided  by  him  in  all  their  future  proceedings ;  but 
reminding  them  that  if  they  did  not  accede  to  this  overture  of  mercy,  sooner  or 
later  they  must  fall  into  the  hands  of  some  of  his  war- vessels,  and  must  count  on 
being  dealt  with  according  to  the  rigour  of  the  law.    On  the  messengers  of  mercy 
approaching  the  vessel,  some  of  the  most  determined  villains  were  for  treating  them 
as  they  had  done  their  commander,  but  this  proposal  being  overruled,  they  were 
taken  aboard,  and  their  sovereign's  proclamation  was  made  in  the  hearing  of  the 
piratical  rebels.     Some  mocked  at  it ;  others  said  it  was  a  stratagem  to  get  them 
into  the  king's  power ;  and  even  the  most  sober  thinking  among  them,  though  they 
were  tired  of  this  scene  of  discord  and  ravage,  both  in  the  vessel  and  when  they 
were  on  the  shore,  said  that  really  they  could  not  give  the  king  credit  for  such 
extraordinary  kindness,  nor  bring  their  mind  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the 
prinoe,  but  that  they  would  endeavour  to  behave  better  as  individuals,  to  establish 
belter  order  in  the  ship,  and  to  restrain  their  companions  from  those  excesses  of 
cruelty  and  rapine  in  which  they  had  formerly  indulged,  so  that  if  the  king's 
cruisers  should  lay  hold  of  them,  as  they  feared  might  be  the  case,  the  king  might 
be  induced  to  pardon  them,  perhaps  reward  them  for  their  good  conduct.    The  time 
dreaded  by  them  all  at  last  arrived.   Their  vessel  is  boarded  by  the  king's  servants  in 
irresistible  force,  and  the  whole  crew  are  safely  lodged  in  prison,  and  in  due  time 
brought  before  the  king  for  judgment.    With  a  calmness  of  inflexible  determination, 
more  appalling  than  the  most  furious  passion,  the  sovereign  pronounces  their 
sentence.    "You  most  causelessly  violated  your  allegiance;  you  transgressed  the 
law ;  you,  in  intention,  murdered  my  son ;  yet,  on  his  intercession,  I  proffered  you 
forgiveness — free,  full  forgiveness.    You  refused  to  give  me  credit  for  the  generosity 
I  manifested,  and  dishonoured  me  by  supposing  me  false  and  malignant  like  your- 
selves.   You  persisted  in  despising  my  authority  and  opposing  my  will.    And  even 
such  of  you  as  have  not  run  to  the  same  enormity  of  licentiousness  and  cruelty, 
have  formed  laws  to  yourselves  which  ye  have  observed ;  but  my  laws  ye  have  not 
regarded.    And  you  have  trampled  on  my  grace  as  well  as  my  authority.    You 
have  spurned  mercy  on  the  only  terms  consistent  with  my  honour  to  offer  it ;  and 
you  have  had  the  insufferable  arrogance  of  attempting  to  dictate  to  me  in  what  way 
I  should  bestow  my  favour.    You  have  had  your  choice,  and  you  must  abide  by  it. 
As  for  those  men  who  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them,  bring  them  forth 
and  slay  them  before  me."    Let  the  self-righteous  see,  in  a  figure,  the  doom  which 
awaits  him  if  mercy  prevent  not.     The  law  by  which  he  must  be  judged  is  none  of 
the  laws  of  human  device,  but  the  law  of  God.     (John  Brown,  D.D.)        All  human 
nature  sinful : — There  is  a  well  in  Belgium  which  once  had  very  pure  water,  and  it 
was  stoutly  masoned  with  stone  and  brick,  but  that  well  became  afterwards  the 
centre  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo.    At  the  opening  of  the  battle  the  soldiers  with 
their  sabres  compelled  the  gardener,  William  von  Kylsom,  to  draw  water  out  of  the 
well  for  them,  and  it  was  very  pure  water.    But  the  battle  raged,  and  three  hundred 
dead  and  half  dead  were  flung  into  the  well  for  quick  and  easy  burial,  so  that  the 
well  of  refreshment  became  the  well  of  death,  and  long  after,  people  looked  down 
into  the  well  and  they  saw  the  bleached  skulls  but  no  water.    So  the  human  soul 
was  a  well  of  good,  but  the  armies  of  sin  have  fought  around  it,  fought  across  it, 
and  been  slain,  and  it  has  become  a  well  of  skeletons.    Dead  hopes,  dead  resolu- 
tions, dead  ambitions.    An  abandoned  well  unless  Christ  shall  reopen  and  purify 
and  fill  it  as  the  well  of  Belgium  never  was.    Unclean,  unclean.        Jesus  our  onto 
hope ;— It  is  a  pretty  thing  which  is  told  of  the  father  of  the  Rev.  Newman  Hall* 


cha».  m.]  GALATIANS.  SOT 

that  his  common  seal  was  a  crown  with  an  anchor  fixed  into  it,  with  just  these 
words:  "Other  refuge  have  I  none."  Well,  if  you  do  not  use  that  seal,  if  you 
do  not  write  the  words  over  the  door  of  your  house,  yet  take  care  that  you  hear 
their  meaning  in  your  hearts,  and  never  hesitate  on  any  occasion  to  confess  that 
you  are  saved  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  The  law  and  the 
gospel : — Faith,  in  my  text,  and  in  sundry  places  in  this  Epistle,  seems  to  have  a 
complex  signification  :  it  signifies  the  object  of  faith,  revealed  in  the  gospel,  or  the 
method  of  salvation  through  faith  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  and  it  also  signi- 
fies the  grace  of  faith  in  the  soul,  or  a  hearty  compliance  with  this  way  of  salvation, 
so  that  this  expression,  "  before  faith  came,"  refers  to  the  time  before  the  doctrine  of 
faith  was  revealed  in  the  gospel  to  the  Galatians,  and  before  the  grace  of  faith  was 
wrought  in  their  hearts.  Here  it  may  be  proper  to  observe,  that  the  members  of 
the  primitive  church  in  general,  and  particularly  that  in  Galatia,  were  brought 
under  the  gospel  dispensation,  and  embraced  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  by  faith,  at 
one  and  the  same  time.  But  they  were  not,  like  us,  educated  under  tbe  gospel 
dispensation;  for  part  of  them  had  been  Jews,  educated  under  the  Mosaic  dispen- 
sation, which  by  way  of  eminence  is  frequently  called  the  law;  and,  as  they  were 
under  the  legal  dispensation,  they  were  generally  under  the  influence  of  a  legal 
spirit ;  that  is,  they  sought  for  justification  by  their  own  works  of  obedience  to  that 
law.  Another  part  of  them  had  been  educated  heathens,  and  were  destitute  at  once 
of  the  revelation  of  the  gospel,  and  of  faith  in  it.  Of  this  sort  the  generality  of  the 
Galatians  had  been.  And  yet  St.  Paul  represents  them  also  as  having  been  under 
the  law,  not  the  Jewish  or  Mosaic  law,  which  the  Gentiles  had  no  concern  with,  but 
the  law  of  nature,  which  is  universally  binding  upon  all  mankind.  And  as  they 
were  under  this  law,  they  were  also  possessed  of  a  legal  spirit ;  that  is,  they  sought. 
salvation  by  their  own  obedience  to  it,  as  the  only  way  which  they  knew,  and  which 
was  natural  to  them.  But,  when  the  gospel  dispensation  was  set  up  in  the  world, 
and  the  doctrine  of  faith  preached  to  them,  they  immediately  believed,  and  so  were 
freed  from  the  outward  dispensation  of  the  law,  and  from  a  legal  spirit  at  once ; 
and  they  heard  the  doctrine,  and  received  the  outward  dispensation  of  the  gospel, 
and  savingly  believed,  "  at  one  and  the  same  time."  My  present  design  is  to  lay 
down  some  propositions  for  the  explication  of  the  apostolic  doctrine  concerning  the 
law  and  the  gospel,  that  you  may  see  in  what  sense  mankind  are  kept  prisoners  by 
the  law,  under  condemnation,  and  shut  up  to  the  faith ;  or  to  the  method  of  justi- 
fication, through  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  as  the  only  way  of  escape.  L  All 
mankind,  in  all  ages,  are  under  a  law  to  God.  This  can  be  denied  by  none  who 
grant  there  is  such  a  thing  as  sin  or  duty ;  for  where  there  is  no  law,  there  can  be 
no  duty  or  trangression.  If  murder  or  blasphemy  are  universally  evil  with  regard 
to  all  mankind,  in  all  ages,  it  must  be  beoause  they  are  forbidden  by  a  law  univer- 
sally and  perpetually  binding.  II.  This  law  was  first  of  all  given  to  man  in  a  state 
of  innocence,  under  the  model  of  a  covenant  of  works ;  that  is,  it  was  the  constitu- 
tion, by  obedience  to  which  he  was  to  secure  the  favour  of  God,  and  to  obtain 
everlasting  felicity.  It  was  his  duty  to  observe  it  with  a  view  to  obtain  immortality 
and  happiness  by  it ;  and  these  blessings  he  was  to  secure  by  his  own  works  of 
obedience.  _  III.  That  this  law  has  passed  through  several  editions,  and  received 
several  additions  and  modifications,  adapted  to  the  various  circumstances  of  man- 
kind, and  the  designs  of  heaven  towards  them.  That  you  may  more  fully  under- 
stand this,  I  would  observe  by  the  way,  that  tbe  law  is  either  moral  or  positive. 
By  the  moral  law,  I  mean  that  law  which  is  founded  upon  the  eternal  reason  of 
things,  and  that  enjoins  those  duties  which  creatures  under  such  and  such  circum- 
stances owe  to  God,  and  to  one  another,  and  which  necessarily  flow  from  their 
relation  to  one  another.  Thus,  love  to  God,  and  justice  to  mankind,  are  moral 
duties  universally  binding  upon  mankind  in  all  circumstances,  whether  in  a  state 
of  innocence,  or  in  a  state  of  sin;  whether  under  the  revealed  law,  or  the  law  of 
nature.  There  can  be  no  possible  circumstances  in  which  mankind  are  free  from 
the  obligation  of  such  duties,  and  at  liberty  to  commit  the  contrary  eins.  These 
are  more  properly  the  materials  of  a  moral  law.  But  there  is  another  set  of  duties 
agreeable  to  the  circumstances  of  fallen  creatures  under  a  dispensation  of  grace, 
which  I  may  call  evangelical  morals ;  I  mean  repentance  and  reformation,  and  the 
utmost  solicitude  to  re-obtain  the  forfeited  favour  of  our  Maker.  These  are  univer- 
sally binding  upon  mankind  in  their  present  state,  and  result  from  their  circum 
stances,  and  consequently  partake  of  the  general  nature  of  a  moral  law.  By  a 
positive  law,  I  mean  a  law  not  necessarily  resulting  from  the  reason  of  things,  and 
our  relations  and  circumstances,  but  founded  upon  the  will  of  the  lawgiver,  and 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt* 

adapted  to  some  particular  occasion.    Such  was  the  appendage  to  the  first  covenant, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowledge."     Such  were  the  institution  of 
sacrifices  immediately  after  the  fall,  the  ordinance  of  circumcision  given  to  Abraham, 
and  the  various  ceremonies  of  the  law  of  Moses ;  and  such  are  baptism  and  the 
Lord's  Supper,  and  the  institution  of  the  first  day  of  the  week  for  the  Christian 
Sabbath  under  the  gospel.    These  ordinances  are  not  binding  in  their  own  nature, 
and  consequently  they  are  not  of  universal  or  perpetual  obligation,  but  they  are  in 
force  when  and  where  the  lawgiver  is  pleased  to  appoint.     IV.  That  the  law  of  God 
requires  perfect,  perpetual,  and  personal  obedience.    This  holds  true  with  regard  to 
every  law  of  God,  whatever  it  be.     If  it  requires  purely  moral  duties,  it  requires 
that  they  be  performed  exactly  according  to  its  prescriptions.     If  it  requires  evan- 
gelical duties  as  repentance  or  sincerity,  it  requires  perfect  repentance,  perfect 
sincerity.    If  it  requires  the  observance  of  any  ceremonial  or  sacramental  institu- 
tions, as  sacrifice,  circumcision,  baptism,  or  the  Lord's  Supper,  it  requires  a  perfect 
observance  of  them.     This,  my  brethren,  is  the  nature  of  the  law,  of  every  law  that 
God  ever  made  under  every  dispensation  of  religion,  before  the  fall,  and  after  the 
fall,  before  the  law  of  Moses,  under  it,  and  under  the  gospel.     In  all  ages,  in  all 
circumstances,  and  from  all  persons,  it  requires  perfect,  perpetual,  and  personal 
obedience:  to  the  performance  of  this,  it  promises  eternal  life:  but  the  sinner,  by 
every  the  least  failure,  falls  under  its  dreadful  curse,  and  is  cut  off  from  all  the 
promised  blessings.    And  hence  it  most  evidently  follows,  V.  That  it  is  absolutely 
impossible  for  any  of  the  fallen  sons  of  men  to  be  justified  and  saved  by  the  consti- 
tution of  the  law.     Take  what  dispensation  of  the  law  you  please,  the  law  of 
innocence,  the  law  of  Moses,  or  the  moral  part  of  the  gospel,  it  is  impossible  for 
one  of  the  fallen  posterity  of  Adam  to  be  saved  by  it  in  any  of  these  views ;  and  the 
reason  is  plain,  there  is  not  one  of  them  but  what  has  broken  it :  there  is  not  one 
of  them  that  has  yielded  perfect  obedience  to  it :  and,  therefore,  there  is  not  one  of 
them  but  what  is  condemned  by  it,  to  suffer  its  dreadful  penalty.     Thus  you  are 
held  in  close  custody  by  the  law;  you  are  shut  up  under  condemnation  by  it.     And 
is  there  no  way  of  escape  ?    No ;  there  is  no  possible  way  of  escape — but  one ;  and 
that  shall  be  the  matter  of  the  next  proposition.    VI .  That  God  has  made  another 
constitution,  namely,  the  gospel,  or  the  covenant  of  grace,  by  which  even  guilty 
sinners,  condemned  by  the  law,  may  be  justified  and  saved  by  faith,  through  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.    According  to  this  constitution  there  is  encourage- 
ment for  sinners  to  repent  and  use  the  means  of  grace ;  and  all  who  are  saved  by  it, 
are  not  only  obliged  to  yield  obedience  to  the  law,  but  also  enabled  to  do  so  with 
sincerity,  though  not  to  perfection.    They  are  effectually  taught  by  it  "to  deny 
ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  righteously,  soberly,  and  godly  in  the 
world ; "  and,  in  short,  holiness  of  heart  and  life  is  as  effectually  secured  in  this 
way  as  in  any  other.    VII.  That  all  mankind  are  under  the  law,  as  a  covenant  of 
works,  till  they  willingly  forsake  it,  and  fly  to  the  gospel  for  refuge  by  faith  in 
Christ.    There  are  but  two  constitutions  that  God  has  set  up  in  our  world,  by  which 
mankind  can  obtain  life,  namely,  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  covenant  of  grace, 
or  the  law  and  gospel ;  and  all  mankind  are  under  the  one,  or  the  other.      We 
are  all  of  us,  my  brethren,  under  one  or  other  of  these  constitutions :  for  to  be  from 
under  both  of  them  is  the  same  thing  as  to  be  lawless,  and  to  be  under  no  plan  of 
life  at  all.     And  would  you  know  whether  you  are  set  free  from  the  law,  and  placed 
under  the  covenant  of  grace  ?    St.  Paul,  who  knew  it  both  by  his  own  experienoe, 
and  by  inspiration  from  heaven,  will  inform  you.     1.  You  have  been  made  deeply 
sensible  of  sin  and  condemnation  by  the  law  (Rom.  iii.  20 ;  viii.  7).    Has  the  law 
ever  had  these  effects  upon  you,  my  brethren  ?    Have  you  ever  had  such  a  convic- 
tion of  sin  and  condemnation  by  it  ?    If  not,  you  are  still  under  it.    2.  If  you  have 
been  delivered  from  the  law,  you  have  been  cut  off  from  all  hopes  of  obtaining 
justification  by  your  own  obedience  to  it ;  you  have  given  up  this  point  as  alto- 
gether desperate  ;  or,  in  the  strong  language  of  the  apostle,  you  have  been  slain  by 
the  law.     "  When  the  commandment  came,  sin  revived  and  I  died  "  (Rom.  viii.  9). 
3.  If  you  have  been  set  at  liberty  from  the  law,  and  brought  under  the  covenant  of 
grace,  you  have  believed  in  Christ,  and  fled  to  the  gospel,  as  the  only  way  of  escape 
from  the  bondage  and  condemnation  of  the  law.     It  is  the  uniform  doctrine  of  the 
apostle,  that  it  is  by  faith  only  that  this  happy  change  is  brought  about  in  our 
condition.    4.  If  you  are  under  the  covenant  of  grace,  then  you  are  not  willing 
slaves  to  sin,  but  make  it  your  great  business  to  live  to  God.     "  I  through  the  law, 
am  dead  to  the  law,  that.  I  might  live  unto  God  "  (Gal.  ii.  19).     And  do  you  thus 
live  to  God,  sirs?    Is  this  the  great  business  and  constant  endeavour  of  your  whole 


CHIP,  in.]  GALATIANS.  SOS 

life?  If  not,  you  are  not  under  grace,  but  under  the  law,  the  Egyptian  task-master, 
who  demands  perfect  obedience,  but  gives  no  ability  to  perform  it.  (President 
Davies,  M.A.)  Works  a  hindrance  to  salvation: — I  have  heard  of  one  who  fell 
into  the  water  and  sank,  and  a  strong  swimmer  standing  on  the  shore  did  not  at 
the  same  instant  plunge  in,  though  fully  resolved  to  rescue  him.  The  man  went 
down  the  second  time,  and  then  he  who  would  rescue  him  was  in  the  water  swim- 
ming near  him,  but  not  too  near,  waiting  very  cautiously  till  his  time  came.  He 
who  was  drowning  was  a  strong,  energetic  man,  and  the  other  was  too  prudent  to 
expose  himself  to  the  risk  of  being  dragged  under  by  his  struggles.  He  let  the  man 
go  down  for  the  third  time,  and  then  he  knew  that  his  strength  was  quite  exhausted, 
and  swimming  to  him  he  grasped  him  and  drew  him  to  shore.  If  he  had  seized 
him  at  first,  while  the  drowning  man  had  strength,  they  would  have  gone  down 
together.  The  first  part  of  human  salvation  is  the  sentence  of  death  upon  all 
human  power  and  merit.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon).  Under  arrest: — I.  The  unhappy 
period — *'  Before  faith  came."  1.  We  had  no  idea  of  faith  by  nature.  It  would 
never  occur  to  the  human  mind  that  we  could  be  saved  by  believing  in  Jesus.  2. 
When  we  heard  of  faith  as  the  way  of  salvation  we  did  not  understand  it.  We 
could  not  persuade  ourselves  that  the  words  used  by  the  preacher  had  their  common 
and  usual  meaning.  3.  We  saw  faith  in  others,  and  wondered  at  its  results  ;  but 
we  could  not  exercise  it  for  ourselves.  4.  We  could  not  reach  to  faith,  even  when 
we  began  to  see  its  necessity,  admitted  its  efficacy,  and  desired  to  exercise  it.  The 
reason  of  this  inability  was  moral,  not  mental.  5.  We  were  without  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  therefore  incapable.  We  do  not  wish  to  go  back  to  the  state  in  which  we 
were  "  before  faith  came,"  for  it  was  one  of  darkness,  misery,  impotence,  hopeless- 
ness, sinful  rebellion,  self-conceit,  and  condemnation.  II.  The  custody  we  weeb 
ih — "  Kept  under  the  law,  shut  up."  1.  We  were  always  within  the  sphere  of  law. 
In  fact,  there  is  no  getting  out  of  it.  As  all  the  world  was  only  one  prison  for 
a  man  who  offended  Caesar,  so  is  the  whole  universe  no  better  than  a  prison  for  a 
sinner.  2.  We  were  always  kicking  against  the  bounds  of  the  law,  sinning,  and 
pining  because  we  could  not  sin  more.  3.  We  dared  not  overleap  it  altogether,  and 
defy  its  power.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  many  of  us,  it  checked  us,  and  held  us  captive 
with  its  irksome  forbiddings  and  commandings.  4.  We  could  not  find  rest.  The 
law  awakened  conscience,  and  fear  and  shame  attend  such  an  awakening.  5.  We 
could  not  discover  a  hope ;  for,  indeed,  there  is  none  to  discover  while  we  abide 
under  the  law.  6.  We  could  not  even  fall  into  the  stupor  of  despair ;  for  the  law 
excited  life,  though  it  forbade  hope.  Among  the  considerations  which  held  us  in 
bondage  were  these:  The  spirituality  of  the  law,  touching  thoughts,  motives, 
desires.  The  need  of  perfect  obedience,  making  one  sin  fatal  to  all  hope  of  salva- 
tion by  works.  The  requirement  that  each  act  of  obedience  should  be  perfect. 
The  necessity  that  perfect  obedience  should  be  continual  throughout  the  whole  of 
life.  IH.  The  revelation  which  set  us  free — "  The  faith  which  should  afterwards 
be  revealed."  The  only  thing  which  could  bring  us  out  of  prison  was  faith.  Faith 
came,  and  then  we  understood — 1.  What  was  to  be  believed.  2.  What  it  was  to 
believe.  We  saw  that  it  was  "  trust,"  implicit  and  sincere.  3.  Why  we  believed. 
(Ibid.)  Law  and  gospel : — The  law  and  the  gospel  are  two  keys.  The  law  is  the 
key  that  shutteth  up  all  men  under  condemnation,  and  the  gospel  is  the  key  which 
opens  the  door  and  lets  them  out.  (William  Tyndale.)  Shut  up  unto  the  faith : — 
To  let  you  more  effectually  into  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  it  may  be  right  to 
state  that  in  the  preceding  clause,  "  kept  under  the  law,"  the  term,  kept,  is,  in  the 
original  Greek,  derived  from  a  word  which  signifies  a  sentinel.  The  mode  of  con- 
ception  is  altogether  military.  The  law  is  made  to  act  the  part  of  a  sentry,  guarding 
every  avenue  but  one,  and  that  one  leads  those  who  are  compelled  to  take  it  to  the 
faith  of  the  gospel.  They  are  shut  up  to  this  faith  as  their  only  alternative — like 
an  enemy  driven  by  the  superior  tactics  of  an  opposing  general,  to  take  up  the  only 
position  in  which  they  can  maintain  themselves,  or  fly  to  the  only  town  in  which 
they  can  find  a  refuge  or  a  security.  This  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  style  of 
argument  with  Paul,  and  the  way  in  which  he  often  carried  on  an  intellectual 
warfare  with  the  enemies  of  his  Master's  cause.  It  forms  the  basis  of  that  masterly 
and  decisive  train  of  reasoning  which  we  have  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  By 
the  operation  of  skilful  tactics,  he  (if  we  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  manoeuvred 
them,  and  shut  them  up  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  It  gave  prodigious  effect  to  his 
argument,  when  he  reasoned  with  them,  as  he  often  does,  upon  their  own  principles, 
and  turned  them  into  instruments  of  conviction  against  themselves.  With  the  Jews 
he  reasoned  as  a  Jew.    He  made  use  of  the  Jewish  law  as  a  sentinel  to  shut  them 

14 


J10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ex. 

oat  of  every  other  refuge,  and  to  shut  them  up  to  the  refuge  laid  before  them  in  the 
gospel.  He  led  them  to  Christ  by  a  schoolmaster  whom  they  could  not  refuse ;  and 
the  lesson  of  this  schoolmaster,  though  a  very  decisive,  was  a  very  short  one — 
"  Cursed  be  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  the  words  of  the  law  to  do  them."  But 
in  point  of  fact,  they  had  not  done  them.  To  them,  then,  belonged  the  curse  of  the 
violated  law.  The  awful  severity  of  its  sanctions  was  upon  them.  They  found  the 
faith  and  the  free  offer  of  the  gospel  to  be  the  only  avenue  open  to  receive  them. 
They  were  shut  up  unto  this  avenue ;  and  the  law,  by  concluding  them  all  to  he 
under  sin,  left  tbem  no  other  outlet  but  the  free  act  of  grace  and  of  mercy  lain 
before  us  in  the  New  Testament.  (Dr.  Chalmers.)  The  law  was  meant  to  prepare 
men  for  Christ,  by  showing  them  that  there  is  no  other  way  of  salvation  except 
through  Him.  It  had  two  especial  ends:  the  first  was  to  bring  the  people  who 
lived  under  it  into  a  consciousness  of  the  deadly  dominion  of  sin,  to  shut  them  up, 
as  it  were,  into  a  prison-house  out  of  which  only  one  door  of  escape  should  be 
visible,  namely,  the  door  of  faith  in  Jesus  ;  the  second  intention  was  to  fence  about 
and  guard  the  chosen  race  to  whom  the  law  was  given — to  keep  them  as  a  peculiar 
people  separate  from  all  the  world,  so  that  at  the  proper  time  the  gospel  of  Christ 
might  spring  forth  and  go  out  from  them  as  the  joy  and  comfort  of  the  whole  human 
race.    (T.  G.  Rooke.) 

Ver.  24.  Wherefore  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster. — The  law  was  our  school- 
master:— I.  The  condition  op  humanity  and  the  ultimate  purpose  of  God 
bespectino  it.  The  Jews  a  type  of  mankind.  Humanity  is  the  Son  of  God, 
legally  disinherited  by  apostasy,  and  gross  and  sensual.  The  heart  of  the  Father  is 
set  upon  its  restoration,  by  pure  favour,  by  means  of  faith.  The  Divine  purpose 
was  spiritual,  and  man  must  be  conducted  to  it  gradually.  So  God  put  man  to 
school  that,  by  a  course  of  preparatory  discipline,  he  might  have  his  senses  exer- 
cised. II.  The  heib  as  long  as  he  was  a  child  was  at  school.  The  methods 
adopted  were  such  as  befitted  his  condition  and  age.  The  young  mind  is  first  made 
familiar  with  visible  symbols,  which  for  a  time  it  mistakes  for  substance,  but 
eventually  learns  the  inner  meaning.  These  methods  were — 1.  Prophetic  intima- 
tions which  must  be  put  together  like  a  dissected  map.  2.  A  large  picture-book  was 
put  before  the  scholars  in  the  Levitical  institute.  3.  In  addition  to  this  pupils  were 
required  to  do  something,  which  constituted  another  process  of  emblematical  teach- 
ing ;  ceremonies  for  purification,  e.g.  III.  These  lessons  of  the  bchoolmastb* 
became  a  pbepabation  fob  the  gospel.  Christ  was  the  end  or  scope  of  the  law. 
The  process  of  learning,  however,  was  similar  to  what  occurs  in  ordinary  teaching. 
The  mind  of  the  scholar  opens  very  gradually  to  that  of  the  teacher.  1.  The  map 
which  the  young  pupil  had  to  study,  the  earthly  land  secured  to  Abraham,  and  his 
seed,  is  found  to  expand  into  a  higher  region,  and  to  associate  itself  with  another 
race  (Rom.  iv.  13;  Heb.  xi.  8,  13-16).  2.  The  pieces  of  prophecy  are  put  together, 
and  compose  the  majestic  figure  of  the  Messiah.  3.  With  new  views  of  the  centre 
figure  the  whole  of  the  Levitical  system  assumes  its  Divine  significance.  (1)  Ita 
sacrifices  become  symbols  of  the  better  sacrifice.  (2)  Its  purification  of  the  fountain 
opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  (3)  Its  feasts  superseded  by  the  spiritual  privileges 
symbolized.  (4)  With  all  this  comes  a  new  and  ennobling  sentiment  of  obedience.  The 
law  is  not  now  heard  in  thunder  and  as  a  terrible  "  shalt  not,"  but  a  privilege  and  a 
joy.  (T.  Binney,  D.D.)  There  was  a  time  of  the  world's  minority,  and  a  time  when 
it  oame  of  age.  These  times  were  marked — 1.  By  two  stages — bondage  and  liberty. 
2.  By  two  principles  of  action — law  and  faith.  Moses  was  the  world's  schoolmaster, 
Christ  became  the  world's  higher  teacher.  This  state  of  things  obtains  in  natural 
life,  and  in  the  single  heart's  life.  Observe — I.  The  uses  of  restraint  in  thh 
heabt's  education.  The  law  to  the  Jews  was  a  system  of  checks.  1.  To  restrain 
from  violence.  The  law  is  a  schoolmaster  to  rule  those  who  cannot  rule  themselves. 
In  this  stage  it  would  be  madness  to  relax  from  restraint.  2.  To  show  the  inward 
force  of  evil.  Evil  is  unsuspected  until  opposed.  3.  To  form  habits  of  obedience. 
Would  you  have  your  child  happy,  decided,  manly  ?  Teach  him  to  obey*  4. 
To  nourish  the  temper  of  faith.  The  use  of  all  education  is  to  form  faith.  The 
child  does  not  know  the  reason  of  his  teaoher's  command ;  he  has  to  trust.  II. 
The  time  when  bebtbaint  may  be  safely  laid  aside.  1.  When  self-command  ii 
obtained.  To  be  brought  to  Christ  is  to  have  learned  to  deny  self.  2.  When  the 
state  of  justification  by  faith  has  been  attained.  Justification  is  acceptance  with 
God,  not  because  a  man  is  perfect,  but  because  he  does  all  in  a  large  and  generous 
spirit.     In  such  a  state  a  man  acts  on  principle,  and  gets  beyond  enactments. 


«ha».  m.]  GALATIAN8.  ill 

Apply  to  parents  and  teachers.  How  is  it  that  children  of  religious  parents  tarn 
out  ill?  1.  Because  there  has  been  no  restraint  during  the  time  of  discipline.  2. 
Because  restraint  has  been  applied  when  there  should  have  been  an  appeal  to 
principle  and  faith.    (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A)        The  law  is  a  schoolmaster: — L  Aa 

GIVING    PBBOEPTS    IN    WHICH    PRINCIPLES    ABE    INVOLVED    BUT    NOT    EXPRESSLY  TAUGHT. 

Every  wise  teacher  begins  so,  and  the  first  duty  of  the  pupil  is  a  blind  obedience. 
At  length  when  the  pupil  discovers  the  principle  he  may  dispense  with  the  rule  or 
not,  as  he  pleases.  II.  As  prescribing  inadequate  duties — a  i  ar  instead  of  the 
whole,  which  was  to  develop  into  the  whole.  1.  The  institution  vt  temple  worship, 
by  means  of  which  the  Jews  were  to  be  led  into  the  truth  that  God  is  here,  and 
therefore  to  be  worshipped.  But  God  is  everywhere,  and  His  true  temples  infinite 
space  and  the  soul  of  man.  2.  The  institution  of  the  Sabbath.  But  just  as  a  right 
of  way  is  often  secured  to  the  proprietor  by  shutting  up  a  road  one  day  in  the  year, 
not  to  declare  it  his  only  on  that  day,  or  more  on  that  day  than  others,  but  simply 
to  vindicate  his  right  in  it  for  every  day ;  so  did  God  shut  up  one-seventh  part  of 
time,  that  it  might  be  understood  that  all  belonged  to  Him.  3.  The  third  com- 
mandment, which  is  not  simply  a  prohibition  of  blasphemy,  but  was  equivalent  to 
"  thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  perform  thy  oaths."  Learn :  1.  That  reve- 
lation is  education.  What  education  is  for  the  individual,  revelation  is  for  the  race. 
2.  That  revelation  is  progressive.  3.  That  the  training  of  character  in  God's 
revelation  has  always  preceded  illumination  of  the  intellect.  (Ibid)  The  stem 
pedagogue : — I.  The  office  of  the  law.  Our  guardian,  ruler,  tutor,  governor. 
1.  To  teach  as  our  obligations.  2.  To  show  us  our  sinfulness.  3,  To  sweep  away 
our  excuses.  4.  To  chasten  our  delinquencies.  5.  To  watch  us  everywhere  II. 
The  design  of  this  office.  1.  Not  to  conduct  any  man  to  despair,  except  of  him- 
self and  it.  2.  Not  to  urge  us  to  make  an  amalgam  of  works  and  faith.  3.  But 
to  make  us  accept  salvation  as  a  free  gift  of  God.  III.  The  termination  of  this 
office.  When  we  come  to  believe  in  Jesus,  the  pedagogue  troubles  us  no  more. 
We  become,  then,  of  age.  The  office  of  the  law  ends.  1.  When  we  ascertain  that 
Christ  has  fulfilled  it.  2.  When  it  comes  to  be  written  on  the  heart.  The  man  can 
be  trusted,  the  boy  must  be  watched.  3.  When  we  take  up  our  heirship  in  Christ. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  law  a  guide  to  Christ : — I.  The  method  of  this  guiding 
power  is  exercised — 1.  By  completely  shutting  us  out  from  every  other  hope.  2.  By 
showing  us  the  character  and  qualifications  which  we  must  find  in  the  Saviour  on 
whom  we  can  entirely  rely.  (1)  He  must  be  one  competent  to  fulfil  all  the  pro- 
visions of  the  holy  law.  (2)  But  no  oreaturely  being  has  ever  accomplished  this. 
(3)  The  Saviour,  therefore,  must  be  Divine  as  well  as  human.  (4)  These  conditions 
meet  in  Christ.  3.  By  revealing  the  way  in  which  we  must  be  partakers  of  the 
Saviour's  mercy,  and  be  interested  in  His  redemption.  (I)  It  must  be  all  of  grace ; 
(2]  by  faith ;  (3)  issuing  in  justification.  4.  By  proclaiming  its  entire  satisfaction ' 
with  the  provided  Saviour.  (1)  All  its  demands  are  honoured ;  (2)  its  penalties  borne ; 
(8)  its  acquital  secured.  II.  The  object  for  which  this  guiding  power  is  exercised. 
1.  Justification  before  God  is  the  great  want  of  the  rebel  under  the  condemnation  of 
the  law.  He  must  gain  this  blessing  or  perish.  2.  This  cannot  be  obtained  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  which  involve  the  discharge  of  its  obligations  and  the  endurance 
of  its  penalty.  3.  It  must,  and  therefore  is,  to  be  obtained  by  faith  in  Christ.  4. 
This  faith  working  by  love  manifests  itself  in  righteousness.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.B.) 
The  pedagogue : — The  pedagogue  was  a  slave  who  had  charge  of  his  owner's  children, 
and  who  led  them  to  the  porch  of  the  one  who  was  really  to  give  them  lessons. 
But  his  office  was  not  merely  to  keep  the  children  in  the  right  path  and  out  of 
danger ;  he  was  a  sort  of  private  tutor,  who  prepared  them  for  the  instruction  they 
srere  to  receive  from  the  philosopher  or  the  professor.  These  higher  lessons  were 
quite  beyond  the  power  of  the  tutor  himself ;  but  he  could  do  something  to  remove 
the  difficulties  whioh  prevented  young  people  from  understanding,  but  above  all  he 
eould  undertake  that  they  should  be  punctually  in  their  place  when  the  professor 
began  his  work.     (Canon  Liddon.)  Christ  our  schoolmaster: — You  send  your 

little  child  in  the  care  of  some  one  to  school.  The  ward  takes  the  little  creature, 
and  says,  "  Come,  I  will  take  you  to  school,"  and  away  they  go  to  the  place  of 
instruction.  Now  the  law  was  our  care-taker,  our  companion,  to  take  us  to  our 
schoolmaster  Christ ;  Christ  keeps  a  school,  Christ  calls  those  who  go  to  His  school 
His  disciples,  His  scholars;  Christ  says,  "Learn  of  Me."  (J,  Parker,  D.D.) 
Life  a  school : — Men  are  brought  into  this  world,  just  as  children  are  taken  to 
school,  to  learn  their  lessons.  We  are  born  into  this  world  to  be  schooled  for 
heaven.    There  are  vacancies  in  heaven  for  a  certain  number  of  us,  and  all  who 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [our.  m. 

pass  a  good  examination  when  the  time  comes  will  have  their  cards  of  admission 
given  them  into  the  place  marked  which  they  are  to  take.  This  life  the  publio 
school  that  prepares  for  the  university  which  we  call  heaven ;  and  the  Bible  the 
code  by  which  our  lives  will  be  tested  when  we  present  ourselves  as  candidates  for 
admission :  this  is  all,  literally,  that  our  present  existence  was  contrived  for,  or  the 
Bible  given.  (E.  S.  Ffoulkes,  B.D.)  Love  in  the  schooling  of  the  law  : — A 
written  law  of  God  being  given  to  man,  what  is  its  further  office?  The  fulfulling 
of  that  law  is  in  one  word,  love ;  for  God  is  its  Author,  and  God  is  love.  Can  the 
will  of  man,  by  itself  and  unaided,  fulfil  that  law  ?  And  here  observe  two  things. 
First,  this  is  not  a  question  of  much  or  little — can  man's  will  half  fulfil  the  law,  or 
nearly  fulfil  it,  or  quite  fulfil  it? — but  it  is  an  absolute  question,  which  must  be 
answered,  yea  or  nay,  from  the  very  nature  of  man's  will  and  of  the  law.  It  is  not, 
•'  Can  man's  will  fulfil  this  or  that  part  of  it  ?  "  but «'  Can  it  ever  fulfil  it  at  all,  any 
single  command  of  it?"  What  is  man's  will?  A  will  diverted,  in  the  fall,  from 
its  central  object ;  a  selfish  will ;  a  will  which  recognizes  not,  follows  not,  the  law 
of  love  as  its  guide ;  and  in  this  wandering  away  from  lov«  and  from  God,  leads 
with  it  man's  whole  nature.  Now  you  see  onr  question  is  this,  "Can  such  a  will 
again  renew  itself  into  love  ?  "  Manifestly  not.  It  is  powerless  to  give  itself  a  new 
direction.  What  we  want,  then,  is  not  a  law  to  obey,  but  a  Kedeemer  to  set  us 
free.  Next,  we  may  remark,  that  this  question  of  the  ability  of  man  by  his  own 
will  to  keep  God's  law,  must  not  be  confused,  by  being  mixed  up  with  the  entirely 
distinct  question  of  the  relation  of  God's  absolute  foreknowledge  and  foreordination 
to  the  free  will  of  man.  That  relation  did  not  begin  with  the  fall  of  man  at  all ; 
it  woaid  have  subsisted  just  as  much  if  he  had  never  fallen :  it  subsists  with 
regard  to  the  holy  angels  in  heaven,  who  have  never  sinned  ;  it  is  an  universal  law 
of  all  created  being.  The  incapacity  of  man's  will  of  which  we  here  speak,  is  not 
in  consequence  of  any  fettering  of  it  by  God's  sovereign  decrees,  but  in  consequeuce 
of  its  own  act  and  deed,  by  which  it  left  God  and  the  law  of  love  in  our  first 
parent,  and  became  subject  to  those  lower  desires  and  faculties  which  it  was 
created  to  rule  and  guide.  Now  let  me  not  be  mistaken  as  to  my  present  position. 
In  saying  that  the  will  of  fallen  man  is  incapable  of  fulfilling  God's  law,  let  me  be 
thoroughly  understood.  I  am  drawing  no  wild,  exaggerated  picture  of  depravity, 
bat  wish  to  keep  to  the  strict  letter  of  fact,  and  to  build  on  it  important  con- 
sequences. There  is  much  that  the  human  will  can  do.  It  can  choose  between 
the  outward  objects  which  are  presented  to  us  in  life — the  objects  of  thought,  of 
speech,  of  action.  Nay,  more ;  over  all  mere  outward  obedience  to  God's  law  the 
will  has  power.  But  the  will  has  not  power  over  the  desires  and  affections ;  in 
other  words,  over  the  superior  faculties,  of  which  it  is  a  servant.  It  can  produce 
good  deeds  to  a  certain  extent,  but  it  cannot  produce  good  tendencies.  And  so  by 
the  law  it  has  been  proved,  that  redemption  is  necessary  for  man.  And  more  ;  it 
has  been  brought  about  that  man  should  be  receptive  of  redemption,  prepared  to 
welcome  it,  eager  to  avail  himself  of  it.  His  very  demonstrated  helplessness  has 
shown  that  he  must  be  helped  from  above.  The  law  was  God's  great  instrument 
to  prepare  man  for  redemption  by  Christ.  He  used  it  in  this  way  on  a  large  scale 
in  the  history  of  the  world.  The  Jewish  people,  who  were  placed  under  it,  were  by 
it  not  rendered  a  people  acceptable  to  God,  but  proved  incapable  of  pleasing  Him. 
Its  lower  requirements  became  to  them  a  substitute  for  its  first  and  great  command- 
ment ;  and  no  restoration  to  the  law  of  love  was  effected  by  it  in  them.  In  the  course 
of  history  its  threatenings  were  executed  on  them,  its  promises,  and  more  than  its 
promises,  fulfilled  to  them  as  a  people ;  and  when  the  Bedeemer  came,  they  were  for 
the  most  part  a  nation  of  hardened  hypocrites.  All  its  power  was  power  to  convict  and 
find  guilty — not  power  to  save  even  by  that  conviction  : — for  man's  depraved  con- 
science might  quench  and  annul  the  conviction.  And  He  has  ever  made  the  same  use 
of  His  law  in  the  hearts  of  individuals.  And  now  I  would  ask  you  to  mark  the 
wonderful  course  and  progress  of  Divine  love  towards  us.  In  maukind  at  large,  as 
in  individual  men,  there  must  be  produced  this  knowledge  and  feeling  of  their  own 
nnworthiness  and  incapacity  to  save  themselves ;  not  indeed  so  as  to  make  them 
universally  cry  out  for  the  gospel,  but  so  as  to  make  them,  when  the  gospel  has 
come,  on  iooking  over  the  page  of  history,  confess  that  God  has  manifested  beyond 
a  doubt  the  sinfulness  of  man.  For  the  first  many  ages  after  the  fall,  the  un- 
written law  took  its  course.  The  conscience  became  darkened — the  earth  full  of 
violence — till  the  vengeance  of  God  was  drawn  down  upon  it  in  the  Flood.  Again, 
the  true  knowledge  and  fear  of  him,  in  the  family  of  Noah,  was  assumed  as  • 
starting-point  for  the  new  world ;  again,  even  from  this  more  definite  covenant  did 


otip.  m.]  GALATIANS.  21J 

the  nations  of  the  world  go  astray  as  widely  as  ever.  Out  of  them  God  selected 
Abraham,  and  entered  into  special  covenant  with  him  and  his  seed.  And  while  in 
them  was  proved  the  powerlessness  of  His  revealed  law  to  renew  or  to  save,  among 
the  Gentile  nations  a  lesson  not  less  remarkable  was  being  taught  to  mankind.  Of 
them  God  suffered  some  to  advance  to  the  very  highest  pitch  of  art,  and  science, 
and  acuteness  of  the  human  intellect.  Their  philosophy  has  set  the  pattern  for 
the  world;  their  oratory,  their  poetry,  have  been  since  unrivalled.  And  that 
nothing  might  be  wanting  to  the  full  trial  of  man,  another  people  found  its  em- 
ployment and  pride  in  civil  arts ;  in  taming  the  nations,  in  sparing  and  consoli- 
dating by  exquisite  polity  the  states  subjected  to  its  sway ;  in  laying  the  foundation 
»f  public  right  and  justice  for  the  latest  age  of  mankind.  And  thus  both  by  these, 
and  in  other  parts  of  the  inhabited  world  by  other  nations,  the  powers  of  man  for 
good  were  fully  and  maturely  tried.  Every  facility  was  given  him  which  belonged 
to  his  fallen  state.  And  the  result  of  all  was  this :  that  neither  by  wisdom,  nor  by 
imagination,  nor  by  individual  or  social  power  for  good,  nor  by  the  revelation  of 
God's  will  in  the  law,  could  man  put  himself  back  again  into  the  path  of  love  which 
he  had  left.  O  you  who  read  ancient  history,  whether  sacred  or  profane,  read  it  to 
trace  it  in  this  design  of  God,  to  prepare  the  world  for  Christ ;  for  this  is  the 
master-key  to  its  secrets.  (Dean  Alford.)  The  use  of  the  law  : — A  minister  says, 
When  I  was  a  boy  I  ploughed  a  field  with  a  team  of  spirited  horses.  I  ploughed  it 
very  quickly.  Once  in  a  while  I  passed  over  some  of  the  sod  without  turning  it, 
but  I  did  not  jerk  back  the  plough  with  its  rattling  devices.  I  thought  it  made  no 
difference.  After  awhile,  my  father  came  along,  and  said  :  "  Why,  this  will  never 
do;  this  isn't  ploughed  deep  enough  ;  there,  you  have  missed  this  and  you  have 
missed  that."  And  he  ploughed  it  over  egain.  The  difficulty  with  a  great  many 
people  is  that  they  are  only  scratched  with  conviction  when  the  subsoil  plough  of 
God's  truth  ought  to  be  put  in  up  to  the  beam.  Tlie  law  and  the  gospel : — You 
never  saw  a  woman  sewing  without  a  needle.  She  would  come  but  poor  speed  if 
she  only  sewed  wi'  the  thread.  So,  I  think,  when  we're  dealing  with  sinners,  we 
maun  aye  put  in  the  needle  of  the  law  first ;  for  the  fact  is,  they  are  sleepin'  sound, 
and  they  need  to  be  awakened  up  wi'  something  sharp.  But,  when  we've  got  the 
needle  o'  the  law  fairly  in,  we  may  draw  as  lang  a  thread  as  you  like  o'  gospel 
consolation   after  it.      (Lockhart.)  The  law  a  schoolmaster: — "The  method 

devised  by  Dr.  Arnold  at  Rugby  School,  was  to  eventually  raise  the  moral  tone 
of  the  whole  school  by  first  raising  the  tone  of  a  certain  part.  Is  it  irreverent 
to  call  the  Israelites  the  "  Sixth  Form "  of  the  school  of  the  human  race,  an 
eleet  nation  for  the  sake  of  the  non-elect,  chosen  neither  for  their  own  merits,  nor 
principally  for  their  own  blessing  (though  their  privileges  were  inestimable), 
but  to  hasten  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  thus  in  the  end  to  open  the  kingdom 
of   heaven   to    all   believers?"      (C.  E.  Lloyd  Engstrom,   M.A.)  The   laio 

leading  men  to  Christ : — "  The  law  !  "  It  is  one  of  a  group  of  words  round  which 
the  thought  of  St.  Paul  constantly  moves ;  and  he  uses  it  in  more  senses  than 
one.  Here  he  means  by  it  generally  the  five  Books  of  Moses  to  which  the  Jews 
commonly  gave  the  name ;  and  more  particularly  he  means  those  parts  of  Exodus, 
Leviticus,  Numbers,  and  Deuteronomy,  in  which  are  contained  the  various  rules 
which  God  gave  to  Moses  for  the  moral,  social,  political,  and  religious,  or  cere- 
monial conduct  of  the  people  of  Israel.  This  was  the  law  in  which,  as  St.  Paul 
said,  the  Jew  of  his  day  made  his  boast ;  he  was  proud  to  belong  to  the  race  which 
had  received  it.  This  was  the  law,  the  possession  of  which  made  Israel  a  "  peculiar 
people,"  marking  it  off  by  a  deep-cut  line  of  separation  from  all  the  other  nations 
of  the  world.  This  was  the  law  which  it  was  the  business  of  every  Israelite  to 
obey.  Now  St.  Paul  6ays  bluntly,  that  the  main  purpose  of  this  law  was  not  pre- 
sent, but  prospective  ;  it  was  not  to  be  so  much  prized  on  its  own  account,  as  for 
the  sake  of  that  to  which  it  was  to  lead.  It  was  really  like  those  slaves  who  were 
kept  in  well-to-do  households  in  the  ancient  world,  first  to  teach  the  children  of 
their  masters  roughly,  or  as  well  as  they  could,  and  then  to  lead  them  down  day  by 
day  to  the  school  of  some  neighbouring  philosopher,  at  whose  hands  they  would 
receive  real  instruction.  This,  then,  was  the  business  of  the  law  ;  it  did  the  little 
it  could  do  for  the  Jewish  people  as  an  elementary  instructor,  and  then  it  had  to 
take  them  by  the  hand  and  lead  them  to  the  school  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  it  did : 
I.  By  fokeshadowino  Him.  This  was  especially  true  of  its  ceremonies.  All  the 
Jewish  ritual,  in  its  minutest  details,  was  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.  Each 
ceremony  was  felt  to  have  some  meaning  beyond  the  time  then  present,  and  so  it 
fostered  an  expectant  habit  of  mind  ;  and  as  lire  ages  p&saed,  these  espeoiatiou* 


U4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<au*.  m. 

converged  more  and  more  towards  a  coming  Messiah ;  and  so,  in  a  subordinate  bat 
real  way,  the  ceremonial  law  did  its  part  in  leading  the  nation  to  the  school  of 
Christ.  II.  Bx  ore  at ing  in  man's  conscience  a  sense  or  want,  which  Chbist  axons 
could  believe.  This  was  the  work  of  the  moral  law.  Exact  obedience  to  strict 
precepts  was  commanded ;  but  who  could  render  it  ?  So  the  law,  universally  dis- 
obeyed, became  like  a  torch  carried  into  the  dark  cellars  and  crevices  of  human 
nature  that  it  might  reveal  the  foul  shapes  lurking  there,  and  might  rouse  man  to 
long  for  a  righteousness  which  it  could  not  confer.  And  this  could  only  be  found 
in  Christ.  III.  By  puttino  them  under  a  discipline  which  trained  them  roi 
Christ.  God  begins  with  rule,  and  ends  with  principle ;  begins  with  law,  and 
ends  with  faith ;  begins  with  Moses  and  ends  with  Christ.  In  the  earlier  revelation 
God  only  said  "  Do  this,"  "  do  not  do  that."  In  the  later  or  Christian  revelation  Ha 
has  done  much  more ;  He  has  said,  "  Join  yourselves  by  an  act  of  adhesion  of  your 
whole  moral  nature  to  the  perfect  moral  Being  " — in  other  words,  "  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  This  is  justification  by  faith.  So  far  from  being  moral 
anarchy,  it  is  the  absorption  of  rule  into  the  higher  realm  of  principle.  In  the 
experience  of  the  soul,  faith  corresponds  to  the  empire  of  principle  in  the  growth 
of  individual  character  and  in  the  development  of  national  life ;  while  the  law 
answers  to  that  elementary  stage  in  which  outward  rules  are  not  yet  absorbed  into 
principle.  {Canon  Liddon.)  The  schooling  of  the  lav: — There  were  three 
systems  of  law  delivered  to  the  Jews,  each  leading,  like  a  highway  of  the  Lord,  to 
Christ.  I.  The  judicial  law.  This  involved  their  civil  policy  as  a  state  or  nation, 
governed  their  conduct  as  between  man  and  man,  and  determined  their  offences  and 
penalties  as  citizens  and  subjects.  II.  The  ceremonial  law,  determining  their 
ecclesiastical  polity.  III.  The  moral  law.  Resolved  by  Christ  into  two  com- 
mandments, and  by  St.  Paul  into  one  word — love.  This  law  brings  us  to  Christ 
(1)  By  convicting  of  sin  ;  (2)  by  revealing  our  peril ;  (3)  by  its  weakness  through 
the  flesh  to  save  from  death.  (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  Pedagogic  character  of  the 
law : — A  schoolmaster  nowadays  is  not  at  all  like  the  personage  Paul  intended.  He 
speaks  of  a  pedagogue,  an  official  seldom  if  ever  now  seen  among  men.  This  was 
not  a  person  who  actually  officiated  as  master  in  the  school,  and  gave  instruction 
in  the  school  itself ;  but  one — a  slave  generally — who  was  set  to  take  the  boys  to 
school,  and  to  watch  over  them,  and  to  be  a  sort  of  general  supervisor  of  them, 
both  in  school  and  out  of  school,  and  at  all  times.  A  pedagogue  was  very  generally 
employed  in  the  training  of  the  young ;  indeed,  it  was  a  common  and  customary 
thing  for  the  sons  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  nobility  to  have  appointed  over  them 
some  trustworthy  servant  who  took  them  in  charge.  The  boys  were  entirely  under 
these  servants ;  and  thus  had  their  spirits  broken  in,  and  their  vivacity  restrained. 
As  a  rule  these  pedagogues  were  very  stern  and  strict — they  used  the  rod  freely, 
not  to  say  cruelly,  and  the  condition  of  the  boys  was  sometimes  no  better  than 
slavery.  The  boys  (as  it  was  supposed  to  be  for  their  good)  were  kept  in  perpetual 
fear.  Their  recreations  were  restricted ;  even  their  walks  were  under  the  surveil- 
lance of  the  grim  pedagogue.  They  were  sternly  held  in  check  in  all  points,  and 
were  thus  disciplined  for  the  battle  of  life.  Now  Paul,  taking  up  this  thought,  says 
the  law  was  our  pedagogue,  our  guardian,  our  custodian,  ruler,  tutor,  governor, 
until  Christ  came.     (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  The  Church  to  be  governed  by  principle, 

not  rigid  law : — A  Christian  Church,  from  the  necessity  of  the  case,  "is  based  on 
faith — that  is,  on  principle ;  it  represents  by  its  existence  the  definitive  triumph  of 
believing  principle  over  mere  outward  Jewish  rule  ;  it  does  not  discard  rule,  far 
from  it,  but  it  provides  for  the  good  that  is  to  be  achieved  by  rule,  by  insisting 
always  on  the  higher  influence  of  principle ;  and  thus  the  true  direction  of  the 
Church's  life  would  seem,  to  be  adherence  to  principle,  combined  with  freedom  as 
to  all  that  touches  mere  outward  rule.  In  modern  language,  Holy  Scripture,  the 
three  great  Creeds  which  guard  it,  the  essential  conditions  of  the  means  of  grace — 
that  is,  the  governing  and  informing  principles  of  the  Church's  life, — should  all  of 
them  be  defended  to  the  very  last  extremity ;  but  as  to  matters  of  mere  ceremonial 
and  the  like,  there  should  be  as  much  freedom  as  is  compatible  with  the  very 
elementary  requirements  of  order.  Where  the  faith  is  held  sincerely,  the  rules  of 
outward  observance  should  be  largely  left  to  take  care  of  themselves ;  the  margin 
of  liberty  within  which  devotional  feeling  at  very  different  stages  of  its  growth 
finds  its  congenial  expression,  should  be  as  wide  as  possible.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
The  gentleness  of  Christ's  dominion: — Moses  and  the  law  is  a  rigid  and  severe 
schoolmaster,  who  by  whips  and  threats  requires  a  hard  lesson  of  his  scholars, 
whether  able  to  learn  it  or  not ;  but  Christ  and  the  gospel  is  a  mild  and  gentle 


chap,  m]  GALATIANS.  215 

teacher,  who  by  sweet  promises  and  good  rewards,  invite  their  scholars  to  duty,  and 
guide  and  help  them  to  do  what  of  themselves  they  cannot  do ;  by  which  means 
they  love  both  their  MaBter  and  their  lessons,  and  rejoice  when  it  is  nearest  to  them 
to  direct  them  in  their  studies.  ( W.  Burkitt.)  Relation  of  the  law  to  the  gospel : — 
L  Thb  whole  law  of  God  is  one.  God's  law  is  the  declaration  of  His  will ;  and 
God's  perfect  will  never  changes,  and,  therefore,  God's  law  is  like  Himself — the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  It  is  essentially  impossible  that  one  part  of 
God's  law  should  ever  contradict  any  other  part ;  from  beginning  to  end  it  is  one. 
But  this  law  may  develop  itself  by  successive  stages,  and  manifest  itself  in  different 
ways  in  these  different  stages.  Under  ground,  among  the  rocks,  among  the  sub- 
terranean springs,  the  tree  develops  in  the  form  of  roots.  Above  ground,  we  find 
the  tree  developing  in  the  form  of  trunk.  We  go  higher,  and  our  tree  is  branches, 
and  then  leaves,  and  blossoms,  and  fruit.  The  tree  is  one.  Fruit  and  root  are  the 
extremes  of  one  perfect  organism ;  yet  what  a  difference  between  them.  So  God's 
law  is  one,  whether  we  see  it  in  its  lower  or  higher  stage.  II.  We  are  to  DIS- 
TINGUISH BETWEEN  THE  SUBSTANCE  AND  THE  FORM  OF  THE  LAW.      The    Divine  thought 

is  the  essential  thing ;  not  the  mere  formal  precept  or  symbol  by  which  it  was  con- 
veyed. So,  while  the  former  must  ever  be  retained,  the  latter  may  drop  off  ;  just 
as  the  tree  drops  off  in  the  branches  the  mould  which  olings  about  the  roots,  and 
drops  off  in  the  blossom  and  fruit  the  bark  of  the  trunk  and  branches,  while  root 
and  trunk  and  branch  and  blossom  yet  continue  to  be  one  tree.  (Marvin  R. 
Vincent,  D.D.)  Rule  yields  to  principle  : — Here  is  a  boy  who  begins  to  study 
mathematics.  The  teacher  gives  him  specific  rules.  "  Do  thus,  and  you  will  add 
numbers.  Do  so,  and  you  will  subtract  or  multiply."  It  is  not  a  matter  of  prin- 
ciples or  laws  at  all.  The  boy  has,  and  can  have,  no  conception  of  the  great  funda- 
mental laws  of  numbers  and  of  their  relations.  He  takes  his  arithmetic  and 
studies  the  rule  for  decimals  or  long  division,  and  does  his  sums  by  the  process 
laid  down  in  the  rule.  But  one  day,  the  boy  comes  to  the  teacher  with  his  sum 
worked  out  by  a  process  not  laid  down  in  his  arithmetic.  He  has  thought  it  out  by 
a  process  of  his  own.  The  rules  he  has  been  practising  have  led  him  unconsciously 
up  to  certain  great  mathematical  principles  which  are  not  confined  in  their  working 
out  to  the  one  little  rule  of  the  arithmetic,  but  are  capable  of  a  variety  of  expres- 
sions. Is  the  teacher  angry  because  the  sum  was  not  done  by  the  rule?  Is  he  not 
rather  delighted  ?  He  sees,  in  the  lad's  overstepping  the  rule,  the  very  result  at 
which  he  has  been  aiming.    All  the  rules  were  directed  to  bring  about  this  grasp  of 

Erinciples  which  he  has  obtained.    Henceforth  he  will  not  be  bound  by  the  rules, 
ut  will  he  therefore  violate  the  great  laws  of  mathematics  ?    Will  he  not  be  as 
much  under  law  as  ever,  yea,  under  the  same  law,  when  he  measures  the  orbits  of 

E Janets  or  weighs  suns,  as  when  he  repeated  the  multiplication  table,  or  cast  up  the 
ttle  oolumns  in  simple  addition  ?  So  it  is  in  moral  development.  You  want  to 
teach  a  child  the  great  principle  of  order.  You  begin  with  specific  rules.  "  You 
must  put  your  books  in  such  a  place,  and  your  hat  in  such  a  place.  You  must 
study  such  and  such  hours.  You  may  amuse  yourself  at  such  times."  The 
time  finally  comes  when  all  these  rules  drop  off  of  themselves.  They  are  no  longer 
needed.  He  has  got  hold  of  the  great  truth  of  order,  and  its  obligation  has  its 
grip  upon  him,  and  that  was  all  that  the  rules  were  intended  for.  That  being 
reached,  he  may  be  orderly  and  systematic  in  his  own  way.  The  great  point  is  that, 
however  his  way  may  differ  from  that  prescribed  by  his  old  rules,  he  is  still  under 
law,  and  under  the  same  law — the  law  of  order.  So  then,  when  God's  law,  the 
pedagogue,  the  law  of  commandments,  precepts,  prohibitions,  hands  a  man  over  to 
Christ,  it  introduces  him  to  a  life  which  is  just  as  much  under  the  power  of  law 
and  of  the  same  law  as  ever.  Law  is  not  abolished,  but  whereas  formerly  the  law 
was  applied  to  the  man  from  without,  it  now  begins  to  work  from  within  the  man. 
In  other  words,  he  lives  by  the  law  of  God  written  upon  his  conscience  and 
wrought  into  his  life.  He  is  a  law  unto  himself.  He  is  no  longer  a  moral  school- 
boy, but  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  law  of  precepts  has  been  silently  preparing 
the  man  to  be  kindled  and  quickened  into  life  by  contact  with  Christ's  life.  You 
know  how,  at  the  sacred  season  in  Borne,  the  workmen  are  engaged  for  days  in 
arranging  the  lines  of  lamps  over  the  dome  and  portico  of  St.  Peter's ;  and  when 
at  last  the  hour  strikes,  on  a  sudden  the  whole  gigantic  structure  bursts  into  flame. 
Just  so  law  draws  the  line  of  obedience  and  duty  ;  but  these,  however  symmetrical 
and  sharp,  are  dead  and  cold  until  they  feel  Christ's  touch ;  then  the  life 
kindles  and  glows.  The  lines  of  law  are  all  irradiated.  (Ibid.)  Christ 
supersedes   the   law :  —  If   the  law   is  done  away,  we   are    never  henceforth 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

under  its  tyranny,  but  are  under  Christ,  and  live  in  all  security  and  joy,  through 
Him  who  now  reigns  in  us  mildly  and  graciously  by  His  spirit.  Therefore,  if  wa 
could  rightly  apprehend  Christ,  the  dear  Saviour,  this  severe  and  wrathful  school- 
master would  not  dare  to  touch  a  hair  of  our  heads.  From  this  it  follows  that 
believers,  as  concerns  the  conscience,  are  by  all  means  free  from  the  law ;  on  this 
account  the  schoolmaster  should  not  rule  therein,  i.e.,  he  should  not  affright, 
threaten,  or  take  the  conscience  captive,  and  though  he  should  undertake  it,  the 
conscience  should  not  care  for  it,  but  should  behold  Christ  on  the  cross,  who 
through  His  death  had  freed  us  from  the  law  and  all  its  terrors.  Nevertheless 
there  is  sin  still  remaining  in  the  saints,  whereby  their  conscience  is  acoused  and 
plagued.  Yet  Christ  helps  it  up  again  through  His  daily,  yea,  continual  drawing 
near.  (Luther.)  The  law  a  schoolmaster : — The  law  taught,  as  a  schoolmaster 
teaches,  the  elements  of  true  religion  and  right  morals.  It  therefore  prepared  men 
for  Christianity,  or  was  the  introduction  to  Christianity,  which  supposes  and  em- 
braces those  elements,  though  it  carries  them  forward  into  further  and  higher 
developments,  and  surrounds  them  with  more  mature  and  heavenly  sanctions  than 
were  before  revealed ;  just  as  the  schoolmaster  prepares  a  pupil  by  the  studies  of  the 
school-room,  for  the  studies  and  pursuits  of  life,  and  furnishes  the  knowledge 
which  is  absolutely  necessary  for  file  attainment  of  the  superior  knowledge  of 
future  years,  and  which  can  never  be  entirely  dispensed  with.  The  pupil  is  not 
required  to  remain  in  the  school-room,  amenable  to  all  the  minor  regulations  of  the 
school-room,  and  indeed  would  not  be  justified  in  doing  so,  when  the  time  has 
come  for  his  entrance  upon  the  advanced  discipline  and  broader  duties  and  pros- 
pects of  maturity  and  the  world ;  and  yet  he  must  never  slight  or  forget  the  real 
knowledge  and  true  habits  which  have  been  instilled  and  formed  within  those 
humbler  precincts,  for  these  are  always  available  and  useful,  and  are  indeed  indis- 
pensable to  his  progress.  •'  The  law  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  unto  Christ.  ** 
It  could  not  have  brought  us  unto  Christ,  unless  it  had  taught  us  much  that  is  in- 
trinsically and  permanently  true  and  good,  and  of  Divine  authority.  Such  an 
introduction  could  have  been  made  by  no  unworthy  or  unauthorized  hand. 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  must  have  been  engraved  upon  the  forehead  of  that 
instructor,  who  performed  the  high  office  of  leading  us  into  the  presence  of  the 
Son  of  God.  Let  us  see  how  this  truth  may  be  confirmed.  Let  us  refer  to  what 
may  be  gathered  of  the  mind  of  Jesus  on  this  subject.  First  and  chiefly,  he  always 
speaks  of  the  God  by  whose  commission  Moses  gave  the  law  to  the  Israelites,  as 
his  own  God  and  Father,  by  whom  he  was  sanctified  and  sent  into  the  world.  It 
is  impossible  for  any  man  of  common-sense  and  a  clear  and  unprejudiced  head, 
who  shall  read  the  Old  Testament  and  then  proceed  to  read  the  New,  to  entertain 
any  other  idea  than  that  the  Supreme  Being  and  Almighty  God  of  the  one  is  the 
Supreme  Being  and  Almighty  God  of  the  other,  though  more  chiefly  revealed  and 
brought  nearer  to  us  in  the  second  than  in  the  first.  Jesus  refers  also  to  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets  of  the  former  dispensation  not  as  strangers,  or  belonging  to  a  hostile 
order  or  communion,  but  as  His  own  predecessors  and  forerunners,  who  had  seen  His 
day  and  intimated  His  coming,  and  He  often  repeats  and  applies  their  sayings  and 
predictions.  The  proposition  is  further  confirmed  by  a  view  of  those  characters  of 
the  law  which  are  evidently  intrinsic  and  unchangeable.  The  primary  truth  of  the 
Unity  of  God  is  declared  in  it  with  a  distinctness  and  a  grandeur  which  no  words 
and  no  imagination  can  surpass.  The  "  Hear,  0  Israel  1  the  Lord  our  God  is  one 
Lord,"  is  a  proclamation  which  sounds,  as  with  trumpet  voice,  from  one  dispensa- 
tion to  the  other,  from  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Temple  to  the  Church,  and  from 
the  Church  into  the  depths  of  time.  Those  infinite  attributes  of  God,  which, 
when  proposed  to  the  mind,  are  in  perfect  conformity  with  the  best  exercises  of  our 
reason,  and  are  yet  so  high  that  our  highest  reason  cannot  reach  or  measure  them, 
are  revealed  in  the  law  with  all  the  clearness  which  human  language  can  command, 
and  with  an  original  sublimity  which  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else.  As  in  the 
doctrinal,  so  in  the  ethical  part  of  the  law,  there  is  a  height  and  a  purity  which 
might  fitly  introduce  the  moral  system  of  the  gospel,  and  be  blended  and  incor- 
porated with  it,  because  it  is  in  unison  with  it,  and  speaks  of  a  common  origin.  The 
ten  commandments,  which  are  the  condensation  of  this  part  of  the  law,  are  un- 
questionably permanent  and  irreversible.  Finally,  two  important  inferences  must 
be  kept  in  mind.  1.  That  we  should  never  take  one  part  of  the  conclusion,  when 
the  apostle  is  pressing  it  upon  our  attention  with  all  his  innate  zeal,  without  a 
referenoe  to  the  other  part,  which,  under  different  circumstances,  he  would  have 
pressed  as  warmly,  and  which  was  never  really  absent  from  his  mind.    He  must  ba 


>.  m.]  GALAT1AN8.  217 

interpreted  by  himself ;  what  he  says  at  one  time  compared  with  what  he  says  at 
another.  2.  We  ourselves  are  bound  to  pay  becoming  reverence  to  that  ancient 
law,  whose  office  it  was  to  introduce  men  to  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of 
gospel  privileges  and  blessings.  There  is  little  danger  at  present  of  our  falling 
back  under  the  yoke  against  which  St.  Paul  warns  his  converts ;  but  there  is  some 
danger  of  our  erring  on  the  opposite  side,  and  treating  the  law,  and  the  books 
which  contain  it,  with  an  undeserved  and  unbecoming  irreverence.  Let  us  remem- 
ber that  the  law  was  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ,  and  that,  as  such,  its 
instructions  were  necessary  and  are  still  to  be  revered.  Having  entered  a  higher 
institution,  we  do  not  go  back  to  school ;  but  having  been  well  taught  in  those 
elements  which  prepared  us  for  that  institution,  we  will  remember  the  teacher 
with  respect  and  gratitude.  While  the  Saviour  of  men  appears  before  us  in  all 
his  transfigured  glory,  though  we  shall  give  to  His  person  our  longest  and 
intensest  regards,  we  shall  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  venerable  forms  of  Moses, 
and  Elias,  who  appear  with  Him  and  talk  with  Him.  (F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.) 
After  that  faith  is  come,  Christian  freedom  and  sonship  : — I.  To  prove  to  ourselves 
that  we  have  faith  we  must  prove  that  we  need  not  the  law.  II.  To  prove  that 
emancipation  and  liberty  we  must  prove  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God.  III.  To  prove 
that  engrafting  and  adoption  we  must  prove  that  we  have  put  on  Christ.  IV.  To 
prove  that  apparelling  our  proof  is  that  we  are  baptized  into  Him.  (Doune.) 
The  superiority  of  Christianity  to  Judaism  : — It  was  the  happiness  of  the  Jews  to 
have  had  the  law,  but  it  is  ours  not  to  need  it ;  they  had  the  benefit  of  a  guide  to 
direct  them,  but  we  are  at  our  journey's  end ;  they  had  a  schoolmaster  to  lead  them 
to  Christ,  but  we  have  proceeded  so  far  as  that  we  are  in  possession  of  Christ. 
The  lsw  of  Moses  binds  us  not  at  all  as  it  is  His  law ;  whatsoever  binds  a  Christian 
in  that  law  would  have  bound  Him  though  there  had  been  no  law  given  to  Moses. 
(John  Donne,  D.D.)  The  law  our  schoolmaster  : — I.  The  Holt  Ghost  employs  thb 
law  as  a  servant.  Salvation  never  came  by  the  law,  never  could  have  come  by  the 
law,  never  oan  come  by  the  law,  through  any  obedience  that  fallen  man  can  render 
either  to  its  letter  or  its  spirit.  The  law  is  the  map ;  it  is  not  the  country.  The  law 
is  the  model ;  it  is  not  the  substance.  The  law  is  the  picture ;  it  is  not  the  person. 
The  law  prophesies,  prefigures,  presents  the  fulness  of  the  salvation  which  is 
wrought  by  Jesus  Christ  as  the  ground  of  the  believer's  security  and  the  warrant  of 
his  faith.  But  under  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost  another  illustration  is  intro- 
duced, and  the  apostle  says  the  law  is  the  schoolmaster,  or,  to  Anglicise  the  Greek 
word,  is  the  pedagogue,  to  bring  us  unto  Christ.  And  the  parts  of  the  figure  are 
easily  comprehended.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  parent  of  the  soul ;  the  law  is  the 
tutor  to  whose  instruction  it  is  committed  until  the  time  of  majority,  when  all  the 
tutors  and  governors  of  minority  disappear,  and  the  privileges  of  heirship  in  Christ 
become  the  possession  and  the  enjoyment  of  those  who  have  passed  from  the 
tutor's  care.  Now,  the  Spirit  of  God  presents  to  us  the  law  of  God  under 
this  simile.  Go  where  the  sinner  will,  before  he  has  come  to  the  full  age  of  faith, 
the  law  of  God  is  his  shadow.  Oh  !  that  men  would  remember  this.  They  do  not 
in  darkness  escape  God's  ever  present  detection ;  they  do  not  by  double  dealing 
evade  the  inspection  of  Him  who  has  established  the  law  for  their  discipline  to 
bring  them  unto  Christ.  Wherever  the  man  goes  before  he  has  learned  the  fulness 
of  his  salvation  in  Jesus,  he  must  be  looking  about  him  for  the  presence  of  the 
schoolmaster.  When  the  law  of  God  takes  hold  of  a  man,  and  he  realizes  his 
obligation  under  its  commandment  and  his  subjection  to  its  penalty,  then,  of  course, 
pleasures  cease  for  him,  for  the  presence  of  the  schoolmaster  destroys  every  circum- 
stance of  peace  and  enjoyment.  Does  he  go  to  a  place  of  frivolous  amusement  ? 
The  law  of  God  whispers  to  his  conscience,  "  What  if  you  should  die  here  ?  "  Does 
he  go  to  his  pillow  and  seek  relief  from  remorse  ?  He  lays  his  head  upon  it 
without  possible  quietness,  while  the  law  of  God  recounts  to  him  the  condemnation 
he  has  justly  deserved  for  every  impurity  of  thought  and  defection  in  act.  Does 
he  go  to  church,  and  is  the  minister  of  God  expounding  the  gospel  of  God's  grace  ? 
Next  to  him  in  the  pew  sits  the  law  of  God  his  inseparable  companion,  who  tells 
him,  in  the  midst  of  promises,  "  These  are  ot  for  you."  In  the  midst  of  all  the 
descriptions  of  the  pleasures  of  the  saint,  "  ou  have  no  part  in  these."  And  when 
the  dark  cloud  of  Divine  indignation  which  brings  out  in  relief  the  grace  of  Jesus 
Christ  rises  before  him,  the  awful  menace  of  the  law  tells  him,  "The  storm  will 
burst  upon  you,  the  condemnation  of  God  will  catch  you,  hell  is  yawning  to  receive 
yoo."  Oh !  the  horrors  of  this  pedagogue-companion  under  whose  discipline  men 
are  so  ready  to  live.     Now  let  us,  having  looked  at  their  inseparable  companionship, 


219  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

overtake  them  in  their  walk  and  listen  to  some  of  their  conversation.  The  refrain 
of  all  that  the  law  says  is,  "  Do."  "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt  live."  And  to  this 
constant  exhortation,  which  stirs  up  all  the  bitterness  of  the  heart,  there  is  a 
succession  of  apologies  and  pleas  presented,  which,  for  the  time,  will  silence  the 
voice  of  conscience,  but  which  the  law  brushes  away  with  ridicule  as  of  offering 
chaff  for  wheat,  brass  for  gold,  currency  for  coin.  "  Do  this  and  thou  Bhalt  live." 
"  I  want  to  do  it."  "  It  is  not  wanting  to  do ;  it  is  doing,"  saith  the  law.  M I  will 
try  to  obey."  "  That  will  not  suffice.  It  is  not  trying ;  it  is  obeying."  "  I  have 
obeyed  a  great  many  of  the  commandments.  I  am  reputed  to  be  obedient.  I  think 
I  have  almost  reached  it."  "  Almost  is  not  enough,  child ;  altogether  thou  must 
do  it."  Not  a  single  defect  must  there  be  in  either  spirit  or  letter  of  prohibition  or 
command.  Oh,  what  a  multitude  of  apologies  does  the  pedagogue  have  to  hear ! 
"  I  am  quite  as  good  as  those  about  me."  "  Thou  hast  nothing  to  do  with  another ; " 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  "  Yes,  but  I  am  ready  to  believe  in  Christ  after  I 
have  done  all  I  can."  "  Christ  cannot  help  thee ;  as  long  as  thou  art  under  age 
thou  must  be  under  the  law  and  thou  must  do  all.  When  thou  hast  become  of 
majority,  then  my  office  is  at  an  end,  and  is  passed  away."  "Well,  I  am  praying 
for  help  to  obey  the  commandment."  "  There  will  no  help  eome  to  thee  until  thou 
dost  come  of  age,  child,  and  dost  trust  completely  in  Him  who  is  the  Saviour  of  the 
world."  Thou  canst  never  compound  and  commingle  and  amalgamate  the  law  and 
the  gospel.  The  illustration  might  be  indefinitely  continued  to  cover  all  the  possible 
pretexts  of  sinners  before  the  law  of  God.  But  the  whole  story  is  told  in  this  one 
statement,  that  the  law  of  God  never  smiles  upon  a  sinner.  This  schoolmaster 
always  frowns.  There  is  no  pity  in  the  law ;  there  is  no  mercy  under  its  minis- 
tration. The  one  office  of  the  pedagogue  was  to  drag  the  boy  down.  The  one 
office  of  God's  law,  as  the  spirit  employs  it,  is  to  humble  every  proud  thought,  every 
high  look,  every  personal  ambition  and  determination,  until  the  man  is  willing  to 
be  a  beggar  and  be  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One.  II.  The  bbband 
which  is  entrusted  to  THIS  pedagooue.  "The  law  was  our  schoolmaster  to 
bring  us  to  Christ."  The  original  reads,  "The  law  is  our  schoolmaster  unto 
Christ."  When  we  reach  Christ,  then  is  the  vocation  of  the  schoolmaster  at  an 
end.  It  convinces  men  that  they  need  Christ — that  they  need  a  free  salvation. 
Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law.  His  obedience  was  perfect.  Now  we  want  to  be 
justified  by  faith  through  His  righteousness.  III.  The  sign  that  the  law  has 
discharged  his  coirMissioN.  Our  boys  come  of  age  at  twenty-one  years.  Under 
the  Greek  code,  the  child  came  of  age  at  thirteen  and  a  half  years.  And  I  know 
some  boys  in  our  congregation  that  it  would  greatly  delight  if  that  were  the  rule  in 
America.  We  have  very  few  children  nowadays.  They  are  all  men  and  women. 
Under  the  Eoman  law,  majority  was  not  attained  until  twenty-five  years,  but  when 
the  day  was  reached  at  which  the  child,  by  the  custom  of  the  land  and  the  con- 
stitution of  the  Government,  was  pronounced  a  man,  he  could  laugh  at  the  school* 
master,  and  his  office  had  passed  away.  Up  to  that  hour  he  was  imperious.  Now 
he  was  impertinent.  Up  to  that  day  his  sharpness  of  examination  was  only  the 
fulfilment  of  the  duty  he  had  assumed.  After  that  day,  to  assume  any  such 
relation  to  the  man,  was  to  bring  himself  under  the  law  which  would  condemn  him 
utterly.  So,  saith  the  apostle,  when  faith  is  come,  when  the  child  has  passed  up 
toward  full  majority  by  trusting  in  Jesus  Christ,  then  the  schoolmaster  has  gone, 
the  believer  is  freed  from  the  law  as  a  discipline.  Oh  1  dear  friend,  this  is  the 
mountain  top  from  which  we  view  the  land  of  promise.  This  is  the  place  of  privilege 
to  which  evsvy  child  of  God  is  permitted  to  attain.  We  are  not  under  the  law,  says 
the  apostle,  we  are  under  grace.  But  the  sign  that  this  majority  has  been  reached 
is  the  transference  of  the  soul  from  the  discipline  of  precepts  to  that  of  principles, 
which  the  apostle  calls  the  law  written  on  the  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart.  We  are 
not  free  from  this  law.  It  never  passes  away  ;  but  now  we  delight  in  the  law  of 
God.  There  is  no  fear  now  as  we  remember  the  old  commandments.    (S.  H.  Tyng.) 

Vers.  25,  29.  For  we  axe  all  the  children  of  Cod  by  faith  In  Christ  Jesus. — 
Liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  : — "Liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity,"  is  the  three' 
fold  watchword  of  the  masses  in  modern  society.  These  words  are  written  up  in 
large  characters  on  public  buildings,  and  even  on  some  of  the  churches,  in  France ; 
and  the  ideas  represented  by  them  are  held  and  aimed  after  by  vast  numbers  is 
nearly  every  European  country.  What  is  meant  by  them  ?  (a)  By  "  Liberty  "  in 
meant  perfect  freedom  for  the  people  to  govern  themselves.    This  is  attainable. 


chip,  m.]  GALATIANS.  219 

•nd,  so  far  as  political  government  is  concerned,  it  has  been  attained  by  France, 
Great  Britain,  and  other  countries,  (b)  By  "  Equality  "  is  meant  the  abolition  of 
rank  and  title,  whether  hereditary  or  otherwise  ;  to  many  it  means  socialism  or 
communism — the  abolition  of  personal  property — the  State  becoming  the  sole 
proprietor  and  apportioner  of  the  means  of  subsistence,  (c)  By  "  Fraternity  "  is 
meant  the  realization  of  the  feeling  of  true  brotherhood  as  between  man  and  man. 
Snob  are  the  ideas  represented  by  the  "  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  "  sought 
after  by  the  world — a  mixture  of  truth  and  error.  True  "  liberty,  equality,  and 
fraternity  "  are  only  to  be  attained  through  the  gospel  being  accepted  and  acted 
on  throughout  the  world.  This  alone  will  stop  the  seethings  of  dissatisfaction,  the 
upheavals  of  discontent,  and  the  outbreaks  of  revolutionary  passion.     I.  True 

LIBERTY   IS  THAT   WHICH   IS   ENJOYED  BY   THE   CHILDREN   OF   GOD.      1.   Freedom    from 

the  condemnation  of  the  law.  2.  Freedom  from  the  power  of  evil.  II.  Equality 
in  Jesus  Christ.  Not  an  equality  subverting  natural  relations  ;  these  remain, 
but  with  a  new  spirit  of  light  and  love,  constituting  essential  equality  under  cir- 
cumstantial inequalities,  so  far  as  these  are  not  inlaid  in  the  very  constitution  of 
man  as  a  social  being.  1.  In  Christ  there  is  no  national  inequality.  2.  In  Christ 
there  is  complete  equality  between  master  and  servant.  3.  Equality  as  between 
man  and  woman.  III.  True  fraternity.  This  is  unattainable  by  political 
methods.  It  never  yet  has  been,  and  never  will  be,  reached  by  these  means. 
Neither  ancient  nor  modern  republics  have  been  able  to  secure  true  brotherhood 
among  the  members  of  the  State,  e.g.,  Athenian  democracy,  French  and  American 
Bepublios.  Only  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  can  make  us  true  brothers,  as  descended 
from  the  same  parent,  heirs  of  the  same  inheritance,  and  hence  possessed  of  a 
spirit  of  true  fraternal  affection  towards  each  other.  Not  necessarily  do  Christians 
always  agree  in  their  opinion  on  indifferent  points ;  nor  do  they  see  fundamental 
questions  always  from  the  same  standpoint— one  seeing  the  matter  according  to 
his  own  God-given  mental  peculiarities,  another  according  to  his,  and  so  on ;  but, 
amid  all  differences  of  opinion,  they  are  one  in  true  brotherly  affection,  sympathy, 
and  aim.  This  is  the  real  tendency  and  intention  and  aim  of  Christianity,  however 
far  we  may  at  present  fall  short  of  it.  What  we  can  now  see  only  "in  part,"  will  one 
day  be  perfected,  for  "  our  citizenship,  our  commonwealth,  is  in  heaven."  (W. 
Spentley.)  True  believers  the  children  of  God: — I.  Consider  the  sonship  o? 
believers  under  the  gospel.  1.  In  common  with  the  other  intelligent  creatures  of 
God  (Acts  xvii.  29).  2.  By  external  profession  (Hos.  xi.  1 ;  Matt.  ii.  15).  3.  Their 
sonship  consists  chiefly  in  their  regeneration  and  adoption.  4.  This  sonship  is 
not  a  mere  title  or  mark  of  distinction,  but  has  privileges  the  most  excellent 
annexed  to  it.  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them.  They  are  His  temples.  Led 
by  His  spirit.  Abiding  in  their  Father's  house,  heart,  love.  They  have  a  title  to 
incorrupt  ion  and  immortality  (Bom.  viii.  23).  They  are  born  to  a  great  inheritance 
(Bom.  viii.  17;  Psa.  xvi.  5).  5.  This  sonship  is  equally  the  privilege  of  every 
believer  in  Christ.  They  may  be  distinguished  from  each  other,  as  to  external 
circumstances  in  life,  spiritual  gifts  and  graces,  &c,  but  their  filial  relation  is  the 
same.  6.  It  is  a  privilege  of  which  they  are  conscious,  and  hence  they  enjoy  the 
comfort  of  it  (Gal.  iv.  6).  U.  How  it  is  that  they  attain  to  this  privilege 
and  dignity.  The  text  says,  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  illustrate  this,  it  may 
be  proper  to  recollect — 1.  That  in  the  state  of  primitive  innocence,  Adam  was  truly 
the  son  of  God :  he  resembled  God  (Gen.  i.  27).  This  resemblance  was  effaced  by 
sin  ;  his  former  relation  of  6onship  to  God  thenjeeased,  and  he  was  turned  out  of 
God's  family  and  garden  as  a  rebel,  while  he  and  his  numerous  progeny  became 
children  of  disobedience  and  wrath.  2.  It  is  by  faith,  or  a  supernatural  revelation 
only,  that  we  are  informed  how  this  high  prerogative  may  be  regained.  This 
surpasses  the  capacity  of  the  wisest  philosopher,  and  even  of  angels.  It  is  brought 
to  light  by  the  gospel  (Gal.  iv.  4,  5).  3.  We  become  the  children  of  God,  when  we 
cordially  believe  in  Christ :  we  are  thereby  brought  into  union  with  Christ  and  into 
a  relation  of  sonship  with  the  Father  (John  i.  12).  Concluding  exhortation :  1. 
Be  astonished,  ye  heavenly  principalities  and  power?,  to  see  such  base-born  slaves 
and  rebellious  creatures  taken  into  the  family  of  God.  TJnmeasurable  love! 
Infinite  honour !  2.  Forget  not  the  love,  duty,  submission,  and  service,  resulting 
from  this  relation.  3.  How  insipid,  alas !  are  such  themes  as  this  to  the  generality 
even  of  gospel  hearers.  Show  them  how  to  acquire  a  fortune,  <&c,  and  they  will 
be  all  attention  ;  but  publish  the  riches  of  God's  gracious  adoption,  they  relish  it 
not.  Blinded  sinner,  what  a  fatal  choice  1  Naught  can  avail  thee  in  the  long  ran, 
but  this.    Claim  thy  adoption,  and  live  as  a  child  of  God.     (Theological  Sketch 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Booh.)  All  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  : — I.  A  wonderful  and  am 
inexplicable  privilege.  What  an  honour  (Prov.  xvii.  6) !  What  an  advantage 
(Rom.  viii.  17) !  In  this  name  we  have — 1.  A  spiritual  right  to  all  the  creatures  of 
God  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23).  2.  An  interest  in  God  Himself  (Isa.  xlix.  15,  16  ;  1  John 
iv.  16).  3.  The  service  and  guardianship  of  angels  (Psa.  xci.  11;  Matt,  xviii.  10; 
Heb.  i.  14).  4.  A  certain  and  infallible  claim  to  eternal  glory  (Col.  i.  12 :  Matt, 
sxv.  34).  II.  The  means  of  the  enjoyment  of  this  privilege.  1.  This  privilege 
is  not  natural  to  man.  By  nature  we  are  (1)  children  of  this  world  (Luke  xvi.  8); 
or  worse,  (2)  a  seed  of  falsehood  (Isa.  lvii.  4) ;  or  yet  worse,  (3)  children  of 
unrighteousness  and  darkness  (1  Thess.  v.  5) ;  or  yet  worse,  (4)  sons  of  wilful 
disobedience  (Eph.  ii.  3);  or  worst  of  all,  (5)  children  of  wrath  (Eph.  ii.  2).  2.  Thie 
enjoyment  may  be  obtained  by  (1)  Adoption  (Eph.  i.  5) ;  (2)  Regeneration ;  not  of 
water  only,  so  we  are  all  sacramentally  regenerated  ;  but  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  John 
i.  12,  13  ;  iii.  5).  3.  Union  with  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  15 ;  Jas.  i.  18).  4. 
By  means  of  faith  as  saith  the  text.  III.  How  shall  we  know  that  wb  enjoy 
this  privilege.  Every  child  of  God  is — 1.  Like  his  Father  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16);  (1) 
He  is  merciful ;  are  we  cruel?  (2)  He  is  righteous  ;  are  we  unjust?  (3)  He  is  slow 
to  anger ;  are  we  furious  ?  (4)  He  is  abhorrent  of  evil ;  do  we  take  pleasure  in 
wickedness?  2.  Bears  a  filial  answering  to  a  paternal  love.  3.  Reverences  his 
Father  (Mai.  i.  6).  4.  Is  obedient  to  his  Father.  5.  But  beyond  this  there  is  the 
witness  and  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  our  Father.  (Bishop  Hall.)  ^  The 
means  of  Christian  sonship  : — A  man  has  faith  in  God  as  the  Creator  of  the  universe, 
as  the  Father  of  man,  as  the  moral  Ruler  of  the  world ;  but  that  is  not  what  it 
meant  by  the  faith  that  admits  into  the  saved  family.  A  man  may  assure  himself 
that  he  has  scientific  ground  for  his  faith  in  theism,  but  that  is  a  long  way  from 
the  faith  that  saves  the  soul.  To  put  faith  in  manhood,  or  kinghood,  or  pope,  or 
progress,  or  church,  or  creed,  as  the  object  of  faith  is  simply  to  divert  the  mind 
from  that  which  saves.  Faith  in  the  beautiful,  the  good,  the  nobler  aspects  of  the 
race,  in  the  poetry  and  yearnings  of  the  higher  humanitarianism,  are  interesting 
things  to  talk  about ;  but  to  put  them  forth  as  the  dark  passages  through  which 
men  are  to  find  their  way  into  the  family,  is  to  shut  the  door  of  hope  in  the  face  of 
the  great  sinning,  sorrowing,  race.  Not  without  meaning  is  Fichte's  despair  of 
raising  men  into  the  blessed  life  since  they  are  so  far  beneath  the  reach  of  his 
philosophy.  But  Paul  here  opens  the  door  of  hope,  and  shows  how  any  man  may 
become  a  new  child  of  God.  (Mitchell.)  The  vastness  of  the  Christian  family : — 
No  man  ever  wrought  to  make  the  world  better  that  was  not  my  brother.  No  man  ever 
laboured  to  exemplify  the  coming  manhood,  that  was  not  kindred  to  me.  Whatever 
nation  he  belonged  to  he  belonged  to  my  nation.  Whatever  language  he  spoke,  he 
spoke  my  language.  Whatever  sphere  he  wrought  in  was  my  sphere.  Whether  he 
was  crowned  or  uncrowned,  he  was  of  my  lineage.  I  own  him  ;  and  if  he  is  saved  he 
owns  me.  And  all  over  the  world,  there  are  no  spirits  bearing  and  enduring  with 
fortitude  and  cheerfulness  in  obscurity  that  are  not  my  unknown  relations.  My 
Father  has  an  enormous  family,  for  my  Father  is  God.  My  eldest  brother  is 
named  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  relationships  which  spring  out  of  this  Fatherhood  and 
this  Brotherhood — how  many  they  are  1  Wherever  men  are  denying  themselves  for 
rectitude,  and  enduring  for  that  which  is  just  and  true,  and  living  courageously 
for  the  right,  and  exemplifying  purity  and  sweetness,  and  diffusing  happiness — 
these  are  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  our  brethren.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Safety  by  trusting  Christ: — A  man  was  fleeing  from  some  men  who 

desired  to  rob  and  kill  him.  He  came  to  a  wide  gulf,  over  which  there  was  only  a 
Blender  plank  for  a  bridge.  It  looked  too  weak  to  bear  him,  so  that  there  seemed  only 
a  choice  of  the  kind  of  death  open  to  him.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  Death  behind !  Death 
in  front  by  a  fearful  fall  1  While  his  mind  was  wavering  as  to  his  right  course,  he 
saw  a  strong,  heavy  man  on  the  opposite  side,  who  shouted,  '  Come  over,  man  !  I 
crossed  the  plank  safely ;  I  am  heavier  than  you  are.  When  it  has  borne  me  it 
will  bear  you.'  Similarly,  Christ  is  our  plank  of  safety  across  the  gulf  of 
damnation.  He  has  borne  my  sins,  therefore  He  can  and  will  bear  yours.  Jesus 
the  only  Saviour : — A  person  asked  me  the  other  day  whether  I  had  seen  a  book 
entitled,  "Sixteen  Saviours."  I  answered,  "  No,  I  have  not,  and  I  do  not  want  to 
know  of  sixteen  saviours,  I  am  satisfied  with  one.  If  all  who  dwell  in  heaven  and 
earth  could  be  made  into  saviours,  and  the  whole  were  put  together,  you  might 
blow  them  away  as  a  child  blows  away  thistle-down,  but  there  is  this  one  Saviour, 
the  Son  of  Man,  and  yet  the  mighty  God,  and  He  cannot  be  moved.  Joy  then,  my 
brethren,  and  rejoice  in  your  blessed  Lord.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


cha*.  ra.]  GALATIANS.  «1 

Ver.  27.  Have  been  baptiaod  into  Christ  have  pnt  on  Christ. — Baptized  into 
Christ  have  put  on  Christ : — I.  The  clothing  is  twofold.  1.  The  putting  on  of  a 
garment.  This  is  also  twofold.  (1)  To  take  the  outward  name  and  profession. 
This  doth  no  good  (Hagg.  i.  6).  It  may  be  done  to  delude  others,  but  God  cannot 
be  deluded.  He  will  take  off  the  garment  of  the  hypocrite,  and  expose  him  to 
open  shame.  For  this  is  an  affront  to  Christ  to  put  on  an  outward  Christianity  till 
noon,  and  be  libertines  after.  If  thou  shouldst  wear  the  prince's  livery  in  scantier 
proportions  or  coarser  stuff  than  belongs  to  thy  place,  will  he  accept  thee  ?  No  more 
will  Christ.  (2)  To  put  on  His  righteousness  by  imitation  and  oonformity.  We 
must  put  off  our  old  clothes  and  appear  naked  before  God,  then  we  come  to  our 
transfiguration  (Eom.  iv.  4).  2.  The  putting  on  of  a  person.  (1)  We  are  not  to 
put  on  Christ  as  a  livery  nor  as  a  coin  the  image  of  a  king.  (2)  But  as  a  son  doth 
his  father  in  whom  the  same  nature  doth  reside.  (3)  Then  shall  we  so  appear 
before  God,  as  that  he  shall  take  us  for  His  own  Christ ;  we  shall  bear  His  name 
and  person.  (4)  We  shall  every  one  be  so  accepted  as  if  every  one  of  us  were  all 
mankind,  yea,  as  if  we  were  He  Himself.  II.  Its  completeness.  As  the  garment 
Christ  wore  was  seamless  and  entire,  so  this  garment,  Christ  Jesus  our  sanctifica- 
tion,  must  cover  us  all  over,  and  go  through  our  whole  life  in  a  constant,  even 
perseverance.  We  must  not  only  be  hospitable  and  feed  the  poor  at  Christmas ;  be 
sober  and  abstinent  the  day  we  receive  the  sacrament ;  repent  and  think  of  amend- 
ment in  the  day  of  sickness.  No  man  may  take  the  frame  of  Christ's  merit  in 
pieces.  He  that  puts  on  Christ  must  put  Him  on  all ;  and  not  only  find  that  Christ 
hath  died,  nor  that  He  hath  died  for  him,  but  that  he  also  hath  died  in  Christ. 
(Doune.)  The  investiture  of  Christ : — 1.  Thb  vesture  is — 1.  Most  beautiful. 
2.  Most  costly.  3.  Most  rare.  (1)  In  its  purity.  (2)  In  its  capacity.  (3)  In  its 
importance.  4.  Most  durable.  II.  The  investiture  is — 1.  Possible  (1)  from  the 
character  of  the  vesture.  Christ's  an  universal  character — "  the  Man  "  ;  (2)  from  the 
nature  of  the  investiture  :  the  assimilation  of  Christ's  character.  2.  Necessary  (1) 
for  protection,  (2)  for  adornment.  3.  Accomplished  by  (1)  faith,  (2)  love,  (3) 
obedience.  III.  The  invested  will  have — 1.  Comfort  in  trial.  2.  Invincibility  in 
temptation.  3.  Confidence  in  the  hour  of  death  and  day  of  judgment.  4.  Com- 
pleteness of  joy  in  this  life  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.  Baptismal  regenera- 
tion : — A  child  is  to  be  baptized  on  a  given  day ;  but  when  that  day  arrives  the  child 
is  unwell,  and  the  ceremony  must  be  postponed  another  week  or  month.  Again  a 
delay  takes  place — the  day  is  damp  or  cold.  At  last  the  time  arrives ;  the  service 
is  read ;  it  may  require,  if  read  slowly,  five  minutes  more  than  ordinarily.  Then 
and  there,  when  that  ceremony  is  slowly  accomplished,  the  mystery  is  achieved. 
And  all  this  time,  while  the  child  is  ill,  while  the  weather  is  bad,  while  the  reader 
procrastinates — I  say  it  solemnly — the  Eternal  Spirit  who  rules  the  universe,  must 
wait  patiently,  and  come  down,  obedient  to  a  mortal's  spell,  at  the  very  second  that 
it  suits  his  convenience.  God  must  wait  attendance  on  the  caprice  of  a  careless 
parent,  ten  thousand  accidents,  nay  the  leisure  of  an  indolent  or  an  immoral  priest. 
Will  yon  dare  insult  the  Majesty  on  high  by  such  a  mockery  as  this  result.  (F.  W. 
Robertson,  M.A.)  Baptism  without  grace : — The  Spanish  converts  in  Mexico  re- 
membered not  anything  of  the  promise  and  profession  they  made  in  baptism,  save 
only  their  names,  which  many  times  they  also  forgot ;  and  in  the  kingdom  of 
Congo,  in  Africa,  the  Portuguese,  at  their  first  arrival,  finding  the  people  to  be 
heathens,  induced  them  to  be  baptized  in  great  abundance,  allowing  the  principles 
of  Christianity  till  such  times  as  the  priests  pressed  them  to  lead  lives  according  to 
their  profession,  which  the  most  part  of  them  in  no  case  enduring,  returned  again 
to  their  Gentilism.  Such  renegades  are  to  be  found  in  the  midst  of  us  this  day, 
such  as  give  themselves  np  to  Christ  in  profession ;  but,  when  it  comes  to  a  holy 
life,  they  leave  him  in  the  open  field,  forsaking  their  colours,  renouncing  their 
baptism,  and  running  away  to  the  enemy.  (Spencer.)  Baptismal  privileges: — 
The  putting  on  of  Christ,  according  to  the  gospel,  consists  not  in  imitation  merely, 
but  in  a  new  birth  and  a  new  creation  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  putting  on  Christ's  innooency, 
His  righteousness,  His  wisdom,  His  power,  His  saving  health,  His  life,  and  His 
Spirit.  We  are  clothed  with  the  leather  coat  of  Adam,  which  is  a  mortal  garment, 
and  a  garment  of  sin ;  that  is  to  say,  we  are  all  subject  unto  sin,  all  sold  under  sin. 
There  is  in  us  horrible  blindness,  ignorance,  contempt,  and  hatred  of  God ;  moreover, 
evil  concupiscence,  uncleanness,  covetousness,  &o.  This  garment,  that  is  to  say, 
this  corrupt  and  sinful  nature,  we  received  from  Adam,  which  Paul  is  wont  to  eall 
"the  old  man."  This  old  man  must  be  put  off  with  all  his  works  (Eph.  iv.  22), 
that  of  th«  children  of  Adam  we  may  be  made  the  children  of  God.    This  is  not 


2SS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha». 


done  by  changing  of  a  garment,  or  by  any  law  or  works,  but  by  a  new  birth,  and  by 
the  renewing  of  the  inward  man,  which  is  done  in  baptism  (Titus  iii.  5).  For, 
besides  that  they  which  are  baptized  are  regenerate  and  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  a  heavenly  righteousness  and  to  eternal  life,  there  riseth  in  them  also  a  new  light 
and  a  new  flame ;  there  rise  in  them  new  and  holy  affections,  as  the  fear  of  God, 
true  faith  and  assured  hope,  Ac. ;  there  beginneth  in  them  also  a  new  will.  This  is 
to  put  on  Christ  truly.  To  be  apparelled  with  Christ  is  not  to  be  apparelled  with 
the  law  nor  with  works,  but  with  an  incomparable  gift ;  that  is  to  say,  with  remis- 
sion of  sins,  righteousness,  peace,  consolation,  joy  of  spirit,  salvation,  life,  and 
Christ  Himself.  This  is  diligently  to  be  noted,  because  of  the  fond  and  fantastical 
spirits  which  go  about  to  deface  the  Majesty  of  baptism,  and  speak  wickedly  of  it. 
Paul  contrariwise  commendeth  it,  and  setteth  it  forth  with  honourable  titles. 
(Luther.)  Putting  on  Christ: — This  verse  introduces  us  to  some  of  the  very 
central  and  most  sacred  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  It  tells  us  what  our  condition  is, 
— we  who  have  been  baptiied  into  Christ ; — and,  telling  us  what  our  condition  is,  it 
opens  to  us  so  wide  and  wonderful  a  view  of  the  duties,  burthens,  hopes,  and  helps 
that  belong  to  that  condition,  as  may  well  astonish  us,  and  fill  us  with  fear  and 
trembling,  with  fearful  hope,  and  with  trembling  joy.  I  need  not  linger  much  in 
explaining  the  first  words  of  the  verse  of  the  text,  "  as  many  of  you  as  have  bee* 
baptized  " ;  however  many  of  the  Galatians  St.  Paul  may  have  comprehended  under 
this  description,  there  is  no  question  that  it  comprehends  all  of  us.  We  have  all 
been  baptized,  have  all  been  carried,  in  the  faith  of  the  Church,  represented  by  our 
godfathers  and  godmothers,  to  the  life-giving  font,  and  have  received  the  promises 
of  God  made  to  us  in  that  sacrament.  Again,  he  says,  "  have  been  baptized  into 
Christ."  On  this  point,  too,  there  is  no  need  to  dwell  at  present ;  suffice  it  for  the 
present  purpose  to  say,  that  to  be  baptized  into  Christ  signifies  (1)  to  be  baptized  into 
the  body  of  Christ ;  to  be  made  by  baptism  a  member  of  that  sacred  immortal  body, 
whose  head  is  the  Lord  in  heaven,  and  whose  bond  of  life  and  union  is  the  blessed 
Spirit  of  God ;  and  (2)  to  be  baptized  into  the  Holy  Trinity,  into  that  name,  into  that 
belief  and  profession,  into  that  holy  keeping,  and  into  that  mysterious  communion. 
These  points  I  will  not  enlarge  upon  at  present ;  I  will  rather  assume  that  we  are 
acquainted  with  all  the  great  things  which  are  signified  by  the  expression,  "  being 
baptized  into  Christ " ;  and,  turning  your  attention  to  the  remaining  words,  con- 
sider how  it  is  said,  that  they  who  have  been  baptized  into  Christ,  have  pot  on 
Christ.  1.  First,  then,  we  may  regard  the  words  as  metaphorical,  and  understand 
them  to  mean,  that  we  have  put  on,  or  assumed,  the  Christian  profession  of  belief,  or 
the  Christian  character,  or  the  Christian  duties,  or  the  Christian  hopes.  "  Consider, 
therefore,"  we  may  suppose  the  apostle  to  go  on,  "  how  far  your  life  really  tallies 
with  all  this  great  profession  which  you  have  made."  2.  But  this  is  not  enough. 
To  interpret  words  like  these  merely  metaphorically,  is  to  interpret  them  very 
inadequately.  To  put  on  Christ  can  hardly  be  a  less  real  phrase  than  to  be  baptised 
into  Christ,  or  to  be  in  Christ ;  and  these  phrases,  as  we  know  from  many  parts  of 
Holy  Scripture,  express  the  wonderful  and  mysterious  connexion  which  subsists 
between  baptized  men  and  their  Redeemer,  whereby  they  are  living  stones  of  a 
spiritual  house  or  temple;  living  members  of  a  sacred  spiritual  body;  living 
branches  of  a  holy  spiritual  vine ;  partakers  of  the  death,  and  so  of  the  life  of 
Christ;  already  immortal  in  estate;  and  in  right,  title,  and  privilege,  already 
assured  of  everlasting  bliss,  unless  they  forfeit  it  by  impenitent  and  unholy  living. 
To  put  on  Christ  seems  to  be  correlative  to  being  in  Christ ;  it  is  the  duty,  while 
the  other  is  the  privilege.  God  has,  of  His  great  mercy,  put  us  in  Christ,  made  us 
to  be  baptized  into  Christ ; — now  let  us  pray  for  His  Spirit,  and  work  with  His 
Spirit,  and  yield  ourselves  np  to  His  Spirit,  that  we  may  put  on  Christ.  In  our 
baptisms  we  were  planted  into  Christ,  into  His  body,  which  is  the  Church ;  and 
there  took  place,  by  God's  Divine  power,  the  birth  of  the  Spirit  in  oar  hearts, — the 
germinating  of  the  little  seed  of  Divine,  spiritual  life,  the  kindling  of  the  little  spark 
of  holy  immortal  fire,  which,  unless  it  be  smothered  by  sin  unrepented,  should  be 
our  earnest,  and  inalienable  title  to  glory  and  salvation.  This  was  the  great 
baptismal  blessing.  But  there  is  something  else  after  this.  Then  Christ  has  to  be 
formed  in  us.  Then  our  own  souls,  in  which,  even  after  baptism,  the  infection  of 
nature  remaineth,  have  to  grow  up  in  Christ's  likeness,  to  grow  to  the  stature  of  a 
perfect  man  in  Christ,  to  become  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God.  This  is  the  work 
of  our  life  after  baptism ;  this  is  the  reason  why  we  live  so  many  years  after 
baptism  ;  this  is  the  reason  why  baptism  is  early,  and  death  often  late,  why  baptism 
is  not  the  end,  but  the  beginning  of  our  lives.    Our  life  after  baptism  should  not  bo 


CHAP,  in.]  GALATIANS.  823 

a  falling  back,  but  a  rising  and  growing;  not  a  declension  from  baptismal 
innocence,  but  a  strengthening  in  Christ-like  virtues.  Herein  then  is  the  precise 
duty,  stated  in  the  lofty  and  mysterious  terms  of  Holy  Scripture,  which  we  are 
living  now  to  discharge  ;  the  putting  on  Christ, — the  forming  of  Christ  in  our  own 
separate  souls,  the  growing  up  to  the  "perfect  man,  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ."  For  this  cause,  our  bodies  grow  from  the  infant  feebleness 
in  which  they  received  the  regenerating  washing  of  holy  baptism,  through  their 
vigorous  and  lively  youth,  to  the  confirmed  strength  of  manhood ;  for  this  cause, 
our  minds  naturally  widen  and  grow  strong,  our  imaginations  vivid  and  inventive, 
our  thought  strong  and  deep,  our  memory  firm  and  tenacious,  and  our  judgment 
considerate  and  sound ;  for  this  cause,  we  are  placed  under  training  and  discipline ; 
for  this  cause,  God  has  given  us  kind  and  loving  friends ;  for  this  cause  He  allows 
us  to  see  and  know,  in  the  examples  of  others,  the  aspect  of  sin,  and  the  aspect  of 
obedience,  that  we  may  be  the  rather  helped  to  right,  and  deterred  from  wrong,  by 
learning  to  love  and  hate  them  respectively,  when  exhibited  in  others ;  for  this 
cause,  He  sends  us  joy  or  sorrow,  takes  us  from  those  we  love,  or  takes  those  we 
love  from  us  ;  for  this  cause,  He  allows  the  various  events  of  life  to  go  on  in  their 
tangled,  inscrutable  order,  trying  us,  testing  us,  proving  us  in  ten  thousand  ways 
at  every  time ;  for  this  cause,  He  gives  us  His  Holy  Spirit,  bids  us  pray,  sets  hopes 
and  bright  encouragements  before  us,  leaves  us  alone,  yet  not  alone,  for  He  is  with 
us,  to  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  For  this  cause,  that,  being 
in  Christ  by  baptism,  we  may  by  degrees  put  on  Christ ;  that  we  may  copy  Him, 
pray  to  Him,  represent  Him,  love  to  be  near  Him,  love  His  house,  His  people,  His 
little  ones ;  that  we  may  believe  in  Him,  have  the  thought  of  Him  ever  before  our 
minds,  read  of  Him,  talk  of  Him,  love  His  words ;  that  we  may  think  who  and 
how  great  He  is,  ascend  with  Him,  love  to  retire  from  other  thoughts  to  be  with 
Him,  love  His  Church  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelleth,  love  His  sacraments 
wherein  He  is  nearest,  His  baptism  wherein  He  giveth  Himself  first,  His  blessed 
Communion  wherein  He  permits  us  more  and  more  to  be  one  with  Him,  to  be  of 
His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones.  The  Christian  estate  is  glory,  it  is 
liberty,  it  is  royal,  it  is  priestly ;  nothing  is  too  high  for  it,  as  the  apostle  sees  it. 
A  baptized  Christian  is  reborn  of  the  Spirit,  sits  in  heavenly  places,  is  companion 
of  angels,  has  his  citizenship  in  heaven,  has  his  life  in  Christ.  Living  on  in  the 
flesh,  he  grows  in  grace,  puts  on  Christ,  Christ  is  formed  in  him,  he  grows  to  the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  No;  we  must  not  lower  our 
teaching,  or  our  holding,  below  the  lofty  but  most  real  sayings,  the  wonderful 
words,  but  words  of  most  faithful  truth  and  soberness,  in  which  the  inspired 
apostles  have  been  taught  to  speak  them.  No;  we  must  raise  our  lives.  We 
must  not  speak  lower,  but  we  must  live  higher.  The  labour  and  the  struggle  is, 
to  bring  these  high  truths  into  the  very  midst  of  our  daily  lives  and  habits,  to 
remember  them  when  we  lie  down,  and  when  we  rise  up,  to  remember  them  in  our 
work  and  our  play ;  to  remember  them  and  act  upon  them  all  through  that  endless 
diversity  of  little  things,  which,  defying  statement  or  description,  make  up  our 
weekly,  daily,  and  hourly  lives.  If  your  life  be  destined  to  be  spent  in  the  midst  of 
secular  business,  let  it  accompany  you,  and  your  secular  business  will  become 
eanctified  to  you  ;  if  you  are  hereafter  to  minister  in  the  sanctuary,  let  it  go  with 
you  to  the  sanctuary,  and  it  will  waken  up  a  deeper  devotion ;  if  you  are  to  remain 
among  the  homes  of  your  fathers,  or  to  do  God's  service  in  distant  lands,  where- 
eoever  you  be,  and  howsoever  occupied,  let  the  remembrance  of  this  thought,  the 
formation  of  Christ  within  you,  the  growing  up  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fulness  of  Christ,  be,  by  God's  grace,  never  absent  from  your  Christian  minds ! 
{Bishop  Moberly.) 

Ver.  28.  There  Is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  Is  neither  bond  nor  free.— The 

unity  of  true  believers : — The  Christian  scheme  is  a  uniting  scheme,  and  all  real 
saints  are  one  in  their  glorious  Head.  I.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  saints 
are  too  much  onb,  viz.,  ik  that  which  is  evil.  They  spring  from  the  same 
depraved  original,  and  are  partakers  of  the  same  corrupt  nature.  Though  sin  does 
not  reign  in  them,  it  remains ;  and  too  frequently  led  away  captive  by  it,  they  act 
in  a  manner  displeasing  to  God.  II.  There  are  many  respects  in  which  this 
saints  are  not  onb.  1.  Natural  capacity.  2.  Temper  and  disposition.  3.  Ex- 
ternal advantages.  III.  Yet  they  are  really  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  They  are 
so  by  virtue  of  their  union  with  Him,  being  thereby  incorporated  into  one  body, 
and  animated  by  one  spirit,  also  by  virtue  of  their  participation  of  Tfl"V     \,  They 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \pnkt.  m. 

are  equally  objects  of  the  Divine  love  and  favour.  One  saint  may  love  God  more 
than  another ;  the  same  saint  may  love  God  more  at  one  time  than  another ;  bnt 
God  always  loves  all  His  people  with  the  same  everlasting,  ardent,  unalterable 
affection.  Infinite  love  admits  of  no  degrees.  2.  They  have  the  same  spiritual 
privileges.  The  same  gospel  is  preached,  the  same  Spirit  poured  on  them ;  the? 
have  one  Lord,  faith,  baptism ;  justified  by  the  same  blood,  adopted  into  the  same 
family,  regenerated  by  the  same  grace,  and  preserved  by  the  same  power.  8.  They 
all  hold  the  Head,  Christ  Jesus.  Differing  in  circumstantials,  they  are  united  in 
essentials.  Inwardly  determined  for  God,  they  are  outwardly  obedient  to  Him.  On 
the  other  hand,  every  unconverted  man  has  more  hearts  than  one,  and  more  ways 
than  one.  4.  They  have  the  same  well-grounded  hopes  and  expectations.  As  ong 
i'ather  begot  them,  so  one  heaven  shall  receive  them.  There  they  shall  be  one  in 
those  senses  in  which  now  they  are  not  so,  for  they  shall  see  eye  to  eye. 
(B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Unity  and  union : — If  there  be  any  truth  in  revelation,  any 
efficacy  to  follow  the  Saviour's  prayer,  any  power  in  the  Word  of  God  accompanied 
by  the  Divine  Spirit,  an  age  must  come  when  the  Church  will  both  be  and  appear 
to  be  one.  I.  There  is  am  essential  unity  in  the  Church,  independent  of  thb 
purpose,  will,  schemes,  and  devices  of  man.  Sincere  and  intelligent  faith  brings 
souls,  without  the  medium  of  an  ecclesiastical  organization,  into  union  with  Christ, 
and  therefore  with  all  the  members  of  His  spiritual  Body  which  is  the  Church. 
There  can  no  more  be  two  Churches  than  there  can  be  two  suns  in  the  solar  system. 
All  believers  are  one,  but  their  unity  ought  to  be  visible.  II.  Notwithstanding 
this  essental  UNITY,  divisions  exist  ik  the  Church.  To  turn  from  the  ideal 
Church  to  that  which  appears  to  view  is  like  looking  off  from  a  peaceful  and  tran- 
quil lake  to  an  ocean  tossed  with  tempest.  These  divisions  are  in  themselves 
injurious,  for  by  splitting  up  the  forces  they  take  away  that  combined  strength 
which  the  Church  ought  to  present  to  the  world;  and  they  also  show  that  bitterness 
of  feeling  exists.  The  clouds  that  are  exhaled  from  the  waters  of  strife  hang,  like 
a  thick  veil,  over  the  bright  orb  of  religion  ;  religion  is  seen  through  them,  no 
doubt,  but  like  the  sun  seen  through  a  mist — shorn  of  its  beams,  diminished  in  its 
effulgence.  Eeligion  suffers  in  consequence.  "  Divide  and  destroy  "  is  the  watch- 
word of  Satan,  net  of  God.  IH.  What  kind  of  manifestation  of  this  unity 
should  we  seek  7  Our  differences  of  opinion  are  not  trifles ;  they  are  serious 
matters.  If  one  body  of  believers  is  right,  then  the  others  must  be  wrong.  If  all 
are  wrong  in  some  particulars,  they  should  renounce  their  errors,  and  unite  on  the 
ground  of  the  common  truth.  How  is  such  a  unity  to  be  brought  about  ?  1.  By 
cultivating  personal  godliness  to  a  much  greater  extent.  Errors  of  judgment  arise, 
in  great  measure,  out  of  the  corruption  of  the  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  not  yet 
brought  mto  subjection  to  the  mind  of  Jesus.  2.  Unity  of  affection.  External 
union  will  never  be  brought  about  until  men's  hearts  are  knit  together  as  thread  is 
interwoven  with  thread.  3.  Unity  of  persons.  Every  Christian  grace  must  be 
seen.  Not  sectarian  love.  4.  Unity  of  action.  Working  together  as  labourers 
in  the  same  vineyard.  The  oxen  must  be  yoked  quietly  together  (to  use  a  familiar 
illustration)  before  they  can  draw  together ;  the  horses  must  be  harnessed,  and 
stand  quiet  without  kicking  each  other,  before  they  can  draw  together ;  we  must  be 
harnessed  and  yoked  in  love  before  we  can  unite  externally.  IV.  The  means  to 
be  used  to  bring  about  this  desirable  union.  1.  We  shall  never  obtain  it 
unless  we  really  do  desire  it.  All  must  long  and  pray  together  for  the  healing  of 
our  unhappy  divisions.  2.  There  must  be  a  conviction  abroad,  that  it  is  every- 
body's business  to  do  what  they  can  towards  accomplishing  it.  Not  ministers  only, 
but  lay  people  as  well.  The  Church  is  made  up  of  units ;  let  all  help.  8.  The 
cultivation  of  personal  religion.  The  olive  branch  can  never  flourish  but  in  the 
rich  soil  of  personal  piety ;  let  that  soil  be  impaired,  and  the  bitter  aloe  of  con- 
tention, the  thorn,  the  bramble,  the  briar,  and  the  nettle  of  angry  controversy  will 
flourish  luxuriantly.  Man  departs  from  his  brother  by  departing  from  God ;  close- 
ness to  God  will  bring  each  one  closer  to  his  brother  man.  Only  the  constraining 
love  of  Christ  can  compress  and  concentrate  the  Church  into  a  closer  union. 
4.  Let  each  do  what  he  can  in  his  own  narrow  circle.  Not  necessary  to  wait 
for  the  working  out  of  a  huge  scheme  of  general  union.  Heal  up  the  little 
sores.  5.  Be  careful  about  controversy.  Don't  elevate  secondary  matters  into 
primary.  Study  the  unity  of  heaven,  and  try  to  realize  it  on  earth.  Pray  for  the 
Spirit's  guidance.  (J.  AngeJl  James.)  Christ  and  the  Church  one  : — I.  Thb 
oneness  of  Christ  and  the  Chubch.  The  Church  is :  (1)  many ;  (2)  manifold  ; 
and  yet  (3)  from  this  very  multitudinousness  and  manifoldness  arises  oneness. 


chap,  m,]  GALAT1ANS. 


II.  Ths  moth  or  the  unity  and  mantfoldness  of  tee  CHcr.cn  is  the  basis  of 
New  Testament   morality.      (Homiltst.)  Grounds  of  unity : — Here    are    the 

grounds  and  reasons  for  Christian  unity.  I.  The  great  end  or  the  gospel  is  not 
only  to  save,  but  to  uaee  one.  One  great  fruit  of  sin  is  separation ;  the  great 
object  of  the  gospel  is  to  bring  about  unity.  Sin  is  extinguished  by  the  cross;  and 
Christ,  the  binding  element,  tills  up  the  chasm  between  offended  God  and  offending 
man — of  twain  making  one  new  man,  and  so  making  peace.  II.  Oub  relationship 
to  each  other.  All  are  sheep  of  the  same  fold.  III.  Christ's  own  command. 
"Love  one  another."  "That  they  all  may  be  one."  IV.  The  bafety  of  the 
whole  body  demands  it.  To  be  insuperable,  Christians  must  be  inseparable.  The 
strength  of  the  Christian  Church,  like  that  of  Napoleon's  army,  lies  in  consolida- 
tion, presenting  a  united  front.  V.  Necessary  fob  the  extension  or  Christ's 
kingdom.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  Union  with  Christ  and  its  results : — I.  The 
fundamental  faot.  1.  In  Christ,  as  the  stone  is  in  the  building.  2.  As  the 
fugitive  is  in  the  city  of  refuge.  3.  As  in  a  seed.  II.  The  great  consequences 
or  this  fundamental  fact.  1.  Distinction  of  nations  ceases.  2.  Distinction 
between  man  and  man  ceases.  3.  Distinction  between  strong  and  weak  ceases. 
The  native  consequence  of  a  fallen  state  is  the  mastery  of  the  strong  over  the  weak. 
Might  makes  right.  And  to  the  everlasting  disgrace  of  the  male  sex  the  woman 
became  the  bond  slave  of  the  stronger  man.  The  only  shield  of  woman's  natural 
rights  is  the  principle  here  stated.  Thus  with  one  stroke  of  the  pen  St.  Paul  settles 
the  national,  personal,  and  sexual  rights  of  men.  By  one  short  sentence  he  solves 
the  three  greatest  problems  of  human  society — peace,  liberty,  fraternity.  When 
all  men  are  one  in  Christ,  earth  will  once  more  be  a  province  of  heaven.  (J.  G. 
Murphy,  LL.D.)  Unity  not  necessarily  uniformity : — Look  around  on  all  creation, 
and  you  will  find  what  metaphysicians  have  called  the  "monad,"  that  is,  the 
ultimate  principle  of  unity,  pervading  all,  but  diversity  its  continual  development, 
characteristic  of  all.  The  cloud  takes  its  multifarious  shapes  from  the  wind,  its 
varied  splendours  from  the  sunbeam,  but  its  substance  remains  continually  the 
same.  The  fable  varies  in  the  incident  and  the  story,  but  the  moral  is  essentially 
the  same;  the  music  has  many  variations,  but  the  old  air,  the  original  air  or  melody 
may  be  detected  like  a  chord  in  the  midst  of  all  these  variations.  Animal  life, 
from  the  humblest  zoophyte  up  to  man,  the  very  perfection  of  physical  life,  presents 
every  variety  of  organization,  and  yet  its  essential  characteristics  are  the  same  in 
the  dog,  the  cat,  the  horse,  and  the  man.  Human  life,  again,  has  general 
characteristics  of  unity,  but  you  will  find  the  utmost  diversity  of  development.  It 
is  to  me  one  of  the  most  extraordinary  and  inexplicable  and  mysterious  phenomena 
of  the  world,  that  while  in  this  assembly  there  may  be  1,000  or  1,100  faces,  with 
the  same  characteristic  features  in  all,  yet  not  one  is  the  least  like  any  of  the 
others.  The  principle  of  unity  pervades  the  whole;  each  face  has  the  great, 
essential,  elemental  characteristics  of  a  face;  yet  no  two  faces,  for  reasons  we 
cannot  explain,  are  so  alike  that  one  might  be  mistaken  for  the  other.  If,  again, 
we  take  spiritual  intelligence,  we  shall  find  the  same  characteristic  unity  with  the 
same  developed  variety.  For  instance,  man  seems  to  me  to  be  the  lowest  link  in 
spiritual  intelligence.  He  is  the  basis  where  soul  or  spirit  is  united  to  matter ; 
the  next  grade  is  the  angel,  the  next  the  archangel,  then  the  cherub,  and  after  that 
the  seraph.  Here  are  ascending  grades  or  diversities  in  heaven  itself,  and  yet  the 
fundamental  characteristics  of  spiritual  life  are  the  same.  If,  again,  I  refer  to  the 
botanical  kingdom,  I  find  that  every  plant,  tree,  and  flower,  have  each  certain 
essential  and  elemental  characteristics,  and  yet  the  utmost  possible  variety  of 
development.  The  fragrance  of  a  violet  is  perfectly  distinct  from  that  of  a  rose ; 
the  colour  of  a  dahlia  is  totally  different  from  the  colour  of  a  daisy.  One  flower 
differs  from  another  in  its  shape,  fragrance,  appearance,  stem,  calyx,  leaves,  and 
yet  all  flowers  have  certain  elemental  and  essential  characteristics  which  distinguish 
the  whole  botanical  kingdom.  If  1  refer  to  the  mineral  kingdom,  I  find  that  all 
minerals  are  originated  and  guided  by  the  same  law  ;  but  one  throws  off  its  crystals  in 
the  shape  of  hexagons,  another  in  the  shape  of  pentagons  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  great 
law  of  crystallization  in  the  mineral  kingdom  is  the  same,  but  the  development  of 
that  law  is  as  varied  as  variety  can  possibly  be.  The  snowdrop,  the  raindrop,  the 
snowflake,  the  buds  of  trees,  and  the  blossoms  of  flowers — all  things  in  the 
botanical  kingdom,  all  things  in  the  mineral,  all  in  the  animal  kingdom,  and  all  in 
nature,  have  each  their  own  essential  elemental  characteristic  unity,  and  yet  in  their 
developments  we  find  the  utmost  possible  varieties  of  that  unity.  And  so,  I  would 
argue,  there  may  be  in  the  Church,  where,  I  cannot  but  think,  uniformity  would  be  a 

15 


SS6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  m. 

blemish  rather  than  a  beauty.  [J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  Near  Christ,  near  Christians : — 
Observing  in  a  large  circle  a  number  of  lines  called  by  mathematicians  "  radii,"  w« 
perceive  that  in  proportion  as  each  radius  approaches  the  centre,  it  approaches  the 
radius  that  is  next  to  it ;  just  in  proportion  to  its  nearness  to  the  centre  is  its  near- 
ness to  the  others ;  and  so  it  is  with  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  one  vast  cir 
cumference,  and  just  as  we  approach  to  Christ,  in  life  and  character,  in  the  same 
proportion  we  draw  near  each  other.  (Ibid.)  One  in  Christ :— There  lies,  deep 
down  in  the  heart  of  mankind,  not  always  read  aright  by  the  spirit  of  man  which 
is  in  him,  but  always  read  aright  by  Him  who  has  all  hearts  in  his  hand,  a 
craving,  yearning,  thirsting  desire  for  this  reversal  of  the  curse  of  Babel — for  this 
re-gathering  and  re-uniting  which  is  to  be  found  only  in  Christ.  We  speak  of 
rest  as  man's  want.  But  what  rest  ?  Not  a  rest  of  dreamy  or  dreamless  slumber  ; 
not  a  rest  of  indolent  self-indulgence ;  not  a  rest  of  undisturbed  self-contained 
isolation :  this  cannot  satisfy  the  want  of  a  spirit  come  from  and  returning  to 
God  ;  this  cannot  fill  the  capacities  of  a  heaven-born,  everlasting  existence.  Under- 
neath the  longing  for  rest  lies  another  longing — and  that  is  for  union,  unity, 
oneness  ;  for  a  voice  to  recall  God's  scattered  ones  from  Assyria,  and  from  Egypt, 
and  from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush,  and  from  Elam,  and  from  Shinar,  and  from 
Hamath,  and  from  the  islands  of  the  sea,  and  make  for  them  one  blessed  home, 
not  by  building  upon  earth  a  tower  whose  top  hhall  reach  heaven,  but  by  bringing 
down  out  of  heaven  that  holy  city  of  which  God,  God  in  Christ,  shall  be  at 
once  the  Light,  and  the  Presence,  and  the  Temple.  The  heart  craves  union : 
till  it  finds  union  it  cannot  know  rest.  And  this  craving  for  union  ia 
often  ignorant,  often  impatient,  often  perverse,  often  sinful.  It  does  not, 
all  at  once,  even  when  it  hears  the  gospel,  submit  itself  to  God'a  will,  to 
Christ's  direction,  as  to  the  end  to  be  sought,  or  the  manner  of  the  seeking. 
One  man,  his  heart  all  athirst  for  that  rest  which  is  union,  will  look  out  for  himself 
some  earthly  object,  which  he  may  deck  with  every  fancied  perfection,  and  then 
bow  before  it  as  his  idol.  Another,  of  a  less  refined  mould  and  making,  will  even 
find  a  gross,  base,  and  perishing  union  in  some  companionship  in  sinning.  For  the 
moment  he  finds  himself  less  alone  ;  for  the  moment  he  has  slaked  the  thirst  of  bis 
soul  at  a  muddy  and  a  broken  cistern — even  in  a  counterfeit  union,  to  be  followed 
by  a  more  aching  loneliness  than  the  former.  And  if  men  happen  to  have  a  differ- 
ent conception  of  the  natural  dispersion — either  because  their  affections  are  less 
lively,  or  their  ideas  wider  and  more  philosophical — then  they  frame  projects,  larger 
or  smaller,  of  combination  and  fellowship ;  they  will  unite  men  in  leagues,  societies, 
associations,  which  are  to  reform  nations  or  remodel  Churches :  disappointed  of 
unity  here,  they  will  seek  it  there :  a  new  sect  shall  give  them  that  sense  of  perfect 
harmony  which  older  creeds  and  communions  have  failed  to  inspire  :  even  an  exclud- 
ing process  has  been  tried,  where  schemes  of  comprehension  have  been  found  vain: 
still  beyond,  a  little  beyond,  has  lain  the  goal  of  absolute  oneness,  and  still  a  weary 
aud  foot-sore  multitude  have  plodded  and  tramped  after  it — in  vain !  And  then, 
all  at  once,  there  enters  this  world  of  dispersion  and  disunion — enters  it,  as  by  a 
small  wicket-gate,  in  remote,  insignificant  Palestine — One  who  represents  Himself 
as  possessing,  for  all  mankind,  for  all  time,  not  only  the  secret  of  rest,  but  the  very 
rest  itself — One  who  cries  aloud  in  the  temple-court,  crowded  for  a  great  festival,  in 
words  absolutely  unique,  probably,  in  philosophy  or  in  religion,  '*  If  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink  " — drink,  as  He  explains  Himself,  a  water  which  ia 
absolutely  satisfying,  because  it  brings  into  the  soul  that  kind  of  rest  whioh  ia 
union,  union  with  God,  and  so  union  with  itself  and  with  its  brother.  "Ye  are  all 
one  in  Christ  Jesus."  In  Him  the  dispersion  is  regathered.  All  things,  St.  Paul 
says,  in  heaven  and  in  earth  are  gathered  together  in  Him.  It  seems  as  though 
even  angels  who  never  fell  are  in  some  manner  interested  and  concerned  in  that 
regathering.  Certainly  the  dead,  equally  with  the  living,  are  so.  And  I  desire  to 
say  to  you,  this  last  night,  how  alone  you  and  I  can  ever  henceforward  be  at  one. 
Each  separately  must  enter  into,  must  put  on,  must  invest  himself  with  Jesus 
Christ.  Are  the  words  ambiguous  ?  You  know  what  they  say.  They  bid  you  to 
cast  all  your  burden  of  guilt — is  it  not  heavy  ?  too  heavy  for  you  ?—  upon  Christ  as 
your  atonement.  They  bid  you  to  cast  all  your  burden  of  sin  and  sorrow  and  con- 
scious weakness — is  it  not  heavy  ?  too  heavy  for  you  ? — upon  Christ  as  your  friend. 
Then  are  you  inside  Him.  He  includes,  He  contains  you — and  in  the  dread  day  of 
days,  when  the  Avenger  of  blood  looks  for  you,  he  shall  find  only  Christ — only  Jesua 
Christ  and  Him  crucified,  Him  risen  !  In  the  exercise  of  that  incorporation,  of  that 
anion,  of  that  oneness,  will  our  true  fellowship  henceforth  be  found.    Yon  might 


chap.  in. J  QALAT1ANS.  227 

detain  me,  you  might  pursue  me,  and  yet  we  might  not  be  one — not  one  person 
certainly !  But  if  you  and  I  are  all  inside  Christ,  then  we  must  be  at  one.  Then 
all  minor  differences,  of  place  and  intercourse,  sink  at  once  into  nothing.  Place 
and  sight  may  make  the  difference  of  pleasure,  of  comfort,  of  expressed  communion, 
of  conscious  unity.  But  they  make  no  difference  whatever,  as  to  the  reality,  as  to 
the  essence  of  union.  You  may  worship  here,  and  I  there — you  may  kneel  at  these 
rails,  I  at  others — what  then  ?  We  are  all  one  person  in  Christ.  In  the  face  of  such 
union,  let  us  learn — it  is  a  hard  lesson — let  us  learn  to  despise  and  trample  under 
foot  all  other.  What  is  neighbourhood  ?  What  i8  co-existence  ?  Men  live  next 
door  to  each  other,  and  never  meet — meet,  and  never  commune — commune,  and 
never  are  one.  At  last  a  call  comes — one  goes  forth,  at  the  summons  of  business, 
of  necessity,  of  the  gospel,  to  a  distant  shore — seas  roll  between — they  never  see, 
they  never  hear  of  each  otber  more — yet,  for  the  first  time,  they  may  be  one — one 
person — in  Christ.  The  communion  of  saints  is  between  them — and  therefore  the 
life  of  life — the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  life  everlasting.  Now  first  they 
are  one.  Days  may  pass,  months,  years,  quarters  of  centuries — but  that  bond  is 
fastened  between  them  which  cannot  be  broken.  Now  life  is  seen  to  be  death,  and 
death  life.  Now  they  know,  or  they  shall  know,  that  the  Babel-dispersion  is  a 
Christ-gathering.  Tbey  may  have  loved  each  other  here,  and  trembled  at  the 
great  parting.  Now  they  know  that  that  parting  is  the  great,  the  first,  the  final  re- 
union. Or,  it  may  be,  here  they  have  not  loved  equally,  not  happily,  not  without 
doubting.  One  loved  more  than  the  other — the  lavished  love  seemed  to  be  wasted. 
There  was  no  felt  reciprocity— it  was  all  on  one  side.  0,  look  forward  !  Spend  all 
your  thoughts  upon  the  union  in  Christ !  Make  your  friend  love  Him,  then  he  will 
at  last  love  you  I     (Dean  Vaughan.)        Oneness  in  Christ : — I.  This  is  a  doctbine 

INSISTED   ON    THROUGHOUT    THE   NEW    TESTAMENT.      II.    THE  ANCIENT  WOULD  DID  NOT 

becognize  the  oneness  op  the  race.  1.  Savage  tribes  preyed  on  each  other  as  they 
do  now.  2.  Jew  and  Greek  were  at  irreconcilable  enmity.  3.  Philosophers  taught 
that  there  was  an  immutable  distinction  between  freeman  and  slave,  male  and 
female.  III.  Christianity  came  to  change  all  that  and — 1 .  To  teach  the  vivifying 
doctrines  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  the  brotherhood  of  man.  2.  To  die  that  all 
might  be  gathered  into  His  fold.  IV.  This  unity  in  Christ  makes  ua  feel  at  one 
with  the  great  and  good;  (1)  of  all  ages;  (2)  of  all  climes;  (3)  of  all  denominations; 
(4)  of  all  sorts  of  society.  (Archbishop  Tait.)  Believers  one  in  Christ : — On  & 
sweet  summer  evening  a  traveller  looked  along  the  valley  on  this  peaceful  scene,. 
when  a  shower  of  rain  was  falling.  Suddenly  the  sun  broke  out,  and  flung  a  bright 
bow  on  the  cloud,  that,  like  that  of  mercy,  discharged  its  showers  on  all.  The  rain- 
bow encircled  within  its  arms  suburb  and  city,  lofty  church  and  humble  meeting- 
house. And  was  it  not  a  true  and  happy  fancy  that  saw  in  this  heavenly  bow  an 
emblem  of  that  covenant  which,  irrespective  of  minor  differences,  embraces  all 
believers  within  the  same  arms  of  mercy  ?  (Dr.  Guthrie.)  The  oneness  of 
believers : — Souls  have  no  sexes  and  Christ  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  The  servant 
paid  the  half-shekel  as  well  as  the  master  (Exod.  xxx).  (Trapp.)  All  one  in 
Christ : — There  are  two  distinct  thoughts  in  these  most  wonderful  words.  St.  Paul 
affirms,  first,  that  the  greatest  natural  differences  between  men  are,  as  we  see  them, 
only  temporary,  provisional,  preparatory.  2.  This  transformation  of  the  circum- 
stances of  human  existence  has  found  already  a  pledge  of  its  accomplishment. 
Deeper  than  all  which  divides  you,  stronger  than  all  which  comes  from  time,  and 
place,  and  circumstance,  is  this  bond  of  one  underlying  life  which  has  now  been 
made  known  in  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Son  of  God.  3.  We  are  to  regard  believers  not 
as  a  family  inspired  by  common  affections  and  with  common  aims,  but  as  one  man, 
one  body  quickened  by  one  Spirit,  through  which  the  one  Lord  is  manifested  to  the 
world.  But  this  doctrine  that  we  men  are  one  man,  this  doctrine,  as  it  is  called,  of 
the  solidarity  of  humanity,  is  no  novelty  to  the  Christian  teacher.  He  finds  in  it 
part  of  the  truth  which  the  Incarnation  proclaims.  "  Ye  all  are  one  man  in  Christ 
Jesus."  This  truth,  as  we  reflect  upon  it,  reveals  to  us  the  fulness  of  life,  the 
promise  of  life,  the  motive  of  life.  I.  The  fulness  of  life.  When  St.  Paul  de- 
clared the  impossibility  of  distinctions  between  peoples  and  classes,  he  did  not  look 
to  their  destruction,  but  to  their  perfect  use — to  their  consecration.  Again  and 
again  it  has  happened  in  times  of  great  conflict  or  peril  that  the  thought  of  educa- 
tion, and  rank,  and  sex,  has  passed  away,  and  each  one  who  has  had  to  face  the 
struggle  has  remembered  only  that  he  is  an  Englishman,  or  a  man.  All  that  ha 
had,  all  that  he  was  before,  remained  unchanged ;  every  gift  and  every  power  was 
made  to  serf i  the  immediate  end;  but  larger  interests  asserted  theiv  supremacy^ 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  the  soul  acknowledged  the  claim.  So  it  is  with  the  nobler  conflict  to  which  we 
are  called  as  believers  in  Christ.  We  all  bring  to  it  the  fullest  offering  of  individual 
service  ;  we  keep  back  nothing,  and  we  rest  in  nothing.  Whatsoever  we  have  that  is 
special  is  the  sign  whereby  God  has  revealed  His  purpose  for  us.  But  this  is  the 
common  thought  which  hallows  every  effort,  which  nerves  us  for  concentrated 
labour,  which  bears  us  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  personal  aim,  which  binds  to- 
gether with  the  strength  of  their  manifold  energies  the  scholar,  and  the  artist,  and 
the  craftsman,  "  I  am  a  Christian."  By  that  confession  we  know  the  vastness,  the 
fulness  of  life  in  its  unity  in  Christ.  II.  The  promise  op  lipe.  The  nnseen  life  is 
greater  than  we  know ;  now  and  then  the  veil  is  lifted  from  some  dark  scene,  and 
through  sordid  and  repulsive  surroundings,  light  and  tenderness  and  self-sacrifice 
flash  out ;  revealed,  not  created,  by  the  circumstances  through  which  it  is  seen.  A 
time  of  wide  distress  shows  us  what  the  heart  of  the  vast  masses  of  tbe  people  is — 
beating  with  the  one  life,  and  loyal  beyond  hope  to  truth  and  righteousness.  Then, 
when  the  deep  foundations  are  being  laid  open  ;  then,  when  we  remember  how  tbe 
Son  of  Man  has  fulfilled  man's  destiny — we  are  sure  that  there  shall  never  be  one 
lost  virtue,  sure  that  the  one  life  with  its  purifying  energy  will  not  fail,  sure  that  it 
is  life  and  not  death  which  is  the  seal  of  humanity.  III.  The  motive  op  life.  To 
work  for  ourselves  is  a  necessity.  If  then,  we  can  be  enabled  to  feel  that  our  true 
self  is  in  Christ,  who  has  taken  humanity  to  Himself,  the  whole  aspect  of  the  world 
is  changed.  Can  we  imagine  any  motive  for  labour  more  inexhaustible  or  more  in- 
spiring than  this  conviction  that  the  well-being  of  the  whole  is  imperilled  in  the 
least  member ;  that  subtle  influences  pass  ever  over  each  one  of  us  at  every  moment 
which  must  work  for  all  time ;  that  at  every  moment  we  are  all  entering  on  the 
inheritance  of  the  one  life,  marred  or  made  richer,  as  it  may  be,  by  the  action  of 
our  fellows  ?  "  Ye  all  are  one  man  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  is  through  us  that  Christ 
works.  He  is  the  vine,  we  are  the  branches  ;  but  where,  without  the  branches,  is 
the  manifold  fertility  of  the  vine  ?  He  is  the  head,  we  are  the  members ;  but  where 
without  the  members  is  the  prevailing  energy  of  the  body  ?  "  Ye  all  are  one  man  in 
Christ  Jesus."  As  we  ponder  the  words  and  follow  them  beyond  this  region  of  conflict 
and  succession,  they  disclose  a  prospect  in  which  our  souls  can  rest.  (Canon  Westcott.) 
Unity  in  diversity  :  There  are  three  classes  of  obstacles  to  all  union,  and  therefore 
to  Christian  union,  and  to  the  realization  of  the  wondrous  prayer  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  These  difficulties  arise  out  of  a  threefold  distinction  that  may  be  made 
among  human  beings.  The  Apostle  Paul,  in  my  text,  does  in  three  different  ways 
divide  mankind.  He  makes  a  threefold  separation  of  the  human  race  into  two 
dissimilar  classes,  which,  though  here  and  there  correspondent  with  one  another, 
are  by  no  means  parallel  the  one  to  the  other.  This  classification  is  governed  by 
(1)  the  great  intellectual  differences  and  antagonisms  among  men ;  (2)  the  chief 
emotional  and  constitutional  differences  of  character ;  and  (3)  the  prodigious  dis- 
tinctions effected  by  external  circumstances.  It  is  true  that  St.  Paul  presents 
these  three  antitheses  in  a  pictorial  fashion,  in  a  vivid  and  concrete  form,  before 
our  consideration,  but  it  is  none  the  less  obvious  that  he  is  thinking  of  more  than 
the  literal  meaning  of  his  own  words.  I.  The  first  of  these  divisions  was  based  on 
that  great  antagonism  which  was  so  admirably  expressed  in  the  apostle's  day  by 
the  intellectual  differences  obtaining  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek.  The  Jew, 
strictly  speaking,  was  the  member  of  the  holy  family,  the  descendant  of  Abraham 
and  Israel,  a  representative  of  that  well-known  nationality  which  had  better  reasons 
than  any  other  Oriental  people  possessed,  to  believe  that  it  was  ,the  special  object 
of  Divine  care,  and  providence,  and  government.  Thus  the  Jew  became  the  type 
of  all  who,  in  every  age  of  the  Church,  are,  by  their  education,  their  mental  habits, 
their  strong  dispositions,  disposed  to  lay  violent  stress  on  the  external  sign,  on  the 
old  tradition,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  the  realities  which  are  indicated  by  them. 
Now  let  us  look  at  the  other  great  type  of  intellectual  character — the  Greek.  The 
term,  even  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  meant 
more  than  a  Gentile  proselyte  to  the  faith  of  Christ ;  and  the  word  "  Grecian  "  or 
"  Hellenist "  meant  more  than  a  Greek-speaking  Jew.  It  is  capable  of  proof  that 
there  was  in  Judaism  a  Grecized  party  even  before  the  time  of  our  Lord,  and  it  is 
quite  clear  that  the  Grecian  converts  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  were  rather  characterized 
by  the  freshness  of  their  ideas,  the  freedom  of  their  speculations,  the  liberty  which 
they  claimed  from  oppressive  rite  and  ceremonial,  than  by  their  mother-tongue. 
No  classes  of  mind  could  be  more  directly  opposed  and  dissimilar  in  their  modes  of 
working  than  those  of  the  pure  Jew  and  pure  Greek.  To  Jewish  conservatism  the 
Greek  oppq  sed  an  incessant  love  of  change ;  to  the  Jewish  love  of  tradition  and 


our.  m.]  GALATIANS.  229 

dependence  npon  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients  the  Greek  offered  endless  speculation 
and  elaborate  guesses  after  truth;  instead  of  the  Jewish  dogma  we  Greek 
luxuriated  in  the  last  logical  puzzle.  By  the  side  of  the  stern  exclusiveness  of  the 
Jewish  Monotheism,  the  Greek  prided  himself  in  a  Pantheon  of  deities,  who  were 
admitted  on  equal  and  easy  terms  to  the  reverence  of  the  Hellenes.  The  mind  of 
the  Jew  was  hampered  in  its  philosophical  researches  by  a  language  of  great 
metrical  power,  but  of  comparative  rigidity  of  movement  and  excessive  externality 
and  objectivity ;  the  Greek  used  the  most  flexible  and  delicate  instrument  of 
thought  which  human  minds  had  ever  fashioned.  The  Jew  accepted  the  super- 
natural with  child-like  simplicity,  and  asked  eagerly  for  more;  the  Greek  sought 
after  the  causes  of  things,  the  meaning  of  words,  the  essence  of  government,  the 
unseen  and  intangible  realities.  It  is  not  a  wonderful  thing  that  St.  Paul  should 
have  said,  "  The  Jew  requires  a  sign,  the  Greek  seeks  after  wisdom."  The  un- 
restrained liberty  of  the  Greek  was  not  without  its  serious  dangers  when  it  was 
brought  by  Divine  grace  within  the  limit  of  the  true  Church.  If  the  two  types  of 
mental  character  of  which  I  have  spoken  be  found  within  the  Church  of  Christ, 
we  may  expect  sharp  and  sustained  antagonism.  Even  regeneration  will  not 
change  these  grave  and  fundamental  differences  of  mental  constitution.  How 
difficult  must  it  ever  prove  for  these  two  kinds  of  men  to  feel  the  deep-hidden  unity 
which  is  possible  between  them  1  To  put  the  matter  in  a  concrete  form,  how 
difficult  for  one  who  imagines  religious  life  to  be  inseparably  associated  with  form, 
ceremonial,  priesthood,  sacraments,  liturgies,  elaborate  dogmatic  creeds  and 
transcendental  propositions,  even  to  believe  in  the  Christianity  of  another,  whose 
only  notion  of  it  is  a  holy  life,  free  from  all  these  restraints  ;  who  thinks, 
speculates,  philosophizes,  and  tries  to  prove  all  things,  and  only  to  hold  fast  that 
which  is  good !  Verily,  if  these  tendencies  are  left  to  themselves  unchecked  and 
unchastised,  very  distant  will  be  the  day  when  Jew  and  Greek  shall  be  one.  II. 
The  second  of  them  is  the  great  constitutional  and  emotional  difference  of 
character  expressed  by  the  antithesis  of  male  and  female.  It  is  not  merely  the 
difference  of  sex  of  which  the  apostle  is  speaking,  but  rather  of  the  great  types  of 
character,  which,  though  not  confined  to  either  sex,  are  best  expressed  by  the  terms 
masculine  and  feminine.  By  masculine  character,  we  mean  the  predominance  over  the 
passions  of  reason  and  conscience,  the  energy  of  will,  the  submission  to  law,  the 
conscious  pride  of  independence,  strength,  self-sufficiency,  robust  "and  vigorous  life. 
By  feminine  character,  whether  seen  in  woman  or  man,  we  mean  the  predominance 
of  the  affections,  the  delight  of  dependence,  the  nnreasoning  consciousness  of 
right,  the  strength  of  submission,  the  power  of  suffering,  self-sacrifice,  and  wait- 
ing. In  the  one  there  is  more  power  to  act,  in  the  other  to  endure.  The  strength 
of  the  one  is  energy,  and  of  the  other  is  rest.  Both  may  be  led  to  do  what 
is  good ;  but  the  one  because  it  is  right,  and  the  other  because  it  is  lovely. 
The  one  looks  at  religion  as  a  system  of  principles,  the  other  as  the  expres- 
sion of  deep  feelings.  The  one  sees  no  religion  in  mere  states  of  mind,  devo- 
tional postures,  strong  sentiments;  and  the  other  cannot  understand  the 
religion  of  mere  principle  and  energy.  How  shall  these  two  types  of  character 
be  harmonized?  III.  The  third  great  decision  is  that  due  to  differences  aris- 
ing out  of  external  circumstances.  The  bond  and  the  free  are  the  terms 
which  Paul  used  to  describe  this  great  contrast.  But  though  formal  slavery  be 
abolished,  the  distinction  between  different  classes  of  men  is  not  obliterated.  Caste 
still  prevails  in  India ;  the  difference  between  the  black  negro  and  the  Southern 
planter  or  Northern  merchant  will  still  abide  in  America.  The  struggle  between 
capital  and  labour,  and  the  contrast  between  rank  and  wealth  and  power  on  the 
one  Land,  poverty,  dependence,  and  obscurity  on  the  other,  are  as  vigorous  and 
obvious  as  they  ever  were.  How  hard  it  is  to  bridge  the  gulf  between  the  lordly 
owner  of  a  county  and  the  half-clad,  unclean,  besotted,  diseased  inmate  of  some 
hovel  within  sight  of  his  palace  1  How  difficult  to  make  even  Christian  people  lay 
down  their  pride,  and  their  caste,  and  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently  ! 
Legislation,  common  griefs  and  joys,  healthful  literature,  and  free  press,  are 
bringing  these  separate  classes  into  one  another's  view,  and  some  of  the  reserve 
and  mutual  antipathy  may  be  overcome  in  the  foremost  of  the  nations ;  but  still 
within  the  Church,  as  well  as  outside  its  pale,  there  are  the  bond  and  the  free.  In 
the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  is  found  the  true  point  of  contact  for  them  all.  1. 
That  the  intellectual  antagonism  between  Jew  and  Greek,  of  every  age  and  Church, 
finds  in  Christ  its  true  counteraction.  The  modern  representative  of  the  Jew 
within  the  Church,  when  he  looks  through  the  form  and  the  letter,  and  the  medium 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  m. 

and  the  visible  sign,  to  the  reality  which  makes  him  Christian,  heartily  confesses 
that  it  is  Christ  crucified  who  satisfies  his  search.  The  Jew  and  Greek  of  St.  Paul's 
day  meet  before  the  cross.  "  Come,"  says  the  Hebrew  of  Hebrews  to  the  sinner  of 
the  Gentiles,"  come,  brother ;  thou  who  wert  afar  off  art  made  nigh  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus.  Tie  is  our  peace,  who  has  made  both  of  us  one,  and  hath  broken  down 
the  wall  of  partition  between  us.'  Let  thee  and  me  clasp  hands  before  the  cross, 
for  we  two  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  And  the  Greek  responds, 
"I  verily  am  no  more  stranger  or  foreigner,  but  a  fellow-heir  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partaker  of  Divine  promise."  There  is  now  neither  Jew  nor  Greek ; 
they  are  both  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  mediating  power  between  the 
masculine  and  feminine  mind.  Christ  is  the  well-spring  of  the  strong  motives  to 
right  action  and  of  the  deepest  passions  of  holy  love.  As  the  mountain  torrent 
may  leap  with  wild  pomp  and  energy  from  the  same  water-shed  from  which,  by  a 
quieter  transit,  other  and  a  gentle  stream  may  wind  its  way  to  the  great  ocean, 
"  reflecting  far  and  fairy-like  from  high  the  immoital  lights  whioh  live  along  the 
sky,"  so  too  from  the  same  fountain  of  deep  emotions  and  great  purposes  varied 
lives  may  flow.  As  the  two  streams  of  water  mingle  at  length,  to  do  ever  after  a 
united  work,  so  the  two  classes  of  mind,  when  they  learn  the  lesson  that  from  the 
one  Christ  they  both  derive  their  life  and  hope,  then,  "like  friends  once  parted, 
grown  single-hearted,"  their  love  begins  to  abound.  (H.  R.  Reynolds,  B.A.)  In 
Christ — 1.  All  distinctions  are  lost.  II.  All  differences  harmonized.  III.  All 
hearts  united.  IV.  All  personal  accomplishments  ignored.  Christian  unity  : — 
I.  Its  foundation.  II.  Completeness.  HI.  End.  In  Christ  we  have — I.  One 
foundation  of  hope.  U.  One  pattern  of  imitation.  III.  One  motive  of  action. 
IV.  One  object  of  triumph.  Observe — I.  The  test — if  ye  are  Christ's,  by  faith — 
redeeming  grace — holy  consecration,  n.  The  privilege — then  are  ye  Abraham's 
seed  included  in  the  covenant — heirs  of  God,  of  every  blessing,  of  heaven.  HI. 
The  foundation  of  it — the  free — unmerited — unchangeable  promise  of  God.  (J.  Lyth.) 
Christ  the  centre  of  Christian  union : — I.  The  great  central  truth  of  Christian  union  is 
the  central  truth  of  Christianity  itself,  which  is  Christ  crucified.  Destroy  the  centre 
of  any  system,  you  have  destroyed  the  system  itself.  Now,  beloved,  a  great  and 
essential  doctrine  is  placed  before  you  here.  All  believers  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus. 
They  have  a  vital  union  with  Jesus.  That  includes,  too,  this  great  and  precious 
truth — accepted  and  justified  in  Christ  Jesus.  Again,  this  being  in  Christ 
involves  our  preservation.  The  child  of  God  is  kept  not  by  any  power  of  his 
own.  H.  The  consequent  unity  of  all  believers  in  the  Lord.  The  unity  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  does  not  spring  out  of  anything  in  that  Church,  but  out  of 
the  oneness  of  that  Church  in  Christ.  Unity  pervades  all  God's  works  and 
operations — unity,  not  uniformity.  You  will  find  a  marvellous  richness  of  diversity 
in  all  the  works  of  God.  There  is  unity  and  there  is  diversity.  The  family  of 
God  is  essentially  one,  and  yet  constituted  into  different  households.  Now  I  would 
remind  you,  in  the  first  place,  beloved,  that  the  unity  of  the  Church  of  God  grows 
out  of  the  unity  of  all  believers  in  Christ  the  one  Head.  All  true  believers  hold 
Christ  the  one  Head  of  the  Church.  Then,  brethren,  the  essential  unity  of  the 
Church  consists  in  the  indwelling  of  the  self-same  Spirit.  Every  believer  is  a 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  All  believers  in  Christ  then  are  essentially  one.  And, 
brother,  how  much  is  there  in  the  circumstances  of  a  child  of  God  to  unfold  the 
essential  unity  of  the  Church  of  God?  We  have  the  same  trials,  afflictions, 
temptations ;  we  take,  oftentimes,  the  same  dreary,  lonely,  tiresome  path.  O,  how 
much  is  there  in  God's  providential  dealings  with  us  in  our  trials,  our  sorrows,  our 
temptations,  to  knit  the  saints  of  God  more  closely  to  their  Head  1  HI.  And  now, 
in  conclusion,  let  me  remind  you  that  there  grows  out  of  this  great  and  precious 
truth  some  solemn  obligations  and  precious  blessings.  I  will,  in  the  briefest 
manner,  refer  to  this  point ;  and,  first,  with  regard  to  obligations  set  forth  in  the 
Scriptures.  If  we  are  in  Christ,  and  Christ  is  the  centre  of  our  union,  then  we  are 
bound  to  recognize  the  unity  of  God's  dear  ones.  We  are  to  recognize  it.  We  are 
to  hail  a  brother  in  Christ  as  a  brother  wherever  we  find  him.  My  beloved 
hearers,  the  world  is  a  keen  observer  of  the  Church  of  God.  The  world  eares  not 
one  iota  how  we  differ  on  points  of  Church  government,  or  of  doctrine,  but  the 
world  looks  at  the  Church  of  God  in  its  union.  It  expects  to  find  oneness, 
brotherly  love,  sympathy,  co-operation.  Therefore,  I  earnestly  implore  you,  first 
to  recognize  the  unity  of  all  God's  dear  saints  with  one  another,  and  then  to  express 
and  manifest  a  loving  spirit*  Brethren,  shall  I  advert  for  a  moment  to  the  bless- 
iaga  that  will  accrue  from  your  recognition  and  manifestation  of  this  great  an4 


<suf.  in.]  6ALATIANS.  S31 

glorious  truth,  the  essential  unity  of  the  Church  ?  Let  me  remind  you  that  your 
happiness  will  be  promoted  by  it.  And  not  only  your  happiness,  but  your  holiness 
will  be  promoted  by  your  recognition  of  brotherly  love.  I  will  only  add  that  use- 
fulness is  another  blessing  that  springs  from  the  recognition  and  manifestation  of 
union.  Beloved,  we  are  useful,  not  as  we  stand  out  in  our  individual  isolated  con- 
dition. We  are  useful  for  Christ  in  combination— combination  of  judgment,  of 
heart,  of  purpose.    (Octavius  Winslow,  D.D.) 

Yer.  29.  And  If  ye  be  Christ's  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according 
to  the  promise. — Abraham's  spiritual  seed : — If  the  life  we  have  in  the  flesh  were 
all  we  had  to  provide  for,  they  might  be  accounted  the  happiest  of  mankind  who 
possess  in  the  greatest  abundance  the  means  of  sustaining  it  in  health  and  comfort ; 
who  can — as  one  of  whom  Jesus  speaks  in  parable,  proposed  to  do — take  their 
ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry,  because  they  have  much  goods  laid  up  for  many 
years.  Who  then  is  to  be  regarded  as  truly  favoured  and  blest  among  the  children 
of  men  ?  There  is  a  class,  few  of  whom  may  have  been  born  to  opulence  in  this 
world,  or  have  any  prospect  of  ever  becoming  rich  in  the  goods  of  time  ;  a  class 
whose  peculiar  possessions  may  be  little  coveted  or  admired  by  those  aronnd  them  ; 
for  the  world  knoweth  them  not.  Yet  with  them,  if  we  were  true  for  ourselves,  we 
would  desire  to  have  our  lot  assigned  ;  for  they  alone  have  an  inheritance  that  can 
supply  the  wants  of  the  immortal  spirit,  and  endure  while  its  being  lasts.  They 
are  the  persons  spoken  of  in  our  text.  Those  who  are  Christ's,  and  therefore 
Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  To  be  Christ's  is  to  belong 
to  Him,  as  those  who  have  given  themselves  to  Him,  come  under  His  government 
and  guidance,  placed  themselves  at  His  disposal,  and  whom  He  hath  taken  for  His 
own,  redeeming  them  from  all  iniquity,  purifying  them  to  Himself.  But  there  is 
more  than  this.  They  are  in  Him,  and  He  is  in  them,  by  a  spiritual  and  vital 
union  formed  between  them  ;  so  they  may  be  regarded  as  members  of  His  body,  of 
His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones.  He  that  is  thus  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit  with 
Him.  Now,  if  ye  be  Christ's  in  this  sense,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed.  They  have 
an  inheritance.  All  the  promises  of  God,  the  promises  of  the  covenant  made  with 
Abraham,  are  in  Christ  yea,  and  in  Him  amen ;  and  they  who  are  Christ's  must  there- 
fore have  an  interest  in  them  all.  1.  Their  inheritance  is  one  which  is  freely  given 
them  of  God,  or  gratuitously  bestowed.  This  may  be  said  of  all  the  gifts  of  God 
to  His  creatures.  "For  who  hath  first  given  to  Him,  and  it  shall  be  recompensed  to 
him  again  ?  "  Angels  do  not  possess  their  thrones  of  light  as  the  merited  reward 
of  service  rendered  to  the  Great  Supreme.  Man  in  innocence,  though  he  held  that 
fair  paradise  in  which  he  dwelt,  and  all  its  happy  fruits,  by  the  tenure  of  his 
obedience,  could  not  have  been  said  to  have  won  for  himself,  as  due  for  that  obedi- 
ence, even  had  he  continued  in  it,  that  which  was  justly  forfeited  by  transgression. 
It  is  still  more  manifest  in  regard  to  those  of  his  fallen  race,  who  are  constituted 
heirs  according  to  the  promise  of  an  eternal  inheritance,  that  the  change  effected  in 
their  state  and  prospects  must  be  wholly  of  grace.  2.  It  is  an  inheritance  which  is 
spiritual  in  its  character.  It  includes  in  it,  indeed,  the  means  of  temporal  subsist- 
ence ;  the  things  needful  for  the  body.  But  these,  only  in  as  far  as  they  may  be 
subservient  to  spiritual  and  eternal  interests.  The  good  promised,  however,  does 
not  lie  altogether  without  themselves,  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  they  shall 
possess  in  the  land  of  their  habitation.  It  is  rather  an  exaltation  and  enlargement 
of  their  own  being.  The  Spirit  of  promise  is  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance  now ; 
and  there  is  nothing  of  an  earthly  or  carnal  nature  in  what  He  imparts  as  a  pledge 
and  foretaste  of  its  delights.  Wisdom,  and  purity,  and  love,  are  His  fruits.  3.  That 
it  is  yet  future  and  unseen.  They  who  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise  have  the 
inheritance  in  prospect,  not  in  full  possession.  They  hope  for  what  they  see  not. 
They  are  under  tutors  and  governors,  until  the  time  appointed  of  the  Father  for 
their  entering  on  the  enjoyment  of  that  for  which  His  discipline  is  preparing  them. 
4.  It  will  be  satisfying  and  eternal.  How  striking  in  these  respects  is  the  difference 
between  it  and  every  earthly  inheritance  1  The  inheritance  of  those  who  are 
heirs  according  to  the  promise  is  "  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  fadeth  not 
away."  The  gold  and  the  silver  which  are  so  much  coveted  here  are  reckoned  by 
the  apostle  among  corruptible  things,  but  this  inheritance  cannot  be  marred  or 
vitiated ;  neither  moth  nor  rust  will  ever  tarnish  its  beauty  or  embitter  its  sweet- 
ness ;  nothing  shall  enter  into  that  world,  that  better  and  heavenly  country  where 
it  lies,  that  defileth,  or  that  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie.  Holiness  and 
happiness  shall  there  be  felt  to  be  but  different  names  for  the  same  thing,  or  shall 


23i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  1% 

be  found  in  indissoluble  and  blissful  union.  5.  It  is  infallibly  secured  to  those  who 
are  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  He  is  faithful  who  hath  promised  it.  He 
who  cannot  lie,  the  apostle  tells  ns,  promised  it  before  the  world  began.  We 
trust  you  have  been  already  examining  yourselves.  Yet  we  may  ofier  a  few 
suggestions  further  on  a  subject  which  at  no  season  can  be  without  its  interest 
to  those  who  would  know  whether  tbey  be  in  the  faith.  1.  We  may  say  that 
they  who  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise  may  be  distinguished  by  the 
foundation  on  which  they  rest  their  hope  of  the  inheritance.  This  is  not  any 
worth  or  goodness  of  their  own,  not  any  compensation  they  have  to  make  for 
past  offences,  by  contrition  for  sin  and  amendment  of  life,  not  any  gifts  or 
offerings  they  have  to  present  to  God  in  order  to  conciliate  His  favour.  It  ia 
the  promise  itself  which  secures  the  inheritance  to  all  who  are  persuaded  of  it 
and  embrace  it.  But  the  promise  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  They  may  be  distinguished 
by  their  regards  to  the  inheritance  itself.  The  character  of  that  inheritance  is 
spiritual,  but  we  are  by  nature  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  We  have  no  delight  in  holy 
exercises  ;  no  desire  to  know,  and  see,  and  dwell  with  God.  A  great  change  must 
take  place  in  our  dispositions  before  we  can  derive  any  satisfaction  from  the  society 
of  saints  in  light,  from  fellowship  with  Jesus,  the  Holy  One  of  God,  from  the  felt 
presence  of  the  Father  of  our  spirits.  He  can  no  otherwise  bless  us  but  by  turning 
us  away  from  our  iniquities.  3.  They  who  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise  may 
be  distinguished  by  the  influence  which  the  hope  of  the  inheritance  has  on  their 
tempers  and  conduct.      (J.  Henderson,  D.D.)  Christian  privilegss  : — I.  To  bb 

Christ's,  i.e.,  to  belong  to  Him  as  members  of  His  body.  1.  The  means.  Faith 
makes  us  one  with  Christ.  2.  The  immediate  benefits— (1)  love ;  (2)  care  ;  (3)  pro- 
tection (Eph.  v.  29,  30).  II.  In  Christ  to  be  Abraham's  seed.  1.  The  Jews  and 
all  legalists  have  despised  their  birthright  and  broken  away  from  Abraham.  2. 
Christ  is  the  true  seed  of  Abraham  (ver.  16),  and  those  who  are  one  with  Christ  by 
faith  become  the  same  through  Him.  Note  (1)  the  antiquity  ;  (2)  the  nobility  of 
the  Christian's  ancestry.  HI.  As  Abraham's  seed,  to  be  heirs  of  Abraham's 
promise.  1.  Of  the  Spirit  (ver.  14),  which  is  the  earnest  of  the  inheritance.  2. 
The  full  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance  in  heaven.  The  Use :  Believers  should  (1) 
Be  content  with  any  earthly  estate.  In  this  regard  Abraham  was  content  to  forsake 
his  country  (Heb.  xi.  8,  9).  (2)  Be  moderate  in  their  earthly  cares,  and  not  live 
as  drudges  in  the  world.  (3)  Have  a  care  for  heaven  in  comparison  with  which  the 
things  of  this  world  are  trifles.  This  did  Abraham  (Heb.  xi.  15,  16).  (W.  Perkins.) 
Believers  heirs  of  God : — When  the  Danish  missionaries  stationed  at  Malabar  set 
some  of  their  converts  to  translate  a  Catechism,  in  which  it  was  asserted  that 
believers  became  the  sons  of  God,  one  of  the  translators  was  so  startled  that  he 
suddenly  laid  down  his  pen,  and  exclaimed,  "  It  is  too  much ;  let  me  rather  render 
it, '  Xhey  shall  be  permitted  to  kiss  His  feet  I ' " 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Now  this  I  say,  that  the  heir,  as  long-  as  he  Is  a  chili,  dlfferetn 
■©thing  from  a  servant. — Heading  life  : — There  is  nothing  final  in  the  character  of 
this  world.  But  all  betrays  infancy.  Everything  is  in  a  state  of  preparation.  We 
move  np  and  down  amidst  the  reflections  of  the  future.  Certainly  the  material 
world  has  not  reached  its  destination.  The  air  we  breathe — the  Bky  we  look 
on — the  soil  we  tread — are  only  to  go  to  make  a  "  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth."  And  the  Divine  government,  which  is  now,  is  mainly  to  illustrate 
the  government  which  is  to  come.  We  have  churches  now  ;  but  they  are 
only  to  prepare  us  for  a  state  where  there  shall  be  no  church — because 
every  spot  shall  be  holy.  This  world,  then,  is  one  large  training-school,  where 
we  are  placed  for  a  little  while,  to  learn  to  fulfil  tine  duties  of  that  great 
seivice  for  which  we  were  destined  and  created.  Training  consists  of  three  things : 
instruction,  which  is  the  imparting  knowledge,  and  giving  new  ideas  ;  education, 
which  is  the  drawing  out,  and  directing,  the  powers  of  mind  and  heart ;  and  moral 
discipline,  which  is  the  moulding  character,  and  the  formation  of  good  habits.  This 
is  just  what  life  is.    I.  We  are  here  to  obt  knowledge,  and  new  ideas  about  the 


oha».  it.]  GALATIAN8.  233 

things  of  God.  How  shall  we  enter  heaven  without  some  previous  knowledge  o* 
it :  its  conditions — its  employments?  And  if  there  is  no  greater  pleasure  on  this 
earth  than  to  get  a  new  idea,  what  must  it  be  when  the  new  ideas  are  these  :  to 
inform  the  mind  about  God  ;  to  see  every  day  some  new,  fresh  beauty  in  Jesus  ; 
to  impregnate  the  understanding  with  the  Infinite  ?  II.  But  let  me  speak  to  you, 
secondly,  of  your  education  for  another  world — according  to  the  strict  meaning  of 
the  word  education.  You  are  probably  aware  that  the  word  "  education  "  means 
"to  draw  out,"  "  to  educe."  So  that  when  we  educate  a  child,  it  is,  literally  and 
properly,  that  we  draw  out  what  is  in  the  child.  The  gardener  does  not  make  the 
branches  and  the  tendrils  ;  but  he  lays  them  out,  he  guides  them,  he  gives  each 
its  proper  place  and  order.  He  lops  what  is  redundant ;  he  fastens  and  makes  sure 
what  is  good.  But,  be  sure  of  this,  there  is  that  in  you  which,  if  you  will,  and  if 
you  will  only  let  it,  can  expand  into  all  that  is  happy,  arid  all  that  is  holy,  and  all 
that  is  useful,  and  all  that  is  Divine,  here  and  for  ever.  III.  Now,  thirdly,  the  way 
in  which  this  is  to  be  done,  we  call  discipline,  the  third  part  of  training.  Self- 
discipline,  and  God's  discipline.  And  yet  they  are  not  two,  for  God's  discipline  is 
to  make  and  to  take  effect  through  self-discipline.  Do  not  count  discipline  a  hard 
word.  In  God's  vocabulary,  discipline  is  only  another  word  for  love.  Th<-re  cannot 
be  discipline  without  friction — without  struggle.  But  a  victory  over  self  is  such  a 
very  pleasant  thing.  And  the  compensations  are  so  accurate,  and  so  great,  that 
discipline  itself  soon  loses  to  yon  its  sterner  sense,  and  becomes  the  element  of  all 
happiness.  Discipline  is  to  form  habits.  Do  not  forget  that  you  are  placed  here 
mainly  to  form  habits,  to  learn  to  do  and  be  what  you  are  to  do  and  be  eternally. 
To  form  a  good  habit  must  always  involve  the  unforming  a  bad  one.  So  you  begin 
to  hold  yourself  in  hand,  to  exercise  self-control,  to  cultivate  pious  thoughts — 
acts  of  devotion  and  religious  communion,  and  a  holy  walk — which  are  the  things 
you  are  to  do  for  ever  and  ever.  Meanwhile,  all  outward  things  are  working  for  you, 
You  will  find  yourselves  in  strange  circumstances.  But  all  to  practise  and  increase 
some  grace — and  especially  a  lacking  one.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  three 
estates  : — L  Socially.  1.  The  servant.  2.  The  child  under  tutors  and  governors. 
3.  The  man  come  of  age,  liberated,  and  in  possession  of  the  inheritance.  II. 
Ecclesiastically.  1.  The  condition  of  servitude  was  that  of  the  Church  under  the 
law,  in  bondage  to  beggarly  elements.  2.  The  condition  of  the  child  already 
adopted  but  waiting  for  the  inheritance  is  that  of  the  Church  under  the  gospel.  3. 
The  condition  of  the  man,  full  grown  and  enjoying  his  inheritance  is  that  of  the 
Church  in  glory.  HI.  Spiritually.  1.  The  state  of  servitude  is  that  of  the  soul 
unconverted.  "He  that  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."  Sin  is  "  bondage  of 
corruption."  2.  Tbe  state  of  Sonship  and  liberty  is  that  of  the  soul  justified  and 
sanctified  (John  viii.  35  ;  xv.  15).  3.  The  state  of  full  manhood  is  where  the  glori- 
fied saint  enters  the  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  which  fadeth  not 
away.    (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  children  at  school  : — I.  The  school.     1.  The 

period  covered  :  from  conversion  to  glorification — "  the  time  appointed  of  the 
Father."  2.  The  necessity  for  the  intermediate  schooltime  arises  from  the  degree 
and  effect  of  imperfect  sanctification.  3.  The  school  sphere,  this  world,  is  admirably 
adapted  to  the  discipline  of  the  soul.  For  moral  lessons  to  be  learned  by  heart  and 
conscience  differ  from  intellectual.  Instruction  may  convey  the  latter,  only  practical 
experience  the  former.  (1)  Faith  can  only  grow  in  the  absence  of  perfect  sight ;  (2) 
hope  amidst  disappointment ;  (3)  love  by  opposition  and  sacrifice ;  (4)  sub- 
mission amidst  contradiction ;  and  (5)  patience  amidst  prolonged  trial.  II.  The 
schooling.  1.  The  knowledge  conveyed  :  God  Himself.  (1)  The  loftiest.  (2) 
The  most  satisfying.  2.  The  books  employed.  (1)  Nature.  (2)  The  human  heart. 
(3)  Providence.  (4)  Scripture,  which  explains  the  others.  3.  Tbe  teacher.  (1) 
Divine.  (2)  Perfect.  (3)  Gentle.  (4)  Patient.  III.  The  Discipline.  1.  The 
necessity  for  this  arises  from  our  corrupt  nature  and  constant  temptations.  2.  In 
the  sense  of  discipline  we  must  interpret  the  afflictions  of  this  transitory  state 
(Bom.  v.  3-5).  IV.  In  view  op  the  advantages  or  school  life  and  the  prospect 
op  home.  1.  Be  patient.  2.  Teachable.  3.  Earnest.  4.  Obedient,  as  befits  those 
who  are  "under  tutors  and  governors  until  the  time  appointed  of  the  Father." 
(Ibid.)  Under  tutors  and  governors  : — This  whole  world  is  a  training  school,  and 
all  life  is  discipline.  Understand  your  position.  You  are  "  an  heir,"  an  heir  of 
an  estate  whose  value  no  numbers  can  represent  ;  an  heir  of  a  kingdom  !  But  you 
are  a  "  child ; "  whatever  age  you  be,  you  are  in  the  infancy  of  your  existence.  And 
the  great  end  of  your  being  is  preparation  for  your  majority — which  lies  the  other 
aide  the  grave.    And  therefore,  all  is  laid  out  here — by  your  wise  and  loving  Father 


3M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I*. 

— for  your  education.  You  are  at  home  in  your  own  household,  and  all  is  going  on 
day  after  day,  in  the  ordinary  round.  You  meet  in  the  morning  ;  you  sit  together 
at  meals  :  you  join  in  the  evening  circle.  It  all  seems  very  commonplace.  But 
what  and  if  in  all  this  you  are  placed,  by  God,  to  prepare  yourself  for  "  the  family  " 
in  heaven  ?  Or,  you  go  about  in  all  the  activities  and  businesses  of  your  earthly 
calling.  Have  you  bethought  you  that  they  are  all  to  cultivate  the  accuracy,  and 
the  energy,  and  the  faithfulness  which  will  make  you  fit  for  higher  trust  and 
heavenly  engagements,  and  more  than  angelic  offices,  in  another  stage  of  your 
immortality  ?  Or,  you  walk  among  the  beauties  of  God's  creation  :  or  you  sit  down 
and  you  study  the  pages  of  Divine  lore  :  and  what  is  the  whole  universe,  what  is  it 
but  a  lesson  book  in  which  you  are  to  read,  day  by  day,  something  of  the  character, 
and  the  wisdom,  and  the  love  of  God  ?  Yet,  all  you  read  now,  is  only  like  a  little 
child  learning  his  alphabet.  Those  pains  and  troubles,  what  are  they  ?  Correctives. 
Not  very  general  correctives  that  will  do  for  every  one.  That  would  not  be  the  way 
of  a  good  "  tutor,"  or  a  wise  "  governor."  But  the  particular  grief,  the  particular 
happiness,  which  is  exactly  suited  to  your  special  case,  and  still  more  to  your 
destined  place  and  portion  which  you  are  to  occupy  in  another  world.  Are  not  the 
poor,  and  the  sorrowful,  the  "tutors"  who  are  sent  to  prepare  you  for  the  higher 
exercises  of  heaven  ? — for  the  missions  and  the  ministrations  of  the  redeemed  t 
(J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Yer.  3.  Even  so  we,  when  we  were  children,  were  In  bondage  under  tac 
elements  of  the  world. — Tlie  elements  of  this  world : — The  law  was  so  called.  1. 
In  respect  op  the  fuller  and  complete  doctrine  ojp  the  New  Testament.  II. 
Because  jewry  was  a  little  school  set  up  in  a  corner  of  the  world  and  the  law  an 
a.  b.  c.  or  primer  in  which  Christ  was  revealed  in  an  elementary  and  obscure 
manner.  Thus  we  see — 1.  That  God's  ancient  people  were  heirs  as  well  as  we:  the 
only  difference  is  the  manner  which  God  used  in  dispensing  His  blessings.  2.  That 
they  were  but  children  in  respect  of  us ;  (1)  as  regards  the  Mosaic  regimen :  they 
were  kept  subject  to  more  laws  than  we;  (2)  as  regards  revelation:  God  hee 
revealed  more  to  us  than  to  them  (Luke  x.  24 ;  Heb.  i.  1-2).  3.  That  we  should 
increase  in  the  knowledge  and  grace  of  God  so  as  to  be  answerable  to  our  conditioa. 
How  sad  that  a  Christian  who  should  be  a  teacher  is  often  a  babe  (Heb.  v.  12).  4. 
That  we  should  rejoice  in  and  live  conformably  to  our  privilege  as  sons.  (W. 
Perkins.)  Children  cannot  have  presented  to  them  pure  intellectual  conceptions : — 
They  must  first  learn  the  import  of  external  signs.  They  must  learn  language  and 
letters.  They  must  put  together  syllables  and  words.  They  must  see  thought 
through  the  medium  of  form,  or  learn  to  think  of  what  is  moral  and  spiritual  by 
facts,  parables,  pictures,  or  such  like  appeals  to  the  imagination  and  the  senses. 
For  a  time  words  to  the  young  mind  are  things — stories  are  facts.  By  and  by  the 
inward  meaning  of  what  has  been  learned  comes  to  be  understood.  The  outward 
ultimately  falls  off  or  loses  its  primary  aspect  and  uses ;  and  the  man,  with  his  fully 
developed  and  perfected  faculties,  is  in  immediate  contact  with  the  abstract  and  the 
spiritual.  He  then  feels  as  if  he  apprehended  it,  and  could  reason  about  it,  or  at 
least  meditate  upon  it,  without  the  aid  of  words  and  signs.  "  When  I  was  a  child,"  &o, 
(1  Cor.  xii.  11-13).  Then  I  saw  through  a  glass  darkly— feeling  after  truth  as 
reflected  from  a  mirror,  or  presented  in  a  parable ;  now  I  look  upon  it  face  to  face. 
(T.  Binney,  D.D.)  All  mankind,  the  whole  race  of  Adam,  were  until  the  Incarnation 
of  Christ  as  children  : — 1.  Because  of  their  want  of  knowledge  of  God  and  the  feeble- 
ness  of  their  intellect  in  the  things  of  God.  2.  Because  of  their  condition  as 
under  the  laws  of  nature  or  of  ceremonies,  so  that  they  were  no  better  than 
servants  under  the  control  of  a  taskmaster.  But  to  the  Jews  especially  does  this 
word  "  children  "  apply — 1.  As  being  ordinarily  busied  about  small  things,  minute 
observances — the  occupation  of  children.  2.  Because  of  the  littleness  of  their 
knowledge  of  Diviue  things.  3.  Because  of  their  fear  of  correction,  their  timidity 
as  children,  going  ever  in  the  fear  of  death  (W.  Denton,  M.A.)  The  minor:— 
L  His  position — one  of  restraint,  subservience,  dependence.  IL  His  training — 
suitable  (v.  3),  wise,  appointed  and  limited  by  the  Father.  III.  His  prospeots — well 
grounded,  magnificent,  conditional.  (J.  Lyth.)  Childhood  is  a  period  of— L 
Subjection.    II.  Instruction.    HI.  Anticipation.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son, 
—Christ's  Advent  in  the  fulness  of  time : — The  question  has  often  been  asked,  Why 
did  not  Christ  come  sooner  ?    Why  were  patriarchs,  kings,  and  prophets,  left  to 


chip,  it.]  OALATIANS.  235 

experience  the  sickness  of  heart  arising  from  hope  long  deferred  ?  It  was  necessary 
that  the  world  should  be  left  to  itself,  in  order  that  its  own  strivings  being  proved 
insufficient  to  the  finding  out  God,  there  might  be  a  standing  demonstration  of  the 
need  of  a  revelation.  And  this  experiment  demanded  long  ages  for  its  development. 
Men  must  be  tried  under  varieties  of  circumstance:  whilst  the  traditions  of  a 
righteous  ancestry  were  fresh  in  their  keeping — when  those  traditions  had  been 
lost  or  corrupted,  and  natural  religion  had  a  clear  stage  to  itself — when  they  bad 
sunk  into  barbarism,  and  when  through  strenuous  exertions  they  had  wrought 
themselves  up  to  a  high  pitoh  of  civilization.  It  is,  in  a  measure,  a  mistake  which 
has  been  assumed  as  a  truth  in  our  foregoing  reasoning — that  mankind,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Jews,  were  abandoned  by  God,  during  those  dark  ages  which 
preceded  Christ's  coming.  On  the  contrary,  if  you  rest  not  satisfied  with  a 
superficial  glance,  you  will  perceive  that  God  was  working  upon  the  world  with  a 
distinct  reference  to  preparing  it  for  the  gospel.  Besides,  if  you  examine  the 
period  of  our  Lord's  appearance  on  earth,  you  will  not  think  it  too  much  to  say, 
that  the  season  was  made  on  purpose  (so  to  speak)  for  the  circumstances.  The 
period  was  a  most  remarkable  one — such  as  could  only  have  been  brought  round  by 
the  revolutions  and  convulsions  of  many  centuries.  The  Eoman  power  had  spread 
itself  over  all  the  nations  of  the  then  known  world ;  and  thus  all  those  petty  states, 
whose  jostling  and  opposing  interests  might  have  withstood  the  propagation  of 
Christianity,  were  swallowed  up  in  one  great  empire.  At  the  same  time,  the  seat 
of  that  empire  lay  so  distant  from  Judea,  the  cradle  of  our  faith,  that  no  opposition 
could  thence  suddenly  arise  to  the  infant  religion.  Christianity  was  sure  to  obtain 
a  good  footing  before  jealousy  could  be  entertained,  and,  therefore,  persecution 
appointed,  by  those  who  occupied  the  remote  throne  of  the  Caesars.  Add  to  this, 
that  in  conformity  with  His  character  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  no  breath  of  war 
ruffled  the  vast  surface  of  the  Eoman  empire,  when  the  Saviour  condescended  to 
be  born  of  a  woman.  The  turbid  waves  of  factious  or  ambitious  policy  had  for  a 
while  settled  into  quiet,  and  the  temple  of  Janus  closed  its  doors  that  the  Church  of 
Jesus  might  throw  open  its  gates.  So  that  there  was  nothing  to  oppose  the  progress 
of  the  messengers  of  the  gospel ;  the  world  stood  free  for  their  labours ;  they  might 
pass  from  land  to  land ;  they  might  cross  seas,  and  rivers,  and  mountains.  It  was, 
moreover,  "  the  fulness  of  time,"  because  many  prophecies  met  in  it,  and  received 
their  accomplishment.  The  great  marvel  of  the  prophecies  which  bear  upon  the 
work  and  person  of  Jesus  is,  that  they  were  delivered  by  a  succession  of  men, 
rising  up  with  long  intervals  between,  and  each  becoming  more  minute  in  his 
predictions,  as  he  stood  more  nearly  on  the  threshold  of  the  Advent.  The  day  of 
Christ's  birth  lying  a  long  way  off  from  that  of  man's  apostasy,  might  be  made  a 
kind  of  focus,  into  which  should  be  gathered  the  prophetic  rays  of  successive 
generations.  You  must  readily  perceive,  that  this  collecting  into  one  point  the 
pencils  of  light  emanating  from  successive  ages,  would  mark  out  the  birth-time  of 
Messiah  with  a  vividness  and  an  accuracy  which  could  not  have  been  produced  by 
a  lesser  combination.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  preparation  of  the  world  for  the 
gospel : — Two  principles  should  be  borne  in  mind  by  those  who  would  discover  the 
Divine  purposes  in  history,  1.  The  first  is  that  God  has  the  supreme  control  of 
events — that  He  "  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will."  2.  The 
other  principle  is  that  the  operations  of  Providence  should  be  studied  in  connection 
with  any  other  disclosures  whioh  we  may  have  of  the  laws  and  plans  of  the  Divine 
workings.  This  rule  is  necessary  if  we  would  distinguish  between  those  evils  in  our 
world  which  have  been  permitted  and  overruled  for  beneficent  and  holy  ends,  and 
those  events  which  have  been  brought  about  either  because  in  themselves  excellent 
or  for  the  accomplishment  of  good  results.  Let  us  spread  before  us  the  map  of  the 
world's  affairs  as  they  stood  in  the  days  of  our  Lord's  appearance  among  men,  and 
let  us  see  the  mighty  hand  of  God  in  the  disposition  of  them  all.  First,  if  we 
regard  that  age  in  its  secular  aspect,  we  find  two  great  preparations  tor  the 
successful  diffusion  of  the  gospel.  The  one  of  these  was  a  general  union  and 
tranquility  of  the  world,  under  Soman  law ;  and  the  other  a  wide-spread  civiliza- 
tion, accompanied  by  a  well-nigh  universal  language,  resulting  chiefly  from  Grecian 
influence.  That  of  the  one,  if  we  may  so  speak,  was  negative,  and  was  chiefly 
occupied  in  removing  obstructions,  so  that  a  free  course  might  be  given  to  the 
Word  of  God.  That  of  the  other  was  positive,  and  furnished  great  facilities  for 
the  presentati  m  and  dissemination  of  the  truth.  It  fact  it  would  have  mattered 
but  little  that  the  nations  were  kept  in  quietness  under  the  compelling  power  of 
Soman  law,  had  not  the  spirit  of  Grecian  civilization,  pervading  the  organization 


2M  TIIE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 

of  Borne,  exerted  everywhere  a  beneficial  influence.  Let  us  now  turn  from  the 
secular  to  the  spiritual  aspect  of  the  ancient  world  if  we  would  discover  yet  more 
convincing  evidence  of  the  workings  of  Divine  wisdom.  Here,  again,  the  attentive 
reader  of  history  can  perceive  two  great  preparations  for  the  introduction  of  the 
gospel.  The  one  of  these  was  a  deep  consciousness  of  moral  debasement  and  of 
religious  darkness  pervading  the  Gentile  nations ;  and  the  other  was  a  very  general 
diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Jewish  faith  throughout  the  Eoman  Empire, 
accompanied  by  a  recognition  of  its  truth  and  excellence.  The  condition  of  the 
heathen  world  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  advent  was  truly  deplorable.  That 
dreadful  description  which  Paul  gives  in  the  first  part  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans 
is  fully  verified  by  the  accounts  of  contemporary  historians.  The  heathen  were 
not  without  a  knowledge  of  God,  a  sense  of  moral  obligation  and  a  perception  of 
the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong.  In  the  discussions  of  their  philosophers 
we  find  not  only  some  of  the  most  eloquent  praises  of  virtue  that  ever  were 
written,  but  also  the  clearest  directions  regarding  the  various  duties  of  life.  The 
law  of  God  was  plainly  written  on  their  hearts.  In  proof  of  this  we  may  cite  the 
remarkable  fact  that  the  treatise  of  Cicero,  "  Concerning  Morals,"  was  long  used  as 
a  text-book  in  seminaries  of  the  Christian  Church.  Indeed,  this  treatise  must  ever 
give  delight  to  those  who  can  appreciate  the  wisdom  and  purity  of  its  instructions. 
But  it  was  the  wretchedness  and  the  condemnation  of  the  heathen  world  that  they 
knew  their  duty  and  they  did  it  not.  Their  philosophy  was  utterly  powerless  to 
resist  the  influ.  noes  which  destroyed  them ;  and  their  religion  was  worse  than 
powerless.  None  save  the  lowest  class  of  the  people  retained  any  faith  in  the 
polytheistic  creeds  ;  a  general  feeling  a  want  regarding  both  the  knowledge  and  the 
efficacy  of  religion  pervaded  the  nations  of  the  world.  But  there  was  yet  another 
method  in  which  a  Divine  Providence  was  preparing  the  nations  for  our  Saviour's 
advent.  This  was,  the  diffusion  of  the  principles  of  the  Jewish  faith  throughout 
every  part  of  the  Roman  Empire.  All  classes  in  society  had  some  followers  of 
Moses;  even  kings  and  queens  did  not  blush  to  own  themselves  believers  in  the  God 
of  Israel.  Then  also  multitudes  of  thinking  men  who  made  no  profession  of 
Judaism  were  familiarized  with  the  conceptions  of  the  ever-living  Jehovah  and  of 
His  promised  Christ.  In  this  way  the  ancient  form  of  religion  went  before 
Christianity,  heralding  its  approach  and  predisposing  men  for  its  clearer  and  more 
powerful  revelations.  There  was  then  an  external  fitness  for  the  successful 
impartation  of  the  truth.  Under  the  security  and  tranquility  of  Bome's  imperial 
sway  the  gospel  was  committed  to  the  language  of  educated  and  thoughtful 
humanity,  and  was  borne  on  the  life-currents  of  Grecian  civilization  to  the  various 
populations  of  the  earth.  There  was,  also,  a  deeper  and  spiritual  preparation. 
Bitter  experience  had  proved  the  worthlessness  of  the  ancient  superstitions,  and 
had  shown  that  extremity  of  wickedness  and  misery  to  which  our  race  is  tending, 
and  from  which  there  can  be  no  deliverance  save  through  the  power  of  a  Heaven- 
sent faith.  And,  finally,  the  Jewish  religion,  containing  in  its  bosom  the  essential 
truths  of  salvation,  by  its  gradual  diffusion,  gave  men  a  prophetic  foretaste  of 
Christianity,  and  a  readiness  to  receive  further  Divine  instructions.  From  this 
whole  subject  we  may  derive  two  important  lessons.  First,  let  us  learn  to  adore 
and  love  and  trust  that  Almighty  Being  who  rules,  with  purposes  of  mercy,  over 
the  children  of  men.  That  is  an  exalted  conception  of  God  which  is  presented  to 
us  in  the  Christian  doctrine  of  providence.  No  evil  genius  presides  over  human 
destinies;  nor  a  blind,  unconscious  fate;  nor  a  stern  God  of  justice  who  has 
forgotten  to  be  gracious.  It  is  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  till  the  present  day,  has  been  controlling  the  affairs  of  our 
globe  to  advance  His  compassionate  designs.  What  a  confidence  have  Christians 
here  1  In  the  midst  of  the  revolutions,  and  disasters,  and  evils  of  earth,  the  Lord 
God  Omnipotent  reigneth.  Let  us,  also,  be  taught  by  this  subject,  the  inestimable 
importance  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  the  Boman  procurator  of  Judea 
carelessly  questioned  the  Galilean  who  stood  before  him,  accused  by  the  malicious 
Jews,  he  little  thought  that  the  very  empire,  in  which  he  himself  was  but  an 
insignificant  officer,  was  brought  into  existence  and  built  up  into  power  to  advance 
the  mission  of  that  despised  and  persecuted  Nazarene.  And  when  the  light-minded 
Athenians  mocked  the  unpretending  preacher  of  the  Cross,  they  were  far  from 
conjecturing  that  the  chief  object  for  which  the  language  and  the  civilization  of 
Greece  had  been  developing  for  centuries,  was  to  diffuse  the  gospel  which  Paul 
proclaimed  throughout  all  the  habitable  globe.  Yet,  in  the  mind  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  this  was  a  worthy  end  of  a  providential  control  of  human  affairs  during  a 


gkap.  it.]  GALATIAN8.  S37 

period  of  thousands  of  years.  See  how  differently  God  and  man  view  the  same 
things  I  But  if  Christianity  has  received  such  care  from  Almighty  God,  how 
important  should  this  religion  be  in  the  eyes  of  those  for  whose  welfare  it  u 
intended !  (E.  J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Christ  obedient  to  the  law : — 1.  Christ'f 
obedience  to  the  law  was  not  a  matter  of  course,  following  upon  His  Incarnation. 
He  might  have  lived  and  died,  had  it  been  consistent  with  His  high  purpose,  in 
sinless  purity — without  expressly  undertaking,  as  He  did,  openly  to  fulfil  the  law. 
2.  It  was  not  only  an  integral,  but  also  a  necessary  part,  of  His  work  of  redemption. 
He  came,  as  regarded  this  matter,  not  to  stand  beneath  the  law,  but  to  stand  above 
it ;  and  this  He  could  only  do  by  fulfilling  it,  and  carrying  out  its  higher  and  more 
spiritual  meaning,  and  causing  God's  truth  and  purity  and  holiness  to  shine 
through  the  outward  veil  of  its  commandments  and  ordinances.  Moreover,  He 
was  the  end  of  the  law.  It  all  pointed  to  Him.  Its  types  and  ceremonies  all  found 
their  fulfilment  in  His  person  and  work.  All  sacrifice  was  consummated  by  His 
suffering.  And  not  less  striking  is  the  way  in  which  the  fact  of  Christ  having  been 
made  under  the  law,  unites  and  clears  and  justifies  all  God's  dealings  with  man. 
God  gave  a  law  which  was  valid  through  whole  generations  of  men ;  a  law  with 
various  sanctions  and  ordinances  and  prohibitions.  That  law  is  done  away.  The 
Church  of  God  seems  to  stand  on  other  foundations ;  to  have  changed  the  ground 
of  her  obedience,  and  the  warrant  of  her  hope.  But  this  is  not  so.  Not  a  jot  nor 
a  tittle  of  that  law  has  fallen  away,  or  become  void.  All  has  been  fulfilled.  (Dean 
Alford.)  Man  in  the  light  of  the  Incarnation: — The  pivots  on  which  the  crises 
of  history  revolve  are  seemingly  very  minute.  I.  The  incarnation  implies  the 
greatness  of  human  natube.  It  is  a  fact,  that  God  has  been  manifest  in  the  flesh, 
in  the  person  of  His  Son.  God  has  expressed  His  attributes  in  many  things.  Men 
do  the  like  in  their  works.  In  the  Incarnation  God  did  not  embody  mere  qualities 
and  perfections,  but  Himself.  How  closely  must  the  nature  of  man  be  related  to  the 
nature  of  God ;  for  God  Himself  became  incarnate  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  !  It  was 
through  the  points  of  similarity  between  the  nature  of  God  and  the  nature  of  man,  in- 
volved in  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  that  the  Incarnation  of  Deity  in  humanity  became 
possible.  We  revolt  at  the  heathen  idea,  that  a  Divine  being  can  be  enshrined  in 
an  idol  of  wood  or  stone,  because  there  are  no  godlike  faculties  through  which  the 
radiance  of  a  Divine  presence  can  stream  forth  on  the  kindred  faculties  of  the 
worshippers  who  are  to  be  illumined  by  the  manifestation.  If  man  be  the  offspring 
of  God,  the  Incarnation  becomes  rational  and  credible.  Of  the  grandeur  of  our 
nature,  as  set  forth  in  this  early  announcement,  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  in 
the  flesh  is  the  demonstration.  II.  The  incabnation  indicates  the  high  destiny 
or  man.  Christ  Jesus  was  the  sample  of  that  moral  perfection  to  which  humanity 
may  be  raised  by  the  power  and  grace  of  God.  The  nature  of  a  thing  discloses 
more  or  less  distinctly  its  primary  intention.  In  all  departments  of  creation  we 
argue  from  the  adaptations  of  an  organ  to  the  uses  for  which  it  was  designed.  The 
eye  is  for  light  and  for  the  objects  of  beauty  and  deformity  which  light  unveils. 
The  ear  is  for  sounds — melodies,  harmonies,  and  discords.  Season  and  conscience 
are  faculties  related  to  truth  and  duty.  It  is  but  an  application  of  the  same  process 
to  infer  from  the  powers  of  man  the  purpose  of  his  Maker.  1.  Our  souls  were 
evidently  intended  for  fellowship  with  God.  That  we  have  faculties  resembling 
the  Divine  attributes,  is  an  intimation  of  this  purport  of  our  being.  2.  Men  were 
plainly  framed  to  work  with  God  as  well  as  to  commune  with  Him.  We  have 
benevolent  activities  resembling  the  beneficent  energies  of  the  Almighty.  From 
our  humble  level  we  can  pity  and  succour.  We  were  formed  for  God-like  thoughts, 
God-like  motives,  and  God-like  deeds.  3.  Human  beings  were  distinctly  marked 
out  for  dominion  and  glory.    III.  The  incarnation  brings  out  in  deepest  hues 

AND   DABKE8T   SHADES   THE   SINFULNESS   OF  OUB   BACE.      But   Of  this  be  SUre,  that   the 

greatness  of  man's  sin  is  inseparable  from  the  greatness  of  man's  nature.  IV. 
The  Incabnation  should  inspibe  mankind  with  brightest  hope.  If  our  state  had 
been  without  the  prospect  of  deliverance,  the  Son  of  God  would  not  have  become 
flesh.  He  would  not  have  appeared  in  our  nature  to  mock  our  despair.  The 
Incarnation  is  Divine  testimony  to  our  recoverability.  V.  The  Incabnation  seems 
to  suggest,  that  the  moral  and  begal  perfection  of  our  humanity  is  unattain- 
able unless  God  dwell  in  us.  Life  and  beauty,  stem  and  leaf,  bloom  and  fruit, 
lie  hidden  in  the  seed.  While  there  is  nothing  but  the  seed,  the  wonderful  vegetable 
fabric,  with  its  verdure,  fragrance,  and  loveliness,  is  merely  latent.  So  all  the 
spiritual  capabilities  of  our  nature  continue  undeveloped  while  the  soul  subsists  in 
vital  and  moral  isolation  from  God.     The  Divine  ideal  of  humanity  cannot  bt 


838  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [pan.  IT, 

fulfilled  by  humanity  alone.  There  must  be  a  Divine  vivification  of  the  dormant 
energies.    The  re-creating  Spirit  must  brood  over  the  chaos.    VI.  The  Incarnation 

DEMONSTRATES    THAT    YOUR    SOULS    ARE    VERT    DEAR    TO    GOD.        How    Vast    is    God'a 

interest  in  us !  He  has  sent  His  own  Son  to  us  in  the  nature  of  one  of 
our  race,  one  of  our  very  selves.  If  a  monarch  waives  the  pomp  of  majesty, 
lays  aside  the  burden  of  empire,  and  crosses  the  threshold  of  some  humble 
cottage,  to  minister  to  a  sufferer  among  the  lowly  poor,  how  obvious  and  how 
touching  is  his  concern  for  his  obscure  and  afflicted  subject!  (H.  Batchelor.) 
Preparation  for  the  Advent: — Our  Lord's  appearance  on  the  scene  of  human 
history  corresponds  with  the  general  law  so  far  as  this — that  He  comes  when 
a  course  of  preparation,  conducted  through  previous  ages,  was  at  last  complete. 
But  then  He  was  not  the  creation,  as  we  say,  of  His  own  or  of  any  preceding 
age.  What  is  true  of  all  other  great  men,  who  are  no  more  than  great  men,  is 
not  true  of  Him.  They  receive  from  their  age  as  much  as  they  give  it;  they 
embody  and  reflect  its  spirit.  They  catch  the  ideas  which  are  in  circulation — 
which  are,  as  we  speak,  "  in  the  air  " — and  they  express  them  more  vividly  than 
do  others,  whether  by  speech  or  by  action.  The  age  contributes  much  to  make 
them,  and  the  age  is  pleased  with  them  because  it  sees  itself  reflected  in  them,  and 
their  power  with  it  is  often  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  that  of  their  real  originality. 
With  our  Lord  it  is  utterly  otherwise.  He  really  owed  nothing  to  the  time  or  the 
country  which  welcomed  His  Advent.  He  had  no  contact  with  the  great  world  of 
Greek  thought,  or  of  Roman  politics  and  administration.  He  borrowed  just  so 
much  rabbinical  language  and  sayings  as  to  make  Himself  intelligible  to  His  own 
generation;  but  no  rabbi,  of  whatever  school,  could  have  said,  or  could  have 
omitted  to  say,  what  He  did.  The  preceding  ages  only  prepared  His  way  before 
Him  in  the  circumstances,  in  the  convictions,  in  the  moral  experiences  of  men ; 
and  thus  a  preceding  period  marked  in  the  counsels  of  God  had  to  be  run  out.  At 
last  its  final  hour  had  struck.  That  hour  was  the  fulness  of  time :  it  was  the 
moment  of  the  Advent.  There  was  a  threefold  work  of  preparation  for  the  Son  of 
God,  carried  forward  in  what  was  then  called  the  civilized  world  ;  and  each  portion 
of  this  preparation  demanded  the  lapse  of  a  certain  period.  I.  The  world  had 
to  be  prepared,  in  a  certain  sense,  politically  for  Christ's  work.  1.  A  common 
language.  This  was  partly  provided  by  the  conquests  of  Alexander.  He  spread 
the  Greek  language  throughout  Western  Asia,  throughout  Egypt;  and  when 
Greece  itself  was  conquered,  the  educated  Romans  learnt  the  language  of 
their  vanquished  provincials.  And  thus,  when  our  Lord  came,  the  Greek 
language,  in  which  the  New  Testament  is  written,  was  the  common  tongue  of 
the  civilized  world,  ready  to  St.  Paul's  hand  for  the  missionary  work  of  Chris- 
tianity. 2.  A  common  social  system,  laws,  and  government.  During  the  half- 
century  which  preceded  the  birth  of  Christ,  the  Roman  Empire  was  finally 
consolidated  into  a  great  political  whole,  so  that  Palestine  and  Spain — so  that 
North  Africa  and  Southern  Germany — were  administered  by  a  single  government. 
Christianity,  indeed,  did  not  need  this,  for  it  passed  beyond  the  frontiers  of  the 
empire  in  the  lifetime  of  the  apostles  ;  and  the  earliest  translation  of  the  New 
Testament — that  into  Syrian,  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century — showed  that 
it  could  dispense  with  Greek.  But  this  preparation  was,  nevertheless,  an  important 
element  in  the  process  by  which  preceding  ages  led  up  to  the  fulness  of  time. 
II.  Then  there  was  a  preparation  in  the  convictions  of  mankind.  The  heathen 
nations  were  not  without  some  religion — a  religion  which  contained  within  various 
degrees  certain  elements  of  truth,  however  mingled  with,  or  overlaid  by,  extra- 
ordinary error.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  element  of  truth  which  is  to  be  found 
in  all  forms  of  heathenism,  heathenism  could  not  have  lasted  as  it  did.  Had  there 
not  been  much  true  religious  feeling  in  the  ancient  world,  although  it  was  lavished 
often  upon  unworthy  and  miserable  objects,  the  great  characters  with  whom  we 
meet  in  history  could  not  have  existed.  But  the  ancient  religions  tended  from  the 
first  to  bury  God,  of  whose  existence  the  visible  world  assured  them,  in  that  visible 
world  which  witnessed  to  Him.  Those  powers  of  nature  which  are,  as  we  know, 
but  His  modeb  oi  working — which  are  but  the  robe  with  which  he  covers  Himself — 
become  more  and  more,  when  man  is  without  a  revelation,  objects  of  devout  venera- 
tion. The  principle  is  the  same  in  the  fetishism  which  finds  a  god  in  some  single 
natural  object,  and  in  the  pantheism  which,  like  that  of  India,  looks  forward  to  the 
absorption  of  the  individual  soul  into  the  universal  life  of  nature.  The  Greek* 
never  knew,  at  their  best  time,  of  a  literally  Almighty  God ;  still  less  did  they  know 
anything  of  a  God  of  love ;  but  it  was  necessary  that  their  incapacity  to  retain  in 


>.  xt.]  QALATIANS.  230 

their  knowledge  the  little  they  did  know  about  Him  should  be  proved  to  them  by 
experience.  Certainly,  their  great  men,  such  as  Plato,  tried  to  spiritualize,  in  a 
certain  sense,  the  popular  ideas  about  God,  but,  the  old  religion  would  not  bear  his 
criticism.  It  went  to  pieees  when  it  was  discussed ;  and  philosophy,  which  he 
wished  to  take  its  place,  having  no  facts,  that  is,  no  religious  facts,  to  appeal  to, 
but  consisting  only  of  views,  could  never  become  a  real  religion,  and  so  take  its 
place.  The  consequence  was  the  simultaneous  growth  of  gross  superstition  and  of 
blank  unbelief — a  growth  which  continued  down  to  the  very  time  of  the  Incarnation. 
Never  before  was  the  existence  of  any  Supreme  Being  so  widely  denied  in  civilized 
human  society,  as  in  the  age  of  the  first  Caesars.  Never  were  there  so  many 
magicians,  incantations,  charms,  rites  of  the  most  debased  and  most  debasing  kind, 
aa  in  that  age.  The  most  gifted  of  races  had  done  its  best  with  heathenism,  and 
the  result  was  that  all  the  highest  and  purest  minds  loathed  the  present,  and 
looked  forward  to  the  future.  It  was  the  fulness  of  the  time.  The  epoch  of  religious 
experiments  had  been  closed  in  an  epoch  of  despair  which  was  only  not  altogether 
hopeless.  III.  There  was  also  a  preparation  in  the  horai.  expedience  of  mankind. 
There  was,  at  times,  much  of  what  we  call  moral  earnestness  in  the  ancient  world  ; 
but  men  were  content,  as  a  rule,  with  being  good  citizens,  which  is  by  no  means 
necessarily  the  same  thing  as  being  good  men.  In  the  eyes  of  Socrates,  for 
instance,  all  obligations  were  discharged  if  a  man  obeyed  the  laws  of  Athens. 
Plato,  St.  Augustine  said,  approached  Christianity  more  nearly  than  any  other ; 
and  yet  Plato  tolerated  popular  vices  of  the  gravest  description,  and  he  drew  a 
pioture  of  a  model  State  in  which  there  was  to  be  a  community  of  wives.  And  the 
moral  teachers  whom  St.  Paul  afterwards  found  at  Athens  were  Epicureans  and 
Stoics.  They  divided  the  ancient  world  between  them,  practically.  The  Stoie 
morality  has  often  been  compared  with  Christianity ;  it  differed  from  it  vitally.  Every 
single  virtue  was  dictated  by  pride,  just  as  every  Epicurean  virtue  was  inspired  by 
the  wish  to  economize  the  sources  of  pleasure.  "Nowadays,"  says  a  pagan  writer, 
Quinctilian,  "the  greatest  vices  are  concealed  under  the  name  of  philosophy." 
And  the  morality  of  the  masses  of  men  whom  the  philosophers  could  not  and  did 
not  dare  to  influence,  was  just  what  might  be  expected.  The  dreadful  picture  of 
the  pagan  world  which  St.  Paul  draws  (Rom.  i.),  is  not  a  darker  picture  than  that 
of  pagan  writers — of  moralists  like  Seneca,  of  satirists  like  Juvenal,  of  historians 
like  Tacitus  ;  and  yet  enough  survived  of  moral  truth  in  the  human  conscience  to 
condemn  average  pagan  practices.  Man  still  had,  however  obscurely,  some  parts 
of  the  law  of  God  written  deep  in  his  heart.  Men  saw  and  approved  (they  said  it 
themselves)  the  better  course,  and  they  followed  the  worse  ;  and  the  natural  law 
was  thus  to  them  only  a  revelation  of  sin  and  of  weakness.  It  led  them  to  yearn 
for  a  deliverer,  although  their  aspirations  were  indefinite  enough.  Still  this  wide- 
spread corruption,  this  longiag  for  better  things,  marked  the  close  of  the  epoch  of 
moral  experiments ;  it  announced  that  the  fulness  of  the  time  had  come.  (Carwn 
Liddon.)  Preparation  of  the  Jewish  people  for  Christ: — 1.  Politically  the  Jews 
were  expecting  change.  They  retained  the  feelings  while  they  had  lost  the  privi- 
leges of  a  free  people.  Their  aspirations  looked  to  a  better  future,  though  they 
mistook  its  character.  The  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judah.  Shiloh,  they 
believed,  would  immediately  come.  2.  Their  purely  religious  convictions  pointed 
in  the  same  direction.  Prophecy  had  in  the  course  of  ages  completed  its  picture  of 
a  coming  deliverer.  Beginning  with  the  indefinite  promise  of  a  deliverance,  it 
had  gradually  narrowed  the  fulfilment,  first  to  a  particular  race,  then  to  a  particular 
nation,  then  to  a  particular  tribe,  and  a  particular  family.  And  the  birth,  the 
work,  the  humiliations,  the  death,  the  triumph,  of  the  deliverer  had  been  described 
by  anticipation.  It  was  four  hundred  years  since  the  last  prophet  had  spoken,  and 
during  the  interval  the  nation  had  been  particularly  active  in  arranging,  comparing, 
discussing  the  great  treasures  which  it  had  received  from  the  past ;  and  there  was 
consequently  what  the  New  Testament  calls  an  "expectation  of  Israel,"  for  which 
all  good  men  in  that  age  were  waiting.  3.  Above  all,  the  Jews  had  a  moral  pre- 
paration  to  go  through,  too — the  law,  which  they  had  not  kept  either  in  letter  Di- 
spirit, and  which  was  therefore  to  them  nothing  less  than  a  constant  revelation  of 
their  own  weakness  and  sin.  It  showed  them  what  in  their  natural  strength  they 
could  not  do;  it  showed  them,  like  a  lantern  carried  into  a  dark  chamber  of  horrors 
which  had  never  been  lighted  up  before,  what  they  had  done.  Thus  the  law  was  a 
confidential  servant  (which  is  the  true  meaning  of  pedagogue ;  not  schoolmaster!, 
to  whom  God  had  entrusted  the  education  of  Israel,  to  brint<  him  to  Christ.  And  thu 
process  of  bringing  him  had  just  reached  its  completion ;  the  fulness  of  the  time  had 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  it. 

come.  (Ibid.)  The  Divine  plan  in  human  affaire: — This  remarkable  expression, 
"  the  fulness  of  the  time,"  is  with  a  slight  variation  elsewhere  used  by  St.  Paul.  He 
calls  the  gospel,  when  writing  to  the  Ephesians,  "  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of 
times  " ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  in  both  cases  he  really  means  by  "  fulness  "  that 
which  fulfils  or  finishes ;  he  means  the  arrival  of  a  given  hour  or  moment  which  com- 
pletes an  epoch — the  hour  which  thus  makes  its  appointed  measure  and  brings  it  to  a 
close.  It  was  in  a  like  sense  that  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  used  the  word  "  hour," 
as  marking  a  particular  point  in  His  life,  determined  in  the  counsels  of  God  (John 
it.  4,  iv.  21,  v.  25,  vii.  6,  xiii.  1 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  45).  .  .  .  All  such  language  is  only 
understood  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  that  succession  of  events  which,  looking  at 
it  from  a  human  point  of  view,  we  call  "  time,"  is  distributed  upon  a  plan  eternally 
present  to  the  Divine  mind,  and  that  particular  persons  or  particular  characters  are 
assigned,  by  this  eternal  plan,  their  predestinated  place  in  the  succession.  "  To 
everything,"  says  the  wise  man,  "  there  is  a  season  and  a  time  for  every  purpose 
under  heaven."  All  the  lesser  incidents  of  our  separate  lives  are  really  arranged  in 
a  preconcerted  order.  There  is  a  fulness  of  time  at  which,  and  not  before,  we  can 
understand  particular  truths  or  can  undertake  particular  duties,  because  for  these 
truths  or  these  duties  all  that  has  preceded  has  been  a  preparation.  "  My  time," 
we  may  say  in  this  sense,  too,  ♦'  is  in  Thy  hand."  And  this  is  peculiarly  true  of 
that  last  awful  moment  which  awaits  us  all,  and  for  which  all  that  precedes  it  is  one 
varied  preparation — the  moment  of  death.  And  in  like  manner  it  is  true,  generally, 
of  those  whom  the  world  recognizes  as  its  great  men,  tnat  each  appears  in  the 
fulness  of  time ;  each  has  his  predestined  hour,  which  he  may  not  anticipate.  He 
is  in  some  sense  the  ripe  product  of  the  ages  of  thought,  and  feeling,  and  labour, 
which  have  elapsed  before  he  comes  :  and  that  he  should  come  when  he  does  is 
just  as  much  willed  by  the  providence  of  God,  as  that  he  should  be  born  at  all. 
So  it  is  with  writers,  with  artists,  with  statesmen,  even  with  discoverers  and 
inventors.  When  such  men  as  these  are  said  to  be  before  their  age,  it  is  only 
meant  that  the  age  has  not  yet  taken  its  own  true  measure,  and  that  they  surprise 
it  by  a  discovery.  They  really  appear,  one  and  all  of  them,  in  the  fulness  of 
time.  (Ibid.)  The  fulness  of  time: — "The  fulness  of  the  time"  means  that 
moment  which  filled  up  the  measure  of  the  appointed  time,  which  completed  the 
number  of  the  allotted  days ;  it  does  not  refer  to  the  feelings  of  men,  but  to  the 
predestination  of  God.  Scripture  tells  us  that  the  world  was  being  educated  for  the 
coming  of  Christ,  so  as  to  be  able  to  receive  Him  and  to  profit  by  His  work.  As 
the  heir  of  some  great  house  is  during  his  childhood  treated  as  a  servant,  and  kept 
under  tutors  and  governors,  so  were  we  under  the  elements  of  the  world  ;  if 
heathens,  we  were  under  the  vague  teaching  of  natural  religion  ;  if  Jews,  under  the 
formal  instruction  of  Mosaic  ordinances.  History  tells  us  how  all  things  were  ripe 
for  the  Redeemer's  coming  just  when  He  did  come.  God  had  prepared  the  civilized 
world  for  the  reception  of  Christianity  thus  : — I.  By  means  of  the  Roman  Empire 
He  had  reduced  all  the  world  under  one  government,  so  that  there  was  free  inter- 
course between  all  parts  of  the  known  world,  and  there  was  no  political  obstacle  to 
the  spread  of  the  faith  from  one  nation  to  another.  II.  By  means  of  the  Greek 
language,  the  most  perfect  instrument  of  thought  ever  known,  He  had  made  the 
earth  to  be  (in  a  very  great  degree)  of  one  tongue,  and  thus  He  had  prepared  the 
way  for  the  apostles  and  evangelists  of  Christ.  III.  By  means  of  the  chosen 
people  of  the  Jews — having  still  their  religious  centre  at  Jerusalem,  yet  scattered 
throughout  the  world — He  had  provided  a  nursery  for  the  tender  plant  of  the 
gospel,  where  it  should  be  sheltered  and  fostered  under  the  protection  of  an  elder 
but  kindred  religion,  until  it  was  strong  enough  to  be  planted  out  in  the  world. 
IV.  By  reason  of  the  general  confluence  and  mutual  competition  of  all  kinds  of 
heathen  idolatries,  He  had  caused  heathenism  to  lose  all  its  old  repute  and  pow^r 
over  souls.      (R.  Winterbotham,  M.A.)  Timeliness  of  the  Advent : — It  was  the 

fulness  of  time.  I.  In  reference  to  the  Giver.  The  moment  had  arrived  which 
God  had  ordained  from  the  beginning,  and  foretold  by  His  prophets,  for  Messiah's 
coming.  II.  In  reference  to  the  recipient.  The  gospel  was  withheld  until  the 
world  had  arrived  at  mature  age ;  law  had  worked  out  its  educational  purpose  and 
now  was  susperseded.  This  educational  work  had  been  twofold  :  1.  Negative.  It 
was  the  purpose  of  all  law,  but  especially  of  the  Mosaic  law,  to  deepen  the  convic- 
tion of  sin  and  thus  to  show  the  inability  of  all  existing  systems  to  bring  men  near 
to  God.  2.  Positive.  The  comparison  of  the  child  implies  more  than  a  negative 
effect.  A  moral  and  spiritual  expansion,  which  rendered  the  world  more  capable  of 
apprehending  the  gospel  than  it  would  have  been  at  an  earlier  age,  must  be 


©SAK  it.]  GALATIANS.  241 

assumed,  corresponding  to  the  growth  of  the  individual ;  since  otherwise  the  meta- 
phor would  be  robbed  of  more  than  half  its  meaning.  The  primary  reference  in  all 
this  is  plainly  to  the  Mosaic  law  ;  but  the  whole  context  shows  that  the  Gentile 
converts  of  Galatia  are  also  included,  and  that  they,  too,  are  regarded  as  having 
undergone  an  elementary  discipline,  up  to  a  certain  point  analogous  to  that  of  the 
Jews.  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Shall  we  say  that  great  events  arise  from  antecedents 
or  witlwut  them : — In  the  fulness  of  time,  or  out  of  due  season  ;  by  sudden  crises, 
or  with  long  purpose  and  preparation  ?  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  view  the  great 
changes  of  the  world  under  any  of  these  aspects  exclusively.  The  spread  of  the 
Roman  empire,  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  nation,  the  decline  of  the  heathen  religions, 
the  long  series  of  prophecy  and  teaching,  are  the  natural  links  which  connect  the 
gospel  with  the  actual  state  of  mankind ;  the  causes,  humanly  speaking,  of  ita 
spread,  and  the  soil  in  which  it  grew.  But  there  was  something  else  mys- 
terious and  inexplicable  beyond  and  above  all  these  causes,  of  which  no 
account  can  be  given,  which  came  into  existence  at  a  particular  time,  because 
God  chose  that  it  should  come  into  existence  at  that  time.  This  is  what  the 
apostle  calls  "  the  fulness  of  time."      (B.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Christ's  human  birth  a 

wonderful  thing: — "Is  it  not  strange,"  asked  a  thoughtful  boy  one  clay  of  his 
tutor,  "  is  it  not  strange  that  St.  Paul  should  tell  us  that  our  Saviour  was  born  of 
a  woman  ?  Everybody  that  I  know  is  born  of  a  woman,  and  it  is  hard  to  see  why 
such  a  matter  should  be  mentioned  at  all  as  if  it  were  remarkable."  .  .  .  There  is, 
it  is  true,  nothing  remarkable  in  this  circumstance,  if  we  take  human  life  simply 
as  we  find  it.  For  us  men  to  be  born  of  a  woman  is  not  merely  a  rule,  it  is  a  rule 
to  which  there  is  no  known  exception.  Since  the  first  parent  of  our  race,  no 
human  being  has  appeared  upon  this  earth  who  has  not  owed  the  debt  of  existence 
to  the  pain  and  travail  of  a  human  mother.  The  rule  holds  equally  with  the 
wisest,  with  the  strongest,  with  the  saintliest.  Millions  there  have  been  among 
the  sons  of  men,  who  have  been  also  by  Divine  grace  made  to  become  sons  of  God ; 
millions  who  have  been  born  again,  and  thus  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  God ;  but  of 
these  each  one  was  also  first  born  of  a  human  mother.  So  that  we  are  driven  to  ask 
why  a  circumstance  which  might  have  been  taken  quietly  for  granted  should  be  in- 
vested by  the  apostle  with  such  prominence  in  the  case  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.. 
But  observe,  the  question  is  whether  in  His  case  it  could  have  been  taken  for 
granted  ?  If  St.  Paul  mentions  it  thus  emphatically,  it  is  because  he,  at  least,  will 
not  at  once  presume  that  this  is  the  case.  If,  indeed,  the  Christ  whom  St.  Paul 
loved  and  served  was  only  a  Son  of  God  by  grace,  while  by  nature  He  was  only  and 
purely  a  man,  then  to  have  written  down  that  he  was  "  born  of  a  woman"  would 
have  been  an  unmeaning  truism.  But  if,  in  naming  Him,  St.  Paul  is  thinking  o£ 
a  Being  whose  nature  is  such  as  to  make  His  appearance  at  all  to  the  eye  of  sense,, 
and  in  this  visible  sphere  of  things,  in  a  very  high  degree  extraordinary,  then  to 
say  that  He  was  "  born  of  a  woman  "  is  to  make  an  assertion  of  startling  signifi- 
cance. Now,  that  St.  Paul  is  thinking  of  such  a  Being  is  clear,  for  when  he  says, 
"  God  sent  forth  His  Son,"  he  used  the  same  word  as  when,  just  after,  he  says, 
"God  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son."  It  is  a  word  which  implies,  not  simply 
the  action  of  God's  providence,  placing  a  created  being  on  the  scene  of  life ;  it  is  a 
word  which  implies  a  sending  forth  from  the  inmost  life,  from  the  depths  of  Deity  itself, 
of  One  who  shared  the  essential  nature  of  the  Sender.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Woman 
exalted  by  Christ's  birth: — The  position  of  women  in  the  ancient  world  was,  as  a 
rule,  one  of  deep  degradation.  There  are  some  great  and  saintly  women  in  ancient 
Israel— Miriam,  Deborah,  Hannah,  Huldah.  There  are  women  who  are  socially 
or  politically  great  in  paganism,  without  being  at  all  saintly — Semiramis,  Aspasia, 
Sappho,  and  the  wives  and  mothers  of  the  Caesars.  But,  as  a  rule,  in  antiquity 
woman  was  degraded ;  women  were  at  the  mercy,  and  the  caprice,  and  the  passions 
of  men.  They  lived  as  they  live  to-day  in  the  Mohammedan  East,  at  least  geae- 
rally,  a  life  in  which  the  luxuries  of  a  petty  seclusion  scarcely  disguise  the  hard 
reality  of  their  fate.  And  yet  women  were  then,  as  now,  the  larger  part  of  the 
human  family ;  and  one  object,  we  may  dare  to  say,  of  the  Divine  Incarnation,  was 
to  put  woman's  life  on  a  new  footing,  within  the  precincts  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Redemption ;  and  this  was  done  when  the  Redeemer,  Himself  God's  Own  Eternal 
Son,  owning  no  earthly  father,  yet  deigned  to  be  "  born  of  a  woman."  The 
highest  honours  ever  attained  by  or  bestowed  upon  the  noblest  or  the  saintliest 
members  of  the  stronger  sex,  surely  pale  into  insignificance  when  contrasted  with 
this  altogether  unique  prerogative  of  Mary.  She  herself,  in  the  great  hymn  of  the 
Incarnation,  is  already  conscious  of  this     Let  us  think  of  the  best  man  or  woman 

16 


245  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

we  have  ever  known  in  life,  and  ask  ourselves  if  it  would  be  possible  for  him  or  her 
to  say,  without  presumption,  without  absurdity,  "  Behold,  from  henceforth  all  gene* 
rations  shall  call  me  blessed."  But  Mary — she  utters  these  words,  and  from  age 
to  age  Christendom  verifies  them.  To  have  been  the  mother  of  the  Divine  Re- 
deemer is  a  privilege  unshared  and  incommunicable,  and  it  sheds  a  glory  upon  all 
Christian  women  to  the  very  end  of  time.  It  is  this  fact  which  has  silently  created 
that  rare  and  beautiful  feeling  which  in  the  Middle  Ages  took  the  form  of  chivalry, 
but  which  is  wider  and  more  lasting  than  to  be  identified  with  any  one  period  of 
the  Church's  life  ;  that  feeling  which,  without  the  aid  of  legislation,  without 
reducing  itself  to  a  theory  or  a  philosophy,  insensibly  corrected  the  wrongs  of 
centuries,  and  secured  for  woman  that  tender  respect  and  deference  which  is  the 
true  safeguard  of  her  commanding  influence,  and  which  alone  secures  it.  The  best 
guarantee  of  woman's  liberty  and  influence  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the 
Eternal  Son  deigned  to  be  "  born  of  a  woman."  (Ibid.)  The  Immaculate  Con- 
ception : — These  words  not  merely  affirm,  they  also  deny.  Their  silence  is  as 
exclusive,  as  their  positive  import  is  significant.  "  Born  of  a  woman."  Nothing, 
then,  is  said  of  another  earthly  parent.  No  human  father  is  named  as  the  instru- 
ment of  the  Divine  providence.  The  apostle  is  thinking,  we  may  say  with  confi- 
dence, on  our  Lord's  birth  of  a  virgin  mother.  It  is  true  that  in  St.  Paul's  writings 
there  is  no  definite  and  unmistakable  reference  to  the  Immaculate  Conception ;  but 
we  must  remember  (1)  that  there  is  no  one  occasion  in  St.  Paul's  writings  on  which 
such  a  reference  would  seem  necessary ;  and  (2)  that  St.  Luke's  Gospel,  written 
under  St.  Paul's  direction  and  illustrating  his  teaching,  gives  the  fullest  account 
of  the  circumstances  of  our  Lord's  Conception  and  Birth  which  we  have  in  the  New 
Testament.  The  word  "  woman,"  then,  is  in  this  passage  emphatic.  It  pointedly 
implies  that  our  Lord  had  only  one  earthly  parent.  Observe  the  import  of  this. 
It  was  a  prime  necessity  that  the  Redeemer  of  mankind  should  be  sinless.  If  Ha 
was  to  help  our  race  out  of  its  condition  of  moral  degradation,  He  must  have  no 
part  in  the  evil  which  it  was  His  work  to  put  away  (Heb.  vii.  26).  But,  then, 
human  sin  was  not  merely  actual,  but  original ;  not  merely  a  result  of  each  man's 
separate  life  and  responsibility,  but  a  consequence  of  the  withdrawal  of  God's 
fiist  gift  of  righteousness  after  Adam's  transgression.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  twist  of  the 
hereditary  human  will ;  it  was  a  taint  upon  the  native  affections  and  intelligence 
of  the  race  ;  it  was  a  subtle  ingredient  of  the  common  character ;  it  was  an  entail 
from  the  obligations  of  which  the  generations  could  not  of  themselves  hope  to 
e&:ape.  Men  have  constantly  resented,  as  they  resent  to-day,  the  very  idea  of  such 
an  inheritance  of  evil ;  but  they  act,  I  observe,  at  least  in  social  and  in  public 
matters,  upon  the  presumption  that  it  is  true.  Man  is  ever  upon  his  guard  against 
his  brother  man,  as  if  he  were  a  disguised  or  a  possible  enemy.  Society  protects 
itself  by  laws  against  human  nature,  by  laws  which  would  be  a  superfluous  and 
in  suiting  libel  upon  it  if  human  nature  were  not  by  instinct  and  originally  sinful. 
And  thus  for  the  apparition  of  a  Sinless  Being,  truly  sharing  in  our  common 
nature,  yet  absolutely  free  from  its  inheritance  of  evil,  some  striking  irregularity  in 
the  transmission  of  natural  life — some  flaw,  if  we  might  say  so,  conspicuous  and 
intentional — was  plainly  suitable,  in  order  to  mark  the  entrance  upon  the  scene  of 
human  life  of  One  who  shared  the  inheritance  of  flesh  and  blood,  without  sharing 
the  tradition  of  sin.  This  was  the  meaning  of  the  Lord's  Birth  of  a  virgin  mother. 
It  was  because  He  "  became  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him,"  that  He  was  in  this  emphatic  and  exclusive 
sense  "  born  of  a  woman."  (Ibid.)  Christ's  Birth  of  a  woman  consecrates  family 
life : — The  life  of  the  family  is  indeed  elder  than  Christianity ;  it  is  grounded  on 
facts  and  instincts  of  human  nature.  It  is  perhaps,  in  the  last  analysis,  the  pro- 
duct of  the  action  of  man's  reason  and  man's  conscience  upon  his  rudimentary 
physical  instincts.  But  the  nature  and  sacredness  of  family  life  has  been  recog- 
nized with  very  different  degrees  of  clearness  in  different  ages  and  countries  of  the 
world.  It  has  had  to  contend  with  selfish  passions  always  threatening  to  break  it 
np,  and,  in  particular,  with  the  widespread  and  degrading  institution  of  polygamy. 
Those  who  have  best  understood  the  true  well-being  of  our  race  have  done  their 
best  at  all  times  to  insist  upon  and  to  uphold  family  life  as  the  safeguard  of  pure 
human  life,  as  the  firmest  foundation  of  social  order.  Now,  when  our  Lord  con- 
descended to  be  "  born  of  a  woman,"  He  became  a  member  of  a  human  family,  and 
He  bestowed  upon  family  life  the  greatest  consecration  it  has  ever  received  since 
the  beginning  of  human  history.  He  had,  indeed,  no  earthly  father ;  but  He  was 
subject  to  His  foster-father,  St.  Joseph,  as  well  as  to  His  own  mother,  Mary.    He 


.  it.]  GALATIAN8.  24S 

was  subject,  while  yet  He  blessed  them.  In  every  age  Christians  have  loved  to 
dwell  upon  the  picture  of  that  incomparable  home,  first  at  Bethlehem  and  then  at 
Nazareth,  that  home  in  which  for  a  while  Mary  presided,  and  for  which  Joseph 
toiled,  and  in  which  Jesus  was  nursed  and  trained.  No  homestead,  we  may 
be  sure,  ever  rivalled  the  moral  beauties  of  that  which  was  set  up  on  this  earth 
when  the  Son  of  God  was  "  born  of  a  woman."  From  that  day  to  this,  He  has 
been  the  inspiring,  regulating,  combining  influence  in  all  Christian  households. 
In  the  Christian  faith  we  trace  His  moral  authority,  in  the  Christian  mother  His 
tenderness  and  love,  in  the  Christian  child  His  lowly  obedience.  (Ibid.)  The 
character  of  the  Messiah : — I.  Herb  is  the  chaeacteb  of  the  person  sent  into  the 
world — •*  God  sent  forth  His  Son."  The  phrase  is  of  the  same  import,  with  those 
other  expressions  we  meet  with  in  Scripture  (John  iii.  16;  Heb.  i.  1).  The  meaning 
is :  God  having  of  old  established  several  forms  of  religion  among  men,  by  divers 
ways  of  revelation,  by  discovering  Himself  to  the  patriarchs,  by  the  delivering  of 
the  law  to  Moses ;  He  did  at  last  in  mercy  and  compassion  to  mankind  vouchsafe  to 
afford  them  one  more  clear  and  perfect  revelation  of  His  will,  by  the  preaching  of  a 
person  of  far  greater  excellence  and  authority  than  any  before ;  even  by  His  own  Son. 
The  person  here  declared  to  be  sent  into  the  world,  was  in  a  peculiar  manner  the  Son 
of  God.  The  text  also  implies  that  He  was  with  God,  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
before  He  was  sent  into  the  world.  II.  Here  is  a  description  of  this  Divine  Person's 

CONDITION,    AND   HlS   MANNER   OF  CONVERSATION    IN   THE   WORLD — "  He    Was    made    Of 

a  woman,  made  under  the  law."  He  was  made  of  a  woman,  i.e.,  He  became  truly 
and  really  a  man ;  not  taking  upon  Him  only  the  similitude  of  our  nature,  but 
being  really  and  truly  such ;  subjected  to  all  the  infirmities  of  human  nature,  and 
tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin  (Heb.  iv.  15  ;  see  also  Heb.  ii. 
17).  IIL  Here  is  the  end  and  design  of  His  coming  thus  into  the  world  ;  set 
forth  in  the  last  part  of  the  words — "  To  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law,  that 
wi«  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons."  The  same  phrase  the  apostle  again  makea 
use  of  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (chap.  viii.  ver .  15).  God  deals  not  with  us  as  a 
master  with  his  servants,  but  as  a  father  with  his  sons,  requiring  of  us  not  any 
hard  and  burdensome  service,  but  only  a  rational  and  sincere  obedience.  Our 
Lord  came  "to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law ;"  i.e.,  to  abrogate  the  burden- 
some ceremonies  of  the  Jewish  institutions  ;  "  That  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of 
sons  " ;  i.e.,  that  He  might  establish  with  men  a  new  covenant,  which  should  be 
most  easy  to  observe,  and  most  sufficient  to  justify  those  that  should  observe  it. 
Most  easy  to  observe,  is  this  covenant  of  the  gospel ;  because  its  precepts  are  not 
positive  and  carnal  ordinances,  but  the  great  duties  of  the  moral  and  eternal  law  of 
God.  Christ  has  suffered  for  us,  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons  ;  but 
if  we  continue  not  to  live  virtuously  as  becomes  the  children  of  God,  it  will 
nothing  profit  us  to  have  received  this  adoption.  "  They  only  who  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  are  the  sons  of  God"  (Kom.  viii.  14).  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Of  the 
fulness  of  time,  in  which  Christ  appeared : — 1.  We  may  consider  it  with  respect  to 
God's  fore-determinati<m  ;  and  then  it  was  therefore  the  fulness  of  time,  because 
determined  and  foretold  by  tbe  prophets.  According  to  that  ancient  prediction  of 
Jacob  (Gen.  xlix.  10),  the  Messiah  was  to  appear  bifore  the  total  dissolution  oi  the 
Jewish  Government.  Again ;  the  prophecy  of  Malachi  (chap.  iii.  1),  determines 
the  coming  of  our  Saviour  to  be  before  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple.  And 
that  no  less  remarkable  prediction  of  Haggai  (chap.  ii.  vers.  6,  7,  and  9).  'Tia 
evident  therefore  that  tbe  incarnation  of  Christ  was  in  the  fulness  of  time;  that  is, 
exactly  at  the  time  foretold  and  fore-determined  by  the  prophets.  And  indeed 
these  prophecies  were  so  plain,  that  about  the  time  of  oar  Lord's  appearance,  the 
Jews,  and  from  them  the  Eomans,  and  all  the  eastern  parts  of  the  world,  were  in 
great  expectation  of  some  extraordinary  person  to  arise,  who  should  be  governor  of 
the  world.  But— 2.  Though  it  be  evident  that  our  Saviour  came  into  the  world  in 
the  fulness  of  time,  viz.,  at  the  time  foretold  by  the  prophets ;  yet  the  question  may 
still  return,  Why  was  that  time  determined  rather  than  any  other,  and  accordingly 
foretold  by  the  prophets ;  for,  without  doubt,  it  was  in  itself  absolutely  the  fittest  and 
the  properest  season.  Now  two  reasons  there  seem  to  have  been  more  especially, 
of  our  Saviour's  appearing  at  that  time :  the  first  is,  because  the  insufficiency  of 
the  Jewish  dispensation,  as  well  as  of  natural  religion,  was  then,  after  a  long  trial, 
become  sufficiently  apparent:  apparent;  not  to  God,  who  knows  all  things  at 
once,  and  makes  accordingly  provision  for  all  things  from  the  beginning ;  but  to 
men,  to  whom  the  counsel  of  God  is  opened  by  degrees.  The  second  reason,  why 
we  may  suppose  our  Saviour  appeared  just  at  the  time  He  did,  was  because  the 


U4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv« 

■world  was  at  that  time  by  many  extraordinary  circumstances,  peculiarly  prepared 
for  his  reception.  Now,  about  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  birth,  it  is  observable  that 
there  was  a  concurrence  of  many  things  in  the  world,  to  promote  and  further 
the  propagation  of  such  a  religion.  The  Romans  had  then  conquered  almost 
all  the  known  parts  of  the  world;  they  had  spread  and  settled  their  language 
among  all  the  nations  of  their  conquests,  and  had  made  the  communication  easy 
irom  one  part  to  another.  They  had,  moreover,  improved  moral  philosophy  to 
its  greatest  height.  Further ;  the  great  improvement  and  increase  of  learning 
in  the  world  about  this  time  (according  to  that  prophecy  of  Daniel,  "  Many  shall 
run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased  ")  gave  occasion  to  the  Jewish 
books  to  be  dispersed  through  the  world :  and  particularly  the  translating  of 
the  Bible  some  few  ages  before  the  birth  of  Christ  into  one  of  the  then  most 
known  and  universal  languages  upon  earth,  which  had  before  been  confined  in 
a  peculiar  language  to  the  Jews  only,  was  a  singular  preparative  to  the  reception 
of  that  great  Prophet  and  Saviour  of  mankind,  whose  coming  was  in  that  book 
bo  plainly  and  so  often  foretold.  Indeed  this  seems  to  have  been  the  first  step 
of  God's  discovering  Himself  further  than  by  the  light  of  nature  to  other  nations 
as  well  as  to  the  Jews,  and  of  His  giving  the  heathen  also  the  knowledge 
of  His  revealed  laws,  and  remarkably  instrumental  it  afterwards  appeared  to  be, 
in  the  propagating  the  Christian  religion  through  the  Gentile  world.  (Ibid.) 
The  Incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ: — Four  thousand  years  elapsed  between  the  giving 
of  the  promise  and  its  fulfilment.     It  is  natural  to  ask — why  ?    I.  Consider  thb 

WISDOM   AND    PROPRIETY   OF   DELAYING    THE    FULFILMENT   OF   THE    PROMISE    UNTIL   WHAT 

Paul  here  calls  "  the  fulness  of  the  time."  St.  Paul  asserts  that  at  any 
earlier  period  it  would  have  been  as  unwise  to  have  gent  His  Son  into  the  world,  *a 
to  make  any  young  man  master  of  his  own  property  till  he  came  of  age.  1.  At  vo 
period  before  "  the  fulness  of  time  "  would  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  have  been  ko 
proper,  all  things  considered.  Eedemption  was  equally  needed  at  all  times,  but 
taking  into  account  Christ's  doctrines,  life,  miracles,  &c,  it  would  have  been  un- 
timely earlier.  During  the  antediluvian  age,  there  was  no  man  living  who  could 
have  written  such  an  account  of  it  as  to  interest  future  generations,  and  at  the  same 
time  benefit  those  of  his  own  time.  From  the  Flood  to  the  time  of  Moses  the 
world's  population  was  comparatively  small  and  uncivilized.  From  the  time  of 
Moses  to  the  prophets,  the  Jews  required  fuller  instruction  and  discipline  to  fit 
them  for  Christ's  teaching.  During  the  four  monarchies  war  was  so  rife  that  the 
religion  of  Christ  would  not  have  gained  public  attention  ;  or,  if  it  had,  men  would 
afterwards  have  asserted  that  Christianity  was  the  invention  of  some  political  tyrant 
of  that  age.  2.  In  the  Augustan  age,  when  Christ  did  come,  the  world  was 
prepared  thoroughly  to  examine  His  claims,  was  able  to  appreciate  His  doctrines  by 
comparison  and  contrast,  and  was  in  such  a  state  as  to  afford  facilities  for  the  ex- 
tension and  propagation  of  Christianity.  II.  Consider  the  manner  of  His  In- 
carnation. 1.  Christ  came  as  a  child.  Fit  emblem  of  the  mission  of  mercy  which 
brought  Him.  2.  He  was  born  in  a  lowly  station.  No  fear,  then,  but  that  the 
poorest  and  humblest  are  welcome  to  Him  and  to  all  His  benefits.  3.  Obedient  to 
the  law,  and  under  its  curse.  III.  Consider  the  great  design  of  His  Incarna- 
tion. 1.  To  redeem  from  the  curse,  not  the  obligation,  of  the  law.  You  cannot 
obey  the  law  too  much,  but  you  must  look  for  justification  to  Christ  alone.  2.  To 
confer  on  all  men  the  adoption  of  sons.  We  must  believe  this  before  we  can  feel 
it.  (R.  Philip.)  The  Advent  of  the  Redeemer : — The  purpose  of  Christ's  earthly 
manifestation  cannot  have  been  to  effect  any  change  in  God's  disposition  towards 
us,  to  make  Him  placable  or  propitious,  for  it  was  the  fruit  and  issue  of  His  love. 
(1  John  iv.  10  ;  John  iii.  16).  I.  The  timeliness  of  the  Advent.  Every  event  in 
the  unfolding  of  the  Divine  plan  has  its  proper  place.  Evidence  of  this  is  not 
wanting  in  regard  to  the  advent.  1.  The  proof  of  the  world's  need  was  complete. 
Philosophy  and  religion  had  been  tried,  and  failed.  Nothing  remained  but  disap- 
pointment and  despair.  2.  The  Jewish  nation  was  prepared.  Prophecy  fulfilled. 
People  expectant.  The  old  system  worn  out.  3.  The  circumstances  of  the  age 
were  favourable.  Peace.  Civilization.  One  language.  II.  The  subjection  to 
human  conditions  wnicH  Christ's  Advent  involved.  1.  His  true  humanity. 
(1)  Identity  of  nature  with  all  men.  (2)  Antecedent  mystery  of  another  and  higher 
nature.  (3)  Progressive  development.  (4)  Completeness  of  sympathy.  2.  His 
legal  obi<iience.  He  submits  to  the  yoke  under  which  all  are  bound.  (Homiletie 
Magazine.)  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  men: — A  little  above  Niagara  Falls  there  is  ft 
duster  of  islets.     The  most  considerable  of  these  is  called  Goat  Island,  and  between 


.  iv.]  GALATIdNS.  245 


Goat  Island  and  the  shore  there  is  a  stream  of  some  breadth,  and  of  exceeding 
swiftness,  crossed  by  a  little  wooden  bridge.  One  day  a  man  was  painting  that 
bridge,  and  whlie  thus  engaged  he  happened  to  miss  his  footing  and  slip  into  the 
rapids,  and  was  carried  down  with  terrible  swiftness.  Though  he  struggled  hard 
to  make  for  the  shore,  his  struggles  were  all  in  vain  ;  the  current  was  far  too  strong 
for  him.  Down,  down  he  went,  and  it  seemed  as  if  in  a  few  moments  he  would 
take  the  fearful  leap  into  the  unbottomed  abyss.  But  just  as  it  appeared  that  all 
hope  was  gone,  ho  was  intercepted  by  a  little  islet  of  rock  not  very  far  from  the 
edge  of  the  precipice — you  would  scarcely  have  noticed  it  if  you  were  looking 
casually  on  the  stream,  it  was  so  small ;  it  attracted  attention  only  by  the  ripples 
the  water  made  about  it.  That  little  islet  happened  to  lie  right  in  his  way  ;  it 
intercepted  his  progress,  and  gave  him  foothold  and  handhold  for  a  time.  There 
he  clung,  and  cried  out  for  assistance.  By  and  by  a  crowd  gathered  on  the  shore, 
and  they  began  to  devise  all  sorts  of  means  to  save  him.  They  tried  one  thing 
after  another,  and  plan  after  plan  failed,  until  at  last  one  brave  man  got  the  idea  of 
having  a  rope  put  round  his  waist ;  and,  getting  into  the  river  at  just  about  the 
plflce  where  the  man  entered  the  water,  so  managed  to  angle  across  the  stream, 
ard  yet  be  carried  down  it,  that  he  reached  the  little  islet  of  rock,  and  grasped  the 
nun  there  with  all  the  strength  he  had  left.  And  now,  firmly  clasped  in  each 
otner's  embrace  they  set  out  back  again  on  their  perilous  journey,  and  safely  reached 
the  shore.  By  this  time  a  great  crowd  had  gathered,  and  you  may  imagine  the 
rif  iging  cheer  which  went  up  from  that  large  company  when  the  two  men  came 
s»lely  back.  Take  this  story  as  an  illustration  of  man's  helpless  condition  in  this 
world  until  Christ  left  the  eternal  shore  to  come  and  rescue  him.  If  man  was  to 
be  saved  these  six  conditions  must  be  fulfilled ;  and  they  were  fulfilled  in  Jesus 
Christ.  I.  Some  one  from  the  shore  must  undertake  to  save  him.  II.  The  Helper 
mast  leave  the  shore  and  come  to  him  su  that  he  can  grasp  Him.  Not  enough  to 
bm  in  the  distance  One  who  has  pity  :  must  be  actual  contact.  III.  In  order  to 
rerteh  him  the  Deliverer  must  come  within  the  sweep  of  the  law.  No  other  way  of 
reaching  him,  but  through  the  current.  IV.  The  Kescuer  must  bear  the  drowning 
man's  share  of  the  curse  of  the  law  if  He  would  save  him.  Powerless  to  bear  the 
strain  himself.  V.  The  Bescuer  must  have  strength  enough  to  get  safely  back. 
VI.  The  Saviour  and  the  saved  must  be  firmly  bound  together.  Otherwise  the 
strain  will  fall  on  both,  and  the  latter  will  inevitably  be  drowned.  Hence  the  need 
of  faith,  which  is  the  grasp  of  the  soul.     (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  The  world's 

majority : — A  doctrinal  explanation  of  the  birth  and  life  of  Christ.  That  event 
marked — 1.  The  world's  coming  of  age.  All  pre-Christian  history  anticipative  and 
preparatory.  2.  The  character  of  the  new  relationship  opened  up  to  men.  (1) 
Liberty.  (2)  Divine  sonship.  3.  The  means  whereby  the  spiritual  maturity  of 
men  is  brought  about.  (1)  It  involved  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of  God.  (2)  The 
proper  human  nature  of  man  is  assumed  by  Christ.  (3)  The  obligations  of  the  law 
are  voluntarily  discharged.  (A.  F.  Muir,  H.A.)  The  fulness  of  time : — Trench 
thinks  it  a  very  remarkable  fact  that  God'B  prophecies  concerning  the  advent  of  His 
Son  seem  to  have  spread  athwart  the  habitable  globe,  and  in  the  shape  of  tradi- 
tional echoes  to  have  been  dispersed  all  over  the  world.  The  poet  Virgil  says  in 
one  of  his  poems  that  He  would  soon  be  born  into  the  world  who  would,  he  ex- 
pected, bring  in  the  golden  age.  Suetonius,  an  ancient  historian,  states  that  a 
certain  and  settled  persuasion  prevailed  in  the  East  that  the  cities  of  Judea  would 
bring  forth,  about  this  time,  a  person  who  should  obtain  universal  empire.  And 
Tacitus  states  that  it  was  contained  in  the  ancient  books  of  the  Jewish  priests  that 
the  East  should  prevail.  These  were  scattered  lights  that  went  out  from  Judea, 
their  reuniting  centre,  and  gave  the  heathen  an  anticipation  and  a  persuasion  that 
some  great  and  illustrious  Deliverer  was  about  to  be  born  into  the  world.  God's 
gift  to  the  world: — An  epitome  of  the  scheme  of  redemption— an  outline  of  the 
gospel  plan — an  abbreviating  system  of  Christian  divinity.  I.  The  important 
■vent  stated.  1.  The  illustrious  Person  spoken  of.  2.  This  illustrious  Person 
■was  divinely  commissioned.  3.  The  nature  which  He  assumed.  4.  The  obliga- 
tions to  which  He  was  liable.  (1)  He  was  subject  to  the  ceremonial  law.  He  was 
circumcised,  and  presented  in  the  temple  ;  He  worshipped  in  the  synagogues,  went 
np  to  the  feasts,  &e.  (2)  He  was  under  the  moral  law.  He  lived  it ;  and  in  all 
He  spake,  and  did,  and  thought,  He  honoured  it.  He  kept  it,  in  all  its  extent, 
perfectly.  He  also  taught  it,  spiritualized  and  vindicated  it.  (3)  He  was  under 
both  the  ceremonial  and  moral  law  in  His  mediatorial  capacity.  He  was  both  the 
Victim  for  sin  and  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.    5.  The  peculiar  period  of  His 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [exit.  W. 

manifestation.  (1)  The  time  referred  to  by  the  prophets.  (2)  After  the  world  had 
been  sufficiently  informed  as  to  the  event,  in  varions  ways  and  forms,  from  the  first 
promise  to  the  last  prophecy  given.  (3)  When  all  means  for  man's  restoration  had 
proved  totally  inadequate.  (4)  When  the  world  was  in  a  state  of  profound  peace. 
(5)  When  there  was  a  general  expectation  of  Him,  especially  among  the  Jews.  (6) 
At  that  particular  time,  fixed  upon  as  the  best,  by  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God. 
II.  The  grand  ends  contemplated  in  these  events.  1.  That  we  might  obtain 
redemption.  2.  That  we  might  receive  adoption.  3.  That  believers  might  thus 
enjoy  redemption  and  the  adoption  of  sons.  Learn  :  1.  The  way  in  which  re- 
demption has  been  effected.  2.  The  invaluable  blessings  it  presents  before  us. 
3.  The  importance  of  a  saving,  personal  interest  in  them.  4.  Exhort  the  guilty 
and  perishing  to  believe  and  have  life.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  first  Advent 
of  Messiah : — I.  The  time  op  His  coming.  He  came  "  when  the  fulness  of  tha 
time  was  come."  And  what  time  was  that  ?  1.  It  was  the  time  appointed  of  the 
Father — the  time  fixed  for  His  coming  in  the  mind  and  counsel  of  God.  Known 
unto  God  are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  even  from  all 
eternity.  Nothing  happens  to  Him  by  chance.  2.  It  was  the  time  foretold  by  tha 
prophets — those  holy  men  of  God  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
3.  It  was  a  time  peculiarly  suitable  for  His  coming,  and  is,  therefore,  called  the 
fulness  of  the  time.  It  was  a  time  when  events  seemed  to  have  gradually  ripened 
for  this  glorious  consummation.  It  was  a  time,  lastly,  when  His  forerunner  ap- 
peared to  prepare  His  way  before  Him,  by  turning  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient  to 
the  wisdom  of  the  just,  and  thus  making  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  Lord. 
Such  was  the  time  of  the  Redeemer's  advent.  II.  Consider  the  manner  of  His 
coming.  "  When  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made 
of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law."  There  are  here  three  particulars  for  our  con- 
sideration. 1.  God  sent  forth  His  Son.  This  expression  evidently  implies  that 
the  Son  of  God  existed  before  He  was  sent  forth.  And  does  not  the  Scripture  every- 
where corroborate  the  truth  thus  implied  ?  But  where  did  He  exist  before  His 
Divine  mission  ?  He  existed  with  God  in  heaven.  He  was  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father.  "  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him 
that  sent  Me."  Consequently,  we  are  not  to  suppose,  when  God  is  here  said  to 
have  sent  Him  forth,  that  it  implies  any  inferiority  of  nature  on  the  part  of  the 
Son ;  for  "  such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the  Son,  and  such,  too,  is  the  Holy  Ghost." 
2.  The  Son  of  God  was  made  of  a  woman ;  and  He  was  so  made  in  accordance 
with  the  prophecies  respecting  Him.  3.  He  was  made  under  the  law.  As  a  Divine 
person,  a  partaker  with  the  Father  in  the  Godhead,  He  was  not  subject  to  any  law ; 
nor  as  a  perfectly  holy  man  was  he  bound  to  submit  to  the  ceremonial  law,  which 
in  everything  implied  the  sinfulness  of  man.  Tet,  for  us  men,  and  for  our  salvation, 
He  humbled  Himself  to  be  made  under  the  law.  He  was  born  of  a  Jewess,  and 
was  circumcised  the  eighth  day,  and  thus  was  placed  under  the  law  as  a  covenant 
of  works ;  that,  as  the  surety  of  His  people,  He  might  in  every  way  answer  its  full 
demands.  HI.  Considee  the  object  of  His  coming.  This  was  to  "  redeem  them 
that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons."  By  the  law, 
we  may  here  understand  both  the  ceremonial  and  the  moral  law.  And  what  is  the 
adoption  here  spoken  of  ?  It  is  a  blessing  of  which  by  nature  we  are  utterly  desti- 
tute ;  for  by  nature  we  are  without  Christ,  being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without 
God  in  the  world.  But  when  does  God  thus  adopt  us  ?  It  is  when  we  truly  repent 
us  of  our  past  sins,  and  embrace  by  faith  the  method  of  salvation  revealed  in  the 
gospel.  And  what  are  the  privileges  to  which  as  adopted  children  we  become 
entitled  ?  They  are  numerous  and  important,  too  numerous  indeed,  to  be  here  all 
specified.  1.  The  spirit  of  adoption,  which  enables  us  to  approach  God  with  filial 
confidence,  and  to  open  our  whole  heart  before  Him.  2.  Heirship.  (D.  Bees.) 
The  fulness  of  the  time: — I.  The  fulness  of  time.  1.  Time  hath  a  fulness, 
because  it  has  a  capacity  (Eph.  iv.  13}.  2.  That  fulness  comes  by  degrees.  As 
with  life  so  with  time.  3.  There  is  a  time  when  time  cometh  to  its  fulness  (John 
vii.  8.  cf.  xii.  23).  In  the  day  at  the  meridian  ;  in  man  at  full  age.  4.  When  that 
"  when"  is.  When  God  sends  it.  That  which  fills  time  is  some  memorable  thing  of 
God's  pouring  into  it.  Moses  and  the  prophets  filled  it  to  a  certain  degree;  Christ 
filled  it  to  the  brim.  Well  might  it  be  called  the  fulness,  for  (1)  Christ  was  the 
fulness  of  God  (Coloss.  ii.  9 ;  John  iii.  34 ;  i.  14-16).  (2)  In  Him  the  promisee 
were  fulfilled.  (3)  The  heir,  the  world  had  come  to  his  full  age,  and  so  was  ripe  to 
receive  Him  its  inheritance.     II.  The  filling  of  time.     1.  From  the  fulness  of 


cha*.  ST.]  QALAT1AN8.  J47 

His  compassion  God  "  sent."  2.  From  the  fulness  of  His  love  He  u  sent  His  Son.' 
3.  In  the  fulness  of  humility  He  sent  Him.  (1)  "Made  of  a  woman,"  to  make  fall 
nnion  with  our  nature.  (2)  "  Made  under  the  law  "  to  make  the  union  yet  more 
perfectly  full  with  our  sinful  condition  by  undertaking,  at  circumcision,  to  fulfil  all 
the  righteousness  of  its  law  (Gal.  v.  3),  and  at  His  passion  fulfilling  all  our  obliga- 
tions to  the  law  (Col.  ii.  14).  III.  The  fulness  of  the  benefit  to  us.  1.  Re- 
demption.     Consider  (1)  The  price  paid ;  (2)  The  captives ;  (3)  The  liberation. 

2.  Adoption :  (1)  Prisoners  translated  into  children ;  (2)  Slaves  of  sin  into  joint 
heirs  with  God's  Son.  IV.  The  fulness  of  duty  by  us.  Christinas  should  be — 
1.  A  time  of  fulness  of  joy ;  but  not  that  only ;  also  a  time  of — 2.  Thankfulness  to 
God.  3.  Piety.  4.  Beneficence.  (Bp.  Andrewes.)  I.  Christ  came  in  the  ful- 
ness of  time.  1.  What  is  this  ?  (1)  The  time  appointed  by  the  Father.  (2)  Fore- 
told by  the  prophets.  2.  How  doth  it  appear?  (1)  From  Gen.  xlix.  10.  (2) 
Daniel  ix.  25.  (3)  Haggai  ii.  9  ;  Mai.  iii.  1.  II.  Christ  was  sent,  therefore  He 
had  a  bgino  before.  This  appears  from  (1)  John  vi.  33, 51 ;  (2)  John  i.  15,  viii,  58. 
(3)  John  i.  2 ;  Heb.  i.  2 ;  Col.  i.  15,  16.  III.  Christ  was  God's  Son.  1.  He  was 
God  (Bom.  ix.  5 ;  1  John  v.  20).  2.  This  Godhead  He  received  of  the  Father  (John  v. 
26).  3.  This  communication  was  properly  a  generation.  IV.  Christ  was  made  of 
a  woman.  1.  He  received  His  human  body  substantially  from  a  woman.  2. 
Made,  i.e.,  without  the  help  of  man  (Isa.  vii.  14 ;  Matt.  i.  23,  24 ;  Luke  i.  34,  35). 
Uses.  1.  Information.  (1)  See  the  infinite  love  of  God  to  man.  (2)  The  dignity 
of  man  above  all  other  creatures.  2.  Exhortation.  Be  thankful  for  this  inestim- 
able mercy.  (1)  How  miserable  you  would  be  without  it.  Your  sins  unpardoned ; 
your  God  unreconciled ;  your  soul  condemned.  (2)  How  happy  by  it :  your  person 
justified;  your  God  reconciled ;  your  souls  saved.  Sing  with  the  angels  (Luke  ii. 
14).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  I.  There  was  a  threefold  work  of  preparation,  each 
portion  of  which  demanded  the  lapse  of  a  certain  period.  1.  The  Gentile  world 
had  to  be  prepared.  (1)  Politically.  A  common  language  and  social  system  with 
laws  and  Government  were  required  and  provided  in  the  Greek  language  and  the 
Eoman  Empire.  (2)  In  religious  conviction.  The  old  religions  went  to  pieces, 
and  an  age  of  vice,  superstition,  and  unbelief  supervened.  The  epoch  of  religious 
experiments  closed  in  an  epoch  of  despair.  (3)  In  moral  experience.  Men  saw  and 
approved  the  better  course  and  followed  the  worse.  Consciousness  of  sin  and 
weakness  led  them  to  yearn  for  a  deliverer.  2.  The  Jewish  world — (1)  Politically 
was  expecting  change,  and  that  Shiloh  would  appear.  (2)  Their  religious  convic- 
tions pointed  to  Him.  (3)  Their  law  was  a  moral  preparation,  "  a  schoolmaster  to 
lead  them  to  Christ. "  II.  When  the  time  was  full  Christ  came.  1.  If  we  had 
seen  Jesus  in  His  earthly  life  what  impression  would  He  have  produced  on  our  un- 
prejudiced souls  ?  (1)  We  should  have  observed  in  Him  a  totally  different  relation 
to  truth  from  that  of  every  other  man.  (a)  There  was  no  struggle  between  His 
will  and  God's  law.  (b)  He  never  sinned.  2.  His  nature  was  at  harmony  with 
itself.  No  one  excellence  is  out  of  proportion.  Contemplation  and  action ;  the 
desire  for  the  public  and  the  individual  good ;  all  that  was  most  manly  and  most 
womanly  ;  the  Jewish,  Greek,  Boman  types,  all  harmonized.  The  first  Adam  con- 
tained the  whole  race  of  his  descendents  ;  so  Christ  became  the  Head  of  a  new  race. 

3.  As  we  looked  steadily  we  should  have  seen  that  He  was  God's  Son,  made  of  a 
woman.  HI.  From  what  did  Christ  come  to  deliver  us.  1.  From  false  views 
of  the  world  and  life.  2.  From  base  and  desponding  views  of  human  nature.  3. 
From  bondage.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  fulness  of  the  time : — I.  When  Bomb 
had  reached  the  zenith  of  her  power  and  influence.  II.  When  civilization 
had  attained  her  uimost  development.  1.  Politically  the  world  was  one  as  it 
had  never  been  before  and  has  never  been  since.  2.  Intellectually.  Except,  perhaps, 
the  golden  age  of  Greece,  without  a  parallel.  Cicero,  Lucretius,  Caesar,  Pliny, 
Juvenal.  Philosophy  now  in  her  prime.  3.  Materially :  every  source  open  from 
which  pleasure  could  be  derived.  4.  Artistically.  III.  When  men  had  fathomed 
the  lowest  depths  of  degradation.  Tbe  fulness  of  time  was  marked  by — 1.  Dis- 
gusting  licentiousness.    2.  Inhuman  cruelty.     3.  Widespread  practice  of  suicide. 

4.  Blank  atheism.  5.  Utter  despair.  (J.  Macgregor,  D.D.)  The  fulness  of  th« 
time  ;  or,  the  ruined  world  redeemed  by  Christ : — I.  A  period  in  which  were  mani- 

FES?   THE   BONDAGE,  DEGRADATION,  AND  MISERY   OF   MAN,  AND   THE    CORRUPTION,   DECAY, 

and  death  of  nations.  1.  After  the  Flood  a  new  term  of  probation  was  granted ; 
but  Babel  became  the  monument  of  man's  pride  and  self-will.  2.  After  the  call  of 
Abraham  God's  administration  took  a  two-fold  form :  (a)  to  prepare  salvation  for  th« 
nations  ;  (b)  To  prepare  the  nations  for  salvation.    (1)  To  the  Jews  the  law  waa 


248  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

given  as  a  pedagogue  to  conduct  them  to  ChriBt ;  but  they  lost  sight  of  the  end  in 
the  means.  (2)  To  the  Greeks  were  given  exquisite  intellectual  faculties;  but 
these  great  gifts  were  prostituted  to  the  basest  uses.  (3)  To  the  Romans  was  given 
the  faculty  for  law  and  empire ;  but  they  became  slaves  of  lust.  The  world's  ex- 
tremity was  God's  opportunity.    II.    A   period   of   special,   supernatural,  and 

DlVINE  INTERVENTION  AS  MANIFESTED  IN  THE  PERSON  AND  WORK  OF  CHRIST,  AND 
THE    SPIRITUAL   FREEDOM   AND    MORAL   ELEVATION    OF   MEN.       1.    The   person    of    Christ. 

(l)His  Divinity — "  sent  forth  His  Son."  (2)  His  humanity — "born  of  a  woman."  (3) 
His  nationality — "  under  the  law."  2.  The  work  of  Christ — "  to  redeem,  &c."  3.  The 
kindred  and  representatives  of  Christ — "  sons,"  whose  distinctive  marks  are :  (1) 
Freedom.  (2)  Spirituality.  (3)  Permanancy.  (4)  Hopefulness.  (Giles  Hester.) 
The  Advent: — I.  The  general  expectation  of  the  people  when  Christ  came,  as 
witnessed  by  Josephus,  Suetonious,  and  Tacitus  II.  The  state  of  the  world  at 
the  period.  1.  The  Jews.  (1)  Their  inordinate  zeal  for  ceremonial.  (2)  Their 
moral  depravity.  2.  The  Roman  empire.  (1)  Its  power  and  wealth.  (2)  Its 
effeminacy  and.  corruption.  3.  Its  hopelessness.  Polytheism  and  philosophy  had 
failed,  and  had  given  place  to  atheism  and  sorcery.  III.  The  results  that  flowed 
from  the  advent.  1.  The  abolition  of  Judaism.  2.  The  extirpation  of  every  pre- 
existing religion  and  philosophy.  3.  The  ultimate  triumph  of  Christianity  in  ita 
effects  —  (1)  On  the  individual  whom  it  regenerated ;  (2)  on  the  race  which  it 
unified  into  a  brotherhood;  (3)  on  the  family  which  it  purified  and  elevated; 
(4)  on  woman  to  whom  it  gave  power  and  a  sphere  ;  (5)  on  children  whom  it 
snatched  from  the  murderer ;  (6)  on  legislation  which  it  humanized  ;  (7)  on 
labour  which  it  ennobled ;  (8)  on  education  whose  sphere  it  widened ;  (9)  on 
slavery  aud  war  whose  horrors  it  mitigated  and  whose  extinction  it  requires.  (O. 
Sexton,  LL.D.)  The  Advent  of  the  Redeemer: — I.  Its  timeliness — "In  due 

time "  (Rom.  v.  6).  1.  The  proof  of  the  world's  need  was  complete  2.  God's 
preparation  as  regards  the  Jews  had  fulfilled  its  course.  3.  The  circumstances  of 
th*  age  were  favourable.  H.  Christ's  subjection  to  human  conditions  which  it 
involved.  1.  His  true  humanity  (Heb.  ii.  17).  2.  His  legal  obedience.  (J. 
Waite.)  The  Advent  in  redemption: — I.  Christ  became  the  Son  of  Man  that 
wb  might  become  Sons  of  God.  Christ's  incarnation  is — 1.  The  secret  of  His 
iniluence  over  us.  Attraction  is  in  proportion  to  nearness.  Christ  stooped  that  He 
might  lift  (Heb.  iv.  15).  2.  The  source  of  His  power  to  conquer  our  foes  (Heb.  ii. 
14).     3.  The  ground  of  His  atonement  unto  God  (Heb.  ii.  17).     II.  Christ  was 

M4DE  SUBJECT  TO  LAW  THAT  He  MIGHT  FREE  US  FROM  BONDAGE  OF  LAW.   1.  He  WaS 

born  subject— (1)  To  Levitical  law  as  a  Jew.  (2)  To  the  social  law— subject  to  His 
parents  (Luke  ii!  51).  3.  To  the  civil  law  (Matt.  xvii.  24-27).  (4)  To  the  moral 
la  N.  2.  He  was  subject  to  the  penalties  of  the  law,  although  Himself  sinless. 
(? )  To  the  shame  and  trouble  of  the  world  generally.  (2)  To  death,  the  distinc- 
t)  ;e  doom  of  sin.  3.  This  leads  to  our  liberation.  (1)  By  facing  the  death-doom 
oi  this  law  Christ  conquers  this  for  us.     (2)  By  obedience  to  the  law  He  triumphed 

0  /er  the  law.  (3)  By  rising  from  obedience  to  the  letter  of  the  law.  and  the  higher 
obedience  of  the  spirit  He  leads  us  also  to  that  freer  service  of  love  which  is 
emancipation  from  law.  (W.  J.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Christ's  mission  for  the  adoption 
of  sons  in  the  fulness  of  time : — I.  The  mission  of  Christ,  and  the  manner  of 
His  manifestation.  1.  The  dignity  of  His  person — God's  Son.  2.  The  manner 
of  His  manifestation.  (1)  Born  of  a  woman  ;  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Fre- 
quently noticed  in  Old  and  New  Testaments  (Gen.  iii.  18 ;  Isa.  vii  14 ;  Matt.  i.  23 ; 

1  Tim.  ii.  14,  15).  2.  Made  under  the  law ;  plainly  implying  that  He  was  put  into 
a  situation  different  from  that  which  was  originally  His  (cf.  Phil.  ii.  7,  8).  The 
necessary  condition  of  every  creature  is  that  of  submission  to  the  law  of  God. 
Christ  was  born  of  a  woman  that  He  might  be  made  subject  to  that  law.  He  was 
made  under— 1.  The  ceremonial  law.  2.  The  moral  law.  3.  The  mediatorial 
law ;  and  fulfilled  all  perfectly.  II.  The  design  of  His  mission.  1.  He  came  to 
accomplish  that  which  could  not  be  accomplished  by  other  means  or  an  inferior 
agency.  2.  He  came  not  merely  to  exemplify  a  rule  of  life  but  to  satisfy  its  viola- 
tion ;  not  to  explain  the  law  but  to  bear  its  curse.  3.  The  character  in  which  He 
appeared  was  that  of  a  Substitute  and  Daysman.  4.  In  this  character  He  magnified 
the  law  and  procured  justification  for  us.  5.  And  further,  secured  to  us  the  adop- 
tion of  sons.  III.  The  fitness  of  the  season  which  God  in  His  infinite  wisdom 
appointed  for  the  purpose.  It  was  a  period— 1.  Foretold  in  prophecy,  Jacob, 
Hagsai,  Daniel.  2.  Of  general  expectation.  8.  Of  profoundest  peace.  4.  Of  ad- 
vanced learning  and  scepticism;  so  a  time  most  favourable  to  detect  impost  or  a 


cat*,  iv.]  OALATIANS.  «49 

and  to  test  the  merits  of  true  religion.  5.  Of  toleration.  In  conclusion :  1.  The 
advent  was  the  most  important  event  in  the  history  of  the  world.  2 .  Yon  are 
all  interested  in  it.  Those  who  neglect  it  will  be  eternally  deprived  of  its  pro- 
visions.    (Robert  Hall.)  Christmas  Day  and  what  it  teaches  : — I.  Wherein 

CONSISTED   THE   PREPARATION     OF    THE    FULNESS     OF     TIME     FOR  A   NEW     TURN   IN   THE 

history  of  the  world  ?  There  was  a  general  sickness  in  the  world's  condition. 
1.  War  had  left  its  sores  and  scars  behind.  2.  Popular  religion  was  worn  out  and 
dying.  3.  The  faith  of  Moses  and  Isaiah  had  degenerated  into  a  discussion  of 
dress  and  posture,  and  into  a  fierce  fanaticism.  It  was  the  darkest  period  before 
the  dawn.  Men  were  dreaming — (1)  That  a  prophet  would  come  to  solve  the 
riddle  of  life.  (2)  That  a  king  would  appear  who  would  establish  universal 
monarchy.  (3)  That  the  Golden  Age  would  be  restored.  II.  Wherein  consisted 
ihe  peculiarity  of  the  comino  of  Christ  which  made  it  the  germ  of  what 
there  was  to  re  in  the  ages  following  ?  1.  The  evils  of  the  world,  however 
glittering,  found  their  level  in  Christ's  presence.  2.  Christ  revealed  to  man  a  new 
image  of  the  Divine  nature  and  a  new  idea  of  human  destiny,  and  made  both 
realizable.  3.  All  that  was  good  in  the  world  took  courage,  and  was  revived  and 
assimilated  and  strengthened  by  Christ ;  what  was  true  in  thought,  beautiful  in 
art,  just  in  law,  were  incorporated,  and  the  organic  unity  of  the  world  gave  a  frame- 
work into  which  the  gospel  could  fit  and  spread  without  hindrance  and  violence. 
III.  What  are  the  conditions  and  what  ought  to  be  the  effects  of  Christianity 
out  its  nineteenth-century  birthdays?  1.  As  regards  our  manners  and  customs. 
(1)  We  have  left  behind  gladiatorial  games ;  have  we  learned  that  mercy  which  the 
humane  spirit  of  Jesus  should  teach  us  t  (2)  We  have  left  behind  the  luxury  and 
86  Ifishness  of  Rome ;  but  is  not  our  extravagance  in  dress  and  living  contrary  to  the 
simplicity,  the  plain  living,  and  high  thinking  of  Jesus  ?  (3)  We  have  left  behind 
the  fonl  sins  of  ancient  heathenism ;  but  is  our  conversation  and  our  literature  free 
from  a  frivolity  and  coarseness  alien  to  Him  who  blessed  the  pure  in  heart  ?  (4) 
"Vf  e  have  left  behind  divisions  between  Pharisee  and  Sadducee,  Greek  and  Barbarian ; 
btit  have  we  not  so  multiplied  sects  and  churches  as  to  break  the  unity  which 
should  be  in  Christ  ?  2.  As  regards  our  outlook.  Just  as  the  advances  of  Roman 
civilization  were  preparations  for  the  gospel,  so  the  advances  of  modern  science,  &c. 
so  far  from  being  contrary  to  the  gospel  are  means  of  its  wider  spread.  3.  As 
regards  us  individually.  When  the  fulness  of  time  is  come  in  joy  or  sorrow  the 
one  redeeming  thought  is  that  Christ  has  redeemed  us  that  we  migbt  receive,  &c, 
(Evan  Stanley.)  The  fulness  of  time  : — The  phrase  marks  a  great  crisis  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  The  ages  flow  on  until  they  reach  a  certain  defined  boundary 
line,  and  then  a  new  order  of  things  is  established.  An  apprentice  is  bound  for  a 
term  of  years ;  at  the  expiration  of  that  period  the  fulness  of  time  has  oome,  and 
he  obtains  his  freedom  from  service.  An  heir  arrives  at  his  majority  and  enters 
into  the  possession  of  freedom  when  he  has  filled  with  service  the  term  fixed  by  his 
father  or  by  the  law.  Boys  and  girls  at  school  count  the  weeks  which  intervene 
between  the  period  appointed  for  breaking-up,  and  long  for  the  fulness  of  time  to 
come  that  they  may  obtain  their  liberty  and  hasten  home  to  see  their  fathers  and 
mothers.  So  in  the  history  of  the  world.  The  old  order  came  to  an  end.  The 
sand  in  the  hour-glass  ran  out.  It  was  time  to  put  the  old  lesson  books,  the  old 
habits,  the  old  employments,  away.  (G.  Hester.)  The  Incarnate  Person  of  Christ : — 
He  possessed  our  human  nature  in  all  its  completeness — body,  soul,  and  spirit. 
United  to  this  perfect  humanity  was  the  infinite  Divine  nature  with  all  its  glorious 
perfections.  The  human  nature  is  the  temple,  the  Divine  nature  is  the  glory  which 
dwelleth  in  the  temple.  The  human  nature  is  the  cloud,  the  Divine  nature  is  the 
eun  shining  through  that  cloud,  giving  light  and  life  to  the  souls  of  men.  When 
He  spoke,  His  human  words  conveyed  Divine  wisdom.  When  He  worked  His 
miracles,  His  human  hands  were  vehicles  of  Divine  power.  When  He  loved,  His 
human  heart  was  surcharged  with  an  infinite,  changeless,  and  everlasting  love. 
(Thomas  Jones.)  The  three  births  of  Christ: — His  eternal  birth  in  heaven  is 
inexpressible,  where  He  was  born  without  a  mother ;  His  birth  on  earth  is  inex- 
pressible, where  He  was  born  without  a  father ;  His  third  birth  in  thy  soul  is  most 
inexpressible,  without  father  or  mother.  He  had  a  heavenly  birth,  by  which 
He  was  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  and  without  that  He  had  not  been  a  Person 
able  to  redeem  thee.  He  had  a  human  birth,  by  which  He  was  the  Son  of  Mary, 
and  without  that  He  had  not  been  sensible  of  thine  infirmities  and  necessities. 
But  He  hath  a  spiritual  birth  in  thy  soul,  without  which  both  His  Divine  and 
human  birth  are  utterly  unprofitable  to  thee,  and  thou  art  no  better  off  than  it 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  if. 

there  had  never  been  a  Son  of  God  in  heaven  or  a  son  of  Mary  on  earth.  (Doune.) 
Redemption  : — God's  law  is  spoken  of  as  a  fetter  or  chain,  binding  a  condemned 
spirit  unto  sure  and  speedy  punishment.  And  Christ  Jesus  is  set  forth  as  a  gracious 
Saviour,  coming  with  both  price  and  power  to  ransom  and  deliver.  These  two 
parts  of  the  figure  should  be  considered  iu  order.  First — Here  is  the  Divine  law  as 
a  bondage  or  imprisonment.  A  principle,  or  power,  hemming  the  sinful  soul  in  and 
ensuring  its  destruction.  Law— that  substantial  and  sublime  tning.  Law,  a  cloud, 
presently  to  vanish  1  Ah  me !  it  iB  anything  else  1  The  very  word  •*  law  "  means 
something  fixed,  established,  immutable.  And  as  everywhere  seen  in  tbe  Divine 
government,  the  thing  *•  law  "  is  the  most  permanent  and  immutable  of  all  things. 
We  observe  this  in  regard  even  of  the  lowest  physical  laws  of  the  universe.  Take 
the  law  of  germination — the  transmission  of  vegetable  life  through  the  earthly 
flora— that  Divine  ordinance  at  creation:  "That  grass  and  herb  and  tree  should 
yield  seed  after  their  kind,  whose  seed  is  in  itself  after  its  kind ;  "  and  observe  with 
what  immutable  power  it  reigns  over  its  broad  domain.  All  the  physical  changes 
since  creation  have  not  abated  jot  or  tittle  of  its  meaning.  The  oak  and  the  cedar 
are  now  in  form,  in  development,  yea,  in  the  colour  and  fibre  of  spray  and  leaf, 
precisely  the  oak  and  the  cedar  of  the  primal  Eden  woodlands.  And  the  odours  we 
breathe  in  spring-time  are  from  the  same  flowers  that  made  fair  and  fragrant  the 
garden  when  the  first  man  walked  with  his  Maker.  And  upon  our  thousand  hills 
the  cattle  feed  upon  the  self-same  grasses  that  fattened  the  living  creatures  to  which 
Adam  gave  names.  Around  every  seed,  as  it  came  from  the  creative  hand,  wa» 
bound  as  an  iron  fetter  that  thing  we  call  "  law."  All  the  men  of  the  world,  with 
all  their  power  and  skill  of  chemistry  and  magic,  cannot  produce  a  rose  from  a  lily 
seed,  nor  a  pomegranate  from  a  fig-tree.  Nor  is  this  natural  law  without  s  mighty 
and  merciful  meaning.  On  its  steadfastness  rests  the  hope  of  creation.  And  from 
this  principle  in  tbe  natural,  how  plain  the  a  fortiori  argument  for  the  supremacy 
and  vindication  of  those  laws  which  make  up  God's  moral  administration.  A  sin 
committed  and  not  punished  would  be,  in  that  regard,  just  what  the  imponderous 
rain-drop  or  the  growth  of  tares  from  seed-corn  would  be  in  a  natural  world — a 
demonstration  of  the  mutable  and  unrighteous  character,  both  of  the  universal 
laws  and  their  Omnipotent  Lawgiver.  One  evil  act  or  word,  or  thought,  permitted 
unpunished ;  and  then  all  such  iniquities  would  have  Divine  license  and  sanction. 
Sin,  the  great  destroyer,  would  spread  as  a  deadly  pestilence  throughout  all  worlds. 
Yes,  my  hearers,  law  is  no  insignificant  thing,  to  be  broken  with  impunity  :  it  is  an 
immutable,  adamantine,  omnipotent  ordinance,  set  to  guard  all  great  and  universal 
interests — lifting  itself  as  an  impassable  barrier  between  the  domains  of  sin  and 
holiness,  disloyalty  and  love.  And  therefore,  so  long  as  Jehovah  reigns,  is  never  to 
be  relaxed  in  one  tittle  of  its  righteous  requirements,  or  defrauded  of  its  full  and 
triumphant  vindication.  All  things  made  by  God,  from  the  atom  in  the  air  to  the 
glorious  archangel,  were  placed,  at  the  first,  and  will  remain  to  the  end,  inexorably 
"  under  law."  And  therefore  the  apostle,  in  the  strong  metaphor  of  the  text,  repre- 
sents the  condition  of  an  ungodly  man,  as  one  around  whom  this  immutable  and 
•verlasting  law  is  bound  as  an  iron  fetter,  and  built  as  an  adamantine  prison-house, 
from  which  he  cannot  escape,  unless  by  some  Divine  and  Omnipotent  deliverance. 
"  Under  law  I  "  "  under  law  1 "  Verily  language  hath  no  more  startling  image  than 
this !  And  this  brings  us  to  consider  the  other  part  of  this  apostolic  figure,  wherein 
unto  the  soul  thus  hopelessly  imprisoned,  Christ  Jesus  is  represented  as  a  deliverer, 
coming  both  with  pvice  and  power  to  work  out  salvation — "to  redeem  1 — to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law."  And  the  figure  illustrates  strikingly  the  meaning 
of  redemption.  It  is  something  more  than  deliverance.  Our  Saviour  is  not  repre- 
sented as  coming  in  arbitrary  omnipotence  to  open  the  prison-door  and  preach 
liberty  to  the  captive.  For  this  were  an  abrogation  of  law,  and  not  its  vindication. 
But  He  comes  to  redeem  men.  The  word  is  "  redemption  " — i.e.,  a  buying  back — 
not  a  wresting  by  power,  but  a  release  by  purchase.  It  is  not  the  advent  of  an 
armed  champion  to  lift  up  his  challenge  at  the  prison-door,  and  to  carry  the  strong- 
hold by  assault;  but  the  advent  of  a  Mediator,  to  satisfy  every  claim,  and  fulnl 
every  condition  of  the  law  which  is  violated,  extenuating  nothing  of  the  captive's 
guilt — disputing  none  of  the  law's  demauds — prepared  to  meet  those  demands  in 
every  jot  and  tittle ;  so  that  if  it  were  possible  to  distinguish  between  the  Divine 
attributes,  it  would  be  rather  the  justice  of  God  than  His  mercy,  which  loosens  the 
fetter  and  unbars  the  dungeon.  *•  Eedemption !  "  "  Redemption  1  "  This  is  the 
word  !  Such  a  vindication  of  the  law  in  the  face  of  the  universe  as  strengthens  the 
universal  faith  in  its  steadfastness  1       Mediation  I      Substitution  I     This  is  th« 


it.]  QALATIANS.  251 

mighty  truth !  Not  a  breaking  of  the  law,  but  a  fulfilling  it  in  behalf  of  us !  Making 
manifest  its  tremendous  power  even  in  the  very  act  of  deliverance — as  in  a  benefi- 
cent rescue  from  some  great  natural  law.  Take  the  law  of  gravitation.  Imagine  a 
child,  abroad  on  a  holiday  in  some  Alpine  valley,  joyously  watching  summer-birds, 
or  gathering  wild  flowers  ;  when  suddenly,  far  above,  some  elemental  agency  loosens 
the  avalanche,  and  downward,  in  awful  momentum,  it  rushes  toward  the  imperilled 
child !  Now,  suppose  that  infant  could  stand  up  in  the  path  of  that  destroyer,  and, 
putting  forth  its  feeble  hand,  stop  it,  and  roll  it  backward  1  Then,  though  the  fond 
mother  would  exult  in  the  deliverance,  yet  all  human  faith  would  be  shaken  in  the 
steadfastness  of  the  great  law,  and  this  world,  and  all  worlds,  be  flung  back  into 
chaos.  But  instead  of  this,  suppose  at  the  first  sound  of  that  descending  de- 
struction, the  father,  thoughtful  of  his  child,  had  sprung  to  the  rescue — bounding 
from  rock  to  rock,  reckless  of  precipices  and  chasms — reaching  the  imperilled  not 
a  moment  too  soon,  snatching  it  from  the  very  jaws  of  death ;  and  springing  back- 
ward, bleeding,  breathless,  into  the  shelter  of  some  adamantine  cavern,  had  come 
forth  when  the  mighty  terror  had  gone  by,  bearing  the  beloved  and  saved  one — then 
the  cry  of  gladness  filling  all  that  stormy  air,  would  be  no  more  in  praise  of  human 
love  than  of  the  might  and  majesty  of  that  glorious  thing — law  1  And  thus  is  it  in 
salvation.  The  claim  of  God's  holy  law  is  in  no  sense  set  aside  or  weakened ! 
Christ  Jesus,  for  us,  bears  all  its  penalty — fulfils  all  its  requirements.  And  the 
universe  beholds  the  amazing  fact  of  substitution,  assured  that  the  righteousness 
of  God  is  absolute  and  immutable,  and  exults  that,  even  in  the  deliverance  of  the 
sinner,  the  law  is  magnified  in  the  punishment  of  sin.  These,  then,  are  the  two 
troths  which  the  text's  metaphor  illustrates  :  The  law  an  imprisonment !  Christ 
Jesus  a  Redeemer.  Yet  each  should  receive  at  our  hands  its  just  personal  appli- 
cation. 1.  If  we  are  impenitent  and  unpardoned  men,  let  us  at  least  consider 
seriously  our  true  estate  of  dark  and  unsheltered  condemnation.  •*  You  are  under 
the  law  1 "  and  as  the  most  necessary  and  certain  of  all  things,  that  law  must  be 
vindicated.  If  you  will  not  accept  of  redemption  as  offered  in  Christ,  yours  is  no 
part  in  salvation.  Law — law.  What  a  fearful  thing  it  is  in  its  aspects  towards 
transgression !  Even  human  law,  weak,  uncertain,  mutable,  imperfect — yet  how 
its  violator  recoils,  if  it  hem  him  in  to  destruction  !  See  yonder !  through  the 
dark  night  hurries  a  trembling  fugitive !  That  man's  hands  are  stained  with  blood. 
In  silence  and  solitude,  with  no  human  eye  to  see,  he  struck  the  fatal  blow,  and 
now  on  swift  foot  turns  from  the  face  of  the  dead  man !  But,  alas  for  him,  the 
avenger  of  blood  is  on  his  track !  Law !  Law  1  that  inexorable  power  of  retri- 
bution— with  an  eye  that  gathers  evidence  from  a  footprint  in  earth,  or  a  stain  in 
water,  or  a  whisper  in  air — is  following  his  footsteps,  and  will  find  him  and  lay  a 
mighty  hand  on  him,  and  bind  him  in  iron  fetters  which  no  power  can  break,  and 
consign  him  to  dungeons  whence  no  skill  can  deliver.  And  if  human  law  is  terrible, 
what  think  ye  of  Divine  law  ?  God's  natural  laws  are  fearful !  You  see  a  fair  child 
gathering  flowers  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice  ;  singing  its  glad  songs  and  weaving 
us  dewy  garlands,  it  approaches  the  dizzy  verge!  Far  out,  in  a  cleft  of  a  rock, 
grows  a  tempting  violet ;  the  ehild  sees  it,  longs  for  it — reaches  for  it — reaches  too 
far !  See,  its  little  feet  slip !  and  you  shudder,  recoil,  cry  out  with  terror !  Why  ? 
Is  not  God  merciful  ?  Are  not  God's  providences  gracious  ?  Yes,  indeed ;  but  even 
God's  merciful  providences  are  according  to  immutable  ordinances.  That  child  is 
under  law.  The  law,  that  holds  the  universe  together,  and  is  as  inexorable  as  its 
Maker,  hems  it  in,  and  presses  on  it,  and  will  dash  it  to  destruction.  And  do  you 
think  God's  moral  laws  are  narrower  in  their  play,  or  weaker  in  their  pressure?  0, 
ungodly  man !  be  alarmed  for  yourself  1  You  are  pursuing  your  chosen  courses 
under  law — "  under  law !  "  You  are  gathering  flowers  of  sin  upon  precipices,  and 
below  are  unfathomed  depths  of  indignation  and  anguish ;  and  the  moral  law  that 
binds  into  one  rejoicing  universe  all  sinless  ranks  of  life,  is  over  you,  and  around 
you,  and  pressing  you  down  to  destruction,  and  at  the  next  footstep  your  feet  may 
slide,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver !  Oh,  the  overwhelming  thought  1  Beings 
passing  to  immortality  under  law — "  under  law."  2.  Meantime,  unto  the  believing 
and  penitent  soul  the  text  is  full  of  consolation.  We  were  under  the  law,  but 
Christ  hath  redeemed  us  1  Bedeemed !  Bedeemed !  Oh,  what  a  word  it  is ! 
Saved !  Saved !  How  the  very  thought  thrills  us !  A  child  saved  from  a  burning 
house!  From  foundation  to  roof  swept  the  red  surges,  hemming  him  in  unto 
destruction  I  But  right  through  the  encircling  fire  rushed  a  strong  deliverer, 
reckless  of  danger,  to  restore  it  in  joyous  life  to  the  mother's  loving  heart  I 
Saved  1    Saved!    A  man  overboard,  in  a  night  of  storm,  lifting  one  despair* 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  W. 

ing  cry  upon  the  rushing  wind,  and  sinking,  in  despairing  anguish,  in  the 
devouring  sea !  But,  behold !  a  life-boat  lowered,  manned,  darting  like  a 
sea-bird  through  the  blinding  spray,  and  strong  arms  outstretched  to  snatch 
the  victim  from  the  very  jaws  of  death!  Saved  1  saved  1  saved  1  Oh,  what 
a  word  it  iB !  And  yet  thus,  0  children  of  God,  are  you  saved  from  the  un- 
fathomed  ocean  and  the  unquenchable  fire !  Saved,  saved  for  ever  I  Oh,  what  grati- 
tude becomes  us  !  What  consecration  1  What  deep,  adoring  love !  (C.  Wadsworth). 
Of  Christ,  the  only  Redeemer  of  God's  elect : — 1.  The  season  in  which  this  freedom 
or  redemption  was  brought  about :  "When  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,"  says 
the  apostle.  2.  We  have  the  means  of  this  deliverance,  namely,  Christ's  incarna- 
tion and  manifestation  in  the  flesh;  "God  sent  forth  His  own  Son,  made  of  a 
woman."  3.  We  have  the  condition  in  which  Christ  came ;  "  made  under  the  law." 
Being  made  flesh,  He  subjected  himself  both  to  the  precepts  and  to  the  curse  of  the 
law.  4.  The  freedom  and  deliverance  itself :  "God  sent  forth  His  Son,"  thus 
qualified,  "  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law  " ;  that  is,  to  free  all  the  elect 
from  the  curse  and  punishment  that  was  due  to  them  for  the  transgression  of  it 
(Gal.  iii.  13).  And  hereby  also  was  procured  to  believers  the  adoption  of  sons  :  by 
which  we  are  to  understand,  not  only  the  benefit  of  adoption  itself,  which  was  the 
privilege  of  believers  under  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  now  under  the  New,  but 
also  and  chiefly  a  clearer  manifestation  of  that  privilege,  and  a  more  free  use  and 
fruition  of  it.  They  have  now  a  more  full  and  plentiful  measure  of  the  Spirit 
than  believers  had  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  I.  The  only  Bedeemeb 
of  God's  elect  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Consider  the  titles  and  names  of 
our  Bedeemer.  (1)  Lord — absolute  and  universal  sovereign  over  all  creatures.  The 
government  belongs  to  Him  originally  as  God,  and  derivatively  as  God-Man, 
Mediator.  (2)  Jesus.  No  salvation  but  through  Him.  (3)  Christ.  Anointed  to 
His  office  by  the  Father.  Three  sorts  of  persons  were  commonly  anointed  among 
the  Jews — kings,  priests,  prophets.  As  oil  strengthened  and  suppled  the  joints, 
and  made  them  agile  and  fit  for  exercise,  so  it  denoted  a  designation  and  fitness  in 
a  person  for  the  function  to  which  he  was  appointed,  (a)  It  implies  the  Father's 
fitting  and  furnishing  Him  with  all  things  necessary,  that  He  might  be  a  complete 
Bedeemer  to  His  people,  (b)  It  implies  the  Father's  giving  Him  a  commission  to 
redeem  poor  sinners  from  hell  and  wrath.  He  was  invested  with  a  fulness  of 
authority  and  power  for  this  very  end.  And  therefore  in  Scripture  He  is  said  to  be 
sealed,  as  having  His  commission  under  the  great  seal  of  Heaven.  2.  Consider  His 
office  and  work  in  general.  He  is  called  the  Mediator,  which  properly  signifies  a  mids- 
man,  that  travels  betwixt  two  persons  who  are  at  variance  to  reconcile  them.  Now, 
Christ  is  Mediator,  (1)  In  respect  of  His  person,  being  a  middle  person  betwixt 
G\)d  and  man,  participating  of  both  natures.  (2)  In  respect  of  His  office ;  being  a 
middle  person  dealing  betwixt  God  and  man,  in  the  offices  of  a  Prophet,  Priest,  and 
Kuig.  II.  Our  next  business  is  to  illustrate  this  grand  truth,  That  Jesus  Christ 
being  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  became  man.  1.  Christ  is  the  eternal  Son  of 
God.  As  to  the  nature  of  this  generation  our  Lord  Himself  in  some  measure 
explains  it  to  us,  so  far  as  we  are  capable  of  apprehending  the  great  mystery,  when 
He  tells  us  (John  v.  26),  ■•  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  to 
the  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself."  2.  The  Son  of  God  became  man.  It  was  not 
the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  was  incarnate,  but  the  Son  (John  i.  14 
"  The  Word  was  made  flesh  ").  He  was  "  God  manifested  in  the  flesh  "  (1  Tim.  iii. 
16).  3.  Why  did  it  behove  Christ,  in  order  to  be  our  Bedeemer,  to  be  God  and 
man  ?  He  could  not  be  our  Bedeemer,  if  He  had  not  been  both.  (1)  He  behoved  to 
be  God,  (a)  That  He  might  be  able  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  infinite  wrath  of  God 
due  to  the  elect's  sins,  and  come  out  from  under  that  heavy  load  (Acts  ii.  24).  (6) 
That  His  temporary  sufferings  might  be  of  infinite  value,  and  afford  full  satisfac- 
tion to  the  law  and  justice  of  God  (Heb.  ix.  14).  In  these  respects  none  other  but 
one  who  was  God  could  redeem  us.  (2)  He  behoved  to  be  man,  (a)  That  He 
might  be  capable  to  suffer  death  (Heb.  ii.  14).  (6)  That  the  same  nature  which 
sinned  might  suffer  (Ezek.  xviii.  4).  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  (3) 
That  He  might  be  a  merciful  High  Priest  (Heb.  ii.  16,  17),  and  that  we  might  have 
comfort  and  boldness  of  access  to  the  throne  of  grace,  having  an  High  Priest  of  onr 
own  nature  as  our  Intercessor  there.  III.  I  come  now  to  prove,  that  Christ  is 
God  and  man,  in  two  distinct  natures,  and  one  person.  Christ  is  God  and 
man  by  a  personal  union  of  two  natures.  The  two  natures  in  Christ  remain  dis- 
tinct :  the  Godhead  was  not  changed  into  the  manhood,  nor  the  manhood  into  tha 
Godhead ;  for  the  Scripture  speaks  of  these  as  distinct  (Bom.  i.  8 ;  1  Peter  iii.  18; 


«up.  it. J  GALATIANS.  853 

Heb.  ix.  14),  and  of  two  wills  in  Christ,  a  human  and  a  Divine  (Lnke  xxii.  42). 
These  natures  remain  still  with  their  distinct  properties,  that  as  the  Divine  nature 
is  not  made  finite,  so  neither  is  the  human  nature  adorned  with  the  Divine 
attributes.  It  is  not  omnipotent  (2  Cor.  xiii.  4),  nor  omnipresent  (John 
xi,  15) ;  nor  omniscient  (Mark  xiii.  22,  &c.)  Yet  are  they  not  divided :  nor 
is  Christ  two  persons,  but  one ;  even  as  our  soul  and  body,  though  distinct 
things,  make  but  one  person.  This  is  clear  from  the  text,  which  shows  that  the 
Son  of  God  was  made  of  a  woman  ;  which  seeing  it  cannot  be  understood  of  His 
Divine  nature,  but  of  the  human,  it  is  plain  that  both  natures  make  but  one 
person.  And  elsewhere  He  is  described  as  one  person  consisting  of  two  natures 
(Rom.  i.  3  and  ix,  5).  And  it  was  necessary  that  the  natures  should  be  distinct; 
because  otherwise,  either  the  Divinity  would  have  advanced  His  humanity  above 
the  capacity  of  suffering,  or  His  humanity  depressed  His  Divinity  below  the 
capacity  of  meriting.  And  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  be  one  person; 
because  otherwise  His  blood  had  not  been  the  blood  of  God  (Acts  xx.  28),  nor  of  the 
Son  of  God  (1  John  i.  7),  and  so  not  of  infinite  value.  Wheaefore  Christ  took  on 
Him  the  human  nature,  but  not  a  human  person.  Concluding  inferences :  1.  The 
redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious.  Saving  sinners  was  a  greater  work  than 
making  the  world.  2.  See  here  the  wonderful  love  and  grace  of  God,  in  sending 
His  own  Son  to  be  the  Redeemer  of  sinful  men.  3.  See  the  matchless  love  of  the 
Son  of  God  to  poor  sinners.  4.  All  who  live  and  die  out  of  Christ  must  perish. 
No  other  Mediator.  5.  How  highly  is  our  nature  exalted  and  dignified  in  the 
person  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  6.  It  is  impious  and  absurd  to  ascribe  any  part  of 
man's  redemption  to  any  other.  It  is  dishonourable  to  Christ,  aud  dangerous  for 
men,  to  join  anything  of  their  own  to  His  righteousness,  in  point  of  justification 
before  God.  The  blessed  Redeemer  will  never  endure  it.  It  reflects  upon  His 
Mediatory  undertaking.  If  He  be  the  only  Redeemer  of  God's  elect,  then 
certainly  there  can  be  no  other.  If  He  hath  finished  that  work,  then  there  is  oo 
need  of  our  additions.  And  if  that  work  be  not  finished  by  Him,  how  can  it  be 
finished  by  men?  It  is  simply  impossible  for  any  creature  to  finish  that  whim 
Christ  Himself  could  not.  But  men  would  fain  be  sharing  with  Him  in  this 
honour,  which  He  will  never  endure.  He  is  the  only  Saviour  of  sinners :  and  ]  le 
will  never  divide  the  glory  of  it  with  us.  (T.  Baton,  D.D.)  The  work  of  t  he 
Messiah: — 1.  The  text  asserts  that  "  God  sent  forth  His  Son."  Who  is  intended  to 
be  designated  by  the  term  Son,  I  need  scarcely  pause  to  inform  you.  It  is  that 
Divine  Being  who  is  elsewhere  called  "  the  Word,"  "  who  was  in  the  beginning 
with  God,  who  was  God,"  "  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  and  without  whom  not 
any  thing  was  made  that  was  made."  2.  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  "  made  of  a 
woman."  The  term  "  made  of  a  woman  "  intends,  as  I  suppose,  to  assert  that  the 
Son  appeared  on  earth  a  human  being ;  that  He  took  upon  Himself  a  human,  in 
opposition  to  an  angelic  or  any  other  nature.  If  this  be  true,  then  the  Messiah 
possessed  a  perfect  human  constitution,  endowed  with  all  the  powers  and  faculties 
belonging  to  such  a  constitution,  just  like  any  one  of  us.  He  possessed  an  under- 
standing, a  taste,  a  conscience,  a  will,  appetites,  passions,  senses,  just  like  our  own, 
save  only  that  they  were  not  defiled  with  the  stain  of  sin.  "Wherefore  He  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  us  brethren."  3.  "  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  made  of  a  woman, 
made  under  the  law."  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  last  phrase — M  made  under  the 
law  "  ?  The  law  spoken  of  here  must  be  either  the  ceremonial  or  the  moral  law. 
The  word  "  law  "  is  used  twice  in  the  sentence  which  forms  the  text.  In  both  cases  it 
mu6t  have  the  same  signification.  It  is  said,  in  the  latter  clause,  Christ  came  to 
redeem  those  who  were  under  the  law.  The  word  here  cannot  mean  the  ceremonial 
law,  since  this  exposition  would  restrict  the  blessings  flowing  from  the  atonement 
of  Christ  to  the  Jews,  who  were  the  only  people  under  this  law  ;  and  would  also 
make  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  nothing  more  than  a  deliverance  from  ceremonial 
observances.  When  we  say,  therefore,  that  Christ  was  made  under  the  law,  we 
mean  the  moral  law,  that  under  which  the  human  race  was  created,  which  they 
are  bound  to  obey,  and  by  which  they  will  all  be  judged  in  the  day  of  final  account. 
What,  then,  does  the  apostle  mean,  when  he  declares  that  Christ  was  under  the 
moral  law  t  You  observe  that  Christ  was  made  under  the  law  "  to  redeem  those 
that  are  under  the  law."  It  is  evident  that  the  expression  in  these  two  places  has 
the  same  signification.  We  cannot,  then,  escape  the  conclusion  that  Christ  was 
made  under  the  law  in  the  same  sense  that  we  are  under  the  law.  He  placed  Him- 
self under  the  same  moral  constitution  as  that  under  which  the  race  of  man  was 
placed ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  same  as  that  under  which  Adam  was  originally 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it 

placed  in  the  gaTden  of  Eden.  When,  however,  I  assert  this,  it  is  proper  to 
remark  that  the  Messiah  voluntarily  placed  Himself  under  this  constitution.  He 
was,  in  His  Divine  nature,  infinitely  removed  from  the  moral  law  proper  for  huma>i 
nature.  The  Creator  cannot,  from  His  nature,  be  subject  to  the  law  of  the  creature. 
He,  of  His  own  incomprehensible  benevolence,  placed  Himself  under  the  law  which 
He  had  appointed  for  the  creature  in  order  to  work  out  our  redemption.  After, 
however,  the  Son  of  God  had  placed  Himself  under  the  law  of  human  nature,  He 
became  subject  to  it,  in  the  same  manner  as  that  nature ;  that  is,  specially  as 
Adam  was  subject  to  it,  when  he  commenced  his  probation.  He  was  exposed  to  all 
the  consequences  of  disobedience,  and  entitled  to  all  the  rewards  of  obedience, 
just  as  we  suppose  our  first  parent  to  have  been  before  his  fall.  This,  however, 
includes  several  particulars,  which  may  properly  be  stated  somewhat  more 
explicitly.  On  this  part  of  our  subject  I  would  remark,  first,  He  took  upon  himself 
8  nature  liable  to  sin.  Were  it  otherwise,  it  would  not  have  been  a  human  nature, 
and  He  would  neither  have  been  under  the  law,  nor  would  He  have  been  of  the  seed 
of  Abraham.  Secondly.  It  follows,  that  if  the  Messiah  had  sinned,  the  con- 
sequences to  Himself  would  have  been  the  same  as  to  any  one  of  as.  Nay,  more  : 
the  plan  of  redemption,  on  which  the  wisdom  of  Omniscience  had  been  exhausted, 
would  have  proved  abortive.  On  this  conflict,  then,  we  may  well  suppose  that  the 
destinies  of  the  universe  were  suspended.  By  the  obedience  of  the  Messiah  was  it 
to  be  determined  whether  sin  or  holiness  should  be  henceforth  in  the  ascendant. 
II.  Let  us  now  survey  this  transaction  from  another  point  of  view,  and  endeavour 
to  form  a  conception  of  the  life  of  Christ  under  the  conditions  which  we  have 
endeavoured  thus  imperfectly  to  explain.  1.  Every  one  of  us  may  possibly  know 
from  experience  how  oppressive  is  the  weight  of  solemn  and  important  respon- 
sibility. There  are  critical  moments  in  the  life  of  almost  every  man,  when  the 
whole  colour  of  hit  destiny  has  been  determined  by  a  single  decision.  He  who 
remembers  these  eras  in  his  history  needs  not  to  be  reminded  of  the  fear  and 
trembling  with  which  he  approached  them.  In  the  case  of  the  Messiah, 
however,  not  temporal  but  eternal  interests  were  suspended  upon  His  decisions.  It 
was  not  merely  the  result  of  His  actions  npon  His  own  happiness  or  misery,  but 
their  result  npon  the  happiness  or  misery  of  innumerable  millions,  that  pressed 
with  overwhelming  anxiety  upon  His  holy  soul.  It  was  not  merely  the  happiness 
or  misery  of  created  beings,  be  they  ever  10  numerous,  or  how  largely  soever 
susceptible  of  pleasure  or  pain ;  it  was  the  honour  of  that  holy  law  which,  in  the 
presence  of  the  universe,  He  had  undertaken  to  magnify,  which  was  perilled  upon 
the  condition  of  His  sinless  obedience.  And  yet  more:  these  stupendous  con- 
sequences were  not  suspended  upon  a  single  hour,  or  day,  or  year  of  the  Messiah's 
life,  bat  apon  every  action,  every  word,  every  thought,  every  motive,  throughout 
hi*  whole  probationary  existence.  Every  moral  bias,  during  His  continuance  under 
tbe  law,  was  put  forth  under  the  pressure  of  this  infinite  responsibility.  Again : 
when  men  are  placed  in  circumstances  of  peculiar  trial,  they  are  of  necessity 
intimately  associated  together.  The  chief  actor  in  a  momentous  enterprise  unites 
with  himself  others  who  sympathize  in  his  motives,  comprehend  his  plans,  carry 
forward  his  designs,  and  who  would  cheerfully  sacrifice  their  lives  in  behalf  of  the 
cause  in  which  all  are  equally  engaged.  How  muoh  this  tends  to  alleviate  anxiety, 
and  soften  the  pressure  of  otherwise  intolerable  care,  I  surely  need  not  remind  you. 
None  of  these  ameliorating  circumstances,  however,  relieved  the  anxieties  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  Of  all  the  beings  who  have  dwelt  upon  our  earth,  none  was  ever  so  emphati- 
cally a  lone  man  as  the  Messiah.  (F.  Wayland,  D.D.)  Nature  of  the  deliverance 
resulting  from  the  Incarnation : — What  is  it  that  the  Incarnation  should  deliver  us 
from  ?  1.  It  delivers  us  from  false  views  of  the  world  and  of  life.  It  divides  all  his- 
tory into  two  portions  for  the  Christian — that  which  precedes  and  that  which  follows 
it.  It  divides  the  huiaan  race  into  two  portions — that  which  is  within  the  kingdom  of 
the  Incarnate  Son,  and  that  which  is  without  it.  It  divides  the  interests  of  life,  of 
thought,  of  work,  for  a  downright,  genuine  Christian  into  two  portions — that  which 
bears  upon  and  advances  God's  work  of  love  in  the  Incarnation  of  His  Son,  and  that 
which  does  not  do  so.  When  a  man  has  once  learnt  really  what  it  means — this 
stupendous  event,  the  Incarnation  of  the  Eternal  Son,  up  to  which  all  history  leads, 
down  from  which  all  true  human  interests  worthy  of  the  name  will  ultimately  be  found 
to  radiate — then  life,  work,  the  world,  death,  the  future,  all  wear  another  aspect.  2. 
It  delivers  us  from  base  and  desponding  views  of  this  our  human  nature.  Often 
enough  we  are  weighed  down  to  the  very  dust  by  a  sense  of  weakness,  of  defile- 
ment, of  distance  from  the  source  of  sanctity  and  peace ;  and  yet  what  mast  be  tht 


chap,  it.]  GALATIANS  255 

worth,  the  capacities,  of  these  poor  human  powers,  when  retouched,  when  regene- 
rated by  God — tnis  nature  upon  which  the  Eternal  Son  has  put  such  high  honour 
that  He  has  robed  Himself  in  it  that  it  might  become  to  us  a  channel  of  sanctifica- 
tion  and  grace.  3.  And  the  Incarnation  delivers  us  from  bondage.  In  every 
Christian  in  whom  the  life  of  Christ  really  exists — in  whose  heart  it  beats, 
however  intermittently — there  is  a  knowledge  that  by  union  with  Christ  he  is  free. 
He  knows  he  is  not  a  slave,  but  a  son.  He  knows  that  this  filial  freedom  is  a 
possession  of  whioh  nothing  without  him  can  deprive  him,  although  he  may  forfeit 
it  himself — a  possession  of  which  every  prayer,  every  act  of  sacrifice,  every  true 
conquest  of  self,  enhances  the  value.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Redemption  and  adop- 
tion : — I.  Redemption  makes  us  servants,  but  it  is  but  servants ;  adoption  makes  us, 
who  are  thus  made  servants  by  redemption,  sons.  II.  Adoption.  1.  He  that 
adopted  another  must  be  a  man  who  had  no  children  of  his  own.  We  were 
children  of  wrath,  not  God's  children.  2.  He  must  be  a  man  who  had  had 
children,  or  naturally  might  have  had ;  for,  a  man  under  years  or  naturally  disabled 
could  not  adopt.  This  was  God's  case,  for  by  onr  creation  we  were  His  sons,  till  we 
died,  and  lost  all  right  and  means  of  regaining  our  privilege  but  by  the  way  of  adoption 
in  Jesus.  3.  No  man  might  adopt  an  elder  man  than  himself.  God  is  from  the 
beginning.  4.  No  man  might  adopt  a  man  of  better  quality  than  himself,  and 
here  we  are  so  far  from  comparing,  that  we  cannot  comprehend  God's  greatness  and 
goodness.  5.  No  man  might  be  adopted  into  any  other  degree  of  kindred,  but  into 
the  name  and  right  of  a  son :  he  could  not  be  an  adopted  brother,  cousin,  or 
nephew,  and  this  is  especially  onr  dignity.  We  have  the  spirit  of  adoption 
whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  (J.  Donne.)  Redemption  is  a  Becond  buying,  a 
buying  back  of  a  thing  alienated  or  sold.  A  kind  of  alienation  had  formerly  been, 
whereby  we  had  made  away  ourselves,  for  a  sale  I  cannot  call  it,  it  was  for  such  a 
trifle ;  onr  nature  alienated  in  Adam  for  the  forbidden  fruit — our  persons  likewise ; 
daily  we  ourselves  alien  for  some  trifling  pleasure  or  profit,  and  when  we  have  thus 
passed  ourselves  away,  by  this  "  selling  of  ourselves  under  sin,"  the  law  seizeth  on 
lis,  and  under  it  we  are  "  locked  up  "  as  it  were  in  a  dungeon  (Gal.  iii.  23),  "  tied 
fast  with  the  cords  of  our  sins  "  (Frov.  v.  22) ;  the  sentence  passed  on  us,  and  we 
waiting  bnt  for  execution.  Christ  got  ns  rid  from  this  estate.  He  did  it,  not  by 
way  of  entreaty,  step  in  and  beg  our  pardon ;  that  would  not  serve.  Sold  we  were, 
and  bonght  we  must  be  ;  and  it  cost  Him  dear  to  pay  the  price.  He  pnt  Himself  in 
the  place  of  the  condemned  malefactors,  and  died  Himself  to  set  ns  free.  But  He 
leaves  us  not  here  as  prisoners  enlarged.  He  brings  us  to  the  same  estate  as 
Himself,  and  makes  us  sons  of  God  and  joint  heirs.  (Bishop  Andrewes.)  Re- 
demption and  adoption : — Kennett  says :  "  There  was  no  custom  more  prevalent  at 
Rome  than  adoption.  The  adopted  person  was  to  hold  the  place  of  a  son,  and  to 
enjoy  all  its  privileges.  When  a  man  had  a  mind  to  adopt  another  into  his  family 
it  formed  a  public  process  in  law.  There  was  also  a  private  ceremony,  which  con- 
sisted in  buying  the  person  to  be  adopted."  God's  redeeming  love: — An  ancient 
historian  tells  us  that,  at  the  siege  of  Babylon,  Darius  condemned  to  the  cross  three 
thousand  oaptives.  Another  relates  how,  when  Alexander  inflicted  long-threatened 
vengeance  on  Tyre,  he  crucified  two  thousand  prisoners,  and  that  crosses  stood  on 
her  bloody  shores  thicker  than  ship  masts  in  her  orowded  harbour.  And  when  the 
Soman  let  fly  his  eagles  against  Jerusalem,  Titus,  measuring  out  to  the  Jews  the 
measure  they  had  meted  to  Jesus,  gave  them  crosses  enough,  "good  measure, 
pressed  down  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over."  A  spectator  of  the  scenes, 
the  dreadful  tragic  scenes,  amid  which  Judah's  sun  set  in  blood  for  ever,  tells  that 
wood  was  wanting  for  crosses,  and  crosses  were  wanting  for  bodies.  Yet  had 
Babylon's,  Tyre's,  Jerusalem's,  all  these  crosses  been  raised  to  save  yon,  and  on 
each  cross  of  that  forest,  not  a  man,  but  a  dying  angel  hung,  had  all  heaven  been 
crucified,  here  is  greater  love,  a  greater  spectacle.  God  commendeth  His  love 
toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us.  (Dr.  Guthrie.) 
Jesus  paid  the  debt : — "  I,  Alexander."  This  was  what  the  late  Emperor  of  Russia 
wrote  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who  is  to  pay  all  these  ?  "  One  of  His  Majesty's 
aides-de-camp,  who  owed  a  great  deal  more  than  he  could  pay,  had  drawn  up  a  list 
of  his  debts,  and  having  in  despair  dashed  off  the  above  question  at  the  foot  of  the 
paper,  had  fallen  asleep  in  his  chair.  The  Empe  or,  happening  to  pass  through  the 
room,  and  seeing  the  doonment,  generously  took  up  a  pen  and  wrote, "  I,  Alexander," 
and  left  the  room  without  disturbing  the  sleeper.  When  the  latter  awoke  he  found 
himself  all  at  once  freely  released  from  his  obli  ations.  Unconverted  reader,  this 
is  the  way  God  freely  releases  you.     There  is  no  condemnation  to  those  who  accept 


15ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  <chaf.  it. 

a  pardon  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  who,  by  His  death  on  the  cross,  paid  the 
debt  we  owed  to  justice,  and  now  we  are  released  debtors.  Christ  redeemed  us : — 
A  gentleman  was  once  passing  through  the  auction  mart  of  a  Southern  Slave 
State,  when  he  noticed  the  tears  of  a  little  girl  who  was  just  going  to  be  put  up  for 
sale.  The  other  slaves  of  the  same  group  did  not  seem  to  care  about  it,  while 
each  knock  of  the  hammer  made  Iter  shake.  The  kind  man  stopped  to  inquire 
why  she  alone  wept.  He  was  told  that  the  others  were  used  to  such  things,  and 
might  be  glad  of  a  change  from  hard,  harsh  homes,  but  that  she  had  been  brought 
up  with  much  care  by  a  good  owner,  and  she  was  terrified  to  think  who  might  buy 
her.  The  stranger  asked  her  price.  It  was  a  great  sum,  but  he  paid  it  down.  The 
tears  fell  fast  on  the  signed  parchment  which  her  deliverer  brought  to  prove  to  her 
her  freedom.  She  only  looked  at  him  with  fear.  She  had  been  born  a  slave  and 
knew  not  what  freedom  meant.  When  the  gentleman  was  gone,  it  began  to  dawn 
upon  her  what  her  freedom  was.  With  the  first  breath  she  said,  "  I  will  follow 
him !  I  will  follow  him !  I  will  serve  him  all  my  days,"  and  when  reasoned  with 
against  it,  she  only  cried,  "  He  redeemed  me !  He  redeemed  me !  He  redeemed  me ! " 
And  so  let  it  be  with  you.  Serve  Jesus  as  sinners  bought  back  with  blood,  arid  when 
men  notice  the  way  you  serve  Him — the  joy  that  is  in  your  looks — the  love  that  is 
in  your  tone,  the  freedom  of  your  service,  have  one  answer  to  give  them :  "  He  be- 
deemed  me  1  "  The  atonement :  Scripture  doctrine  and  current  theories  : — Most  of 
the  leading  topios  to  be  attended  to,  in  a  survey  of  the  great  doctrine  of  the  atone- 
ment, are  more  or  less  fully  stated  or  indicated  in  the  text.  They  are  these  :  First, 
the  connection  between  the  Person  and  the  work  of  Christ,  or  between  His  proper 
Divinity  and  His  vicarious  atonement.  Second,  the  necessity  of  an  atonement  or 
satisfaction,  in  order  to  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  Third,  the  reality  and  the  true  nature 
of  an  atonement  or  satisfaction  as  effected  by  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ. 
And,  fourth,  the  extent  of  the  atonement.  The  first  of  these  topics  is  brought 
before  us  by  the  ascription  of  the  whole  scheme  of  the  salvation  of  fallen  men  to 
God,  who  sent  His  Son  to  accomplish  this  great  object,  and  by  the  description 
given  of  Him  who  was  sent,  as  being  at  once  God's  own  Son  and  also  made  of  a 
woman,  having  thus  the  Divine  and  human  nature  united.  The  reality  of  an 
atonement,  and  its  true  nature,  and  immediate  objeot  and  effect,  are  brought  out  in 
the  statement  that  God's  Son  "  was  made  under  the  law,"  and  was  "  sent  to 
redeem  those  who  were  under  the  law ; "  while  the  last  clause,  viz.,  "  that 
we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons,"  bears,  though  not  very  formally  or 
explicitly,  upon  the  subject  of  the  extent  of  the  atonement.  (FT.  Cunningham, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  Into 
your  hearts. — The  spirit  and  the  cry  of  adoption : — I.  The  dignity  of  believebs. 
Adoption  gives  us  the  rights  of  children ;  regeneration  gives  us  the  nature  of 
children :  we  are  partakers  of  both  of  these,  for  we  are  sons.  1.  This  sonsbip  is  a 
gift  of  grace  received  by  faith.  (1)  Faith  brings  us  justification.  (2)  Faith  sets 
us  free  from  the  bondage  of  the  law.  (3)  Faith  is  the  mark  of  sonship  in  all  who 
have  it.  2.  Adoption  comes  to  us  by  redemption.  3.  We  now  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  sonship.  Not  only  sons,  but  full-grown  sons.  II.  The  consequent  indwelling 
or  the  Holt  Ghost  in  believebs.  1.  Here  is  a  Divine  act  of  the  Father.  2.  He 
comes  as  the  Spirit  of  Jesus.  3.  He  takes  up  His  residence  in  the  believer's  heart. 
Coming  into  the  central  fortress  and  universal  citadel  of  our  nature,  He  takes 
possession  of  the  whole.  4.  This  wonderful  blessing  is  fraught  with  marvellous 
results.  Sonship  sealed  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  brings  us  peace  and  joy ;  it  leads 
to  nearness  to  God  and  fellowship  with  Him  ;  it  excites  trust,  love,  and  vehement 
desire ;  and  creates  in  us  reverence,  obedience,  and  actual  likeness  to  God.  UI. 
The  filial  cby.  1.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  cries.  2.  It  is  literally  the  cry 
of  the  Son.  3.  This  cry  in  our  hearts  is  exceedingly  near  and  familiar.  A  cry  is 
a  sound  which  we  are  not  anxious  that  every  passer-by  should  hear;  yet  what 
child  minds  his  father  hearing  him  cry  ?  4.  How  earnest  a  thing  is  a  cry.  5.  The 
most  of  this  crying  is  kept  within  the  heart,  and  does  not  come  out  at  the  lips.  At 
ail  times  and  in  all  places  we  can  lift  np  our  hearts  and  cry  to  God.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  gain  of  adoption : — By  adoption  God  gives  us  (1)  a  new  nature 
(2  Peter  i.  3) ;  (2)  a  new  name  (Eev.  iii.  12) ;  (3)  a  new  inheritance  (Bom.  viii.  17) ; 
(4)  new  relations  (Rom.  viii.  15,  16);  (5)  a  new  hope  (1  Peter  i.  8).  (John  Bate.) 
What  is  implied  in  adoption: — 1.  Derivation  of  nature  from  God  (John  i.  13; 
James  i.  18  ;  1  John  v.  18).    2.  Being  born  again  in  the  image  of  God,  bearing  Hi* 


chap,  iv.]  QALATIANS.  257 

likeness  (Rom.  viii.  29 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18  ;  Col.  iii.  10 ;  2  Peter  i.  4).  3.  Bearing  Hia 
name  (1  John  iii.  1 ;  Eev.  ii.  17  ;  iii.  12).  4.  Being  the  objects  of  His  peculiar  love 
(John  xvii.  23  ;  Bom.  v.  5-8  ;  Titus  iii.  4  ;  1  John  iv.  7-11).  5.  The  indwelling  of 
the  Spirit  of  His  Son;  who  gives  an  obedient  spirit  (1  Peter  i.  14;  2  John  6),  a 
spirit  free  from  sense  of  guilt,  legal  bondage,  fear  of  death  (Rom.  viii.  15,  21 ; 
2  Cor.  iii.  17  ;  Gal.  v.  1 ;  Heb.  ii.  15 ;  1  John  v.  14),  a  spirit  elevated  with  a  holy 
boldness  and  royal  dignity  (Heb.  x.  19,  22;  1  Peter  ii.  9  ;  iv.  14).  6.  Present  pro- 
tection, consolations,  and  abundant  provisions  (Psa.  cxxv.  2 ;  Isa.  lxvi.  13 ;  Luke 
xii.  27-32;  John  xiv.  18;  1  Cor.  iii.  21-23;  2  Cor.  i.  4).  7.  Present  fatherly 
chastisements  for  our  good,  including  both  temporal  and  spiritual  afflictions  (I'sa.  Ii. 
11,  12 ;  Heb.  xii.  5-11).  8.  The  certain  inheritance  of  the  riches  of  our  Father's 
glory,  as  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  17 ;  James  ii.  5  ; 
1  Peter  i.  4,  iii.  7),  including  the  exaltation  of  our  bodies  to  fellowship  with  Him 
(Bom.  viii.  23  ;  Phil.  iii.  21).  (A.  A.  Hodge.)  Divinr  adoption  contrasted  with 
human: — 1.  Men  generally  adopt  when  they  have  no  children  of  their  own.  But 
God  had  a  Son,  His  dear  Sou,  His  well-beloved  Son.  He  also  had  angels.  2.  Men 
generally  adopt  such  as  they  think  deserving ;  God  adopts  criminals,  traitors, 
enemies.  3.  Men  adopt  living  children  ;  God,  those  who  are  by  nature  spiritually 
dead.  4.  Man  generally  adopts  one  only :  God,  many.  (G.  S.  Bowes.)  Privileges 
of  adoption : — By  adoption — 1.  God  the  Father  is  made  our  Father.  2.  The  in- 
carnate God-Man  is  made  our  elder  Brother,  and  we  are  made  (1)  like  Hi»n  ; 
(2)  intimately  associated  with  Him  in  community  of  life,  standing,  relations, 
privileges ;  (3)  joint-heirs  with  Him  of  His  glory.  3.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  our  in- 
dweller,  teacher,  guide,  advocate,  comforter,  sanctifier.  4.  All  believers,  being  subjects 
of  the  same  adoption,  are  brethren  (Eph.  iii.  6;  1  John  iii.  14,  v.  1).  (^4.  A.  Hod>ie.) 
Heatlien  and  Christian  conceptions  of  God: — A  Jew  entered  a  Persian  temple,  *nd 
saw  there  the  sacred  fire.  He  said  to  the  priest,  "  How !  do  you  worship  tire  ♦  " 
"Not  the  fire;  it  is  to  us  an  emblem  of  the  sun  and  of  his  animating  light,"  saidfche 
priest.  Then  asked  the  Jew,  "Do  you  adore  the  sun  as  a  deity?  Do  you  kDow 
that  he  also  is  a  creature  of  the  Almighty  T  "  The  priest  explained  that  the  sun  was 
to  them  only  an  emblem  of  the  invisible  light  which  preserves  all  things.  The 
Israelite  continued,  "  Does  your  nation  distinguish  the  image  from  the  original  ? 
They  call  the  sun  their  god,  and  kneel  before  the  earthly  flame.  You  dazzle  the 
eye  of  the  body,  but  darken  that  of  the  mind  ;  in  presenting  to  them  the  terrestnal 
light  you  take  from  them  the  celestial."  The  Persian  asked,  "  How  do  you  name 
the  Supreme  Being  ?  "  "  We  call  Him  Jehovah  Adonai ;  that  is,  the  Lord  who  was, 
and  is,  and  shall  be."  "  Tour  word  is  great  and  glorious  ;  but  it  is  terrible,"  smd 
the  Persian.  A  Christian  approaching,  said,  "  We  call  Him  Abba,  Father."  Tl«n 
the  Gentile  and  the  Jew  regarded  each  other  with  surprise,  and  said,  "  Your  word 
is  the  nearest  and  the  highest ;  but  who  gives  you  courage  to  call  the  Eternal 
thus  ?  "  "  The  Father  Himself,"  replied  the  Christian ;  and  with  that  he  proceeded 
to  expound  to  them  the  plan  of  redemption.  Then  they  believed,  and  lifted  up  their 
eyes  to  heaven,  saying,  "  Father,  dear  Father ;  "  and,  joining  hands,  called  each 
other  brethren.  (Krummacher.)  I.  The  Spibit  sent.  1.  There  are  Three  Persons 
in  the  Godhead  who  are  often  mentioned  together  as  here  (Matt.  iii.  16-17, 
xxviii.  19  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14  ;  1  John  v.  7).  2.  The  Spirit  is  the  third  Person  because 
He  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  (John  xiv.  26,  xv.  26,  xvi.  15,  and  here). 
II.  Who  sent  Him  ?  1.  God  sent  His  Son  (ver.  4).  2.  By  the  mediation  of  His 
Son.  He  sent  the  Spirit  too  (John  xvi.  6,  7  ;  Luke  xxiv.  49  ;  Acts  i.  4,  ii.  1).  IH. 
Why  ?  Because  ye  are  sons.  1.  All  believers  are  God's  sons  (John  i.  12).  2.  There- 
fore, because  they  believe,  and  so  are  His  Sons,  God  gives  them  His  Spirit. 
IV.  Whitheb?  Into  your  hearts.  1.  Because  the  heart  is  the  fountain  of  life 
(Prov.  iv.  23).  2.  The  seat  of  true  grace.  V.  What  to  dot  1.  To  be  a  pledge  of 
Christ's  presence  (John  xiv.  16-18 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  20).  2.  To  teach  us  all  things 
needful  (John  xiv.  26).  3.  To  guide  us  into  all  truth.  4.  To  comfort  us  (John 
xv.  26 ;  xvi.  7).  5.  To  seal  our  redemption  (Eph.  i.  13, 14 ;  iv.  30).  6.  To  uphold  us 
under  all  afflictions  (Psa.  Ii.  12).  7.  To  witness  our  adoption  (Rom.  viii.  15,  16). 
VI.  Uses.  1.  Examine  yourselves  whether  you  have  this  Spirit.  (1)  He  is  a 
convincing  Spirit  (John  xvi.  9-11)  (a)  of  sin  in  ourselves,  (b)  of  righteousness  in 
Christ,  (c)  of  Christ's  power  and  judgment  to  come.  (2)  A  renewing  Spirit 
(Titus  iii.  5 ;  John  iii.  3-5).  (3)  A  quickening  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  2  ;  John  vi.  63) 
(4)  A  leading  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  1,  14).  (5)  A  praying  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  15,  26). 
2.  Use  all  the  means  to  get  the  Spirit  in  your  hearts.  VH.  Motives.  Consider — 
1.  Till  then  you  are  not  Christ's  (Rom.  viii.  9).    2.  Can  do  no  good  thing  (John 

17 


S58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tf, 

xv.  5  ;  Rom.  viii.  26).  3.  Are  exposed  to  all  sin.  4.  In  continual  danger  of  hell. 
5.  Can  have  no  true  comfort.  VIII.  Means.  1.  Pray  to  God  for  it  (Luke  xi.  13). 
2.  Frequent  all  public  ordinances  (Acts  ii.  1).  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  The  work  of 
the  Spirit : — I.  The  Wobker.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  called  the  Spirit  of  the  Son 
because — 1.  Of  His  eternal  procession  from  the  Son.  2.  He  was  given  to  the  Son  as 
Head  of  the  Church  for  the  unction,  consecration,  and  sanctification  of  His  human 
nature.  8.  He  is  communicated  through  the  Son  to  all  believers.  (1)  Authoritatively, 
by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  redemption  (Acts  ii.  33  ;  v.  32).  ^2)  Formally,  in  that 
all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  derived  by  us  from  Him  (Col.  l.  19,  ii.  19,  iii.  1-4 ; 
Eph.  iv.  16).  II.  The  work.  He  enables  God's  adopted  children  to  behave  them- 
selves suitably  to  their  state  and  condition.  1.  Not  as  strangers,  foreigners,  or 
even  servants,  but  2.  as  children  and  heirs  by  becoming  in  them  the  Spirit  oi 
power,  love,  and  sobriety  (2  Tim.  i.  7).  III.  The  effects  of  the  working.  1. 
Freedom  of  access  to  the  "  Father  "  is  secured.  2.  He  becomes  to  us  the  Spirit 
of  grace  and  of  supplications,  (1)  by  exerting  graces  and  gracious  affections  in  our 
souls  in  the  duty  of  prayer :  especially  those  of  faith,  love,  and  delight ;  (2)  by 
enabling  us  to  exercise  those  graces  and  express  those  affections  in  vocal  prayer. 
(J.  Owen,  D.D.)  Abba  Father: — I.  The  first,  a  Hebrew  word,  and  the  second,  a 
Greek,  signifies  the  onion  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  our  Church.  In  Christ 
the  corner-stone  both  are  joined  by  becoming  sons :  circumcision  from  one  place, 
wherefore  "  Abba  " — uncircumcision  from  another,  wherefore  "  Father  "  is  named, 
the  concord  of  walls  being  the  glory  of  the  corner-stone.  II.  The  word  "  Abba  " 
is  retained  because  it  is  full  of  affection ;  but  "  Father  "  is  added  not  only  to  expound 
the  same,  but  the  better  to  express  the  eager  moving,  the  earnest  and  vehement 
desires  and  singular  affections  of  believers  in  their  crying  unto  God.  (Brooks.) 
You  are  to  look  unto  your  experience,  and  try  and  find  out  whether  there  there  be 
not  working  with  your  soul,  working  through  it,  working  beneath  it,  distinct  from 
it,  but  not  distinguishable  from  it  by  anything  but  its  consequences  and  fruitfulness 
— a  deeper  voice  than  yours — a  "  still,  small  voice."  No  whirlwind,  nor  fire,  nor 
earthquake,  but  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  secret,  taking  the  voice  and  tones  of 
your  own  heart  and  your  own  consciousness,  and  saying  to  you,  "  Thou  art  My 
child,  inasmuch  as,  operated  by  My  grace,  and  Mine  inspiration  alone,  there 
rises  tremblingly,  but  truly,  in  thine  own  soul  the  cry,  Abba,  Father."  (A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D.)  Sonship: — It  speaks  of  the  communication  of  a  life  and  the 
reciprocity  of  love.  It  rests  upon  a  Divine  act,  and  it  involves  a  human  emotion. 
It  involves  that  the  Father  and  the  child  shall  have  kindred  life — the  Father 
bestowing,  and  the  child  possessing,  a  life  which  is  derived ;  and  because  derived, 
kindred;  and  because  kindred,  unfolding  itself  in  likeness  to  the  Father  that 
gave  it.  And  it  requires  that  between  the  Father's  heart  and  the  child's  heart 
there  shall  pass  in  blessed  interchange  and  quick  correspondence,  answering  love, 
Hashing  backwards  and  forwards,  like  the  lightning  that  touches  the  earth,  and 
rises'  from  it  again.  (Ibid.)  The  character  and  privileges  of  the  children  of  God: — 
I.  The  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  children  of  God.  Believing 
Christians  enter  into  a  higher  condition.  The  servant  becomes  a  son.  Everything 
which  would  obstruct  the  view  of  a  God  of  love  is  done  away  in  Christ.  1.  A  spirit 
of  filial  confidence,  as  opposed  to  servile  fear.  2.  A  spirit  of  holy  love,  as  opposed 
to  the  bondage  of  sin.  3.  A  spirit  of  ready  obedience,  as  opposed  to  the  gloomy 
Bpirit  of  servitude.  As  love  is  the  most  powerful  and  self-devoted  passion  of  our 
nature,  it  explains  the  character  as  well  as  the  principle  of  Christian  obedience.  It 
is  self-denying  ;  for  we  no  longer  live  to  ourselves,  but  to  Him  who  died  for  us  and 
rose  again  (2  Cor.  v.  15).  It  is  soul-absorbing  ;  for  it  is  not  so  much  we  that  now  live, 
as  Christ  that  liveth  in  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).  It  is  devoted,  for  our  will  is  swallowed 
up  in  His,  and  the  cry  of  the  heart  is,  "  Lord,  what  wouldst  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
Hence  the  bold  assertion  of  St.  Paul,  "  For  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  ;  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might  be 
fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  3,  4). 
H.  Wk  now  proceed  to  consider  some  of  the  distinguishing  privileges  of  thh 
children  of  God.  It  will  be  at  once  acknowledged  that  the  characteristics  which 
we  have  mentioned  are  also  exalted  privileges.  To  have  a  satisfactory  sense  of  sin 
being  pardoned ;  to  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  with  a  secret  assurance 
of  His  love  and  favour ;  to  be  freed  from  the  degrading  bondage  of  sin,  and  the 
servile  fear  of  a  holy  law ;  to  possess  the  moral  power  of  holy  obedience,  and  to 
have  thin  heavenly  principle  pervading  the  soul ;  these  are  distinguishing  gift*  of 


«BAP.  it.]  GALATIANS.  259 

Divine  mercy.  Whilst  the  "  spirit  of  a  son  "  has  its  characteristic  endowments, 
the  condition  of  a  child  has  its  peculiar  prerogatives.  The  one  is  the  family 
genius,  the  other  the  family  privileges.  1.  The  child  of  God  has  a  part  in  the 
Father's  love  and  care.  2.  The  child  of  God  has  a  filial  resemblance  to  his 
heavenly  Father.  In  the  households  of  earth  there  is  what  is  termed  a  family  like- 
ness. Some  distinguishing  trait  of  feature  often  marks  the  countenances  of  all  the 
offspring.  However  varied  may  be  the  form  and  hue  of  their  faces,  there  is  some 
identity  of  expression  which  makes  them  like  their  parent,  and  like  to  one  another. 
So  it  is  with  the  family  of  God.  Being  born  from  above,  they  possess  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  heavenly  nature.  They  differ  in  the  proportion  and  intensity  of  their 
spiritual  graces,  but  they  are  all  marked  with  the  lineaments  of  virtue.  One  is 
more  eminent  for  faith,  another  for  zeal,  another  for  wisdom ;  some  excel  in 
patience,  or  meekness,  or  fervid  hope,  or  gentle  love ;  but  all  have  the  fundamentals 
of  these  holy  principles.  They  all  bear  the  marks  of  a  noble  lineage.  You  might 
see  in  each  of  their  hearts  the  peculiar  traits  of  royalty.  You  might  readily  per- 
ceive that  each  inherits  his  Father's  holiness.  He  is  the  child  of  a  King,  a  prince 
of  God  (1  Peter  ii.  9 ;  Rev.  i.  6).  3.  Children  of  God  have  the  privileges  of  family 
communion  and  fellowship.  It  is  not  now  granted  to  man  to  hold  conversational 
intercourse  with  angelic  or  sainted  members  of  the  heavenly  family.  He  must  be 
satisfied  with  knowing  that  they  have  some  communion  with  his  spirit.  This  is 
often  alleged  in  the  Scriptures.  And  who  can  tell  what  benefits  we  receive  from 
holy  thoughts,  counsels,  and  promptings,  whispered  to  the  soul  by  hovering  spirits 
of  an  ethereal  nature  ?  But  we  are  privileged  with  the  "  communion  of  saints." 
We  may  associate  with  the  wise  and  good,  the  saints  that  are  in  the  earth,  and 
the  excellent  (Psa.  xvi.  3).  Above  all,  the  Christian  has  access  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  and  holds  communion  with  the  Father,  through  the  Son,  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  4.  Children  of  God  have  a  share  in  the  family  provisions.  There  is  a 
common  stock  of  mercies,  of  which  all  the  children  have  a  right  to  partake.  A 
certain  property  in  blessings  belongs  to  the  household  of  faith.  Exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises  have  been  provided  by  their  heavenly  Father.  There  is  a 
fulness  in  Christ  out  of  which  His  Church  are  permitted  to  receive.  Every  one 
Is  exhorted  to  take  largely  of  these  Divine  gifts.  Unlike  property  of  an  earthly 
nature,  these  riches  never  diminish  by  using.  There  could,  therefore,  be  no  reason 
for  withholding  them  from  any  seeking  soul.  All  are  at  liberty  to  "ask  and  receive, 
that  their  joy  may  be  full."  5.  Children  have  a  title  to  the  future  inheritance. 
"  If  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ: "  or,  as  the  apostle  writes  in  another 
place,  "  If  children  then  heirs,"  &o.  "  Heirs  of  God  " — it  is  a  strange  expression  I 
What  does  it  mean?  [R.  M.  Macbraire,M.A.)  Adoption: — I.  In  what  does  adoption 
consist  ?  It  is  the  translation  of  a  person  out  of  one  family  into  another.  The  act  of 
grace  by  which  God  takes  the  children  of  the  wicked  one  out  of  the  world,  and  makes 
them  the  sons  and  daughters  of  His  spiritual  family.  1.  Points  of  similarity  between 
natural  and  spiritual  adoption.  (1)  In  adoption  we  cease  to  have  our  former  name, 
and  are  designated  after  the  name  of  God,  who  adopted  us ;  then  sinners,  now 
saints ;  then  enemies,  now  reconciled ;  then  aliens  and  rebels,  now  brought  nigh 
and  the  friends  of  God.  (2)  In  adoption  we  change  our  abode.  Once  in  the  world, 
in  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  in  a  far  country ;  now  in  the  Church,  in  the  kingdom 
of  God's  dear  Son,  in  the  household  of  faith,  and  family  of  heaven.  (3)  We 
change  our  costume.  Conform  to  the  family  dress.  2.  Points  of  difference  between 
natural  and  spiritual  adoption.  (1)  Natural  adoption  was  to  supply  a  family  defect. 
Because  there  was  no  son.  God  had  hosts  of  sons — the  angels,  &c.  (2)  Natural 
adoption  was  only  of  sons.  God  makes  no  distinction  as  to  sex,  race,  &c.  (3)  In 
natural  adoption  there  was  only  a  change  of  condition ;  the  child  never  became 
really  the  son  of  the  adopter.  But  God  makes  His  children  partakers  of  His  own 
nature,  and  imprints  on  them  His  own  image.  (4)  In  natural  adoption  only  one 
was  adopted ;  but  God  adopts  multitudes.  (5)  In  natural  adoption  only  temporal 
advantages  were  derived ;  but  in  spiritual,  the  blessings  are  eternal.  II.  The  signs 
of  adoption.  1.  Internal  (see  chapter  iv.  6 ;  Bom.  viii.  14-16).  The  Spirit  will 
produce  within  us  (1)  peace  of  mind,  (2)  comfort  of  heart,  (3)  spiritual  joy. 
2.  External.  (1)  Language.  Conversation  such  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
(2)  Profession.  We  shall  appear  as  the  sons  of  the  family  of  God  ;  have  the  family 
badge,  be  enrolled  in  the  family  book,  be  found  in  the  family  circle,  and  sit  at  the 
family  table.  (3)  Obedience.  God's  family  has  its  laws,  its  specific  rules  for  tlv 
government  of  itself,  and  for  the  direction  of  its  conduct  towards  those  who  av« 
without.     III.  Its  privileges.     1.  Deliverance  from  all  the  miseries  of  oar  pris- 


MO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

tine  state.  Poverty,  rags,  misery,  ruin.  2.  Investiture  into  all  the  benefits  o! 
Christ's  family  on  earth.  3.  A  title  to  the  celestial  inheritance  which  Christ  has 
bought  and  prepared  for  all  who  love  Him.  Application :  1.  Learn  the  essential 
importance  of  this  blessing.  Wkat  would  pardon  and  regeneration  be  without  it  ? 
Let  us  seek  the  good  of  God's  family.  We  are  in  it  to  labour  as  well  as  enjoy. 
2.  Invite  strangers  to  become  the  sons  and  heirs  of  God,  (  J.  Burnt,  D.D.)  Sons 
by  adoption :  — Great  indeed  is  the  rank  and  privilege  of  a  son  of  God.  The  son 
of  Adam,  that  is  taken  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  is  taken  out  of  the  company  of  the 
rebels  against  God,  into  the  company  of  those  that  adore  and  bless  His  name  with 
thanksgiving,  and  perform  His  service  with  diligence,  in  His  glorious  presence. 
But  he  always  remembers  whence  he  has  been  taken ;  that  if  as  a  son  of  Adam  he 
was  taken  from  the  comparatively  vile  dust  of  the  earth,  as  a  son  of  God  he  baa 
been  taken  into  a  spiritual  nature  out  of  the  comparatively  much  viler  fleshly  nature. 
He  remembers  that  he  is  not  a  real  son,  but  an  adopted.  Now  a  real  son  is  always 
a  son  to  his  father,  happen  what  will.  And  having  been  born  and  bred  in  hia 
house,  he  knows  all  that  is  required  of  him,  and  does  naturally  all  the  duties  of  » 
member  of  the  family.  But  very  different  is  the  condition  of  an  adopted  son ;  he 
has  been  born  and  bred  in  another  family,  and  therefore  under  different  rules ;  and 
hence,  however  respectable  his  family  may  be,  he  cannot  accommodate  himself  so 
freely  and  fully  as  he  could  wish,  nor  sufficiently  know  the  mind  of  a  father, 
whom  he  has  not  known  from  childhood.  Much  more  then  if  he  be  talen 
out  of  a  family  whose  habits  are  quite  contrary,  and  disreputably  contrary  to 
the  habits  of  that  into  which  he  has  been  adopted,  he  must  be  in  contin  ml 
fear  and  perplexity.  All  is  quite  strange  to  him,  and  let  him  be  ever  do 
willing  to  accommodate  himself  to  his  new  situation,  still  he  is  in  continual 
doubt  as  to  what  he  should  do,  and  what  he  should  not  do,  and  is  continually, 
notwithstanding  all  his  watchfulness,  letting  out  the  secrets  of  the  corrupt  habits  of 
his  old  family.  But  on  the  very  account  of  this  natural  infirmity,  God  hath  put 
him  under  an  instructor,  to  give  him  the  proper  knowledge,  to  form  his  habits,  to 
influence  his  will,  and  by  such  a  thorough  change,  to  qualify  him  for  the  duties  of 
the  new  station  to  which  he  has  been  admitted.  And  this  instructor  is  the  Holy 
Spirit,  called  also,  from  this  His  very  office  amongst  us,  the  spirit  of  adoption,  as  in 
Bom.  viii.  14,  15.  (R.  W.  Evans,  M.A.)  Comfort  of  assurance: — Death,  like  the 
proud  Philistine,  comes  marching  out  in  his  hideous  shape,  daring  the  whole  host 
of  Israel  to  match  him  with  an  equal  combatant.  The  atheist  dares  not  die  for  fea* 
non  esse, — that  he  shall  not  be  at  all ;  the  profane  dares  not  die,  for  fear  male,  esse  — 
to  be  damned;  the  doubtful  conscience  dares  not  die,  because  he  knows  not  whether 
he  shall  be,  or  be  damned,  or  not  be  at  all.  Only  the  resolved  Christian  dares  die, 
because  he  is  assured  of  his  election  ;  he  knows  he  shall  be  happy,  and  so  lifts  up 
pleasant  eyes  to  heaven,  the  infallible  place  of  his  eternal  rest.  He  dares  en- 
counter with  his  last  enemy,  trample  on  him  with  the  foot  of  disdain,  and  trium- 
phantly sing  over  him,  "  O  death!  where  is  thy  sting?  O  grave  !  where  is  thy 
victory  ?  "  He  conquers  in  being  conquered ;  and  all  because  God  hath  said  to  hia 
soul,  "  I  am  thy  salvation."  (T.  Adams.)  Assurance  of  adoption: — In  1768  Mr. 
Wesley  visited  Glasgow,  where  the  greatest  part  of  the  members  had  found  peace 
with  God.  Three  years  before  Thomas  Taylor  had  been  sent  there,  and  had  for 
his  first  congregation  two  bakers'  boys  and  two  old  women.  He  kept  on  preaching, 
and  his  hearers  increased  also  to  two  hundred,  but  for  want  of  means  he  never 
kept  so  many  fast  days  in  his  life.  He  hired  a  room,  formed  a  society,  and  paid  a 
precentor  fourpence  for  each  service  to  lead  off  the  psalms,  but  the  money  falling 
short,  he  had  to  dismiss  both  the  psalms  and  the  precentor ;  but  he  left  a  society 
of  seventy  members.  One  of  these  was  old  Janet,  of  whom  John  Pawson  records 
this  anecdote.  Meeting  the  minister  of  the  kirk  she  had  long  attended,  she  was 
thus  accosted :  "  Oh,  Janet,  where  have  ye  been,  woman  ?  I  have  no  seen  ye  at 
the  kirk  for  long."  She  replied,  "I  go  among  the  Methodists."  "Why,  what 
gude  get  ye  there,  woman? "  "Glory  to  God  1 "  said  Janet;  "  I  do  get  gude;  for 
God,  for  Christ's  sake,  has  forgiven  me  a'  my  sins."  "  Ah,  Janet,  be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear ;  the  de'il  is  a  cunning  adversary."  "  I  dinna  care  a  button  for 
the  de'il,"  said  Janet;  I've  gotten  him  under  my  feet.  I  ken  the  de'il  can  do 
rnuckle  deal,  but  there  is  ane  thing  he  canna  do."  "  What  ia  that,  Janet  ?  "  "  He 
canna  shed  abroad  the  love  of  God  in  my  heart ;  an'  I  am  sure  I've  got  it  there  I " 
"  Weel,  weel,"  said  the  minister,  "  If  ye  have  got  that  there,  hold  it  fast,  Janet, 
and  never  let  it  go."  Benefit  of  assurance  : — Latimer  writes  to  Ridley,  "When 
I  live  in  a  settled  and  steadfast  assurance  about  the  state  of  my  soul,  methinks  I 


OHA*.  it.]  QALATIANS.  261 

am  as  bold  as  a  lion ;  I  can  laugh  at  all  trouble ;  no  affliction  daunts  me ;  but, 
when  I  am  eclipsed  in  my  comforts,  I  am  of  so  fearful  a  spirit,  that  I  could  run  into 
A  very  mouse-hole."  Sonship  of  the  believer: — I.  The  true  position  of  the  Christian. 
44  Sons."  Many  fail  to  see  it.  They  admit  "  believers,"  "  Christians,"  "  disciples," 
44  soldiers,"  "  servants."  True.  Each  has  a  truth.  Just  as  "Jesus,"  "  Christ," 
44  Master,"  "  Lord  ;  "  but  "  Emanuel "  reveals  a  new  connection.  So  with  the 
believer.  4*  Son."  Christ  took  our  nature,  and  we  receive  His  in  degree  (2  Peter 
i.  4).  This  is  often  urged  in  Scripture.  Eom.  vii.  plainly  describes  '4law  of 
nature"  and  "law  of  grace."  Why  urge  this?  1.  Because  of  privileges,  of 
which  we  shall  speak  soon.  2.  Because  it  is  a  necessity  of  life.  Many  fail 
in  efforts.  They  "  try  to  be  good,"  and  fail.  Because  they  begin  wrongly.  Must 
be  so.  Ostrich  cannot  soar  as  eagle.  Nature  is  fitted  to  habits.  So  in  grace. 
God  requires  great  things.  A  new  life  begins.  How  ?  Not  by  laws  or  precepts — 
it  is  a  new  gift.  Adoption  transfers  from  Satan's  family  to  God's,  and  then  a  new 
nature  is  given.  II.  The  power  bt  whom  this  adoption  is  wrought.  By  44  God's 
Spirit."  In  every  aspect; — redemption,  sanctification,  preservation,  fruitfulness — 
the  believer  is  a  Divine  work.  Often  forgotten.  We  are  surrounded  by  human 
instruments,  and  the  agent  is  not  seen.  Insufficient.  Only  the  statue,  not  the 
man.  Form  without  life.  Both  solemn  and  assuring.  III.  The  necessary 
results  of  this  indwelling.  "  Whereby,"  &o.  Immediate  connection  between 
life  and  action.    The  means  may  lie  dormant,  but  the  grace  never.     What  results  ? 

1.  God  is  known.  In  daily  life  such  knowledge  must  be  imparted.  Very  true  of 
spiritual  things.  This  knowledge  surpasses  that  imparted  by  Scripture  or  human 
teachers.  Examples :  1  Sam.  hi.  7 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  Gal.  iii.  16,  17.  Samuel  and 
Paul  both  taught  by  man,  and  yet  they  were  spiritually  ignorant.  So,  however 
much  we  may  study,  prize,  increasingly  value  the  Bible,  eaoh  must  go  beyond  it, 

2.  Confidence  is  enjoyed.  Point  of  argument  lies  in  "  son  "  and  "  slave."  The 
difference,  the  unwavering  confidence  of  "  son. "  So  boldness  in  prayer,  conflict, 
work,  is  believer's  privilege.  The  Father  never  deserts  His  child.  3.  Consistent 
life.  A  great  name  should  never  be  disgraced.  What  so  noble  as  this  T  where 
else  is  such  honour  entrusted?    "Be  imitators  of  God."    (II.  T.  Cavell.) 

Ver.  7.  Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but  a  son. — Servitude  and  ton- 
thip : — I.  Sonship  is  here  contrasted  with  servitude.  1.  It  is  a  change  from 
ignorance  to  knowledge.  2.  A  change  from  bondage  to  self-control.  3.  A  change 
from  a  temporal  relationship  to  an  eternal  one.  II.  This  sonship  is  the  oift  of 
Gon.  1.  God  intervenes  with  the  offer  of  sonship  at  the  fitting  time.  2.  God 
seods  the  only  Being  who  can  win  us  to  sonship.  3.  God  accompanies  the  gift 
of  eonship  with  the  only  infallible  witness — the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Ill  This  oift  of  sonship  makes  us  heirs  of  god.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  The 
Ch>  istian>8  inheritance : — For  what  purpose  did  God  make  the  worlds  ?  Not  that 
H»  might  in  solitary  joy  behold  their  glittering  brightness ;  but  that  they  might 
m>  oister  to  our  sense  of  beauty,  and  cast  lights  on  our  devious  way.  If  we  truly 
understood  our  relation  to  the  world  in  which  we  live,  and  indeed  to  the  universe 
of  which  we  form  a  part,  we  should  see  that  the  material  has  been  made  for  the 
sake  of  the  moral,  that  all  things  have  been  put  under  our  feet  because  we  are  sons 
of  God  Who  has  more  right  to  the  world's  riches  and  wealth  than  a  child  of  Him 
to  whom  the  world  belongs  ?  Let  him  erect  his  machinery,  carry  on  his  transac- 
tions, dive  into  the  mine,  cross  the  ocean,  span  yawning  gulfs,  and  pierce  hard 
rocks,  assured  that  He  is  doing  his  Father's  will  in  thus  obtaining  and  using  his 
Father's  wealth  "  All  things  are  yours — things  present  and  things  to  come." 
44  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth."  But  higher  things  are 
ours  if  we  are  children  of  God  We  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  That 
nature  is  spirit,  and  our  spirits  overcome  and  subjugate  the  grosser  part  of  our 
being.  That  nature  is  righteous,  and  we  become  pure  in  heart,  single  in  purpose, 
simple  in  behaviour,  just  toward  all  men.  That  nature  is  mercy,  and  we,  having 
ourselves  obtained  the  blessings  of  Divine  pity,  look  with  compassion  on  the  fallen, 
and  long  to  win  them  to  the  home  from  which  they  have  been  so  long  exiles.  That 
nature  is  changeless  power,  and  our  weakness  becomes  strength,  and  an  inward 
energy  is  granted  enabling  us  to  triumph  over  time,  the  world,  and  self.  That 
nature  is  infinite  wisdom,  and  by  dwelling  ever  in  the  presence  of  God  we  see  the 
world's  troubles  and  our  own  in  the  light  of  higher  purposes,  and  when  we  cannot 
understand  we  learn  in  quiet  repose  to  trust  in  Him  who  doeth  all  things  well. 
That  latnre  is  world-embracing  and  unquenchable  love;   He  takes  away  the 


262  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

patriarchs  when  their  weary  pilgrimage  is  finished,  that  He  may  give  them  perfect 
rest.    He  makes  us  ask,  "  The  fathers,  where  are  they ?  "  because  He  wants  them 
home  with  Him ;  and  soon  the  doors  of  His  presence-chamber  will  open  for  us, 
new  visions  of  bliss  and  joy  will  open  upon  us,  and  we  shall  see  God  as  He  is,  and 
be  like  Him.    In  the  meanwhile  our  rejoicing  is,  that  "  now  are  we  the  sons  of 
God."     (Ibid.)         The  Christian's  scorn  of  the  world  : — Whoever  could  believe 
without  any  doubt  that  it  were  true,  and  certainly  comprehend  how  immeasurably 
great  a  thing  it  is,  that  one  should  be  God's  child  and  heir,  such  an  one  would 
without  doubt  take  little  account  of  the  world,  with  all  that  therein  is  esteemed 
precious  and  honourable,  such  as  human  righteousness,  wisdom,  dominion,  power, 
money,  possessions,  honour,  pleasure,  and  the  like ;  yea,  all  that  in  the  world  is 
honourable  and   glorious,   would    be  to  him    loathsome  and  an    abomination. 
(Luther.)        Sons  and  heirs : — I.  No  inheritance  without  sonshtp.     Spiritual 
blessings  are  only  for  those  who  are  in  a  spiritual  condition.    1.  The  lower  orders 
of  creatures  are  shut  out  from  gifts  which  belong  to  the  higher  forms  of  life  because 
they  are  so  organized  that  these  cannot  enter  into  their  nature.     2.  So  the  soul 
must  be  adapted  to  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  salvation.    3.  The  final  inheritance 
depends  on  character.    To  possess  God  for  ever  we  must  love  Him  for  ever.    II. 
No  sonshep  without  a  SPIRITUAL  birth.    1.  We  are  sons  in  some  sense  by  nature. 
2.  But  we  become  spiritual  sons  by  grace.     III.  No  spiritual  birth  without 
Christ.    1.  The  very  figure  shows  us  that  the  process  of  becoming  sons  does  not 
lie  within  our  own  power.    2.  Christ  has  come  to  give  the  spirit  of  adoption  and 
regeneration.    IV.  No  Christ  without  faith.    1.  Ceremonies  are  nothing.    2.  Trust 
in  Christ  is  everything.   (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)      Sonship  through  Christ : — Christ  has 
effected  an  actual  change  in  the  possible  aspect  of  the  Divine  justice  and  govern- 
ment to  us ;  and  He  has  carried  in  the  golden  urn  of  His  humanity  a  new  spirit 
and  a  new  life  which  He  has  set  down  in  the  midst  of  the  race ;  and  the  urn  was 
broken  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  the  water  flowed  out,  and  whithersoever  that 
water  comes  there  is  life,  and  whithersoever  it  comes  not  there  is  death.    (Ibid.) 
Adoption  and  confidence: — A  train  dashed  into  a  tunnel  with  a  warning  whistle. 
The  whistle  and  darkness  startled  a  child  in  his  mother's  arms,  and  caused  him  to 
scream  with  fear ;  but  directly  the  mother's  voice  was  heard,  and  he  felt  the 
soothing  hand  upon  his  face,  all  fear  vanished.    Yet  the  child  knew  not  why  the 
train  went  through  the  darkness,  but  immediately  the  parent's  voice  reached  him, 
he  trusted.    When  we  go  through  any  dark  or  laborious  way,  let  us  also  trust  our 
Father  in  heaven,  and  nothing  will  harm  us.    *•  The  darkness  and  the  light,  O 
Lord,  are  both  alike  to  Thee."        Privileges  of  adoption : — By  it  God  the  Father 
is  made  our  Father.    The  incarnate  God-man  is  made  our  Elder  Brother,  and  we 
are  made — 1.  Like  Him.    2.  Intimately  associated  with  Him  in  community  of  life, 
standing,  relations,  and  privileges.     3.  Joint-heirs  with  Him  of  His  glory.     The 
Holy  Ghost  is  our  Indweller,  Guide,  Advocate,  Comforter,  and  Sanctifier.    All 
believers  being  subjects  of  the  same  adoption  are  brethren.     (A.  A.  Hodge.)        The 
Christian  a  Son  of  God: — I.  Then  we  are  to  notice  the  gracious  relation  dj 
which  good  men  stand  to  God.    They  are  not  servants,  but  sons.    As  I  have  before 
intimated,  this  privilege  belongs  to  believers  alone ;  they  only  can  properly  be 
called  the  sons  of  God.     1.  That  true  believers  are  the  sons  of  God  by  a  new 
creation.    By  nature  they  are  the  children  of  wrath  even  as  others.    They  are  the 
offspring  of  degenerate,  fallen  man,  the  posterity  of  Adam,  the  sinful  representative 
of  mankind.     The  temper  of  the  mind  is  renewed,  and  the  outward  conduct  is 
reformed.    A  spiritual  and  vital  influence  is  felt,  and  a  spiritual  and  vital  principle 
is  imparted.      2.   Believers  are  the  sons  of  God,   by  their  union  with  Christ. 
"  Wherefore,  my  brethren,"  says  the  apostle  to  the  Romans,  "  ye  are  also  become 
dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ ;  that  ye  should  be  married  to  another,  even 
to  Him  that  is  raised  from  the  dead,  that  ye  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God." 
3.  Believers  are  the  sons  of  God  by  adoption.    Adoption  was  an  act  frequent  among 
the  ancient  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Romans.    II.  The  happy  consequence  which 

RESULTS  FROM  THE  PRIVILEGE  OF  OUR  BEING  THE  »ONS  OF  GOD.   If  a  SOn,  then  an 

heir  of  God,  through  Christ.  They  are  heirs  of  all  that  God  possesses.  The 
treasures  to  which  they  are  entitled  are  vast  and  immeasurable.  Believers,  too, 
are  heirs  of  all  that  God  has  promised.  Christians  are  said  to  be  heirs  of  the 
promise.  If  they  have  but  little  in  possession,  they  have  much  in  prospect ;  if  not 
rich  in  enjoyment,  they  are  rich  in  faith  and  hope.  Believers,  too,  are  heirs  of 
the  righteousness  of  Christ.  Believers,  too,  are  heirs  of  salvation,  and  angels  arc 
their  minister  jig  spirits.    Those  happy  beings  have  charge  over  the  people  of  God, 


..  iv.]  GALATIANS.  263 

and  minister  to  them  in  their  path  to  glory.  They  are  called,  too,  heirs  of  the 
grace  of  life.  Salvation  is  all  of  grace.  Believers,  too,  are  heirs  of  the  kingdom. 
God  has  provided  a  kingdom  for  them  that  love  Him,  and  of  this  kingdom  they  are 
heirs.  They  are  also  heirs  of  the  world.  This  promise  primarily  refers  to  the 
land  of  Canaan,  which  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  to  possess ;  but  here  heaven  is 
typically  promised  and  represented.  III.  Notice  the  means  by  which  this 
pbtvileob  is  obtained.  If  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God,  through  Christ.  Now  we 
are  heirs  of  God  through  Christ,  because  he  has  purchased  this  privilege  for  us. 
Christ,  too,  can  only  give  this  glorious  privilege.  He  is  the  Head  and  Representa- 
tive of  His  Church.  Believers  are  the  members  of  His  body,  and  receive  their 
spiritual  nourishment  from  Him.  It  is  through  Christ  we  obtain  this  privilege  as 
joint-heirs  with  Him.  To  Him  the  birthright  blessing  properly  belongs.  The 
Father  loved  the  Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into  His  hands.  In  conclusion, 
let  me  inquire — If  not  heirs  of  God,  what  are  we?  We  are  heirs  of  Satan — that 
prince  of  darkness,  who  now  employs  us  in  the  drudgery  of  sin  in  order  that  he 
may  reward  us  with  the  damnation  of  hell.  (Isaac  Clarkson.)  A  servant  or  a 
ton ; — The  apostle  had  laid  down  some  broad,  simple  rules  of  the  gospel  (verses  4, 
5).  Here  he  points  out — I.  The  believer's  change  :  he  was  a  servant ;  he  is  a 
son.  1.  A  servant  to  sin  (Bom.  vi.  16).  Unconverted  man's  virtues  are  splendid 
sins.  Servants  in  a  large  house  have  different  work,  but  if  well  done,  master  \a 
satisfied.  2.  Slave  to  the  world — its  fashions,  opinions,  pleasures.  3.  In  bondage 
to  the  law.  He  cannot  see  the  freeness  of  the  gospel  (Rom.  iii.  28;  v.  1).  But 
there  is  a  change  (ver.  6  ;  Rom.  viii.  15).  There  is  now  an  interest  in  God ;  filial 
affection  to  Him ;  freedom  of  access  (Eph.  ii.  18 ;  Prov.  xv.  8) ;  an  abode  in  the 
Father's  house  (John  viii.  34-5 ;  Eph.  ii.  19-22).  II.  The  beleeveb'b  hope.  An 
inheritance  is  not  purchased  by  ourselves — it  descends.  Itimplies — 1.  Full  for- 
giveness. One  unpardoned  sin  is  certain  hell  (Ezek.  xviii.  4;  1  John  i.  7).  2. 
Inward  righteousness — imperfect,  but  improving  (Luke  xxiii.  41 ;  Heb.  xii.  14). 
3.  That  God  Himself  will  be  the  portion  of  His  believing  people  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23). 
Whatever  Christ  has,  we  have.  In  conclusion — 1.  Is  it  not  a  wonder  that  privi- 
leges such  as  these  should  be  eo  much  overlooked,  undervalued  ?  Can  every  one 
here  say :  "  I  was  a  servant  of  sin,  but  I  am  now  a  son  of  God  ?  "  (Rom.  x.  10).  2. 
If  not  a  son  of  God,  what  is  the  alternative  ?  (Gal.  vi.  7,  8).  An  heir  of  the  one  or 
of  the  other  is  every  cne  present  at  this  moment.  We  must  expect  opposition,  but 
we  are  well  led,  supported  (2  Cor.  xii.  9 ;  Rev.  xxi.  7).  (H.  M.  Villiers.)  *'  No 
more  a  servant,  but  a  son:" — He  simply  reminds  those  Christians  of  their  early 
state,  and  calls  them  to  consider  their  present  condition.  Once  they  were  servants, 
now  they  are  sons ;  once  in  bondage,  now  free.  I.  Every  believer  will  find  it  to  his 
advantage  occasionally  to  recall  his  former  condition  under  the  Divine  law,  previous 
to  the  glad  day  in  which  grace  came  to  him  with  full  redemption.  They  say  it  is 
the  custom  in  the  city  of  Munich  to  arrest  every  mendicant  child  that  is  caught 
begging  in  the  street,  and  put  him  immediately  at  school  under  some  proper  super- 
vision until  he  is  able  to  obtain  a  moderate  support.  As  he  enters  the  institution, 
his  portrait  is  taken  by  an  artist  precisely  as  he  appears  in  his  uncleanliness  and 
rags.  This  picture  is  always  carefully  preserved,  so  that  when  he  is  educated  and 
matured  enough  to  appreciate  his  position  it  may  be  shown  to  him.  Then  he  will 
know  how  much  has  been  done  for  his  good,  even  while  he  was  thinking  unkindly 
of  the  restraint  he  resisted.  Furthermore :  he  is  made  then  to  promise  that 
he  will  keep  the  likeness  ever  afterwards,  in  order  not  only  that  it  may  remind  him 
of  his  abject  career  as  a  beggar,  and  so  keep  him  humble,  but  also  make  him  think 
of  others  as  companions  in  misfortune,  and  so  render  him  charitable  to  the  poor. 
And  it  is  said  in  the  reports  that  some  of  these  castaways  thus  saved  to  usefulness, 
make  the  strongest  and  the  most  hopeful  friends  for  the  recovery  and  rescue  of  any 
young  lad,  however  unpromising  he  may  at  first  sight  appear,  a  mere  waif  and 
wanderer  in  the  world.  Here  in  our  lesson  the  apostle  seems  to  have  a  very  similar 
purpose  in  mind.  For  he  begins  with  the  description  of  men  in  a  state  of  nature 
(vers.  1-3),  and  having  shown  how  deeply  in  "bondage"  they  are,  he  proceeds  to 
set  forth  the  glorious  interposition  of  grace  in  the  gospel  (vers.  4-6),  by  which  they 
might  receive  the  "adoption  of  sons."  It  is  as  if  we  all  looked  steadily  back  for 
a  moment  to  see  what  we  were  once,  and  in  the  height  of  our  gratitude  looked 
around  to  see  what  we  now  have  become,  and  to  inquire  how  best  we  could  glorify 
our  Saviour.  II.  In  the  next  place,  the  apostle  dwells  upon  the  lofty  position  of 
those  who  are  the  children  of  God.  They  are  not  any  more  bound  by  the  drudgeries 
uf  service;   they  are  not  under  "tutors  and  governors"  any  longer;   they  are 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

"  sons."  It  remains  for  us  only  to  understand  what  adoption  implies,  and  then 
this  liberty  will  be  defined,  and  this  relationship  established.  1.  A  son  by  adoption 
takes  the  name  of  his  new  father  for  all  the  future.  No  matter  how  honourable 
that  may  be ;  no  matter  how  clear  the  aristocratic  blood  may  have  run  in  the 
ancestral  veins ;  no  matter  what  the  world's  heraldry  has  to  say  of  ancient  prowess 
or  feudal  right ;  any  one  who  is  legally  adopted  bears  the  same  proud  designation. 
Although  the  forefathers  never  knew  him,  the  children  of  this  generation  must 
hereafter  call  him  a  brother,  the  mother  must  consider  him  the  same  as  her  son. 
The  analogy  holds  perfectly  here.  To  be  sons  of  God  means  to  bear  His  name. 
Christians  are  called  such  after  Christ ;  it  is  said  that  the  Germans  often  call  a 
true  believer  a  "  Christ."  2.  An  adopted  child  receives  the  care  of  his  father.  The 
privileges  bestowed  upon  the  other  children  are  exactly  the  privileges  bestowed  upon 
him.  Indeed,  a  son  by  adoption  is  often  more  likely  to  want  peculiar  help,  simply 
because  on  entering  an  entirely  fresh  line  of  relations  and  duties  he  has  everything 
to  learn  and  much  to  unlearn.  He  hardly  knows  the  first  rules  of  the  house,  and 
he  does  not  at  all  understand  the  dispositions  of  those  within  the  family  circle. 
He  cannot  be  expected  to  arrive  at  once,  as  if  by  a  flash  of  intuition,  at  a  full 
apprehension  of  even  his  father's  will ;  he  will  need  time  to  be  instructed  in  the 
delicate  solicitudes  of  watchful  obedience.  Hence,  he  must  have  more  forbearance, 
more  patient  instruction,  more  provident  guardianship,  perhaps  than  all  the  rest 
together.  To  be  the  adopted  sons  of  God  means  just  in  this  way  to  share  Hia 
peculiar  parental  care.  Jesus  our  Lord  left  on  record  an  engagement  of  it  for  His 
brethren  (John  xvi.  27).  Even  the  Father  Himself  has  made  a  covenant  promise 
for  help  (2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18).  3.  An  adopted  child  takes  the  honours  of  his  father. 
The  child  goes  away  from  the  old  condition  wholly  into  the  new.  A  prince  might 
bring  a  peasant's  son  into  a  royal  household ;  then  he  will  be  a  peasant-boy  no 
longer  ;  he  is  a  king's  son.  That  sets  him  on  a  level  with  the  nobles  of  the  realm ; 
for  he  takes  the  condition  of  his  parent  as  if  he  had  been  born  under  the  same  roof. 
4.  A  child  by  adoption  receives  an  appropriate  share  in  the  wealth  of  his  father. 
Numbered  in  the  household,  bearing  the  common  name,  he  can  also  draw  on  the  joint 
resources.  Former  poverty  is  forgotten.  Avenues  of  influence  are  suddenly  thrown 
open  to  him.  5.  An  adopted  child  receives  at  last  the  inheritance  of  his  father. 
What  God  has  laid  out  for  His  people  is  much,  what  He  has  laid  up  for  them  is 
more.  "  The  Saints'  Inventory  "  contains  a  list  of  spiritual  possessions,  most  rare 
and  valuable  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23).  III.  It  would  seem  now  as  if  there  could  be  no 
need  for  the  apostle  to  press  his  closing  consideration.  How  could  any  one  wish 
tc  go  back  into  service  after  he  had  experienced  these  advantages  of  sonship  ? 
Huw  could  he  "  desire  again  to  be  in  bondage  "  ?  We  are  told  that  the  Israelites, 
ev«n  when  they  had  manna,  wished  for  onions  and  leeks  of  Egypt ;  and,  even  when 
G&d  was  feeding  them,  sighed  for  garlic.  But  what  is  this  beside  the  folly  of  those 
who  accept  times  and  seasons  in  the  place  of  the  "  blessedness  "  of  a  sonship  of 
Gjd  with  Christ  I  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Son  and  heir: — I.  What  we  were — 
servants.  The  idea  of  bondage  is  implied,  and  refers  to  the  twofold  influence  of 
sin.  1.  Its  entire  sway  over  ourselves.  The  language  of  .Scripture  is  decisive  on 
this  matter.  Sin  has  not  only  affected  a  part  of  human  nature,  but  the  whole.  2. 
Its  power  to  exclude  every  good  influence.  The  slave  has  no  intercourse  with  the 
outside  world.  Others  must  not  speak  to  him,  or  offer  him  any  counsel.  His 
master  will  not  allow  any  foreign  influence.  Sin  keeps  out  the  light ;  the  sinner 
does  neither  see  himself  nor  his  surroundings.  II.  What  we  are — sons.  Adoption 
is  the  term  used  by  the  apostle  to  designate  the  change.  No  comparison,  however, 
will  exactly  represent  the  altered  state.  1.  As  sons  we  are  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  imparted  a  heavenly  disposition  to  our  hearts.  2. 
As  sons  we  are  partakers  of  God's  care  and  government.  Correction  is  a  necessary 
part  of  the  relationship.  HI.  What  we  shall  be — heirs.  There  is  a  present  right, 
but  minority  excludes  full  possession  for  want  of  fitness.  1.  Maturity  There  is  a 
stage  in  our  experience  when  restrictions  and  limitations  will  be  removed.  We 
now  only  know  in  part.  2.  Indebtedness — "  through  Christ."  He  is  the  link 
between  us  and  the  inheritance.    (The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Ver.  8.  Howbeit  then,  when  ye  knew  not  God,  ye  did  service  unto  them  which 
Dy  nature  are  no  gods. — The  three  estates  of  the  Galatian  Church : — I.  Befork 
their  conversion.  1.  Ignorance  of  God.  There  is  a  twofold  knowledge  of  God. 
(1)  Natural  (Acts  xiv.  17 ;  Bom.  i.  20),  but  this  is  (a)  imperfect,  (fc)  weak.  (2) 
Re  waled :  of  the  Father  in  Christ ;  neither  of  which  did  the  Galatians  possess. 


our.  it.]  GALATIANS.  265 

4  Idolatry.  (1)  False  gods  are  set  up  in  two  ways,  (a)  when  that  which  is  not 
God  is  worshipped  as  God,  (b)  when  men  acknowledge  the  true  God  but  do  not 
conceive  of  Him  as  He  will  be  conceived.  (2)  There  is  a  spiritual  idolatry.  What 
a  man  loves  most  is  His  god — wealth,  pleasure,  sin.  (3)  That  the  sin  of  idolatry 
be  rooted  out  there  must  be  (a)  an  illumination  of  the  mind,  (b)  a  renovation  of 
the  heart.  II.  In  their  convebsion.  1.  They  knew  God.  (1)  The  foundation  of 
this  knowledge  :  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  (Heb.  i.  2  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6).  (2)  Its 
properties  (a)  special :  whereby  we  acknowledge  Him  to  be  our  God  in  Christ  through 
faith ;  (b)  distinct,  not  confused  :  His  presence  with  us,  providence  over  us,  will 
concerning  us  ;  life  is  as  (c)  effectual  (1  John  ii.  4  ;  iii.  6).  2.  God  knew  them.  1. 
This  knowledge  is  the  root  of  ours.  We  know  Him  because  He  first  knew  us.  2. 
The  ground  of  all  our  hope  and  comfort  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  Ill  In  their  apostasy, 
wHeh  was — 1.  An  intolerable  sin.  2.  A  voluntary  sin.  3.  A  senseless  sin.  4.  A 
common  sin.  (W.  Perkins.)  Idolatry:  its  commonness: — Many  people  have 
thviir  own  god ;  and  he  is  muoh  what  the  French  mean  when  they  talk  of  le  bon 
Dieu, — very  indulgent,  rather  weak,  near  at  hand  when  we  want  anything,  but  far 
away  out  of  sight  when  we  have  a  mind  to  do  wrong.  Such  a  god  is  as  much  an 
idol  as  if  he  were  an  image  of  wood  or  stone.  (Archdeacon  Hare.)  Idolatry  : 
misrepresentation  of  God: — It  is,  as  it  were,  putting  a  mask  on  the  face  of 
God.  Now  if  we  do  not  make  idols,  still  we  may  misrepresent  God.  We 
often  speak  as  though  God  did  not  rejoice  to  see  us  enjoying  ourselves.  (T.  T. 
Lynch.)  Idolatry  :  its  power : — Idolatry  is  one  of  the  most  unconquerable  of  all 
th«  corrupt  propensities  of  the  human  soul.  Miracles  under  the  new  dispensation 
had  scarcely  ceased,  the  apostolic  fathers  were  scarcely  cold  in  their  graves,  before 
idolatrous  forms  were  superinduced  upon  the  pure  spirituality  of  the  holy  gospel. 
(J.  B.  Walker,  M.A.)  Idolatry  :  its  folly  : — How  senseless  it  is  I  We  should 
think  that  artist  beside  himself  who  would  undertake  to  draw  a  likeness  of  some- 
thing which  he  had  never  seen,  nor  ever  could  see ;  to  paint  a  portrait  of  the  air, 
the  wind,  the  fragrance  of  flowers.  And  God  is  a  Spirit.  To  what  shall  we  liken 
Ham  1  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of  idolatry  : — It  is  a  very  important 
truth  that  the  prevalence  of  idolatry  is  in  itself  a  strong  testimony  for  the  existence 
of  one  supreme  God.  For  we  find  idolatry  in  some  form  amongs*  all  but  the  most 
degraded  and  debased  of  nations,  such  as  are  some  of  the  African  tribes,  and  it  is 
not  certain  that  its  remnants  are  not  traceable  there.  As  Luther  puts  it :  "  All 
idolatry  in  the  world  arises  from  this,  that  people  by  nature  have  had  the  common 
knowledge  that  there  is  a  God,  without  which  idolatry  would  remain  unpractised. 
With  this  knowledge  engrafted  in  mankind,  they  have  (without  God's  Word)  fancied 
all  manner  of  ungodly  opinions  about  God."     (Biblical  Treasury.) 

Ver.  9.  But  now,  after  that  ye  have  known  God. — Knowledge  of  God : — That  is 
not  the  best  and  truest  knowledge  of  God  which  is  wrought  out  by  the  labour  and 
sweat  of  brain,  but  that  which  is  kindled  within  us  by  a  heavenly  warmth  in 
onr  hearts.  As,  in  the  natural  body,  it  is  the  heart  that  sends  up  good  blood  and 
warm  spirits  into  the  head,  whereby  it  is  best  enabled  to  perform  its  several 
functions  ;  so  that  which  enables  us  to  know  and  understand  aright  in  the  things 
of  God.  must  be  a  living  principle  of  holiness  within  us.  (John  Smith.)  God's 
knowledge  of  us  • — I.  Its  basis.  1.  His  omniscience.  2.  His  intimate  connection 
with  us  through  all  the  stages  of  our  life.  (1)  Physically.  (2)  Spiritually :  as  our 
Maker,  Preserver,  Redeemer,  Sanctitier.  II.  Its  wide  embrace.  1.  God  knows 
every  one  of  us  2.  Our  innermost  thoughts.  3.  Our  secret  wants.  4.  Under  all 
disguises  5.  In  all  circumstances.  Conclusion  :  1.  A  warning  to  the  sinner ;  2. 
An  encouragement  to  the  believer.  However  doubtful  may  be  our  estimate  of 
ourselves  or  that  of  others,  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  God's  estimate  of  us  being  the 
right  ono,  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Weak  and  beggarly  elements  : — I.  Weak,  because 
they  have  no  power  to  rescue  man  from  condemnation.  II.  Beggarly,  for  they 
bring  no  rich  endowments  of  spiritual  treasures.  A  passionate  and  striking  ritualism, 
expressing  itself  in  bodily  mortifications  of  the  most  terrible  kind,  had  been  sup- 
planted by  the  simple  spiritual  teaching  of  the  gospel.  For  a  time  the  pure 
morality  and  lofty  sanctions  of  the  new  faith  appealed  not  in  vain  to  their  higher 
instincts,  but  they  soon  began  to  yearn  after  a  creed  which  suited  their  material 
cravings  better,  and  was  more  allied  to  the  systems  they  had  abandoned.  This 
end  they  attained  by  overlaying  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  with  Judaic  observances 
This  new  phase  is  ascribed  to  the  temper  which  their  old  heathen  education  had 
fostered      Ic  was  a  return  to  the  "  weak  and  beggarly  elements  "  which  they  had 


16«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  IT. 

outgrown,  a  renewed  subjection  to  the  "  yoke  of  bondage  "  which  they  had  thrown 
off  in  Christ.  They  had  escaped  from  one  ritualistic  system,  only  to  bow  before 
another.  The  innate  failings  of  a  race  whom  Cassar  (Bell  Gall.  vi.  16)  describes  as 
"excessive  in  its  devotion  to  external  observances "  was  here  reasserting  itself. 
(Bishop  Lightfoot.)  The  use  and  abuse  of  ordinances : — Ordinances  may  be  con- 
sidered  three  ways.  I.  With  Christ.  1.  As  types  and  figures  of  Christ  to  come. 
2.  As  signs  of  grace  of  Divine  institution.  II.  Without  Chbist.  As  mere  customs 
whether  before  or  after  Him.  III.  Against  Christ.  As  meritorious  causes  of 
salvation.  (W.  Perkins.)  The  difficulty  of  not  believing : — I  have  been  thinking 
bow  difficult  it  would  be  for  ns  not  to  be  Christians.  It  is  hard,  we  say,  to  have 
faith ;  but  do  we  realize  what  a  task  a  man  imposes  upon  himself  if  he  attempts 
to  live  without  faith  ?  Is  not  some  faith  one  of  the  first  vital  necessities  of  the 
human  reason  and  heart?  I  wish,  then,  this  morning,  to  invert  a  very  common 
way  of  reasoning  about  religion  among  men.  Instead  of  treating  a  religious  faith 
as  though  it  were  a  good  thing  to  be  added  to  a  man's  moral  capital  in  life,  I  would 
raise  the  question  rather,  whether  a  man  will  have  capital  enough  for  life  left  if 
he  lets  a  Christian  faith  go  from  him  ?    I.  In  order  not  to  have  faith,  one  must 

VACATE  A  CONSIDERABLE  PORTION  OF  HIS    OWN    MENTAL    EXPERIENCE.      1.   There  is   a 

large  part  of  every  man's' self-conciousness  which  is  bound  up  with  faith  in  realities 
beyond  this  present  world  of  sights  and  sounds.  It  would  be  almost  an  impossible 
task  for  us  to  disentangle  all  faith  in  things  Divine  and  eternal  from  the  elements  of 
our  self-consciousness.  Our  reasons  have  their  roots  in  the  Divine.  If  these 
primal  beliefs  in  God  and  immortality  were  simply  results  of  argument,  we  might 
reason  ourselves  out  of  them :  but  they  are  elements,  rather,  of  our  rational  and 
conscious  life,  so  that  we  cannot  separate  them  wholly  from  ourselves.  Atheists, 
after  all,  can  only  make  believe  not  to  believe.  2.  There  is  another  tremendously 
present  thing  which  would  have  to  be  put  away  from  us  in  order  that  we  might  be 
able  to  live  without  faith,  and  that  is  the  Divine  imperative  of  conscience.  Some- 
thing higher  and  better  than  we  lays  hold  of  us  in  conscience.  There  are  several 
other  vital  elements  which  must  be  sacrificed  in  the  vain  effort  to  live  without 
faith.  3.  One  will  have  to  leave  out  some  of  the  most  marked  experiences  of  his 
life.  The  simple  fact  is,  that  the  invisible  powers  are  constantly  laying  hold  of 
the  life  of  man  in  the  world.  It  would  be  an  impossible  task  for  us  to  account 
wholly  for  our  own  lives  simply  and  solely  upon  natural  causes.  Super-sensible 
influences  do  mingle  and  blend  with  the  sensible ;  providences  are  realities  of 
human  experience.  4.  There  is  another  side  of  our  experience,  which  I  will  just 
mention,  from  which  one  must  cut  himself  loose,  if  he  would  have  any  success  in 
not  belonging  to  a  Christian  world  ;  he  must  break  off  his  fellowship  with  the  truest 
and  best  life  of  humanity.  The  history  of  man  is  not  merely,  nor  chiefly,  political ; 
it  is  religious.  The  history  of  the  kingdom  of  redemption  is  the  paramount  part 
of  human  history.  Other  history,  what  we  call  profane  history,  is  the  form  and 
shaping  of  events  only ;  the  substance  of  history  is  its  spiritual  progress ;  the 
issue  of  it,  and  the  main  thing  in  it  all  along,  is  redemption.  If,  then, 
one  wants  not  to  be  a  Christian  believer,  a  citizen  of  a  world  becoming 
Christian,  he  will  have  to  begin  by  denying  himself  a  goodly  fellowship. 
II.  Let  us  consider  further  how  much  one  will  have  to  believe  in  ordeb  not 
to  be  a  Christian,  in  relation  to  some  particulars  of  the  Christian  life.  1. 
One  vital  element  of  the  Christian  life  is  trust  in  the  goodness  of  the  heavenly 
Father.  We  do  not  conceal  from  ourselves,  we  cannot,  that  this  is  a  trust 
written  often  across  the  face  of  events  in  our  lives  which  seem  to  contradict  it. 
As  Christians  we  believe  in  the  sunny  side,  that  is,  in  the  Divine  side,  of  every- 
thing. We  say  it  is  only  our  present  position  in  the  shadow,  or  under  some  cloud, 
which  prevents  our  seeing  the  bright  and  eternal  side  of  it.  Wait,  and  we  shall 
see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  We  were  sailing  one  afternoon  with  the  broken 
coast  of  Maine  in  the  distance  projecting  upon  our  horizon.  A  black  thunder- 
cloud gathered  in  shore  over  the  hill-tops.  We  could  see  the  play  of  the  lightnings, 
and  the  waters  breaking  from  the  cloud.  That  was  all  that  the  villagers  and  the 
fishermen  along  the  shore  could  have  seen.  But  we,  at  our  distance,  beheld  also 
the  untroubled  sun  in  the  clear  sky  above;  its  beams  struck  the  edges  of  that  heavy 
mass  of  vapours,  and  above  the  darkness  and  the  lightnings  we  could  see  the  upper 
side  of  the  cloud  turn  to  gold ;  and,  even  while  it  was  blackness  and  fear  to  those  below, 
its  pinnacles  and  towers  were  shining  before  our  eyes  like  the  city  of  God  descending 
from  heaven.  Thus  Christian  faith  beholds  also  the  heavenly  side  of  this  world's 
etorm  and  darkness.    2.  Take  as  another  instance  the  Christian  belief  in  our  per- 


our.  w.]  OALATIANS.  167 

sonal  sinfulness  and  need  of  forgiveness.  How  many  thoughts  of  the  heart  must 
one  forget  not  to  believe  that  ?  I  pass  to  two  other  examples.  3.  Men  say  it  is 
hard  to  believe  in  an  atonement.  Perhaps  it  may  be  in  some  of  onr  human 
philosophies  of  God's  method  of  reconciling  the  world  ;  but  not  to  believe  in  Jesus' 
word  that  the  Son  of  man  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sin,  would  require  us  to 
believe  some  things  about  God  which  it  would  be  very  hard  for  us  to  hold  of  the 
Creator  of  our  hearts.  Even  a  human  government  would  be  incomplete  unless,  in 
some  hand,  there  should  be  lodged  some  power  of  pardon.  Not  to  believe  in  the 
authority  of  God  Himself  over  the  execution  of  His  own  law  is  to  believe  that 
God's  government  is  not  so  perfect  as  man's.  Or,  to  take  the  subject  up  to  a  higher 
plane,  where  I  much  prefer  to  study  it,  our  human  love  can  sometimes  find  for 
itself  a  way  of  forgiveness  which  it  will  follow  without  dimming  its  own  purity,  or 
losing  its  own  self-respect,  though  it  be  for  it  a  way  of  tears.  To  believe,  then, 
that  the  God  of  love  can  find  no  way  of  atonement  for  sin,  though  it  be  the 
way  of  the  Gross,  is  to  believe  that  man's  heart  is  diviner  than  God's.  4.  The 
other  remaining  point  which  I  will  mention  is  the  Christian  belief  in  the  last 
judgment.  Surely  everything  in  this  world  would  be  left  at  loose  ends,  and  all 
our  instincts  of  justice,  righteousness,  and  love  thrown  into  confusion,  if  we  should 
attempt  to  wrench  the  substance  of  this  Christian  faith  in  the  judgment  to  come 
from  our  experience  of  this  present  life.  Not  to  believe  in  it  requires  a  great  task 
of  reason  and  conscience ;  for  then  one  must  believe  that  there  is  no  moral  order, 
as  there  is  plainly  a  natural  order  of  things  ;  one  must  then  believe  that  the  one 
constant  undertone  of  justice  in  man's  consciousness  is  a  false  note  of  life  ;  that 
the  first  laws  of  things  are  but  principles  of  eternal  discord ;  that  man's  whole 
moral  life  and  history,  in  short,  is  meaningless  and  worthless.  You  say  it  is  a 
terrible  thing  to  believe  in  the  judgment  to  come ;  yes,  but  it  is  a  more  fearful 
thing  not  to  believe  in  it.  (Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  How  a  faithful  minister  seeks 
to  recover  the  erring : — He  appeals — I.  To  the  oonscience — reminding  them  of  the 
gracious  change  God  had  effected  in  them  (vers.  8,  9).  H.  To  the  understanding — 
remanding  the  reason  of  their  instability — exhibiting  its  folly  (vers.  9-11).  HI.  To 
the  heart — by  affectionate  entreaty — tender  and  happy  reminiscences  (vers.  12-15). 
IV.  To  their  regard  for  the  truth — which  he  faithfully  preaches — others  have 
perverted — should  be  zealously  maintained  (vers.  16-18).  V.  To  his  own  sincerity — 
he  is  anxious  for  their  happiness — to  have  the  assurance  of  it.  (J.  Lyth.)  The 
folly  of  returning  to  the  world : — I.  It  is  to  act  in  opposition  to  knowledge.  II.  To 
abuse  the  grace  of  God.  III.  To  seek  happiness  in  that  we  have  already  proved 
unsatisfactory.    IV.  To  subject  ourselves  to  a  new  bondage.    (Ibid.) 

Ver  10.  To  observe  days  and  months — The  observance  of  days  and  seasons : — I. 
Natubal.  When  days  are  observed  according  to  the  course  of  the  sun  and  moon. 
Thus  night  follows  day,  and  every  year  hath  four  seasons.  II.  Civil.  When  set 
times  are  observed  in  husbandry,  for  household  affairs,  for  matters  of  the  common- 
wealth,  and  for  business.  HI.  Ecclesiastical.  When  set  days  are  observed  for 
order's  sake,  as  days  of  thanksgiving,  and  days  of  humiliation.  IV.  Superstitious. 
1.  Jewish :  when  made  compulsory  on  the  conscience.  2.  Heathen :  when  good  and 
bad  success  are  dependent  on  them.  From  this  last  the  Sabbath  is  excluded  be- 
cause (1)  it  is  the  Lord's  day,  and  (2)  a  moral  commandment.  Apply  against — 1. 
Romish  festivals.  2.  Lucky  or  unlucky  periods.  (W.  Perkins.)  St.  Paul  is  not 
here  dealing  with  the  Sabbath : — The  apostle  is  dealing  with  some  of  the  difficulties 
which  had  arisen  out  of  their  former  heathenism.  The  Galatian  had  worshipped 
•«  them  which  by  nature  were  no  gods,"  the  powers  of  nature  and  celestial  objects, 
which  indicate  and  influence  the  changes  of  seasons,  months,  and  days,  and  were 
returning  to  these  "  weak  and  beggarly  elements."  They  were  in  danger  not  only 
of  taking  up  with  the  Judaistic  doctrine  of  justification  by  works,  but  also  of 
relapsing  into  the  heathen  custom  of  calculating  lucky  and  unlucky  days  and 
auspicious  seasons  by  methods  of  astrology.  Against  this  the  apostle  enters  his  pro- 
test. There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  any  idea  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  in  his 
mind.  (W.  Spiers,  M.A.)  Christian  festivals  not  prohibited : — If  it  be  objected 
that  we  are  accustomed  to  observe  certain  days — as,  e.g.,  the  Lord's  Day,  the 
Preparation,  the  Passover,  or  Pentecost,  I  have  to  answer  that,  to  the  perfect 
Christian — who  is  ever  in  his  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds,  serving  Christ — all  his  days 
are  the  Lord's,  and  he  is  always  keeping  the  Lord's  Day.  He,  also,  who  is  unceas- 
ingly preparing  himself  for  the  true  life,  such  an  one  is  always  keeping  the 
Preparation  day.  Again,  he  who  considers  that  "  Christ  our  Passover  was  sacrificed 


S69  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  it. 

for  us,"  and  that  it  is  of  his  duty  to  keep  the  feast  by  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the 
Word,  never  ceases  to  keep  the  Paschal  feast.  And,  finally,  he  who  can  truly  say  : 
"  We  are  risen  with  Christ,"  and  "  He  hath  exalted  as,  and  made  us  sit  with  Him 
in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  "  is  always  living  in  the  season  of  Pentecost.  But 
the  majority  of  believers  are  not  of  this  advanced  class ;  but  from  being  cither 
unable  or  unwilling  to  keep  every  day  in  this  manner,  they  require  some  sensible 
memorial  to  prevent  spiritual  things  from  passing  altogether  from  their  minds. 
(Origen.)  Superstitions  respecting  days  : — The  superstitious  belief  in  good  and 
evil  days  has  prevailed  in  all  ages  and  countries.  No  season  of  the  year,  no  month, 
no  week,  has  been  free  from  them.  From  Egypt  unlucky  days  have  received  the 
name  of  Egyptian  days.  The  Romans  had  their  dies  atri,  which  were  pointed  out 
on  the  calendar  with  a  black  character  denoting  a  day  of  bad  luck,  and  their  dies 
albi,  pointed  out  with  a  white  character  denoting  good  luck.  In  commenting  on  the 
text  Augustine  says :  "  Those  wbom  the  apostle  blames  are  those  who  say :  "  I  will 
not  set  forward  on  my  journey  because  it  is  the  next  day  after  such  a  time,  or  be- 
cause the  moon  is  so ;  or  I'll  set  forward  that  I  may  have  luck,  because  such  is  just 
now  the  position  of  the  stars.  I  will  not  traffic  this  month  because  a  star  presides, 
or  I  will  because  it  does."  Lodge  (1596)  tells  us  of  those  "  who  would  not  eat  their 
dinner  before  they  have  lookt  in  their  almanacke."  Aubrey,  the  antiquarian, 
later  on,  in  dealing  with  the  same  subject,  says  :  "  I  shall  take  particular  notice  here 
of  November  3rd,  both  because  'tis  my  own  birthday,  and  for  the  remarkable  acci- 
dents that  have  happened  thereupon.  Constantius,  son  of  Constantino  the  Great, 
died  on  this  day,  Exveteri  calendaris  penes  me.  Thomas  Montacute,  Earl  of  Salis- 
bury, that  famous  commander  under  Henries  IV.,  V.,  and  VI.,  died  this  day  from 
a  cannon  shot  received  at  Orleans.  So  also  did  Cardinal  Borrhomes,  and  Sir 
John  Perot,  Lord  deputy  of  Ireland,  son  to  Henry  VHL,  and  extremely  like  him  ; 
grief  of  the  fatality  of  the  day  killed  him.  Stow  in  his  annals  says,  November  3rd, 
1099,  the  sea  broke  in  on  Scotland  and  England,  drowning  divers  towns,  and  much 
people  and  cattle,  submerging  the  lands  once  belonging  to  Earl  Godwin  in  Kent, 
now  called  Godwin  Sands.  My  father  died  in  1643,  and  within  a  year  and  a  half 
of  his  decease  such  changes  came  upon  my  marsh  lands  in  Kent  by  the  influence  of 
the  sea  that  it  was  never  worth  one  farthing  to  me ;  so  that  I  often  think  this  day 
being  my  birthday  hath  the  same  influence  upon  me  that  it  had  five  hundred  and 
eighty  years  since  upon  Earl  Godwin  and  others.  The  Parliament  bo  fatal  to 
Rome's  concerns  here  in  Henry  VIII.'s  time  began  on  November  3rd.  The  3rd  of 
November,  1640,  began  that  Parliament  so  direfully  fatal  to  England  and  its 
King."  After  the  Reformation  the  unlucky  day  seems  to  have  been  Friday ;  fisher- 
men and  sailors  would  not  go  forth  on  that  day,  or  servants  take  a  place.  No  one 
on  that  day  would  get  married,  or  begin  a  journey,  or  open  a  house  of  business  on 
that  day.  A  similar  superstition  prevails  among  the  Brahmins.  In  Japan  a  par- 
ticular table  is  employed  by  travellers,  which,  it  is  said,  has  been  observed  to  hold 
true  by  a  continued  experience  of  many  ages,  and  wherein  are  set  down  all  the 
unfortunate  days  of  every  month.  A  copy  of  this  table  is  printed  in  all  their  road 
books.  The  Siamese  observe  the  feasts  of  the  new  and  full  moon,  and  think  the 
days  that  from  the  change  precede  the  full  are  more  fortunate  than  those  that 
follow  it.  Their  almanacks  are  marked  with  lucky  and  unlucky  days.  Neither  prince 
nor  any  one  who  has  means  of  applying  to  the  astrologers  will  undertake  anything 
without  consulting  them  The  Mexicans  predicted  the  good  or  bad  fortunes  of 
infants  from  the  sign  under  which  they  were  born,  and  the  happiness  or  misfortune 
of  marriages,  the  success  of  wars ;  and  of  nearly  everything  from  the  day  on  which 
they  were  undertaken.  Nor  are  these  notions  confined  to  heathen  countries.  The 
newspapers  frequently  bring  to  light  the  credulity  of  Englishmen.  "  Such  an  ex- 
travagant cast  of  mind,"  truly  says  The  Spectator,  "  engages  multitudes  of  people 
not  only  in  needless  terrors  but  in  supernumerary  duties,  and  arises  from  that  fear 
and  ignorance  which  are  natural  to  the  soul  of  man.  Wise  men  concern  themselves 
to  retrench  the  evils  of  life  by  the  reasonings  of  philosophy ;  fools  seek  to  multiply 
them  by  the  sentiments  of  superstition.  God's  providence  overrules  all  things. 
We  should  do  our  part  faithfully,  and  leave  the  event  with  Him."  The  advantages 
of  a  fixed  Sabbath: — There  are  two  distinct  grounds  on  which  works  in  religion  axe 
appraised  at  a  low  or  rather  worthless  valuation  in  the  Bible,  and  either  rejected  or 
denounced  accordingly.  The  first  is  when  they  are  offered  as  the  price  of  our  jus- 
tification in  the  sight  of  God ;  as  an  equivalent  upon  which  the  Lawgiver  is  chal- 
lenged for  the  honour  and  the  regard  that  are  due  to  righteousness  ;  then  does  the 
Bible  utte^.y  hold  at  nought  the  most  laborious,  and,  perhaps,  when  looked  to  in 


otap.  it.]  GALATIANS.  269 

another  view,  the  most  holy  and  estimable  of  all  human  performances.  The  other 
ground  on  which  works  are  oomputed  at  a  low  valuation  in  the  Bible,  is  when, 
either  in  themselves  they  are  devoid  of  true  moral  excellence,  or  serve  not  in  their 
tendencies  to  refine  and  to  strengthen  the  principles  of  our  moral  nature.  But  let 
a  good  work  be  delivered  of  both  these  ingredients — let  there  be  neither  an  arrogated 
merit  nor  an  inherent  meanness  in  it— free  of  all  pettiness  and  abject  timidity 
— And  we  say  of  works  like  unto  this,  that,  so  far  from  the  gospel  lifting  a  voice  of 
hostility  or  casting  a  look  of  discountenance  towards  them,  the  very  aim  of  the 
gospel  is  to  raise  and  to  multiply  them  over  the  face  of  a  new  moral  creation.  Now, 
in  the  text  there  is  a  certain  scrupulous  observation  referred  to  by  the  apostle,  which 
his  converts  adhered  to  as  a  duty,  but  which  he  charges  them  with  as  if  it  were  a 
delinquency.  They  observed  days  and  months  and  times  and  years,  annexing  a 
religious  importance  to  the  stated  acts  and  exercises  of  stated  periods ;  and  we  have 
no  doubt,  labouring  under  distress  of  conscience,  at  any  misgiving  from  the  pre- 
scribed and  wonted  regularity.  It  is  likely  enough,  that  both  of  those  ingredients 
which  go  to  vilify  a  work,  and  to  render  it  null  and  worthless,  entered  into  this 
outward  formality  of  the  Galatians — that  it  gave  them  a  feeling  of  security  as  to 
their  meritorious  acceptance  with  God,  which  nought  but  the  Bedeemer's  merits 
ought  to  inspire ;  and  that  it  further  degraded  the  character  of  man,  by  reducii.g 
morality  to  the  level  of  mechanism,  and  substituting  for  the  obedience  of  a  rightly 
strung  and  rightly  actuated  heart,  an  obedience  like  that  of  a  galley-slave  who  plies 
at  his  unvaried  oar,  and  moves  in  the  one  and  unvaried  circuit  that  is  assigned  to 
him.  But  there  is  another  side  to  this  question,  which  must  not  be  left  out  of  sight; 
for,  though  it  be  true  that  man  was  not  made  for  the  Sabbath,  yet  let  it  never  be 
forgotten  that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man.  Man  was  not  made  to  move  in  a 
precise  orbit  of  times  and  seasons ;  yet  times  and  seasons  may  be  arranged,  so  as 
to  subserve  his  use,  and  be  the  ministers  of  good  both  to  his  natural  and  moral 
economy.  Were  the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  a  mere  servitude  of  the  body,  which 
left  the  heart  no  better  than  before,  it  would  be  a  frivolous  ceremonial  and  ought  to 
be  exploded.  But  if  it  be  true  that  he  who  sanctifies  the  Sabbath  sanctifies  his  own 
bouI,  then  does  the  Sabbath  assume  a  spiritual  importance,  because  an  expedient  of 
spiritual  cultivation.  It  is  not  that  the  virtue  of  man  consists  in  these  things,  but 
that  these  things  are  devices  of  best  and  surest  efficacy  for  upholding  the  virtue  of 
man.  If  it  be  true  of  man,  that  he  can  attain  a  loftier  communion  with  his  God, 
at  those  hours  when  the  din  and  urgency  of  the  world  are  away  from  him ;  and  thai 
a  season  of  reading,  and  contemplation,  and  prayer  acts  as  a  restorative  to  tb.6 
embers  of  his  decaying  sacredness ;  and  that  the  voice  of  *  minister,  when  prompted 
by  the  Spirit  from  on  high,  and  aided  by  the  sympathies  of  all  who  are  around  him, 
can  often  send  the  elevation  of  heaven  into  his  soul ;  and  that  it  is  on  those  even- 
ings  of  deep  and  lengthened  tranquility  which  the  footstep  of  intruding  companion- 
ship does  not  violate,  when  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord  can  descend 
more  abundantly  on  the  hearts  of  His  children,  and  when  the  calm  and  the  unction 
of  a  holy  influence  may  be  most  felt  in  His  dwelling-place — then  Sabbath,  which, 
from  one  end  to  the  other  of  it,  teems  with  these  very  opportunities,  instead  of 
ranking  with  the  holidays  of  idle  superstition,  will  be  dear  as  piety  itself  to  every 
enlightened  Christian ;  and  to  it,  in  the  most  emphatic  sense  of  the  term,  will  he 
award  the  obeisance  of  a  Divine  and  spiritual  festival.  And  on  this  principle,  too, 
may  the  Sabbath  be  rescued  from  that  contempt  which  the  text,  in  denouncing  the 
observation  of  days  and  of  times,  would  appear  to  cast  on  it.  It  is  true,  that  it  is  a 
periodic  festival,  and  that  man  was  not  made  for  periods.  But  this  does  not 
hinder  that  periods  maybe  made  for  man.  Does  sacredness  so  keep  at  all  times  its 
undisturbed  place  and  pre-eminence,  amid  the  turmoil  of  those  many  secularities 
by  which  you  are  surrounded,  that  any  one  set  and  specific  time  is  not  needed,  on 
which,  at  a  distance  from  the  besetting  world,  you  might  relume  that  lamp  of 
heaven  in  the  soul  which  was  ready  to  expire  ?  Or  if  the  time  were  left  to  your 
own  discretion,  are  such  your  longings  after  a  spiritual  atmosphere,  that  you  would 
be  ever  sure  to  make  your  escape  to  it,  when  like  to  be  lulled  or  overborne  in  an 
atmosphere  of  earthliness  ?  It  is  true  you  may  lift  up  your  hearts  to  God  when 
you  please — and  even  amid  the  thickening  occupations  of  the  market  and  the 
counting-house,  is  it  possible  that  many  a  secret  aspiration  may  arise  to  Him.  But 
how  often  is  it  that  you  would  so  please ;  and  tell  us,  on  your  experience  of  the  past 
what,  if  all  days  were  alike,  would  be  the  fervour  or  the  frequency  of  such  aspi- 
rations ?  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  will  be  required ;  and  on  this  prin- 
ciple your  Sabbaths,  these  precious  gifts  of  God  to  man,  will  have  to  be  accounted 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  tf 

for.  And  oh,  forget  not,  that  if  these  have  been  nauseated  in  time,  heaven,  if 
yon  e'er  were  admitted  there,  would  be  nauseated  through  all  eternity.  Sabbath  is 
that  station  on  the  territory  of  human  life,  from  which  we  can  descry  with  xnoBt 
advantage  and  delight  the  beauties  of  the  promised  land ;  and  it  is  there,  as  if  at  the 
gate  of  the  upper  sanctuary,  where  we  can  command  one  of  the  nearest  approaches 
whereof  our  nature  is  capable,  to  the  contemplations  and  the  doings  of  the  saints 
in  blessedness.     (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  I  am  afraid  of  yon. — A  minister's  fears. — I.  What  abb  those  ribs? 

I.  Lest  his  word  should  not  issue  in  conversions.  2.  Lest  the  converted  members 
of  his  flock  should  not  adorn  their  profession.  3.  Lest  bis  converts  should  apostatise. 

II.  What  is  his  duty  in  the  presence  or  these  fears?  1.  To  labour  on  in 
spite  of  them.  (1)  They  may  be  groundless,  (2)  or  if  only  too  well  grounded,  he  is 
not  responsible.  2.  Not  to  allow  them  to  generate  despair.  The  worst  sinner  may 
yet  be  converted  and  the  worst  backslider  reclaimed.  3.  To  do  all  he  can,  with 
God's  help,  to  prevent  failure.  III.  What  are  his  encouragements  in  the  face 
of  these  fears  ?  1.  That  he  has  been  working  for  God's  glory.  2.  That  God  is 
responsible  for  results.  3.  That  in  spite  of  appearances  to  the  contrary  God's  word 
will  not  return  unto  Him  void.  Conclusion :  How  sad  to  be  the  subject  of  these  fears. 
1.  Unconverted.  2.  Inconsistent.  3.  Backsliding.  At  one  point  in  Dr.  Bang's 
ministry  he  became  greatly  discouraged,  and  attempted  to  leave  his  work.  A 
significant  dream  relieved  him.  He  thought  he  was  working  with  a  pickaxe,  on  the 
top  of  a  basaltic  rock.  His  muscular  arm  brought  down  stroke  after  stroke  for 
hours,  but  the  rock  was  hardly  indented.  He  said  to  himself  at  last,  "It  is  useless ; 
I  will  pick  no  more."  Suddenly  a  stranger  of  dignified  mien  stood  by  his  side,  and 
said,  "  You  will  pick  no  more  ? "  **  No."  "  Were  yon  not  set  to  do  this  task? " 
"Yes."  "  Why  then  abandon  it?"  "My  work  is  in  vain;  I  make  no  impression." 
Solemnly  the  stranger  replied,  "  What  is  that  to  yon  ?  Your  duty  is  to  pick, 
whether  the  rock  yields  or  not.  Your  work  is  in  your  own  hands ;  the  result  is  not. 
Work  on."  He  resumed  his  task.  The  first  blow  was  given  with  almost  super- 
human force,  and  the  rook  flew  into  a  thousand  pieces.  He  awoke,  returned  to  his 
work,  and  a  great  revival  followed.  (A.  Stevens,  LL.D.)  Pain  of  fruitless 
labour : — Dr.  Talmage  says,  "  I  remember  visiting  a  military  prison  where  they 
punish  men  by  making  them  carry  cannon-balls  from  one  end  of  the  yard  to  the 
other,  and  the  sergeant  who  accompanied  me  said :  *  When  we  made  the  men  carry 
the  balls  from  this  end  of  the  yard  to  the  other  to  make  a  pyramid  at  the  other 
end  there  was  a  kind  of  amusement  in  it,  because  they  were  building  up  this 
pyramid ;  and  so  we  made  an  alteration,  and  the  man  has  to  carry  the  ball  from 
this  end  of  the  yard  to  the  other  and  back  again,  and  his  toil  seems  to  be  so  alto- 
gether fruitless,  that  it  becomes  a  double  punishment  to  him.' "  Even  so  it  is  a 
source  of  bitter  pain  to  an  earnest  minister  to  feel  that  his  laborious  efforts  for  the 
good  of  his  hearers  are  after  all  in  vain. 

Yer.  12.  Brethren,  X  beseech  you,  be  as  I  am. — The  call  to  Christian  liberty  .•— 
I.  The  call  is  based  on  personal  example.  "  I  am."  Paul,  an  exemplification  of 
Christian  liberty.  He  could  afford  to  contrast  himself  with  the  Jndaisers  in  point 
of  piety,  labour,  and  Divine  blessing  on  his  work.  Christian  liberty  stood  approved 
of  God  in  his  person  and  ministry.  There  was  no  risk  to  run,  he  himself  being 
witness,  in  this  glorious  liberty.  A  grand  thing  when  a  teacher  can  make  such  an 
appeal  on  the  ground  of  his  own  character.  H.  The  call  is  founded  on  self- 
abnegation.  Paul  renounced  all  his  Jewish  rights  and  privileges,  and  became  "  as 
without  law  to  them  that  were  without  law,"  that  he  might  liberate  the  Gentiles 
and  keep  them  free.  "  Will  you  abandon  me,  when  I  have  abandoned  all  for  you  ?  " 
The  teacher  must  stoop  to  conquer,  and  place  himself  in  the  position  of  the  taught. 

III.  The  call  is  based  on  the  past  relationship  or  the  two.  "Ye  have  not 
injured  me  at  all ;  yon  never  disobeyed  me ;  don't  do  so  now."  Happy  the  teacher 
who  has  such  a  ground  of  appeal.  IV.  The  call  is  based  on  its  own  merits. 
There  was  no  personal  ground  of  complaint.  Any  grief  the  apostle  might  have 
had  for  the  wreck  of  his  own  work  was  altogether  subordinate  to  the  thought  of 
spiritual  disaster.  In  the  last  resort  every  appeal  must  rest  here.  Other  grounds 
are  helpful,  bnt  gospel  freedom  must  win  its  way  on  its  own  merits.  The  spirit 
of  liberty  is  not  merely  a  jealousy  of  our  own  particular  rights,  but  a  respect  for 
the  rights  of  others,  and  an  unwillingness  that  any  man,  whether  high  or  low, 
should  be  trampled  under  foot.      (Channing.)        Liberty  is  the  soul's  right  to 


CTAP.  it.]  GALATIANS.  871 

breathe,  and  when  it  cannot  take  a  long  breath,  laws  are  girded  too  tight.  Without 
liberty  man  is  in  a  syncope.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  A  viinister's  appeal  to  his 
people : — What  motives,  what  insinuations,  what  reasons,  what  wise  pre-occupa- 
tions  and  preventions,  what  art,  what  humility,  what  love  is  here !  •*  Brethren,  I 
beseech  you,"  &c.  We  have  (1)  a  loving  compellation — "  Brethren."  2.  A  sub- 
missive address  by  way  of  comprecation — "  I  beseech  you."  3.  A  request  most 
reasonable — "  Be  you  as  I  am ;  for  I  am  as  ye  are."  4.  A  wise  and  prudent  pre- 
occupation or  prevention,  which  removes  all  obstructions,  and  forestalls  those 
jealousies,  those  surmises  and  groundless  suspicions,  which  are  the  bane  of  charity, 
and  the  greatest  enemies  to  peace — "  Ye  have  not  injured  me  at  all."  Of  these  the 
request  is  the  main.  We  shall  at  this  time  speak  only  of  the  first  part,  that 
adducing,  persuading,  powerful  name  of  "brethren."  I.  Nature  herself  hath 
made  all  men  brethren.  "  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  Hath  not  one  God 
created  us  ? "  (Mai.  ii.  10).  There  is  great  difference  indeed  in  other  respects. 
Some  are  high,  others  low ;  some  fair,  others  foul ;  some  learned,  others  unlearned ; 
some  rich,  others  poor.  But  in  respect  of  original  and  extraction  there  is  no 
difference  at  all :  we  are  all  branches  of  the  same  root,  all  hewn  out  of  one  rock, 
all  digged  out  of  one  pit.  1.  And  therefore,  to  make  some  use  of  that  which  we 
have  learnt  concerning  our  brotherhood  by  nature,  this  may  serve,  in  the  first  place, 
to  condemn  all  those  who  look  upon  men  under  other  consideration  than  as  men,  or 
view  them  in  any  other  shape  than  that  of  brethren.  And  the  very  name  of  "man" 
and  of  "brother"  should  be  an  amulet  for  all  mankind  against  the  venom  of 
iniquity  and  injustice.  2.  Therefore,  in  the  second  place,  by  this  light  of  nature 
we  may  condemn  ourselves  when  any  bitterness  towards  our  brother  riseth  in  our 
hearts  and  allay  or  rather  root  it  out  with  this  consideration,  that  it  is  inhuman 
and  most  unnatural ;  that  we  cannot  nourish  it  in  our  breasts,  and  not  fall  from 
our  creation,  and  leave  off  to  be  men.  II.  And  further  we  carry  not  this  con- 
sideration, but  pass  now  to  view  the  Galatians  as  brethren  in  that  other  capacity, 
as  they  were  Christians,  professing  the  same  faith  :  which  our  apostle  in  this 
place  might  more  particularly  and  especially  mean.  There  is  such  a  relation,  such 
a  brotherhood,  betwixt  all  those  who  profess  the  same  faith,  that  neither  error,  nor 
sin,  nor  injury  can  break  and  dissolve  it.  For  if  any  or  all  of  these  had  been  of 
force  enough  to  do  it,  then  certainly  our  apostle  would  never  have  been  so  free  as  to 
have  called  the  Galatians  "  brethren."  1.  And,  first,  to  error :  though  it  have  a 
foul  aspect,  and  bear  a  distasteful  and  loathed  name,  yet  it  carrieth  no  such 
monstrosity,  no  such  terror  with  it,  as  to  flight  brethren  so  far  asunder  as  not  to 
behold  one  another  in  that  relation,  not  •*  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
bond  of  peace  "  (Eph.  iv.  3).  2.  But,  in  the  next  place,  if  error  cannot  break  and 
dissolve  this  relation  of  brotherhood  which  is  amongst  Christians,  being  of  itself 
venial  and  easy  to  be  pardoned,  especially  of  those  who  are  subject  to  error  them- 
selves ;  yet  sin  hath  a  foul  aspect,  and  is  of  the  most  ugly  and  deformed  appearance 
of  anything  in  the  world.  We  should  never  ask  this  question,  if  we  would  dis- 
tinguish (which  is  easy  to  be  done)  between  the  nature  of  our  brother  and  hi3  fault ; 
between  that  which  he  received  from  God,  and  that  evil  affection  [which]  he  hath 
from  himself ;  between  that  which  is  from  heaven,  heavenly,  and  that  which  is 
from  the  earth,  nay,  from  the  lowest  pit  of  hell ;  if  we  would  consider  him  in  his 
rational  nature,  the  image  of  God ;  and  in  that  other  capacity,  as  he  is  one  for 
whom  Christ  died,  and  so  capable  of  eternal  life  ;  and  that  though  he  seemed  dead, 
yet  his  life  may  nevertheless  be  "  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  "  (Col.  hi.  3).  For 
why  judgest  thou  thy  brother?  (Matt.  vii.  1-3).  "  Judgment  is  the  Lord's  "  (Deut. 
i.  17),  who  seeth  "  things  that  are  not  as  if  they  were  "  (Rom.  iv.  17).  Look  not 
upon  thy  brethren  as  grasshoppers,  and  upon  thyself  as  a  strong  and  perfect  man 
in  Christ ;  as  if  thou  wert  spiritual,  heavenly,  impeccable,  and  as  far  removed  from 
sin  as  God  Himself.  But  rather,  as  St.  Paul  was  made  a  Jew  to  the  Jew  (1  Cor. 
ix.  20),  so  be  thou  as  a  sick  man  ministering  to  the  sick,  handling  another  with 
the  same  compassion  thou  wouldst  have  extended  to  thyself,  if  thou  thyself 
Bhouldst  be  in  his  case.  If  thou  despise  and  reproach  him,  I  am  sure  thou  art  iu 
a  far  worse.  3.  So,  then,  neither  error  nor  sin  can  untie  this  knot,  can  dissolve 
and  break  this  relation  of  brethren.  I  named  a  third,  but  I  am  well-near  ashamed 
to  name  it  again,  or  bring  it  in  competition  with  error  or  sin  ;  because  an  offence 
against  God  should  more  provoke  us  than  any  injury  done  to  ourselves :  which  our 
apsstle  here  sets  so  light  by,  that  although  the  Galatians  had  even  questioned  his 
apoetleship,  and  preferred  Peter  and  James  and  John  before  him,  yet  he  passeth  it 
by  m  not  worth  the  taking  notice  of ;  like  Socrates,  who,  being  overcome  in  judg- 


J72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I?. 

ment,  professed  he  had  no  reason  to  be  angry  with  his  enemies,  unless  it  were  tat 
this,  that  they  conceived  and  believed  they  had  hurt  him.  And  here  St.  Paul  saith, 
"  Ye  have  not  hurt  me  at  all."  And  indeed  no  injury  can  be  done  by  a  brother  to 
a  brother.  For  the  injury  is  properly  done  to  God,  who  made  them  brethren  and 
fellow-servants,  and  who  reserves  all  power  of  revenge  unto  Himself,  who  is  their 
common  Master  and  the  God  of  revenge.  But  we  shall  no  further  prosecute  this, 
because  it  will  fall  in  with  our  last  part.  We  will  rather,  having,  as  ye  have  read, 
secured  and  fortified  the  brethren,  walk  about  yet  a  while  longer,  and  tell  the 
towers  and  bulwarks  which  the  God  of  love  hath  raised  and  set  up  to  uphold  them. 
And  they  are— 1.  Pleasure,  excessive  pleasure.  2.  Profit,  great  profit.  3.  Neces- 
sity, extreme  necessity.  All  these  serve  to  maintain  and  uphold  this  brotherhood. 
For  brotherly  love  is — 1.  Pleasant  and  delightful.  2.  Profitable  and  advantageous. 
3.  So  necessary,  that  it  had  been  better  for  as  never  to  have  been  than  not  to  love 
the  brethren.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Live  above  injuries: — When  an  incon- 
siderate fellow  had  stricken  Cato  in  the  path,  and  afterwards  cried  him  mercy, 
he  replied,  "  I  remember  not  that  thou  didst  strike  me."  One  having  made  a  long 
and  idle  discourse  before  Aristotle  concluded  it  thus :  "  I  doubt  I  have  been  too 
tedious  to  you,  sir,  with  my  many  words."  "Indeed,"  said  Aristotle,  "you  have  not 
been  tedious  to  me,  for  I  gave  no  heed  to  anything  you  said."  Momus  in  Luoian 
tells  Jupiter,  "  It  is  in  thy  power  whether  any  one  shall  vex  or  wrong  thee."  St 
Paul  here  shakes  all  the  affronts  offered  to  him  with  as  much  ease  as  he  did  the 
viper.  (Trapp.)  Forget  injuries: — It  was  a  noble  testimony  borne  to  Henry  VL 
that  "  he  never  forgot  anything  but  injuries; "  and  even  still  nobler  to  Cranmer,  - 
"  To  get  a  favour,  do  him  wrong." 

The  noblest  worship  of  the  Power  above 

Is  to  extol  and  imitate  His  love ; 

Not  to  forgive  our  enemies  alone, 

But  use  our  bounty  that  they  may  be  won.    (Waller.) 

Yet.  13.  Te  know  bow  through  Infirmity  of  the  flesh.  —  Preaching  in  the 

infirmity  of  the  flesh : — I.  That  we  might  not  exalt  odb  teachers  unduly,  who 
are  only  instruments  of  grace  (Acts  xiv.  15).  II.  That  we  might  ascbibe  the 
whole  work  of  our  conversion  to  God  alone  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  III.  That  God 
might  by  this  means  confound  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  and  cause  men  that 
would  be  wise  to  become  fools  that  they  might  be  wise  (1  Oor.  iii.  18).     IV.  That 

WE  MIGHT  BE  ASSURED  THAT  THE  DOCTRINE  IS  OF  GOD  BECAUSE  IT  PREVAILS  WITH- 
OUT the  strength  and  polict  of  man.  (W.  Perkins.)  The  Gospel : — I  have 
been  delighted,  on  a  calm  summer's  evening,  to  hear  the  tones  of  a  sweet  human 
voice  borne  to  my  ears  from  the  other  side  of  the  valley.  The  shadows  of  the 
evening  were  around  me,  the  birds  had  gone  to  their  rest,  a  sadness  was  over  the 
land ;  not  a  sound  was  heard  save  that  voice,  singing  some  tender  Welsh  air.  The 
voice  wandered  among  the  hills,  or  seemed  to  linger  in  the  caves  ;  then  it  trembled 
among  the  branches ;  by  and  by  it  became  more  powerful  as  it  passed  over  the 
clear  plain  below.  There  was  in  it  an  indescribable  pathos — it  was  a  sigh  swelling 
into  a  song — and  it  created  in  me  unutterable  longings  for  the  perfect  good,  for  that 
state  in  which  life  is  musical,  harmonious,  and  not  filled  with  wild,  discordant  notes, 
as  our  present  life  is.  The  gospel  resembles  that  voice,  it  comes  to  us  trembling 
with  Divine  love  ;  a  tender,  melting,  pathetic  voice,  speaking  of  God  and  His  love 
and  His  heaven,  and  the  blessedness  that  shall  be  revealed.  (Thomas  Jones.) 
Why  no  record  of  Paul's  preaching  : — While  we  have  more  or  less  acquaintance  with 
all  the  other  important  Churches  of  Paul's  founding,  not  a  single  name  of  a  person 
or  place,  and  scarcely  a  single  incident  connected  with  the  apostle's  preaching  in 
Galatia  is  preserved  in  either  the  Acts  or  the  Epistle.  This  may  partly  be 
accounted  for  by  the  circumstances  of  the  Church.  The  same  delicacy  which  has 
concealed  from  us  the  name  of  the  Corinthian  offender  may  have  led  the  apostle  to 
avoid  all  special  allusions  in  addressing  a  community  to  which  he  wrote  in  a  strain 
of  severest  censure.  And  the  historian  would  seem  to  have  purposely  drawn  a  veil 
over  the  infancy  of  a  Church  which  swerved  so  soon  and  so  widely  from  the  purity 
of  the  gospel.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  The  indisposition  of  St.  Paul  .'—Nothing  is 
more  natural  than  that  the  traversing  of  vast  distances  over  the  burning  plains  and 
freezing  mountain  passes  of  Asia  Minor — the  constant  changes  of  climate,  the 
severe  bodily  fatigue,  the  storms  of  fine  and  blinding  sand,  the  bites  and  stings  of 
insects,  the  coarseness  and  scantiness  of  daily  fare — should  have  brought  on  a 


6HA*.  rv.J  GALATIANS.  273 

return  of  his  malady  to  one  whose  health  was  bo  shattered  as  that  of  St.  Paul. 
(Farrar.)  The  climate  and  the  prevailing  maladies  of  Asia  Minor  may  have  been 
modified  by  lapse  of  centuries  ;  and  we  are  without  the  guidance  of  St.  Luke's 
medical  language  which  sometimes  throws  a  light  on  diseases  alluded  to  in 
Scripture;  but  two  Christian  sufferers,  in  widely  different  ages  of  the  Church, 
occur  to  the  memory  as  we  look  on  the  map  of  Galatia.  We  could  hardly  mention 
any  two  men  more  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  St.  Paul  than  John 
Chrysostom  and  Henry  Martyn.  And  when  we  remember  how  these  two  saints 
suffered  in  their  last  hours  from  fatigue,  pain,  rudeness,  and  cruelty,  among  the 
mountains  of  Asia  Minor  which  surround  the  place  where  they  rest,  we  can  well 
enter  into  the  meaning  of  St.  Paul's  expression  of  gratitude  to  those  who  received 
him  kindly  in  the  hour  of  his  weakness.  (Conybeare  and  Howson.)  Personal 
suffering  a  means  of  the  world's  progress  : — The  hopes  of  humanity  do  not  lie  in  the 
fulness  with  which  science  discovers  and  employs  the  forces  of  nature.  On  the 
contrary,  there  is  no  danger  which  is  more  imminent  than  the  appropriation  of 
those  powers  by  the  coarsest  despotism  which  can  enslave  and  corrupt  its  subjects. 
It  does  not  consist  in  what  is  called  culture,  because  art  and  poetry  are  easily  made 
slaves  of  that  wealth  which  is  willing  to  have  its  existence  certified  and  its  power 
acknowledge  by  the  homage  of  cultivated  parasites.  It  is  not  learning  that  can 
save  man ;  for  at  best  learning  only  influences  a  few,  and  is  apt,  in  those  who 
possess  it,  to  degenerate  into  self-sufficiency  and  ease.  Least  of  all  do  the  hopes 
of  man  lie  in  the  aggregation  of  wealth ;  for  experience  tells  us  that  wealth  is  not 
only  apt  to  be  arrogant  and  domineering,  but  to  form  a  coarse  and  harsh  oligarchy, 
degraded  by  low  tastes  and  prone  to  ferocious  fears.  Nor,  finally,  do  the  hopes  of 
humanity  reside  in  any  form  of  polity.  It  may  be  that  one  form  of  administra- 
tion is  better  than  another,  because  it  offers  least  resistance  to  the  influence  which 
ought  to  leaven  society,  gives  a  freer  course  to  those  forces  which  can  chasten  and 
exalt  mankind.  Despotism  degrades  us,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  liberty  purifies 
ns.  The  atmosphere  is  cleared  of  its  accumulated  poisons  by  some  furious  storm, 
which  does  in  the  end  bring  health  to  the  many,  but  bestows  its  benefits  amidst  the 
waste  and  the  ruin  of  those  whom  it  smites.  And  so  the  moral  purification  of 
society  is  effected  by  the  suffering  of  .those  whom  the  cleansing  storm  catches  in  (ts 
course  ;  the  victory  of  the  most  righteous  cause  demands  the  suffering  and  death 
of  some  among  those  who  enter  into  the  battle.  When  the  stronghold  of  truth  and 
virtue  is  to  be  built,  the  foundations  are  laid  in  the  firstborn,  and  the  youngest  perishee 
before  the  walls  are  finished.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Affliction  a  means  of  moral 
influence : — The  sunlight  falls  upon  a  clod,  and  the  clod  drinks  it  in,  is  itself 
warmed  by  it,  but  lies  as  black  as  ever,  and  sheds  out  no  light.  But  the  sun 
touches  a  diamond,  and  the  diamond  almost  chills  itself  as  it  sends  out  in  radiance 
on  every  side  the  light  that  has  fallen  upon  it.  So  God  helps  one  man  to  bear  his 
pain,  and  nobody  but  that  one  man  is  a  whit  the  richer.  God  comes  to  another 
sufferer — reverent,  unselfish,  and  humble — and  the  lame  leap,  and  the  dumb  speak, 
and  the  wretched  are  comforted  all  around  by  the  radiated  comfort  of  that  happy 
soul.     (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.) 

Yer.  14.  And  my  temptation  which  was  in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not. — Ministers 
and  people : — Here  we  see — I.  The  ooodness  of  God,  who  does  not  speak  in  His 
awful  majesty,  but  sends  ambassadors  to  beseech  us   to  be  reconciled  to  Him. 

II.  The  responsibility  of  pastors,  because  they  stand  in  the  stead  of  Christ 
Jesus,  and  must,  therefore,  (1)  only  declare  what  they  know  to  be  His  will ;  and 
(2)  have  a  special  care  to  maintain  that  holiness  of  life  which  befits  their  position. 

III.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  the  Church.  1.  Not  to  despise  their  minister's 
weakness.  2.  To  treat  him  with  reverence  and  love,  because  a  messenger  of  God 
and  of  Christ.  IV.  The  comfort  of  believers.  Sure  and  certain,  as  though 
administered  by  an  angel  or  by  Christ  Himself.  (W.  Perkins.)  The  super- 
ficiality of  Galatian  religious  life : — If  we  picture  to  ourselves  the  apostle  as  he 
appeared  before  the  Galatians,  a  friendless  outcast,  writhing  under  the  tortures  of  a 
painful  malady,  yet  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  by  turns  denouncing 
and  entreating,  appealing  to  the  agonies  of  a  crucified  Saviour,  perhaps,  also,  as  at 
Lystra,  enforcing  this  appeal  by  some  striking  miracle,  we  shall  be  at  no  loss  to  con- 
ceive how  the  fervid  temperament  of  the  Gaul  might  have  been  aroused,  while  yet 
only  the  surface  of  his  spirit  and  consciousness  was  ruffled.  For  the  time,  indeed, 
all  seemed  to  be  going  on  well.  *•  Ye  were  running  bravely ;  "  but  the  very  eager- 
ness  with  which  they  had  embraced  the  gospel  was  in  itself  a  dangerous  symptom, 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*,  r* 

A  material  bo  easily  moulded  soon  loses  the  impression  it  has  taken.  The 
passionate  current  of  their  Celtic  blood,  which  flowed  in  this  direction  now,  might 
only  too  easily  be  diverted  into  a  fresh  channel  by  some  new  religious  impulse. 
Their  reception  of  the  gospel  was  not  built  on  a  deeply-rooted  conviction  of  ita 
truth,  or  a  genuine  appreciation  of  its  spiritual  power.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  St. 
PanVs  infirmity : — The  right  reading  and  rendering  is :  "  But  ye  know  that  by 
reason  of  an  infirmity  of  my  flesh  I  preached  the  gospel  to  you  on  the  former 
visit ;  and  your  temptation  in  my  flesh  ye  did  not  utterly  despise  (set  at  nought) 
nor  loathe."  The  drift  of  the  first  of  these  clauses  is  that  on  the  former  of  two 
visits,  he  had  not  purposed  preaching  in  Galatia,  but  did  so  because  he  was 
detained  there  by  his  peculiar  affliction.  The  drift  of  the  second  clause,  which  is 
rather  irregularly  expressed,  is  that  the  Galatians  did  not  scorn  his  infirmity  nor 
regard  it  with  abhorrence,  although  it  constituted  a  temptation  to  them  to  repu- 
diate the  gospel,  when  preached  by  one  so  afflicted.  This  passage  and  2  Cor.  xii.  7 
taken  together  point  to  the  following  results  :  I.  The  affliction  was  bodily.  **  In 
my  flesh."  The  effect  of  shocking  and  revolting  those  who  witnessed  it,  which  ia 
pointed  to  in  the  word  "  loathe,"  could  only  be  produced  by  visible  symptoms. 
"  Infirmity  of  my  flesh  "  also  suggests  most  naturally,  although  not  necessarily, 
that  the  infirmity  attached  to  the  body.  From  its  tendency  to  bring  him  into 
contempt,  the  apostle  looked  upon  it  as  a  grievous  impediment  to  his  ministry. 
The  words  "  smite  with  the  fist "  (2  Cor.  xii.  7)  indicate  the  violence  and  the 
suddenness  of  its  approaches;  and  his  detention  in  Galatia,  where  he  had  not 
meant  to  stay,  shows  that  he  could  not  forecast  its  coming  on,  and  apparently 
alsto  that  its  after-effects  were  of  some  duration.  The  current  impression  that 
it  was  attended  by  agonizing  pain  is  not  positively  justified  by  anything  that  is 
stated.  It  was  probably  humiliating  rather  than  painful.  2.  It  was  an  adjunct 
cf  his  visions  and  special  revelations  in  two  ways.  (1)  It  served  a  discipli- 
nary purpose  in  connection  with  them.  (2)  Its  particular  visits  were  the 
immediate  antecedent,  if  not  the  conditional,  accompaniments  of  the  visions  and 
revelations  themselves.  This  last  relation  is  not  only  indicated  by  the  apostle's 
general  statement,  but  appears  more  distinctly  from  the  fact  that  the  answer,  "  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  "  is  exactly  one  of  the  special  revelations  in  question, 
and  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  was  given  in  direct  reply  to  the  third  prayer 
for  deliverance,  uttered  at  a  moment  when  he  was  painfully  sensible  of  the 
pressure  of  his  bodily  trial.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  he  is  speaking  in 
2  Cor.  xii.  of  visions  and  revelations  experienced  by  him  while  in  an  ecstatic  condi- 
tion, i.e.,  when  the  connection  between  the  inner  spiritual  man  and  the  body  was 
either  in  complete  abeyance  or  actually  for  a  while  severed,  and  this  strongly  com- 
mends the  supposition  that  the  abnormal  state  of  body  was  a  transition-stage  to 
the  ecstasy.  The  three  petitions  would,  in  this  case,  be  made  when  the  apostle, 
under  some  painfully  humbling  physical  conditions,  felt  his  conscious  union  with 
his  material  organism  dissolving,  and  the  Lord's  answer  to  the  third  petition  would 
be  heard  by  him  when  one  of  the  ecstatic  states  had  set  in.  The  ecstasy,  the 
visions  and  revelations,  and  the  peculiar  affection  of  the  body,  would  thus  be  coin- 
cident in  time,  possibly  of  the  same  duration,  and,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  comple- 
ments of  each  other His  conversion  (Acts  xxvi.  11-18)  furnishes  a  most 

striking  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  he  may  have  received  his  supernatural 
communications  at  the  precise  time  when  he  was  under  the  actual  application  of 
the  "  stake  for  the  flesh."  Its  close  conjunction  with  the  visions  and  revelations 
does  not  justify  the  conclusion  that  the  suffering  which  it  brought  and  the  Divine 
communications  alternated  with  one  another  during  the  ecstasy,  so  that  the  ecstatic, 
like  the  waking  life  of  the  apostle  was  a  copy  of  the  life  of  his  Master  in  its 
contrary  aspects  of  humiliation  and  suffering  and  of  exaltation  and  glory.  If  the 
stake  for  the  flesh  was  felt  during  the  ecstasy,  he  could  not  have  said  that  he  did 
not  know  whether  he  was  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,  for  a  sense  of  bodily 

suffering  must  imply  the  presence  of  the  body One  clear  result  of  the 

intimate  union  of  the  stake  with  the  visions  and  revelations  is  that  the  occasions  of 
his  suffering  from  it  cannot  be  regarded  and  spoken  of  as  if  they  came  on  like  the 
attacks  of  a  malady.  They  coincided  with  the  times  at  which  he  stood  in  need  of 
special  disclosures  of  the  Divine  will.  The  date,  "  fourteen  years  ago  "  (2  Cor. 
xii.  2),  points  to  directions  given  him  previously  to  quitting  Arabia  for  a  new 
province  of  ministerial  work.  3.  When  St.  Paul  ascribes  to  the  stake  a  twofold 
relation  to  the  invisible  world,  and  sees  in  it  a  concurrence  of  Divine  and  of  Satanie 
agency,  the  latter  controlled  by  the  former,  he  is  neither  speaking  figuratively,  nor 


■hap.  rv.]  GALATIANS.  *75 

merely  stating  his  own  personal  impressions  in  accordance  with  popular  views,  bnt 
affirming  what  he  knew  to  be  a  truth,  and  his  statement  is  amply  supported  by 
other  representations  in  Scripture.  This  admixture  of  Satanic  action  makes  the 
attempt  precarious  to  identify  the  stake  with  any  known  malady  or  ailment,  such 
as  acute  headache,  earache,  a  complaint  in  the  eyes,  or  epilepsy.  The  view  which 
chiefly  claims  consideration  under  this  head,  although  there  is  an  ancient  and 
sustained  tradition  in  favour  of  headache,  is  that  it  was  epilepsy.  Both  Jews  and 
pagans  deemed  epilepsy  a  supernatural  visitation,  and  hence  its  name  morbus 
divinus,  or  sacer.  Another  designation  of  it,  morbus  comitialis,  rested  upon  the 
same  idea,  for  if  any  one  was  seized  with  it  in  the  Boman  Forum  during  an  election 
it  was  supposed  to  be  the  intervention  of  a  god,  and  business  was  suspended.  The 
original  for  "loathe  "  in  this  verse  means  literally  to  "  spit  out,"  and  it  is  curious 
that  epilepsy  was  also  called  morbus  que  sputalur,  because  those  present  were 
"  accustomed  to  spit  upon  the  epileptic  or  into  their  own  bosoms,  either  to  express 
their  abomination,  or  to  avert  the  evil  omen  for  themselves."  Persons  may  become 
subject  to  epilepsy  at  middle  age  by  a  great  shock,  physical  or  moral,  or  both,  such 
as  St.  Paul's  conversion  was.  Almost  all  medical  writers  on  epilepsy  mention  a 
patient  who  before  a  seizure  imagined  that  he  saw  a  figure  approach  and  smite  him 
a  blow  on  the  head,  after  which  he  lost  consciousness.  This  has  a  resemblance  to 
the  expression  "  smite  with  the  fist,"  which  might  well  represent  the  suddenness  of 
epileptic  attacks.  Those  who  happen  to  have  seen  a  person  seized  with  epilepsy 
while  officiating  in  Divine  service,  will  comprehend  how  natural  it  would  be  for 
St.  Paul  to  regard  any  bodily  liability  at  all  resembling  it  as  a  terrible  hindrance  to 
his  ministry.  After  epileptic  convulsions  have  ended  there  often  ensues  an  insen- 
sibility, and  patients  sometimes  fall  into  a  profound  stupor  or  coma,  which  has 
been  known  to  last  as  long  as  a  week.  This  symptom  would  harmonize  with  the 
apostle's  forced  stay  in  Galatia.  Still  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  of  these  points 
are  more  than  superficial  agreements.  An  epileptic  remembers  nothing  of  what 
passed  during  the  fit,  whereas  St.  Paul  had  the  most  vivid  recollection  of  every- 
thing. Epilepsy,  frequently  suffered,  generally  impairs  the  intellect,  and  the  cases 
of  Julius  Caesar,  Mahomet,  and  Buonaparte,  who  are  quoted  as  instances  of  high 
intellectual  power  remaining  in  spite  of  epilepsy,  are  not  deemed  by  medical 
authorities  to  be  of  much  value.  4.  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  find  an  analogy 
of  nature  for  the  apostle's  cross  from  a  different  point  of  view,  viz.,  by  taking  his 
visions  and  revelations  for  the  starting-point.  A  large  number  of  instances  are  upon 
record  of  religious  visionaries,  as  they  are  called,  and  ecstatical  persons,  who  have 
seemed  to  themselves  to  be  translated  into  the  invisible  world,  and  to  have  seen 
and  heard  its  inhabitants  and  transactions  as  sensibly  as  they  could  have  seen 
and  heard  anything  with  their  bodily  organs.  They  have  for  the  most  part  a 
strong  conviction  that  they  are  under  the  immediate  guidance  and  inlluence  of 
spiritual  beings  during  the  disclosures  made  to  them.  The  body  is  in  many  cases 
in  a  state  resembling  that  of  catalepsy,  in  which  the  will  exercises  no  power  over 
it ;  the  expression  of  the  eyes,  though  open,  is  extinguished ;  the  limbs  are  like 
those  of  an  automaton,  and  remain  unaffected  by  the  law  of  gravitation  in  any 
attitude  in  which  they  may  be  placed ;  and  the  face  is  like  that  of  a  dead  person. 
6.  It  may  be  questioned  whether  such  inquiries  and  speculations  as  these,  although 
interesting,  can  lead  to  any  solid  results,  on  account  of  the  perfectly  exceptional 
character  of  the  apostle's  case.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  no  malady  or  bodily 
disorder  brought  about  by  demoniacal  agency  is  ever  identical  with  ordinary 
disease.  If  similarities  are  traceable,  they  are  rather  symptomatic  than  essential 
affinities.  There  are  not  sufficient  data  for  determining  what  peculiar  ingredient 
characteristic  of  Satanic  malignity  there  was  in  the  apostle's  affliction,  but  it  would 
seem  to  have  been  something  calculated  to  overwhelm  him  with  ignominy  rather 
than  to  excruciate  him  with  pain.  It  is  consolatory  to  know  that,  however  hard  it 
was  to  bear,  the  grace  of  Christ  enabled  him  ultimately  to  rejoice  and  glory  in  it 
as  a  means  whereby  the  power  of  the  Lord  more  fully  tabernacled  upon  him  and 
invested  him  with  the  true  strength  for  doing  his  Master's  work.     (Canon  Waite.) 

Ver.  15.  Where  is  then  the  blessedness  ye  spake  of?—  Instability : — I.  Theib 
»abt  religious  experience  was  one  of  blessedness.  1.  Blessedness  is  one  of  the 
earliest  notes  of  religious  life.  Christ's  first  miracle  was  at  Cana:  amongst  His  first 
words  were  the  beatitudes.  The  earliest  religious  experience  is  that  known  as 
*'  first  love."  2.  There  is  a  danger  of  this  being  lost  through  the  truth  on  which 
it  is  based  losing  its  freshness.     The  vision  of  Christ  crucified  had  faded,  and  the 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

Galatians  were  now  seeking  perfection  in  another  way  than  that  by  which  they 
had  attained  blessedness.  3.  Blessedness  can  only  be  maintained  by  the  constant 
realization  of  Christ  as  Savionr.  II.  Their  present  example  is  one  op  religious 
instability.  1.  They  were  of  a  fickle  and  changeable  temperament.  2.  Eeligion 
had  entered  them  chiefly  through  the  emotions.  They  had  not  fairly  grasped  the 
doctrines  of  Christianity.  Hence  they  became  an  easy  prey  to  false  teachers. 
3.  They  regarded  the  teacher  rather  than  the  truth  he  taught.  4.  Influences  were 
at  work  calculated  to  draw  them  away  from  their  faith.  (1)  Learned  teachers 
whom  it  was  hard  to  refute.  (2)  Gorgeous  ceremonial  for  which  they  had  a 
predilection.  (3)  Old  worldliness  and  heathenism  so  recently  renounced. 
III.  The  remedy.  1.  Eecognize  the  evil.  2.  Return  to  Christ.  (S  Pearson, 
M.A.)  A  missing  treasure: — 1.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  show  that  blessedness 
is  the  privilege  of  every  Christian.  2.  But  where  is  it  in  many  an  average 
Christian  life?  3.  If  it  be  amissing,  something  must  be  wrong.  4.  Its  sole 
source  is  God,  but  it  is  dispensed  at   sundry  places  and  by  sundry  channels. 

1.  The  Cross  of  Christ.  By  this  (1)  a  curse  is  removed ;  (2)  a  blessing 
conferred.  II.  The  throne  of  grace.  1.  A  reconciled  God  2.  A  sympathetic 
High  Priest.  III.  The  welt.s  of  salvation.  1.  The  Bible.  2.  The  Lord'? 
Supper.  IV.  The  ways  of  Christian  good-doino  (Acts  xx.  35).  V.  Mount 
Pisgah,  with  its  views  of  the  promised  land.  When  all  is  gloomy  elsewhere,  all  u 
bright  there  (John  xiv.  1-3 ;  Bom.  viii.  18-21 ;  Heb.  xii.  22-24 ;  Rev.  xxii.  1-5). 
In   conclusion,   where  is  this  blessedness?      1.    How   strange  not  to  have  i%\ 

2.  Stranger  still  to  have  had  it  and  lost  it.  (Norman  Macleod,  D.D.)  Happine** 
and  duty  : — I.  To  make  happiness  the  chief  end  of  life  is  a  mistake  as  well  as  4 
sin,  for  it  must  meet  with  failure.  II.  The  end  of  oub  being  is  holiness,  and 
when  this  is  attained,  happiness  is  the  certain  result.     III.  The  blessedness  or 

RELIGION  IS  THE  OUTWARD  AND  VISIBLE  SIGN  OF  THE  INWARD  AND  INVISIBLE  GRACE,  ]UBt 

as  good  health  is  a  token  that  our  physical  employments  are  conducive  to  our  well 
being.  1.  Those  forms  of  religion  which  induce  melancholy  bear  no  stamp  of 
Divine  origin.    2.  Man's  greatest  miseries  have  been  produced  by  such  a  religion. 

3.  Happiness  shows  the  worth  of  true  religion,  for  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is 
joy."  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)  Blessedness  is  not  the  foundation  or  warrant  of 
Christian  life,  but  its  crown  and  glory,  like  the  tuft  of  green  that  adorns  the  palm 
tree :  like  the  rich  capital  that  wreathes  the  Corinthian  column  ;  like  the  crown 
that  sparkles  on  the  brow  of  a  king.  Without  it  the  Christian  is  like  a  king 
without  a  crown,  a  column  without  a  capital,  a  palm  tree  with  a  headless  stem. 
(N.  Macleod,  D.D.)  Mere  feeling ;  its  worthlessness : — Feeling,  even  when 
directed  to  heavenly  objects,  may  be  in  its  substance  partly  physical ;  and  there  is 
no  necessary  connection  between  feeling  so  originating  and  moral  earnestness  or 
right  morality.  Nay,  it  is  very  possible  for  those  who  feel  warmly  to  imagine, 
mistakenly  enough,  that  warm  feeling  is  the  same  thing  as,  or  an  adequate 
substitute  for,  acting  rightly.  He  who  said,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  command- 
ments," implied  that  there  are  forms  of  religious  passion  which  may  co-exist  with 
disobedience,  and  may  even  appear  to  compensate  for  it.  The  Galatians  had  not 
been  less  willing  to  "  pluck  out  their  own  eyes  "  out  of  devotion  to  St.  Paul,  at  the 
time  of  their  conversion,  because  they  afterwards  looked  on  him  as  a  personal 
enemy  for  telling  them  the  truth  about  the  Judaizers.  The  apostle  was  not 
insincere  who  protested,  "  Though  I  should  die  with  Thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny 
Thee ; "  albeit  a  few  hours  later,  at  the  crisis  of  danger,  he  could  exclaim,  "  I 
know  not  the  man."  Feeling  is  not  necessarily  moral  purpose;  and  its  possible 
deficiencies  show  that  we  cannot  regard  it  as  alone  forming  the  material  of 
Christian  life.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Feeling:  its  place  and  power  in  religion: — 
Feeling  is  of  as  much  use  in  religion  as  steam  is  in  an  engine — if  it  drives  the 
engine  it  is  good  ;  but  if  it  does  not  it  is  no  good  for  anything  but  to  fizz  and  hiss 
and  buzz.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Lost  blessedness : — At  the  Governor's  banquet  in 
California  State,  where  wine  was  flowing  freely,  one  of  the  speakers,  while  making 
an  excited  speech,  said  :  "  If  there  is  any  one  present  who  was  ever  happier  in  his 
life  than  he  is  here  to-night,  I  call  upon  him  at  once  to  arise  and  say  so."  A 
young  man  sprang  to  his  feet  and  said  :  "  I  was  very  much  happier  in  one  of  Mr. 
Hammond's  meetings  than  I  am  here."  It  produced  a  profound  impression  upon 
that  gay  audience.  The  backslider's  misery  : — A  number  of  persons  were  once 
relating  their  misfortunes  to  each  other.  One  told  of  his  whole  substance  en- 
trusted to  one  vessel,  having  perished  in  the  ocean;  another  of  an  only  and 
bel  :-Ted  daughter  recently  laM  in  the  grave  ;  another  of  a  son  breaking  loose  from 


•MAP.  it.]  GALATIANS.  J77 

restraint,  and  plunging  like  the  prodigal  into  the  wickedness  of  a  great  city.  It 
was  agreed  that  these  were  sore  afflictions,  and  it  was  wondered  whether  any  could 
produce  sorer.  One  who  had  hitherto  been  silent  now  spoke.  "  Yes,"  said  he, 
"  I  can  tell  of  something  sadder  than  all  these,  a  believing  heart  has  gone  from 
me."  There  followed  deep  silence  at  these  words,  and  when  the  little  group  spoke 
again  it  was  agreed  that  the  last  was  the  heaviest  sorrow;  that  there  was  no 
calamity  like  it.     (British  Messenger.) 

Ver.  16.  Am  I  therefore  become  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  t—The 
right  mode  of  giving  and  receiving  reproof: — Men  commonly  assign  a  number  of 
the  persons  and  things  within  their  sphere  to  the  classes,  respectively,  of  friends 
and  enemies.  There  are  beings  that  have  in  them  an  evil  spirit  toward  us,  and 
there  are  those  that  have  a  good  one.  Many  things  in  our  notions,  tastes,  habits, 
practices,  if  traced  back  to  the  cause,  are  what  they  are,  because  such  and  such 
men  were  regarded  by  us  as  friends  or  as  enemies.  How  disastrous,  therefore,  that 
perversity  of  apprehension  through  which  enemies  have  so  often  been  accounted 
friends,  and  friends  enemies  I  And  especially  conspicuous  has  this  perversity  been 
in  regard  to  the  point  suggested  in  our  text,  namely,  whether  it  should  be 
esteemed  the  part  of  a  friend  faithfully  to  tell  men  the  truth ;  and  whether  the 
suppression  of  truth,  and  the  substitution  of  its  opposite,  should  not  be  held  to 
mark  the  character  of  an  enemy.  Where  and  when  has  it  been  that  flatterers 
were  not  admitted  and  welcomed  as  friends?  What  a  prodigious  singularity  in 
history  were  it,  if  there  were  recorded  any  nation,  or  tribe,  or  city,  in  which  these 
were  generally  and  practically  discouraged  and  silenced,  and  honest  truth  was  the 
way  to  favour  I  Whenever  was  it,  that  honest  truth  was  the  obvious  expedient  of 
self-interest?  Self-interest  with  men  is  to  be  promoted  by  giving  them  the 
persuasion  that  we  are  their  friends.  Well  then,  has  their  faithfulness  been  the 
way  in  which  men  have  gone  about  to  make  their  fellow-mortals  esteem  them  for 
friends  ?  How  often  has  the  amicable  state  of  feeling  been  broken  up  by  telling 
the  truth,  even  when  done  in  a  proper  spirit  and  manner  1  The  great  apostle  him- 
self seems  not  without  apprehension  of  such  an  effect,  sincere  as  he  was,  and 
affectionate,  and  venerable,  and  even  speaking  to  them  with  the  authority  of  God. 
And  still,  and  always,  is  not  this  honest  expression  of  truth  one  of  the  most 
difficult  and  hazardous  things  a  friend  has  to  do?  All  which  is  but  one  more 
example  to  show  that,  in  this  world,  whatever  is  the  best  in  a  thing,  is  the  most 
difficult  to  be  had,  and  to  be  kept  in  that  thing.  But  now,  in  a  general  theoretical 
judgment,  men  would  approve,  by  implication  at  least,  what  is  so  unwelcome  when 
it  comes  to  the  practice.  "  What  would  you  wish  your  friend  to  be  ?  "  Answer  : 
"  I  would  wish  him  to  be  such  that,  as  the  last  result  of  my  communications  with 
him,  a  great  deal  of  whatever  may  be  defective  and  wrong  in  me  shall  have  been 
disciplined  away."  But,  by  what  manner  of  operation,  if  he  is  never  to  hint  at 
B&ch  a  thing?  Is  it  to  be  by  some  moral  magic  ?  Or  is  he  to  presume  no  further 
than  to  admonish  by  example?  What!  not  even  if  he  perceives  that  that 
admonition  does  not  take  effect  ?  How  many  pointed  suggestions  of  his  mind  is  he 
to  withhold  from  putting  into  words,  in  waiting  to  see  whether  they  will  arise  in 
your  own  thoughts?  May  he  not  justly  despair  of  accomplishing  much  beneficial 
correction,  so  long  as  he  must  not  say  that  he  intends  or  wishes  to  do  it  ?  so  long, 
in  short,  as  he  feels  himself  in  hazard  of  becoming,  in  your  regard,  an  "  enemy  " 
by  telling  you  the  truth?  Thus  men  will  profess,  and  perhaps  unthinkingly 
believe,  that  they  derive  the  most  essential  benefits  derivable  from  a  true  friend ; 
but  if  he  shall  offer  to  impart  them,  he  becomes  an  "  enemy  1  "  But  consider, 
what  an  invitation,  the  while,  this  temper  of  mind  gives  to  real  enemies — to  the 
flatterer,  to  the  designing  hypocrite,  to  every  imposition  the  mind  can  put 
on  itself,  and  to  the  great  deceiver  of  souls — to  anything  but  salutary  truth' 
The  great  cause  of  this  perversity  and  repugnance  is,  that  it  cannot  be  but  that 
plain  truth  (by  whatever  voice)  must  say  many  things  that  are  unpleasing.  All 
censure  is  so ;  as  it  hnrts  that  most  quick,  and  delicate,  and  constant  of  all 
feelings,  self-love.  Another  thing  greatly  contributing  to  this  feeling  toward  him 
is,  a  want  of  the  real  earnest  desire  to  be  in  all  things  set  right ;  a  kind  of  hollow 
truce  which  ia  kept  up  with  conscience,  with  great  difficulty,  easily  disturbed,  and 
the  disturbance  painful ;  therefore,  "  do  not,  do  not  come  to  provoke  the  enemy 
within  1  "  And  then,  again,  there  is  pride,  reacting  against  a  fellow-mortal  and 
fellow-sinner.  We  note  only  one  thing  more,  as  tending  to  excite  in  a  person 
hearing  unpleasant  truth  a  feeling  as  toward  an  "  enemy,"  and  that  is,  an 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ««, 

unfavourable  opinion  or  surmise,  as  to  the  motives  of  the  teller  of  this  truth. 
If  it  is  truth,  and  useful  truth,  the  motives  of  him  that  says  it  should  make  nc 
material  difference.  Even  from  an  enemy  real  instruction  has  an  undiminished 
value.  But,  as  we  are  constituted,  this  consideration  does  make  a  great  difference. 
But  the  person  reprehended  should  reflect  how  strongly  the  nature  of  the  case 
tempts  him  to  think  unfavourably  of  the  motives.  Let  him  consider  how  slowly 
such  surmises  are  entertained  by  him  when  he  receives  approbation  or  applause. 
But,  to  look  now  at  the  other  side  of  the  question,  we  shall  do  well  to  insist  on  a 
circumstance  or  two  of  propriety,  in  respect  to  the  telling  of  unpleasant  truth. 
For  one  thing,  it  is  self-evident  that  those  who  have  to  do  this  should  well  exercise 
themselves  to  understand  what  they  speak  of.  If  this  be  a  rule  of  propriety 
generally,  in  the  utterance  of  thoughts  and  judgments,  it  is  especially  so  in  respect 
to  those  winch  are  to  be  expressed  as  reprehensions,  directly  applied  to  persons 
and  to  friends ;  where  some  pain  and  displeasure  may  be  expected  to  be  caused, 
and  opposition  provoked.  On  such  occasions  how  needful  a  knowledge  of 
the  subject,  well-considered  opinion,  clear  representation,  pertinent  sound  argu- 
ment. It  hardly  needs  be  said,  that  a  real  and  evident  friendly  intention  is 
of  great  avail.  It  may  be  added,  that  there  should  not  be  the  same  stress  laid  on 
everything  that  may  not  be  exactly  as  the  corrective  instructor  thinks  it  ought. 
Indeed,  many  minor  things  may  wisely  be  altogether  passed  over.  Again,  in 
presenting  admonitory  or  accusatory  truth,  it  should  be  the  instructor's  aim  that 
the  authority  may  be  conveyed  in  the  truth  itself,  and  not  seem  to  be  assumed  by 
him  as  the  speaker  of  it;  that  he  may  be  the  mere  conveyer  of  the  force  of 
the  subject.  Then,  too,  the  teller  of  unpleasant  truths  should  take  care  to  select 
favourable  times  and  occasions ;  when  an  inquisitive  or  docile  disposition  is  most 
apparent ;  when  some  circumstance  or  topic  naturally  leads,  without  formality  or 
abruptness ;  when  there  appears  to  be  in  the  way  the  least  to  put  the  person 
reproved  in  the  attitude  of  pride  and  hostile  self-defence.  (J.  Foster.)  Tolera- 
tion : — This  section  is  full  of  pathos.  In  it  the  theologian  gives  way  to  the  man ; 
or  rather,  the  sanctified  heart  proves  itself  to  be  in  full  harmony  with  the  inspired 
intellect ;  and  the  most  vehement  indignation  against  error  is  shown  to  be  quite 
consistent  with  the  utmost  tenderness  and  affection  towards  those  falling  from  the 
truth.  It  is  a  fine  combination  of  the  spirit  of  faithfulness  with  the  spirit 
of  toleration ;  a  rare  union  of  jealous  regard  for  the  truth  of  God  and  considera- 
tion for  the  weakness  and  infirmity  of   man.     I.  The  duty    of    maintaining 

DOGMATIC    TRUTH    IN    A    CRITICAL    AND    SCEPTICAL    AGE.        II.   THE    SPIRIT     IN    WHICH 

dogmatic  truth  should  be  upheld.  1.  Not  in  the  spirit  of  violence  and  persecu- 
tion. Faith  cannot  be  created  by  force.  The  action  of  the  mind  is  essentially 
free.  2.  Not  in  the  spirit  of  unfairness,  vindictiveness,  and  misrepresentation. 
This  is  the  old  spirit  of  persecution  showing  itself  under  new  forms.  If  by  using 
this  unhallowed  means,  we  excite  men's  enmity,  we  have  only  ourselves  to  blame. 
3.  The  truth  of  God  is  to  be  upheld  and  advanced  in  the  spirit  of  toleration,  and 
by  those  means  by  which  alone  the  minds  of  men  are  informed,  their  reason  con- 
vinced, their  confidence  won.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Him  who  tells  us  the 
truth,  we  ought  to  count  for  our  true  and  best  friend.  (Heubner.)  In  the  world 
matters  go  altogether  strangely,  and  against  reason,  namely,  he  that  speaks  truth 
becomes  an  unwelcome  guest,  yea,  is  counted  for  an  enemy;  but  this  is  not 
so  among  good  friends,  and  still  less  among  Christians.  (Luther.)  He  that  hates 
any  one,  because  he  tells  him  the  truth,  such  an  one  betrays  himself  very  clearly 
as  no  child  of  God.  (Starke.)  Truth  often  unpopular: — As  the  friar  wittily 
told  the  people,  that  the  truth  he  then  preached  unto  them  seemed  to  be  like  holy 
water,  which  every  one  called  for  apace,  yet,  when  it  came  to  be  cast  upon  them, 
they  turned  aside  their  faces  as  though  they  did  not  like  it ;  just  so  it  is  that 
almost  every  man  calls  fast  for  truth,  commends  truth,  nothing  will  down  but 
truth,  yet  they  cannot  endure  to  have  it  cast  in  their  faces.  They  love  truth  when 
it  only  pleads  itself,  and  shows  itself ;  but  they  cannot  abide  it,  when  it  presses 
upon  them,  and  shows  them  themselves  :  they  would  have  it  shine  out  unto  all  the 
world  in  its  glory,  but  by  no  means  so  much  as  peep  out  to  reprove  their  own 
errors.  (Senhouse.)  Falsehood  cheaper  than  truth  : — Something  sure  is  in  it, 
that  impostors  find  such  quick  return  for  their  ware,  while  truth  hangs  upon  the 
hand.  And  is  it  not  this  ?  that  they  offer  to  sell  heaven  cheaper  to  their  disciples 
than  Christ  will  to  His  ?  He  that  sells  cheapest  will  have  the  most  customers, 
though  at  last,  the  best  will  be  the  cheapest ;  truth  with  self-denial  will  be  a  better 
pennyworth  than  error  with  flesh-pleasing.     (W.  Gurnall.)        Truth  sacrificed  to 


cnup.  nr.]  GALATIANS.  271 

telf-interest : — Trath  is  so  connatural  to  the  mind  of  man,  that  it  would  certainly 
be  entertained  by  all  men,  did  it  not  by  accident  contradict  some  beloved  interest 
or  other.     The  thief  hates  the  break  of  day ;  not  but  that  he  naturally  laves  the 
light  as  well  as  other  men ;  but  his  condition  makes  him  dread  and  abhor  that 
which,  of    all  things,  he  knows  to   be  the  likeliest  means  of   his  discovery. 
(R.  South,  D.D.)         Hostility    to    the    truth: — I.  Arises    from — 1.  Ignorance. 
2.  Prejudice.     3.  The  influences  of  (1)  early  training;  (2)  subsequent  sophistry. 
4.  Wilful  sin.     II.  Should  be  met  by — 1.  Patient  instruction  of   the  ignorant. 
2.  Gentl*  persuasion  in  the  case  of  prejudice.    3.  Convincing  argument  with  those 
who  hate  been  brought  up  in  it,  or  have  been  seduced  from  it.    4.  Stern  denuncia- 
tion w)-en  truth  is  wilfully  opposed.    III.  Its  utter,  unreasonableness      1.  Truth 
must  prevail.      2.  Should    truth    be  temporarily  overcome,   the  truth-killer   is 
involved  in  the  ruin  of  the  truth.     Truthfulness  is  a  corner-stone  in  charaoter, 
and  if  it  is  not  firmly  laid  in  youth,  there  will  ever  after  be  a  weak  spot  in 
the  foundation.        Truth  telling : — I.  Its  importance.    He  who  begins  by  loving 
Christianity  better  than  truth  will  proceed  by  loving  his  own  sect  better  than 
Christianity,  and  end  in  loving  himself  better  than  all.     {Coleridge.)        II.  Its 
value.     The  liar  is  like  the  wrecker  of    old,  who  by  the  false  light  of  mis- 
representation would  lure  his  unwary  victim  to  injury  or  destruction.    The  truth- 
teller  is  like  the  skilful  pilot,  who,  acquainted  with  all  the  features  and  practices 
of  the  coast,  keeps  the  ship,  it  may  be  for  the  time  being  far  out  on  the  stormy 
sea,  but  conducts  it  eventually  with  safety  into  port.    III.  The  confidence  it  does 
and    should    inspire.      Account    that   man    thy  friend  who  desires   thy  good 
rather  than  thy  good  will.     (Bishop  Hall.)        Talent  is  by  no  means  rare  in  the 
world,  nor  is  even  genius.    But  can  the  talent  be  trusted  ?    Can  the  genius  ?    Not 
unless  based  on  truthfulness.    It  is  this  quality  more  than  any  other  that  com- 
mands the  esteem  and  respect,  and  secures  the  confidence  of  others.    (S.  Smiles.) 
"  Am  I  therefore  become  your  enemy.  .  .  .  truth."    Speaking  of  the  want  of  any 
real  self-sacrifice  in  the  "  general  actions  of   charity  1  of  Christians,"  Gordon 
Bays,    "  I  say  it  is  the  fault  of  the  preachers  not    speaking   out.      You  need 
not  come  to  Africa  for  the  martyr's  crown ;  there  are  plenty  to  be  given  in 
England.      Speak  out,    and    you    will   find   sharper  pricks  than  you  will  get 
from    the    native    lances,    and   plenty    of   poison    to   envenom   the    wound." 
Reproof  makes  enemies : — There  was  a  foolish  law  among  the  Lacsedemonians  that 
none  should  tell  his  neighbour  any  ill  news  befallen  him ;  but  every  one  should  be 
left  to  find  it  out  for  himself.    There  are  many  that  would  be  glad  if  there  were  a 
law  that  would  tie  up  ministers'  mouths  from  scaring  them  with  their  sins.    Most 
are  more  careful  to  run  from  the  discourse  of  their  misery  than  to  get  out  of  the 
danger  of  it ;  are  more  offended  with  the  talk  of  hell  than  troubled  for  that  sinful 
state  that  shall  bring   them  thither.    But,   alas  1   when,  then,   shall   ministers 
have  a  fitting  time  to  tell  sinners  of  their  danger,  if  not  now  ?    Hereafter  there 
remain  no  more  offices  of  love  to  be  done  for  them.    Hell  is  a  pest-house ;  there 
cannot  be  written  so  much  on  the  door  of  it  as  "  Lord,  have  mercy  on  them  that 
are  in  it."     (Spencer.)        Breaking  the  looking-glass : — Lais  broke  her  looking-glass 
because  it  showed  the  wrinkles  on  her  face.      Many  men  are  angry  with  them  that 
tell  them  their  faults :  when  they  should  be  angry  only  with  the  faults  that  are 
told  them.    (Venning.)        Concealing  the  truth  a  crime: — As  he  who  stands  by 
and  sees  another  commit  murder  without  giving  an  alarm  is  accounted  accessory 
to  the  murder  ;  or  as  he  who  sees  a  blind  man  running  into  a  pit,  in  which  he  is 
drowned,  and  makes  no  effort  to  save  him,  is  guilty  of  death ;  so  is  he  who  sees 
his  brother  kill  his  soul  without   an  effort  to  prevent  it.     (Cawdray.)        God's 
covenant  with  Abraham: — The  question  handled  in  this  chapter  is  given  in  ver.  2. 
*•  Beceived  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?  " 
It  is  argued  in  two  ways — from  the  Scriptures  and  from  analogy.    It  is  first  shown 
by  the  testimony  of  several  passages  that  "  we  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
through  faith"  (ver.  J 4).     The  second  argument  from  analogy  commences  with 
the  15th   verse,   and  is  applied  in   vers.   16-18    to  Abraham,   the  conclusion 
being  the  same  as  that  of  the  first  argument,  viz.,  that  the  inheritance  is  of 
promise,  and  not  of  the  law.    I    State  the  argument,  and  trace  its  course.    1. 
The  argument  is  this.     According  to  the  customs  of  men  ("I  speak  after  the 
manner  of  men  "),  a  covenant,  if  confirmed,  cannot  be  disannulled  or  added  to. 
An  agreement,  when  signed  and  sealed,  is  binding.    This  is  evident ;  it  is  accord- 
ing to  one  of  the  first  principles  of  justice.    Now  if  such  be  the  case  with  human 
engagements,  how  much  more  must  it  be  with  the  solemn  engagements  of  the  God 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  W. 

of  truth,  "  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning ! "  2 
Inquire  into  the  nature  of  this  Divine  covenant.  A  covenant  means  either  a  last 
will  or  testament,  or  an  agreement  between  two  parties.  The  second  meaning  is 
the  better  here.  But  it  is  generally  understood  as  equivalent  to  a  promise.  "When 
God  established  His  covenant  with  Noah,  there  was  no  engagement  on  Noah'a 
part.  A  promise  given  by  God,  "  who  cannot  lie,"  has  all  the  force  and  inde- 
feasibility  of  the  most  sacred  contract.  3.  In  verse  16  the  apostle  begins  to  apply 
his  argument.  God  established  a  covenant  with  Abraham,  i.e.,  "to  him  and  his 
seed  were  the  promises  made."  The  Holy  Ghost  intended  Christ  by  his  "  seed." 
Here  we  may  interpose  an  important  reflection.  When  we  speak  of  the  covenant 
being  an  agreement  between  two  parties,  is  it  not  strictly  true  that  the  covenant 
was  of  this  nature,  the  Father  and  the  Son  being  the  high  contracting  parties? 
"The  counsel  of  peace  was  between  them  both."  And  "all  the  promises  of 
God  are  yea  and  amen  (given  and  fulfilled)  in  Christ  "  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  4.  In  vers© 
17  St.  Paul  proceeds  in  the  application  of  the  analogy.  "  And  this  I  say  " — "  I 
affirm."  This  covenant  with  Abraham  was  confirmed  by  God,  and  confirmed  four 
hundred  and  thirty  years  before  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  therefore  the  law  can- 
not disannul  it,  that  it  should  make  the  promise  of  none  effect.  The  inheritance 
could  only  have  come  to  Abraham  in  one  of  two  ways — either  by  the  law  or  by 
promise.  As  a  matter  of  history  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  promise.  The  con- 
clusion is,  that  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  or  salvation,  is  not  of  law,  but  of  promise — 
not  by  works,  but  by  faith.  The  covenant  was  confirmed  in  that  remarkable 
vision  in  Genesis  xv.  The  smoking  furnace  and  the  burning  lamp  were  emblems 
of  the  Divine  majesty.  These  passing  through  the  parts  of  the  sacrificed  animals 
signified  the  ratification  of  the  covenant.  It  was  necessary  that  the  covenant 
should  be  confirmed  by  the  shedding  of  blood.  The  inheritance  here  means  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  question  is,  How  did  ye  receive  the  Spirit— by  works  or  by 
faith  ?  The  answer  is,  The  blessing  of  Abraham— the  promise  of  tbe  Spirit — is 
by  faith.  God  gave  this  inheritance  to  Abraham  by  promise  (Comp.  Eph.  i.  13, 
14).  II.  Gather  up  some  of  the  lessons.  1.  Christ  has  the  promises.  So 
verse  19,  "Till  the  Seed  should  come,  to  whom  the  promise  was  made."  All 
spiritual  blessing  is  wrapped  up  in  Him.  On  His  exaltation  He  received  the  pro- 
mise of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  poured  Him  forth  upon  the  infant  Church  (Acts  ii. 
33).  How  foolish  the  Galatians  to  seek  the  blessing  by  ritual !  How  foolish  now 
are  they  who  want  the  blessing  to  stay  away  from  Christ!  (Expose  common 
excuses.  Some  think  they  are  too  wicked  ;  others  waiting  till  they  can  see  them- 
selves more  vile,  &c. ;  and  speak  of  the  glory  of  Christ  as  the  Friend  of  Sinners. 
Enlarge  on  this.)  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  gift.  Some  talk  of  religion  as  if  it 
were  a  trade  to  which  to  be  apprenticed,  and  at  which  they  must  labour  before 
they  can  earn  the  title  of  being  religious.  Let  them  accept  the  gift  of  God. 
"  How  much  more  will  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
Him  I "  The  law,  or  works,  bid  a  man  wait  till  the  moving  of  the  waters  ;  Christ's 
waters  of  salvation  are  always  being  moved,  and  He  invites  every  sinner  to  step 
in  at  once  and  be  healed.  This  subject  is  most  important  as  bearing  upon  sanctifi- 
cation.  "  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  in  the  flesh  ?  " 
No — we  are  made  perfect  in  the  Spirit;  we  are  sanctified  by  faith.  We  must 
receive  by  faith  from  the  Lord  Jesus  the  supply  of  His  Spirit.  (W.  J.  Chapman, 
U.A.) 

Ver.  17.  They  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  well — False  teal : — Paul  suggests — 
I.  That  things  which  abe  good  in  their  kind  mat  be  done  for  wrong  ends. 
1.  In  preaching,  (1)  some  do  it  for  envy  and  strife ;  (2)  some  to  gain  personal  or 
pecuniary  ends.  2.  In  embracing  the  gospel,  some  do  it,  not  for  its  own  sake,  but 
for  (1)  honour;  (2)  profit.  3.  This  must  teach  us  not  only  to  do  good,  but  to  do 
it  well.  For  which  end — (1)  We  must  set  before  us  the  will  of  God  as  our  main 
motive.  (2)  The  outward  action  must  be  conformable  to  the  inward  motion.  IL 
That  nature  can  counterfeit  grace.  Thus  men  feign — 1.  The  experiences  and 
life  of  religion.  2.  The  activities  of  religion.  How  hard  to  detect  the  hypocrite, 
and  yet  how  easy  to  become  one.  III.  The  envy  and  ambition  of  the  deceivers. 
Paul  must  be  excluded  from  the  love  of  the  Galatians  that  they  alone  may  be 
loved.  Thus  Joshua  (Numb.  xi.  20) ;  John's  disciples  (John  iii.  30) ;  our  Lord'g 
disciples  (Luke  ix.  49).  IV.  The  divisions  between  pastors  and  people  created  by 
the  false   teachers.      (W.   Perkins.)  The  spirit  of  religious  faction : — L  I»« 

prominent  characteristic.    Clever  imitation  of  religious  zeal.     1.  In  its  apparent 


•Hi*,  if.]  GALATIANS.  281 

motives  What  other  end  could  they  have  in  making  the  sacrifices  their  work 
,'jivolved,  2.  In  the  deep  interest  it  teems  to  take  in  its  objects.  8.  In  the  un- 
doubted earnestness  with  which  its  work  is  done.  II.  Its  method  of  operation. 
1.  To  create  a  schism  between  pastor  and  people.  Paul's  apostleship  was  denied ; 
his  character  traduced ;  his  motives  impugned.  2.  To  create  a  schism  be- 
tween one  Church  and  another.  The  Judaizers  sought  to  divorce  the  Galatiana 
from  the  fellowship  of  Gentile  Churches  which  were  based  on  liberty.  2.  To 
create  a  schism  between  the  believer  and  his  Lord.  How  often  is  this  effected,  not 
precisely  in  this  way,  but  by  the  passions  engendered  by  religious  strife.  III.  Its 
object.  1.  To  gain  personal  ascendancy.  2.  To  secure  the  deference  and  zeal  of 
the  Galatiana.  Schism: — To  separate  from  the  Church  in  some  one  or  few 
essential  articles  while  you  pretend  to  hold  Christ  the  Head  is  heresy ;  to  separate 
from  it  in  spirit,  by  refusing  holiness  and  not  loving  such  as  are  holy,  is  ungodli- 
ness ;  to  differ  from  it  by  any  error  of  judgment  or  life  is  sin  ;  to  magnify  any  one 
church  or  party,  so  as  to  deny  due  love  and  communion  to  the  rest,  is  schism.  To 
limit  all  the  Church  to  your  party,  and  deny  all  or  any  of  the  rest  to  be  Christians, 
and  parts  of  the  Universal  Church,  is  schism  by  a  dangerous  breach  of  charity, 
And  the  principal  schism  that  you  should  avoid.  It  is  schism  also  to  condemn 
unjustly  any  particular  Church  as  no  Church,  and  it  is  schism  to  withdraw  your 
Lodily  communion  from  a  Church  that  you  were  bound  to  hold  that  communion 
with ;  and  it  is  schism  to  make  divisions  or  parties  in  a  Church,  though  you 
divide  not  from  that  Church.  (B.  Baxter.)  Zeal : — I.  Consider  the  nature  of 
zucal  in  general.  Zeal  is  a  strong  and  ardent  affection  of  the  heart  towards 
some  distant  and  desirable  object.  It  is  not  a  simple,  but  complicated,  emotion, 
which  admits  of  different  degrees  of  ardour  and  sensibility,  accordingly  as  its 
object  appears  more  or  less  agreeable,  more  or  less  distant,  or  more  or  less 
important.  Zeal  always  supposes  a  fixed  and  steady  attention  to  the  object  upon 
which  it  terminates.  A  slight  and  cursory  view  of  any  agreeable  objects  never 
exeites  in  our  breast  the  least  degree  of  zeal  to  make  them  our  own.  But  it  is  a 
law  of  our  nature  that  a  close  and  continued  attention  to  any  desirable  object 
should  draw  all  the  affections  of  the  heart  towards  it,  and,  of  consequence, 
should  produce  the  emotion  of  zeal.  Whatever  agreeable  subject  seizes 
and  absorbs  tbe  mind  will  naturally  enkindle  the  fire  of  zeal.  Zeal 
is  one  of  the  first  and  strongest  emotions  which  we  discover  in  children. 
The  reason  is,  the  smallest  trirles  are  sufficient  to  fill  their  minds  and 
engross  their  whole  attention.  And  when  greater  trifles  fill  greater  mind3 
they  produce  the  same  effect.  Even  philosophers  and  politicians  often  suffer 
th«  most  vain  and  imaginary  schemes  to  take  tne  entire  possession  of  their 
thoughts,  and  to  fill  their  minds  with  a  flame  of  zeal,  which  is  astonishing  to  all 
who  have  never  paid  the  same  atteution  to  the  same  ideal  or  trifling  subjects. 
But  whatever  be  the  object  of  zeal,  it  always  appears  to  the  person  who  feels  this 
li-rely  emotion  to  be  a  matter  highly  interesting,  either  on  its  own  account,  or  on 
account  of  its  supposed  connection  with  some  valuable  end.  II.  Distinguish 
false  zeal  from  true.  There  is  a  zeal  which  forms  a  beautiful  moral  character. 
A  strong  and  ardent  desire  to  promote  the  public  good  justly  commands  universal 
approbation  and  esteem.  This  the  apostle  observes  in  the  verse  immediately  suc- 
ceeding the  text.  •*  But  it  is  good  to  be  zealously  affected  always  in  a  good  thing." 
It  is  the  goodness  of  its  ultimate  object  which  renders  zeal  virtuous  and  amiable. 
When  it  ultimately  seeks  the  promotion  of  a  good  cause,  it  is  according  to  know- 
ledge, it  is  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  reason  and  conscience,  it  is  of  a  godly  sort, 
and  it  resembles  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  But  false  zeal  has  a  diametrically 
opposite  object,  and  ultimately  seeks  a  selfish  end.  III.  How  false  zeal  will  dispose 
men  to  act.  It  is  a  powerful  stimulus  to  action,  and  will  dispose  all  men  to  act 
in  tbe  same  manner,  unless  restrained  by  some  different  passion,  or  by  some 
insurmountable  obstacle.  1.  It  will  dispose  them  to  combine  together  in  carrying 
on  their  destructive  designs.  This  false  fervour,  like  electrical  fire,  will  easily  and 
instantaneously  spread  from  breast  to  breast  among  those  who  are  ardeutlv 
engaged  in  the  same  cause.  2.  False  zeal  will  hurry  men  on  to  act  without  regard- 
ing or  even  consulting  the  sober  dictates  of  their  own  reason.  It  will  not  suffer 
them  to  make  a  proper  use  of  that  noble  faculty  which  God  has  implanted  in 
their  breasts  to  direct  them  in  all  their  private  and  publio  conduct.  Zealots  who 
do  not  give  a  reason  to  themselves  for  their  own  opinions  and  conduct  are  still 
more  averse  to  giving  a  reason  to  others.  3.  While  men  are  under  the  influenoe 
•f  false  z*al  they  are  prone  to  act,  not  only  without  consulting  their  own  reason. 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  IT. 

bat  without  hearkening  to  the  reason  of  others.  They  are  inclined  to  shut  their 
ears  against  the  most  plain  and  conclusive  arguments  which  can  be  offered  to 
their  cool  and  candid  consideration.  4.  Those  whom  a  false  zeal  has  united 
together  in  a  bad  cause  are  extremely  fond  of  increasing  their  strength  by  bringing 
over  as  many  as  possible  to  their  views  and  feelings.  A  false  zeal  is  no  less  a 
proselyting  than  an  infatuating  spirit.  Those  who  are  deceived,  as  are  all  who 
are  actuated  by  a  blind  zeal,  have  a  strong  inclination  to  deceive  others.  The 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  whom  our  Saviour  calls  "  blind  leaders  of  the  blind,"  would 
compass  sea  and  land  to  make  proselytes  to  their  own  errors  and  delusions.  But 
zealots  are  no  less  artful  than  indefatigable  in  their  efforts  to  attach  others  to 
their  persons  and  pursuits.  5.  It  is  the  nature  of  false  zeal  to  embolden  and 
stimulate  men  to  acts  of  violence  and  cruelty  in  effecting  their  sinister  and  selfish 
purposes.  A  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  is  not  more  fierce  and  cruel  than  those 
who  are  zealously  engaged  to  accomplish  a  base  and  cruel  design.  Their  fiery  zeal 
sears  their  consciences  and  hardens  their  hearts,  which  prepares  them  to  sacrifice 
without  remorse  either  friends  or  foes,  who  stand  in  their  way  and  oppose  their 
views.  It  only  remains  to  make  a  proper  application  of  this  subject.  1.  What 
has  been  said  upon  the  nature  and  effects  of  false  zeal  may  help  us  to  determine 
who  are  under  its  governing  influence  at  the  present  day.  2.  It  appears  from  tbe 
description  which  has  been  given  of  false  zeal  that  those  who  feel  it  and  act  under 
its  influence  are  altogether  criminal.  3.  False  zeal  is  the  most  dangerous,  as  well 
as  the  most  criminal,  passion  that  can  possibly  reign  in  the  human  heart.  It  has 
been  the  primary  source  of  innumerable  murders,  massacres,  persecutions,  con- 
spiracies, revolutions,  wars,  and  desolations  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  A 
single  spark  of  false  zeal  may  spread  from  the  breast  of  one  popular  influential 
character  through  a  whole  nation,  and  involve  them  in  the  heaviest  calamities. 
Of  this  we  have  a  late  and  memorable  instance.  About  a  half-a-century  ago  the 
malignant  heart  of  Voltaire  swelled  with  impetuous  zeal  to  crush  Christianity  and 
all  its  votaries.  From  him  the  flame  spread  among  his  learned  friends;  from 
these  it  spread  among  the  French  philosophers  and  nobility ;  and  from  these  it 
spread  among  a  vast  number  of  secret  societies  in  France,  in  Germany,  and  in 
several  other  parts  of  Europe.  In  this  rapid  progress  it  employed  a  thousand  pens 
and  ten  thousand  tongues  to  plead  its  cause  and  proselytize  millions  to  atheistical 
and  sceptical  infidelity.  Strengthened  and  encouraged  by  their  numbers,  these 
zealots  pointed  their  virulence  against  the  throne  as  well  as  the  altar,  which  spread 
anarchy  and  destruction  through  France,  and  involved  a  great  part  of  Europe, 
Egypt,  and  Syria  in  all  the  terrors  and  miseries  of  a  long  and  cruel  war.  Such 
have  been  the  genuine  fruits  of  false  zeal  in  our  own  day;  and  such  we  have 
reason  to  believe  it  will  continue  to  produce  wherever  it  rages  without  restraint. 
Let  us  therefore  endeavour  to  undeceive  those  who  are  deceived,  and  in  this  way 
effectually  check  the  further  spread  of  false  zeal.  4.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  our 
immediate  duty  to  cherish  in  ourselves  and  others  the  spirit  of  true  zeal  in  opposi- 
tion to  false.  Our  cause  is  the  best  in  which  we  can  possibly  be  engaged.  The 
defence  of  our  religion  and  government  calls  for  our  most  zealous  exertions.  (If. 
Emmons,  D.D.)  Unchristian  zeal : — A  false  zeal  in  religion  is  always,  in  some 
respect  or  other,  a  misdirected  zeal,  or  a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge ;  a  zeal 
seeking  some  false  end,  or,  while  proposing  to  itself  a  good  end,  seeking  its  pro- 
motion in  some  unauthorized  way.  Jehu  had  a  good  zeal,  which  he  called  zeal  for 
the  Lord  of  Hosts.  His  fault  was  not  that  he  was  too  zealous,  but  that  his  zeal 
was  really  directed  to  his  own  advancement.  The  Jews,  in  the  days  of  Christ,  had 
a  zeal  for  God,  but  it  was  so  misdirected  as  to  fire  them  with  a  frenzy  to  destroy 
the  Son  of  God,  and  extinguish  the  Light  of  the  world.  There  are  countless  forms 
of  false  zeal  now  at  work,  but,  in  all  cases,  they  sin,  not  by  excess,  but  by  mis- 
direction. Some  are  flaming  with  a  zeal  to  spread  some  of  the  corruptions  of 
Christianity,  and  to  carry  men  away  from  its  great  and  cardinal  truths.  Some  are 
equally  zealous  to  build  up  a  sect  or  a  party  on  other  foundations  than  those 
which  God  has  laid  in  Zion ;  and  that  which  taints  their  zeal  is  the  purpose  to 
which  they  employ  it,  and  not  any  excessive  fervour  of  their  zeal  itself.  (Bonar.) 
True  and  false  zeal : — Let  us  take  heed  we  do  not  sometimes  call  that  zeal  for  God 
and  His  gospel  which  is  nothing  else  but  our  own  tempestuous  and  stormy 
passion.  True  zeal  is  a  sweet,  heavenly,  and  gentle  flame,  which  makes  us  active 
for  God,  but  always  within  the  sphere  of  love.  It  never  calls  for  fire  from  heaven 
to  consume  those  that  differ  a  little  from  us  in  their  apprehensions.  It  is  like  that 
kind  of  lightning  (which  philosophers  speak  of)  that  melts  the  sword  within,  bot 


«up.  iv.]  GALATIANS.  283 

singeth  not  the  scabbard ;  it  strives  to  save  the  soul,  but  hurteth  not  the  body. 
(Cudworth.) 

Ver.  18.    Zealously  affected  always  in  a  good  thing.— Value  and  importance  of 
Christian  zeal: — I.  Examine  the  Christian  quality  spoken  of.     1.  Its  foundation. 
Supreme  love  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  fruit  of  spiritual  regeneration,  is  the  only  solid 
basis  of  true  zeal.      2.  Its  nature.      Sincere  and  warm  regard  for  God's  glory.     A 
compound  of  strong  faith  and  disinterested  regard,  manifesting  itself  by  patient 
endurance  and  constant  exertion.     3.  Its  objects.     (1)  Plain  acknowledged  truths, 
such  as  man's  ruin  by  nature,  his  redemption  by  Christ,  his  renewal  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.     (2)  Matters  of  real  importance.      Not  the  shell  or  garment  of  religion,  but 
the  life  and  heart  of  it.      (3)  The  advancement  of  the  Divine  glory  is  the  object 
nearest  every  true  believer's  heart,  and  he  will  use  all  his  influence  to  uphold  and 
support  the  means  calculated  to  promote  it.    The  instruction  of  the  young,  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  Scriptures,  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  at  home  and  abroad,  &c. 
4.  Its  properties.     (1)  Enlightened  and  prudent.     (2)  Mild  and  gsntle.     (3)  Modest 
and  humble.   (4)  Warm  and  active.  II.  Its  valub  and  importance  in  the  Christian 
cause.      1.  It  facilitates  the  progress  of  those  who  possess  it  in  their  Christian 
course.     2.  It  makes  the  practical  part  of  religion  easy  and  delightful.     3.  It  pro- 
motes a  Christian's  usefulness.     He  feels  a  desire  to  do  something  for  the  interest 
and  benefit  of  his  fellows.     Application :  1.  Let  those  who  possess  this  Christian 
quality  cultivate  it.     2.  Let  strangers  to  Christian  zeal  seek  to  become  partakers 
in  it.     (T.  Lewis.)         Definition  of  zeal : — Zeal  may  be  defined  as  the  heat  or 
fervour  of  the  mind,  prompting  its  vehemence  of  indignation  against  anything 
which  it  conceives  to  be  evil — prompting  its  vehemence  of  desire  towards  anything 
which  it  imagines  to  be  good.     In  itself,  it  has  no  moral  character  at  all.    It  is  the 
simple  instinct  of  energetic  nature,  never  wholly  divested  of  a  sort  of  rude  nobility, 
and  never  destitute  of  influence  upon  the  lives  and  characters  of  others.    The  word 
"  zeal "  is  used  indiscriminately  in  Scripture  in  order  to  denote  a  strong  feeling  of 
the  mind,  whether  bent  upon  evil  design  or  on  cultivating  the  things  which  are  of 
good  report  and  lovely.     (W.  M.  Punslion,  D.D.)        True  zeal : — True  zeal  is  like 
the  vital  heat  in  us  that  we  live  upon,  which  we  never  feel  to  be  angry  or  trouble- 
some.    (Cudworth.)        Heavenly  zeal : — Our  zeal,  if  it  be  heavenly,  if  it  be  true 
vestal  fire  kindled  from  above,  will  not  delight  to  tarry  here  below,  burning  up 
straw  and  stubble  and  such  combustible  things,  and  sending  up  nothing  but  gross 
earthly  flames  to  heaven ;  bat  it  will  rise  up  and  return  back  pure  as  it  came 
down,  and  will  be  ever  striving  to  carry  up  men's  hearts  to  God  along  with  it.  (Ibid.) 
Constancy  of  zeal: — We  do  not  value  an  intermitting  spring  so  much  as  the  clear 
brooklet  which  our  childhood  knew,  and  which  has  laughed  on  its  course  unheed- 
ing, and  which  could  never  be  persuaded  to  dry  up,  though  it  has  had  to  battle 
against  the  scorchings  of  a  jubilee  of  summer's  suns.      We  do  not  guide  ourselves 
by  the  glow-worm's  bead  of  light,  or  with  the  marsh-lamp's  fitful  flame.      No,  we 
look  to  the  ancient  sun,  which  in  our  infancy  struggled  through  the  window,  and 
danced  upon  the  wall  of  the  nursery,  as  if  he  knew  how  much  we  delighted  to  see 
him  light  up  the  flower-cup  and  peep  through  the  shivering  leaf.      And,  for  our- 
selves, we  do  not  value  the  affection  of  a  stranger  awakened  by  some  casual  conge- 
niality, and  displayed  in  kindly  greeting  or  in  occasional  courtesy.     Our  wealth  is 
in  the  patient  bearing,  and  the  unnoticed  deed,  and  the  anticipated  wish,  and  the 
ready  sympathies,  which  make  a  summer  and  a  paradise  wherever  there  is  a  home. 
And  not  only  in  the  natural  and  the  social  relations,  but  in  the  enterprise  of  the 
world,  in  the  busy  activities  of  men,  the  necessity  for  uniformity  in  earnestness  is 
readily  acknowledged.      Society  very  soon  brands  a  man  if  he  has  not  got  a  perse- 
verance as  well  as  an  earnestness  about  him.     The  world  has  got  so  matter-of-fact 
now,  that  it  jostles  the  genius  off   the  footpath,  while  the  plodder,  whose  eye 
sparkles  less  brilliantly  but  more  evenly,  steadily  proceeds  on  his  way  to  success. 
(W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.)         Interest  in  holy  work  to  be  maintained  : — It  is  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  keep  up  our  interest  in  the  holy  work  in  which  we  are 
engaged,  for  the  moment  our  interest  flags  the  work  will  become  wearisome.    Hum- 
boldt says  that  the  copper-coloured  native  of  Central  America,  far  more  accustomed 
than  the  European  traveller  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  climate;  yet  complains  more 
when  upon  a  journey,  because  he  is  stimulated  by  no  interest.     The  same  Indian, 
who  would  complain  when  in  botanizing  he  was  loaded  with  a  box  full  of  plants, 
would  row  his  canoe  fourteen  or  fifteen  hours  together  against  the  current  without 
a  murmur,  because  he  wished  to  return  to  his  family.     Labours  of  love  are  light, 


184  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  ir. 

Love  much,  and  you  can  do  much.  Impossibilities  disappear  when  zeal  is  fervent. 
(C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  Quality  of  action: — The  Hebrews  have  a  saying  that  God  is 
more  delighted  in  adverbs  than  in  nouns  ;  'tis  not  so  much  the  matter  that's  done, 
but  the  matter  how  'tis  done,  that  God  minds.  Not  how  much,  but  how  well !  'Tis 
the  well-doing  that  meets  with  a  "  Well  done  !  "  Let  us  therefore  serve  God,  not 
nominally  or  verbally,  but  adverbially.  (Venning.)  Zeal  and  prudence  : — Two 
ships  were  aground  at  London  Bridge.  The  proprietors  of  one  sent  for  a  hundred 
horses,  and  pulled  it  to  pieces  ;  the  proprietors  of  the  other  waited  for  the  tide,  and 
with  sails  and  rudder  directed  it  as  they  pleased.  (C  Simeon.)  Zeal  and  discre- 
tion : — Zeal  and  discretion  united  together  are  like  the  two  lions  which  supported 
the  throne  of  Solomon  ;  and  he  who  has  them  both  is  like  Moses  for  mildness  and 
like  Phiueas  for  his  service  ;  therefore,  as  wine  is  tempered  with  water,  so  let  dis- 
cretion temper  zeal.  (E.  Smith.)  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  affected  always  in  a 
good  thing: — I.  What  is  the  nature  of  true  Christian  zeal?  1.  The  original 
word  means  heat.  When  the  passions  are  strongly  moved  to  good  and  against  evil 
there  is  religious  zeal.  2.  Love  is  the  chief  ingredient  in  its  composition.  But  it 
is  love  in  the  highest  degree — "  fervent  love."  II.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the 
properties  of  love  are  the  properties  op  zeal  (see  1  Cor.  xiii.).  1.  Humility.  2. 
Meekness.     3.  Patience.     4.  Permanence.    5.  Proportioned  to  that  which  is  good. 

(1 )  For  the  Church.  (2)  More  for  Church  ordinances.  (3)  More  still  for  works  of 
mercy.  (4)  Most  for  love  itself.  III.  Practical  inferences.  If  this  be  true,  then — 1. 
Christian  zeal  is  inimical  to — (1)  Hatred,  bitterness,  prejudice,  bigotry,  persecution. 

(2)  Pride.  (3)  Anger.  (4)  Murmuring  and  impatience.  And,  2,  Is  not  fervour  for 
(1)  Any  evil  thing.  (2)  Indifferent  things.  (3)  Opinions.  (J.  WesUy.)  Zeal: — 
I  Its  ohjects — "  Good  things."  1.  Acts  of  worship.  2.  Acts  of  our  secular  call- 
inn.  3.  Acts  of  righteousness.  4.  Acts  of  charity  and  mercy.  II.  Its  nature. 
1  Forward  and  cheerful.  2.  Besolute  in  spite  of  discouragements.  3.  Diligent  and 
earnest.  4.  Constant.  III.  Its  place  in  religion.  1.  It  is  a  note  of  God's  people. 
2.  It  is  the  fruit  of  Christ's  death.  (1)  By  way  of  obligation.  (2)  Because  Christ 
has  purchased  for  us  the  Spirit  of  power.  IV.  Application.  1.  How  earnest  men 
aru  in  sin — shall  Satan  be  served  better  than  God?  2.  Consider  how  zealous 
you  once  were.  3.  We  cannot  afford  to  be  lukewarm.  (1)  Time  is  short.  (2)  The 
enemy  is  earnest.  4.  The  object  deserves  the  warmest  zeal.  5.  Coldness  is  dan- 
gerous to  ourselves  and  others.  6.  Christian  comfort  depends  on  zeal.  7.  The 
want  of  zeal  is  odious  to  God  and  dishonourable.  (Manton.)  Christian  zeal : — 
I.  Its  nature.  1.  In  general  the  heat  or  fervour  of  the  mind  prompting  its  vehe- 
mence of  indignation  against  evil,  of  desire  for  good  ;  the  simple  instinct  of  ener- 
getic nature,  never  wholly  divested  of  a  sort  of  rude  nobility,  and  never  destitute  of 
influence  upon  the  lives  and  character  of  others.  2.  Christian  zeal — (1)  Springs 
frtim  a  Christian  motive.  If  it  does  not  spring  from  love  it  will  be  a  blind  distem- 
pered emotion.  (2)  Is  displayed  in  a  Christian  manner — merciful  and  tolerant.  (3) 
1&  used  for  Christian  ends — peace  and  good- will.  II.  Its  permanence — on  which 
rusts  its  main  value.  1.  We  see  this  in  nature,  social  relationships,  business.  2. 
The  temptations  to  make  it  fitful.  (1)  Beligious  lukewarmness.  (2)  The  race  for 
wealth.  (3)  Ministerial  preferences.  But  if  religion  is  a  "  good  thing,"  it  is  always 
so.  III.  Its  profit arleness.  It  is  good — 1.  In  itself.  2.  In  its  influences.  3.  In 
its  effects.  (W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.)  The  reasonableness  of  Christian  zeal : — The 
■world  applauds  the  zealous  in  everything  but  religion.  The  warrior  whose  breast 
shall  shine  with  stars,  the  scholar  who  makes  a  hush  as  he  appears — they  are 
those  who  set  an  object  before  them  and  strive  for  it  through  the  hazard  of  years, 
Knd  would  deem  it  a  shame  if  they  did  not  put  heart  into  their  work.  And  shall 
not  the  Christian  be  in  earnest  with  a  cause  that  ennobles,  with  a  responsibility 
•which  he  may  not  transfer,  with  the  destinies  of  his  fellows  for  ever  trembling  in 
the  balance,  and  in  some  sort  committed  to  his  fidelity  as  a  witness  for  God  ?  With 
the  solemn  concerns  of  the  soul  shall  there  be  trifling  ?  When  a  moment's  oppor- 
tunity welcomed  or  Blighted  may  decide  the  fortunes  of  an  eternity,  shall  languid 
counsels  prosper  or  faint  desires  prevail?  When  a  real  strife  is  waged,  fiercer  far 
than  the  fabled  battle  between  the  giants  and  the  gods,  and  heaven  and  hell  are  fn 
earnest  for  the  possession  of  the  man,  shall  thosu  who  have  been  won  for  God  be 
craven  or  traitorous  in  the  fight  ?  (Ibid.)  The  causes  of  declining  zeal : — 
Commercial  prosperity  and  business  cares,  the  eagerness  after  pleasure  and 
the  exigencies  of  political  life,  diffused  doubt  and  wide  -  spread  artistic  and 
literary  culture,  eat  the  very  life  out  of  thousands  in  our  Churches,  and  lower 
their  fervour  till,  like  the  molten  iron  cooling  in  the  air,  what  was  once  all 


OUT.  IV.]  GALAT1ANS.  285 

glowing  with  ruddy  heat  is  crusted  over  with  foul  black  scoriae,  ever  encroaching 
on  the  tiny  central  warmth.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Zeal  illustrated: — During 
the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  Chaplain  Eastman  was  so  badly  injured  by  a  fall  of 
his  horse  as  to  be  compelled  to  lie  down  on  the  field  for  the  night.  As  he  lay 
in  tbe  darkness,  he  heard  a  voice  say,  "  Oh,  my  God  !  "  and  thought,  "  How  can 
I  get  at  him  ?  "  Unable  to  walk,  he  started  to  roll  to  the  sufferer,  and  rolled 
through  blood,  among  the  dead  bodies,  till  he  came  to  the  dying  man,  to  whom  he 
preached  Christ.  This  service  done,  he  was  sent  for  to  attend  a  dying  officer,  to 
whom  he  had  to  be  carried  by  two  soldiers.  Thus  he  passed  the  long  night;  the 
soldiers  carrying  him  from  one  dying  man  to  another,  to  whom  he  preached  Christ, 
and  with  whom  he  prayed,  while  he  was  compelled  to  lie  upon  his  back  beside 
them.  (Foster.)  Christian  teal : — At  a  missionary  meeting  in  Edinburgh,  the 
Rev.  W.  C.  Bunning  related  that  a  friend  of  his  was  once  riding  between  Glasgow 
and  Greenock,  when  the  train  began  to  flag,  and  at  length  stood  still.  The  gentle- 
man got  out,  and  going  up  to  the  engine,  said  to  the  driver,  "  What's  the  matter  ? 
Have  you  run  out  of  water  ?  "  "  No,"  was  the  reply,  "  we've  plenty  of  water,  but 
it's  not  boiling. "  (R.  Brewin.)  Zeal  the  need  of  the  Church: — A  fearful  storm 
was  raging,  when  the  cry  was  heard,  "  Man  overboard  1  "  A  human  form  was  seen 
manfully  breasting  the  furious  elements,  in  the  direction  of  the  shore ;  but  tho 
dominant  waves  bore  the  struggler  rapidly  outward,  and,  ere  boats  could  h» 
lowered,  a  fearful  space  sundered  the  victim  from  help.  Above  the  shriek  of  the 
storm  and  roar  of  the  waters  rose  his  rending  cry.  It  was  an  agonizing  moment. 
With  bated  breath  and  blanched  cheek,  every  eye  was  strained  to  the  struggling 
man.  Manfully  did  the  brave  rowers  strain  every  nerve  in  that  race  of  mercy,  but 
all  their  efforts  were  in  vain.  One  wild  shriek  of  despair,  and  the  victim  went 
down.  A  piercing  cry,  "  Save  him,  save  him  1 "  rang  through  the  hushed  crowd ; 
and  into  their  midst  darted  an  agitated  man,  throwing  his  arms  wildly  into  the 
air,  shouting,  "  A  thousand  pounds  for  the  man  who  saves  his  life !  "  but  his  start- 
ing eye  rested  only  on  the  spot  where  the  waves  rolled  remorselessly  over  the 
perished.  He  whose  strong  cry  broke  the  Btillness  of  the  crowd  was  captain  of  the 
ship  from  whence  the  drowned  man  fell,  and  was  his  brother.  This  is  just  the 
feeling  now  wanted  in  the  various  ranks  of  those  bearing  commission  under  the 
great  Captain  of  our  salvation.  "  Save  him  1  he  is  my  brother."  (Biblical  Treasury.) 
Zeal  in  religion: — Reasons  why  we  should  be  zealous  in  Christ's  service.  1.  Man- 
liness requires  it.  2.  The  character  and  services  of  the  Master  render  anything 
short  of  this  a  crime  and  a  betrayal  of  an  infinite  trust.  3.  The  reward  promised 
may  well  tax  every  power  of  our  being  to  its  utmost  capacity.  (American  Homiletic 
Review.)  Work  aids  zeal : — When  Dr.  Kane  was  in  the  Arctic  regions  he  one 
day  wanted  to  light  a  fire,  and  being  away  from  camp  where  he  could  not  get 
matches,  he  took  a  piece  of  ice,  clear  as  crystal,  and  cutting  it  into  the  shape  of  a 
convex  lens,  he  held  it  up  to  the  sun,  and  in  a  few  moments  kindled  a  pile  of  dry 
leaves  and  sticks  into  a  blaze.  I  presume  the  ice  in  its  turn  was  melted  in  the  fire 
it  had  kindled.  If  any  one  of  us  are  in  a  cold  state  religiously ;  if  in  the  place  of  a 
heart  glowing  with  the  love  of  Christ  which  we  once  had,  we  have  only  a  frozen 
lump  of  religious  respectability  in  our  bosom,  I  wish  we  could  go  among  the  lost 
and  sinning  and  impenitent,  and  just  tell  them  as  best  we  can  how  Christ  died  to 
save  them,  and  I  believe  it  would  open  their  hearts  as  the  sunlight  opens  the  frozen 
bulbs.  And  in  Him  our  own  hearts  would  be  thawed  and  melted.  (A.  J.  Gordon.) 
The  military  value  of  enthusiasm  ; — "  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  .  .  .  with  you."  A 
good  general,  a  well-organized  system,  good  instruction,  and  severe  discipline,  aided 
by  effective  establishments,  will  always  make  good  troops,  independently  of  th« 
^ause  for  which  they  fight.  At  the  same  time  a  love  of  country,  a  spirit  of  enthu- 
siasm, and  a  sense  of  national  honour,  will  operate  upon  young  soldiers  with 
advantage.  (Maxim  LVI.)  An  object  unworthy  of  zeal- — An  eccentric  writer 
tells  this  story  about  a  man  who  was  more  eccentric  than  himself  . — "  Being  still 
ignorant,  he  took  a  vow  upon  him  not  to  wear  a  hat,  because  he  had  heard  that  Sir 

Isaac  Newton  took  off  his  hat  when  he  thought  upon  God.   Thomas  B thought 

he  would  outdo  Sir  Isaac,  for  he  would  not  wear  a  hat  at  all,  and  kept  his  vow 
faithfully  for  eight  years  under  the  bitterest  persecution.  In  his  own  strength  he 
took  his  legal  bondage  upon  him ;  and,  self-will  being  his  ruling  passion,  he  would 
go  through  fire  and  water  for  the  Lord  and  his  own  way,  more  under  law  than 
gospel."  What  a  useful  man  he  might  have  been  if  his  zeal  had  been  well 
directed  !  If  he  had  suffered  persecution  on  account  of  his  devotion  to  religioua 
duties,  and  in  obedience  to  authority  ordained  by  God  !      (From  "  The  Gospeller."} 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IT. 

Christian  zeal : — I.  The  natube  of  Chbistian  zeal.  1.  A  spiritual  principle,  and 
therefore  Divine  in  its  origin.  A  man  may  be  zealous  in  sin  ;  he  may  be  a  zealous 
bigot  or  sectarian ;  but  no  man  can  be  spiritually  zealous,  until  he  is  a  spiritual 
man.  2.  Christian  zeal  is  an  intellectual  principle,  and  therefore  the  result  of 
knowledge.  It  not  only  warms,  but  it  illumines.  3.  Christian  zeal  is  a  modest 
and  humble  principle.  4.  Christian  zeal  is  a  constant,  enduring  principle.  Not 
the  feverish  heat  of  a  diseased  body,  but  regular,  constitutional  warmth.  5.  Chris- 
tian zeal  is  an  active,  vigorous  principle.  It  loosens  the  tongue,  opens  the  hand, 
swiftens  the  feet.  It  prays,  as  well  as  believes ;  it  labours  as  well  as  hopes.  6. 
Christian  zeal  is  an  affectionate  principle,  and  is  always  connected  with  fervent 
love.  No  anathemas ;  no  shibboleths.  It  is  not  suspicious,  but  open ;  not  narrow, 
but  broad,  liberal,  generous.  II.  The  object  of  Chbistian  zeal.  A  twofold 
ephere  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  zeal.  1.  In  securing  the  greatest  possible 
amount  of  good  to  ourselves.  Zealous  in  seeking  extensive  knowledge.  Zealously 
labouring  after  more  of  the  spirit  of  Christ.  In  communicating  all  the  good  in 
our  power  to  those  around  us.  What  an  enlarged  sphere !  The  world  itself  is 
our  field.  But  especially  those  in  our  immediate  neighbourhood.  III.  The 
excellency  op  Chbistian  zeal.  1.  It  is  good  to  the  soul  which  is  under  its 
influence.  The  same  as  exercise  to  the  body.  It  produces  energy,  buoyancy, 
safety,  happiness.  2.  It  is  good  for  the  Church.  8.  It  is  good  for  the  world  at 
large.  4.  It  is  good,  as  it  associates  us  with  the  highest  intelligences  of  the 
heavenly  world.  The  angels  are  distinguished  especially  for  zeal.  And  how 
zealous  was  our  blessed  Saviour  1  IV.  The  impobtance  op  Christian  zeal.  1.  It  is 
pre-eminently  important  when  the  object  contemplated  is  great  and  glorious.  2.  It 
is  pre-eminently  important  when  difficulties  are  numerous.  3.  It  is  pre-eminently 
important  when  the  time  of  action  is  limited.  4.  When  the  responsibilities  are 
momentous.  It  is  not  a  secondary  concern.  Not  optional.  It  is  imperative  that 
we  be  zealously  affected  in  every  good  work.  Our  destiny  awaits  us  according  to 
the  spirit  and  practice  we  have  pursued  on  earth.  Application :  1.  Let  Christians 
cherish  this  holy  principle.  2.  Let  unpardoned  sinners  zealously  seek  the  salva- 
tion of  their  souls.  3.  Let  the  Church  be  zealous  for  the  instruction  of  the  rising 
age.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Religious  zeal : — Zeal  about  religion  may  be  very  far 
from  religious  zeal ;  and  as  the  abuse  of  the  best  thing  is  proverbially  the  worst, 
there  are  few  passions  that  have  proved  more  truly  Satanic  in  their  operations  and 
consequences,  than  a  blind  and  misguided  zeal  about  God  and  divine  things.  I.  We 
must  be  sure  that  its  object  is  the  tbue  one.  Personal  religion.  There  may 
be  a  great  deal  of  profession,  with  little  life  or  spirit.  It  must  have  the  heart,  as 
w*ll  as  the  mind  in  it.  II.  It  must  always  be  in  a  good  thing.  1.  A  truth.  2. 
A  duty.  III.  The  pbinciple  ob  motive  op  zeal  must  be  good.  God's  glory,  not 
our  own  advantage  or  comfort.  IV.  It  must  be  pbopebly  pbopobtioned.  Every 
truth  and  every  duty  is  good,  and  ought  to  be  attended  to  in  its  proper  place ;  but 
troths  and  duties  have  various  degrees  of  importance,  and  we  must  not  prosecute 
the  lower  to  the  neglect  of  the  higher.  V.  It  must  be  consistent,  uniform,  and 
pebsevering.  It  does  not  burn  and  shiver  alternately,  nor  pass  with  uncertain  and 
capricious  mutability  from  the  torrid  to  the  frigid,  and  from  the  frigid  to  the 
torrid  zone  of  feeling.  It  is  not  the  sudden  and  nickering  flame,  however  brilliant 
and  lively,  that  fuses  the  hard  ore,  but  the  glowing  heat  of  the  well-regulated 
furnace.  VI.  The  means,  as  well  as  the  object,  op  Christian  zeal  must  be  good. 
Nothing  may  be  used  that  is  at  variance  with  any  of  the  great  principles  of  moral 
rectitude.  We  cannot  advance  the  Divine  honour  by  first  doing  dishonour  to  the 
Divine  law.  No  fighting  or  persecuting  zeal,  no  indulgence  of  passion,  can  be 
tolerated  in  this  hallowed  cause.  (R.  Wardlaw,  D.D.)  Temporary  zeal : — This 
is  a  human  feeling,  which  exists  in  many,  even  pious  souls.  They  are  zealous  in 
good,  when  faithful  teachers  are  present,  but  when  they  are  absent,  or  it  may  be 
dead,  they  slacken  in  their  zeal.  (Starke.)  Christian  zeal : — Many  things  must 
be  attended  to,  in  order  that  our  zeal  may  be  as  efficient  as  possible ;  that  it  may 
not  be  injurious,  but  acquire  a  proper  tone,  and  be  made  useful  to  ourselves  and 
others.  I.  It  should  be  real  and  conscientious.  1.  There  are  many  kinds  of 
zeal  which  do  not  stand  this  test.  (1)  Zeal  of  sympathy,  which  is  only  that  of  a 
soldier,  who,  though  himself  a  coward,  is  urged  on  to  battle  by  the  example  of  the 
general.  (2)  Constitutional  zeal,  mere  animal  warmth,  no  more  allied  to  our  spirit 
than  are  our  arms  or  feet.  (3)  Zeal  of  sentimentality,  requiring  some  powerful 
excitement,  and  dying  away  when  that  is  gone.  (4)  Zeal  of  affectation,  which  is 
in  fact  hypocrisy,  only  pot  on  for  the  sake  of  appearances.    2.  The  zeal  that  k 


otap.  it.]  GALATIANS.  287 

proper  is  a  fair  demonstration  of  what  is  felt  within  ub.  It  seeks  not  the  eye  of  man, 
but  acts  under  the  keen,  all-searching  eye  of  God.  It  is  influenced  by  what  is  real 
and  true ;  it  is  fed  by  the  real  and  great  blessings  which  Christianity  has  to  bestow ; 
and  then  it  becomes  a  constituent  part  of  the  character,  and  maintains  its  dominion 
in  the  soul.  II.  It  should  be  intelligent,  accompanied  with  knowledge.  That 
it  be  sincere  alone,  is  not  enough.  It  may  be  that,  and  yet  mistaken.  So  we 
must  take  care  to  be  fully  instructed  in  that  on  behalf  of  which  we  put  forth  zeal. 
III.  Prudence  in  the  exercise  and  manifestation  of  our  religious  zeal. 
Prudence  does  not  damp  our  zeal,  but  enables  us  better  to  accomplish  our  object. 
You  cannot  be  too  zealous  in  obtaining  personal  religion,  but  you  cannot  be  too 
prudent  in  the  means  you  adopt  to  promote  it.    IV.  Its  exercise  must  always 

CONSIST   WITH   MORAL  INTEGRITY.      V.    It   MUST   BE  UNDER  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  CHARITY. 

(Dr.  Thomson.)  The  duty  of  Christian  zeal: — The  word  zeal  refers  to  fire  ;  to  be 
zealously  affected  is  to  be  warm,  to  glow,  to  burn.  It  implies  an  ardour  which 
agitates  our  whole  being,  rouses  every  dormant  faculty,  touches  every  spring  of 
sensibility,  and  calls  forth  all  our  energy  in  vigorous  exertion  towards  the  object  to 
which  our  efforts  are  directed.  The  heart  of  the  true  Christian  is  the  altar  where 
this  holy  flame  glows  and  burns,  and  to  fan  this  pure  flame  of  love  into  a  brighter 
blaze  was  St.  Paul's  design  when  he  wrote  this  passage.     I.  Let  us  adduce  a  few 

CONSIDERATIONS   ILLUSTRATIVE   OF  THE   TRUTH   OF  THE    PROPOSITION   IN   THE   TEXT.      1. 

An  object  really  and  pre-eminently  good,  deserves  and  demands  an  ardent  con- 
tinuous zeal  in  its  promotion.  And  is  not  Christianity  such  ?  2.  An  object  really 
and  pre-eminently  good,  is  not  ordinarily  to  be  attained  without  an  ardent 
persevering  zeal.  How  readily  is  this  recognized  with  respect  to  worldly  affairs. 
And  shall  those  in  pursuit  of  a  soul's  salvation  fold  their  hands  in  idle  self-com- 
placency t  Are  not  the  angels  zealous  ?  Was  not  our  Lord  consumed  with  zeal  f 
What  but  this  brought  Him  down  to  earth — from  a  throne  of  glory  to  an  igno- 
minious Cross  t  3.  Zeal,  in  promotion  of  an  object  really  and  pre-eminently  good, 
is  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  crowned  with  success.  Truth  is  indestructible, 
cannot  die,  must  prevail.  There  are  no  difficulties  that  cannot  be  conquered  by 
ardent,  persevering  zeal ;  there  is  no  work  which  it  cannot  achieve.    II.  Let  us 

LEARN    SOME   OF   THOSE   LESSONS   OF  PRACTICAL  INSTRUCTION   WHICH  THE  MAXIM  OF  THE 

text  is  well  calculated  to  teach.  1.  Let  us  always  see  to  it  that  the  object  of 
our  zeal  is  really  good.  2.  How  can  any  persons  professing  religion  justify  their 
claim  to  the  Christian  character  while  destitute  of  zeal  ?  3.  Let  us  see  that  our 
zeal  be  constant,  and  stable.  4.  Those  who  are  thus  zealous  are  not  the  fools,  but 
the  wise  men.  (R.  Newton.)  Excellency  of  Christian  zeal: — To  be  zealously 
affected  as  to  spiritual  things  will  be  found  to  be  "  good " — 1.  As  an  evidence 
of  the  liveliness  of  grac9  in  our  own  souls.  2.  Because  it  is  a  most  suitable  means 
of  preserving  and  increasing  Divine  grace.  3.  Because  of  its  beneficial  tendency 
to  arouse  the  zeal  of  others.  4.  Because  of  the  usefulness  accomplished  by 
this  excellent  quality  in  the  welfare  of  mankind  at  large.  6,.  Because  of  the 
especial  glory  which  is  thereby  brought  unto  God.  (John  Garwood,  M.A.)  Holy 
and  unholy  zeal  contrasted: — Fire  may  be  employed  for  good  or  evil.  Heat  is 
essential  to  life,  yet  may  prove  the  forerunner  of  widespread  consumption.  If  on 
the  one  hand  it  is  genial,  restorative,  purifying ;  on  the  other  it  is  devastating  and 
destructive.  So  we  speak  of  the  warmth  of  love,  the  heat  of  passion,  the  fire  of 
persecution,  &c,  to  describe  various  affections  and  emotions  of  the  mind.  Zeal  is 
a  word  invented  by  the  Greeks  to  express  the  glowing  intensity  of  any  mental 
affection,  whether  usefully  or  perniciously  directed.  Observe — I.  The  zeal  that 
is  reprehensible.  1.  A  zeal  for  rites  and  forms  and  ceremonies,  as  if 
they  were  of  any  value  in  themselves.  2.  A  zeal  for  tradition,  3.  An  ignorant 
zeal.  4.  A  persecuting  zeal.  This  always  defeats  its  own  end.  II.  The 
zeal  that  is  commendable.  1.  That  which  proceeds  from  true  love  to  God. 
2.  A  zeal  for  God's  spiritual  worship.  3.  A  zeal  for  good  works.  4.  Zeal  for 
the  edification  of  the  Church.  (J.  D.  Sirr,  D.D.)  Motives  of  Christian  zeal  • — 
1.  The  command  of  Christ.  2.  The  example  of  Christ.  3.  The  love  of  Christ 
in  the  heart.  4.  The  examples  of  holy  men.  5.  The  personal  advantages 
derived  from  it.  6.  The  good  which  it  may  accomplish.  7.  The  commendation 
which  is  given  of  it,  and  its  examples  in  the  Scriptures,  (John  Bate.)  Tlie  pro- 
fitableness of  Christian  zeal : — "  It  is  good  "  ;  no  higher  praise  than  that  can  be  given 
to  it.  "  It  is  good  " — the  very  thing  that  was  said  of  the  fairly  finished  earth,  on 
the  morning  of  Jehovah's  rest  and  pleasure.  "  It  is  good  " — the  very  thing  that 
is  spoken  of  God  Himself:  "Thou  art  good,  and  doest  good. "     1.  To  be  always 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [au».  I?. 

zealously  affected  in  a  good  thing  is  good  in  itself.  Where  the  heart  preserves  the 
ardour  of  devotion,  it  will  preserve  the  ardour  of  enterprise.  It  will  be  always  at 
work  for  the  best  interests  of  men.  There  will  be  no  time  for  dalliance  with 
temptation,  or  for  the  misgiving  of  unbelief.  The  active  love  and  the  loyal  heart 
will  be  mutually  helpful  to  each  other,  and  the  man  will  grow  like  a  cedar — his 
roots  wedging  themselves  close  and  firm  into  the  Rock  of  Ages,  his  branches 
flinging  themselves  upward  with  such  graceful  aim  that  no  tree  in  the  garden  of 
God  shall  be  like  unto  him  in  his  beauty.  2.  Good  in  its  influences.  Who  shall 
estimate  the  effect  upon  the  progress  of  the  Redeemer's  Kingdom,  when  the  Church 
is  filled  with  the  spirit  of  Christian  zeal  ?  Oh !  a  prospect  of  ineffable  spiritual 
beauty  rises  up  before  the  prophetic  eye,  informed  by  the  spirit  of  the  Master. 
Each  member  of  the  Church  becomes  a  missionary  of  the  truth,  and  there  is  neither 
silence  nor  faltering  in  the  testimony ;  the  cords  of  love,  which  are  the  bands  of  a 
Man,  enclose  thousands  in  the  gospel  fellowship  ;  the  Church  itself,  in  growing 
purity  and  strength,  becomes  the  dominion  of  ever-ripening  authority ;  the  world, 
charged  by  the  Word  as  the  living  epistles  speak  it,  bows  its  rank,  and  its  intellect, 
and  its  pride,  before  the  feet  of  Jesus ;  He  reigns  whose  right  it  is,  over  a  regenerate 
people,  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power;  and  then  cometh  the  end — the 
finished  mystery  of  the  Cross,  the  consummated  glories  of  redemption.  (W.  M. 
Punshon,  D.D.)  Objects  of  Christian  zeal : — 1.  The  salvation  of  the  soul  of  him 
who  is  the  subject  of  it.  2.  The  House  of  God  in  its  worship,  its  word,  its  att««n- 
dance.  3.  Promotion  of  family  religion.  4.  The  conversion  of  sinners.  5.  The 
general  welfare  of  all  the  means,  ordinances,  and  institutions  of  the  Church.  6. 
Whatever  concerns  the  real  welfare  of  mankind.  (John  Bate.)  Obligation  to 
Christian  zeal : — 1.  The  value  of  personal  salvation.  2.  The  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  its  exercise.  3.  The  duties  and  privileges  of  religion.  4.  The  claims  of  the 
Church.  5.  The  condition  of  the  world.  6.  The  glory  of  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Regu- 
lation of  Christian  zeal : — 1.  It  should  be  guided  by  charity.  2.  By  the  wisdom 
which  cometh  from  above.  3.  By  a  due  regard  to  times,  circumstances,  places,  and 
persons.  4.  By  the  relative  claims  of  each  object.  5.  By  an  aim  to  the  glory  of 
God.  (Ibid.)  False  zeal : — A  false  zeal  in  religion  is  always,  in  some  respect  or 
other,  a  misdirected  zeal,  or  a  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge — a  zeal  seeking 
some  false  end,  seeking  its  promotion  in  some  unauthorized  way.  Jehu  had  a 
good  zeal,  which  he  called  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  His  fault  was,  not  that  he 
was  too  zealous,  but  that  his  zeal  was  really  directed  to  his  own  advancement. 
The  Jews  in  the  days  of  Christ  had  a  zeal  for  God,  but  it  was  so  misdirected  as  So 
fire  them  with  a  frenzy  to  destroy  the  Son  of  God  and  extinguish  the  Light  of  the 
world.  There  are  countless  forms  of  false  zeal  now  at  work  ;  but  in  all  cases  th«y 
sin,  not  by  excess,  but  by  misdirection.  Some  are  flaming  with  a  zeal  to  spread 
some  of  the  corruptions  of  Christianity,  and  to  carry  men  away  from  its  great 
and  cardinal  truths.  Some  are  equally  zealous  to  build  up  a  sect  or  party  on  other 
foundations  than  those  which  God  has  laid  in  Zion ;  and  that  which  taints  their 
zeal  is  the  purpose  to  which  they  employ  it,  and  not  any  excessive  fervour  of  their 
zeal  itself.  (II.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Zeal : — I.  As  to  the  true  natuke  of  godly 
zeal,  in  the  general  it  is  a  great  vehemency  and  ardency  in  religion.  It  is  a  fire  of 
the  sanctuary,  not  a  profane  flame.  It  is  the  warmth  and  vigour  of  holy  persons  in 
their  prosecution  of  what  is  good  and  virtuous.  More  particularly,  this  zeal  is  either 
internal  or  external.  I  will  speak  first  of  that  which  is  internal,  and  hath  its  seat 
in  the  mind  and  soul.  This  is  no  other  than  the  vehemency  and  fervour  of  the 
affections,  or  it  is  the  affections  inflamed  with  religion.  It  is  a  burning  of  all  the 
passions,  namely,  a  fervent  desire  of  God  and  goodness ;  it  is  a  holy  anger  for  sin 
stirred  up  to  a  great  height ;  it  is  an  exalted  love  of  whatever  is  good  ;  it  is  a  per- 
fect hatred  and  detestation  of  vice ;  it  is  vehemency  of  grief,  because  God  is 
offended  and  religion  despised ;  it  is  a  seraphic  joy  and  gladness  springing  from 
the  delight  which  is  taken  in  holiness.  But  though  zeal  be  the  utmost  intention 
and  fervent  acting  of  all  the  affections,  yet  it  is  chiefly  the  heat  and  earnestness 
of  these  two,  namely,  love  and  anger.  First,  it  is  an  ecstasy  of  love :  and  that  love 
respects  both  God  and  man.  He  that  doth  not  love  God  dearly  can't  be  zealous : 
for  zeal  is  an  inflamed  love  of  the  beauties  and  excellences  of  the  Divine  nature, 
and  (as  the  consequence  of  this)  it  is  a  passionate  longing  to  exalt  God's  glory  in 
the  world.  Again,  he  that  ardently  loves  God,  will  love  those  who  bear  His  image. 
Wherefore  an  earnest  love  of  the  brethren  must  needs  be  an  inseparable  attendant 
of  godly  zeal,  according  to  that  of  St.  Peter,  "  Love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart 
fervently."     Thus  zeal  is  the  flame  of  love.     And  from  this  love  flows  anger  and 


CHAP,  it.]  GALATIANS.  289 

indignation  against  sin,  and  the  doers  of  it ;  for  he  that  loves  God  will  show  hia 
wrath  against  that  which  offends  and  displeaseth  Him.  We  find  ourselves  incensed 
and  exasperated  to  a  very  high  degree  when  we  see  affronts  and  injuries  offered  to 
onr  parents,  and  those  whom  we  love  most ;  much  more,  when  our  heavenly  Father 
is  affronted  and  injured,  our  hearts  must  needs  rise  within  us,  and  we  cannot  but 
feel  them  stirred  with  anger  and  a  holy  revenge ;  for  zeal  is  an  indignation  con- 
ceived for  the  wrong  done  to  those  whom  we  dearly  love.  Thus  zeal  is  no  other 
than  love  angered.  Secondly,  this  godly  zeal  is  not  only  inward,  but  outward.  First, 
the  Christian  zeal  manifests  itself  by  words,  as  it  is  said  of  Apollos,  that  "being  fer- 
vent in  spirit,  he  spake  and  taught  diligently  the  things  of  the  Lord  "  (Acts  xviii.  25) ; 
and,  "  he  spake  boldly  in  the  synagogue  "  (ver.  26).  So  the  apostles,  "  We  cannot 
but  speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  "  (Acts  iv.  20).  Zeal  gives 
utterance,  and  will  not  suffer  the  truth  to  be  stifled  and  concealed ;  for  truth  is  of 
absolute  necessity,  and  error  is  damnable  as  well  as  vice.  Secondly,  zeal  displays 
itself  in  all  religious  actions  and  performances.  But  to  let  you  see  that  zeal 
manifests  itself  in  outward  actions,  and  never  wants  ways  of  expressing  and  openly 
displaying  itself,  I  will  mention  some  of  the  chief  est  duties  required  in  Christianity. 
The  first  I  will  name,  is  repentance.  This  and  zeal  must  go  hand  in  hand, 
according  to  that  advice  given  to  the  Church  of  Laodicea,  "Be  zealous  and  repent" 
(Kev.  iii.  19).  And  St.  Paul,  speaking  to  the  Corinthians  of  the  several  effects  and 
concomitants  of  repentance,  demands  of  them  "  what  zeal  it  wrought  in  them  " 
(2  Cor.  vii.  11).  Again,  true  evangelical  charity  is  never  void  of  this  ;  wherefore  you 
hear  St.  Peter  exhorting  the  Christians  thus,  "  Have  fervent  charity  among  your- 
selves "  (1  Peter  iv.  8).  And  hence  the  Corinthians'  forwardness  in  alms-deeds,  in 
distributing  and  ministering  to  the  saints,  is  called  "  zeal"  (2  Cor.  ix.  2).  Moreover, 
the  zeal  of  Christians  must  be  discovered  in  prayer,  that  most  necessary  duty  of 
our  religion.  This  is  called  by  St.  Paul  "  labouring"  (or  striving)  "fervently  in 
prayer  "  (Col.  iv.  12).  In  the  next  place,  hearing  the  Word  ought  to  be  with  zealous 
attention  and  vigour,  because  it  is  for  our  lives,  or  eternal  welfare  is  concerned. 
Farther,  I  might  show  you  that  an  extraordinary  fervour  and  zeal  must  accompany 
the  partaking  of  the  holy  communion.  Here,  if  ever,  our  life  and  heat  must  dis- 
play themselves.  There  must  be  fire  on  this  altar :  our  hearts  must  be  a  burnt- 
offering.  Zeal  is  when  our  graces  are  in  their  zenith  or  vertical  point.  Zeal  is 
heroic  virtue  in  the  Christian  philosophy  :  it  is  the  highest  pitch  and  most  exalted 
degree  of  every  endowment,  grace,  and  duty.  I  will  now  (according  to  what  I  pro- 
posed) annex  the  properties  of  it,  which  are  these :  First,  this  zeal  which  I  have 
described,  is  real  and  sincere,  in  opposition  to  counterfeit  zeal.  And  we  may  know 
the  sincerity  of  it — 1.  By  this,  namely,  if  we  are  most  offended  and  incensed 
because  God  is  dishonoured  and  injured;  for  zeal  shows  itself  in  the  things  that 
belong  to  God's  glory.  Thus  Christ  showed  the  truth  of  His  zeal  for  His  Father's 
house  (John  ii.  17).  This  is  one  way  to  try  the  sincerity  of  your  zeal,  viz.,  if 
you  signally  show  it  against  God's  enemies,  whilst  in  the  meantime  you  discover 
a  great  deal  of  clemency  to  those  who  are  your  own,  and  have  particularly  injured 
yourselves.  2.  The  right  genuine  zeal  may  be  known  by  this ;  that  it  spends  not 
itself  about  lesser  matters,  and  things  that  are  wholly  indifferent.  Some  men's  zeal 
runs  out  into  this  one  main  thing,  viz.,  to  uphold  some  doubtful  opinion,  and  to 
defy  and  detest  all  that  are  not  of  their  persuasion  as  to  that  particular.  But  a 
wise,  good  man  proportions  his  zeal  according  to  the  worth  and  importance  of  the 
matters  he  is  conversant  about.  And  because  indifferent  things  are  not  important 
and  weighty,  he  knows  that  they  deserve  not  his  zeal.  All  was  not  massy  gold  that 
Solomon's  merchants  brought  over  in  their  ships :  apes  and  peacocks  were  part  of 
their  cargo.  Thus  in  our  merchandising  for  truth,  we  meet  with  some  slight  and 
trifling  things,  nice  points,  notions  for  embellishment  only.  And  next  to  these,  are 
external  ceremonies  and  rites,  particular  modes  and  circumstances  in  religious 
worship.  But  we  ought  to  lay  out  our  zeal  on  those  things  which  are  in  their  own 
nature  worthy,  necessary,  and  indispensible.  3.  This  is  another  trial :  if  your  zeal 
be  accompanied  with  love  and  charity,  you  may  infer  it  is  sincere ;  but  if  it  be 
so  fierce  and  greedy  as  to  devour  these,  and  to  stir  you  up  to  be  cruel  and  implac- 
able, then  conclude  that  your  zeal  is  not  the  evangelical  zeal.  4.  Sometimes  gain 
and  profit  are  the  only  spring  of  men's  zeal,  and  then  yon  may  conclude  it 
to  be  false  and  counterfeit,  and  not  the  true  religious  zeal.  Those  who  make 
gain  their  godliness  are  no  true  zealots.  5.  When  zeal  proceeds  from  pride 
and  ambition,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  not  sincere.  Secondly,  this 
is  another  property  of  zeal,  that  it  be  accompanied  with,  and  guided  by  know- 

J9 


290  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ledge,  in  opposition  to  blind  zeal.  St.  Paul  bears  record  of  the  Jews,  that  "  they 
had  a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge"  (Rom.  x.  2).  And  of  himself 
he  saith,  that  he  had  formerly  been  "  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  his 
fathers"  (Gal.  i.  14),  which  were  a  medley  of  ignorance  and  superstition.  But  ha 
tells  us  in  another  place  how  pernicious  that  zeal  proved  to  him,  and  what  vile 
enormities  it  excited  him  to.  But  true  zeal  is  built  on  knowledge.  This  heat  doth 
not  want  light,  but  is  conducted  by  judgment  and  wisdom.  Thirdly,  there  ought 
to  be  this  property  of  our  zeal,  that  it  be  according  to  a  rule,  and  that  it  keep 
within  its  due  limits,  in  opposition  to  irregular  and  lawless  zeal.  Zeal  must  have 
its  certain  limits  and  boundaries.  This  fire  must  be  kept  on  the  hearth,  in  its  due 
place.  We  ought  to  act  in  religion  by  certain  rules  and  measures,  for  it  is  a  regular 
and  well-guided  zeal  that  God  accepts.  Fourthly,  I  will  add  this  as  another 
property,  it  must  be  peaceable  and  well-tempered,  sedate  and  discreet,  in  opposition 
to  turbulent  and  rash  zeal.  This  carnal  zeal  is  an  immoderate  heat,  an  exorbitant 
commotion  of  the  mind,  an  excess  and  transport,  whereby  men  disorder  both  them- 
selves and  others.  Between  this  zeal  and  the  other,  there  is  as  much  difference  as 
between  the  quick  and  fierce  lightnings  which  are  observed  sometimes  in  the  skies, 
and  the  sun's  mild,  yet  active  flame.  False  zeal  is  full  of  noise  aud  clamour,  and 
violent  motion.  They  who  are  acted  by  it  think  that  it  is  of  the  nature  of  some 
rivers,  which  are  never  so  useful  as  when  they  overflow.  Christian  zeal  is  a  natural 
and  kindly  heat,  not  a  burning  fever  or  calenture.  The  mind  or  soul  of  man  with 
all  its  functions  and  faculties,  is  in  Scripture  often  called  the  heart,  that  being 
thought,  of  old,  to  be  the  chief  place  of  its  residence.  But  we  may  learn,  by  the 
by,  from  this  denomination,  that  the  mind  of  man  ought  to  resemble  his  heart, 
from  whence  it  borrows  its  name.  Now  the  motion  of  this  in  healthful  persons  is 
even  and  placid,  propagates  the  like  pulse  into  all  the  several  arteries  which  over- 
spread the  body.  All  its  stops  and  intervals  are  equal  and  harmonious,  as  if  nature 
kept  time  in  these  organs  of  the  body.  This  high  pulse  argues  no  less  than  an 
inflamation  of  the  mind,  than  a  feverish  distemper  of  the  soul.  Lastly,  the  text 
affords  another  character  of  this  zeal :  it  must  be  constant  and  persevering.  We 
are  to  be  zealously  affected  always.  This  holy  fire  must  ever  be  burning  on  the 
altar.  This  is,  according  to  the  apostle's  expression,  "  instantly  "  (or  intensely) 
"  serving  God  day  and  night  "  (Acts  xxvi.  7).  As  no  adverse  accidents  and  calami- 
tous circumstances,  so  no  allurements  and  smiles  of  the  world  are  able  to  make 
the  truly  zealous  person  alter  the  tenour  of  his  life.  He  hath  set  himself  to  a  just 
pitch,  and  there  he  continues.  False  zeal  spends  itself  too  fast,  and  like  some 
meteor  is  seen  to  blaze  only  a  short  time,  and  then  to  vanish.  But  that  zeal  which 
is  true  and  genuine,  like  the  sun  shineth  more  and  more  unto  a  perfect  day,  and  is 
a  never-failing  source  of  light  and  heat.  II.  Having  finished  the  first  general 
part  of  my  discourse,  wherein  I  have  displayed  the  true  nature  of  Christian  zeal,  I 
am  now  in  the  next  place  (but  more  briefly)  to  show  you  how  seasonable  it  is  to 
pot  in  practice  this  geace,  or  rather  this  complication  of  graces  and  virtues. 
The  reasonableness  of  this  is  contained  in  those  words  in  the  front  of  the  text. 
1.  I  say  it  is  good  in  respect  of  God,  and  that  if  you  consider  Him,  either  as  He  is 
in  His  own  nature,  or  as  He  is  to  us.  First,  in  Himself,  and  in  His  own  nature,  He 
is  a  spirit,  and  therefore  our  service  to  Him  must  be  spiritual,  lively,  and  zealous. 
But  will  you  offer  dead  services  to  the  living  God  1  Will  you  offer  a  body  without 
a  soul  ?  For.such  is  our  service  and  worship,  if  it  be  devoid  of  zeal  and  fervency. 
Secondly,  if  you  consider  God  as  He  is  to  us,  every  ways  good  and  gracious,  con- 
tinually loading  us  with  His  benefits,  and  laying  obligations  on  us  by  all  ways 
imaginable,  we  are  engaged  on  this  account  to  be  zealous.  We  must  do  our  homage 
and  service  to  God,  as  to  our  great  King  and  Lord  in  the  highest  strain,  and  with 
the  greatest  intention.  2.  Zeal  is  most  reasonable  in  respect  of  ourselves,  and 
that,  first,  because  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  our  happiness.  Neither  grace  nor 
glory  are  attained  otherwise,  as  our  Saviour  assures  us,  telling  us  that  "the  kingdom 
of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force  "  (Matt.  xi.  12).  And 
secondly,  zeal  is  not  only  necessary  but  advantageous.  The  benefits  of  it  are  veiy 
numerous ;  it  shall  suffice  to  mention  some  of  them  only.  Zeal  takes  up  our 
thoughts,  and  employs  our  minds  wholly,  and  therefore  is  beneficial  on  this  account, 
that  it  frees  us  from  worldly  cares  and  solicitudes.  It  suffers  us  not  to  be  anxious 
about  earthly  things,  because  it  fixes  our  hearts  on  heavenly  ones  :  it  causes  us  to  set 
our  affections  on  things  above,  and  consequently  we  are  not  troubled  with  those 
below.  Again,  zeal  makes  us  contented  and  cheerful.  When  we  are  spirited  with 
this  excellent  quality,  we  are  able  to  serve  God  with  ineffable  joy  and  gladness* 


chap,  w.]  GALATIANS.  891 

This  likewise  produoeth  fortitude  and  courage.  If  we  be  zealous,  we  shall  be  valiant 
for  the  truth,  we  shall  not  fear  the  greatest  opposition,  but  undauntedly  make  our 
way  through  all  difficulties  and  disasters.  Zeal  will  enable  us  to  suffer  anything 
for  a  good  cause.  Let  me  add,  that  zeal  renders  all  things  in  religion  easy.  There 
are  some  things  so  sublime  in  every  virtue,  that  it  is  hard  to  attain  to  them.  But 
zeal  facilitates  all ;  this  makes  the  way  of  religion  plain  and  smooth,  and  helps  us 
to  run,  and  not  faint.  This  is  as  wind  to  the  sails,  as  bellows  to  the  fire,  and  as  an 
edge  to  the  sword.  Lastly,  steadiness  is  begot  by  zeal,  this  crowns  us  with  con- 
stancy and  perseverance.  3.  Not  only  in  respect  of  God  and  ourselves,  but  in 
regard  of  our  brethren  also,  this  is  our  duty  and  concern.  For  zeal  is  the  best 
promoter  of  religion  in  others,  according  to  that  of  the  apostle,  "  Your  zeal  hath 
provoked  many"  (2  Cor.  ix.  2).  No  wonder  that  there  are  so  few  converts,  that 
religion  gains  no  more  ground  in  the  world,  since  there  is  so  little  zeal.  III.  And 
last  task  must  be  to  apply  the  foregoing  doctrine,  which  I  will  do  in  these  two 
particulars,  namely,  by  way  of  reproof  and  of  exhortation.  First,  this  reproves 
all  lukewarmness,  carelessness,  and  indifferency  in  religion.  What  a  frigid  zone  do 
we  live  in  now  ?    How  perfunctory  are  we  in  all  our  religious  duties  and  services  ? 

0  thou  Christian  zeal,  whither  art  thou  banished  ?    Now  to  back  my  exhortation, 

1  will  offer  these  serious  considerations  to  you.  1.  It  will  not  be  improper  for 
some,  yea,  most  of  you,  to  reflect  on  your  former  indifferency  and  coldness :  and 
let  that  consideration  move  you  to  be  very  zealous  for  the  future.  It  is  high  time 
to  mend  our  pace.  2.  It  may  be  some  of  you  have  been  zealots  in  the  worst  sense, 
that  is,  exceeding  eager  and  hot  against  religion  and  the  ways  of  holiness.  The 
thoughts  of  this  should  make  you  for  the  future  zealously  affected  in  that  which  is 
?ood.  3.  All  of  us  ought  to  consider  the  end  aDd  design  of  Christ's  meritorious 
indertakings  for  us.  4<  He  gave  Himself  for  us,"  saith  the  apostle,  "  that  He  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works."  4.  Let  us  weigh  well  the  important  nature  of  those  things  which  we 
are  bid  to  concern  ourselves  for.  5.  There  is  this  consideration  to  urge  you  to  this 
duty,  that  the  neglect  of  it  will  prove  very  dangerous  to  you,  as  appears  from 
what  was  said  to  the  Church  of  Laodicea  (Eev.  ill.  16).  6.  Set  before  you  the 
examples  of  the  best  and  chiefest  servants  of  God.  As  we  see  in  nature's  fabric 
the  most  excellent  bodies,  as  the  sun  and  stars,  are  the  most  restless  and  active,  so 
it  is  in  the  economy  of  grace,  the  most  eminent  saints  of  God  have  been  always 
most  earnest  and  zealous,  continually  moving  and  acting  in  the  way  of  godliness. 
How  zealous  were  Moses,  Phineas,  Elias,  David,  John  the  Baptist,  Paul,  and  other 
saints  recorded  in  holy  Scripture?  7.  Would  you  be  zealous,  then  seriously 
study  the  last  things.  Think  often  of  death,  and  that  will  inspire  you  with  zeal, 
(John  Edwards,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  Until  Christ  be  formed  in  yon. — The  growth  of  Christ  in  us : — Now, 
although  the  apostle  nowhere  carries  out  this  into  a  full  allegory,  yet  it  may  be 
clearly  seen  that  this  thought  dwelt  in  his  mind,  viz.,  that  as  Christ  came  into  this 
world,  and  was  first  a  babe,  and  then  a  youth,  and  finally  a  man,  so  there  was  an 
order  in  the  stages  of  our  personal  experience ;  and  that  Christ  in  us  was  born, 
first  as  a  babe,  and  went  on  through  all  the  stages  of  youth  up  to  maturity,  so  that 
we  have  in  the  spiritual  experience  of  our  nature  the  parallel,  the  analogue,  of  that 
which  Christ  Himself  went  through.  This  great  truth,  therefore,  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  Christian  life  begins  at  the  point  of  weakness,  and  goes  on  by  regular 
normal  stages  to  maturity.  It  is  first  a  spark,  and  then  a  flame,  hidden  in  much 
smoke,  and  at  last  a  pure  and  glowing  coal.  With  this  unfolding  of  the  primal 
idea,  I  proceed,  now,  to  make  some  applications.  1.  Children  and  youth  may 
become  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  may  be  safely  gathered  into  the 
Christian  fold,  if  only  their  parents  and  their  pastors  will  be  content  to  receive  the 
babe-Christ  in  the  young  convert,  or  the  young  Christian.  Persons,  we  all  know, 
are  more  susceptible  at  an  early  age  that  at  any  other.  Children  are  not  superior 
to  men  in  knowledge,  nor  in  strength,  nor  in  discrimination.  There  are  a  thousand 
of  the  acquirements  by  which  a  man  battles  with  the  world  that  they  are  not 
superior  in.  But  there  is  one  all-important  principle  which  belongs  to  childhood, 
and  not  to  any  other  time,  viz. :  that  peculiar  development  of  the  soul  by  which  it 
knows  how  to  take  hold  of  another,  and  to  borrow  ics  light  from  that  other.  To 
borrow  an  orchard  illustration,  there  is  but  one  period  of  the  year  in  which  you  can 
graft  well.  It  may  be  possible  to  graft  successfully  at  other  times ;  but  there  is  one 
period  when  you  must  make  the  transfer  if  you  would  take  a  bud  from  one  tree. 


191  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it 

and  graft  it  into  another,  and  have  it  produce  its  kind,  and  do  the  best  that  it  is 
capable  of  doing.  There  is  but  just  one  season  when  the  bark  lifts  easy,  and  the 
staff  is  in  the  right  condition.  There  is  a  time,  also,  when  the  little  natures  bud 
easily,  and  graft  easily.  It  is  possible  to  graft  them  at  other  times,  by  extra 
elaboration  ;  but  more  thau  half  of  the  grafts  will  blow  out,  as  the  saying  is. 
There  is  a  period,  however,  in  which  ninety-nine  out  of  a  hundred  will  Btick  and 
grow.  For  all  the  adaptations  of  the  child  at  the  time  are  such  as  to  incline  it  to 
borrow  its  life  from  another.  It  feeds  upon  another  instinctively.  It  is  a  little 
parasite.  It  is  but  the  transfer  of  that  which  is  its  need  and  instinct  to  the  blessed 
Saviour.  And  then  it  becomes  a  Christian  child.  But  many  people,  in  bringing 
up  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  look  with  great  sus- 
picion on  early  Christian  experiences.  They  are  afraid  of  abnormal  growths.  2. 
One  may  be  a  Christian  who  is  yet  very  far  from  the  beauty  and  symmetry  and 
manhood  of  piety.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  they  only  are  Christians  who  are 
beautiful  Christians,  or  who  are  embellished  with  all  Christian  graces.  A  man 
may  be  a  Christian,  and  his  Christ  may  be  a  babe.  A  man  may  be  a  Christian, 
and  the  Christian  nature  in  him  may  yet  be,  as  it  were,  in  its  boyhood.  A  man 
may  be  a  Christian,  and  yet  the  Christ  in  him  may  have  reached  only  that  stage  in 
which  it  enters  upon  young  manhood.  A  man  may  be  a  Christian,  and  the  Christ 
in  him  may  have  entered  upon  His  ministry,  as  it  were,  in  the  full  ripeness  of  His 
manhood.  We  are  not,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  persons  are  not  Christians 
because  they  are  very  imperfect.  If  a  man's  heart  is  in  the  cause,  and  he  enlists 
in  the  army,  he  is  a  soldier,  not  when  he  is  a  veteran,  but  when  he  enlists.  He  is 
a  soldier  just  as  really  when  his  name  goes  down  on  the  roll,  and  he  goes  out  with 
the  awkward  squad  to  the  first  drill,  as  after  he  has  been  in  the  army  five  years — 
although  he  is  not  a  soldier  with  the  same  degree  and  amplitude  of  experience. 
He  is  a  soldier,  provided  his  heart  is  right,  and  he  loves  the  cause,  and  he  joins  in 
earnest.  The  degree  of  imperfection  and  ignorance  that  is  in  him  has  nothing  to 
do  with  the  fact  of  his  being  a  soldier.  It  is  that  silent  other  thing,  viz.,  the 
principle  at  the  core  of  your  life  which  undertakes  to  organize  your  whole  being  on 
the  law  of  love.  And  that  may  be  established  in  a  man  without  any  outward 
experience.  A  person  may  come  to  a  state  in  which  he  means  to  be  like  Christ,  and 
means  to  cut  off  everything  that  hinders  his  being  like  Christ,  and  to  enforce 
outward  and  inward  compliance  to  this  law  of  love  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  yet,  he 
may  not  have  light  nor  joy.  But  it  is  the  raising  up  of  that  standard,  the  vindi- 
cating of  that  sovereign  law  in  the  soul,  which  constitutes  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  life.  If  it  comes  with  joy  so  much  the  better.  If  it  does  not  come  with 
joy  it  is  none  the  less  true  conversion.  3.  In  a  Christian  life,  as  in  the  ordinary 
life,  there  are  two  principles  at  work — first,  the  force  of  nature  in  the  steady 
growth  and  unfolding  of  our  normal  powers ;  and  secondly,  the  voluntary  drill 
which,  working  in  harmony  with  nature,  we  call  education.  Christian  graces,  if  1 
might  so  say  without  being  misapprehended,  are  like  so  many  trades.  They  are 
not  to  be  learned  theoretically ;  and  certainly  they  are  not  created  in  us  by  the 
mere  operation  of  the  Spirit,  nor  by  the  forces  of  sanctified  nature.  We  learn 
them  just  as  we  learn  anything  in  outward  life.  It  is  supposed  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  makes  men  humble ;  that  it,  as  it  were,  sends  humility  into  them.  Just  as 
dew  falls,  and  orbs  itself  on  the  bearded  grass,  gemmed  and  jewelled  on  a  summer's 
morning;  so  men  think  that  the  Christian  graces  fall  down  out  of  the  great 
heavenly  concave  above  them  ;  and  that  all  one  knows  is,  that  he  went  to  sleep  a 
violet  dry,  and  woke  up  a  violet  wet  and  beautiful  1  Many  persons  think  that 
meekness,  and  gentleness,  and  humility,  and  faith,  and  patience,  and  hope,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  Divine  gifts.  They  are  Divine  gifts,  to  be  sure.  So  is 
corn  a  Divine  gift ;  so  is  wine  a  Divine  gift ;  and  so  are  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills 
Divine  gifts  ;  but  men  have  to  work  for  them.  God  gives  them  to  man's  industry, 
and  not  to  his  laziness.  All  gifts  are  Divine  gifts  in  such  a  sense  as  that.  If  the 
connection  between  the  6oul  and  God  were  to  stop,  these  things  would  never  take 
place;  but  He  works  together  with  us  to  will  and  to  do  these  things.  No  man  ever 
came  to  a  state  of  Christian  eminence  by  waiting  and  praying  alone.  4.  The 
experiences  of  Christian  life  are  not  promiscuous.  They  stand  in  a  certain  order 
of  nature.  Just  as  in  summer  all  flowers  do  not  blossom  in  spring,  nor  wait  till 
autumn ;  as  there  is  a  regular  succession,  according  to  the  temperament  of  the 
year,  following  a  line  of  increasing  heat ;  as  there  is  an  order  of  development  in 
the  tree ;  as  there  is  first  the  leaf,  and  afterwards  the  green  fruit,  and  then  the  ripe 
fruit,  so  is  it  in  Christian  life.    Christ  begins  with  us  at  the  infant  point,  and 


chap,  iv.]  0ALAT1ANS.  293 

develops  in  us  steadily ;  and  the  later  developments  cannot  be  had  until  the  inter- 
mediate  ones  are  passed.  We  are  steadily  to  grow ;  but  at  each  point  of  growth  we 
are,  as  it  were,  to  seize  the  experiences  of  that  point.  When  first  people  think  they 
are  delivered  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan  and  death  ;  when  they  first  have  a 
triumphant  feeling  that  Christ  loves  them,  and  they  know  they  love  Christ,  there 
is  something  wonderful  and  beautiful  in  it,  and  they  should  remember  it  as  long  as 
they  live ;  but,  after  all,  is  that  the  best  ?  And  do  you  look  back  and  say,  "  I  never 
again  had  such  experiences  of  love ;  I  never  again  was  so  happy ;  I  never  again 
was  so  near  to  Christ  ?  "  Oh  I  what  a  life  you  have  been  living !  Why,  how  far 
have  you  been  ?  Is  your  Christ  a  babe  yet  ?  Born  into  your  soul,  did  you  turn  the 
key  of  the  chamber  where  He  was  ?  And  did  you  send  no  schoolmaster  and  no 
nurse  there  ?  Did  you  starve  the  infant  child  ?  And  has  there  never  been  any 
growth  in  that  child  ?  Is  it  but  a  phantom  or  vision  in  you  ?  That  child  Jesus, 
born  into  your  soul,  should  have  grown,  and  should  little  by  little  have  expelled  the 
natural  man,  and  swollen  to  all  the  proportions  of  your  being,  until  he  became 
Christ  formed  truly  and  perfectly  in  you.  How  is  it  with  you,  dear  Christian 
brethren  ?  Have  you  grown  in  that  part  of  your  being  which  is  represented  by 
Christ's  love,  and  humility,  and  disinterestedness?  Have  you  imitated  Him  in 
going  about  doing  good?  Have  these  elements  of  the  Divine  nature  in  you 
severally  grown  and  cohered  symmetrically,  and  swollen  to  the  proportions  of  full 
manhood?  On  earth  there  is  no  sight  more  beautiful,  and  there  never  will  be  a  sight 
more  beautiful  till  He  comes  to  reign  a  thousand  years,  than  a  character  which 
has  been  steadfastly  growing  in  every  direction,  and  has  come  to  old  age  rich 
and  ripe.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  such  characters  are  rare.  (II.  W.  Beecher.) 
I  travail  in  birth  again : — I.  The  apostle's  ministbt.  He  takes  the  condition  of 
a  mother  to  express  his  most  tender  affection.  If  this  be  the  case  with  Paul, 
how  great  is  the  compassion  of  God  (Isa.  xlix.  15).  2.  He  signifies  the  measure 
of  his  ministerial  pains  (2  Cor.  xi.  23).  Those  who  take  most  pains  are  most  suc- 
cessful. S.  He  signifies  the  dignity  of  his  ministry  that  it  is  the  instrument  of 
the  new  birth.  II.  Its  end.  "  Till  Christ,"  Ac.  This  conformity  to  Christ  is 
two-fold.  1.  In  quality.  (1)  To  the  death  of  Christ.  (2)  To  the  resurrection  life 
of  Christ.  2.  In  practice.  (1)  As  prophets;  confessing  Christ;  teaching  and 
admonishing  one  another.  (2)  As  priests ;  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifices.  (3)  As 
kings ;  to  have  sway  over  the  corruptions  of  our  own  hearts.  (W.  Perkins.) 
Christians  as  children: — They  are  weak,  humble,  teachable,  obedient,  hopeful, 
and  progressive;  and  hence  are  called  children.  (Thomas  Jones.)  Superiority 
of  speech  to  writing  : — It  is  a  common  saying  that  a  letter  is  a  dead  messenger,  for 
it  can  give  no  more  than  it  hath.  And  no  epistle  or  letter  is  written  so  exactly 
that  it  is  not  lacking  in  some  respect.  For  the  circumstances  are  divers ;  there  is 
a  diversity  of  times,  places,  persons,  manners,  and  affections,  all  which  no  epistle 
can  express ;  therefore  it  moveth  the  reader  diversely,  making  him  now  sad,  now 
merry,  as  he  himself  is  disposed.  But  if  anything  be  spoken  sharply,  or  out  of 
time,  the  living  voice  of  a  man  may  expound,  mitigate,  or  correct  the  same.  There- 
fore the  apostle  wisheth  that  he  were  with  them,  to  the  end  he  might  temper 
and  change  his  voice,  as  he  should  see  it  needful,  by  the  qualities  of  their  affec- 
tions. As,  if  he  should  see  any  of  them  very  much  troubled,  he  might  so  temper 
his  words  that  they  should  not  be  oppressed  thereby  with  more  heaviness ;  con- 
trariwise, if  he  should  see  others  high-minded,  he  might  sharply  reprehend  them, 
lest  they  should  be  too  secure  and  careless,  and  so  at  length  become  despisers  of 
God.  Wherefore  he  could  not  devise  how  he,  being  absent,  should  deal  with  them 
by  letters.  As  if  he  should  say  :  If  my  epistle  be  too  sharp,  I  fear  I  shall  more 
offend  than  amend  some  of  you.  Again  ;  If  it  be  too  gentle,  it  will  not  profit  those 
who  are  perverse  and  obstinate ;  for  dead  letters  and  words  give  no  more  than  they 
have.  Contrariwise,  the  living  voice  of  a  man,  compared  to  an  epistle,  is  a  queen ; 
for  it  can  add  and  diminish,  it  can  change  itself  into  all  manner  of  affections, 
times,  places,  and  persons.  (Luther.)  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you : — I.  Paul's 
desike.  This  presence  of  pastors  among  their  people  is  most  necessary.  1.  To 
prevent  spiritual  dangers ;  whence  they  are  called  watchmen  and  overseers.  2.  To 
redress  wrongs.  3.  To  recover  backsliders.  II.  The  end  of  this  desire — "That  I 
may  change  my  voice."  1.  From  that  of  seeming  rebuke  to  that  of  tender  entreaty. 
2.  From  that  of  the  hard  controversialist  to  that  of  the  loving  teacher  and  friend. 
Learn  that  frequent  conference  between  pastor  and  people  is  most  desirable — (1) 
That  pastors  may  know  better  how  to  teach.  (2)  That  people  may  know  better 
what  ia  taught.    (3)  That  both  may  live  in  peace  and  goodwill.    III.  The  occasion 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA*.  I?» 


of  the  desire.    1.  The  apostle's  perplexity  was  real.    2.  He  took  steps  to  relieve 
his  doubts  by  this  Epistle.     3.  He  left  events  to  God.     (W.  Perkins.)        Christian 
fellowship: — Fellowship  of  souls  does  not  consist  in   the   proximity  of  persons. 
There  are  millions  who  live  in  close  personal  contact — dwell  under  the  same  roof, 
board  at  the  same  table,  and  work  at  the  same  shop — between  whose  minds  there 
is  scarcely  a  point  of  contact,  whose  souls  are  far  asunder  as  the  poles ;  while 
contrariwise  there  are  those  who  are  separated  by  oceans  and  continents,  ay,  by  the 
mysterious  gulf  which  divides  time  and  eternity,  between  whom  there  is  constant 
intercourse,  a  delightful  fellowship.     In  truth,  we  have  often  more  communion 
with  the  distant  than  with  the  near.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)        The  tender  anxieties 
of  ministers  for  their  people  ; — I  stand  in  doubt  of  some  of  you.     I  am  jealous  over 
you  with  a  godly  jealousy.    And  if  there  be  no  ground  for  it,  you  will  forgive  me ; 
for  if  it  be  an  error,  it  is  the  error  of  love.    Even  the  apostles,  the  most  select 
society  that  ever  was  formed,  had  a  Judas  among  them.    Even  a  judicious 
Christian  may  suspect  that  your  whole  hearts  are  not  engaged,  that  the  vigour  of 
your  spirits  is  not  exerted,  and  that  there  is  no  spiritual  life  in  your  devotions. 
This  man  may  suspect ;  and  he  who  searches  tbe  heart  may  see  it  is  so  in  fact.    I 
also  stand  in  doubt  of  some  of  you,  that  you  have  worn  off  your  religious  impres- 
sions before  they  ripened  to  a  right  issue.    This  is  a  very  common  case  in  the 
world,  and  therefore  it  may  be  yours.     The  temper  of  a  Christian  has  such  a 
resemblance  to  Christ's,  that  it  was  called  Christ  in  embryo,  spiritually  formed 
within  us.    It  is  indeed  infinitely  short  of  the  all-perfect  original,  but  yet  it  is  a 
prevailing  temper,  and  habitually  the  governing  principle  of  the  soul.    That  filial 
temper  towards  God,  that  humble  veneration  and  submission,  that  ardent  devotion, 
that  strict  regard  to  all  the  duties  of  religion,  that  self-denial,  humility,  meekness 
and  patience,  that  heavenly -mindedness  and  noble  superiority  to  the  world,  that 
generous  charity,   benevolence  and   mercy  to  mankind,  that  ardent  zeal  and 
diligence  to  do  good,  that  temperance  and  sobriety  which  shone  in  the  blessed 
Jesus  with  a  Divine  incomparable  splendour :  these  and  the  like  graces  and  virtues 
shine,  though  with  feebler  rays,  in  all  His  followers.     They  have  their  infirmities 
indeed,  many  and  great  infirmities — but  not  such  as  are  inconsistent  with  the 
habitual  prevalency  of  this  Christ-like  disposition.    You  may  make  what  excuses 
you  please,  but  this  is  an  eternal  truth,  that  unless  you  have  a  real  resemblance  to 
the  holy  Jesus,  you  are  not  His  genuine  disciples.    Pray  examine  critically  into 
this  point.    Have  you  a  right  to  take  your  name  Christian  from  Christ,  by  reason 
of  your  conformity  to  Him  ?    Again,  if  Christ  be  formed  in  your  hearts,  he  lives 
there.    The  heavenly  embryo  is  not  yet  complete,  not  yet  ripe  for  birth  into  the 
heavenly  world,  but  it  is  quickened.    I  mean,  those  virtues  and  graces  above- 
mentioned  are  not  dead,  inactive  principles  within  you,  but  they  operate,  they 
show  themselves  alive  by  action,  they  are  the  governing  principles  of  your  practice. 
Before  I  dismiss  this  head,  I  must  observe  that  the  production  of  this  Divine 
infant,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  in  the  heart,  is  entirely  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    It 
is  not  the  growth  of  nature,  but  a  creation  by  Divine  power.  But  you  would  inquire 
farther,  "  In  what  manner  does  this  Divine  agent  work ;  or  how  is  Christ  formed  in 
the  hearts  of  His  people  ? "    I  answer,  the  heart  of  man  has  a  quick  sensation. 
Nothing  can  be  done  there  without  its  perceiving  it,  much  less  can  Christ  be  formed 
there,  while  it  is  wholly  insensible  of  the  operation.   There  is  indeed  a  great  variety 
in  the  circumstances,  but  the  substance  of  the  work  is  the  same  in  all  adults. 
Therefore,  if  ever  you  have  been  the  subjects  of  it,  you  have  been  sensible  of  the 
following  particulars.    1.  You  have  been   made  deeply  sensible  of  your  being 
entirely  destitute  of  this  Divine  image.    Your  hearts  have  appeared  to  you  as  a 
huge,  shapeless  mass  of  corruption,  without    one   ingredient  of  true  goodness, 
amidst  all  the  flattering  appearances  of  it.    2.  You  have  hereupon  set  yourselves 
in  earnest  to  tbe  use  of  the  means  appointed  for  the  renovation  of  your  nature. 
3.  You  have  been  made  sensible  of  your  own  weakness,  and  the  inefficaoy  of  all  the 
means  you  could  use  to  produce  the  Divine  image  upon  your  hearts ;  and  that 
nothing  but  the  Divine  hand  could  draw  it  there.    4.  Hereupon  the  Holy  Spirit 
enlightened  your  mind  to  view  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
method  of  salvation  revealed  in  the  gospel.    You  were  enabled  to  cast  your  guilty, 
corrupt,  helpless  soul  upon  Jesus  Christ,  whom   you  saw  to  be  a  glorious  all- 
sufficient  Saviour;  and  with  all  your  hearts  you  embraced  the  way  of  salvation 
through  His  mediation.    The  view  of  His  glory  proved  transformative  :  while  you 
were  contemplating  the  object,  you  received  its  likeness;  the  rays  of  glory  beaming 
upon  you,  as  it  were,  rendered  your  hearts  transparent,  and  the  beauties  of  holines* 


•Hi*,  it.]  GALATIANS.  295 

were  stamped  upon  them.  5.  If  Christ  has  ever  been  formed  in  you,  it  is  your 
persevering  endeavour  to  improve  and  perfect  this  Divine  image.  You  long  and 
labour  to  be  fully  conformed  to  Him,  and,  as  it  were,  to  catch  His  air,  His  manner 
and  spirit,  in  every  thought,  in  every  word,  and  in  every  action.  As  far  as  you  ar« 
unlike  to  Him,  so  far  you  appear  deformed  and  loathsome  to  yourselves.  While 
you  feel  an  unchristian  spirit  prevail  within  you,  you  seem  as  if  you  were  possessed 
with  the  devil.  And  it  is  the  labour  of  your  life  to  subdue  such  a  spirit,  and  to 
brighten  and  finish  the  features  of  the  Divine  image  within  you,  by  repeated  touches 
and  retouches.  (President  Davies,  M.A.)  Perplexing  professors : — There  are 
minerals  which  exhibit  different  colours  on  different  faces.  Thus  dichroite,  or 
iolite,  is  often  deep  blue  along  its  vertical  axis ;  but,  on  a  side  perpendicular  to 
this  axis,  it  is  brownish  yellow.  The  phenomenon  results  from  the  manner  in 
which  the  particles  are  arranged  for  reflecting  and  transmitting  light.  The  whole 
internal  structure  must  be  changed  before  the  same  colour  shall  be  presented  on  all 
the  faces.  There  is  a  moral  dichroism.  It  consists  in  a  man's  being  Janus-faced 
— that  is,  double-faced — both  in  his  principles  and  his  practice,  in  order  to  secure 
popular  favour  and  avoid  odium.  The  chameleon  is  said  to  have  the  power  of 
assuming  the  colour  of  the  object  on  which  it  fastens ;  so  this  man  means  to  con- 
form his  creed  and  his  practice  to  those  which  are  most  popular  in  the  community 
where  he  happens  to  abide  or  sojourn.  In  one  place  he  is  orthodox ;  in  another, 
heterodox :  in  one,  an  advocate  for  temperance ;  in  another,  loose  in  this  matter, 
both  in  theory  and  practice:  in  one  place,  proslavery;  in  another,  antislavery. 
His  moral  and  religious  principles  are  not  settled,  or,  rather,  he  makes  them  bend 
to  his  worldly  interest,  and  you  have  no  way  of  determining  where  to  find  him  in 
any  circumstance,  except  to  inquire  what  aspect  self-interest  will  require  him  to 
put  on.  Nor  will  it  ever  be  essentially  better  until  Divine  grace  shall  have  trans- 
formed and  re-arranged  the  elements  of  his  character.  (Hitchcock.)  Half- 
hearted religion  vain: — Mr.  Camden  reports  of  one  Bedwald,  king  of  the  East 
Saxons,  the  first  prince  of  this  nation  that  was  baptized,  yet  in  the  same  church  he 
had  one  altar  for  Christian  religion,  another  for  that  of  the  heathens.  And  many 
such  false  worshippers  of  God  there  are  to  be  found  amongst  us — such  as  divide 
the  rooms  of  their  souls  betwixt  God  and  the  devil,  that  swear  by  God  and 
Malcham,  that  sometimes  pray  and  sometimes  curse,  that  halt  betwixt  God  and 
Baal — mere  heteroclites  in  religion.  But  God  cannot  endure  this  division:  He 
will  not  have  thy  threshold  to  stand  by  His  threshold ;  He  will  have  all  thy  heart ; 
He  cares  not  for  half,  if  it  and  the  devil  have  the  other.    (Spencer.) 

Ver.  21.  Tell  me.  —  The  value  of  a  pointed  question :  —  The  question  that 
prompts  ns  to  tell  what  we  know  sharpens  our  knowledge;  and,  similarly,  the 
question  that  makes  us  tell  what  we  are  doing  may  greatly  influence  our  conduct. 
For  many  a  man  drifting  on  in  a  course  of  evil  that  he  has  never  stopped  to  define, 
it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  some  one  by  a  pointed  question  could  get  him  to  say 
out,  in  plain  words,  just  what  he  is  doing.  If  he  would  only  honestly  state  it  to 
himself  he  would  shrink  from  it  with  horror.  But  not  only  for  clearing  away  the 
haze  that  obscures  an  unworthy  purpose,  but  also  for  removing  the  fog  in  which 
good  purposes  are  sometimes  involved,  a  pointed  question  may  serve  us.  There  are 
those  whose  intention  to  do  right  and  live  the  highest  life  is  rather  nebulous.  If 
some  question  could  be  put  to  them  that  would  lead  them  to  objectify  their  purpose 
in  language  so  that  they  could  look  at  it  and  understand  it,  it  would  be  of  great 
service  to  them.    (Washington  Gladden.) 

Ver.  22, 23.  That  Abraham  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bondmaid,  the  other  by  a 
tree  woman. — St.  PauVs  outlook  and  vision : — The  principle  from  which  he  views  the 
Old  Testament  history  may  be  compared  to  those  lines  of  light  which,  on  a  misty 
day,  open  up  glimpses  among  the  mountains,  in  which  that  which  is  definitely  seen 
is  as  nothing  to  the  crowded  and  mysterious  shapes  suggested  to  the  imagination. 
First  his  mind  turns  to  the  tents  of  the  patriarchs,  to  that  simple  and  pathetic  tale 
— Sarah  and  Hagar — Isaac  and  Ishmael.  Concentrated  in  them  he  sees  the  spirit 
of  the  two  covenants.  First  the  Egyptian  slave,  "  which  gendereth  unto  bondage," 
•'which  is  Mount  Sinai."  But  this  covenant  reminds  him  of  Jeruselem  which  now 
is  in  miserable  bondage.  But  then,  high  above  all,  the  apostle's  spirit  rises  to 
another  Jerusalem,  where  the  fetters  fall  from  the  soul  of  every  slave  that  sets  foot 
upon  that  soil.  "Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free."  (Bishop  Alexander.)  Point* 
of  parallelism : — 


396 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR. 


[chip.  if. 


Jewish  Chubch. 

The  bondwoman,  Hagar. 

Son  of  the  bondwoman,  IshmaeL 

Natural  birth  (the  flesh). 

Mount  Sinai.   I 

The  Law.         j 

The  earthly  Jerusalem. 

Enslaved. 

Fruitful. 

Small  offspring. 

Persecuting. 

Expulsion. 

The  Jewish  Churoh  is  enslaved. 


Christian  Chdboh. 

The  freewoman,  Sarah. 

Son  of  the  freewoman,  Isaac 

Supernatural  birth  (the  promise). 
(Mount  Zion. 
{  The  Promise. 

The  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

Free. 

Barren. 

Large  offspring. 

Persecuted. 

Inheritance. 

The  Christian  Church  is  free. 

(W.  Sunday,  D.D.) 


Bond  and  free : — Look  at  the  two  covenants  as  represented  by  Hagar  and  Sarah. 

1.  Their  points  op  connection.  1.  They  have  the  6ame  origin.  Those  who  are 
outside  the  covenant  of  promise  are  still  children  of  the  Heavenly  Father.  2.  They 
have  to  a  great  extent  the  same  elements.  Promise  on  God's  part  and  conditions 
on  man's.  Ishmael  got  promises,  and  Isaac  was  subjected  to  conditions.  Sinai 
had  its  promises  ;  the  gospel  has  its  conditions.  3.  For  a  time  they  largely  in- 
fluence each  other.  Ishmael  and  Isaac  live  together.  The  law  was  permeated  by 
the  gospel ;  the  gospel  by  the  law.  II.  Theib  points  op  dippebence.  1.  The  degrees 
of  prominence  in  those  elements  which  they  possess  in  common.  The  covenant 
becomes  under  the  new  dispensation  also  a  testament  with  large  bequests.  2.  In 
the  absence  or  presence  of  one  great  vital  element: — grace,  forgiveness.  3.  In  their 
effects  on  men's  natures.  The  law,  like  Hagar,  bringeth  forth  children  of  bondage ; 
the  gospel,  like  Sarah,  children  of  freedom.    (Clerical  World,  hi.,  441.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  Which  things  are  an  allegory :  for  they  are  the  two  covenants.— 
Which  things  are  an  allegory : — I.  The  two  women.  1.  Sarah,  the  type  of  the 
covenant  of  grace,  was  the  original  wife  of  Abraham.  This  covenant  is  the  original 
one.  2.  Though  Sarah  was  the  elder  wife,  Hagar  bore  the  first  son.  3.  Hagar  was 
not  intended  to  be  a  wife,  and  ought  never  to  have  been  anything  but  a  handmaid 
to  Sarah.  The  law  was  meant  to  be  a  handmaid  to  grace.  4.  Hagar  wished  to  be 
mistress,  so  was  driven  out.  The  law  is  a  good  servant,  but  when  it  usurps  the 
mastership  it  must  be  expelled.  5.  Hagar  never  was  a  freewoman,  Sarah  never  a 
slave.  So  with  the  law  and  grace.  6.  Hagar  was  cast  out  as  well  as  her  son,  but 
Sarah  never  was.  So  the  law  has  ceased  to  be  a  covenant,  and  it  and  all  who  trust 
in  it  are  now  driven  out  by  Christ.  IL  The  two  sonb.  1.  Ishmael  was  the  elder — 
so  the  legalist  is  older  than  the  Christian.  2.  Where  was  the  difference  between 
them  1  (1)  None  as  to  ordinances ;  both  were  circumcised.  (2)  Nor,  probably,  as 
to  character.  (3)  It  was  that  one  was  of  the  flesh,  the  other  of  the  Spirit.  IIL 
Ishmael's  conduct  to  Isaac.  He  mocked  him — so  the  legalist  is  irritated  by  the 
doctrine  of  free  grace,  and  mocks  at  it.  IV.  What  became  op  the  two  sons.  1. 
Isaac  had  all  the  inheritance  and  Ishmael  none.  Not  that  he  had  nothing,  but  no 
spiritual  inheritance.     The  legalist  gets  respect  and  honour,  and  has  his  reward. 

2.  Ishmael  was  sent  away;  Isaac  was  kept  at  home.  (Spurgeon.)  The  two  cove- 
nants:— I.  The  covenant  of  works  propounds  the  bare  justice  of  God  without 
mercy ;  the  covenant  of  grace  reveals  both  the  justice  and  the  mercy  of  God.  II. 
The  law  requires  of  us  perfect  righteousness  both  for  nature  and  action ;  the  gospel 
propounds  to  us  an  imputed  righteousness  in  the  person  of  the  Mediator.  III.  The 
law  promises  life  on  the  condition  of  works ;  the  gospel,  remission  of  sins  and  life 
everlasting  on  the  condition  of  faith.  IV.  The  law  was  written  on  tables  of  stone ; 
the  gospel  on  the  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart  (Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  2  Cor.  in.  3).  V.  The 
law  was  in  nature  by  creation ;  the  gospel  is  above  nature,  was  revealed  after 
the  fall.  VI.  The  law  had  Moses  for  a  mediator  (Deut.  v.  27) ;  but  Christ  is  the 
Mediator  of  the  New  Testament  (Heb.  viii.  5).  VH.  The  law  was  dedicated  by  the 
blood  of  beasts  (Exod.  xxiv.  5) ;  the  New  Testament  was  confirmed  by  the  blood  of 
Christ  (Heb.  ix.  12).  (W.  Perkins.)  The  lessons  of  the  allegory ;— I.  It  teaches  us 
what  to  expect  in  God's  Wobd.  1.  That  Word  is  full  of  God,  but — 2.  It  is  full 
of  man.  3.  While,  therefore,  it  is  the  medium  of  Divine  thought,  that  thought  is 
not  expressed  as  by  a  flash  of  lightning,  but  through  various  minds  and  characters. 
II.  This  makes  our  study  op  revelation  the  mobe  difficult  and  responsible.     L 


.  IT.]  GALAT1ANS.  297 

"  The  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  "  in  its  general  import ;  but  a 
man  will  grievously  err  if  he  thinks  he  may  read  it  like  a  fool — superficially,  care- 
lessly. 2.  Each  writer  and  book  has  its  own  peculiarities,  wbich  demand  discrimi- 
nation for  profitable  study.  III.  The  main  principle  of  the  Bible  is  "  the  testi- 
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  The  Old  Testament  must  be  studied  in 
the  light  of  the  New.  1.  In  its  predictions  of  Christ.  2.  In  its  analogies  of  spiritual 
life.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  The  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament: — I.  In  the 
interpretation  of  Scripture  our  first  duty  is  to  hold  fast  the  literal  historical 
sense.  Christianity  is  distinguished  from  other  religions  by  the  fact  that  it  rests 
on  a  firm  historical  basis.  Whatever  else  we  are  to  learn  from  the  story,  we  are  to 
nnderstand  first  of  all  that  the  persons  really  lived,  the  places  existed,  the  events 
transpired.     II.  From  the  intent  for  which  Scripture  was  written  we  gather  that  it 

MOST  CONTAIN  DEEPER  THAN  THE  MERELY  HISTORICAL   LESSONS.        It    WaS   Written    with 

reference — 1.  To  Christ.  And  hence  apostles  found  in  the  Old  Testament  yearn- 
ing and  hopes  and  types  which  were  fulfilled  in  Him.  2.  To  Christ's  people.  So 
they  found  analogies  of  spiritual  life  in  its  historical  events.  III.  The  general  prin- 
ciple which  should  guide  us  in  interpreting  these  types  and  analogies  is  their 
exposition  in  the  New  Testament.  (Bishop  Lynch-Cotton.)  The  profitableness 
of  Scripture : — How  fruitful  are  the  seeming  barren  places  of  Scripture.  Bad 
ploughmen  they  who  make  balks  of  such  ground.  Wheresoever  the  surface  of  God's 
Word  doth  not  laugh  and  sing  with  corn,  then  the  heart  thereof  within  is 
merry  with  wines,  affording,  where  not  plain  matter,  hidden  mysteries.  (T.  Fuller.) 
St.  Paul  allegorizing: — Though  the  apostle  does  not  disdain  either  Amoraic  or 
Alexandrian  methods  of  dealing  with  Scripture,  he  never  falls  into  the  follies  or 
extravagances  of  either.  Treating  the  letter  of  Scripture  with  intense  respect,  he 
yet  made  the  literal  sense  of  it  bend  at  will  to  the  service  of  the  spiritual  conscious- 
ness. On  the  dead  letter  of  Urim,  which  recorded  the  names  of  the  lost  tribes,  he 
flashed  a  mystic  ray,  with  made  them  gleam  forth  into  Divine  and  hitherto  un- 
dreamed-of oracles.  The  actual  words  of  the  sacred  writers  became  but  as  the  wheels 
and  wingsof  the  cherubim,  and  whithersoever  the  Spirit  went  they  went.  (Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  The  force  of  the  allegory : — There  was  a  terrible  severity  in  it  meant 
to  shock  and  exasperate  his  opponents  ;  a  withering  contempt  which  we,  with  our 
feelings,  can  hardly  comprehend.  To  make  Hagar  and  Ishmael— the  bondwoman 
and  her  slave  child — a  type  of  the  Jew,  and  Sarah  and  Isaac  of  the  Christian  Gen- 
tiles, would  seem  to  those  pointed  at  by  the  parable  as  if  a  sacrilegious  hand  had 
torn  down  tbe  vail  of  the  temple,  and  exposed  the  holiest  of  all  to  the  common 
gaze  ;  or,  rather,  as  if  the  unclean  and  uncircumcised  had  been  introduced  within 
the  sacred  precincts  as  their  proper  place,  and  the  very  priest  of  God  thrust  out. 
Consistently  with  this  daring  defiance  of  the  national  opinion,  this  contemptuous 
mocking  of  Jewish  pretensions,  put  in  the  form  of  that  allegorical  logic  in  which 
St.  Paul  was  so  thorough  a  proficient,  and  the  force  of  which  on  the  Hebrew  mind 
he  knew  so  well, — in  consistency  with  this,  he  even  represents  the  believing  Gentiles 
as  the  seed  of  Abraham ;  tells  them  that  the  blessing  of  Abraham  comes  on  them  ; 
that  theirs  is  the  promise  and  the  inheritance  through  faith ;  that  circumcision  is 
nothing,  and  may  be  worse  than  nothing;  that  "the  Israel  of  God"  is  not  now 
"  the  concision,"  but  those  who  walk  according  to  the  rule  that  "  neither  circum- 
cision availeth  anything  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature"  (Phil.  iii.  2,  3). 
(T.  Binney.)  Legitimate  use  of  allegory  : — 1.  It  is  by  no  means  affirmed  that  the 
history  of  Hagar  and  Sarah  in  Genesis  had  any  original  reference  to  the  gospel. 
The  account  there  is  a  plain  historical  narrative,  not  designed  to  have  any  such 
reference.  2.  The  narrative  contains  important  principles  that  may  be  used  as 
illustrating  truth,  and  is  so  used  by  St.  Paul.  There  are  parallel  points  between 
the  history  and  the  truths  of  religion,  where  the  one  maybe  illustrated  by  the  other. 
3.  The  apostle  does  not  use  it  at  all  in  the  way  of  argument,  or  as  if  that  proved 
that  the  Galatians  were  not  to  submit  to  the  Jewish  rites  and  customs.  It  is  an 
illustration  of  the  comparative  nature  of  servitude  and  freedom,  and  would  therefore 
illustrate  the  difference  between  a  servile  compliance  with  Jewish  rites  and  the 
freedom  of  the  gospel.  4.  This  use  of  an  historical  fact  by  the  apostle  does  not 
make  it  proper  for  us  to  turn  the  Old  Testament  into  allegory,  or  even  to  make  a 
very^free  use  of  this  mode  of  illustrating  truth.  That  an  allegory  may  be  used 
sometimes  with  advantage  no  one  can  doubt  while  the  "Pilgrim's  Progress  "  shall 
exist.  Nor  can  any  one  doubt  that  St.  Paul  has  here  derived,  in  this  manner,  an 
important  and  striking  illustration  of  truth  from  the  Old  Testament.  But  no  one 
acquainted  with  the  history  of  interpretation  can  doubt  that  vast  injury  has  been 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  w. 


done  by  a  fanciful  mode  of  explaining  the  Old  Testament,  by  making  every  fact  in 
its  history  an  allegory,  and  every  pin  and  pillar  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  temple  a 
type.  Nothing  is  better  fitted  to  bring  the  whole  science  of  interpretation  into  con- 
tempt, nothing  more  dishonours  the  Bible  than  to  make  it  a  book  of  enigmas,  and 
religion  to  consist  in  puerile  conceits.  The  Bible  is  a  book  of  sense,  and  all  the 
doctrines  essential  to  salvation  are  plainly  revealed.  (Albert  Barnes,  D.D.)  The 
children  of  promise : — The  hidden  truth  here  spoken  of — "  which  things  are  an  alle- 
gory " the  apostle  tells  us,  is  that  of  "  the  two  covenants  ;  the  one  from  the  Mount 

Sinai,  which  gendereth  to  bondage,  wbich  is  Agar.  For  this  Agar  is  Mount  Sinai 
in  Arabia,  and  answereth  to  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her 
children.  But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all."  By 
"  the  two  covenants "  I  do  not  think  we  are  to  understand  what  are  generally 
described  as  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  covenant  of  grace.  It  would  take  us  a 
long  time  to  enter  into  that  argument ;  but,  in  the  first  place,  the  covenant  of  works 
was  certainly  not  made  with  Moses — if  made  at  all,  it  was  made  with  Adam ;  and, 
therefore,  we  cannot  suppose  that  it  is  here  referred  to.  There  appears  rather  to  be 
an  allusion  to  the  national  covenant  that  was  made  with  Israel,  which  is  contrasted 
with  the  new  and  better  covenant  made  with  all  God's  believing  people.  The  first 
covenant  here  spoken  of  is  one  "which  gendereth  to  bondage,"  and  if  we  go  back 
to  the  Israelitish  covenant  we  find  it  beginning  with  the  painful  rite  of  circum- 
cision, and  connected  with  a  multitude,  I  might  almost  say  an  innumerable  multi- 
tude, of  sacrifices,  burdensome  to  the  mind  and  conscience  of  the  people  of  God, 
and  with  the  killing  letter  of  the  law.  But  the  other  covenant  refers  to  the  state  of 
the  gospel  Church — that  gospel  Church  state  in  which  all  believers  have  a  part.  If 
\ou  look  again  at  the  context,  you  find  that  one  of  these  children  was  born  to  the 
bondmaid  and  the  other  to  the  freewoman  ;  and  the  character  of  the  birth  of  these 
two  children  exactly  answers  to  the  difference  which  exists  between  Israelites  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh  and  the  spiritual  Israel,  who  are  really  God's  children  by 
promise.  The  child  that  was  born  to  Hagar,  Ishmael,  was  born  in  the  common 
course  of  nature ;  the  child  that  was  born  to  Sarah,  Isaac,  was  born  "  by  promise," 
and  was  therefore  eminently  distinguished  from  the  other.  In  the  one  case,  we  see 
that  the  child  that  was|born  of  the  bondmaid  was  not,  so  to  speak,  a  free  child ;  and 
bo  it  is  with  all  who  are  born  by  nature ;  they  are  all  naturally  born  under  bondage 
to  the  law.  But  the  child  that  was  born  "  by  promise,"  when  it  was  contrary  to  all 
expectation  that  Abraham  and  Sarah  should  have  a  child,  was  born  by  the  direct 
interference  of  God,  and  became  the  heir  of  special  privileges,  of  which  Ishmael  waa 
not  allowed  to  be  a  partaker.  The  one,  therefore,  may  be  spoken  of  in  plain  terms, 
as  having  been  born — the  other  may  be  more  correctly  spoken  of,  or  at  least  com- 
pared with  those  who  are  new  born.  I  have,  therefore,  in  opening  up  the  subject 
further,  first  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  persons  who  are  partakers  of  the  promised 
privileges ;  because  we  read  at  the  twenty-eighth  verse — "  Now  we,  brethren,  as  Isaao 
was,  are  the  children  of  promise."  In  other  words,  the  apostle  intends  to  teach 
ns  that  what  was  figured  under  Ishmael  and  Isaac  has  a  direct  bearing  upon  our- 
selves. The  Galatians  were  a  Gentile  Church  ;  we  then,  as  Gentiles,  have  an  interest 
in  the  promise,  and,  like  Isaao,  who  was  the  child  of  promise,  are  partakers  of 
epecial  blessings.  It  is  very  clear  from  this  passage,  first,  that  these  blessings  do 
not  belong  to  those  who  are  only  nominally  the  people  of  God.  We  know  that  the 
Israelites  were  in  a  peculiar  manner  God's  people ;  but  they  were  not,  nationally, 
to  be  the  inheritors  of  all  the  promised  blessings  which  come  down  to  us  under  the 
new  covenant.  Our  Lord,  in  His  parable  of  the  husbandmen  and  the  vineyard, 
illustrates  this,  when,  after  having  spoken  of  those  wicked  husbandmen  putting  to 
death  the  son  of  the  proprietor  of  the  land,  He  draws  the  conclusion  that  the  vine- 
yard shall  be  taken  away  from  them  and  given  to  others — in  other  words,  that  those 
who  were  first  God's  chosen  people  were  not  to  continue  His  chosen  people  for 
ever,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  that  others  were  to  be  admitted  to  the  privilegss 
which  they  had  abused.  Then,  if  we  have  ascertained  that  the  promises  do  not 
refer  to  those  who  are  merely  nominally  belonging  to  God,  we  may  say  that  they 
do  belong  to  those  who  are  partakers  of  God's  sovereign  grace.  They  are,  therefore, 
the  persons  who  are  brought  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  they  are  those  who  through 
faith  in  Christ,  simply  trusting  to  His  merit,  are  introduced  into  "  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God."  They  are  those,  therefore,  who  not  only  belong  to 
God  as  an  outward  and  visible  Church,  but  as  the  true  invisible  Church,  which  shall 
be  made  manifest  unto  all  men,  not  in  our  day,  but  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord. 
These,  then,  are  the  parties  described.     They  are  born  not  of  "a  bondmaid,"  but 


chap.  w.J  GALATIANS.  199 

of  "  a  freewoman  ;  "  or,  as  we  read  here — "  We,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  the 
ohildren  of  promise ; "  and  in  the  concluding  verse — "  So,  then,  brethren,  we  are 
not  children  of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free."  Now,  if  this  be  the  case,  the 
moment  that  we  are  thus  under  grace,  and  partakers  of  the  promised  blessings,  we 
are  free  from  ceremonial  bondage ;  we  are  not  looking  to  anj  mere  outward  act  or 
ceremony,  but  we  are  made  free  by  the  Son  of  God,  and  those  whom  He  makes  free 
"  are  free  indeed."  But  we  are  not  only  free  from  the  ceremonial  law,  but  we  are 
free  from  the  terrorism  connected  with  the  judgment  to  come.  We  are  taught, 
indeed,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  that  "  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto 
the  Father  "  through  Jesus  Christ ;  for  He  "  came  and  preached  peace  to  us  who 
were  afar  off,  and  to  them  that  were  nigh."  See,  therefore,  what  our  privileges  are 
if  we  are  real  believers  under  the  new  covenant ;  see  what  freedom  we  enjoy.  But 
though  we  may  all  take  this  joyful  view  of  a  believer's  privileges,  yet  we  are  not  to 
think  that  the  believer  has  no  crosses  or  trials.  Let  us  turn  again  to  the  context, 
for  that  which  happened  to  Ishmael  and  to  Isaao  is  again  an  illustration  of  what 
will  happen  to  believers  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  world.  The  twenty- 
ninth  verse  says — "  As  then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that 
was  born  after  the  Spirit,  even  so  it  is  now."  We  are  not  to  expect  that  if  a  man 
desires  to  walk  blameless,  or  to  carry  out  such  an  exhortation  as  that  in  the  second 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  to  "  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons 
of  God,  without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among  whom 
ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life " — we  are  not  to 
expect  that  he  will  be  left  alone.  The  very  fact  of  his  being  a  light  in  the  midst  of 
a  dark  world,  one  who  desires  constantly  to  carry  out  into  practice  the  doctrines  he 
professes  to  believe,  will  draw  attention  to  him,  be  he  where  he  may.  And  what  will 
be  the  result?  He  will  be  exposed  to  those  very  things  against  which  we  are 
taught  to  pray  in  our  Litany — "  the  envy,  hatred,  and  malice  "  which  abound  in 
the  world.  You  will  see  this  happening  over  and  over  again  in  every-day  life ;  and 
when  they  cannot  catch  believers  halting,  they  will  try  to  "  entangle  them  in  their 
talk."  And  why  should  we  expect  all  this  t  Because  our  Lord  has  told  us  that 
we  must  expect  it — that "  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  Master  " — and  in  that  striking 
chapter,  the  fifteenth  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  our  Lord  has  said,  "  If  the  world  hate 
you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  Me  before  it  hated  you.  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the 
world  would  love  his  own ;  but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen 
you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."  Persecution,  misrepresenta- 
tion, therefore,  must  be  expected  by  the  Lord's  people.  As  Ishmael  mocked  and 
ridiculed  Isaac,  so  we  must  expect  the  Ishmaelites  of  this  day  to  attack  and  ridicule 
and  persecute  you  and  me,  if  we  are  really  on  the  Lord's  side.  Let  us  never,  then, 
be  surprised  for  a  moment  to  find  that  we  must  experience  that  which  the  Word  of 
God  has  laid  down  in  unmistakable  terms — "  Through  much  tribulation  we  must 
enter  the  kingdom."  The  Jews  have  always  shown  their  hatred  to  the  gospel.  We 
have  seen,  then,  who  are  to  be  partakers  of  the  privilege  ;  we  have  not  blinded  our 
eyes — I  trust  I  have  not,  and  you  have  not — to  the  treatment  we  may  expect  in  the 
world ;  and  now  let  us  see  the  encouragement  which  is  held  out  in  this  portion. 
"  We  are  the  children  of  promise ; "  "  we  are  not  children  of  the  bondwoman,  but 
of  the  free."  The  persecuted,  then,  shall  be  known,  and  the  persecutors  shall  be 
known.  There  is  no  overlooking  any  one,  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  in  the  eye  of 
the  Lord;  His  eye  "is  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  My 
brethren,  if  you  look  at  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  you  will  find  the 
apostle  saying,  "We  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God  for  your  patience 
and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure :  which  is  a  mani- 
fest token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the 
kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer:  seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with 
God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  trouble  you ;  and  to  you  who  are 
troubled  rest  with  us,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  His 
mighty  angels."  God's  eye,  therefore,  is  in  every  place.  The  first  covenant  that 
was  looked  to  was  a  national  covenant — the  covenant  that  is  now  looked  to  is  an 
individual  covenant ;  it  is  with  each  one  of  us  personally.  The  whole  passage, 
therefore,  upon  which  we  have  been  speaking  is  intended  to  make  every  single  soul, 
high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  cut  off  all  idea  of  salvation  by  works,  and  cultivate  a  hope 
of  salvation  by  grace — this  is  the  whole  purport  of  the  passage — to  lead  us  to  see 
our  own  individual  interest  in  the  covenant  of  grace.  What  a  blessing  it  would  be, 
brethren,  if  one  inspired  by  God's  Holy  Spirit  could  indeed  make  use  of  the  lan- 
guage of  this  passage,  and  standing  here  address  you  and  me,  and  say  to  each 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

person  in  this  congregation — '•  Ye  are  not  children  of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the 
free ! "     And  why  should  it  not  be  said  of  us  ?     (H.  M.  Villiers,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  But  Jerusalem,  which  is  above,  is  free. — Notes  of  the  Church : — Tha 
Church  is — 1.  Heavenly.  2.  One.  3.  Invisible.  4.  Free.  5.  PropagatWe. 
6.  Careful  of  her  children.  Jerusalem  a  type  of  the  Church  : — Cf.  Heb.  xii.  22-23 : 
Rev.  xxi.  2.  I.  God  chose  Jerusalem  above  all  places  to  dwell  in  ;  the  catholic 
Church  is  composed  of  those  in  the  midst  of  whom  He  dwells  (Matt,  xviii.  20 ; 
xxviii.  20).  II.  Jerusalem  is  a  city  compact  in  itself  by  reason  of  the  bond  of 
love  and  order  among  the  citizens  (Psa.  cxxii.  3) ;  so  the  members  of  the  Church 
are  linked  together  by  the  bond  of  one  Spirit.  III.  In  Jerusalem  was  the 
sanctuary,  a  place  of  God's  presence  and  worship  and  truth  ;  the  Church  is  now 
in  the  room  of  that  sanctuary ;  in  it  we  must  seek  the  presence  of  God  and  the 
word  of  life  (1  Tim.  iii.  15).  IV.  In  JerusaIjEM  was  the  throne  of  David 
(Psa.   cxxii.  5) ;   the  Church  is  the  throne  and  sceptre  of  Christ  (Rev.  iii.  7). 

V.  The  commendation  of  a  city,  as  Jerusalem  is  the  subjection  and  obedience 
of  its  citizens  ;  in  the  Church  all  believers  are  citizens  (Eph.  ii.  19),  and  yield 
voluntary  obedience  and  subjection  to  Christ  the  King  (Psa.  ex.  2 ;  Isa.  ii.  5). 

VI.  As  in  Jerusalem  the  names  of  the  citizens  were  enrolled  in  a  register,  bo 
the  names  of  Christians  are  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Life  (Rev.  xx.  15 ;  Heb. 
xii.  23).  (W.  Perkins.)  The  heavenly  Jerusalem : — The  Church  in  the  creed  has 
three  properties :  holy ;  catholic ;  knit  in  a  communion.  The  word  "  above  " 
intimateth  that  she  is  holy ;  "  mother,"  that  she  is  knit  in  a  communion ;  "  of 
all,"  that  she  is  catholic.  I.  Jerusalem  a  type  of  the  Church.  1.  In  election 
(Psa.  exxxii.  13 ;  cf.  1  Peter  ii.  9).  2.  In  collection  (Isa.  v.  2 ;  cf.  Eph.  iv.  3). 
3.  In  nobility  (Psa.  cxxii.  5;  cf.  Rev.  iii.  7).  II.  This  new  Jerusalem  is 
heavenly.  1.  In  respect  of  her  birth  and  heavenly  beginning  (James  i.  18). 
2.  In  respect  of  growth  and  continuance  (Phil,  iii  20).  3.  In  respect  of  the  end 
(John  xvii.  24).  (T.  Adams.)  The  heavenly  origin  and  nature  of  the  Church ; — 
The  Church  is  said  to  be  above — I.  In  respect  of  her  beginning,  which  is  from 
the  grace  of  God.  II.  Because  she  dwells  by  faith  in  heaven  with  Christ. 
Wherefore  we  are  admonished — 1.  To  live  in  this  world  as  pilgrims  and  strangers 
(1  Pet.  ii.  21).  2.  To  carry  ourselves  as  burgesses  of  heaven  (Phil.  iii.  20). 
(1)  By  seeking  heavenly  things ;  (2)  by  leading  a  heavenly  life.  (W.  Pzrkins.) 
Characteristics  of  the  Church: — In  that  it  is  said  she  is  above  it  signifies  her 
heavenly  origin ;  that  she  is  Jerusalem,  her  peaceful  multitude  ;  that  she  is  free, 
her  great  liberty ;  that  she  is  mother,  her  abundant  fecundity ;  that  she  is  mother 
of  us  all,  her  wide  charity.  (Cardinal  Hugo.)  Jerusalem  our  mother: — The 
holy  Church  is  our  mother,  and  the  most  holy  God  our  Father.  She  feeds  us  with 
sincere  milk  (1  Tim.  iii.  15)  from  her  two  breasts,  the  Scriptures  of  both  Testa- 
ments, which  God  hath  committed  to  her  keeping.  God  doth  beget  us  of 
immortal  seed  by  the  Word  (1  Pet.  i.  23),  but  by  the  instrumentality  of  the 
Church.  (2*.  Adams.)  The  comprehensiveness  of  the  Church : — The  city  of  God, 
of  which  the  Stoics  doubtfully  and  feebly  spoke,  was  now  set  up  before  the  eyes  of 
men.  It  was  no  unsubstantial  city,  such  as  we  fancy  in  the  clouds ;  no  invisible 
pattern,  such  as  Plato  thought  might  be  laid  up  in  heaven ;  but  a  visible  corpora- 
tion, whose  members  met  together  to  eat  bread  and  drink  wine,  and  into  which  they 
were  publicly  initiated.  Here  the  Gentile  met  the  Jew  whom  he  had  been 
accustomed  to  regard  as  an  enemy  of  the  human  race ;  the  Roman  met  the  lying 
Greek  sophist;  the  Syrian  slave  the  gladiator  born  beside  the  Danube.  In 
brotherhood  they  met,  the  natural  birth  and  kindred  of  each  forgotten,  the 
baptism  alone  remembered  to  which  they  had  been  born  again  to  God  and  to  each 
other.  The  edict  of  comprehension  conferred  citizenship  upon  every  class. 
Under  it,  whatever  law  of  mutual  help  and  consideration  had  obtained  between 
citizen  and  citizen  obtained  also  between  the  citizen  and  his  slaves.  Tbe  words 
"  foreign "  and  "  barbarous  "  lost  their  meaning.  All  nations  and  tribes  were 
gathered  within  the  pomcerium  of  the  City  of  God;  and  on  the  baptized  earth 
the  Rhine  and  the  Thames  became  as  Jordan,  and  every '•sullen  desert-girded 
settlement  of  German  savages  as  sacred  as  Jerusalem.  (Ecce  Homo.)  The 
Judaizers  would  have  made  the  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  which  is  free,  and 
which  is  the  mother  of  us  all,  a  mere  cramped  and  narrow  faubourg  in  the 
metropolis  of  Jerusalem.  (Paul  of  Tarsus.)  Christian  freedom: — Jesus  Christ 
not  only  called  Lazarus  into  life,  but  he  commanded  the  grave-clothes  to  be  taken 
off  him,  that  he  might  have  liberty  in  life.    Life,  without  liberty  from  the  grave- 


.  it.]  OALATIANS.  801 

clothes,  would  scarcely  have  been  a  blessing.  So  Jesus  Christ  not  only  gives 
life  to  the  soul  which  believes  in  Him ;  He  also  commands  the  Spirit  to  descend 
upon  him,  to  set  him  free  from  all  enslaving  habits.  "  If  the  Son  make  you  free, 
ye  ■hall  be  free  indeed."    (J.  Bate.) 

TRUE  LIBERTY. 

Who  then  is  free  ?  the  wise  who  well  maintains 
An  empire  o'er  himself ;  whom  neither  chains 

Nor  want  nor  death  with  slavish  fear  inspire, 

"Who  boldly  answers  to  his  warm  desire ; 
Who  can  ambition's  vainest  gifts  despise, 
Firm  in  himself  who  on  himself  relies ; 

Polished  and  round  who  runs  his  proper  course. 

And  breaks  misfortune  with  superior  force.  (Horace.) 

St.  Pauf$  allegory : — And  because  similitudes  and  figures  will  hold  faster  in  the 
memory  of  the  unlearned,  who  are  the  greater  number,  than  powerful  arguments ; 
after  weighty  reasons  premised,  the  apostle  concludes  with  an  allegory  at  the  end 
of  his  disputation,  as  a  banquet  after  a  meal  of  solid  meat.  And  thus  it  runs, 
that  they  who  sought  righteousness  by  the  law  were  no  better  than  Ishmael,  the 
son  of  Hagar ;  they  that  sought  righteousness  by  faith  were  as  Isaac,  the  heir  of 
his  father.  That  the  law  came  from  Sinai,  which  was  seated  in  Arabia,  a  moun- 
tain quite  out  of  the  confines  of  the  Land  of  Promise ;  the  gospel  began  at  Sion,  or 
Jerusalem,  which  was  the  heart  of  the  Holy  Land.  In  this  little  abstract  of  the 
excellency  of  the  Church,  six  portions  of  its  glory  are  contained  in  six  words. 
1.  She  is  a  Jerusalem,  a  visible  fair  city,  that's  her  external  communion.  2.  A 
Jerusalem  above,  that's  her  internal  sanctity.  3.  A  Jerusalem  that  is  free,  which 
is  her  supernal  redemption.  4.  A  mother,  that's  her  fruitfulness.  5.  The  mother 
of  us,  which  comprehends  her  unity.  6.  The  mother  of  us  all,  which  expresseth 
the  universality.  1.  Jerusalem  is  the  substantive  or  fundamental  word  that  bears 
up  the  whole  text,  and  it  is  as  musical  a  word  as  most  that  run  upon  syllables ; 
but  it  offers  more  pleasantness  to  the  understanding  than  to  the  ear ;  full  of  happy 
signification;  a  name  given,  as  the  philosopher  Plato  was  wont  to  say,  so 
accommodate  to  the  Church  apostolical,  that  unless  God  had  foreseen  that  His 
saving  truth  should  first  grow  up  within  the  walls  thereof,  it  had  never  been 
called  Jerusalem.  And  I  refer  myself  to  two  things  especially,  how  the  name 
descended  upon  the  Church.  (1)  While  the  old  tabernacle  stood,  Jerusalem  was 
the  chief  place  wherein  men  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (2)  Out  of  the 
same  Sion  went  forth  the  new  law,  and  Jerusalem  was  the  mother  of  the  first-born 
in  Christ.  2.  It  was  not  enough  in  St.  Paul's  judgment  to  denominate  the  spouse 
of  Christ  from  the  best  habitation  (for  earth  is  but  earth  be  it  never  so  much  a 
selected  portion);  therefore  he  carries  her  aloft  in  his  praise,  and  adds,  that  it  is 
Jerusalem  which  is  above,  an  heavenly  city  (Heb.  xii.  22),  as  if  it  had  not  its 
original  here,  but  fell  down  from  the  starry  firmament.  (1)  Because  Christ  our 
head  is  ascended  into  heaven,  and  governs  all  things  beneath  from  thence,  sitting 
at  the  right  hand  of  His  Father.  As  a  king,  upon  whose  safety  the  weal  of  the 
kingdom  depends,  is  said  to  carry  the  lives  of  his  people  with  him,  when  he 
adventures  his  person  into  danger;  so  our  souls  do  hang  upon  Christ  our 
Redeemer:  in  Him  we  live  and  move,  wheresoever  He  goes  He  draws  us  after 
Him  ;  if  He  be  lifted  up  on  high,  so  are  we  also  by  virtue  of  concommitancy ;  it  is 
His  will,  and  we  have  His  word  for  it,  that  where  He  is,  there  should  we  be  also. 
When  we  pray  unto  Him,  if  our  spirit  do  not  issue  out  from  us,  and  prostrate 
itself  before  Him  in  heaven,  that  petition  solicits  faintly,  and  is  not  like  to 
speed,  because  it  comes  not  nearer  to  Him  who  is  our  advocate  with  the  Father. 
When  we  come  to  His  Holy  Supper,  unless  we  carry  up  our  heart  unto  Him  by 
strong  devotion,  and  presume  that  we  see  that  very  Body  which  was  crucified  for 
us  before  our  eyes,  we  pollute  the  Sacrament  for  want  of  faith.  There  are  such 
joints  and  bands  which  knit  the  body  unto  the  head,  as  mortal  reason  cannot 
express ;  but  through  faith  and  love  we  are  often  with  Him  by  invisible  ascensions ; 
but  most  assured  be  we  that  there  He  intercedes  for  us,  from  thence  He  assists  His 
sacraments,  sanctifieth  His  ministry,  gives  grace  unto  His  Word.  And  if  they  did 
not  escape  who  refused  Him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we  escape, 
if  we  turn  from  Him  that  speaketh  from  heaven.  (2)  Our  Jerusalem  is  above,  not 
only  in  the  head,  but  in  the  members.    I  do  not  say  in  all  the  members ;  for  the 


SOS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  IT. 

Church  is  that  great  house  in  which  are  vessels  of  honour  and  dishonour.  Terms 
of  excellency,  though  indistinctly  attributed  to  the  whole,  are  agreeing  oftentimes 
only  to  the  chiefer  or  more  refined  part.  Some  there  are  in  this  body,  whom 
though  we  salute  not  by  the  proud  word  of  their  sublimity,  yet  in  true  possession, 
which  shall  never  be  taken  from  them,  they  are  tho3e  that  are  above.  Witness 
that  the  angels  make  up  one  Church  with  us,  being  the  chief  citizens  that  are 
reckoned  in  the  triumphant  part ;  fellow  servants  with  us  under  one  Lord ;  adopted 
sons  under  one  Father;  elect  under  one  Christ.  This  is  the  language  of  the 
Scripture,  and  surely  members  of  one  mystical  body,  for  the  same  Jesus  is  the 
head  of  all  principality  and  power  (Col.  ii.  10).  Of  this  family  also  are  the 
saints  departed,  even  all  those  holy  spirits  that  obey  God  in  heavenly  places,  and 
do  not  imitate  the  devil  and  his  angels.  (3)  We  have  obtained  this  dignity,  to  be 
ranked  as  them  that  are  above,  because  our  calling  is  very  holy  :  "  He  hath  saved 
us,  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling  "  (2  Tim.  i.  9) ;  called  to  doctrine  which  is 
above,  which  flesh  and  blood  did  not  reveal,  but  the  Father  that  giveth  wisdom 
plentifully.  (4)  This  holy  city  of  God  is  above,  because  it  pursues  not  the  things 
beneath,  but  it  seeks  those  things  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God ;  it  is  above  in  its  affections.  The  delights  of  the  synagogue  were  victory  over 
their  enemies,  length  of  days,  a  land  of  wine  and  olives,  and  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey,  poor  accessories  of  a  transitory  happiness.  This  was  tolerated  unto 
them,  when  the  first  rudiments  of  the  fear  of  God  were  taught ;  but  these  are  too 
childish  for  us  to  look  after,  inasmuch  as  long  continuance  of  time  hath  taught 
us  to  choose  the  better  part.  (5)  The  Church  evangelical  is  Jerusalem  above  in 
respect  of  the  Jewish  Hagar,  propter  sublime  pactum,  the  covenant  that  is  made 
with  us  is  sublime  and  magnificent ;  not  the  dreadful  law  of  works,  but  the  mild 
and  gentle  oovenant  of  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  3.  Jerusalem,  which  is  above, 
is  free.  The  precedent  praise  of  the  Church  adheres  unto  this  word  for  the  con- 
summation thereof.  If  there  be  any  that  take  upon  them  to  belong  to  the  New 
Jerusalem,  and  to  the  city  which  is  above,  let  them  show  the  copy  of  their 
freedom,  that  they  are  not  led  by  the  spirit  of  bondage,  but  by  the  spirit  of 
adoption.  (1)  What  this  freedom  is.  Our  freedom  oonsists  in  a  manumission 
from  a  fourfold  servitude,  (a)  We  are  delivered  from  the  yoke  of  ceremonies, 
called  the  bondage  of  the  elements  of  this  world,  in  this  chapter,  verse  4.  (b)  We 
are  most  free  for  the  new  covenant's  sake,  which  is  made  with  us.  For  salvation 
is  not  offered  us  through  the  works  of  the  law,  but  through  the  promise  of  grace. 
We  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  children  of  promise  (verse  28).  (c)  We  have  not 
received  the  spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,  but  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry, 
"Abba,  Father"  (Kom.  viii.  25).  Says  Theophylact  upon  my  text,  The  gospel 
exhorts  us  gently,  it  doth  not  affright  us  tyrannously.  (d)  The  rewards  of  the 
New  Testament  are  not  momentary  things,  such  as  the  law  propounded,  but 
heavenly.  Says  the  same  author,  We  are  not  servants  that  do  our  duty  for  visible 
wages.  And  all  these  together  make  the  copy  of  a  perfect  freedom.  (2)  How  we 
got  this  freedom.  We  all  know  the  procurer,  and  what  He  did  to  gain  it  for  us ; 
it  is  a  flower  that  grew  out  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  We  were  not  proteoted,  as 
Joshua's  spies  were,  by  a  common  woman ;  nor  set  at  large,  as  Samaria  was,  by  the 
tidings  of  lepers  ;  our  Deliverer  is  more  honourable  to  us  than  our  freedom.  The 
Son  of  God  was  made  a  servant,  that  we  servants  might  become  sons.  As  God 
made  nothing  in  nature  but  by  His  Son,  by  Him  He  made  the  worlds,  so  He  did 
nothing  for  the  restoration  of  the  world  without  Him.  He  is  all  in  all.  He  hath 
freed  us  from  the  bondage  of  shadows  by  taking  a  body;  from  the  covenant  of 
works  by  satisfying  His  Father's  justice ;  from  the  dread  of  fear  by  the  sweetness 
of  His  mercy ;  from  the  sordid  desire  of  earthly  things  by  the  operation  of  His 
holy  Spirit.  (3)  How  we  should  use  this  freedom.  No  blessing  hath  been  more 
abused  than  this.  Under  colour  hereof  the  Galileans  would  be  free  from  tribute, 
the  Nicolaitans  from  the  bond  of  marriage,  the  Gnostics  from  all  justice  and 
temperance,  the  clerks  of  the  Eoman  Church  from  the  courts  of  the  civil  magis- 
trate, and  the  Anabaptists  from  all  moral  duties.  No,  says  St.  Peter  to  all  these, 
"As  free,  but  not  using  your  liberty  as  a  cloak  of  maliciousness,  but  as  the 
servants  of  God."  It  was  St.  Austin's  by- word,  You  are  free,  therefore  love  God, 
and  do  what  you  will.  If  ye  love  Him  keep  His  commandments.  We  are  not  so 
soon  loosed  but  we  are  tied  again,  both  freed  and  bound  at  once.  We  must 
recompense  His  goodness  with  our  imperfect  obedience.  It  is  the  law  of 
gratitude ;  it  is  the  bond  of  nature.  As  we  commonly  say,  that  nothing  is  more 
dearly  bought  than  that  which  comes  by  gift ;  so  we  owe  the  greater  service  to 


ota».  IT.]  GALATIANS.  803 

Him  of  whom  we  got  our  freedom.  Nay,  we  are  bound  to  endure  all  for  Hi3  sake. 
We  feel  the  pain  as  much  as  they  that  curse  and  rage  in  their  sufferings,  but  our 
love  unto  Christ  doth  overcome  it.  A  free  man,  that  will  thrive,  follows  his  trado 
as  close  as  any  apprentice,  though  not  by  austere  compulsion.  So  our  freedom 
will  not  make  our  hands  slack  from  working,  if  we  mean  to  lay  up  a  treasure  in 
heaven.  4.  And  as  the  Church  hath  taken  upon  it  the  proper  name  of  Jerusalem, 
yet  without  any  contract  to  the  local  and  material  building  of  Jerusalem,  so  she 
hath  taken  up  the  appellation  of  a  mother,  yet  without  any  respect  to  nature,  no 
way  bending  to  natural  causes,  or  natural  affections.  For  not  only  our  parents  in 
the  flesh,  but  the  whole  world,  hath  quite  lost  us  in  this  word.  As  Moses 
remembered  the  great  devotion  of  Levi,  that  he  said  of  his  father  and  mother,  I 
have  not  seen  them,  or  I  respeot  them  not,  and  of  his  brethren,  I  do  not  acknow- 
ledge them  (Deut.  xxxiii.  9) ;  so  by  deriving  ourselves  from  this  mother,  we  cast 
our  fleshly  parentage  aside,  and  we  say  to  her,  who  did  give  us  to  suck  from  her 
breasts,  as  our  Saviour  did  to  the  blessed  Virgin ;  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  " 
Jerusalem  is  ours,  and  we  are  hers.  First,  to  know  our  mother,  that  we  may  not 
be  ignorant  either  of  her  fruitfulness  or  our  own  obedience.  He  is  a  wise  son,  says 
Telemachus,  in  Homer,  that  knows  his  father ;  but  he  is  a  foolish  son  that  doth  not 
know  his  mother.  Secondly,  note  the  unity  and  indivision  of  the  children  of  this 
mother.  They  are  a  cluster  of  grapes  hanging  upon  one  stalk,  a  brood  of  chickens 
clockt  under  the  wings  of  one  hen ;  there  is  but  one  stem  and  one  progeny ;  one  in 
relation  to  this  parent,  the  mother  of  us.  The  third  and  last  part  puts  us 
to  observe,  that  the  note  of  universality  was  large  in  Paul's  days,  but  now  much 
more  amplified  than  in  those  times — the  mother  of  as  all.  (Bishop  Hacket.) 
The  new  Jerusalem : — Liberty  is  the  element  of  a  Christian.  The  fall  placed  nature 
under  the  bondage  of  sin ;  but  then  the  law  placed  sin  under  the  bondage  of  fear  ; 
but  Christ  first  delivers  sin  from  fear,  and  then  delivers  nature  from  sin.  That  the 
"  Jerusalem  above  "  means  the  present  Churoh  militant,  as  well  as  the  Church  tri- 
umphant— the  kingdom  of  heaven  within  yon,  as  well  as  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
above  you — both  grace  and  glory — is  evident  from  the  manner  in  which  the  expres- 
sion "  Jerusalem,"  or  "  Zion,"  is  used  in  its  connection  of  thought  in  many  other 
parts  of  Scripture ;  as,  for  example,  in  the  Psalms ;  or  Isaiah  lxii.  1,  2  ;  or  Hebrews 
xii.  22 ;  or  Rev.  iii.  12 ;  or  Rev.  xxi.  2.  Of  all  this  Jerusalem,  then,  or  Church-state, 
the  character,  the  determining  character,  is  liberty.  If  I  wanted  a  proof  of  this,  I 
might  see  it  in  the  fact  that  everything  which  is  not  free  is  from  beneath.  Every 
machination  of  Satan  against  God's  people — every  dark  heresy  that  comes  to  con- 
fine the  Churoh — every  spiritual  temptation  which  ensnares  a  man's  conscience — 
every  distress  which  cramps  a  believer's  mind — is  from  beneath ;  therefore,  because 
it  is  from  beneath,  it  is  bondage.  Bondage  is  from  below.  "  Jerusalem  above," — 
that  which  your  citizenship  is — "  is  free."  Endeavour  now  to  catch,  for  a  moment  or 
two,  a  feature,  one  or  two  features,  in  the  liberty  of  the  Churoh  in  heaven,  that  we 
may,  by  God's  grace,  copy  it  into  our  liberty  of  the  Church  below.  I  observe  that 
in  heaven  everything  is  very  large,  to  us  infinite.  The  room  is  boundless ;  the 
inhabitants  are  beyond  computation — even  as  those  stars  in  the  heavens,  which  no 
man  can  reckon.  But  yet,  as  God  does  with  those  stars,  so  God  does  with  every- 
thing in  heaven.  The  gates,  the  fruits,  the  seats,  the  elders,  the  crowns,  are  all 
numbered — so  that  I  see  in  heaven  at  once  vastness  and  accuracy ;  the  freest  scope 
with  the  minutest  observation.  So  be  our  freedom  here.  Our  mercies  are  infinite. 
Still,  every  one  of  my  mercies  is  known,  and  written  down  in  God's  book,  as  a 
separate  item.  It  is  written ;  it  is  catalogued,  and  responsible.  The  multitude  is 
vast ;  but,  for  each  one  that  goes  to  make  that  multitude,  I  have  to  give  a  separate 
account  how  I  have  used  it  in  this  world.  That  is  my  liberty.  Again,  look  at  the 
services  of  heaven.  I  note  that  they  use  forms  in  heaven.  We  are  told  the  very 
words,  which  they  cease  not  day  and  night  to  say  (never  weary,  though) — "  Worthy 
is  the  Lamb ! — Amen  1 — Alleluia ! — For  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth  1 "  But 
oh  1  what  a  freshness,  what  spirit  there  is  in  those  celestial  formularies  i  Let  us 
take  our  liberty.  Free  thoughts  and  full  affections,  in  prescribed  currents  of  regu- 
lated words,  go  to  send  up  our  separate  feelings  in  all  the  individualities  of  un- 
premeditated prayer ;  and  now  we  blend  in  social  worship,  as  in  the  beautiful  prayer 
and  language  of  the  holy  services  in  which  we  have  been  this  night  engaged ;  and, 
in  all,  with  the  equal  liberty  of  Zion's  children.  That  is  heaven's  free  worship, 
and  that  is  the  liberty  of  the  Church  around.  There  must  be  law  to  have  freedom. 
The  greater  the  law,  the  greater  liberty  ;  but  the  deeper  that  law  is  engraven  in  the 
heart's  fine  feelings,  and  the  more  a  man  is  the  spring  of  bis  own  obedience,  th* 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

more  of  habit,  the  more  of  anticipation's  boundings,  the  less  of  misapprehensions 
without  a  man,  and  the  more  felt  presence  of  the  love  of  Christ  in  a  man,  the 
nearer  are  we  to  the  "  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  which  is  free,  and  which  is  the 
mother  of  us  all.  "The  mother  of  us  all."  There  is  no  confidence  which  the 
world  ever  shows,  so  intimate  and  so  tender,  as  that  which  a  son  feels  for  his  mother. 
There  are  feelings  which  a  man  will  deposit  nowhere  but  with  his  mother.  "The 
mother  of  us  all !  "  Children  of  "the  New  Jerusalem  " — children  of  the  Church — 
set  much  by  your  Church.  She  is  to  you  no  other  than  a  parent.  Children  of 
"  the  new  Jerusalem " — children  of  heaven — remember  into  what  a  registry  your 
name  is  now,  by  your  second  birth,  enrolled.  Demean  it  not ;  sully  it  not ;  sit  loose 
to  this  world  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds ;  for,  behold !  she,  which  is  your  "  mother," 
will  come  presently,  in  her  perfect  beauty ;  and  where  should  your  eye  be,  and 
where  should  your  anticipation  daily  be,  but  to  that  "  new  Jerusalem,"  which  shall 
come  from  heaven.  Children  of  "  the  new  Jerusalem  " — children  of  liberty — take 
the  image  of  your  parent's  features.  "Be  free"  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds.  Have 
freer  prayer — freer  hope — freely  take  the  freedom  so  freely  given  you.  (J.  Vaughan, 
If.  A .)  The  liberties  of  the  Church : — We  must  understand  St.  Paul  here  to  speak 
of  the  Church ;  and  not  of  the  Church  triumphant  in  heaven,  as  some  of  the  school- 
men have  asserted,  but  the  Church  militant  here  on  earth,  that  glorious  edifice  of 
the  faithful,  whose  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life,  and  who  are  united  with 
Christ  above  in  a  fellowship  of  His  sufferings.  But  the  word  "  above  "  is  not  to 
mislead  you,  as  Luther  has  well  observed;  for  all  the  processes  of  spiritual  goner- 
ation  and  adoption  are  from  above  ;  all  intercourse  between  God  and  His  faithful 
worshippers  is  from  above ;  and  "  our  conversation  is  in  heaven."  All,  then,  that 
are  allowed  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  are  to  be  born  from  above :  this  is  the  decree 
of  the  Head  of  the  Church.  As  Christ,  therefore,  is  in  heaven,  and  as  He  is  Head 
of  the  Church,  so  is  the  Church  spiritually  in  heaven,  even  whilst  she  is  militant 
here  below ;  for  the  Church  is  an  unmeasured  edifice,  and  never  can  be  measured 
till  some  one  by  searching  can  find  out  the  limits  of  the  Almighty  :  "  It  is  as  high 
as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do?  deeper  than  hell,  what  oanst  thou  know?  "  The 
Head  of  the  Church  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God ;  the  feet  are  walking  here  on  earth ; 
and  yet  one  mighty  eternal  Spirit  animates  the  whole,  one  will  and  principle  of 
action  pervades  the  immense  body ;  one  thought  and  intention  directs  and  disci- 
plines all  the  mass  ; — for  in  Him  "  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being ;"  and  the 
whole  company  of  true  and  faithful  believers,  from  the  day  that  Christ  was  cruci- 
fied, down  to  the  hour  when  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound  from  heaven,  do  form  but 
one  mystical  body,  with  one  soul  and  one  spirit,  entire  in  union  and  perfeot  in 
co-operation.  But  the  beauty  of  this  city  is  her  freedom :  the  real  Church  of 
Christ  has  ample  privileges;  and  all  her  laws  are  comprehensive  and  liberal. 
There  is  no  spirit  of  bigotry,  no  local  attachments,  no  exclusive  jealousy,  no 
straining  on  the  conscience,  no  turning  of  the  fancies  of  man  into  the  decrees  of 
God.  St.  Paul,  the  illustrious  scribe  of  that  holy  city,  lays  no  heavier  burthen  on 
the  chartered  inhabitants  than  this — "  Stand  fast  therefore  in  the  liberty  where- 
with Christ  hath  made  us  free;  and  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of 
bondage  "  (Gal.  v.  1.)  How  easy,  one  would  think  it  must  be,  to  love  the  freedom 
which  God  has  given  us  1  But,  alas !  that  which  has  been  given  us  as  our  freedom 
by  God,  has  been,  by  the  world  in  general,  considered  irksome  and  intolerable.  The 
world  cannot  endure  a  spiritual  Church ;  it  loves  neither  a  spiritual  worship  nor  a 
spiritual  faith  ;  and  to  worship  God  in  spirit  is  what  it  can  neither  understand  nor 
tolerate.    (R.  M.  Beverley.) 

Vers.  27,  28.    Rejoice,  thou  barren,  that  bearest  not. — Rejoice,  thou  barren  :— 

1.  The  Church  in  heb  sadness.  1.  The  figure  is  drawn  from  the  closest  tie  that 
nature  knows,  that  of  marriage  relationship,  and  teaches  that  as  both  male  and 
female  are  incomplete  without  each  other,  so  the  happiness  of  God  is  incomplete 
without  the  love  of  the  creature  He  has  made  to  love  Him.  2.  The  picture,  how- 
ever, Is  that  of  a  wife  whose  husband  has  forsaken  her.  She  is  (1)  barren,  desolate, 
and  therefore  (2)  sorrowful.  3.  This  applies  to  the  Hebrew  Church.  II.  The 
Church  in  her  gladness.     1.  Bestrictions  between  Jew  and  Gentile  broken  down. 

2.  Arbitrary  barriers  of  race  and  rank  and  law  are  removed.  3.  All  nations  are 
redeemed  and  gathered  into  a  common  salvation.  (C.  Clemance,  DJ).)  Songs 
for  desolate  hearts : — Take  the  text  to  refer — I.  To  the  Church  of  God.  1.  For 
a  long  season  before  the  Advent  the  Church  was  desolate.  2.  During  Christ's  tem- 
poral stay  with  her  her  condition  was  not  much  better.    3.  Suddenly  after  His 


chap,  iv.]  GALATIANS.  305 

departure,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  she  became  fruitful.  4.  And  continued  fruitful 
during  the  whole  apostolic  age.  Notice — 1.  That  at  all  seasons  when  the  Church 
has  been  desolate  and  barren  God  has  appeared  to  her.  (1)  In  the  dark  ages  the 
Church  was  barren,  but  the  Lord  appeared  through  Luther,  and  she  became  fruitful. 
(2)  In  the  last  century  the  Church  was  barren,  but  God  appeared  and  made  her 
fruitful  through  the  Wesleys  and  Whitefield.  2.  That  in  the  present  age  of  com- 
parative barrenness  we  may  expect  revival.  II.  Tc  any  one  Church.  1.  There 
are  some  separate  Churches  that  are  in  a  sad  condition,  with  a  lifeless  ministry, 
worldly  officers,  and  declining  membership.  2.  What  is  the  present  duty  of  mem- 
bers of  such  Churches  ?  (1)  Labour  to  be  conscious  of  your  state,  of  its  evil  and 
danger.  (2)  Pray  earnestly  for  revival.  (3)  Do  all  you  can  personally  to  bring  it 
about.  III.  To  the  poor,  helpless  sinner.  1.  His  fruitlessness.  2.  Desolation. 
3.  Help  in  Christ.  4.  Trust  in  Him,  and  He  will  make  thee  fruitful.  IV.  To  the 
depressed  believer.  1.  Barrenness  is  the  platform  of  Divine  power.  2.  Desola- 
tion the  setting  for  God's  everlasting  love.  V.  To  those  Christians  who  have 
hot  been  successful  in  doino  good.  1.  It  is  good  for  you  while  you  are  barren 
to  feel  desolate.  2.  But  you  may  be  barren  only  in  your  own  esteem.  3.  Wait, 
and  toil  on,  for  in  due  season  you  will  reap  if  you  faint  not.  4.  If  your  barrenness 
is  real  let  it  humble  you,  but  repair  to  the  source  of  fruitfulness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christianity  not  a  failure : — While  Christianity  is  speaking  in  languages  more 
numerous,  by  tongues  more  eloquent,  in  nations  more  populous  than  ever  before  : 
marshalling  better  troops  with  richer  harmony;  shrinking  from  no  foe,  rising 
triumphant  from  every  conflict ;  shaking  down  the  towers  of  old  philosophies  that 
exalt  themselves  against  God ;  making  the  steam  press  rush  under  the  demand  for 
her  Scriptures,  and  the  steam  horse  groan  under  the  weight  of  her  charities ;  eman- 
cipating the  enslaved,  civilizing  the  lawless,  refining  literature,  inspiring  poetry ; 
sending  forth  art  and  science  no  longer  clad  in  soft  raiment  to  linger  in  king's 
palaces,  but  as  hardy  prophets  of  God  to  make  earth  bud  and  blossom  as  the  rose ; 
giving  God-like  breadth  and  freedom  and  energy  to  the  civilization  that  bears  its 
name,  elevating  savage  islands  into  civilized  states,  leading  forth  Christian  martyrs 
from  the  mountains  of  Madagascar,  turning  the  clubs  of  cannibals  into  the  railings 
of  the  altars  before  which  Fiji  savages  call  upon  Jesus ;  repeating  the  Pentecost 
"  by  many  an  ancient  river  and  many  a  palmy  plain  "  ;  thundering  at  the  seats  of 
ancient  Paganism ;  sailing  all  waters,  cabling  all  oceans,  scaling  all  mountains  in 
the  march  of  its  might,  and  ever  enlarging  the  diameter  of  those  circles  of  light 
which  it  has  kindled  on  earth,  and  which  will  soon  meet  in  a  universal  illumination 
— you  call  it  a  failure  1  A  little  more  such  failure  and  we  shall  have,  over  all  the' 
globe,  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  (E. 
Thompson.)  The  enlargement  of  the  Church  ; — I.  Depends  on  the  promise — 

made  to  Abraham  and  secured  in  Christ — is  effected  by  the  Spirit — realized  in  the 
children  of  promise  (ver.  28).  II.  Is  certain — because  the  revealed  purpose  of  God 
— which  must  surmount  all  the  difficulties  of  barrenness  and  apparent  desolation. 
III.  Will  be  glorious — surpassing  all  experience — hope — faith.  IV.  Will  be  a 
source  of  unspeakable  joy  —  to  all  believers  —  to  the  world  at  large.  (J. 
Lyth.)  The  children  of  promise: — I.   Thb  resemblance    of   the  Gentilr 

Christians  to  Isaac.  1.  They  had  been  promised.  2.  They  had  been  begotten 
(spiritually)  by  a  supernatural  and  extraordinary  operation.  II.  The  spiritual 
character  of  the  pbomise.  1.  It  appealed  to  faith.  2.  Its  fulfilment  was  by 
Divine  grace.  III.  The  dignity,  and  privilege  of  the  relation  it  creates.  The 
relation  is — 1.  Immediate.     2.  Vital.    3.  Spiritual.     (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.) 

Ver.  29.  He  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that  was  born 
after  the  Spirit. — Enmity  between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  man: — I  must 
profess  that  since  I  observed  the  course  of  the  world,  and  the  concord  of  the  Word 
and  providences  of  God,  I  took  it  for  a  notable  proof  of  man's  fall,  and  of  the  verity 
of  the  Scripture,  and  the  supernatural  origin  of  true  sanctification,  to  find  such  a 
universal  enmity  between  the  holy  and  the  serpentine  seed,  and  to  find  Cain  and 
Abel's  case  so  ordinarily  exemplified,  and  him  that  is  born  after  the  flesh  to  perse- 
cute him  that  is  born  after  the  Spirit.  And  methinks  to  this  day  it  is  a  great 
and  visible  help  for  the  confirmation  of  our  Christian  faith.  But  that  which  is 
much  remarkable  in  it  is,  that  nothing  else  in  the  world,  except  the  crossing  of 
men's  carnal  interest,  doth  meet  with  any  such  universal  enmity.  A  man  may  be 
as  learned  as  he  can,  and  no  man  hate  him  for  it.  If  he  excel  all  others,  all  men 
will  praise  him,  and  proclaim  his  excellency  ;  he  may  be  an  excellent  linguist,  an 

20 


806  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r* 

excellent  philosopher,  an  excellent  physician,  an  excellent  logician,  an  excellent 
orator,  and  all  commend  him.  Among  musicians,  architects,  soldiers,  seamen,  and 
all  arts  and  sciences,  men  value,  prefer,  and  praise  the  best ;  yea,  even  speculative 
theology,  such  wits  a3  the  schoolmen  and  those  who  are  called  great  divines  are 
honoured  by  all,  and  meet,  as  such,  with  but  little  enmity,  persecution,  or  obloquy 
in  the  world.  Though  I  know  that  even  a  Galilaeus,  a  Campanella,  and  many  such 
have  suffered  by  the  Boman  Inquisitors,  that  was  not  so  much  in  enmity  to  their 
speculations  or  opinions,  as  through  a  fear  lest  new  philosophical  notions  should 
unsettle  men's  minds  and  open  the  way  to  new  opinions  in  theology,  and  so  prove 
injurious  to  the  kingdom  and  interest  of  Rome.  I  know  also  that  Demosthenes, 
Cicero,  Seneca,  Lucan,  and  many  other  learned  men  have  died  by  the  hands  or 
power  of  tyrants.  But  this  was  not  for  their  learning,  but  for  their  opposition  to 
those  tyrants'  wills  and  interests.  And  I  know  that  some  religious  men  have  suf- 
fered for  their  sins  and  follies,  and  some  for  their  meddling  too  much  with  secular 
affairs,  as  the  counsellors  of  princes,  as  Funetius,  Justus  Jonas,  and  many 
others.  But  yet  no  parts,  no  excellency,  no  skill  or  learning,  is  hated  commonly, 
but  honoured  in  the  world ;  no,  not  theological  learning,  save  only  this  practioal 
godliness  and  religion,  and  the  principles  of  it,  which  only  renders  men  amiable  to 
God,  through  Christ,  and  saves  men's  souls.  (R.  Baxter.)  Honour  of  persecu- 
tion:— One  who  was  persecuted  in  Queen  Mary's  time  wrote  thus  :  "  A  prisoner  for 
Christ !  What  is  this  for  a  poor  worm  ?  Such  honour  have  not  all  His  saints. 
Both  the  degrees  which  I  took  in  the  university  have  not  set  me  so  high  as  the 
honour  of  becoming  a  prisoner  of  the  Lord."  Glorifying  in  persecution : — Paul 

and  Silas  had  their  prison  songs  in  their  prison  sufferings.    Those  caged  birds  sing 
with  as  much  melody  as  any  that  have  sky  liberty.    Thus  Ignatius,  in  his  epistle, 
glorified,  saying :  "  The  wild  beasts  may  grind  me  as  corn  between  their  teeth :  but 
I  shall  by  that  become  as  choice  bread  in  the  hand  of  my  God.    (Archbishop 
Seeker.)        Faithfulness  under  persecution  : — A  young  Christian  soldier  in  the  army 
was  often  assaulted  by  his  tent-mates  while  at  prayer  at  night.    He  sought  advice 
of  the  chaplain,  and,  by  his  counsels,  omitted  his  usual  habit.     But  his  ardent  soul 
could  not  endure  this.    He  chose  rather  to  have  prayer  with  persecution  than  peaee 
without  it,  and  resumed  his  old  way.    The  result  was,  that  after  a  time  all  his  tent- 
oompanions  knelt  in  prayer  with  him.    In  reporting  to  the  chaplain  he  said, 
"  Isn't  it  better  to  keep  the  colours  flying  ?  "        Riches  of  persecution: — A  certain 
person,  on  seeing  a  Christian  woman  go  cheerfully  to  prison,  said  to  her,  "  0,  you 
have  not  yet  tasted  of  the  bitterness  of  death."    She  as  cheerfully  replied,  "No, 
nor  never  shall ;  for  Christ  has  promised,  that  those  who  keep  His  sayings  shall 
never  see  death."        On  persecution : — In  these  words  the  apostle  doth  present  to 
our  eye  the  true  face  of  the  Church  in  an  allegory  of  Sarah  and  Hagar,  of  Ishmael 
and  Isaao,  of  Mount  Sinai  and  Mount  Sion.    Take  the  full  scheme  and  delineation 
in  brief.     1.  Here  is  Sarah  and  Hagar ;  that  is,  servitude  and  freedom.     2.  Here 
are  two  cities :  "  Jerusalem  that  now  is,"  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews ;  and  that 
"Jerusalem  which  is  above,"  "the  vision  of  peace,"  and  "mother  of  all"  the 
faithful.    For  by  the  new  covenant  we  are  made  children  unto  God.     3.  Here  ia 
the  law  promulgated  and  thundered  out  on  Mount  Sinai;   and  the  gospel,  the 
covenant  of  grace,  which  God  published,  not  from  the  mount,  but  from  heaven 
itself,  by  the  voice  of  His  Son.     In  all,  you  see  a  fair  correspondence  and  agree- 
ment between  the  type  and  the  thing,  but  so  that  "  Jerusalem  our  mother  "  is  still 
the  highest ;  the  gospel  glorious  with  the  liberty  it  brought,  and  the  law  putting  on 
a  yoke,  breathing  nothing  but  servitude  and  fear ;  Isaac  an  "  heir,"  and  Ishmael 
"  thrust  out " ;  the  Christian  more  honourable  than  the  Jew.    The  veil  is  drawn, 
and  you  may  behold  presented  to  your  view  and  consideration  a  double  parallel. 
1.  Of  the  times;  "But  as  then,  so  now."    2.  Of  the  occurrences,  the  acts  and 
monuments,  of  these  times,  divided  between  two,  the  agent  and  the  patient,  "  those 
that  are  born  after  the  flesh  "  persecuting,  and  "  those  that  are  born  after  the 
Spirit "  suffering  persecution.    I.  Though  the  privileges  and  pbebogatives  of  the 
Chtjbch  be  many,  yet  was  she  neveb  exempted  fbom  pebsecdtion,  but  bather 
had  it  entailed  on  heb  as  an  inhebitance.     1.  In  the  persons  themselves.    2. 
This  will  yet  more  plainly  appear  from  the  very  nature  and  constitution  of  the 
Church,  which  is  best  seen  in  her  blood,  when  she  is  militant ;  which  is  more  full 
and  expressive  than  any  other  representation  of  the  title  that  she  hath.    3.  "  As 
it  was  then,  so  it  is  now."    St.  Paul  doth  not  say,  "  It  may  be  so,"  or  "  It  is  by 
chance,"  but  "  So  it  is,"  by  "  the  providence  of  God,  which  is  seen  in  the  well- 
ordering  and  bringing  of  every  motion  and  action  of  man  to  a  right  end,"  whick 


chap,  iv.]  GALATIANS.  807 

commonly  runneth  in  a  contrary  course  to  that  which  flesh  and  blood*  human 
infirmity,  would  find  out.  Eternity  and  mortality,  majesty  and  dust  and  ashes, 
wisdom  and  ignorance,  steer  not  the  same  course,  nor  are  they  bound  to  the  same 
point,  "  My  ways  are  not  your  ways,  nor  My  thoughts  yours,"  saith  God,  by  His 
prophet,  to  a  foolish  nation  who  in  extremity  of  folly  would  be  wiser  than  God. 
We  must  first  be  made  more  spiritual  by  the  contradiction  of  "  those  who  are  born 
after  the  flesh  " ;  more  Isaacs  than  before,  for  the  many  Ishmaels.  So  perfection 
is  not  only  agreeable  to  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  convenient  to  the  weakness  of  mm. 
And  it  is  a  beatitude:  Blessed  poverty,  blessed  mourning,  blessed  persecution 
(Matt.  v.  3,  4,  10-12).  Blessedness  is  set  upon  these  as  a  crown,  or  as  rich 
embroidery  upon  sackcloth,  or  some  coarser  stuff.  Thus  you  see  the  Church  is  not, 
cannot  be,  exempt  from  persecution,  if  either  we  consider  the  quality  of  the  persons 
themselves,  or  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  Church,  or  the  providence  and 
wisdom  and  mercy  of  God.     II.  Let  us  now  look  back  upon  this  dreadful  but 

BLESSED   SIGHT,    AND    SEE    WHAT   ADVANTAGE    WE    CAN    WORK,  what   light  W6  Can  Strike, 

out  of  this  cloud  of  blood  to  direct  and  strengthen  us  in  this  our  warfare,  that  we 
may  "be  faithful  unto  death,  and  so  receive  the  crown  of  life"  (Rev.  ii.  10).  1. 
Let  us  not  be  dismayed  when  we  see  that  befall  the  Church  which  befalleth  all  the 
kingdoms  and  commonwealths  in  the  world,  when  we  see  the  face  of  the  Church 
gather  blackness,  and  not  shine  in  that  beauty  in  which  formerly  we  beheld  her. 
For  what  strange  thing  is  it  that  Ishmael  should  mock  Isaac?  that  a  serpent 
should  bite,  or  a  lion  roar  ?  that  the  world  should  be  the  world,  or  the  Church  the 
Church  ?  The  Church,  so  far  as  she  is  visible,  in  respect  of  her  visibility  and  out- 
ward form,  is  as  subject  to  change  as  any  other  thing  that  is  seen,  as  those  things 
which  we  use  to  say  are  but  the  balls  of  fortune  to  play  with.  2.  And  that  we  may 
not  marvel,  let  us,  in  the  next  place,  have  a  right  judgment  in  all  things,  and  not 
set  up  the  Church  in  our  fancy,  and  shape  her  out  by  the  state  and  pomp  of  this 
world,  but  "be  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  our  minds"  (Rom.  xii.  2).  We 
must  not  make  the  world  the  idea  and  platform  of  a  Church.  3.  Therefore  let  us 
cast  down  these  imaginations,  these  bubbles  of  air  blown  up  by  the  flesh  the  worse 
part  which  doth  soonest  bring  on  a  persecution,  and  doth  soonest  fear  it ;  and  let 
us,  in  the  place  of  these,  build  up  a  royal  fort,  build  ourselves  up  in  our  holy  faith, 
and  so  fit  and  prepare  ourselves  against  the  fiery  trial.  4.  "  Be  ye  therefore  ready ; 
for,  in  an  hour  when  you  think  not,  the  Son  of  man,"  the  Captain  of  your  salvation, 
may  come  (Matt.  xxiv.  44),  and  put  you  into  the  lists.  Though' the  trumpet 
sound  not  to  battle,  yet  is  it  not  peace.  And  now,  to  conclude,  "What  saith 
the  Scripture  ?  Cast  out  the  bondwoman  and  her  son :  for  the  son  of  the  bond- 
woman shall  not  inherit  with  the  son  of  the  freewoman."  To  cast  out  is  an  act 
of  violence ;  and  the  true  Church  evermore  hath  the  suffering  part ;  but  yet  she 
may  cast  them  out,  and  that  with  violence ;  but  then  it  is  with  the  same  "  violence 
we  take  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  a  violenoe  upon  ourselves  (Matt.  xi.  12).  1.  By 
laying  ourselves  prostrate,  by  the  vehemency  of  our  devotion,  by  our  frequent 
prayers  that  God  would  either  melt  their  hearts,  or  shorten  their  hands ;  either 
bring  them  into  the  right  way,  or  strike  off  their  chariot  wheels.  2  By  our 
patience  and  long-suffering.  Patience  worketh  more  miracles  than  power.  3.  We 
cast  them  out  by  our  iunocency  of  life,  and  sincerity  of  conversation.  4.  Lastly : 
We  may  cast  them  out  by  "  casting  our  burden  on  the  Lord  "  (Psa.  Iv.  22) ;  by 
putting  our  cause  into  His  hands  who  best  can  plead  it,  by  citing  our  persecutors 
before  His  tribunal  who  is  the  righteous  Judge.  If  we  thus  cast  it  upon  Him,  we 
need  no  other  umpire,  no  other  revenger.  If  it  be  a  loss,  He  can  restore  it ;  if  an 
injury,  He  can  return  it ;  if  grief,  He  can  heal  it ;  if  disgrace,  He  can  wipe  it  off : 
and  He  will  certainly  do  it,  if  we  so  cast  it  upon  Him  as  to  trust  in  Him  alone  ; 
the  full  persuasion  of  God'B  power  being  that  which  "  awaketh  Him  as  one  out  of 
sleep,"  putteth  Him  to  clothe  Himself  with  His  majesty,  setteth  His  power 
a- working,  to  bring  mighty  things  to  pass,  and  make  Himself  glorious  by  the  delivery 
of  His  people.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  He  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted 
him  that  was  born  after  the  Spirit  .-—When  the  powers  of  the  world  give  any  rest, 
yet  the  carnal  seed  will  be  mocking  and  scoffing,  and  bringing  God's  holy  ways  into 
contempt,  branding  them  with  censures  and  calumnies.  The  reasons  of  this  are 
partly  because  men  are  drunk  with  the  delusions  of  the  flesh,  and  so  cannot  judga 
of  spiritual  things ;  and  partly  to  excuse  themselves.  Men  will  be  quarrelling  at 
religion  when  they  have  no  mind  to  practise  it,  and  dispute  away  duties  when  they 
are  unwilling  to  perform  them  ;  partly  they  take  occasion  from  the  failings  of  God's 
people,  though  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should  do  so.     An  art  should  not  be 


B08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

condemned  for  the  workman's  want  of  skill ;  but  they  do  so.  If  Christians  be 
serious  then  religion  is  counted  an  uncomfortable  thing.  If  there  be  any  differences 
among  God's  people,  because  of  their  several  degrees  of  light,  oh,  then  there  are  so 
many  sects  and  factions  and  controversies  about  religion,  they  suspect  all.  If  any 
creep  into  the  holy  profession,  and  pollute  it  with  their  scandals,  then  all  strictness 
in  religion  is  but  a  pretence  and  imposture.  If  men  be  strict  and  would  avoid 
every  ordinary  failing  incident  to  mankind,  then  they  are  more  nice  than  wise,  and 
this  is  preciseness  and  indiscretion.  (T.Manton,  D.D.)  We  must  expect  persecution : 
— A  soldier  in  the  East  Indies — a  stout,  lion-hearted  man — had  been  a  noted  prize- 
fighter, and  a  terror  to  those  who  knew  him.  That  man  sauntered  into  the  mission 
chapel,  heard  the  gospel,  and  was  converted.  The  change  in  his  character  was 
most  marked  and  decided.  The  lion  was  changed  into  a  lamb.  Two  months 
afterwards,  in  the  mess-room,  some  of  those  who  had  been  afraid  of  him  before 
began  to  ridicule  him.  One  of  them  said,  "  I'll  put  it  to  the  test  whether  he  is  a 
Christian  or  not ;  "  and,  taking  a  basin  of  hot  soup,  he  threw  it  into  his  bosom. 
The  whole  company  gazed  in  breathless  silence,  expecting  that  the  lion  would 
start  up,  and  murder  him  on  the  spot.  But  after  he  had  torn  open  his  waistcoat, 
and  wiped  his  scalded  breast,  he  calmly  turned  round,  and  said,  "  This  is  what  I 
must  expect  if  I  become  a  Christian.  I  must  suffer  persecution."  His  comrade* 
were  filled  with  astonishment.  (Biblical  Treasury.)  Persecution  is  harmless : — 
Do  they  cast  us  out  of  the  city  ?  They  cannot  cast  us  out  of  that  which  is  in  the 
heavens.  If  they  who  hate  us  could  do  this,  they  would  be  doing  something  real 
against  us.  So  long,  however,  as  they  cannot  do  this,  they  are  but  pelting  us  with 
drops  of  water  or  striking  us  with  the  wind.    (Gregory  Nazianzen.) 

Ver.  80.  Cast  out  the  bondwoman  and  her  son. — Freedom  the  blessing  of  th* 
gospel : — I.  Freedom  is  the  characteristic  privilege  of  the  gospel.  1.  Christ 
proclaimed  freedom  from  sin  (John  viii.  33-36).  2.  Paul  proclaimed  freedom  from 
the  law,  both  ceremonial  and  moral.  3.  But  does  not  the  latter  (1)  contradict  the 
former?  is  not  lawlessness  sinfulness?  (2)  contradict  the  moral  sense  which 
asserts  the  obligation  of  the  moral  law  ?  II.  This  freedom  is  the  provision  of 
the  covenant  of  grace.  1.  This  covenant  is  no  longer  restricted  to  an  observance 
of  the  law,  but  is  fulfilled  by  us  when  we  believe  in  Christ.  2.  The  purpose  of  this 
covenant  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  covenant  of  the  law,  but  that  purpose  is  effected 
(1)  by  a  different  method,  viz. ,  faith  in  One  who  has  fulfilled  the  law,  which  we 
could  not  do.  (2)  By  a  higher  method  by  introducing  us  into  a  state  in  which  we 
keep  the  law  by  the  effective  motive  of  eonship  ;  into  which  state  we  enter  by  faith 
in  God's  Son.  3.  This  faith  works  by  love,  which  is  henceforth  our  ruling  impulse 
(Bom.  xiii.  10),  and  we  become  followers  of  God,  not  as  servants,  but  as  "  dear 
children,"  having  received  the  spirit  of  adoption.  III.  This  covenant  answers 
the  yearnings  of  the  human  soul,  which  are — 1.  To  be  reconciled  to  God 
and  at  peace  with  Him.  This  is  accomplished  through  Him  who  fulfilled  the  law 
for  us.  2.  To  serve  Him  truly.  This  is  done  by  Him  who  conquers  evil  in  us, 
and  who  gives  us  through  faith  a  power  to  work  the  works  of  God  (John  vi.  28-9). 
IV.  This  covenant  brings  us  therefore  under  the  law  to  Christ.  Hence  the 
moral  precepts  of  the  gospel ;  which  are  given — 1.  Because  of  the  imperfection  of 
our  faith  and  lest  liberty  should  become  licence.  2.  To  supply  us  with  the  means 
of  self-examination  whether  we  are  keeping  the  royal  law  of  liberty.  (Canon  Vernon 
Hutton.)  The  simplicity  of  the  gospel  covenant : — Our  attention,  perhaps,  may 
not  be  nnprofitably  directed  to  a  consideration  of — first,  the  principles  of  the  old 
and  new  covenant,  and,  secondly,  the  declaration  of  the  text  concerning  them.  1.  It 
is  important  for  us  to  have  constantly  before  us  clear  views  concerning  the  law  and 
the  gospel,  or  the  dispensation  of  works  and  the  dispensation  of  grace.  The  law 
given  on  Sinai  was  a  system  of  precepts  and  commands,  which  required  man's 
perfect  obedience.  These  were  to  be  constantly  in  the  people's  minds  and  in  their 
hearts.  They  were  to  teach  them  diligently  unto  their  children,  and  to  talk  of 
them  when  they  sat  down  in  the  house,  or  journeyed  in  the  way ;  they  were  even  to 
write  them  upon  the  outside  of  their  houses  and  gates,  that  they  might  be  in  every 
place  a  memorial,  that  they  should  "  observe  and  do  them. "  And  they  had  two 
motives  presented  to  urge  them  to  obedience :  first,  the  fear  of  punishment,  and 
secondly,  the  hope  of  reward — "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live  ;  "  but  "  this  "  neglect 
"  to  do,"  and  thou  shalt  die.  It  shall  be  our  righteousness  if  we  observe  to  do  all 
these  commandments  before  the  Lord  our  God,  as  He  hath  commanded  us,  and  yet, 
"cursed  be  He  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  Book  of 


CHAP.  IT.]  GALATIANS.  809 

the  Law  to  do  them."  The  effect  of  the  law,  then,  upon  the  individual  soul  was 
this,  that  with  some  it  led  to  a  constant  fear,  lest  there  should  be  a  violation  01 
omission  of  any  command.  But  then,  with  others  it  had  an  opposite  effect.  It 
was  not  the  fear  of  punishment,  and  this  leading  sometimes  to  despair,  but  it  was 
the  hope  of  reward,  and  this  often  lifting  up  the  heart  with  pride,  so  that  many 
were  led  to  suppose  themselves  perfect — to  say,  "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  " — "  I  thank 
Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are."  But  we  pass  on  to  notice  the  principles  of 
the  new,  or  gospel  covenant.  The  Old  Testament,  as  we  said,  was  a  system  of 
commands  and  precepts,  rewards  and  punishments — "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt 
live  " — this  neglect  to  do  and  thou  shalt  die.  The  gospel  is  an  offer  of  eternal 
happiness  and  life,  as  a  free  gift,  secured  to  us  by  the  work  of  One  who  fulfilled  the 
law,  and  kept  the  covenant  of  works  for  us ;  who  bore  the  curse  and  the  punish- 
ment due  to  a  broken  law,  and  thus  became  Himself,  in  His  own  living  Person,  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth.  The  gospel,  indeed, 
summons  us  to  a  work,  but  it  is  the  work  of  faith ;  the  act  of  casting  our  soul's 
affections  and  hopes  upon  a  living  Saviour.  Scripture  has  beautifully  set  forth 
the  condition  of  a  true  believer  under  the  new  covenant  as  that  of  one  married  to 
Christ.  In  other  words,  are  we  delivered  from  doing  any  good  works,  having 
ceased  from  the  economy  of  works  ?  Are  we  to  live  carelessly,  and  without  diligent 
activity  for  God's  glory  ?  By  no  means.  We  are  not  delivered  from  doing  our 
Heavenly  Father's  will ;  it  is  the  motives  only  that  are  changed.  Under  the  law  we 
are  servants,  and  the  servant  or  hireling  obeys  from  duty ;  he  labours  for  recom- 
pense, or  to  keep  his  situation ;  but  the  wife  and  child  feel  that  the  husband  or 
father's  interests  are  identical  with  their  own ;  his  will  is  their  will ;  his  honour 
and  welfare  theirs.  The  mercenary  soldier  fights  for  pay  or  promotion,  in  a  cause, 
perhaps,  with  which  he  has  no  sympathy,  but  the  Christian  soldier  fights  the  fight 
of  faith,  because  Christ's  enemies  are  his  enemies,  Christ's  cause  His  cause.  "  I 
delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man,"  says  St.  Paul;  my  heart's 
affections  are  now  given  to  my  Saviour.  II.  Now  notice  the  declaration  of  the  text 
concerning  these  principles  of  the  two  covenants.  1.  Here  is  a  distinct  statement, 
that  it  is  impossible  for  the  soul  to  be  saved  and  for  heaven  to  be  gained,  if  we  are 
actuated  by  the  principles  of  the  law  and  the  principles  of  the  gospel  at  the  same 
time — "  The  son  of  the  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  free- 
woman."  And  yet  there  is  constantly  an  attempt  made  to  gain  heaven  in  this  way. 
It  is  ft  very  common  condition  in  the  religious  history  of  man.  The  principles  of  the 
law  and  the  gospel  combined  form  the  motives  actuating  and  influencing  many  a 
Christian's  life :  his  deeds  of  charity,  his  benevolence,  even  his  very  prayers  are 
offered  partly  as  a  matter  of  duty,  and  partly  as  an  act  of  faith.  2.  The  text,  con- 
sequently, points  out  to  us  our  duty,  if  we  are  being  drawn  away  from  the  simplicity 
of  the  faith.  God  will  not  allow  Christ  to  be  robbed  of  His  own  glory.  If  the  soul 
is  to  receive  heaven  at  all,  it  must  be  as  a  beggar  would  receive  an  alms ;  it  must 
be  with  a  consciousness  that  in  itself  it  is  poor,  and  miserable,  and  blind,  and 
naked ;  that  Christ  bestows  the  purchase-money,  and  the  holy  garments,  and  the 
anointing  as  a  gift.  In  fine,  yield  your  heart  to  Him,  entirely  and  constantly,  and 
then  will  His  love  be  shed  abroad  in  your  heart,  and  become  the  motive  for  your 
every  act,  and  the  magnet  of  constant  attraction.  Then  will  there  arise  up  in  your 
soul  the  spirit  of  love  and  not  of  fear ;  the  spirit  of  a  child,  and  not  of  a  servant. 
Then  will  the  fruits  and  graces  of  God's  own  Spirit  develop  and  grow  in  you,  and 
then  shall  you  have  assurance  as  well  as  reliance,  heaven  yours  because  Christ  is 
yours.  In  conclusion,  let  us  notice  how  inconsistent  we  are,  not  to  say  how  sinful, 
when  any  double  motives  actuate  us  in  anything.  In  the  common  concerns  of  life, 
if  I  display  an  act  of  kindness  to  a  poor  person,  partly  from  benevolence,  but  partly 
in  order  that  he  may  think  well  of  me,  or  my  neighbour  may  think  well  of  me  ;  if 
I  subscribe  to  a  missionary  society,  partly  because  it  is  a  duty,  and  partly  to  be 
thought  religious ;  then,  if  such  a  double  motive  were  known,  how  I  should  be  held 
up  to  the  just  scorn  and  contempt  of  others  1  But  do  we  not  act  like  this  when  we 
are  expecting  to  gain  heaven  itself,  partly  by  our  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  partly 
by  our  prayers,  almsdeeds,  or  refined  sanctities,  when,  as  a  fact,  we  are  half- 
worldly  and  only  half-religions,  and  will  not  go  as  helpless,  bankrupt  sinners,  and 
in  brokenheartedness,  and  faith,  and  love  to  Christ?  We  have  all  need,  brethren, 
to  keep  constantly  before  us  the  principles  of  the  new  covenant  of  grace,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  old  covenant  of  works.    (Louis  Stanham,  M.A.) 

Ver.  31.  We  are  not  children  of  the  bondwoman,  but  of  the  free.—  Natur*  and 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  supernatural : — The  whole  force  of  this  application  of  the  allegory  lies  in  the 
truth  of  the  facts.  It  is  because  the  birth  of  Isaac  was  supernatural  that  St.  Paul 
was  able  to  find  in  it  what  he  here  bids  us  see.  What  Isaac  was  in  the  miracle  of 
his  origin  that  is  the  Christian  in  the  miracle  of  his  regeneration.  What  Hagar 
and  Ishmael  hated  in  Isaac  was  the  interference  of  God  with  the  laws  of  nature. 
This  spirit  caused  the  strife  and  the  ejection.  So  it  is  now.  II.  The  Jew  has  his 
covenant  from  Sinai.  Call  that  Hagar.  Set  it  in  the  same  row  with  Jerusalem 
that  now  is.  See  her  gendering  to  bondage,  bearing  her  offspring  into  a  condition  of 
spiritual  servitude,  the  condition  of  all  who  trust  in  the  flesh.  II.  The  Christum 
has  his  covenant,  and  its  home  is  above.  He  is  a  child  not  of  the  flesh  but  of  the 
Spirit.  He  is  born  not  of  blood  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  supernatural 
graces.  III.  Nature  cries  out  against  grace,  and  regards  it  as  an  interference 
with  creature  rights  and  dignity,  and  "  mocks  "  and  "  persecutes,"  and  must  be 
ejected,  at  last,  from  the  family  and  the  home  of  the  free.  IV.  Apply  this  to  scep- 
ticism. It  is  the  boast  of  anti-supernaturalism  that  it  is  free.  It  has  cast  off  the 
shackles  of  tradition,  authority,  priestcraft.  Freethought  is  its  watchword.  Paul 
here  brings  a  charge  against  it  under  the  figure  of  Hagar  and  Ishmael,  whose 
characteristic  was  dislike  of  the  supernatural.  1.  Unbelief  in  rejecting  the  super- 
natural rejects  pardon  and  Christ,  grace  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  This  is  a  state  of 
bondage.  For  what  hope  is  there  for  man  in  nature?  (I)  None  as  he  turns 
remorsefully  towards  the  past.  Nature  crushes  the  sinner.  (2)  None  as  he  looks 
wistfully  towards  the  future.  Mark  the  poor  tentative,  vacillating  peradventures  in 
reconstructing  himself  in  holiness.  Mark  the  self- vexing  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  "  of  the 
man  who  will  not  grasp  the  Divine  Sanctifier.  3.  If  we  would  be  free  from  the 
slavery  of  sin  and  despair,  we  must  seek  forgiveness  through  Christ  and  sanctification 
through  the  Holy  Spirit.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Christianity  the  home  and  the  hope 
of  tlie  free : — I.  The  nature  of  true  freedom.  1.  The  absence  of  all  restraint. 
2.  The  worldling  is  not  free.  8.  Man  naturally  desires  freedom.  IL  The 
Church  of  Christ  as  the  home  of  the  truly  free.  1.  It  is  a  voluntary 
association.  2.  It  is  well  adapted  to  promote  human  happiness.  3.  It  is  a  state 
of  preparation  and  training  for  higher  scenes.  III.  The  province  of  the 
Church  in  diffusing  the  true  freedom  of  the  race.  1.  What  it  has  done. 
2.  Would  do.  3.  Can  do,  as  the  hope  of  the  free.  Learn :  gospel  freedom 
is  necessary,  for  it  alone  can — (1)  make  other  freedom  possible ;  (2)  valuable ; 
(3)  permanent.  (W.  R.  Williams.)  Abraham's  two  sons  : — We  must  keep  this 
faith  pure ;  "  For  it  is  written  that  Abraham  had  two  sons."  This  fact  of  history, 
the  Holy  Ghost  shows  us,  is  an  allegory,  exposing  the  fatal  bondage  into  which  the 
Galatians  were  gliding.  In  the  two  sons  of  Abraham  we  see — I.  The  bondage  of 
the  law.  1.  Hagar's  son  was  born  after  the  flesh,  in  the  common  course  of  nature. 
"  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  "  (John  iii.  6).  We  inherit  an  evil  nature, 
inclined  to  sin,  yet  miserable  in  it.  No  natural  man  is  really  happy  (Isa.  lvii.  21, 
22) ;  he  is  always  sinful  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  2.  Hagar's  son  was  born  in  bondage.  She 
a  bondwoman ;  her  child,  though  Abraham's  son,  a  bondslave,  under  the  law  of 
the  house.  Here  is  the  old  covenant:  "For  this  Agar  denotes  Mount  Sinai." 
There  Israel  consented  to  a  covenant  of  works  (Exod.  xxiv.;  Dent.  v.  2,  3),  which 
results  in  failure  and  bondage.  Hagar  brings  forth  only  bondmen :  this  is  all  the 
law  can  do.  "  The  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  5,  6).  3.  Hagar's  son 
was  a  persecutor.  He  derides,  mocks,  persecutes  the  promised  seed.  The  world, 
Israel,  hated  Christ.  The  law  cannot  endure  grace  (Luke  xv.  2).  The  natural 
cannot  tolerate  the  spiritual  (1  Cor.  ii.  14;  1  John  iii.  1).  Here  is  the  mind  of 
Cain.  Hagar's  son  was  Abraham's  son.  This  increased  the  hostility.  Religion  is 
often  religion's  greatest  enemy.  Our  claim  to  be  perfectly  justified  by  faith,  with- 
out the  law,  arouses  animosity  (John  viii.  33).  4.  Hagar's  son  waB  cast  out:  he 
had  not  it!e ;  he  could  inherit  nothing.  His  continuance  in  the  house  depended  on 
his  obedience.  Obedience  to  law  avails  not  for  justification  (Psa.  cxliii  2) ;  it  only 
brings  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10),  and  wrath  (Rom.  iv.  15),  rejection  (Gal.  v.  2  ;  John  viii. 
35) ;  it  confers  no  claim  to  inheritance.  Christ  the  only  way  to  God,  to  heaven 
(John  xiv.  6).  If  not  "  in  Christ,"  "  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  "  (Rom.  iv.  16),  we 
are  yet  *  in  our  sins  "  (John  viii.  24).  But  think  of  Christ's — "  by  no  means  "  cast 
out  (John  vi.  37).  II.  The  liberty  of  the  gospel.  1.  The  freewoman's  son 
was  the  child  of  promise.  Abraham  and  Sarah  being  as  good  as  dead  (Heb.  xi.  12), 
their  child  was  born,  not  in  the  course  of  nature,  but  by  God's  gracious  power 
(Rom.  iv.  17-21).  "We,  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  i.e.,  after  the  manner  of  Isaac, 
are  the  children  of  promise  "  (Rom.  ix.  8 ;  2  Tim.  i.  1).     Our  sonship  is  not  the 


T.]  GAL  ATI  AN 8.  311 

result  of  legal  obedience,  or  "  culture,"  or  of  man  in  any  way  (John  i.  12).  We  are 
counted  dead,  and  have  been  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  grace  of  God 
(Bom.  ix.  11).  2.  The  freewoman's  son  was  born  free,  free  from  the  conditions  of 
the  bondslave's  law.  For  us,  who  by  faith  are  justified,  the  law  is,  in  that  respect, 
dead  (Bom.  vii.  4 ;  Gal.  ii.  19).  Its  condemning  hold  is  broken.  In  Christ  its 
claims  are  satisfied.  It  is  no  longer  an  outer  law,  restraining,  convicting ;  but  an 
inner  law,  in  which  we  delight  (Bom.  vii.  22 :  Psa.  i.  2),  and  which,  by  love,  we 
fulfil  (Bom.  viii.  4),  through  the  Spirit.  This  is  real  liberty.  "  Whose  service  is 
perfect  freedom."  3.  The  freewoman's  son  was  persecuted.  This  we  must  expect 
if  we  are  faithful,  to  be  "mocked"  (John  xv.  20),  especially  in  "the  last  days" 
(2  Tim.  iii.  12).  The  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased.  "Blessed  are  tbe 
meek,"  &c.  4.  The  freewoman's  son  was  the  heir.  The  children  of  promise  are 
counted  for  the  seed,  and  are  heirs  according  to  the  promise.  Jerusalem  above  is 
a  city  of  freemen  (Gal.  iii.  19 ;  Bom.  viii.  17  ;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  Conclusion.  1.  Let 
us  hold  fast  (Gal.  v.  1)  our  liberty  in  Christ,  and  beware  of  legal  bondage.  2.  Let 
us  use  our  liberty  in  aotive,  loving  service  (Gal.  v.  13).  3.  Let  us  meekly  suffer, 
in  patient  hope,  for  His  sake.  (J.  E.  Sampson,  M.A.)  The  ways  of  religion  are 
not  and  cannot  be  pleasant  to  irreligious  men : — It  is  to  renewed  and  holy  persons 
that  the  assertion  refers,  and  to  them  only ;  for  our  pleasures  must  be  suitable  to 
our  prevailing  dispositions  and  predominant  tempers.  Light  itself  affords  no  plea- 
sure to  the  blind,  nor  can  the  most  exquisite  music  yield  any  gratification  to 
the  deaf.  An  idle  man  has  no  enjoyment  in  labour,  nor  a  glutton  or  a  drunkard 
in  temperance  and  sobriety.  Those  very  things  which  the  spiritual  mind  most 
relishes  and  desires  are  to  the  carnal  mind  distasteful  and  offensive.   (Dr.  Bunting.) 


CHAPTEB  VJ 

Vbb.  1.  Stand  fast  therefore  In  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  free, 
and  he  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage. — The  freedom  of  the 
Christian  : — It  is  necessary  that  we  first  see  generally  what  that  "  liberty  "  is, 
"wherewith  Christ  maketh  His  people  free."  I  cannot  hold  any  one  "free,"  so 
long  as  his  own  conscience  locks  him  up  into  the  fear  of  death  and  punishment. 
The  mind  which  has  places  which  it  is  afraid  to  touch,  can  never  expatiate  every- 
where ;  and  the  mind  which  cannot  go  anywhere,  never  is  "free."  It  is  the  sense 
of  pardon  which  is  that  man's  emancipation.  Have  we  not  all  felt  the  difference- 
to  work  that  we  may  be  loved,  and  to  work  because  we  are  loved  ;  to  have  a  motive 
from  without,  or  to  have  a  motive  from  within  ;  to  be  guided  by  a  fear,  or  to  be 
attracted  by  an  affection  ?  But,  again,  to  obey  any  one  isolated  law,  however  good 
that  law  may  be,  and  however  we  may  admire  and  love  the  Lawgiver,  may  still 
carry  with  it  a  sense  of  confining  and  contraction.  To  do,  not  this  or  that  com- 
mand, but  the  whole  will,  because  it  is  the  will  of  one  we  love — to  have  caught 
His  mind,  to  breathe  His  spirit,  to  be  bound  up  with  His  glory — that  has  in  it  no 
littleness  ;  there  are  no  circumscribing  confines  there  ;  and  these  are  the  goings 
out  of  the  unshackled  being  in  the  ranges  which  match  with  his  own  infinity.  And 
yet  once  more.  Such  is  the  soul  of  man,  that  all  that  in  his  horizon  falls  within 
the  compass  of  time,  however  long — or  of  a  present  life  however  full — that  man's 
circle  being  small,  compared  to  his  own  consciousness  of  his  own  capability, 
through  that  disproportion,  he  feels  a  limitation.  But  let  a  man  once  look,  as  lie 
may,  and  as  he  must,  on  that  great  world  which  lies  beyond  him  as  his  scope  and 
his  home,  and  all  that  is  here  as  only  the  discipline  and  the  school-work  by  which 
he  is  in  training,  and  immediately  everything  contains  in  it  eternity.  And  very 
"  free"  will  that  man  be  "  among  the  dead,"  because  his  faith  is  going  out  above 
the  smallnesses  which  surround  him,  to  the  great,  and  to  the  absorbing,  and  to  the 
satisfying  things  to  come.  It  will  not  be  difficult  to  carry  out  these  principles,  and 
apply  them  to  the  right  performance  of  any  of  the  obligations  of  life.  It  needs  no 
words  to  show  that  whatever  is  done  in  this  freedom  will  not  only  be  itself  better 
done,  but  it  takes  from  that  freedom  a  oharaoter  which  comports  well  with  a  mem- 
ber of  the  family  of  God  ;  and  which  at  once  makes  it  edifying  to  Him,  and  ac- 
ceptable and  honouring  to  a  heavenly  Father.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)        Spiritual 


3U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  * 

freedom : —  What  is  liberty  ?  Obedience  to  one's  self ;  obedience  to  a  law 
which  is  written  in  a  man's  own  heart.  If  I  obey  myself,  and  myself  is 
not  a  right  self,  it  is,  indeed,  "  liberty,"  but  being  a  bad  liberty,  it  becomes  "  licen- 
tiousness." It  is  compulsion  ;  it  is  bondage.  Liberty  is  when  the  outer  law  and 
the  inner  law  are  the  same  ;  and  both  are  good.  1.  Every  one  has  a  past  which 
fetters  him.  The  moment  a  man  really  believes,  and  accepts  his  pardon,  he  is  cut 
off  from  all  his  sinful  past !  He  is  at  liberty — free  from  his  own  bitter  history — free 
from  himself !  2.  Now  look  to  the  "  liberty  "  from  the  present.  If  I  have  received 
Christ  into  my  heart,  I  am  a  pardoned  man,  I  am  a  happy  man,  and  I  know  and 
feel  that  I  owe  all  my  happiness  to  Him — therefore  I  love  Him  ;  I  cannot  choose 
but  love  Him  ;  and  my  first  desire  is  to  please  Him  ;  to  follow  Him  ;  to  be  like 
Him  ;  to  be  with  Him.  My  life  is  to  become  a  life  of  love.  In  obeying  God,  I  obey 
myself.  The  new  life  and  the  new  heart  are  in  accord.  3.  And  what  of  the  future  ? 
A  vista  running  up  to  glory  !  But  are  there  no  dark  places  ?  Chiefly  in  the  antici 
pation.  When  they  come,  they  will  bring  their  own  escapes  and  their  own 
balances.  He  has  undertaken  for  me  in  everything.  He  will  never  leave 
me.  So  I  am  quite  free  from  all  my  future.  To  die  will  be  a  very  little 
thing.  The  grave  cannot  hold  me.  He  has  been  through,  and  opened  the  door  the 
other  side.  (Ibid.)  Christian  liberty : — I.  The  liberty  of  the  subjects  that 
abe  fbeed.  Christian  liberty  stands — 1.  In  immunity  from  evil.  (1)  From  that 
which  is  evil  in  itself.  Satan  ;  sin  (a)  in  the  fault,  (o)  in  the  punishment  : 
whether  the  inward  slavery  of  an  accusing  conscience  or  outward  wrath  of  God, 
death,  and  damnation.  (2)  From  that  which  is  evil  to  us,  as  (a)  burdensome  tra- 
ditions, (5)  the  law,  either  ceremonial  or  moral,  as  regards  either  the  obligation  or 
the  curse.     2.  Less  than  this  is  bondage,  more  than  this  is  looseness.    II.  The 

PREROGATIVE   OF   THE  KlNG   OF   GLORY  THAT   HATH  FBEED   THEM.       1.    They  Could  DOt 

free  themselves.  2.  Angels  could  not  free  them.  3.  Only  Christ  could,  whose  ran- 
som was  infinite.  4.  Only  Christ  has,  whose  love  is  infinite.  How?  (1)  By  force; 
in  that  He  hath  conquered  him  whose  captives  we  were.  (2)  By  purchase  ;  in 
that  He  hath  paid  the  full  price  to  him  to  whom  we  were  forfeited.  We  could  not 
be  free  by  birth  since  we  were  sons  of  wrath  ;  nor  by  service  since  we  were  vassals 
of  Satan.  5.  Christ  has  freed  us  from  seven  Egyptian  masters.  (1)  The  bondage 
of  sin  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (Bom.  vi.  12,  vii.  14  ;  2  Peter  ii.  19  ;  Bom.  vii.  24, 
25  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17).  (2)  An  accusing  conscience  by  the  blood  of  Christ  (Heb.  x.  19, 
22).  (3)  The  wrath  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  (Heb.  x.  27  ;  Bom.  v.  1).  (4)  The 
tyranny  of  Satan  by  the  victory  of  Christ  (2  Tim.  ii.  26  ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  (5)  The 
curse  of  the  law  by  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  10,  13).  (6)  The  law  of  cere- 
monies by  the  consummation  of  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  2  ;  Eph.  ii.  14-16).  (7)  Human 
ordinances  by  the  manumission  and  instruction  of  Christ  (Gal.  iv.  10,  11 ;  1  Cor.  vii. 
23).  III.  The  maintenance  of  the  libebty  which  the  poweb  of  that  obeat  pbeboga- 
tive  hath  achieved.  1.  How  strange  that  Buch  an  exhortation  should  be  necessary. 
In  the  case  of  a  liberated  bird  or  an  emancipated  slave  it  would  be  superfluous.  2. 
Yet  facts  prove  it  necessary  in  the  case  of  Christ's  freemen.  (Bishop  Hall.) 
Christian  believers  exhorted  to  the  maintenance  of  their  spiritual  liberty  : — I.  This 
exhortation  implies — 1.  That  attempts  will  be  made  to  deprive  us  of  this  liberty. 
This  is  discovered  soon  after  its  first  enjoyment.  (1)  By  Satan  and  sin.  (2)  By 
companions.  (3)  By  pleasure.  (4)  By  persecution.  (5)  By  deceivers  who  attempt 
to  undermine  the  doctrine  on  which  salvation  rests.  2.  The  awful  possibility  of 
losing  this  liberty,  as  testified  (1)  by  Scripture  ;  (2)  by  the  history  of  the  Church  ; 
(3)  by  observation  ;  (4)  by  experience.  3.  That  there  is  no  necessity  to  lose  this 
liberty.  When  lost  it  is  most  frequently  by  (1)  a  culpable  ignorance  of  spiritual 
duties  and  privileges ;  (2)  a  presumptuous  self-confidence  leading  to  unwatchfulness ; 
(3)  a  weak  and  wicked  self-indulgence.  4.  Yet  while  there  is  no  necessity  to  forfeit 
their  liberty,  Christians  are  exposed  to  great  and  peculiar  dangers  (1)  from  con- 
stitution and  temperament ;  (2)  circumstances  ;  (3)  difficulties  and  sorrows  ;  (4) 
spiritual  exercises.  H.  The  duties  in  the  obsebvance  of  which  spiritual  free- 
dom may  be  maintained.  1.  The  devotional  reading  of  Scripture  day  by  day  in  con- 
nection with  religious  biography  and  kindred  works.  2.  A  regular  and  con- 
scientious attention  to  private  prayer.  3.  A  spirit  of  watchfulness.  4.  Constant 
self-denial.  5.  Unceasing  cultivation  of  holiness.  In  conclusion  :  Bemember — 1. 
The  price  paid  for  your  redemption.  2.  The  wretched  state  of  the  re-enslaved 
believer.  (H.  H.  Chettle.)  Christian  freedom : — I.  Ih  the  voluntaby  service 
of  God  (Luke  i.  74;  1  Tim.  i.  9).  II.  In  the  fbee  use  or  the  creatures  of  God 
(Titus  i.  15 ;  Bom.  xiv.  14).    HI.  To  comb  unto  God  through  Christ  in  prate* 


chap,  T.]  GALATIANS.  SIS 

{Bom.  v.  2 ;  Eph.  iii.  12).  IV.  To  enter  heaven  (Heb.  x.  19).  (W.  Perkins.) 
Liberty  not  lawlessness: — Liberty  is  harmony  between  the  law  and  the  nature  and 
inclinations  of  its  subjects.  Law  is  essential  to  freedom,  but  freedom  requires  that 
the  law  shall  be  such  as  comports  with  the  best  interests  and  highest  reason  of 
those  who  have  to  obey  it ;  for  then  their  best  desires  will  concur  with  their  obli- 
gations, and,  wishing  to  do  only  what  the  law  requires  them  to  do,  they  will  be 
conscious  of  no  restraint.  (Newman  Hall.)  Spiritual  and  related,  freedoms : — 
Let  me  remind  you  of  the  arrangement  of  the  ancient  temple.  In  the  centre  was 
the  sanctuary,  with  the  altar  of  sacrifice  before  it,  and  the  altar  of  incense  within ; 
and  beyond  the  veil,  the  Holy  of  Holies  and  the  mercy  seat.  Here  worship  was 
offered,  atonement  made,  the  presence  of  God  manifested.  Let  this  represent 
liberty  spiritual — the  union  of  the  soul  with  its  Maker.  Beyond  the  sanctuary  and 
enclosing  it,  was  the  Court  of  the  Jews,  through  which  access  was  obtained  to  the 
inner  shrine.  Let  this  represent  liberty  doctrinal — that  revealed  truth  by  which 
the  soul  obtains  admission  into  the  liberty  of  God's  children.  Beyond  was  the 
Court  of  the  Gentiles — further  from  the  Holy  of  Holies — but  connected  with  it, 
surrounding  and  defending  it.  Let  this  represent  liberty  ecclesiastical,  by  which 
doctrinal  truth  is  best  conserved  and  thus  spiritual  liberty  best  attained.  Beyond 
all  these  were  the  outer  walls  and  gates,  and  the  lofty  rock  on  which  it  was 
upreared.  Let  this  represent  liberty  national,  by  which  ecclesiastical  freedom  is 
guaranteed.  (Ibid.)  Freedom  and  slavery  : — Enow  that  to  be  free  is  the  same 
thing  as  to  be  pious,  to  be  wise,  to  be  temperate  and  fast,  to  be  frugal  and  abstinent, 
and,  lastly,  to  be  magnanimous  and  brave ;  so  to  be  the  opposite  of  all  these  is  the 
same  as  to  be  a  slave ;  and  it  usually  happens  that  that  people  who  cannot  govern 
themselves,  are  delivered  up  to  the  sway  of  those  whom  they  abhor,  and  made  to 
submit  to  an  involuntary  servitude.  (Milton.)  The  soul's  rebellion  against  its 
thraldom : — As  the  lark,  imprisoned  since  it  burst  its  shell,  though  it  has  never 
sprung  upward  to  salute  the  rising  sun,  will  often  manifest  how  cruel  is  its  cap- 
tivity by  instinctively  spreading  its  wings  and  darting  upward,  as  if  to  soar,  but 
oaly  beats  its  head  against  the  wires  and  falls  back  on  its  narrow  perch  ;  so  the 
soqI  of  man,  designed  to  soar  and  utter  its  raptures  in  the  rays  of  the  great  central 
sun,  will  sometimes,  even  in  its  cage,  attempt  to  rise  and  breathe  a  loftier  atmos- 
phere, but  falls  back  vainly  struggling  against  the  bars  which  sin  and  death  have 
framed  around  it.  (Newman  HallJ  Standing  fast  in  liberty  : — The  phrase 
alludes  to  the  duties  of  soldiers  on  military  service.  When  marshalled  in  the 
ranks  they  must  stand  firm,  without  yielding  their  ground,  without  bending  their 
knees ;  when  placed  as  sentinels  they  must  stand  upon  their  guard  and  permit  no 
enemy  to  surprise  them.  You  are  soldiers  of  Christ,  and  must  stand  fast — be 
valiant  for  the  truth — and  look  to  yourselves.  (H.  H.  Chettle.)  Liberty  from 
law  unconscious  obedience : — No  man  has  reached  liberty  until  he  has  learned  to 
obey  with  such  facility  and  perfection  that  he  does  it  without  knowing  it.  If  I 
step  upon  a  little  bit  of  plank  in  the  street  I  walk  along  over  it  without  thinking. 
Although  it  is  only  four  inches  wide  I  can  walk  on  it  as  well  as  I  can  on  the  rest  of 
the  pavement.  But  put  that  plank  between  two  towers  one  hundred  feet  high  in 
the  air  and  let  me  be  called  to  walk  over  it.  I  begin  to  think,  of  course,  of  what  I 
am  called  upon  to  do.  And  the  moment  I  begin  to  think  I  cannot  do  it.  When 
you  try  to  do  a  thing  you  cannot  do  it  as  well  as  when  you  do  it  without  trying. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian  liberty  : — The  apostle  now  enters  upon  the  more  prac- 
tical part  of  the  Epistle.  Freedom  is  the  link  which  connects  tbe  two  parts  together. 
L  Christian  liberty  is  the  liberty  of  faith.  Faith  receives  the  truth,  the  whole 
truth,  concerning  sin  and  redemption  ;  and  it  is  the  truth,  believed,  that  makes  men 
free.  II.  Christian  liberty  is  the  liberty  of  hope.  1.  A  hope  which  maketh  not 
ashamed,  for  it  is  based  on  Christ's  accomplished  work.  2.  A  hope  which 
patiently  waits  for  that  which  it  knows  it  will  assuredly  possess.  III.  Christian 
liberty  is  the  liberty  of  love.  The  Saviour's  love  to  the  sinner  draws  the 
sinner's  love  to  Himself.  IV.  Christian  liberty  is  the  liberty  of  holiness. 
The  safeguards  of  political  liberty  lie  not  in  the  laws  which  regulate,  or  the  armies 
which  defend  it,  but  in  the  spirit  which  animates  a  people,  in  their  respect  for  law, 
in  their  mutual  toleration,  in  their  recognition  of  others'  rights,  and,  above  all,  in 
their  hearty  devotion  to  the  government  under  which  they  live.  Where  these  pre- 
vail, a  nation  is  already  free,  and  a  liberty  so  founded  will  never  degenerate  into 
license.  So  also  Christian  liberty  is  best  secured  from  abuse,  not  by  the  threat  of 
penalties,  or  by  an  appeal  to  fear,  but  by  the  operation  of  those  principles  which 
lie  at  the  foundation  of  Christian  character.    The  gospel  sets  man  free  from  a 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  T. 

bondage  beneath  which  a  loving  obedience  is  impossible,  in  order  that,  being  free, 
he  may  serve  God  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  liberty.  (Emilivs  Bayley,  B.D.) 
Spirittial  liberty:— Spiritual  liberty  consists  in  freedom  from  the  curse  of  the 
moral  law ;  from  the  servitude  of  the  ritual ;  from  the  love,  power,  and  guilt  of 
sin ;  from  the  dominion  of  Satan ;  from  the  corruption  of  the  world ;  from  the 
fear  of  death  and  the  wrath  to  come.  (C.  Buck.)  Christian  liberty  : — The 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  men  free  is  a  deliverance  from  a  system  of 
rules,  positive  and  prohibitory — a  temporary  and  provisional  system  which  had  an 
educational  value,  training  men  to  the  full  privileges  of  religious  manhood.  It  is 
an  abdication  of  privilege,  when  men  fall  back  upon  the  old  standpoint  of  Judaism, 
and  fence  themselves  in  by  rigid  rules  as  if  of  primary  importance.  There  is  a 
perpetual  tendency  to  make  men  subject  to  ordinances,  whose  language  is,  "  Touch 
not,  taste  not,  handle  not,"  after  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  men ;  and 
not  only  to  adopt  these  precepts  as  useful  helps  for  their  own  moral  progress,  but 
to  impose  them  upon  others,  almost  as  if  they  were  of  Divine  origin ;  and  to 
make  them  the  standard  of  their  judgment  upon  the  spiritual  condition  of  their 
fellow  men.  Every  school  of  religious  thought  exhibits  proofs  of  this  temptation 
to  represent  as  commandments  of  God,  precepts  of  man's  own  devising.  This 
Judaising  temper  displays  itself  whenever  men  try  to  narrow  down  eternal  prin- 
ciples of  conduct  into  minute  rules,  which  can  prefer  no  higher  claim  than  to  be 
deemed  useful  to  some,  whilst  they  may  be  positively  injurious  to  others.  ...  In 
vindicating  the  freedom  brought  to  us  by  the  gospel,  we  throw  ourselves  back  on 
the  primary  truths  of  Christianity — the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  the  reconciliation 
wrought  out  by  the  atoning  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God. 
Fully  believing  that  God  is  a  righteous  Judge,  we  shall  yet  not  feel  towards  Him 
as  if  He  were  a  hard  taskmaster  or  rigid  lawgiver,  but  as  the  Infinite  Being  whose 
love  first  created  us,  and  subsequently  devised  our  redemption  ;  we  shall  exercise 
an  unreserved  faith  in  the  completeness  of  the  sacrifice  for  sin  which  has  been 
made  by  onr  Saviour,  and  the  present  forgiveness  which  has  been  obtained  for  us ; 
and  we  shall  rejoice  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  But  this  sense 
of  liberty  will  not  degenerate  into  licentiousness  and  unrestrained  self-indulgenoe. 
Because  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  we  shall  see  ourselves  called 
to  a  higher  and  nobler  type  of  holiness.  We  shall  certainly  not  be  without  law  to 
God.  Our  religion  will  be  displayed,  not  in  a  punctilious  attention  to  external 
rules,  but  in  a  life-giving  spirit,  which  will  penetrate  into  every  department  of 
action  in  relation  to  others.  In  daily  society  it  will  impart  a  kindliness,  a  charity, 
a  justice,  in  our  estimate  of  the  words  and  conduot  of  those  around  us ;  it  will 
teach  us  a  Divine  tolerance  and  a  modest  humility.  It  will  make  the  best 
of  both  worlds,  not  in  the  low  commercial  sense,  which  tries  to  strike  a  balance 
between  the  claims  of  secular  expediency  and  devotion  to  the  service  of  God, 
but  in  the  spirit  of  the  apostolic  exhortation  which  bids  men  "  use  this  world 
as  not  abusing  it."  Spite  of  all  the  manifold  temptations  on  the  plea  of  piety,  or 
on  the  plea  of  the  necessary  subordination  of  the  individual  to  the  society, 
it  will  firmly  refuse  to  descend  to  a  lower  level  of  Christianity  than  that  which 
Christ  its  Founder  intended.  It  will  uphold  the  banner  of  freedom  by  maintaining, 
alike  in  theory  and  in  practice,  that  Christianity  is  not  in  its  essence  a  system  of 
doctrince  or  a  code  of  precepts,  but  a  life  and  a  spirit,  a  communion  with  God  in 
Christ,  manifesting  itself  in  the  power  of  true  godliness.  (Canon  Ince.)  Per- 
sonal  liberty  of  the  Christian : — The  doctrine  of  St.  Paul  is  not  that  a  Christian 
man  has  a  right  to  liberty  in  conduct,  thought,  and  speech  in  and  of  himself, 
without  regard  to  external  circumstances,  interests,  organizations,  and  without 
reference  to  his  own  condition.  Paul's  conception  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of 
men  stands  on  the  philosophical  ground  underneath  all  those  things.  Bights  and 
liberties  belong  to  stages  or  states  of  condition.  The  inferior  has  not  the  right  of 
the  superior.  A  stupid  man  has  not  the  right  of  an  educated  or  intelligent  man. 
He  may  have  the  legal  rights ;  but  the  higher  ones,  that  spring  out  of  the  condi- 
tion of  the  soul,  must  stand  on  the  conditions  to  which  they  belong.  A  refined 
man  has  rights  and  joys  that  an  unrefined  man  has  not  and  cannot  have,  because 
he  cannot  understand  them,  does  not  want  them,  could  not  use  them.  Bights 
increase  as  the  man  increases — increases,  that  is,  not  merely  in  physical  stature,  or 
in  skill  of  manual  employment  or  material  strength,  but  in  character.  So,  as  men 
work  up  higher  and  higher  towards  the  Divine  standard  of  character,  their  rights 
and  liberties  increase.  The  direct  influence  of  Christ  is  to  bring  the  human  mind 
into  its  highest  elements.     The  power  of  the  Divine  nature  upon  the  human  soul 


.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  315 

is  to  lift  it  steadily  away  from  animalism  or  from  the  flesh — the  under-man — up 
through  the  realm  of  mere  material  wisdom  and  accomplishment,  in  the  direction  of 
soul-power,  reason,  rectitude — such  reason  and  such  rectitude  as  grow  up  under 
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  When  love  has  permeated  the  whole  man,  he 
then  has  perfect  liberty — liberty  of  thought,  liberty  of  speech,  liberty  of  conduct. 
A  perfect  Christian  is  the  one  and  only  creature  that  has  absolute  liberty  unchecked 
by  law,  by  institution,  by  foregoing  thoughts  of  men,  by  publio  sentiment.  Because 
a  perfect  man  is  in  unison  with  the  Divine  soul,  he  has  the  whole  liberty  of  God 
in  himself,  according  to  the  measure  of  his  manhood.  But  he  has  liberty  to  do 
only  what  he  wants  to  do,'and  he  wants  to  do  nothing  that  is  not  within  the  bounds 
and  benefit  of  a  pure  and  true  love.  He  becomes  a  law  to  himself ;  that  is,  he 
carries  in  himself  that  inspiration  of  love  which  is  the  mother  of  all  good  law. 
He  is  higher  than  any  law.  His  will  is  with  God's  will.  He  thinks  what  is  true  ; 
he  does  what  is  benevolent.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian  liberty  a  trust : — When 
a  man  is  in  slavery  he  is  not  his  own  master ;  he  acts  and  lives  under  the  direction 
of  others,  and  the  responsibility  of  life  is  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  shifted  from 
him  on  to  some  one  else.  When  a  man  becomes  free,  he  assumes  the  duties  of  life, 
and  recognizes  that  it  rests  only  with  himself  whether  those  duties  are  performed 
or  not.  And  so  man  living  under  the  Christian  covenant  stands  in  a  direct  per- 
sonal relation  to  God,  a  relation  of  trust.  Gifted  with  freewill,  he  is  answerable 
for  his  conduct ;  subjected  no  longer  to  the  ordinances  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  he  claims 
the  liberty  of  the  gospel ;  but  he  dares  not  forget  that  there  still  is  a  law  limiting 
and  controlling  the  freedom  which  he  enjoys,  and  that  every  action  of  his  carries 
responsibility  with  it.  The  soul  of  the  old  law  is  enshrined  and  quickened  in  the 
body  of  the  new.  The  spirit,  not  the  letter,  of  Sinai  is  met  with  again  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount.  All  Christian  duties  are  summed  up  there  and  enforced 
with  the  authority  of  One  who  taught  not  as  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  who 
spake  as  never  man  spake  (Matt.  xxii.  37-40).  Our  liberty  is  a  limited  one.  No 
man  can  do  as  he  likes.  He  has  a  Master  in  heaven  whom  he  must  serve.  He 
is  indeed  set  free  by  the  death  of  Christ  from  the  ordinances  of  the  old  covenant, 
and  he  is  no  longer  a  slave  ;  but  he  has  been  placed  in  a  society  which  is  governed 
by  laws  eternal  in  their  force,  and  the  measure  of  the  liberty  he  enjoys  is  the  good 
of  his  own  soul  and  the  well-being  of  his  brother's,  for  none  of  us  liveth  to  him- 
self, and  no  man  dieth  to  himself.  ...  As  Christian  members  in  the  common- 
wealth of  Christ  we  possess,  indeed,  in  its  highest  and  holiest  sense,  the  triple 
right  of  liberty,  fraternity,  equality ;  but  the  religion  to  which  we  belong  is  neither 
reactionary  nor  revolutionary,  and  our  liberty  must  be  controlled,  our  equality 
sanctified,  and  our  fraternity  blessed,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  (C.  W.  II,  Ken- 
rick,  M. A.)  Stand  fast: — Brethren,  I  cannot  be  of  any  other  faith  than  that 
which  I  preached  nearly  twenty-nine  years  ago  on  this  platform.  I  am  to-day 
what  I  was  then.  That  which  I  preached  here  then  I  preach  here  now.  You 
know  the  story  of  the  boy  who  stood  on  the  burning  deck  because  his  father  said, 
"  Stand  there,"  and  he  could  not  come  away.  Other  boys,  much  wiser  than  he 
was,  had  gone  and  got  out  of  the  mischief.  I  am  standing  where  I  stood  then ; 
I  cannot  help  it,  so  help  me  God.  I  know  no  more  to-day  than  I  knew  when 
first  I  believed  in  Jesus  as  to  this  matter.  I  know  by  grace.  Are  ye  saved  through 
faith  and  that  not  of  yourself — "it  is  the  gift  of  God?"  Tou  shall  leave  this 
Bock  if  you  like  ;  you  may  be  able  to  swim;  I  cannot,  and  so  I  stop  here;  and 
when  the  crack  of  doom  shall  come  I  shall  be  here,  God  helping  me,  believing  this 
self-same  doctrine.  There  is  something  in  oar  very  adhesiveness  and  pertinacity 
which  represents  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  I  am  sure  that  steadfastness  in  these 
particular  times  has  its  value,  and  I  urge  you  to  it  that  the  gospel  which  you  have 
received,  "  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,"  you  stand  fast  to  as  long  as  you  live. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  secret  of  steadfastness : — Standing  on  the  shore  of  an 

estuary,  one  sees  a  boat  riding  in  the  tideway,  when  sea-weed  and  other  things 
float  by,  over  the  self-same  spot ;  and  whether  the  tide  ebbs  or  flows,  whether  it 
steals  quietly  in  or  comes  on  with  the  rush  and  roar  of  foaming  billows,  the  boat 
always  boldly  shows  its  face  to  it ;  and  turning  its  head  to  the  current  receives  on  its 
bows,  to  split  them,  the  shock  of  waves.  This,  which  to  a  child  would  seem 
strange,  is  due  to  the  anchor  that  lies  below  the  waters,  and,  grasping  the  solid 
ground  with  its  iron  arms,  holds  fast  the  boat.  It  seems  no  less  wonderful  to  see 
a  tree — no  sturdy  oak,  but  slender  birch,  or  trembling  aspen — standing  erect  away 
up  on  a  mountain  brow ;  where,  exposed  to  the  sweep  of  every  storm,  it  has  gal- 
lantly maintained  its  ground  against  the  tempests  that  have  laid  in  the  dust  th« 


Sit  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coat.  r. 

stateliest  ornaments  of  the  plain.  Bat  our  wonder  ceases  so  Boon  as  we  climb  the 
height,  and  see  wherein  its  great  strength  lies ;  how  it  has  struck  its  roots  down 
into  the  mountain,  and  wrapped  them  with  many  a  strong  twist  and  turn  round 
and  round  the  rock.  (W.  Arnot).  Standfast: — 1.  In  Christ  to  whom  you  have 
been  brought.  2.  In  adherence  to  the  doctrines  which  the  gospel  has  set  before 
you.  3.  You  will  find  your  strength  and  dependence  only  in  the  grace  of  Christ, 
4.  In  the  service  of  your  Master  to  the  end.  (J.  Harding,  M.A.)  The  bounds  of 
Christian  freedom: — When  we  speak  of  freedom,  we  are  apt  to  think  only  of  the 
removal  of  restraints.  But  though  it  is  important  to  get  rid  of  all  needless 
restraints,  it  is  much  more  important  that  we  should  possess  and  train  the  powers 
for  which  the  absence  of  restraint  is  demanded.  If  there  is  no  life,  the  removal  of 
restraints  will  be  of  no  use.  If  the  life  is  feeble,  and  tied  down  by  inward 
restraints  like  those  of  superstition  or  of  fear,  the  removal  of  outward  restraints 
will  not  set  it  free.  But  if  there  is  vigorous  life,  it  demands  for  its  development  s 
constantly  expanding  freedom  :  and  this  spiritual  power  has  in  itself  both  iU 
proper  energy  and  its  proper  bound.  It  is  a  tree  which  has  an  innate  capacity  of 
growth.  Give  it  air  and  light ;  remove  whatever  confines  and  overshadows  it.  It 
may  need  pruning  and  guiding ;  but  it  can  provide  its  own  symmetry  for  itself.  I 
do  not  propose  to  dwell  verse  by  verse  upon  the  passage  (Gal.  iv.  1-16)  which  I 
have  taken  for  a  starting  point,  but  to  illustrate  and  enforce  its  central  principle. 
Wherever  there  is  a  just  demand  for  freedom,  it  is  because  there  exists  a  living 
power  to  be  liberated ;  and  this  living  power,  if  it  be  kept  pure,  contains  in  itself 
the  true  limit  of  its  exercise.  First,  take  the  revival  of  Christian  liberty  at  the 
time  of  the  Beformation.  Luther's  first  great  treatise  was  Concerning  Christian 
Liberty.  The  liberty  he  claims  presupposes  the  establishment  in  the  soul  of  the 
Divine  life  of  faith.  You  do  not  work,  he  says  again  and  again,  so  that  you  may 
live.  Life  comes  first ;  works,  afterwards.  The  fruit  will  never  make  the  root  or 
the  sap,  but  the  root  and  the  sap  ensure  the  fruit.  But,  since  this  Divine  life  of 
faith  exists,  he  demands  that  it  should  be  free  from  the  fetters  of  the  clerical 
system  of  the  Middle  Ages.  But  let  us  come  to  more  commonplace  examples  of 
freedom ;  we  shall  still  find  that  it  is  the  growth  of  the  inner  life  or  capacity 
which  determines  and  controls  the  external  conditions.  Take  the  familiar 
case  of  a  boy  who  wants  to  leave  school  and  go  to  sea.  If  his  father  is  wise,  he 
will  watch  carefully,  and  try  to  estimate  the  meaning  of  this  wish.  Is  it 
mere  unruliness  or  restlessness,  or  dislike  of  study?  If  so,  he  will  give  it  no 
encouragement.  But,  if  he  finds  the  boy  in  his  leisure  moments  reading  about  the 
sea,  and  haunting  about  the  seashore,  and  studying  intelligently  the  boats  and 
sails  and  machinery,  after  a  time  he  will  begin  to  recognize  in  the  boy  such  a  bent 
as  indicates  a  genuine  call.  And  when  this  is  so,  he  may  assure  himself  that  the 
freedom  will  not  be  abused.  The  boy  will  be  free  from  the  constraints  of  the  shore 
life  ;  but  that  very  zest  for  seamanship  which  has  won  its  freedom  will  be  most 
likely  to  ensure  the  right  use  of  that  freedom.  There  is  a  fine  expression  in  the 
speech  in  which  Pericles  contrasted  the  free  system  of  Athenian  life,  "the  trustful 
spirit  of  liberty,"  with  the  narrower  system  of  Sparta.  It  might  be  thought  that, 
unless  such  constraints  as  those  imposed  at  Sparta  existed,  each  man  would  try 
to  impose  his  own  will  or  tastes  upon  others.  But  the  contrary,  Pericles  declared, 
was  the  case  at  Athens ;  each  man  respected  the  feelings  of  his  neighbour.  The 
slavish  system  is  that  of  mistrust.  Mutual  confidence  is  the  offspring  of  freedom. 
We  might  illustrate  this  by  the  experience  of  two  great  English  schools  some 
sixty  years  ago.  When  Keate  was  head-master  of  Eton,  his  system  of  discipline 
was  one  of  terrorism.  He  never  took  a  boy's  word,  and,  on  the  suspicion  of  a  fault, 
he  flogged  him.  At  the  same  period,  Arnold  was  head-master  at  Rugby.  He  alwayi 
believed  a  boy ;  and  it  was  only  on  rare  occasions,  when  the  proof  was  indubitable, 
that  he  punished.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that,  under  the  severer  system, 
boys  would  be  afraid  to  do  wrong,  and  that  they  would  take  advantage  of  the  more 
lenient  system  to  deceive.  The  contrary  was  the  case.  At  Eton,  under  Keate,  it 
was  thought  quite  fair  to  deceive  a  master.  At  Rugby,  boys  said,  "  It  is  a  shame 
to  tell  Arnold  a  lie,  he  always  believes  you."  Thus  freedom  and  trustfulness  beget 
the  sense  of  responsibility.  To  conclude  :  We  have  spoken  of  freedom  first  as  an 
inward  and  spiritual  state,  secondly  as  the  removal  of  outward  restraints.  The 
first  of  these  is  the  most  important.  To  the  attainment  of  this  we  must  constantly 
attend,  both  for  ourselves  and  for  those  on  whom  we  have  any  influence.  There 
are  tyrannies  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  physical  restraints,  and  against  these 
we  must  war  incessantly.    There  is  the  tyranny  of  evil  habits.    How  can  he  bt 


CHAP.  7.]  GALATIANS.  317 

thought  free  who  is  the  slave  of  customs  which  he  knows  to  be  wrong?  There  ia 
the  tyranny  of  fashion  and  opinion,  and  again  of  prejudice  and  party  spirit.  How 
can  he  be  free  who  acts  only  as  others  choose  ?  There  is  the  tyranny  of  ignorance. 
How  can  he  be  called  free  whose  life  is  bounded  by  a  narrow  circle  of  ideas  ? 
Let  us  strive  for  the  sublime  liberty  which  belongs  to  those  who  fear  God  and  hate 
evil.     (Canon  Fremantle.) 

Ver.  2.  If  ye  be  circumcised,  Christ  shall  profit  yon  nothing. — The  law  and 
grace : — I.  God  will  deal  with  us  either  altogether  by  works  or  altogether  by 
Christ ;  these  things  cannot  be  mixed.  II.  To  piece  up  therefore  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  by  our  own  works,  and  to  add  anything  to  the  passion  as  a  meri- 
torious cause  of  our  justification,  is  to  make  Christ  unprofitable.  III.  We  ought 
to  content  ourselves  with  Christ  and  His  merits  alone  (Col.  ii.  10).  (T.  Manton, 
D.D.)  Circumcision: — I.  The  nature  of  sacraments  in  general.  1.  Signs  (1)  to 
represent  and  instruct ;  (2)  of  absolute  grace  and  favour.  2.  Seals,  to  ratify  and 
confirm  (1)  seals  of  the  conditional  promises ;  (2)  mutual  seals.  II.  The  nature  of 
circumcision  in  particular.  1.  A  sign  prefiguring  baptism  which  has  now  taken 
its  place.  2.  A  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  particularly  of  justification  by  faith. 
(Matthew  Henry.)  The  superfluousness  of  circumcision: — Circumcision  was  the 
shadow  of  the  substance  which  the  Christian  man  already  enjoyed.  The  law  which 
prescribed  it  had  already  done  its  true  work  and  was  abolished  in  Christ.  Where 
was  the  sense  then  of  leaving  the  great  liberator  for  one  of  the  most  grievous 
shackles  of  their  old  tyranny?  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christianity  not  uniformity . — 
It  is  not  uniformity  that  we  see  in  the  works  of  God ;  but  unity  in  variety  or 
diversity.  The  tree  has  branches  large  and  small,  but  the  tree  is  one.  Ev*<ry 
plant,  flower,  or  tree  in  the  landscape  has  full  freedom  to  unfold  itself  according  to 
its  nature  ;  and  yet  the  landscape  is  one.  The  many  members  in  the  human  frame 
form  one  body.  The  many  nations  of  the  earth  form  one  race.  The  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel  constituted  one  "peculiar  people."  The  same  law  is  true  in 
relation  to  the  Church.  Christians  are  many,  and  differ  in  natural  powers,  gifts, 
education,  and  opinions ;  but  they  have  all  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  worship  the  true 
God,  and  love  their  fellow  men,  and  therefore  form  one  spiritual  brotherhood  and 
Church.    (Thomas  Jones.) 

Ver.  3.  For  I  testify  again  to  every  man  that  Is  circumcised,  that  he  Is  a  debtor 
to  do  the  whole  law. — The  great  dilemma ; — I.  Justification  by  the  law.  1.  What 
this  means.-  (1)  Circumcision  which  commits  a  man  to  the  law.  (2)  Obedience  to 
all  the  requirements  of  the  law  to  which  the  circumcised  are  committed.  2.  Its 
utter  impossibility.  (1)  The  legal  covenant  is  abolished.  To  seek  justification  is 
to  follow  a  course  which  God  condemns.  (2)  Supposing  it  still  in  force,  no  man 
can  fulfil  all  its  requirements.  II.  Salvation  by  grace.  1.  This  is  now  the  only 
appointed  way.  2.  This  is  a  perfectly  possible  way :  what  man  cannot  do  God  does 
for  him.    3.  This  is  a  very  simple  way :  accept  by  faith  what  God  has  provided. 

III.    To  REJECT  THE  LATTER  IN  FAVOUR  OF   THE  FORMER,  THEREFORE,  IS  TO  FALL  FROM 

grace.  Christ  is  thus — (1)  repudiated ;  (2)  rendered  unnecessary ;  consequently 
(3)  becomes  of  no  effect,  and  so  (4)  the  legalist  puts  himself  beyond  the  pale  of 
salvation.  The  comprehensiveness  of  tlie  claims  of  the  law : — Tell  me,  then,  ye  who 
desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law?  Does  it  say  anything  to  you, 
but  •'  do  this  and  thou  shalt  five  ?  "  Does  it  set  before  you  any  alternative  but 
"  cursed  is  he  that  continueth  not"  (chap.  iii.  10)  ?  "Do  this,"  this  wrath-working 
law  proclaims,  "  do  it  all — all  without  exception — continue  in  it  from  first  to  last, 
and  you  shall  live ;  but  a  curse,  an  everlasting  curse,  awaits  you  if  you  offend  in 
one  particular."  Plead  what  you  will,  these  denunciations  are  irreversible — its 
terms  cannot  be  changed.  You  may  say,  "  I  wish  to  obey ; "  and  it  answers  you  ; 
"tell  me  not  of  your  wishes,  but  do  it."  "  I  have  endeavoured  to  obey."  "  Tell 
me  of  no  endeavours,  but  do  it  or  you  are  cursed."  "  I  have  done  it  in  almost 
every  particular."  "  Tell  me,  not  what  you  have  done  almost,  have  you  obeyed  it 
altogether  ?  Have  you  obeyed  it  in  all  things ;  if  not,  you  are  cursed."  *•  I  have 
for  many  years  obeyed  it,  and  but  once  only  have  I  transgressed."  "  Then  you  are 
cursed ;  if  you  have  offended  in  one  point  you  are  guilty  of  all."  "  But  I  am  very 
sorry  for  my  transgressions."  "  I  cannot  regard  your  sorrow ;  you  are  under  a 
curse."  "  But  I  will  reform,  and  never  transgress  again."  "  I  care  nothing  for 
your  reformation ;  the  curse  remains  upon  you."  "  But  I  will  obey  perfectly  in 
the  future,  if  I  can  find  mercy  for  the  past."    "I  can  have  no  concern  with  youi 


BIS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t. 

determinations  for  the  future;  I  know  no  such  word  as  mercy  ;  my  terms  cannot 
be  altered  for  any  one.  If  you  rise  to  these  terms  you  will  have  a  right  to  life,  and 
need  no  mercy.  If  you  fall  short  in  any  one  particular,  nothing  remains  for  you 
but  punishment  1  "        (G.  Simeon). 

Ver.  4.  Christ  Is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you,  whosoever  of  you  are  Justified  oy  the 
law;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace. — 1$  Christ  preached  "  of  no  effect"  ? — I  think,  tha 
sum  and  substance  of  my  text  amounts  simply  to  this :  that  the  attempt  to  add  any- 
thing to  Christ's  perfect  work  in  the  salvation  of  a  ruined  sinner,  is  an  entire  re- 
jection of  Christ,  and  makes  the  man  an  infidel.  I.  First  of  all,  let  us  look  a 
little  to  the  effect.  Now  what  effect  has  been  produced  upon  your  hearts  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  I  will  tell  you  three  effects  produced  upon  the  hearts  of 
many.  In  the  first  place,  the  preaching  of  Christ  has  produced  the  effect  of  pardon 
sealed  upon  the  conscience — but  not  where  justification  is  looked  for  from  the  law  ; 
in  the  second  place,  where  Christ  is  preached  and  embraced  by  faith,  reconciliation 
to  all  God's  method  of  saving  sinners,  and  to  all  God's  dispensations,  is  wrought  in 
the  heart ;  and  thirdly,  the  effect — and  the  prime  effect — included  in  the  covenant 
of  grace,  and  registered  in  heaven  to  be  carried  into  execution,  is  a  vital  oneness  of 
soul  with  Jesus.  II.  A  few  words  now  respecting  the  apostasy.  "  Christ  is  become 
of  no  effect  unto  you,  whosoever  of  you  are"  seeking  to  be  "justified  by  the  law." 
I  pray  you,  mark  what  an  awful  extent  of  apostasy  this  one  short  sentence  proves  : 
that  all  those,  who  are  cherishing  vain  hopes  of  justification  before  God,  in  whole 
or  in  part,  from  any  thine;  that  the  creature  does,  or  anything  proposed  to  the 
creature,  have  "no  effect"  from  Christ  ;  they  are  rejecting  Christ.  I  would  have 
you  think  Beriously  upon  this.  You  know,  we  do  not  now  dwell  upon  the  term 
"  circumcision,"  nor  yet  the  keeping  of  the  ceremonial  law :  only  we  insist,  that  these 
are  phrases,  which  set  forth  the  folly  and  rebellion  of  attempting  to  put  anything 
of  the  creature  along  with  the  perfect  work  of  Christ.  One  single  condition,  if  it 
be  but  an  act  of  obedience,  if  it  be  but  a  word,  if  it  be  but  a  thought — one  single 
coudition  or  contingency  left  with  man,  seals  his  damnation  for  ever.  If  the 
preaching  of  the  Word  of  God  does  not  give  man  a  salvation  without  a  contingency, 
it  gives  him  none  at  all.  III.  A  word  or  two  now,  relative  to  the  apostle's  testi- 
mony against  this  apostasy.  Ah !  I  fear  there  are  many  such  professors  in  these 
days;  who  receive  the  doctrines  of  grace  as  a  whole  in  theory,  but  by  and  by 
abandon  them  for  the  first  theory  that  seems  more  pleasing  to  their  fleshly 
natures.  "  Fallen  from  grace  "  marks,  then,  a  rejection  of  the  doctrine  once  em- 
braced or  received — the  doctrine  once  admitted  to  be  correct.  I  think  there  is 
another  class  that  might  be  included  in  this ;  and  that  _  is,  the  great  class 
who  hold  the  doctrines  of  grace  while  living  in  habits  of  sin.  _  (J.  Irons,  D.D.) 
Although  the  law  cannot  justify,  it  has  a  value: — Money  doth  not  justify,  is  it  there- 
fore unprofitable  ?  The  eyes  do  not  justify,  must  they  therefore  be  plucked  out  ? 
The  hands  make  not  a  man  righteous,  must  they  therefore  be  cut  off?  We  must 
attribute  to  everything  its  proper  effect  and  use.  If  the  law  doth  not  justify  we 
have  no  right  to  condemn  or  destroy  it ;  it  is  good,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  if  a  man 
do  rightly  use  it;  that  is  to  say,  if  he  use  the  law  as  law.  (Luther.)  Falling 
from  grace : — If  Satan  cannot  hinder  the  birth  of  graces,  then  he  labours  to  be  the 
death  of  graces.  This  is  too  ordinary,  to  see  a  Christian  lose  his  first  love,  and  to 
fall  from  his  first  works.  This  love  that  was  formerly  an  ascending  flame,  always 
sparkling  up  to  heaven,  is  now,  like  a  little  spark,  almost  suffocated  with  the  earth. 
The  godly  sorrow  that  was  once  a  swelling  torrent,  like  Jordan  overflowing  his 
banks,  is  now  like  Job's  summer  brook,  which  makes  the  traveller  ashamed.  His 
proceedings  against  sin,  once  furious,  like  the  march  of  Jehu  against  Ahab ;  but 
now,  like  Samson,  he  can  sleep  in  Delilah's  lap  while  she  steals  away  his  strength. 
Before,  he  oould  not  give  rest  to  his  eyes  till  God  had  given  rest  to  his  soul ;  but 
now  he  can  lie  down  with  sin  in  his  bosom,  and  wounds  in  his  conscience.  At 
first,  his  zeal  did  eat  him  up ;  but  now  his  decayings  have  eaten  up  his  zeal. 
{Foster.)  Falling  away : — As  leaves  fall  from  the  trees,  so  the  grace  of  God 
decay,  and  drop  away,  in  the  wicked,  one  after  another,  as  if  there  was  a  eon- 
sumption.    (Cawdray). 

Yet.  5.  Pot  we,  through  the  Spirit,  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith.— 
Salvation  by  faith  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit : — Faith  is  not  opposed  to  the  spirit, 
but  is  the  child  of  it.  Through  the  Spirit  we  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by 
faith,     L  Declabe  the  Christian's  hope.     1.  Its  singularity.     Not  founded  oa 


mup.  t.]  4ALATUM8.  319 

parentage,  outward  rites  and  ceremonies,  moral  virtues  and  spiritual  excellencies; 
but  upon  Christ.  2.  Its  speciality.  In  grace  alone — looking  entirely  to  the  free 
mercy  of  God.  Nothing  by  merit.  Nobody  has  any  claim  upon  God.  He  blesses 
as  because  He  is  good,  not  because  we  are  ;  He  saves  us  because  He  is  gracious, 
not  because  He  sees  any  grace  inherent  in  us.  3.  Its  ground.  It  is  founded  upon 
right — a  solid  base  for  hope.  We  expect  to  be  saved  by  an  act  of  justice  as  well  as 
by  a  deed  of  mercy.  By  faith  the  righteousness  of  Christ  becomes  ours,  so  that 
we  have  a  right  to  salvation  (Bom.  iv.  23,  24,  25 ;  v.  1,  2  ;  viii.  1-4,  32-34).  4.  Its 
substance.  A  triumphant  death,  a  glorious  eternity.  5.  Tbe  posture  which  our 
hope  takes  up.  Waiting.  All  is  done ;  we  have  but  to  wait  for  the  reward.  To 
the  garment  which  covers  us  we  dare  not  think  of  adding  a  single  thread.  To  the 
acceptance  in  which  we  stand  before  God,  we  cannot  hope  to  add  a  single  jewel. 
Why  attempt  it  ?  Has  not  Jesus  said,  "  It  is  finished  ?  "  Waiting  implies  con- 
tinuance. Our  faith  is  not  for  to-day  and  to-morrow  only,  but  for  eternity.  II. 
The  relation  of  this  matter  to  the  Holt  Spirit.  No  division  in  the  pur- 
poses and  works  of  the  three  sacred  Persons  in  the  Trinity.  Their  will  is  one. 
That  which  glorifies  Jesus  cannot  dishonour  the  Holy  Spirit.  1.  The  faith 
which  brings  this  righteousness  is  never  exercised  by  any  but  those  who  are 
born  of  the  Spirit.  The  new  heart  which  the  Spirit  creates  is  the  only  soil  in 
which  faith  will  grow.  2.  Faith  for  righteousness  is  based  on  the  testimony  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  3.  Simple  faith  is  always  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  4.  When  a  man  has 
believed,  he  obtains  a  great  increase  to  his  faith  in  Jesus  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
5.  It  is  by  the  Spirit  that  we  oontinue  to  exercise  faith.  III.  Concluding  inferences. 

1.  Whoever  has  this  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith  has  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  that 
believeth  hath  the  witness  in  himself.    He  that  believeth  in  Him  is  not  condemned. 

2.  Wherever  there  is  any  other  hope,  or  hope  based  upon  anything  else  but  this,  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  not  present.  The  Spirit  will  not  bear  witness  to  man's  home-born 
presumptuous  hopes,  but  only  to  the  finished  work  of  Jesus.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Difference  between  faith  and  hope : — There  is  so  great  affinity  between  faith  and 
hope,  that  the  one  cannot  be  separate  from  the  other.  Notwithstanding,  there  is  a 
difference  between  them,  which  is  gathered  of  their  several  offices,  diversity  of 
working,  and  of  their  ends.  1.  They  differ  in  respect  of  their  subject,  that  is,  of 
the  ground  wherein  they  rest.  For  faith  resteth  in  the  understanding,  hope  in  the 
will;  but  the  one  is  to  the  other,  as  the  two  cherubim  on  the  mercy-seat.  2. 
They  differ  in  respect  of  their  office,  i.e.  of  their  working.  Faith  tells  what  is  to  be 
done,  teaches,  prescribes,  directs ;  hope  stirs  up  the  mind  that  it  may  be  strong, 
bold,  courageous,  that  it  may  suffer  and  endure  adversity,  waiting  for  better  things. 
8.  They  differ  as  touching  their  object,  that  is,  the  special  matter  whereunto  thej 
look.  Faith  has  for  her  object  the  truth,  teaching  us  to  cleave  surely  thereto,  and 
looking  upon  the  word  and  promise  of  the  thing  that  is  promised ;  hope  has  fo? 
her  object  the  goodness  of  God,  and  looks  upon  the  thing  which  is  promised  in  the 
word,  that  is,  upon  such  matters  as  faith  teaches  us  to  hope  for.  4.  They  differ  in 
order.  Faith  is  the  beginning  of  life,  before  all  tribulation  ;  hope  proceeds  from 
tribulation.  5.  They  differ  by  the  diversity  of  working.  Faith  is  a  teacher  and  a 
judge,  fighting  against  errors  and  heresies,  judging  spirits  and  doctrines;  hope  is,  aa 
it  were,  the  general  or  captain  of  the  field,  fighting  against  tribulation,  the  cross, 
impatience,  heaviness  of  spirit,  weakness,  desperation,  and  blasphemy,  and  it  waits 
for  good  things  even  in  the  midst  of  all  evils.  Therefore,  when  I  am  instructed  by 
faith  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  lay  hold  of  Christ,  believing  in  Him  with  my  whole 
heart,  then  am  I  righteous  by  this  knowledge.  When  I  am  so  justified  by  faith, 
or  by  this  knowledge,  by  and  by  cometh  the  devil,  the  father  of  wiles,  and 
laboureth  to  extinguish  my  faith  by  wiles  and  subtleties ;  that  is  to  say,  by  lies, 
errors,  and  heresies.  Moreover,  because  he  is  a  murderer,  he  goeth  about  also  to 
oppress  it  by  violence.  Here  hope  wrestling,  layeth  hold  on  the  thing  revealed  by 
faith,  and  overcometh  the  devil  that  warreth  against  faith ;  and  after  this  victory 
followeth  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Luther.)  Faith  and  hope  comple- 
mentary of  each  other : — In  civil  government,  prudence  and  fortitude  do  differ,  and 
yet  these  two  virtues  are  so  joined  together,  that  they  cannot  easily  be  severed. 
Now,  fortitude  is  a  constancy  of  mind,  which  is  not  discouraged  in  adversity,  but 
endureth  valiantly,  and  waiteth  for  better  things.  But  if  fortitude  be  not  guided 
by  prudence,  it  is  but  temerity  and  rashness.  On  the  other  side,  if  fortitude  be  not 
joined  with  prudence,  that  prudence  is  but  vain  and  unprofitable.  Therefore,  lik« 
as,  in  policy,  prudence  is  but  vain  without  fortitude  ;  even  so  in  divinity,  faith 
without  hope  is  nothing ;  for  hope  endureth  adversity  and  is  constant  therein,  and 


8«0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

in  the  end  overcometh  all  evils.  And  on  the  other  side,  like  as  fortitude  without 
prudence  is  rashness,  even  so  hope  without  faith  is  a  presumption  in  spirit,  and  a 
tempting  of  God  :  for  it  hath  no  knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  the  truth  which  faith 
teacheth,  and  therefore  it  is  but  a  blind  rashness  and  arrogancy.  Wherefore,  a 
godly  man,  before  all  things,  must  have  a  right  understanding  instructed  by  faith; 
according  to  the  which  the  mind  may  be  guided  in  afflictions,  that  it  may  hope  for 
those  good  things  which  faith  hath  revealed  and  taught.  To  be  short,  faith  is  con- 
ceived by  teaching  ;  for  thereby  the  mind  is  instructed  what  the  truth  is.  Hope 
is  conceived  by  exhortation;  for  by  exhortation  hope  is  stirred  up  in  afflictions, 
which  confirmeth  him  that  is  already  justified  by  faith,  that  he  be  not  overcome  by 
adversities,  but  that  he  may  be  able  more  strongly  to  resist  them.  (Ibid.)  Hope 
with  faith : — The  heir  must  believe  his  title  to  an  estate  in  reversion  before  he  can 
hope  for  it :  faith  believes  its  title  to  glory,  and  then  hope  waits  for  it.  Did  not 
faith  feed  the  lamp  of  hope  with  oil,  it  would  soon  die.  (Ambrose.)  The 
believer's  treasure  : — 1.  The  riches  of  a  believer  are  not  so  much  in  possession  as  in 
expectation  and  hope.  2.  None  have  right  to  heaven  here,  or  shall  enjoy  it 
hereafter,  who  are  wholly  unrighteous.  3.  No  personal  righteousness  of 
our  own  can  entitle  us  to  this  blessed  hope  and  heavenly  inheritance ; 
but  only  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  4.  It  is  only  the  inward,  efficacious 
teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  that  can  sufficiently  instruct  us  in  the  knowledge  of 
this  imputed  righteousness  by  faith,  and  make  us  with  security  and  confidence 
venture  our  eternal  well-being  and  hope  of  heaven  upon  it.  (James  Fergusson.) 
Faith  and  morality : — When  faith  is  finished  a  good  life  is  made  perfect  in  cur 
kind :  let,  therefore,  no  man  expect  events  for  which  he  hath  no  promise ;  nor  call 
for  God's  fidelity  without  his  own  faithfulness ;  nor  snatch  at  a  promise  without 
performing  the  condition ;  nor  think  faith  to  be  a  hand  to  apprehend  Christ,  and 
to  do  nothing  else  ;  for  that  will  but  deceive  us,  and  turn  religion  into  words,  holi- 
ness into  hypocrisy,  the  promises  of  God  into  a  snare,  the  truth  of  God  into  a  He. 
When  God  gives  us  better  promises,  He  intends  that  we  should  pay  Him  a  better 
obedience;  when  He  forgives  us  what  is  past,  He  intends  that  we  should  sin  no 
more ;  when  He  offers  us  His  graces,  He  would  have  us  make  use  of  them  ;  when 
He  causes  us  to  distrust  ourselves  His  meaning  is  that  we  should  rely  on  Him  ; 
when  He  enables  us  to  do  what  He  commands  us,  He  commands  us  to  do  all  that 
we  can.  (Jeremy  Taylor.)  Faith  the  only  basis  of  righteousness  and  hope : — Our 
religion  is  spiritual  faith,  which  speaks  after  this  fashion :  "  Believe  in  God ; 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  believe  in  your  own  soul ;  believe  in  redemption  from  sin, 
from  guilt,  and  from  punishment ;  and  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and 
the  life  everlasting."  This  is  our  religion.  Infidelity  comes  and  unfolds  its  little 
couch  and  lays  it  on  the  ground,  and  says  to  my  soul,  "  Rest  there."  But  I  have 
tried,  and  cannot.  The  bed  is  too  short  for  my  soul  to  stretch  itself  upon  it.  It 
only  reaches  from  the  cradle  there  to  the  grave  yonder,  while  my  soul  has  desires 
that  wander  through  eternity.  No,  thank  God,  here  is  room :  God  is,  Christ  is, 
thy  soul  is,  redemption  is,  pardon  is,  liberty  from  sin  is,  and  the  glorious  life 
eternal  is  !  Stretch  thy  soul  upon  that  couch  and  rest  for  ever.  (Thomas  Jones.) 
Faith  and  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — I.  Consider  faith  in  Christ.  1.  Explain 
the  nature  of  it.  (1)  This  includes  in  it  an  assent  to  the  truth  of  Christ's  being 
appointed  of  God,  to  be  a  Mediator  betwixt  Him  and  the  sinful  children  of  men. 
(2)  An  hearty  acceptance  of  Him  to  be  our  Saviour,  as  He  is  proposed  to  us  in  the 
gospel.  The  apostle  tells  us  that  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness, 
so  as  to  be  justified,  to  be  entitled  to  life  (Bom.  x.  10).  Justifying  faith  is  not 
seated  only  in  the  head,  but  in  the  heart.  (3)  True  and  saving  faith  in  Christ 
imports  a  dependence  upon  Him.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  believe  in  Christ.  (1)  The 
evidences  of  God's  appointment  of  Jesus  to  be  Mediator  betwixt  Him  and  men  aw 
sufficient  to  convince  all  attentive  unprejudiced  persons,  upon  whom  the  light  of 
the  gospel  shines.  The  exact  accomplishment  of  the  many  ancient  prophecies 
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  relating  to  the  Messiah,  in  our  Lord  Jesus  ;  the 
miracles  wrought  by  Him  in  the  presence  of  enemies,  as  well  as  friends,  who  could 
not  deny  the  reality  of  them  ;  and  His  resurrection  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day. 
(2)  As  it  is  "  a  faithful  saying,"  so  it  is  "worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  (3)  We  all  need  Christ  and  His  salvation, 
therefore  it  behoves  us  greatly  to  accept  of  Him.  (4)  Christ  Jesus  is  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour,  therefore  we  ought  to  believe  in  Him,  to  depend  upon  Him.  (6)  We  ar* 
expressly  required  in  the  Word  of  God  to  believe  in  Christ  Jesus.  A  heart  ol 
unbelief  is  emphatically  styled  an  evil  heart ;  it  rebels  against  the  word  of  the 


.  T.]  GALATIAN8.  821 

living  God,  and  departs  from  Him  (Heb.  iii.  12).  Having  showed  that  it  is  our 
duty  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  give  me  leave  to  subjoin  a  few  remarks.  1.  Though 
it  be  our  duty  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  tbis  should  be  pressed  upon  our 
consciences,  yet  we  need  the  aids  of  Divine  grace  to  enable  us  to  discharge  this 
duty ;  therefore  we  should  ask  them  of  God.  2.  It  is  not  only  tbe  duty  of  persons, 
when  they  are  first  awakened  to  a  sense  of  sin,  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  those 
also  who  have  received  Him  should  be  daily  exercising  faith  in  Him.  II.  Consider 
hope  in  Christ.  1.  Let  us  consider  what  it  is  true  Christians  hope  for  in  the  Lord 
Jesus.  (1)  True  Christians  hope  that  the  Lord  Jesus  will  keep  "  that  which  they 
have  eommitted  unto  Him  against  the  great  day."  (2)  They  hope  that  He  will 
"present  them  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy."  (3) 
True  Christians  hope  through  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  admitted  to  dwell  for  ever  with 
Him  in  His  Father's  house.  2.  Let  us  inquire  into  the  reasons  of  this  their  hope 
in  Christ.  (1)  God's  appointment  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  work  of  mediation 
encourages  the  hope  of  believers  in  Him.  (2)  liie  dignity  of  Christ's  Person 
encourages  believers  to  hope  in  Him.  We  are  expressly  told  in  His  Word  that  He 
hath  "  laid  help  upon  One  that  is  mighty"  (Psa.  lxxxix.  19).  (3)  The  resurrection, 
ascension,  and  intercession  of  Christ  encourage  the  hope  of  believers  in  Him.  (4) 
The  compassion  of  Christ  is  a  reason  of  believers'  hope  in  Him.  Though  He  be  "  a 
great  High  Priest,"  and  "  is  passed  into  the  heavens,"  yet  He  is  not  such  a  One  "  as 
cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  "  (Heb.  iv.  14,  15,  16).  (5)  The 
promises  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  greatly  support  the  hope  of  believers  in  Him ;  they 
have  a  promise  of  very  ancient  date  to  bear  up  their  hope  of  eternal  life  (Titus  i.  2). 
Concluding  reflections:  1.  We  may  hence  learn  that  true  Christians  should  be  ready 
always  to  answer  every  man  that  asketh  them  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them. 
Seeing  it  is  so  reasonable,  so  well  grounded,  they  should  never  be  ashamed  of  it, 
nor  suffer  themselves  to  be  moved  from  it  by  the  vain  cavils  of  men.  2.  Is  our 
hope  in  Christ  Jesus?  Then  it  should  be  our  great  care  to  "  glorify  His  name,  and 
to  adorn  His  doctrine  in  all  things."  And  in  order  hereto  let  us  live  answerably 
to  our  hope  in  Him.  3.  It  behoves  us  to  be  very  solicitous  that  we  do  not  take  up 
with  such  a  hope  as  shall  make  us  ashamed.  The  salvation  proposed  by  Jesus 
Christ  to  His  disciples  is  inexpressibly  great ;  and  it  should  be  our  great  concern 
that  our  expectations  of  it  be  not  disappointed.  "  Not  every  one  that  says  "  unto 
Christ,  "Lord,  Lord,"  that  pretends  respect  for  Him,  "shall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven"  (Matt.  vii.  21).  "  The  hope  of  the  hypocrite  shall  perish."  (S.  Price.) 
The  Spirit  inclining  us  to  seek  after  righteousness  : — In  these  words  observe — 1.  The 
end,  scope,  and  blessedness  of  a  Christian  in  the  word  "hope."  2.  The  film 
ground  of  it — "  The  righteousness  of  faith."  3.  The  carriage  of  Christians — "  We 
wait."  4.  The  inward  moving  cause  of  waiting  for  this  hope  in  this  way — "  Through 
the  Spirit."  They  are  taught  by  Him,  inclined  by  Him,  so  to  do.  1.  The  blessed- 
ness of  a  Christian  is  implied  in  the  word  "  hope."  For  hope  is  taken  two  ways  m 
Scripture — for  the  thing  hoped  for,  and  for  the  affection  or  act  of  him  that  hopetu. 
Here  it  is  taken  in  the  first  sense,  for  the  thing  hoped  for.  As  also  Titus  ii.  1 3, 
"  Looking  for  the  blessed  hope."  So  Col.  i.  5,  "  For  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for 
us  in  heaven."  2.  The  ground  and  foundation  of  this  hope,  "  The  righteousness 
of  faith."  What  it  is  I  will  show  you  by  and  by.  Only  here  it  is  opposed,  partiy 
to  the  covenant  of  works,  which  could  not  give  life ;  partly  to  the  legal  observances ; 
for  it  presently  followeth,  "  Neither  circumcision,  nor  uncircumcision,"  &c.  But 
by  no  means  is  it  opposed  to  evangelical  obedience ;  for  the  wbole  New  Testament 
obedience  is  comprised  in  this  term,  "  The  righteousness  of  faith ;  "  as  appeareth 
by  the  apostle's  explication  in  the  next  verse,  "  But  faith,  which  works  by  love." 

3.  The  duty  of  a  Christian — "  We  wait."  All  true  Christians  wait  for  the  mercy  of 
God  and  life  everlasting.  And  he  calleth  it  waiting,  because  a  believer  hath  not 
so  much  in  possession  as  in  expectation.  And  this  waiting  is  not  a  devout  sloth, 
but  implieth  diligence  in  the  use  of  all  means  whereby  we  may  obtain  this  hope. 

4.  The  inward  efficient  cause — "  Through  the  Spirit"  We  are  taught  by  the  Spirit, 
inclined  by  the  Spirit  so  to  do.  That  by  the  Spirit  all  true  Christians  are  inclined 
to  pursue  after  the  hope  built  upon  the  righteousness  of  faith.  I.  What  is  the 
righteousness  of  faith  ?  We  told  you  before  it  is  opposed  either  to  the  law  of  works 
or  the  ceremonial  observances  of  the  law  of  Moses.  But  more  particularly  it  may 
be  determined — (1)  Either  with  respect  to  the  object  of  faith  ;  or  (2)  to  the  act  or 
grace  of  faith  itself ;  (3)  with  respect  to  the  rule  and  warrant  of  faith,  which  is  the 
gospel  or  new  covenant.  We  return  to  God,  as  our  chief  good  and  sovereign  Lord, 
that  we  may  love,  serve,  and  obey  Him,  and  be  happy  in  His  love.    Faith  respects 

21 


822  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  T. 

Christ  as  Redeemer  and  Mediator,  who  hath  opened  the  way  for  our  return  by  Hia 
merit  and  satisfaction,  or  reconciliation  wrought  between  us  and  God,  and  given  ua 
a  heart  to  return  by  the  renewing  grace  of  His  Spirit.  II.  What  is  the  hope  built 
upon  it,  or  the  things  hoped  for  by  virtue  of  this  righteousness  ?  and  they  are 
pardon  and  life.  1.  Certainly  pardon  of  sins  is  intended  in  the  righteousness  of 
faith,  as  appeareth  by  that  of  the  apostle  (Eom.  iv.  6-8).  2.  There  is  also  in  it 
salvation,  or  eternal  life  (Titus  iii.  7).  These  two  benefits  give  us  the  greatest 
support  and  comfort  against  all  kind  of  troubles.  III.  What  is  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  in  this  business  in  urging  believers  to  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by 
faith  ?  The  work  of  the  Spirit  doth  either  concern  the  duties  of  the  new  covenant 
or  the  privileges  of  the  new  covenant,  or  what  is  common  to  them  both.  I  begin 
with  the  latter.  1.  What  is  common  to  them  both.  He  doth  convince  us  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel,  both  of  means  and  end ;  that  there  is  such  a  hope,  and  the 
righteousness  of  faith  is  the  only  way  to  obtain  it.  Now  this  he  doth  externally 
and  internally.  (1)  Externally,  and  by  way  of  objective  evidence.  All  the  cer- 
tainty that  we  have  of  the  gospel  is  by  the  Spirit  (Acts  v.  32 ;  John  xv.  26,  27). 
(2)  Internally,  enlightening  their  minds  and  inclining  their  hearts  to  embrace  the 
truth ;  which  maketh  the  former  testimony  effectual  (Eph.  i.  17).  To  the  sight 
of  anything  these  things  are  necessary — an  object,  a  medium,  and  a  faculty.  As  in 
outward  sight,  an  object  that  may  be  seen ;  a  convenient  light  to  represent  it  and 
make  the  object  perspicuous ;  an  organ  or  faculty  of  seeing  in  the  eye.  Unless 
there  be  an  object,  you  bid  a  man  see  nothing.  Unless  there  be  a  medium,  a  due 
light  to  represent  it,  as  in  a  fog,  or  at  midnight,  the  sharpest  sight  can  see  nothing. 
Unless  there  be  a  faculty,  neither  the  object  nor  medium  will  avail ;  a  blind  man 
cannot  see  anything  at  noonday.  Now  here  is  an  object,  the  way  of  salvation  by 
Christ ;  a  convenient  light,  it  is  represented  in  the  gospel ;  and  the  faculty  is  pre- 
pared, for  the  eyes  of  the  mind  are  opened  by  the  Spirit,  that  we  may  see  both  way 
and  end,  the  necessity  of  holiness,  and  the  reality  of  future  glory  and  blessedness. 
2.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  as  to  the  duties  of  the  new  covenant.  He  doth  not  only 
convince  us  of  the  reality  and  the  necessity  of  Christ's  obedience  and  our  holiness, 
but  by  His  powerful  operation  frameth  and  inclineth  our  hearts  to  the  duties 
required  of  us.  Faith  itself  is  wrought  in  us  by  this  holy  Spirit,  for  it  is  "  the  gift 
of  God"  (Eph.  ii.  8);  and  so  is  repentance  and  obedience:  Heb.  viii.  10,  "I  will 
write  My  laws  upon  their  hearts,  and  put  them  into  their  minds."  Moses'  law  was 
written  on  tables  of  stone,  as  a  rule  without  them ;  but  Christ's  law  on  the  heart 
and  mind,  as  drawing  and  inclining  them  to  obey  it.  The  renewing  grace  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  doth  prepare  us  and  fit  us,  and  His  exciting  grace  doth  quicken  us, 
that  we  may  do  what  is  pleasing  in  His  sight.  3.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  as  to  the 
privileges  of  the  new  covenant,  which  are  pardon  and  life.  (1)  As  to  pardon,  He 
is  the  Comforter.  He  cometh  into  our  hearts  as  the  pledge  of  our  atonement ;  we 
receive  it  when  we  receive  the  Spirit  (Bom.  v.  11) ;  and  His  sanctifying  work  is 
the  sure  evidence  that  God  is  at  peace  with  us  (1  Th.es.  v.  23).  (2)  As  to  life,  He 
doth  three  things,  (a)  He  prepare th  us  and  fitteth  us  for  it  (2  Cor.  v.  5).  (b)  He 
assure th  us  of  it  (2  Cor.  i.  22).  (c)  He  comforteth  us  and  raiseth  our  longing  after 
this  blessed  estate,  for  the  beginnings  we  have  here  are  called  also  "  the  first-fruits  " 
(Bom.  viii.  23).  The  beginnings  are  sweet;  what  will  the  completion  be?  Applica- 
tion :  1.  Here  you  see  your  scope,  what  you  should  look  for  and  hope  for — the  for- 
giveness of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  the  sanctified.  2.  Here  you  see  your  work, 
and  what  you  should  now  seek  after — "  The  righteousness  of  faith."  3.  Here  you 
see  your  help,  and  what  will  enable  you  to  obtain — "  Through  the  Spirit."  Oh  I  let 
these  things  be  more  in  your  thoughts.  (1)  For  your  happiness,  or  the  great  privileges 
which  you  should  most  value  and  hope  for.  (i)  The  forgiveness  of  sins.  Till  sin 
be  forgiven  you  can  never  have  found  peace  within  yourselves,  but  still  God  will  be 
matter  of  fear  and  terror  to  you.  (ii)  By  waiting  on  the  duties  of  the  gospel,  this 
comfort  is  more  and  more  settled  in  the  heart.  (2)  For  eternal  life.  Having  spoke 
to  your  hope  and  scope,  let  me,  secondly,  now  speak  to  your  work,  what  you  must 
Beek  after,  and  that  is,  "  The  righteousness  of  faith."  To  enforce  this  consider — 
1.  There  is  no  appearing  before  God  without  some  righteousness  of  one  sort  or 
another.  Why?  Because  it  is  an  holy  and  just  God  before  whom  we  appear;  and 
"  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  (Gen.  xviii.  25) ;  and  1  Sam.  vi  20, 
"Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord  God  ?  "  If  not  now  in  the  time  of  Hia 
patience,  how,  then,  in  the  time  of  His  recompense  ?  His  holiness  inclineth  Him 
to  hate  sin,  and  His  justice  to  punish  it.  "Thy  law  is  exceeding  pure"  (Psa. 
cxix.  140).    The  gospel  abateth  nothing  of  the  purity  of  it.    Now  when  we  appear 


chap.  T.J  GALATIAN8.  323 

before  an  holy  God,  and  must  be  judged  by  an  holy  law,  surely  we  must  have  holi- 
ness and  righteousness  answerable,  or  how  can  we  stand  in  the  judgment  ?  2.  No 
other  righteousness  will  serve  the  turn  but  the  righteousness  of  faith ;  and  there- 
fore, till  we  submit  to  the  new  covenant,  we  are  in  a  woeful  case.  Now  the 
righteousness  of  the  new  covenant  is  supreme  or  subordinate  ;  the  supreme  by  way 
of  merit  and  satisfaction,  the  subordinate  by  way  of  application  and  qualification 
on  our  parts.  (1)  The  supreme  is  the  righteousness  or  obedience  of  Christ,  which 
can  alone  deliver  us  from  hell :  Job  xxxiii.  24,  "  Deliver  him  from  going  down  to 
the  pit,  for  I  have  found  a  ransom."  There  is  no  deliverance  from  eternal  destruc- 
tion, which  our  sins  deserve,  but  only  by  the  ransom  which  He  hath  paid.  Till 
His  justice  be  satisfied  by  Christ,  no  good  can  come  unto  us.  (2)  The  subordinate 
righteousness,  which  qualifieth  us,  and  giveth  us  an  interest,  is  faith,  repentance, 
and  new  obedience;  all  which  are  hugely  necessary,  convenient,  and  gracious 
terms.  (T.  Manton,  D.D<)  The  hope  of  righteousness  reasonable: — How  foolish 
and  ignorant  we  shouid  esteem  an  artificer,  who,  having  taken  a  piece  of  iron, 
should  melt  and  mould,  file  and  polish  it,  and  then  imagine  that  it  has  become 
gold !  It  shines,  it  is  true  ;  but  is  its  brilliancy  a  proof  that  it  is  no  longer  iron  ? 
And  does  not  God  require  pure  and  refined  gold ;  that  is  to  say,  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness and  a  perfect  holiness  ?  (Utalan.)  Righteousness  by  faith  : — As  the  graft 
is  kept  in  union  with  the  stock  by  means  of  the  clay  which  has  been  applied  by  the 
gardener,  so  is  the  believer  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  which  is  the  gift  of  God.  The 
clay  cement  keeps  the  parts  together,  but  has  no  virtue  in  itself :  so  faith  is  the 
means  of  nnion  to  Christ ;  it  shows  that  the  husbandman  has  been  there.  When 
the  clay  is  removed  in  an  ordinary  tree,  the  graft  is  found  united  to  the  stock :  so, 
when  faith  is  swallowed  up  in  sight,  then  the  perfect  union  of  Christ  and  His 
people  is  seen.    (J.  U.  Balfour.) 

Ver.  6.  For  In  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  uncir- 
cumclsion ;  but  faith  which  worketh  by  love. — The  order  of  gracious  exercises  in 
the  renewed  heart : — All  evangelical  writers  and  preachers  maintain  that  none  can 
be  real  Christians  without  exercising  faith,  repentance,  and  love ;  but  they  differ 
widely  in'  respect  to  the  proper  order  of  these  gracious  affections.  Some  place  faith 
before  love  and  repentance,  and  some  place  love  before  repentance  and  faith.  I. 
Let  us  consider  the  order  in  which  holy  exercises  take  place  in  a  renewed 
sinner.  The  Spirit  of  God  in  renewing,  sanctifying,  or  converting  a  sinner,  does 
not  give  him  any  new  natural  power,  faculty,  or  principle  of  action ;  but  only  gives 
him  new  affections  or  exercises  of  heart.  It  is  true,  indeed,  the  Holy  Spirit 
commonly  awakens  and  convinces  a  sinner,  before  He  converts  him.  But  as  both 
din  and  holiness  oonsist  in  free,  voluntary  exercises,  so  the  Divine  Spirit,  in 
converting  a  sinner,  only  turns  him  from  sinful  to  holy  exerciser.  Having  pre- 
mised this,  I  proceed  to  consider  the  order  in  which  the  Spirit  produces  the  first 
gracious  affections.  If  love  be  distinct  from  repentance,  and  repentance  distinct 
from  faith,  which  cannot  be  reasonably  denied,  then  one  of  these  affections  must 
be  exercised  before  another,  in  a  certain  order.  They  cannot  all  be  exercised 
together.  1.  And  here  it  is  easy  to  see  that  love  must  be  before  either  repentance 
or  faith.  Pure,  holy,  disinterested  love,  which  is  diametrically  opposite  to  all 
selfishness,  is  the  essence  of  all  true  holiness  ;  and,  of  consequence,  there  can  be  no 
holy  affection  prior  to  the  love  of  God  being  shed  abroad  in  the  heart.  2.  The 
next  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  repentance.  As  soon  as  the  renewed  sinner  loves  God 
supremely,  he  must  loathe  and  abhor  himself  for  bating,  opposing,  and  dishonouring 
such  a  holy  and  amiable  Being.  As  repentance  follows  love,  so  faith  follows  both 
love  and  repentance.  When  the  sinner  loves,  he  will  repent ;  and  when  he  repents, 
he  will  exercise  not  merely  a  speculative,  but  a  saving  faith.  It  is  morally  im- 
possible that  he  should  feel  his  need  of  a  Saviour,  until  he  sees  and  feels  that  God 
would  be  righteous  and  amiable  in  sending  men  tc  destruction.  II.  The  impor- 
tance  OF   REPRESENTING     THESE   FIRST   EXERCISES   OF    THE    RENEWED     HEART    IN   THE 

obder  I  have  mentioned.  1.  Unless  we  place  love  before  faith  and  repentance, 
we  cannot  reconcile  regeneration  with  the  Divine  law,  which  requires  all  men  to 
love  God  immediately  and  supremely.  If  we  say  that  faith  is  the  first  gracious 
exercise,  then  we  virtually  say  that  men  ought  to  believe  the  gospel  before  they 
love  God ;  which  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  it  is  not  the  duty  of  sinners  to  obey 
the  first  and  great  command,  until  they  become  true  believers  in  Christ.  2.  It  is 
of  importance  to  represent  love  as  before  repentance  and  faith,  in  order  to  make 
it  appear  that  sanctification  is  before  justification  and  the  only  proper  evidence  of 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*.  T. 

it.     Those  who  place  faith  before  love  and  repentance,  suppose  that  men  are 
justified  before  they  are  renewed  or  sanctified.     They  suppose  that  saving  faitb 
consists  in  a  man's  believing  that  he  is  justified  and  entitled  to  eternal  life  without 
any  evidence  from  Scripture,  sense,  or  reason.     3.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
place  love  before  repentance  and  faith,  in  order  to  distinguish  true  religion  from 
false.     All  true  religion  essentially  consists  in  pure,  holy,  disinterested  love ;  and 
all  false  religion  essentially  consists  in  interested,  mercenary,  selfish  love.     Now 
those  who  place  faith  before  love  and  repentance,  make  all  religion  selfish  ;  because, 
upon  their  supposition,  all  religious  affections  flow  from  a  belief  of  their  being 
elected  and  entitled  to  eternal  life.    But  if  we  place  supreme  love  to  God,  for  what 
He  is  in  Himself,  before  faith,  then  all  the  gracious  exercises  which  flow  from  it 
will  be  holy  and  disinterested  affections.     Conclusion :  1.  If  the  first  exercises  of 
renewed  sinners  always  take  place  in  the  same  order,  then  all  real  saints  have 
always  had  precisely  the  same  kind  of  religious  experience.    2.  If  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  converting  sinners,  always  produces  love  to  God  before  faith  in  Christ,  then  it 
i-  extremely  erroneous  to  represent  faith  as  previous  to  love  in  the  renewed  heart. 
This  is  the  greatest  and  most  prevailing  error  among  those  who  believe  in  experi- 
mental religion.     3.  If  there  can  be  no   true   experimental  religion  but  what 
originates  from  that  supreme  love  to  God  which  is  before  faith  in  Christ,  then  there 
is  ground  to  fear  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  false  religion  among  all  denominations 
of  Christians.     Finally,  this  subject  teaches  all  who  have  entertained  a  hope  of 
having  experienced  a  saving  change,  the  great  importance  of  examining  themselves, 
whether  they  have  ever  exercised  that  precious  faith  which  flows  from  supreme 
love  to  God.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)        Prevailing  faith  : — I.  What  is  this  faith  • 
1.  It  is  not  a  mere  creed-holding.     Though  the  creed  be  true,  it  may  not  be  true  to 
you,  if  you  just  repeat  it  and  put  it  away  like  a  paper  in  a  pigeon-hole.     No  use  if 
it  does  not  influence  your  heart  and  affect  your  life.     2.  It  is  trust.    As  creaturos 
we  look  up  to  the  great  Father  of  spirits  ;  as  sinners  we  trust  for  the  pardon  of  our 
sins  to  the  atonement  of  Christ ;  as  being  weak  and  feeble  we  trust  to  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  us  holy  and  to  keep  us  so  ;  we  venture  our  eternal  interests 
in  the  vessel  of  free  grace,  content  to  sink  or  swim  with  it.    We  rely  upon  God  in 
Christ.    We  hang  upon  Christ  as  the  vessel  hangs  upon  the  nail.    II.  Why  is 
faith  selected  as  the  wat  of  salvation?      1.  No  other  way  is  possible.    The 
road  of  good  works  is  blocked  up  by  our  past  sins,  and  it  is  sure  to  be  further 
blocked  up    by  future  sins:    we   ought,    therefore,  to    rejoice   that    God    ha* 
commended   to  us  the    open  road   of  faith.    2.  God  has  chosen  the  way  of 
faith,  that  salvation  might  be  by  grace.    All  idea  of    our  own    merit  is  thias 
shut  out.    3.  That  there  may  be  no  boasting.    4.  It  is  a  way  open  to  the  molt 
unlearned.    However  little  you  may  know,  you  know  that  you  have  sinned  ;  knou, 
-then,  that  Jesus  has  come  to  put  away  sin,  and  that  there  is  life  in  a  look  at  tie 
crucified  One.     HI.  How  does  faith  operate?    1.  It  touches  the  mainspring  of 
our  nature  by  creating  love  within  the  soul.    2.  It  puts  us  into  a  new  relation. 
No  longer  servants,  but  sons.    3.  It  creates  agreement  with  the  Divine  will.    (V. 
U.  Spurgeon.)        What  makes  a  Christian :  circumcision  or  faith  ? — Mistake  to 
.mppose  the  Primitive  Church  can  be  regarded  as  a  pattern.    Apostolic  teaching 
they  had ;  yet  they  were  only  beginners.  Just  rescued  from  heathenism,  no  wonder 
their  spirits  long  bore  the  scars  of  their  former  bondage.    To  know  what  they  were 
like,  we  must  look  at  the  communities  gathered  by  modern  missionaries.    The 
same  infantile  simplicity,  the  same  partial  apprehensions  of  the  truth,  the  same 
danger  of  being  led  astray  by  the  low  morality  of  their  heathen  kindred,  the  same 
openness  to  strange  heresy,  the  same  danger  of  blending  the  old  with  the  new,  in 
opinion  and  practice,  beset  both.     The  first  theological  difference  in  the  early 
Church  illustrates  this.     It  was  an  attempt  to  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles.    The 
Jewish  and  the  Gentile  elements  did  not  coalesce.    The  point  round  which  the 
strife  was  waged  was  not  whether  Gentiles  might  come  into  the  Church.    That  was 
conceded  by  the  fiercest  Judaisers.    But  it  was  whether  they  could  come  in  as 
Gentiles,  without  being  first  incorporated  into  the  Jewish  nation  by  circumcision, 
and  whether  they  could  remain  in  as  Gentiles,  without  conforming  to  Jewish 
ceremonial  and  law.    Those  who   said  "no"  were  members  of  the  Christian 
communities,  and,  being  so,  they  still  insisted  that  Judaism  was  to  be  eternal. 
Those  who  said  "  yes  "  were  mostly  Gentiles,  headed  and  inspired  by  St.  Paul,  a 
Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.     They  believed  that  Judaism  was  preparatory,  and  that  itl 
work  was  done.    This  Epistle  is  the  memorial  of  that  feud.     It  is  of  perennial  use, 
as  the  tendencies  against  which  it  is  directed  are  constant  in  human  nature.    The 


chat,  v.]  GALATIANS.  325 

text  contains  St.  Paul's  condensed  statement  of  his  whole  position  in  the  con- 
troversy. I.  The  first  grand  principle  contained  in  these  words  is  that  Faith 
wobeing  by  love  makes  a  Christian  (Comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  19 ;  Gal.  vi.  15.) 
1.  Religion  is  the  harmony  of  the  soul  with  God,  and  the  conformity  of  the  life  tc 
His  law.  Obedience  must  be  the  obedience  of  a  man,  and  not  of  his  deeds  only ;  it 
must  include  the  submission  of  the  will  and  the  prostration  of  the  whole  nature 
before  God.  To  be  godly  is  to  be  godlike.  As  two  stringed  instruments  may  be  so 
tuned  to  one  keynote  that,  if  you  strike  the  one,  a  faint  ethereal  echo  is  heard  from 
the  other,  which  blends  undistinguishably  with  its  parent  sound  ;  so,  drawing  near 
to  God,  and  brought,  into  unison  with  His  mind  and  will,  our  responsive  spirits 
vibrate  in  accord  with  His,  and  give  forth  tones,  low  and  thin  indeed,  but  still 
repeating  the  mighty  musio  of  heaven.  2.  This  harmony  with  God  results  from 
love  becoming  the  ruling  power  of  our  lives.  Love  to  God  is  no  idle  emotion  or 
lazy  rapture,  no  vague  sentiment,  but  the  root  of  all  practical  goodness,  of  all 
strenuous  effort,  of  all  virtue,  of  all  praise.  That  strong  tide  is  meant  to  drive  the 
busy  wheels  of  life,  and  to  bear  precious  freightage  on  its  bosom  ;  not  to  flow  away 
in  profitless  foam.  All  the  virtues  and  graces  will  dwell  in  our  hearts,  if  Love,  their 
mighty  mother,  be  there.  3.  The  dominion  of  love  to  God  in  our  hearts  arises 
from  faith.  How  can  we  love  Him  so  long  as  we  are  in  doubt  of  His  heart,  or 
misconceive  His  character,  as  if  it  were  only  Power  and  Wisdom,  or  awful  Severity? 
Men  cannot  love  an  unseen  person  at  all  without  some  very  special  token  of  his 
personal  affection  for  them.  It  is  only  when  we  know  and  believe  the  love  that 
God  has  to  us,  that  we  come  to  cherish  any  corresponding  emotion  to  Him. 
Heaven  must  bend  to  earth,  before  earth  can  rise  to  heaven.  The  skies  must  open 
and  drop  down  love,  ere  love  can  spring  in  the  fruitful  fields.  And  it  is  only  when 
we  look  with  true  trust  to  that  great  unveiling  of  the  heart  of  God  which  is  in 
Jesus  Christ,  that  our  hearts  are  melted,  and  all  their  snows  are  dissolved  into 
sweet  waters,  which,  freed  from  their  icy  chains,  can  flow  with  music  in  their 
ripple,  and  fruitfulness  along  their  course,  through  our  otherwise  silent  and  barren 
lives.  II.  But  we  have  to  consider  also  the  negative  side  of  the  apostle's  words.  They 
affirm  that  in  comparison  with  the  essential — faith,  all  externals  are  infi- 
nitely tjnimpobtant.  A  general  principle.  Rites,  sacraments,  <fec,  may  be  helps: 
nothing  more.  If  religion  be  the  loving  devotion  of  the  soul  to  God,  resting  upon 
reasonable  faith,  then  all  besides  is,  at  the  most,  a  means  which  may  further  it. 
The  test  of  all  acts  and  forms  of  Christian  worship  is,  Do  they  help  men  to  know 
and  feel  Christ  and  His  truth  ?  They  are  but  fuel ;  the  flame  is  loving  faith.  The 
only  worth  of  the  fuel  is  to  feed  the  flame.  We  are  joined  to  God  by  faith.  What- 
ever strengthens  that  is  precious  as  a  help,  but  worthless  as  a  substitute.  III.  There 

IS  A    CONSTANT  TENDENCY  TO  EXALT  THESE   UNIMPORTANT    EXTERNALS    INTO   THI  PLACT 

of  faith.  So  long  as  men  have  bodily  organizations,  there  will  be  need  for  outward 
helps.  Forms  are  sure  to  encroach,  to  overlay  the  truth  that  lies  at  their  root,  to 
become  dimly  intelligible,  or  quite  unmeaning,  and  to  constitute  at  last  the  end 
instead  of  the  means.  Necessary  to  remember,  in  using  them,  that  a  minute 
quantity  may  strengthen,  but  an  overdose  will  kill.  Even  freedom  from  forms  may 
be  turned  into  a  bondage.  IV.  When  an  indiffebent  thing  is  made  into  an 
essential,  it  ceases  to  be  indifferent,  and  must  be  fought  against.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  office  and  operation  of  faith  : — The  peculiar  character  of 
the  gospel  is,  that  it  shows  how  a  sinner  may  he  justified  before  God.  Yet  the 
generality  of  Christians  are  far  from  entertaining  just  views  of  this  most  funda- 
mental point.  They  confound  the  different  offices  of  faith  and  works.  But  St. 
Paul  distinguishes  them  with  much  accuracy  and  precision.  He  invariably  declares 
that  our  justification  is  by  faith.  Yet,  though  he  denies  to  works  the  office  of 
justifying,  he  invariably  insists  on  them  as  the  fruits  and  evidence  of  our  faith. 
Nothing  can  be  more  decisive  than  the  declaration  in  the  text.  I.  We  shall 
explain  it.  1.  Man  is  prone  to  trust  in  outward  rites  and  ceremonies.  The  Jews 
trusted  in  the  ordinance  of  circumcision  ;  some  among  ourselves  think  it  sufficient 
that  they  have  been  baptized,  or  are  communicants.  2.  But  no  outward  obser- 
vances can  avail  for  our  salvation.  (1)  An  external  conformity  with  the  rule  of 
duty  may  proceed  from  the  basest  motives  ;  (a)  to  obtain  man's  applause ;  (6)  to 
establish  a  righteousness  of  our  own;  (2)  it  may  consist  with  the  indulgence  of  (a) 
evil  tempers  ;  (b)  vicious  appetites.  It  cannot,  therefore,  of  itself  characterize  the 
true  Christian.  Nor  can  it  avail  anything  towards  procuring  the  Divine  favour; 
thonsrh,  if  it  proceed  from  faith  and  love,  it  will  doubtless  be  rewarded.  3.  Thai 
which  alone  can  avail  for  our  acceptance  with  God  is  faith.     It  is  by  faith  that  all 


$26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha*.  V. 

the  saints  of  old  obtained  salvation  (Rom.  iv.  3,  6,  7).  All  the  promises  of  God  are 
made  to  faith  (Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Acts  x.  43).  4.  Yet  this  faith  mast  be  productive  of 
good  works.  It  is  not  a  mere  notional  assent  to  certain  doctrines  ;  nor  a  confident 
assurance  respecting  the  safety  of  our  own  state  ;  but  a  living,  operative  principle 
in  the  heart.  5.  It  is,  on  our  part,  the  bond  of  union  between  Christ  and  our  souls ; 
and  it  cannot  but  discover  itself  by  works  of  love.  II.  Improve  it  (2  Tim.  iii.  16). 
1.  For  the  establishment  of  true  doctrine.  Let  us  renounce  all  confidence  in  our 
own  works,  and  rely  wholly  on  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  2.  For 
reproof,  i.e.,  refutation  of  false  doctrine.  We  are  not  justified  by  faith  as  an 
operative  principle,  but  simply  as  uniting  us  with  Christ.  Our  works  do  not  make 
our  faith  to  be  good  or  saving,  but  only  prove  it  to  be  so.  3.  For  correction  of 
unrighteous  conduct.  Let  unrighteous  Christians  put  away  either  their  profession 
or  their  sins.  4.  For  instruction  in  righteousness.  Love  should  operate  uniformly, 
and  respect  both  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  Let  us  abound  in  it  more  and 
more.      (Theological  Sketch  -  book.)  Faith  : — Faith  is  the  foundation  of  the 

whole  spiritual  building,  whereby  we  are  built  on  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  the  root  of 
the  whole  spiritual  life  of  grace,  the  ground  whereon  the  soul  rests  securely,  the 
beginning  of  our  spiritual  existence.  The  cross  is  not  far  off,  not  over  the  seas,  in 
the  Holy  Land,  nor  removed  by  length  of  time.  Faith  sees  it  close  at  hand,  and 
clasps  it  and  loves  it,  and  is  crucified  on  it  with  Him,  dying  to  itself  with  its  Lord, 
nailed  to  it,  motionless  to  its  own  desires,  dead  to  the  world,  and  living  to  Him. 
Nor  is  heaven  far  off  to  faith.  For  where  its  Lord  is,  there  is  heaven.  Faith  is 
with  Him,  present  with  Him  in  spirit,  though  absent  in  the  body ;  a  penitent  amid 
those  who,  around  the  Throne,  sing  "Holy,  Holy,  Holy."  Faith,  in  one  sense, 
goes  before  love,  because,  unless  we  believed,  we  should  have  none  to  love.  Faith 
is  Divine  knowledge.  As  in  human  love  we  cannot  love  unless  we  have  seen, 
heard,  or  in  some  way  known,  so,  without  faith,  we  cannot  know  aught  of  God,  or 
know  that  there  is  a  God  whom  to  love.  Yet  in  act,  faith  cannot  be  without  love. 
"  *  The  just,'  says  Scripture,  '  shall  live  by  his  faith,'  but  by  a  faith  which  lives. 
A  dead  faith  cannot  give  life."  Faith  without  love  is  the  devils'  faith.  For 
they  believe,  and  tremble.  Hearing  must  come  before  faith,  for  "  faith  cometh 
by  hearing."  But  faith  cannot  for  an  instant  be  separated  from  love.  Who  is  the 
object  of  faith  ?  God  the  Father,  who  created  us,  and  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  ns ; 
God  the  Son,  who  became  one  of  us,  and  by  dying,  redeemed  us ;  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  us,  and  "  pours  forth  love,"  which  He  is,  "  abroad  in  our 
hearts."  We  were  as  stocks  and  stones  without  faith ;  but  He  died,  even  "of  these 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham."  Are  we  stocks  or  stones  now,  that, 
having  faith,  we  can  believe  without  loving  ?  Which  of  His  acts  of  boundless  love 
should  we  believe  without  loving  ?  Were  it  not  enough  to  bear  us  out  of  our- 
selves for  love,  to  transport  us,  to  make  us  give  up  our  lives  for  love,  to  carry  us 
away  out  of  ourselves  and  of  all  that  we  are,  to  think  that  for  us,  earth-worms  and 
defiled,  Jesus  died  T  Does  not  the  very  name  of  Jesus  make  the  heart  beat,  and 
tremble,  and  thrill  with  love  ?  Could  a  criminal  really  believe  that  he  had  received 
a  full  pardon  from  his  injured  king,  or  that  the  king's  son  had  suffered  to  obtain 
his  pardon,  and  was  come  to  tell  it  him  and  forgive  him,  and  not  love  ?  Well 
might  he  doubt  such  love.  But  he  could  not  believe  it  and  not  love.  Faith  and 
love  would  enter  his  soul  together.  Love  is  in  all  true  faith,  as  light  and  warmth 
are  in  the  ray  of  the  sun.  Light  and  warmth  are  in  the  sun's  ray,  and  the  sun's 
ray  brings  with  it  light  and  warmth ;  not,  light  and  warmth,  the  sun's  ray :  yet, 
where  the  sun's  ray  is,  there  are  light  and  warmth,  nor  can  that  ray  be  anywhere 
without  giving  light  and  warmth.  Even  so,  faith  it  is  which  brings  love,  not  love, 
faith  ;  yet  faith  cannot  come  into  the  heart,  without  bringing  with  it  the  glow  of 
love,  yea,  and  the  light  wherewith  we  see  things  Divine.  So  soon  as  faith  is 
kindled  in  the  heart,  there  is  the  glow  of  love  ;  and  both  come  from  the  same  Sun 
of  Righteousness,  pouring  in  faith  and  love  together  into  the  heart,  and  "  there  is 
nothing  hid  from  the  heat  thereof."  In  winter,  fewer  rays  come  upon  any  spot  of 
this  land  from  the  sun  ;  whence  there  is  then  less  brightness  of  light  and  less  glow 
of  heat  than  in  summer ;  and  so  the  surface  of  the  earth  is  chilled ;  and  though 
for  a  time  the  frost  be  melted  by  that  fainter  sun,  this  warmth,  coming  upon  it 
only  for  a  short  time,  soon  passes  away.  Even  so,  there  are  degrees  of  faith  and 
love.  Yet  they  may  be  real  faith  and  love,  even  when  the  power  of  both  is  lessened, 
in  that  the  soul  does  not  keep  itself  or  live  in  the  full  presence  of  God.  Or,  as 
through  a  closed  window,  more  light  comes  than  heat,  so  in  some  hearts,  there 
may  be  more  of  knowledge  than  of  love.    And  again,  as  on  a  cold  misty  day,  when 


OOP.  v.]  GALATIANS.  827 

the  sun  is  hidden  from  our  eyes,  we  are  so  oppressed  by  the  clamminess  of  the 
chill  damp  upon  the  surface  of  our  bodies,  and  by  the  heavy  gloom  around,  that  we 
scarcely  feel  the  presence  of  the  light  and  heat ;  and  yet  the  light  and  heat  are 
there,  else  we  should  be  in  utter  darkness,  and  our  bodies  would  die  ;  even  so,  many 
hearts,  at  many  times,  when  some  mist  hides  from  them  the  presence  of  their 
Lord,  feel  nothing  but  their  own  coldness  and  numbness,  and  all  seems  dark  around 
them,  and  yet  in  their  very  inmost  selves  they  believe  and  love,  else  their  souls 
would  be  dead,  and  they  would  be  "  past  feeling,"  and  they  would  not  pine  for 
more  light  and  love.  A  dead  body  is  in  darkness,  and  seeth  not  the  light  of  this 
world,  and  has  an  awful  coldness  to  the  touch  ;  yet  itself  feels  not  its  own  coldness, 
nor  knows  its  own  darkness.  Even  so,  the  dead  soul,  being  without  the  life  of 
God,  feels  not  its  own  death,  craves  not  to  love  more.  For  He  who  is  love  hath 
left  it,  and  it  hath  no  power  wherewith  to  desire  to  love,  unless  or  until  the  voice  of 
Christ  raises  it  from  the  dead  and  awakens  it  and  it  hears  His  voice,  and  lives.  Or 
think  on  the  great  instanoes  of  faith  in  Holy  Scripture.  Think  you  not  that 
Abraham  loved,  as  well  as  believed,  when  God  first  spake  to  him,  and  called  him 
to  give  up  his  country,  and  his  kindred,  and  his  father's  house,  and  instead  of  all, 
God  said,  "  I  will  bless  thee,"  and  he  took  God  for  his  all,  and  "  went  out,  not 
knowing  whither  he  went,"  save  that  he  was  following  God  P  And  of  that 
great  penitent,  St.  Mary  Magdalene,  our  Lord  bears  witness  that  in  her  there  were 
together  love  and  faith;  and  for  both  together,  a  loving  faith,  or  a  "faith  working 
by  love,"  our  Lord  tells  her,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven."  Or  was  there  not  love  in 
the  faith  of  the  penitent  thief,  when  he  discerned  his  Saviour  by  his  side,  in  that 
marred  form,  which  *'  had  no  beauty  or  comeliness,"  "  His  visage  was  so  marred 
more  than  any  man,  and  His  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men,"  and  he  said, 
"  Lord,  remember  me  in  Thy  kingdom."  There  was  humility,  which  owned  that 
it  deserved  to  be  forgotten,  and  wondrous  faith  which  owned  in  Him,  "  the  rejected 
of  men,"  his  Lord  and  King  and  God.  But  there  was  love  too.  For  love  only 
craves  to  be  remembered.  Or  think  you  not  that,  when  God  •«  opened  the  heart 
of  Lydia,  to  attend  unto  the  things  spoken  by  Paul,"  He  poured  into  her  heart 
which  He  had  opened,  love  with  faith  f  Faith  which  loves  not,  is  not  faith  ;  it  is 
dead.  And  what  is  dead,  hath  ceased  to  be.  A  "  dead  faith  "  is  a  "  faith  without 
love. "  A  dead  body  is,  for  the  time,  until  it  wholly  decays  in  outward  form,  like 
a  living  body  or  a  body  asleep ;  a  dead  faith  has  an  outward  likeness  to  a  living 
faith.  But  as  a  dead  body  has  no  warmth  nor  power  of  motion,  nor  feeling,  nor 
can  use  any  of  the  powers  it  once  had,  nor  has  them  any  longer,  it  can  neither 
taste,  nor  see,  nor  hear ;  so  a  dead  faith  is  that  which  has  no  love,  no  power  to  do  good 
works.  It  perceives  not,  hears  not,  tastes  not,  feels  not,  the  things  of  God.  As  love  is 
the  life  of  faith,  so  with  the  increase  of  love,  faith  increaseth.  Even  from  man  towards 
man,  faith  and  love  grow  together.  The  more  we  love,  the  more  we  understand  and  the 
more  we  trust  one  another.  We  trust,  because  we  love,  and  by  loving,  know  God, 
We  can  only  know  God,  by  loving  Him.  St.  Paul  says,  "  I  know  in  whom  I  have 
believed."  Want  of  love  is  the  cause  of  all  want  of  faith.  Did  we  fully  love  God, 
who  could  for  a  moment  doubt  of  Him  ?  But  love  liveth  by  good  works.  Love 
cannot  live  torpid.  Even  in  human  love,  love  which  never  did  deeds  of  love  would 
grow  chill  and  die.  We  love  those  most,  to  whom  we  do  most  good.  Love  is 
perhaps  increased  more  by  doing  than  by  receiving  good ;  at  least,  by  doing  good 
out  of  the  love  of  God.  Aots  of  love  do  not  prove  only  that  we  have  a  living  faith ; 
they  increase  it.  But  it  has  been  thought,  "  if  faith,  on  which  God  holds  us 
righteous,  or  justifying  faith,  have  love  in  it,  are  we  not  accounted  righteous 
for  something  in  ourselves  ?  "  We  are  justified,  or  accounted  righteous  before 
God,  neither  for  faith  nor  love,  but  for  the  merits  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
alone.  And  faith  and  love  alike,  although  in  us,  are  not  of  us ;  both  are  alike  the 
gift  of  God.  But  this  gift,  whether  of  faith  or  love,  is  so  given,  that  it  is  with  aa 
to  receive  it.  We  come  to  God  by  faith  and  love.  But  "  no  man  cometh  unto 
Me,"  saith  our  Lord,  "  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  Me,  draw  him."  "  Be- 
lieve, and  thou  comest ;  love  and  thou  art  drawn."  The  drawing  of  grace  changes 
nature,  and  strengthens  nature,  reforms  nature,  subdues  nature,  but  only  if  we  be 
willing  to  be  changed,  reformed,  subdued,  strengthened.  How  then  may  we  know 
if  we  have  this  faith  ?  How  may  it  grow  and  be  strengthened  in  us  ?  How  do  we 
know  that  our  bodies  live?  "  As,"  says  a  holy  man,  "  we  discern  the  life  of  this 
body  by  its  motion,  so  also  the  life  of  faith  by  good  works.  The  life  of  the  body  is 
the  soul,  whereby  it  is  moved  and  feels  ;  the  life  of  faith  is  love ;  because  by  it,  it 
worketh,  as  thou  readest  in  the  apostle,  '  faith  which  worketh  by  love.'    Whence 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

also  when  charity  waxeth  cold,  faith  dies  ;  as  the  body,  when  the  soul  departeth. ' 
(E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  grandeur  of  faith : — I.  View,  then,  the  grandeur  of 
faith  as  the  great  collective  act,  in  which  all  the  powers  of  the  soul  are  alike 
embarked.  If  God,  in  the  beginning,  by  the  constitution  which  He  gave  to  man, 
made  him  a  creature  of  law,  if  it  can  be  shown  that  man  fell  from  his  original 
holiness  in  the  free  exercise  of  all  the  powers  by  which  he  was  characterized  a 
responsible  being,  then  it  follows  that  the  gospel,  as  a  remedy,  must,  in  all  its 
provisions,  recognize  this  fundamental  fact.  The  whole  work  of  salvation  has  been 
already  achieved  by  One  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  acting  as  our  substitute  under 
the  law,  satisfying  the  claims  of  justice,  and  rendering  obedience  to  the  precepts. 
Where,  then,  if  we  do  not  work  out  the  righteousness  by  which  we  are  saved,  comes 
into  play  our  agency  ?  What  has  man  to  do  in  this  matter  of  personal  salvation  ? 
Where  does  God  place  the  test  of  our  responsibility  and  freedom  ?  Exactly  at  this 
point :  Not  in  working  out  a  righteousness,  not  in  making  atonement  for  sin,  but 
in  accepting  the  righteousness  which  is  already  provided — by  cleaving  to  the  Saviour 
whom  the  gospel  presents  to  ub  as  our  Redeemer.  Therefore,  with  the  highest 
philosophy,  do  the  Scriptures  say,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved  ;  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  I  ask  you,  now,  to  notice  how  completely,  in  the 
simplest  exercise  of  faith,  every  faculty  of  the  human  soul  is  brought  into  action. 
There  is  the  understanding,  which  must  employ  itself  upon  the  prepositions  of 
Scripture  in  order  to  perceive  what  they  say.  There  is  the  judgment  and  reason, 
which  must  meditate  upon  what  is  contained  in  these  statements,  in  order  to  see 
whether  they  constitute  a  sound  basis  for  a  sinner's  hope.  Here  are  the  affections, 
all  brought  into  exercise  when  we  behold  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  feel  that  He  is,  to  us,  "  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and  the  one 
altogether  lovely."  Here  is  the  will,  putting  forth  its  determinate  act  of  choice 
when  it  accepts  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  accepts  His  work ;  and,  in  this  very  act 
of  acceptance,  distinctly  and  consciously  repudiates  every  other  ground  of  trust — 
exclaiming,  with  the  apostle,  "  I  desire  to  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  mine  own 
righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ, 
the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  Nay,  eyen  the  subordinate  faculties 
of  the  human  soul,  such  as  the  imagination,  and  the  fancy,  and  the  taste,  all  are 
brought  into  exercise  in  order  that  the  great  facts  of  the  gospel  may  be  presented 
before  the  mind  as  realities  which  it  can  touch  and  apprehend.  Even  the  faith 
wliich  is  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  over  which  you  and  I  weep  in  the  closet 
because  it  is  so  feeble,  when  you  come  to  analyze  it  in  its  constituent  parts,  is  found 
to  have  drawn  upon  the  whole  contents  of  your  spiritual  being.  It  has  occupied 
th*  understanding,  it  has  employed  the  conscience,  it  has  drawn  out  the  affections, 
it  has  exercised  the  will ;  so  that  not  one  single  power  in  man  has  remained 
dormant  in  that  faith  by  which  we  cling  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  hear  the 
eulogy  pronounced  every  day  upon  the  achievements  of  intellect.  Men  spread  out 
their  philosophies  before  us,  and  we  follow  the  painful  steps  with  which  they  have 
proceeded  from  the  first  premise  to  the  most  distant  conclusion.  We  walk  with 
the  scientists,  who  seem  to  have  wrested  from  the  hand  of  the  Creator  the  keyB  of 
His  own  universe,  and  with  bold  adventure  have  roamed  through  its  wide  domains, 
opening  its  secret  cabinets  and  unlocking  their  treasures  to  our  gaze.  And  as  these 
high  achievements  of  science  and  of  philosophy  are  held  up  before  us,  we  are 
filled  with  astonishment  and  pride.  God  forbid  that  I  should  lack  in  sympathy 
with  these  grand  movements  of  the  human  mind  I  But  they  are  the  exercise  of 
only  one  power  of  our  nature,  even  at  the  best.  They  reveal  man  in  the  towering 
reach  of  his  intellect,  which  is  bound  to  expand  throughout  the  eternal  ages, 
growing  larger  in  its  grasp  and  holding  within  its  embrace  the  great  truths  of 
eternity  and  of  God.  By  so  much  as  I  hope  hereafter  to  see  in  heaven  the  bound- 
less glory  of  Jehovah,  and  to  spread  out  all  my  intellect  in  the  contemplation  of 
what  is  sublime  and  beautiful  in  God,  am  I  forbidden  this  day  to  utter  one  word  of 
disparagement  upon  the  proofs  of  man's  gigantic  understanding.  But  I  turn  to 
faith,  which  equally  exercises  this  intellect,  which  draws  out  all  the  affections  of 
the  soul  and  the  immense  power  of  the  will ;  which  presents  man  before  me  in  the 
full  complement  of  his  powers ;  which  reveals  me  to  myself  in  the  superb  integrity 
of  my  nature — and  I  feel  that  if,  through  grace.  I  have  been  able  to  exercise  this 
faith  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  have  put  forth  ao  act  which  has  brought  out 
the  totality  of  my  being,  which  has  expressed  all  the  constituents  of  my  nature, 
and  which,  therefore,  in  its  essential  glory,  immeasurably  transcends  all  other  acts 
within  the  compass  of  the  human  soul.    Under  this  aspect  of  it,  then,  I  ask  you  to 


CHIP.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  328 

look  at  faith — as  the  great  collective  act  of  the  soul,  in  which  a  man  embarks  all 
the  constituent  faculties  of  his  being.  II.  Faith  is  the  full  and  final  conveyance 
of  tub  boot,  to  thb  Lord  Jesus  as  His  possession  for  ever.  So  that  the  first  act 
of  faith,  by  which  we  cleave  to  Jesus  Christ,  contains  potentially  within  itself  every 
subsequent  act.  Just  as  the  seed  implicitly  contains  the  whole  plant  which  is 
evolved  from  it,  so  all  other  acts  of  faith,  until  the  hour  when  faith  shall  lose  itself 
in  sight,  are  contained  within  this  first  conveyance  of  the  soul  over  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  For,  my  hearer — God  help  you  to  understand  it ! — ten  myriads  of 
times,  in  sins  of  desire  and  of  thought  and  of  deed,  you  have,  with  your  own 
signature,  endorsed  the  original  apostasy  in  the  garden  of  Eden  and  underwritten 
it  for  yourself.  All  your  days,  by  personal  transgression,  you  have  assumed  that 
guilt  as  your  own.  But  now  comes  the  hour  when  the  connection  with  the  first 
Adam  is  to  be  broken,  when,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  we  openly  and  publicly  recan  t  ail 
our  sin,  and  say  to  the  second  Adam,  who  stands  upon  the  ruins  of  the  first 
covenant  and  fulfils  all  of  its  forfeited  conditions,  "  As  for  me  and  my  house,  we 
will  serve  the  Lord."  My  hearer  1  is  there  no  power  in  such  an  act  ?  and  must  there 
not  be  a  Divine  virtue  in  the  principle  which  enables  you  to  perform  it — when  you 
can  thus  cut  the  connection  with  all  preceding  sin,  and  with  him  who  by  his  fall 
precipitated  you  beneath  the  curse,  disavowing  all  the  transactions  of  the  past,  and 
giving  yourselves  over  in  an  everlasting  covenant  to  Him  who  is  your  Redeemer  ? 
III.  View  faith  as  the  germinal  grace,  out  of  which  the  whole  experience  of  the 
Christian  is  developed — the  root  of  all  repentance,  obedience,  love,  and  worship. 
Thus  I  meet  the  shallow  criticism  which  men  sometimes  make  against  the  gospel, 
when  they  say,  "  We  turn  to  one  Scripture  which  declares,  '  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  ; '  and  we  turn  to  another  Scripture  which 
proclaims,  'Repent  and  be  converted  for  the  remission  of  sins."'  They  ask  of  what 
value  is  that  system  which,  in  the  very  terms  of  salvation,  is  found  so  contra- 
dictory? Faith  and  repentance  are  but  the  two  poles  of  one  and  the  same  truth. 
As  there  can  be  no  faith  which  does  not  involve  repentance  as  its  immediate  con- 
sequence, so  there  can  be  no  repentance  which  has  not  been  preceded  by  the  faith 
of  which  it  was  born :  and  the  difference  between  the  two  is  simply  in  the  order  of 
thought  in  which  you  choose  to  contemplate  them.  When  you  shall  presently  go 
out  of  this  building,  every  step  down  those  aisles  toward  the  door  carries  you  just 
bo  much  away  from  your  pew  :  but  as  egress  from  the  building  is  before  the  mind 
as  the  object  to  be  attained,  the  motion  toward  the  door,  in  the  order  of  thought, 
precedes  the  motion  from  the  pew ;  yet  every  inch  that  lessens  the  distance  from 
the  one  inoreases  just  so  much  the  distance  from  the  other.  The  two  are 
neoessarily  reciprocal.  Then  the  faith  which  accepts  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
accepts  Him  in  all  of  His  offices.  Thus,  faith  is  seen  to  be  the  germ, 
first  of  our  repentance,  then  of  our  obedience,  and  then  of  that  supreme  love 
which  we  have  to  God  when  we  love  Him  with  all  the  heart  and  with  all  the  soul 
and  with  all  the  strength  and  with  all  the  mind.  And  if  faith  be,  as  I  have  sought 
to  represent,  the  full  conveyance  of  the  soul  to  Christ  as  His  possession,  then  is  it 
in  itself  a  complete  and  sublime  devotion  ;  and  becomes  the  germ  of  that  positive 
worship  which  we  render  to  God  upon  His  throne  here  upon  earth  and  hereafter  in 
heaven.  IV.  See  the  grandeur  of  faith  as  it  is  the  human  correlative,  and  the 
human  measure,  of  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  Here,  again,  as  I  put  into 
these  cold  words  a  thought  that  burns  like  fire,  I  tremble  at  the  presumption.  The 
obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  measure  of  God's  holiness.  And  you  find  that 
there  is  a  human  measure  and  a  human  correspondent  to  this  atonement  of  the 
Redeemer  itself.  For  when  our  faith  embraces  it — when  our  faith  looks  upon  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  upon  ths  obedience  of  Christ,  and  upon  the  sufferings  and  upon 
the  oross  of  Christ — when,  with  all  the  power  that  belongs  to  thought,  with  all  the 
pathos  that  belongs  to  feeling,  with  all  the  energy  that  belongs  to  will,  man  brings 
out  his  whole  nature  and  grasps  that  atonement,  and  draws  it  up  to  him,  and  lays 
it  over  against  his  own  guilty  conscience,  and  rests  in  life  and  in  eternity  upon  its 
blessed  provisions — you  have  the  best  expression  that  earth  can  give  of  its  estimate 
of  the  glory  that  lies  in  obedience  to  the  law.  I  cannot  afford  to  disparage  that  faith 
which  thus,  in  its  excursions,  travels  over  the  atonement  of  the  adorable  Redeemer ; 
which  is  itself  the  measure  of  the  infinite  justice  of  God,  and  takes  the  dimensions 
of  the  boundless  glory  of  Jehovah.  V.  In  the  last  place,  I  signalize  the  grandeur 
of  faith,  in  that  it  is  the  perfection  of  reason.  Philosophers  are  wont  to  glory  in 
the  prowess  of  human  reason.  Let  me  illustrate  this,  most  simply,  from  the  science 
of  mathematics.    If  I  say  that  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right. 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V* 

angles,  I  by  no  means  state  a  truth  that  is  intuitive,  but  one  that  is  demonstrable. 
But,  then,  how  do  I  demonstrate  it  ?  By  proving  that  the  things  which  are  equal 
to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one  another.  Through  the  demonstration  I  carry 
the  mind  back,  step  by  step,  until  it  is  landed  in  one  of  those  original  and  necessary 
cognitions.  And  yet  the  mathematician  will  smile,  with  the  most  self-complacent 
disdain,  upon  the  very  principle  which  gives  him  the  postulate  upon  which  his 
reasoning  depends.  Now,  consistency  is  a  jewel;  and  when  you  undertake  to 
flout  faith,  you  must  go  clean  through  and  strike  at  all  these  beliefs.  When  a  man 
tramples  upon  this  principle  of  faith,  which  demands  the  acceptance  of  the  Saviour, 
I  debar  him  from  the  possibility  of  reasoning  on  any  subject  under  the  sun.  If 
the  human  reason  starts  from  what  it  is  obliged  to  accept;  if,  in  all  the  after 
process,  it  is  obliged  to  remand  its  conclusions  to  that  elementary  trust  from  which 
it  in  the  first  instance  departed,  in  order  to  verify  them — if  you  are  obliged,  for 
example,  to  believe  in  the  principle  of  causality ;  if  you  are  obliged  to  believe  in  the 
fact  of  your  personal  indentity  ;  if  you  are  obliged,  by  the  necessity  of  your  mental 
constitution,  to  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  external  world,  and  to  rely  upon  the 
evidence  and  the  testimony  of  sense  which  underlies  all  the  demonstrations  of  our 
proud  physical  science  ;  if  you  are  compelled,  by  the  same  necessity,  to  rely  upon 
memory,  which  hangs  together  all  the  links  of  every  chain  of  reasoning  through 
which  you  are  carried — I  say,  just  in  proportion  as  you  reason  with  power  to  con- 
clusions that  are  satisfactory,  the  verification  of  those  conclusions  is  found  in  the 
elementary  beliefs  which  you  accept  simply  and  alone  with  the  trust  of  faith  ;  and 
I  interdict  you,  by  this  known  fact,  from  undertaking  to  despise  or  contemn  it. 
The  man  of  intellect,  who  is  proud  of  his  power  of  thought,  is  the  very  last  under 
the  broad  heavens  to  despise  the  principle  of  faith,  which  gives  him  his  postulates, 
and  the  tests  by  which  his  conclusions  are  verified.  One  other  suggestion,  and 
then  I  am  done  with  this  point ;  which  is,  that  if  we  start  from  faith,  and  if  all  the 
time  we  are  going  back  to  faith  to  verify  every  course  of  reasoning,  it  would  seem  that 
when  we  have  accomplished  the  grand  circuit,  and  know  all  things  that  are  know- 
able,  and  have  proved  all  things  that  are  demonstrable — it  seems  to  me  in  perfect 
analogy  with  man's  mental  constitution  and  with  God's  high  prerogatives,  that  He 
should  open  to  us  the  infinite  beyond  the  finite  ;  that  we  should  rise  at  last  beyond 
nature  up  to  God ;  that  we  should  ascend,  at  last,  above  these  mortal  shores  to 
the  immortal ;  that  we  should  have  power,  by  this  principle  of  faith,  to  take 
possession  of  another  world,  grander,  larger,  more  glorious  than  all  these  myriads 
of  worlds  which  dot  the  immensity  of  space ;  and  that,  by  and  by,  when  we  shall 
have  illustrated  all  the  triumphs  of  science,  we  shall  be  able  to  put  the  climax 
upon  all  this  by  the  higher  triumphs  of  a  grander  faith.  God  is  infinite,  lying  beyond 
the  sphere  of  human  thought.  Can  He  ever  be  known  except  through  revelation  ? 
Could  we  ever  understand  Him,  except  by  the  power  of  faith  ?  (B.  M.  Palmer,  D.D.) 
Faith  working  by  love : — I.  Faith  always  produces  love.  1.  By  a  necessity  of  faith's 
own  nature.  2.  By  the  discoveries  of  beauty  in  Christ  which  faith  is  sure  to  make. 
3.  By  its  appropriation  of  the  love  of  Christ.  4.  By  its  enjoyment  of  mercy,  leading 
the  heart  to  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  source  of  mercy.  5.  By  the  fami- 
liarity with  God  and  the  congeniality  of  disposition  which  it  breeds  in  the  heart. 
II.  Love  is  entirely  dependent  on  faith.  1.  No  man  loves  a  Saviour  in  whom  he 
reposes  no  confidence.  2.  Love  cannot  flourish  except  as  faith  flourishes.  3.  Love 
cannot  work  without  faith.  III.  Faith  displays  its  power  by  love.  Compare  faith 
to  an  artificer  in  metals .  1.  Love  is  faith's  arm.  2.  Faith's  tools.  3.  Faith's  fur- 
nace. 4.  Faith's  mould.  5.  Faith's  metal,  for  into  the  mould  of  love  faith  pours 
love  itself.  6.  Faith's  burnisher.  IV.  Love  reacts  on  faith  and  perfects  it.  1. 
Love  leads  the  soul  into  admiration  and  so  increases  faith.  2.  Love  forbids  unbe- 
lief. 3.  Perfect  love  casts  out  fear.  In  conclusion  (1)  Faith  works :  let  us  as  a 
Church  work  because  we  have  faith.  (2)  A  working  Church  must  be  a  loving 
Church,  for  faith  works  by  love.  (3)  But  if  you  are  to  be  a  working  and  a  loving 
Church  you  must  be  a  believing  Church,  for  that  is  the  bottom  of  all.  (C.  H.  Spur- 
geon.)  Tliat  salvation  is  conditional  does  not  affect  its  gratuitousnesi : — A  noble- 
man might  declare  his  intention  of  giving  a  purse  of  money  to  all  who  would  walk 
to  his  castle,  knock  at  his  door,  and  ask  for  the  treasure.  The  walking,  the  knock- 
ing,the  asking,  would  be  the  conditions  of  bestowment ;  but  certainly  the  conditions, 
when  fulfilled,  would  leave  untouched  the  gratuitousness ;  and  no  one  who  walked, 
knocked,  and  asked,  and  obtained  the  purse  would  regard  it  as  wages  due  for  what 
had  been  done.  The  case  is  precisely  the  same  when  the  proposed  benefit  is  salva- 
tion, ami  the  prescribed  conditions  repentance,  faith,  and  works.    (H.  Melvill,  B.D.I 


.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  831 

Uncircumcision  availeth  nothing : — There  may  be  as  much  formalism  in  protesting 
against  forms  as  in  using  them.    Extremes  meet ;  and  an  nnspiritual  Quaker  is  at 
bottom  of  the  same  way  of  thinking  as  an  unspiritual  Soman  Catholic.     They 
agree  in  their  belief  that  certain  outward  acts  are  essential  to  worship,  and  even  to 
religion.    They  only  differ  as  to  what  those  acts  are.    The  Judaizer  who  says, 
•«  you  must  be  circumcised,"  and  his  antagonist  who  says,  "  you  must  be  uncircum- 
cised,"  are  really  in  the  same  boat.     Neither  rejection  of  forms  nor  formalism, 
neither  negations  nor  affirmations,  make  a  Christian.    One  thing  alone  does  that, 
faith  whioh  worketh  by  love,  against  which  sense  everwars,  both  by  tempting  some 
of  us  to  place  religion  in  outward  acts  and  ceremonies,  and  by  tempting  others  of 
us  to  place  it  in  rejecting  the  forms  which  our  brethren  abuse.      (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)         The  relation/  between  faith  and  love: — The  two  graces  are  inseparable. 
Like  Mary  and  Martha  they  are  sisters,  and  abide  in  one  house.     Faith,  like  Mary, 
sits  at  Jesus'  feet  and  hears  His  words,  and  then  love,  like  Martha,  diligently  goes 
about  the  house  and  rejoices  to  honour  the  Divine  Lord.    Faith  is  light,  while  love 
is  heat,  and  in  every  beam  of  grace  from  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  you  will  find  a 
measure  of  each.    True  faith  in  God  cannot  exist  without  love  to  Him,  nor  sincere 
love  without  faith.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Faith  and  love  are  the  brain  and  heart 
of  the  soul,  so  knit  together  in  a  mutual  harmony  and  correspondence,  that  with- 
out their  perfect  union  the  whole  Christian  man  cannot  move  with  power,  nor  feel 
with  tenderness,  nor  breathe  with  true  life.    (T.  Adams.)       Faith  and  love : — Judith 
goes  in  alone,  and  by  her  own  hand  delivers  Israel ;  the  waiting  woman  hath  not  a 
stroke  in  it  (Judith  xiii.).  Faith  is  this  great  lady,  and  charity  her  handmaid ;  through 
all  the  actions  of  goodness  she  attends  on  her  mistress ;  when  faith  sets  down  the 
objects  of  her  beneficence,  love  is  her  secretary;  when  she  disposeth  her  good  deeds, 
love  is  her  almoner ;  when  she  treats  a  league  of  peace,  love  is  her  ambassador ; 
what  work  soever  she  undertaketh,  charity  is  her  instrument.    But  when  it  eomea 
to  a  point  of  justification  to  enter  the  presence  chamber  of  the  Great  King,  to  pro- 
cure remission  and  peace,  charity  leaves  her  to  herself.     Thus  is  it  now.    But 
hereafter  these  two  shall  change  places ;  charity  shall  be  the  lady,  and  faith  the 
waiting-woman.    When  the  soul  is  to  be  discharged  out  of  prison  and  moves  to  the 
high  court  of  heaven,  faith  waits  upon  her  all  the  way ;  but  at  the  presence-cham- 
ber of  glory,  faith  stays  without  and  love  only  enters.    Yet  though  faith  at  last 
perish  in  the  act,  it  shall  never  perish  in  the  effect ;  for  we  shall  enjoy  what  we 
have  believed.     (Ibid.)        The  relation  of  faith  and  love  to  spiritual  life  : — We  may 
compare  the  infusion  of  spiritual  life  by  God  to  His  importation  of  vegetable  life  to 
a  tree ;  faith  and  love,  considered  as  organs  of  the  inner  life,  we  may  compare  to 
the  roots  of  the  tree  which  cleave  to  the  soil  for  nourishment  and  support,  and  to 
the  sap  which  is  propelled  through  the  trunk  to  every  branch  and  fibre ;  and  finally, 
we  may  compare  good  works,  which  are  the  products  and  manifestations  of  the 
vital  energies,  to  the  leaves  and  blossoms  with  which  the  tree  is  adorned,  and  to 
its  fruits,  which  are  pleasant  to  the  eye  and  grateful  to  the  palate.    No  one  of  these 
is  to  be  overlooked,  nor  are  they  to  be  confounded  with  each  other.    (T.  MacNeece, 
D.D.)        Faith,  a  power: — Whenever  the  things  believed  are  fitted  to  awaken  any 
emotion  or  other  active  principle  of  our  nature,  belief  becomes  a  power.    Such  it  is 
in  all  matters  respecting  man's  life,  his  interests,  and  his  passions.    Let  a  geologist 
tell  a  man  that  there  is  coal  on  his  property;  if  he  believe  him,  be  assured  his  faith 
will  not  be  long  inoperative.    (Ibid.)        Love  impossible  without  faith: — You  can- 
not love  by  mere  trying.    Trial  is  the  first  stage  in  Christian  development,  but  do 
not  call  yourself  an  expert  Christian  until  the  distinguishing  Christian  graces  come 
to  you  in  ways  that  are  spontaneous,  automatic,  overflowing,  consentaneous,  sym- 
metrical, and  brood  as  the  stream  of  life — until  every  thought  and  feeling  has  been 
subdued  to  the  supreme  will  of  God,  which  is  love.    When  yon  have  reached  that 
condition,  then  you  may  call  yourself  an  expert  Christian.     (JET.   W.  Bcecher.) 
Faith  working  by  and  not  by  love : — Faith  is  one  of  the  mightiest  powers  that  the 
world  contains.     It  is  like  the  central  fire  of  the  earth,  it  is  like  the  fountain  of  the 
great  deep.    But  whether  it  be  a  power  for  good  or  evil  depends  entirely  on  the 
objects  to  which  it  is  directed,  or  the  way  in  which  it  "  works."    It  may  be  a  vol- 
cano scattering  ruin  and  desolation  around  it,  or  it  may  be  the  genial  heat  and 
warmth  which  fuses  together  the  granite  foundations  of  the  globe,  and  sustains 
the  life  of  every  human  being  on  its  surface.     It  may  be  a  torrent  tearing  and 
rending  everything  before  it;   it  may  be  diverted  into  a  hundred  insignificant 
streams ;  or  it  may  be  a  calm  and  mighty  river,  fertilizing  and  civilizing  the  world. 
There  is  a  faith  which  justifies  and  a  faith  which  condemns.    Faith  which  worketh 


331  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

by  love  justifies,  sanctifies,  elevates,  strengthens,  purifies  Faith  which  worketh 
not  by  love,  condemns,  hardens,  weakens,  destroys.  The  ordinary  means  and  ways 
by  which  the  faith  of  a  Brahmin,  e.g.,  works  are  not  love,  and  truth,  and  justice; 
but  meats,  and  drinks,  and  washings.  To  eat  the  flesh  of  a  cow  is  the  most  enor- 
mous wickedness  of  which  a  Hindoo  can  be  guilty,  and  one  for  which  there  is  no 
forgiveness  in  this  world  or  the  world  to  come.  To  bathe  in  the  waters  of  the 
sacred  river,  is  a  passport  to  heaven  which  will  avail  though  every  moral  virtue 
be  cast  aside.  On  the  avoidance  of  this  sin  and  the  preservation  of  this  virtue  the 
Hindoo  expends  an  energy,  a  courage,  a  faith,  which  would  be  sufficient  to  convert 
a  kingdom,  and  tbe  consequence  is  that  the  wilder  passions  of  his  nature  are  left 
either  altogether  unrestrained,  or  are  actually  stimulated  and  aggravated  by  the 
faculty  which  was  meant  to  purify  and  elevate  them.  It  is  like  any  other  power  of 
the  human  mind,  which,  if  fed  on  useless  or  poisonous  substances,  becomes  unable 
to  attend  to  what  is  useful  and  wholesome.  There  may  be  a  gigantic  memory, 
which  lays  up  the  most  trifling  details,  and  forgets  the  most  important  events. 
There  may  be  a  gigantic  intellect,  which  wastes  itself  away  in  subtlety,  or  degrades 
itself  in  fraud  and  treachery.  There  may  be  also  a  gigantic  faith,  which  squanders 
its  powers  on  things  without  profit,  which  works  by  blindness  of  heart,  vainglory, 
and  hypocrisy,  by  envy,  malice,  hatred,  and  all  uncharitableness.  But  Christian 
faith  worketh  always  and  everywhere  by  love.  In  this  one  broad  channel,  faith 
may  work  as  it  will ;  it  will  find  enough  to  fill,  enough  to  fertilize,  many  rough 
corners  to  be  rounded  off,  many  intervening  obstacles  to  be  washed  away,  many 
winding  tracks  to  be  followed.  Do  not  divert  the  faith  of  Christ  our 
Saviour,  that  world-controlling,  world-conquering  faith,  from  its  proper  functions ; 
we  cannot  afford  to  lose  its  aid,  we  want  the  whole  volume  of  its  waters,  the  un- 
divided strength  of  its  stream,  to  moisten  the  dry  soil  of  our  hardened  hearts,  to 
feed  and  cleanse  our  dark  habitations,  to  turn  the  vast  wheels  of  our  complex  social 
system,  to  deepen  our  shallow  thoughts,  to  widen  our  narrow  sympathies,  to 
sweeten  our  bitter  controversies,  to  freshen  our  stagnant  indolence.  "Faith  work- 
ing by  love,"  can  do  this,  and  nothing  else  can ;  and  we  can  neither  with  safety 
Bpare  its  motive  power,  nor  yet  without  danger  open  another  path  for  its  energies. 
(Dean  Stanley.)  Faith  working  by  love  tlie  only  genuine  faith: — That  only  is 
faith  that  makes  us  to  love  God,  to  do  His  will,  to  suffer  His  impositions,  to  trust 
His  promises,  to  see  through  a  cloud,  to  overcome  the  world,  to  resist  the  devil,  to 
stand  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  to  be  comforted  in  all  our  sorrows.  (Jeremy  Taylor.) 
Faith  working  by  love : — Faith  is  able  to  justify  of  itself,  not  to  work  of  itself.  The 
band  alone  can  receive  an  alms,  but  cannot  cut  a  piece  of  wood  without  an  axe  or 
lome  instrument.  Faith  is  the  Christian's  hand,  and  can  without  help  receive  God's 
given  grace  into  the  heart ;  but  to  produce  the  fruits  of  obedience,  and  to  work  the 
actual  duties  required,  it  must  have  an  instrument :  add  love  to  it,  and  it  worketh 
by  love.  So  that  the  one  is  our  justification  before  God,  and  the  other  our  testifi- 
cation before  man.  (T.Adams.)  Faith  when  once  it  lives  in  the  soul  is  all  Christian 
practice  in  the  germ.  (Canon  Liddon.)  How  to  estimate  the  strength  of  faith: — 
Faith  works  by  love,  and  therefore  its  strength  or  weakness  may  be  discovered  by 
the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  love  it  puts  forth  in  the  Christian's  actings.  The 
strength  of  a  man's  arm  that  draws  a  bow  is  seen  by  the  force  the  arrow  which  he 
shoots  flies  with.  And,  certainly,  the  strength  of  our  faith  may  be  known  by  the 
force  that  our  love  mounts  to  God  with.  It  is  impossible  that  weak  faith,  which  is 
unable  to  draw  the  promise  as  a  strong  faith  can,  should  leave  such  a  forcible  im- 
pression on  the  heart  to  love  God  as  the  stronger  faith  does.  If,  therefore,  thy 
heart  be  strongly  carried  out  from  love  to  God,  to  abandon  sin,  perform  duty,  and 
exert  acts  of  obedience  to  His  command,  know  thy  place,  and  take  it  with  humble 
thankfulness ;  thou  art  a  graduate  in  the  art  of  believing.  (W.  Gurnall.)  Faith 
and  love  intimately  connected : — Faith  without  love  is,  as  it  were,  a  dream,  an  image 
of  faith;  just  as  the  appearance  of  a  face  in  a  qlass  is  not  a  real  face.  (Luther.) 
Flatter  not  thyself  in  thy  faith  to  God,  if  thou  wantest  charity  for  thy  neighbour  ; 
and  think  not  thou  hast  charity  for  thy  neighbour,  if  thou  wantest  faith  to  God : 
where  they  are  not  both  together,  they  are  both  wanting ;  they  are  both  dead  if  once 
divided.  (F.  Quarles.)  Faith  is  the  source ;  charity,  that  is,  the  whole  Christian 
life,  is  the  stream  from  it.  It  is  quite  childish  to  talk  of  faith  being  imperfect 
without  charity ;  as  wisely  might  you  say  that  a  fire,  however  bright  and  strong, 
was  imperfect  with  heat;  or  that  the  sun,  however  cloudless,  is  imperfect  without 
beams.  The  true  answer  would  be,  it  is  not  faith,  but  utter  reprobate  faithlessness. 
(S.  T.  Coleridge.)        Faith  is  that  nail  which  fastens  the  soul  to  Christ ;  and  lov« 


OTAP.  T.]  QALATIANS.  833 

is  the  grace  which  drives  the  nail  to  the  head.  Faith  takes  hold  of  Him,  and  love 
helps  to  keep  the  grip.  Christ  dwells  in  the  heart  by  faith,  and  He  burns  in  the 
heart  by  love,  like  a  fire  melting  the  breast.  Faith  casts  the  knot,  and  love  draws 
it  fast.  (Erskine.)  Faith's  evidences : — Consider  the  character  and  the  position 
of  a  man  of  simple  faith.  That  man  walks  this  earth,  and  with  every  step  he  feels 
and  realizes  that  he  is  in  another  world  of  unseen  things,  greater  and  far  more  real 
to  him  than  what  he  can  see  about  him.  Now  let  us  see  what  some  of  the  conse- 
quences of  that  faith  are — its  results,  and  its  evidenced  It  is  quite  evident  that 
such  a  man  is,  and  must  be,  at  peace,  for  he  possesses  every  element  of  peace.  The 
past  pardoned ;  the  present  furnished  and  supplied ;  the  future  secure.  Now  that 
rest  makes  composure,  and  composure  is  strength.  Faith,  and  faith  only  makes 
strength.  Faith  is  strength.  Or  look  at  him  again  in  another  of  the  consequences 
of  faith.  •*  And  now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  these  three ;  but  the  greatest 
of  these  is  charity."  Then  you  say,  charity — that  is,  love — is  greater  than  faith  ? 
Yes,  greater  as  a  tree  is  greater  than  its  root,  or  as  a  river  is  greater  than  its  spring ; 
but  the  faith  makes  the  charity.  It  is  an  indispensable  ingredient  and  representa- 
tion of  all  charity.  I  must  believe  before  I  can  love ;  I  must  believe  in  God  before 
I  can  love  God.  Now  we  are  all  kind  in  proportion  as  we  are  happy.  Who  has 
not  found  it  bo?  Why  do  we  feel  kind  on  a  birthday,  or  at  a  marriage,  or  when  we 
receive  some  very  good  news  ?  Why  are  we  kind  at  Christmas  ?  Because  we  sre 
happy.  For  to  be  happy,  we  must  have  no  bitter  past ;  we  must  have  no  dreaded 
future ;  but  there  must  be  in  the  future  hope  which  casts  back  its  happiness  upon 
the  passing  hour.  To  make  happiness  there  must  be  a  happy  to-day,  and  a  happier 
to-morrow ;  without  a  happier  to-morrow,  no  day  will  be  perfectly  happy.  Thig 
again,  is  just  what  faith  gives.  What  is  bad  in  the  past  is  cancelled.  The  future 
is  bright ;  and  the  bright  future  brightens  the  passing  hour.  Faith  makes  hope, 
hope  makes  happiness,  and  happiness  makes  love.  The  next  thing  is  union  with 
Christ.  It  is  a  new  creation,  and  faith,  faith  has  done  it.  "  Faith  has  worked  by 
love,"  and  made  the  union.  That  union  is  heaven ;  it  is  heaven  begun  upon  earth. 
Let  as  follow  that  man  now  that  he  is  united.  See  him  at  his  prayers.  O,  so  d  vf - 
ferent  to  what  he  used  to  call  "  saying  his  prayers."  It  is  a  child  speaking  to  a 
Father ;  and  he  goes  boldly.  "  Faith  worketh  by  love."  Observe  the  relationship. 
Faith  is  mistress,  love  is  the  handmaid.  "  Faith  worketh  by  love."  Love  subor- 
dinate to  faith.  If  love  is  not  subordinate  to  faith,  love  becomes  misplaced.  Lo  ve 
subordinate  to  faith.  Faith  has  to  do  with  the  unseen,  and  makes  it  seen,  and 
then  the  love  clasps  the  seen  and  makes  it  his  own.  We  begin  by  believing  the 
great  Cnseen ;  we  go  on  to  believe  that  is  love ;  we  apply  that  love  to  ourselves,  and 
so  that  is  faith.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Faith  working  by  love: — Now  observe, 
this  "  love  "  has  nothing  to  do  with  saving  you.  You  were  saved  before  the  "  lovn  " 
began.  It  owes  its  existence  to  the  fact  of  your  being  saved.  It  is  no  cause,  it  is 
an  effect — an  invariable  effect — an  effect  which  loves  the  presence  of  the  cautie. 
"  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  And  now  you  come  to  the  second 
stage.  You  "love:"  deeply,  gratefully,  irrepressibly,  you  "love,"  What  comes 
next  ?  "  Love  "  is  a  feeling  which  always  looks  about  to  find,  or  make  for  itself 
language.  If  it  do  not  this,  it  may  be  a  passion,  but  it  is  not  "love."  The  lan- 
guage of  love  is  action.  We  all  wish  to  please  where  we  feel  affection.  Therefore, 
by  a  necessary  law,  the  forgiven  soul — happy  and  attached — looks  out  lovingly — 
to  see  how  it  can  testify  its  gratitude  to  the  God  of  its  salvation.  In  God's  great 
scheme,  every  Christian  is  working  under  constraint  of  the  most  powerful  impulse 
that  ever  animates  the  breast  of  man.  It  is  a  spring  strong  enough  for  the 
machine,  the  great  machine  which  it  has  to  move ;  but  all  the  while  he  works 
happily  because  he  works  under  the  smile  of  God,  who  has  forgiven  him,  and  who 
loves  him  with  an  everlasting  love  :  sure,  because  it  is  free,  and  certain  to  continue 
on  to  the  end,  because  it  was  all  Christ  at  the  beginning.  In  this  little  ladder  of 
three  steps  which  goes  up  from  sin  to  peace,  and  from  peace  to  glory — the  only 
point  that  unites  the  two  worlds :  faith  resting  on  Christ,  love  springing  out  of  faith, 
and  good  works  crowning  love — I  do  desire  to  trace  with  you,  for  a  minute, 
how  they  act  and  re-act  one  upon  the  other,  interweaving  themselves  endlessly. 
into  greater  and  greater  unity  and  strength.  "  Faith  "  is  the  only  basis  of  "  love." 
You  cannot  really  "  love  "  God  until  you  believe  that  He  has  forgiven  you.  You 
cannot  "  love  "  an  angry  God  .  you  cannot  "  love  "  an  object  of  fear — such  as  God 
must  be  to  every  man  who  does  not  feel  that  he  is  pardoned.  Well,  now,  see  the 
return.  Every  good  work  re-acts  to  feed  the  "love"  from  which  it  sprang.  Do 
not  you  know  how,  by  doing  something  for  any  person,  you  may  make  yourself,  at 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

last,  begin  to  "  love  "  that  person  ?  Do  not  you  know  still  more  how,  by  every  *et 
of  self-denying  affection  to  those  you  love,  you  increase  the  feeling,  and  deepen  the 
tendency  of  the  attachment  ?  So  that  the  rule  is  good  in  the  heavenly  code,  every 
good  action,  done  for  Christ's  sake,  increases  spiritual  affection,  and  enhances  the 
desire  to  love — just  as  the  dropping  of  the  fruit  strengthens  the  roots  for  the  next 
autumn's  harvest.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  have  a  religion  which  I  am  now  en- 
deavouring to  show  in  its  whole  nature  is  a  "  faith  which  worketh  by  love." 
(Ibid.)  Faith  worketh: — I  have  read  that  a  bishop  of  the  Episcopal  Church 
said,  ••  When  I  was  about  entering  the  ministry,  I  was  one  day  in  conversation  with 
an  old  Christian  friend,  who  said,  *  You  are  to  be  ordained :  when  you  are  ordained, 
preach  to  sinners  as  you  find  them ;  tell  them  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  they  shall  be  as  safe  as  if  they  were  in  heaven ;  and  then  tell  them  to  work  like 
horses. '  "  Christian  enthusiasm  : — I.  Define  enthusiasm.  1.  Origin  of  the  word, 
and  its  uses  at  that  time.  2.  Etymology  :  marking  changes  in  meaning.  3.  Em- 
phasize present  use — Christian  enthusiasm.  II.  Enthusiasm  subjectively  considered. 
God  in.  Love  dwelling  in  the  Christian's  heart.  1.  Crystalized  energy;  energy 
taking  form ;  efficiency.  2.  Concentrated  earnestness ;  sincerity  and  singleness  of 
purpose.  3.  Unwavering  perseverance;  continuity.  4.  Indomitable  courage; 
bravery.  III.  Objectively  considered.  Love  at  work.  Love  gives  faith  its  life,  and 
causes  it  to  glow  with  fervency,  but  it  does  more:  it  gives  action.  Faith  worketh 
by  love.  This  action  depends  upon  two  conditions,  viz. :  1.  A  correct  ideal.  Love 
reveals  Christ  as  the  One  altogether  lovely,  (a)  In  His  character,  (b)  In  His  work. 
2.  A  worthy  cause.  Love  seeks  the  best  time,  place,  subject.  What  can  be  more 
worthy  to  engage  the  Christian's  powers  than  the  gospel  ?  When  once  at  work, 
what  will  not  a  Christian  endure?  (Heb.  xi.)  (Missionaries.)  Faith  may  subdue 
kingdoms,  may  overcome  worlds,  but  first  of  all  it  must  be  inspired  by  love.  Faith 
worketh  by  love.  (American  Homiletic  Review.)  Doctrine  1.  That  the  grace  of 
faith  is  a  working  grace  if  it  be  of  a  right  kind.  2.  That  if  faith  be  right  and  true 
it  worketh  by  love.  First. — That  faith  is  a  working  grace :  we  have  many  Scrip- 
tures that  prove  this  (2  Thess.  i.  11).  If  faith  be  living  it  works.  Show  I. — What 
the  work  is  that  faith  doth.  Answer — It  is  that  which  nothing  else  can  do.  If  we 
ask  faith,  as  Christ  did  His  disciples,  What  do  ye  more  than  others  ?  Faith  might 
say,  Yes,  I  do.  1.  It  doth  more  than  sight  or  sense  can  do.  Faith  can  make  that 
which  is  far  off  to  be  near  (Heb.  xi.  1).  2.  It  will  do  that  which  reason  cannot. 
[1.]  In  reference  to  doctrinal  revelation,  as — (1.)  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  (2.) 
Of  the  creation.  (3.)  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  [2.]  In  reference  to  provi- 
dential dispensations.  God  told  Abraham  that  he  should  have  a  child,  though  he 
were  an  hundred,  and  Sarah  fourscore  and  ten ;  and  Abraham  believed  it,  and  it 
was  so.  3.  It  can  do  that  which  no  other  grace  can  do.  Faith  doth  all  things  well. 
This  will  appear  by  three  things — (1)  Other  graces  are  but  particular  graces,  but 
this  is  a  universal  grace.  (2)  Other  graces  depend  upon  faith,  but  faith  de- 
pends upon  none.  If  faith  be  strong,  then  patience  will  be  so,  and  meekness  will 
be  so,  and  charity  will  be  so.  Faith  is  the  mouth  of  the  soul :  it  maintains  the 
whole  body.  (3)  Other  graces  are  useful,  but  all  the  graces  together  without  faith 
will  not  justify  a  man.  Show  II. — How  it  comes  to  pass  that  faith  doth  all  these 
things  ?  Answer — Not  by  its  own  power.  Whence  then  is  it  ?  1.  It  is  from  the 
supplies  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  the  Spirit  of  God  works  in  every  act  of  believing 
(Col.  i.  29).  Faith  of  itself  can  do  nothing.  2.  As  it  hath  Christ  for  the  object  of 
it  (John  xiv.  1 ;  Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  By  applying  the  promises,  which  are  the  food  of 
faith  (Fsa.  lx.  6).  Secondly. — Faith  works  by  love.  Question — What  are  we  to 
understand  by  love?  Answer — There  is  a  two-fold  love.  (1)  The  love  of  God. 
(2)  The  love  of  our  neighbour.  This  maybe  understood  of  both  these.  Question — 
How  doth  faith  work  by  love?  1.  Passively.  Faith  is  accepted  by  love.  (1)  By 
works  faith  is  discovered,  and  made  manifest,  as  life  by  action,  and  fire  by  flame. 
Compared  to— 2  Cor.  xii.  9.  (2)  It  was  improved  and  bettered.  Abraham's  faith 
had  three  great  trials.  [1.]  Leaving  his  kindred  and  country  to  follow  God,  he 
knew  not  where.  [2.]  When  God  told  him  that  he  should  have  a  son,  which  was 
greater  than  the  former.  [3.]  The  offering  of  this  son,  which  was  the  geatest  trial 
of  all  to  him.  2.  Actually.  Show  I. — How  faith  in  God  doth  produce  love  to  God. 
1.  By  acquainting  the  soul  with  His  most  excell  nt  perfections.  2.  By  acquainting 
the  soul  with  the  great  love  of  God  to  us.  3.  It  revealing  this  to  us  in  the  gospel, 
by  inviting  us ;  when  the  soul  sees  this  great  love  of  God,  saith,  How  can  I  choose 
but  love  Him  again?  (Psa.  xxxi.  19,  23).  U.  Where  this  love  is,  it  works  desire  of 
obedience  to  the  command  of  God.    Where  love  is,  obedience  is.    (1)  Free  and 


«HAT.  V.]  GALATIANS.  33S 

voluntary.  (2)  It  is  abounding  (1  Cor.  xv.  last  verse).  (3)  It  is  constant,  like  the 
waters  of  a  spring.  How  should  I  know  whether  mine  be  a  true  faith  ?  Answer — 
If  it  doth  work.  1.  If  it  sets  the  Lord  always  before  us.  2.  It  sets  the  things  of 
thi3  other  world  before  us.  3.  It  purines  the  heart.  4.  It  overcomes  the  world. 
6.  It  overcomes  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil.  Thou  hast  faith,  but  it  hath  these 
characters :— (1)  It  is  a  blind  faith.  (2)  It  is  a  barren  faith.  (3)  It  is  a  profane 
faith.  (4)  It  is  a  presumptuous  faith ;  it  works  security ;  it  rocks  thee  asleep  in  the 
devil's  cradle.  (5)  There  is  a  faith  which  men  do  swear  by,  but  they  cannot  live 
by.  (6)  See  whether  it  works  by  love  (1  John  iv.  20).  (7)  Try  the  strength  of 
your  faith.  [1.]  If  faith  be  weak,  it  will  work  but  weakly.  When  faith  is  weak,  it 
will  look  upon  that  to  be  a  discouragement  that  is  indeed  an  encouragement.  [2.] 
If  it  be  weak,  it  will  not  work  alone,  it  must  have  company.  [3.]  If  faith  be  weak, 
it  will  not  work  in  the  dark.     (Philip  Henry.) 

Yer.  7.  Te  did  ran  well;  who  did  hinder  yon,  that  ye  should  not  obey  the 
truth. — I.  The  Concession — "Ye  did  run  well."  1.  Christianity  is  like  a  race. 
(1)  It  is  laborious.  (2)  It  is  brief.  (3)  It  gives  the  prize  only  to  the  persevering. 
2.  Christianity  differs  from  a  race.  (1)  In  other  races  many  run,  but  only  one 
wins ;  in  this  all  who  run  faithfully  shall  reign  triumphantly.  (2)  In  other  races 
one  hinders  another ;  in  this  one  helps  another.  (3)  In  other  races  the  runners 
obtain  a  perishable  crown ;  in  this  one,  incorruptible.  II.  The  expostulation — 
"Who  did  hinder  you?"  1.  Satan  (1  Thess.  ii.  18;  Zech.  iii.  1).  2.  Heretical 
teachers.  3.  Worldly  influences.  (T.  Adamt.)  Running : — I.  Christian  people 
must  be  runners  in  the  race  or  God,  which  teaches  us — 1.  That  we  must  make 
haste  without  delay  to  keep  God's  commandments  (Psa.  exix.  32,  60).  2.  That 
we  must  increase  in  all  good  duties.  3.  That  we  must  look  neither  right  nor  left, 
but  forward  (Phil.  iii.  1 ,  Luke  ix.  62).  4.  That  we  must  allow  no  man  to  hinder 
our  course.  II.  Christian  people  must  not  only  run,  but  bun  well.  1.  The 
two  feet  by  which  we  run  are  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  2.  Some  men  are  lame 
in  one  or  other  of  their  feet,  and  are  therefore  hindered.     III.  Christian  people 

MUST    BUN     FROM     1HE    BEGINNING  TO   THE   END,   AND   FINISH  THEIR   COURSE    SO  AS   TO 

obtain  life  eveblasting  (1  Tim.  vi.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24).  For  which 
cause  they  must  1.  Cherish  a  fervent  desire  of  eternal  life.  2.  Maintain  a  daily 
purpose  of  not  sinning.     (W.  Perkins.)        Hindrances: — I.  The  tbuth  demands 

UNHINDEBED  OBEDIENCE.      H.  HINDRANCES  TO  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  TBUTH  ABE  ALWAYS  TO 

be  expected.  The  Galatians  were  too  hot  to  last.  Hindrances  arise  from — 1.  The 
discovery  that  Christianity  is  a  daily,  practical,  quiet  conformity  to  the  will  of  Christ, 
arising  out  of  steady  love  to  Him.  2.  The  use  of  extraordinary  means  to  revive 
the  pleasure  of  spiritual  sensation  or  sentimentality.  3.  Bevived  zeal  for  the 
mere  external  performances  of  religion.  4.  Worldly  longings  and  sinful  habits. 
5.  Listening  to  others  sneering  at  religion.  III.  The  most  disastrous  consequences 
foxJiOW  upon  giving  way  to  spibitual  hindrances.  1.  We  lose  our  hold  on  saving 
truth.  2.  Hindrances  lead  to  the  ruin  of  the  soul.  IT.  Incessant  watchfulness 
is  necessary  against  such  hindrances.  They  may  come — 1.  Suddenly.  2.  In- 
sidiously. 3.  Therefore  be  always  on  guard.  (Hadji.)  Christian  advancement : — 
He  only  is  advancing  in  life  whose  heart  is  getting  softer,  whose  blood  is  getting 
warmer  and  brain  quicker,  and  whose  spirit  is  entering  into  living  peace.  (Ruskin.) 
Hindrances — Riches : — Atlanta,  according  to  fable,  was  an  athletic  yet  charming 
maiden,  who  challenged  all  her  suitors  to  run  with  her  in  the  race.  She  offered  to 
become  the  wife  of  the  conqueror,  but  attached  death  as  a  penalty  to  failure. 
Many  competed  with  her,  and  lost  their  lives.  At  last  Hippomenes,  the  judge, 
overcome  by  her  charms,  offered  himself  for  the  contest.  Unseen,  he  took  three 
golden  apples,  and  they  sprang  forth  from  the  goal,  and  skimmed  along  the  sand. 
Hippomenes  felt  himself  failing,  and  threw  down  one  of  the  golden  apples  to  detain 
the  virgin.  She,  amazed,  stopped  to  pick  it  up,  while  he  shot  ahead.  She  soon 
overtook  him,  when  he  threw  another  apple,  which  she  stopped  to  get.  Again  she 
shot  by  him.  One  apple  remained,  which  he  threw  to  one  side ;  and  she,  self- 
confident  or  undecided,  turned  aside  for  it ;  and  he  reached  the  goal,  and  won  the 
prize.  The  golden  apples  defeated  her,  as  they  have  many  others,  in  the  race  of 
life.  Hindrances — Novel  reading  : — At  a  prayer-meeting  on  March  9th  Mr.  J.  M. 
Scroggie  said : — "  At  the  close  of  an  evangelistic  meeting  in  Inverness  I  saw  a 
young  lady  at  the  church  door  looking  very  sad.  I  spoke  to  her,  and  she  told  me 
she  was  a  backslider.  She  said  she  was  converted  ten  years  before,  and  for  many 
years  enjoyed  fellowship  with  Christ ;  but  she  began  novel-reading.    For  awhile 


836  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ▼. 

she  read  novels  and  the  Bible  side  by  side,  but  in  the  end  the  novels  had  the  best 
of  it,  and  she  laid  aside  the  Bible.  She  had  then  no  desire  for  private  prayer,  and 
grew  cold  in  her  Christian  life.  She  moved  from  the  part  where  she  was  then 
living,  and  went  and  sat  under  the  preaching  of  Dr.  Black,  whose  earnest  words 
showed  to  her  that  she  must  either  give  up  the  novels  or  her  hope  of  salvation. 
She  added,  '  For  some  weeks  I  have  been  wretched.'  I  pointed  out  to  her  suitable 
portions  of  God's  Word,  and  soon  the  light  began  to  dawn  upon  her  darkened  soul. 
She  went  home,  fell  upon  her  knees,  and  after  lengthened  prayer,  between  two  and 
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  she  was  able  to  thank  God  for  restoration  and  joy  and 
peace  in  Christ."  Hindered  Christian*  : — In  the  heathery  turf  you  will  often  find  a 
plant  chiefly  remaikable  for  its  peculiar  roots ;  from  the  main  stem  down  to  the 
minutest  fibre,  you  will  find  them  all  abruptly  terminate,  as  if  shorn  or  bitten  off, 
and  tbe  quaint  superstition  of  the  country  people  alleges,  that  once  on  a  time  it 
was  a  plant  of  singular  potency  for  healing  all  sorts  of  maladies,  and  therefore  the 
great  enemy  of  man  in  his  malignity  bit  off  the  roots,  in  which  its  virtues  resided. 
The  plant  with  this  odd  history  is  a  very  good  emblem  of  many  well-meaning  but 
little-effecting  people.  They  might  be  defined  as  radicibus  prcemorsis,  or  rather 
inceptis  succisis.  The  efficacy  of  every  good  work  lies  in  its  completion,  and  all 
their  good  works  terminate  abruptly,  and  are  left  off  unfinished.  The  devil  frus- 
trates their  efficacy  by  cutting  off  their  ends  ;  their  unprofitable  history  is  made  up 
of  plans  and  projects,  schemes  of  usefulness  that  were  never  gone  about,  and 
magnificent  undertakings  that  were  never  carried  forward  ;  societies  that  were  set 
agoing,  then  left  to  shift  for  themselves,  and  forlorn  beings  who  for  a  time  were 
taken  up  and  instructed,  and  just  when  they  were  beginning  to  show  symptoms  ot 
improvement  were  cast  on  the  world  again.  (James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Spiritual 
declension: — When  visiting  a  gentleman  in  England,  I  observed  a  fine  canary. 
Admiring  his  beauty,  the  gentleman  replied,  "  Yes,  he  is  beautiful,  but  he  has  lost 
his  voice.  He  used  to  be  a  fine  singer,  but  I  was  in  the  habit  of  hanging  his  cage 
out  of  the  window,  the  sparrows  came  around  him  with  their  incessant  chirping, 
gradually  he  ceased  to  sing  and  learned  their  twitter,  and  now  all  that  he  can  do  is 
to  twitter,  twitter."  Oh !  how  truly  does  this  represent  the  case  of  many  Christians; 
they  used  to  delight  to  sing  the  songs  of  Zion,  but  they  came  into  close  association 
with  those  whose  notes  never  rise  so  high,  until  at  last,  like  the  canary,  they  can 
do  nothing  but  twitter,  twitter.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Religious  decline^ : — This  disease 
is  one  which,  like  that  fatal  malady  which  leaves  the  cheek  beautiful  and  the  eye 
brilliant  whilst  it  rapidly  undermines  the  strength,  may  allow  external  appearances 
to  continue  specious  and  flattering,  though  the  work  of  death  is  fast  going  on 
within.  I.  Signs  of  spiritual  decline.  1.  Remissness  in  spiritual  exercises. 
(1)  Prayer.  (2)  Bible  reading.  (3)  Church-going.  2.  Want  of  interest  in  the 
conversion  of  others.  3.  Worldliness.  4.  Laxness  in  creed.  II.  The  dangers  o» 
this  state.  1.  Difficult  to  restore  decayed  affection.  If  the  fire  be  once  out, 
almost  impossible  to  rekindle  the  embers.  2.  The  longer  any  one  goes  on  in  this 
state,  the  less  likely  he  is  to  retrace  his  steps.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Spiritual 
declension  insidious: — It  is  the  insidiousness  of  the  disease  which  makes  it  so 
difficult  to  cope  with,  and  so  likely  to  be  fatal.  The  resemblance  is  continually 
forced  upon  us,  between  what  our  medical  men  call  consumption,  and  what  our 
theologians  call  spiritual  declension.  You  know  very  well  that  the  presence  of  con- 
sumption is  often  scarcely  suspected,  till  the  patient  is  indeed  past  recovery.  The 
worm  has  been  eating  out  the  core  of  life,  and  yet  its  ravages  have  been  overlooked, 
for  the  victim  has  hardly  seemed  to  languish,  and  if  the  hectic  flush  may  have 
occasionally  excited  a  parent's  fears,  they  have  been  quickly  allayed  by  the 
assurance  that  no  pain  was  felt,  and  by  the  smile  that  seemed  prophetio  of  life. 
And  even  when  no  doubt  could  exist  in  the  minds  of  others  as  to  the  presence  and 
progress  of  the  malady,  it  is,  we  might  almost  say,  one  symptom  of  the  complaint, 
that  it  flatters  the  patient,  so  that  often  he  may  be  expecting  recovery  even  on  the 
day  of  his  death.  Now  this  disease,  so  insidious,  so  flattering,  so  fatal,  is  the 
exact  picture  of  spiritual  decline.  There  is,  indeed,  one  point  of  difference ;  but 
that  only  makes  the  moral  malady  the  more  formidable  of  the  two.  It  may  be 
hard  to  make  the  consumptive  patient  see  Ids  danger,  but  that  disease  is  apparent 
enough  to  others;  friends  and  neighbours,  however  unsuspicious  at  the  first,  become 
well  aware  of  the  painful  truth,  as  disease  is  more  and  more  confirmed.  But  where 
there  is  spiritual  decline,  it  may  be  unsuspected  to  the  last.^  Ministers  and  kinsmen 
may  perceive  no  difference  in  the  man ;  equally  regular  in  the  public  duties  of 
xehgion,  equally  large  in  his  charities,  equally  honourable  in  his  dealings,  equally 


.  t.]  GALATIANS.  53? 

pore  in  his  morals.  The  fatal  symptoms  may  be  all  internal ;  and  beaanse 
they  are  not  such  as  to  draw  observation,  there  may  be  no  warning  given  by 
others ;  and  the  sick  man,  not  examining  himself,  and  not  finding  that  his 
religious  friends  suppose  his  health  to  be  on  the  decline,  will  be  all  the  more 
likely  to  be  persuaded  of  his  safety,  and  to  learn  his  disease,  alas  1  only 
from  his  death.  See  to  it,  then,  whether  or  not  there  be  amongst  you  this 
spiritual  cankerworm.  You  may  find  out  by  the  symptoms  already  indicated, 
whether  or  not  you  are  in  any  measure  ceasing  to  "  ran  well."  But  you  must 
be  honest  and  bold  with  yourselves.  The  case  is  not  one  for  trifling.  You  are 
not  to  shrink  from  proving  yourselves  diseased.  Go  down  into  your  hearts  ;  taf  the 
pulse  there ;  use  the  thermometer  there.  Stay  not  upon  the  surface,  where  a  thousand 
things  may  preserve  the  appearance  of  animation,  and  induce  what  may  pass 
for  the  glow  of  life  and  health ;  but  descend  into  yourselves,  search  into  yourselves, 
and  be  content  with  no  evidence  but  that  of  an  increasing  love  of  God  and  an 
increasing  hatred  of  sin.  (Ibid.)  Hindrances  to  a  godly  life  :— -Christian  life 
fitly  compared  to  a  race :  soon  over,  and  followed  by  a  prize  to  the  winner :  a  hard 
struggle  while  it  lasts.  But  how  often  does  one  who  began  by  running  well  relax 
his  efforts  and  fall  back  1  What  are  the  causes  of  this — the  obstacles  that  come  in 
the  way  of  Christian  endeavour  ?  I.  Corrupt  heart.  This  remains  even  in  the 
best.  It  inclines  us  to  sin ;  and  unless  we  resist  the  inclination,  sin  gets  the 
mastery  over  us,  and  we  are  slaves.  One  bad  habit,  thus  contracted,  is  enough  to 
ruin  the  soul.  Our  only  safety  lies  in  the  help  of  God.  He  "  will  give  His  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  II.  Bad  example.  We  are  greatly  influenced  by 
what  we  see  in  others.  Sometimes  an  influence  is  exerted  purposely  to  corrupt  us. 
At  school.  At  home.  Be  careful  in  the  choice  of  companions.  Be  stedfast  in 
doing  the  right,  even  if  alone.  III.  Want  of  good  guidance  in  youth.  An  un- 
favourable start  is  a  terrible  obstacle.  But  God  will  bestow  His  blessing  on  those 
who  love  and  fear  Him,  wherever  their  lot  has  cast  them.  (R.  D.  B.  Rawnsley,  M.A.) 
Warning  against  defection  : — 1.  A  Christian  life  is  like  a  course  or  race  from  earth 
to  heaven  by  the  way  of  holiness  and  all  oommanded  duties,  especially  the  exercise 
of  faith  and  love  ;  therefore  we  ought  to  carry  ourselves  as  those  who  run  in  a  ra»*e. 
2.  It  is  very  ordinary  for  new  converts  to  be  carried  on  with  a  greater  measure  of 
affection  and  zeal,  and  to  make  swifter  progress  than  others,  or  they  themselves 
afterwards,  when  they  are  of  older  standing;  the  newness  of  the  thing,  the  first 
edge  which  is  upon  their  affections,  not  yet  blunted  by  change  of  cases  and  multi- 
plicity of  duties,  and  God's  restraining  for  a  time  the  violent  assault  of  multiplied 
furious  temptations  until  they  be  a  little  confirmed  and  engaged  in  His  way,  together 
with  His  affording  a  more  plentiful  measure  of  His  sensible  presence  at  first  than 
afterwards,  all  contribute  to  this.  3.  As  those  who  once  made  good  progress  in: 
the  ways  of  God  may  afterwards  sit  up,  their  after- carriage  proving  no  ways  answer- 
able to  their  promising  beginnings ;  so,  when  it  thus  happens,  it  is  matter  of  sad 
regret  to  beholders,  and  of  deserved  reproof  to  the  persons  themselves.  4.  No  satis- 
factory reason  can  be  given  for  which  any,  who  has  once  entered  the  way  of  truth 
and  holiness,  should  alter  his  course,  halt  in  it,  or  make  defection  from  it,  and 
thereby  cause  the  ways  of  God  to  be  evil  spoken  of  (2  Pet.  ii.  2).  5.  When  people  fall 
remiss  and  lazy  in  giving  obedience  to  known  truth,  they  are  upon  the  very  brink  and 
precipice  of  defection  into  contrary  error,  and  of  apostasy  from  the  very  profession 
of  truth.  6.  The  serious  consideration  of  a  man's  former  forwardness  in  the  ways 
of  God,  and  how  little  reason  can  be  given  for  his  present  backsliding  and  remiss- 
ness, is  a  strong  incitement  to  do  the  first  works,  and  by  future  diligence  to  regain 
what  he  has  lost  by  his  former  negligence.  {James  Fergusson.)  Obstructions  to 
tpiritual  progress  : — What  are  the  conditions  which  alone  could  frustrate  the  pro- 
gress upon  a  river  of  a  strong  man  and  an  expert  rower,  placed  in  a  good  and  swift 
boat,  and  furnished  with  oars  ?  Such  an  one  might  either  not  use  the  oars  at  all, 
or  use  only  one  of  them  ;  the  result  in  each  case  would  be  practically  much  the 
same.  In  both  case3  the  boat  would  drift  with  the  stream ;  the  only  difference 
would  be  that,  when  one  oar  was  vigorously  applied,  the  boat,  in  addition  to  drift- 
ing, would  move  round  and  round  in  a  circle,  and  might  perhaps  for  a  while  mock 
the  rower  by  the  semblance  of  progress.  In  spiritual  things  there  are  those  who  are 
utterly  careless  and  godless — dead  alike  to  the  claims  of  religion  and  to  its  hopes. 
These  are  they  who,  launched  upon  the  stream  of  life,  quietly  drift  down  it,  giving 
no  thought  to  the  life  which  is  to  come  after,  and  seeking  only  to  gather  the  few 
perishable  flowers  which  grow  upon  the  brink.  And,  among  persons  of  more  serious 
mind,  there  are  those  who  are  willing  indeed  that  Christ  should  do  all  for  them,  bat 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

have  never  surrendered  themselves  to  Him  to  be  and  do  all  that  He  requires.    And 
there  are  those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  have  surrendered  the  will  to  Christ,  and 
are  making  efforts  to  obey  Him  ;  but  because  they  perceive  not  this  simple  truth, 
that  they  cannot  sanctify  themselves,  that  sanctification  from  first  to  last,  like 
justification,  must  be  wrought  for  us  by  Him, — are  constantly  met  by  failures  and 
disappointments,  which  a  simple  trust  in  Him  to  do  all  for  them  can  alone  remedy. 
Both  these  last  are  they  who  are  rowing  with  one  oar,  moving  indeed,  but  moving 
in  a  circle,  and  coming  round  always  to  the  same  point  from  which  they  started — 
deluding  themselves  for  a  while  by  the  very  fact  of  their  motion  with  the  idea  that 
they  are  progressing,  and  often  bitterly  complaining,  as  soon  as  they  are  undeceived, 
that  they  are  making  no  way.      And,  finally,  there  are  those  who  are  equally  well 
contented  to  give  all  to  Christ  which  they  have  to  give  (that  is,  their  will),  and  to 
take  all  from  Him  which  He  has  to  give — sanctification  and  wisdom,  as  well  as 
righteousness— who  in  one  and  the  same  act  of  faith  have  renounced  both  self-will 
and  self-distrust.    These  are  they  who  are  rowing  with  two  oars,  and  so  realizing  a 
true  progress  towards  that  haven  where  they  would  be.      Show  me  a  man  who  is 
both  giving  to  Christ  all  he  has  to  give,  i.e.,  his  will,  and  at  the  same  time  taking 
from  Christ  all  Christ  has  to  give,  which  is  a  perfect  salvation  from  sin's  guilt, 
power,  and  consequences ;  and  I  will  show  you  a  man  who  is  growing  in  grace,  and 
advancing  daily  in  meetness  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.     And  if  we 
find  ourselves  not  thus  growing  and  advancing,  and  yet  are  certainly  well-disposed 
persons  of  some  seriousness  of  mind,  it  is,  no  doubt,  that  we  are  endeavouring  to 
push  the  boat  forward  with  only  one  of  the  oars,  to  reach  that  holiness  without 
which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord,  with  trust  in  Christ  alone,  or  with  self-surrender 
alone.     Apply  the  other  oar  simultaneously,  and  the  bark  shall  at  once  begin  to 
cleave  the  water,  as  an  arrow  cleaves  the  air,  straight  forward.      {Dean  Goulburn.) 
Want  of  perseverance  : — The  leopard  does  not  run  after  his  prey  like  other  beasts, 
but  pursues  it  by  leaping ;  and  if  at  three  or  four  jumps  he  cannot  seize  it,  for  very 
indignation  he  gives  over  the  chase.     They  are  some  who,  if  they  cannot  leap  into 
heaven  by  a  few  good  works,  will  even  let  it  alone ;  as  if  it  were  to  be  ascended  by 
leaping,  not  by  climbing.     But  they  are  most  unwise,  who,  having  got  up  many 
rounds  of  Jacob's  ladder,  and  finding  difficulties  in  some  of  the  uppermost — whether 
a-wrestling  with  assaults  and  troubles,  or  looking  down  upon  their  old  allurements — 
even  fairly  descend  with  Demas,  and  allow  others  to  take  heaven.    (T.  Adams.) 
Fickleness : — Many  are  soon  engaged  in  holy  duties,  easily  persuaded  to  take  up  a 
profession  of  religion — and  as  easily  persuaded  to  lay  it  down  :  like  the  new  moon 
which  shines  a  little  in  the  first  part  of  tbe  night,  but  is  down  before  half  the 
night  be  gone  ;  lightsome  professors  in  their  youth,  whose  old  age  is  wrapped  up  in 
thick  darkness  of  sin  and  wickedness.     (W.  Gurnall.)        What  congregation  can- 
not show  some  who  have  outlived  their  profession?  Not  unlike  the  silkworm  which, 
they  say,  after  all  her  spinning,  works  herself  out  of  her  bottom,  and  becomes  a 
common  fly.    As  the  disciples  said  of  the  literal  temple,  "  See  what  manner  of 
stones  are  here,"  so  we  once  said  of  the  spiritual  temple ;  but  now,  not  one  stone 
upon  another.      (Ibid.)        The  nature  of  backsliding ; — Backsliding  is  the  act  of 
turning  from  the  path  of  duty.     It  may  be  considered  as — 1.  Partial,  when  applied 
to  true  believers,  who  do  not  backslide  with  the  whole  bent  of  their  will.    2.  Volun- 
tary, when  applied  to  those  who,  after  professing  to  know  the  truth,  wilfully  turn 
from  it  and  live  in  the  practice  of  sin.    3.  Final,  when  the  mind  is  given  up  to 
judicial  hardness.  Partial  backsliding  must  be  distinguished  from  hypocrisy,  as  the 
former  may  exist  when  there  are  gracious  intentions  on  the  whole ;  but  the  latter 
is  a  studied  profession  of  appearing  to  be  what  we  are  not.    (G.  Buck.)        Signs  of 
backsliding : — Among  the  evidences  of  backsliding  are  these — 1.  Indifference  to 
prayer  and  self-examination.     2.  Trifling  or  unprofitable  conversation.    3.  Neglect 
of  publio  ordinances.     4.  Shunning  the  people  of  God.     5.  Associating  with  the 
world.     6.  Neglect  of  the  Bible.     7.  Gross  immorality.     (Ibid.)        Gradual  back- 
sliding  : — We  warn  you  against  little  concessions,  little  acquiescences,  little  indul- 
gences, little  conformities.     Each  may  only  destroy  the  millionth  part   of  the 
velocity ;  but  this  destruction  of  a  millionth  has  only  to  be  perpetually  repeated, 
and  the  planet's  march  is  arrested,  and  its  lustre  is  quenched,     If  vital  religion  be 
driven  out  of  the  soul,  it  will  be  as  the  Canaanites  were  to  be  driven  before  the 
Israelites,  "by  little  and  little."     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)        At  Preston,  at  Malines,  at 
many  such  places,  the  lines  go  gently  asunder ;  so  fine  is  the  angle,  that  at  first 
the  paths  are  almost  parallel,  and  it  seems  of  small  moment  which  you  select.  But 
a  little  farther  one  turns  a  corner,  or  dives  into  a  tunnel ;  and,  now  that  the  speed 


chap,  v.]  QALATIAN8.  839 

is  fall,  the  angle  opens  up,  and,  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  a  minute,  the  divided  convoy 
flies  asunder ;  one  passenger  is  on  the  way  to  Italy,  another  to  the  swamps  of 
Holland ;  one  will  step  out  in  London,  the  other  in  the  Irish  Channel.  It  is  not 
enough  that  you  look  for  the  better  country ;  you  must  keep  the  way ;  and  a  small 
deviation  may  send  you  entirely  wrong.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Spasmodic  re- 
ligion : — Nay,  sometimes  those  motions  in  natural  men  under  the  gospel  may  be 
more  quick,  and  warm,  and  violent  for  a  time  than  the  natural  motion  of  this 
habit ;  as  the  motion  of  a  stone  out  of  a  sling  is  quicker  than  that  of  life,  but  faints 
by  degrees,  because  it  is  from  a  source  impressed,  not  implanted  and  inherent  in 
the  nature.  They  are  just  like  water  heated  by  the  fire,  which  has  a  fit  of  warmth, 
and  may  heat  other  things  ;  but  though  you  should  heat  it  a  thousand  times,  the 
quality  not  being  natural,  will  vanish,  and  the  water  return  to  its  former  coldness. 
But  the  new  heart  being  in  the  new  creature  causes  him  to  walk  in  the  statutes  of 
God,  not  by  fits  and  starts,  but  with  an  uniform  and  harmonious  motion.  (S. 
Charnock.)  Hindrances :  (1)  Worldliness : — Mrs.  Hannah  More  once  took  Dr. 
Sprague  to  her  window  to  show  him  what  she  called  her  Moral  Prospect.  Not 
far  from  her  house  was  a  little  clump  of  trees  and  bushes,  covering  a  few  yards  of 
ground.  At  some  considerable  distance  was  a  little  forest  covering  some  acres.  If 
one  would  place  this  small  cluster  between  him  and  the  larger,  the  latter  was  quite 
hidden  from  view.  "  So,"  said  Mrs.  More,  "the  things  of  time  being  near,  seem 
great,  and  so  hide  from  our  view  the  things  of  eternity."  (Rev.  Dr.  Plumer.)  (2) 
Evil  company  ; — Saphronius,  a  wise  teacher,  would  not  suffer  even  his  grown-up 
sons  and  daughters  to  associate  with  those  whose  character  was  not  pure  and 
upright.  "  Dear  father,"  said  the  gentle  Eulalia  to  him  one  day,  when  he  forbade 
her,  in  company  with  her  brother,  to  visit  the  volatile  Lucinda, — "  dear  father,  you 
must  think  us  very  childish  if  you  imagine  that  we  should  be  exposed  to  danger  by 
it."  The  father  took  in  silence  a  dead  coal  from  the  hearth,  and  reached  it  to  his 
daughter.  "  It  will  not  burn  you,  my  child  ;  take  it."  Eulalia  did  so,  and  behold ! 
her  beautiful  white  hand  was  soiled  and  blackened,  and,  as  it  chanced,  her  white 
dress  also.  "  We  cannot  be  too  careful  in  handling  coals,"  said  Eulalia,  in  vexa- 
tion. "  Yes,  truly,"  said  the  father.  "  You  see,  my  child,  the  coals,  even  if  they 
do  not  burn,  blacken ;  so  it  is  with  the  company  of  the  vicious."  (From  the 
German.)  (3)  Neglect  oj  prayer : — When  a  pump  is  frequently  used,  but  little 
pains  are  necessary  to  obtain  water ;  it  flows  out  at  the  first  stroke,  because  the 
water  is  high.  But  if  the  pump  has  not  been  used  for  a  long  time  the  water  gets 
low,  and,  when  it  is  wanted,  you  must  pump  a  great  while,  and  the  stream  only 
comes  after  great  efforts.  And  so  it  is  with  prayer :  if  we  are  instant  in  it  and 
faithful  in  it,  every  little  circumstance  awakens  the  disposition  to  pray,  and  desires 
and  words  are  always  ready.  But  if  we  neglect  prayer,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  pray, 
for  the  water  in  the  well  gets  low.  (Felix  Nejf.)  (i)  Unsubdued  sins : — "  The 
horse  that  draws  its  halter  with  it,"  says  the  proverb,  "  is  only  half  escaped ;  "  so 
long  as  any  remnant  of  a  sinful  habit  remains  in  us,  we  make  but  an  idle  boast  of 
our  liberty ;  we  may  be  caught,  and  by  that  which  we  drag  with  us.  True  and 
seasonable  is  the  remark  of  Adams  of  Puritan  times — "  He  who  will  not  be  a  morti- 
fied saint  on  earth  shall  never  be  a  glorified  saint  in  heaven."  (G.  Neil.)  (5)  Un- 
worthy trifles : — A  lost  pound  of  candy  delayed  a  train  crowded  with  passengers  for 
a  considerable  time  on  June  24th,  at  New  London,  U.S.  Just  as  the  special  train 
was  about  to  start,  a  well-dressed  young  man  went  to  the  guard  and  asked  him  if 
he  would  delay  his  train  a  few  minutes  while  he  went  for  a  valuable  package  he  had 
mislaid.  He  replied,  "  I  will,"  and  kindly  waited.  The  young  man  sped  on  his 
mission  and  returned  without  finding  his  package.  The  guard  then  gave  the  signal 
to  start.  Thinking  there  might  have  been  Government  bonds  or  priceless  jewels  in 
the  missing  package,  he  asked  the  young  man  what  was  in  it,  that  he  might  aid 
him  in  recovering  it.  At  first  the  young  man  declined  to  answer,  but  he  finally 
replied,  "  A  pound  of  French  candy."  The  guard's  chagrin  at  having  lost  time  and 
hindered  over  fifty  passengers  for  so  trifling  a  cause  may  be  imagined.  Various 
hindrances : — Never  censure  indiscriminately ;  admit  and  praise  that  which  is  good, 
that  you  may  the  more  effectually  rebuke  the  evil.  Paul  did  not  hesitate  to  praise 
the  Galatians,  and  say,  "  Ye  did  run  well."  It  is  a  source  of  much  pleasure  to  see 
saints  running  well.  To  do  this  they  must  run  in  the  right  road,  straight  forward, 
perseveringly,  at  the  top  of  their  pace,  with  their  eye  on  Christ,  <fcc.  It  is  a  great 
grief  when  such  are  hindered  or  put  off  the  road.  The  way  is  the  truth,  and  the 
running  is  obedience ;  men  are  hindered  when  they  cease  to  obey  the  truth.  It 
may  be  helpful  to  try  and  find  out  who  has  hindered  us  in  our  race.     1.  Wit  sum* 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  T, 

C8K  THE  TEXT  IN  REFERENCE  TO  HINDERED  BELIEVER8.     I.  YOU  tLTO  evidently  hindered. 

(1)  You  are  not  so  loving  and  zealous  as  you  were.  (2)  You  are  quitting  the  old 
faith  for  new  notions.  (3)  You  are  losing  your  first  joy  and  peace.  (4)  You  ara 
not  now  leaving  the  world  and  self  behind.  (5)  You  are  not  now  abiding  all  the 
day  with  your  Lord.  2.  Who  has  hindered  you  ?  (1)  Did  I  do  it?  Pray,  then, 
for  your  minister.  (2)  Did  your  fellow-members  do  it  ?  You  ought  to  have  been 
proof  against  them ;  they  could  not  have  intended  it.  Pray  for  them.  (3)  Did  the 
world  do  it  ?  Why  so  much  in  it  ?  (4)  Did  the  devil  do  it  ?  Eesist  him.  (5)  Did 
you  not  do  it  yourself  ?  This  is  highly  probable,  (a)  Did  you  not  overload  your- 
self with  worldly  care?  (b)  did  you  not  indulge  carnal  ease  ?  (c)  Did  you  not  by 
pride  become  self-satisfied  ?  (d)  Did  you  not  neglect  prayer,  Bible  reading,  the 
public  means  of  grace,  the  Lord's  Table,  &c.  ?  Mend  your  ways,  and  do  not  hinder 
your  own  soul,  (e)  Did  not  false  teachers  do  it,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Galatians  f 
U  so,  quit  them  at  once,  and  listen  only  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  3.  You  must  look 
to  it,  and  mend  your  pace.  (1)  Your  loss  has  been  already  great.  You  might  by 
this  time  have  been  far  on  upon  the  road.  (2)  Your  natural  tendency  will  be  to 
slacken  still  more.  (3)  Your  danger  is  great  of  being  overtaken  by  error  and  sin. 
(4)  Your  death  would  come  of  ceasing  to  obey  the  truth.  (5)  Your  wisdom  is  to 
cry  for  help,  that  you  may  run  aright.  II.  We  shall  use  the  text  in  reference  to 
delating  sinners.  1.  You  have  sometimes  been  set  a-running.  (1)  God  has 
blessed  His  Word  to  your  arousing.  (2)  God  has  not  yet  given  you  up ;  this  is 
evident.  (3)  God's  way  of  salvation  still  lies  open  before  you.  2.  What  has  hin- 
dered you?  (1)  Self-righteousness  and  trust  in  yourself?  (2)  Carelessness,  pro- 
crastination, and  neglect  ?  (3)  Love  of  self-indulgence,  or  the  secret  practice  of 
pleasurable  sins  ?  (4)  Frivolous,  sceptical,  or  wicked  companions  ?  (5)  Unbelief 
and  mistrust  of  God's  mercy  ?  3.  The  worst  evils  will  come  of  being  hindered.  (1) 
Those  who  will  not  obey  truth  will  become  the  dupes  of  lies.  (2)  Truth  not  obeyed 
is  disobeyed,  and  so  sin  is  multiplied.  (3)  Truth  disregarded  becomes  an  accuser, 
and  its  witness  secures  our  condemnation.  Conclusion :  1.  God  have  mercy  on 
hinderers.  We  must  rebuke  tbem.  2.  God  have  mercy  on  the  hindered.  We 
would  arouse  them.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  wrong  maxim: — Cecil  says  that 
some  adopt  the  Indian  maxim,  that  it  is  better  to  walk  than  to  run,  and  better  to 
stand  than  to  walk,  and  better  to  sit  than  to  stand,  and  better  to  lie  than  to  sit. 
Such  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  walking  in  the  ways 
of  God,  but  it  is  better  to  be  running — making  real  and  visible  progress,  day  by  day 
advancing  in  experience  and  attainments.  David  likens  the  sun  to  a  strong  man 
rejoicing  to  run  a  race  ;  not  dreading  it  and  shrinking  back  from  it,  but  delighting 
in  the  opportunity  of  putting  forth  all  his  powers.  Who  so  runs,  runs  well.  (The 
Christian. )  A  difficult  race  : — The  Christian  race  is  by  no  means  easy.  We  ar» 
so  let  and  hindered  in  running  "  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,"  because  of — 1. 
Our  sinful  nature  still  remaining  in  the  holiest  saints.  2.  Some  easily-besetting 
sin  (Heb.  xii.  1).  The  entanglements  of  the  world,  like  heavy  and  close-fitting 
garments,  impeding  the  racer's  speed.  4.  Our  weakness  and  infirmity,  soon  tired 
and  exhausted,  when  the  race  is  long  or  the  road  is  rough.  (G.  S.  Bowes.)  Hin~ 
derers  : — It  is  possible  that  fellow-professors  may  hinder.  We  are  often  obliged  to 
accommodate  our  pace  to  that  of  our  fellow-travellers.  If  they  are  laggards  we  are 
very  likely  to  be  so  too.  We  are  apt  to  sleep  as  do  others.  We  are  stimulated  or 
depressed,  urged  on  or  held  back,  by  those  with  whom  we  are  associated  in  Christian 
fellowship.  There  is  still  greater  reason  to  fear  that  in  many  cases  worldly  friends 
and  companions  are  tbe  hinderers.  Indeed,  they  can  be  nothing  else.  None  can 
help  us  in  the  race  but  those  who  are  themselves  running  it ;  all  others  must 
hinder.  Let  a  Christian  form  an  intimate  friendship  with  an  ungodly  person,  and 
from  that  moment  all  progress  is  stayed ;  he  must  go  back ;  for  when  his  companion 
is  going  in  the  opposite  direction,  how  can  he  walk  with  him  except  by  turning  his 
back  upon  the  path  which  he  has  formerly  trodden  ?  (P.)  A  sailor  remarks : — 
"  Sailing  from  Cuba,  we  thought  we  had  gained  sixty  miles  one  day  in  our  course ; 
but  at  the  next  observation  we  found  we  had  lost  more  than  thirty.  It  was  an 
under-current.  The  ship  had  been  going  forward  by  the  wind,  but  going  back  by 
the  current."  So  a  man's  course  in  religion  may  often  seem  to  be  right  and  pro- 
gressive, but  tbe  under-current  of  his  besetting  sins  is  driving  him  tbe  very  contrary 
way  to  what  he  think*.  (Gheever.)  Hindrances  to  religious  life  : — I  propose  to 
discuss  some  of  those  causes  which  prevent  growth  and  development  of  religioua 
life.  I  shall  not  stop  to  illustrate  the  evil  influences  of  overt  and  known  wicked- 
ness.  I  shall  select,  therefore,  only  some  less  apparent,  but  nevertheless  influential 


chap,  v.]  GALATIANS.  341 

causes  which  produce  barrenness  in  Christian  life.  Let  me  say,  preliminarily,  that 
there  are  a  gt  eat  many  persons  who  seem  to  need  no  special  religious  teachings,  for 
one  of  two  opposite  reasons.  There  is  one  class  who  are  so  evenly  adjusted  in  their 
faculties,  so  well  balanced  in  mind  constitutionally,  and  who  from  birth  are  so 
Christianly  educated,  and  who  are  so  genially  affected  by  parents,  friends,  and  social 
connections,  and  who  have  all  the  appointments  of  society  so  fitted  round  about 
them,  that  when  they  become  Christians  their  life  seems  to  be  a  tranquil  and  almost 
unresisting  progress.  Then  there  is  another  large  class  to  whom  I  do  not  speak 
particularly,  namely,  those  persons  who  have — I  know  not  how,  and  they  know  not 
how — made  a  profession  of  religion  ; — I  know  not  why,  and  they  know  not  why ; — 
but  still  they  have  done  it,  and  are  in  the  Church ;  and  that  is  about  the  whole  of  it. 
Other  people  have  their  difficulties  about  prayer  ;  they  have  none,  for  they  do  not 
pray.  Other  people  have  their  difficulties  about  the  sacred  Scriptures  ;  they  do  not 
read  the  Scriptures  enough  to  be  troubled  by  them.  The  Bible  seldom  troubles 
people  who  do  not  meddle  with  it.  Other  people  have  their  temptations ;  they  have 
none  that  they  recognize  as  such.  They  have  temptations,  but  they  yield  so  easily 
to  them  that  they  are  not  disturbed  by  them.  Those  who  have  no  religious  con- 
science, and  whose  life  is  one  of  quiet  compliance  with  circumstances  as  they  are — 
it  is  not  particularly  to  such  that  I  speak  to-day.  The  third  class — which  is  the 
great  middle  class — consists  of  persons  who  are  professedly  Christian  people,  but 
who  have  great  and  almost  unceasing  religious  difficulties.  I.  The  want  of  general 
technical  religious  culture  is  one  obvious  cause  of  confusion  and  distress.  Men  may 
«njoy  little  for  the  very  same  reason  that  some  farmers  reap  little — because  they 
bow  little  and  till  little.  This  is  the  natural  poverty  which  comes  from  the  want  of 
religious  thrift.  The  tendency  of  our  age  and  nation  is  particularly  to  external 
activity,  not  to  internal  meditations.  This  excessive  activity  carries  us  away,  and 
exhausts  our  susceptibility.  How  can  it  be  but  that  Christians  should  be  weak, 
when  there  is  so  much  to  stimulate,  and  so  little  to  feed  them  ?  II.  But,  secondly, 
the  endeavours  which  men  are  continually  making  to  live  a  religious  life  while  using 
only  a  part  of  their  natures,  will  explain  a  great  many  difficulties  which  Christians 
experience.  It  is  to  be  assumed  that  man  is  a  symmetrical  being  in  his  Divinely- 
created  nature  ;  that  every  part  of  that  nature  was  needed,  or  God  would  not  have 
given  it,  and  that  no  man  can  become  what  God  meant,  who  does  not  develop  every 
part  of  himself  according  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  To  take  every  faculty  or 
power  God  has  given  you,  and  bring  it  under  Divine  influences,  and  make  it  act 
tight — that  is  being  a  Christian ;  and  all  partialisms,  by  just  so  much  as  they  are 
partialisms,  are,  therefore,  misunderstandings  or  misappropriations  of  Christian 
truth.  Let  us  specify  a  few.  First,  our  religion  must  always  aim  at  a  good  and 
healthy  condition  of  the  body.  Health  is  a  Christian  grace.  It  is  the  mother  of 
almost  all  the  Christian  graces ;  so  much  so  that  in  respect  of  multitudes,  although 
it  is  not  difficult  for  them  to  exercise  Christian  graces  when  they  are  perfectly 
healthy,  it  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to  do  it  when  they  are  not  healthy.  What 
they  supposed  to  be  an  infernal  temptation  was  the  protest  of  nature  in  themselves. 
Our  appetites  and  passions  are  all  of  them  to  be  controlled,  used,  sanctified — not 
killed.  So  all  our  social  affections  must  be  used,  Christianized,  and  made  to  be  a 
part  of  our  Christian  life.  They  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  alternatives,  but  as  parts 
of  true  Christian  experience.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  we  are  to  distinguish  between 
the  natural  affections  and  the  gracious  ones.  I  do  not  know  of  any  gracious  affec- 
tions that  are  not  natural  ones.  Natural  affections,  rightly  directed,  become,  by 
that  very  rectitude,  gracious.  Your  store,  your  office,  your  shop,  your  family,  your 
neighbourhood,  the  street — these  are  not  so  many  things  that  you  must  resist  for 
the  sake  of  grace.  On  the  contrary,  you  must  deal  with  them  as  the  means  of 
grace.  III.  Thirdly,  men  are  left  in  an  ungrowing  and  barren  state  from  an  igno- 
rance of  the  various  influences  or  instruments  by  which  religious  feeling  may  be 
cultivated.  Let  me  mention  a  few  of  those  things  which  observation  and  experience 
have  taught  me  to  be  instrumental  in  promoting  religious  feeling.  I  have  mentioned 
already,  and  shall  mention  again  only  for  the  sake  of  completeness,  secret  religious 
exercise,  as  one  of  the  things  that  promote  Christian  feeling.  I  will  mention,  next, 
sympathy  with  other  minds.  I  have  never  seen  a  tree  whose  leaves  sung,  unless, 
somehow,  the  wind  was  caused  to  play  among  them ;  but  the  leaves  of  any  tree  will 
sing  when  the  wind  does  play  through  them.  And  there  are  a  great  many  hearts 
that  do  not  sing  because  nothing  moves  them  to  sing.  Then  there  are  some  persons 
who  seem  so  constituted  that  their  religious  feelings  almost  never  flow  so  readily  as 
when  they  act  for  other  people.     They  are  persons  of  great  constitutional  benevo- 


•43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

lence.     They  make  benevolence  their  conscience.     When  they  go  forth  into  life, 
benevolence  is  their  guiding  principle.     Such  persons  oftentimes  say,  "  I  never  can 
have  deep  religious  feelings  by  ordinary  means ;  but  when  such  a  man  was   in 
trouble,  and  told  me  of  the  wants  of  his  family — his  wife  and  children — and  I  took 
my  hat  and  went  home  with  him,  and  mingled  my  tears  with  theirs,  it  did  seem  as 
if  I  was  not  a  hand- breadth  from  heaven.    I  never  had  such  a  sense  of  the  goodness 
of  God  as  I  had  then."   Probably  you  were  never  so  near  like  God  as  you  were  tben. 
No  wonder  you  felt  near  Him.   You  are  not  far  from  Him  when  you  get  so  near  Him 
as  to  give  your  time  and  energies  for  the  good  of  His  needy  creatures.      There  are 
many  persons  who  are  very  little  affected  by  social  sympathy,  or  music,  or  art,  or 
any  of  the  other  influences  to  which  I  have  referred,  but  who  would  be  amazingly 
lifted  np  if  they  could  have  certain  doubts  which  they  have  concerning  their  religious 
safety  purged  away.     Oh,  how  many  different  ways  there  are  by  which  God  comes 
into  the  soull    The  great  God,  so  prolific  of  thought,  so  endless  in  diversity  of 
function,  has  a  million  ways  by  which  to  express  Himself.    He,  in  His  power,  works 
on  the  soul,  not  through  one  thing  alone — not  alone  through  steeple,  nor  meeting- 
house, nor  lecture-room,  nor  closet,  though  often  and  much  through  these ;  but 
through  all  things — through  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  animals,  and  insects,  and 
worms,  and  clouds,  and  mountains,  and  oceans,  and  rivers,  and  the  productions  of 
the  earth  ;  and  not  by  these  only,  but  by  everything  that  affects  man's  comfort  and 
happiness  in  this  life — by  store  and  anvil,  and  plane  and  saw,  and  hospital  and 
poor-house,  and  musio  and  formB  of  beauty,  and  sweet  feelings  and  trials,  and  suffer- 
ings and  victories  over  temptation,  and  light  and  darkness,  and  joy  and  sorrow,  and 
ten  thousand  unnameable  subtle  influences  that  touch  the  human  soul;  by  all  these 
God  reveals  His  greatness  and  goodness  to  us,  that  He  may  win  us  to  Himself,  and 
make  us  heirs  of  immortality ;  and,  blessed  be  His  name,  not  to  us  alone  who  are 
here,  but  to  every  one,  everywhere  1     (H.  W.  Beecher.)        Obeying  the  truth :— To 
obey  the  truth  is  to  feel  and  act  agreeably  to  it.     It  implies  such  a  state  of  the 
heart,  and  such  a  comformation  of  conduct,  as  comports  with  the  nature  of  the 
things  revealed  and  believed.     As,  for  example,  the  truth  relates  in  part  to  the 
character  of  God,  which  it  represents  to  be  infinitely  excellent  and  amiable.     To 
obey  that  truth  is  to  admire  and  love  the  Divine  character,  for  those  are  the  feelings 
appropriate  to  it      Is  it  the  greatness  of  God  that  is  the  object  of  contemplation  ? 
The  duty  is  veneration.    Is  it  His  sovereignty  ?   The  duty  is  submission.  Is  it  His 
law?   The. duty  is  compliance  with  all  its  requisitions.    Does  the  truth  relate  to  the 
subject  of  sin  ?    Then  the  duty  is  repentance.    Does  it  relate  to  the  Saviour  ?   The 
duty  is  faith  and  trust  in  Him.    We  may  learn  hence  the  high  importance,  yea, 
necessity  of  apprehending  and  believing  the  truth.     It  cannot  otherwise  be  obeyed. 
Obedience  to  truth  not  known  or  not  credited  is  impossible.     We  may  learn  also 
the  insignificance  and  worthlessness  of  mere  faith  and  knowledge.  To  believe  there 
is  a  God  and  not  love  Him ;  to  have  a  knowledge  of  Christ,  without  trust  in  Him, 
or  of  Bin  without  repenting  of  it,  what  is  that  worth  f     The  obedience  of  the  truth 
is  religion.     There  can  be  no  better  definition  of  it,  unless  it  be  one  which  we  find 
in  Scriptures,  via.,  this  "  faith  that  worketh  by  love."     There  is  no  other  religion 
worth  anything,  or  availing  aught,  but  that  which  answers  to  this  description.   The 
obedience  of  error  is  not  religion,  nor  is  the  belief  of  truth  religion.    Sincerity  is  not 
religion,  nor  is  orthodoxy,  but  the  obedience  of  the  truth.    To  obey  the  truth  is  not 
anything  that  can  be  done  at  once,  or  that  requires  to  be  done  only  at  stated  periods. 
Keligion  is  not  a  job,  which,  being  done,  there  is  an  end  of  it ;  not  a  mere  arrears  to 
be  paid  up,  or  a  mere  score  to  be  wiped  off.      The  truth  must  be  perseveringly 
obeyed.      There  is  such  a  thing  (would  there  were  not)  as  declension  in  religion. 
The  Galatians  declined.    Paul  heard  of  it,  and  wrote  to  them  on  the  subject.    How 
melancholy  it  is  that  men  should  turn  away  from  God,  that  they  should  grow 
worse,  as  they  get  nearer  the  grave  and  the  judgment !    If  we  see  no  indications  of 
declension  in  you,  yet  He  who  sees  not  as  man  sees  may.   In  some  of  you,  however, 
even  we  do  see  them.     There  is  a  visible  diminution  of  interest  in  the  things  of  re- 
ligion.   And  I  ask  you,  professor  of  religion,  what  it  was  that  hindered  you.  What 
first  drew  you  away  ;  how  did  this  declension  commence  ;  and  where  did  it  com- 
mence, and  how  did  it  first  manifest  itself  ?     What  sin  did  you  fall  into,  what  duty 
omit,  what  was  it  that  you  suffered  yourself  to  become  inordinately  attached  to  ? 
And  you  who  neither  profess  nor  possess  religion,  I  ask  you  what  hindered  you 
from  becoming  a  penitent  disciple  of  Christ  at  that  time  to  which  I  have  alluded  f 
Although  the  hindrance  in  every  case  is  not  precisely  the  same,  yet  there  is  a  passage 
of  Scripture  which  is  applicable  to  every  case.   "  A  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him 


.  v.]  QALATIANS.  913 

aside."  Whenever  one  either  totally  or  partially  departs  from  the  living  God,  it  is 
because  of  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  that  is  in  him.  And  there  is  another  passage 
which  applies  perhaps  to  every  case  of  defection.  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me, 
having  loved  this  present  world."  That  phrase,  the  "world,"  is  a  very  comprehen- 
sive one.  It  includes  everything  which  may  be  preferred  to  God.  It  includes 
persons  and  things.  It  comprehends  profit,  pleasure,  and  honour  ;  your  business, 
your  profession,  your  family.  One  loves  the  world  in  this  aspect  of  it,  another  in 
that.  In  what  shape  or  phase  of  it,  it  drew  away  and  destroyed  Demas,  I  do  not 
know.  By  what  one  of  its  many  chains  it  binds  you,  I  cannot  tell ;  perhaps  by  one 
of  such  delicate  materials,  and  so  finely  drawn,  that  it  is  scarcely,  if  at  all,  per- 
ceptible.    (W.  Nevins,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  This  persuasion  comethnot  of  Him  that  calleth  yon. — This  persuasion : — 
We  learn — I.  That  the  cause  of  religious  declension  is  unbelief  in  God's  Word, 
and  surrender  to  plausible  persuasions.  Thus — 1.  Eve,  by  the  persuasion  of  the 
devil.  2.  Papists,  by  persuasion  that  the  Church  cannot  err.  3.  Common  people, 
by  persuasion  that  God  is  all  mercy.  4.  Tradesmen,  that  they  have  a  family  to 
keep.  5.  Moralists,  that  honesty  and  temperance  are  sufficient  for  salvation.  II. 
That  oub  duty  and  SAFETY  lie  in  following  absolutely  the  calling  of  God.  1.  Thus 
Abraham.     2.  Thus  Paul.    III.  That  doctrines    are    to    be   tested   by   their 

CONFORMITY    OB    NONCONFORMITY    TO    THE    CALLING   OF     GoD.        1.     God   Calls     US    to 

liberty ;  hence  the  yoke  of  ordinances  is  wrong.  2.  God  calls  us  to  justification  by 
the  merits  of  Christ ;  hence  justification  by  works  is  wrong.  3.  God  calls  us  to 
self-denial  and  service  ;  hence  self-indulgence  even  in  religious  privileges  is  wrong. 
4.  God  calls  us  absolutely  to  and  for  Himself ;  hence  the  sin  of  conformity  to  the  world. 
IV.  That  Gon  calls  even  backsliders  ;  which  shows — 1.  God's  patience.  2.  The 
possibility  of  restoration.  Y.  That  our  life  and  conversation  must  be  suitable 
to  the  high  calling  or  God.    (W.  Perkins.) 

Ver.  9.  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump. — Leaven  as  a  symbol  of  evil : — ; 

1.  Leaven  corrupts:  evil  corrupts.  II.  Leaven  infects:  evil  infects.  III. 
Leaven  is  subtle  and  secret  in  its  movements  :  so  is  evil.  It  is  a  virus  whose 
antecedents  and  consequents  it  is  impossible  to  trace.  IV.  Leaven  is  not 
restricted  to  one  mode  of  reaching  the  mass  upon  which  it  superinduces  its  own 
chemioal  conditions.  It  may  be  inserted  by  the  hand  of  another,  or  it  may  be 
wafted  by  a  breeze,  and  fall  by  its  own  gravity.  So  evil  works — 1.  Through 
systems  and  organizations.  (1)  In  our  Lord's  time  by  the  Pharisaic,  Sadducean, 
and  Herodian  systems.  (2)  In  Paul's  day  by  the  Judaizing  emissaries.  So  now 
there  is  the  leaven  of — (1)  Religious  superficiality  ;  (2)  scepticism ;  (3)  formalism. 

2.  Through  the  Zeit-Geist,  the  spirit  of  the  age.  IV.  The  resultant  duties.  1. 
Indignation.  To  prevent  fermentation,  the  chemist  passes  the  air  which  contains  the 
sporules  through  a  hot  platinum  tube,  which  destroys  the  germs.  A  mild  apologetic 
mood  will  not  do  for  evil.  2.  Separation.  Living  organisms  will  not  grow 
energetically  until  brought  in  contact  with  substances  having  an  affinity  with  them. 
So  evil  must  be  "cut  off"  by  caution.  V.  The  chief  instrument  in  the  war 
against  evtl  18  the  Crosb  of  Christ.  {J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  Tlie  power  of 
example : — Just  as  the  leaven,  by  its  mere  presence,  changes  the  particles  of  meal 
in  which  it  is  hid,  so  does  each  human  being,  by  his  mere  presence,  affect  for  good  or 
evil  those  with  whom  he  associates.  (H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  Scripture  use  of 
leaven  : — I  suppose  we  are  most  of  us  rather  surprised  that  "  leaven  "  is  generally 
used  in  a  bad  sense  in  Holy  Scripture.  Not,  indeed,  always  ;  because  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  itself  is  likened  to  leaven ;  but  generally.  In  the  New  Testament  leaven 
is  mentioned  on  five  distinct  occasions,  and  on  four  of  these  as  a  type  of  something 
very  evil,  as  a  symbol  of  a  thoroughly  mischievous  activity.  In  the  Old  Testament, 
the  prohibition  of  leaven  in  all  the  offerings  made  to  God  occurs  to  us  at  once.  It 
must,  however,  be  allowed  that  this  prohibition  has  two  distinct  origins,  the  one  of 
which  (and  the  earlier  and  most  important)  is  purely  historical,  and  carries  with  it 
no  notion  of  good  or  evil.  The  total  avoidance  of  leaven  during  the  annual 
solemnity  of  the  Passover,  although  it  afterwards  acquired  a  moral  significance, 
was  simply  ordained  in  memory  of  their  hasty  flight  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.).  The 
other  prohibition,  however,  is  of  a  moral  and  typical  character :  the  exclusion  of 
leaven  from  the  sacrifices  of  God  distinctly  gave  a  moral  character  and  meaning  to 
its  absence  (Lev.  ii.  11).  .  .  .  Now  let  us  ask  what  leaven  is,  and  whether  there  is 
anythirg  in  its  own  nature  to  explain  the  evil  significance  which  Holy  Scripture 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [amr.  T. 

has  attached  to  it.  Leaven,  then,  is  simply  so  much  dough  in  a  state  of  fermenta- 
tion. When  the  last  "  lump  "  had  been  leavened,  and  was  ready  for  baking,  a 
portion  was  set  aside  to  act  as  leaven  for  the  next  "  lump ."  Now  the  process  oi 
fermentation  is  one  of  the  most  curious,  and  (until  lately)  most  obscure  among 
the  commoner  operations  of  nature.  It  is  now  known  to  be  due  to  the  rapid— often 
inconceivably  rapid— development  of  vegetable  (fungoid)  growth,  which  has  the 
power  of  disengaging  a  quantity  of  free  acid,  and  of  changing  the  chemical 
character  of  the  substance  on  which  it  acts.  It  is  believed  that  most,  if  not  all, 
contagious  diseases  are  due  to  fermentation  imported  into  the  blood ;  and  the 
terrible  danger  of  these  diseases  is  only  a  striking  proof  of  the  extreme  facility 
v.  ith  which  fermentation  spreads.  This  is,  indeed,  its  one  great  characteristic— a 
characteristic  which  governs  at  once  many  of  tbe  most  ordinary  and  useful  opera- 
tions of  life,  and  many  of  its  most  deadly  and  widespread  evils.  Fermentation 
may,  indeed,  be  conveyed  by  one  substance  into  another,  as  in  the  common  case  of 
dough  "  raised"  by  means  of  yeast.  But  the  ordinary  and  typical  method  is  that 
of  leaven,  which  is  itself  fermented  dough,  introduced  into  the  midst  of 
other  unfermented  dough.  The  invariable  consequence  is,  that  the  fer- 
mented portion  has  the  power  of  superinducing  its  own  chemical  condition 
upon  the  mass  with  which  it  is  placed  in  contact :  being  itself  in  a  state  of  violent 
chemical  change,  it  has  the  power  of  setting  on  the  same  change  all  around  it ;  nor 
will  this  action  cease  until  that  of  which  it  is  a  part  has  entirely  succumbed  to  its 
influence.  But  this  change  is,  in  its  entirety,  a  change  for  the  worst :  it  may, 
indeed,  be  checked  (as  in  bread  by  baking,  in  wine  by  adding  spirit,  or  by  other 
means) ;  but  unless  stopped  at  an  early  stage  it  is  hurtful ;  and  when  it  cannot  be 
checked,  as  in  decaying  substances  and  in  fatal  diseases,  it  is  simply  destructive. 
Thus  fermentation  does,  as  it  were,  spring  from  evil  and  end  in  evil ;  it  originates  in 
that  which  is  corrupt  and  hastening  towards  dissolution,  and  it  ever  tends  to 
reproduce  the  same.  Only  when  carefully  watched,  and  mastered,  and  held  in 
check,  does  it  lend  itself  to  real  usefulness.  And  even  so  it  retains  some  reminder 
'  of  its  evil  origin.  Yeast  may  be  tasteless  and  harmless  enough ;  but  leaven  is 
fermented,  i.e.,  "  sour,"  dough,  and  always  imparts  a  certain  sourness  to  the  bread 
which  is  made  with  it.  .  .  .  It  is  in  the  nature  of  all  complex  organio  substances 
to  be  subject  to  a  destructive  fermentation ;  they  are  only  kept  from  it,  only 
preserve  their  delicate  chemical  balance,  by  the  principle  of  life  (whatever  it  may  be) 
within  them.  .  .  .  The  very  law  of  leaven  and  its  power  stands  in  the  fact  of  like 
to  like ;  and  even  so  false  teaching  can  only  act  with  rapidity  and  certainty  when  it 
comes  to  minds  disposed  to  receive  it — when  it  jumps,  i.e.,  with  the  popular  errors 
and  exaggerations  of  the  day.  But  with  moral  evil  it  is  different,  because  that  evil 
is  always  in  us  more  or  less,  and  therefore  the  leaven  always  finds  something  apt  to 
work  on  if  it  be  admitted.  There  is  in  most  of  ns,  at  any  rate,  a  large  body  of 
imaginations  which  are  ready  to  swell,  to  work,  to  become  turbid,  to  disengage  a 
quantity  of  evil  temper  and  evil  feeling,  and  to  ruin  the  proper  sweetness  and  savour 
of  our  Christianity,  if  once  we  have  opened  our  hearts  to  the  contagion  of  malice 
and  wickedness.  In  1  Cor.  v.  St.  Paul  passes,  by  an  easy  transition,  from  the 
natural  to  the  historical  associations  of  leaven.  As  sedulously  as  all  ferment  was 
banished  from  the  houses  of  the  Israelites,  so  sedulously  should  the  moral  ferment 
be  banished  from  the  hearts  of  Christians.  (R.  Winterbotham,  B.  Sc.)  Infec- 
tioiu  nature  of  evil : — The  least  particle  of  evil  infects;  a  single  spark  kindles  a 
forest.  Away  with  it  I  But  0  ye  careless  1  is  it  a  small  thing  to  you,  to  be  oorrupted 
through  idle  talk  and  accompanyings,  through  poison  of  lies  against  Christ? 
(Hedinger.)  The  lost  hammer: — A  relief  lifeboat  was  built  at  New  London 
thirteen  years  ago.  While  the  workmen  were  busy  over  it,  one  man  lost  his  hammer. 
Whether  he  knew  it  or  not,  it  was  nailed  up  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat.  Perhaps 
if  he  found  it  out,  he  thought  the  only  harm  done  was  the  loss  of  one  hammer. 
The  boat  was  put  to  service,  and  every  time  it  rocked  on  the  waves  that  hammer 
was  tossed  to  and  fro.  Little  by  little  it  wore  for  itself  a  track,  until  it  had  worn 
through  planking  and  keel,  down  to  the  very  copper  plating,  before  it  was  found 
out.  Only  that  plate  of  copper  kept  the  vessel  from  sinking.  It  seemed  a  very 
little  thing  in  the  start,  but  see  what  mischief  it  wrought.  So  with  a  little  sin  in 
the  heart.  It  may  break  through  all  the  restraints  that  surround  us,  and  but  for 
God's  great  mercy,  sink  our  souls  in  endless  ruin.  A  few  evil  words  in  a  child's  ear 
have  rung  in  his  bouI  for  twenty  years,  and  brought  untold  harm.  It  is  the  si* 
hidden  in  the  heart  that  we  should  most  fear.  There  are  none  who  do  not  need  to 
pray,  "Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults."        Little  faults : — The  least  unfaith- 


emit,  v.]  GALATIANS.  345 

fulness  may  bring  a  curse  upon  us,  as  the  f  sot  of  the  ohamois  on  the  snowy  mountains, 
or  the  breath  of  a  traveller  who  sings  or  shouts  on  his  snowy  road,  may  cause  an 
avalanche  which  shall  entomb  the  village  now  full  of  life  and  gaiety  at  the 
mountain's  base. 

44  It  is  the  little  rift  within  the  lute, 
That  by-and-by  will  make  the  music  mate, 
And,  ever  widening,  slowly  silence  all : 
The  little  rift  within  the  lover's  lute, 
Or  little  pitted  speck  in  garnered  fruit, 
That  rotting  inwards  slowly  moulders  all." 

One  wilful  tin  enough  to  ruin : — The  effect  of  one  wilfully  committed  vicious  action 
on  the  inner  life  of  a  man  may  be  like  the  effect  produced  by  allowing  a  single  drop 
of  ink  to  fall  into  a  glass  of  pure  water,  which  surely,  though  perhaps  imperceptibly, 

f>ermeates  and  contaminates  the  whole.  Danger  of  little  sins  : — A  little  leaven 
eaveneth  the  whole  lump ;  a  little  staff  may  kill  one ;  a  little  leak  in  a  ship  sinks 
it ;  a  little  flaw  in  a  good  cause  mars  it — so  a  little  sin  may  at  once  bar  the  door  of 
heaven  and  open  the  gates  of  hell :  though  the  scorpion  be  little,  yet  it  will  sting  a 
lion  to  death :  and  so  will  the  least  sin,  if  not  pardoned  by  the  death  of  Christ. 
(T.  Brooks.)  You  need  not  break  the  glasses  of  a  telescope,  or  coat  them  over 
with  paint,  in  order  to  prevent  you  from  seeing  through  them.  Just  breathe  upon 
them,  and  the  dew  of  your  breath  will  shut  out  all  the  stars.  So  it  does  not 
require  great  crimes  to  hide  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  Little  faults  can  do  it 
just  as  well.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Believe  it,  these  little  sins  do  arm  God's 
terrible  power  and  vengeance  against  you  :  and  as  a  page  may  carry  the  sword  of  a 
great  warrior  after  him,  so  your  little  sins  do,  as  it  were,  bear  the  sword  of  God's 
justice,  and  put  it  into  His  hands  against  you.  (Bishop  Hopkins.)  A  company 
was  walking  in  Sudbrook  Park,  when  Dr.  Ellis  drew  attention  to  a  large  sycamore 
tree  decayed  to  the  core.  "  That  fine  tree,"  said  he,  was  killed  by  a  single  worm. 
Two  years  previously,  the  tree  was  as  healthy  as  any  in  the  park,  when  a  wood- 
worm, about  three  inches  long,  was  observed  to  be  forcing  its  way  under  the  bark  of 
the  trunk.  It  then  caught  the  eye  of  a  naturalist  who  was  staying  there ;  and  he 
remarked,  "  Let  that  worm  alone,  and  it  will  kill  the  tree."  This  seemed  very 
improbable  ;  but  it  was  agreed  that  the  black-headed  worm  should  not  be  disturbed, 
after  a  time  it  was  discovered  that  the  worm  had  tunnelled  its  way  a  considerable 
distance  under  the  bark.  The  leaves,  next  summer,  dropped  off  very  early ;  and,  in 
the  succeeding  year,  it  was  a  dead,  rotten  thing,  and  the  hole  made  by  the  worm 
might  be  seen  in  the  heart  of  the  once  noble  trunk."  "  Ah,"  said  one  who  was 
present,  "  let  us  learn  a  lesson  from  that  single  tree.  How  many  who  once  pro- 
mised fair  for  usefulness  in  the  world  and  the  Church  have  been  ruined  by  a  single 
sin !  "  Little  sins  lead  to  greater : — It  is  Satan's  custom  by  small  sins  to  draw  us 
to  greater,  as  the  little  sticks  set  the  great  ones  on  fire,  and  a  wisp  of  straw  enkindles 
S  block  of  wood.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  A  spark  is  the  beginning  of  a  flame,  and  a 
small  disease  may  bring  a  greater.  (R.  Baxter.)  Sin  encroacheth  by  degrees  upon 
the  soul ;  if  it  can  get  but  one  of  its  claws  into  us,  it  will  quickly  follow  with  its 
head  and  whole  body.  Unfaithfulness  to  God  is  first  discovered  in  the  smallest 
matters,  then  it  proceeds  to  greater  things.  As  the  decay  of  a  tree  is  first  visible  in 
its  twigs,  but  by  degrees  it  goeth  on  the  bigger  arms,  and  from  them  to  the  main 
body.  As  it  is  the  nature  of  a  cancer  or  gangrene  to  run  from  one  joint  or  part  of 
the  body  to  another,  from  the  toe  to  the  foot,  from  the  foot  to  the  leg,  from  the  leg 
to  the  thigh,  and  thence  to  the  vital  parts.  Do  we  not  sometimes  see  a  whole  arm 
imposthumated  with  the  prick  of  a  little  finger ;  and  have  we  not  sometimes 
heard  of  a  great  city  betrayed  by  the  opening  of  a  little  postern  ?  These  little  sins 
will  grow  to  great  ones  if  let  alone.  Time  will  turn  small  dust  into  stone.  The 
poisonous  cockatrice  at  first  was  but  an  egg.  Small  twigs  will  prove  thorny  bushes 
if  not  timely  stubbed  up.  (O.  Swinnock.)  Deteriorating  influence  of  little  sins : — 
The  little  transgressions  in  which  men  indulge,  though  they  have  no  power  upon 
the  settled  oourse  of  human  affairs,  even  if  they  are  swept  out  into  a  ourrent  of 
public  sentiment  that  carries  them  down,  as  leaves  are  carried  by  the  Amazon,  are 
not  harmless  nor  indifferent,  because,  aside  from  the  influence  of  minor  delinquencies 
apon  the  sum  of  affairs  outwardly,  there  is  another  history  and  record,  namely, 
their  influence  upon  the  actor.  They  deteriorate  conscience.  You  can  by  a  blow 
crush  and  destroy  the  conscience,  or  you  can  nibble  and  gnaw  it  to  pieces.    There 


346  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼, 

is  one  way  in  which  a  lion  strikes  down  his  prey,  and  there  is  another  way  in  which 
a  rat  comes  at  his  prey ;  and  in  time  the  gnawing  of  vermin  is  as  fatal  to  beauty 
and  life  itself  as  the  stroke  of  the  lion's  paw.  These  little  infidelities  to  duty, 
truth,  rectitude,  lower  the  moral  tone,  limit  its  range,  destroy  its  sensibility ;  in 
short,  they  put  out  its  light.  It  is  recorded  of  a  lighthouse  erected  on  a  tropical 
shore,  that  it  was  like  to  have  failed  for  the  most  unlooked-for  reason.  When  first 
kindled,  the  brilliant  light  drew  about  it  such  clouds  of  insects,  which  populate  the 
evening  and  night  of  equatorial  lands,  that  they  covered  and  fairly  darkened  the 
glass.  There  was  a  noble  light  that  shone  out  into  the  darkness  and  vanquished 
night,  that  all  the  winds  could  not  disturb,  nor  all  the  clouds  and  storms  hide ;  but 
the  soft  wings  and  gauzy  bodies  of  myriads  of  insects,  each  one  of  which  was 
insignificant,  effectually  veiled  the  light,  and  came  near  defeating  the  proposed  gift 
to  mariners.  And  so  it  is  in  respect  to  conscience.  There  may  be  a  power  in  it  to 
resist  great  assault,  to  overcome  strong  temptations,  and  to  avoid  fearful  dangers ; 
but  there  may  be  a  million  little  venomous  insect  habits,  unimportant  in  them- 
selves, taken  individually,  but  fearful  in  their  results  collectively.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Insidiousness  of  little  sins : — Men,  in  their  property,  are  afraid  of  conflagrations  and 
lightning  strokes ;  but  if  they  were  building  a  wharf  in  Panama,  a  million 
madrepores,  so  small  that  only  the  microscope  could  detect  them,  would  begin  to 
bore  the  piles  down  under  the  water.  There  would  be  neither  noise  nor  foam ;  but 
in  a  little  while,  if  a  child  did  but  touch  the  post,  over  it  would  fall  as  if  a  saw  had 
cut  it  through.  Now  men  think,  with  regard  to  their  conduct,  that  if  they  were  to 
lift  themselves  up  gigantically  and  commit  some  crashing  sin,  they  should  never 
be  able  to  hold  up  their  heads ;  but  they  will  harbour  in  their  souls  little  sins, 
which  are  piercing  and  eating  them  away  to  inevitable  ruin.  (Rid.)  The  bad 
leaven ;  or,  the  contagion  of  sin : — There  is  a  thing  active,  "leaven ; "  a  thing 
f active,  "soureth;"  a  thing  passive,  "the  lump."  I.  But  because  the  whole 
speech  is  allegorical,  let  us  first  open  the  hbtaphob  with  the  key  of  propeb 
analogy.  1.  First,  taking  leaven  for  false  doctrine,  so  we  find  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment four  sorts  of  leavens :  Matt.  xvi.  6,  "  Beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 
and  of  the  Sadducees ; "  there  be  two  of  them,  the  Pharisaical  and  the  Sadducean 
leavens.  Mark  viii.  15,  "  Beware  of  the  leaven  of  Herod ; "  there  is  the  third. 
The  fourth  is  my  text,  the  leaven  of  mingling  Mosaical  ordinances  with  Christ's 
institutions.  2.  Now  to  the  second  way  of  considering  these  words,  taking  leaven 
personally  for  leaveners,  false  teachers,  indeed  heretics.  3.  "A  little  leaven 
leaveneth  the  whole  lump."  Now  let  us  resolve  this  allegory  another  way,  and 
conceive  by  leaven,  sin ;  by  lump,  man ;  by  leavening,  infection.  In  effect,  a  little 
sin  makes  the  whole  man,  in  body  and  soul,  unsavoury  to  the  Lord.  Sin  and 
leaven  are  fitly  compared  for  their  sourness.  There  is  a  leaven  sharp  and  sour, 
but  sanative.  But  this  leaven  is  far  sourer,  yet  hath  nothing  but  death  in  it.  It 
is  sour  to  God,  sour  to  angels,  sour  to  saints,  sour  to  the  sinner.  Bin  is  sourer 
than  any  leaven.  II.  The  allegory  thus  opened,  the  special  treasure  ob  in- 
struction remains  yet  to  be  dbawn  OUT.  We  perceive  what  the  leaven  signifies, 
and  what  the  lump.  Now  we  must  consider  the  relation  betwixt  a  little  leaven, 
and  the  whole  lump.  "  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump."  A  little  sin 
inf ecteth  a  great  deal  of  righteousness.  "  Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law, 
and  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all"  (James  ii.  10).  And  upon  good 
reason ;  for  there  is  a  universal  corruption,  therefore  should  be  a  universal 
sanctification.  In  that  young  man  that  professed  himself  to  have  kept  the  com- 
mandments, and  Christ  began  to  love  him,  yet  there  was  a  little  leaven  spoiled  all 
— covetousness.  In  Herod,  though  he  heard  many  sermons  of  John's  preached 
gladly  (and  it  is  some  good  thing  to  hear  sermons  with  joy),  yet  the  leaven  of 
Herodias  marred  all.  1.  Even  the  least  offence  is  mortal  in  its  own  nature,  capable 
of  transgression,  and  liable  to  malediction.  2.  Sins  less  heinous,  are  the  most 
numerous.  Many  littles  make  a  mickle.  Small  drops  of  rain  commonly  cause  the 
greatest  floods.  The  less  violence,  the  longer  continuance.  The  drizzling  sleet, 
that  falls  as  it  were  in  a  mist,  fills  the  channels,  they  swell  the  rivers,  the  overcharged 
rivers  send  forth  their  superfluous  waters  over  the  containing  banks ;  now  the 
meadows  are  polluted,  the  corn-fields  spoiled,  the  cattle  drowned  ;  yea,  even  houses, 
and  towns,  and  inhabitants  are  endangered,  and  firm  continents  buried  under  a 
deluge  of  waters.  Many  little  sands,  gathered  to  a  heap,  fail  not  to  swallow  a 
great  vessel.  You  have  eagles,  hawks,  kites,  and  such  great  fowls  of  rapine,  flying 
always  alone ;  but  the  sparrows  and  pigeons,  that  devour  the  grain,  by  innumerable 
troops.     A  pace  is  but  a  little  space  of  ground  ,  yet  a  thousand  paces  make  a  mile. 


chap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  847 

and  many  miles  bring  to  hell.  If  they  be  not  the  worst,  they  are  the  most ;  and  ia 
it  not  all  to  one  purpose  whether  one  Goliath  or  a  thousand  Philistines  overcome 
thee  ?  The  bird  brings  so  many  little  straws  as  make  up  her  nest :  the  reprobate 
bo  many  little  sticks  as  make  up  his  own  burning  pile.  Augustine  saith  tbere  is  in 
sin  both  weight  and  number.  Judge  them  by  tale,  and  not  by  weight.  Put  a 
wanton  speech,  a  loose  gesture  into  the  balance,  though  Christ  found  it  heavy,  and 
•very  soul  shall  for  whom  he  did  not  bear  it,  yet  it  is  censured,  a  little  faulting,  a 
little  failing :  so  little,  that  were  it  less,  it  were  nothing.  3.  These  little  sins  are 
not  so  easily  felt,  therefore  most  pernicious.  If  a  man  hath  dyed  his  hand  in  blood, 
a  peaoeless  conscience  haunts  him  with  incessant  vexation :  let  him  hate  his 
brother,  this  little  murder  he  feels  not.  The  devil,  like  a  roaring  lion,  is  soon 
heard:  forming  himself  to  a  fox,  his  insinuation  is  not  perceived.  Doubtless 
there  be  some  that  would  shudder  at  the  temptation  to  perjury ;  yet,  by  insensible 
steps  they  arrive  at  it :  by  lying  they  come  to  swearing,  by  swearing  to  forswearing. 
4.  Little  sins  are  the  materials  of  great  sins.  The  seeds  of  all  sins  are  naturally 
in  as:  not  so  much  as  treason,  homicide,  perjury,  but  there  is  in  our  nature 
a  proclivity  to  them.  Sin  seems  at  first  like  a  little  cloud,  but  it  prognosti- 
cates a  deluge  of  ensuing  wickedness.  5.  A  little  sin  infects  a  great  deal  of 
righteousness.  The  leprosy  infected  the  garments,  and  the  very  walls  of  the 
house ;  but  sin  hath  infected  wood,  and  wool,  and  walls,  earth,  air,  beasts,  plants, 
and  planets ;  and  stuck  a  scar  on  the  crystal  brow  of  nature  itself :  "  For  we  know 
the  whole  creation  groaneth,  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now  "  (Bom.  viii. 
22).  If  the  great  world  groan  for  man's  sin,  shall  not  the  little  world,  man,  groan 
for  his  own  sin  ?  When  one  commended  Alexander  for  his  noble  acts  and  famous 
achievements,  another  objected  against  him  that  he  killed  Gallisthenes.  He  was 
valiant  and  successful  in  the  wars ;  true,  but  he  killed  Callisthenes.  He  overcame 
the  great  Darius ;  so,  but  he  killed  Callisthenes.  He  made  himself  master  of  the 
world ;  grant  it,  bat  still  he  killed  Callisthenes.  His  meaning  was,  that  this  one 
unjust  fact  poisoned  all  his  valorous  deeds.  Beware  of  sin,  which  may  thus 
leaven  the  whole  lamp  of  oar  soal.  Indeed  we  must  all  sin,  and  every  sin  sours  ; 
bat  to  the  faithful  and  repentent  Christian  it  shall  not  be  damnable  :  "  There  is  no 
damnation  to  them  that  are  in  Jesus  Christ,"  (Bom.  viii.  1).  There  is  in  all  corrup- 
tion, to  most  affliction,  to  none  damnation,  that  are  in  Christ.  Our  leaven  hath 
soured  as,  bat  we  are  made  sweet  again  by  the  all-perfuming  blood  of  our  blessed 
Saviour.  _  6.  The  least  sins  are  the  most  fatal  to  men's  destruction.  There  is 
death  in  it  and  for  it.  A  dram  of  poison  diffuseth  itself  to  all  parts,  till  it  strangle 
the  vital  spirits,  and  tarn  oat  the  soal  from  the  tenement.  (T.  Adams.)  A  little 
leaven: — It  is  needful  to  remember  what  leaven  represented  under  the  Mosaic 
ritual.  It  typified  the  unrenewed  degenerate  nature.  Though  its  component 
ingredients  were  the  same  as  sweet  dough,  through  fermentation  it  was  liable  to 
corruption  and  acidity.  Thus  it  is  opposed  to  the  oil  of  the  meat  offering  which 
symbolised  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  the  latter  case  the  meal  was  made  palatable  by 
a  mild  and  penetrating  process,  while  leaven  caused  a  fermenting  disturbance  of  the 
(.Kurtz.) 


Ver.  10.  I  have  confidence  In  yon  through'the  Lord  that  ye  will  be  none 
otherwise  minded— (Comp.  chap.  iv.  11-20).  The  troubled  Church  and  its 
troublers : — I.  Paul's  treatment  or  the  Galatian  Chuech  shows  us — 1.  To  hope 
the  best  of  men  so  long  as  they  are  curable.  (1)  Objection  :  Those  that  hope  the 
best  may  be  deceived.  Answer :  In  judgment  but  not  in  practice.  It  is  the  duty 
of  love  to  hope  the  best.  Those  who  suspect  the  worst  are  the  oftenest  deceived. 
(2)  Objection  :  We  must  judge  of  things  as  they  are  indeed.  Beply  :  Judgment 
of  things  and  persons  must  be  distinguished.  No  uniform  rule  is  sufficient  by 
which  to  estimate  a  fellow  creature.  The  worst  have  repented.  The  best  have 
fallen.  2.  How  are  we  to  be  hopeful  of  men  ?  (1)  Only  for  such  things  as  they  are 
able  to  perform,  (2)  and  these  "  in  the  Lord."  He  only  can  give  helping  grace, 
exciting  grace,  and  so  lead  to  reformation.  3.  Not  to  excommunicate  them  unless 
they  are  incurable.  So  long  as  they  are  curable  we  must  use  means  to  cure  them. 
(1)  If  the  sheep  or  the  ox  that  goes  astray  must  be  brought  home  (Exod.  xxiii.  4), 
much  more  our  neighbour.  (2)  Christ  brings  home  the  lost  sheep  (Luke  xv.  1-5). 
So  most  every  onder-shepherd  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  4).  II.  Paul's  treatment  of  the 
troubles  of  this  Chubch  shows  as — 1.  That  God  watches  over  the  Church  by  a 
special  providence.  2.  That  the  apostle's  doctrine  is  an  infallible  certainty.  3. 
That  the  troublers  of  Churches  shall  be  plagued  by  the  just  judgment  of  God.     (W- 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

Perkins.)  Bearing  the  judgment : — The  consul  Q  S.  Caepio  had  taken  the  city  of 
Toulouse  by  an  act  of  more  than  common  perfidy  and  treachery,  and  possessed 
himself  of  the  immense  hoards  of  wealth  stored  in  the  temples  of  the  Gaulish 
deities.  From  this  day  forth,  he  was  so  hunted  by  calamity,  all  eztremest  evila 
and  disasters,  all  shame  and  dishonour,  fell  so  thick  on  himself  and  all  who  were 
bis,  and  were  so  traced  up  by  the  moral  instinct  of  mankind  to  this  accursed  thing 
which  he  had  made  his  own.  that  any  wicked  gains  fatal  to  their  possessor  acquired 
this  name  ;  and  of  such  a  one  it  would  be  said,  "  He  has  gold  of  Toulouse." 
(Trench.) 

Ver.  11.  And  I,  brethren,  If  I  yet  preach  circumcision,  why  do  I  yet  suffer  per- 
secution ?  then  Is  the  offence  of  the  Cross  ceased. — The  perversion  of  apostolic 
preaching: — There  are  two  attempts  or  resolves  in  constant  operation  as  to  the 
Cross.  One  is  man's,  to  accommodate  it  to  human  liking  and  taste  :  the  second  is 
God's,  to  raise  human  liking  and  taste  to  it.  I.  The  aim  of  man.  "  Then  is  the 
offence  of  the  Cross  ceased."  And  in  such  case,  there  must  be  its  depreciation.  It 
is  brought  down  from  its  proper  excellency.  What  is  to  be  understood  by  the 
Cross  ?  Not  the  wood.  How  should  we  be  the  better  did  we  possess  the  very  tree 
on  which  the  Saviour  hung  and  died  ?  The  true  Cross  consists  in  a  fact,  the  cruci- 
fixion of  the  Sun  of  God  :  in  a  doctrine,  salvation  by  atonement  :  in  an  influence 
and  moral  power,  a  hatred  to  sin,  a  weanedness  from  the  world,  a  penitential 
devotedness  to  the  Saviour.  The  Cross  is  preached  when  the  sinner  is  taught  how 
he  may  be  justified,  and  how  he  must  be  born  again.  In  what  lies  its  scandalising 
property,  its  offence  ?  It  was  early  declared  that  Christ  should  be  a  sign  spoken 
against,  and  that  in  connection  with  his  death,  when  the  sword  should  pierce  through 
her  soul  who  held  the  Holy  Child.  This  obnoxious  sign  was  therefore  the  spectacle 
of  a  crucified  Messiah.  Now  the  following  may  be  named  as  the  principal  excep- 
tions taken  to  it  by  those  who  rejected  it.  1.  It  was  an  improbable  medium  of 
revelation.  For  man  can  talk  loudly  how  God  should  manifest  Himself  and  Hia 
purposes  toward  us.  He  is  fond  of  anticipating  the  Father  of  lights,  would  teach 
Him  the  path  of  judgment  and  show  to  Him  the  way  of  understanding.  Is  it  morally 
probable  that  all  His  dispensations  should  revolve  upon  the  Cross  for  their  pivot  ? 
%  It  was  a  stigma  on  this  religion  which  set  it  in  disadvantageous  contrast  with 
every  other.  It  was  unheard  of  that  the  vilest  of  all  deaths  should  give  its  absolute 
character  to  a  religion,  and  that  this  religion  of  the  Cross  should  triumph  over  all. 
Yet  this  was  avowed.  3.  It  was  a  violent  disappointment  of  a  general  hope.  4. 
It  was  a  humiliating  test.  Ambition,  selfishness,  insincerity,  licentiousness, 
ferocity,  pride,  felt  that  it  was  encircled  with  an  atmosphere  in  which  they  were 
instantly  interrupted  and  condemned.  In  what  manner  did  the  first  preachers  of 
the  Cross  exhibit  it  ?  So  ingenuous,  so  unvarnished,  was  that  manner,  that  it 
always  prejudiced  them  :  "  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greeks 
foolishness."  They  preached  it  not  only  in  its  integrity  of  truths,  but  without 
gloss  and  concealment.  They  refined  not  on  it.  But  man  is  desirous  of  doing  this 
away  as  a  wrongful  and  unnecessary  impression.  He  would  make  the  offence  of  the 
Cross  to  cease.  (1)  By  fixing  it  upon  some  extrinsic  authority.  (2)  By  torturing 
it  into  coalition  with  foreign  principles.  (3)  By  transforming  the  character  of  its 
religious  instructions.  (4)  By  applying  it  to  inappropriate  uses.  (5)  By  excluding 
its  proper  connections.  It  is  not  to  be  viewed  as  naked  and  detached,  it  is  a  centre 
to  which  all  that  is  great  and  serious  spreads  out  as  circumference.  While  it  is 
alone  and  single  in  its  incomparableness,  it  is  full  of  relations  and  consequences. 
It  declares  the  righteousness  of  God.  It  is  the  basis  of  mercy  to  sinners.  It  is  in- 
tended to  sanctify  as  well  as  to  expiate.  II.  The  procedure  of  God.  We  have  seen 
that  the  Cross,  the  true  type  and  pledge  of  Christianity,  may  be  placed  in  such 
factitious  lights  and  may  be  contemplated  through  such  false  mediums,  may  be  so 
distorted  from  its  real  excellence,  and  so  polished  of  its  real  reproach,  may  be  so 
illustrated  and  decked,  that,  instead  of  offending,  it  shall  be  taken  into  favour.  Yet 
this  is  no  just  reading  of  Christianity,  it  is  only  a  fiction,  a  tale  that  is  told.  It 
evades  the  actual  import  of  it.  It  offers  nothing  of  its  actual  efficacy.  It  is  a  god 
which  cannot  save.  God's  way  is  therefore  to  frustrate  all  these  miserable  perver- 
sions— to  set  them  all  aside — to  honour  the  Cross  as  He  knows  and  unfolds  it — to 
bring  the  sinner  into  direct  contact  with  it — to  suffer  him  to  interpose  nothing— 
to  add  nothing  of  his  own — to  subtract  nothing  however  offensive  to  him — that  he 
may  be  brought  under  its  original  power  and  receive  its  complete  impression.  The 
method  is  conducted  after  this  sort.     1.  It  is  necessary,  if  we  would  receive  the 


*■!».  ▼.]  GALAT1ANS.  349 

proper  influence  of  the  Cross,  that  we  be  prepared  to  hail  it  as  a  distinct  revelation. 
It  is  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world.  It  is  not  some 
conclusion  that  the  wise,  the  prudent,  the  disputer  of  this  world,  have  reached.  It 
is  no  gathering  up  of  certain  prepossessions  and  analogies.  It  is  no  happy  venture 
in  the  large  field  of  discovery  and  experiment.  It  is  the  immediate  ray  from 
heaven.  It  is  a  great  declarative  act.  2.  When  we  rightly  appreciate  the 
Cross,  when  it  has  its  full  effect  upon  us,  we  recognize  it  as  the  instrument  of  re- 
demption. This  is  not  an  expedient  among  many  expedients,  a  safe  remedy  among 
remedies  equally  safe.  It  stands  apart.  This  is  the  one  vent  and  vehicle  for  mercy. 
3.  When  our  mind  approves  this  method  of  salvation,  it  finds  in  it  the  principle  of 
sanctification.  We  reverse  all  our  aims  and  desires.  We  are  called  unto  holiness. 
What  shall  work  it  in  us  ?  Gratitude  for  the  Saviour's  love,  common  cause  with 
His  mission,  sympathy  with  His  design.  (1)  Mark  the  process.  We  had  hitherto 
abided  in  death.  We  had  continued  indifferent  to  the  most  mighty  interests.  Christ 
was  preached,  but  He  was  dead  in  vain.  He  profited  us  nothing.  We  thrilled  not 
with  wonder,  nor  grief,  nor  joy.  But  now  we  are  quickened  with  Him.  He  liveth  in 
us.  Our  eyes  are  opened.  It  is  like  another  sense.  Our  ideas  are  new.  Each 
emotion  is  strange.  We  are  disabused.  (2)  Mark  the  necessity.  Until  we  be 
brought  nigh  to  it,  until  we  take  hold  of  it,  the  doctrine  of  the  Crucified  Saviour  is 
an  unintelligible  and  uninteresting  thing.  "He  is  of  none  effect  to  us."  It  is 
alienated  from  holy  use.  We  see  it  only  at  a  distance,  and  it  scarcely  moves  the 
most  transient  feeling.  Until  it  comes  into  contact  with  our  mind,  it  can  command 
no  proper  influence.  It  is  not  a  blind  agent,  operating  perforce.  It  works  in  no 
occult  manner.  It  addresses  the  understanding.  It  convinces  and  persuades.  It 
excites  the  moral  dispositions.  (3)  Mark  the  effect.  There  is  a  suddenly,  though 
a  most  intelligently,  developed  charm.  It  is  the  infinite  of  attraction.  All  con- 
centrates on  it.  It  absorbs  the  tenderness  and  the  majesty  of  the  universe.  It 
is  full  of  glory.  It  combines  whatever  can  make  great  or  constitute  greatness.  It 
is  the  simplest  of  all  simple  things — the  deepest  of  all  deep  things.  (R.  W.  Hamil- 
ton, D.D.)  The  offence  of  the  Cross  : — I.  Wherein  lies  the  offence  of  the 
Cbosb  ?  1.  Its  doctrine  of  atonement  offends  man's  pride.  2.  Its  simple  teaching 
offends  man's  wisdom,  and  artificial  taste.  3.  Its  being  a  remedy  for  man's  ruin 
offends  his  fancied  power  to  save  himself.  4.  Its  addressing  all  as  sinners  offends 
the  dignity  of  Pharisees.  5.  Its  coming  as  a  revelation  offends  "  modern  thought." 
6.  Its  lofty  holiness  offends  man's  love  of  sin.  II.  How  is  this  offence  shown  ? 
1.  Frequently  by  the  actual  persecution  of  believers.  2.  More  often  by  slandering 
believers,  and  sneering  at  them  as  old-fashioned,  foolish,  weak-minded,  morose, 
self-conceited,  <&o.  3.  Often  by  omittmg  to  preach  the  Cross.  Many  nowadays 
preach  a  Christless,  bloodless  gospel.  4.  Or  by  importing  new  meanings  into 
orthodox  terms.  6.  Or  by  mixing  the  truth  of  Christ  with  errors.  6.  Or  by  openJy 
denying  the  Deity  of  Him  who  died  on  the  cross,  and  the  substitutionary  character 
of  His  sufferings.  Indeed,  there  are  a  thousand  ways  of  showing  that  the  Cross 
offends  us  in  one  respect  or  another.  HI.  What  then  ?  1.  Herein  is  folly,  that 
men  are  offended  with  that  which  God  ordains ;  with  that  which  must  win  the  day ; 
with  the  only  thing  which  can  save  them  ;  with  that  which  is  full  of  wisdom  and 
beauty.  2.  Herein  is  grace,  that  we  who  once  were  offended  by  the  Cross,  now 
find  it  to  be  (1)  the  one  hope  of  our  hearts,  (2)  the  great  delight  of  our  souls,  (3) 
the  joyful  boast  of  our  tongues.  3.  Herein  is  heart-searching.  (1)  Perhaps  we 
are  secretly  offended  at  the  Cross.  (2)  Perhaps  we  give  no  offence  to  haters  of  the 
Cross.  Many  professed  Christians  never  cause  offence  to  the  most  godless,  (a)  Is 
this  because  they  bear  no  testimony  to  the  Cross  ?  (6)  Is  this  because  they  are  not 
crucified  to  the  world  ?  (c)  Is  this  because  there  is  no  real  trust  in  the  Cross,  and 
no  true  knowledge  of  Christ  t  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  slandered  apostle  : — I. 
The  refobt  spread  about  Paul.  1.  What  it  was — that  he  preached  circumcision  : 
from  whence  we  see  that  ministers  are  subject  to  defamation,  not  only  in  respect  of 
their  lives  but  of  their  doctrine.  (1)  This  verifies  the  saying  (Eccles.  viii.  14).  (2) 
Ministers  must  use  circumspection  both  in  the  manner  and  matter  of  preaching. 
(3)  Being  defamed  wrongfully  they  must  be  more  careful  to  please  God  (Psa.  cxix. 
69).  2.  How  it  came  about.  Probably  by  the  circumcision  of  Timothy.  Hence 
we  see  the  fashion  of  the  world  to  raise  reports  on  light  occasions.  II.  Paul's 
defence.  1.  As  it  was  more  than  a  mere  personal  matter,  and  one  that  affected  the 
purity  and  success  of  the  gospel,  he  was  obliged  to  notice  it.  (1)  Ministers  should 
not  be  overnice  in  defending  themselves.  Character  is  its  best  defence.  (2)  When 
tneir  doctrine  is  impugned  let  them  defend  it  with  all  their  might,  for  thereunto  ar« 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP,  f, 

they  set.  2.  Paul  disproves  the  charge  from  the  fact  that  he  is  persecuted  for  not 
doing  what  he  is  charged  with  doing.  Hence  we  see  (1)  that  ministers  must  preach 
the  gospel,  whatsoever  trouble  may  follow.  (2)  The  fidelity  of  St.  Paul,  who,  by  con- 
ceding circumcision,  might  have  gained  honour,  profit,  and  pleasure.  3.  Paul  proves 
his  innocence  by  the  fact  that  the  offence  of  the  Cross  was  not  abolished.  It  still 
offended  the  lapsed  Galatians  and  their  teachers.  Hence  this  charge.  (W.  Perkins.) 
Preach  the  Cross  : — Let  others  hold  forth  the  terrors  of  hell  and  the  joys  of  heaven. 
Let  others  drench  their  congregations  with  teachings  about  the  sacraments  and  the 
Church.  Give  me  the  Cross  of  Christ.  This  is  the  only  lever  wbich  has  ever 
turned  the  world  upside  down  hitherto,  and  made  men  forsake  their  sins.  And,  if 
this  will  not,  nothing  will.  A  man  may  begin  preaching  with  a  perfect  knowledge 
of  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  ;  but  he  will  do  little  or  no  good  among  his  hearer3 
unless  he  knows  something  of  the  Cross.  Never  was  there  a  minister,  who  did  much 
for  the  conversion  of  souls,  who  did  not  dwell  much  on  Christ  crucified.  Luther, 
Butherford,  Whitefield,  M'Cheyne,  were  all  most  eminent  preachers  of  the  Cross. 
This  is  the  preaching  that  the  Holy  Ghost  delights  to  bless.  He  loves  to  honour 
those  who  honour  the  Cross.  (Bishop  Ryle.)  The  offence  of  the  Cross  : — Luther 
was  offered  to  be  made  a  cardinal  if  he  would  be  quiet.  He  answered,  "  No,  not  if  I 
might  be  pope,"  and  defends  himself  thus  against  those  that  thought  him  haply  a 
proud  fool  for  his  pains  :  "  Let  me  be  counted  fool,  or  anything,  so  I  be  not  found 
guilty  of  cowardly  silence."  The  Papists,  when  they  could  not  rule  him,  railed  at 
him,  and  called  him  an  apostate.  He  confesseth  the  action,  and  saith,  "  I  am  in- 
deed an  apostate,  but  a  blessed  and  holy  apostate — one  that  hath  fallen  off  from 
the  devil."  Then  they  called  him  devil ;  but  what  saith  he  ?  "  Luther  is  a  devil ; 
be  it  so  :  but  Christ  liveth  and  reigneth  ;  that's  enough  for  Luther  :  so  be  it." 
Nay,  such  was  the  activity  of  Luther's  spirit,  that,  when  Erasmus  was  asked  by  the 
Elector  of  Saxony  why  the  pope  and  his  clergy  could  so  little  abide  Luther,  he 
answered,  "  For  two  great  offences — meddling  with  the  pope's  triple  crown  and  the 
monk's  fat  paunches."    And  hence  was  all  the  hatred.     (Spencer.) 

Ver.  12.  I  would  they  were  even  cut  off  that  trouble  you, — Reasons  for  Paul's 
indignation : — Not  content  with  argument  he  charges  the  Judaizers  with  what  is 
base,  cowardly,  and  corrupt.  They  are  mean  and  time-serving,  and  dread  the  loss 
of  caste  among  their  fellow-countrymen.  His  whole  being  at  last  becomes  excited 
with  indignation ;  his  brow  darkens ;  his  feelings  explode ;  and  the  flash  and  the 
thunderbolt  leap  forth  in  an  anathema.  Only  something  very  serious  could  justify 
even  an  apostle  in  such  a  mode  of  conducting  religious  controversy.  What  was  it? 
The  error  he  denounced  was — 1.  A  species  of  blasphemy  against  the  Divine  fact 
which  constituted  God's  method  of  reconciliation,  and,  as  such,  it  shocked  Paul's 
love  and  reverence  for  the  Christ  it  dishonoured  (Gal.  ii.  21).  A  species  of  apostasy 
from  Christ,  whatever  might  be  their  verbal  profession  of  belief,  and  thus  it 
shocked  and  was  resented  by  his  love  for  man  (Gal.  v.  2-5).  A  thing  absurd  in 
itself,  and,  as  such,  it  shocked  his  understanding  (Gal.  ii.  16-18).  4.  It  opposed  the 
idea  of  progress,  intellectually  considered,  and  it  was  thus  inconsistent  with  Paul's 
hope  for  humanity  (Gal.  iv.  9).  5.  It  was  a  yoke  put  on  the  neck  of  the  Gentiles,  and, 
as  such,  it  shocked  the  apostle's  respect  for  liberty,  and  offended  and  aroused  his  spirit 
of  independence  (Gal.  v.  1).  6.  It  was  an  attempt  to  perpetuate  a  national  distinc- 
tion, and  to  keep  up  the  supremacy  of  a  particular  people,  and,  as  such,  it  offended 
St.  Paul's  philanthropy  and  ran  counter  to  his  conviction  of  the  design  of  the 
gospel,  the  oneness  of  the  race,  and  the  equality  of  the  nations  (Gal.  iii.  26-28). 
7.  It  interfered  with  the  bestowal  of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and,  as  such,  it  grieved 
the  apostle  on  account  of  his  anxiety  for  the  holiness  of  the  Church  (Gal.  iii.  2,  3). 
(T.  Binney  )  Church  troublers  : — The  Church  is  troubled — I.  By  false  doctrine  ; 
thus  Ahab  troubled  Israel  (1  Kings  xviii.  18),  and  false  apostles  the  Galatians. 
U.  By  wicked  example  :  thus  Aohan  troubled  Israel  (Josh.  vii.  15).  HI.  By  fokcb 
and  cruelty:  thus  tyrants  and  persecutors  trouble  the  Church  (Acts  xii.  1). 
(W.  Perkins.) 

Ver.  13.  For,  brethren,  ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty ;  only  use  not  liberty  for 
an  occasion  to  the  flesh,  but  by  love  serve  one  another. — Christian  liberty : — I.  The 

NATURE   OF  THAT  LIBERTY  OB*  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  HERE  SPEAKS.      There  IB  a  charm  in 

the  very  sound  of  liberty ;  it  awakens  many  grateful  recollections.  But  the  word 
is  employed  in  various  acceptations.  Civil  liberty  is  that  freedom  which  ie  out 
birthright  as  men.    Spiritual  liberty  is  that  freedom,  which  belongs  to  as,  not  as 


OTA*,  v.]  GALATIAN8.  851 


men,  bat  as  Christians.  II.  The  great  value  of  that  spiritual  liberty  to  which 
all  believers  op  gosi'el  tbuth  are  called.  Political  freedom,  important  as  it  is, 
may  be  overrated.  It  is  highly  advantageous  to  a  nation,  but  not  essential  to  the 
happiness  of  individuals.  Good  men  have  been  happy  in  exile  or  in  prison,  and 
bad  men  cannot  be  so  under  any  circumstances  however  favourable ;  the  cause  of 
the  difference  is  to  be  referred  to  the  state  of  the  mind.  1.  The  measure  of  spiritual 
liberty,  which  a  Christian  even  now  attains,  removes  or  alleviates  some  of  the 
keenest  and  heaviest  sorrows  to  which  man  is  subject.  2.  The  measure  of  spiritual 
liberty,  which  a  Christian  now  possesses,  greatly  heightens  and  refines  all  his 
enjoyments.  Countermanding  the  original  curse,  it  brings  back  some  of  the  pro- 
ductions of  paradise.  It  opens  the  noblest  faculties  and  animates  the  best  feelings 
of  the  mind.  3.  It  is  but  the  beginning  and  pledge  of  that  complete  deliverance 
from  all  sin  and  sorrow,  to  which  he  is  looking  with  lively  hope.  The  best  state 
on  earth  bears  the  marks  of  imperfection.  Even  where  grace  reigns,  sin,  like  a 
rebel  dethroned  but  not  destroyed,  is  too  near  to  leave  any  long  interval  of  peace. 
In  that  kingdom  to  whieh  we  are  hastening,  no  tumults  or  temptations  will  rise  ; 
no  sickness  or  sighing,  death  or  danger,  will  be  known.  No  law  in  the  members  will 
be  found  warring  against  the  law  of  the  mind,  or  bringing  us  into  captivity  to 
sin.  Even  creation  itself  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into 
the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  21).    III.  The  way  in  which 

THE  LIBERTY   TO   WHICH  THE   BELIEVER    IS    CALLED   MAY    BE    DULY   IMPROVED.      All  the 

principles  of  our  holy  religion  have  a  practical  bearing.  We  see  a  beautiful  harmony 
in  its  doctrines  and  precepts.  This  is  one  of  the  great  excellencies  of  Christianity. 
Paul  was  a  wise  master-builder,  equally  concerned  to  lay  a  good  foundation,  and  to 
carry  up  the  superstructure.  1.  He  gives  a  word  of  salutary  warning — "  Use  not 
liberty,"  &o.  There  is  hardly  any  good  but  is  liable  to  abuse.  Every  sacred 
privilege  has  been  and  may  be  perverted.  We  must  be  on  our  guard  against  this. 
To  use  Christian  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  indulge  the  flesh  is  the  best  thing  in  the 
world  turned  to  the  worst  purpose.  2.  The  apostle,  in  our  text,  gives  a  suitable 
word  of  direction — "  By  love  serve  one  another."  Love  is  the  first  and  best  of  all 
the  Christian  graces.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  &o.  Love  finds 
out  many  means  of  serving  our  brethren.  It  prompts  and  animates  the  mind — 
it  makes  us  cheerful,  active,  tender,  kind,  forbearing.  (Essex  Congregational 
Remembrancer.)  By  love  serve  one  another — Christianity  a  system  of  love  : — Look 
at  the  operations  of  charity,  or  the  love  of  benevolence.  It  was  this  which  existed 
in  the  mind  of  Deity  from  eternity,  and  in  the  exercise  of  which  He  so  loved  our 
guilty  world  as  to  give  His  only-begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.  It  was  on  the  wings  of  charity  that 
the  Son  of  God  flew  from  heaven  to  earth,  on  an  errand  of  mercy  to  onr  lost  world; 
it  was  charity  that  moved  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  apostles,  and  urged  them 
with  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation,  from  country  to  country.  The  whole  missionary 
enterprise  is  founded,  not  of  course  on  the  basis  of  brotherly  kindness,  but  on  that 
of  charity.  All  those  splendid  instances  that  have  been  presented  to  us  of  the 
exercise  of  philanthropy  are  the  operations  of  this  Divine  charity.  See  Howard, 
leaving  the  seclusion  of  a  country  gentleman,  giving  up  his  elegant  retreat  and  all 
its  luxurious  gratifications,  pacing  to  and  fro  through  Europe,  plunging  into 
dungeons,  battling  with  pestilence,  weighing  the  fetters  of  the  prisoner,  gauging  the 
disease  of  the  pest-house— all  under  the  influence  of  heavenly  charity.  See  Wil  ber- 
force,  through  twenty  years  of  his  eventful  life,  lifting  up  his  unwearied  voice,  and 
employing  his  fascinating  eloquence  against  the  biggest  outrage  that  ever  trampled 
on  the  rights  of  humanity.  What  formed  his  character,  sketched  his  plan,  inspired 
his  zeal,  but  charity  ?  See  that  illustrious  woman,  lately  departed,  so  ripe  for  glory 
and  so  richly  invested  with  it,  who  interested  herself  amidst  the  prisoners  of  New- 
gate— to  chain  their  passions,  to  reclaim  their  vices,  and  to  render  them  more  meet 
for  society,  which  had  condemned  them  as  its  outcasts.  What  was  it  that  gave  to 
Mrs.  Fry  her  principle  of  action,  what  indeed  was  the  principle  itself,  but  charity  ? 
(J.  AngellJames.)  "  One  another"  : — I.  What  is  a  Christian  Chubch  ?  1.  Not 
a  club,  an  association  of  persons  belonging  to  the  same  rank  in  life,  but  a  Divine 
society  embracing  all  classes.  2.  Not  a  republic  where  majorities  rule,  but  a  society 
where  the  will  of  the  Divine  Head  is  the  governing  power.  3.  Two  or  three, 
met  in  Christ's  name,  and  loyal  to  His  will,  are  sufficient  to  constitute  a  Christian 
Church.  H.  What  are  the  conditions  of  hvppy  Church  life  ?  1.  The  root  of  all 
is  obedience  to  the  law.  "Love  one  another."  2.  Love  gives  rise  to  mutuality  in 
everything.    3.  Mutual  feeling  branches  out  in  various  ways.    (1)  Where  help  u 


852  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  t4 

wanted — *'  Bear  ye  one  another's  bnrdens,"  "  Edify  one  another,"  "  Admonish  one 
another."  (2)  Where  wounded  feelings  prevail — ••  Confess  to  one  another,"  "  Pray 
for  one  another,"  "  Forbearing  one  another,"  "  Forgiving  one  another."  4.  From 
the  whole  proceeds  the  Christian  law  of  courtesy  and  etiquette — "Be  subject  to 
one  another,"  "  In  honour  prefering  one  another,"  "  In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each 
esteem  other  better  than  himself."  (E.  Johnton,  M.A.)  Law  and  liberty: — 
There  is  a  great  mistake  about  liberty  from  law.  Some  religious  persons  think  it 
means  free,  so  that  though  you  sin,  the  law  will  not  punish.  This  is  the  liberty  of 
devils :  free  to  do  as  much  evil  as  you  will,  and  yet  not  suffer.  True  Christian 
liberty  is  this,  self-command ;  to  have  been  brought  to  Christ ;  to  do  right  and  to 
love  right  without  a  law  of  compulsion  to  school  you  into  doing  it.  If  we  have  not 
got  so  far,  the  law  has  all  its  power  hanging  over  us  still.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  To 
preach  justification  by  the  law  as  a  covenant  is  legal,  and  makes  void  the  death  and 
merits  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  to  preach  obedience  to  the  law  as  a  rule  is  evangelical ; 
and  it  savours  as  much  of  a  New  Testament  spirit  to  urge  the  commands  of  the 
law  as  to  display  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  (Bishop  Hopkins.)  True  liberty 
is  only  realized  in  obedience.  The  abuse  of  freedom  is  bondage,  from  which 
there  is  no  self-deliverance.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  The  joy  of  liberty  :— Dr.  Fletcher 
was  passing  the  Old  Bailey  one  day,  and  saw  a  couple  of  boys  turning  somersaults, 
standing  on  their  heads,  making  wheels  of  themselves,  and  all  sorts  of  things; 
and  he  stopped,  and  said,  "  "Why,  boys,  whatever  are  you  at  ?  You  seem  to  be 
delighted; "  to  which  one  of  them  replied,  "Ah!  and  you  would  be  delighted,  too, 
if  you  had  been  locked  up  in  that  jail  three  months.  You  would  jump  when  you 
came  out."  And  the  good  old  doctor  said  he  thought  it  was  very  likely  he  should. 
And  the  man  who  has  been  called  unto  liberty  by  Christ,  knows  the  Bweets  of  freedom, 
because  aforetime  the  iron  had  entered  his  soul.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Loving 
service : — A  train  from  the  Far  West  of  America  was  once  passing  through  Saratoga, 
having  among  other  passengers  a  man  with  an  infant  child.  The  man's  garments 
showed  him  to  be  poor,  and  the  crape  on  his  hat  showed  the  child  to  be  motherless. 
The  infant  was  restless,  and  the  father  handled  it  clumsily  ;  with  all  his  efforts  he 
could  not  quiet  it.  He  wiped  the  tears  from  its  eyes,  and  then  from  his  own.  All 
who  saw  him  pitied  him.  At  length  a  richly-dressed  lady,  whose  infant  lay  in  the 
arms  of  its  nurse,  said,  with  motherly  tenderness  in  her  tone,  "  Give  me  the  child." 
The  poor  man  gave  her  his  boy,  whose  coarse  and  soiled  robes  rested  for  once  en 
costly  silk ;  his  head  disappeared  under  her  shawl,  and  all  was  still.  She  held 
him  mile  after  mile,  and  did  not  relinquish  him  until  her  own  child  required  atten- 
tion. (Biblical  Treasury.)  Liberty  through  love: — I.  The  nature  of  this 
liberty.  1.  This  liberty  is  freedom  from  the  burden  of  a  religion  of  ordinances. 
2.  It  is  liberty  from  the  moral  law  as  the  awakener  of  sin,  and  from  the  fear  of  ita 
punishment,  which  is  death.  II.  To  keep  this  libebtt  pure,  we  should  know  its 
dangers,  and  avoid  them.  1.  It  may  be  so  used  as  to  allow  the  lower  nature  to 
rule — as  "  an  occasion  to  the  flesh."  (1)  We  are  freed  from  ceremonies,  but  we 
cannot  live  without  some  forms.  Spiritual  life,  left  to  silence,  unsymbolized, 
unused,  fades  away.  (2)  We  err  if  we  use  liberty  to  despise  those  who  love  cere- 
monial ;  or  if  we  bind  ourselves  never  to  use  it.  2.  Our  liberty  from  coercive  law 
is  produced  in  us  by  a  love  which  obeys  the  law.  If  we  do  not  love  to  obey,  we  are 
not  in  Christian  liberty  at  all.  St.  Paul  calls  such  despisers  of  law  the  servants  of 
sin.  3.  The  use  of  freedom  must  be  in  subordination  to  love.  It  is  the  habit  of 
many  to  placard  their  freedom ;  to  violate  the  scruples  of  others.  What  sort  of 
Christianity  is  that  which  uses  the  freedom  of  Christ  to  do  violence  to  the  love  of 
Christ  ?  The  rule  is — Use  your  liberty,  not  for  your  own  gratification,  but  for  the 
good  of  others.  Liberty  is  not  a  principle  of  action ;  it  is  a  mode  of  action.  Love 
is  its  principle,  and  love  is  the  test  which  tells  whether  we  are  free  or  enslaved. 
(S.  A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 

Ver.  14.  For  all  the  law  Is  fulfilled  In  one  word,  even  In  this;  Thou  shalt 
*ove  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  —  The  fulfilling  of  tlie  law: — L  Love  is 
op  perpetual  obligation.  II.  A  tbuk  eebponsk  to  the  obligation  of  neigh- 
bourly LOVE  WILL  ENSURE  THE  FAITHFUL  DISCHARGE  OF  EVERY  OTHER  OBLIGA- 
TION. III.  Therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  For — 1.  The 
law  is  the  interpretation  of  love,  and  the  definition  and  prescription  of  that 
which  the  infinite  intelligence  knows  that  love  demands.  But — 2.  There  is 
also  the  underlying  assumption  that  in  the  absence  of  love  the  law  cannot  be 
truly  fulfilled.  Therefore— 3.  When  the  principle  of  love,  recognizing  the  authority 


chap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  853 

of  the  teaching  and  guiding  law,  has  restrained  from  every  act  of  injury  to  its 
neighbour,  and  prompted  to  all  sorts  of  kindly  service  for  that  neighbour's  good, 
then  has  the  law  been  truly  fulfilled.     (W.  Tyson.)        Love  of  our  neighbour : — 

1.  Love   ra — (1)  Desire  for,   (2)  delight  in,  (3)  endeavour  after    another's  good. 

II.  It  exists  as  being — 1.  Cherished  in  the  heart.      2.  Exhibited  in  the  life. 

III.  The  term  neighbour  is  applicable  and  includes  all  men.  All  are  God's  off- 
spring. IV.  The  degree  of  love  here  necessary.  1.  As  truly  as  thyself.  2.  With 
the  same  love  in  kind  and  degree.  (T.  Robinson.)  I.  The  doty — Love.  1.  The 
word.  2.  The  deed.  3.  Tbe  truth.  II.  Its  object — Our  neighbour.  1.  Friend 
or  foe.  2.  At  home  or  abroad.  Ill  Its  measure — As  thyself ;  therefore — 1.  Sin- 
cerely. 2.  Constantly.  3.  Devotedly.  IV.  Its  excellence.  1.  It  fulfils  the 
whole  law,  2.  Promotes  universal  happiness  and  peace.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Self- 
love  : — Contracted  affections,  like  self-love,  may  oppose  their  own  end — private 
good.  The  supposed  contrariety  between  benevolence  and  self-love  may  be  only 
apparent.  I.  Self-lovk  as  distinguished  from  other  passions.  1.  Self-love  has 
an  internal,  other  affections  an  external,  object.  2.  Such  affections  are  distinct 
from  self-love,  though  part  of  ourselves.  3.  All  language  recognizes  this  distinc- 
tion. Self-love  produces  interested  actions ;  particular  affections,  actions  which 
are  friendly.  4  Happiness  does  not  consist  in  self-love,  but  in  the  wise  gratifica- 
tion of  all  our  affections.  5.  Self-love  often  fails  to  produce  happiness ;  it  often 
produces  anxiety,  and.  when  in  excess,  misery.  Thus  self-love  is  distinct  from 
particular  affections,  and  so  far  from  being  our  only  rule,  it  often  disappoints 
itself,  especially  when  made  one  solitary  principle.  II.  Self-love  as  distinguished 
from  benevolence.  These  are  distinguished  but  not  necessarily  opposed.  1.  From 
the  nature  of  the  affections  themselves ;  self-love  does  not  exclude  particular 
affections,  nor  does  benevolence.  2.  From  the  course  of  action  suggested  by  them. 
(1)  Affections  tend  both  to  private  and  public  good.  (2)  Their  tendency  to  one 
object  does  not  disturb  their  connection  with  another.  (3)  Benevolence  produces 
as  much  enjoyment  as  ambition.  3.  From  the  temper  of  mind  produced  by  them. 
(1)  Benevolence  gives  a  pleasure  over  and  above  other  pleasures,  with  which  it 
does  not  interfere.  (2)  Has  an  assurance  of  special  favour  from  God.  (3)  Hence 
self-love  and  benevolence  are  so  far  from  being  opposed,  that  the  second  may  be 
the  easiest  way  of  gratifying  the  first.  (4)  It  is  true  that  particular  affections  m  ay 
be  gratified,  so  as  to  interfere  with  self-love,  but  benevolence  interferes  with  it  loss 
than  any  other.  (5)  The  origin  of  the  mistake  that  they  interfere  is  in  the 
confusion  of  property  and  happiness.  4.  From  Scripture,  which  inculcates  bene- 
volence, and  yet  recognizes  self-love  and  appeals  to  it.  (Bishop  Butler.)  The 
love  of  our  neighbour : — I.  The  object  of  this  affection.  Love  of  our  neighbour 
or  benevolence  seeks  the  good  of  others,  and  in  its  noblest  form  it  is  the  perfection 
of  God.  II.  The  proper  extent  of  this  affection.  As  ourselves  :  which  imp]  tes 
— 1.  That  this  love  is  to  be  of  the  same  kind.  (1)  We  have  a  common  interest  in 
others  and  in  ourselves.  (2)  This  is  the  proper  temper  of  virtue  ;  love.  2.  That 
our  love  for  others  is  to  bear  a  certain  proportion  to  our  love  for  ourselves. 
(1)  A  proportion  in  affections  implied  in  all  virtuous  characters.  (2)  So  a  due 
proportion  of  benevolence  and  self-love  is  implied  here.  (3)  What  the  proportion 
is  to  be  not  easily  decided,  for  affection  is  not  easily  measured ;  but  as  to  actions, 
the  expression  of  affection,  the  more  others  occupy  our  thoughts  (provided  we 
neglect  not  ourselves)  the  better.  Even  if  this  imply — 3.  That  our  love  for  others 
is  equal  to  our  love  for  ourselves,  no  ill  consequences  can  ensue,  for  (1)  men 
have  other  affections  for  themselves  not  felt  for  others.  (2)  They  are  specially 
interested  in  themselves.  (3)  They  have  a  particular  perception  of  their  own 
interests,  so  that  there  is  no  fear  of  self-neglect.  III.  The  influence  of  this 
affection  on  our  general  temper.     Its  effect  is — 1.  To  produce  all  charitableness. 

2.  To  fit  men  for  every  relation  and  duty.  3.  To  moderate  party  feeling. 
4.  To  prevent  or  heal  all  strife.  IV.  This  affection  includes  all  virtue. 
1.  Love  prompts  men  to  seek  the  greatest  happiness  of  all,  which  is  itself  a  dis- 
charge of  all  obligations.  2.  Love  even  prompts  to  the  practice  of  personal  virtues 
(temperance,  &c.) ;  and  certainly  the  neglect  of  these  virtues  implies  a  deficiency  of 
love  to  others.  3.  Apart  from  particular  natures  and  circumstances,  love  includes 
all  goodness  ;  and — 4.  Piety  itself  is  the  love  of  God,  as  an  infinitely  good  Being. 
(Ibid.)  We  may  love  man  because  of  what  he  is  as  man  : — God  has  stamped  beauty 
on  his  material  body,  and  given  an  higher  grandeur  to  his  mysterious  mind.  But 
there  is  a  deeper  and  diviner  reason  for  love.  It  is  this  :  To  love  a  man  because 
he  is  a  brother  in  Christ ;  because  he  is  to  some  extent  like  Christ,  and  reflects  His 

83 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  *. 

image  upon  thosa  who  come  in  contact  with  him.  Here  the  grounds  of  love  ara 
moral,  spiritual,  and  internal.  (Thomas  Jones).  Neighbourly  love: — Thomas 
Samson  was  a  working  miner,  and  working  hard  for  his  bread.  The  captain  of  the 
mine  said  to  him  on  one  occasion,  "  Thomas,  I've  got  an  easier  berth  for  you, 
where  there  is  comparatively  little  to  do,  and  where  you  can  earn  more  money : 
will  you  accept  it?"  What  do  you  think  he  said?  Captain,  there's  our  poor 
brother  Tregony.  He  has  a  sick  body,  and  he  is  not  able  to  work  as  hard  as  I  am. 
I  fear  his  toil  will  shorten  his  useful  life.  Will  you  let  him  have  the  berth  ?  "  The 
captain,  pleased  with  his  generosity,  sent  for  Tregony,  and  gave  him  the  berth, 
which  he  is  now  enjoying.  Thomas  was  gratified,  and  added,  "  I  can  work  a  little 
longer  yet."  (Sunday  Magazine.)  Caring  for  others : — The  intensity  of  maternal 
affection  was  illustrated  in  the  observation  of  a  little  boy,  who,  after  reading 
Banyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  asked  his  mother  which  of  the  characters  she  liked 
best.  She  replied,  "  Christian,  of  course :  he  is  the  hero  of  the  story."  The  dear 
child  responded,  "  Mother,  I  like  Christiana  best,  because  when  Christian  set  out 
on  his  pilgrimage,  he  went  alone  ;  but,  when  Christiana  started,  she  took  the 
children  with  her."  Great  love : — Edward   I.   of  England  having  received  a 

wound  from  a  poisoned  dagger,  his  wife  Eleanor  sucked  out  the  poison,  venturing 
her  own  life  to  save  her  husband's. 

Ver.  15.  But  If  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  con- 
sumed one  of  another. — Uncharitable  contentions  in  the  Church  of  God : — I.  There 

EVER  WERE,  ARE,  AND  WILL  BE,  DIFFERENCES  AMONG  God's  OWN  PEOPLE  IN  THE  MATTERS 

of  religion.  Even  amongst  the  Jews,  who  had  such  punctual  rules  prescribed  before 
th^m,  yet  the  school  of  Hillel  went  one  way,  and  the  school  of  Shammai  went 
another ;  and  their  contentions  sometimes  were  sprinkled  with  the  blood  one  of 
another.  And  no  sooner  was  the  gospel  planted,  but  the  professors  of  it  fell  at 
variance  about  matters  of  religion :  this  is  plain  in  the  controversies  about  cir- 
cumcision, for  the  quieting  whereof  that  famous  council  met  at  Jersalem  (Acts  xv.). 
And  the  causes  hereof  are  evident : — 1.  Our  general  imperfection  in  this  life.  As 
the  best  men  are  imperfect  in  their  holiness,  so  are  they  in  their  knowledge  ;  there 
will  be  defects  in  our  understanding,  as  well  as  in  our  will.  So  that  it  is  scarce 
possible  to  prevent  all  diversity  of  opinions  in  religion.  2.  Men's  education  con- 
tributes much  hereunto.  It  is  manifest  how  strong  an  influence  this  hath  upon  all 
people's  understandings.  3.  Men's  capacities  are  different.  Some  have  a  greater 
sagacity  to  penetrate  into  things  than  others ;  some  have  a  clearer  judgment  to 
weigh  and  determine  of  things  than  others  ;  some  have  more  solid  learning  by  far 
than  others;  and  these,  doubtless,  will  attain  to  a  higher  form  and  class  than 
others  can.  4.  Men's  natural  tempers  are  different.  Some  more  airy  and  mercurial, 
some  more  stiff  and  melancholy.  5.  Men's  interests  are  different.  Not  that  any 
good  man  doth  wittingly  calculate  his  profession  for  his  baser  ends ;  but  y6t  they 
may  secretly  bias  him,  especially  in  more  minute  and  dubious  matters  belonging  to 
religion.  II.  These  differences  mat  and  should  be  managed  with  charity. 
*'  Better  to  have  truth  without  public  peace,  than  peace  without  saving  truth : "  so  Dr. 
Gauden.  "  We  must  not  sail  for  the  commodity  of  peace  beyond  the  line  of  truth  ; 
we  must  break  the  peace  in  truth's  quarrel :  "  so  another  learned  man.  But  this  ia 
to  be  understood  of  necessary  and  essential  truths ;  in  which  case,  "  that  man 
little  consults  the  will  and  honour  of  God,  who  will  expose  the  truth,  to  obtain," 
as  saith  Nazianzen,  "  the  repute  of  an  easy  mildness."  But  when,  after  all  such 
endeavours  have  been  used  as  are  within  the  reach  of  a  man's  parts  and  calling, 
still  differences  do  remain  in  smaller  matters,  these  ought  to  be  managed  with  all 
charity  ;  that  is,  with  true  love.  III.  These  dissensions  are  uncharitable,  when 
persons  bite  and  devoub  one  another.  The  spring  of  all  this  poison  is  in  the 
heart;  for  "  oat  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  and  the  hand 
acts.  There  is  a  defect  of  real  and  fervent  love,  and  an  excess  of  selfishness 
within ;  Belf-opinion,  self-will,  and  self-interest :  and  this  arrogance  breeds 
insolence,  and  all  the  "  biting  and  devouring  "  mentioned  in  this  place.  Now  if 
these  two  expressions  do  bear  a  distinct  signification,  then — 1.  Men  do  "  bite  "  one 
another  by  keen  and  venomous  words.  (1)  Sometimes  by  censuring  their  brethren. 
(2)  Sometimes  men  "  bite "  one  another  by  plain  slandering  one  another,  charg- 
ing them  with  crimes  which  they  abhor.  (3)  And  sometimes  men  "  bite  "  by  down- 
right railing  at,  if  not  cursing,  those  that  differ  from  them.  2.  Men  "  devour " 
one  another  by  actual  endeavours  to  injure  and  hurt  one  another.  (1)  By  fraud. 
(2)  By  force.      IV.  These    uncharitable    contentions   do   prepare  fob    utteb 


chap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  355 

dkstbuction.  1.  So  saith  Scripture  (Hosea  x.  ii. ;  Matt.  xii.  25).  2.  Histories  and 
experience  do  attest  the  same.  For  contentions  in  general :  it  is  evident  that  the  divi- 
sions  which  were  among  the  Trojans  made  way  for  their  overthrow  by  the  Greeks ; 
the  like  animosities  among  the  Greeks  brought  them  under  the  slavery  of  Philip. 
The  feuds  that  were  among  the  Assyrians,  brought  in  the  Persians  ;  and  the  like 
among  the  Persians  subjected  them  to  the  Macedonians;  and  the  contentions 
among  Alexander's  successors  rendered  them  up  to  be  swallowed  by  the  Eomans,  one 
after  another.  Yea,  the  Eoman  Empire  itself,  near  the  time  when  the  western  and 
the  eastern  branches  of  it  were  hottest  in  contention  about  the  supremacy  of  their 
bishops  and  about  images, — behold,  the  Goths  and  Vandals  destroyed  the  one,  and 
the  Saracens  and  Turks  ruined  the  other.  The  scandalous  discords  among  the 
Jews  exposed  Jerusalem  at  length  to  that  dreadful  desolation  by  Titus  Vespasian. 
And  for  this  island,  it  has  been  still  accounted  like  some  great  animal,  that  can 
only  be  ruined  by  its  own  strength.  The  contentions  of  the  Britons  made  the 
Eomans  conquerors.  Afterwards  the  Saxons  came  in  upon  the  divisions  of  the 
natives ;  and  the  contentions  of  the  Saxons  prepared  the  way  for  the  Normans. 
And  for  religious  differences :  it  is  known  how  Julian  the  Apostate  cherished  those 
between  the  Catholics  and  the  Donatists ;  saying,  that  no  savage  beasts  were  so 
cruel  against  one  another  as  the  Christians ;  so  that  he  expected  thereby  to  ruin 
them  all.  It  is  notorious  what  famous  and  numerous  churches  were  once  in  Africa ; 
but,  by  the  contentions  of  the  Manichees,  then  of  the  Donatists,  they  are  now 
extinguished.  The  contentions  among  the  Protestants  in  King  Edward  the  Sixth's 
reign  ended  in  the  persecution  by  Queen  Mary :  and  if  ever  the  Eomans  ruin  ua 
again,  it  will  be  procured  by  our  contentions  among  ourselves.  3.  There  is  too 
much  reason  for  it.  (1)  On  the  part  of  the  thing  itself.  These  dissensions  have  a 
natural  tendency  to  promote  our  destruction ;  nothing  can  more  properly  bring  it 
to  effect,  (a)  They  weaken  that  confidence  that  is  necessary  for  the  preservation 
of  a  people,  (b)  They  destroy  that  love  which  is  the  cement  of  all  societies.  As 
they  proceed  from  a  defect  of  love,  so  they  quite  ruin  the  remainders  of  it.  Now, 
this  love  unites,  and  so  strengthens  :  but  when  men's  hearts  are  once  divided  from 
each  other,  what  care  I  what  becomes  of  them  whom  I  hate  ?  (c)  They  prepare 
for  the  most  desperate  actions.  For  when  there  is  a  dislike  settled  within,  and 
that  men's  spirits  are  exasperated  by  provoking  words  and  actions,  there  wants 
nothing  but  opportunity  to  produce  the  most  violent  effects.  (2)  On  the  part  of 
God  they  deserve  destruction  ;  and  therefore  they  plainly  prepare  for  it.  (a)  They 
provoke  the  wrath  of  God.  (6)  They  consume  the  power  and  life  of  godliness.. 
God's  grace  never  thrives  in  an  unquiet  spirit.  Application  :  1.  Union  is  the  true* 
means  of  our  preservation.  Let  us  consider  (1)  how  many  things  we  agree  in. 
And  if  men  would  begin  at  this  end,  and  not  still  at  the  wrong  end — to  wit,  the 
few  and  small  things  wherein  we  differ — we  could  not,  for  very  shame,  be  so 
implacable  to  one  another.  (2)  Consider  the  imperfections  of  our  human  nature. 
Our  understandings  were  sorely  wounded  by  the  fall  of  Adam ;  and  they  are  but 
imperfectly  and  unequally  recovered  by  all  the  means  which  the  gospel  affords. 
Why  should  we  condemn  every  one  that  is  not  endowed  with  our  abilities,  or 
advanced  to  our  capacity?  (3)  Consider,  that  you,  who  are  so  violent,  do  differ 
from  others  just  as  far  as  they  differ  from  you.  (4)  Consider,  that  there  have  been 
greater  differences  than  ours  among  those  that  were  the  true  members  of  Christ's 
Church.  Witness  Acts  xv.  1 :  "  And  certain  men  which  came  down  from  Judaea 
taught  the  brethren,  Except  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  manner  of  Moses,  ye 
cannot  be  saved : "  a  material  point,  and  urged,  you  see,  with  great  confidence ; 
and  yet  God  forbid  we  should  blot  these  out  of  the  roll  of  true  Christians ! 
(5)  Consider  your  own  personal  moral  failings.  Hath  not  each  of  us  some  "  right 
eye"?  Are  we  perfectly  good?  Are  not  we  all  "men  of  like  passions"?  2.  If 
uncharitable  contentions  do  prepare  for  utter  destruction,  then  woe  be  to  the 
instruments  and  bellows  of  our  contentions  1  (1)  The  devil.  (2)  Atheistical  and 
debauched  persons.  (3)  Ignorant  and  proud  people.  These  are  many  in  number, 
and  generally  most  conceited  and  contemptuous.  Of  such  good  old  Mr.  Greenham 
is  to  be  understood,  when,  being  asked  by  the  lord-treasurer  Cecil,  where  the 
blame  of  that  great  rent  lay  between  the  bishops  of  those  times  and  others,  "  The 
fault,"  said  he,  "is  on  both  sides,  and  on  neither  side  :  for  the  godly-wise  on  both 
sides  bear  with  each  other,  and  concur  in  the  main ;  but  there  be  some  selfish, 
peevish  spirits  on  both  sides,  and  these  make  the  quarrel."  3.  If  these  prepare 
for  destruction,  then  we  in  this  sinful  nation  are  in  the  ready  way  to  misery.  For, 
(1)  Our  differences  and  contentions  are  notorious.    (2)  We  are  uncharitable  in 


856  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

these  contentions.  (3)  Too  many  of  those  that  should  quench  these  flames, 
exasperate  them.  (4)  Our  common  enemy  is  ready  to  devour  us.  4.  Let  us  all, 
tnen,  be  entreated,  conjured,  and  persuaded  to  forbear  biting  and  devouring  one 
another.  Leave  off  this  brutish  behaviour  toward  one  another.  To  which  end 
consider — (1)  The  greatness  and  baseness  of  the  sin.  (a)  You  break  the  great 
commandment  of  God's  law,  which  is  love.  (6)  You  trample  upon  the  great 
precept  of  the  gospel,  which  is  love,  (c)  These  contentions  bring  great  dishonour 
to  Jesus  Christ,  (d)  They  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  (e)  They  stir  up  ranch 
corruption,  both  in  the  aggressor  and  in  the  defendant.  (/)  They  greatly  hinder 
the  conversion  of  the  ungodly,  and  the  progress  in  holiness  of  the  godly,  (g)  These 
contentions  in  religion  tempt  men  to  be  atheists,  (h)  These  biting  and  devouring 
contentions  are  uncivil,  inhuman,  and  barbarous.  (2)  The  certainty  and  sadness 
of  the  danger.  "  Lest  ye  be  consumed  one  of  another."  (a)  It  includes  the  ruin 
of  our  outward  comforts,  (b)  It  threatens  the  ruin  of  our  religion,  (c)  This 
destruction  infers  the  ruin  of  our  posterity.  (3)  The  best  method  to  cure  this  great 
evil,  and  to  prevent  this  great  danger,  (a)  Lament  your  own  and  others'  sin  in 
this  particular.  (6)  Learn  Christian  wisdom,  (c)  Endeavour  for  a  catholic  spirit. 
{d)  Be  clothed  with  humility.  It  is  pride  that  begins  and  maintains  our  quarrels. 
(e)  Apply  yourselves  to  the  practice  of  real  piety.  (/)  Follow  after  charity.  This 
is  the  healing  grace ;  and  if  this  be  not  applied  to  our  bleeding  wounds,  they  will 
never  be  cured.  It  were  better,  as  one  says,  that  Caesar  should  break  all  Pollio'm 
curious  glasses,  than  that  they  should  break  the  bond  of  charity,  or  that  the 
breach  of  them  should  be  the  occasion  of  so  much  inhumanity  of  brethren  one 
against  another,  (g)  Avoid  extremes.  Do  not  labour  to  screw-up  one  another  to 
the  utmost,  (h)  Mind  every  one  his  own  business,  (i)  Observe  that  good  old  rule, 
of  doing  to  others  as  you  would  be  done  to.  You  would  have  others  to  bear  with 
jou;  and  why  will  not  you  bear  with  others?  (j)  My  last  advice  is,  to  "pray  for 
the  peace  of  Jerusalem."  This  every  one  may  do,  and  this  every  one  ought  to  do  : 
"  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem :  they  shall  prosper  that  love  thee.  Peace  be 
within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity  within  thy  palaces  "  (Psa.  cxxii.  6,  7).  (R.  Steele, 
M.A.)  Dissensions  in  the  Church: — 1.  Are  often  due  to  trivial  causes.  2.  Are 
always  nnreasonable.  3.  Are  a  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  4.  Enfeeble 
and  imperil  the  Church.  5.  Are  a  cause  of  rejoicing  to  the  enemies  of  the 
truth.  6.  Are  offensive  to  God.  (R.  A.  Bertram.)  Good  results  from  cessa- 
tion of  party  strife  ; — A  wall  having  become  very  feeble  by  age,  a  portion  of  it  one 
day  fell  down.    Great  consequences  followed  the  falling  of  the  piece  of  the  old  wall. 

1.  The  sun  was  able  to  pour  more  light  into  the  gardens  on  either  side,  which  the 
height  of  the  wall  had  obstructed,  so  that  the  flowers  looked  to  greater  advantage ; 
and,  owing  to  their  having  more  air  and  sunshine,  became  really  more  beautiful. 

2.  The  perfume  was  borne  across  the  breach;  so  that  the  gardens  were  the 
sweeter.  "  What  a  pity  that  piece  of  old  wall  had  not  fallen  down  before,"  said 
the  flowers.  3.  The  shrubs  looked  over  to  one  another,  and  got  into  friendly  talk ; 
and  so  they  said,  "What  a  good  thing  that  piece  of  old  wall  fell  down  ;  it  is  a  pity 
it  stood  so  high  so  long."  4.  The  flowers  and  6hrubs  of  each  garden  discovered 
that  members  of  their  own  families  had  been  living  on  the  other  side,  and  therefore 
really  near  to  each  other,  though  they  had  had  no  communion,  owing  to  the  wall 
between.  5.  Finally,  so  many  benefits  were  seen  to  be  the  result  of  the  occurrence 
that,  instead  of  rebuilding  the  fallen  part,  the  remainder  was  pulled  down  to  a  low 
level,  that  air  and  sunshine  might  have  freer  course,  and  the  gardens  a  free  commu- 
nication. And  not  a  few  afterwards  acknowledged  that  a  real  good  and  blessing 
was  the  consequence  to  all  parties,  by  the  opportunely  falling  down  of  that  old 
dividing  wall.  .  .  .  Party  spirit  is  a  wall  of  separation  which  the  coming  and  the 
work  of  Christ  was  intended  to  remove .  "  For  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath  broken 
down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us."  Let  none  now  seek  to  divide 
Christians  by  building  up  a  wall  of  party  spirit  between  them  ;  for,  "  behold  how 
good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity."  (G.  Bowden.) 
Satanic  origin  of  quarrels  among  Christians  : — You  all  profess  to  have  been  baptized 
into  the  spirit  of  the  gospel ;  but  you  do  not  show  it  when  you  bite  and  snarl  at 
one  another.  The  gospel,  which  makes  wolves  and  lambs  agree,  does  not  teach  the 
lambs  to  turn  wolves  and  devour  each  the  other.  The  gospel  will  not  allow  us  to 
pay  our  enemies  in  their  own  coin,  and  give  them  wrath  for  wrath ;  much  less  will 
it  suffer  brethren  to  spit  fire  at  one  another's  lace.  No,  when  any  such  embers  of 
contention  begin  to  smoke  among  Christians,  we  may  know  who  left  the  spark  ;  no 
other  but  Satan,  he  is  the  great  kindle-coal  of  all  their  contentions.    If  there  be 


chap,  v.]  GALATIANS.  357 

tempest  (not  in  the  air)  in  the  spirits  of  Christians,  and  the  wind  of  their  passions 
be  high  and  loud,  it  is  easy  to  tell  who  is  the  conjuror  ;  it  is  the  devil  that  is 
practising  his  black  art  upon  their  lusts,  which  yet  are  so  much  unmortified,  as 
gives  him  too  great  an  advantage  of  raising  many  times  sad  storms  of  division 
and  strife  amongst  them.  There  is  nothing  (next  Christ  and  heaven)  that  the 
devil  grudges  believers  more  than  their  peace  and  mutual  love ;  if  he  cannot  rend 
them  from  Christ,  or  stop  them  from  getting  heaven,  yet  he  takes  some  pleasure  to 
see  them  go  thither  in  a  storm ;  like  a  shattered  fleet  severed  one  from  another, 
that  they  may  have  no  assistance  from,  nor  comfort  of,  each  other's  company  ail 
the  way  ;  though,  where  he  can  divide,  he  hopes  to  ruin  also,  well  knowing  this  to 
be  the  most  probable  means  to  effect  it ;  one  ship  is  easier  taken  than  a  squadron. 
A  town,  if  it  can  be  but  set  on  fire,  the  enemy  may  hope  to  take  it  with  more  ease.  Let 
it,  therefore,  be  your  great  care  to  keep  the  devil's  spark  from  your  powder.  (W. 
Gurnall.)  Consumed  one  of  another:  Strife  in  the  fold: — Two  friends  met  the 
other  day.  One  inquired  of  the  other  how  his  Church  was  prospering.  "  Not  at 
all,  I  am  sorry  to  say,"  was  the  answer  ;  "  our  numbers  are  diminishing  weekly." 
"  Why,  how  is  that  ?  Has  the  wolf  got  into  the  fold  ?  "  "  Worse  than  that,  I  fear. 
If  it  was  only  the  wolf  that  was  worrying  the  flock,  we  might  cherish  the  hope  that 
we  could  get  him  driven  out.  The  fact  is,  the  sheep  have  taken  to  worrying  each 
other,  and  our  condition,  therefore,  could  not  be  worse."  The  ideal  brother- 
hood : — A  little  boy,  seeing  two  nestling  birds  pecking  at  each  other,  inquired  of 
bis  elder  brother  what  they  were  doing.  "  They  are  quarrelling,"  was  the  answer. 
"  No,"  replied  the  child,  "  that  cannot  be,  for  they  are  brothers."  Would  that  this 
true  and  simple  and  natural  logic  were  always  borne  in  mind ;  then  might  the 
Christian  nest  be  more  peaceful,   more  like  a  family  Divine  1  Unity  among 

Christians  to  be  sought  after  : — Melancthon  mourned  in  his  day  the  divisions 
among  Christians,  and  sought  to  bring  them  together  by  the  parable  of  the  war 
between  the  wolves  and  the  dogs.  The  wolves  were  somewhat  afraid,  for  the  dogs 
were  many  and  strong,  and  therefore  they  sent  out  a  spy  to  observe  them.  On  his 
return  the  scout  said,  "  It  is  true  the  dogs  are  many,  but  there  are  not  many 
mastiffs  among  them.  There  are  dogs  of  so  many  sorts  one  can  hardly  count 
them ;  and  as  for  the  worst  of  them,"  said  he,  "  they  are  little  dogs,  which  bark 
loudly,  but  cannot  bite.  However,  this  did  not  cheer  me  so  much,"  continued  the 
wolf,  "  as  this,  that  as  they  came  marching  on,  I  observed  they  were  all  snapping 
right  and  left  at  one  another,  and  I  could  see  clearly  that  though  they  all  hate  the 
wolf,  yet  each  dog  hates  every  other  dog  with  all  his  heart."  Is  not  this  still  true 
— that  many  professed  Christians  snap  right  and  left  at  their  own  brethren,  when 
they  had  better  save  their  teeth  for  the  wolves  ?  Evils  of  strife  : — They  say  of 
bees,  that,  when  they  strive  among  themselves,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  queen  is  about 
to  leave  the  hive.  When  the  sheep  of  Christ  are  malignant  one  against  another,  it 
is  a  fearful  presage  of  ensuing  ruin ;  when  there  are  tumults  in  the  Church,  it  may 
justly  be  feared  that  God  is  about  to  remove  from  us.  (Spencer.)  Wranglings 
destroy  Churches: — Jars  and  divisions,  wranglings  and  prejudices,  eat  out  the 
growth,  if  not  the  life,  of  religion.  These  are  those  waters  of  Marah  that  embitter 
our  spirits,  and  quench  the  Spirit  of  God.  Unity  and  peace  are  said  to  be  like  the 
dew  of  Hermon,  that  descended  upon  Sion,  where  the  Lord  promised  His  blessing. 
Divisions  run  religions  into  briars  and  thorns,  contention  and  parties.  Divisions 
are  to  Churches  like  wars  in  countries  ;  where  war  is,  the  ground  lieth  waste  and 
untilled ;  none  takes  care  of  it.  It  is  love  that  edifieth,  but  division  pulleth  down. 
Divisions  are  as  the  north-east  wind  to  the  fruits,  which  causeth  them  to  dwindle 
away  to  nothing ;  but  when  the  storms  are  over,  everything  begins  to  grow.  When 
men  are  divided,  they  seldom  speak  the  truth  in  love ;  and  then,  no  marvel,  they 
grow  not  up  to  Him  in  all  things  which  is  the  Head.  It  is  a  sad  presage  of  an 
approaching  famine  (as  one  well  observes) — not  of  bread,  nor  of  water,  but  of 
hearing  the  Word  of  God — when  the  thin  ears  of  corn  devour  the  plump  full  ones ; 
when  our  controversies  about  doubtful  things,  and  things  of  less  moment,  eat  up 
our  zeal  for  the  more  indisputable  and  practical  things  in  religion.  (American.) 
How  to  defeat  strife  : — A  young  fox  asked  his  father  if  he  could  not  teach  him  some 
trick  to  defeat  the  dogs-,  if  he  should  fall  in  with  them.  The  father  had  grown 
grey  in  a  long  life  of  depredation  and  danger,  and  his  scars  bore  witness  to  his 
narrow  escapes  in  the  chase,  or  his  less  honourable  encounters  with  the  faithful 
guardians  of  the  hen-roo3t.  He  replied  with  a  sigh, "  After  all  my  experience,  I  am 
forced  to  confess  that  the  best  trick  is,  to  keep  out  of  their  way."  The  safest  mode 
of  dealing  with  a  quarrelsome  person  is  to  keep  out  of  his  way.    (Persian  Fables.) 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ▼. 

How  to  end  bickerings : — The  following  incident,  respecting  two  philosophers  of 
old,  may  well  put  to  the  blush  Christians  who  are  unwilling  to  be  reconciled,  and 
who  consequently  have  their  intercourse  with  heaven  hindered  (Matt.  v.  24).  We 
are  told  that,  Aristippus  and  iEschines  having  differed,  the  former  came  to  the 
latter  and  said — "  iEschines,  shall  we  be  friends?"  •■  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  with  all 
my  heart."  "But,  remember,"  said  Aristippus,  "that  I,  being  older  than  you,  do 
make  the  first  motion."  "  Yes,"  replied  iEschines,  "  and  therefore  I  conclude  that 
you  are  the  worthiest  man:  for  I  began  the  strife,  and  you  began  the  peace."  (C. 
Neil.)  The  evil  of  dissensions  : — The  English  ambassador,  some  years  since, 
prevailed  so  far  with  the  Turkish  emperor  as  to  persuade  him  to  hear  some  of  our 
English  music,  from  which  (as  from  other  liberal  sciences)  both  he  and  his  nation 
were  naturally  averse.  But  it  happened  that  the  musicians  were  so  long  in  tuning 
their  instruments  that  the  great  Turk,  distasting  their  tediousness,  went  away  in 
discontent  before  the  music  began.  I  am  afraid  that  the  dissensions  betwixt 
Christian  Churches  (being  so  long  in  reconciling  their  discords)  will  breed  in 
pagans  such  a  disrelish  of  our  religion,  as  they  will  not  be  invited  to  attend 
thereunto.     (T.  Fuller,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.    Walk  In  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh. — Fle$h 

versus  Spirit : — A  Galatian  Christian  might  argue  that  the  religion  of  Christ  had  not 
wrought  for  him  the  deliverance  which  he  had  expected ;  that  whereas  he  had  been 
taught  to  believe  in  the  Almighty  power  of  Christ,  and  of  Christ's  grace,  he  found 
that  there  yet  abode  within  him  another  power  of  a  wholly  different  kind,  a  power 
antagonistic  to  the  grace  of  Christ,  a  power  constantly  inclining  him  to  evil.  How 
was  he  to  account  for  this  state  of  things  ?  was  it  that  Christ's  gospel  was  ineffec- 
tual ;  or  that  he  had  not  rightly  apprehended  it  ?  I.  The  abiding  presence  op  thb 
law  o»  sin  in  the  believer's  soul.  Scripture  everywhere  assumes  and  asserts 
this  (James  iii.  2  ;  1  John.  i.  8).  II.  Its  hostility  to  good.  Compromise  is  im- 
possible. If  sin  be  false  to  everything  else,  it  must  be  true  to  its  own  nature ;  it 
must  be  hostile  to  that  principle  which  aims  at  its  destruction.  III.  Note  certain 
features  in  the  action  op  sin.  1.  It  is  secret.  2.  It  is  constant.  3.  It  is  subtle. 
Seeks  to  discover  the  weakest  parts  in  the  soul's  defences  ;  to  deceive  and  beguile 
the  soul,  and  so  lead  it  captive.  IV.  The  maintenance  op  the  spiritual  life.  (1) 
The  spirit  acts  upon  the  soul  as  the  Kevealer  of  spiritual  truth ;  and  (2)  as  the 
Giver  of  spiritual  power.  (3)  There  must  be  co-operation  on  oar  part.  No  tamper- 
ing with  evil.  A  circumspect  walk.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Twofold  nature  of 
man : — Man's  nature  presents  two  sides.  On  the  one  hand  the  body,  with  all  its 
physicial  needs,  desires,  impulses;  on  the  other  hand  that  spiritual  nature  which 
distinguishes  him  from  the  animal  creation.  These  two  sides  are  often  found  in 
collision,  warring  against  each  other ;  the  question  is,  how  shall  they  be  adjusted, 
and  which  ought  to  rule?  The  two  extremes  of  crushing  out  one  or  the  other 
entirely,  are  both  wrong.  The  Christian  method  does  no  violence  to  any  true  part 
of  human  nature.  It  respects  all  parts ;  but  gives  special  emphasis  to  the  highest, 
not  by  crushing  out  the  lower,  but  by  bringing  it  into  proper  subordination,  so  that 
there  shall  be  harmony,  due  proportion,  and  complete  unity.  I.  The  spiritual 
nature  must  have  the  first  place.  It  is  the  most  noble,  and  therefore  the 
most  worthy  of  attention.  IT.  The  spirit  is  to  be  the  directing  and  ruling 
element.     It  is  to  sway  the  body,  not  the  body  to  sway  it.    III.  The  physical 

NATURE    IS     TO     BE    ALLOWED   TO     EXERCISE     ITS    NATURAL   RIGHTS,     BUT     UNDER    THE 

guidance  and  control  of  the  spiritual.  How  practical  is  all  this  1  St.  Paul  does 
not  content  himself  with  taking  up  a  merely  negative  attitude.  To  have  simply 
forbidden  this  or  that,  or  to  have  told  his  readers  that  they  were  to  exercise  a  re- 
straint upon  their  passions,  would  have  been  at  best  only  a  partial  and  an  unsatis- 
factory way  of  dealing  with  their  danger.  He  was  far  too  true  a  master  of  the 
human  heart  to  fall  into  the  error  that  nothing  more  than  prohibition  was  needed. 
If  man  is  to  be  saved  from  evil  thoughts,  habits,  passions,  he  must  be  given  definite 
and  positive  duties  to  fulfil.  This  is  true  both  of  (a)  the  body,  and  (b)  the  mind,  as 
well  as  (c)  the  soul.  Be  up  and  doing.  Don't  be  idle.  Let  your  life  have  definite 
aims ;  your  heart  and  mind  definite  impulses,  desires,  principles.  In  this  way  will 
you  be  better  able  not  only  to  resist  what  is  evil  but  to  grow  in  what  is  best.  (A. 
Boyd  Carpenter,  M.A.)  The  appeal  to  the  spiritual  nature  : — Such  is  St.  Paul's 
method,  and  it  is  the  one  which  treats  man  with  the  greatest  respect,  and  is  calcu- 
lated to  effect  the  desired  end  most  completely.  Man  is  not  a  machine  to  be 
regulated  only  by  external  influences.     He  has  reason,  will,  conscience,  love ;  in  a 


OTAP.  v.]  GALATIAN8.  859 

word,  a  spiritual  nature.  To  appeal  to  this  spiritual  nature,  to  place  it  in  its  proper 
position  of  authority  and  rule,  is  to  treat  man  as  man,  and  to  do  so  with  the  greatest 
hope  of  success.  Law  alone  will  not  succeed  unless  there  iB  a  response  from  within. 
Self-restraint  will  not  be  sufficient.  What  is  needed  is  the  creation  of  an  inward 
power  of  good ;  a  self-acting  principle  that  shall  love  and  will  and  strive  after  what 
is  highest  and  best,  and  from  the  innermost  citadel  of  the  spirit  rule  every  thought, 
word,  act.  This  is  what  St.  Paul  advocates  when  he  says,  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit." 
He  contends  for  voluntary  service  as  against  enforced ;  for  spiritual  obedience  as 
against  the  mere  living  by  rule.  It  is  the  life  of  love  and  purity  and  wisdom  that 
he  advocates  as  the  life,  as  against  the  impulses,  desires,  passions  of  the  physical 
nature.  And  in  doing  this  he  not  merely  respects  man  as  spiritual,  he  not  merely 
points  out  the  superiority  of  the  spiritual,  but  he  seeks  to  base  thought  and  word 
and  deed,  and  the  whole  tenor  of  the  life,  upon  a  heart  loving  what  is  good  and 
hating  what  is  evil.  Service,  with  St.  Paul,  is  spiritual,  free,  spontaneous,  high- 
minded.  The  higher  desires  and  spiritual  forces  for  what  is  good  not  only  check 
what  is  baser,  but,  influencing  the  whole  manhood,  lift  up  every  faoulty,  power,  im- 
pulse into  a  purer  atmosphere.  (Ibid.)  The  spiritual  walk: — In  these  words 
observe — (1)  A  duty  enforced;  (2)  The  consequent  and  fruit  of  it.  1.  The 
duty  is  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  sum  of  all  Christian  piety. 
2.  The  motive  is  taken  from  the  consequent  and  fruit  of  it :  "  and  ye  shall 
not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh."  Let  us  fix  the  sense.  1.  For  the  duty,  "to 
walk  in  the  Spirit."  Walking  implieth  the  tenor  and  course  of  our  actions,  in  all 
which  we  should  follow  the  direction  and  inclination  of  the  Spirit.  Therefore  by 
flesh  and  spirit  is  meant  the  old  man  and  the  new,  and  so  by  spirit  is  meant  the 
renewed  part,  or  the  new  man  of  grace  in  the  heart  (John  iii.  6,  "  That  which  is 
born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit  ") ;  that  is,  there  is  a  work  of  saving  grace  wrought  in  our 
hearts  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  new  nature  hath  its  motions  and  inclinations 
which  must  be  obeyed  and  followed  by  us.  And  by  flesh,  is  meant  inbred  corrup- 
tion, or  the  old  man,  which  is  "  corrupt,  with  his  deceivable  lusts  "  (Eph.  iv.  22) . 
Now,  then,  you  see  what  it  is  to  walk  after  the  Spirit,  to  direct  and  order  our  actions 
according  to  the  inclinations  of  the  new  nature.  2.  For  the  consequent  fruit  of  it: 
"  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh."  Here  two  things  must  be  explained : 
—(1)  The  lust  of  the  flesh.  (2)  Fulfil.  1.  "  The  lust  of  the  flesh."  By  it  is 
meant  the  inordinate  motions  of  corrupt  nature.  The  flesh  doth  not  consider  what 
is  right  and  good,  but  what  is  pleasing  to  the  senses,  and  craveth  their  satisfaction 
with  much  importunity  and  earnestness,  to  the  wrong  of  God  and  our  own  souls  ; 
especially  in  youth,  when  the  senses  are  in  vigour,  and  lust  and  appetite  in  their 
strength  and  fury.  2.  Ye  shall  not  fulfil ;  that  is,  accomplish  and  bring  into  com- 
plete act,  especially  with  deliberation  and  consent.  Mark,  he  doth  not  say  that  the 
lusting  of  corrupt  nature  shall  be  totally  suppressed,  but  it  shall  not  be  fulfilled. 
The  best  of  God's  children  feel  the  motions  of  the  flesh,  but  they  do  not  cherish  and 
obey  them.  The  lusts  of  the  flesh  may  be  said  to  be  fulfilled  two  ways — (1)  When 
the  outward  act  is  accomplished,  or  "  when  lust  hath  conceived  and  brought  forth 
(actual)  sin  "  (James  i.  15).  (2)  When  for  a  continuance  we  obey  the  flesh,  usually 
accomplish  its  motions  without  let  and  restraint,  and  with  love,  pleasure,  and  full 
consent  of  will ;  this  is  proper  to  the  unregenerate.  The  flesh  doth  reign  over  them 
as  its  slaves  ;  this  is  spoken  of  (Eom.  vi.  12),  "  Let  not  sin  reign  in  your  mortal 
body,  that  ye  should  obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof."  Let  it  not  have  a  power  over 
you  as  slaves.  The  doctrine,  then,  is  this  :  That  the  more  Christians  set  them- 
selves to  obey  the  new  nature,  the  more  is  the  power  of  inbred  corruption  mortified 
and  kept  under.  To  understand  this  point,  let  me  lay  down  these  propositions.  1. 
That  there  is  a  diversity  of  principles  in  a  Christian — flesh  and  spirit.  2.  That 
there  is  a  liberty  in  a  Christian  of  walking  according  to  each  principle,  either  the 
spirit  or  the  flesh.  Application :  1.  It  showeth  what  necessity  there  is  that  we 
should  look  after  conversion  to  God,  or  a  work  of  grace  wrought  in  us  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  for  the  apostle  supposeth  they  had  the  Spirit.  There  is  no  walking  without 
living,  for  otherwise  our  motions  are  but  the  motions  of  puppets,  not  proceeding 
from  internal  life,  but  acted  from  springs  and  engines  ;  no  subduing  the  flesh  with- 
out setting  up  an  opposite  principle.  2.  Being  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is, 
having  our  minds  enlightened  and  hearts  inclined,  we  must  obey  this  inclination ; 
for  life  is  not  given  us  that  we  may  have  it,  but  that  we  may  act  by  it,  and  do  things 
suitable  to  that  life  which  we  have.  Grace  is  not  a  sluggish,  idle  quality,  but  is 
always  working  and  warring  on  the  opposite  principle.  3.  Though  at  first  we  are 
pestered  and  encountered  with  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  which  divert  us  from  God  an  J 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  T. 

heavenly  things,  yet  we  should  not  be  discouraged  by  every  difficulty  ;  for  difficul- 
ties do  but  inflame  a  resolved  spirit,  as  stirring  doth  the  fire.  4.  The  carnal  life  ia 
not  of  one  sort.  Some  wallow  in  sensual  pleasures,  others  have  head  and  heart 
altogether  taken  up  with  the  world  and  worldly  things.  Now  if  God  hath  put  a  new 
bias  upon  our  wills  and  affections,  we  must  show  it  forth  by  a  heavenly  conver- 
sation ;  for  they  that  mind  earthly  things  are  carnal,  and  the  great  inclination  of  the 
new  nature  is  to  carry  us  unto  God  and  the  things  of  another  world  (2  Cor.  v.  5) 
5.  They  are  much  to  blame  that  complain  of  sin,  and  will  not  take  the  course  to 
get  rid  of  it  by  obeying  the  instincts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  motions  of  the  new 
nature.  The  Lord's  spirit  is  a  "  free  spirit  "  (Fsa.  li.  12.),  and  His  "  truth  maketh 
us  free  "  (John  viii.  32).  6.  How  much  we  are  concerned  in  all  conflicts,  especially 
in  those  which  allow  deliberation,  to  take  part  with  the  Spirit,  and  obey  His  motions 
rather  than  to  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh :  otherwise,  by  consent  and  upon  deliber- 
ation, you  are  unfaithful  to  Christ  and  your  own  souls.  Tour  business  is  not  to 
gratify  the  flesh,  but  to  crucify  it,  to  overrule  sense  and  appetite,  and  cherish  the 
life  of  grace  (Gal.  v.  24).  7.  It  is  of  great  use  and  profit  to  us  to  observe  which 
principle  decayeth,  the  flesh  or  the  Spirit;  for  thereby  we  judge  of  our  condition, 
Doth  in  order  to  mortification  and  comfort.  The  increase  of  the  flesn  may  be 
known  — 1.  By  your  backwardness  to  God.  Grace  is  clogged  when  you  cannot 
serve  Him  with  sweetness  and  delight  (Rom.  vii.  18).  2.  When  the  heart  groweth 
careless  of  heaven,  and  your  life  and  love  is  more  taken  up  about  things  present 
than  things  to  come.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prevalency  and  increase  of  the  Spirit 
is  known — 1.  By  a  humble  contentedness  and  indifference  to  plenty,  pleasures,  and 
honours,  2  When  your  delight  in  God.  heaven,  and  holiness  is  still  kept  up.  3. 
When  the  heart  is  kept  in  a  preparation  for  the  duties  of  your  heavenly  calling.  (T. 
Manton,  D.D.)  Walking  in  the  Spirit,  thepreserva  tive  from  the  lusts  of  the  flesh : — I. 
We  are  to  inquire  what  it  is  to  walk  in  the  Spirit.  I  scarcely  need  to  observe,  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  always  represented  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  Author  of  all 
holiness  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  ;  whence  the  Christian  dispensation  is  eminently 
styled  "  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit."  1.  And  first  I  imagine,  that  a  regard  to  all 
the  great  evangelical  principles  is  implied  in  the  words,  "  walk  in  the  Spirit."  In 
the  Epistles  to  the  Bomans  and  the  Galatians,  in  which  the  phrases  of  walking 
"in  the  Spirit"  or  "after  the  Spirit"  are  chiefly  used,  the  apostle  takes  much 
pains  to  wean  the  Judaizing  converts  from  a  servile  spirit  of  dependence  upon  the 
law,  and  to  instil  into  them  a  spirit  of  liberty  in  Christ  Jesus.  Where  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is  there  is  liberty.  2.  By  walking  in  the  Spirit  may  be  also  implied 
habitual  dependence  upon  His  help.  To  walk  in  the  Spirit,  therefore,  is  to  acknow- 
ledge with  the  heart  our  own  weakness  and  inability  to  serve  God  ;  to  expect  victory 
over  sin  only  by  the  gracious  operation  of  His  Spirit.  3.  To  walk  in  the  Spirit 
implies  also,  that  we  use  the  means  by  which  the  Spirit  has  promised  to  convey 
His  influence,  in  the  humble  hope  of  thus  receiving  it.  Bible-reading,  attendance 
on  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  reception  of  the  Holy  Communion,  and  especially 
prayer.  4.  I  observe,  further,  that  to  walk  in  the  Spirit  implies  the  exercise  of  a 
holy  fear  of  Him ;  which  will  manifest  itself  by  avoiding  those  things  which  would 
grieve  Him,  and  by  complying  with  His  holy  motions.  II.  If  we  thus  walk  in  the 
Spirit,  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  This  is  the  second  point 
which  I  proposed  to  illustrate.  There  is  a  certain  degree  to  which  victory  over  the 
sinful  desires  of  the  flesh  is  obtained  by  every  real  Christian  ;  and  this  degree  is, 
perhaps,  proportioned  to  that  in  which  he  walks  in  the  Spirit.  (J.  Venn,  M.A.) 
How  may  ice  be  so  spiritual  as  to  check  sin  in  the  first  risings  of  it  ? — I.  The  principle 
and  root  of  sin  and  evil — the  flesh  with  its  lusts.  II.  The  opposite  principle  and 
root  of  life  and  righteousness — the  Divine  Spirit.  III.  The  terms  and  bounds  of  a 
Christian's  conquest,  how  far  he  may  hope  for  victory — "  Ye  shall  not  fulfil  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh."  IV.  The  method  and  way  of  conquering — "Walk  in  the 
Spirit."  The  best  expedient  in  the  world  not  to  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  is  to 
walk  in  the  Spirit ;  which  what  it  imports,  I  come  now  to  show.  1.  "  Walk  in  the 
Spirit ;  "  that  is,  in  obedience  to  God's  commandments,  which  are  the  oracles  of 
the  Spirit  (see  Psa.  cxix.  1-3).  2.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit ; "  that  is,  as  becometn 
those  in  whom  God's  Spirit  dwells.  As  if  the  apostle  had  said,  "  The  part  which 
ye  are  now  to  act,  0  ye  Christian  Galatians,  it  is  that  of  new  creatures :  see  that  ye 
keep  the  decorum.  Demean  yourselves  like  the  children  of  God  who  are  led  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  14).  3.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit ;  "  that  is,  Fulfil  the  counsels 
and  advices  of  the  Spirit,  and  you  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  Bnt  it 
these  three  rules  are  too  general  and  remote,  I  shall  now  lay  down  some  more  pur- 


chap.  T.]  OALATIANS.  861 

ticular  and  exact  directions  for  checking  the  beginnings  of  sin.  Rule  I. — Before 
the  paroxysm  cometh,  prepare  and  antidote  thy  soul  against  these  lusts  of  the 
flesh,  by  observing  these  advices.  1.  That  notable  counsel  of  Eliphaz  to  Job : 
*'  Acquaint  now  thyself  with  God,  and  be  at  peace  "  (Job  xxii.  21).  2.  Stir  up 
spiritual  and  holy  hustings  in  thy  soul  after  the  love  and  favour,  the  grace  and 
image,  of  thy  God  ;  and  thou  shalt  not  fulfil  the  lustings  of  the  flesh.  Rule  II. — 
Study  thoroughly  the  unchangeable  natures,  the  eternal  laws  and  differences,  of 
moral  good  and  evil,  The  sum  of  this  rule  then  is  :  Deeply  possess  and  dye  thy 
soul  all  over  with  the  representation  of  that  everlasting  beauty  and  amiablenesa 
that  are  in  holiness,  and  of  that  horror,  and  ugliness,  and  deformity  that  eternally 
dwell  on  the  forehead  of  all  iniquity.  Be  under  the  awe  and  majesty  of  such  clear 
convictions  all  day  long,  and  "  thou  shalt  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh."  Rale 
III. — Understand  thyself ;  be  no  stranger  to  thy  own  breast ;  know  the  frame,  and 
temper,  and  constitution  of  thy  mind.  See  what  grace  is  principally  wanting  in 
thee,  which  is  weakest,  in  what  instances  thy  greatest  failure  betrays  itself,  in 
which  of  thy  passions  and  affections  thou  art  most  peccable,  and  what  lustings  of 
the  flesh  they  are  which  give  thee  the  frequentest  alarms,  and  threaten  the  greatest 
dangers.  Rule  IV. — Get  and  keep  a  tender  conscience.  Be  sensible  of  the  least 
sin.  The  most  tender-hearted  Christian — he  is  the  stoutest  and  most  valiant 
Christian.  "Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  always:  but  he  that  hardeneth  his 
heart  shall  fall  into  mischief."  Rule  V. — Keep  an  exact  guard  upon  thy  heart 
(Prov  iv.  23).  Let  the  eyes  of  thy  soul  be  open  and  awake,  upon  all  the  stirrings  of 
thy  thoughts  and  affections.  Rule  VI. — Be  daily  training  and  exercising  all  thy 
graces.  Have  them  always  in  battle-array.  Rule  VII. — Be  well-skilled  in  the 
elenchs  of  temptation.  I  mean,  in  unmasking  the  sophistry  and  mystery  of 
iniquity,  in  defeating  the  wiles  and  stratagems  of  the  tempter,  and  in  detecting 
and  frustrating  the  cheats  and  finesses  of  the  flesh  with  its  deceitful  lusts  (Eph,  iv. 
22 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  11).  No  small  part  of  spiritual  wisdom  lies  in  the  blessed  art  of 
discovering  and  refuting  sin's  fallacies  and  impostures.  Rule  VIII. — Withdraw 
thyself,  if  possible,  from  the  occasions  of  sin.  Be  thou  as  the  deaf  adder  to  that 
great  charmer :  the  best  entertainment  thou  canst  give  him  is,  "  Get  thee  behind 
me,  Satan !  "  Bule  IX — Bind  thyself  beforehand  witn  the  severest  of  thy  resolu- 
tions, not  to  trust  thy  judgment,  when  the  temptation  begins  to  get  within  thee. 
"  A  man  in  passion  is  not  himself."  Rule  X. — Awe  them  with  the  authority  of  thy 
reason  and  understanding.  It  is  infinitely  unbeseeming  a  man,  that  his  lower 
appetites  should  grow  mutinous  and  untractable,  that  "  the  inferior  and  brutish 
faculties  of  our  soul,"  should  rebel  against  "  that  sovereign  faculty  of  reason." 
How  soon  doth  the  presence  of  a  grave  magistrate  allay  a  popular  tumult,  if  he 
comes  in  soon  enough,  in  the  beginning  of  the  riot  1  God  hath  made  reason  the 
magistrate  of  the  little  world  ;  He  hatn  given  it  a  commission  to  keep  the  peace  in 
oar  souls.  Rule  XI. — If  thy  distempered  affections  and  lusts  slight  the  authority 
of  thy  reason,  as  thou  art  a  man ;  bid  thy  conscience  do  its  office,  as  thou  art  a 
Christian.  Try  to  awe  them  with  God's  written  Word.  Bring  out  of  the  register  of 
conscience  the  laws  of  Him  that  made  thee  ;  oppose  some  clear  text  of  Holy  Writ, 
that  comes  into  thy  mind  against  that  very  lust  that  is  now  rising.  Rule  XII. — 
If  all  this  effect  nothing,  then  draw  the  curtain,  take  off  the  veil  from  before  thy 
heart,  and  let  it  behold  the  God  that  searcheth  it  (Jer.  xvii.  10 ;  Heb.  iv.  13). 
Show  it  the  majesty  of  the  Lord ;  see  how  that  is  described  (Isa.  vi.  1-3).  Rule 
XIII. — If  these  great  real  arguments  be  slighted,  try  whether  an.  argument,  ad 
hominem,  drawn  from  sense,  will  prevail.  Awe  thy  lusts  with  the  bitterness  of 
thine  own  experience.  Consider  how  often  thou  hast  rued  their  disorders  ;  what 
dismal  consequences  have  followed  upon  their  transports,  and  how  dearly  thou 
hast  paid  heretofore  for  thy  connivance  at  them.  Rule  XIV. — Labour  to  cure  thy 
lustings  and  affections  in  the  first  beginning  of  their  disorders,  by  revulsion,  by 
drawing  the  stream  and  tide  another  way.  As  physicians  stop  an  hemorrhage,  or 
bleeding  at  the  nose,  by  breathing  the  basilic  vein  in  the  arm,  or  opening  the 
Baphsena  in  the  foot ;  so  may  we  check  our  carnal  affections,  by  turning  them 
into  spiritual  ones :  and  those  either — 1.  Of  the  same  nature.  For  example : 
catch  thy  worldly  sorrow  at  the  rise,  and  turn  thy  mourning  into  godly  sorrow.  If 
thou  must  needs  weep,  weep  for  something  that  deserves  it.  2.  Turn  thy  carnal 
affections  into  spiritual  ones  of  a  contrary  nature.  For  example  :  allay  thy  worldly 
sorrow  by  spiritual  joy.  Try  whether  there  be  not  enough  in  all-sufficiency  itself 
to  compensate  the  loss  of  any  outward  enjoyment ;  whether  there  will  be  any  great 
miss  or  want  of  a  broken  cistern,  when  thou  art  at  the  fountain-head  of  living 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ^hap.  * 

■waters  ;  whether  the  light  of  the  sun  cannot  make  amends  for  the  expiring  of  « 
candle.     Chastise  thy  carnal  fears  by  hope  in  God.     Set  on  work  the  grace  con. 
trary  to  the  lust  that  is  stirring ;  if  it  be  pride  and  vain-glory  in  the  applause  of 
men,  think  how  ridiculous  it  were  for  a  criminal  to  please  himself  in  the  esteem 
and  honour  his  fellow-prisoners  render  him,  forgetting  how  guilty  he  is  before  his 
judge.     If  thou  beginnest  to  be  poured  loosely  out,  and  as  it  were  dissolved  in 
frolic,  mirth,  and  joviality,  correct  that  vainness  and  gaiety  of  spirit  by  the  grave 
and  sober  thoughts  of  death,  and  judgment,  and  eternity.    Bule  XV. — If  this  avail 
not,  fall  instantly  to  prayer.    Kule  XVI. — When  thou  hast  done  this,  rise  up,  and 
buckle  on  the  shield  of  faith  (Eph.  vi.  16).     Go  forth  in  the  name  and  strength  of 
the  Lord,  to  do  battle  with  thy  lusts.    Conclusion  :  Let  me  now  persuade  the  prac- 
tice of  these  holy  rules.    Let  us  resolve,  in  the  strength  of  Christ,  to  resist  these 
lustings  of  the  uesh.    Let  me  press  this  with  a  few  considerations.    1.  The  more 
thou  yieldest,  the  more  thou  mayest.     Sin  is  insatiable ;  it  will  never  say  "enough." 
Give  it  an  inch,  it  will  take  an  ell.     2.  It  is  the  quarrel  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  which 
thou  fightest.     A  cowardly  soldier  is  the  reproach  of  his  commanders.     Thou  hast 
a  noble  General,  0  Christian,  that  hath  done  and  finished  perfectly  whatever  con- 
cerns thy  redemption  from  the  powers  of  darkness.     3.  The  lusts  of  the  flesh  are 
thy  greatest  enemies,  as  well  as  God's.     "  They  war  against  thy  soul "  (1  Pet.  ii.  11). 
To  resist  them  feebly,  is  to  do  not  only  the  work  of  the  Lord,  but  of  thy  soul,  negli- 
gently.   4.  It  is  easy  vanquishing  at  first  in  comparison.    A  fire  newly-kindled  is 
soon  quenched,  and  a  young  thorn  or  bramble  easily  pulled  up.    5.  If  thou  resistest 
the  victory  is  thine  (James  iv.  7).    Temptation  puts  on  its  strength,  as  the  will  is. 
Cease  but  to  love  the  sin,  and  the  temptation  is  answered.    6.  Consider  what  thou 
doest.    If  thou  fulfillest  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  thou  provokest  thy  heavenly  Father, 
rebellest  against  Him  (and  "  rebellion  is  as  witchcraft,  and  stubbornness  as  idolatry  "), 
thou  "  crucifiest  Jesus  Christ  afresh,  and  puttest  Him  to  an  open  shame."    Is  this 
thy  love  and  thanks  to  thy  Lord,  to  whom  thou  art  so  infinitely  beholden  r    Canst 
thou  find  in  thy  heart  to  put  thy  spear  again  in  His  side  ?    Hath  He  not  suffered 
yet  enough  ?    Is  His  bloody  passion  nothing  ?    Must  He  bleed  again  ?    Ah,  monster 
of  ingratitude !    Ah,  perfidious  traitor  as  thou  art,  thus  to  requite  thy  Master ! 
Again,  thou  grievest  thy  Comforter :  and  is  that  wisely  done  ?    Who  shall  comfort 
thee,  if  He  depart  ?    (John  Gibbon,  B.D.)        The  renewed  man : — If,  therefore,  you 
would  judge  of  the  life  in  the  soul  by  the  command  which  is  exercised  over  the 
body,  you  must  bring  into  account  the  agency  employed,  as  well  as  the  result 
effected.    You  must  calculate  whether  the  non-fulfilment  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh  be 
in  consequence  of  a  radical  change  of  the  heart,  or  nothing  more  than  the  proud 
device  of  a  weak,  and  self-sufficient  nature.    1.  It  is  not  necessary  that  a  man 
should  be  what  Scripture  calls  a  renewed  man  in  order  to  his  effecting  a  vast  refor- 
mation in  his  ordinary  conduct.    Eeformation,  indeed,  will  unavoidably  follow  on 
renewal ;  and  when  thus  produced,  will  be  far  more  vigorous  and  decided  than  when 
traced  to  any  other  origin.    But  Satan,  yea,  even  Satan,  can  busy  himself  with  the 
reforming  of  a  man ;  for  has  the  devil  nothing  to  do  with  self-righteousness  ?  has 
he  nothing  to  do  with  the  substitution  of  morality  for  faith  ?    There  will,  indeed, 
have  been  all  this  outward  change  if  an  individual  has  been  renewed  by  God's 
Spirit ;  but,  alas  !  it  is  not  true,  that  because  there  is  a  change  there  must  have 
been  renewal  1  For  you  should  remember  that  there  follows,  in  the  chapter  from  which 
our  text  is  taken,  a  catalogue  of  the  works  of  the  body  ;  and  this  catalogue  contains 
"  emulations,  wrath,  strife  " — though  these  may  have  seemed  to  be  mental  rather 
than  bodily  actions.    We  are  bpund,  therefore,  to  set  down  as  works  of  the  body 
many  works  which  are  not  wrought  by  the  agency  of  our  corporeal  members. 
Pride,  for  example,  is  classed  as  a  work  of  the  flesh,  though  it  passes  ordinarily  as 
a  disease  of  the  mind.     We  argue,  therefore,  that  since  a  man  may  gratify  his 
pride  by  the  higher  discipline  which  he  exercises  over  appetite  and  passion,  he  may 
be  fulfilling,  in  one  sense,  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,"  whilst  to  others  he  may  seem  to 
be  mortifying  that  lust.     Pride  is  emphatically  a  sin  of  the  devil,  and,  therefore,  to 
trace  the  action  of  pride  is  to  trace  it  to  the  devil.     Thus,  we  think  our  first  propo- 
sition sufficiently  established.  There  may  be  a  struggle  with  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh  " 
where  there  is  no  "walking  in  the  Spirit,"  and,  therefore,  well  might  the  apostle 
fix  our  thoughts  on  the  agency  as  well  as  on  the  result.     "  This  I  say,  then  " — oh  ! 
be  not  content  with  the  appearance  of  resistance  to  the  corruption  of  nature  with- 
out searching  into  the  origin  of  that  resistance — "  this  I  say,  then,  Walk  in  the 
Spirit,"  then,  and  then  only,  shall  you  really  and  actually  "not  fulfil  the  lust  of 
the  flesh."    2.  We  proceed  to  set  more  definitely  before  you  our  second  position, 


cbap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  86* 

that  there  can  be  no  effectual  non-fulfilment  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh — none  such  as 
shall  prove  spiritual — unless  there  be  "  walking  in  the  Spirit."  It  is  unquestion- 
able, as  we  have  already  admitted,  that  a  man  may  mortify  many  deeds  of  the  body. 
He  may  climb  the  mountains,  and  there,  far  away  from  all  companionship  with 
his  fellows,  the  rock  for  his  couch,  and  the  wild  fruits  for  his  sustenance,  he  may 
live  down  the  fierceness  of  passion,  and  win  over  carnal  desires  so  effective  a 
sovereignty,  that  though  they  have  heretofore  been  most  imperious  in  their  cravings, 
they  shall  ever  after  yield  obedience  to  the  severer  calls  of  the  Divine  law.  We 
Jinow  of  nothing  that  may  more  confound  those  who  have  embraced  true  religion — 
"who  prefer  deliverance  through  the  satisfaction  of  Christ — than  the  ready  submis- 
sion to  every  kind  of  toil  and  privation  which  is  presented  by  the  votaries  of  false 
systems  of  theology.  But,  whatever  the  appearance,  there  is  no  thorough  mbrtifi- 
cation  of  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh  "  unless  it  be  with  the  heart  that  the  mortification 
begins.  Yes,  when  the  flesh  is  covered  with  the  ashes  and  torn  with  the  stripes,  may 
pride  be  abroad  in  its  strength,  and  man  be  regarded  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  as 
cherishing  that  self-sufficiency  which  it  is  the  first  object  of  the  gospel  to  eject, 
and  which  must  be  subdued  ere  there  can  be  admission  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
And  if  it  be  thus  true  that  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh  "  cannot  be  thoroughly  unfulfilled 
unless  the  heart  be  overcome  and  brought  into  subjection,  then  no  withstanding  of 
the  lusts  can  be  that  which  proves  a  man  quickened  from  the  death  of  "  trespasses 
and  sins,"  unless  effected  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  to  outward  conduct,  a  man 
may  change  it  for  himself,  and,  even  as  we  have  shown  you,  be  assisted  by  Satan ; 
but  an  internal  change,  the  bringing  order  and  harmony  out  of  confusion  and  dis- 
cord in  the  human  soul,  the  crucifixion  of  the  flesh,  the  renewal  of  the  heart,  can 
only  be  brought  about  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  See,  then,  whither  you  must  turn  for 
instruction  and  strength  if  you  would  live  and  not  die.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  Oh !  not  to  be  Christ's,  after  Christ  has  taken 
flesh,  and  sorrowed,  and  suffered,  and  died  in  order  to  make  us  His  1  Ohl  not  to 
be  Christ's,  though  redeemed  by  Christ  at  the  untold  cost  of  His  agony  and  His 
blood  1  And  what  is  wanting  to  make  us  Christ's  ?  Just  that  we  have  His  Spirit, 
that  Spirit  which  is  freely  promised  to  all  by  whom  it  is  earnestly  sought.  {H. 
Melvill,  B.D.)  Walking  in  the  Spirit : — As  having  a  steady  forward  movement, 
as  requiring  not  only  an  action  of  the  will,  but  purpose,  strength,  and  circumspec- 
tion, the  Christian  life  is  very  well  conceived  in  figure  as  walking.  Now,  there  are 
two  ways  or  roads  on  either  of  which  we  may  be  walking — a  way  of  life  and  a  way 
or  death.  And  the  way  of  life  is  not  easy  to  find.  It  is  full  of  questions.  The 
paths  divide  and  diverge  at  all  angles.  We  do  not  travel  by  trains.  The  apostle 
uses  the  more  accurate  word.  It  is  a  "  walk  " — step  by  step — an  individual,  per- 
sonal thing,  with  free  choice,  continual  effort,  and  an  onward  movement.  If  it  is 
to  be  worth  anything,  if  it  is  to  come  to  anything  noble  here,  or  immortal  hereafter, 
life  is  costly.  We  must  pay ;  we  must  think ;  we  must  watch  and  work,  and  per- 
haps suffer.  We  are  equal  to  it,  not  in  our  own  strength,  but  by  a  Power  given  us 
from  above.  What  is  the  Power  ?  Where  is  the  Guide  ?  To  have  the  life  that  is 
glorious  and  eternal — all  its  failures  forgiven,  and  its  end  perfect — perfect  victory 
and  perfect  peace — we  must  "  walk" — in  that  way?  We  come  back  to  St.  Paul. 
He  answers,  "  This  I  say  then,  Walk  in  the  Spirit."  He  is  positive  and  peremp- 
tory. "This  I  say  then,  Walk  in  the  Spirit."  There  is  one  way  to  take  and 
follow.  There  is  a  guide  for  this  life.  Walking  is  living ;  it  is  our  life's  move- 
ment forward  in  this  world.  But  how  that  shall  be  "  in  the  Spirit "  is  what  we 
want  to  know  more  perfectly.  And  here,  as  often  happens,  we  are  helped  by  con- 
trasts. Throughout  all  this  writing  to  the  Galatians,  and  through  all  his  preaching 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  find  this  grand  expounder  of  it  pointing  out  two  opposite 
forces  in  the  nature  of  every  man.  He  has  various  names  for  them — "  the  law  of 
the  members  and  the  law  of  the  mind  " — "  the  old  man  and  the  new  man  " — but 
oftenest  "  the  flesh  and  the  spirit."  It  is  popular  language :  we  all  know  well 
enough  what  he  means,  not  because  the  terms  are  precise,  but  because  we  are  all 
conscious  of  having  in  ourselves  the  two  things — if  not  always  at  work  or  at  war, 
yet  always  there,  ready  to  start  up  at  any  time  and  renew  their  battle.  Take 
notice,  the  New  Testament  never  says  that  the  worse  force  of  the  two  is  wholly  evil, 
or  the  better  one  wholly  good.  The  gospel  does  teach  everywhere  that  the  spirit 
in  man  is  the  natural  organ  of  what  is  highest  and  best  in  him,  while  the  flesh  is 
the  natural  organ  of  what  is  lower — the  one  connecting  with  the  spiritual  world 
above  us,  the  other  with  the  world  below.  St.  Paul  does  preach,  plainly  and  with 
all  his  might,  that  there  is  a  struggle  of  each  of  these  two  forces  for  the  master/. 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OUT.  « 

and  that  it  is  a  desperate  fight  till  the  right  one  gets  the  upper  hand  and  rules. 
There  are  only  two  ways  anywhere.     It  is  one  thing  or  the  other.    H  we  are  not 
living  in  the  spirit,  we  are  living  as  part  and  parcel  of  a  material  world,  which 
then  overgrows  and  stifles  the  spirit,  absorbs  all  interests  into  its  outside  show  and 
passional  comforts,  then  runs  down,  perishes,  and  has  no  immortality  but  the 
lingering  one  of  the  second  death.     If  it  is  inquired  then,  What  is  our  spiritual 
life  ?  it  is  that  within  us  which  feels  God  to  be  a  Father,  which  seeks  and  follows 
what  is  good  in  itself,  which  chooses  what  is  lovely  in  conduct  and  generous  in 
judgment,  which  tests  friendships  by  their  purity,  and  pursuits  by  their  righteous- 
ness, which  has  faith  in  tbe  unseen,  which  worships,  which  is  touched  and  some- 
times enraptured  by  the  beauty  of  holiness.     The  spirit  is  that  in  us  which  would 
rather  suffer  than  do  wrong,  and  rather  be  crucified  than  mistake  Caesar  for  the 
Saviour  or  Mammon  for  its  maker.    It  would  choose  truth  before  falsehood,  no 
matter  what  bribe  is  put  into  the  balance  with  the  lie.    It  is  that  by  which  we  for- 
give injuries,  and  confess  our  own  sins,  and  are  willing  to  be  made  poorer  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven's  sake,  and  take  in  the  glorious  sense  of  the  encomium  on 
charity  in  1  Cor.  xiii.     There  is  another  contrast  still.     St.  Paul,  through  all  this 
passage,  has  in  mind  not  only  a  comparison  of  the  spiritual  mind  with  the  sensual 
and  selfish  mind,  but  of  the  life  lived  in  the  spirit  and  a  life  which  looks  somewhat 
like  it,  but  at  heart,  under  the  surface,  is  a  very  different  thing : — i.e.,  a  life  lived 
under  a  set  of  rules  formed  by  external  regulations,  fashioned,  pieced  together,  cut 
and  dried  by  the  law.     You  know  how  determined  his  assaults  were  always,  in  every 
sermon  and  every  epistle,  from  his  conversion  at  Damascus  up  to  his  martyrdom  at 
Borne,  on  the  system  which  sees  nothing  in  religion  but  rule.    The  reason  is  that 
in  a  character  shaped  by  outside  rules  you  will  never  have  anything  deeper  than 
an  outside  piety.    It  wUl  not  be  character  at  all,  but  only  the  shell  of  it.     The 
heart  of  love  has  not  begun  to  beat,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  has  not  begun  to  breathe 
jn  them.    Whoever  would  be  a  Christian  must  be  one  heartily  and  cheerfully,  not 
grudgingly  or  of  necessity.    The  Christian  life  must  spring  and  bubble  up  from 
within,  not  be  fitted  on  from  without.      (Bishop  F.  D.  Huntington.)         The  posi- 
tiveness  of  the  Divine  life: — There  are  two  ways  of  dealing  with  every  vice  that 
troubles  us,  in  either  ourselves  or  others.     One  is  to  set  to  work  directly  to  destroy 
the  vice ;  that  is  the  negative  way.    The  other  is  to  bring  in  as  overwhelmingly  as 
possible  the  opposite  virtue,  and  so  to  crowd  and  stifle  and  drown  out  the  vice ;  that 
is  the  positive  way.    Now  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  St.  Paul.    Here  comes  his 
poor  Galatian  fighting  with  his  lust  of  the  flesh.     How  shall  he  kill  it  7     St.  Paul 
says  not,  "Do  as  few  fleshly  things  as  you  can,"  setting  him  out  on  a  course  of 
repression  ;  but,  "Do  just  as  may  spiritual  things  as  you  can,"  opening  before  him 
the  broad  gates  of  a  life  of  positive  endeavour.    And  when  we  have  thoroughly 
comprehended  the  difference  of  these  two  methods,  and  seen  how  distinctly  St. 
Paul  chose  one  instead  of  the  other,  we  have  laid  hold  on  one  of  the  noblest  charac- 
teristics of  his  treatment  of  humanity,  one  that  he  had  gained  most  directly  from 
his  Lord.     I  should  despair  of  making  any  one  see  the  distinction  who  did  not 
know  it  in  his  own  experience.    Everywhere  the  negative  and  the  positive  methods 
of  treatment  stand  over  against  each  other,  and  men  choose  between  them.     Here 
is  a  man  who  is  beset  by  doubts,  perhaps,  about  the  very  fundamental  truths  of 
Christianity.    He  may  attack  all  the  objections  in  turn,  and  at  last  succeed  in 
proving  that  Christianity  is  not  false.     That  is  negative.    Or  he  may  gather  about 
him  the  assurance  of  all  that  his  religion  has  done,  and  sweep  away  all  his  doubts 
with  the  complete  conviction  that  Christianity  is  true.     That  is  positive,  and  that 
is  better     We  see  the  same  principle,  the  superiority  of  the  positive  to  the  negative, 
constantly  illustrated  in  matters  of  opinion.    How  is  it  that  people  change  their 
opinions,  give  up  what  they  have  steadfastly  believed,  and  come  to  believe  some- 
thing very  different,  perhaps  its  very  opposite  ?     I  think  we  all  have  been  surprised, 
if  we  have  thought  about  it,  by  the  very  small  number  of  cases  in  which  men 
deliberately  abandon  positions  because  those  positions  have  been  disproved  and 
seem  to  them  no  longer  tenable.    And  even  when  such  cases  do  occur,  the  effect  is 
apt  to  be  not  good,  but  bad.     The  man  abandons  his  disproved  idea,  but  takes  no 
other  in  its  stead  ;  until,  in  spite  of  their  better  judgment,  many  good  men  have 
been  brought  to  feel  that,  rather  than  use  the  power  of  mere  negation,  and  turn  the 
believer  in  an  error  into  a  believer  in  nothing,  they  would  let  their  friend  go  on 
believing  his  falsehood,  since  it  was  better  to  believe  something,  however  stupidly, 
than  to  disbelieve  everything,  however  shrewdly.     But  what  then?    How  do  men 
change  their  opinions  ?    Have  you  not  seen  ?    Holding  still  their  old  belief,  thej 


cha*.  r.]  OALATIANS.  S6i 

come  somehow  into  the  atmosphere  of  a  clearer  and  a  richer  faith.  That  better 
faith  snrrounds  them,  fills  them,  presses  on  them  with  its  own  convincingness. 
They  learn  to  love  it,  long  to  receive  it,  try  to  open  their  hands  and  hearts  just 
enough  to  take  it  in  and  hold  it  along  with  the  old  doctrine  which  they  have  no 
idea  of  giving  up.  They  think  that  they  are  holding  both.  They  persuade  them- 
selves that  they  have  found  a  way  of  reconciling  the  old  and  the  new,  which  have 
been  thought  unreconcilable.  Perhaps  they  go  on  thinking  so  all  their  lives.  But 
perhaps  some  day  something  startles  them,  and  they  awake  to  find  that  the  old  is 
gone,  and  that  the  new  opinion  has  become  their  opinion  by  its  own  positive  con- 
vincing power.  There  has  been  no  violence  in  the  process,  nor  any  melan- 
choly gap  of  infidelity  between.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  something  so 
sublimely  positive  in  Nature.  She  never  kills  for  the  mere  sake  of  killing,  but 
every  death  is  but  one  step  in  the  vast  weaving  of  the  web  of  life.  She  has  no 
process  of  destruction  which,  as  you  turn  it  to  the  other  side  and  look  at  it  in  what 
you  know  to  be  its  truer  light,  you  do  not  see  to  be  a  process  of  construction.  She 
gets  rid  of  her  wastes  by  ever  new  plans  of  nutrition.  This  is  what  gives  her  such 
a  courageous,  hopeful,  and  enthusiastic  look,  and  makes  men  love  her  as  a  mother 
and  not  fear  her  as  a  tyrant.  They  see  by  small  signs,  and  dimly  feel,  this  posi- 
tiveness  of  her  workings  which  it  is  the  glory  of  natural  science  to  reveal  more  and 
more.  We  find  the  same  thing  in  the  New  Testament.  The  God  there  revealed 
to  us  is  not  a  God  of  repression,  or  restraint,  but  a  God  whose  symbols  should  b« 
the  sun,  the  light,  the  wind,  the  fire — everything  that  is  stimulating,  everything 
that  fosters  and  encourages  and  helps.  Such  is  the  God  whose  glory  we  see  in 
the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  distinction  is  everywhere.  Not  by  merely  trying  not 
to  sin,  but  by  entering  farther  and  farther  into  the  new  life,  in  which,  when  it  is 
completed,  sin  becomes  impossible ;  not  by  merely  weeding  out  wickedness,  but  by 
a  new  and  supernatural  culture  of  holiness,  does  the  saint  of  the  New  Testament 
walk  on  the  ever-ascending  pathway  of  growing  Christliness,  and  come  at  last  per- 
fectly to  Christ.  This  is  the  true  difference  between  law  and  grace,  and  the  New 
Testament  is  the  book  of  grace.  And  this  character  of  the  New  Testament  must 
be  at  the  bottom  in  conformity  with  human  nature.  The  Bible  and  its  Christianity 
are  not  in  contradiction  against  the  nature  of  the  man  they  try  to  save.  Let  us 
never  believe  they  are.  They  are  at  war  with  all  his  corruptions,  and,  in  his  own 
interest,  though  against  his  stubborn  will,  they  are  for  ever  labouring  to  assert  and 
re-establish  his  true  self.  And  in  this  fundamental  character  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, by  which  it  is  a  book  not  of  prohibitions  but  of  eager  inspirations,  there 
comes  out  a  deep  harmony  between  it  and  the  heart  of  man.  For  man's  heart  is 
always  rebelling  against  repression  as  a  continuous  and  regular  thing.  Man  is 
willing  to  make  self-sacrifices  for  a  certain  temporary  purpose.  The  merchant  will 
give  up  his  home,  the  student  shut  his  books,  the  mother  leave  her  household  for  a 
time,  to  do  some  certain  work.  The  world  is  full  of  self-sacrifice,  of  the  suppression 
of  desires,  the  forcing  of  natural  inclinations ;  but  all  the  while  under  this  crust  the 
fire  is  burning ;  all  the  time,  under  this  self-sacrifice,  there  is  a  restless,  hungry 
sense  that  it  is  not  right,  that  it  cannot  be  final ;  there  is  a  crying  out  for  self- 
indulgence.  All  the  time  there  is  a  great  human  sense  that  not  suppression  but 
expression  is  the  true  life.  And  what  has  Christ  to  say  to  one,  who,  acting  on  this 
prompting  of  his  nature,  gives  up  restraint  and  tries  indulgence  ?  My  brother,  I 
can  hear  him  say,  you  are  not  wholly  wrong.  Nay,  at  the  bottom,  you  are  right. 
Self-mortification,  self-sacrifice,  is  not  the  first  or  final  law  of  life.  You  are  right 
when  you  think  that  these  appetites  and  passions  were  not  put  into  you  merely  to 
be  killed,  and  that  the  virtue  which  only  comes  by  their  restraint  is  a  poor,  colour- 
less, and  feeble  thing.  You  are  right  in  thinking  that  not  to  restrain  yourself  and 
to  refrain  from  doing,  but  to  utter  yourself,  to  act,  to  do,  is  the  purpose  of  your 
being  in  the  world.  Only,  my  brother,  this  is  not  the  self  you  are  to  utter,  these  are 
not  the  acts  you  are  to  do.  There  is  a  part  in  you  made  to  think  deeply,  made  to 
feel  nobly,  made  to  be  charitable  and  chivalric,  made  to  worship,  to  pity,  and  to 
love.  You  are  not  uttering  yourself  while  you  keep  that  better  self  in  chains,  and 
only  let  these  lower  passions  free.  Let  me  renew  those  nobler  powers,  and  then 
believe  with  all  your  heart  and  might  that  to  send  out  those  powers  into  the  in- 
tensest  exercise  is  the  one  worthy  purpose  of  your  life.  Then  these  passions,  which 
you  are  indulging  because  you  cannot  believe  that  you  were  meant  to  give  your 
whole  life  up  to  bridling  them,  will  need  no  forcible  bridling,  and  yet,  owning  their 
masters  in  the  higher  powers  which  come  out  to  act,  they  will  be  content  to  serve 
them.    You  will  not  fulfil  your  passions  any  longer,  but  the  reason  will  not  be  thai 


86«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*.  Y. 

you  have  resumed  the  weary  guard  over  your  passions  which  you  tried  to  keep  of 
old.  It  will  be  that  you  have  given  yourself  up  so  utterly  to  the  seeking  after  holi- 
ness, that  these  lower  passions  have  lost  their  hold  upon  you.  You  will  not  bo 
much  have  crushed  the  carnal  as  embraced  the  spiritual.  I  shall  have  made  you 
free.  You  will  be  walking  in  the  Spirit,  and  so  will  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 
Is  not  this  Christ's  method  ?  Is  not  this  the  tcne  of  His  encouraging  voice  ? 
"  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin,"  but  *'  Ye  shall  know  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  It  is  the  positive  attainment  and  not  the 
negative  surrender.  It  is  the  self-indulgence  of  the  highest,  and  not  the  self- 
surrender  of  the  lowest,  that  is  the  great  end  of  the  gospel.  (Phillips  Brooks, 
D.D.)  The  spiritual  walk: — I.  The  point  from  which  we  have  to  start — 

••  Walk  in  the  Spirit."  In  every  walk  there  is  a  place  from  which  we  first  proceed. 
The  starting-point  for  every  man  in  the  spiritual  walk  is  a  state  of  unrenewed 
nature,  an  unconverted,  unregenerated  condition.  II.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  our 
second  part :  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh." 
We  have  seen  the  point  from  which,  we  now  consider  the  course  by  which  we  abb 
to  walk — "  Walk  in  the  Spirit."  But  here  there  must  first  of  all  be  life  in  order 
te  our  obeying  this  exhortation.  A  dead  man  walks  not,  moves  not,  from  whence 
he  is.  But  to  walk  not  only  requires  life,  there  must  be  strength,  and  willingness 
to  exert  strength.  The  sick  man  often  cannot  walk,  the  slothful  man  often 
will  not ;  the  spiritually  diseased  and  slothful  walk  not  in  the  Spirit ;  but  the 
Holy  Ghost  infuses  an  energy  into  the  soul  of  man.  But  in  walking  beside 
life,  strength,  and  willingness,  there  must  likewise  be  a  constraining  motive 
to  induce  man  to  walk  in  the  road  marked  out  for  his  path.  The  constraining 
motive  in  the  spiritual  walk  is  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour 
and  Bedeemer.  But  still  there  must  be  a  road  marked  out  for  walking.  There  is 
one  marked  out  for  each  of  you  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  there  is  a  way,  little  trodden 
indeed  by  the  multitude,  but  well  known  to  all  who  have  gone,  and  who  are  going 
to  heaven.  It  is  a  straight  and  a  narrow  way ;  it  has  its  difficulties.  III.  Our  third 
part  yet  waits.  A  walk,  we  have  seen,  has  a  point  whence,  a  way  by  which,  and  now 
A  place  whither  hen  ARE  waleino.  The  point  to  which  the  spiritual  walk  is  intended 
to  lead  is  perfect  holiness,  meetness  for  heaven,  yea,  heaven  itself.  (J.  Hambleton.) 
The  spirit  and  the  flesh : — When  St.  Paul  talks  of  man's  flesh,  he  means  by  it 
man's  body,  man's  heart  and  brain,  and  all  his  bodily  appetites  and  powers — what 
we  call  a  man's  constitution ;  in  a  word,  the  animal  part  of  man,  just  what  a  man 
has  in  common  with  the  beasts  who  perish.  To  understand  what  I  mean,  consider 
any  animal — a  dog,  for  instance — how  much  every  animal  has  in  it  what  men 
have, — a  body,  and  brain,  and  heart ;  it  hungers  and  thirsts  as  we  do ;  it  can  feel 
pleasure  and  pain,  anger  and  loneliness,  and  fear  and  madness :  it  likes  freedom, 
company,  and  exercise,  praise  and  petting,  play  and  ease  ;  it  uses  a  great  deal  of 
cunning,  and  thought,  and  courage,  to  get  itself  food  and  shelter,  just  as  human 
beings  do ;  in  short,  it  has  a  fleshly  nature,  just  as  we  have,  and  yet,  after  all,  it  is 
but  an  animal,  and  so,  in  one  sense,  we  are  all  animals,  only  more  delicately  made 
than  the  other  animals ;  but  we  are  something  more — we  have  a  spirit  as  well  as  a 
flesh,  an  immortal  soul.  If  any  one  asks,  what  is  a  man  ?  the  true  answer  is,  an 
animal  with  an  immortal  spirit  in  it ;  and  this  spirit  can  feel  more  than  pleasure 
and  pain,  which  are  mere  carnal,  that  is,  fleshly  things ;  it  can  feel  trust,  and  hope, 
and  peace,  and  love,  and  purity,  and  nobleness,  and  independence,  and,  above  all,  it 
can  feel  right  and  wrong.  There  is  the  infinite  difference  between  an  animal  and  a 
man,  between  our  flesh  and  our  spirit ;  an  animal  has  no  sense  of  right  and  wrong ; 
a  dog  who  has  done  wrong  is  often  terrified,  but  not  because  he  feels  it  wrong  and 
wicked,  but  because  he  knows  from  experience  that  he  will  be  punished  for  doing 
it :  just  so  with  a  man's  fleshly  nature  ; — a  carnal,  fleshly  man,  a  man  whose  spirit 
is  dead  within  him,  whose  spiritual  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  honour  and 
purity,  is  gone,  when  he  has  done  a  wrong  thing  is  often  enough  afraid ;  but  why  ? 
Not  for  any  spiritual  reason,  not  because  he  feels  it  a  wicked  and  abominable  thing, 
a  sin,  but  because  he  is  afraid  of  being  punished  for  it.  Now,  in  every  man,  the 
flesh  and  the  spirit,  the  body  and  the  soul,  are  at  war.  We  stand  between  heaven 
and  earth.  Above  us,  I  say,  is  God's  Spirit  speaking  to  our  spirits ;  below  us  is 
this  world  speaking  to  our  flesh,  as  it  spoke  to  Eve's,  saying  to  us,  "  This  thing  ia 
pleasant  to  the  eyes — this  thing  is  good  for  food — that  thing  is  to  be  desired  to 
make  you  wise,  and  to  flatter  your  vanity  and  self-conceit."  And  where  man'a 
flesh  gets  the  upper  hand,  and  takes  possession  of  him,  it  can  do  nothing  but  evil 
— not  that  it  is  evil  in  itself,  but  that  it  has  no  rule,  no  law  to  go  by  ;  it  does  not 


OHAr.  T.]  GALATIANS.  867 

know  right  from  wrong ;  and  therefore  it  does  simply  what  it  likes,  as  a  dumb 
beast  or  an  idiot  might ;  and  therefore  the  works  of  the  flesh  are — adulteries, 
drunkenness,  murdere,  fornications,  envyings,  backbitings,  strife.  When  a  man's 
body,  which  God  intended  to  be  the  servant  of  his  spirit,  has  become  the  tyrant  of 
his  spirit,  it  is  like  an  idiot  on  a  king's  throne,  doing  all  manner  of  harm  and  folly 
without  knowing  that  it  is  harm  and  folly.  This  is  not  its  fault.  "Whose  fault  is 
J3  it,  then?  Our  fault — the  fault  of  our  wills  and  our  souls.  (C.  Kingsley,  JH.A.) 
Walking  in  the  Spirit : — I.  We  are  to  walk  in  the  Spirit  or  God.  II.  How 
aee  we  to  know  that  we  have  the  Spieit  ?  1.  Not  simply  by  natural  conscience. 
2  By  the  effect  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Christian  life.  3.  By  a  life  that  has  an 
uniform  God-ward  tendency.  III.  The  Spieit  must  influence  ode  daily  life 
and  actions.  1.  The  Spirit  comes  to  young  and  old.  2.  The  Spirit  influences  in 
different  ways.  3.  His  operation  is  necessary.  4.  His  operation  must  be  deep 
and  permanent.  (Canon  Tristram.)  The  life  and  warfare  of  the  Spirit  in  the 
soul : — I.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  believer.  1.  We  live  in  the  Spirit. 
{1)  He  begins  the  new  life.  (2)  Sustains  it.  2.  We  walk  in  the  Spirit.  Activity 
the  first  symptom  of  life.  This  (1)  reminds  us  of  our  dependence  on  the  Spirit. 
(2)  Implies  our  consistency.  Deportment  must  harmonize  with  character.  (3)  Is 
significant  of  progress.  3.  We  are  led  by  the  Spirit.  (1)  An  entire  surrender  to 
His  authority.  (2)  Following  Him  in  the  path  of  duty,  we  find  the  truest  happi- 
ness and  perfect  safety.  II.  The  reasons  why  the  believer  should  be  urged  to 
maintain  it.  1.  We  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  (1)  We  shall  be  kept 
from  sin.  (2)  We  shall  grow  in  grace.  2.  We  are  not  under  law.  Freedom  from 
(1)  the  law  of  sin ;  (2)  the  law  of  death.  3.  We  shall  be  victorious  in  the  great 
battle  between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  (1)  Indwelling  sin  is  strong.  (2)  The 
Spirit  makes  us  conquerors.  (J.  Morgan,  D.D.)  The  marks  of  a  Christian : — 
I.  He  "  walks  in  "  and  is  "  led  by  the  Spirit,"  i.e.,  he  has — 1.  A  heart  always 
open  to  Divine  influence.  2.  A  life  subordinate  to  Divine  rule.  II.  He  conquers 
tbb  flesh.  1.  In  the  inward  strife  described  here,  and  in  Bom.  vii.,  the  Christian 
is  not  under  the  law  of  the  flesh,  but  subdues  the  corrupt  nature  and  brings  it  into 
subjection  to  the  Spirit.  2.  He  does  this  daily.  III.  He  brings  forth  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit.  Examine  yourself  by  the  list  (vers.  22,  23).  The  principles  and 
method  of  Christian  life: — I.  The  practical   principles  of  the  Christian  life. 

1.  The  virtues  which  are  God-derived  and  God-ward.  (1)  Love,  the  tie  which 
binds  us  to  God  as  a  Father.  (2)  Joy,  the  glad  emotion  which  makes  music  in  the 
renewed  soul.      (3)  Peace,  the  summer  calm  which  settles  upon  the  conscience. 

2.  Those  which  refer  to  our  fellow-men — "  longsuffering  ....  meekness." 
(1)  They  are  the  counterpart  of  the  Divine  virtues.  (2)  Are  derived  from  the 
same  spring.  3.  These  belonging  to  the  general  disposition  and  habit  of  the  soul, 
"Faith  ....  temperance."    II.  The  method  by  which  we  appropriate  these 

PRINCIPLES    AND     MAKE    THEM     EFFECTIVE    IN    OUR    CHARACTER.        1.   Negatively:   the 

apostle  does  not  (1)  throw  us  back  on  our  own  will ;  (2)  hold  up  minute  regulations 
and  restrictions.  2.  Positively:  he  tells  us  to  "walk  in  the  Spirit."  (1)  Not 
simply  after  a  spiritual  manner,  (2)  by  a  mere  Divine  influence;  but  (3)  by 
personal  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  Remember  the  true  order  of  Christian 
life  as  here  unfolded.  1.  The  bad  is  not  overcome  by  mere  abstinence  from 
evil.  2.  Be  filled  with  the  Spirit  and  evil  will  be  overcome.  (S.  Pearson,  M.A.) 
The  non-fulfilment  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh  without  the  Spirit : — I.  When  man  trusts 
in  anything  he  has  done  it  cannot  be  God's  Spirit  who  leads  to  the  doing  of  it. 
II.  No  non-fulfilment  of  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  which  is  not  the  result  of  walking  in 
the  Spirit,  affords  any  proof  of  life  in  the  soul.  III.  The  operations  of  grace  may 
be  closely  imitated,  though  no  change  may  have  passed  over  the  heart.  IV.  In  his 
endeavour  to  destroy  meu  the  devil  may  employ  morality  as  well  as  villainy.  V.  It 
is  not  enough  for  the  mortification  of  the  deeds  of  the  body  that  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh  should  appear  unfulfilled.  VI.  If,  therefore,  you  would  judge  of  the  life  in 
the  soul  by  the  command  which  is  exercised  over  the  body,  you  must  bring  into 
account  the  agency  employed  as  well  as  the  result  effected.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Flesh 
and  Spirit : — Thou  hast  a  double  nature.  Choose  between  the  worst  and  the  better 
that  is  within  thee.  Thou  hast  it  in  thy  power  to  become  the  slave  of  passion,  the 
6lave  of  luxury,  the  slave  of  sensual  power,  the  slave  of  corruption.  Thou  hast  it 
also  in  thy  power  to  become  the  free  master  of  thyself,  to  become  the  everlasting 
benefactor  of  thy  country,  and  the  unfailing  champion  of  thy  God.  (Dean  Stanley.) 
The  Divine  ruU: — Keep  the  spiritual  nature  uppermost.  Give  the  spiritual  mau 
the  advantage.     Settle  every  acoount  in  the  Spirit's  favour.       It  will  not  make 


868  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

everything  convenient,  or  merry,  or  prosperous.  There  may  be  mistakes  of  judg- 
ment ;  life  may  seem  like  a  strain  of  bad  music  pitched  to  a  minor  key ;  your  ideals 
may  not  be  attained.  Never  mind  that.  The  voice  rings  out  over  all  the  contra- 
dictions and  ruins,  "  This  I  say  then,  walk  in  the  Spirit,"  "  To  be  spiritually 
minded  is  life  and  peace  " — life  now  and  peace  at  last.  (Bp.  Huntington.)  The 
Pauline  ethics  are  as  Btern  and  strict  as  those  of  any  system  which  has  ever  been 
promulgated.  The  liberty  on  which  he  insisted  was  no  cover,  no  apology,  no 
defence  for  licence,  for  those  wild  and  profligate  excesses  which  the  fanatics'  faith 
has  sometimes  permitted.  The  extravagances  of  the  Adamites,  of  the  Cathari,  of 
the  Anabaptists,  have  been  quoted  as  a  reproaah  on  the  genius  of  Christianity.  In 
reality  they  are  a  homage  to  it.  The  claim  of  Christianity  on  the  allegiance  of  men 
has  been  so  strong  that  they  who  have  repudiated  its  spirit  have  affected  to  call 
themselves  by  its  name.  The  Israelites  often  fell  into  that  idolatry  which  the  law 
donounced,  condemned,  chastised,  But  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  they  forgot 
their  nationality  in  tbeir  sin.  (Paul  of  Tarsus. )  Value  of  spirituality  of  mind : — 
A  beautiful  flower — the  wood  sorrel — grows  among  the  trees  in  some  parts  of 
England.  It  has  shining  green  leaves,  and  transparent  bells  with  white  veins. 
When  it  is  gathered  roughly,  or  the  evening  dew  falls,  or  the  clonds  begin  to  rain, 
the  flower  closes  and  droops ;  but  when  the  air  is  bright  and  calm,  it  unfolds  all  its 
loveliness.  Like  this  sensitive  flower,  spirituality  of  mind,  wben  touched  by  the 
rough  hand  of  sin,  or  the  cold  dews  of  worldliness,  or  the  noisy  rain  of  strife,  hides 
itself  in  the  quietude  of  devout  meditation ;  but  when  it  feels  the  influence  of  sunny 
and  serene  piety,  it  expands  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  moral  image  of  God. 
(S.  J.  Wright.)  Entire  consecration  necessary  : — Suppose  you  were  to  buy  a 
house  and  lot  and  an  elegant  residence,  pay  the  money  and  get  the  deeds,  and  the 
day  you  were  to  go  in  the  gentleman  said,  "  Here's  the  key  to  eight  rooms,  I  have 
reserved  two  rooms."  "  Didn't  I  buy  the  house  ?  "  "  Yes,"  "  Well,  what  do  you 
mean?"  "  I  want  to  keep  four  tigers  in  one  room,  and  the  other  I  want  to  fill 
with  reptiles.  I  want  them  to  stay  here."  You  say,  "  Well,  my  friend,  if  yon 
mean  what  you  say  I  would  not  have  your  house  as  a  gracious  gift.  You  want  me  to 
move  my  family  into  a  house  where  one  room  is  full  of  tigers  and  the  other  full  of 
snakes."  Many  a  time  we  turn  over  our  whole  heart  to  God,  and  when  He  comes 
in  we  have  reserved  some  rooms  for  the  wild  beasts  of  pride  and  the  hissing 
serpents  of  iniquity.  Let  me  tell  you,  brethren,  I  won't  ask  God  to  come  and  live 
in  a  house  that  I  won't  let  my  family  live  in.  Empty  every  room  in  the  house, 
and  then  the  heart  is  the  centre  of  gravity  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  He  will  come  in 
and  live  with  you.  (S.  Jones.)  How  to  overcome  temptation: — "Flee  youthful 
lusts."  Fight  not,  but  flee ;  or  if  fight  you  must,  copy  the  old  Parthians,  who, 
seated  on  fleet  coursers  and  armed  with  bow  and  arrows,  shot  from  the  saddle, 
flying  as  they  fought.  If  you  cannot  flee,  then  in  Christ's  name  and  strength  face 
round  on  the  foe,  and  make  a  bold  stand  for  God ;  and  the  virtues  of  youth  shall 
rebuke  the  vices  of  age,  and  hoary  sin  shall  go  down  before  you  armed  with  God's 
word,  as  did  the  Philistine  before  the  young  shepherd  and  his  sling.  (TGuthrietD.D.) 
How  to  vanquish  sin: — Prudence  :  "  Can  you  remember  by  what  means  you  find 
your  annoyances  at  times  as  if  they  were  vanquished  ?  "  Christian :  "  Yes,  when  I 
think  what  I  saw  at  the  cross,  that  will  do  it ;  and  when  I  look  upon  my  broidered 
coat,  that  will  do  it ;  also  when  I  look  into  the  roll  that  I  carry  in  my  bosom,  that 
will  do  it ;  and  when  my  thoughts  wax  warm  about  whither  I  am  going,  that  will 
do  it."    (John  Bunyan.) 

Yer.  17.  For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the 
flesh. — Contest  between  flesh  and  spirit : — Here  is  a  battle — a  struggle — described : 
one  in  which  we  must  all  fight.  Our  own  corrupt  and  wilful  hearts,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God,  are  ever  drawing  ns  different  ways ;  and  we  have  to  choose  between 
them.  This  is  the  work  of  the  will.  God  leaves  us  free.  The  Spirit  draws,  but 
does  not  drive  :  invites,  not  compels.  There  are  four  states  in  which  we  may  be. 
1.  Before  the  struggle  begins.  The  soul  living  utterly  regardless  of  any  will  but 
his  own,  any  law  but  his  own  desires  ;  sin  slumbering  within  him,  lying  hid  and 
unknown ;  at  peace  with  himself,  and  having  no  idea  of  his  danger.  Terrible 
condition ;  yet,  alas !  how  many  baptized  Christians  are  in  it.  2.  The  struggle 
going  on.  The  sinner  sees  what  God  commands,  and  tries  to  obey.  Then  comes 
the  difficulty.  The  mind  approves  one  thing,  but  the  flesh  strives  after  another ; 
and  alas  1  how  often  the  flesh  comes  off  victorious.  3.  The  spirit  subduing  the 
flesh.    Still  a  struggle,  but  by  God's  grace  the  good  is  now  conquering  the  evil,  the 


oha».  t.]  GALATIANS. 


Holy  Spirit  dwelimg  in  the  heart  and  making  the  will  strong  to  persist  in  following 
the  law  of  God.  Oh,  how  happy,  how  blessed  a  state  is  this  !  4.  The  struggle 
over.  In  the  first  state  there  was  no  struggle,  because  the  evil  held  undisputed 
sway.  In  the  second  state  there  was  a  struggle,  but  it  was  the  helplessness  of  the 
natural  man  striving  in  vain  to  fulfil  the  law  of  God.  In  the  third  state  there  is  a 
struggle  too,  but  now  it  is  the  grace  and  power  of  God  striving  in  us  against  the 
rebellious  nature  which  before  held  us  captive,  and  that  grace  and  power  gain  the 
victory.  In  the  fourth  state  there  is  again  no  struggle.  But  it  is  because  the 
battle  has  been  fought,  and  the  victory  gained  for  ever.  No  more  foes  to  oppose,  no 
sins  to  do  battle  with.  A  state  we  may  not  look  for  in  this  life  ;  but  it  shall  be 
reached  by  all  who  persevere.  A  little  while,  and  the  last  struggle  will  be  over ; 
and  then — rest,  peace,  joy,  glory,  victory  I  (Bishop  Walsham  How.)  So  that  ye 
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would :  The  wrestle  of  humanity : — The  translation  is 
wrong.  The  R.  V.  gives  it  correctly :  "  that  ye  may  not  do  the  things  that 
ye  would."  Here  you  have  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  personified :  each  has 
given  to  it  intelligence,  aim,  purpose.  Here  is  the  man,  the  individual,  the 
moral  and  spiritual  personality  —  man  with  his  moral  capacity  and  power  of 
volition,  but  volition  is  modified  by  influences  from  without.  Here  are  two 
integral  powers,  standing  on  each  side  of  the  personality,  and  each  of  them  is 
watching  the  action  of  the  other  as  it  may  be,  operating  upon  the  human  volition  ; 
when  the  spirit  with  its  elevating  thoughts,  its  intense  desire,  its  strong  aspirations, 
is  operating  upon  the  feeling  and  the  soul,  and  when  a  man  would  act  under  that 
influence,  then  the  flesh,  watching  its  opportunity,  comes  with  all  its  force  and 
power,  and  endeavours  to  prevent  it,  so  that  "  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit, 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  that  the  man  may  not  do  the  things  he  would/' 
What  is  the  remedy  for  that  ?  Why,  you,  the  central  personality,  take  sides  with 
one,  that  there  may  be  two  against  one.  Throw  your  moral  power  and  affections 
upon  one  side,  walk  in  the  spirit,  yield  to  the  spirit,  hold  to  the  spirit,  and  then 
you  will  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  You  will  then  do  the  things  that  you  would, 
under  the  spiritual  influence  of  this  gracious  Agent.  Hold,  pray,  strive,  depend, 
look  up  with  religious  faith,  and  seek  to  have  within  you,  strengthened  continual  ly, 
an  intense  repugnance  to  everything  evil — to  the  influences  and  lusts  operating 
upon  you — and  you  will  conquer.  The  flesh  will  be  defeated,  you  will  gain  victory 
after  victory ;  there  will  be  sympathy  after  sympathy,  strength  after  strength  ;  and 
then  it  will  come  to  pass  that  the  flesh,  and  the  devil  in  the  flesh,  will  pass  by  you. 
(T.  Binney.)  Self  versus  self : — The  Christian  life  is  one  of  conflict  between 
opposing  forces  designated  respectively,  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  i.e.,  between  the 
old  nature  and  the  new ;  between  Christians  themselves  usually  so  called,  and  that 
which  is  higher,  stronger,  holier,  than  themselves.  It  is  a  conflict,  we  may  say, 
between  Christ  and  anti-Christ :  for  the  soul,  on  the  battlefield  of  the  soul.  The 
old  nature  is  strong  and  very  active,  and  loses  no  opportunity  of  plying  all  the 
weapons  of  its  deadly  armoury  against  the  new-born  grace :  the  new  nature,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  ever  on  the  watch  to  resist  and  destroy  its  enemy.  Grace  within  us 
employs  prayer  and  faith  and  hope  to  cast  out  evil.  .  .  .  All  growing  Christians 
are  like  men  working  under  difficulties  ;  like  racers  who  must  carry  weights ;  like 
men  rowing  against  wind  and  tide,  yet  compelled  for  dear  life  to  row.  This  is  not 
the  popular  conception  of  a  Christian's  career.  With  some  religious  teachers 
Christianity  is  a  mere  sentiment ;  a  given  idea  as  to  moral  accountability,  and 
as  to  escape  through  Jesus  Christ,  has  to  be  fixed  in  the  mind,  and — Presto !  a 
man  is  "fully  saved."  Such  teaching  is  void  of  danger  only  when  explained  to 
mean  that  he  who  has  seen  his  sinfulness,  and  rested  upon  his  Saviour,  has  passed 
the  strait  gate  and  entered  upon  the  narrow  way.  Men  need  salvation  from 
their  all  but  infinite  conceits.  There  can  be  no  salvation  "  unto  the  uttermost  " 
apart  from  character.  Faith  as  a  disposition  must  follow  faith  as  an  act.  1.  A 
Christian's  life  must  be  a  battle  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  Flesh  and  spirit  are 
contrary  as  water  and  oil,  as  light  and  darkness,  as  good  and  evil ;  and  so,  to  do  the 
things  they  would  and  ought,  Christians  have  to  fight.  2.  Because  we  gain  im- 
mensely from  fighting.  All  valuable  discipline  comes  of  difficulties  faced  and 
overcome.  Better  to  fight  and  win  than  to  obtain  moral  mastery  without  fighting. 
(J.  S.  Swan.)  Sins  of  infirmity  : — True  faith  is  not  shown  here  below  in  peace,  but 
rather  in  conflict ;  and  it  is  no  proof  that  a  man  is  not  in  a  state  of  grace  that  ho 
continually  sins,  provided  such  sins  do  not  remain  on  him  as  permanent  results,  but 
are  ever  passing  on  into  something  beyond  and  unlike  themselves,  into  truth  and 
righteousness.    As  we  gain  happiness  through  suffering,  so  do  we  arrive  at  holiness 

24 


S70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [iHA*.  ▼. 

through  infirmity,  because  man's  very  condition  is  a  fallen  one,  and  in  passing  oat 
of  the  country  of  sin,  he  necessarily  passes  through  it.     This  prevents  holy  men 
from  regarding  themselves  with  satisfaction,  or  resting  in  anything  but  Christ's 
death  as  their  ground  of  confidence.    The  following  are  some  of  the  infirmities 
which,  while  they  certainly  beset  those  who  are  outcasts  from  God's  grace,  are  alao 
possible  in  a  state  of  acceptance,  and  do  not  necessarily  imply  absence  of  true  faith. 
1.  Original   sin.     An   evil  principle  within,  dishonouring  our  best  service.     The 
old  Adam,  pride,  profaneness,  deceit,  unbelief,  selfishness,  greediness,  the  inheritance 
of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil ;  sin  which  the  words  of  the  serpent 
sowed  in  the  hearts  of  our  first  parents,  which  sprang  up  and  bore  fruit,  some 
thirty  fold,  some  sixty,  some  an  hundred,  and  which  have  been  by  carnal  descent 
transmitted  to  us.     2.  Sins  arising  from  former  evil  habits,  now  abandoned.     Sin 
once  committed  retains  power  over  our  souls  ;  it  has  given  a  colour  to  our  thoughts, 
words,  works ;  and  though,  with  many  efforts,  we  would  wash  it  out  from  us,  yet 
this  is  not  possible  except  gradually.      Sloth,  self-conceit,  self-will,   impurity, 
worldly-mine? edness ;  sins  such  as  these,  though  cast  off,  cling  like  a  poisoned 
garment  to  the  soul.    3.  Sins  arising  from  want  of  self-command ;  the  conscience 
informed,  but  the  governing  principle  weak.     Difficult  to  do  as  one  would  wish — to 
govern  the  feelings,  the  tongue,  the  thoughts.     4.  Sins  which  we  fall  into  from 
being  taken  unawares.     5.  Sins  which  rise  from  the  devil's  temptations,  inflamirjg 
the  wounds  and  scars  of  past  sins  healed,  or  nearly  so  ;  exciting  the  memory,  and 
hurrying  us  away ;  and  thus  making  use  of  our  former  selves  against  our  present 
selves  contrary  to  our  will.      6.  Sins  which  rise  from  a  deficiency  of  practical 
experience,  or  from  ignorance  how  to  perform  duties  which  we  set  about.     Men 
attempt  to  be  munificent,  and  their  acts  are  prodigal ;  they  wish  to  be  firm  and 
zealous,  and  their  acts  are  cruel ;  they  wish  to  be  benevolent,  and  are  indulgent 
and  weak ;  they  do  harm  when  they  mean  to  do  good ;  they  engage  in  undertakings, 
or  promote  designs,  or  put  forth  opinions,  or  set  a  pattern,  of  which  evil  comes ; 
they  mistake  falsehood  for  truth  ;  they  are  zealous  for  false  doctrines  ;  they  oppose 
the  cause  of  God.     7.  Unworthy  motives,  low  views,  mistakes  in  principle,  false 
maxims.      8.  Negligences  and  ignorances.      Forgetfulness,  heedlessness,  want  of 
seriousness,  frivolity.    All  these  infirmities  may  be  and  are  found  in  persons  living 
consciously  sinful  lives,  and  in  them  of  course  they  only  serve  to  heighten  trans- 
gression and  hasten  judgment ;  but  they  are  also  to  be  found  in  persons  free  from 
wilful  sin,  and  such  persons  need  not  despond,  or  be  miserable  on  account  of  failings 
which  in  them  are  not  destructive  of  faith  or  incompatible  with  grace.    Who  these 
are  is  only  known  for  certain  by  God.     He  is  able,  amid  the  maze  of  contending 
motives  and  principles  within  us,  to  trace  out  the  perfect  work  of  righteousness 
steadily  going  on  there,  and  the  rudiments  of  a  new  world  rising  from  out  the 
chaos.    He  can  discriminate  between  what  is  habitual  and  what  is  accidental ; 
what  is  on  the  growth  and  what  is  in  decay ;  what  is  a  result  and  what  is  indeter- 
minate ;  what  is  of  us  and  what  is  in  us.    He  estimates  the  difference  between  a 
will  that  is  honestly  devoted  to  Him,  and  one  that  is  insincere.    And  where  there 
is  a  willing  mind  He  accepts  it,  "  according  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according 
to  that  he  hath  not."     In  those  whose  wills  are  holy  He  is  present  for  sanctification 
and  acceptance ;  and,  like  the  sun's  beams  in  some  cave  of  the  earth,  His  grace 
sheds  light  on  every  side,  and  consumes  all  mists  and  vapours  as  they  rise.     (J. 
H.  Newman,  D.D.)        Involuntary  transgression  : — The  soul  of  man  is  intended  to 
be  a  well-ordered  polity,  in  which  there  are  many  powers  and  faculties,  and  each 
has  its  due  pface  ;  and  for  these  to  exceed  their  limits  is  sin  ;  yet  they  cannot  be 
kept  within  them  except  by  being  governed,  and  we  are  unequal  to  this  task  of 
governing  ourselves  except  after  long  habit.     While  we  are  learning  to  govern  our- 
selves we  are  constantly  exposed  to  the  risk,  or  rather  to  the  occurrence  of  number- 
less failures.     We  have  failures  by  the  way  though  we  triumph  in  the  end  ;  and 
thus  the  process  of  learning  to  obey  God  is,  in  one  sense,  a  process  of  sinning,  from 
tbe  nature  of  the  case.  .  .  .  We  are  feeble-minded,  excitable,  effeminate,  wayward, 
irritable,  changeable,  miserable.     We  have  no  lord  over  us,  because  we  are  but 
partially  subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  true  King  of  saints.    Let  us  try  to  do  right 
as  much  as  we  will,  let  us  pray  as  earnestly,  yet  we  do  not,  in  a  time  of  trial,  come 
up  even  to  our  own  notions  of  perfection,  or  rather  we  fall  quite  short  of  them,  and 
do,  perhaps,  just  the  reverse  of  what  we  had  hoped  to  do.     While  there  is  no 
external    temptation   present,    our  passions  sleep,    and    we   think   all   is   well. 
Then  we  think  and  reflect  and  resolve  what  we  will  do ;  and  we  anticipate  no  diffi< 
•ulty  in  doing  it.    Bat  w_>ven  the  temptation  is  come,  where  are  we  then  ?    We  ar« 


.  r.]  GAL  ATI  ASS.  tU 

like  Daniel  in  the  lion's  den  ;  and  our  passions  are  the  lions  ;  except  that  we  have 
not  Daniel's  grace  to  prevail  with  Goi  for  the  shutting  of  the  lions'  m rathe  ie=; 
they  devour  us.  Then  our  reason  is  but  like  the  miserable  keeper  of  i 
who  in  ordinary  seasons  is  equal  to  them,  but  not  when  they  are  excite  i. 
"Whatever  the  affection  of  mind  may  be,  how  miserable  it  is !  It  may  be  a  dull, 
heavy  sloth,  or  cowardice,  which  throws  its  huge  limbs  around  us,  binds  u; 
oppresses  our  breath,  ani  makes  us  despise  ourselves,  while  we  are  1 
resist  it ;  or  it  may  be  anger,  or  other  baser  passion,  which,  for  the  moment, 
escapes  from  cur  control  after  its  prey,  to  our  horror  and  our  disgrace  ;  t  : 
how,  what  a  miserable  den  of  brute  creatures  does  the  soul  then  become,  and  we  at 
the  moment  literally  unable  to  help  it !  I  am  not,  of  course,  speaking  of  deed*  of 
evil,  the  fruits  of  wilfulness,  malice,  or  revenge,  or  uncleannesa,  or  intemperance, 
or  violence,  or  robbery,  or  fraud;  alas  !  the  sinful  heart  often  goes  on  to  commit 
sins  which  hide  from  it  at  once  the  light  of  God's  countenance;  but  I  am  sup- 
posing what  was  Eve's  case,  when  she  looked  a:  the  tree  and  saw  that  the  fruit 
wa3  good,  but  before  she  plucked  it,  when  lust  had  conceived  and  was  bringing 
forth  sin,  but  ere  sin  was  finished  and  had  brought  forth  death.  I  am  supposing 
that  we  do  not  exceed  so  far  as  to  estrange  God  from  us ;  that  He  mercifully  chains 
the  lions  at  our  cry,  before  they  do  more  than  frighten  us  by  their  moanings  or 
their  roar,  before  they  fall  on  us  to  destroy  us  :  yet  at  best,  what  misery,  what 
pollution,  what  sacrilege,  what  a  chaos  is  there  then  in  that  consecrated  spot  which 
is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost !  How  is  it  that  the  lamp  of  God  does  not  go  out 
in  it  at  once,  when  the  whole  soul  seems  tending  to  hell,  and  hope  is  almost  gone  • 
Wonderful  mercy  indeed  it  is  which  bears  so  much  !  Incomprehensible  patience 
in  the  Holy  One,  so  to  dwell,  in  such  a  wilderness,  with  the  wild  beasts  !  Exceed- 
ing and  Divine  virtue  in  the  grace  given  us,  that  it  is  not  stifled !  Yet  such  is  the 
promise,  not  to  those  who  sin  contentedly  after  they  have  received  grace  ;  there  is 
no  hope  while  they  so  sin ;  but  where  sin  is  not  part  of  a  course,  while  it  is  still  sin, 
whether  sin  of  our  birth,  or  of  habits  formed  long  ago,  or  of  want  of  self-command, 
which  we  are  trying  to  gain,  God  mercifully  allows  and  pardons  it,  and  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  it  alL  ...  To  know  thus  much,  that  infirmities  are 
no  necessary  mark  of  reprobation,  that  God's  elect  have  infirmities,  and  that  our 
own  sins  may  possibly  be  no  more  than  infirmities,  this,  surely,  by  itself,  is  a  con- 
eolation.  And  to  refect  that  at  least  God  continues  us  visibly  in  Hi3  Church ;  that 
He  does  not  withdraw  from  us  the  ordinances  of  grace ;  that  He  gives  us  means 
of  instruction,  patterns  of  holiness,  religions  guidance,  good  books  ;  that  He  allows 
us  to  frequent  Hi3  house,  and  to  present  ourselves  before  Him  in  prayer  and  Holy 
Communion  ;  that  He  gives  us  opportunities  of  private  prayer ;  that  He  has  given 
us  a  care  for  our  souls  ;  an  anxiety  to  secure  their  salvation  ;  a  desire  to  be  more 
strict  and  conscientious,  more  simple  in  faith,  more  full  of  love  than  we  are  ;  all 
this  will  tend  to  soothe  and  encourage  us  when  the  sense  of  our  infirmities 
makes  us  afraid.  (Ibid.)  The  traitor  rcithin  : — A  garrison  is  not  free  from 
danger  while  it  has  en  enemy  lodged  within.  Tou  may  bolt  all  your  doors 
and  fasten  all  your  windows  ;  but  if  the  thieves  have  placed  even  a  little  child 
within  doors,  who  can  draw  the  bolts  for  them,  the  house  is  still  unprotected.  All 
the  sea  outside  a  ship  cannot  do  it  damage  till  the  water  enters  within  and  fills  the 
hold.  Hence,  it  i3  clear,  our  greatest  danger  is  from  within.  All  the  devil;  in 
hell  and  tempters  on  earth  could  do  U3  no  injury  if  there  were  no  corruption  in  our 
nature.  The  sparks  will  fall  harmlessly  if  there  is  no  tinder.  Alas,  our  heart  is 
our  greatest  enemy  :  thi3  i3  the  little  home-born  thief.  Lord,  save  me  from  that 
evil  man,  myself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Continuance  of  natural  depravity  in  Chrit- 
tians : — In  material  fruit-trees  the  sour  nature  of  the  wild  plants  that  are  grafted 
upon  still  continues  in  the  stock  or  root,  and  is  not  taken  away  by  ingrafting  ;  it  is 
only  restrained  and  kept  under  by  the  graft.  The  nature  of  the  graft  is  predo- 
minant in  the  tree,  and  overrules  in  bringing  forth  fruits  according  t:  it;  mm  kind 
(although  with  some  small  degree  of  the  sour  nature  of  the  stoc^  mixed  wit::  i:  . 
and  the  two  natures  of  the  graft  and  stock  continue  mixed  together  as  long  as  the 
tree  lives.  This  is  a  similitude  of  the  state  of  mystical  fruit-trees,  and  shadows 
forth  to  us  this  proposition :  That  corrupt  nature  abides  in  believers  as  long  as 
they  live,  and  is  but  in  part  subdued  by  grace.  We  find  by  experience  that  after  a 
plant  is  ingrafted,  both  the  graft  and  the  stock  will  shoot  forth,  and  if  the  graft 
grow  vigorously  and  strongly,  then  the  shoot3  of  the  stock  are  but  weak ;  but  if  th« 
shoots  of  the  stock  break  tut  strorgiy  then  the  graft  grow3  but  weakly;  therefor* 
the  husbandman  takes  pains  often  to  cut  off  the  shoots  that  grow  upon  the  stock, 


87J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

bo  that  the  graft  may  grow  the  better.  This  is  another  similitude  of  the  state  of 
mystical  fruit-trees,  and  shadows  forth  to  us  this  proposition:  That  while  the 
spiritual  part  in  us  acts  and  grows  strongly,  the  fleshly  part  acts  but  weakly ;  so 
also,  if  the  fle&h  be  strong,  the  spirit  is  weak.  This  should  teach  us  often  to  take 
notice  of  the  actings  of  our  spirits,  whether  the  stock  or  the  graft  bud  the  faster. 
If  we  were  watchful  daily,  and  took  pains  with  our  spirits  to  keep  them  up  in  a 
spiritual  frame  in  communion  with  God,  then  (by  degrees)  the  shoots  and  growths 
of  the  spiritual  part  would  become  strong,  and  the  shoots  of  the  flesh  weak  and 
feeble.  (Austen.)  The  Christian's  conflicts: — The  conflicts  of  the  Christian, 
"  the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,"  continue  to 
the  end  of  life,  and  may  be  compared  to  a  conflagration  which  is  opposed  by 
engines,  where  the  supply  of  water  is  scarcely  equal  to  the  demand,  and  not  inces- 
santly followed  up.  Sometimes  the  fire  yields  to  the  well-directed  stream,  and  at 
other  times  it  breaks  forth  with  renewed  fury,  and  seems  to  defy  the  efforts  of 
those  who  would  arrest  its  progress.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  The  believer's  struggle  : — 
The  spirit  and  the  flesh,  grace  and  nature,  heavenly  and  earthly  influences,  are 
sometimes  so  fairly  balanced,  that,  like  a  ship  with  wind  and  tide  acting  on  her 
with  equal  power  but  in  opposite  directions,  the  believer  makes  no  progress  in  the 
Divine  life.  He  loses  headway.  He  does  not  become  worse,  but  he  grows  no 
better ;  and  it  is  all  he  can  do  to  hold  his  own.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  losea 
ground,  falling  into  old  sins.  Temptation  comes  like  a  roaring  sea-squall,  and, 
finding  him  asleep  at  his  post,  drives  him  backward  on  his  course ;  and,  further 
now  from  heaven  than  once  he  was,  he  has  to  pray :  Heal  my  backsliding,  renew 
me  graciously,  love  me  freely.  For  Thy  name's  sake,  0  Lord,  pardon  my  iniquity, 
for  it  is  great.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Conflict  and  conquest : — I.  The  fact  stated. 
"  The  flesh,"  &c.  Kemnants  of  indwelling  sin  remain.  "  Flesh  "  does  not  mean 
"  sinews,"  "  fibres,"  &c,  but  carnal  propensities.  Fact  stated  shared  by  apostles. 
They  no  exception  to  general  rule.  Not  by  nature  more  saintly  than  ourselves. 
Indwelling  sin  affects  all.  Sinners  not  perfected  in  holiness  here.  Why  ?  1.  To 
make  us  watchful.  Common  idea,  "  way  to  heaven  easy."  Nature  of  sin  misun- 
derstood, so  that  men  fly  to  it  as  moths  to  candle.  But  saints  are  taught  another 
lesson.  Sin  is  a  deadly  enemy.  Truth  is  known,  "  flesh  lusteth,"  &o.  This  keeps 
them  alive,  watchful,  safe.  Sleep  is  fatal.  The  story  is  told  that  Satan  once 
summoned  his  angels  to  inquire  what  they  had  been  doing.  One  said,  "  I  saw  a 
company  of  Christians  crossing  the  desert,  and  I  let  loose  the  winds  of  heaven,  and 
their  bones  are  bleaching  in  the  sun."  "  What  of  that?  "  said  Satan;  "  perhaps 
their  souls  are  saved."  Another  said,  I  saw  a  ship  with  missionaries  on  board, 
going  to  a  heathen  land,  and  I  raised  a  storm  and  drowned  them  all."  "  What  ot 
that  ?"  said  Satan ;  "  perhaps  their  souls  are  saved."  And  then  came  forwards 
subtle  spirit,  who  said,  "  For  fifteen  years  I  have  been  trying  to  lull  an  old  Christian 
to  sleep,  and  I  have  just  succeeded."  Whereupon  there  arose  a  shout  of  triumph, 
the  bells  of  hell  rang  for  joy,  and  Satan  spoke  approvingly.  So  the  old  nature  is 
never  made  better,  but  a  new  one  added.  Always  an  enemy  within.  2.  That  we 
may  never  mistake  the  grounds  of  our  salvation.  Works  have  no  meritorious  part. 
All  of  grace.  Beginning  (1  Cor.  xv.  8,  9),  ending  (Phil.  i.  6).  But  only  failures 
teach  this.  Past  sins  like  past  gales  to  the  seaman — forgotten.  Present  sickness, 
distress,  make  us  cling  to  friends.  So  indwelling  sin  and  conflict  bring  the  saint 
close  to  Christ.  II.  The  Attitude  op  indwelling  sin.  Not  dead  or  restful,  quiet 
or  submissive.  Bom.  vii.  23,  24,  describes  a  deadly  feud,  very  unlike  common  idea 
of  personal  depravity.  Never  feud  more  deadly,  not  even  the  Wars  of  the  Koses  or 
the  Indian  Mutiny.  Its  nearness  makes  it  so.  If  distant,  less  painful,  less  dis- 
tressing. Near.  I  would  press  this.  Saints  contest  every  step.  Bunyan's 
description  of  Apollyon's  conflict  with  Christian  graphically  describes  the  state. 
Weapons  vary,  but  enemy  never.  Pride,  anger,  lust,  sloth,  despair  (Eph.  vi.  11) 
"  lusteth."  III.  The  conquest.  '*  So  that  ye,"  &a.  Not  the  flesh  hindering 
grace.  Vice  versa.  What  a  mercy  I  Shout  of  victory  always  follows  cry  of  battle. 
Gospel  purposes  not  accomplished  when  men,  even  Christians,  are  stationary. 
More  glorious.  Bich  become  liberal,  godless  godly,  &c.  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  Not 
preach  defeat.  "  Greater  is  He  that  is,"  &c.  Are  you  ready  to  despair?  Think 
of  the  issue.  Not  always  slaves  or  prisoners.  Deliverance.  Wait  as  Wellington 
behind  the  lines  of  Torres  Vedras.  So  you  behind  the  grace  of  God.  Then  go 
forth  to  victory.     (H.  T.  Cavell.)  The  struggle  of  the  flesh  and  the  spirit: — 

It  is  on  this  passage  we  offer  the  following  reflections : — 1.  Paul  regards  all  the 
events  that  constitute  the  general  course  of  the  world,  whether  of  private  history 


CHAT.  T.]  GALATIANS.  S73 

or  of  public  affairs,  as  the  works  of  the  flesh.  As  water  cannot  rise  beyond  its 
spring,  so  neither  can  life  rise  beyond  its  origin  and  inspiration.  The  natural  life  of 
man  is  "  animal."  The  awful  catalogue  which  is  given  of  the  "  works  of  the  flesh  " 
(ver.  19)  is  a  condensed  history  of  the  world  of  mankind  in  all  latitudes  and  in  all 
ages.  There  is  a  close  alliance  between  man  and  the  animal  races.  In  this  state 
the  gospel  finds  mankind.  2.  They  that  lead  this  animal  life,  under  whatever 
form  of  civilization  or  barbarism,  "  cannot  please  God  "  (Kom.  viii.  7,  8).  3.  But 
God,  in  His  mercy,  has  provided  redemption  for  man  from  his  fleshly  or  animal 
condition — from  sin  and  its  consequences — by  the  Incarnation  of  the  Divine  Word, 
by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross,  by  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  and  by  His  new-creating 
Spirit.  Christ  is  the  new  Head  of  life  for  mankind — the  second  Adam.  Those 
who  are  not  born  twice  will  die  twice.  4.  But  God  affords  His  Spirit  of  renovation 
to  dwell  with  all  believers.  The  Spirit  originates  a  struggle  of  forces  within  the 
nature  of  a  Christian,  the  issue  of  which,  as  with  the  unborn  Jacob  and  Esau 
(Gen.  xxv.  22,  23),  is  that  the  elder  serves  the  younger,  the  newer  vanquishes  the 
older  man — the  wild  and  shaggy  animal  Nature  is  subdued  in  the  Israel  of  God  by 
the  civilizing  power  of  Divine  grace.  We  are  surrounded  on  all  sides  in  the  crea- 
tion by  the  struggle  of  rival  forces ;  gravitation  and  muscular  power ;  the  vital 
powers  and  the  chemical  laws ;  the  opposing  forces  which  combine  to  send  the 
earth  along  its  nearly  circular  orbit.  But  there  is  no  struggle  in  physical  nature 
half  Bo  interesting  or  half  so  glorious  as  this  inward  contest  between  the  flesh  and 
the  spirit.  It  is  emphatically  a  war  between  heaven  and  earth  in  the  body  and  soul 
of  man.  The  condition  of  the  contest  is  that  God  by  His  Spirit  supplies  a  new  power 
in  supplying  a  new  life.  It  is  the  part  of  man,  as  a  living  and  intelligent  will,  to  yield 
to  the  inspirations  of  the  new  power  and  life,  and  so  to  overcome  the  works  of  the 
flesh.  God  does  not  operate  irresistibly,  as  upon  dead  matter,  but  intellectually  and 
spiritually,  as  upon  honest  mind.  He  "  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do,"  but  we 
must  "  work  out  our  own  salvation."  5.  How  does  the  Holy  Spirit  accomplish  the 
work  of  renewal  in  the  Divine  image  ?  As  it  were  by  infusing  a  new  blood  into  the 
system — a  new  life.  What  is  this  life-blood  ?  It  is  the  truth  of  Christ.  "  Sanctify 
them  by  Thy  truth"  The  old  corrupt  humanity  is  cut  down.  The  new  vine  now 
bears  fruit  unto  God,  the  "  fruit  of  the  spirit "  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus.  There  is  a 
new  motive  in  life.  God  has  become  real,  and  near,  and  dear  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Here  are  revealed  the  secrets  of  power,  the  mystery  of  that  supernatural  "life 
in  Christ  Jesus "  which  begins  in  the  gift  of  God,  and  repentance  from 
dead  works  is  strengthened  by  the  assurance  of  salvation  from  sin  already 
visible,   and  will  be  perfected  in  the  resurrection.     (Edward   White.)  The 

conflict  in  man's  nature : — The  flesh  represents,  in  St.  Paul's  terminology,  the 
whole  brood  of  lower  faculties,  or  that  part  of  our  nature  which  constitutes  us 
animals ;  and  the  spirit  represents  manhood,  or  that  whole  class  of  faculties  by 
which  we  are  exalted  into  the  higher  sphere,  by  which  we  become  sons  of  God.  In 
a  figurative  way,  he  represents  these  two  as  in  conflict.  It  is  as  if  there  were  two 
bands  of  soldiers  quartered  in  one  tenement,  having  an  upper  and  a  lower  storey. 
On  the  ground-floor  is  a  company  of  brawling,  drunken,  unruly,  brutal,  cruel  men ; 
and  in  the  story  above  them  is  a  company  of  soldiers  that  are  gentlemanly,  and 
courteous,  and  humane,  and  well  disciplined.  And  there  are  three  states  of  affairs 
which  may  exist.  The  brawling  soldiers  below  may  govern  the  house  ;  and  then 
they  will  have  hard  times  upstairs,  for  their  supplies  will  be  cut  off,  and  they  will 
starve.  Or,  a  part  of  the  time  the  gentlemen  upstairs  may  govern  the  house,  and 
part  of  the  time  the  coarse  brutal  fellows  downstairs  may  govern  it ;  and  then  there 
will  be  a  terrible  conflict.  And  between  the  attempts  of  those  upstairs  to  maintain 
discipline,  and  the  attempts  of  those  below  stairs  to  break  down  discipline,  the 
place  will  be  a  perfect  pandemonium.  There  will  be  no  peace  there.  They  will  be 
quarrelling  perpetually.  And  so  the  animal  nature  and  the  manhood,  in  man, 
quarrel.  Sometimes  it  is  the  lower  nature  that  is  in  the  ascendency;  and 
then  whatever  things  are  above  it — conscience,  faith,  hope,  all  spiritual  ten- 
dencies, and  all  supernal  tendencies — are  at  a  discount.  The  upper  part  of 
the  mind  is  starved  out  because  of  the  absolute  ascendency  of  the  appetites 
and  passions — of  pride  and  selfishness,  and  envy  and  lusts,  and  all  manner  of  evil 
feelings.  Then,  by  and  by,  there  is  the  second  state — the  state  of  resistance  and 
conflict.  The  spirit  wars  against  the  flesh,  and  refuses  to  be  in  subjection  to  it. 
And  while  this  war  continues,  sometimes  one  predominates  and  sometimes  the 
other.  The  men  upstairs  to-day  have  the  best  of  it,  and  the  men  downstairs  to- 
morrow have  the  best  of  it.     Nothing  is  settled,  nothing  is  continuous ;  all  is  sub* 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

ject  to  chance.  There  is  many  a  half-formed  man  who  has  no  fixed  habits  of  life, 
and  in  whom  sometimes  one  part  of  his  nature  gets  momentum  and  comes  into 
the  ascendency,  and  sometimes  the  other  part.  Sometimes  those  faculties  which 
are  seeking  to  do  good  govern,  and  sometimes  those  which  are  seeking  to  do  evil 
govern.  And  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  there  is  a  state  of  conflict  between  the  upper 
and  the  lower  nature,  between  the  manhood  and  the  animal,  in  everyone  of  us.  Then 
comes  that  state  in  which,  by  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  and  by  the  discipline  of 
life,  complete  ascendency  is  gained  by  our  supersensuous  nature.  And  all  the 
other  parts  of  our  being  "  are  brought  into  obedience,"  as  it  is  said,  "  to  thB  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Or,  if  you  choose  to  follow  out  the  psychological  figure,  the  superior 
faculties  in  our  souls  assume  control.  And  then  there  is  peace.  Then  there  is  rest. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Opposite  tendencies  of  flesh  and  spirit: — As  a  fair  and  gentle 
wife,  starlike  and  dovelike,  is  given  to  the  guardianship  of  some  rude,  coarse,  un- 
cultured nature,  who  treads  among  her  sweet  feelings  as  the  hoof  and  the  snout 
deal  with  flowers  in  the  garden,  so  it  is  in  this  strange  husband  and  wife,  the  body 
and  the  soul ;  the  soul  full  of  sweetness  and  gentleness,  purity  and  delicacy,  and 
the  coarse  animal  body  full  of  despotism,  and  swayings  and  conflicts  of  cruel  pas- 
sions ;  and  they  fare  but  ill  in  their  wedded  life  on  earth.  The  body  looks  down 
and  searches  the  ground  for  its  delights ;  the  soul  looks  up,  and,  like  an  astronomer, 
culls  treasures  from  among  the  stars,  and  beyond.  The  body  eats  and  drinks ;  the 
soul  thinks  and  feels.  The  body  lives  in  the  world,  for  the  world,  and  with  the 
world ;  the  soul  reaches  far  away  to  some  higher  life  whose  need  it  feels — but  all  is 
vague,  but  the  wish,  but  the  need.  Strange  visions  rise ;  but  neither  to-day  does 
the  soul  know  its  origin,  nor  to-morrow.  The  picture  of  beauty  and  of  purity  that 
rose  bright  in  the  morning  has  faded  out  before  night.  To-morrow  mocks  the  ex- 
pectation  of  to-day.  The  soul  is  like  a  bird  caged  from  the  nest,  that  yet  remembers 
something  of  its  fellows  in  the  forest  of  green  leaves,  and  in  summer  days  hears 
snatches  of  song  from  far-off  fields,  and  yearns,  with  all  its  little  life,  for  that 
liberty  which  it  has  never  proved,  for  that  companionship  which  it  so  early  missed, 
and  for  those  songs  which  it  never  learned  to  utter,  though  it  strives  in  broken  notes 
for  them*  Once  some  adventurous  hunters,  from  a  ledge  of  rocks,  robbed  an  eagle's 
nest  of  an  eaglet.  Brought  home,  he  was  reared  among  fowls,  that  he  might  per. 
form  domestio  duty.  As  he  grew,  he  grew  apart  from  the  children  of  the 
dunghill,  and  sat  moody  in  sullen  dignity.  As  his  wings  secretly  grew  strong, 
they  were  clipped.  When  on  a  summer's  day,  wild  in  the  heaven  the  hawk 
screamed,  every  fowl  in  the  yard  ran  cowering  to  shelter ;  he,  with  flashing  eye 
and  discordant  scream,  reared  himself  to  fly,  but  alas  1  he  could  not  rise.  He  fell 
sick.  He  would  have  died,  if  he  might.  They  let  him  alone.  His  pinions  grew 
again.  They  forgot  him.  He  forgot  not.  The  sky  was  his.  The  great  round 
of  air,  without  line  or  bound,  was  his.  And  when,  one  neglectful  summer 
day,  all  were  dozing,  from  afar  up  in  the  sky — so  far  that  none  could  see,  or  see 
only  a  floating  speck — there  came  down  a  cry  so  faint  that  no  ear  might  hear  it — 
none  but  an  eagle's.  Then,  with  sudden  force,  all  its  life  beating  in  its  breast,  it 
Bprang  up.  Away  from  the  yard,  its  fowls,  its  owners,  over  the  rick  and  over  the 
barn,  over  the  trees  and  over  the  hills,  round  and  round  in  growing  circles,  beaten 
with  growing  power  of  wing,  the  freed  eagle  sought  its  fellow,  and  found  its  liberty 
right  under  the  sun  I  And  such,  of  many  and  many  a  soul,  sad  in  bondage, 
valiant  in  liberty,  has  been  the  history.  (Ibid.)  The  two  natures  in  a  Chris- 
tian : — A  Christian  lives  in  two  worlds  at  one  and  the  same  time — the  world 
of  flesh,  and  the  world  of  spirit.  It  is  possible  to  do  both.  There  are  certain 
dangerous  gases,  which  from  their  weight  fall  to  the  lower  part  of  the  place  where 
they  are,  making  it  destructive  for  a  dog  to  enter,  but  safe  for  a  man  who  holds  his 
head  erect.  A  Christian,  as  liviDg  in  the  world  of  flesh,  is  constantly  passiDg 
through  these.  Let  him  keep  his  head  erect  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  he  is  safe. 
He  does  this  so  long  as  the  Son  of  God  is  the  fountain  whence  he  draws  his  in- 
spiration,  his  motives,  encouragement,  and  strength.  (George  Philip.)  Spiritual 
conflict : — This  is  one  of  those  many  passages  in  the  Bible  which,  from  some  causes 
or  other,  men  have  taken  away  from  their  first  and  proper  and  comforting  sense, 
and  invested  with  a  dark  and  stern  meaning.  For  most  men,  when  they  read  these 
words — understand  them  to  mean  that,  by  reason  of  indwelling  sin,  "  we  cannot  do 
the  good  things  which  we  desire  to  do."  Whereas,  the  real  intention  of  it  is 
exactly  the  reverse — that  by  reason  of  "  the  good,"  that  is  in  us,  "  we  cannot  do  the 
bad  things,"  which,  nevertheless,  we  wish  to  do.  That  this  is  the- chief  and  true 
signification,  the  whole  line  of  thought  proves.    No  one  who  knows  anything  of 


CHAT,  v.]  GALATIANS.  «T« 

human  nature,  or  of  his  own  heart,  can  doubt,  for  a  moment,  that  the  ninth  article 
of  our  Church  is  thoroughly  and  literally  true,  and  that  "the  infection  of  nature 
doth  remain,  yea  in  them  that  are  regenerated ;  whereby  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  called 
in  the  Greek,  phronema  sarhos,  which  some  do  expound  the  wisdom,  some  sensuality, 
some  the  affection,  some  the  desire,  of  the  flesh,  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God." 
Nay,  many  could  give  painful  testimony  that  the  more  they  have  striven  to  do  what 
is  right,  the  more  they  have  been  dragged  back  again  !  that  the  stronger  the  light, 
the  deeper  has  been  the  shadow !  that  the  presence  of  God  in  them  seemed  to  serve 
only  to  6tir  up  the  violence  of  the  wicked  one !  The  fact  is  that  the  process  of 
sanctification,  in  a  man,  is  not  exactly  what  almost  all  of  us  beforehand  thought  it 
would  be.  It  is  not  in  the  main  that  evil  gradually  ceases,  and  good  gradually  takes 
its  place.  It  is  not  the  extirpation  of  sin  at  all — but  it  is  the  subjugation  of  sin. 
The  Pbilistines  are  yet  in  the  land,  in  their  strongholds,  though  the  land  belong  to 
the  people  of  God.  I  am  not  sure  that  wbat  is  wrong  in  a  man  is  at  all  diminished 
by  his  sanctification.  It  is  ratber  (if  I  may  so  call  it)  the  increase  of  grace  than 
the  decrease  of  nature.  Imaginations — the  wicked  desires — are  all  there;  and 
there  they  are  in  their  strength,  tbeir  tremendous  strength  I  Do  not  doubt  it. 
They  are  there  to  the  very  end  1  Witness  the  falls,  the  awful  falls  of  Christian  men 
— long  after  their  conversion  1  Witness  the  fearful  struggles  which  we  all  have 
passed  through  sometimes  !  Sin  lives  a  subject,  a  slave,  a  rebel — but  Christ  reigns ! 
Ah  I  brethren,  what  if  there  were  not  something  by  reason  of  which  "  we  could  not 
do  the  things  that  we  would  ?  "  This,  then,  brings  us  to  the  immediate  force  of  St. 
Paul's  words.  The  way  to  subdue  sin  is  to  introduce  a  master-power.  You  will 
never  actually  destroy  the  wrong  will ;  but  you  must  neutralize  it  by  another  wilL 
You  must  bring  in,  and  cultivate,  and  enlarge  the  prohibitive  and  preventive  forces 
of  the  heart,  till  at  last  you  have  come  to  the  state  tbat  "  you  cannot  do  the  things 
that  you  would."  Let  us  look  at  this  a  little  in  detail.  I  will  take  one  of  you  who 
is  still  much  too  fond  of  the  world.  The  world  exercises  a  particular  fascination 
over  that  man.  He  is  probably  ashamed  of  the  influence ;  and  yet  he  is  unable  to 
resist  it.  At  last,  the  fact  is  certain,  that  he  goes  more  into  the  world  than  is  good  for 
his  soul ;  and  he  knows  that  he  does.  Now,  wbat  shall  we  say  to  that  man  ?  No  man 
can  really  and  honestly  live  higher  than  his  level.  While  the  level  of  your  heart 
— its  tastes,  and  pleasures,  and  ideas — is  the  level  of  the  world,  into  the  world,  of 
course,  you  will  go.  It  would  not  do  much  good — it  would  not  make  you  a  better 
Christian — if  you  kept  out  of  it.  What  you  want  is  to  raise  your  level.  You  want 
to  taste  pure  pleasures — to  have  a  higher  ambition — to  pursue  more  satisfying 
objects—  to  live  in  a  holier  atmosphere — to  get  into  an  upper  range.  How  shall  you 
do  this  ?  You  must  accept  the  love  of  God — you  must  have  more  peace — you  must 
have  more  real  communion  with  God — more  of  the  spiritual  life,  with  all  its  deep, 
absorbing  influences — more  of  the  fellowship  with  God's  people — more  work  done 
for  usefulness,  and  for  the  Church,  and  for  Christ.  As  soon  as  ever  you  reach  that 
point,  those  lesser  things  will  descend  in  the  scale ;  they  will  not  be  congenial  to 
the  new  life ;  they  will  become  insipid ;  they  will  be  actually  distasteful.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  conflict  of  the  Christian  life  : — I.  Its  nature.  1.  The 
flesh  has  its  desires,  so  has  the  spirit  as  acted  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  both 
are  strong,  contradictory,  and  antagonistic.  2.  The  struggle  between  the  two  is  a 
matter  of  the  commonest  Christian  experience.  (1)  Of  the  flesh  against  the  spirit. 
The  sense  of  obligation  arouses  the  spirit  of  revolt.  Hence  even  Paul  had  to  keep  his 
body  under.  (2)  The  spirit  against  the  flesh.  The  revolt  against  command  is 
checked  by  the  grace  of  submission,  and  the  desire  to  be  faithful  awakens  disgust 
at  sin.  3.  The  Divine  nature  is  imparted  to  us  with  all  its  love  and  longing  that 
the  flesh  with  its  lusts  may  be  overcome.  4.  The  nobler  shall  be  victor  over  the 
meaner.  H.  Its  purpose.  1.  That  the  antagonism  of  righteousness  and  un- 
righteousness may  work  out  the  highest  good  and  accomplish  the  destiny  of  the 
faithful.  2.  To  prevent  the  Christian  life  becoming  one  of  impulse,  merely  the 
doing  simply  as  we  would  because  we  will  it.  3.  To  force  on  us  the  task  of  delibera- 
tion and  wise  resolve ;  to  make  us  choose  as  well  as  will,  and  determine  as  well  as 
choose,  and  thus — 4.  To  add  the  steadfastness  of  Christian  purpose  to  the  eagerness 
of  Christian  passion.  (A.  Mackennal,  B.A.)  I.  The  flesh  desires  ease,  and 
thus  comes  into  collision  with  the  spirit,  which  requires  us  to  fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith  (Heb.  xii.  1-2).  II.  The  flesh  desires  excitement,  whereas  the  spirit  re- 
quires us  to  deny  ourselves  and  take  up  our  cross.  III.  The  flesh  desires  distinc- 
tion, whereas  the  spirit's  injunction  is  to  humility  (Phil.  ii.  3-4 ;  Matt.  xx.  26  ; 
Horn.  xii.  10).    1 V.  The  flesh  desires  to  make  self  supreme,  whereas  the  spirit  da- 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

sires  to  make  God  supreme.  (W.  Landells,  D.D.)  There  are  eight  main  incom- 
modities  which  the  soul  hath  cause  to  complain  of  in  her  conjunction  with  the 
body.  1.  The  defilement  of  original  sin.  2.  A  proneness  to  actual  sin.  3.  The 
difficulty  of  doing  well.  4.  The  dulness  of  our  understanding  in  the  things  of  God. 
5.  Perpetual  self-conflict.  5.  Backing  solicitude  of  cares.  7.  Multiplicity  of  pas- 
sions. 8.  Retardation  of  our  glory.  (Bishop  Hall.)  We  must  fight  the  flesh:— 
You  that  carry  flesh  and  blood  about  with  you,  and  sinful  natures,  and  do  perceive 
the  conflicts  of  the  flesh  against  the  spirit,  weigh  with  yourselves  what  it  is  the 
flesh  conflicts  with  you  for  :  it  is  no  less  than  for  the  immortal  soul,  as  the  Apostle 
Peter  tells  yon,  "  I  beseech  you,  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts 
which  war  against  the  soul."  The  flesh  aims  to  damn  the  soul.  It  is  in  this  con- 
flict, as  Csesar  said  in  the  battle  he  had  once  in  Africa  with  the  children  and  par- 
takers of  Pompey,  that,  in  other  battles,  he  was  wont  to  fight  for  glory,  but  there 
and  then  he  was  obliged  to  fight  for  his  life.  Remember  thy  precious  soul  lies  at 
stake  in  this  conflict.  (Christopher  Lowe.)  Evil  thoughts  perilous : — A  gossamer 
thread  is  attached  to  an  arrow,  and  shot  through  the  air  unseen,  over  an  impas- 
sable chasm.  Fixed  on  the  other  side  it  is  sufficient  to  draw  over  a  cord.  The  cord 
draws  over  a  rope,  the  rope  draws  over  a  bridge,  by  which  a  highway  is  opened  to  all 
comers.  Thus  is  the  gulf  passed  that  lies  between  the  goodly  character  of  a  youth 
fresh  from  his  father's  family,  and  the  daring  heights  of  iniquity  on  which  veteran 
libertines  stand.  "Out  of  the  heart,"  said  He  who  knows  it,  "proceed  evil 
thoughts."  Yes,  but  what  come  out  next  ?  "  Murders,  adulteries,  fornications, 
thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies."  A  horrible  gang.  How  quickly  they  eome  on. 
Once  the  fountain  were  cleansed,  the  streams  of  life  would  be  pure.  So  thought 
David,  when,  in  an  agony  of  grief,  he  cried,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God." 
(W.  Arnot,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.    But  If  ye  be  led  of  the  Spirit  ye  are  not  under  the  law. — The  guidance 

of  the  Spirit : — 1.  The  Spirit  is  a  person.  The  personality  of  the  Spirit  is  a  doe- 
trine  freely  confessed  by  us  in  our  creed,  but  often  denied  by  us  in  thought,  converse, 
prayers.  He  comes  to  have  with  us  only  the  indefiniteness  of  an  impulse  and  the 
inipersonalness  of  an  influence,  with  none  of  that  substantive  being,  intelligence, 
and  will  that  constitutes  the  Holy  Spirit  a  true  and  complete  personality.  2.  The 
Spirit  is  in  some  way  the  continuance  to  us,  under  altered  conditions,  of  that  same 
Jesus,  who  once  walked  among  men  in  visible  form,  and  in  the  utterance  of  tones 
that  were  audible.  In  a  way  He  is  the  Son's  messenger ;  and  so,  in  letting  our- 
selves be  actuated  by  the  Spirit,  we  are  living  still  under  the  same  personal  regime 
a3  did  the  disciples  who  walked  in  the  companionship  of  Jesus.  (Chas.  H.  Park- 
hurst,  D.D.)  Christian  freedom : — The  text  has  its  affirmative  and  also  its  nega- 
tive element.  In  neglecting  the  latter,  and  addressing  ourselves  (as  is  more 
satisfactory)  only  to  its  affirmative  and  constructive  aspect,  it  needs  to  be  accepted 
as  our  basal  principle,  that  through  whatever  stages  God's  government  passes,  God's 
government  never  ceases,  and  that  changes  of  dispensation  are  not  breaks  in  Divine 
authority,  but  alterations  simply  in  God's  method  of  administering  His  authority. 
This  principle  is  distinctly  implied  in  the  text.  The  Jew  as  such  is  under  the  law, 
amenable  to  God's  authority  as  exercised  through  Moses  :  the  Christian  as  a  Chris- 
tian is  also  under  a  kind  of  law,  amenable  to  God's  authority  as  exercised  through 
the  Son,  the  Holy  Spirit — sovereignty,  Divine  sovereignty,  carrying  its  exercise 
through  both  dispensations  in  one  uninterrupted  continuity  without  hint  of  break 
or  interregnum.  Now  the  conception  we  are  likely  to  have  of  Christianity  is  of  a 
system  under  which  there  is  larger  liberty  enjoyed  than  under  the  system  of  Moses; 
and  this  conception,  provided  only  we  associate  with  the  word  "  liberty  "  its  true 
notion,  is  justified,  and  justified  by  the  Scripture  (John  viii.  32,  33,  36 ;  1  Cor. 
vii.  22 ;  2  Cor-  iii.  17).  But  I  question  if  we  are  all  of  us,  or  even  most  of  us,  quite 
careful  or  accurate  in  the  notion  we  have  of  the  thing  called  "  freedom."  Freedom 
is  not  exemption  from  government ;  rather  is  freedom  a  form  of  government.  An- 
archy, lawlessness,  is  the  opposite  of  government ;  freedom  is  a  special  variety  of 
government.  Political  freedom  is  civil  authority  vested  in  a  particular  way. 
Christian  freedom  is  Divine  authority  vested  in  a  particular  way  ;  so  that  in  coming 
out  from  the  bondage  of  a  Jew  into  the  freedom  of  a  Christian,  there  is  no  inquiry 
to  be  had  respecting  the  abatement  of  authority,  but  only  respecting  the  new  point 
at  which  authority  is  vested  and  the  new  manner  in  which  it  is  exercised.  (Ibid.\ 
Freedom  only  for  the  spiritual: — "If  "  ...  A  man  may  live  in  an  age  of  gospel, 
but  it  does  not  follow  from  that  that  he  lives  under  the  administration  of  the  gospel. 


oha*.  ▼.]  QALATIANS.  877 

Christ  has  come  into  the  world,  bat  it  does  not  follow  that  He  has  come  into  my 
heart  and  set  up  His  throne  there.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  abroad  in  society,  and  there 
are  thousands  and  hundreds  of  thousands  that  are  being  led  by  that  Spirit.  It  does 
not  follow  from  that,  that  I  am  being  led  by  it.  If  I  am  led  by  it,  I  am  not  under 
the  law  ;  if  I  am  not  led  by  it,  of  course  I  am  under  the  law.  I  have  not  escaped 
the  pressure  of  Divine  authority  at  one  point  until  I  have  first  put  myself  under  the 
pressure  of  Divine  authority  at  another  point.  We  read  in  the  Book  of  Numbers 
that  a  man  gathered  sticks  on  the  Sabbath,  and  he  was  stoned  at  the  Lord's  com- 
mand ;  and  our  thought  perhaps  is  that  God  used  to  be  very  particular.  We  read 
in  the  book  of  Joshua  that  Achan,  the  son  of  Zerah,  was  guilty  of  embezzlement, 
and  that  at  the  Lord's  command  he  and  his  sons  and  his  daughters  were  stoned 
with  stones  and  burned  with  fire  ;  and  our  thought  perhaps  is  that  the  Lord  used  to 
be  very  particular.  He  used  to  be  particular  to  be  obeyed.  There  is  so  much  in 
the  New  Testament  respecting  love,  liberty,  and  the  abolition  of  old  ordinances, 
that  we  allow  ourselves  sometimes  to  be  betrayed  into  supposing  that  the  old  dis- 
pensation was  the  dispensation  of  man's  submission  to  God,  and  that  the  new 
dispensation  is  the  dispensation  of  God's  submission  to  man;  that  the  gospel  is  a 
kind  of  giviDg  up  on  God's  part,  a  sort  of  confession  that  He  is  not  disposed  to  be 

E articular  about  little  things  any  more,  and  that  it  hardly  avails  Him  to  attempt  to 
e  particular  about  little  things.  Now,  this  conception  of  the  gospel  as  an  economy 
of  Divine  "  relaxation,"  Divine  "  letting  down,"  Divine  "  giving  up,"  is  one  that 
yields  bitter  fruit ;  it  makes  the  gospel  contemptible  by  making  it  irresolute.  .  .  . 
Calvary  proves  that  the  truth  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  such  a  notion  as  this — 
that  God  thinks  so  much  of  His  own  sovereignty  that  He  would  rather  have  Divine 
blood  shed  than  not  have  you  and  me  respect  that  sovereignty  and  come  into  terms 
of  gentle  allegiance  to  it.  ,  .  .  The  man  who  discards  the  punctilious  observance  of 
God's  outward  statutes  because  he  lives  in  an  age  of  gospel,  without  having  first 
submitted  himself  to  the  governance  of  an  inward  Christ,  and  to  the  laws  written 
by  the  Spirit  upon  the  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart,  has  detached  himself  from  God  at 
one  point,  without  having  first  attached  himself  to  God  at  another  point.  (Ibid.) 
Superiority  of  spiritual  to  legal  guidance  : — The  old  administration  was  an  adminis- 
tration of  exterior  lines  that  men  could  see  :  the  new  administration  is  an  adminis- 
tration of  interior  personal  impulses  that  men  can  feel.  God  drew  the  lines :  God 
gives  the  impulses.  Moses  was  the  agency  then  :  Christ  is  the  agency  now ;  one 
government  underlying  both,  one  sovereign  administrative  in  both.  In  one  case  it 
was  government  by  communicated  statute  ;  in  the  other  it  is  government  by  im- 
manent leadings.  In  one  the  law  was  a  thing  distinct  from  us,  and  laid  down  for 
us  to  run  upon,  like  railroad-irons  spiked  and  bedded  before  a  locomotive ;  in  the 
other  the  impulse  is  a  thing  inwardly  contained  and  inseparable  from  us,  in  a  cer- 
tain way  like  the  instinct  of  a  bird  guiding  it  southward  at  the  approach  of  winter. 
In  various  ways  might  this  distinction  between  government  by  applied  constraint 
and  government  by  contained  motive  be  illustrated  to  us.  Any  bar  of  wood  or 
metal  you  can  balance  upon  a  pivot  and  constrain  into  a  north  and  south  direction ; 
a  magnetic  needle  delicately  suspended  in  the  same  way  will  constantly  constrain 
itself  into  a  north  and  south  direction.  An  applied  constraint  in  one  instance,  an 
immanent  tendency  in  the  other.  Although  it  will  occur  to  you,  I  hope,  that  even 
this  immanent  tendency  of  the  magnetized  needle  becomes  operative  only  as  celes- 
tial polarity  makes  itself  in  a  delicate  way  inwardly  felt.  The  needle  would  not 
move  only  as  the  heavens  move  in  it.  Or  again — one  pupil  solves  a  problem  ac- 
cording to  the  rule  stated  in  his  arithmetic  ;  another  pupil  solves  the  same  problem 
purely  at  the  direction  of  his  own  mathematical  insight.  The  result  may  be  the 
same — the  steps  by  which  the  result  is  reached  may  be  the  same  ;  but  in  the  latter 
instance  the  process  will  be  purely  intellectual,  and  in  the  former  to  a  considerable 
degree  mechanical ;  for  between  such  constrained  operations  of  mind  and  the  oper- 
ations of  a  Babbage's  calculating  machine  the  points  of  resemblance  are  obvious  and 
striking.  This  contrast,  however,  must  not  betray  us  into  supposing  that  our 
gifted  problem-worker  is  not  as  amenable,  quite  as  amenable,  to  authority,  as  the 
boy  who  ciphers  with  his  finger  on  the  rule.  When  a  man  becomes  a  genius,  a 
mathematical  genius  if  you  please,  he  passes  out  from  under  the  constraints  of  his 
book,  but  not  from  under  the  supremacy  of  his  science.  There  is  no  caprice  about 
genius.  Genius  does  not  care  much  for  a  set  of  explicit  regulations,  but  that  does 
not  mean  that  genius  is  lawless ;  in  fact  no  mind  comes  so  close  to,  and  into  such 
loyal  intimacy  with,  the  very  substance  of  mathematical  law  as  the  free  and  the 
gifted  mathematician.    So  far  from  genius  discarding  law,  rather  is  it  the  supreme 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  I1LUSTRAT0R.  [chap.  ▼„ 


joy  of  genius  to  re-enact  the  eternal  and  unwritten  law  in  the  chamber  of  its  own 
intellect.  And  however  the  Christian,  the  moral  genius,  may  discard  systems  of 
detailed  ordainment  suited  to  a  slow-paced  Hebrew,  so  far  from  a  Christian's  deny, 
ing  the  great  supremacy  beneath  which  he  stands,  rather  is  it  his  sovereign  joy  to 
re-enact  in  the  senate-chamber  of  his  own  conscience  the  unwritten  law  that  abides 
eternal  in  the  bosom  of  his  Lord.  (Ibid.)  The  Spirit's  leading  : — We  cannot 
put  one  foot  before  another  in  religion,  except  as  we  are  led ;  and  if  there  be  diffi- 
culty of  a  more  than  common  order,  it  is  that  which  encounters  the  man  who  takes 
upon  himself  to  be  his  own  guide  in  seeking  salvation.  We  are  not,  indeed, 
machines ;  we  are  not  to  be  the  subjects  of  an  uncontrollable  impulse,  or  a  rigid 
compulsion,  destroying  free  will,  and  forcing  us  into  righteousness ;  but  if  we  be  not 
drawn,  we  must  be  led ;  if  there  be  no  bending  of  the  will  which  would  destroy  our 
moral  responsibility,  there  must  be  a  bending  of  the  will  which  would  incline  us  to 
godliness.  Helpless  and  hopeless  is  man's  natural  estate :  born  in  sin,  cradled  in 
sorrow.  The  Spirit  of  the  living  God  enters  into  this  alienated  creature,  lifts  him 
from  the  dust,  urges  b""  with  vigour,  and  introduces  him  into  the  circle  of  the 
celestial  family,  leading  him  to  the  knowledge  of  all  that  is  most  blessed  and  to  the 
love  of  all  that  is  most  beautiful,  leading  him  from  ruin  to  triumph,  from  the 
wreck  of  all  that  Adam  was  to  the  fulness  of  all  that  Christ  Jesus  is.  Whom  else, 
then,  shall  I  take  as  my  guide  ?  Shall  I  be  led  by  reason  ?  Meteor  of  a  day,  I  can- 
not trust  thee.  Shall  I  be  led  by  philosophy  f  Device  of  man,  thou  canst  not 
bring  me  to  God.  No ;  Spirit  of  light,  Spirit  of  truth,  enter  Thou  into  our  souls,  and 
go  Thou  before  us,  as  went  the  fiery  cloudy  pillar  before  Israel  of  old ;  and  we  will 
follow  Thee,  and  we  will  obey  Thee ;  making  it  our  confidence,  that,  if  we  are 
led  of  Thee,  we  are  sons  of  God  and  heirs  of  immortality.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
A  disposition  to  follow  the  guide  needed : — The  case  is  not  merely  that  the  man  has 
lost  his  way.  The  traveller  who  is  conscious  that  he  has  wandered  from  the  road 
is  uneasy  at  advancing,  so  that  he  will  climb  every  little  eminence  as  that  from 
which  he  may  hope  to  catch  some  landmark ;  and  if  none  be  around  him,  he  will 
look  up  to  the  stars,  and  seek  to  learn  from  the  constellations  the  direction  he 
should  take;  and  all  his  actions  will  betray  his  anxiety.  If  he  hear  but  the  bark- 
ing of  a  shepherd's  dog,  or  discern  a  glimmering  light  amongst  distant  trees,  there 
will  be  an  eagerness  in  endeavouring  to  procure  intelligence,  and  to  seek  guidance. 
But  there  is  nothing  of  all  this  in  the  moral  traveller.  He  will  follow  with 
obstinate  determination  the  path  upon  which  he  has  entered.  And  though  there 
be  much  to  assure  him  of  his  error — the  rugged  rocks,  and  deep  mountains,  and 
tangled  forests — he  will  nevertheless  push  desperately  on,  pausing  now  and  then 
for  a  moment,  as  though  half  conscious  that  all  is  not  right,  and  then  with  a  more 
dogged  resolution  hurrying  forward  in  the  same  hopeless  course.  Thus  he  requires 
something  more  than  a  guide  ;  he  must  be  furnished  with  a  disposition  to  follow. 
And  when  we  say  that  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  the  true  Christian,  we  do  not  mean 
that  it  merely  goes  before  him  as  a  guide  and  a  director  to  the  city  of  refuge.  Nay, 
but  that  it  takes  hold  on  him,  as  did  the  angel  when  he  brought  Lot  out  of  Sodom. 
We  rather  mean  that  the  Spirit  literally  leads  him  by  dwelling  in  him,  residing  in 
him  as  a  quickening  and  actuating  principle.      (Ibid.)  The  leading  of  the 

Spirit : — These  words  have  before  now  been  most  mischievously  mistaken  by 
ignorant  persons  who  were  glad  enough  to  suppose  that  by  Christian  privilege  they 
were  put  out  of  the  reach  of  the  law.  The  meaning  is  as  follows : — The  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  puts  into  the  heart  of  man  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  this  is  the  Spirit 
to  think  and  do  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  what- 
soever things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely, 
whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report."  Now  if  a  man  have  in  himself  the  spirit 
for  a  thing,  what  needs  he  any  outward  ordinance  to  compel  him  to  it  ?  To  the 
man  who  is  led  by  the  Spirit  the  works  of  the  law  of  God  are  the  natural  outward 
working  of  his  spirit,  as  natural  to  him  as  the  very  motion  of  his  limbs  ;  he  does 
not  want  them  to  be  written  down,  any  more  than  he  requires  to  be  told  that  he 
must  move  his  arms  and  legs,  and  they  can  neither  condemn  him  nor  justify  him  ; 
he  is  what  he  is  without  them,  before  he  comes  to  them  ;  and,  as  St.  Paul  says,  he, 
"  through  the  Spirit,  waits  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith ;  "  so  independent 
is  he  of  them.  la  it  not  manifest,  then,  that  he  who  is  led  by  the  Spirit  is  not 
under  the  law  ?  Let  us  go  on,  then,  to  know  more  concerning  this  Spirit,  in  which  we 
are  called  into  such  glorious  liberty.  It  is,  as  I  have  said,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  within 
a  man,  formed  there  by  the  renewing  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  it  is  the  new,  the 
inner,  the  spiritual  man,  and  the  walk  of  this  man  is,  of  course,  a  following  of 


chap,  v.]  GALATIANS.  87» 

Christ,  a  continual  working  out  of  that  which  he  believes ;  for  instance,  he 
believes  that  Christ  was  crucified,  therefore  he  crucifies  the  flesh  with  the 
affections  and  lusts ;  he  believes  that  Christ  died,  therefore  he  reckons  himself 
dead  unto  sin ;  he  believes  that  Christ  rose  again,  therefore  he  reckons  himself 
alive  unto  God  through  Him;  he  believes  that  Christ  ascended  into  heaven, 
therefore  he  sets  his  affections  on  things  above ;  he  believes  that  Christ  is  sitting 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  administering  His  kingdom  and  interceding  for  His 
people,  therefore  he  does  all  that  His  kingdom  may  come  and  His  will  be  done, 
and  is  instant  in  prayer;  he  believes  that  Christ  will  come  again  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead,  therefore  he  does  the  part  of  a  faithful  servant  in  watching 
and  waiting  for  his  Lord.  Our  notion  of  perfect  liberty  in  the  flesh  is  to 
do  everything  that  we  like ;  but  experience  soon  tells  us  that  the  notion  is 
impossible.  But  the  true  Christian  does  everything  that  he  likes,  for  he  does 
everything  from  the  heart,  because  of  the  spirit  which  is  within  him.  This  it  is 
to  be  led  by  the  Spirit ;  this  is  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  His  people 
free.  Shall  we  not  desire  to  stand  fast  in  it  ?  Shall  we  surrender  ourselves  to  the 
bondage  of  the  law  ?  Let  us  only  consider  a  little  farther  the  difference  of  these 
two  states.  1.  To  be  under  the  bondage  of  the  law,  is  either  to  take  merit  to  our- 
selves for  obeying  it,  or  to  bring  its  vengeance  upon  us  by  disobeying  it ;  in  either 
case  it  is  a  hard  master  indeed.  2.  Surely,  then,  there  is  no  real  liberty  but  that 
wherewith  the  gospel  of  Christ  makes  us  free.  Let  me  state  a  few  particulars  of 
this  also.  The  man  of  God,  continuing  in  the  word  of  Christ,  and  led  by  the 
Spirit,  uses  the  law  as  he  does  a  road ;  he  is  not  guided  by  it,  any  more  than  a  man 
perfectly  acquainted  with  a  country  is  guided  by  it,  but  he  uses  it  to  travel  along 
through  this  world,  and  he  delights  in  it,  as  in  a  road  to  a  better  place,  and  a3  in 
the  exercise  of  his  spirit,  As  for  the  commandments  of  God,  he  loves  them,  and 
in  His  statutes  he  meditates.  The  word  of  God  is  a  lamp  unto  his  feet  and  a  light 
nnto  his  path.  He  feels  no  unwillingness  ;  he  has  no  mind  for  pleading  excuses 
and  making  delays ;  but  he  deplores  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  which  in  this  body 
of  sin  cannot  follow  up  the  willingness  of  the  spirit,  and  he  strives  to  put  to  full 
account  all  the  means  which  God  hath  so  graciously  given  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  for  enabling  him  to  keep  the  precepts  and  testimonies  of  the  Lord.  He  takes 
to  himself  no  merit  for  keeping  them,  any  more  than  for  eating  or  drinking,  or 
satisfying  any  craving  of  his  nature  ;  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  makes  the  will  of 
God  his  will,  and  therefore  doing  the  will  of  God  is  doing  his  own  will,  so  that 
while  he  keeps  the  law  he  is  not  subject  to  it.  (-R.  W.  Evans,  B.D.)  Beside  the 
spirit  of  our  mind  (Eph.  iv.  23)  every  man  is  led  by  some  spirit  or  other.  1.  One 
is  led  by  the  spirit  of  error  (1  Tim.  iv.  1).  2.  Another  by  the  spirit  of  giddiness 
(Isa.  xix.  14).  3.  Another  by  the  spirit  of  bondage  (ver.  1;  Bom.viii.  15).  4.  Another 
by  the  spirit  of  the  world  (I  Cor.  ii.  12).     5.  The  regenerate  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

I.    HOW  MAT  A   MAN  KNOW  THAT  HE  IS  TRULY  LED  BY   THE  SPIRIT  ?      The  Spirit  leads 

— 1.  In  a  right  way :  the  way  of  God's  commandment.  2.  By  a  just  rule :  the 
word  of  truth.  3.  Sweetly  and  justly.  4.  In  a  constant  way  of  progression,  from 
grace  to  grace.  5.  In  a  way  opposed  to  the  flesh.  II.  Who  are  those  who  abb 
not  led  by  the  Spirit  ?  1.  Those  who  go  in  a  known  evil  way.  2.  Those  who 
are  led  by  their  own  imaginations  without  any  warrant  from  the  Word  of  God.  3. 
Those  who  are  carried  by  passions  and  distempers  even  in  a  good  way.  4.  Those 
who  make  no  progress.     5.  Those  who  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh.     (Bishop  Hall.) 

1.  The  need  op  guidance  and  help.  1.  We  are  ignorant  of  the  road.  2.  Have 
defective  vision  and  cannot  see  our  way.  3.  Are  lame  and  impotent.  II.  Wh 
should  seek  for  this  guidance  and  help.  This  is  what  a  lost,  benighted,  or 
disabled  traveller  does.  Man,  however,  does  the  opposite,  and  pursues  his  journey 
perversely,  blindly,  helplessly.  III.  We  must  be  provided  spiritually  with 
what  an  ordinary  traveller  has  mentally.  1.  A  disposition  to  seek  the  right 
way.  2.  A  willingness  to  receive  every  help  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  IV.  This  is 
supplied  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  1.  He  leads  by  dwelling  in  the  believer  as  a 
quickening  and  actuating  principle  ever  aspiring  after  knowledge  and  holiness. 

2.  Under  His  guidance  the  believer  advances — (1)  in  knowledge  (a)  of  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ;  (b)  of  the  issues  of  obedience  and  suffering;  (c)  of  Christ's 
spiritual  kingdom.  (2)  In  holiness,  (a)  In  inward  graces ;  (6)  in  outward  deport- 
ment. V.  This  leading  is  not  driving.  1.  The  free  will  is  not  destroyed  by 
uncontrollable  impulses  or  rigid  compulsion,  2.  The  will  is  so  influenced  as  to  ba 
inclined  to  holiness.  (H.  Melvill,B.D.)  The  spiritually  guided  not  under  the  law  : — 
I.  Negatively.    I  am  not  under  the  law — of  picking  pockets.    If  the  law  wera 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  V. 

abolished  to-morrow,  I  would  not  pick  anybody's  pocket.  I  am  not  under  the  law 
of  murder ;  for  if  there  were  no  gallows,  nor  officer,  nor  judge,  nor  court,  I  would 
not  murder.  I  am  not  under  the  law  to  drunkenness.  I  can  go  by  a  whole 
regiment  of  shops  and  never  think  of  turning  in.  I  am  above  it.  I  have  the  law 
within  me.  I  do  not  abstain  from  gambling  because  gambling  is  disreputable,  and 
I  fear  losses.  I  do  not  gamble  because  I  do  not  want  to.  I  do  not  avoid  bad 
company  because  I  should  lose  respectability;  but  for  the  same  reason  that 
musicians  do  not  sit  down  and  work  out  discords,  and  who  keep  to  harmony 
because  harmony  is  so  sweet,  and  discord  so  painful.  And  so  in  regard  to  spiritual 
things,  we  are  led  by  tbe  Divine  Spirit  into  such  a  state  of  approbation  and  satis- 
faction in  the  higher  things,  that  we  do  not  want  the  inferior,  the  antagonistic,  the 
antithetic.  II '.  Positively.  There  is  not  in  all  tbe  statute  books  in  the  world  one 
single  word  saying  to  the  mother,  "Theu  shalt  love  thy  babe."  There  is  not  a 
Church  or  creed  which  says,  "  Thou  shalt  feed  thy  babe."  But  see  the  mother  as 
the  twilight  darkens,  sitting  with  her  child  as  it  draws  sustenance  from  her  own 
bosom,  and  singing  sweet  carols,  and  counting  it  the  proudest  of  all  the  hours  of 
the  day.  She  has  the  love  of  the  mother  in  her,  and  does  the  things  that  ought 
to  be  done,  because  she  loves  to  do  them — it  is  automatic.  So  if  ye  be  led  of  the 
Spirit  ye  do  the  things  by  the  law  that  is  in  you,  and  by  your  spiritual  preferences 
and  loves  and  likes,  which  otherwise  are  commandments.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
From  bondage  to  liberty  by  obedience : — Consider  how  many  laws  there  are  which 
affect  a  man's  body — the  laws  of  light,  of  heat,  of  gravitation,  of  sleep,  of  diges- 
tion, of  exercise,  &c,  &c.  When  men  are  young  and  inexperienced,  and  have  no 
one  to  teach  them  they  get  into  trouble  by  violating  these  laws.  They  have  no 
mind  to  keep  them,  and  they  suffer  in  consequence.  They  are  in  bondage  respect- 
ing these  laws.  But  as  they  learn  more  perfectly,  so  that  they  use  their  eyes 
according  to  the  law  of  light,  and  their  ears  according  to  the  law  of  sound,  and 
their  mouth  according  to  the  law  of  health  ;  selecting  this  thing  because  the  law 
requires,  rejecting  that  because  the  law  forbids  it — then  they  are  set  free  from  these 
trials,  and  pass  out  of  a  state  of  bondage  into  a  state  of  liberty.  The  little  child 
when  it  begins  to  walk  has  to  think  where  it  shall  put  this  foot  and  where  it  shall 
put  that,  and  has  to  poise  itself  carefully,  and  use  its  mind  as  well  as  its  body. 
But  a  man  walks  without  thinking.  What  is  the  difference  ?  One  is  under  the 
law — has  not  learned  it — is  yet  subject  to  it ;  the  other  has  learned  it  so  perfectly 
that  he  is  emancipated  from  it.  The  man  does  automatically,  what  it  requires  an 
effort  on  the  part  of  the  child  to  do.  The  child  is  in  bondage  and  the  man  is  free, 
because  the  child  does  not  keep  the  law,  and  the  man  does.  (Ibid.)  The  Holy 
Spirit  our  light : — A  man  has  lost  his  way  in  a  dark  and  dreary  mine.  By  the 
light  of  one  candle,  which  he  carries  in  his  hand,  he  is  groping  for  the  road  to  sun- 
shine and  to  home.  That  light  is  essential  to  his  safety.  The  mine  has  many 
winding  passages,  in  which  he  may  be  hopelessly  bewildered.  Here  and  there 
marks  have  been  made  on  the  rocks  to  point  out  the  true  path,  but  he  cannot  see 
them  without  that  light.  There  are  many  deep  pits  into  which,  if  unwary,  he  may 
suddenly  fall ;  but  he  cannot  avoid  the  danger  without  that.  Should  it  go  out,  that 
mine  will  be  his  tomb.  How  carefully  he  carries  it !  How  anxiously  he  shields 
it  from  sudden  gusts  of  air,  from  water  dropping  on  it,  from  everything  that  might 
quench  it  1    The  case  desciibed  is  our  own.    (Newman  Hall.) 

Vers.  19,  21.  Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest. — The  works  of  the  flesh 
our  own : — It  is  the  same  with  all  the  passions  and  appetites.  No  one  of  them 
ever  leaves  a  man,  who  indulges  them,  just  where  he  was  before.  No  one  of  them 
is  a  mere  dry,  isolated  fact,  that  drops  into  his  record  and  stops  there.  If  a  bank- 
clerk  steals  his  employer's  money,  we  do  not  put  our  funds  in  his  hands,  as  if  that 
were  a  simple  fact,  and  he  the  same  as  before.  If  a  woman  loses  her  purity  by  a 
single  act,  no  sensible  man  seeks  her  in  marriage,  on  any  theory  that  he  can  afford 
to  condone  the  fall.  Such  is  the  nature  of  the  soul  that  it  lives  in  its  own  issues, 
or  dies  in  its  own  empoisoned  evil  deeds.  They  are  all  our  works — ours  only.  God 
has  no  part  in  them  ;  good  angels  have  no  part  in  them  ;  yea,  that  thing  in  us,  which 
is  truest  self,  the  conscience,  resists  and  struggles  against  them.  As  the  eye  weeps 
and  inflames  at  the  irritation  of  a  grain  of  sand,  so  the  conscience  resists  and 
inflames  before  the  works  of  the  flesh — before  "  adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness, 
and  such  like."  I  do  not  wonder  at  the  despair,  the  black  despair,  which,  like  a 
dark  night  in  winter  of  clouds  and  sleet  and  chill,  settles  down  on  such  souls  as 
are  victims  to  bodily  lusts,  namely,  hatred,  envyings,  murders,  drunkenness,  and 


chap.  T.]  OALATIANS.  881 

Bach  like  ;  and  men  hear  the  howling  of  fiends,  and  see  lurid  lights,  and  moan  of  a 
hell  of  fears,  horrible  to  think  of,  as  yawning  before  them.  These  things  are  the 
inheritance  of  their  election.  (G.  H.  Hall,  D.D.)  The  works  of  the  flesh: — I. 
What  is  flesh  ?  It  is  taken  for — 1.  The  whole  man  (Gen.  vi.  3).  2.  The  mortal 
body  (2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  3  The  ceremonies  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  3;  vi.  12; 
Phil,  iii  3),  because  performed  by  the  body.  4.  The  human  nature  of  Christ  (Rom. 
i.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  iv.  1)  as  spirit  for  the  Divine  (Rom.  i.  4).  5.  All  mankind  (Gen. 
▼i,  12  ;  Isa.  xl.  6).  6.  The  human  nature,  as  corrupt,  or  a  state  of  sin  (Eph.  ii.  3  ; 
Rom.  vii.  5).  This  denotes  the  corruption  of  soul  as  well  as  body  (Rom.  viii.  6  ; 
Col.  ii.  18).  7.  The  unregenerate  part  in  the  regenerate  man  (Rom.  vii.  18).  II. 
What  are  works  ?  Whatsoever  proceeds  from  the  body  of  death.  III.  How  are 
they  manifest  ?  1.  By  the  light  of  nature.  2.  They  cannot  be  hid  (Heb.  iv.  13). 
Conclusion  :  1.  Take  notice  of  them.  (1)  The  power  of  the  flesh  in  your  heart. 
(2)  The  works  of  the  flesh  in  your  life.  2.  Labour  against  them.  They  are  (1) 
pleasing  to  Satan,  (2)  offensive  to  God,  (3)  tormenting  to  the  conscience,  (4)  injurious 
to  religion,  (5)  destructive  to  the  soul.  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Though  some  have 
all  flesh  and  no  spirit,  none  have  all  spirit  and  no  flesh.  (Ibid.)  Adultery  : — I.  Its 
nature.  It  is  a  vice  opposed  to  chastity,  and  may  be  committed — 1.  In  the  heart 
(Matt.  v.  28) ;  and  therefore  (1)  look  not  on  yourselves  as  innocent  because  not 
actual  idolaters.  (2)  Repent  of  unchaste  thoughts.  (3)  Labour  against  them.  2. 
In  the  act.  II.  Its  greatness  as  a  sin.  1.  It  is  frequently  forbidden.  2.  It  is 
destructive  to  self  and  others.  3.  It  is  the  occasion  of  many  sins.  4.  It  is  a 
punishment  as  well  as  a  sin  (Prov.  xxii.  14;  Rom.  i.  24).  5.  It  consumes  a  man's 
estate  (Prov.  v.  10 ;  vi.  26  ;  Job  xxxi.  12).  6.  The  body  also  (Prov.  v.  11).  7.  It 
defiles  the  body  (1  Cor.  vi.  18).  8.  It  darkens  a  man's  judgment  and  understanding 
(Hos.iv.  11).  9.  It  destroys  the  whole  soul  (Prov.  vi.  32).  10.  It  brings  irreparable 
disgrace  (Prov.  vi.  33).  11.  Ordinarily  it  is  punished  in  this  life  (Numb.  xxv.  6  ;  1 
Cor.  x.  8).  12.  Certainly  in  the  life  to  come  (Heb.  xiii.  4  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10).  III.  Its 
prevention.  1.  Avoid  the  occasions.  (1)  Idleness  (Ezek.  xvi.  49  ;  2  Sam.  xi.  2) ; 
(2)  Bad  company  (Prov.  vii.  25) ;  (3)  All  other  sins  (Prov.  i.  25).  2.  Make  a 
covenant  with  thine  eyes  (Job.  xxxi.  1).  3.  Watch  over  thy  thoughts  (Mai  ii.  16). 
4.  Keep  in  with  God  (Prov.  xxii.  14).  5.  Delight  in  the  Word  of  God  (Prov.  ii. 
10-16).  6.  Be  much  in  prayer  and  meditation  (Psa.  cxix.  37).  (Ibid.)  Forni- 
cation:— I.  What  it  is.  When  two  single  persons  come  together  out  of  the 
state  of  matrimony  (Deut.  xxii.  28).  II.  Its  sinfulness.  1.  Contrary  to  God's 
command  (1  Cor.  vi.  18 ;  Eph.  v.  3 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  3).  2.  Provokes  God's  anger 
(Col.  iii.  5, 6 ;  Jer.  v.  7 ;  Hosea  iv.  14).  3.  God  will  judge  it  (Heb.  xiii.  4 ;  1  Cor. 
vi.  9).  (Ibid.)  Uncleanness: — I.  Inward.  1.  The  desire  of  strange  flesh,  with 
a  resolution  to  enjoy  it  if  he  eould  (Col.  iii  5 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  5).  2.  Sinful  lusts  and 
affections  (James  i.  15).  3.  Unclean  thoughts.  II.  Outward.  Adultery,  fornication, 
incest  or  nameless  infamies.  (Ibid.)  Lasciviousness : — Wantonness,  whereby 
the  soul  is  inflamed  to  the  other  sins,  expressed :  I.  In  appparel.  1.  Excess.  2. 
Lightness  (Prov.  vii.  10).  3.  Singularity  (2  Sam.  xiii.  18).  4.  Of  a  contrary  sex. 
II.  Gestures.  1.  Wanton  looks,  Ac.  (2  Pet.  ii.  14 ;  Job  xxxi.  1).  2.  Wanton 
walking,  &c.  (Isa.  iii.  16).  HL  Meat  and  drink.  1.  The  quantity  (Ezek.  xvi. 
49).  2.  The  quality  (Luke  xvi.  19).  IV.  Words.  1.  Foolish  (Eph.  v.  3,  4).  2. 
Obscene  talking  (1  Cor.  xv.  33).  (Ibid.)  Idolatry  : — I.  Its  nature.  The  wor- 
shipping of  anything  besides  God ,  so  as — 1.  To  pray  to  them  (Isa.  xliv.  17).  2.  To 
sacrifice  to  them  (2  Kings  xvii.  35).  3.  To  build  temples  and  altars  to  them  (Hosea 
xii.  11).  4.  Asking  counsel  of  them  (Hosea  iv.  12).  5.  Thanking  them  (Judges 
xvi.  23,  24 ;  Dan.  v.  4).  II.  Those  who  are  guilty  of  it.  1.  Heathens,  who 
worship— (1)  Men;  as  Jupiter,  Saturn,  &c.  (2)  Devils.  (3)  Beasts.  (4)  Stars. 
(5)  Images.  2.  Christians.  (1)  Popish,  who  worship  the  sacramental  bread, 
saints,  images,  relics.  (2)  Protestants :  the  covetous  (Col.  iii.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  5)  ; 
voluptuous  (Phil.  iii.  19) ;  ambitious ;  sinful.  III.  The  greatness  of  the  sin. 
1.  It  is  frequently  forbidden  (Exod.  xx.  3,  4).  2.  Severely  punished  (Exod.  xxii, 
90 :  Deut.  xvii.  3-5).  3.  No  sin  can  bring  greater  dishonour  to  God  (Jer.  ii.  13). 
4.  It  will  certainly  bring  thee  to  hell  (Rev.  xxi.  8;  xxii.  15).  Witchcraft: — I. 
Thb  Biblical  estimate  of  it.  1.  As  a  stern  and  diabolical  reality  (Lev.  xx.  27  ; 
Deut.  xviii.  19).  2.  As  unlawful  trafficking  with  the  unseen  world  (Lev.  xix.  31 ; 
Isa.  viii.  19).  3.  As  sometimes  trickery  and  imposture  (Isa.  viii.  19).  4.  As  filthy 
defilement  (Lev.  xix.  31).  5.  As  deserving  death  (Lev.  xx.  6  ;  Exod.  xxii.  18).  6. 
As  one  of  the  crimes  for  which  the  Canaanites  were  destroyed.  7.  As  inconsistent 
wall  a  trust  in  God  (Isa.  viii.  19).    8.  As  frustrated  by  God  (Isa.  xliv.  25).    4.  As 


882  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<>HA».  V, 

a  power  from  which  the  godly  have  nothing  to  fear.  II.  Its  prevalence.  1. 
Amongst  the  heathen.  Pythagoras,  Plutarch,  Pompey,  Croesus,  Caesar,  were  all 
under  its  spell.  2.  The  progress  of  modern  civilization  has  not  exterminated  it.  3. 
But  whilst  it  assumes  the  form  of  astrology,  with  its  star-gazing ;  palmistry,  with  its 
handwriting ;  or  spiritualism,  with  its  media  and  trances  and  dark  seances  ;  it  is 
the  same  abomination  reprobated  in  the  Word  of  God.  Hatred  (of  God) : — L 
What  is  this  ?  (Bom.  i.  30).  1.  God  is  the  chiefest  good  (Luke  xviii.  19) :  the 
essential,  original,  universal,  infinite,  satisfying,  necessary,  and  eternal  good.  2. 
Therefore  He  ought  to  be  loved  supremely.  3.  The  want  of  this  love  is  accounted 
as  hatred.  II.  Who  are  guilty  of  it.  1.  Those  who  wish  there  were  no  God 
(Psa.  xiv.  1).  2.  Who  hate  the  knowledge  of  Him  (Psa.  1.  17 ;  Job  xxi.  14 ;  Prov. 
viii.  36).  3.  Who  hate  His  ways  and  ordinances.  4.  Who  love  other  things  more 
than  God  (2  Tim.  iii.  4).  5.  Who  love  sin.  6.  Who  break  His  commandments 
(Exod.  xx.  5-6 ;  John  xiv.  15).  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Hatred  (of  man) : — I.  Its 
nature  :  the  transgression  of  the  commandment  to  love  our  neighbours  as  our- 
selves. II.  Its  sinfulness.  1.  It  is  contrary  to  the  law.  2.  It  is  the  cause  of 
many  sins,  as — (1)  Anger  (Eph.  iv.  26,  31).  (2)  Envy  (James  iii.  14).  (3) 
Unmercifulness  (Bom.  i.  31;  Amos  vi.  6).  (4)  Cruelty  (Psa.  v.  6).  (5)  Pride 
(Prov.  xiii.  10).  (6)  Desire  of  revenge  (Bom.  xii.  19).  (7)  Uncharitable  suspicions 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  5-7).  (8)  Befractoriness  (Bom.  i.  31).  3.  It  is  the  breaking  of  the 
whol«  law  (Bom.  xiii.  9;  Gal.  v.  14).  III.  Who  are  guilty  of  it?  All  who — 1. 
Wish  their  neighbours  evil,  or  not  good.  2.  Who  do  not  what  good  they  can. 
3.  Who  do  not  reprove  of  sin  and  excite  to  good  (Lev.  xix.  17;  Heb.  x.  24).  4. 
Who  bear  any  secret  grudge  and  malice.  (Ibid.)  Variance: — I.  Its  nature. 
A  sin  opposed  to  amity.  1.  In  opinion  (Eph.  iv.  13).  2.  Affection  (Eph.  iv.  8). 
H.  Its  sinfulness.  1.  It  is  contrary  to  God's  law.  2.  It  springs  from — (1)  Pride 
and  ambition  (Prov.  xiii.  10).  (2)  Want  of  true  love.  3.  Its  effects  are  sinful. 
(1)  Vexation  and  trouble  to  self  and  others.  (2)  Hatred.  III.  Those  guilty  of 
it.  1.  Infidels.  2.  Such  as  fall  out  for  trifles.  3.  Such  as  being  fallen  out  refuse 
to  be  reconciled.  (Ibid.)  Emulation: — I.  What  is  it?  Twofold.  1.  Good 
(Gal.  iv.  18).  2.  Evil.  (1)  To  grieve  for  another's  excelling  us.  (2)  To  desire  to 
excel  him.  II.  It  is  a  sin.  1.  It  proceeds  from  an  evil  root.  (1)  Error.  (2) 
Pride.  2.  It  brings  forth  sinful  fruit.  (1)  Contention.  (2)  Envy.  III.  Who  are 
guilty  of  it.  1.  Such  as  are  zealous  in  a  bad  cause.  2.  In  a  good  cause  in  a 
bad  manner  (Bom.  x.  2).  3.  More  for  themselves  than  God.  4.  Such  as  love  to 
see  nobody  above  them.  (Ibid.)  Anger: — It  is  sinful  when  with — 1.  The  provi- 
dence of  God.  2.  The  laws  of  God.  3.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  4.  The  good 
we  see  in  others.  5.  Those  who  differ  from  us  in  religious  sentiments.  6.  Beproof. 
7.  Our  reprover,  wishing  him  evil.  8.  When  we  use  unlawful  means  to  avenge 
ourselves.  (J.  Beaumont,  M.D.)  I.  What  is  it?  A  passion  raised  up  in  the 
mind  against  some  present  evil  that  cannot  easily  be  removed.  II.  Whether  a 
man  may  be  ever  lawfully  angry?  Yes  (Eph.  iv.  26).  1.  When  it  proceeds 
from  a  lawful  cause  (Mark  iii.  5).  2.  When  it  is  placed  on  a  lawful  object  (Exod. 
xi.  8 ;  xxxii.  19 ;  Lev.  x.  16-17).  3.  In  a  lawful  manner  (Matt.  viii.  22).  4.  To 
a  lawful  end.  III.  Who  sin  in  their  anger?  Such  as  are  angry — 1.  Not  so 
much  at  the  offence  as  the  offender.  2.  At  anything  rather  because  it  dishonours 
them  than  God.  3.  Without  a  cause  (Matt.  v.  22).  4.  Excessively,  though  in  a 
good  cause  (Gen.  xlix.  7).  5.  And  hateful.  6.  And  curse  (Psa.  cvi.  33).  7.  And 
therefore  indisposed  to  duties.  8.  From  sinful  causes.  9.  For  a  wrong  end.  10. 
And  continue  long  in  their  anger  (Eph.  iv.  26).  IV.  Motives  against  it.  1.  God 
forbids  it  (Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Col.  iii.  8).  2.  It  disturbs  soul  and  body.  3.  It  is  not 
only  a  sin  but  a  folly  (Eccles.  vii.  9  ;  Prov.  xiv.  17,  29).  4.  It  may  prove  thy  ruin. 
6.  It  may  keep  thee  out  of  heaven.    (Bishop  Beveridge.)        Strife : — I.  Lawful. 

1.  Which  should  bring  the  most  glory  to  God's  name.  2.  Perform  the  exactest 
obedience  to  His  precepts  (Phil.  iii.  10-13).  3.  Believe  the  firmest  in  His  Son.  4. 
Grow  the  fastest  in  His  grace  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  5.  Make  our  calling  and  election 
surest  (2  Pet.  i.  10).    II.  Sinful.    1.  When  proceeding  from  anger  and  malice. 

2.  About  trifles.  3.  In  opprobrious  terms.  4.  Ending  in  hatred  and  revenge. 
(Ibid.)  Seditions: — I.  To  oppose  lawful  governors  (Bom.  xiii.  1).  H.  To 
consent  to  and  connive  at  those  who  do  it.  III.  To  raise  tumults  in  a 
kingdom,  commonwealth,  or  parish.  (Ibid.)  Heresies  : — There  is  no  heresy  in 
the  long  list  of  heresies  which  have  invaded  the  Church,  like  the  heresy  of  nega- 
tiveness,  of  inaction,  of  death.  The  dead  man  is  the  great  heresiarch.  (If.  W. 
Beecher.)       Envying*: — L  In  what  consists  the  sinfulness  or  uvy.     1.  It  i» 


ann.  ▼.]  OALATIANS.  883 

contrary  to  God's  command  (Rom.  xiii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  1).  2.  Bepining  at  God's 
providence  and  goodness.  3.  The  fruit  of  pride.  4.  The  root  of  confusion  and 
evil  (James  iii.  16).  5.  The  cause  of  hatred.  II.  Have  a  care  of  it.  1.  Thou 
art  never  the  worse  for  others  being  better.  2.  Envy  makes  him  never  the  worse,  nor 
thee  the  better.  3.  Thou  hast  more  cause  to  rejoice  than  to  be  troubled  at  another's 
goodness.  4.  Thy  envying  God's  goodness  to  others  may  hinder  it  to  thyself. 
(Bishop  Beveridge.)  I.  Its  nature.  1.  Its  object  is  something  good,  natural, 
or  acquired,  even  religious  excellence.  2.  Something  in  the  possession  of  another 
which  is  grudged  and  desired.  3.  Something  not  altogether  unattainable.  II.  Its 
properties.  1.  It  is  common.  2.  Odious.  3.  Destructive.  III.  Its  curb.  1. 
A  scriptural  estimate  of  the  objects  which  excite  envy.  They  are  not  so  valuable 
as  they  appear  to  be.  2.  A  just  opinion  of  ourselves.  We  do  not  deserve  as 
much  as  we  imagine.  3.  An  entire  change  of  heart.  Application :  1.  Do  not 
needlessly  provoke  envy.  2.  Do  not  wickedly  indulge  it.  3.  Do  not  basely  fear 
it.  4.  Do  not  angrily  resent  it.  (G.  Brooks.)  Envy  is  the  daughter  of  pride, 
the  author  of  revenge  and  murder,  the  beginning  of  sedition  and  the  perpetual 
tormentor  of  virtue.  (Socrates.)  Murders  : — Life  is  threefold  of  the  body,  mind, 
and  spirit ;  and  murder  against  each  may  be  deliberate  or  careless,  resulting  from 
action  or  inaction.  1.  Deliberate  murder  is  life  taken  by  malice  aforethought.  2. 
Careless  murder,  resulting  from  careless  or  culpable  ignorance ;  e.g.,  the  builder 
who  neglects  the  drains ;  the  parent  who  spreads  an  infectious  disorder  through 
Bending  his  children  to  school  while  tainted  with  it.  3.  Inactive  murder  (James 
iv.  17),  e.g.,  a  man  who  allows  another  to  commit  murder,  or  who  neglects  to 
save  life  physical  or  moral.  (C.  A.  Goodheart.)  Murder  is  not  mere  blood- 
shedding.     1.  Anger  without  cause  is  murder.    2.  So  is  oppression  of  the  weak. 

3.  So  is  depriving  a  man  of  the  means  of  getting  his  livelihood  to  gratify  revenge. 

4.  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  in  his  heart  is  a  murderer.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.\ 
Drunkenness  : — I.  What  is  it  ?  An  immoderate  use  of  any  liquor  (Eph.  v.  181. 
II.  Its  sinfulness.  1.  It  transgresses  the  law  (Eph.  v.  18 ;  Bom.  xiii.  13). 
2.  Abuses  the  creature.  3.  Destroys  the  body  (Prov.  xxiii.  29).  4.  Disturbs 
the  soul  (Hos.  iv.  11).  5.  Spends  time.  6.  Unfits  for  employment  (Luke  xxi. 
34).  7.  Entails  woe  (Isa.  v.  11).  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Evil  of  hatred: — If 
you  hate  your  enemies,  you  will  contract  such  a  vicious  habit  of  mind  as  by 
degrees  will  break  out  upon  those  who  are  your  friends,  or  those  who  are 
indifferent  to  you.  (Plutarch.)  All  sin  is  seen  by  God: — In  Mr.  Balph  Wells's 
school  the  other  day,  the  lesson  was  about  God's  all-seeing  eye.  On  the  blackboard, 
Mr.  Wells  placed  the  words,  "  Thou  God  seest  me."  He  then  held  up  a  vase  of 
water,  in  which  a  gold-fish  was  swimming  about.  "  Now,  children,"  said  Mr.  Wells, 
*•  see  this  fish  hide.  Do  you  see  him  now  ?  "  "Yes,  sir,"  the  children  shouted.  "Do 
you  see  him  now  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir."  "  Now  do  you  see  him  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir  :  yes,  sir," 
they  all  said.  "  Can't  he  hide  from  you  ?  "  "No,  sir."  "Why?"  "Because  we 
tee  right  through  the  glass."  "So,"  said  Mr.  Wells,  "God  sees  right  through 
our  hearts.  We  cannot  hide  from  Him."  (Picture  Paper.)  Fleshly  sins: — 
The  list  of  fleshly  sins  here  given  is  not  an  exhaustive  one;  merely  samples. 
Seventeen  distinct  sins  are  speoified,  which  may  be  roughly  grouped  in  four 
classes.  1.  Sensuality — viz.,  "adultery,  fornication,  uncleanness,  wantonness" 
2.  Idolatry,  or  unlawful  dealing  in  things  spiritual ;  consisting  of  "  idolatry,"  or 
the  open  recognition  of  false  gods,  and  "  sorcery  or  withcraft,"  the  secret  tam- 
pering with  the  powers  of  evil.  3.  Malice,  or  violation  of  the  principle  of  brotherly 
love ;  such  as  "  hatreds,  strife,  rivalry,  outbursts  of  wrath,  cabals,  dissensions, 
heretical  factions,  envyings,  murders."  4.  Intemperance — viz.,  "drunkenness 
and  riotous  revelry."  These  vices  are  probably  named  by  St.  Paul  as  being 
those  to  which  the  Galatians  had  been  specially  addicted,  and  to  which 
they  might  now  be  tempted.  From  early  habit  a  Gentile  Church  would  be 
exposed  to  sins  of  the  first  two  classes,  sensuality  and  idolatry.  Sins  of  the 
third  class,  consisting  of  breaches  of  brotherly  love,  would  be  a  probable 
consequence  of  their  religious  dissensions.  Vices  of  the  fourth  class,  when 
once  established,  are  not  easily  shaken  off,  and,  as  we  know  from  the  example 
of  the  Corinthian  Church,  may  even  find  their  way  into  the  holiest  services  of  the 
Christian  religion.  But  we  must  not  confine  this  catalogue  of  sins  to  the  Galatians, 
as  though  it  had  no  application  to  ourselves  (1  Cor.  x.  11,  12).  (Emilius  Bayley, 
B.D.)  The  old  life : — As  St.  Paul  looks  back  at  that  bad  life  out  of  which  he 
had  snatched  the  souls  of  his  Gentile  converts,  it  is  its  bitter  brutality  that  he  most 
vividly  remembers  and  recalls.    It  was  a  jarring  life,  in  which  there  was  no  tender* 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [em*,  ». 

ness,  no  courtesy,  no  kindliness,  no  peace.  It  was  full  of  collisions,  of  frictions,  of 
wounds,  of  sores.  It  was  a  loud  and  violent  life,  in  which  men  fought,  and  hit,  and 
swore.  As  he  runs  over  his  list  of  old  habits  once  familiar  to  them,  his  picture  is 
as  of  some  back  alley  in  our  crowded  towns,  in  which  all  is  shrill,  rough,  boisterous, 
with  women  screaming,  with  children  shrieking,  a  nest  of  noises,  a  swarm  of 
jangling  cries.  This  is  what  they  have  left  behind,  this  which  had  made  life  one  long 
quarrel,  pitiless  and  brutal.  They  had  left  it,  mastered  and  enthralled  by  the 
sweet  vision  of  Him,  the  Man  of  peace,  and  meekness,  and  lowliness,  who  had  been 
led,  quiet  and  patient,  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and,  as  a  sheep  before  its  shearers, 
had  never  opened  His  mouth  ;  who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again  ;  and 
when  He  was  threatened,  threatened  not ;  One  who  never  gave  back  railing  for  railing , 
but  only  blessing.  "  You  all  remember  it ",  he  keeps  crying  to  them,  "  those  old  days, 
so  merciless,  so  angry,  so  cruel ;  how  you  grated  on  one  another,  how  you  rasped  one 
another,  how  you  bit  and  devoured  one  another  like  snarling  dogs."  It  had  been  one 
long  quarrel,  a  life  of  wrath,  "  full  of  bitterness,  clamour,  evil  speaking  " ;  they 
knew  it  all  but  too  well  what  he  meant,  for  "  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest, 
which  are  these — hatred,"  &o.  "  Works  of  the  flesh,"  he  calls  them.  His  keen 
eye  sweeps  over  the  whole  range  of  this  loud  quarrelling  ;  to  him,  it  is  no  senseless 
storm  that  rages  on  without  rhyme  or  reason.  Nay !  it  has,  all  of  it,  a  story  and  a 
cause ;  it  is  the  witness,  on  the  surface  of  life,  to  inner  disorder.  These  rough 
oaths,  these  venomous  taunts,  this  bitter  tumult — these  are  the  natural  issues  of 
the  root  from  which  they  spring.  They  are  "  works  " — normal,  and  anticipated, 
and  legitimate  deeds,  which  appear  in  obedience  to  a  law  of  rational  production. 
They  are  "  fruits  " — results  that  grow  out  of  certain  creative  activities,  as  accurately 
and  inevitably  as  grapes  from  vines  and  figs  from  fig-trees.  And  what  is  this  root 
which  so  legitimately  flowers  into  these  uncomfortable  blossoms  ?  "  The  flesh," 
St.  Paul  names  it;  the  flesh  is  as  much  the  seat  and  home  of  this  passionate 
violence  as  it  is  of  those  other  passions  and  appetites  with  which  we  commonly 
identify  it.  This  petulance,  this  savagery,  this  hail  of  malice,  this  outcry  of  rage, 
this  havoc  of  revenge,  this  recklessness  of  cruelty — all  this  finds  its  principle,  its 
origin,  its  motive-cause  in  that  same  activity  of  the  flesh.  Set  the  law  of  the  fle«h 
in  action,  and  you  must  have  quarrels.  Out  of  the  flesh  they  fly,  these  oaths  and 
screams,  just  as  sparks  out  of  a  smitten  flint.  It  would  be  a  miracle  if  men  who 
lived  after  the  methods  of  the  flesh  failed  to  envy  and  to  hate  one  another.  (Canon 
Scott  Holland.)  St.  Paul's  conception  of  "the  flesh  ": — Try  to  enter  into  the  solid 
and  broad  meaning  which  St.  Paul  attaches  to  this,  his  favourite  term  for  the  root- 
principle  of  human  sin — "  the  flesh."  Obviously,  it  is  much  more  to  him  than  the 
mere  matter  of  animal  passions."  It  expresses  to  him  the  typical  nature,  the 
essential  form,  of  all  that  can  be  set  in  antithesis  to  spirit.  It  includes  the  pride 
and  the  falsity  of  intellect.  It  embraces  the  disorder  and  stubbornness  of  the  will. 
What,  then,  is  this  "flesh?"  How  can  we  describe  and  define  it  P  .  .  .  "The 
flesh  "  represents  all  that  a  man  is,  when  he  is  his  own  aim,  his  own  end.  His 
power  of  self-observation,  that  Divine  gift,  in  possessing  which  he  is  the  image  of 
his  God,  has  about  its  use  this  terrible  risk — that  he  may  cease  to  observe  himself 
as  he  is  in  God,  as  he  is  in  God's  ordered  world,  set  to  fulfil  an  office  in  combination 
with  his  fellows,  the  member  of  a  vast  body,  pledged  to  a  peculiar  or  disciplined 
service  ;  he  may  forget  all  this,  and  only  observe  himself,  himself  just  as  he  stands, 
with  his  own  private  appetites,  likes,  gifts,  feelings.  And,  so  observing,  he  may 
separate  himself  off  from  all  else,  hold  himself  up  before  his  own  eyes,  and  fasten 
upon  himself  all  his  interest,  all  his  thought,  and  his  imagination,  and  his  pains ; 
and  may  spend  his  every  effort  in  scheming  how  best  to  serve,  in  richness  of 
pleasurable  experience,  this  self,  who  has  become  his  idol,  and  before  which  he 
bows  himself  to  minister  as  to  a  god.  This  he  may  do ;  and  that  which  a  man  has 
then  in  front  of  him  as  his  aim  or  end — whether  it  be  low  and  gross,  or  whether  it 
be  delicate  and  intellectual — that  is  "  the  flesh."  And  the  life  that  he  lives  in 
obeying  its  behest,  that  is  "  the  life  after  the  flesh  "  ;  that  is  "  minding  the  things 
of  the  flesh"  ;  that  is  "walking  after  the  flesh."  And  the  end  of  that  walk  is 
Death.  (Ibid.)  Result  of  walking  after  the  flesh : — We  can  easily  understand 
why  life  in  the  flesh  is  a  life  of  jars  and  quarrels,  as  much  as  a  life  of  passion  and 
lust.  The  man  who  walks  after  the  flesh  is  absorbed  in  self-interests.  He  has 
dropped  his  eyes  from  their  outward  gaze  at  that  busy  and  social  world  which 
encompasses  him.  That  world  is  calling  to  him  with  all  its  voices,  but  he  hears 
them  no  longer;  it  is  appealing  to  him  to  act,  to  hope,  to  aspire,  to  give,  but  he 
pays  no  heed  to  its  invocations.     He  has  forgotten  its  wants  and  its  movements ; 


OHAF.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  885 

he  is  dead  to  its  touch  and  to  its  cry.  His  brothers  look  to  him  for  help,  but  they 
have  ceased  to  interest  him :  his  sisters  turn  to  him  for  tenderness,  but  he  is  chill 
as  a  blind  stone.  All  this  crowded  scene  of  our  human  story  has  lost  for  him  its 
charm,  its  colour,  its  warmth,  its  neighbourly  friendliness.  He  has  turned  his 
eyes  within  ;  he  has  bent  all  his  gaze  in  upon  himself ;  it  is  his  own  feelings  that 
alone  have  an  interest  to  him,  his  own  needs  that  alone  entice.  He  is  busy  night 
and  day  in  considering  himself ;  he  is  picturing  his  own  success  ;  he  is  planning 
his  own  pleasures  ;  he  is  brooding  over  his  own  possibilities  ;  he  is  filled  with  his 
own  imaginations.  Bound  and  round  himself  he  is  always  weaving  the  ever- 
thickening  web  of  his  own  fancies,  and  his  own  schemes ;  and  fainter  and  more 
distant  grows  the  sound  of  outward  things.  He  walks  abroad,  brimming  with  self- 
interests  ;  and  he  is  bent  on  things  fulfilling  themselves  according  to  his  fostered 
expectations ;  and  so,  walking,  he  must  of  neoessity  jar  at  once  against  a  world 
that  he  has  not  taken  the  pains  to  study,  or  understand,  or  revere.  He  clashes 
against  it,  as  against  a  wall ;  he  is  pushed  and  squeezed  by  the  crowd  of  bustling 
men,  who  have  no  time  to  give  to  his  broodings,  and  are  at  variance  with  his 
designs,  and  upset  his  favourite  plans,  and  traverse  his  ambitions.  He  is  disap- 
pointed, as  he  must  be  ;  for  this  earth  demands  of  us  a  social  temper,  and  he  is 
hopelessly  and  helplessly  individual ;  it  asks  us  to  give,  and  he  is  proposing  only  to 
take.  He  is  wholly  out  of  tune  with  a  world  that  exists  only  through  self-sacrifice, 
and  is  bonded  together  by  the  grace  of  humility ;  he  must  be  repudiated  by  it,  he 
must  be  disregarded,  he  is  bound  to  be  checked  at  every  turn,  and  he  gets  cross, 
angry,  bitter.  The  world  ignores  him,  laughs  at  him,  brushes  him  aside,  bowls 
him  over.  And  the  man,  so  treated,  grows  more  and  more  wounded,  hurt, 
indignant.  Perhaps  he  rails  and  storms  at  the  world  that  he  finds  so  hard,  at  the 
men  whom  he  thinks  so  unsympathetic  and  so  cruel.  Perhaps  he  retreats  into 
sulky  silence,  and  6huts  himself  up  in  clouds  of  vaporous  passion,  and  fumes  out 
his  angry  soul  in  secret  broodings,  and  hugs  himself  the  closer,  and  vents  his 
grudge  against  life  in  spite,  and  scorn,  and  uncomfortable  depression.  (Ibid.) 
Remedy  for  selfishness: — Self-pre-occupation,  self-broodings,  self-interest,  self-love 
— these  are  the  reasons  why  you  go  jarring  against  your  fellows.  Turn  your  e.^res 
off  yourself ;  forget  your  own  pet  schemes,  the  hopes  you  are  always  nursing  to 
yourself,  the  self-importance  that  you  hug.  Forget  them,  throw  them  aside,  push 
through  them.  Look  up,  and  out  I  There  is  a  larger  world  outside  you,  brimming 
over  with  far  other  hopes  than  yours,  illumined  by  a  vaster  sun,  travelling  to  some 
far  historic  goal.  Look  up,  and  out  upon  it !  It  has  its  interests,  its  purposes,  its 
ends,  which  it  is  your  glad  privilege  to  learn,  and,  by  learning,  to  obey  and  follow. 
Give  it  your  heart,  and  it  will  show  you  its  own.  Take  its  road,  and  it  will, 
then,  take  yours.  Look  up,  and  out!  There  are  men,  your  brothers,  and 
women,  your  sisters ;  they  have  needs  that  you  can  aid.  Listen  for  their  con- 
fidences; keep  your  heart  wide  open  to  their  calls,  and  your  hands  alert  for 
their  service.  Learn  to  give,  and  not  to  take ;  to  drown  your  own  hungry  wants 
in  the  happiness  of  lending  yourself  to  fulfil  the  interests  of  those  nearest  or 
dearest.  Break  through  your  own  moody  musings,  and  run  out  abroad,  from  these 
closed  and  darkened  chambers  of  self-consideration — out  into  the  wide  and  teeming 
earth,  where  not  your  scheme,  but  God's  great  hope,  is  working  out  its  world-wide 
triumph.  Look  up  and  out,  from  this  narrow,  cabined  self  of  yours,  and  you  will 
jar  no  longer,  you  will  fret  no  more,  you  will  provoke  no  more,  you  will  quarrel  no 
more ;  but  you  will,  to  your  own  glad  surprise,  find  the  secret  of  "  the  meekness 
and  the  gentleness  of  Jesus"  ;  and  "the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing "  will  drop  down  like  dew  upon  your  happy-hearted  days ;  and  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit  will  all  bud  and  blossom  from  out  of  your  life — "love,  joy,  peace, 
gentleness,  meekness,  goodness,  long-suffering,  faith,  temperance."  (Ibid.)  The 
spirit  above  nature : — I.  Natural  desireB  are  never  to  rule,  always  to  be  ruled.  II. 
By  the  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God  they  are  kept  in  subjection.  III.  Unrestrained, 
they  produce  all  kinds  of  wickedness.  IV.  Present  goodness  and  happiness  are 
the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  V.  Self-denial  and  suffering  are  requisite  for  the 
highest  good.  VI.  By  faith  in  Christ  men  follow  Him  and  become  like  Him.  (J. 
H.  Godwin.)  Drunkenness,  revellings  : — The  apostle  is  not  speaking  merely  of 
the  habit  and  custom  of  drinking  ;  therefore  it  is  a  false  excuse  if  any  one  thinka 
that  a  debauch  is  no  sin  if  one  does  not  make  a  business  of  it.  The  devil  invented 
this  excuse.  When  any  one  so  overfills  himself  that  he  is  unfit  for  prayer  and  the 
business  of  his  calling,  that  is  drunkenness.  What,  then,  are  we  to  think  of  the 
respeotable  world  with  its  sinful  and  damnable  Christian  drinking  bouts?  and 

25 


863  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

what,  too,  of  this  continual  drinking  of  healths,  but  as  of  a  temptation  to  swill 
down  liquor?  (Starke.)  The  list  of  vices  : — These  works  of  the  flesh  have  often 
been  divided  into  four  classes.  Any  classification  or  system,  however,  is  scarcely 
to  be  expected ;  but  each  term  of  the  catalogue  may  have  been  suggested  by  some 
law  of  association,  especially  as  some  of  the  terms  are  similarly  arranged  in  other 
places.  In  the  first  class  are  sensual  sins — fornication,  impurity,  wantonness  ;  in 
the  second  class  are  sins  of  superstition — idolatry  and  sorcery;  in  the  third  class, 
sins  of  malice  and  social  disorder — hatred,  strife,  jealousy,  wraths,  caballing, 
divisions,  heresies,  envying,  murders ;  and  in  the  fourth  class  are  sins  of  personal 
excess — drunkenness  and  revellings.  In  the  first  class,  the  first  term,  which  has  a 
distinct  meaning,  may  have  suggested  the  other  and  allied  vices — miscellaneous 
and  grosser  aspects  of  forbidden  indulgence.  The  two  terms  of  the  second  clasa 
are  somewhat  similar — the  first  more  precise  in  meaning,  and  the  second  more 
comprehensive — all  occult  dealings  with  the  powers  of  evil.  In  the  third  class 
there  is  a  climatic  enumeration — hatreds  ripening  into  strife ;  jealousy  venting 
itself  in  passionate  outbursts ;  cabals  yet  darker  and  more  selfish;  divisions,  the 
result  of  deepening  hostility ;  envjings  quite  fiendish  in  nature  ;  and  murders — the 
extreme  result,  and  no  uncommon  thing  in  such  countries,  to  obtain  an  end  and 
consummate  an  intrigue  by  the  removal  of  a  rival.  In  the  fourth  class  are  first  the 
simple  term  drunkenness,  and  the  more  inclusive  term  after  it,  referring  either  to 
scenes  of  dissipation  so  gay  and  wanton,  or  to  orgies  so  gross  and  sensual,  that 
they  may  not  be  described.    (John  Eadie,  D.D.) 

Yer.  21.  That  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not  Inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God. — 

Sin's  dominion  fatal  to  the  soul : — It  is  not  said  :  They  that  do  such  things  daily ; 
for  even  though  one  does  any  such  thing  only  now  and  then,  on  certain  occasions, 
yea  even  only  once,  but  voluntarily,  he  forfeits  the  Kingdom  of  God,  so  long  as  he 
remains  underk  he  dominion  of  this  work  of  the  flesh.  Nor  is  it  said  :  They  that  do 
all  this.  It  is  not  needful  for  a  man  to  do  all  these  sins,  or  many  such,  to  fall  under 
the  penalty ;  it  is  enough  if  he  lets  one  single  sin  rule  over  him,  let  it  be  what  it 
will.  Now  it  rules  over  him,  not  only  while  he  is  committing  it,  but  so  long  as  the 
purpose  never  to  commit  it  again  is  not  fully  fixed.  .  •  .  They  shall  not  only 
not  procure  eternal  life  by  their  works  of  the  flesh  (as  may  well  be  supposed),  but,  if 
ttusy  set  their  hopes,  not  upon  earning  eternal  life  by  their  works,  but  receiving  it 
as  a  gift  to  be  received  by  faith,  they  will  not,  leading  a  dissolute  life,  inherit  it 
any  more  than  earn  it.  Such  a  man  inherits  not  the  kingdom  of  grace,  still  less  the 
kingdom  of  glory,  even  though  his  funeral  sermon  extols  him  as  blessed.  (Starke.) 
Shall  not  inherit  the  Kingdom  of  God : — I.  What  is  the  Kingdom  of  God  ?  Two- 
fold. 1.  Of  grace  (Matt.  v.  19,  20).  2.  Glory  (Matt,  xviii.  1,  3  ;  xix.  23).  Where— 
(1)  Jehovah  is  king  (2)  the  laws  are  just ;  (3)  the  subjects  unanimous  ;  (4)  sin 
and  misery  banished  ;  (5)  righteousness  triumphant ;  (6)  the  citizens  happy.  II. 
How  rr  appeabs  that  the  vicious  cannot  inhebit  it.  1.  From  the  Word  of  God 
(Eph.  v.  5  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10  ;  Heb.  xii.  14).  2.  The  rules  of  justice.  3.  The  con- 
clusions of  reason  ;  because  not  capable.  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Heaven  will  be 
inherited  by  every  man  who  has  heaven  in  his  soul  :  it  is  equally  true  that  there 
are  materials  enough  in  every  man's  mind  to  make  a  helL  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Sin 
cuts  men  off  from  God : — Were  a  cup  of  pleasant  wine  put  into  your  hands,  and  you 
knew  for  certain  that  a  deadly  poison  was  mixed  up  with  the  wine,  which  would 
rack  you  with  the  fiercest  pains,  and  ere  long  tear  soul  and  body  in  sunder, 
who  would  drink  it  ? — who  would  not  dash  it  from  him  forthwith  ?  Yet,  if  we  had 
but  faith,  we  should  know  and  feel  that  sin  is  deadlier  than  the  deadliest  poison, 
that  it  racks  us  with  fiercer  pains,  and  gives  us  over  to  a  more  terrible  dissolution  ; 
for  it  cuts  us  off  from  God — from  Him  who  is  the  only  source  of  all  blessing  and 
peace.  (Hare.)  Sin  and  death  : — The  tale  of  the  goblet,  which  the  genius  of  a 
heathen  fashioned,  was  true  ;  and  taught  a  moral  of  which  many  a  death-bed 
furnishes  the  melancholy  illustration.  Having  made  the  model  of  a  serpent,  he 
fixed  it  in  the  bottom  of  a  cup.  Coiled  for  the  spring,  a  pair  of  gleaming  eyes  in 
its  head,  and  in  its  open  mouth  fangs  raised  to  strike,  it  lay  beneath  the  ruby  wine. 
Nor  did  he  who  raised  that  golden  cup  to  quench  his  thirst,  and  quaff  the  delicious 
draught,  suspect  what  lay  below,  till,  as  he  reached  the  dregs,  that  dreadful  head 
rose  up  and  glistened  before  his  eyes.  So,  when  life's  cup  is  nearly  emptied,  and 
sin's  last  pleasure  quaffed,  and  unwilling  lips  are  draining  the  bitter  dregs,  shall 
rise  the  ghastly  terrors  of  remorse,  and  death,  and  judgment,  upon  the  despairing 
■oul.    Be  assured,  a  serpent  lurks  at  the  bottom  of  guilt's  sweetest  pleasure.    To 


chap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  887 

this  awful  truth  may  God,  by  His  Word  and  Holy  Spirit,  open  your  eyes  I    (7. 
Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  Is  love. — The  tpiritual  life  ; — The  works  ef 
the  flesh  are  manifest,  known  and  plain  to  all.  But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  not  so 
manifest  :  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  is  a  hidden  life  :  still  it  is  a  real  life,  pro- 
ducing genuine  fruit  ;  cherish  therefore  and  cultivate  it.  I.  The  Spirit  Himself  is 

THE  SOURCE  OF  ALL  SPIRITUAL  FRUIT.      II.    THE  NATURE  OF    THIS  FRUIT.       The  list  here 

given  is  not  exhaustive.  Nor  does  it  admit  of  very  definite  classification.  The 
following  three  groups  of  three  each  have  been  suggested.  1.  Christian  states  of 
mind  in  their  more  general  aspect.  2.  Those  special  qualities  which  affect  a  man's 
intercourse  with  his  neighbours.  3.  Certain  general  principles  which  guide  a 
Christian  man's  conduct.  III.  The  connection  between,  and  mutual  dependence 
upon  each  other,  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  1.  They  are  all  from  one  and  the 
same  source.  2.  They  all  conform  to  one  rule,  the  law  of  God.  3.  Each  Christian 
must  possess  them  all,  at  least  in  germ.  Grace  in  the  soul  is  the  reflection  of 
Christ's  glory  (2  Cor.  iii.  19)  ;  but  that  can  be  no  true  reflection  which  lacks  any 
leading  features  of  the  moral  glory  of  the  Saviour.  IV.  Practical  inferences  .  1.  Be 
careful  to  cultivate  all  the  graces  of  the  Christian  character.  Without  this  there 
can  be  no  symmetry  and  harmony.  2.  Growth  in  grace  is  the  best  security  for  the 
crucifixion  of  the  flesh.  3.  B»filled  with  the  Spirit.  Avoid  whatever  grieves  and 
tempts  Him  to  withdraw  His  presence!  lield  readily  to  His  godly  motions,  Hia 
guidance,  His  teaching.  4.  Pray  for  increase  of  grace.  The  daily  life  must  be 
lived,  whether  we  will  or  no.  It  rests  with  us  whether  it  shall  be  lived  in  the  power 
and  under  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  Spiritual 
fertility  : — See  the  fertility  and  fruitfulness  of  the  soul  that  is  in  a  state  of  grace 
and  therefore  in  the  love  of  God.  First  of  all,  here  is  the  relation  of  the  soul  with 
God  Himself  :  Love  is  that  which  unites  us  with  God  ;  joy,  which  means  the 
thanksgiving  and  the  consciousness  of  God's  in  finite  goodness,  in  which  we  live 
and  move  ;  peace,  whereby  we  are  at  rest  with  God,  and  in  ourselves,  and  with  all 
mankind.  Then  there  are  the  fruits  which  have  relation  to  our  neighbour  ;  and 
the  first  is  patience.  Do  we  bear  with  our  neighbours  ?  Are  we  irritable,  revenge- 
ful, resentful,  malicious  ?  If  so,  the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  not  in  us,  because 
the  benignity  of  God  is  not  in  us.  Long-suffering  is  another  name  for  patience. 
Just  as  equity  is  the  most  delicate  form  of  justice,  long-suffering  is  the  most  perfect 
form  of  charity,  the  perpetual  radiance  of  a  loving  heart,  which,  in  its  dealings 
with  all  around,  looks  kindly  upon  them  and  judges  kindly  of  their  faults.  It  means 
also  perseverance,  the  not  being  wearied  in  well-doing,  notthrowing  up  and  saying, 
"  I  have  tried  to  do  good  for  such  a  one,  I  have  tried  to  correct  his  faults.  I  have 
tried  to  win  him  ;  but  he  is  ungrateful,  incorrigible,  and  I  will  have  no  more  to  do 
with  him."  Our  Lord  does  not  so  deal  with  us.  Long-suffering  means  an  un- 
wearied perseverance  in  doing  good.  Gentleness  means  kindness  and  forbearance, 
the  dissembling  of  wrong,  the  absence  of  the  fire  of  resentment  and  of  the  smoulder- 
ing of  ill-will.  Next  comes  goodness  ;  as  a  fountain  pours  out  pure  water,  so  the 
good  heart  is  perpetually  pouring  out  goodness  and  diffusing  goodness  on  all 
around.  Faith  means  veracity,  so  that  a  man's  word  is  as  good  as  an  oath.  And 
then,  lastly,  there  are  certain  fruits  which  have  relation  to  ourselves.  They  are, 
first,  modesty,  ( =  meekness  ?)  which  is  both  within  and  without — modesty  of  bear- 
ing, modesty  of  conduct,  of  dress,  of  demeanour,  a  chastened  and  sensitive  regard 
for  others,  in  all  that  is  due  from  us  to  them,  which  keeps  us  from  obtrusiveness, 
and  from  transgressing  the  delicate  consideration  which  is  their  right.  Temperance 
or  continence  means  most  especially  the  repressing  of  passions — the  passion  of 
anger,  the  inclination  to  pleasure,  to  honour,  to  wealth  ;  it  is  the  transparent 
purity  of  the  soul,  and  the  custody  of  the  senses,  because  they  are  the  avenues  to 
the  soul  by  which  sin  enters.  Such,  then,  are  the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Every 
soul  that  is  in  the  grace  of  God  has  in  it  this  fertility.  It  may  not  bear  them  all  in 
equal  measure,  but  it  bears  them  all  in  some  proportion.  (H.  E.  Manning.) 
Spiritual  fruit  in  the  Church  : — Look  at  the  world  before  the  Son  of  God  came  into 
it.  Find  one  institute  of  mercy  in  it.  Find  a  hospital,  or  an  asylum  for  the  widow 
or  for  the  orphan.  Find  a  home  for  those  who  were  bereft  of  reason.  Find  a 
ministry  of  charity  to  the  sick.  The  culture  of  classical  nations  was  as  cold  as  the 
ice,  as  hard  as  a  stone.  The  sacred  heart  of  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  cast  fire 
upon  the  earth.  And  the  Christian  world  kindled  and  broke  forth  into  all  the 
works  of  charity.  As  soon  as  the  widows  and  the  orphans  among  those  who  believed 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [coat.  t. 

were  known  to  be  destitute,  the  apostles  set  apart  a  special  order — the  sacred  order 
of  Deacons — to  be  the  ministers  of  the  charity  of  Jesus  Christ  to  His  poor.  The 
law  of  alms  came  in,  which  had  no  existence  in  the  heathen  world.  The  life  of 
community — not  the  communism  of  those  that  do  not  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  but 
the  community  of  all  things  among  those  who,  being  members  of  His  Body,  have  a 
sympathy  one  with  another,  and  share  in  each  other's  sorrows,  and  joys,  and  in 
their  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  nakedness.  The  miseries  of  mankind  as  they  were 
seen  by  the  Son  of  God  Himself  are  before  the  eyes  of  His  Church.  All  the  miseries 
of  mankind,  of  body  and  soul,  are  open  to  the  heart  that  is  illuminated  and  kindled 
with  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour.  The  Church  from  the  beginning  has 
sho  svn  an  inventiveness  of  charity,  in  finding  out  how  it  may  apply  the  help  of  the 
love  and  of  the  meroies  of  God  to  every  form  of  human  suffering.  And  what  the 
Church  does  as  a  body  the  saints  of  the  Church  have  done  one  by  one.  The  life  of 
St.  Charles,  the  great  pastor  of  Milan,  was  inexhaustible  in  compassion.  St. 
Vincent  of  Paul,  who  did  not  commence  his  works  of  mercy  until  he  was  forty 
years  of  age,  has  filled  the  whole  world  with  the  exercise  of  the  most  various  forms 
of  Christian  love,  ministering  to  every  form  of  disease  and  suffering.  And  what 
there  is  in  the  lives  of  saints  there  ought  to  be  in  its  measure  in  every  one  of  you. 
Do  not  say,  "  I  have  a  preference  for  this  or  for  that  kind  of  charity,  and  I  am  not 
called  to  other  things. "  You  are  called  to  show  all  these  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
on  every  occasion  in  which  it  is  possible,  at  least  in  some  measure  or  in  some 
degree,  and  that  to  all.  (Ibid.)  Man's  productive  capabilities  : — Fruit,  regarded 
in  the  light  of  the  orchard,  the  garden,  or  the  vineyard,  is  the  most  perfect  form  of 
development  to  which  a  tree  or  plant  can  come.  Fruit  is  the  thing  for  which  all 
the  enginery  of  roots  and  branches  and  leaves  was  appointed.  All  these  are  servants. 
They  toil  and  wait.  The  fruit  only  sits  regent ;  it  is  the  final  result — the  perfect 
thing.  The  tree  can  never  go  a  step  further  than  its  fruit.  It  can  stop,  and  go 
back  and  begin  again  ;  but  it  goes  only  to  that  limit ;  and  when  it  has  reached 
that,  it  has  reached  perfection.  The  fruit  is  +J]g  ""«°"tp  cfjihe  tree's  possibility. 
So  when  we  speak  of  man  as  a  tree,  or  a  vine,  and  when  we  speak  of  the  fruit  of 
that  tree  or  vine,  we  refer  to  that  Divine  summer  which  quickens  man,  and  rendera 
him  productive,  and  brings  forth  in  him  the  highest  results  of  which  he  is  capable. 
When  a  man  comes  to  that  which  is  nn-llpd  "  t.hn  fr^it  of  the  Spirit/'  he  reaches  hia 
full  limit  as  a  creature  of  time.  When  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  in  man  is  spoken  of, 
that  which  is  meant  is  the  fairest,  the  noblest,  the  best  thing  that  he  can  be  brought 
to,  by  the  brooding  of  the  Divine  mind.  It  is  the  final  result  which  is  wrought  out 
by  all  the  influences  for  good  which  are  brought  to  bear  upon  him.  It  is  that  which 
his  higher  nature  ultimates  in.  .  .  .  Here  is  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  manhood.    It 

fmust  have  these  marks — love,  joy,  peace,  &c.  It  must  Tie  Characterised  by  "these 
qualities.  A  man  may  be  resplendent ;  he  may  dramatise  as  Shakespeare  ;  he  may 
paint  as  Eaphael  ;  he  may  carve  as  Michael  Angelo  ;  he  may  colour  as  Titian  ;  he 
may  build  as  Bramante ;  he  may  subdue  the  material  globe,  and  conquer  by  physical 
forces  ;  but  these  things  do  not  represent  manhood.  A  man  may  think  till  hia 
tVmnpli+n  cjTH7ffti  P8*  far  "-B  ^e  starlight  shoots  ;  a  man  may  speak  with  an  eloquence 
which  is  transcendent ;  a  man  may  be  endowed  with  all  conceivable  intellectual 
\  qndnwmp.ntf?  ;  hnt  there  dn  nnt.  represent  manhood.  That  which  distinguishes  the 
true  man  is  not  the  capacity  to  command  physical  substances.  It  is  not  the  power 
to  analyse  and  use  things  created  out  of  material.  It  is  not  any  of  the  lower  forms 
of  power  ;  nor  even  the  influence  of  mental  strength.  None  of  these  things  con- 
stitute the  truest  manhood.  It  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit — man  being  the  stalk  on 
which  that  frnit  is  growing,  and  out  of  which  it  is  to  be  developed.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Fruit  of  the  Spirit : — This  is  a  rich  coronet  of  graces,  with  which  the 
apostle  decks  the  character  of  the  Christian  believer.  He  tells  us  here  what  a 
spiritual  life  in  Christ  means,  a  life  that  has  its  ripe  fruit  in  these  real  virtues  of 
the  man.  It  is  no  exact  classification  of  the  religious  graces,  but  we  may  find  an 
inward  harmony,  as  if  he  thought  of  them  as  following  a  law  of  personal  growth. 
Love,  joy,  and  peace  are  the  inmost  dispositions  of  the  heart,  flowing  from  com- 
munion with  the  heart  of  Christ  ;  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness  are  social 
dispositions  toward  others  ;  and  faith,  meekness,  temperance  (or  self-restraint)  are 
qualities  of  conduct.  (E.  A.  Washburn,  D.D.)  Spiritual  tests  : — We  believe  that 
we  pass  from  sin  to  holiness,  not  of  ourselves,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  working  in 
us.  How,  then,  do  we  recognize  the  reality  of  such  a  Divine  life  ?  It  must  be  by 
the  real  dispositions  and  the  real  graces  that  are  in  us.  There  is  no  other  possibla 
way.    What  is  the  grace  of  the  Spirit?    If  a  spiritual  grace  be  a  mysterious  some* 


cbat.  v.]  GALATIANS.  S89 

thing,  which  has  no  test  save  our  individual  feeling,  it  may  be  an  imagination.  If 
a  man  should  say,  I  see  the  grass  to  be  red  :  it  may  be  so  to  his  eyes,  but  it  only 
shows  his  eyes  to  be  in  a  diseased  state.  So  with  our  spiritual  perceptions.  If  a 
man  should  say,  The  spirit  has  revealed  to  me  that  Christ  shall  appear  next  week 
on  the  earth  :  we  should  reply,  What  proof  do  you  bring  tbat  you  are  not  an 
enthusiast  ?  And  so  if  any  one  say,  I  am  assured  that  at  a  certain  time  I  was  con- 
victed of  sin,  and  passed  from  death  to  life ;  we  have  still  to  ask,  How  do  you  know 
that  this  is  not  a  fancy,  a  will  o'  the  wisp,  shining  out  of  the  swamp  of  a  morbid 
feeling.  It  is  not  enough  to  say,  I  have  an  extraordinary  peace  of  conscience,  a 
sense  of  pardon  and  joy  ;  for  any  one  who  knows  human  nature  and  his  own, 
knows  that  we  can  be  more  readily  cheated  by  our  religious  emotions  than  all  else, 
and  may  mistake  the  spirit  of  self-conceit  for  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  must  be  a  test 
beyond  our  inner  feeling.  It  must  be  a  test  seen  and  known  by  others.  It  must  be 
a  test  of  a  permanent  kind.  What  is  it  ?  There  can  be  only  one  answer.  We 
know  the  Divine  Spirit  by  the  likeness  of  our  characters  to  His,  as  we  know  the  sun 
in  his  beams,  the  plant  in  its  blossom.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  of  love  and  peace  ; 
it  shows  itself  in  the  conquest  of  our  unloving,  warring  passions.  It  is  of  long- 
suffering  and  goodness  ;  it  is  known  in  our  unselfish  goodness  toward  our  fellow- 
men.  It  is  of  meekness  and  temperance  ;  it  is  known  in  our  self-restraint.  This 
is  reality.  There  is  no  outward  surface  morality  in  it ;  but  the  genuine  morality  of 
heart  and  life.  If  we  have  these  positive  graces,  if  our  religion  create  this  true  joy 
of  a  cheerful,  happy  spirit ;  this  peace  not  of  a  self-satisfied  conscience,  but  of  one 
▼oid  of  offence  ;  this  gentleness,  this  goodness  which  prompts  our  action  in  daily 
life  ;  this  temperance,  which  keeps  us  from  all  unholy  appetites  of  wealth  or  selfish 
pleasure  ;  if  it  be  this  in  the  household,  in  the  social  circle,  in  the  calling  of  business 
— then  we  have  the  only  assurance  we  can  have  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
There  can  be  no  mistake  about  it.  And  so  as  to  others.  If  I  recognize  these  genuine 
graces  in  any,  whether  his  religious  experiences  tally  with  mine  or  no,  I  know  that 
he  is  a  living  disciple  of  Christ,  as  I  know  the  flavour  of  a  peach,  although  it  may 
not  be  of  my  garden.  (Ibid.)  Danger  of  substituting  any  other  test  for  tins  : — 
There  is  a  religion  calling  itself  spiritual,  which  substitutes  a  vague  notion  of  the 
Divine  grace  for  the  plain  rule  of  the  apostle.  Let  such  a  notion  enter,  and  what 
more  sure  to  make  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  apology  for  every  morbid 
mistake  I  What  strange  doubts  in  regard  to  the  plainest  duty,  what  vagaries  in 
feeling,  what  contradictions  between  faith  and  life  ?  You  meet  one  class  of  sincere 
Christians,  who  make  religion  an  inward  self-torment ;  always  asking  whether  they 
oan  find  signs  of  their  conversion,  distressed  about  their  states  of  mind,  instead  of 
testing  the  grace  of  God  by  their  simple  acceptance  of  His  promises  and  daily 
growth  in  duty.  It  is  the  saddest  of  inversions.  As  well  dig  up  the  roots  of  the  rose 
bush  every  hour  to  know  if  it  have  life,  when  you  should  see  it  in  the  fragrance  and 
bloom  of  the  rose.  You  meet  others,  who  believe  that  some  strong  conviction  is  the 
assurance  of  the  Spirit.  I  know  nothing  more  unreal  than  that.  In  proportion  as 
we  believe  in  this  assurance  of  our  own  unchanging  state,  we  l»se  our  humble  sense 
of  our  weakness.  The  assurance  we  have  is  in  God.  But  there  is  none  that  we 
have  that  life  in  us,  unless  we  keep  it  by  our  growth.  I  have  even  known  those, 
who  hold  this  notion  of  religion,  speak  very  doubtfully  of  the  moral  virtues,  of 
integrity,  honour,  purity,  benevolence,  as  a  "  mere  morality  "  which  might  be  with- 
out any  spiritual  piety  at  all.  Let  us  beware  of  such  conceits.  When  men  indulge 
in  this  theory,  it  often  ends  in  machinery,  in  the  mechanical  exercise  of  feeling, 
and  leaves  the  real  life  barren.  Try  the  spirits  by  the  rule  of  Christ  ;  and  when 
you  see  that  the  figs  do  not  grow  on  the  thistles,  that  the  spiritual  experience  is  one 
thing,  and  the  real  man  another  ;  a  lofty  faith  here,  and  a  selfish  conduct  there  ; 
a  grace  that  has  no  graces  ;  a  change  within  that  makes  no  change  without — then 
learn  the  difference  between  the  subtleties  of  men  and  the  plain  Word  of  God. 
(Ibid.)  New  leaves  pushing  off  the  old  : — "  Old  leaves,  if  they  remain  upon  the 
trees  through  the  autumn  and  the  winter,  fall  off  in  the  spring."  We  have  seen  a 
hedge  all  thick  with  dry  leaves  throughout  the  winter,  and  neither  frost  nor  wind 
nas  removed  the  withered  foliage,  but  the  spring  has  soon  made  a  clearance.  The 
new  life  dislodges  the  old,  pushing  it  away  as  unsuitable  to  it.  So  our  old  corrup- 
tions are  best  removed  by  the  growth  of  new  graces.  M  Old  things  are  passed  away  ; 
behold,  all  things  are  become  new."  It  is  as  the  new  life  buds  and  opens  that  the 
old  worn-out  things  of  our  former  state  are  compelled  to  quit  their  hold  of  us.  Our 
wisdom  lies  in  living  near  to  God,  that  by  the  power  of  His  Holy  Spirit  all  our 
graces  may  be  vigorous,  and  may  exercise  a  sin-expelling  power  over  our  lives  :  th* 


( 


•90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼„ 

new  leaves  of  grace  pushing  off  our  old  sere  affections  and  habits  of  sin.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  visible  : — If  the  sun  is  sparkling  on  the  healthy 
leaves  of  a  fruit-tree,  and  heavenly  airs  are  fanning  them,  and  the  good  soil  lies 
below,  we  do  not  try  to  prove  by  abstract  rules  that  probably  the  fruit  will  somehow 
drop  down  of  a  sudden  on  the  twigs.  The  eye  sees  the  work  going  on,  and  doubts 
about  contingencies  and  dangers  seldom  disturb  the  husbandman.  If  there  is  a 
work  of  grace  now  stirring,  if  the  Christ-thoughts  become  more  and  more  our 
thoughts,  if  the  world  below  sinks  in  value,  and  the  character  deepens  on  sound 
things,  on  truer  judgments,  on  simpler  goodness  and  wisdom,  we  need  not  to  look 
to  some  far-off  future  to  find  hope.  (G.  H.  Hall,  D.D.)  Symmetrical  fertility  : — 
"  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit "  do  not  always  appear,  even  in  every  true  Christian,  in 
their  Divine  order  and  symmetrical  proportion.  Grace  works  on  very  different 
natures,  and  is  subject  to  an  endless  variety  of  conditions  and  modifying  influences ; 
so  that  while  the  great  change  has  been  wrought,  the  seeds  of  the  new  life  have 
taken  root  in  the  heart,  the  form  and  degree  of  development  will  greatly  vary  in 
different  persons,  and  different  conditions  and  surroundings.  In  one,  faith  pre- 
dominates, in  another,  love,  in  another,  charity,  &c.  Seldom  do  we  see  in  this 
world  a  perfectly  rounded  symmetrical  Christian  character.  Grace  has  not  its 
perfect  work  here :  and  yet  the  conversion  may  be  genuine.  The  believer 
should  not  despair,  if  he  fails  to  discover  in  his  heart  and  daily  life,  at  one  and  the 
same  time,  all  the  fruits  of  grace  here  enumerated.  (American  Homeletic  Review.) 
Catechism  of  religion: — When  I  ask  you,  "Do  you  believe  in  religion?"  I  do  not 
mean  to  ask  you  whether  you  believe  in  creeds,  and  ordinances,  and  Church 
organisations.  When  I  want  to  know  whether  a  man  believes  in  religion  or  not, 
I  do  not  ask,  "  Do  you  believe  in  Sunday,  and  in  ministers,  and  in  the  Bible  ?  " 
For  a  man  may  believe  in  all  these  things,  and  not  believe  in  religion.  And  a  man 
might  not  believe  in  any  of  them,  and  yet  believe  in  religion.  If  I  were  going  to 
question  you  to  ascertain  whether  you  were  a  Christian  or  not,  I  would  say,  "  Do 
you,  sir,  believe  in  love,  as  the  transcendent  element  of  manhood  ?  "  Where  is  the 
man  who  would  say  "  No  "  to  that  ?  Where,  in  the  whole  round  of  creation,  would 
be  found  a  man  who,  if  the  question  were  put  to  him,  "  Do  you  believe  in  the 
validity,  and  authority,  and  divinity  of  love  ? "  would  not  say,  "  I  believe  ?  "  That 
is  the  first  question  in  the  catechism.  The  second  is,  "  Do  you  believe  in  joy, 
supernal,  ineffable,  Divine,  bred  in  the  soul  of  man,  and  in  the  highest  realm  of 
the  soul  ?  Do  you  believe  that  all  the  faculties  of  man,  like  the  pipes  of  an  organ, 
conspire  in  ringing  out  sweet  symphonies  ?  "  If  the  question  were  asked,  "  Do  yon 
believe  in  joy?"  where  is  the  man  who  would  not  say,  " I  believe ? "  "Do  yon 
believe  in  peace?"  "I  believe."  "Do  you  believe  in  long-suffering?"  "I 
believe."  "Do  you  believe  in  gentleness?"  "I  believe."  "Do  you  believe  in 
goodness?"  "I  believe."  " Do  you  believe  in  faith ? "  "I  believe."  "Do  yon 
believe  in  meekness  and  temperance  t "  "I  believe."  Answer  me,  hungry  heart — 
you  that  have  wandered  from  church  to  church,  and  have  not  been  fed ;  you  that 
have  tried  pleasure,  and  aspiration,  and  ambition,  without  being  satisfied,  and  have 
become  wearied  and  discouraged ;  you  that  have  listened  to  discourse  on  discourse, 
and  enigma  on  enigma,  and  had  spectacular  views  which  purported  to  be  religion, 
and  have  fallen  off,  wearily  saying,  "  Ah,  there  is  no  religion  in  these  things !  " — is 
there  no  religion  ?  Do  not  you  believe  in  religion  ?  If  you  were  to  see  a  man 
filled  with  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  would  you  not  believe  in  that  man?  "  Yes,"  you 
say,  "but  there  is  no  such  man."  But  is  not  that  an  ambition  which  every  man 
may  most  worthily  set  before  him,  and  press  toward  with  all  the  power  that  is  in 
him  ?  Is  not  that  worth  living  for  ?  And  if  men  come  together,  and  say,  "  We 
will  bear  with  each  other,  and  will  uphold  each  other,  and  together  we  will  press 
toward  that  high  conception  of  manhood,"  is  not  that  a  worthy  reason  for  coming 
together  ?  Is  there  anything  in  pleasure,  or  business,  or  citizenship  which  is  com- 
parable in  dignity  and  worth  to  coming  together  earnestly  bent  on  having  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  as  it  is  here  depicted  ?  ....  I  spread  before  you  this  reality 
of  love,  and  joy,  and  peace,  and  long-suffering,  and  gentleness,  and  goodness,  and 
faith,  and  meekness,  and  temperance,  and  say,  "  This  is  what  you  are  to  be  and  to 
do.  And  you  can  help  each  other  to  be  and  to  do  that.  Take  hold  of  hands.  Avail 
yourselves  of  what  advantage  there  may  be  in  social  power.  If  you  are  wanderers 
and  discouraged,  join  one  with  another  that  you  may  inspire  each  other  with  hope 
and  find  rest."  This  is  the  whole  economy  of  religion.  It  is  the  whole  philosophy 
of  the  Church.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  perceptible : — 
When  the  rays  of  the  son  fall  on  the  surface  of  a  material  object,  part  of  those 


chap,  y.]  GALATIANS.  891 

rays  are  absorbed;  part  of  them  are  reflected  backin  straight  lipegjand  part  of 


them  refracted  this  wig  and  Lhst'ln  various  directions.  When  the  Holv  Ghost 
gBines  upon  our  souls,  part  of  the  grace  HtJ  inspires'  is  abUol'Deu1  to  our  own 
particular  uuwfurla ;  part  of  it  is  reflected  baek  IB  aula- of-4ove-,  joy,  prayer, 
praise;  and  part  of  it  is  refracted  every  way  in  acts  of  benevolence,  bene- 
ficency,  and  all  moral  and  social  duty.  (.4.  M.  Toplady.)  t^he  fruit  of  th* 
Spirit  is  love  :  Love  an  abiding  quality^— Not  love  like  a  June  day"  breaking  out  in 
March,  and  everybody  saying,  "Was  there  ever  such  a  beautiful  day  ?  But  you 
mustn't  expect  more  such  days."  There  are  a  good  many  people  who  have  love 
like  that.  It  is  a  rare  thing  with  them.  But  the  quality  is  to  be  permanent, 
pervading,  atmospheric,  automatic,  spontaneous.  You  are  to  be  clothed  with  it, 
and  it  is  to  abide  with  you.  What  if  men  had  to  run  to  an  air  reservoir  every 
time  they  wanted  any  atmosphere — taking  a  breath,  then  going  as  long  as  they 
could,  and  then  going  back  to  get  another  breath !  But  in  this  world  of  hurly- 
burly,  strifes,  conflicts,  envyings,  jealousies,  selfishness,  and  various  attrition,  a 
6weet,  universal,  unvarying,  atmospheric  love  is  almost  as  rare  as  the  illustration 
would  indicate.  Yet  we  are  brought  into  circumstances  where  every  vengeful 
passion  plays,  and  threatens  to  supersede  all  our  grace.  We  have  to  get  up  our 
grace.  It  is  as  if  a  man,  having  laid  aside  his  armour  in  time  of  warfare,  and 
hearing  some  warning  bell  strike,  and  being  in  his  house,  should  spring  up  and 
cry,  "Where  is  my  spear,  my  arrow,  my  armour?  I  must  get  on  my  things, 
and  go  out  to  fight."  That  may  do  for  warfare ;  but  so  sharp  are  our  appetites 
and  temptations,  that  we  have  no  time  to  put  on  our  armour.  Circumstances 
require  us  to  wear  it  all  the  time.  "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God."  If  yon 
leave  off  any  piece  at  any  time,  that  is  the  point  where  death  will  enter.  Love, 
automatic,  continuous.  You  see  it  now  and  then.  You  will  see  it  in  a  great- 
souled  man.  He  never  moves  from  the  stability  of  that  state  of  mind ;  or  if  he 
moves,  it  is  only  as  an  overfull  vessel  sometimes  spills  herself  on  one  side  and 
on  the  other.  Now  and  then  you  see  it  in  a  great-souled  and  saintly  woman, 
not  only  where  she  makes  herself  radiant,  but  where  the  whole  household  is 
filled  with  the  atmosphere  of  her  graciousness  and  her  goodness.  This  is  what  you 
Bee  in  the  Indian  summer  of  life  in  the  aged  often — namely,  tbat  they  have  worn 
out,  as  it  were  burned  out,  the  passions,  and  have  been  released  little  by  little  from 
the  temptations  of  the  aggressive  life.  They  have  brought  themselves  into  a  con- 
tinued exercise  of  the  higher  Christian  states  of  mind,  until,  as  they  sit  waiting 
for  their  sun  to  go  down,  that  it  may  rise  again  and  never  set,  they  are  luminous 
and  are  clothed,  and  in  their  right  mind.  (H.  W.  Beeclier.)  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  love  :  The  Christian  the  only  true  lover  of  mankind : — Is  it  not  the  fact, 
that  religion  unlocks  the  closest  bosoms,  softens  the  most  rugged  nature,  touches 
the  heart  of  stone,  and  melts  it  into  tenderness  and  love?  I  have  lately  been 
called  to  watch  the  last  years  of  an  individual,  who,  during  a  life  of  more  than 
eighty  years,  barred  out  every  feeling  of  compassion  and  generosity ;  but  no  sooner 
did  the  beams  of  the  blessed  gospel  pierce  his  heart,  than  I  myself  saw  every 
sterner  quality  at  once  subdued,  and  all  that  was  large  and  generous  and  sympa- 
thizing occupy  the  vacant  place ;  no  sooner  did  he  learn  his  own  condition,  as  a 
sinner  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ — no  sooner  had  he  been  taught 
that,  if  saved  at  all,  he  must  be  saved  by  an  act  of  sovereign  and  unmerited  grace 
and  compassion,  than  the  frost  of  his  soul  seemed  dissolved,  his  heart  expanded, 
his  affections  were  new-born,  he  looked  over  the  world  with  a  new  eye,  and  literally 
drained  himself  to  supply  the  spiritual  and  temporal  necessities  of  those  around 
him.  And  he  is  not,  by  any  means,  an  isolated  instance  ;  but  simply  a  sample  of 
the  Spirit's  work  in  the  souls  of  the  regenerate.  Who,  I  ask,  was  Howard — and 
who  are  the  men  that  tread  in  his  steps,  and  dive  into  the  depths  of  the  dungeon, 
and  take  the  guage  of  misery  in  all  nations  of  the  world  ?  Who  was  Wilberf orce 
— and  who  are  those  upon  whom  his  mantle  has  fallen,  the  men  that  give  tyranny 
no  rest,  and  count  no  sacrifice  too  great  "  to  break  the  staff  of  the  oppressor,  and 
let  the  prisoner  go  free  ?  "  In  all  cases  the  answer  is  the  same.  These  are  the 
men  who  look  to  the  Spirit  of  God  only,  as  the  source  of  all  that  is  good  and  great, 
as  the  living  fountain  of  love,  as  their  only  stay  and  prop,  as  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  all  real  schemes  of  benevolence;  they  are  men,  in  short,  whose  help 
and  trust  are  placed  in  God  alone.  (J.  W.  Cunningham,  M.A.)  The  voice  of 
love : — Oh  1  there  is  a  voice  in  love ;  it  speaks  a  language  which  is  its  own ;  it  has 
an  idiom  and  a  brogue  which  none  can  mimic ;  wisdom  cannot  imitate  it ;  oratory 
cannot  attain  unto  it ;  it  is  love  alone  which  can  reach  the  mourning  heart ;  Iota 


S92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r, 

is  the  only  handkerchief  which  can  wipe  the  mourner's  tears  away.  And  is  not  the 
Holy  Ghost  a  loving  Comforter  ?  Dost  thou  know,  0  saint,  how  much  the  Holy 
Spirit  loves  tbee  ?  Canst  thou  measure  the  love  of  the  Spirit  ?  Dost  thou  know 
how  great  is  the  affection  of  His  soul  towards  thee?  Go,  measure  heaven  with 
thy  span  ;  go,  weigh  the  mountains  in  scales ;  go,  take  the  ocean's  water,  and  tell 
each  drop ;  go,  count  the  sand  upon  the  sea's  wide  shore ;  and  when  thou  bast 
accomplished  this,  thou  may'st  tell  how  much  He  loveth  thee !  He  has  loved  thee 
long,  He  lias  loved  thee  well ;  He  loved  thee  ever,  and  He  still  shall  love  thee ; 
surely  He  is  the  person  to  comfort  thee,  because  He  loves.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 
The  harmony  of  manhood : — Oh,  what  a  grand  thing  human  nature  is  when  it  is 
working  smoothly  1  There  is  the  will  sitting  supreme,  informed  from  above,  through 
channels  and  means,  by  all  the  grace  of  God  which  the  Spirit  supplies.  There  is 
conscience,  its  spiritual  assessor,  waiting  and  warning  and  testing  with  unerring 
accuracy.  There  is  the  inner  circle  of  the  intellect,  presenting  to  it  all  that  is  good, 
noble,  or  useful.  Memory,  bringing  in  its  treasures  from  the  past.  Imagination, 
bringing  in  ornament  and  beauty  from  the  present,  and  even  from  the  future. 
There  is  the  body  beneath,  with  its  active  slaves  ceaselessly  conveying  materials 
through  the  senses.  There  are  the  passions  and  the  emotions,  with  their  hidden 
fires,  all  ministering  to  the  great  work  which  is  going  on  within.  And  surely  it  if 
worth  the  effort  to  be  all  that  is  meant  by  spiritual,  to  set  ourselves  to  work  in  the 
best  way.  And  to  this  end  it  will  be  helpful  to  consider  those  virtues  which  the 
apostle  tells  us  are  the  "fruit  of  the  Spirit" — those  fruits  and  productions  which 
spring  up  within  us  out  of  the  harmonious  working  of  our  being — working,  that  is, 
as  God  means  it  to  work,  with  all  its  several  parts  acting  according  to  the  will 
of  God  concerning  us.  It  may  be  that  we  have  not  as  yet  learnt  to  use  the  machine 
aright ;  perhaps  we  have  shrunk  from  it,  and  God  drives  us  in  upon  ourselves  by 
the  admonition  of  adversity  or  the  reproofs  of  conscience.  Perhaps,  it  may  be, 
there  is  a  large  piece  of  this  world's  grit  sticking  somewhere  within  which  needs  to 
come  away.  Perhaps  there  may  be  a  sense  that  we  are,  after  all,  our  own  masters, 
instead  of  workers  for  God,  whteh  hinders  our  perfection.  If  so,  let  us  try  to  think 
what  we  might  be  if  all  these  parts  of  our  being  were  "  entire,"  if  we  were  working 
smoothly  for  Him.  (W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.)  The  right  use  of  human  capabilities : — 
Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  human  nature,  if  rightly  used,  is  a  machine  of  delicate 
and  wonderful  powers,  only  some  employ  it  as  they  might  use  some  beautiful 
musical  instrument,  using  but  a  part  of  it,  with  no  combination  of  stops,  no 
intricacies  of  effect,  or  concentration  of  action ;  while  some  maim  it  as  they  use  it, 
and  spoil  it  altogether.  What  a  frightful  perversion,  for  instance,  is  the  man  who 
is,  as  it  were  all  body ! — in  whom  the  governing  power  has  passed  over  to  the  lower 
senses,  who  perverts  his  mental  faculties  to  the  procuring  of  mere  animal  gratifica- 
tion, who  stifles  out  all  the  spiritual  yearnings  and  pleadings  within  him  that  he 
may  be  more  and  more  carnal  and  sensual.  And  if  this  be  so,  it  is  also  true  that 
there  may  be  an  intellectual  deformity  as  well,  higher  and  nobler  if  you  will,  but 
still  a  deformity,  where  the  body  is  despised  or  dishonoured,  where  the  spirit 
has  been  shut  off  in  its  higher  regions,  and  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  with- 
out any  influence  upon  life.  The  first  perversion  is  obvious ;  we  may  see 
it  any  day  at  almost  any  tavern  door.  But  the  other  may  also  be  traced  in 
many  an  impartial  biography,  where  on  a  review  of  the  whole  life  before  us,  it  can- 
not be  said  that  the  spirit,  soul,  and  body  have  been  preserved  "entire"  (6XdK\rjpa), 
that  the  owners  might  be  presented  "whole"  (6\ort\t~is)  before  God.  (Ibid.) 
The  fruits  of  the  spirit : — A  hard  thing  it  is,  to  bring  an  overweening  hypocrite  to 
a  true  understanding  of  himself ;  for  pride  and  hypocrisy  are  two  such  things  as 
few  men  are  willing  to  own.  That  they  might  therefore  with  better  certainty  be 
able  to  discern  whether  they  were  indeed  spiritual,  or  but  yet  carnal,  the  apostle 
proceedeth  to  describe  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit  by  their  different  effects.  The  thing 
we  are  to  take  notice  of  now  is  the  differences  that  may  be  observed  between  the 
titles  under  which  St.  Paul  hath  entered  the  several  particulars  of  both  sorts.  "  The 
works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  these  :  adultery,"  <fcc,  the  other  in  the 
beginning  of  verse  22  :  "  But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,"  &o.  1.  The  first 
difference,  which  ariseth  from  the  nature  of  things  themselves,  as  they  relate  to 
their  several  proper  causes,  is  of  the  four  the  most  obvious  and  important :  and  it  is 
this:  that  whereas  the  vicious  habits  and  sinful  actions  catalogued  in  the  former 
verses  are  the  production  of  the  flesh,  the  graces  and  virtues  specified  in  the  text 
are  ascribed  to  the  Spirit,  as  to  their  proper  and  original  cause.  They  are  not  the 
works  of  the  flesh,  as  the  former,  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit    First,  dear  it  is,  that 


«*ap.  v.]  GALATIANS.  893 

8.11  the  wicked  practices  recited  and  oondemned  in  the  foregoing  verses,  with  all 
other  of  like  quality,  do  proceed  merely  from  the  corruption  that  is  in  us,  from  our 
own  depraved  minds  and  wills,  without  any  the  least  co-operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  therein.  It  cannot  stand  with  the  goodness  of  God  to  be  the  principal ; 
and  neither  with  His  goodness  nor  greatness  to  be  an  accessory,  in  any  sinful 
action.  He  cannot  be  either  the  author  or  the  abettor  of  anything  that  is  evil. 
Secondly,  it  is  clear  also  that  all  the  holy  affections  and  performances  here  men- 
tioned,  with  all  other  Christian  virtues  and  graces  accompanying  salvation,  not 
here  meutioned,  though  performed  immediately  by  us,  and  with  the  free  consent  of 
our  own  wills,  are  yet  the  fruit  of  God's  Spirit  working  in  us.  All  those  very 
many  passages  in  the  New  Testament,  which  either  set  forth  the  unframeableness 
of  our  nature  to  the  doing  of  anything  that  is  good — "  Not  that  we  are  sufficient 
of  ourselves  to  think  a  good  thought "  ;  "  In  me,  that  is  in  my  flesh,  there 
dwelleth  no  good  thing,"  and  the  like :  or  else  ascribe  our  best  performances  to  the 
glory  of  the  grace  of  God — "  Without  me  you  can  do  nothing " ;  "  All  our 
sufficiency  is  of  God  "  ;  "  Not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  " ;  °  It  is  God 
that  worketh  in  you  both  the  will  and  the  deed,"  and  the  like,  are  so  many  clear 
confirmations  of  the  truth.  (1)  The  necessity  of  our  prayers.  It  is  true,  our 
endeavours  are  necessary :  God  that  doth  our  work  for  us,  will  not  do  it  without 
us.  (2)  A  duty  of  thankfulness.  If  by  His  good  blessing  upon  our  prayers 
and  endeavours  we  have  been  enabled  to  bring  forth  any  fruit,  such  as  He  will 
graciously  accept ;  take  we  heed  we  do  not  withdraw  the  least  part  of  the  glory  of 
it  from  Him,  to  derive  it  upon  ourselves,  or  our  own  endeavours.  Enough  it  is  for 
us,  that  we  have  the  comfort  onward,  and  shall  have  an  unmeasurable  reward  at  the 
last,  for  the  good  we  have  done  (either  of  both  which  is  infinitely  more  than  we 
deserve) ;  but  far  be  it  from  us  to  claim  any  share  in  the  glory :  let  all  that  be  to 
Him  alone.  2.  The  evil  effects  proceeding  from  the  flesh  are  called  by  the  name  of 
"  works  " ;  and  the  good  effects  proceeding  from  the  Spirit  are  called  by  the  name 
of  "fruits."  The  query  is,  why,  being  both  effects  alike,  they  are  not  either  both 
alike  called  works,  or  both  alike  called  fruits ;  but  the  one  works,  the  other  fruit — 
the  works  of  the  flesh  there ,  here,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  ?  For  answer  whereunto, 
I  shall  propose  to  your  choice  two  conjectures.  The  one  more  theological,  or 
rather  metaphysical,  which  is  almost  as  new  to  me  as  perhaps  it  will  seem  to  you 
(for  it  came  not  into  my  thoughts  till  I  was  upon  it) ;  the  other  more  moral  and 
popular.  For  the  former,  take  it  thus.  Where  the  immediate  agent  produceth  a 
work  or  effect,  virtute  propria,  by  his  own  power,  and  not  in  the  virtue  of  a 
superior  agent,  both  the  work  itself  produced,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  operation 
whereby  it  is  produced,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  him  alone ;  so  as  it  may  be  said  pro- 
perly and  precisely  to  be  his  work.  But  where  the  immediate  agent  operateth 
virtute  aliend,  in  the  strength  and  virtue  of  some  higher  agent,  without  which  he 
were  not  able  to  produce  the  effect,  though  the  work  done  may  even  there  also  be 
attributed  in  some  sort  to  the  inferior  and  subordinate  agent,  as  the  immediate 
cause,  yet  the  efficacy  whereby  it  was  wrought  cannot  be  so  properly  imputed  to 
him,  but  ought  rather  to  be  ascribed  to  that  higher  agent  in  whose  virtue  he  did 
operate.  If  this  seem  but  a  subtlety  and  satisfy  not,  let  it  go;  the  other,  I 
presume,  will,  seeing  it  is  so  plain  and  popular.  The  word  "  fruit "  mostly  relates 
to  some  labour  going  before.  The  reason  is,  because  no  man  would  willingly 
undergo  any  toil  or  labour  to  no  end  ;  he  would  have  something  or  other  in  his  eye 
that  might  in  some  measure  recompence  his  pains  ;  and  that  is  called  "  the  fruit  of 
his  labour."  Where  the  flesh  ruleth  all,  the  work  exceedeth  the  fruit ;  and  there- 
fore, without  ever  mentioning  the  fruit,  they  are  called  "  the  works  of  the  flesh." 
But  where  the  Spirit  of  God  ruleth,  the  fruit  exceedeth  the  work ;  and  therefore, 
without  ever  mentioning  the  work,  it  is  called  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  3.  The 
works  of  the  flesh  are  spoken  of  as  many,  "  works,"  in  the  plural :  but  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  spoken  of  as  one,  "fruit,"  in  the  singular.  Many  works,  but  one 
fruit.  There  is  such  a  connection  of  virtues  and  graces,  that  albeit  they  differ  in 
their  objects  and  natures,  yet  they  are  inseparable  in  the  subject.  As  when  many 
links  make  up  one  chain,  pull  one,  and  pull  all :  so  he  that  hath  any  one  spiritual 
grace  in  any  degree  of  truth  and  eminency,  cannot  be  utterly  destitute  of  any  other. 
But  as  for  sins  and  vices,  it  is  not  so  with  them  :  they  are  not  only  distinct  in  their 
kinds,  natures,  and  definitions  (for  so  are  virtues  too),  but  they  may  also  be 
divided  from  one  another,  and  parted  asunder  in  respect  of  the  subject  wherein 
they  are.  We  are  told  (and  if  we  were  not  told  it,  we  could  not  but  see  reason 
enouga  in  these  times  to  believe  it)  that  a  man  may  hate  idolatry,  a  work  of  the 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

flesh ;  and  yet  love  sacrilege  well  enough,  a  work  of  the  flesh  too.  There  is  no 
necessity  that  a  swearer  should  be  an  adulterer,  or  an  adulterer  a  slanderer,  or  a 
slanderer  an  oppressor,  or  an  oppressor  a  drunkard,  or  a  drunkard  a  seditious 
person;  and  so  of  many  other.  The  reason  of  the  difference  is,  because  all 
spiritual  graces  look  one  way :  they  all  run  to  the  same  indivisible  point,  wherein 
they  concentre  ;  to  wit,  almighty  God,  who  is  unchangeable  and  one :  even  as  all 
moral  virtues  concentre  in  the  same  common  point  of  right  reason.  But  sins, 
which  turn  from  God  to  follow  the  creature ;  and  vices,  which  are  so  many  devia- 
tions from  the  rule  of  right  reason,  do  not  all  necessarily  run  towards  the  same 
point,  but  may  have  their  several  tendencies  different  one  from  another.  Because 
though  God  be  one,  yet  the  creatures  are  manifold  ;  and  although  the  straight  way 
from  one  place. to  another  can  be  but  one,  yet  there  may  be  many  crooked  turnings, 
by-paths,  and  deviations.  Even  as  truth  is  but  one  and  certain,  but  errors  are 
manifold  and  endless.  4.  The  last  difference  is,  that  the  works  of  the  flesh  are 
expressly  said  "  to  be  manifest  "  ;  but  no  such  thing  is  affirmed  of  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit.  The  most  probable  reasons  of  which  difference  are,  to  my  seeming,  one  of 
these  two  following.  (1)  The  commonness  and  frequency  of  those  above  these 
everywhere  abroad  in  the  world.  The  works  of  the  flesh,  "  adultery,  fornication, 
uncleanness,  wantonness,  idolatry,  witchcraft,  hatreds,  emulation,  debate,  wrath, 
strifes,  seditions,  heresies,  envyings,  murders,  gluttony,  drunkenness,  and  such 
like"  (I  name  them,  because  the  bare  recital  of  them  will  save  me  the  labour  of 
further  proof),  do  so  abound  in  all  places,  that  you  can  scarce  look  beside  them. 
Turn  your  eyes  which  way  you  will,  ye  shall  see  cursed  examples  of  some  or  other 
of  these  every  day,  and  in  every  street,  and  every  corner.  Alas,  the  works  of  the 
flesh  are  but  too  "  manifest !  "  But  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  not  so.  "  Love, 
peace,  gentleness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance,"  and  the  rest — these  are  very  thin 
grown  in  the  world  ;  they  are  rarities  not  everywhere  to  be  met  withal.  Hips  and 
haws  grow  in  every  hedge,  when  choicer  fruits  are  but  in  some  few  gardens ;  and 
every  soil  almost  yields  stones  and  rubbish,  but  gold  and  precious  stones  are  found 
in  very  few  places.  (2)  The  works  of  the  flesh  may  be  said  to  be  manifest, 
and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  not  so,  with  respect  to  our  judgments  of  them,  and 
the  easiness  of  discerning  the  one  sort  more  than  the  other.  (Bishop  Sanderton.) 
On  tlie  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — I.  The  reality  of  the  Spirit's  influence 
upon  the  mind.  That  it  is  possible,  must  surely  be  admitted  by  all.  It  is  the 
highest  reach  of  presumption  to  deny  that  God  can,  in  a  manner  far  beyond  our 
comprehension,  direct  and  control  all  the  secret  springs  and  movements  of  the 
human  soul.  The  only  question  then  is,  whether  He  will,  in  this  way,  exert  His 
power  and  communicate  His  grace.  Scripture  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  as  to  this. 
See  especially  1  Cor.  hi.  16,  17 ;  vi.  19.  II.  The  nature  of  the  Spirit's  influence 
upon  the  mind.  1.  To  lighten  the  understanding,  and  rectify  the  judgment  (2 
Cor.  iv.  6 ;  John  xvi.  13,  14.)  2.  To  awaken  the  slumbering  conscience,  and  to 
subdue  the  obstinate,  rebellious  will.  Sin  is  a  fatal  opiate,  by  which  the  soul  is 
intoxicated,  and  bewildered  with  visionary  pleasures,  and  rendered  insensible  to  its 
danger.  III.  The  absolute  necessity  of  the  Divine  Spirit's  influence.  The 
perfect  purity  of  heaven  forbids  us  to  indulge  the  thought  that  either  sin,  or  those 
who  are  infected  with  it,  can  have  admission  there.  O,  let  it  never  be  forgotten 
that  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  So  great  is  the  change  that  must 
pass  upon  us,  before  we  can  be  made  truly  happy,  that  nothing  short  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  can  produce  it.  This  change,  in  the  Scriptures,  is  called  a  new  birth,  a 
resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  a  new  creature.  1.  It  is  sometimes  called  a  new 
birth  (John  i.  12,  13;  iii.  3.)  2.  Sometimes  the  change  that  must  pass  upon  us 
before  we  can  be  fitted  for  heaven  is  called  a  resurrection  from  the  dead.  3. 
Sometimes  this  great  change  is  called  a  new  creation.  IV.  The  evidence  of  the 
Holt  Spirit's  influence  on  the  mind.  1.  One  evidence  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
special  influence  is  a  strong,  prevailing,  and  permanent  aversion  to  sin,  in  all  its 
kinds  and  degrees.  The  nature  of  the  cause  is  known  by  the  quality  of  the  effects 
produced  by  it.  2.  Another  evidence  of  these  heavenly  influences  on  the  mind  is 
a  spirit  of  humble,  unfeigned,  and  animated  devotion.  3.  Another  evidence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  influence  is  a  supreme  regard  to  the  Word  of  God  as  our  rule,  the 
glory  of  God  as  our  end,  and  the  immediate  presence  of  God  as  our  ultimate  and 
complete  happiness.  4.  Another  evidence  of  the  Spirit's  influence  is  a  sweet 
persuasion  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  and  adoption  into  the  household  of  faith. 
"It  is,"  says  Bishop  Hopkins,  "but  an  airy  assurance,  a  void  evidence,  an 
insignificant  charter  for  heaven,  which  hath  not  on  it  the  print  of  the  Spirit's 


«hap.  v.]  GALATIANS.  895 


real.  Now  the  impress  of  this  seal  is  the  very  image  and  superscription  of  God, 
which,  when  the  heart  is,  like  wax,  made  soft  and  pliable,  is,  in  a  man's  regenera- 
tion, enstamped  upon  it."  V.  I  shall  now  answer  some  objections  which  abb 
usually  urged  aoainst  this  doctrine.  1.  It  has  been  boldly  asserted,  that  none 
were  ever  endowed  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  prophets,  apostles,  and  evangelists. 
But  shall  we  then  deny  that  gracious,  though  ordinary  influence,  which  renovates 
the  mind,  and  which  was  evidently  bestowed  upon  common  believers  as  well  as 
apostles  ?  2.  It  is  said,  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  on  the  mind  is  too  mysterious 
to  be  comprehended,  and  therefore  the  doctrine  which  teaches  it  is  unworthy  to  be 
believed.  Who  then  will  dare,  in  the  fulness  of  his  self-conceit,  to  deny  a  doctrine  of 
Divine  revelation,  which  has  been  the  comfort  of  good  men  in  every  age,  because  it  sur- 
passes his  comprehension  ?  3.  It  is  objected,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Spirit's  influence 
has  a  bad  tendency,  opening  a  door  to  licentiousness,  opposing  the  liberty  of  the 
human  will,  and  discouraging  our  honest  endeavours.  The  whole  of  this  objection 
is  founded  on  a  mistake.  The  same  Scriptures  which  authorize  us  to  expect  the 
Divine  influence,  require  us  to  honour  God  in  the  use  of  His  own  appointed  means. 
(John  Thornton.)  The  transition  from  the  works  of  the  flesh  to  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit : — Have  yon  ever  heard  a  clever  organist  undertaking  to  show  what  can  be 
done  in  the  gymnastics  of  music  !  He  goes  screwing  his  way  up  through  all  the 
ohromatio  scale  with  all  sorts  of  thunderous  conjunction  of  sound  until  he  has 
shown  that  the  organ  is  devilish,  or  you  feel  so,  but  at  last  he  modulates  and  gives 
out  some  rare  strain  such  as  Beethoven  and  Mozart  has  given  birth  to.  So  out 
from  the  cacophony  of  harsh  and  ugly  affections  and  passions  the  text  modulates 
into  the  very  melody  and  musio  of  religion.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit : — L  Contrasts  with  the  produce  of  the  sinful  nature.  II.  Can  only  be 
accounted  fob  by  the  new  life  and  the  new  infuences  of  the  Spirit.     III.  Is 

SWEET,    SERVICEABLE,    AND    ACCEPTABLE,    NOT    ONLY   TO    GOD   BUT   TO    MAN.       (Family 

Churchman.)  I.  The  boil  is  prepared  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  II.  He  quickens 
the  seed — the  truth  which  is  instinct  with  a  Divine  vitality.  III.  He  fosters  the 
life  :  like  sunshine  and  showers  on  the  seed  sown.  IT.  He  matures  the  fruit  : 
creating  for  it  a  congenial  climate.  (Ibid.)  I.  We  have  here  the  inspired  defini- 
tion of  Christianity.  1.  A  great  many  men  have  religion  who  have  no  Christianity. 
il)  They  are  devout,  but  inspired  by  fear.  (2)  Orthodox,  being  learned  in  theology. 
3)  Moral,  being  controlled  by  law.  2.  Christianity  is  a  life  of  liberty,  spirituality, 
and  joyous  love.  II.  This  representation  of  Christianity  is  eminently  fitted 
fob  the  young,  who  are  repelled  by  many  representations.  III.  The  inspiration 
of  the  ministry  is  the  practical  experience  of  the  Spirit  and  the  development 
of  His  fruits.  IV.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  the  antidote  to  infidelity.  1. 
Men  may  question  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  2.  They  cannot  deny  its  practical 
effect.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Hindering  Christianity : — 1.  The  secret  of  Christ's 
power  was  the  goodness  of  God  as  manifested  in  His  character  and  life,  raising  up 
a  permanent  moral  influence  and  capable  of  remoulding  the  character  and  life  of 
man.  2.  Why,  then,  has  Christianity  made  so  little  advance  after  nineteen  cen- 
turies of  history  ?  For  remember  that  the  growth  of  Christianity  does  not  consist 
in  the  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  it  or  the  extension  of  its  organizations,  but  in 
the  development  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  Those  who  have  set  forward 
Christianity  have — I.  Adopted  a  coercive  policy.  But — 1.  You  cannot  coerce  men 
into  loyalty  in  the  State.  2.  You  cannot  coerce  the  growths  of  nature.  3.  Much 
less  can  men  be  coerced  into  love,  joy,  peace,  &o.  II.  Formulated  theological 
and  ECCLEiiiASTiCAL  systems,  and  endeavoured  to  extend  them,  critically,  contro- 
versially, and  in  an  anathematizing  spirit.  But  it  is  just  as  reasonable  as  placing 
violets  and  roses  in  an  atmosphere  of  biting  frost  or  consuming  fire  and  expect 
them  to  grow,  as  for  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  to  develop  in  these  ways.  Ill,  Aimed 
at  enowdedge,  not  charity.  Knowledge  can  only  puff  a  man  up;  charity  will  build 
him  op.  The  knowledge  of  love  may  deceive  a  man  that  he  has  it,  but  will  not 
make  him  loveable ;  and,  the  disunited  state  of  Christendom  being  witness,  has 
not.  IV.  Placed  organic  Christianity  in  the  room  of  personal  Christianity. 
Physical  life  may  be  left  to  organize  itself,  which  it  does  perfectly.  In  Christian 
life  the  loving,  joyous,  peaceful,  &c,  will  make  the  most  harmonious  and  orderly 
Church.  V.  Hidden  the  character  of  Christ,  and  misrepresented  the  character 
of  God.  (Ibid.)  Tlie  fruit  of  the  Spirit  an  element  of  Christian  assurance  : — 
The  last  witness  is  the  comfort  and  contentment  the  conscience  takes  in  doing  good 
works,  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  new  obedience ;  that  though  he  knows 
his  best  doings  are  straitened  with  corruptions  and  imperfections,  yet  because  they 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi».  «. 

are  the  end  of  his  vocation  and  the  justifiers  of  his  faith ;  because  the  gospel 
thereby  is  graced,  wicked  men  amazed,  some  of  them  converted,  the  rest  con- 
founded, weak  Christians  confirmed,  the  poor  relieved,  devils  repining  at  them, 
angels  rejoicing  for  them,  God  Himself  glorified  by  them ;  I  say  because  of 
tuese  and  other  reasons  he  doeth  good  deeds  with  humility  and  cheerfulness, 
and  findeth  a  singular  joy  in  his  soul  resulting  therefrom.  (T.  Fuller, 
D.D.)  The  ultimatum  of  Christian  life: — The  ultimatum  of  all  vegetation  is 
matured  fruit.  You  take  that  oak  tree ;  a  few  months  ago  it  budded  and  blos- 
somed, and  now  you  see  the  matured  acorn  upon  it.  Since  the  appearance  of  the 
little  acorn,  the  tree  has  bent  all  its  energies  towards  furnishing  it  nutriment ;  it 
draws  food  from  its  roots,  and  drinks  in  from  the  atmosphere  all  the  vital  forces, 
and  pours  its  life  into  the  little  acorn.  I  see  that  little  acorn  growing  and  deve- 
loping and  extending  until,  by  and  by,  there  is  a  well-rounded,  ripe,  symmetrical 
acorn ;  and  then  the  tree  goes  back  into  its  winter  quarters.  So  with  all  vegetation. 
Now,  I  grant  that  there  are  many  intervening  difficulties  between  the  bud  and  the 
ripe  fruit.  There  are  worms  that  gnaw  at  the  vitals  of  the  tree ;  there  are  the 
cold  winds  and  the  frosts ;  but  the  tree  is  only  valuable  as  it  overleaps  them  all 
and  matures  the  fruit.  Just  so  the  ultimatum  of  Christian  life  is  the  maturing  of 
Christian  fruitage.  (Sam.  P.  Jones.)  The  analysis  of  grace  : — Dr.  J.  Hamilton 
says  :  "  The  chemist  who  can  analyse  the  fruit  of  the  vine  finds  many  ingredients 
there.  Of  these  no  single  one  nor  any  two  together  would  form  the  juice  of  the 
grape,  but  the  combination  of  all  yields  the  polished  and  delicious  berry  which 
everyone  knows  so  well.  In  the  best  specimens  nine  ingredients  are  found,  but 
that  is  not  a  good  cluster  where  any  is  wanting."  The  application  is  easy. 
Love. — Love,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit: — The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love.  You  know 
what  the  fruit  as  it  hangs  on  the  tree  is.  It  is  the  result  of  many  causes.  Look 
at  the  apple  as  it  hangs  ripe  and  ready  for  the  mouth,  on  the  bough.  What  a 
wonderful  production !  How  symmetrical  its  shape  !  How  beautiful  its  colour  t 
How  mellow  its  substance  I  How  pure  and  gracious  to  the  palate  is  its  juice  1 
Whence  came  it  ?  It  came  from  below  and  from  above.  The  earth  owns  part  of 
it ;  the  sun  owns  part  of  it ;  the  dews  have  a  claim — even  the  wind  and  the  stars 
have  done  something  to  make  it  what  it  is.  A  dozen  ministries — angels  of  the 
earth  and  the  air,  ingenious  and  active,  have  joined  hands  in  its  manufacture. 
Fruit,  then,  is  the  last  result — the  ultimate  product  of  many  forces  acting  con- 
junctively. Fruit  is  not  crude ;  it  is  finished.  It  is  not  a  process ;  it  is  the  end 
of  a  process ;  the  end  of  many  processes ;  the  consummation  to  which  time  and 
cause  have  alike  tended.  Now  there  is  one  result  in  character  which  has  the 
Divine  Spirit  for  its  cause;  it  is  love.  It  may  be  in  embryo;  it  may  be  in  maturity; 
it  may  be  weak  or  strong.  It  may  rule  the  life  wholly ;  it  may  rule  it  only  in  part. 
But  in  whatever  degree  of  growth  it  may  be — to  whatever  point  it  may  have  been 
carried  forward  and  upward,  the  element  and  principle  of  affection  in  human  nature 
never  happens  by  chance,  never  occurs  by  accident.  To  understand  the  works  of 
the  Spirit,  and  how  its  fruits  are  generated  and  ripened,  you  must  understand  the 
nature  on  which  it  works  and  the  forces  in  connection  with  which  its  potency  is 
rendered  efficient.  I  say  forces,  for  human  nature  is  a  forceful  nature.  It  is  a 
co-operative  nature.  It  is  not  played  on  like  an  instrument  of  music  that  has  only 
a  responsive  power ;  it  is  powerful  itself ;  it  is  acted  upon  and  re-acts.  It  has  its 
own  capabilities.  It  is  strong  enough  to  be  resistful,  and  is  essentially  independent. 
A  great  many  think  of  God  only  as  outside  of  themselves — think  of  the  Spirit  as 
coming  down  upon  them  as  winds  come  upon  the  sea,  being  blown  from  afar.  The 
action  of  the  Spirit  is  thus  made  to  seem  instantaneous,  and  the  changes  wrought 
arbitrary.  Many  even  think  that  it  would  in  some  sort  disparage  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  if  its  actions  were  made  in  any  sense  dependent  on  the  human  will,  or  to 
any  considerable  extent  co-operative  with  human  faculties.  But,  friends,  he  who 
exalteth  his  own  power  exalteth  God ;  for  is  not  God  the  maker  of  his  power  ? 
The  father  is  honoured  in  the  honour  of  his  son,  and  the  whole  family  becomes 
distinguished  through  the  glory  of  one.  Let  it  be  known,  then,  to  all  of  you,  that 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  a  co-operative  work.  He  works  in  alliance  with  our  own 
natural  capacity.  Alas  t  that  He  is  often  compelled  to  work  in  resistance  to  it. 
Nor  is  the  saving  work  of  God  sudden.  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  destruction  that  it  is 
always  swift.  God  kills  in  an  instant,  but  He  grows  things  slowly.  The  lightning 
smites  the  tree  in  a  flash,  which  a  hundred  years  with  laborious  chemistry  have 
grown.  Is  it  less  honourable  to  God  that  He  works  through  method  and  climbi 
to  His  consummations  through  spiritual  processes  ?    After  our  way  of  thinking, 


COAT.  T.]  GALATIANS.  897 

the  Spirit's  work  in  man  is  a  slow  work.  Exceptions  there  may  be,  but  swiftness 
of  operation  is  not  the  law.  Human  nature  never  blooms  suddenly.  Some  are 
born  blossoms,  but  those  that  are  born  in  the  bud,  as  most  of  us  were,  sweeten, 
colour,  and  unfold  slowly.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  bring  back  and  reinstate 
in  its  original  regnancy  the  Divine  characteristic  of  loving.  This  is  what  it  is 
striving  to  do  in  your  bosom,  fellow  Christian.  Faith  in  the  Christ  is  valuable, 
because  it  is  the  means,  the  great  and  glorious  means,  of  this  reinstatement.  By 
faith  we  perceive  the  loveliness  of  this  principle;  by  faith  we  are  made  appreciative 
of  it  and  are  filled  with  longing  that  we  may  overflow  with  it ;  by  faith  we  are  thus 
quickened  into  this  new  life  of  concord  and  amiability  and  good-will  toward  men, 
and  hearty  affection  toward  God.  Now,  to  start  with  in  life,  love  is  selfish.  The 
love  of  the  child,  how  unlike  the  love  of  the  mother !  Hence,  we  all  say  that  we 
love  mother  better  as  we  grow  older.  And  why  is  this  true  ?  Because  the  selfish- 
ness which  was  in  our  early  loving  is  eliminated.  To  start  with,  we  loved  our 
mothers  with  our  bodies,  so  to  speak.  We  have  grown  to  love  them  with  our 
minds  and  our  spirits.  Some  of  us  have  had  them  taken  from  us.  In  their  love 
for  us  they  have  passed  out  of  the  body ;  and  we,  too,  in  our  love  for  them  have 
passed  out  of  the  body.  They  are  spirits,  and  we  love  them  with  our  spirit.  And 
thus  has  love  been  perfected  in  us.  The  best  love  is  never  perfect  until  it  becomes 
thus  unselfish.  And  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  I  understand  it,  is  operating  in 
human  hearts  to  this  end.  When  it  is  made  perfect  in  Christ,  or  after  the  manner 
of  Christ's  love,  what  will  it  not  do  f  what  will  it  not  bear  ?  what  will  it  not  give  ? 
And  one  thing,  especially,  is  worthy  of  note  in  respect  to  this  love  which  is  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  in  the  human  heart :  that  it  not  only  prompts  them  and  enables 
them  to  die  for  the  Christ,  and  that  truth,  wide  as  the  world  of  being  and  deep  as 
the  nature  of  things  of  which  He  was  the  embodiment,  and  is  and  will  be  for  ever 
the  cardinal  illustration :  but  it  qualifies  them  to  die  for  it  as  men  receive  a  favour. 
It  was  not  a  task  for  men  and  women  to  give  up  their  mortal  lives  in  evidence  of 
their  faith.  They  counted  it  joy  so  to  do.  They  were  in  love  with  the  immortality 
which  waits  upon  such  sacrifice,  and  death  was  to  them  the  happy  ministry  which 
wedded  them  to  it  for  ever.  What  power  is  this,  that  charges  into  human  nature 
such  sublime  courage ;  gives  to  human  minds  such  forecast  of  wisdom  ;  and  lifts 
human  souls  so  high  that  they  forget  the  earth  and  are  mindful  only  of  heaven  ? 
What  power  is  this  that  renews  the  mind,  transforms  the  spirit,  and  gives  to  us 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  the  sensation  of  angels  and  the  serenity  of  the  skies  T  It 
is  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  Christian  character  that  in  it,  through  the 
work  of  the  Spirit,  is  generated  strength  to  bear  all  things  and  hope  all  things. 
The  courage  that  you  need  is  the  courage  to  live — the  courage  to  bear  yet  a  while 
and  faint  not ;  to  do  this  hopefully,  patiently ;  to  find  happiness  amid  your  tears ; 
to  so  order  your  sorrows  that  they  shall  bloom ;  to  look  at  emptiness  as  if  it  were 
fulness,  and  at  poverty  as  if  it  were  wealth — this  can  only  come  as  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit.  The  love  which  enables  you  to  do  this  must  be  the  love  of  right  things ; 
the  love  of  truth  ;  the  love  of  God.  They  who  have  this  love  have  a  new  sight 
come  to  their  eyes.  They  see  things  far  off  and  far  up  and  far  ahead.  (W.  H. 
Murray,  D.D.)  Love  produced  by  the  Spirit  in  regeneration: — 1. 1  am  to  show 
that  the  Spirit  of  God,  m  regeneration,  produces  nothing  but  love.  He  does, 
indeed,  often  strive  with  sinners,  and  sometimes  very  powerfully,  without  softening 
or  subduing  their  hearts  in  the  least  degree.  He  commonly  alarms  the  fears  and 
awakens  the  consciences  of  those  sinners  whom  He  intends  to  renew,  some  time 
before  He  effectually  changes  their  hearts.  This  He  does  to  prepare  them  for 
regeneration,  in  which  He  forms  them  vessels  of  mercy.  The  only  question  now 
before  us  is,  whether,  in  the  act  of  regeneration,  He  produces  anything  besides 
love.  And  here  we  may  safely  say  that  He  does  not  produce  anything  besides  love 
in  regeneration,  because  there  is  no  need  of  His  producing  any  other  effect  in  that 
saving  change.  Sinners  possess  all  the  natural  powers  and  faculties  which  belong 
to  human  nature,  and  which  are  necessary  to  constitute  them  moral  agents,  before 
they  are  made  the  subjects  of  grace.  Manasseh  was  as  capable  of  doing  good  as  of 
doing  evil,  before  he  was  renewed ;  and  Paul  was  as  capable  of  promoting  as  of 
opposing  the  cause  of  Christ,  before  he  was  converted.  This  is  true  of  all  sinners, 
who  are  as  much  moral  agents,  and  as  proper  subjects  of  moral  government,  before 
as  after  regeneration.  Whenever,  therefore,  the  Divine  Spirit  renews,  regenerates, 
or  sanctifies  them,  He  has  no  ocoasion  of  producing  anything  in  their  minds  besides 
love,  II.  That  love  is  the  effect  which  He  actually  does  produce  in  regeneba- 
110*.    *  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,"  says  the  apostle  in  the  text.    His  words 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbav.  t. 


are  very  plain  and  emphatical.  He  does  not  say  that  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  a 
new  teste,  or  relish,  or  disposition,  or  principle  ;  but  is  love,  and  nothiDg  which  ia 
previous  to  it,  or  the  foundation  of  it.    III.  That  love,  which  the  Holy  Spirit 

PRODUCES   IN    REGENERATION,    IS    THE    ESSENCE    AND    SOURCE    OF  ALL   HOLT  OR  GRACIOUS 

affections.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  regeneration  lays  the  foundation  of  all 
the  exercises  of  grace.  Benevolent  love  is  the  root  from  which  all  holy  feelings 
and  conduct  naturally  spring.  It  produces  everything  which  the  law  requires,  and 
which  is  necessary  to  perfect  obedience.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  produces  love  in 
the  soul  in  which  there  was  nothing  before  but  selfishness,  he  effects  an  essential 
change  in  the  heart,  and  forms  the  subject  of  grace  after  the  moral  image  of  God, 
and  prepares  him  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  this  is  as  great  and  as  good  a 
change  as  can  be  produced  in  the  human  heart.  Conclusion :  1.  If  the  Spirit  of 
God  produces  nothing  but  love  in  regeneration,  then  there  is  no  ground  for  the  dis- 
tinction which  is  often  made  between  regeneration,  conversion,  and  sanctification. 
They  are,  in  nature  and  kind,  precisely  the  same  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  2.  H  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  regeneration  produces  nothing  but  love,  then  men  are  no  more 
passive  in  regeneration  than  in  conversion  or  sanctification.  3.  If  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  regeneration,  produces  nothing  but  love,  or  holy  exercises,  then  the  regenerate 
are  as  dependent  upon  Him  for  their  future,  as  for  their  first,  exercises  of  grace. 
4.  If  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  nothing  but  love  in  regeneration,  then  it  is  no 
more  a  supernatural  work  on  the  part  of  God  than  any  other  Divine  operation  upon 
the  minds  of  men.  5.  If  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  nothing  but  love  in  regenera- 
tion, then  sinners  have  no  more  excuse  for  not  beginning  to  love  God,  than  saints 
have  for  not  continuing  to  love  Him.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  On  holy  love: — 
There  can  scarcely  be  a  more  gross  abuse  of  language,  than  to  call  that  rational 
religion  in  which  the  affections  have  no  share.  It  is  clear,  from  the  Scriptures, 
that  the  heart  is  the  seat  of  true  religion.  The  sincere  Christian  is  animated  and 
distinguished  by  the  grace  of  holy  love.  I.  The  objects  of  this  love.  1.  God  as 
the  source  of  all  being,  and  the  centre  of  all  perfection  and  excellency,  claims  the 
chief  place  in  our  affection.  The  Christian,  being  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his 
mind,  feels  his  heart  pant  after  God.  He  views  the  Lord  as  his  portion,  and  sets 
his  affections  on  things  above.  2.  As  God  is  the  supreme  object  on  which  holy 
love  fixes,  so  creatures  ought  to  have  a  subordinate  measure  of  love,  according  to 
the  degree  in  which  they  bear  His  image.  3.  There  is  a  clear  distinction  between 
a  love  of  complacence  and  a  love  of  benevolence.  By  the  former,  we  delight  in 
God  and  what  resembles  Him  ;  by  the  latter,  we  show  a  regard  for  the  welfare  of 

ad  men,  though  we  detest  their  ways.  In  this  sense,  the  worst  enemies  must  not 
be  shut  out  of  our  affections.  II.  The  leading  properties  of  this  love.  1.  Love 
is  the  purest  principle  of  obedience.  How  many  appear  actuated  in  all  they  do  by 
the  hateful  principle  of  pride.  Surely  it  is  plain,  without  bringing  arguments  to 
establish  the  point,  that  no  works  can  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  such 
as  spring  from  a  principle  of  love,  and  are  directed  to  promote  His  glory.  Wherever 
this  noble  motive  habitually  prevails,  it  will  in  a  good  degree  harmonize  the 
passions,  bring  the  scattered  thoughts  and  purposes  into  subserviency  to  one  grand 
end,  and  produce  a  simplicity  of  intention,  and  uniformity  of  character,  which 
peculiarly  distinguish  the  consistent  Christian.  2.  Holy  love  is  the  strongest  prin- 
ciple of  obedience.  Love  invigorates  and  animates  the  soul.  Many  obstacles 
cannot  destroy  its  force ;  many  waters  cannot  quench  its  fire.  3.  Holy  love  is  the 
most  permanent  principle  of  obedience.  All  kinds  of  religious  affection  are  not 
lasting.  The  fire  on  God's  altar  was  kept  alive  by  being  constantly  fed ;  but  the 
strange  fire  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  was  but  for  a  moment.  Cold  chills  not  unfre- 
quently  follow  feverish  heats.  But  the  love  which  the  true  Christian  feels  to  bis 
God,  and  all  that  bears  the  stamp  of  His  authority  or  likeness,  is  not  a  vapour  in 
the  brain,  or  a  vision  in  the  fancy,  but  a  deep-rooted  principle  in  the  heart.  He 
knows  the  solid  excellency  of  Divine  realities.  "  His  faith  is  not  grounded  on 
slippery  deductions  of  reason,  or  slender  conjectures  of  fancy,  or  on  musty  tradi- 
tions, or  popular  stories  ;  but  on  the  sure  testimonies  of  God."  III.  The  origtm 
of  this  love,  and  the  way  in  which  it  may  be  increased.  1.  It  is  by  the  eyes  of  the 
understanding  being  enlightened  to  see  the  perfections  of  God,  the  excellencies  of 
Christ,  and  the  unspeakable  value  of  eternal  realities,  that  Divine  love  is  kindled 

in  the  soul.  2.  It  is  by  the  exercise  of  living  faith  that  the  flame  of 
holy  love  is   enkindled  and   preserved   in   the  heart.     The  objects  whioh  most 

men   love    are    such    as    strike    the  senses,  or  in    some  way  relate    to    their 

present  interests.     3.  It  is   by  communion  with  God,  and  one  another,  thai 


chap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  839 

holy  love  is  promoted  and  increased.  Concluding  reflections:  1.  How  awful 
is  the  state  of  those  who  are  destitute  of  this  love  1  2.  How  happy  is  their  state,  who 
live  under  the  habitual  and  powerful  influence  of  Divine  love !  Love,  in  the  heart, 
melts  the  stubborn  will  to  sweet  submission,  consumes  the  dross  of  sin,  and 
fits  the  believer  as  a  vessel  of  honour  for  the  Master's  nse.  (John  Thornton.) 
Love: — I.  The  source  of  love.  "Love  is  of  God."  "God  is  love."  II.  Its 
excellence.  1.  It  is  the  life  of  the  soul  and  of  the  moral  universe.  2.  It  is  the 
bond  that  unites  all  holy  intelligences.  3.  It  is  the  supreme  grace.  4.  Its 
production  is  the  end  of  Christ's  mission  and  of  all  religious  ordinances.  5.  It 
renders  all  our  services  acceptable.  6.  Its  excellence  is  manifest  in  its  influence  on 
the  heart  and  life.  (1)  It  casts  out  fear.  (2)  It  expels  whatever  is  inconsistent 
with  itself.  (3)  It  kindles  aspirations  after  holiness.  (4)  It  makes  obedience  easy. 
(5)  It  inspires  self-sacrifice.  (6)  It  makes  the  soul  beautiful.  III.  Characteristics 
op  true  love.  1.  It  is  practical.  2.  It  embraces  God  and  man.  IV.  Love  to 
God.  1.  God  must  be  loved  for  His  own  sake.  2.  God  must  Himself  kindle  our 
love  to  Him.  3.  It  is  capable  of  being  cultivated.  4.  It  leads  to  trust  in  God 
V.  Love  to  the  brethren.  1.  The  badge  of  Christ's  disciples.  2.  Our  love  must 
be  like  Christ's.  3.  We  must  love  what  is  Christlike  in  them.  4.  We  must  love 
them  on  account  of  what  they  are  to  be.     (R.  A.  Bertram)        Love: — I.  The 

NATURE  OF  THIS  LOVE.      II.   The  OBJECTS  ON  WHICH  IT  IS  EXERCISED.       III.    THE  MARES 

op  rr.  I.  The  love  which  stands  first  in  the  apostle's  catalogue  stands  first  also  in 
the  estimate  of  God.  Our  Lord  says,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great 
commandment "  (Kom.  xiii.  10).  This  is  the  grace  of  which  so  beautiful  a  descrip- 
tion is  given  in  1  Cor.  13.  It  is  set  forth  as  a  privilege,  without  which  all  gifts  are 
worthless.  This  love  is  no  natural  product  of  the  human  heart ;  on  the  contrary 
{Rom.  viii.  7 ;  1  John  iv.  7).  II.  The  objects  on  which  this  love  is  exercised. 
These  are  three  principally — 1.  The  Father.  2.  Christ  the  Son.  3.  Our  brother. 
III.  Some  marks  of  this  love.  1.  As  regards  God.  (1)  In  the  desire  to  be  like 
Him — holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  (Ephes.  v.  1).  (2)  In  aiming  at  His  glory. 
(3)  In  delighting  in  communion  with  Him.  2.  As  regards  Christ.  Love  shows 
itself — (1)  In  obedience  (John  xiv.  15).  (2)  In  loving  Christ  still,  though  Providences 
be  dark,  and  all  things  seem  against  us.  3.  As  regards  the  saints,  love  shows  itself 
especially.  (1)  In  praying  one  for  another.  (2)  Bearing  one  another's  burden, 
entering  into  their  troubles,  helping  and  sympathising.  (3)  By  forbearing 
and  forgiving  one  another,  "  even  as  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  hath  forgiven 
you."      (J.   Reeve,  M.A.)  The    Divine    source    of   love  : — As    one    familiar 

with  the  sonatas  and  the  symphonies  of  Beethoven,  while  passing  along 
the  street  in  summer,  gets  from  out  of  the  open  window  a  snatch  of  a  son*; 
or  of  a  piece  that  is  being  played,  catching  a  strain  here  and  another  there, 
and  says  to  himself ,  "  Ah,  that  is  Beethoven  I  I  recognize  that;  it  is  from  such 
and  Buch  a  movement  of  the  Pastoral,"  or  whatever  it  may  be  ;  so  men  in  life  catch 
strains  of  God  in  the  mother's  disinterested  and  self-denying  love ;  in  the  lover's 
glow  ;  in  the  little  child's  innocent  affections.  Where  did  this  thing  come  from  ? 
No  plant  ever  brought  out  such  fruit  as  this.  Nature,  dumb  and  blind,  with  her 
lizards,  and  stones,  and  thousand  accumulations  of  matter,  never  thought  anything 
like  that.  This  and  that  harmony  of  light,  the  few  hints  which  we  see  here  and 
there — these  have  been  sprinkled  into  life,  dropping  from  above.  And  there  is  a 
fountain  where  exist  elements  and  attributes  of  which  these  are  but  the  souvenirs. 
And  to  me  they  all  point  back  to  something  which  we  have  not  seen.  As  birds, 
when  after  moulting  they  begin  to  sing,  break  down  in  mid-song,  and  give  only  a 
snatch  here  and  a  snatch  there  of  the  full  volume  of  their  summer  strains  ;  so  these 
hints,  these  little  tinkling  notes  of  love  on  earth,  beautiful  as  they  are  in  them- 
selves, are  not  perfect,  and  are  not  understood  until  we  trace  them  back,  and  feel 
that  there  is  above  somewhere  One  whose  nature  epitomises  all  these  things.  Go 
and  look  on  the  south  side  of  the  Highlands.  You  shall  see  that,  detached  from 
the  rocks  there,  and  lying  in  a  long  trail,  for  miles  and  miles,  are  blocks  of  syenite, 
or  of  trap,  or  of  granite,  as  the  case  may  be.  And  there  is  many  a  block  which,  if 
you  choose,  you  can  trace  back  to  the  very  spot  where  the  ice  pried  it  out,  or  from 
which  the  flood  or  the  iceberg  drifted  it  along  the  mountain  side.  Now,  as  it  is 
with  those  blocks  of  stone,  so  it  is  with  these  scattered  elements  and  traits  that 
have  drifted  out,  as  it  were,  from  the  mountain  of  God,  and  sweetened  the  house- 
hold, and  refined  civilized  life.  They  are,  after  all,  but  the  outflowing,  the  drift, 
M  it  were,  of  the  great  Divine  Soul,  in  this  world.     (H.  W.  Beecher.)        Love,th* 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

heat  of  the  universe : — It  is  the  heat  of  the  universe.  Philosophers  tell  us  that 
without  heat  the  universe  would  die.  And  love  in  the  moral  universe  is  what  heat 
is  in  the  natural  world.  It  is  the  great  germinating  power.  It  is  the  ripening 
influence.  It  is  the  power  by  which  all  things  are  brought  steadily  up  from  lower 
to  higher  forms.  (Ibid.)  Love  casts  out  fear: — Love  and  fear  are  like  the  sun 
and  moon,  seldom  seen  together.  (Newton.)  Love  lightens  duty : — Love  to  God 
would  make  duties  of  religion  facile  and  pleasant.  I  confess  to  him  that  hath  no 
love  to  God,  religion  must  needs  be  a  burden ;  and  I  wonder  not  to  hear  him  say, 
"What  a  weariness  is  it  to  serve  the  Lord."  It  is  like  rowing  against  the  tide. 
But  love  oils  the  wheels ;  it  makes  duty  a  pleasure.  Why  are  the  angels  so  swift 
and  winged  in  God's  service,  but  because  they  love  Him  ?  Jacob  thought  seven 
years  but  little  for  the  love  he  did  bear  to  Rachel.  Love  is  never  weary ;  he  who 
loves  money  is  not  weary  of  toiling  for  it ;  and  he  who  loves  God  is  not  weary  of 
serving  Him.  (,T  Watson.)  Nothing  is  difficult  to  love:  it  will  make  a 
man  cross  his  own  inclinations  to  pleasure  those  whom  he  loves.  (Archbishop 
Tillotson.)  Labours    of   love    light: — It    is    of    the    utmost    importance    to 

keep  up  our  interest  in  the  holy  work  in  which  we  are  engaged,  for 
the  moment  Tour  interest  flags,  the  work  will  become  wearisome.  Hum- 
boldt says  that  the  copper-coloured  native  of  Central  America,  far  more 
accustomed  than  the  European  traveller  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  climate,  yet 
complains  more  when  upon  a  journey,  because  he  is  stimulated  by  no  interest. 
The  same  Indian  who  would  complain,  when  in  botanizing  he  was  loaded  with  a 
box  full  of  plants,  would  row  his  canoe  fourteen  or  fifteen  hours  together  against  the 
current  without  a  murmur,  because  he  wished  to  return  to  hia  family.  Labours  of 
love  are  light.  Routine  is  a  bad  master.  Love  much,  and  you  can  do  much.  Impos- 
sibilities disappear  when  seal  is  fervent.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Love  ennobles  :^- 
True  love  alone  can  awaken  and  evoke  all  the  nobility  and  grandeur  of  human 
nature.  Then  we  are  like  musical  instruments  touched  by  a  master's  hand.  That 
organ  yonder,  many  fingers  have  moved  over  its  keys  and  drawn  out  its  stops ;  but 
the  harmonies  have  not  surprised  us,  our  listening  has  not  even  deepened  into 
interest.  But  one  day  a  stranger  came  and  sat  before  it,  and  presently  rich, 
exquisite  melodies  began  to  pour  forth,  new  and  wondrous  depths  and  changes  of 
tone  trembled  in  the  air  and  thrilled  our  souls.  It  seemed  like  a  living  thing 
interpreting  the  secrets  of  our  hearts,  bo  that  we  hardly  dared  to  breathe  lest  we 
should  destroy  the  charm.  What  a  revelation  that  was  1  We  never  dreamed  that 
the  old  instrument  could  discourse  such  marvellous  strains.  But  the  capacity  was 
there,  only  the  soul  of  the  musician  was  needed  to  inspire  it.  Thus  too  can  love 
elicit  in  answer  to  its  skilful  touch  the  grandest  responsive  harmonies  from  the 
lowliest  human  heart.  And  it  is  by  love — God's  love — that  our  great  nature  shall 
reveal  all  its  greatness.  (W.  Braden.)  Test  of  love : — A  loving  wife,  when  her 
husband  returns  home  from  a  far  country,  as  soon  as  she  is  sensible  of  his  approach 
or  hears  his  voice,  although  she  be  ever  so  much  engaged  in  business,  or  forcibly 
detained  from  him  in  the  midst  of  a  crowd,  yet  her  heart  is  not  withheld  from  him, 
but  leaps  over  all  other  thoughts  to  think  on  her  husband  who  is  returned.  It  is 
the  same  with  souls  that  love  God ;  let  them  be  ever  so  busy,  when  the  remem- 
brance of  God  comes  near  them,  they  lose  almost  the  thought  of  all  things  else, 
for  joy  to  see  that  this  dear  remembrance  is  returned ;  and  this  is  an  extremely 
good  sign.  (Francis  de  Sales.)  Love,  the  test  of  discipleship  : — So  peculiar  is 
this  blessing  to  the  gospel,  that  Christ  appoints  it  for  the  badge  and  cognisance  by 
which  they  should  not  only  know  one  another,  but  even  strangers  should  be  able  to 
know  them  from  any  other  sect  and  sort  of  men  in  the  world.  A  nobleman's 
servant  is  known,  as  far  as  he  can  well  be  seen,  by  the  coat  on  his  back,  whose  man 
he  is ;  so,  says  Christ,  shall  all  men  know  you,  by  your  mutual  love  that  you 
retain  to  Me  and  My  gospel.  (W.Gurnall.)  A  sermon  to  wives: — I.  Lovb  toub 
husband,  he  can  beat  you  in  argument  and  stubbornness,  but  you  can  beat  him  in 
love.  II.  Make  totjb  homes  joyous,  and  you  will  keep  your  husbands  at  home. 
III.  Be  peaceable  and  there  will  be  no  domestic  jangles.  Let  others  do  all  the 
quarrelling.  IV.  Beab  with  yoob  household  and  you  will  conquer  if  you  suffer 
long  enough.  V.  Be  gentle,  and  like  the  gentle  horse  all  work  will  be  easy.  VI. 
Be  temperate,  and  do  not  live  beyond  your  means.  (Sam  P.  Jones.)  Love 
jirst: — Love  is  the  fruitful  mother  of  [bright  children.  "A  multitude  of  babes 
around  her  hung,  Playing  their  sport  that  joyed  her  to  behold."  Her  sons  are 
Strength,  and  Justice,  and  Self-control,  and  Firmness,  and  Courage,  and  Patience, 
and  many  more  besides ;  and  her  daughters  are  Pity  with  her  sad  eyes,  and  Gentle- 


chap.  ▼.]  GALATIAN8.  403 

ness  with  her  silvery  voice,  and  Mercy  whose  sweet  face  makes  sunshine  in  the 
shade  of  death,  and  Humility  all  unconscious  of  her  loveliness ;  and  linked  hand 
in  hand  with  these,  all  the  radiant  band  of  sisters  that  men  call  Virtues  and  Graces. 
These  will  dwell  in  our  hearts,  if  Love,  their  mighty  mother,  be  there.  If  we  are 
without  her  we  shall  be  without  them.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Nature  is  love  :— 
And  all  things  are  possessed  with  tbe  spirit  of  giving.  Flowers  spend  their 
strength  that  they  may  make  the  air  fragrant ;  fountains  become  streams,  that  they 
may  water  the  valleys ;  trees  give  us  foliage,  blossom,  fruit,  and  beauty ;  the  clouds 
weep  over  us,  swell,  dissolve,  and  give  themselves  away ;  the  distant  heavens  send 
down  their  light ;  the  universe  is  instinct  with  the  free,  generous,  glowing  spirit  of 
love.  (Thomas  Jones.)  Love :— There  is  the  great  machine  of  life,  standing 
ready  in  all  its  beauty  and  power,  with  its  wide  open  senses,  its  advising  mind,  its 
warning  conscience,  its  governing  will ;  with  the  mighty  flood  of  spiritual  power 
pouring  into  it  from  above ;  and  its  first  fruit,  the  subtle  influence  which  per- 
vades it,  the  direction  given  to  it,  is  love.  For  that  Holy  Spirit  of  order,  as  He 
pours  His  influence  into  us,  has  a  definite  work  for  our  energy  to  spend  itself  upon, 
amidst  all  the  vast  and  complicated  machinery  of  the  world;  and  love  is  the 
initial,  the  foundation  motive,  which  is  to  start  our  force,  our  passions,  our  motives, 
our  imagination,  our  intellect,  our  strength,  into  their  proper  groove  amidst  the 
great  labyrinth-scheme  of  the  Providential  working  of  God.  For  love  means, 
without  any  attempt  at  a  definition,  a  giving  out  of  self  to  God,  to  Man,  to  Nature. 

"  We  live  by  admiration,  hope,  and  love." 

And  love  secures  that  all  this  splendid  machinery  and  endowment  of  strength  shall 
be  used  for  the  right  objects ;  not  for  self-advantage  or  self-display,  not  for  rivahy, 
or  in  the  interests  of  pride ;  but  that  it  shall  be  at  the  disposal  of  God,  the  disposal 
of  man,  and  of  the  world,  for  good ;  and  this  not  by  an  effort,  not  by  a  foroed 
resolution  of  surly  resignation,  but  in  a  bright  spirit  of  instinctive  willingnens. 
Yes,  there  is  no  doubt  about  it ;  if  we  are  spiritual ;  the  first  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
will  be  love.  One  glance  will  be  sufficient  to  show  us  the  importance  of  love  as  a 
motive  principle,  the  strength  of  this  loving  nature  becoming  fulfilled  with  the 
growing  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  It  'is  very  hard  to  do  God's  will :  it  is  harder  still 
sometimes  to  love  it.  We  talk  in  a  helpless  way  of  resignation,  as  we  feel  ourseltts 
tossed  up  and  down,  and  whirled  hither  and  thither  in  the  irresistible  currents  of 
uncontrollable  force.  But  the  spiritual  man  wants  something  more  than  resig- 
nation to  circumstances  which  he  cannot  control ;  he  wants  love,  not  to  wish  them, 
otherwise — a  far  higher  step  Love  is  just  that  spirit  in  which  a  man  offers  him- 
self entirely  to  God,  •«  0  God,  I  offer  myself  wholly  to  Thee,  and  then  to  whatso- 
ever work  Thou  givest  me  to  do."  And  equally  true  is  it  if  we  look  towards  our 
fellow-men,  that  love  is  a  foundation  virtue.  Ah!  love  throws  open  wide  ttll 
those  points  of  contact  with  our  friend  and  our  neighbour,  that  is  with  the  world ; 
and  does  it  not  need  love  ?  "  Nothing  but  the  infinite  pity  is  sufficient  for  the 
infinite  pathos  of  human  life."  And  the  Spirit  pours  into  the  great  machinery  of 
our  being,  which  finds  it  only  too  easy  to  be  rough  and  hard,  the  germ  of  that 
"  infinite  pity  "  in  His  gift  of  love.  "  Love  your  enemies."  Love  is  not  a  weak 
word,  or  a  weak  emotion,  and  never  can  be.  Love  knows  how  to  send  for  its  two 
body-guards,  resentment  and  justice,  and  to  prevent  any  enfeebling  of  its  strength 
or  diminishing  of  its  power.  There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  love  of  our  enemies, 
and  nothing  short  of  it,  is  required  of  us.  And  further,  perhaps  we  may  believe 
that  this  Love  will  develop  itself  within  us,  when  our  powers  are  working  rightly 
under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  perhaps  this  principle  of  love  should 
be  carried  further  still.  Perhaps  our  Master  would  have  us  feel  that  we  ought  to* 
move  amidst  what  we  call  Nature  with  a  loving  tread,  as  a  mediator  between  Him 
and  the  lower  creation,  to  discover,  to  develop,  and  mature  all  the  varied  resources 
of  the  world,  and  to  try,  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  roll  away  some  of  that  failure 
(fiaraioTr]Q),  which  has  passed  through  from  us  to  them,  who  share  in  the  sorrows 
of  the  Fall,  as  they  also  share  in  the  hope  of  Eedemption.  Yes  ;  surely  this  love, 
this  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  will  carry  us  as  far  as  this.  Let  us  try  now  and  see  one  or 
two  characteristics  of  love,  one  or  two  signs  of  its  indwelling,  abiding  presence. 
First  of  all  love  will  be  thoughtful.  "  If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love 
one  another."  How  much  thoughtfulness  may  we  trace  in  the  love  of  God !  "  God 
so  loved  us."  There  is  all  the  thoughtfulness  which  lies  around  our  creation,  the 
beauty  of  the  world  we  live  in,  the  wonderful  adaptation  of  our  life,  the  daily 

26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

tenderness  and  forethought  of  God,  who  clothes  the  lily,  who  feeds  the  ravens,  and 
marks  the  fall  of  the  sparrow  to  the  ground,  who  bids  us  cast  out  our  cares  and  lay 
aside  anxiety,  for  He  is  caring  for  us,  and  marking  all  our  needs  and  wants.  Or, 
look  again,  if  we  may  say  so  with  reverence,  at  all  the  thoughtfulness  which  lies 
around  our  Bedemption.  Or  look  once  more  at  the  thoughtfulness  which  surrounds 
our  sanctification.  And  so,  must  not  our  love  be  equally  thoughtful  t  Must  we 
not  try  to  do  all  we  can  to  open  up  life  to  our  fellow-men  ?  Ought  we  not  to  be 
thoughtful  in  trying  to  help  on  all  those  special  works  of  thoughtful  love  which  are 
in  the  world,  such  as  schools,  and  penitentiaries,  and  hospitals,  and  the  like  ?  And 
a  second  characteristic  of  love  will  be  sacbifice.  Love  is  ready  at  any  moment  to 
sacrifice  itself.  Think  how  our  Divine  Lord  and  Master  gave  up  His  quiet  and  His 
retirement,  His  food  and  His  sleep,  at  the  calls  of  love.  Think  how  patient  He  was 
with  the  misconception,  the  ignorance,  and  the  unbelief  which  He  encountered  ! 
Ah,  yes  I  It  is  good  for  us  to  think  of  all  the  work  done  out  of  sight  for  this  hungry, 
selfish  world.  It  is  good  for  us  to  think  of  those  who  labour  in  the  deep  mines  of 
life,  that  we  may  be  warmed  and  enlightened,  of  those  who  work  the  hidden 
machinery,  that  we  may  cut  the  waves  more  freely,  and  barter  and  exchange  in  the 
community  of  social  commerce.  It  is  good  for  us  to  think  of  the  missionary  toiling 
under  the  burning  sun  of  Africa,  leaving  home  and  kindred  and  advancement,  that 
he  may  spread  among  the  heathen  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Wherever 
we  see  it,  wherever  we  find  it,  self-surrender  is  a  beautiful  thing  ;  it  is  the  second 
characteristic  of  that  fruit  of  the  Spirit  growing  within,  which  is  love.  And  a 
third  characteristic  is  surely  tjnweabiedness.  "  Having  loved  His  own  which  were 
in  the  world,  He  loved  them  unto  the  end."  Ah,  yes !  That  continual  uninter- 
rupted love  is  hard  and  difficult  to  maintain  when  the  child  of  our  love  ceases  to 
be  interesting ;  when  it  is  rough  and  uncouth,  and  as  yet  unable  to  come  back  to  us 
with  any  return  in  its  hands.  It  is  difficult  to  love  on  in  disappointment  after 
disappointment.  (W.  C.E.Newbolt.)  Joy. — Joy,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit: — It  is  a  very 
fortunate  thing  that  the  assertion  that  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  joy  is  in  the  Bible : 
for  if  it  were  not,  it  is  the  last  thing  that  many  people  would  associate  with  the 
Spirit.  To  many  the  Spirit  has  very  little  ministry  on  the  earth  save  to  convict 
sinners  of  their  sins  and  sanctify  saints.  They  conceive  of  Him  as  a  peripatetic 
that  travels  around  among  the  churches  producing  what  is  known  as  revivals.  His 
chief  work  seems  to  these  people  to  be  among  the  sinners,  or  the  saints  that  have 
fallen  from  grace.  To  startle  these  from  their  lethargy,  to  strike  them  through  and 
through  with  remorse,  to  fill  their  eyes  with  tears  and  their  mouths  with  groanings, 
is  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  That  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  make  a  person  happy — 
actually  and  positively  light-hearted : — that  His  aim  is  to  add  to  the  laughter  of  the 
world,  to  its  pleasures  and  its  enjoyments,  has  never  occurred  to  these  people  as  among 
the  possibilities.  Beligion  to  them  means  a  certain  strict,  decorous,  and  godly  way  of 
living ;  but  that  it  means  a  happy  way  of  living — if  to  happiness  you  give  the  same  sig- 
nificance that  other  people  give  it — has  never  occurred  to  them.  In  the  first  place,  it 
is  impossible  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  produce  or  seek  to  produce  in  human 
nature  any  result  that  is  not  in  entire  harmony  with  the  Divine  Nature.  The  Spirit 
seeks  to  make  man  like  God — to  bring  the  human  nature  into  nearer  and  nearer 
similitude  with  the  Divine.  If  we  are  made  joyous  by  the  Spirit,  then  is  it  certain 
that  God  Himself  is  a  joyous  Being.  There  is  one  conclusion,  the  proof  of  which 
runs  like  a  cord  spun  from  wool  of  gold  through  the  entire  woof  of  things,  and  the 
entire  woof  of  time ;  and  which,  therefore,  no  one  who  discerns  the  true  nature  of 
things  and  reads  aright  the  lessons  of  time,  can  deny ;  and  this  conclusion  is,  that 
the  aim  and  object  of  all  God's  creation  is  for  His  own  happiness,  through  the 
happiness  of  the  creatures  He  has  made.  And  this  makes  His  own  happiness  self- 
receiving  indeed,  but  most  royally  unselfish.  For  he  who  labours  for  self  only  in 
labours  for  others,  treads  that  broad  mosaic  of  right-doing,  or  righteousness,  whose 
pavement  is  finer  than  if  inlaid  with  stars ;  and  which  stretohes  in  beauty  through 
the  eternity  of  things  as  to  their  extent,  and  the  eternity  of  time  as  to  its  duration. 
But  one  might  say,  "  If  God  created  the  world  and  man  for  happiness,  how  is  it  that 
misery  has  come  upon  the  earth  ;  and  sorrows,  from  which  there  is  no  deliverance 
as  yet,  have  come  upon  man  ?  "  I  answer  :  These  miseries  are  the  result  of  sin 
which  has  broken  in  upon  and  disrupted  the  state  of  peace  which  was,  and  is  still, 
the  normal  state  of  things.  If  you  say  farther :  "  But  how  could  sin  come  into  the 
world  if  God  is  all-powerful  and  all-wise,  and  its  coming  brought  interruption  to 
His  plan,  and  hence  disappointment  to  Himself  ?  "  I  answer  frankly :  Of  this  I 
know  nothing ;  and  furthermore  it  is  safe  to  say,  that  of  this  no  one  knows  any- 


ckap.  v.]  GALATIANS.  403 

thing.  Conjectures  have  been  made  and  may  he  made.  But  in  respect  to  deep 
spiritual  truth  conjecture  availeth  nothing.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  it  is  said,  is  joy ; 
but  the  results  of  God  as  wrought  in  nature  and  man,  are  not  arbitrarily  bestowed  : 
they  come  in  the  way  of  a  process  and  spring  from  a  cause.  The  Christ  oould  say, 
"  My  peac,  I  leave  with  you,"  because  the  causes  that  made  His  bosom  peaceful  He 
had  implanted  in  their  bosoms.  If  I  should  collect  seeds  of  all  the  flowers  in  my 
garden  and  give  them  into  a  neighbour's  hand,  or  go  down  and  plant  them  in  that 
neighbour's  garden,  I  could  go  to  him  and  say,  "  Neighbour,  my  flowers  I  have 
given  unto  you."  So  the  results  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  human  nature  are  results,  not 
gifts.  And  the  joy  which  the  Spirit  gives  to  us  comes  as  the  outgrowth  of  a  cause 
or  causes  that  He  has  implanted  within  our  bosoms.  If  you  sing,  is  it  not  because 
you  have  the  capacity  and  the  desire  of  song?  If  you  laugh,  is  it  not  because  your 
mouth  is  framed  for  laughter,  and  your  spirit  capable  of  delight  ?  If  you  have  joy, 
is  it  not  because  the  cause  or  causes  of  joy  have  been  born  within  you  ?  Yea,  is  it 
not  because  the  well-spring  of  gladness  itself  has  been  opened  and  set  flowing  in 
your  hearts  ?  Happiness  is  not  given  to  us ;  we  grow  up  into  it.  Misery  is  not  an 
infliction ;  it  is  a  self -generated  state.  The  Christ  said,  in  speaking  to  His  followers, 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you ;  "  and  thereby  did  He  teach  us  that  the  happi- 
ness of  the  heavenly  state  comes  through  interior  development.  Now,  among  the 
causes  of  joy  which  result  from  the  Spirit's  work  within  us,  is,  first  of  all,  perhaps, 
an  increase  of  spiritual  discernment.  What  a  pleasure  it  is  to  grow  in  mental 
vision  ! — to  feel  that  you  are  able  to  look  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  heart  of  things. 
Now,  the  Spirit  makes  man  wise.  It  co-operates  with  the  natural  faculties  and 
gives  them  that  instruction  in  observation  and  discernment  that  they  need.  Did 
you  ever  think  that  most  of  the  misery  of  life  can  be  traced  to  this  Jack  of  right 
vision  in  people — this  lack  of  accurate  discernment  as  to  the  value  of  things  ?  One 
man  looks  to  the  wine-cup  and  sees  happiness  in  it.  Oh,  if  he  could  see  the  snake 
that  is  in  it !  If  he  could  see  the  torture  and  the  torment  that  are  in  it ;  the  ruin 
it  will  bring  to  his  reputation  ;  the  woe  it  shall  work  to  his  family  ;  the  overthrow 
which  it  shall  bring  to  his  honour ;  the  disgrace  and  the  beggary  that  lurk  in  that 
cup,  do  you  think  he  would  drink  ?  And  this  is  why  the  Spirit  of  God  is  so  effica- 
cious in  its  work  of  reforming  drunkards.  It  brings  a  revelation  to  them — a  reve- 
lation which  they  need  and  which  they  had  not ;  and  which  having,  compels  them 
to  reform.  It  gives  unto  him  the  sight  to  see  the  loveliness  and  the  nobleness  of  a 
wise  ordering  of  his  habits  ;  it  takes  deceit  out  of  temptation,  and  causes  him  to 
perceive  the  danger  of  yielding  thereto.  (W.  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  The  Christian's 
joy : — I.  The   grounds  and  reasons  of  the   Christian's   jot,  and   the  way   in 

WHICH   IT   SPRINGS   FROM   THE    INFLUENCE  OF  THE    HOLT  SPIRIT.       1.    He  has   aCCeSS  to 

all  the  blessings  of  the  great  salvation  procured  by  Christ.  2.  The  Christian  has 
cause  to  rejoice  in  the  warrant  which  he  possesses  of  claiming  God  as  his  portion. 
It  is  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  we  are  enabled  to  claim  God  as  our 
God.  It  is  the  very  nature  of  Divine  grace  to  inspire  a  humble  and  holy  confidence. 
"  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts, 
crying,  Abba,  Father."  II.  The  qualities  of  that  jot  which  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit.  1.  This  joy  is  sincere  and  refined.  Much  of  what  is  called  joy  in  the 
world  is  little  better  than  an  illusive  show.  Pleasure  is  the  profligate's  great 
Diana.  To  this  gay  goddess  he  sacrifices  his  health,  property,  time,  talents,  com- 
fort, credit,  present  peace,  and  future  happiness.  The  joy  of  the  believer,  issuing 
from  the  purest  springs,  is  suited  to  the  noble  faculties  and  sublime  hopes  of  the 
heaven-born  soul :  it  is  what  the  understanding  approves,  and  the  conscience  allows. 
2.  That  joy  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  is  refreshing  and  invigorating.  We  are 
passing  through  a  wilderness,  to  "  seek  a  city  that  hath  foundations,  whose  builder 
and  maker  is  God.'  As  sojourners,  we  are  therefore  subject  to  many  toils,  dangers, 
and  trials.  "  Without  are  fightings,  within  are  fears."  Yet  we  are  not  left  desti- 
tute and  comfortless.  God  has  both  a  kingdom  for  them  that  love  Him,  and  many 
rich  blessings  to  cheer  us  while  we  are  in  the  way  to  it.  With  a  cordial  composed 
of  ingredients  brought  from  the  celestial  country,  and  mingled  with  consummate 
wisdom,  the  languid,  drooping  spirit  is  quickened  and  filled  with  holy  resolution 
and  ardour.  The  Christian  traveller  never  makes  so  much  progresses  when  he 
goes  on  his  way  rejoicing.  3.  That  joy,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  is  solid  and 
lasting.  Dion  Pruseus  tells  us,  that  when  the  Persians  had  got  a  victory,  they 
would  pick  out  the  noblest  slave,  make  him  a  king  for;  three  days,  clothe  him  with 
royal  robes,  and  feast  him  with  all  kinds  of  dainties  and,  at  last,  put  him  to  death 
m  a  sacrifice  to  folly.    Such  is  the  fate  of  the  gay  profligate.    He  has,  at  most  bat 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

a  short  season  of  mirth  and  mock  majesty,  accompanied  with  the  terrors  of  a 
guilty  conscience,  anticipating  his  final  doom.  But  the  Christian  has  joy  in  review, 
joy  in  possession,  and  still  brighter  joy  in  prospect.  III.  Answers  to  objections. 
1.  Nathanael  exclaimed,  "  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  "  And  too 
many  seem  to  think,  neither  profit  nor  pleasure  can  come  from  the  religion  of  the 
despised  Nazarene.  Let  the  reader  be  on  his  guard  against  misapprehensions  and 
misrepresentations  of  religion.  Gross  ignorance  and  slavish  fear  produce  many 
false  notions  and  absurd  practices.  2.  But  perhaps  the  objector  may  ask,  Do  not 
the  Scriptures  require  us  to  take  up  the  cross  daily,  <fec.  ?  Can  the  deeps  of  humilia- 
tion, the  tears  of  penitence,  and  the  toils  of  zealous,  unabated  exertion,  be  consis- 
tent with  comfort  and  joy?  Certainly  they  are.  The  design  of  those  precepts 
which  call  us  to  subdue  pride,  restrain  corrupt  passions,  and  root  out  evil  habits, 
is  to  conform  us  to  the  Divine  will,  and  fit  us  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  3.  Some 
persons,  from  a  natural  debility,  have  their  trembling  nerves  exceedingly  shaken, 
and  their  spirits  greatly  depressed,  by  the  slightest  accidents.  When  symptoms  of 
this  unhappy  weakness  appear  in  pious  people,  many  cry  out,  *  *  These  are  the  fruits 
of  religion.  Their  prayers  have  brought  them  into  a  sad  state  of  moping  melan- 
choly." But  tbe  truth  is,  many  of  the  depressions  and  fears  which  are  imputed  to 
religion  as  the  cause,  have  no  connection  with  it.  They  have  their  seat  in  the  body, 
rather  than  in  the  soul,  I  shall  conclude  with  an  exhortation  addressed  to  three 
classes  of  persons.  1.  I  shall  address  those  who  neither  possess,  nor  desire,  that 
joy  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  2.  I  shall  address  those  who  possess  not,  but 
desire  that  joy  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  3.  I  shall  address  those  who  possess 
that  joy  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  but  have  to  lament  that  it  is  so  much 
deadened  and  interrupted.  That  you  may  have  this  blessing  in  a  richer  measure, 
let  me  exhort  you  to — 1.  Exercise  yourselves  daily,  to  keep  a  conscience  void  of 
offence,  both  towards  God  and  man.  2.  Employ  all  your  time,  your  talents,  and 
privileges,  in  zealous  endeavours  to  do  good,  and  promote  the  Divine  glory.  3.  Be 
often  renewing  your  covenant-engagements  with  God.  (John  Thornton.)  Joy  in 
Jesus : — Three  hundred  years  ago,  a  martyr  was  burned  for  his  religion  in  the  city 
of  Borne.  He  must  have  felt  the  truth  of  the  words  just  quoted  ;  for  the  last  letter 
that  he  wrote  to  his  friends,  just  before  his  death,  he  dated,  not  from  prison, 
but  "  from  the  most  delightful  pleasure-garden."  In  that  letter  he  wrote  thus : 
"  Who  will  believe  that  which  I  now  state  ?  In  a  dark  hole,  I  have  found  cheer- 
fulness ;  in  a  place  of  bitterness  and  death,  I  have  found  rest,  and  the  hope  of 
salvation.  Where  others  weep,  I  have  fouaid  laughter ;  where  others  fear,  I  have 
found  strength.  Who  will  believe  that  in  a  state  of  misery  I  have  had  great  plea- 
sure ;  that  in  a  lonely  corner  I  have  had  glorious  company,  and  in  the  hardest 
bonds,  perfeot  repose  ?  All  these  things  Jesus,  my  Saviour,  has  granted  me.  He 
is  with  me ;  He  comforts  me ;  He  fills  me  with  joy ;  He  drives  bitterness  from  me, 
and  gives  me  strength  and  consolation."  (Dr.  Newton.)  Christians  a  joyful 
people  : — There  is  a  room  in  Borne  that  is  filled  with  the  busts  of  the  emperors.  I 
have  looked  at  their  heads;  they  look  like  a  collection  of  prize-fighters  and 
murderers.  Brutal  passions  and  cruel  thoughts  deprived  the  lords  of  Borne  of  all 
chance  of  joy.  Turn  now  to  the  poor  hunted  Christians,  and  read  the  inscriptions 
left  by  them  in  the  catacombs ;  they  are  so  calm  and  peaceful  that  they  say  instinc- 
tively, "  A  joyous  people  were  wont  to  gather  here."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Benefit* 
of  joy : — "  Why  should  Christians  be  such  a  happy  people  ?  Why,  it  is  good  in  all 
ways.  It  is  good  for  our  God ;  it  gives  Him  honour  among  the  sons  of  men  when 
we  are  glad.  It  is  good  for  us ;  it  makes  us  strong.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength."  It  is  good  for  the  ungodly  ;  for  when  they  see  Christians  glad,  they  long 
to  be  believers  themselves.  It  is  good  for  our  fellow  Christians ;  it  comforts  them 
and  tends  to  cheer  them.  Whereas,  if  we  look  gloomy  we  shall  spread  the  disease, 
and  others  will  be  wretched  and  gloomy  too.  For  all  these  reasons,  and  for  many 
more  that  can  be  given,  it  is  a  good  and  pleasant  thing  that  a  believer  should  delight 
himself  in  God.  (Ibid.)  Joy  is  the  response  of  each  of  the  higher  faculties  of  a 
man's  soul  when  it  is  brought  up  to  concert  pitch.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Can  you 
give  any  special  directions  how  we  are  to  get  a  joy  when  we  have  not  one  ?  We  reply, 
no  man  can  make  the  sun  rise,  but  he  can  go  into  the  sunshine ;  we  can  make  our  dark 
room  bright  by  opening  the  shutters  and  letting  in  the  day.  We  often  think  c  f  a  state 
we  want  to  remove,  and  not  of  those  things  that  will  remove  it.  (T.  T.  Lynch. )  The 
joy  of  the  Christian  man  in  the  darksome  time  is  that,  like  the  lark,  he  sings  in  the 
rain  as  well  as  in  the  sunshine.  (Ibid.)  The  relation  of  joy  to  love  : — In  the  Supreme 
Nature  the  two  capacities  of  perfect  love  and  perfect  joy  are  indivisible.    Holiness 


cm*.  T.]  GALATIANS.  405 

and  happiness,  says  an  old  divine,  are  two  several  notions  of  one  thing.  Equally 
inseparable  are  the  notions  of  opposition  to  love  and  opposition  to  bliss.  Unless, 
therefore,  the  heart  of  a  created  being  is  at  one  with  the  heart  of  God,  it  cannot  but 
be  miserable.  (A.  H.  Hollam.)  Christian  joy  : — The  farthest  that  any  of  the 
philosophers  went  in  the  discovery  of  blessedness  was  but  to  come  to  that — to  pro- 
nounce  that  no  man  could  be  called  blessed  before  his  death  ;  not  that  they  had 
found  what  kind  of  better  blessedness  they  went  to  after  death,  but  that  still,  till 
death,  they  were  sure  every  man  was  subject  to  new  miseries,  and  interrup- 
tions of  anything  which  they  could  call  blessedness.  The  Christian  philosophy 
goes  farther  :  it  shows  us  a  perfecter  blessedness  than  any  conceived  for  the  next 
life  also.  The  pure  in  heart  are  blessed  already,  not  only  comparatively,  that  they 
are  in  a  better  way  of  blessedness  than  others  are,  but  actually,  in  a  present  posses- 
sion of  it ;  for  this  world  and  the  next  world  are  not,  to  the  pure  in  heart,  two 
houses,  but  two  rooms,  a  gallery  to  pass  through  and  a  lodging  to  rest  in,  in  the 
same  house,  which  are  both  under  one  roof,  Christ  Jesus.  So  the  joy  and  the  sense 
of  salvation  which  the  pure  in  heart  have  here  is  not  a  joy  severed  from  the  joy  of 
heaven,  but  a  joy  that  begins  in  us  here,  and  continues,  and  accompanies  us  thither, 
and  there  flows  on,  and  dilates  itself  to  an  infinite  expansion.  (John  Donne,  D.D.) 
There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  joy  of  the  Christian  and  the  joy  of  the  world- 
ling : — The  one  is  quick  and  violent,  like  a  flash  of  lightning ;  the  other  is  steady 
and  abiding,  as  the  light  of  a  fixed  star.  The  Christian's  joy  is  like  the  sea  shells 
in  the  depths  of  ocean,  which  lie  undisturbed  by  the  violence  of  the  waves.  There 
reigns  within  a  holy  calm  which  comes  from  Christ.  (J.  G.  Pilkington.)  Duty 
of  joy  : — Christians,  it  is  your  duty  not  only  to  be  good,  but  to  shine ;  and,  of  all 
the  lights  which  you  kindle  on  the  face,  joy  will  reach  farthest  out  to  sea,  where 
troubled  mariners  are  seeking  the  shore.  Even  in  your  deepest  griefs,  rejoice  in 
God.  As  waves  phosphoresce,  let  joys  flash  from  the  swing  of  the  sorrows  of  your 
souls.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Of  joy  : — 1.  It  is  a  delightful  passion.  Joy  is  a  sweet 
and  pleasant  affection,  which  eases  the  mind,  exhilarates  and  comforts  the  spirits. 

2.  It  ariseth  from  the  feeling  of  some  good.  Joy  is  not  a  fancy,  or  bred  of  conceit ; 
but  is  rational,  and  ariseth  from  the  feeling  of  some  good,  viz.,  the  sense  of  God's 
love  and  favour.  Joy  is  so  real  a  thing  that  it  makes  a  sudden  change  in  a  person ; 
it  turns  mourning  into  melody.  As  in  the  spring-time,  when  the  sun  comes  to  our 
horizon,  it  makes  a  sudden  alteration  in  the  face  of  the  universe ;  the  birds  sing, 
the  flowers  appear,  the  fig-tree  puts  forth  her  green  figs,  everything  seems  to  rejoice 
and  put  off  its  mourning,  as  being  revived  by  the  sweet  influence  of  the  sun :  so, 
when  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  ariseth  on  the  soul,  it  makes  a  sudden  alteration, 
and  the  soul  is  infinitely  rejoiced  with  the  golden  beams  of  God's  love.  3.  By  it  the 
soul  is  supported  under  present  troubles.  Joy  stupefies  and  swallows  up  troubles  ; 
it  carries  the  heart  above  them,  as  the  oil  swims  above  the  water.  4.  The  heart  is 
fenced  against  future  fear.  Joy  is  both  a  cordial  and  an  antidote;  it  is  a  cordial 
which  gives  present  relief  to  the  spirits  when  they  are  sad ;  and  an  antidote,  it 
fenceth  off  fear  of  approaching  danger :  "  I  will  fear  no  evil ;  for  Thou  art  with  me, 
Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  comfort  me "  (Psa.  xxiii.  4).  How  is  this  joy  wrought  ? 
1.  It  ariseth  partly  from  the  promise ;  as  the  bee  lies  at  the  breast  of  the  flower, 
and  sucks  out  the  sweetness  from  it,  so  faith  lies  at  the  breast  of  a  promise,  and 
sucks  out  the  quintessence  of  joy :  "  Thy  comforts  delight  my  soul  "  (Psa.  cxiv.  19) ; 
that  is,  the  comforts  which  distil  from  the  limbec  of  the  promises.  2.  The  Spirit  of 
God,  who  is  called  the  "  Comforter"  (John  xiv.  26),  doth  sometimes  drop  in  this 
golden  oil  of  joy  into  the  soul.  What  are  the  seasons  when  God  doth  usually  give 
His  people  these  Divine  joys  ?  Five  seasons :  1.  Sometimes  at  the  blessed 
Supper  ;  the  soul  oft  comes  weeping  after  Christ  in  the  sacrament,  and  God  sends 
it  away  weeping  for  joy.  2.  Before  God  calls  His  people  to  suffering:  "Be 
of  good  cheer,  Paul "  (Acts  xxiii.   11).     God  candies  our  wormwood  with  sugar. 

3.  After  sore  conflicts  with  Satan.  Now,  when  the  soul  hath  been  bruised 
with  temptations,  God  will  comfort  this  bruised  reed :  He  now  gives  joy  to 
confirm  a  Christian's  title  to  heaven.  4.  After  desertion :  God  keeps  His 
cordials  for  a  time  of  fainting.  Joy  after  desertion  is  like  a  resurrection  from  the 
dead.  5.  At  the  hour  of  death,  such  as  have  no  joy  in  their  lifetime,  God  puts 
in  this  sugar  in  the  bottom  of  the  cup,  to  make  their  death  sweet.  What  are 
the  differences  between  worldly  joys  and  spiritual.  The  gleanings  of  the  one  are 
better  than  the  vintage  of  the  other.  1.  Spiritual  joys  help  to  make  us  better, 
worldly  joys  do  often  make  us  worse  :  but  spiritual  joy  makes  one  better  ;  it  is  like 
cordial  water,  which,  as  physicians  say,  doth  not  only  cheer  the  heart,  but  purges 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r. 

oat  the  notions  humours  ;  so  Divine  joy  is  a  cordial  water,  which  doth  not  only 
comfort  but  cleanse.  As  some  colours  do  not  only  delight  the  eye,  bat  strengthen  the 
eight,  so  the  joys  of  God  do  not  only  refresh  the  soul,  but  strengthen  it.  "  The  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  2.  Spiritual  joys  are  inward,  they  are  heart  joys  : 
"  your  heart  shall  rejoice  "  (John  xvi.  22).  Seneca  saith,  true  joy  is  hidden  within  ; 
worldly  joy  lies  on  the  outside,  like  the  dew  that  wets  the  leaf,  who  "  glory  in  appear- 
ance "  (2  Cor.  y.  12),  in  the  Greek,  in  the  face.  It  goes  no  farther  than  the  face,  it 
is  not  within,  in  "  laughter  the  heart  is  sad."  Like  a  house  which  hath  a  gilded 
frontispiece,  but  all  the  rooms  within  are  hung  in  mourning.  But  spiritual  joy 
lies  most  within :  "  your  heart  shall  rejoice."  Divine  joy  is  like  a  spring  of  water 
which  runs  underground.  3.  Spiritual  joys  are  sweeter  than  others,  better  than 
wine  (Cant.  i.  2).  Divine  joys  are  so  delicious  and  ravishing,  that  they  do  very  much 
put  our  mouth  out  of  taste  to  earthly  delights ;  as  he  who  hath  been  drinking  spirits 
of  alkermes,  tastes  little  sweetness  in  water.  4.  Spiritual  joys  are  more  pure,  they  are 
not  tempered  with  any  bitter  ingredients ;  a  sinner's  joy  is  mixed  with  dregs,  it  is 
imbittered  with  fear  and  guilt ;  spiritual  joy  is  not  muddied  with  guilt,  but  like  a 
crystal  stream,  runs  pure ;  it  is  all  spirits  and  quintessence,  it  is  joy  and  nothing 
but  joy,  it  is  a  rose  without  prickles,  it  is  honey  without  the  wax.  5.  These  are 
satisfying  and  filling  joys :  M  ask,  that  your  joy  may  be  full "  (John  xvi ,  24).  Worldly 
joys  can  no  more  fill  the  heart,  than  a  drop  can  fill  a  cistern.  5.  These  are  stronger 
joys  than  worldly :  ••  strong  consolation  "  (Heb.  vi.  18).  7.  These  are  unwearied 
joys :  other  joys,  when  in  excess,  oft  cause  a  loathing,  we  are  apt  to  surfeit  on 
them,  too  much  honey  nauseates,  one  may  be  tired  with  pleasure  as  well  as  labour  : 
Xerxes  offered  a  reward  to  him  who  could  find  out  a  new  pleasure :  but  the  joys  of 
God,  though  they  satisfy,  yet  they  never  surfeit ;  a  drop  of  joy  is  sweet,  but  the  more 
of  this  wine  the  better ;  such  as  drink  of  the  joys  of  heaven  are  never  cloyed ;  the 
satiety  is  without  loathing,  because  they  still  desire  the  joy  wherewith  they  are 
satiated.  8.  These  are  more  abiding  joys  ;  yet  these  joys  which  seem  to  be  sweet 
are  swift,  like  meteors,  they  give  a  bright  and  sudden  flash,  and  then  disappear. 
Why  is  this  joy  to  be  laboured  for?  1.  Because  this  joy  is  self-existent,  it  can 
subsist  in  the  want  of  all  other  carnal  joy.  2.  Because  spiritual  joy  carries 
the  soul  through  duty  cheerfully ;  the  Sabbath  is  a  delight,  religion  is  a  recreation. 
The  oil  of  joy  makes  the  wheels  of  obedience  move  faster.  3  It  is  called  the 
kingdom  of  God  (Bom.  xiv.  27),  because  it  is  a  taste  of  that  which  the  saints  have 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  What  shall  we  do  to  obtain  this  spiritual  joy  ?  Walk 
accurately  and  heavenly  ;  God  gives  it  after  a  long  and  close  walking  with  Him. 
Then  see  that  religion  is  no  melancholy  thing ;  it  brings  joy ;  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  joy — it  is  changed,  but  not  taken  away.  If  God  gives  His  people  such 
joy  in  this  life  ;  0  then,  what  glorious  joy  will  He  give  them  in  heaven  !  "  Enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord"  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  Here  joy  begins  to  enter  into  us, 
there  we  shall  enter  into  joy ;  God  keeps  His  best  wine  till  last  (T.  Watson.) 
The  method  and  variety  of  spiritual  joy : — It  is,  therefore,  the  use  that  we  make  of 
Divine  truth,  the  reception  we  give  to  it,  the  obedience  we  pay  to  it,  the  taking  it  up 
into  our  life,  that  constitutes  the  possibility  and  makes  the  variety  of  such  experi- 
ence. Our  hearts  and  minds  are  like  an  organ  that  God  is  willing  to  play  upon, 
sends  His  heavenly  organists  to  play  upon,  with  the  very  music  of  heaven  -,  but  if 
the  organ  itself  is  out  of  tune,  what  becomes  of  the  melody  ?  If  we  have  let  the 
chords  be  broken,  if  we  have  suffered  the  instrument  to  get  out  of  order,  if  the  dust 
of  the  earth,  the  defilement  of  sin,  and  sinful  affections,  and  the  discord  of  a  rebel- 
lious, selfish  will  are  there,  the  master  melodist  of  the  choirs  of  heaven  could  not 
breathe  harmony  through  it,  nor  could  the  angels  sing  with  it.  But  when  it  is  in 
tune  by  God's  Spirit,  and  God  breathes  upon  it,  strike  but  the  keynote  of  one  of 
the  great  anthems,  and  the  whole  being  is  a  spontaneous  living  utterance  and  pur- 
suit of  the  strain.  But  there  is  great  variety  in  the  music,  as  there  is  in  the  instru- 
ment. All  hearts  and  minds  are  not  organs  ;  and  God  will  not  have  a  monotony  in 
His  praises.  There  is  great  variety  in  Christian  experience,  even  when  it  is  all 
taught  and  inspired  by  God's  Spirit  and  grace.  Some  hearts  are  like  an  Eolian 
harp,  always  an  undertone  of  sadness,  sometimes  from  some  peculiarity  of  organi- 
zation or  of  temperament,  sometimes  from  the  effect  of  a  long  and  saddening  dis- 
cipline. But  if  such  a  harp  is  kept  in  tune,  if  it  is  strung  for  the  love  of  Jesus,  open 
the  windows  of  Divine  truth  anywhere,  and  set  it  in  the  breeze  of  heaven,  and  it 
will  breathe  forth  exquisite  melody.  But  it  would  not  do  this  if  the  chords  were 
rusted,  neglected,  loosened.  Then  the  sadness,  that  even  in  a  perfect  harp  might 
be  most  musical,  most  melancholy,  almost  drawing  tears  by  its  pathos,  would  be 


CHAP.  T.J  OALATIANS.  407 

jarring  with  despair,  would  converse  of  guilt  and  misery.  We  must  keep  our  hearts 
with  all  diligence,  in  order  to  bear  a  part  without  discord,  without  jarring,  in  the 
full  harmony  of  God's  grace.  The  state  of  the  affections  has  everything  to  do  with 
it,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  disciplined,  the  habits  in  which  they  are 
trained.  God  does  not  make  extempore  melodies  in  hearts  habitually  set  upon  other 
things ;  neither,  even  by  regeneration,  does  He  create  a  perfect  instrument,  and 
develops  all  its  powers  at  once.  There  is  a  constant  gradual  training,  a  training  to 
the  sentiments,  capacities,  experiences,  of  happiness  and  joy  as  a  permanent  fulness 
of  life.  The  growth  of  love,  joy,  faith,  hope,  every  grace,  is  like  the  growth  of  the 
foliage  of  a  tree  in  nature.  The  law  of  life  works,  and  works  well ;  but  God  does 
not  create  the  trees  full  blossomed,  full  leaved,  any  more  than  He  does  the  grain 
full  ripened ;  but  it  is  first  the  blade,  peeping  out  of  the  ground,  then  the  ear,  then 
the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  But  all  this  is  the  work  of  growth  and  gradualism,  and 
just  so  it  is  with  our  Christian  affections  and  habits.  Some  Christians  are  like  a 
tree  covered  with  foliage  ;  every  leaf  is  sensitive  to  the  light,  and  rejoices  in  it ;  the 
branches  dance  in  the  wind ;  the  birds  nestle  and  sing  among  the  branches ;  the 
cattle  repose  under  the  cool  shade.  Other  Christians  again  seem  like  a  tree  in 
winter;  no  sensitive,  sympathizing,  playful  affections,  to  tremble  in  the  wind, 
reflect  the  light,  perform  the  ministry  of  life,  joy,  and  love.  There  may  be  life, 
but  it  is  too  exclusively  in  the  roots,  a  life  so  hidden,  that  indeed  it  is  not  only  out 
of  sight,  but  out  of  office,  so  that  it  is  an  uninviting  rather  than  a  joyful  spectacle. 
(George  Cheever,  D.D.)  Joy  : — I.  The  nature  of  this  jot.  It  is  spiritual  joy, 
"joy  in  the  Lord,"  and  "in  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  Holy  Ghost  is  its  author. 
Sometimes  He  produces  this  joy  by  showing  the  soul  its  interest  in  Christ,  and  thu8 
it  is  essentially  a  "joy  of  faith."  It  is  peculiar  to  faith  or  to  believers,  for  it  springs 
from  believing  "  the  record  that  God  hath  given  unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is 
in  His  Son  "  (1  St.  John  v.  11) ;  from  believing  that  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Him- 
self for  me."  Indeed,  it  is  inseparable  from  faith,  it  is  joy  in  believing — in  the  very 
act.  (Bom.  xv.  13  ;  Acts  viii.  37  ;  xvi.  34.)  II.  Some  gbounds  op  oub  jot.  1.  Bear 
in  mind  it  is  a  joy  of  faith,  which  appropriates  to  itself  all  God  is  as  its  own. 
God's  wisdom,  power,  truth,  faithfulness,  goodness,  grace,  mercy,  on  all  matters  of 
joy.  2.  His  election  in  Christ  is  matter  of  joy  to  the  believer  (St.  Luke  x.  17-20). 
3.  The  covenant  of  grace  is  another  ground  of  joy.  4.  Again,  salvation  is  a  ground 
of  joy  (Psa.  xx.  5).  Again,  the  hope  of  glory  is  a  privilege  which  believers  rejoice 
in.  III.  Some  properties  of  this  jot.  1.  It  is  a  holy  joy.  2.  An  elevating  joy. 
It  lifts  the  heart  above  the  world.  3.  A  self-denying  joy.  Nothing  so  shrivels  up 
self  as  joy  in  Christ.  4.  A  satisfying  joy.  5.  It  is  a  joy  a  stranger  intermeddleth  not 
with.  6.  It  is  independent  of  circumstances.  7.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength." 
Let  me  close  with  a  word  of  caution  how  you  should  preserve  the  sense  of  it  in  your 
heart.  1.  Beware  of  sin  and  worldliness.  2.  Keep  close  to  a  throne  of  grace  and 
the  study  of  the  Scriptures.  5.  Beware  of  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit.  (J.  Reeve,  M.A.) 
Joy : — And  what  is  joy  ?  Equally  with  love  it  seems  to  elude  and  escape  d«finition, 
and  in  some  sense  to  baffle  an  intelligible  description  of  its  nature.  But  possibly 
joy  may  be  something  like  this,  an  outward  expression  of  a  happiness  which  is 
absorbing  and  real.  There  is,  for  example,  the  genuine  joy  of  a  little  child  shouting 
in  his  games,  absorbed  in  the  pursuit  of  the  moment ;  there  is  the  deeper  joy  pene- 
trating even  to  the  face  of  an  intellectual  man,  as  he  is  "  enjoying  "  some  scientific 
pursuit ;  and  there  is  a  joy,  the  peculiar  property  of  the  soul,  which  hangs  with  a 
pervading  fragrance  round  the  writings  of  the  saints  and  their  books  of  devotion, 
no  much  so,  that  sometimes  their  words  seem  strange  and  unreal  to  our  coldej 
hearts  ;  a  joy  which  indicates  a  satisfaction  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor 
take  away.  So  that  we  might  further  describe  joy  as  the  radiant  atmosphere  which 
plays  around  pleasure  ;  and  if  pleasure  is,  roughly  speaking,  satisfaction,  and  the 
highest  pleasure  the  highest  satisfaction,  joy  will  be  the  illumination,  half  con- 
scious, half  unconscious,  which  plays  about  the  life  of  true  pleasure.  Sometimes  we 
may  fancy  that  even  an  inanimate  machine,  with  its  beautiful  adjustments  and 
nice  mechanism,  seems  to  work  with  a  smoothness  which  is  almost  joy ;  but  in  this 
great  engine  of  life  it  is  no  fancy ;  its  harmonious  working  is  joy,  and  joy  gives  it 
strength  to  cut  and  carve  the  various  materials,  rough  and  smooth,  which  coma 
before  it.  And  joy  gives  it  strength,  so  that  there  shall  be  no  slurred  or  jagged  or 
twisted  or  yerverted  work.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  "  The  excel- 
lence of  the  work  is,  cateris  paribus,  in  proportion  to  the  joy  of  the  workman."  And 
it  has  been  pointed  out  in  a  recent  sermon  that  this  was  the  dominant  note  which 
rang  through  the  first  proclamations  of  Christianity— joy.     "  Sorrowful,  yet  alway 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

rejoicing,"  is  the  very  watchword  of  the  Christian.  It  is  joy  which  is  in  the  very 
front  of  our  Saviour's  teaching  in  the  Beatitudes  :  it  is  His  last  legacy  before  Hia 
Passion,  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  might  be  full."  "  Your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy." 
"  Your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you."  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy 
may  be  full."  It  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the  Church,  that  it  is  fulfilled  with  a 
ministration  of  joy.  And  the  simple  "  power  of  being  pleased  "  is  in  itself  not  to  be 
despised.  We  mistake  sometimes  our  coldness  and  sternness,  and  that  dignified 
nil  admirari,  for  something  else  than  it  really  is.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  rust,  and 
the  dust  of  long  work,  and  the  wearing  out  of  unrenewed  strength,  over  which  the 
oil  of  gladness  has  no  power.  Bemember  that  man  alone  can  laugh,  and  delight  in 
the  deeper  joys  of  nature  and  the  glories  of  art.  Ah,  there  are  innumerable  little 
ducts  and  channels  through  which  it  seems  meant  that  the  "  oil  of  gladness  "  should 
be  poured  into  our  life.  "  Consider  the  lillies,"  says  our  blessed  Lord,  as  if  parts 
of  nature  were  designed  expressly  to  give  us  delight,  in  the  unfolding  beauty  and 
splendour  displayed  before  our  eyes  !  What  fields  of  wonder  and  enchantment  open 
upon  us  through  the  imaginative  faculty  1  What  subtile  and  pure  pleasures  art 
and  music  conjure  up  before  us  1  What  force  there  is  in  such  words  as  "  recrea- 
tion "  and  "  amusement "  !  Nothing  short  of  a  complete  renewal  of  our  jaded 
nature,  or  the  very  enchanting  us  away  by  the  thraldom  of  an  engrossing  delight. 
Are  all  these  things  to  be  lightly  set  aside  or  ••  despised  "  t  Is  companionship  no- 
thing, or  the  society  of  books  which  brings  us  into  contact  with  the  great  minds  of 
all  ages?  And  joy  has  its  distinguishing  marks  and  characteristics,  as  well  as 
"  love,"  the  freshness  and  verdure  which  mark  out  its  course.  And  one  of  these 
surely  will  be  hopefulness  :  "  joyful  through  hope,"  is  what  we  pray  that  every 
baptized  person  may  be,  as  he  passes  through  the  difficulties  of  the  world.  It  is  a 
characteristic  of  joy  that  makes  us  so  hopeful ;  so  that  in  the  warm  rush  of  delight 
a  man  does  not  even  know  when  he  is  beaten,  but  presses  on  to  victory,  through 
failure  and  defeat  which  had  otherwise  crushed  him.  How  many  a  man  has  sur- 
mounted apparently  insuperable  obstacles,  because  joy  has  whispered  to  hope,  and 
hope  has  said,  "  It  can  be  done."  And  a  second  characteristic  will  be  brightness. 
It  makes  all  the  difference  to  life  if  joy  is  shining  within.  It  sheds  a  rainbow  light 
across  the  darkest  storm.  And  brightness  not  only  makes  a  difference  to  our  own 
lives,  but  also  to  the  lives  of  other  people,  if  instead  of  the  creaking,  groaning 
machinery,  they  have  in  its  place  the  smooth,  easy,  joyous  life  before  their  eyes. 
Benevolent  people  talk  of  brightening  the  homes  of  the  poor,  and  it  is  a  blessed 
work  to  attempt ;  but  bright  lives  do  a  great  deal  to  cheer  and  help  all  around  them. 
Perhaps  others  are  bearing  their  cross  better,  or  doing  their  work  with  greater  ease, 
because  they  can  walk  in  our  brightness  ;  whereas  gloom  and  melancholy,  and  "  the 
indolent  rebellion  of  complaint,"  would  cause  them  to  loosen  their  hold  from  very 
weariness,  and  then  to  fall  crushed  and  broken  below.  And  a  third  characteristic 
of  joy  may  well  be  evenness.  A  life  in  which  there  is  nothing  of  those  alternations 
of  depression  and  excitement,  of  exultation  and  despair,  which  cause  it  to  expand 
and  contract  with  a  suddenness  which  well-nigh  cracks  it  in  two  ;  a  variableness  so 
wearisome  to  the  man  himself,  so  painful  to  his  friends.  Instead  of  this,  joy  sheds 
abroad  a  quiet,  even  glow,  all  over  work,  just  as  God  Himself,  in  His  wondrous 
love,  has  an  evenness  of  beauty  in  all  forms  of  His  working.  There  is  the  beauty 
of  the  spring  life  and  the  beauty  of  the  autumn  decay,  the  beauty  of  the  summer 
sun  and  the  beauty  of  the  winter  cloud.  So  with  us,  however  varied  and  diversified 
the  work  of  our  life  may  be  in  its  vicissitudes  and  changes,  still  the  evenness  of  joy 
with  which  we  work  may  be  uniform,  until  death  itself  comes  as  only  one  more 
day's  experience  "  with  God  onwards."  "  Bejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  ;  and  again  I 
say,  rejoice."  (W.C.E.  Newbolt.)  Peace. — Peace,  a  fruit  of  the  spirit: — Theearth 
is  full  of  war.  Nor  is  it  a  new  thing ;  it  is  an  old  thing.  Since  brother  smote  brother, 
fighting  has  been  popular.  Bace  has  contended  with  race,  nation  with  nation. 
One  island  of  the  sea,  century  after  century,  has  carried  arms  against  a  neighbour- 
ing island.  The  warlike  element  is  strong  in  human  nature.  Bead  history.  Its 
letters  are  all  red.  History  tells  little  of  the  triumphs  of  peace.  Seventeen-twen- 
tieths  of  her  pages  are  crowded  from  top  to  bottom,  to  tell  the  student  of  the 
triumphs  of  war.  Triumphs  of  war !  War  has  no  triumphs.  War  is  all  disaster, 
all  calamity,  all  ruin.  There  is  in  the  universe  a  Spirit  of  right,  a  Spirit  of  good- 
ness, a  Spirit  of  love,  and  this  we  call  God.  This  Spirit  is  an  energetic  Spirit.  Its 
object  is  to  have  everybody  to  do  right — to  have  everybody  good,  and  to  establish 
thr  teign  of  universal  love — lore  towards  Himself  as  the  beautiful  embodiment  of 


obap.  ▼.]  QALATIANS.  409 

those  sweet  and  sublime  principles,  and  love  to  all  lesser  ones  whose  nature  and 
condition  make  them  the  object  of  benevolent  designs  and  the  recipient  of  benevo- 
lent efforts.  This  great  Spirit,  whose  characteristics  are  what  we  have  suggested, 
has  within  His  bosom  these  benevolent  wishes,  and  His  wishes  when  expressed  be- 
come law  unto  us  and  unto  every  order  of  being.  Man  contends  against  them  ; 
man  rejects  them.  In  so  doing  man  declares  war  against  God.  And  this  God, 
against  whom  man  is  at  war,  is  not  a  Being  disconnected  from  us,  whose  Spirit  is 
separate  from  our  spirit ;  but  He  is  a  Being  associated  with  us,  and  whose  Spirit  it 
mingled  with  our  spirit.  He  is  not  a  power  that  is  remote,  foreign,  arbitrary  ;  He 
is  a  power  that  is  nigh,  that  is  native,  and  whose  workings  are  co-operative  with 
our  faculties.  It  is  the  Father's  Spirit  lovingly  contending  with  the  child's  spirit, 
striving  to  bring  it  into  sympathetic  alliance  with  that  which  is  good.  The  war, 
therefore,  on  the  part  of  man  with  God,  is  a  war  within  his  own  members ;  a  war 
between  that  which  is  right  and  wrong  in  tendency  and  principle,  between  that 
which  is  pure  and  impure  in  passion,  between  tbat  which  is  holy  and  unholy  in 
deed.  The  evil  in  man  contends  with  that  which  is  good  in  him.  The  war  ia  the 
war  with  nature.  The  fight  is  spiritual.  The  Waterloo  is  the  Waterloo  of  the  soul. 
Indeed,  man  might  be  likened  to  a  globe  composed  of  two  hemispheres,  whereof  the 
one  is  black,  the  other  white.  Over  civilized  people  the  evil  does  not  hold  dominion ; 
it  seeks  dominion  and  fights  for  it.  In  civilized  classes  men  are  not  possessed  of 
the  devil ;  the  devil  striveth  to  possess  them.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  war,  then. 
The  elements  in  him  are  of  opposite  character  and  in  actual  contention.  And  only 
when  the  evil  in  him  is  eradicated,  and  the  good  in  him  is  not  only  thoroughly 
rooted  in  him,  but  moves  upward  and  develops  in  the  course  of  its  growth  unmo- 
lested, will  the  war  within  him  cease,  and  his  nature  find  its  original  but  long-lost 
heritage  of  peace.  The  text  says  that  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  peace.  The  ultimate 
result  of  those  Divine  operations  which  work  their  change  in  men  is  peacefulness  ; 
and  this  word  "  peacefulness  "  is  one  of  those  mirror-like  words  which  are  framed 
into  every  language,  because  of  its  fine  capacity  to  receive  and  reflect  happy  impres- 
sions. "  Home"  is  one  of  these  words.  "  Mother"  is  another,  and  "peace  "  is  a 
third.  Looking  into  its  reflected  depths  you  behold  a  sky  without  a  cloud  ;  a  sun 
whose  rays  are  genial  without  being  fierce  ;  fields  waving  with  abundant  harvests  ; 
broad  stretches  of  territory  on  which  no  armies  manoeuvre.  In  the  plains  no  battles 
emoke ;  in  the  cities  no  sack  nor  pillage ;  in  the  hamlets  no  blazing  cottage  ;  on  the 
sea  no  hostile  armaments.  These  are  the  scenes,  the  lovely  scenes,  the  charming 
scenes  which  the  word  reflects  in  reference  to  material  interests  and  prosperity. 
But  other  and  more  lovely  images  are  in  it :  men  and  women  find  therein  reflection 
—men  and  women  with  happy  faces,  with  countenances  that  glow  in  innocent 
pleasure ;  men  and  women  with  no  war  within  their  natures ;  whose  passions  are 
orderly  and  under  correct  government ;  whose  feelings  are  pure,  whose  emotions 
are  all  noble,  whose  aspirations  are  heavenly,  whose  consciences  are  undisturbed ; 
men  and  women  at  peace  with  themselves,  with  surrounding  nature,  and  with  God. 
The  earth  shall  come  to  such  a  day.  Its  mountains  shall  behold  the  rising  of  its 
sun.  The  hills  shall  clap  their  hands  at  its  coming,  and  its  fields  through  all  their 
bounteous  growth  shall  laugh  as  they  receive  of  the  benevolence  of  its  quickening 
beam.  The  golden  age  of  which  the  ancient  poets  sang,  the  old  star-gazing 
dreamers  dreamed,  and  the  prophets  who  saw  with  eyes  that  looked  not  out  of  mor- 
tal sockets,  predicted ;  when  the  swords  shall  be  beaten  into  ploughshares,  and  the 
spears  be  turned  into  priming-hooks  ;  when  the  lion  and  the  lamb  shall  lie  down 
together,  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them — this  age,  I  say,  shall  come.  And  the 
human  race,  which  has  been  like  a  ship  long  tossed  on  stormy  waves,  and  which 
many  times  has  come  nigh  unto  utter  wreck,  shall  sail  in  toward  a  coast  whose 
winds  blow  fair,  and  be  wafted  by  favouring  and  fragrant  gales  into  the  wished-for 
harbour  of  repose.  But  how  shall  the  race  come  to  such  a  time  ?  you  ask  ;  and  by 
what  power  shall  man  be  changed — as  he  must  be — or  ever  he  can  stand  like  a 
perfect  note  in  this  sweet  psalm  ?  By  the  Spirit  of  God,  I  answer.  Ay,  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  shall  bring  it  about,  and  by  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  shall  it  be 
caused.  The  Spirit  that  is  mighty ;  that  is  pure ;  that  is  peace-working ;  that 
bloweth  like  the  wind  whose  home  is  all  lands,  and  which  moveth  its  salutary 
influences  through  all  climes ; — the  Spirit  of  God  shall  bring  it  about.  Here  we  see 
tht  philosophy  of  that  peace  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  Its  causes  are  found 
in  the  enlightenment  of  the  understanding  and  the  regeneration  of  the  soul,  by 
which  men  are  made  to  see  what  is  for  their  true  and  lasting  happiness,  and  to 
seek  after  it  with  all  the  energy  of  their  natural  powers,  reinforced  with  other  and 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

su}  erior  energies  imparted  to  them  by  the  Author  of  their  souls.  And  when  this 
twofold  work  is  accomplished,  the  nature  of  a  man  cometh  unto  peace,  because  out 
of  it  have  been  eradicated  the  causes  that  produce  war.  The  sons  of  God  are, 
therefore,  with  peculiar  aptness,  called  the  sons  of  peace.  They  are  peaceful  in 
their  disposition  ;  peaceful  in  their  conduct ;  peaceful  in  their  lives,  and  peaceful 
in  their  resignation  when  they  come  to  die.     (W.  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  On  spiritual 

peace  : — I.  Show  wherein  spiritual  peace  consists.  1.  Spiritual  peace  consists 
in  that  sweet  and  calm  serenity  of  conscience,  which  arises  from  a  well-grounded 
persuasiou  of  our  reconciliation  to  God.  2.  Spiritual  peace  consists  in  that  amiable 
frame  of  mind  which  disposes  a  believer  to  live  in  harmony,  concord,  and  quietness 
with  his  fellow-men.  This  is  called  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  in  opposition  to  hatred, 
variance,  emulations,  wraths,  strifes,  Ac,  which  are  reckoned  among  the  works  of 
the  flesh.  The  amiable  temper  which  religion  inspires,  sheds  its  tranquilizing 
influence  over  all  the  relations  of  life.  It  has  a  tendency  to  produce  (1)  harmony  in 
the  family;  (2)  unity  in  the  Church.  Those  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ought 
to  be  ever  in  harmony  with  each  other.    (3)  Quietness  in  society  at  large.  II.  Point 

OUT    THE    MEANS    BY   WHICH   PEACE    IS   ENJOTED    AND    PRESERVED.       1.    Let   US    show    by 

what  means  peace  is  enjoyed  and  preserved  in  the  conscience.  (1)  To  enjoy  and 
preserve  peace  in  the  conscience  it  is  necessary  to  have  an  extensive  and  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  revealed  will  of  God.  None  but  the  paths  of  wisdom  are  the 
paths  of  peace  ;  and  the  blind  cannot  pursue,  because  they  cannot  discern  them.  (2) 
To  enjoy  and  preserve  peace  in  the  conscience,  it  is  necessary  to  put  our  trust  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (3)  To  enjoy  and  preserve  peace  in  the  conscience,  there  must 
be  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands.  Any  neglect  of  known  duties,  or  indulgence 
of  secret  sins,  will  as  certainly  distress  the  mind  as  Achan  with  his  accursed  thing 
troubled  the  camp  of  the  Israelites.  2.  I  shall  now  show  by  what  means  we  may 
promote  peace  among  our  fellow-men,  and  Christian  brethren.  (1)  While  we  are 
in  the  world,  we  must  have  dealings  with  some  who  are  strangers,  and  others  who 
are  enemies  to  religion.  You  may  perhaps  say,  therefore,  What  peace  can  there  be 
with  such  persons  ?  Concord  or  unity  of  spirit  is  not  to  be  expected.  But  we  are 
required  to  act  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  give  no  real  cause  of  offence,  and  endeavour 
to  conciliate  their  good  will,  rather  than  provoke  their  displeasure.  A  likely  way 
of  attaining  this  end,  is  to  keep  in  the  sphere  where  Providence  has  placed  us. 
Another  means  which  we  should  use  to  live  at  peace  with  all  men  is  an  unwearied 
endeavour  to  do  them  all  the  good  we  can.  Should,  however,  all  these  means  fail  to 
soften  and  conciliate  the  enemies  of  religion,  there  is  one  thiDg  yet  left  for  us  to  do, 
which  ought  never  to  be  neglected  ;  I  mean,  to  pray  for  them.  2.  It  will  have  a 
useful  tendency  to  promote  peace  among  Christian  brethren,  if  we  seriously  consider 
the  unhappy  consequeDces  that  attend  the  want  of  it.  Where  envying  and  strife 
are,  there  are  confusion  and  every  evil  work.  To  promote  peace  among  Christian 
brethren,  cultivate  a  charitable  and  forbearing  temper.  Never  conclude  that  all 
must  be  fatally  wrong,  who  do  not  think  just  as  you  think.  We  cannot  find  two 
faces  exactly  alike ;  why  then  should  we  expect  to  meet  many  minds  that  in  every 
respect  correspond  with  our  own  ?  If  you  really  love  and  pursue  peace,  you  must 
judge  favourably  and  speak  candidly  of  others.  When  a  breach  is  made,  you  must 
try  to  close,  rather  than  widen  it.  (John  Thornton.)  Peace,  a  treasure  : — Peace 
is  greater  than  all  other  treasures,  but  no  philosophy  can  bestow  it ;  for  how  can 
philosophy  cleanse  from  sin  ?  Nor  can  works  ;  for  how  are  they  able  to  justify  ? 
Descend,  into  whatever  mine,  shake  whatever  trse,  knock  at  whatever  door  in  the 
world  thou  wilt,  the  poor  world  cannot  offer  it  thee.  Peace  is  but  one  :  One  only 
has  peace  ;  One  only  can  give  it — •*  the  Prince  of  Peace."  (Krummacher.)  Peace 
in  poverty  : — I  have  seen  the  Christian  man  in  the  depths  of  poverty,  when  he  lived 
from  hand  to  mouth,  and  scarcely  knew  where  he  should  find  the  next  meal,  still 
with  his  mind  unruffled,  calm,  and  quiet.  If  he  had  been  as  rich  as  an  Indian 
prince,  yet  could  he  not  have  had  less  care.  If  be  had  been  told  that  his  bread 
should  always  come  to  his  door,  and  the  stream  which  ran  hard  by  should  never 
dry ;  if  he  had  been  quite  sure  that  ravens  would  bring  him  bread  and  meat  in  the 
morning,  and  again  in  the  evening — he  would  not  have  been  one  whit  more  calm. 
There  is  his  neighbour  on  the  other  side  of  the  street  not  half  so  poor,  but  wearied 
from  morning  till  night,  bringing  himself  to  the  grave  with  anxiety.  (C.  H.  Spur- 
geon.)  Armour  of  peace: — He  that  hath  peact  with  God,  is  armed  cap-a-pie :  he 
is  covered  from  head  to  foot  in  a  panoply.  The  arrow  may  fly  against  it,  but  can- 
not pierce  it ;  for  peace  with  God  is  a  mail  so  strong,  that  the  broadsword  of  Satan 
him  self  may  be  broken  in  twain  ere  it  can  pierce  the  flesh.     Oh,  take  care  that  you 


'.  t.]  GALATIANS.  411 

are  at  peace  with  God ;  for  if  you  are  not,  you  ride  forth  to  to-morrow's  fight  un- 
armed, naked ;  and  God  help  the  man  who  is  unarmed  when  he  has  to  fight  with 
hell  and  earth.  (Ibid.)  Peace  : — When  the  soul  in  every  part  of  itself  is  stayed 
upon  some  good  centre,  upon  God  and  Christ  in  the  love  of  God — when  every  part 
of  the  soul  ceases  to  be  hungry,  when  it  has  no  clamour,  no  sorrow,  but  is  restful, 
glad,  and  perfectly  composed  in  a  sweet  harmony  with  itself,  that  is  peace.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christian  peace,  the  peace  which  Christ  gives,  the  peace  which  He 
sheds  abroad  in  the  heart,  is  it  aught  else  than  such  a  glorified  harmony — 
the  expelling  from  man's  life  of  all  that  was  causing  disturbance  there,  all 
that  was  hindering  him  from  chiming  in  with  the  music  of  heaven,  all  that  would 
have  made  him  a  jarring  and  dissonant  note,  left  out  from  the  great  dance  and 
minstrelsy  of  the  spheres,  in  which  now  shall  mingle  for  ever  the  consenting  songs 
of  redeemed  men  and  elect  angels?  (Abp.  Trench.)  Peace  is  love  reposing: — 
It  is  love  on  the  green  pastures,  and  beside  the  still  waters.  It  is  that  great 
calm  which  comes  over  the  conscience  when  it  sees  the  atonement  sufficient  and 
the  Saviour  willing.  It  is  unclouded  azure  in  a  lake  of  glass.  It  is  the  soul 
which  Christ  has  pacified,  spread  out  in  serenity  and  simple  faith,  and  the  Lord 
God,  merciful  and  gracious,  smiling  over  it.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Peace: — 
We  now  reach  the  third  note  of  the  spiritual  life,  a  third  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  which  is 
peace.  That  peace  which  is  "  the  tranquility  of  order,"  which,  like  the  other  frnit, 
joy,  settles  down  in  a  blessed  calm  over  the  steady  working  of  our  being  when  all 
its  different  parts  are  moving  harmoniously.  Now  peace  is  not  an  ordinary  nor  a 
common  fruit ;  rather  it  is  terribly  rare  Men  are  rifling  the  earth  of  its  treasures 
and  secrets,  its  beauties  and  pleasures,  but  peace  does  not  seem  to  brood  over  their 
efforts.  But,  so  it  is,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  peace :  not  the  airaQiia,  the  calmness 
of  the  Stoics,  to  be  won  by  a  deliberate  crushing  out  of  feeling ;  not  the  mere 
Hedonism  of  the  Epicureans,  which  cannot  allow  even  a  painful  thought ;  but  with 
every  sensitive  nerve  finely  strung,  with  passion,  feeling,  and  affection  all  alive  and 
warm  within  ns,  the  pursuing  our  way  in  tranquility,  calm  and  unruffled,  protected 
by  an  influence  which  is  nothing  else  than  an  armed  escort — the  peace  of  God. 
Now  there  would  seem  to  be  two  great  counter  influences  to  jar  and  disturb  and 
throw  out  this  peace.  The  one  is  a  godlessness,  of  which  we  are  oftentimes  un- 
conscious ;  the  other  is  the  presence  of  Satan,  molesting,  harassing,  disturbing, 
even  where  he  fails  to  kill.  "  Neither  is  God  in  all  his  thoughts,"  Here  is  the  des- 
cription of  that  first  adverse  influence.  Why  is  it  that,  in  the  face  of  God's  promises, 
"  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee ;  "  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the  world,"  that  yet,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  He  is  absent  from  large 
portions  of  our  life  ?  There  is  that  anxiety  which  divides  up  our  life  and  maims 
our  energies,  which  burns  deep  into  the  channels  of  our  activity,  and  sometimes 
impairs  us  altogether.  Is  anxiety  sent  from  God  ?  Has  he  not  said,  "  Take  no 
anxious  thought,"  "  casting  (down)  all  your  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  you." 
It  is  we  who  drop  the  hand  of  God  and  try  to  walk  alone.  We  do  not  believe 
that  God,  who  governs  the  world,  can  remove  a  petty  trouble  from  our  clouded  life. 
"  We  use  the  realm  of  the  possible,  which  was  given  for  man  to  hope,  only  to  fear 
in."  So  again  it  is  with  depression,  which  weighs  our  footsteps  to  the  earth.  We 
walk  and  are  sad,  because  our  eyes  are  holden  so  that  we  do  not  know  the  Com- 
panion who  wishes  to  cheer  us,  and  resolve  the  doubts  and  fears  which  harass  us. 
And  this  is  what  we  need  to  alter,  if  this  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  to  grow  within  us.  We 
must  secure  the  abiding  presence  of  God,  not  only  when  we  are  in  His  house  or  on 
our  knees,  and  in  times  of  our  better  moments,  but  always,  everywhere,  and  in  all 
circumstances.  The  second  disturbing  influence  which  is  hostile  to  the  tranquility 
of  peace  is  the  adverse  presence  of  Satan  to  tempt,  to  harass,  and,  if  possible,  to 
destroy.  Temptation,  as  we  commonly  call  it,  is  one  of  the  most  serious  troubles 
which  can  beset  the  life  of  man.  And  we  are  by  nature  terribly  exposed  to  its  in- 
fluence. There  are  great  tracts  of  our  being  which  are  being  constantly  swept  by 
its  fury  and  malignity,  and  we  are  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour  assaulted  and 
shaken  by  it.  First  of  all  there  is  the  vast  region  of  thought.  It  is  Satan's  purpose, 
if  possible,  to  get  the  command  of  this  instrument,  to  feed  it  with  what  is  evil,  and 
to  produce  out  of  it  sin.  He  bribes  the  senses  with  pleasures,  he  dazzles  the 
imagination  with  fascinating  pictures,  he  plies  the  memory  with  scenes  of  past 
iniquity.  If  facts  fail  his  purpose,  he  knows  where  to  find  poisonous  fiction: 
he  can  employ  music  and  painting,  and  art  of  all  kinds ;  he  even  knows  how  to 
manipulate  religion  to  his  purpose ;  he  labours  hard,  and  out  of  the  heart  proceeds 
as  evil  thought.    And  then  this  quickly  spreads,  and  the  senses  are  ever  ready  foe 


4U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*.  T. 

a  mutiny.  We  know  what  it  means ;  but  is  there  any  reason  why  this  should  dis- 
turb our  peace?  Most  surely  not.  We  have  learnt  at  least  these  two  great  facts. 
1.  That  every  one  is  tempted,  and  that  not  even  the  holiness  of  the  Son  of  God 
was  exempted  from  it.  2.  That  temptation  is  not  sin,  but  rather  the  material 
out  of  which  vice  and  virtue  is  formed.  What  a  call  to  that  which  we  are  so  apt  to 
forget — watchfulness,  and  self-discipline,  and  self-distrust  1  And  then  it  does  us  a 
still  further  service — it  drives  the  soul  back  on  its  supports  in  prayer,  and,  like  a 
frightened  child  in  its  mother's  embrace,  feels  a  sense  of  safety ;  so  confidence  re- 
turns to  us  as  we  feel  the  pressure  of  the  everlasting  arms.  Further,  it  makes  the  soul 
feel  its  own  strength  and  security  by  God's  help  ;  for  just  as  we  never  value  so  much 
the  shelter  of  a  good  roof  and  stout  walls  as  when  the  wind  is  howling  and 
whistling  and  battling  with  its  storm-blasts  against  the  house,  so  the  storm  of 
temptation  may  but  intensify  the  peace  within.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee :  because  he  trusteth  in  Thee. "  Peace  may  come 
in  the  very  midst  of  temptation,  the  peace  of  a  well-ordered  security.  (W.  G.  E.  Newbolt.) 
Peace  : — I.  The  nature  or  this  peace.  1.  It  is  an  inward  spiritual  peace — peace 
of  soul.  2.  There  is  a  peace  arising  from  easy  circumstances,  from  good  health, 
position,  friends,  relatives,  happy  families,  tender  affections,  prosperous  affairs. 
This  is  not  the  peace  of  God ;  for  these  things  make  to  themselves  wings  and  fly 
away.  3.  Then  there  is  the  peace  of  the  world,  though  but  few  seriously  call  it  so. 
4.  Again,  there  is  a  peace  which  may  be  aptly  called  the  peace  of  the  devil.  The 
strong  man,  armed,  keeps  his  goods  in  peace.  II.  The  source  of  this  peace.  1. 
A  clear  sense  of  the  favour  of  God.  2.  Submissiveness  to  the  will  of  God,  There 
can  be  no  peace  without  this.  3.  Power  to  appropriate  the  promises  of  God,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  say,  "  They  are  mine."  III.  How  it  is  seen.  1.  In  the  disposition 
and  temper.  It  makes  a  man,  if  not  bright  and  cheerful,  at  least  calm  and  quietly 
happy.  2.  In  the  circumstances.  When  prosperity  is  gone,  the  peace  of  God  still 
remains.  3.  In  the  hour  of  temptation  (Phil.  iv.  7).  4.  In  spirituality  of  mind. 
"  To  be  spiritually -minded  is  life  and  peace  "  (Bom.  viii.  6).  It  is  worth  keeping. 
1.  Pray  against  unbelief.  2.  Pray  against  disobedience.  3.  Pray  against  levity. 
Nothing  sooner  destroys  peace  than  a  trifling  spirit.  4.  Pray  against  fretful  and 
murmuring  tempers.  5.  Pray  against  self -righteousness.  (J.  Reeve,  M.A.) 
Long-suffering. — Long-suffering,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit: — You  all  know  what  long- 
suffering  means.  It  means  the  power  to  bear  up  under  a  burden — a  power  to 
endure — a  power  to  resist  pressure — the  capacity  to  stand  a  tremendous  strain. 
The  idea  of  endurance  is  that  which  gives  emphasis  to  the  word.  The  ancients 
realized  both  the  desirableness  and  the  nobility  of  the  quality,  and  the  noblest 
among  them  set  themselves  to  the  task  of  acquiring  it.  They  said,  "  Weakness  is 
unmanly ;  it  is  ignoble.  Strength  is  magnificent — is  godlike.  We  will  be  strong. 
We  will  be  braced  so  as  to  resist  all  pressures.  Though  an  avalanche  fall  on  us, 
though  we  stand  in  the  very  path  of  it,  yet  we  will  not  be  moved  from  our  founda- 
tions." They  said,  "Pain  shall  not  make  us  groan.  Danger  shall  not  appal. 
Peril  shall  not  intimidate.  The  shocks  and  ills  of  life  shall  not  disturb  our  equani- 
mity. Bereavement  and  loss  may  come ;  but  they  shall  not  jostle  us  from  the  fine 
poise  of  perfect  self-control."  The  extent  of  their  success  showed  what  human  will 
can  do.  Men  called  them  Stoics.  They  called  themselves  Stoics.  The  philoso- 
pher Zeno  was  the  master  of  this  school.  To  him  many  disciples  flocked.  They 
were  blown  to  the  stern  severity  of  his  presence  by  the  ills  and  adversities  of  life, 
as  ships  are  blown  by  tempests  into  harbours  encircled  by  mountains,  and  whose 
narrow  entrances  are  guarded  by  immovable  cliffs.  He  taught  them  that  men 
should  be  free  from  passion ;  unmoved  by  joy  or  grief ;  and  that  they  should  submit 
without  complaint  to  the  unavoidable  necessities  by  which,  as  he  supposed,  all 
things  were  governed.  This,  I  believe,  was  the  nearest  approach  to  what  is  known 
in  Christian  ethics  as  long-suffering,  that  the  ancients  made.  It  is  easy  to  discern 
how  far  they  climbed,  and  yet  how  near  the  base  of  the  majestic  pyramid  of  Chris- 
tian serenity,  amid  the  storms  of  trouble,  they  remained.  They  had  the  right 
idea,  but  they  did  not  have  the  Divine  help.  They  relied  on  themselves,  and 
hence  their  inspiration  was  insufficient.  Their  stoicism  was  not  the  upspringing 
of  a  Divine  patience  in  their  soul,  or  the  light  of  a  Divine  illumination  shining  into 
their  minds,  but  was  only  the  result  of  human  determination.  Their  long-suffering 
was  only  the  discipline  of  the  nerves  and  the  muscles.  To  endure  when  one  has 
lost  his  sensibility,  is  taking  the  very  virtue  from  endurance ;  but  to  bear  up  against 
trouble  to  which  one  is  keenly  sensi live;  to  be  resigned  to  losses  that  divide  the 
very  life,  so  to  speak,  and  rend  it  asunder ,  to  be  patient  in  the  face  of  provocation 


our.  t.]  GALATIANS.  413 

strongly  felt ;  to  endure  what  taxes  the  highest  forces  in  one's  life — not  because  of 
a  sullen  faith  that  you  cannot  escape  them  if  you  would,  but  because  of  a  sublime 
trust  which  supplies  you  with  a  feeling  that  you  would  not  escape  them  if  you 
could — this  is  the  triumph  of  Christian  teaching.  Herein  is  the  Christ  seen  superior 
to  Zeno,  and  the  marvellous  beauty  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  apprehended.  The 
question,  therefore,  naturally  at  this  point  arises :  How  does  the  Spirit  accomplish 
this  work  ?  By  what  process  of  development  is  this  effect  produced  ?  Is  it  of  the 
mind?  Is  it  of  the  soul?  Or  is  it  of  both  conjoined?  I  find  God  everywhere — in 
the  works  of  nature,  &c.  But,  beyond  what  I  find  Him  in  the  works  of  Nature,  I 
find  Him  in  myself ;  not  in  that  part  of  myself  which  is  material,  which  the  trees 
on  the  hills  outlive,  and  on  the  grave  of  which  the  sun  will  some  day  look  and  the 
stars  will  some  night  shine ;  but  in  that  part  of  me  which  is  immaterial,  beside 
whose  life  the  life  of  the  tree  is  as  nothing,  and  which  shall  live  on  and  on  when 
the  sun,  which  now  wheels  his  sure  course  above  us,  shall  have  set  for  ever ;  and 
when,  for  aught  I  know,  the  stars  themselves,  which  now  make  the  heavens  glorious 
by  night,  shall  be  quenched  in  their  every  beam.  I  find  Him  most,  I  say,  within 
my  soul ;  yea,  in  the  works  of  that  Spirit  of  whose  fruit  I  am  speaking ;  in  the 
energies  of  its  puissant  action  ;  in  the  conservative  pressure  of  its  guidance  ;  in  the 
fine  enlightenment  of  its  illumination ;  in  the  life-giving  quickening  of  its  vitalising 
touch,  and  in  the  sanctifying  influence  of  its  presence-  I  find  Him,  I  say,  most  of 
all  in  my  spirit ;  and  because  of  the  benevolence  of  His  operation,  my  spirit  loveth 
the  Spirit  that  moveth  it  aright,  and  worships  at  the  throne  which  is  white  because 
it  symbolizes  a  power  which  is  innocent.  And  to  those  who  tell  me  that  the  works 
of  the  Spirit  are  mysterious,  I  say :  Not  so-  They  are  plain  as  the  work  of  the 
day  when  the  flowers  open  on  the  hills;  plain  as  the  movement  of  the  white  clouds 
when  the  force  which  eye  cannot  see  rolls  their  snowy  formation  upward ;  plain  as 
the  power  of  love  which  gives,  when  it  is  apprehended  by  the  love  which  receives. 
Let  us  answer,  then,  the  interrogation  as  to  how  the  Spirit  develops  the  capacity  of 
long-suffering  in  the  soul  ?  How  does  He  make  man  able  to  bear  losses,  disap- 
pointments, vexations,  bereavements,  and  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to?  We 
answer,  that  the  Spirit  accomplishes  this  effect  by  teaching  us  the  relative  value  of 
things  ;  and  this  I  will  illustrate.  Take,  e.g.,  the  matter  of  wealth.  Who  of  you 
that  are  wealthy  could  see  your  wealth  pass  from  your  hands  without  a  murmur  ? 
Who  of  you  could  endure  the  loss  of  your  gains — the  gains  of  honourable  and  life- 
long toil — with  patience  ?  And  who  of  you  could  see  the  noble  properties  whkh 
you  have  inherited  from  the  industry  and  affection  of  the  past  taken  from  your  con- 
trol, and  pass  from  the  ownership  of  your  name  with  equanimity  ?  In  how  many 
cases  do  cheerfulness  and  patience  decline  with  the  decline  of  profits !  In  how 
many  cases  have  men  who  were  rich  in  this  world's  goods,  when  their  riches  have 
suddenly  vanished,  committed  suicide,  as  if  all  that  made  life  desirable  had  gone 
with  their  treasures !  But  if  the  Spirit  of  God,  dear  friends,  has  brought  true  en- 
lightenment to  the  mind ;  has  given  it  discernment  as  to  the  comparative  value  of 
things ;  has  brought  the  next  world  into  conjunction  with  this,  and  made  one  to  see 
the  lasting  glory  of  the  one  and  the  evanescent  splendour  of  the  other ;  the  man,  I 
say,  in  whom  this  blessed  work  has  been  wrought  out  can  see  his  wealth  depart 
without  loss  of  courage,  of  patience,  or  of  hope.  For  he  knows  that  what  is  taken, 
looked  at  in  the  large  way  and  viewed  in  the  light  of  eternity,  was  not  essential  to 
his  nature.  He  knows  that  his  character  is  independent  of  it.  He  knows  that  it 
was  but  an  accident,  collateral  to  his  life,  and  not  the  true  life  itself.  And  he 
realizes  the  affirmation  contained  in  the  question  of  the  Saviour  when  He  ex- 
claimed: "  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  more  than  raiment?" 
And  thus  were  they  enabled  to  endure  the  deprivation  without  murmuring.  Thus 
was  the  sublime  element  of  long-suffering  developed  in  them,  and  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  amply  realized.  I  might  illustrate  farther.  I  have  seen  those  to  whom 
health  was  most  desirable,  lose  it,  and  yet  through  all  their  sickness  be  upheld  by 
the  thought  implanted  in  their  minds,  and  ripened  into  a  conviction  by  the  Spirit, 
that  they  would  soon  enter  into  a  realm  where  sickness  is  unknown,  into  which 
pain  never  enters,  and  where  health  is  the  only  expression  of  existence.  We  have 
seen  the  beautiful  lose  their  beauty ;  and  yet,  though  they  knew  that  the  loveliness 
of  the  flesh  had  left  form  and  feature  for  ever,  they  bore  their  loss  with  sweetest 
patience — with  cheerfulness,  even,  as  if  they  had  lost  but  a  trifle,  because  that 
within  them  was  being  born  a  loveliness  that  should  never  fade,  and  beauty  whieh 
once  possessed  in  the  heavens  would  never  depart.  Ay,  and  we  have  seen  men  and 
women  stand  over  coffins,  in  which  lay  the  form  once  inhabited  by  their  darling, 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V, 

without  a  tear.  We  have  seen  them  stand  on  the  edge  of  the  grave  and  look  int« 
the  darkness  of  death,  as  into  a  great  sunrise,  because  they  knew  by  discernment 
between  the  mortal  and  the  immortal  that  their  loved  ones  had  only  passed  on  and 
gone  up,  and  that  their  feet  as  they  climbed  the  sky-tending  path  had  left  the 
radiance  of  their  ascension  to  light  them  upward  to  a  happy  and  endless  reunion 
when  they  should  be  called  to  go.  Thus  do  we  see  how  it  is  by  enlightenment  of 
the  mind  and  the  soul  as  to  the  comparative  value  of  things,  that  the  Spirit  worketh 
as  one  of  its  fruits  the  capacity  of  long-suffering,  the  capacity  to  bear  without  mur- 
muring, to  endure  without  complaint,  and  in  the  midst  of  grief  live  sustained  by 
consolations.  (W,  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  Long-suffering,  a  patience: — In  every 
station,  and  through  every  stage  of  life,  we  are  involved  in  troubles.  So  necessary 
is  self-possession,  that  a  man  without  it  resembles  a  ship  without  a  rudder,  left  to 
the  mercy  of  the  winds,  over  which  the  pilot  has  no  command.  Yet  we  cannot 
possess  or  govern  our  own  minds  in  times  of  trouble,  except  we  possess  patience. 
1. 1  shall  define  Chbistian  patienoe,  ob  show  what  re  is.  That  patience  which 
is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  stands  opposed  to  irritability  of  temper,  undue  eagerness 
of  expectation,  fretfulness  under  sufferings,  and  weariness  in  well-doing.  Christian 
patience  must  be  distinguished  from  constitutional  fortitude  and  stoical  apathy. 
Some,  as  if  formed  of  tougher  materials,  are  much  more  capable  of  enduring  suffer- 
ings than  others.  But  there  is  nothing  to  be  commended  in  that  sort  of  hardihood 
which  is  the  effect  of  callousness  or  insensibility :  for  where  there  is  no  feeling, 
there  is  no  patience.  Dr.  Barrow  ingeniously  calls  Christianity,  the  special  academy 
of  patience  ;  wherein  we  are  informed,  are  inured,  are  trained  up,  and  tried  to  bear 
all  things.  In  this  academy,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Great  Teacher,  by  whose  gracious 
influence  we  become  conformed  to  the  will  of  God.  How  poor  and  eontemptibla 
were  the  best  lessons  of  the  school  of  Zeno,  compared  with  those  taught  in  the 
school  of  Christ !  How  empty  and  vapid  were  the  choicest  products  of  pagan  philo- 
sophy, contrasted  with  the  rich  fruit  of  the  Spirit !  II.  I  shall  now  point  out  the 
happy  effects  of  PATiENCB.  A  celebrated  modern  writer  asserts,  that  "  philosophy 
overcomes  past  and  future  ills ;  but  present  ills  easily  overcome  philosophy."  If  it 
be  so,  philosophy  itself  is  not  worth  pursuing.  Who  would  seek  such  a  miserable 
comforter  ?  It  is  when  the  wound  smarts,  that  we  need  the  healing  balm ;  when 
the  fainting  fit  comes  on,  that  we  want  the  reviving  cordial.  Religion  does  not 
merely  follow  our  path,  or  come  forth  to  meet  us  ;  but  goes  with  us  to  lighten  our 
burdens,  to  relieve  our  wants,  and  redress  our  griefs.  1.  Patience  in  affliction  is 
profitable  to  ourselves.  We  are  naturally  impetuous  and  self-willed.  W«»  wish  to 
wear  the  crown  without  bearing  the  cross ;  and  to  find  some  shorter  and  smoother 
road  to  the  heavenly  kingdom  than  that  which  leads  us  through  the  perilous  and 
tedious  wilderness.  It  is  not  without  repeated  trials,  sanctified  by  Divine  grace, 
that  we  are  brought  to  a  more  submissive  spirit.  There  are  lessons  to  be  learned, 
and  duties  to  be  performed,  for  which  patience  is  an  indispensable  preparation. 
2.  Patience  in  affliction  is  advantageous  to  others.  It  excites  mutual  sympathy, 
and  imparts  much  encouragement.  3.  Patienoe  in  suffering  gives  honour  to  God. 
(1)  It  acquiesces  in  the  will  of  God.  (2)  It  bows  to  the  sovereignty  of  God.  (3)  It 
acknowledges  the  justice  of  God.  (4)  It  confesses  the  faithfulness  of  God.  (5)  It 
admires  the  wisdom  of  God.  III.  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  how  the  grace  of 
patience  mat  be  cultivated.  1.  Let  us  seek  a  larger  measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  take  heed  that  we  do  not  provoke  Him  to  withdraw  His  influences  from  U6.  2 
To  cultivate  the  grace  of  patience,  let  us  seriously  consider  our  afflictions,  in  their 
short  continuance,  and  glorious  issue.  3,  To  cultivate  the  grace  of  patience,  it  will 
be  useful  tc  have  a  special  regard  to  the  promises  which  belong  to  a  state  of  trial. 
A  good  man  put  this  among  his  daily  prayers :  "  Lord,  teach  me  the  art  of  patience 
while  I  am  well,  and  the  use  of  it  when  I  am  sick.  In  that  day,  either  lighten  my 
burden,  or  give  me  strength  to  bear  it."  4.  To  cultivate  patience,  set  before  you  the 
brightest  examples  of  His  grace.  (John  Thornton.)  Long-suffering : — Look  at 
that  matron  who  through  the  years  of  early  life  inherited  bereavement  and  sorrows, 
the  thinning  out  of  the  precious  flock,  the  dishonoured  names  of  the  husband,  the 
death,  the  rolling  upon  her  of  the  responsibility  of  rearing  the  whole  flock,  the  un- 
wearied fidelity,  the  inexhaustible  patience,  furrow  after  furrow  that  experience  is 
ploughing  upon  her  brow ;  at  last  the  children  had  come  to  ripeness,  and  they  in 
their  turn  are  lifting  her  out  of  trouble,  and  she  sits  down  serene  at  the  close  of 
life  more  beautiful  than  the  going  down  of  the  sun.  Is  there  any  object  in  life  that 
a  man  can  look  upon  that  is  more  beautiful  than  long-suffering.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Long-suffering ; — A  fourth  mark  of  the  spiritual  life,  a  fourth  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  it 


.  t.]  QALATIANS.  415 

long-safFering.  And  long-suffering  is  perhaps  that  power  which  enables  us  to 
suffer  on,  which  will  not  let  us  become  ruffled,  or  put  back,  or  paralyzed,  or  over- 
whelmed by  difficulties  as  they  come  upon  us.  And  we  do  well  to  realize  that  we 
have  to  exercise  long-suffering  quite  early  in  our  spiritual  life,  in  our  very  dealings 
with  the  great  and  good  God  Himself.  We  remember  how  in  His  mercy  He  is  ever 
urging  us  to  be  strong.  Sometimes  we  ourselves  have  wondered  why  in  God's  good 
providence  we  are  given  a  work  to  do  which  is  a  special  temptation  to  us.  And  at 
last  the  truth  becomes  apparent  that  God  has  some  signal  favour  to  bestow  upon 
us ;  that  He  wishes  us  to  recover,  by  using  it,  the  power  in  some  maimed  limb,  to 
make  whole  by  painful  exercise  some  impaired  faculty.  To  walk  upon  it,  to  stretch 
it,  to  move  it,  with  many  a  cry  of  anguish  and  many  a  secret  groan,  and  then 
at  last  to  feel  a  new  strength  in  an  unlooked-for  department  of  life.  Or  further,  it 
may  be  some  distinguished  grace,  some  pre-eminent  honour,  that  He  is  waiting  to 
bestow  upon  us ;  but  He  has  to  delay  until  He  can  see  whether  we  can  bear  the  pre- 
liminary cutting  and  carving  which  is  to  prepare  our  souls  to  receive  it.  Vat  his 
qui  perdiderunt  sustinentiam :  ["Woe  to  them  that  have  lost  the  power  of  bearing  !] 
and  what  will  ye  do  when  the  Lord  shall  visit  you?  "  (Ecclesiasticus  ii.  14.)  And  it 
is  just  the  same  with  God's  methods  of  working,  which  He  consigns  to  our  care, 
and  puts  as  instruments  into  our  hands.  His  methods  seem  terribly  slow  to  our 
impatience.  We  have  to  deal  with  a  system  of  work  which  of  necessity  demands 
much  time,  where  planting  and  watering  and  maturing  all  must  have  their  ordered 
course,  where  the  bud  precedes  the  flower  and  the  flower  the  fruit,  and  forming  has 
to  develop  into  ripening,  and  ripening  into  full  maturity.  Boots  are  ugly  things, 
and  when  they  are  buried  the  garden  looks  very  bare.  Sometimes  it  is  covered  with 
snow,  or  dried  up  with  the  frost,  or  pulverised  with  the  east  wind,  or  the  growing 
plants  are  scorched  by  the  sun  or  dashed  with  the  wet.  What  a  temptation  it  is  to 
try  and  plant  the  bed  with  forced  flowers,  just  to  make  a  show  while  we  are  here  ; 
or  to  damage  the  tree  that  we  may  hasten  its  untimely  fruit.  Is  it  not  a  character- 
istic of  the  present  day  that  we  are  all  very  impatient  in  our  work  ?  It  is  so  in 
politics,  everything  must  be  done  at  once ;  it  is  so  in  religion,  method  after  method 
is  attempted  and  cast  away,  as  if  it  were  a  worn-out  garment,  almost  before  it  has 
been  used ;  it  is  so  in  education,  give  us  results  at  any  cost,  and  let  competitive  ex- 
aminations settle  everything.  But  if  we  are  to  work  together  with  God,  we  shall 
need  a  great  deal  of  patience.  "  You  can  hurry  man,"  said  Eishop  Milman,  "  but 
you  cannot  hurry  God."  And  if  we  are  tempted  to  be  impatient  with  God's  methods 
of  working,  are  we  not  equally  tempted  to  grow  out  of  heart,  to  be  sullen  and  dis- 
pleased with  the  character  of  the  actual  portion  of  work  which  is  assigned  to  us  ? 
Truly  it  requires  some  degree  of  long-suffering  if  we  aspire  in  any  way,  within  or 
without,  to  work  together  with  God.  But  this  is  not  all.  We  shall  need  long- 
suffering  also  in  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-men.  There  is  a  want  of  refine- 
ment very  often,  as  well  as  misunderstanding,  which  we  have  to  deal  with,  coupled 
with  injustice,  misrepresentation,  imputation  of  motives,  or  ingratitude.  Ah  1  yes  : 
there  is  no  strain  so  continuous  as  that  of  helping  the  weak  friend  to  climb.  Every 
footstep  has  to  be  steadied  as  he  laboriously  ascends ;  he  gets  fatigued,  he  gets 
giddy,  he  disdains  the  use  of  the  rope ;  perhaps  he  slips  and  falls ;  his  constant 
stumbles  seem  to  imperil  our  very  existence.  Shall  we  leave  him  ?  He  keeps  us 
back,  he  makes  our  progress  slow ;  we  cannot  enjoy  the  prospect  by  the  way,  nor 
the  delight  of  climbing ;  but  yet  it  is  a  trust  which  we  may  not  betray.  He  is  given 
to  us ;  we  are,  indeed,  before  God  and  angels  and  men,  our  brother's  keeper.  Alas ! 
we  are  always  trying  to  push  away  from  us  the  responsibilities  of  this  mediator-life. 
The  priest,  the  man  of  wealth,  the  man  of  science,  the  politician— all  are  sometimes 
tempted  to  forget  it.  But  this  was  the  glory  of  the  early  Christian  Church ;  it 
waited  for  the  little  children,  the  old,  the  helpless,  the  infirm,  all  which  the  busy 
empire  would  spurn  from  its  hurried  path.  Do  not  let  us  think  that  we  shall  reach 
greater  heights  by  neglecting  those  who,  from  the  realms  of  duty  or  affection  or 
simple  circumstance,  are  crying  out,  "Wait  for  me."  But  all  this  will  require  the 
development  within  us  of  long-suffering.  And  yet  further  still,  beside  God  and  our 
neighbour,  who  each  in  their  mysterious  way  demand  the  exercise  of  this  virtue, 
there  is  self.  We  must  learn  to  bear  long  with  ourselves.  (W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.) 
Long -suffering — meekness : — I.  The  graces  themselves.  By  "  long-suffering  "  we 
should  understand  a  frame  of  mind  which  would  endure,  with  manly  firmness  and 
resignation,  the  various  trials  of  life  in  the  service  of  God.  II.  How  they  abh 
exhibited.  1.  Long-suffering  sees  God's  hand  in  afflictive  dispensations,  and  so  is 
quieted  under  them.     (Fsa.  xxxix.  9 ;  2  Sam.  xvi.  11 ;  Job  i.  21.)     2.  In  respect 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATun.  [chap.  ». 

to  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises  (Bom.  iv.  19).  3.  In  respect  of  patient  per- 
severance  in  well-doing.  4.  In  bearing  the  infirmities  of  the  brethren  (Bom.  xv.  1). 
5.  To  bear,  moreover,  the  unjust  suspicion  of  others.  6.  To  receive  reproof.  Thus 
far  I  have  spoken  of  the  passive  grace  of  "  long-suffering,"  let  us  look  now  at  the 
active  grace  of  meekness.  1.  In  bearing  injuries,  and  putting  up  with  affronts.  2. 
In  forgiving  injuries.  3.  In  recompensing  good  for  evil.  4.  In  not  fretting  against 
evil-doers.  (J.  Reeve,  M.A.)  Gentleness. — Gentleness,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit: — 
Gentleness  is  derived  from  gentle,  and  hence  we  must  find  the  meaning  of  the  word 
gentle,  or  ever  we  can  understand  what  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  it  relates  to  gentle- 
ness, is.  In  the  first  place,  we  find  that  gentle  does  not  primarily  refer  to  manners. 
it  is  often  used,  and  properly  too,  as  descriptive  of  manners,  but  when  so  used  the 
root  idea  is  not  brought  out.  Gentle  primarily  refers  to  disposition,  and  disposition 
relates  to  the  structure  of  one's  nature — it  refers  to  the  way  in  which  a  man  is  put 
together  morally.  A  man  with  an  evil  disposition  is  a  man  whose  moral  structure 
inclines  him  toward  evil ;  a  man  with  a  good  disposition,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
one  whose  moral  structure  inclines  him  toward  good.  Gentleness  primarily, 
therefore,  is  descriptive  of  the  nature  and  not  to  manners ;  descriptive  of  the  soil 
in  its  chemical  qualities,  and  not  in  respeot  to  its  colour;  descriptive  of  the 
character  of  the  seed,  and  not  of  the  shape  of  the  blade  or  of  the  tree  that  grows 
up  from  it.  A  gentle  person,  therefore,  is  one  whose  nature  is  so  constructed  that 
it  works  itself  out  naturally  in  sweet  and  benevolent  action.  We  can  get  a  better 
idea  of  it,  perhaps,  by  looking  at  it  in  contrast  with  its  opposite  ;  even  as  we  get  a 
better  idea  of  light  when  contrasted  with  darkness.  The  opposite  of  gentleness  is 
rudeness,  boisterousness,  coarseness.  A  gentle  person  is  just  the  opposite  of  a  rude 
person,  or  a  coarse  person.  You  know  there  are  rude  dispositions.  We  Bay  of  a 
man,  "  He  has  a  coarse  nature,"  or  "  He  has  a  very  rude  disposition,"  and  such 
persons  are  the  moral  opposite  of  a  gentle  person.  The  first  fact  brought  out, 
therefore,  by  the  text,  when  analyzed,  is  the  peculiar  character  of  the  Spirits 
work  ;  and  it  may  be  summed  up  in  the  assertion  that  the  Spirit  of  God  operates 
on  the  disposition.  This  is  a  most  important  fact,  and  one  that  we  all  should 
fully  realize,  because  it  proves  what  the  Spirit's  work  is,  and  whom  He  represents. 
It  shows  that  His  work  is  a  Divine  work,  and  that  He  represents  God.  Who  knows 
when  the  work  of  the  Spirit  begins  in  the  formation  of  life — in  the  perfection  of 
what  would  otherwise  be  imperfect  results  ?  Do  we  not  know  that  the  sweetness 
of  the  apple  comes  from  the  sweetness  of  the  root — that  the  bloom  is  only  the 
expression  of  the  floral  and  fragrant  element  in  the  stalk  ?  There  are  streams 
whose  waters  are  pure ;  and  why  are  they  pure  ?  Because  the  springs  from 
whence  they  flow  are  pure,  and  the  channel-beds  over  which  they  glide  are  clean 
and  white.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  innocence  in  motherhood  and  fatherhood 
would  invariably  mean  innocence  in  the  child.  It  did  in  the  case  of  Jesus — 
begotten  of  the  Spirit,  and  born  of  a  virgin.  Well  might  the  wise  men  bring  their 
gifts  of  gold  and  myrrh  and  frankincense  to  the  manger  cradle  1  Wise  were  they 
in  seeing  the  innocence  of  Nature.  And  when  the  same  innocence  came  in  human 
shape,  the  sweet  old  men  knew  it  at  a  glance,  and  bowed  down  and  worshipped. 
Yes,  there  are  some  that  are  born  gentle  ;  or  so  nearly  so  that  our  eyes  cannot  see 
wherein  they  fail.  I  have  known  a  few  such,  so  have  you.  God  took  some  of 
them,  out  of  Fatherly  fear,  perhaps,  that  the  earth  might  soil  them.  God  let 
some  stay  awhile,  out  of  his  love  for  the  earth  and  we  imperfect  ones  who  live  on 
it,  that  we  might  have  a  better  Bible  than  words  can  frame,  and  a  stronger  inspira- 
tion to  be  gentle  ourselves,  than  we  might  through  invisible  channels  receive  I 
had  a  dovecote  once  on  my  farm,  full  of  white  doves.  They  were  bred  to  a  feather, 
and  white  as  snow.  And  I  have  seen  them  on  a  clear,  crystal,  sunny  day  spread 
their  white  wings  and  sail  up  and  up  until  they  actually  disappeared  from  my  eyes, 
vainly  shaded  to  follow  them,  in  the  glory  of  the  sun.  And  I  have  seen  dove-like 
spirits  sail  up  at  death  just  so.  For  death  «o  them  was  not  night :  it  was  broad 
noon — the  broad  noon  of  life  everlasting — and  God  shone  in  the  dome  of  it 
brighter  than  ten  thousand  suns.  And  their  white  spirits  flew  into  His  presence ; 
and  His  glory  hid  them  from  the  earthly  eyes  that  strained  their  vision  in  vain  to 
follow  them  in  their  ascension.  Yes,  I  can  well  believe  that  some  are  born  gentle ; 
but  their  gentleness  is  not  by  accident.  It  floweth  out  from  a  crystalline  cause.  The 
cause  is  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  those  who  become  gentle  in  death,  only  the  opera- 
tion is  reversed.  They  receive  in  being  born  what  most,  who  receive  it  at  all,  receive 
when  they  come  to  die.  Their  spiritual  and  their  natural  birth  are  contemporaneous. 
Indeed,  there  is  a  deal  of  unrecognized  piety  in  the  world.    There  is  a  moral  sweet- 


•hap.  T.]  QALATIANS.  ill 

aess  that  is  not  known  as  such.  It  is  called  ntCiural  sweetness ;  and  so  it  is.  Bat 
it  is  a  sweetness  of  grace,  nevertheless.  Nothing  is  more  false  in  conception  than 
to  suppose  that  grace  is  something  opposite  from  Nature.  Grace  is  the  highest 
phase  of  Nature,  or  Nature  in  her  finest  mood.  God  is  natural ;  Jesus  was 
natural ;  the  angels  are  all  natural ;  and  so  are  saints  if  they  be  perfect  enough. 
Sin  is  Nature  in  discord.  Piety  is  Nature  keyed  and  tuned  for  perfect  harmony. 
How  many  amiable  people  there  are,  kindly  and  gentle-hearted,  that  never  know 
they  are  saints.  Some  receive  the  Spirit  as  the  bud  receives  the  sunshine :  slowly, 
subtilely.  and  in  ways  peculiar  to  its  own  composition  and  order  of  growth.  Some 
take  the  Spirit  as  they  take  medicine ;  it  creates  a  disturbance  in  order  to  cure. 
Others  take  it  as  the  mouth  takes  cream ;  it  is  rich  and  delicious,  and  they  are 
happy  in  receiving.  They  eat  of  it  secretly,  as  it  were-  And  we  should  not  know 
they  had  eaten,  were  it  not  for  the  way  they  grow  1  That  reveals  at  what  table  and 
of  what  food  they  have  eaten.  I  love  to  think  of  the  sweet  flowers  that  are  unnamed. 
I  find  them  in  the  fields ;  I  take  them  home  and  say  to  my  friends,  "  Do  any  of  you 
know  what  the  name  of  this  flower  is  ?  "  And  no  one  can  tell.  I  find  them  in 
the  hedgerows  and  down  in  the  damp  places,  and  even  in  the  foul  places.  Most  of 
them  are  small ;  they  hide  easily.  Some  have  a  strong  fragrance.  Some  are  so 
rich  in  aroma  that  they  scent  the  air.  Others  are  so  faint  in  their  odour  that  you 
must  breathe  long  to  scent  them  at  all ;  but  when  you  breathe  long  and  gently, 
your  sense  interprets  them,  and  their  sweetness  is  so  fine,  so  delicate,  so  satisfyingly 
exquisite,  thai  you  wish  you  could  breathe  it  for  ever  1  So  God  has  saints — hae 
morally  sweet  ones  scattered  all  up  and  down  through  the  world.  In  the  fields  and 
the  hedgerows,  ay,  and  in  the  damp  and  foul  places  of  life  you  will  find  them. 
But  you  will  not  find  them  unless  you  look  closely.  Nor  will  you  know  their 
sweetness  unless  you  come  nigh  to  them.  And  should  you  take  them  into  your 
churches  and  say,  "  Wili  this  Church  please  tell  me  by  what  name  to  call  this 
exquisite  life?  "  the  Church  will  look  it  over  and  say,  "  This  does  not  look  like  a 
Calvinistic  plant."  And  another  will  say,  "  This  did  not  sprout  from  a  Presbyterian 
seed."  And  another  will  say,  "  I  don't  think  this  belongs  to  any  of  our  Unitarian 
gardens"  And  so  you  may  go  the  whole  rounds  and  not  a  Church  will  know  by 
what  name  to  call  the  sweet  life  you  have  brought  to  them — unless  it  be  the 
Quakers.  I  think  the  Quakers  might  know,  for  they  have  a  sense  to  know  piety 
without  form,  and  which  has  never  been  classified  or  catalogued  in  the  herbarium 
of  the  Church.  But  the  Spirit  knows,  and  the  angels  in  heaven  know,  and  God  who 
giveth  the  angels  wisdom  knows,  that  all  sweetness,  whether  found  in  field  or 
hedgerows  or  down  in  the  swamps  of  human  life,  is  His,  and  He  calls  it  by  its 
name.  And  there  is  not  on  all  the  face  of  the  globe  a  life  that  is  being  lived  in 
gentleness,  however  small  it  be,  or  however  evilly  placed,  that  is  not  known  of 
God,  and  has  not  the  name  by  which  He  knows  it  written  in  letters  of  light  on  its 
forehead-  And  this  leads  me  to  remark  that  much  of  the  really  best  evidence  of 
piety  is  not  regarded  as  such  in  the  churches.  You  can  think  about  God  as  much 
as  yon  please,  and  commune  with  Him  as  you  say — that  is,  silently ;  but  if  yon 
talk  your  thoughts  out  to  Him  as  you  would  to  an  earthly  being,  they  will  call  you 
insane.  But,  friends,  cannot  the  reverential  and  loving  soul  have  daily  companion- 
ship with  God  ?  Cannot  gentle  spirits  confide  their  thoughts  to  Him  and  hold 
converse  with  the  Supreme  Spirit  from  whom  they  have  caught  their  gentleness, 
and  into  whose  gentleness  they  grow  as  boys  grow  into  the  likeness  of  their 
father?  Then  do  not  all  natures  as  they  age  and  are  spiritualized  into  this 
gentleness  find  God  more  and  more  companionable  to  them  ?  I  think  I  have  seen 
this  in  old  folks  as  they  come  to  what  we  call  the  second  childhood.  We  make  it  the 
period  of  weakness  because  we  measure  it  by  the  body.  Should  we  not  regard  it 
as  the  beginning  of  immortal  strength  if  we  forgot  the  body  and  measured  it  by 
the  growing  state  of  the  soul  ?  Let  me  teach  you  that  the  finest  evidence  of  piety 
is  that  gentle  appropriation  of  God  which  childlike  trust  makes  of  Him.  Leo  me 
teach  you  that  among  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  you  should  set  in  the  front  rank  the 
increasing  gentleness  of  your  nature.  The  stream  is  noisy  amid  the  hills,  for  there 
it  runs  swift  and  sends  the  murmur  of  its  roar  far  out  on  the  air ;  but  when  it 
reaches  the  level  meadow  and  widens  out  for  entrance  into  the  great  sea,  it  flows 
with  smooth  surface,  so  that  the  stars  come  and  bathe  in  it.  It  makes  no  noise. 
It  disturbs  not  itself  or  others ;  but  it  reflects  the  whole  sky  and  receives  for  it* 
own  ornament  all  the  glory  that  is  domed  above  it.  And  so  lives  are  noisy  at 
first ;  for  they  flow  swift.  They  turn  many  wheels,  and  keep  many  industries  in 
motion ;  bat  when  they  have  flowed  on  and  have  come  nigh  to  the  magic  line 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  w, 

where  the  here  and  the  hereafter  touch,  where  the  seen  and  the  unseen  join,  they 
widen  out,  move  easily — so  gently  that  you  can  scarcely  say  where  the  Btream 
ended  and  the  sea  began ;  scarcely  say  where  the  earthly  passed  into  the  heavenly. 
And  so,  friends,  we  will  say  in  the  language  of  the  text:  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness."  I$y-and-by,  perhaps,  we  shall  all 
become  gentle.  By-and-by  we  shall  have  done  with  economic  industries  and  the 
faction  they  put  upon  our  tempers,  and  enter  into  eternal  entertainment.  By-and- 
by  we  shall  talk  without  harshness  and  live  in  neighbourhoods  of  peacefulness, 
unvexed  by  jealousy  and  unflushed  with  the  inflammation  of  hate.  Nor  will  we, 
even  now,  forget  the  example  of  the  incarnated  Gentleness  that  took  human  shape 
for  our  instruction.  (W.  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  Gentleness  : — Real  gentleness  is  the 
subjugation,  or  rather  the  right  use  and  government  of  strong  feelings.  The  word 
"gentle"  has  a  Latin  root,  and  means  literally  that  which  suits  or  belongs  to  a 
high  race,  a  good  family.  And  if  we  take  it  so,  what  ought  not  our  "  gentleness  " 
to  be  who  belong,  or  profess  to  belong,  to  the  race  of  the  Holy  One — to  the 
generation  of  saints — to  the  family  of  God  ?  Let  me  consider  with  you,  for  a  few 
minutes,  how  "  gentleness  "  is  to  be  attained  and  cultivated.  First,  let  me  advise  you, 
by  looking  back  and  looking  into  yourself,  to  get  a  more  accurate  and  definite 
knowledge  where  your  want  of  gentleness  chiefly  lies ;  with  whom,  and  on  what 
occasions,  you  have  been  most  ungentle.  Ask  forgiveness  of  anybody  in  the 
world  to  whom  you  feel  you  have  been  ungentle ;  and  let  the  facts  remain  to  be 
your  beacons.  Get  more  general  self-knowledge,  and  trace  the  steps  which  have 
led  you  down.  Find  the  roots,  try  to  eradicate  those  roots  which  have  led  to 
ungentleness—  selfishness,  temper,  jealousy,  the  neglect  of  watchfulness,  want  of 
prayer  at  the  right  moment.  Then  lay  down  yourself  some  strong  rules  upon  the 
subject,  and  pray  that  you  may  remember  those  rules  and  keep  them.  Tune  your 
heart  to  gentleness  before  you  leave  your  room  in  the  morning.  Want  of  health 
has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  ungentleness.  Put  on  a  double  watch  when  you  feel 
poorly.  Do  not  be  discouraged  by  failures ;  only  humble  yourself  and  watch  and 
pray  the  more.  Be  very  gentle  to  those  who  are  below  you  in  social  rank — 
especially  to  your  servants.  I  would  say  to  men — if  you  are  young — be  like  a  son 
or  a  brother  to  those  you  meet;  if  you  are  old,  be  as  a  father  to  those  you  meet. 
I  would  say  to  women — if  you  are  young — be  like  a  daughter  or  sister  to  any  one ; 
if  you  are  old,  be  as  a  mother  to  every  one.  There  are  some  persons  with  whom 
you  feel  it  particularly  difficult  to  be  gentle.  You  can  scarcely  say  why,  but  so  it 
is.  They  are  specially  provoking  to  us,  perhaps  even  in  their  look.  Or  per- 
haps that  which  would  not  provoke  you  in  others,  irritates  you  in  that  person. 
Put  on  a  double  guard  when  you  are  with  that  person.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Gentleness  and  goodness : — I.  The  graces  themselves.  1.  Gentleness  has  reference 
to  the  demeanour  of  a  Christian.  Gentleness  is  not  mere  polish  and  politeness.  It 
shows  itself  in  a  desire  to  please  others  for  Christ's  sake,  because  it  would  please 
God  and  commend  His  gospel.  Gentleness  has  nothing  to  do  with  indecision  and 
vacillation,  so  that  it  may  be  turned  this  way  and  that  without  regard  to  principles. 
2.  By  "  goodnesB  "  we  may  understand  not  only  goodness  in  general  ("for  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness  "),  but  here  especially  benevolence  and  munificence. 
II.  How  these  graces  abe  exhibited.  1.  Of  gentleness.  (1)  Gentleness  is  seen 
in  its  perfection  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  In  the  exercise  of  authority. 
The  true  grace  of  power  and  authority  is  gentleness.  (3)  In  taking  the  best 
view  of  others'  characters.  (4)  In  being  considerate  to  people's  feelings.  (5)  In 
administering  reproof.     2.  Of  goodness.     (J.  Reeve,  M.A.)  Gentleness : — The 

greatest  results  are  accomplished  by  gentle,  quiet  influences.  Not  long  ago,  I 
saw  a  man  mounted  on  a  dray,  very  heavily  loaded,  beating  his  poor  half -starved 
horse  most  cruelly,  because  the  wheels  had  got  stuck  fast  in  the  mud,  and  the  beast 
was  too  feeble  to  pull  tbem  out.  The  more  the  man  whipped,  and  swore,  and 
wished  the  horse  might  go  to  the  bad  place,  the  more  frightened  the  animal  became, 
and  the  less  able  to  perform  what  was  so  unreasonably  demanded.  As  I  witnessed 
the  painful  sight,  I  could  not  but  hope  that  Mr.  Rarey,  the  horse-tamer,  might 
some  time  come  along,  and  teach  the  cruel  driver  that  kind  and  cheering  words 
would  prove  much  more  effectual  in  making  the  horse  do  as  he  desired.  You  may 
ask  me,  perhaps,  whether  one  who  is  born  cross,  and  crabbed,  and  cruel,  can  ever 
hope  to  become  gentle.  He  can.  Just  listen  to  the  text.  "  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  gentleness."  The  Spirit  here  spoken  of  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
teaches,  and  guides,  and  blesses  us.  He  it  is  who  helps  to  make  us  gentle.  The 
word  gentleness  (which  is  one  of  the  virtues ,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  helps  as  to 


OTA*.  T.]  OALATIANS.  Alt 

cultivate)  means,  in  the  text,  goodness  and  kindness.     It  is  the  opposite  of   a 
harsh,  crooked,  and  crabbed  temper.     It  is  a  disposition  easy  to  be  pleased,  and  in 
our  idea  of  this  Christian  gentleness  we  must  include  mildness  and  politeness. 
The  power  of  gentleness  is  really  irresistible.     The  blustering  wind   could  not 
make  the  traveller  take  off  his  cloak,  but  the  only  effect  was  that  he  wrapped 
himself  up  the  more  tightly  in  it.     When,  however,  the  gentle  sunbeams  shined 
softly  and  steadily  on  him,  he  was  glad  to  remove  it.     Gentleness  must  not  be  con- 
founded with  cowardice,  and  with  a  mean,  truckling  spirit.    No  one  would  doubt 
General  Washington's  courage ;  and  yet  he  could  practise  gentleness.    After  the 
Kevolution  was  well  over,  and  the  country  had  become  settled  and  quiet,  he  was 
making  a  long  journey  in  his  carriage,  attended  by  several  gentlemen  who  travelled 
in  a  conveyance  of  their  own.     One  afternoon,  as  night  wa3  fast  approaching,  and 
they  were  all  anxious  to  reach  the  neighbouring  town  before  dark,  they  found  the 
road  almost  blocked  up  by  a  large  wagon  drawn  by  four  horses,  proceeding  at  a  snail's 
pace.     Wishing  to  go  faster  than  this  wagon,  a  gentleman  in  the  foremost  carriage 
called  out  to  the  teamster,  with  a  lordly  air,  to  turn  out  and  let  them  pass.   As  might 
be  supposed,  the  man  merely  looked  angry,  and  refused  to  budge.     Seeing  how 
matters  were,  General  Washington  spoke  politely  to  the  driver,  and  explaining  why 
they  wished  to  hasten  forward,  asked  him  to  allow  the  carriages  to  go  by.   The  power 
of  gentleness  prevailed  in  a  moment ;  and  the  weary  travellers  were  soon  enjoying 
a  good  supper  at  the  village  inn.     Two  little  boys  were  once  rolling  a  hoop  over 
the  frozen  ground,  and,  in  running  carelessly  after  it,  Gerald,  the  younger,  heing 
behind,  came  in  contact  with  his  brother  Thomas,  and  both  fell  down  with  violence, 
the  younger  on  top  of  the  elder.   Thomas  was  severely  bruised,  and  rose  up  in  a  ter- 
rible passion.  He  scolded  Gerald,  in  the  most  offensive  words  he  could  think  of,  and 
then  began  to  beat  him.     Instead  of  crying  out,  or  striking  back,  the  little  fellow 
put  his  hand  into  his  pocket  hurriedly,  fumbled  about  among  his  treasures,  and 
drawing  out  a  stick  of  candy,  thrust  it  into  Thomas's  mouth,  even  while  he  was 
scolding  and  beating  him.     Thomas  instantly  stopped,  and  looked  confused  and 
ashamed.    And  thus  his  wrath  was  turned  aside  by  the  spirit  of  gentleness  which 
his  younger  brother  manifested.     I  ought  to  say  for  your  comfort  and  encourage- 
ment, that  such  a  spirit  is  not  natural  to  us,  nor  easy  to  acquire ;  and  yet,  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  help  us  to  gain  it,  whenever  we  show  a  real  desire  to  do  so.     The 
Holy  Spirit,  gentle  and  loving  Himself,  is  the  best  teacher  we  can  have.    (J.  N.. 
Norton,  D.J5.)         Gentleness: — I.  I  shall  describe  the  nature  of  that  gentle- 
ness which   is  the   fruit  of  the  Spirit.      It  has  its  seat  in  the  heart,  and 
pervades   all  the  faculties   and   powers  of  the  man.     It  consists  in  humility, 
candour,  sweetness  of  temper,  and  tenderness  of  feeling.     II.  Let  us  specify  some 
cases  in  which  gentleness  appears  to  be  particularly  necessary.      1.  Gentle- 
ness is  required  in  the  exercise  of  authority.    While  Nero  remained  a  subject,  he  was 
noted  for  condescending  manners  ;  but  after  he  was  made  Emperor  of  Kome,  he 
became  a  monster  of  cruelty.     Now,  as  there  can  be  nothing  more  odious  and 
injurious  than  authority  exerted  with  fierce  unrelenting  severity — so  there  can  be 
nothing  more  amiable  and  beneficial,  than  authority  exercised  with  firmness  and 
lenity.    When  true  religion  sways  the  heart  it  teaches  kings  to  sway  the  sceptre 
and  rulers  to  use  their  power  with  moderation  and  justice.     Nor  is  it  less  necessary 
that  authority  should  be  exercised  with  gentleness  by  the  head  of  a  single  family, 
than  by  the  chief  of  a  province  or  the  head  of  a  nation.     2.  Gentleness  is  required 
in  a  suitable  manner,  to  give  warnings  and  administer  reproofs.    3.  Gentleness  is 
necessary  in  attempting  to  allay  animosities.     4.  Gentleness  is  necessary  in  the 
treatment  of  strangers.     5.  Gentleness  is  necessary  to  preserve,  uninterrupted,  the 
endearments  of  friendships.     Without  genuine  tenderness  there  can  be  no  union  of 
hearts.     III.    I    shall    endeavour    to    point    out    some    causes    which    impair 
Christian  gentleness,  and  recommend  the  means  adapted   to   promote   it.     1. 
Nothing  more  directly  tends  to  impair  gentleness  than  eagerly  grasping  at  the 
things  of  the  world.     Though  Christians  are  in  the  world  they  ought  not  to  be  of 
the  world.     It  is  remarked  of  some  insects  that  they  resemble  the  colour  of  the 
plants  on  which  they  live  and  feed.     Those  who  wholly  mind  earthly  things  are  of 
a  low,  grovelling  spirit.     By  plunging  into  the  cares  of  this  life  they  are  con- 
tinually ruffled  and  distracted.     "  They  are  linked  so  closely  to  the  world ;  by  so 
jaany  sides  they  touch  every  object  and  every  person  around  them,  that  they  are 
perpetually  hurt  and  hurting  others.     The  spirit  of  true  religion  removes  us  to  a 
proper  distance  from  the  grating  objects  of  worldly  contention."    2.  Taking  an 
eager  part  in  political  disputes  tends  to  impair  the  gentleness  of  the  Christian.      Z 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  t, 

shall  now  recommend  some  means  adapted  to  promote  gentleness.  1.  Retire 
often  into  the  calm,  undisturbed  region  of  solitude.  2.  Set  constantly  before  yon 
the  perfect  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Scipio  declared  that  he  was 
inflamed  with  a  virtuous  and  heroic  spirit,  by  viewing  the  statues  of  his  ancestors. 
And  for  what  end  have  we  exhibited  before  us  the  matchless  excellence  of  Jesus 
Christ  ?  Is  it  not  that  we  may  imitate  it  ?  The  fairest  characters  we  can  find 
have  some  blots  and  stains.  Here  we  have  a  pure  unblemished  pattern.  He  was 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  amiable  and  unassuming  in  conduct.  How  condescend- 
ingly did  He  instruct  His  disciples  !  How  faithfully,  yet  gently,  did  He  reprove 
their  faults !  3.  Pray  for  more  abundant  communications  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Every  other  means  must  derive  efficacy  from  the  Divine  Spirit,  or  we  shall  gain  no 
real  profit.  Reading,  prayer,  retirement,  and  reflection  are  all  in  vain,  unless  His 
gracious  influence  open  the  mind,  and  animate  the  heart.  (John  Thornton.) 
Gentleness :  its  strength : — I've  noticed  often  that  the  strong,  skilful  men  are 
oftenest  the  gentlest  to  women  and  children ;  and  it's  pretty  to  see  'em  carrying  the 
little  babies  as  if  they  were  no  heavier  than  birds,  and  the  babies  often  seem  to 
like  the  strong  arms  best.  (George  Eliot.)  Description  of  gentleness : — Gentle- 
ness is  love  in  society.  It  is  love  holding  intercourse  with  those  around  it.  It  is 
that  cordiality  of  aspect,  and  that  soul  of  speech,  which  assure  us  that  kind  and 
earnest  hearts  may  still  be  met  with  here  below.  It  is  that  quiet  influence,  which, 
like  the  scented  flame  of  an  alabaster  lamp,  fills  many  a  home  with  light,  and 
warmth,  and  fragrance  altogether.  It  is  the  carpet  soft  and  deep,  which,  whilst  it 
diffuses  a  look  of  ample  comfort,  deadens  many  a  creaking  sound.  It  is  the 
curtain  which,  from  many  a  beloved  form,  wards  off  at  once  the  summer's  glow 
and  the  winter's  wind.  It  is  the  pillow  on  which  sickness  lays  its  head  and  forgets 
half  its  misery,  and  to  which  death  comes  in  a  balmier  dream.  It  is  considerate- 
ness.  It  is  tenderness  of  feeling.  It  is  warmth  of  affection.  It  is  promptitude  of 
sympathy.  It  is  love  in  all  its  depths,  and  all  its  delicacy.  It  is  everything 
included  in  that  matchless  grace,  the  gentleness  of  Christ.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
Power  of  gentleness : — By  invincible,  self-controlling  gentleness,  the  mother  at  last 
wins  back  to  virtue  the  son  whom  no  threats,  no  severities,  no  storms  and 
upbraidings  of  passion  could  subdue.  Geologists  tell  us  that  the  calm  and  silent 
influence  of  the  atmosphere  is  a  power  mightier  than  all  the  noisier  forces  of 
nature.  Rocks  and  mountains  are  worn  down  and  subdued  by  it.  (Anon.)  Need 
of  gentleness  : — Wishing  to  seal  a  letter,  Gotthold  called  for  a  lighted  candle.  The 
maid  obeyed  his  orders ;  but,  proceeding  too  hastily,  the  flame,  which  had  not  yet 
gathered  sufficient  strength,  went  out.  "  Here,"  said  Gotthold,  "  we  have  that 
which  may  well  remind  us  of  the  gentleness  and  moderation  to  be  observed  in  our 
comportment  towards  weak  and  erring  brethren.  Had  this  candle  when  first  lighted 
been  carried  slowly,  and  shaded  by  the  hand  from  the  air,  it  would  not  have  been 
extinguished,  but  would  soon  have  burned  with  vigour.  In  like  manner,  many  a 
weak  brother  might  be  set  right,  if  we  only  came  to  his  help  in  the  right  way  and 
with  kindly  advice.  Gentleness: — And  we  ought,  it  may  be,  always  to  move 
with  great  gentleness  amidst  the  handiwork  of  God ;  with  a  feeling  of  reverence 
amidst  the  order,  life,  and  beauty  of  this  world  ;  with  some  of  that  holy  reserve, 
which  the  builders  of  our  great  Gothic  cathedrals  understood  when  they  reared  the 
long  mysterious  aisles,  and  veiled  in  retiring  beauty  the  glories  of  the  sanctuary ; 
or  such  reserve  as  the  early  Christians  displayed  in  the  allegory  of  the  fresco,  or 
the  secrecy  of  their  worship,  or  the  shutting  off  of  the  sacred  truths  of  God  from 
all  danger  of  heathen  pollution ;  or  such  a  holy  retirement,  again,  as  belonged  to 
the  religious  life  of  men  fifty  years  ago  more  perhaps  than  it  does  now.  With 
some  such  feeling  we  should  move  in  a  world  where  all  breathing  life  is  yet  warm 
with  the  impress  of  God.  And  with  reverence  will  mingle  a  feeling  of  responsi- 
bility ;  the  lilies,  and  the  ravens,  and  the  waving  corn,  and  the  growing  tares,  are  all 
speaking  to  us,  and  proclaiming,  "  So  they  are  without  excuse :  if  when  they  know 
God,  they  glorify  Him  not  as  God,  neither  are  thankful."  And  with  reverence  and 
responsibility  will  mingle  a  feeling  of  awe ;  what  is  the  destiny  of  the  creatures 
around  me  ?  What  mean  the  mysteries  which  throng  my  path  ?  And  more 
especially  when  we  look  at  man,  at  ourselves — the  work,  the  purchase,  and  the 
temple  of  God — there  is  still  greater  need  of  that  gentleness,  xpr/ffronje,  benignitas, 
which  makes  us  move  amidst  all  these  wonders  with  something  of  the  manners 
and  the  refinement  of  one  who  is  of  the  race  of  heaven.  It  is  written  that  the 
Creator  of  all  things  beheld  them,  not  in  that  they  were  beautiful,  but  in  that  they 
were  gx>d.     This  gentle  goodness,  benignitas,  s  a  true  mark  of  a  heavenly  life. 


OTAP.  v.]  GALATIANS.  421 

So  we  shall  guard  against  an  overweening  confidence,  or  a  roughness  and 
impatience  which  thinks  that  the  minute  splendour  and  wondrous  works  of  God 
can  be  seen  at  a  hurried  and  unloving  glance,  ending  either  in  a  dogmatism  or  a 
scepticism  which  a  wider  and  a  deeper  view  would  have  dissipated.  So  we  shall 
guard  equally  against  self-assertion  ;  how  often  comes  that  command  in  the  midst 
of  wonders,  accompanied  sometimes  with  actual  sternness,  "  See  thou  tell  no 
man  ?  "  How  silently,  how  quietly  God  works !  You  cannot  ever  quite  catch  a 
glimpse  of  His  hand.  Man  is  sometimes  so  loud,  so  self-asserting,  even  when  doing 
good  and  serving  God,  that  he  seems  to  have  forgotten  his  gentleness,  or  that  he 
is  a  fellow-servant  with  the  angels,  and  a  fellow-worker  even  with  God.  Above  all, 
we  shall  guard  against  flippancy,  the  coarsest  form  of  the  ungentle  spirit ;  that 
flippancy  which  displays  itself  in  an  irreverent  treatment  of  Bevelation  in  the 
hasty  criticism,  or  cheap  jest ;  in  the  light  handling  of  history,  which  parodies 
great  scenes  of  national  calamity  or  great  moments  of  political  life ;  in  the  vulgar 
profanity  which  insults  nature,  or  degrades  self.  "  Such  as  are  gentle,  them  shall 
He  learn  His  way."  Gentleness  will  teach  us  more  especially  the  way  of  God.  Is 
it  creative  work  ?  Whatever  it  may  be,  in  all  such  things  we  shall  need  gentleness  ; 
not  the  imperiousness  of  Moses,  or  the  vengeance  of  Boaneiges,  or  the  stern 
persecution  of  Saul ;  these  are  but  rough  ways  of  dealing  with  error  and  human 
infirmities ;  and  the  rough  hand  often  does  a  great  deal  of  harm ;  it  engrains  the 
dust  and  smears  it,  where  a  gentle  hand  would  have  brushed  it  off.  Christian 
hands  must  not  wield  the  sword  of  vengeance  and  anger.  Granted  that  people  are 
very  provoking,  and  circumstances  distorted.  Just  as  Baxter  said  when  his  friends 
told  him  that  he  was  going  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling — "  Yes,  and 
where  the  good  cease  from  troubling  too."  Redemptive  work  also  requires  a  gentle 
hand ;  there  must  be  no  breaking  of  the  bruised  reed,  no  quenching  of  the  smoking 
flax.  Think  of  His  gentle  words  and  actions.  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do,"  spoken  amidst  all  the  pain  and  derision  of  Calvary.  And 
yet  gentleness  means  equableness,  a  firm  hand ;  not  at  one  time  hardly  to  be  felt, 
at  another  time  rough  and  severe ;  and  means  also  tenderness.  Where  God  and 
His  holy  angels  are  dealing  with  the  man  ;  who  am  I  that  I  should  despise  him  ? 
And  gentleness,  again,  means  a  good  kind  of  self-consciousness.  We  ourselves  are 
owing  to  our  Master  ten  thousand  talents,  which  He  has  freely  forgiven  us,  while 
we  are  dealing  with  a  man  who  owes  us  only  a  hundred  pence,  in  injury,  or  insult, 
or  violation  of  human  laws.  We  can  only  say  with  ourselves,  "  If  thou,  Lord, 
will  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss :  O  Lord,  who  may  abide  it  ?  "  Con- 
scious to  ourselves  of  God's  manifold  gentleness,  we  must  needs  be  gentle  too. 
"  His  way ! "  Sanctifying  work  equally  requires  a  gentle  hand.  We  need  to  be 
gentle  even  with  ourselves.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth  ; "  let  us  think  of 
the  manifold  ways  in  which  grace  comes  to  us.  And,  so  doing,  we  shall  learn  to 
work  quietly.  We  are  not  working  to  secure  some  brilliant  effect.  Why  should 
we  finish  up  work  hastily  to  make  a  display  before  its  time,  rather  than  labour  at 
detail  ?  Oh,  what  a  temptation  it  is !  Results,  anyhow,  by  any  means,  at  any 
cost !  It  is  the  temptation  which  besets  the  clergy,  who  shall  boast  of  the  largest 
congregation  ?  It  is  the  temptation  of  great  institutions  for  good,  to  make  a  show, 
to  rival  one  another  in  hurried  emulation  ;  and  when  this  reaches  the  region  of 
our  soul,  it  is  doubly  dangerous.  Publicity  is  always  dazzling,  sometimes  it  is 
fatal.  "  All  this  power  will  I  give  thee,"  whispers  Satan,  "  if  thou  wilt  fall  down 
and  worship  me."  Give  up  the  Cross :  give  up  the  oldmethods  ;  give  up  thoroughness ; 
give  up  the  unseen  work ;  brush  away  the  failures !  Anything  for  brilliancy !  Brilliancy 
dazzles,  but  it  does  not  last,  and  it  burns  deep  down  into  the  socket.  Have  we  then 
this  gentleness  ?  It  grows  upon  us,  it  develops  within  us,  as  the  mighty  machine 
of  life  goes  working  on,  habitually  in  the  presence  of  God  ;  as  we  realize  that  all 
our  work,  whatsoever  we  do,  is  done  for  God,  and  in  His  sight.  (W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.) 
Goodness. — Goodness,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit : — Goodness  embraces  so  much  and 
suggests  so  much  that  it  is  hard  to  circumscribe  its  radiating  significance  within  a 
definition.  And  this  will  be  seen  when  our  theme  of  to-day  is  placed  in  contrast 
with  the  themes  we  have  already  treated.  Love,  for  instance,  refers  to  one  class  of 
emotions,  and  is  therefore  definable.  Joy  is  one  phase  of  the  emotions.  Peace  is 
a  particular  state  of  being.  Long-suffering  is  an  element  of  character.  Gentleness 
is  a  habit  of  the  disposition.  These  characteristics  are,  you  see,  definable.  Their 
significance  has  its  limitations,  and  the  boundaries  of  our  treatment  were  therefore 
clearly  marked.  But  goodness  is  not  one  emotion,  nor  a  single  element  of  character, 
nor  a  particular  state  of  being,  nor  any  one  habit  of  disposition.    Goodness  is  larger 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  v. 

than  either  of  these  excellences — larger  than  they  all.  These,  and  many  other 
virtues  of  equal  fervency,  are  only  the  rays  which  goodness,  like  a  solar  orb,  sends 
forth  through  the  moral  atmosphere  as  it  rolls  forward  in  its  beneficent  career, 
enlightening  the  darkness  and  quickening  the  otherwise  dormant  life  of  the  world. 
A  good  man  !  Who  shall  describe  him,  or  with  what  language  shall  we  depict  him  t 
In  his  heart  is  love.  In  his  bosom  is  joy.  The  atmosphere  of  his  nature  is  peace. 
Enthroned  within  him  is  divinest  patience.  Gentleness  spreads  its  mild  light  over 
his  countenance,  and  falls  in  charming  language  from  his  lips.  But  in  him,  too,  is 
courage ;  courage  to  do  and  die.  Strength  also  braces  him  like  a  girdle.  Temperance 
orders  his  life  with  discretion.  Purity  keeps  his  record  stainless.  Faith  steadies 
his  footsteps  as  he  walks  the  high  level  of  his  aspirations.  And  Hope,  ever  by  his 
Bide,  points  him  to  a  fairer  world  and  a  nobler  destiny  beyond  the  grave.  In  short, 
can  we  say  less  than  this,  that  goodness  implies  perfection  of  moral  being,  perfec- 
tion  of  spiritual  state,  perfection  of  manhood,  in  all  things  which  adorn  the  same, 
and  move  it  upward  in  that  amplifying  growth  which  the  ordering  of  a  good  God 
has  provided  as  the  destiny  for  good  beings.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  therefore — its 
object  and  aim — is  to  produce  a  good  man — a  perfect  man  by  that  standard  of 
measurement  which  God  Himself,  in  His  infinite  wisdom  and  Fatherly  ambition, 
applies  to  the  character  of  His  children.  Goodness  is  a  thing  that  must  be  born  ; 
and  the  query  therefore  comes,  whence  this  birth  t  With  the  exception  of  Jesus,  who 
was  a  gift  from  above,  there  has  been  no  perfect  man  on  the  earth.  Human  power 
has  never  produced  one.  The  good  man  or  the  good  men  that  are  to  be  must  be 
born,  not  after  the  birth  of  the  flesh,  but  after  the  birth  of  the  Spirit.  We  assume 
that  this  birth  of  goodness  does  occur  in  human  nature;  nor  should  it  surprise  one, 
at  least  into  incredulity,  for  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  hence  it  is  only  natural  for  Him 
to  operate  in  and  upon  spirit.  With  my  hands  it  is  natural  for  me  to  mould  plastic 
matter,  because  it  is  subject  to  pressure,  and  my  power  is  sufficient.  But  it  is  as 
natural — why  should  it  not  be  ? — for  the  great  Almighty  Spirit  to  mould  spirits  that 
are  plastic  as  for  me  to  mould  clay.  Not  only  so,  but  I  can  produce  life.  That  is, 
I  can  take  a  seed,  plant  it  in  the  earth,  and  from  it  a  tree  shall  spring.  Why 
strange,  then,  that  God  should  take  a  principle  germinant  with  virtues  and  plant  it 
in  man's  understanding — in  man's  consciousness — in  man's  affections — and  from  it 
goodness  should  spring  up  ?  The  moment  that  God  is  acknowledged  in  the  under- 
standing as  the  Author  of  life — the  moment  that  this  power  is  accredited  to  Him — 
that  moment  faith  in  the  new  birth — the  birth  of  goodness  in  the  depraved,  un- 
fortunate or  lacking  soul — springs  up.  We  take  it  for  granted,  therefore,  we  say, 
that  the  life  of  goodness,  even  in  its  largest  definition,  can  begin  in  the  soul.  And 
what  a  perspective  of  possibility  is  opened  up  to  him  who  accepts  this  sublime  and 
most  encouraging  view  I  How  silly  and  untruthful  even  seem  the  words  of  those 
who  are  ever  degrading  man  in  their  descriptions  of  him  morally  I  For  when  you 
contemplate  man  from  this  point  of  view,  the  vast  expenditure  of  forces  which 
Heaven  has  put  forth  for  man's  salvation  appears  accountable.  Knowing  now, 
through  the  revelations  that  come  to  us  in  Jesus,  what  we  can  be — knowing  that 
goodness  is  both  the  highest  ornament  and  noblest  object  of  living,  the  question 
recurs  to  each  one  in  the  Divine  presence  here,  "What  am  I  doing  to  be  good? 
Have  I  taken  the  first  step  ?  "  If  you  should  ask  me,  "  What  is  the  first  step  ?  "  I 
should  reply,  Spiritual  connection  with  God's  Spirit.  If  you  say,  "  I  don't  under- 
stand it,"  I  respond,  You  do  understand  it,  or  you  can  understand  it.  If  you 
should  ask  me,  "  What  is  the  first  step  to  take  in  order  that  I  may  love  people  ?  " 
I  should  reply,  Put  yourself  on  amiable  relations  with  lovable  people ;  and  the  reply 
would  cover  the  whole  ground.  For  in  your  mood  of  desiring  to  love,  you  could 
not  be  a  single  week  in  the  company  of  those  that  were  lovable,  and  not  find  your 
heart  going  out  towards  them.  And  this  result  would  not  be  dependent  upon  any 
decision  of  your  will,  but  would  be  the  natural  result  arising  from  the  workings  of 
your  nature.  If  you  say,  therefore,  "What  is  the  first  step  in  being  good?"  I 
should  say,  Put  yourself  in  connection  with  God's  Spirit.  And  you  perceive  that 
rny  answer  is  the  right  one.  If  you  say,  "  But  how  am  I  to  find  this  connection  * 
How  can  my  spirit  come  under  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit  ?  "  I  reply,  There 
are  many  ways,  all  plain  ;  and  perhaps  the  best  one  is  the  plainest  one — prayer. 
Pray  to  the  Spirit.  Say,  "  Spirit  of  Good,  come  and  influence  my  spirit  that  I  may 
be  good."  Yes,  some  men  are  changing  for  the  worse.  They  are  growing  into  bad- 
ness, and  badness  is  growing  into  them — the  black  branches  of  conduct  stretching 
outward,  and  the  blocker  roots  of  desire  striking  deeper  and  deeper  into  them.  But 
if  you  make  this  spiritual  connection,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  you  will  find  yourselves, 


chap.  T.J  GALATIAN8.  423 

the  moment  it  is  made,  beginning  to  change  for  the  better,  and  to  grow  sweeter.  And 
from  this  thought  comes  such  happiness  as  comes  from  no  other  source,  for  man 
must  be  happy  in  himself  if  he  is  happy  at  all.  Others  may  minister  greatly  to  him, 
but  unless  he  is  great  enough  to  receive  the  ministry,  it  shall  be  barren  of  joy  unto 
his  soul.  And  what  other  inward  happiness  is  there  so  fine  and  helpful  as  that 
which  springs  from  the  thought — from  the  consciousness,  rather — that  you  are 
growing  better.  The  highest  expression  of  manhood  is  Goodness ;  before  its 
expression  men  bow  in  acknowledgment,  and  lifting  their  heads  pronounce  their 
applause.  It  is  a  law  of  our  nature  to  abhor  villainy ;  to  despise  the  sneak  and 
avoid  a  scamp.  This  is  Nature's  tribute  to  honesty,  and  frankness,  and  upright- 
ness. There  is  no  weakness  in  Goodness,  for  it  symbolises  the  strength  of 
Heaven.  (W.  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  Goodness: — The  production  of  a  strawberry, 
vine,  or  of  an  orange-tree,  is  pleasant  and  palatable,  while  the  fruit  of  a  crab-tree 
is  sour  and  disagreeable.  One  might  fasten  the  most  delicious,  rosy-cheeked 
peaches  or  apricots,  by  strings  or  bits  of  wire,  to  the  limbs  of  a  poplar,  but  these 
would  not  be  the  fruit  of  it.  The  whole  thing  would  be  a  sham.  In  the  text, 
goodness  is  described  as  the  fruit  of  something.  Of  what  ?  Why,  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God.  The  Blessed  Spirit  is  God,  and  He  can  do  all  things.  He  is  spoken 
of  in  the  Creed,  as  "  The  Lord  and  Giver  of  Life."  A  skilful  gardener  can  take  a 
most  unsightly,  stony  waste,  and  by  bestowing  much  care  and  culture  on  it,  he  can 
change  it  into  a  spot  covered  with  luxuriance  and  beauty.  So  the  Holy  Spirit 
accomplishes  His  wonderful  work  in  our  hard  and  stony  hearts.  During  the 
autumn  of  1799,  the  retreating  French  army  left  three  hundred  wounded  men  at 
Bobbio,  the  capital  of  Piedmont.  Although  the  soldiers  were  enemies  both  to  the 
religion  and  the  country  of  the  Waldenses,  yet  they  received  the  kindest  treatment 
at  their  hands.  The  people  of  Piedmont  were  extremely  poor,  but  they  cheerfully 
shared  their  scanty  provisions  with  the  strangers,  bound  up  their  wounds,  and 
nursed  them  as  carefully  as  if  they  had  been  near  friends.  At  length  provisions 
became  still  more  scarce,  and  finding  that  if  they  kept  the  French  soldiers  during 
the  winter  all  must  starve  together,  the  good  Waldenses  performed  the  wonderful 
and  dangerous  feat  of  carrying  them  across  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  the  Alpine 
ranges,  then  covered  with  ice  and  snow,  and  leaving  them  safe  within  the  borders 
of  their  own  land.  The  meaning  of  God  is  the  Good  One,  and  they  who  are  like 
Him  abound  in  acts  of  goodness.  That  you  may  the  better  understand  this,  I  shall 
go  on  to  tell  you  some  things  which  goodness  prompts  people  to  do.  I.  Goodness 
makes  them  willing  to  eokgive  wrongs.  A  gentleman  once  came  to  Sir  Eardley 
Wilmot  in  great  anger  at  an  injury  which  he  had  suffered  from  a  person  of  high 
rank,  and  on  whom  he  wished  to  be  avenged.  "  Would  it  be  manly  to  resent  it  ?  " 
"  Yes,"  answered  Sir  Eardley,  "  but  God-like  to  forgive  it."  II.  Goodness  teaches 
people  to  be  considerate  and  generous.  Joseph  William  Turner,  one  of  the 
greatest  of  English  landscape  painters,  was  one  of  the  committee  whose  business  it 
was  to  arrange  about  hanging  the  pictures  sent  for  exhibition  to  the  Boyal  Academy. 
The  walls  were  already  crowded,  when  his  attention  was  attracted  by  one  which 
had  been  painted  by  an  unknown  artist  from  some  distant  town,  and  who  had  no 
friend  to  advance  his  interest.  "A  good  picture,"  exclaimed  Turner,  as  soon  as 
his  critical  eye  rested  on  it :  "  it  must  be  hung  up,  and  exhibited."  "  Impossible  !  " 
replied  the  other  members  of  the  committee,  with  one  voice.  "  The  arrangement 
cannot  be  disturbed.  Quite  impossible  I "  "A  good  picture,"  persisted  the 
generous  Turner ;  "  it  must  be  hung  up  ;  "  and,  so  saying,  he  took  down  one  of  his 
own  pictures,  and  put  the  unknown  Mr.  Bird's  in  its  place.  III.  Goodness  prompts 
people  to  be  conscientious  and  enduring.  There  lived  in  a  Scotch  village  a  very 
little  boy,  Jamie  by  name,  who  set  his  heart  on  being  a  sailor.  His  mother  loved 
him  very  dearly,  and  the  thought  of  giving  him  up  grieved  her  exceedingly,  but  he 
showed  such  an  anxiety  to  go  and  see  the  distant  countries  which  he  had  read 
about,  that  she  finally  consented.  As  the  boy  left  home,  the  good  woman  said  to 
him,  ,1  Wherever  you  are,  Jamie,  whether  on  sea  or  land,  never  forget  to  acknow- 
ledge your  God.  Promise  me  that  you  will  kneel  down,  every  night  and  morning, 
and  say  your  prayers,  no  matter  whether  the  sailors  laugh  at  you  or  not." 
"  Mother,  I  promise  you  I  will,"  said  Jamie  ;  and  soon  he  was  on  shipboard  bound 
for  India.  They  had  a  good  captain,  and  as  several  of  the  sailors  were  religious 
men,  no  one  laughed  at  the  boy  when  he  kneeled  down  to  pray.  On  the  return 
voyage  things  were  not  quite  so  pleasant.  Some  of  the  sailors  having  run  away, 
their  places  were  supplied  by  others,  and  one  of  these  proved  to  be  a  very  bad 
fellow.    When  he  saw  little  Jamie  kneeling  down  to  say  his  prayers,  this  wicked 


iU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  IS. 

sailcn-  went  up  to  him,  and  giving  him  a  sound  box  on  the  ear,  said  in  a  very 
decided  tone,  "  None  of  that  here,  sir."  Another  seaman  who  saw  this,  although 
he  swore  sometimes,  was  indignant  that  the  child  should  be  so  cruelly  treated,  and 
told  the  bully  to  come  up  on  deck,  and  he  would  give  him  a  thrashing.  The 
challenge  was  accepted,  and  the  well-deserved  beating  was  duly  beBtowed.  Both 
then  returned  to  the  cabin,  and  the  swearing  man  said,  "Now,  Jamie,  say  your 
prayers,  and  if  he  dares  to  touch  you,  I  will  give  him  another  dressing."  The  next 
night  the  devil  tempted  Jamie  to  do  a  very  foolish  thing.  He  does  not  like  to  have 
any  one  say  his  prayers,  or  do  right  in  any  way,  and  so  he  put  it  into  the  little  boy's 
mind  that  it  was  quite  unnecessary  for  him  to  be  creating  such  a  disturbance  in  the 
ship,  when  it  could  easily  be  avoided,  if  he  would  only  say  his  prayers  very  quietly 
in  his  hammock,  so  that  nobody  would  observe  it.  Now,  see  how  little  he  gained 
by  this  cowardly  proceeding.  The  moment  that  the  friendly  sailor  saw  Jamie  get 
into  the  hammock,  without  first  kneeling  down  to  pray,  he  hurried  to  the  spot,  and 
dragging  him  out  by  the  neck,  he  said,  "  Kneel  down  at  once,  sirl  do  you  think  I 
am  going  to  fight  for  you,  and  you  not  say  your  prayers,  you  young  rascal?" 
During  the  whole  voyage  back  to  London,  this  reckless,  profane  sailor  watched  over 
the  boy  as  if  he  had  been  his  father,  and  every  night  saw  that  he  knelt  down  and 
said  his  prayers.  Jamie  soon  began  to  be  industrious,  and  during  his  spare  time 
studied  his  books.  He  learned  all  about  ropes  and  rigging,  and  when  he  became 
old  enough,  about  taking  latitude  and  longitude.  Several  years  afterwards,  the 
largest  steamer  ever  built — the  Great  Eastern — was  launched  on  the  ooean,  and 
carried  the  famous  cable  across  the  Atlantic,  A  very  reliable,  experienced  captain 
was  required  for  this  important  undertaking,  and  who  should  be  chosen  but  the 
little  Jamie  of  whom  I  have  been  telling  you  1  When  the  Great  Eastern  returned 
to  England,  after  this  successful  voyage,  Queen  Victoria  bestowed  on  him  the 
honour  of  knighthood,  and  the  world  now  knows  him  as  Sir  James  Anderson. 
IV.  Goodness  makes  people  heroic.  Two  houses  were  once  wrapped  in  flames, 
at  Auch,  in  France,  and  from  one  of  them  was  heard  the  piteous  cry,  "  Save  my 
child  !  "  The  archbishop  came  hurrying  to  the  place,  and  worked  as  long  as  his 
strength  would  allow,  in  helping  to  put  out  the  fire,  when  he  said,  "  I  will  give 
twenty-five  louis  d'or  to  the  man  who  will  save  this  woman  and  her  child."  At 
this  appeal  several  of  the  crowd  came  a  few  steps  nearer  to  the  burning  building, 
but  the  heat  was  so  great  that  they  as  quickly  retreated  from  the  danger.  "  Fifty 
louis  d'or  to  the  man  who  will  save  the  mother  and  the  child  1 "  shouted  the  arch- 
bishop, still  louder  than  before,  but  no  one  moved.  Now,  by  the  lurid  light  of  the 
fire,  the  archbishop  himself  was  seen  to  take  a  cloth,  and  having  dipped  it  in  a 
bucket  of  water,  to  wrap  it  round  his  body,  and  then  to  mount  the  ladder  which 
had  been  placed  against  the  shaking  wall.  Soon  he  reached  a  window,  which  he 
bravely  entered,  and,  in  a  few  moments  more,  a  group  was  seen  at  this  window — 
the  archbishop,  the  mother,  and  the  little  child.  The  good  man  had  scarcely 
reached  the  ground,  before  he  sank  on  his  knees,  to  bless  God  for  His  protecting 
care,  and  then,  rising,  he  said  to  the  poor  mother,  who  had  lost  everything  by  the 
fire  except  her  precious  child — "  My  good  woman,  I  offered  fifty  louis  d'ors  to  the 
man  who  would  save  you .  I  have  won  the  sum,  and  now  I  present  it  to  you." 
See  that  English  clergyman,  Mr.  Ancient,  venturing  out  in  his  little  cockle-shell 
boat,  to  rescue  those  who  are  holding  fast  to  the  shattered  remnant  of  the  proud 
steamer  Atlantic,  wrecked  on  the  treacherous  coast  of  Nova  Scotia  !  He  has  been 
living  for  years  in  that  little  hamlet  with  a  few  fishermen  and  wreckers  as 
parishioners — ruling  and  civilizing  them  by  love ;  and  now,  in  this  awful  moment, 
when  so  many  lives  are  in  peril,  he  is  proving  himself  a  hero.  (J.  N.  Norton, 
D.D.)  Goodness  is — I.  The  necessary  and  indispensable  corrective  op  self- 

culture,  and  completes  the  education  of  the  whole  man.  II.  The  principal  test 
of  piety.     III.  The  corrective  of  the  harsher  forms  of  theology.     IV.  The 

DESTROYER  OF  ALL  CHURCH  EXCLUSIVENESS.      V.  THE  ONLY  AND  UNIVERSAL  ANTIDOTE  TO 

scepticism.  (H.  W.  Beeclier.)  Youthful  goodness : — I  remember  once  on  the  deck 
of  an  Atlantic  steamer,  one  wild  autumn  night,  how  a  little  child,  overwhelmed 
with  a  violent  illness  through  the  heaving  sea,  was  just  beginning,  so  to  speak,  to 
get  her  feet  under  her.  A  friend  who  was  by  took  the  child  something  to  relieve 
the  sense  of  utter  sickness,  and  I  remember  as  we  stood  by  the  little  one  trying  to 
say  some  kind  things  to  encourage  her,  as  she  received  the  gift  from  the  stranger, 
how  she  suddenly  sprang  to  her  feet  and  said,  "  Let  me  take  it  to  my  father,  he  is 
worse  than  I  am."  And  we  watched  the  little  creature  for  a  moment  tottering 
along  the  deck    eager,  bright-eyed,  determined,  while  the  ship  reeled,  and  my 


aup.  T.]  GALATIANS.  42J 

friend  turning  to  me  said,  "There  is  the  making  of  a  glorious  character  there."  That 
is  what  I  call  goodness.  (Canon  Knox-Little.)  On  goodness,  or  benevolence : — 
I.  Let  us  contemplate  the  excellency  op  Christian  benevolence  :  it  is  the  most 
amiable  and  noble  part  of  charity.  1.  It  must  be  acknowledged  by  all,  that  there 
is  something  peculiarly  amiable  in  that  goodness  which  springs  from  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  wears  a  miid  and  winning  aspect.  It  possesses  a  powerful 
and  prevailing  charm.  It  brings  forth  abundant  fruit,  at  once  pleasant  to  the  eye 
and  wholesome  to  the  taste.  This  grace  has  something  in  it  peculiarly  amiable 
and  attractive.  Goodness  is  a  God-like  attribute,  that  rinds  pleasure  in  diffusing 
happiness.  It  is  the  gospel  embodied.  2.  That  goodness  which  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  is  a  most  noble  and  exalted  grace.  It  is  genuine,  disinterested,  cheerful, 
and  unostentatious  benevolence.  II.  Let  us  point  out  the  field  which  opens  for 
the  exercise  of  Christian  benevolence.  1.  We  must  exert  ourselves  to  do  good 
in  the  world.  (1)  By  using  every  proper  means  to  suppress  folly,  vice,  and  immo- 
rality in  the  world.  (2)  By  relieving  the  sick,  and  assisting  the  poor.  (3)  By 
instructing  the  ignorant,  or  contributing  to  promote  their  instruction.  2.  We  must 
exert  ourselves  to  do  good  in  the  Church.  III.  I  shall  adduce  some  considera- 
tions as  motives  to  the  exercise  of  benevolencb.  1.  Consider  that  the  express 
commands  of  God  require  you  to  be  active  in  doing  good.  2.  As  another  motive 
to  do  good,  consider  the  bright  examples  of  benevolence  set  before  you.  3.  As 
another  motive  to  do  good,  consider  the  present  pleasure  there  is  in  all  the  exercises 
of  benevolence.  4.  As  a  motive  to  do  good,  consider  the  amazing  love  and  con- 
descension of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  5.  As  another  motive  to  do  good,  consider 
that  your  continuance  on  earth  is  both  short  and  uncertain.  Opportunity  has  been 
called  the  flower  of  time  ;  let  it  not  bloom  and  wither  neglected.  Be  on  the  watch, 
to  seize  every  occasion  that  offers  for  doing  good.  There  are  favourable  circum- 
stances which  ought  to  be  instantly  improved.  While  the  soil  is  soft,  let  the  seed 
be  cast  in ;  while  the  sun  shines,  defer  not  to  secure  the  precious  harvest.  (John 
Thornton.)  Value  of  goodness : — The  homage  which  the  bad  give  to  the  principle 
of  goodness  is  seen  in  this,  that  bad  men  almost  always  wish  their  children  to  be 
good.  (Dr.  J.  Duncan,)  Perseverance  in  goodness  : — We  live  in  the  fall  of  the 
leaf;  divers  trees  did  put  forth  fair  blossoms,  but  their  flattering  spring  is  turned 
into  an  unfruitful  winter ;  and  their  clear  mornings  have  been  overcast  with  the 
thickest  clouds.  The  oorn  which  promised  a  large  harvest  in  the  blade  of  profes- 
sion, is  blasted  in  the  ear.  The  light  remains  no  longer  than  while  the  sun  shines. 
The  flowers  of  Paradise  would  quickly  wither  on  earth,  if  they  were  not  watered 
*vith  drops  from  heaven.  To  see  a  ship  sink  in  the  harbour  of  profession,  is  more 
grievous  than  if  it  had  perished  in  the  open  sea  of  profaneness.  (Archbishop 
Seeker.)  True  goodness : — True  goodness  is  like  the  glow-worm  in  this,  that  it 
shines  most  when  no  eyes,  except  those  of  heaven  are  upon  it.  (A.  W.  Hare.) 
Goodness : — Goodness  is  love  in  action,  love  with  its  hand  at  the  plough,  love  with 
the  burden  on  its  back.  It  is  love  carrying  medicine  to  the  sick,  and  food  to  the 
famished.  It  is  love  reading  the  Bible  to  the  blind,  and  explaining  the  gospel  to 
the  felon  in  his  cell.  It  is  love  at  the  Sunday-class,  or  in  the  ragged-school.  It  is 
love  at  the  hovel-door,  or  sailing  far  away  in  the  missionary  ship.  But,  whatever  task  it 
undertakes,  it  is  still  the  same, — love  following  His  footsteps,  "  who  went  about  con- 
tinually doing  good."  (Dr.  J.  Hamilton.)  Goodness : — Our  spiritual  life,  our  love, 
joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  and  gentleness,  all  set  us  free  for  this — to  do  good.  Just 
as  we  read  in  those  mysterious  words  how  our  Blessed  Lord  said,  "  For  their  sakes 
I  sanctify  Myself."  What  a  world  it  is,  with  all  its  myriad  woes  and  troubles ! 
He  who  would  do  good  seems,  as  he  steps  into  it,  to  be  swept  away  by  the  very 
multitude  and  persistency  of  the  calls  upon  him,  like  a  man  who  goes  down  with  a 
basket  of  food  into  a  hungry  crowd.  To  do  good  is  to  do  something  in  the  great 
work  of  putting  the  world  right  And  then  there  comes  the  further  question,  how 
to  do  good  ?  How  are  we  to  set  to  work  to  make  our  influence  felt,  and  to  cause 
our  good  desires  to  take  effect?  "  A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  the  heart 
bringeth  forth  that  which  is  good  "  (Luke  vi.  45).  If  any  asks  how  to  do  good, 
the  answer  surely  will  be  this,  "  be  good."  "  A  letter  was  once  written  to  an  old 
clergyman  whose  ministry  had  been  greatly  blessed.  *  My  people,'  said  the  writer, 
•  are  cold  and  heartless.  Tell  me  how  I  can  effect  a  revival  of  religion  in  my 
parish.'  The  answer  was  very  brief.  '  My  brother,'  he  said,  '  revive  thyself.' " 
Are  we  the  right  people  to  do  good?  Are  we  trying  to  be  perfect?  Jesus  Christ  was 
perfect,  and  told  us  to  be  perfect  also.  No  one  could  have  met  Him,  even  in  the 
ordinary  walks  of  life,  without  experiencing  some  electric  shock  of  goodness,  as  it 


$26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [OTA».  M. 

•were,  of  that  virtue  which  went  out  of  Him.  Are  we,  again,  in  sympathy  with  all 
the  world?  Does  that  invitation,  "As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us  do  good 
unto  all  men,"  find  a  response  in  our  hearts  ?  Not  in  interesting  cases  merely,  or 
among  the  intelligent  and  hopeful,  but  to  all  men  ;  to  the  uninteresting,  the  unin- 
telligent, the  brutal,  the  selfish,  the  contemptible.  There  will  after  this  arise  the 
third  question,  Where  can  I  do  good  ?  What  is  my  mission  ?  What  am  I  called  to 
do  ?  What  am  I  fitted  for  ?  There  is  the  priesthood,  the  medical  profession,  the 
masters  of  education,  the  missionaries,  the  superintendents  of  homes,  penitentiaries, 
religious  bodies,  and  the  like.  These  are  our  representatives  in  the  manifold  work 
of  "  goodness."  Do  we  recognize  this  ?  Do  we  recognize  that  here  comes 
in  the  solemn  obligation  of  alms-giving?  And  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is, 
this  goodness^  this  ' KyaQoavvrj,  this  Bonitas.  Think  of  the  gratitude,  the  love,  the 
prayers  which  follow  the  path  of  the  good  man.  And  yet  it  is  a  virtue  so  delicate, 
a  fruit  with  such  a  tender  bloom,  a  spring  so  very  delicate,  that  it  soon  becomes 
injured.  "  A  good  man  is  a  popular  character,  and  a  good  man  has 
dangers  to  contend  with  which  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  while  we 
gaze  at  the  beauty  of  the  character.  St.  Barnabas,  the  good  man  ol 
Holy  Scripture,  failed  from  good-nature  in  a  matter  involving  important 
doctrinal  issues :  he  failed,  also  from  good-nature,  in  a  difficult  matter 
which  concerned  his  friend  and  kinsman  St.  Mark.  (W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.) 
Faith. — Faith,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit : — We  are  in  a  world,  the  fashion  of  which — to 
us  at  least — is  passing  away.  I  cannot  believe  that  annihilation  can  be  asserted  of 
any  creation  of  God ;  for  annihilation  means  the  destruction  of  the  substance  of 
things ;  and  the  substance  of  things,  whatever  change  may  come  to  their  outward 
embodiments  or  their  visible  expression,  eternally  endures.  But  while  the  substance 
of  things  may  remain,  yet  the  fashion  of  things  is  continually  passing  away.  With 
the  lower  which  is  passing,  and  the  upper  which  is  abiding,  man  alike  lives  in  co- 
partnership. In  his  body  he  is  connected  with  that  which  is  transient.  He  knows 
that  his  life,  measured  by  his  earthly  connections,  is  as  a  vapour — a  cloud  of  the 
morning — and  happy  is  the  thought  that  it  is  a  cloud  of  the  morning  and  not  of  the 
night ;  that,  when  it  disappears,  it  disappears  not  because  darkness  has  swallowed  it 
up,  but  because  a  greater  splendour  has  captured  it  with  its  own  nature  and  given  it 
its  own  sublimity.  It  is  one  thing  to  disappear  into  the  night.  It  is  another  thing  to 
be  mingled  with  and  be  made  a  part  of  the  morning.  It  is  one  of  the  most  satisfactory 
reflections  which  the  mind  of  man  can  entertain,  that  this  faith  in  his  inherent 
indestructibility  is  race-wide  and  race-deep.  It  is  native  to  every  clime  and  co- 
existent with  every  age.  Even  grossness  has  been  unable  to  conceal  the  lustrous 
evidence  of  this  pure  and  exalted  instinct.  However  deep  and  black  the  alluvia, 
still  mingled  with  the  foulness  were  grains  of  purest  gold,  so  that  it  might  almost 
be  said  that  the  very  flats  of  humanity  are  full  of  this  priceless  evidence,  as  if  the 
shining  proofs  had  been  sown  broadcast  from  the  hand  of  God.  It  can  be  said  that 
a  dim  instinct,  at  least,  of  immortality  is  a  part  of  the  inevitable  bestowment  made 
by  God  to  the  human  being  in  his  very  inception.  Indeed,  I'  cannot  conceive  of 
God  as  creating  one  in  His  image  devoid  of  this  instinct.  It  seems  to  me  to  con- 
stitute the  essential  characteristic  of  the  resemblance.  It  is  enough  to  satisfy  the 
longing  of  legitimate  pride  to  reflect  that  by  nature,  at  least,  we  are  children  of 
God.  And  I  envy  no  man  his  way  of  looking  at  himself,  if  he  look  at  himself  along 
any  lower  level.  My  self-respect  roots  itself  in  the  remembrance  of  my  parentage. 
I  am  myself — in  the  endlessness  of  my  existence — in  the  progressiveness  of  my 
vitality — in  the  capacities  which  I  express — a  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  a  ripe  result  of 
operations  which  culminated  in  the  birth  of  my  being.  Whence  came  we  then  ? — 
There  is  but  one  answer  :  we  came  out  of  God.  By  nature  we  are  His  children. 
Being  thus  born,  we  came  into  the  world  organized  for  a  sublime  faith.  Being  thus 
born,  we  cannot  mistrust  ourselves  so  far  as  to  think  of  ourselves  as  being  only 
creatures  of  a  day.  Out  of  our  very  structure  proceeds  a  voice  of  prophecy.  And 
in  ourselves  is  written,  as  ineraseable  letters  on  an  indestructible  tablet,  the  pre- 
dictions of  a  dignified  and  exalted  destiny.  The  present  is  not  our  home ;  it  is 
only  the  vestibule  through  which  we  are  passing  in  order  that  we  may  come  and 
enter  into  our  everlasting  home.  It  was  for  the  enlargement  of  your  faith  that 
history  was  called  into  existence  to  record  the  birth  of  the  world  and  the  creation 
of  man.  It  was  for  the  confirmation  of  your  faith  that  men  with  eyes  to  look  into 
eternity  were  ever  and  anon,  as  the  centuries  passed,  born  of  women,  who  spoke  as 
they  were  moved  by  the  sublime  visions  that  they  saw,  and  whose  fervent  testimony, 
flaming  into  lyric  splendour,  lighted  up  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  made  th« 


CBAP.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  42f 

heavenly  city  stand  oat  to  sight  as  if  a  supernatural  sunrise  had  poured  its  light 
through  time  into  eternity.  It  was  for  the  enlargement  of  your  faith  in  yourself,  as 
well  as  in  God,  that  heaven  loaned  its  central  Life  to  the  earth  for  the  space  of  a 
generation,  and  put  so  much  of  its  sweet  wisdom  into  human  speech,  and  so  much 
of  its  loving  into  human  affection,  that  they  who  heard  the  heavenly  speech  grew 
wise  as  the  angels,  and  they  who  felt  through  Him  the  heavenly  love,  had  born 
within  their  breasts  an  answering  affection.  It  was  for  the  education  of  your  faith 
that  this  wonderful  Being  not  only  condescended  to  be  born  of  woman,  but  to  live 
a  life  which  subjected  Him  to  base  reproach,  and  finally  to  endure  the  pangs — the 
pangs  such  as  only  the  noblest  nature  might  feel — of  a  shameful  and  cruel  death, 
in  the  which,  although  pure  in  His  nature  and  stainless  in  record  as  snow,  He 
nevertheless  was  made  an  exhibition  of  as  if  He  had  been  evil  born  and  lived  a  life 
of  evil  deeds.  And  this  was  done  that  you  might  have  faith  in  God — not  as  exis- 
tent in  the  far-off  heavens,  above  cloud,  and  star,  and  the  blue  rim  of  sight — but  as 
existing  in  innocent  manhood  just  such  as  yours  ought  to  be — yes,  that  you  might 
have  faith  in  God  in  man,  or  as  the  Scripture  phrases  it,  "  Immanuel,  God  with 
us."  I  have  called  your  attention  to  three  sources  of  this  faith :  birth  or  nature ; 
history ;  the  teachings,  life,  and  death  of  Jesus.  There  is  one  more  for  us  to  con- 
sider :  the  present  work  of  the  Spirit,  as  an  enlightening  and  sanctifying  influence 
in  our  faculties  as  they  are  momentarily  exercised,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  see 
things  rightly  and  incline  to  do  only  right  things.  And  he  who  is  enabled  to  see 
things  rightly  is  sure  to  have  a  faith  which  is  correct  in  its  nature  and  abundant  in 
its  strength.  And  this  we  will  illustrate.  You  may  take  this  matter  of  worldliness, 
or  of  loving  overmuch  this  world,  its  pursuits  and  its  gains.  It  is  a  common  mis- 
take, and  yet  it  is  a  mistake  that  could  not  occur  if  we  had  been  enlightened  of  the 
Spirit  to  see  things  rightly.  For  when  you  look  at  this  world  rightly  you  see  first 
that  it  is  only  a  temporary  residence — and  that  is  a  truth  which  none  of  you  can 
deny.  We  see — 1.  That  it  is  only  a  temporary  residence;  2.  That  its  pursuits  are 
chiefly  valuable  because  they  educate  us.  (W.  H.  Murray,  D.D.)  On  faith,  or 
fidelity : — I.  Let  us  show  wiiekein  consists  that  fidelity  which  is  an  effect  or 
the  Holy  Spirit.  It  will  be  better  understood  from  a  view  of  its  relative  bearings, 
than  from  an  abstract  definition.  1.  We  must  be  faithful  to  God.  (1)  Faithfulness 
to  God  includes  undisguised  sincerity  in  His  service.  (2)  Faithfulness  to  God  is 
unreserved  obedience  to  His  revealed  will.  (3)  Faithfulness  to  God  includes  an 
inflexible  adherence  to  the  profession  of  the  gospel.  2.  We  must  be  faithful  to  men. 
(1)  This  requires  truth  in  our  words  (Eph.  iv.  25).  (2)  Faithfulness  to  men  requires 
justice  in  our  actions.  (3)  Fidelity  to  man  requires  stedfastness  in  our  engagements. 
(4)  Faithfulness  to  men  requires  a  bold  and  conscientious  discharge  of  all  the 
relative  duties  of  life.  H.  Let  us  prove  the  vast  importance  of  faithfulness.  1. 
This  grace  is  absolutely  necessary  to  give  value  to  every  other  branch  of  religion. 
What  is  a  lofty,  widespread ng  tree,  with  a  rotten  trunk  ?  What  is  a  spacious  and 
beautiful  house  built  on  the  sand,  which  must  be  sapped  by  the  rising  flood,  or  over- 
thrown by  the  wintry  storm  ?  And  what  are  the  gifts,  talents,  and  attainments  of 
one  who  is  destitute  of  faith  and  sincerity  ?  We  condemn,  in  strong  language,  the 
man  who  basely  betrays  his  friend ;  the  subject  who  traitorously  lays  schemes  for 
the  life  of  his  lawful  sovereign ;  or  the  prince,  who  sells  the  liberties  and  lives  of  his 
people  to  gratify  a  boundless  ambition.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  man,  who 
denies  his  God,  crucifies  the  Saviour  afresh,  and  trucks  away  the  gem  of  truth  for 
the  poor  glittering  baubles  of  the  world?  2.  The  importance  of  faithfulness  is 
obvious,  as  it  is  necessary  to  our  own  comfort.  Though  a  person  could  wrap  him- 
self so  closely  in  the  cloak  of  hypocrisy,  and  so  artfully  manage  his  vizard,  as  never 
to  be  detected  by  his  fellow-creatures,  would  he  thus  make  sure  of  happiness?  No; 
in  the  path  of  deceit  there  is  no  peace.  Conscience  will  renew,  from  time  to  time, 
her  troublesome  accusations.  3.  The  importance  of  faithfulness  is  obvious,  as  it  is 
necessary  to  the  credit  of  religion  and  the  honour  of  Christ.  Nothing  has  brought  so 
much  scandal  on  the  gospel  as  the  conduct  of  hypocrites  and  apostates.  The  men  of 
the  world  are  always  on  the  watch  to  spy  defeots  in  professing  Christians.  HI.  Let 
us  inquire  what  are  the  leading  marks,  or  signs,  by  which  this  faithfulness  may  be 
known.  1.  A  faithful  man  is  willing  impartially  to  examine  his  own  state.  2.  A 
faithful  Christian  has  a  deep  sense  of  the  deceitfulness  and  danger  of  sin.  3.  A 
faithful  Christian  fixes  his  whole  dependence  on  Divine  grace.  (John  Thornton.) 
Faith  is  sanctified  imagination ;  it  is  having  the  horizon  above  the  world ;  it  ia 
believing  that  there  are  things  that  have  no  mortal  forms,  in  a  future,  in  a 
whole  assembly  of  intelligence  above  your  head;  it  is  having  a  life  hereafter. 


42&  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

a  greater  life  than  this.  Ah !  the  man  who  sits  in  his  honse  all  day  knows 
exactly  what  he  knows — that  is  the  fireplace,  that  is  the  rug,  that  is  the  fender, 
that  is  the  door.  That  is  what  is  called  a  practical  person,  who  knows  what  he 
does  know.  But  out  of  doors  the  whole  heaven  is  above  his  head,  night  and  day, 
filled  with  inestimable  treasures.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Faith  is  the  fullest  and  com- 
pletest  exercise  of  reason.  It  is  the  conscious  trusty  dependence  of  our  whole  nature 
upon  God.  It  will  not  make  the  sun  rise  sooner,  but  it  will  make  the  night  seem 
shorter.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Faith: — The  balance  of  probability  and  authority  would 
lead  us  to  regard  that  7ri<mc  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  as  faithfulness.  The 
spiritual  man  is  faithful — faithful  to  his  God,  to  his  work,  to  himself.  The  life  of 
faithfulness  is  a  life  of  truth.  And  we  remember  again  how,  in  earthly  matters  at 
all  events,  we  pride  ourselves  on  keeping  our  word.  We  recall  the  glow  of  splendour 
which  lingers  still  around  famous  scenes  in  history,  where  men  have  risked  any- 
thing and  everything  to  keep  a  trust.  We  traoe  its  magic  power  still,  where  the 
historian  ascribes  the  influence  of  Livingstone  over  the  affections  and  sympathies 
of  the  savage  African  tribes  to  that  moment  of  noble  faithfulness  when  he  gave  np 
the  gratification  of  an  earnest  longing  for  home,  and  rest,  and  distinction,  which 
bewitchingly  offered  itself  to  him  at  the  end  of  his  weary  march,  that  he  might  keep 
faith  with  the  natives  who  trusted  to  him  for  guidance,  albeit  that  faith  meant  dis- 
appointment, weariness,  wandering,  and  perhaps  death.  And  although  we  might 
well  recall  ourselves  by  the  thought,  "  Who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God  ?  " 
still  it  is  not  hard  to  see,  not  the  reasonableness  only,  but  the  strength  of  the  vow, 
and  the  great  part  which  faith  or  faithfulness  has  to  play  in  the  spiritual  life.  In 
the  baptismal  vow  there  is  the  promise  to  renounce,  the  promise  to  believe,  and  the 
promise  to  do  certain  things.  The  child  starts  out  into  the  foggy  night,  where  there 
are  the  dazzling  lights  of  the  streets,  the  confusion  of  the  cross-ways,  the  seductions 
of  evil,  the  perplexity  of  the  path ;  and  it  is  no  slight  strength  to  such  a  child  to 
say  to  him,  "  Promise  to  go  straight  on ;  if  any  one  asks  yon  to  turn  into  that 
brilliant  tavern,  say,  I  have  promised  not  to  do  so :  if  any  one  says,  This  is  not  the 
way,  turn  down  that  broader  street,  and  more  attractive  path,  say,  I  have  promised 
to  keep  straight  on :  if  any  one  says,  Come  with  me  and  enjoy  yourself  first,  say, 
No,  I  am  intrusted  with  a  trust,  I  must  do  my  bidding  and  discharge  my  obliga- 
tion. All  this  is  a  strength  and  support  to  him  in  the  conflict  of  seduction  with 
duty.  And  further  still,  the  vow  is  reciprocal.  "  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  He  will 
draw  nigh  to  you."  The  renunciation  of  evil  is  to  clear  the  way  for  the  advent  of 
good ;  the  belief  in  God  and  His  truth  is  the  prelude  to  the  influx  of  that  glorious 
tide  of  mercy  ;  the  doing  His  will  is  to  tread  in  those  paths  where  we  most  cer- 
tainly shall  meet  Him  and  be  cheered  by  Him.  His  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness, 
and  all  His  paths  are  peace.  And  the  life  of  fidelity  is  doubtless  a  hard  one.  Faith 
is  nothing  else  than  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  The  renunciation  is  severe :  to  give  up, 
and  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh.  And 
here  we  remember  that  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  faith  or  faithfulness  ;  it  is  a  gift 
of  God.  It  is  possible  now,  by  God's  mercy,  to  be  faithful ;  it  is  possible  to  pay 
our  vows.  ( W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.)  Meekness. — Meekness,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit : — The 
popular  definition  or  conception  of  meekness  is  not  the  scriptural  one  in  two  par- 
ticulars ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  the  popular  conception  of  meekness  pictures  it  as  a  state 
of  miud  or  mood  of  spirit  in  one  man  toward  another  man ;  whereas  the  scriptural 
idea  makes  it  appear  as  a  state  of  mind  or  mood  of  soul  which  a  man  has  toward  his 
God.  I  can  be  a  meek  man,  for  instance,  and  not  be  meek  toward  man  at  all ;  meek- 
ness relates  to  God.  In  other  words,  whatever  definition  you  put  upon  meekness,  it 
does  not  describe  my  feelings  toward  or  for  others ;  it  simply  describes  the  attitude 
of  my  mind  and  soul  towards  the  Deity.  And  this  distinction,  you  can  see,  is  of  a 
character  to  change  the  entire  line  of  thought  running  through  the  discourse.  If 
meekness  were  a  term  descriptive  of  a  state  of  a  man's  feelings  toward  his  fellow- 
men,  the  line  of  thought  would  be  in  one  direction ;  but  if  meekness  be  a  term 
descriptive  of  a  man's  feelings  toward  his  God,  then  the  line  of  thought  would  run 
in  altogether  a  different  direction.  To  illustrate:  When  the  Bible  speaks  of  Moses 
as  being  the  meekest  man,  does  it  describe  the  state  of  his  disposition  or  the  man- 
nerism of  his  bearing  toward  his  fellows  ;  or  does  it  describe  the  state  of  his  dis- 
position and  the  mannerism  of  his  bearing  toward  the  Deity  ?  The  apprehension 
of  this  distinction  shed  the  first  light  my  mind  received  on  this  subject :  and  I  said, 
Very  well;  if  meekuess  has  nothing  to  do  with  one's  attitude  toward  his  fellow-men, 
but  is  strictly  and  beautifully  descriptive  of  the  soul's  feeling  toward  God,  I  know 
which  way  the  path  of  my  examination  lies.     This  is  the  first  difference  I  discerned 


.  T.]  OALATIANS.  429 

between  the  popular  and  the  scriptural  conception  of  meekness.  The  second 
difference  is  as  to  the  quality  of  meekness,  or  its  character  as  a  feeling.  What  ia 
the  feeling  that  we  call  meekness  ?  We  have  found  out  what  the  proper  object  of 
it  is ;  now  let  us  discover,  if  we  may,  what  the  feeling  is.  In  the  first  place,  mark 
what  it  is  not :  it  is  not  weak.  Many  a  man  and  many  a  woman  who  has  been 
filled  with  meekness  toward  God,  has  at  the  same  time  stood  up  in  the  might  of  a 
majestic  strength  and  defied  the  power  of  man,  even  when  that  power  appeared  in 
the  terrible  guise  of  cruellest  death.  Then  again,  here  is  another  characteristic  of 
meekness.  The  Saviour  said,  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the 
earth."  In  other  words,  a  man  in  whose  soul  is  developed  the  filial  fear  of  God — 
in  whose  soul  is  this  inner  strength  which  enables  him  in  the  face  of  all  human 
opposition  to  do  right  even  at  the  cost  of  his  life — is  a  man  fitted  to  possess  the 
whole  earth.  Pile  all  the  treasures  of  the  world  into  one  heap ;  bring  together  iti 
gems,  its  precious  metals,  its  priceless  ores,  its  beauties  that  grow  out  of  the  earth 
and  hang  pendant  from  the  skies — bring  these  all  together,  I  say,  and  over  against 
them  place  the  man  who  fears  God  and  does  not  fear  man,  and  he  is  worthy  to 
possess  them,  is  fit  to  use  them,  is  great  and  noble  enough  to  own  and  handle  them. 
Not  only  so  ;  but  the  soul  that  has  in  it  this  feeling  toward  God  has  in  it  also  a 
sensing  power  to  receive  the  richness  of  all  this  accumulated  wealth.  Nothing  but 
love  can  appreciate  the  gifts  of  love ;  and  love  does  appreciate  such  gifts  invariably. 
So  then,  we  conclude  that  meekness  is — 1.  Descriptive  of  a  state  of  mind  and  soul  to- 
ward God  and  not  man ;  2.  Is  strong  and  not  weak;  3.  Is  expressive  of  a  disposition 
that  can  receive  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  as  it  stands  revealed  in  the  earth,  and 
hence  might  truly  be  said  to  inherit  it.  It  is  not  the  kings  of  the  earth,  not  its 
warriors,  not  those  who  are  mighty  in  their  command  of  material  forces,  and  who 
are  only  thus  mighty,  that  shall  inherit  the  earth  ;  not  those  who  are  proud  in  the 
sufficiency  of  their  self-conceit,  that  shall  own  the  earth ;  but  those  who  have  within 
them  this  spiritual  enlightenment  to  apprehend  the  spirit  that  is  hidden  from  eyes 
not  thus  enlightened,  those  who  are  humble  before  God,  those  who  are  meek,  and 
therefore  fully  and  sweetly  receptive  in  their  spirits,  that  shall  possess  the  untold 
treasures  which  God  bestows  upon  those  that  love  Him.  And  if  this  were  the  day 
and  the  hour  of  Divine  inspection  and  decision,  if  this  were  the  moment  for  us  all 
to  be  judged  as  to  our  inward  state  and  ripeness  of  capacity,  should  we  be  of  the 
number  of  those  who  are  meek — should  we  be  of  the  number  of  those  within  whom 
and  upon  whom  the  Divine  Spirit  has  moved  with  its  enlightening  and  refining  in- 
fluence? In  thinking  of  this  trait  being  fostered  in  your  disposition,  do  not  think  of 
it  as  you  stand  related  to  men  ;  but  think  of  it  as  if  you  were  not  connected  with 
men  at  all — as  if  there  were  no  men  living,  if  that  will  help  your  imagination,  and 
you  Btood  connected  with  God  only.  This  brings  out  the  blessed  ministry  of  meek- 
ness. It  connects  us  with  God.  And  this  makes  it  priceless  to  the  soul ;  for  what 
is  so  priceless  as  that  which  binds  us  so  closely  and  happily  to  Him  r  ( W.  H.  Mur- 
ray, D.D.)  Meekness  an  evidence  of  connection  with,  God : — Are  there  any  here 
■who  are  absent  from  home  ?  Are  there  any  of  you  here  who,  being  thus  absent, 
have  a  picture  of  a  loved  one  with  you,  a  picture  that  you  often  look  at — look  at 
when  alone  by  yourself,  and  suddenly  hide  if  you  hear  one  coming,  not  because  yon 
are  ashamed  of  being  seen  looking  at  the  picture,  but  because  the  picture  is  too 
sacred  to  be  seen  by  another  ?  Have  any  of  you  your  mother's  picture — the  picture 
of  a  mother  who  is  away  from  you,  divided  by  a  distance  on  the  earth,  or  perhaps 
divided  not  by  any  distance,  but  because  your  eyes  cannot  see  into  the  heaven  that 
holds  its  atmosphere  for  ever  around  you,  as  sunshine  is  around  the  blind  ?  Have 
any  of  you  in  your  houses  at  home,  hanging  somewhere  on  the  wall,  the  picture  of 
the  house  in  which  you  were  born  ;  of  the  dear  old  place  where  you  began  to  live, 
which  to-day  stands  associated  with  mother  and  father,  with  brother  and  sister  and 
youthful  companions — the  old  place,  known  in  every  curve  of  the  banks,  in  every 
slope  of  the  hills,  in  every  rock  by  the  roadside,  in  every  footpath  and  every  stone 
in  the  footpath  ;  known  as  you  know  no  other  spot  on  earth,  not  even  the  house  in 
which  you  used  to  live — have  any  of  you,  I  say,  any  such  picture?  If  you  have, 
they  will  serve  as  an  illustration.  Just  as  these  pictures  bind  you  to  mother,  father, 
loved  one,  and  the  dear  old  home  of  your  earlier  days  and  perhaps  your  happiest — 
as  these  pictures,  when  you  look  at  them,  bring  back  the  faces  and  scenes  that  you 
once  saw  so  vividly  that  you  realize  them  as  you  might  not  otherwise  do — realize 
them  so  that  your  heart  grows  warm  and  the  eye  perhaps  yields  the  mist  of  affec- 
tionate remembrance ;  so  in  the  face  of  this  heaven-born  meekness,  when  once  it 
has  become  a  trait  of  your  disposition,  you  can  see  the  evidence  of  your  connection 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  t. 

with  God,  the  proof  that  yon  are  His — His  in  a  sense  and  a  way  that  no  distance 
can  separate  you,  and  no  passage  of  time  can  sever  the  connection.  (Ibid.)  On 
meekness  j — Patience  keeps  the  mind  firm  and  unshaken  under  sufferings  ;  meekness 
renders  it  calm  and  unruffled  amidst  provocations.  These  kindred  graces  may  be 
easily  distinguished,  but  cannot  be  separated.  I.  Here  I  shall  point  out  thb 
nature  and  exercise  of  Christian  meekness.  Meekness  is  a  disposition  which 
keeps  the  mind  from  aspiring  after  things  too  high  for  us.  Being  fixed  in  our  proper 
place,  it  makes  us  easy  there.  Meekness  is  opposed  to  all  those  troublesome  pas- 
sions, which,  when  an  extravagant  self -estimation  is  cherished,  the  thwarting  opinions 
and  vexatious  humours  of  other  men  never  fail  to  excite.  Meekness  is  the  growth 
of  pure  religion,  cherished  in  the  heart,  and  displaying  its  fruits  in  the  life.  1. 
Christian  meekness  fits  the  mind  to  receive  or  impart  spiritual  instruction.  Pride 
blocks  up  the  passage  through  which  truth  enters  the  heart.  "  Receiving  in  meek- 
ness the  engrafted  word,  which  is  able  to  save  our  souls."  2.  Meekness  disposes  a 
Christian  to  refrain  from  stirring  up  angry  passions  in  others,  and  renders  him 
calm  under  their  provocations.  A  meek  man  will  not  rekindle  the  dying  embers  of 
resentment,  by  lending  his  breath  to  blow  them,  much  less  add  fuel  to  heighten  the 
flame.  He  feels  it  his  duty  to  guard  his  heart  against  the  tumults  of  impetuous 
passions.  3.  Meekness  disposes  the  mind  to  forgive  injuries.  4.  Meekness  will 
dispose  the  Christian  to  suppress  the  first  risings  of  a  murmuring  spirit,  and  to  live 
contented  with  the  allotments  of  Providence.  II.  I  shall  adduce  a  few  consider- 
ations to  recommend  the  cultivation  of  meekness.  1.  Meekness  is  one  of  the 
clearest  evidences  of  personal  religion.  2.  Meekness  is  one  of  the  brightest  orna- 
ments, as  well  as  one  of  the  clearest  evidences  of  personal  religion.  Think  of  its 
permanence.  Meekness  makes  no  ostentatious  display  to  the  eyes ;  but  investing 
the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  it  will  wear  well.  It  is  said,  like  the  soul  itself,  to  be 
incorruptible.  When  all  the  beauties  of  the  visible  creation  are  faded,  and  all  its 
glories  extinguished,  this  fair  ornament  will  shine  with  untarnished  and  evergrow- 
ing lustre.  Think  of  its  unspeakable  value.  Some  things  are  fondly  admired  by 
children,  which  are  despised  by  men,  and  those  things  which  are  highly  prized  and 
eagerly  sought  by  men,  appear  but  worthless  toys  to  angels.  But  a  meek  and  quiet 
Bpirit,  in  the  view  of  all  good  men,  in  the  eyes  of  holy  angels,  and  in  the  sight  of 
God,  is  of  great  price.  3.  Meekness  will  enable  you  to  achieve  the  noblest  victories. 
Have  you  with  well-doing  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men?  you  have 
gained  a  greater  trophy,  than  if,  like  Brutus,  with  a  vengeful  hand  you  had  stabbed 
a  tyrant  to  the  heart.  Have  you  by  mild  forbearance  or  winning  kindness,  con- 
ciliated an  enemy,  or  brought  a  profane  hardened  scoffer  to  weep  and  pray  ?  you 
have  obtained  a  nobler  victory  than  if  you  had  subdued  an  empire.  The  honour 
which  arises  from  overcoming  evil  with  good,  will  be  read  in  the  book  of  God's 
remembrance,  when  time  shall  be  no  longer  1     III.  I  shall  offer  some  directions 

THAT   MAT  BE   USEFUL   IN   PROMOTING   CHRISTIAN   MEEKNESS.      1.    Set  a  Watchful  guard 

over  your  tempers  and  passions.  The  tradesman  must  keep  his  shop,  or  he  can- 
not prosper ;  the  cultivator  must  keep  his  vineyard,  or  it  will  not  be  fruitful ;  and 
the  Christian  must  keep  his  heart,  or  he  cannot  be  safe.  Better  were  it  to  admit  a 
thief  into  your  house,  than  this  incendiary  into  the  soul.  Shut  every  gate,  bar 
every  door,  and  block  up  every  avenue  where  it  is  wont  to  gain  success.  2.  Avoid, 
as  much  as  possible,  all  occasions  which  excite  and  nourish  pride  and  passion. 
The  remains  of  corruption  in  them  are  like  sediment  at  the  bottom  of  a  pool  which 
rises  when  the  water  is  troubled.  Let  it,  then,  be  your  care  to  avoid  those  causes, 
which  stir  up  your  proud  and  angry  passions.  3.  Place  before  you  the  brightest 
examples  of  meekness.  4.  Seek  meekness  by  meditation  and  prayer.  (John 
Thornton.)  Definition  of  meekness: — Meekness  is  a  mild  and  placid  dis- 
position of  mind,  which  subdues  and  restrains  our  angry  passions ;  which  gives 
Bweetness  to  our  tempers,  dignity  and  kindness  to  our  words  and  actions.  Free 
from  censoriousness,  and  reluctant  to  offend,  it  is  not  easily  ruffled  by  provocation. 
It  blends  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove  with  the  gentleness  of  the  lamb  ;  it  bears 
injury  without  resentment,  or  a  disposition  to  revenge.  It  covers  the  faults  of 
others  with  the  mantle  of  love,  and  while  it  is  censured  and  reviled,  it  remains  un- 
disturbed as  the  island  amid  the  raging  of  the  stormy  waves  around.  (W.  H. 
Elliott,  M.A.)  Meekness  is  love  at  school — the  Saviour's  school : — It  is  Christian 
lowlihood.  It  is  the  disciple  learning  to  know  himself ;  learning  to  fear,  and  dis- 
trust, and  abhor  himself.  It  is  the  disciple  practising  the  sweet  but  self-emptying 
lesson  of  putting  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  finding  all  his  righteousness  in  that 
righteous  other.     It  is  the  disciple  learning  the  defects  of  his  own  character,  and 


«■».  ▼.]  GALATIANS. 


431 


taking  hints  from  hostile  as  well  as  friendly  monitors.    It  is  the  disciple  praying 
and  watching  for  the  improvement  of  his  talents,  the  mellowing  of  his  temper,  and 
the  amelioration  of  his  character.    It  is  the  loving  Christian  at  the  Saviour's' feet 
learning  of  Him  who  is  meek  and  lowly,  and  finding  rest  for  his  own  soul     (J 
Hamilton,  D.D.)         Power  of  meekness  .-—One  day,  as  he  strolled  along  a  river 
Gotthold  came  to  a  straight  and  stately  alder  tree,  growing  upon  the  bank,  and  said 
to  himself:  This  kind  of  timber  is  the  softest,  and  can  without  difficulty  be  split 
cut,  and  wrought;  and  yet  experience  proves  the  fact  that  it  does  not  rot  in  water' 
In  fact,  the  greater  part  of  the  city  of  Venice  stands  upon  piles  of  alder,  which  sunk 
in  the  sea,  forms  the  foundations  of  great  massive  buildings.     It  is  the  same  with 
meek  hearts.    There  is  no  better  basis  for  important  undertakings  of  public  or 
private  utility,  than  that  intelligent  modesty,  which  is  gentle  indeed,  and  ready  to 
yield  as  far  as  a  good  conscience  will  allow,  but  which  nevertheless  lasts  and 
continues  stable  in  the  flood  of  contradiction.         Meekness :— This  Christian 
grace  is  universal  in  its  operation— submission  Godward,  meekness  man  ward,  which 
seems  to  be  its  special  reference.    The  meek  man  bears  himself  mildly  •  submis- 
sively j  in  all  things,  "  like  a  weaned  child ; "  neither  arraigns  God,  nor  avenges 
himself  on  man.    (J.  Eadie,  D.D.)        Advantage  of  meekness  .-—There  is  nothing 
lost  by  meekness  and  yielding.    Abraham  yields  over  his  right  of  choice :  Lot 
taketh  it.    And,  behold  I  Lot  is  crossed  in  that  which  he  chose ;  Abraham  blest  in 
that  which  was  left  him.    As  heaven  is  taken  by  violence,  so  is  earth  with  meek- 
ness.   And  God  (the  true  proprietor)  loves  no  tenants  better,  nor  grants  larger 
leases  to  any,  than  to  the  meek.      (John  Trapp.)        Test  of  meekness ;— As  we  do 
not  keep  tinder  in  every  box  in  the  house,  so  we  do  not  keep  the  sense  of  anger  in 
every  faculty.    When  one  comes  against  the  door  of  some  faculties  with  an  injury 
we  look  over  the  railing,  and  say,  "I'll  forgive  you  for  that ;  for  you  did  not  get 
in.      But  by-and-by,  when  the  faculty  where  we  are  sensitive  is  entered,  then  we 
grind  our  teeth,  and  say,  «« I  could  have  forgiven  him  for  anything  but  that  I  "  We 
must  not  arrogate  to  ourselves  a  spirit  of  forgiveness,  until  we  have  been  touched 
to  the  quick  where  we  are  sensitive,  and  borne  it  meekly :  and  meekness  is  not  mere 
white-facedness,  a  mere  contemplative  virtue ;  it  is  maintaining  peace  and  patience 
in  the  midst  of  provocations.    (H.  W.  Beeeher.)        Example  of  meekness  .-—When 
Sir  Matthew  Hale  dismissed  a  jury  because  he  was  convinced  that  it  had  been 
illegally  chosen  to  favour  the  Protector,  the  latter  was  highly  displeased  with  him  • 
and  when  Sir  Matthew  returned  from  the  circuit,  Cromwell  told  him  in  anger  that 
he  was  not  fit  to  be  a  judge ;  to  which  all  the  answer  he  made  was,  «« that  that 
was  very  true."         Meekness  and  forgiveness  .-—Joseph  Bradford  was  for  some 
years  the  travelling  companion  of  Mr.  Wesley,  for  whom  he  would  have  sacri- 
ficed health  and  even  life,  but  to  whom  his  will  would  never  bend,  except  in 
meekness.    "  Joseph,"  said  Mr.  Wesley,  one  day,  "take  these  letters  to  the  post." 
V  ".X,wlU  tate  toem  after  preaching,  sir."    W.  "  Take  them  now,  Joseph."    B 
"I  wish  to  hear  you  preach,  sir;  and  there  will  be  sufficient  time  for  the  post 
after  service."    W.  "I  insist  upon  your  going  now,  Joseph."    B.  "I  will  not  eo 
at  present."     W.   "You  won't?"    B.  "No,  sir."    W.  "Then  you  and  I  must 
part.      B.  "  Very  good,  sir."    The  good  men  slept  over  it.   Both  were  early  risers 
At  four  o'clock  the  next  morning,  the  refractory  helper  was  accosted  with,  "  Joseph 
have  you  considered  what  I  said— that  we  must  part?"     B.   "Yes,  sir"     w' 
"  And  must  we  part  ?  "    B.  "  Please  yourself,  sir."    W.  "  Will  you  ask  my'pardon 
Joseph  ?      B.  " No,  sir."    W.  "  You  won't  ?  "    B.  No,  sir."    W.  "  Then  I  will  ask 
yours,  Joseph."    Poor  Joseph  was  instantly  melted ;  smitten  as  by  the  word  of 
Moses ;  when  forth  gushed  the  tears,  like  the  water  from  the  rock.     He  had  a 
tender  soul ;  and  it  was  soon  observed,  when  the  appeal  was  made  to  the  heart,  in- 
stead of  the  head.     (Anecdotes  of  the  Wesleys.)        The  secret  of  Christian  fruitful- 
ness  .-—Plutarch  asks  how  it  is  that  the  fig-tree,  whose  root,  stem,  branches,  and 
leaves  are  so  extremely  bitter,  should  bear  such  sweet  and  pleasant  fruit.    It  may 
also  be  asked  how  the  sweet  fruits  of  the  Spirit  can  grow  on  the  bitter  stock  of 
nature.    Not  otherwise  but  by  faith  and  repentance  being  grafted  into  the  stock  of 
Christ  Jesus.     (Spencer.)        Meekness ;— A  pushing  man  in  a  crowd  does  not  push 
himself  very  far  after  all— he  knocks  down  a  few  children,  or  thrusts  aside  a  few 
women  ;  but  the  broad  shoulders  and  strong  arms  make  themselves  broader  and 
stronger  and  sterner,  where  perhaps  they  would  relax,  yield,  and  give  way  to  a  child 
or  to  a  weak  woman,  or  to  one  who  was  gentle.     But  after  all  that  can  be  said, 
meekness  is  a  difficult  virtue,    There  is  something  in  that  "  impassiveness," 
i&opyyria)  to  which  Aristotle  opposed  it,  which  has  a  real  existence  still  as' a 


4tS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  V. 

spiritual  counterfeit.  Meekness  is  rare ;  it  is  unpopular.  Pride  Is  a  sin  which 
especially  fastens  on  the  good ;  and  meekness  suffers  from  spurious  imitations  of 
Borne  of  its  accidents,  and  we  know,  only  to  despise,  such  tares  among  the  wheat 
as  little-mindedness,  affectation,  or  that  which  we  style  m  contemptuons  pity,  an 
amiable  weakness.  How  then  is  this  grace,  so  tender,  so  delicate,  yet  so  beautiful, 
to  be  encouraged  within  our  hearts,  without  any  of  that  false  admixture  of  mock 
humility,  which  is  only  pride  in  another  form  t  The  first  Btep  surely  will  be  to 
keep  out  pride ;  and,  in  order  to  effect  this,  resolutely  to  stop  all  the  avenues 
through  which  it  comes,  that  pride  which  feeds  upon  us  as  a  parasite  upon  a  tree. 
Seeking  for  praise,  is  such  an  avenue,  wherein  pride  fastens  upon  us  with  a  restless 
hunger,  snatching  surreptitious  crumbs  of  comfort  even  from  the  ruin  of  another's 
credit,  or  picking  them  up  out  of  his  depreciation.  Putting  one's-self  forward,  is 
another  avenue  by  which  pride,  entering  in,  makes  us  think  that  we  are  necessary 
to  the  very  well-being  of  society.  Want  of  simplicity,  is  a  very  wide  avenue  ;  so 
are  self-gratification,  criticism,  comparison,  talking  of  self — all  these  are  inlets 
through  which  it  enters  with  a  full  stream — rising  up  through  vanity,  conceit,  and 
self-love,  with  a  polluting,  stifling  flood,  until  it  annihilates  the  love  of  God  on  the 
high  places  of  our  soul,  carrying  away  with  it  mercy,  truth,  charity,  and  meekness, 
the  very  charter  of  our  inheritance  as  sons.  And  individuality  a$  such  is  never  a 
pleasing  trait ;  the  maker  of  the  shield  who  so  worked  in  his  name  that  you  could 
not  destroy  it  without  destroying  the  shield,  is  not  a  noble  conception  ;  it  contrasts 
harshly  with  true  artistic  greatness,  and  is  like  "  the  memorial  stone  "  of  some 
modern  ecclesiastical  building  glaring  out  of  the  wall,  as  compared  with  the 
foundation-stone  of  some  grand  old  cathedral  buried  deep  in  the  ground,  unknown 
and  forgotten  as  the  very  builders  themselves,  who  were  contented  if  they  had  but 
raised  a  building  in  which  posterity  might  worship  God.  Good  work  is  often  spoilt 
by  the  affectation  of  the  workman.  Yes,  apart  from  any  higher  motives,  if  we  are 
to  possess  the  earth,  let  us  stop  these  avenues  through  which  that  deadly  satis- 
faction comes,  which  ends  in  pride,  and  the  fatal  assertion  of  a  disproportionate 
self.  And,  after  all,  what  is  self  ?  Is  not  this  another  way  in  which  to  kill  pride — 
to  know  ourselves  ?  What  class  am  I  in,  as  it  were  ?  It  is  no  credit  to  a  school- 
boy to  remain  high  up  in  the  second  class,  if  that  only  means  that  if  he  were  re- 
moved he  would  be  at  the  bottom  of  the  first.  And  taking  all  our  life  with  all  its 
mistakes,  is  it  so  very  wonderful  ?  Just  as  children  sometimes  amuse  themselves 
with  painting,  and  some  kind  friend  tells  them  that  the  result  is  good,  meaning 
that  it  is  good  for  them — so  is  all  our  work,  only  good  for  us  ;  before  it  can  be  pre- 
sented, it  will  need  to  be  touched  anew  and  remodelled  by  a  Higher  hand,  and  what 
is  crowned  will  not  be  our  merits  but  His  gifts  And  if  all  our  life  were  known,  all 
our  thoughts,  our  meanness,  our  pettiness,  our  narrowness,  where  would  satisfaction 
be  ?  Ah  !  if  only  we  knew  ourselves,  this  knowledge  would  keep  us  humble  1  If 
only  we  had  before  our  eyes  the  rough,  dirty,  unkempt,  ragged  figure  which  we 
presented  before  God  took  us  in  hand,  and  clothed  us  and  taught  us,  and  made  ns 
what  we  are  I  And  another  way  still,  is  surely  to  try  and  know  other  people  as  well 
as  to  know  ourselves.  Perhaps  the  person  about  whom  we  have  roughly  followed 
the  general  classification  in  placing  him  among  "  publicans  and  sinners,"  will  stand 
out  an  apostle ;  while  the  apostle  who,  as  we  thought,  was  busied  in  actions  of 
mercy  to  the  poor,  will  turn  out  a  traitor ;  and  the  publicans  and  harlots  will  be 
stepping  into  heaven  before  those  who  coarsely  taunted  them  with  their  sins.  Oh  I 
how  much  good  there  is  in  the  world !  Let  us  remember  this.  It  was  said  in  one 
of  those  revolutionary  disturbances  which  from  time  to  time  have  broken  over  Paris 
that  when  "  the  party  of  order  "  had  the  courage  to  take  to  the  streets,  they  were 
surprised  to  find  how  many  they  were ;  if  we  could  see  the  good  that  is  going  on  all 
around  us,  it  would  not  only  cheer  us,  but  make  us  humble.  Those  who  are 
moving  up  and  down  among  the  wounded  in  life's  conflict,  to  heal,  to  cheer,  and  to 
soothe,  are  not  so  conspicuous  as  the  glitter  and  glare  of  arms  and  accoutrements, 
and  the  flash  and  gleam  of  battle.  The  grand  ship  cuts  her  way  through  the  waves 
Vvith  swift  and  powerful  motion,  and  we  do  not  stop  to  think  of  those  who  are  work- 
ing out  of  sight  to  secure  that  motion.  The  strength  and  beauty  of  life  around  us 
is  owing,  it  may  be,  to  those  whose  left  hand  does  not  know  what  their  right  hand 
is  doing.  Where  God,  who  "  is  provoked  every  day,"  is  so  meek  and  gentle  with 
us,  we,  at  all  events,  cannot  afford  to  be  proud,  and  rough,  and  harsh  with  others. 
And  yet  another  way  still  to  this  end,  is  to  accept  humiliation  It  is  said  "  that 
when  IiOuis  XVI.  of  France,  previously  to  his  execution,  was  about  to  be  bound,  he 
showed  signs  of  resistance;   but  that  upon  his  confessor  (the  Abbe  Edge  worth) 


cha».  r.J  4ALATIAN8.  *33 

reminding  him  that  our  Lord  submitted  to  be  bound,  the  king  immediately 
acquiesced  with  a  remark  to  this  effect ;  "  assuredly  it  needed  nothing  less  than  His 
example  to  induce  me  to  undergo  so  great  an  indignity."  We  read  in  the  Life  of 
the  Pere  Lacordaire  of  the  austerities  which  he  practised  to  crush  in  himself  all 
feeling  of  self-satisfaction  after  his  splendid  conferences  in  Notre  Dame.  God  has 
plenty  of  these  wholesome  humiliations  in  store  for  us ;  there  are  those,  certainly, 
which  follow  hard  upon  most  of  our  active  work  for  Him :  criticism,  which  scourges 
our  self-complacency ;  rejection,  which  wounds  our  self-love ;  and  defeat,  which 
shatters  our  self- superiority.  And  we  are  the  servants  of  a  God  who  works  by 
defeat.  All  such  things  are  an  excellent  corrective  to  pride ;  to  be  superseded  by 
some  one  who  does  the  duty  so  much  better  than  we  did  ;  to  be  withdrawn,  in  all 
the  healing  bitterness  of  the  feeling  "  I  am  not  needed  ;  "  to  have  to  recognize  a 
superior  hand,  just  to  miss  the  going  into  the  promised  land,  and  to  hand  it  over 
to  Joshua.  And  then  further,  we  are  in  the  presence  of  perfect  goodness.  If  we 
say  a  prayer,  think  whither  our  prayers  have  to  penetrate,  and  who  it  is  who 
presents  them  1  How  can  an  inferior  singer  venture  on  some  well-known  song  in 
the  presence  of  any  great  or  illustrious  performer,  who  has  made  that  song  his 
own !  And  then  further  still,  we  are  in  the  presence  of  the  Giver,  it  is  all  His.  His 
grace,  His  strength,  His  body,  His  soul,  His  spirit ;  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou 
didst  not  receive  ?  n  Therefore,  perhaps,  we  hav*  come  to  this.  Humility  and 
meekness  are  a  sign  of  greatness ;  they  show  that  we  have  at  least  an  ideal. 
"  Alas,  I  am  satisfied  ] "  this  was  the  lament  of  a  great  sculptor  who  feared 
in  this  thought  a  sign  of  the  decadence  of  his  art.  (W.  G.  E.  Newbolt.) 
Temperance. — Temperance,  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit : — Order  has  been  called  the  first 
law  of  God.  And  order  implies  perfect  control  on  the  part  of  intelligence  over  all 
things  within  its  domain.  And  we  know — slight  as  our  real  knowledge  is  of  the 
natural  forces  that  are  around  us  in  the  earth  and  air  and  waters  under  the  earth 
— how  essential  that  the  bond  which  binds  all  forces  together  in  orderly  connection 
should  not  be  cut  or  weakened  in  a  single  strand.  The  nobility  of  self-control,  as 
well  as  the  absolute  necessity  of  it,  is  perceived  in  the  study  of  the  nature  and  the 
administration  of  God.  It  can  also  be  seen  as  we  study  the  nature  and  doings  of 
man.  Now,  man  has  his  realm.  In  it  he  is  sovereign ;  and  his  realm  is  first  his 
own  nature,  and  secondly  the  space  circumscribed  within  the  influences  which  that 
nature  exerts.  In  the  first  place,  I  say,  man  must  have  control  over  himself.  He 
must  treat  himself  as  a  force  that  needs  control,  as  a  collection  of  energies  that 
need  restraint  and  direction,  as  a  being  of  emotions  that  must  not  rise  save  in 
certain  directions,  as  a  creature  of  appetite  which  must  be  kept  subordinate ;  and 
by  appetite  we  mean  any  strong  desire,  any  urgent  craving  after  a  thing.  In 
looking  into  the  matter  of  human  appetites,  perhaps  the  most  prominent  fact  you 
discover  is  that  they  are  natural.  They  are  found  imbedded  in  the  organic 
structure  of  man.  The  physical  appetites  reveal  themselves  first ;  but  the  mind 
has  its  native  cravings  as  truly  as  the  body.  The  spirit  also — by  which  we  mean 
that  faculty  in  us  which  holds  relations  to  the  moral  realm — has  its  natural 
characteristics.  Neroes  and  Caligulas  are  born.  Their  gratification  in  cruelty 
made  them  monsters.  Even  time,  that  rounds  off  so  many  angles  and  mellows  so 
much  that  is  garish,  refuses  to  soften  a  single  line  of  their  harsh  vices,  or  soften 
the  fierce  and  baleful  expression  of  their  career.  Bonapartes  and  Caesars  are  born 
as  truly  as  drunkards — born  with  the  appetite  for  fame,  for  glory,  for  power. 
History  tells  us  to  what  excesses  these  mental  appetites  can  carry  persons,  and  into 
what  miseries  they  can  plunge  mankind.  These  men  and  their  like  were  born  with 
violent  appetites,  unruly  desires,  an  inordinate  craving  after  prominence,  power, 
and  the  splendour  of  a  great  career.  What  to  them  were  sacked  cities,  burning 
villages,  and  blazing  hamlets  1  What  to  them  the  dying  agonies  of  slaughtered 
troops,  the  widow's  wail,  the  orphan's  cry,  the  imprecations  of  men  and  the  indig- 
nation of  God  ?  These  men  knew  no  moderation.  Their  appetites,  uncontrolled 
and  perhaps  uncontrollable  by  mortal  power,  urged  them  into  such  excesses  that 
Justice,  forgetting  her  function  in  her  righteous  rage,  smote  their  memories  with 
her  scales  as  if  she  would  not  deign  to  weigh  them  in  her  balances ;  and  Mercy 
herself  refused  to  champion  their  cause,  being  utterly  alienated  in  her  sympathy  by 
the  number  and  magnitude  of  their  dreadful  crimes.  Observe,  now,  the  actions  of 
physical  appetites.  How  gross  the  spectacle  of  the  animal  exhibition  we  behold ! 
In  our  country  gluttony  is  not  in  vogue  ;  but  the  time  has  been  when  it  flourished 
in  nations  of  highest  civilization,  and  I  think  it  may  be  said,  as  a  natural 
adjunct  of  the  civilization.    In  our  age  intemperance  crops  out  not  in  eating  but  in 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha»   T, 

drinking.  We  stimulate  the  nerves  instead  of  gorging  the  stomach.  We  sin 
against  the  mind  more  directly  than  against  the  body.  The  sin  of  intemperance 
springs  from  two  causes:  a  physical  appetite  and  a  mental  habit.  The  mental 
habit  is  acquired,  and  is  especially  acquired  by  brain-workers.  But  the  question 
may  be  asked — and  I  have  often  asked  it  myself — why  did  the  Creator  make  us 
so  ?  Why  did  He  who  designed  our  structure  and  mingled  the  elements  of  out 
nature,  not  make  us  more  moderate,  self-contained,  and  less  impulsive?  Why 
did  He  kindle  in  us  such  fiery  heats,  or  build,  as  it  were,  into  the  very  walls  of  the 
edifice  such  combustible  material?  In  reuly  Our  creation,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
is  as  it  is  because  it  is  one  of  power  and  dignity.  Greatness  is  great  because 
of  the  strength  of  its  tendencies,  the  warmth  of  its  emotions,  and  its  liabilities 
to  overdo  and  go  astray.  We  could  have  been  made  more  moderate  if  we  had 
been  made  weaker ;  but  we  could  not  have  been  made  more  moderate  and  pos- 
sessed the  strength,  the  force,  the  impulsive  and  emotional  energies  that  we  do. 
Now  and  then  you  come  across  a  man  who  is  all  moderation;  not  because  of 
any  masterly  control  he  has  over  himself  whereby  he  holds  the  outgoing  forces 
of  his  nature  back  with  benevolent  restraint ;  but  because  he  lacks  the  force  and 
energy.  What  small  sinners  some  people  are  1  They  sin  weakly.  Their  morality 
is  limp.  It  takes  a  great,  angel  to  make  a  great  devil.  It  takes  great  strength  to  be 
monumentally  virtuous  or  monumentally  wicked.  It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  we  were 
made  as  we  are  in  order  that  we  might  become  truly  great.  And  how  do  men  and 
women  become  great  ?  They  become  great  through  great  resistances,  great  struggles, 
and  great  victories.  One  must  wrestle  with  the  angels  of  light  and  the  angels 
of  darkness  both,  if  he  would  be  thewed  and  corded  with  spiritual  power. 
Therefore,  temperance,  or  a  wise  and  noble  control  of  one's  nature  touching  every 
outgoing  of  one's  power,  does  not  imply  negation,  but  the  strongest  kind  of  affirma- 
tion. And  again  :  Self-control  is  the  only  kind  that  really  covers  the  whole  man. 
Laws  control  the  actions ;  but  actions  are  only  the  results  of  emotional  causes.  And 
while  the  actions  can  be  dictated  to  by  law,  can  be  checked — yet  the  emotional 
causes  strike  their  roots  deeper  into  the  nature  than  the  hand  of  law  can 
reach.  You  may  arrest  a  thief  and  put  him  into  the  prison  cell,  and  thereby 
restrain  his  thievish  actions  ;  but  his  thievish  instincts  remain  untouched,  remain 
in  all  their  force  laughing  from  the  depths  in  which  they  are  imbedded  at  your 
attempts  to  reach  them,  when  you  only  pass  your  hand,  as  it  were,  over  the  surface 
far  beneath  which  they  lurk.  Nothing  short  of,  nothing  less  penetrative,  nothing 
less  potent  or  radical  than,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  put  its  arrest  upon  the  instincts 
of  man.  The  central  idea  of  the  word  temperance,  which  in  our  text  is  named  as 
one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  is  self-control.  And  this  self-mastery  relates  first 
and  with  greatest  emphasis  to  ourselves.  It  is  the  foundation  on  which  all  nobility 
of  nature  must  be  builded.  Without  it,  character  is  essentially  unsound  and  likely 
to  become  corrupt.  For  your  own  selves,  therefore,  for  your  peace  of  mind,  for 
your  self-esteem,  for  that  satisfaction  in  living  which  comes  from  the  consciousness 
that  you  are  living  rightly,  we  should  all  alike  make  it  the  first  object  of  our 
endeavours.  To  be  able  to  stand  up  against  the  pressure  of  any  current,  from 
whatever  direction  it  may  come,  and  with  whatever  force  it  may  strike  us — to  be 
able  to  bit  and  bridle  our  passions  and  control  the  otherwise  wild  and  runaway 
forces  of  our  nature — is  a  consummation  so  devoutly  to  be  wished  that  all  others 
may  be  regarded  as  subordinate.  Nor  should  we  fail  to  put  ourselves  in  connection 
with  any  helpful  agencies.  If  Christianity  can  help  us,  then  we  should  avail  our- 
selves of  the  teachings,  and  above  all  of  the  spirit,  of  Christianity.  If  the  power 
needed  for  such  a  sublime  service  can  only  be  received  from  heavenly  bestowment, 
then  heaven  should  not  go  unbesought  of  us.  If  the  Father  can  help  us,  then  the 
Father's  aid  should  be  invoked.  This  is  a  conclusion  in  respect  to  which  I  feel 
confident,  whatever  may  be  our  views  and  opinions  touching  subsidiary  questions 
we  can  unite  in  common  and  hearty  agreement.  But  we  cannot  and  we  do  not 
live  alone.  The  social  structure  of  the  world,  based  upon  our  social  natures  com- 
mon to  all  men,  makes  isolation  impossible  to  us.  We  are  knitted  and  knotted 
together.  We  are  interwoven  as  threads  when  they  have  been,  by  the  skill  of  men 
and  the  pressure  of  machinery,  incorporated  into  one  fabric.  We  cannot  help 
influencing  others,  nor  can  we  protect  ourselves  from  that  interaction  of  influences 
which,  as  we  affect  others,  causes  others  to  affect  us.  We  mar  or  make  the  happi- 
ness of  many.  The  joy  of  many  lives  holds  to  us  the  same  relation  that  the  flowers 
in  spring-time  hold  to  the  sun.  From  us  they  receive  those  warm  and  vivifying 
influences  which,  and  which  alone,  make  them  floral.     We  can  bo  the  sun  or  we 


.  T.J  GALATIANS.  4te 

can  be  the  frost  unto  thousands.  We  are  strong  enough  in  onr  capacities  of 
imparting  pleasure  to  make  them  happy.  We  are  strong  enough  in  our  capacity  to 
impart  pain  to  make  them  wretched.  If  we  hold  ourselves  in  such  control  that  the 
going  forth  of  our  natures  is  salutary  and  blessed  to  them,  then  do  we  indeed  make 
their  Uvea-  If,  lacking  this  self-control,  the  forces  of  our  natures  go  forth  lawlessly, 
then  it  is  not  only  their  happiness,  but  even  the  existence  of  their  virtue,  put  in 
peril.  How  solemn,  therefore,  is  the  exhortation  which  comes  to  us  from  these  grave 
and  tender  considerations  that  we  become  temperate  in  our  lives;  that  we  surrender 
our  natures  to  the  influences  of  that  Spirit  that  worketh  out  in  them  so  desirable  a 
result  1  For  what  is  the  use  of  living  unless  we  can  make  some  one  happy  ?  Why 
do  we  draw  breath  ?  Why  do  we  toil  t  Why  do  we  pile  our  backs  with  burdens  ? 
Why  do  we  fill  our  mouth  with  laughter,  and  yield  our  eyes  to  tears,  unless  in  so 
doing  we  supply  our  own  souls  with  their  natural  food  for  good,  and  give  unto 
others  the  support,  the  pleasure,  and  the  consolation  that  they  need  r  (W.  H. 
Murray,  D.D.)  On  temperance : — I.  A  brief  outline  of  temperance.  1.  To  be 
temperate  we  must  use  with  moderation  the  common  comforts  that  Providence 
bestows  for  the  support  of  nature.  The  Christian  must  neither  insult  the  God  of 
providence  by  despising  His  gifts,  nor  provoke  Him  by  wasting  and  abusing  them. 
2.  To  be  temperate  we  must  possess  tbat  chastity  which  is  opposed  to  lascivious 
passions.  II.  It  will  be  necessary  to  assign  some  reasons  why  temperance  is 
called  the  fruit  or  thb  Spirit.  1.  Nothing  can  be  justly  denominated  a 
virtue,  but  that  which  is  produced  by  a  proper  motive,  and  referred  to  a  proper 
end.  A  principle  of  rectitude,  or  purity,  must  influence  the  heart.  Now  nothing 
can  change  and  effectually  renew  the  heart,  but  Divine  grace.  The  operations  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  only  can  produce  that  which  strictly  deserves  the  name  of 
temperance.  2.  The  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  applying  Divine  truth  to  the 
heart,  have  recovered  many  from  the  most  fixed  and  inveterate  habits  of  gross 
sensuality,  to  a  life  of  sobriety  and  purity.  To  confirm  this  observation,  we  need 
only  refer  to  the  first  fruits  of  their  ministry,  whom  Christ  first  employed  to  preach 
the  gospel.  But  such  instances  were  not  confined  to  that  age :  in  every  age,  some 
have  been  brought,  by  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  from  the  vilest  intemperance  to  a 
life  of  sobriety  and  chastity.  Colonel  Gardiner,  who  before  his  conversion,  was  so 
much  given  up  to  profligacy,  particularly  to  lewdness,  that  he  used  to  say,  "  God 
Himself  could  not  reform  him  without  giving  bim  a  new  constitution,"  declared 
that  "  afterwards  he  felt  no  temptation  from  what  had  once  been  his  besetting  sin." 
Mr.  Brainerd,  whose  labours  were  so  eminently  blessed  to  the  conversion  of  many 
American  Indians,  after  tbat  remarkable  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  which  attended 
the  preaching  of  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  among  them,  observes,  tbat  a  very 
visible  and  happy  change  immediately  followed  in  their  conduct.  "Numbers,"' 
says  he,  "  of  these  people  are  brought  to  a  strict  compliance  with  the  rules  of 
morality  and  sobriety,  and  to  a  conscientious  performance  of  the  external  duties  of 
Christianity,  without  their  having  been  frequently  inculcated  upon  them,  and  the 
contrary  vices  particularly  exposed.  When  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel  were  felt 
at  heart,  there  was  no  vice  unreformed,  no  external  duty  neglected.  Drunkenness, 
their  darling  vice,  was  broken  off,  and  scarcely  an  instance  known  of  it  for  months 
together.  The  practice  of  husbands  and  wives  in  putting  away  each  other,  and 
taking  others  in  their  stead,  was  quickly  reformed.  The  same  might  be  said  of  all 
other  vicious  practices  ?  the  reformation  was  general,  and  all  springing  from  the 
internal  influence  of  Divine  truth  upon  their  hearts."  3.  The  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  applying  the  word  of  truth  to  the  heart,  subdue  those  strong  propen- 
sities to  intemperance,  which  would  break  out  and  gather  strength  by  indulgence,  if 
not  prevented  by  a  powerful  counteracting  cause.  Spiritual-mindedness  cannot 
consist  with  the  sickening  scenes  of  riot  and  lewdness.  They  that  are  after  the 
flesh,  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh  ;  but  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit,  the  things 
of  the  Spirit.  III.  We  shall  mention  some  of  the  advantages  of  temperance. 
1.  There  is  a  noble  kind  of  freedom  invariably  attending  Christian  temperance. 
The  believer  is  not  only  free  from  the  curse,  but  also  from  the  reigning  power  of 
sin.  The  senses,  appetites  and  passions,  become  subject  to  the  enlightened  under- 
standing and  renewed  will.  The  inferior  powers  of  our  nature  are  brought  to  obey, 
rather  than  rule,  the  higher  faculties  of  the  soul.  This  is  justly  styled,  "  The 
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God."  2.  Temperance  ensures  the  best  enjoy- 
ment of  those  comforts  which  the  God  of  providence  imparts.  "  Meat  kills  more 
than  muskets;  and  the  board  destroys  more  than  the  sword."  I  have  read  of  a 
very  extraordinary  mode  of  executing  capital  offenders  practised  in  some  heathen 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

country.  "  There  is  an  engine  shaped  like  a  beautiful  lady,  which  the  criminal 
salutes,  and  afterwards  retires.  He  returns  again  to  salute  the  fatal  machine  :  the 
figure  opens  its  arms,  and  cuts  him  through  the  heart ! "  Whether  such  a  custom 
now  actually  prevails  in  any  place,  I  cannot  engage  to  affirm.  I  quote  the  story 
for  the  sake  of  the  allusion  it  supplies  :  it  presents  us  with  a  true  image  of  that 
flattering  but  cruel  goddess,  sensual  pleasure.  Those  who  eagerly  press  into  her 
arms,  are  sure  to  fall  and  perish  at  the  last.  But  the  temperate  man  enjoys  the 
benefit  designed  in  earthly  things,  while  he  still  looks  for  something  higher  and 
better.  3.  Temperance  assists  the  exercise  of  benevolence.  Temperance,  by 
moderating  our  passions,  and  lessening,  rather  than  multiplying  our  wants,  puts  us 
in  circumstances  capable  of  benefiting  our  fellow-creatures.  Some  Christians  of 
no  great  wealth,  have  been  remarkably  useful  in  society.  4.  Temperance  prepares  ua 
to  engage  in  the  various  duties  of  religion.  IV.  Specify  some  means  which  mat 
be  useful  in  the  cultivation  op  tempeeance.  1.  Consider  all  the  blessings  you 
enjoy  as  talents,  which  you  are  solemnly  called  to  use  and  improve.  2.  Take  heed 
what  company  you  keep.  3.  Let  your  attention  be  chiefly  directed  to  the  attain- 
ment of  spiritual  and  Divine  blessings.  4.  Seek  a  larger  measure  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  influence.  Rules  of  discipline  alone  will  prove  insufficient  to  govern  and 
purify  the  mind.  If  we  are  not  taught  by  Divine  grace,  we  shall  learn  nothing 
aright.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  was  never  yet  produced  on  the  stock  of  unre- 
newed nature.  Let,  then,  your  eyes  be  daily  lifted  up  to  that  Being,  who  is  the 
Fountain  of  all  purity  and  bliss.  (John  Thornton.)  Definition  of  temperance  : — 
Temperance  is  love  taking  exercise,  love  enduring  hardness,  love  seeking  to  become 
healthful  and  athletic,  love  striving  for  the  mastery  in  all  things,  and  bringing  the 
body  under.  It  is  superiority  to  sensual  delights,  and  it  is  the  power  of  applying 
resolutely  to  irksome  duties  for  the  Master's  sake.  It  is  self-denial  and  self-control. 
Fearful  lest  it  should  subside  into  gross  carnality,  or  waste  away  into  shadowy  and 
hectic  sentiment,  temperance  is  love  alert,  and  timeously  astir ;  sometimes  rising 
before  day  for  prayer,  sometimes  spending  that  day  on  tasks  which  laziness  or 
daintiness  declines.  It  is  love  with  girt  loins,  and  dusty  feet,  and  blistered  hands. 
It  is  love  with  the  empty  scrip,  but  the  glowing  cheek ;  love  subsisting  on  pulse  and 
water,  but  grown  so  healthful  and  hardy  that  it  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Temperance 
— I.  Undeb  ant  cibcumstances  is  self-mastery.  II.  With  respect  to  the  senses, 
self-control.  III.  In  relation  to  food,  moderation ;  to  drink,  soberness  ;  to  both, 
abstemiousness.  IV.  In  relation  to  the  sexes,  continence.  V.  In  anger,  forbear- 
ance ;  in  tempeb,  self-control.  VI.  In  action,  modesty ;  in  success,  humility ;  in 
defeat,  hopefulness.  VII.  In  desire,  self-restraint ;  VIII.  in  pleasure,  self-denial. 
(Orby  Shipley.)  God  hath  made  several  objects  pleasing  to  man's  senses.  The 
affections  of  the  soul  are  apt  to  follow  the  senses  of  the  body.  Hence  sensual 
pleasures  are  apt  to  draw  us  into  vice.  It  is  therefore  our  great  duty  and  interest  to 
moderate  our  affections  to  sensual  pleasures.  I.  In  keeping  our  affections 
subject  to  beason  and  beligion,  and  so  denying  them  what  is  unlawful  (Titus  ii. 
12).  H.  In  abstaining  especially  fbom  such  lusts,  as  by  our  calling,  condition, 
or  constitution  we  abe  most   subject  to  (1  Pet.  iv.  2-4).     III.  In  abstaining 

FBOM     THE     INWARD     DESIBES     AS     WELL     AS     THE      OUTWARD    ACT    OF    INTEMPERANCE 

(Col.  iii.  5;  Bom.  viii.  13;  Matt.  v.  28).    IV.  In  not  being  too  much  lifted  up 

WITH   THE   INCBEASE,   NOB   CAST  DOWN  WITH   THE   LOSS   OF   SENSUAL  PLEASUBES  (1  Cor. 

vii.  29-31 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  10).  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Temperance  is  the  right  handling 
of  one's  soul.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Temperance  keeps  the  senses  clear  and  unem- 
barrassed, and  makes  them  seize  the  object  with  more  keenness  and  satisfaction. 
It  appears  with  life  in  the  face,  and  decorum  in  the  person  ;  it  gives  you  the  com- 
mand of  your  head,  secures  your  health,  and  preserves  you  in  a  condition  for 
business.  (Jeremy  Collier.)  Temperance  is  corporeal  piety ;  it  is  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  Divine  order  of  the  body.  (Theodore  Parker.)  Temperance  : — Temper- 
ance ('EyKpdrtia)  seems  to  be  the  last,  the  crowning  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  as  if  the  very 
greatness  of  the  riches  which  await  the  perfect  man  needed  a  regulating  and 
discriminating  power.  There  is  a  phrase  in  St.  Peter's  writings  which  is  eloquent 
with  the  same  warning,  iv  Si  ry  ywiffei  rrjv  iyKpar'uav,  "  and  to  knowledge  temper- 
ance "  ;  as  if  each  sense,  each  feeling,  each  power,  when  it  has  aroused  its  dormant 
energies,  were  moving  amidst  fresh  possibilities  of  wealth  and  satisfaction,  which 
needed  regulating.  And  so  there  grows  up  this  splendid  lyicpartia,  temperance,  as 
a  regulating  principle,  showing  us  the  when,  the  how,  the  how  much,  and  the  how 
long,  with  undeviating  instinct.     In  the  spirit  of  those  grand  lines — 


OBAF.  ▼.)  GALATIANS.  437 

•*  Self-reverence,  self-knowledge,  self-control, 
These  three  alone  lead  life  to  sovereign  power ; 
Yet  not  for  power  (power  of  herself 
Would  come  uncalled  for),  but  to  live  by  law, 
Acting  the  law  we  live  by  without  fear  ; 
And  because  right  is  right,  to  follow  right 
Were  wisdom,  in  the  scorn  of  consequence." 

la  not  this  true  temperance,  the  moderating,  the  regulating,  the  due  admixture,  aa 
time  and  season  require,  of  all  that  goes  to  make  up  life ;  so  much  pleasure,  so  much 
pain,  so  much  work,  so  much  recreation ;  memory,  imagination,  body,  soul,  and 
spirit — all  contributing,  and  nothing  in  excess,  fitjSi v  ayav  ?  And  the  words  quoted 
above  may  surely  give  us  a  good  analysis  of  the  formation  of  temperance,  "  self- 
reverence,"  this  may  well  be  the  first  element ;  reverence  even  for  the  less  comely 
parts  of  our  nature.  "  Self-knowledge,"  again  ;  how  necessary  this  is  as  a  con- 
stituent part  1  Each  knows  for  himself  what  he  can  do ;  each  knows  for  himself 
what  he  is  bound  to  avoid.  Some  can  make  good  use  even  of  poisons  in  their 
skilful  mingling,  while  to  others  the  most  wholesome  meat  is  to  them  the  veriest 
poison.  Self-knowledge  is  all-essential,  as  showing  us  what  we  can  do  and  what 
we  cannot  do,  and  in  helping  us  to  gauge  all  those  delicate  tendencies  which  are 
latent  in  us  from  heredity,  or  pass  into  us  from  environment  and  which  in  them- 
selves go  to  make  or  mar  the  man.  And  then  as  a  third  element  we  have  "  self- 
control  " — that  master-spirit  which  has  all  its  slaves  under  its  dominion,  obedient 
to  the  nod  of  the  will,  which  in  itself  can  submit  to  the  Master's  call,  which  has 
learnt  to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  There 
are  two  stages  in  the  development  of  this  temperance  which  we  may  do  well  to 
consider.  First  of  all,  as  a  preliminary  step,  we  may  place  what  we  call  "self- 
denial  " — that  sort  of  learning  not  to  touch — the  free,  detached  mode  of  walking 
through  the  world.  And  the  uses  of  self-denial  are  obvious ;  it  makes  us  more 
prepared  for  the  assaults  of  the  devil.  Being  indifferent  in  things  lawful,  we 
are  not  likely  to  be  tempted  in  things  unlawful.  Our  appetites  are  all  under 
guard ;  the  circle  of  the  walls  is  vigilantly  patrolled ;  the  watchword  is  passed 
on  from  tower  to  tower  of  prayer  ;  and  all  the  bush  of  pride  and  luxury  has  been 
cut  down.  So  self-denial  cuts  off  occasion;  while  as  a  further  stage  still,  it 
makes  us  more  fit  for  God's  work.  And  self-denial  will  make  us  more  continent, 
so  to  speak,  amidst  all  the  allurements  of  the  world;  where  one  less  braced 
would  become  enervated  and  lifeless.  We  have  become  mortified,  dead  to  the 
world ;  all  the  channels  of  evil  have  been  stopped  and  cut  off.  And  now,  if  we 
have  secured  this  great  principle  of  self-denial,  we  shall  be  daily  and  hourly  called 
upon  to  practise  self-restraint — a  higher  stage  still ;  and  this  in  the  most  far-reaching, 
the  most  comprehensive  manner.  There  are,  for  instance,  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the 
thoughts,  the  imagination,  the  understanding,  which  all  need  restraining,  just  aa 
we  restrain  the  lower  appetites  themselves.  Modesty  we  all  feel  the  need  of; 
vigilance  we  know  is  of  the  utmost  importance;  but  recollectedness,  perhaps, 
we  are  not  so  careful  to  cultivate  as  we  ought  to  be.  What  a  force  it  is,  in  its 
simple  concentration  of  powers,  whether  at  study,  or  in  prayer,  or  when  simply 
alone.  "How  we  grow  unable  to  commune  silently  and  seriously  with  our  own 
souls,  because  we  have  shrunk  from  the  discipline  of  solitude  when  it  was 
offered  for  our  acceptance."  And  self-restraint  does  not  stop  here,  it  goes  higher 
and  it  goes  lower.  It  goes  higher,  up  to  that  self-will,  in  all  its  unteachable 
obstinacy,  fancies,  and  dislikes.  It  goes  lower,  to  that  self-indulgence,  which,  to 
say  the  least  of  it,  is  taking  off  the  hardness  which  it  was  the  object  of  self, 
denial  to  produce.  It  is  required  for  the  tongue,  to  stop  its  misuse,  and  mis- 
direction. It  is  required  for  the  actions,  to  stop  hastiness,  imprudence, 
unsteadiness,  or  self-abandonment  out  of  the  due  proportion  of  life.  It  is 
required  even  for  the  soul,  to  bring  it  back  from  its  favourite  doctrines  to  "  the 
proportion  of  faith,"  to  drive  it  into  the  wilderness,  after  scenes  of  holy  peace 
at  Jordan ;  to  stop  untaught  enthusiasm  and  uninstructed  zeal ;  landing  the  life 
at  last  in  that  perfect  temperance,  where  all  things  mingle  in  their  due  propor- 
tion in  that  perfect  man,  where  each  part  rejoices  in  the  excellence  of  each,  for 
the  excellence  of  each  part  is  the  joy  of  the  whole.  Above  all  things  lei 
us  ie  spiritual.  Spirituality  is  a  power  in  the  world,  quite  separate  and 
distinct  by  itself ;  some  are  as  ignorant  of  it  as  our  forefathers  were  of  electricity  ; 
but  there  is  no  power  like  it ;  and  this  power  may  be  ours.     ( W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.) 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*.  T. 

Againat  such  there  Is  no  law. — The  spirit'*  relation  to  law : — The  object  of  law 
is  education.  There  is  no  law  made  for  any  other  use,  bo  far  as  law  applies  to 
human  beings.  God  never  rested  a  law  of  His  on  force.  Every  law  He  has  made 
rests  on  love.  No  law  was  ever  passed  in  order  to  punish  people,  but  to  save  people 
from  punishment.  Looked  at  in  this  light  the  value  of  law  cannot  be  over-esti- 
mated. It  might  be  called  the  free,  the  impartial,  the  universal  educator  of  men. 
Into  the  realm  of  human  rights  which  for  ages  lingered  in  prolonged  night — a  night 
•without  a  star — it  rises  like  a  sun,  and  the  realm  of  darkness  becomes  illuminated. 
Nothing  is  more  unfortunate  than  to  have  people  suppose  that  love  is  one  thing 
and  law  is  another,  even  its  opposite.  If  it  were  so,  then  is  my  mind  one  thing 
and  my  arm  another  when,  in  obedience  to  my  will,  it  makes  a  movement.  For 
law  is  only  the  armed  extension  of  love;  doing  its  wish,  serving  its  purpose, 
and  therefore  one  with  itself.  To  deify  force,  even  non-intelligent  force — force 
governed  in  no  other  law  in  its  outgoings  than  the  law  of  change — is  sad  enough  ; 
but  to  deify  force  that  is  not  only  intelligent,  but  is  so  cruel  that  it  delights  in  the 
suffering  it  can  inflict,  is  infamous.  Such  a  theology,  or  such  a  travesty  on 
theology,  is  but  a  mockery  of  the  Christian  religion.  Now,  then,  we  have  come 
to  the  understanding  of  the  use  of  law  and  its  relation  to  love.  We  have  ascertained 
that  law,  in  its  use,  is  education  as  it  relates  to  man ;  and  as  it  relates  to  God  it  is 
only  a  servant  to  love — a  means  of  wisely  expressing  unto  mortals  His  affection  for 
them.  We  now  come  to  the  further  statement,  that  while  law  is  valuable  both  as 
a  method  of  education  and  as  a  means  of  expressing  His  love,  yet  in  relation  to 
both  of  these  objects  it  has  its  strict  limitations  ;  that  is,  it  can  only  carry  the  moral 
education  of  man  up  to  a  certain  point,  which  point  is  by  no  means  sufficiently 
high  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  soul ;  and  that  it  can  only  in  a  very  imperfect 
manner  proclaim  to  the  universe  the  Divine  affections.  Now,  the  necessities  of  the 
soul  are  the  necessities  of  our  whole  being.  For  the  word  soul  is  an  all-including 
word,  and  within  its  significance  every  faculty,  power,  and  sense  are  embraced. 
But  the  necessities  of  our  whole  being  can  never  be  met  by  mere  knowledge,  which 
is  all  that  law  can  give.  Nor  can  it  reveal  unto  us  the  nature  of  God  in  any  such 
degree  as  we  crave  to  know  it.  For  law  can  only  reveal  to  us  the  conscience  of 
God,  while  His  affections,  His  mercies,  His  sympathies  are  not  directly  expressed 
by  it.  And  while  God  is  the  highest  embodiment  of  conscience  that  we  can  imagine ; 
while  He  is  the  superlative  expression  of  moral  sense,  He  is  more  than  this.  There 
is  another  thought  in  this  connection  that  may  help  some  of  you,  that  not  only  is 
law  unable  to  express  God,  but  God's  design  aims  at  a  finer  expression  of  Himself 
than  law  can  give.  The  master  recognizes  the  inability  of  his  servant,  and  there- 
fore calls  upon  other  assistance.  And  this  is  seen  if  you  will  ask  and  answer  this 
question  :  What  is  God's  design  as  it  stands  related  to  moral  beings?  Is  it  to 
make  fashionable  a  class  of  conduct  or  a  class  of  character  ?  A  class  of  character, 
assuredly.  In  this  connection  the  interrogation  might  not  be  amiss,  nor  lacking 
just  application  to  us  all,  What  sort  of  a  character  under  our  profession  of  piety 
are  we  growing,  granted  that  the  outward  conduct  is  in  strict  conformance  with 
religious  requirements  ?  What  is  the  actual  inner  state  ?  Are  we  in  our  natures 
as  good  as  we  are  in  our  behaviour  ?  Are  we  as  faultless  in  our  dispositions  as 
God's  eye  sees  them  as  we  are  in  that  deportment  which  men's  eyes  see  ?  These 
are  questions  that  penetrate  us,  friends.  God  grant  they  do  not  carry  fire  on  their 
point  as  they  enter  into  us.  One  other  thought  touching  this  matter  of  law  as  it 
relates  to  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Let  me  ask  you  this  question:  What  is  the 
highest  form  of  law  ?  Don't  think  of  the  legislature,  of  the  statute  book,  of  the 
Decalogue,  no,  nor  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ;  for  in  none  of  these  will  you  find 
law  expressed  in  its  highest  form.  Where  then  ?  In  man,  if  he  be  good  enough, 
in  God  always.  The  highest  form  of  law  is  impersonated  law,  law  that  has  been 
translated  out  of  statute  into  character ;  out  of  the  enactment  into  the  act,  and  out 
of  the  act  into  the  spirit.  Enshrined  in  that  spirit  like  a  pure  element  in  a  trans- 
parent substance,  the  law  shines  forth  with  an  expression  so  fine  that  the  obedience 
of  earth  and  the  piety  of  heaven  alike  take  it  as  their  guiding  star.  Th;"»  was  pre- 
cisely the  condition  of  things  in  the  case  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  In  Him  the  spirit 
of  all  good  law  found  embodiment.  He  was,  as  it  were,  the  breathing,  living, 
walking  genius  of  justice  ;  that  justice  which  was  utterly  just  because  it  kept  its 
own  alliance  with  the  love,  the  mercy,  and  the  pity  of  the  skies.  They  who  heard 
Him  speak  heard  the  law  speak ;  hence  the  people  recognized  that  He  spake  as  ona 
having  authority — a  crude,  popular  way  of  expressing  a  sublime  perception  only 
dimly  sensed.     One  thing  I  cannot  refrain  from  suggesting :  never  think  that  th« 


CHA*.  v.]  GALATIANS.  48* 

object  of  the  Spirit's  work  is  to  deliver  you  from  penalty.  Heaven  is  something 
more  and  finer  than  an  escape  from  hell.  No  one  ever  shuns  hell ;  he  grows  up 
above  it.  Heaven  is  character ;  and  he  whose  character  is  being  grown  daily  by  the 
culture  of  the  Spirit  is  growing  daily  into  the  heavenly  state.  Ah,  it  is  not  what 
the  Spirit  mercifully  holds  me  back  from,  but  what  it  graciously  leads  me  unto, 
that  makes  me  love  Him.  He  has  led  me  to  knowledge  without  which  I  should  not 
have  had  the  powers  and  pleasures  of  intelligence.  He  has  led  me  into  sensitive- 
ness touching  my  own  rights  and  the  rights  of  others,  and  thereby  has  given  me 
self-dignity,  and  with  it  humanity.  He  has  brought  me  into  emotional  neighbour- 
hood with  God  ;  so  that  I  live  in  the  same  city  with  Him — His  own  city — and  am 
one  of  His  subjects,  and  have  the  honour  of  serving  Him  day  and  night.  Not  only 
bo,  but  this  blessed  Spirit  has  utilized  the  subtle  forces  of  my  own  mind  and  nature 
in  my  bebalf — forces  which  lurk  in  nerves  of  feeling  that  the  anatomist  has  never 
found,  and  which  move  in  strong  currents  through  channels  of  my  soul  that 
psychologists  have  never  discovered.  (W.  II.  Murray,  D.D.)  No  law  against 
the  spiritual : — Against  such  there  is  no  law !  God  be  thanked,  no  !  When  a 
man's  whole  soul  has  been  illuminated,  so  that  it  burns  day  and  night  with  the 
lambent,  sweet  flame  of  love,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  and 
hopefulness,  when  this  is  his  habitual  frame  of  mind,  or  a  frame  of  mind  so  nearly 
habitual  that  only  the  occasion  is  necessary  to  bring  it  out  in  full  force,  then  there 
is  no  law  for  him.  Under  such  circumstances  men  do  right,  not  because  the  way 
of  doing  right  is  laid  down  before  them.  It  was  once  ;  but  long  ago  they  digested 
it  just  as  food  is  digested,  and  it  has  become  part  and  parcel  of  their  organization. 
This  is  to  be  a  Christian — a  ripe  Christian.  A  man  may  be  a  Christian,  and  excel 
in  many  things  ;  but  here  is  the  portraiture ;  and  an  imperfect  portrait  is  no 
portrait  at  all.  If  a  portrait-painter  should  draw  one  half  of  a  face  and  leave  the 
other  half  blank,  nobody  would  take  it ;  or,  if  he  should  draw  the  forehead  and 
eyes  perfectly,  and  leave  the  nose  out,  nobody  would  take  that.  The  glory  of  the 
face  is  in  the  symmetry  of  all  its  parts  ;  and  the  glory  of  a  Christian  character 
does  not  lie  in  this  excellence  or  that  excellence — good  as  it  may  be  and  desirable — 
but  in  the  harmony  of  all  excellences.  .  .  .  This  is  the  measure  by  which  we  can 
examine  ourselves  ;  not  to  know  whether  we  are  in  the  faith,  but  to  know  how  far 
we  have  progressed  in  the  faith.  How  many  things  are  yet  burdensome  duties  ? 
How  many  things  are  yet  done  with  a  painful  self-denial  ?  I  believe  in  self-denial ; 
but  I  believe  that  all  self-denial  should,  after  a  very  short  time,  become  gracious 
and  sweet ;  for  all  self-denial  is  in  its  last  analysis  but  the  overcoming  of  a  lower 
impulse  by  the  interference  of  a  higher  one  ;  and  every  single  step  we  take  up, 
should  make  that  which  in  the  beginning  was  painful  less  and  less  so,  until  it 
positively  becomes  pleasurable.  How  many  victories  of  that  kind  have  you  gained  ? 
How  many  are  you  striving  after  ?  Do  you  ask  yourselves  how  many  of  you  have 
been  constant  in  family  prayers,  constant  inthe  Sunday-school,  constant  in  the  Word 
of  God  ?  All  of  these  things  are  very  good ;  but  they  do  not  produce  fruit 
necessarily,  any  more  than  if  a  farmer  should  go  round  his  farm  every  day,  clear 
to  the  boundaries,  but  never  plant  anything,  never  hoe  anything,  never  plough  any- 
thing, but  simply  look  at  everything,  and  people  should  say :  "  Oh,  he  is  a  good 
farmer,  isn't  he  ?  "  A  good  farmer  is  known  at  reaping  time.  There  are  a  great 
many  people  who  read  the  Bible  and  pray.  That  is  all  very  well  indeed  ;  but  they 
do  not  practise  so  much.  These  are  the  outward  indications  of  what  is  right  and 
proper ;  but  it  is  the  inward  registration  that  tells.  And  in  all  self-examination  it 
must  come  to  this.  How  much  of  my  nature  is  really  exalted  ?  How  much  of  it 
has  become  automatic  ?  How  much  of  my  mind  is  pure  and  high,  according  to  the 
gracious  qualities  of  my  Master  ?  Am  I  living  in  these  states  of  mind  from  day  to 
day,  and  habitually?  (H.  W  Beecher.)  Law  is  needed  up  to  a  certain  point; 
but  if  a  man  can  go  higher  than  that  point,  he  does  not  need  law : — Wings  would 
help  me ;  but  angels  do  not  need  wings — though  painters  have  represented  them 
as  having  wings.  An  angel,  according  to  our  conception,  is  one  that  can  lift  itself 
up,  and  move  hither  and  thither,  by  its  own  spontaneity.  In  proportion  as  men 
have  these  thoughts,  in  proportion  as  they  live  by  the  force  of  them,  they  do  not 
need  the  wings,  the  feet,  the  helps,  the  schoolmasters,  the  directors,  the  wardens, 
That  laws  are.  Laws  are  simply  aids  to  weak  folks,  to  tell  them  where  to  go,  to 
help  them  to  go,  and  to  make  them  remember  the  next  time  if  they  do  not  go. 
Laws  are  men's  servants ;  and  they  are  servants  which  serve  them  in  that  way. 
Hut  if  a  man  has  a  direct  inspiration  of  God ;  or  if  his  culture  has  gone  so  high 
that  he  does  not  need  these  external  stimulants ;  or  if  he  has  another  sphere  oi 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  *t 

influences  which  lead  him  to  the  same  things  from  a  higher  point  of  view,  the  lower 
ones  drop,  not  because  they  are  wrong,  but  because  the  man  is  doing  the  same  things 
better  by  a  different  set  of  instruments.  Therefore  it  is  that  there  is  no  law  to  some 
men.  A  man  who  needs  a  law  is  yet  a  child.  There  is  not  one  man  in  a  hundred 
who  ever  does  live  by  the  laws  of  the  land  that  he  is  in.  We  do  not  live  by  the  laws 
Df  our  land.  You  do  not  know  one  quarter  of  the  laws  that  are  on  our  statute- 
books.  A  virtuous  and  honest  man  does  not  need  to  know  what  the  laws  are.  The 
greatest  proportion  of  men  live  and  die  without  hearing  once  in  all  their  life  a 
tenth  or  a  hundredth  part  of  the  laws  that  pertain  to  good  conduct.  They  do  right 
of  their  own  accord,  and  therefore  the  law  has  no  force  on  them.  So  it  is  in  respect 
to  true  manly  living.  As  far  as  a  real,  upright  man  goes,  he  goes  voluntarily.  He 
does  from  spontaneity  and  from  choice  what  men  lower  down  do  from  necessity,  or 
from  fear  of  punishment.  The  consequence  is  that  men  live  toward  freedom  in 
proportion  as  they  live  toward  fidelity.  (Ibid.)  Law  exists  for  the  purpose  of 
restraint,  but  in  the  works  of  the  Spirit  there  is  nothing  to  restrain.  (Bishop 
Lightfoot.)  Law  neither  prohibits  nor  enjoins  Christian  graces,  which  belong 

to  a  different  sphere.  (B.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Whether  with  regard  to  the  fruits  of 
the  earth  there  may  be  a  natural  law,  whether  it  be  true  of  the  natural  creation 
that  by  the  force  of  law  the  seasons  may  fail,  the  rain  be  too  heavy,  or  the  sun  too 
slight,  it  can  be  boldly  said  that  against  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  there  can  be  no  law. 
(Canon  Knox-Little.) 

Yer.  24.  And  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections 

and  lusts. — Ore  the  marks  which  distinguish  a  real  Christian : — Thus  those  that  are 
Christ's  are  occasionally  characterized  as  born  of  the  Spirit ;  walking  in  the  Spirit ; 
the  children  of  God ;  the  elect  of  God ;  the  doers  of  the  law ;  the  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Those  that  are  not  Christ's  are  described  as  walking  in  the 
flesh ;  fulfilling  the  lusts  of  the  flesh ;  the  children  of  this  world ;  the  unfruitful 
hearers  of  the  law ;  the  servants  of  Satan  ;  the  heirs  of  damnation.  Let  me  now 
endeavour  to  assist  you  in  judging  whether  you  are  living  to  Christ,  or  to  the  flesh, 
by  setting  before  you  some  of  the  scriptural  tests,  which  distinguish  from  a  corrupt 
and  unregenerate  world  those  who  belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  I.  To  crucify  the 
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  make  it  the  business  of 
life  to  overcome,  through  the  ever  present  grace  of  God,  the  evil  dispositions  and 
desires  of  human  nature ;  and  to  abstain  from  the  evil  actions  to  which  those 
dispositions  and  desires  would  lead.  And  on  what  principle  are  you  thus  to  crucify 
the  flesh?  You  are  to  crucify  it  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  are  to  abhor 
and  renounce  sin  because  it  was  the  occasion  of  His  sufferings.  From  love  and 
gratitude  to  your  Redeemer  for  the  unspeakable  kindness  which  He  has  shown 
towards  yourself,  you  are  to  forsake  whatever  is  displeasing  in  His  sight.  II.  Have 
you  therefore  resolved,  through  the  grace  of  God,  to  renounce  the  indulgence  of 
sinful  inclinations  and  practices  ?  Have  you  thus  taken  the  first  step  towards 
living  unto  Christ?  What  then  is  the  second?  " Cease  to  do  evil :  "  saith  the 
prophet.  What  is  his  next  injunction  ?  "  Learn  to  do  well."  III.  The  characteristics 
which  have  hitherto  been  proposed  as  tests,  by  which  you  may  be  assisted  in 
forming  a  judgment  whether  at  present  you  belong  to  Christ,  have  principally  been 
deduced  from  your  proceedings  as  to  the  government  of  unhallowed  inclinations 
and  desires,  and  from  your  tempers  and  conduct  as  exercised  towards  man.  Not 
that  the  frame  of  your  heart  towards  God  has  been  thrown  into  the  background. 
Love  to  God  through  Christ  has  been  assumed  as  the  basis  of  self-government,  and 
of  love  to  man.  From  that  root  must  spring  every  ramification  of  duty.  The 
disposition,  however,  of  your  soul  as  to  subjects  more  immediately  and  closely 
spiritual  than  those  which  have  been  specified  is  the  least  dubitable  of  all  the 
tokens  to  which  you  can  resort  for  insight  into  your  actual  state.  Does  the  current 
of  your  thoughts,  when,  unchecked  by  impediments,  it  selects  a  course  for  itself, 
flow  towards  God  and  your  Redeemer  ?  IV.  Direct  your  attention  to  the  objects, 
which,  when  the  affection  of  the  Apostle  Paul  for  his  converts  expatiated  in  calling 
down  blessings  upon  them,  uniformly  presented  themselves  to  his  thoughts  (Eph. 
i.  16-18,  iii.  16-19 ;  Philipp.  i.  9-11 ;  Col.  i.  9-11).  1.  If  you  are  not  Christ's,  what 
are  your  hopes  ?  Do  you  flatter  yourself  that  the  Scriptures  may  prove  not  to  be 
the  word  of  inspiration?  Or  do  you  assume  the  promises  of  God  as  true,  and 
regard  His  threatenings  as  empty  terrors  ?  Or  do  you  think  that  Christ,  when  Ha 
comes,  will  make  you  an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  and  distinguish  you  by 
unexampled  mercy  in  spite  of  your  disobedience  ?    Behold  the  thin  and  hollow  ice 


OTA*.  T.]  QALATIANS.  441 

on  which  you  propose  to  cross  the  gulf  of  everlasting  destruction !  2.  If  you  are 
already  a  true  Christian ;  foster  the  good  seed  sown  in  your  heart,  that  the  Divine 
planter  may  preserve  it  from  being  overwhelmed  by  surrounding  tares,  and  may 
nourish  it  unto  timely  and  plentiful  maturity.  Grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Thomas  Gisborne.)  Crucifixion  of  the  flesh: — Men 
who  believe  in  Jesus  become  purer,  holier,  better.  They  are  saved  from  living  aa 
they  used  to  live — saved  from  licentiousness,  dishonesty,  drunkenness,  selfishness, 
and  any  other  sin  they  may  have  lived  in.  They  are  different  men.  There  is  a 
change  in  their  heart  and  soul,  conduct  and  conversation.  I.  The  reception  of 
Jesus  Christ  by  faith  is,  in  itself,  an  avowal  that  we  have  crucified  the  flesh, 
with  the  affections  and  lusts.  Christ  died  in  our  room  and  stead.  By  faith  we 
regard  ourselves  as  dead  with  Him.  II.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  reception  of 
Christ  ia  attended  with  the  crucifixion  of  sin.  Every  truly  converted  man  is  a 
proof  of  this.  III.  The  reception  of  Jesus  Christ  into  the  heart  by  simple 
faith  is  calculated  to  crucify  the  flesh.  1.  The  believer  has  seen  the  evil  of 
sin.  It  is  a  deicide — a  killing  of  God.  2.  He  has  seen  in  the  death  of  Christ  an 
amazing  instance  of  the  great  grace  of  God.  3.  He  has  had  a  view  of  the  justice 
of  God.  4.  He  has  seen  the  amazing  love  of  Jesus.  How,  then,  can  he  go  on 
grieving  and  offending  Him?  IV.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  with  the  gospel,  and 
where  He  ia  holiness  must  be  promoted.  Wherever  Jesus  Christ  is  preached, 
there  is  present  One  sublime  in  rank  and  high  in  degree — the  ever-blessed  Spirit  of 
God.  He  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  shows  them  unto  men.  His  power 
changes  the  current  of  men's  desires,  making  them  crucify  the  flesh  and  its 
affections,  and  love  things  holy,  just,  and  true.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  believer 
crucifying  his  sins : — When  I  believed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  and  rested  my 
soul  in  Him,  I  felt  in  my  heart  from  that  moment  an  intense  hatred  to  sin  of  every 
kind.  I  had  loved  sin  before,  some  sins  particularly,  but  those  sins  became  from 
that  moment  the  most  obnoxious  to  me,  and,  though  the  propensity  to  them  was 
still  there,  yet  the  love  of  them  was  clean  gone ;  and  when  I  at  any  time  trans- 
gressed I  felt  an  inward  grief  and  horror  at  myself  for  doing  the  things  which 
aforetime  I  had  allowed  and  even  enjoyed.  My  relish  for  sin  was  gone.  The 
things  I  once  loved  I  abhorred  and  blushed  to  think  of.  Then  I  began  to  search 
out  my  sins.  I  see  now  a  parallel  between  my  experience  in  reference  to  sin,  and 
the  details  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ.  They  sent  Judas  into  the  garden  to  search 
for  our  great  Substitute,  and  just  in  that  way  I  began  to  search  for  sin,  even  for 
that  which  lay  concealed  amid  the  thick  darkness  of  my  soul.  I  was  ignorant,  and 
did  not  know  sin  to  be  sin,  for  it  was  night  in  my  soul ;  but,  being  stirred  up  to 
destroy  the  evil,  my  repenting  spirit  borrowed  lanterns  and  torches,  and  went  out 
as  against  a  thief.  I  searched  the  garden  of  my  heart  through  and  through,  with 
an  intense  ardour  to  find  out  every  sin ;  and  I  brought  God  to  help  me,  saying, 
'*  Search  me,  0  God,  and  try  me,  and  know  my  ways ;  "  nor  did  I  cease  till  I  had 
spied  out  my  secret  transgressions.  This  inward  search  is  one  of  my  most  constant 
occupations  ;  I  patrol  my  nature  through  and  through  to  try  and  arrest  these  felons, 
these  abhorred  sins,  that  they  may  be  crucified  with  Christ.  O  ye  in  whom 
iniquity  lurks  under  cover  of  your  spiritual  ignorance,  arouse  yourselves  to  a  strict 
scrutiny  of  your  nature,  and  no  longer  endure  that  your  hearts  should  be  the 
lurking-places  of  evil.  I  remember  when  I  found  my  sin.  When  I  found  it  I 
seized  it,  and  I  dragged  it  off  to  the  judgment-seat.  Ah,  my  brethren,  you  know 
when  that  occurred  to  you,  and  how  stern  was  the  judgment  which  conscience  gave 
forth.  I  sat  in  judgment  on  myself.  I  took  my  sin  to  one  court,  and  to  another. 
I  looked  at  it  as  before  men,  and  trembled  to  think  that  the  badness  of  my  example 
might  have  ruined  other  men's  souls.  I  looked  at  my  sin  as  before  God,  and  I 
abhorred  myself  in  dust  and  ashes.  My  sin  was  as  red  as  crimson  in  His  sight 
and  in  mine  also.  I  judged  my  sin  and  I  condemned  it — condemned  it  as  a  felon 
to  a  felon's  death.  I  heard  a  voice  within  me  which,  Pilate-like,  pleaded  for  it — 
"  I  will  chastise  him  and  let  him  go  ;  let  it  be  a  little  put  to  shame  ;  let  not  the 
wrong  deed  be  done  quite  so  often  ;  let  the  lust  be  curbed  and  kept  under."  But, 
ah,  my  soul  said,  "Let  it  be  crucified!  Let  it  be  crucified  1  "  and  nothing  could 
shake  my  heart  from  this  intent,  that  I  would  slay  all  the  murderers  of  Christ  if 
possible,  and  let  not  one  of  them  escape ;  for  my  soul  hated  them  with  a  deadly 
hatred,  and  would  fain  nail  them  all  to  the  tree.  I  remember,  too,  how  I  began  to 
see  the  shame  of  sin.  As  my  Lord  was  spitted  upon,  and  mocked,  and  despitefully 
used,  so  did  my  soul  begin  to  pour  contempt  upon  all  the  pride  of  sin,  to  scorn  ita 
promises  cf  pleasure,  and  to  accuse  it  of  a  thousand  crimes.     It  had  deceived  me. 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [cha*.  «, 

it  had  led  me  into  ruin,  it  had  well-nigh  destroyed  me ;  and  I  despised  it,  and 
poured  contempt  upon  its  briberies,  and  all  it  offered  of  sweetness  and  of  pleasure. 

0  sin,  how  shameful  a  thing  didst  thou  appear  to  be  1  I  saw  all  that  is  base,  mean, 
and  contemptible,  concentrated  in  thee.  My  heart  scourged  sin  by  repentance, 
smote  it  with  rebukes,  and  buffeted  it  with  self-denials.  Then  was  it  made  a 
reproach  and  a  scorn  But  this  sufficed  not — sin  must  die.  My  heart  mourned  for 
what  sin  had  done,  and  I  was  resolved  to  avenge  my  Lord's  death  upon  myself. 
So  I  led  forth  my  sins  to  the  place  of  crucifixion.  They  would  fain  have  escaped, 
but  the  power  of  God  prevented  them,  and  like  a  guard  of  soldiery,  conducted  them 
to  the  gibbet  of  mortification.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  present,  and  His  all- 
revealing  spirit  stripped  my  sin  as  Christ  was  stripped  ;  setting  it  before  mine  eyes, 
even  my  secret  sin  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.     Oh,  what  a  spectacle  it  was  as 

1  gazed  upon  it !  I  had  looked  before  upon  its  dainty  apparel,  and  the  colours  with 
which  it  had  bedizened  itself,  to  make  it  look  as  fair  as  Jezebel  when  she  painted 
her  face ;  but  now  I  saw  its  nakedness  and  horror,  and  I  was  well-nigh  ready  to 
despair ;  but  my  spirit  bore  me  up,  for  I  knew  that  I  was  forgiven,  and  I  said, 
"  Christ  Jesus  has  pardoned  me,  for  I  have  believed  in  Him;  and  I  will  put  the 
flesh  to  death,  by  crucifying  it  on  His  Cross."  The  driving  of  the  nails  I  do 
remember,  and  how  the  flesh  struggled  to  maintain  its  liberty.  One,  two,  three, 
four,  the  nails  went  in,  and  fastened  the  accursed  thing  to  the  wood  with  Christ,  so 
that  it  could  neither  run  nor  rule ;  and  now,  glory  be  to  God,  though  my  sin  is  not 
dead,  it  is  crucified,  and  must  eventually  die.  It  hangs  up  there ;  J  can  see  it 
bleeding  out  its  life.  Sometimes  it  struggles  to  get  down,  and  tries  to  wrencb  away 
the  nails,  for  it  would  fain  go  after  vanity  ;  but  the  sacred  nails  hold  it  too  fast,  it 
is  in  the  grasp  of  death,  and  it  cannot  escape.  Alas,  it  dies  a  lingering  death, 
attended  with  much  pain  and  struggling :  still  it  dies,  and  Boon  its  heart  shall  be 
pierced  through  with  the  spear  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  it  shall  utterly  expire.  (Ibid.) 
Self-denial  the  duty  of  Christians : — 1.  What  is  meant  by  being  Christ's  ?  To  be 
Christ's  is  to  accept,  of  and  have  an  interest  in  Christ,  as  He  is  offeted  and  proposed 
in  the  gospel.  Now  Christ  is  offered  and  held  forth  to  every  particular  person  that 
expects  to  be  saved  by  Him  under  three  offices — (1)  His  prophetical ;  (2)  His 
kingly  ;  and  (3)  His  sacredotal.  2.  In  the  next  place  we  are  to  wee  what  is  meant 
by  "the  flesh,  and  the  affections  and  lusts."  In  the  meantime  by  flesh  we  are  to 
understand  tbe  whole  entire  body  of  sin  and  corruption,  that  inbred  proneness  in 
our  nature  to  all  evil,  in  one  word  expressed  by  "  concupiscence,"  usually  called  by 
the  schoolmen  "  fomes  "  ;  that  fuel  or  combustible  matter  in  the  soul,  that  is  apt  to 
be  fired  by  every  temptation ;  the  womb  that  conceives  and  brings  forth  all  actual 
impurities,  styled  in  the  next  words,  "affections  and  lusts."    I.  To  show  why 

THIS   VITI08ITY   AND   CORRUPT   HABIT   OF   NATURE    COMES   TO    HAVE    THIS    DENOMINATION 

of  "  flesh."  1.  Because  of  its  situation  and  place,  which  is  principally  in  the 
flesh.  Here  it  is  placed,  here  it  is  enthroned.  Concupiscence  itself  follows  the 
crasis  and  temperature  of  the  body ;  as  we  know  the  liquor  for  the  present  receives 
the  figure  of  the  vessel  into  which  it  is  infused.  2.  The  vitiosity  of  our  nature  is 
called  "  flesh,"  because  of  its  close,  inseparable  nearness  to  the  soul.  There  is  an 
intimate  conjunction  and  union  between  the  soul  and  sin;  and  the  intimacy  of 
their  coherence  is  the  cause  of  the  intimacy  of  their  friendship.  The  nearness 
between  these  two,  our  soul  and  our  corruption,  is  so  great,  that  it  arises  to  a  kind 
of  identity  ;  hence  to  deny  and  conquer  our  sin  is,  in  Scripture  language,  to  deny 
ourselves,  implying  that  sin  adheres  so  close  to  us,  that  it  is  a  kind  of  second 
self.  3.  A  third  reason  why  the  vitiosity  of  our  nature  is  called  "  flesh  "  is 
because  of  its  dearness  to  us.  And  this  founded  upon  the  former,  for  vicinity  is 
one  cause  of  love.  Now  there  is  nothing  that  we  prosecute  with  a  more  affec- 
tionate tenderness  than  our  flesh ;  for,  as  the  apostle  says  (Eph.  v.  29),  "  No  man 
ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it."  Nay,  take  a  sur- 
vey of  all  the  arts,  the  trades,  and  the  most  prized  inventions  in  the  world,  and  you  will 
find  ten  to  four  found  out  and  employed  either  to  please  or  adorn  the  flesh.  It  is 
for  this  that  the  artificer  labours  and  the  merchant  ventures ;  and  we  compass  sea 
and  land  ten  times  oftener  to  make  a  gallant  than  to  make  a  proselyte.  Justly 
therefore  upon  this  account  also  does  the  Spirit  express  our  sin  by  the  name  of 
"'  flesh,"  for  this  has  an  equal  share  in  our  love.  Now  what  has  been  hitherto 
discoursed  of  may,  by  way  of  inference,  suggest  these  things  to  our  consideration. 
1.  The  deplorable  estate  of  fallen  man,  whose  condition  is  now  such  that  he  carries 
his  plague  about,  him,  and  wears  it  something  nearer  to  him  than  his  shirt ;  that 
he  encloses  a  viper  in  his  bowels,  feeds  and  maintains,  and  is  passionately  fond 


our.  ▼.]  GALATIANS.  448 

of  his  mortal  enemy ;  and  what  is  the  greatest  misery  of  all,  has  it  not  in  his 
power  to  be  otherwise.  He  has  a  body  that  is  not  so  much  the  instrument,  or 
servant,  as  the  dungeon  of  his  soul :  and  sin  holds  him  by  such  bonds  of  pleasure 
so  strong,  so  suitable  to  his  perverted  and  diseased  inclinations,  that  his  ruin  is 
presented  to  him  as  his  interest,  and  nothing  gratifies,  delights,  or  wins  upon  him, 
but  that  whioh  dishonours  his  Maker,  and  certainly  destroys  himself.  2.  The 
next  thing  offered  from  hence  to  our  thoughts  is  the  great  difficulty  of  the  duty  of 
mortification.  This  is  a  greater  work  than  men  are  aware  of.  It  is  indeed  the 
killing  of  an  enemy,  but  of  such  an  enemy  as  a  man  thinks  his  friend,  and  loves 
as  his  child ;  and  how  hard  it  is  to  put  the  knife  to  the  throat  of  an  Isaac  is 
easily  imaginable.  What  I  part  with  that  that  came  into  the  world  with  me,  and 
has  ever  since  lived  and  conversed  with  me,  that  continually  lies  down  and  rises 
up  with  me,  that  has  even  incorporated  itself  into  my  nature,  seized  all  my 
appetites,  and  possessed  all  my  faculties,  so  that  it  is  the  centre  and  principle  of 
all  my  pleasures,  and  that  which  gives  a  relish  and  a  quickness  to  every  object ! 
This  is  a  hard  saying,  and  a  harder  undertaking.  He  must  be  a  good  orator 
that  should  persuade  a  man  to  stick  daggers  and  needles  in  his  flesh,  to  stiip  his 
bones,  and  fin  a  manner  to  tear  his  nature  over  his  eyes  ;  yet  to  mortify  a  sin  is 
something  like  it.  But  alas  1  it  would  go  near  to  nonplus  the  most  artificial 
persuader,  to  bring  a  man  to  part  with  the  covering  of  his  body;  but  how  much 
more  with  the  vestment  of  bis  soul  I  3.  In  the  third  and  last  place,  this  declares 
to  us  the  mean  and  sordid  employment  of  every  sinner.  He  serves  the  flesh,  that 
is,  he  is  a  drudge  and  a  scavanger  to  the  most  inferior  part  of  his  nature.  II. 
What  is  impobted  by  the  cbuctfixion  of  the  flesh.  1.  The  reason  of  the 
use  of  the  term  here.  It  is  used  by  way  of  allusion  to  Christ,  of  whose  behaviour 
and  sufferings  every  Christian  is  to  be  a  living  copy  and  representation.  Christ 
will  have  His  death  an  example  to  excite,  as  well  as  a  sacrifice  to  save ;  and  there 
is  no  passage  in  His  life  and  death  but  is  intended  for  our  instruction,  as  well  as 
our  salvation.  2.  The  full  force  and  significance  of  it.  Crucifying  therefore,  as 
it  is  here  applied  to  the  corruption  and  depraved  sinful  disposition  of  our  nature, 
imports  these  four  things — (1)  The  death  of  it.  The  cross  is  the  instrument  of 
death,  and  to  crucify  is  to  kill.  A  few  interrupted  assaults  and  combats  with  a 
man's  corruption  will  not  suffice.  He  that  will  crucify  his  sin  must  pursue  it  to 
the  very  death.  (2)  As  it  implies  death,  so  it  further  imports  a  violent  death. 
Sin  never  dies  of  age.  It  is  as  when  a  young  man  dies  in  the  full  fire  and  strength 
of  his  youth,  by  some  vehement  distemper ;  it  as  it  were  tears,  and  forces,  and  fires 
his  soul  out  of  his  body.  Never  think  to  dispossess  him  by  a  bare  summons,  or 
imagine  that  a  man  can  recover  the  mastery  of  his  heart  and  his  affections  by  a 
few  prayers  and  broken  humiliations.  The  conquest  had  need  be  glorious,  for  it 
will  be  found  by  sharp  experience  that  the  combat  will  be  dangerous.  (3)  To 
crucify  the  flesh  with  the  affections  of  it  imports  a  painful,  bitter,  and  vexatious 
death.  Let  us  but  reflect  upon  our  Saviour.  He  was  nailed  to  the  tree,  and  that 
through  those  parts  which  were  most  apprehensive  of  pain,  the  hands  and  the 
feet ;  which  members,  by  reason  of  the  concurrence  of  the  nerves  and  sinews 
there,  must  needs  be  of  quickest  sense.  Thus  He  hung,  in  the  extremity  of 
torture,  till,  through  the  insupportable  pressures  of  pain,  He  at  length  gave  up 
the  ghost.  So  the  mortification  of  sin  is  to  be  so  general  and  diffused  as  not 
only  to  fix  upon  the  bulk  and  body  of  sin,  but  to  stretch  the  inquisition  to  even 
the  least  desire,  the  most  lurking  and  secret  affection,  for  assuredly  there  is  some- 
thing more  than  ordinary  implied  in  this  expression  of  "  crucifying  sin  ; "  it  can- 
not but  import  the  most  rugged,  cruel,  and  remorseless  dealing  with  it  that  is 
imaginable.  And  however  men  are  nice  and  favourable  to  their  corruption,  yet 
did  they  consider  what  endless  pains,  what  unspeakable  torments,  their  corrupt 
affections  and  lusts  prepare  for  them,  even  self-love  could  not  but  be  religion 
enough  to  make  them  prevent  such  miseries,  by  first  inflicting  them  upon  the 
author.  (4)  In  the  fourth  and  last  place,  crucifixion  denotes  a  shameful  and  a 
cursed  death ;  it  is  such  a  one  as  was  marked  out  and  signalized  with  a  peculiar 
malediction,  even  of  old,  by  God  Himself  (Deut.  xxi.  23).  Thus,  therefore,  must 
the  corruption  and  vitiosity  of  our  nature  be  dealt  with.  God  has  doomed  it  to 
death  without  the  benefit  of  so  much  as  dying  honourably.  3.  The  means  for 
enabling  us  to  perform  this  duty.  Two  I  shall  mention  as  conducible  to  this 
crucifixion  of  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  (1)  The  first  is  a  constant 
and  pertinacious  denying  them  in  all  their  cravings  for  satisfaction.  Defraudation 
of  the  appetites  of  sin  weakens  the  whole  body  of  sin  and  themselves  also ;  as  on 


A44  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  r 

the  other  side  all  satisfaction  corroborates  and  inflames  them.  (2)  The  other 
means  to  crucify  a  corrupt  affection  is  to  encounter  it  by  actions  of  the  opposite 
virtue.  This  differs  from  the  former  thus,  that  that  was  only  the  denying  of  fuel 
to  a  fire,  but  this  a  pouring  of  water  upon  it,  and  so  vanquishing  it  by  the 
prevalence  of  a  contrary  element.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Of  the  nature,  principle, 
and  necessity  of  mortification : — Here  is  what  St.  Paul  says  to  these  Galatians. 
You  all  profess  yourselves  to  be  members  of  Christ,  to  be  followers  of  Him ;  but 
how  incongruous  are  these  practices  to  such  a  profession  ?  Is  this  the  fruit  of  the 
dove-like  spirit  of  Christ?  1.  The  subject  of  the  proposition,  they  that  are 
Christ's,  viz.,  true  Christians,  real  members  of  Christ ;  such  as  truly  belong  to 
Christ,  such  as  have  given  themselves  up  to  be  governed  by  Him,  and  are,  indeed, 
acted  by  His  spirit ;  such,  all  such  persons  (for  the  indefinite  is  equipollent  to  an 
universal),  all  such,  and  none  but  such.  2.  The  predicate ;  they  have  crucified 
the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts.  But  he  chooses  in  this  place  to  call  it 
crucifixion,  to  show,  not  only  the  conformity  there  is  betwixt  the  death  of  Christ 
and  the  death  of  sin,  in  respect  of  shame,  pain,  and  lingering  slowness,  but  to 
denote  also  the  principle,  means,  and  instrument  of  mortification,  viz.,  the  death, 
or  cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  virtue  whereof  believers  do  mortify  the  corruptions 
of  their  flesh,  the  great  arguments  and  persuasives  to  mortification  being  drawn 
from  the  Bufferings  of  Christ  for  sin.  The  observation  followeth :  That  a 
saving  interest  in  Christ  may  be  regularly  and  strongly  inferred  and  concluded 
from  the  mortification  of  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  I.  What  thb 
mortification,  ob  crucifixion  of  sin,  imports.  And  for  clearness  sake  I  shall 
speak  to  it,  both  negatively  and  positively,  showing  you  what  is  not  intended,  and 
what  is  principally  aimed  at,  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  this  expression.  1.  Negatively. 
(1)  The  crucifying  of  the  flesh  doth  not  imply  the  total  abolition  of  sin  in  believers, 
or  the  destruction  of  its  very  being  and  existence  in  them,  for  the  present. 
Sanctified  souls  so  put  off  their  corruptions  with  their  bodies  at  death.  This  will 
be  the  effect  of  our  future  glorification,  not  of  our  present  sanctification.  (2)  Nor 
doth  the  crucifixion  of  sin  consist  in  the  suppression  of  the  external  acts  of  sin 
only,  for  sin  may  reign  over  the  souls  of  men  whilst  it  doth  not  break  forth  into 
their  lives  in  gross  and  open  actions  (2  Pet.  ii.  20  ;  Matt.  xii.  43).  (3)  The  crucifixion 
of  the  flesh  does  not  consist  in  the  cessation  of  the  external  acts  of  sin,  for,  in  that 
respect  the  lusts  of  men  may  die  of  their  own  accord,  even  a  kind  of  natural 
death.  (4)  It  does  not  consist  in  the  severe  castigation  of  the  body,  and  penancing 
it  by  stripes,  fastings,  and  pilgrimages.  2.  Positively.  (1)  It  implies  the  soul's 
implantation  into  Christ,  and  union  with  Him.  (2)  It  implies  the  agency  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  that  work,  without  whose  assistances  and  aids  all  our  endeavours 
must  needs  be  fruitless.  (3)  The  crucifixion  of  sin  necessarily  implies  the  subver- 
sion of  its  dominion  in  the  soul.  (4)  A  gradual  weakening  of  the  power  of  sin  in 
the  soul.  (5)  The  crucifying  of  the  flesh  denotes  to  us  the  believer's  designed 
application  of  all  spiritual  means,  and  sanctified  instruments,  for  the  destruction 
of  it.  II.  Why  this  work  of  the  Spirit  is  expressed  by  crucifying.  1.  The 
death  of  the  cross  was  a  painful  death,  and  the  mortification  of  sin  is  very  painful 
work  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  2.  The  death  of  the  cross  was  universally  painful.  Every 
member,  every  sense,  every  sinew,  every  nerve  was  the  seat  and  subject  of  torment- 
ing pain.  So  is  it  in  the  mortification  of  sin.  'Tis  not  this  or  that  particular 
member  or  act,  but  the  whole  body  of  sin  that  is  to  be  destroyed  (Rom.  vi.  6).  3. 
The  death  of  the  cross  was  a  slow  and  lingering  death,  denying  unto  them  that 
suffered  it  the  favour  of  a  quick  dispatch.  Just  so  it  is  in  the  death  of  sin,  though 
the  Spirit  of  God  be  mortifying  it  day  by  day.  4.  The  death  of  the  cross  was  a 
very  opprobrious  and  shameful  death.  They  that  died  upon  the  cross  were  loaded 
with  ignominy.  The  crimes  for  which  they  died  were  exposed  to  the  public  view. 
After  this  manner  dieth  sin,  a  very  shameful  and  ignominious  death.  Every  true 
believer  draws  up  a  charge  against  it  in  every  prayer,  aggravates  and  condemns  it 
in  every  confession,  bewails  the  evil  of  it  with  multitudes  of  tears  and  groans, 
making  sin  as  vile  and  odious  as  they  can  find  words  to  express  it,  though  not  so 
vile  as  it  is  in  its  own  nature.  5.  In  a  word,  the  death  of  the  cross  was  not  a 
natural,  but  a  violent,  death.  Such  also  is  the  death  of  sin.  Sin  dies  not  of  its 
own  accord,  as  Nature  dieth  in  old  men,  in  whom  the  balsamum  radicale,  or 
radical  moisture,  is  consumed,  for  if  the  Spirit  of  God  did  not  kill  it,  it  would  live 
to  eternity  in  the  souls  of  men.  HI.  Why  all  that  are  in  Christ  must  be  so 
ckucififd  or  mortified  unto  sin.  1.  From  the  inconsistency  and  contrariety  that 
there  is  betwixt  Christ  and  unmortified  lust  (Gal.  v.   17).     2.  The  necessity  of 


jhap.  T.]  GALATIANS.  445 

mortification  appears,  from  the  necessity  of  conformity  betwixt  Christ  the  head  and 
all  the  members  of  His  mystical  body,  for  how  incongruous  and  uncomely  would 
it  be  to  see  a  holy,  heavenly  Christ  leading  a  company  of  unclean,  carnal,  and 
sensual  members  ?  (Matt.  xi.  29).  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  Me,  for 
I  am  meek  and  lowly."  3.  The  necessity  of  crucifying  the  flesh  appears  from  the 
method  of  salvation,  as  it  is  stated  in  the  gospel.  4.  The  whole  stream  and 
current  of  the  gospel  puts  us  under  the  necessity  of  mortification.  Gospel-precepts 
have  respect  unto  this  (Col.  iii.  5;  1  Pet.  i.  15).  Gospel -presidents  have  respect 
unto  this  (Heb.  xii.  1).  Gospel-threatenings  are  written  for  this  end,  and  do  all 
press  mortification  in  a  thundering  dialect  (Bom.  viii.,  13 ;  i.  18).  The  promises 
of  the  gospel  are  written  designedly  to  promote  it  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  But  in  vain 
are  all  these  precepts,  presidents,  threatenings,  and  promises  written  in  the  Scripture, 
except  mortification  be  the  daily  study  and  practice  of  professors.  5.  Mortification 
is  the  very  scope  and  aim  of  our  regeneration,  and  the  infusion  of  the  principles 
of  grace  (Gal.  v.  25).  In  vain  were  the  habits  of  grace  planted  if  the  fruits  of 
holiness  and  mortification  be  not  produced ;  yea,  mortification  is  not  only  the 
design  and  aim,  but  it  is  a  special  part,  even  the  one-half  of  our  sanctification. 
6.  If  mortification  be  not  the  daily  practice  and  endeavour  of  believers,  then  the 
way  to  heaven  no  way  answers  to  Christ's  description  of  it  in  the  gospel.  IV.  In  the 
next  place  we  are  to  inquire  into  the  true  principle  of  mortification.  'Tis  true 
there  are  many  ways  attempted  by  men  for  the  mortification  of  sin,  and  many  rules 
laid  down  to  guide  men  in  that  great  work,  some  of  which  are  very  trifling  and 
impertinent  things.  But  I  shall  lay  down  this  as  a  sure  conclusion  that  the 
sanctifying  Spirit  is  the  only  effectual  principle  of  mortification,  and  without  Him 
no  resolutions,  vows,  abstinences,  castigations  of  the  body,  or  any  other  external 
endeavours  can  ever  avail  to  the  mortification  of  one  sin.  This  work  of  mortifica- 
tion is  peculiar  to  the  Spirit  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  13 ;  Gal.  v.  17),  and  the  Spirit 
becomes  a  principle  of  mortification  in  believers  two  ways,  namely — 1.  By  the 
implantation  of  contrary  habits.  2.  By  assisting  those  implanted  habits  in  all  the 
times  of  need.  V.  The  last  query  to  be  satisfied  is,  how  mortification  of  sin 
solidly  kvinceth  thb  soul's  interest  in  Christ  ;  and  this  it  doth  divers  ways, 
affording  the  mortified  soul  many  sound  evidences  thereof.  As  evidence — 1. 
Whatsoever  evidences  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  in  us  must 
needs  be  evidential  of  a  saving  interest  in  Christ,  as  hath  been  fully  proved 
before;  bat  the  mortification  doth  plainly  evidence  the  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  for  it  can  proceed  from  no  other  principle.  2.  That  which 
proves  a  soul  to  be  under  the  covenant  of  grace  evidently  proves  its  interest  in 
Christ,  for  Christ  is  the  head  of  that  covenant,  and  none  but  sound  believers  are 
under  the  blessings  and  promises  of  it.  But  mortification  of  sin  is  a  sound 
evidence  of  the  soul's  being  under  the  covenant  of  grace,  as  is  plain  from  those 
words  of  the  apostle  in  Bom.  vi.  12-14.  3.  That  which  is  the  fruit  and  evidence 
of  saving  faith  must  needs  be  a  good  evidence  of  our  interest  in  Christ,  but 
mortification  of  sin  is  the  fruit  and  evidence  of  saving  faith  (Acts  xv.  9 ;  1  John  v. 
4).  4.  In  a  word,  there  is  an  intimate  and  indissoluble  connection  betwixt  the 
mortification  of  sin  and  the  life  of  grace  (Bom.  vi.  11).  And  the  life  of  Christ 
must  needs  involve  a  saving  interest  in  Christ.  Application :  1.  For  information. 
(1)  If  they  that  be  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh,  then  the  life  of  Christians  is  no 
idle  or  easy  life.  The  corruptions  of  the  heart  will  continually  fill  the  hands  with 
work  of  the  most  difficult  nature.  (2)  If  mortification  be  the  great  work  of  a 
Christian,  then  certainly  those  that  give  the  corruptions  of  Christians  an  occasion 
to  revive  must  needs  do  them  a  very  ill  office.  They  are  not  our  best  friends  who 
stir  the  pride  of  our  hearts  by  the  flattery  of  their  lips.  (3)  Manifold  and 
successive  afflictions  are  no  more  than  what  is  necessary  for  the  best  of  Christians. 
The  mortification  of  our  lusts  requires  them  all,  be  they  never  so  many.  (4)  How 
deeply  hath  sin  fixed  its  roots  in  our  corrupt  nature  that  it  should  be  the  constant 
work  of  a  Christian's  whole  life  to  mortify  and  destroy  it.  2.  For  exhortation. 
(1)  The  comfort  and  sweetness  resulting  from  mortification  should  effectually 
persuade  every  believer  to  more  diligence  about  it.  (2)  As  your  comfort  depends 
npon  this,  so  does  your  fitness  for  the  service  of  God.  (3)  Tour  stability  and 
safety  in  the  hour  of  temptation  depends  upon  the  success  of  your  mortifying 
endeavours.  (4)  As  temptations  will  be  irresistible,  so  afflictions  will  be  unsup- 
portable  to  you  without  mortification.  (5)  The  reputation  and  honour  of  religion 
»s  deeply  concerned  in  the  mortification  of  the  professors  of  it,  for  unmortified 
professors  will,  first  or  last,  be  the  scandals  and   reproaches  of  it.     (6)  What 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  ▼. 

hard  work  will  you  have  in  your  dying  hour,  except  you  get  a  heart  mortified 
to  this  world  and  all  that  is  in  it  ?  Your  parting  hour  is  like  to  be  a  dreadful 
hour  without  the  help  of  mortification.  Your  corruptions,  like  glue,  fasten  your 
affections  to  the  world,  and  how  hard  will  it  be  for  such  a  man  to  be  separated  by 
death.  0  what  a  bitter  and  doleful  parting  have  carnal  hearts  from  carnal  things  1 
whereas  the  mortified  soul  can  receive  the  messengers  of  death  without  trouble, 
and  as  cheerfully  put  off  the  body  at  death  as  a  man  doth  his  clothes  at  night. 
Death  need  not  pull  and  hale;  such  a  man  goes  half-way  to  meet  it  (Phil.  i.  23). 
3.  For  direction.  (1)  If  ever  you  will  succeed  and  prosper  in  the  work  of  mortifi- 
cation, then  get  and  daily  exercise  more  faith.  Faith  is  the  great  instrument  of 
mortification.  (2)  Walk  in  daily  communion  with  God  if  ever  you  will  mortify 
the  corruptions  of  nature.  That  is  the  apostle's  own  prescription  (Gal.  v.  16). 
(3)  Keep  your  consciences  under  the  awe  and  in  the  fear  of  God  continually,  as 
ever  you  hope  to  be  successful  in  the  mortification  of  sin.  The  fear  of  God  is  the 
great  preservative  from  sin,  without  which  all  the  external  rules  and  helps  in  the 
world  signify  nothing.  (4)  Study  the  vanity  of  the  creature,  and  labour  to  get 
true  notions  of  the  emptiness  and  transitoriness  thereof.  (5)  Be  careful  to  out  off 
all  the  occasions  of  sin,  and  keep  at  the  greatest  distance  from  temptation.  (6) 
Never  engage  against  the  corruptions  of  your  nature  in  your  own  single  strength. 
Seek  God's  assistance ;  then  you  will  succeed,  and  then  only.  (7)  Set  in  with  the 
mortifying  design  of  God  in  the  day  of  thine  affliction ;  sanctified  afflictions  are 
ordered  and  prescribed  in  heaven  for  the  purging  of  our  corruptions  (Isa.  xxvii.  9). 
(8)  Bend  the  strength  of  your  duties  and  endeavours  against  your  proper  and 
special  sin.  'Tis  in  vain  to  lop  off  branches  while  the  root  of  bitterness  remains 
untouched.  (9)  Study  the  nature  and  great  importance  of  those  things  which  are 
to  be  won  or  lost  according  to  the  success  and  issue  of  this  conflict.  Your  life  is 
as  a  race,  eternal  glory  is  the  prize ;  grace  and  corruption  are  the  antagonists,  and, 
accordingly  as  either  finally  prevails,  eternal  life  is  won  or  lost  (1  Cor.  ix.  24). 
(10)  Accustom  your  thoughts  to  such  meditations  as  are  proper  to  mortify  sin  in 
your  affections,  else  all  endeavours  to  mortify  it  will  be  but  faint  and  languid, 
(i.)  Consider  the  evil  that  is  in  sin,  and  how  terrible  the  appearances  of  God  will 
one  day  be  against  those  that  obey  it  in  the  lust  thereof  (Bom.  i.  18  ;  1  Thess.  i. 
7-9).  (ii.)  Think  what  it  cost  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  expiate  the  guilt  of  sin  by 
the  suffering  the  wrath  of  the  great  and  terrible  God  for  it  in  our  room.  The 
meditations  of  a  crucified  Christ  we  very  crucifying  meditations  unto  sin  (Gal.  vi. 
14).  (iii.)  Consider  what  a  grief  and  wound  the  sins  of  believers  are  to  the  Spirit 
of  God  (Eph.  iv.  30).  (iv.)  Consider  with  yourselves  that  no  real  good,  either  of 
profit  or  pleasure,  can  result  from  sin.  If  they  do  repent,  the  pleasure  of  sin  will 
be  turned  into  the  gall  of  asps  here ;  if  they  do  not  repent,  it  will  terminate  in 
everlasting  howlings  hereafter.  That's  a  smart  question,  Bom.  vi.  21.  (v.)  Con- 
sider what  the  damned  suffer  for  those  sins  which  the  devil  now  tempteth  yon  to 
commit,  (vi.)  Bethink  yourselves  what  inexcusable  hypocrisy  it  will  be  in  you  to 
indulge  yourselves  in  the  private  satisfaction  of  your  lusts  under  a  contrary 
profession  of  religion.  You  are  a  people  that  profess  holiness,  and  professedly 
own  yourselves  to  be  under  the  government  and  dominion  of  Christ.  And  most 
the  worthy  name  of  Christ  be  only  used  to  cloak  and  cover  your  lusts  and 
corruptions,  which  are  so  hateful  to  Him*  God  forbid,  (vii.)  Consider  with 
yourselves  what  hard  things  some  Christians  have  chosen  to  endure  and 
suffer,  rather  than  they  would  defile  themselves  with  guilt;  and  shall 
every  small  temptation  ensnare  and  take  your  souls  T  (Bishop  Hacket.) 
The  Cross  a  reality  in  our  life: — L  What  is  it  to  be  "of  Chbist  Jesus"?  1. 
We  must  become  His  in  His  own  way — the  way  which  He  appointed  when  He  left 
the  world,  and  commanded  that  all  nations  were  to  become  His  disciples  by  being 
baptized  into  the  name  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Those  who  name  the 
name  of  Christ  are  His  by  profession.  This  is,  as  it  were,  subscribing  with  our 
hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  naming  ourselves,  or  having  our  name  named,  in  the 
same  breath  as  the  Name  of  God.  3.  It  is  the  living  faith  of  the  baptized  dis- 
ciple, which  proves  him  to  be  a  Christian,  a  member  of  Christ,  not  merely  by  virtue 
of  his  baptismal  adoption  (though  that  is  a  gift  unspeakably  great),  not  merely 
because  of  his  profession  (though  it  is  an  honour  to  him  beyond  all  words,  to  be 
allowed  a  place  in  the  ranks  of  the  glorious  Church  as  it  moves  on  after  the  Great 
Commander),  not  only  this,  but  a  member  of  Christ,  "  in  word,  in  manner  of  life, 
in  love,  in  faith,  m  purity"  (1  Tim.  iv.  12).  II.  Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves, 
even  as  we  listen  to  such  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises. "     They  are 


chip,  v.]  GALATIANS.  447 

meant  to  brace  us  to  action,  not  to  lull  us  into  security.  They  should  not  make 
us  say,  "  All  is  well  with  me,  for  I  am  Christ's,"  but  should  rather  set  us  upon 
earnestly  considering  our  ways  and  proving  our  own  selves.  And  the  test  is  no 
ideal  or  visionary  one.  No,  indeed,  it  is  most  practical :  "  have  crucified  the  flesh." 
It  is  not  merely  that  the  soul  flies  high,  while  the  body  grovels  in  the  dust,  intent 
on  earthly  things  and  passing  enjoyments.  The  body  also  is  being  fought  with, 
conquered,  mortified.  I  must  be  ever,  says  the  Christian,  putting  to  death  this 
rebel  body  which  is  at  enmity  with  God,  ever,  by  His  grace,  keeping  under  my 
body  and  bringing  it  into  subjection,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  III.  It  is 
not  the  destruction  op  the  bodt  we  are  to  aim  at,  but  its  purification  for  the 
Lord — its  consecration,  as  it  were,  upon  the  Cross,  to  Him  who  died  thereon — its 
being  devoted  to  God,  by  means  of  the  conquest  of  whatever  is  sinful  therein,  and 
through  its  union,  even  here,  with  the  glorious  Body.  "  The  passions  and  the 
lusts  thereof."  We  speak  of  passion  as  an  active  habit ;  but  it  is  really,  as  the 
term  implies,  a  state  of  suffering ;  and  we  know  this  well  enough ;  for  we  know,  e.g., 
that  he  whom  we  call  a  passionate  man  suffers  much  more  himself  than  those  with 
whom  he  is  angry.  Our  passions  and  our  lusts  then — the  lusts  and  passions  of 
the  body — must  be  crucified,  because  the  body,  from  our  baptism  onwards,  belongs 
to  Christ  crucified,  and  the  lusts  which  war  in  our  members  are  ever  striving  to 
alienate  us  from  Him.  But  when  we  recollect  that  we  are  really  His — His  who 
actually,  and  not  only  in  a  figure,  was  put  to  death  in  the  flesh — we  make  it  our  daily 
aim  to  imitate  Him,  at  whatever  pain  and  trial  to  ourselves.  (Canon  G.  E.  Jelf.) 
We  must  forsake  sin: — I  once  heard  of  two  men  who,  under  the  influence  of  liquor, 
came  down  one  night  to  where  their  boat  was  tied ;  they  wanted  to  return  home, 
so  they  got  in  and  began  to  row.  When  the  grey  dawn  of  morning  broke,  behold, 
they  had  never  loosed  the  mooring  line,  or  raised  the  anchor.  And  that's  just  the 
way  with  many  who  are  striving  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  They  cannot 
believe,  because  they  are  tied  to  this  world.  Cut  the  cord !  Cut  the  cord  !  Set 
yourselves  free  from  the  clogging  weight  of  earthly  things,  and  you  will  soon  go  on 
toward  heaven.  (D.L.Moody.)  Crucifying  the  flesh  : — This  suggests  the  story 
of  the  old  lady  whose  daughter's  tooth  ached.  She  sent  for  a  doctor.  He  came 
and  pulled  out  a  pair  of  big  old-fashioned  forceps.  "  The  old  lady  screamed  out, 
"  Don't  put  them  things  in  my  daughter's  mouth :  pull  it  with  your  fingers  1 " 
That  would  be  nice  if  it  could  be  done.  But  hear  me.  Do  you  know  the  terms  on 
which  God  will  carry  you  through  this  world  and  safely  to  heaven  ?  Lay  down 
those  things  that  are  hurting  you,  and  take  up  those  other  things  that  will  help 
you,  and  you  will  have  His  help  in  time  and  in  eternity.  *(Sam.  Jones.)  Cruci- 
fying the  flesh: — I.  What  is  to  be  crucified?  1.  What  the  "flesh"  is  maybe 
known  by  its  works  (verses  19-21).  2.  But  it  is  not  the  works,  but  the  worker  that 
is  to  be  crucified.  From  whence,  then,  do  these  evils  proceed?  (1)  From  the 
depravity  of  the  heart,  says  one  ;  which  is  perfectly  true,  but  somewhat  vague,  and 
does  not  wholly  meet  the  case.  (2)  From  the  devil,  says  another ;  but  while  he 
fosters  evil  works,  he  is  not  the  worker.  (3)  From  within,  out  of  the  heart,  says 
Christ,  out  of  man's  true  inmost  self.  From  which  we  learn  that  sin  must  not 
be  referred  to  defective  legislation,  pernicious  training,  the  force  of  evil  custom  and 
bad  example.  But  you  say,  •*  There  are  many  sins  of  which  I  am  not  guilty." 
You  need  not  break  all  the  laws  of  England  to  be  a  law  breaker.  So  one  sin 
evinces  the  agency  of  the  evil  heart.  II.  What  is  meant  by  crucifying  it  ?  In 
physical  crucifixion  there  are  three  stages.  So  in  moral.  1.  The  old  Adam  is 
arraigned,  found  guilty,  sentenced,  and  visited  with  all  the  marks  of  hatred  and 
contempt.  But  this  is  not  enough  (Bom.  vii.  14,  21-24).  2.  The  old  Adam  is 
actually  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  dying — but  this  is  only  "  being  crucified  "  ;  the 
flesh  still  lives  and  pleads  hard.  3.  The  old  Adam  dies.  When  this  stage  is 
reached,  a  glorious  power  is  acquired  over  self  and  sin.  (Luke  H.  Wiseman,  M.A.) 
Moral  crucifixion: — Correspondent  with  Christ's.  I.  Painful.  II.  Ignominious. 
III.  Lingering.  IV.  Surkly  fatal.  (J.  Hughes.)  The  Christian's  Calvary : — 
I.  The  flesh  is  generally  the  old  man  which  regeneration  does  not  kill,  that  must 
be  treated  as  an  interior  enemy,  having  a  spiritual  body  of  sin,  that  must  be  pierced 
through  without  remorse,  and  Christian  men  must  use  every  sacred  effort  to  hasten 
its  death.  II.  It  must  be  denied  every  gratification.  "If  thine  enemy  thirst, 
feed  him,"  Ac.  must  not  hold  good  here.  "  Make  no  provision  for  the  flesh,  to 
fulfil  the  luRts  thereof."  If  it  hunger  and  thirst  for  old  solaces,  we  must  not 
gratify  it.  The  least  favour  gives  the  dying  enemy  strength ;  and  if  it  be  habitually 
nourished,   it   will   gather  power  to   wrench   its  members  from   the  cross,   and 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  *. 

come  down  and  save  itself,  to  the  loss  of  the  soul  that  was  unfaithful  to  its 
trust.  III.  It  must  be  afflicted,  smitten,  and  opposed  in  its  every  movement. 
"  Mortify,  therefore,  your  members."  1.  The  affection  that  passively  waits  for  the 
solicitations  of  sin,  always  ready  to  be  courted  by  temptation,  must  be  bound  to 
the  cross,  that  it  may  weaken  and  languish  and  die ;  more  or  less  slowly,  but  with 
a  certain  decline,  sinking  towards  the  torpor  and  death  which  the  voice  of  no 
charmer  can  awaken.  2.  The  lasts  which  actually  go  out  in  quest  of  sinful  indul- 
gence must  be  kept  firm  to  the  Gross  that  they  may  not  seek  their  prey.  (W.  B. 
Pope,  D.D. )  The  gospel  the  guarantee  of  morality  : — L  The  beception  of 
Jesus  Chbist  by  faith  is,  in  itself,  an  avowal  that  we  have  cbucified  the 
flesh,  &c.  ii.  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  beoeption  of  chbist  is  attended  with 
the  crucifixion  of  sin.  iii.  the  beception  of  chbist  into  the  heabt  by 
simple  faith  is  calculated  to  crucify  the  flesh.  The  man  who  has  received 
Christ — 1.  Has  seen  the  evil  of  sin.  2.  Has  seen  the  death  of  Christ.  An  amazing 
instance  of  the  grace  and  justice  of  God.  8.  Has  seen  the  infinite  love  of  Jesus; 
and,  therefore,  he  has  been  led  to  hate,  renounce,  and  pursue  sin  to  the  death.  IV. 
The  Holt  Ghost  is  with  the  gospel,  and  whebe  He  is  holiness  must  be 
pbomoted.  (C.  JET.  Spurgeon.)  Crucifying  the  flesh: — Five  persons  were  studying 
what  were  the  best  means  to  mortify  sin ;  one  said,  to  meditate  on  death ;  the  second, 
to  meditate  on  judgment ;  the  third,  to  meditate  on  the  joys  of  heaven ;  the  fourth, 
on  the  torments  of  hell :  the  fifth,  on  the  blood  and  sufferings  of  Jesus ;  and 
certainly  the  last  is  the  choicest  and  strongest  motive  of  all.     (T.  Brooks.) 

Ver.  25.  If  we  live  In  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  In  the  Spirit.— (Cf.  vers.  18 
and  18.) — I.  The  supposition.  1.  We  have  been  born  of  the  Spirit.  2.  We  are 
living  in  the  continual  exercise  of  faith  in  Christ  who  is  our  life.  II.  The  obli- 
gation. 1.  Living  a  life  of  spirituality  in  opposition  to  one  of  formalism.  2 
Being  addicted  to  the  spiritual  contemplation  of  Divine  things.  3.  Making  progress 
in  all  that  constitutes  religion.  (W.  Cowan,  M.A.)  Walking  in  the  Spirit : — I 
Suggests  that  a  new  bibth  will  invariably  be  followed  by  a  new  life,  ani 
conversation  (Matt.  vii.  16-20 ;  xiii.  33).  The  conviction  of  the  inseparable  con 
nection  between  regeneration  and  sanctification  will  save  us  from — 1.  Practical 
antinomianism.  2.  The  error  that  morality  is  sufficient  without  a  spiritual  change. 
II.  Implies  that  not  only  the  commencement  but  the  continuance  of  spiritual 
life  depends  on  the  gbacious  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  9).  The 
Spirit  works  in  us — 1.  Encouragement.  2.  Help.  3.  Watchfulness.  III.  Prescribes  t. 
practical  duty.  To  walk  consistently  with  our  past  experience  and  present  profession. 
This  walking  in  the  Spirit  consists  in — 1.  The  habit  and  exercise  of  faith  in  Christ. 
2.  Maintaining  a  constant  conflict  with  indwelling  sin.  8.  A  spiritual  frame  of 
mind.  4.  The  cultivation  and  exercise  of  all  the  graces  of  Christian  life  (verses 
22,  23).  (J.Buchanan,  D.D.)  Walking  in  the  Spirit:— 1.  Life.  Walking  in 
the  Spirit  implies  living  in  the  Spirit.  There  must  be  a  principle  of  spiritual  life, 
before  there  can  be  any  spiritual  motions  and  exercises.  And  living  in  the  Spirit 
implies  walking  in  the  Spirit.  What  is  a  man's  walk  ?  It  is  his  whole  life,  his 
whole  conduct,  outward  and  inward — all  he  thinks,  feels,  desires,  speaks,  does, 
suffers.  To  walk  in  the  Spirit  is  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost  originating,  directing,  con- 
trolling, and  governing  all  these.  2.  Progress.  A  walk  is  a  progress,  it  has  an  end  in 
view,  and  it  is  a  going  towards  that  end,  more  or  less  steadily — more  or  less  rapidly. 

(1)  The  man  who  walks  in  the  Spirit  has  the  same  end  in  view  which  his  Master 
had  ;  he  looks  for  the  joy  which  is  set  before  us,  the  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed. 

(2)  He  has  a  guide—  Christ,  whom  the  Spirit  reveals  to  him,  that  he  may  follow  in 
the  footsteps  of  Him  who  is  our  example  in  all  things.  (3)  He  has  a  rule  or  map 
of  the  way — the  Word  of  God,  which  the  Spirit  opens  up  and  makes  plain  to  his 
soul.  (4)  He  has  a  motive  or  gracious  spring  urging  him  on — love.  3.  The 
benefit.  The  old  nature  is  checked,  kept  down,  and  not  permitted  to  ripen  its 
bitter  fruit.  Its  nature  and  tendencies  are  unchanged,  unchangeable,  but  it  is 
checked  and  restrained  at  every  point.  But  the  new  nature  is  cultivated,  and  so 
it  bears  its  peaceable  fruits.  The  man  who  walks  in  the  Spirit  haB  less  outward 
stir  and  bustle  than  others,  but  he  has  more  success,  for  he  works  in  God,  and  God 
works  in  and  with  him.  But  why  this  long,  tedious,  fluctuating  conflict  between 
flesh  and  spirit?  It  is  to  show  the  evil  and  deceitfulness  of  sin,  to  humble,  to 
make  watchful,  to  make  us  dependent,  and  make  us  long  for  heaven.  (John  Milne.) 
A  Christian's  walk: — "That  man's  been  in  the  army,"  said  a  gentleman  to  his 
friend,  the  other  day,  as  a  stranger  pasted  them  in  the  street;  "I  know  a  soldi*1' 


chap.  T.]  OALATIANS.  449 

by  his  walk."  Men  ought  to  know  Christ's  soldiers  by  their  walk.  But  how  many 
are  there  of  us  who  profess  to  march  under  His  banner,  who  compel  the  world  to 
take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus  ?  Often  the  community  in 
which  a  man  lives  first  learns  that  he  was  a  Christian  at  his  funeral. 

Ver.  26.  Let  us  not  be  desirous  of  vainglory,  provoking  one  another,  envying 
one  another. — I.  Discnion    may  exist  in   a   Christian   community.     II.  Entire 

SYMPATHY  WITH  CHRIST  WILL  HEIGHTEN  MAN'S  APPRECIATION  OP  MAN  WITHOUT  SELF- 
SEEKING.  III.  Christianity  is  the  only  humanizing  and  fraternizing  religion. 
IV.  Self-seeking  is  in  utter  antagonism  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  V.  Chris- 
tianity never  encourages  a  degrading  view  of  human  nature.  1.  Paul's  appeal 
is  for  unanimity.  2.  Want  of  unanimity  is  a  reflection  on  the  uniting  force.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Vainglory : — I.  What  it  is.  A  branch  of  pride  which  makes  men 
refer  all  they  have  or  can  do  to  show  their  own  private  glory  and  advancement. 
II.  Why  the  Galatians  were  admonished  of  it  ?  They  were  adorned  with  many 
excellences,  and  those  who  are  so  favoured  are  frequently  the  most  vainglorious 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7  ;  Matt.  vi.  5).  Other  vices  feed  on  evil ;  this  on  good.  For  a  man  will  be 
proud  sometimes,  even  because  he  is  not  proud.  III.  Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?  1.  In 
a  Church  where  men  make  a  great  show  of  piety  to  be  praised  of  men,  but  not  at 
home  to  be  praised  of  God.  2.  In  the  world,  for  honour  and  renown.  IV.  What  is  the 
remedy?  1.  Meditation  on  these  facts.  (1)  God  resisteth  the  proud,  &c.  (1  Pet.  v.  5). 
(2)  It  is  the  work  of  the  devil  to  puff  up  that  he  may  pull  down  ;  but  God  abases  that 
He  may  exalt.  (3)  Vainglory  is  a  sure  mark  of  impiety  (John  v.  44).  2.  Practice.  (1) 
Acknowledge  God's  majesty  and  our  own  vileness.  (2)  God's  grace  and  our  own 
indebtedness.  (3)  Approve  ourselves  to  God  first.  (4)  When  reviled,  be  content ; 
when  praised,  take  heed.  (W.  Perkins.)  Vainglory: — I.  Manifests  itself  in 
— 1.  Display.  2.  Boasting.  3.  Presumption.  4.  Insolence.  5.  Depreciation  of 
others.  II.  Springs  from — 1.  Conceit.  2.  Ignorance.  3.  Contempt  of  man. 
4.  Forgetfulness  of  God.  IH.  Leads  to — 1.  Extravagance.  2.  Dishonesty.  8. 
Humiliation.  4.  Buin.  (J.  W.  Burns.)  Unworthy  boasts : — It  would  be  con- 
solatory could  we  think  this  exhortation,  though  necessary  in  the  apostles'  time, 
had  become  unnecessary  in  ours.  But,  alas,  how  different  is  the  truth  !  How 
much  vainglorying  is  there  among  the  professors  of  the  name  of  Christ,  even 
among  those  of  whom  charity  obliges  us  to  hope  that  their  profession  is  genuine  ? 
How  do  they  glory  in  their  distinctions  1  One  boasts  of  his  connection  with  a  rich 
and  powerful,  ancient  and  venerable  establishment ;  another  glories  in  his  being  a 
Dissenter.  One  boasts  of  the  imposing  splendour,  and  another  glories  in  tbe 
primitive  simplicity,  of  their  respective  modes  of  worship.  Even  far  less  discernible 
marks  of  distinction  become  grounds  of  glorification,  and  this  provokes  to  angry 
controversy,  and  this  again  produces  strife,  jealousy,  enmity,  malignity.  Were  we 
more  spiritual  it  would  be  otherwise.  We  should  glory  chiefly  in  the  grand  prin- 
ciples of  Christian  truth,  in  which  all  really  good  men  are  agreed ;  and  our 
attachment  to  these  would  produce  attachments  to  all  who  really  believe  them. 
While  every  man  sought  after,  and  endeavoured  to  communicate  to  his  brother 
those  viewB  of  truth  and  duty  which  he  conceived  he  had  obtained  from  his  Bible 
— "speaking  the  truth  in  love" — there  would  be  no  provoking  one  another,  except 
to  love  and  good  works  ;  and  instead  of  envying  and  hating  one  another,  there  would 
be  general  edification  of  the  body  in  love.  (John  Brown,  D.D.)  Love  of  vain- 
glory : — Love  of  vainglory  is  a  common  vice  the  whole  world  through,  in  all 
conditions.  No  village  so  small  but  there  be  one  or  two  peasants  therein,  that  will 
fain  be  taken  for  wiser  and  better  than  the  rest.  It  is  so  pleasant  to  be  pointed  at 
with  the  finger  and  hear  it  said  :  "  See,  there  is  a  man  that  is  fit  for  anything !  " 
This  vice  is  common,  yet  nowhere  does  it  such  harm  as  to  those  who  fulfil  a 
spiritual  function  and  service  in  the  Church.     (Luther.)  Vainglory  : — I  recollect 

a  little  town  where  there  was  a  chapel,  the  people  connected  with  which  thought 
that  if  they  could  only  buy  a  chandelier  that  was  on  sale,  they  would  cut  out  all  the 
other  chapels  entirely,  and  everybody  would  feel  that  they  were  made  weighty  and 
respectable  people,  and  that  the  place  would  be  filled  with  people  to  see  the  chan- 
delier. I  believe  for  a  time  it  was,  but  its  light  grew  dim,  and  they  found  that  wan 
not  the  way  in  which  the  light  of  the  kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  spread,  (0. 11, 
Spurgeou.) 


29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Yeb.  1.  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  overtaken  In  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  n* 
store  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness. — I.  The  nature  or  the  fault.  Over- 
taken in  it,  not  overtaking  it.  II.  The  duty  op  the  friend.  The  allusion  is  to 
the  surgeons  who  set  bones  out  of  joint,  although  they  put  their  patients  to  pain. 
III.  The  method  of  service.  Swine  may  be  driven  violently ;  brethren  must  be 
drawn  gently.  (G.  Swinnock.)  A  triple  duty  : — I.  An  act  of  charity  ;  support  of 
the  weak  (vers.  1,  2).  II.  An  act  op  integritt  :  proof  of  ourselves  (vers.  3,  4).  IIL 
An  act  op  equity  ;  support  of  ministers  (ver.  6).  (T.  Adams.)  Christian  helpful- 
ness and  personal  independence : — I.  The  motive  to  mutual  helpfulness  drawn 
from  self-knowledge.  Apply  to — 1.  Infirmities.  2.  Matters  of  opinion.  3.  Sins. 
4.  Unfaithfulness  to  Church  obligations.  II.  The  power  of  mutual  helpfulness 
arising  from  the  endeavour  after  Christian  integrity.  1.  The  simple  unso- 
phisticated conscience  never  finds  consolation  in  others'  sins.  2.  The  moral  power 
of  sympathy  is  in  proportion  to  the  sincerity  of  our  Christian  character.  3.  That 
was  the  secret  of  Christ's  moral  power  among  men.  III.  The  limits  of  mutual 
helpfulness  imposed  by  personal  independence.  1.  We  cannot  stand  in  another's 
place  to  answer  for  his  sin.  2.  We  cannot  put  ourselves  within  his  being  so  as 
to  compel  his  judgment,  command  his  feeling,  restrain  his  choice.  IV.  Peactical 
lessons.  1.  To  call  our  thoughts  from  vain  longings  after  the  impossible  to  do 
what  is  given  us  to  do.  2.  Not  to  burden  with  our  follies  and  sins  those  already 
bearing  burdens  of  their  own.  3.  The  proper  ^burden  for  the  Galatians  and  all  who 
seek  a  burden  is  "the  law  of  Christ."  (A.  Mackennal,  B.A.)  Other  men's  fail- 
ings:— I.  These  things  are  to  be  done  because  they  are  commanded.  II.  Christ- 
like PIETY  MAY  BE  KNOWN  BY  ITS  GENTLENESS  AND  HELPFULNESS  TOWARDS  THEM  THAT 
ARE  EVIL.  III.  A  PKOFOUND  SENSE  OF  WEAKNESS  AND  SINFULNESS  IS  INDISPEN8IBLE  TO 
ANY  INTELLIGENT  CHARITY.  IV.  THE  GRACE  OP  GOD  SERVES  INSTRUMENTALLY  BY  MAN'S 
LOVE.       V.    The  CURATIVE  SYMPATHY  OF  MEN  DOES  NOT  LEAD  THEM  TO  LOOK  LIGHTLY  ON 

transgression.  Conclusion :  1.  No  man  has  a  right  to  be  absorbed  in  his  own 
piety  :  we  were  born  to  live  together,  and  no  man  has  a  right  to  shirk  the  duties  he 
owes  to  his  brother.  2.  The  bearing  of  burdens  is  a  duty  (1)  in  the  household,  (2) 
in  society.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  sins  of  others  : — Consider — I.  The  eefect  pro- 
duced by  the  falls  of  others.  1.  Here  is  a  worldly  company.  A  scandal  is  dis- 
closed ;  what  malignant  joy  it  occasions.  2.  But  what  shall  we  say  when  that 
detestable  joy  is  shared  by  Christians  ?  (1)  Over  the  adversaries  of  the  faith,  (2)  and, 
alas  I  over  fallen  Christians  also.  3.  Who  are  we  to  condemn  the  fallen?  (1) 
Have  we  never  erred  ?  (2)  Have  we  had  no  secret  inclination  to  equivalent  trans- 
gression ?  (3)  Did  we  strive  to  prevent  our  brother  falling  ?  (4)  Was  he  blessed 
with  our  privileges  ?  4.  Thus  a  brother's  fall  should  produce  in  us,  not  censure, 
but  self-examination  and  humiliation.  II.  What  are  we  to  do  in  order  to  raise 
them  ?  1.  The  nearer  a  being  lives  to  God  the  more  deeply  it  feels  compassion  and 
mercy.  (1)  As  proved  by  the  angels  who  sang  hymns  of  redemption  and  rejoice 
over  returning  sinners.  (2)  As  proved  by  the  infinite  tenderness  of  Christ.  2.  The 
least  that  we  can  do  is  to  give  our  fallen  brother  our  sympathy.  3.  But  this  is  not 
enough.  (1)  There  is  a  sympathy  which  is  mere  weakness.  (2)  You  must  have  for 
your  brother  a  love  without  weakness,  a  holiness  without  pride.  (3)  You  must 
point  him  to  the  Saviour.  (4)  We  cannot  raise  souls  en  masse,  but  only  by  indi- 
viduals. III.  Conclusion :  1.  What  an  honour  to  raise  a  fallen  soul.  2.  Christ 
the  Baiser  has  called  you  to  this.  3.  Have  you  not  lost  some  soul  ?  {E.  Bersier, 
D.D.)  The  restoration  of  the  erring  : — I.  The  Christian  view  of  other  men's 
sin.  1.  The  apostle  regards  it  as  if  it  might  be  the  result  of  a  surprise.  (1)  There 
are  some  sins  for  which  we  have  an  inclination.  (2)  There  are  those  which,  seem- 
ingly unnatural  to  us,  come  upon  us  unexpectedly,  (a)  A  question  maybe  hurriedly 
put  concerning  a  secret;  not  having  presence  of  mind  to  turn  it  adroitly,  a  lie  is 
told.  So  Peter,  (b)  Inexperience,  a  hasty  promise,  excess  of  truxt,  and  even 
generous  devotion  may  have  the  same  effect.  2.  The  apostle  considers  it  a  fault 
which  has  left  a  burden  on  the  erring  spirit.  (1)  It  is  a  chain  of  entanglement 
which  drags  down  to  fresh  sins.  (2)  It  is  the  burden  of  the  heart  weighing  on  itself 
which  keeps  the  soul  down  from  good.  (3)  The  weight  of  secret  uncommunicated 
sin  ;  as  evidenced  (a)  by  a  mysterious  necessity  to  tell  it  under  the  personality  of 
another ;  (b)  by  profuse  general  acknowledgment  of  guilt ;  (c)  by  the  longing  for 
•enfession.     (4)  The  intuitive  consciousness  of  hidden  sins  in  the  hearts  of  others. 


0*A*.  Yl.]  GALATIANS.  451 

II.  The  Chbistiah  power  of  restoration.  1.  Restoration  is  possible.  2.  Restora- 
tion is  accomplished  by  men  as  instruments.  3.  The  mode  in  which  it  is  done ;  (1) 
by  sympathy;  (2)  forgiveness.  4.  The  motive — "considering  thyself,"  &c.  (J. 
W.  Robertson.)  The  duty  of  brotherly  admonition  and  reproof: — I.  What  that 
duty  is.  1.  We  are  members  one  of  another.  2.  It  is  our  interest  to  keep  our 
members  together,  and  in  good  health.  3.  A  means  of  doing  this  is  timely  admo- 
nition. II.  Rules  for  its  effective  discharge.  1.  It  does  not  follow  that  where- 
ever  a  man  sees  vice  he  is  bound  to  rebuke  it.  Reproof  may  exasperate.  2.  Regard 
must  be  had  to  the  circumstances  of  the  offending  party.  3.  An  exact  proportion 
should  be  preserved  between  the  offence  and  the  rebuke  ;  failings  are  not  necessarily 
sins.  4.  The  rebuke  should  be  given  privately.  6.  Take  care  not  to  be  chargeable 
with  the  same  fault  yourself.  6.  The  end  in  view  must  not  be  the  gratification 
of  a  private  pique,  but  restoration.  III.  The  evil  of  neglecting  it.  1.  Evil  is 
encouraged  by  neglect.  2.  The  good  are  lost  for  the  want  of  timely  interference.  (H. 
MelvillyB.D.)  Motives  to  charity : — "  Considering  thyself."  1.  Thine  abundance 
may  become  poverty;  therefore,  O  man  of  wealth,  "consider  the  poor."  2.  Thy 
happiness  may  be  blighted ;  therefore,  0  man  on  whom  all  things  smile,  raise  up  the 
mourners.  3.  Thou  mayest  be  sick ;  therefore,  O  man  of  health,  give  aid  to  the 
diseased.  4.  Thou,  too,  must  die ;  therefore,  O  living  man,  do  not  forget  the  be- 
reaved. 5.  Thou  mayest  be  deprived  of  the  means  of  grace,  therefore,  frequenter 
of  the  house  of  God,  succour  those  to  whom  the  gospel  does  not  come.  (Ibid.) 
Self-knowledge  is  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God  : — There  are  many  ways  of  self- 
consideration.    I.  Self-love,  when  right  and  when  wrong.    II.  Self-ignorance. 

III.  Self-knowledge.  IV.  The  knowledge  of  God's  love  in  Christ,  on  which  thb 
noblest  self«knowledge  rests.  (Ibid.)  The  occasion  for  the  injunction  : — The 
fervour  and  pathos  of  this  appeal  are  perhaps  to  be  explained  by  certain  circumstanoes 
which  engaged  St.  Paul's  attention  at  this  time.  A  grave  offenoe  had  been  com- 
mitted in  the  Church  of  Corinth.  St.  Paul  had  called  upon  the  brethren  to  punish 
the  offender,  and  his  appeal  had  been  answered  with  so  much  promptness  that  it 
was  necessary  to  intercede  for  the  guilty  one.  He  commended  their  indignation, 
their  zeal,  their  revenge  ;  they  had  approved  themselves  clear  in  the  matter  (2  Cor„ 
vii.  11) ;  and  now  they  must  comfort  and  forgive  their  erring  brother,  lest  he  be. 
Bwallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow  (see  the  striking  resemblance  in  tone  of  2  Cor.. 
ii.  6-8,  and  the  text).  It  was  the  recollection  of  this  circumstance  that  dictated 
this  injunction.  The  Galatians  were  proverbially  passionate  and  fickle.  If  a  re- 
action came  it  might  be  attended,  as  at  Corinth,  with  undue  severity  towards  the  de- 
linquents. The  Epistle,  therefore,  was  probably  written  while  the  event  was  fresh,  and 
perhaps  after  he  had  witnessed  too  evident  signs  of  over  severity.  (Bishop  Light- 
foot.  )  The  restoration  of  the  lapsed  : — In  the  Pauline  hypothesis  of  a  perfect 
Bociety,  the  rectification  of  a  wrong  is  not  due  to  the  clamour  or  plaint  of  that 
which  is  immediately  distressed,  but  to  the  sympathy  felt  by  the  whole  of  the  society 
towards  the  suffering  or  injured  part.  From  St.  Paul's  point  of  view,  a  social  evil 
sends  a  pang  through  the  whole  body,  urging  it  to  take  note  of  the  disease,  and  to 
discover  the  remedy.  That  the  remedy  can  be  found  and  the  disease  subdued  he 
did  not  for  a  moment  doubt.  Conceive,  if  you  can,  a  public  conscience  so  keen  and 
tender  as  to  be  instantly  alive  to  the  moral  evils  which  corrupt,  enfeeble,  and  blemish 
it,  and  so  wise  as  to  be  constantly  busying  itself  with  their  cure.  Imagine  men  com- 
prehending that  the  corrective  forces  of  public  morality  are  concerned  principally 
with  the  purification  of  mankind  from  evils  which  it  has  contracted.  Picture 
a  society  employed  in  finding  out  the  means  by  which  poverty,  ignorance,  vice, 
selfishness,  can  be  chastened  or  healed  because  itself  is  degraded  and  dishonoured, 
and  is  restless  till  it  has  found  a  cure.  Well  would  it  have  been  if  the  reformation 
of  man  had  been  continued  on  these  lines  laid  down  by  St.  Paul ;  but  the  utmost 
that  men  have  done  as  yet,  is  to  concede  a  right,  perhaps  no  more  than  a  right,  of 
complaint  to  the  sufferer.  ("  Paul  of  Tarsus.")  Methods  of  restoration : — Saints, 
like  clocks,  made  up  of  curious  wheels  and  engines,  are  soon  discomposed,  and 
therefore  often  want  some  workman  to  set  them  in  order  again.  A  good  man, 
if  his  friend  follow  virtue,  will  be  a  father  to  encourage  him ;  if  he  be  full  of 
doubts,  he  will  be  a  minister  to  direct  him ;  if  he  follow  vice,  will  be  a  magis- 
strate  to  correct  him.  Christians  must  allow  one  another  for  their  infirmities, 
but  not  in  them.  (G.  Swinnock.)  Compassion  the  law  of  Christ: — Compassion  is 
the  law  of  Christ,  not  because  He  laid  it  down  in  words,  but  because  it  was  His 
life.  He  who  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps,  showed  that 
with  Him  no  condition  of  life  was  too  low  for  His  esteem,  no  sinner  too  guilty  foe 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

His  assistance,  no  enemy  too  fierce  or  cruel  for  His  good  will.  And  Christ  is  the 
law  of  His  people,  not  His  words  alone,  but  the  life  He  lived  and  the  Person  He 
Bhowed  Himself  to  be.  (Archbishop  Thomson.)  Our  duty  to  the  erring : — The  soul 
which  sin  has  overtaken  is  like  the  bruised  reed.  It  must  be  raised  up  gently  that 
it  may  once  more  aspire  heavenwards.  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  The  graceful  vase 
that  stands  in  the  drawing-room  under  a  glass  shade  and  never  goes  to  the  well,  has 
no  great  right  to  despise  the  rough  pitcher  that  often  goes  and  is  broken  at  last. 
(A.  K.  H.  B.)  Brotherly  reproof: — L  Thb  case  which  the  text  describes. 
Wrong-doing  under  the  influence  of  sudden  temptation.    H.  Let  us  endeavoub 

TO  ASCERTAIN  THE  CONDUCT  TO  BE  PEBSUED  IN  SUCH  A  CASE.  Ye  WHICH  ABE 
SPIRITUAL,    BESTOBE    SUCH   AN   ONE,    CONSIDEBING    THYSELF,    <EC.       This    applies    not 

simply  to  such  persons  as  are  endowed  with  spiritual  gifts ;  but  to  those 
Christians  who  are  more  than  ordinarily  devoted  to  religion.  A  spiritual  man 
is  one  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  enlightened  and  changed.  It  does  not  belong  to 
every  one  in  the  Church  to  assume  this  office.  To  restore,  is  a  general  term,  admit- 
ting of  a  variety  of  applications.  It  often  signifies  to  amend.  In  a  moral  sense, 
it  means  to  restore  the  faulty  person  to  the  moral  feeling  which  he  has  lost.  He  who 
thus  restores,  becomes  the  healer  of  disease.  1.  The  text  intimates  that  the  re- 
proof is  to  be  faithfully  administered.  To  tell  another  of  a  fault,  even  if  it  be  done 
in  the  mildest  manner,  constitutes  reproof.  Faults  are  not  confined  to  practical 
matters,  but  extend  also  to  doctrinal.  Christians  are  exposed  to  both,  and  both  are 
equally  dangerous.  2.  It  is  to  be  done  in  the  spirit  of  meekness.  This  is  emi- 
nently necessary ;  because  we  undertake  to  restore  our  brother,  we  assume  superior 
ground.  He  who  inflicts  pain  willingly  and  intentionally  is  a  monster.  The  skilful 
practitioner  will  probe  the  wound  to  the  bottom,  but  he  will  do  it  as  gently  as  pos- 
sible. A  spirit  of  kindness  pervaded  the  corrections  which  the  Saviour  so  faithfully 
applied.  It  must  be  obvious,  from  what  has  been  already  said,  that  if  we  see  a 
brother  overtaken  in  a  fault,  and  leave  him,  without  an  attempt  to  restort 
him,  we  are  guilty  of  serious  neglect  of  a  known  Christian  duty.  This  will  appear 
even  more  forcibly,  if  you  consider  what  was  enjoined  under  the  Jewish  economy, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thy  heart,  nor  suffer  his  sin  upon  him,  but 
rebuke  him."  (R.  Hall.)  Faults  and  burdens: — I.  The  possibility  or  being 
morally  overcome.  II.  The  duty  or  restobation.  This  includes — 1.  A  proper 
sense  of  the  value  of  individuals — a  man.  2.  An  intense  sympathy  with  Jesus 
Christ  in  His  saving  work.  3.  A  practical  knowledge  of  human  nature.  HI.  The 
wore  of  restoration  is  to  be  done  in  a  proper  spirit.  Dislocated  limbs  should  be 
handled  skilfully.  What  is  involved  in  restoring  a  man?  1.  A  proper  sense  of  sin. 
2.  A  wise  excitement  of  hope.  3.  A  deep  conception  of  Christ's  work  in  relation  to 
fallen  men.  Beware  of  encouraging  false  peace.  It  is  possible  to  bandage  a  limb 
without  setting  it.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  spirit  in  which  restoration  should  be 
taken: — 1.  In  a  spirit  of  faith.  2.  Meekness.  3.  Considerateness.  4.  Humility. 
(Clergyman's  Magazine.)  Christian  reformation: — Let  us  begin  this  considera- 
tion with  its  proper  beginning — the  first  detection — the  first  moment  that  consti- 
tutes what  society  knows  as  a  criminal.  The  first  detection  may  have  followed  on 
a  trifling  fault,  or  a  mere  inadvertence ;  but  once  past,  the  barrier  is  past  with  it — 
the  badge  is  irremovably  attached;  the  words  " convicted  criminal"  are  the 
strokes  of  a  knell  which  tolls  the  man  to  his  grave,  be  he  scores  of  years  from 
it :  we  are  so  determined  to  be  in  outward  appearance  separate  from  sinners,  that 
we  draw  the  line  bold  and  dark  which  shall  mark  the  distinction:  there  shall  be  no 
penumbra  to  that  eclipse.  Exiles  and  outcasts,  whether  their  fault  has  been  great 
or  small,  from  the  society  of  the  virtuous  or  of  the  undetected— every  influence  is 
arrayed,  many  influences  perhaps  not  unjustly  arrayed,  against  their  return  to  the 
place  whence  they  have  fallen.  First  of  all,  in  speaking  of  this  duty,  let  me  say 
something  of  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  to  be  performed.  "  Bestore  such  an  one  in 
the  spirit  of  meekness— considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted."  Surely  this 
is  the  very  opposite  of  the  spirit  of  the  world,  of  which  we  have  been  speaking. 
That  spirit  refuses  to  consider  the  possibility  of  ourselves  being  tempted :  parades 
a  challenge  in  the  face  of  the  world  to  question  our  own  purity  and  inviolability, 
and  declares  that  we  are  determined  never  to  admit  the  hypothesis  of  our  becom- 
ing like  them.  Well  then,  it  is  here  as  so  often  :  I  have  to  ask  you  to  put  on  a 
spirit  directly  contrary  to  that  which  you  find  around  you  in  the  world  :  to  sit  at 
the  feet  of  a  far  different  Teacher,  and  learn  of  Him.  We  have  spoken  of  Him  who 
came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  And  this  is  the  very  thing  which 
we  ask  you  to  do  likewise.    Our  blessed  Lord  spent  His  life  and  shed  His  blood,  is 


CHAP,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  453 

devising  means  whereby  His  lost  ones  might  be  recovered  to  Him.  And  every  fol- 
lower of  His — every  one  who  is  under  the  discipline  of  that  great  Reformatory 
which  He  has  founded — is  expected  not  to  look  only  on  his  own  things,  but  also  on 
the  things  of  others.  These  criminals  are  your  brethren  ;  your  fellow-Christians 
by  profession.  And  it  is  only  His  preventing  and  upholding  grace,  which  keeps 
from  falling  any  of  us  who  thinketh  he  standeth  in  uprightness.  Bearing  their 
burdens,  instead  of  disclaiming  them  and  letting  them  sink  under  their  weight ; 
and  so  fulfilling  the  law  of  Christ.  We  may  ask,  what  law?  And  the  answer  is 
very  simple.  There  was  one  law  in  which  our  blessed  Lord  summed  up  His  social 
and  practical  precepts  ;  one,  which  peculiarly  belongs  to  Him :  "  Whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  even  so  do  unto  them."  This  is  emphatically 
the  law  of  Christ.     (Dean  Alford.)  On  restoring  a  sinner : — This  restoring  of 

sinners  is  the  primary  duty  of  the  members  of  the  brotherhood  of  Christ.  Is  it  not, 
too,  the  great  problem  of  society  ?  It  lies  as  near  to  the  heart  of  the  welfare  of 
homes,  of  kingdoms,  as  of  Churches.  Restore  the  sinners  and  you  save  the  State. 
I.  The  man  overtaken  in  a  fault.  It  is  literally  the  man  "  even  caught  in  a  sin." 
Putting  the  case  most  strongly,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  a  one,  despite 
the  open  scandal  and  shame.  The  sense  of  our  translation, "  overtaken  in  a  fault," 
suggesting,  I  think,  the  idea  of  surprise  by  the  sin  as  well  as  in  the  sin,  though  not 
the  literal  sense  of  the  original,  is,  perhaps,  spiritually,  not  far  from  the  truth.  The 
word  for  "  sin,"  the  word  for  "  restore,"  and  the  allusion  to  temptation,  seem  all  to 
point  to  the  case  of  a  man  overtaken  and  snared  by  a  sin.  There  are  those  who 
overtake  sin  ;  who  seem  to  catch  sins  as  easily  as  the  vapour  of  naphtha  catches  fire. 
It  is  not  to  them  that  the  apostle  is  here  referring.  But  there  are  others  whom  sin 
overtakes.  It  is  out  of  the  course  of  their  most  earnest  purpose.  It  comes  as  a 
perversion.  It  twists,  if  it  does  not  break,  the  unity  of  their  lives.  David's  deadly 
sin  was  of  this  character.  Sin  has  caught  him,  and  holds  him  as  a  captive.  But 
there  is  an  uprightness  there  which  it  has  bent  but  has  not  prostrated,  a  love  for 
truth  and  honour  which  it  has  blighted  but  has  not  killed.  Brethren,  take  him  by 
the  hand  and  clasp  him.  Throw  the  cords  of  your  love  around  him,  and  stay  him 
in  his  mad  career.  II.  Ye  which  abe  spiritual.  Who  are  the  spiritual  ?  Who 
knows  the  secret  of  this  Divine  art  of  restoring  souls  ?  The  spiritual — those  who 
know  that  they  are  the  spiritual,  and  who  are  the  qualified  teachers,  correctors,  and 
exemplars  to  their  fellow-men.  I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  the  class  which  is  meant 
by  the  term,  when  we  hear  it  on  an  apostle's  lips — indeed,  I  am  quite  sure  that  it 
is  not.  I  am  quite  sure  that  Paul  speaks  of  a  class  of  much  simpler  and  humbler 
men.  Men  who  are  not  at  all  sure  that  they  are  the  spiritual ;  men  who  are  only 
sure  that  sin  is  a  great  sorrow  to  the  sinner,  a  great  sorrow  to  the  Saviour,  a  crush- 
ing burden  on  the  spirit,  which  so  fills  them  with  distress  and  pity,  that  they  can 
take  no  rest  and  know  no  joy  until  they  have  lifted  it  and  borne  it  away.  III.  Re- 
store such  an  one.  Restore  him.  There  is  but  one  way.  Restore  him  to  God,  and 
you  restore  him  to  his  brother,  to  the  Church,  and  to  himself.  Do  not  imagine  that 
you  can  restore  him.  Man  can  do  just  one  essential  service  to  his  brother :  he  can 
bring  him  to  Jesus,  and  leave  him  with  Him.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Turning  the 
icy  end  to  our  fellows : — One  day,  when  I  was  serving  my  apprenticeship  in  a  factory 
on  the  banks  of  the  Marrimac  River  (says  the  Hon.  N.  P.  Banks,  late  Governor  of 
Massachusetts),  a  party  of  the  hands  saw  a  man  a  quarter  of  a  mile  down  the  river 
struggling  among  the  broken  cakes  of  ice.  We  could  none  of  us  for  the  moment 
determine  his  political  complexion  or  bodily  colour,  but  he  proved,  in  the  end,  to  be 
a  Degro  in  the  water.  Of  course  the  first  care  was  to  rescue  him  ;  but  twice  the 
victim  slipped  from  the  plank  that  was  thrown  him.  The  third  time  it  was  evident 
to  our  inner  hearts  that  it  was  the  negro's  last  chance,  and  so  he  evidently  thought ; 
but  as  he  again  slipped  from  the  board,  he  shouted,  "  For  the  love  of  God,  gentle 
men,  give  me  hold  of  the  wooden  end  of  the  plank  this  time."  We  had  been 
holding  him  the  icy  end  1  How  often  do  Christians  make  the  same  mis- 
take. We  turn  the  icy  end  of  the  plank  to  our  fellows ;  and  then  wonder  why 
they  do  not  hold  on,  and  why  our  efforts  do  not  save  them.  (Preacher's  Lantern.) 
Duty  of  the  Church  to  the  over-tempted : — The  exercise  of  discipline  is  ever  a  delicate 
and  dangerous  work.  Those  who  have  not  themselves  fallen  are  apt  to  be  a  little 
puffed  up  by  the  sense  of  their  superior  purity,  and  so  to  neglect  to  treat  outcasts 
with  true  Christian  considerateness.  I.  The  duty  of  Christians  to  seek  to 
reclaim  the  over-tempted.  1.  The  light  in  which  many  sins  are  to  be  viewed— 
a  slip  into  a  pit.  Sin  not  indulged  in  because  loved,  but  because  the  sinning  ona 
has  been  surprised,  overtaken,  entrapped  by  it.    2.  The  difficulty  of  rising  aftet 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  T* 

Bach  a  fall.  Despair  settles  down  on  the  soul;  disgrace;  self -reproach.  Sonle 
that  are  in  the  wild,  wide  forest  of  sin,  with  night  coming  down,  are  not  likely  to 
find  their  way  out  when  the  notches  on  the  trees — such  as  the  Indians  make  for 
guidance — have  grown  over  or  been  obliterated.  Souls  that  have  lost  their  balance 
on  the  narrow  ledge  of  the  lofty  mountain  path,  are  very  likely  to  fall  into  the  abysmal 
gorge  at  their  Bide.  Then  is  the  time  for  Christians  to  step  in  and  take  the  erring 
one  by  the  hand,  bestowing  interest,  affection,  fellowship.  II.  The  manner  and 
spirit  in  which  this  is  to  be  pebfobmed.  The  spiritual  must  act  in  a  spiritual 
manner.  1.  Setting  an  example  in  all  good.  No  moderate  indulgence  in  sin,  no 
laxity,  no  half -measures.  2.  The  spirit  of  meekness.  This  gives  us  a  fellow-feeling, 
and  makes  us  act  as  brothers.  3.  Consideration  for  ourselves.  We  may  one  day 
need  the  helping  hand  we  are  now  extending  to  another.  Let  us,  then,  do  as  we 
would  be  done  by.  No  boastful,  self-sufficient  spirit  becomes  those  who  are  them- 
selves within  reach  of  temptation.  (F.  Hastings.)  Comprehensiveness  of  Christ's 
law : — The  law  of  Christ  is  the  law  of  universal  love ;  and  it  requires  every  man  to 
be  interested  in  every  man  and  in  his  difficulties ;  to  be  in  sympathy  with  him  and 
in  all  the  spirit  of  helpfulness,  although  the  act  may  be  beyond  our  power.  It 
requires  us  also  to  be  in  sympathy  with  men,  not  only  when  they  are  doing  right, 
but  when  they  are  doing  wrong.  A  fault  is  anything  inconsistent  with  the  rule  of 
life  or  duty.  In  common  usage  it  is  a  minor  transgression,  but  here  undoubtedly 
it  is  comprehensive ;  it  includes  whatever  a  man  does  aside  from  the  rule  of  recti- 
tude, or  aside  from  any  law,  ideal,  or  measure  in  life  by  whioh  men  are  accustomed 
to  be  judged.  It  may  respect  the  man's  person,  his  body,  health,  his  strength,  or 
it  may  respect  a  man's  mind,  his  judgment,  temper,  disposition  generally.  It  may 
have  respect  to  a  man's  social  connections,  neighbourhood ;  his  relations  to  the 
family,  and  to  all  the  collected  families.  It  may  have  relation  to  his  religious 
connection;  what  as  a  churchman,  what  as  a  professing  Christian,  his  faults, 
feelings,  and  transgressions.  It  may  have  relation  to  his  civil  and  business  duties, 
commercial  or  political.  .  .  •  Nobody  can  free  himself  from  the  subtle  and  per- 
petual influences  that  work  upon  the  intelligence,  the  conscience,  the  ideals  of  life. 
We  are  members  of  a  complex  body  in  family  relations  or  in  civil  relations ;  and, 
as  the  foot  cannot  ache  without  having  the  whole  body  ache,  and  the  hand  cannot 
suffer  and  the  whole  body  not  suffer,  so  every  man  more  or  less  is  so  connected  by 
vital  nerves  with  the  whole  community  in  which  he  is,  that  he  comes  up  with  them 
and  goes  down  with  them,  and  he  commits  faults  simply  because  he  cannot  separate 
and  disentangle  himself  quick  enough  not  to  go  as  the  multitude  are  going.  We 
are  all  of  us  in  a  drove.  We  are  all  of  ns  of  one  nature  in  the  one  world,  under  the 
one  system;  and  there  is  not  a  man  living  who  does  not  commit  faults  every  day  of 
his  life.  They  may  not  be  of  the  severest  kind.  They  may  not  be  the  faults  you 
dislike  the  most.  You  commit  them — not  as  your  neighbour  does,  but  in  your  own 
way.  Everybody  does,  and  everybody,  therefore,  is  dependent  upon  the  charity 
and  the  goodwill  of  his  neighbour  for  himself ;  and  the  command  is,  "  return  that 
goodwill  and  that  charity,  since  you  yourself  are  liable  to  suffer  in  this  very  way, 
and  are  Buffering  all  the  time.  Treat  every  man  as  you  would  wish  him  to  treat  you," 
...  A  brave  man  would  not  know  that  a  companion  was  in  captivity  among  the 
Indians,  and  not  venture  something  for  him.  What  if  he  did  caution  him  not  to 
ride  out  unattended  ?  What  if  he  did  warn  him  ?  If  the  man  was  careless  and 
heedless,  and  was  snatched  up,  bound,  and  hidden  away  for  to-morrow's  torment, 
he  would  creep  on  his  belly  until  the  moon  went  down,  and  steal  in  and  cut  the 
man's  cords  and  withs,  and  snake  him  out,  and  put  himself  behind  him  to  defend 
him  if  they  were  discovered,  and  work  him  back  again  into  liberty  and  the  settle- 
ments. .  .  .  The  scope  and  the  sweep  of  faults  is  so  great,  that  you  may  just  as 
well  sit  yourself  down  to  this  thing,  that  universal  human  nature  is  so  poor  and  so 
weak  and  so  liable  to  temptation,  and  to  failure  under  temptation,  that  you  must 
have  compassion  upon  all  men,  or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  Hebrews,  you  must  "  have 
compassion  on  the  ignorant  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  "—compassion 
universal,  continuous,  adequate,  vital,  and  active.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Chris- 
tians duty  to  an  erring  brother: — We  have  here — I.  Christian  fallibility.  II, 
The  duty  of  those  who  stand  towards  those  who  fall.  III.  The  reason  why 
we  should  so  act.  (A.  F.  Barfield.)  Magnanimous  conduct  • — When  Conkling 
precipitated  himself  from  the  Senate,  it  was  very  much  against  General  Grant's 
judgment,  and  that  was  known,  and  yet  he  attempted  in  every  way  to  befriend  Mr. 
Conkling,  and  shield  him  ;  so  much  o  that  everybody  thought  he  had  gone  over  ta 
his  Bide,  and  a  man  expostulated  with  him,  saying,  "  General  Grant,  how  is  this  f 


chat,  yi.]  GALATIANS.  455 

You  don't  believe  that  he  did  right,  do  you  f  "  "  No,  sir ;  I  don't."  "  How  is  it, 
then,  that  you  are  on  his  side  now  ?  "  His  reply  was  worthy  to  be  written  in  letters 
of  gold.  "  When  is  the  time  to  show  a  man's  self  friendly,  exoept  when  his  friend 
has  made  a  mistake  T  That  is  not  the  time  to  leave  a  man — when  he  has  made  a 
blunder  or  a  mistake."  That  is  one  of  those  unimpeachable  moral  principles  which 
appeal  to  the  universal  oonsoienoe.  Stand  by  a  man  who  is  your  friend.  Stand 
by  him  in  his  adversity,  if  you  don't  stand  by  him  at  any  other  time.  (If.  W. 
Beecher.)  Discretion  in  censure  : — It  is  true,  open  sinners  deserve  open  censures ; 
but  private  admonitions  will  best  suit  private  offences.  While  we  seek  to  heal  a 
wound  in  our  brother's  actions,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  leave  a  scar  upon  his 
person.  We  give  grains  of  allowance  in  all  current  coin.  That  is  a  choice  friend 
who  conceals  our  faults  from  the  view  of  others,  and  yet  discovers  them  to  our  own. 
That  medicine  which  rouses  the  evil  humours  of  the  body,  and  does  not  carry  them 
off,  only  leaves  it  in  a  worse  condition  than  it  found  it.  (Archbishop  Seeker.) 
Test  of  friendship : — It  is  one  of  the  severests  tests  of  friendship  to  tell  your  friend 
of  his  faults.  If  you  are  angry  with  a  man,  or  hate  him,  it  is  not  hard  to  go  to  him 
and  stab  him  with  words :  but  so  to  love  a  man  that  you  cannot  bear  to  see  the 
stain  of  sin  upon  him,  and  to  speak  painful  truth  through  loving  words — that  is 
friendship.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Tenderness  in  reproof : — There  is  much  discretion 
to  be  observed  in  reprehension  :  a  word  will  do  more  with  some  than  a  blow  with 
others.  A  Venice  glass  is  not  to  be  rubbed  so  hard  as  a  brazen  kettle.  The  tender 
reed  is  more  easily  bowed  than  the  sturdy  oak.  Christ's  warfare  requires  no  carnal 
weapons.  Dashing  storms  do  but  destroy  the  seed,  while  gentle  showers  nourish 
it.  Chariots  too  furiously  driven  may  be  overturned  by  their  own  violence.  The 
word  "  restore"  in  this  verse  signifies,  to  set  in  joint  again  ;  and  to  set  a  dislocated 
bone  requires  the  lady's  hand :  tenderness,  as  well  as  skill.  Reprehension  is  not 
an  act  of  butchery,  but  of  surgery.  Take  heed  of  blunting  the  instrument,  by 
putting  too  keen  an  edge  upon  it.  (Archbishop  Seeker.)  Suitable  times  for  re- 
proving • — Discretion  in  the  choice  of  seasons  for  reproving,  is  no  less  necessary 
than  zeal  and  faithfulness  in  reproving.  Good  physicians  use  not  to  evacuate  the 
body,  in  the  extremities  of  heat  and  cold.  Good  mariners  do  not  hoist  up  sail  in 
every  wind.  (John  Trapp.)  Reproof  begins  with  self: — If  we  would  reprove 
others  wisely,  we  must  understand  our  own  hearts.  If  we  give  ourselves  to  the 
healing  of  others,  and  take  no  remedy  for  our  own  mortal  disease,  we  must  expect 
the  scorn  of  men.  He  would  be  an  ill  pastor  who  busied  himself  about  another's 
parish  and  neglected  his  own.  (J.  G.  Pilkington.)  Benefit  of  reproof: — To 
reprove  a  brother  is  like  as,  when  he  has  fallen,  to  help  him  up  again ;  when  he  is 
wounded,  to  help  to  cure  him  ;  when  he  has  broken  a  bone,  to  help  to  set  it ;  when 
he  is  out  of  the  way,  to  put  him  into  it ;  when  he  is  fallen  into  the  fire,  to  pluck 
him  out;  when  he  has  contracted  defilement,  to  cleanse  him.  (Philip  Henry.) 
Considering  thyself: — The  motive  for  Christian  tenderness: — What  an  amount  of 
motive  is  gathered  into  these  simple  words !  It  has  been  one  of  the  natural,  we 
might  almost  say  necessary,  consequences  of  the  combination  of  men  into  societies, 
possessing  all  possible  variety  of  condition  and  circumstance,  that  there  has  been  a 
comparative  losing  sight  of  the  equal  liability  of  all  to  the  several  ills  to  which  flesh 
is  heir.  In  an  early  stage  of  society,  when  men  are  nearly  on  a  level,  and  every 
one  is  in  a  measure  dependent  on  his  own  strivings  for  the  means  of  subsistence, 
there  is,  evidently,  much  the  same  exposure  to  misfortune ;  and  none  can  be  fancied 
secure  against  calamities  by  which  others  have  been  or  may  be  overtaken.  But  the 
case  alters  as  society  is  wrought  into  a  finished  structure  and  form,  and  through 
the  accumulation  of  capital,  certain  of  its  ranks  are  placed  beyond  the  need  of 
labouring  for  a  livelihood.  Then  in  all  the  security  with  which  property  is  fenced, 
and  the  ready  supplies  which  it  commands,  there  is  something  which  looks  like, 
and  which  passes  for,  evidence  that  a  measure  of  independence  is  reached,  and  that 
some  are  in  the  enjoyment  of  certainty,  whilst  others  are  still  within  the  reach  of 
accident.  It  is  very  difficult  not  to  fancy,  that  the  man  of  large  ancestral  revenues, 
inhabiting  the  baronial  hall  which  proudly  surmounts  the  domain  which  owns  him 
for  its  lord,  has  an  exemption  from  the  contingencies  and  chances  of  want,  which 
beset  the  poor  peasant  who  tills  one  of  his  fields.  And  that  noble,  surrounded  by 
everything  which  luxury  can  either  invent  or  desire,  might  look  upon  us  coldly, 
and  even  angrily,  if  we  backed  our  appeal  to  him  on  behalf  of  some  starving 
cottager,  by  simply  telling  him  to  "  consider  himself,  lest  he  should  be  similarly 
tried."  It  might  sound  to  him  as  a  threat,  whether  of  ignorance  or  insolence,  that 
it  should  thus  be  implied  that,  notwithstanding  all  his  state,  and  all  hi»  abundance, 


45C  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

he  might  come  to  want  the  morsel  which  we  ask  him  to  bestow ;  and,  if  he  complied 
with  the  petition,  he  would  probably  spurn  the  motive  by  which  it  had  been  urged. 
And,  of  course,  it  does  need  a  very  thorough  and  practical  recognition  of  the  truth 
that  *•  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  to  be  able  to  put  aside  all 
the  appearances  of  security  and  independence,  which  hoarded  wealth  furnishes,  and 
to  view  in  every  man,  whatsoever  his  circumstances,  a  pensioner  on  the  bounty  of 
that  Omnipotent  Parent  who  "  openeth  His  hand,  and  satisfieth  the  desire  of  every 
living  thing."  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  the  beggar  be  commonly  thought  to 
have  to  live  from  day  to  day  on  the  providence  of  God,  whilst  the  man  of  accumu- 
lated stores  is  considered  as  having  provision  in  hand  for  his  every  future  necessity. 
But  what  actual  infidelity — what  virtual  atheism — may  be  detected  in  every  such 
notion.  It  is  a  substitution  of  money  for  God.  I  would  rather  have  the  security 
against  want,  which  the  meanest  of  our  villagers  enjoys,  whose  daily  bread  is  the 
subject  of  daily  care  and  daily  toil,  than  that  of  the  foremost  of  our  capitalists 
who  in  any  way  gives  indulgence  to  the  sentiment,  "  Soul,  thou  hast  goods  laid  up  for 
many  years."  The  one,  indeed,  has  a  security — the  security  of  a  prayerful  depen- 
dence on  God ;  the  other  has  no  security  whatever,  but  lies  exposed  to  the  peril  of 
being  punished  for  presumption.  It  matters  nothing  to  us,  what  may  be  the 
worldly  circumstances  of  any  one,  nor  how  far  they  may  seem  to  remove  him  from 
liability  to  poverty.  If  he  be  a  man,  he  may  come  to  be  a  starving  man  ;  and  that, 
too,  without  any  of  these  inexplicable  occurrences  and  variations  which  seem  to 
mark  God's  special  interference  to  bring  round  the  unlooked-for  catastrophe. 
There  ought,  therefore,  to  be  to  him,  as  much  cogency  as  to  the  man  whose 
property  seems  jeopardized,  in  the  words  "  lest  thou  also  be  tempted,"  when  it  is  for 
the  relief  of  the  actually  destitute  that  we  appeal  to  his  bounty.  And  this  is, 
perhaps,  the  only  oase  in  which  there  is  even  the  appearance  of  exemption  from 
liability  to  misfortunes  with  whioh  we  see  others  oppressed.  In  every  other  case 
we  may  contend,  that  even  the  appearances  are  wanting ;  so  that  there  cannot  be 
the  shadow  of  an  excuse  for  denying  to  the  apostle's  motive  the  greatest  possible 
force.  It  cannot  be  said  that  any  one  form  of  sorrow  is  appropriated  to  this  class 
of  men,  and  warded  off  from  that ;  all  are  accessible  through  the  same  channels, 
and  all  are  capable  of  the  same  wounds.  Bank  gives  no  exemption  from  misfor- 
tune. The  great  and  the  mean  bow  beneath  the  same  sorrows,  and  die  of  the  same 
sicknesses.  Is  there  not,  in  consequence,  the  greatest  cogency,  whosoever  be  the 
party  addressed,  and  whatsoever  the  affliction,  in  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  con- 
sidering thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted !  "  It  is  the  enlisting  of  selfishness  on 
the  side  of  the  afflicted,  and  the  calling  upon  ns  to  be  merciful,  if  we  would  have 
mercy  ourselves.  The  thing  assumed — and  it  is  not  a  thing  to  be  disputed — is, 
that  God's  moral  government  is  eminently  and  avowedly  a  retributive  government. 
And  if,  moreover,  we  live  beneath  a  retributive  government,  and  lie  ourselves  ex- 
posed to  all  the  afflictions  with  which  we  see  others  are  visited,  then,  if  only  on  the 
principle  of  self-preservation,  we  are  bound  to  be  merciful  to  the  suffering,  lest 
being  brought  into  similar  circumstances  ourselves,  we  find  our  neglect  and  churlish- 
ness returned  to  us  in  kind.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Spirituality  of  mind  possible  : — 
If  you  will  go  to  the  banks  of  a  little  stream,  and  watch  the  flies  that  come  to  bathe 
in  it,  you  mil  notice  that,  while  they  plunge  their  bodies  in  the  water,  they  keep 
their  wings  high  out  of  the  water ;  and,  after  swimming  about  a  little  while,  they 
fly  away  with  their  wings  unwet  through  the  sunny  air.  Now,  that  is  a  lesson  for 
us.  Here  we  are  immersed  in  the  cares  and  business  of  the  world ;  but  let  us  keep 
the  wings  of  our  soul,  our  faith,  and  our  love,  out  of  the  world,  that,  with  these 
nnclogged,  we  may  be  ready  to  take  our  flight  to  heaven.  (J.  Inglis.)  Meditation 
promotes  spirituality  : — A  beautiful  flower,  the  wood-sorrel,  grows  among  the  trees 
in  the  sylvan  scenes  of  England.  It  has  shining  green  leaves,  and  transparent  bells 
with  white  veins.  When  it  is  gathered  roughly,  or  the  evening  dew  falls,  or  the  clouds 
begin  to  rain,  its  foliage  closes  and  droops  ;  but,  when  the  air  is  bright  and  calm,  it 
unfolds  all  its  loveliness.  Like  this  sensitive  flower,  spirituality  of  mind,  when 
touched  by  the  rough  hand  of  sin,  or  the  cold  dew  of  worldliness,  or  the  noisy  rain 
of  strife,  hides  itself  in  the  quietude  of  devout  meditation ;  but,  when  it  feels  the 
influence  of  sunny  and  serene  piety,  it  expands  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  moral 
image  of  God.  (P.  J.  Wright.)  The  spirit  of  meekness  : — Meekness  is  Christian 
lowlihood.  It  is  the  disciple  learning  to  know  himself  :  learning  to  fear  and  dis- 
trust and  abhor  himself.  It  is  the  disciple  learning  the  defects  of  his  own  character, 
and  taking  hints  from  hostile  as  well  as  friendly  monitors.  It  is  the  disciple  watch- 
ing and  praying  for  the  improvement  of  his  talents,  the  mellowing  of  his  temper. 


chap,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  451 


and  the  amelioration  of  his  character.  It  is  the  loving  Christian  at  the  Saviour's 
feet.  It  is  the  loving  Christian  at  the  Saviour's  feet  learning  of  Him  who  is  meek 
and  lowly,  and  finding  rest  for  his  own  soul.     (Dr.  T.  Hamilton.) 

Ver.  2.  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ. — Burden- 
bearing. — These  two  principles  are: — I.  The  brotherhood  of  souls — "Bear  ye 
one  another's  burdens."     II.  The  responsibility  of  the  individual  soul — "Every 
man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."    Now  these  two  principles  are  not  really  opposed 
to  each  other,  and  neither  are  the  precepts  of  the  text.     For  if  you  think  of  it, 
you  will  find  it  is  impossible  to  obey  one  part  of  this  law  without  obeying 
the  otber  ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  bear  one,  your  own  burden,   without  at  the 
same  time  bearing  the  burden  of  others  ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  realize  the  awful 
responsibilities  of  your  being  without  at  the  same  time  realizing  the  claims  of  your 
brothers  ;  impossible  to  find  your  own  true  life  without  giving  up  your  individual 
will,  without  "merging  your  personal  interests  in  those  of  the  human  brotherhood, 
and  those  of  the  human  brotherhood  in  the  light  of  the  life  of  God."     Take  one 
side  of  the  idea  first.   "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."   There  is  certainly 
a  very  real  sense  in  which  this  is  true,  and  perhaps  no  truth  has  impressed  itself 
more  deeply  upon  the  mind  of  man.    Strangest  of  all  things  in  this  wondrous  uni- 
verse is  the  loneliness  of  man.    Lonely  in  his  birth,  lonely  in  all  the  great  move- 
ments of  his  life,  lonely  in  his  death,   he  comes,   he  passes,  he  disappears. 
Enthroned  on  the  citadel  of  being,  each  soul  is  like  a  star,  and  dwells  apart.  There, 
in  the  solitary  circuit  of  its  own  being,  it  must  patiently  revolve,  for  no  star  can 
move  in  the  orbit  of  another  star ;  it  cannot  pass  the  silent  deep  that  lies  between ; 
it  is  alone,  and  shines  in  solitary  beauty.    How  then,  you  ask,  is  it  possible  to  obey 
the  command  of  the  apostle  :  "Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens "  ?    My  only  answer 
is  that  which  is  implied  in  the  words  of  the  text,  that  it  is  only  by  bearing  one 
another's  burdens  that  we  can  really  bear  our  own.  Does  that  seem  to  be  a  paradox? 
If  you  consider  deeply  you  will  not  think  so,  you  will  see  that  it  is  really  the  law  of 
Christ — the  highest  phase  of  that  law  which  rules  the  rhythmic  harmony  of  the 
universe — that  the  true  life  of  man  is  something  higher  than  a  life  of  individual 
isolation  or  of  personal  interest,  and  that  to  attain  this  you  must  give  up  your 
individual  will,  you  must  rise  into  a  life  which  is  your  own,  and  yet  not  your 
own,  and  of  which  the  highest  expression  must  always  be,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me."    1.  Take  first  the  illustration  which  Christ  Himself  gave  in 
the  simplest  phase  of  growing  life,  the  living  unity  of  the  tree :  "  I  am  the  Vine,  ye 
are  the  branches."    In  the  economy  of  a  tree  you  know  there  is  a  function  which 
every  member  must  perform,  and  without  which  the  vigour  of  life  cannot  be  main- 
tained.   If  any  part  should,  so  to  speak,  refuse  to  exercise  its  function  and  to  bear 
the  burden  of  the  others,  itself  must  pass  away.    Give  it  a  separate  existence,  give 
it  the  individuality  to  which  it  aspires,  and  what  is  the  result  ?    When  it  formed 
a  part  of  the  tree  joyfully  bearing  its  own    burden,   and  so  also  bearing  the 
burden  of  the  others,  it  shared  the  glory    and  the  freshness  of  its  life,  and 
all  its  bloom  and  beauty.      2.   The  same  principle  which  is  thus  exemplified 
in  the  tree  is  seen   also  in  the  phenomena  of  sentient  life.     It  is  true  that 
the  same  law  holds  throughout  the  realm  of  our  inorganic  life,  and  even  in  the 
subtler  relations  of  organisms  as  collections  of  modified  cells,  with  unity  of  origin 
and  co-ordination  of  function,  it  is  clearly  shown  that  life  cannot  be  sustained  with  - 
out  that  mutual  burden-bearing  which  is  part  of  the  very  law  of  God.    While  each 
individual  member  has  its  part  to  play,  its  burden  to  bear,  there  is  a  life  of  the 
organism  to  which  it  must  contribute.     The  members  are  not  independent  of  each 
other,  but  linked  together  and  mutually  helpful.     "  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand 
I  have  no  need  of  thee  ;  nor  again  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  need  of  you."   Each 
member  must  bear  its  own  burden,  and  in  so  doing  it  will  bear  the  burdens  of  the 
others.    3.  You  have  seen  the  principle  illustrated  in  the  life  of  the  body.    In  the 
struoture  as  it  rises  from  base  to  summit  each  stone  bears  its  own  burden,  and  from 
foundation  to  cope  stone  there  is  none  which  is  useless,  all  alike  sustaining  and 
sustained,  rising  in  gradual  ascent  according  to  the  plan  in  the  mind  of  the  archi- 
tect, and  growing  up  into  that  ideal  of  beauty  and  of  serviceableness  after  which  he 
strove,  exemplifying  in  the  simplest  as  well  as  in  the  most  elaborate  form  the  same 
principle,  and  showing  that  the  law  which  gives  its  nameless  grace  to  the  tiny  arch 
gives  also  its  imposing  grandeur  to  the  great  cathedral,  rising  as  it  does,  in  ever 
ascending  glory,  from  its  pillars  of  over-vaulted  g'oom,  with  architraves  and  arche* 
of  majestic  beauty,  "like  a  primeval  forest,"  till  all  the  building  fitly  framed  to • 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

gether  grows  into  a  holy  temple,  meet  for  the  worship  of  God.  4.  And  if  we  pass 
from  these  suggestive  illustrations  we  shall  also  find  in  the  life  of  man  and  in  the 
arrangement  of  society  equally  forcible  illustrations  of  the  same  principle  ;  a 
principle  which  is  indeed  the  very  law  of  society,  and  without  which  society  could 
not  cohere.  Take,  for  instance,  the  very  common  principle  of  the  division  of 
labour,  a  principle  which  was  slowly  adopted,  but  which  is  now  one  of  the  axioms 
of  economic  science.  It  is  not  only  of  direct  utility  in  increasing  the  power  of 
labour,  justifying  the  saying  of  the  preacher,  "  Two  are  better  than  one,"  because 
they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labours.  But  there  is  also  a  higher  principle  in- 
volved. For  it  is  thus  by  their  lower  necessities  that  men  are  led  to  see  that  they 
have  need  of  each  other,  and  that  each  and  all  have  their  place.  I  might  go  on  to 
speak  of  the  basis  that  has  been  laid  for  the  law  of  mutual  burden-bearing  in  the 
natural  constitution  of  man,  in  the  power  of  sympathy  and  natural  affection,  in  the 
love  that  binds  parent  to  child,  and  friend  to  friend  in  the  sweet  charities  of  human 
life.  There  is  a  similar  illustration  which  may  be  given  in  what  is  called  the  body 
politic.  What  is  a  State  ?  The  true  idea  of  a  State  is  not  that  of  an  unconnected 
collection  of  individuals,  but  rather  that  of  an  organism,  with  an  organic  life 
and  an  economy  of  members,  each  of  which  has  its  own  part  to  play,  its 
own  burden  to  bear,  and  if  it  honestly  bears  that  harden,  it  is  also  bearing  the 
burdens  of  the  others.  For  you  cannot  say  that  in  making  the  demand  Christ 
makes  a  demand  which  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  things.  He  merely  demands 
that  you  should  submit  yourself  to  a  law  which  is  the  expression  of  God's  will,  and 
which  is  the  very  law  of  life.  He  shows  that  which  is  the  very  glory  of  the  Christian 
faith,  that  it  does  not  stand  in  antagonism  with  any  true  principle  of  our  nature. 
We  are,  as  it  were,  a  great  army  under  marching  orders.  Day  by  day  we  are  march- 
ing onwards.  Each  of  us  has  his  own  burden  to  bear.  Each  of  us  must  carry  his 
own  knapsack,  and  shoulder  his  own  musket.  And  as  our  comrades  fall  beside  us 
shall  we  not  pause,  and  carry  them  to  the  rear  ?  Would  you  call  that  man  a  true 
soldier  who  could  see  his  fellow  soldier  fall  and  not  seek  to  relieve  him,  who  would 
quail  before  the  shot  of  the  enemy  and  run  to  save  himself  when  his  wounded 
brother  fell  ?  To  this  it  is,  my  brethren,  that  the  law  of  Christ  calls  yon.  Ton 
must  renounce  your  own  will,  and  bow  to  the  will  of  God.  You  must  give  up  your 
own  freedom,  and  find  it  in  a  greater  and  nobler  freedom.  You  must  bear  the 
burdens  of  others  or  you  cannot  bear  your  own.  (A.  W.  Williamson,  M.A.) 
Bearing  one  another's  burdens  : — I.  Enumerate  some  of  the  burdens  or  the 
Christian  life.  1.  The  greatest  of  all  burdens  which  the  Christian  feels  is  sin.  It 
is  this  which  makes  the  whole  creation  groan,  and  causes  an  apostle  to  cry  out, 
"  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am ;  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  P  " 
(Eom.  vii.  24).  David  also  complains  and  says,  "  Mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  my 
head  ;  as  a  heavy  burden  they  are  too  heavy  for  me  "  (Psa.  xxxviii.  4).  2.  Bodily 
infirmities  and  diseases  are  in  themselves  a  burden,  however  providence  may  intend 
them  for  our  good,  and  finally  overrule  them  for  our  spiritual  advantage.  3. 
Worldly  losses,  trials  and  difficulties,  are  the  burden  which  some  are  called  to  bear, 
and  of  these  there  is  a  heavy  load.  The  unkindness  and  ingratitude,  the  malice 
and  opposition  of  enemies,  press  heavily  on  some  :  the  undutifulness  of  children, 
and  the  breaches  made  by  death,  on  others  :  and  an  endless  train  of  disappointed 
hopes  and  expectations  attend  on  all.  4.  A  state  of  distance  from  God,  and  the 
hidings  of  His  face,  are  a  great  grief  and  burden  to  the  believing  soul.  "  Thou  hidest 
Thy  face,"  says  David,  "and  I  am  troubled."  II.  Our  obligations  to  sympathise  with 

ONE  ANOTHER,  UNDER  THE  VARIOUS  ILLS  AND  EVILS   OF  THE  PRESENT  LIFE.      We  Cannot 

so  "bear  each  other's  burdens"  as  to  transfer  them  to  ourselves,  or  suffer  in 
another's  stead.  In  this  sense  Christ  bore  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows,  and 
at  length  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  en  the  tree  ;  and  He  alone  was  able  to  do 
it.  1.  Let  us  bear  one  another's  burdens  by  tenderly  sympathising  with  those  who 
are  afflicted.  Let  us  make  their  griefs,  as  well  as  their  joys,  our  own.  2.  We  are 
to  bear  one  another's  burdens  by  endeavouring  to  alleviate  the  afflicted,  and  com- 
forting them  under  all  their  sorrows.  3.  The  motive  by  which  this  duty  is  enforced 
is,  that  in  so  doing  we  "  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ."  It  is  according  to  the  new  com- 
mandment which  He  has  given  us,  that  we  should  love  one  another ;  and  according 
to  the  old  commandment  that  we  should  love  God,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 
(B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Mutual  burdens: — I.  We  must  take  this  text  into  the 
spherk  of  realism.  Trouble  is  not  to  be  treated  sentimentally,  curiously,  inquisi- 
tively, but  practically.  Beach  out  a  heart  of  love  and  a  hand  of  help  to  your  brother 
man,  not  only  touching  his  burden,  but  bearing  it,  so  that  it  becomes  a  matter  of 


chap.  Yi.]  GALATIANS.  459 

prayerful  thought,  tender  remembrance,  and  gracious  kindness.     II.  This  is  to  bb 
done  with  great  tact  and  DELICACY  of  FEELING.     Seek  never  to  lower  a  brother's 
honour,  while  helping  his  need.    III.  We  must  do  this  as  the  law  of  life.    There 
is  nothing  "  occasional "  in  the  Christian  spirit.  Separate  actions  do  not  make  good 
men.    IV.  We  most  look  at  this  gbeat  teaching  along  the  line  of  tbtje  social 
economy.     Help  those  who  are  trying  to  help  themselves.    V.  Cultivate  a  tendeb 
sense  of  bbothebhood.     In  sympathising  with,  and  bearing  one  another's  burdens, 
we  realize  the  great  fact  that  we  shall  have  burdens  to  bear  ourselves.     So  we  shall. 
Those  who  have  most,  often  say  least  about  them.     But  God  intends  these  trials  to 
prepare  us  for  Christian  service.  Every  experience  brings  with  it  the  power  of  bear- 
ing a  burden.      (W.  M.  Statham.)        Christian  generosity  : — So  deceitful  is  the 
heart,   it  must  be  constantly  watched,  lest  under  the  semblance  of  piety  and 
religious  zeal,  we  should  be  led  to  indulge  rancorous  and  unholy  passions.     This 
the  apostle  seems  to  have  felt ;  hence  the  caution  (chap.  v.  13-16),  the  exposure  of 
the  fruits  both  of  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  (vers.  19-23),  and  the  exhortation  which 
eonoludes  with  the  text.     I.  The  duty  enjoined.    The  term  "  burden  "  denotes 
something  which,  by  uneasy  pressure,  exhausts  the  strength  and  spirits  of  the  per- 
son oppressed  by  it.     It  may  apply  to — 1.  A  weight  of  labour  or  bodily  toil.    This 
is  the  effect  of  the  original  transgression  (Gen.  iii.  19).      We  may  lighten  it  by 
manual  assistance,  by  procuring  the  requisite  help,  or  pecuniary,  whioh  would 
render  the  excess  of  labour  unnecessary.    2.  A  weight  of  personal  affliction  (Job 
vii.  20).     The  pressure  of  this  may  be  relieved  by  medical  aid,  kind  attendance,  the 
soothing,  sympathising  language  of  friendship,  or  the  considerations  which  religion 
affords.    3.  Domestic  affliction  and  cares.    4.  Providential  losses,  poverty,  em- 
barrassment, oppression,  &c.    5.  Guilt  and  corruption.    In  this  case  especially,  is 
Christian  sympathy  demanded.  6.  Temptation  (Eccl.  iv.  9  ;  Bom.  xv.  1  ;  1  Thess. 
v.  14).    7.  Infirmities,  whether  of  body  or  mind.    Pity  rather  than  upbraid  a  weak 
brother.    Help  his  infirmities,  instead  of  exposing  them  to  others.      II.  The  en- 
*obcing  motive.     1.  This  is  worthy  of  the  character  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  it  is — 
(1)  a  law  of  equity,  (2)  a  law  of  benevolence,  (3)  a  law  of  general  utility,  by  which 
society  is  benefited,  the  sum  of  evil  being  lessened,  and  that  of  happiness  increased. 
2.  It  is  congenial  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (Phil.  ii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9  ;  Col.  iii.  12, 
13).    3.  It  is  agreeable  with  the  example  of  Christ  (John  xiii.  13  ;  Phil.  ii.  6-9  ; 
Heb.  ii.  14-16).     4.  It  is  deducible  from  the  precepts  of  Christ  (John  xiii.  33,  34  ; 
xv.  12,  17).    5.  It  has,  and  shall  have,  the  approbation  of  Christ  (Matt.  v.  7  ;  xxt. 
34-40).    Concluding  inferences  :  (1)  Seeing  that  the  text  expresses  the  peculiar 
genius  of  the  religion  by  which  we  hope  for  salvation,  the  subject  should  awaken 
inquiry  (1  John  iv.  19-21).    (2)  If  examination  should  happen  to  lead  us  to  humili- 
ating views  of  past  shortcomings,  &c,  it  should  also  lead  us  to  unreserved  and  con- 
stant obedience  ;  which  may  be  supported  by  a  consideration  of  what  we  owe  to — 
(a)  ourselves  ;  (6)  our  brethren  ;  (c)  our  Saviour,  who  regards  what  is  done  to  His 
followers  as  done  to  Himself  ;  (d)  our  God,  who  expects  such  return  for  His  love 
(1  John  iv.  9-11).     (Theological  Sketch-book.)        Bearing  one  another's  burdens  : — 
This  world  is  full  of  burden-bearers.    We  cannot  pass  through  it  without  taking  a 
load.    Nor  can  we  help  fulfilling  the  injunction  of  the  text  in  some  sense.     We  do, 
naturally  and  inevitably,  bear  one  another's  burdens.    Life  is  such  that  every  man 
must  take  some  share  of  the  life  of  those  around.     To  be  in  relationships  means 
this  ;  to  be  in  a  family  as  head  or  member,  to  be  in  business,  to  be  one  of  a  social 
and  civilized  community,   implies  it.     The  text  is  needed,  then,  to  make  that 
Christian  which  is  simply  natural,  to  change  hard  necessity  into  holy  duty. 
Christianity  speaks  to  men  who  are  all  struggling  and  suffering  together,  and  says 
not,  ••  Throw  off  the  burden,  deny  the  mutual  claim,  restrain  the  hand  of  help," 
but,  "What  you  must  do,  do  willingly  ;  what  you  might  leave  undone,  do' more 
willingly  still."     I.  Some  of  the  burdens  we  may  help  others  to  beab.     1. 
Poverty.    Answers  to  objections — (1)  "  Many  of  the  poor  are  born  so,  and  do  not  ■ 
feel  their  privations  as  a  burden,  not  knowing  any  other  state."   True,  but  we  must 
think  of  what  they  may  be  raised  to.     The  poorest  man  is  a  man  altogether,  and 
capable  of  all  a  man  can  be  in  soul  and  circumstances.     (2)  "  There  must  be  the 
different  classes  in  society.    Christ  tells  us  we  shall  always  have  the  poor  with  us." 
Yes,  but  Christ  merely  refers  to  a  fact.    He  does  not  commend  it,  or  announce  it  as 
one  of  the  laws  of  His  Kingdom.     The  nature  of  His  Kingdom  is,  in  proportion  as 
its  principles  prevail,  to  bring  all  evils  to  an  end,  and  poverty  undoubtedly  tends  to 
produce  and  perpetuate  evil ;  e.g.,  it  prevents  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  make* 
decency  very  difficult,  quenches  nobler  strivings,  makes  life  a  drudgery.  When  very 


460  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

deep,  it  is  twin-sister  to  famine,  and  behind  them  both  are  the  darker  forms  of  crime 
(Ptov.  xxx.  8,  9).  2.  Infirmity.  "Weak  goodnesB  needs  encouragement.  Many  who 
fall  often  are  struggling  hard  all  the  time.  Be  willing  and  ready  to  hold  out  a  help- 
ing hand.  Suffer  the  hasty  word  to  pass  in  silence,  without  answering  again. 
Check  the  ungenerous  judgment  in  your  heart.  Watch  for  the  best  opportunity  of 
suggesting  a  more  excellent  way.  3.  Trouble.  To  "  weep  with  them  that  weep  " 
is  a  ministration  of  love  far  more  intense  than  to  "  rejoice  with  them  that  do  re- 
joice." A  friendship  of  fellowship  cemented  by  sorrow  is  often  both  more  profitable 
and  more  lastiug  than  the  fellowship  of  health,  and  laughter,  and  mutual  success. 
Christ's  fellowship  with  men  is  enduring  and  valuable  because  it  includes  all 
imaginable  sympathy.  You  must  fill  yonr  own  heart  with  the  trouble  you  would 
lessen.  This  is  "Christ  in  you,"  and  is  probably  the  presage  of  Christ  in  your 
suffering  friend,  with  inorease  of  soul-strength,  and  abundance  of  consolation.  II. 
Motives  ob  inducements.  1.  The  frailty  of  human  nature,  and  the  uncertainties  of 
human  life.  2.  It  is  the  way  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  And  to  fulfil  that  law  is  to 
fulfil  all  laws.  More  than  all  whole  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices,  more  than  all  cere- 
monial and  observance,  more  than  all  philosophy,  more  than  all  morality,  more  than 
all  religion  besides.  The  keeping  of  it  is  the  completeness  of  duty,  the  substance  of 
goodness,  the  secret  of  happiness,  and  the  best  preparation  for  the  ineffable  glories 
and  joys  of  heaven.  (A.Raleigh,  D.D.)  Poverty  is  the  load  of  some,  and  wealth  is  the 
load  of  others,  perhaps  the  greater  load  of  the  two.  It  may  weigh  thee  down  to  per- 
dition. Bear  the  load  of  thy  neighbour's  poverty,  and  let  him  bear  with  thee  the  load 
of  thy  wealth.  Thou  lightenest  thy  load  by  lightening  his.  (Bp.  Chris.  Wordsworth.) 
What  is  our  whole  religion  but  a  burden-bearing  ?  We  have  our  own  and  also 
others'  burdens  to  bear.  We  are  all  on  a  journey  ;  if  one  is  like  to  give  way,  the 
other  must  refresh  him  ;  if  one  is  likely  to  fall,  the  other  must  help  him  up. 
(Starke.)  Chnstian  sympathy  : — The  individual  conscience,  if  sufficiently  sensitive, 
and  alive  to  its  responsibilities,  will  daily  find  for  itself  manifold  occasions  of  bear- 
ing others'  burdens.  We  may  show  our  sympathy,  for  instance,  with  sickness  and 
suifering,  in  our  liberal  support  of  hospitals  and  similar  appliances  for  bringing 
excellent  medical  skill  within  reach  of  those  who  most  need  and  can  least  afford 
it.  Those  who  have  leisure  to  do  so,  may  show  it  by  visiting  the  sick  and  afflicted, 
and  alleviating,  by  gentle  acts  and  kindly  attentions,  the  suffering  they  find  around 
them.  We  may  sympathise  with  poverty,  either  by  actual  relief  of  want  and  desti- 
tution, or  by  the  better  method,  where  it  is  possible,  of  procuring  for  them  the 
means  of  earning  an  honest  livelihood.  And  our  sympathy  with  such  may  be  most 
clearly  expressed  by  the  delicacy  with  which  the  help  is  tendered,  a  matter  which 
many  benevolent  people  are  apt  to  forget,  and  so  mar  the  good  they  would  other- 
wise do.  We  may  sympathise  with  age  and  its  attendant  evils,  by  cheerfully 
tendering  the  deference  and  consideration  which  the  better  portion  of  mankind  has 
always  combined  to  accord  to  increasing  years :  we  may  show  it,  too,  by  patience  of 
its  tediousness,  and  querulousness,  and  by  diverting  attention  from  failing  faculties 
and  enfeebled  powers  of  mind  and  body.  We  may  sympathise  with  infirmities  of 
temper  in  those  with  whom  we  may  be  thrown  in  contact,  by  tact  and  temper, 
and  forbearance  on  our  part,  endeavouring  to  hit  the  due  medium  between  an  un- 
due complaisance,  which  is  no  true  kindness  to  the  wayward,  and  a  needless  and 
irritating  opposition.  We  may  sympathise  with  ignorance,  by  excusing  it  where  it 
is  unavoidable  and  not  culpable,  by  seeking  to  remedy  it  in  every  way  that  lies  in 
our  power,  and  by  readiness  to  impart  whatever  knowledge  we  possess,  at  whatever 
cost  of  time  or  trouble.  We  may  sympathise  with  the  penitent  sinner,  if  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  has  placed  us  in  such  a  position  as  to  minister  to  the  wounds  of  a 
stricken  conscience,  by  encouraging  the  confidence  of  those  who  would  repose  it  in 
us,  by  hearing  their  griefs  and  troubles  and  by  leading  them  to  Him  who  alone  can 
heal  the  ravages  of  sin  and  speak  peace  to  the  troubled  spirit.  We  may  sympa- 
thise with  distracting  doubts  and  difficulties,  whether  as  to  faith  or  conduct,  by 
patiently  hearing  all  the  doubter's  perplexity,  by  offering  in  all  humility  solutions 
which  have  satisfied  the  minds  of  others,  or,  if  it  be  so,  by  showing  how  we  our- 
selves have  groped  our  way  amid  such  clouds  of  the  mind  from  darkness  to  partial 
light  :  or  at  least  we  may  do  so  by  secret  prayer,  that  God  in  His  own  good  time 
will  lead  all  who  err  or  waver  into  the  narrow  path  which  struggles  upward  towards 
the  truth.  (Bishop  Mitchinson.)  Lightening  others'  burdens  : — The  application 
of  this  law  are  manifold.  Yonder  is  a  poor  woman  who  has  more  children  than  she 
can  feed.  Take  one  of  them  to  your  own  house.  Give  employment  to  another  of 
them  in  your  store.  That  will  lift  up  the  load  from  her,  and  it  will  send  you  to  you* 


CHAP,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  461 

family  altar  with  a  new  cause  for  thanksgiving  and  praise.  Do  yon  not  know 
that  in  life,  sometimes,  the  breadth  of  one  inch  in  a  railway  truck  determines 
whether  the  cars  shall  go  over  the  embankment  or  on  the  straight  track — just  the 
pull  of  a  switch  one  inch.  I  know  some  large-hearted,  godly  men,  who  stand  by 
young  men  when  they  come  to  London  or  New  York,  and  give  them  the  helping 
hand  of  sympathy  and  prayerful  support ;  and  that  act  just  pulls  the  switch  one 
inch,  and  puts  them  on  the  road  to  success,  to  happiness,  and  to  God's  blessing. 
We  have  in  America  our  William  E.  Dodges  who  are  the  Lord's  switch-tenders.  I 
am  thankful  that  in  London  you  have  your  Samuel  Morley,  and  other  faithful  ser- 
vants of  the  Lord,  who  rejoice  to  be  God's  switch-tenders,  to  turn  the  needy,  and 
the  tempted,  and  the  young  into  paths  of  sobriety, prosperity,  and  blessing.  Do  you 
not  know  that  sometimes  a  very  small  lif t  is  very  timely  ?  A  word,  an  old  familiar 
word — it  is  like  a  medicine.  A  kind  word  to  your  neighbour  in  trouble,  an  inquiry 
at  the  door  when  crape  hangs  there,  the  pressure  of  the  hand  :  there  is  not  a  man 
in  England  so  high  that  he  is  above  the  reach  of  the  need  of  sympathy.  One  of  our 
noblest  women,  Fidelia  Fisk,  tells  us  that  when  she  was  in  Syria  one  day,  preaching 
to  the  native  women,  she  found  herself  very  tired.  Here  are  her  own  words — "I 
had  worked  hard  all  day,  and  I  had  a  prayer-meeting  yet  to  attend  that  night,  and  I 
felt  very  weary.  I  longed  for  a  little  rest.  Just  then,  as  I  was  sitting  on  the  floor, 
one  of  the  native  Christian  women  took  hold  of  me,  and  pulled  me  over  against  ber 
and  said,  '  Are  you  tired  ?  Just  lean  against  me  ;  and  if  you  love  me,  lean  hard  — 
lean  hard.'  I  did  lean  against  her,  and  I  found  myself  wonderfully  rested.  I  at- 
tended the  women's  prayer-meeting,  and  I  went  home  that  night  soarcely  tired  at 
all ;  and  oh,  how  often  the  words  of  that  woman  came  to  me,  ■  If  you  love  me,  lean 
hard — lean  hard.'  And  then  I  thought  how  the  Blessed  Saviour  says,  'If  you  love 
Me,  lean  hard.' "  And  mothers,  mothers,  do  you  not  remember  how,  when  you 
carried  that  burden  of  the  dying  child,  pale,  feeble,  and  the  breath  almost  gone,  you 
felt,  "  Oh,  if  it  loves  me,  let  it  lean  hard."  You  man,  remember  you  not  the  time 
when,  night  after  night,  you  took  up  your  beloved  wife  and  carried  her  to  her  couch, 
sad  at  the  thought  that  the  load  was  becoming  lighter  every  moment,  and  you  were 
ready  to  say  to  her,  "  My  darling,  if  you  love  me,  lean  hard  and  close."  Oh,  blessed 
Jesus,  teach  us  how  to  rest  our  weakness  on  Thee,  and  lean  hard  on  the  burden- 
bearer  of  our  sorrows  and  our  weaknesses !  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  The  Church  a 
reliever  of  burdens : — In  this  work  of  supplying  the  conditions  of  human  progress, 
the  State  has  found  from  time  to  time  its  most  powerful  helper  and  its  most  elo- 
quent teacher  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  And  in  proportion  as  the  State  has  realized 
more  and  more  its  true  idea  it  has  seemed  to  some  to  trench  upon  the  work  of  its 
best  friends.  The  relief  of  poverty  for  instance,  the  guarantee,  that  is,  of  the  con- 
ditions of  life  in  its  lowest  form,  was  long  the  work  of  the  religious  orders.  The 
poor  law  of  Elizabeth  was  the  direct  outcome  of  the  suppression  of  the  monasteries. 
So,  too,  the  education  of  the  people.  The  Church  made  manful  efforts  to  supply  the 
defects  which  the  State  ignored  by  its  system  of  parochial  schools,  and  it  was  not 
till  our  own  time  that  the  truth  came  home  to  men,  that  national  education  is  a 
matter  of  national  interest,  and  can  be  guaranteed  only  by  the  nation  itself.  So, 
too,  in  earlier  times  the  freedom  and  the  sanctity  of  the  individual  person  were 
recognized  by  the  Church  long  before  they  became  embodied  in  legislation,  and  in 
our  own  time  it  was  the  religious  instinct  of  the  nation  which  drove  Parliament  to 
sweep  away  the  last  trace  of  slavery.  Are  we  then  peevishly  to  complain  of  the 
growth  of  the  responsibility  and  activity  of  the  State  ?  Are  we  to  look  upon 
each  fresh  duty  which  it  undertakes  as  an  invasion  of  individual  rights,  or  a 
sort  of  trespass  upon  what  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the  Church  ?  Shall  we 
not  rather  see  in  every  successive  advance  a  fresh  victory  for  the  Church  of  Christ  ? 
for  it  shows  that  the  Church  has  been  true  to  its  mission,  and  has  taught  its  lesson 
to  the  world,  and  has  made  men  feel  the  truth  and  the  power  of  the  words,  "  Bear 
ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  (L.  R.  Phelps.) 
Burden-bearing : — I.  Different  kinds  of  burdens.  1.  Those  that  are  necessary. 
2.  Those  that  are  superfluous.  3.  Those  that  are  imaginary.  II.  What  shall 
we  do  with  them  ?  1.  Beduce  their  number  to  the  limits  of  necessity.  2.  Some 
of  these  we  are  expected  to  carry  ourselves.  (American  Homiletic  Review.)  I. 
Bbab  tb  onb  another's  burdens.  The  late  George  Moore  was  accustomed  to  say  that 
sympathy  was  the  grandest  word  in  the  English  language.  Sympathy  overcomes 
evil  and  strengthens  good,  it  lies  at  the  root  of  all  religion.  The  late  Mr.  Justice 
Talfourd  lamented  the  lack  of  it.  He  said,  "  If  I  were  asked  what  is  the  great 
lack  of  human  society,  I  should  say  that  need  is  sympathy."     Selfishness  is  said 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  be  the  very  root  of  original  sin,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  Christianity  to  break  down 
this  selfishness.  We  have  all  burdens  to  bear,  but  not  all  equally,  and  it  is  the 
privilege  of  those  who  are  less  burdened  than  their  fellows  to  minister  to  the  relief 
of  those  by  whom  they  are  surrounded.  Sometimes,  under  an  apparently  rough 
exterior,  there  is  a  gentle  spirit  and  genuine  kindness.  But  in  offering  to  these 
the  ministry  of  Christian  love  we  should  avoid  everything  that  is  likely  to  hurt 
their  sensibilities.  An  air  of  condescension  and  a  lofty  tone  of  patronage  are  out 
of  place  in  Christian  service.  Genuine  Christlike  sympathy  must  be  practical. 
The  shedding  of  sentimental  tears  will  not  suffice.  It  is  a  mockery  and  an  insult 
to  go  to  a  man  and  offer  him  a  tract  when  he  wants  a  loaf,  if  you  have  a  loaf  to 
spare.  Sympathy  must  be  personal.  In  this  age  of  societies  and  committees  we 
are  in  danger  of  delegating  our  duty  to  other  people.  Real  beneficence  is  simple 
prudence — to  do  good  is  to  get  good.  Be  the  almoners  of  your  own  bounty.  This 
ministry  is  to  be  mutual.  Human  life  is  very  changeful,  the  picture  is  constantly 
being  replaced.  A  man  rejoicing  to-day  may  be  smitten  down  by  a  fell  disease  to- 
morrow. The  hand  that  is  now  ministering  to  others  may  sorely  need  ministration 
itself.  By  observing  the  principles  of  the  text  we  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  There 
is  a  moral  power  in  the  human  nature  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  which  is  second 
only  to  His  Divinity.  It  fitted  Him  for  the  ministry  of  solace.  But  we  are  to 
bear  one  another's  burdens  in  order  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  We  fulfil  the  law 
of  Christ's  example,  as  witnessed  in  the  incident  at  Nain,  and  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus.  There  Jesus  wept  in  sympathy  with  Mary  and  Martha.  We  fulfil  the 
law  of  Christ's  teaching,  and  that  of  His  apostles.  "  A  new  commandment  I  give 
unto  you,  that  ye  love  another,  as  I  have  loved  you."  We  fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ's  administration.  It  is  a  law  of  the  kingdom  that  all  His  people  shall  be 
mutually  dependent.  Society  is  bound  together  by  mysterious  but  mighty  ties. 
II.  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden.  The  two  statements  of  my  text  are 
perfectly  consistent.  There  are  burdens  which  we  can  help  other  people  to  bear. 
But  there  are  others  which  neither  they  nor  we  can  bear  for  purposes  of  mutual 
help.  There  is  the  burden  of  responsibility.  Life  is  a  magnificent  thing.  Life  in 
this  world  may  lead  to  life  eternal  in  the  world  to  come.  Then  there  is  the  burden 
of  guilt.  This  is  a  personal  matter.  Again,  there  is  the  burden  of  remorse.  We 
all  possess  a  faculty  of  conscience.  Lastly,  we  have  each  a  burden  to  bear  in  the 
hour  of  death.  (M.  C.  Osborn.)  Fellowship  in  suffering: — The  apostle  here 
go«s  even  beyond  what  he  has  laid  down  in  another  very  large  and  comprehensive 
precept,  "  Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep."  He 
requires  something  more  than  sympathy — more  at  least  than  sympathy  as  com- 
monly understood,  though  not  perhaps  more  than  sympathy  in  its  strict  literal 
import.  One  man  is  generally  said  to  sympathize  with  another,  who  is  pained, 
when  and  because  that  other  is  pained ;  and  sympathy,  as  thus  understood,  is 
little  more  than  pity  or  commiseration.  But  to  suffer  with  another — which  is 
actually  to  sympathize — this  goes  much  beyond  the  weeping  with  another.  It  is 
the  making  the  griefs  of  that  other  mine  own ;  so  that  the  blow  is  on  me  as  well 
as  on  him,  and  the  wound  is  in  my  heart  as  well  as  in  his.  The  members  of  one 
family  accurately  sympathize,  or  suffer  together,  when  death  has  come  in,  and 
snatched  one  from  their  circle.  The  loss  is  a  common  loss,  affecting  all  equally, 
and  the  sorrow  of  each  is  literally  the  sorrow  of  every  other.  A  Christian  friend 
or  minister  may  visit  the  disconsolate  household,  animated  by  the  kindliest  feelings, 
and  sincerely  desirous  to  afford  them  a  measure  of  consolation,  through  the  mani- 
fest interest  which  he  takes  in  their  grief ;  and  he  may  succeed  ;  for  exhibitions  of 
kindliness  have  the  great  faculty  of  going  like  balm  to  the  heart.  The  tears  which 
friendship  sheds  in  our  woe,  possess  the  wonderful  property  of  staunching  our 
own.  But  nevertheless,  this  comforting  visitor  may  rather  feel  for  than  with  the 
afflicted.  They  have  lost  a  brother  or  a  sister,  but  he  does  not  necessarily  feel  as 
though  he  had  lost  a  brother  or  a  sister.  The  blow  has  made  them  orphans,  but 
he  does  not  necessarily  feel  as  though  it  had  made  him  an  orphan.  And  thus, 
whilst  he  may  literally  and  thoroughly  obey  the  injunction  which  requires  of  him 
that  he  "  weep  with  them  that  weep,"  he  may  yet  be  far  off  from  that  actual 
sympathy — that  suffering  with  them  that  suffer — which  is  described  in  the  text ; 
where  you  are  not  only  enjoined  to  commiserate  with  the  oppressed,  but  so  to  put 
yourselves  into  their  position  as  to  bear  their  burdens.  And  yet  it  is  evident  that 
so  far  as  Christianity  succeeds  in  restoring  the  brotherhood  which  sin  has  in- 
fringed, it  will  substitute  sympathy  thus  strictly  understood,  for  that  which  in  our 
present  broken  state  has  usurped  the  definition.    It  is  only  needful  that  I  come  t« 


CHAP.  vi. J  GALATIANS.  463 

regard  any  one  of  you  as  a  brother ;  and  when  he  loses  a  kinsman,  I  shall  lose  a 
kinsman.  I  shall  not  merely  be  sorry  for  his  bereavement,  but  I  shall  feel  that  the 
bereavement  is  my  own.  So  far  as  two  families  can  be  made  one,  the  sorrows  of 
either  are  the  sorrows  of  both ;  and  if  there  were  but  one  vast  family  on  the  face 
of  the  earth,  whatsoever  afflicted  the  individual  would  afflict  the  mass  .  .  .  Who 
can  tell  us  what  Christian  philanthropy  would  be,  if  the  law  of  membership  were 
felt  and  obeyed.  You  ought — this  is  what  St.  Paul  seems  to  enjoin  and  exhort  in 
the  text — you  ought  to  remember  the  imprisoned  and  burdened,  not  merely  as 
being  your  fellow  creatures,  but  rather  as  being,  in  a  certain  sense,  yourselves. 
What  a  motive  to  exertion  on  their  behalf !  How  earnest,  how  unremitting,  would 
be  that  exertion,  if  that  motive  were  indeed  in  full  force.  You  tell  me,  for 
instance,  of  unfortunate  captives  who  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  cruel  task- 
masters. They  are  shut  out  from  the  cheerful  light  of  day;  they  eat  their  bread 
in  bitterness  of  soul,  and  almost  long  for  death  ;  and  you  say  to  me,  Remember 
them,  Remember  them!  Why,  you  have  told  me  of  myself  I  It  is  my  own 
captivity  which  you  have  described ;  it  is  the  clanking  of  my  own  chains  which 
you  have  made  me  hear ;  and  I  must  struggle  for  their  emancipation,  that  my 
limbs  may  be  free,  and  that  I  may  breathe  the  fresh  air  of  heaven.  0  Christians  t 
what  would  be  your  benevolence,  if  you  felt  that  they  were  your  own  members 
which  you  were  invited  to  succour  ?  And  it  is  quite  evident  from  the  text,  that 
nothing  less  is  expected  of  you  as  professed  disciples  of  Christ.  The  apostle 
introduces  the  principle  of  membership,  just  as  he  might  the  simplest  and  most 
elementary  of  truths.  He  is  not  proposing  any  rule  or  standard  to  which  men 
were  unaccustomed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  one  which,  as  being  generally  acknow- 
ledged, needed  only  to  be  indicated  by  a  passing  remark.  And  yet  it  is  possible 
enough,  that  the  doctrine  which  we  have  now  endeavoured  to  lay  down,  will  appear 
to  many  of  you  to  have  the  air  of  a  new  and  far-fetched  speculation.  "  Give  us," 
you  are  ready  to  say,  "  pictures  or  descriptions  of  distress ;  expatiate  upon  the 
miseries  by  which  numbers  are  oppressed ;  and  move  our  feelings  by  a  touching 
tale  of  human  grief ;  but  as  to  wishing  us  to  make  the  wretchedness  our  own — 
that  we  should  labour  for  its  alleviation,  just  as  though  it  were  pressing  upon  our- 
selves— that  is  altogether  beyond  nature,  and  its  possibility  is  but  the  fiction  of  an 
exaggerated  theology !  "  Beyond  nature,  we  confess  it ;  but  not  beyond  graee. 
The  Christian  is  not  to  be  content  until,  in  relieving  the  distressed,  he  can  feel 
that  he  acts  upon  the  great  principle  of  membership.  It  must  not  be  enough  for 
him  that  his  heart  yearns  at  the  tale  of  calamity,  and  that  he  is  ready  to  employ 
his  money  and  his  time  in  lightening  the  pressure  of  which  he  has  been  told  ;  he 
must  see  to  it  that  he  have  part  in  the  bearing,  as  well  as  in  the  relieving  of  the 
calamity.  (H.  Melvill,  JB.D.)  Helping  men  to  bear  their  own  burdens  : — Many 
persons  are  caught  with  the  most  superficial  contradiction.  Here  St.  Paul  says, 
"  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens  "  ;  and  in  the  fifth  verse  of  this  same  chapter,  he 
says,  "Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  As  if  both  of  the  statements 
could  not  be  true  I  As  if  a  man  carrying  a  burden  for  which  he  is  especially 
responsible,  might  not  have  it  lightened  somewhat  by  one  who  walked  by  his  side 
and  helped  htn !  As  if  a  little  child  carrying  a  heavily-laden  basket — which  it 
was  his  task  and  business  to  carry,  and  which  he  had  to  take  care  of — might  not 
be  helped  by  another  child  walking  by  his  side  and  taking  hold  of  the  handle  1  so 
that  it  might  be  said  to  one  of  them,  "  This  is  your  burden,  and  you  must  see  to 
it,"  and  to  the  other,  "  Help  him  with  his  burden."  And  yet,  persons  suppose, 
because  here  it  is  said,  " Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,"  and  further  on,  "Every 
man  shall  bear  hi3  own  burden,"  there  is  some  contradiction.  No  ;  there  is  co- 
operation. The  reponsibility  is  on  each  man  to  carry  himself  and  his  trials  and 
troubles  through  life.  All  the  more,  therefore,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  we  should  help 
each  other.  For,  to  "  bear  one  another's  burdens,"  does  not  mean  to  take  them  off 
from  one  another's  shoulders,  but  to  help  each  other  to  carry  them.  We  are  to 
assist  others  in  bearing  their  own  burdens.  We  are  to  contribute  to  their  strength 
and  to  their  courage.  We  are  to  render  them  as  much  help  as,  by  sympathy  or 
otherwise,  we  may.  Taken  in  connection  with  the  preceding  verse  this  preceptmeans : 
Whatever  thing  tends  to  bend  a  man,  to  warp  him  in  his  habit  of  thought,  in  the 
conduct  of  his  moral  feelings,  in  the  administration  of  his  affections,  in  the  whole 
range  of  his  social  life ;  whatever  may  be  a  man's  imperfection,  or  misdemeanour, 
or  fault,  or  tailing,  the  command  is — "  Help  him  ;  "  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Help- 
fulness : — To  bear  the  burden  of  a  person  who  has  a  heavy  load  of  laborious  duty, 
is  either  to  assist  him  directly  in  the  performance  of  it,  or  to  act  towards  him  in 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vfc 

6uch  a  manner  as  shall  make  the  performance  of  it  more  easy ;  to  bear  the  burden 
of  a  person  who  is  oppressed  with  affliction,  is  to  commiserate  him,  and  do  what  we 
can  to  relieve  and  comfort  him ;  to  bear  the  burden  of  one  who  is  encumbered  with 
mistaken  views,  mental  weakness,  strong  prejudices,  and  bad  temper,  is  patiently 
to  bear  the  annoyance  which  these  unavoidably  occasion ;    at  the  same  time 
employing     all    proper    means    for    correcting    these    intellectual    and    moral 
obliquities,  weaknesses,  and  faults.  ...  To  bear  the  mistakes  and  faults  of  our 
fellow  Christians  does  not  by  any  means  imply  that  we  flatter  them  in  their 
erroneous  opinions  or  improper  habits :  but  it  does  imply  that  we,  cherishing  a 
deep-felt  sense  of  our  own  intellectual  and  moral  deficiencies  and  improprieties, 
bear  patiently  tbe  inconveniences  which  their  mistakes  and  faults  occasion  to  us, 
and  in  a  truly  friendly  disposition  do  everything  in  our  power  to  remove  these 
mistakes  and  faults.     (Jhrysostom  well  says  on  this  point — "He  who  is  quick  and 
irritable,  let  him  bear  with  the  slow  and  sluggish  ;  and  let  the  slow,  in  his  turn, 
bear  with  the  impetuosity  of  his  fiery  brother ;  each  knowing  that  the  burden  is 
heavier  to  him  who  bears  it  than  to  him  who  bears  with  it."     When  a  Christian 
brother  under  his  burden  stumbles  and  falls,  we  are  not  to  let  him  lie  on  the 
ground  and  recover  his  feet  the  best  way  he  may  ;  far  less  are  we  to  insult  him  as 
he  lies  prostrate,  and  point  him  out  to  the  scorn  and  derision  of  the  world.     We 
are  to  take  him  by  the  hand  and  raise  him  up  ;  and  as  we  have  all  our  burdens, 
we  are  to  journey  on,  hand  in  hand,  endeavouring  to  keep  one  another  from 
falling,  and  to  press  in  a  body  forward  along  the  prescribed  course,  that  we  may 
all  obtain  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,  in  that  better  country,  where  we  shall  be 
relieved  from  all  our  burdens  at  once  and  for  ever.     (John  Brown,  D.D.)        The 
spirit  that  restores  a  fallen  brother  should  pervade  ordinary  Christian  relations'^ 
The  "  burdens  "  have  been  unduly  narrowed  in  the  definition  of  them.     They  are 
not  weaknesses  simply,  as  in  Eom.  xv.  1,  but  also  errors,  trials,  sorrows,  sins, 
without  any  distinct  specification.     And  they  are  not  merely  to  be  tolerated;  they 
are  to  be  taken  up  as  burdens  (Matt.  xx.  12 ;  Acts  xv.  10).     Whatever  forma  a 
burden  to  our  brethren  we  are  to  take  upon  ourselves,  and  carry  it  for  them  or 
with  them,  in  the  spirit  of  Him  who  "  bore  our  sins  and  carried  our  sorrows." 
The  emphasis  is  on  "  one  another's,"  giving  distinctness  to  the  duty  as  a  mutual 
duty.     Mutual  interposition  in   sympathy  and  for  succour  in  any  emergency  — 
fellow-feeling  and  fellow-helping — is  the  duty  inculcated,  as  opposed  to  that  selfish 
isolation  which  stands  aloof,  or  contents  itself  with  a  cheap  expression  of  com- 
miseration, or  an  offer  of  assistance  so  framed  as  to  be  worthless  in  the  time  or 
the  shape  of  it  (2  Cor.  xi.  29).     (John  Eadie,  D.D.)        The  best  burden  and  the 
highest  law  : — "If  you  must  needs  impose  burdens  on  yourselves,  let  them  be  the 
burdens  of  mutual  sympathy.    If  you  must  needs  observe  a  law,  let  it  be  the  law 
of  Christ."     (Bishop  Lightfoot.)         Christian  socialism, : — No  other  law  but  the 
law  of  Christ  ever  taught  this  maxim ;  the  proper  discharge  of  social  duties  is 
regulated  nowhere  but  in  the  law  of  Christ,  which  is  the  law  of  love,  "  for  love 
worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour,  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."    All 
those  social  symptoms  which  rise  like  the  foam  out  of  the  agitated  elements  of  the 
present  generation,  disappear  in  rapid  succession,  because  they  have  no  other 
foundation  than  the  wave  which  cannot  rest ;    and  they  are  at  best  but  mere 
spurious  imitations  of  that  fraternity  which  was  founded  by  Jesus  Christ.     It  is 
tome  tribute  to  the  origin  of  our  holy  religion,  that  men  in  their  most  extravagant 
aberrations,  and  amidst  the  wildest  theories  for  promoting  the  happiness  of  the 
many,  should  appeal  to  the  Divine  founder  of  Christianity,  as  having  first  intro- 
duced the  system  which  they  are  seeking  to  propagate ;  but,  inasmuch  as  they 
know  nothing  of  the  law  of  love,  which  He  taught  as  the  moving  spring  of  every 
good    word    and    work,  they  do   but    wander   on  the  outside  of    the    Christian 
system.  ...  In  the  general  history  of  mankind,  the  maxim  of  the  text,  so  far 
from  being  acted  out,  has  been  reversed ;  instead  of  men  sharing  or  bearing  one 
another's  burdens,  they  appear  to  act  upon  the  rule  of  laying  them  on  each  other's 
shoulders,  with  the  view  of  getting  rid  of  their  portion  of  the  weight.    In  the 
times  of  classical  antiquity,  which  our  youth  are  taught  to  hold  in  admiration ;  in 
the  days  of  heroism  and  splendid  war,  which  poets  have  sung  and  historians  have 
embellished,  there  were  the  degraded  classes  of  the  community,  made  to  bear  the 
burdens  of    the   rest.      The   helots   of    Sparta,    and   the   slaves  of    Greece,   the 
gladiators  of  Rome,  and  the  captives  of  barbarian  invaders,  were  but  the  beasts  of 
burden  for  the  more  favoured  portion  of  the  community.     What  cared  the  Roman 
citizen  for  the  slave  that  went  his  round  of  ceaseless  toil?    What  thought  had  the 


ota>.  n.]  OALATIANS.  465 

feudal  lord  for  the  drudge  that  wore  out  his  brief  existence  in  subterranean  damps 
to  do  his  master's  pleasure  ?  Who,  even  in  our  Christian  land  for  many  genera- 
tions, heeded  the  heavy  burdens  laid  upon  the  negro  slave,  or  the  tender  females 
working  in  our  mines,  or  the  helpless  children  in  our  factories  ?  What  thought  or 
care  among  hundreds  and  thousands  now,  who  refuse  to  give  to  the  man  who  has 
done  his  six  days'  labour,  the  day  of  rest  which  is  his  due,  because  they  will  not 
forego  one  single  particle  of  their  ordinary  luxury,  nor  bear  any  portion  of  their 
brother's  burden  ?  St.  Paul  here  appears  to  take  it  for  granted  that  every  man  has 
a  burden ;  and  shortly  afterwards  he  says  that  "  every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden."  There  must  be  no  such  shifting  away  of  the  trial  or  hardship,  which,  in 
the  course  of  providence,  he  has  to  bear,  as  will  exempt  him  from  the  ordinary  lot 
of  humanity.  It  is  not  at  all  a  question  of  getting  everything  done  for  us,  so  that 
we  may  have  a  smooth  and  easy  path  at  others'  expense  and  toil ;  but  it  is  just  that 
there  may  be  a  mutual  succour,  which  will  help  every  man  to  "  bear  his  own 
burden,"  such,  e.g.,  as  the  burdens  of  poveity,  affliction,  excessive  labour,  <fec.  (R. 
Burgess,  B.D.)  Loving  ministrations : — There  lay  recently,  in  an  infirmary  in 
New  York,  in  a  darkened  room,  helpless  and  sightless,  a  man  made  blind  by 
cataract.  He  had  crossed  half  a  oontinent  in  the  faint  hope  of  finding  a  relief  or 
cure.  Beside  him,  when  I  saw  him,  sat  his  daughter,  who,  as  I  learned  afterwards, 
had  taken  up  his  work — a  work  involving  long  and  exposed  journeys  through  a  wild 
and  thinly  settled  country  on  our  western  frontier,  and  who  left  it,  now,  only  to 
minister  to  this  helpless  and  suffering  parent  while  he  lay  shrinking  and  quivering 
under  the  surgeon's  knife.  It  seemed  doubtful  whether  the  operation  would  be 
successful,  and  equally  doubtful  whether  all  this  filial  devotion  would  not  be  wasted 
time  and  worthless  endeavour.  But,  as  one  looked  at  that  woman's  face  of  heroic 
sacrifice  and  utter  self-abnegation,  one  read  in  it  how  out  of  love's  Divine  unsel- 
fishness there  comes  a  sweeter  and  nobler  fruitage  than  any  that  could  be  garnered 
without  it,  even  though  to-morrow  all  sorrow  and  pain  and  helplessness  should  be 
swept  out  of  the  world  for  ever.  (Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.)  Sympathy  aided 
by  sight : — Consider  how  you  would  act  if  these  vices  and  monstrous  passions, 
instead  of  being  a  part  of  the  machinery  of  rational,  intelligent,  and  responsible 
agents,  were  transformed  in  the  actual  forms  of  wild  beasts.  Is  it  intemperance  ? 
suppese  you  figure  to  yourself  a  lion  in  ambush  springing  out  upon  a  man ;  suppose 
you  saw  the  man  trembling  under  the  lion's  paw,  how  would  you  feel?  But 
suppose,  instead  of  being  a  lion,  it  was  Satan  in  the  form  of  an  intemperate 
appetite,  worse  a  thousand  times  to  the  man  than  any  real  lion  of  the  desert  f 
You  would  run  to  rescue  a  man  from  an  outside  lion :  will  you  not  do  anything 
for  a  man  who  has  one  inside  ?  What  if  it  were  sickness  ?  What  if  it  were  a  man 
swollen  with  dropsy?  What  if  it  were  a  man  crying  out  for  water,  with  lips 
parched  by  merciless  fever  ?  Would  you  not  moisten  his  tongue  and  his  bro  v, 
and  fan  the  fever  away  ?  But  is  any  fever  of  the  body  so  pitiable  as  the  fevers 
which  come  upon  the  soul  7  Would  you  have  compassion  upon  a  man  who  was 
attacked  by  an  outward  disease,  and  none  for  a  man  whose  soul  was  diseased  I 
Are  there  no  bearers  of  men's  inward  burdens  ?  Are  not  these  burdens  to  be  borne, 
even  though  men  may  have  brought  them  upon  themselves  ?  Are  not  bad  men 
punished  by  what  they  suffer  from  their  transgressions?  Is  it  not  enough  that 
such  men  have  to  live  with  themselves,  and  take  the  consequences  of  their  own 
actions  ?  And  is  not  a  man,  the  consequences  of  whose  conduct  are  going  on,  working, 
and  laying  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  to  be  pitied  ?  Is  not  he  to  be  pitied  who 
for  his  transgression  has  to  bear  the  infliction  of  law,  of  public  sentiment,  and  of  his 
own  nature  ?  In  all  ways  of  looking  at  it,  he  is  most  to  be  pitied  who  is  most  variously 
and  most  hopelessly  wicked.  (H.  W.  Beeeher.)  Sympathy  not  separation: — 
But  it  will  be  objected,  "  Are  we  not  commanded  to  abhor  that  which  is  evil,  and 
to  cleave  to  that  which  is  good ? "  Certainly;  but  are  we  anywhere  commanded 
to  abhor  sinners  because  we  abhor  sin?  What  is  it  to  abhor  evil?  Is  it  the 
sudden  disgust  which  arises,  which  ought  to  be  momentary,  and  which  is  designed 
to  put  us  upon  our  guard,  and  to  inspire  us  with  self-defensory  power,  till  we  have 
time  to  lay  our  course  more  deliberately  ?  Every  man  ought  at  the  first  impulse 
of  the  evil  to  feel  repugnance  at  it ;  but  that  is  not  the  higher  kind  of 
abhorrence  of  evil.  It  is  an  inspiration  of  a  lower  kind.  He  hates  evil  most 
who  hates  it  so  that  he  will  annihilate  it.  There  is  animal  hatred,  and  there 
is  Divine  hatred.  Two  men  hate  malaria.  One  says,  "  I  will  not  settle  here ; 
I  will  pack  up  my  things,  and  clear  out."  The  other  says,  "  I  hate  it ;  but  I  am 
going  to  work  to  morrow  morning,  with  my  whole  force,  to  drain  that  marsh." 

30 


M6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y* 

He  goes  to  work  and  digs  a  ditch  through  it,  risking  his  health,  and  removes  the 
stagnant  water.  Who  hated  the  malaria  most,  the  one  who  ran  away  from  it,  or 
the  one  who  cured  it  ?  Is  not  a  cure  a  witness  of  dislike  more  than  neglect  ?  A 
mother  hates  the  disease  that  is  in  her  child ;  but  does  she  abandon  the  child, 
saying,  "  I  hate  morbid  conditions  of  every  kind,"  and  let  the  child  die,  as  a  testi- 
mony to  her  dislike  of  violations  of  natural  law  ?  Is  it  not  a  better  testimony  to 
her  hatred  of  disease,  that  night  and  day  she  lingers  over  the  little  sufferer  till  she 
brings  it  back  to  good  health  ?  Is  not  that  a  better  way  of  hating  disease  than 
the  other  would  be  ?  That  is  the  true  hatred  of  sin  which  kills  it  by  kindness.  (Ibid.) 
Open  hearts  and  ready  hands: — One  day  a  teacher  said  to  his  class,  "Boys,  you  can 
all  be  useful  if  you  will.  If  you  cannot  do  good  by  great  deeds  you  can  by  little 
ones."  These  boys  said  nothing,  but  the  teacher  saw  by  their  looks  that  they 
thought  he  was  mistaken.  They  did  not  believe  that  they  could  be  of  any  use.  So 
he  continued :  "  You  think  it  is  not  so ;  but  suppose  you  just  try  it  for  a  week." 
"  How  shall  we  try  it  ?  "  asked  one  of  them.  "  Just  keep  your  eyes  open  and  your 
hands  ready  to  do  anything  good  that  comes  in  your  way  this  week,  and  tell  me 
next  Sabbath  if  you  have  not  managed  to  be  useful  in  some  way  or  other,"  said  the 
teacher.  "Agreed,"  said  the  lads ;  and  so  they  parted.  The  next  Sabbath  those 
boys  gathered  round  the  teacher  with  smiling  lips  and  eyes  so  full  of  light  that  they 
fairly  twinkled  like  the  stars.  "  Ah,  lads,  I  see  by  your  looks  that  you  have  some- 
thing to  tell  me."  "  We  have,  sir ;  we  have  !  "  they  said  all  together.  Then  each 
told  his  story.  "  I,"  said  one,  "  thought  of  going  to  the  well  for  a  pail  of  water 
every  morning  to  save  mother  the  trouble  and  time.  She  thanked  me  so  much, 
was  so  greatly  pleased,  that  I  mean  to  keep  on  doing  it  for  her."  "And  I,"  said 
another  boy,  "thought  of  a  poor  old  woman,  whose  eyes  were  too  dim  to  read,  I 
went  to  her  house  every  day  and  read  a  chapter  to  her  from  the  Bible.  It  seems  to 
give  her  a  great  deal  of  comfort.  I  cannot  tell  how  she  thanked  me."  "  I  was 
walking  with  my  eyes  open  and  my  hands  ready,  as  you  told  us,"  said  the  fourth 
boy,  "  when  I  saw  a  little  fellow  crying  because  he  had  lost  some  pennies.  I  found 
them,  and  he  dried  his  tears,  and  ran  off  feeling  very  happy."  A  fifth  boy  said : 
"  I  saw  my  mother  was  very  tired  one  day.  The  baby  was  cross,  and  mother 
looked  sick  and  sad.  I  asked  mother  to  put  baby  into  my  little  waggon.  She  did 
so,  and  I  gave  him  a  grand  ride  round  the  garden.  If  you  had  only  heard  him 
crow,  and  seen  him  clap  his  hands,  it  would  have  done  you  good ;  and  oh  !  how 
xuuch  brighter  mother  looked  when  I  took  the  baby  indoors  again ! "  The  value 
vf  sympathy  : — An  eminent  clergyman  sat  in  his  study,  busily  engaged  in  preparing 
his  Sunday  sermon,  when  his  little  boy  toddled  into  the  room,  and  holding  up  hie 
pinched  finger,  said,  with  an  expression  of  Buffering,  "  Look,  pa,  how  I  hurt  it  I " 
The  father,  interrupted  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence,  glanced  hastily  at  him,  and 
with  just  the  slightest  tone  of  impatience,  said,  "  I  can't  help  it."  The  little  fellow's 
eyes  grew  bigger,  and  as  he  turned  to  go  out,  he  said  in  a  low  voice,  "  Yes,  you 
cculd  ;  you  might  have  said  '  Oh  1 '  "  Alas  !  how  many  of  us  "  children  of  a  larger 
growth  "  have  gone  away  hugging  our  hurt,  with  a  sadder  hurt  in  our  hearts  for 
lack  of  one  little  sympathizing  word.  To  most  of  us,  in  the  great  trials  of  life, 
sympathy  comes  freely  enough ;  but  for  the  small  aches  and  hurts,  the  daily  smarts 
and  bruises,  how  many  a  heart  hungers  in  vain  for  the  meagrest  dole !  "  It  is  such 
a  briery  world  !  "  said  a  little  girl  one  day,  while  making  her  way  through  a  black- 
berry thicket.  The  briers  meet  us  at  every  turn,  and  there  is  nothing  like  sympathy 
to  ease  their  pricks  and  stings.  (Christian  Age.)  The  power  of  a  kind  word: — There 
are  no  readier  or  sweeter  sympathizers  in  the  world  than  little  children,  and  they 
seem  to  know  intuitively  when  sympathy  is  needed.  A  friend  of  ours  had  the 
misfortune  to  break  a  valuable  dish  not  long  ago,  and  naturally  enough  was  inclined 
to  blame  herself  for  her  carelessness.  A  little  four-year-old  girl  looked  up  from 
her  play  as  the  dish  fell  to  the  floor,  and  touched  by  the  mother's  troubled  face  she 
stole  to  her  side,  and  softly  stroking  her  hand,  whispered,  "  Nice  mamma." 
Blessed  little  comforter !  What  mother  would  not  cheerfully  have  given  the  price 
of  a  dozen  dishes  for  the  sake  of  such  sweet  sympathy  ?  And  what  mother  in  the 
world  would  have  the  heart  to  reprove  such  a  cuild  for  a  similar  mishap  ? — for  to 
reprove  when  the  little  one  is  already  quivering  with  dismay  at  the  mischief  it  has 
wrought,  is  sheer  cruelty.  It  is  a  wise  mother  who  at  such  a  time  folds  the  darling 
in  her  arms  with  a  gentle,  "  Never  mind."  (Mary  B.  Sleight.)  Fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ — not  "fulfil,"  but  "  complete  " : — He  says  not  "  fulfil,"  but  "  complete ; "  i.e., 
make  it  up  all  of  you  in  common  by  the  things  wherein  ye  bear  with  one  another. 
This  man  is  irascible,  thou  art  dull-tempered ;  bear  therefore  with  his  vehemence. 


ohap.  vi.]  QALAT1ANS.  467 

that  he  in  turn  may  bear  with  thy  sluggishness ;  and  thus  neither  will  he,  through 
thy  support,  transgress,  nor  wilt  thou  offend  in  the  points  where  thy  defects  he, 
through  thy  brother's  forbearance.  So  do  ye  reach  forth  a  hand  one  to  another 
when  about  to  fall,  and  one  with  another  fulfil  the  law  in  common,  each  completing 
what  is  wanting  in  his  neighbour  by  his  own  endurance.  {Chrysostom.)  The 
bearing  of  burdens : — These  passages  seem  to  be  contradictory ;  but  the  opposition  is 
only  apparent,  not  real.  One  asserts  a  Christian  obligation,  the  other  states  a 
solemn  fact.  I.  There  abb  bubdkns  to  be  shared.  Our  relationship  to  each 
other,  and  our  possession  of  advantages  and  talents,  involve  us  in  manifold 
responsibilities.  1.  Burdens  of  ignorance.  It  is  our  duty  to  diffuse  the  know- 
ledge of  God,  and  to  attempt  to  remove  the  evils  of  darkness  and  superstition. 

2.  Burdens  of  sorrow.  Calamities,  distress,  bereavement,  appeal  for  sympathy  and 
ministry;  and  we  cannot  escape  the  demands  upon  us  for  consideration  and  help. 

3.  Burdens  of  infirmity.  All  are  in  jeopardy.  The  strongest  are  not  always  strong. 
Christians  are  not  to  rejoice  in  iniquity,  or  affect  a  disdainful  sanctity,  but  to  seek 
with  Christlike  gentleness  and  grace  the  recovery  of  tbe  erring  one  (Jas.  v.  19,  20). 
The  Christian  has  two  noble  attitudes  or  possibilities — he  can  look  up,  and  he  can 
lift  up.  Think  of  the  animating  motive,  "  and  so  fulfil,"  &c .  Christ  tanght  the 
law  of  action  by  (a)  His  precepts,  (b)  His  life,  (c)  His  death.  II.  There  abe 
burdens  which  cannot  be  shabed.  1.  The  burden  of  personal  duty.  2.  The 
burden  of  sinful  character.  3.  The  burden  of  individual  responsibility.  4.  The 
burden  of  death.  Conclusion :  Do  you  carry  an  anxious  heart,  or  a  weary  soul,  or 
a  guilty  conscience  ?  Get  rid  of  the  heavy  burden.  Carry  the  load  not  a  moment 
longer  (Psa.  lv.  22).  (M.  Braithwaite.)  Mutual  help  in  burden-bearing: — You 
have  often  noticed,  if  you  have  any  special  disease  or  malady,  how  strangely  you 
begin  to  learn  of  others  who  have  the  same.  There  is  this  sympathetic  instinct  in 
our  mental  and  spiritual  maladies.  ...  It  is  when  we  have  learned  in  our  own 
personal  experience  the  struggles  of  mind  and  heart,  the  manifold  bonds  of  human 
life,  that  we  have  gained  the  only  power  to  help  our  fellow-men.  It  may  be  said 
most  truly  that  it  is  only  the  man  or  woman  who  has  suffered,  who  has  any  real 
feeling  of  kindred  with  the  heart  of  man.  The  child  is  often  cruel  to  the  child,  the 
young  are  impatient  of  the  sight  of  sorrow,  because  they  do  not  know  the  reality  of 
it.  The  deepest  cause  of  our  uncharitableness  is  our  ignorance.  Who  of  us  has 
ever  known  the  weary  burden  of  doubt,  the  earnest  craving  for  a  truth  to  rest  on 
amidst  the  chaos  of  opinion,  who  that  has  at  last  found  it  does  not  know  how  many 
there  are  like  himself  who  only  need  a  word  of  wise  counsel,  a  ray  of  kindly  light, 
to  lead  them  into  the  path?  It  is  that  spirit  the  Christian  believer  must  cherish. 
And  who,  again,  has  felt  the  hard  struggles  of  his  conscience  in  this  daily  life,  the 
temptations  that  have  met  him,  the  weakness  of  his  own  will,  and  yet  through 
God's  grace  has  kept  his  purity,  does  not  know  somewhat  of  the  burdens  that 
crush  others  less  happy  than  himself  in  the  results  of  the  trial  ?  Yes,  this  is  the 
lesson  we  all  need.  .  .  .  We  cannot  change  all  the  inequalities  of  the  world,  or 
heal  all  its  diseases.  But  we  can  do  much  to  help  it  by  the  spirit  in  which  we 
strive  to  understand  and  reach  human  need.  It  is  not  our  wealth  or  our  cold, 
condescending  pity  men  and  women  need  ;  it  is  the  Christian  fellowship  that  makes 
them  feel  that  "  we  have  all  of  us  one  human  heart,"  that  sees  in  every  class  or 
lot  creatures  of  "  like  passions "  with  us,  the  same  infirmities,  and  the  same 
redeeming  graces.  It  is  this  gospel  which  teaches  no  envy  of  the  rich  and  no 
scorn  of  the  poor,  but  that  all  these  differences  of  lot,  to  the  believer  in  Christ,  are 
not  barriers  to  sever,  but  bonds  to  bind  us  in  one.  And  as  we  have  so  learned  it  in 
our  personal  experience,  we  have  found  happiness  in  this  joy  of  human  sympathy. 
Our  grief  is  healed  as  we  go  out  of  our  own  cell  of  brooding  thought  to  find  our 
fellow-sufferers  It  is  the  only  antidote.  For  then  we  learn  always  that  there  are 
sadder  hearts  to  be  healed,  and  we  feel  ashamed  of  our  own  trouble  in  the  presence 
of  a  greater,  and  as  we  minister  to  them  the  mercy  of  our  God  steals  into  our  own 
souls,  and  brings  the  consolation  we  never  knew  before.  And  so  our  happiness  is 
enlarged  only  as  it  enters  into  the  enlarged  heart.  If  we  have  brought  our  sunshine 
into  the  life  of  others,  if  we  have  given  of  our  comfort  to  those  whose  lot  is  less 
fortunate,  we  can  enjoy  the  wealth  with  a  new  sense  of  His  goodness  who  has 
made  us  stewards.  I  have  read  of  a  Christian  man,  who,  to  know  the  reality  of 
poverty,  put  on  the  dress  of  a  beggar,  and  went  into  the  hard  lodging-house,  where 
the  poor  outcasts  have  a  comfortless  pallet  of  straw  and  a  ration  of  bad  food,  and 
after  a  week  of  experience  gave  this  evidence,  that  it  was  worth  to  him  ten  years 
of  study,  and  the  source  of  the  most  intense  pleasure  in  his  lifetime.     Such  a 


188  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vt. 

voluntary  exile  is  not  often  sought  or  found  by  most  of  us.  But  each  in  his  degree, 
if  he  have  come  face  to  face  with  human  wretchedness,  has  learned  the  meaning  of 
this  Christian  experience.  Each  has  found  the  recompense  of  the  reward ;  as  we 
haT8  borne  the  burden  of  others,  we  have  borne  our  own  more  bravely.  (E.  A. 
Washburn,  D.D.)  Burden-bearing : — Galatians  apparently  fond  of  the  law  and 
its  burdens :  at  least,  they  appeared  to  be  ready  to  load  themselves  with  ceremonies, 
and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Moses.  Paul  would  have  them  think  of  other  burdens,  by 
the  bearing  of  which  they  would  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  I.  Community.  •'  Bear 
ye  one  another's  burdens."  1.  Negatively.  It  tacitly  forbids  certain  modes  of 
action.  We  are  not  to  burden  others.  We  are  not  to  spy  out  others'  burdens,  and 
report  thereon.  We  are  not  to  despise  them  for  having  such  loads  to  bear.  We 
are  not  to  go  through  the  world  oblivious  of  the  sorrows  of  others.  2.  Positively. 
We  are  to  share  the  burdens  of  others.  By  compassion  bear  with  their  former  sins 
(ver.  1).  By  patience  bear  with  their  infirmities,  and  even  with  their  conceit  (ver. 
3).  By  sympathy  bear  their  sorrows  (vers.  2,  3).  By  assistance  bear  their  wanta 
(vers.  6,  10).  By  communion,  in  love  and  comfort,  bear  their  struggles.  By  prayer 
and  practical  help  bear  the  burden  of  their  labours,  and  thus  lighten  it  (ver.  6). 
3.  Specially :  We  ought  to  consider — The  erring  brother.  Beferred  to  in  ver.  1  as 
"  overtaken  in  a  fault."  We  must  tenderly  restore  him.  The  provoking  brother, 
who  thinks  himself  to  be  something  (see  ver.  3).  Bear  with  him  :  his  mistake  will 
bring  him  many  a  burden  before  he  has  done  with  it.  The  brother  who  is  peculiarly 
trying  is  to  be  borne  with  to  seventy  times  seven,  even  to  the  measure  of  the  law  of 
Christ.  The  greatly  tried  is  to  have  our  greatest  sympathy.  The  minister  of  Christ 
should  be  released  from  temporal  burdens,  that  he  may  give  himself  wholly  to  the 
burden  of  the  Lord.  II.  Immunity.  "For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden." 
We  shall  not  bear  all  the  burdens  of  others.  We  are  not  so  bound  to  each  other 
that  we  are  partakers  in  wilful  transgression,  or  negligence,  or  rebellion.  1.  Each 
must  bear  his  own  sin  if  he  persists  in  it.  2.  Each  must  bear  his  own  shame, 
which  results  from  his  sin.  3.  Each  must  bear  his  own  responsibility  in  his  own 
sphere.  4.  Each  must  bear  his  own  judgment  at  the  last.  III.  Personality. 
"  Every  man  .  .  .  his  own  burden."  True  godliness  is  a  personal  affair,  and  we 
cannot  cast  off  our  individuality :  therefore,  let  us  ask  for  grace  to  look  well  to  our- 
selves in  the  following  matters : — 1.  Personal  religion.  The  new  birth,  repentance, 
faith,  love,  holiness,  fellowship  with  God,  &c,  are  all  personal.  2.  Personal  self- 
examination.  We  cannot  leave  the  question  of  our  soul's  condition  to  the  judgment 
of  others.  3.  Personal  service.  We  have  to  do  what  no  one  else  can  do.  4. 
Personal  responsibility.  Obligations  cannot  be  transferred.  5.  Personal  effort. 
Nothing  can  be  a  substitute  for  this.  6.  Personal  sorrow.  "  The  heart  knoweth 
its  own  bitterness."  7.  Personal  comfort.  We  need  the  Comforter  for  ourselves, 
and  we  must  personally  look  up  to  the  Lord  for  His  operations.  All  this  belongs 
to  the  Christian,  aud  we  may  judge  ourselves  by  it.  So  bear  your  own  burden  as 
not  to  forget  others.  So  live  as  not  to  come  under  the  guilt  of  other  men's  sins. 
So  help  others  as  not  to  destroy  their  self-reliance.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  Secret 
burdens : — There  is  a  gateway  at  the  entrance  of  a  narrow  passage  in  London,  over 
which  is  written,  "No  burdens  allowed  to  pass  through."  "And  yet  we  do 
pass  constantly  with  ours,"  said  one  friend  to  another,  as  they  turned  up  this 
passage  out  of  a  more  frequented  and  broader  thoroughfare.  They  carried  no 
visible  burdens,  but  they  were  like  many  who,  although  they  have  no  outward  pack 
upon  their  shoulders,  often  stoop  inwardly  beneath  the  pressure  of  a  heavy  load 
upon  the  heart.  The  worst  burdens  are  those  which  never  meet  the  eye.  (Ibid.) 
Sympathy  curative: — When  the  child  was  dead,  and  the  prophet  came  to  heal 
it,  he  stretched  himself  out  on  the  child,  and  put  his  lips  to  the  child's  lips, 
and  his  hand  on  the  child's  hand,  and  his  heart  to  the  child's  heart.  Then 
it  was  that  the  breath  came  back,  and  the  child,  sneezing,  showed  that  life 
was  returning  to  it.  And  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  anything  which  cures 
hearts  in  this  world  besides  other  hearts  laid  upon  them,  brooding  them,  and 
imparting  to  them  something  of  their  own  sympathy  and  goodness.  If  a  heart 
cannot  be  cured  by  a  loving  heart,  it  is  incurable.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  What 
is  included  in  the  term  Burden?  Whatever  makes  right  living,  according  to 
the  law  of  God,  difficult  to  a  sincere  man — that  is  a  burden.  It  may  be  in  his 
mental  constitution ;  it  may  be  in  his  bodily  health  ;  it  may  be  in  the  habits  of  his 
education  ;  it  may  be  in  his  relation  to  worldly  affairs ;  it  may  be  in  his  domestic 
circumstances  ;  it  may  be  in  his  peculiar  liabilities  to  temptation  and  sin.  It  in- 
cludes the  whole  catalogue  of  conditions,  and  influences,  and  causes,  that  weigh. 


«hap.  vi.]  GALATIANS.  469 

men  down,  and  hinder  them,  when  they  are  endeavouring  sincerely  to  live  lives  of 
rectitude.    What  is  the  meaning,  then,  of  Bearing  ?    It  is,  generally,  such  a  course 
of  conduct  towards  our  fellow-men,  as  shall  enable  them  more  easily  to  carry  and 
manage  their  infirmities  and  troubles.    It  is  a  spirit  of  compassion  and  hopefulness 
excited  in  view  of  men's  failures  and  moral  obliquities,  rather  than  a  spirit  of  fault- 
finding and  criticism.    I.  Negatively.     (1)  This  teaching  forbids  all  moral  indiffer- 
ence  to  others.    You  have  no  right  to  be  unconcerned,  whether  men  act  rightly  or 
wrongly — whether  they  are  good  or  bad.    That  spirit  which  says  :  "  I  will  take 
care  of  my  own  self,  and  let  other  men  take  care  of  themselves,"  is  of  the  devil. 
The  spirit  of  God  is  this:  "Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man 
also  on  the  things  of  another."    That  spirit  which  says  of  a  man's  conduct :  "  Oh, 
it  is  his  own  look-out,  not  mine,"  is  un-Christian.    It  is  his  own  look-out ;  but  it 
is  yours,  too.    And  no  man  has  a  right  to  call  himself  a  Christian,  who,  living 
among  men,  finds  that  the  only  thing  he  cares  for  is  himself — that  the  only  things 
that  affect  his  mind  are  moral  considerations  of  his  own  purity  and  his  own  en- 
joyment.   (2)  This  Divine  command  also  forbids  the  spirit  of  hard  judging.    It 
forbids  severity  and  unnecessary  blaming.    If  a  man  does  not  believe,  when  he  has 
done  wrong,  that  he  is  in  the  wrong,  it  is  perfectly  right  for  us  to  apply  the  rule  of 
judgment  to  his  case,  and  convince  him  of  his  error ;  but  we  are  not  to  be  stern, 
nor  harsh,  nor  severe,  but  gentle,  sympathizing,  and  all-loving  and  helpful.    (3) 
The  text  pointedly  excludes  all  manner  of  pleasure  in  the  wrong-doing  of  other 
men.    2.  Positively.    We  are  commanded  to  sympathize  with  men  though  sinful ; 
and  to  have  patience  with  them  on  account  of  their  sins.    We  make  up  our  minds 
to  treat  babes  tenderly,  because  they  are  babes.    We  treat  sick  people  with  greater 
forbearance  than  we  do  the  sound  and  healthy.    We  put  ourselves  out  of  the  way 
for  the  sake  of  those  that  are  blind  and  deaf.    By  as  much  as  men  are  defrauded 
of  any  sense,  or  weakened  in  any  power,  we  afford  them  protection.    By  as  much 
as  men  are  physically  unfortunate,  we  have  learned  how  to  show  them  consider- 
ation and  kindness.    The  same  spirit  must  be  enlarged  in  our  treatment  of  men 
in  respect  to  their  interior  state.    We  must  expand  this  same  rule  of  judgment, 
and  apply  it  to  men's  characters.    If  a  man's  understanding  is  darkened,  and  his 
conscience  is  perverted,  we  are  to  judge  him  accordingly.    1.  Of  course  this  passage 
inculcates  the  largest  spirit  of  sympathy  towards  all  men  in  trouble.    If  any  trouble 
befalls  those  within  the  circuit  of  our  affections,  we  need  no  exhortation  on  this 
point.     Nature  teaches  us  to  bear  the  burdens  of  those  we  love.    But  this  spirit 
should  go  out,  quickened  by  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  beyond  our  own  household. 
Every  human  being  brought  to  our  hands  in  trouble  is  a  messenger  of  God.     His 
trouble  is  a  letter  of  introduction,  his  nature  is  a  declaration  of  brotherhood,  and 
his  destiny  links  him  to  us  with  an  irrefragable  chain  1    2.  This  sympathy  and 
helpfulness  should  not  be  confined  to  troubles  of  "  bereavement " — to  trouble  oc- 
casioned by  "  disasters,"  so-called ;  but  should  include  all  the  affairs  of  life.    And 
the  lowest  should  be  helped  first,  and  the  most  needy  should  be  helped  most.    3. 
But  I  go  further :  for  these  are  things  more  frequently  preached,  and  more  obvious 
to  your  understanding.     I  remark,  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  that  the  spirit  of 
our  text  requires  that,  in  judging  of  men,  and  dealing  with  them,  we  should  recog- 
nise the  constitutional  differences  of  mind  which  exist  among  them,  and  should 
not  seek  to  compel  all  minds  as  if  they  were  like  our  own.    When,  therefore,  you 
go  to  a  man,  as  a  Christian  and  a  benefactor,  to  bear  his  burdens,  you  must  take 
into  consideration  what  his  nature  and  circumstances  have  been.    If  he  has  sunk 
low  in  the  scale  of  being,  you  must  ask,  ••  How  came  he  here  ?    Has  he  not  been 
subjected  to  a  power  of  down-pulling,  such  as  I  can  scarcely  form  any  conception 
of  ?  "    I  think  the  bitterest  reprehensions  of  evil  which  we  hear,  would  be  spared, 
if  men  would  only  reflect  upon  these  things.    4.  We  need  only  to  vary  this  thought 
a  little  to  make  it  apply  to  our  requisitions  in  social  intercourse.    Much  domestic 
untappiuess  comes  from  the  fact  that  people  do  not  know,  or  do  not  enough  recog- 
nize, the  peculiarities  of  each  other's  natures.    They  expect  impossible  things  of 
each  other.     If  a  flaming,  demonstrative  nature,  and  a  cool,  undemonstrative 
nature,  come  together,  neither  of  them  understanding  or  making  allowance  for  the 
peculiarities  of  the  other,  there  can  scarcely  fail  of  being  unhappiness.     5.  We 
are  to  have  a  nice  and  tender  regard  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  men — their 
external  conditions.     The  health  of  men,  and  its  relation  to  their  disposition, 
strength,  fidelity,  and  efficiency,  is  seldom  enough  pondered.     Still  less  is  education 
taken  into  account.     6.  We  must  guard  against  a  judgment  formed  of  men  from 
the  effect  of  their  mind-action  upon  us,  rather  than  from  a  consideration  of  their 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «& 

real  moral  character.  A  man  may  make  yon  feel  happy,  and  yet  be  a  bad  man. 
A  man  may  leave  you  unhappy,  and  yet  be  a  good  man.  Your  sensations  of  pain 
or  pleasure  are  not  to  measure  your  fellow-men's  character.  Selfishness  may  gild 
you  like  sunshine.  Vanity  may  court  you,  aud  pride  may  patronize  you.  Bat  bo, 
too,  conscience  in  a  good  mau  may  leave  you  stirred  up.  Truth  may  put  you  to 
discontent.  7.  The  spirit  of  this  teaching  forbids  us  to  employ  our  rights  of 
pleasure  in  Euch  a  way  as  to  harm  men.  8.  The  spirit  of  this  passage  forbids 
that  we  should  make  the  failings  of  other  men  a  source  of  amusement  to  ourselves. 
To  watch  to  see  what  is  awkward  in  others  ;  to  search  out  the  infirmities  of  men ; 
to  go  out  like  a  street-sweeper,  or  a  universal  scavenger,  to  collect  the  faults  and 
failings  of  people ;  to  carry  these  things  about  as  if  they  were  cherries  or  flowers ; 
to  throw  them  out  of  your  bag  or  pouch,  and  make  them  an  evening  repast,  or  a 
noonday  meal,  or  the  amusement  of  a  social  hour,  enlivened  by  unfeeling  criticism, 
heartless  jests,  and  cutting  sarcasms ;  to  take  a  man  up  as  you  would  a  chicken, 
and  gnaw  his  flesh  from  his  very  bones,  and  then  lay  him  down,  saying  with  fiendish 
exultation,  "  There  is  his  skeleton," — this  is  devilish  1  Concluding  remarks :  1.  No 
man  can  fulfil  the  spirit  of  this  Divine  command,  who  does  not  dwell  in  the  spirit  of 
love.  A  momentary  flush,  kindled  for  the  occasion,  will  not  do.  It  must  pervade 
all  parts  of  the  heart.  It  must  have  long  dwelt  with  you,  until  your  habits  of 
thought,  your  instinctive  judgments,  the  expression  of  your  face,  the  outlook  of 
your  eyes,  and  your  very  tones,  gestures,  and  attitudes,  are  animated  with  it — yea, 
till  it  is  the  spontaneous  and  inevitable  outburst  of  life  in  you.  Then  you  will  be 
able  to  look  at  men  in  the  right  way.  When  you  have  this  abiding  spirit  of  love, 
so  that  all  your  faculties  live  in  it,  and  have  been  drilled  in  it,  then,  no  matter  how 
large  a  duty  seems  to  be,  your  performance  of  it  will  be  just  as  easy.  2.  When 
men  are  so  pervaded,  it  is  not  hard,  but  easy,  for  them  to  bear  other  men's  burdens 

to  be  unselfish  and  unselfishly  benevolent.    When  we  speak  of  things  being  easy 

in  Christian  life,  we  always  imply  the  presence  in  the  soul  of  true  love.  Take  an 
old  gambler — or  a  young  one,  it  makes  no  difference  which ;  for  they  are  both 
alike.  With  him  cheating  is  inevitable.  Gambling  and  cheating  are  only  inter- 
changeable terms.  No  man  gambles  that  does  not  cheat.  After  such  a  man  has 
gone  through  years  and  years  and  years,  practising  his  various  tricks  and  sleights 
of  dexterity,  if  you  talk  in  his  presence  of  a  man  being  honest,  he  will  laugh  at 
you.  He  will  not  believe  that  a  man  can  be  honest ;  or,  if  he  does  believe  it,  he 
will  say  to  himself,  "  What  a  power  a  man  must  require  to  enable  him  to  be  honest. 
Why,  there  was  a  man  who  was  so  situated  that  he  could  have  possessed  himself 
of  a  hundred  thousand  dollars,  by  just  signing  his  name,  and  he  did  not  do  it !  He 
must  have  had  an  almost  omnipotent  power,  or  he  could  not  have  resisted  that 
temptation."  And  if  you  go  to  the  man  who  did  that  thing,  and  ask  him  if  he  did 
not  find  it  hard  to  refuse  the  money,  he  will  say,  "  It  would  have  required  omnipo- 
tence to  make  me  take  it.  I  could  not  do  such  a  thing.  I  could  not  live  with 
myself  after  committing  a  deed  like  that."  Why  ?  Because  he  has  been  trained 
to  the  very  heroism  of  honesty.  It  is  as  inevitable  for  him  to  be  honest  as  it  was 
for  the  other  man  to  be  dishonest.  It  is  not  hard  for  a  really  refined  man  to  be 
refined.  It  is  the  easiest  thing  he  can  do.  If  a  man's  heart  is  pervaded  by  Chris- 
tian love,  it  is  not  hard  for  him  to  perform  the  deeds  and  works  of  Christian  love. 
And  Christian  graces,  as  set  forth  in  the  New  Testament,  imply  this  atmosphere 
of  love  in  the  soul.  If  you  read  gardening  books,  they  direct  you  how  to  raise 
flowers  and  plants ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  read  to  find  out  that  certain 
plants  require  a  certain  kind  of  climate.  The  nature  of  each  plant  implies  the 
particular  kind  of  climate  which  is  adapted  to  its  growth.  You  do  not  need  to  be 
told  that  a  warm  climate  is  indispensable  to  the  production  of  pomegranate  and 
olive-trees.  Now  when  God  says  "  Christian  graces,"  he  means  climate  also  ;  and 
love  is  that  climate.  And  when  a  man  possesses  the  spirit  of  Christian  love,  it  i9 
not  hard  for  him  to  live  the  life  of  a  Christian.  3.  When  we  are  addicted  to  this 
love,  we  every  day  become  more  and  more  like  God.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Bearing 
one  another's  burdens : —  If  a  company  of  travellers  were  journeying  towards 
the  same  place,  some  heavily,  and  others  more  lightly  laden,  they  could 
render  the  way  less  tedious  and  endear  themselves  to  each  other  by  mutual 
assistance,  in  bearing  their  burdens.  1.  We  are  to  do  this,  first  with  regard  to 
the  spiritual  trials  and  difficulties  of  our  brethren.  2.  In  the  second  place,  the 
command  of  our  text  should  be  especially  heeded  in  the  family  relation.  3.  It  is  a 
rule,  also,  very  applicable  to  Christian  Churches.  (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  Indi- 
viduality  and    brollterhood : — Consider — I.   The    soul's   individuality   (ver.    5). 


chap,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  471 

1.  This  is  one  of  the  first  facts  of  which  our  opening  intelligence  informs  us. 

2.  We  carry  it  with  us  everywhere.  3.  It  becomes  more  marked,  and  the  conscious- 
ness of  it  more  painful,  through  the  action  of  sin  and  suffering.  4.  It  is  taught 
by  our  life  work.  5.  It  is  brought  home  most  emphatically  in  the  hour  of  death. 
II.  Individuality  tends  to  despair.  1.  Life  itself  becomes  bearing  a  burden 
when  man  has  to  bear  it  alone.  2.  So  with  the  sense  of  sin.  3.  So  with  our  life 
work.  III.  The  soul's  well-being  is  secured  by  ministebino  to  the  brother- 
bood.  (1)  Not  being  ministered  unto,  (2)  but  in  ministering;  which  is  (a)  to  lighten 
our  own  burdens  and  (6)  to  lighten  others,  so  that  they  may  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ. 
(S.  Pearson,  M.A.)        The  law  of  Christ ; — I.  Every  man  has  a  burden  of  his  own. 

I.  All  are  burdened.  2.  But  all  are  not  burdened  alike.  3.  Our  estimate  of 
human  burdens  is  often  false,  (1)  because  some  are  burdens  which  do  not  appear  to 
be ;  (2)  because  burdens  are  borne  differently  by  different  individuals.  4.  Every 
man  has  a  burden  distinctly  his  own.    5.  His  burden  is  not  necessarily  a  calamity. 

II.  Each  is  to  bear  the  other's  burden.  1.  This  presumes  that  he  is  able  to  do 
so.  Our  individual  burdens  are  not  so  heavy  but  we  have  some  strength  left  to 
give  away.  2.  The  requirement  fits  in  to  the  general  constitution  of  things,  which 
is  based  on  giving  and  receiving,  3.  It  has  its  reason  and  authority  in  our  mental 
constitution,  which  is  formed  to  pity.    4.  Pity  to  others  is  kindness  to  ourselves. 

III.  To  bear  one  another's  burdens  is  to  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  1.  The 
law  of  love.  (1)  Not  a  mere  passionate  excitement  or  fluctuating  sentiment,  (2)  but 
a  living  principle  and  persistent  habit  divinely  begotten  and  sustained.  2.  This 
law  is  emphatically  the  law  of  Christ — "  as  I  have  loved  you."  (1)  Love  of  the 
brotherhood,  (2)  neighbours,  (3)  enemies.  (W.  Stacey,  D.D.)  Our  individual 
burden  often  not  the  heaviest : — An  old  fable  tells  us  that  Jupiter,  finding  that  each 
man  thought  his  lot  the  hardest,  caused  all  men  to  be  brought  together  for  a 
mutual  exchange  of  burdens.  Promptly  they  came  together,  hoping  that  the 
exchange  would  lighten  the  burdens  of  life.  Each  man  proceeded  to  display  his 
sorrow.  One  had  a  concealed  ulcer ;  another  a  sightless  eye ;  another  a  besetting 
Bin ;  another  an  intolerable  debt ;  another  a  fearful  recollection ;  another  an  awful 
apprehension ;  and  when  all  the  burdens  were  exposed  to  view,  and  each  man  bidden 
to  make  his  own  selection,  every  man  preferred  his  own.  ( W.  K.  Marshall.)  Charity 
organisation : — Let  us  organize  against  professional  beggars  and  impostors,  but  let 
us  not  organize  almsgiving  out  of  the  Church  as  if  the  whole  question  were  to  be  solved 
by  the  workhouse.  Our  workhouses,  like  our  hospitals,  may  be  due  to  Christianity, 
and  standing  evidences  of  that  care  for  the  poor  which  Christianity  after  the  example 
of  its  Divine  Founder  enjoins.  But  the  Christian  Church  is  not  to  relegate  all  her 
poor  to  the  workhouse  ;  nor  is  the  relieving  officer  the  substitute  for  the  Christian 
pastor  and  his  Christian  flock.  (Canon  Miller.)  The  blessedness  of  sympathy  and 
the  vice  of  selfishness : — Amid  all  the  profuse  waste  of  the  means  of  happiness  which 
men  commit,  there  is  no  imprudence  more  flagrant  than  that  of  selfishness.  The 
selfish  man  misses  the  sense  of  elevation  and  enlargement  given  by  wide  interests : 
he  misses  the  secure  and  serene  satisfaction  that  attends  continually  on  activities 
directed  towards  ends  more  stable  and  permanent  than  one's  own  happiness  can 
be;  he  misses  the  peculiar,  rich  sweetness,  depending  upon  a  sort  of  complex 
reverberation  of  sympathy,  which  is  always  found  in  services  rendered  to  those 
whom  we  love,  and  who  are  grateful.  He  is  made  to  feel  in  a  thousand  various 
ways,  according  to  the  degree  of  refinement  which  his  nature  has  attained,  the  dis- 
cord between  the  slightness  of  his  own  life  and  of  that  larger  life  of  which  his  own 
is  but  an  insignificant  fraction.  (A .  Sedgwick.)  Tlie  difficulty  of  helpfulness  arising 
from  the  suspicion  of  others  : — Just  imagine  a  weary,  footsore  traveller  tugging  along 
with  his  pack  on  a  hot  summer's  day.  A  waggon  comes  up,  and  the  kind-hearted 
owner  calls  out,  "  Friend,  you  look  tired.  Toss  that  pack  into  my  waggon ;  I  am 
going  your  way."  But  the  wayfarer,  eyeing  him  suspiciously,  mutters  to  himself, 
"  He  wants  to  steal  it ; "  or  else  obstinately  replies,  *'  I  am  obliged  to  you,  Bir,  but  I 
can  carry  my  own  luggage."  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  The  blessedness  of  burden 
bearing : — How  few  know  the  mystery  that  shadowed  Lamb's  life !  We  are  told 
that  one  day,  in  a  fit  of  insanity,  his  sister  killed  a  member  of  their  family.  The 
affair  was  hushed  up,  and  things  went  on  to  outward  seeming  very  much  as  before. 
The  insane  fury  recurred  but  seldom,  and  was  unsuspected  by  many  intimate 
friends.  But  all  the  same  it  was  there,  a  latent  possibility,  and  it  marked  out  a 
narrow  pathway  in  which  she  would  have  to  go  softly  to  the  end  of  her  days. 
Charles,  with  opportunities  of  social  advancement  and  domestic  happiness  possessed 
by  few  within  easy  reach  of    him  if  he  chose,  preferred  the  "  better  part,"  and 


47»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yt. 

resolutely  shutting  out  the  bright  future  that  might  have  been  his,  sacrificed  him. 
self  to  his  sister.  He  never  married,  but  spent  his  life  in  an  affectionate  guardian- 
ship of  the  dear  one  whose  misfortune  he  made  his  own.  Shall  such  renunciation 
go  unrewarded?  Nay,  are  they  not  their  own  exceeding  great  reward.  (F.  Hastings.) 
Sympathy  for  others : — Though  the  lower  animals  have  feeling,  they  have  no 
fellow-feeling.  Have  not  I  seen  the  horse  enjoy  his  feed  of  corn  when  his  yoke- 
fellow lay  a-dying  in  the  neighbouring  stall,  and  never  turn  an  eye  of  pity  on  the 
sufferer?  They  have  strong  passions,  but  no  sympathy.  It  is  said  that  the  wounded 
deer  sheds  tears,  but  it  belongs  to  man  only  to  "  weep  with  them  that  weep,"  and 
by  sympathy  to  divide  another's  sorrows,  and  double  another's  joys.  When  thunder, 
following  the  dazzling  flash,  has  burst  among  our  hills,  when  the  horn  of  the 
Switzer  has  rung  in  his  glorious  valleys,  when  the  boatman  has  shouted  from  the 
bosom  of  a  rock-girt  loch,  wonderful  were  the  echoes  I  have  heard  them  make;  but 
there  is  no  echo  so  fine  or  wonderful  as  that,  which,  in  the  sympathy  of  human 
hearts,  repeats  the  cry  of  another's  sorrow,  and  makes  me  feel  his  pain  almost  as 
if  it  were  my  own.  They  say,  that  if  a  piano  is  struck  in  a  room  where  another 
stands  unopened  and  untouched,  who  lays  his  ear  to  that  will  hear  a  string  within, 
as  if  touched  by  the  hand  of  a  shadowy  spirit,  sound  the  same  note ;  but  more 
strange  how  the  strings  of  one  heart  vibrate  to  those  of  another ;  how  woe  wakens 
woe:  how  your  grief  infects  me  with  sadness;  how  the  shadow  of  a  passing  funeral 
and  nodding  hearse  casts  a  cloud  on  the  mirth  of  a  marriage-party ;  how  sympathy 
may  be  so  delicate  and  acute  as  to  become  a  pain.  There  is,  for  example,  the  well- 
authenticated  case  of  a  lady  who  could  not  even  hear  the  description  of  a  severe 
surgical  operation,  but  she  felt  all  the  agonies  of  the  patient,  grew  paler  and  paler, 
and  shrieked  and  fainted  under  the  horrible  imagination.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Real 
burden-bearing : — A  poor  woman  was  reduced  to  extreme  poverty  by  the  loss  of  her 
cow,  her  only  means  of  support.  A  neighbour,  who  was  unable  to  give  aid, 
personally  went  round  to  different  friends  to  solicit  money  to  buy  another  one.  He 
went  from  one  to  another,  and  told  the  pitiful  tale.  Each  offered  sorrow  and  regret, 
but  none  practical  assistance.  He  became  impatient  after  being  answered  as  usual 
by  a  plentiful  shower  of  feeling,  and  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  yes,  I  don't  doubt  your  feel- 
ing ;  but  you  don't  feel  in  the  right  place."  "  Oh  !  "  said  he,  "  I  feel  with  all  my 
heart  and  soul."  "  Yes,  yes,"  replied  the  solicitor,  "  I  don't  doubt  that  either ;  but 
I  want  you  to  feel  in  your  pocket."     (Foster.) 

Ver.  3.  For  if  a  man  think  himself  to  be  something',  when  he  Is  nothing,  he 
deceiveth  himself. — Caution  against  over  self-estimation : — These  words  admit  of 
two  different  interpretations,  according  as  you  connect  the  middle  with  the  first  or 
with  the  last  clause.  1.  If  we  connect  the  middle  clause  with  the  first  one,  as  our 
traaslators  have  done,  the  meaning  is,  "  If  a  man  think  himself  to  be  a  Christian 
of  a  high  order,  while  he  either  is  not  a  Christian  at  all,  or,  at  any  rate,  a  Christian 
of  a  very  inferior  order,  he  commits  an  important  mistake  and  falls  into  a 
hazardous  error.  The  man  who  supposes  himself  arrived  at  the  measure  of  the 
stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ,  when  in  reality  only  a  babe  in  Christ,  deceives 
himself,  and  throws  important  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his  own  improvement. 
In  their  own  estimation  they  have  little  to  learn,  while  the  truth  is,  they  have 
learned  but  little.  But  the  mistake  is  much  more  deplorable  when  a  man  flatters 
himself  into  the  belief  that  he  is  a  Christian,  perhaps  a  Christian  of  the  first  order, 
while  in  reality  he  is  not  a  Christian  at  all.  The  thing  is  quite  possible — I  fear 
not  uncommon.  We  pity  the  poor  maniac  mendicant  who  thinks  himself  a  king  ; 
we  pity  the  man  who  has  persuaded  himself  he  is  a  man  of  wealth,  while  in  reality 
he  is  in  immediate  hazard  of  bankruptcy ;  we  pity  the  man  who  is  assuring  himself 
of  long  life,  whe»  he  is  tottering  on  the  brink  of  the  grave ;  but  how  much  more  to 
be  pitied  is  the  man  who  thinks  himself  secure  of  the  favour  of  God,  and  of  eternal 
happiness,  while  in  reality  the  wrath  of  God  is  abiding  on  him,  and  a  miserable 
eternity  lies  before  him  I  No  kinder  office  can  be  done  to  such  a  person  than  to 
arouse  him  from  his  state  of  carnal  security,  to  undeceive  him,  to  convince  him  of 
his  wants  while  they  may  be  supplied,  of  his  danger  while  it  may  be  averted.  A 
woe  is  denounced  against  such  as  are  thus  at  ease  in  Zion.  2.  Perhaps,  how- 
ever, the  apostle's  meaning  is,  "  If  any  man  think  he  is  something,  he 
deceiveth  himself,  for  he  is  nothing."  The  apostle  is  cautioning  the  Gala- 
tianB  against  a  vainglorious  disposition ;  and  in  this  verse  I  apprehend  he 
means  that  the  habitual  indulgence  of  vainglory  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the 
possession  of  genuine  Christianity.    Humility  is  a  leading  trait  in  the  character  ot 


taut,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  472 


every  genuine  Christian.  He  knows  and  believes  that  he  is  guilty  before  the  God 
of  heaven  exceedingly,  and  he  feels  that  he  is  an  ignorant,  foolish,  depraved 
ereature,  that  of  himself  he  is  nothing,  less  than  nothing,  and  vanity.  Feeling 
thus  his  insignificance  as  a  creature,  and  his  demerit  and  depravity  as  a  sinner,  he 
is  not — he  cannot  be — vainglorious.  Whatever  he  is  that  is  good,  he  knows  God 
has  made  him  to  be.  Whatever  he  has  that  is  good,  he  knows  God  ha3 
given  him.  The  falls  of  others  excite  in  him  not  self-glorification,  but  grati- 
tude. (John  Brown,  D.D.)  Self-magnifiers  : — A  friend  had  fitted  two  glasses 
into  a  little  ivory  tub8  in  such  a  way  that  any  small  object,  like  a  midge  or 
other  insect,  when  put  into  it,  and  viewed  through  the  smaller  and  upper  glass, 
seemed  of  enormous  magnitude,  with  all  its  parts,  however  diminutive,  distinctly 
visible.  If,  however,  the  tube  was  reversed,  and  the  objects  contemplated  through 
the  larger  glass,  they  then  appeared  to  shrink  below  the  usual  size.  Gotthold 
looked  upon  the  contrivance  with  no  ordinary  pleasure,  and  said :  "  I  know  not 
what  better  name  to  give  this  instrument  than  '  the  magnifier.'  "  In  my  opinion, 
however,  the  hearts  of  the  proud  and  of  the  hypocritical  are  of  the  same  construc- 
tion. When  they  contemplate  what  is  their  own — their  virtues  and  talents — they 
see  through  a  glass  which  self-love  has  so  artfully  prepared  that  all  seems  of  vast 
dimensions,  and  they  imagine  that  they  have  good  reason  to  boast  and  congratulate 
themselves  upon  their  gifts.  If,  however,  they  have  occasion  to  look  at  their  neigh- 
bour and  his  good  points,  they  turn  the  instrument  upside  down,  and  then  all  seems 
small  and  commonplace.  In  like  manner,  their  own  faults  and  vices  they  observe 
through  the  diminishing  glass,  and  reckon  them  very  inconsiderable ;  while  they 
contemplate  their  neighbour's  from  the  opposite  side,  and  so  convert  a  midge  into 
an  elephant.  The  greatest  of  all  delusions  in  the  world  is  that  which  man  volun- 
tarily practises  upon  himself ,  and  which  betrays  him,  with  his  eyes  open,  into  pride, 
self-esteem,  and  contempt  of  others.  You  will  own  that  the  heart  of  the  Pharisee, 
who  looked  upon  himself  as  a  mighty  Faint,  and  upon  the  publican  as  a  brand  fit 
for  the  burning,  was  of  this  description.  That  Pharisee,  however,  has  left  behind 
him  a  numerous  breed,  and  spread  his  line  over  the  whole  earth.  In  fact,  I  do  not 
believe  there  exists  a  man  who  has  not  sometimes  used  such  an  instrument  in  the 
way  we  have  described.  (Scriver.)  Self-deception  : — Boswell  relates  that  Dr. 
Johnson  told  him  that  when  his  father's  workshop,  which  was  a  detached  building, 
had  partly  fallen  down  for  want  of  being  repaired,  he  was  no  less  diligent  to  lock 
th.e  door  every  night,  though  he  saw  that  anybody  might  walk  in  at  the  back.  Even 
so  do  many  persons,  guarding  themselves  against  one  approach  of  sin  only,  while 
they  are  exposed  to  danger  from  some  other  point,  vainly  suppose  themselves  safe 
from  their  spiritual  foes.  (R.  Brewin.)  I.  Men  are  nothing  of  themselves. 
1.  The  gifts  of  God,  whether  of  nature  or  grace,  are  not  ours,  but  God's.  2.  In  the 
use  of  th»3e  gifts  the  best  fall  far  short  of  what  they  ought  to  be  (1  Cor.  xv.  10 ;  viii. 
2).  II.  Though  men  are  nothing,  tet  they  seem  to  be  something,  and  that  of 
themselves.  This  arises  from — (1)  Pride ;  (2)  the  excessive  consideration  of  our 
good  things ;  (3)  the  comparing  of  ourselves  with  the  infirmities  of  others  ;  (4)  the 
flattery  of  men.  III.  In  so  doing,  men  deceive  themselves.  Self-deception  is — 
(1)  The  worst  deception  (James  i.  22,  26) ;  (2)  the  most  dangerous  deception ;  (3) 
self- degradation  ;  (4)  spiritual  impotence.  Conceit  is  fatal  to  the  duty  of  burden- 
bearing,  for  it  is  the  death  of  love.  IV.  The  remedies  against  the  overweening 
op  ourselves.  1.  To  look  ourselves  in  the  glass  of  the  law  (1  Cor.  iii.  18).  2.  To 
remember  that  the  gifts  on  which  we  pride  ourselves  are  ours  only  for  a  time  (Luke 
xvi.  2),  and  for  the  use  of  them  we  shall  be  held  responsible.  3.  To  compare  our- 
selves with  God's  majesty  (Psa.  viii.  4).  (R.  Cudworth.)  Self-complacency: — One 
day  Narcissus,  who  had  resisted  all  the  charms  of  others,  came  to  an  open  fountain 
of  silvery  clearness.  He  stooped  down  to  drink,  and  saw  his  own  image,  and 
thought  it  some  beautiful  water-spirit  living  in  the  fountain.  He  gazed,  and 
admired  the  eyes,  the  neck,  the  hair,  the  lips.  He  fell  in  love  with  himself.  In 
vain  he  sought  a  kiss  and  an  embrace.  He  talked  to  the  charmer,  but  received  no 
response.  He  could  not  break  the  fascination,  and  so  he  pined  away  and  died.  The 
moral  is,  Think  not  too  much  nor  too  highly  of  yourself.  A  man's  talk  better  than 
himself: — A  hungry  man  once  caught  and  killed  a  nightingale  that  filled  a  grove 
with  its  song.  A  bird  that  makes  so  much  noise,  thought  he,  must  be  something. 
So  he  plucked  it.  And  lo  !  it  was  no  bigger  than  a  sparrow.  "  Ah  !"  said  the  man, 
"  I  see  what  you  are.  You  are  voice  and  nothing  else."  So  it  is  with  not  a  few. 
They  are  full  of  vauntings,  they  talk  of  their  goodness,  their  liberality.  .  .  .  the 
whole  parish  rings  with  the  praises  of  themselves,  whicn  they  warble  so  well.     But 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».    4. 

pluck  them,  strip  them  of  all  appearances,  and  yon  will  find  them  "  voice  and 
nothing  else."    A  great  deal  of  talk,  and  very  little  action.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.) 

Ver.  4.  But  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work. — Faithful  self-examination  :— 
Let  us  be  careful  to  get  the  true  balance  to  weigh  ourselves.  There  are  the  scales 
in  which  the  world  weighs  men  and  things,  and  decides  their  amount  of  good  or 
evil.  But  these,  or  the  like  balance,  are  so  appended  to  the  beam  as  to  favour  one 
scale  more  than  the  other.  They  will  therefore  deceive  ua  in  forming  our  estimate 
of  things ;  for  sin,  when  put  into  them,  and  love  for  God,  and  devotedness  to  Him, 
like  two  feathers  cast  into  the  scale,  will  weigh  so  light  that  they  will  kick  tbe 
beam  when  the  meanest  worldly  trifle  is  weighed  against  them,  while  the  scale  in 
which  the  world  weighs  their  virtues  will  have  a  vast  preponderance  in  their  favour. 
There  is  also  the  balance  of  conscience,  and  this  is  more  false  and  deceitful  (if 
possible)  than  the  other.  The  conscience  of  the  natural  man  is  like  a  fraudulent 
man  with  false  weights  and  measures,  from  whom  we  shall  be  sure  to  have  no  just 
weight.  We  must  therefore  take  the  golden  balance  of  the  sanctuary.  Here, 
indeed,  even  our  best  services,  when  weighed  with  the  law  of  God,  will  be  found 
wauting ;  but  the  fulness  of  the  redemption  in  the  blood  of  Jesns,  the  freeness  of 
His  promises  to  every  repenting  sinner,  the  merit  of  His  sinleBS  obedience — these, 
on  which  the  believer  builds  his  hopes,  however  nicely  weighed  in  the  balance  of 
truth,  will  want  nothing  of  that  true  weight  whioh  the  justice  of  God  will  demand 
at  our  hands.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  Necessity  of  self-examination: — The  reason  why 
there  is  so  little  self-condemnation  is  because  there  is  so  little  self-examination. 
For  want  of  this  many  persons  are  like  travellers,  skilled  in  other  countries,  but 
ignorant  of  their  own.  (Archbishop  Seeker.)  True  self-examination : — Around  the 
masterpieces  in  the  galleries  of  Europe  artists  are  always  congregated.  You  may 
see  them  standing  before  Raphael's  transfiguration,  copying  with  the  nicest  care 
every  line  and  tint  of  that  matchless  work,  glancing  constantly  from  their  canvas 
to  the  picture,  that,  even  in  the  minutest  parts,  they  may  reproduce  the  original. 
But  if,  at  one  side,  you  saw  an  artist  who  only  looked  up  occasionally  from  his 
work  and  drew  a  line,  but  filled  in  there  a  tree  or  a  waterfall,  and  there  a  deer  or  a 
cottage,  just  as  his  fancy  suggested,  what  kind  of  a  copyist  would  you  call  him  ? 
Now,  true  self-examination  lies  in  ascertaining  how  nearly  we  are  reproducing 
Christ.  He  has  painted  for  us  in  no  gallery ;  but  His  life  glows  fourfold  in  the 
Gospels,  and  our  hearts  are  the  canvas  upon  which  we  are  to  copy  it.  Let  us  not 
take  occasional  glimpses,  and  work  meanwhile  upon  earthly  designs;  but  let  us 
look  long  and  earnestly  till  our  lives  reflect  the  whole  Divine  image.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Dread  of  self-examination : — As  it  is  an  evidence  that  those  tradesmen 
are  embarrassed  in  their  estates,  who  are  afraid  to  look  into  their  books,  so  it  is 
plain  that  there  is  something  wrong  within,  among  all  those  who  are  afraid  to  look 
within.  ...  He  that  buys  a  jewel  in  a  case  deserves  to  be  cozened  with  a  Bristol 
stone.  (Archbishop  Seeker.)  Urgency  of  self-examination : — Remember  that  the 
time  you  have  for  self-examination  is,  after  all,  very  short.  Soon  thou  wilt  know 
the  great  secret.  I  may  not  say  words  rough  enough  to  rend  off  the  mask  which 
thou  hast  now  upon  thee ;  but  there  is  one  called  Death  who  will  stand  no  compli- 
ment.  You  may  masquerade  it  out  to-day  in  the  dress  of  a  saint ;  but  Death  will 
soon  strip  you,  and  you  must  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  after  Death  has  dis- 
covered you  in  all  your  nakedness,  be  that  naked  innocence  or  naked  guilt.  (G.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  True  and  false  standards  of  character : — L  The  false  standard  of 
character.  There  is  a  very  common  mode  of  judging  of  ourselves  and  our 
friends  which  is  in  itself  utterly  false  and  unsatisfactory;  I  mean  that  mode  of 
estimating  character  and  works,  not  by  what  these  are  in  themselves,  but  by  what 
they  are  in  comparison  with  the  life  of  others.  "  I  may  not  be  what  I  ought  to  he," 
a  man  says ;  ••  but,  side  by  side  with  my  neighbour,  I  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed." 
The  picture  seems  fairer  if  it  has  a  dark  background ;  and  we  fall  into  the  habit  of 
measuring  our  own  goodness  by  other  men's  want  of  goodness.  Instead  of  making 
conscience  the  standard  of  duty,  they  practically  make  other  men's  want  of  con- 
science the  standard.  They  have  no  sorrow  or  compunction  for  anything  they 
have  done  or  left  undone,  so  long  as  they  can  point  to  others  who  are  more  to  blame 
than  themselves — as  if  health  were  to  be  measured,  not  by  the  pulse  and  vigour  of 
the  patient,  but  by  the  feverishness  and  insensibility  of  another  patient  lying  at  his 
side  1  II.  Thb  true  standard  of  character.  Let  every  man  prove  his  own  work ; 
let  him  test  it  on  its  own  merits  and  for  its  own  sake  ;  and  let  it  be  judged,  not  by 
the  indolence  and  failures  of  others,  but  by  its  own  character  and  worth.    This 


chap,  n.]  6ALATIANS.  47S 

method  of  judgment,  whereby  every  man  must  prove  his  own  work,  is  in  accordance 
with  facts  of  the  spiritual  world ;  for  "  every  man  must  bear  his  own  burden."  The 
character  is  the  outcome  of  a  man's  life  and  labours.  What  the  man  is,  is  really 
the  fruit  of  what  he  does,  and  of  what  he  thinks  and  speaks  day  by  day.  The 
character  of  every  man  is  the  measure  of  his  works.  The  character  will  continue 
to  tell  what  a  man's  life  has  been,  and  what  in  its  inmost  nature  it  continues  to  be. 
And  in  this  matter  each  man  bears  his  own  burden — a  burden  in  which  others  may 
sympathize,  but  which  no  human  sympathy  can  relieve  him  of.  God  has  made 
visible  in  man  His  eternal  law,  that  every  man's  own  work  is  proved,  so  »s  to  give 
him  rejoicing  or  sorrow,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  himself,  and  not  in  another.  And 
there  is  all  the  more  need  to  test  and  prove  our  own  work,  that  the  time  for  doing 
our  work  is  fast  passing  away.  Our  influence  is  gradually,  and  in  modes  unnoticed 
and  unseen,  pervading  all  around  us  ;  and  that  influence  for  good  and  evil  is  what 
we  are  responsible  for.  (A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Self-examination: — Mind  is  the 
principal  distinguishing  attribute  of  man.  This  undying  principle  enables  us  to 
reflect  on  our  condition  as  accountable  creatures,  and  on  the  connection  between 
our  present  state  and  final  destiny.  It  is  to  man,  thus  constituted,  that  Divine 
revelation  is  addressed.  It  regards  him  as  capable  of  reasoning  as  well  as  feeling. 
Every  man  is  required  to  prove  his  own  work.  Those  who  most  need  this  counsel  will 
probably  least  feel  their  need  of  it,  which  is  the  strongest  argument  for  attempting 
to  enforce  it.  The  text  prescribes  an  important  measure,  and  enforces  it  by  weighty 
considerations.  Let  us  advert — I.  To  the  measure  which  it  prescribes.  "  Let 
every  man  prove  his  own  work,"  This  seems  to  imply  that  every  man  should  be 
seriously  concerned  to  ascertain  his  own  real  character  and  condition  before  God ; 
and  that  in  order  to  this  he  should  carefully  examine  both  his  principles  and  prac- 
tice, his  heart  and  life,  and  thus  prove  his  own  work.  Probably  there  is  in  these 
words  an  allusion  to  the  process  of  proving  the  genuineness  of  metals,  by  putting 
them  to  the  test.  1.  The  text  supposes  the  existence  of  an  authorized  test.  In  the 
absence  of  a  test  the  process  of  proof  is  impracticable.  Every  man  must  have  some 
rule  by  which  to  try  his  work,  or  he  cannot  prove  his  own  work.  The  Word  of  God, 
and  nothing  but  the  Word  of  God,  is  the  authorized  test  of  Christian  character. 
2.  It  requires  the  application  of  this  test  by  every  man  to  himself.  The  application 
of  this  test  includes  two  things,  namely,  the  examination  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the 
examination  of  ourselves  by  the  Scriptures.  If  either  of  these  is  neglected,  the 
examination  is  but  partial.  II.  The  motives  by  which  this  measure  is  enforced. 
Beyond  the  obvious  importance  and  necessity  of  this  self-scrutiny,  the  apostle 
adduces  two  considerations  to  prompt  every  man  to  the  adoption  of  the  measure. 
1.  He  adduces  the  advantage  that  may  arise  from  it  at  present.  "  Then  shall  he 
have  rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  another."  The  apostle  supposes  a 
favourable  result  of  the  investigation,  and  in  this  case  he  affirms  it  would  yield 
peculiar  satisfaction  and  joy.  He  whose  own  work  is  thus  proved  to  be  genuine 
has  just  ground  for  rejoicing.  (1)  As  it  respects  the  question  decided.  Many  question? 
•bout  which  we  often  perplex  our  minds  and  waste  our  time  are  after  all  but  trifling, 
comparatively  very  trifling !  But  in  the  case  before  us  the  question  is  of  the  highest 
importance,  of  infinite  moment.  The  extremes  of  bliss  and  woe,  immortal  bliss 
and  endless  woe,  are  involved  in  this  question.  (2)  As  it  respects  the  manner  of 
deciding  it.  "  Then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  another." 
His  rejoicing  arises  from  the  testimony  of  his  own  conscience,  and  not  from  the 
opinion  of  others  respecting  him.  He  has  not  rested  in  the  vain  conceit 
of  his  own  imagination.  2.  He  adduces  the  nature  of  the  proceedings  of  the 
last  great  day.  "For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  Having  endea- 
voured to  explain  the  measure  which  the  text  prescribes,  and  the  motives  by  which 
it  enforces  this  measure,  I  shall  close  by — 1.  Urging  its  immediate  adoption.  2. 
By  attempting  to  obviate  some  difficulties  attending  it.  In  undertaking  and  prose- 
cuting an  examination  of  ourselves,  we  shall  probably  discover  many  and  great 
defects.  If  the  trial  be  impartial,  this  will  certainly  be  the  case.  (Essex  Congre- 
gational Remembrancer.)  Self-proving  ? — I.  A  duty.  Our  work  is  good,  and 
approved  by  God,  if  it  have — 1.  A  good  ground,  viz.,  the  will  and  Word  of  God, 
and  not  will-worship  and  human  invention.  2.  A  good  performance.  Sincere,  as 
in  the  presence  of  God,  and  with  an  honest  heart.  3.  A  good  end.  (1)  God's  glory 
(1  Cor.  x.  30).  (2)  Our  brother's  good  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  II.  A  privilege.  1.  Inde- 
pendence of  men.  2.  The  blessed  testimony  of  a  good  conscience  (2  Cor.  i.  12). 
Hence  learn — (1)  That  if  we  would  have  a  light  heart  we  must  approve  ourselves 
onto  God.    (2)  That  the  common  estimate  of  religion  as  gloomy  is  false  (Prov.  xv. 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [oha».  Yl 

15 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18).  (3)  That  there  is  much  spurious  joy  in  the  world,  which  arises, 
not  from  within,  but  without.  There  are  those  (a)  who  rejoice  in  the  opinions  of 
others ;  (b)  in  the  fact  that  they  have  not  been  open  offenders ;  (c)  in  the  virtue 
of  their  ancestors  (John  viii.  33 ;  Matt.  iii.  9) ;  (d)  in  that  others  are  worse  than 
themselves.    (R.  Cudworth.) 

Yer.  5.  For  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden. — Here  are  some  of  the  bur- 
dens which  each  man  must  bear  for  himself  alone : — 1.  The  burden  of  personality. 
Each  individual  is  open  to  manifold  influence — may  be  impressed,  drawn,  turned, 
melted,  inflamed,  according  to  the  powers  that  play  upon  him  ;  but  he  is  himself  in 
all.  He  abides  in  the  eye  of  God  a  separate,  complete,  individual  soul  for  ever. 
2.  The  burden  of  responsibility.  This  arises  of  necessity  out  of  the  personality. 
Man  is  moral,  therefore  responsible.  The  separate  threads  of  each  one's  life  are 
singled  out  by  God  for  judgment.  3.  The  burden  of  guilt.  Where  guilt  gathers, 
there  guilt  must  rest  until  God  shall  remove  it.  And  what  a  load  it  is.  'Tis  this 
which  turns  the  moisture  into  the  drought  of  summer,  which  breaks  the  bones, 
drinks  up  the  spirit,  weakens  strength  by  the  way,  quenches  the  light  of  hope,  and 
cleaves  aud  clings  to  the  soul  a  burden  of  present  judgment,  and  daily  foretelling  of 
doom.  4.  Immortality  is  a  man's  own  burden.  Each  is  to  live  for  ever — his  own 
life  and  not  another's :  carrying  forward  with  him  through  eternity  its  accumu- 
lating elements  of  happiness  or  woe.  (A.  Raleigh.  D.D.)  The  individual  burden : — 
A  man  often  ceases  to  feel  it  for  a  while.  He  mingles  in  some  great  and  gay 
assemblage,  and  for  the  time  feels  as  though  his  personality  were  gone,  or  in 
suspense.  He  is  not  as  a  separate  drop,  he  is  lost  in  an  ocean  of  life.  But  in  a 
little  while  the  great  assemblage  melts  all  away — only  the  individuals  are  left ; 
that  which  they  constituted  when  they  were  together  has  gone  for  ever ;  and  the 
man  whose  life  seemed  to  be  almost  absorbed  and  lost  in  an  ocean  of  multitudin- 
ous existence — where  is  he  now  ?  He  is  going  home  there  pensively  under  the 
shadow  of  the  trees,  and  deeply  conscious  of  himself;  with  his  own  joys  and 
sorrows,  with  his  own  thoughts  and  plans,  with  his  soul  in  all  its  powers  and  affec- 
tions untouched.  He  is  bearing  his  own  burden.  Or,  in  a  time  of  sorrow,  other 
souls  come  around  with  watchful  yearning  love.  He  has  letters  breathing  the 
intensest  sympathy.  He  has  visits  of  sincere  and  sorrowing  affection,  or  he  has  in 
the  house  with  him  those  who  feel  so  deeply  and  truly  with  himself  that  they 
hardly  seem  to  be  divided  in  the  grief.  But,  the  letters  are  read,  the  visits  are 
paid,  the  tears  are  shed,  and  then — he  retires  into  his  personality,  and  feels  that  his 
sorrow  is  his  own,  that  none  can  tell  the  loss  to  him,  that  none  can  feel  as  he  feels, 
that  he  possesses  his  sorrow  because  he  possesses  his  soul,  and  that  he,  as  every 
man,  shall  bear  his  own  burden.  A  man  is  born  alone — has  his  being  moulded 
with  God's  plastic  hand,  has  all  his  powers  implanted,  and  the  awful  image  of 
God  impressed,  to  be  carried  in  glory  or  in  ruin  for  ever.  In  all  the  stages  really, 
and  in  all  the  critical  and  important  times  of  his  life  consciously,  he  is  alone,  as 
distinct  as  a  tree  in  the  forest,  separate  as  a  star  in  the  sky.  And  in  death  he 
leaveth  all  his  friends,  and  goeth  out  along  the  darksome  valley  without  a  hand  to 
help,  without  a  voice  to  cheer — when  the  dying  really  oomes.  He  goeth  out  bear- 
ing his  own  burden  of  life  from  one  world  into  another — from  the  things  which 
are  seen  to  the  things  which  are  not  seen,  from  those  which  are  temporal  to  those 
which  are  eternal.  .  .  .  We  must  think  of  this  if  we  wish  to  be  faithful  and  true 
men.  It  may  be  to  some  the  taking  up  of  the  cross  ;  but  it  must  be  done.  Let  a 
man  examine  himself.  Let  him  sit  down  to  weigh  his  burden  and  think :  "  I  am 
one — personal,  complete.  I  cannot  mingle  my  being  in  a  general  tide.  I  cannot 
lose  one  atom  of  my  personality.  I  must  be  myself  for  ever !  "  (Ibid.)  The 
believer's  freight : — The  Greek  word  (Qopriov)  is  different  from  the  word  translated 
"burden  "  [fiapoq)  in  (ver.  2;  and  signifies  "  a  burden  or  load,  especially  a  ship's 
freight  or  lading."  Paul  was  a  native  of  Tarsus,  which  was  situated  on  the 
Cydnus,  about  twenty  miles  from  the  sea ;  and,  in  Paul's  time,  was  in  the  Eastern 
basin  of  the  Mediterranean  almost  what  Marseilles  was  in  the  Western.  It  was  a 
place  of  much  commerce ;  and  St.  Basil  describes  it  as  a  point  of  union  for  Syrians 
Cilicians,  Isaurians,  and  Cappadocians.  Such  was  the  city  in  which  Paul  was 
born  and  brought  up,  and  from  which  he  must  have  repeatedly  sailed  as  a  passen- 
ger in  merchant  ships  going  from  one  port  to  another  to  take  in  or  unlade  their 
freight  (^opri'ov).  And  thus,  from  his  very  childhood,  Paul  must  have  been  quite 
familiar  with  this  word  as  signifying  a  ship's  freight,  and  he  could  scarcely  evei 
have  connected  it  with  any  other  idea  than  that  of  something  precious  and  valuable. 


'.  n.]  GALATIANS.  477 

This  is  the  only  place  in  his  writings  in  which  he  uses  the  word.  May  we  not  sup. 
pose  that  he  here  compares  believers  to  vessels  carrying  off  their  respective  freights, 
varying  in  value ;  and  that  he  means,  by  this  nautical  phrase,  that  each  one  will 
receive  his  due  reward  at  the  last  day?  Elsewhere  he  speaks  of  the  believer's 
receiving  a  "  burden  (j3apoc)  of  glory,"  which  is  a  somewhat  similar  figure,  and 
certainly  not  less  harsh  to  our  ears  than  the  one  here  used  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  Thus 
translated,  the  connection  is  clear.  Let  each  one  take  care  to  have  his  ground  of 
rejoicing  in  his  own  consistent  life,  and  not  in  the  falls  of  others ;  and  this  is  the 
reason  why  he  should  do  so — viz. ,  that  each  one  will  have  a  reward  acoording  to 
what  his  own  hfe  has  been,  without  reference  to  what  the  lives  of  his  brethren 
were.  (John  Venn,  M.A.)  The  separate  burden  of  each  soul: — I  hope  you  will 
not  associate  with  burden-bearing  anything  menial  or  degraded.  Eemember  that 
our  Blessed  Saviour  consecrated  labour  with  the  axe  and  the  adze  and  the  mallet 
at  Nazareth ;  and  labour  is  a  crown  of  glory,  never  of  degradation.  Everybody, 
high  or  humble,  ought  to  have  some  work  to  do.  I  remember  how,  in  the  days  of 
the  old  dispensation  in  America,  before  slavery  committed  suicide,  I  was  once  the 
guest  of  a  hospitable  planter,  and  I  stood  by  the  river  bank  and  watched  the  long 
line  of  negro  men  and  women  carrying  bags  of  rice  on  their  heads  to  load  a  vessel, 
and  chanting  the  rich  melodious  song  with  which  Africa's  daughters  seem  to  have 
cheered  themselves  in  the  hours  of  their  bondage.  They  were  carrying  their  bur- 
dens. I  went  into  the  house,  and  the  head  of  the  family  said  to  me,  very  thought- 
fully ;  "  Sir,  it  is  a  tremendous  tiling  to  be  the  owner  of  a  hundred  immortal 
beings."  That  was  his  burden  then.  The  burden  in  the  one  case  was  physical, 
and  in  the  other  mental,  moral,  spiritual.  Well,  in  the  same  way,  everybody  has 
his  own  burden.  Bear  that  in  mind.  The  merchant  goes  to-morrow  to  his  ware- 
house, and  he  says,  "What  an  easy  time  my  porter  has  I  He  has  nothing  to  do 
but  to  load  up  the  dray.  He  has  no  care.  What  an  easy  time  my  clerk  has — my 
book-keeper.  He  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  perform  my  work  and  receive  his  salaiy, 
and  I  have  the  care  of  the  whole  establishment."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  says  the 
workman :  "  What  an  easy  time  my  master  has.  He  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  ride 
here  in  his  carriage,  and  sign  cheques,  and  go  home  to  his  country  seat."  Ah,  and 
the  brain  of  the  employer  is  the  bread  of  the  workman,  and  the  toil  of  the  workman 
is  the  prosperity  of  the  master.  Capital  and  labour  God  has  joined  together,  and 
what  God  has  joined  together  let  no  agrarian  or  communist  ever  tear  asunder.  (T. 
L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Our  burden  our  blessing : — Here  is  a  man  who  has  "  come  in  " 
for  a  good  fortune  and  a  good  business.  He  has  not  "  made  "  either  the  one  or  the 
other.  Those  who  did  make  the  business,  who  watched  and  nurtured  it  from  a  tiny 
seed  to  a  great  tree  with  many  branches,  nourished  and  organized  it  so  wisely  that, 
even  after  they  are  gone,  it  continues,  at  least  for  a  time,  to  grow  and  thrive  and 
bring  forth  fruit  well-nigh  of  itself.  The  man  has  no  serious  difficulties  to 
encounter,  no  rubs,  no  hardships,  no  heart-tormenting  cares.  He  lives  at  his  eas*e, 
carelessly,  luxuriously — drives  down  to  his  counting-house  now  and  then,  but  givts 
most  of  his  time  to  pleasure  or  to  self-pleasing  pursuits.  Is  he  likely  to  be  eithei  a 
good  man  or  a  good  man  of  business?  It  is  nothing  short  of  a  miracle  if  he  is. 
How  should  he  feel  the  gravity  of  life,  its  solemn  responsibilities,  or  even  its  true 
joys  ?  For  want  of  a  burden  he  is  only  too  likely  to  leave  the  straight  path.  With 
nothing  to  bear,  nothing  to  conquer,  and  not  much  to  do,  he  grows  indolent,  self- 
indulgent,  fastidious,  perhaps  hypochondriacal;  and,  because  he  has  no  other  burden, 
becomes  a  burden  to  himself.  But  here  is  another  man  who  has  had  to  "  begin  life 
for  himself."  Under  the  pressure  of  necessity,  he  has  been  industiious,  frugal, 
temperate,  contriving ;  he  knows  all  the  ins  and  outs  of  his  work  ;  he  has  mastered 
the  secrets  of  his  craft,  studied  his  markets,  adapted  himself  to  the  time,  won  a 
good  name,  inspired  his  neighbours  with  respect  for  his  ability,  with  confidence  in 
his  trustworthiness.  In  short,  his  burdens  have  made  a  man  of  him,  and  a  true 
man  of  business.  He  is  likely  to  succeed,  and  to  be  happy  in  his  success.  Up  to  a 
certain  point,  let  us  say,  he  has  succeeded.  He  has  a  good  and  growing  business, 
a  considerable  capital  embarked  in  it,  a  comfortable  home,  a  family  trained  in 
habits  similar  to  his  own.  If  you  set  such  an  one  talking  of  his  past  career,  you 
eoon  find  that  he  sees  how  much  he  owes  to  his  burdens.  He  will  tell  you  himself 
that  he  thanks  God  for  the  very  difficulties  he  once  found  it  so  hard  to  bear  ;  for 
the  obstacles  which  stood  in  his  way,  but  which  he  has  surmounted.  If  he  is  a 
thoughtful  Christian  man,  he  will  also  acknowledge  that  he  has  gained  in  character, 
in  judgment,  in  patience,  in  energy  of  will,  in  faith  in  God,  in  charity  with  his 
neighbours,  by  the  very  trials  and  hardships  he  has  had  to  endure.  Nothing,  indeed. 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   u. 

is  more  common  than  to  hear  "  a  self-made  man  "  refer  boastfully,  or  thankfully, 
to  the  disadvantages,  the  unfavourable  conditions,  which  he  has  overcome,  and 
confess  that  but  for  these,  and  his  resolute  struggle  with  them,  he  would  never  have 
been  the  man  he  is.  Whatever  else,  or  more,  a  family  may  be,  no  one  will  deny 
that  it  is  a  burden.  The  father's  broad  shoulders  take  a  new  weight  with  every 
child  that  is  born  to  him.  He  must  work  harder  ;  he  must  think  and  plan,  and 
strive  not  for  himself  alone,  but  that  he  may  feed,  clothe,  and  educate  his  children. 
Most  of  you  fathers  have,  no  doubt,  felt  at  times  how  heavy  this  load  is ;  how  sharp 
and  painful  is  the  pressure  of  the  anxieties  it  entails.  But  you  have  also  felt  how 
this  burden  is  your  help  and  blessing.  For  your  children's  sake  you  rule  and  deny 
yourselves.  You  know  very  well  that  if  you  would  have  them  grow  up  with  good 
habits,  yotir  habits  must  be  good ;  that  you  cannot  expect  them  to  be  punctual, 
orderly,  temperate,  industrious,  considerate,  kind,  if  you  are  unkind,  thoughtless, 
indolent,  passionate,  disorderly,  irregular.  That  you  may  train  them  in  the  way 
they  should  go,  you  try  to  keep  the  right  way,  to  set  them  a  good  example.  And 
thus  they  help  you  to  acquire  the  very  habits  which  make  your  own  life  sweet  and 
pure,  to  keep  the  only  course  which  leads  to  peace  on  earth  or  in  heaven.  Tour 
burden  is  your  benediction.  Despite  your  good  example  and  careful  training,  some 
of  your  children  (let  us  suppose  so  cruel  a  case)  do  not  turn  out  what  you  wish 
them  to  be :  they  are  lazy,  though  you  have  tried  to  make  them  industrious  ;  self- 
pleasing,  though  you  have  taught  them  self-denial ;  passionate  and  ungovernable, 
though  you  have  striven  to  make  them  temperate  and  obedient ;  or  even  vicious, 
though  you  have  done  your  utmost  to  keep  them  pure.  And  as  the  sad  conviction 
grows  on  you  that  your  labour  has  been  lost,  that  they  are  settling  into  the  very 
habits  from  which  you  would  have  made  any  sacrifice  to  preserve  them,  your  heart 
fails  you,  and  you  almost  give  up  the  hope  of  reclaiming  them.  This  new  burden 
is,  you  say,  heavier  than  you  can  bear.  Oh,  weak  and  faithless  that  we  are !  Oh, 
thankless  and  inobservant !  Though  every  past  burden  has  helped  us,  no  sooner  is 
a  new  and  strange  burden  laid  on  us  than  we  declare  it  beyond  our  strength.  How 
does  God  prove  Himself  the  perfect  Father  t  What  is  it  that  we  most  admire  in 
His  paternal  goodness  ?  Is  it  that  He  sits  among  His  unfallen  children,  shedding 
a  heavenly  bliss  into  their  pure  obedient  hearts  ?  Is  it  not,  rather,  that  He  comes 
into  this  fallen  world  to  dwell  with  us — His  prodigal  and  unthankful  children — to 
suffer  in  and  for  our  sins,  to  bear  our  sorrows,  to  pursue  us  with  His  lovingkindness 
and  tender  mercy  ?  Is  it  not,  rather,  that  He  will  not  cease  to  hope  for  us,  however 
hopeless  and  wicked  we  may  be ;  that  He  lavishes  His  love  upon  us,  even  when  we 
do  not  love  Him,  and  saves  and  conquers  us  at  last  by  a  goodness  which  has  no 
limit,  and  will  not  be  repelled  7  And  how  shall  we  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in 
heaven  is  perfect,  unless  we,  too,  bear  the  burdens  of  the  weak  and  erring, 
patiently  endure  the  ingratitude  of  the  thankless,  and  overcome  the  evil  of  the 
wicked  with  our  good  ?  How  shall  you,  fathers  and  mothers,  become,  and  prove 
yourselves,  perfect  parents  if  you  can  only  love  the  children  that  love  you,  if  you 
cannot  be  patient  with  the  disobedient,  if  you  cannot  take  thought  and  pains  to 
bring  back  those  who  have  gone  astray  f  This  new  terrible  burden  of  sorrow  and 
care  is  a  new  honour  which  Ood  has  put  upon  you,  a  new  call  to  perfection.  It  is 
because  you  are  strong  that  He  asks  you  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  It  is 
because  you  are  capable  of  the  most  heroic  tasks  of  love  that  he  taxes  your  love, 
and,  by  taxing,  strengthens  and  deepens  it.  But  take,  for  one  example,  the  burden 
of  mystery  which  lies  on  the  sacred  page.  Most  thoughtful  men  have  felt  its 
weight ;  in  these  days,  indeed,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  escape  its  pressure.  When 
we  seek  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  truth,  which  is  one,  lo  I  we  find  it  manifold ; 
the  simple  and  sincere  Word  bristles  with  paradox  and  contradiction  ;  it  opens  up 
depths  we  cannot  fathom,  and  suggests  problems  we  cannot  solve.  Yet  is  not  this 
burden  a  veritable  blessing?  If  the  inspired  Word  were  simple  and  plain  through- 
out— if  it  were  level  to  the  meanest  understanding,  and  disclosed  its  inmost  secrets 
to  the  most  cursory  and  fugitive  attention,  could  we  study  and  love  it  as  we  do  * 
{S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Burden-bearing  strengthens : — The  Christian  gets  stronger  for 
his  load,  or  he  ought  to.  Train  up  your  boy  indoors ;  give  him  as  much  spending 
money  as  he  wants ;  never  put  the  boy  to  any  work ;  and  the  poor  little  flabby 
creature  will  get  to  be  mere  pulp.  But  turn  him  out  to  work  for  himself,  load  on 
him  study,  toil,  the  necessity  of  supporting  himself,  and  you  graduate  him  to  man- 
hood. That  man,  at  whose  departure  a  world  is  mourning,  fought  his  way  up 
from  poverty  by  hard  struggle,  until  he  attained  that  place  which  he  filled  in  the 
eyes  of  the  country  and  of  the  world.    Now,  that  is  the  way  God  deals  with  Hi* 


otap.  vi.]  OALATIANS.  479 

children.  He  burdens  them  to  make  them  strong.  He  says  to  one  of  His  spiritual 
children,  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  ;  carry  that ;  "  and  to  another, 
"  Every  man  to  his  work ;  do  that :  "  and  to  another,  "  Every  man  his  own  cross  " 
carry  tnat."  Between  here  and  heaven  hies  many  a  Hill  of  Difficulty,  as  Bunyan 
describes  it,  where  you  and  I  have  got  to  give  over  running  for  walking,  and  to 
give  over  walking  for  climbing  on  the  knees.  I  have  lived  long  enough  to  thank 
God  for  difficulties.  They  make  you  strong,  they  sinew  your  heart ;  they  enlarge 
your  faith  ;  they  bring  you  near  to  God.  Burden-bearing  strengthens  ;  grappling 
with  difficulties  gives  us  what  we  so  much  need,  and  that  is  force ;  and  in  God's 
school  some  hard  lessons  have  to  be  learnt.  I  think  we  learn  our  most  precious 
lessons  when  we  look  at  them  through  tears  which  make  a  lens  for  the  eye.  I 
have  found  the  hardest  lesson  in  this  world  is — what?  It  is  to  let  God  have  His 
way ;  and  the  man  or  woman  who  has  learnt  how  to  let  God  have  His  way  has 
attained  the  higher  life — the  highest  on  earth.  (Ibid.)  Religion  must  be 
personal: — A  little  girl,  whom  we  will  call  Ellen,  was  some  time  ago  helping  to 
nurse  a  sick  gentleman  whom  she  loved  very  dearly,.  One  day  he  said  to  her, 
"  Ellen,  it  is  time  for  me  to  take  my  medicine,  I  think.  Will  you  pour  it  out  for 
me  ?  You  must  measure  just  a  table-spoonful,  and  then  put  it  in  that  wine-glass 
close  by."  Ellen  quickly  did  so,  and  brought  it  to  his  bedside ;  but,  instead  of 
taking  it  in  his  own  hand,  he  quietly  said,  "  Now,  dear,  will  you  drink  it  for  me?" 
•'  Will  I  drink  it  ?  What  do  you  mean  ?  I  am  sure  I  would,  in  a  minute,  if  it  would 
cure  you  all  the  same ;  but  you  know  it  won't  do  you  any  good,  unless  you  take  it 
yourself."  •*  Won't  it,  really  ?  "  the  gentleman  replied.  •'  No,  I  suppose  it  will 
not.  But  Ellen,  if  you  can't  take  my  medicine  for  me,  I  can't  take  your  salvation 
lor  you.  You  must  go  to  Jesus,  and  believe  in  Him  for  yourself. "  In  this  way  he 
tried  to  teach  his  little  friend  that  each  human  being  must  seek  salvation  for  him- 
self — repent,  believe,  obey,  for  himself :  that  this  is  a  burden  which  no  man  can 
bear  for  his  brother.  Doing  duty  by  proxy : — Bishop  Burnet,  in  his  charges  to 
the  clergy  of  his  diocese,  used  to  be  extremely  vehement  in  his  declamations  against 
pluralities.  In  his  first  visitation  to  Salisbury  he  urged  the  authority  of  St.  Ber- 
nard ;  who  being  consulted  by  one  of  his  followers,  whether  he  might  accept  of  two 
benefices,  replied,  "And  how  will  you  be  able  to  serve  them  both?"  "I  intend," 
answered  the  priest,  "  to  officiate  in  one  of  them  by  a  deputy."  "  Will  your  deputy 
suffer  eternal  punishment  for  you  too  ?  "  asked  the  saint.  "  Believe  me,  you  may 
serve  your  cure  by  proxy,  but  you  must  suffer  the  penalty  in  person."  This  anec- 
dote made  such  an  impression  on  Mr.  Kelsey,  a  pious  and  wealthy  clergyman  then 
present,  that  he  immediately  resigned  the  rectory  of  Bernerton,  in  Berkshire,  worth 
two  hundred  a  year,  which  he  then  held  with  one  of  great  value.  Burden-bearing: — 
I.  Self-help.  1.  This  is  inevitable.  Each  has  his  burden  of  (1)  work ;  (2)  sorrow; 
(3)  responsibility  ;  (4)  bodily  infirmities ;  (5)  waiting.  2.  This  is  salutary.  (1) 
To  utilize  our  powers.     (2)   To  develope  our  excellences.    II.  Bbothebly  help 

!ver.  2).  The  carrying  of  our  own  load  gives  strength  to  carry  the  burden  of  others. 
1)  The  burden  of  trial.  (2)  Of  poverty.  (3)  Of  bearing  a  wandering  brother  to 
Christ.  III.  Divine  help  (Psa.  lv.  22).  (1)  The  burden  of  anxiety.  (2)  Of  sin.  (T.L. 
CuyJLer.)  I.  Man  is  independent,  (popriov,  one's  own  proper  burden,  a  packman's  bag, 
a  soldier's  kit.  Responsibilities  of  life,  of  parents,  masters,  teachers,  is  not  a  curse 
but  a  privilege,  which  is  thrown  away  when  we  endeavour  to  throw  it  on  others.  2. 
Fruits  of  past  conduct.  II.  Men  are  interdependent  (ver.  2),  (3apri,  burdens  which 
may  be  shifted  or  borne  by  another  A  man's  infirmities,  temptations,  poverty, 
stumblings  (ver.  1).  2.  The  mutual  blessedness  of  this  interdependence.  III. 
Men  are  absolutely  dependent.  (Psa.  lv.  22) :  burdens  sent  as  a  portion  from  God. 
1.  Affliction.  2.  Consciousness  of  guilt.  (D.  A.  Taylor,  M.A.)  Burdens: — I. 
Oub  own.  II.  Oub  brotheb's  (ver.  2).  III.  OubLobd's  (ver.  17).  By  bearing  the 
fibst  we  relieve  our  Lord's  trouble :  if  every  man  bore  his  own  burden,  instead  of 
shirking  it,  the  will  of  God  would  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  By  bearing 
the  second  we  relieve  our  brother's  trouble.  Either  by  sympathy  or  substitution. 
By  bearing  the  thibd  we  relieve  our  own :  the  trouble  of  doubt,  of  sin,  of  contro- 
versy.    IV.  Pebsonalitt  an  awful  gift.    This  short  verse — I.  Singles  us  out  from 

ALL   THE    MULTITUDE    ABOUND    US.       II.    BlDS   US   BEMEMBEB,  WHAT  THE   WOBLD   WOULD 

hide  from  us,  that  we  abe  each  of  us  one.  1.  This  is  a  great  thought.  2.  An 
awful  thought.  3.  A  thought  we  cannot  shake  off.  III.  Obdinaby  life  wit- 
nesses to  this  tbuth.  1.  All  deep  thinking  people  live  apart  from  others.  2. 
Sympathy  may  lighten  their  burden,  but  still  it  is  their  own.  3.  Pain  and  death 
prove  this.     IV.  The  present  life   cannot  explain  all  this.     We  must  go  to 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tr 

revelation :  there  we  find — 1.  That  this  great  mystery  is  the  gift  of  individual 
being  from  God  (Gen.  ii.  7).  2.  That  we  have  a  will  that  can  resist  the  almighty 
will  of  God.  3.  That  the  whole  volume  is  a  history  of  the  conflict  of  the  human 
will  with  the  Divine,  and  of  God's  endeavour  to  win  the  human  will  by  redemption. 
4.  That  every  healed  will  owes  its  healing  to  Divine  grace.  V.  Hence  the  un- 
speakable wokth  of  evert  LIFE.  1.  The  will  is  either  hardening  itself  against 
God,  or — 2.  is  being  drawn  into  harmonious  action  with  the  will  of  God.  VI. 
Practical  lessons.  1.  The  great  importance  of  acting  in  the  remembrance  of  our 
responsibility.  2.  The  necessity  of  securing  times  for  self-examination  and  prayer. 
3.  The  need  of  claiming  our  place  in  Christ  the  new  and  living  man.  {Bishop  Samuel 
Wilberforce.)  How  to  bear  our  burden : — The  world  proposes  rest  by  the  removal 
of  a  burden.  The  Redeemer  gives  rest  by  giving  us  the  spirit  and  power  to  bear 
the  burden.  (F.  W.  Robertson.)  Burden-bearing : — I.  This,  then,  is  my  first  pro- 
position, namely,  that  every  one  must  bear  the  burden  of  his  own  sins,  both  as 
concerns  this  life  and  the  next.  The  results  of  sin  are  strictly  individual.  It  is 
with  the  soul  as  with  the  body,  with  the  spirit  as  with  the  flesh.  If  you  thrust  a 
knife  into  your  arm,  it  does  not  affect  me.  Vou  yourself  feel  the  pain  ;  you  your- 
self must  endure  the  agony.  I  may  sympathize,  I  may  pity,  I  may  bandage  the 
gash,  but  the  severed  flesh,  and  the  lacerated  fibres  are  yours,  and  along  your  nerves 
nature  telegraphs  the  pain.  So  it  is  with  the  soul.  A  man  who  stabs  himself  with 
a  bad  habit,  who  opens  the  arteries  of  his  higher  life  with  the  lancet  of  his  passions, 
and  drains  them  of  the  vital  fluid,  who  inserts  his  head  within  the  noose  of  appetite 
and  swings  himself  off  from  the  pedestal  of  his  self-con trol,  must  endure  the  suffer- 
ing, the  weakness,  and  the  loss  which  are  the  issue  of  his  insane  conduct.  In 
morals  there  is  no  copartnership,  no  pro  rata  division  of  profit  and  loss.  Each 
man  receives  according  to  the  summation  of  his  own  account.  II.  I  have  alluded 
to  the  individuality  of  moral  responsibility.  I  have  striven  to  show  you  that  each 
one  must  endure  his  own  sufferings,  and  abide  the  result  of  his  own  actions,  and 
that  in  this  no  one  can  share  with  him.  Not  only  is  this  true  in  respect  to  moral 
responsibility,  but  it  is  equally  true  in  respect  to  moral  growth.  Ton  may  place 
two  trees  side  by  side,  so  that  their  branches  shall  interlace,  and  the  fragrance  of 
their  blossoms  intermingle,  and  yet  in  their  growth  each  is  separate.  Covered  by 
the  same  soil,  moistened  by  the  same  drop,  warmed  by  the  same  ray,  the  roots  of 
either  collect  and  reinforce  the  trunks  of  each,  with  their  respective  nourishment. 
Each  tree  grows  by  a  law  of  its  own  growth,  and  the  law  of  its  own  effort.  The 
sap  of  one,  in  its  upward  or  downward  flow,  cannot  desert  its  own  channels  and 
feed  the  fibres  of  the  other.  So  it  is  with  two  Christians.  Planted  in  the  same 
soil,  drawing  their  sustenance  from  the  same  source,  they,  nevertheless,  extract  it 
through  individual  processes  of  thought  and  life.  In  daily  contact  and  communion, 
whether  in  floral  or  fruitful  states  intermingling,  equal  in  girth  and  height,  equal 
in  the  results  of  their  growth,  the  spiritualized  currents  of  the  one  mind  cannot 
become  the  property  of  the  other.  They  cannot  exchange  duties.  They  cannot 
exchange  hopes.  I  cannot  think  for  you,  or  you  for  me.  We  cannot  meditate  for 
one  another.  Soul-food,  like  bodily  food,  is  assimilated  by  each  man  for  himself. 
See  what  determination  the  world  manifests  in  pursuit  of  carnal  things ;  over  what 
sharp  obstacles  men  mount  to  honour  and  wealth.  A  worldly  man  asks  no  help 
from  another.  He  plays  the  game  of  life  boldly,  asking  no  odds.  When  he  comes 
to  an  obstruction,  he  puts  his  shoulder  bravely  against  it,  and  rolls  it  aside  or 
climbs  over  it.  Nay,  more,  out  of  the  very  fragments  of  a  previous  overthrow  he 
erects  a  triumph.  Nothing  overawes  him  nor  discourages  him.  He  asks  no  one 
to  bear  his  burden.  He  bears  it  himself,  and  finds  it  to  be  a  source  of  strength  and 
power.  And  shall  a  Christian  shrink  from  what  a  worldling  bravely  attempts  ? 
Shall  we  unto  whom  the  heavens  minister,  faint  when  those  to  whom  the  gates  of 
power  are  shut  persevere  ?  These  things  ought  not  so  to  be.  What  is  a  slip  ? 
What  is  a  scar  ?  What  is  a  fall  ?  They  will  all  testify  to  the  perils  you  endured, 
and  the  heroism  of  your  perseverance,  at  the  Last  Day.  Think  not  of  these.  Write 
on  your  banner,  where,  living  or  dying,  your  eyes  shall  behold  them,  these  words  : 
*•  He  who  endureth  unto  the  end  shall  be  saved.    (W.  H.  H.  Murray.) 

Ver.  6.  Let  him  that  Is  taught  In  the  Word  communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth 
In  all  good  things. — The  duty  of  ministerial  support: — It  is  one  of  the  tricks 
of  Satan  to  defraud  godly  ministers  of  support,  that  the  Church  may  be  deprived 
of  their  services.  Paul's  recommendation  arose  from  a  desire  to  preserve  a  gospel 
ministry.      [Calvin.)         I  do  not  love  to  expound  such  sentences  which  speak  tot 


jhaj-.  n.)  GALATIANS.  481 

ob  that  are  ministers  of  the  Word ;  moreover,  it  may  look,  if  one  is  zealous  to 
treat  such  texts  before  the  people,  as  if  he  did  it  on  account  of  avarice.  But  one 
must  nevertheless  instruct  the  people  thereabout,  that  they  may  know  what  degree 
of  honour  and  support  they  owe  to  their  teachers.  This  is  also  good  for  us,  that 
are  in  the  ministry,  to  know  that  we  may  not  take  our  deserved  recompense  with 
uneasy  conscience,  as  if  we  had  no  right  to  it.  (Luther.)  A  fair  exchange : — 
Between  teachers  and  hearers  there  should  be  a  lovely  exchange  and  joyful  barter. 
A  hearer  needs  not  to  complain  as  though  he  suffered  disadvantage  in  this 
exchange.  Whoever  will  not  give  our  Lord  God  a  penny,  gets  his  due  when  he  is 
forced  to  give  the  devil  a  dollar.  (Starke.)  The  support  of  the  ministry  : — I.  As 
children  abb  boond  to  maintain  theib  pabents  (1  Tim.  v.  4),  so  believers  their 
spiritual  parents  (Gal.  iv.  19;  1  Cor.  iv.  15).  II.  The  Old  Testament  enjoins 
this  (Deut.  xii.  19),  muoh  more  the  New.  III.  Evebt  calling  maintains  thosb 
who  live  therein  :  the  highest  calling  should  do  no  less.  IV.  Ministers  are 
God's  soldiers,  and  should  not  go  a  warfare  at  their  own  cost ;  the  Lord's 
labourers,  and  therefore  worthy  of  their  hire ;  the  Lord's  shepherds,  and  there- 
fore worthy  the  milk  of  the  flock  (see  also  Deut.  xxv.  4 ;  of .  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  10 ;  1  Tim. 
v.  17).  V.  Ministebs  abb  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  their  work  (2  Tim.  iv. 
13-16),  and  therefore  must  not  be  entangled  in  the  affairs  of  this  life  (2  Tim.  ii.  4). 
VI.  It  is  the  ordinance  of  God  that  they  which  preaoh  the  gospel  should  live  of  the 
gospel  (1  Cor.  ix.  14).  (R.  Cudworth.)  Material  aids  needful: — Some  people 
give  as  though  they  only  half  believed  that  Christ  has  ordained  the  money  power 
as  one  of  the  powers  of  His  cause ;  as  if  in  travelling  from  place  to  place  the  mis- 
sionary cost  no  more  than  the  flight  of  an  angel ;  as  if  the  Philip  of  to-day  might 
be  "  caught  away  by  the  Spirit,"  and  then  suddenly  be  "  found  at  Azotus  " ;  as  if 
bills  could  be  paid  by  devout  emotions  or  declaratory  words ;  as  if  lives  could  be 
sustained  on  mere  air ;  as  if  ravens  might  be  expected  to  bring  food  to  fainting 
prophets ;  as  if  miracles  of  providence  would  provide  for  ministers  of  grace.  But 
this  is  not  God's  method  of  working  now.  You  must  furnish  material  supplies  for 
material  apparatus.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Paying  the  minister: — In  1662,  the  town 
of  Eastham  agreed  that  a  part  of  every  whale  cast  on  shore  be  appropriated  for  the 
support  of  the  ministry.  The  ministers  must  have  sat  on  the  cliffs  in  every  storm, 
and  watched  the  shore  with  anxiety.  And  for  my  part,  if  I  were  a  minister,  I  would 
rather  trust  to  the  bowels  of  the  billows  to  cast  up  a  whale  for  me  than  to  the 
generosity  of  many  a  country  parish  that  I  know.  (Thoreau.)  Liberality  to 
ministers : — The  people  of  one  of  the  out  parishes  of  Virginia  wrote  to  Dr.  Eioe, 
then  at  the  Theological  Seminary  in  Prince  Edward,  for  a  minister.  They  wantttd 
a  man  of  first-rate  talents,  for  they  had  run  down  considerably,  and  needed  build- 
ing up.  They  wanted  one  who  could  write  well,  for  some  of  the  young  people  were 
nice  about  that  matter.  They  wanted  one  who  could  visit  a  good  deal,  for  their 
former  minister  had  neglected  that,  and  they  wanted  to  bring  that  up.  Thtiy 
wanted  a  man  of  very  gentlemanly  deportment,  for  some  thought  a  great  deal  of 
that,  and  so  they  went  on  describing  a  perfect  minister.  The  last  thing  mentioned 
was  that  they  gave  their  last  minister  £70,  but  if  the  Doctor  would  send  them  such 
a  man  as  they  described,  they  would  raise  another  £10,  making  it  £80.  The  Doctor 
sat  down  and  wrote  them  a  reply,  telling  them  they  had  better  forthwith  make 
out  a  call  for  old  Doctor  Dwight  in  heaven,  for  he  did  not  know  of  any  one  in  this 
world  who  answered  the  description ;  and  as  Dr.  Dwight  had  been  living  so  long 
on  spiritual  food,  he  might  not  need  so  much  for  the  body,  and  possibly  he  might 
live  on  £80.  (Dr.  Haven. )  It  is  my  intention  to  expound  and  to  defend  this 
financial  law  of  the  Christian  Church :  "  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  Word  com- 
municate unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things."  I.  Let  us  expound  this 
financial  law  of  thb  Chbistian  Church.  The  phrase  "  in  all  good  things  "  may 
be  connected  either  with  the  words  •*  him  that  teacheth  ;  "  or  with  the  words  "  him 
that  oommunicateth. "  It  may  mean  either,  first,  "  Let  him  who  is  instructed  in 
all  good  things  communicate  to  him  who  thus  instructs  him  ; "  or,  secondly,  "  Let 
him  who  is  instructed  communicate  all  good  things  to  him  who  instructs  him."  The 
necessity  of  a  distinct  order  of  men  for  the  purpose  of  Christian  instruction  might  be 
easily  rested  on  rational  principles.  But  I  choose  rather  now  to  appeal  to  the  will  of 
the  great  Legislator ;  I  appeal  to  that  passage  contained  in  Epbesians  iv. :  «•  When 
He  ascended  up  on  high  He  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men  ; "  and 
among  these  gifts  he  gave  "  pastors  and  teachers."  It  is  plain,  from  Scripture,  that 
there  ought  to  be  an  order  of  men  devoted  to  this  work.  It  is  evident,  also,  that 
they  should  devote  their  whole  time  and  attention  to  its  duties :  thio  might  b« 

31 


ASS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

grounded  on  rational  principles,  arising  from  the  nature  and  number  of  the 
subjects  which  must  necessarily  be  included  in  such  instructions ;  but  here,  again, 
I  shall  refer  to  the  will  of  the  great  Lawgiver.  His  determination  is,  that  those 
who  minister  should  "  wait  on  their  ministering,  and  he  that  teacheth,  on  teaching ;  " 
that  such  should  "  give  attendance  to  reading  and  exhortation  ;  "  that  they  should 
"  meditate  upon  these  things,"  and  "  give  themselves  wholly  to  them."  We  are  not 
to  look  at  this  subject  as  we  look  at  our  Missionary  Societies,  and  Bible  and  Edu- 
cational Societies :  these  are  human  institutions,  and  we  may  support  them  by 
human  plans;  but  the  Christian  ministry  is  a  divinely  appointed  means  for  a 
divinely  appointed  end ;  and  the  means  of  its  support  are  divinely  appointed  too. 
We  may  as  much  err  by  using  means  different  from  those  which  Christ  has  insti- 
tuted, as  if  we  lost  sight  of  the  end  itself.  II.  Let  us  defend  this  financial  law 
of  the  Christian  Chukch.  Like  all  the  other  laws  of  Christ  it  is  "  holy,  just,  and 
good."  It  is  an  arrangement  which  is  alike  just,  generous,  and  useful.  1.  It  is  a 
just  arrangement.  2.  This  is  a  generous  as  well  as  a  just  principle.  Men  who  thus 
believe  are  brought  under  the  influence  of  the  love  of  Christ ;  and  on  this  principle 
Christ  secures  the  maintenance  of  His  ministers  in  Christian  Churches  to  the  end 
of  time.  3.  Tbis  is  a  useful  arrangement  also.  But  objections  have  been  made. 
First,  it  is  said,  "  Such  an  arrangement  has  a  great  tendency  to  degrade  the 
Christian  ministry."  In  one  sense  we  may  ask,  Do  such  persons  expect  the 
Christian  minister  to  be  altogether  independent?  We  are  all  dependent,  and 
must  necessarily  be  so.  And  who  applies  this  mode  of  reasoning  to  other  pro- 
fessions ?  Who  would  think  of  saying  of  a  lawyer,  or  of  a  medical  man,  that  they 
are  low-spirited,  time-serving,  dependent  men,  because  the  one  is  dependent  on  his 
clients,  and  the  other  on  his  patients,  for  subsistence  ?  Are  they  degraded  by  such 
dependence  as  this?  Is  the  minister  of  Christ  to  be  degraded,  because  he  is 
supported  by  the  same  means  by  which  Christ  his  Master  was  supported  ?  It  may 
seem  strange  that  those  who  are  to  be  accounted  "worthy  of  double  honour," 
should  be  dependent  for  their  support  on  the  bounty  of  others.  But  when  it  is 
founded  on  such  a  principle  as  Christian  love,  I  know  not  of  a  more  honourable 
way  than  to  be  dependent  on  the  will  and  love  of  others.  Secondly,  as  to  the 
objection  that  "  this  arrangement  throws  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  minister,  by 
making  it  necessary  for  him  to  submit  to  much  in  order  to  cultivate  the  good- will  of 
those  to  whom  he  preaches."  But  let  them  continue  a  Christian  people,  and  then 
t-ell  me  how  such  a  man  should  please  such  a  people  but  by  doing  his  duty  towards 
♦  hem  as  a  Christian  minister.  Thirdly,  it  is  objected  that  "  it  makes  the  subsistence 
of  Christian  ministers  uncertain ;  and  that  it  endangers  the  existence  of  the  Christian 
ministry,  and  by  this  means,  Christianity  itself."  I  might  say  here,  that  all  below 
is  insecure ;  but  I  would  say  also,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  subsistence  of  the 
Christian  minister  is  more  uncertain  than  that  of  other  men.    (J.  Brown,  M.A.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Be  not  deceived ;  God  Is  not  mocked  :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap. — The  present  seed-sowing,  decisive  of  the  future  harvest: — 
And  I  suppose,  that  nature  is  full  of  spiritual  instruction,  in  all  its  subdivisions 
and  departments,  if  we  had  but  an  eye  to  see  it.  And  for  anything  I  know,  it  may 
be  as  much  the  purpose  and  design  of  God,  to  teach  ns  by  all  the  objects  and 
operations  in  His  world  and  in  His  works  round  about  us,  as  it  was  the  object  and 
design  of  God  to  teach  us  by  the  furniture  and  all  the  preparations  of  the  Hebrew 
sanctuary.    Our  Lord  frequently  adverted  to  the  harvest.    I.  And  first,  then,  for 

THE    SENTIMENT   AND   DOCTRINE,    WHICH    THE  TEXT   CONTAINS.      I  think   that   the   text 

necessarily  carries  out  our  thoughts  to  the  future  life.  If  we  sow  to  the  Spirit,  we 
shall  "  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting ; "  which  can,  as  it  seems  to  me,  have  no 
reference  to  the  existing  economy  of  things,  where  every  object  around  ns  is 
transient  and  perishing  and  passes  away.  And  if  '•  sowing  to  the  Spirit,"  leading 
to  a  harvest  of  "  life  everlasting,"  directs  our  view  to  the  future  world,  then  "  sowing 
to  the  flesh,"  involving  in  it  "  corruption,"  must  also  necessarily  relate  to  the  future 
life ;  the  two  being  parallel  to  each  other,  both  must  have  reference  to  the  result  of 
good  and  evil  actions  in  the  world  to  come.  What  is  *'  sowing  to  the  flesh  ?  "  By 
"  the  flesh  "  understand,  not  the  body  as  in  contradistinction  to  the  mind ;  but 
understand  depravity  as  in  opposition  to  holiness.  They  will  "  reap  corruption." 
That  which  is  defiled,  that  which  is  worthless,  that  which  is  filthy,  that  which  is 
abominable — corrupted  in  body,  corrupted  in  mind,  corrupted  in  associates — all  the 
corrupt  deeds  of  the  guilty  past,  of  the  unforgiven,  unrenovated,  human  population, 
concentrated,  amassed  for  them.    A  harvest  of  corruption.    Let  me  tarn,  therefore. 


chip,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  488 

to  the  other  question,  respecting  "  sowing  to  the  Spirit."  And  the  "  sowing  to  the 
Spirit,"  again,  here,  is  the  same  thing  with  bringing  forth  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit," 
of  which  we  read  in  the  foregoing  chapter.  But  of  the  principle,  of  the  fact,  of  the 
troth,  we  have  the  deepest  certainty — that  as  we  "sow  to  the  Spirit,"  we  shall 
"reap  life  everlasting."  And  this  notwithstanding  the  time,  be  it  what  it  may, 
longer  or  shorter,  more  or  less,  which  may  intervene  between  the  period  of  the 
sowing  and  the  period  of  the  reaping.  In  the  case  of  the  natural  harvest,  as 
yon  are  aware,  there  is  a  considerable  period  intervening.  But  I  think  that 
time  has  respect  purely  and  exclusively  to  man,  and  not  to  God  at  all.  Neither 
does  it  matter  how  entirely  the  sowing  of  the  seed  may  have  been  forgotten.  It 
does  not  appear  that  the  memory  of  the  husbandman  has  any  influence  whatever 
npon  the  seed  sown.  There  it  is ;  it  takes  root,  germinates,  buds,  comee  to  perfec- 
tion, whether  he  remembers  and  thinks  of  it  or  does  not.  Now  we  know  nothing 
of  man's  memory.  We  cannot  explain  what  man's  memory  is ;  we  do  not  know 
how  it  was  ereated,  or  in  what  manner  it  acts  ;  we  can  give  no  explanation  of  the 
diversities  of  memory — why  is  it  that  one  man's  memory  retains  clearly  all  things, 
and  another  man's  memory  is  like  a  sieve  which  lets  all  things  through ;  we  cannot 
tell  how  this  is,  or  why  this  is.  But  in  the  future  life  memory  may  be  a  perfected 
capacity ;  so  that,  as  I  have  intimated,  all  things  may  be  as  fresh  and  vivid,  as 
powerful  and  direct  npon  the  spirit,  as  if  no  time  had  intervened  whatever.  There- 
fore, though  there  may  be  a  non -recollection  now,  an  utter  forgetfulness  of  what  kind 
and  manner  of  seed  we  may  have  sown  for  the  last  seven  years,  or  the  last  twenty 
years,  this  is  no  proof  whatever  against  the  principle  of  the  text-— that  the  seed  has 
been  sown,  and  that  the  harvest  will  be  reaped,  and  that  when  the  harvest  is  reaped, 
either  for  good  or  for  evil,  we  may  have  brought  powerfully  to  our  recollection  the 
seed  that  has  been  sown.  Neither  is  it  of  any  consequence,  that  we  cannot  under- 
stand the  nature  of  the  connection  between  the  process  of  the  sowing  of  the  seed 
and  the  coming  of  the  harvest.  If  you  saw  a  man  casting  seed  into  the  soil,  and 
were  not  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  probable  result — if  you  or  I  were  not  ac- 
quainted with  the  fact,  that  the  seed-time  always  precedes  the  harvest,  we  should 
think  the  man  was  throwing  the  seed  away ;  we  should  ask — "  What  is  he  doing? 
be  is  easting  his  bread  into  the  ground."  But  we  know  what  he  is  doing.  Yet  we 
do  not  understand  any  one  of  the  principles,  which  bring  to  pass  the  harvest  in 
connection  with  the  seed  sowing ;  we  only  know  the  fact.  And  exactly  in  the  same 
manner,  though  I  cannot  explain  what  is  the  nature  of  the  thing,  or  what  are  the 
manifold  causes  which  are  at  work  and  in  operation  so  as  eventually  to  evolve  a 
harvest  of  glory  or  of  corruption,  yet  as  I  see  the  close  connection  subsisting  in  the 
one  case  in  nature,  why  should  I  doubt  an  equally  close  or  a  stronger  connection  in 
morals,  when  I  have  reason  on  my  side  and  God's  Word  declares  it?  And  I 
think,  the  principle  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,  which  is  the  resurrection  of 
character,  the  re-appearance  of  our  moral  actions,  stands  in  close  connection  with 
the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  I  believe,  as  I  have  said,  from  Scrip- 
ture, that  there  is  to  be  a  resurrection  of  man's  body ;  but  that  is  comparatively  a 
mere  small  matter.  Suppose  it  be  a  resurrection  of  the  body  in  glory ;  well,  let 
the  body  in  glory  stand  by  itself,  alone  in  its  glory,  what  is  it? — (I  mean,  without 
its  mind,  and  without  its  character  and  these  transactions. )  What  is  it  ?  A  statue, 
that  shines  and  glitters ;  that  is  all.  A  statue ;  nothing  but  a  statue.  Tou  must 
have  the  mind ;  not  the  mere  intellect — you  must  have  the  moral  state  and  condition ; 
you  must  have  the  virtues,  with  which  the  mind  is  endued  and  ingrained ;  you  must 
have  the  achievements,  if  there  are  any— or  the  softer  and  milder  emanations  of 
moral  beauty,  if  there  is  nothing  that  is  great  and  grand.  II.  Now  I  have  to  state, 
secondly  and  more  briefly,  the  evidence  and  authority  by  which  it  is  sustained. 
And  I  might  remark,  it  is  God's  ordinance — God's  constitution.  It  is  His  arrange- 
ment and  His  pleasure ;  and  we  can  even  see  wisdom  and  reason  in  it.  The  connec- 
tion between  seed-time  and  harvest  is  of  Divine  constitution.  All  that  we  see  in  the 
processes  of  nature  round  about  us,  from  the  one  period  to  the  other,  is  of  Divine 
arrangement  and  according  to  the  will  of  heaven.  The  elements  work,  all  the 
agencies  and  causes  are  in  action,  under  the  presidency  and  direction  of  the  unerring 
and  infinite  Mind.  The  connection  by  man  cannot  be  destroyed.  God's  ordinance 
by  God  will  be  carried  into  effect.  So  it  is  in  morals.  It  is  certain ;  it  is  irresistible ; 
it  will  be  triumphant.  The  sower  to  the  flesh  shall  reap  his  corruption ;  the  sower 
to  the  Spirit  shall  reap  life  everlasting.  Secondly,  this  is  plainly  revealed  to  us  in 
Scripture.  We  have  it  in  various  other  forms,  besides  that  of  the  passsage  which 
is  now  before  us.     There  is  the  parable  of  the  talents.     And,  thirdly,  I  observe, 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  y* 

that  it  is  sustained  by  the  justice  and  fidelity  of  God.  Without  this,  there  is  no 
explanation  of  the  exceeding  mysteries  of  the  Divine  providence.  Hereafter  good 
is  to  have  its  day — justice  its  day.  It  is  the  day  of  God.  Now,  he  says,  "  they 
call  the  proud  happy ;  "  now  they  say  that  those  who  blaspheme  God  are  in  honour ; 
then — hereafter — "  shall  ye  discern  between  the  righteous  and  tbe  wicked,  between 
hitn  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not."  There  are  various  kinds 
and  degrees  of  vice  and  virtue,  According  to  the  kind  and  according  to  the  degree, 
"  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Not  only  according  to  the 
quality  and  the  degree,  but  the  quantity.  And  I  think  the  text  implies  the  principle 
of  reproduction.  The  seed  produces  itself  over  and  over  again.  And  the  principle 
of  multiplication  is  seen  in  a  vicious  action  or  in  a  vicious  principle.  It  existed 
and  was  manifested  in  you ;  it  may  be  copied — re-produced — in  your  eons  and  in 
your  daughters ;  and  it  may  go  on  from  them  illimitably.  Or  it  went  forth  from 
you  and  took  root  in  society ;  and  it  went  on,  and  reproduced  itself  in  its  own 
unslightliness  and  enormity  over  and  over  again.  Or  take  the  other  view  of  it. 
There  is  a  virtue  and  an  excellency  in  you  ;  it  reproduces  itself  ;  it  is  seen  in  your 
family,  it  shines  in  your  sons  and  your  daughters ;  it  is  copied  ;  it  reproduces  itself 
in  your  circle  ;  it  goes  on  to  posterity ;  no  man  can  tell  where  it  goes,  any  more 
than  a  man  can  tell  what  will  be  the  result  and  produce  of  a  handful  of  corn  planted 
upon  the  top  of  the  mountains.  And  this  principle  of  reproduction  I  hold  to  be 
one  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  consolatory  in  the  highest  degree  to  good  men. 
It  is  what  is  intended  in  Scripture  by  "  the  dead  yet  speaking ; "  because  their 
thoughts  and  their  actions  go  on.  Especially  note  the  influence  of  it  in  the  com- 
positions of  wise  and  holy  men — such  men  as  Owen,  and  Howe,  and  Baxter,  and 
Jeremy  Taylor,  and  Bishop  Hall;  view  their  thoughts,  their  character,  their 
writings,  re-produced  over  and  over  again,  till  nobody  knows  to  what  extent  they 
scatter  the  principles  of  truth.  And  on  the  other  hand,  the  principle  is  terrific  in 
respect  to  vice.  Take  up  such  a  writer  as  Hobbes,  Voltaire,  Hume,  Lord  Byron  ; 
think  of  the  mischief  done  by  such  men,  the  evil  which  comes  over  and  over  again 
— the  seeds  of  pestilential  doctrine,  the  mischief  of  bad  and  malign  passions,  over 
and  over  again.  Yes ;  reproduction — multiplication — again  and  again.  A  harvest 
of  evil,  a  harvest  of  corruption — a  harvest  of  good,  a  harvest  of  glory — in  the  life 
that  is  for  ever  and  ever.  So  it  will  be.  III.  The  danger  of  oub  being  deceiveu. 
"Be  not  deceived."  What  is  the  danger?  Why,  the  heart  is  very  deceitful,  "de- 
ceitful above  all  things  ; "  and  there  may  be  reasoning,  very  acceptable  but  very 
delusive,  that  men  may  indulge  in  sin  and  yet  esoape  any  punishment — that  they 
may  not  serve  God  and  yet  arrive  in  heaven.  I  find  Scripture,  in  several  emphatic 
places,  giving  this  caution — the  caution  '*  not  to  be  deceived  "  in  connection  with 
the  indulgence  of  sin.  If  this  be  true,  what  importance  attaches  itself  to  our  daily 
life  1  You  rise  in  the  morning,  and  go  through  the  day ;  you  are  sowing  seed  of 
some  kind  or  other.  You  rise  without  God,  live  without  Christ,  go  up  and  down 
among  men  unjust,  a  thundercloud,  hating,  angry,  backbiting;  what  are  yon 
sowing  ?  You  rise  in  the  morning ;  your  first  thoughts  consecrated  to  God  ;  you 
come  into  your  family,  meek,  gentle,  bland;  among  men,  just,  upright,  good, 
generous ;  what  seed  are  you  sowing  ?  See ;  the  harvest  you  shall  reap  in  the 
world  to  come.  (J.  Stratten,  M.A.)  Ckrittian  liberality  : — The  metaphor  of  seed- 
time and  harvest,  although  capable  of  an  almost  universal  application,  is  primarily 
applicable  to  the  principle  of  Christian  liberality,  and  the  earnestness  of  St.  Paul's 
admonition  finds  its  probable  explanation  in  an  allusion  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  1 :  "  Now 
concerning  the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of 
Galatia,  even  so  do  ye."  He  had  at  his  former  visit  urged  them  to  contribute  to 
the  support  of  their  suffering  brethren  of  Judea ;  but  Gallic  avarice  was  proverbial. 
And  is  it  not  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  messenger  who  had  brought  the 
apostle  word  of  their  defection  from  the  faith,  reported  also  unfavourably  of  their 
liberality  ?  Hence  his  strong  statement  concerning  sowing  and  reaping ;  hence  his 
earnest  exhortation  to  support  their  teachers,  to  do  good  unto  all  men.  And  surely, 
brethren,  the  money  test  is  one  of  the  truest  tests  by  which  the  genuineness  of  a 
man's  religion  can  be  tried.  It  was  the  money  test  which  our  Lord  applied  to  the 
rich  young  ruler,  and  from  which  he  shrank;  it  was  the  money  test  which 
proved  too  much  for  Achan  and  Gehazi  in  the  Old  Testament,  for  the  Apostle 
Judas,  and  for  Ananias  and  Sapphira  in  the  New.  And  the  money  test  has  not, 
I  believe,  lost  its  practical  value  now.  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  as 
much  evil  in  England  as  it  was  in  Gallatia  or  Judea ;  it  is  equally  now  as 
then  a  lust  of  the  flesh  which  needs  greatly  to  be  crucified.     Show  me  a  liberal  and 


vi.  J  6ALATIANS.  485 

large-hearted  man — one  whose  delight  it  is  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  clothe  the  naked ; 
a  generous,  ungrudging,  cheerful  giver.  His  creed  may  possibly  be  defective,  his 
knowledge  limited ;  yet  surely  it  may  be  said  of  such  an  one,  that  he  is  not  far  from 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  for  is  it  not  promised  that  "if  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to 
the  hungry,  and  satisfy  the  afflicted  soul,  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  obscurity,  and 
thy  darkness  be  as  the  noonday."  But  let  a  man  be  close  and  miserly  in  his  habits 
— more  ready  to  hoard  than  to  give — one  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  but  doeth  it  not 
— then,  however  accurate  his  creed,  however  strict  and  orthodox  his  profession,  he 
lacks  surely  the  vitality  of  grace;  he  has  a  name  to  live,  but  is  dead.  All  separation 
between  knowledge  and  action  is  ruinous  and  enfeebling,  and  faith  in  Christ  as 
dying  for  us  is  worth  little,  unless  there  be  also  faith  in  Christ  as  living  in  us  .  .  . 
There  is  no  alternative  between  sowing  to  the  spirit  and  sowing  to  the  flesh.  No 
middle  course  is  possible.  The  policy  of  inaction,  whilst  the  great  contest  between 
good  and  evil  is  raging  around  us,  is  nothing  else  than  the  policy  of  selfishness, 
and  many  a  life,  which  drifts  along  in  amiable,  aimless  inactivity,  is  just  as  truly  a 
sowing  to  the  flesh  as  is  the  life  of  the  most  abandoned.  According  to  tbe  context, 
the  man  who  soweth  to  his  flesh  is  he  who  spends  upon  himself  that  which  he 
ought  to  spend  upon  others — the  niggardly  Galatian  who  neglects  his  Christian 
teacher,  or  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem,  that  he  may  hoard  or  squander  his  gains — 
the  professing  Christian  of  every  age  who  lays  up  treasure  for  himself,  and  is  not 
rich  towards  God.  It  is  in  such  things  that  self-deception  is  so  easy.  The  profli- 
gate, the  drunkard,  or  the  murderer  cannot  doubt  for  a  moment  how  he  is  sowing : 
his  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest.  But  the  man  of  Christian  profession  may 
eonceal  his  selfishness  beneath  such  a  veil  of  devout  behaviour  as  to  deceive  others, 
and  perhaps  himself.  Hence  the  warning  of  the  apostle — "  Be  not  deceived  ;  God 
is  not  mocked."  If  Christ  would  have  His  followers  count  the  cost  of  becoming 
His  disciples,  He  would  have  all  men  count  the  cost  of  serving  sin,  whether  in  its 
grosser  or  in  its  more  polished  form ;  He  would  have  no  man  cheat  himself  into 
believing  that  a  life  of  self-indulgence,  however  amiable  and  engaging  it  may  be, 
can  issue  in  aught  but  ruin.  (Emilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  The  danger  of  self-de- 
eeption : — Man  is  both  deceitful  and  deceived ;  and  being  so,  it  is  difficult  to  unde- 
ceive him.  We  have  also  to  do  with  a  deceitful  enemy.  Moreover,  everything 
around  ns  is  deceitful.  Riches  are  so.  Favour  is  deceitful.  The  heart  also  is 
deceitful.  Sin  also  is  said  to  be  deceitful ;  and  there  is  therefore  great  need  of  the 
caution  in  the  text — "  Be  not  deceived."  I.  Consider  some  of  the  instances  in 
which  we  abe  liable  to  be  deceived.  Men  in  general  have  mistaken  apprehen- 
sions of  the  character  of  God.  We  are  also  much  deceived  about  our  fellow- 
creatures.  We  call  the  proud  happy,  and  regard  the  poor  as  miserable  :  we  despise 
those  whom  God  honcurs,  and  applaud  those  whom  He  condemns.  But,  above  all, 
we  are  in  danger  of  being  deceived  about  ourselves.  1.  Those  are  certainly  de- 
ceived who  entertain  lessening  apprehensions  of  the  evil  of  sin,  saying  of  this  and 
the  other  transgression  of  God's  holy  law,  as  Lot  did  of  Zoar,  "  Is  it  not  a  little 
one?  and  my  soul  shall  live."  2.  Those  are  deceived  who  think  that  the  wrath  of 
God  against  sin  is  represented  in  too  strong  a  light.  3.  Those  who  amuse  themselves 
with  the  hope  of  a  death-bed  repentance,  are  in  danger  of  being  deceived.  4.  Those 
who  flatter  themselves  with  the  idea  of  safety,  while  they  continually  expose  them- 
selves to  danger,  are  under  great  deception.  5.  Those  are  awfully  deceived  who 
think  their  state  to  be  good  when  it  is  really  otherwise.  Many  imagine  that  they 
are  justified  and  pardoned  when  they  are  in  a  state  of  wrath  and  condemnation, 
II.  Consider  the  evil  and  danger  of  self-deception.  1.  It  leaves  us  in  a  state 
of  painful  uncertainty.  Those  who  are  under  the  power  of  it  will  still  be  in  sus- 
pense, and  never  attain  to  full  satisfaction :  they  will  be  continually  fluctuating 
between  hope  and  fear,  neither  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  sin  nor  the  contentments 
of  piety.  2.  Bemember,  God  cannot  be  deceived.  He  knoweth  them  that  are  His, 
and  them  that  are  not  so.  3.  Those  who  are  deceived  will  one  day  be  undeceived, 
and  that  perhaps  when  it  will  be  too  late.  4.  Self-deception  discourages  from  the 
use  of  means.  Those  who  fancy  themselves  safe  and  right,  though  they  have  the 
greatest  need  of  a  Saviour,  are  not  likely  to  apply  to  Him.  5.  Present  deception 
will  aggravate  future  misery.  None  sink  so  deep  in  hell  as  hypocrites  and  self- 
deceivers.  Hence  we  may  learn — 1.  The  necessity  of  self-examination.  2.  The 
advantage  of  a  soul-searching  ministry.  3.  When  we  have  examined  ourselves, 
and  have  been  tried  by  others  to  the  utmost,  still  there  i3  a  need  to  prostrate  our- 
selves before  the  throne,  and  to  pray  with  the  Psalmist,  "  Search  me,  O  God,  and 
know  my  heart :  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  I  "  (Psalm  cxxxix.  23,  24).     (Br 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

Beddome,  M.A.)  The  reward  of  the  work : — "  Whatsoever  "—both  in  kind  and 
in  degree.  The  law  runs  through  all  creation,  from  the  natural  up  to  the  super- 
natural  life — from  the  world  of  sensation  to  the  world  of  spirits — from  this  earthly 
existence  to  life  eternal.  The  what  and  the  how  much  are  proportionate.  The 
wheat-seed  comes  not  up  as  barley,  and  the  scanty  sowing  Bends  not  forth  an 
abundant  harvest.  The  acorn  comes  not  up  as  the  sycamore,  nor  does  the  orange 
seed  produce  the  fig-tree.  Each  has  its  own  crop.  What  we  put  into  the  earth, 
that  we  know  will  come  back  to  us  after  many  days.  Or  rise  into  the  world  of 
man.  Here  the  same  law  obtains.  What  man  labours  for,  that  he  for  the  most 
part  achieves.  What  man  labours  for,  that  he  achieves,  and  in  proportion  to  his 
labour.  The  years  given  to  intellectual  study  do  not  produce  the  athletic  champion 
of  his  country.  These  form  the  student.  The  keen  politician  does  not  find  hie 
meed  in  the  peace  and  retirement  of  a  learned  leisure.  Each  man  works  to  an 
end ;  and  the  appropriate  end  for  which  he  works,  that  he  obtains.  He  gets  his 
own  reward,  and  not  another's.  Now  let  ns  go  a  step  further.  We  have  found  this 
great  law  of  God  pervading  physical  and  intellectual  life — does  it  extend  into  the 
spiritual  life  ?  The  text  gives  us  the  answer — "  God  is  not  mocked.  Whatsoever  a 
man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  The  law  of  the  natural  harvest,  of  the 
intellectual  harvest,  of  the  spiritual  harvest,  is  one ;  and  that  law  is  the  law,  ec 
universal,  bo  all-encircling,  that  the  heathen  in  their  blindness  supposed  it  a  Deity — 
Retribution.  I.  The  life  of  the  flesh.  There  is  a  gross  sowing  to  the  flesh  in 
the  indulgence  of  the  carnal  desires  of  the  flesh  in  their  coarsest  form.  Not  only 
is  there  retribution  here,  but  retribution  in  its  most  evident  form.  The  man  who 
lives  for  the  purpose  of  indulging  his  passions  does  so  with  effect.  He  makes  a 
science  of  sinning.  The  whole  powers  of  his  mind  are  bent  upon  compassing  his 
desires,  and  by  the  great  law  of  life,  he  succeeds  beyond  other  men.  Occasions  of 
evil,  by  an  inscrutable  mystery,  present  themselves  to  him  beyond  others.  Success 
attends  his  efforts  in  evil,  as  we  see  in  the  luck  which  attends  the  incipient  gamester. 
He  has  good  fortunes  (as  another  nation  terms  such  offences)  in  his  iniquity.  He 
reaps  the  meed  of  the  care,  and  thought,  and  time,  and  money  he  has  expended 
upon  his  favourite  faults.  But  this  very  harvest  is— corruption.  The  very  success 
is  ruin.  Linked  as  cause  and  effect  with  the  fortunate  perpetration  of  sin  comes 
the  destruction  of  all  the  aspiring  part  of  man.  And  what  is  the  condition  of  things 
when  this  fearful  degeneracy  has  budded  and  flowered  and  brought  forth  its  fruit  in 
the  world  to  come  ?  What  a  sight  will  it  be  in  the  sunlight  of  the  new  creation  to 
behold  the  haggard,  scowling,  bloated  features  of  the  victim  of  past  sin ;  how  fearful 
will  it  be  to  fix  our  eyes  upon  those  hardened  and  deformed  lineaments  in  which 
weakness  and  brutality,  coarseness  and  emaciate  sickliness  in  marvellous  combi- 
nation, alike  have  their  part  and  portion.  But  what  will  this  be  to  the  state  of 
their  bouIs  ?  The  measure  of  iniquity  has  been  fulfilled ;  not  one  unit  from  the  full 
sum  of  absolute  degradation  is  wanting, — the  natural  powers  have  been  perverted 
— the  spiritual  ones  are  lost,  gone  for  ever,  or  only  exist  in  the  increased  responsi- 
bility which  attends  them,  and  nought  remains  but  the  full  measure  of  the  fruits  of 
sin — the  pain  of  the  loss  of  God's  presence — the  agony  of  the  undying  worm, 
inextinguishable  despair,  and  absolute  hatred  of  God.  II.  The  lot  or  the 
Spirit.  He  that  sows  to  the  Spirit  shall  also  reap,  both  in  degree  and  in  kind.  In 
degree  he  will  reap  in  proportion.  He  that  soweth  sparingly,  shall  reap  sparingly ; 
and  he  that  soweth  plentifully  shall  reap  plentifully.  A  scanty  obedience  will 
produce  a  scanty  reward :  scanty,  both  here  and  hereafter ;  scanty  in  the  graces 
and  comforts  accorded  by  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  as  the  consolation  of  our 
pilgrimage  here  below ;  scanty,  alas  1  also  in  the  jewels  of  our  eternal  crown.  A 
plentiful  sowing  on  the  other  hand  will  produce  its  proportionate  harvest.  For 
everything  done  for  Christ  we  shall  have  our  own  reward ;  and  in  the  degree  that 
we  work  for  Him  so  shall  that  reward  be.  The  same  law  of  retribution  will  run 
through  the  apportionment  of  every  seat  in  heaven.  Everything  in  the  way  of 
faithful  obedience  done  here  below  will  determine  and  establish  its  own  peculiar 
glory  and  bliss  in  the  world  to  come.  (Bishop  A.  P.  Forbes.)  Sowing  and 
reaping : — I.  God  is  not  tc,  be  trifled  with.  1.  Either  by  the  notion  that  there 
will  be  no  rewards  and  punishments.  2.  Or  by  the  idea  that  a  bare  profession  will 
suffice  to  save  us.  8.  Or  by  the  fancy  that  we  shall  escape  in  the  crowd.  4.  Or  by 
the  superstitious  supposition  that  certain  rites  will  set  all  straight  at  last,  whatever 
our  lives  may  be.  5.  Or  by  a  reliance  upon  an  orthodox  creed,  a  supposed  conver- 
sion, a  presumptuous  faith,  and  a  little  almsgiving.  H.  The  laws  of  His  govern- 
ment cannot  be  set  aside.     1.  It  is  so  in  nature.    Law  is  inexorable.    Gravitatioa 


•hap.  n.]  GALATIAN8.  487 

crashes  the  man  who  opposes  it.    2.  It  is  so  in  providence.    Evil  results  surely 
follow  social  wrong.     3.  Conscience  tells  as  it  must  be  so.     Sin  must  be  punished. 
4.   The  Word  of   God  is  very  clear  npon  this  point.     5.   To  alter  laws  would 
disarrange  the  universe,  and  remove  the  foundation  of  the  hopes  of  the  righteous. 
III.  Evil  sowing  will  being  evil  heaping.     1.  This  is  seen  in  the  present  result 
of  certain  sins.     Sins  of  lust  bring  disease  into  the  bodily  frame.     Sins  of  idolatry 
have  led  men  to  cruel  and  degrading  practices.      Sins  of  temper  have  caused 
murders,  wars,  strifes,   and  misery.      Sins  of  appetite,  especially  drunkenness, 
cause  want,  misery,  delirium,  &c.    2.  This  is  seen  in  the  minds  becoming  more 
and  more  corrupt,  and  less  able  to  see  the  evil  of  sin,  or  to  resist  temptation. 
3.  This  is  seen  when  the  man  becomes  evidently  obnoxious  to  God  and  man, 
so  as   to   need  restraint,  and  invite   punishment.      4.  This  is    seen   when    the 
sinner  becomes  himself  disappointed  in  the  result  of  his  conduct.      His  malice 
eats  his  heart ;  his  greed  devours  his  soul ;  his  infidelity  destroys  his  comfort ;  his 
raging  passions  agitate  his  spirit.   5.  This  is  seen  when  the  impenitent  is  confirmed 
in  evil,  and  eternally  punished  with  remorse.     Hell  will  be  the  harvest  of  a  man's 
own  sin.     Conscience  is  tbe  worm  which  gnaws  him.    IV.  Good  sowing  will  bring 
good  heaping.     The  rule  holds  good  both  ways.    Let  us,  therefore,  inquire  as  to 
this  good  sowing.     1.  In  what  power  is  it  to  be  done  ?    2.  In  what  manner  and 
spirit  shall  we  set  about  it?    3.  What  are  its  seeds?    (1)  Towards  God,  we  sow  in 
the  Spirit,  faith,  and  obedience.     (2)  Towards  men,  love,  truth,  justice,  kindness, 
forbearance.     (3)  Towards  self,  control  of  appetite,  purity,  &o.     4.  What  is  the 
reaping  of  the  Spirit  ?    Life  everlasting,  dwelling  within  us  and  abiding  there  for 
ever.    Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  sow  good  seed  always.     2.  Let  us  sow  it  plentifully, 
that  we  may  reap  in  proportion.     3.  Let  us  begin  to  sow  it  at  once.      (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        No  loss  from  sowing  good  seed : — Doth  any  think  he  shall  lose  by  his 
charity  ?    No  worldling,  when  he  sows  his  seed,  thinks  he  shall  lose  his  seed ;  he 
hopes  for  increase  at  harvest.    Darest  thou  trust  the  ground,  and  not  God  ?     Sure, 
God  is  a  better  paymaster  than  the  earth ;  grace  doth  give  a  larger  recompense 
than  nature.    Below,  thou  mayest  receive  forty  grains  for  one ;  but  in  heaven  (by 
the  promise  of  Christ)  a  hundred-fold :  a  measure  heapen,  and  shaken,  and  thrust 
together,  and  yet  running  over.    •'  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor";  there 
is  the  seeding :  "  The  Lord  shall  deliver  him  in  the  time  of  trouble  "  (Psa.  xli.  1) ; 
there  is  the  harvest.     Is  that  all?    No;  Matt.  zxv.  35:  "Ye  fed  Me  when  I 
was  hungry,  and  gave  Me  drink  when  thirsty  " — comforted  Me  in  misery ;  there  is 
the  sowing.     Venite,  beati.     "Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you";   there  is  the  harvest.      (Thomas   Adams.)        Christian  dili- 
gence : — The  days  and  hours  of  this  present  state,  which  often  flit  by  so  little 
heeded,  are  of  immense  consequence  to  us  all.    They  contain  the  seeds,  the  con- 
centrated germs,  of  an  endless  future  life.    As  the  seed  enwraps  the  plant  that  shall 
be,  so  the  thought,  the  word,  the  act  of  time,  enwraps  the  expansion  of  the  man 
in  eternity.    Now,  what  does  the  Christian  sow  ?  and  what  shail  he  reap  ?    In  the 
answer  to  this  question,  comes  in  a  deep  and  most  important  truth,  to  which 
I  will  beg  your    earnest   attention.      When    the  husbandman  has  sown,   and 
tended  the  seed,  and  waited  the  appointed  months  till  the  harvest  come,  what, — 
of  what  kind,  is  his  reward  ?    It  is  not  a  bestowal  of  something  different,  And  from 
without,  as  a  recompense  for  his  labours ;  but  the  fruit  and  expansion  of  those 
labours  themselves  ;  that  which  be  has  sown,  the  same  does  he  reap,  not,  it  is  true, 
as  it  was  sown,  but  enriched  with  God's  abundant  blessing,  increased  thirty  and 
sixty  and  an  hundred  fold,  still,  however,  the  same ;  the  very  thing  which  he 
deposited,  so  unpromising  itself,  in  ground  so  unpromising,  does  he  now  gather 
into  his  bosom,  a  full  and  rich  reward,  satisfying  him  and  gladdening  him,  and 
filling  his  heart  with  praise.     Again  then,  what  does  the  Christian  sow  ?  for  that 
.also,  not  a  reward  or  recompense  external  to  and  separate  from  that,  shall  he 
reap ;  that  same,  but  blessed  and  expanded  and  glorified,  and  become  his  exceeding 
great  reward.    The  Christian,  brethren,  sows  to  the  Spirit,  not  to  the  flesh.    Let 
us  try  to  give  a  plain  practical  interpretation  to  these  words.    The  sowing  being 
interpreted  to  mean  the  thoughts,  words,  and  acts  of  this  present  life — the  Christian 
thinks,  speaks,  and  acts  with  reference  to  the  Spirit — to  his  higher,  his  Divine  part ; 
to  that  part  of  him  which  being  dwelt  in  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  aims  at  God's  glory; 
loves  Hun,  serves  Him,  converges  to  Him  in  its  desires  and  motions.    His  Spirit, 
the  abode  of  the  Divine  witness  within  him — the  highest  part,  which  aspires  after 
God  and  His  glory — this  deserves  especial  culture  of  its  own,  but  not  exclusive 
culture.    It  must  reign  in  him,  not  by  sitting  on  a  height  apart,  not  by  dignified 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 


Blumber  only  broken  on  solemn  occasions,  but  by  watchful  and  constant  rule,  by 
claiming  for  itself  and  for  God  the  subordinate  thoughts  and  plans  and  desires. 
And  it  is  among  these  that  the  Christian's  sowing  for  eternity  will  most  commonly 
and  most  busily  take  place.    Educate  for  God  by  drawing  forth,  and  as  you  draw 
them  forth,  balancing  with  love  and  with  wisdom  those  mental  and  bodily  capa- 
cities, and  the  several  parts  of  that  spiritual  character,  which  God  has  entrusted  to 
your  care.    But  do  not  educate  for  self  and  for  the  world,  for  the  display  of  person 
and  of  attainment ;  for  this  is  sowing  to  the  flesh,  and  the  harvest  shall  be  ac- 
cordingly.    (Dean  Alford.)        Men  reap  at  they  sow : — Human  actions  draw  after 
them  consequences  corresponding  with  the  nature  of  those  actions.     I  shall  begin 
with  offering  a  few  familiar  illustrations  of  this  principle  as  witnessed  in  the 
common  affairs  of  life,  in  the  hope  that  I  shall  thus  be  able  to  show  more  clearly 
and  usefully  its  bearing  on  the  higher  interest  of  the  soul  and  eternity.    I  remark 
then — 1.  The  assertion  of  our  text  is  literally  true.     Whenever  the  husbandman 
goes  forth  and  sows  his  prepared  acres,  or  the  reaper  gathers  in  the  harvest,  or  the 
passer-by  surveys  the  crop  as  he  looks  abroad  upon  the  fields,  waving  with  the 
ripening  grain,  and  fruits  of  various  kind,  a  voice  continually  sounds  in  the  ears  of 
each,  "  Whatsoever  ye  sow,  that  shall  ye  also  reap."    It  is  the  voice  of  nature 
repeating  the  voice  of  revelation.     2.  We  see  the  principle  of  our  text  illustrated 
in  the  culture  of  the  mind.    Here  it  holds  true  that  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that 
he  also  reaps.    3.  The  same  truth  is  illustrated  in  all  the  various  occupations  and 
pursuits  of  life.     The  lawyer,  who  sets  his  mark  high  in  his  profession  and  pursues 
his  object  with  earnest,  persevering  application,  is  sure  to  acquire  a  reputation  and 
an  influence  corresponding  with  his  efforts.    The  physician,  who  gives  himself  to 
his  calling,  and  is  judicious  and  thorough  in  his  practice,  draws  around  him,  if  not 
suddenly,  yet  certainly,  the  confidence  and  patronage  of  the  community,  and  in  the 
end  reaps  the  rewards  of  his  diligence  and  skill,  while  the  pretender  and  the  quack 
are  of  ephemeral  reputation,  and  soon  pass  away  and  are  forgotten.    The  mastei 
mechanic  and  the  merchant,  and  men  of  business  of  every  name,  know  well  how 
universally  applicable  to  their  respective  callings  is  the  principle  we  are  consider- 
ing.    They  know  that  success  depends  on  diligence,  industry,  perseverance,  and 
that  to  expect  to  rise  to  eminence  or  to  wealth  without  corresponding  efforts,  would 
be  as  vain  as  to  expect  to  reap  a  harvest  without  the  previous  labours  of  sowing 
and  cultivation.    4.  Apply  this  principle  to  another  case  :  the  acquisition  and  use 
of  property.     The  moral  law  of  accumulation  is  but  little  understood.     We  are 
not  our  own  masters,  but  God's  stewards.    So  long  as  we  plan  and  toil  on  this 
principle,  we  act  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God  and  for  our  own  best  and 
highest  interests.     We  are  sowing  our  seed  well,  and  we  shall  reap  a  plentiful 
harvest  both  here  and  hereafter.  But  when  the  law  here  referred  to  is  transgressed, 
and  the  just  limits  of  accumulation  are  disregarded ;  when  a  man  comes  to  feel  thai 
he  is  his  own  master,  and  gives  himself  up  to  the  getting  and  laying  up  money  for 
his  own  selfish  purposes,  to  gratify  his  worldliness  and  love  of  gain,  or  to  heap  up 
treasures  for  his  children,  he  just  as  surely  sows  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  shad, 
reap  corruption,  as  that  he  is  a  living  man.     5.  The  truth  of  the  maxim  declared 
in  our  text  is  also  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  training  of  families.     The  fainilj' 
state,  the  first  ordained  of  God  in  Paradise  was  expressly  appointed,  as  He  tells  ok 
in  His  Word,  "that  He  might  seek  a  godly  seed,"  in  other  words,  to  spread  and  per 
petuate  truth  and  piety  in  the  world,  and  no  institution  can  be  conceived  mor« 
wisely  adapted  to  this  end.    There  is  no  so  hopeful  a  vineyard  for  cultivation  as 
a  young,  rising  family.    The  soil  is  rich  and  mellow,  as  yet  unoccupied  by  noxious 
plants,  and  ready  to  receive  whatever  seed  may  be  cast  into  it.    6.  The  principle  of 
our  text  holds  true  in  regard  to  the  attainment  and  growth  of  personal  religion. 
Every  man,  while  life  lasts,  may  be  regarded  as  entrusted  with  the  care  of  a  moral 
vineyard,  which  he  is  required  to  cultivate,  and  the  harvest  he  reaps  is  sure  to 
correspond  with  the  seed  he  sows  in  it.    A  part  of  this  vineyard,  if  I  may  so  speak, 
lies  in  his  own  bosom.     It  is  his  mind,  his  heart,  his  conscience,  his  affections, 
his  character.      7.  The  principle  we  are  considering  will  be  fully  illustrated  in 
the  retributions  of  eternity.      Men  are  now   forming  the  characters  in  which 
they  are   to   appear  before  the   judgment  seat   of   Christ.       (J.   Hawes,  D.J).) 
It  is  impossible  for  a  man  continuously  and  successfully  to  practise  a  fraud.     I. 
Upon  his  own  immortality.    II.  Upon  his  neighboub.    HI.  Upon  his  God.    (Sam. 
P.Jones.)        The  double   harvest: — I.  Oub  present  life  is  a  moral  tbial  fob 

ANOTHER    TO    COME.       II.    HUMAN    LIFE  HAS   ONE   OB   OTHEB   OF  TWO  OBEAT  CHARACTERS, 
AND  WILL  ISSUE   IN  ONE  OB   OTHEB  OF   TWO   OKEAT   RESULTS.      III.    We   ABE    LIABLE  T« 


.  vi.J  QALATIANS.  489 

DELUSIONS    WITH   RESPECT  TO  THESE  GEEAT   VEKITIE8.      (J.  B.    Geden,  D.D.)  The 

principle  of  the  spiritual  harvest : — I.  The  principle.  1.  There  are  two  kinds  of 
good  possible  to  man ;  the  one  enjoyed  by  our  animal  being,  the  other  by  our 
spirits.  There  are  two  kinds  of  harvest,  and  the  labour  which  procures  the  one  has 
no  tendency  to  produce  the  other.  2.  Everything  has  its  price,  and  the  price  buys 
that  and  nothing  else :  the  soldier  pays  his  price  for  glory  and  gets  it :  the  recluse 
does  not.  3.  The  mistake  men  make  is  that  they  sow  for  earth  and  expect  to  win 
spiritual  blessings,  and  vice  versd.  Christian  men  complain  that  the  unprincipled 
get  on  in  life,  and  that  the  saints  are  kept  back.  But  the  saints  must  pay  the 
price :  they  have  as  their  reward  something  better  for  which  they  do  pay.  No  man 
can  have  two  harvests  for  one  sowing.  II.  The  application  of  the  principle.  1. 
Sowing  to  the  flesh  includes  (1)  open  riot,  whose  harvest  is  disappointment  and 
remorse.  (2)  Worldliness  whose  harvest  being  with  earth  perishes.  2.  Sowing  to 
the  spirit,  which  is  "well  doing,"  the  harvest  of  which  is  (1)  Life  eternal;  here  and 
hereafter.  (2)  Not  arbitrary  but  natural :  the  seed  sown  contains  the  harvest.  (/'". 
W.  Robertson.)  Man's  seed  time  and  harvest  • — L  A  caution  which  is — 1.  Dis- 
suasive— "  Be  not  deceived  "  (Eph.  v.  6).  To  prevent  the  deceivings  of  sin  (Heb.  iii. 
13.)  The  pretexts  for  sin  are — (1)  Predestination.  (2)  God  saw  it  and  might  have 
prevented  it.  (3)  Ignorance.  (4)  Good  deeds  outweigh  it.  (5)  God  is  merciful.  (6) 
Christ  died  for  it.  (7)  I  shall  repent  of  it.  2.  Persuasive — "  God  is  not  mocked  " 
(2  Chron.  vi.  30 ;  Acts.  i.  24).  Hypocrisy  and  gold  can  cozen  men,  but  not  God. 
II.  The  reason.  "  Whatsoever,"  be  it  good  or  evil,  blessing  or  cursing,  truth  or 
hypocrisy,  "  a  man,"  Jew,  Turk,  heathen  or  Christian,  prince  or  subject,  rich  or 
poor,  "  soweth,"  &o.  1.  To  begin  with  the  wicked.  They  shall  reap  what  they 
have  sown.  (1)  In  kind  (Obad.  15  ;  Ezek.  xxxv.  15).  (2)  In  proportion  (James  ii. 
13 ;  Hosea  x.  13).  2.  The  godly.  They  sow  (1)  in  faith,  and  have  eternal  life 
(John.  v.  24).  (2)  In  obedienoe,  and  have  a  sense  of  God's  love  (John  xv.  10). 
(3)  In  tears,  and  reap  in  joy  (Psa.  cxxvi.  5 ;  Matt.  v.  4).  (4)  In  charity,  and  have 
heaven's  abundance  (Matt.  x.  42  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6  ;  Matt.  xxv.  35).  (Thomas  Adams.) 
Sowing  and  reaping: — I.  The  solemnity  of  the  apostle's  warning.  1.  The  nature 
of  self-deception.  It  is  sad  to  be  deceived  in  (1)  a  friend ;  (2)  our  state  of  health ;  (3) 
our  means — but  these  are  not  beyond  remedy — but  (4)  to  be  deceived  about  the  soul's 
condition  is  irreparable.  2.  Its  cause.  (1)  Living  upon  the  memories  of  the  past. 
(2)  Zeal  for  the  ordinances  of  religion.  (3)  Taking  safety  for  granted.  3.  Its  futility. 
While  you  deceive  yourselves  God  is  not  mocked.  II.  The  importance  of  the 
apostle's  statement.  1.  Flesh  includes  all  desires  whether  sensual  or  refined 
that  does  not  lead  us  to  God :  the  Spirit  those  desires  which  spring  from  His  inspir- 
ation and  find  in  Him  their  response  and  their  joy.  2.  The  underlying  principle 
here  is  that  we  have  largely  the  making  and  marring  of  our  own  future.  3.  The 
marring  is  when  by  sowing  to  the  flesh  in,  e.g.,  pride,  covetousness,  ungodliness,  a 
man  reaps  corruption,  i.e.,  desolation  and  decay;  the  making  when  by  sowing  to  the 
Spirit  we  reap  everlasting  life,  something  that  shall  not  pass  away.  (W.  M.  Pun- 
shon,  LL.D.)  I.  A  man  expects  to  reap  that  which  he  sows.  II.  He  expects  to 
reap  a  crop  of  the  same  kind  that  he  has  sown.     IH.  He  expects  to  reap  more 

THAN  HE  SOWS.  IV.  IGNORANCE  OF  THE  KIND  OF  SEED  SOWN  WILL  MAKE  NO  DIFFER- 
ENCE to  the  crop.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  I.  Righteousness  and  sin  always  yield  their 
harvests  :  the  moral  results  of  our  actions  are  determined  by  definite  and  irresis- 
tible laws.  II.  Yet  in  the  lower  provinces  of  life  there  is  a  good  deal  of 
■owing  that  is  followed  by  no  REAPING.  1.  In  business  ;  2.  Politics  ;  3.  Science ; 
4.  Home  and  society.  III.  The  disappointments  in  these  lower  provinces 
make  us  cynical,  but  God  permits  them  in  order  to  warn  us  against  sowing  too 
much  seed  where  it  may  be  blighted.  IV.  God  is  the  only  master  who  always 
gives  His  servants  the  wages  they  work  for.  Serve  Him — 1.  In  business,  and 
whether  you  make  money  or  not,  you  will  increase  your  treasure  in  heaven.  2.  In 
the  service  of  the  public,  and  whether  you  have  your  reward  or  not  you  will  have 
honourable  distinction  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  V.  The  harvest  may  not  be  to- 
morrow or  the  day  after,  but  in  due  season  we  shall  reap.  VI.  Enough,  however, 
is  reaped  now  to  save  men  from  despair.  Work  done  for  God  is  never  wasted.  1. 
Take  the  social  and  political  improvements  of  recent  years.  2.  The  advance  of 
the  kingdom  of  God.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Man's  work  and  his  certain  reward: — 
1.  A  timely  caution :  God's  omniscience  renders  it  impossible  that  He  should  be 
mocked.  2.  A  great  principle  stated  :  what  is  true  in  nature  is  true  in  morals.  3. 
This  great  principle  in  its  application  to  man's  probation.  The  work  of  man  is — I. 
That  of   sowing   to  the  flesh.     1.  Pleasure  seeking.     2.    Money  making.     3* 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Knowledge  acquiring.  This  must  reap  corruption,  because  (1)  the  corruption  of 
death  will  put  an  end  to  most  earthly  accomplishments.  (2)  That  which  survives 
the  work  of  corruption  will  entail  the  agonies  of  spiritual  corruption.  II.  That  of 
bowing  to  the  spirit.  1.  Those  who  yield  their  heart  a  willing  sacrifice  to  God. 
2.  Who  consecrate  their  substance  to  God.  3.  Who  devote  all  their  energies  to  the 
service  of  God,  sow  to  the  Spirit ;  (1)  because  they  enter  into  sympathy  with  the 
strongest  elements,  laws,  and  forces  of  the  spiritual  universe :  and  (2)  in  eternity 
reap  in  quantity  and  quality  what  they  have  sown  here.  (S.  B.)  Retribution 
and  grace : — I.  The  preacher  of  justification  by  faith  lavs  down  the  principle 
of  retribution.  1.  This  principle  is  of  universal  application.  2.  It  is  applied  to 
man  not  only  as  the  agent  but  as  the  one  on  whom  it  is  to  operate.  3.  In  virtue 
of  it  we  can  be  prophets  of  our  future.  II.  The  laws  of  grace  and  retribution 
abe  perfectly  habmonious.  1.  Salvation  is  a  gift.  2.  But  we  have  to  take  advan- 
tage of  this  gift.  3.  This  is  accomplished  by  faith.  4.  But  faith  is  a  continuous 
act,  and  involves  obedience  as  well  as  trust.  (S.  Pearson,  H.A.)  Three  dualities : — 
I.  A  duality  of  nature.  1.  "  Flesh,"  representing  that  which  connects  man  with 
time  and  sense.  2.  "  Spirit,"  that  which  connects  man  with  the  immutable  and 
the  Divine.  II.  A  duality  of  proceedure.  1.  Sowing  to  the  flesh  :  cultivating  the 
animal  powers  and  propensities.  2.  Sowing  to  the  Spirit :  cultivating  the  spiritual 
powers  and  propensities.  III.  A  duality  of  result.  1.  Corruption.  2.  Everlasting 
life.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  True  moral  culture : — I.  The  spirituality  of  the  work. 
1.  The  spirit  requires  moral  cultivation.  In  its  unregenerate  state  its  ground  is 
fallen ;  it  is  a  wilderness,  full  of  the  germs  of  evil.  2.  The  spirit  is  capable  of 
moral  cultivation.  Facts  show  this:  what  moral  changes  have  taken  place  in 
human  nature:  read  the  history  of  Paul.  II.  The  eternity  of  the  work.  1.  The 
soil  is  everlasting.  2.  The  seed  is  everlasting :  we  are  sowing  for  eternity.  3.  The 
uniformity  of  the  work.  (1)  Of  kind.  The  kind  you  sow  you  will  reap.  (2)  Of 
amount.  If  little,  reap  little.  All  this  is  ensured  by  the  laws  of  causation,  habit, 
memory,  retribution.  Every  deed  is  a  seed  sown  in  our  nature,  either  good  or  evil, 
and  according  to  the  seed  will  be  the  harvest.  (Ibid.)  God  is  not  mocked: — I 
could  both  sigh  and  smile  at  the  simplicity  of  a  native  American,  sent  by  a  Spaniard, 
his  master,  with  a  basket  of  figs,  and  a  letter  wherein  the  figs  were  mentioned,  to 
carry  them  both  to  one  of  his  master's  friends.  By  the  way  this  messenger  eat  up 
the  figs,  but  delivered  the  letter,  whereby  his  deed  was  discovered,  and  he  soundly 
punished.  Being  sent  a  second  time  on  the  like  message,  he  first  took  the  letter, 
which  he  conceived  had  eyes  as  well  as  a  tongue,  and  hid  it  in  the  ground,  sitting 
himself  on  the  place  where  he  had  put  it ;  and  then  securely  fell  to  feed  on  his  figs, 
presuming  that  that  paper  which  saw  nothing,  could  tell  nothing.  Then  taking  it 
again  out  of  the  ground,  he  delivered  it  to  his  master's  friend,  whereby  bis  fault 
was  perceived,  and  he  worse  beaten  than  before.  Men  conceive  they  can  manage 
their  sins  with  secrecy,  but  they  carry  about  them  a  letter,  or  a  book  rather,  written 
by  God's  finger,  their  conscience  bearing  witness  to  all  their  actions.  But  sinners, 
being  often  detected  and  accused,  hereby  grow  wary  at  last,  and  to  prevent  this 
speaking  paper  from  telling  tales,  do  smother,  stifle,  and  suppress  it,  when  they  go 
about  the  committing  of  any  wickedness.  Yet  conscience  (though  buried  for  a 
time  in  silence)  hath  afterwards  a  resurrection,  and  discovers  all,  to  their  greater 
shame  and  heavier  punishment.  (T.  Fuller.)  The  folly  of  sowing  to  the  flesh : — 
If  you  saw  a  man  with  a  seed  basket  on  bis  shoulder,  who  had  a  field  which  by 
proper  cultivation  would  yield  a  plentiful  crop  and  profit,  and  there  he  was  with  his 
basket  filled  with  thistles  and  nettles,  and  all  noxious  weeds  that  he  could  lay  his 
hand  on,  and  he  was  sowing  that  field  with  these  from  morning  to  night  and  on 
Sunday  too — you  would  say,  "  I  doubt  yon  man  is  spoiling  that  field,  sowing  it 
with  that  stuff ; "  and  if  you  saw  him  sowing  still  all  day  long,  and  on  Sunday  more 
than  any  day,  you  would  say,  "  I  think  it  is  time  yon  man  was  stopped,  he  must 
be  a  madman,"  and  suppose  you  talked  with  a  person  that  saw  it  too,  and  he  said 
to  you,  "Do  you  know  what  the  end  will  be?  "  "Why,"  you  would  say,  "he  is 
ruining  his  field,  it  must  be  all  undone  before  any  crop  can  be  got  from  it  again." 
"  Ah  1  but  (says  the  other)  do  you  know  these  seeds  that  he  is  sowing  will  rise  and 
prove  to  be  a  plentiful  harvest,  and  they  will  touch  the  clouds,  and  then  afterwards 
the  field  is  to  be  cleared  of  them,  and  there  is  to  be  a  fire  made  of  them  in  which 
the  man  himself  will  be  consumed  ?  "  "  Do  you  say  so  ?  "  *'  That  is  the  truth." 
"  Why  then,  surely  he  must  be  undeceived ;  let  us  try  to  undeceive  him."  Ah,  friends, 
I  am  afraid  that  there  are  many  such  mad  men  here  to-night.  (William  Dawson.) 
Self-deceived : — A  Neapolitan  shepherd  came  in  great  anguish  to  his  priest.  "Father, 


«H4*.  ▼?.]  GALATIANS.  491 

have  mercy  on  a  miserable  sinner !  It  is  the  holy  season  of  Lent,  and,  while  I  wai 
basy  at  work,  some  whey,  spurting  from  the  cheese-press,  flew  into  my  month,  and, 
wretched  man  !  I  swallowed  it.  Free  my  distressed  conscience  from  its  agonies  by 
absolving  me  from  my  guilt !  "  "  Have  you  no  other  sin  to  confess  ?  "  said  his 
spiritual  guide.  "  No ;  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  committed  any  other."  "  There 
are,"  said  the  priest,  "  many  robberies  and  murders  from  time  to  time  committed 
on  your  mountains,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  you  are  one  of  the  persons  con- 
cerned in  them."  "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "I  am ;  but  these  are  never  aocounted  a 
crime ;  it  is  a  thing  practised  by  us  all,  and  there  needs  no  confession  on  that 
account."  (Bagley's  Family  Biblical  Instructor.)  Sowing  and  reaping: — An 
American  minister,  towards  the  close  of  his  sermon,  introduced  a  very  powerful  and 
dramatic  illustration  in  allusion  to  some  well-known  place  where  certain  blasting 
was  to  be  carried  out.  "  The  rock  is  tunnelled,  and  deep  under  the  solid  masses 
over  which  men  walk  with  snch  careless  security,  there  are  now  laid  trains  of  ex- 
plosive powder.  All  seems  so  safe  and  firm  outwardly,  it  is  hardly  possible  to 
imagine  that  those  solid  masses  will  ever  be  shaken ;  but  the  time  will  oome  when 
a  tiny  spark  will  fire  the  whole  train,  and  the  mountain  will  be  in  a  moment  rent 
in  the  air,  and  torn  to  atoms."  "  There  are  men,"  he  said,  looking  round,  "there 
are  men  here  who  are  tunnelled,  mined ;  their  time  will  come,  not  to-day  or  to- 
morrow, not  for  months  or  years,  perhaps,  but  it  will  come  in  a  moment,  from  an 
unforseen  quarter,  a  trifling  incident,  their  reputations  will  be  blown  to  atoms,  and 
what  they  have  sown  they  will  reap.     There  is  no  dynamite  like  men's  lusts  and 

Ewsions."  Sowing  and  reaping : — One  day  as  Felix  Neff  was  walking  in  the  city  of 
ausanne,  he  saw  a  man  whom  he  took  for  one  of  his  intimate  friends.  He  ran  up 
behind  him,  tapped  him  on  the  shoulder,  and  asked,  "  What  is  the  state  of  your 
soul,  my  friend  ?  "  The  stranger  turned  ;  Neff  perceived  his  mistake,  apologized, 
and  went  away.  A  few  years  after  a  stranger  came  to  Neff,  saying  he  was  greatly 
indebted  to  him.  Neff  did  not  recognize  the  man,  and  begged  him  to  explain.  The 
stranger  replied,  "Have  you  forgotten  an  unknown  person  whose  shoulder  you 
touched  in  the  street  in  Lausanne,  and  asked,  '  What  is  the  state  of  your  soul  ?'  It 
was  I ;  your  question  led  me  to  serious  reflection,  and  now  I  trust  it  is  well  with  my 
soul."  Deception  in  spiritual  thing* : — There  are  four  subjects  which  the  apostle 
would  have  us  particularly  guard  against  being  deceived  in.  I.  Be  mot  deceived  in 
the  ohabacteb  of  the  BEING  and  PERFECTIONS  of  God.  1.  He  is  omnipresent.  2. 
He  is  omniscient.  There  are  no  secrets  on  earth  to  Him — no  secrets  in  hell :  hell 
is  naked  before  Him,  and  destruction  has  no  covering  ;  much  more  the  hearts  of  the 
children  of  men.  II.  Be  not  deceived  regarding  your  own  ohabacteb  as  rational 
and  redeemed  cbeatubes.  You  are  a  probationer  for  eternity.  What  infinite 
importance,  then,  is  stamped  on  every  thought,  word,  action ;  they  will  all  spring  up 
again,  multiplied  a  hundredfold  at  the  world's  great  harvest.    III.  Be  not  deceived 

CONCERNING  THE  EVIL  NATURE  AND  DREADFUL  END  OF  A  LIFE  OF  SIN.      Whenever  a  man 

is  living  according  to  the  principles,  appetites,  propensities,  and  passions  of  his 
fallen  nature,  he  is  sowing  to  the  flesh,  and  the  crop  that  he  must  reap  is  eternal 
perdition.  He  can't  have  anything  else.  IV.  Be  not  deceived  concerning  the 
nature  and  excellenct  of  A  life  of  holiness.  "  Sowing  to  the  Spirit "  is  yielding 
to  the  illuminating  and  quickening  energies  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  living  according  to 
the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within  and  without  us.  Surely  this  is  better  than 
sowing  to  the  flesh.  A  man  who  is  sowing  to  the  flesh  has  to  labour ;  and  sowing 
to  the  Spirit  is  no  more  laborious  than  sowing  to  the  flesh,  nor  yet  so  much.  The 
exercises  of  holiness  are  no  greater  than  the  exercises  of  sin :  so  that  even  in  that 
view  the  saint  has  no  loss.  But  then  there  is  the  harvest  to  come  ;  and  what  a 
difference  then.  (W.  Dawson.)  Deception  in  matters  of  religion : — It  is  above  all 
things  important  that  in  the  great  and  momentous  matters  of  religion  we  should 
not  be  mistaken  or  deceived,  but  should  have  the  most  correct,  exact,  and  vivid 
impressions  and  opinions  ;  because  religion  deals  with  such  momentous  subjects  as 
God,  the  soul,  eternity ;  and  if  in  these  momentous  interests  we  are  deceived,  and 
our  conduct  in  consequence  be  mistaken,  the  consequences  must  be  to  us  lament- 
ably and  eternally  fatal.  No  other  way  of  acceptance  with  God,  no  other  refuge 
from  the  wrath  to  come ;  nor  can  we  offer  acceptable  worship  and  service  to  the 
Most  High,  if  our  impressions  of  His  character  be  false  and  incorrect.  For,  remem- 
ber, God  cannot  be  deceived.  I.  Consideb  oub  liability  to  deception.  1.  Our 
ignorance.  2.  Our  natural  selfishness.  For  the  most  part,  men  are  fearfully  inert, 
awfully  indifferent,  strangely  unconcerned  about  religion.  They  won't  take  the 
trouble  to  ascertain  the  truth.    3.  Our  natural  warmth.    Susceptible  of  imprea- 


493  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  tx. 

eiona  ;  easily  moved — first  one  way,  then  another.  Like  the  chameleon,  men  an 
ever  shifting  the  hue  of  their  religious  character.  The  misfortune  is,  that  those 
who  try  everything,  generally  hold  fast  nothing.  II.  Some  of  thk  ways  in  which 
delusion  in  religion  operates.  1.  It  produces  satisfaction  in  externals,  and  the 
deluded  sinner  rests  there.  2.  It  fills  the  mind  with  false,. distorted  views  of  religion. 
Eve  actually  believed  Satan  when  he  gave  the  lie  direct  to  God  1  Men  will  rather 
receive  a  pleading  error  than  embrace  a  self-denying  truth.  3.  It  substitutes  mere 
animal  excitement  for  practical  godliness.  III.  The  consequences  of  such  decep- 
tion. 1.  Criminality.  It  is  the  sinner's  own  fault.  No  excuse  for  ignorance  or 
apology  for  error,  because  he  ought  to  have  sought  the  truth,  which  whosoever 
seeks,  shall  surely  find.  2.  Eternal  ruin.  The  mistake  is  final  and  fatal.  Repair 
it  while  there  is  time.  (T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  Fallacies  in  religion : — If  anything  ia 
important,  religion  is  all-important.  It  may  be  undervalued  in  health  and  pros- 
perity ;  but  in  sickness  and  trouble  we  feel  its  necessity.  When  the  ship  is  over- 
taken by  the  storm  it  must  have  not  only  a  good  anchor,  but  a  strong  cable.  Here 
are  some  of  the  fallacies  with  which  men  deceive  themselves.  I.  Ample  time  in 
the  future  for  attending  to  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  What  a  mistake !  You 
cannot  tell  what  a  moment  may  bring  forth.  By  delay  the  heart  gets  harder.  _  The 
unwillingness  of  today  becomes  still  deeper  to-morrow  (2  Cor.  vi.  2;  Heb.  iii.  7. 
8,  15 ;  iv.  7  ;  Eccl.  ix.  10).  II.  If  elected,  we  shall  be  saved  ;  if  not  elected,  wb 
must  be  lost.  But,  observe,  election  is  the  result  of  foreknowledge  on  God's  part 
(Bom.  viii.  29).  It  is  our  own  fault,  and  only  ours,  if  we  are  not  elected.  The 
gospel  has  been  preached  to  us,  and  the  offer  of  salvation  extended.  III.  It  will 
be  all  the  same  a  hundred  vears  hence.  No :  it  will  not,  it  cannot  be.  The 
present  is  seed-time ;  the  harvest  is  to  come  (Gal.  vi.  7).  Our  destiny  hereafter 
depends  upon  our  conduct  now.  IV.  Great  men  have  held  that  there  is  no 
future  poNiSHMENT  ;  so  we  need  not  fear.  A  bold  assertion,  but  no  proof.  Butler's 
argument  is  unanswerable :  that,  inasmuch  as  the  visitation  of  our  acts  by  rewards 
and  punishments  takes  place  in  this  life,  rewards  and  punishments  must  be  consis- 
tent with  the  attributes  of  God,  and  therefore  may  go  on  as  long  as  the  mind 
endures.  The  soul  that  dies  in  love  with  sin  and  sinful  pleasures,  may  only  have 
that  love  intensified  in  the  future  state.  Change  of  residence  brings  about  no 
change  of  moral  character.  V.  Wb  are  to  be  saved  by  doing  the  best  we  can. 
Nay  ;  but  by  taking  hold  on  Christ  by  the  hand  of  faith,  and  walking  with  Him  in 
newness  of  life.  (Alex.  Brunton.)  Be  not  deceived : — Futility  of  delayed  repen- 
tance : — If  any  of  you  rely  upon  the  hope  or  the  chance  or  thb  possibility  of  a  death- 
bed  repentance  as  an  excuse  for  sin ;  if  any  of  you  are  secretly  saying  to  yourselves 
"  I  will  go  on  sinning  now ;  I  will  repent  before  or  when  I  die," — I  would  say  to  you 
briefly  and  most  solemnly,  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked,"  but  when  you 
wickedly  think  thus  you  are  mocking,  you  are  insulting,  you  are  defying  God,  you 
are,  as  it  were,  insolently  bidding  God  to  wait  your  leisure ;  you  are  bidding  Him  to 
be  content  with  the  ragged  and  bitter  lees  of  life  after  you  have  drained  to  the  dregs 
what  should  have  been  its  bright  libation.  Ton  are  flinging  to  Him,  as  it  were,  the 
shrivelled  and  withered  leaves  in  which  you  have  yourself  cherished  a  canker  in  the 
worthless  flower.  There  is  an  awful  truth,  if  there  be  also  quaintness,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  one  who  said,  "  My  Lord,  heaven  is  not  to  be  won  by  short  hard  work  at 
the  last,  as  some  of  us  take  a  degree  at  the  university  after  much  irregularity  and 
negligence.  I  have  known,"  he  says,  "  many  old  playfellows  of  the  devil  spring  up 
suddenly  from  their  deathbeds,  and  strike  at  him  treacherously,  while  he,  without 
returning  the  blow,  only  laughed  and  made  grimaces  in  the  corner  of  the  room." 
If  you  rely  on  deathbed  repentance,  you  are,  believe  me,  relying  on  a  bruised  and 
broken  reed,  which  will  break  beneath  you  and  run  into  your  hand.  I  nave  seen 
deathbeds  not  a  few,  and  I  know  that  he  who  thinks  he  can  make  sure  of  deathbed 
repentance,  or  even  a  mere  semblance  of  it,  is  hanging  his  whole  weight  upon  the 
thread  of  a  gossamer  over  a  deep  and  dark  abyss.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  law 
of  sowing  and  reaping  : — No  analogy  is  more  easily  understood  than  this.  A  cer- 
tain point  of  resemblance  between  the  thoughts,  wishes,  affections,  purposes  of  the 
mind,  and  the  seed-corn  cast  into  the  earth  at  one  season  of  the  year ;  and  another 
between  the  gathering  of  the  harvest,  and  the  result  in  our  own  minds  of  the 
thoughts  and  affections  we  have  cherished  during  our  life.  •«  Culture  "  and  "  culti- 
vation," e.g., — terms  originally  denoting  the  tillage  of  the  earth,  have  been  trans- 
ferred, by  the  hint  of  analogy,  to  the  soul.  I.  Sowing  and  reaping  as  an 
illustration  o»  spiritual  law.  1.  In  reference  to  labour  and  reward,  we  cannot 
reap  without  previous  sowing ;  we  cannot  reap  where  we  have  aot  sown ;  inferior 


«■**.  vi.]  QALATIAN8.  493 

seed  will  yield  a  poor  return.  And  we  must  patiently  wait  for  our  crop  till  "due 
season."  2.  In  reference  to  Divine  will  and  operation.  God  is  faithful ;  He  will 
not  fail  those  who  sow  in  dependence  on  Him.  II.  The  application  of  this  law 
to  the  personal  akd  the  sooial  life.  1.  The  life  for  self  distinguished  from  the 
life  for  others.  The  cultivation  of  the  lower  mind  and  nature  in  us.  There  are 
men  who  hunt  after  sensualities  as  if  they  were  digging  for  hid  treasures,  or  pressing 
after  the  discovery  of  truth  that  would  bless  mankind ;  they  cultivate  their  pro- 
pensities as  if  they  were  talents  that  ought  to  be  increased  by  use,  and  faculties  that 
might  be  improved  by  constant  exercise.  How  they  are  deceived  1  They  reap  the 
quality  of  their  sowing ;  and  it  is  a  harvest  of  corruption.  A  soil  that  has  been 
forced,  and  whose  virtue  has  been  used  up,  is  the  image  of  their  souls.  2.  The 
life  for  self  united  with  the  life  for  others.  "  Flesh  " — the  ordinary  uninspired  life 
of  man  ;  "  Spirit " — the  inspired  life  of  those  who  have  come  under  a  higher  influ- 
ence. Slavery  to  custom  is  life  after  the  flesh,  the  origin  of  a  thousand  corruptions 
in  the  whole  system  of  our  social  life.  The  ideal  of  the  Christian  is  the  inspired 
life,  sowing  to,  walking  in,  being  led  by  the  Spirit — the  promotion  of  truth,  justice, 
love,  between  man  and  man.  III.  The  application  of  this  law  to  the  present 
and  the  future  life.  1.  The  present  life  as  a  sowing  incomplete.  To  follow  the 
inspiration  of  God,  to  live  the  truly  elevated  and  conscientious  life  is  too  hard  and 
fatiguing  for  many ;  and  the  few  who  do  persevere  are  exposed  to  terrible  temp- 
tations to  doubt  of  themselves,  and  to  suspect  they  would  have  done  better  to  have 
walked  in  the  beaten  track  of  the  world's  use  and  wont.  This  life  does  not  afford 
materials  for  the  complete  solution  of  the  problem ;  it  leaves  room  for  a  multitude 
of  doubts  which  only  the  strongest  illumination  and  faith  can  overcome.  2. 
Indications  of  future  completeness.  Traits  of  character  so  Divine,  promises 
of  youth  cut  off  by  untimely  death,  loftinesses  of  the  human  spirit,  buds 
not  yet  unfolded,  aspirations  only  starved  here — what  of  these  ?  Surely  their 
harvest  is  to  come.  3.  The  hope  of  future  perfection  and  glory.  Life  will  then 
be  rounded  and  made  whole,  moving  on  from  true  beginnings  to  worthy  ends. 
Death  is  not  the  end  of  our  being,  but  rather  the  moment  for  putting  in  the 
sickle,  and  reaping  that  fulness  and  completeness,  that  purity  and  intensity  of  all 
intellectual  and  social  joy,  that  glorious  revelation  of  the  truth  of  the  spiritual 
nature,  which  is  included  in  the  great  word  "Life  Eternal."  (E.  Johnson,  M.A.) 
Sowing  and  reaping : — I.  The  sowing.  That  is  a  description  of  our  life — a  descrip- 
tion which  very  few  people,  old  or  young,  seem  to  think  of.  Our  present  life  is  our 
Bowing-time  for  eternity.  Tou  may  have  been  in  the  country  in  spring,  when  the 
frost  and  snow  have  disappeared,  and  preparations  are  being  made  for  the  work  of 
the  coming  year.  The  ground  has  been  ploughed  and  manured  and  made  ready 
for  receiving  the  seed,  and  you  may  have  seen  sacks  of  seed-corn  standing  all  over 
the  field,  and  men  walking  up  and  down  the  furrows,  with  bags  tied  round  their 
waist  or  slung  across  their  breast,  throwing  out  their  arms  in  a  peculiar  way. 
Those  of  you  who  have  been  brought  up  in  towns,  may  have  thought  they  were 
taking  exercise  on  a  cold  spring  morning,  or  were  amusing  themselves.  But  if  you 
had  asked  them,  ••  What  are  you  doing?  "  you  would  have  got  the  answer,  "We 
are  sowing."  If  you  had  stood  in  their  way,  or  done  anything  to  interrupt  them, 
or  put  off  their  time,  they  would  have  called  out  to  you,  "  Keep  out  of  our  way,  we 
are  sowing ;  this  is  seed-time.  After  a  long  winter,  we  must  make  the  most  of 
spring,  for  all  the  rest  of  the  year  depends  on  what  we  make  of  it.  If  we  lose  the 
spring,  we  lose  the  harvest ;  and  so  we  want  to  make  the  most  of  every  hour.  We 
have  not  a  minute  to  spare."  Or  you  have  seen  in  the  garden,  at  the  same  season 
of  the  year,  the  gardener  busy  at  work.  Everybody  wanted  to  have  him,  and  so  he 
was  hurrying  through  with  his  work,  in  one  garden  after  another,  late  and  early. 
If  you  had  asked  him,  "  What  are  you  doing,  gardener  ?  "  he  would  have  said,  "  I 
am  sowing— pease,  and  turnips,  and  lettuce,  and  carrots,  and  spinach ;  or  migno- 
nette, and  sweet  pea,  and  candytuft,  and  saponaria,  and  asters,  and  marigolds,  and 
wallflower,  and  stock.  If  we  miss  these  weeks — if  we  were  not  to  sow,  as  we  are 
doing,  you  would  have  no  vegetables  and  no  flowers.  And  what  would  you  say  to 
that?  All  depends  on  what  we  are  now  doing.  It  is  the  most  important  work  of 
the  year."  Now,  suppose  some  mischievous  boy  were  to  take  up  a  handful  of  vege- 
table seeds  and  to  scatter  peas  and  beans  and  potatoes  over  the  flower-beds ;  or  a 
handful  of  flower-seeds,  and  were  to  scatter  Indian  cress,  and  wallflower,  and 
Virginian  stock,  and  Venus'  looking-glass,  and  Love-lies-bleeding  over  the  vege- 
table-beds, the  gardener  would  call  to  him,  "  Stop,  boy  1  do  you  know  what  you  are 
doing?  "     «' Getting  a  little  fun,"  he  might  say.     "  Fun  is  all  very  good  in  its  own 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

place,"  says  the  gardener,  **  but  yon  are  sowing.  It  is  not  as  if  you  were  scattering 
clay,  or  stones,  or  bits  of  wood.  These  are  seeds,  and  they  will  grow ;  they  will 
spring  up  again ;  and  what  a  strange  sight  the  garden  will  be ! "  Now  your  life  is 
just  like  that.  It  may  seem  mere  amusement  to  some ;  but  it  is  a  sowing — a  scat- 
tering of  seed.  1.  The  sowers — who  are  they  ?  All  of  you.  Every  one  who  liveg 
sows,  and  sows  until  he  dies.  2.  The  seed — what  is  it  ?  Everything  that  you  do. 
There  has  never  been  a  day  or  an  hour  in  which  you  have  not  been  sowing.  You 
have  never  done  anything  else.  Your  work,  your  play,  your  lessons  at  home  or  at 
school  during  the  week  or  on  the  Lord's  Day,  when  you  were  at  your  games,  when 
you  were  reading  some  story  or  other  book,  when  you  were  amusing  yourself  or 
other  people — it  waB  a  seed  which  you  were  sowing — sowing,  indeed,  for  this  life, 
but  sowing  also  for  the  life  to  come — for  eternity.  Some  of  us  have  the  field  or 
garden  of  our  life  well  filled  up — some  have  it  almost  full,  almost  all  sown  over. 
Some  have  only  a  tenth  of  the  field  filled,  and  some  an  eighth,  and  some  a  fifth, 
and  some  a  quarter,  and  some  a  half ;  and  by  the  time  we  come  to  die,  it  will  be 
filled  altogether ;  it  will  be  like  a  field  in  which  every  corner  is  sown  with  seed. 
Have  you  ever  thought  of  this  ?  Do  you  ever  think  of  it  ?  No  action  of  your  life 
is  done  with.  It  may  be  out  of  sight.  It  may  be  out  of  mind.  It  may  have 
troubled  you  for  a  while,  and  you  said,  "  I  wish  I  could  forget  it."  And  you  have 
forgotten  it.  Or  you  have  never  thought  about  it.  It  has  never  troubled  you. 
And  yet  it  is  no  more  done  with  than  the  seed  that  is  buried  in  the  ground,  and 
that  will  spring  up  by  and  by.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,"  is  just  the  same  as 
saying,  "  Whatsoever  a  man  does."  3.  The  character  or  kind  of  the  sowing — what 
is  it?  All  the  sowing  must  be  one  or  other  of  two  kinds.  There  is  an  endless 
variety  of  seed.  If  you  were  to  take  a  seedsman's  catalogue,  you  would  find  an 
almost  endless  list  of  seeds  and  roots.  And  so  there  is  no  limit  to  the  number  and 
variety  of  actions  which  you  do.  But  they  may  all  be  divided  into  two  classes. 
They  may  all  be  arranged  under  two  heads.  The  verse  that  follows  our  text  tells 
what  these  are.  The  one  is  "  Sowing  to  the  flesh ;  "  the  other,  "  Sowing  to  the 
Spirit."  Take  anything  you  have  done  during  the  past  week — anything  you  are 
about  to  do  now,  and  ask  yourselves :  Is  this  sowing  "  to  the  flesh,  or  to  the 
Spirit?"  Is  it  only  to  please  myself,  or  is  it  to  please  God?  II.  The  reaping. 
Wherever  there  has  been  a  sowing,  people  expect  a  reaping.  The  harvest  follows 
the  spring.  It  is  God's  arrangement  in  the  world  of  nature  everywhere,  and  so  it 
is  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world.  1.  The  reapers — who  are  they  ?  All  of  you. 
As  you  are  all  sowers,  so  you  shall  all  be  reapers,  every  one  of  you.  Every  sower 
shall  be  a  reaper,  and  he  shall  reap  what  he  sowed.  "  That  fchall  he  also  reap." 
He  must  do  it  himself.  No  one  can  do  it  for  him.  He  cannot  hand  it  over  to  an- 
other. 2.  The  kind  of  reaping — what  shall  it  be  ?  Of  the  same  kind  as  the  sowing. 
It  must  be  so.  Every  kind  of  seed  has  fruit  of  its  own  kind.  Everybody  knows  to 
expect  this.  If  a  farmer  sowed  oats,  he  would  not  expect  to  reap  wheat  or  barley. 
If  he  sowed  turnips,  he  would  not  expect  to  gather  potatoes.  And  just  so  with  your 
actions,  your  conduct,  your  life.  You  cannot  do  one  kind  of  action,  and  expect 
fruit  of  a  different  kind.  You  cannot  have  an  evil  sowing,  and  expect  to  reap  what 
is  good.  You  cannot  sow  to  the  flesh,  and  reap  what  is  of  the  Spirit.  And  as  w» 
saw  there  are  but  two  kinds  of  sowing,  so  there  will  be  but  two  kinds  of  reaping— 
the  one,  in  each  case,  corresponding  to  the  other.  It  is  not  merely  that  if  we  dt 
what  is  wrong,  we  shall  be  punished  for  it.  But  if  we  sow  evil,  we  shall  reap  eviL 
The  one  grows  out  of  the  other.  If  you  sow  nettle  seed,  the  nettle  with  its  sting 
will  come  of  it.  If  you  sow  the  thistle,  the  thistle  with  its  prickles  will  spring  up. 
And  so  with  sin.  And  so,  also,  with  good.  3.  The  measure  of  the  reaping — what 
6hall  it  be  ?  What  is  the  measure  of  other  reaping,  as  compared  with  the  sowing  ? 
Plant  a  single  grain  of  corn  in  the  ground,  and  from  the  one  grain  you  have  several 
stalks,  and  each  head  has  many  grains.  Plant  a  pea  or  a  potatoe,  and  how  many 
you  get  for  the  one.  Some  people  think  sin  a  very  small  thing,  to  have  such  con- 
sequences coming  of  it.  But  if  it  is  a  seed,  and  if  there  i3  a  harvest,  must  not  the 
increase  be  as  with  every  other  kind  of  sowing  and  reaping  ?  4.  The  certainty  of 
the  reaping.  Other  harvests  sometimes  fail.  Too  dry  or  too  rainy  a  season,  a 
strong  wind  brushing  off  the  flower  when  it  is  in  bloom,  or  a  storm  when  the  corn 
is  all  but  ripe,  may  deprive  the  husbandman  of  his  harvest.  In  some  cases,  in  a 
bad  season,  you  will  see  sowing  that  has  had  little  or  no  reaping.  The  straw  is 
uncut.  It  was  not  worth  cutting.  It  is  left  to  rot  on  the  ground.  But  in  regard 
to  the  sowing  to  the  flesh  and  to  the  Spirit,  God  says  "  we  shall  reap."  "  Whatso- 
ever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."    The  seed  may  he  a  long  time  in  the 


.  yi.J  GALATIAN8.  495 

ground,  bat  it  is  still  there,  it  is  not  dead.  And  when  it  does  grow,  its  growth  is 
sometimes  very  slow  and  gradual.  "  First  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the 
full  corn  in  the  ear."  It  sometimes  looks  as  if  it  would  never  come  to  anything. 
But  God's  word  stands  pledged,  alike  as  regards  the  good  and  the  evil,  that  failure 
there  shall  be  none :  "  Shall  reap."  (J.  H.  Wilson,  D.D.)  Sowing  and  reap- 
ing : — I.  Sowing  and  reaping  is  an  example  of  a  principle  seen  everywhere  in  the 
government  of  God.  An  act  performed  at  one  time  leads  to  products  at  a  future 
time.  See  this  exemplified  in  nature  and  also  in  human  character.  II.  Consider 
the  application  of  the  principle  to  corrupt  human  nature:  "He  that  soweth  to  the 
flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  Man,  when  he  comes  into  the  world,  has 
seeds  in  his  very  nature,  tendencies  to  act  for  good  and  for  evil.  The  tendency  to 
evil  grows  unless  it  is  restrained.  The  roots  strike  themselves  deeper  into  the  soil, 
and  the  seeds  of  evil  develop  in  the  course  of  years.  See  this  exemplified  in  intem- 
perance, in  pride,  in  all  temptations  and  lusts.  III.  The  application  to  regenerated 
nature :"  He  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting." 
We  have  seen  that  in  our  nature  evil  propagates  itself.  But  it  is  equally  true  that 
good  does  so,  good  purposes,  good  dispositions,  good  acts.  It  increases  at  com- 
pound interest.  Every  temptation  promptly  resisted  strengthens  the  will.  Every 
step  we  take  on  the  ladder  upwards  helps  up  to  a  higher.  The  new  nature  is  in  the 
form  of  seeds.  Grace  grows  upon  grace.  In  the  same  way  the  Church  as  a  whole 
grows  and  increases.  (J.  McCosh,  D.D.)  The  certainty  of  a  harvest : — So  it  is 
with  all  temptations  and  lusts.  They  are  ever  scattering  seeds — as  weeds  do. 
What  a  power  there  is  in  seeds !  How  long-lived  they  are ! — as  we  see  in  the  mum- 
mies of  Egypt,  where  they  may  have  lain  for  thousands  of  years  in  darkness,  but 
now  come  forth  to  grow.  What  contrivances  they  have  to  continue  and  to  propa- 
gate themselves !  They  have  wings,  and  they  fly  for  miles.  They  may  float  over 
wide  oceans,  and  rest  themselves  in  foreign  countries.  They  have  hooks  and 
attach  themselves  to  objects.  Often  they  are  taken  up  by  birds,  which  transport 
them  to  distant  places.  As  it  is  with  the  seeds  of  weeds,  so  it  is  with  every  evil 
propensity  and  habit.  It  propagates  itself  and  spreads  over  the  whole  soul,  and 
goes  down  from  generation  to  generation.  (Ibid.)  Two  kinds  of  harvest: — 
God  leaves  us  free  to  sow  what  sort  of  seed  we  will,  and  no  one  can  blame  the 
Almighty,  that  having  chosen  our  own  course,  we  reap  our  own  harvests.  The 
individual  who  indulges  in  one  known  sin  is  planting  a  seed,  which  will  be  sure  to 
spring  up,  and  grow,  and,  perhaps,  prepare  the  way  for  a  wider  departure  from 
duty.  A  second  and  third  temptation,  will  prove  more  irresistible  and  dangerous 
than  the  first.  Every  careful  farmer  will  look  after  his  fences,  lest  his  own  cattle 
make  their  escape,  or  his  neighbour's  break  in.  "  Set  double  guard  upon  that  point 
to-night,"  was  the  command  of  a  prudent  officer,  when  an  attack  was  expected. 
Our  whole  life  is  nothing  but  a  seed-time,  and  the  present  and  the  future  already 
stand  facing  each  other.  "Corruption"  is  the  harvest  of  "sowing  to  the  flesh," 
and  "  life  everlasting,"  the  harvest  of  *'  sowing  to  the  Spirit."  If  we  desire  a  fruit, 
in  eternity,  to  please  us,  the  seed  must  be  sown  which  will  bring  it.  A  philoso- 
pher once  said  to  his  friend,  "  Which  of  the  two  would  you  rather  be,  Croesus,  the 
wealthiest,  but  one  of  the  worst  men  of  his  day ;  or  Socrates,  who  was  the  poorest 
of  the  poor,  but  distinguished  for  many  virtues  f  "  The  answer  was,  that  he  would 
rather  be  Croesus  in  this  life,  and  Socrates  in  the  next !  A  Christian  woman  was 
one  day  visiting  an  aged  man,  who,  in  years  gone  by,  had  been  associated  with  her 
own  father  in  business.  Although  differing  widely  in  their  opinions  on  various 
subjects,  the  two  old  men  still  felt  a  deep  interest  in  each  other.  The  good  woman 
had  answered  a  hundred  questions,  which  her  father's  former  partner  had  asked 
concerning  him,  and,  as  he  listened  to  the  story  of  his  friend's  patience  in  suffering 
and  poverty,  and  the  unflagging  cheerfulness  with  which  he  could  look  forward, 
either  to  a  longer  continuance  of  his  pilgrimage  in  this  world,  or  to  a  speedy  de- 
parture to  a  better  one,  his  conscience  applied  the  unuttered  reproach,  and  he  cried 
out,  in  a  tone  of  hopeless  despair,  "  Yes,  yeB :  you  wonder  I  cannot  be  as  quiet  and 
happy  too :  but  think  of  the  difference :  he  is  going  to  his  treasure,  and  I — I  must 
leave  mine !  "  Such  is  the  condition  of  every  possessor  of  worldly  wealth,  who 
sows  only  for  the  ingathering  of  a  temporal  harvest.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D,D.) 
Like  produces  like ; — The  warning  implies  a  liability  to  deception  orerror :  in 
this  case  the  deception  appears  to  be,  that  a  man  may  be  sowing  to  the  flesh, 
and  yet  be  hoping  to  reap  of  the  Spirit,  or  that  for  him  might  be  changed  the 
unchangeable  order  which  God  has  ordained — *'  like  seed,  like  harvest"  But,  h*< 
says,  "  there's  no  such  thing  as  mocking  God. "    The  expression  is  a  strong  one, 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

taken  from  that  organ  of  the  face  by  which  we  express  careless  contempt.  The  verb 
\xvKrripil(x)f  from  /ivKrrip,  is  to  torn  up  the  nose  at,  to  sneer  at,  to  mock.  Men  may 
be  imposed  on  by  a  show  of  virtue  on  the  part  of  one  who  all  the  while  scorns  their 
weakness ;  but  God  cannot  be  so  mocked.  Let  him  sow  what  he  likes,  that  and  that 
only,  that  and  nothing  else,  shall  he  also  reap.  The  reaping  is  not  only  the  effect 
of  the  sowing,  but  is  necessarily  of  the  same  nature  with  it.  He  that  sows  cockles, 
cockles  shall  he  also  reap ;  he  that  soweth  wheat,  wheat  also  shall  he  reap.  It  ie 
the  law  of  God  in  the  natural  world — the  harvest  is  but  the  growth  of  the  sowing ; 
and  it  illustrates  the  uniform  sequences  of  the  spiritual  world.  The  nature  of  con- 
duct is  not  changed  by  its  development  and  final  ripening  for  Divine  sentence ;  nay, 
its  nature  is  by  the  process  only  opened  out  into  full  and  self-displayed  reality. 
The  blade  and  the  ear  may  be  hardly  recognized  and  distinguished  as  to  species, 
but  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  is  the  certain  result  and  unmistakeable  proof  of  what 
was  sown.  And  the  sowing  leads  certainly,  and  not  as  if  by  accident,  to  the  reap- 
ing ;  the  connection  cannot  be  severed — it  lies  deep  in  man's  personal  identity  and 
responsibility.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  The  law  of  retribution : — The  Bible  every- 
where describes  men  as  reaping  what  they  sow,  and  as  receiving  again,  not  the  bare 
seed  sown,  but  the  harvest  of  their  actions.  And,  when  we  test  this  common  and 
pervading  metaphor  by  our  experience,  we  find  it  true.  Our  actions  are  fertile,  and 
we  do  have  to  eat  the  fruit  they  yield.  Every  time  we  take  a  decisive  and  deliberate 
step,  we  set  forces  in  motion  which  soon  slip  from  oar  oontrol.  But  it  is  we  who 
have  set  them  going,  and  we  are  held  responsible  for  whatever  effects  they  produce. 
If  you  throw  a  stone  into  the  air,  you  may  mean  no  harm,  or  only  a  little  harm ; 
but  you  may  do  a  great  injury.  And  when  the  harm  is  done,  you  cannot  torn 
lightly  away  and  say,  "  It  was  none  of  my  doing."  It  was  your  doing,  even  if  it 
went  beyond  your  intention,  and  you  have  to  pay  the  penalty  of  it ;  you  have  to  eat 
the  fruit  of  your  deed.  If  in  the  charm  of  bright  social  intercourse,  or  to  relieve  the 
gloom  of  depression,  you  take  too  much  wine,  you  may  have  had  no  distinctly  bad 
motive  for  it ;  your  motive  may  have  been  nothing  more  than  a  friendly  wish  to 
share  and  promote  the  hilarity  of  the  hour,  or  to  free  yourself  from  the  disabling 
effects  of  a  transient  incapacity  for  a  task  you  felt  bound  to  do :  but  if  that  indul- 
gence should  excite  a  growing  craving  for  similar  indulgences,  as  in  some  natures 
it  will,  and  you  sink  into  a  sot,  and  your  health  flies,  and  your  business  goes  to 
rack,  and  your  domestic  peace  is  broken  np,  you  cannot  plead,  "  I  did  not  do  it" 
You  did  do  it,  and  the  world  fairly  holds  you  responsible  for  all  that  has  oome  of  it. 
Or,  to  take  a  still  sadder  and  more  perilous  instance,  if,  out  of  mere  thoughtless 
hospitality,  you  press  a  man  to  drink  with  you,  and  he  sets  out  by  your  prompting 
on  the  perilous  and  slippery  path  which  leads  him  to  a  madhouse  or  to  a  dis- 
honoured grave,  you  oannot  escape  the  consequences  of  your  own  act ;  you  have  to 
bear  all  the  misery  of  witnessing  his  downfall,  and  of  the  heartrending  fear  that, 
but  for  you,  he  might  never  have  fallen.  Do  you  not  see,  then,  how  the  results  of 
our  bad,  and  even  of  our  thoughtless,  actions  accumulate  upon  as,  multiplying 
sometimes  in  a  geometrical  ratio,  and  landing  as  in  the  most  awful  responsibilities  t 
And  can  you  doubt  that,  in  like  manner,  the  results  of  our  good  deeds  multiply  and 
accumulate  t  If  a  man  cultivate  any  faoulty,  that  of  learning  languages,  for  ex- 
ample, or  of  written  composition,  or  of  public  speaking,  who  can  say  whereunto  it 
will  grow,  what  nutriment  it  will  meet  from  the  most  unexpected  quarters,  how  one 
opportunity  will  open  the  door  for  another,  and  one  success  pave  the  way  for  a 
dozen  more  f  If  you  once  brace  yourself  for  a  good  deed  which  involves  thought 
and  labour  and  self-sacrifice,  do  not  all  similar  deeds  become  easier  to  you  ?  Does 
not  even  one  good  deed  induce  your  neighbours  to  ask  your  help  in  other  good 
deeds,  and  thus  furnish  you  with  ever  new  opportunities  of  service  7  Does  not  your 
example  stimulate  and  encourage  them  in  the  good  works  they  have  in  hand,  or 
now  and  then  even  rouse  the  indolent  and  indifferent  to  interest  and  activity  t  Do 
not  those  who  benefit  by  your  kindness  at  least  sometimes  remember  and  imitate 
it  f  Have  yon  yourselves  never  been  constrained  to  help  a  neighbour  by  a  recollec- 
tion of  how,  when  you  once  needed  similar  help,  some  good  man  or  woman  came 
to  your  assistance  f  A  good  deed  shines,  we  are  told,  "  like  a  candle  in  this  naughty 
world."  And  how  many  solitary  and  forlorn  wayfarers,  stumbling  in  the  dark,  may 
even  one  such  candle,  shining  through  a  cottage  casement,  serve  to  guide,  to  stimu- 
late, to  console  1  We  do  get  according  to  our  deeds,  then,  and,  through  the  mercy 
of  God,  we  get,  in  addition,  all  the  fruit  our  deeds  bring  forth.  And  if,  in  the  world 
to  oome,  the  consequences  of  our  deeds,  even  to  the  last,  should  more  largely  come 
upon  us,  we  cannot  deny  that  this,  too,  will  be  just.    But  in  the  future  at  all  events 


OHap.  vi.]  GALATIANS.  497 

and  far  more  largely  than  tn  the  present,  the  law  of  retribution  will  work,  the  con- 
sequences of  our  actions  will  come  home  to  us,  according  to  the  infinite  wisdom 
and  compassion  of  God.  Then,  if  not  now,  God  will  deal  with  us,  not  according  to 
the  outward  form  and  appearance  of  our  conduct,  but  according  to  those  inward 
springs  of  thought,  will,  emotion,  purpose,  of  which  our  life  is  at  best  but  a  poor 
and  inadequate  outcome,  a  pale  and  distorted  reflection.  He  will  search  the  inmost 
fibres  of  our  hearts  in  order  tuat  He  may  mete  out  to  us  the  recompense  we  de- 
serve, the  discipline  we  require ;  in  order  that,  to  the  last  fibre  of  our  hearts,  we 
may  be  satisfied  with  the  justice  and  the  love  of  His  award.  (Samuel  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  spiritual  law : — "  What  ?  You  hold  back  ?  Nay,  do  not  deceive  yourselves. 
Tour  niggardliness  will  find  you  out.  You  cannot  cheat  God  by  your  fair  profes- 
sions. You  cannot  mock  Him.  According  as  you  sow,  thus  will  you  reap.  If  you 
plant  the  seed  of  your  own  selfish  desires,  if  vou  sow  the  field  of  the  flesh,  then 
when  you  gather  in  your  harvest,  you  will  find  the  ears  blighted  and  rotten.  But 
if  you  sow  the  good  ground  of  the  spirit,  you  will  of  that  good  ground  gather  the 
golden  grain  of  life  eternal."  (Bishop  Lightfoot.)  Seed-time  and  harvest : — What 
is  the  seed  ?  Our  thoughts,  our  feelings,  our  purposes,  our  plans,  our  words,  our 
actions ;  and,  as  we  are  always  thinking,  feeling,  purposing,  planning,  speaking,  or 
acting,  except  when  under  the  power  of  sleep,  so  we  are  always  sowing  for  eternity, 
which  is  the  harvest-time  of  the  soul.  What  millions  of  thoughts,  and  feelings:, 
and  words,  and  actions,  enter  into  the  history  of  a  single  year !  And  all  these  have 
a  moral  character,  a  moral  bearing,  and  are  being  "  sown  "  for  eternity.  It  is  not 
only  to  religious  matters  that  this  observation  applies,  but  to  the  transactions  of 
the  world.  There  is  a  moral  character  belonging  to  our  everyday  conduct.  The 
man  in  the  shop,  the  man  in  the  bargain,  the  man  in  the  transaction,  is  acting 
under  a  moral  influence :  there  is  a  motive  in  his  mind  influencing  him  for  good  or 
for  evil ;  there  is  seed  being  sown.  The  moral  character  does  not  belong  merely  to 
the  greater  actions  and  transactions  of  life,  but  equally  to  the  lesser.  There  may 
be  as  much  moral  character  in  a  pecuniary  transaction  over  a  shilling,  as  in  one 
over  a  thousand  pounds.  So  that  there  is  a  moral  character  stamped  upon  all  that 
we  are  engaged  in  doing ;  and  consequently  there  is  a  "  sowing  "  in  many  actions  that 
we  think  little  about ;  there  is  that  attending  each,  which  makes  it  a  moral  and 
eternal  agent.  (J.  Angell  James.)  Relation  of  human  actions  to  the  other 
world: — I.  Our  connection  with  the  invisible  and  eternal  world  is  more  close 
and  intimate  than  we  generally  feel.  Everything  connects  us  with  eternity ;. 
we  are  not  only  travelling  to  it,  but  are  already  on  its  confines.  II.  Our 
misery  and  happiness  proceed  not  merely  from  Divine  appointment,  but  from 
ourselves.  IH.  There  must  be  different  degrees  of  glory  in  heaven.  (Ibiil.) 
Retribution : — The  fact  of  retribution  is  necessarily  a  very  serious  one  to  all  who 
are  not  "  past  feeling."  We  find  the  law  of  retribution  working  here  in  our  Hite. 
It  cannot  be  denied.  The  natural  inference  is  that  a  law  here  indicates  a  similar 
law  beyond  the  period  and  condition  we  call  temporal.  It  is  wiser  and  better 
always  to  face  facts,  never  to  ignore  them,  never  to  close  our  eyes  to  them.  Inter- 
rogate them.  Let  us  have  the  courage  resolutely  to  stand  by  the  laws  and  facts 
which  are  revealed.  We  recognize  in  ourselves,  and  so  in  other  men,  a  sense  of  a 
righteousness  which  ought  to  be  obeyed  and  maintained  ;  and  we  recognize  also  a 
condition  of  feeling,  mind,  will,  life,  that  is  mot  according  to  righteousness.  All 
our  efforts  to  make  righteousness  and  unrighteousness  the  same,  or  the  one  a 
modification  of  the  other,  are  failures.  We  recognize  also  that  unrighteousness 
brings  penalty.  Righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  happiness  and  misery,  are 
not  expressible  in  terms  of  material  gifts.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you, 
saith  the  Lord ;  so  is  the  kingdom  of  the  devil.  Thus,  it  is  evident  that  in  con- 
sidering this  theme  of  retribution,  we  have  to  look  below  the  surface.  We  have  to 
school  ourselves  into  the  recognition  that  a  man  is  rich  or  poor  really  not  according 
to  what  he  has  but  according  to  what  he  is.  Let  us  never  lose  sight  of  this  faot 
that  union  with  God  in  Christ  is  heaven,  for  the  soul  of  man  was  made  for  that ; 
separation  from  God  in  Christ  is  hell,  the  soul  of  man  was  never  made  for  that. 
Whatever  brings  us  nearer  to  God  brings  us  into  the  sphere  of  ineffable  reward, 
such  as  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of 
man  to  conceive ;  whatever  separates  us  from  Him  brings  us  into  that  sphere  of 
retribution  into  which  we  cannot  look  far,  where  the  selfish  and  the  loveless  find 
those  of  their  own  order  and  kind.  1.  That  the  Eternal  One  can  make  no  compro- 
mise with  sin.  "  If  God  were  not  sure  to  punish  the  evil,  and  to  make  it  bear,  so 
far  as  it  remains  evil,  the  weight  of  his  condemnation,  the  good  would  lose  for  u« 

32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  Vfc 

its  reality."  2.  As  to  duration,  that  as  long  as  the  sin  lasts,  bo  long  will  its 
appropriate  punishment  last.  3.  That  no  punishment  will  be  inflicted  which  will 
throw  the  Divine  Character  as  revealed  in  Christ  into  discord  with  itself.  4.  That, 
as  there  is  no  malice  in  the  Divine  nature  and  no  cruelty,  all  punishment  will  have 
as  its  purpose  an  end  worthy  of  the  Divine  nature.  5.  That  future  punishment 
will  be  to  present  sin  as  consequence  to  cause.  6.  That  it  will  be  inevitable  and 
not  arbitrary.  7.  That  it  will  be  of  such  a  nature,  that  no  enlightened  mind  in  the 
universe  of  God  can  offer  any  objection  to  it  that  shall  not  be  unreasonable. 
(Reuen  Thomas.)  That  every  man  sliall  finally  receive  according  to  his  works : — I. 
Here  is  laid  down  the  general  and  fundamental  doctrine  of  true  religion;  that 
every  man  shall  finally  receive  of  God,  according  to  what  he  has  done.  This 
maxim  is  the  reason  and  end  of  all  laws,  the  maintenance  and  support  of  all 
government,  the  foundation  and  ground-work  of  all  religion.  By  the  disposition 
arid  appointment  of  the  same  Author  and  Buler  of  the  universe,  the  moral  conse- 
quences and  connections  of  things  do,  in  their  proper  manner,  and  at  their  proper 
seasons,  take  place  likewise  in  the  world.  And  could  our  faculties  extend  them- 
eelves,  to  take  in  at  one  view  those  larger  periods  of  the  Divine  dispensations,  on 
which  depends  the  harmony  and  beauty  of  the  moral  world ;  in  like  manner  as  our 
experience  enables  us  to  contemplate  the  yearly  products  of  nature ;  we  should 
then  probably  be  no  more  struck  with  wonder,  at  the  seeming  forbearing  of 
providence  to  interpose  at  present  in  the  ordering  of  the  moral  state  of  the  world, 
than  we  are  now  surprised,  in  the  regular  course  of  nature,  to  see  grain  lie  as  it 
were  dead  in  the  earth  in  winter,  and  seemingly  dissolving  into  corruption ;  and 
yet,  without  fail,  at  the  return  of  its  proper  season,  bringing  forth  the  certain 
particular  fruit,  of  which  it  was  the  seed.  II.  Here  is  a  declaration,  that  every 
opinion  or  practice,  that  subverts  this  great  and  fundamental  doctrine;  is,  in 
reality  and  in  true  consequence,  a  mocking  of  God  :  "  God  is  not  mocked;  for  what- 
soever a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  The  word, "  mock  "  (which  in  the  New 
Testament  is  in  the  original  expressed  by  two  or  three  synonymous  terms),  in  its 
literal  and  most  proper  sense,  signifies,  deceiving  any  person,  deluding  him,  or 
disappointing  his  expectation.  Thus  Matt.  ii.  16.  At  other  times,  it  signifies 
affronting  or  abusing  any  person  by  open  violence.  Thus  Matt.  Xx.  18.  By  way 
of  derision,  in  a  scornful,  insulting,  and  despiteful  manner.  Thus  Matt,  xxvii.  29 
Now  in  the  literal  and  proper  sense  of  the  phrase,  'tis  impossible  in  the  nature  of 
tbings  that  God  should  in  any  of  these  ways  be  mocked.  But  figuratively,  conse- 
quentially, and  in  true  reality  of  guilt  and  folly,  all  wicked  men,  who  set  themselves 
to  oppose  God's  kingdom  of  righteousness ;  who,  without  repentance,  amendment, 
and  obedience  to  God's  commands,  expect  to  escape,  and  teach  others  that  they 
may  escape,  His  righteous  judgment ;  are,  in  the  apostle's  estimation,  mockers  of 
God.  And  the  grounds  or  reasons  upon  which  they  are  justly  so  esteemed  are 
very  evident.  For — 1.  Such  persons,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  confound  the  necessary 
reasons  and  proportions  of  tbings,  and  endeavour  to  take  away  the  eternal  and 
unchangeable  differences  of  good  and  evil ;  which  are  the  original  order  and  rule  of 
God's  creation,  and  the  very  foundation  of  His  government  over  the  universe.  2. 
But  also  further,  because  'tis  an  entertaining  of  very  dishonourable  and  very 
injurious  apprehensions,  concerning  the  perfections  and  attributes  of  God  Himself. 
3.  As  such  persons  are,  in  true  estimation  of  things,  mockers  of  God,  upon  account 
of  their  confounding  those  essential  differences  of  good  and  evil,  which  are  the 
foundation  of  God's  government  over  rational  creatures;  and  upon  account  of 
their  entertaining  dishonourable  and  very  injurious  apprehensions  concerning  the 
perfections  and  attributes  of  God  Himself :  so  they  are  still  further  guilty  of  the 
same  charge,  in  perverting  the  plain  revelation  of  Christ,  and  overthrowing  the 
whole  design  of  His  religion  (see  Matt.  xvi.  27 ;  Bev.  xxii.  12 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  The 
doctrine  itself ;  that  every  man  shall  finally  receive  of  God,  according  to  what  he 
has  done,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil ;  that,  "whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap ;  "  is  undeniably  proved  by  all  the  principles  of  reason,  and 
expressly  confirmed  by  all  the  notices  of  revelation.  Yet  so  manifold  and  various 
are  the  delusions  of  sin,  and  such  a  mist  of  darkness  do  the  passions  and  appetites 
of  men  continually  cast  before  their  eyes  ;  that  the  apostle  thought  it  necessary  to 
add,  with  great  affection  and  earnestness,  the  caution  in  the  text ;  and  to  repeat  it 
frequently  elsewhere,  upon  the  like  occasion  (1  Cor.  iii.  17,  18;  vi.  9;  Eph.  v.  5, 
&c).  And  here,  that  which  first  and  most  obviously  offers  itself,  in  our  view  of 
mankind,  is  the  deceit  men  put  upon  themselves  by  a  general  carelessness  and 
inattention.     They  pursue  the  ends  of  ambition  and  covetousness ;  they  labour 


chav.  Yi.]  GALATIANS.  499 

continually  to  gratify  their  passions  and  appetites ;  and  consider  not  at  all,  that 
the  most  High  regardeth,  and  that  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  them  into 
judgment.  Some  judge  of  God  by  themselves ;  not  according  to  tbe  reason  of 
things,  but  by  their  own  disposition  and  temper.  And  because  they  themselves  are 
not  apt  to  be  displeased,  unless  at  things  directly  injurious  to  themselves  ;  therefore 
they  natter  themselves  that  God,  who  can  no  way  be  injured  by  the  sins  of  men, 
will  not  be  severe  in  punishing  them ;  and  particularly,  that  His  anger  will  not  be 
so  highly  provoked  by  sins  of  debauchery  or  injustice,  as  by  irreligion  or  profane- 
ness.  In  which  matter  they  deceive  themselves  for  want  of  considering,  that  God 
is  not  a  party,  but  the  Judge  and  Governor  of  the  universe ;  who  punishes  wicked- 
ness,  not  that  He  himself  suffers  anything  by  it,  but  as  being  repugnant  to  the 
nature  and  reason  of  things,  to  the  eternal  laws  of  His  righteous  government,  to 
the  welfare  and  happiness  of  the  whole  creation.  Others  there  are,  who  deceive 
themselves  by  imagining  that  God  is  pleased  or  displeased  with  little  things, 
instead  of  judging  of  men  according  to  the  whole  course  and  tenor  of  a  virtuous  or 
vicious  life.  Another  sort  of  men  there  are,  who  seem  to  content  themselves  with 
•  loose  and  general  expectation  that  they  shall  fare  upon  the  whole  as  well  as 
others ;  and  thai  ihe  multitude  of  those  who  live  in  the  same  sensual  way  with 
themselves  cannot  be  all  of  them  in  a  state  liable  to  God's  severe  displeasure. 
They  hope,  therefore,  that  the  debaucheries  they  are  guilty  of  will  be  put  to  the 
account  of  natural  infirmities,  and  excused  as  the  weaknesses  of  human  nature  in 
general.  And  here  they  deceive  themselves  by  not  considering,  that  the  very  end 
and  design  of  Christ's  religion,  was,  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  this  present 
evil  world,  and  purchase  to  Himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works ;  that 
we  might  not  be  conformed  to  this  world,  but  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  our 
mind ;  that  we  might  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of 
God.  There  are  still  others,  who  speak  peace  to  themselves  in  a  vicious  course  of 
life,  upon  the  mere  general  notion  of  the  mercy  and  patience  and  goodness  of  God ; 
without  at  all  considering  whether  they  themselves  be  proper  and  capable  objects 
of  His  mercy  and  compassion.  And  these  deoeive  themselves,  by  fixing  their 
attention  wholly  upon  one  single  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature ;  and  consider  not 
God  as  indued  with  all  those  perfections  together,  which  complete  the  character  of 
an  all- wise  and  righteous  governor  of  the  universe.  They  consider  not,  that  as 
power,  though  infinite,  is  still  confined  to  what  is  the  object  of  power,  and  extends 
not  at  all  to  the  working  of  contradictions  ;  so  mercy  likewise,  however  infinite,  is 
still  limited  to  the  things  which  are  in  their  nature  the  objects  of  mercy.  But  the 
frequentest,  and,  of  all  others,  the  most  extensive  deceits,  are  the  two  following. 
I.  A  careless  misunderstanding  of  certain  texts  of  Scripture,  wherein  salvation 
may  seem  to  be  promised  upon  other  terms,  than  the  practice  of  virtue  and  true 
righteousness.  H.  An  imaginary  design  of  future  repentance.  (S.  Clarke, 
D.D.)  Self-deceit  and  future    retribution: — One    of    the    mighty    blessings 

bestowed  upon  us  by  the  Christian  revelation,  is,  that  we  have  now  a  certain  know- 
ledge of  a  future  state,  and  of  the  rewards  and  punishments  that  await  us  after 
death,  and  will  be  adjusted  according  to  our  conduct  in  this  world.  I.  The  sinner's 
belf-deceit.  Of  self-deceit,  in  the  great  business  of  our  lives,  there  are  various 
modes.  The  far  greater  part  of  mankind  deceive  themselves,  by  willing  negligence, 
by  refusing  to  think  on  their  real  state,  lest  such  thoughts  should  trouble  their 
quiet,  or  interrupt  their  pursuits.  He  that  is  willing  to  forget  religion  may  quickly 
lose  it ;  and  that  most  men  are  willing  to  forget  it,  experience  informs  us.  Others 
there  are,  who,  without  attending  to  the  written  revelation  of  God's  will,  form  to 
themselves  a  scheme  of  conduct  in  which  vice  is  mingled  with  virtue,  and  who 
cover  from  themselves,  and  hope  to  cover  from  God,  the  indulgence  of  some 
criminal  desire,  or  the  continuance  of  some  vicious  habit,  by  a  few  splendid 
instances  of  public  spirit,  or  some  few  effusions  of  occasional  bounty.  The  mode 
of  self-deception  which  prevails  most  in  the  world,  and  by  which  the  greatest 
number  of  souls  is  at  last  betrayed  to  destruction,  is  the  art  which  we  are  all  too 
apt  to  practise,  of  putting  far  from  us  the  evil  day,  of  setting  the  hour  of  death, 
and  the  day  of  account,  at  a  great  distance.  II.  God  is  not  mocked.  God  is  not 
mocked  in  any  sense.  He  will  not  be  mocked  with  counterfeit  piety,  He  will  not 
be  mocked  with  idle  resolutions ;  but  the  sense  in  which  the  text  declares  that  God 
is  not  mocked,  seems  to  be,  that  God  will  not  suffer  His  decrees  to  be  invalidated ; 
He  will  not  leave  His  promises  unfulfilled,  nor  His  threats  unexecuted.  And  this 
will  easily  appear,  if  we  consider,  that  promises  and  threats  can  only  become 
ineffectual  by  change  of  mind,  or  want  of  power.    God  cannot  change  His  will ; 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  yi. 


He  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  repent ;  what  He  has  spoken  will  surely  come  to 
pass.  Neither  can  He  want  power  to  execute  His  purposes  ;  He  who  spoke,  and 
the  world  was  made,  can  speak  again,  and  it  will  perish.    HI.  In  what  sense  it 

13   TO   BE   UNDERSTOOD,   THAT   WHATSOEVER  A  MAN    SOWS,   THAT    SHALL    HE    REAP.        (S. 

Johnson,  LL.D.)  The  moral  harvest : — Is  it  not  strange  that  the  apostle  should  have 
thought  it  necessary  to  draw  out  into  a  formal  proposition  a  truth  so  obvious  and 
admitted  as  that  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  and  not  something  of  a  different 
kind  he  shall  also  reap  ?  Is  it  not  universally  understood  that  the  product  of  a 
field  will  be  according  to  the  nature  of  the  seed  sown  in  it  ?  The  contrary  propo- 
sition involves  an  absurdity.  Why,  then,  does  Paul  so  solemnly  introduce  and  so 
formally  express  this  truth,  or  truism,  as  I  may  call  it  ?  Because,  though  this 
proposition  is  assented  to  as  expressing  a  truth  in  agriculture,  it  is  denied  or 
disregarded  as  expressing  a  principle  in  morals.  1.  It  is  a  most  interesting  view  to 
take  of  human  conduct,  that  it  is  a  sowing ;  that  all  our  acts  and  exercises  are  as 
if  they  were  planted  in  a  rich  soil,  and  to  produce  many  fold ;  that  we  are  to  eat  of 
the  fruit  of  our  doings,  of  whatever  kind  they  are.  If  every  act  expired  in  its 
performance,  and  every  exercise  of  mind  and  heart  terminated  with  itself,  it  would 
not  be  of  so  much  importance  to  attend  to  the  nature  of  our  acts  and  the  character 
of  our  exercises.  But  it  is  not  so.  They  are  seeds  sown  and  abundantly  producing 
each  after  its  kind.  How  important  how  I  spend  this  day !  centuries  answer  to  it. 
2.  The  seed  we  sow  consists  not  merely  of  overt  acts,  but  comprehends  whatever 
goes  to  constitute  or  to  manifest  character.  We  must  beware  of  our  words.  We 
must  take  heed  to  our  spirits.  We  must  keep  our  hearts  with  all  diligence.  Wa 
must  not  only  consider  what  we  are  doing,  but  from  what  motive,  and  with  what 
aim  we  are  doing  it.  3.  How  much  seed  every  man  sows  even  in  a  short  life,  seed 
of  some  sort  or  other  1  How  many  acts,  words,  thoughts,  and  feelings  enter  into 
the  record  of  every  day,  and  each  is  a  productive  seed  1  Now  let  these  be  multiplied 
by  the  days  of  the  life  of  man,  and  what  an  aggregate  they  make !  4.  Nothing 
which  is  sown  is  so  productive  as  human  conduct ;  nothing  so  fertile  in  its  conse- 
quences; so  abundant  in  results.  5.  The  season  of  sowing  precedes  that  of 
reaping.  Yes,  my  friends,  be  not  deceived.  It  does.  You  may  wonder  that  I  so 
gravely  assert  this.  The  reason  is,  that  some  deny  it.  They  make  sowing  and 
reaping,  probation  and  retribution,  contemporaneous.  They  say  we  reap  while  we 
sow.  Every  farmer  knows  better ;  and  every  sinner  ought  to  know  better.  6.  As 
it  regards  the  duration  of  the  reading,  we  have  nothing  to  rely  on  but  the  declara- 
tion of  Holy  Writ.  We  may  learn  some  things  from  this  subject.  1.  Some  suppose 
that,  if  a  man  is  only  sincere,  all  will  be  well  with  him,  however  erroneous  hie 
views  may  be,  and  however  wrong  his  conduct.  But  can  sincerity  arrest  and  alter 
the  tendencies  of  conduct  ?  If  a  man,  verily  thinking  he  is  sowing  wheat,  sow 
tares,  will  he  reap  wheat  ?  2.  We  may  learn  the  importance  of  beginning  right ; 
that  the  first  seeds  we  sow  should  be  good,  because  they  are  the  first ;  they  sink 
deepest.  And  the  first  may  be  the  only  seeds  we  shall  sow.  If  you  begin 
not  early  to  sow  to  the  Spirit,  you  may  never  sow  to  it.  ( W.  Nevins,  D.D.) 
The  method  of  penalty : — As  we  look  at  retribution  in  the  mingled  light  of  revela- 
tion and  reason,  we  can  understand  why  it  is  that  some  sins  are  punished  in  this 
world,  while  other  sins  await  punishment  in  a  future  world.  If  we  were  to  classify 
the  sins  that  reap  their  painful  consequences  here,  and  those  that  do  not,  we  would 
find  that  the  former  are  offences  that  pertain  to  the  body,  and  the  order  of  this 
world;  and  that  the  latter  pertain  more  directly  to  the  spiritual  nature.  The 
classification  is  not  sharp  ;  the  parts  shade  into  one  another ;  but  it  is  as  accurate 
as  is  the  distinction  between  the  two  departments  of  our  nature.  In  his  physical 
and  social  nature  man  was  made  under  the  laws  of  this  world.  If  he  breaks  these 
laws,  the  penalty  is  inflicted  here.  It  may  continue  hereafter,  for  the  grave  feature 
of  penalty  is  that  it  does  not  tend  to  end,  but  continues  to  act,  like  force  imparted 
to  an  object  in  a  vacuum,  until  arrested  by  some  outside  power.  But  man  is  also 
under  spiritual  laws — reverence,  humility,  love,  self-denial,  purity,  and  all  that  are 
commonly  known  as  moral  duties.  H  he  offends  against  these,  he  may  incur  but 
little  of  painful  consequence.  There  may  be  much  ef  evil  consequence,  bat  the 
phase  of  suffering  lies  farther  on.  The  soil  and  atmosphere  of  this  world  are  not 
adapted  to  bring  it  to  full  fruitage.  We  constantly  see  men  going  through  life  with 
little  pain  or  misfortune,  perhaps  with  less  than  the  ordinary  share  of  human 
suffering,  yet  we  term  them  sinners.  They  do  not  love  nor  fear  God ;  they  have  no 
true  love  for  man  ;  they  reject  the  law  of  self-denial  and  the  duty  of  ministration  ; 
they  stand  off  from  any  direct  relations  to  God ;  they  do  not  pray ;  their  motives 


chip,  fi.]  QALATIANS.  601 

are  selfish ;  their  temper  is  worldly  ;  they  are  devoid  of  what  are  called  graces,  ex- 
cept as  mere  germs  or  chance  outgrowths,  and  make  no  recognition  of  them  as 
forming  the  substance  of  true  character.  These  men  seem  to  be  sinning  without 
punishment,  and  often  infer  that  they  do  not  deserve  it.  The  reason  is  plain. 
They  keep  the  laws  that  pertain  to  this  world,  and  so  do  not  come  in  the  way  of 
their  penalties.  They  are  temperate,  and  are  blessed  with  health.  They  are 
shrewd  and  economical,  and  amass  wealth.  They  are  prudent,  and  avoid  calami- 
ties. They  are  worldly  wise,  and  thus  secure  worldly  advantages.  Courteous  in 
manners,  understanding  well  the  intricacies  of  life,  careful  in  device  and  action, 
they  secure  the  good  and  avoid  the  evil  of  the  world.  If  there  were  no  other  world, 
they  would  be  the  wisest  men,  because  they  best  obey  the  laws  of  their  condition. 
But  man  covers  two  worlds,  and  he  must  settle  with  each  before  his  destiny  is 
decided :  he  may  pass  the  judgment  seat  of  one  acquitted,  but  stand  convicted  before 
the  other.  It  is  as  truly  a  law  of  our  nature  that  we  shall  worship,  as  that  we  shall 
eat.  If  one  starves  his  body,  he  reaps  the  fruit  of  emaciation  and  disease.  But 
one  may  starve  his  soul  and  none  remark  it.  This  world  is  not  the  background 
upon  which  such  processes  appear,  or  they  appear  but  dimly ;  but  when  the  spiri- 
tual world  is  reached,  this  spiritual  crime  will  show  itself.  ...  It  is  not  strange 
that  the  world  of  thinking  men  reject  the  doctrine  of  punishment  of  sin  when  it  is 
taught  as  some  far  off,  arbitrary,  outside  infliction  by  God  in  vindication  of  His 
government,  the  issue  of  some  special  sentence  after  special  inquisition.  This 
1b  unlike  God,  it  has  no  analogy,  no  vindication  in  the  Scriptures  ;  it  is  artificial, 
ooarse,  unreasonable.  But  carry  the  subject  over  into  the  held  of  cause  and 
effect,  and  we  find  it  irradiated  by  the  double  light  of  reason  and  revelation.  It 
takes  on  a  necessary  aspect.  Penalty  is  seen  to  be  a  natural  thing,  like  the  grow- 
ing of  seed.  It  is  not  a  matter  that  God,  in  His  sovereignty,  will  take  up  after  a 
time,  but  is  a  part  of  His  ever-acting  law.  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  Sowing  for  eternity  : — 
In  the  stirring  history  of  English  martyrology  we  read  of  an  eminent  victim  that 
ob  one  occasion  he  was  taken  from  his  dungeon  to  a  chamber  which  was  hung 
vund  with  tapestry  ;  that  there  he  was  being  gradually  drawn  into  a  conversation 
/egarding  himself  attd  his  companions,  when  in  a  moment  of  quietness  he  heard 
the  sound  of  a  nib  of  a  pen  moving  upon  paper,  as  if  some  one  were  wrisiug 
behind  the  arras  ;  and  that  immediately  thereupon  he  became  silent,  for  vre'u  he 
knew  that  by  a  thoughtless  word  he  might  bring  upon  both  himself  and  his 
brethren  the  severest  suffering.  The  actions  in  which  now  we  engage  are  seeds 
whose  fruit  shall  be  eternal,  and  when  we  know  and  believe  that,  shall  we  be  less 
careful  of  them  than  he  was  of  his  speech  ?  It  is  told  of  a  famous  painter  that 
he  was  remarkable  for  the  careful  manner  in  which  he  went  about  his  work,  and 
when  one  asked  him  "why  he  took  such  pains?  "  his  answer  was,  "Because  I  paint 
for  eternity."  Shall  this  be  so  in  the  case  of  one  who  is  trying  to  secure  a  lasting 
earthly  fame,  and  shall  we  not  be  considerate  in  all  our  ways,  knowing  that  what  we 
are  doing  now  shall  have  an  eternal  effect  upon  our  character  and  condition  T  (W. 
M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  seed  contains  the  germ  of  the  harvest: — The  pea  contains 
the  vine  and  the  flower  and  the  pod  in  embryo  ;  and  I  am  sure,  when  I  plant  it, 
that  it  will  produce  them,  and  nothing  else.  Now,  every  action  of  our  lives  is  em- 
bryonic, and,  according  as  it  is  right  or  wrong,  it  will  surely  bring  forth  the  sweet 
flowers  of  joy,  or  the  poison  fruits  of  sorrow.  Such  is  the  constitution  of  this 
world ;  and  the  Bible  assures  us  that  the  next  world  only  carries  it  forward.  (H. 
W.  Beecher.)  Reproduction  in  kind: — I  call  my  child  to  my  knee  in  anger;  I 
strike  him  a  hasty  blow  that  carries  with  it  the  peculiar  sting  of  anger  ;  I  speak  a 
loud  reproof  tb»at  bears  with  it  the  spirit  of  anger  ;  and  I  look  in  vain  for  any  re- 
lenting in  his  flashing  eyes,  flushed  face,  and  compressed  lips.  I  have  made  my 
child  angry,  and  my  uncontrolled  passion  has  produced  after  its  kind.  I  have  sown 
anger,  and  I  have  reaped  anger  instantaneously.  Perhaps  I  become  still  more 
angry,  in  consequence  of  the  passion  manifested  by  my  child,  and  I  speak  and 
strike  again.  He  is  weak  and  1  am  strong ;  but,  though  he  bow  his  head,  crushed 
into  silence,  I  may  be  sure  that  there  is  a  sullen  heart  in  the  little  bosom,  and  anger 
the  more  bitter  beoause  it  is  impotent.  I  put  the  child  away  from  me, 
and  think  of  what  I  have  done.  I  am  full  of  relentings.  I  long  to  ask  his  pardon, 
for  I  know  I  have  offended  and  deeply  injured  one  of  Christ's  little  ones.  I  call  him 
to  me  again,  press  his  head  to  my  breast,  kiss  him,  and  weep.  No  word  is  spoken, 
but  the  little  bosom  heaves,  the  little  heart  softens,  the  little  eyes  grow  tenderly 
penitent,  the  little  hands  come  up  and  clasp  my  neck,  and  my  relentings  and  my 
sorrow  have  produced  after  their  kind.    The  child  is  conquered,  and  so  am  I. 


50!  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n> 

(Pulpit  Analyst.)  Harvest  in  proportion  to  sowing : — There  shall  be  degrees  in 
retribution  and  reward.  The  ragged  urchin  in  our  city  streets,  who  has  not  had 
the  opportunities  of  a  Christian  household,  will  not  have  to  gather  such  a  harvest 
of  suffering  from  his  sowing  to  the  flesh  as  will  he  who  has  sinned  against  light 
and  privilege  of  the  highest  order.  The  heathen,  who  have  not  heard  of  Christ, 
will  not  have  the  same  future  as  those  who,  having  had  the  Saviour  preached  to 
them,  have  defiantly  rejected  Him.  The  condition  of  each  will  be  proportioned  to 
his  guilt.  He  who  creeps  in  at  last  to  the  kingdom  through  the  fast  closing  gate, 
and  by  a  deathbed  repentance  becomes  regenerated,  shall  not  have  a  place  like  that 
of  the  man  whose  entire  life  has  been  devoted  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  who  made 
the  one  pound  into  ten  received  in  the  parable  authority  over  ten  cities.  He  who 
from  the  one  gained  as  much  as  made  it  five,  was  set  over  five  cities.  All  this 
goes  to  show  that  while  it  is  wholly  of  grace  that  reward  is  granted  to  any  believer, 
yet  the  reward  itself  is  graduated  for  each  according  to  the  magnitude  of  the  ser- 
vice. (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Harvest  an  increase  on  soxoing : — The  harvest  is 
always  an  increase  on  that  which  was  sown.  From  the  seed  of  the  flesh  the  ripened 
result  is  corruption,  which  is  flesh  in  its  most  revolting  state.  From  the  seed  of 
the  spirit  the  full  ear  is  life  everlasting,  which  is  eternal  holiness  with  its  concomi- 
tent  of  endless  happiness.  And  what  can  I  say  to  make  these  ideas  more  clear  and 
forcible  that  this  simple  presentation  of  them  is  ?  Corruption  1  The  delirium 
tremens  of  the  drunkard,  and  the  living  death  of  the  sensualist  whose  sin  has  found 
him  out  here  on  earth,  may  help  us  to  understand  something  of  what  that  most 
mean  in  eternity,  and  for  the  rest  I  must  ask  Byron  to  help  me  out : 

"  It  is  as  if  the  dead  could  feel 
The  icy  worm  around  them  steal, 
And  shudder,  as  the  reptiles  creep 
To  revel  o'er  their  rotting  sleep, 
Without  the  power  to  scare  away 
The  cold  consumers  of  their  clay." 

But  «nough  of  that  I  I  turn  rather  to  the  other  side,  and  bid  yon  remember  that 
the  highest  happiness  of  the  Christian's  experience  on  earth  will  be  but  like  as  the 
faint  light  of  early  dawn  is  to  the  meridian  day,  when  it  is  compared  with  the 
blessedness  of  heaven.  The  harvest  is  always  an  increase.  We  plant  a  single 
grain,  we  pluck  a  full  ear ;  we  sow  in  handfuls,  we  reap  in  bosomfuls ;  we  scatter 
bushels,  but  we  gather  in  rich  granary  stores.  The  remorse  of  earth  is  but  the 
germ  of  the  despair  of  hell.  The  holiness  of  the  present  is  only  the  bud  from  which 
will  blossom  that  vision  of  God  which  is  the  full-flowered  beatitude  of  heaven. 
(Ibid.)  Importance  of  this  life  in  the  light  of  the  future: — It  used  to  be  said  by 
the  apostles  of  infidelity,  under  the  name  of  secularism,  that  belief  in  a  future  state 
unfits  men  for  the  performance  of  the  duties  of  this  life  by  fixing  their  minds  on 
♦hat  which  is  as  yet  in  the  distance.  It  were  as  rational  to  allege  that  the  husband- 
man by  looking  forward  to  the  harvest  incapacitates  himself  for  the  work  of  the 
spring-time ;  or  that  the  youth  by  setting  his  ambition  on  after  success  is  thereby 
disqualified  for  the  prosecution  of  his  early  education.  Faith  in  the  future  life 
intensifies  the  importance  of  the  present  by  focussing  upon  it  the  issues  of  eternity. 
It  makes  us  all  the  more  careful  to  do  the  work  that  lies  at  our  hands,  not  in  the 
fleshly  manner  of  the  unrenewed  man,  but  after  the  spiritual  method  of  the  re- 
generated soul.  Every  thought  we  think,  every  word  we  speak,  every  action  we 
perform,  every  opportunity  of  service  neglected  or  improved,  is  a  seed  sown  by  us, 
the  fruit  of  which  shall  multiply  either  into  untold  miseries  or  myriad  blessings  in 
the  eternity  into  which  we  go.  (Ibid.)  The  moral  harvest : — Liability  to  impos- 
ture is  perhaps  inseparable  from  human  frailty ;  the  best  of  men  have  been  num- 
bered with  its  victims.  Upon  no  subject  is  deception  more  common — upon  none 
more  fatal  than  that  of  our  accountableness  to  God.  I.  Life  is  a  sowing  timb. 
This  view  of  life  exhibits  it  as — 1.  A  season  of  mercy.  Seed-time  is  the  gracious,  the 
covenant  boon  of  Heaven :  forfeited  by  man's  original  transgression,  it  was  restored 
in  virtue  of  that  dispensation  of  mercy  disclosed  in  the  first  promise  to  the  fallen ; 
again  held  in  abeyance,  whilst  the  waters  of  the  deluge  covered  a  polluted  world, 
the  sacrifice  of  faith  availed  to  the  renewal  of  the  benefaction  in  terms  more  dis- 
tinct, and  ratified  by  a  sign,  visible  to  all  the  nations  and  coeval  with  all  the  suc- 
cessive generations  of  man.  2.  A  season  of  anxious  toil.  It  imposes  upon  the 
husbandman  the  necessity  of  diligent  and  laborious  exertion ;  nothing  must  dis* 


mi*.  ?i.]  OALATIANS.  60S 

courage  him  from  his  oocnpation.  Such  a  season  is  human  life.  Idleness,  either 
in  respect  to  temporal  or  spiritual  things,  is  utterly  incompatible  with  the  circum- 
stances or  the  destiny  of  our  race.  3.  A  season  of  limited  duration.  The 
Eeed-time  occupies  but  a  comparatively  small  portion  of  the  year;  it  is  soon 
over  and  gone.  "And  what  is  your  life?"  (James  iv.  14.)  The  comparison 
reminds  us  that  life  is — i.  A  season  of  immense  importance.  The  sowing 
season  neglected  would  entail  upon  the  husbandman,  and  all  dependent  upon  his 
exertions,  certain  ruin.  Life  is  the  only  time  wherein  the  seeds  of  immortal  bliss  can  be 
deposited,  and  the  soul  prepared  for  heaven.  II.  All  men  are  sowers.  Men  are  active 
and  voluntary  agents.  Their  minds  are  active.  Their  passions  are  active.  Their  bodies 
are  active.  Their  influence  is  active.  Men  are  accountable  creatures — necessarily  so. 
Universally  so.  Consciously  so.  III.  The  seed  is  of  different  kinds.  Now  all 
those  actions  must  be  denominated  fleshly  seed,  which  are  the  natural  produce  or 
fruit  of  the  flesh  (Rom.  vii.  5).  "  The  old  man,"  our  carnal  nature,  •■  is  corrupt 
according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,"  and  **  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh." 
The  seed  may  be  attractive  in  its  colour ;  it  may  appear  clean  and  free  from  admix- 
ture ;  but  whilst  it  can  boast  no  higher  origin  than  the  natural  stock,  it  is  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  fleshly  seed.  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  you,  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  Again  ;  all  those  actions  demand  this  appellation,  which  are  intended 
to  realize  carnal  satisfaction.  Hence  it  will  appear,  that  those  actions  only  deserve 
to  be  classed  as  spiritual  seed,  that  proceed  from  the  regenerating  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart,  and  that  are  performed  with  a  sincere  desire  to  please 
and  to  glorify  God.  Some  of  these  exercises  of  mind  are  delineated  in  Gal.  v.  22 ; 
Col.  iii.  12.  IT.  Eveby  man  most  heap.  He  cannot  employ  a  substitute,  or  devolve  the 
consequencies  of  his  actions  upon  others.  He  cannot  evade  or  refuse  the  task.  Self- 
annihilation  is  impossible,  and  the  field  will  present  itself  in  every  part  of  the  man.  Self- 
oblivion  will  be  impossible,  and  memory  will  yield  a  prolific  harvest.  V.  The  crop 
will  bear  a  close  relation  to  the  seed  sown.  As  to  its  nature  or  quality.  "  He 
that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption,"  disappointment,  shame, 
misery,  eternal  death  (Job  iv.  8 ;  Hosea  viii.  7 ;  Matt.  vii.  18,  19 ;  Rev.  xxi.  8) ; 
"  He  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting,"  a  life  of 
perfect  purity,  celestial  peace,  exalted  intelligence,  immortal  joy  (Psalm  xvii.  15 ; 
1  John  iii.  2 ;  Rev.  vii  14,  &c).  As  to  its  extent.  The  subject  impresses 
the  neeessity  of  regeneration.  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God. " 
(J.  Broad.)  The   spiritual   harvest: — I.    That  evert  man,  in  his    earthly 

CONDITION,  IS  TO  BE  REGARDED  AS  A  BOWER.  H.  THAT  THE  KIND  OF  SEED  SOWN 
DEPENDS  ON  EVERY  MAN'S  CHOICE.  IU.  THAT  THE  SOWEB  SHALL  AT  LENGTH 
BECOME    THE    REAPER.       IV.    THAT    THE    CHARACTER    OF    THE    HARVEST   WILL  EXACTLY 

CORBE8POND  with  the  eind  of  seed.  (J.  Davies,  M.A.)  Souring  to  the 
flesh : — Not  so  much  the  act  of  indulging  in  irregular  passions,  as  the  providing  for 
their  indulgence.  The  daughter  who  engages  in  a  ceaseless  round  of  gaieties,  who 
hastens  from  one  scene  of  amusement  to  another,  whose  attention  is  wholly  directed 
to  the  frivolities  of  dissipation,  and  from  whose  course  of  life  nothing  can  be  more 
diverse  than  preparation  for  eternity ;  it  is  not  so  much  she  who  can  be  said  to 
**  sow  to  the  flesh,"  as  her  father,  who  provides  all  the  means  of  enjoyment  in  which 
she  indulges,  although  perhaps  he  has  himself  no  taste  for  such  delights,  although 
perhaps  with  brow  wrinkled  by  oare  he  has  no  desires  beyond  his  counting-house  ; 
he  whose  whole  attention  is  absorbed  in  the  pursuit  of  gain,  and  as  utterly  regard- 
less of  a  preparation  for  eternity  as  his  daughter — he  it  is  who  "  sows  to  the  flesh." 
Both  are  hastening  to  the  same  end,  but  by  different  ways ;  she  "  sows  the  whirl- 
wind," while  he  "reaps  the  storm."  I.  The  brevity  of  all  the  objects  of  this 
wobld'b  ambition.  Suppose  a  man  who  has  been  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth 
to  attain  the  summit  of  his  ambition.  He  may,  indeed,  enjoy  a  brief  hour  of 
delight,  but  that  hour  will  soon  be  past.  The  wealth  he  has  acquired  may  not  be 
taken  from  him ;  but  he  will,  sooner  or  later,  be  taken  from  it.  The  splendid  man- 
sion he  has  reared  may  stand  in  castellated  pride  for  many  generations,  and  his 
domain  may  smile  for  ages  in  undiminished  beauty ;  but  in  less,  perhaps,  than  half 
a  generation,  death  will  shoot  his  unbidden  way  into  the  inner  apartment,  and 
without  despoiling  the  lord  of  his  possessions,  will  despoil  the  possessions  of  their 
lord  1  It  is  not  his  way  to  tear  the  parchments  and  rights  of  investiture  from  the 
hand  of  the  proprietor,  but  he  paralyzes  and  unlocks  the  hand,  and  they  fall  like 
useless  and  forgotten  things  away  from  him.  Thus  death  smiles  in  ghastly 
contempt  on  all  human  aggrandisement;  he  meddles  not  with  the  things  that  are 
occupied,  but  lays  hold  of  the  occupier  ;  he  does  not  seize  on  the  wealth,  but  lays 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  ju 

his  arrest  on  the  owner !  he  forces  away  his  body  to  the  grave,  where  it  crumbles 
into  dust ;  and  in  turning  the  soul  out  of  its  warm  and  well-favoured  tenement,  ha 
turns  it  adrift  on  the  cheerless  waste  of  a  desolate  and  neglected  eternity.    II.  The 

UNPEOVTDED   STATE,   WITH   EESPECT   TO   ETERNITY,  IN   WHICH   ALL  ABE   LIVING  WHO   SOW 

to  the  flesh.  This  world  is  between  heaven  and  hell ;  but  the  existence  of  such 
a  middle  region,  where  the  creature  may  enjoy  himself  amid  the  Creator's  gifts,  and 
care  not  for  the  Giver,  cannot  long  be  tolerated.  According  to  the  natural  course 
of  things,  it  will  come  to  an  end.  He  who  chooses  this  world  for  his  portion  may 
have  his  "  good  things  "  here,  but  leaves  his  eternity  a  blank.  His  desires  being 
earthly,  his  reward  is  perishable.  ( T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Retribution,  though  delayed, 
comes  at  last : — Penalties  are  often  so  long  delayed  that  men  think  they  shall  escape 
tbem ;  but  some  time  or  other  they  are  certain  to  follow.  When  the  whirlwind  sweeps 
through  the  forest,  at  its  first  breath,  or  almost  as  if  the  fearful  stillness  that  pre- 
cedes  had  crushed  it,  the  giant  tree  with  all  its  boughs  falls  crashing  to  the 
ground.  But  it  had  been  preparing  to  fall  for  twenty  years.  Twenty  years  before  it  re- 
ceived a  gash.  Twenty  years  before  the  water  commenced  to  settle  in  at  some  crotch, 
and  from  thence  decay  began  to  reach  in  with  its  silent  fingers  towards  the  heart 
of  the  tree.  Every  year  the  work  of  death  progressed,  till  at  length  it  stood,  all 
rottenness,  only  clasped  about  by  the  bark  with  a  semblance  of  life,  and  the  first 
gale  felled  it  to  the  ground.  Now  there  are  men  who  for  twenty  years  have  shamed 
the  day  and  wearied  the  night  with  their  debaucheries,  but  who  yet  seem  strong 
and  vigorous,  and  exclaim,  "  You  need  not  talk  of  penalties.  Look  at  me  1  I  have 
revelled  in  pleasure  for  twenty  years,  and  I  am  as  hale  and  hearty  to-day  as  ever.'* 
But  in  reality  they  are  full  of  weakness  and  decay.  They  have  been  preparing  to 
fall  for  twenty  years,  and  the  first  disease  strikes  them  down  in  a  moment.  Ascend  • 
ing  from  the  physical  nature  of  man  to  the  mind  and  character,  we  find  the  sama 
laws  prevail.  People  sometimes  say,  "  Dishonesty  is  as  good  as  honesty,  for  aught 
I  see.  There  are  such  and  such  men  who  have  pursued  for  years  the  most  corrupt 
courses  in  their  business,  and  yet  they  prosper,  and  are  getting  rich  every  day." 
Wait  till  you  see  their  end.  Every  year  how  many  such  men  are  overtaken  with 
sudden  destruction,  and  swept  for  ever  out  of  sight  and  remembrance  1  Many  a 
man  has  gone  on  in  sin,  practising  secret  frauds  and  villainies,  yet  trusted  and 
honoured,  till  at  length,  in  some  unsuspected  hour,  he  is  detected,  and,  denounced 
by  the  world,  he  falls  from  his  high  estate  as  if  a  cannon-ball  had  struck  him — for 
there  is  no  cannon  that  can  strike  more  fatally  than  outraged  public  sentiment — 
and  flies  over  the  mountains,  or  across  the  sea,  to  escape  the  odium  of  his  life.  Ha 
believed  that  his  evil  course  was  building  him  up  in  fame  and  fortune  ;  but  finan- 
ciering is  the  devil's  forge,  and  his  every  act  was  a  blow  upon  the  anvil  shaping  the 
dagger  that  should  one  day  strike  home  to  his  heart,  and  make  him  a  suicide. 
{H .  W.  Beecher.)  Reproduction  in  kind : — 1.  The  first  law  which  invites  our 
attention  in  the  field  of  reproduction  is,  that  like  produces  like.  The  seed  of  a  fig 
never  can  be  made  to  produce  a  thistle,  nor  the  thistle-seed  a  fig.  The  corn,  con- 
ccaled  for  three  thousand  years  in  the  hand  of  an  Egyptian  mummy,  and  last  year 
discovered  and  planted  in  the  earth,  produced  precisely  the  same  sort  of  grain  which 
grew  so  many  centuries  ago  from  similar  seed.  The  same  law  is  equally  imperative 
as  relates  to  every  variety  of  the  animal  species.  Sheep  and  goats,  though  mingling 
for  centuries  in  flocks  cared  for  by  the  same  shepherd,  never  confuse  their  dis- 
tinctive features.  The  ant  which  to-day  runs  athwart  our  path  is  the  same  insect, 
in  kind,  to  which  Solomon  directed  the  sluggard,  to  learn  a  lesson  of  wisdom  in 
industry.  The  lark  which  now  rises  upon  the  wing  of  song  to  meet  the  early  morn- 
ing rays  is  the  same  songster,  in  kind,  which  regaled  the  ears  of  Adam  in  Eden's 
bowers.  Like  produces  like ;  and  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap. 
Wor-ds,  thoughts,  desires,  are  seeds ;  eye-glances,  and  ear-attentions,  and  hand 
operations,  and  feet  movements  are  seeds ;  habits  are  seeds.  The  lives  of  otherB 
are  gardens ;  so  likewise  the  home  circle,  the  social  assembly,  the  church,  the  con- 
gregation, the  office,  the  warehouse,  the  public  conveyance —ay,  every  child  or 
adult — the  very  laws  and  elements  of  nature  are  gardens  in  which  we  are  sowing 
these  seeds  ;  and  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  God  ha3  so 
ordered  the  vast  machinery  of  our  earthly  habitation  that  we  shall  be  paid  in  tha 
harvest  that  which  we  have  scattered  in  the  seeding-time.  It  is  the  law  in  indi- 
vidual sympathies.  Love  begets  love,  and  hate  excites  hate,  and  anger  arouses 
anger,  and  the  results  of  our  mental  dispositions  return  into  our  own  bosoms. 
Impatience  provokes  impatience,  and  violence  awakens  violence,  and  we  reap  tha 
harvests  of  our  own  moods  and  humours.    But  that  like  produces  like  is  moat 


otup.  ti.]  QALATIANS.  105 

clearly  evinced  in  this :  that  that  state  and  temper  which  we  cultivate  assumes  a 
more  intensified  form.  The  man  who  once  gives  way  to  forbidden  pleasure  reaps 
the  harvest  of  a  stronger  and  stronger  desire,  till,  upon  further  indulgence,  the 
desire  is  followed  by  a  craving,  which,  in  turn,  is  succeeded  by  insatiable  rage.  A 
moderate  heat  is  agreeable,  but  a  burning  fire  is  torture.  So  the  early  indulgence 
of  unlawful  passion  (though  for  a  season  it  be  pleasurable),  the  harvest  of  misery 
and  corruption  will  but  too  quickly  and  surely  succeed.  What  is  the  consuming 
thirst  of  the  inebriate  but  the  harvest  of  a  once  manageable  but  indulged  desire ! 
What  is  the  wasting  passion  of  the  debauchee  but  the  harvest  of  those  urgencies 
which  could  once  have  been  controlled !  What  is  the  maddening  passion  of  the 
gambler  but  the  harvest  of  that  seed  which  was  scattered  in  the  earlier  indulgence 
of  the  spirit  of  venture  1  What  is  the  idolatry  of  the  covetous  man  but  the  reaping 
of  those  habits  which  were  sown  in  the  cultivation  of  desires  for  gain  forbidden  by 
the  Tenth  Commandment  1  What  is  that  dolorous  and  destructive  emulation  of  the 
ambitious  man  but  the  returning  into  his  own  bosom  of  the  harvest  which  was  sown 
by  the  indulgence  of  vanity  and  pride  I  What  is  that  outward  and  ragged  filth  of 
the  blear-eyed  and  staggering  prodigal,  but  the  harvest  of  indulged  inward  im- 
purity !  Can  a  more  terrible  harvest  be  reaped  than  that  self-consuming,  ever- 
increasing  intensity  of  passion  which  is  the  necessary  result  of  indulged  and 
unlawful  desire  ?  Like  produces  like,  and  we  cannot  sow  vice  and  reap  the  reward 
of  virtue.  Idleness  can  never  rise  to  gather  in  the  rewards  of  industry.  Unbelief 
never  can  be  followed  by  the  golden  harvest  of  faith.  The  acceptance  of  error 
never  can  be  made  to  produce  the  good  effects  of  truth,  nor  can  truth  ever  be  made 
to  damage  the  soul,  like  its  opposite.  The  only  possible  way  in  which  we  can  reap 
good  is  to  sow  good ;  for  an  unchangeable  law  of  God  it  is,  that  like  must  produce 
its  like.  2.  A  second  law  of  reproduction  is,  that  the  harvest  multiplies  upon  the 
sowing.  One  grain  may  produce  a  hundred.  This  is  true  of  good  seed,  and  like- 
wise of  the  bad.  One  thistle-down,  which  blew  from  the  deck  of  a  vessel,  is  said 
to  have  covered  with  full-grown  thistles  the  entire  surface  of  a  South  Sea  island. 
A  single  error  or  sin  of  youth  may  overspread  our  whole  life  with  misery ;  and  a 
life  spent  in  impenitenoy  here  will  be  followed  by  an  eternity  of  regret  hereafter. 
8.  A  third  law  of  reproduction  is,  that  the  bad  is  voluntary  and  the  good  is  involun- 
tary. Marvellous  it  is  to  behold  how  prolific  the  earth  is  of  the  useless  and  the 
vile.  The  ground  owes  the  weeds  to  itself,  and  the  corn  to  the  hands  of  the  hus- 
bandman. The  seeds  of  evil  lie  deep  and  lie  long,  and  are  instantly  responsive  to 
circumstances  favourable  to  their  growth.  For  sin  we  are  indebted  to  ourselves ; 
for  righteousness  to  the  gracious  purpose  and  intervening  hand  of  God.  In  the 
kingdom  of  grace  there  may  be  examples — like  Samuel  and  John  the  Baptist — who 
display  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  at  the  early  dawn  of  life  ;  still,  it  is  none  the  less 
true,  in  these  cases  as  in  others,  the  fear  of  God  is  planted  by  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  In  a  tropical  latitude  the  fields  may  be  waving  their  golden  grain 
when,  further  from  the  equator,  the  mantle  of  winter  is  still  enshrouding  the 
earth.  But  at  the  South  the  ground,  covered  with  fruit,  is  as  much  indebted  to  the 
hand  of  the  husbandman  as,  at  a  later  period,  the  northern  fields  are  dependent 
upon  the  seed  of  the  sower,  and  the  care  of  the  labourer.  So,  whether  piety  be 
exhibited  earlier  or  later  in  life,  we  are  equally  indebted  to  the  gracious  and  merciful 
intervention  of  the  Divine  Husbandman.    (A.  McElroy  Wylie.) 

Ver.  9.  And  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well  doing-. — Perseverance  in  religious  duties : — 
The  path  of  duty  is  often  found  to  be  the  path  of  difficulty  and  discouragement. 
Efforts  to  do  good  are  often  misunderstood  and  ill-requited  ;  benevolent  plans  are 
ridiculed,  motives  misrepresented,  kindness  of  heart  abused,  hopes  of  success  treated 
as  visionary  and  absurd.  Still  the  conscientious,  right-minded,  true  servant  of 
God  is  a  man  of  determination  ;  he  acts  from  principle,  not  impulse  ;  his  heart  is 
in  the  work,  therefore  he  proceeds  in  it,  doing  his  utmost  to  discharge  the  duties 
God  has  laid  on  him.  I.  The  butt.  To  do  what  is  just  and  approved  in  God's 
sight.  This  refers — 1.  To  ourselves.  (1)  Starting  in  the  heavenly  course.  (2) 
Persevering  therein.  2.  To  our  fellow-men.  (1)  Their  bodies  (James  i.  27 ;  Matt. 
xxv.  35,  36).  (2)  Their  souls.  More  valuable  than  body,  so  ought  to  be  more 
regarded.  Sympathy.  A  word  in  season.  Consideration  and  regard  for  other's 
feelings  and  prej  udices.  II.  The  manner  of  performing  it.  Unwearied  ly.  Much 
need  for  this  admonition.  We  often  feel  our  unfitness  and  unworthiness  to  b« 
employed  in  doing  good.  Let  us  take  heed  lest  our  supposed  humility  and  self 
depreciation  proceed  really  from  coldness  of  heart,  apathy,  selfishness,  deadness  of 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  v% 

spirit.  Great  need  for  diligence,  patience,  and  heartfelt  earnestness.  HI.  The 
motive.  "  In  due  season  we  shall  reap,"  &o.  Encouraging  to  know  this.  God's 
service  is  not  labour  without  return.  He  gives  to  every  man  according  to  his  work 
— exactly  what  he  deserves.  (George  Weight,  M.A.)  The  importance  of  well- 
doing : — The  interest  of  this  world  arises  from  the  fact  that  here  we  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  our  character  for  eternity.  I .  Consider  the  Christian  man's  vocation  in 
the  prebent  world.  "  Well-doing."  While  other  men  are  setting  before  them- 
selves, as  objects  of  ultimate  attainment,  the  possession  of  wealth,  of  worldly 
aggrandisement,  of  luxurious  ease,  he  is  to  be  emulating  the  example  of  Him  of 
whom  it  was  said,  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  1.  This  life  is  not  merely  for  con- 
templation. 2.  Nor  is  it  merely  for  projecting  schemes — religious  castle-building. 
We  are  placed  here  to  do,  not  to  plan  or  talk.  3.  The  believer  is  endowed  by  God 
with  the  capacity  for  imparting  blessing  to  his  fellow-men.  II.  An  incentive  to 
perseverance.  1.  The  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  vocation  is  connected  with  cer- 
tain reward  in  the  future.  All  works  done  for  God  are  the  sowing  of  seed,  the  fruits 
of  which  will  be  reaped  another  day.  The  earnest  prayer,  the  sympathizing  or 
reproving  word,  the  self- denying  and  laborious  effort — little  accounted  of  here,  and 
perhaps  unassociated  with  any  thought  of  future  recompense — are  all  helping  to 
form  the  material  out  of  which  will  be  woven  the  robe  of  unfading  brightness  and 
beauty  which  the  Lord  Himself  shall  cast  upon  His  own,  in  the  great  harvest-time 
to  come.  2.  This  reward  will  be  bestowed  at  an  appropriate  period.  "In  due 
season."  God  does  not  act  without  a  deliberate  plan  of  His  own,  and  amid  all  the 
apparent  conflict  and  confusion  of  human  events,  that  plan  is  being  wrought  out, 
and  at  the  proper  time  appointed  by  Him  will  be  accomplished.  This  intimation  is 
admirably  calculated  to  correct  our  misapprehensions,  and  evoke  our  confidence. 
8.  The  assurance  of  certain  reward  is  a  sufficient  motive  to  perseverance  under  every 
temptation  to  weariness.  Just  as,  under  the  influence  of  some  mighty  exoiting 
cause,  the  human  frame  can  bear  an  amount  of  toil,  or  lift  burdens,  under  which 
at  ordinary  times  it  would  utterly  bow  down ;  so  we,  inspirited  by  the  prospect  of  our 
glorious  future,  animated  by  foretastes  of  heavenly  joy,  would  be  transformed,  each 
one,  into  a  spiritual  Hercules,  equal  to  all  toil,  affrighted  at  no  difficulties,  ready 
for  all  labours,  exultant  over  all  opposition.  (C.  M.  Merry.)  Exhortation  and 
assurance  : — Our  great  want  is  confessedly  staying  power.  Impulse  and  spasm  are 
common ;  not  so  permanence  in  character  and  conduct.  The  wheels  of  Christian 
energy  begin  rolling  gaily  enough  ;  but  are  soon  checked  by  weariness,  depression, 
disappointment ;  and  the  result,  too  often,  is  failure.  Against  this  weariness  St. 
Paul  here  warns  us,  and  he  unfolds  his  thought  in  a  parable.  The  husbandman 
sows  his  seed,  which,  in  the  act  of  sowing,  passes  out  of  sight.  He  waits  with  long 
patience  for  it  to  sprout  and  come  forth  ;  but  he  faints  not,  knowing  that  harvest 
as  well  as  seed-time  is  an  ordinance  of  God  and  cannot  fail.  So,  after  we  have  sown 
the  seeds  of  effort  and  endeavour,  we  must  not  faint  if  the  harvest  does  not  follow 
on  the  heel  of  seed-time.  I.  The  admonition.  1.  We  are  sowers.  2.  In  our  sowing, 
an  absence  of  apparent  results  will  beget  weariness.  Even  Christ  grew  weary 
in  His  work,  never  of  His  work.  Let  us  take  care  that  our  weariness  is  like  His. 
3.  Our  weariness,  unlike  Christ's,  may  arise  from  misunderstanding  of  the  ways  of 
God.  His  ways  are  hidden.  Results  do  not  appear  at  once.  Slowly  He  works,  but 
surely,  and  fast  enough.  Let  us  not  be  in  greater  haste.  H.  The  assurance. 
"  Due  season  "  is  God's  time,  not  ours.  For  us,  it  may  not  even  be  in  this  world 
at  all ;  we  may  be  only  sowers  here  ;  still  we  shall  reap  one  day — Christ  will  be  no 
man's  debtor.  (William  Scott.)  The  commandment  against  weariness  : — Why  is 
weariness  deprecated  ?  1.  It  invites  failure.  The  task  set  us  is  listlessly  performed ; 
interest  flags  ;  no  great  results  are  expected  ;  mechanical  routine  gradually  steals 
into  the  holiest  service.  Our  attitude  conveys  no  inspiration,  but  rather  depresses. 
2.  It  may  forfeit  the  reward.  Only  by  waiting  and  persevering  to  the  end  does  the 
toiler  secure  his  harvest.  3.  It  dishonours  Christ.  (St.  John  A.  Frere,  M.A.) 
Well-doing  : — Paul  himself  often  weary  (2  Cor.  xi.  23-28),  but  he  never  loses  heart. 
As  a  minister  of  the  glad  tidings,  he  maintains  a  cheerful  serenity  amid  discourage- 
ments, and  exhorts  his  converts  to  cultivate  the  same  spirit.  I.  The  Christian's 
duct.  "  Well-doing."  Practical  religion.  Sin  is  wrong-doing.  The  faith  that 
saves  impels  to  the  opposite.  1.  Duty  to  God.  2.  Duty  to  self.  3.  Duty  to  one's 
neighbour.  II.  The  Christian's  danger  in  ddct.  Weariness  of  spirit  may  arise 
from — 1.  Physical  exhaustion.  2.  Spiritual  exhaustion — worry.  3.  Fruitless 
toil.  4.  Opposition  from  those  who  should  help.  5.  Oppression  from  the 
sense  of  responsibility       III.  The  Christian's  encouragement  in  duct.     1.  Tha 


chap.  Yi.]  GALATIANS.  607 

present  is  sowing-time.  2.  The  time  of  reaping  is  certain.  3.  There  is  a  right 
time  for  such  reaping  ;  "in  due  season,"  4.  Each  phall  gather  for  himself  of  his 
own  sowing.      (J.  E.  Flower,  M.A.)  Reward  of  perseverance  : — A  German 

musician  whose  sense  of  sound  was  remarkably  acute,  tells  us  that  a  day  or 
two  after  he  landed,  he  entered  one  of  our  churches.  The  music  happened 
to  be  most  discordant,  and  his  first  impulse  was  to  rush  out  again.  "  But 
this,"  said  he,  "  I  feared  to  do,  lest  offence  might  be  given  ;  so  I  resolved  to  endure 
the  torture  with  the  best  fortitude  I  could  assume,  when  lo  !  I  distinguished,  amid 
the  din,  the  soft,  clear  voice  of  a  woman,  singing  in  perfect  tune.  She  made  no 
effort  to  drown  the  voice  of  her  companions,  neither  was  she  disturbed  by  their 
noisy  discord  ;  but  patiently  and  sweetly  she  sang  in  full  rich  tones  ;  one  after 
another  yielded  to  the  gentle  influence,  and  before  the  tune  was  finished  all  were  in 
perfect  harmony."  I  have  often  thought  of  this  story,  as  conveying  an  instructive 
lesson  to  the  Christian.  The  spirit  that  can  thus  sing  patiently  and  sweetly  in  a 
world  of  discord,  must,  indeed,  be  of  the  purest  kind.  The  Christian  sometimes 
scarce  can  hear  his  own  voice  amid  the  multitude  ;  and  ever  and  anon  comes  the 
temptation  to  sing  louder  than  they,  and  drown  the  voices  that  cannot  be  forced 
into  perfect  tune.  But  the  melodious  tones,  cracked  into  shrillness,  would  only  in- 
crease the  tumult.  And  more  frequently  comes  the  temptation  to  stop  singing,  and 
let  discord  do  its  own  wild  work.  But  blessed  are  they  that  endure  to  the  end  — 
singing  patiently  and  sweetly,  till  all  join  in  with  loving  acquiescence,  and  universal 
harmony  prevails  without  forcing  into  submission  the  free  discord  of  a  single  voice. 
(Illustrations  of  Truth.)  The  way  to  success : — It  is  the  old  route  of  labour,  along 
which  are  many  landmarks  and  many  wrecks.  It  is  lesson  after  lesson  with  the 
scholar,  blow  after  blow  with  the  labourer,  crop  after  crop  with  the  fanner,  picture 
after  picture  with  the  painter,  step  after  step,  and  mile  after  mile  with  the  traveller, 
that  secures  what  all  desire — success.  Alexander  desired  his  preceptor  to  prepare 
for  him  some  easier  and  shorter  way  to  learn  geometey  ;  but  he  was  told  that  he 
must  be  content  to  travel  the  same  road  as  others.  Encouragement  to  stead- 
fastness in  religious  duties : — 1.  The  way  of  duty  is  difficult ;  that  of  Bin 
easy.  2.  After  we  have  received  grace,  we  are  still  prone  to  depart  from 
God.  3.  The  prospect  of  a  happy  issue  of  our  labours  is  a  strong  support.  4.  The 
gospel  encourages  us  to  expect  a  certain  and  seasonable  recompense.  I.  When  we 
mat  bk  said  to  bb  weabt  in  WELL-DOING.  1.  Well-doing  respects  every  part  of  a 
Christian's  duty.  2.  We  may  apprehend  ourselves  weary  in  it  when  we  are  not 
really  so.  (1)  We  are  not  necessarily  so  because  our  affections  are  not  so  lively  as 
they  once  were.  This  may  arise  from  age  and  infirmity,  or  an  enlarged  view  of  our 
own  depravity.  (2)  Nor  because  our  corruptions  appear  to  have  increased.  The 
more  we  know  of  oar  hearts,  the  more  hideous  will  they  seem.  (3)  Nor  because  we 
do  not  find  enlargement  in  prayer.  Excess  of  trouble  may  for  a  time  distract.  3. 
But  we  have  reason  to  apprehend  that  we  are  weary  in  well-doing.  (1)  When  we 
do  not  make  progress  in  our  religious  course.  No  standing  still ;  if  we  are  not 
advancing,  we  must  be  falling  back.  (2)  When  we  are  habitually  formal  in  our 
religious  duties.  (3)  When  we  do  not  carry  religion  into  our  worldly  business.  _  (4) 
When  our  consciences  are  not  tender.  We  cannot  be  too  much  on  our  guard  against 
each  a  state.  II.  The  argument  used  to  dissuade  us  fbom  it.  1.  The  hope  only 
of  a  harvest  is  enough  to  stimulate  the  husbandman  to  his  labours.  But  the 
Christian  is  sure  of  a  harvest  in  due  time  if  he  faint  not.  2.  Let  this  considera- 
tion animate  us  to  steadfastness.  The  harvest  will  amply  repay  the  labour.  (C. 
Simeon,  M.A.)  Necessity  of  perseverance : — In  the  heathery  turf  you  will 
often  find  a  plant  chiefly  remarkable  for  its  peculiar  roots  ;  from  the  main 
stem  down  to  the  minutest  fibre,  you  will  find  them  all  abruptly  terminate, 
as  if  shorn  or  bitten  off,  and  the  quaint  superstition  of  the  country  people 
alleges,  that  once  on  a  time  it  was  a  plant  of  singular  potency  for  healing 
all  sorts  of  maladies,  and  therefore  the  great  enemy  of  man  in  his  malignity 
bit  off  the  roots,  in  which  its  virtues  resided.  The  plant  with  this  odd  history,  is  a 
very  good  emblem  of  many  well-meaning  but  little-effecting  people.  They  might 
be  defined  as  radicibus  praemorsis,  or  rather  inceptis  succisis.  The  efficacy  of  every 
good  work  lies  in  its  completion,  and  all  their  good  works  terminate  abruptly,  and 
are  left  off  unfinished.  The  devil  frustrates  their  efficacy  by  cutting  off  their 
ends  ;  their  unprofitable  history  is  made  up  of  plans  and  projects,  schemes  of  use- 
fulness that  were  never  gone  about,  and  magnificent  undertakings  that  were  never 
carried  forward  ;  societies  that  were  set  agoing,  then  left  to  shift  for  themselves, 
and  forlorn  beings  who  for  a  time  were  taken  up  and  instructed,  and  just  when  they 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ▼» 

were  beginning  to  «iiow  symptoms  of  improvement  were  east  on  the  world  again. 
(James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Reward  of  perseverance : — An  old  man  in  Walton,  whom 
Mr.  Thornton  had  in  vain  urged  to  come  to  church,  was  taken  ill  and  confined  to 
his  bed.  Mr.  Thornton  went  to  tbe  cottage,  and  asked  to  see  him.  The  old  man, 
hearing  hit  voice  below,  answered  in  no  very  courteous  tone,  "  I  don't  want  you 
here  ;  you  may  go  away."  The  following  day  he  returned  to  the  charge.  "  Well, 
my  friend,  may  I  come  up  to-day  and  sit  beside  you  ?  "  Again  he  received  the  same 
reply,  "  I  don't  want  you  here."  Twenty-one  days  successively  Mr.  Thornton  paid 
his  visit  to  the  cottage,  and  on  the  twenty-second  his  perseverance  was  rewarded. 
He  was  permitted  to  enter  the  room  of  the  aged  sufferer,  to  read  the  Bible,  and  pray 
by  his  bedside.  The  poor  man  recovered  and  became  one  of  tbe  most  regular  atten- 
dants at  the  House  of  God.  Little  efforts,  if  continuous,  produce  great  results : — A 
poor  woman  had  a  supply  of  coal  laid  at  her  door  by  a  charitable  neighbour.  A  very 
little  girl  came  out  with  a  small  fire-shovel,  and  began  to  take  up  a  shovelful  at  a 
time,  and  carry  it  to  a  sort  of  bin  in  the  cellar.  I  said  to  the  child,  "Do  you  expect  to 
get  all  that  coal  in  with  that  little  shovel  ?  "  She  was  quite  confused  at  my  question, 
but  her  answer  was  very  striking  :  "  Yes,  air,  if  I  work  long  enough."  So  it  is  with 
everything  in  life.  Humble  worker,  make  up  for  your  want  of  ability  by  continuous 
effort,  and  your  lif ework  will  not  be  trivial.  Sowing  and  reaping : — Mr.  Garrison's 
last  recorded  public  utterances  in  England  closed  with  these  memorable  words  : — 
"I  began  my  advocacy  of  the  anti-slavery  cause  in  the  Northern  States  of  America, 
in  the  midst  of  brickbats  and  rotten  eggs,  and  ended  it  on  the  soil  of  South  Carolina, 
almost  literally  buried  beneath  the  wreaths  and  flowers  which  were  heaped  upon 
me  by  her  liberated  bondmen."  Reaping  in  due  season  : — We  must  not  look  to 
sow  and  to  reap  in  a  day,  as  he  saith  of  the  people  far  north  that  they  sow  shortly 
after  the  sun  rises  with  them,  and  reap  before  it  sets,  that  is,  because  the  whole  half 
year  is  one  continued  day  with  them.  (Trapp.)  The  harvest  delayed,  but  sure :  — 
Many  years  ago,  in  England,  a  lad  heard  Mr.  Flavel  preach  from  the  text :  "  If  any 
man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema  maranatha."  Years 
passed  on.  The  lad  became  a  man.  He  came  to  this  country.  He  lived  to  be  a 
hundred  years  old  and  yet  had  not  found  the  Lord.  Standing  at  that  age  in  the 
field  one  day,  he  bethought  himself  of  a  sermon  which  he  had  heard  eighty-five 
years  before,  and  of  the  fact  that  when  Mr.  Flavel  had  finished  the  discourse  and 
came  to  the  olose  of  the  service,  he  said,  "  I  shall  not  pronounce  tbe  benediction.  I 
cannot  pronounce  it  when  there  may  be  in  this  audience  those  who  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  are  anathema  maranatha."  The  memory  of  that  old  scene  came 
over  him,  and  tben  and  there  he  gave  bis  heart  to  God — the  old  sermon  eighty-five 
years  before  preached  coming  to  resurrection  in  the  man's  salvation.  Would  God  that 
those  of  us  who  now  preach  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  might  utter  some  word  that  will 
resound  in  helpfulness  and  in  redemption  long  after  we  are  dead  !  (Dr.  Talmage.) 
Well  doing,  good  doing  : — But  more  than  this.  I  must  be  "  well-doing."  The  Greek 
word  expresses  beauty,  and  this  enters  into  the  apostolic  thought.  True  piety  is 
lovely.  Just  bo  far  as  it  comes  short  in  the  beautiful,  it  becomes  monstrous.  But 
as  used  by  Paul  it  goes  far  beyond  this,  and  signifies  all  moral  excellence.  Activity 
is  not  enough  ;  for  activity  the  intensest  may  be  evil.  Lucifer  is  as  active,  as  con- 
stantly  and  earnestly,  as  Gabriel.  But  the  one  is  a  fiend  and  the  other  a  seraph. 
Any  activity  that  is  not  good  is  a  curse  always  and  only.  Better  be  dead,  inert 
matter — a  stone,  a  clod — than  a  stinging  reptile,  or  a  destroying  demon.  And 
herein  lies  the  great  practical  change  in  regeneration.  It  transforms  the  mere  doer 
into  a  well-doer.  It  is  not  so  much  a  change  in  the  energy  as  in  the  direction. 
"We  must  be  doing  good."  (C.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Constancy  in  well-doing  : — 
I.  The  engagement  eefeebed  to.  "  Well-doing."  What  is  well-doing  T  (1)  It 
cannot  be  confounded  with  evil  doing.  (2)  Resolving  is  not  doing.  (3)  Professing 
is  not  doing.  (4)  Feeling  is  not  doing.  1.  Well-doing  must  respect  our- 
selves. And  this  supposes  that  we  have  been  converted  from  the  evil  of 
our  ways,  for  we  cannot  do  well  in  the  ways  of  depravity  and  practical 
evil.  2.  Well-doing  must  respect  the  Church.  Our  first  concern  must  be 
our  personal  salvation  and  happiness,  then  the  mystical  body  of  Christ, 
the  Church.  We  must  be  eyes  to  see,  ears  to  harken,  mouths  to  plead, 
hands  to  labour,  feet  to  walk,  or  shoulders  to  bear  for  the  body  the  Church  (1  Cor. 
xii.  12-27  ;  Eph.  iv.  11-13).  3.  Well-doing  must  respect  the  world.  Believers  are 
not  of  ik,  or  conformed  to  it ,  but  they  are  in  it,  and  they  must  live  to  promote  its 
■welfare.  II.  The  exhortation  given.  1.  The  text  supposes  that  there  is  danger 
of  wearying.     This  may  arise  from  various  causes.     (1)  Some  are  constitutionally 


chap,  ti.]  OALATIANS.  509 

wavering  and  unsettled.  (2)  Doing  implies  toil,  and  human  nature  is  fond  of  ease. 
(8)  Often  difficulties  in  the  way  of  well-doing,  and  resolution  is  indispensable.  (4) 
Well-doing  requires  sacrifices,  and  we  are  prone  to  selfishness.  (5)  Satan  and  the 
'world  will  be  against  us,  so  that  we  must  fight  and  wrestle  even  in  doing  good.  (6) 
Often  oar  labours  appear  useless,  and  we  are  in  danger  of  being  discouraged.  2. 
Constancy  and  perseverance.  (1)  Because  God  has  formed  us  especially  for  well- 
doing. (2)  Because  this  is  the  great  end  of  our  regeneration,  that  we  may  live  to 
God.  (3)  Because  w  jll-doing  is  inseparably  connected  with  our  safety.  (4)  Because 
it  is  always  identified  with  our  happiness.  (5)  Because  it  associates  us  with  the 
highest  orders  of  beings.  All  holy  men  have  been  acquainted  practically  with  well- 
doing. Angels  are  always  engaged  in  well-doing.  But  there  is  another  considera- 
tion, which  is — III.  The  motive  thb  text  assigns.  "  We  shall  reap  if  we  faint 
not."  "  We  shall  reap."  1.  The  first-fruits  here.  In  doing  good  we  obtain  good. 
2.  The  full  harvest  hereafter.  "  In  due  season."  (1)  Be  graciously  abundant.  (2) 
Be  proportionate  to  our  well-doing.  (3)  Our  reaping  is  absolutely  certain.  Appli- 
cation: 1.  Evil-doers  shall  also  reap — wretchedness  and  anxiety  here,  and  eternal 
woe  hereafter.  2.  Those  who  cease  well-doing  cannot  obtain  the  promised  reward. 
(J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Weariness  in  well-doing  : — Well-doing  may  be  of  two  kinds — 
subjective,  the  doing  well  to  ourselves  simply;  objective,  the  doing  well  towards 
others.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  cannot  very  well  separate  these,  for,  as  Seneca  says, 
"  He  that  does  good  to  another  man  does  good  also  unto  himself,  not  only  in  the 
consequences,  but  in  the  very  act  of  doing  it,  for  the  conscience  of  well-doing  is  an 
ample  reward."  If  a  man  should  set  himself  to  improve  his  mind  and  manners 
simply  out  of  a  desire  to  be  something  better  than  he  had  been,  he  would  still,  in 
the  doing,  be  helping  others,  for  he  would  become  a  more  valuable  member  of 
society.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  no  man  can  set  himself  to  do  good  to  others  with- 
out receiving  good  himself.  Hence,  it  must  appear  to  us  that  God,  in  His  provi- 
dence, has  so  ordered  it  that  well-doing  is  necessary  to  well-being.  It  is  assumed, 
however,  that  there  is  a  strong  temptation  to  grow  weary  in  well-doing,  to  cease 
from  good  activities.  And  this  for  three  reasons.  1.  On  account  of  the  indolence 
of  our  nature.  2.  On  account  of  not  seeing  adequate  results  to  our  efforts.  We  are 
eonstantly  hearing  of  the  disappointments  which  come  to  all  Christian  workers ; 
indeed  of  the  discouragements  which  come  to  all  benevolent  helpers  of  all  kinds.  I 
grant  you  that  large  results  are  often  given.  But  the  word  "  results  "  is  a  very 
indefinite  kind  of  word.  It  may  be  that  the  results  which  God  can  give  are  not  the 
results  which  you  mean.  "  Only  one  soul  brought  to  Christ  by  all  my  efforts,"  says 
a  discouraged  Sunday  School  teacher.  Let  us  look  at  that  expression  a  moment. 
Supposing  that  Sunday  Sohool  teacher  had  built  the  pyramids,  it  would  have  been 
undeniably  a  great  result  of  persistent  labour,  but  it  would  have  been  such  labour 
as  would  last  at  the  longest  for  a  limited  time,  and  its  use  would  be  problematical, 
for  we  are  not  very  sure  why  and  for  what  the  pyramids  were  built.  Supposing  one 
soul  is  brought  to  Christ,  and  permanently  united  to  Christ  by  the  love  and  faith  of 
the  heart,  so  united  that  that  soul  becomes  a  faithful  Christian  soul,  living  a  life  of 
love  and  faith,  doing  good  to  others,  and  those  others  doing  good  to  a  wider  circle 
still,  and  so  from  generation  to  generation  the  influence  broadens,  how  can  you  cal- 
culate the  result  ?  3.  And  this  brings  me  to  a  third  source  of  weariness  and  dis- 
couragement in  well-doing — our  narrow  and  inadequate  views  of  life.  We  constantly 
forget  that  this  life  of  ours  is,  as  to  everything  mental  and  spiritual,  the  sowing 
time,  not  the  time  of  reaping.  "For,  in  due  season,  ye  shall  reap  if  ye  faint  not." 
And  as  the  farmer  has  long  patience,  so  ought  we  to  have  long  patience.  Our 
narrow  views  of  life  account  for  much  of  our  weariness  in  well-doing.  Practically, 
we  plan  for  this  life  and  this  only.  Our  sentiments  may  embrace  the  beyond,  our 
opinions,  actions,  plans,  purposes  are  too  much  controlled  by  the  example  set  us  by 
the  men  whose  creed  is  "  let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  And  so  we 
sow  only  that  which  we  can  reap  now — or  that  which  the  children  in  our  households 
can  reap  here  on  earth.  Not  entirely  of  course,  but  too  much.  I  might  appeal  on 
the  ground  of  self-interest — only  in  well-doing  can  we  develop  our  own  natures  into 
the  fulness  of  their  powers.  To  enkindle  the  mind,  to  enlarge  the  heart,  to  awake 
the  imagination,  these  will  be  spiritual  results  to  ourselves,  worth  while  surely. 
Even  here  on  earth,  says  Lord  Jeffrey,  "  he  will  always  see  the  most  beauty  in 
things  whose  affections  are  warmest  and  most  exercised,  whose  imagination  is  the 
most  powerful,  and  who  has  most  accustomed  himself  to  attend  to  the  objects  by 
which  he  is  surrounded."  How  are  we  10  get  that  competence  to  feel  the  invisible 
in  toe  visible  which  a  Wordsworth  possessed  so  royally,  which  makes  Buskin  the 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [out.  n. 

high-priest  of  the  beautiful  to  the  age  in  which  he  lives  f  Only  by  well-doing,  not 
spasmodically  and  occasionally,  but  of  set  intent  and  purpose.  We  may,  like  the 
caterpillar,  spin  a  very  beautiful  cocoon  and  call  it  our  home,  but  even  the  cater- 
pillar will  teach  us,  if  we  will  listen,  that  if  he  were  to  remain  satisfied  in  that  silken 
ball  which  he  has  woven,  it  would  become  not  his  home,  but  his  tomb.  Forcing  a 
way  through  it,  and  not  resting  in  it,  he  finds  sunshine  and  air  and  life  more 
abundantly.  Man  says — here  will  I  rest.  I  will  make  my  home  in  these  pleasant 
surroundings.  I  will  shut  out  the  sob  of  sorrow,  the  wail  of  the  woe-worn,  the  sigh 
of  the  suffering,  the  baying  and  babblement  of  the  crowd ;  here,  spending  my  sym- 
pathies on  myself,  I  will  enjoy  all  that  is  enjoyable.  Ah  I  that  silken  cocoon ! — 
fastened  in  it  you  are  dead  while  you  live.  No,  says  God,  that  is  not  what  I  mean 
for  you.  And  He  calls  to  His  aid  His  angels,  clothes  them  in  funeral  robes,  and 
they  call  themselves  Pain,  Disease,  Death ;  and  they  stir  up  the  intellect,  the  heart, 
the  imagination,  compel  men  to  think  and  to  feel  about  eternity,  and  then,  when 
it  is  all  over,  these  disguised  angels  throw  aside  the  masks  they  have  worn  and 
strip  off  the  sable  garb,  and  lo  1  underneath  is  the  pure  white  of  immortality.  We 
are  sowers  of  seed  here.  Let  us  not  forget  that  "  he  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,"  &c. 
And,  "  let  us  not  be  weary,"  Ac.  (Reuen  Thomas.)  The  reward  of  unwearied 
diligence  in  the  work  of  the  Lord : — 1.  The  first  principle  of  stedfast  and  abounding 
righteousness  is  a  constant  sense  of  the  obligation  of  the  Divine  law.  Thus,  the  Chris- 
tian, in  all  his  conduct,  acts  agreeably  to  the  dictates  of  religion.  2.  The  second 
principle  of  standing  fast  and  growing  in  righteousness,  so  as  not  to  weary  in  well- 
doing, is  that  of  love.  Love  is  the  sovereign  attribute  of  God  in  relation  to  man. 
Was  it  not  love,  to  fill  the  universe  with  animated  beings,  and  to  pour  the  riches  of 
beauty  and  happiness  over  oreation  ?  Was  it  not  love,  to  form  man  after  the  image 
of  God,  and  to  breathe  into  him  a  thinking,  reasonable,  immortal  spirit  t  And  is  it 
not  love,  that  at  this  moment  we  think,  and  feel,  and  hear,  and  see,  amidst  the 
enjoyment  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  all  the  means  of  temporal  being,  and  everything 
that  sweetens  life  t  Now,  from  the  sense  of  all  this  goodness,  will  not  the  man, 
who  Is  not  dead  to  every  generous  feeling  in  human  nature,  love  the  Lord  his  Maker 
and  Saviour  with  all  his  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength  ?  Will  not  the  love  of  Christ 
constrain  him  ?  3.  The  third  principle  of  unwearied  stedfastness  and  increase  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord,  is  a  conviction  of  the  evil  of  sin.  In  this  respect  a  good  man 
partakes  of  the  Spirit  of  that  holy  and  righteous  Being  who  hateth  the  workers  of 
iniquity,  and  with  whom  evil  cannot  dwell.  He  despises  what  is  mean,  and  abhors 
what  is  impure,  with  every  false  and  wicked  way.  The  sentiment  we  describe  is, 
moreover,  quickened  by  fellow-feeling  with  the  Saviour  of  man,  who,  laying  aside 
the  form  of  God,  gave  Himself  up  to  sorrow,  and  suffering,  and  death,  for  sin. 
Now  in  all  oases  sympathy  is  a  powerful  spring  of  action ;  it  interests  the  heart  and 
raises  every  power  of  the  soul.  4.  Another  principle  of  unwearied  well-doing  and 
increasing  righteousness,  is  the  conviction  that  holiness  is  necessary  as  a  qualifica- 
tion of  the  Christian  fellowship.  The  great  law  of  communion  with  Christ  is  that 
of  light,  purity,  and  righteousness,  in  opposition  to  the  spiritual  darkness  of  cor- 
ruption and  sin.  If,  then,  we  say  we  have  fellowship  with  Him  while  we  walk  in 
darkness,  that  is  sin,  "  we  deceive  ourselves,"  says  the  apostle.  But  if  we  walk  in 
light,  or  righteousness,  then  we  have  communion  with  the  Father  and  His  Son  ; 
and,  cherished  by  the  rays  of  Divine  light  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  graces 
spring  up,  and  virtues  flourish  in  our  lives,  as  the  tender  herb  with  the  fostering 
warmth  and  dew  of  heaven.  5.  The  last  principle  of  holding  fast  our  integrity,  so 
as  not  to  weary  in  well-doing,  is  a  firm  confidence  in  the  declaration  that  our  labour 
shall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord ;  that  if  we  faint  not  in  well-doing,  we  shall  reap 
through  Jesus  Christ  the  fruit  of  eternal  life  and  peace.  It  is  the  prospect  of 
this  that  purifies  the  heart,  and  exalts  the  affections  beyond  the  earth  to  things 
above.  How  animating  the  motive  to  perseverance  and  progress  in  grace,  that  the 
fruit  of  these  things  shall  be  peace  and  joy  unspeakable  for  evermore !  (12.  Macknight, 
D.D.)    A  caution  against  declension  in  the  ways  of  practical  piety : — I.  Let  us  inquire, 

what    is    THE     NATURE    OF   THE    EVIL   AGAINST    WHICH   WE   ABB   GUARDED   IN   THE   TEXT. 

"  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing."  And  for  this  purpose  it  is  not  improper  we  should 
briefly  touch  upon  the  nature  of  the  well-doing  here  intended,  that  we  may  be 
enabled  the  more  easily  to  understand  what  it  is  to  be  weary  of  it.  By  well-doing 
here  we  are  to  understand,  in  general,  the  duties  we  owe  to  God,  our  neighbour, 
and  ourselves.  These  are  of  great  extent ;  they  are  many  in  number,  and  impor. 
taut  in  their  nature.  There  is  not  a  single  relation  we  sustain  to  God,  or  to  each 
other,  but  what  is  fruitful  of  a  variety  of  these  duties.    They  include  all  that  the 


8BA».  tl]  QALATIANS.  Ill 

sacred  oracles  mean  by  piety  towards  God ;  by  justice,  benevolence  and  humanity 
towards  our  neighbour,  and  by  sobriety  and  temperance  in  our  conduct  towards 
ourselves.  Those  duties  are  called  well-doing,  because  in  a  conscientious  observ- 
ance of  them  we  do  well ;  we  comply  with  the  approving  will  of  God.  The 
weariness  in  well-doing,  against  which  we  are  here  guarded,  ordinarily  begins  in 
the  loss  of  that  relish  for  Divine  things,  and  that  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  God, 
which  the  person  may  have  had  in  days  past.    II.   Why   we   should  guabd 

AGAINST   BEING   THUS     WEART     IN    WELL-DOING,   AND     PURSUE     THB     CONTRARY    LINE   OV 

conduct.  1.  Because  this  evil,  as  described,  is  a  fatal  syrntom  of  an  unregenerate 
state.  True  grace  is  a  living  principle,  and  wherever  it  is  found  in  the  heart,  it 
always  tends  towards  perfection.  2.  Those  who  grow  weary  in  well-doing,  so  as 
to  forsake  the  ways  of  practical  godliness,  lose  all  their  former  labour  and  pains  in 
religion.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  being  in  the  ways  of  God,  that  we  set  out  in  the 
paths  of  piety,  but  we  must  persevere  in  them ;  we  must  endure  to  the  end ;  for  he 
alone  "  that  shall  endure  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved."  3.  We  ought  not  to 
grow  weary  in  well-doing,  for  God  is  not  weary  in  doing  good  to  us.  He  not  only 
gave  us  our  being,  but  He  holds  our  souls  in  life.  By  His  visitation  alone  we  are 
preserved.  4.  We  have  many  bright  examples  of  patience  and  perseverence  in 
well-doing,  to  encourage  us  not  to  be  weary  in  it.  5.  There  is  a  glorious  reward 
before  us,  if  we  do  not  grow  weary  in  well-doing.  This  is  the  argument  urged  by 
the  apostle  in  our  text :  "  for  iD  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."  Again  r 
It  will  be  a  full  reward.  Never  did  the  most  plenteous  harvest  reward  the  labours 
of  the  husbandman  more  certainly  or  fully,  than  the  joys  and  glories  of  the  future 
World  shall  reward  the  faithful,  persevering,  and  diligent  disciples  of  Jesus.  They 
shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  Once  more  :  This  reward  will  bear  some  pro- 
portion to  our  faithfulness  and  diligence  in  our  Lord's  service  here.  Concluding 
admonitions :  1.  As  ever  you  would  desire  not  to  be  weary  in  well-doing,  beware  of 
sloth  in  the  ways  of  God.  This  is  a  sin  natural  to  us ;  but  there  are  few  greater 
«nemies  to  vital  godliness  than  it  is.  2.  Beware  of  venturing  on  known  sin, 
especially  the  sin  to  which  you  are  most  inclined.  {John  Rodgers,  D.D.)  A  dis- 
tuasivefrom  weariness  in  well-doing  ; — I.  Well-doing  is  an  important  feature  of  the 

Christian  character.    If  it  be  a  true  and  an  approved  maxim  in  common  things to 

be  ever  active  in  laudable  pursuits  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  a  man  of 
merit — in  a  high  and  peculiar  sense  may  it  be  asserted  of  real  Christians,  that  they 
"  cease  from  evil,  and  learn  to  do  well."  II.  The  evil  to  which  the  Christian  is  exposed, 
and  against  which  he  is  cautioned — weariness  in  well-doing.  HI.  The  powerful  anti- 
dote to  the  threatening  evil — ' '  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap  if  we  faint  not.  In  conclu- 
sion :  1.  It  may  perhaps  be  thought  necessary  that  some  guard  be  put  to  the  doctrine, 
lest  grace  be  dishonoured,  and  the  worthless  idol  of  human  merit  be  exalted.  Be 
it  then  observed,  as  Scripture  teacheth,  that  the  work  is  of  grace,  and  the  reward  of 
grape.  In  every  duty  done  for  God,  grace  calls  to  the  work,  aids  in  the  discharge 
of  it,  makes  meet  for  and  finally  bestows  the  promised  inheritance.  2.  It  must  be 
remembered,  that  celestial  honours  await  only  the  faithful  unto  death.  Death 
alone  must  terminate  exertion  and  fidelity.  3.  What  encouragement  does  the 
service  of  God  yield,  to  make  us  valiant  for  the  truth  and  patient  in  well-doing  ? 
"  The  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  the  effect  of  righteousness,  quiet- 
ness and  assurance  for  ever."  Polycarp  could  say,  when  commanded  to  deny 
Christ,  "I  have  served  Him  these  six  and  eighty  years,  and  He  has  never  hurt  me, 
and  shall  I  deny  Him  now?  "  Go  and  do  likewise.  (Essex  Congregational  Remem- 
brancer.) Terseverence  in  well-doing : — I.  Our  duty.  There  are  two  things  in 
connection  with  duty  which  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  remember — well-doing,  and 
constancy  in  well-doing.  Action  is  at  once  the  destiny  and  the  lot  of  man.  All 
the  conditions  of  his  existence  are  training  for  his  activity.  The  text  contains 
special  exhortation  to  constancy  in  well-doing.  He  was  thinking  not  only  of  the 
fickleness  of  the  Galatian  Church,  but  upon  the  general  possibility  of  paralysis 
common  to  the  whole  family  of  man.  The  wants  of  the  world  and  the  wants  of 
the  Church  demand  action.  The  same  motives  enforce  constancy.  If  we  weary  in 
well-doing,  we  shall  be  the  only  recreants  from  duty.  Does  the  Spirit  tire  of 
striving  ?  Is  there  any  pause  in  the  intercession  of  the  Son  ?  Are  the  ranks  of 
evil  weary  ?  Does  not  death  still  stalk,  sword  in  hand,  over  the  great  battle-field  of 
life?  H.  The  special  encouragement  which  the  apostle  presents.  There  is  a 
reward  promised  by  Him  who  cannot  lie,  and  preserved  by  Him  who  cannot  be 
turned  from  His  purpose.  The  moral  harvest  comes  all  to  perfection ;  not  a  grain 
is  lost.     Surely  you  will  not  be  weary,  when  your  salvation  is  so  much  nearer  than 


511  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u. 

■when  you  first  believed  ?  (W.  M.  Putuhon,  D.D.)  Be  not  weary : — I.  The 
causes  or  weariness  in  well-doinq.  1.  The  difficulty  of  the  work.  Well-doing 
from  right  motives  is  the  most  difficult  of  all  works.  It  is  purely  a  spiritual  work ; 
and  no  man  can  enter  upon  it,  and  do  it  aright,  unless  he  be  a  spiritual  man.  When 
a  Christian  first  enters  upon  this  work,  he  thinks  that  all  is  easy ;  that  to  convert 
souls  is  no  great  difficulty :  to  draw  other  minds  into  the  state  in  which  he  is,  is 
but  simply  a  pleasant  exercise.  And  sometimes  God  favours  those,  who  thus 
enter  upon  tbe  work  zealously  and  affectionately,  in  their  first  efforts,  with  remark- 
able success.  But  after  a  little  while,  difficulties  begin  to  spring  up,  which  they 
had  never  before  seen ;  difficulties,  which  appear  to  them  to  be  insurmountable. 
For  see  wbat  the  individual  who  has  to  instruct  the  human  mind,  has  to  contend 
with.  First  there  are  the  strongholds  of  prejudice,  which  guard  all  the  avenues  to 
that  mind ;  and  these  are  found  in  the  child  often,  as  well  as  in  the  man.  Then 
there  are  the  gates  of  unbelief,  thicker  and  stronger  than  the  gates  of  Gasa ; 
which  only  the  spiritual  Samson  can  carry  away.  Then  there  is  the  ancient  wall 
of  old  educational  prejudices  and  feelings,  against  submission  to  Christ  and  His 
gospel,  which  has  to  be  thrown  down,  before  you  can  go  up  and  take  the  city.  No 
doubt  the  work  is  hard ;  yet  you  should  not  despair.  Every  good  work  is  difficult ; 
never  was  there  a  good  work  very  easily  done.  It  is  always  associated  with  great 
difficulty.  And  difficulties  always  rouse  a  generous  mind.  The  soldier — it  is 
natural  to  him  to  be  amongst  bullets,  and  to  mount  up  cliffs,  in  order  to  plant  his 
standard  upon  castles  and  difficult  places.  The  sailor  thinks  it  a  tame  voyage  if 
he  never  has  a  storm ;  it  is  the  storm  that  rouses  him  to  action ;  and  the  battle 
that  brings  out  the  soldier's  energies.  Besides,  difficulties  are  just  nothing  to 
Omnipotence.  It  is  nothing  for  Him  to  speak  to  that  child  that  you  cannot  affect, 
and  the  work  is  done.  You  are  but  a  channel ;  His  is  the  power ;  and  that  power 
can  be  communicated  through  you.  2.  Then,  secondly,  this  weariness  often  arises 
from  a  sense  of  our  own  insufficiency.  As,  when  God  called  Moses  to  bring  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  he  said — "  O  my  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither 
heretofore  nor  since  Thou  hast  spoken  unto  Thy  servant,  but  I  am  slow  of  speech 
and  of  a  slow  tongue ;  "  just  so  does  a  Sunday  School  teacher  often  speak.  "  Send 
any  one  to  this  work,"  says  Moses,  "  only  Bend  not  me."  And  the  teacher,  when 
he  sees,  as  he  carries  on  this  work,  his  own  knowledge  bo  imperfect,  his  own  faith 
so  weak,  his  own  love  bo  cold,  his  own  zeal  so  dying,  exclaims — "  What  oan  I  do  ? " 
And  then  Satan  rushes  in,  while  the  mind  is  thus  exercised ;  and  he  says — "  What 
can  such  a  wretch  as  you  effect  f  how  can  you  expect  to  be  blessed  f  Go,  learn 
yourself,  before  you  teach  others ;  how  can  you  place  yourself  in  such  a  position, 
to  teach  others  the  way  to  heaven  ?  "  Sometimes,  to  humble  the  individual,  and 
to  show  that  individual  that  the  work  is  wholly  of  God,  He  lets  us  see  how  helpless 
and  how  weak  we  are.  But  this,  instead  of  discouraging  us,  should  only  make  u* 
cling  closer  to  Him.  3.  Then,  thirdly,  this  weariness  springs  from  the  trials,  to 
which  "  well-doing "  frequently  exposes  individuals.  4.  Another  cause  of  this 
weariness  is  the  want  of  success.  5.  The  want  of  love  to  Christ.  6.  The  want  of 
spirituality  of  mind.  7.  The  want  of  faith.  II.  The  necessity  of  pebsevebancf. 
in  well-doing.  Should  it  not  excite  us  to  perseverance,  when  we  think  that  Christ 
our  Master  has  entrusted  His  cause  in  our  hands  ?  Who  are  we,  that  the  Lord  of 
all  should  let  us  labour  for  Him  ?  Then  th*  brevity  of  our  time  is  another  reason 
for  perseverance.  "Brethren,  the  time  is  short."  Opportunities  are  few;  and 
if  we  would  do  good,  they  must  be  seized.  The  waterman  seizes  the  tide, 
the  moment  it  turns ;  the  Bailor  seizes  the  breeze,  the  moment  it  springs  up ; 
Christ,  the  day  in  which  the  Father  sent  Him  to  execute  His  will.  "I  must 
work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  while  it  is  day;  the  night  cometh, 
when  no  man  can  work."  So  said  He,  who  could  do  more  work  in  a  minute,  than 
we  oan  do  in  a  whole  life.  Then  there  is  another  reason  which  ought  to  excite  us 
to  perseverance :  the  account  we  must  render.  "  Give  an  account  of  thy  steward- 
ship :  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer  steward."  HI.  The  certainty  of  success  in 
well-doing.  "  We  shall  reap."  About  that  there  is  no  doubt.  God  has  by  this 
promise  connected  our  diligence  in  well-doing  with  a  harvest  of  blessedness  and  of 
honour.  Do  you  ask  me,  then,  what  kind  of  reaping  you  shall  have  ?  Think  of 
these  three  things.  First,  you  shall  reap  spiritual  advantage.  "  He  that  wateretb 
shall  be  watered  also  himself."  And  it  is  no  small  mercy,  to  reap  a  lively  heart, 
and  a  generous  soul,  and  an  affectionate  spirit,  and  a  willingness  to  labour  in 
Christ's  cause,  as  a  reward  for  any  little  acts  we  perform  for  Him.  Relative  use- 
fulness shall  be  another  portion  of  your  reaping :  "  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not.* 


taut.  TI.J  GALATIANS.  61 J 

"Everything  is  beautiful  in  its  season."    Good  harvest  time,  then,  has  not  yet 
arrived.     Some  are  later,  too,  than  others ;  but  the  promise  is  sure,  stable  as  the 
everlasting  hills ;  sowing  the  seed,  which  "  is  the  Word,"  will  naturally  produce  all 
its  legitimate  effects.     Then  I  add,  you  shall  reap  Divine  approbation.     And  surely 
that  is  not  a  small  thing.     Oh  I  to  hear  my  Master  say  in  that  day,  "  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant !  "    And  to  address  it  to  me,  who  felt  so  often  tired,  and 
yet  by  His  grace  was  enabled  to  persevere  I     To  see  Him  rise  from  His  seat,  and 
stretch  out  His  hand,  and  say,  "  Come,  thou  blessed  child  of  My  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of    the    world."      (Jame$ 
Sherman.)        The  weary  well-doers : — In  such  a  complicated  social  state  as  ours, 
those  who  do  not  know  how  to  do  good  probably  outnumber  those  who  do  not  oare. 
The  weary  and  hopeless  outnumber  the  careless,  if  one  may  judge  by  the  eager 
throng  which  presses  into  the  field  when  some  direct,  immediate  good  is  set  before 
them  as  capable  of    being  done.    The  difficulty  of  the  problem  depresses  and 
disheartens  ns.    I.  Well-doing  is  is  the  broad  evidence  of  the  Christian  calling.  The 
word  here  employed  does  not  bear  on  beneficence  exclusively.  Love  of  truth,  honour, 
goodness,  are  contained  in  it,  as  well  as  (v.  10)  help  to  humanity  around.     I  do  not 
say  that  this  help  is  the  one  evidence  of  a  Christian  calling,  but  it  is  essential,  and 
never  more  so  than  in  these  days.    In  a  broad  view  of  the  Christian  profession,  it 
is  a  volunteer  service  for  the  help  of  Christ  in  lifting  the  burden  of  the  sin  and 
misery  of  mankind.     The  Church  is  His  body  ;  His  eye  to  see,  His  voice  to  cheer, 
His  hand  to  lift  and  to  heal  the  weakness  and  the  misery  of  mankind.     It  is  not 
only  for  Christ's  sake  that  it  toils,  but  in  Christ's  spirit.    It  has  learnt  from  Christ 
the  lesson,  caught  the  habit.    To  the  perfect  Christian,  Christ  is  not  so  much  the 
motive  as  the  spring  :  a  fountain  springing  up  to  all  beautiful,  joyful,  and  blessed 
work  for  mankind.    II.  Be  not  weary  in  welldoing.    1.  The  causes  of  weariness. 
(1)  The  weight  of  the  flesh.     "  The  spirit  truly  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak." 
The  great  battle  of  life  is  with  this  heavy,  weard,  languid  flesh,  that  ties  us  to  the 
dust.    Weariness  in  well-doing  is  part  of  the  universal  weariness ;  the  slow  move- 
ment of  the  flesh  under  high  compulsions ;  the  deadness  of  the  soul  itself  to  truth, 
and  Christ,  and  the  eternal  world.     (2)  The  largeness  of   the  problem.     I  can 
hardly  wonder  that  the  best  stand  appalled  before  the  mass  of  the  misery  and  sin 
of  society.    Could  we  get  it  all  in  a  small  compass,  as  Job  had  it  (Job  xxix.  11-17), 
we  could  put  onr  hands  to  it  with  some  hope  of   success.    It  is  like  pumping 
a  sinking  ship.    We  may  wear  our  hearts  out,  and  in  the  end  all  will  go  down.     (3) 
The  immense  difficulty  and  intricacy  of  the  work,  and  the  evil  it  brings  in  its  train. 
Many  say,  if  I  were  but  sure  of  doing  good,  God  knows  I  would  try.    But  who  can 
be  sure  ?    Does  not  every  effort  to  help  on  the  one  hand,  depress  and  deprave  on 
the  other  t    (4)  The  measure  in  which  the  sorrow  is  mixed  with  sin.    (5)  It  is 
thankless  work.    2.  The  reasons  which  should  move  us  to  endure.    (1)  Because 
such  words  as  these  are  written  in  the  Bible  (Matt,  xviii.  21-35).    I  pray  you  read 
them.    (2)  Because  these  words  are  sustained  and  enforced  by  the  infinite  patience 
and  mercy  of  God.    If  God  does  this,  despite  our  sin,  it  is  our  honour,  and  shall 
be  oar  life,  to  stir  ourselves  to  do  likewise ;  for  it  is  the  human  dignity  and  bliss  to 
think,  feel,  and  live  like  God.   (3)  This  endurance  is  life's  grand  lesson.  Spasmodio 
virtue  and  charity  are  easy  enough  and  cheap  enough.  It  is  a  poor  life  that  never  treads 
a  mountain  summit,  and  flings  an  eagle  glance  over  a  promised  land.  But  to  stay  on  the 
level,  to  live  in  the  clear  upper  air,  to  soar  untiring  as  an  angel,  to  work  unresting  as 
Christ,  this  is  the  strain  of  life.    It  is  learned  only  by  intense  effort,  by  sorrowful 
failures,  by  many  steps  on  the  brink  of  despair.    But  work  at  it  and  work  on. 
Renew  the  fight,  endure  the  strain.    The  lesson  of  constant,  patient,  Christlike 
effort,  learnt  once,  is  learnt  for  eternity.    (4)  Because  there  is  an  end  which  will 
fulfil  all  our  hope  for  humanity  in  sight.      Not  in  your  sight  nor  in  mine,  but  in 
Christ's.    He  sees  the  triumph  of  all  that  you  struggle  for,  the  defeat  of  all  that 
you  hate.    Work  on,  work  ever.    (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)         Soul  culture : — I.  la 
well-doing.    1.  It  is  something  more  than  attention  to  our  personal  condition. 
2.  The  man  who  labours  most  for  the  good  of  others  is  most  effectively  employed 
in  training  his  own  soul.     3.  Well-doing  is  not  the  doing  of  the  superstitious,  the 
formalist,  the  exclusive,  the  recluse,  nor  the  training  of  any  peculiar  faculty  of  the 
soul,  but  the  training  of  the  entire  man  under  the  master  impulse  of  love.    This 
work  is  well-doing,  because — (1)  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God.     (2)  It  is 
indispensable  to  the  well-being  of  mankind.    II.  Has  its  difficulties.     1.  These 
should  not  dishearten.    2.  Everything  worth  having  requires  a  struggle.     IU.  Will 
meet  with  its  reward.    1.   The  conditions.    2.   The  certainty.     3.   The  season 

83 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  u. 

ableness  of  the  reward.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  I.  There  is  a  well-doeng  01 
goodness  that  is  incumbent  on  us,  viz.,  sowing  to  the  Spirit.  In  order  to  do 
this — 1.  I  must  deny  myself.  2.  Bow  to  a  higher  will.  3.  Live  in  nnseen  com- 
munings. II.  Well-doing  implies  fixedness  of  will  and  chaeacteb.  This  is 
needed 1.  To  form  new  habits.     2.  To  restrain  natural  passions  and  propensities, 

3.  To  resist  the  evil  world.  III.  Well-doing  is  possible  thbough  aids  offebed 
in  the  gospel.  Christ  has  become  tbe  power  of  God  to  us.  1.  By  his  conquest 
of  temptation.  2.  By  receiving  the  residue  of  the  Spirit.  3.  By  bearing  the 
Cross.  IV.  Teub  well-doing  brings  with  it  appropriate  results.  1.  In 
growth  of  character.  2.  In  usefulness  to  others.  3.  In  acceptance  with  God.  V. 
The  result  of  well-doing  will  come  in  the  pbopeb  time.  1.  Not  ours,  but  (2) 
God's.     (J.  F.  Stevenson.)        I.  Well-doing.    In  order  to  do  good  it  is  necessary 

1.  To  have  generous  minds.    2.  To  fully  realize  our  obligation  to  do  good.    II. 

Unweabiness  in  well-doing.  1.  There  is  much  need  of  untiring  effort  to  do  good. 
2.  There  are  abundant  opportunities  for  everybody.  3.  The  necessary  power  will 
be  given  to  all  who  attempt  it.  III.  A  motive  to  well-doing.  Good  accomplished — 
1.  Increases  our  power  for  well-doing.  2.  Strengthens  our  faith  in  the  power  of 
well-doing.  3.  Is  a  source  of  genuine  joy.  (D.  Rhys  Jenkins.)  Weariness : — I. 
Its  natube.  1.  Simple  fatigue.  2.  Discouragement.  3.  Disgust.  II.  Its  sphebeb. 
1.  Such  necessary  business  in  life  as  does  not  minister  pleasure.  2.  The  struggle 
after  a  better  Christian  life.  3.  Social  duties  and  relationships.  4.  The  promo- 
tion of  the  public  good  in  Sunday  Schools,  mission  work,  &o.  5.  Early  pastoral 
experiences.  III.  Its  occasions.  1.  Injudicious  labour.  2.  Attempts  to  do  too 
much.  3.  Unreasonable  expectations  of  an  immediate  harvest.  4.  Diverse  dis- 
positions in  those  with  and  for  whom  we  work.  5.  Working  from  wrong  impulses. 
(1)  Praise.  (2)  Pride.  (3)  Mere  duty.  These  will  engender  disappointment  and 
therefore  weariness.  IV.  Its  curb.  1.  Take  the  most  disagreeable  task  first: 
don't  leave  it  until  it  becomes  more  burdensome  than  it  is.  2.  Cultivate  the 
grace  of  forbearance.    3.  Remember  the  evil  one  never  gets  discouraged  or  weary. 

4.  Recollect  that  the  time  is  short,  and  that  you  cannot  afford  to  be  weary.  5.  Re- 
collect that  you  are  working  together  with  a  God  who  is  unweariable.  6.  Reflect 
that  the  work  and  weariness  will  Boon  be  over  in  that  land  of  rest  where  we  shall 
be  burdened  no  more.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  cause  and  cure  of  weariness  in  Sabbath 
School  teachers  : — I.  Youb  wobk  is  well  desceibed  in  the  text.  1.  Sunday  School 
teaching  is  well-doing,  because — 1.  It  is  an  act  of  obedience  2.  It  brings  glory  to  God. 
3.  It  is  well-doing  towards  man.  (a)  Highest  form  of  charity  is  to  teach  the  gospel. 
(6)  Particularly  to  children,  for  prevention  is  better  than  cure,  (c)  You  strike  at 
the  root  of  sin  in  seeking  the  regeneration  of  a  child.  2.  Sunday  School  teaching 
is  sowing.  (1)  The  seed  you  sow  is  the  tiuth.  (2)  If  you  don't  sow  the  devil  will. 
(3)  Reaping  is  your  reward,  but  sowing  is  your  work.     II.  You  will  meet  with 

EVILS   IN   YOUB   SERVICE,   AND  BE   LIABLE   TO   WEABINESS   AND   FATNTNESS.      1.   YOU  will 

be  tempted  to  grow  weary.  (1)  Some  by  constitution  are  inapt.  (2)  The  work 
asts  on  year  after  year.  2.  But  don't  be  •'  disheartened  "  (see  Greek).  (1)  Some 
think  their  work  less  important  than  at  first.  (2)  Others  fear  that  it  will  prove  a 
failure.  (31  Want  of  order  and  discipline  in  the  school.  3.  The  text  speaks  of 
"fainting.  The  original  means  "loosened."  Some  teaohers  get  unstrung,  and 
thus  get  into  a  slip-shod  way.  (1)  The  flesh  cries  out  for  ease.  (2)  Grace 
perhaps  is  at  a  low  ebb.  (3)  Fellow  Christians  are  cold  and  indifferent.  (4)  The 
want  of  appreciation.  (5)  The  difficulty  of  the  work.  III.  We  have  abundant 
encoubagement  in  the  prospect  of  reward.  1.  The  reaping  time  will  come.  3> 
We,  not  our  successors,  will  reap.  3.  The  harvest  will  come  in  due  season.  4. 
When  it  comes  it  will  abundantly  repay  us.  The  present  reward  is — (1)  The  con- 
version of  the  children.  (2)  The  rearing  of  a  generation  of  worship-loving  people. 
(3)  The  training  of  real  home  missionaries.  (4)  Saturating  the  whole  population 
with  religious  truth.      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  difficulty  of  well-doing  : — When 

I  dug  my  well,  I  knew  that  there  were  rocks  below,  and  when  I  had  thrust 
down  the  pick  and  spade  through  the  easily  yielding  earth  until  they  struck 
the  rock  I  found  no  water.  It  was  necessary  to  drill  and  blast  a  foot,  two 
feet,  six,  ten,  eighteen,  twenty  feet,  and  then  I  struck  a  spring.  While  I  was 
doing  it  it  was  not  pleasant,  but  after  I  had  got  through  it  was  permanent 
refreshment.  It  is  hard  to  deal  with  hard  cases ;  but  when  we  have  struck  the 
water  of  life  in  any  one,  after  that  we  have  overflowing  remuneration  even  here. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christian  endurance: — In  the  earlier  days  of  Christianity, 
when  it  had  to  contend  against  the  prejudices  and  intolerance  of  ages  ;  when  the 


CBAP.  Ti.]  GALATIANS.  515 

bigotry  of  the  Jew  fiercely  opposed  it,  and  the  philosophy  of  the  Greek  and  Roman 
despised  it,  and  when  the  bitterness  of  persecution  grew  up  into  greater  fierceness, 
it  was  then  that  the  earlier  and  devoted  Christians,  exposed  to  all  manner  of  trial 
and  death  on  all  sides,  had  need  of  encouragement.  I.  The  charge  or  the 
apostle.  1.  The  apostle  means  by  this  charge  that  we  are  not  to  allow  any  kind 
of  weariness  in  right  doing  to  arrest  us  in  the  discharge  of  duty,  or  to  force  us 
away  from  its  path.  Weariness  of  mind  and  of  body  is  common  to  most  men. 
The  traveller  gets  weary  on  his  journey,  whether  by  sea  or  land ;  the  student  bending 
over  his  studies  through  a  long  period,  cannot  escape  that  fatigue  which  attends  a 
close  and  intense  application  of  thought ;  the  labourer,  when  his  day's  work  is 
done,  often  turns  to  his  home  with  a  tired  look  and  a  faltering  step ;  the  sick  man 
upon  his  couch  feels  the  passing  hours  to  be  weary  as  they  creep  through  the  dark- 
ness of  the  night  or  the  light  of  day,  bringing  no  ease  to  his  pains  nor  strength  to 
his  weakness ;  the  watcher  by  the  bedside  grows  faint  with  watching,  and  the  over- 
tasked eyes  grapple  with  the  slumber  that  steals  upon  them  in  vain.  No ;  weari- 
ness in  some  form  or  other  is  the  result  of  our  infirmities,  and  as  long  as  human 
nature  remains  what  it  is,  the  mind  and  the  body  will  sink  under  its  pressure. 
What,  however,  we  have  to  do  is  to  be  faithful,  to  endure  patiently  our  burdens,  and  to 
press  onward  in  the  strength  of  faith  and  hope.  2.  Now,  the  duty  of  "  well-doing  " 
embraces  much  of  inner  thought  and  of  outward  action ;  it  embraces  every 
Christian  virtue  that  can  be  mentioned — every  good  work  that  is  worthy  of  the 
name ;  and  among  the  many  good  things  it  includes,  it  most  assuredly  numbers 
among  them  the  duty  of  supporting,  of  advancing  the  interests  of  "the  house  of 
God,"  as  a  means  to  an  end,  as  an  agency  which  the  Almighty  is  pleased  to  adopt 
lor  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  Divine  ends,  whether  in  the  way  of  His  Spirit 
or  of  His  providence.  His  house  is  not  confined  to  any  one  particular  spot ;  it 
may  be  found  on  the  broad  ocean,  in  the  midst  of  the  desert  waters,  where  the  ship 
is  turned  into  a  sanctuary,  and  the  incense  of  prayer  and  praise  be  made  to  ascend 
from  her  cabin  or  her  decks.  It  may  be  found  in  the  wide  waste  of  sands,  in  the 
vast  wilderness,  where  the  tent  of  the  pilgrims  is  erected,  and  from  beneath  the 
spread  of  its  canvas  may  be  heard  the  earnest  breathings  of  a  humble  and  contrite 
spirit.  It  may  be  found  upon  the  mountain's  top,  amid  the  sweep  of  winds  and 
the  wrapt  curtain  of  clouds  ;  where  two  or  three  are  met  together  in  the  name  of 
Christ  to  worship  God,  and  to  believe  in  the  work  of  His  redemption.  It  may  be 
found  in  the  depths  of  the  valley,  amid  streams  and  rocks,  or  in  the  city,  amid 
lofty  towers,  temples,  and  palaces,  where  the  "  Te  Deums  "  of  thankful  hearts  may 
meet  and  swell  into  one  of  earth's  loudest  anthems  before  the  throne  of  heaven.  3. 
One  of  the  great  objects  of  religions  buildings  is,  that  we  should  gather  together 
within  their  walls  for  public  worship;  that  on  the  Sabbath,  as  a  day  of  rest 
from  the  toils  of  labour,  the  mind  should  seek  for  strength  and  solace  in  the 
ministrations  of  united  devotion  and  of  Christian  fellowship.  II.  The  en- 
couraging prospect  annexed  to  the  CHARGE — "For  in  due  season  we  shall 
reap,  if  we  faint  not."  True,  the  prospect  may  appear  to  us  far  off, 
though  to  some  it  may  be  nearer  than  they  think.  (W.  D.  Horwood.) 
Against  weariness  in  well-doing  : — It  is  the  part  of  religion  to  teach  man  to  do  well. 
Do — he  must  and  will.  He  does  not  always,  alas,  do  right ;  but  it  is  the  object  of 
religion — of  revelation —  to  induce  him  to  do  so.  Weariness.  How  much  is  there 
to  induce  this  spirit,  and  to  render  the  exhortation  against  it  appropriate.  How 
soon  does  a  spirit  of  weariness  creep  over  us  in  our  spiritual  career.  Does  any  one 
ask,  "  Why  is  this — what  are  its  causes  ?  "  I  reply — something  is  to  be  attributed 
in  this  tendency  to  die  love  which  the  human  mind  has  for  novelty.  We  all  desire 
change.  Monotony  is  irksome.  The  absence  of  variety  is  painful,  and  transforms 
the  period  over  which  it  extends  into  a  desert — a  sandy  plain  ;  while,  were  there  to 
be  the  entire  negation  of  variety,  life  would  be  insupportable,  and,  like  solitary  con- 
finement, would  soon  become  the  harbinger  of  death.  God  knows  this  tendency  of 
man's  mind,  and  has  provided  for  it — for  what  is  there  that  does  not  change  ?  The 
seasons  revolve,  and  each  appears  clad  in  a  different  garb.  Man's  life  progresses,  and 
each  age  has  its  character.  Not  only  is  a  desire  for  novelty  sometimes  the  occasion 
of  weariness  in  well-doing — something  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  influence  of  sloth. 
An  active  creature  as  man  is,  there  is  still  in  him  a  love  of  ease,  of  repose,  of 
luxurious  rest.  Nor  is  this  all — there  is  the  spirit  of  self-complacency.  I  have 
done  so  much  that  at  least  I  may  be  satisfied.  One  more  occasion  of  inconstancy 
in  well-doing  may  be  adverted  to,  and  that  is  the  most  powerful  of  all — the  natural 
disinclination  of  the  mind  to  doing  well  at  any  time.    1.  "Be  not  weary,"  for  ths 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

MOTIVES   TO   CONTINUANCE   IN   THE    BIGHT    COURSE    ABB   AS   POWERFUL   AS   IHB   MOTIVE! 

to  commencement.  I  say  there  is  no  change  in  the  motives  to  diligence  and  duty, 
which  abide  as  at  first ;  and  if,  after  having  gone  a  little  way,  or  a  long  way,  in  the 
course  of  well-doing,  whatever  its  peculiar  form,  you  have  become  weary,  it  is  you 
who  have  altered,  and  not  the  course.  The  path  is  as  much  the  king's  highway  as 
ever ;  its  banks  as  green,  its  turns  as  beautiful,  its  trees  as  picturesque :  but  you 
have  become  weary,  and  your  footsteps  have  flagged.  What  you  want  is,  to  get 
fresh  impulse  by  a  reconsideration  of  the  motives  by  which  at  first  you  were  impelled. 
2.  Let  me  say  to  you,  "  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing,"  because  you  have  the  most 
noble  examples  to  constancy  and  diligence.  Study  the  history  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  Place  yourself  amid  its  events.  Observe  the  spirit  by  which  those 
events  were  vitalized.  Seek  to  understand  the  hidden  laws  of  that  outward  and 
inward  life.  Was  there  any  symptom  of  yielding,  of  inconstancy  there  ?  3.  "  Be 
not  weary  in  well-doing,"  because  an  unfinished  enterprise,  ob  a  work  incom- 
plete THROUGH  INCONSTANCY  IS  BOTH  A  DISTRESS  AND  A  DISGRACE.      There  may  be, 

of  course,  work  left  unfinished  through  necessity.    The  sculptor  may  die,  and  his 
bust  half  finished  be  his  most  significant  monument.    The  painter  may  be  paralyzed, 
and  his  unfinished  canvas  be  the  best  expositor  of  his  malady.    In  these  cases 
there  is  distress,  indeed,  but  no  disgrace ;  pity,  but  not  scorn :  but  let  a  work  be 
begun,  and  left  through  vacillation  of  purpose — a  great  work  be  undertaken,  and  be 
unfulfilled  through  childish  waywardness,  and  no  wonder  if  they  that  go  by  "  begin 
to  mock,"  while  the  artificer  is  ashamed  and  distressed.    And  surely  there  is  dis- 
grace.   Do  the  men  of  the  world  even  respect  a  backslider  ?    Then  I  might  urge 
the  exhortation  by  a  reference  to  the  self-discipline  which  is  secured  by  perseverance 
— especially  perseverence  in  a  course  of  self-denial.    4.  Direct  you  to  the  motive 
adverted  to  by  the  apostle.    The  prospect  op  beward.     "  In  due  season  ye  shall 
reap  if  ye  faint  not."    The  bestowment  of  rewards  is  a  feature  of  God's  government, 
as  the  doctrine  which  teaches  it  is  a  doctrine  both  of  Scripture  and  of  providence. 
(J.  Viney,  D.D.)        The  danger  signal : — I.  Some  places  where  we  abb  liable 
to  obow  weaby.      1.  We  grow  weary  when  the  work  seems  too  large  and  wa 
try  to  take  it  all  in  at  once.    One  morning  a  man  found  the  snow  all  piled  up  before 
his  door.    He  began  to  shovel  it  away,  but  there  seemed  to  be  such  a  mountain  of 
it  he  threw  down  his  shovel  in  despair  saying :  "  I  can  never  clear  away  all  that 
snow."    Then  he  picked  up  his  shovel,  and  marked  off  a  square,  and  began  to  see 
how  long  it  would  take  him  to  cast  that  aside ;  then  another  and  another,  until  ths 
whole  was  cleared  away.     So  the  girl  looks  at  that  great  pile  of  music,  as  she  begins 
her  first  lessons,  and  says :  "  Oh,  I  can  never  learn  all  that  music."    And  the  boy 
looks  from  the  beginning  of  his  arithmetic  through  to  the  last  page,  and  says :  "  I 
shall  never  get  through  that."    2.  We  become  discouraged  and  weary  when  we  do 
not  see  immediate  fruits  of  our  labour.    My  little  nephew  was  out  in  the  garden 
one  evening  with  his  father  sowing  peas  ;  next  morning  he  took  a  basket  and  was 
going  out  to  gather  the  crop,  and  was  greatly  disappointed  when  told  the  peas  were 
not  yet  grown.    Sunday-school  teachers  may  appropriate  this.    3.  We  grow  weary 
and  give  up  sometimes  on  the  eve  of  reaping,  and  lose  the  harvest.    Two  men 
were  digging  for  gold  in  California  once.    They  toiled  a  good  while  and  got  nothing. 
At  last  one  threw  down  his  tools  and  said :  "  I  will  leave  here  before  we  starve," 
and  he  did  leave.    The  next  day  his  comrade  that  remained  found  a  nugget  of  gold 
that  supported  him  until  he  made  a  fortune.    One  of  my  Sunday-school  teachers 
came  to  me  to  resign  her  class,  because  she  said  she  was  doing  them  no  good. 
They  were  less  thoughtful  than  when  she  took  charge  of  them.    I  encouraged  her 
to  "  labour  and  to  wait."    Only  a  few  weeks  elapsed  when  ten  of  the  twelve  young 
ladies  openly  professed  faith  in  Christ.     4.  We  grow  languid  sometimes  in  pros- 
perity.   Christian  slept  in  the  arbour  after  ascending  the  hill  Difficulty.    IL  How 
to  prevent  weariness  in  WELL-DoiNG.    1.  Keep  near  to  the  Master.    It  was  when 
Peter  followed  from  afar  that  he  denied  Him.    Keep  Christ  in  full  view.     It  was 
when  Peter  looked  on  the  waves  that  he  began  to  sink.    2.  Have  strong  faith  in 
the  promises :  "  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void — it  shall  prosper  "  (Is*, 
lv.  11).    "  We  shall  reap,"  and  reap  in  the  best  time,  God's  time,  "  in  due  season." 
Perseverence  will  bring  success,  success  will  inspire  courage,  courage  will  bring 
victory,  and  victory  will  be  followed  by  glory.    3.  Often  pray  to  God.    "  Even  the 
youths  shall  faint  and  be  weary — but  they  that  wait  on  God  shall  renew  their 
strength  "  (Isa.  lx.  30).    4.  Help  others.    This  is  the  health-lift  of  the  soul.     Two 
travellers  crossing  the  Alps  were  freezing  to  death.    One  lay  down  to  die ;  the 
othsr,  seeing  his  awful  condition,  began  to  rub,  chafe,  and  rouse  him.    He  sue- 


otu*.  nj  GALATIANS.  417 

aeeded,  and  the  exertion  of  helping  to  save  his  friend,  kindled  a  glow  of  warmth  in 
himself.  They  started  off  arm  in  arm,  and  were  saved.  (George  H.  Smyth.) 
Perseverance  in  well-doing : — I.  I  will  call  your  attention,  in  the  first  place, 
to  the  speaker,  or  rather  the  writer.  The  language  was  written,  as  we 
find,  under  inspiration,  by  Paul  to  the  Church  at  Galatia.  It  is  very 
important  when  we  hear  an  exhortation  to  consider  the  character  of 
the  person  who  gives  it.  And  here  we  see  the  importance,  if  we  first  consider 
what  was  the  issue  of  the  apostle's  labours.  What  was  the  issue  of  his 
labours  amongst  the  Gentiles  and  Jews  ?  Yet  he  was  not  weary  in  well-doing.  II. 
As  to  the  "  well-doings  "  of  the  apostle,  scarcely  any  doubt  can  be  left  on  the  mind 
with  reference  to  these,  if  we  attentively  peruse  the  records  of  his  commission. 
His  well-doings  were  not  to  make  himself  a  name  or  a  praise  in  the  earth ;  he  was 
no  mountebank,  who  for  a  season  sought  to  attract  the  gaze  and  admiration  of 
men,  in  order  that  upon  the  pinnacle  they  should  raise  for  him  he  might  stand  and 
enjoy  his  transient  life  of  honour  and  worldly  reputation.  No ;  his  desire  was  to 
do  that  which  Christ  did ;  he  desired  so  to  follow  Christ  as  he  himself  exhorts 
others  to  follow  Christ.  III.  What  the  apostle  means  by  his  expression,  "  due 
season."  It  is  evident  the  apostle  referred  not  first  to  his  labours.  The  apostle 
doubtless  understood  that  while  the  end  is  the  first  in  God's  purpose,  it  is  the  last 
in  manifestation.  He  could  see  that  his  own  season  might  not  be  God's  season. 
And  therefore  he  was  content  to  Bay,  "  And  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-doing :  for 
in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."  The  expression  "  due  season,"  then, 
I  conceive  refers  to  a  time  which  is  known  only  to  the  Father,  who  hath  put  the 
times  and  seasons  in  His  own  power-  The  expression  "  due,"  is  a  word  which  is 
elsewhere  translated  "  own."  It  is  a  pronominal  adjective,  which  signifies  posses- 
sion ;  which  signifies  a  peculiar  appropriateness  when  it  is  joined  with  any  particular 
substantive.  To  give  you  an  instance  of  the  use  which  is  always  made  of  it,  I  may 
mention  the  place  where  we  are  told  that  the  Jews  found  fault  with  Christ  because 
He  made  Himself  equal  with  God,  saying  that  God  was  His  Father  :  "  My  Father 
worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work. "  The  expression  there  is  the  same  that  is  found 
here ;  His  own  Father ;  God  was  His  own  Father.  So  in  His  "  own  season  " — that 
is,  the  season  which  is  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  purpose  ;  the  season  which  God 
knows  to  be  the  most  appropriate  ;  the  season  that  shall  best  fit  in  to  all  the  other 
declarations  which  God  shall  make  of  His  majesty,  His  justice,  and  His  power,  as 
well  as  His  love,  His  mercy,  and  His  grace:  at  that  time  "  we  shall  reap,  if  we 
faint  not."  That  season  may  not  be  ours,  as,  doubtless,  many  times  it  is  not :  that 
season  may  not  be  ours,  not  the  one  which  we,  in  our  fleshly  wisdom,  should 
choose  ;  but  it  is  the  season  which  God  chooses,  the  season  which  is  best  adapted, 
which  is  most  peculiarly  suited  for  the  purpose  of  mercy  and  truth  meeting  to- 
gether, and  righteousness  and  peace  kissing  eaoh  other.  Paul  was  thus  content  to 
look  forward  to  the  time  when  he  should  reap  the  reward  of  his  labours.  The 
husbandman  was  first  to  endure  toil,  that  afterwards  he  might  receive  the  joy  of 
the  harvest.  (J.  L.  Galton,  M.A.)  Vnweariedness  in  well-doing: — Let  us  not  be 
weary  in  well-doing  in  consequence  of — I.  The  rivalry  of  other  workers.  II.  The 
mighty  name  by  which  we  are  called.  HI.  The  insidious  character  of  our  tempta- 
tions to  weariness.  IV.  The  reward  promised  to  patient  labour.  First,  the 
rivalry  of  other  workers  forbids  weariness.  1.  The  undying  activity  of  the  world. 
In  this  busy  working  world,  the  inactive,  the  disappointed,  the  weary,  are  soon 
trodden  down  and  destroyed.  2.  If  we  turn  from  the  unwearying  work  of  the  busy 
world  to  contemplate  the  great  power  of  evil,  if  we  try  to  realize  its  presence,  to 
separate  it  in  thought  from  the  world  which  it  defiles  and  seeks  to  ruin,  we  are 
appalled  by  its  ceaseless  efforts  to  accomplish  its  deadly  purpose.  Whatever  power 
can  afford  to  rest,  the  power  of  evil  never  grows  weary.  3.  The  energies  of  good- 
ness never  rest  nor  take  their  ease.  II.  The  mighty  name  of  "  Christian  "  com- 
bines many  of  the  strongest  arguments  to  unwearying  service.  1.  The  Christian 
owes  his  own  salvation  to  unwearied  love  and  infinite  sacrifice.  2.  Christians  are 
the  pledged  disciples  of  the  Great  Worker  in  this  field  of  holy  exertion.  "  I  must 
work,"  said  Jesus,  "  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day."  "  My  Father 
worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  3.  Christ  Himself  lives  and  works  within  the 
Christian  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit.  III.  Further  incentives  to  perseverance  may 
be  found  in  the  peculiar  and  insidious  character  of  the  temptations  to  which  well- 
doing is  exposed.  1.  The  man  who  is  resolved  to  ruin  himself  has  the  evil  propen- 
sities of  his  fallen  nature  to  help  him.  On  the  other  hand,  "  well-doing  "  exacts  a 
perpetual  conflict  with  the  evil  tendencies  of  our  nature.    The  Christian  has  a 


£18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  Tfe 

persevering  enemy  to  slay.    2.  Another  of  the  hindrances  to  which  "  well-doing  H 
of  this  kind  is  exposed,  is  the  tendency  of  our  machinery  to  wear  out,  and  our  own 
disposition    not    unfrequently  to  hurry  it  off  the  field.      Our  ways  of    doing 
good  may  often  be  antiquated  and  cumbrous.    A  mass  of  useless  lumber,  in  the 
shape  of  old  instruments,  may  infest  the  Church  of  God,  and  we  perhaps  often 
feel    that    nothing    can    be    done   without   removing    such   incumbrances.      3. 
There  is  temptation  to  weariness  in    "  well  •  doing "   from   the  very  number  of 
methods  by  which  it  may  be  persued.     IV.  Let  us,  in  conclusion,  consider  the 
reason  which  the  apostle  urges  for  our  observance  of  this  injunction.     In  all  the 
well-doing  of  the  Christian,  in  all  the  toil  of  the  earnest  worker  for  God,  there  ie 
alliance  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  with  the  purposes  of  God  ;  and  it 
would  seem  that  the  sovereignty  of  God  has  included  the  labours  of  man  in  its  own 
far-reaching  penetration.     The  months  before  the  ingathering  may  often  seem  long 
and  wearisome,  and  verily  be  heart-breaking  things,  but  God's  "  seasons  "  are  not 
always  measurable  by  our  forecastings,  even  though  the  harvest  is  pledged  by  His 
oath  and  His  promise.     We  shall  reap  the  growth  effectuated  by  His  Holy  Spirit, 
though  we  may  not  always  understand  the  nature  of  the  gracious  sheaves  that  we 
are  bringing  in  our  bosom.     We  cannot  calculate  the  hour  nor  the  nature  of  our 
triumph,  but  we  know  that  the  Word  of  God  standeth  sure,  and  that  the  due  season 
draweth  nigh.     (H.  R.  Reynolds,  B.A.)         Unwearied  in  error: — Consider  the 
victims  of  falsehood  and  idolatry.    Learn  from  the  devotee  of  many  a  false  god ;  from 
the  worshipper  of  Siva,  who,  drunk  with  opium,  swings  on  the  flesh-hook  at  some 
horrid  festival,  or  prostrates  himself  before  the  advancing  car  of  Juggernaut,  mak- 
ing this  revolting  self-6acrifice  to  pacify  the  raging  of  a  guilty  conscience,  or  to  gain 
the  ephemeral  applause  of  an  ignorant  mob ;  even  he  is  not  weary  with  his  work. 
(Ibid.)        Perseverence  in  religious  duties  enforced : — I.  In  the  first  place,  your  duty 
is,  to  be  engaged  "  in  well-doing  ;"  that  is  to  say,  in  doing  well,  in  doing  good,  in 
doing  that  which  is  just  and  approved  in  the  sight  of  God.     But  this  is  not  the 
meaning  of  the  word  in  the  common  and  popular  sense  of  it.     If  you  say  a  man  is 
doing  well,  you  mean  to  say  that  a  man  is  increasing  in  his  wealth,  his  influence, 
or  his  connections.     Brethren,  it  is  true  with  regard  to  the  world,  "  so  long  as  thou 
doest  well  to  thyself,  men  will  speak  good  of  thee ; "  it  is  true  with  regard  to  God, 
so  long  as  you  do  well  in  His  sight,  shall  you  have  His  sanction  and  His  smile.    1. 
In  the  first  place,  it  refers  individually  to  ourselves — doing  well,  or  doing  good, 
with  regard  to  ourselves.     Now  mark,  brethren,  what  the  text  says, — "  Let  us  not 
be  weary  in  well-doing."    Then  the  assumption  is,  that  we  have  begun"  well- 
doing," because  he  who  has  not  begun  to  do  well,  can  never  be  said  to  be  in  any 
risk  or  danger  of  being  weary  in  it.    2.  Having,  then,  assumed  this,  that  we  have 
learned  to  care  for  our  own  souls,  and  to  regard  our  own  immortal  interests,  the 
next  point  to  be  considered  is,  that  we  are  bound  to  engage  in  "  well-doing  "  for 
our  fellow-creatures ;  for  it  is  especially  to  this  that  the  text  refers.    (1)  And 
in  the  first  place,  we  are  bound  to  regard  the  bodies  of  our  fellow-creatures.    The 
human  body  is,  as  well  as  the  soul,  the  purchase  of  the  blood  of  Christ.    The 
human  body,  therefore,  must  be  regarded.    It  is  the  casket  which  contains  the 
most  precious  of  all  jewels.    (2)  But  we  must  not  exclude  man  as  a  responsible 
and  immortal  being.    To  be  engaged  in  doing  good  is  to  sympathize  with  the  feel- 
ings, and  to  imitate  the  conduct  of  all  God's  saints  on  earth.    Listen  to  what  Job 
says :  "  When  the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me ;  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it 
gave  witness  to  me :  because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the  fatherless,  and 
him  that  had  none  to  help  him.    II.  The  second  thing  to  regard  is,  the  manner  in 
which  this  duty  is  to  be  performed ;  that  is  to  say,  unweariedly :  "  Let  us  not  be 
weary  in  well-doing."    There  is  good  and  solid  reason  why  we  should  be  so 
admonished.    We  often  feel  our  unfitness  and  our  un worthiness  to  be  employed  in 
doing  good.     We  are  too  ready  to  suppose  that  our  exertions  for  the  present  and 
future  benefit  of  our  fellow-creatures  are  utterly  without  success,  because  we  do  not 
Bee  the  success.     Zeal  is  sometimes  without  knowledge,  and  zeal  is  often  without 
patience ;  we  look  for  the  oak,  without  giving  the  acorn  time  to  germinate ;  we  desire 
to  gather  the  cool  and  delicious  fruit,  forgetful  of  the  preliminary  processes  of  vege- 
tation.   We  are  too  ready  to  be  "  weary  in  well-doing,"  because  we  observe  the  apathy, 
the  obstinacy,  the  carelessness,  the  ingratitude  of  those  whom  we  seek  to  benefit. 
III.  In  the  third  place,  the  text  furnishes  us  with  most  encouraging  motives  for 
perseverence :  '•  In  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."     We  know  from 
experience,  that  perseverance,  either  with  respect  to  earthly  or  heavenly  things,  ie 
•carcely  ever  without  success.     Patience,  industry,  and  perseverance,  are  the  thre* 


our.  n.]  GALATIANS.  51t 

great  elements  of  success  in  life.  We  find  Jacob  wrestling  with  the  wondrous 
angel  of  God's  covenant  through  the  entire  night,  and  prevailing  not  till  the  morn- 
ing began  to  break.  We  find  St.  Paul  praying  thrice  that  the  thorn  in  the  flesh 
might  be  extracted,  before  he  received  that  answer  which  caused  his  soul  to  thrill 
with  holy  joy.  We  find  Daniel,  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  saying — "  In  those  days  I, 
Daniel,  was  mourning  three  full  weeks ;  I  ate  no  pleasant  bread,  neither  came  flesh 
nor  wine  in  my  mouth,  neither  did  I  anoint  myself  at  all,  till  three  whole  weeks 
were  fulfilled."  At  length  his  faith, his  patience,  and  his  submission  received  their 
rich  reward :  "  behold,  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen  "  appeared  to  him  and  said 
— "  Fear  not,  Daniel ;  for  from  the  first  day  that  thou  didst  set  thine  heart  to 
understand,  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy  God,  thy  words  were  heard."  Again  : 
unwearied  continuance  in  "  well-doing  "  has  the  distinct  promise  of  success.  (Gf. 
Weight,    M.A.)        Be    not   weary : — I.  The    Christian   man's  vocation   in   the 

PRESENT     WORM).       II.    THK     MOTIVE    TO     PERSEVERANCE    IN     IT,     ARISING     FROM    THE 

assurance  op  final  REWARn.  I.  The  text  may  be  regarded,  in  the  first  place,  as 
marking  out  the  Christian  man's  vocation  in  the  present  world.  It  is  well-doing. 
This  is  what  he  is  specially  called  to — the  business  of  his  life — his  "  being's  end 
and  aim."  1.  The  first  thought  which  claims  our  attention  here,  is  this  :  That  the 
present  life  is  not  designed  to  be  a  merely  contemplative  thing.  2.  A  second 
thought  which  the  text  suggests  is  that  the  Christian  vocation  comprehends  some- 
thing more  than  the  mere  purpose,  or  project  of  good.  You  must  observe  that  it 
does  not  enjoin  upon  us  well-scheming,  but  well-doing — not  the  design,  but  the 
deed.  A  day  is  hastening  on,  when  works,  and  not  wishes,  or  projects,  will  deter- 
mine your  eternal  reward.  In  that  day,  the  least  thing  done  will  secure  you  a 
revenue  of  unspeakable  glory ;  whilst  the  greatest  thing  talked  of  and  planned  only 
will  bring  you  nought  but  disappointment  and  shame.  3.  A  third  thought  suggested 
by  the  view  given  us  in  the  text  of  the  Christian's  vocation  is— that  the  believer  is 
endowed,  by  God,  with  the  capacity  for  imparting  blessing  to  his  fellow-man. 
"Do  well,"  is  the  command;  and  the  command  obviously  implies  that  those  to 
whom  it  is  addressed  have  the  power  to  do  well — are,  in  other  words,  invested  with 
an  ability  to  benefit  and  bless  others.  There  is  infinite  goodness  in  this  arrange- 
ment, inasmuch  as  it  opens  to  us  one  of  the  richest  sources  of  happiness  ;  for  what 
joy  is  comparable  to  that  of  bringing  joy  to  others?  II.  Let  us  consider  it, 
secondly,  as  urging  him  to  perseverance  in  that  vocation  by  the  promise  of 
ultimate  reward.  ••  Let  us  not  be  weary — for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we 
faint  not. "  Now  there  seem  to  be  three  important  particulars  suggested  to  us  here. 
1.  First,  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  vocation  is  connected  with  certain 
reward  in  the  future.  "  We  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."  2.  And  this  brings  me  to 
the  second  thought  suggested  by  this  part  of  our  text,  namely :  That  the  reward 
connected  with  the  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  vocation  awaits  its  bestowment  at  an 
appropriate  period.  "  In  due  season,  we  shall  reap  if  we  faint  not."  God  acts  not 
without  a  plan.  3.  And  now  let  me  request  your  attention  to  the  last  suggestion 
derivable  from  this  text :  That  the  assurance  of  certain  reward,  in  connection  with 
the  fulfilment  of  the  Christian  vocation,  is  a  sufficient  motive  to  perseverance 
therein  under  every  temptation  to  weariness.  (G.  M.  Merry.)  The  beauty  of  a 
Christian  is  to  hold  on  in  piety  : — It  is  a  beautiful  sight  to  see  silver  hairs  crowned 
with  golden  virtue.  The  beauty  of  a  thing  is  when  it  comes  to  be  finished ;  the 
beauty  of  a  picture  is,  when  it  is  drawn  out  in  its  full  lineaments,  and  laid  in  its 
orient  colours;  the  beauty  of  a  Christian  is,  when  he  hath  finished  his  faith.  (T. 
Watson.)  Motives  to  perseverance  : — It  is  a  strange  sight,  to  see  a  busy  devil, 
and  an  idle  Christian.  2  If  we  would  not  grow  weary,  let  us  pray  for  persevering 
grace.  It  was  David's  prayer,  "  hold  Thou  me  up  and  I  shall  be  safe ;  "  and  it  was 
Beza's  prayer,  "Lord,  perfect  what  Thou  hast  begun  in  me."  That  we  may  hold 
on  a  Christian  course,  let  us  labour  for  three  persevering  graces.  Faith  keeps  from 
fainting ;  faith  gives  a  substance  to  things  not  seen,  and  makes  them  to  be  as  it 
were  present,  As  a  perspective  glass  makes  those  things  which  are  at  a  distance 
near  to  the  eye,  so  doth  faith  r  heaven  and  glory  seem  near.  A  Christian  will  not 
be  weary  of  service,  that  hath  the  crown  in  his  eye.  The  second  persevering  grace 
is  hope.  Hope  animates  the  spirits :  it  is  to  the  soul  as  cork  to  the  net,  which 
keeps  it  from  sinking.  Hope  breeds  patience,  and  patience  breeds  perseverance. 
The  third  persevering  grace  is  love.  Love  makes  a  man  that  he  is  never  weary. 
Love  may  be  compared  to  the  rod  of  myrtle  in  the  traveller's  hand,  which  ref  reshetb 
;  kim,  and  keeps  him  from  being  weary  in  his  journey.  He  who  loves  the  world,  ia 
;  never  weary  of  following  the  world ;  he  who  loves  God  will  never  be  weary  of  serv- 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tt; 

ing  Him  ;  that  is  the  reason  why  the  saints  and  angels  in  heaven  are  never  weary 
of  praising  and  worshipping  God ;  because  their  love  to  God  is  perfect,  and  love 
turns  service  into  delight.  Get  the  love  of  God  in  your  hearts,  and  you  will  run  in 
His  ways,  and  not  be  weary.  (Ibid.)  Reaping  in  due  season  : — The  husband- 
man doth  not  desire  to  reap  till  the  season  ;  he  will  not  reap  his  corn  while  it  is 
green,  but  when  it  is  ripe ;  so  we  shall  reap  the  reward  of  glory  in  due  season ; 
when  our  work  is  done,  when  our  sins  are  purged  out,  when  our  graces  are  come  to 
their  full  growth ;  then  is  the  season  of  reaping  ;  therefore  let  us  not  be  weary  of 
well-doing,  but  hold  on  in  prayer,  reading,  and  all  the  exercises  of  religion ;  we  shall 
"  reap  in  due  season,  if  we  faint  not."     (Ibid.) 

Yer.  10.  As  we  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men. — 
Opportunity,  man's  treasure : — If  time  be  as  "  the  grass,"  fading  and  fleeting, 
opportunity  is  as  "  the  flower  of  the  grass,"  more  fading,  as  it  is  more  beautiful  and 
valuable.  In  the  ordinary  transactions  and  affairs  of  life,  as  well  as  in  natural 
things,  of  how  much  importance  is  that  juncture  of  concurrent  circumstances  which 
ve  style  opportunity.  Opportunity,  even  in  natural  things,  when  once  lost,  can 
lever  be  recalled.  The  spark,  that  one  single  drop  would  have  quenched  in  the 
cutset,  may,  if  neglected,  spread  fire  around  till  it  wraps  a  whole  city  in  one  wasting 
conflagration.  The  garment,  spotted  with  the  plague,  that  might  have  been  de- 
stroyed with  the  least  possible  effort,  may,  if  it  lie  unheeded  and  neglected,  com- 
municate the  fearful  infection,  and  the  pestilence  may  spread  its  frightful  ravages 
far  and  wide  through  a  desolated  nation.  In  the  course  of  nature,  God  has  been 
pleased  to  "  furnish  "  opportunity  "  to  every  man,  to  awake  the  diligence  and  keep 
alive  the  watchfulness  of  His  dependent  creatures.  If  the  husbandman  passes  by 
the  season  of  spring,  that  precious  season  returns  not  again  to  him ;  and  if  he 
delay  but  a  little  space,  watching  the  wind  and  waiting  for  the  clouds,  he  shall  not 
reap.  And  in  the  ordinary  transactions  of  mankind  one  with  another,  how  much 
depends  upon  seizing  the  passing  and  present  opportunity  !  Many  a  man,  by 
missing  the  "  tide  in  the  affairs  of  life,"  has  missed  the  highroad  to  fame  and  for- 
tune, and  whatever  this  world  could  give  to  make  him  illustrious  and  distinguished. 
How  many  gray-headed  and  aged  men  look  back  upon  the  squandered  opportunities 
of  early  life  with  bitter  regret  and  unavailing  sighs  ?  They  can  now  see  where  they 
turned  down  the  wrong  pathway,  and  where  they  missed  the  golden  and  precious 
season,  which,  had  they  employed  it  well,  would  have  brought  them  to  far  different 
results.  (Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.)  Universal  beneficence  the  duty  of  Christians : — 
The  law  of  Jesus  Christ  lays  Christians  under  obligations  to  the  whole  human  race. 
This  is  at  once  its  triumph  and  its  difficulty :  its  triumph  as  it  stands  contrasted 
with  moral  codes  of  narrower  scope,  whether  national  or  religious ;  its  difficulty, 
when  we  look  upon  it  as  having  to  be  put  in  practice.  "  While  we  have  time,  let 
us  do  good  unto  all  men."  The  race  which  our  Lord  and  Bedeemer  has  honoured 
by  taking  its  nature  upon  Him  appeals  to  the  thought  and  energies  of  all  the 
redeemed.  Whether  civilized  or  barbarous,  whether  European  or  African,  whether 
Christian  or  pagan,  man,  as  man,  has  claims  upon  the  servants  of  Christ ;  it  is 
their  business  and  their  privilege  to  do  him  any  good  they  can  :  the  highest  good, 
before  all  else — the  communication  of  the  True  Faith,  the  bringing  him  into  living 
contact  with  the  Divine  Bedeemer,  His  Person,  His  Cross,  His  Spirit,  His  Word, 
His  Sacraments ;  and  then  lesser  forms  of  good,  all  that  we  commonly  mean  by 
civilization  and  useful  knowledge — alms,  advice,  medicine,  service,  means  of  educa- 
tion, helps  to  material  happiness  and  progress,  as  opportunities  for  doing  so  may 
present   themselves.      (Canon    Liddon.)  Benevolence    never    kills : — Said    a 

speaker  at  a  missionary  meeting  :  I  have  often  heard  of  congregations 
starving  through  niggardliness,  but  never  of  one  laid  on  its  deathbed 
through  benevolence.  If  I  could  find  one  that  had  thus  suffered  by  over- 
giving,  I  would  make  a  pilgrimage  to  that  church,  and  pronounce  over  it  this 
requiem,  "Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord."  The  beauty  of  benefi- 
cence : — An  Eastern  legend  tells  us  how  Abraham  wore  round  his  neck  a  jewel  whose 
light  healed  the  sick  and  raised  up  those  who  were  bowed  down,  and  that  when  he 
died  it  was  placed  amongst  the  stars.  You  may  see  it  now  among  the  stars  in  all 
holy  lives  ;  but,  more  than  that,  if  such  be  your  desire,  your  Saviour  will  grant  it 
to  you  also,  to  wear  it.  No  diamond  can  shine  so  gloriously  on  the  white  neck  of 
beauty,  no  order  blaze  so  worthily  on  the  breast  of  noble  manhood.  It  becomes 
even  the  sceptred  monarch  better  than  his  crown.  It  is  the  diamond  of  pure 
sympathy  with  your  fellow-men.    In  one  word,  it  is  charity.   Usually  she  is  painted 


chap,  vi.]  OALATIANS.  521 

as  nursing  young  children,  and  giving  dolls  to  paupers,  but  with  a  far  greater 
insight  Giotto  represents  her  as  a  fair  matron  with  her  eyes  uplifted,  trampling  on 
bags  of  gold,  while  coming  out  of  heaven  an  angel  from  the  Lord  Christ  gives  her 
a  human  heart.  Yes,  it  is  the  human  heart  by  which  we  live — the  heart  at  leisure 
with  itself  to  soothe  and  sympathize ;  the  heart  which  can  be  as  hard  as  adamant 
against  vice  and  corruption,  but  as  tender  as  a  mother  towards  all  that  suffers  and 
can  be  healed.  (Archdeacon  Farrar).  Opportunity  : — A  sculptor  onee  showed  a 
visitor  his  studio.  It  was  full  of  gods.  One  was  very  curious.  The  face  was  con- 
cealed by  being  covered  with  hair,  and  there  were  wings  to  each  foot.  "What  is 
its  name  ?  "  asked  the  spectator.  "  Opportunity,"  was  the  reply.  "  Why  is  his 
face  hidden  ?  "  "  Because  men  seldom  know  him  when  he  comes  to  them." 
"  Why  has  he  wings  upon  his  feet?  "  "  Because  he  is  soon  gone,  and  once  gone  ha 
cannot    be    overtaken."  Transient   nature   of  opportunity  : — Opportunity    is 

like  a  favouring  breeze  springing  up  around  a  sailing-vessel.  If  the  sails  be  all 
6et,  the  ship  is  wafted  onwards  to  its  port ;  if  the  sailors  are  asleep  or  ashore,  the 
breeze  may  die  again,  and  when  they  would  go  on  they  cannot :  their  vessel  stands 
as  idle  as  a  painted  ship  upon  a  painted  ocean.  (Union  Magazine.)  Opportunity 
is  like  a  strip  of  sand  which  stretches  around  a  seaside  cove.  The  greedy  tide  is 
lapping  up  the  sand.  The  narrow  strip  will  quickly  become  impassable ;  and  then 
how  sad  the  fate  of  the  thoughtless  children  who  are  now  playing  and  gathering 
shells  and  seaweed  inside  the  cove!  (Ibid.)  Seizing  opportunities: — Coming 
once  down  the  Ohio  Biver  when  the  water  was  low,  we  saw  just  before  us  several 
small  boats  aground  on  a  sandbar.  We  knew  the  channel  was  where  they  were 
not,  and,  shaping  our  course  accordingly,  we  went  safely  by.  They  saw  our  intention ; 
and,  taking  advantage  of  the  light  swell  we  created  in  passing  them,  the  nearest 
ones  crowded  on  all  steam,  and  were  lifted  off  the  bar.  Now,  when  in  life's  stream 
you  are  stranded  on  some  bar  of  temptation,  no  matter  what  it  is  that  makes  a 
swell,  if  it  is  only  an  inch  under  your  keel,  put  on  all  steam,  and  swing  off  into  the 
current.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Prepare  for  opportunities  :— Once  upon  a  time,  a 
wild  boar  of  a  jungle  was  whetting  his  tusks  against  the  trunk  of  a  tree.  A  fox  pass- 
ing by,  asked  him  why  he  did  this,  seeing  that  neither  hunter  nor  hound  was  near. 
"  True,"  said  the  boar,  "  but  when  danger  does  arise,  I  shall  have  something  else  to 
do  than  to  sharpen  my  weapons  ! "  The  more  limited  sphere  of  beneficence  : — 
Humanitarian  aspirations,  as  they  are  termed,  are  exhilarating,  especially  to  noble 
talures :  but  we  cannot  all  of  us  do  everything.  And  there  is  some  danger  in 
dreaming  of  doing  it ;  the  danger  of  ending  by  doing  nothing,  on  the  ground  that 
to  do  everything  is  plainly  impossible.  Schemes  which  embrace  the  human  race 
are  apt  to  fade  away  into  vague  unattainable  outlines,  instead  of  leading  to  prac- 
tical and  specific  results.  And,  therefore,  while  our  duties  towards  humanity  at 
large  are  to  be  kept  in  view,  as  the  real  measure  of  our  obligation,(and  as  a  valuable 
incentive  to  generous  efforts,  our  actual  enterprises  are  necessarily  restricted  to  this 
or  that  portion  of  the  great  human  family,  which,  for  us,  and  for  the  time  being, 
represents  the  whole.  Hence  it  is  that  St.  Paul  adds  to  his  general  exhortation  to 
do  good  unto  all  men  a  specific  limitation,  "  especially  unto  them  that  are  of  the 
household  of  faith."  The  household  of  faith!  There  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  sense 
of  the  expression.  As  the  whole  human  race  is  one  vast  family  banded  together 
by  the  indestructable  tie  of  blood,  so  within  this  family  the  possession  of  a  com- 
mon faith  creates  another  and  a  selected  household,  whose  members  are  bound  ts 
each  other  by  a  yet  closer  and  more  sacred  bond.  Of  the  natural  human  family 
Adam  is  the  departed  head  and  father  :  the  family  of  faith  is  grouped  around  the 
Second  Adam,  Jesus  Christ,  as  its  ever-living  and  present  Parent.  To  all  mem- 
bers of  this  family  He  has  given  a  new  and  common  nature ;  He  has  clothed  each 
and  all  in  that  sacred  Manhood  which,  after  God,  "  is  created  in  righteousnss  and 
true  holiness,"  whether  that  precious  gift  have  been  forfeited  or  not.  By  faith 
each  member  of  the  family  understands  his  relationship,  first  to  the  common 
life-giving  Parent,  and  next  to  those  who  are  his  brethren  in  virtue  of  this 
new    and    sacred    tie.      (Canon   Liddon.)  Doing  good  in  trifles : — There    is 

a  story  of  a  man  living  on  the  borders  of  an  African  desert,  who  carried  daily 
a  pitcher  of  cold  water  to  the  dusty  thoroughfare,  and  left  it  for  any  thirsty 
traveller  who  might  pass  that  way.  Doing  good  by  a  child  : — "  Children,  1 

want  each  of  you  to  bring  a  new  scholar  to  the  school  with  you  next  Sunday,"  said 
the  superintendent  of  a  Sunday-school  to  his  scholars  one  day.  "  I  can't  get  any 
new  scholars,"  said  several  of  the  children  to  themselves.  "  I'll  try  what  I  can 
do,"  was  the  whispered  response  of  a  few  others.     One  of  the  latter  class  went 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  n. 

home  to  his  father,  and  said,  "  Father,  will  you  go  to  the  Sunday-school  with  me?" 
"  I  can't  read,  my  son,"  replied  the  father,  with  a  look  of  shame.  "  Our  teachers 
will  teach  you,"  answered  the  boy,  with  respect  and  feeling  in  his  tones.  "  Well, 
I'll  go,"  said  the  father.  He  went,  learned  to  read,  sought  and  found  the  Saviour, 
and  at  length  became  a  colporteur.  Years  passed  on,  and  that  man  had  established 
four  hundred  Sunday-schools,  into  which  thirty-five  thousand  children  were 
gathered  1  Thus  you  see  what  trying  did.  That  boy's  effort  was  like  a  tiny  rill, 
which  soon  swells  into  a  brook,  and  at  length  becomes  a  river.  His  efforts,  by 
God's  grace,  saved  his  father,  and  his  father,  being  saved,  led  thirty-five  thousand 
children  to  the  Sunday-school.  Doing  good  by  little  means  : — See  that  well  on 
the  mountain-side — a  small,  rude,  rocky  cup  full  of  crystal  water,  and  that  tiny 
rill  flowing  through  a  breach  in  its  brim.  The  vessel  is  so  diminutive  that  it 
could  not  contain  a  supply  of  water  for  a  single  family  in  a  single  day.  But,  ever 
getting  through  secret  channels,  and  ever  giving  by  an  open  overflow,  day  and 
night,  summer  and  winter,  from  year  to  year,  it  discharges  in  the  aggregate  a 
volume  to  which  its  own  capacity  bears  no  appreciable  proportion.  The  flow  from 
that  diminutive  cup  might,  in  a  drought  or  war,  become  life  to  all  the  inhabitants 
of  a  city.  It  is  thus  that  a  Christian,  if  he  is  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  is  a 
greater  blessing  to  the  world  than  either  himself  or  his  neighbours  deem.  Let  no 
disciple  of  Christ  either  think  himself  excused,  or  permit  himself  to  be  discouraged 
from  doing  good,  because  his  talents  and  opportunities  are  few.  Your  capacity  is 
small,  it  is  true,  but  if  you  are  in  Christ  it  is  the  capacity  of  a  well.  Although  it 
does  not  con  tarn  much  at  any  moment,  so  as  to  attract  attention  to  you  for  your 
gifts,  it  will  give  forth  a  great  deal  in  a  lifetime,  and  many  will  be  refreshed. 
(W.  Arnot,  M.A.)  The  Christian's  duty  : — Now  let  us  oonsider — 1.  The  solemn 
exhortation  or  advice  given  here  by  the  apostle,  that  is,  "  Let  us  do  good."  Not- 
withstanding all  the  sin  and  misery  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  world,  yet  the  world 
•would  not  be  so  bad  after  all,  were  it  not  for  our  own  selves.  That  is,  it  is  we, 
through  our  conceit,  pride,  and  unfriendly  behaviour  to  one  another,  that  really 
constitute  and  render  this  world  so  unpleasant  as  it  is !  And  if  you  admit 
the  truth  of  this  statement,  then  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  the  duty  of  all  of  us,  as 
true  Christians,  to  endeavour  to  reform  ourselves  in  the  first  place,  and  then  try  to 
spread  this  reformation  amongst  others  by  our  own  good  examples.  There  are 
some  people  to  be  found  who  will  only  do  good  at  times,  and  upon  some  extra- 
ordinary occasions,  and  then  only  when  they  are  really  ashamed  to  withhold  their 
hands.  2.  The  extent  of  this  duty,  "Unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who  are 
of  the  household  of  faith !  "  You  may  recollect  that  when  Joseph  made  himself 
known  unto  his  brethren  in  Egypt,  and  entertained  them  at  a  sumptuous  dinner, 
that  "  Benjamin's  mess  was  five  times  as  much  as  any  of  the  others ; "  and  do  yon 
recollect  the  reason  of  that  strange  proceeding  of  his  ?  I  will  tell  you,  Joseph 
and  Benjamin  were  the  only  sons  of  Bachel  by  Jacob,  their  father,  and  bo  they 
were  two  brothers  by  the  same  father  and  the  same  mother,  and  therefore  were 
more  nearly  allied  to  one'  another  than  all  the  rest.  And  we  read  that  when 
Joseph  first  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,  "  his  bowels  did  yearn  upon  him,  and  he 
sought  where  to  weep."  And  so  I  would  have  you,  my  brethren,  to  follow  Joseph's 
good  example,  if  ever  you  shall  meet  with  any  member  of  "the  household  of 
faith,"  "  who  in  this  transitory  life  is  in  trouble,  sorrow,  need,  sickness,  or  any 
ether  adversity  " ;  then  give  him  more  readily  and  more  abundantly  than  to  any  one 
else,  for  he  is  more  nearly  related  to  you  by  the  Spirit,  if  not  by  the  flesh,  for  he 
is  a  member  of  the  same  Catholic  Church  as  yourself.  3.  The  time  that  we  are 
to  atteud  to  this  most  important  duty — "  As  we  have  an  opportunity,"  or,  "  whilst 
we  have  the  opportunity  of  this  life  and  as  occasions  present  themselves."  No  one 
offers  a  word  of  advice,  nor  an  alms,  nor  a  dose  of  physic,  nor  anything  else  to  a 
dead  man.  Oh,  no !  for  the  time  for  these  things  and  the  like  is  gone  by  for  ever 
with  regard  to  him.  And  so  I  would  have  you  to  bear  in  mind  that  it  is  not  after 
•  poor  fellow-creature  has  been  left  to  starve  to  death  with  cold  and  hunger ;  that 
it  is  not  after  a  long  "  hope  deferred  "  had  broken  his  tender  heart  in  twain,  and 
caused  it  to  cease  to  beat  for  ever,  that  you  are  to  take  pity  and  compassion  upon 
him.  Oh,  no !  but  you  should  do  so  now  while  you  have  him  with  you,  while  yon 
can  relieve  him,  and  while  he  can  appreciate  your  good  attention,  your  sympathy 
and  kindness.  Some  are  in  the  habit  of  putting  poor  people  off  indefinitely  when 
they  ask  assistance,  though  perhaps  the  favour  they  ask  for  will  be  hardly  worth 
receiving,  and  so  the  time  is  lost  when  it  can  be  of  any  value  to  the  recipient.  For 
my  own  part,  if  I  do  not  get  a  favour  when  I  beg  for  it  and  when  I  want  it,  I  would 


ClUF.  ti. J  QALATIANS.  52S 

not  care  for  it,  if  the  opportunity,  or  "  the  time  of  need  "  is  gone.  (H.  H.  Davies, 
M.A.)  The  Church  household  an  especial  scene  of  kind  deeds  : — Every  one  enter- 
ing a  Ghnrch  has  a  right  to  feel  that  he  is  going  into  a  higher  atmosphere  than  that 
in  which  he  has  been  accustomed  to  move.  Every  one  has  a  right  to  feel  that  when 
he  goes  into  the  Church  of  Christ  he  goes  into  an  association,  a  brotherhood,  where 
the  principle  of  gentleness  and  kindness  is  carried  on  to  a  higher  degree  than  it  ia 
outside  the  Church.  I  know  that  it  is  not  so.  I  know  that  the  Church  is  keyed, 
often,  very  low  in  the  matter  of  sympathy.  I  know  that  too  frequently  persona 
who  go  into  the  Churoh  are  like  those  who  go  at  night  to  a  hotel.  Each  lodger  has 
his  own  room,  and  calls  for  what  he  himselt  needs,  and  does  not  feel  bound  to  take 
care  of  any  of  the  other  lodgers.  And  a  Church,  frequently,  is  nothing  but  a 
spiritual  boarding-house,  where  the  members  are  not  acquainted  with  each  other, 
and  where  there  is  but  very  little  sympathy.  Now,  every  Church  should  be  under 
the  inspiration  of  such  large  sympathy  and  benevolence  as  to  make  every  one  of 
its  members  the  object  of  kindly  thought  and  feeling.  There  should  be  a  public 
sentiment  and  an  atmosphere  of  brotherhood  in  every  Church.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Kind  deeds  to  go  beyond  the  Church : — And  here  I  may  say,  in  carrying  out  this  work, 
beware,  while  you  do  not  neglect  home,  that  you  do  not  confine  the  disclosure  of 
yourself  to  your  own  household.  It  is  right  for  a  bird  to  make  herself  a  nest,  and 
put  the  finest  moss  and  softest  feathers  in  that  nest,  and  it  is  right  that  she  should 
sit  upon  it.  It  is  right  that  she  should  have  but  one  chamber — for  birds  never 
build  for  more  than  themselves  and  their  own.  But  they  are  only  bird,  and  do 
not  know  any  better.  It  is  for  us  to  build  a  broad  nest.  To  build  it  so  that  nobody 
can  get  into  it  but  ourselves,  to  line  it  with  our  own  prosperity,  and  so  selfishly  fill 
it  with  everything  that  is  sweet  and  soft — that  is  not  right.  I  think  that  a  man's 
house  ought  to  be  a  magazine  of  kindness.  Its  windows  ought  to  send  out  light.  I 
like,  when  I  go  by  a  house  at  night,  to  see  the  window-shutters  open,  so  that  the 
light  shines  forth  from  inside.  A  person  says,  "  I  will  put  this  clump  of  flowers 
under  the  parlour  window."  No,  no ;  put  them  by  the  gate.  A  thousand  will  see 
them  there,  wher6  one  would  see  them  in  that  other  place.  A  person  says,  "  I  will 
put  this  plant  where  nobody  can  reach  it."  Well,  do;  but  put  two  close  to  the 
fence,  where  they  can  be  reached.  I  like  to  see  little  hands  go  through  the  pickets 
and  pluck  off  flowers.  And  if  you  say,  "  That  is  stealing,"  then  let  it  be  under- 
stood through  all  the  neighbourhood  that  it  is  not  stealing.  There  are  some  who 
seem  to  have  such  a  sense  of  property  that  if  they  had  a  hundred  magnolia  trees 
in  full  blossom  on  their  premises,  they  would  want  the  wind  to  blow  from  the  north, 
and  south,  and  east,  and  west,  so  that  all  the  fragrance  would  come  into  their  own 
house ;  whereas  the  true  spirit  would  be  a  desire  that  a  thousand  others  should  be 
blessed  by  these  bounties  as  well  as  themselves.  Make  your  dwelling  beautiful ; 
but  not  for  your  own  eyes  alone.  Fill  it  sumptuously,  if  you  have  the  grace  to 
rightly  use  that  sumptuosity  Let  the  feet  of  the  poor  step  on  your  plushy  carpet. 
Let  their  eyes  behold  the  rich  furniture  of  your  apartments.  Would  it  make  their 
home  less  to  them  ?  Not  necessarily.  If  you  take  a  child  by  the  hand — you,  whose 
name  is  great  in  the  town  ;  you,  who  tower  up  in  power  above  all  your  neighbours ; 
if  you  lay  your  hand  on  his  head,  and  call  him  "  Sonny  ; "  if  you  bring  him  into 
your  house ;  if  you  go  to  the  cupboard  and  take  out  the  unfamiliar  cake,  or  what 
not,  that  children  so  much  like  (for  the  senses  must  be  appealed  to  in  childhood 
before  the  spirit  can  be  reached ;  and  by  feeding  the  mouth  of  a  child  you  come  to 
his  affections  and  feelings) ;  if  you  show  him  your  rooms,  and  give  him  something 
in  his  pocket  to  carry  home  and  show  his  aunt  or  sister,  do  you  suppose  that  child 
ever  thinks  you  are  stuck  up,  or  looks  on  you  with  an  unkindly  eye  ?  When  he 
comes  into  the  neighbourhood  again,  and  your  house  dawns  upon  him,  he  re- 
members, the  moment  he  sees  it,  how  happy  you  made  him  there.  And  that  house 
of  yours  can  be  made  to  bless  generation  after  generation.  (Ibid.)  Doing  good 
according  to  opportunity  ; — I.  There  is  ooon  which  Christians  cam  do.  This  is  a 
common  thing  to  notice,  and  you  may  think  it  is  not  likely  to  be  overlooked.  Per- 
haps not,  as  far  as  the  eyes  are  concerned,  but  certainly  liable  to  be  overlooked  so 
far  as  the  heart  and  the  hand  are  concerned.  To  do  good  (as  we  all  should  say  if 
we  were  asked  to  define  it),  is  to  secure  by  our  own  efforts  the  welfare  of  others. 
The  doing  good  to  human  nature,  as  it  is  made  up  of  body  and  spirit,  is  required  of 
us  by  our  God,  but  beside  this  we  are  all  required  to  do  good  to  others  in  all  the 
variety  of  condition  in  which  they  are  found.  Hence  we  have  such  particular 
directions  as,  to  doing  good  to  them  that  hate  us,  giving  meat  and  drink  and 
raiment  to  the  poor,  visiting  the  sick  and  the  prisoner,  the  widow  and  the  father* 


£84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 


less,  holding  forth  the  word  of  life,  and  distributing  to  the  'necessity  of  saints. 
What  a  wide  and  life-long  service  do  these  two  words  cover,  "  As  we  have  there- 
fore opportunity,  let  us  do  good."  II.  To  no  good  there  must  be  both  intention 
and  exertion,  aim  and  effort.  Benefits  sometimes  accrue  to  men  from  theii 
fellow-men  without  any  intention  or  effort  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  the 
channels  of  good ;  but  being  the  channel  of  good  or  the  occasion  of  doing 
good,  and  the  willing  and  active  agent,  are  widely  different  things.  It  is 
one  thing  to  lose  a  piece  of  money,  which  is  picked  up  by  a  beggar,  and  by  which 
he  supplies  his  wants,  and  another  thing  to  give  that  beggar  money  for  the 
purchase  of  food.  The  man  is  fed  in  both  cases,  but  the  ministering  is  only 
in  the  one  case.  It  is  one  thing  to  utter  words  at  random  by  which  bystander! 
are  instructed,  and  another  thing  to  endeavour,  as  in  the  case  of  our  devoted 
Sabbath  school  and  ragged  school  teachers,  steadily  and  perseveringly  to  impart 
instruction  to  the  ignorant.  The  difference  here  is  as  broad  and  as  clear  and  as 
palpable  as  that  between  the  stone  head  of  a  fountain  through  which  the  water 
flows,  and  from  which  you  drink,  and  the  loving  hand  which  brings  you  a  cup  of 
water  that  has  been  intentionally,  thoughtfully,  and  sympathetically  filled  for  you 
at  that  fountain.  Doing  good  partially,  if  self-originated  and  self-willed,  is  easy ; 
but  to  do  good  fully  we  must  overcome  much  within  ourselves.  Then  we  must  do 
it  as  servants — not  when  and  as  we  like,  but  when  and  as  the  great  Master  bids  us. 
Moreover,  real  good  is  not  done  except  by  labour  of  some  sort.  In  the  sweat  of 
the  brow  we  not  only  eat  bread,  but  we  cast  bread  on  the  waters.    III.  The  kind  of 

GOOD  DONE   AND   THE   AMOUNT   MUST   BOTH   BE   GOVERNED   BY  WHAT    PAUL    HERE     CALLS 

"opportunity."  Circumstances  being  suitable  for  a  particular  ministration,  we 
must  minister ;  and  circumstances  fix  the  time  and  place,  and  the  means,  and  the 
powers  of  the  individual.  They  say  to  him,  Thou  art  the  man  to  do  this  thing 
)<ere,  and  to  do  this  thing  now.  "  Opportunity"  is  that  season  in  which  we  can 
minister  to  the  benefit  of  others.  Our  opportunities  test  us.  You  will  always  see 
that  a  man  is  just  what  he  is  to  his  opportunities.  You  will  find  this  in  every 
walk  of  life.  Opportunities  test  us  Christians.  Some  opportunities  are  rare, 
others  are  common ;  some  are  fleeting,  others  abide.  "  The  poor,"  said  Jesus, 
' '  are  always  with  you,  and  whensoever  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good ;  "  here  is  the 
i-ernianent,  abiding  opportunity.  *•  But  Me  ye  have  not  always  ; "  here  is  the 
fleeting,  passing  opportunity.  Doing  good,  dear  brethren,  if  men  be  faithful  to 
their  trust,  never  can  be  monotonous.  (S.  Martin.)  On  doing  good: — I.  Illus- 
trate the  duty  in  the  text.  1.  The  duty  inculcated  is  goodness.  Now  this 
necessarily  supposes  that  we  are  renewed  in  our  mind.  In  our  natural  state,  we 
cannot  do  good.  We  must  first  be  made  partakers  of  Divine  goodness  before  we 
can  diffuse  it  abroad.  The  Christian  may  do  good — (1)  By  the  exhibition  of  a 
pious  example.  Thus  to  be  monitors  to  those  around.  (2)  By  imparting  spiritual 
instruction.  (3)  By  our  prayers  and  supplications  (See  1  Tim.  ii.  1).  (4)  By 
imparting  of  our  substance  to  the  poor  and  necessitous.  2.  The  extent  of  the 
goodness  we  are  to  exercise — "  To  all  men."  3.  The  seasonablenesa  and  constancy 
of  our  goodness — "As  we  have  opportunity."  *.  The  preference  appointed— 
"Especially  to  those  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith."  II.  Enforce  the  dutt 
in  the  text.  1.  The  commands  of  God  require  it.  "  Thou  Shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bour as  thyself,"  &c.  (Psa.  xxxvii.  3;  1  Tim.  vi.  18).  *.  Our  resemblance  to  God 
lequires  it.  If  we  are  His  spiritual  offspring,  then  we  must  be  followers  of  God  aa 
dear  children.  3.  The  example  of  Christ  reauires  it.  "  He  went  about  doing 
good."  4.  The  Spirit  of  God  within  us  requires  it.  •*  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is 
.  .  .  goodness."  5.  Our  own  happiness  requires  it.  It  enlarges  the  mind,  expands 
the  heart,  elevates  to  the  most  heavenly  dignities  and  enjoyments.  6.  Our  acquittal 
at  the  last  day  requires  it  (Matt.  xxv.  34,  &c).  Application  :  1.  Does  not  the  sub- 
ject  condemn  most  of  the  professed  disciples  of  Christ?  How  few  have  their 
hearts  set  upon  doing  good  !  How  few  do  all  the  good  they  can !  2.  Let  it  lead 
us  to  a  closer  acquaintance  with  the  Lord's  will,  and  provoke  us  to  love  and  good 
works.  3.  A  religion  without  goodness  is  not  of  God,  and  shall  not  receive  a 
reward  at  the  last  day.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  witness  to  the  ennobling  principle : — 
Life  is  a  work.  The  best  efforts  of  the  human  spirit  spring  from  the  energy  of  an 
artist  toiling  at  himself.  And  just  as  Van  Eyck,  or  Memling,  or  Diirer,  each 
possessed  "the  sacred  science  of  colour,"  each  noted  faithfully  the  teachings  of 
experience,  each  rose  into  some  vision  of  a  better  country,  drew  down  the  results 
of  that  vision  to  the  practical  purposes  of  daily  life ;  and  neither  neglected  th« 
claims  of  the  present  nor  forgot  the  solemn  certainties  of  another  world ;  so  the 


VBMT.  Yi.]  GAL  ATI  AN 3.  Hi 

human  spirit,  alive  to  its  responsibility,  and  therefore  to  the  need  of  Borrowfnl  toil 
here,  without  the  reminding  of  the  preacher,  hears  voices  like  passing  bells,  now 
loud,  now  dying;  sounds  tossed  up  in  sorrowing  cadence,  surging  and  solemn, 
mystical  and  threatening,  like  the  roll  of  the  Atlantic  in  the  caves  of  Cornwall ;  or 
tender  and  saddening,  like  the  water  of  the  spreading  surf  on  the  sands  of  the 
Adrian  Sea ;  and  the  voices,  whether  loud  or  soft,  whether  threatening  or  tender, 
are  chanting  an  unchanging  story :  "  Death  is  coming,  diligence  and  fortitude ; 
life  is  passing,  use  it  while  you  may."  Listening  to  these  the  human  spirit  works 
in  the  vision,  with  the  sense  of  eternity ;  unites  the  ideal  and  the  practical,  strives 
to  make  idealism  into  realised  result,  does  not  merely  travel  a  destitute  journey, 
nor  work  a  work  fruitless  to  others  as  well  as  self,  but  exercises  in  the  highest  of 
all  subjects,  with  the  possibility  of  the  most  lasting  results,  exercises  an  artist's 
powers.  I.  Let  us  note  swiftly  some  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  self- 
tsacrificing  temper,  the  productive  principle  of  a  noble  life.  1.  First  we  may  note 
what  is  negative.  In  a  really  self-sacrificing  temper  there  is  the  absence  of  that 
miserable  taint  and  bane  of  rich  and  gifted  natures  which  the  Greeks  would  describe 
as  a  withering  vfiptc — an  insolent  scorn.  The  self  sacrificing  spirit,  believe  me,  will 
not  lose  faith  in  human  nature ;  will  learn  for  itself  simple-hearted  sincerity ;  will 
not  demand  too  much  from  others  ;  will  "  possess  "  itself  "  in  patience,"  and  thus 
lay  a  stern  arrest  upon  the  too  natural  encroachments  of  v/3|°'£ — °*  insolent  scorn. 
2.  Another  mark  of  a  self-sacrificing  temper  is  a  sincere,  a  supernatural,  a  gentle 
yet  chastened  sorrow.  "  Sorrow ! "  you  say ;  "  why,  that  is  nothing  so  strikingly 
exceptional."  A  short  experience  of  the  most  shallow  observer  says  "there  is 
plenty  of  sorrow !  It  requires  no  special  gaze  on  eternity,  it  demands  no  yearning 
desire  for  a  higher  life,  to  find  one's  self  plunged  in  the  mystery  of  sorrow.'* 
Quite  so ;  but  stay.  There  are  violets  and  violets.  The  violet  of  the  bleak  hedge- 
Bide  on  the  edge  of  the  windy  common,  cramped  with  the  crisping  frost  and 
shrivelled  by  the  withering  storm,  is  generically  the  same,  but  in  individual  fact  how 
different  from  those  rich  masses  of  unfathomable  colour  which  carpet  the  ruined 
pavement  of  Hadrian's  Villa.  So  there  is  sorrow  and  sorrow.  There  is  the  sorrow 
of  a  broken  life,  the  sorrow  of  a  greedy,  unsatisfied  desire,  the  sorrow  of  a 
degraded  moral  purpose,  and  the  sorrow  of  a  brave  and  tender  soul,  which  sees 
the  beauty  of  the  ideal  and  the  sadness  of  partial  failure,  and  yet,  though  sorrow- 
ing, does  not  faint  or  grow  weary ;  which  realizes  the  possibility  of  human  progress, 
and  is  heartstricken  at  the  spectacle  of  men  with  gifts  of  noble  nature  living  for 
the  changeful  and  passing,  when  they  might  live  for  what  can  never  die.  This 
Borrow  is  an  outcome  of  the  self-sacrificing  temper.  Is  it  yours  ?  Are  you  sorry 
when  wrong  is  done?  sorry  at  the  record  of  wretchedness  and  the  chronicle  of 
crime ;  sorry  at  lives  with  possibilities  of  glory  falling  into  the  depths,  missing  the 
standard,  the  example  of  Christ  7  Is  yours  such  sorrow  as  stimulates  you  to  read 
and  obey  the  secret  of  this  unearthly  loveliness  ?  Is  your  soul's  life  touched  into 
activity  by  the  tragedy  of  human  misery  and  the  tragedy  of  the  cross  ?  Blessed 
are  ye  if  it  be  so.  Then  it  is  the  principal  anxiety  of  your  life  to  enrich  the  lives 
of  others.  This  is  the  witness  of  self-sacrifice.  3.  And  a  third  feature  of  such  a 
temper  is  a  sunny  earnestness.  What  is  earnestness  ?  It  is  not  gloom,  it  is  not 
grim  determination,  it  is  not  dogged  persistence,  it  is  not  revolting  narrowness,  or 
wearying  one-sidedness,  or  stupid  and  tormenting  fanaticism.  What  is  earnest- 
ness ?  Earnestness  is  that  temper  of  mind,  that  habit  of  thought  which  comes  of 
taking,  of  habitually  taking,  the  truths  of  eternity  as  realities,  as  in  fact  they  are. 

II.  Let  us  ask,  then,  what  ground  can  be  shown  for  cultivating  a  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice  ?  1.  My  brothers,  first,  unquestionably  first,  a  loving  gratitude.  Christ 
died  for  you.  If  you  have  a  grain  of  gratitude  in  you  for  the  highest  blessings,  act 
by  grace  towards  Him  in  the  spirit  in  which  He  has  acted  towards  you.  2.  And 
another  ground  is  a  wise  and  gracious  estimate  of  the  dignity  of  man.  Man  is  an 
animal ;  yea,  but  man  is  also  a  spirit ;  mysterious  instincts  within  him — despite 
the  passing  crotchets  of  sciolists  and  dreamers — witness  to  him  his  immortality. 

III.  And  now  for  the  result.  Self-sacrifice  is  the  ennobling  principle.  It  ennobles 
the  world;  it  fertilizes  the  soul.  How?  For  all  man  it  leaves  behind  rich 
memories  and  great  examples ;  it  shows  thus  what  man  can,  and  therefore  what 
man  ought,  to  do,  and  encourages  to  use  the  strength  God  gives  to  do  it.  And 
again,  it  enriches  the  individual  soul.  It  is  strange,  yet  it  is  true,  that  to  give  in 
love  increases  the  store  of  love  within  us ;  strange,  but  true,  that  self-love  weakens 
the  moral  fibre  and  impoverishes  life ;  strange,  but  true,  that  self-sacrifice  stores 
moral  treasures,  and  produces  moral  power.    IV.  "  While  we  have  time  let  us  do 


5*8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  y«, 

good."  What  is  life  then  but  a  severe  probation  to  test  the  metal  of  our  souls,  and 
prove  their  value  ?  ••  While  we  have  time  let  us  do  good."  Nay,  what  is  life  then 
but  a  careful  education,  wherein  stern  circumstances  and  trials — the  calls  of  duty, 
and  the  sharp  assaults  of  sorrow  combine,  or  may  combine  with  inward  principle, 
to  train  the  soul,  to  "  try  us  and  turn  us  forth  sufficiently  impressed."  *•  While 
we  have  time."  Nay,  what  is  life  but  a  great  opportunity,  though  an  opportunity 
not  perhaps  to  leave  behind  the  rich  results  of  patient  and  daring  investigation,  or 
the  astounding  stores  of  accumulated  knowledge,  yet  something  better?  While 
you  have  time !  The  days  are  travelling  on,  the  night  is  coming,  let  us  bestir  our  - 
eelves  to  assist  in  the  triumph  of  goodness,  let  us  act  in  self-sacrifice,  and  so  let  us 
advance — oh !  blessed  opportunity — advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  (Canon 
Knox-Little.)  Christian  beneficence: — I.  Thb  principle  op  Christian  benefi- 

cence.  The  excellence  of  any  action  in  the  sight  of  a  heart-searching  and  holy 
God,  depends  entirely  on  the  motive  from  whence  it  proceeds,  and  on  the  spirit 
with  which  it  is  performed.  Christian  beneficence  is  founded  in  the  noblest  of 
principles — love  to  our  God  and  Redeemer.  II.  Thb  objects  op  Christian 
beneficence.  True  believers  are  united  to  each  other  by  the  most  sacred  and 
indissoluble  bonds.  III.  The  qualities  op  Christian  beneficence.  1.  Active  in 
its  nature.  2.  Constant  and  unwearied  in  its  operations.  IY.  The  value  ov 
Christian  beneficence.  (John  Hunter,  D-D.)  Doing  good: — I.  The  nature. 
1.  Preserving  goodness.  2.  Uniting  goodness.  3.  Communicating  goodness.  II. 
The  rules.  We  must  do  good — 1.  With  that  which  is  our  own  (1  Chron.  xxi. 
24).  2.  With  cheerfulness  and  alacrity  (2  Cor.  ix.).  8.  So  that  we  do  not  dis- 
able ourselves  from  doing  good  (Psa.  xo.  14 ;  oxii.  5 ;  2  Cor.  iii. ;  viii.  13).  III.  Thb 
reasons.  1.  From  the  grounds  of  love  and  beneficence,  which  are  in  all  men.  2. 
From  the  example  of  God  Himself  (Matt.  v.  44,  45).  3.  The  testimony  of  Christ 
(Acts  xx.  35).  (R.  Cudworth.)  I.  God  made  all  things  to  do  good.  II. 
Christ  saves  men  in  order  that  they  hat  do  good.  III.  Do  good  because — 1. 
God  commands  it.  2.  It  will  overcome  evil.  3.  It  will  make  you  happy. 
4.  It  will  make  others  happy.  5.  Others  will  then  do  good  to  us.  (W.  Newton.) 
The  occasion  for  the  injunction : — The  admonition  is  thrown  into  a  general  form, 
but  it  has  evidently  a  special  application  in  the  apostle's  own  mind  (see  1  Cor. 
xvi.  1).  He  had  solicited  their  alms  for  the  suffering  brethren  of  Judaea.  The 
messenger  who  had  brought  him  word  of  the  spread  of  Judaism  among  the 
Galatians  had  also,  I  suppose,  reported  unfavourably  of  their  liberality.  They  had 
not  responded  heartily  to  the  appeal.  He  reproves  them  in  consequence  for  their 
backwardness ;  but  he  wishes  to  give  them  more  time,  and  therefore  refrains  from 
prejudging  the  case.  (Bp.  Lightfoot.)  Beneficence: — Give  what  you  have. 
To  some  it  may  be  better  than  you  dare  to  think.  (Longfellow.)  There 
may  be  a  furlough  from  our  customary  work;  there  can  be  none  from 
doing  good.  There  may  be  change  of  scene  and  place  and  fellowship ;  there 
must  be  none  in  the  spirit  of  self-sacrificing  beneficence.  (A.  L.  Stone.)  The 
danger  of  selfishness : — Let  us  proportion  our  alms  to  our  ability,  lest  we  provoke 
God  to  proportion  His  blessings  to  our  alms.  (Bp.  Beveridge.)  Seising 
opportunities: — A  lady  once  writing  to  a  young  man  in  the  navy,  who  was 
almost  a  stranger,  thought,  "  Shall  I  close  this  as  anybody  would,  or  shall 
I  say  a  word  for  my  Master  ? "  and  lifting  up  her  heart  for  a  moment, 
■he  wrote,  telling  him  that  his  constant  change  of  scene  and  place  was  an 
apt  illustration  of  the  word,  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing  city,"  and  asked  if  he 
could  say,  "I  seek  one  to  come."  Trembling  she  folded  it,  and  sent  it  off,  Back 
came  the  answer :  "  Thank  you  so  much  for  those  kind  words.  I  am  an  orphan, 
ond  no  one  has  spoken  to  me  like  that  since  my  mother  died,  long  years  ago." 
The  arrow,  shot  at  a  venture,  hit  home,  and  the  young  man  shortly  afterward 
rejoiced  in  the  fulness  of  the  gospel  of  peaoe.  How  often  do  we,  as  Christiana, 
close  a  letter  to  those  we  know  have  no  hope  "  as  anybody  would,"  when  we  might 
say  a  word  for  Jesus!  Shall  we  not  embrace  each  opportunity  in  the  future T 
Do  good  to  all  men  :•—  Some  years  ago  a  society  was  formed  in  London  which  called 
itself  the  "  Titus  Society."  It  took  its  name  from  Titus,  the  Roman  Emperor, 
who  counted  a  day  lost  in  which  he  had  not  done  some  act  for  the  good  of  others. 
The  members  of  this  society  bound  themselves  to  act  on  this  benevolent  principle. 
In  this  they  did  well ;  but  their  obligation  lay  back  of  their  pledge,  inasmuch  as 
the  voice  of  God  in  Scripture  and  in  the  love  He  pours  into  every  regenerate  heart 
is  constantly  saying,  "  Do  good !  Do  good  ! "  There  is  no  need  of  looking  far  to 
find  the  opportunity,  since  sorrow,  suffering,  ignorance,  poverty,  and  sin  are  every- 


-chap.  Tl.]  GALATIANS.  627 

where.  No  one  who  walks  the  streets  with  his  eyes  open  can  fail  to  find  some  one 
to  whom  a  kind  word,  a  pleasant  smile,  a  small  gift,  a  few  words  of  instruction  or 
of  exhortation,  or  even  a  cordial  grasp  of  the  band,  would  be  a  benediction.  To 
encourage  such  effort  the  God  of  love  has  ordained  that  the  satisfaction  of  doing 
good  is  greater  than  that  of  receiving  a  favour.  In  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  is  it  not  written  that  "  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  ? " 
American.  Lost  opportunities: — A  poor  fellow  in  connection  with  a  Liverpool 
mission  lay  dying  the  other  day,  and,  as  his  mother  stood  by  bis  side,  he  said, 
'•Mother,  I  shall  soon  be  with  Christ,  but  it  makes  me  miserable  to  think  that  I 
have  never  done  aught  for  Him."  Yes,  it  will  make  you  miserable  when  you  come 
to  die,  if  you  have  done  nothing  for  Christ.  I  charge  you  to  go  away  and  consecrate 
yourselves  to  this  work.  Listen  to  the  cries  of  the  heathen  world — "  What  must  we 
do  to  be  saved  t " 

Ver.  11.  Te  fee  how  large  a  letter  I  nave  written  unto  yon  with  mine  own  hand.  — 
The  personal  element  in  Christian  power : — It  has  been  supposed  that  some  disorder 
of  the  eyes  made  it  painful  for  the  apostle  to  write.  Earlier  in  this  Epistle,  where 
he  tries  to  gain  these  childish  Galatians  by  a  recital  of  his  own  sorrows  for  them, 
he  praises  their  affection  by  saying,  "  I  bear  you  record  that  if  it  had  been  possible 
ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes  and  have  given  them  to  me."  In  the 
adjoining  sentence  he  speaks  of  the  "  temptation  in  his  flesh,"  for  which  they 
neither  despised  nor  rejected  him,  but  entertained  him  "as  an  angel  of  God." 
Doubtless  the  use  of  the  pen  or  style  was  costly  to  his  comfort.  All  the  better  if 
it  only  helps  in  the  least  degree  to  draw  them,  through  his  Christlike  sacrifice  in 
their  behalf,  nearer  to  Christ  Himself  Suppose  he  had  not  been  so  thoughtful ; 
suppose  he  had  just  followed  the  custom  and  had  dictated  bis  letter  to  an  amanu- 
ensis— every  truth  recorded,  every  appeal  for  fidelity,  every  part  of  the  intellectual 
demonstration  of  the  doctrine  would  have  stood  there  just  as  it  stands  now. 
Nothing  of  the  literal  contents  of  the  message  he  was  bidden  to  deliver  would 
have  been  lost.  And  yet  one  thing  would  not  have  been  there.  The  Galatian 
reader,  and  we  here,  would  have  missed  the  sign-manual  of  personal  interest  and 
personal  sympathy  so  vividly  and  yet  so  delicately  stamped  on  the  whole  face  of 
the  manuscript  in  the  painstaking  writing  of  his  "own  hand."  There  is  the 
additional  power  of  personal  feeling  and  personal  character.  The  secret  value  is 
not  what  we  say  in  words ;  it  is  not  in  our  specific  actions,  much  less  in  our  pro- 
fessions. Terms  are  not  competent  to  define  it.  Science  has  never  analyzed  it. 
Yet  there  it  is — the  personal  quality,  a  power  that  is  perpetually  and  mightily  at 
work  wherever  men  are,  for  or  against  the  Love  and  Truth  of  God.  It  is  the  thing, 
too,  which  more  than  all  else  makes  people  love  one  another,  unites  them  in 
companionships,  and  colours  society.  Mere  abstract  truth  is  not  sufficient  to  change 
men's  motives,  to  rouse  their  hearts  or  to  save  their  souls.  The  gospel  is  not  delivered 
to  us  as  a  mere  string  of  propositions,  however  striking,  however  true,  however 
inspired — and  we  may  be  thankful  it  is  not.  For  no  such  treatise,  law-book,  moral 
philosophy,  "  Aids  to  Eeflection,"  or  "  Whole  Duty  of  Man,"  call  it  a  gospel  or  by 
any  other  name — would  ever  have  led  the  race  from  darkness  to  light,  or  lifted  it  up 
from  death  to  life.  As  a  matter  of  history,  that  never  happened.  True  enough, 
we  have  our  gospel,  our  Christianity  through  a  book.  It  is  a  "  Word  of  Life,"  but 
it  is  more.  The  Word  is  "  made  flesh  "  in  the  Person  Christ.  He  is  the  gospel. 
It  was  not  Christianity  that  regenerated  mankind  and  changed  the  face  of  the 
earth ;  it  was  Christ.  We  have  much  more  than  a  Book.  We  have  even  that 
through  living  men  ;  it  brings  before  us  living  characters — men  whose  personality 
was  taken  up  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  made  part  of  the  vehicle  of  Bevelation.  I 
take  it  that  what  was  personal  to  each  one  of  the  twelve  men  that  were  grouped 
about  our  Lord  was  put  there  in  order  to  give  the  glad  tidings  of  His  life  to  man- 
kind in  a  twelvefold  shape,  so  that  it  would  be  "  twelve  manner  of  fruits  "  for  the 
healing  of  many  nations.  Peter's  impulsiveness,  John's  ardour,  Philip's  curiosity, 
Matthew  the  publican's  sagacity,  the  square-dealing  of  James,  every  peculiarity 
amongst  them  all  was  just  as  much  a  part  of  the  apparatus  of  Bevelation  as  the 
words  of  the  Beatitudes,  or  the  stone  tables  of  the  law.  The  Bible,  all  through  it,  is 
quick  and  brilliant  with  these  personal  tokens.  There  were  occasions,  too,  in 
Christ's  intercourse  with  His  followers  when,  beyond  anything  that  could  be 
described  in  words,  His  personal  soul  went  into  His  manner,  motions,  glances, 
yielding  marvellous  effects.  His  "Follow  Me,"  His  "Daughter,  be  of  good  cheer." 
His  look  at  Peter,  His  woes  upon  the  Pharisees,  His  aspect  before  the  trained 


{88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  n. 

soldiers  of  the  imperial  army,  sent  oat  to  arrest  Him,  are  instances.  Since  Hi» 
ascension,  in  every  land  and  period,  Christian  piety  has  been  vigorous  in  proportion 
to  the  attachment  and  devotion  to  the  Saviour's  person.  It  is  the  vital  aroma  of 
the  best  hymns  of  the  ages.  It  sh6ds  the  holiest  unction  into  the  most  memorable 
sermons.  If  there  is  a  personal  power  like  this  in  the  faith  of  Christ  at  all,  we 
are  not  Christ's  true  followers  till  we  have  it  and  use  it.  Which  of  us  has  come 
in  and  goes  out  in  a  personal  communion,  face  to  face,  with  God,  holding  the 
promises,  doing  the  service,  with  his  own  hand  t  Which  of  us  will  return  this 
week,  to  business,  to  study,  to  housework,  to  society,  with  new  personal  purposes, 
more  truly  Christ's  follower,  more  thoroughly  in  earnest  in  keeping  this  world 
under  foot,  and  so  using  it  for  God  as  to  mount  up  by  it  to  heavenly  places? 
(Bishop  F.  D. Huntington.) 

"Ver.  12.  As  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  show  In  the  flesh,  they  constrain  yom 
to  be  circumcised ;  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ. — 
The  history  and  odium  of  Christ's  Cross : — The  Cross  of  Christ  demands  notice, 
calls  for  Christian  feeling,  sets  before  us  a  glorious  object  of  contemplation. 
I.  The  Cross  of  Chbist  in  the  history  connected  with  it.  A.  very  affecting  and 
astonishing  history ;  the  very  angels  bestow  on  it  their  attention  and  admiration. 
1.  A  history  of  suffering  ;  (1)  on  the  part  of  the  Master;  (2)  on  the  part  of  every 
true  disciple.  2.  A  history  of  sin.  II.  The  odium  connected  with  the  Cross. 
If  any  man  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  leading  a  holy  life,  manifesting  and 
setting  forth  Christian  principle  instead  of  depending  on  morality,  avowing  his 
conviction  that  there  is  no  salvation  but  in  the  Cross  of  Christ — then  shall 
reproach,  if  not  persecution  fall  upon  him — hatred,  illwill,  sarcasm,  wit,  ridicule, 
obloquy.  (T.  Mortimer,  B.D.)  The  impossibility  of  a  divided  service  : — The 
difficulties  of  the  Church  and  the  Christian  life  are  much  the  same  in  all  ages. 
Clothed  in  different  forms,  they  embody  the  same  spirit.  The  text  speaks  of  those 
who  seek  to  please  God  and  the  world  at  the  same  time ;  to  secure  for  themselves 
the  safety  which  Christ  offers,  without  losing  the  ease  and  social  comfort  which 
they  imagine  to  to  be  found  in  the  world.  1.  This  is  a  temptation  from  which 
none  are  wholly  free.  When  in  the  society  of  careless  persons,  how  hard  to  main- 
tain a  high  standard  of  life  and  conversation  1  How  difficult  to  see  where  the  line 
between  what  is  and  what  is  not  consistent  with  a  Christian's  position  is  to  be 
drawn  !  How  easy  to  let  slip  the  opportunity  of  speaking  for  the  right.  How  im- 
possible to  recover  it  when  let  slip  1  How  easy  to  assent  to  the  low  tone  around 
ub  ;  how  hard  to  have  to  appear  disagreeable  if  we  feel  compelled  to  protest  against 
it  t  2.  To  yield  to  this  temptation  is  the  symptom  of  a  half-conversion.  If  any 
man  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  new  creature.  Where  is  the  new  creature  in  as,  if 
we  so  easily  forget  Him,  and  fail  to  confess  Him  ?  3.  Consider  how  cowardly  and 
cruel  it  is  to  allow  Him  to  be  insulted  without  a  word  spoken  in  His  defence. 
Could  we  sit  still  and  hear  a  friend  abused,  his  dearest  wishes  ridiculed  ?  Is  not 
the  least  sin  a  direct  insult  to  Jesu3?  Has  He  not  entrusted  His  honour  to  oar 
keeping  ?  Are  we  not  members  of  a  thorn-crowned  head  7  Shall  we,  then,  leave 
Him  to  suffer  alone  ?  4.  Consider  the  harm  which  such  an  apparent  acquiescence 
in  evil  may  do  to  others.  5.  The  attempt  to  serve  God  and  mammon  will  fail. 
Sooner  or  later  the  choice  between  the  two  must  be  made.  The  longer  we  delay 
choosing  for  God  the  more  difficult  we  shall  find  it  to  do  so  even  when  we  would.  6. 
Howto  meet  the  temptation.  In  the  power  of  Christ  all  temptation  may  be  vanquished. 
In  Him  you  are  a  new  creature.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.)  Shams: — What  multi- 
tudes of  mahogany-handled  drawers  there  are  to  be  met  with  in  daily  life,  labelled  in 
black  on  a  gold  ground,  with  swelling  and  mysterious  names  cf  precious  healing 
drugs ;  but  alas  1  they  are  handles  which  do  not  pull  oat,  or  drawers  that  are  full 
of  nothing.  What  myriads  of  empty  bottles  make  up  yonder  "  enormous  stock  " 
in  the  universal  emporium  so  largely  advertised  1  What  a  noble  army  of  canisters 
filled  with  air  stand  marshalled  in  shining  ranks,  as  if  they  were  fresh  from  China, 
and  brimming  with  the  fragrant  leaf !  Now  in  mere  business  such  things  may 
answer  well  enough ;  but  bring  them  into  your  moral  dealings,  and  you  shall  soon 
become  contemptible.  One  smiles  at  the  busy  tradesman  arranging  the  shams  in 
his  window,  but  we  are  indignant  with  men  who  exhibit  unreal  virtues  and  ex- 
cellences ;  he  thinks  that  he  makes  a  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  but  when  we  have 
found  him  out  once,  even  what  may  be  genuine  in  him  is  subjected  to  suspicion, 
and  the  man's  honour  is  hopelessly  gone.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Persecution  a 
benefit  to  the  Church: — The  cold  water  of  persecution  is  often  thrown  on  the 


heap,  n.]  GALATIANS.  629 

Church's  face  to  fetch  her  to  herself  when  she  is  in  a  swoon  of  indolence  or  pride. 
{Ibid.)  Persecution  not  to  be  feared  : — Do  not  fear  the  frown  of  the  world. 

When  a  blind  man  comes  against  you  in  the  street  you  are  not  angry  at  him  ;  you 
eay,  "  He  is  blind,  poor  man,  or  he  would  not  have  hurt  me.  So  you  may  say  of 
the  poor  worldlings  when  they  speak  evil  of  Christians — they  are  blind.  (McClieyne.) 
The  exposure  of  the.  tactics  of  the  Judaizers : — I.  Their  dogmatic  attitude.  II. 
Their  urgent  zeal.  III.  The  true  motive  of  their  conduct.  1.  Their  conduct 
was  cowardly.  2.  Hypocritical.  3.  Self-interested.  IV.  It  was  just  and  neces- 
sary THAT  THE  APOSTLE  SHOULD  EXPOSE  A  POLICY  80  MEAN,  SO  MERCENARY,  SO  IN- 
SINCERE.    (Prof.  Crosskery.) 

Yer.  14.  But  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  In  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world. — The  glory 
sf  the  Cross: — The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  key  to  St.  Paul's  life;  and  that  life  is 
itself  the  best  human  exponent  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  He  saw  no  ground  for 
boasting,  or  rejoicing,  or  living,  save  in  that.  By  "  the  Cross  "  is  to  be  under- 
stood the  atoning  death  of  which  it  was  the  instrumental  cause.  It  stands  for 
"  Christ  crucified."  I.  The  Cross  of  Christ  the  highest  exhibition  of  the  glory 
of  God.  1.  It  exhibits  in  a  special  manner  the  justice  of  God.  2.  It  exhibits 
in  a  special  manner  the  love  of  God.  3.  It  reveals  in  perfect  harmony  the  justice 
and  the  love  of  God.  The  pardon  which  God  has  provided  for  sinners  is  a  pro- 
pitiated pardon — a  pardon  for  which  a  price  has  been  paid,  even  the  blood  of 
the  Son  of  God.  Justice  is  thus  upheld  in  itB  integrity :  mercy  is  shielded  from 
the  charge  of  conniving  at  unrighteousness  (Rom.  iii.  21-26).  II.  The  Cross 
of  Christ  the  best  security  for  the  happiness  of  man.  1.  It  secures 
pardon  and  reconciliation  for  the  sinner.  Nothing  to  be  done,  but  to  belitve 
the  overture  of  mercy,  and  become  reconciled  to  God.  Man  has  nothing  to 
bring  of  his  own,  and  nothing  is  asked  for.  The  Cross  provides  a  present 
salvation  for  all  who  believe  in  the  crucified  Son  of  God.  2.  It  supplies  *he 
believer  with  a  two-fold  power  ;  (1)  the  power  of  a  new  motive,  viz. ,  love ;  (2) 
the  power  of  a  new  life — the  life  of  the  spirit.  Henceforth  the  love  of  Christ 
constrains  him ;  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  Life  has  made  him  free  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death,  and  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  him  who  walks 
not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  III.  Concluding  inferences.  The 
Cross  of  Christ  may  further  be  viewed — 1.  As  supplying  the  only  safe  rule  for 
faith  and  practice.  2.  As  demanding  courage  in  confession.  3.  As  securing 
grace  for  action.  (Eviilius  Bayley,  B.D.)  The  Cross  of  Christ  the  Christian's 
glory  • — I  What  is  it  to  glory  in  any  object,  and  what  ark  the  objects  in 
which  the  apostle  would  not  glory?  1.  To  glory  in  an  object  implies—  (1) 
That  we  have  a  sincere  regard,  a  high  esteem,  and  a  real  affection  for  it.  (2), 
That  we  are  deeply  interested  in  it.  (3)  That  the  object  affords  us  joy  and  con- 
solation. 2.  The  objects  in  which  the  apostle  would  not  glory.  (1)  Worldly 
wisdom.  (2)  Worldly  riches.  (3)  Worldly  honours.  (4)  Self  righteousness.  (5}> 
Eminency  of  gifts.  (6)  H>s  privileges  as  a  Jew.  (7)  His  usefulness  as  a  minister 
of  the  gospel.  II.  The  object  in  which  he  determined  to  glory.  The  Cross.. 
III.  His  reasons  for  thus  glorying.  1.  Because  it  gives  a  full  and  copious 
description  of  the  Redeemer's  person.  2.  Because  it  gives  an  ample  relation  of 
the  blessings  procured  for  man,  by  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  Reconcilia- 
tion with  God ;  pardon,  holiness,  joy,  victory  over  the  world,  eternal  life. 
3.  Because  it  gives  a  glorious  display  of  the  Divine  perfections.  Divine  love ; 
infinite  mercy ;  resistless  power ;  incomprehensible  wisdom ;  inflexible  justice  ; 
spotless  purity.  4.  Because  it  gives  a  grand  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Persons 
in  the  Godhead.  5.  Because  it  gives  a  brilliant  exhibition  of  the  Redeemer's 
conquest.  6.  Because  it  procured  the  glories  of  heaven.  (Robert  Bond.)  The 
Cross  our  only  boast : — Strong  language — the  result  of  strong  emotion.  Used  by  St. 
Paul  on  hearing  that  the  Galatians,  among  whom  he  had  planted  the  standard  of 
the  Cross,  were  now  trying  to  conceal  its  odium  if  not  to  abandon  it  altogether^ 
I.  Thr  meaning  of  the  terms  he  employs.  1.  The  sacrificial,  meritorious, 
victorious  "Cross."  2.  "Glorying."  Not  mere  acquaintance,  approbation,  oe 
cordial  attachment ;  something  higher  than  all  this — exultation,  boasting,  rejoic- 
ing. "  Call  me  madman,"  he  says,  "  despise  me,  mock  me,  because  I  make  my 
boast  in  the  Crucified  1  Beize  me  by  the  hand  of  violence,  drag  me  to  your  dungeons, 
load  me  with  chains,  lead  me  to  the  stake  :  still  I  will  rejoice.  Among  friends  or 
ioes,  in  liberty  and  in  bonds,  in  life  and  in  death,  I  will  glory  still  in  the  Cross  of 

84 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tt 

Christ."  3.  "  Only  "  in  the  Cross  will  he  glory.  Not  in  his  lineal  descent,  or  his 
affinity  to  the  Jewish  Church ;  not  in  his  literary  attainments  or  learning :  these  are 
insufficient  for  the  hope  and  salvation  of  guilty  man.  (1)  In  nothing  inconsistent 
with  the  Cross.  (2)  All  glorying  consistent  with  the  Cross  must  be  made  subser- 
vient to  it.  When  he  glories  in  infirmities,  tribulations,  &c,  it  is  bpcause  Christ  is 
glorified  in  and  by  them.  So  also  he  would  glory  in  the  Advent  of  Christ,  when  Ha 
came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil ;  in  the  life  of  Christ,  so  immaculate,  bene- 
volent, useful ;  in  the  teaching  of  Christ,  so  wise,  important,  Divine ;  in  the 
splendour  of  the  miracles  of  Christ ;  in  the  triumphant  resurrection  of  Christ ;  in 
the  ascension  of  Christ,  when  He  took  human  nature  with  Him  into  heaven ;  but 
only  in  so  far  as  these  looked  forward  or  back  to  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ, 
without  which  they  would  all  have  been  in  vain.  II.  Eeasons  fob  this  resolution. 
1.  The  Cross  is  the  grand  consummation  of  all  the  preceding  dispensations  of  God 
to  man.  2.  The  splendid  scene  of  a  decisive  victory  over  the  Lord's  enemies  and 
ours.  3.  The  meritorious,  procuring  cause  of  every  blessing  to  Adam's  fallen  race. 
4.  The  most  powerful  and  only  effectual  incentive  to  all  moral  goodness.  (1)  The 
pattern  of  moral  excellence  there  exhibited.  (2)  We  must  have  grace  to  imitate. 
(R.  Newton.)  The  Cross  a  glorious  spectacle: — Behold  our  Divine  High  Priest. 
offering  up  the  great  sacrifice  required  for  the  redemption  of  the  souls  of  men;  the 
very  Son  of  God  pouring  forth  His  own  blood  upon  the  altar,  an  atonement  for  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world.  Behold  this,  and  you  will  acknowledge  that  though  there 
was  never  any  spectacle  so  sad,  vet  never  was  there  any  so  glorious,  so  worthy  of 
contemplation  by  men  and  angels.  And  consider  to  what  mighty  results  that  dark 
hour  of  His  humiliation  and  anguish  is  giving  birth  ;  and  despise  the  vain  pomp  of 
the  world  in  comparison  of  the  splendour  of  His  sufferings.  For  there,  as  H* 
hangs  on  the  accursed  tree,  is  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation  fighting  our 
battles  and  vanquishing  our  enemies ;  there  is  He,  for  us,  bruising  the  head  of 
Satan,  taking  the  sting  from  death,  robbing  the  grave  of  victory,  disarming  hell  of 
its  terrors.  Surely  the  vain  glories  of  earth,  when  in  contrast  with  those  real 
triumphs  of  the  Saviour's  Cross,  must  lose  their  attraction  in  the  view  of  every 
Christian ;  can  we  look  on  Him  whom  we  have  pierced  and  see  Him  stretched  on 
His  Cross,  for  us  enduring  the  pain,  despising  the  shame  of  it,  and  yet  regard  with 
satisfaction  that  scene  of  vanity  and  sin  which  occasioned  Him  thus  to  suffer?  Can 
v^e  love  the  world  and  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,  while  our  view  is  fixed  on 
Him  who  gave  Himself  expressly  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil 
world  ;  that  He  might  see  us  free  from  the  enchantment,  the  enslavement,  of  its 
false  allurements  and  hollow  delights?  (Bishop  Atterbury.)  The  Cross  reveals 
God's  heart : — The  real  glory  of  the  Cross,  for  a  deep  soul  like  that  of  Paul,  consists 
in  this — that  it  is  the  best  revelation  of  the  heart  of  God.  It  often  seems  much 
easier  to  get  at  the  mind  of  God  than  at  His  heart.  His  mind  is  •'  writ  large  "  for 
most  of  us  in  the  nightly  majesty  and  order  of  the  starry  heavens ;  but  for  His 
heart  we  search  vainly  in  the  bewildering  labyrinths  of  external  nature.  As  the 
intellect  spells  out  each  single  word  that  tells  it  of  the  thoughts  of  God,  the  heart 
remains  too  often  unsatisfied,  and  cries  aloud  with  bewildered  Job,  "  Oh  that  I  knew 
where  I  might  find  Him !  "  Like  some  fainting  and  forlorn  wanderer  in  a  parched 
and  arid  desert,  the  heart  still  yearns  for  "  the  fountain  of  living  waters,"  still  cries 
aloud,  '*  I  thirst,  I  thirst."  Unable  to  recognize  its  true  God,  its  real  Father,  in 
those  hard,  unpitying  laws  which  science  reveals,  the  heart  of  man  cries  despair- 
ingly, like  its  great  Lord  on  Calvary,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken 
me  ?  "  Now  the  teaching  of  Christ's  life  and  death  is  that  God  has  a  heart  as  well 
as  a  mind ;  that,  notwithstanding  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  love  is  the  source 
and  root  of  all  things — stronger  than  hate,  mightier  than  sin,  more  enduring  than 
hell.  Christianity  dares  to  go  down  into  the  lowest  hell  of  degradation,  and  preach 
the  everlasting  gospel  to  souls  fast  bound  in  the  misery  and  iron  of  inveterate  evil. 
In  order  to  meet  our  very  sorest  needs,  our  religion  reveals  a  Being  who,  needing 
nothing  Himself,  finds  His  deepest  happiness  in  perpetually  giving.  Christianity 
boldly  declares  the  naturalness  of  self-sacrifice  in  God ;  for  this,  surely,  is  the  meaning 
of  the  declaration  that  M  God  is  love."  And  thus  entrenched  for  ever  in  the  very 
heart  of  God,  the  Christian  spirit  is  not  dismayed  either  at  the  stony-hearted  apathy 
of  nature  or  the  manifold  activity  of  the  powers  of  evil.  Even  as  the  Christian 
pilgrim  sinks  down  fainting  in  some  cheerless  wilderness,  he  is  for  ever  heard 
exclaiming  with  one  of  old,  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?"  {Alex.  H. 
Craufurd,  M.A.)  Self -renouncement  through  the  Cross: — I.  The  nature  op  his 
•lobxino.     And  the  word  itself  is  for  most  of  us,  at  first  thought,  of  evil  odour  and 


otip.  vi.]  GALATIAN9.  581 

association.  For  where  men  and  women  have  been  given  to  boast  and  glory,  it  hai 
ordinarily  been  assumed  to  be  the  outworking  of  personal  pride  or  the  dictate  of 
personal  vanity,  a  pretension  to  greatness  or  an  aping  of  superiority  that  most  men 
and  moralists  have  resented  as  offensive  and  loved  to  discipline  with  contempt  and 
humiliation.  Now,  I  do  not  deny  that  there  is  a  kind  (I  will  not  say  a  degree)  of 
that  self-appreciation,  right  and  proper,  not  to  be  repressed  in  ourselves  or 
censured  in  our  neighbours ;  but  in  practice  about  one  of  the  best  safeguards  in 
young  or  old,  for  nobility  and  purity  of  character.  A  man  should  always  have  so 
high  an  opinion  of  his  own  honour  that  he  would  not  stoop  to  dishonour ;  and  so 
good  an  estimate  of  hi<?  own  worth  that  he  will  scorn  to  degrade  himself  by  a  mean 
or  vulgar  or  discreditable  action.  But  tbat  opinion  we  all  have  a  right  to  form  of 
ourselves,  simply  as  men,  apart  from  any  circumstances  peculiar  to  us  personally. 
Now,  that  is  what  we  call  the  self-conscious  type  of  glorying,  which  you  know  is 
very  common,  and  is  not  by  any  means  an  insignificant  force  and  factor  in  society, 
and  among  the  ordinary  working  motives  of  men.  And  there  are  at  least  two 
natural  checks  to  it  which  we  must  mention,  though  only  incidentally  and  on  our 
path  to  higher  truths.  First,  consider  the  inconceivable  littleness  of  the  very  best 
that  you  or  I  can  be  or  do,  compared  with  the  immensities  around  us,  in  which  we 
are  less  than  a  speck  upon  the  mountain.  "  What  impression  do  I  make  in 
Europe  ?  "  inquired  a  petty  chief  in  the  centre  of  Africa,  from  a  daring  traveller 
who  visited  his  hut.  Surrounded  by  barbaric  honours,  he  little  thought  that  two 
hundred  miles  away  they  had  never  heard  his  name.  But,  again,  remember  that 
what  distinguishing  qualities  may  be  yours  admit  of  two  interpretations.  Either 
you  may  regard  them  as  lifting  you  up  to  superior  honour,  in  which  case  of  course 
you  glory  ;  or  you  may  think  of  them  as  burdening  you  with  unusual  responsibility, 
which  aspect  of  the  matter  can  surely  only  work  humility.  For  if  God  Almighty 
has  given  you  peculiar  endowments  of  mind  or  property,  or  appointed  you  a  place 
where  in  some  measure  you  will  be  the  light  and  leader  of  men,  ah  1  my  friend,  let 
others  think  it  a  glorious  thing  to  be  the  pilot  of  a  vessel  amid  the  cruel  rocks  and 
breakers,  where  the  safety  of  five  hundred  lives  may  depend  upon  your  skill ;  or  the 
captain  of  an  army,  where  the  destruction  of  tens  of  thousands  may  result  from 
one  trivial  blunder.  But  for  you,  if  in  society  you  are  in  any  sense  a  pilot  or  a 
captain,  to  strut  in  conscious  self -appreciation,  is  to  show  yourself  unworthy  of  the 
trust,  incapable  of  realizing  the  responsibility,  and  self-condemned  of  moral 
inferiority  before  the  eye  of  men.  God  forbid  that  in  aught  pertaining  to  myself 
I  should  glory.  However,  I  find  there  is  a  saving  clause  in  our  text — "  Save  in  the 
Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ" — which  redeems  the  matter  of  glorying  from 
unqualified  condemnation.  Glorying,  when  selfish  or  in  the  least  tainted  with 
selfishness,  is  contemptible ;  when  it  is  unselfish,  it  may  simply  be  sublime.  To 
take  a  simple  example.  Have  you  never  known  some  leal-hearted  old  nurse,  for 
instance,  who  in  the  days  of  her  infancy  attended  some  little  boy  for  pay,  and  gave 
him  besides  a  true  affection  that  could  not  be  rewarded  by  the  gold  she  got  then 
or  ever  for  her  services.  He  grew  up  in  her  hands,  and  passed  out  to  a  brilliant 
career  at  school,  in  college,  and  in  the  world.  Those  old  affectionate  eyes  followed 
his  bright  course  day  by  day.  He  was  no  child  of  hers.  He  was  never  likely  to 
lift  her  from  her  lowly  station.  She  had  no  claim  or  hope  to  share  his  renown. 
But  every  hour  his  name  was  on  her  lips ;  every  paper  was  searched  with  eager 
hope  to  find  some  mention  of  his  praise ;  and  when  it  comes  on  to  the  hour  of  her 
sickness  and  pain  and  death  (I  am  not  imagining  a  story),  the  message  from  the 
far-away  place  of  his  fame  will  strengthen  her  heart  for  the  last  struggle,  and  the 
thought  that  he  will  come  to  follow  her  hearse  forecasts  a  brightness  on  her  grave. 
The  old  creature  unselfishly  glories  in  him  who  was  her  charge,  and  that  boasting 
is  not  despicable,  but  humanly  beautiful  and  even  grand.  So,  who  does  not  know 
that  "  the  poor  swearing  soldier  "  may  come  bo  to  glory  in  his  country's  flag,  and 
his  regiment's  honour,  and  his  captain's  renown,  that  he  will  step  forward  to  be 
shot  down  into  the  ditch,  that  unpraised  and  unnoticed  there  his  body  may  support 
the  feet  of  gallant  comrades  on  their  way  to  victory.  His  glorying  is  unselfish,  and 
for  that  reason  not  despicable,  but  sublime.  And  I  am  deeply  convinced,  brethren, 
that  no  life  of  yours  or  mine  can  ever  be  so  fine  and  potent  as  it  is  capable  of 
becoming,  so  long  as  it  contents  itself  by  merely  restraining  this  Galatian  vanity, 
and  does  not  go  on  to  replace  it  by  apostolic  enthusiasm.  In  other  words,  to  make 
the  best  of  our  lives,  they  must  be  utterly  consecrated  to  some  cause  outside  them- 
selves. H.  We  pass  on  to  consider  the  basis  or  subject  of  the  apostle's 
GLOBTisa.     "I  glory  in  nothing  but  a  cross."    But  this  paradox,  though  at  the 


133  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yu 

time  a"  stumbling-block"  and  "foolishness,"  is  by  no  means  a  permanent  difficulty 
of  the  gospel.  For  often  and  often  throughout  the  course  of  history  you  find  things 
that  visibly  were  weak  and  contemptible  transfigured  by  splendid  principles  behind 
them  into  a  glory  that  has  burned  their  image  on  the  minds  of  men  for  ever.  A 
Bimple  example  will  serve.  One  of  the  notable  traditions  of  the  world  is  that  of 
the  gallant  burgher  of  Flensburg,  who,  on  his  way  to  have  his  battle-wounds 
dressed,  paused,  with  Sidney's  very  exclamation,  "  Thy  need  is  greater  than  mine," 
to  empty  the  contents  of  his  own  flask  into  the  lips  of  a  dying  enemy.  But  perhaps 
you  have  heard  how,  when  his  noble  offer  of  help  was  replied  to  only  by  a  desperate 
wound  from  the  hand  of  him  whom  he  was  denying  himself  to  befriend,  he  still 
persisted  in  his  mercy ;  and  just  muttering,  "  Rascal,  I  would  have  given  you  the 
whole  bottle,  but  now  you  shall  only  have  the  half,"  drained  off  a  part  himself,  and 
with  the  rest  still  eased  the  thirst  of  his  unworthy  foe.  The  wooden  bottle,  pierced 
with  an  arrow,  which  his  king,  on  making  him  a  noble,  gave  him  as  his  armorial 
bearings,  was  itself  of  no  great  concern.  But  behind  that  trifle,  you  see,  there  lay 
a  deed  and  a  principle  which  have  lifted  it  among  the  noblest  emblems  of  chivalry, 
and  made  it  a  thing  in  which  the  hero's  sons  might  "glory,"  while  a  whisper  of  his 
deed  lingered  in  tradition  or  a  tinge  of  his  blood  was  in  the  veins  of  men.  But 
what  are  those  transfiguring  principles  behind  the  symbol  ?  Of  these  two  principles , 
love  and  sacrifice,  the  Cross  is  the  external  token,  and  from  them,  for  the  apostle 
and  all  men,  it  derived  its  meaning  and  its  glory.     1.  Love.    2.  Sacrifice.    III.  But 

now,    IN   WHAT   SENSE   WAS  THE   WORLD   CRUCIFIED   TO   THE   APOSTLE,   AND    HE    TO    THE 

world,  by  devotion  to  the  Cross  op  the  Savioub  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  this 
language  ?  Well,  I  fancy  we  have  all  seen,  in  common  life,  something  very  like 
it ;  and  borrowing  an  illustration,  it  may  be  possible  to  paint  the  truth  in  other 
colours  than  its  own.  Perhaps  you  have  known  some  young  neighbour  of  yours 
very  fond  of  singing,  very  fond  of  reading,  very  fond  of  drawing  and  sketching,  and 
passionately  fond  of  society.  She  is  now  only  a  few  years  older,  nothing  more.  But 
how  comes  it  that  the  only  songs  she  cares  for  now  are  simple  lullabies ;  and  all 
the  pictures  she  makes  are  little  rapid  ones,  to  be  crushed  the  next  hour  by  baby 
fingers ;  and  tales  of  half  a  page  are  her  only  literature  ?  Besides,  she  does  not 
now  much  care  for  society.  There  is  a  transformation,  and  by  that  infant  life 
given  in  charge  to  her  the  world  that  once  was  hers  is  become  dead  to  her  and  she 
dead  to  the  world.  Is  not  this  something  akin  to  the  great  apostle's  transforma- 
tion? I  repeat  that  the  problem  of  the  Christian  life  for  you  and  me  is  likely 
somewhat  different  to  what  it  was  for  this  first  great  missionary.  Him  the  Cross 
of  Christ  severed  off  entirely  from  the  world's  pleasures  and  business.  You  and  me 
it  sends  back  with  purified  motives  to  the  world's  pleasures  and  business.  The 
question  is,  In  what  way  should  I  be  dead  to  the  world,  and  the  world  dead  to  me? 
One  often  wonders  why  it  is  that  men  and  women,  capable  of  such  high  and  varied 
enjoyments  and  with  things  so  beautiful  and  good  around  them,  are  yet  able  on  the 
whole  to  enjoy  life  so  little,  and  in  grasping  natural  good,  find  it  become  ashes  in 
their  hands ;  and  the  glory  of  what  they  coveted,  when  they  have  got  it,  becomes 
darkness  to  their  eyes.  I  do  not  believe  there  are  half  the  men  of  your  acquaint- 
ance who  have  tried  hard  to  make  the  most  of  the  world,  and  have  succeeded 
splendidly,  who,  if  asked  in  private  conference  seriously,  will  not  answer  that 
substantial  happiness  rarely  advanced  with  upward  movement;  and  that  their 
outward  triumphs  have  very  largely  been  inner  disappointment.  What  is  the 
meaning  of  that  old  lament  on  the  folly  of  the  sons  of  men  ?  Is  it  God's  way  of 
commentary  on  what  apparently  is  the  sentiment  of  our  text,  namely,  that  every 
man's  good  consists  in  dying  to  the  ordinary  affairs  of  time  ?  I  was  just  thinking 
over  these  commonplace  matters  last  night,  brethren,  when,  looking  out  of  my  own 
window,  I  saw  a  dark  crescent  creeping  over  the  surface  of  our  lovely  full  moon ; 
on  and  on  it  spread,  till  it  blotted  out  her  whole  mild  light,  leaving  her  a  big  ashy 
ball  hanging  out  from  the  sky,  and  the  earth  in  comparative  darkness.  The  fault 
of  last  night's  eclipse  is  not  altogether  to  be  charged  upon  the  beautiful  moon.  It 
was  our  own  earth  that  swung  itself  in  between  her  and  the  sun,  preventing  the 
solar  rays  from  getting  at  our  attendant,  and  then,  of  course,  she  had  a  natural 
revenge  upon  us,  in  not  being  able  to  reflect  them  back  upon  ourselves  again.  But 
the  darkness  of  the  moon  was  just  our  own  shadow  falling  upon  her  surface,  and 
blotting  out  her  beauty.  Brethren,  I  could  not  help  feeling  it  was  u  symbol  of  what 
often  happens  in  my  own  life  and  that  of  thousands  about  me.  This  belief  of  my 
heart  never  wavers,  that  God  Almighty  has  made  all  things  of  which  the  world  is 
eompo-  ed  to  bless  and  please  and  gladden  the  lives  of  His  dear  children.    His  lov« 


chap,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  63g 

is  reflected  from  every  one  of  them.  But  we  fling  upon  them  the  shadow  of  our 
own  selfishness  and  vices,  and  then,  in  return,  they  throw  hack  upon  our  hearts 
the  dark  eclipse-shade  of  sorrow  and  disappointment.  For  instance,  we  win 
wealth :  and  if  we  got  it  righteously,  and  used  it  nobly  and  usefully,  let  us  not  talk 
the  common  cant  about  its  powerlessness  to  yield  a  pleasure  that  will  not  cloy,  and 
afford  a  true  and  solid  satisfaction.  But  we  get  it  by  "  shady  dealings,"  or  we  use 
it  selfishly,  to  the  hardening  of  our  own  hearts,  or  cruelly,  to  the  injury  instead  of  the 
blessing  of  others ;  and  is  it  wonderful  that  God's  love  is  not  reflected  in  the  glitter 
of  our  gold,  and  that  the  light  of  our  prosperity  is  darkness  f  How  much  of  the 
eclipse  of  our  lawful  joy  is  the  shadow  of  our  own  guilt  and  selfishness  f  But  I 
repeat  again,  it  is  not  necessary,  or  even  probable,  that  your  call,  like  that  of  Saul 
of  Tarius,  is  to  become,  as  if  crucified  by  Christ's  Cross,  dead  to  secular  aims, 
common  pleasures,  and  domestic  comforts  and  attachments.  Your  vocation  may 
be  to  live  in  and  enjoy  these  for  your  own  good  and  the  benefit  of  men.  And  I 
know  of  no  lawful  business,  the  lowliest,  that  cannot  be  so  administered  as  to  do 
essential  service  to  that  gospel  cause  which  is  wide  enough  (if  we  were  wide  enough 
to  understand  it)  to  embrace  all  tendencies  of  good  to  the  souls  or  the  bodies  of 
men ;  whose  Author  not  merely  taught  the  consciences,  but  fed  the  hunger  of  Hig 
followers,  and  to  which  every  part  of  man  is  redeemed  and  preoious.  (John 
Irwin,    31. A.)  False    grounds    of   boasting: — Putting    out    of    sight    their 

special  reference,  it  will  be  a  legitimate  use  of  these  words  to  regard  them,  in  a 
general  view,  as  condemnatory  of  all  vainglory,  as  conveying  to  all  persons  who 
would  boast  themselves  in  things  unworthy  to  be  made  ground  of  exultation.    It  is 
natural  to  man,  in  entire  accordance  with  the  law  of  his  corrupt  nature,  thus  to 
jiory.    He  will  pride  himself  on  something  that  he  has,  or  does,  or  is,  too  often 
unduly  valuing  himself  on  the  score  of  it.    Each  human  excellence,  each  worldly 
advantage,  will,  in  turn,  serve  to  elate  the  mind  of  its  possessor.     One  man  will 
esteem  himself  on  account  of  his  personal  qualities,  moral  or  intellectual ;  another 
will  regard  with  complacency  his  rank  and  influence,  his  wealth,  or  other  favour- 
able  outward  circumstance.    All  which  various  things,  unsuitable  wherein  to  glory, 
are  briefly  summed  up  in  the  words  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  and  at  the  same  time 
contrasted  with  that  which  is  the  one  good  and  lawful  ground  of  all  human  boast- 
ing :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  :  let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let 
the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might ;  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches ;  but 
let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  this,  that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  Me,  that  I 
am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving-kindness,  judgment,  and  righteousness  in  the 
earth  "  (ix.  23,  24).     Thus,  no  human  worth  or  greatness,  no  earthly  satisfaction  or 
comforts,  nothing  in  the  shape  of  good,  that  our  present  mortal  life  can  yield,  may 
be  acquiesced  in  as  an  end,  and  rejoiced  in  for  its  own  sake ;  on  the  contrary, 
man's  real  satisfaction  and  rejoicing  must  be  in  his  God.      As  a  sinner,  more 
especially,  his  joy  will  consist  herein,  that  he  has  "  seen  the  salvation  of  God"  as 
revealed  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  language  of  exultation 
most  becoming  to  him  will  be  that  uttered  of  old  by  the  blessed  Virgin :  "  My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour."     But, 
although  the  talents,  of  whatever  kind,  which  God  has  given  to  each  of  us,  do  not 
afford  ground  or  excuse  for  self-complacency,  still,  rightly  used,  there  is  a  lawful 
satisfaction  in  their  possession.     Recognized  as  from  the  hand  of  God,  enjoyed  in 
His  fear  and  love,  and  diligently  improved  to  His  honour  and  glory,  they  may  well 
be  rejoiced  in  as  the  instruments  of  our  happiness.    It  is  only  when  they  are 
thanklessly  received,  or  used  without  reference  to  the  purpose  of  Him  who  bestowed 
them,  that  they  lose  their  value  to  us,  or  become  worse  than  valueless.    And  the 
guilt  of  such  ingratitude  is  only  equalled  by  the  folly  of  men's  priding  and  vaunt- 
ing themselves  in  the  possession  of  that  of  which  they  have  no  certain  tenure,  and 
<vhicb,  at  any  moment,  may,  in  just  judgment,  be  withdrawn  from  them.     (John 
Buhner,  B.D.,  Mus.  Bac.)        No  Christianity  without  the  Gross: — That  celebrated 
divine,  Jonathan  Edwards,  in  giving  his  interesting  diary  of  the  life  of  Brainerd, 
the  great  American  apostle,  who  was  the  means  of  converting  thousands  of  the 
wild  Indians,  records  that  for  some  time  poor  Brainerd,  in  simplicity  and  not  in 
guile,  thought  that  the  best  way  to  make  men  sober  was  by  preaching  to  them  the 
attributes  of  God,  laying  hold  of  the  functions  of  conscience,  and  keeping  the  Cross 
in  the  background.    It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  he  found  the  whole  system  a 
failure ;  he  could  not  produce  one  sober  man.     "  Then,"  he  says,   "  I  bethought 
me  that  I  would  go  and  preach  Jesus  Christ;   and  many  a  hard  face  relaxed, 
many  an   eye    shed  tears   that  had   never  wept  before,  and  I  found   that  tha 


£34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

best  way  to  make  men  sober  was  to  make  them  spiritual;"  and  from 
henceforth  he  gloried  in  and  held  forth  nothing  but  the  Cross.  Mistaken 
concealment  of  the  Cross : — It  is  recorded  of  some  of  the  Romish  missionaries, 
that  in  their  endeavours  to  bring  over  the  heathen  to  Christianity,  they  scrupu- 
lously kept  the  crucifixion  out  of  sight,  considering  that  such  a  topio  would 
create  prejudices  with  those  whom  they  wished  to  convince ;  and  it  is  well  known 
that  the  Moravian  missionaries — men  of  extraordinary  piety  and  zeal — laboured  for 
a  long  time  in  Greenland  without  at  least  giving  prominence  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Atonement,  believing  it  necessary  to  clear  the  way,  and  prepare  men's  minds, 
before  they  advanced  the  truth  of  Christ's  death — a  truth  so  likely,  as  they  thought, 
to  give  fatal  offence,  even  to  the  most  degraded  and  barbarous.  In  each  case  the 
same  feeling  was  at  work — the  feeling  that  there  is  something  very  humiliating  in 
the  Cross,  and  that  human  reason,  and  yet  more,  human  pride  must  recoil  from 
the  thought  of  being  saved  by  One  who  died  as  a  malefactor ;  and  you  must  all  be 
aware  that  this  doctrine  is  not  one  which  commends  itself  at  once  to  those  whom 
it  promises  to  rescue ;  on  the  contrary,  it  almost  invariably  excites  opposition, 
because  instead  of  flattering  any  one  passion  it  demands  the  subjugation  of  all. 
Yet  Christianity  is  valuable  and  glorious  on  those  very  accounts  on  which,  in  com. 
mon  estimation,  it  must  move  the  antipathies  of  its  hearers.  He  who  keeps  back 
the  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  is  all  the  while  withholding  that  which  gives  its  majesty 
to  the  Christian  religion,  and  is  striving  to  apologise  for  its  noblest  distinction. 
Instead  of  admitting  what  may  be  styled  "  the  shame  of  the  Cross,"  we  should 
boldly  affirm  and  exhibit  its  glory.  The  doctrine  has  only  to  be  fairly  exhibited 
and  fully  expanded,  in  order  to  its  attracting  the  warmest  admiration.  (H.  Mel- 
vill,  B.D.)  Meanness  of  self -boasting  : — If  I  were  a  pupil  of  Titian,  and  he  should 
design  my  picture,  and  sketch  it  for  me,  and  look  over  my  work  every  day,  and 
make  suggestions,  and  then,  when  I  had  exhausted  my  skill,  he  should  take  the 
brush  and  give  the  finishing  touches,  bringing  out  a  part  here  and  there,  and  making 
the  whole  glow  with  beauty,  and  then  I  should  hang  it  upon  the  wall,  and  call  it 
mine,  what  a  meanness  it  would  be  1  When  life  is  the  picture,  and  Christ  is  the 
Designer  and  Master,  what  unutterable  meanness  it  is  to  allow  all  the  excellences 
to  be  attributed  to  ourselves !  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Christ  crucified  the  preacher'* 
theme  : — The  pulpit  is  intended  to  be  a  pedestal  for  the  cross,  though,  alas !  even 
the  cross  itself,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is  sometimes  used  as  a  mere  pedestal  for  the 
preaoher's  fame.  We  may  roll  the  thunders  of  eloquence,  we  may  dart  the  corusca- 
tions of  genius,  we  may  scatter  the  flowers  of  poetry,  we  may  diffuse  the  light  of 
science,  we  may  enforce  the  precepts  of  morality,  from  the  pulpit ;  but  if  we  do  not 
make  Christ  the  great  subject  of  our  preaching,  we  have  forgotten  our  errand,  and 
shall  do  no  good.  Satan  trembles  at  nothing  but  the  Cross:  at  this  he  does 
tremble ;  and  if  we  would  destroy  his  power,  and  extend  that  holy  and  benevolent 
kingdom,  which  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  must  be  by 
means  of  the  Cross.  (J.  A.  James.)  Glorying  in  the  Cross: — The  doctrine 
of  the  text  is,  that  the  death  of  Christ,  as  an  expiatory  sacrifice,  is  the  glory 
of  the  true  Christian.  This  is  that  great  truth  which  there  have  been  so 
many  strenuous  efforts  in  all  ages  to  subvert.  At  first  it  was  opposed  by 
Jewish  sealots,  and  by  Gentile  philosophers ;  and  at  present  it  is  equally 
opposed  by  pharisaic  speculatists  in  religion,  who  have  no  adequate  views  of 
the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  rights  and  honour  of  the  Divine  government.  It  is,  how- 
ever,  the  key-stone  of  the  Christian  arch ;  and  it  therefore  becomes  us  to  hold  it  in 
its  place.  I.  Reasons  fob  globyinq  in  the  Cross.  1.  We  glory  in  the  doctrine  of 
the  Cross — the  justification  of  guilty  men  through  a  propitiatory  sacrifice — because 
of  its  antiquity.  Antiquity  is  no  excuse  for  error.  Its  hoariness,  like  that  of  age, 
cannot  of  itself  claim  reverence.  The  oldness  of  an  opinion  is  no  proof  of  its  truth. 
No  opinion  which  affects  the  foundations  of  a  religion,  or  stands  connected  with  a 
sinner's  acceptance  with  God,  can  be  true,  if  it  be  new ;  if  it  be  not  as  old  as  the 
human  race  itself,  considered  as  fallen  creatures.  We  glory  in  the  antiquity  of  this 
doctrine.  It  was  taught  by  patriarchs  and  prophets ;  the  law  of  ceremonies  was  its 
grand  hieroglyphical  record ;  the  first  sacrifices  were  its  types  ;  the  first  awakened 
sinner,  with  his  load  of  guilt,  fell  upon  this  rock,  and  was  supported ;  and  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  shall  the  last  saved  sinner  be  raised  to  glory.  2.  We  glory  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Cross,  because  it  forms  an  important  part  of  the  revelation  of  the 
New  Testament.  This  is  indeed  our  principal  reason  lor  boasting  in  it ;  for  that 
*rhich  is  revealed  by  God  must  be  truth  and  goodness.  3.  We  glory  in  the  Cross  of 
Christ  as  affording  the  only  sure  ground  of  confidence  to  a  penitent  sinner.    When 


iOUf.  tl]  6ALATIANS.  535 

preached  to  the  broken  in  spirit  it  strikes  hope  into  the  deepest  darkness  of  despair. 
It  is  life  to  the  dead.  4.  We  glory  in  the  Cross  because  of  its  moral  effects.  II. 
Let  ns  attempt  to  derive  some  improvement  from  the  whole.  1.  Is  there  any  per- 
son here,  who,  allured  by  the  infidelity  or  semi-infidelity  of  the  age,  has  denied  or 
derided  this  doctrine  ?  You  are  ashamed  of  the  faith  of  your  forefathers ;  and  what 
do  you  glory  in  now?  In_ your  new  rational  discoveries  ?  2.  But  I  address  more 
who  hold  and  respect  this  doctrine.  But  do  you  still  cherish  the  love  of  sin, 
and  live  under  its  power  ?  0  the  intolerable  hell  of  the  reflection,  that  you 
have  Blighted  a  Bedeemer  1  8. 1  grant  that  practically  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross 
is  too  often  made  to  encourage  indifference  to  religion.  4.  Lastly,  I  recommend  you 
to  consider,  that  the  grand  practical  effect  we  are  to  expect  from  the  death  of  Christ, 
after  we  have  received  remission  of  sins  through  His  blood,  is  to  become  crucified 
to  the  world ;  and  that  the  world  should  be  crucified  to  us.  Happy  state  of  those 
who  yield  to  the  full  influence  of  the  Cross  !  (Richard  Watson.)  The  Cross  a 
reality  in  our  faith : — Outwardly  we  make  much  of  the  cross  ;  we  place  it,  and  we 
rightly  place  it  (for  we  are  not  ashamed  of  the  symbol  of  our  salvation),  over  the 
sacred  table  of  our  Lord,  remembering  the  sacrifice  of  His  death.  We  carve  it,  in 
polished  marble  or  beautiful  stone,  for  the  gables  of  our  churches  or  the  graves 
which  contain  the  blessed  dead.  We  emboss  it  in  wood  or  ivory  on  our  prayer- 
books.  We  wear  it,  in  gold,  or  silver,  or  jet,  or  bronze,  on  our  breast.  The  Vic- 
toria Cross  is  our  most  prized  decoration.  The  Geneva  Cross  protects  our  ambu- 
lances. The  Church  of  England  Temperance  Society  adopts  the  cross  as  its  badge. 
A  combination  of  three  crosses  makes  up  the  Union  Jack,  our  national  standard. 
Our  prints  are  set  in  cross  frames.  All  sorts  of  notices  have  the  cross  for  their 
border.  Very  many,  following  the  early  Christians,  use  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  the 
midst  of  the  congregation.  Lovely  flowers  and  ripened  corn  are  put  together  into 
this  shape  for  the  harvest  ornamentation  of  the  sanctuary ;  and  pictures  of  our 
dying  Lord,  as  He  hung  for  us  upon  the  tree  of  shame,  are  common  things  in  our 
homes.  Yet,  after  all,  do  we,  as  a  nation,  do  we,  as  a  Church,  do  we,  as  individual 
Christians,  really  glory  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?    I.  Is  faith  in  an 

UXSEEN    SaVIOXJB  INFLUENCING    THOROUGHLY,  OB  AT  LEAST  MOKE  AND  MOBE,  YOUB  DAILY 

life  and  convebsation  ?  The  fact  that  Christ  died  for  us — for  you,  for  me — is  just 
as  true  and  certain  for  us  as  it  was  for  St.  Paul.  But  do  we,  as  he  did,  make  Christ 
the  great  reality  of  the  spiritual  world,  and  determine  thankfully  to  live  and  die  for 
Him  ?  H.  Does  the  Cross  become  the  true  measure  fob  odb  self-congratula- 
tion ?  How  could  we  plume  ourselves  on  our  cleverness,  or  our  quick  progress,  or 
oar  skill  in  musio,  or  our  power  of  language,  or  the  influence  which  we  have  gained 
by  money,  or  by  eloquence,  or  by  social  talents,  if  we  did  but  recollect  that  the 
triumph  of  the  Son  of  God  was  won  by  His  emptying  Himself  of  His  glory  and 
bending  to  the  lowest  place — the  death  of  the  slave  and  the  malefaotor,  apparently 
smitten  of  God  and  afflicted  by  the  hiding  away  of  His  face  ?  Truly,  the  higher  we 
are,  the  more  we  are  to  humble  ourselves,  in  order  to  grow  like  unto  Him.  III.  Is 
the  Cross  abasing  us,  specially  in  the  place  where  God's  honour  dwelleth,  and 
wherein  the  presence  of  our  once  crucified,  now  glorious  Lord,  does  chiefly  manifest 
itself  ?  IV.  Is  the  Cross  my  secret  joy  ?  Does  it  really  represent  the  attitude  of 
my  soul  towards  God  T  How  deeply  many  of  us  must  feel,  that  we  want  less  of  the 
Cross  on  the  heart,  and  more  of  it  in  the  heart  1  We  want,  not  so  muoh  the  display 
of  the  form,  as  the  proof  that  we  are  not  ashamed  of  the  thing,  when  we  are  with 
the  men  and  women  of  the  world.  V.  Is  the  Cross  our  chief  help  in  trouble 
— that  whereon  we  can  stay  ourselves  when  all  our  earthly  friends  are  taken  away — 
because  it  invites  us  in  our  sorrow  to  "  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings  "  ?  (Canon 
G.  E.  Jelf.)  Three  crucifixions ; — I.  Christ  crucified.  In  this  Paul  gloried  so 
as  to  glory  in  nothing  else,  for  he  viewed  it — 1.  As  a  display  of  the  Divine  character 
(2  Cor.  v.  19).  2.  As  the  manifestation  of  the  Saviour's  love  (John  xv.  13).  3.  As 
the  putting  away  of  sin  by  atonement  (Heb.  ix.  26).  4.  As  the  breathing  of  hope, 
peace,  and  joy  to  the  desponding  soul.  5.  As  the  great  means  of  touching  hearts 
and  changing  lives.  6.  As  depriving  death  of  terror,  seeing  Jesus  died.  7.  As  en- 
suring heaven  to  all  believers.  In  any  one  of  these  points  of  view,  the  Cross  is  a 
pillar  of  light,  flaming  with  unutterable  glory.  II.  The  world  crucified.  As  the 
result  of  seeing  all  things  in  the  light  of  the  Cross,  he  saw  the  world  to  be  like  a 
felon  executed  upon  a  cross.  1.  Its  character  condemned  (John  xii.  31).  2.  Its 
judgment  contemned.  Who  cares  for  the  opinion  of  a  gibbeted  felon?  3.  Its 
teachings  despised.  What  authority  can  it  have  ?  4.  Its  pleasures,  honours,  trea- 
sures rejected.     5.  Its  pursuits,  maxims,  and  spirit  cast  out.    6.  Its  threatening! 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

and  blandishments  made  nothing  of.  7.  Itself  soon  to  pass  away,  its  glory  and  its 
fashion  fading.  IIL  The  believer  croctfted.  To  the  world,  Paul  was  no  better 
than  a  man  crucified.  If  faithful,  a  Christian  may  expect  to  be  treated  as  only  fit 
to  be  put  to  a  shameful  death.  He  will  probably  find — 1.  Himself  at  first  bullied, 
threatened,  and  ridiculed.  2.  His  name  and  houour  held  in  small  repute  because 
of  his  association  with  the  godly  poor.  3.  His  actions  and  motives  misrepresented. 
4.  Himself  despised  as  a  sort  of  madman,  or  of  doubtful  intellect.  5.  His  teaching 
described  as  exploded,  dying  out,  &c.  6.  His  way  and  habits  reckoned  to  be  puri- 
tanic and  hypocritical.  7.  Himself  given  up  as  irreclaimable,  and  therefore  dead 
to  society.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  us  glory  in  the  Cross,  because  it  gibbets  the  world's 
glory,  and  honour,  and  power.  2.  Let  us  glory  in  the  Cross,  when  men  take  from 
us  all  other  glory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Reasons  for  glorying  in  the  Cross  : — It  is 
a  subject  of  rejoicing  and  glorying  that  we  have  such  a  Saviour.  The  world  looked 
upon  Him  with  contempt ;  and  the  Cross  was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew,  and 
folly  to  the  Greek.  But  to  the  Christian  this  Cross  is  the  subject  of  glorying.  It  ia 
so  because — (1)  of  the  love  of  Him  who  suffered  there ;  (2)  of  the  purity  and  holi- 
ness of  His  character,  for  the  innocent  died  there  for  the  guilty ;  (3)  of  the  honour 
there  put  on  the  law  of  God  by  His  dying  to  maintain  it  unsullied  ;  (4)  of  the  recon- 
ciliation there  made  for  sin,  accomplishing  what  could  be  done  by  no  other  obla- 
tion, and  by  no  power  of  man  ;  (5)  of  the  pardon  there  procured  for  the  guilty ;  (6) 
of  the  fact  that  through  it  we  become  dead  to  the  world,  and  are  made  alive  untc 
God ;  (7)  of  the  support  and  consolation  which  go  from  that  Cross  to  sustain  us  in 
trial  *,  and  (8)  of  the  fact  that  it  procured  for  us  admission  into  heaven,  a  title  to 
the  world  of  glory.  All  is  glory  around  the  Cross.  It  was  a  glorious  Saviour  who 
died ;  it  was  glorious  love  that  led  Him  to  die  ;  it  was  a  glorious  object  to  redeem  a 
world ;  and  it  is  unspeakable  glory  to  which  He  will  raise  lost  and  ruined  sinners  by 
His  death.  Oh,  who  would  not  glory  in  such  a  Saviour  !  (Albert  Barnes.)  The 
Cross  the  foundation  of  the  Bible : — If  you  have  not  yet  found  out  that  Christ 
crucified  is  the  foundation  of  the  whole  volume,  you  have  hitherto  read  your  Bible 
to  very  little  profit.  Your  religion  is  a  heaven  without  a  sun,  an  arch  without  a 
keystone,  a  compass  without  a  needle,  a  clock  without  spring  or  weights,  a  lamp 
without  oil.  It  will  not  comfort  you;  it  will  not  deliver  your  soul  from  hell. 
(Bishop  Ryle.)  The  glory  of  the  Cross: — Do  not  be  satisfied  with  so  many  others 
only  to  know  the  Cross  in  its  power  to  atone.  The  glory  of  the  Cross  is,  that  it  was 
not  only  to  Jesus  the  path  to  life,  but  that  each  moment  it  can  become  to  us  the 
power  that  destroys  sin  and  death,  and  keeps  us  in  the  power  of  the  eternal  life.  Learn 
from  your  Saviour  the  holy  art  of  using  it  for  this.  Faith  in  the  power  of  the  Cross 
and  its  victory  will  day  by  day  make  dead  the  deeds  of  the  body,  the  lusts  of  the 
fleBh.  This  faith  will  teach  you  to  count  the  Cross,  with  its  continual  death  to  self, 
all  your  glory.  Because  you  regard  the  Cross  not  as  one  who  is  still  on  the  way  to 
crucifixion,  with  the  prospect  of  a  painful  death,  but  as  one  to  whom  the  crucifixion 
is  past,  who  already  lives  in  Christ,  and  now  only  bears  the  Cross  as  the  blessed 
instrument  through  which  the  body  of  sin  is  done  away  (Kom.  vi.  6,  R.  V.).  The 
banner  under  which  complete  victory  over  sin  and  the  world  is  to  be  won  is  the 
Cross.  (Andrew  Murray.)  The  Cross  of  Christ : — And  we  reckon  it  of  importance, 
that  we  should  occasionally  shift  the  ground  of  debate  :  and  that  thus,  in  the  place 
of  admitting  what  may  be  styled,  "  the  shame  of  the  Cross,"  we  should  boldly  affirm 
and  exhibit  its  glory.  With  all  our  admissions,  that  at  the  first  hearing  there  would 
be  something  repulsive  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified ;  we  believe  that  this 
doctrine  has  only  to  be  fairly  exhibited  and  fully  expanded,  in  order  to  its 
attracting  the  warmest  admiration.  I.  The  reasons  why  wb  should  glory 
in  the  Cross  of  Christ.  H.  The  strength  op  the  particular  reason  by 
which  St.  Paul  justifies  his  boasting.  Now  we  need  hardly  observe  to  you, 
that  so  far  as  Christ  Jesus  Himself  was  concerned,  it  is  not  possible  to  com- 
pute what  may  be  called  the  humiliation  or  the  shame  of  the  Cross.  It 
is  altogether  beyond  our  power  to  form  any  adequate  conception  of  the  degree 
in  which  the  Mediator  humbled  Himself  when  born  of  a  woman,  and  taking 
part  of  flesh  and  blood.  We  read  nothing  of  shame  in  His  becoming  a  man ;  bat 
we  do  read  of  His  shame  as  dying  as  a  malefactor.  Indeed,  we  are  not  so  to  exult  as 
to  lose  those  feelings  of  godly  contrition  which  a  sight  of  the  cross  should  always 
produce.  But,  nevertheless,  though  of  all  men  perhaps  St.  Paul  was  the  least 
likely  to  forget  or  underrate  the  cause  of  sorrow  presented  by  the  Cross,  this  great 
apostle  could  speak  of  glorying  in  the  Cross — yea,  could  shun  as  a  great  sin,  tha 
glory wg  in  anything  beside.     Why  think  ye  was  this  ?    We  would  first  observe, 


tttt».  ti.]  QALATIANS.  537 

that  the  greater  the  humiliation  to  which  the  Son  of  God  submitted,  the  greater  ia 
the  demonstration  of  the  Divine  love  towards  man.  We  show  you,  then,  the  Cross  1 
Aye,  the  blazing  of  the  sun,  or  the  milder  shinings  of  the  moon,  or  the  processes  of 
vegetation,  or  the  soarings  of  mind,  are  not  a  thousandth  part  so  demonstrative  of 
the  love  in  which  sinners  are  beheld  as  this  emblem  of  shame,  this  memento  of 
ignominy.  We  proceed  to  observe  to  you,  that  although  to  the  eyes  of  sense  there 
be  nothing  but  shame  about  the  Cross,  yet  spiritual  discernment  proves  it  to  be  hung 
with  the  very  richest  triumphs.  It  is  necessary  to  be  admitted,  that  in  one  point  of 
▼iew  there  was  shame,  degradation,  and  ignominy  in  Christ  dying  on  the  cross  ;  but 
it  is  equally  certain  that  in  another  there  was  honour,  victory,  and  triumph.  We 
are  told  that  "  through  death  Jesus  Christ  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of 
death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  and  that  "  He  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  the  Cross."  We 
know  that  in  dying  the  Redeemer  broke  off  the  yoke  from  the  neck  of  the  human 
population,  wrenched  from  Satan  the  sceptre  which  he  had  long  wielded  as  the  god 
of  this  world,  and  scattered  the  seeds  of  immortality  amid  the  dust  of  the  sepul- 
chres. Indeed,  I  know  you  may  tell  me,  that  the  result  may  be  glorious,  and  yet 
the  means  through  which  it  is  effected  degraded  and  ignoble ;  and  we  can  well  be- 
lieve, that  had  the  Redeemer  appeared  at  the  head  of  the  heavenly  hosts  ;  had  He 
come  the  first  time  as  He  shall  the  second,  with  a  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of 
ministering  spirits  ;  and  had  He  met  Satan  and  his  angels  with  all  the  retinue  of 
evil,  and  overthrown  them  in  some  such  battle  as  that  of  Armageddon  in  the  last 
day ;  we  can  well  believe  that  those  who  now  see  little  but  shame  in  the  Cross  would 
have  exulted  in  the  victory  of  the  Cross.  Yet  what  is  called  shame  is  one  great  ele- 
ment of  glory.  It  would  have  been  comparatively  nothing,  that  as  the  leader  of  the 
celestial  army  Christ  should  have  overthrown  the  enemies  of  God  and  man.  The 
splendid  thing  is,  that  He  trod  the  wine-press  alone,  and  that  of  the  people  there 
was  with  Him  none.  To  have  destroyed  death  by  living  would  have  been  wonder- 
ful ;  but  to  have  destroyed  it  by  dying — oh,  this  is  the  prodigy  of  prodigies,  the 
glory  of  glories  1  But  hitherto  we  have  spoken  only  comparatively:  we  have  rather 
shown  that  we  can  have  no  such  great  cause  for  glorying  as  the  Cross,  than  that  we 
should  glory  in  nothing  but  the  Cross.  It  is  to  the  latter  extent  that  the  apostle 
carries  his  determination.  It  is  a  truth  which  we  have  frequently  laboured  to  set 
plainly  before  you,  that  we  are  indebted  to  the  mediation  of  Jesus  for  all  we  have  in 
the  present  life,  as  well  as  for  all  we  hope  for  in  the  next.  Yes,  man  of  science, 
thine  intellect  was  saved  for  thee  through  the  Cross !  Yes,  father  of  a  family, 
the  endearments  of  home  were  rescued  by  the  Cross  !  Yes,  admirer  of  nature,  the 
glorious  things  in  the  mighty  panorama  retain  their  place  through  the  erection  of 
the  Cross  1  Yes,  ruler  of  an  empire,  the  subordination  of  the  different  classes,  the 
links  of  society,  the  energies  of  government,  are  all  owing  to  the  Cross  !  And  when 
the  mind  passes  on  to  the  consideration  of  spiritual  benefits,  where  can  you  find  one 
not  connected  with  the  Cross  ?  If  we  can  affirm  all  this  of  the  Cross  (and  there  i3 
no  exaggeration,  for  every  blessing  we  have,  and  every  hope  we  possess,  is  derived 
to  ns  through  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mediator),  then  to  glory  in  the  Cross  is  to  glory 
that  God  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy ;  that  He  heareth  our  prayers ;  and 
that  to  understand,  to  know  Him  aright,  is  to  love  Him.  It  is  to  glory  that  there 
is  yet  fertility  in  the  soil,  yet  strength  in  the  intellect,  that  grace  is  bestowed  on  us 
here,  and  that  a  kingdom  is  ready  for  us  hereafter.  I  observe  in  the  last  place,  that 
there  is  a  special  reason  given  by  the  apostle  for  his  glorying  in  the  Cross;  and 
which,  though  perhaps  included  in  those  which  have  been  advanced,  yet  demands, 
from  its  importance,  a  brief  and  separate  consideration.  St.  Paul  gloried  in  the 
Cross,  because  by  it "  the  world  was  crucified  unto  him,  and  he  unto  the  world."  What 
are  we  to  understand  by  this  two-fold  crucifixion  ?  The  world  was  to  St.  Paul  as  a 
crucified  thing,  and  St.  Paul  was  to  the  world  as  a  crucified  thing.  They  were  dead 
one  to  the  other.  The  apostle  regarded  the  world,  with  its  pomps,  its  shows,  its 
pleasures,  its  riches,  its  honours,  with  no  other  feelings  than  those  with  which  he 
would  have  regarded  a  malefactor  fastened  to  a  cross,  and  whose  condition  could  pre- 
sent no  desire  for  participation ;  or  the  world  appeared  no  more  glorious,  no  mora 
attractive  to  Paul  than  it  would  to  a  man  in  the  agony  of  dissolution,  who,  sus 
pended  on  the  cross,  would  look  down  with  a  kind  of  insensibility  on  objects  which 
before  were  precious  in  his  sight.  Thus  the  world  was  to  the  apostle  as  a  crucified 
thing;  or,  to  express  the  same  idea  somewhat  differently,  the  apostle  was  to  tha 
world  as  a  crucified  man  :  so  that  if  we  put  away  the  metaphor,  the  thing  affirmed 
is,  that  St.  Paul  was  completely  a  new  creature,  with  affections  detached  from  things 
below,  and  fixed  on  things  above ;  and  he  ascribes  to  the  virtues  of  the  Cross  this 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [out.  ft 

change  in  himself,  and  then  considers  the  change  as  a  sufficient  vindication  of  his 
resolution,  that  he  would  glory  in  nothing  but  the  Cross.  For  a  moment  let  us 
examine  these  points ;  they  are  full  of  interesting  instruction.  It  is  one  of  the 
great  fruits  of  Christ's  passion  and  death,  that  the  life-giving  influences  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  are  shed  on  us  abundantly.  It  is,  therefore,  through  the  Cross  that  we  become 
new  creatures,  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world  crucified  unto  us ;  and  it  is  through 
the  sacrifice  presented  on  the  cross  that  those  influences  are  derived  to  us,  without 
which  they  could  do  nothing  for  our  moral  renovation.  There  is  more  to  be  said 
than  this.  Would  you  learn  to  despise  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  earth,  to  hate  sin 
and  to  withstand  evil  lusts  7  Then  must  you  be  much  on  the  mount  of  crucifixion  ; 
much  with  Jesus  in  His  last  struggle  with  evil.  Who  would  yield  to  a  corrupt  pas- 
sion, who  would  indulge  himself  in  unlawful  gratification,  who  would  hearken  to 
base  temptations  if  his  eye  were  on  Christ,  "  wounded  for  our  transgressions  and 
bruised  for  our  iniquities  "  ?  The  sight  of  Jesus  pierced  by  and  for  our  sins  is  the 
great  preservative  against  our  yielding  to  the  pleadings  of  corrupt  nature.  So  true 
is  it,  that  by  the  Cross  of  Christ  the  world  is  crucified  to  us,  and  we  unto  the  world. 
Can  a  stronger  reason  be  assigned  why  we  should  glory  in  the  Cross  of  the 
Redeemer  ?  By  nature  we  are  prisoners — we  would  glory  in  being  free ;  we  are 
powerless — we  would  glory  in  being  mighty ;  we  are  doomed  to  eternal  misery — we 
would  glory  in  being  heirs  of  happiness.  Liberty,  strength,  immortality,  all  flow  oat 
of  the  crucifixion  of  the  world  to  man,  and  of  man  to  the  world.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ : — To  glory  is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  propensities 
of  our  nature.  It  is  seen  in  every  class  of  society,  and  in  every  portion  of  the 
human  race.  From  the  highest  dignitary  to  the  lowest  beggar,  from  the  enlightened 
and  refined  citizen  to  the  savage  in  whose  mind  scarcely  a  spark  of  reason  appears, 
all  discover  something  in  which  they  think  they  can  glory.  And  in  what  do  they 
glory  ?  In  foolish  toys,  of  which  they  should  rather  be  ashamed  than  proud.  God 
designed  to  give  man  something  in  which  he  could  reasonably  glory :  He  gave  him 
"  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  meditation  will  be  devoted  to  the  examination 
of  the  new  right  of  glorying  which  has  been  granted  to  man.  On  this  subject  there 
are  two  opinions  :  one  is  the  apostle's  opinion,  which  we  shall  sustain.  The  other 
is  the  opinion  of  the  world,  which  we  shall  refute.  I.  The  apostle's  opinion.  1. 
The  first  reason  which  led  him  to  glory  in  the  Cross  was  because  he  saw  the 
character  and  glory  of  God  fully  displayed  in  it.  2.  But  if  St.  Paul  gloried  in  the 
Cross  of  Christ  because  it  revealed  to  him  all  the  glory  of  God,  he  gloried  in  it 
quite  as  much  because  it  taught  him  his  own  wretchedness.  Let  the  proudest  of 
men  draw  near ;  let  him  stand  at  the  foot  of  that  cross  erected  for  his  salvation, 
and  what  will  become  of  his  pride  ?  The  Cross  destroys  that  deceiving  glass  which 
magnifies  us  in  our  own  eyes.  3.  He  glories  in  it  especially  because  it  raises  him 
to  the  level  of  true  greatness.  4.  But  notice  the  motive  which  the  apostle  himself 
assigns.  "  God  forbid,"  he  says,  "  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  onto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world." 
This,  my  brethren,  is  indeed  a  glorious  advantage  of  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Yes,  my  brethren,  the  death  of  the  Bedeemer  is  the  only  thing  that  can  make  you 
hate  your  own  evil  nature.  It  is  the  true  remedy  for  your  disease.  But  the  Cross 
of  Christ  will  also  crucify  the  world  to  you ;  that  is,  it  will  destroy  in  you  all  the 
attractions  of  the  vanities  of  this  world.  You  cannot  love  both  the  Cross  and  the 
world.  But  the  last  motive  which  induced  St.  Paul  to  exclaim,  as  he  was  advancing 
into  Asia,  Greece,  or  Italy,  or  crossing  the  sea,  that  he  desired  no  other  glory,  was 
his  conception  of  the  power  of  that  Cross,  and  of  the  triumphs  which  await  it.  The 
great  apostle  knew  that  it  was  all-sufficient  to  give  immortality  to  those  who  had 
fallen  into  the  deepest  misery.  He  knew  that  it  had  redeemed  a  great  people,  both 
in  the  cities  of  Galatia,  to  which  he  wrote,  and  in  Greece,  Borne,  and  Jerusalem. 
He  knew  its  future  destiny,  that  kings  and  nations  would  come  and  prostrate  them- 
selves  before  it,  that  "  the  people  would  bring  their  sons  and  their  arms ;  "  and  that 
it  had  received  the  ends  of  the  earth  for  an  inheritance.  II.  The  opinion  of  the 
world.  Is  this  your  language  t  If  such  was  St.  Paul's  opinion,  what  is  yours  f 
There  is  perhaps  no  truth  which  encounters  so  much  opposition  from  the  world  as 
this.  How  many  there  are  who  say,  on  the  contrary,  I  will  glory  in  anything  rather 
than  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1  And  why  is  it  thus  ?  Perhaps  you  ask, 
"Is  it  necessary  to  think  so  much  of  the  Cross,  when  there  are  so  many  other 
subjects  in  religion  of  more  importance  than  this  ?  "  Of  more  importance  than  the 
Cross !  We  might  here  remind  you  of  what  we  have  just  said,  but  we  prefer  to 
refute  you  by  your  own  words.    You  wish  to  set  aside  the  Cross  as  a  thing  of  little 


▼T]  GALATIANS.  639 

importance;  and  yet  you  exclaim,  "We  cannot  conceive  of  snch  a  thing  as  that 
Cross,  that  expiatory  death  of  God's  only  Son ;  it  is  too  much  for  our  reason."  How 
ean  such  decisions  be  made  to  agree  ?  How  can  the  Cross  be  at  once  so  contemptible 
and  so  astonishing  ?  If  it  so  greatly  surpasses  your  comprehension,  why  do  you  esteem 
it  so  lightly  ?  "  But,"  you  will  say,  "  it  is  this  that  perplexes  us.  If  the  Cross  be 
true,  then  it  is  certain  that  the  foundation  of  all  our  pretensions  must  give  way, 
and  that  we  must  glory  in  it  alone  But  is  it  true  ?"  But,  without  seeking  a 
witness  in  heaven,  is  not  earth  itself  sufficient  ?  Think  of  the  most  striking  events 
of  antiquity ;  not  a  vestige  of  them  remains,  and  it  is  only  through  the  ancient 
chronicles  which  have  been  handed  down  to  us  that  we  are  acquainted  with  their 
existence.  But  it  ia  not  so  with  the  expiatory  death  of  Christ ;  this  fact  is  living 
in  the  world.  The  present  state  of  the  world  bears  testimony  concerning  it.  It  is 
from  the  blood  which  flowed  from  that  cross  that  all  those  nations  have  sprung 
which  have  unfurled  the  sacred  banner  over  the  globe  which  they  rule.  Among 
them  everything  speaks  of  it.  Shall  we  tell  you  why  you  will  not  know  it? 
Because  you  do  not  feel  the  need  of  it.  This  is  the  point  to  which  the  whole  case 
refers.  We  seize  with  eagerness  the  aid  which  we  think  to  be  necessary,  but  we  des- 
pise it  if  we  think  it  superfluous.  The  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ  is  designed  to  purchase 
eternal  happiness  for  you ;  but  you  would  fain  purchase  it  for  yourselves.  The 
Cross  of  Jesus  Christ  is  designed  to  procure  sanctification ;  but  you  would  fain 
procure  it  yourselves.  But  perhaps  you  say — as  some  may  say  with  truth — "  I  do 
not  deny  the  Cross  of  Christ."  That  is  true ;  you  believe  it,  but  partially.  You 
do  not  deny  the  fact,  but  you  evade  it.  Tou  dare  not  believe,  fully  and  openly, 
that  the  Son  of  God  was  nailed  to  the  cross  for  your  sake ;  and  therefore,  so  far  as 
its  influence  on  your  heart  is  concerned,  it  is  a  faot  of  no  importance.  Forsake 
this  ruinous  semi-Christianity.  Any  form  of  Christianity  of  which  Christ  crucified 
is  not  the  centre  to  which  everything  tends  and  from  which  everything  proceeds  is 
a  false  Christianity.  Why  should  yon  not  believe  what  St.  Paul  believed  ?  (J.  H. 
M.  D'Aubigne",  D.D.)  The  method*  of  glorying  in  the  Cross  of  Christ : — I.  First, 
I  am  to  show  that  whatever  excellencies,  outward  advantages,  or  privileges  it  may 
be  our  lot  to  enjoy,  yet  it  misbecomes  ns,  as  we  are  Christians,  to  glory  in  them. 
1 1  do  not  say  that  we  are  to  be  insensible  of  such  advantages,  to  have  no  relish  of 
them,  no  complacence  in  them ;  for  neither  reason  nor  religion  require  such  a  con- 
duct from  ns.  They  are  the  good  things  of  life,  given  us  by  the  Author  of  all  good, 
on  purpose  that  we  should,  in  due  measure  and  season,  enjoy  them.  They  may  be 
nsed,  if  they  are  not  over-valued  ;  if  we  do  not  suffer  our  affections  to  cleave  too 
closely  to  them,  and  our  minds  to  be  in  any  degree  elated  and  swelled  by  a  reflec- 
tion upon  them.  The  Christian  religion,  by  the  tendency  of  all  its  doctrines 
(particularly  that  of  Christ  crucified),  by  the  manner  of  its  progress,  and  the  mean 
characters  of  those  who  first  promulgated  and  embraced  it,  seems  to  have  been  so 
throughout  contrived  as  effectually  to  mortify  and  beat  down  any  undue  compla- 
cence we  may  have  in  ourselves  on  such  occasions.  II.  Secondly,  it  highly 
becomes  ns  to  glory  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  as  I  proposed  in  the  second  place  to 
show ;  for  since  by  the  alone  merits  of  His  Cross  we  gain  all  the  advantages  of  the 
Christian  dispensation,  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  made  capable  of  heaven  and 
happiness,  we  cannot  but  glory  in  that  Cross,  if  indeed  we  value  ourselves  upon  our 
being  Christians.  III.  Thirdly,  by  what  methods,  and  in  opposition  to  what 
enemies  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  we  are  obliged  to  glory  in  it.  1.  Now,  the  first  step 
requisite  towards  our  complying  with  this  obligation  is,  frequently  to  meditate  on 
the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ.  We  glory  in  nothing  but  what  we  esteem  and 
value ;  and  what  we  value  much  we  shall  be  apt  often  and  attentively  to  consider 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16).  We  should  turn  it  on  all  sides,  and  consider  it  as  the  proper 
subject  of  our  awe  and  wonder,  our  joy  and  pleasure,  our  gratitude  and  love,  till  we 
have  warmed  our  hearts  with  a  lively  sense  of  the  inestimable  benefits  conferred 
on  us  by  the  means  of  it.  2.  A  second  step  towards  fulfilling  our  obligation  to 
glory  in  the  Cross  of  Christ  is,  if  we  endeavour  to  imitate  the  perfect  example  He 
hath  set  ns,  and  to  form  in  our  minds  some  faint  resemblances  of  those  meek 
graces  and  virtues  whioh  adorn  the  character  of  our  suffering  Saviour.  And  this 
step  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  former;  for  imitation  will  in  some  degree 
spring  from  attention.  3.  A  third  instance  and  proof  of  our  glorying  as  becomes 
as  in  the  Cross  of  Christ  is,  if  we  frequently  and  worthily  celebrate  the  memorial 
of  His  death,  the  blessed  sacrament  of  His  body  and  blood.  4.  In  the  fourth 
place,  we  may  be  said,  very  properly  said,  to  glory  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  when  we 
Kealoualy  assert  and  vindicate  the  true  doctrine  of  His  satisfaction  against  all  Lisa 


MO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tx 

enemies  and  opposers  of  it ;  against  the  false  notions  of  the  Jews,  and  the  false 
religion  of  the  Mahometans ;  against  the  mischievous  opinions  of  some  deceived  or 
deceiving  Christians ;  against  the  vain  pretences  of  reason  and  philosophy ;  and 
against  the  proud  insults  and  blasphemies  of  atheists  and  infidels.  (Bishop  Atter- 
bury.)  The  Surety's  Cross: — The  death  of  the  cross  has  always  been,  above 
every  other,  reckoned  the  death  of  shame.  The  fire,  the  sword,  the  axe,  the  stone, 
the  hemlock,  have  in  their  turns  been  used  by  law  as  its  executioners ;  but  these 
nave,  in  so  many  cases,  been  associated  with  honour,  that  death  by  means  of  them 
has  not  been  reckoned  either  cursed  or  shameful.  Not  so  the  cross.  Not  till  more 
than  four  thousand  years  had  gone  by  did  it  begin  to  be  rumoured  that  the  cross 
was  not  what  men  thought  it,  the  place  of  the  curse  and  shame,  but  of  strength 
and  honour  and  life  and  blessing.  Then  it  was  that  there  burst  upon  the  astonished 
world  the  bold  announcement,  "  God  forbid,"  &c.  From  that  day  the  Gross  became 
"  a  power"  in  the  earth  ;  a  power  which  went  forth,  like  the  light,  noiselessly  yet 
irresistibly,  smiting  down  all  religions  alike,  all  shrines  alike,  all  altars  alike; 
sparing  no  superstition  nor  philosophy ;  neither  flattering  priesthood  nor  succumb- 
ing to  statesmanship ;  tolerating  no  error,  yet  refusing  to  draw  the  sword  fdr  truth ; 
a  power  superhuman,  yet  wielded  by  human,  not  angelic,  hands ;  "  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation."  Let  us  look  at  the  Cross  as  the  Divine  proclamation  and 
interpretation  of  the  things  of  God ;  the  key  to  His  character,  His  word,  His  ways, 
H>s  purposes ;  the  clue  to  the  intricacies  of  the  world's  and  the  Church's  history. 
I.  It  is  the  interpreter  or  man.  By  means  of  it  God  has  brought  out  to  view 
what  is  in  man.  In  the  Cross  man  has  spoken  out.  He  has  exhibited  himself, 
and  made  unconscious  confession  of  his  feelings,  especially  in  reference  to  God — 
to  His  Being,  His  authority,  His  character,  His  law,  His  love.  The  Cross  was  the 
public  declaration  of  man's  hatred  of  God,  man's  rejection  of  His  Son,  and  man's 
avowal  of  his  belief  that  he  needs  no  Saviour.  If  any  one,  then,  denies  the  ungod- 
liness of  humanity,  and  pleads  for  the  native  goodness  of  the  race,  I  ask,  What 
means  yon  Cross  ?  II.  It  is  the  interpreter  or  God.  It  is  as  the  God  of  grace 
that  the  Cross  reveals  Him.  It  is  love,  free  love,  that  shines  out  in  its  fulness 
there  (1  John  iii.  16).  Nor  could  any  demonstration  of  the  sincerity  of  the  Divine 
love  equal  this.  It  is  love  stronger  than  shame,  and  suffering,  and  death ;  love 
immeasurable,  love  unquenchable.  Truly,  "  God  is  love."  But  righteousness  as 
well  as  grace  is  here.  We  learn  God's  righteous  character  in  many  ways.  We 
learn  it  from  its  dealings  with  righteousness,  as  in  the  case  of  all  unfallen  ones ; 
we  learn  it  still  more  fully  from  its  dealings  with  sin,  as  in  our  fallen  world ;  but 
we  learn  it,  most  of  all,  from  its  dealings  with  both  of  these  at  once,  and  in  the 
same  person,  on  the  Cross  of  Christ ;  for  here  is  the  righteous  Son  of  God  bearing 
the  unrighteousness  of  men.  III.  It  is  the  interpreter  of  law.  It  tells  as 
that  the  law  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good ;  that  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  it  can  pass 
away.  The  perfection  of  the  law  is  the  message  from  Calvary,  even  more  awfully 
than  from  Sinai.  The  power  of  law,  the  vengeance  of  law,  the  inexorable  tenacity 
of  law,  the  grandeur  of  law,  the  unchangeable  and  infrangible  sternness  of  law — 
these  are  the  announcements  of  the  Cross.  IV.  It  interprets  sin.  The  Cross 
took  up  the  ten  commandments,  and  on  each  of  their  "  Thou  shalts  "  and  "  Thou 
shalt  nots,"  flung  such  a  new  and  Divine  light,  that  sin,  in  all  its  hideousness  of 
nature  and  minuteness  of  detail,  stood  out  to  view,  as  it  never  did  before,  "  the 
abominable  thing  "  which  Jehovah  hates.  It  showed  that  sin  was  no  trifle  which 
God  would  overlook ;  that  the  curse  was  no  mere  threat  which  God  could  depart 
from  when  it  suited  Him.  It  showed  that  the  standard  of  sin  was  no  sliding  scale, 
to  be  raised  or  lowered  at  pleasure ;  that  the  punishment  of  sin  was  no  arbitrary 
infliction ;  and  that  its  pardon  was  not  the  expression  of  Divine  indifference  to  its 
evil.  V.  It  interprets  the  Gospel.  That  good  news  were  on  their  way  to  us 
was  evident  from  the  moment  that  Mary  brought  forth  her  first-born,  and,  by  Divine 
premonition,  called  His  name  "  Jesus."  Goodwill  to  men  was  then  proclaimed. 
But  not  till  the  Cross  is  erected,  and  the  blood  is  shed,  and  the  life  is  taken,  do  we 
fully  learn  how  it  is  that  His  work  is  so  precious,  and  that  the  tidings  concerning  it 
furnish  so  glorious  a  gospel.  VI.  It  interprets  service.  We  are  redeemed  that 
we  may  obey.  We  are  set  free  that  we  may  serve — even  as  God  spoke  to  Pharaoh, 
"  Let  My  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  Me."  But  the  Cross  defines  the  service, 
and  shows  us  its  nature.  It  is  the  Bervice  of  love  and  liberty ;  yet  it  is  also  the 
service  of  reproach,  and  shame,  and  tribulation.  We  are  crucified  with  Christ.  It 
is  not  His  cross  we  bear.  None  but  He  could  bear  it.  It  is  a  cross  of  our  own ; 
calling  us  to  self-denial,  flesh-denial,  and  world-denial ;  pointing  out  to  us  a  path 


chap,  vi.]  GALATIANS.  541 

of  humiliation,  trial,  toil,  weakness,  reproach,  such  as  our  Master  trod.  (II.  Bonar, 
D.D.)  Glorying  in  the  Cross: — Let  us  look  for  a  very  little  to  the  expression, 
"  the  Cross  of  Christ."  This,  my  brethren,  has  different  meanings  in  Scripture. 
Sometimes  it  signifies  simply  the  wooden  cross  to  which  our  Saviour  was  nailed — 
the  accursed  tree  on  which  He  hung;  sometimes,  again,  it  is  used  in  a  figurative 
sense,  to  signify  those  sufferings  which  our  Saviour  endured  on  the  cross — the 
death  which  He  died  on  it.  In  a  wider  sense  still,  it  is  employed  to  designate  the 
whole  of  His  sufferings  both  of  His  life  and  death,  of  which  sufferings  His  death 
was  the  consummation.  Lastly,  the  expression  is  not  unfrequently  used  to  denote 
the  doctrine  of  Christ's  Cross ;  in  other  words,  the  way  of  salvation  through  a 
crucified  Saviour ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  chiefly  that  we  are  to  understand  it  in  the 
verse  before  us.  I.  Let  ua  consider  the  nature  and  description  of  Paul's  feelings 
towards  the  Cross  of  Christ.  "  God  forbid,"  he  says,  "  that  I  should  glory,  save 
in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  You  all  know,  my  brethren,  what  it  is  to 
glory  in  any  object.  It  is  just  to  have  a  very  high  esteem  for  it.  For  example,  if 
we  speak  of  a  man  glorying  in  his  good  name,  his  riches,  or  his  friends,  we  just 
mean  that  he  esteems  these  things  very  highly,  that  he  sets  a  great  value  upon 
them.  The  consequence  is  that  he  thinks  and  talks  continually  about  them,  and 
nothing  sooner  excites  his  indignation  than  to  hear  them  undervalued  or  dispraised. 
When  Paul  says,  then,  that  he  gloried  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  you  are  simply  to 
understand  him  as  meaning  that  he  placed  a  high  value  upon  it,  that  he  prized  it 
greatly.  The  consequence  was,  that  that  Cross  was  the  all-engrossing  theme  of  his 
meditation,  his  conversation,  and  his  preaching.  Observe,  however,  more  closely 
the  nature  of  the  apostle's  glorying,  as  described  in  the  text :  "  God  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  shows  his  glorying 
in  the  Cross  to  have  been  an  exclusive  glorying.  The  Cross  not  only  appeared  to 
him  as  an  object  worthy  of  esteem,  but  it  appeared  to  him  as  the  only  such  object. 
We  often  see  men  taken  up  with  several  objects  at  once.  No  doubt  there  cannot 
well  be  more  than  one  object  on  which  the  mind  is  supremely  set,  but  there  may  be 
others  on  which  a  considerable  share  of  attention  is  at  the  same  time  bestowed, 
and  for  which  a  strong  attachment  is  also  conceived.  It  filled  his  whole  soul ;  it 
displaced  and  shut  out  every  lesser  object.  Some  of  the  Judaizing  teachers  among 
the  Galatians,  while  professing  Christianity,  were  yet  glorying  more  in  some  of  the 
institutions  of  the  law  and  in  the  proselytes  they  made  than  in  the  grand  doctrines 
of  the  Cross ;  and  Paul,  with  special  reference  to  these,  says  in  the  text, "  God  forbid 
that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  Cross."  The  glory  of  the  Cross  appeared  to  him  so 
great  as  to  eclipse  every  other  object.  Although,  as  the  Scriptures  say,  there  is  one 
glory  in  the  sun,  and  another  glory  in  the  moon,  and  another  glory  in  the  stars,  for 
one  star  differeth  from  another  star  in  glory,  yet  such  is  the  superlative  glory  of 
the  sun,  that  when  once  it  has  risen  and  attained  its  meridian  splendour  all  those 
lesser  lights  disappear.  II.  Let  us  now  point  out  some  of  the  grounds  of  the 
apostle's  glorying,  especially  the  one  stated  in  the  text.  Notwithstanding  the 
ignominy  usually  attached  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  there  was  something  transcen- 
dently  glorious  in  the  death  of  Christ.  Never  were  the  Divine  perfections  so 
conspicuously  displayed  as  in  that  event.  The  mighty  changes  which  the  preaching 
of  that  Cross  had  produced,  the  wonderful  effects  which  it  had  wrought  on  a  dark 
and  benighted  world,  might  well  have  made  him  glory  in  its  behalf.  Was  it  not  a 
glorious  sight  to  see  the  wilderness  and  solitary  place  made  glad,  and  the  desert 
rejoicing  and  blossoming  as  the  rose  ?  to  see  the  parched  ground  becoming  a  pool, 
and  the  thirsty  land  turned  into  springs  of  water  ?  But  while  the  apostle  thus  gloried 
in  the  effects  produced  by  the  Cross  upon  others,  his  glorying  as  mentioned  in  the 
text  seems  to  have  had  especial  reference  to  the  effects  it  produced  upon  himself. 
"By  which,"  he  says,  "  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world." 
But  what  was  it  that  produced  such  a  change  as  this  upon  the  aspect  of  the  world 
to  him  ?  It  was  just,  my  brethren,  the  Cross  of  Christ.  No  sooner  was  it  beheld 
by  him  than  the  world  lost  its  charms.  The  light  which  shone  from  the  Cross  at 
once  revealed  to  him  the  true  nature  of  all  earthly  things ;  it  showed  him  a  hideous- 
ness  and  ugliness  in  them  that  he  had  never  discerned  before.  Many  things,  you 
know,  appear  smooth  and  beautiful  in  the  dark,  but  once  let  in  the  light  upon  them, 
and  they  immediately  wear  a  very  different  aspect.  So  it  was  in  the  case  of  Paul. 
He  thought  at  one  time  that  the  world  was  all  fair  and  lovely,  because  he  viewed 
it  through  a  thick  and  darkening  medium,  the  veil  of  unbelief.  But  when  that 
veil  was  taken  away,  and  when  the  flood  of  light  which  streams  from  Calvary'3 
Cross  was  let  in  upon  his  soul,  what  a  changed  aspect  did  the  once  lovely  scene 


Ui  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  H. 

begin  to  wear  1  Bat  this  was  not  the  only  effect  which  the  Gross  of  Christ  pro- 
duced on  him.  It  not  only  made  the  world  dead  to  him,  but  him  likewise  dead  to 
the  world :  "  by  which  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  Not 
only  did  the  world  become  changed  to  him,  but  he  became  changed  towards 
it.  Not  only  did  it  lose  its  charms,  but  he  lost  his  desires  after  it.  He  now 
viewed  its  pleasures,  its  joys,  its  amusements,  with  as  little  relish  and  delight 
as  a  man  hanging  on  a  cross  would  view  the  richest  delicacies  and  most  inviting 
fruits  that  might  be  spread  out  before  him.  The  current  of  his  affections  was 
completely  changed,  and  the  direction  they  had  taken  was  just  the  very  reverse 
of  that  in  which  they  had  formerly  been  flowing.  (J.  Philip.)  The  glory  o 
the  Cross : — This  is  the  keynote  of  the  Epistle,  so  that  it  may  be  called  the 
"  Cruoifixion  Epistle."  It  reflects  the  glory  of  the  Cross  as  presented  in  this 
chosen  champion  of  the  Cross.  And  how  ?  1.  In  Paul's  conversion.  2.  The 
preaching  of  Paul  reflects  the  glory  of  the  Cross.  This  is  the  centre  and  cir- 
cumference of  his  thought.  3.  The  sufferings  of  Paul.  He  died  daily.  4. 
The  triumphs  of  Paul  reflect  the  glory  of  the  Cross.  (W.  H.  War  dwell.)  The 
Cross  of  Christ  :  the  highest  object  of  glorying  and  the  mightiest  instrument  o 
power : — Every  man  has  an  object  of  glory — the  avaricious,  wealth ;  the  vain,  dis- 
tinction; the  ambitious,  power;  the  self-righteous,  virtue;  the  philosophical, 
wisdom ;  the  Christian,  his  Lord.  I.  The  Cross  is  the  highest  object  of  human 
glory.  Glorying  implies — 1.  The  highest  appreciation  of  it.  Paul  valued  it  more 
than  talents,  learning,  connections,  influence,  life.  He  looked  upon  it — (1)  Theo- 
logically— upwards  towards  God.  (2)  Morally — downwards  on  man.  2.  A  personal 
interest  in  it.  3.  A  delight  in  professing  it.  II.  The  Cboss  is  the  mightiest 
instrument  of  human  poweb.  1.  What  world  it  does  not  crucify.  (l)The  physical. 
(2)  Philosophic  (3)  Artistic  (4)  Commercial.  (5)  Social.  2.  What  world  it 
does  crucify — the  corrupt  moral  world  as  animated  by  the  spirit  of — (1)  Practical 
atheism.  (2)  Animalism.  (3)  Selfishness.  (D.  Tliomas,  D.D.)  Tlie  glories  of 
the  Cross : — I.  We  have  no  occasion  to  globt  in  anything  without  this.  All  men 
are  naturally  apt  to  glory  in  something.  2.  There  is  nothing  on  earth  but  someone 
glories  in  it.  3.  Many  glory  in  wisdom,  power,  and  riches  (Jer.  ix.  23,  24) ;  but  (1) 
these  are  folly,  weakness,  and  poverty  (1  Cor.  i.  26-29)  in  themselves ;  (2)  are  only 
useful  as  they  glorify  God,  their  real  owner  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  4.  Some  glory  in  their 
good  works,  but  these  are  nought  save  as  wrought  by  the  strength  of  the  Cross, 
which,  therefore,  is  the  proper  object  of  our  glory  through  them.  II.  What  infinite 

CAUSE  WE  HAVE  TO  GLORY  IN  THE  CROSS,  AND  IN  THAT  ONLY.     1.   ItS  glory  in  itself  COn- 

sists  in— (1)  The  dignity  of  the  Crucified.  (2)  The  atoning  efficacy  of  the  oruci- 
fixion.  (3)  Its  results,  in  the  triumphant  enthronement,  intercession,  and  sovereignty 
of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Its  glory  in  relation  to  us.  Hereby — (1)  Our  sins  are  par- 
doned. (2)  We  are  justified.  (3)  God  is  reconciled.  (4)  The  blessings  of  the 
covenant  ensured.  (5)  The  Holy  Ghost  given.  (6)  The  new  creation  effected. 
(Bishop  Beveridge.)  Glorying  in  the  Cross : — I.  Paul  gloried  in  the  Cboss  as  a 
man  glories  in  a  gbeat  and  wide-beaching  tbuth.  1.  There  were  truths  in  Judaism 
in  which  Paul  once  gloried,  which  possessed  vast  breadth  and  stimulating  power. 
2.  But  they  all  paled  before  this.  H.  Paul  gloried  in  the  Cross  as  a  man  globies  in 
a  great  truth  which  he  has  made  his  own.  1.  Paul  not  merely  possessed  the 
truth.  2.  It  possessed  him.  IH.  Paul  gloried  in  the  Cross  because  it  was  a  great 
paradox.  1.  He  had  a  peculiar  affinity  for  paradoxes  (2  Cor.  vi.  9 ;  xii.  10 ;  iv.  8). 
2.  This  being  Paul's  tendency,  the  central  paradox  of  Christianity  was  the  very 
thing  for  him.  (1)  It  was  the  triumph  of  weakness.  (2)  This  weak  and  despised 
Cross  was  to  destroy  the  world  without,  and  (3)  to  conquer  the  world  within.  In 
conclusion :  1.  There  are  four  stages  of  assent  which  we  can  give  to  any  truth  like 
that  of  Christ's  Cross.  (1)  Understanding  it.  (2)  Accepting  it.  (3)  Comforting 
ourselves  by  it.  (4)  Glorying  in  it.  2.  It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  cross 
fully  until  we  glory  in  it.  3.  It  is  impossible  to  glory  in  it  unless  we  are  willing 
that  the  world  should  be  crucified  to  us  and  we  to  the  world.  (A.  F.  Ewing.)  It 
is  not  safe  to  judge  by  first  appearances,  otherwise  we  shall  deem  the  Cross  repul- 
sive. I.  St.  Paul's  judgment  on  the  Cross.  1.  The  Cross  was  not  a  thing  to  be 
tolerated,  but  to  be  exulted  in.  2.  The  Cross  exceeded  all  things  within  his  know- 
ledge. (1)  He  knew  the  philosophy  of  the  day.  (2)  He  had  seen  the  achievements 
of  its  art,  (3)  and  the  military  force  of  Rome.  (4)  He  had  been  a  Pharisee.  8.  Ha 
ehose  the  Cross  in  preference  to  them  all.  II.  The  grounds  on  which  it  bested. 
1.  Not  merely  the  supernatural  manifestations  which  invested  it  with  grandeur.  2. 
But  mainly  its  spiritual  significance.    (1)  The  Cross  is  a  revelation  of  the  glory  of 


chap,  n.]  GALATIAN8.  643 

God.  God's  glory  does  not  lie  in  His  power  or  possessions,  bat  (a)  in  His  righteous- 
ness ;  (b)  His  love.  Tne  Cross  sets  this  forth.  (2)  The  Cross  displays  the  true 
greatness  of  man — Love  for  God  and  man.  (3)  The  Cross  is  adapted  to  the  chief 
exigency  and  other  needs  of  men.  (a)  Guilt ;  (b)  the  need  of  a  redeeming  fact ; 
(c)  the  need  of  fellowship  with  a  living  person.  (4)  Its  actual  results,  (a)  Its  first 
function  in  the  apostolic  age.    (b)  Its  ameliorating  influence  on  the  race  at  large. 

SJ.  G.  Galloway,  M.A.)  I.  Almost  all  men  have  something  wherein  to  glory. 
..  Men  glory  so  as  to  become  boastful  and  full  of  vainglory.  2.  Men  are  ruined  by 
their  glory.  3.  Men  glory  in  their  shame.  4.  Some  glory — (1)  in  physical  strength, 
in  which  the  ox  excels  them ;  (2)  in  gold,  which  is  only  clay ;  (3)  in  gifts,  which 
are  only  talents  which  have  been  entrusted  to  them,  and  so  glory  in  the  transient 
and  the  trifling.  5.  Men  rob  God  of  His  glory.  II.  Paul  had  a  rich  choice  of 
things  in  which  he  could  have  gloried.  1.  Amongst  the  Jews  he  (1)  might  have 
been  an  honoured  rabbi ;  (2)  might  have  gloried  in  his  genius,  religious  attainment. 
2.  As  a  Christian  he  might  have  gloried  in  (1)  his  sufferings ;  (2)  his  zeal ;  (3)  his 
work  for  Christ.  III.  Paul  gloried  in  the  Cross  of  Christ.  He  does  not  here  say 
he  gloried  in  Christ,  though  he  did  with  all  his  heart.  He  might  have  gloried  in — 
1.  The  Incarnation.  2.  Life.  3.  Ascension.  4.  Second  advent.  Yet  he  selected 
the  Cross  as  the  centre  of  the  Christian  system.  Learn :  1.  The  highest  glory  of 
our  religion  is  the  Cross.  2.  To  think  of  it  till  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  we  can 
say,  "  God  forbid,"  <fec.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I.  The  Cross  is  the  true  symbol  of 
the  Christian  religion.  1.  What  it  seemed  to  the  Jew.  A  symbol  (1)  of  failure ; 
(2)  of  servitude.  2.  What  is  it  to  tho  Christian?  (1)  The  culmination  of  the 
Incarnation ;  (2)  a  means  of  partaking  of  the  Divine  love.  II.  Glorying  in  the 
Cross  is  a  sign  of  true  religion.  It  is — 1.  To  believe  that  religion  centres  round 
a  person.  2.  To  feel  that  Christ  has  entirely  changed  our  relations  to  God.  (1) 
It  has  abolished  circumcision.  (2)  It  has  made  the  new  nature  the  desideratum. 
III.  Glorying  in  the  Cross  is  an  evidence  of  practical  religion.  1.  By  it  the 
Christian  is  crucified  to  the  world  and  the  world  to  the  Christian.  2.  By  it  the 
believer  obtains  deep  and  lasting  satisfaction.  3.  By  it  is  evolved  the  love  which 
is  the  inspiration  of  self-sacrifice.    (S.  Pearson,  M.A.)       Tlie  Cross : — I.  Justifies 

THE  FACT  OF  THE  INCARNATION  TO  THE  REASON  AND  COMMENDS  IT  TO  THE  HEART.  H.  CON- 
TAINS THE  HIGHEST  AND  FULLEST  REVELATION  GOD  HAS  MADE  OF  HlMSELF  TO  MAN.  HI. 
IS  THE  ONLY  FOUNTAIN  WHENCE  FLOWS  A  SUPPLY  ADEQUATE  FOR  THE  DEEPEST  NEEDS  OF 
HUMANITY.  IV.  Is  THE  MIGHTIEST  INSTRUMENT  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  MAN  FOR  THE  UPLIFT- 
ING of  his  beother.  (W.Jackson.)  Christ  the  means  of  self '-crucifixion  : — L  By 
His  mighty  working  within  us.  H.  By  looking  upon  Him  as  an  effectual  en- 
gaging example.     III.  By  beholding  in  Him  infinitely  more  and  better  things 

THAN  THE  WORLD  CAN  AFFORD.  IV.  BY  PONDERING  THAT  IT  WAS  OUR  SINFUL  LIVING  IN 
THE   WORLD   FOB    WHICH    CHRIST   WAS    CRUCIFIED.      V.   By    ACCEPTING   CHRIST    AS    OUB 

surety,  who  died  for  us  to  the  world,  undertaking  that  we  should  die  in  Him.  (2>. 
Clarkson.)  Moral  crucifixion: — I.  Of  the  world.  H.  To  the  world.  (Owen.) 
The  double  sacrifice : — "  The  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  refers  to  His  vicarious 
sacrifice.  "  By  which  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,"  &o.,  refers  to  his  own  interior 
crucifixion  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ  to  all  things  outside  the  new  creation.  But 
the  two  are  now  one ;  and  the  sanctified  apostle  glories  in  the  Cross  because, 
through  its  virtue,  condemnation  is  gone  and  sin  destroyed  in  the  unity  of  his 
Christian  experience.  This  is  the  pith  and  heart  of  this  grand  apostrophe,  too 
often  forgotten  by  those  who  fail  to  mark  that  it  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole 
matter.  Some  there  were  who  despised  the  vicarious  death  of  Christ,  and  made  it 
of  none  effect ;  some  there  were  who,  unduly  trusting  in  that,  explained  away  the 
necessity  of  an  interior  passion.  Against  both  this  apostle  of  the  Cross  protests 
with  holy  vehemence.  And  the  force  of  this  protest  is  this — that  the  one  without 
the  other  is  not  enough :  that  each  is  the  complement  of  the  other,  and  that  their 
union  is  their  perfection.  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Our  Cross  : — The  Cross  of  Christ 
is  divided  through  the  world.  To  each  his  portion  ever  comes.  Thou,  therefore, 
O  my  soul,  cast  not  thy  portion  from  thee,  but  rather  take  it  to  thee  as  thy  most 
precious  relio,  and  lay  it  up,  not  in  a  gold  or  silver  shrine,  but  in  a  golden  heart — 
a  heart  clothed  with  gentle  charity,  with  patience,  and  suffering  submission. 
(Luther.)  Salvation  at  the  Cross .—  I  have  read  how,  in  the  burning  desert,  the 
akeletons  of  unhappy  travellers,  all  withered  and  white,  are  found,  not  only  on  the 
way  to  the  fountain,  but  lying  grim  and  ghastly  on  its  banks,  with  their  skulls 
stretched  over  its  very  margin.  Panting,  faint,  their  tongue  cleaving  to  the  roof 
of  their  mouth,  ready  to  fill  a  cup  with  gold  for  its  fill  of  water,  they  press  on  to 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v* 

the  well,  steering  their  course  by  the  tall  palms  that  stand  full  of  hope  above  the 
glaring  sands.  Already,  in  fond  anticipation,  they  drink  where  others  had  been 
saved.  They  reach  it.  Alas  t  sad  sight  for  the  dim  eyes  of  fainting  men,  the  well 
is  dry.  With  stony  horror  in  their  looks,  how  they  gaze  into  the  empty  basin,  or 
fight  with  man  and  beast  for  some  muddy  drops  that  but  exasperate  their  thirst. 
The  desert  reels  around  them.  Hope  expires.  Some  cursing,  some  praying,  they 
sink,  and  themselves  expire.  And  by  and  by  the  sky  darkens,  lightnings  flash, 
loud  thunders  roll,  the  rain  pours  down,  and,  fed  by  the  showers,  the  treacherous 
waters  rise  to  play  in  mockery  with  long  fair  tresses,  and  kiss  the  pale  lips  of  death. 
But  yonder,  where  the  cross  stands  np  high  to  mark  the  fountain  of  the  Saviour's 
blood,  and  heaven's  sanctifying  grace,  no  dead  souls  lie.  Once  a  Golgotha,  Calvary 
has  ceased  to  be  a  place  of  skulls.  Where  men  went  onoe  to  die,  they  go  now  to 
live ;  and  to  none  that  ever  went  there  to  seek  pardon,  and  peace,  and  holiness,  did 
God  ever  say,  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Yer.  15.  For  In  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision  avalleth  anything',  nor  unclr- 
cumcision,  but  a  new  creature. — A  new  creature : — I.  What  the  apostle  herb 
means  by  the  new  obeatube.  It  is  not  a  mere  reformation,  but  a  creation — not  a 
partial,  but  a  complete,  entire,  and  radical  change.  This  new  creation  is  of  God. 
It  is — 1.  Divine  in  its  origin.  Its  commencement,  its  progress,  its  consummation, 
belong  to  God.  2.  God  has  various  methods  in  effecting  this  change.  Here  we 
might  mention  the  afflictive  dispensations  of  Providence;  the  admonitions  and 
expostulations  of  friends.  3.  It  is  a  total  and  universal  change.  It  is  complete  in 
its  purpose.  II.  In  what  ways  this  important  change  is  discovered  and  mani- 
fested.  It  is  the  new  world  of  grace,  springing  into  existence  with  all  its  rioh 
furniture,  and  increasing  in  beauty.  The  subject  of  this  glorious  change  is  led  to 
the  adoption — 1.  Of  new  views.  No  new  faculties  are  bestowed.  There  is  what 
is  called  the  eye  of  the  mind,  which  is  the  faculty  by  whioh  the  mind  views  the 
objects  presented  to  its  notice.  2.  In  the  new  creation  there  is  a  change  in  the 
affections.  These,  it  is  true,  existed  before,  but  now  they  flow  in  a  new  channel, 
and  are  directed  to  other  objects.  8.  In  the  new  creation  new  principles  are  im- 
planted. The  new  creature  is  governed  by  the  principles  of  the  Christian  religion. 
Love  and  gratitude  to  God,  and  benevolence  to  mankind  at  large.  The  principles 
of  the  new  creature  are  gathered  from  his  relation  to  eternity.  4.  In  the  new 
creation  there  will  be  a  new  and  holy  life.  There  the  change  will  be  visible.  "  By 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them  "  (see  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27  ;  1  John  iii.  9, 10).  (Essex 
Congregational  Remembrancer. )  The  re-creation  of  the  soul : — This  world  was 
created  beautiful,  and  holy,  and  good.  To  understand,  therefore,  in  any  degree 
what  this  moral  creation  of  holiness  and  God-life  is,  we  must  study  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  first  material  creation  of  this  world.  And  that  must  be  in  a  great 
degree  its  type  and  model.  Now  the  first  thing  which  we  may  notice  in  the  creation 
of  our  system,  as  recorded  in  Genesis,  is  that  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Holy  Trinity 
were  all  separately  and  collectively  engaged.  As  then  the  first  creation  was  the 
work  of  each  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity,  so  we  are  led  to  believe  and  feel  sure 
that  the  moral  and  spiritual  creation  of  any  one  soul  must  be  by  the  whole  Trinity. 
If  we  may  say  it  reverentially,  and  venture  into  those  deep  mysteries,  the  Father 
wills,  and  plans,  and  ordains ;  the  Son  executes ;  the  Holy  Ghost  applies  and  appro- 
priates the  restoration,  the  re-formation  of  the  body  and  soul.  Therefore  in  Trinity 
you  receive  it.  Another  feature  which  we  may  observe  in  primeval  creation  is  that 
it  was  gradual  and  progressive.  Six  days  it  took,  which  some  understand  to  be  six 
years  of  time.  First  the  inanimate,  then  the  animate,  then  the  rational,  then  the 
spiritual  and  immortal.  Just  so  we  must  expect  it  to  be  in  that  new  creation  for 
which  we  look.  We  must,  therefore,  have  patience.  It  is  a  gradual,  a  slow  process. 
But,  remember,  it  is  a  sure  one.  The  selfish  man  will  be  full  of  sympathy  and 
energy  in  good  work  with  all  around  him.  He  who  thought  himself  the  first  will 
be  content  always  to  be  the  la&t.  The  miser  will  be  the  generous  man.  He  who 
seldom  had  God  in  his  thoughts,  and  perhaps  really  never  said  a  prayer,  will  be  in 
constant  communion  with  God,  either  silent  or  expressed.  Where  the  world  was 
once,  holy  things  will  be.  Heaven  and  earth  will  change  their  places, — heaven 
being  the  substance,  and  earth  the  shadow.  A  new  creature  will  testify  to  "  a  new 
creation,"  and  the  Creator  will  be  glorified.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  new 
creature : — The  particle  "  but,"  in  the  front  of  my  text,  is  exclusive  and  restrictive ; 
it  excludes  everything  in  the  world  from  pretending  to  avail  anything,  from  being 
believed  to  do  us  any  good.    The  substance  of  all  the  apostle's  discourse,  and  the 


okaf.  vi.]  QALATIANS.  545 

groundwork  of  mine,  shall  be  this  one  aphorism — Nothing  is  efficaciously  available 
to  salvation  but  a  renewed,  regenerated  heart.  I.  It  is  observable,  that  our  state  of 
nature  and  sin  is  in  Scripture  expressed  ordinarily  by  old  age,  the  natural  sinful 
man ;  that  is,  all  our  natural  affections  that  are  born  and  grow  up  with  us,  are 
called  "  the  old  man,"  as  if,  since  Adam's  fall,  we  were  decrepit  and  feeble,  and 
aged  as  soon  as  born  ;  as  a  child  begotten  by  a  man  in  a  consumption  never  comes 
to  the  strength  of  a  man,  is  always  weak,  and  crazy,  and  puling,  hath  all  the  im- 
perfections and  corporal  infirmities  of  age  before  he  is  out  of  his  infanoy.  Now,  the 
new  principle,  by  which  not  the  man,  but  the  new  man,  the  Christian  lives,  is,  in 
a  word,  the  Spirit  of  God ;  which  unites  itself  to  the  regenerate  heart,  so  that  now 
he  is  said  to  be  a  godly  man,  a  spiritual  man,  from  the  God,  from  the  Spirit ;  as 
before  a  living  reasonable  man,  from  the  soul,  from  the  reason  that  informed  and 
ruled  in  him  ;  which  is  noted  by  that  distinction  in  Scripture  betwixt  the  regene- 
rate and  unregenerate,  expressed  by  a  natural,  or  animal,  and  a  spiritual  man.  1. 
"Whence  comes  the  new  creature  ?  From  above.  Since  Christ's  ascension,  the  Hory 
Ghost,  of  all  the  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  is  most  frequently  employed  in  the  work 
of  descending  from  heaven ;  and  that  by  way  of  mission  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  according  to  the  promise  of  Christ,  "  The  Comforter  whom  I  will  send  from 
the  Father."  2.  Where  does  the  new  creature  lodge?  In  the  heart  of  man,  in 
the  whole  soul,  ruling  and  guiding  it  in  all  its  actions,  enabling  it  to  understand 
and  will  spiritually.  As  the  soul  of  man  sees  in  the  eye,  hears  in  the  ear,  under- 
stands in  the  brain,  chooses  and  desires  in  the  heart ;  and,  being  but  one  soul,  yet 
works  in  every  room,  every  shop  of  the  body,  in  a  several  trade,  as  it  were,  and  is 
accordingly  called  a  seeing,  a  hearing,  a  willing,  or  understanding  soul ;  thus  doth 
the  habit  of  grace,  seated  in  the  whole,  express  and  evidence  itself  peculiarly  in 
every  act  of  it,  and  is  called  by  as  several  names  as  the  reasonable  soul  hath  dis- 
tinct acts  or  objects.  In  the  understanding  it  is,  first,  spiritual  wisdom,  and  dis- 
cretion in  holy  things  ;  opposite  to  which  is  j/«*c  atioiouoe,  an  unapproving,  as  well 
as  unapproved  or  reprobate  mind,  and  frequently  in  Scripture  spiritual  blindness. 
Then,  as  a  branch  of  this,  it  is  belief  or  assent  to  the  truth  of  the  promises,  a  ad 
the  like.  In  the  practical  judgment  it  is  spiritual  prudence  in  ordering  all  our  holy 
knowledge  to  holy  practice  ;  in  the  will  it  is  a  regular  choice  of  whatsoever  may 
prove  available  to  salvation,  a  holy  love  of  the  end,  and  embracing  of  the  means 
with  courage  and  zeal.  Lastly,  in  the  outward  man,  it  is  an  ordering  of  all  our 
actions  to  a  blessed  conformity  with  a  sanctified  soul.  In  brief,  it  is  one  principle 
within  us  doth  everything  that  is  holy — believes,  repents,  hopes,  loves,  obeys.  Ar*d, 
consequently,  is  effectually  in  every  part  of  body  and  soul,  sanctifying  it  to  work 
spiritually,  as  a  holy  instrument  of  a  Divine  invisible  cause ;  that  is,  the  H<  >ly 
Ghost  that  is  in  us  and  throughout  us.  3.  When  does  this  new  principle  enter? 
It  comes  into  the  heart  in  a  threefold  condition.  (1)  As  a  harbinger,  it  comes  to 
fit  and  prepare  us  for  itself ;  trims  up,  and  sweeps,  and  sweetens  the  soul,  that  it 
may  be  readier  to  entertain  Him  when  He  comes  to  reside ;  and  this  He  does  by 
skirmishing  with  our  corruptions  before  He  comes  to  give  them  a  pitched  battle ; 
He  brandishes  a  flaming  sword  about  our  ears,  and,  as  by  a  flash  of  lightning,  gives 
us  a  sense  of  a  dismal,  hideous  state,  and  so  somewhat  restrains  us  from  excess  and 
fury — first,  by  a  momentary  remorse,  then  by  a  more  lasting,  yet  not  purifiying 
flame,  the  spirit  of  bondage.  (2)  When  the  Spirit  comes  a  guest  to  lodge  with  us, 
then  He  is  said  to  enter  ;  but,  till  by  actions  and  frequent  obliging  works  He  makes 
Himself  known  to  His  neighbours,  as  long  as  He  keeps  His  chamber,  till  He  declare 
Himself  to  be  there,  so  long  He  remains  a  private,  secret  guest.  And  that  is  called 
the  introduction  of  the  form,  that  makes  a  man  to  be  truly  regenerate,  when  the 
seed  is  sown  in  his  heart,  when  the  habit  is  infused ;  and  that  is  done  sometimes 
discernibly,  sometimes  not  discernibly,  but  seldom,  as  when  Saul  was  called  in  the 
midst  of  his  madness,  he  was  certainly  able  to  tell  a  man  the  very  minute  of  his 
change,  of  his  being  made  a  new  creature.  (3)  The  third  condition  in  which  this 
Spirit  comes  into  our  hearts  is  as  an  inhabitant,  or  housekeeper.  The  Spirit,  saith 
Austin,  "  first  is  in  us,  then  dwells  in  us  :  before  it  dwells  it  helps  us  to  believe; 
when  it  dwells  it  helps,  and  perfects,  and  improves  our  faith,  and  accomplishes  it 
with  all  other  concomitant  graces."  II.  And  for  the  necessity  of  renewedn^ss  of 
heart ;  to  demonstrate  that,  I  will  only  crave  of  you  to  grant  me  that  the  perform- 
ance of  any  one  duty  towards  God  is  necessary,  and  then  it  will  prove  itself ;  for  it 
is  certain  no  duty  to  God  can  be  performed  without  it.  For  it  is  not  a  fair  outside, 
a  slight  performance,  a  bare  work  done,  that  is  accepted  by  God :  if  it  were,  Cain 
would  deserve  as  much  thanks  for  his  sacrifice  as  his  brother  Abel ;  for  in  the  out- 

85 


(46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  tx. 

side  of  them  there  was  no  difference,  unless  perhaps  on  Cain's  side,  that  he  was 
forwardest  in  the  duty,  and  offered  first.  But  it  is  the  inside  of  the  action,  the 
marrow  and  bowels  of  it,  that  God  judges  by.  Be  the  bulk  and  skin  of  the  work 
never  so  large  and  beautiful  to  the  eye,  if  it  come  not  from  a  sanctified,  renewed, 
gracious  heart,  it  will  find  no  acceptance,  but  that  in  the  prophet,  "  Who  hath  re- 
quired it  at  your  hands  ?  "  In  brief,  the  fairest  part  of  a  natural  man,  that  which 
is  least  counterfeit,  his  desire  and  good  affections  to  spiritual  things  (which  we 
call  favourably,  natural  desires  of  spiritual  obedience),  these,  I  say,  are  but  false 
desires,  false  affections.  1.  They  have  no  solidity  or  permanency  in  the  will,  are 
only  fluid  and  transitory ;  some  slight  sudden  wishes,  tempests  and  storms  of  a 
troubled  mind,  soon  blown  over  ;  the  least  temptation  will  be  sure  to  do  it.  They 
are  like  those  wavering  prayers  without  any  stay  of  faith ;  "•  like  a  wave  of  the  sea 
driven  by  the  wind  and  tOBsed."  2.  That  being  which  they  have  is  counterfeit; 
they  are  not  that  which  they  are  taken  for.  We  are  wont  to  say  that  acts  are  dis- 
tinguished by  their  objects :  he  sees  truly  which  judges  the  thing  to  be  that  that  it 
is.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  another  man  sees  that  he  takes  blue  for  green,  but  he 
does  not  see  truly ;  so  also  he  only  willeth  a  good  thing  that  wills  that  in  it  which 
is  truly  good.  Now  the  natural  man,  when  he  is  said  to  choose  spiritual  things, 
as  heaven,  happiness,  and  the  like,  desires  not  a  spiritual  but  a  carnal  thing  : 
in  desiring  heaven,  he  desires  somewhat  that  would  free  him  from  misery  in 
happiness,  a  natural  or  moral  good,  that  would  be  acceptable  to  any  creature 
under  heaven :  and  so  a  Turk  will  desire  paradise,  and  that  very  impatiently, 
in  hope   that   he   shall   have  his  fill  of   lust   there.     (Dr.  Hammond.)  The 

new  creature : — I.  Lex  us  examine  what  is  implied  in  "a  new  creatube."  Four 
explanatory  questions  may  be  asked  upon  this  subject.  1.  In  what  sense  is  a 
Christian  a  new  creature  ?  Is  it  a  physical  or  a  moral  one  ?  It  is  only  a  moral 
onn.  New  faculties  are  not  given  him  ;  but  his  faculties  have  new  qualities  and 
applications.  Compare  Paul  after  his  conversion  with  Paul  before  his  conversion : 
his  body  and  soul,  his  learning  and  abilities,  and  the  ardour  of  his  disposition,  con- 
tinued the  same ;  and  yet,  was  there  ever  a  being  so  different  ?  2.  How  far  does 
this  change  extend?  A  new  creed,  or  a  new  denomination,  does  not  make  a 
man  a  new  creature.  The  new  creation  is  not  a  change  from  vicious  to  virtuous 
only ;  but  from  natural  to  spiritual,  from  earthly  to  heavenly,  from  walking  by 
si(,'ht  to  walking  by  faith.  3.  Is  this  work  produced  instantaneously,  or  is  it 
gradually  advanced  to  perfection  ?  Scripture  describes  Christians  as  going  "  from 
strength  to  strength  :  "  as  "  renewed  day  by  day :  "  as  "  changed  into  the  same 
image,  from  glory  to  glory."  4.  Who  is  the  Author  of  this  new  creation? 
Creation  is  a  work  of  omnipotence,  and  belongs  exclusively  to  God.    II.  Observe 

Wr.  AT  IS  TO  BE  INFERRED  FROM  ITS  UNRIVALLED  IMPORTANCE.    And,  "  if  in  Christ  JeSUS 

neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature," 
this  should  regulate  your  inquiries — your  prayers — your  praise — your  esteem,  and 
your  zeal.  (W.Jay.)  The  family  title : — The  great  difference  between  the  bulk 
of  professors  and  real  Christians  is  this,  the  former  are  patched,  and  mended,  and 
decorated,  and  ornamented,  and  transformed ;  nay,  not  transformed,  but  rather 
changed,  or  metamorphosed  into  the  appearance  of  something  that  they  are  not.  Will 
you  bear  with  a  familiar  simile  before  I  enter  immediately  on  my  text  1  Suppose 
that  in  some  of  our  Sunday  Schools  the  children  had  a  doll  that  they  had  nursed 
and  dressed  very  prettily,  after  their  own  fashion,  and  some  one  had  beaten  it,  and 
bruised  it,  and  torn  its  dress,  and  then  painted  it  again,  and  put  it  on  a  new  dress, 
they  could  not  say  it  was  a  new  doll,  it  would  only  be  a  mended  one.  This  is  just 
the  character  of  religion  in  our  day — it  has  no  new  life.  What,  then,  does 
avail  ?  "A  new  creature."  I.  The  title  op  a  real  Christian.  A  new  creature — 
a  new  creation — the  workmanship  of  God.  The  prominent  characteristic  of  this 
new  creature  is  spirituality.  It  is  the  reigning  principle,  and  it  will  manifest  itself 
wherever  he  goes,  whatever  he  does.  II.  The  household  which  all  such  new 
creatures  CONSTITUTE.  The  living  Church  of  the  living  God.  The  Temple  of 
Jehovah.  The  Body  of  Christ.  III.  Their  employments  and  their  destiny.  Now 
if  God  has  made  you  a  new  creature,  the  first  end  and  employment  He  has  in  view, 
is  the  glory  of  His  own  name.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  says  the  apostle,  "  but  ye 
are  bought  with  a  price — wherefore,  glorify  God  in  your  bodies,  and  in  your  spirits, 
which  are  God's."  Again,  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all 
to  the  glory  of  God,  giving  thanks  to  His  name."  Look  again,  for  a  moment,  at 
the  very  salvation  of  the  soul  itself.  More  ought  to  be  said  and  taught  about  the 
perfections  of  Deity  being  glorified  when  I  get  home,  than  the  mere  fact  of  my 


(sap.  ▼!.]  GALATIAN8.  o47 

escaping  hell  and  getting  into  rest.  The  latter  is  glorious  to  me,  but  the  former  ia 
glorious  to  Him.  Moreover,  among  the  employments,  and  the  end  of  God's  new 
creation,  is  the  obtaining  of  spiritual  blessings.  Are  you,  a  new  creature,  employed 
thus  in  God'B  vineyard  ?  Then  do  you  ask  how  every  day  is  employed  for  such  a 
purpose?  One  thing  more,  and  I  close — the  destiny.  I  dwell  upon  that  with 
especial  delight,  and  it  fires  my  soul  with  sacred  joy.  What  is  it  ?  Why  just  to 
dwell  with  my  God.  I  do  not  want  any  other  explanation.  I  know  I  must  enter 
heaven  to  understand  it.  (Joseph  Irons,  D.D.)  New  creation  alters  the  whole 
man: — "A  new  creature"  does  not  mean  that  one  clothes  himself  differently, 
and  puts  on  a  different  air  from  before ;  but  it  means  the  renewal  of  the  mind 
which  is  brought  about  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  From  that  there  follows  an  alteration 
of  the  outer  life.  For  where  the  heart  through  the  gospel  obtains  a  new  light, 
there  it  never  fails  that  the  outward  senses  also  are  altered.  The  ears  have  there 
no  longer  pleasure  in  hearing  human  dreams  and  fools'  tidings,  but  God's  Word 
alone.  The  mouth  no  longer  boasts  of  a  man's  own  works  and  righteousness,  but 
of  God's  compassion  in  Christ  Jesus.  This,  then,  is  an  alteration,  which  consists 
not  in  words,  but  in  work  and  in  power.  (Luther.)  Source  and  result  of  new 
creation : — This  spiritual  renewal  springs  out  of  living  union  to  Christ,  and  it  ia 
everything.  For  it  re-enstamps  the  image  of  God  on  the  soul,  and  restores  it  to 
its  pristine  felicity  and  fellowship.  It  is  not  external — neither  a  change  of  opinion, 
party,  or  outer  life.  Nor  is  it  a  change  in  the  essence  or  organization  of  the  soul, 
but  in  its  inner  being — in  its  springs  of  thought  and  feeling,  in  its  powers  and 
motives — by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  the  influence  of  the  truth  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 
This  creation  is  "  new " — new  in  its  themes  of  thought,  in  its  susceptibilities  of 
enjoyment,  and  in  its  spheres  of  energy ;  it  finds  itself  in  a  new  world,  into  which 
U  is  ushered  by  anew  birth.  (John  Eadie,  D.D.)  A  new  creature. — Re-creation 
not  merely  reformation : — There  is  such  a  thing  as  what  we  call  reformation.  Thii 
necessarily  presupposes  the  indulgence  in  some  bad  habit,  or  the  following  in  some 
wicked  course  of  life.  When  it  is  said  a  man  has  reformed,  it  is  well  understood 
that  he  has  abandoned  his  previous  evil  habits,  and  become  a  different  man.  And 
you  may  suppose  this  reformation  to  be  so  complete  and  radical,  that  the  man  may 
toe  regarded  as  being  a  new  creature  as  touching  all  his  relations  to  human  society. 
He  will,  if  he  is  thoroughly  reformed,  be  a  different  husband,  a  different  father,  t 
different  friend,  a  different  member  of  society ;  and  his  influence,  in  all  these 
relationships  of  life,  will  be  for  good.  In  this  sense  we  understand  what  reforma- 
tion is.  He  may  be  all  this  without  becoming  a  religious  man.  He  may  be  all 
this,  and  yet  remain  an  absolute  stranger  to  the  renewing  power  of  that  Divine 
grace  which  alone  constitutes  him  a  Christian,  and  places  him  in  a  condition  of 
safety  before  God.  If  we  were  to  trace  the  origin  of  this  reformation,  we  should 
see  that  it  sprang  from  some  prudential  policy ;  we  should  see  that  the  man  had 
been  influenced  by  the  power  of  external  relationships,  or  that  such  influences  were 
brought  to  bear  upon  him,  that  he  was  enabled  to  realize  the  terrible  end  to  which 
the  course  of  life  he  was  pursuing  must  inevitably  lead.  Or  he  may  have  felt  the 
growing  effects  of  these  vicious  habits,  and  that  they  were  taking  away  even  the 
power  of  self-indulgence,  and  the  capacity  for  relishing  forbidden  pleasures.  And 
so  he  changes  his  course  of  life.  But  that  does  not  constitute  him  a  religious  man. 
Many  mistake  reformation  for  re-formation,  a  new  creation ;  but  there  is  a  great 
difference  between  the  two.  The  change  of  which  we  have  spoken  does  not  con- 
stitute a  man  a  new  creature.  It  merely  affects  his  relations  with  his  fellow-men  ; 
it  does  not  produce  the  slightest  change  in  his  relationship  to  God.  He  is  no  safer 
in  his  virtue  than  he  was  in  his  viciousness.  If  he  is  to  be  saved,  he  must  be  made 
a  partaker  of  God's  renewing  grace.  (Wm.  Y.  Rooker,  M.A.)  The  non-essential 
and  the  necessary  in  genuine  Christianity  : — I.  The  non-essential.  1.  No  ritualism 
is  of  any  avail.  (1)  Not  even  the  most  ancient.  (2)  Not  even  the  most  Divine. 
(3)  Not  even  the  most  significant.  2.  Not  that  ritualism  is  to  be  wholly  condemned  ; 
but  that  it  is  of  minor  importance.  3.  The  same  applies  to  the  isms  of  men.  Neither 
Catholicism  nor  Protestantism,  Conformity  nor  Nonconformity,  availeth  anything. 
Christianity  is  (1)  independent ;  (2)  older ;  (3)  greater ;  (4)  sublimer  than  all 
denominations.  1L  The  nece-saby.  1.  Unless  a  man  is  a  new  creation  it 
matters  not  (1)  what  theology  he  accepts  (2)  What  ceremonial  he  observes. 
(3)  What  church  he  attends.  2.  Every  man  who  is  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  new 
creation.  (1)  He  has  a  new  life,  new  loves,  aims,  hopes,  fears.  (2)  He  has  a  new 
sphere,  (a)  He  is  no  longer  materialistic  but  spiritual.  (6)  Even  the  material  in 
him  is  full  of  spiritual  significance,     (c)  He  walks  after  the  Spirit,     (d)  His  citizen- 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vx. 

ship  is  in  heaven.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  new  creation : — is — I.  God's  work. 
and  therefore — 1.  Complete  as  being  by  the  activity  of  the  undivided  Trinity, 

(1)  The  Father  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  (2)  The  Son  (Eph.  ii.  6).  (3)  The  Holy  Ghost 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18).  2.  Present  (John  xi.  25,  26).  3.  Glorious.  II.  Effected  by 
onion  with  Christ.     1.  This  is  not — (1)  Membership  in  any  ecclesiastical  society. 

(2)  The  mystic  sprinkling  of  water.  (3)  To  be  attained  or  tested  by  ritualistic  per- 
formances or  theological  beliefs.  2.  But  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  (Gal.  iii.  26). 
III.  Not  perfect,  but  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  life  which  is  to  grow  to  perfec- 
tion. (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  I.  Negatively.  1.  It  is  not  a  common  work,  but  a 
creation.  2.  No  innovating  humour.  3.  Not  the  restraint  of  the  old  man,  but 
something  new.  4.  Not  moral  virtue,  and  what  we  call  good  nature.  5.  Not  out- 
ward conformity  to  the  law  of  God,  but  something  inward.  6.  Not  a  partial  change 
of  the  inward  man.  II.  Positively.  1.  A  new  mind — (1)  New  apprehensions. 
(2)  New  judgments  and  assents.  (3)  New  valuations.  (4)  Nfew  designs.  (5)  New 
inventions.  (6)  New  reasonings  and  thoughts.  (7)  New  consultations.  2.  A 
new  will.  (1)  New  inclinations.  (2)  New  intentions.  (3)  New  elections.  (4)  New 
determinations.  3.  A  new  heart,  affections,  &c.  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.)  I.  The 
efficient  cause  of  it — God  (Eph.  ii.  10).  II.  The  act — creation  (2  Cor.  v.  17). 
III.  The  effect.  1.  New  qualities  (2  Cor.  iv.  17 ;  Col.  iii.  10;  Eph.  iv.  23,  24). 
2.  Gracious  qualities.  (1)  Not  the  natural  endowments  or  moral  qualifications, 
but  (2)  Divine,  and  hence  holy  (Eph.  iv.  24 ;  Col.  iii.  10).  IV.  The  subject — the 
whole  soul,  not  one  part  or  faculty  (1  Thess.  v.  23).  (Ibid.)  New  creations :— 
I.  Christ  Himself,  a  new  Person :  His  Being  and  character  were  unique.  II.  Tub 
world,  by  Christ's  advent  :  a  new  era :  new  thoughts,  hopes,  aspirations,  possi- 
bilities, institutions,  for  the  race.  III.  The  Christian  :  the  new  man  through 
Christ's  crucifixion  :  a  new  heart,  view,  purpose,  interest,  and  attainment  in  life. 
(Dean  Stanley.)  The  Christian  a  new  creature : — There  is  a  churchyard  where 
the  passenger  who  reads  the  inscriptions  on  the  tombs,  that  stand  up  amid  the 
long  rank  grass  beneath  the  shadow  of  waving  elms  and  an  old  gray  steeple,  will 
find  one  to  surprise  him ;  which,  though  quaint  in  form,  I  doubt  not  is  true  in 
substance.  Here  no  angel  flying  through  the  heavens  sounds  a  trumpet ;  no  figure 
of  old  Time,  with  bald  head,  shoulders  a  scythe  or  shakes  an  hour-glass ;  no  cross- 
bones  rudely  carved,  nor  sexton's  spade,  nor  grinning  skull,  give  point  to  the  trite 
"  Memento  Mori."  Stranger  still,  the  monument  which  is  raised  to  the  memory 
and  virtues  of  one  person  bears  the  date  of  more  than  one  birth :  with  long  years 
between,  it  says,  speaking  in  name  of  the  dead,  I  was  born  the  first  time  on  such  a 
day,  and  born  the  second  time  on  such  another  day  of  another  year.  (T.  Guthrie,, 
D.D.)  Conversion  more  than  restraint : — A  vicious  horse  is  none  the  better  tempered 
because  the  kicking  straps  prevent  his  dashing  the  carriage  to  atoms ;  and  so  a 
man  is  none  the  better  really  because  the  restraints  of  custom  and  providence  may 
prevent  his  following  that  course  of  life  which  he  would  prefer.  Poor  fallen  human 
nature  behind  the  bars  of  laws,  and  in  the  cage  of  fear  of  punishment,  is  none  the 
less  a  sad  creature ;  should  its  Master  unlock  the  door  we  should  soon  see  what  it 
would  be  and  do.  A  young  leopard  which  had  been  domesticated,  and  treated  as  a 
pet,  licked  its  master's  hand  while  he  slept,  and  it  so  happened  that  it  drew  blood 
from  a  recent  wound ;  the  first  taste  of  blood  transformed  the  gentle  creature  into 
a  raging  wild  beast ;  yet  it  wrought  no  real  change,  it  only  awakened  the  natural 
ferocity  which  had  always  been  there.  A  change  of  nature  is  required  for 
our  salvation — mere  restraints  are  of  small  value.     (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  16.  And  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace  be  on  them,  and 
mercy,  and  upon  the  Israel  of  God. — The  Christian's  walk  and  rule  : — 1.  Christianity 
is  a  walk ;  a  free  and  voluntary  motion,  an  uniform  and  even  motion,  a  progressive 
motion,  a  constant  motion.  2.  This  walk  is  a  walk  by  rule.  A  Christian  is  not  a 
lawless  person  to  range  up  and  down  as  fancy  leads  him.  3.  The  rule  is  the  law 
of  the  new  creature.  The  new  creature,  in  the  principles  and  workings  of  it,  is 
made  the  ground,  the  pattern  and  direction  of  our  obedienoe,  and  we  frame  and 
square  all  the  actions  of  our  lives  according  thereunto.  4.  The  blessed  privi- 
leges belonging  to  those  who  thus  walk — peace  and  mercy.  5.  Such  are  the 
true  Israel :  a  thousand  times  greater  privilege  than  to  be  the  children  of 
Abraham's  flesh.      (W.  Burkitt.)  The   true   canon  of  Christianity: — This 

"rule" — I.  Does  not  consist  in  party  watchwords.     II.  Does  consist  in  a 

SPIRITUAL   CHANGE   OF  THE   INNER  MAN    (2  Cor.  V.  17).        III.    PRACTICALLY   FOLLOWED 

bungs  blessing.     "  Peace  and  mercy.         (Canon  Vernon  Hutton.)  Canonical 


OTA*,  n.]  GALATIANS.  649 

obedience  : — I.  The  rule.  1.  Glorying  in  the  Cross.  2.  The  new  life.  8.  Called 
a  rule  of  faith  and  practice  because  by  it  all  doctrines  and  acts  are  to  be  examined. 
4.  We  are  to  walk  by  it  warily,  circumspectly,  in  order  and  measure,  without 
swerving,  but  making  straight  steps  to  our  feet.  II.  The  blessedness  of  walking 
by  this  role.  1.  Peace.  (1)  With  God  (Bom.  v.  1).  (2)  With  ourselves.  (3) 
With  the  world.  2.  Mercy — all  spiritual  blessings  flowing  from  the  love  and 
favour  of  God  in  Christ.  (R.  Cudworth.)  Peace  and  righteousness  : — Peace  may 
be  suught  two  ways.  One  way  is  as  Gideon  sought  it  when  he  built  his  altar  in 
Ophrah,  naming  it  "  God  send  peace,"  yet  sought  this  peace  that  he  loved  as  he 
was  ordered  to  seek  it,  and  the  peace  was  sent,  in  God's  way :  "  The  country  was  in 
quietness  forty  years  in  the  days  of  Gideon."  And  the  other  way  of  seeking  peace 
is  as  Menahem  sought  it  when  he  gave  the  king  of  Assyria  a  thousand  talents  of 
silver,  that  "his  hand  might  be  with  him."  That  is,  you  may  either  win  your 
peace  or  buy  it — win  it  by  resistance  to  evil ;  buy  it  by  compromise  with  evil.  You 
may  buy  your  peace  with  silenced  consciences ;  you  may  buy  it  with  broken  vows ; 
buy  it  with  lying  words  ;  buy  it  with  base  connivances ;  buy  it  with  the  blood  of 
the  slain,  and  the  cry  of  the  captive,  and  the  silence  of  lost  souls.  (Rushin.) 
Christianity  a  rule  of  life: — I.  That  Christianity  is  a  bule  op  life.  "And  as 
many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule."  1.  Christianity  is  a  Divine  rule.  Chris- 
tianity is  of  God.  2.  Christianity  is  a  perfect  rule.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  per- 
fect." 8.  Christianity  is  an  unchangeable  rule.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  standeth 
for  ever."  4.  Christianity  is  a  precious  rule.  "  The  law  of  Thy  mouth  is  better 
unto  me  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver."  5.  Christianity  is  an  influential  rule. 
K  Converting  the  soul."  II.  That  conformity  to  Christianity  as  a  rule  of  life 
imparts  great  blessings.  1.  Harmony  of  soul.  *  ■  Peace  be  on  them."  2.  The 
favour  of  God.  **  And  mercy."  3.  Relation  to  the  children  of  God.  "  And  upon 
the  Israel  of  God."     (J.  O.  Griffiths.) 

Ver.  17.  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me :  for  I  bear  In  my  body  the 
marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — Freedom  from  human  criticism  : — A  man  who  is  grow- 
ing old  claims  for  himself  in  these  words  the  freedom  and  responsibility  of  his  own 
life.  He  asks  that  he  may  work  out  his  own  career  uninterfered  with  by  the  criti- 
cism of  his  brethren.  He  bids  them  stand  aside  and  leave  him  to  the  Master  whom 
he  serves,  and  by  whom  he  must  be  judged.  How  natural  that  demand  is  !  How 
we  all  long  at  times  to  make  it  1  How  every  man,  even  if  he  dare  not  claim  it  now 
looks  forward  to  some  time  when  it  must  be  made.  He  knows  the  time  will  com« 
when,  educated  perhaps  for  that  moment  by  what  his  brethren's  criticism  has  done 
for  him,  he  will  be  ready,  and  it  will  be  his  duty  to  turn  aside  and  leave  that 
criticism  unlistened  to  and  say:  "From henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me.  Now  I 
must  live  my  own  life.  I  understand  it  best.  You  must  stand  aside  and  let  me  go 
the  way  where  God  is  leading  me."  When  a  man  is  heard  saying  that,  his  fellow- 
men  look  at  him  and  they  can  see  how  he  is  saying  it.  They  know  the  difference 
between  a  wilful  and  selfish  independence,  and  a  sober,  earnest  sense  of  responsi- 
bility. They  can  tell  when  the  man  really  has  a  right  to  claim  his  life  ;  and  if  he 
has,  they  will  give  it  to  him.  They  will  stand  aside  and  not  dare  to  interfere  while 
be  works  it  out  with  Goa.  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  cry  of  absolute  self- 
devotion  : — Magnificent  outburst  of  a  heart  filled  to  the  overflow  with  the  spirit  of 
impassioned  consecration.  The  man  who  utters  it  has  made  up  his  mind  so  firmly 
that  he  is  conscious  there  is  not  the  faintest  possible  chance  of  his  ever  changing 
his  determination.  He  has  come  to  so  certain  and  final  a  conclusion  that  he  tells 
those  around :  "You  may  as  well  save  yourselves  the  trouble  of  ever  arguing  with 
me  or  seeking  to  alter  me.  1  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  And 
these  marks  are  only  so  many  seals  upon  a  resolution  deliberately  taken,  and  so 
awfully  intense  in  its  nature,  that  you  may  as  well  argue  with  a  rock,  and  expect 
to  move  it  by  force  of  your  logic,  as  anticipate  effecting  the  slightest  alteration  in 
my  determined  purpose."  It  is  the  language  of  a  wholly  consecrated  man.  He  has 
now  given  himself  up  to  his  Master  without  reserve.  All  in  Paul  belongs  to  Christ. 
There  is  not  an  atom  of  his  manhood  now  which  he  feels  he  can  claim  as  his  own. 
It  is  lost  time,  lost  trouble,  and  lost  energy,  for  any  to  attempt  to  change  his  deci- 
sion, or  make  him  swerve  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  "  Let  no  man  trouble  me. 
I  am  given  up  to  Christ,  and  I  bear  His  brand  upon  me."  The  word  he  uses  is 
•«  Btigmata."  "  I  bear  the  stigmata  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  This  was  the  brand  the 
■lav*  used  to  wear,  to  show  he  was  the  property  of  his  master.  H  you  look  at  the 
context,  you  will  see  how  magnificent  a  climax  this  verse  forms.    Throughout  tha 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tl 

Epistle  St.  Paul  had  been  arguing  with  a  Church  that  had  yielded  him  but  little  joy. 
He  seems  now  virtually  to  say,  "  I  have  taught  you  the  gospel,  I  have  preached 
Christ  to  you.  Tea,  I  have  so  preached  Him  that  He  has  been  evidently  set  forth 
crucified  before  your  eyes.  I  have  denounced  the  folly  of  circumcision  in  the  flesh. 
I  have  used  every  possible  means  to  lead  you  wholly,  solely,  to  Christ.  Now  yon 
must  take  your  own  way.  I  cannot  do  more.  I  cannot  say  more.  But  be  it 
known  unto  you,  0  Galatians,  whichever  way  you  may  go,  I  cannot  follow  you  if 
you  go  adrift  from  the  gospel ;  for  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  Cross 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. "  The  text  is  the  language  of  a  man  who  has  not  only 
hoisted  his  colours,  but  also  deliberately  nailed  them  to  the  mast.  He  has  driven 
the  nails  right  through.  Pulled  down  those  colours  never  can  be.  Displayed  on 
any  other  masthead,  never.  "  Christ  is  my  Master,  and  Christ  alone.  For  Him  I 
live ;  for  Him,  if  necessary,  I  will  die.  Let  none  attempt  to  make  me  swerve.  I 
am  past  hope  of  change."      (A.  G.  Brown.)  The  marks  of  the  Lord  Jem*. — 

Explanation  of  the  figure  : — It  was  the  custom,  in  those  days  of  darkness  and 
cruelty,  to  prick  or  brand  upon  the  body  of  a  slave  some  distinctive  letter  or  other 
mark  of  ownership,  by  which  he  might  be  deterred  from  attempting  flight,  or 
quickly  traced  and  reclaimed  in  the  event  of  his  escape.  More  especially  was  this 
brand  used  in  cases  of  theft  or  crime  ;  as  a  mark  of  disgrace,  a  perpetual  badge  of 
degradation  and  contempt.  In  either  case  it  stamped  a  poor,  fallen,  outcast  crea- 
ture as  what  he  was;  a  slave  at  least — a  man  who  through  the  misfortune  of  hia 
birth  or  hia  country  had  never  possessed,  or  had  forfeited,  the  right  of  free  will  and 
free  agency  ;  perhaps  one  who  through  his  own  fault  had  sunk  lower  still,  and  had 
added  to  the  involuntary  misery  of  servitude  the  culpable  appendage  of  crime  and 
ignominy.  To  "  bear  in  his  body  the  marks  "  of  any  one,  was  to  carry  about  with 
him  everywhere  one  or  both  of  the  two  reproaches,  This  man  is  a  slave,  and,  This 
man  is  a  convict.  And  was  St.  Paul  then  not  ashamed  to  apply  to  himself  such 
a  figure  ?  Was  St.  Paul  some  poor  degraded  being,  who  cared  not  whether  he  was 
a  slave  or  a  freeman,  an  innocent  man  or  a  criminal  ?  We  must  draw  a  distinc- 
tion here.  .The  essence  of  slavery  is  to  have  no  free  will ;  to  be  the  possession,  the 
property,  of  another  ;  to  enjoy  nothing,  to  have  nothing,  to  do  nothing,  and  to  be 
nothing,  save  at  the  beck,  command,  will,  of  another.  A  dreadful  state,  if  that 
other  be  a  man  like  myself.  But  suppose  my  master  be  my  Creator,  Bedeemer, 
Lord,  and  God.  Suppose  me  His  by  a  right  antecedent  to  my  being,  a  right  only 
to  be  set  aside  by  my  self-abandonment  and  self-ruin.  Will  it  then  be  any  dis- 
grace to  bear  His  mark  in  my  body,  or  to  be  incapable  of  severing  myself  from  His 
all-watchful  and  all-beneficent  ownership?  St.  Paul  thought  not.  (Dean 
Vaughan.)  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — The  stigmata: — 

He  was  growing  an  old  man.  Anybody  who  looked  at  him  saw  his  body 
covered  with  the  signs  of  pain  and  care.  The  haggard,  wrinkled  face,  the  bent 
figure,  the  trembling  hands;  the  scars  which  he  had  worn  since  the  day  when  they 
beat  him  at  Philippi,  Bince  the  day  when  they  stoned  him  at  Ljstra,  since  the  day 
when  he  was  shipwrecked  at  Melita ;  all  these  had  robbed  him  for  ever  of  the 
fresh,  bright  beauty  which  he  had  had  once  when  he  sat,  a  boy,  at  the  feet  of  old 
Gamaliel.  He  was  stamped  and  marked  by  life.  The  wounds  of  his  conflicts,  the 
furrows  of  his  years,  were  on  him.  And  all  these  wounds  and  furrows  had  oome 
to  him  since  the  great  change  of  his  life.  They  were  closely  bound  up  with  the 
service  of  his  Master,  to  whom  he  had  given  himself  at  Damascus.  Every  scar 
must  have  still  quivered  with  the  earnestness  of  the  words  of  Christian  loyalty 
which  brought  the  blow  that  made  it.  See  what  he  calls  these  scars,  then.  "  The 
marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  had  a  figure  in  his  mind.  He  was  thinking  of  the 
way  in  which  a  master  branded  his  slaves.  Burnt  into  their  very  flesh  they  carried 
the  initial  of  their  master's  name,  or  some  other  sign  that  they  belonged  to  him, 
that  they  were  not  their  own.  That  mark  on  the  slave's  body  forbade  any  other 
but  his  own  master  to  touch  him  or  compel  his  labour.  It  was  the  sign  at  once  of 
his  servitude  to  one  master,  and  of  his  freedom  from  all  others.  (Phillips  Brooks, 
D.D.)  The  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus : — I.  The  text  is  an  expression  of  that  rest 
in  love  which  those  alone  can  have  whose  "  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  The 
immediate  motive  of  its  utterance  here  is  a  certain  sense  of  powerlessness  in  sway- 
ing the  minds  of  others.  What  is  argument  to  him  ?  What  is  the  judgment  of 
man  ?  What  is  any  outward  evidence  ?  Has  he  not  within  the  surest  of  all  proof, 
the  experience  of  the  highest  faith  1  "  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me : 
for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  H.  What  are  the 
"marks "  here  signified?    Whatever  they  are,  no  doubt  they  are  proofs  that  he  is 


n.]  QALATIANS.  651 

Christ's,  and  Christ  is  his.    Bat  what  are  they  t    Elsewhere,  he  speaks  of  his 
labours  and  sufferings  in  the  cause  of  Christ ;  and  that  too  on  an  occasion  like  the 
present,  when  some  were  disparaging  him,  and  making  invidious  comparisons 
between  himself  and  the  earlier  apostles.    He  is  obliged  to  say  in  his  own  cause, 
"  I  suppose  I  was  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  chief  est  apostles.'.    Then  he  speaks 
of  his  severe  sufferings  as  signs  of  his  apostleship.    Are  these  uppermost  in  his 
mind  now  ?    I  think  not.    Again,  he  speaks  to  the  Corinthians  of  the  vision  vouch- 
safed  to  him — "  How  that  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise,  and  heard  unspeakable 
words,  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter."    And  he  concludes,  "  In  nothing 
am  I  behind  the  very  chiefest  apostles,  though  I  be  nothing.  Truly  the  signs  of  an 
apostle  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  patience,  in  signs,  and  wonders,  and  mighty 
deeds."  Is  it  to  the  same  that  he  is  referring  now  ?  Or,  once  more,  does  he  allude  to 
the  many  converts  whom  he  had  made,  signs,  if  there  be  any,  that  Christ  is  with  him  ? 
Well  might  his  heart  rest  in  thoughts  like  this,  as  when  he  wrote  to  the  Church  at 
Corinth — "Though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors  in  Christ,  yet  have  ye  not 
many  fathers :  for  in  Christ  Jesus  I  have  begotten  you  through  the  gospel ; "  "  And 
the  seal  of  my  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  Lord."    Or  when  he  calls  the  Philippians 
"  my  brethren,  dearly  beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown."    Is  this  the 
mark  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  he  looks  at,  and  takes  comfort  at  the  sight  T    No.    I 
think  not.    It  is  something  closer  to  him  than  this.    Sufferings  may  find  a  man 
and  leave  a  man  separate  from  Christ :  "  Though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and 
have  not  charity,  it  is  nothing."    Of  visions  he  says,  "  It  is  not  expedient  for  me 
doubtless  to  glory ; "  and  lest  he  should  be  exalted  above  measure  through  the 
abundance  of  the  revelations,  there  was  given  unto  him  a  thorn  in  the  flesh.     Of 
miracles  and  mighty  works,  One  greater  than  Paul  said — "  Notwithstanding  in  this 
rejoice  not,  that  the  spirits  are  subject  unto  you ;  but  rather  rejoice,  because  your 
names  are  written  in  heaven."    And  as  to  making  converts,  here  is  his  own  solemn 
caution,  "  Lest  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  be  a  castaway." 
*'  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."    What  are  these  marks  ?    They 
are  the  stigmata,  the  marks  (as  the  Greeks  would  say,  whose  word  it  was),  burnt 
into  a  slave,  the  brand  set  on  a  runaway  slave:  a  sign  graven  upon  the  very  body, 
as  inseparable  as  a  birth-mark ;  one  that  has  indeed  been  imposed  in  after  years, 
and  by  another  hand,  but  now  become  part  and  parcel  of  the  man  himself,  as  his 
own  flesh  and  bone.    They  are  the  stigmata,  the  marks  (as  Christians  would  say, 
in  memory  of  Him  who  bore  them  on  Himself),  of  Christ  their  Master :  His  marks 
on  their  body,  as  signs  that  they  are  members  of  His  Body,  in  all  purity  and 
chastity  and  holiness,  as  being  "  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  His  marks  on  their 
temper,  as  those  who  have  taken  up  their  cross  and  borne  it  after  Him  in  self- 
denial  and  mortification,  in  patience,  in  forgiveness,  in  humility,  in  cheerfulness ; 
His  marks  on  their  soul,  as  being  set  free  from  condemnation  by  the  atoning  mercy  of 
the  Saviour,  as  being  made  partakers  of  the  precious  fruits  of  His  sacrifice  upon 
the  cross — the  mark  of  justification,  and  the  mark  of  sane tifi cation — the  imputed 
righteousness  of  Christ,  the  imparted  and  inherent  righteousness  wrought  in  them 
by  the  Holy  Ghost :  His  marks  on  their  spirit,  being  full  of  all  spiritual  affections — 
love,  joy,  peace,  patience,  amid  the  trials  of  earth,  longing  for  the  security  of 
heaven,  the  present  enjoyment  of  an  almost  perfect  rest  in  the  arms  of  God ;  in 
short,  "  a  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God."    III.  In  the  next  place  observe,  that  this  is 
not  an  unusual  thought  with  St.  Paul,  and  will  not  admit  of  being  explained  away 
as  a  momentary  instance  of  highly-wrought  enthusiasm.     It  was  his  life !    Did  it 
seem  to  any  a  mischievous  intrusion  of  imagination  into  holy  things,  to  speak  of 
love  imagining  the  Saviour's  wounds  to  be  traced  in  the  Christian's  heart  ?    Then 
how  do  you  read  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Colossians — "  I,  Paul,  who  now  rejoice  in 
my  sufferings  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in 
my  flesh ; "  or  these  to  the  Philippians — "  That  I  may  know  Him  and  the  power  of 
His  resurrection,  and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  being  made  conformable  to 
His  death ; "  and  again  to  the  Galatians — "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless 
I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  that  liveth  in  me  "  r    These  are  the  marks  branded  by 
the  fire  of  God's  love  upon  his  heart.     "  What  marks  have  I  of  the  Lord  Jesus?" 
and  again,  "  Without  these  marks  will  Christ  know  me  for  His  own  ?  "    They  are 
brands  burnt  into  the  very  body,  so  no  outward  thing  will  satisfy ;  nothing  that 
your  hands  have  done,  nothing  that  the  world  can  measure,  for  it  is  beneath 
all  the  dress  and  apparel  of  a  so-called  religious  life,  of  which  the  world  takes 
cognizance.    They  are  part  and  parcel  of  yourself,  so  they  can  be  nothing  which 
can  be  taken  up  and  laid  down  at  will.    Think  how  great  is  the  risk  of  self-deceit ; 


852  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

because  that  mark  is  not  genuine  unless  it  be  found  in  the  very  inmost  circle  of  your 
life.  (G.  W.  Furse,  M.A.)  A  branded  body  : — What  a  testimony  does  the  outward 
man  give  to  the  inner  life — the  body  becomes  the  tell-tale  of  the  soul !  We  bear  in  onr 
body  the  brand  of  the  master  whom  we  serve.  The  horny  hand  of  the  labourer  tells 
that  he  is  tbe  slave  of  unceasing,  unpitying  toil.  The  dinted  brow  of  the  merchant 
declares  what  master  it  is  that  sits  over  him  in  the  counting-house  as  he  pores 
over  his  ledger,  and  anxiously  balances  his  gains  and  losses.  The  thoughtful 
features  of  the  student  reveal  his  servitude  to  a  higher  master — the  love  of  know- 
ledge and  truth.  The  sailor's  weather-beaten  brow,  the  soldier's  scars  or  dismem- 
bered frame,  tell  of  a  more  arduous  service  ;  and  a  grateful  country  can  confer  on 
them  no  decoration  more  honourable  than  those  which  they  have  already  them- 
selves acquired.  On  many  a  once  robust  and  comely  frame  sickness  and  pain, 
or  grief  or  anxiety,  have  wrought  their  work,  have  set  their  seal,  too  deeply  as  we 
are  apt  to  think.  In  others  the  wrinkled  countenance,  the  trembling  hands,  the 
whitening  hair,  the  dim  eye,  the  dull  ear,  are  signs  of  the  submission  that  we  must 
all  make  to  the  universal  law  of  God,  the  law  of  Nature — not  to  be  repined  at,  not 
to  be  evaded,  however  heavily  it  may  weigh  upon  us.  But  there  are  disfigurements 
of  the  poor  body  which  betoken  no  such  honourable  or  natural  servitude.  There 
are  marks  to  be  seen  deeply  stamped  on  cheek  and  lip  and  eye,  signs  of  sottishness 
and  sensuality,  signs  that  the  body,  which  was  formed  to  be  a  temple  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  is  given  over  to  be  the  slave  of  selfish  indulgence,  of  appetites  and  passions 
that  are  meant  to  serve,  not  to  rule.  If  the  life  has  been  given  to  God's  service, 
and  the  soul  has  been  filled  with  the  love  of  Christ,  our  will  subjected  to  His  will, 
our  spirit  pervaded  by  His  Spirit,  intent  on  the  fulfiment  of  His  gracious  purposes 
towards  ourselves  and  all  mankind,  there  will  scarcely  fail  to  be  some  outward 
signs,  in  the  meek  and  chastened  deportment,  in  the  melting  voice  and  kindling 
eye — the  doors  and  windows  of  the  soul — through  which  even  the  careless  observer 
may  become  aware  of  the  purity  of  the  spirit  that  dwells  within,  of  the  Master 
who  rules  it,  and  who  in  return  for  the  service  which  He  asks  gives  peace  and  joy, 
and  the  sense  of  perfect  freedom.  And  we  may  be  sure,  however  they  may  be  over- 
looked or  looked  down  upon  by  us,  these  ornaments  of  the  outer  man  are  in  the 
sight  of  God  of  great  price.  They  are  in  part  a  fulfilment  of  the  command  which 
the  apostle  gives  us,  that  we  should  endeavour  to  glorify  God  in  our  body  as  well 
as  our  spirit,  for  both  are  God's,  created  by  Him  for  His  glory,  owned  by  Him  now 
in  their  low  estate,  to  be  hereafter  blessed  and  purified  by  Him,  so  as  to  partake  of 
His  glory.  And  they  whose  spirits  are  now  increasing  in  grace  and  holiness,  which 
shine  through  their  earthly  tabernacle,  they  make  the  poor  body,  be  it  ever  so  much 
a  wreck  from  age,  from  sickness,  or  from  pain — they  make  it  more  beautiful  before 
God  than  the  most  perfect  youthful  form,  marred  as  yet  by  no  suffering,  chastened 
by  no  trials,  not  convinced  of  Bin,  of  righteousness,  or  of  the  judgment  to  come. 
(Prebendary  Humphrey.)  Marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus: — I.  The  word-picture  herb 
presented.  1.  The  figure,  "  slave  brands."  2.  The  facts  (1  Cor.  iv.  9,  15 ;  2  Cor. 
xi.  23,  30).  3.  The  challenge.  II.  The  suggestion  the  picture  makes.  1.  He 
who  follows  the  Lord  Jesus  must  expect  that  some  will  try  to  "  trouble  "  him. 
2.  He  whose  "marks''  are  most  conspicuous  will  be  troubled  the  least.  8. 
He  who  has  "  marks "  may  take  comfort  in  knowing  how  much  his  Master 
paid  for  him.  4.  He  who  is  owned  may  remember  that  his  Master  owns 
and  recognizes  the  "  marks "  also.  5.  He  that  has  no  "  marks "  is  either 
a  better  or  a  poorer  Christian  than  St.  Paul.  6.  Satan  outwits  himself 
when  he  gives  a  believer  more  "marks."  7.  A  sure  day  is  coining  when 
the   "mafks"  will  be  honourable.      (American  Homiletic  Review.)  Signs  of 

struggle  in  life: — Here  is  a  man  whose  body  shows  the  signs  of  toil  and  care. 
I  will  not  read  the  long,  familiar  catalogue.  The  whitened  hair,  the  cautious 
step,  the  dulness  in  the  eye,  the  forehead  seamed  with  thought ;  you  know  them 
all,  you  watch  their  coming  in  your  friend,  you  feel  their  coming  in  yourself.  What 
do  they  mean?  In  the  first  and  largest  way  they  mean  life.  The  difference 
between  this  man  and  the  baby,  in  whose  soft  flesh  there  are  no  branded  marks 
like  these,  is  that  this  man  has  lived.  But  then  they  mean  also  all  that  life  has 
meant ;  and  life,  below  its  special  circumstances,  always  means  the  mastery  in 
obedience  to  which  all  the  actions  have  been  done  and  all  the  character  has  taken 
shape.  For  instance,  here  among  the  white  careworn  features  there  are  certain 
lines  which  tell,  beyond  all  misunderstanding,  that  this  man  has  struggled  and  has 
had  to  yield.  Somewhere  or  other,  sometime  or  other,  he  has  tried  to  do  something 
which  he  very  much  wanted  to  do,  and  failed.    As  clear  as  the  scratches  on  the 


chap,  yi.]  GALATIANS.  553 

rock  which  make  us  sure  that  the  glacier  has  ground  its  way  along  its  face,  so 
clearly  this  man  lets  us  know  that  he  has  been  pressed  and  crushed  and  broken  by 
a  weight  which  was  too  strong  for  him.  What  was  that  weight  ?  If  it  were  only 
disappointment,  then  these  marks  are  the  marks  of  simple  failure.  If  the  weight 
were  laid  on  him  as  punishment,  then  these  marks  are  marks  of  sin.  If  it  were  a 
weight  of  culture,  then  the  marks  are  marks  of  education.  If  the  weight  was  the 
personal  hand  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  teaching  the  man  that  his  own  will  must 
be  surrendered  to  the  will  of  a  Lord  to  whom  he  belonged  ;  if  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  been  drawing  him  away  from  every  other  obedience  to  His  obedience  ; 
then  these  marks  which  he  bears  in  his  body  are  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It 
is  as  if  a  master,  seeking  for  his  sheep,  found  him  all  snarled  and  tangled  in  a 
thicket,  clinging  to  and  clung  to  by  the  thorns  and  cruel  branches.  He  unsnarls 
him  with  all  tenderness,  but  the  poor  captive  cannot  escape  without  wounds.  He 
even  clings  himself  to  the  thorns  that  hold  him,  and  so  is  wounded  all  the  more. 
When  the  rescue  is  complete  and  the  master  stands  with  his  sheep  in  safety,  he 
looks  down  on  him  and  says,  "  I  need  not  brand  you  more.  These  wounds  which 
have  come  in  your  rescue  will  be  for  ever  signs  that  you  belong  to  me.  No  other 
sheep  will  carry  scars  just  like  them,  for  every  sheep's  wanderings,  and  so  every 
sheep's  wounds,  are  different  from  every  other's.  Their  pain  will  pass  away,  but 
the  tokens  of  the  trials  through  which  I  brought  you  to  my  service  will  remain. 
They  shall  declare  that  you  are  mine.  You  shall  bear  in  your  body  my  marks  for 
ever."  (Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  Marks  of  ownership  : — These  "brands"  were 
usfd — 1-  In  the  case  of  domestic  slaves.  With  these,  however,  branding  was  not 
usual,  at  least  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  except  to  mark  such  as  had 
attempted  to  escape,  or  had  otherwise  misconducted  themselves,  and  such  brands 
were  held  a  badge  of  disgrace.  2.  Slaves  attached  to  some  temple,  or  persons 
devoted  to  the  service  of  some  deity  were  so  branded.  3.  Captives  were  so  treated 
in  very  rare  cases.  4.  Soldiers  sometimes  branded  the  name  of  their  commander 
on  some  part  of  their  body.  The  metaphor  here  is  most  appropriate,  if  referred  to 
the?  second  of  these  classes.  Such  a  practice  at  all  events  cannot  have  been 
unknown  in  a  country  which  was  the  home  of  the  worship  of  Cybele.  (Bishop 
Lightfoot.)  The  language  of  a  true-hearted  veteran ; — Although  the  first  and  the 
chief  meaning  of  "  stigmata  "  is  the  brand  the  slave  bore  to  show  that  he  was  the 
property  of  another,  yet  the  word  also  meant  any  scar,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  the  apostle  had  this  also  in  his  mind  when  he  said,  "  Don't  you  trouble  me. 
I  bear  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  There  were  the  weals — the  red  lines — 
through  the  scourgings.  There  were  the  bruises  through  the  stonings.  I  think 
Paul  says  to  all,  "  It  is  no  use  your  trying  to  turn  me  back.  You  are  not  talking  to 
any  young  recruit.  I  have  fought  in  the  battle.  I  have  been  wounded  in  the 
conflict.  I  have  tried  and  tested  my  Captain  in  actual  war.  Look  at  the  scars  I 
have  on  me."  And  methinks  his  eyes  would  flash  as  he  would  say,  "  Yes,  I  have 
scars  already,  and  I  am  willing  to  have  a  great  many  more.  Why,  look  at  what  I 
have  suffered  for  Him.  Do  you  think  I  am  going  to  give  Him  up  now  ?  Look  at 
what  I  have  endured  for  Him.  Do  you  think  that,  after  bearing  all  the  scourgings 
and  buffetings  and  loneliness  that  I  have,  I  am  likely  to  be  turned  on  one  side 
now  ?  "  He  was  proud  of  his  scars.  Do  you  see  what  a  beautiful  expression  it  is 
— "  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  t  We  may  say,  "  Paul,  it  is  a  most  disgraceful 
thing  to  be  whipped.  Why,  you  have  on  your  back  the  brand  of  infamy."  He 
only  smiles  and  says,  "No,  I  have  on  my  back  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
"  Why,  Paul,  look  at  your  wrist ;  there  is  a  deep,  blue  line  round  it  where  the 
manacle  has  been.  You  have  the  mark  of  the  fetter  on  you."  Says  the  apostle  : 
"  You  mistake  it;  I  have  the  mark  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  looked  upon  these 
Bears  as  so  many  badges  of  honour.  Go,  walk  through  Greenwich  Hospital  to- 
morrow, or  go  down  to  Chelsea  and  talk  to  some  of  the  old  pensioners.  Are  they 
ashamed  of  their  scars  ?  Why,  I  remember  how  a  few  months  back  we  had,  at  one 
of  our  meetings,  a  brother  who  had  served  in  the  Crimean  war,  and  he  showed  me 
kow  a  bayonet  had  gone  in  here  and  come  out  there ;  how  there  was  a  mark  in  his 
arm  where  a  ball  had  gone  right  through,  and  a  scar  in  his  face  where  the  sword 
had  cut.  I  think  he  told  me  that  he  had  about  twenty  scars  on  him,  and  his  eyes 
flashed  fire  as  he  told  the  story.  And  have  not  you,  brethren,  some  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  of  this  sort  ?  Have  not  you  been  wounded  in  conflicts  willingly  endured 
for  the  Master's  sake  ?  Have  not  you  known  what  it  is  to  be  jeered  at  for  Christ's 
Bake  ?  Have  you  not  had  to  stand  a  rattling  artillery  of  scoffs  in  your  workshop  * 
Have  not  some  of  you  deep  scars  now  through  being  cruelly  misrepresented,  and 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVS^RATOR.  [chap.  n. 

you  knew  it  was  for  Christ's  sake?  I  will  say  to  you  as  Paul  said  to  the  Church  at 
Galatia,  "  Have  you  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain,  if  it  be  yet  in  vain  ?  "  Oh, 
by  the  scars  of  the  past,  I  pray  you  be  heroes  in  the  present.  I  demand  of  you  a 
complete  consecration.  Will  you  yield  to  the  demand  which  He  here  makes  by 
me  ?  If  some  of  us  have  had  to  say,  "  Lord,  I  am  afraid  that  the  mark  is  not  as 
clear  as  it  used  to  be,"  then  I  will  tell  you  what  we  had  better  do.  We  had  better 
go  and  kneel  down  at  His  feet,  and  say,  "  Lord  Jesus,  brand  us  anew.  Put  Thy 
mark  on  us  again.  Thine  we  are,  and  on  Thy  side.  Brand  us.  Put  the  iron  upon 
us,  though  it  burn  us.  Oh,  do  not  listen  to  our  cries,  but  put  a  deep  indelible 
mark,  so  that  in  business  life,  in  home  life,  in  church  life,  men  and  women  shall 
say,  '  Lo,  there  are  men  who  carry  the  stigmata  of  their  Lord  upon  them.'  "  May 
God  fill  us  with  this  holy  impassioned  earnestness — this  sense  of  having  taken  an 
irretrievable  step,  which  shall  lead  us  to  say  to  all  about  us,  "  From  henceforth  let 
no  man  trouble  me.  From  henceforth  clear  the  road,  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the 
brand  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  The  Lord  put  His  brand  on  us  afresh  for  His  name's 
sake.  Amen.  (A.  G.  Brown.)  Marks  of  servitude : — A  slave  once  carried  a 
message  written  in  punctures  on  the  skin  of  his  head,  which  had  been  previously 
shaved  bare  to  receive  the  writing.  When  his  hair  was  grown  so  as  to  hide  the 
letter,  he  went  unsuspected ;  and  the  person  to  whom  the  message  was  sent,  having 
shaved  the  letter-carrier's  head,  read  the  message.  The  slave  in  old  times  often 
carried  in  his  body  (as  the  poor  slave  does  still  where  slavery  is  rampant)  the  marks 
of  his  master,  just  as  the  sailor  in  our  own  time  loves  to  have  printed  on  his  arm 
the  initials  of  his  own  name  and  ship,  the  figure  of  his  crucified  Bedeemer,  or  the 
anchor  and  cable.  St.  Paul  carried  in  his  body  the  marks  of  the  master  to  whom 
he  belonged.  The  weals  made  by  the  Boman  lictor's  rods,  with  which  he  was  thrice 
beaten ;  the  red  lines  of  those  two  hundred  stripes  which  had  been  laid  on  him  in 
the  Jewish  synagogues  ;  the  scars  left  by  the  stones  which  had  bruised  and  beaten 
him  down,  so  that  he  was  left  for  dead, — these  "  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  he  carried 
with  him,  the  proofs  as  to  whose  he  was  and  whom  he  served."  Legend  of  St. 
Francis : — The  biographer  of  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  says,  that  after  having  fasted 
for  forty  days  in  his  solitary  cell,  and  passed  the  time  in  a  fervour  of  prayer  and 
ecstatic  contemplation,  transported  almost  to  heaven  by  the  ardour  of  his  desires — 
then  be  beheld,  as  it  were,  a  seraph  with  six  shining  wings,  bearing  down  upon  him 
from  above,  and  between  his  wings  was  the  form  of  a  man  crucified.  By  this  he 
understood  to  be  figured  a  heavenly  and  immortal  intelligence,  subject  to  death  and 
humiliation.  And  it  was  manifested  to  him  that  he  was  to  be  transformed  into  a 
resemblance  to  Christ,  not  by  the  martyrdom  of  the  flesh,  but  by  the  might  and 
fire  of  Divine  love.  When  the  vision  had  disappeared,  and  he  had  recovered  a 
little  from  its  effects,  it  was  seen  that  in  his  hands,  feet,  and  side,  he  carried  the 
wounds  of  the  Saviour.  Service  the  road  to  honour : — When  the  Spartan  king 
advanced  against  the  enemy,  he  had  always  with  him  some  one  that  had  been 
crowned  in  the  public  games  of  Greece.  And  they  tell  us  that  a  Lacedaemonian, 
when  large  sums  were  offered  him  on  condition  that  he  would  not  enter  the  Olympio 
lists,  refused  them.  Having  with  much  difficulty  thrown  his  antagonists  in  wrest- 
ling, one  put  this  question  to  him,  "  Spartan,  what  will  you  get  by  this  victory?" 
He  answered  with  a  smile,  "  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  fight  foremost  in  the  ranks 
of  my  prince."  The  honour  which  appertains  to  office  in  the  Church  of  God  lies 
mainly  in  this — that  the  man  who  is  set  apart  for  such  service  has  the  privilege  of 
being  first  in  holiness  of  example,  abundance  of  liberality,  patience  of  long-suffering, 
zeal  in  effort,  and  self-sacrifice  in  service.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  : — I.  The  makes — slave  brands.  1.  The  body  of  the  Christian  is  itself 
a  badge  of  servitude  to  Christ.  2.  Baptism  is  another.  3.  So  is  bodily  persecution 
and  mental.  II.  The  inference  to  be  drawn.  1.  No  man  can  legitimately  doubt 
our  Christianity  and  therefore  need  not  be  told  about  it.  2.  We  need  not  trouble 
ourselves*  we  ever  bear  the  incontestible  evidences  of  being  Christ's.  In  conclu- 
sion :  1.  Let  no  man  infer  that  singularity  makes  a  Christian.  2.  The  reward  of 
bearing  the  marks.  (1)  Hope.  (2)  Happiness.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Every  be- 
lieving Christian  hath  these.  1.  The  crown  of  thorns  pierces  his  head  when  his 
sinful  conceits  are  mortified.  2.  His  lips  are  drenched  with  vinegar  and  gall,  when 
sharp  and  severe  restraints  are  given  to  his  tongue.  3.  His  hands  and  feet  are 
nailed  when  he  is,  by  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  disabled  to  the  wonted  courses 
of  sin.  4.  His  body  is  stripped  when  all  colour  and  pretences  are  taken  away 
from  him.  5.  His  heart  is  pierced  when  the  life-blood  of  his  formerly- 
reigning  corruptions  is  let  out.     (Bishop  Hall.)       The  broad-arrow  of  $ervice :— 


ti.]  GALATIANS.  65* 

When  North  America  was  merely  an  English  colony  the  very  timber  of  the 
country  was  sorted  oat,  and  wherever  a  valiant  pine  or  noble  oak,  fit  for 
the  masts  or  for  the  ribs  of  ships  was  found,  the  arrow — tbe  Broad  Arrow 
as  it  was  called — was  stamped  upon  it.  The  tree  was  in  no  respect  different, 
dendrologically  speaking,  after  the  arrow  was  put  on  from  what  it  was  before ; 
but  when  people  saw  the  Broad  Arrow  on  the  tree  they  said,  "  That  is  tha 
king's";  or,  "It  does  not  belong  to  us:  it  belongs  to  the  king";  and  it  had 
attached  to  it  a  sense  of  royalty,  a  sense  of  appropriation ;  and  it  took  to  itself 
something  of  the  dignity  which  belongs  to  real  royalty.  Now  it  is  not  an  arrow  ; 
it  is  a  cross  that  is  stamped  on  us — the  sign  And  symbol  of  the  purchase  of  suffering, 
by  which  we  are  Christ's  and  manifest  it  to  the  world.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
glory  of  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus : — As  it  is  a  glory  to  a  soldier  to  have  received 
many  wounds  and  to  have  many  scars  in  his  prince's  quarrel,  and  for  the  defence 
of  his  country ;  so  it  is  a  glory  for  the  Christian  soldier  to  have  the  marks  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  his  body,  as  of  wounds,  scourges,  and  imprisonments  for  the  truth. 
But  if  these  be  the  glory  of  Christ's  servants,  what  shall  we  say  of  those  who  not 
only  have  their  consciences  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron,  but  have  the  marks  of 
Bacchus  and  Venus  in  their  bodies.  (R.  Cudworth.)  Entire  consecration  best : — 
The  well-defined  spiritual  life  is  not  only  the  highest  life,  but  it  is  also  the  most 
easily  lived.  The  whole  cross  is  more  easily  carried  than  the  half.  It  is  the  man 
who  tries  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds  who  makes  nothing  of  either.  And  he 
who  seeks  to  serve  two  masters  misses  the  benediction  of  both.  But  he  who  takes 
his  stand,  who  has  drawn  a  boundary  line,  sharp  and  deep,  about  his  religious  life, 
who  has  marked  off  all  beyond  as  for  ever  forbidden  ground  to  him,  finds  the  yoke  easy 
and  the  burden  light.  So  even  here  to  die  is  gain.  (If.  Drummond,  M.A.)  Honour- 
able marks : — John  Clark,  of  Meldon,  in  France,  being  for  Christ's  sake  whipped 
three  several  days,  and  afterwards  having  a  mark  set  in  his  forehead,  as  a  note  of 
infamy,  his  mother  beholding  it,  encouraged  her  son,  crying  with  a  loud  voice, 
"  Vivet  Christus  ajusque  insignia,"  "  Blessed  be  Christ,  and  welcome  be  these  prints 
and  marks  of  Christ."  I  conclude  this  discourse  with  that  saying  of  Pericles,  "  It 
is  not  gold,  precious  stones,  statues,  that  adorn  a  soldier,  but  a  torn  buckler,  a 
cracked  helmet,  a  blunt  sword,  a  scarred  face."  Sceva  is  renowned  for  this,  that 
at  the  siege  of  Dyrrachium  he  so  long  alone  resisted  Pompey's  army  that  he  had 
two  hundred  and  twenty  darts  sticking  in  his  shield,  and  lost  one  of  his  eyes,  and 
yet  gave  not  over  till  Cesar  came  to  his  rescue.    (Trapp.) 

Ver.  18.  Brethren,  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit 
Amen. — The  apostolic  benediction  : — By  this  last  word  he  seals  all  that  precedes  it. 
He  says  not  merely  "  with  you  "  as  elsewhere ;  but,  "  with  your  spirit,"  thus  with- 
drawing  them  from  carnal  things,  and  displaying  throughout  the  beneficence  of 
God,  and  reminding  them  of  tbe  grace  which  they  enjoyed,  whereby  he  was  able  to 
recall  them  from  all  tbeir  Judaizing  errors.  For  to  have  received  the  Spirit  came 
not  of  the  law's  penury,  but  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith,  and  to  preserve 
it  when  obtained  came  not  from  circumcision  but  from  grace.  Farther,  he  concludes 
his  exhortation  with  a  prayer,  and  makes  mention  of  grace  and  the  Spirit  on  this 
account,  namely,  both  as  addressing  himself  to  the  brethren,  and  as  supplicating 
God  that  they  might  continue  to  enjoy  these  blessings,  thus  providing  for  them  a 
twofold  security.  For  this  very  thing,  namely,  both  prayer  and  complete  teaching, 
became  to  them  as  a  double  wall.  For  teaching,  reminding  them  of  what  benefits 
they  enjoyed,  they  rather  kept  them  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  and  prayer, 
invoking  grace,  and  exhorting  to  an  enduring  constancy,  permitted  not  the  Spirit 
to  depart  from  them.  And  He  abiding  in  them,  all  the  error  of  such  doctrines  as 
they  held  was  shaken  off  like  dust,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  (Chrysostom.)  The 
blessing  of  Christ's  grace  : — Dwell  as  we  will  on  the  brighter  side  of  things,  life  is 
very  hard,  and  men  and  women  are  hard  on  one  another,  and  we  ourselves  are 
growing  hard,  and  that  is  the  worst  of  all.  We  need  something  to  soften,  in  no 
enfeebling  way,  the  hardness  of  life,  and  of  men,  and  of  our  own  heart.  And  most 
of  the  blessings  we  seek  of  our  own  will,  weaken  our  souls ;  and  in  the  weakening, 
make  us  harder  in  the  future.  But  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  if  we  could  win 
it  and  take  it,  softens  all  things  by  making  us  stronger  towards  goodness  and  truth 
and  righteousness  and  love.    What  is  it  ?    What  is  His  grace  ?    I.  Whatever  this 

GRACE  IS,  IT  DOES  NOT  COME  FROM  ONE  WHO  IS  IGNORANT     OF  ALL  WE  NEED.       1.    He  llfl'1 

known  to  the  full  the  weight  of  human  suffering,  and  tbe  blessing  of  His  grace  that 
u  with  us  is  brought  home  to  us  by  that  knowledge.     He  can  comfort  because  Ha 


556  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  n. 

knows.  He  has  known  what  temptation  is,  and  can  feel  with  the  agony  of  our 
resistance,  and  through  that  with  our  weakness.  He  has  not  known  remorse  or  the 
loss  of  good,  but,  through  Hi3  infinite  pain  in  contact  with  sin,  and  His  infinite  pity 
for  those  enthralled  by  it,  He  can  understand  our  unhappiness  in  guilt.  By  know. 
ledge  of  sorrow  He  can  bring  blessing  to  sorrow.  2.  Nor  has  He  known  joy  leas. 
In  early  life,  as  boy  and  youth,  He  knew  all  our  simple  and  pure  joys.  In  manhood, 
when  He  first  went  out  to  the  world,  we  have  often  traced  the  joy  of  enthusiasm  in 
His  work.  In  later  days  these  only  lived  in  memory,  but  another  joy  took  their 
place — the  mighty  joy  of  universal  love,  the  joy  of  giving  up  all  things  for  all  men 
— that  wonderful  and  mystic  joy  which  we  faintly  realize  whenever  out  of  the 
depths  of  personal  suffering  we  rise  into  the  glorious  life  of  self-surrender  because 
we  love.     II.  Christ's  fitness  to  give  comes  not  only  of  knowledge  of  oub  need, 

BUT  ALSO  OF  Hl8  VICTORY   OVEB  ALL  THAT   IS  EVIL   AND  WEAK    IN    OCR    NEED.       It    is    the 

Victor  who  can  give  grace  and  strength  to  those  whom  the  same  foes  attack .  In 
order  to  conquer,  win  His  grace  who  has  conquered,  and  who  will  give  it  to  you. 
1.  Kindness,  the  goodwill  of  love.  The  first  meaning  of  the  invocation  in  the  text 
is:  "The  lovingkindness  which  belonged  to  Christ,  which  formed  part  of  His 
character,  be  with  you,  and  form  part  of  yours."  Filial  tenderness.  Penetrating 
love  and  insight.  Nay,  more  than  this  :  to  be  perfect,  it  ought  to  reach,  through 
frank  forgiveness,  those  who  injure  us ;  through  interest  in  the  interests,  ideas,  and 
movements  of  human  progress,  those  who  are  beyond  our  own  circle,  in  our  nation, 
nay,  even  in  the  world  ;  and  finally  all  men,  those  even  who  are  our  bitterest  foes, 
through  desire  that  they  should  have  good  and  be  good.  2.  The  kind  of  beauty  we 
express  by  the  word  charm.  "  The  beautiful  charm  of  Christ  be  with  you  all  " — 
the  charm  of  harmony  of  character,  the  musical  subordination  and  accord  of  all 
the  qualities  and  powers  of  His  nature,  so  that  the  whole  impression  made  was  one 
of  exquisite  and  various  order  in  lovely  and  living  movement.  Sensitiveness  to  the 
feelings  of  others,  and  to  all  that  is  beautiful.  An  eye  to  see  traces  of  the  Divine 
loveliness  everywhere  ;  faith  to  believe  in  it ;  power  to  draw  it  forth.  Conclusion: 
Pray  for  this  grace.  It  will  make  you  at  one  with  all  that  is  tender,  pitiful,  dear, 
and  sweet  in  human  lovingkindness,  and  with  all  that  is  sensitive  and  delicate  and 
graceful  in  manner  and  speech,  and  will  create  in  you  an  harmonious  soul.  It  will 
make  you  at  one  with  moral  good,  just  and  true  and  pure,  it  will  take  all  that  is 
living  in  humanity,  all  that  is  fair,  all  that  is  moral,  and  link  them  to  and 
complete  them  by  uniting  them  to  the  love  of  God,  and  to  God's  love  for  all  men  ; 
so  that  to  human  love  and  moral  love  and  imaginative  love  will  b«  added  th« 
spiritual  love  which  gathers  them  all  into  perfection.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 
The  apostle's  farewell  wish: — The  apostle  concludes  the  Epistle  with  his  ordinary 
farewell  wish ;  wherein,  having  designated  them  by  the  name  of  "  brethren,"  he 
wishes  that  God's  grace  and  favour,  with  all  spiritual  benefits  flowing  from  it,  and 
purchased  and  conveyed  to  them  through  Jesus  Christ,  might  reside,  both  in  the 
effects  and  sense  of  it,  in  their  spirits  and  whole  soul ;  and  he  affixes  his  "  Amen," 
as  an  evidence  of  fervency,  and  confidence  in  his  wish,  and  as  a  confirmation  of  the 
whole  doctrine  delivered  by  him  in  this  Epistle.  1.  The  more  of  prejudice  a 
minister  apprehends  to  exist  in  a  people  or  person  against  himself  and  his  doctrine, 
the  more  ought  he  to  endeavour  by  affectionate  insinuations,  and  by  frequent  and 
seasonable  reiterations  of  loving  force,  to  root  out  those  prejudices.  2.  The  main 
thing  in  people  for  which  ministers  ought  to  care,  is  the  spirit  and  inward  man,  aa 
that  for  which  God  mainly  calls  (Prov.  xxiii.  28),  and  being  kept  right,  will 
command  the  outward  man  and  keep  it  right  also  (Prov.  iv.  23).  (James  Fergusson.) 
Parting  words : — This  is  his  last  farewell.  He  ends  the  Epistle  with  the  same 
words  wherewith  he  began.  As  if  he  said :  *'  I  have  taught  you  Christ  purely,  I 
have  entreated  you,  I  have  chidden  you,  and  I  have  let  pass  nothing  which  I 
thought  profitable  for  you.  I  can  say  no  more,  but  that  I  heartily  pray  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  bless  and  increase  my  labour,  and  govern  you  with  His 
Holy  Spirit  for  ever."  (Lutlier.)  Grace: — I.  Grace  is  the  sum  of  all  other 
blessings.  IL  Grace  is  obtained  through  Christ.  HI.  Grace  is  the  greatest 
happiness  we  can  desire  for  others.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Grace  for  all : — I.  Grace 
is  needed  by  all.  H.  Grace  is  provided  for  all.  III.  Grace  is  offered  to  all. 
IV.  Grace  is  supplicated  for  all.  V.  Grace  may  be  enjoyed  by  all.  {Ibid.)  The 
grace  of  Christ: — It  is  of  little  moment  whether  by  this  "grace"  we  understand 
that  free  love  and  favour  which  He  always  bears  in  His  heart  to  all  that  believe  in 
His  name,  or  all  that  kindness — all  those  heavenly  and  spiritual  blessings-  in  the 
communication  of  which  He  manifests  this  love,  this  free  favour.     In  any  case,  to 


9BAT.  ti.j  GALATIANS.  567 

possess  His  grace  is  an  inconceivable  blessing.  To  be  the  objects  of  tbe  kind 
regards  of  one  so  excellent,  so  amiable,  so  kind,  so  •wise,  so  faithful,  who  can 
estimate  the  value  of  this  ?  It  was  the  apostle's  wish  that  the  Galatian  Christians 
might  every  day  enjoy  new  proofs  of  this  unaltered,  unalterable  love.  He  does  not 
pray  simply  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  them,  but  that  it 
may  be  with  their  spirit.  The  leading  object  of  the  whole  Epistle  is  to  withdraw 
them  more  from  external  things,  and  fix  them  on  things  spiritual ;  and  such  a 
prayer  is  a  most  appropriate  conclusion.  (John  Brown,  D.B.)  Grace  through 
Christ  alone : — Here  is  the  concluding  wish  of  Paul  for  the  Galatians,  and  it  ia 
quite  in  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  the  Epistle.  In  opposition  to  all  that  the 
false  teachers  would  have  the  teachers  believe  respecting  righteousness  through  the 
sacrifices  of  the  law  and  obedience  to  its  precepts,  Paul  had  set  before  them  Christ 
crucified  as  the  sole  foundation  of  all  their  hopes  for  ettrnity,  and  proved  to  them 
that  by  faith,  and  by  faith  alone,  all  the  benefits  of  Christ's  death  are  to  be  obtained 
and  appropriated.  And  now  he  concludes  with  the  affectionate  wish  that  they 
might  constantly  and  richly  experience  in  their  own  souls  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
through  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  dwelling  in  their  hearts.  May  every 
true  believer,  both  with  respect  to  himself  and  to  the  whole  Church  of  Christ,  say 
with  the  apostle,  "Amen  I"  (John  Venn,  M.A.)  It  is  much  to  be  observed  that 
In  the  original  the  word  "  Brethren  "  stands  at  the  end  of  the  sentence  in  a  very 
unusual  and  emphatic  position.  After  all  the  severity  and  strength  of  the  Epistle, 
he  concludes  with  this  word  of  tenderness  and  affection.  (Bishop  Moberly.) 
After  all  his  sorrow,  amazement,  censure,  and  despondency,  he  parts  with  them  in 
kindness  ;  after  all  the  pain  they  had  cost  him,  yet  were  they  dear  to  him ;  and  ere 
he  lifts  his  hand  from  the  parchment,  it  writes  as  a  parting  love-token — Brethren. 
(John  Eadie,  D.D.)  The  benediction : — As  the  apostle  began  with  grace  (chap.  i. 
3),  so  he  ends  with  grace,  to  teach  us — I.  That  oub  salvation  is  placed  in  it  alone 

FOB  THE  BEGINNING,  PROGRESS,  AND  ACCOMPLISHMENT  THEREOF.      Fd 1.  Election  13  of 

grace  (Rom.  xi.  5).  2.  Vocation  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  3.  Justification  (Eom.  iv.  24). 
4.  Glorification  (Bom.  vi.  23).  II.  That  Chbist  is  to  have  all  the  glory  of  this 
ubace.  III.  That  all  oub  salutations  and  greetings,  adieus  and  farewells, 
ought  to  be  founded  in  thb  OBAOE  of  Christ.  The  conclusion  :  It  is  an  epitome 
of  the  Epistle.  I.  Christ  "thb  Lobd  "  of  the  house  is  opposed  to  Moses  who  was 
but  a  servant.  II.  The  "  grace  "  of  Christ  is  opposed  to  the  merit  of  works.  III. 
The  "  Spibit,"  the  true  seat  of  graoe,  is  opposed  to  the  flesh  in  which  the  false 
apostles  gloried  so  much.  17.  "Bbethren"  denotes  the  affection  which  is 
opposed  to  the  lordly  carriage  of  the  false  apostles  and  to  the  strife  which  they 
•cdeeroorod  to  foment    (R.  Cudworth.) 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer 


1    1012  01127  8274 


Date  Due 

•MM* 

, ., 

iAyi — fT"1 

"£**" 

ui^iKW 

st^^^n^ 

1 

'■ i-U 

■■a  hi ikiii 

f) 

